
January
January 7: Ames Research Center (ARC) announced the completion of a flight program to evaluate the quiet short-haul research aircraft (QSRA). Twenty-two visiting pilots representing 16 organizations made 2 flights each in the modified deHavilland Buffalo (C-8A) with a new wing design and 4 Lycoming YF-102 engines mounted on the wing to provide propulsive lift. NASA offered the evaluation program to introduce QSRA technology to potential users, obtain feedback on the future of the program, and get an independent critique. Participating pilots and engineers represented ARC, Dryden Flight Research Center (DRFC), and Langley Research Center (LaRC), as well as the U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and companies including Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Lockheed, deHavilland, Grumman, United Airlines, U.S. Air, Ran-some Airlines, and the Airline Pilots Association (APA). (ARC Release 81-01)
January 8: NASA officially approved the continuation of Voyager 2’s journey to encounter Uranus in 1986 after a Saturn flyby this summer. The Uranus encounter in January 1986 (a first close-up look at that planet, seventh from the Sun and twice as far from it as Saturn) would produce measurements and photographs as the spacecraft passed on its way to a possible encounter with Neptune.
NASA’s decision to maintain Voyager 2’s present trajectory depended on Voyager l's November 1980 close approach to Titan and Saturn’s ring system. Successful so far in its scientific aims, NASA judged the health of the Voyager 2 spacecraft and instruments sufficient to complete a 5-year journey to Uranus and a productive flyby of that planet. (NASA Release 81-3)
January 13: NASA said that a new instrument it developed for the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) had measured, for the first time, ozone concentration and distribution in a column of atmosphere. Ozone is a component of photochemical smog possibly hazardous to health; previous instruments could analyze its presence only in the area immediately surrounding an aircraft. The ultraviolet differential-absorption lidar, called UV-DIAL, analyzed light of different wavelengths—one absorbed by ozone, the other not—to define the amount and location of ozone between aircraft and ground. Lidar (light-intensification detection and ranging) is similar to radar but uses electromagnetic waves of much shorter length. (NASA Release 81-7)
January 15: Outgoing NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch held a press conference on the agency’s 1982 budget proposed by President Reagan
j	PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
PftBB	INTENnONAlkr
in the amount of $6.7 billion, an overall increase of 21% ($1.2 billion) over FY81. “Given the inflation rate, the budget reflects real growth of about 9% over FY 1981... [not] as much as I would like to have seen, given NASA’s extremely tight budgets over the past decade.” The major emphasis would be on completing the development of operational capability for the Shuttle.
This budget would also include “a balanced effort in other areas of the space program and in aeronautics,” Frosch said, mentioning the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR); a geological applications program (GAP); research using the triagency flight program NOSS (National Oceanic Satellite System); an upper-atmosphere research satellite (UARS) experiment defining the optimum spacecraft design to improve understanding of the stratosphere and mesosphere; and a numerical aerodynamic simulator (NAS) of airflow over three-dimensional aerodynamic surfaces, with major impact on design of aircraft and large-scale computers. The budget was “good, but not as good as it should be if we are to revitalize NASA,” Frosch said. (NASA Text, press conf, Jan 15/81)
• In an accompanying statement, Frosch reviewed the situation of the inertial upper stage (IUS) to be used on the Shuttle for launching spacecraft into outer space from Shuttle orbit. Within resources offered by the 1981 and 1982 budgets, the best alternative seemed to be modifying the Centaur instead of proceeding with a three-stage IUS, in order to have “that very powerful combination available for first launches in 1985. No other alternative upper stage is available on a reasonable schedule or with comparable costs. Therefore, NASA will expand discussions with the Air Force on the best means for providing upper stages. . .[and continue with] the two-stage IUS, which both we and the Air Force are counting on.” (NASA Release 81-14)
January 16: NASA announced the selection of the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), a consortium of 14 universities, for final negotiation of a contract to establish, operate, and maintain a science institute for the 13.1-meters (43-foot) Space Telescope scheduled for launch on the Shuttle early in 1985.
The space telescope science institute, making scientific investigations using the telescope for at least 15 years, would be located on the Homewood campus of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. The estimated contractor cost for an initial 5-year contract would be $24 million. Additional funding would be needed later for a guest-observer and archival-research program. The contract had options for three 5-year extensions. The institute would receive data sent from the telescope via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and NASA’s communications network through the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), where the institute would operate a space telescope support center. Investigations would be able to ask GSFC to point the spacecraft at any desired field-of-view. The 2.4-meter (96-inch, mirror in the telescope could
image 350 times the volume of space now visible from Earth. (NASA Release
81-12; MSFC Release 81-11; Nature, Jan 29/81, 339)
January 17: NASA reported success in the last Shuttle main-engine test (static firing 12); engine 3 shut down as planned at 235 seconds, engines 1 and 2 shut down at 624.5 seconds. All major objectives were satisfied, including gimbal-ing and POGO pulsing; loading liquid oxygen (LOX) with the anti-geyser line removed; shutting down engines 1 and 2 using a flight high-pressure oxygen turbopump overspeed-prevention sequence; and completing a full-duration run using flight nozzles. Completion of this test ended the main propulsion test (MPT) constraint on the Space Transportation System STS-1. The test facility would be phased down until full power-level tests scheduled to take place in the spring of 1982. (NASA Dly Actv Rept, Jan 21/81; NASA Release
81-16; MSFC Release 81-8)
January 26: The government of Spain delivered a note to the U.S. embassy in Madrid agreeing to use of the naval base at Rota as a contingency landing site for the Shuttle. This completed action on contingency landing-site negotiations, as NASA had already reached agreement with Japan. (NASA Dly Actv Rept, Jan 28/81)
January 30: Johnson Space Center’s (JSC) Space News Roundup said that a conference sponsored by NASA and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), attended by representatives of major U.S. industries, heard briefings on systems developed for the space program that were applicable to Earth-based activities. Representatives of Dow Chemical, Exxon, ITT, Johnson & Johnson, Teledyne, 3M, Xerox, and numerous other corporations learned about pharmaceutical production in Earth-orbiting laboratories, life-support systems designed for space suits, and an electromechanical alternative to conventional hydraulic actuators.
Bryan Erb of JSC’s Earth-resources division described the use of satellite observations to predict crop growth or locate mineral deposits or oil sources. From 1974 to 1978 JSC had managed the Large-Area Crop-Inventory Experiment (LACIE), showing how sensors on an orbiting platform could read and relay to Earth the characteristic signatures of Earth features used by scientists and engineers to make mathematical models on a worldwide basis. The AgRISTARS (agricultural resources inventory survey through aerospace remote sensing) project was carrying the measurements further, reading out thermal conditions, predicting soil moisture, and analyzing crops in the visual (as compared to infrared) spectrum. Erb said a worldwide remote-sensing system should be available within the next 20 years for managing Earth resources.
Another innovation would be to work in space with living cells and proteins to develop products for fighting disease. Products like beta cells, enzymes, and immunoglobulins produced by kidney cells were already available in
hospitals, but at astronomical cost. JSC’s Dennis Morrison said that on the ground this kind of work was limited to a microbiological level; working in space with larger amounts would mean a 20 to 50% improvement. Pituitary, kidney, and pancreas cells would be among candidates for spaceflight, even though weight limitations would delay early commercial processing. (JSC Space News Roundup, Jan 30/81, 4)
During January: NASA reported Orbiting Astronomical Observatory Oao 3 (Copernicus), the heaviest and most complex observatory ever launched by the agency and instrumental in discovery of the first black hole (Cyg X-l), had finished its career at the end of 1980 after 8.5 years of operation. Launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) August 21, 1972, with a life expectancy of 1 year, its performance was “astonishing,” said GSFC engineers and scientists.
Orbiting at an altitude of 740 kilometers (460 miles), Oao 3 used its supersensitive ultraviolet telescope, largest ever put into orbit, to view the heavens “with a precision and clarity never before possible,” producing spectral readings invisible to ground-based observatories because of the obscuring effects of Earth’s atmosphere. The telescope was capable of pointing accuracy equivalent to seeing a volleyball from a distance of 400 miles. During its lifetime, Oao 3 served more than 160 investigators from the United States and 13 foreign countries in observing more than 450 unique objects.
Formal scientific investigations using Oao 3 ended December 31, 1980, but a series of engineering tests would continue into mid-February, when NASA would terminate contact with the spacecraft. GSFC engineers were not sure whether it would orient itself permanently toward the Sun, begin a permanent orbital tumble, or combine the two. (NASA Release 81-10; Goddard News, Jan 5/81, 1)
February
February 2: Insulation that separated from the Space Shuttle’s huge external fuel tank would delay the long-awaited launch to a time “no earlier than the week of April 5,” NASA announced. Columbia’s maiden flight was already more than two years behind its original schedule because of technical probable causing a series of postponents. The new difficulty was discovered in preflight tests at Cape Canaveral in which over a half-million gallons of supercold liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen were pumped into the fuel tank for the first time.
The new delay was “the first substantial” problem encountered since July 1980 and was not related to earlier problems with the Shuttle’s ceramic-tile insulation. During tanking tests, two areas on the external tank—one about 7x8 feet, the other about 4x4 feet—became debonded. The loose insulation would have to be rebonded before launch. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Jan 28/81; NASA Releases 81-15, 81-25; W Post, Feb 3/81, A-7; W Star, Feb 3/81, A-8)
February 2: The European Space Agency (ESA) reported on the May 23, 1980, failure of Ariane flight L02. The cause was “clearly identified” as inherent instability in one of the four launch-vehicle engines. All external causes had been excluded, and the manufacturer was able to reproduce the failure at a single-engine test stand. Devices for fuel injection in the combustion chamber provided unstable despite positive tests during development. The fault, “unfortunately a very common phenomenon with liquid-fuel rocket engines,” had occurred in “most rocket programmes. . . notably in the American programmes.”
ESA said that it had abandoned the injector in its present form and was working on modifications. The report concluded with a tentative launch schedule to be confirmed after the modifications were validated. (ESA Info Bltn, Jan 28/81 for release Feb 2/81)
February 9: LaRC reported on a meeting of representatives from industry and six NASA centers to review the agency’s large space antenna program. Shuttle flights in the mid-1980s would include models of several antenna concepts: the large antennas designed for communications and other Earth-oriented applications, as well as for purely scientific studies of the solar system and the universe, would be transported into space folded into the Shuttle’s cargo bay and deployed in Earth orbit. Previous work concentrated on the structural and material requirements of each concept; the meeting would identify work still needed on system technology, ground testing, and technical resources to complete development. (LaRC Release 81-9)
February JO: The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) was undertaking the first mass shift of satellites at 22,300 miles altitude in space, moving three meteorological satellites to new areas to improve their product and to prevent possible collision of one of them in its present crowded location, the Department of Commerce (DOC) reported.
NOAA would move Goes 4 (the geostationary operational environmental satellite launched in September 1980) from 98°W to 135 °W as backup for failing Goes 3\ NOAA would not move Goes 3 while it continued to function, but would put Goes 4 as near as possible without its interfering with communications.
On January 29, NOAA moved a third meteorological satellite, Goes 2, from 105 °W to 109 °W to reduce the danger of collision with other craft or space debris; this satellite served primarily to relay weatherfax charts to ground stations. NOAA had to operate two geostationary satellites at all times: “Goes Fast” for the eastern United States and Canada and for most of the Atlantic, and “Goes West” for the western United States and Canada, for Alaska, and for the Pacific westward to Hawaii.
On January 29, NOAA also boosted its 7-year old Sms 1 into a 22,600 mile high orbit, where it would remain indefinitely. After NASA’s launch of a seventh geostationary satellite, planned for March, NOAA would move Sms 2 from its station at 75 °W to a nearby location on standby. (NOAA Release
81-16)
February 11: Japan reported that its National Space Development Agency successfully launched the first N-2 vehicle from Tanegashima carrying the 21st Japanese satellite—the engineering test satellite Ets 4 (Kiku 3)—into a transfer orbit with 36,000-kilometer apogee, 230-kilometer perigee, and 10.5-hour period. The 650-kilogram satellite would monitor vehicle performance. Japan would launch seven N-2s between August 1981 and February 1986 to meteorological and communications satellites and aeronautical experiments. Although used for five years, the N-l did not have the power to carry big geostationary spacecraft into orbit. (FBIS, Kyodo in English, Feb 11/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 12/81)
February 20: Columbia, flagship of U.S. Space Shuttles, “proved that at long last it is ready to carry astronauts into orbit,” said the Washington Star, describing “a successful and spectacular firing of its three powerful engines.”
At the end of the practice countdown, 8:45 a.m. EST, the three engines at the base of the delta-wing spaceship “flashed to life, spewing torrents of almost invisible flame, steam, and smoke over the launch pad” and sending a thunderclap of sound across KSC. “All engines are up and running,” the control center announced. The world’s most sophisticated rocket machine had generated 1.1 million pounds of thrust for 20 seconds, while the 122-foot-tall orbiter with fuel tank and boosters remained fixed to the pad by eight 3-foot
steel bolts. In actual launch, explosive charges would sever the bolts, releasing the orbiter, and the solid-fuel boosters would help lift it to orbit.
During the final countdown, 526,000 gallons of fuel were pumped into the external fuel tank. Technical, weather, and procedural difficulties had postponed the firing, a first test of all shuttle systems combined, three times this week. Minor problems had delayed today’s test another hour.
The Washington Post said that a labor walkout at KSC immediately after the 8:45 a.m. firing might threaten the April 7 date set for the actual launch of Columbia. About 800 aerospace workers, members of the International Association of Machinists employed by Boeing in spaceport support work, had struck in a pay dispute. Richard Smith, KSC director, said that the strike might jeopardize remaining operations; however, he noted that the union had a legal right to strike because its contract with Boeing had expired some time ago.
Columbia crew members John Young and Robert Crippen, who had waited out 2Vi years of delays, viewed the test firing from the air; Young in a Shuttle training jet at 4,000-foot altitude, and Crippen in an identical craft about 1,900 feet higher. (W Star, Feb 20/81, A-l; W Post, Feb 21/81, A-7)
February 21: NASA launched Comstar-D, last of a series of four domestic communications satellites built by Hughes Aircraft for Comsat General, from KSC at 6:23 p.m. EST on an Atlas Centaur into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. The 6.1-mile (20-foot) high cylinder called Comstar 4 in orbit, weighing 1,516 kilograms (3,342 pounds) at launch, had 12 transponders (channels), each capable of relaying 1,500 two-way voice circuits (overall capability of
18,000	simultaneous high-quality two-way phone transmissions). A postlaunch report said the apogee motor firing February 23 was successful. (NASA Release 81-27; NASA MOR-O-491-201-81-04 [prelaunch summary] Feb 10-12/81, [prelaunch] Feb 17/81, [postlaunch] June 17/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 24/81, Feb 25/81; ComSat Gnl Release 81-6; D/SD, Feb 25/81, 286; Feb 26/81, 294; A/D, Feb 26/81, 292; Spacewarn, Mar 31/81, 2)
• FBIS reported the launch at 9:30 a.m. local time of Astro-A, a scientific experimental satellite, by the University of Tokyo’s Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science. The launch from Kagoshima had been postponed twice, from February 18 to 19 and again to February 21, because of rain. NASA’s Space Tracking and Data Network (STDN) supported both this launch and that of Comsat 4.
Called Hinotori (fire bird) in orbit, the new satellite was Japan’s 22d object to orbit and its 7th scientific satellite. It was the heaviest (190 kilograms) ever launched on the MU-3S rocket. In an elliptical orbit with 695-kilometer apogee, 568-kilometer perigee, and 37-minute period, Hinotori would study X-rays, gamma rays, and other aspects of solar flares. Its data would be of particular value because the Solar Max satellite launched by the United States in February 1980 on a similar mission was having instrument trouble. (FBIS, Kyodo in English, Feb 21/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 23/81)
February 26: ESA announced that it had “rejected” NASA’s decision to cancel the U.S. spacecraft that would have been part of the joint International Solar-Polar Mission (ISPM). NASA told a meeting of the two organizations in New York that the cancellation resulted from budget cuts imposed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in preparing the Reagan administration’s budget proposal. ESA responded that canceling the satellite without consultation was a unilateral breach of a memorandum of understanding between the agencies and was unacceptable. ESA asked that NASA restore the program to its original level, noting that unilateral actions of this kind would be detrimental to future space cooperation between the United States and Europe. ESA said that, when its science-program committee decided to pursue ISPM in 1979, they chose that mission over a number of purely European missions because of the value ESA put on transatlantic cooperation.
Because of NASA’s decision, European scientists from 17 institutions who supplied experiments for the NASA spacecraft would not be able to fly them. The experiments, “in an advanced stage of development” with more than half of the costs committed, ESA said, would be lost with no corresponding scientific return. ESA’s director general immediately asked all of its member states to protest, through their ambassadors in Washington, the decision taken by NASA. Timing was crucial, because Congress would consider the federal budget in March. (ESA Inf 2)
February 27: DFRC reported on a dress rehearsal of Shuttle first-mission landing and postlanding activities on the dry lake bed at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. The crew that would act as recovery convoy used an orbiter mock-up, fitted with interfaces for ground connections, to practice postlanding safety and servicing procedures: simulated activities included testing for the presence of toxic or explosive vapors and gases and cooling the orbiter by circulating freon through its pipes and cool air through its ducts. To simulate the landing, a NASA .T-38 jet descended along the planned flight path from 40,000 feet up, while test manager Deke Slayton kept in touch with the recovery convoy and with the flight director, Don Puddy, at JSC.
Meanwhile, astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen at JSC completed a full-scale flight rehearsal, going through the 54.5-hour mission in a computer-operated simulator. Flight directors monitored the mock mission as if it were the real thing. (DFRC Release 81-8; W Star, Feb 27/81, A-9)
During February: Nature magazine reported that the Franco-Soviet mission to Halley’s comet in 1986 entailed “a substantial cutback” for a planned joint mission to Venus in 1984. Assignment of two of the original four Venus probes to Halley was a reminder that Soviet space-program resources, though vast, “are not infinite.”
Pravda had published several articles aimed at putting the Soviet effort in a favorable light; the Communist party congress would be asked next week
to approve another 5-year plan including space exploration. However, the Soviet Union had never revealed the costs of the program. Nature said hints of increasing financial constraints had appeared recently: no further Intercosmos flights were in view after those with Mongolia and Romania, and Bulgaria had been offered two unmanned probes instead of a manned flight to replace the failed trip of its cosmonaut to the orbiting Salyut 6. (Nature, Feb 26/81, 741)
March
March 5: The Japanese government accepted a U.S. proposal to use the U.S. Air Forces’ Kadena Airbase on Okinawa Island as an emergency landing area for the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia, the Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS) reported. Tokyo Kyodo said NASA was arranging sites for emergency landings at six airports, three domestic and three abroad. The agreement with Japan covered only four test flights; other flights would need further negotiations. Officials of Japan’s foreign and defense ministries would discuss safety measures because nearby Naha airport was in constant use for both civil and military flights. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Mar 5/81)
March 9: The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) reported that it had signed an agreement with the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) to provide satellite communications services to ships. INTELSAT would put at the service of INMARSAT three of its satellites to be launched between mid-1981 and mid-1982: two Intelsat Vs over the Indian Ocean, one over the Atlantic.
The maritime communications subsystems (MCS), each with a capacity of 30 voice channels plus data, would operate for up to seven years and would bring more than $100 million (U.S.) to INTELSAT. In addition to the MCS, each Intelsat V could carry up to 12,000 simultaneous international telephone calls and two television channels. (INTELSAT Release 81-1-1)
March 10: Dr. Alan Lovelace, NASA’s acting administrator, held a briefing on the agency’s FY82 amended budget, which he said “eliminates or defers all FY81 and FY82 new program initiatives in space science, aeronautics, and applications.” At a press conference January 15, he had discussed the budget for NASA proposed by the previous administration, just over $6.7 billion for FY82. The revised budget would reduce NASA funds by $604 million to a new total of $6,122 billion. The revisions preserved Space Shuttle test-flight schedules and research and development; allowed continued production of a four-orbiter fleet on the present schedule, which “meets the critical needs for both civil and military missions”; and kept the option for a fifth orbiter.
However, the funding would delete the solar-polar spacecraft; cut space and aeronautical technology development; delete construction-of-facilities projects; and eliminate 840 civil-service positions. It would defer the VOIR and the gamma-ray observatory launch from 1986 to 1988; cancel NOSS, a three-agency project; end the technology transfer program; and cancel funding for energy-technology activities, a geological applications program, and a search-and-rescue mission.
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
***** - AS i .-INTENftONAUf fiLAIft
Aeronautics programs canceled or deferred included efforts in vertical/ sidewise takeoff and landing (V/STOL) systems, supersonic cruise research, the variable-cycle engine, and the proposed numerical aerodynamic simulator. A initiative in large, composite primary aircraft structures was eliminated.
Other programs affected were materials processing in space, AgRISTARS, instrumentation for an upper-atmosphere research satellite, and the Spacelab flight schedule.
Lovelace said that adjustments in FY81 figures would reflect impact of decisions on the FY82 budget: an increase of $60 million in 1981 Space Shuttle changes and upgrading would “provide added schedule confidence” in Shuttle development and testing and in production of orbiter vehicles. The amended budget reflected NASA’s decision announced in January to discontinue the three-stage version of an inertial upper stage and to modify the Centaur upper stage instead. The modified stage would allow NASA to fly the Galileo mission to Jupiter on a single launch in 1985 and could be used for a restructured solar-polar mission in 1986 and VOIR in 1988. (NASA Text, Mar 10/81)
March 12:	The Soviet Union announced the launch of Soyuz T-4 at 10 p.m.
Moscow time to link with the orbiting space complex Salyut 6-Progress 12. Salyut 6, in space since September 29, 1977, had docked January 26 with cargo craft Progress 12, which refueled it automatically on ground command and used its engine to raise the orbit.
Soyuz T-4 carried as commander Col. Vladimir Kovalenok, veteran of Soyuz 25 that failed to dock with Salyut 6 in October 1977 and of Soyuz 29, which docked there for 140 days in June 1978. Also on the T-4 flight was Viktor Savinykh as flight engineer. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 12/81)
—Tass said March 13 that the Soyuz T-4 had docked with the Salyut 6-Progress 12 complex March 12 at 11:33 p.m. Moscow time and the cosmonauts had transferred into the space station, being the 15th crew to occupy it in the 3Vi years. They would check on-board systems and equipment, do maintenance, and replace instrumentation as necessary. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 13/81)
March 16: ESA reported that it had successfully tested injectors for the five Ariane engines to be used in the L03 flight, now scheduled for the latter part of June. The L03 vehicle could carry a tech capsule to monitor equipment and environment; a second flight model of the Meteosat 2 aimed at putting ESA into the Earth-observation field; and an India communications satellite known as Apple (Ariane passenger-payload experiment) at Kourou, French Guiana. (ESA Info 3)
March 17: NASA announced the selection of scientific instruments to be flown on the Gamma-Ray Observatory scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in 1988. Produced from the most energetic processes in the universe, gamma rays were the most direct source of knowledge about these processes.
Gamma rays to be measured by the observatory would begin at 100,000 electron volts (100 Kev) and continue up to several hundred million electron volts (100 Mev or more).
The instruments chosen were a transient-event monitor to detect short intense bursts of gamma rays of unknown origin and localize them to determine their distribution in the galaxy; a high-energy gamma-ray telescope that could measure the energy spectra and arrival directions of the highest-energy gamma rays it finds; an imaging Compton telescope to obtain gamma-ray maps of the celestial sphere at medium energies; and a low-energy gamma-ray spectrometer to look for evidence of nucleosynthesis in supernovas.
The observatory, with a planned 2-year lifetime would be one of the largest every orbited, weighing 23,000 pounds (10,432-kilograms) and measuring 25 feet (7.6 meters) in length and 12.5 feet (3.8 meters) in diameter. (NASA Release 81-40)
March 22: The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 39 from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 5:59 p.m. Moscow time to link with the orbiting Salyut 6/ Soyuz T-4 complex. Tass said that the Progress 12 cargo ship had undocked March 19 after being filled with discarded equipment to replace the supplies it brought and on March 20 had entered the atmosphere over the Pacific where it “ceased to exist.”
The crew of Soyuz 39 were veteran cosmonaut Vladimir Dzhanibekov as commander and the first citizen of Mongolia to fly in space, Jugderdemidyn Gurragcha, as researcher and “101st spaceman of the world.” They would join Vladimir Kovalenok and Viktor Savinykh already aboard the orbiting complex.
Tass said that the launch commemorated the 60th anniversary of the revolution of the Mongolian People’s Republic, 10th nation to participate in manned spaceflight. United Press International (UPI) said that it was in honor of the 20th anniversary of launching Yuri Gagarin, first man into space, on April 12, 1961. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 22/81; UPI, in W Star, May 23/81, A-8)
March 23: Digital techniques would cope with “the coming world telecommunications explosion” and cut the cost of overseas transmissions as well, said INTELSAT Director General Santiago Astrain in his keynote address to the fifth international conference on satellite communications in Genoa, Italy.
In the first use of the giant new Intelsat V (launched December 6, 1980, from Cape Canaveral into geostationary orbit 22,300 miles up), the speech was heard simultaneously in three countries. The telecast also marked INTELSAT’s first use of the 14/11 GHz frequency band. Receiving stations were two small 3-meter antennas at Genoa; a 10-meter torus antenna at COMSAT laboratories in Clarksburg, Md.; and 19-meter antenna at Goonhilly, England. (INTELSAT Release 81-5-1)
March 24: Biggest and best customer of the Space Shuttle, developed and operated by a civilian agency, would be the Department of Defense (DOD), said the Washington Star in one of a series of articles on the Shuttle program. At least 21 of 75 spaceflights planned before 1986 would be military missions, and neither NASA nor DOD would say what the flights were for. DOD had contributed millions of dollars to the Shuttle program in hardware and personnel, including a multibillion-dollar facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base for launches into polar orbit.
Although the Shuttle would serve both civilian and military purposes, the two sides showed differing degrees of confidence: current boosters had reached orbit only 90% of the time, 10% dumping expensive satellites into the sea. “We have yet to achieve routine access to space,” said Lt. Gen. Richard C. Henry, commander of the U.S. Air Force’s Space Division. Shuttle reliability should be “as close to 100% as you can get.” Most NASA missions slated for the 1980s and beyond could not be flown without the huge cargo bay of the Shuttle. The military, however, would keep its Adas and Titan expendable boosters just in case. Space, said Henry, was the high ground, “crucial for collecting and disseminating information, for reducing the confusion of battle, even for improving combat efficiency. . . . Everything we put up is supportive of our national security, but nothing is combative.” DOD, he added, had “made commitments far in excess of any civil users.” (W Star, Mar 24/81, A-8)
March 26: Japan’s National Space Development Agency conducted, for the first time, a successful 30-second firing test of its huge H-l liquid-fuel rocket. Japan’s LE5 engine fueled with liquid oxygen and hydrogen would serve as the second stage of H-l, which was scheduled to launch a 500-ton satellite into orbit in February 1986. Japan was now the fourth country to have a liquid-hydrogen engine,1 in addition to the United States, ESA, and China. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Mar 26/81)
March 30: Shuttle launch director George Page said that success of the two final fueling tests cleared the way for launch April 10, but official announcement would await a flight-readiness review at KSC Page said examination of the silo-like tank revealed “a few foam cracks” readily fixed with spray-on foam.
The launch-preparation schedule now in progress could indicate an April 9 launch, but Page wanted to give his teams a day off before the launch took place. Inquiry into the accidental death of a launchpad worker would not delay the liftoff, Page said, but the board would probably recommend revising safety procedures. (W Star, Mar 30/81 A-5)
March 31: NASA Headquarters held a press briefing on scientific results of Voyager 7’s Saturn encounter in 1980. On hand were project scientists Dr. Edward C. Stone, California Institute of Technology (CalTech); imaging-team
leader Dr. Bradford Smith, University of Arizona; and project manager E.K. Davis, JPL. Initial results included discovery of a ring system vastly more complex than imagined and a thick nitrogen atmosphere around Titan, Saturn’s major moon.
Voyager 1 took 17,500 photographs of Saturn and its satellites between August 22 and December 15, 1980. The closest approach was November 12—126,000 kilometers (78,000 miles) from Saturn’s cloud tops. From the spacecraft, as from Earth, the atmosphere of Saturn looked grossly similar to Jupiter’s, with alternating light and dark zones, circulating storm regions, and other distinguishable cloud markings.
Unlike Jupiter, however, Saturn’s markings were blurred by thick haze above the visible cloud tops; the haze layer at Jupiter was not as optically dense as Saturn’s. Wind speeds were substantially higher than on Jupiter and did not appear closely tied to belt-zone boundaries. Highest winds, blowing eastward at the equator, were four times stronger than on Jupiter; velocity decreased to near-zero at about 40° latitude north and south.
Saturn’s atmosphere consisted mostly of hydrogen, helium accounting for only 11% of atmospheric mass above the clouds compared to 19% at Jupiter. The difference was consistent with separation by gravity of helium and hydrogen in Saturn’s interior and could explain the excess energy radiated by Saturn over that received from the Sun.
Voyager 1 found that the A, B, and C rings visible from Earth consisted of hundreds of small ringlets, a few of them elliptical; the classical gaps also contained ringlets. Intertwining (“braiding”) of the rings was not explainable, although it might stem from electrostatic charging of their dust-sized particles. Voyager 1 discovered three new satellites, photographed the D and E rings, and confirmed the existence (2.8 Saturn radii from planet center) of a new ring postulated on the basis of Pioneer 11 findings.
The flyby observed all of Saturn’s known satellites except Phoebe; Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys, Dione, and Rhea, all appeared roughly spherical and composed mainly of water ice. Titan was the most interesting from an Earth viewpoint because of its atmosphere, similar to what would have evolved on Earth had it formed at Titan’s distance from the Sun. Previously considered the largest satellite in the solar system, Titan was found to be slightly smaller than the largest satellite of Jupiter (Ganymede). Both are larger than the planet Mercury. Titan’s atmosphere consisted mostly of nitrogen, the main constituent of Earth’s atmosphere; pressure near the surface was 60% greater than Earth’s. The surface was not visible in photographs from Voyager 1 because of the haze layer, though the southern hemisphere was slightly brighter than the northern, possibly a seasonal effect. Titan’s density seemed about twice that of water ice, indicating that it, like Ganymede, was made of equal amounts of rock and ice.
Voyager 1 was now headed out of the solar system, and its platform instruments were turned off December 19. Most fields-and-particles instruments on Voyager 1 were still monitoring the solar wind and its changes
with distance and time; exact location of the heliopause (outer edge of the solar wind) was unknown, but might be reached around 1990, Voyager 2 would reach Saturn in August 1981 and proceed on a trajectory to Uranus. (NASA Releases 81-41, 81-44)
April
April 10: Nine minutes before launch time, NASA grounded the Space Shuttle Columbia until April 12, because one of five computers in its nose was failing to communicate properly with the other four. The decision to scrub the launch came after a three-hour delay from the original 6:50 a.m. liftoff time; a fuelcell warning light showed in the cockpit just 16 minutes beforehand. No sooner was that problem solved than a second one appeared, when the program in the backup computer did not match that of the four primary computers controlling the ship. (W Star, Apr 10/81, A-l)
April 12: NASA launched Space Shuttle Columbia, designated STS-1, from pad A of KSC’s launch complex 39 at 3 seconds after 7 a.m. EST. All launch facilities, systems, and support equipment performed as designed; NASA said that damage to the launch pad was less than predicted. The solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRBs) jettisoned after burnout fell within the predicted impact “footprint” in the Atlantic about 14 nautical miles northeast of KSC, splashing down 7 minutes and 100 seconds after liftoff. All the SRB parts were recovered for reuse except two of the six parachutes.
The external tank separated at 8 minutes and 58 seconds into the flight and began to break up at about a 280,000,-foot altitude without tumbling as planned. A tumble system built into the tank to prevent skipping during reentry (and keep debris within a preplanned area) did not work. The Indian Ocean tracking ship, USNS Arnold, said that the tank-debris footprint was larger than expected.
Orbit-maneuvering system (OMS) firings (OMS-1 and OMS-2) put Columbia into an orbit with 133.7-nautical-mile apogee, 132.7-nautical-mile perigee, and 40.3° inclination. Ascent went as planned, with all events, through payload-bay door opening, occurring normally. (NASA MOR M-989-81-01 [postlaunch] May 12/81)
April 13: Press reports on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s launch noted the loss of some insulating tiles from engine-pod coverings visible, television viewers from an aft-facing cockpit window when astronaut Robert Crippen opened the payload-bay doors to dissipate heat into space as a way of cooling the orbiter. The areas lacking tiles, nine on the right-hand engine pod and four to six on the left-hand pod, had undergone the greatest stress during blastoff and ascent. Astronaut John Young relayed the view to Earth so flight directors could estimate the damage.
The two astronauts evinced so little concern about the missing tiles that, during a six-minute telecast late on Monday, neither mentioned the subject. As flight directors wanted to know whether the underside of the fuselage was
intact, Deputy Operations Director Eugene F. Kranz announced that supersecret U.S. Air Force cameras in Hawaii and Florida would photograph the orbiter in an attempt to discover further areas of damage. His statement hinted at the highly classified capability of DOD cameras: photographing areas lacking tiles of a moving craft 170 miles up would be like reading license plates in a Moscow parking lot from orbit, the Washington Post commented.
The fuselage’s underside housed Shuttle electronics and hydraulics systems that would navigate the craft on its return; move the elevons, keeping it on course during the last 1,000 miles; and lower the landing gear. Should loss of tiles expose the surface to reentry heat that could burn through the fuselage and the underlying systems, the orbiter without its landing gear lowered would have to crash-land at more than 200 mph. If photography showed underside tiles missing, Kranz said the crew would handle the reentry “to avoid a possible catastrophe,” not specifying the alternatives. Officials said that the areas known to be missing tiles were not critical to reentry; all visible edges of tail and wings appeared intact, suggesting that tiles v/crc lost during the stress of launch only on the engine pods. (W Post, Apr 13/81, A-l, A-20, WSJ, Apr 13/81 3; NYTimes, Apr 13/81, 1; W Star, Apr 13/81, A-l)
April 14: The Shuttle orbiter Columbia came to a “flawless” landing on a dry lake bed in the Mojave desert at Edwards Air Force Base, California, at 1:21 p.m. EST before a crowd that included NASA employees, 20,000 VIPs, and about 250,000 spectators who had camped out all night to watch Columbia’s return. Millions of people around the world also watched the return on television.
The astronauts got a wakeup call from mission control about 4 a.m. on their 30th orbit, with a special message for Robert Crippen: “You’ve waited 12 years for this. If you don’t wake up, you’ll miss the whole thing.” Before eating breakfast, the crew took time to check flight systems, guidance and navigation instruments, and the 44 reaction-control thrusters used during reentry. On 36th orbit, the crew received “final go” for deorbit firing. Columbia’s payload-bay doors were closed four hours before the scheduled landing time, and the astronauts put on their pressurized space suits in case of emergency.
Over the Indian Ocean at 12:22 p.m., an hour before landing and while out of contact with any tracking stations, Commander John Young turned Columbia tail-first and fired two on-board maneuvering rockets to brake the spacecraft; then, turned it nose-first again, tilting it slightly to permit full exposure of underside insulation. Reentry into the atmosphere at more than
17,000	mph took place at 12:48 p.m., 400,000 feet over the Pacific at Wake Island. The few tiles missing from tail areas after liftoff did not affect reentry at heats up to 2750°F. The 80-ton 122-foot long vehicle landed at 215 mph, twice the usual jet speed.
As Columbia’s wheels touched down, flight-control chief Don Puddy at Houston told his jubilant team to “Prepare for exhilaration,” allowing them about 15 seconds of celebration before resuming their jobs. For the first time,
a splashdown or landing did not immediately end a manned spaceflight. “Welcome home, Columbia,” Houston greeted the craft landing on the center line of the California runway. “Do you want us to take it up to the hangar, Joe?” Young radioed, and mission control responded “We’re going to dust it off first.”
A NASA official said that Columbia would probably begin its return flight to Cape Canaveral in seven or eight days, riding piggyback on its Boeing 747 carrier. An “optimistic” estimate was that the orbiter would fly again under its own power in less than six months, on a four-day flight from which it might be able to “turn around” and be ready to fly again in four months. (NYTimes, Apr 15/81, 1, 21; W Post, Apr 15/81, A-l; W Star, Apr 15/81, A-l; WSJ, Apr 15/81, 2)
April 15: NASA officials said that the Space Shuttle Columbia was “in excellent condition” after its flight and should be able to make at least 100 round trips into orbit. Technicians were hooking up ground power links and monitoring systems, photographing the tiles, and preparing to purge the fuel tanks and to install a shroud over the tail section for the flight back to Florida. Postflight servicing was running about 12 hours behind schedule. (WStar, Apr 16/81, A-l)
April 16: NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Columbia would not be ready by April 21 for ferrying back to KSC. A first postlanding check at DFRC indicated that no tiles were missing other than those noted before; later, however, two from in front of the windshield appeared to be missing, and gouges were evident on the tile surface from nose to aft fuselage. Gap fillers, thermal-barrier seals, and ablators were reported to “look good,” and technicians said that they could still read the stenciling on the tiles “with no shrinkage to speak of.” (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 16/81, 2)
April 17: The New York Times said that launch pad 39A at KSC, earlier reported to have been seriously damaged by Columbia’s blastoff, suffered “very minimal” damage, according to a KSC damage-assessment team. Wayne C. Ranow, an assistant to pad-site manager Tip Tallone, supplied a preliminary list of items damaged and added that just a few more seconds of “hang time” before the Shuttle cleared the pad would have caused much more damage. NASA spokesman Hugh Harris said KSC had expected “a lot more damage than that;” although it would take two weeks to restore the pad this time, “we will learn from the experience and change some things” to avoid delays in the program. The impact of the 6.6 million pounds of thrust was “similar to what we saw with Apollo,” Harris said. (NYTimes, Apr 17/81, A-26)
• ARC reported the effects of weightlessness on physiological processes shown in 14 U.S. experiments carried on unmanned Soviet satellite Cosmos
1129 in 1979. This was the only U.S. opportunity for biological research in space since 1975. The Vostok spacecraft sent into elliptical orbit and recovered within the Soviet Union 18 Vi days later was like those of two previous Cosmos missions in which the United States had participated in 1975 and 1977. Use of Cosmos vehicles was inexpensive for the United States because the Soviet Union paid for spacecraft, launch, and support activities; 40 scientists from 18 U.S. universities and research organizations shared in the mission.
The U.S. experimenters found changes in enzymes and in animal bone strength, growth rate, and mineral content, like the changes experienced by astronauts and cosmonauts; the results would help explain some of the problems of weightlessness. The Soviet Union provided 37 white rats and 60 fertile quail eggs, shared by the experimenters; U.S. scientists provided carrot-tissue cultures and plantlets and carrot slices inoculated with tumor-forming bacteria. One of two control groups of white rats kept in Moscow lived in ordinary cages and ate the flight diet; the other, called “synchronous control,” was housed in an identical spacecraft on the ground and subjected to vibration and gravity forces like those of launch and reentry, experiencing whatever changes in environment the orbiting Cosmos transmitted to earth. The only difference between the synchronous control group and the mammals in flight was the weightlessness.
After the Cosmos flight, the animals were recovered immediately, before they could readapt to Earth gravity, and a recovery team set up a mobile lab at the landing site to autopsy about a fifth of the rats. The rest were flown to Moscow, where some were autopsied after 6 days of readaptation to gravity, and the rest after 29 days. The Cosmos rats showed a 20% deficiency in bone mineral content compared to the synchronous-control subjects. In the rats readapting to normal gravity, some changes reversed within a few days; others took longer to return to normal.
Under normal conditions, the total amount of bone in an adult human or animal remains constant, with bone continually resorbed and replaced by newly formed bone. In spaceflight, production of new bone seems to slow down, but resorption continues, resulting in net loss of bone and a decrease in strength. The greatest change is in weight-bearing bones, but even those not bearing weight (as jaw bones) show changes in mineral content and the cells forming new bone.
The experiments included the first attempt to breed animals in spacemating the rats and examining how embryos developed in a weightless state. This experiment did not succeed, however, and no litters were produced; the control group, to the surprise of Soviet and U.S. scientists, showed the same results. The scientists were still seeking a reason for the failure. The quail eggs provided no information on embryo development because the incubator failed on the 13th day of flight. The plants showed no ill effects; carrot embryos and plant tumors grew in space just as on the ground, suggesting that spaceflight had no effect on carrot tissue. (ARC Release 81-21)
April 21: NASA said that the most likely date for ferrying the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia back to KSC would be April 25 for the flight to Tinker Air Force Base in Oklahoma and April 26 for the flight from Tinker to KSC. Delays in deservicing were “mainly due to first-time-thru problems,” the agency said, referring to the lack of interface between Columbia and the mate/demate device “because of the unavailability of OV-2” which had not been checked out with the new ground-servicing equipment “for form, fit and function.” NASA noted that the three-day stretch in the schedule had covered leaks in quick-disconnect systems, new position of the work stand, the “unexpected OV-102 configuration (engine-bell placement that no longer fitted into the mate/demate device), and changes in operational maintenance instructions.
A NASA press release pointed out that deservicing the orbiter involved “removal or containment of hazardous propellants such as toxic hypergolics and cryogenics,” inspecting its systems (including the thermal protection system), and raising the orbiter, with its 17-piece tailcone in place, to a stand where it could be fastened to its 747 carrier. Reviewing events, Aviation Week Space Technology said that ground personnel wearing protective suits had trouble connecting hoses to orbiter interfaces for off-loading propellants and purging systems because of limited space; operations were complicated by wind, rain, and lightning, with a series of four power losses in service facility, each requiring a two-hour minimum to power up again by following a checklist. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 21/81; NASA Release 81-50; DFRC Release 81-18; AvWk, Apr 27/81, 30-31)
April 23: President Reagan announced the nomination of business executive James Montgomery Beggs as administrator and Dr. Hans Mark as deputy administrator of NASA. If confirmed, Beggs (who was executive vice president and a director of General Dynamics Corporation, which he had joined in January 1974), would be the sixth person to head the civilian space agency, succeeding Dr. Robert A. Frosch.
Beggs had been associate administrator in the Office of Advanced Research and Technology (OART) at NASA in 1968-69, leaving to become undersecretary at the Department of Transportation (DOT). Mark, who became secretary of the Air Force in July 1979 the being undersecretary since 1977, was formerly director of NASA’s ARC. (NASA Release 81-51; MSFC Release 81-50; NYTimes, Apr 24/81, A-12; W Post, Apr 25/81 A-4)
• John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Columbia’s maiden flight, told of their experience at at 75-minute JSC press conference carried on closed-circuit television to NASA Headquarters and other centers. They said that the orbiter was an incomparable flying machine, surprisingly easy to control, and that the mission was “what NASA calls nominal, although I think you’re going to have to call it phenomenal,” Young reported. Neither crewman expressed concern over the loss of tiles from the aft end of the vehicle, detected shortly
after launch. Young said that he was impressed by the fact that the metal under the tiles did not heat up during reentry as much as expected: he said “a lot” of the thermal tiles on the topside could probably be eliminated in future missions, lowering spacecraft weight and increasing the limit on payload weight, now set at 65,000 pounds.
Young said that he went immediately upon landing to look at the underside of the orbiter, which had encountered the most heat. “People had been telling us it was impossible that some of these tiles wouldn’t fall off. Well, none of them fell off, and those tiles went through some of the roughest ascent and reentry you can imagine.” “Nothing failed. Statistically, I didn’t think that was possible,” Crippen added. “We’ve been working 3 years to learn how to handle catastrophes, and all we did the whole time was sit back and enjoy it.”
The cruise was not perfect, the astronauts agreed: the craft was cold to the point of discomfort some of the time, and the toilet shut down near the end of the flight. The crew kept getting tangled in communications lines, and Columbia “landed long” instead of at its prescribed touchdown spot. Young said the chill could be avoided by putting interior temperature sensors nearer to the crew than to heat-emitting electronic gear. Cordless microphones would solve the problem of tangled cords, and engineers were already working on the toilet program. Young said that he had landed Columbia farther down the 7-mile long runway than he was asked in order to test the Shuttle’s wings and tail for lift; he said that the lift he got at landing was “remarkable.” “We hardly used our brakes. I tell you that was quite a performance, taking 99 tons out of orbit and getting it back down all in one piece.”
A reporter asked Crippen if his pulse rate of 130 at liftoff, compared to Young’s 90, meant that he was more excited. “You betchum I was excited,” he replied. “What you don’t understand is, I was excited too,” Young added. “I just can’t make it go any faster.” (Young is 50, seven years older than Crippen.)
The mission was so successful that Columbia might fly again as early as September 23, with a third test in December and a final test in April 1982. With that schedule, NASA might begin operational flights carrying cargo into space as early as September 1982. Young said they had been given 135 flight objectives and had completed all 135. “You really should be proud of this vehicle,” he told the JSC audience. (NASA Text, postflight brfg, Apr 23/81; NYTimes, Apr 24/81, A—12; WPost, Apr 24/81, A-6; W Star, Apr 24/81, A—12; B Sun, Apr 24/81, A-6)
April 27: NASA announced that it would consolidate two major field installations as of October 1, 1981: DFRC would become an operational element and component of ARC, and Wallops Flight Center (WFC) would become an operational element and component of GSFC. DFRC and WFC would retain their identity under the overall management of ARC and GSFC, respectively. (NASA anno, Apr 27/81; NASA Release 81-54)
April 27: Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) reported that Heao 2, NASA’s second high-energy astronomy observatory (Heao), had expended its control-gas supply and ended its mission. One of a family of three “highly successful” scientific satellites managed by MSFC, Heao 2 (like its predecessor, Heao I) had performed twice as long as its predicted design life; a third observatory was still operating.
Launched November 13, 1978, Heao 2 carried the world’s largest focusing X-ray telescope and an array of astronomical instruments; it had provided data on X-ray output of normal stars, content of supernova remnants, distribution of mass in galaxies, and the origin of the extragalactic X-ray background. MSFC said that participating astronomers would need years to analyze all the data received. Unable to maintain attitude after exhausting its control fuel April 25, the spacecraft was powered down April 26. Reentry and burnup would probably occur early in 1982. (MSFC Release 81-52; NASA Release
81-56)
April 28: Shuttle orbiter Columbia on its 747 carrier landed at the Shuttle landing facility runway at KSC at 11:24 a.m. EDT. Demating began in preparation for moving it into the processing facility for 72 hours of troubleshooting.
CBS-TV News said hundreds of employees and their families were on hand for the arrival; reporter Bruce Hall said that, although the orbiter’s condition was “excellent,” a number of NASA officials did not expect the next launch to take place before 1982. Jules Bergman of ABC-TV said that work on the orbiter would include installing a miniature remote-control arm to deploy satellites and retrieve them on future missions. The second flight, STS-2, would test the arm only. NASA’s current target date was said to be mid-October, though much work remained to be done on the reusable boosters and the launch pad. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 29/81; DOD RadioTv Rpts, Apr 29/81)
• NASA’s acting administrator, Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, signed a memorandum of understanding with Hans-Hilger Haunschild of the Federal Republic of Germany’s (FRG) ministry for research and technology on FRG use of the STS (Shuttle), with NASA furnishing launch and support services on a reimbursable basis. NASA said that the Federal Republic had “long been a supporter” of STS and had contributed 40% to ESA’s development of Spacelab, soon to be a Shuttle payload with laboratory facilities like those on Earth but adapted for zero gravity.
The Federal Republic of Germany had already paid NASA for two reimbursable Spacelab missions: D-1, materials processing and life-sciences experiments, and D-4, astrophysics experiments; it also planned to launch an X-ray satellite (Rosat) from the Shuttle in 1986. In addition, private and scientific organizations in West Germany had reserved 25 small self-contained payloads for eventual shuttle flight on a space-available basis. (NASA Release 81-58)
May
May 8: NASA announced that the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA), chosen last summer to run a nationwide student competition to develop payloads to fly on the Shuttle, had picked from 191 semifinal entries 10 finalists to attend a conference at KSC on preparing their experiments for payload assignment.
Finalists and their teacher-advisers would view KSC preparations for Columbia’s second flight, now scheduled for October; the finalists and their teachers as well as their schools would receive special medallions.
The winners and their experiments were Wendy A. Angelo of New York, use of biofeedback to help Shuttle crew members relax or sleep; Aaron K.
Gillette, Florida, growth of common sponges in zero gravity; Pritchett A.
Harris, Pennsylvania, simulating planetary atmosphere; Karla R. Hauersperger, North Carolina, space-travel effect on chromium in the human body; Michelle A. Issel, Connecticut, formation of crystals from supersaturated solution in weightlessness; Amy M. Kusske, California, space-travel effect on lipoprotein profiles; Dave D. Madura, Indiana, space-travel effect on human cell division; Todd E. Nelson, Minnesota, insects in zero-g; D. Scott Thomas, Pennsylvania, convection in zero-g; Daniel J. Weber, New York, effect of weightlessness on arthritis in rats. (NASA Release 81-59)
May 14: The Soviet Union launched from Baykonur the Soyuz 40 spacecraft crewed by Leonid Popov, who in 1980 achieved a world space-endurance record of 185 days with fellow cosmonaut Valery Ryumin, and Dumitru Prunariu of Romania’s air force. Tass said the ship would dock with orbiting space station Salyut 6,. occupied since March 14 by Vladimir Kovalenok and Viktor Savinykh.
This flight, ninth in the Intercosmos program of launching a Soviet cosmonaut with one from another country, would complete the first round that began in March 1978 with representatives from Bulgaria, East Germany,
Poland, Cuba, Hungary, Vietnam, Czechoslovakia, and Mongolia. (W Star,
May 15/81, A-16)
May 15: NASA launched the U.S. Navy’s improved Transit navigational satellite Nova 1 at 2:07 a.m. from the Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC) on a Scout vehicle into a polar transfer orbit with 935-kilometer apogee, 353-kilometer perigee, 90.16° inclination, and 97.67-minute period.
The solar panels deployed, and the payload was in a housekeeping mode. A multiple-burn spacecraft motor fired on later orbit would raise the 368-pound spacecraft’s altitude to about 600 nautical miles.
This 102d launch of a Scout was the ninth success in a row. NASA provided the launch under a June 1962 agreement with DOD to reimburse NASA for the cost of Scout vehicles, Western Test Range (WTR) launch services, and mission support, as required. So far, NASA had launched 15 Transit satellites and 3 Transit improvement program satellites, of which 5 were currently operating. The Navy would reimburse NASA about $7.6 million for services and hardware provided for the program ($1,825 million for launch-vehicle hardware; $0,950 million for WTR launch services and mission support; $4,825 million for FY81 support services). (NASA MOR 0-490-603-81-01 [prelaunch] May 13/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, May 18/81; SF, Oct 81, 274)
• NASA announced that it would launch the next Shuttle flight (STS-2) on September 30, if turnaround procedures went smoothly. JSC spokesman Robert Dotts said that the thermal-protection system “exceeded our expectations” and that the amount of repair needed would not affect turnaround time. Only 10 or 12 of the foamed-glass tiles protecting Columbia’s fuselage during reentry would need replacement. Inch-deep gouges all over the surface of the Shuttle mostly occurred during takeoff. NASA cautioned that the orbiter would be undergoing turnaround for the first time, and unforeseen problems could affect the flight schedule. (NASA Release 81-65; MSFC Release 81-61; W Post, May 16/81, A-2)
May 19: Some 40 astronauts were on hand at the White House as President Reagan awarded John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Space Shuttle Columbia’s first flight, the Distinguished Service Medal. Young also received a Space Medal of Honor for his five spaceflights in two decades as an astronaut.
The guest list of 160 included present and former space officials and astronauts, including six of the original Mercury seven: Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the Earth;
L.	Gordon Cooper, M. Scott Carpenter, Walter M. Schirra, and Donald K. Slayton. (Virgil L. Grissom, the seventh, had died 14 years ago in a launch-pad fire.) The group included the crew of Apollo 8 that orbited the Moon at Christmas in 1968: Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Also on hand were the Apollo 11 moon walkers, Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and the third pilot on their mission, Michael Collins. This was the first time so many former astronauts from the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab projects had come together. They did so at the invitation of the president to honor the reusable Shuttle, most recent U.S. space effort, and the men who flew it into orbit for the first time last month.
The president described the Shuttle as “the world’s first true space transportation system,” saying it would affect American life in both subtle and dramatic ways, “bringing energy and excitement to our national reserve.” The Columbia crewmen presented the president and vice president with American flags they had carried on the Shuttle’s first flight. They also gave the president
a gold spaceflight jacket with the presidential seal, and Reagan responded: “You won’t mind if I only wear this in Earth’s atmosphere.”
Reagan also awarded the presidential citizen’s medal to Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting head of NASA, who had been in charge of the Shuttle’s first flight. Lovelace was the fourth recipient of the medal, established in 1969. (Text, WhHs remarks, May 19/81; NASA Releases 81-70, 81-71 NYTimes, May 20/81, A-22, W Post, May 20/81, A-2; W Star, May 20/81, A-3)
May 22: After a series of delays, NASA launched GOES-E, fifth of a series of geostationary operational environmental satellites funded by NOAA, from the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) at 6:29 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 49,768-kilometer apogee, 192-kilometer perigee, 921-minute period, and 24.1° inclination. The craft would move into synchronous orbit at 85 °W by the first week of June for testing.
The Hughes-built 875-pound satellite, Goes 5 in orbit, carried a new visible-infrared radiometric atmospheric sounder (VAS)—modified from the original visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR) first carried by Goes 4 in September 1980—to provide not only visual imagery of Earth surface and cloud cover and infrared sea-surface temperature but also temperatures and amount, distribution, and movement of water vapor at various altitudes.
Goes 5 would ultimately replace an older craft at 75 °W, now serving as “Goes East” to monitor the eastern United States and Canada, Central America, South America, and much of the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA MOR E-612-81-03 [prelaunch] Apr 28/81, [postlaunch] July 23/85; NASA wkly SSR, GSFC, May 28/81; D/SD, May 29/81, 156; AvWk, June 15/81, 53; Spacewarn SPX-332, June 30/81)
May 23: NASA launched the world’s largest telecommunications satellite, Intelsat V-2, from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur at 6:42 p.m. EDT into a highly elliptical transfer orbit with 35,960-kilometer apogee, 172-kilometer perigee, 633.9-minute period, and 24.1° inclination. Originally scheduled for May 21, the launch was delayed by computer problems in the rocket’s main safety-control system.
The huge communications satellite, weighing more than 2 tons, was second in a new series of nine international communications satellites the first having been launched December 9, 1980, as an on-orbit spare for the Atlantic network, which would eventually consist of four satellites. The first five Intelsat Vs would be launched by Atlas Centaur; the next three, by Europe’s Ariane booster. Average estimated cost of an Atlas Centaur launch was $42 million; that of an Ariane launch was $27 million. Overall cost of the Intelsat V program was $680 million, or some $76 million for each mission; estimated average cost of each satellite was $34 million.
Intelsat V-2, after coming on station at 355 °E for a month of testing, would be operational by July at 335.5 °E, handling communications between the Americas and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. It could transmit 12,000
telephone calls simultaneously in addition to two television color channels, having twice the capacity of Intelsat IV-As previously launched by NASA for INTELSAT. The 106-nation organization jointly owned and operated 12 satellites over the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans in order to handle two-thirds of the world’s overseas communications, from telegrams and telephone calls to television and data.
In 1984, INTELSAT would begin a series of three improved Intelsat V-As capable of 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two television channels; 1986 would inaugurate Intelsat Vis, each handling more than 40,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two television channels and designed for launch by either the Ariane or the Space Shuttle. (NASA MOR-491-203-81-02 [prelaunch] May 20/81, [postlaunch] June 17/81; NASA Release 81-60; INTELSAT Release 81-10-1; W Post, May 24/81, A-3, D/SD, May 27/81, 140; A/D, May 28/81, 151; Spacewarn SPX-332, June 30/81)
May 26: NASA announced the establishment of two new divisions within the Office of Space Transportation Systems and the disestablishment of the Expendable Equipment Division. L.M. Weeks, NASA Headquarters deputy associate administrator for space transportation systems, said the change would direct increased attention and impetus to the widebody Centaur program recently approved by NASA.
A new Upper Stage Division would manage the widebody Centaur, the inertial Upper stage (IUS), the spinning solid upper stage (SSUS), and the solar-electric propulsion system (SEPS) proposed for use on the Galileo and solar-polar missions. Frank van Rensselaer, director of the former Expendable Equipment Division, would direct the new upper Stage Division. Jerry Fitts would direct a new Solid Rocket Booster and External Tank (SRB/ET) Division. (NASA anno May 26/81)
• Press reports said that two the cosmonauts who occupied orbiting space station Salyut 6 for 75 days had returned safely at 4:38 p.m. Moscow time in Soyuz T-4 to a landing site in Kazakhstan. Col. Vladimir Kovalenok, flight commander, and flight engineer Viktor Savinykh had two sets of visitors during their mission: Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Mongolian cosmonaut Jugderdemidyn Gurragcha of Soyuz 39 in March and Leonid Popov and Romanian cosmonaut Dumitru Prunariu of Soyuz 40, just a week ago.
The New York Times said that this was the final mission for Salyut 6, which would probably be abandoned. Launched in 1977, it had been the base for nearly four years of record-setting tests of human endurance. Last week, Popov said that the Soviet Union would also retire the old-model two-person Soyuz spacecraft used for the past 14 years in favor of the Soyuz-T, a three-man version more maneuverable and sophisticated, with four successful flights, including the one just ended. (NYTimes, May 27/81, A-l; W Post, May 27/81, A-14)
During May: The National Aeronautic Association (NAA) reported unofficial records set by Columbia’s first flight, pending review for world certification. As the official U.S. certification authority for aerospace records since 1905 and sole U.S. representative of the Federal Aeronautique International (FAI), NAA gave the following figures: duration, 54 hours, 20 minutes, 52 seconds; maximum altitude, 209 kilometers; distance, 1,144,709 kilometers; mass carried into orbit, 95,201 kilograms; payload mass to altitude, 4624 kilograms. NAA said that Columbia was “the world’s first and only aerospacecraft.. .capable of operating in space or in the atmosphere.” NAA had awarded the Voyager mission team represented by Dr. Edward C. Stone the Collier Trophy, oldest U.S. aviation award, for space exploration achievement peaking in the close examination of Saturn after a comparable visit to Jupiter the previous years. Established in 1911 and first presented to Glenn Curtiss for development of a seaplane, the Collier Trophy was awarded yearly for achievement demonstrated by actual use. (NAA newsletter, May 1981)
June
June 1: NASA said that the principal investigators for the plasma-wave instruments on the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)-managed Voyager 2, heading for rendezvous with Saturn in August 1981, discovered that the spacecraft had encountered the magnetic tail of Jupiter almost two years after leaving that planet, confirming a theory that the huge magnetosphere might extend all the way to Saturn.
Dr. Frederick L. Scarf, scientist at TRW Inc., and his colleagues, Dr. Donald Gurnett and Dr. William Kurth of the University of Iowa, found plasma-wave phenomena from February 1981 identical to those of July and August 1979, when Voyager 2 had left Jupiter but was still in that planet’s magnetosphere. Scarf had published in 1979 in the Journal of Geophysical Research his idea that Jupiter’s magnctotail might reach as far as Saturn and that the rare alignment of outer planets that permitted the successive Jupiter-Saturn encounters might put Voyager 2 and Saturn simultaneously into Jupiter’s far-flung influence.
Inside the Jovian tail, Saturn could experience unusual conditions observable by the Voyager when it arrived in August. The next Saturn encounter might differ widely from the two previous. (NASA Release 81-73)
June 2: MSFC said that NASA’s third high-energy astronomy observatory, Heao 3, used the last of its attitude-control thruster gas and was powered down, completing a mission begun in September 1979 to study pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes in space, whose high energy output could not be studied with Earth-based telescopes due to atmospheric interference. With 20 mqnths of operation in orbit, Heao 3 was the third of its type to perform for more than twice its design lifetime. It would reenter and burn up later this year. (MSFC Release 81-69; NASA Release 81-77)
• Lewis Research Center (LeRC) said that it had awarded four contracts totaling more than $7 million for design and development of a modified Centaur launch vehicle and components to be used as a Shuttle upper stage.
A $1,545 million contract with Teledyne Industries called for five digital computer units and nine remote multiplex units. A $1,593 million contract with Honeywell was for three inertial-measurement groups, part of an automatic navigation and guidance system. A $3,412 million contract with General Dynamics was for design and development of two modified Centaur vehicles. A $.933 million contract with United Technologies Corporation would cover building four RL10-3-3A rocket engines, two of which would provide primary thrust for one Centaur. Work under these contracts would con
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
tinue through September 1981; they were all to support the Galileo mission to Jupiter, scheduled for launch in 1985, and the international solar-polar mission in 1986.
The Centaur for these missions would resemble the one used over the past 15 years as an upper stage for Atlas and Titan boosters on Mariner missions to Mars and Venus, Pioneer missions to Jupiter and Venus, Viking and Voyager missions, and the cooperative Helios missions with West Germany. It had carried low Earth-orbit missions for NASA, such as the Heao series and commercial and military geosynchronous satellites. (LeRC Release 81-26; NASA Release 81-75)
• DFRC said that its newly refurbished Canberra bomber would be the test airplane for an atmospheric-turbulence measurement program to gather data on sudden wind changes creating abrupt and uneven pressures on different areas of an aircraft. Engineers would use the information to improve aircraft design and operation, with special attention to approach and takeoff during strong winds and unstable atmospheric conditions.
Project engineers chose the B-57B because of its ability to withstand high g forces; its wings were extremely rigid and strong enough to recover from upsets during severe turbulence. Its cockpit held two crewmen, so that a meteorologist could fly as observer during the tests. Wen Painter, project manager for the program, said that scientists do not fully understand wind-shear phenomena and expect the flight tests to produce valuable data.
The B-57B would fly at Edwards Air Force Base, Denver, Oklahoma City, Huntsville, Cape Canaveral, and Wallops Island, all of which exhibited distinctive types of turbulence. Other NASA centers participating in the study would be ARC, LaRC, and MSFC. (DFRC Release 81-21)
June 10: NASA’s Atmosphere Explorer 5 reentered Earth’s atmosphere after 31,268 orbits and more than 5'A years of service. Launched from KSC November 20, 1975, the 720-kilogram (1,587-pourd) AE-5 carried 15 highly specialized instruments to gather data on Earth’s near-space environment. It was the first spacecraft using on-board propulsion to make large orbit changes and to use a central computer to make all data acquired immediately accessible to members of investigator teams at terminals in their own facilities.
The last signal from AE-5 came over Hawaii, and no signal was received when it was due over Ascension Island. Trajectory of the descent was across the Pacific, Central America, and toward the Atlantic; the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) confirmed reentry into the atmosphere over the Caribbean east of Nicaragua at 9:57 a.m. EE'T. (NASA Release 81-86)
June 11: The Soviet Union’s space program must develop a low-cost transport vehicle like the U.S. Space shuttle, according to Konstantin P. Feoktistov, one of the three cosmonauts who orbited the Earth six times in Vostok 1 in 1964. Feoktistov, now a professor of technical sciences doing research for the Soviet
space program, did not specifically mention the successful flight of Columbia in April but called for solution of technological problems in space travel such as cheap lightweight batteries. The New York Times quoted from Pravda, the official Communist Party newspaper, the first official acknowledgment by the Soviet Union that it would like to have a shuttle-like vehicle for manned space flights.
Tass said June 19 that Cosmos 1267 had docked with the empty Salyut 6 with the mission of testing systems “of the design of future spacecraft and for training in the methods of assembly of orbital complexes of a big size and weight.” The Washington Post said that the linkup was “the precursor of a very large space complex that U.S. sources expect to have military uses.” (NYTimes, June 11 81, A-18; W Post, June 20/81, A-9; FBIS, Tass in English, June 91/81)
June 12: NASA signed an agreement with the West German firm Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom (MBB) covering the first flight of shuttle-pallet satellite SPAS-01 scheduled for orbit on STS-5, the first operational Shuttle flight, in September 1982. This would be the first payload deployed and retrieved by the Shuttle’s Canadian-built remote-manipulator system (RMS).
The 1,814-kilogram (4,000-pound) payload would operate inside the payload bay and would also be a free flyer when deployed, using an on-board stabilization and control system. NASA would use it to test RMS capabilities during the five-day mission, with a 70-mm camera on the payload to record deployment, free flight, retrieval, and reberthing. MBB would conduct materials-processing experiments while the payload was in the shuttle bay.
The agreement was signed for NASA by Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, and for MBB by Dr. Johannes Schubert and Dr. Peter C. Bittner, general manager and commercial director of MBB’s space division. The pact would cover KSC and JSC launch services as well as NASA’s use of the payload for RMS testing. (NASA Release 81-80)
June 15: NASA said that investigators at GSFC and the University of Maryland had discovered a natural infrared laser on Mars, a find that could help detect new planets in the universe and require rewrites of books on general physics of the planetary atmosphere. Members of the team were Dr. Michael J. Mumma, Dr. David Buhl, Dr. Gordon Chin, Dr. Drake Deming, Fred Espenak, and Dr. Theodore Kostiuk, all of GSFC, and Dr. David Zipoy of the University of Maryland. The discovery was reported in Science magazine.
Optical lasers since their 50-year-ago invention had proved extremely useful not only in scientific laboratories but also in everyday life; for example, as price scanners in supermarkets. However, the investigators said, no naturally occurring laser had ever been reported, although “the extreme variety of physical and chemical environments of extraterrestrial objects.. .arguefd] that natural lasers must exist.”
In theory, “natural” lasers would occur whenever atoms or molecules were stimulated to release photons in transition from higher to lower energy states. A Goddard-developed device (an infrared heterodyne spectrometer) used with the McMath solar telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona had detected such a process in the Mars atmosphere (made up almost entirely of cabon dioxide) between January and April 1980. The new device let the scientists confirm occurrence of a molecular-population inversion, necessary for lasing.
The natural laser on Mars, identical in principle to man-made lasers with commercial, scientific, and military applications, had a total continuous power output of more than a million megawatts, equivalent to that generated by a thousand large hydroelectric-power projects; in fact, the Mars laser generated more than five times the total power output of the United States. The investigators said orbiting satellites might eventually be able to extract power from the natural laser and beam it wherever needed. (NASA Release 81-78)
June 16: NASA announced that Perkin-Elmer Corporation’s Danbury, Connecticut, facility had finished shaping and polishing the 94-inch (2.4-meter) diameter primary mirror for the space telescope, main optical component of the telescope assembly. Launched on the Shuttle early in 1985, the 12-ton unmanned telescope would orbit at 600 kilometers (370 miles) above the interfering haze of Earth’s atmosphere. It would be able to see objects 50 times fainter than observable from Earth telescopes, observing about 350 times more volume of space and 7 times further into space than now possible, up to 14 billion light-years. To make full use of this undistorted view of space, telescope parts had to be much more accurate than those in Earth telescopes. The mirror exhibited a deviation at any point on its surface of less than one millionth of an inch from an ideally perfect surface.
Manufacture of the mirror blank began in October 1977 at Corning Glass Works, which delivered it to Perkin-Elmer in December 1978. The blank was made of a Corning product called ultra-low-expansion glass, which has extremely low thermal expansion properties. Optical fabrication began with rough grinding of front and back surfaces of the blank, followed in August 1980 by fine polishing of the front surface, using a computer-controlled polisher. The next stage of fabrication would be the application to the polished surface of two uniform extremely thin coatings, one a reflective layer of pure aluminum, the other a protective layer of magnesium fluoride to prevent oxidation of the aluminum. Coating would take place at Perkin-Elmer in the world’s largest vacuum chamber, which operates at a vacuum very near that of space. After coating, the mirror would be installed in the optical telescope and aligned to the secondary mirror, focal plane, scientific instruments, and guidance sensors. The completed optical telescope would then be integrated into a support-systems module, a major element of the space telescope, under construction by Lockheed.
The space telescope project was managed by MSFC. (NASA Release 81-82)
June 17: MSFC awarded a $400,000 contract to McDonnell Douglas as the follow-up of an initial study of ideas for manned platforms in space. MSFC was the lead NASA center for the study of space platforms designed to carry payloads of science experiments left in orbit by the Shuttle, which would return from time to time to replace equipment in orbit. As a structure grew, temporary manned modules would be added, with the objective of a permanent structure where scientists and technicians would do research for extended periods of time. The McDonnell Douglas study would be completed in about 10 months. (MSFC Release 81-68)
June 18: ESA successfully launched its Ariane rocket from Kourou, French Guiana, at 2:33 p.m. local time, carrying Indian-built comsat Apple and ESA’s own Meteosat 2 into an orbit with 36,206-kilometer apogee and 201-kilometer perigee and “breaking a quarter-century two-power monopoly on space achievements,” as the Washington Post and Washington Star agreed.
Michel Bignier, ESA’s director of space and transport systems, said “space is no longer the exclusive preserve of a few powerful nations but now belongs to all of humanity.” Pierre Morel, director general of the Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), said the third Ariane launch “opens the way to European commercial exploitation of space.” ESA had hoped for a third of the 180 to 200 satellite launches scheduled for the next decade; Ariane had firm contracts for 7 launches through 1985 and options for another 14.
Ariane’s second launch in May 1980 had ended in failure when the rocket burst into flames moments after leaving the pad. The first test in December 1979 had been successful, but that rocket carried no satellites. The $1.6 billion Ariane program was funded by 10 nations, with France (contributing about 64%) and West Germany (about 20%) as major participants. (ESA Info 10, 11, 12; WPost, June 20/81, A-9; WStar, June 20/81, D-2; Nature, June 25/81, 604)	'
June 19: NASA Headquarters released an official report on the investigation of the March 19, 1981, accident at KSC that killed two employees of Rockwell International, who went into the Shuttle’s aft compartment while it was filled with gaseous nitrogen. It had been determined that an all-clear signal was given too soon.
Primary findings by an investigative board headed by Charles D. Gay, KSC director of expendable-vehicle operations, were that test procedures lacked adequate steps to clear a vehicle or pad for hazardous operations, or to partially or completely reopen the vehicle or pad for resumption of normal work; also, that a breakdown occurred in the operational command/coordination process. The report of more than 400 pages included 19 pages of findings, observations, and recommendations to prevent similar accidents in future. (NASA Release 81-85; W Post, June 20/81, A-5)
• NASA said that astronaut Alan L. Bean, fourth man to set foot on the Moon, would resign effective June 26 to devote full time to his career as a painter. Bean, selected in the third group of astronauts in the fall of 1963, flew on the second moon-landing mission, Apollo 12, in November 1969, exploring the Ocean of Storms with Charles (Pete) Conrad, Jr., as Richard F. Gordon circled in the command module. He captained the second Skylab mission in July-September 1973 and was backup spacecraft commander for the 1975 U.S.-USSR Apolio-Soyuz mission. He noted that in his 18 years as astronaut he had seen sights no artist had ever viewed firsthand, and he hoped to record his experiences through his art.
Bean’s time in space—1,671 hours 45 minutes—made him first among active U.S. astronauts and fourth of all in total spaceflight time. He was currently head of astronaut-candidate operations and training. His resignation would leave in the corps only one of the 12 U.S. astronauts who had walked on the Moon: John Young, chief of the astronaut office and commander of shuttle Columbia’s first flight last April. (NASA Release 81-87)
June 23: A U.S. Air Force launch team from WSMC, Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, launched NOAA-C under NASA direction from WSMC at 6:53 a.m EDT on an Atlas F into a polar orbit with 863-kilometer apogee, 845-kilometer perigee, 101.9-minute period, and 98.9° inclination. The
371-centimeter-high spacecraft, 188 centimeters in diameter weighing 723 kilograms in orbit, was fourth of eight advanced weather satellites to be launched in the Tiros-N series to measure Earth-atmosphere temperature and humidity, sea-surface temperature, and proton-electron flux near the Earth.
Designated NOAA 7 in orbit, the spacecraft with a two-year design life carried the most versatile scanning radiometer ever launched, gathering visual and infrared images and other measurements in five spectral channels. (Two earlier craft in the series carried four-channel radiometers: NOAA 6 was still operational, but Tiros N was turned off February 21 after operating for twice its design life.) NOAA 7 also carried a joint U.S. Air Force-NASA instrument to monitor in the spacecraft vicinity any environmental contamination from its propulsion systems; such contamination could degrade performance of future instruments planned for launch on similiar satellites.
Successful launch of NOAA 7 meant that two polar-orbiting satellites would circle the Earth, viewing virtually all of its surface at least twice each 24 hours. NOAA routinely used data and imagery from the polar orbiters as well as from two geostationary spacecraft it was operating. NOAA 6 and NOAA 7 would transmit unprocessed sensor data in real time to ground stations in more than 120 nations, while passing overhead. Four more satellites in this series would be launched through 1985 on a call-up basis to ensure uninterrupted data flow.
NOAA 7, built by RCA Astro-Electronics, under contract to GSFC, industry interface for NOAA, cost about $15 million to build and $7.5 million to launch. (NASA MOR E-615-81-03 prelaunch summary, June 2/81; [prelaunchj
June 9/81; NASA Release 81-76; NASA wkly SSR, June 25/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 24, 30/81; SPX-332)
• The House of Representatives passed NASA’s authorization bill by a vote of 404-13. The amount, the same that appeared in the amended budget request, was $6,122 billion for research and development, construction of facilities, and research and program management. One amendment was adopted, reducing the authorization for aeronautical research and technology by $11.2 million. (CR, June 23/81, D773; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 24/81)
June 25: The Senate confirmed appointment of James M. Beggs as administrator of NASA. (CR, June 25/81, D797)
July
July 2: Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting adminsitrator, left the agency July 11 to become corporate vice president for science and engineering at General Dynamics Corporation, St. Louis, Mo., in charge of research, engineering, advanced product and program development, and development and implementation of corporate engineering and research policy. NASA’s new chief, James
M.	Beggs, who began his new job July 9, had been executive vice president for aerospace at General Dynamics.
Lovelace had been acting administrator of NASA since the departure of Dr. Robert A. Frosch in January 1981; he had actually retired as deputy administrator in December 1980 but at Frosch’s request had agreed to remain through the first flight of the space shuttle Columbia and appointment of a new administrator. Lovelace had entered federal service in 1954 with the U.S. Air Force at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, and became director there in 1967. He went to Andrews Air Force Base in 1972 as director of science and technology for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command and in 1973 became acting deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development. He came to NASA in 1974 as associate administrator, Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST) and was appointed deputy administrator of NASA in June 1976 by President Ford.
Lovelace recently received the Presidential Citizens Medal for his work on developing the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, July 2/81; NASA Release 81-88; NYTimes, July 6/81, D-6)
July 7: A 122-pound Colorado pilot, Stephen Ptacek, steered Dr. Paul MacCready’s Solar Challenger (a 210-pound aircraft made of lightweight DuPont synthetics and powered solely by 16,000 photovoltaic cells on its 47-foot wingspan) across the English Channel from Cormeilles-en-Vexin 25 miles northwest of Paris to a Royal Air Force base at Manston on England’s southeast coast, a 5 Vi-hour flight of 165 miles at an average speed of 30 mph and a cruising altitude of 11,000 feet. Other planes had flown on solar power, but Challenger was the only one to do so without storage batteries. The project was largely financed by DuPont, maker of the Lucite windscreen, Mylar sheathing, and Kevlar-fiber struts.
MacCready said that his solar plane was no serious alternative for air travel, but the flight was to highlight “irrational” dependence on fossil fuels. He had built the first human powered aircraft, Gossamer Condor, which flew in 1977, winning the $100,000 Kremer prize and earning the Condor a place beside the Wright flyer in the National Air and Space Museum. He had also made the Gossamer Albatross, which flew the Channel in 1979 under human legpower,
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED ^INTfNTJONALty W.Am 287
winning a $213,000 prize and a Royal Aeronautical Society trophy. (NYTimes, June 9/81, C-l; July 8/81, A-l; July 12, 22E; WPost, July 8/81, A-20; W Star, July 8/81, A-2; AvWk, July 13/81, 21; Nswk, July 20/81, 50; Time, July 20/81, 45)
July 8: The Senate confirmed the appointment as NASA deputy administrator of Dr. Hans Mark, former secretary of the Air Force and former director of NASA’s ARC. Mark, a physicist and nuclear engineer, became diretor of ARC in February 1969 and undersecretary of the Air Force in 1977. He had been secretary of the Air Force from July 1979 until 1981.
Mark had taught at Boston University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), the University of California, and Stanford University. He was chairman of the nuclear engineering department at Berkeley from 1964 to 1969, administering its research reactor. (NASA spl anno, July 9/81; NASA Release 81-51)
July 10: NASA reported “encouraging initial results” from a two-month experiment that it conducted jointly with the FAA, National Center for Atmospheric Research, and Northwest Airlines. An instrument on Nimbus 7, called total ozone-mapping spectrometer, sent GSFC experimenters data on the total ozone profile in the atmosphere. Within three hours the GSFC scientists relayed the data, processed to indicate upper-air patterns and meteorological activity, such as rapidly moving fronts, to Northwest Airlines meteorologists in Minnesota for use in forecasting.
Knowing the location of the fronts could help in avoiding them, both because they were associated with clear-air turbulence and because ozone encountered by airlines at high altitudes had caused shortness of breath as well as eye, nose, and throat irritation among airline passengers. Further research would lead to deduction of troposphere heights from total-ozone data for comparison with satellite temperature-sounding data. (NASA Release 81-90)
• NASA reported that Dr. Jack L. Kerrebrock, former head of MIT’s department of aeronautics and astronautics, had become associate administrator at NASA Headquarters for aeronautics and astronautics, effective July 1, replacing Dr. James J. Kramer, who retired in October 1979.
Before accepting the NASA Headquarters position, Kerrebrock had been a member of the U.S. Air Force scientific advisory board, the National Research Council’s aeronautics and space engineering board, and the NASA Advisory Committee. He had directed MIT’s gas-turbine laboratory from 1968 to 1978. He received his Ph.D. from CalTech in 1956; from 1951 to 1953 he was a researcher in aeronautics at the Lewis laboratory of NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). (NASA Release 81-91)
July 23: Press reports said that a Texas-based firm called the Percheron project was preparing to launch the first U.S. privately owned space rocket into a 50-mile suborbital flight from Matagorda Island northeast of Corpus Christi.
Backers of the project, named for a breed of large French draft horses, hoped to launch their rocket powered by kerosene and liquid oxygen at the end of July, but had run into trouble with the FAA, which said they must seek waiver of air-traffic rules preventing “nonconventional” use of U.S. air space above 12,500 feet. An FAA spokesman said that an application for waiver could take more than two weeks to resolve and could end by restricting Percheron to a flight no higher than 14,500 feet and no further out to sea than the three-mile limit over which FAA had jurisdiction. A flight would also call for extensive coordination with the Coast Guard to protect shipping and oil rigs in the area.
Percheron was the idea of Gary C. Hudson, a “self-taught engineer” seeking to head a company pioneering corporate space ventures. In 1979 he met a fellow enthusiast, Houston developer David Hannah, described as “a disciple of Dr. Gerard K. O’Neill,” the Princeton physics professor famous for his ideas about the commercial and social possibilities of space colonies. Hannah, a supporter of the U.S. space program, had developed a slide show on commercial uses of a cheap, privately owned space vehicle; to launch Percheron, he raised $1.2 million from a number of investors including an oilman and rancher who owned part of Matagorda Island.
Hudson rounded up a crew of engineers, scientists, and technicians, some from NASA’s JPL, others from private aerospace firms. So much information and so many plans were available that production of Percheron took only six months from final design. The 55-foot single-engine rocket used in clusters might one day orbit a 5,000-pound geosynchronous payload with a conical module able to withstand reentry heat and return reusable components to Earth. (W Star, July 23/81, A-l; July 28/81, A-7; W Post, July 29/81, A-l)
July 26: Space shuttle Columbia was still awaiting its trip to KSC’s Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) because of a delay in the orbiter integrated test that had been scheduled for July 23. The test had to wait until technicians finished wiring the remote manipulator’s system for emergency jettison of its $100 million Canada-built “bionic arm.” That system would have to be retested before the major integrated test could begin, probably not before August 9. The delay would not affect launch date of STS-2, NASA said. (MSFC Release
81-90, 81-91; NASA Release 81-109; W Star, July 27/81, A-2)
July 27: MSFC reported the arrival from Europe of a jumbo jet carrying equipment to prepare Spacelab, the ESA reusable scientific research facility, for flight on the shuttle beginning in 1983.
The gear for electrical ground support and mechanical servicing arrived at KSC after formal acceptance in early July by representatives of MSFC, which
was responsible for monitoring Spacelab design and development and would manage the first three Spacelab missions. (MSFC Release 81-92)
• LaRC said that it was studying a possible “assembly line in space” that would allow astronauts to build large platforms or antennas in Earth orbit from the shuttle. A mobile work station would position a pair of pressure-suited astronauts so that they could move horizontally and vertically within a prescribed area to set up structures too large or complex to fold up and transport inside the shuttle. The work station would be located inside the or-biter’s cargo bay or would be a free-flyer operating near the shuttle.
LaRC was testing a large-scale model to detect possible problems in space and identify ways to improve astronaut productivity: foot restraints to leave hands free, for instance, and electrically operated work platforms. (LaRC Release 81-50; NASA Release 81-104; MSFC Release 81-93)
July 30: The NASA centers which were directed in April to merge reported the steps being taken to complete the action, approved by the agency’s new administrator, James M. Beggs.
As of October 1, DFRC, Edwards, Calif., would become a directorate of ARC, Mountain View, Calif., reporting to ARC director C.A. Syvertson; it would retain its name and its “essential identity” but would function as an operational element of ARC. Aeronautical research at the two locations would be integrated and staff functions for the two centers would be combined. Several ARC projects, such as the quiet short-harid research aircraft (QSRA) and the tilt-rotor research aircraft would be moved to DFRC over the 30-month consolidation period.
WFC in Virginia would become an operating clement of GSFC at Greenbelt, Md., responsible for suborbital projects and operations. WFC’s applied sciences directorate would be a new instrument-systems division of GSFC’s applications directorate. GSFC’s management operations directorate would absorb WFC’s technical support and administrative directorates, except for electronic and mechanical shops. (NASA Release 81-107; WFC Release
81-9)
August
August 3: NASA launched Dynamics Explorer A and B from the WSMC at 2:56 a.m. PDT (5:56 a.m. EDT) on a Delta into polar orbits with 24,945-kilometer(15,500-mile) and 1300-kilometer(808-mile) apogees, 675 kilometer(420-mile) and 306-kilometer(190-mile) perigees, 90° inclination, and 409 and 97.5-minute periods. The orbits, lower than predicted, were still suitable for the full scientific mission. Launch had been delayed three successive days by command-system discrepanies, high winds at the launch site, and problems with a tracking aircraft.
Called DE-1 and DE-2 in orbit, the satellites would study the interaction of solar energy with near-Earth space, simultaneously acquiring data on auroras (northern lights) produced by solar energy entering Earth’s magnetic field and their effect on radio transmission and basic weather patterns. (NASA Releases
81-95, 81-114; NASA MOR S-850-81-03 [prelaunch] July 28/81, [postlaunch] Aug 7/81; W Star, Aug 4/81, D-5)
August 5: Press reports said that test firing of a rocket built by Space Services Inc. (SSI) seeking to be the first private company to launch satellites for profit, ended with an explosion on the launching pad while 18 of its crew watched.
The 53-foot Percheron [see July 23] broke into four major parts, costing the firm more than $1.2 million and delaying the project at least six months. Flight plans had called for the rocket to climb to 14,500-feet and drop into the Gulf of Mexico about three miles from the site. (NY Times, Aug 6/81, B-7, W Star Aug 6/81, A-8)
August 6: NASA launched FltSatCom-E for the Naval Electronic Systems Command at 4:16 a.m. EDT from KSC on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,790-kilometer apogee, 166.7-kilometer perigee, and 26.6° inclination, and turned the craft after it separated from the Centaur over the U.S Air Force Space Division.
Designated FltSatCom 5 in orbit, the TRW-built DOD communications satellite with a five-year design life would join four similar craft now in geostationary orbit 22,300 miles over the equator at different locations around the Earth, forming a worldwise system to provide two-way communications between naval aircraft, ships, submarines, ground stations, Strategic Air Command elements, and presidential command networks. FltSatCom 5 would serve over the eastern Pacific. DOD would reimburse NASA for Atlas Centaur and launch services. LeRC had management responsibility for development and operation of the Atlas Centaur; KSC was responsible for checkout and
launch. (NASA Releases 81-32, 81-93; NASA MOR 0-491-202-81-05 [prelaunch] Aug 4/81; D/SD, Aug 7/81, 211)
August 7: The Soviet Union launched an Intercosmos-Bulgaria 3000 satellite into an orbit with 906-kilometer apogee, 825-kilometer perigee, 81.2° inclination, and 101.9-minute period. A Tass report said that the satellite would study ionsopheric plasma and high-energy charged-particle flux, magnetic fields, and upper-atmosphere glow in the ultraviolet and visible bands of spectrum. The Soviet Union and Bulgaria cooperated on the design of the craft and would continue to work together in data processing and analysis. (FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 7/81)
August 8: WFC reported the launch of a coordinated balloon, plane, and rocket experiment to study electric fields in thunderstorms. Five vehicles simultaneously measured the fields from troposphere to ionosphere for a number of firsts: first multiple flight of electric-field devices, first simultaneous direct observations of ionosphere lightning, and first measures of lightning waveforms in the stratosphere. (WFC Release 81-11)
August 10: During the early-morning move of space shuttle Columbia from it KSC hangar to the VAB, a forklift “accidentally banged into” the spacecraft, damaging two tiles on the left elevon, according to KSC spokesman Rocky Raab. Engineers and technicians were expected to replace the tiles by nightfall so that raising Columbia and bolting it to its mobile launcher could proceed. The three-times-delayed rollout began at 3:54 a.m EDT and took 26 minutes to cover the quarter-mile distance. (NY Times, Aug 11/81, C-3)
August 18: NASA declared successful the Landsat 3 project launched March 5, 1978, still in operation three years later. Its multispectral scanner (MSS) acquired more than 200,000 images worldwide and the return-beam vidicon (RBV) acquired more than 175,000. The project completed two full years of data acquisition and processing for LACIE, and was continuing the same for AgRISTARS. Some equipment was no longer operative, but MSS operations were judged successful, and some foreign stations were still receiving RBV data in real time. (NASA MOR F-641-78-03 [postlaunch] Aug 18/81)
August 19: NASA announced that it had postponed to August 31 Columbia’s move to KSC’s launch complex 39A, scheduled for August 26, but did not say what effect the delay would have on the September 30 launch date. A nine-day preflight test series that began August 17 would culminate in simulated liftoffs and descent from orbit to landing.
MSFC later reported that the launch date for STS-2 would be reset to October 9 because of “a number of small problems” and a need to prevent crew fatigue. A loss of five days in the VAB was caused by delays in interface tests and misalignment of Shuttle and external-tank connections. The thunderstorm
season would also account for some lost time. (NASA Releases 81-123, 81-135; MSFC Release 81-107)
August 25-31: Press coverage of the Voyager 2 encounter with Saturn came from JPL, Pasadena, Calif. New NASA Administrator James M. Beggs told reporters that the mission was “one of the really great scientific achievements of our age.” Under questioning, Beggs said that he could not promise any new planetary missions in the near future. The New York Times said that the encounter meant “farewell to American planetary exploration for at least five years,” alluding to the expected encounter with Uranus in January 1986.
The 1,800-pound Voyager 2, having arrived within Saturn’s magnetic field early August 25 after a four-year 1.2 billion-mile journey, was sending back data and pictures “as perplexing as they are dazzling,” the New York Times said. The craft photographed four of Saturn’s moons in greater detail than before, sent data on the thousands of strands in Saturn’s rings, and dived behind the planet for a close approach and a gravity-assisted push toward arrival at Uranus in 4 Vi years. So far, it had found no new moons of Saturn, which had been one of its aims.
When Voyager 2 reappeared, JPL engineers reported that its camera platform was stuck, affecting three scientific sensors as well as the two television cameras. Chief project scientist Dr. Edward C. Stone said Voyager 2 “basically completed” all of its observations before the malfunction: “We were fortunate that the troubles didn’t happen a few hours earlier,” he told a news conference.
Signals needed 1 hour and 27 minutes to travel to Earth. Controllers picked up the signals again at 3 a.m. EDT after Voyager had been out of touch with Earth for 2 hours and 20 minutes; the cameras were showing black space, indicating that the platform was pointing away from Saturn. The platform could be rotated in two dimensions, and controllers countermanded the original program so that the swivel could operate in high torque and expel or destroy whatever foreign object was making the platform stick. A similar problem with Voyager 1 in 1978 was solved by manipulation of the swivel, after records showed a tiny piece of plastic had been left in a gearbox during construction.
Further reports Thursday, August 27, said that the platform (which had been jammed for 17 hours) was working again but not perfectly. Project Director Esker K. Davis said that it was moving sluggishly in low gear; the plan was to keep moving it, but it took three hours just to send a command and get back a signal that the spacecraft responded. Stone said that his main objective was to recover use of the platform for the voyage to Uranus. Project scientists had turned the cameras off when the platform stuck and would not turn them on again until the problem was solved.
Loss of about 600 pictures of Saturn’s rings and darkside, as well as infrared and ultraviolet measurements of clouds and atmosphere, did not mean that the mission had failed, Stone said, calling it “a 200 percent success.” Thousands of photos stored on Voyager’s tape recorders were still pouring back to Earth,
showing sights never seen before. Dr. Arthur L. Lane’s telescope aimed at a distant star to catch it blinking on and off as Voyager 2 passed through Saturn’s rings was so successful that he said it would take years to map the rings,
45,000	miles of which were shown by his telescope.
Early on Friday, August 28, flight directors restarted one of the five blacked-out cameras to photograph “a rapidly receding Saturn” from Voyager 2’s location already 2 million miles beyond the planet. The platform had responsed by rotating 40° on command in exactly the proper time. NASA would photograph Saturn’s outermost moon Phoebe next week when Voyager crossed its orbit: Phoebe, rotating in a direction opposite to that of the other 16 moons, might be a burned-out comet nucleus captured by Saturn.(NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02, July 16/81, WSJ, Aug 24/81, 15; NY Times, Aug 14/81, A-13; Aug 26/81, A-l; Aug 27/81, A-l; Aug 28/81, B-5; Aug 29/81, A-9; Aug 30/81, F—1; Aug 31/81, B-6; W Post, Aug 25/81, A-2; Aug 26/81, A-3; Aug 27/81, A-l; Aug 28/81, A-l, Aug 29/81, A-3; Aug 30/81, A-5; Aug 31/81, A-5; Science, Sept 11/81, 1236; Dscvr, Sept 81, 79)
August 26: The Washington Post said that a USSR satellite that fell into the sea off the coast of China August 23 might have “lost its way to the Moon.” The Soviet foreign ministry said that Cosmos 434 was not nuclear-powered and posed no danger of nuclear contamination: the Washington Post said that the Soviet Union seemed eager to allay any fears of radioactive debris like that Cosmos 954 strewed over Canada’s “sparsely inhabited” Northwest Territories in January 1978. The Soviets said that the reentered craft was an “experimental lunar cabin.” This description tallied with a long-held belief that Cosmos 434 was relic of an unsuccessful manned lunar mission planned in the 1960s by the Soviet Union to rival the U.S. Apollo program, which had put 12 men on the Moon by the time it ended in 1972.
Between November 1970 and August 1971, the Soviet Union had launched four unmanned satellites that performed complex maneuvers in Earth orbit simulating those of a lunar-landing mission. A two-volume book on the Soviet space program published in 1979 by the American Astronautical Society said that the satellites (Cosmos 379, Cosmos 382, Cosmos 398, and Cosmos 434) seemed to be practicing acceleration toward the Moon, braking into lunar orbit, landing on the Moon, and returning to Earth. The Soviet Union never disclosed the purpose of the satellites, but U.S. analysts believed them to be flight tests of a propulsion unit for manned lunar spacecraft. As the 50th anniversary of the 1917 Bolshevik revolution neared, observers thought it likely that the Soviet Union would mark 1967 by putting a man on the Moon; in 1968; the year before the first U.S. moon landing, Soviet cosmonauts were saying that, when the Americans reached the Moon, Russians would be there to greet them.
The Soviet program apparently had a series of setbacks that “cooled the leadership’s enthusiasm,” the Washington Post said. In June 1969 the first attempt to launch the G rocket (a giant new booster like the U.S. Saturn 5) was
said to have ended in a mammoth explosion demolishing the launch complex. It also apparently exploded in the early stages of flight during two other tests, in the summer of 1971 and on November 24, 1972. (W Post, Aug 30/81, A-25)
September
September 1: Press reports described the rollout of space shuttle Columbia on its eight-tread mobile launching platform from KSC’s VAB to launch pad 39A, a 3.5-mile trip that took about seven hours.
New launch date was October 9, only 39 days from rollout; however, Columbia had sat on its pad for 104 days before its first flight, and launch director George F. Page said that all the usual tests should be completed in time. The new schedule allowed for weather delays or new technical problems. The launch pad was modified after last April’s ignition caused shockwaves that buckled struts on the spaceship and endangered other parts; Columbia had “several hundred” of its 31,000 heat-resistant tiles replaced. It would carry a new fuel tank—the only expendable part of the Shuttle assembly—and two new solid-fuel booster rockets to be retrieved from the ocean shortly after liftoff.
KSC officials had closed two viewing sites for the next launch because of exhaust fallout. Dr. Albert Koller, chief of environmental management for KSC, said that the fallout problem was a surprise: acid drops in an exhaust cloud produced by STS-l’s boosters had spotted vegetation up to four miles north of the site, but apparently did not harm animals in the area. Hydrochloric acid drops from the cloud might cause reddening and burning of unprotected skin.
NASA hoped eventually to send a shuttle back into space within two or three weeks of its previous mission, but Page said “we’re a long way from that ultimate goal.” (NY Times, Sept 1/81, C-3; W Post, Sept 1/81, A-4)
September 7: ESA announced that Drs. Claude Nicollier and Wubbo Ockels, two ESA payload specialists in astronaut training at JSC since July 1980, had completed training and were now officially European mission specialists. Ockels would rejoin the crew readying the first Spacelab mission in Europe, at MSFC and at JSC; Nicollier would stay at JSC to continue training as mission specialist for future missions carrying European payloads. The third ESA representative, Dr. Ulf Merbold, had been working with the European experiments selected for first Spacelab flight and would remain as European payload specialist.
The two U.S. candidates for the Spacelab crew, Drs. Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg, had been in a hiatus from training because of delays in the launch date. One each of the U.S. and ESA candidates would be chosen to fly; the others would provide ground support. (MSFC Release 81-119; FSA Info 20)
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED Mg.INTIMDQNALLE ffcANtav
September 14: GSFC said the two Dynamic Explorers DE-1 and DE-2 launched August 3 would soon be fully operational. Designed for simultaneous observation of solar-energy effects on Earth’s environment, the two craft failed to achieve planned orbit because of Delta-stage misfire but should carry out their major scientific objectives. (NASA Release 81-147)
September 15: LaRC said that it was conducting, under contract with McDonnell Douglas Corporation, a test program on widebody commercial DC-10 aircraft to measure the effect on fuel efficiency of winglets, small structures attached to the tips of airplane wings perpendicular to the wing surfaces. Winglets would reduce fuel-consuming drag by lessening the effect of vortices, turbulent air swirls forming during flight at tips of all aircraft wings.
Developed by aeronautical designer Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, recently retired from LaRC, the concept had been tested on several types of small aircraft but not on a plane as large as the DC-10. Winglets were already in use on the Gates Learjet 55 and Grumman’s Gulfstream III. Wind-tunnel tests showed a drop of about 3% in fuel use, which would mean an annual saving per plane of about 250,000 gallons of fuel, now priced at more than Si a gallon.
LaRC said that it was also working on the prevention of stall and spin in light aircraft by using the canard, a miniature wing sprouting from an aircraft’s nose area, first used by the Wright brothers at the turn of the century but neglected since then because of patent and flight-handling considerations. LaRC found that home-built airplane kits that used the canard to increase fuel efficiency also had impressive records of stall-spin safety. Tests of a model in LaRC’s spin tunnel showed that with proper loading the plane was “virtually impossible to spin.” Current tests would document the plane’s aerodynamic efficiency without trying to improve it. Although the canard did reduce a pilot’s area of vision in takeoff and landing, the tunnel data should show whether it could be relocated without sacrificing its safety features.
NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program was seeking ways to reduce fuel consumption and improve safety. Four NASA centers were focused on aeronautical research: LaRC, LeRC, ARC, and DFRC. (NASA Releases
81-145, 81-155; LaRC Releases 81-68, 81-75)
• NASA officials began a “tanking exercise” of the Shuttle on its KSC launch pad to see if newly installed water-pressure systems would prevent recurrence of shockwaves produced by booster exhaust during the April 12 liftoff. The New York Times quoted officials as saying that shockwave reduction was “mandatory” before Columbia could head for space again. Columbia, already erected on the pad for its second mission, contained a payload of five experiments and a 50-foot mechanical arm put aboard in June when the cargo bay was “closed out,” the New York Times said. NASA might remove a package of scientific experiments rather than risk damaging it during liftoff. (NY Times, Sept 15/81, C-2)
—MSFC said September 8 that the Shuttle’s external tank was “successfully filled with liquid propellants” in a cryo-loading test at KSC designed to check out ground and vehicle systems. The success was “a major milestone” toward the second Shuttle flight, now scheduled for October 9. (MSFC Release
81-117)
September 20: The People’s Republic of China (PRC) launched 3 experiments in space physics on a single rocket, making a total of 11 manmade Earth satellites sent into space by that country since 1970. FBIS quoted PRC press service Xinhua in reviewing the successful series that began April 24, 1970. Previous reports had said the Great March 3 rocket would use a liquid hydrogen and oxygen mixture “slightly less powerful than the European Ariane system,” in which the People’s Republic had “shown close interest.” Both the rocket and its payload were “wholly Chinese manufactured.” (FBIS, Xinhua in English, Sept 20/81; Hong Kong AFP in English, Sept 14/81; Paris AFP in English, Sept 10/81)
September 22: LaRC said that it was advancing aviation technology that could “revolutionize commuter flying in the 1990s” by making 20- to 60-passenger turboprops sturdier, faster, and able to travel farther than current commuter aircraft. Rising interest in such aircraft stemmed from high oil prices and airline deregulation, creating “greater demand than supply” for small planes that had to be more cost-effective than large ones because of their smaller capacity and short-haul operations.
LaRC and NASA’s other lead centers for aeronautics (ARC, DFRC, and LeRC) were developing advanced aerodynamics, propulsion, materials, and control and guidance systems to provide technological data considered too high-risk or beyond the resources of industry to produce (LaRC Release 81-69; NASA Release 81-131)
September 22-25: Accidental spillage of a caustic oxidizer being pumped into the shuttle damaged the spacecraft surface, unglued nearly 300 of its thermal tiles and forced postponement of the October 9 launch date. Between two and three gallons of nitrogen tetroxide spurted from a malfunctioning connector about 1:15 a.m. and dissolved the bonding agent that fastened the tiles to Columbia’s skin. [See December 14] No one was on the launch pad except the specially clothed technicians, and no injuries were reported. About 67 tiles came loose in the hands of technicians mopping up the spill; launch director George Page said the tiles themselves were not damaged, but the vehicle skin would have to be decontaminated and dried, and each tile would have be waterproofed and retested.
NASA warned that the shuttle might have to be moved back into the VAB, separated from its external tank, and moved again into the orbiter-processing facility to see if any propellant had leaked inside. The Washington Post said September 24 that inspection of the orbiter’s nose showed contamination of
the reactor-control system containing thrusters to govern pitch and roll of the vehicle during atmospheric reentry. The oxidizer, when it encountered water, turned into nitric acid, highly corrosive to copper wire and other materials. Moving the ship back to its hangar for repair would delay launch “in excess of a month,” Page said.
September 25 NASA said that management had decided to repair Columbia on its launch pad, making a move to the VAB unnecessary. ( W Post, Sept 23/81, A—17; Sept 24/81, A-28; NASA Release 81-154)
September 24: NASA launched SBS-B from the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) on a Delta at 7:09 p.m. EDT into a transfer orbit. Owned by Satellite Business Systems, Inc. (a consortium of IBM, Comsat General, and Aetna Insurance Company), the Hughes-built cylinder was second of four commercial communications satellites planned for launch by NASA at a fixed cost to SBS Inc. of $22 million. Called SBS 2 in orbit, the spin-stabilized communications satellite 660 centimeters high and 216 centimeters in diameter weighed 555 kilograms on station. It would be the first to offer routine commercial service in the K-band, 12-14 GHz. (NASA Release 81-130; NASA MOR 0-492-213-81-02 Iprclaunch] Sept 21/81, [postlaunch] Jan 27/82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 25/81, 2)
September 29: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Headquarters effective November 9 “to assure proper delegation of authority to all line managers, set forth a clear distinction between line and staff, and a simplification of field centers’ reporting lines.” The change would combine the Office of Space Science and Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications into an Office of Space Science and Applications. It would set up an Office of Management to handle some functions now under the NASA comptroller and some now under the Office of Management Operations and to support program offices in managing research and development and institutional resources.
Associate administrators in the program offices would be NASA’s major line officers through whom center directors would report to Headquarters. JPL and GSFC would report to the associate administrator for Space Science and Applications. ARC, LaRC, and LeRC would report to associate administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology; JSC, KSC, MSFC, and the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), to the associate administrator for STS. Remaining program offices would be Space Transportation Operations and Space Tracking and Data Systems.
The administrator’s staff would include chief engineer, comptroller, procurement, equal opportunity, external relations, general counsel, inspector general, legislative affairs, associate deputy administrator, and assistants to the administrator. A reorganization working group led by NASA’s general counsel S. Neil Hosenball would work out functional and personnel changes; a reorganization steering committee led by Dr. Hans Mark, deputy ad-
ministrator, would review the plans and recommend a complete reorganization package to the administrator. (NASA Release 81-156)
•	The external tank (ET) for the third shuttle flight (ETA) left the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans on a NASA barge for KSC. Unlike those used in the first two flights, this tank would be light brown, the natural color of the insulation sprayed on the tank’s exterior. The white paint on the first two tanks weighed about 600 pounds. Since the tank went almost all the way to orbit, elimination of the paint would add nearly 600 pounds payload besides saving several thousand of dollars in handling and would not affect the tank’s fire-retardant or water-repellent qualities. (MSFC Release 81-122)
•	Pravda, the official Communist Party newspaper, marked the fourth anniversary of orbital laboratory Salyut 6 with a report of planned space activity. A “lull” was being used for an overhaul of the ground-control center in the Crimea. Employees were on long-awaited vacations, and a skeleton staff was monitoring Salyut 6, orbiting without a crew since May 26.
After orbiting for nearly two months of unspecified tests, a Cosmos craft launched April 25 had linked with the Salyut in June to form a 34-ton complex. A flight-test manager said that the complex would help in designing future space stations and was being monitored to see how such a heavy system behaved in space. Since docking with the Salyut the Cosmos had used its engines twice to raise the orbit of the complex. (NY Times Oct 7/81, B—11)
During September: William F. Lilly, named NASA comptroller in 1973 and the only person so far to hold that position, announced that he would retire in October after 37 years of service to the federal government, the last 21 with NASA. (NASA Release 81-148; Sp anno Sept 22/81)
—Isaac T. Gillam IV, director of DFRC since June 1978, would become special assistant to the NASA administrator October 1, detailed to the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy to participate in a space-policy review. (NASA Release 81-151; DFRC Release 81-30; NASA anno Sept 15/81)
—Abraham D. Spinak, acting director of Wallops Flight Facility, would leave government service in December after nearly 33 years with NASA and NACA, its predecessor, which he joined in 1948. He had actually retired September 1, 1980, but stayed on to help in the consolidation with GSFC. (WFC Release 81-14)
—Edwin C. Kilgore, associate administrator for management operations at Headquarters, would retire in October after 37 years of service with NASA and NACA. After graduation from Virginia Polytechnic Institute in 1944, he went to work at Langley, joined Headquarters in 1970, and was named deputy associate administrator for center operationas in 1974. As head of management operations, he had been in charge of agencywide institutional management. (NASA Release 81-139; LaRC Release 81-67)
—Ann P. Bradley, deputy associate administrator for management operations, who had been acting associate administrator and acting executive officer at NASA Headquarters pending the retirement of E.C. Kilgore, would return to her duties in management operations with the appointment of A.B. Virkler Legate to the office of the administrator as NASA's executive officer. Legate had been associate deputy undersecretary for intergovernmental relations at the Department of Labor since February 1971: he had previously been a congressional special assistant and executive secretary of DOT from 1969 to 1977. He had also been a congressional administrative assistant. (NASA Spl anno, Aug 28/81, Sept 21/81)
October
October 1: NASA appointed Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, deputy chief of staff for systems at Air Force Systems Command headquarters, Andrews Air Force Base, as associate administrator for the Office of Space Transportation Systems. Abrahamson, former test pilot and manager of the development program for U.S. Air Force’s F-16 fighter, would succeed John F. Yardley, who left NASA in May to become president of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corporation.
In 1979, Abrahamson was one of five on a special panel selected by NASA to assess STS management; he began his job at Andrews in July 1980. He had been an astronaut in the Air Forces’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) program from August 1967 until the program was canceled in June 1969. He then served on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council in the Executive Office of the President. A command pilot with more than 3,000 flying hours in jet and conventional fighter aircraft, he was promoted to major general May 1, 1978. (NASA Release 81-159; NASA anno Oct 2/81; NY Times, Oct 3/81, 15)
October 2: Astronomers at three major U.S. observatories found a vast region of empty space so large that 2,000 galaxies the size of the Milky Way could fit into it. The void, about 400 million light years from Earth’s solar system, seemed to be growing as galaxies near its boundaries gravitated together.
A survey of the large-scale structure of the universe by telescopes at Mt. Hopkins, Arizona, Kitt Peak, and Mt. Palomar showed enormous gaps in three directions near the constellation Bootes. The cosmological principle, basis of modern theories about the universe, assumed that distribution of matter and motion in all directions of space was homogeneous; the new finding would challenge that principle (W Post, Oct 2/81; NY Times, Oct 2/81, A-l)
October 6: NASA launched a 90-pound solar mesosphere explorer from WSMC, Vandenberg Air Force Base, at 7:27 a.m. EDT on a two-stage Delta into a polar orbit at an altitude between 535 and 550 kilometers with
95-minute period and 97.4° inclination. The satellite, carrying five sensors to monitor atmospheric constituents between 19 and 50 miles up, would study conversion of molecular oxygen to ozone, a layer protecting Earth against ultraviolet radiation and possibly being depleted by refrigerant chlorofluorocarbons. The University of Colorado Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics developed the instruments and would manage the mission under contract to JPL.
Riding piggyback atop the Delta was a smaller craft built by amateur radio
operators at the University of Surrey in England. Uosat (University of Surrey satellite) was ninth in a series of Oscar (orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio) satellites launched as a second payload on U.S. rockets. Using a voice synthesizer, it could broadcast ionosphere data to amateur receivers. (NASA Release 81-106; NASA MOR S-887-81-01 [prelaunch] Sept 17/81, [postlaunch] Oct 16/81; NY Times, Oct 7/81, B-ll)
• ARC announced that John A. Manke, famed test pilot, would head a new directorate of flight research after consolidation of ARC and DFRC, effective October 1.
Manke, who made the first supersonic flight of a lifting body and the first landing of a lifting body on a hard-surface runway, had joined DFRC as a research engineer in 1962 and later became a research pilot, testing advanced designs like the wingless craft that were forerunners of the Shuttle. He was project pilot on the X-24B and also flew the M-2, HL-10, and X-24A lifting bodies. Most recently he had been director of flight operations and support at DFRC, where he would remain responsible for on-site management as well as for aircraft operations at both centers. (ARC Release 81-32)
October 7: The Washington Post said that NASA was faced with cutting so much money from its budgets for the next three years that it was considering abandoning the Voyager, now on its way from Saturn to a flyby of Uranus in 1986 and Neptune in 1989.
Turning off Voyager’s radios would save S222 million (the amount needed to keep NASA scientists and engineers on the job and to operate the Deep Space Network antennas in California, Australia, and Spain) over the next eight years. OMB had ordered NASA to cut $367 million from its FY82 budget and $1 billion each from FY83 and FY84. As NASA could not take money from the Space Shuttle, it would have to save money in other ways.
It had already bowed out of an international mission to Halley’s comet and now must choose from among three other programs: the Galileo mission to Jupiter in 1987, the large Space Telescope to be orbited in 1985, or the Voyager trips to Uranus and Neptune. Killing both Voyager and Galileo would save about $520 million. The only other way for NASA to save a large amount of money would be an indefinite delay in building a fourth shuttle, the Discovery, estimated to cost $1.2 billion and due for delivery in 1985. (WPost, Oct 7/81, A-4)
October 8: NASA postponed the second Shuttle launch to November 4 because of tile damage caused by an oxidizer spill September 22. Tile replacement was “proceeding well,” and measures had been taken to prevent further spillage.
Science magazine described the “minor problems” causing previous postponements: tests that took longer than expected and various handling mishaps. The Shuttle’s complexity would “resist attempts to operate with
aircraft-like efficiency,” the article said. NASA had already decided to trim its Shuttle flights by 30% over the next three years, from 44 missions to 28: it had less money to spend on flying its own satellites and science experiments, as it had to pay for Shuttle modifications and construction of more orbiters.
The delicate instruments planned for the second flight had almost been delayed to a later mission by the discovery that pressures from the solid-fuel boosters against the KSC module launch pad could damage the experiments: the shock had been 2.4 pounds per square inch, not the expected 0.6, enough to buckle a strut supporting a fuel tank near the cabin. If the tank had been jarred enough to leak or malfunction, the first-flight crew would not have been able to orient the Shuttle properly for landing. NASA engineers devised a system of nylon water troughs to disperse the shock and redesigned the launch platform to allow jet watersprays to dissipate the pressure. (NASA Release
81-160; W Post, Oct 9/81, A-15; Science, Oct 9/81, 160)
October 20: NASA declared the mission of the stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment (SAGE) launched February 18, 1979, successful. SAGE, designed for a 1-year life in orbit, was the second of two small applications-explorer missions built to provide a global data base on ozone and aerosols in the atmosphere.
Like its predecessor, the heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM), the SAGE spacecraft was built by Boeing. It carried an instrument designed by LaRC that met or exceeded all design specifications, despite power-subsystem problems. Before battery capacity dropped in June 1979, SAGE had acquired 96% of all possible events; since then, about 82%.
SAGE obtained the first global measurements accurate within 1%, more than 12,000 between 78°S and 78 °N, to define mass aerosol loading of the stratosphere and its seasonal variations. Worldwide ground-truth measurements validated the accuracy of its measurements from space of vertical profiles of aerosol extinction and of ozone and nitrogen dioxide concentration.
SAGE also detected and tracked at least five volcanic-eruption plumes that had penetrated the stratosphere, one every six months: La Soufriere in May 1979, Sierra Negra in November 1979, Mt. St. Helens in May 1980, Ulawun in October 1980, and Aloid in May 1981. The volcanic data were the first clear instance of gas-to-particle conversion in the stratosphere and of using volcanic aerosols to track global circulation. (NASA MOR E-659-79-01 [postlaunch] Oct 20/81)
October 22: NASA said that the third shuttle flight, now scheduled after January 1982, would carry the first biology experiment specifically designed for the Shuttle: the effect of gravity on formation in plants of lignin, the woody substance giving plants structural stability. Monitoring growth in the microgravity environment of space should show how wood is formed. The plants should grow upward in response to the presence of artificial sunlight,
but root development was unpredictable. (NASA Release 81-166; ARC Release
81-56)
October 27: NASA consideration of a “mixed fleet” to augment Shuttle missions by using an unmanned vehicle developed from recoverable shuttle components led to issuance in September by MSFC of a request for proposals asking for definition of such a vehicle, to be called SRB-X. Boeing Aerospace and Martin Marietta Aerospace were the two contractors responding. MSFC had management responsibility for the SRB-X study because it had been in charge of Shuttle propulsion and was the lead center for design, development, and testing of all NASA propulsion systems. (MSFC Release 81-135)
October 28: NASA announced that it would shut down on December 1 its three 26-meter (85-foot) tracking antennas operated by the Deep Space Network at Canberra (Australia), Madrid (Spain), and Goldstone (California), because of reductions in the agency’s budget. The stations would operate the
64-meter (210-foot) and 34-meter (112-foot) deep-space antennas as in the past. Loss of the 26-meter antennas would mean a 30% reduction in tracking and data-acquisition and support for NASA’s planetary spacecraft: the network was currently supporting Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Helios 1, the Viking I lander on Mars, and Pioneers 6 through 72.
Shutting down the three antennas would save about $7.2 million per year, beginning in FY83; termination would eliminate 110 positions, 51 in Spain, 26 in Australia, and 33 at Goldstone. The stations in Spain and Australia were operated by government agencies of those countries, which would reduce staff by reassignment and attrition; the Goldstone station was operated by Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, which would also reduce staff by reassignment and attrition. JPL managed the Deep Space Network for NASA’s Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. (NASA Release 81-171)
November
November 1-12: NASA reported that its $2 million quick-fix shock-prevention water system was hooked up November 1 during a countdown “notable for its smoothness,” the Washington Post said. Designed hastily over the past five months, the shock-absorber system would flush 400,000 gallons of water in 35 seconds into the Shuttle’s exhaust. Food for the journey was loaded aboard the spacecraft, and the next task would be loading chemicals for the ship’s electric and environmental systems.
Liftoff had been scheduled for 7:30 a.m. EDT on November 4, but officials called off the countdown at 9:35 a.m., when rising oil pressures in the Shuttle’s power generators, apparently caused by waxy contaminants, threatened to impair control of the hydraulic system that moved aerodynamic surfaces, such as the elevons, landing gear, and rudder and body flaps, and swiveled the nozzles on the Shuttle’s three main rocket engines. L. Michael Weeks, acting associate administrator for STS, said that the engineers would have to analyze the trouble, correct it, and lay out a plan for resuming countdown; the delay would be “approximately one week.”
NASA was considering two courses of action: changing the oil and the filters in the auxiliary power units or replacing them with backup units. Engineers at KSC or JSC were not sure which course would take longer; neither, however, would mean hauling Columbia with its attached fuel tank and booster rockets back from the launch pad into the processing hangar for reworking.
The launch team had noticed the lubrication problem while the countdown was halted to grapple with other problems. Pressure in the liquid-oxygen chamber of the external tank had dropped below the limit for launch, and a similar glitch occurred in three smaller tanks feeding the electricity-producing fuel cells inside the Shuttle. Flight controllers decided that they could live with the pressure drops and instructed the control computers to ignore the warning signals. Two of the computers accepted the instruction but “logic got hung up in the system” leading to the third computer, which stopped the clock governing countdown at T minus 31 seconds. This was the point at which Columbia’s on-board computers were supposed to take over control of all remaining steps in the countdown, but—having detected a problem—they refused to continue.
Controllers at the Cape and at mission control in Houston called up data displays to locate the trouble, and Shuttle operations director George F. Page finally announced that there would be no launch. Astronauts Col. Joe H. Engle and Capt. Richard H. Truly, who emerged from the Shuttle about an
hour after the launch was scrubbed, seemed to take the delay “in stride,” the New York Times said.
What persuaded controllers to call off the launch was the Finding that oil pressure for two of the units had stabilized at 100 pounds per square inch, about 40 over normal. Neil B. Hutchinson, a flight director at JSC, said that contaminants in the oil had previously clogged Shuttle filters, which resembled the oil filter in an automobile. However, replacing a filter along with the lubricant it was supposed to keep clean would take far more time than in an automobile. If the auxiliary power units now in the Shuttle were to be used, technicians would have to drain the present oil, change filters, and flush the system before the flight could proceed. This had never been done on the launch pad; engineers would have to go ahead without knowing how long it would take. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond noted that General Motors found out about such problems “at the proving grounds, behind high screens, while we’re doing it in public.”
Either changing filters and lubricant or completely replacing the two power units would be time-consuming because the units deep inside the ship would be difficult to reach. The power-unit fuel hydrazine, suspected of gumming up the works by interacting with the lubricating oil, was highly toxic, and the location of the power units would have to be purged with nitrogen. The nitrogen, which also could be fatal, would have to be purged in its turn.
The next procedure was the flushing and reservicing of the auxiliary power-unit (APU) gearboxes and installation of new filters. Tests to see what would happen if the APU was operated with a clogged filter (using the oil and filter removed from Columbia) showed that the filter would clear after about 10 minutes of operation, as the temperature increased. Launch was reset for November 12.
A second countdown to launch November 12 was delayed 2 hours and 40 minutes by trouble in the cockpit electronics. Engineers discovered November 11 that a 15-pound device, called multiplexer-demultiplexer (MUX/DEMUX), that collected information from all over the spacecraft about its condition to display both on video terminals for the astronauts and on the ground for analysis by engineers, was not working properly; it was quickly replaced with a substitute that did not work as well as the original. Officials sent for two of the instruments from the Challenger orbiter, still unfinished at Rockwell’s Palmdale plant, to be flown to KSC and installed on Columbia. One went into Columbia’s cockpit; the other would be carried as a spare. Countdown was at a built-in hold designed for emergencies such as the one that had occurred; it would resume early November 12 with the loading of 3-million gallons of supercold liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel into the external tank, delaying launch until at least 10 a.m. The latest delays would cost NASA more than $26 million; every day of delay, including the eight in this last series, cost $3 million. The MUX/DEMUX delay cost an extra $2 million from handling, overtime, travel costs, and additional launch and landing tracking report.
Launch of the second mission finally occurred at 10:10 a.m. EST November
12.	About 2V4 hours into the mission, during the third orbit, fuel cell one showed a voltage drop; by the sixth orbit, it was so erratic that the astronauts were told to turn it off and use one of the other two. The faulty cell failed when one of the lines feeding hydrogen into it caused a water buildup that spilled onto an electrically charged manifold, breaking down the water into a potentially explosive mixture of gaseous hydrogen and oxygen. The failure took flight directors by surprise, as the cells had been used in 25 manned U.S. spacecraft since 1965 and had never before failed in flight. Hutchinson noted that “the good thing about this” was that the Shuttle could sustain a fuel-cell failure and continue operations. At 10 p.m. November 12, one of the standby cells was producing 7.5 kilowatts of electricity, and the other, 8.5, enough to do nearly everything except run all five instruments while the Shuttle arm was in operation. If the two good cells continued satisfactory, the flight would proceed as scheduled and return November 16 to Edwards Air Force Base in California; if either showed signs of weakening, the crew would return November 13 or 14. {WPost, Nov 2/81, A-3; Nov 6/81, A-9; Nov 13/81, A-l; NY Times, Nov 5/81, A-l; NASA MOR M-989-81-02 [postlaunch] Dec 17/81)
November 13-15: President Reagan became the first incumbent chief executive to visit JSC’s mission-control center during a flight, when he came on the second day of STS-2’s flight to sit in the capsule communicator chair and talk briefly to the astronauts. After his conversation, the president had a short talk with the Engle and Truly families and left for a dinner in Houston. Two days later, November 15, JSC played host to Vice President Bush at breakfast with the STS-1 and STS-2 crews at the recreation center. This was the first back-to-back visit to JSC of the two highest U.S. officials.
The New York Times said that workers were already ahead of schedule November 13 in a 3- to 4-week cleanup of the launch compound at Cape Canaveral. A shock-absorber water-trough system worked “better than expected,” said Merrill Oakley, design engineer on the launch pad, cutting shockwaves to a fifth of the first launch’s intensity. After a washdown and system checks, Oakley said all that remained was replacement of some bricks that blew out of a flame trench and painting.
The STS-2 crew flew to Ellington Air Force Base, in Texas shortly after landing the Columbia at Edwards Air Force Base ending “a troubled but scientifically rewarding 54-hour mission,” the New York Times said. Welcomed on their 9:50 p.m. arrival in Texas by about 400 JSC employees, the astronauts breakfasted the next morning with Bush, JSC director Chris Kraft, and the first shuttle crewmen John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen among the 23 guests. Although Bush said “the people here at the NASA complex are a national treasure,” he said that he could not promise any easing of budget constraints on the agency.
Preparations were already under way for the third shuttle flight, now scheduled for March 1982. Damage to the launch pad from the second mission was “minimal and superficial,” Oakley said. (Public Papers of the Presi-
dent; WPost, Nov 14/81, A-7; NY Times, Nov 15/81, 35; Nov 16/81, A-l, A-19; JSC Sp NRdP, Nov 20/81, 1)
November 20: NASA launched RCA Satcom 4 from the ESMC on a Delta at 8:37 p.m. EST into a transfer orbit with 19,356-kilometer apogee, 100-kilometer perigee, and 25.5° inclination. The objective of the commercial communications satellite was to transmit video programs to cable television (CATV) systems throughout the United States. The 500-kilogram box-shaped craft, fourth in a series of large 24-transponder communications satellites, managed by a subsidiary of RCA, carried a payload-assist module (PAM) to put it into geosynchronous orbit at 132 °W, joining three other RCA satellites providing television, voice, and high-speed data to all 50 states and Puerto Rico. More than 4,000 Earth stations had direct access to these spacecraft.
GSFC had project-management responsibility for the launch vehicle; RCA Americom, which managed the Satcom program, including spacecraft acquisition and tracking, telemetry, and command systems, would reimburse NASA $22 million for the launch and launch support. (NASA Release 81-172; NASA MOR 0-492-206-81-04 [prelaunch] Nov 18/81, [postlaunch] Jan 27/82)
•	NASA announced that it had completed plans for the reorganization of its Office of Space Science and Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications into a new Office of Space Science and Applications to take over responsibilities of the former offices, except for the technology utilization program, which would go to the government and industry affairs di vision of the Office of External Relations.
Andrew J. Stofan, formerly acting associate administrator for space science, would be acting associate administrator of the new group; Samuel W. Keller, formerly deputy associate adminstrator for space and terrestrial applications, would be deputy associate administrator. (NASA Release 81-182)
•	Science magazine said that Congress was in a “stir” because the administration planned to let a U.S. company sell materials for an advanced communications satellite to an Arab consortium that included the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
Ford Aerospace would sell satellite parts to the French firm Aerospatiale, which was under contract to build three communications satellites for a group called Arabsat, composed of 22 governments, among them Libya, Syria, South Yemen, and the PLO. Libya has been “an avowed enemy” of the United States. The $135 million contract would cover satellites similar to but less sophisticated than the one Ford Aerospace was building for global communications system INTELSAT: Arabsat would offer 8,000 simultaneous twoway telephone conversations and one television channel. These services would cost less if bought directly from INTELSAT, but the Arab group apparently preferred to operate its own system.
The matter came up November 3 during hearings before the Senate Foreign
Affairs Committee, when Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger said that he knew nothing about the deal; the next day, Secretary of State Alexander Haig also said that he knew nothing about it. The Arms Export Control Act required State Department approval of exports of high-tech items, even those having no direct military application. (Science, Nov 20/81, 891)
•	NASA reported that it would join a sounding-rocket program with Canada’s National Research Council to study a cleft or wedge-shaped opening over the Northwest Territories (N.W.T.) in Earth’s magnetic field. From November 25 to December 21, researchers would launch five rockets carrying experiments into the cleft region to record effects ranging from disrupted communications to pipeline corrosion and long-term weather patterns. Ground-station equipment would be installed at the launch site, Cape Parry, N.W.T., and at Sachs Harbor about 200 kilometers (124 miles) north.
Data from the project, called CENTAUR (cleft energetics, transport, and ultraviolet radiation), would define mechanisms causing particle acceleration in the cleft and would aid in studying ion flow, auroral arcs, and plasma instabilities. WFC would manage launch and tracking and acquisition of experiment data. (NASA Release 81-180; WFC Release 81-18)
•	DFRC said that it was readying Shuttle orbiter Columbia for its return to KSC on its Boeing 747 carrier plane. DFRC was deservicing the orbiter after its 54-hour second flight, draining liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuels, removing pyrotechnic devices, and purging toxic chemical and fuel cells used in the propulsion systems. DFRC would attach a tailcone to the orbiter covering its three main engines and two orbital-maneuvering engines.
The ferry flight would take two days, with a refueling and overnight stop at Bergstrom Air Force Base near Austin, Texas, or Dyess Air Force Base near Abilene. Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, manager of the orbital flight tests, would accompany Columbia back to KSC. (NASA Release 81-181; ARC Release 81-34)
•	The Soviet Union launched India’s satellite Bhaskara 2 into an orbit with 557-kilometer apogee, 514-kilometer perigee, 95.2-minute period, and 50.7° inclination. It carried television and microwave radiometers to study Earth’s natural resources. Tass said that India and USSR stations were receiving data. (FBIS, Tass in English, Nov 20/81)
November 27: Newsreview, published by the Air Force Systems Command, told of a special “bake job” done for NASA by Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., in its Civil Engineering Squadron’s fabrication-branch shop. Ovens there, normally used to harden, soften, or anneal metals, were large enough to treat 75 to 80 thermal tiles from Shuttle orbiter Columbia damaged by a nitrogen tetroxide spill. The heat treatment at 1,100—1,400°F took about 16 hours to
burn off contaminant and bonding material. Checking for toxic vapors caused by the heat disclosed none. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 27/81, 8)
During November: Administrator James M. Beggs appointed Philip E. Culbertson associate deputy administrator with revised duties, serving as senior staff adviser and directing formulation of NASA policy, strategy, and planning of a facility to constitute permanent U.S. presence in space. Culbertson had served for two years as assistant for space transportation systems.
—Robert F. Allnutt, associate deputy administrator since mid-1978, would assume new duties as deputy general counsel for policy review, studying the long-term development of NASA and its relationship to other federal agencies as well as contractual arrangements with future users of the Space Shuttle.
(NASA anno, Nov 18/81; NASA Release 81-178, 81-179)
—NASA named C. Thomas Newman comptroller to succeed Wiliam E. Lilly, who retired in October. Thomas F. Campbell would replace Newman as deputy comptroller. (NASA anno Nov 25/81)
—Frank J. Malina, cofounder of JPL and of the Aerojet General Corporation, died November 9 at his home in Paris. He had moved there to work with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) after retiring in 1947 as an officer of Aeroject and JPL. He had worked for Theodore von Karmann as a researcher for Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, CalTech, leading to creation of the CalTech rocket-research project in 1936 that later became JPL, which made the first successful U.S. satellites in the 1950s.
—William Pickering, who followed Malina as JPL director from 1954 to 1976, said that inventions'that made present-day rockets possible went back to work done at JPL under Malina. A leader in developing jet-assisted takeoff (JATO) rockets used in World War II and co-developer of the WAC Corporal, first U.S. successul stratosphere rocket, Malina had in 1942 joined von Karmann to form Aerojet General, first U.S. manufacturer of rocket engines. He left UNESCO in 1953 to start a studio as a graphic artist, working in a form he invented called “kinetic art.” (LA Times, Nov 11/81; LA Star News, Nov 11/81)
December
December 1: NASA said that it had picked Jack R. Lousma and C. Gordon Fullerton as commander and pilot for the third flight of Shuttle orbiter Columbia. The backup crew would be Thomas K. Mattingly II and Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr.
Lousma, a colonel in the U.S. Marine Corps, was mission pilot on Skylab 3, logging more than 1,427 hours in space as he and his crew accomplished 150% of their assigned goals. Fullerton, a colonel in the U.S. Air Force, piloted the Shuttle Enterprise on its first, third, and fifth flights in the approach-and-landing tests in 1977. The third Columbia flight, a seven-day and three hour mission of 116 orbits set for March 1982, would carry a payload (OSS-1) developed by NASA’s Office of Space Scinece and would further test the remote manipulator arm for inserting future payloads into space. (NASA Release 81-187)
December 4: ESA handed over to NASA in Bremen the first flight unit of Spacelab, built for use on the shuttle. Just a year after delivery of the engineering model, NASA received all the systems—first main components of standard equipment, platforms, ground facilities, and spare parts—to be used on the first Spacelab flight September 1983. It would transfer to NASA in May 1982 experiments for the first Spacelab payload.
An industrial consortium with ERNO as prime contractor had carried out development since January 1980. The contract, worth 301.3 million deutschmarks (DM) at 1980 levels, had increased to 380 million DM at 1981 levels. NASA would receive the components of a second Spacelab flight unit, ordered throughout ESA to be identical with the first, in 15 batches, starting in 1982. (ESA Info 28; NASA Release 81-193; MSFC Release 81-145)
December 7: NASA’s Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications (OSTA) announced its selection of 9 experimental and 10 theoretical teams to participate in the upper-atmosphere research satellite (UARS) program designed to provide data on energy input, chemical composition, and dynamics of Earth’s stratosphere and mesosphere. Interest in this area had increased with the realization of potential damage to the ozone layer from high-flying aircraft and from chemicals in aerosol sprays, refrigeration, air-conditioning, and foam-blowing operations.
The experimental teams would develop instruments for direct measurement of upper-atmosphere winds, solar-ultraviolet radiation, energetic-particle interaction with the upper atmosphere, and variation of chemical content with altitude. Theoretical teams would develop upper-atmosphere models to be us-
ed with new acquired data for assessing the impact of man’s activities on the delicate processes in the stratosphere and for improving understanding of upper-atmosphere chemistry and dynamics. (NASA Release 81-190)
December 8: MSFC said that the Spacelab 1 payload crew was in Japan for a week, practicing the use of instruments scheduled to fly on the First mission in 19S3. A NASA-sponsored package, SEPAC (space experiments with particle accelerators), would study the interaction of Earth’s magnetosphere with the upper atmosphere. Professor Tatsuzo Obayashi of the University of Tokyo would be the principal investigator.
Before leaving Japan December 15, the crew would be trained on the actual flight hardware at Japan’s National Space Development Agency. The crew— civilian scientists called payload specialists and two NASA mission-specialist astronauts—were Drs. Byron Lichtenberg and Michael Lampton of the United States, Dr. Ulf Merbold of West Germany, Dr. Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands, and NASA mission specialists Drs. Owen Garriott and Robert Parker. Two payload specialists would actually fly on the mission with the mission specialists; the other two would support the mission on the ground. (MSFC Release 81-146)
—NASA said that one of Japan’s major newspapers, Asahi Shibmun, had signed an agreement to fly a “getaway special” experiment on the Shuttle, possibly in late 1982, using the weightlessness of space to make pure artificial snow crystals directly from a gaseous substance while the Shuttle was in orbit.
A Japanese physicist, the late Dr. Ukichiro Nakaya, had made the first artificial snow-crystal experiments in 1936. The Shuttle experiment, a first try at creating artificial snow in a weightless environment, would contribute significantly to crystallography, especially growth of semiconductor crystals or other items from a vapor source. The idea, suggested by two Japanese students, was chosen for 17,000 suggestions by the newspaper’s readers.
To date NASA had accepted 321 getaway specials—privately funded experimental payloads—for flight on the Shuttle on a space-available basis, beginning with the fifth mission in 1982. (NASA Release 81-191)
December 10: ARC reported the first NASA-piloted test flight of its “flying research facility,” a helicopter-type aircraft equipped with fixed wings and jet engines, over San Francisco Bay at speeds of up to 120 knots (138 mph) for 45 minutes. Warren Hall of ARC piloted the flight; copilot was Lt. Col. Bob Merrill, deputy director of U.S. Army flight tests at Edwards Air Force Base.
Designed for studying advanced rotor systems in actual flight, the craft had the highly reliable type of rotor used on presidential helicopters. The wings and engines provided the lift needed in studying rotors too small to support the research aircraft alone. A second rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA) had been flown at ARC in the basic-helicopter configuration.
Located at ARC, the two aircraft constituted a national facility for in-flight verification of rotor-system technology; they could be flown as helicopters or
equipped with the fixed wings and auxiliary jet engines to enhance test capability. The two craft, built by the Sikorsky Division of United Technologies for LaRC and the Army’s technology lab at Moffett Field, California, were transferred to ARC in 1979 for the joint NASA-Army research program. (ARC Release 81-67; NASA Release 81-194)
•	MSFC reported a milestone in the development of the Space Telescope. Perkin-Elmer Corporation, contractor for design and production of the optical asembly, finished putting an aluminum coating 3 millionths of an inch thick on the 94-inch primary mirror, an 1,800-pound polished glass blank. Engineers from the firm and from MSFC verified that the coating adhered to the mirror and exhibited the proper reflectivity. The telescope would use two mirrors to focus light from stellar objects onto a group of instruments at the rear of the telescope assembly. Launched from the Shuttle into Earth orbit in the mid-1980s, the Space Telescope should allow astronomers to see seven times deeper into space than is now possible with ground-based telescopes. (MSFC Releae 81-148)
•	NASA declared the mission of Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 successful. Launched September 5 and August 20, 1977, each of the spacecraft had traveled more than 2.4 billion kilometers during the past four years and had conducted scientific investigations at seven major bodies of the solar system. They had made comparative studies of the Jupiter and Saturn systems, including their satellites, rings, and fields and particles environments. They had also measured characteristics of the interplanetary medium from Earth to Saturn. Achievements included:
—acquiring more than 62,000 images from the outer solar system
—discovering rings around Jupiter and unusual braiding, spokes, ringlets, and shepherding satellites in the rings of Saturn; new satellites of Jupiter and Saturn; lightning on Jupiter; eight active volcanoes on Io; and new sources of radio emissions in the Jupiter and Saturn systems
—measuring atmospheric composition, temperature, pressure, and dynamics, magnetospheres; and particle environments of Jupiter, Saturn, and Titan. (NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02 [postlaunch] Dec 10/81)
December 14: NASA issued a final report on investigation of the leak of nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer at KSC September 22. A four-person committee chaired by KSC’s Wiley Williams said that the cause of the leak was failure of a quick-disconnect fitting in which iron nitrate from the oxidizer had accumulated between interior components, allowing escape to the outside.
Between 15 and 20 gallons of oxidizer escaped, some diverted away from the orbiter surface by a catch system, but “a significant quanity” flowed over the outside of the orbiter and its thermal-protection system. About 370 tiles
had to be removed. Oxidizer also got into the forward module of the reaction-control system, damaging thermal blankets and electrical wiring.
Close tolerance in the interior components, allowing the binding to take place, was a design failure point unrecognized before the accident. As the same fittings would be used for the second Shuttle launch, the committee recommended taking several steps before loading hypcrgolic propellant again:
—adding more values to the system to permit isolation of the quick-disconnect fittings
—modifying the catch system and adding protective aprons to guard against a large leak
—changing procedures to eliminate use of the quick-disconnect fitting as a shutoff valve
—expanding emergency procedures and conditioning the servicing team to expect similar failures
—sealing possible entry paths into the orbiter during loading, or purging internal compartments with inert gaseous nitrogen.
Although the committee limited its investigation to this one incident, it recommended review of its report to identify other fluids used around the orbiter that could cause damage if spilled. (NASA Release 81-73)
December 15: NASA launched Intelsat 5-CF3 from ESMC at 6:35 p.m. EST on an Atlas-Centaur into a highly elliptical transfer orbit with 35,953-kilometer apogee, 165.8-kilometer perigee, and 23.7° inclination. Firing of the apogee motor by INTELSAT would put it in geostationary orbit at 15 °E for tests by Telespazio at Fucino, Italy. It would later become the primary Atlantic communications satellite at 335.5°E, replacing Intelsat 5 FI, which would move to an Indian Ocean location at 62 °E to begin service next March after launch of another communications satellite as a spare.
The two-ton F3, capable of 12,000 simultaneous telephone conversations plus two international color television channels, was third of the 5 and 5A series of 15 communications satellites planned by INTELSAT to handle international communications, such as telephone, telegrams, telex, data, and television. (NASA MOR 0-491-203-81-03 [prelaunch] Dec 1/81, [postlaunch] Jan 9/82: NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 16/81; Spacewarn, Dec 29/81; INTELSAT Releases 81-27-1, 81-32-1; A/D, Dec 22/81, 268)
December 20: ESA launched Marecs-A, first European maritime communications satellite, from Kourou in French Guiana at 1:29 a.m. GMT on the fourth Ariane booster into a highly elliptical orbit with 35,820-kilometer apogee, 220-kilometer perigee, 632-minute period, and 10.5° inclination, preparatory to a boost into geosynchronous orbit at 26 °W. The Ariane also carried a technological capsule (CAT 4) enclosing an experiment called Thesee (Theseus) that would remain in the original orbit.
The European Space Operations Center (ESOC) would test Marecs before handing it over to INMARSAT, which would lease its communications capaci-
ty over the Atlantic Ocean. A Marecs-B spacecraft was being readied for launch in April 1982 for INMARSAT use over the Pacific Ocean. (ESA Infos 29, 31, 32, [81], 1 [82])
December 22: NASA said that its joint sounding-rocket project with Canada’s National Research Council [see November 20] was successful. William A. Brence of WFC said that preliminary results were satisfactory. Data from the seven experiments launched on five large suborbital rockets from temporary facilities at a radar site on the Arctic coast would, in combination with ground-based observations, enlarge understanding of the dynamics of the cleft in Earth’s magnetic field. (WFC Release 81-20)
During December: NASA announced the appointment of Dr. Walter B. Olstad, deputy associate administrator for management to direct all matters such as personnel, supply and equipment, facilities, computer support, and the like. He would succeed Edwin C. Kilgore, who retired October 2. C. Robert Nysmith would replace Olstad in an acting capacity. Both appointments were effective immediately.
The Office of Management was created in the NASA reorganization plan effective in November to perform some of the functions previously under the Office of Management Operations and some previously under the NASA comptroller.
Olstad began his association with the agency in 1954, working at the Langley laboratory as a research engineer in the transonic tunnel branch, then in the reentry physics branch. He became chief of LaRC’s space systems division in July 1975. He went to Headquarters in 1979 as deputy associate administrator for OAST. (NASA anno Dec 14/81; NASA Release 81-195)