Washington Technology reported that at a May 11 appearance before the annual meeting of the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences (NCMS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin emphasized his commitment to NASA's technology-transfer outreach to industry. At the meeting, Goldin announced a memorandum of understanding that allowed NASA and the NCMS to propose joint research projects. (Washington Technology, May 20, 1993)
Space News praised President Bill Clinton's space plan as a "rational, sound approach that will keep the station alive, head NASA in the right direction, and keep NASA Administrator Dan Goldin around."(Space News, Feb 22-28/93)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the agency had exceeded its 1992 goal of awarding 6.7 percent of the total value of the agency's prime and subcontracts to small disadvantaged businesses. Over $865 million was awarded to minority organizations; this figure represented 7.2 of the total $12 billion awarded during the last fiscal year. (National Black Review, Feb 5/93)
Representatives from NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and industry described how they had worked together to take windshear advance-warning devices from the drawing board to the commercial aviation marketplace in just five years.  The windshear reports, part of a NASA/FAA conference in Hampton, Virginia, detailed development of microwave radar, laser radar, and infrared sensors that provide up to 40 seconds warning of windshear. Now NASA and the FAA were considering whether pilots should have formal training to interact with these new instruments. (NASA Release 93-270 and 93-171; AvWk, Oct. 18/93)
In a speech delivered April 2 at the annual conference in Washington of the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education, Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, outlined what NASA was doing to emphasize cultural diversity within the organization.
A NASA in-house study reported that the agency's technology transfer reputation had been overblown. According to the assessment,"Technology transfer processes are non-integrated, undocumented, and too slow." The report was requested last May by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. (Washington Technology, Jan 14/93)
NASA announced that it had awarded contracts to three U.S. aerospace companies to develop materials and materials fabrication technology for a future U.S. high-speed civil transport. Contracts went to Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, Seattle, Washington; Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Co, Marietta, Georgia; and McDonnell Douglas Aerospace, Long Beach, California.  (NASA Release 93-124)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Jeff Lawrence, a senior congressional staff aide with experience in space and aeronautics matters, as the agency's Associate Administrator for Legislative Affairs. (NASA Release 93-70; W Post, Apr 21/93)
According to a USA Today/CNN/Gallop Poll, most Americans now feel the nation should cut or eliminate spending for the space program. Marcia Smith of the Congressional Research Service said that people are concerned about where to cut the budget, and NASA is seen as a discretionary program. The poll also revealed that people were losing faith in NASA's performance. (USA Today, Sep 7/93)
In a speech to the National Space Symposium, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make the space program relevant to all Americans. He said he wanted everything smaller, faster, cheaper, and more varied. And he wanted to take more risks.
NASA awarded the Arlington, Virginia-based Analytic Services Inc. a one-year grant to help study opportunities for cooperation among nations with space programs. (W Times, Mar 9/93)
NASA reported that the agency was working with the nation's large aerospace companies to determine how NASA computer programs could help industry design and produce aircraft more efficiently. The ultimate goal was to integrate all the factors involved in aircraft design and production in order that aeronautical engineers would be able to design aircraft systems simultaneously rather than separately as is done now. (NASA Release 93-90)
NASA negotiated with PRC, Inc. of McLean, Virginia, a sole source contract extension to provide data processing and telecommunications support for NASA headquarters, Washington. (NASA Release C93-o)
NASA's newly formed Minority Business Resource Advisory Committee met in Washington to discuss their charter and to begin developing an agenda. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who formed the group, charged them with helping NASA respond to a directive from Congress that required the agency to award 8 percent of the total value of the agency's contracts to economically and socially disadvantaged businesses and minority educational institutions involved in key NASA activities.	Goldin pledged in September that NASA would meet its 8 percent goal. In an attempt to meet his pledge. the agency identified 26 procurements that would be set aside for small disadvantaged businesses (SDBs) and for members of the Small Business Administration's 8(a) program for minority-owned firms.
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA was raising the number of contracts it had with small, disadvantaged and women-owned businesses. According to Goldin, $310 million would be set aside under a Determinations and Findings (D & F) to make sure that NASA awarded 8 percent to such businesses. Eight percent was the figure set by Congress. (LA Watts Times, Jan 7/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA had awarded 8.5 percent of its 1993 fiscal year contracting budget to socially and economically disadvantaged firms, achieving a congressionally mandated goal of 8 percent for FY 1994 a year early. (NASA Release 93-214)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the activities of the Office of Exploration would be absorbed by the Office of Space Science, effective immediately. (NASA Release: 93-54)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the recipients of the Minority Contractor and Subcontractor of the Year Awards in recognition of minority businesses that had made outstanding contributions to NASA. Hernandez Engineering, Inc., Houston, was named as Minority Contractor of the Year. AJT and Associates, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida, was named Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 93-177)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden awarded test pilot A. Scott Crossfield the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his contributions to aeronautics and aviation during his career of 50 years.
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) described innovative new aeronautics research programs that would let airports across the nation and around the world handle more planes with fewer delays while maintaining today's high level of safety. (NASA Release 93-172)
The Houston Chronicle  announced that NASA, responding to criticism of its cost overruns and the quality of its projects, had announced major reforms in the way it did business. In addition to other changes, procurement reforms would levy greater penalties on contractors that deliver defective products, continually exceed cost estimates, or fall behind schedule. (H Chron, May 10/93; Federal Computer Week, May 24/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that he had appointed Margaret G. Finarelli to be Assistant for Strategic Planning.  Prior to her appointment, she served as NASA's Associate Administrator for Policy Coordination and International Relations. (NASA Release 93-132)
David Lux, project manager for the SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane, which crisscrossed the globe on Cold War spy missions, said that the plane had a new job helping NASA generate a database to be used by people who do aircraft design.  He said that Blackbird would soon take to the skies to see if it were possible to eliminate or reduce sonic booms for future high-speed airliners. (UPI, Jul 25/93)
A report released by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA must improve its ability to transfer technology to business. The report included eight recommendations for changing NASA's culture to facilitate technology transfer.
The House of Representatives passed an amendment to the National Helium Act of 1960. The amendment judged the helium program as a case of government waste and voted to end its monopoly on sales to the space program. The 1996 Act required NASA to buy its helium from the government-run reserve, even though it could be bought for as much as $10 less per 1,000 cubic feet on the open market. The Senate was still considering the amendment.
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, presented Gene Roddenberry, creator of the Star Trek television series, NASA's Distinguished Public Service Medal on January 30. The medal, which was awarded posthumously, was presented to Roddenberry's widow, Majel Barrett Roddenberry. Gene Roddenberry died in October 1991.
NASA's Inspector General told Congress that NASA is plagued with contractors who overcharge, receive bonus payments while running up huge cost overruns and employ workers who frequently sleep on the job. The agency currently has more than 400 criminal fraud investigations under way, the Inspector General told the House Government Operations Committee. (AP, Oct 6/93; NY Times, Oct 6/93, Oct 7/93; LA Times, Oct 7/93)
NASA appointed Deidre A. Lee as Acting Associate Administrator for Procurement. She replaced Don G. Bush, who announced his intention to resign in November 1992. Since September 1991, Lee has been serving as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Procurement. Prior to that she was the Executive Officer to NASA's Acting Deputy Administrator. (NASA Release 93-11)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, who described himself as "an agent of change" in a late-November interview with Government Executive magazine, has set about instituting the "faster, better, cheaper" goals popularized over the past two years by the National Space Council.
A feature in the NY Times about Daniel S. Golden, NASA Administrator, called him a "bold remodeler of a drifting agency." Golden was quoted in the article as saying that he believes "nonlinear thinking" is essential to the rebirth of NASA. (NY Times, Dec 21/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that the U.S. space program "is in chaos" because of congressional budget cuts. NASA's five-year budget plan dropped from $106 billion last year to $71 billion. Noting that NASA's budget changed every two or three months, Goldin called on Congress to institute a multiyear budget that would enable the agency to develop a strategic plan. (USA Today, Nov 17/93; W Times, Nov 17; Reuters, Nov 16/93, Nov 17/93; Fla Today, Nov 17/93)
