NASA selected the National Consortium for Aviation Mobility (NCAM)a consortium of more than 100 public and private entities involved in transportation issuesas its partner in a joint venture to develop air-mobility technologies for small aircraft and small airports. By mid-2005 NASA and NCAM intended to create a flight demonstration, called a proof-of-concept, of NASA’s Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS). Engineers planned for the system to provide on-demand, point-to-point transportation with 4- to 10-passenger aircraft operating from nearly 5,400 public-use landing facilities. NASA officials hoped SATS would improve the affordability, efficiency, reliability, and safety of small aircraft servicing small communities throughout the United States. However, NASA wanted to determine the project’s feasibility and to share its costs through partnerships with public and private entities. NASA expected that funding from the Department of Transportation and other federal agencies, along with its own contributions, would total nearly US$40 million for research over four years.(NASA, “NASA Selects Partner for Aviation Research,” news release 02-89, 14 May 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced his selection of an independent task force to assess the productivity and priorities of the research produced by NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) and to provide a report to the NASA Advisory Council. O’Keefe expected the task force, designated the Research Maximization and Prioritization Task Force (ReMAP), to recommend strategies the OBPR could use to achieve its research goals and still remain within President George W. Bush’s requested budget. In addition, O’Keefe requested the task force to offer assessments and recommendations to guide NASA in maximizing the scientific returns of the ISS’s missions and of its other programs. O’Keefe selected Rae Silver, the Helene L. and Mark N. Kaplan Professor of Natural and Physical Sciences at Columbia University, as the chairperson of ReMAP.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names Task Force To Review Biological and Physical Research Programs,” news release 02-61, 29 March 2002.)
Citing terrorism concerns, NASA officials stated that NASA planned to change the manner in which it released information about launch times to the public. NASA officials said that NASA would no longer publicize launch times until 24 hours before liftoff, at which time NASA would announce a 4-hour time slot during which liftoff would occur. The change was a reversal of NASA’s previous practice of announcing specific launch times months in advance of liftoff.(Steve Siceloff, “NASA To Withhold Shuttle Launch Times,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 March 2002. 64)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named Jeremiah F. Creedon, Director of NASA’s LaRC, as the new Associate Administrator for the Office of Aerospace Technology at NASA Headquarters. Creedon had begun working at LaRC in June 1963 as an engineer, eventually succeeding Paul F. Holloway to become LaRC’s seventh director. Delma C. Freeman Jr., LaRC’s Deputy Director, became its Acting Director.(NASA LaRC, “NASA Administrator Names Langley Director Associate Administrator of Aerospace Technology,” news release 02-037, 14 May 2002; NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 18 August 2008).)
The White House informed NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe that it was withdrawing Major General Charles F. Bolden as its nominee for NASA’s Deputy Administrator. According to a White House spokesperson, President George W. Bush had withdrawn the nomination so that Bolden could serve the military in the war on terrorism. At the time of the nomination, Bolden, a former astronaut, was the commanding general for the Third U.S. Marine Aircraft Wing, which had nearly 11,000 U.S. Marines in Afghanistan as part of Operation Enduring Freedom.(NASA, “Deputy Administrator Nomination Withdrawn,” news release 02-49, 13 March 2002; Mark Carreau and Bennett Roth, “Nomination Is Withdrawn for Deputy’s Post at NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 14 March 2002.)
GAO released a report examining NASA’s established mechanisms for learning lessons from past failures. The report, “NASA: Better Mechanisms for Sharing Lessons Learned,” noted that NASA’s investigations of its past failures and its evaluations of its programs had led it to establish various mechanisms to ensure that NASA’s personnel had learned from past successes and failures and had applied their knowledge to future programs and projects. These mechanisms included a Web-based database of lessons learned, program reviews, and the development of a business strategy called knowledge management. However, GAO’s report also noted that, according to interviews with NASA managers, NASA’s established policies, procedures, and systems were not facilitating the use of lessons learned. GAO indicated that this was largely because managers faced challenges, such as lack of time to note, submit, and share lessons learned, and cultural barriers, such as reluctance to discuss mistakes for fear of their colleagues’ disapproval. Among the report’s main recommendations were that NASA develop a strong managerial commitment to sharing knowledge and create technological systems capable of facilitating access to this information.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA: Better Mechanisms Needed for Sharing Lessons Learned” (report no. GAO-02-195, Washington, DC, January 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02195.pdf (accessed 31 July 2002). 181 NASA, “Aging NASA Spacecraft To Reenter Earth’s Atmosphere,” news release 02-16, 29 January 2002; NASA, “EUVE Spacecraft Re-enters Earth’s Atmosphere,” news release 02-19, 31 January 2002; NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “EUVE Guest Observer FacilityThe Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Mission,” http://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/euve/euvegof.html (accessed 30 July 2002).)
The Research Maximization and Prioritization Task Force (ReMAP) presented the executive summary of its external review to the NASA Advisory Council. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had created ReMAP in March 2002 to recommend strategies that NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) could use to achieve its research goals within budgetary limits. Among its recommendations, ReMAP suggested that the ISS include a chief science officer on board, and that NASA increase the ISS’s equipment, the ISS crew’s work time, and the frequency of Shuttle flights, to enable the crew to conduct first-rate research aboard the station.(NASA, “ReMaP Task Force Recognized by NASA Administrator and NASA Advisory Council Chair,” news release 02-123, 10 July 2002; Warren E. Leary, “Panel Asserts Reduced Space Station Plans Will Limit Scientific Work,” New York Times, 11 July 2002.)
