U.S. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN), senior Democrat on the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, introduced H. R. 2450, the Human Space Flight Independent Investigation Commission Act, in an effort to ensure that future investigations of human spaceflight accidents would remain independent and “free from any perception that [NASA] is hiding something.” Gordon had wanted President George W. Bush to appoint an independent commission, free of any NASA personnel, to investigate the Columbia disastersimilar to the commission that had investigated the Challenger accident in 1986. Instead, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had to revise the charter of the CAIB three times before the Board had attained a measure of independence. Moreover, the Board still included one NASA official and relied on NASA staff, an arrangement that Gordon feared would undermine the credibility of the CAIB’s final report. H.R. 2450 proposed that, in the event of another disaster, the investigative panel would follow the Challenger model, requiring a 15-member commission, with the chairperson of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) serving as a member and the President of the United States appointing the other 14. Under the terms of the Act, commission members would have diverse backgrounds, although some would also have spaceflight and accident investigation experience. The resolution also stipulated that NASA personnel could not serve, either on the investigative panel or on its staff. The commission would have subpoena powers and would report its findings simultaneously to the President, Congress, and the public.(Leonard David, “Lawmaker Calls for Independent Space Accident Investigations,” Space.com, 16 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_gordon_030616.html (accessed 19 December 2008).)
NASA announced the selection of 15 organizations from industry, government, and academia to carry out 22 propulsion-technology research proposals in five areas of the In-Space Propulsion Program: aerocapture, advanced chemical propulsion, solar-electric propulsion, space-based tether propulsion, and solar-sail technologies. The goal of the program, under the management of the Office of Space Sciences at NASA Headquarters, was to make exploration of deep space more practical, affordable, and productive.(NASA, “NASA Selects In-Space Propulsion Innovations for Research,” contract release C03-q, 16 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_news_c03Q.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
NASA announced the replacement of its Mishap Response Team with the newly formed NASA Accident Investigation Team (NAIT), which would continue to support the CAIB. NASA had formed the Mishap Response Team within hours of the Columbia disaster on 1 February but had drawn criticism for the team’s composition, which included staff that had directly overseen the Shuttle’s mission. Linda Ham had led the Mishap Response Team, even though, as a senior Shuttle program manager, she had assisted in making key decisions during the 16-day Columbia mission. NASA and the CAIB intended for the NAIT to support the CAIB, and they had organized the NAIT to mirror the CAIB’s structure, with three subsections: materials, operations, and engineering. NASA had appointed Deputy Director of JSC Randy Stone to chair the NAIT.(NASA, “NASA Columbia Accident Support Activities Reorganized,” news release 03-113, 21 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03113.html (accessed 25 August 2008); Robyn Suriano, “New Team Created To Help with Shuttle Probe,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 March 2003.)
In response to the anticipated recommendations of the CAIB, NASA announced its plans to create an independent NASA Engineering and Safety Center (NESC) at NASA’s LaRC, providing a central location to coordinate engineering and safety assessment for all of NASA. The NESC, expected to draw on the talents of 250 staff throughout NASA to conduct analysis and share technical information, would report to Director of LaRC Roy D. Bridges Jr. Bryan D. O’Connor, Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters, would have responsibility for policy. NASA intended for the NESC to provide independent assessment and testing of engineering, in support of critical NASA projects and programs; to conduct reviews and evaluations of engineering and safety; to provide a central location for trend analysis; to provide a structure to support engineering collaboration for problem resolution; to provide central coordination of engineering and programmatic lessons learned, technical standardization, and development of technical discipline expertise; and to provide independent inspection and validation of activities to ensure the constant maintenance of NASA safety standards.(NASA, “NASA Announces Independent Engineering and Safety Center,” news release 03-239, 15 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03239_safety_center.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Warren E. Leary, “In Response to Panel, NASA Plans Safety Center,” New York Times, 16 July 2003.)
NASA announced the appointment of David A. King as the new Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, effective 15 June. NASA would reassign Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson, in preparation for his planned January 2004 retirement from NASA. King had been MSFC’s Deputy Director since November 2002, assisting Stephenson in managing a range of propulsion, space science, and materials research, as well as development work. NASA had also dispatched King to Lufkin, Texas, within hours of the Columbia disaster, to serve as the senior on-site NASA official in the search-and-recovery effort. In that capacity, he had created critical, initial work processes; established effective working relationships among federal and state government agencies; and set the foundation for the two subsequent NASA officials who would share responsibility for leading effective recovery efforts. Before serving as Deputy Director of MSFC, King had been Deputy Director of Shuttle Processing, Launch Director of six Shuttle missions, and Director of Shuttle Processing at NASA’s KSC. As Director of Shuttle Processing at KSC, he had managed and coordinated all Space Shuttle processing, launch, and landing operations and had made the final determination to launch during the three-day countdown process.(NASA, “David A. King Named Marshall Space Flight Center Director,“ news release 03-181, 23 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/03181_king_msfc_director.html (accessed 20 November 2008); Patty Reinert, “Marshall Space Flight Center Chief Will Leave Post in January,” Houston Chronicle, 21 May 2003.)
