In nbc TV interview, Dr. F. J. Krieger, specialist of the rand Corporation on Soviet space affairs, pointed out that the 50th anniversary of the Communist Revolution in Russia was in 1967, and that that year may be the political target date for the accomplishment of a Soviet lunar landing mission.
TV pictures of Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich orbiting the earth in spacecraft vostok iii and iv were viewed by the public in Russia, Western Europe, England, and the U.S. The pictures were put on videotape or kinescope film during London broadcast for TV viewing in America.
Capt. Richard H. Coan (usaf) established a new world’s record for a helicopter distance flight over a closed course, flying an H-43B Huskie 656.258 miles on a 25-mile course near Mono Lake, Calif. Previous record of 625.464 miles had been held by a Russian military helicopter Mi-1 (June 1960).
Addressing sam’s Aerospace Medicine symposium, Major General C.	H. Mitchell, Vice Commander of afcs, said that the “Russian threat in space is becoming obvious . . . Clearly it is our responsibility as a nation to insure that space is used to benefit all mankind. We can insure this only through development of the ability to conduct military operations in space with maximum effectiveness . . .”
In an article in Ekonomicheskya Gazeta, the economic newspaper of the Soviet Communist Party, Dr. Peter Kapitza, one of Russia’s outstanding physicists, said that Soviet science had been hampered by attempts to judge the validity of scientific theories on the basis of Marxist dialectics. If Soviet scientists had listened to Marxist philosophers in the 1950’s, he said, the Russian achievements in space would have been impossible.
Soviet Academician Leonid Sedov denied in interview with Trud that U.S.S.R. had launched other men into orbit besides Majs. Gagarin and Titov. U.S. press had speculated that as many as five Russian cosmonauts had been killed in unsuccessful flights.
Reported that Russian Cosmonauts Gagarin and Titov were assured membership in the Supreme Soviet. Neither was opposed in election slates and both will represent their home towns. It was also reported that the U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry’s press department had denied the rumor that Russia was preparing to let Western newsmen cover the next Soviet space shot.
