Dr. Boris Yegorov, the Russian doctor who orbited the earth in the VOSICHOD I spaceship, suggested that persons suffering from high blood pressure and heart trouble might one day be rocketed into weightless space for therapy. By relieving the gravitational load on the patients and giving them drugs, he said, “it will be possible to heal a person and give his wearied heart a chance to recuperate.” Dr. Yegorov said this novel heart treatment would be possible in the “foreseeable future.” (Toth, Boston Sunday Globe, 12/20/64)
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was reported to have told visiting Japanese legislators that U.S.S.R. had developed a new “terrible weapon” capable of destroying mankind. Two days later, however, Mr. Khrushchev clarified his remark, denying he had said that the weapon could destroy mankind. “I said that scientists had shown me the terrible weapon, which shows what mankind can do. We did not say anything about unlimited power.” He also said the weapon was not a nuclear bomb. He blamed the earlier report on having been “misinterpreted” in translation from Russian to Japanese and then to English. (NYT, 9/16/64; Shabad, NYT, 9/18/64)
New program combining study of science with study of U.S.S.R. at Columbia University’s Russian Institute was announced by Institute director Prof. Alexander Dallin. (NYT, 5/24/64, 21)
out an agreement with the Europeans, and it was believed that the system would be greatly strengthened by Russian participation. The Geneva meetings, which would involve the U.S., European nations, and the U.S.S.R., would include a general discussion of recent developments in space communications. It was also reported that before the Geneva meeting a negotiation session in London between the U.S. and European nations would work on a preliminary agreement on an interim organization for a space communications system. (Farnsworth, NYT, 6/7/64,6)
Yelena Andrianovena Nikolayeva, infant daughter of Russian cosmonauts Valentina Tereshkova and Andrian Nikolayev, was to be thoroughly examined for next few years to determine whether weightlessness or radiation of her parents had any effect. (Snider, CDNS, Houston Chron., 7/13/64)
Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. designer of the F—12A (A—11) aircraft, said that the airplane could easily outfly Russian aircraft. He stated that the F—12A could capture all three absolute world flight records currently held by the Russians. (AP, Kansas City Times, 7/18/64)
British scientists at the Jodrell Bank radio astronomy station were reported searching the skies for the Russian space probe zond i which was believed to be approaching Venus. The Russians had never revealed the precise mission of the probe and refused to supply the Jodrell Bank scientists with the radio frequencies on which it was operating, but it was believed that the probe would closely approach Venus during the 72-hr. period beginning July 17. (Reuters, Minneapolis Morning Trib., 7/18/64)
