After 26 hrs. of flight, Col. Pavel I. Belyayev landed voskhod ii manually near Perm, Russia. Tass announced. The two-man spacecraft had completed 17 orbits of the earth, one more orbit than planned, and had traveled 447,000 mi. This was the first time landing of a Soviet spacecraft had been described as manual. Impact of voskhod II on the ground, later revealed as snow bank, was described as “soft.” (Tanner, NYT, 3/20/65, 1, 3; Shabad, NYT, 3/21/65, 3)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, made his first address on the U.S. space program at the Goddard Memorial Dinner sponsored by the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He said: “1 intend to be an advocate of a dynamic space program—a program which will succeed in reaching to goals we have set—and one which will see new goals—one that can see beyond the moon and into fields where we can only speculate about the knowledge awaiting us.” The Vice President spoke briefly about the Soviet Union’s VOSKHOD II flight: “It is well for us from time to time to take stock—to take a careful look—in order to see how we are making out in comparison with our main competitor. The facts are that we do have very strong competition and hence we have another big reason for a major space effort—namely, prudence. Our national security alone would suggest reason enough for us to strive for absolute leadership in space exploration.” Humphrey pointed out that the Soviets remained ahead in propulsion for their rockets, while the U.S. continued to lead “in the directly useful fields of weather reporting, navigation, and communications.” He continued: “The Soviets clearly have an advantage in studying the effects of space environment on human beings. . . . We can salute the Russian achievements . . . but we would be foolish if we did not understand the military implications of Soviet space science as well as our own. “Each Russian shock has produced action here. But a mature nation should not need shock treatment. We are a peaceful nation . . . but we would ignore the real interests of the free world if we diminished our military efforts in space.” In the principal presentation, the widow of the scientist presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and leader of the RANGER vii team that obtained the first close-up pictures of the moon’s surface. The National Space Club Press Award for “an outstanding role in adding significantly to public understanding and appreciation of astronautics” went to Aviation Week and Space Technology; Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for “an outstanding contribution to the missile, aircraft, and space field” was presented to Florida Research and Development Center, Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft; Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was made to John Tascher, Case Institute of Technology, for U.S. Rocket Society Number Two: the Story of the Cleveland Rocket Society; Robert H. Goddard Scholarship ($1,500 to the university of the recipient’s choice) for “the purpose of stimulating the interest of talented students in space research and exploration” was awarded Willard M. Cronyn, a graduate student in Maryland Univ.’s Dept, of Physics and Astronomy. (Text; Program; Carmody, Wash. Post, 3/20/65)
Soviet Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov appeared in public for the first time since they landed voskhod ii in the Perm region Mar. 19. They were en route to Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan where they were expected to undergo detailed medical checkups and debriefings by scientists and technicians before being welcomed in Moscow in Red Square. (Shabad, NYT, 3/22/65, 1,3)
Referring to the “real success of Luna 6,” an article in the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin said: “This is not the first Russian failure in space. But it is the first open admission of failure. Americans, who have had their own failures, can’t help but warm up a little in the glow of such non-Marxist honesty.” (Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/15/65)
A secret weapon, about which former Soviet Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev had boasted, blew up in 1960 killing the commander-inchief of the Soviet missile forces, Marshal Mitrofan I. Nedelin, and 300 others, the Manchester Guardian reported. The weapon was a missile with a nuclear propellant. The Guardian quoted secret reports of Oleg V.	Penkovsky, a Russian executed in 1963 for spying for the West, which would be published in November 1965.	(NYT, 10/17/65, 25; Wash. Post, 10/17/65, 1)
Display of what the Soviets called an orbital missile at the military parade in Moscow Nov. 7 and “related Russian statements do seem to place upon the Russian government an obligation to make clear its future intentions with respect to the [U.N.] resolution” against weapons in space, State Department press officer Robert J. McCloskey told a news conference. Noting that the U.S. could easily put such a weapon into orbit, McCloskey said that the military value of this would be negligible, (ap, Wash. Post, 11/19/65, A10)
Soviet deputy minister of communications I. V. Klokov, commenting for Izvestia on orbiting of the second molniya I comsat, said: “The orbiting of the second Soviet Comsat ‘Molniya-1’ will permit us to verify the feasibility of organizing a communication system envisaging the combined use of several sputniks. This will offer the possibility of a marked increase in the duration of contact to the point of becoming a round-the-clock system. . . . “With the aid of the new sputnik, the first telephone communication sessions have already been conducted; Moscow and Vladivostok have exchanged the first TV programs. These tests have shown that the quality of the radio communications and telecommunications is superior to that found in the experiments with the first Soviet Comsat, Molniya-1.” (Izvestia, 10/16/65, 3; atss-t Trans.)
In a New York Times letter to the editor, Daniel Murphy commented on President Johnson’s decision to develop Manned Orbital Laboratory: “Once again we are asked to silently acquiesce to a questionable military dictum—‘if we don’t, they will.’ Because Russia has the capacity to send up such armaments, why does it so logically follow that they will do so? It is we, not they, who have a three or four to one superiority in icbm’s. . . . “By our action will we allow the Soviet Union any alternative but to respond in kind? Would not President Johnson’s invitation to the Soviet scientists stand a much greater likelihood of acceptance if coupled with an offer of diplomatically exploring the possibility of not constructing such armaments? “The Administration’s proposal can only increase the tensions of a world troubled enough.” {NYT, 9/1/65, 32)
Moscovsky Komsomolets reported that the wife of Valery Bykovsky, Russian cosmonaut, was expecting a second baby. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 2/12/65)
Gen. Thomas Dresser White, usaf Chief of Staff from 1957 to 1961 and one of the chief proponents of a balanced air-space defense system, died. He had been a member of the naca 1957-58, and the first U.S. military attache in Russia in 1933. (Wash. Post, 12/23/65, D4)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, at Nebraska Wesleyan Univ. to receive an honorary doctorate, said in a speech:	“. . . while our national policy is to maximize the peaceful uses of outer space . . . and to avoid the extension of weapons, we have no choice but to acquire a broadly-based total capability in space; a capability that can enable us to insure the protection of our national security interests while we actively seek cooperative peaceful development. . . . “The Roman mastery of land and sea communications, the English mastery of the seas, the American mastery of the air and of nuclear energy were each accompanied by greatly enhanced prestige and followed by vast increases in power and position, new knowledge, the establishment of strategic international economic advantages, the wide use of new resources, great advances in military capability, and a quickening of national pride and vigor. Portentous realignments among nations were inevitable. These are the advantages the Russians now seek from their enormous investments in space. These are the advantages we cannot permit them to acquire and use against the non-Communist world. “In these lessons of history lies the real challenge of space. The portents for our own time are clear enough in the early lead of the Soviet Union with the first Sputnik, Vostok, and Voskhod. The spurt in Soviet prestige brought a new assurance and weight in the international political arena, a new pride and confidence in Soviet national purpose. We have reacted quickly and with ever-increasing success, but the challenge of the mastery of space remains to be accomplished for us as a nation and for you as a member of the new generation. We are meeting this challenge, and in doing so enhancing the broadest values for our society and our world. “Our power to survive as a great and vigorous Society is in the process of being proven again through our space efforts. Your own involvement in the actions and consequences will be far greater than you or I can fully appreciate today. . . .” (Text; NYT, 2/5/65)
