Moscow newspaper Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya quoted unidentified “Chief Designer of Spaceships” as saying U.S.S.R. was preparing further manned orbital flight of long duration as prelude to creation of permanent space laboratory. Soyuz spacecraft had “undergone necessary modifications to insure fulfillment of a long and extensive program.” Later New York Times said designer was believed to be Mikhail K. Yangel, member of Soviet Academy of Sciences. (NYT, 3/15/71)	_
Washington Daily News editorial commented on Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 mission: “What is significant ... is not the docking, in itself, but the evidence of the Soviet Union’s zealous determination to exceed everybody in space—for whatever purpose. There is nothing in all this that the U.S. space agency cannot, when it chooses, accomplish—given the funds and priorities. It is not a question of firsts—the U.S. has had its share of those, and more. The difference is that to Russia the priorities and judgments are made in one place, the Kremlin. In the United States, not only the space agency but the President, Congress and the prevailing public mood share the decisions.” (W News, 6/8/71)
Discovery of diamonds in 1.4-kg (3-lb) .meteorite that fell through roof of storehouse on Finnish island of Havro Aug. 2 was announced by Smithsonian Center for Short-Lived Phenomena. It was sixth such meteorite to be found. First discovery of meteoritic diamonds had been made by Russian scientists in 1888 while analyzing meteorite found near Novoured. (upi, NYT, 11/13/71)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, was first speaker in Leuc Awareness Program series. Dr. Von Braun said at LeRC: “Our agency is at the crossroads. Our success story is our greatest enemy.” After four successful manned lunar landings, people had become complacent. If nasa fell behind U.S.S.R. in space, it would create another “Sputnik” environment. (Lewis News, 12/3/71, 1)
Administration officials expected U.S.S.R. to test-fire SS-9 icbms within few months, New York Times reported. Two silos were being rebuilt at Baykonur test center in Kazakhstan to same dimensions as larger silos that had been appearing all over western Russia since December. (Beecher, NYT, 5/19/71, 1)
