In a close race to tame the hydrogen-bomb reaction process—fusion—to make electricity, the U.S. and USSR were both ready for larger engineering units to demonstrate the practical production of electricity by the mid-1980s, reporter Robert Toth said in the Los Angeles Times. The Kurchatov Institute in Moscow had announced earlier in Feb. a “breakthrough” in the first successful test conducted in its Tokamak-10, the last purely experimental machine intended to prove feasibility of the approach. Last November, U.S. had announced a comparable achievement with the Alcator Tokamak at the Mass. Institute of Technology, described as a major development in fusion research. Although U.S. scientists claimed a fusion process had been first tested at Los Alamos 20 yr ago, it was not seriously pursued, whereas the late Dr. Lev Artsimovich of the USSR had worked along the same line independently and given the machine its name—a Russian contraction for current-machine chamber—upon achieving the first success. Advantages of the fusion process were that it was the most efficient reaction known, producing 180 times more energy than consumed; fuel, the heavy forms of hydrogen, would be as inexhaustible as the seas; and the process left no radioactive waste like that from atomic-power plants based on the fission reaction. Fusion would require containment of the reaction in a magnetic field, which had been accomplished, and continuous production of energy would require temperatures of a million degrees Centigrade and a density of 100 trillion ions for a second— conditions beyond the capability of present machines. Both the U.S. and USSR results had been 5 to 10 times less than needed, although they were 5 to 10 times greater than previously achieved. (W Post, 23 Feb 76, A— 1)
U.S. observers were concerned about spiraling strategic arms programs in the USSR, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Heavy payload in the Soviet nuclear system and an expanded program of deploying multiple warheads had aroused fears of a possible “first strike” by the USSR against U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) systems. Intelligence experts estimated the USSR would have 1500 land-based missiles by summer, compared with 1054 for the U.S.; an article in Foreign Affairs magazine by Paul Nitze—Secretary of the Navy in the Johnson administration—had stated the Russians believed they could “win” a nuclear war, whereas popular feeling in the U.S. was that all participants in a nuclear exchange would be destroyed. A Russian “cold launch” system for missile launching that did not damage the silo was contrasted to the U.S. “hot launch” system that damaged the silo during launch. The Pentagon had sought $78 million for development of a new ICBM called “MX,” and a FY 1977 budget of $9.4 billion for strategic forces. (CSM, 19 Feb 76, 6)
The USSR would be able by 1980 to produce a thermonuclear reaction by using a powerful laser, according to scientists at the Lebedev Physics Institute quoted in the USSR’s Academy of Sciences journal Priroda. Institute Director Nikolai Basov (sharer of the 1964 Nobel prize in physics, for work in laser amplification) emphasized that Soviet science had been first to begin work on this problem, which would be the basis of power engineering in the future. Scientists were using two approaches: building powerful installations called Tokamaks, in which a reaction would proceed continuously; or using a laser beam to compress a small quantity of material such as deuterium to “a hundred trillion atmospheres, thousands of times as great as inside the sun,” with accompanying rise in temperatures until a microexplosion occurred, to produce current for future power and heat stations. Unlike the Tokamak, this line of research could lead to production of transportable nuclear-power stations for delivery to remote areas, the article said. (FBIS, Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 14 Nov 76; A&A 64, 367)
The USSR Ministry of Higher and Specialized Secondary Education had announced plans to build an Institute of Nuclear Energetics at Obninsk, in central Russia, site of the “world’s first industrial atomic power station,” the Tass news agency reported. First Soviet educational institution of this type, the new center would train engineers in design and use of nuclear power stations. In accordance with a new program of constructing nuclear power stations, Tass said the present 6-million-kw capacity would be supplemented by an additional 13 to 15 million kw; new stations were being built at Kursk, Smolensk, Kalinin in central Russia, and in the southern Ukraine. The Obninsk center would be the 860th higher education institution in the USSR, Tass noted. (FBIS, Tass in English, 14 Dec 76)
An unmanned Soviet spacecraft that returned to the earth 17 Dec. in Soviet Asia after 18 days in orbit might have been the test vehicle of a new Soyuz designed to carry three cosmonauts into space, instead of the two that have flown on the 13 Soyuz missions during the past 5 yr. Thomas O’Toole, reporting in the Washington Post, pointed out that the Cosmos 869 had flown the same pattern followed by all Soviet manned space flights, and noted that the USSR had long followed the practice of disguising unmanned test flights of Soyuz spacecraft by using the generalized Cosmos designation. At least four unmanned Soyuz vehicles had flown under the name of Cosmos during the past 4 yr, the article said. The USSR had not attempted a three-man flight since 1971, when the three crewmen of Soyuz 11 suffocated on their return to earth; the crew could have survived had they worn space suits, but the vehicle being used had no room for three men in space suits. Officials said then that the spacecraft would be modified to accommodate three-member crews in space suits, and Western observers predicted that the Inter-Soyuz flights scheduled to begin in 1978 with Russians and non-Russians together would use three cosmonauts again. (WPost, 22 Dec 76, A-2)
Information of value to the U.S. Pioneer mission to Venus scheduled for 1978 was published by the USSR in Pravda after 4 mo of analysis of the 2 Soviet spacecraft that reached Venus in Oct. 1975. Each of the Russian craft, weighing about 5000 kg, separated into an orbiting section and a landing capsule; the two landers transmitted the first panoramic photographs of the Venus surface to earth. U.S. scientists had debated the angle at which landers should enter the Venus atmosphere; the Russian report stated that Venera 9 entered at 20.5° and Venera 10 at 22.5° to the horizon. Besides the entry angle, the report included details of descent, amount of sunlight on the surface, wind speeds, rock chemistry, and character of surface erosion. Although the 2 landers failed under surface temperatures of 482°C and pressure 90 times that of earth— Venera 9 lander operated 53 min., Venera 10 65 min—the orbiters continued to transmit data on cloud cover and upper atmosphere. The U.S. planned to launch 2 spacecraft, an orbiter and a lander, toward Venus in 1978, the lander separating into 4 or 5 probes to relay data via the orbiter to the earth. {NYT, 29 Feb 76, 34)
Tass announced that the yachts Rodina and Rossiya had left the port of Vladivostok in an attempt to repeat the route sailed by Russian navigators 250 yr ago on 2 expeditions to Kamchatka under the leadership of Vitus Bering (1681-1741). The 7-man crews of the ships would begin by visiting Okhotsk, the port where Bering built the ship that went to Kamchatka, then proceed to Kamchatka about 3700 km away. In 1977 and 1978, the expedition would cruise to the Bering Strait and go ashore in North America where Bering’s ship St. Peter visited 17 July 1741. (FBIS, Tass in English, 11 July 76)
