FBIS reported the Soviet Union’s Venera 11 had reached Venus Dec. 25, and its descent module had made a soft landing some 800km from where Venera 12’s descent module had landed. Main task of Venera 11 and 12 was to examine the characteristics of various areas of Venus. After the descent module separated from Venera 11 Dec. 23, the spacecraft had proceeded on a flyby trajectory some 35 000km from the planet’s surface. The Venera 11 module, during descent and while on the planet surface, had performed research similar to that done by the Venera 12 module (scientific and technical experiments and exploration of Venus’s surface at 446°C and pressure of 88 atmospheres) for 95min. Descent-module data received by Venera 11 were relayed to earth. After leaving the zone of radio visibility and completing receipt of data, Venera 11 would continue in a heliocentric orbit. Scientific measurement and research begun on the earth-Venus interplanetary route would continue during the flight of Venera 11 and 12. Data obtained from the two spacecraft would be processed and studied in the institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Dec. 25/78)
Using a multichamber furnace delivered to Salyut 6 by the Progress 1 unmanned tanker/freighter, Soviet cosmonauts had begun major spaceprocessing experiments, Tass reported. Operated in a Salyut airlock to vent into the vacuum of space, the furnace had three areas: one maintaining heat up to 1100C, a “cold” area maintaining 600 to 700C, and a “gradient” area allowing linear temperature change between maximum and minimum furnace-heating capabilities. The Salyut space-processing system, designated “Splav” (alloy), would use material samples in capsules, each containing 3 crystal ampules to fuse when heated in the furnace and form monocrystals in the “gradient” area, with 3-dimensional crystallization in the hot and cold sections of the furnace. Combinations of materials heated to form new substances not possible in earth gravity would be aluminum/antimony, aluminum/tungsten, molybdenum/gal-lium, copper/indium, and indium/antimony. Some of the alloys might have semiconductor properties, suggesting that Soviet interest would be in specific applications in earth orbit rather than in theory. The cosmonauts had also reported a major technology experiment using a closed-cycle cryogenic system designed to provide temperatures comparable to liquid helium (- 269C) but did not say whether or not the test actually used liquid helium. Cosmonauts had also used cryogenics to cool the receivers of a “submillimeter telescope,” Tass reported. (FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 15/78, Feb 16/78; Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Feb 21/78; AvWk, Feb 27/78, 21)
FBIS reported the USSR interplanetary spacecraft Venera 12 had reached Venus Dec. 21 after a 98-day flight covering over 240 million km. The descent module had entered Venus’s atmosphere at 11.2 km/sec and soft-landed, transmitting scientific information from the planet’s surface for llOmin. During descent, the module made precise chemical analyses of the composition of the atmosphere and clouds, a spectral analysis of solar radiation scattered in the atmosphere, and a study of electric charges in the atmosphere from 62m above the planet’s surface. Scientific measurements continued after the module landed. The Venera 12 station was continuing its flight in space, carrying a Soviet-French experiment for studying solar and galactic gamma flares. Venera 11, launched 5da before Venera 12, would reach Venus Dec. 25. (FBIS, Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Dec 21/78)
