It was reported that Russian scientists successfully tested an engine for a space plane in 1991. (Time, Feb 24/92)
The U.S. Department of Energy and the Mayak Production Association of the Russian Ministry of Atomic Energy signed a contract by which the Energy Department would buy Russian-produced plutonium-238 for use as a power source in U. S. spacecraft. The contract provided for the United States to purchase up to 40 kilograms (88 pounds) over five years. The plutonium is not weapons-grade and is to be used by NASA to power unmanned space missions that are being planned. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; W Post, Dec 29/92)
Fearing that unemployed scientists in the former Soviet Union might put their talents to use building weapons of mass destruction for unsavory regimes, the United States, Germany and Russia announced the formation of an international center to promote "non-military endeavors." (P Inq, Feb 26/92)
The main Russian TV news reported that some members of the former Soviet Union's cosmonaut ground controllers planned a warning strike to protest low wages, which in many cases were equivalent to $6 a month. The television report said that "One of the most prestigious jobs on Earth had become one of the lowest-paid." (W Times, Jan 28/92; P Inq, 28/92)
A Russian industry grouping called the Space Regatta
Dr. Wesley T. Huntress, Jr., Director of NASA's Solar System Exploration Division, last week received the Korolev Medal, awarded by the Russian Federation of Astronautics and Cosmonautics for achievement in space research. (NASA Relesase 92-151)
It was reported that a NASA-led team might travel to Russia to explore areas for joint cooperation on axisymmetric scramjets. At the top of the list was the possibility of the U.S. joining in a second flight later during the year of the Russian scramjet that already had achieved about three seconds of supersonic combustion. (AvWk, Apr 20/92)
The Boeing Aircraft Company announced plans to produce some jetliner parts in the former Soviet Union as soon as possible. The effort would enable Boeing to gain increased access to the Russian aviation market and to meet stiff competition from Russian and European firms. (WSJ, Sept 11/92)
The Russian Space Agency announced plans for three piloted missions and six Progress flights in 1993. The first mission of the series was scheduled for January 24, 1993. (Itar-Tass, Dec 11/92)
