Roald Sagdeev, director of the Space Research Institute in Moscow from 1973-1988 and now professor of physics at the University of Maryland, and Michael Nacht, dean of the school of public affairs at the university, argued in a New York Times article that NASA should solicit Russian design help and begin plans to modify the Space Station's orbit so that it could be reached by launch vehicles from both the Kennedy Space Center and the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The authors also noted that a University of Maryland study commissioned by NASA found that a wider use of Russian technology could reduce costs by up to a billion dollars a year after the station was operational. (NY Times, June 26/93)
Russian scientists on the Mir spaceship were scheduled to begin an experiment that involved using a mirror to reflect sunlight down to earth. In the experiment, a 65-foot-diameter disk of aluminum-coated plastic film would be unfurled in space. The experiment would test the possibility of illuminating areas on the Earth with light equivalent to that of several moons. Scientists agree on the need for environmental studies to access the possible effect of such a practice. (B Sun, Jan 12/93; NY Times, Jan 12/97; W Times, Feb 3/93; AP, Feb 3/93; USA Today, Feb 4/93; W Post, Feb 4/93; LA Times, Feb 4/93)
The European Space agency, eager to boost its cooperation with Russia, said that it was studying the joint development of a new generation of space vehicles. Jean-Jacques Dorian, Director of Policy Planning, told journalists on the eve of Moscow's first aerospace show that the agency had contracts worth millions of dollars with a number of Russian firms. (RTw, Aug 30/93)
The  Washington Times reported that the former Soviet military had welcomed the U.S. decision to scrap most of the Strategic Defense Initiative. Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev called the decision a "reasonable decision" and said that "it seems there's no reason to raise the possibility again" of putting weapons in space. (W Times, May 18/93)
NASA and the Russian State Committee for the Defense Branches of industry signed a memorandum of understanding in Moscow to cooperate in eight areas of fundamental aeronautical sciences.  The agreement called for cooperative activities in the following areas: transition and turbulence, composite structures and materials, chemically reacting flows, thermal protection system materials, environmental concerns in aviation, hypersonic technologies, experimental test facilities, and advanced aerospace materials. (NASA Release 93-22)
A Washington Times editorial questioned the wisdom of the space partnership between Russia and the United States, finding significant problems with the agreement. First, should the Russian fascists come to power, the United States would have provided a hostile government with very detailed insights into the state of our advanced technologies. Second, the writer charged, the United States was being tricked into purchasing obsolete equipment for the joint station; third, Russia's space launch base, called Baikonur, was reported to be badly decayed; and, fourth, there were issues of crew safety--two fires were known to have taken place in similar modules of Russian Space Stations and the Russians had not provided complete details of these events.
