Russian television on the "Aerospace Salon" program discussed various Russian space flights. The correspondent said that much was known about Salyut flights 1, 6, and 7 but nothing had been publicized about Salyut 2, 3, and 5 missions. It developed that the flight engineers for these missions were military cosmonauts and that they involved Almaz orbital reconnaissance stations. The Almaz hulls were launched as Salyuts, the first unsuccessfully in 1973 and two more in 1974 and 1976. A cosmonaut who flew on one of these, V.V. Gorbatko, was quoted as saying that the initial intention was to arm the Almaz station but the one on which he flew had reconnaissance equipment only. (FBIS-Sov, Nov 30/94)
The United States and Ukraine signed a five-year civil space agreement the week of November 21, which established direct cooperation between NASA and the Ukrainian National Space Agency and created the legal basis for bilateral scientific cooperation. The agreement, which provided for cooperation in such fields as remote sensing, telecommunications, biomedical sciences and biotechnology, and space research and technology, was described as "almost exactly the same" as the 1992 agreement with Russia. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
The media reported that Pratt & Whitney and Rockwell International were negotiating a potential $1 billion deal with Russian aircraft manufacturer Ilyushin to produce jetliners. The project could involve the initial purchase of 20 aircraft by Aeroflot Russian International Airlines and create $1 billion in U.S. exports. Pratt & Whitney would provide the engines and Rockwell would provide the avionics The Il-96M is a four-engine wide-body craft that carries 300 passengers. (P Inq, Jan 22/94)
Russian cosmonauts Vasily Tsibliyev and Alexander Serebrov on the Soyuz TM-17 landed safely and without incident after six months in the Mir station, although the module had collided with Mir before descent. They were replaced by two cosmonauts, including Valery Polyakov, due to stay a record-breaking 14 months in space, to break the record 366 days set by Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov in 1988--1989. (Reuters, Jan 14/94)
NASA announced that Russian cosmonauts on Mir had completed the first in a series of U.S. experiments using NASA's Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS). SAMS was activated October 4 to collect vibration data in preparation for future chemistry and physics experiments. (NASA Release 94-168)
Russia's Interfax news agency reported that the previous week a fire had destroyed a control facility at the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Experts stated, however, that launches would not be affected. (AP, Mar 15/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that a Russian spaceship manned by a Russian and a Kazakh cosmonaut had docked with Mir. (H Post, Jul 4/94)
