Endeavour separated from Mir to head home at 11:57 a.m. (EST), returning David A. Wolf to Earth and leaving Andrew S. W. Thomas at the Mir station for a four-and-one-half-month stay. Wolf was returning to Earth aboard Endeavour after completing a 119-day stay on Mir. The new crew of Mir, two cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and a French astronaut Léopold Eyharts, lifted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on Soyuz TM-27, 23 minutes before Endeavour undocked from Mir.(New York Times, “Shuttle Departs, Leaving Last American on Mir,” 30 January 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Endeavour Separates from Mir,” USA Today, 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.”)
Russian space officials cancelled a spacewalk after cosmonauts broke three wrenches on the last of 10 locks, while trying to open a hatch. The cosmonauts had intended to repair a damaged solar panel. NASA rescheduled the spacewalk for April. The incident further increased concerns about the safety of Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 March 1998.)
Following a meeting of the Defence Council, President Boris N. Yeltsin issued a decree giving overall control of Russia’s space industry to the civilian Russian Space Agency. Yeltsin’s intention was “to extract maximum economic benefit from one of the few manufacturing industries in which Russia is a world leader.” With this decree, Yeltsin required the government to create a plan for a restructured space industry, giving priority to national security, to economic and scientific missions, and to strengthening Russia’s position in the world marketplace.(Reuters, “Russia Puts Civilian Agency in Charge of Space,” 20 January 1998.)
Cosmonauts working aboard Mir conducted the first of two tests, using green fluorescent gas made from combining nitrogen, acetone, and biacetyl gases, to search for leaks in the Spektr laboratory module damaged in a collision in June 1997. However, they were unable to pinpoint the sources of any seepage. Because Mir was nearing its decommission stage, Russia planned no repairs, in the event that the cosmonauts were able to locate the leaks precisely. Instead, the tests were intended as practice for finding leaks on the future ISS.
Russian Mission Control monitored Mir’s airlock pressure following the repair work of 9 January. On Friday, 8 January, when the crew entered the airlock without spacesuits to retrieve some equipment, the repair was holding, but the pressure had fallen slightly. Russian ground control near Moscow, which was analyzing the data, planned to decide on Monday whether Mir’s Kvant-2 module was safe.(Reuters, “Mir’s Airlock Pressure Down a Bit—Russian Control,” 11 January 1998.)
An international group of computer hackers, calling itself Masters of Downloading or MOD, announced that it had stolen key software programs from NASA. The same group had previously broken into the Pentagon’s Defense Information Systems Network, claiming to have stolen enough information to “‘take control’ of military satellites and other systems.” Although U.S. Department of Defense officials said that MOD had downloaded an application for management and record keeping, not for “anything that could perform a control function,” the group claimed that its cyber attack on NASA had “stripped the U.S. space agency of its chief defense against computer intrusion.” MOD had sent the stolen samples of NASA software to a computer expert who maintained a Web site devoted to information-security issues. The group, which included at least two Russian members, asserted that it had broken into NASA’s system through JPL to obtain the software samples and threatened to sell the information to international terrorist groups or foreign governments.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “NASA Becomes Latest Victim of Masters of Downloading,” 23 April 1998.)
Russian cosmonauts aboard Mir located a lost wrench among 12 years’ worth of accumulated spare parts. They used the wrench to loosen the bolt that had broken three wrenches earlier in the week, preventing the two cosmonauts from undertaking a planned spacewalk.(Reuters, “Mir Cosmonauts Solve Mystery of Missing Wrench,” 5 March 1998.)
