Beginning of the fifth year of the “space age,” being the anniversary of the launching of Sputnik I (1957).
Sputnik IV launched into orbit by U.S.S.R., a 7.1-ton payload, but mission of flight was not announced.
Sputnik IV, launched on February 4, reentered the Earth’s atmosphere.
Sputnik VIII launched into Earth orbit by U.S.S.R., from which it placed 1,419-pound Venus probe on its course.
The Soviet Communist Party organ, Pravda, explained why Russian space techniques and the names of spaceship designers were kept secret as follows: “A corrupt capitalist society, by its very nature, is extremely capable of turning the greatest peaceful achievements of mankind into the total means of destruction of mankind. This is why it is risky to open even the smallest loopholes in the world of Soviet rocket technique for the gentlemen who are lagging considerably behind as far as their technique is concerned, but who become militarily agitated and distracted from an honest program of general and complete disarmament and who mumble something about the right of inspection of neighbors’ orchards and storerooms. That is why the wonderful group of heroes who insured the mastering of the cosmos remain nameless until now.”
Russian scientist, K. Florensky, reported in Komsomol Pravda that a comet’s head, not a meteorite or an interplanetary atomic weapon, caused the big explosion that jarred Siberia on June 30, 1908. The blast near the Hunguska River killed 1,500 reindeer, felled trees over an area of 700 square miles, and was recorded on seismographs around the world.
U.S.S.R. launched 5-ton Sputnik IV into orbit and recovered dog passenger, the second time this feat was performed.
President Kennedy, in his regular press conference, stated that “no one is more tired than I am” in seeing the United States second to Russia in the space field. “They secured large boosters which have led to their being first in Sputnik, and led to their first putting their men in space. We are, I hope, going to be able to carry out our efforts, with due regard to the problem of the life of the men involved, this year. But we are behind * * * the news will be worse before it is better, and it will be some time before we catch up * *
In an article in Ekonomicheskya Gazeta, the economic newspaper of the Soviet Communist Party, Dr. Peter Kapitza, one of Russia’s outstanding physicists, said that Soviet science had been hampered by attempts to judge the validity of scientific theories on the basis of Marxist dialectics. If Soviet scientists had listened to Marxist philosophers in the 1950’s, he said, the Russian achievements in space would have been impossible.
Reported that Russian Cosmonauts Gagarin and Titov were assured membership in the Supreme Soviet. Neither was opposed in election slates and both will represent their home towns. It was also reported that the U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry’s press department had denied the rumor that Russia was preparing to let Western newsmen cover the next Soviet space shot.
In nbc TV interview, Dr. F. J. Krieger, specialist of the rand Corporation on Soviet space affairs, pointed out that the 50th anniversary of the Communist Revolution in Russia was in 1967, and that that year may be the political target date for the accomplishment of a Soviet lunar landing mission.
Capt. Richard H. Coan (usaf) established a new world’s record for a helicopter distance flight over a closed course, flying an H-43B Huskie 656.258 miles on a 25-mile course near Mono Lake, Calif. Previous record of 625.464 miles had been held by a Russian military helicopter Mi-1 (June 1960).
TV pictures of Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich orbiting the earth in spacecraft vostok iii and iv were viewed by the public in Russia, Western Europe, England, and the U.S. The pictures were put on videotape or kinescope film during London broadcast for TV viewing in America.
Addressing sam’s Aerospace Medicine symposium, Major General C.	H. Mitchell, Vice Commander of afcs, said that the “Russian threat in space is becoming obvious . . . Clearly it is our responsibility as a nation to insure that space is used to benefit all mankind. We can insure this only through development of the ability to conduct military operations in space with maximum effectiveness . . .”
Soviet Academician Leonid Sedov denied in interview with Trud that U.S.S.R. had launched other men into orbit besides Majs. Gagarin and Titov. U.S. press had speculated that as many as five Russian cosmonauts had been killed in unsuccessful flights.
The April issue of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, included an article by Dr. Robert E. Marshak, entitled “Reexamining the Soviet Scientific Challenge.” In this article, Dr. Marshak, chairman of the Department of Physics and Astronomy at the University of Rochester, pointed out that Soviet preeminence in space does not necessarily mean that the U.S.S.R. has “achieved a decisive scientific and technological supremacy.” Comparing the “closed” economic and political structure of Soviet Russia with its controlled educational system to the “open” society of the United States, he suggested that the Soviet system was geared to the more tangible results of applied science while the United States had made greater strides in pure science. “Soviet space triumphs are due to an early and precise delineation of a major national goal in applied science and a most detailed and deliberate organization of the wherewithal to achieve it. “. . . I believe that our [the United States’] undoubted leadership in pure science will continue to be nurtured by the openness, freedom, and free enterprise spirit which characterize our society. Our accomplishments in pure science will provide a vast reservoir of ideas for important achievements in applied science, and our innate good sense and good will lead to a voluntary rational measure of coordination and control in those areas which are indispensable for the achievement of our national objectives in applied science. I believe that the Soviet methods of strict supervision and control will lead to numerous short-range breakthroughs in applied science but that the momentum will not be sustained unless there are also significant advances in their pure science. A great improvement in the quality of these achievements will depend upon their ability to fully establish the conditions of scientific freedom which are essential for highly creative work in pure science. “. . . If the Soviet Government comes to realize—and I believe that the Russian scientists already do—that scientific and political freedom go hand in hand and that it is difficult to guarantee scientific freedom without a major liberalization of Soviet society in all its aspects, there is bound to be a great efflorescence of pure science in the Soviet Union. And if a large measure of political freedom is established in the Soviet Union, it is quite likely that we shall be sending our American astronauts together with their Russian counterparts on joint expeditions to the moon and other celestial objects beyond.” {CR, 5/27/63, 9036-38) During April: Air Force launched an Atlas F with a Chrysler-built nose cone on a 5,000-mile flight from Cape Canaveral to the vicinity of Ascension Island in a continuation of the Advanced Ballistic Re-entry System (Abres) test program. The flight, which largely duplicated the initial Abres test of Mar. 1, was described as “highly successful.” (M&R, 5/6/63, 11)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, president of Cal Tech, said in speech before Spring Recognition Dinner of Miracle Mile Association, Los Angeles: “The United States had put 118 space vehicles into orbit, whereas Russia has only placed 34. We are ahead of Russia on scientific data because of these space probes. “Proof of this is in the papers published by the Soviet Union. There has been very little scientific knowledge gleaned from their reports in the past few years, whereas the United States has given a wealth of information on space problems. “Through these probes we have been able to evaluate the temperature on the planet Venus. Of more important issue to us on Earth is the invaluable aid in predicting our own weather. . . .” (L.A. Herald-Examiner, 3/13/63)
Dr. T. L. K. Smull, nasa Director of Grants and Research Contracts, said in commencement address, Univ. of Georgia: “Today we are dealing not only with profound changes in a social and economic structure of our country and of the world; we are dealing as well with even more profound changes in man’s own conception of the boundaries and limitations of his habitable environment and of his understanding of the forces of the universe. “Therefore, the opportunities available to you graduates in the next decade are, in a very real sense, boundless. The challenges of tomorrow are not just for the scientist, the engineer, and the technician working toward scientific developments, but for all men and women in all professions—for every one of you. Even if science is not your field, you must understand what it implies simply because science will continue affecting your lives with even greater impact as each year passes .... “Never before has a civilization seized upon and exploited a new technology at the rate man is now exploring the new dimension of space. In the 2,060 days since the Russians launched Sputnik, nasa has conducted 96 major vehicle launchings, an average of one every 22 days. In this period, the ussr has announced about 35 successful space flights. 741-623 0—64--21 “nasa’s impressive accomplishments will be dwarfed by United States activities during the rest of this decade as our understanding of the nature of space, the sun, and the map of the Universe is greatly enhanced. “In an age of exploding knowledge in all of the physical sciences no area of human activity better focuses and dramatizes the meaning of today than does this boldest, most challenging arena of space . . . .” (Text)
Sixth anniversary of launching of sputnik i, the opening of the Space Age.
On test ban treaty, U.S. News and World Report said: “Nuclear test ban does not mean disarmament. Nuclear weapons still will be the weapons of future war. Weapon testing will not come to a full stop. “Tests will continue underground. France will go on testing in the air. Red China will test in the air, too, if and when she gets the bomb .... “Test agreement, now being entered into, favors Russia. Russia, behind in smaller nuclear weapons, can catch up by testing underground. United States, behind in bigger weapons and in an antimissile missile, will be hindered in her effort to catch up by the bar against testing in the atmosphere .... “Just as long as Russia is a closed country, ruled by a dictatorship, possessed of weapons capable of destroying United States, there can be no real disarmament, no real end to the arms race without great danger . . . .”	(U.S. News, 8/5/63, in OR,
Soviet embassy in Rio de Janeiro reported that Cosmonauts Pavel Popovich and Andrian Nikolayev were to arrive in Rio to represent Russia at the Brazilian air and space show on March 15. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/8/63,1)
The Russian Deople heard of President Kennedy’s U.N. proposal for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar exploration for first time. Pravda reprinted without comment Walter Lippmann’s column praising the President’s proposal. (AP, Wash. Post, 10/2/63)
Exchanging Scientists and Engineers: Oppose__________________________________ 54% Not sure_________________________________12% Selling equipment with potential military application to Russia was adamantly opposed. (L. Harris, Wash. Post, 12/16/63, 1)
First official Soviet comment on President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar cooperation came from Russian news agency Tass. While not identifying the proposal with the President, Tass said: “Maybe it is too early to discuss now the question what is better—to combine a Soviet rocket with an American spaceship or to include an American in the Soviet space crew, but first steps in cooperation cannot but give satisfaction.” A few hours later, Cosmonaut Pavel Popovich made an unscheduled talk on Moscow Radio, calling for a “common effort by the peoples of all states of our planet” to solve the earthly difficulties that hinder man’s flight to the stars. ( Wash. Post, 10/4/63)
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, interviewed on nbc-tv, said he was surprised in May 1960 when the U.S.S.R. publicized the downing of the U.S. U-2 reconnaissance aircraft over Russia. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles also “believed just as I did that it was necessary to use it but he also believed that it would cause no real publicity if one of them should fall.” Both of them felt that the Soviets would not be willing to concede publicly that for “three or four years we’ve been doi'ig this . . . .” On the question of admitting U.S. responsibility ror the flights, Mr. Eisenhower said: “ . . . I just thought as L.ig as the thing had come out, the best thing to do—and I don’t believe I asked anyone’s advice on this—I just said ‘l am responsible and that’s that.’” (TFasA Post, 11/4/631
A roundup of world press opinion on the manned lunar landing race, following Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 that Russia was not presently planning manned lunar flight, indicated that the majority of the newspapers thought Khrushchev had made a sensible decision which the U.S. ought to follow. (NYT, 11/3/63, 9E)
Two Soviet Ilyushin-18 transport aircraft completed 15,000-mile flight from Moscow to the Russian Antarctic base of Mirny. Director of the Leningrad Polar Institute, A. Treshnokov, said in New Zealand that such flights might well inaugurate regular supply flights between Moscow and the Antarctic. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/1/63, A29)
Dr. Boris Yegorov, the Russian doctor who orbited the earth in the VOSICHOD I spaceship, suggested that persons suffering from high blood pressure and heart trouble might one day be rocketed into weightless space for therapy. By relieving the gravitational load on the patients and giving them drugs, he said, “it will be possible to heal a person and give his wearied heart a chance to recuperate.” Dr. Yegorov said this novel heart treatment would be possible in the “foreseeable future.” (Toth, Boston Sunday Globe, 12/20/64)
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was reported to have told visiting Japanese legislators that U.S.S.R. had developed a new “terrible weapon” capable of destroying mankind. Two days later, however, Mr. Khrushchev clarified his remark, denying he had said that the weapon could destroy mankind. “I said that scientists had shown me the terrible weapon, which shows what mankind can do. We did not say anything about unlimited power.” He also said the weapon was not a nuclear bomb. He blamed the earlier report on having been “misinterpreted” in translation from Russian to Japanese and then to English. (NYT, 9/16/64; Shabad, NYT, 9/18/64)
New program combining study of science with study of U.S.S.R. at Columbia University’s Russian Institute was announced by Institute director Prof. Alexander Dallin. (NYT, 5/24/64, 21)
out an agreement with the Europeans, and it was believed that the system would be greatly strengthened by Russian participation. The Geneva meetings, which would involve the U.S., European nations, and the U.S.S.R., would include a general discussion of recent developments in space communications. It was also reported that before the Geneva meeting a negotiation session in London between the U.S. and European nations would work on a preliminary agreement on an interim organization for a space communications system. (Farnsworth, NYT, 6/7/64,6)
Yelena Andrianovena Nikolayeva, infant daughter of Russian cosmonauts Valentina Tereshkova and Andrian Nikolayev, was to be thoroughly examined for next few years to determine whether weightlessness or radiation of her parents had any effect. (Snider, CDNS, Houston Chron., 7/13/64)
Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. designer of the F—12A (A—11) aircraft, said that the airplane could easily outfly Russian aircraft. He stated that the F—12A could capture all three absolute world flight records currently held by the Russians. (AP, Kansas City Times, 7/18/64)
British scientists at the Jodrell Bank radio astronomy station were reported searching the skies for the Russian space probe zond i which was believed to be approaching Venus. The Russians had never revealed the precise mission of the probe and refused to supply the Jodrell Bank scientists with the radio frequencies on which it was operating, but it was believed that the probe would closely approach Venus during the 72-hr. period beginning July 17. (Reuters, Minneapolis Morning Trib., 7/18/64)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, at Nebraska Wesleyan Univ. to receive an honorary doctorate, said in a speech:	“. . . while our national policy is to maximize the peaceful uses of outer space . . . and to avoid the extension of weapons, we have no choice but to acquire a broadly-based total capability in space; a capability that can enable us to insure the protection of our national security interests while we actively seek cooperative peaceful development. . . . “The Roman mastery of land and sea communications, the English mastery of the seas, the American mastery of the air and of nuclear energy were each accompanied by greatly enhanced prestige and followed by vast increases in power and position, new knowledge, the establishment of strategic international economic advantages, the wide use of new resources, great advances in military capability, and a quickening of national pride and vigor. Portentous realignments among nations were inevitable. These are the advantages the Russians now seek from their enormous investments in space. These are the advantages we cannot permit them to acquire and use against the non-Communist world. “In these lessons of history lies the real challenge of space. The portents for our own time are clear enough in the early lead of the Soviet Union with the first Sputnik, Vostok, and Voskhod. The spurt in Soviet prestige brought a new assurance and weight in the international political arena, a new pride and confidence in Soviet national purpose. We have reacted quickly and with ever-increasing success, but the challenge of the mastery of space remains to be accomplished for us as a nation and for you as a member of the new generation. We are meeting this challenge, and in doing so enhancing the broadest values for our society and our world. “Our power to survive as a great and vigorous Society is in the process of being proven again through our space efforts. Your own involvement in the actions and consequences will be far greater than you or I can fully appreciate today. . . .” (Text; NYT, 2/5/65)
Gen. Thomas Dresser White, usaf Chief of Staff from 1957 to 1961 and one of the chief proponents of a balanced air-space defense system, died. He had been a member of the naca 1957-58, and the first U.S. military attache in Russia in 1933. (Wash. Post, 12/23/65, D4)
After 26 hrs. of flight, Col. Pavel I. Belyayev landed voskhod ii manually near Perm, Russia. Tass announced. The two-man spacecraft had completed 17 orbits of the earth, one more orbit than planned, and had traveled 447,000 mi. This was the first time landing of a Soviet spacecraft had been described as manual. Impact of voskhod II on the ground, later revealed as snow bank, was described as “soft.” (Tanner, NYT, 3/20/65, 1, 3; Shabad, NYT, 3/21/65, 3)
Referring to the “real success of Luna 6,” an article in the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin said: “This is not the first Russian failure in space. But it is the first open admission of failure. Americans, who have had their own failures, can’t help but warm up a little in the glow of such non-Marxist honesty.” (Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/15/65)
In a New York Times letter to the editor, Daniel Murphy commented on President Johnson’s decision to develop Manned Orbital Laboratory: “Once again we are asked to silently acquiesce to a questionable military dictum—‘if we don’t, they will.’ Because Russia has the capacity to send up such armaments, why does it so logically follow that they will do so? It is we, not they, who have a three or four to one superiority in icbm’s. . . . “By our action will we allow the Soviet Union any alternative but to respond in kind? Would not President Johnson’s invitation to the Soviet scientists stand a much greater likelihood of acceptance if coupled with an offer of diplomatically exploring the possibility of not constructing such armaments? “The Administration’s proposal can only increase the tensions of a world troubled enough.” {NYT, 9/1/65, 32)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, made his first address on the U.S. space program at the Goddard Memorial Dinner sponsored by the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He said: “1 intend to be an advocate of a dynamic space program—a program which will succeed in reaching to goals we have set—and one which will see new goals—one that can see beyond the moon and into fields where we can only speculate about the knowledge awaiting us.” The Vice President spoke briefly about the Soviet Union’s VOSKHOD II flight: “It is well for us from time to time to take stock—to take a careful look—in order to see how we are making out in comparison with our main competitor. The facts are that we do have very strong competition and hence we have another big reason for a major space effort—namely, prudence. Our national security alone would suggest reason enough for us to strive for absolute leadership in space exploration.” Humphrey pointed out that the Soviets remained ahead in propulsion for their rockets, while the U.S. continued to lead “in the directly useful fields of weather reporting, navigation, and communications.” He continued: “The Soviets clearly have an advantage in studying the effects of space environment on human beings. . . . We can salute the Russian achievements . . . but we would be foolish if we did not understand the military implications of Soviet space science as well as our own. “Each Russian shock has produced action here. But a mature nation should not need shock treatment. We are a peaceful nation . . . but we would ignore the real interests of the free world if we diminished our military efforts in space.” In the principal presentation, the widow of the scientist presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and leader of the RANGER vii team that obtained the first close-up pictures of the moon’s surface. The National Space Club Press Award for “an outstanding role in adding significantly to public understanding and appreciation of astronautics” went to Aviation Week and Space Technology; Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for “an outstanding contribution to the missile, aircraft, and space field” was presented to Florida Research and Development Center, Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft; Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was made to John Tascher, Case Institute of Technology, for U.S. Rocket Society Number Two: the Story of the Cleveland Rocket Society; Robert H. Goddard Scholarship ($1,500 to the university of the recipient’s choice) for “the purpose of stimulating the interest of talented students in space research and exploration” was awarded Willard M. Cronyn, a graduate student in Maryland Univ.’s Dept, of Physics and Astronomy. (Text; Program; Carmody, Wash. Post, 3/20/65)
A secret weapon, about which former Soviet Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev had boasted, blew up in 1960 killing the commander-inchief of the Soviet missile forces, Marshal Mitrofan I. Nedelin, and 300 others, the Manchester Guardian reported. The weapon was a missile with a nuclear propellant. The Guardian quoted secret reports of Oleg V.	Penkovsky, a Russian executed in 1963 for spying for the West, which would be published in November 1965.	(NYT, 10/17/65, 25; Wash. Post, 10/17/65, 1)
Moscovsky Komsomolets reported that the wife of Valery Bykovsky, Russian cosmonaut, was expecting a second baby. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 2/12/65)
Soviet Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov appeared in public for the first time since they landed voskhod ii in the Perm region Mar. 19. They were en route to Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan where they were expected to undergo detailed medical checkups and debriefings by scientists and technicians before being welcomed in Moscow in Red Square. (Shabad, NYT, 3/22/65, 1,3)
Display of what the Soviets called an orbital missile at the military parade in Moscow Nov. 7 and “related Russian statements do seem to place upon the Russian government an obligation to make clear its future intentions with respect to the [U.N.] resolution” against weapons in space, State Department press officer Robert J. McCloskey told a news conference. Noting that the U.S. could easily put such a weapon into orbit, McCloskey said that the military value of this would be negligible, (ap, Wash. Post, 11/19/65, A10)
Soviet deputy minister of communications I. V. Klokov, commenting for Izvestia on orbiting of the second molniya I comsat, said: “The orbiting of the second Soviet Comsat ‘Molniya-1’ will permit us to verify the feasibility of organizing a communication system envisaging the combined use of several sputniks. This will offer the possibility of a marked increase in the duration of contact to the point of becoming a round-the-clock system. . . . “With the aid of the new sputnik, the first telephone communication sessions have already been conducted; Moscow and Vladivostok have exchanged the first TV programs. These tests have shown that the quality of the radio communications and telecommunications is superior to that found in the experiments with the first Soviet Comsat, Molniya-1.” (Izvestia, 10/16/65, 3; atss-t Trans.)
Soviet press reported that Belka and Strelka, dog passengers on U.S.S.R. ’s sputnik v in orbit more than 24 hrs. Aug. 19-20, 1960, were alive anp well. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/28/66, B7)
Aviatrix Geraldine Mock—who in 1964 became first woman to make a solo flight around world—set a new world nonstop distance record for women in a 4,550-mi., 31-hr. flight from Honolulu, Hawaii, to Columbus, Ohio, in single-engine Cessna 206. Previous distance flight record of 3,671 mi. had been set by three Russian women in 1938. (NYT, 4/12/66, 25; Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, A3)
Pointing out that "space triumphs” had made "secrecy and the hoarding of scientific data less worthwhile,” editorial in the Baltimore Sun concluded: ". . . it is not surprising that, despite the relationship between military defense and some space activity, Russia and France seem about to agree to cooperate in space research—and the United States and Russia likewise.” (Balt. Sun, 6/27/66)
Seven U.S. scientists had consented to serve on joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Editorial Board provided for in agreement on space biology and medicine reached by NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences representatives Oct. 8, 1965, in New York City: Melvin Calvin, Univ. of California, Berkeley— U.S. co-chairman; Loren D. Carlson, Univ. of Kentucky; Dr. Robert W. Krauss, Univ. of Maryland; Robert B. Leighton, Cal Tech; Dr. John P. Marbarger, Univ. of Illinois; Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, nasa; and Wolf Vishniac, Univ. of Rochester. Agreement provided that Editorial Board, cochaired by a Soviet and a U.S. scientist, would supervise collection, preparation, and publication of materials on space biology and medicine. It would select compilers to assemble and prepare materials and authors —approximately equal number of Soviet and U.S.—to write the material. Work was expected to be published in several volumes, in both English and Russian, between 1967 and 1968. Cost of work performed by each country would be borne by that country, (nasa Release 66-49)
Ninth anniversary of orbiting of sputnik i by U.S.S.R.
U.N. space law treaty had been ratified by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, Tass announced. Presidium acted on behalf of the Supreme Soviet when the full body was not in session. Ratified by U.S. Senate April 25, treaty would become effective when U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other nations had filed ratification papers. Washington Evening Star later commented: “. . . [the space law treaty] may not be one of the most significant agreements of our time, but it is surely the most far-reaching, encompassing nothing less than the infinities between us and the stars. It is an agreement, moreover, that puts America and Russia on the same side. It can be helpful as an example of what the two of us can do together—down here on the troubled earth—to promote a good and enduring peace.” (NYT, 5/20/ 67, 1, 5; AP, W Star, 5/20/67, A5; W Post, 5/20/67, 1; W Star, 5/22/67, A16)
Washington Evening Star editorial praised Senate’s unanimous approval of the space law treaty April 25: “The action lends timely support to President Johnson’s policy of seeking to promote a spirit of detente through various types of agreements designed to build Bridges between our country and the Communist East. “. . . the new space treaty is at best only a modest step in the direction of improved Soviet-American relations. Still, it is a step forward, and a good one. Anybody who objects to it on security grounds can rest assured: It will not interfere in the slightest with our country’s ability to detect Russian cheating between us and the stars if such cheating actually takes place.” (W Star, 5/1/67)
Astronautics & Aeronautics noted that NASA-sponsored translations of Russian historical works compiled 1963—68 were available from Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and Technical Information, Springfield, Va. 22151. It was a credit to NASA’s historians “that they have not neglected bringing to our attention the products of their opposing numbers.” (Stehling, A&A, 9/68, 76)
Cosmos CCXXXI was launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 391-km (243-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Equipment functioned normally and spacecraft reentered July 18. (upi, W Star, 7/11/68, A5; upi, NYT, 7/12/68, 7; SBD, 7/12/68, 41; gsfc SSR, 7/15/68, 7/31/68)
President Nixon announced James H. Wakelin, Jr., former Assistant Secretary of the Navy for R&D, would be chairman of new Presidential Task Force on Oceanography [see Sept. 22]. (PD, 10/13/69, 1393-4) Soyuz VII, carrying Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko, Vladislav N. Volkov, and Viktor V. Gorbatko, was launched from Baikonur at 3:45 pm Oct. 12 into orbit with 217-km (134.8-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass said spacecraft’s mission was “maneuvering in the orbit, staging joint navigation observations of the spaceships ... in group flight, observation of celestial bodies and the horizon of the Earth, determination of the real luminosity of stars, observation of changes in illumination created by the Sun and other scientific experiments.” Third spacecraft, Soyuz VIII, carrying Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov and Dr. Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, was launched from Baikonur at 3:29 pm Oct. 13 into orbit with 278-km (172.7-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Its mission, Tass said, was “comprehensive simultaneous scientific studies in near-terrestrial space in accordance with an extensive program; testing of the complex system of controlling a simultaneous group flight of three space ships; mutual maneuvering of ships in orbit with the aim of solving a number of problems of developing the piloted space system.” TV viewers received announcement of flights about 30 min after launches and saw video-tape recordings of launches about U/2 hrs later. Ultimate goal of three-spacecraft mission was not given. In prelaunch interview shown on TV several hours after launch, Dr. Yeliseyev said group mission would conduct experiments leading to “creation of still more powerful orbiting stations.” Tass reported crews had checked out equipment and communicated with each other. Soyuz VI	was conducting medical-biological tests, Soyuz VII was observing and photographing earth and celestial bodies, and Soyuz VIII was conducting research on polarization of solar light reflected by atmosphere. On Oct. 14 Tass reported Soyuz VII and Soyuz VIII had moved close together, carried out “mutual observation-photography and movie filming,” studied “possibility of exchanging information with the aid of light signals and visceral optical methods,” conducted series of medical experiments, and observed “effect of erosion by micrometeorites on the condition of illuminators and optic systems of the craft.” On Oct. 15 spacecraft approached to within 500 yds during rendezvous, while Soyuz VI hovered nearby. On Oct. 16 Radio Moscow announced Soyuz VI had successfully completed mission and had softlanded in preset area 100 mi northwest of Karaganda at 12:52 pm Moscow time. No information on other two Soyuz spacecraft was given until Tass announced softlanding of Soyuz VII	at 12:36 pm Oct. 17 and of Soyuz VIII at 12:10 pm Oct. 18. Western officials speculated missions had not achieved all objectives. Tass said all major tasks were carried out with “high efficiency.” (Gwertzman, NYT, 10/12-14, 18/69; SBD, 10/14/69, 195; 10/ 21/69, 230; Reuters, W Post, 10/15-16/69; AP, W Star, 10/16/69, Al; Reston, LA Times, 10/19/69, A2; gsfc SSR, 10/15/69; 10/31/69)
In editorial directed to “Americans who think Soviet Russia is ‘mellowing’ ” and who opposed President Nixon’s Safeguard abm plan, New York News noted U.S.S.R. had paraded no military gear in Moscow May Day parade and limited oratory “to a peace-it’s-wonderful speech” by Brezhnev. Paper then quoted April 30 issue of Partinaya Zhizn in which Marshal Matvey V. Zakharov, U.S.S.R. Chief of Staff, described Soviet stockpile of nuclear missiles: “ ‘These rockets are always prepared for immediate firing. Global rockets have unlimited range, and are able not only to carry colossal payloads but to overcome the antimissile defense of the adversary.’” (NY News, 5/2/69)
First launch of Poseidon missile from submarine had been postponed by USN [see July 25] because of proximity of heavily instrumented Soviet trawler to U.S. nuclear submarine James Madison, AP reported. Informed source had said there was nothing wrong with Poseidon or support systems and that dod officials “became a little apprehensive after the Russian trawler. . .moved in so close [within 183 m (200 yds)]” during test July 24. (B Sun, 7/28/70, Al)
First volume of third edition of Bolshaya Sovetskaya Entsklopediya, new Soviet encyclopedia, was released in U.S.S.R. It credited Wright Brothers with first airplane flight. Second edition, which appeared from 1950 to 1958, had contended that Russian, A. F. Mozhaisky, was designer of first airplane, which had been flown first during summer of 1882. This version had appeared in U.S.S.R. as late as 1968, in history of Russian aviation and astronautics published by Ministry of Defense. New edition of encyclopedia said Mozhaisky’s airplane was built in 1885 and “crashed on take-off.” (Gwertzman, NYT, 3/24/70, 6)
Administration officials expected U.S.S.R. to test-fire SS-9 icbms within few months, New York Times reported. Two silos were being rebuilt at Baykonur test center in Kazakhstan to same dimensions as larger silos that had been appearing all over western Russia since December. (Beecher, NYT, 5/19/71, 1)
Moscow newspaper Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya quoted unidentified “Chief Designer of Spaceships” as saying U.S.S.R. was preparing further manned orbital flight of long duration as prelude to creation of permanent space laboratory. Soyuz spacecraft had “undergone necessary modifications to insure fulfillment of a long and extensive program.” Later New York Times said designer was believed to be Mikhail K. Yangel, member of Soviet Academy of Sciences. (NYT, 3/15/71)	_
Washington Daily News editorial commented on Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 mission: “What is significant ... is not the docking, in itself, but the evidence of the Soviet Union’s zealous determination to exceed everybody in space—for whatever purpose. There is nothing in all this that the U.S. space agency cannot, when it chooses, accomplish—given the funds and priorities. It is not a question of firsts—the U.S. has had its share of those, and more. The difference is that to Russia the priorities and judgments are made in one place, the Kremlin. In the United States, not only the space agency but the President, Congress and the prevailing public mood share the decisions.” (W News, 6/8/71)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, was first speaker in Leuc Awareness Program series. Dr. Von Braun said at LeRC: “Our agency is at the crossroads. Our success story is our greatest enemy.” After four successful manned lunar landings, people had become complacent. If nasa fell behind U.S.S.R. in space, it would create another “Sputnik” environment. (Lewis News, 12/3/71, 1)
Discovery of diamonds in 1.4-kg (3-lb) .meteorite that fell through roof of storehouse on Finnish island of Havro Aug. 2 was announced by Smithsonian Center for Short-Lived Phenomena. It was sixth such meteorite to be found. First discovery of meteoritic diamonds had been made by Russian scientists in 1888 while analyzing meteorite found near Novoured. (upi, NYT, 11/13/71)
Claim that Central Intelligence Agency had “stolen” Soviet Sputnik spacecraft for three hours to examine it while it was on tour in 1958 was included in new book critical of CIA by former CIA agent, Baltimore Sun reported. Book was CIA—The Myth & the Madness, by Patrick J. McGarvey. (B Sun, 10/20/72, Al)
Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, U.S. Secretary of State, said in a speech before The Pilgrims in London that the 1973 energy crisis should become “the economical equivalent of the Sputnik challenge of 1957. Only this time, the giant step for mankind will be one that America and its closest partners take together.” He proposed “that the nations of Europe, North America and Japan establish an energy action group of senior and prestigious individuals, with a mandate to develop within three months an initial action program for collaboration in all areas of the energy problem.” (Text)
A Tass photo published by the New York Times showed Soviet ApolloSoyuz Test Project Cosmonauts Valery N. Kubasov and Aleksey A. Leonov practicing moving from a Soyuz spacecraft in the water to a rescue raft. The site of the training was not identified. {NYT, 7/19/73, }) . . . .
A Washington Star and Daily News editorial commented on the June 3 crash of the Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport aircraft during the May 24-June 3 Paris Air Show: “Coming on the heels of a series of Soviet air disasters which have killed more than 600 people in the last 18 months and many failures of its space program, the image of Soviet technology at this point is not so reassuring. . . . The crash of the Russian SST is certain to affect the commercial prospects of the Concorde as well.” (W Star & News, 6/8/73, A18)
Soviet cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, relaxing on the eve of their launch for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, viewed the film White Sun of the Desert. The film, following a tradition set by the cosmonauts’ predecessors in space, was a Russian action movie set during the civil war after the Bolshevik revolution in 1917. (Wren, NYT, 16 July 75, 1)
In a close race to tame the hydrogen-bomb reaction process—fusion—to make electricity, the U.S. and USSR were both ready for larger engineering units to demonstrate the practical production of electricity by the mid-1980s, reporter Robert Toth said in the Los Angeles Times. The Kurchatov Institute in Moscow had announced earlier in Feb. a “breakthrough” in the first successful test conducted in its Tokamak-10, the last purely experimental machine intended to prove feasibility of the approach. Last November, U.S. had announced a comparable achievement with the Alcator Tokamak at the Mass. Institute of Technology, described as a major development in fusion research. Although U.S. scientists claimed a fusion process had been first tested at Los Alamos 20 yr ago, it was not seriously pursued, whereas the late Dr. Lev Artsimovich of the USSR had worked along the same line independently and given the machine its name—a Russian contraction for current-machine chamber—upon achieving the first success. Advantages of the fusion process were that it was the most efficient reaction known, producing 180 times more energy than consumed; fuel, the heavy forms of hydrogen, would be as inexhaustible as the seas; and the process left no radioactive waste like that from atomic-power plants based on the fission reaction. Fusion would require containment of the reaction in a magnetic field, which had been accomplished, and continuous production of energy would require temperatures of a million degrees Centigrade and a density of 100 trillion ions for a second— conditions beyond the capability of present machines. Both the U.S. and USSR results had been 5 to 10 times less than needed, although they were 5 to 10 times greater than previously achieved. (W Post, 23 Feb 76, A— 1)
U.S. observers were concerned about spiraling strategic arms programs in the USSR, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Heavy payload in the Soviet nuclear system and an expanded program of deploying multiple warheads had aroused fears of a possible “first strike” by the USSR against U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) systems. Intelligence experts estimated the USSR would have 1500 land-based missiles by summer, compared with 1054 for the U.S.; an article in Foreign Affairs magazine by Paul Nitze—Secretary of the Navy in the Johnson administration—had stated the Russians believed they could “win” a nuclear war, whereas popular feeling in the U.S. was that all participants in a nuclear exchange would be destroyed. A Russian “cold launch” system for missile launching that did not damage the silo was contrasted to the U.S. “hot launch” system that damaged the silo during launch. The Pentagon had sought $78 million for development of a new ICBM called “MX,” and a FY 1977 budget of $9.4 billion for strategic forces. (CSM, 19 Feb 76, 6)
The USSR would be able by 1980 to produce a thermonuclear reaction by using a powerful laser, according to scientists at the Lebedev Physics Institute quoted in the USSR’s Academy of Sciences journal Priroda. Institute Director Nikolai Basov (sharer of the 1964 Nobel prize in physics, for work in laser amplification) emphasized that Soviet science had been first to begin work on this problem, which would be the basis of power engineering in the future. Scientists were using two approaches: building powerful installations called Tokamaks, in which a reaction would proceed continuously; or using a laser beam to compress a small quantity of material such as deuterium to “a hundred trillion atmospheres, thousands of times as great as inside the sun,” with accompanying rise in temperatures until a microexplosion occurred, to produce current for future power and heat stations. Unlike the Tokamak, this line of research could lead to production of transportable nuclear-power stations for delivery to remote areas, the article said. (FBIS, Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 14 Nov 76; A&A 64, 367)
The USSR Ministry of Higher and Specialized Secondary Education had announced plans to build an Institute of Nuclear Energetics at Obninsk, in central Russia, site of the “world’s first industrial atomic power station,” the Tass news agency reported. First Soviet educational institution of this type, the new center would train engineers in design and use of nuclear power stations. In accordance with a new program of constructing nuclear power stations, Tass said the present 6-million-kw capacity would be supplemented by an additional 13 to 15 million kw; new stations were being built at Kursk, Smolensk, Kalinin in central Russia, and in the southern Ukraine. The Obninsk center would be the 860th higher education institution in the USSR, Tass noted. (FBIS, Tass in English, 14 Dec 76)
An unmanned Soviet spacecraft that returned to the earth 17 Dec. in Soviet Asia after 18 days in orbit might have been the test vehicle of a new Soyuz designed to carry three cosmonauts into space, instead of the two that have flown on the 13 Soyuz missions during the past 5 yr. Thomas O’Toole, reporting in the Washington Post, pointed out that the Cosmos 869 had flown the same pattern followed by all Soviet manned space flights, and noted that the USSR had long followed the practice of disguising unmanned test flights of Soyuz spacecraft by using the generalized Cosmos designation. At least four unmanned Soyuz vehicles had flown under the name of Cosmos during the past 4 yr, the article said. The USSR had not attempted a three-man flight since 1971, when the three crewmen of Soyuz 11 suffocated on their return to earth; the crew could have survived had they worn space suits, but the vehicle being used had no room for three men in space suits. Officials said then that the spacecraft would be modified to accommodate three-member crews in space suits, and Western observers predicted that the Inter-Soyuz flights scheduled to begin in 1978 with Russians and non-Russians together would use three cosmonauts again. (WPost, 22 Dec 76, A-2)
Information of value to the U.S. Pioneer mission to Venus scheduled for 1978 was published by the USSR in Pravda after 4 mo of analysis of the 2 Soviet spacecraft that reached Venus in Oct. 1975. Each of the Russian craft, weighing about 5000 kg, separated into an orbiting section and a landing capsule; the two landers transmitted the first panoramic photographs of the Venus surface to earth. U.S. scientists had debated the angle at which landers should enter the Venus atmosphere; the Russian report stated that Venera 9 entered at 20.5° and Venera 10 at 22.5° to the horizon. Besides the entry angle, the report included details of descent, amount of sunlight on the surface, wind speeds, rock chemistry, and character of surface erosion. Although the 2 landers failed under surface temperatures of 482°C and pressure 90 times that of earth— Venera 9 lander operated 53 min., Venera 10 65 min—the orbiters continued to transmit data on cloud cover and upper atmosphere. The U.S. planned to launch 2 spacecraft, an orbiter and a lander, toward Venus in 1978, the lander separating into 4 or 5 probes to relay data via the orbiter to the earth. {NYT, 29 Feb 76, 34)
Tass announced that the yachts Rodina and Rossiya had left the port of Vladivostok in an attempt to repeat the route sailed by Russian navigators 250 yr ago on 2 expeditions to Kamchatka under the leadership of Vitus Bering (1681-1741). The 7-man crews of the ships would begin by visiting Okhotsk, the port where Bering built the ship that went to Kamchatka, then proceed to Kamchatka about 3700 km away. In 1977 and 1978, the expedition would cruise to the Bering Strait and go ashore in North America where Bering’s ship St. Peter visited 17 July 1741. (FBIS, Tass in English, 11 July 76)
LaRC announced that Sir Robert Mark, former director of New Scotland Yard (his official title was Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis), would be guest speaker at a center colloquium on terrorism and law enforcement as part of the public lecture series, “Our Future in the Cosmos.” The lecture would contrast philosophy and methodology of British and U.S. criminal justice systems, including the areas of capital punishment, terrorism, and political influence on police matters, reflecting the speaker’s feeling that a free society is governed by consent rather than by force. (LaRC Release 77-45) Officials had canceled Soyuz 25 only 26hr into the mission because of unspecified trouble, although the craft had come within 130yd of the Salyut 6. The Moscow domestic service in Russian said only that the linkup was called off “due to deviations from the planned procedure for docking.” The word that the flight was canceled came after 24hr of silence, which had caused fears for the safety of the crew. Tass said Oct. 12 that the capsule had returned safely, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:25am local time Oct. 11. U.S. officials speculated that, like Soyuz 15 in Aug. 1974 and Soyuz 23 in Oct. 1976, this mission failed because the cosmonauts had overshot the docking point and could not make another attempt because their battery power allowed insufficient time to correct the navigational error. When a crew last overshot its Salyut, 4mo elapsed before another crew made a docking attempt. (W Star, Oct 10/77, A-l; Oct 11/77, A-6; W Post, Oct 11/77, A-l; Oct 12/77, A-21; FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 9/77, Oct 10/77, Oct 11/77)
The USSR announced it had launched a 910kg Prognoz 6 to continue study of galactic energetic particles and of solar activity impact on the magnetosphere and the interplanetary medium. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 22/77)
FBIS reported that the USSR had opened a television station in Duki, town of Khabarov Krai on the Pacific coast of Siberia near Bering Strait and the Sea of Okhotsk, permitting reception of both central and local programs in all villages of the area. (FBIS, Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Sept 23/77)
FBIS reported the Soviet Union’s Venera 11 had reached Venus Dec. 25, and its descent module had made a soft landing some 800km from where Venera 12’s descent module had landed. Main task of Venera 11 and 12 was to examine the characteristics of various areas of Venus. After the descent module separated from Venera 11 Dec. 23, the spacecraft had proceeded on a flyby trajectory some 35 000km from the planet’s surface. The Venera 11 module, during descent and while on the planet surface, had performed research similar to that done by the Venera 12 module (scientific and technical experiments and exploration of Venus’s surface at 446°C and pressure of 88 atmospheres) for 95min. Descent-module data received by Venera 11 were relayed to earth. After leaving the zone of radio visibility and completing receipt of data, Venera 11 would continue in a heliocentric orbit. Scientific measurement and research begun on the earth-Venus interplanetary route would continue during the flight of Venera 11 and 12. Data obtained from the two spacecraft would be processed and studied in the institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Dec. 25/78)
Using a multichamber furnace delivered to Salyut 6 by the Progress 1 unmanned tanker/freighter, Soviet cosmonauts had begun major spaceprocessing experiments, Tass reported. Operated in a Salyut airlock to vent into the vacuum of space, the furnace had three areas: one maintaining heat up to 1100C, a “cold” area maintaining 600 to 700C, and a “gradient” area allowing linear temperature change between maximum and minimum furnace-heating capabilities. The Salyut space-processing system, designated “Splav” (alloy), would use material samples in capsules, each containing 3 crystal ampules to fuse when heated in the furnace and form monocrystals in the “gradient” area, with 3-dimensional crystallization in the hot and cold sections of the furnace. Combinations of materials heated to form new substances not possible in earth gravity would be aluminum/antimony, aluminum/tungsten, molybdenum/gal-lium, copper/indium, and indium/antimony. Some of the alloys might have semiconductor properties, suggesting that Soviet interest would be in specific applications in earth orbit rather than in theory. The cosmonauts had also reported a major technology experiment using a closed-cycle cryogenic system designed to provide temperatures comparable to liquid helium (- 269C) but did not say whether or not the test actually used liquid helium. Cosmonauts had also used cryogenics to cool the receivers of a “submillimeter telescope,” Tass reported. (FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 15/78, Feb 16/78; Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Feb 21/78; AvWk, Feb 27/78, 21)
FBIS reported the USSR interplanetary spacecraft Venera 12 had reached Venus Dec. 21 after a 98-day flight covering over 240 million km. The descent module had entered Venus’s atmosphere at 11.2 km/sec and soft-landed, transmitting scientific information from the planet’s surface for llOmin. During descent, the module made precise chemical analyses of the composition of the atmosphere and clouds, a spectral analysis of solar radiation scattered in the atmosphere, and a study of electric charges in the atmosphere from 62m above the planet’s surface. Scientific measurements continued after the module landed. The Venera 12 station was continuing its flight in space, carrying a Soviet-French experiment for studying solar and galactic gamma flares. Venera 11, launched 5da before Venera 12, would reach Venus Dec. 25. (FBIS, Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Dec 21/78)
The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 35 at 1638 hours Moscow time April 9 from the Baykonur site into an orbit with 346-kilometer apogee, 336-kilometer perigee, 91.3-minute period, and 51.6° inclination. Headed for a linkup with the obiting station Salyut 6 were two cosmonauts, engineer Valery Ryumin, 40, who spent 175 days there last year, and rookie Lt. Col. Leonid Popov, 34, a former jet fighter pilot. The cargo carrier Progress 8 launched March 27 had automatically docked March 29 with Salyut 6, which used the Progress engine to adjust its orbit. The supply ship was still docked to Salyut, waiting for the new arrivals to unload it, Salyut 6, launched September 29, 1977, had been in orbit for more than 30 months; when the Soyuz 35 crew docked with it at 6:16 p.m. Moscow time April 10, Ryumin said in a telecast “Look, the station is absolutely in the same condition as we left it.” Tass said the crew would clean, repair, and restock the station and resume research on medical and biological effects of long-term spaceflight. The Soviet television program said that Ryumin was a last-minute choice for this flight, apparently taken from a backup crew to replace an unidentified flight engineer who “had trouble during his physical exercises.” First task was to turn on station systems: lights, air and water regeneration, communications, and control desk, all of which had been off for seven months while Salyut 6 was unmanned. The crew began April 11 to unload Progress 8 and activate systems and instruments including plant-life installations Oaziz, Vazon, and Malakhit, the latter an orchid-growing greenhouse the crew had brought with them on Soyuz 35. Ground control said that observing growth of the orchids would encourage “good spirits” in the crew. By April 15 the crew had dismantled and replaced apparatus that had worn out, putting the used equipment into the freight compartment of Progress 8. They had installed new storage batteries and replaced solar batteries in the attitude-control system and parts in the water-regeneration system. They had also prepared to refuel the propulsion unit. At the end of their first week, Dr. Anatoly Yegorov said that the cosmonauts were adapting “more quickly than expected” and were working ahead of schedule, “the most convincing proof of their physical wellbeing.” [Nature magazine reported speculation that Ryumin’s return flight meant the Soviet Union might be preparing for a manned mission to Mars. “Classical” Soviet projects for space exploration, following the lead of Tsiolkovsky, assumed the establishment of a permanent orbital station staffed by “several tens” of male and female crew and scientists for several months at a time; lunar and planetary exploration, for this century at least, would be left to automatic vehicles. However, Soviet experts had shown considerable interest in biological effects of long-term spaceflight; they had found “no significant organic changes” that might limit the duration of future flights. Sending Ryumin aloft again after his record 175-day flight (which Nature called “serendipitous”) should have especially interesting results. Nature quoted a Tass report that Ryumin was included at the last minute when “Flight Engineer Lebedev” hurt his leg.] By April 22 the crew had almost finished unloading the freighter and had refueled the joint propulsion plant, preparatory to filling the station with oxidizer. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov said that the most productive period of cosmonauts in space would begin one month to six weeks after a mission started; the Soyuz 35 crew had been doing repair and fault-prevention work so far, but had also begun to resume experiments. They used Progress S’s propulsion unit for another orbit adjustment April 24. On April 25 they separated the freighter from the Salyut-Soyuz complex; on April 26 they ignited the propulsion unit at 9:54 Moscow time to put it into a descent trajectory over the Pacific Ocean, where it “ceased to exist.” On April 27 the Soviet Union launched Progress 9 at 9:24 p.m. Moscow time; it docked with the Soyuz-Salyut complex at 11:09 a.m. April 29, bringing more apparatus and equipment, materials for the life-support systems, additional fuel, and mail for the cosmonauts. As usual, the report ended with the statement that the cosmonauts were “feeling fine.” (Tass in English, Apr 3-29/80; Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Apr 3-29/80; W Post, Apr 10/80, A-18; W Star Apr 10/80, A-15; Apr 12/80, A-10; NY Times, Apr 11/80, D-15; Nature, Apr 17/80, 585)
Cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev, veteran of Soyuz 5, Soyuz 8, and Soyuz 10, told a press conference that the flight of Ryumin and Popov on Salyut 6 “is coming to an end. The flight will be completed in the first half of October and no more Soyuz expeditions will visit.” “The station today,” he added, “is in a perfectly good state and the question of its being manned in the future may be answered in the affirmative.” (FBIS, Mosc Dom Svc in Russian, Oct 4/80)
The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 36 May 26 at 9:21 p.m. Moscow time (2:21 p.m. EDT) carrying a Russian commander (Valery Kubasov, 45, veteran of three space missions) and Hungarian engineer (Bertalan Farkas, 30) to the orbiting Salyut 6 station already occupied by Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin. (W Star May 27/80, A-8)
FBIS reported further comment on the joint flight of Soyuz T and Salyut 6, predicted to continue “for several months” so that experts could test systems and operations before proceeding to build the new spacecraft “in series.” The propellant tanks used by the engines for cruise and for docking now formed a single system; in the past, overuse of propellant in attitude control meant a Soyuz would have to return to Earth even if plenty of propellant was left in the cruise engine. This would not be so in the new engine. The on-board computer now carried out duties previously handled by the crew, such as data processing and flight or system control. Also, Soyuz T had a panel of solar batteries, which previous spacecraft did not have. The commentary said that previous Soyuz spacecraft would continue to be used for the immediate future, the present trial flight serving as dress rehearsal for the “many novel technical features.” (FBIS, Moscow Wrld Svc in Russian, Jan 8/80)
At 8:30 p.m. Moscow time (4:30 p.m. GMT), the Soviet Union launched Soyuz T-6 carrying cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Alexandr Ivanchenkov, with French “spationaut” Col. Jean-Loup Chretien, to spend a week with cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev, the Soyuz T-5 crew who had been occupying orbiting laboratory Salyut 7 since May 13. This was the first time a five-man crew would occupy an orbital station. Initial orbit elements were 277-kilometer apogee, 248-kilometer perigee, 89.6-minute period, and 51.6° inclination. Chretien, who had trained with his French backup Maj. Patrick Baudry in the Soviet Union for 21 months, was the first westerner to take part in a Soviet space mission. (The last east-west venture was the U.S.-Soviet Apollo-Soyuz linkup in July 1975.) The mission had been approved by French President Valery Giscard d’Estaing in 1979. This was also the first Soviet life television coverage of a launch, beginning two hours before liftoff with taped views of crew training, Salyut assembly, Soyuz rollout, departure of the crew by bus, interviews with the crew orbiting in the Salyut, and ending with a live broadcast of the liftoff plus 10 minutes. During the two-hour broadcast, all three crew members gave speeches praising the trip as symbolic of friendship between French and Soviet peoples. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, June 24/82, June 28/82; Mosc DomTVSvc in Russian, June 24/82; NY Times, June 25/82, A-9; W Post, June 25/82, A-22; Spacewam SPX-344, June 29/82)
The Soviet Union launched Cosmos 1374 from Kapustin Yar into a “round orbit” at 225-kilogram altitude and 50.7° inclination. Press reports said that Australian aircraft watched a seven-ship Soviet task force retrieve from the Indian Ocean an object that might be either a nuclear test craft or a “fairly small” shuttle. United Press International (UPI) said an Australian spokesman claimed to know what kind of craft was recovered but gave no details because the information was “classified”; also, U.S. scientists said that the spacecraft had “an unusually low trajectory.” Associated Press (AP) quoted U.S. government sources “who asked to remain anonymous” that the Soviet Union had launched and recovered, after 1 1/4 orbits, its first space-shuttle type of vehicle; they did not know whether the craft was manned. A Reuters report said that Maj. Gen. Alexey Leonov, who had been one of the cosmonauts on the Apollo-Soyuz mission, hinted that the shuttle guess was right but would give no details. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, June 4/82; W Post, June 9/82, A-7; June 10/82, A-26; June 11/82, A-35; W Times, June 11/82, 6; AvWk, June 14/82, 18-19)
The Soviet Union said that Soyuz T-5 cosmonauts Anatoliy Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev, in their fourth week aboard Salyut 7, had finished unloading Progress 13, launched May 23 to refuel and replenish the orbiting station, and undocked it to make room for a spacecraft carrying a French-Soviet crew later in June. Progress 13's propulsion unit had served twice to adjust the orbit of the Spyuz-.Salyut complex. Tass reported that ground control had reoriented the Progress June 6 to reenter and burn up over the Pacific Ocean. (FBIS, MscWldSvc in English, Tass in English, June 4/82; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, June 6/82)
Tass reported that the fuel core for the nuclear-powered Cosmos 1402 entered the atmosphere over the Atlantic at 1:56 p.m. Moscow time and “burned up entirely.” Data from “competent Soviet organizations tracking the flight” said the Sputnik “totally ceased its existence.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 7/83)
A Russian industry grouping called the Space Regatta
The Russian Space Agency announced plans for three piloted missions and six Progress flights in 1993. The first mission of the series was scheduled for January 24, 1993. (Itar-Tass, Dec 11/92)
Dr. Wesley T. Huntress, Jr., Director of NASA's Solar System Exploration Division, last week received the Korolev Medal, awarded by the Russian Federation of Astronautics and Cosmonautics for achievement in space research. (NASA Relesase 92-151)
The Boeing Aircraft Company announced plans to produce some jetliner parts in the former Soviet Union as soon as possible. The effort would enable Boeing to gain increased access to the Russian aviation market and to meet stiff competition from Russian and European firms. (WSJ, Sept 11/92)
The main Russian TV news reported that some members of the former Soviet Union's cosmonaut ground controllers planned a warning strike to protest low wages, which in many cases were equivalent to $6 a month. The television report said that "One of the most prestigious jobs on Earth had become one of the lowest-paid." (W Times, Jan 28/92; P Inq, 28/92)
It was reported that Russian scientists successfully tested an engine for a space plane in 1991. (Time, Feb 24/92)
The U.S. Department of Energy and the Mayak Production Association of the Russian Ministry of Atomic Energy signed a contract by which the Energy Department would buy Russian-produced plutonium-238 for use as a power source in U. S. spacecraft. The contract provided for the United States to purchase up to 40 kilograms (88 pounds) over five years. The plutonium is not weapons-grade and is to be used by NASA to power unmanned space missions that are being planned. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; W Post, Dec 29/92)
It was reported that a NASA-led team might travel to Russia to explore areas for joint cooperation on axisymmetric scramjets. At the top of the list was the possibility of the U.S. joining in a second flight later during the year of the Russian scramjet that already had achieved about three seconds of supersonic combustion. (AvWk, Apr 20/92)
Fearing that unemployed scientists in the former Soviet Union might put their talents to use building weapons of mass destruction for unsavory regimes, the United States, Germany and Russia announced the formation of an international center to promote "non-military endeavors." (P Inq, Feb 26/92)
Roald Sagdeev, director of the Space Research Institute in Moscow from 1973-1988 and now professor of physics at the University of Maryland, and Michael Nacht, dean of the school of public affairs at the university, argued in a New York Times article that NASA should solicit Russian design help and begin plans to modify the Space Station's orbit so that it could be reached by launch vehicles from both the Kennedy Space Center and the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The authors also noted that a University of Maryland study commissioned by NASA found that a wider use of Russian technology could reduce costs by up to a billion dollars a year after the station was operational. (NY Times, June 26/93)
Russian scientists on the Mir spaceship were scheduled to begin an experiment that involved using a mirror to reflect sunlight down to earth. In the experiment, a 65-foot-diameter disk of aluminum-coated plastic film would be unfurled in space. The experiment would test the possibility of illuminating areas on the Earth with light equivalent to that of several moons. Scientists agree on the need for environmental studies to access the possible effect of such a practice. (B Sun, Jan 12/93; NY Times, Jan 12/97; W Times, Feb 3/93; AP, Feb 3/93; USA Today, Feb 4/93; W Post, Feb 4/93; LA Times, Feb 4/93)
The European Space agency, eager to boost its cooperation with Russia, said that it was studying the joint development of a new generation of space vehicles. Jean-Jacques Dorian, Director of Policy Planning, told journalists on the eve of Moscow's first aerospace show that the agency had contracts worth millions of dollars with a number of Russian firms. (RTw, Aug 30/93)
The  Washington Times reported that the former Soviet military had welcomed the U.S. decision to scrap most of the Strategic Defense Initiative. Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev called the decision a "reasonable decision" and said that "it seems there's no reason to raise the possibility again" of putting weapons in space. (W Times, May 18/93)
NASA and the Russian State Committee for the Defense Branches of industry signed a memorandum of understanding in Moscow to cooperate in eight areas of fundamental aeronautical sciences.  The agreement called for cooperative activities in the following areas: transition and turbulence, composite structures and materials, chemically reacting flows, thermal protection system materials, environmental concerns in aviation, hypersonic technologies, experimental test facilities, and advanced aerospace materials. (NASA Release 93-22)
A Washington Times editorial questioned the wisdom of the space partnership between Russia and the United States, finding significant problems with the agreement. First, should the Russian fascists come to power, the United States would have provided a hostile government with very detailed insights into the state of our advanced technologies. Second, the writer charged, the United States was being tricked into purchasing obsolete equipment for the joint station; third, Russia's space launch base, called Baikonur, was reported to be badly decayed; and, fourth, there were issues of crew safety--two fires were known to have taken place in similar modules of Russian Space Stations and the Russians had not provided complete details of these events.
Russian television on the "Aerospace Salon" program discussed various Russian space flights. The correspondent said that much was known about Salyut flights 1, 6, and 7 but nothing had been publicized about Salyut 2, 3, and 5 missions. It developed that the flight engineers for these missions were military cosmonauts and that they involved Almaz orbital reconnaissance stations. The Almaz hulls were launched as Salyuts, the first unsuccessfully in 1973 and two more in 1974 and 1976. A cosmonaut who flew on one of these, V.V. Gorbatko, was quoted as saying that the initial intention was to arm the Almaz station but the one on which he flew had reconnaissance equipment only. (FBIS-Sov, Nov 30/94)
The United States and Ukraine signed a five-year civil space agreement the week of November 21, which established direct cooperation between NASA and the Ukrainian National Space Agency and created the legal basis for bilateral scientific cooperation. The agreement, which provided for cooperation in such fields as remote sensing, telecommunications, biomedical sciences and biotechnology, and space research and technology, was described as "almost exactly the same" as the 1992 agreement with Russia. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
The media reported that Pratt & Whitney and Rockwell International were negotiating a potential $1 billion deal with Russian aircraft manufacturer Ilyushin to produce jetliners. The project could involve the initial purchase of 20 aircraft by Aeroflot Russian International Airlines and create $1 billion in U.S. exports. Pratt & Whitney would provide the engines and Rockwell would provide the avionics The Il-96M is a four-engine wide-body craft that carries 300 passengers. (P Inq, Jan 22/94)
Russian cosmonauts Vasily Tsibliyev and Alexander Serebrov on the Soyuz TM-17 landed safely and without incident after six months in the Mir station, although the module had collided with Mir before descent. They were replaced by two cosmonauts, including Valery Polyakov, due to stay a record-breaking 14 months in space, to break the record 366 days set by Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov in 1988--1989. (Reuters, Jan 14/94)
NASA announced that Russian cosmonauts on Mir had completed the first in a series of U.S. experiments using NASA's Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS). SAMS was activated October 4 to collect vibration data in preparation for future chemistry and physics experiments. (NASA Release 94-168)
Russia's Interfax news agency reported that the previous week a fire had destroyed a control facility at the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Experts stated, however, that launches would not be affected. (AP, Mar 15/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that a Russian spaceship manned by a Russian and a Kazakh cosmonaut had docked with Mir. (H Post, Jul 4/94)
Dr. Daniel S. Goldin, head of the nation�s space agency, has won support in the White House for his philosophy of smaller, better, and less expensive spacecraft. A case in point is the early planning for a Pluto mission. Four years ago, engineers came up with a concept costing as much as $4 billion. After many redesigns they developed a mission, called Pluto Express, at an estimated cost of $400 million. Instead of packing many instruments into a single craft weighing several tons, engineers designed two lightweight craft weighing as little as 300 pounds each. In the proposed mission, the craft would be launched separately, perhaps by Russian Proton rockets, on �fast� trajectories. They should be able to reach Pluto in 6 to 8 years, compared to Voyager 2�s travel time of 12 years to distant Neptune.
Boris Ostroumov, Deputy General Director of the Russian space agency, said that the Baikonur Cosmodrome is a scientific and technical complex and that it will not become a Russian miliary base. The facilities will be used for scientific and national economic needs and will be administered by the Russian space agency, Ostroumov said. (FBIS-Sov, Jan 10/95)
Professional and amateur astronomers in northern China and in the eastern reaches of Russia witnessed the near-simultaneous occurrence of a total solar eclipse and an unimpeded view of Comet Hale-Bopp. According to news reports, tens of thousands of people crowded city streets and braved freezing temperatures to observe the spectacle, many using pieces of smoked glass to protect their eyes. Mohe County in China’s northern tip had banned the use of smoke-producing stoves and other heating devices, to keep the air as clear as possible for the view. Chinese television stations broadcast the event, only the third time in recorded history when a full eclipse and the passing of a nearby comet had occurred simultaneously.(Associated Press, “Comet, Eclipse Dazzle Chinese, Russians,” 10 March 1997.)
NASA reported that one of the two monkeys sent into space aboard the Russian Bion-11 flight in December 1996 had died upon completing postmission tests in Moscow. Both NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that they would investigate the death. According to observers, both monkeys aboard the mission returned to Earth alert and active. The purpose of the flight was to investigate further the effects of spaceflight on the musculoskeletal system.(Associated Press, “Russian Space Monkey Multik Dies,” 12 January 1997; NASA, “Monkey Dies After Completing 14-Day Bion Mission,” news release 97-8, 9 January 1997.)
Following a meeting of the Defence Council, President Boris N. Yeltsin issued a decree giving overall control of Russia’s space industry to the civilian Russian Space Agency. Yeltsin’s intention was “to extract maximum economic benefit from one of the few manufacturing industries in which Russia is a world leader.” With this decree, Yeltsin required the government to create a plan for a restructured space industry, giving priority to national security, to economic and scientific missions, and to strengthening Russia’s position in the world marketplace.(Reuters, “Russia Puts Civilian Agency in Charge of Space,” 20 January 1998.)
Cosmonauts working aboard Mir conducted the first of two tests, using green fluorescent gas made from combining nitrogen, acetone, and biacetyl gases, to search for leaks in the Spektr laboratory module damaged in a collision in June 1997. However, they were unable to pinpoint the sources of any seepage. Because Mir was nearing its decommission stage, Russia planned no repairs, in the event that the cosmonauts were able to locate the leaks precisely. Instead, the tests were intended as practice for finding leaks on the future ISS.
Russian cosmonauts aboard Mir located a lost wrench among 12 years’ worth of accumulated spare parts. They used the wrench to loosen the bolt that had broken three wrenches earlier in the week, preventing the two cosmonauts from undertaking a planned spacewalk.(Reuters, “Mir Cosmonauts Solve Mystery of Missing Wrench,” 5 March 1998.)
An international group of computer hackers, calling itself Masters of Downloading or MOD, announced that it had stolen key software programs from NASA. The same group had previously broken into the Pentagon’s Defense Information Systems Network, claiming to have stolen enough information to “‘take control’ of military satellites and other systems.” Although U.S. Department of Defense officials said that MOD had downloaded an application for management and record keeping, not for “anything that could perform a control function,” the group claimed that its cyber attack on NASA had “stripped the U.S. space agency of its chief defense against computer intrusion.” MOD had sent the stolen samples of NASA software to a computer expert who maintained a Web site devoted to information-security issues. The group, which included at least two Russian members, asserted that it had broken into NASA’s system through JPL to obtain the software samples and threatened to sell the information to international terrorist groups or foreign governments.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “NASA Becomes Latest Victim of Masters of Downloading,” 23 April 1998.)
Russian space officials cancelled a spacewalk after cosmonauts broke three wrenches on the last of 10 locks, while trying to open a hatch. The cosmonauts had intended to repair a damaged solar panel. NASA rescheduled the spacewalk for April. The incident further increased concerns about the safety of Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 March 1998.)
Endeavour separated from Mir to head home at 11:57 a.m. (EST), returning David A. Wolf to Earth and leaving Andrew S. W. Thomas at the Mir station for a four-and-one-half-month stay. Wolf was returning to Earth aboard Endeavour after completing a 119-day stay on Mir. The new crew of Mir, two cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and a French astronaut Léopold Eyharts, lifted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on Soyuz TM-27, 23 minutes before Endeavour undocked from Mir.(New York Times, “Shuttle Departs, Leaving Last American on Mir,” 30 January 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Endeavour Separates from Mir,” USA Today, 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.”)
Russian Mission Control monitored Mir’s airlock pressure following the repair work of 9 January. On Friday, 8 January, when the crew entered the airlock without spacesuits to retrieve some equipment, the repair was holding, but the pressure had fallen slightly. Russian ground control near Moscow, which was analyzing the data, planned to decide on Monday whether Mir’s Kvant-2 module was safe.(Reuters, “Mir’s Airlock Pressure Down a Bit—Russian Control,” 11 January 1998.)
Mir Commander Viktor M. Afanasyev and French cosmonaut Jean-Pierre Haigneré replaced scientific equipment on Mir’s exterior during a planned 5-hour spacewalk that went overtime. The pair overcame “numerous technical blips,” to complete the French portion of the tasks and most of the Russian portion. Malfunctions in their spacesuits’ ventilation systems delayed both men in leaving the station. Other problems included equipment failure during a simulated repair to an imaginary hole on Mir’s superstructure; an unsuccessful attempt to retrieve data from a pollution study in process around the station; and the failure to install a new Russian-sponsored experiment to measure cosmic rays. Cosmonauts succeeded in other tasks during the spacewalk, including the recuperation of a French-sponsored test and the installation on the station’s hull of comet technology designed to gather space dust for analysis. Haigneré was on his second mission to Mir, but this was his first spacewalk.(Agence France-Presse, “Cosmonauts Struggle Through Grueling Space Walk Program,” 19 April 1999.)
The Soyuz spacecraft, carrying space enthusiast Dennis A. Tito, arrived safely at the ISS, having completed a two-day journey from Kazakhstan. The successful docking took place only 14 hours after Shuttle Endeavour left the ISS, with the crew having completed its mission of installing a Canadian-built robotic arm. Tito arrived at the ISS in good health. Appearing through grainy footage provided by the Russian Space Agency, Tito floated into the space station with arms outstretched and proclaimed, “I love space.” The Soyuz mission mandated that the Russian- American crew remain aboard the ISS for six days.(Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Leaves Space Station After 8 Days,” Houston Chronicle, 30 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Tito’s ‘Taxi’ Drops Fare at Station, ‘I Love Space’, Says the American Cosmonaut, Who Faces Strict NASA Limits,” 30 April 2001.)
Diplomats from 178 nations reached a compromise agreement to enact the Kyoto Protocol, a pact designed to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases, which scientists believed were contributing to global warming. The United States, represented by Undersecretary of State Paula J. Dobriansky, had rejected the final agreement. Calling the agreement “fatally flawed,” President George W. Bush expressed concern over the effect of the treaty on the U.S. economy. Although Russia and Japan had also expressed major reservations, the two countries had eventually signed the Kyoto Protocol when negotiators included language in the final draft delaying the date of compliance. The treaty called for industrialized nations to limit the emissions released by automobiles, plants, and factories, but the mechanisms for enforcement defied easy solutions. However, according to final rules, each nation must reduce its carbon- dioxide emissions or pay fines for violations. Nations throughout the world criticized the United States’ rejection of the treaty. For example, the chief negotiator for the European Union expressed disappointment at the United States’ decision, saying, “Almost every single country stayed in the protocol. There was one that said the Kyoto Protocol was flawed.” Although an international consensus had emerged, the treaty still required the ratification of the 55 nations responsible for 55 percent of the world’s carbon-dioxide emissions in 1990.(Traci Watson, “Compromise Rescues Kyoto Protocol; Nations Hope Global Warming Treaty Will Take Effect in 2002; U.S. Says Pact ‘Is Not Sound Policy’,” USA Today, 24 July 2001; Peter N. Spotts, “Global Climate Treaty Moves Ahead, Without US,” Christian Science Monitor, 24 July 2001.)
Russian Deputy Prime Minister Boris Alyoshin and French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin signed an agreement allowing Russian access to the ESA launch complex in French Guiana, beginning in 2006. The agreement provided for the construction of a new launchpad at Kourou for the launching of Russian Soyuz rockets. France agreed to contribute half of the cost of EUR 314 million (US$361 million), with other ESA member states providing the remainder. The agreement also allowed Arianespace to collaborate with the Russian company Starsem to use Soviet-era Soyuz rockets for launching medium-sized payloads, thereby closing a gap in Arianespace’s marketing range.
The Russian Space Agency successfully launched the Progress M1-11 resupply vehicle to the ISS from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:58 a.m. (EST). The Progress vehicle, the 13th resupply flight to the ISS, carried 2.5 tons (2,300 kilograms or 2.3 tonnes) of food, fuel, and equipment. The vehicle’s mission designation was ISS 13P.
The ISS Expedition 10 crew, comprising Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov, successfully reactivated the station’s Elektron oxygen generator, which had shut down on 1 January because of air bubbles in the system’s lines. Flight Engineer Sharipov made three unsuccessful attempts to repair the Russian-built unit. While the ISS crew continued to work on the problem, flight controllers in Russia used oxygen stores aboard the Progress 16 supply ship to repressurize the station. Russian engineers then instructed the crew to hook up a backup liquid unit to infuse fresh electrolytes into the oxygen generator’s system. The crew reactivated the Elektron generator without incident. Engineers planned to monitor the system’s performance to ensure that it continued to function properly.(Tariq Malik, “Repaired Oxygen Generator Fails Again Aboard ISS,” Space.com, 5 January 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/exp10_elektron_050104.html (accessed 18 August 2009); William Harwood, “Space Station’s Oxygen Generator Back in Action,” Spaceflight Now, 6 January 2005.)
ESA’s YES2 craft attempted to deliver Fotino, a 12-pound (5.4-kilogram) reentry capsule, to a landing site in Kazakhstan, via an experimental tether system. YES2 deployed Fotino from the Foton-M3 spacecraft. A metal brace and straps held Fotino in place while the tether unwound, gradually lowering the capsule. The mission plan called for the tether to lower the capsule 30 kilometers (18.6 miles) below Foton-M3. However, a malfunction prevented the tether from unreeling to its full length. Telemetry data indicated that the tether had deployed approximately 8.5 kilometers (5.3 miles). Automated timers aboard the craft commanded Fotino to separate approximately a half hour before the scheduled touchdown time, even though the tether had not extended fully. However, because the tether had not completely deployed before Fotino’s release, early estimates predicted that the reentry vehicle would orbit for 4–11 days before reentering the atmosphere. Lead Engineer for the YES2 mission Â. Michiel Kruijiff remarked that, apart from the problem with the tether, the mission had been largely successful, achieving many of the mission objectives.(Stephen Clark, “Space Tether Experiment Hits Major Snag,” Spaceflight Now, 26 September 2007; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russian Attempt To Deliver Parcel from Space Fails,” 26 September 2007.)
NASA announced that it had signed a modification to the ISS contract with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos for crew transportation services. NASA would use the US$141 million, firm-fixed-price extension to meet the United States’ obligations to its international partners for transportation to and from the ISS. The contract’s extension would cover two Soyuz flights, to carry cargo to and from the ISS and to remove trash. The contract allowed for Roscosmos to launch to the ISS 50 kilograms (110.23 pounds) of cargo per person; to return to Earth 17 kilograms (37.48 pounds) of cargo per person; and to dispose of 30 kilograms (66.14 pounds) of trash per person. Additionally, the contract extension covered broad support for a long-duration mission for three ISS crew members, including crew rescue and training and preparation for launch and landing. The crew members would launch aboard two Soyuz rockets in the fall of 2011 and would land on Earth in the spring of 2012.(NASA, “NASA Extends Contract with Russian Federal Space Agency,” news release C08-068, 2 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_08-317_Dale_resigns.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
Soyuz TMA-17, carrying Timothy J. Creamer, Soichi Noguchi, and Oleg V. Kotov, docked with the ISS at 22:48 (GMT). An automated docking system successfully brought the craft into port on the Earth-facing side of the Russian Zarya module. Hatches opened at 00:30 (GMT). The new arrivals floated onto the station wearing red Santa hats and elf hats and carrying a small Christmas tree and a white sack of gifts. Jeffrey N. Williams and Maxim V. Suraev welcomed them on board the ISS, where they would live for six months as members of the Expedition 22 and Expedition 23 missions.(James Dean, “New Crew Set To Begin Six-Month Stay on Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 December 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “New Crew Arrives at Space Station,” Space.com, 23 December 2009, http://www.space. com/7704-crew-arrives-space-station.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
