MSC announced selection of United Aircraft Corp’s Pratt & Whitney Div. and General Electric Co.’s Direct Energy Conversion Business Section to negotiate parallel cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts for development of fuel-cell technology leading to design, fabrication, and testing of engineering-model fuel-cell system. Contracts, which would run for 13 mos beginning July 1, were valued at $825 000 each. MSC program to provide electrical power for space shuttle was aimed at development of hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell with 5000-hr lifetime, 5000-w power output, and weight of 333 kg (735 lbs) or less. (MSC Release 70-66)
msc announced it was negotiating with Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. on $699 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for 18-mo study of space shuttle cryogenic systems. (MSC Release 70-110)
NASA selected McDonnell Douglas Corp. and NR Space Division to negotiate 11-mo, $8-million, fixed-price contracts for parallel definition and preliminary design studies of two-stage reusable space shuttle vehicle to transport crew, passengers, and cargo between earth and near space, msfc would manage McDonnell Douglas work and msc would manage NR work. (NASA Release 70-68)
msc and NR Space Div. announced selection of MesserschmittBoelkow-Blohm of Munich, West Germany, and bac of Bristol, England, to conduct subsystems studies for NASA’s space shuttle. In major step toward international cooperation in space. Messer-schmitt would study attitude-control system and bac would study structures, aerodynamics and flight-test instrumentation, and data handling under contracts financed by their governments. Work would be performed in Downey, Calif, (msc Release 70-98; NR Release NS-59)
Senate passed H.R. 19830, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill, which contained $3.269-billion NASA appropriation. As budgeted by NASA, appropriation allocated $678.7 million for research and program management, $25 million for construction of facilities, and $2,565 billion for R&D. Amendment proposed by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) to eliminate funds for space shuttle and station was rejected. Bill was cleared for President’s signature. (CR, 12/7/70, S19521-59; Conf Rpt 91-1345)
NASA issued RFPs for preliminary definition and planning studies for main propulsion system of reusable space shuttle. Preliminary concepts called for cluster of throttleable engines with 1780-kilonewton (400000-lb) thrust each at sea level, nr Rocketdyne Div., United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., Aerojet-General Corp., TRW Inc., Bell Aerospace Systems, and Marquardt Corp. would submit proposals by March 20. Three firms would be awarded fixed-price contracts for 11-mo parallel studies, (nasa Release 70-26)
msfc announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. and TRW Inc. for final negotiations leading to four contracts (two per company) totaling $1.2 million for space shuttle auxiliary propulsion system definition, (msfc Release 70-103)
MSFC announced issuance of rfps for study of inflight venting of space shuttle vehicles to identify areas of vehicle requiring venting, establish venting schemes, outline data requirements for venting analyses, and develop test program to analyze shuttle vehicles during launch and reentry. Proposals were due July 17. (MSFC Release 70-126)
Wall Street Journal editorial said Congressmen were “squabbling” over location of future NASA space shuttle base: “There’s a lot to be learned from the space shuttle, we have no doubt. The scientific results will be greatest, though, if NASA manages to locate the project where it can be managed most efficiently—and not merely where local Congressmen are most adept at gathering spoils.” (WSJ, 12/8/70)
NASA announced selection of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. for negotiations leading to eight-month, $250000, fixed-price contract for design study for “versatile upper stage” (vus), high-energy stage that would increase orbital capacity of current launch vehicles and could be used as expendable upper stage with space shuttle. (nasa Release 70-140)
Three of nine USAF volunteers began test at msc to determine man’s physiological tolerance to reentry loads expected on space shuttle missions. Subjects, whose reactions to shuttle reentry profile had been measured after 24 hrs rest Sept. 9-11 would rest in bed seven days before riding centrifuge in “eye balls down” reentry configurations at 2.5-g to 4.5-g levels for up to 6 min 10 secs to determine what effect prolonged “eye balls down” reentry acceleration would have on space shuttle crew members and passengers after long periods of weightlessness. Normal space shuttle reentry mode of MSC straightwing shuttle produced downward through-the-head acceleration as opposed to “eyeballsin” acceleration through the chest. (msc Release 70-94)
msc awarded ltv Aerospace Corp. Missiles and Space Div. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. $215 000, fixed-price contracts to conduct six-month parallel development studies of radiative nonmetallics for high-temperature heat protection on space shuttle, (msc Release 70-95)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Grumman Aerospace Corp., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and Chrysler Corp. for 11-mo Phase A (feasibility) contracts to study space shuttle concepts. Boeing Co. would be major subcontractor to Grumman on $4-million contract for three shuttle concepts: stage-and-a-half shuttle of reusable manned spacecraft with onboard propulsion system and droppable tanks for supplementary propellants; reusable orbiter with expendable booster; and reusable 1st stage using existing J-2S engine technology, solid-propellant auxiliary boosters, and reusable 2nd-stage orbital shuttle with J-2 engine. Lockheed’s $l-million fixed-price contract would define alternate stage-and-a-half shuttle system including high and low cross-range designs. Chrysler Corp. would study reusable vehicle capable of placing payload into earth orbit with single stage, under $750 000 contract. (nasa Release 70-97)
samso, Aerospace Corp., and NR Space Div. had completed study of solution to in-space emergencies involving near-orbiting spacecraft and space shuttle vehicles, AFSC announced. Study was based on requirements that space escape vehicle (sev) must perform all functions required for crew safety from decision to abandon spacecraft until successful recovery. In delayed return, ground station would supply data to aid selection of recovery site; sufficient oxygen and water to last 24 hrs after departure from spacecraft would be available. In “quick return,” life support would be provided for only six hours, sev would become autonomous following issue of “May Day” signal and would splash down without ground-based advice. Crew would plot recovery course using wristwatches and information indicating orbital paths for 24 hrs. Study recommended three kinds of escape vehicle: spherical heat shield, rigid vehicle thermally protected by ablative heat shield; rib-stiffened expandable vehicle which would function like umbrella; and two-man conical reentry vehicle like rubber raft, inflatable and made of double-wall fabric connected by woven drop threads, (afsc Release 137.70)
NASA announced award of $380 000 contract to Ralph M. Parsons Co. for engineering services in development of overall plan for space shuttle ground facilities. (NASA Release 70-165)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, at Key Biscayne press conference following release of President’s space message outlined NASA plans for “Grand Tour” missions in 1970s and space developments for next decade: “A strong effort in exploration, in science and in the practical application of space for the benefit of man here on Earth is laid out, with increasing emphasis on international cooperation.” Space shuttle and space station proposals contained reduction in cost of space activities and increase in man’s capability to travel back and forth and to work in space for long periods. Space shuttle would take off vertically; at 64-km (40-mi) altitude and 11 300 km per hr (7000 mph), 2nd stage would separate and carry 22.5-metric-ton (25-short-ton) payload of men, equipment, and supplies into earth orbit, with 1st stage returning to earth for horizontal landing. After mission of up to two weeks, 2nd stage would reenter atmosphere and land horizontally for reuse. President’s program of planetary exploration would “provide man with a closehand look of every planet in the solar system.” Administration placed “great emphasis. . .on the practical applications of space techniques, not only in communication satellites and weather satellites, but in new areas such as Earth resources satellites.” Dr. Paine saw as “most statesmanlike portion” of President’s statement “increasing recognition of the international participation of other nations in both the exploration and the utilization of space.” It was too early to report specific results of Dr. Paine’s visit to world’s space capitals but “there certainly is a very substantial interest overseas in utilizing more fully the American program as a means of closing the technology gap on the part of other nations and, at the same time, allowing them to participate in both the exploration and the utilization of space in the decades to come.” (Transcript)
NASA decision to search nationwide for suitable site for launching $6billion space shuttle had stirred “anguished complaints from Florida politicians and other proponents of Cape Kennedy,” Wall Street Journal said. But NASA experts had insisted shuttle’s unique characteristics and estimated $200-million to $400-million cost of complex ground equipment made search essential. While Cape Kennedy was “leading launch-site candidate,” other possibilities included FRC, wsmr, and Dugway Proving Ground in Utah. Essential requirement was flat area for landing shuttle, with several alternate landing locations in case of emergency. Cape Kennedy was not equipped for shuttle landings and lacked facilities to support plane-like flight through atmosphere. (Spivak, WSJ, 12/3/70, 36)
