Award of $112 000 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for visual system definition study leading to development of space shuttle mission simulator was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center, (msc Release 72-92)
Atomic Energy Commission was “encouraging” NASA to examine cost of permanent removal from environment of wastes from atomic plants by “shooting these high-level radioactive wastes into the sun—taking them right out of the world,” Dr. James R. Schlesinger, AEC Chairman, said in interview published by U.S. News & World Report. Method would “depend on development of the space shuttle ... a decade away.” (US News, 2/14/72, 46-51)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced contract award and issuance of requests for proposals for work on space shuttle. One-year, $99 985, firm-fixed-price contract went to Lowey/Snaith, Inc., to study methods for making space shuttle orbiter interior pleasant environment for working and living. RFPs were for design study for orbiter’s orbital maneuvering system (oms). Firm selected would receive one-year, $250 000 firm-fixed-price contract, (msc Releases 72-29, 72-30)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) in press release called for “full and open debate” on space shuttle development issue, “leading to the rejection of this wasteful program.” It was “typical” that Nixon Administration “can squander $6.5 billion to fly four people into orbit when it refuses to invest less than one-third that amount to provide desperately needed day care and development programs for millions of children.” Space shuttle was “many timbs worse than SST” in “magnitude of its cost, in the folly of its concept and in its damage to the country.” (Text)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced contract activity: trw Systems Group had received two study contracts totaling $134 160, one for safety criteria study for space shuttle sortie payload and one for payload systems compatibility criteria study, both to be concluded by May 18, 1973. Grumman Aerospace Corp. had received $248 500 contract to study and develop test samples of closed pore insulation for possible thermal use on space shuttle orbiter. (msc Releases 72-124, 72-125)
Among strongest arguments for funding space shuttle was its great military usefulness, D. J. R. Bruckner said in Washington Post column. Argument might persuade Congress, “but do they really need another weapon?” Shuttle’s greatest use would be “as a tool supporting research, including the construction and maintenance ... of a research station on the moon’s surface.” But that was insufficient reason for Congress. “If they cannot convince themselves that it will help destroy something, they won’t put up the money for it.” Apollo program had destroyed nothing. “It only added a cubit to the stature of every American in the eyes of mankind, . . . benefited the understanding, the imagination and the spirit of humanity . . . [and] opened up enormously fruitful areas of knowledge about how the world we live in was formed and how it works.” (W Post, 4/22/72, A14)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of 18-mo, $238 000, costplus-fixed-fee contract to United Aircraft Corp. Hamilton Standard Div. to design and build prototype waste collection system—usable by both males and females—for space shuttle orbiter. (msc Release 72168) During July:	U.S.S.R. launched Salyut spacecraft which failed to achieve orbit, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Magazine said spacecraft penetrated atmosphere, where it was detected by over-the-horizon radars. One of two 2nd-stage engines stopped firing early; second stopped at end of programmed firing time with fuel remaining. (Av Week, 4/9/73, 21)	_
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of 10-mo, $98 000 contract extension to Martin Marietta Corp. Denver Div. for continued design of crew compartment configured for space shuttle, which would be tested in neutral buoyancy t&nk. Extension brought total value of contract to $173 670. (msc Release 72-161)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $92 800 firm-fixed-price contract to General Dynamics Corp. Convair Aerospace Div. to study effect jet thrusters would have on aerodynamics of space shuttle orbiter during reentry. Study would help in determining best configuration for orbiter’s reaction control system, (msc Release 72—173)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $407 630 to General Electric Space Div. for development of checkout system for space shuttle software. GE would develop system specifications, computer program compatible with msc system, procedural documents, and demonstration plan; would document results; and would demonstrate system, (msc Release 72-21)
Signing of $125 000 firm-fixed-price contract with Florida Operations of Honeywell, Inc., St. Petersburg, for study of inertial measurement unit program for space shuttle orbiter was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Honeywell would develop alternative approaches to allow NASA to assess feasibility of adapting existing units for space shuttle. (msc Release 72—132)	.
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and Japanese government were discussing production in Japan of twin-engine version of Lockheed TriStar transport aircraft, Wall Street Journal reported. McDonnell Douglas had proposed production in Japan of smaller-version DC-10.	(WSJ, 8/22/72, 8) August 23:	Republican National Platform for science and technology was published by Washington Evening Star and Daily News: “We will place special emphasis on these areas in which break-throughs are needed: Abundant, clean energy sources; safe, fast and pollution-free transportation; improved emergency health care; reduction of loss of life, health, and property in natural disasters; rehabilitation of alcoholics and addicts to dangerous drugs. We will press ahead with the space shuttle program to replace today’s expendable launch vehicles and provide low-cost access to space for a wide variety of missions, including those related to earth resources.” (W Star & News, 8/23/72, A10)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $299250 contract to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. to study and develop program for weld-bonding materials for space shuttle, (msc Release 72-55)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $226 256 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study system for handling space shuttle cargo in space. MSC engineers envisioned manipulators to handle payloads in shuttle orbiter as being 9-12 m (30-40 ft) long, electrically powered, and free-moving like human limbs, (msc Release 72-189; Av Wk, 9/18/72, 9)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on scientific forecasts that earth’s surface would become too hot for habitation in 4 billion yrs: “While we work on problems of more immediate concern, let’s not scrimp on the space shuttle. Down the line a few billion years, they may think well of us for that.” {LA Times, 8/18/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of requests for proposals for development of concepts, construction of hardware, and testing of thrust chamber for space shuttle orbit maneuver engine (ome). Two firms would be selected, each to receive one-year, $275 000, firm-fixed-price parallel contract, (msc Release 72-33)
Newspaper editorials commented on President Nixon’s decision to develop space shuttle. Washington Post said arguments for or against shuttle were not “error free” since “major ones rest on projections into the future which are exceedingly difficult to make and others rest on basically undemonstrable assumptions about the quest for knowledge. Part of the difficulty springs from the fact that no one can know what space-based research will discover. Is the key to the hydrogen atom and thus to unlimited energy out there . . .? Will the world some day need to import minerals from space to sustain life here? Will man have to be in space to accomplish things such as these or can machines do them all? Above all, where does this kind of program fit in a national budget that cannot provide for doing all the things at home that ought to be done?” Such questions would make debate over space shuttle “different in character and significance from last year’s debate over the sst.” Standards applied to “project which involves scientific research and military considerations . . . must be somewhat different from those applied to a project, such as the sst, which involved only another way to move people from place to place.” (W Post, 1/14/72, A22) Houston Post: “With the last Apollo moon flight scheduled later this year and the Skylab project to terminate in 1973, the shuttle holds the key to an on-going space program. Our failure to build it would indicate our lagging interest in space research to the possible detriment of future cooperation with the Russians in this field. It is true that we have important social priorities which need attention, but our space research posture in relation to the Soviet Union, whether competitive or cooperative, also carries a high priority.” (H Post, 1/14/72)
New York News editorial commented on space shuttle decision: “We would like to see the U.S. taking on, too, some of the more exciting space challenges that could be achieved with America’s present knowhow. But at least Mr. Nixon has furnished assurance that he will keep the U.S. in the space business. We can be thankful for that at a time when undeserved abuse is being heaped on the whole program by people who prefer to shut out the beckoning glitter of the stars so they can concentrate on the mud at their feet.” (NY News, 1/9/72)
Flying model of winged shuttle orbiter by erno Raumfahrt-technik GmbH of West Germany would be air-launched during year to study subsonic dynamic stability, Spaceflight reported. Program, begun in mid-1960s by Federal German Ministry for Education and Science, had led to development of small pilotless flight model called Bumerang, which made first unguided flight off Heligoland Aug. 12, 1971. Research to date by erno specialists, participating with space shuttle team led by McDonnell Douglas Corp. of TJ.S. had been on winged (nonlifting body) orbiter models at German Research and Test Establishment for Aviation and Spaceflight. (SF, 8/72, 301)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $365 000 contract supplement to LTV Aerospace Corp. for work on space shuttle orbiter thermal-protection system using reinforced pyrolyzed plastic. Supplement brought total funding for work to be done by April 20, 1973, to $859 000. (msc Release 72-171)
New York Times published response by Univ. of Michigan astronomer James A. Loudon to Jan. 16 letter in which former scientist-astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary questioned compatibility of space shuttle with national goals. O’Leary letter had been “strange document from a man who wrote a whole book to complain that scientists don’t have access to space.” Shuttle’s most important aspect, “aside from its economy,” was its ability to carry passengers. “For the first time, scientists will be able to perform experiments in space without spending years in irrelevant pilot training first.” Shuttle’s effect would be “to make space very much more available, with results for a dozen different branches of science that are now incalculable.” (NYT, 3/28/72)	_
Award of $168 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. for design study of low-density ablative materials was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Materials could be used to protect space shuttle orbiter from heat, (msc Release 72-117)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of requests for proposals to 13 aerospace firms to study, design, and test polymer seal materials for storing space shuttle propellants. Firm selected would receive $100 000, firm-fixed-price contract, (msc Release 72-43)
McDonnell Douglas Corp. announced in St. Louis that it was laying off 11 000 employees in next 17 mos, largely because of its failure to win prime contract for space shuttle. President and Chief Executive Officer Sanford N. McDonnell said 260 employees would he laid off immediately and that by year’s end figure would reach 6000. Most of 11 000 layoffs—perhaps 9800—would be from California divisions of company that employed total of 92 000 persons. (Andelman, NYT, 8/3/72, 43)	:
House by vote of 367 to 10 passed H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that included $3.349-billion NASA appropriation [see May 18]. House rejected amendment by Rep. Rella S. Abzug (D-N.Y.) to delete $200 million for space shuttle. (CR, 5/23/72, H4896-924)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced renegotiation and extension of thermal protection contract with LTV Aerospace Corp. for advanced development of reinforced pyrolyzed plastics to protect space shuttle orbiter. About $493 500 would be added to previous funding for total study cost of $767 500. (msc Release 72-121)
General Accounting Office released Cost-Benefit Analysis Used in Support of the Space Shuttle Program (B-173677). Review of analysis prepared for NASA by Mathematica, Inc., and used by NASA to justify shuttle development economics, had been requested by shuttle-foe Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.). GAO said it had “worked with estimates received from Mathematica for two representative configurations of the space shuttle,” solid-fuel and liquid-fuel reusable-booster shuttles; “made computations using NASA’s cost model developed by Mathematica to show the effect of increasing or decreasing selected critical areas within their plausible boundaries”; and “found that the two configurations were economically justified in terms of the 10-percent investment criterion proposed by Mathematica as the hasis for evaluating the Space Shuttle Program.” Investment criterion used was “space transportation system having the lowest total space program cost, considering the time value of money.” Use of criterion required selection of discount rate to consider time value of money. Mathematica had proposed 10% discount rate. (Text)
Washington Evening Star editorial supported space shuttle development: “Congress should go along with this proposed investment, knowing that if the country’s highly efficient space organization is killed, it will not easily be revived. There is still much work to be done on those peaceful cosmic frontiers that can spread many benefits and much inspiration on this troubled earth.” (W Star, 1/26/72, A17)
Extension of McDonnell Douglas Corp. contract for design study of space shuttle orbiter auxiliary propulsion systems to include study of earth-storable propellants was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Extension increased contract value to $576 000 and carried it through Oct. 15, 1972. (msc Release 72-101)
European Space Research Organization would use preliminary definition study of sortie laboratory for space shuttle application as basis for future negotiations with nasa, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Study, to be performed by Dornier, was part of European effort to participate in post-Apollo program. (Av Wk, 10/30/72, 9)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of two requests for proposals for space shuttle heating contracts. One request was for design study of ablative materials with low density to protect space shuttle orbiter and one was for design and construction of heating unit to produce high temperatures for testing materials used externally on shuttle, (msc Releases 72-24, 72-25)
Manned Spacecraft Center awarded two parallel, firm-fixed-price contracts for study of aircraft that could simulate subsonic flight characteristics of space shuttle orbiter. Grumman Aerospace Corp. would receive $150 000 and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Georgia Div. would receive $149 000 to provide sufficient data to assure NASA that proposed shuttle training aircraft was technically feasible and acceptable and that recommended design could meet specified requirements, (msc Release 72-147)
Apparent U.S. decision not to seek European participation in shuttle development was discussed by Nicholas Valery in British publication New Scientist: “By all accounts it seems that just as Britain and her continental partners were deciding whether to accept America’s invitation to join the post-Apollo space programme, Washington has slammed the door smartly in their face. Having used the idea of international participation—ostensibly to ease the burden on the US taxpayer—as a means of winning congressional support for its re-usable space shuttle, NASA is now quietly letting it be known that it has no intention of letting Europe get its hands on anything technologically important.” (New Scientist [London], 7/6/72)
