Two European space consortiums were in competition to develop the manned spacelab to be flown on the U.S. space shuttle, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Groups led by ERNO—VFW—Fokker and Messerschmitt-Boeklow-Blohm GmbH were in Phase B studies to define Spacelab (sortie lab) costs and configurations. The studies would end in July to allow the European Space Research Organization to decide on supporting Spacelab development. ERNO planned to offer two Spacelab configurations. One would be certain of meeting the established cost criteria. The second would be more expensive but technically more advanced. The MBB system used a common support system of a single module housing all general-purpose subsystems, with separate individual payload systems inserted as needed. Scientific payloads could be prepared independently of launch cycle constraints. One set of payload experiments could return to earth and another set be slid into place within two weeks. (Av Wk, 4/9/73, 22)
The Manned Spacecraft Center had awarded a shuttle contract to Charles S. Draper Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the MSC Roundup reported. The Laboratory had received a $1 375 484 cost-no-fee contract to provide technical support for guidance, navigation, and control subsystems in space shuttle program, (msc Roundup, 2/16/73, 1)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. announced the award of a $30million-plus subcontract to ltv Aerospace Corp. Vought Systems Div. to design and develop the leading-edge structural subsystem of the space shuttle orbiter’s thermal protection system. Final details were being negotiated. (ri Release SP—45)
NASA announced selection of Martin Marietta Corp. for negotiation of a $ 107-million cost-plus-award-fee contract for the design, development, test, and evaluation of the space shuttle external tank. The development phase would include fabrication of three ground-test tanks and six developmental flight tanks. The contract would run through 1978. (nasa Release 73-163)
NASA announced the selection of Grumman Aerospace Corp. for negotiation of a contract to modify two Gulf stream II aircraft for crew trainers for the space shuttle orbiter, The contractor’s proposed cost was $19.5 million, (nasa Release 73—278)
The Senate Committee on Appropriations reported H.R. 8825, FY 1974 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans appropriation bill that included a $3.002-billion NASA appropriation, $13 million above the $2.989-billion version passed by the House June 22. The bill increased the appropriation for construction of facilities from $89 million to $101 million, including $56.3 million for space shuttle facilities at various locations. (CR, 6/28/73, D771; S Rpt 93-272)
Contractor project definition and cost (Phase B2) studies were begun in Europe on the European Space Research Organization (esro) Spacelab (sortie lab) for NASA’s space shuttle. (NASA Release 73-191)
Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass.), Chairman of the House Committee on Appropriations Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans, introduced H.R. 8825, FY 1974 HUD-Space-Science-Veterans appropriation bill that included a $2.989-billion NASA appropriation—$2,194 billion for research and development, $87.8 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. The bill would cut NASA’s requested $2,197 billion for r&d by $3 million and the $112 million requested for construction of facilities by $24.2 million. Research and program management funding would remain at NASA’s requested $707 million. The Subcommittee had reduced NASA’s requested $28 million for supersonic flight research to $11.7 million; strongly urged NASA to continue advanced nuclear technology development “within the total funds provided in this appropriation”; urged NASA to reprogram funds to launch ERTS—B as early as possible if the malfunction in Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23, 1972) continued to degrade performance; urged continued development of the quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft “to insure American competitiveness in this largely underdeveloped area of commercial aviation”; and allocated $2.5 million to replace NASA’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft (lost in an April 12 mid-air collision). Reductions in construction of facilities funding would defer amounts for space shuttle facilities construction. (CR, 6/19/73, H4994, H Rpt 93296)
NASA released to industry a request for proposals for design, development, and production of the space shuttle external tank. Invited to bid were McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., and Martin Marietta Corp.’s Aerospace Div. (nasa Release 73-64)
Four seven-year subcontracts totaling $140 million for the design and fabrication of major structural components for the space shuttle orb iter were awarded by Rockwell International Corp. Fairchild Hiller Corp. received a $13-million contract for the design and fabrication of the vertical tail. Grumman Aerospace Corp. received a $40-million contract to design and build the double delta orbiter wing. Convair Aerospace Div. of General Dynamics Corp. was awarded a $40-million contract to build the mid-fuselage that formed the payload bay section. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. received a $50-million contract to design and build the orbital maneuvering system that would aid in orbital circularization and change and in rendezvous and deorbit maneuvers. (ri Release SP—17)
Award of a $19 500 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for design, construction, and testing of an electromagnetic pulse simulator for testing large aircraft systems was announced by the Air Force, (dod Release 190-73) April 16-17:	A joint meeting on the space shuttle Sortie Lab/Spacelab Project at Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center was attended by 20 representatives of the European Space Research Organization (esro) , European Space Research and Technology Center (estec), and European space consortiums headed by Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH and erno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH. The group was briefed by NASA on the space shuttle and Skylab programs, concept verification testing, and the msfc sortie lab activities. The consortiums presented a summary of European Spacelab studies, (msfc Release 7344)	. Dr. Bruce Murray, Cal Tech astronomer and principal TV investigator of the Mariner 9 mission (launched May 30, 1971), disputed the theory that ancient floods on Mars had carved the huge canyons shown in the Mariner 9 photos. “Mars’ atmosphere, which, at present, is only one-hundredth as dense as the earth’s, very probably never has been dense enough for water to run on the planet’s surface.” There might have been times “when Mars had virtually no atmosphere at all.” (NYT, 4/22/73, 31; Swaim, Pasadena Star-News, 4/22/73) April 17:	NASA announced the signing of a definitive contract with Rockwell International Corp.’s Space Div. for design, development, and production of the orbiter vehicle and for the integration of all space shuttle system elements.-The cost-reimbursement, fixed-fee, and award-fee contract would have a $477 400 000 initial increment. The contract superseded an Aug. 9, 1972, letter contract and would continue through Aug. 3, 1974. A second work increment—the balance of design, development, test, and evaluation, plus delivery of two orbiters—was planned to begin Aug. 4, 1974. Rockwell planned to subcontract to firms and suppliers in almost every state. (NASA Release 73-76)
Chairman Maurice M. Levy of the European Space Research Organization Council described steps to complete plans for European participation in the space shuttle program, during FY 1974 nasa authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “The ESRO Council has already approved the text of an agreement laying down the arrangements under which the Spacelab [sortie lab] will be developed, first in esro and subsequently within the European Space Agency which, in conformity with the decisions taken in Brussels, is expected to be set up in 1974. This agreement is open for signature between March 1 and the end of July. It will probably be implemented very shortly.” A technical agreement would have to be negotiated between nasa and esro as to Spacelab’s procurement and its integration into the space shuttle. A second agreement between governments would be necessary to cover commitments for nonduplication of efforts, the possibility of transferring technology to other European programs, access to the whole shuttle system, and the availability of conventional launch vehicles. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), nasa Director of Facilities, testified that the $8.9-million budget request for space shuttle facility planning—in addition to $67.2 million for shuttle facility modification projects—included studies, engineering support, and preliminary engineering reports for upcoming projects and the final design for the pending FY 1975 facility needs. “This specific final design, when accomplished, will essentially complete facility design for the shuttle ground test program, the early and initial phase of Solid Rocket Booster (srb) production and test facilities,” and the pads and mobile launchers at the Kennedy Space Center. (Transcript; Text) *	Microwave measurements of the atmosphere of Venus were described by Univ. of California scientists in Science. Two sets of passive radio observations—measurements of the spectrum of the disc temperature near the 1-cm wavelength and interferometric measurements of the planetary limb darkening at the 1.35-cm water vapor resonance—had shown no evidence of water vapor in the lower atmosphere of Venus. The upper limit for the mixing ratio of water vapor to dry air was substantially less than the amounts derived from the Venus probes. The amount of water vapor could not produce dense clouds nor contribute significantly to a greenhouse effect. (Janssen et al., Science, 3/9/73, 994-996)
U.S. technological progress had proceeded “almost without interruption” during 70 yrs of flight, Marquis Childs said in his Washington Post column. The doubters had “always been proven wrong.” In astronautics, Skylab was continuing successfully and work was progressing on the space shuttle. “As for the scientific benefits, perhaps only a few specialists can give a proper evaluation. Rut the cynics who spoke derisively of spending billions to put some clown in the sky are wrong on several scores.” The aircraft production record was equally impressive. In 1972 the U.S. had made 79% of the aircraft being operated by the world’s airlines, exclusive of the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of China. The achievements in U.S. production, discovery, and invention were “in painful contrast to the failures in self-government illustrated by the grim mess in Washington, It may not be too much to say that if we find a way out of the morass, the swamp of intrigue, deceit and doubt, it will be thanks to American productivity.” The Smithsonian Institution’s new Air and Space Museum was to be dedicated July 4, 1976. “That no one can predict what manner of man will preside over thi occasion is a melancholy commentary on the gap between technology and politics.” (W Post, 10/9/73) October 9—12:	A radical new growth hormone theory evolved from Ames Research Center studies was introduced by arc scientist Dr. Richard E. Grindeland during a Raltimore, Md,, symposium on growth hormones. Dr. Grindeland’s theory that the growth hormone in blood was chemically different from that in the pituitary gland had originated from arc research to determine effects of physiological stresses like acceleration, simulated weightlessness, chemical agents, thermal extremes, and nutritional status on the human body. The theory, which the symposium suggested would have profound effect on the understanding of growth hormone physiology, showed that radio immunological methods detected only a minute fraction of the concentration of growth hormone in the blood, (arc Astrogram, 10/25/73, 1) Release 73—143; ksc Release 238—73; Marshall Star, 10/3/73, 1; MSFC PAO)
The return payload limit on the space shuttle orbiter had been increased 28%, up from 11 300 kg to 14 500 kg (from 25 000 lbs to 32 000 lbs), following system analysis by Rockwell International Corp., Aviation Week & Spcwe Technology reported. The increase could be made without modifying the orbiter structure, by permitting the orbiter to land at a faster speed, and without exceeding the 68 000-kg (150 000-lb) liftoff weight limit. The orbital payload limit remained 29 500 kg (65 000 lbs) in easterly orbits and 13 600 (30 000 lbs) in polar orbits. (Av Wk, 11/5/73, 9; nasa omsf)
