Rockwell International Corp. Space Division, prime contractor for the space shuttle orbiter, signed a $16.5-million supplemental agreement with NASA. This 27th supplemental agreement since the contract was awarded 9 Aug. 1972 brought the estimated contract value to *$995 million. It incorporated authorization for sneak circuit analysis, vertical flight-test support, midfuselage mockups, integration of all shuttle elements, and other changes. (jsc Release 74-258)
NASA announced the award of a $483 000 000, costplusfixedandaward-fee supplemental contract and 11-mo contract extension to Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. for development of the space shuttle orbiter and integration of all elements of the shuttle system. The supplement brought the total value of the contract, which would continue through 30 June 1975, to $943 248 000. Rockwell was to subcontract more than 50% of the dollar value of the contract. (NASA Release 74-195)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. to negotiate a twoyear, $13.2-million, cost-plus-award fee contract to support the space shuttle program in system analysis; avionics system engineering; mission planning, analysis, and software formulation; computer systems and software; and crew procedures and flight planning, (nasa Release 74-83)
Lockheed-California Co. had received a $25-million letter contract from Rockwell International Corp. for structural testing of the space shuttle orbiter, the Huntsville Times reported. (Huntsville Times, 12 Sept 74)
Martin Marietta Corp. had been awarded a $26 453 600 NASA contract for support of the external tank effort of the space shuttle program, NASA announced. The consolidated facilities contract, which would run through 31 Aug. 1978, provided for acquisition of plant equipment at Michoud Assembly Facility, rehabilitation of existing facilities, and construction, modification, maintenance, and repair of facilities, (nasa Release 74239)
Permanent nasa employment had decreased 4.2% during FY 1974, dropping from 25 955 to 24 854 employees, NASA’s Office of Personnel reported. Despite a numerical decrease of 470, employment in professional occupations had risen to 61.4% of the NASA total. The minority component increased to 6%. The increase in average age slowed to 0.2 year, reaching 42.7 years, while the average GS grade remained the same at 11.0. The 2358 separations were almost twice as many as the 1246 accessions, with most of the reduction-in-force separations occurring in technical support, wage grade, and clerical occupations, (nasa, “The In-house Work Force,” FY 1974) During June: NASA began “Outlook for Space,” a comprehensive planning study to identify potential roles for space exploration and exploitation 1980-2000. The year-long study, headed by Deputy Director Donald P. Hearth of Goddard Space Flight Center, would seek to relate goals of potential civilian space activities to national interests, to develop a list of desirable and practical U.S. civilian space activities, to group activities with specific sets of goals, to define research and development tasks required for potential commercial and operational uses of space, and to identify social and economic challenges that could benefit from the use of space. NASA would consult representatives from universities, other Government agencies, and' industry. The study would supplement “The 1973 NASA Payload Model” planning effort, which had evaluated potential uses of the space shuttle, space tug, and Spacelab and which had been completed in October 1973. The new study would continue through June 1975. (NASA Activities, 15 Sept 74, 2-6; gsfc proj off, interview, 17 July 74)
A standardized solar-electric propulsion stage (seps) that could become part of a space transportation system for payloads in planetary and earth-orbital missions was under study at Marshall Space Flight Center, seps, one of several concepts under study, would be able to accept modules such as a docking subsystem for earth-orbital missions or a science package for planetary missions. Another concept, for an attachable SEP module, would provide propulsion only and depend on spacecraft subsystems for all other functions, seps would carry a cluster of six to nine thrusters, fueled by ionized mercury, and two lightweight 27-m solar-array wings to supply 25 kw of power to the thrusters and payloads. It was being designed for use with the space shuttle and space tug, and application of an attachable Sep module to a Mariner spacecraft was being studied. The tug, supplemented by seps, would be able to deploy and retrieve a 2500-kg geosynchronous equatorial payload in 100 days, tripling the amount the unaided tug could deliver. After one delivery, the seps could continue to operate between the shuttle orbit and intermediate orbits, delivering and retrieving 20 more payloads before the thruster life was used up. (nasa Release 74r-38; NASA omsf, interview)
The space shuttle had no imaginable use which could not be met more cheaply and expeditiously by rockets already in existence, columnist Nicholas von Hoffman charged in the Washington Post. Of the justifications for the space shuttle program, one of “the most persuasive is the large amounts of money that will be pumped” into an ailing economy. However, “it would be difficult to think up a more inflationary way to provide jobs for people.” (W Post, 8 July 74) '
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had signed a protocol agreement in Moscow with the U.S.S.R. on possible future cooperation, including development of civilian transports and helicopters, air traffic control, and navigation and communications systems, Lockheed announced. The protocol was one of 20 agreements the U.S.S.R. signed with U.S. companies. (Lockheed Release, 30 Jan 74) 30 January—4 February: Two representatives of the 10-nation European Space Research Organization that would develop and build Spacelab for use with NASA’s space shuttle accompanied U.S. scientists on the Ames Research Center’s Galileo II Convair 990 aircraft on flights evaluating electronic instruments designed to measure sea conditions. Dr. D. J. Shapland of the United Kingdom and J. De Waard of The Netherlands observed the flying laboratory, which would serve as a pattern for shuttle sortie missions carrying Spacelab. Spacelab was to have two elements: a manned laboratory module permitting scientists and engineers to work in a shirt-sleeve environment and an instrument platform, or pallet, for telescopes, antenna, and other equipment requiring space exposure, (nasa Release 74-31; arc Aerospace Sci Div, interview, 17 July 74)
NASA announced selection of International Business Machines Corp. for an fill-million, two-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to design, develop, and implement a ground-based computing and data-processing system for the space shuttle and other programs. (NASA Release 74-132)
The Army was issuing a $1 988 000 firm-fixed-price contract to Algernon Blair Industrial Contractors, Inc., for modifications to orbiter propulsion system test facilities for space shuttle engine testing at NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility, the Dept, of Defense announced, (dod Release 59—74)
Astronaut-physician Dr. F. Story Musgrave and Dr. Dennis R. Morrison of Johnson Space Center’s Bioscience Payloads Office spent one week in a mockup Spacelab at JSC in a shakedown' test of operational procedures and experiments. Spacelab, a scientific space laboratory, was being developed and built by the European Space Research Organization for orbital missions aboard NASA’s space shuttle. A rehearsal for future tests and a means of perfecting operational procedures, this first test also evaluated proposed space shuttle ground support and flight crew operational procedures, data-handling techniques, man-machine integration, and biomedical demonstrations representative of Spacelab medical experiments, (jsc Release 74-255; jsc Roundup, 11 Oct 74, 1)
Skyrocketing fuel prices had added almost $1.5 billion to the cost of producing aluminum, titanium, and magnesium, threatening serious inflation for military aircraft programs and NASA’s space shuttle, the Washington Post reported. The price of aluminum had jumped from 6.5 cents for a half kilogram to 31.5 cents in the preceding six months. One aerospace company was quoted as telling the Pentagon and NASA that the rising aluminum prices would increase its program costs 16%. Grumman Aircraft Corp. had said it was paying 25% more for titanium and aluminum than one year ago. Grumman manufactured six models of aircraft, including the Navy’s F-14, which used more titanium than any other aircraft. Rockwell International Corp. had raised the estimated delivery cost of each of its B-l bombers from $45 million to $61.5 million, at least partly because of soaring aluminum and titanium prices. Each B-l required 12 000 kg of titanium and 24 000 kg of aluminum. (O’Toole, W Post, 8 May 74)
