Rockwell International Corp., prime contractor for the Space Shuttle, announced selection of Consolidated Controls for a $1.5-million contract to provide high- and low-pressure helium valves for the Shuttle Orbiter reaction-control system (RCS). The valves would control helium output in the RCS propellant tanks, serving as a manifold shutoff valve in the vernier engine and as a low-pressure helium shutoff valve. (Rockwell Release SP—29)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. announced the award of an estimated $1 million subcontract to the United Technologies Corp. Hamilton Standard Div. to build the flash evaporator subsystem, a part of the Space Shuttle Orbiter’s environmental control and life-support system. The evaporator would use excess heat generated by Orbiter subsystems to turn water from the spacecraft’s three power-producing fuel cells into steam vented into space, handling as much as 60 kg of water per hr. (United Aircraft became UTC in May.) Rockwell held the prime contract with NASA to build the Orbiter and . integrate the complete Space Shuttle system. The evaporator subsystem contract was the third of three contracts totaling more than $27 million awarded to Hamilton. Under previously awarded subcontracts, Hamilton was also developing the Orbiter’s atmospheric revitalization subsystem, Freon coolant loop, water boiler hydraulic thermal-control unit, and ground-support equipment hydraulic cart. (Rockwell Int’l Space Div Release SP—17)
The first set of wings for NASA’s Space Shuttle Orbiter began an 18-day land and water journey from Grumman Aerospace Corp.’s facility in New York to Palmdale, Calif., for final assembly with the Orbiter. The two wing panels, each 9 m long from tip to fuselage and 18 m wide at the fuselage edge, would travel aboard transporters specially designed to be pulled by a truck—at 16 km per hr—or loaded onto an ocean-going container ship. From New York the wings would make a 13-day trip through the Panama Canal to Long Beach, Calif., and then travel overland to Palmdale. The double-delta aluminum wings had been designed, manufactured, and tested by Grumman under a $40 million subcontract awarded by the prime Space Shuttle contractor, Rockwell International Corp., in March 1973. (JSC Release 75—38)
NASA announced selection of Martin Marietta Aerospace for a $22.8 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for checkout, control, and monitoring of subsystem hardware for the Space Shuttle launch processing system (LPS). Martin would design, fabricate, test, and install hardware for the subsystem, composed of hardware assemblies communicating directly with computers and with flight and ground equipment of the Space Shuttle. The LPS was designed to use automated and modular techniques to meet Space Shuttle launch, maintenance, and refurbishment requirements. (NASA Release 75—219)
NASA Life Sciences Director, Dr. David L. Winter, issued an invitation to scientists to help plan NASA’s future life sciences program in space. The invitation, sent to 30 000 biological scientists in the U.S., said that NASA was considering a series of manned laboratories staffed by scientists, engineers, and technicians to be launched aboard the Space Shuttle. One entire lab devoted to life-science experimentation would be launched every 6 mo. Other small highly automated life-science experiments could be performed during Spacelab and Space Shuttle missions dedicated to other disciplines; NASA estimated that as many as 200 life-science flight experiments could be conducted in space during the 1980s. The invitation stated that “in order to take maximum advantage of future research opportunities, NASA intends to involve a large cross section of the Life Sciences community in shaping scientific program objectives, in selecting spacecraft laboratory equipment, and in the planning and execution of Flight Experiments.” NASA estimated that approximately 200 scientists could participate as principal investigators of future flight experiments and that 50 of those could perform their research in space as crew members. As part of the first phase of the life-science program, NASA requested that interested scientists suggest general topics for future research and identify equipment needed to carry out life-science investigations. (Winter letter, text; NASA Release 75-140; UPI, ATT, 9 May 75, 7)
The aft fuselage for Space Shuttle Orbiter 101 arrived at Rockwell International Corp.’s Palmdale, Calif., assembly facility after a 160-km truck journey from Rockwell’s Downey plant. The aft fuselage joined the midfuselage, vertical tail, and wing panels delivered earlier by Rockwell subcontractors. The forward fuselage was due in Palmdale in October, with rollout of the first orbiter scheduled for the third quarter of 1976. Approach and landing tests would begin during the second quarter of 1977. (JSC Roundup, 12 Sept 75, 4)
The Space Shuttle was, in many ways, the “ultimate recycling program,” Robert Anderson, president and chief executive officer of Rockwell International Corp. said on Transportation Day at the Canadian National Exhibition in Toronto. Anderson said that the Shuttle program, with its international scope and emphasis on reusability, was the first major step toward economical and effective use of space. More advanced Shuttle-launched satellites Would benefit the world by aiding crop control; locating new sources of minerals and fossil fuels; monitoring weather, pollution, and localized disasters such as oil slicks and forest fires; mapping oceans and urban areas; and improving communications. “For the job of transportation is not just to move people and goods from point to point—it is to also move history forward by enabling the pioneers to explore the new frontiers and by enabling society to capitalize on their discoveries.” (Text; Rockwell Inti Release R—42)
West Germany was studying the possibility of purchasing a Spacelab pressurized module for use on the U.S. Space Shuttle, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. The German Spacelab would be configured for research in space processing, a field of considerable interest to Germany. Its missions on Spacelab, launched by NASA aboard the Space Shuttle on a cost-reimbursable basis, would be separate from missions conducted by the European Space Research Organization. {Av Wk, 21 April 75, 27)
Rockwell International Corp., holder of the prime contract with NASA to build the Space Shuttle Orhiter, announced that more than $109 million in subcontracts for the Space Shuttle main engine had been awarded by the Rocketdyne Div. since work on the engine began 3 yr ago. Figures to date showed that firms in 40 states were participating in the Space Shuttle program. Rockwell reported that Space Shuttle development would funnel an estimated $5 billion into the U.S. economy by 1978 and create employment for approximately 50 000 workers. (Rockwell Int’l Release RO—9)
NASA announced the award of a $2 376 400 contract to Reinhold Construction Co. for phase 2 of the Space Shuttle landing facility, including the landing aids control building, Orbiter landing instrumentation facilities, and related communications and utility systems. Phase 2 was scheduled for completion by the end of 1976. Phase 1, which began in April 1974 as a $21 812 737 contract with Morrison Knudsen Co., included construction of the 4570-m-long, 91-m-wide runway, towway apron, and towway. Site preparation was nearing completion and the paving with nearly 200 000 cu m of cement would begin in July. Phase 1 was scheduled for completion by the summer of 1976. (KSC Release 62— 75)
NASA and Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. had signed a $1.8-billion supplemental agreement for the follow-on development of the Space Shuttle Orbiter, NASA announced. The agreement formally incorporated into an existing contract awarded for Orbiter design, development, and test and evaluation, the construction of Orbiters 101 and 102, approach and landing tests, and six orbital flight tests. The supplemental agreement for the additional work brought the value of the Rockwell contract to more than $2.7 billion. (NASA Release 75—266; JSC Release 75—90)
The preliminary design review of Space Shuttle Orbiter 102 for the first manned orbital flight was completed on schedule. (NASA Gen Mgmt Rev Rpt, 17 March 75, 39)
DOD announced the award of a $3 500 000 firm-fixed-price contract to TRW, Inc., for software support of the Space Shuttle. (DOD Release 83-75)
Approximately 31 000 contractor personnel in 47 states were current .at work on the development of the Space Shuttle, NASA announced. That number was expected to increase to 34 000 by June and to reach a maximum of 50 000 persons within 2 yr. (NASA Release 75-63)
NASA Black Brant VC sounding rockets would be used to carry materials-processing experiments as a low-cost way of expanding observations made during the 1973—1974 Skylab missions, NASA announced. Three flights a year aboard the sounding rockets were planned from 1975 through 1980 to provide a better understanding of material behavior during melting, solidification, and heat treatment without the effects of gravity. Although the sounding rockets would provide only 6 min of low gravity—one ten-thousandth of the gravity on earth—rocket missions were the only way to get low-gravity materials-processing data between the July 1975 manned Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and the Space Shuttle flights in the 1980s. (NASA Release 75—12)
Assembly of the first main engine of the Space Shuttle had been completed by Rockwell International Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. 1 mo ahead of schedule, NASA announced. After assembly the engine was automatically checked out—for the first time in history—by the engine’s internal controller and integral digital computers for functional, electrical, and mechanical operations. Known as the Integrated Subsystems Test Bed, this engine was not built for flight but for static firing tests at the National Space Technology Laboratories. The Space Shuttle would use 3 of the liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen engines. Designed to perform at high internal pressures for greater specific impulse, each engine would produce more than 2.1 million newtons thrust and would be used for up to 55 missions before overhaul, with between-mission maintenance comparable to techniques used by commercial airlines. (NASA Release 75—83; Rocketdyne Release RD—7)
NASA announced award of a $46.8-million cost-plus-award-fee contract to International Business Machines Corp. for developing and testing the Space Shuttle avionics software system. IBM would design, develop, test, and maintain the avionics software for the data-processing system on the Shuttle Orbiter that would include electric and electronic systems for guidance, navigation, and control capability; communication; computation; displays and controls; instrumentation; and electrical power distribution and control for the orbiter, external tank, and solid-rocket boosters. (JSC Release 75—63)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported out H.R. 4700 authorizing FY 1976 appropriations to NASA. Changes recommended by the committee would raise the NASA authorization by $5.7 million to $3,545 billion. Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the Senate Committee Program Difference from Submission (millions) Recommended Authorization (millions) Purpose Research and Development: Space shuttle 0 1206.0 Accepted as presented Space flight operations -4.0 203.1 Allocation of reduction left to discretion of NASA Advanced missions -1.5 0 Recommended deletion of this item; activities to be integrated with similar and related functions in other programs Physics and astronomy +7.0 162.8 To increase knowledge of upper atmosphere, identifying problems and developing new technology for dealing with them Lunar and planetary exploration 0 259.9 Accepted as presented Launch vehicle procurement 0 166.9 Accepted as presented Space applications +8.9 183.9 To increase emphasis on weather research, LACIE program, advanced communications research, and Space Shuttle payload definition Aeronautical research and technology 0 175.4 Accepted as presented Space & nuclear research & technology 0 74.9 Accepted as presented Energy technology appHcations 0 5.9 Accepted as presented Tracking & data acquisition -2.2 240.8 To seek economies in the program Technology utilization 0 7.0 Accepted as presented R&D Totals: +8.2 2686.6 Research and Program Management: Basic submission 0 776.0 Accepted as presented R&PM Totals: 0 776.0 Construction of Facilities: Modification of 11-by-ll-ft transonic wind tunnel at ARC 0 2.7 Accepted as presented Addition to Lunar Sample Facility at JSC -2.5 0 Deleted from funds Addition for composite model and metal finishing shops at LaRC 0 1.9 Accepted as presented Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the Senate Committee (continued) Program Difference from Submission (millions) Recommended Authorization (millions) Purpose Construction of Facilities: (cont.) Space Shuttle facilities 0 47.2 Accepted as presented Rehabilitation of facilities at various locations 0 16.0 Accepted as presented Minor construction of new facilities or additions to old facilities 0 5.0 Accepted as presented Facility plannirig and design 0 9.3 Accepted as presented C of F Totals: -2.5 82.1 Grand Totals* +5.7 3544.7
Manufacture of unique items in space is nearing reality with the availability of the Space Shuttle, scientists from TRW Systems Group told the 6th U.S.—European conference on partnership for space applications. Five practical processes in the space environment would be crystal growth, purification and separation, mixing, solidification, and processes in fluids. The gravity-free environment would permit the manufacture of items such as contamination-free glass for laser requirements, pure crystals for semiconductors, and highly pure vaccines. Also, if materials like copper-lead alloys that do not mix on earth could be combined in zero gravity, retd breakthroughs in aircraft and automotive parts manufacture might be possible. (SBD, 14 Oct 75, 221)
The vertical tail assembly for the Space Shuttle arrived at Rockwell International Corp., in Palmdale, Calif., after being shipped by Shuttle subcontractor Fairchild Republic Co. The tail unit, more than 8 m high, had a root chord of nearly 7 m. (FRC X-Press, 6 June 77, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 76, 25)
