Astronaut-pilots in training for the Space Shuttle program had used a simulated shuttle—a Grumman Gulfstream 2 twin-engine jet— in approach-and-landing maneuvers over the southern New Mexico desert at White Sands Missile Range, the New York Times reported. Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, JSC director, who recently watched the training at White Sands, said that the latter installation might eventually become a space port for launch and recovery of the shuttle. The pilots were to test an actual space shuttle—the Enterprise, unveiled this fall by Rockwell Inti.—some time next year; the first vertical launch of the shuttle had been scheduled for 1977 from KSC at Cape Canaveral, Fla. (ATT, 19 Dec 76, 41)
A launch-abort system for the Space Shuttle, for use in case of malfunction during the first 2.5 min of flight, was “quietly” removed by NASA 3 yr ago although such a system had been designed into the Shuttle late in 1971, according to the Washington Post. (In 2.5 min the Shuttle would reach a 40-km altitude from which it could “fly” to earth.) Staff writer Thomas O’Toole said that in 1973 NASA “reversed itself and dropped the launch-abort system ... a decision understood to have met with dissent inside the space agency.” The abort system designed for the Shuttle consisted of 2 huge solid-fuel rocket motors, one on each side of the Shuttle tail, that could be fired to separate the spacecraft and its occupants from the booster engines and main-engine fuel tanks in case of trouble; however, the abort motors weighed 43,500 kg—half as heavy as the entire 68 000-kg Shuttle carrying an average 18 000-kg pay-load—and even after they fired, the Shuttle would fall for 2 or 3 sec before being lifted away from the boosters. Elwood W. Land, director of system operations for the Shuttle program, defended the decision to remove the abort system, saying that it was not needed because of redundancy built into the spacecraft and its engine. Land noted that, in 58 manned space flights, neither the U.S. nor the USSR had resorted to a launch-abort system to rescue spacecraft crews, notwithstanding 2 close calls: Gemini 6 astronauts had almost fired their ejection seats when their engine shut down on the pad in 1965, and the Soyuz 18 cosmonauts never reached earth orbit but flew their spacecraft to a landing in southeast Siberia. The 1-man Mercury capsule had a rocket-boosted escape system to carry the spacecraft cabin away from its rocket engines and fuel tanks; the 2-man Gemini had ejection seats to fire astronauts from the cabin like jet pilots from disabled aircraft; and the 3-man Apollo carried a large solid-fuel rocket motor that could pull the 18 000-kg spacecraft away from its tower of engines sec after trouble hit the engines or fuel tanks. Only remaining provision for the Shuttle was a pair of ejection seats for pilot and copilot of the first 4 orbital test flights; the seats would be removed when 5 more crew members were added for subsequent tests and for operational flights. “There is no way to install 7 ejection seats in the shuttle,” the article noted. (WPost, 7 May 76, A-3)
RockwelLIntl. Corp. inspectors testing their inventory of transistors after a government warning to watch for counterfeit semiconductors had found 11 of 11 transistors of one type to be fakes, the New York Times reported. Rockwell had concluded that bogus parts had been “unwittingly built into [NASA’s] major current project, the Space Shuttle, for which Rockwell is the prime contractor.” The NYT said that “a rash of discoveries of bogus devices” had plagued the electronics industry for the last year and a half. The Defense Electronics Supply Center (DESC), a DOD agency that procured almost all electronic devices for defense, found 20 of 60 components taken randomly from stock to be “suspect” and had returned them to the makers for tests to determine authenticity. “Counterfeit” components—devices altered physically to misrepresent their true type or quality, by relabeling, renumbering, or adding false reliability information or dating— would not necessarily be nonfunctional; however, as the purpose of the alteration would be to indicate falsely that a part had passed certain quality tests, and would therefore be much more valuable, the part might fail under strenuous application. Failure of a single component could have consequences far outweighing its 25-cent cost. The transistors tested at Rockwell had been marked to indicate suitability for use in the most rigorous applications; upon disassembly, the parts showed no indication of having undergone any of the extra testing signified by the external markings, which had increased the cost fivefold. Although one trade organization (Electronics Industries Assn.) set up a task group to combat the problem of counterfeiting, “all sectors of the electronics industry are working against . . . major procedures to alleviate counterfeiting,” said the NYT report. At issue was the use of distributors, intermediary between producers and end users, who had a “heavy financial interest in maintaining the current system,” the report said. Most semiconductor producers sold rejects to junk or surplus dealers for their metal content; the items not disfigured were a very inexpensive source for remarking, and could be introduced into the market as high-quality low-cost items. Virtually all counterfeit components could be traced to the big defense contractors, said the NYT. Industry sources contended that 'the DOD had loose procurement practices, with a purchasing-policy rule that component contracts must go to the lowest bidder. As a DESC spokesman pointed out, “We are simply not allowed to pay a premium price on any contract,” even if the low bid is suspiciously below the going rate—“a strong indication that something may be wrong,” the NYT noted. Accepted methods of the industry made it impossible to guarantee the authenticity of any part that did not come directly from the manufacturer, the report added. Although vendors had predicted that a 1974 DESC edict calling for a strict and immediate upgrading of tests on military-grade components would disrupt the supply, few problems had arisen after the regulations had taken effect. (NYT, 24 Oct 76, 3F; Newsweek, 25 Oct 76)
MSFC announced it had shipped to GFSC the experiment payload for SPAR III, third in a series of about 15 space-processing applications rockets being flown over a 15-yr period to obtain space-processing data in near-zero gravity until Space Shuttle flights become available in the 1980s. The scientific payload built by MSFC would be integrated with GFSC components—igniter, separator, control and recovery systems—and shipped to the U.S. Army White Sands Missile Range, N.M., for a scheduled mid-December launch. SPAR payloads recovered by parachute would be forwarded to investigators for analysis. The SPAR flight would provide about 5 min of near-zero gravity in which to perform materials processing. (MSFC Release 76-204)
MSFC announced launchings of two giant helium-filled polyethylene balloons carrying cosmic-ray detectors, last week’s flight for a French-Danish team investigating isotopic composition of primary cosmic rays, the upcoming flight to evaluate instrumentation for a planned HEAO launch and for other Space Shuttle experiments. The HEAO flight scheduled for 1979 would survey and map gamma-ray and cosmic-ray flux. The balloon launch site near Sioux Falls, S.D., was chosen because earth magnetic-field lines there would deflect fewer cosmic rays, and the low population density and open terrain facilitated payload recovery. The balloons would reach an altitude of about 41 km, above 99.6% of earth’s atmosphere (which fragments cosmic rays), and remain aloft for 40 to 60 hr sending data to the ground. Upon electronic command from the ground, the instrument payloads would separate from the balloons and return to earth by parachute; the balloons would be destroyed by ground command over unpopulated areas. Telemetry tapes and recovered instruments would go to the investigators for analysis. (MSFC Release 76-172)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. and the Singer Company’s Simulations Products Division for parallel negotiations, leading to award of a contract to one of the companies for maintenance, modification, and operational support of Johnson Space Center’s simulator complex to be used in training flight crews for the Space Shuttle. The 2-yr contract beginning 1 July would provide for optional additional periods of 24 mo and 6 mo respectively. The training complex, consisting initially of a Shuttle procedures simulator and a crew procedures evaluation simulator, would have added to it an orbiter aeroflight simulator and a Shuttle mission simulator. General Electric and Computer Sciences Corp. also submitted proposals. (NASA Release 76-87; JSC Release 76-30)
Modifications of the test stand to be used at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories for static firing of the combined Space Shuttle propulsion system had been finished 2 wk early, MSFC announced. The stand had been built for tests of the Saturn V first stage and converted for use in the Shuttle program by Industrial Contractors, Inc., of Idaho Falls, Ida. In the tests, scheduled to be conducted late in 1977 by workers in Rockwell Inti. Corp.’s Space Division under MFSC direction, the main engines of the Shuttle would be connected to a structure resembling the orbiter; this simulator, using both flight and nonflight hardware, would be attached to an external tank, the Shuttle element containing liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen for the three main engines. Firing of this combination (known as the Main Propulsion Test Article) would be the first time the three main engines were fired as a system. Engineers would combine acoustic tests with the MPT A firings to obtain data for determining optimum vibration and sound levels; they would also use the data to check tanking procedures. Hardware for the tests would arrive at NSTL next summer. (MSFC Release 76-178)
Pilot training for the Space Shuttle would begin in October at White Sands Missile Range, the Washington Post reported, with instructors completing their training by mid-October. Two of the instructors—David Griggs and Ted Mendenhall—were scheduled to make practice approaches at the range 29 September; chief instructor A1 Manson and copilot Ed Rainey made a similar test in August. Aircraft used in the Shuttle training are modified Grumman Gulfstream II jets fitted with Shuttle orbiter controls and instrumentation. (WPost, 26 Sept 76, A20)
No immediate serious problem appeared to exist in modification of the stratosphere, according to a report released by an interagency task force on inadvertent modification of the stratosphere (IMOS) prepared by the Interdepartment Committee for Atmospheric Sciences (ICAS). Assessing presently postulated manmade modifiers of the stratosphere other than fluorocarbons, the report considered 6 kinds of possible hazards: nitrogen fertilizers, brominated compounds, other chlorinated compounds, particles, the Space Shuttle, and carbon monoxide. The report concluded that concern over modification of the stratosphere was so far speculative, and that it was based on compounds not yet released to the upper atmosphere in quantities believed sufficient to produce a hazardous effect. Although a large number of substances had been considered, only those appearing most potentially harmful were singled out. Also, cumulative effects from several substances might become significant later, the report said, even if the effect of any single substance were relatively slight. The report urged increased research into stratosphere modifiers and prevention of inadvertent modification now and in the future. (IMOS report, 30 Mar 76)
The Hugh L. Dryden Flight Research Center, formerly the Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., was formally dedicated in a ceremony by NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first administrator of NASA from 1958-1961; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; and Mrs. Dryden, guest of honor, who unveiled a bust of her late husband that would be placed in the Center’s lobby. After the ceremony, visitors were invited to a display of aircraft in the main hangar, including the 747 aircraft that would be used for the Space Shuttle orbiter approach and landing tests next year. Center efforts to transfer space technology to industry were represented by a solar-energy display and low-drag truck exhibits. Dr. Dryden in 1947 had been named to the newly created post of director of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics; when Dr. Glennan, then head of the Case Institute of Technology, was selected as NASA’s first administrator, he insisted on Dr. Dryden as his deputy. When James E. Webb was chosen NASA’s second administrator, he also made the condition that Dr. Dryden remain as his deputy; he had served in that position until his death in 1965. (NASA X-Press, 26 Mar 76; program)
First test firing of the second Space Shuttle main engine—Engine 0002, first to have a flight-type engine-mounted controller—achieved the programmed 1.5-sec duration, firing through a diffuser used for altitude simulation when production engines were throttled in testing. Engine 0002, a flight configuration that would not be flown, was a developmental engine instrumented for test purposes. It was fired on the National Space Technology Lab’s Stand A-2, used in Saturn V tests during the 1960s and modified and reactivated for the Space Shuttle program. NASA planned to fire each engine on the A-2 throttling test position before using it on a Shuttle flight. Stand A-l, the sea-level test position, had been used for about a year to test the first SSME, a test version known as the integrated subsystem test bed; A-l was also developed for the Saturn program and modified for Shuttle tests. (MSFC Release 76-57; Rockwell Release RD-7)
NASA announced successful static test firing of one of two Space Shuttle main engines for 650 sec at main-stage operating level (50% rated thrust level) at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss., under the direction of MSFC. The firing, on 30 Sept., was the longest test firing of an SSME to date. Previous firings had aimed at testing engine-throttling control, engine start and shutdown sequence, and engine power balance. The current series of tests, conducted by personnel of Rockwell Intl.’s Rocketdyne Div., would obtain component- and system-operation data at increasing levels of power. The NSTL test program combined development and acceptance testing; each Shuttle engine would be fired at NSTL before being certified for flight. (NASA Release 76-162)
NASA asked scientists to submit proposals for scientific experiments to be carried on the first Spacelab mission in late 1980, according to Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science. Primary objective of Spacelab 1 would be to verify performance of systems and subsystems and to measure the environment surrounding NASA’s Space Shuttle; secondary objectives would be to obtain scientific, applications, and technology data and to demonstrate Spacelab’s abihty to perform space research. The first flight would emphasize stratospheric and upper atmosphere research, but proposals from other scientific disciplines were also solicited. Objectives of the Spacelab 1 mission had been planned jointly by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA); the NASA announcement of opportunity would be sent to U.S. scientists and those in all other nations not members of ESA, and ESA would make a separate solicitation to its 11 member states. Responses would be coordinated between the two agencies. (NASA Release 76-49)
Despite lower profits in its work on the Space Shuttle and increased losses in business aircraft, Rockwell Inti, reported higher sales and earnings for both the last quarter and the full fiscal year ending 30 Sept. 1976. Earnings were $121.1 million, up 29% in fiscal 1976, and sales increased 8% to a record $5.2 billion. The figures did not include discontinued operations in Rockwell’s industrial components area, sold in Dec. 1975. Four of the company’s five operating areas reflected better management and lower interest costs: automotive operations, electronics operations, consumer operations, and utility and industrial operations. The aerospace operations figures reflected fewer award-fee opportunities, Rockwell said. (Rockwell Release R-40)
The Michoud Assembly Facility operated for NASA by MSFC at New Orleans was nearing production capability for the Space Shuttle external tank, MSFC announced. Delivery of all required items to Michoud would require an estimated 225 trucks, about three fourths of them carrying loads classified as oversize. By the time all 225 trucks arrived, total “train” length would have reached more than 3 km. Getting the equipment from the suppliers located at faraway points such as Dallas, San Diego, Baltimore, and Nashville had presented problems because of the size of the loads; special escorts were required for oversized loads, and travel time at New Orleans for oversize loads was restricted to the period between 10 pm and 4 am. Tooling and fixtures being installed at Michoud would give Martin Marietta, prime external tank contractor, the capability needed to meet flight schedules; each Shuttle flight would require a new external tank, and NASA had planned more than 400 flights between 1979 and 1989. Launches should number 60 per year by 1984. (MSFC Release 76-60)
NASA announced plans for rollout of the first Space Shuttle orbiter on 17 Sept, at NASA’s Rockwell Inti. Space Div. at Palmdale, Calif. The ceremony was scheduled for 9:30 am PDT, and media representatives were alerted. (JSC Release 76-51)
