JSC announced award of a $5 189 500 supplement to an existing contract with Rockwell Intl.’s Space Division, Downey, Calif., covering 8 engineering changes in the Space Shuttle orbiter to accommodate the European-built Spacelab in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. (JSC Release 77-26)
NASA announced that four customers had signed up for “getaway special” payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle on a space-available basis beginning in 1980. The small self-contained payloads must weigh no more than 90kg (2001b) each, measure no more than 0.15m3 (5ft3), and require no services such as electrical power or deployment into space. Owners of the research and development packages were R. Gilbert Moore of Utah, a private citizen who offered half his payload to Utah State Univ., which in turn would make the space available to high school students who submitted proposals to fly their own experiments; Dr. L.R. Megill, chairman of the space science experiment committee at Utah State, who funded a payload as a follow-on to Moore and also planned to invite student proposals; and Reiner Klett, representing independent West German researchers, who signed for two payloads, one biological and one for space processing. (NASA Release 77-4)
Project Halo (high-altitude large optics), a space-based system proposed by DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency to detect and track foreign missiles and aircraft, would require 6 Space Shuttle payloads to orbit its structures and equipment, AvWk reported. ARPA’s Halo research had focused on systems analysis, infrared focal planes, optics, cryogenic cooling, power sources, data utilization, and phenomenology. CAvWk, Mar 28/77, 11)
Rockwell Intl.’s Space Division and Autonetics group had won an Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) design competition for a Teal Ruby sensor to detect and track aircraft targets from space, AvWk reported. The DOD sensor, using up to a quarter million mosaic infrared detectors with charge-coupled processors, would fly on the Space Shuttle in 1980. A Lockheed-Grumman team had also competed. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 13)
MSFC announced that a special hammer developed in the 1960s for Saturn fabrication had solved a major problem of manufacturing external tanks for the Space Shuttle. Martin Marietta Aerospace, prime contractor for the tanks, in welding four large sections of a liquid-oxygen container at the Michoud assembly facility, had found that peaking of the weld joints left some areas as much as 5° out of tolerance. The special tool MSFC had created for removing distortions in component welds would not impact a surface in the usual sense but, when in contact with the metal, would send a hydrodynamic force uniformly into the thickness of the metal when an electrical charge dumped into the hammer’s coil created an expanding magnetic field. The field would exert an evenly distributed three-dimensional force that would remove the distortions without leaving hammer marks on the target. After Robert M. Avery of MSFC’s Materials and Processes Laboratory showed how to use the tool at the Michoud facility, the contractor was able to remove most of the distortions during the week of demonstration. Two working hammers would remain at the plant for future use. (MSFC Release 77-21)
NASA announced it had identified about 40 payloads to be carried on 11	Space Shuttle flights in its first yr of operation, beginning in 1980. Three civilian firms had deposited “earnest money” with NASA for payloads on 8 flights; NASA had plans for 5 payloads, and DOD had plans for one. Chester M. Lee, STS operations director, said NASA also had forecast 12	non-NASA civilian payloads, 10 NASA payloads, and 4 DOD payloads for launch during 1980 and 1981. Allocating the payloads to specific flights would not be firm until about a yr before launch, he noted. A working model for Shuttle traffic in the first 12yr, totaling 560 Shuttle flights, would show NASA flying about half the missions on its own; 20% would be DOD missions; 6%, other U.S. government agencies; 12%, commercial firms; and 12%, foreign customers. (NASA Release 77-175)
MSFC reported that NASA had issued a request for proposals to integrate mission payloads, in preparation for the first three Spacelab missions and the sixth Space Shuttle orbiter flight test. Integration would include combining a number of experiments into a compatible payload; controlling the configuration during instrument development, testing, and flight operations; and disassembly of the payload after the mission. Proposals, due Aug. 15, would be reviewed by a source evaluation board. (MSFC Release 77-131)
JSC announced award of a $2 752 000 contract to Hamilton Standard Division of United Technologies Corp., Windsor Locks, Conn., for development and production of a Space Shuttle portable oxygen system for use independently or connected to the orbiter’s oxygen system. Consisting of a face mask, rebreather loop, heat exchanger, oxygen bottle, and recharge kit, the system would operate during emergencies and for prebreathing before spacewalks to denitrogenize the crew’s circulatory systems. (JSC Release 77-18)
JPL announced that NASA had followed its recommendation and selected a 12-bladed spinning solar sail spacecraft as a candidate for the automated interplanetary shuttle to be used within earth’s solar system in the 1980s and beyond. Also known as a heliogyro, the set of extremely long blades or sails made of reflective aluminized plastic would be deployed in two tiers of six each by centrifugal force after its spacecraft had been launched from the Space Shuttle late in 1981. The spacecraft and its scientific payload, mounted at the center of the heliogyro, would be propelled by photon radiation from the sun to rotate once every 3min. The spinning-sail concept had been chosen by program engineers and designers for development as being more feasible than a square-sail concept that would have used an 850sq.m (half-mile square) sail configuration. NASA would choose in mid-Aug. between the heliogyro and a proposed ion-drive (solar-electric propulsion) spacecraft for a Halley’s Comet mission in 1986. JPL had been working with other NASA centers and a dozen industrial and research groups on parallel efforts to develop low-thrust long-life spacecraft for the 1980s. (JPL Release 826)
JSC announced it had signed a $40 million letter contract with Rockwell Inti. Corp. Space Division for modifications to the first Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise and for starting design of a third orbiter. Funded in part by the Economic Stimulus Bill, the contract had been directed at generating more employment opportunities. (JSC Release 77-37)
MSFC announced a $1 046 100 amendment of a contract with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Inti. Corp., Canoga Park, Calif., contractors for the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME). The amended contract, totaling more than $66 million, would include equipment to build SSME. (MSFC Release 77-37)
The Washington Post said NASA was looking for “someplace else to land the space shuttle.” Its second free flight had been postponed when Hurricane Doreen turned the planned landing strip (a dry lakebed at Edwards AFB) into a “mud puddle.” A NASA source said officials had investigated other sites for the flight, tentatively rescheduled to Sept. l.(W Post, Sept 1/77, A-27)
DFRC announced that a malfunction during a June 2 test of the Space Shuttle orbiter’s auxiliary power system would delay the orbiter’s first manned captive flight from June 9 for 1 or 2 weeks, depending on successful completion of ground tests. (DFRC Release 22-77)
KSC announced award of a $95 025 000 contract to the Space Division, Rockwell Inti. Corp., Downey, Calif., for activation of the Space Shuttle facilities and systems, and for Orbiter support during checkout, launch, and postflight operations, in the first six Space Shuttle missions. Rockwell would also support postflight operations at the DFRC landing site for the first four missions. (KSC Release 92-77)
NASA announced it had issued proposals to buy 6 spinning solid fuel upper stages (SSUS) for boosting spacecraft launched from the Space Shuttle into higher orbits. The decision was the first step following agreement earlier this yr with McDonnell Douglas and Boeing Aerospace, allowing them to design, build, and test the devices and market them independently of NASA. The agency as part of a procurement agreement would normally bear cost of development and production; the current bidding would be limited to the 2 companies that had agreed to develop the stages with private funds. The purchase would include hardware, analyses, logistics, and services needed to put a spacecraft into higher orbit after launch and orientation by the Space Shuttle. The contractor would build the vehicle, provide services, and operate the systems. First delivery in Dec. 1979 would be a flight demonstrator; 3 others would launch advanced Intelsat V comsats; the other 2 would serve for other missions. (NASA Release 77-101; MSFC Release 77-90)
MSFC announced award of a $110 096 contract to General Dynamics Convair Div., San Diego, Calif., to study and define ideas for an automatic structural-beam fabrication machine for use in the Space Shuttle [see Mar. 1]. The beams, made of a composite material, would support large scale space structures and act as electrical and thermal insulators. (MSFC Release 77-72)
MSFC reported plans to request another $18 610 000 in NASA’s FY 1978 budget for construction or modification of facilities to be used in building the Space Shuttle external fuel tank (ET) at the Michoud assembly facility (MAF) near New Orleans. With addition of a chemical waste-treatment plant and alterations of the manufacturing, vertical-assembly, final-assembly, and checkout buildings, MAF could produce 28 ETs each yr. (MSFC Release 77-35)
MSFC announced it had selected General Electric Co. of Valley Forge, Pa., to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for a prototype Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) to be flown on a number of Spacelab missions carried by the Space Shuttle [see June 22]. The prototype with software and spares was due for delivery to MSFC by Oct. 1, 1979, and to KSC for Shuttle launch by Jan. 1, 1980. (MSFC Release 77-124)
MSFC reported that the NASA barge Poseidon was on its way to Seal Beach, Calif., to pick up a Space Shuttle orbiter simulator and deliver it to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Mo., to stand in for the orbiter during firings next year of the main propulsion test article, consisting of the simulator with an external tank and thrust structure covering 3 main engines. MSFC had used the Poseidon in the 1960s to move stages of Saturn rockets. (MSFC Release 77-84)
JSC announced that NASA and the Soviet Academy of Science would send representatives to a meeting Nov. 14-17 in Moscow to discuss a joint program for the 1980s using the flexible delivery and large capacity of the Space Shuttle and the Salyut’s longer stay time in orbit. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, would head the U.S. delegation, and Dr. Boris Petrov, chairman of the academy’s Intercosmos council, would head the Soviet delegation. (JSC Release 77-78; NASA Release 77-234; FBIS, Moscow Dom Sv in Rusn, Nov 18/77)
A cryogenically cooled infrared telescope carried aboard the Space Shuttle would become the major infrared research instrument in space, AvWk reported. NASA studies had indicated such a telescope could gather spectroscopic data on objects 1000 times fainter than now visible. (AvWk, Mar 7/77, 11)
The USAF announced it had issued contracts to Martin Marietta Aerospace at Denver and General Dynamics Corp.’s Convair Divison at San Diego for design of a large space structure to be carried into orbit on the Space Shuttle and erected and deployed in space. The contracts, each for $750,000, called for conceptual design of a flight-demonstration model of an antenna-like structure to be assembled and deployed in a form exceeding the size of the orbiter cargo bay (60ft long by 15ft in diameter). Plans called for automated assembly in space with manned supervision. The flight article would also serve to verify the Shuttle’s ability to deploy other DOD craft that might require assembly in orbit. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 77, 4)
Spacelab, ESA’s manned reusable space laboratory scheduled to fly on the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments in life, physical, and materials science, Nature reported. Although Spacelab’s multinational management and unique financing scheme (ESA members would pay for the laboratory on a voluntary basis) could limit its scientific potential, participants would receive a proportionate share of construction contracts and experiment facilities. Management problems included the question of apportioning payment of NASA’s $10 million launch fee. (Nature, April 7/77, 491)
The Washington Star reported that the first Space Shuttle fuel tank emerged from the Michoud assembly facility near New Orleans on its way to tests at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratory in Miss. NASA contractor Martin Marietta had built the 520 OOOgal tank, half as long as a football field, at a cost of about $2.5 million. If successful, as many as 500 similar tanks would be built during the next 15 to 20yr. The 153ft-long tank, almost 30ft in diameter, was built of aluminum alloy and was disposable, designed to fall away and disintegrate in the atmosphere just before the Shuttle reached orbit. Shuttle flights would cost about $10 million each, as compared to $150 million each for earlier launches. (W Star, Sept 10/77, A-3)
MSFC announced it had awarded a $276 597 contract to Bryson Construction Co., Decatur, Ala., for modification of the Redstone Arsenal airfield to accept the Space Shuttle and its Boeing 747 carrier aircraft. The contractor would install a concrete pad 75m long and 55m wide for a derrick to unload the orbiter from the 747. (MSFC Release 77-56)
NASA reported that MSFC had received 119 proposals for experiments in materials processing to be performed on Space Shuttle and Spacelab flights. As lead center for the Spacelab program, a cooperative venture of NASA and ESA, MSFC had been given project management responsibility for the first three Spacelab payloads. An MSFC team had evaluated the proposals, and the center would announce selection of between 10 and 20 experiments by the end of July. (NASA Release 77-103; MSFC Release 77-91)
The $500-million Space Shuttle with no crewmembers aboard took its first ride over the Calif, desert, carried piggyback on its converted Boeing 747 for a 2hr test at nearly 5km altitude. Operating the 747 were veteran NASA test pilot Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr.; copilot Thomas C. McMurtry; and flight engineers Victor W. Horton and Lewis E. Guidry, Jr. The Enterprise, prototype of the reusable craft designed to carry cargo and scientists into space in the 1980s, was secured to the 747 by mounts at its nose and tail; the combination craft stood almost 20m from the ground to the top of the orbiter’s tail. The explosive bolts provided to separate the two craft in free flight were armed during this first test, in case of emergency. NASA officials said the weight of the Enterprise (about 65 000kg) did not strain the capacity of the 747, which weighed nearly 200 000kg empty and had carried much greater loads in cargo and passengers. “Most of the time we couldn’t even tell the Shuttle was here,” Fulton said after the flight, which reached speeds of about 450kph as the crew turned and banked the combined ships, shut down some of the 747 engines, and performed other maneuvers to check stability. The Enterprise would be unmanned during the next 5 combined test flights; in May, a 2-man crew would conduct 6 more tests of the 747/orbiter combination, and in July the orbiter would be released from its carrier for a series of unpowered flights. (W Post, Feb 19/77, A3; W Star, Feb 19/77, A-8)
A 25-article series in Science News by Jonathan Eberhart on the Viking mission won the 1976 AAAS-Westinghouse science writing award Feb. 22, Science reported. Henry S.F. Cooper’s New Yorker article on the Space Shuttle received honorable mention. (Science, Mar 4/77, 864)
NASA announced it had selected 5 materials-processing experiments to be flown on an early orbital-test flight of the Space Shuttle beginning in 1979. The Materials Experiment Assembly (MEA) would offer scientists an interim opportunity to conduct studies before Spacelab missions began; it would be automated and unattended, containing its own power source and a minicomputer to collect data. Principal investigators and their experiments were Dr. J. Bruce Wagner, Jr., Ariz. State Univ.—solid electrolytes containing dispersed particles; Ralph A. Happe, Rockwell Inti.—containerless preparation of advanced optical glass; Dr. Herbert Wiedemeier, Rensselaer Polytechnic Inst.—vapor growth of alloy-type semiconductor crystals; Dr. John W. Vanderhoff, Sinclair Laboratories, Lehigh Univ.—large-particle-size monodisperse latexes; Dr. S.H. Gelles, Gelles Associates, Columbus, O.—liquid miscibility gap materials. (NASA Release 77-222)
Two giant crawler-transporters that had ferried Saturn V rockets to the launch pad at KSC and were scheduled for similar work in the Space Shuttle program had been designated National Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmarks, Today newspaper reported. At ceremonies held Feb. 3 beneath one of the vehicles, more than 100 persons watched the unveiling of a plaque noting the creation of the 18th national landmark identified since the Am. Society of Mechanical Engineers began singling them out in 1973. Present at the ceremony were KSC employees who had helped build the pair of 2.7-million-kg platforms; ASME officials and members from across the U.S. on their way to a national meeting in southern Fla.; and former astronaut Donn F. Eisele, who had been command-module pilot on the 1968 Apollo 7 flight that resumed moonshots more than a yr after the fatal fire in an Apollo training exercise. Eisele had since become a manager for Marion Power Shovel Co., the Ohio firm that built the transporters at a cost of $14 million. Ray Clark, KSC director of design engineering, accepted the plaque from Dr. Stothe P. Kezios, presidentelect of ASME, with the comment that the transporters were “barely broken in” with mileage on each at just over 800km; they might accumulate 10 times that amount carrying Shuttle equipment during their second yr of operation, he added. (Today, Feb 4/77, 10A)
NASA announced it had signed an agreement with McDonnell Douglas Corp. allowing the company as a commercial venture to design, manufacture, and test an upper-stage system, including integration services, for Space Shuttle missions having payloads weighing up to 2000kg. Carried into low earth orbit on the Shuttle, the upper stage called SSUS-A (for spinning solid upper stage, Atlas Centaur class) would take payloads into transfer orbit where a kick motor would put it into a circular geosynchronous orbit 35 900km above earth. A similar agreement last yr with McDonnell Douglas was for an upper stage called SSUS-D (for Delta class) suitable for use with payloads weighing up to 1100kg, like those being orbited on Delta vehicles. NASA had planned to procure SSUS-A systems only from firms with which it had such an agreement; under the agreements, firms would be free to sell stages either to NASA or directly to customers. The agreements would specify performance requirements, define a delivery schedule to meet NASA’s Shuttle schedule, and establish unit ceiling prices and a ceiling profit. (NASA Release 77-29)
MSFC announced it had requested price quotations on designing a space spider (a device capable of building large-scale structures). The spider, containing prefabricated materials, would attach itself to the core of a planned structure and spin a larger structure, of any diameter, around the core. MSFC engineers had sought estimates of costs and data on the best size of spider to fit inside the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 77-62)
The NY Times reported that the General Accounting Office, Congress’s investigative arm, had told the lawmakers to consider delaying completion of the Space Shuttle fleet, originally planned to include five ships. Two had been built so far. GAO said Congress should go ahead will building a third Shuttle but should put off construction of the other two until “there is sufficient confidence in the shuttle development program and more information is available on the space transportation system operations cost and plans for future space activity.” Today noted that this report was “the most sweepingly and harshly critical” of a number of negative assessments of the Shuttle issued by GAO. Among its charges were that the Shuttle would cause sonic booms over Calif, and Fla. upon landing; that its tires would blow out and cause a crash when it tried to land; that it could make too few orbits; that there was no proof it would reduce the costs of carrying cargoes into space; and that hardly anyone would want to use its services except DOD and NASA itself. GAO pointed out that other nations, led by Japan, had been developing their own launch vehicles and were likely to use them instead of paying to use the Shuttle; it also said NASA had erred in setting its fees low to encourage users to change over from expendable launchers. NASA’s plan to recover expenses later, when costs had fallen with increased use, might never be possible, the GAO said. Former NASA administrator James C. Fletcher said he disagreed with most of GAO’s comments: NASA would solve the technical problems as it had solved others, he said, and delaying acquisition of the fourth and fifth Shuttles would be wasteful. “If they are procured while tooling and assembly lines are in place, they unquestionably can be procured at far less cost than would be incurred by delay.” A 3-yr delay would run up the program cost by from $3 billion to $4.5 billion, he said. (NYT, June 5/77, 43; Today, June 4/77, 8A)
MSFC announced arrival June 24 at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories of a huge steel structure to simulate the Space Shuttle or-biter in main propulsion-test article firings later in 1977. The article would include the simulator with an aft fuselage, an external tank, and three Shuttle main engines; first test would take place in Dec. The simulator, about 29m (95ft) long and weighing about 110 000kg (243 0001b), had moved from the Michoud assembly facility near New Orleans to NSTL in Miss, on the barge Pearl River, having traveled from Calif, to Michoud via the Panama Canal on the NASA barge Poseidon [see May 10]. (MSFC Release 77-118; NASA Release 77-132)
A Space Shuttle orbital-maneuvering system engine had completed acoustic environment testing at JSC, and a second engine had fired 1000 times in life-cycle testing at the White Sands, N.M., test facility, Aviation Week reported. The latter achievement demonstrated the engine’s ability to perform 100 missions, a project requirement. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 13)
NASA announced it had awarded a cost-plus-fee contract worth about $43.5 million to McDonnell Douglas Technical Services, Inc., Spacelab Integration Division, Huntsville, Ala., for Spacelab integration. The contract, lasting from March 1977 through Dec. 1983, would include design, development, manufacturing, and operational testing of NASA’s Spacelab components. NASA planned to provide all operational services including flight operations, crew training, and maintenance, after the European Space Agency delivered the lab. Spacelab would remain in the Space Shuttle cargo bay to perform earth observations and experiments in materials science, physics, life science, communications, navigation, and space systems. (NASA Release 77-47)
NASA announced a successful 60-sec firing of the Space Shuttle main engine on Mar. 12 at rated thrust conditions of 2 082 560 newtons. Employees of the Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell Inti. Corp., contractor for the SSME, conducted the test at NASA’s Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA Release 77-54)
NASA announced it had awarded Computer Sciences Corp. a $41 million contract for support services to communications and instrumentation at KSC, the major site for Space Shuttle launches beginning in 1979. Services would be in 2 categories: the first, covering 3yr, would include modification, installation, operation, and maintenance of an operational intercommunications system, operational TV system, and checkout-control-monitor subsystem. The second category, lyr with 2yr option to renew, would cover KSC work on communications, measurements, telemetries, computer services, data storage and retrieved, program planning, and reliability and quality assurance. (NASA Release 77-104; KSC Release 104-77)
NASA announced that its administrator, Dr. Robert A. Frosch, and Hans Matthoefer, minister for research and technology for the Federal Republic of Germany, had signed a memorandum of understanding for participation in a Jupiter orbiter/probe mission to be launched by the Space Shuttle in 1982. The mission would send an orbiter and a probe on the most detailed investigation to date of the environment and moons of Jupiter, the first opportunity for 114 investigators to measure Jupiter directly as well as remotely from various orbital positions over a long period of time. The orbiter, carrying 10 instruments, would circle Jupiter for at least 20mo; the probe, carrying 6, would plunge into the atmosphere. West Germany would provide a retropropulsion module to inject the orbiter into its path around Jupiter, as well as the scientific instruments and the services of 14 German investigators in preparing the two spacecraft and analyzing their data. JPL would manage the U.S. project, ARC the probe, JSC the Space Shuttle. An office in West Germany would manage FRG’s share. (NASA Release 77-211)
JSC announced it had signed a supplemental agreement with Rockwell Inti. Corp. Space Division deleting two items from the Space Shuttle orbiter contract: a neutral-buoyance trainer, and vibroacoustic tests on the aft fuselage of the orbiter. This work had been scheduled for Rockwell’s plant in Downey, Calif., with support from JSC and KSC field offices. The decrease of $25 334 750 had lowered the value of the cost-plus-award-fee contract with Rockwell to $3 013 971 603. (JSC Release 77-38)
ARC announced selection of 10 women volunteers aged 35 to 45 with nontechnical backgrounds as test subjects in an experiment to help set medical standards for future Space Shuttle passengers. The experiment, ope of a series using varying ages and sexes, would require 9 days of total bedrest to simulate weightlessness, and occasional spins in a centrifuge to simulate Shuttle reentry. Results would show whether or not age and gender affected the ability to cope with spaceflight. (ARC Release 77-15; NASA Release 77-61)
KSC announced it had awarded a $39 812 contract to Ky. State Univ. for continuing research on effects of prolonged exposure of experimental animals to variations in the atmospheric level of oxygen. Previous studies in the field had been on short-term exposure to 100% oxygen, but little was known about prolonged exposure to oxygen at low to moderate concentrations. Ky. State’s first grant for this work in March 1974 had exposed vinegar flies to higher levels of oxygen than normal and drastically shortened the life span, whereas exposure to lower than normal levels had greatly reduced reproductive capacity. This work had also suggested that certain individuals might prove better adapted genetically for survival in abnormal oxygen environments. The findings would be useful in planning atmospheres for long-term manned space missions aboard the Space Shuttle or on space colonies. (KSC Release 91-77)
The possibility of teleportation-transfer of objects from one place to another by radio waves came closer with the announcement of a new way to create identical copies of a three-dimensional object by using a sculpture-photography system based on the same principles of chemistry and electronics now used in making printing plates. As reported in the Chicago Tribune, Wyn Kelly Swainson, a young man with a degree in English literature and some training in science, had obtained his first patent on a device being developed with the help of the Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, Ohio. Swainson began with the idea of reproducing great works of sculpture without painstaking handwork: a plastic material hardened by light rays would be targeted by intersecting laser beams, controlled by a computer programmed with the image of the object to be copied. Swainson said IBM had already produced an instrument to record computerized shapes, convert the electronic data into light rays, and feed them through the lasers scanning a container of plastic. Where the beams intersected, they would cause a chemical reaction hardening the plastic; washing off the unhardened material would leave an exact copy of the object previously computerized. In theory, a three-dimensional hologram of an object even of complex metals could be analyzed for its precise composition, converted to electronic data, transmitted, and reproduced as often as desired. (C Trib, Jan 30/77, 1-5) Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, with tailcone covering engine-nozzle location, moves on a 90-wheel rig January 31 from the Rockwell plant to DFRC 3 5mi away in preparation for approach and landing tests. (NASA 77-H-77) January 30—February h Enterprise, the first Space Shuttle, towed atop a 90-wheel trailer from Rockwell Intl.’s plant in Palmdale, Calif., made its first trip to Edwards AFB 57km away. Escorted by a convoy of security and patrol cars, the Enterprise moved at 8kph and drew hundreds of spectators to view its configuration (24m wingspan and 21m vertical tailfin). Tests of the 38m-long space vehicle would begin Feb. 18 with a series of “captive” flights; first manned flight to an unpowered landing would occur July 22. (WStar, Jan 30/77, A-7, NYT, Jan 31/77, 12; W Post, Feb 1/77, A-3) ORIGINAL PA&E IZ OF POOR QUALITY	n
