NASA announced it had tentatively selected 4 more experiments for its Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) scheduled as a major Space Shuttle payload in 1980. The four scientific experiments—to study hazards to man of ion particles in space, the chemistry of micrometeoroids, the interstellar wind, and cosmic-ray nuclei—would join 23 technology experiments selected for LDEF earlier in 1978 [see Jan. 9]. LDEF, an unmanned reusable free-flying facility carrying technical and scientific experiments mounted in special trays, would offer an easy and economical way to expose primarily passive experiments to the space environment during 6 to 9 mo of LDEF orbit. Selected experiments and principal investigators were: free-flyer biostack experiment, Dr. Horst Bucker, Universitat Frankfurt-am-Main, W. Germany; interstellar gas experiment, Dr. Don Lind, Johnson Space Center; high-resolution study of ultra-heavy cosmic ray nuclei, D. V. Domingo and Dr. K. P. Wenzel of ESA (the Netherlands), and Prof. C. O. Ceallaigh, Dr. D. O’Sullivan, Dr. A. Thompson of the Dublin Inst, for Advanced Studies, Ireland; and chemistry of micrometeoroids, Dr. Fred Horz, JSC. (NASA Release 78-20; LaRC Release 78-5; JPL Universe, Feb 3/78, 1; ESA newsletter, Feb 78, 3)
MSFC announced it had awarded RCA Government Systems Division an $880 000 contract to develop and deliver three video-instrumentation tape recorders for use on Spacelab 1 and subsequent missions. Under the contract, RCA would deliver three STAR-4 units before April 1980 for integration into Spacelab program equipment before the first launch planned for 1981. Spacelab crew members would use the units to record visual and analog data during communications blind spots, while the Space Shuttle was out of contact with NASA ground stations. The information would be played back for transmission when communications were reestablished. The units, capable of about 500 record-playback operations between tape changes, could record for 45min simultaneously on one video and two audio channels under computer control. Video bandwidth was 5MHz, audio bandwidths 50 to 8000hz. The instruments would undergo rigorous testing for high performance and reliability, and to ensure equipment compatibility with the manned-spacecraft environment. NASA would install two STAR-4s as part of the Spacelab 1 payload and keep the third as a spare. {Marshall Star, Nov 29/78, 4)
NASA announced it had selected Global Associates, Oakland, Calif., to provide operating services at the Michoud Assembly Facility, New Orleans, La. Services provided under the contract would support NASA program activity and missions of the Depts. of Agriculture, Defense, and Commerce tenanted at the Michoud facility, as well as refuse collection and telecommunications services at Slidell Computer Complex, Slidell, La. MSFC managed both facilities. Under the 1-yr cost-plus-award-fee contract, with four 1-yr options for extension, Global Associates would provide management, personnel, and materials for plant engineering, maintenance, telecommunications, and property and supply, as well as mail, transportation, medical, and food services. Proposed cost over the 5-yr period was approximately $26.5 million. NASA’s primary program at Michoud was manufacture and assembly of external tanks for the Space Shuttle, including those for service as test articles, on test flights, and on operational missions. (NASA Release 78-192)
NASA announced plans to develop hardware systems to support materials-processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle in mid-1981. The materials-processing in space (MPS) program would take advantage of near-weightlessness in earth orbit to eliminate sedimentation in liquid materials and to reduce movement of liquid caused by heat, allowing precise control of processes such as casting and crystal growth. MSFC had asked industry to submit proposals by Feb. 23 for support of 8 materials-processing experiments. on 1981 Shuttle/Spacelab missions, specifically a fluids-experiments system and a solidification-experiments system using a high-temperature furnace; other hardware systems to be developed would support individual experiments and related earth-based systems. The fluid-experiments system would use an area in the Spacelab for optical observation of fluid phenomena; it would accommodate a variety of cells for use in a broad range of experiments. The solidification experiments system would require a multiuse system for processing metals, alloys, eutectics, semiconductors, crystals, ceramics, glasses, etc., in orbit by melting, refining, and resolidification in near weightlessness. Scientists at MSFC’s ground control laboratory would process “control samples” under conditions identical (except for gravity) to those on the spacecraft. (MSFC Release 78-20; Marshall Star, Feb 22/78, 2)
MSFC announced successful completion of the first test of the Space Shuttle external tank, a major milestone leading to firing tests of the Shuttle’s main propulsion system. The Dec. 21 test assured that the main propulsion test article (the test facility and associated hardware) could handle super-cold propellants, liquid hydrogen, and liquid oxygen used by the Shuttle main engine. Propellants used to fill the external tank had flowed through connecting piping to the 3 engines until stopped by the main-engine valve; test engineers then made sure the engines had cooled down to operating temperature, several hundred degrees below zero. A series of static firings of the external tank, a simulated orbiter with a flight aft fuselage, three main engines, and associated piping would validate system operation. (Marshall Star, Jan 11/78, 4)
DFRC announced it had begun a 2 wk flight program with Calspan Corp., using the total inflight simulator (TIFTS) to investigate advanced flight-control systems like those used in the Space Shuttle. TIFTS, a small twin-engine commercial passenger aircraft with the nose modified to include an additional pilot’s cockpit, was one of the largest airborne simulators equipped with variable stability and 6 deg of freedom. Test pilots had flown the simulated mission from the nose cockpit (with safety pilots in the normal cockpit) to improve understanding of the flying qualities of advanced craft when landing, especially in actual touchdown under differing pilot-task conditions. (DFRC X-Press, June 30/78, 2)
NASA reported successful static firing of a Space Shuttle main engine Oct. 30 at the National Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss. The firing lasted for more than 13min, testing its ability to return the Shuttle orbiter to a landing site in case of mission abort during launch. The main engine operated continuously for 823sec, longest burn time an engine should require during an actual mission. A Shuttle orbiter would use 3 main engines having a normal burn time of about 8min. (NASA Release 78-173)
MSFC announced it had begun preparations for stress tests of the Space Shuttle orbiter at Lockheed-Calif.’s 430ton (390 metric tons) steel test rig at Palmdale, Calif. The 6-story “reaction frame” rig had more than 350 hydraulic jacks exerting loads on the orbiter to simulate those to be encountered at launch, during spaceflight, and on reentry into earth atmosphere. Lockheed would perform the tests under contract to Rockwell Inti., builder of the orbiter. (Marshall Star, May 17/78, 2)
LaRC reported on its Jan. 17-19 seminar on Large Space Systems Technology (LSST) attended by more than 200 persons who had exchanged ideas on the technology needed to build large space systems in the future. The group had tried to guess what research and technology the multimission needs of the Space Shuttle would be in 1985 to 2000; NASA had scheduled no definite programs for 1985 to 2000, but wanted to ensure performance of economical and well-organized future missions. Seminar subjects included predictions of structural behavior in space, particularly under loads and stresses; advanced materials and techniques for joining various kinds of structures; distribution of controls for large structures; and electronics equipment needed for operation and control of structures. Those attending had represented six NASA centers, 24 aerospace firms, 8 universities, and 4 DOD centers. To continue cooperation between government agencies and industry, LaRC planned to hold a similar seminar yearly. (LaRC Release 78-3; Langley News, Jan. 27/78, 1)
NASA reported it had halted MSFC preparations for vibration tests of the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise May 12, when the upper dome of the prototype liquid oxygen tank buckled inward while being filled with water. Pressurizing the tank to lib later removed the wrinkles. The tank implosion would delay Enterprise vibration testing, but the program office would have to review delay of the overall Space Shuttle program. (JSC Roundup, May 26/78, 1; Marshall Star, May 10/78, 1)
NASA reported that DOD had lent it 5 Navy divers to support simulated weightlessness tests in the Space Shuttle program. The divers, all fleet-salvage men selected for their expertise in erecting or dismantling underwater structures or equipment, had been assigned to the neutral buoyancy simulator at MSFC. Working underwater in full-scale segments of the Space Shuttle, they would assist test engineers with contingency procedures, equipment operation, evaluation of space-construction techniques, and other activities scheduled for Shuttle and Spacelab missions. (NASA Activities, Jan 78, 5)
The Marshall Star announced it had begun ground-vibration tests of the Space Shuttle, using a computerized shaker system turned on by engineers in instrumentation trailers located near the test stand. The shaker system, the Shuttle modal test and analysis system (SMTAAS), had applied vibration cycles and force inputs and had acquired response information from the vehicle suspended inside a tall stand and canted 9° from vertical. In upcoming months engineers would use SMTAAS to “tune in” to the vehicle’s various vibration modes, comparing responses to mathematical predictions. Results of the tests would allow engineers to verify predictions of Shuttle reaction to the much more severe vibrations expected during launch. (Marshall Star, June 7/78, 1; JSC Roundup, June 9/78, 1; DFRCX-Press, June 16/78, 2; AvWk, June 19/78, 75)
JSC announced it had selected General Electric Co., Space Division, Valley Forge, Pa., for negotiations leading to a contract for the Space Shuttle orbiter food system galley. The estimated $1.2 million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, beginning December 1978 and ending January 1981, would be for a facility including food-preparation equipment (hot and cold water dispensers, oven, water heater) and serving equipment (meat trays). (JSC Release 78-43)
ESA’s Spacelab program board had turned down NASA’s proposal to barter Space Shuttle launch services for the second Spacelab NASA was committed to acquire, and the action was seen as final, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. NASA had hoped to exchange launch service in return for the Spacelab in order to reduce costs [see Sept. 12]. Although ESA itself favored the barter plan, the European governments had refused to commit themselves in advance to Space Shuttle flights. In lieu of the barter deal or any increased NASA funding, ESA might be asked to prefinance work on the second Spacelab until NASA could get the money. (D/SBD, Nov 8/78, 39)
NASA announced that a frame structure for mounting experiments inside the Space Shuttle orbiter’s payload bay had arrived by ship in Savannah, and would be transported by tug to the vehicle assembly building at KSC. Called an OFT (orbital flight test) pallet, the structure, fitted with NASA-developed subsystems, would provide electrical and other support to the experiments. This was the first of two pallet systems destined for use on two of the first six Space Shuttle flight tests. Designed and assembled by British Aerospace Corp. for ESA as part of the joint ESA/NASA Spacelab program, the pallet structure was nearly identical to that of experiment pallets to be used in Spacelab missions beginning in 1981. It was 3m (10ft) long and constructed in a U-shape to fit into the 4.5m (15ft)-diameter orbiter payload bay. Later in the Spacelab program, five pallets would be available for space missions. MSFC was responsible for delivery and system integration of the OFT pallets. (NASA Release 78-182)
KSC reported that NASA’s 4-engine Jetstar aircraft had completed the second of five flight tests of the microwave scanning beam landing system (MSBLS) installed at the orbiter landing facility. The first three flight tests were to verify the system’s ability to land the unpowered Space Shuttle orbiter safely on the 15 000ft runway; the final two would be to commission (declare operational) the runway-landing system. Because orbiters could approach KSC from either the northwest or southeast, the center would have to commission the system twice. Each of the first tests had taken about a week, as the Jetstar had made daily 2hr passes over the runway at different altitudes and azimuths. Precision laser tracking system instrumentation that could locate an aircraft at distances of 14mi and altitudes of 100 to 20 000ft had locked on to special instrumentation in the Jetstar, continuously tape recording the Jetstar’s position while the MSBLS tape recorded the same data. The tapes had been fed into a computer and compared; any positional errors in the MSBLS could then be corrected, aligning the landing system. (Spaceport News, July 7/78, 2)
MSFC reported that the USAF had redesignated an interim upper stage (IUS) for Space Shuttle as the “inertial upper stage,” to reflect its inertial-guidance capabilities as compared to the NASA-sponsored spinning solid upper stage. The new name would also indicate that DOD payloads would use the stage well into the 1980s. (Marshall Star, Feb 1/78, 1; Spaceport News, Feb 17/78, 3)
NASA announced the five Pioneer Venus atmospheric-entry craft reaching Venus and the companion craft in orbit around Venus were the highlights of its space-exploration activities in 1978, the agency’s 20th anniversary yr. NASA had conducted 20 launches in 1978, mainly for other organizations and agencies; it was the third yr in NASA history with a 100% launch-success record. It had also seen completion, of major milestones in preparing for crew-carrying Space Shuttle missions scheduled to begin late in 1979. (NASA Release 78-190)
JSC announced it would issue an RFP for management-consulting firms to answer questions such as: Would controlling 40 to 60 Space Shuttle flights per yr limit JSC’s ability to perform its basic R&D job? How could JSC keep costs low to encourage maximum use of the space transportation system? How would increased Shuttle activity affect JSC relationships with other NASA centers and contractors? If Shuttle launches reached the expected rate of one or two per wk by 1985, JSC officials wanted to be sure these operations did not deplete already limited personnel and other resources JSC would need to remain a major R&D arm of the space agency. JSC planners had drafted an operations plan for the full-use era of the Shuttle, whose onboard capabilities had exceeded those of previous spacecraft. The plan would reduce the number of flight controllers now assigned to real-time ground operations, and would increase the effort put into flight planning. Because JSC flight control work would affect NASA-wide operations and JSC would have large responsibilities in future spaceflight R&D, center management wanted an outside examination of the plan and alternatives before making a commitment. (JSC Roundup, Aug 18/78, 1)
JSC announced it had signed a contract with Itek Optical Systems Division of Lexington, Mass., for the Space Shuttle orbiter camera payload system. The $4 890 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract would cover the first flight system with an option for a second. Planned for spaceflight on pallets and test racks built by NASA or ESA in the orbiter’s 15 by 65ft cargo bay, the system would be a flexible photographic array for earth-imaging surveys, remote sensing, and supplementing nonimaging systems. The second option (to produce a large-format camera for the USGS) would, if exercised, increase the contract value by $1.5 million. (JSC Release 78-42)
Engineers from Rocketdyne and NASA were trying to determine why a liquid-oxygen heat exchanger on a Space Shuttle main engine had failed during a test at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss., Av Wk reported. This was the first failure of a heat exchanger (an engine component converting liquid oxygen to gaseous oxygen to pressurize the Space Shuttle’s external propellant tank). Earlier in 1978 the Natl. Research Council’s Assembly of Engineering had noted that, although the exchanger had not encountered any difficulties, the system “poses a potential threat to the total shuttle system” from a single-point-failure standpoint. The committee said that, whereas redesign to add systems redundancy was impractical at that point, the system warranted continued examination for potential design improvements. NASA agreed with that assessment. Inflight heat-exchanger failure might start a serious fire or explosion that could result in loss of the spacecraft. Failure during the test had resulted in some engine damage, but none to the test-stand. Testing with different engines was continuing. (AvWk, Dec 18/78, 8)
ESA’s Geos2 had apparently suffered a collision in space that did not affect its payload performance but had badly disturbed experiments studying the low-energy plasma, Nature magazine reported. Geos 2 had become fully operational Aug. 2, with all onboard instruments functioning well; prospects for a full 2-yr, mission had been excellent until 07.13 GMT Aug. 5, when UHF telemetry temporarily shut off. The fault had seriously affected the low-energy plasma experiments: the electrical-reference potential of the spacecraft appeared to have jumped 12v for half of each 6-sec spin cycle. This seemed to be the result of slight damage to a solar-array panel that apparently shorted the output of a string of cells to the structure whenever they became illuminated. The design of Geos 2 had attempted to eliminate differential charging; the conductive indium oxide coating of the solar cells was supposed to offer a shorting path in the case of mechanical damage. The Space Shuttle might some day serve as a vacuum cleaner to gather the many manmade objects floating in space. In the meantime, the geostationary corridor had rapidly become crowded, and spacecraft designers would have to consider the probabilities and consequences of space collisions. (Nature, Aug 17/78, 631)
NASA reported that a flight-configured Space Shuttle engine fired in tests at NASA’s Bay St. Louis, Miss., facility had exceeded 5000sec, the level to be met by a production engine to certify the main propulsion system for manned flight. Testing of the Space Shuttle main engine had increased dramatically, both in number of tests and time accumulated, since Aug. 12, 1978. Two engines had each accumulated approximately 7100sec of testing time, putting total engine-testing time over 25 OOOsec in 342 tests. Among these were five consecutive runs of 520sec, the length of time needed to put the Shuttle into orbit, on one engine at rated power level. Preliminary flight certification, which required a flight engine to have run 5000sec, was expected in the spring of 1979. Full-duration testing of the complete main propulsion system (a cluster of three engines) would resume in early 1979 when the first manned orbital flight configuration engines would become available. (NASA Release 78-144; JSC Release 78-40; Marshall Star, Sept 13/78,1)
Europe’s space industry was looking beyond Spacelab to future programs that would maintain technological advances and employment as well as joint development activities with the U.S. in manned spaceflight, AvWk reported. With delivery of the first Spacelab scheduled for next yr, European industry said U.S. delay in ordering a second flight unit might disrupt skilled manpower employment and management performance. Also, European industry officials had told NASA that its charges for Space Shuttle flights were too high, and that Europe should have special treatment in Space Shuttle/Spacelab use. W. Germany’s ERNO, Spacelab prime contractor, had proposed to NASA and ESA a second Spacelab as the basis for a barter agreement [see Sept. 12] under which costs of the second Spacelab would offset future Space Shuttle services for Europe. An ERNO spokesman had warned that NASA should not increase Spacelab 2 technical requirements to a point where the cost to Europe’s space industry was unreasonable. On the other hand, the barter agreement should not give the U.S. full autonomy in operating Spacelab or producing future Spacelabs. Commercialization of the Space Shuttle was essential, because “twenty million dollars (1975 price basis) for a standard Shuttle launch and possibly the same amount for a standard Spacelab flight service Eire hardly suited to arouse the interest” of European users, particularly industry, the spokesman said. (AvWk, Oct 23/78, 17)
NASA had officially changed the date of the first Space Shuttle orbital flight from Mar. to June of 1979 because of engine problems, the NY Times reported. NASA said the June date would be tentative until additional tests confirmed that the Shuttle’s three main engines were free of problems. There had been signs the engine situation was improving. Launch date had been important because of NASA’s plan to use the Shuttle to rescue Skylab from an uncontrolled fall to earth next year, possibly by early summer. (NYT, May 18/78, B-10)
NASA announced it had invited scientists to submit proposals for life sciences experiments to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle and Spacelab in the early 1980s. The experiments would study physical effects of spaceflight on humans and other living systems, and would test equipment and procedures. These experiments would be performed in the pressurized cabin of the Space Shuttle orbiter, in a pressurized Spacelab module, or (if requiring continuous exposure to the space environment) attached to an unpressurized Spacelab pallet. Proposed investigations would have to meet one or more of the following life sciences objectives: investigate and understand physiological, performance, and biochemical changes observed in humans who had flown in space; identify and investigate significant biological phenomena that might occur during or after exposure to the space environment; and/or test and demonstrate under operational conditions the equipment and procedures that would be needed by the NASA life sciences program. (NASA Release 78-64)
JSC announced that technicians had installed four radiator panels and a flash evaporator system (FES) in a chamber of Building 32 to prepare for Nov. tests of the Space Shuttle heat rejection system. Radiator panels that would reject heat and maintain a livable temperature for Space Shuttle crews would contain Freon. 21 flowing continuously through system loops, picking up heat throughout the ship and depositing cold; heat would be pumped to a central location and vented into space. From 14 000ft to orbit, the FES would cool the ship; in orbit, it would supplement panels that would open and, using ship’s maneuvers, reflect heat. The Nov. tests would close off the 120-ft-high chamber and pump liquid nitrogen through tubes in the black walls, dropping temperatures to -320°; infrared lamps would then increase temperatures to the level required in space. This would be first testing of all system components as a unit. (JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 1)
NASA reported it had amended a contract with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Inti. Corp. to procure 9 Space Shuttle main engines, in addition to the 7 already on order. The amendment had authorized Rocket-dyne to manufacture and test the 9 engines during a 180-day period in which prices would be negotiated. Estimated cost of the amendment had been $250 million. The 9 engines would support the Space Shuttle program through the first 4 orbiters approved for production; the present contract had covered engines for the first Space Shuttle flight scheduled for 1979 and had included 3 ground-test engines and 1 spare. (Marshall Star, May 31/78, 3)
NASA announced it had selected Teledyne Brown Engineering, Huntsville, Ala., for negotiations leading to award of a contract for payload/missions integration for the sixth Space Shuttle orbital flight test and for the first 3 Spacelab missions to be managed by MSFC. An experiment-integration contractor, Teledyne Brown would ensure that the group of experiments for each mission was compatible with the Space Transportation System scheduled to carry it into orbit. The contract would provide for manpower, materials, and associated services required for integration and operation of Spacelab payloads. Flights scheduled during 1980 to 1981 would offer opportunities for scientific investigations on Spacelab missions in the planning stage with scientists from throughout the world participating. These missions would give scientists the first chance to go into space as payload specialists and conduct their investigations in earth orbit. (Marshall Star, Feb 22/78, 1)
In its “Profile of a Mission,” Lewis News reported that a new era of opportunity in space had become available. The Space Transportation System (the Space Shuttle) would open the door to activities ranging from experiments in basic research on physical and chemical process, to using the weightlessness and vacuum of space as an environment for manufacturing products. LeRC’s Space Experiments Integration Office (SEIO) would help principal investigators proposing experiments that needed a space environment, by preventing duplication of effort and standardizing paperwork required for project approval. SEIO had management responsibility for one facility and four experiments, three of which were to fly on the long-duration exposure facility (LDEF) managed at LaRC: —The advanced photovoltaic experiment (APEX) on the LDEF consisted of three related approaches to investigating the solar spectrum and the effect of exposure to space on advanced photovoltaics and materials. For the first time, space-calibrated solar cells would be available as laboratory standards for assessing performance of new solar cells. —The space power experiment (SPEX) on the LDEF would evaluate the use of commercially available components for a space-power system. With three LDEF trays carrying commercially available terrestrial solar cells and a fourth carrying commercial power electronics and batteries, successful operation of these components in space could significantly reduce costs of future space-power systems. —In the ion-beam texturing and surface-coating experiment on the LDEF, which would expose such surface samples to launch stress and near-earth space, ground tests before and after exposure would record the optical properties of the surface of each sample and compare durability of ion-beam-textured surfaces with that of state-of-the-art surfaces. If the ion-beam-textured surfaces exhibited higher durability, use of thermal-control coatings for spacecraft would increase. —The cryogenic fluid-management experiment (CFME), a payload attached to a Spacelab pallet, would obtain long-duration low-gravity engineering data on systems for storage/acquisition/supply of liquified gas (subcritical) to verify the possibility of successfully operating such a system in space. The zero-gravity combustion facility (OGCF), a versatile reusable assembly that would permit a Spacelab experimenter to study combustion free of earth’s buoyancy forces, would carry out tests ranging from rapid burning to long-term smoldering of a variety of liquid, solid, and gaseous fuels. {Lewis News, June 9/78, 3)
KSC announced award to the International Hydrodynamics Co., Vancouver, British Columbia, of a contract for systems to recover expended Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket-booster (SRB) casings. The $1 million contract would cover fabrication, testing, and delivery of the recovery systems with associated equipment and hardware. Recovery of SRB casings would mean sizeable savings to the Shuttle program; estimating 19 reuses of a casing, the savings realized by reuse (including cost of retrieval and refurbishment) would be $47 million. (KSC Release 37-78)
AvWk reported that the Soviet Union had labeled the U.S. Space Shuttle a killer-satellite development, and U.S. officials planning talks with the USSR had been debating how to refer to the Space Shuttle in these discussions. NASA had been concerned about the effect on the Space Shuttle program of antisatellite negotiations, although U.S. negotiators had stated they had no intention of trading away Space Shuttie capability for USSR concessions. Informal negotiations on limitation of antisatellite-weapons tests had been set for May; U.S. officials said that NASA must have expected the Space Shuttle to be part of antisatellite discussions. As the Soviets had not cited the Space Shuttle by name, but rather as a “manned system of dual use,” U.S. officials had not decided whether the concessions sought by the USSR would be on overall Shuttle capability, on individual Shuttle capabilities, or on individual potentially antisatellite Shuttle missions. (AvWk, Apr 17/78, 17)
Boeing had awarded a $2 million contract to United Technologies’ Chemical Systems Division to build seven servoactuator systems (and two actuators for preflight testing) that would raise the inertial upper stage (IUS) to deployment position in the Space Shuttle payload bay, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Each system would consist of two servoactuators (one for backup), composed of an actuator and electronic controller positioned on either side of a tilt table in the payload bay to which the IUS would be secured. On command, the system would physically tip the tilt table to a predetermined position (e.g., 58°) for IUS deployment. The actuator motor would drive an extendable shaft 41 to 57in long to rotate the tilt table. Pyrotechnic devices on the tilt table would release the IUS, and springs would launch it into space. First flight of the IUS on board the Space Shuttle was scheduled for 1980. (D/SBD, Dec 20/78, 239)
MSFC reported that a failure in Skylab’s power system July 9 had caused loss of vehicle attitude; MSFC engineers had reconfigured the system and fully charged the spacecraft’s batteries, before performing reorientation maneuvers to return it to its minimum-drag attitude. Skylab was now about 240mi above earth, rolling at about 2 revolutions per hr. Engineers had planned maneuvers to stop the roll and place the vehicle first in a solar-inertial attitude, then in an end-on velocity vector that would encounter minimum atmospheric drag. However, Dr. Chris Kraft, JSC director, said in a copyrighted interview with the Dallas Morning News reported in the Washington Post: “I don’t believe Skylab is going to live long enough for us to get to it with the Space Shuttle . . . We’re going to have to live with the fact that Skylab is going to die a natural death.” (Marshall Star, July 19/78,1, July 12/78,1; JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 1; ARC Astrogram, July 13/78; 1; W Post, July 21/78, A14)
NASA announced that President Jimmy Carter had presented 1977 presidential management-improvement awards to Curtis Helms and Thomas Winstead of MSFC’s structures and propulsion laboratory. The two were among 7 awardees, selected from 50 nominees, honored at a May 23 ceremony in the White House rose garden. Their redesign of the Space Shuttle external fuel tank, eliminating one of the two vent-relief valves, had reduced vehicle weight and program costs while still meeting venting requirements and reliability standards, resulting in total savings of $5.6 million. (NASA Actv., July 78, 27)
