NASA announced that JPL had selected TRW’s Space Systems Division, Redondo Beach, Calif., to negotiate a contract estimated at $80 million for designing, building, and testing one of two spacecraft to explore the Sun’s polar regions in the 1980s. A second spacecraft would be developed by ESA. The solar-polar mission sponsored jointly by NASA and ESA would study the Sun, cosmic rays, and magnetic fields in uncharted areas of the solar system. The four-year mission would begin with launch of both spacecraft by the Space Shuttle in 1983; a gravity-assist flyby of Jupiter in 1986 would put the craft over the solar poles in 1986 and again in 1987. This would be the first mission using spacecraft out of the plane in which Earth and other planets orbit the Sun. JPL would manage the project for NASA’s Office of Space Science. The TRW contract covered the spacecraft system and ground-support equipment, integration of the science payload, tests and launch preparation, and spacecraft-system support during the mission. (NASA Release 79-100)
NASA reported successful completion December 17 at NSTL in Mississippi of a full-duration 9-minute 10-second run of the Space Shuttle main-engine test article, a time longer than that needed to launch an actual Shuttle into orbit. This was the first time the whole system was operated for full duration. No problems occurred, and MSFC test managers said that all goals were achieved. The test article consisted of a cluster of three main engines mounted in a simulated orbiter aft section, drawing propellants from a flight-type external tank. The three engines were throttled back from 100% rated power level to 90%, 80%, and 70%; engine gimbaling and pulsing were successful. To check out two-engine performance, one engine was cut off early as planned, and the remaining two were operated at 70% rated power level for the last 5 seconds of testing. (NASA Release 79-178; MSFC Release 79-133)
MFSC reported that the first Space Shuttle engine tested for flight acceptance had “passed with flying colors” a 520-second endurance test May 12 that simulated launch conditions. Scheduled for use on Columbia, this engine would undergo electrical and mechanical checkout before formal acceptance. The tests began April 25 with 1.5-second ignition-test firing, followed by a 100-second calibration-test firing May 2. After formal acceptance, the engine would go by truck to KSC for installation. The other two of the cluster of three Rockwell-built engines to be used on Columbia were at Space Technology Laboratories for the same series of tests. (MSFC Release 79-45; NASA Release 79-68)
MSFC reported that the NASA barge Poseidon carrying a Space Shuttle external tank and other components had begun an 11-day trip to KSC by way of the Tennessee River and the Gulf of Mexico. KSC would use the items to check out assembly and movement of the components in the vehicle assembly building and to train personnel in stacking the Shuttle on its mobile launch platform. MSFC said the waterways to the Gulf, swollen by recent rains, had receded enough to permit a normal trip to KSC. (MSFC Release
NASA announced that it had named the first four Space Shuttle orbiters that would operate in space to honor U.S. explorer ships. The first orbiter (102) scheduled for launch later in 1979 was named for the Columbia, which located the Columbia River in 1792; Captain Robert Gray named the river for his sloop. Challenger (orbiter 099) was named for the ship that gathered data December 1872-May 1876, filling 50 volumes on Earth’s oceans. Discovery (orbiter 103) was the ship looking in 1610-1611 for a northwest passage from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific Ocean by exploring Hudson’s Bay. Atlantis (orbiter 104) was the first U.S.-operated vessel designed for ocean research, a two-masted ketch that logged half a million miles between 1930 and 1966. Enterprise, the first orbiter built, was named for a vessel exploring the Arctic from 1851 to 1854, as well as for the flagship in television’s Star Trek; as the test orbiter, it was not intended for use in space. (NASA Release 79-10; Washington Post, Jan 26/79, C-2; WSJ, Jan 26/79, 1).
JSC reported that it had amended its contract with Rockwell International Corporation to cover 56 engineering changes in the Space Shuttle orbiter. The first amendment, covering 32 changes, would cost $14,338,000; the second, covering 24 changes plus testing, repairs, and spares, would cost $2,869,833. The control value was now about $3.43 billion. (JSC Release
MSFC reported the successful conclusion October 26 of three separate static-firing tests of the Space Shuttle main engine. The three test engines had completed a scheduled total of 1245 seconds of firing time in less than 12 hours; two engines were tested at NSTL in Mississippi; the other, in California. One of the pair tested in Mississippi fired for 520 seconds, the running time needed for Shuttle launch; the other fired for 665 seconds, the time required for a mission abort. Both these tests were part of a preliminary flight certification series. NASA had postponed a 510-second static test scheduled for October 24 [see October 25] because of a faulty sensor that indicated a hydrogen leak. (MSFC Release 79-119)
NASA reported that a scheduled 510-second firing of the main Shuttle propulsion system test article’s three-engine cluster at the National Space Technology Laboratories had failed November 4 when a sensor detected excessive pressure in the oxygen pump of the No. 3 engine and shut the test down after 9 seconds. The No. 1 engine was damaged during the cutoff sequence, when a hydrogen line ruptured near the base of the engine nozzle. Extent of the damage was unknown; the engine would be sent to Rockwell’s California plant for inspection and repair. MSFC and the contractor were investigating the failure and the possibility of replacing the damaged article in the test stand. Impact on Shuttle schedules had not been assessed. Meanwhile, the orbiter Columbia had successfully passed a series of “ hot fire” tests at KSC of the auxiliary power units to steer main-engine nozzles during launch and to drive control surfaces during atmospheric flight. The tests simulated ascent and descent phases of a Shuttle mission. Next milestone for Columbia would be an integrated test of all systems. (NASA Release 79-146; MSFC Release 79-122)
MSFC said a long-duration test firing of the Shuttle main propulsion system scheduled June 12 was successful, even though a glitch in the automatic-cutoff instrumentation had terminated the test about 50 seconds into the 520 second program. Frank Stewart, test manager for MSFC’s Shuttle projects office, said that the test was successful “in the sense that the system performed as predicted and yielded a great deal of valuable data” needed before the first Shuttle flight. Stewart said the firing sequence was excellent. For the first time in test firing of three flight engines, the rated power level was attained, and the test produced pogo pulsing (a deliberate oscillation from very low to very high frequencies generated by a piston in the liquid-oxygen manifold, to show if vibrations in flight would constitute resonance dangerous to structures). This first long-duration firing of the clustered flight-type engines and propulsion system had already been delayed by malfunction of a development engine during single-engine tests. Inspection after the failure revealed a crack in the coolant pipe, requiring removal of the engine nozzle. Engineers modified a spare nozzle for installation in the test article. Stewart said the event should not delay the total test schedule, which included extra time for unforeseen difficulties. System verification should be complete “in ample time for the first Shuttle flight,” he said. (MSFC Release 79-58)
JSC announced that all Space Shuttle orbiters would have an optical landing aid presently used by pilots of more than 20 U.S. and foreign commercial and military aircraft. Rockwell International, prime contractor for the Shuttle, would provide for the commander and pilot of all orbiters a “head up” system to project instantaneous displays of spacecraft speed, rate of descent, altitude, and other critical flight factors on a transparent viewing glass located above the cockpit window to be pulled down like the sun visor of an automobile. The system would be placed on Columbia in time for the first operational flight, expected early in 1981 after completion of the flight-test program, and in JSC simulators and trainers. (JSC Release 79-64)
The Washington Star reported that NASA had reestablished radio contact with Voyager 1 speeding toward Saturn after the spacecraft apparently became disoriented December 13 during a commanded course correction and aimed its antenna in the wrong direction. JPL controllers had managed to make it “reorient itself and aim its antenna directly at earth.” (W Star, Dec 17/79, A-4) The press reported that a 14-hour dry-run test of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia got under way at Cape Canaveral December 16 after a day’s delay for routine checks. The orbiter integrated test would check out Columbia’s systems using equipment and engineering teams in control centers at the Cape and JSC. (NY Times, Dec 17/79, D-15; W Star, Dec 17/79, A-2; W Post, Dec 17/79, A-28) Dr. Paul MacCready, builder of the lightweight Gossamer Albatross that made the world’s first manpowered flight across die English Channel in June this year, saw his creation go on display in Philadelphia’s Franklin Institute, the Washington Star reported. MacCready was now planning a solar-powered Albatross, the paper said. {W Star, Dec 17/79, A-2)
MSFC reported that 1.5-second ignition-test firings May 4 of a cluster of three Space Shuttle main engines at National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) had been successful, clearing the way for the second phase of verification tests. The three flight-type engines, previously acceptance tested individually at the facility, had undergone the cluster test in an assembly including the engines, a simulated orbiter midbody, and a flight-type aft fuselage to which the engines were fitted. Frank Stewart, MSFC test manager, said that sequencing was good and that he foresaw no problems with the first long-duration firing scheduled for May 15. The tests would evaluate system performance in a static-firing environment as a step in verifying the system for the first manned orbital Shuttle flight. Cluster firings would take place about once per month through July; the third phase of long-duration firings would begin in September and conclude in November, after the equipment had been modified. (MSFC Release 79-47)
MSFC announced that NASA would buy from Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International, 12 more main engines for the Space Shuttle under a $365.7 million amendment of the original 1972 contract that would bring its value to $1,263,215,058. The original contract was for purchase of 27 engines; the amendment would bring the total ordered to 19. The amendment also called for overhaul and test of 10 engines to 109% of rated power level, plus a second overhaul and flight test of the 3 engines being used for propulsion testing. Rocketdyne had delivered the engines for the first Shuttle flight, three ground-test engines, and a spare flight engine under the original 1972 contract. The three flight engines delivered to KSC had been installed on Columbia for next year’s first spaceflight. (MSFC Release 79-117)
ESA reported that the West German firm, Dornier System, leader of the STAR industrial consortium, would be prime contractor for a European spacecraft to participate in the international solar-polar mission (ISPM), a cooperative ESA-NASA project. The contract would cover design, development, manufacture, and testing, at a cost of more than 47MAU (million accounting units, worth U.S. $1.2 in 1979). The ISPM would make measurements outside the ecliptic plane and observations of the Sun using two spacecraft, one each from ESA and NASA, to be launched in February 1983 on the U.S. Space Shuttle. (ESA Release 25)
