NASA reported that MSFC had chosen Ball Aerospace Division to negotiate a $9.5 million contract for design, development, and manufacture of a chemical release module for use in the first large-scale controlled investigations of dynamic phenomena outside Earth’s atmosphere. Information on such processes in Earth’s magnetosphere, ionosphere, and upper atmosphere was hard to obtain because the areas were so enormous and the dynamic activity was invisible. Scheduled for mid-1983 launch on the Space Shuttle, the self-contained free-flying module would release in space chemical elements that would absorb sunlight and reflect distinctive colors; other chemicals would glow when reacting with oxygen particles in the upper atmosphere. Motion of atoms and ions colored in this way could be tracked. During the module’s six-month lifetime, it would make 20 to 30 chemical releases for visual, camera, and radar observation. (NASA Release 80-99; MSFC Release 80-89)
Eighteen years after he blasted away from a launch pad at Complex 14, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, to become the first American to orbit the Earth, Sen. John Glenn (D-Ohio) returned to dedicate a marble memorial of his flight and those of Mercury astronauts Scott Carpenter, Walter Schirra, and Gordon Cooper, donated in 1978 by the American Monument Association but held back for dedication until gantries at the site were removed and sold for scrap. The Washington Star said the site was now desolate, “surrounded by palmettos and visited only by an occasional alligator or rattlesnake.” About 600 persons at the ceremony heard Glenn describe the new U.S. goal of routine and economical access to space with the Space Shuttle. {W Star, Feb 21/80, A-2; Today, Feb. 12/80, 1QA; NASA Actv, May 80, 19)
NASA announced that, contrary to recently published reports, it was not taking reservations for travel on Space Shuttle missions. Recent articles on NASA plans to carry small experimental payloads on the Shuttle had mentioned a deposit of $500 to reserve payload space; the reference to a reservation had been taken to imply passenger space. NASA said that it would not offer seats on Shuttle flights to paying passengers. (NASA Release 80-2)
MSFC reported the first sustained operation of the Space Shuttle main engine at full power level, 109% of rated power for 6 minutes, in static firing tests March 31 at NSTL. The engine ran for 10 minutes, 10 seconds, reaching the objectives attempted in an aborted run the previous week. (MSFC Release 80-47; NASA Release 80-42)
NASA announced selection of two firms, McDonnell Douglas and TRW, to receive parallel $1 million one-year contracts for design-definition studies of 25-kilowatt power systems for the STS. The power systems, using solar energy to support large payloads left in orbit, would be placed in a fixed orbit by the Space Shuttle to provide electric power, heat rejection, attitude control, communications, and data handling for a variety of payloads freeing the Shuttle from extended time in orbit and reducing payload cost per day in orbit. MSFC would manage the study contracts and any follow-on development flight system. (NASA Release 80-63)
NASA reported successful testing April 14 of a Space Shuttle main engine at 109% of rated power for six minutes, in the second such test in two weeks conducted by Rockwell International at NSTL. The 10-minute, 10-second test met all objectives; NASA said that it planned at least one more firing in this series on this engine, which had accumulated 183 minutes of firing time in two series of preliminary flight-certification tests. (NASA Release 80-49; MSFC Release 80-55)
Ground testing of Space Shuttle engines suffered another setback, the New York Times reported, when three engines shut down prematurely during a static test firing in Mississippi. The engines, identical to three now on the Columbia at Cape Canaveral, were supposed to fire for 9 minutes, 41 seconds, the time it would take to put a Shuttle into orbit. NASA said that instruments indicated overheating in part of a turbopump. This 11th firing of the three engines in the test series would have been the 5th for the full time needed to launch a Shuttle. Columbia was scheduled for its maiden launch in March 1981. (NY Times, Nov 4/80, C-3)
NASA announced that MSFC had awarded a $230 million cost-plus-award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace for full-scale production of Space Shuttle external tanks, the only part of the: Shuttle not recovered for reuse. Martin Marietta had an earlier contract for design, development, and delivery of nine tanks—three test articles and six flight articles—for Shuttle test flights. The new contract, for delivery of 7 flight tanks to support Shuttle operating missions, included long lead-time procurement of components and subassemblies for 5 additional tanks and raw material for 24 other additional tanks. Manufacturing of the external tanks would take place at NASA’s Michoud assembly facility. (NASA Release 80-100; MSFC Release 80-90) —MSFC announced that it planned to reduce the weight of the Shuttle external tank by 6,000 pounds, a change that could increase the Shuttle’s payload-carrying capability by about the same amount. The center amended its tank design and development contract with Martin Marietta, adding more than $42.9 million to cover the weight-reduction effort and modify tools used in future production. The change would affect tanks built under a new contract for full-scale tank production to support operational Shuttle launches. The first lightweight external tank would be delivered in the summer of 1982. (MSFC Release 80-93; NASA Release 80-102)
NASA announced a student involvement project, a joint activity with the NSTA. Up to 200 semifinalists in a competition to develop experiments for flight on the Shuttle and their teachers would attend preliminary conferences in 10 regions to discuss the proposals with other students as well as NASA and industry scientists; many of the regional conferences would be at NASA centers. NASA awarded the science teachers’ group a contract to conduct the competition and select the winners. From the 200, 10 would be selected whose concepts would best use the capabilities of the Shuttle. The 10 national winners would attend a special conference at KSC late in 1981; all entrants would receive a certificate of participation. Shuttle flights should begin in March 1981; the winning experiments might go on flights in 1981 or 1982. (NASA Release 80-132)
NASA reported a major milestone for a Shuttle main engine February 8, with completion of a second series of flight certification tests at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) near Bay St. Louis, Miss. In the two series of tests (mostly run for 520 seconds at 100% of rated power level), the engine accumulated more than 10,000 seconds of firing time, equivalent to that required for 19 Shuttle flights; in one test, the engine ran at 102% of rated power, and in another it ran for 823 seconds to simulate an aborted mission. The first series of tests last year began March 27 and ended June 27. (MSFC Release 80-19; NASA Release 80-26)
MSFC reported successful completion March 13 of the first full-power test (10% of rated power level) of the Space Shuttle main engine. The test consisted of a 125-second run on a single engine, 10 seconds at 109%; a total of 26 seconds ran above normal rated power. This major step toward certification of the engine for full-power abort capability envisioned possible malfunction of a single engine, requiring thrust in excess of rated power from the other two engines to ensure achievement of orbit or return for safe landing. Rockwell International, prime Shuttle contractor, conducted the tests at NSTL in Mississippi. (MSFC Release 80-36; NASA Release 80-36)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Rocketdyne officials had decided that widespread modification of Space Shuttle flight-engine welds made with welding rods from a suspect lot would not be necessary. Last month the company reported that it might have to straighten a large number of welds, but it had now decided to limit the modifications to an area of hydrogen line located near the base of the engine nozzles. The modified engines would be reinstalled on Orbiter 102 by mid-March, the magazine said. (AvWk, Jan 14/80, 21)
Today reported that Rockwell International, prime Space Shuttle contractor, had made “key management changes and major organizational realignments.. .similar to ones made within the space agency recently.” The paper said NASA now hoped to launch the Shuttle in September, two years behind schedule. {Today, Jan 4/80, 12A)
NASA reported selection of Hughes Aircraft’s space and communications group for negotiation of a $40 million contract to be managed by ARC for a carrier spacecraft to transport the Galileo probe to Jupiter. Launched from the Space Shuttle in March 1984, the probe would reach the planet by July 1987, separate from the carrier, and enter the atmosphere to measure it for about one hour down to a level where pressure would be 10 times that of Earth’s. The carrier would be powered by two radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs); solar energy at Jupiter’s distance would be too weak to furnish power to the carrier, which would maintain contact with Earth during the entire mission, returning data both in real time and for playback on tape recorders. The carrier would receive data from the probe during its entry and descent into Jupiter’s atmosphere, transmitting it to Earth stations. Data on Jupiter’s atmosphere, believed to consist of the original material that formed the stars, would give scientists better understanding of Jupiter’s and Earth’s weather mechanisms. (NASA Release 80-171; ARC Release 80-79)
NASA had no plans to carry tourists into outer space, the Washington Star said, even though its offices around the United Slates had floods of requests for rides since the Space Shuttle project was unveiled in 1977. At least 15,000 people had tried to book seats, and 1,200 new requests arrived each week. “Non-astronauts may be aboard some missions to conduct experiments,” said Chester M. Lee, NASA’s director of space transportation systems, “but we’re not ready to book tourists. There is absolutely no provision or thought for non-working passengers.” (W Star, July 8/80, A-2)
JSC announced NASA selection of two California aerospace firms to negotiate contracts for production of solar cells as a supplemental power source for the Space Shuttle orbiter. Applied Solar Energy Corporation and Spectrolab would each receive a $300,000 contract to develop a large-area low-cost solar cell for NASA’s proposed power-extension package, to be produced at the rate of 144,000 space-qualified solar cells per year, reducing the cost to $30 per watt. (Solar cells now cost from $80 to $120 per watt.) The power-extension item would be a 2,000-pound package folded into the orbiter cargo bay; in orbit, the item would be moved out by a remote mechanical arm, the 177-foot wings unfolding to supply the Shuttle with 26 kilowatts of electric power. (JSC Release 80-032)
The Washington Star quoted Defense Secretary Harold Brown’s statement before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation that NASA’s Space Shuttle program was “critical” to defense planning. The committee was considering the FY81 budget requests of NASA and DOD. (WStar, Feb 8/80, A-5)
NASA announced award of its largest contract so far to a small business firm. KSC entered a fixed-price contract of $6,689,666 to W&J Construction Company of Cocoa, Fla., for work on Pad B of Launch Complex 39 where the Space Shuttle would be launched in 1982 when it became operational. W&J would put in long-run pipes and cables to pump and monitor fuels, coolant, nitrogen and gaseous helium, compressed air, and hydraulic fluids, from storage areas to the fixed and the rotating service structures. Connections to the Space Shuttle would be from the two service towers. The contract would be completed in 20 months. (NASA Release 80-152) •
NASA reported “highly successful” completion of a third static test on a Space Shuttle main engine at NSTL April 19, last of a series simulating power levels necessary to abort at full power in a Shuttle launch. Previous tests were on March 31 and April 14. The engine used (2004) was fired for 10 minutes, 10 seconds with 6 minutes at the 109% power level; this engine had a total firing time of 12,911 seconds (3.58 hours), equivalent to about 25 Shuttle flights. It would now undergo preliminary flight certification tests, 13 static firings at 102% of rated power level. (NASA Release 80-55; MSFC Release 80-58)
Changes made during the past year to the three main engines designated for the first flight of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia had led NASA to set up further tests, the agency announced. Modifications included high-piessure turbopumps, valves, and nozzles. Acceptance-tested between April and July 1979, the engines would be shipped from KSC to NSTL in Mississippi for reacceptance firing and return to KSC. The two- to three-month testing would not affect the timing of the first flight, now scheduled for a date between November 1980 and March 1981. About 6 weeks before the planned launch, the engines would be fired again for 20 seconds on the launch pad. (NASA Release 80-60; JSC Release 80-030)
NASA announced that it would maintain an expendable launch-vehicle capability at the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) in Florida as a backup to the Space Shuttle during transition to Space Transportation System (STS) operation. It would use the standard Delta launch vehicle, capable of putting spacecraft weighing up to 1,100 kilograms (2,400 pounds) into orbit. NASA would charge commercial Delta users $22 million per launch at the outset. (NASA Release 80-22)
JSC reported signing of a letter contract with Martin Marietta Aerospace for development and production of an in-orbit tile-repair kit to be used on llie Space Shuttle. The letter preceded an official award of contract and aulliorized llie firm to go ahead willi design and development of llie kit. Estimated value of llie contract was $2.1 million. (JSC Release 80-004)
NASA announced that it and the ESA had selected 37 scientific experiments for the first flight of Spacelab, scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle late in 1982. The experiments were in five categories: atmospheric physics and Earth observation; space plasma physics; material sciences and technology; astronomy and solar physics; and life science. NASA would sponsor 13 of the 37; ESA (a consortium of 11 nations), the others. Deferred for assignment to later flights were three NASA experiments and a major ESA facility; the factor preventing selection of all the experiments was mass. Each agency would be allowed to fly 1,392 kilograms (3,062 pounds) of equipment on the mission. Unlike Skylab, Spacelab would not be left unattended in space; it would remain in the Shuttle and be returned to Earth for use in another mission. (NASA Release 80-62; MSFC Release 80-66; ESA Info 9)
MSFC said that the Michoud facility near New Orleans had begun assembling the lightweight external-propellant tank for the Space Shuttle. Built by Martin Marietta Aerospace, the modified tank would weigh 6,000 pounds less than its predecessor, increasing Shuttle payload capacity by about that amount. Recent structural tests showed that reducing thickness of skin panels would not affect tank integrity; changing materials of some components would also take advantage of recent research. The external tank (actually two tanks connected by a collar-like intertank) would contain liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants for the three Shuttle main engines and would be the only major element not recovered for reuse. First of the lightweight tanks should be ready for delivery in the summer of 1982 for the fifth Shuttle launch. (MSFC Release 80-155)
MSFC reported successful firing of three Space Shuttle main engines mounted in a test article for 535 seconds in the eighth test of the main propulsion system. A similar firing for 555 seconds occurred 3 weeks ago. In the latest test, engineers for the first time gimbaled the engines while including a “pogo” effect (a phenomenon of cyclic pressures in the propellant system that had occurred in earlier launch vehicles) to demonstrate the engine accumulator’s ability to prevent pogo during flight. Another successful first was the simulation of failure in thrust-vector control to see whether redundant systems would perform properly. The test had been planned for early morning so that engineers could observe ice and frost conditions on the external tank when it was filled with supercold propellants during nighttime hours, in the absence of heat from the Sun. Rockwell International’s space systems group conducted the main propulsion-system testing for MSFC at NSTL. (MSFC Release 80-41)
