MSFC reported a joint-endeavor agreement signed by NASA’s Office of Space Sciences and GTI Corporation of San Diego that might lead to flight of a GTI materials-processing device on four future Shuttle flights. The agreement was a new NASA approach to government-industry partnerships in developing future applications or technologies for space-flown devices. The agreement would have three phases: design by GTI of a low-cost multichamber alloy-solidification furnace operable in low-gravity space; development, testing, and integrating the GTI furnace into the Shuttle; and flight on the Shuttle. GTI’s interest was in the manufacturing in microgravity of space alloys that would not be immiscible on Earth, where many theoretical alloys were not possible because of the density variations of the elements and the effect of gravity on the heavier elements. GTI would fund development and testing; NASA, the integration and flight. (MSFC Release 82-13; NASA Release
NASA said that the three main engines that powered Space Shuttle Columbia on its five missions would be modified and retested to certify them for operation on the orbiter Atlantis. Rocketdyne would disassemble, inspect, and reassemble the engines before forwarding them to MSFC’s NSTL for acceptance tests and certification. They would be installed in Atlantis for its first mission in 1985. Columbia would get three new engines for its Spacelab mission in 1983. (MSFC Release 82-104)
NASA successfully completed a 30 second flight-readiness firing of the new higher power space shuttle main engines at KSC. The test was to verify llight readiness of the three new engines and demonstrate in a launch-day environment the proper integration of all elements before the STS-6 mission. The successful test was a major step in preparation for STS-6, scheduled for launch in January 1983. Pre- and post-test activities included personnel from KSC, JSC, and MSFC. This was the second time in history for static-firing the primary propulsion system of a manned spacecraft on the launch pad. A similar test of Columbia’s three main engines occurred Febraury 20, 1981, before the first Shuttle launch. Challenger’s more powerful engines, each generating 390,000 pound of thrust at sea level, had been fired individually at NSTL but were fired for the first time today in a flight configuration. The most significant problem was a high level of gaseous hydrogen in the aft compartment. NASA said that so much work remained in the crew compartment that Rockwell employees at KSC were scheduled to work in that area over the holidays. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 21/82; NASA Release 82-187; MSFC Release 82-111)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC since 1972, said that he would retire from NASA after the fifth (and first operational) Shuttle flight, now scheduled for November. He had begun working at the Langley laboratory of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1945. When NASA was established in 1958, he was selected as an original member of the space task group to manage the Mercury project: that group was the nucleus of NASA’s manned spacecraft center, which became JSC in 1973.	Kraft was flight director of all the Mercury missions and many of the Gemini missions; in 1972 he succeeded Dr. Robert Gilruth, who had been the first director of JSC. Kraft said he had no definite plans for the future. (NASA Release 82-62; NY Times, Apr 15/82, B-4; W Post, Apr 15/82, D-2)
MSFC said that it had shipped the external tank for the fourth Shuttle mission from Michoud Assembly Facility on the NASA barge Orion for a five-day trip to KSC. The fourth launch was set for mid-1982. (MSFC Release 82-12) —MSFC reported shipment of the monodisperse latex reactor, an experiment “with major medical and industrial applications,” to KSC for flight on the third Shuttle mission. Dale Kornfeld of MSFC’s space sciences laboratory said that the instrument would produce identical-sized microspheres of polystyrene latex, resembling tiny beads, to measure the size of intestinal pores for cancer research and of pores in the eye for glaucoma research and to act as a carrier of drugs and radioactive isotopes for treatment of cancerous tumors. On Earth, the beads could be produced only up to about 3 microns in size; the low gravity of space would permit them to “grow” up to 20 microns while remaining identical. The National Bureau of Standards had indicated interest in using the beads to calibrate medical and scientific equipment. (MSFC Release 82-9)
NASA rolled out the first lightweight external tank for the Space Shuttle at its Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. The tank, structural backbone of the Shuttle launch assembly, included an oxygen tank, a hydrogen tank, and a connecting intertank housing the instrumentation. At 66,824 pounds the new tank was more than 10,000 pounds lighter than the one used for the first Shuttle flight in April 1981; the reduced weight would add payload capability almost pound for pound. The new tank, loaded on a NASA barge for shipment to KSC, would be prepared for the sixth shuttle mission scheduled for January 1983. (MSFC Releases 82-81, 82-83)
ESA said that it would begin a follow-on program with Spacelab. Financial contributions from member states for this purpose had reached 80% of the goal April 15, permitting work to start immediately. Part of the new program would be development of a European retrievable carrier (EURECA) to be launched and retrieved by the Space Shuttle as well as a core payload for the first mission consisting of microgravity research emphasizing material and life sciences, with first flight scheduled for the end of 1986. Weighing about 1,500 kilograms, EURECA would have a design life of six months or more in orbit, providing services for its payload including electrical power and heat protection. Its low gravity-disturbance level would be essential to microgravity research. After deployment, an on-board propulsion unit would put it in a higher orbit with less drag on its large solar arrays. Once in orbit, its experiments, although highly automated, would be operated by remote control and monitored from the ground. It would reassume low orbit for recovery by the Shuttle and return to Earth for refurbishment. (ESA Info
