The Washington Post said that an experiment on the next U.S. Shuttle flight was canceled because of the shooting down last month of a South Korean airliner by the Soviet Union. The experiment would have made the first mapping photographs from orbit of the entire area of Afghanistan, whose government the Soviet Union supports. Cancellation was a joint decision of NASA and ESA, which built the $1 billion Spacelab scheduled to make its first flight October 28 in the Shuttle Columbia’s cargo bay. This mission would take the Shuttle farther north and south than any previous manned U.S. flight, going 55° from the equator over the end of Argentina as well as the Hudson Bay region of Canada and the upper areas of Scotland. Columbia and Spacelab would also fly over most of the Soviet Union (including Moscow for the first time) but would take no photographs of the Soviet Union. (W Post, Oct 4/83, A-2)
MSFC said that it had installed the reusable orbital-research Spacelab in the cargo bay of the Shuttle Columbia at KSC. Designed, developed, and funded by ESA, Spacelab had undergone tests for three months in a cargo-integration test equipment (CITE) stand at KSC. Columbia would carry Spacelab and a four-member crew into orbit October 28 to perform more than 70 individual investigations in five research areas during a nine-day mission. (MSFC Release 83-59; ESA Info 36)
LeRC issued a request for proposals to design, build, and launch an ACTS system, including flight spacecraft, ground system, and operations. Launched by the Space Shuttle in 1988, ACTS would serve for two years in communications experiments. (NASA Release 83-28; LeRC Release 83-14)
A colony of carpenter ants flown on the shuttle Challenger in June had apparently not survived the trip. Press reports said that no signs of life were seen through the clear plastic top of the casing housing the 151 ants. The sponsors, students from two New Jersey high schools who flew to Cape Canaveral with a teacher to recover the experiment, checked heat and light supply to the canister, as well as the cameras—one making periodic exposures and the other recording on television tape—that monitored the ants in flight. Everything worked. RCA Corporation had supported the experiment with a $10,000 grant. Press reports noted that the ants had been inside Challenger’s cargo bay almost two months before launch and might have died before the flight; however, two control colonies in New Jersey had survived under the same conditions. The canister would be opened in New Jersey in the presence of two biology professors from Temple University who were advisers to the students. (IV Post, July 7/83, A-2) The incident had “amazingly coincided” with a preplanned exercise in “urgent escape from the station.” Journalists “could not help asking” how long it would take for the crew to abandon station. Deputy flight director Victor Blagov said that the “minimum required time is 15 minutes, but we consider 90 minutes—that is, one orbit—to be standard time” during which the crew could take all steps needed for an emergency mothballing of the station and enter the return module. The cosmonauts could “spend several days [there] in absolute safety,” Blagov added, but if necessary they could “splash down in the reentry vehicle in the ocean, or touch down in one of the reserve landing ranges in the USA, France, and other countries. There is an international convention on that score.” (FBIS, Tass in English, July 15, 22 , 27/83)
