U.S. Rep. George Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), author of an amendment to prohibit tests of the antisateilite miniature homing vehicle (MHV-ASAT) against objects in space, suggested that in light of the successful ground-based laser test with the orbiting Space Shuttle [see Space Transportation System, Military Applications, June 21], the U.S. should drop the MHV in favor of a laser antisatellite system, Defense Daily reported. Brown said that ". . . This very successful demonstration raises the question of whether the United States should spend several billion dollars on the technologically less-advanced MHV ASAT system, still in the testing stage, when we could have a more technologically advanced, far more versatile system available for deployment in the same timeframe . . . and probably at a lesser cost." Brown emphasized the significance of the laser test, which he noted had hit a target on the Space Shuttle "less than a foot in diameter, much smaller than an ICBM, traveling faster than a missile, and there is no question but that a missile would be just as easy to hit." Although lethality was not demonstrated in the test, the U.S. had "demonstrated lethality more than 10 years ago when we knocked down a drone airplane with a laser, and we have now in the inventory lasers with about a million times the energy of the one that was used" in the Space Shuttle test, Brown added. "There is no question that lethality is achievable with existing technology." (D/D, June 26/85, 318)
France's Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) space agency was planning to select by midyear a prime contractor for the Hermes manned shuttle and would open the program to participation by other European countries before the end of 1985, Aviation Week reported. CNES had established a competition between Aerospatiale and Dassault-Breguet for the Hermes leadership role, and the two companies would make technical presentations in April. After review of the data, CNES would make a selection within several months. Normally the two companies had their separate niches in the aerospace field, but CNES had forced them into head-to-head competition over Hermes. In the competition, Dassault-Breguet would draw on expertise gained from its Mirage, jaguar, and Alpha jet military aircraft and related electronics/ avionics systems; Aerospatiale would emphasize its work on military missiles, reentry vehicles/nuclear warheads, the Ariane launcher, communications satellites, and civil aircraft such as the Concorde and Airbus Industrie A300/A310/A320. CNES Director General Frederic d'Allest said several countries had shown interest in joining the Hermes program following the European Space Agency's (ESA) council meeting at which ministers approved Phase B definition work for the Ariane 5 launcher [see Feb. 4], Ariane 5 would be capable of orbiting Hermes. France planned to retain a 50% share in the Hermes program and open the rest to participation by other European nations. The 1985 and 1986 budgets for Hermes totaled $12 million, followed by about $20 million in study work in 1987. France would supply most of this money in 1985, because other European countries wouldn't be involved until at least October. Hermes would carry two to six crew members and be about half the size of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Its approximate length would be 59 ft. and wingspan, about 33 ft. Payload bay volume would be 377 sq. ft.; diameter of the bay, 9.8 ft. A typical mission would carry 7,700 to 9,900 lb. of useful load to a 248.5-mile circular orbit inclined 0-30°. Mission duration with four to six crew members would be eight days, extending to 30 days with a reduced crew. Start of full-scale Hermes development in mid-1988 would permit a first flight in 1997, according to CNES scheduling. (AvWk, Mar 11/85, 19)
The 3M Corp. and McDonnell Douglas joined as a team to produce and market a proprietary drug that McDonnell Douglas produced on board the Space Shuttle to treat patients who had lost their ability to produce red blood cells, Aviation Week reported. The ability of the drug erythropoietin to stimulate the body to produce red blood cells could benefit persons who were anemic or had a variety of other disorders in which red blood cell levels were a factor. And it had the potential in a number of medical situations to reduce the need for blood transfusions that carried the risk of complications. Erythropoietin was not widely used because current production techniques could not filter out by-products harmful to the body. A batch of the material to be produced in an electrophoresis machine on the next flight of Space Shuttle, mission 61-B, would be given to the first human test patients soon. It was expected the drug could be available for sale in 1988 pending Food and Drug Administration approval. McDonnell Douglas was completing arrangements to bring 3M's Riker Laboratories Div. into the program as the drug company that would market the product in place of Johnson & Johnson's Ortho Pharmaceuticals Div., which recently dropped out of the program in favor of producing the substance through earth-based bioengineering. Ortho believed it would be able to bring the drug to market a year sooner, while McDonnell Douglas believed space processing would be far more efficient and less costly. McDonnell Douglas was also completing arrangements with a French drug company, Roussel Pharmaceuticals of Paris, to begin processing starting the next summer of a French drug on the Space Shuttle as a second commercial space product. The French product would be purified in the same mid-deck unit that brought erythropoietin to the animal and human test phase. NASA and McDonnell Douglas were completing arrangements to keep the middeck system operational for research and to help generate new products under their joint endeavor agreement. (AvWk, Nov 18/85, 16)
NASA announced that a mishap investigation board had completed its report on a March 8 accident in which the Space Shuttle Discovery's payload bay door was damaged and a technician was injured during prelaunch preparations for mission 51-D at KSC [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Launch Schedules, March 8]. In its executive summary, the board reported that "the immediate cause of the mishap was the failure of a master link in one of the two redundant hoist systems that raise and lower the payload bay access platform." The report then noted, "The mishap can be characterized as the culmination of a series of events and conditions that pushed the mechanical components to and beyond their limits." In the accident, a payload bay access platform used to provide access to the orbiter's cargo bay fell from its stowed position on a rolling bridge crane. Tracing the events and conditions that led to the accident, the board noted that "Operators of the payload bay access platforms customarily stowed the platforms by raising them until the telescoping tubes contacted the (single) upper-limit switch that stopped its upward travel. "On March 4, a Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) technician reported a broken upper-limit switch that had caused the telescoping structure to impact the supporting structure. In crane and hoist parlance, this is called 'two-blocking.' The inboard master link failed at this time, and cable overwrap was noted on that portion of the winch. The entire up-down portion of this system was tagged out with a 'Do Not Operate' tag, since only one half of the redundant hoist system remained intact. This tag was placed on the operating controls along with two other similarly appearing tags, both several months old, describing limitations on the operation of the platforms.'' The board's summary then noted the platforms were operated at least twice and stowed at least once between March 4 and the March 8 accident. "During the stowing operation(s), given the fact of a broken upper-limit switch and the standard operating procedure, it is an inescapable conclusion that additional two-blocking occurred. This imparted extremely high loads to the master link in the remaining wire rope assembly, fracturing it almost to the point of sufficient separation for the assembly to fall. When the bridge assembly was moved on the morning of March 8, the resulting jolt was enough to complete the break, and the platform assembly fell." The board recommended that there be a revision of operating procedures and operator training to ensure the upper-limit switches not be used as operational stops, of tagout/lockout procedures to prevent unauthorized use of equipment that had been identified as unsafe, and of the platform preventive maintenance procedures to meet all KSC and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards; a modification of the design of the payload bay access platform to include the addition of an operational stop and 'load sensing device in the wire rope system; and a redesign of the telescoping tubes to facilitate the required inspection of critical linkages. The board estimated damage to Discovery and access platform at $200,000 and noted that the accident delayed rollover to the vehicle assembly building from March 8 until March 23. (NASA Release 85-95) Technology Transfers
NASA announced award of a $2,374,800 fixed-price contract to Stearns Catalytic Corp. to modify a test stand at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), Hancock County, Mississippi, to give NSTL a third test position to static-fire individually Space Shuttle main engines. The structural, mechanical, and electrical modifications would begin no later than March 1985 for completion in a year. Space Shuttle main-engine testing had begun at NSTL in June 1975, using test stands A-1 and A-2 for single-engine testing of flight and nonflight engines. Later NASA used the B-2 test position to certify the main propulsion system in a series of three-engine cluster firings. The additional test position would support projected increases in main-engine test requirements, including increased turbopump production rates. NASA would initially use the new B-2 position to test new and overhauled engine turbopumps using a testbed engine. NASA had originally used the B-2 test stand in the 1960s to flight-certify the Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle's first stage. (NASA Release 85-19)
Digital computers would serve as the focal point for the Centaur flight-control system, processing data from the other flight boxes including the multiplexer units. They would also provide the hardware capability to interface with the orbiter and ground system^ NASA scheduled the first Centaur launch—the Ulysses mission—for May 15, 1986, from the Space Shuttle payload bay followed on May 21, 1986, by the Galileo mission. (LeRC Release 85-58)
NASA scheduled the Space Shuttle Challenger to take today four high-tech cans each of Pepsi-Cola and Coca-Cola, the world's two largest-selling soft drinks, into orbit for the first time, the Washington Post reported. Stocking Challenger with both Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola resulted from a compromise reached after weeks of highly sensitive negotiations. NASA had not previously flown carbonated drinks in space because no containers were available to control and dispense carbonated liquids in zero gravity. It took the companies more than two years to develop and test the cans. Pepsi-Cola said its can cost its supplier, Enviro-Spray, $14 million to develop. Pepsi-Cola filled its can with eight ounces of cola and a plastic pouch that expanded when chemicals were mixed inside it to create carbon dioxide gas, which then inflated the pouch and forced the beverage out. Coca-Cola's can was lined with a laminated plastic bag filled with cola that overlaid a second plastic bag containing carbon dioxide under 50 lb. of pressure. The carbon dioxide forced the cola out of the can. A drawback to both cans was that they must be drunk unchilled. NASA retained the legal right to use whichever container worked best, the Washington Times reported, and to fill it with the drink of its choice. (WPost, July 12/85, A3; W Times, July 8/85, 3A)
NASA announced it signed with Rockwell Internatl. Corp. a memorandum of understanding (MOU) covering Space Shuttle flight assignments for Rockwell's materials-processing laboratory, which flew on STS 41-D and, using the float-zone technique, grew a single indium crystal with a lattice structure originating from a crystal seed. The agreement called for Rockwell to develop an industrial space-processing program under which research institutions and commercial firms would install and operate experiments in the modular laboratory. Rockwell designed its fluids-experiment apparatus (FEA), the first zero-gravity laboratory for basic and product research in low-earth orbit, to fit in the Space Shuttle's mid-deck stowage area where crew could operate and monitor it. Experiments could range from processing applications to liquid chemistry, fluid physics, thermodynamics, crystal growth, and biological-cell culturing. The laboratory, about the size of a 19-inch TV, could heat, cool, expose to vacuum, and manipulate experiment samples that might be gaseous, liquid, or solid, and could mix or stir, remove, and change samples during a mission. A motion-picture or video camera would record sample behavior and instrument data displays. (NASA Release 85-2)
After 16 Space Shuttle flights, NASA believed it had solved the spacecraft's commode problems, as reports of the last two missions indicated the improved waste-disposal system performed perfectly, the Washington Post reported. A $12 million-GE design had transformed the commode from a multipronged, motor-drive blender, which had fogged the Space Shuttle's air with particles of noxious dust or frozen liquid, to a device using a blast of air from a fan to carry waste into the toilet bowl; by pressing a lever, the user closed the commode top and opened a valve in the side of the Space Shuttle, where the waste was frozen and dried by the cold and vacuum of space. A tube collected urine and directed it to a holding tank for later overboard disposal. (W Post, Feb 11/85, A5)
NASA announced today that Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), chairman of the subcommittee on space science and applications, would fly as a payload specialist aboard Space Shuttle mission 61-C scheduled for launch no earlier than December 20. NASA said it was willing to schedule flights for the chairmen of its four Congressional appropriations and authorization subcommittees in connection with their NASA oversight duties. Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the subcommittee on HUD/independent agencies, was a payload specialist the previous April aboard mission 51-D. NASA assigned Nelson to mission 61-C after reassigning Gregory Jarvis, a Hughes Communications, Inc. payload specialist, from that flight to mission 51—L which was scheduled for launch January 22, 1986. Hughes's decision not to launch its Syncom IV-5 spacecraft on the December mission eliminated the need for a company payload specialist on that flight. Jarvis would conduct experiments in fluid dynamics on the January flight. (NASA Release 85-141)
NASA confirmed successful launch on January 24 from KSC of the Space Shuttle with a Department of Defense inertial upper stage deployed and an aggregation of red blood cells experiment for the University of Sydney completed. Spacecraft orbital parameters were classified. The mission had lasted three days, one hour, and 33 minutes, with landing at KSC. Unusually cold weather, causing icing on the external tank, had delayed launch for one day. (NASA FOR M-989-51-C [post flight] Mar 5/85)
NASA and the Defense Department (DOD) with White House concurrence abandoned any consideration of transferring the management of Space Shuttle operations to a commercial venture or quasi-public corporation for the foreseeable future, Aviation Week reported. The decision would thwart plans of commercial ventures that had sought the combined Space Shuttle management/marketing role. The Shuttle Operations Strategic Planning Group, a team made up of officials from NASA, DOD, the White House, and private enterprise, said ". . . the suggestion that the space shuttle should or could be transferred, sold or leased to private enterprise for its operation, marketing and future development is simply not a viable alternative for the foreseeable future." Although some commercial space officials called the group's study a "whitewash," others believed the decision could introduce more Space Shuttle launch and cost stability, a critical issue with a large segment of commercial space ventures that needed Space Shuttle transportation no matter who was managing it. DOD Space Shuttle military space-flight requirements, including the potential for Strategic Defense Initiative Space Shuttle activity, were key elements in the decision not to take management of the program away from NASA. As a result of the decision, NASA would have to create a new management structure in order to get the Space Shuttle out of existing development-oriented management. "As the shuttle evolves and the flight rate increases," the strategic planning group said, "organizational realignments within NASA will become necessary to ensure that NASA's R&D and shuttle operations do not detract from one another but are mutually supportive." (AvWk, Apr 29/ 85, 42)
The Department of Defense's 1985 edition of Soviet Military Power pointed out that the Soviets were developing a version of the U.S. Space Shuttle, a space plane, and directed-energy weapons and were engaged in military-related experiments abroad the Salyut 7space station, the Washington Times reported. The book concluded that the USSR's grand strategy was to attain global supremacy "by means short of war—exploiting the coercive leverage inherent in superior forces, particularly nuclear forces." (W Times, Apr 1/85, 1 A)
There were five Americans aboard the Space Shuttle, but commander Daniel Brandenstein decided Nagel took the 100th honor because three Americans sat in front of him on Discovery's flight deck. "Shannon Lucid was the first runner-up," Brandenstein said. "She got to space three inches ahead of Steven Nagel." To mark the occasion, which was televised back to earth, Brandenstein presented Nagel with a cake that had "100th" written on it. "I'm not sure if that's true," Nagel said. "Although I sat three inches behind Shannon, my nose is about three and a half inches longer than hers is." (W Times, June 20/85, 3A)
U.S. Air Force's imaging reconnaissance spacecraft had observed the USSR's 200-foot tall oxygen/hydrogen-powered rocket hardware, to be used in both their space shuttle and new unmanned heavy booster programs, being frequently mounted and removed from its Tyuratam launch pad, suggesting Soviet dissatisfaction with the ground test results and leading U.S. space experts to believe the troubles could greatly slow the Soviet's ability to launch large new space station elements or space weapons such as laser battle stations, Aviation Week reported. The Soviets had not test flown any of the new heavy space shuttle or new unmanned-booster hardware, and serious delays in their flight test schedules would undoubtedly arise from the ground test problems. However, U.S. reconnaissance had also discovered the Soviet shuttle program recently had added a significant new element—a second large space shuttle orbiter vehicle—observed sitting partially in a hangar at the Soviet Ramenskoye Flight Test Center east of Moscow. The other Soviet heavy orbiter was sitting outside the hangar. The orbiters were almost identical in size and design to the U.S. Space Shuttle orbiter, and the discovery of the second vehicle showed a forward program direction. (AvWk, May 27/85, 21)
NASA announced it had delayed for at least a week the February 20 Space Shuttle flight that would carry Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), because of thermal tiles problems and a backlog of paperwork, the Washington Post reported. A chemical reaction in the thermal tiles' adhesive on the orbiter Challenger's underside had caused about 4,000 of the more than 30,000 tiles to loosen during return to earth on the orbiter's last flight. Although NASA had replaced all but 47 of the faulty tiles, it had not certified the repair work. (W Post, Feb 6/85, A12)
NASA said today it postponed the December 18 launch of the Space Shuttle Columbia on mission 61-C for 24 hours because tired workers had fallen behind in countdown tasks, the Washington Post reported. "Essentially there were too many tasks to complete and too little time to complete them," NASA spokesman George Diller said. "We felt it was more prudent to delay than to take a chance on making a mistake." Diller added that crews used up more than eight hours of contingency time built into the countdown as they worked through the night December 16 to complete checkout of the engine compartment. NASA rescheduled the launch for 7 a.m. December 19. (WPost, Dec 128/ 85, A17)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers announced that 10,690 teachers applied for a Space Shuttle flight. The Council was responsible for application and screening processes; NASA would choose the teacher to go into space. The Council's review panel would screen all applications to eliminate those not meeting basic requirements and forward the remaining applications to state-review panels to select two teachers per state by May 1, 1985. A national panel would then review applications of the approximately 118 nominees (two per state plus the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, territories and trusts, and Department of Defense and independent schools) to recommend 10 semifinalists to NASA's spaceflight participant evaluation committee. All nominees would attend a teacher-workshop and orientation program from June 24 to 28, 1985, in Washington to learn of current developments in the aeronautics and space-education program and to undergo further evaluation and screening; 10 semifinalists would report to JSC for thorough medical examinations, in-depth briefings, and interviews by NASA's evaluation committee. NASA's administrator and the evaluation committee would select a primary and a backup candidate to undergo training. NASA had not decided on a specific flight opportunity, but was aiming to fly the teacher on a mission in late 1985. California had the greatest number of applications, 926. (NASA Release 85-26)
Chilean government member Admiral Jose Toribio Merino said today that he favored accepting the NASA request to build a Space Shuttle emergency landing airfield on Easter Island and that it was essential to build a port for the operation of larger and faster ships, FBIS Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish reported. "If someone offers to extend the Easter Island airport," Merino said, "we should accept because Chile does not have the money to do it." The need to supplement the project with the construction of a port for security reasons was a new element added by Merino to the NASA proposal. Merino explained that the operation of an international airport near the sea called for fast ships to act in case a plane went down in the ocean. It was imperative to have a port for the operation of such ships, and Easter Island had only a small bay, he said. "If someone offers to build a port, I would let them," he added. In referring to criticism of the project because of possible military uses of the airfield, Merino said that those who said that about the project were "ignorant people who were politicians in the past but not now." (Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish, June 12/85)
When the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-F landed today, it successfully concluded the third mission of the European-developed space laboratory, Spacelab 2, which NASA used for the first time in its pallet-only configuration, NASA reported. All Spacelab subsystems but one provided excellent data, and NASA verified for the first time two new Spacelab systems, the "Igloo" and the instrument pointing system. NASA would fly many of the Spacelab 2 instruments on future missions, so the 51-F mission provided opportunities not only for scientific data collection but also for engineering checkouts of the new equipment. Since instruments are brought home, engineers could evaluate and refurbish them to improve their performance or modify them to meet different scientific objectives in response to results from prior flights. Through Spacelab 2's four ultraviolet and visible light instruments, researchers observed a sun that, although it was in a fairly quiet phase of its activity cycle, displayed sunspots, filaments, granules, spicules, and prominences. These solar features changed over periods as brief as five to ten minutes and from orbit to orbit, day to day. The solar ultraviolet universal polarimeter (SOUP) started its program late in the mission after an unexplained shutdown and startup. Thereafter, the instrument performed almost perfectly, observing the strength, structure, and evolution of magnetic fields in the solar atmosphere. Scientists were confident that despite abbreviated operations SOUP data would be the best and longest run of solar granulation data ever collected. Although loss of altitude and propellant during initial Space Shuttle ascent jeopardized part of the plasma depletion experiment, planners managed to schedule four of the eight anticipated burns, two over Millstone Hill, Massachusetts, and one each over Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and Hobart, Australia. Preliminary data indicated that the burns did produce "holes" or troughs of depleted plasma that persisted in the ionosphere for more than an hour. The crew observed resultant airglow after the nighttime burns, and there were reports of visual observations from the ground. The Hobart site reported the reception of low-frequency cosmic radio emissions through the window the burn temporarily opened. In the properties of superfluid helium in zero-gravity experiment, the cryostat performed up to expectation, maintaining a temperature low enough to keep the helium in the superfluid state. Temperature was readily controlled, and the cryostat recovered well from temperature increases. These findings were important to the use of superfluid helium as a cryogen on future missions. During the gravity influenced lignification in plants experiment, pine seedlings, oats, and bean sprouts grew in self-contained growth chambers. The crew daily monitored chamber temperatures and photographed the chambers early and late in the mission. The oat and bean seeds germinated in orbit, and sprouts grew to a height of five to six inches as expected. The pine seedlings also showed normal growth. Researchers would analyze the plant tissues to determine whether there was any difference in the production rate of lignin between plants grown in space and in a control group grown in a ground laboratory. (NASA Prelim Spacelab Mission Science Report, Aug 6/ 85; ESA release Aug 7/85)
Rep. Norman Mineta, (D-Calif.) introduced legislation today for the planning and construction of an expansion of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum at Washington Dulles Airport, the Congressional Record reported. When introducing H.R. 3403, Mineta said, "This legislation is proposed to solve two major problems confronting the Air and Space Museum. First, as my colleagues know, this is perhaps the most popular museum in the world. The public's demand for exhibits and information concerning our aviation history is enormous, and growing. We need the additional facilities to respond to this demand. "But why Dulles? Why not build the new facility in downtown Washington? The answer is simple: there is no site large enough for the needs envisioned and of paramount importance, there is no other site adjacent to a major airport. "An airport site is critical because of the second problem we are trying to solve, which is how to display objects of the scale of the space shuttle or other modern aircraft. The museum needs to be at Dulles Airport because that is the only site to which these exhibits can be transported and displayed. "In particular, this legislation authorizes the transfer to the Smithsonian of land at the airport. This bill authorizes a total of $2.4 million in funds for planning of the new museum, to be appropriated in the 1986 to 1988 period. "In addition, the bill authorizes the appropriation of $42.6 million in Federal funds beginning in 1989 to finance half of the cost of actually constructing the museum. These Federal funds would not be available unless and until a private fundraising effort has raised an identical amount." (Cong. Record, Sept 20/85, E4165)
NASA announced it reached agreement with the Department of Defense (DOD) on a pricing and reimbursement policy for DOD use of the Space Transportation System during the period FY 89 through FY 91. The agreement established an average price of $60 million (in 1982 dollars) for each DOD launch, an average which was based on the estimated cost to fly and an exchange of launch and range support services between DOD and NASA. The price reflected a fixed-base component of $30 million for each planned flight and an incremental component of $30 million for each actual flight. The annual fixed-based component total—$270 million a year, based on DOD projections of nine equivalent flights—would be paid regardless of the number of actual flights, while the $30 million incremental component would be paid for each actual flight. By combining a fixed annual charge with a low variable cost per flight, the agreement insured that NASA would be able to cover its funding needs and DOD would continue to rely on the Space Shuttle as DOD's primary space launch vehicle. (NASA Release 85-169) Scientific Research
NASA and the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) announced the first sales of a product manufactured in space—tiny polystyrene spheres to serve as NBS standard reference material. The spheres could improve microscopic measurements made throughout the economy in electronics, medicine, and other high-technology areas. A chemical process developed for NASA by Lehigh University produced billions of the 10 micrometers (1/2500th of an inch) in diameter spheres during several space Shuttle flights. Earthbound processes could not yield sufficiently uniform materials in usable quantities; when produced in a low-gravity environment, the spheres grew uniformly in size and shape. NBS had packaged the spheres into approximately 600 Standard Reference Material (SRM) units priced at $384 per unit. Each unit was a 5-milliliter vial that contained about 30 million spheres in a 0.4% concentration by weight; the remainder was water. NASA and NBS shared sales proceeds equally. (NASA Release 85-106)
NASA announced it had signed with the International Space Corp. (ISC) an agreement for development of the Normal Freezing Furnace, a high-temperature furnace for producing several types of infrared semiconductor crystals in the microgravity environment of spaceflight. The furnace would produce materials through a directional solidification crystal growth process. The agreement call for NASA to fly the furnace aboard six to eight Space Shuttle missions to perfect the proposed crystal production process, and ISC would make the experimental equipment available to NASA for the agency's exploratory space processing operations. NASA anticipated that the experiments would lead to new space manufacturing techniques for producing crystal materials, thus enhancing the U.S. electronic industry's position in the highly competitive worldwide semiconductor market. (NASA Release 85-173)
