The Wall Street Journal reported that a Reagan administration interagency group would soon recommend that NASA discontinue commercial and foreign launches. NASA objected to the idea because of the likely permanent loss of the business to foreign competitors. The group also recommended a replacement for the Shuttle Challenger and a greater supply of expendable launch vehicles, but did not suggest how these costs could be met. (WSJ, Apr 3/86)
USA Today reported that 40yearold Karen Kofoed, a reporter for the Camden CourierPost, was the first journalist to apply to be part of a crew aboard a Space Shuttle into space. As of January 6, only 20 of the 4000 reporters who requested applications had submitted the completed forms, which were due by January 15. The contest for the first journalist in space was administered for NASA by the Association of Schools of Journalism and Mass Communications at the University of South Carolina. (USA Today, Jan 6/86)
For the sixth time, launching of the Shuttle Challenger was scrubbed, this time because of a stuck fuel valve in one of the main engines. (CSM, Jan 9/86; W Times, Jan 9/86; NY Times, Jan 9/86; P Inq, Jan 9/86)
NASA released a list containing 748 critical parts of the Space Shuttle that could lead to disaster if they did not function properly. All of these components lacked a backup system and were therefore placed in the "Criticality 1" category. Unlike the fuselage or heatshielding tiles, for example, 617 of the0*critical parts could be covered by backup equipment, but engineers waived the measure as they felt confident that failure of them was unlikely. Arnold D. Aldrich, Manager, National Space Transportation System, said, "We are reviewing in detail all the items on the Critical Items list." (Nat Sp Trans Sys: Critical Items List; W Post, Mar 18/86; W Times, Mar 18/86; B Sun, Mar
United Technologies Corporation proposed implementing the launch propulsion and guidance system used in NASA's Space Shuttle for an untended space vehicle. The guidance system, they averred, would allow untended rockets to deliver much heavier'B0*payloads at a cheaper cost than the Shuttle. Operation, they claimed, would begin about three years after NASA approved the plan. (AP, Nov 8/86)
NASA said it had canceled 18 Space Shuttle missions over a 5year period for Spacelab because of the Challenger accident. The agency further stated that it planned to release a list of other scrubbed missions. (W Post Sep 1/86)
NASA signed an agreement with the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company (3M) allowing the company to fly 62 materials processing experiments aboard future Shuttle flights. The microgravity experiments in organic and polymer science were to be conducted on a spaceavailable basis, and NASA would have use of 3M's experiment equipment for scientific investigations. (UPI, Dec 9/86)
NASA announced that it had postponed three launches: the Ulysses mission to investigate the poles of the sun; the Galileo mission to orbit Jupiter and send a probe into the planet; and the Astro1 mission, an ultraviolet astronomy laboratory mounted in the Shuttle's payload bay that was to examine quasars, "hot" stars, galaxy centers, and Halley's Comet. The Ulysses and Galileo missions were scheduled for launch from a Shuttle in May, but both launches were dependent on certain relative positions of Jupiter and Earth, occurring only once every 13 months. The Astro1 had to be launched in the MarchApril timeframe in order to observe Halley's Comet, and with that opportunity gone no new date was requested. The delays were caused by the January Space Shuttle accident. (NASA Release 8611; NY Times, Feb 11/86)
The InterAgency Consultative Group (IACG) on Halley's Comet encounter was scheduled to meet March 49 in Moscow and March 1214 in Darmstadt, Federal Republic of Germany. Formed in 1981, the IACG comprised representatives from NASA, the European Space Agency (ESA), the Soviet Union's Intercosmos Council, Japan's Institute for Space and Astronautical Studies (ISAS), and the International Halley Watch. ESA's Giotto, the Intercosmos Council's VEGA 1 and 2, and the ISAS Suisei (Comet) and Sakigake (Pioneer) spacecraft were launched in the previous 15 months to observe the Comet's passage around the Sun. NASA's Launching of a Spartan UV telescope and an Astro UV telescope to observe the Comet from Earth orbit was terminated because of the Challenger accident. But NASA's PioneerVenus spacecraft (launched in May 1978) had already completed five of its seven planned weeks of viewing the Comet, and the International Cometary Explorer spacecraft (launched in August 1978) was scheduled to monitor Halley's solar wind upstream. (NASA Release 8619; P Inq, Feb 28/86; NY Times, Mar
The steering problem that halted the Shuttle Columbia's launch in December of 1985 was traced to a tiny electrical component that led ground computers astray. (W Times, Jan 3/86; NY Times, Jan 3/86)
The United States Space Foundation outlined plans to provide a focal point that would raise funds for a replacement of the Space Shuttle Challenger. The Challenger 7 Fund reached out to individuals and organizations for contributions while hoping that Congress would authorize the replacement. (NASA Release 8618)
The cause of the faulty engine valve that was responsible for Shuttle Columbia's sixth delay was discovered to be a 5inch thermometer that was broken during fuel loading. After engineers removed the thermometer, they were hopeful for a launch later in the day, but feared that overcast weather might cause yet another delay. (W Times, Jan 10/86; W Post, Jan 10/86; B Sun, Jan 10/86)
In a response to the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the establishment of the Office of Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance and the appointment of George A. Rodney, from Martin Marietta Corporation, to head the office as Associate Administrator. Objectives of the office were to ensure a program that monitored equipment status and designed validation problem analysis and system acceptability in Agencywide plans and programs. Rodney's responsibilities were to have oversight of safety, reliability, and quality assurance functions related to all NASA activities. (NASA Release 8687; W Post, Jul 9/86; W Times, Jul 9/86; B Sun, July 9/86; P Inq, Jul 6/86)
Top officials at Rockwell International, builder of NASA's orbiters and closely tied to the Shuttle program, testified that they believed cold weather had made launch of the Challenger unsafe. The President's panel concluded that NASA's launch decision process was flawed because criteria for approval should not have been changed at the last minute. The New York Times concluded, "The picture emerging from the inquiry into the loss of the Space Shuttle is one of chronic failure in the space agency and its contractors to communicate lifeanddeath problems up the chain of command." (W Post, Feb 28/86; NY Times, Feb 28/86; C Trib, Feb 28/86; WSJ, Feb 28/86;
NASA announced another test of a Space Shuttle engine to take place later in that week. The purpose was to collect additional data to be added to the previous test of the same engine, that ran for 250 seconds, at the National Space Technology Laboratory. (NASA Release 8697)
Documents released by the Roger's Commission investigating the Challenger accident revealed that the Space Shuttle Columbia had narrowly avoided a severe mishap on January 6 when it came within 31 seconds of launch after 18,000 pounds of liquid oxygen had been inadvertently drained from its external tank. The mistake would have left the ship without enough fuel to obtain orbit; the error was blamed on fatigue among the ground crew, who were pursuing a rigid schedule. (NY Times, Aug 6/86; W Post, Aug 6/86; W Times, Aug 6/86; B Sun, Aug 6/86)
NASA planned to shift its original plan of carrying a mixture of scientific, military, and commercial payloads and give greater emphasis to the military when Shuttle flights resumed. The military, they added, always had top priority and five to seven of the flights slated for next year were devoted to them. NY Times, Mar 24/86)
Unpublished test results done for the Presidential Commission studying the Challenger accident showed that cold weather on the morning of the Challenger launch made failure inevitable. Other findings by the commission concluded that a second joint on the righthand booster rocket ruptured seconds after the Challenger breakup, suggesting that the joint was unduly fragile; reusable booster rockets ballooned about twohundredths of an inch after each previous flight, and segments of the ill fated rocket did not match well; a breach of the bottom of the external tank led to a structural failure but the nose cone of the booster rocket crashing into the fuel tank was not responsible for the final breakup; and the Shuttle did not explode, but rather a hydrogenoxygen flash fire caused it simply to fall apart. (NY Times, Apr 30/86)
NASA located a video tape concerning the Shuttle mission 51E Flight Readiness Review (FRR) that contained twoandonehalf minutes of discussion on previous oring erosion. Because there was no requirement to record audio or video of FRR's, no cataloging of the tape was made. The Presidential Commission was provided with the tape but informed NASA that no new information was on it. (NASA 8677)
NASA released transcriptions of the prelaunch intercom tape of the 51L, Space Shuttle Challenger, for public consumption. The tape was about an hour long, beginning when the crew first entered the craft to two minutes and five seconds before liftoff. It contained nothing that was relevant to the';0*accident and was not provided to the Presidential Commission in support of the investigation. Because the intercom channel provides a private mechanism for exchanging spontaneous comments and recording information of a personal nature, NASA had not released these transcripts previously. Because of media inquiries, however, the prelaunch tape was transcribed. (NASA Release 86135; 86137; 51L Transcript Folder; NY Times, Oct
Recovery operations for the Space Shuttle Challenger crew cabin were completed. Scattered debris and the remains of all seven crew members were located in an effort that was hampered by heavy seas, high winds, and reduced underwater visibility. Final forensic work and future planning in accordance with family requests were expected to finish shortly thereafter. (NASA Release 8646; C Trib, Apr 21/86; NY Times, Apr 21/86)
