NASA said that engineers have launched a review of the Space Shuttle Columbia's liftoff to identify debris seen near Columbia's three main engines.  A spokesman said that the Shuttle performed flawlessly during its ascent, but that officials were intrigued by video images that captured an object "of unknown origin" falling into the fiery engine plume about 45 seconds after liftoff. (RTw, Oct 19/93)
A spokesman for Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California said that a pressure buildup ripped apart an experimental supergun designed to fire objects into space. The accident delayed a demonstration scheduled for this spring. Scientists hoped to use the gun, which is like an enormous air rifle, to shoot payloads into space at a fraction of the cost of sending them into orbit via a Space Shuttle. (AP, Mar 18/93; USA Today, Mar 18/93;
A biography of Christa McAuliffe, the teacher-astronaut who was killed when the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, is the subject of a new biography, written by her mother, Grace George Corrigan. The biography, A Journal for Christa, published  on September 7, by the University of Nebraska Press, lends weight to arguments that NASA pressed ahead with the high-profile flight to win mention of it in President Reagan's State of the Union Message, which had been scheduled for January 28, the day of the launch. (AP, Sep 7/93; NY Times, Sep 8/93; B Sun, Sep 8/93)
NASA announced that a mysterious glitch had caused the Ulysses solar explorer spacecraft to shut down its instruments and stop sending data over the weekend. Eight of the instruments were working by the Tuesday following the shutdown, and NASA predicted that the ninth instrument would be operational within days. A similar, still unexplained malfunction occurred in 1991. Ulysses was released from a Space Shuttle in 1990 on a $750 mission to study the sun's poles in 1994-95. (AP, Feb 16/93; W Post, Feb 17/93); USA Today, Feb 17/93; AP, Feb 17/93)
NASA spokeswoman June Malone said a broken pin was responsible for a leaky engine valve removed from Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled to lift off on an atmospheric research mission next week. The alignment pin broke while technicians were removing plumbing from around the valve for leak tests ordered after the March 22 main engine shutdown of Columbia. (AP, Apr 1/93)
The House of Representatives voted to deny funding requests for two science projects: President Clinton's request for $640 million for the superconducting Super Collider and $4 billion for NASA's request to build a more powerful Space Shuttle engine. (AP, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 20/93; USA Today, Oct 20/93, Oct 21/93; NY Times, Oct 20/93; W Post, Oct 21/93, Oct 22/93; C Trib, Oct 22/93; B Sun, Oct 25/93)
The launch of Space Shuttle Discovery's eight-day scientific mission, scheduled for 2:32 a.m. April 6 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, was aborted 11 seconds before liftoff when computers detected a problem. It was the second aborted launch in two weeks for the Shuttle program. The previous launch, involving the Shuttle Columbia, was halted three seconds from liftoff on March 22.
NASA said that the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour would be delayed for at least two weeks because the Shuttle's engine maker, Rocketdyne, had failed to correctly document whether one of the engine's parts was reliable. In a review of Rocketdyne's operation, NASA discovered many problems with how the company documented its work. In one case earlier in the year, a paperwork problem made it impossible for NASA to determine whether a Shuttle's engines contained proper seal retainers or older, phased-out models.
NASA began replacing Space Shuttle Discovery's main engines in preparation for another launch attempt next month.  The third countdown for Discovery ended on August 12 with an engine shutdown three seconds before launch.  Engineers traced the problem to a sensor that was supposed to monitor the flow of fuel in main engine No. 2. (AP, Aug 18/93)
NASA announced that a German-chartered Space Shuttle mission was scheduled for launch March 14 after a delay of more than two weeks. NASA said the delay was caused by a false alarm with the space shuttle Columbia's main engines, which were suspected of containing outdated parts. (W Times, Feb 27/93)
NASA announced that, despite transmitting problems, the on-board data recovery system of Space Shuttle STS-56 had captured 103 orbital sunrises and sunsets observed by the Atmospheric Trace Molecule Spectroscopy (ATMOS) instrument aboard the Shuttle. (NASA Release 93-118)
Working with a team of Hopkins scientists last spring, Kimberly Ennico, a 20-year-old junior at Johns Hopkins University, discovered a small flaw in the video camera that acts as a range finder for the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope scheduled for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in January 1995. Ms. Ennico discovered that the telescope's video range finder slightly distorted the positions of stars and distant galaxies. Her discovery allowed astronomers to compensate for the flaw by adjusting their computations. (B Sun, Jan 28/93)
NASA delayed the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour, scheduled to blast off on June 20, because of poor weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. A second launch attempt was expected for Monday morning, June 21. (RTw, June 20/93; UPI, June 20/93, June 21/93; Ap, June 21/93; NY Times, June 21/93; LA Times, June 21/93; W Post, June 21/93; USA Today, June 21/93; W Times, June 21/93; B Sun, June 21/93)
According to Neal Pellis of the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, a research project from the Cancer Center aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour could provide "a big step in developing better treatments for cancer patients." The experiment will attempt to find out more about the human immune system and why it doesn't work as well in long-term space travel. (H Post, Jan 6/93)
A last-minute glitch in a computer system that monitors Shuttle takeoffs to ensure people's safety on the ground forced NASA to scrub the launch of Shuttle Columbia on a medical research mission. NASA said that it would try for an October 15 launch, if the weather cooperated.
NASA halted the countdown for Space Shuttle Discovery less than an hour before scheduled liftoff because of a bad electrical circuit controlling a set of launch pad safety locks.  A second launch attempt was expected to take place no earlier than late next week. (AP, Jul 17/93; UPn, Jul 17/93; RTw, Jul 17/93; USA Today, Jul 19/93; P Inq, Jul 18/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93; W Times, Jul 18/93; W Post, Jul 18/93)
A NASA study of safety in the Space Shuttle program found that honest mistaken go unreported if workers fear blunders can cost their jobs.  The study found no major safety concerns but said managers had not bridged the communications gap identified in the investigation of the 1986 Challenger disaster. The report said that "exaggerated" news coverage of safety-related incidents led to the mistaken perception among workers that reporting incident and mistakes might result in punitive action. (Rtw, Jul 26/93)
A NASA official said that Rocketdyne might lose as much as $29 million in profits on its Space Shuttle engine program because of manufacturing problems at its Canoga Park plant. The company could lose the funds, known as award fees, if NASA determined that the company had performed poorly between November and April. NASA was completing a review of Rocketdyne's space shuttle engine manufacturing operation. (Daily News, June 3/93)
NASA announced an August 4 launch attempt for the Space Shuttle Discovery. (RTw, Jul 7/93; USA Today, Jul 28/93)
A recent Space Shuttle experiment on rats some day may lead to the discovery of the genes that direct bone cells to produce more bone.  The third Physiological and Anatomical Rodent Experiment (PARE-3) studied changes in the activity of bone-forming cells after nine days of spaceflight.  It also investigated whether these changes were reversed within three days of return to Earth. (NASA Release 93-181)
NASA announced that three engine pumps that had been removed from Space Shuttle Columbia for fear that the seal retainers in the pumps were an old variety that required inspection after each flight were a newer version that did not need automatic pre-flight inspection. The confusion stemmed from a paperwork mixup at the Rockwell International Corporation, maker of the engines. (NY Times, Feb 19/93)
NASA reported that the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia had been halted three seconds before liftoff because of a main engine failure caused by a malfunctioning engine valve. When the Shuttle's computers detected a faulty valve, the safety system shut down the Shuttle's main engines. Officials stressed that the crew on the $1 billion German-charted research mission was never in any danger because of the aborted liftoff. Repairs were expected to take about three weeks. The shutdown was the third launch pad abort in Shuttle program history. (Reuters, Mar 22/93, Mar 23/93; AP, Mar 22/93; UPI, Mar 22/93; B Sun, Mar 23/93; P Inq, Mar 23/93; CSM, Mar 23/93; NY Times, Mar 23/93; USA Today, Mar 23/93; W Post, Mar 23/93; W Times, Mar 23/93; WSJ, Mar 23/93)
After a month of delays, NASA prepared for launch  of the Shuttle Columbia's German mission. Forecasters were predicting a 70 percent chance of favorable lift-off conditions. The flight would be Columbia's 14th in 12 years.
The Smithsonian Museum put the Air and Space Museum Annex proposed for Dulles Airport on its priority list for 1993. The annex would display, for the first time, such pieces of aeronautical history as the Enola Gay atomic bomber, the Space Shuttle Enterprise, and the SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane.
NASA released 45 photos of the Space Shuttle Challenger's smashed crew cabin, after they were given to the New York Times by a man who had obtained them under the federal Freedom of Information Act. The pictures were taken after the crew cabin was recovered from the Atlantic Ocean in 1986. (AP, Feb 15/93; B Sun, Feb 15; W Post, Feb 15/93; USA Today, Feb 15/93; P Inq, Feb 15/93; NY Times, Feb 13/93)
Rocketdyne, the Canoga Park unit of Rockwell International, was blamed for the last-minute blastoff delay of Space Shuttle Discovery.  The shutdown was traced to a faulty fuel sensor in one of Discovery's engines, built by Rocketdyne.
NASA announced at least a two-day delay in the planned March 14 launch of Space Shuttle Columbia because of a ruptured hydraulic hose that had sprayed fluid in the engine compartment. This was the second delay in three weeks for the German Spacelab mission. (AP, Mar 3/93, Mar 4/93; UPI, Mar 3/93; P Inq, Mar 4/93; USA Today, Mar 4/93; RTw, Mar 3/93)
NASA announced that NASA personnel had moved the Space Shuttle Discovery to the launch pad on Monday March 15. Discovery was scheduled to be launched in April on an atmospheric research mission. Meanwhile preflight work resumed on Columbia, which was scheduled to be launched in less than a week. (W Times, Mar 16/93; USA Today, Mar 16/93; AP, Mar 15/93)
NASA announced that the Space Shuttle Discovery would be sent on its eight-day atmospheric research mission next week, pushing Columbia's German-sponsored science flight into late April. The Columbia was scheduled for launch April 24. (UPI, Mar 30/93; W Post, Mar 31/93; RTw, Mar 31/93)
China's state-run media reported that China had reached its first agreement with the United States to rent payload space in the U.S. Space Shuttle program for scientific research projects.  Jian Jingshan, director of the Center for Space  Science and Applied Research at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, said his center had rented eight payload booths to carry equipment for experiments in space physics. (C Trib, Dec 5/93)
USA Today reported that an article in Florida Today suggested that cuts in quality-control staffs at NASA and workers' fear of admitting error were creating potentially deadly problems for the Space Shuttle program. (USA Today, June 14/93)
NASA postponed a scheduled launch of Space Shuttle Discovery until August 12 because of the Perseid meteor shower.  This was the third time the mission had been delayed.  The Perseid meteor shower occurs each August; it was expected to be more intense than usual this August, raising the possibility that a spacecraft in Earth orbit could be damaged by a piece of debris. (UPI, Jul 30/93; Rtw, Jul 30/93; AP, Jul 31/93; W Post, Jul 31/93; NY Times, Jul 31/93; B Sun, Aug 4/93; USA Today, Aug 10/93, Aug 11/93, Aug 12/93)
Astrophysicists reported that data from an x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour might have come from a million-degree gas produced by a nearby and fairly recent supernova, or exploding star. Scientists have puzzled over these x-rays for 25 year. Wilton T. Sanders from the University of Wisconsin commented, "There's a lot more analysis that needs to be done before we can start pinning down the exact origin of these x-rays. At this point, we're just very happy with the results that we're getting. The x-rays do seem to clearly be from a thermal process." (W Times, Jan 19/93; B Sun, Jan 19/93; NASA Release, Jan 21/93)
NASA added a spacewalk to Space Shuttle mission STS-51 aboard Discovery, set for launch in July. The spacewalk would continue extravehicular activity tests that began with the addition of a spacewalk to NASA's first Shuttle flight in January of this year. (NASA Release 93-21)
Space Shuttle Endeavour's spacewalkers were the first to wear new spacesuit gloves that provide not only more thermal protection but also a better sense of touch than earlier models. The gloves are the first to have breaks in the gray silicone-coated Keviar finger and palm surface so joints can bend easier.  They are also insulated with Nomex felt for added warmth in space, where temperatures can plunge to hundreds of degrees below zero. (USA Today, Dec 7/93)
NASA announced that results from a Spacelab crystal growth experiment flown aboard the Space Shuttle last summer had brought researchers closer to understanding the molecular structure of proteins; such understanding would aid scientists in developing more effective disease-fighting, anti-parasitic drugs. (NASA Release 93-166)
The Los Angeles Times reported that NASA was using a new x-ray machine, called the Reverse Geometry x-ray system, to examine parts of the Space Shuttle. The new technology, produced by the Digiray Corporation, eliminates fuzzy images and displays a 3-D picture almost instantly. (LA Times, Apr 25/93; AP, May 24/93)
NASA completed its review of the flight readiness of Columbia Shuttle Mission STS-55, a mission dedicated primarily to the German Space Agency for research in life and microgravity sciences. During the review, inspectors decided to replace the Shuttle's high pressure oxidizer pumps.
An article in Flight International featured the U.S. Spacehab, the world's first privately owned, manned microgravity-laboratory. The Spacehab was scheduled to be lifted aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour mission on June 3.
Technicians re-entered the engine compartment of Space Shuttle Discovery to replace what was believed to be a bad temperature sensor. The problem delayed some launch countdown preparations but, according to Shuttle Test Director Mike Leinbach, posed no threat to the launch, scheduled for the morning of August 12. (B Sun, Aug 12/93; RTw Aug, 11/93, Aug 12/93; UPI, Aug 11/93; P Inq, Aug 12/93; W Post, Aug 12/93; USA Today, Aug 12/93)
NASA announced that June 20, 1993, had been set as the new launch date for the next flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour. The launch originally had been scheduled for June 3. (NASA Launch Advisory)
The Christian Science Monitor, noting that Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission would symbolize what NASA called "the year of commercial space," reported that companies had been slow to exploit the commercial possibilities of space. For example, although NASA had leased 200 of the 300 locker spaces available on Spacehab's first six flights, the agency had few customers for the other 100 lockers. (CSM, June 3/93)
A panel of experts tasked with examining the Space Shuttle's main engines said that they were safe to fly provided that technical checks were made "vigorously and rigorously." The panel noted that the engines were so fussy that they needed constant maintenance. Such attention was one of the factors that had driven the cost of each Shuttle flight to about $500 million. The panel suggested that NASA continue to press forward on a number of technical improvements already in the works. (AP, Feb 12/93)
NASA removed scientific samples and volatile fuels from the Space Shuttle Columbia on Tuesday. The Shuttle was grounded for at least three weeks because of an engine shutdown that had occurred three seconds before liftoff. (AP, Mar 24/93; UPI, Mar 24/93)
NASA said that two ozone monitors aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery were having difficulty sending measurements to ground controllers. Two monitors--one German and the other American--had trouble sending measurements to the ground. The U.S. monitor, which was supposed to supply most of the atmospheric research data, was also in danger of losing information. Timothy Miller, mission scientist for NASA, said a backup recorder for the U.S. ozone instrument could hold just over half the amount of data sought. Nasa ground controllers were attempting to solve the problem. (B Sun, Apr 9/93; NY Times, Apr 9/93; USA Today, Apr 9/93; W Post, Apr 9/93; UPI, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 9/93)
NASA canceled the Space Shuttle Columbia launch, scheduled for April 24, because of problems with a key navigational aid. The launch was rescheduled for 10:50 a.m. April 26. (UPI, Apr 24/93; RTw, Apr 24/93; P Inq, Apr 25/93; NY Times, Apr 25/93; B Sun, Apr 24/93)
