The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel reported its findings on the safety of the Space Shuttle program, concluding that aggressive cost-cutting measures had not increased risks. The review responded to critics who had suggested that measures, such as outsourcing flight operations, had been too drastic, causing a precipitous decline in NASA workers’ morale. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, responsible for making NASA a more fiscally lean organization, praised NASA’s “clean bill of health.” However, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel warned NASA about challenges that would arise during the assembly of the ISS, cautioning those in favor of cutting the budget against trimming NASA’s funds too drastically.(NASA, “Panel Review Finds Space Shuttle Safe,” news release 96-257, 13 December 1996.)
Mission STS-75, the 19th mission of Shuttle Columbia, launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral,
The television series Home Improvement aired an episode showing members of Shuttle Columbia’s crew in scenes shot in space. The Shuttle’s crew had captured the film during Mission STS-73 in October 1995. The airing marked the first time that NASA had allowed the filming of operations in space, specifically for a television series. The NASA crew included Kenneth D. Bowersox, Catherine G. Coleman, Frederick W. Leslie, Kathryn C. Thornton, and Albert Sacco Jr. Bowersox, who had appeared previously on Home Improvement, praised the event as a public relations achievement for NASA.(Ann Hodges, “‘Home Improvement’ Project Takes On a New Kind of Space,” Houston Chronicle, 12 February 1996.)
scientists had designed to harness new sources of power for the Space Shuttle. An attempt in
Republican presidential candidate Patrick J. Buchanan announced that he would cancel a controversial political advertisement using images of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. Responding to harsh criticism from New Hampshire residents, Buchanan removed the footage of Challenger from the television spot. Buchanan stated that the purpose of the advertisement, his first in the crucial primary state of New Hampshire, was to demonstrate his service to President Ronald Reagan during difficult times. However, in the home state of teacher-astronaut Christa McAuliffe, who had died in the accident, many residents felt that the campaign’s use of the images exploited the event for political gain. The political controversy brought to the foreground the lingering public dismay over the lost Challenger, even as the 10-year anniversary of the tragedy neared.(Howard Kurtz, “Television Ad Backfires on Buchanan,” Washington Post, 12 January 1996; Associated Press, “Buchanan Chastised for Using Challenger Image in TV Ad,” 12 January 1996.)
