Ending one of NASA’s “most successful and historic missions” with a rare night landing, Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after its weeklong linkup with the new ISS. Before departing the ISS on 13 December, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow flew around the station slowly, while the crew photographed the ISS, permitting ground controllers to see the station for the first time. NASA’s Deputy Station Chief Frank L. Culbertson Jr. remarked that the mission was as historically significant as that of Apollo 8, the first piloted mission to the Moon, and that the hardware of ISS was the foundation of “what will put humanity in space forever.”(Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup”; United Press International, “Shuttle Lands in Florida,” 15 December 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-88,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-88.html.)
The contractor operating the Space Shuttle program, United Space Alliance (USA), announced that it would cut 500 jobs at KSC by 30 January, to reduce total workforce by 10 percent. The announcement raised concerns in Congress about Shuttle safety.(Robyn Suriano, “500 KSC Layoffs Jan. 30 Expected: Budget Shortfall Will Reduce Work Force 10 Percent,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 January 1998; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Latest Round of KSC Layoffs Needs Congressional Scrutiny,” 15 January 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery encountered its first malfunction during Mission STS-91, when the KU- band system failed to switch on after Discovery’s crew deployed its antenna upon reaching orbit. The KU-band downlink carries broadcasts with a high rate of data. The system failure prevented the Shuttle crew from sending televised images or high rates of information to Mission Control. This problem had never occurred before. NASA spokesperson James Hartsfield stated that it was unclear whether the trouble originated with the antenna, transmitter, or other associated equipment. Hartsfield also mentioned that the failure would “prevent immediate analysis of data from the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer.” The S-band antennas worked normally, and the crew was able to talk with ground controllers as usual.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91”; Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Shuttle Soars Toward Final Mir Docking, but Antenna Won’t Send TV Signals,” 3 June 1998; Aerospace Daily, “Lightweight Tank Perfect on First Flight; KU-Band a Problem,” 4 June 1998.)
