NASA announced that, after Space Shuttle Columbia’s return to Earth on the night of 27 July, engineers had found “three little holes” in its right engine nozzle, confirming that the Shuttle had leaked hydrogen fuel during liftoff. The holes, 0.25 inches (0.64 centimeters) in size, had caused the craft to lose up to 5 pounds (2.3 kilograms) of fuel during each second of its 81⁄2-minute climb to orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Confirms Hydrogen Leak in Columbia Shuttle,” 29 July 1999.)
NASA announced its decision to ground the entire Space Shuttle fleet while technicians continued detailed inspections of the fleet’s wiring. During the first month of inspections, following the discovery that faulty wiring had caused a short circuit during Columbia’s 23 July launch, technicians had located dozens of nicked or exposed wires. Shuttle managers had decided to extend the inspections to allow technicians to examine additional parts of each Shuttle. Technicians had replaced damaged wiring, encased some wires in plastic tubing, added Teflon wrapping to others, and replaced some connectors, to protect the wiring systems against future damage. Manager of the Space Shuttle Program Ronald D. Dittemore explained that the wiring problems “appeared to have been caused by work-related mechanical damage”⎯from being rubbed or stepped on or from having “heavy objects set down on them.” The age of the wiring, normal wear, or vibrations from Shuttle operations did not appear to have caused the damage.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Fleet Is Grounded by Damage to Wiring,” New York Times, 4 September 1999. 219)
Commander Eileen M. Collins became the first woman to “land a spaceship of any kind, anywhere,” when she guided Space Shuttle Columbia to a safe late night landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, the 12th nighttime touchdown in the Shuttle program’s 95-flight history. A few hours after the landing, NASA confirmed that hydrogen fuel had leaked from one of the craft’s main engines during liftoff on 23 July. Columbia’s mission, lasting just five days, was the shortest planned flight in nine years.(Atlanta Journal (GA), “Shuttle Columbia: Woman Commander Kept Cool During Snafus,” 28 July 1999; Los Angeles Times, “1st Shuttle Led by Woman Lands Safely in Florida,” 28 July 1999.)
