NASA announced the selection of two missions as part of its Discovery Program, which had as its objective low-cost, highly focused scientific missions using innovative methods to enhance scientific understanding of the solar system. One of the missions NASA had selected was Dawn, a spacecraft that would orbit the solar system’s two largest asteroids, Vesta and Ceresto, to help scientists understand early planetary formation in the solar system. The other mission, Kepler, was a space-based telescope that would search for Earth-like planets outside of the solar system, to help scientists learn more about planetary formation and the possibility of life on other planets. NASA had selected the missions―both scheduled to launch in 2006―from a pool of 26 proposals made earlier in 2001.(NASA, “NASA Selects Missions To Explore Two Large Asteroids and Search for Earth-Like Planets,” news release 01-254, 21 December 2001; NASA Discovery Program, “Discovery Mission: Kepler,” http://discovery.nasa.gov/kepler.html (accessed 19 December 2008).)
Engineers at NASA’s KSC completed the installation of a new main engine for Space Shuttle Atlantis. Modifications of previous engine designs included a new high-pressure fuel turbopump, strengthened and made more durable by a casting process, rather than by welding. During the roughly 81⁄2 minutes that the engines operate during a Shuttle launch, they must perform at temperatures reaching 6,000°F (3,300°C). The improvements continued NASA’s practice of regularly updating the Shuttle’s components.(NASA, “New Main Engine Promises Even Safer Shuttle Ride,” news release 01-79, 26 April 2001.)
NASA launched Space Shuttle Discovery STS-105/ISS-7A.1 at 4:10 p.m. Central Daylight Time (CDT). Shuttle crew consisted of Mission Commander Scott J. Horowitz, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, Mission Specialists Daniel T. Barr and Patrick G. Forrester; and Expedition 3 crew members, Frank L. Culbertson Jr., Vladimir N. Dezhurov, and Mikhail Tyurin. One of the main purposes of the mission was to transport the Expedition 3 crew to the ISS, returning Expedition 2 crew members to Earth. Another objective was to use an Italian-built, 9,000-pound (4,100-kilogram) Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM) called Leonardo to deliver supplies to the ISS. Leonardo would deliver six resupply stowage racks, four resupply stowage platforms, and two scientific experiment racks for the station’s laboratory. Discovery’s payload also included NASA’s scientific project, the Materials International Space Station Experiments (MISSE).(NASA, “STS-105: A New Crew Arrives at the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts-105/ (accessed 7 November 2008); NASA KSC, “STS-105,” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-105/mission-sts-105.html (accessed 7 November 2008).)
NASA announced the first significant group of awards for its Space Launch Initiative (SLI)a program dedicated to finding safer and more cost-effective modes of sending humans into space. NASA’s SLI board had awarded a total of US$767 million in contracts to 22 groups. NASA clarified that the purpose of the contracts was to find a long-term solution to replace the costly Shuttle program. Therefore, NASA intended that grantees focus on conceptual designs rather than on vehicle specifics. NASA had designed the program to facilitate the development of a new space vehicle by the middle of the 21st century. Those receiving the funds had to meet ambitious standards; NASA wanted awardees to design a craft that would be 10 times safer than the Space Shuttle, with 100 times higher rates of crew survival, at a 10th of the cost of the current Shuttle program. The SLI board had consulted more than 100 experts to determine which proposals should receive funding.(Marshall Star (NASA MSFC), “NASA Awards $767 Million in SLI Contracts,” 24 May 2001, 1, 6; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Begins Bid To Improve Its Launchings,” New York Times, 18 May 2001.)
After a one-day delay because of rain, Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-104 landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, having completed its mission successfully. The crew had installed a new hatch, allowing spacewalkers easier access in and out of the ISS. Officially called the ISS Airlock and also known as the Joint Airlock, the new pressurized unit gave ISS spacewalkers a portal that oxygen-nitrogen tanks could quickly pressurize. NASA planned for all future spacewalks on ISS to begin and end at the new site. In addition to installing the airlock, Atlantis’s crew delivered to the ISS the EarthKAM, a new camera that U.S. high school and middle school students could direct from the ground, enabling them to take pictures of some 2,000 points of interest on Earth, thus, participating in ISS research.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573; Washington Post, “Shuttle Lands After Extra Day in Space,” 25 July 2001.)
