NASA announced its approval of a new design of the particular part of the Space Shuttle that may have critically contributed to Space Shuttle Columbia’s accident. The part―called a bipod fitting―connects a Shuttle’s external fuel tanks to the orbiter during launch. The newly designed bipod fitting eliminated the use of foam covering in favor of four rod-shaped heaters, reducing the risk of falling debris during launch. Investigators believed that the Columbia disaster might have resulted from the impact of insulating foam, which had fallen from the bipod fitting, damaging the orbiter’s left wing. According to NASA, the approval of the redesigned bipod fitting was a significant step in its efforts to resume safe Shuttle flights. Engineers would begin using the new fitting on the external tanks for the next Space Shuttle mission.(NASA, “NASA Approves New Design for Shuttle External Tank Fitting,” news release 04-240, 26 July 2004.)
The GAO released an analysis of NASA’s budgetary outlays for fiscal years 2002 through 2004. Under Pub. L. No. 106-391, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000, GAO was required to verify NASA’s accounting of its funds obligated against established budgetary limits for the ISS and for Space Shuttle support for the ISS. Under the Act, NASA’s obligations were limited to US$25 billion for the ISS and US$17.7 billion for Shuttle support. GAO’s report noted that NASA had not provided sufficient documentation for the amounts it had reported as obligated against budgetary limits. Thus, GAO could not verify the amounts that NASA had reported to Congress in its budget requests for fiscal years 2002 through 2004. Similarly, NASA had not reported any documentation of its FY 2004 budget obligations in its FY 2005 budget request to Congress. NASA officials acknowledged that NASA’s accounting system presented some difficulties for GAO’s auditors, but explained that those difficulties were the result of NASA’s having reported budgetary figures based on the amount it was authorized to spend rather than on the amount it was obligated to spend.(Patty Reinert, “GAO Says Lax Bookkeeping Thwarts Space Agency Audit,” Houston Chronicle, 7 April 2004; U.S. General Accounting Office, “International Space Station and Shuttle Support Cost Limits” (report no. GAO- 04-648R, Washington, DC, 2 April 2004), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04648r.pdf (accessed 19 March 2009). 623 British National Space Centre, “Beagle 2” (report, ESA/UK Commission of Inquiry Swindon, UK, 5 April 2004), http://www.bnsc.gov.uk/assets/channels/resources/press/report.pdf (accessed 31 March 2009), 3–7; ESA, “Beagle 2: Lessons Learned and the Way Forward,” ESA news release 27-2004, 20 May 2004.)
NASA released pieces of the debris from Space Shuttle Columbia to a nongovernmental agency for study and testing. The release of the materials was the first implementation of NASA’s new policy for the use of materials from a destroyed Space Shuttle. Henceforth, instead of burying Space Shuttle materials, as it had done after the Challenger accident, NASA would use materials from destroyed Space Shuttles for research. The company that received the partsthe Aerospace Corporation of El Segundo, Californiawas one of several organizations that had requested NASA’s permission to study Columbia’s debris. Under the terms of the release, the company would keep the Shuttle parts for one year, using them to analyze the effect of atmospheric reentry on materials.(NASA, “First Columbia Debris Loaned for Research,” news release 04-165, 20 May 2004; James R. Asker, “In Orbit,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 22 (31 May 2004): 19.)
NASA awarded a US$814 million contract to Hamilton Sundstrand Space Systems International (HSSSI) to provide equipment and services supporting spacewalks performed by Space Shuttle and ISS crew members. Under the contract―formally called the Extravehicular Activity (EVA) Systems Contract―Hamilton Sundstrand would provide EVA hardware, training support, real- time mission support, and other products and services related to spacewalks. The contract had a five-year base period and five additional one-year options.
An independent panel of experts released an interim assessment of NASA’s progress implementing recommendations of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB). The U.S. Congress had chartered the group―formally called the Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG)―to provide independent evaluations of NASA’s progress in meeting the CAIB’s recommendations. The CAIB had enumerated safety and operational practices that NASA must implement before resuming Space Shuttle flights. In its interim assessment, the Task Group stated that NASA had successfully implemented two of the CAIB’s recommendations: to define foreign-object debris and to create computer-accessible digital images of Shuttle hardware, taken at various stages of development and launch preparation. The Task Group would assess NASA’s progress toward satisfying the other CAIB recommendations in future reports.(NASA, “Stafford-Covey Task Group Announces July 22 Public Meeting,” news release N04-108, 19 July 2004; NASA, “Statement of Sean O’Keefe, Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Before the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, United States Senate” (statement of testimony, Washington, DC, 8 September 2004), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf64686main_aok_/ 64686main_aok_ testimony_090804.pdf (accessed 28 April 2009).)
