NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery had reached a major milestone, arriving at Launch Pad 39B at NASA’s KSC in preparation for its Return to Flight Mission, scheduled for 15 May. Over more than two years, Discovery had undergone 41 major modifications in response to the Columbia accident, including the addition of the new sensor system at the far end of the orbiter boom; cameras and laser systems to inspect its thermal protection system while in space; sensors in the leading edge of its wings to monitor for debris impacts; and a new digital camera for viewing the external tank during launch.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Discovery at Launch Pad for Return to Flight,” news release 05-095, 7 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05095_Discovery_Roll_Out.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
NASA announced that it would once again ground the Space Shuttle fleet, because mission personnel had discovered that Shuttle Discovery had experienced a problem similar to the one that had fatally damaged Columbia. Specifically, analysts had discovered that, during launch, Discovery’s external fuel tank had shed portions of foam insulation. At least one of the pieces of insulation had come from the same area of the tank as the foam that had ended the Columbia mission. Although the problem did not affect Discovery’s launch, the Shuttle’s crew had spent much of their first full day in orbit closely examining the orbiter’s exterior to determine the extent of the problem.
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) provided an update on NASA’s efforts to comply with the Columbia Accident Investigation Board’s (the CAIB’s) recommended safety and operational practices for Shuttle launches. The Task Group stated that it had approved NASA’s efforts regarding five of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, bringing the total number of CAIB recommendations with which NASA had complied to 12. Among the five recommendations that NASA had implemented were the installation of cameras on the Shuttle to observe critical events and steps to ensure that budgetary issues and other outside pressures would not influence flight schedules in the future. The Task Group stated further that, although NASA had not yet complied with three of the CAIB recommendations, it saw no circumstances that might prevent NASA’s planned launch of Space Shuttle Discovery in July 2005. The three CAIB recommendations that NASA had not yet implemented were establishing in-orbit repair techniques for the orbiter, preventing catastrophic debris from falling off the orbiter’s fuel tank during launch, and fortifying the orbiter against debris impacts.
NASA announced findings from its investigation into the causes of the foam loss on Discovery’s external tank during the Space Shuttle’s launch in July 2005, a problem similar to the one that had caused the destruction of Space Shuttle Columbia in February 2003. A team of NASA investigators stated that they had uncovered several possible factors that may have caused a 3- foot (0.9-meter) portion of insulating foam to separate from Discovery during launch. They reported that the most likely cause was inadequate methods of applying and repairing the foam on Discovery’s external tank. The investigators stated that workers might have sprayed the foam in a manner that introduced fissures into it and might have crushed the foam while standing on it in the course of conducting the repairs on Discovery. Although the foam debris had not damaged Discovery, the incident had prompted NASA to suspend Shuttle launches until May 2006, so that engineers could identify the problem and correct it.(Guy Gugliotta, “Discovery Launch Is Still On for May,” Washington Post, 15 October 2005. 264)
