Space Shuttle Discovery launched at 8:47 p.m. (EST) from NASA’s KSC on Mission STS-116. NASA anticipated that STS-116 would be one of the most complex missions ever made to the ISS. The crew of ISS and Discovery planned to reconfigure the station’s electrical and cooling systems, making the solar arrays that the previous mission (STS-115) had delivered fully operational. In this unprecedented operation, the ISS’s ground control would shut down and reroute the ISS’s power in an iterative process. In addition, crew members would install the P(NASA, “NASA Honors Distinguished Astronomer with Medal,” news release 06-005, 10 January 2006, http://nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06005_Bahcall_AAS_Award.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
The joint ESA-NASA Ulysses spacecraft commenced its third passage over the Sun’s south pole, an event that scientists expected would reveal new information about changes in the Sun and the effects of those changes on space. Carried into space in 1990 by the Space Shuttle Discovery, Ulysses was on a mission to explore the heliosphere—the region of space influenced by the Sun and its magnetic field. Data gathered during Ulysses’s orbit of the Sun, once every 6.2 years, was enabling scientists to study the Sun’s 11-year cycle of maximum and minimum solar activity. Moreover, Ulysses had accomplished 17 years of orbit, making it possible for scientists to study the Sun during its entire 22-year magnetic cycle. The spacecraft had first passed over the Sun’s south pole in 1994 and over its north pole in 1995, both passes occurring during a phase of minimum solar activity. Ulysses’s second set of polar passes, in 2000 and 2001, had occurred during a period of maximum solar activity. The spacecraft’s third passage over the Sun’s south pole was occurring during another period of minimum solar activity, but this pass would provide new data because the Sun’s magnetic field had reversed in polarity since the spacecraft’s first passage over the south pole. Ulysses is part of the Heliospheric Network, a spacecraft fleet that includes NASA’s Cassini, the joint ESA-NASA Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), and other spacecraft.(NASA, “NASA-European Spacecraft Swoops Under Sun’s Pole,” http://www.nasa.gov/vision/universe/ solarsystem/ulysses-20070207.html (accessed 14 September 2010); ESA, “Ulysses Embarks on Third Set of Solar Passes,” http://www.esa.int/esaSC/SEMWPIUXJUE_index_0.html (accessed 14 September 2010).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis returned to Earth, landing at NASA’s KSC at 6:21 a.m. (EDT) to complete its 12-day mission (STS-115). During that mission, the crew had resumed construction of the ISS after a four-year hiatus. The mission highlights included three spacewalks to install the P3/P4 truss on the ISS and to prepare new solar panels on that truss for future production of electricity at the orbiting space station.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-115.”)
NASA launched Space Shuttle Atlantis (STS-115) from NASA’s KSC at 11:15 a.m. (EDT). The mission’s principal objective was to deliver and install a girder-like structure to the ISS. That structure, called the Port 3/Port 4 (P3/P4) truss, contained arrays—large, wing-shaped solar panels—designed to increase significantly the station’s power capability. The mission’s crew members included Commander Brent W. Jett Jr., Pilot Christopher J. Ferguson, Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper, Joseph R. Tanner, all U.S. astronauts, and CSA astronaut, Mission Specialist Steven G. MacLean.(NASA, “STS-115,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-115.html (accessed 11 March 2010).)
