Lockheed-Califomia Co. announced it had developed concept for space shuttle vehicle that could be available in 1966. The “space tug” was designed primarily as spacecraft-to-spacecraft cargo transportation system and was result of study sponsored by afsc. (SBD, 4/14/64, 75; Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 59)
MSC announced selection of United Aircraft Corp’s Pratt & Whitney Div. and General Electric Co.’s Direct Energy Conversion Business Section to negotiate parallel cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts for development of fuel-cell technology leading to design, fabrication, and testing of engineering-model fuel-cell system. Contracts, which would run for 13 mos beginning July 1, were valued at $825 000 each. MSC program to provide electrical power for space shuttle was aimed at development of hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell with 5000-hr lifetime, 5000-w power output, and weight of 333 kg (735 lbs) or less. (MSC Release 70-66)
msc announced it was negotiating with Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. on $699 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for 18-mo study of space shuttle cryogenic systems. (MSC Release 70-110)
NASA selected McDonnell Douglas Corp. and NR Space Division to negotiate 11-mo, $8-million, fixed-price contracts for parallel definition and preliminary design studies of two-stage reusable space shuttle vehicle to transport crew, passengers, and cargo between earth and near space, msfc would manage McDonnell Douglas work and msc would manage NR work. (NASA Release 70-68)
msc and NR Space Div. announced selection of MesserschmittBoelkow-Blohm of Munich, West Germany, and bac of Bristol, England, to conduct subsystems studies for NASA’s space shuttle. In major step toward international cooperation in space. Messer-schmitt would study attitude-control system and bac would study structures, aerodynamics and flight-test instrumentation, and data handling under contracts financed by their governments. Work would be performed in Downey, Calif, (msc Release 70-98; NR Release NS-59)
Senate passed H.R. 19830, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill, which contained $3.269-billion NASA appropriation. As budgeted by NASA, appropriation allocated $678.7 million for research and program management, $25 million for construction of facilities, and $2,565 billion for R&D. Amendment proposed by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) to eliminate funds for space shuttle and station was rejected. Bill was cleared for President’s signature. (CR, 12/7/70, S19521-59; Conf Rpt 91-1345)
NASA issued RFPs for preliminary definition and planning studies for main propulsion system of reusable space shuttle. Preliminary concepts called for cluster of throttleable engines with 1780-kilonewton (400000-lb) thrust each at sea level, nr Rocketdyne Div., United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., Aerojet-General Corp., TRW Inc., Bell Aerospace Systems, and Marquardt Corp. would submit proposals by March 20. Three firms would be awarded fixed-price contracts for 11-mo parallel studies, (nasa Release 70-26)
msfc announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. and TRW Inc. for final negotiations leading to four contracts (two per company) totaling $1.2 million for space shuttle auxiliary propulsion system definition, (msfc Release 70-103)
MSFC announced issuance of rfps for study of inflight venting of space shuttle vehicles to identify areas of vehicle requiring venting, establish venting schemes, outline data requirements for venting analyses, and develop test program to analyze shuttle vehicles during launch and reentry. Proposals were due July 17. (MSFC Release 70-126)
Wall Street Journal editorial said Congressmen were “squabbling” over location of future NASA space shuttle base: “There’s a lot to be learned from the space shuttle, we have no doubt. The scientific results will be greatest, though, if NASA manages to locate the project where it can be managed most efficiently—and not merely where local Congressmen are most adept at gathering spoils.” (WSJ, 12/8/70)
NASA announced selection of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. for negotiations leading to eight-month, $250000, fixed-price contract for design study for “versatile upper stage” (vus), high-energy stage that would increase orbital capacity of current launch vehicles and could be used as expendable upper stage with space shuttle. (nasa Release 70-140)
Three of nine USAF volunteers began test at msc to determine man’s physiological tolerance to reentry loads expected on space shuttle missions. Subjects, whose reactions to shuttle reentry profile had been measured after 24 hrs rest Sept. 9-11 would rest in bed seven days before riding centrifuge in “eye balls down” reentry configurations at 2.5-g to 4.5-g levels for up to 6 min 10 secs to determine what effect prolonged “eye balls down” reentry acceleration would have on space shuttle crew members and passengers after long periods of weightlessness. Normal space shuttle reentry mode of MSC straightwing shuttle produced downward through-the-head acceleration as opposed to “eyeballsin” acceleration through the chest. (msc Release 70-94)
msc awarded ltv Aerospace Corp. Missiles and Space Div. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. $215 000, fixed-price contracts to conduct six-month parallel development studies of radiative nonmetallics for high-temperature heat protection on space shuttle, (msc Release 70-95)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Grumman Aerospace Corp., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and Chrysler Corp. for 11-mo Phase A (feasibility) contracts to study space shuttle concepts. Boeing Co. would be major subcontractor to Grumman on $4-million contract for three shuttle concepts: stage-and-a-half shuttle of reusable manned spacecraft with onboard propulsion system and droppable tanks for supplementary propellants; reusable orbiter with expendable booster; and reusable 1st stage using existing J-2S engine technology, solid-propellant auxiliary boosters, and reusable 2nd-stage orbital shuttle with J-2 engine. Lockheed’s $l-million fixed-price contract would define alternate stage-and-a-half shuttle system including high and low cross-range designs. Chrysler Corp. would study reusable vehicle capable of placing payload into earth orbit with single stage, under $750 000 contract. (nasa Release 70-97)
samso, Aerospace Corp., and NR Space Div. had completed study of solution to in-space emergencies involving near-orbiting spacecraft and space shuttle vehicles, AFSC announced. Study was based on requirements that space escape vehicle (sev) must perform all functions required for crew safety from decision to abandon spacecraft until successful recovery. In delayed return, ground station would supply data to aid selection of recovery site; sufficient oxygen and water to last 24 hrs after departure from spacecraft would be available. In “quick return,” life support would be provided for only six hours, sev would become autonomous following issue of “May Day” signal and would splash down without ground-based advice. Crew would plot recovery course using wristwatches and information indicating orbital paths for 24 hrs. Study recommended three kinds of escape vehicle: spherical heat shield, rigid vehicle thermally protected by ablative heat shield; rib-stiffened expandable vehicle which would function like umbrella; and two-man conical reentry vehicle like rubber raft, inflatable and made of double-wall fabric connected by woven drop threads, (afsc Release 137.70)
NASA announced award of $380 000 contract to Ralph M. Parsons Co. for engineering services in development of overall plan for space shuttle ground facilities. (NASA Release 70-165)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, at Key Biscayne press conference following release of President’s space message outlined NASA plans for “Grand Tour” missions in 1970s and space developments for next decade: “A strong effort in exploration, in science and in the practical application of space for the benefit of man here on Earth is laid out, with increasing emphasis on international cooperation.” Space shuttle and space station proposals contained reduction in cost of space activities and increase in man’s capability to travel back and forth and to work in space for long periods. Space shuttle would take off vertically; at 64-km (40-mi) altitude and 11 300 km per hr (7000 mph), 2nd stage would separate and carry 22.5-metric-ton (25-short-ton) payload of men, equipment, and supplies into earth orbit, with 1st stage returning to earth for horizontal landing. After mission of up to two weeks, 2nd stage would reenter atmosphere and land horizontally for reuse. President’s program of planetary exploration would “provide man with a closehand look of every planet in the solar system.” Administration placed “great emphasis. . .on the practical applications of space techniques, not only in communication satellites and weather satellites, but in new areas such as Earth resources satellites.” Dr. Paine saw as “most statesmanlike portion” of President’s statement “increasing recognition of the international participation of other nations in both the exploration and the utilization of space.” It was too early to report specific results of Dr. Paine’s visit to world’s space capitals but “there certainly is a very substantial interest overseas in utilizing more fully the American program as a means of closing the technology gap on the part of other nations and, at the same time, allowing them to participate in both the exploration and the utilization of space in the decades to come.” (Transcript)
NASA decision to search nationwide for suitable site for launching $6billion space shuttle had stirred “anguished complaints from Florida politicians and other proponents of Cape Kennedy,” Wall Street Journal said. But NASA experts had insisted shuttle’s unique characteristics and estimated $200-million to $400-million cost of complex ground equipment made search essential. While Cape Kennedy was “leading launch-site candidate,” other possibilities included FRC, wsmr, and Dugway Proving Ground in Utah. Essential requirement was flat area for landing shuttle, with several alternate landing locations in case of emergency. Cape Kennedy was not equipped for shuttle landings and lacked facilities to support plane-like flight through atmosphere. (Spivak, WSJ, 12/3/70, 36)
Status of space shuttle technology was described by MSFC propulsion engineer Gerald M. Thompson during aiaa/sae Seventh Propulsion Joint Specialist Conference at Salt Lake City, Utah. Because “shuttle propulsion technology has been vigorously pursued in a totally organized approach for several years,” no major technology work remained to be done before shuttle main engine development phase began. Designs with strong technical bases were ready to proceed. However, if hydrogen propulsion was selected for air-breathing engines that would return shuttle stages to landing fields on mission completion, additional technology development would add about one year to schedule. Main engine development was to begin in 1971, with flight certification targeted for March 1978. (msfc Release 71-103)
NASA announced availability of new publications: Space Shuttle Technologies, FY 1971 Programs, compilation of 110 projects making up NASA shuttle technology program, described projects and listed FY 1971 funding for each. Significant NASA Inventions Available for Licensing in Foreign Countries listed abstracts of inventions in which NASA owned principal or exclusive rights and which were available for patent licensing in various countries, (nasa Special Release; NASA Release 71-83)
msfc announced award of $1081 343 contract to Research, Inc., to design, fabricate, install, and check out electrical heating devices for space shuttle prototype heat protection systems. Device would be installed in an existing structural test facility at msfc and would heat up to 1600 K (2500°F) on lower surface and 1300 K (1800°F) on top surface of test articles. Work on device would be funded in increments, beginning with $100 000 for preliminary design phase, (msfc Release 71-67)
Senate Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 9382, FY 1972 HUD-space-science appropriations bill that contained $3,325-billion NASA appropriation. Committee added $24 million for NERVA to nasa request of $2,518 billion for r&d, making total of $2,542 billion, and rejected House recommendations for cuts in construction of facilities appropriation, including $20 million for space shuttle funding. (CR, 7/15/71, D703; SBD, 7/16/71, 70)
NASA announced it had authorized MSFC to extend for one month the level-of-effort contract with NR Rocketdyne Div. for design of Space Shuttle main engine. Action had been taken pending completion of gao review of United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div.’s protest of contract award to Rocketdyne [see Aug. 3]. (nasa Release 71—249)
Oklahoma Governor Dewey H. Bartlett told state legislature in Oklahoma City there was good possibility that Oklahoma could become launch site for NASA space shuttle. “Based on the launch azimuth and the orbital inclinations . . . Oklahoma provides both a desirable launch and recovery location.” (Daily Oklahoman, 1/6/71, 1)
Senate, by vote of 82 to 5, passed H.R. 7109, $3.281-billion FY 1972 NASA authorization bill, after rejecting by vote of 64 to 22 Mondale amendment No. 233 that would have deleted from bill $138 million for space shuttle program. Senate also passed by voice vote H.J.R. 742, making continuing appropriations for FY 1972, after rejecting by vote of 63 to 24 modified Proxmire amendment limiting ceiling for defense expenditures to $68 billion. (CR, 6/29/71, S10126-62, S10177, S10272-98)
House, by vote of 302 to 64, passed H.R. 7109, $3,433 billion FY 1972 NASA authorization bill, after agreeing by voice vote to amendment deleting $500 000 for feasibility studies of offshore airports. House rejected amendment that would have eliminated $125 million for space shuttle system. (CR, 6/3/71, H4588-628)
NASA announced availability of Shuttle Technology Program—Fiscal Year 1972, compilation of projects making up NASA FY 1972 Space Shuttle Technology Program, (nasa Release 71—183)
Decisions on nasa’s space shuttle program might be politically timed, Aviation Week & Space Technology said. Four contractors would complete study contracts in spring 1972. “At this point, President Nixon— in the midst of his re-election campaign—might publicly state his support for the project.” Selection of winners “of the biggest plum in space” would not be announced until after the November election, magazine said. (Av Wk, 10/25/71, 11)
gao investigation of NASA selection of NR Rocketdyne Div. for prime contract for final design and manufacture of reusable space shuttle [see July 13] was requested by Bruce N. Torell, President of Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp., in telegram to Elmer B. Staats, U.S. Comptroller General. Bases for protest were that source selection had disregarded objective of the rfp, nasa had failed to conduct “written or oral discussions” on proposals, Pratt & Whitney felt its proposal was “clearly entitled to a superior technical evaluation to the technical proposal of Rocketdyne,” and NASA had failed to give proper consideration to “Pratt & Whitney’s test-proven flight weight design and greater experience.” In letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, nine senators requested that no award of space shuttle engine contract be made until gao investigation had been completed. (CR, 8/6/71, S13789)
Selection of NR Rocketdyne Div. for negotiations leading to award of 8500-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for development and delivery of 35 space shuttle engines by 1978 was announced by nasa. Selection followed 12-mo competition during which nasa had accepted proposals from three firms on April 21. Program would be managed by msfc and would support space shuttle orbital flights beginning in 1978. (nasa Release 71-131)
Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. filed formal protest against nasa award of $500-million space shuttle main engine contract to NR Rocketdyne Div. and asked Federal Government to reverse award. In letter to Gao, Pratt & Whitney charged selection of Rocketdyne was “illegal, arbitrary and capricious, and based on unsound decisions” and reiterated complaints cited Aug. 3 to gao. (W Post, 8/19/71, C12; SBD, 8/19/71, 230)
NASA announced award of $2-million, one-year, fixed-price contract to General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. for definition and preliminary design of Research and Applications Module (ram) that could be attached to space shuttle, (nasa Release 71-67)
Results to date of study to determine minimum cockpit visibility required by space shuttle pilot to make safe horizontal ground landings were announced by FRC. Tests, begun in July with instrumented T—33 jet aircraft with radar system to judge accurate altitude to within two feet (0.6 meters), had shown pilots could land aircraft with greater visibility restrictions than expected. Visibility restriction of 5° had been extended to 75° on either side, or total of 150° in 225 approaches flown. Restrictions would be increased in future to 160°. (frc Release 26-71)
msfc had signed level-of-effort contract with NR Rocketdyne Div. for design of Space Shuttle main engine, NASA announced. The interim contract—for four months at $1 million per month—had been signed pending gao review of protest by United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. of the contract award [see Aug. 3]. (nasa Release 71-165)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported H.R. 7109, $3.281-billion nasa FY 1972 authorization bill—$152 million less than $3,433 billion approved by House June 3 and almost $10 million above nasa request of $3,271 billion. Committee deleted $45 million increase voted by House for Skylab and additional $25 million House had voted for space shuttle. Committee version of bill would provide $2,543 billion for R&D, $55.3 million for construction of facilities, and $681.3 million for research and program management. Total of $3,281 billion was lowest total recommended by Senate Committee since FY 1962 and was $35.1 million less than total Committee recommended in FY 1971. (S Rpt 92-146)
MSC announced award of three seven-month, firm, fixed-price contracts for development of new surface materials for space shuttle orbiter stage. McDonnell Douglas Corp. would receive $325 000; GE Aerospace Group, $319 200; and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., $322 500. (msc Release 71—50)
MSC issued rfps to develop and test polymer seal materials for space shuttle propulsion systems. Proposals, for fixed-price R&D contract, were due Dec. 3, with work to be concluded 12 mos after contract award, (msc Release 71-82)
msc announced issuance of rfps for technological development of new surface materials that could stand environmental extremes expected to be experienced by space shuttle, msc would award fixed-price contract to company that designed and developed best ceramic insulator, (msc Release 71-36)
AP quoted Fairchild Hiller Corp. spokesman as saying firm was serving as clearinghouse for proposals for SST funding. “Sketchy and tentative plans” existed, AP said, to finance sst through public stock issue backed up by $1 billion in bank loans. (AP, B Sun, 4/7/71, A6) April 6-7: Space Shuttle Technology conference at msfc discussed space vehicle propulsion systems with operational life requirements of 100 flight missions, (msfc Release 71—59; msfc pao)
Msc announced issuance of rfps for development of human waste collection and storage system for space shuttle orbiter stage. Contractor would receive $90 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract under which firm would fabricate for testing one fully functional unit that could be used individually during week-long test by team of three men and one woman, (msc Release 71-23)
Lowell K. Zoller, Chief of Program Control Group in msfc Office of Program Development, had been appointed manager of task team for research and applications modules (ram) by msfc Director, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, msfc announced, ram was proposed family of space payload carrier modules to be delivered to earth orbit by space shuttle, (msfc Release 71—122)
U.K. government agreed to finance half of bac’s contribution to NR’s Phase B space shuttle study for nasa. Total financing was about $550 000. (SF, 4/71, 121)
msfc announced selection of NR Rocketdyne Div. for 16-mo, $1.1-million contract to develop turbopump assemblies for hydrogen and oxygen space shuttle auxiliary propulsion system (aps) technology program. Six-phase contract included exploratory study; design for tubopump components; fabrication of turbopump system; testing, refurbishing, acceptance testing, and delivery to NASA; and engineering support. (msfc Release 71-110)
Msc announced it had issued RFPs to 10 firms for $150 000 firmfixedprice R&D contract to study space walking requirements in space shuttle program. Proposal called for investigation of emergency, contingency, and normal extravehicular and intravehicular activities (eva/ IVA) while outside earth’s atmosphere and study of protective equipment needed to perform eva/iva. Proposals were due Dec. 6. (msc Release 71-83)	\
Award of $112 000 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for visual system definition study leading to development of space shuttle mission simulator was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center, (msc Release 72-92)
Atomic Energy Commission was “encouraging” NASA to examine cost of permanent removal from environment of wastes from atomic plants by “shooting these high-level radioactive wastes into the sun—taking them right out of the world,” Dr. James R. Schlesinger, AEC Chairman, said in interview published by U.S. News & World Report. Method would “depend on development of the space shuttle ... a decade away.” (US News, 2/14/72, 46-51)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced contract award and issuance of requests for proposals for work on space shuttle. One-year, $99 985, firm-fixed-price contract went to Lowey/Snaith, Inc., to study methods for making space shuttle orbiter interior pleasant environment for working and living. RFPs were for design study for orbiter’s orbital maneuvering system (oms). Firm selected would receive one-year, $250 000 firm-fixed-price contract, (msc Releases 72-29, 72-30)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) in press release called for “full and open debate” on space shuttle development issue, “leading to the rejection of this wasteful program.” It was “typical” that Nixon Administration “can squander $6.5 billion to fly four people into orbit when it refuses to invest less than one-third that amount to provide desperately needed day care and development programs for millions of children.” Space shuttle was “many timbs worse than SST” in “magnitude of its cost, in the folly of its concept and in its damage to the country.” (Text)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced contract activity: trw Systems Group had received two study contracts totaling $134 160, one for safety criteria study for space shuttle sortie payload and one for payload systems compatibility criteria study, both to be concluded by May 18, 1973. Grumman Aerospace Corp. had received $248 500 contract to study and develop test samples of closed pore insulation for possible thermal use on space shuttle orbiter. (msc Releases 72-124, 72-125)
Among strongest arguments for funding space shuttle was its great military usefulness, D. J. R. Bruckner said in Washington Post column. Argument might persuade Congress, “but do they really need another weapon?” Shuttle’s greatest use would be “as a tool supporting research, including the construction and maintenance ... of a research station on the moon’s surface.” But that was insufficient reason for Congress. “If they cannot convince themselves that it will help destroy something, they won’t put up the money for it.” Apollo program had destroyed nothing. “It only added a cubit to the stature of every American in the eyes of mankind, . . . benefited the understanding, the imagination and the spirit of humanity . . . [and] opened up enormously fruitful areas of knowledge about how the world we live in was formed and how it works.” (W Post, 4/22/72, A14)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of 18-mo, $238 000, costplus-fixed-fee contract to United Aircraft Corp. Hamilton Standard Div. to design and build prototype waste collection system—usable by both males and females—for space shuttle orbiter. (msc Release 72168) During July:	U.S.S.R. launched Salyut spacecraft which failed to achieve orbit, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Magazine said spacecraft penetrated atmosphere, where it was detected by over-the-horizon radars. One of two 2nd-stage engines stopped firing early; second stopped at end of programmed firing time with fuel remaining. (Av Week, 4/9/73, 21)	_
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of 10-mo, $98 000 contract extension to Martin Marietta Corp. Denver Div. for continued design of crew compartment configured for space shuttle, which would be tested in neutral buoyancy t&nk. Extension brought total value of contract to $173 670. (msc Release 72-161)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $92 800 firm-fixed-price contract to General Dynamics Corp. Convair Aerospace Div. to study effect jet thrusters would have on aerodynamics of space shuttle orbiter during reentry. Study would help in determining best configuration for orbiter’s reaction control system, (msc Release 72—173)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $407 630 to General Electric Space Div. for development of checkout system for space shuttle software. GE would develop system specifications, computer program compatible with msc system, procedural documents, and demonstration plan; would document results; and would demonstrate system, (msc Release 72-21)
Signing of $125 000 firm-fixed-price contract with Florida Operations of Honeywell, Inc., St. Petersburg, for study of inertial measurement unit program for space shuttle orbiter was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Honeywell would develop alternative approaches to allow NASA to assess feasibility of adapting existing units for space shuttle. (msc Release 72—132)	.
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and Japanese government were discussing production in Japan of twin-engine version of Lockheed TriStar transport aircraft, Wall Street Journal reported. McDonnell Douglas had proposed production in Japan of smaller-version DC-10.	(WSJ, 8/22/72, 8) August 23:	Republican National Platform for science and technology was published by Washington Evening Star and Daily News: “We will place special emphasis on these areas in which break-throughs are needed: Abundant, clean energy sources; safe, fast and pollution-free transportation; improved emergency health care; reduction of loss of life, health, and property in natural disasters; rehabilitation of alcoholics and addicts to dangerous drugs. We will press ahead with the space shuttle program to replace today’s expendable launch vehicles and provide low-cost access to space for a wide variety of missions, including those related to earth resources.” (W Star & News, 8/23/72, A10)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $299250 contract to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. to study and develop program for weld-bonding materials for space shuttle, (msc Release 72-55)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $226 256 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study system for handling space shuttle cargo in space. MSC engineers envisioned manipulators to handle payloads in shuttle orbiter as being 9-12 m (30-40 ft) long, electrically powered, and free-moving like human limbs, (msc Release 72-189; Av Wk, 9/18/72, 9)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on scientific forecasts that earth’s surface would become too hot for habitation in 4 billion yrs: “While we work on problems of more immediate concern, let’s not scrimp on the space shuttle. Down the line a few billion years, they may think well of us for that.” {LA Times, 8/18/72)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of requests for proposals for development of concepts, construction of hardware, and testing of thrust chamber for space shuttle orbit maneuver engine (ome). Two firms would be selected, each to receive one-year, $275 000, firm-fixed-price parallel contract, (msc Release 72-33)
Newspaper editorials commented on President Nixon’s decision to develop space shuttle. Washington Post said arguments for or against shuttle were not “error free” since “major ones rest on projections into the future which are exceedingly difficult to make and others rest on basically undemonstrable assumptions about the quest for knowledge. Part of the difficulty springs from the fact that no one can know what space-based research will discover. Is the key to the hydrogen atom and thus to unlimited energy out there . . .? Will the world some day need to import minerals from space to sustain life here? Will man have to be in space to accomplish things such as these or can machines do them all? Above all, where does this kind of program fit in a national budget that cannot provide for doing all the things at home that ought to be done?” Such questions would make debate over space shuttle “different in character and significance from last year’s debate over the sst.” Standards applied to “project which involves scientific research and military considerations . . . must be somewhat different from those applied to a project, such as the sst, which involved only another way to move people from place to place.” (W Post, 1/14/72, A22) Houston Post: “With the last Apollo moon flight scheduled later this year and the Skylab project to terminate in 1973, the shuttle holds the key to an on-going space program. Our failure to build it would indicate our lagging interest in space research to the possible detriment of future cooperation with the Russians in this field. It is true that we have important social priorities which need attention, but our space research posture in relation to the Soviet Union, whether competitive or cooperative, also carries a high priority.” (H Post, 1/14/72)
New York News editorial commented on space shuttle decision: “We would like to see the U.S. taking on, too, some of the more exciting space challenges that could be achieved with America’s present knowhow. But at least Mr. Nixon has furnished assurance that he will keep the U.S. in the space business. We can be thankful for that at a time when undeserved abuse is being heaped on the whole program by people who prefer to shut out the beckoning glitter of the stars so they can concentrate on the mud at their feet.” (NY News, 1/9/72)
Flying model of winged shuttle orbiter by erno Raumfahrt-technik GmbH of West Germany would be air-launched during year to study subsonic dynamic stability, Spaceflight reported. Program, begun in mid-1960s by Federal German Ministry for Education and Science, had led to development of small pilotless flight model called Bumerang, which made first unguided flight off Heligoland Aug. 12, 1971. Research to date by erno specialists, participating with space shuttle team led by McDonnell Douglas Corp. of TJ.S. had been on winged (nonlifting body) orbiter models at German Research and Test Establishment for Aviation and Spaceflight. (SF, 8/72, 301)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $365 000 contract supplement to LTV Aerospace Corp. for work on space shuttle orbiter thermal-protection system using reinforced pyrolyzed plastic. Supplement brought total funding for work to be done by April 20, 1973, to $859 000. (msc Release 72-171)
New York Times published response by Univ. of Michigan astronomer James A. Loudon to Jan. 16 letter in which former scientist-astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary questioned compatibility of space shuttle with national goals. O’Leary letter had been “strange document from a man who wrote a whole book to complain that scientists don’t have access to space.” Shuttle’s most important aspect, “aside from its economy,” was its ability to carry passengers. “For the first time, scientists will be able to perform experiments in space without spending years in irrelevant pilot training first.” Shuttle’s effect would be “to make space very much more available, with results for a dozen different branches of science that are now incalculable.” (NYT, 3/28/72)	_
Award of $168 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. for design study of low-density ablative materials was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Materials could be used to protect space shuttle orbiter from heat, (msc Release 72-117)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of requests for proposals to 13 aerospace firms to study, design, and test polymer seal materials for storing space shuttle propellants. Firm selected would receive $100 000, firm-fixed-price contract, (msc Release 72-43)
McDonnell Douglas Corp. announced in St. Louis that it was laying off 11 000 employees in next 17 mos, largely because of its failure to win prime contract for space shuttle. President and Chief Executive Officer Sanford N. McDonnell said 260 employees would he laid off immediately and that by year’s end figure would reach 6000. Most of 11 000 layoffs—perhaps 9800—would be from California divisions of company that employed total of 92 000 persons. (Andelman, NYT, 8/3/72, 43)	:
House by vote of 367 to 10 passed H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that included $3.349-billion NASA appropriation [see May 18]. House rejected amendment by Rep. Rella S. Abzug (D-N.Y.) to delete $200 million for space shuttle. (CR, 5/23/72, H4896-924)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced renegotiation and extension of thermal protection contract with LTV Aerospace Corp. for advanced development of reinforced pyrolyzed plastics to protect space shuttle orbiter. About $493 500 would be added to previous funding for total study cost of $767 500. (msc Release 72-121)
General Accounting Office released Cost-Benefit Analysis Used in Support of the Space Shuttle Program (B-173677). Review of analysis prepared for NASA by Mathematica, Inc., and used by NASA to justify shuttle development economics, had been requested by shuttle-foe Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.). GAO said it had “worked with estimates received from Mathematica for two representative configurations of the space shuttle,” solid-fuel and liquid-fuel reusable-booster shuttles; “made computations using NASA’s cost model developed by Mathematica to show the effect of increasing or decreasing selected critical areas within their plausible boundaries”; and “found that the two configurations were economically justified in terms of the 10-percent investment criterion proposed by Mathematica as the hasis for evaluating the Space Shuttle Program.” Investment criterion used was “space transportation system having the lowest total space program cost, considering the time value of money.” Use of criterion required selection of discount rate to consider time value of money. Mathematica had proposed 10% discount rate. (Text)
Washington Evening Star editorial supported space shuttle development: “Congress should go along with this proposed investment, knowing that if the country’s highly efficient space organization is killed, it will not easily be revived. There is still much work to be done on those peaceful cosmic frontiers that can spread many benefits and much inspiration on this troubled earth.” (W Star, 1/26/72, A17)
Extension of McDonnell Douglas Corp. contract for design study of space shuttle orbiter auxiliary propulsion systems to include study of earth-storable propellants was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Extension increased contract value to $576 000 and carried it through Oct. 15, 1972. (msc Release 72-101)
European Space Research Organization would use preliminary definition study of sortie laboratory for space shuttle application as basis for future negotiations with nasa, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Study, to be performed by Dornier, was part of European effort to participate in post-Apollo program. (Av Wk, 10/30/72, 9)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuance of two requests for proposals for space shuttle heating contracts. One request was for design study of ablative materials with low density to protect space shuttle orbiter and one was for design and construction of heating unit to produce high temperatures for testing materials used externally on shuttle, (msc Releases 72-24, 72-25)
Manned Spacecraft Center awarded two parallel, firm-fixed-price contracts for study of aircraft that could simulate subsonic flight characteristics of space shuttle orbiter. Grumman Aerospace Corp. would receive $150 000 and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Georgia Div. would receive $149 000 to provide sufficient data to assure NASA that proposed shuttle training aircraft was technically feasible and acceptable and that recommended design could meet specified requirements, (msc Release 72-147)
Apparent U.S. decision not to seek European participation in shuttle development was discussed by Nicholas Valery in British publication New Scientist: “By all accounts it seems that just as Britain and her continental partners were deciding whether to accept America’s invitation to join the post-Apollo space programme, Washington has slammed the door smartly in their face. Having used the idea of international participation—ostensibly to ease the burden on the US taxpayer—as a means of winning congressional support for its re-usable space shuttle, NASA is now quietly letting it be known that it has no intention of letting Europe get its hands on anything technologically important.” (New Scientist [London], 7/6/72)
Two European space consortiums were in competition to develop the manned spacelab to be flown on the U.S. space shuttle, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Groups led by ERNO—VFW—Fokker and Messerschmitt-Boeklow-Blohm GmbH were in Phase B studies to define Spacelab (sortie lab) costs and configurations. The studies would end in July to allow the European Space Research Organization to decide on supporting Spacelab development. ERNO planned to offer two Spacelab configurations. One would be certain of meeting the established cost criteria. The second would be more expensive but technically more advanced. The MBB system used a common support system of a single module housing all general-purpose subsystems, with separate individual payload systems inserted as needed. Scientific payloads could be prepared independently of launch cycle constraints. One set of payload experiments could return to earth and another set be slid into place within two weeks. (Av Wk, 4/9/73, 22)
The Manned Spacecraft Center had awarded a shuttle contract to Charles S. Draper Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the MSC Roundup reported. The Laboratory had received a $1 375 484 cost-no-fee contract to provide technical support for guidance, navigation, and control subsystems in space shuttle program, (msc Roundup, 2/16/73, 1)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. announced the award of a $30million-plus subcontract to ltv Aerospace Corp. Vought Systems Div. to design and develop the leading-edge structural subsystem of the space shuttle orbiter’s thermal protection system. Final details were being negotiated. (ri Release SP—45)
NASA announced selection of Martin Marietta Corp. for negotiation of a $ 107-million cost-plus-award-fee contract for the design, development, test, and evaluation of the space shuttle external tank. The development phase would include fabrication of three ground-test tanks and six developmental flight tanks. The contract would run through 1978. (nasa Release 73-163)
NASA announced the selection of Grumman Aerospace Corp. for negotiation of a contract to modify two Gulf stream II aircraft for crew trainers for the space shuttle orbiter, The contractor’s proposed cost was $19.5 million, (nasa Release 73—278)
The Senate Committee on Appropriations reported H.R. 8825, FY 1974 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans appropriation bill that included a $3.002-billion NASA appropriation, $13 million above the $2.989-billion version passed by the House June 22. The bill increased the appropriation for construction of facilities from $89 million to $101 million, including $56.3 million for space shuttle facilities at various locations. (CR, 6/28/73, D771; S Rpt 93-272)
Contractor project definition and cost (Phase B2) studies were begun in Europe on the European Space Research Organization (esro) Spacelab (sortie lab) for NASA’s space shuttle. (NASA Release 73-191)
Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass.), Chairman of the House Committee on Appropriations Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans, introduced H.R. 8825, FY 1974 HUD-Space-Science-Veterans appropriation bill that included a $2.989-billion NASA appropriation—$2,194 billion for research and development, $87.8 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. The bill would cut NASA’s requested $2,197 billion for r&d by $3 million and the $112 million requested for construction of facilities by $24.2 million. Research and program management funding would remain at NASA’s requested $707 million. The Subcommittee had reduced NASA’s requested $28 million for supersonic flight research to $11.7 million; strongly urged NASA to continue advanced nuclear technology development “within the total funds provided in this appropriation”; urged NASA to reprogram funds to launch ERTS—B as early as possible if the malfunction in Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23, 1972) continued to degrade performance; urged continued development of the quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft “to insure American competitiveness in this largely underdeveloped area of commercial aviation”; and allocated $2.5 million to replace NASA’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft (lost in an April 12 mid-air collision). Reductions in construction of facilities funding would defer amounts for space shuttle facilities construction. (CR, 6/19/73, H4994, H Rpt 93296)
NASA released to industry a request for proposals for design, development, and production of the space shuttle external tank. Invited to bid were McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., and Martin Marietta Corp.’s Aerospace Div. (nasa Release 73-64)
Four seven-year subcontracts totaling $140 million for the design and fabrication of major structural components for the space shuttle orb iter were awarded by Rockwell International Corp. Fairchild Hiller Corp. received a $13-million contract for the design and fabrication of the vertical tail. Grumman Aerospace Corp. received a $40-million contract to design and build the double delta orbiter wing. Convair Aerospace Div. of General Dynamics Corp. was awarded a $40-million contract to build the mid-fuselage that formed the payload bay section. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. received a $50-million contract to design and build the orbital maneuvering system that would aid in orbital circularization and change and in rendezvous and deorbit maneuvers. (ri Release SP—17)
Award of a $19 500 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for design, construction, and testing of an electromagnetic pulse simulator for testing large aircraft systems was announced by the Air Force, (dod Release 190-73) April 16-17:	A joint meeting on the space shuttle Sortie Lab/Spacelab Project at Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center was attended by 20 representatives of the European Space Research Organization (esro) , European Space Research and Technology Center (estec), and European space consortiums headed by Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH and erno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH. The group was briefed by NASA on the space shuttle and Skylab programs, concept verification testing, and the msfc sortie lab activities. The consortiums presented a summary of European Spacelab studies, (msfc Release 7344)	. Dr. Bruce Murray, Cal Tech astronomer and principal TV investigator of the Mariner 9 mission (launched May 30, 1971), disputed the theory that ancient floods on Mars had carved the huge canyons shown in the Mariner 9 photos. “Mars’ atmosphere, which, at present, is only one-hundredth as dense as the earth’s, very probably never has been dense enough for water to run on the planet’s surface.” There might have been times “when Mars had virtually no atmosphere at all.” (NYT, 4/22/73, 31; Swaim, Pasadena Star-News, 4/22/73) April 17:	NASA announced the signing of a definitive contract with Rockwell International Corp.’s Space Div. for design, development, and production of the orbiter vehicle and for the integration of all space shuttle system elements.-The cost-reimbursement, fixed-fee, and award-fee contract would have a $477 400 000 initial increment. The contract superseded an Aug. 9, 1972, letter contract and would continue through Aug. 3, 1974. A second work increment—the balance of design, development, test, and evaluation, plus delivery of two orbiters—was planned to begin Aug. 4, 1974. Rockwell planned to subcontract to firms and suppliers in almost every state. (NASA Release 73-76)
Chairman Maurice M. Levy of the European Space Research Organization Council described steps to complete plans for European participation in the space shuttle program, during FY 1974 nasa authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “The ESRO Council has already approved the text of an agreement laying down the arrangements under which the Spacelab [sortie lab] will be developed, first in esro and subsequently within the European Space Agency which, in conformity with the decisions taken in Brussels, is expected to be set up in 1974. This agreement is open for signature between March 1 and the end of July. It will probably be implemented very shortly.” A technical agreement would have to be negotiated between nasa and esro as to Spacelab’s procurement and its integration into the space shuttle. A second agreement between governments would be necessary to cover commitments for nonduplication of efforts, the possibility of transferring technology to other European programs, access to the whole shuttle system, and the availability of conventional launch vehicles. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), nasa Director of Facilities, testified that the $8.9-million budget request for space shuttle facility planning—in addition to $67.2 million for shuttle facility modification projects—included studies, engineering support, and preliminary engineering reports for upcoming projects and the final design for the pending FY 1975 facility needs. “This specific final design, when accomplished, will essentially complete facility design for the shuttle ground test program, the early and initial phase of Solid Rocket Booster (srb) production and test facilities,” and the pads and mobile launchers at the Kennedy Space Center. (Transcript; Text) *	Microwave measurements of the atmosphere of Venus were described by Univ. of California scientists in Science. Two sets of passive radio observations—measurements of the spectrum of the disc temperature near the 1-cm wavelength and interferometric measurements of the planetary limb darkening at the 1.35-cm water vapor resonance—had shown no evidence of water vapor in the lower atmosphere of Venus. The upper limit for the mixing ratio of water vapor to dry air was substantially less than the amounts derived from the Venus probes. The amount of water vapor could not produce dense clouds nor contribute significantly to a greenhouse effect. (Janssen et al., Science, 3/9/73, 994-996)
U.S. technological progress had proceeded “almost without interruption” during 70 yrs of flight, Marquis Childs said in his Washington Post column. The doubters had “always been proven wrong.” In astronautics, Skylab was continuing successfully and work was progressing on the space shuttle. “As for the scientific benefits, perhaps only a few specialists can give a proper evaluation. Rut the cynics who spoke derisively of spending billions to put some clown in the sky are wrong on several scores.” The aircraft production record was equally impressive. In 1972 the U.S. had made 79% of the aircraft being operated by the world’s airlines, exclusive of the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of China. The achievements in U.S. production, discovery, and invention were “in painful contrast to the failures in self-government illustrated by the grim mess in Washington, It may not be too much to say that if we find a way out of the morass, the swamp of intrigue, deceit and doubt, it will be thanks to American productivity.” The Smithsonian Institution’s new Air and Space Museum was to be dedicated July 4, 1976. “That no one can predict what manner of man will preside over thi occasion is a melancholy commentary on the gap between technology and politics.” (W Post, 10/9/73) October 9—12:	A radical new growth hormone theory evolved from Ames Research Center studies was introduced by arc scientist Dr. Richard E. Grindeland during a Raltimore, Md,, symposium on growth hormones. Dr. Grindeland’s theory that the growth hormone in blood was chemically different from that in the pituitary gland had originated from arc research to determine effects of physiological stresses like acceleration, simulated weightlessness, chemical agents, thermal extremes, and nutritional status on the human body. The theory, which the symposium suggested would have profound effect on the understanding of growth hormone physiology, showed that radio immunological methods detected only a minute fraction of the concentration of growth hormone in the blood, (arc Astrogram, 10/25/73, 1) Release 73—143; ksc Release 238—73; Marshall Star, 10/3/73, 1; MSFC PAO)
The return payload limit on the space shuttle orbiter had been increased 28%, up from 11 300 kg to 14 500 kg (from 25 000 lbs to 32 000 lbs), following system analysis by Rockwell International Corp., Aviation Week & Spcwe Technology reported. The increase could be made without modifying the orbiter structure, by permitting the orbiter to land at a faster speed, and without exceeding the 68 000-kg (150 000-lb) liftoff weight limit. The orbital payload limit remained 29 500 kg (65 000 lbs) in easterly orbits and 13 600 (30 000 lbs) in polar orbits. (Av Wk, 11/5/73, 9; nasa omsf)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Division, prime contractor for the space shuttle orbiter, signed a $16.5-million supplemental agreement with NASA. This 27th supplemental agreement since the contract was awarded 9 Aug. 1972 brought the estimated contract value to *$995 million. It incorporated authorization for sneak circuit analysis, vertical flight-test support, midfuselage mockups, integration of all shuttle elements, and other changes. (jsc Release 74-258)
NASA announced the award of a $483 000 000, costplusfixedandaward-fee supplemental contract and 11-mo contract extension to Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. for development of the space shuttle orbiter and integration of all elements of the shuttle system. The supplement brought the total value of the contract, which would continue through 30 June 1975, to $943 248 000. Rockwell was to subcontract more than 50% of the dollar value of the contract. (NASA Release 74-195)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. to negotiate a twoyear, $13.2-million, cost-plus-award fee contract to support the space shuttle program in system analysis; avionics system engineering; mission planning, analysis, and software formulation; computer systems and software; and crew procedures and flight planning, (nasa Release 74-83)
Lockheed-California Co. had received a $25-million letter contract from Rockwell International Corp. for structural testing of the space shuttle orbiter, the Huntsville Times reported. (Huntsville Times, 12 Sept 74)
Martin Marietta Corp. had been awarded a $26 453 600 NASA contract for support of the external tank effort of the space shuttle program, NASA announced. The consolidated facilities contract, which would run through 31 Aug. 1978, provided for acquisition of plant equipment at Michoud Assembly Facility, rehabilitation of existing facilities, and construction, modification, maintenance, and repair of facilities, (nasa Release 74239)
Permanent nasa employment had decreased 4.2% during FY 1974, dropping from 25 955 to 24 854 employees, NASA’s Office of Personnel reported. Despite a numerical decrease of 470, employment in professional occupations had risen to 61.4% of the NASA total. The minority component increased to 6%. The increase in average age slowed to 0.2 year, reaching 42.7 years, while the average GS grade remained the same at 11.0. The 2358 separations were almost twice as many as the 1246 accessions, with most of the reduction-in-force separations occurring in technical support, wage grade, and clerical occupations, (nasa, “The In-house Work Force,” FY 1974) During June: NASA began “Outlook for Space,” a comprehensive planning study to identify potential roles for space exploration and exploitation 1980-2000. The year-long study, headed by Deputy Director Donald P. Hearth of Goddard Space Flight Center, would seek to relate goals of potential civilian space activities to national interests, to develop a list of desirable and practical U.S. civilian space activities, to group activities with specific sets of goals, to define research and development tasks required for potential commercial and operational uses of space, and to identify social and economic challenges that could benefit from the use of space. NASA would consult representatives from universities, other Government agencies, and' industry. The study would supplement “The 1973 NASA Payload Model” planning effort, which had evaluated potential uses of the space shuttle, space tug, and Spacelab and which had been completed in October 1973. The new study would continue through June 1975. (NASA Activities, 15 Sept 74, 2-6; gsfc proj off, interview, 17 July 74)
A standardized solar-electric propulsion stage (seps) that could become part of a space transportation system for payloads in planetary and earth-orbital missions was under study at Marshall Space Flight Center, seps, one of several concepts under study, would be able to accept modules such as a docking subsystem for earth-orbital missions or a science package for planetary missions. Another concept, for an attachable SEP module, would provide propulsion only and depend on spacecraft subsystems for all other functions, seps would carry a cluster of six to nine thrusters, fueled by ionized mercury, and two lightweight 27-m solar-array wings to supply 25 kw of power to the thrusters and payloads. It was being designed for use with the space shuttle and space tug, and application of an attachable Sep module to a Mariner spacecraft was being studied. The tug, supplemented by seps, would be able to deploy and retrieve a 2500-kg geosynchronous equatorial payload in 100 days, tripling the amount the unaided tug could deliver. After one delivery, the seps could continue to operate between the shuttle orbit and intermediate orbits, delivering and retrieving 20 more payloads before the thruster life was used up. (nasa Release 74r-38; NASA omsf, interview)
The space shuttle had no imaginable use which could not be met more cheaply and expeditiously by rockets already in existence, columnist Nicholas von Hoffman charged in the Washington Post. Of the justifications for the space shuttle program, one of “the most persuasive is the large amounts of money that will be pumped” into an ailing economy. However, “it would be difficult to think up a more inflationary way to provide jobs for people.” (W Post, 8 July 74) '
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had signed a protocol agreement in Moscow with the U.S.S.R. on possible future cooperation, including development of civilian transports and helicopters, air traffic control, and navigation and communications systems, Lockheed announced. The protocol was one of 20 agreements the U.S.S.R. signed with U.S. companies. (Lockheed Release, 30 Jan 74) 30 January—4 February: Two representatives of the 10-nation European Space Research Organization that would develop and build Spacelab for use with NASA’s space shuttle accompanied U.S. scientists on the Ames Research Center’s Galileo II Convair 990 aircraft on flights evaluating electronic instruments designed to measure sea conditions. Dr. D. J. Shapland of the United Kingdom and J. De Waard of The Netherlands observed the flying laboratory, which would serve as a pattern for shuttle sortie missions carrying Spacelab. Spacelab was to have two elements: a manned laboratory module permitting scientists and engineers to work in a shirt-sleeve environment and an instrument platform, or pallet, for telescopes, antenna, and other equipment requiring space exposure, (nasa Release 74-31; arc Aerospace Sci Div, interview, 17 July 74)
NASA announced selection of International Business Machines Corp. for an fill-million, two-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to design, develop, and implement a ground-based computing and data-processing system for the space shuttle and other programs. (NASA Release 74-132)
The Army was issuing a $1 988 000 firm-fixed-price contract to Algernon Blair Industrial Contractors, Inc., for modifications to orbiter propulsion system test facilities for space shuttle engine testing at NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility, the Dept, of Defense announced, (dod Release 59—74)
Astronaut-physician Dr. F. Story Musgrave and Dr. Dennis R. Morrison of Johnson Space Center’s Bioscience Payloads Office spent one week in a mockup Spacelab at JSC in a shakedown' test of operational procedures and experiments. Spacelab, a scientific space laboratory, was being developed and built by the European Space Research Organization for orbital missions aboard NASA’s space shuttle. A rehearsal for future tests and a means of perfecting operational procedures, this first test also evaluated proposed space shuttle ground support and flight crew operational procedures, data-handling techniques, man-machine integration, and biomedical demonstrations representative of Spacelab medical experiments, (jsc Release 74-255; jsc Roundup, 11 Oct 74, 1)
Skyrocketing fuel prices had added almost $1.5 billion to the cost of producing aluminum, titanium, and magnesium, threatening serious inflation for military aircraft programs and NASA’s space shuttle, the Washington Post reported. The price of aluminum had jumped from 6.5 cents for a half kilogram to 31.5 cents in the preceding six months. One aerospace company was quoted as telling the Pentagon and NASA that the rising aluminum prices would increase its program costs 16%. Grumman Aircraft Corp. had said it was paying 25% more for titanium and aluminum than one year ago. Grumman manufactured six models of aircraft, including the Navy’s F-14, which used more titanium than any other aircraft. Rockwell International Corp. had raised the estimated delivery cost of each of its B-l bombers from $45 million to $61.5 million, at least partly because of soaring aluminum and titanium prices. Each B-l required 12 000 kg of titanium and 24 000 kg of aluminum. (O’Toole, W Post, 8 May 74)
Rockwell International Corp., prime contractor for the Space Shuttle, announced selection of Consolidated Controls for a $1.5-million contract to provide high- and low-pressure helium valves for the Shuttle Orbiter reaction-control system (RCS). The valves would control helium output in the RCS propellant tanks, serving as a manifold shutoff valve in the vernier engine and as a low-pressure helium shutoff valve. (Rockwell Release SP—29)
Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. announced the award of an estimated $1 million subcontract to the United Technologies Corp. Hamilton Standard Div. to build the flash evaporator subsystem, a part of the Space Shuttle Orbiter’s environmental control and life-support system. The evaporator would use excess heat generated by Orbiter subsystems to turn water from the spacecraft’s three power-producing fuel cells into steam vented into space, handling as much as 60 kg of water per hr. (United Aircraft became UTC in May.) Rockwell held the prime contract with NASA to build the Orbiter and . integrate the complete Space Shuttle system. The evaporator subsystem contract was the third of three contracts totaling more than $27 million awarded to Hamilton. Under previously awarded subcontracts, Hamilton was also developing the Orbiter’s atmospheric revitalization subsystem, Freon coolant loop, water boiler hydraulic thermal-control unit, and ground-support equipment hydraulic cart. (Rockwell Int’l Space Div Release SP—17)
The first set of wings for NASA’s Space Shuttle Orbiter began an 18-day land and water journey from Grumman Aerospace Corp.’s facility in New York to Palmdale, Calif., for final assembly with the Orbiter. The two wing panels, each 9 m long from tip to fuselage and 18 m wide at the fuselage edge, would travel aboard transporters specially designed to be pulled by a truck—at 16 km per hr—or loaded onto an ocean-going container ship. From New York the wings would make a 13-day trip through the Panama Canal to Long Beach, Calif., and then travel overland to Palmdale. The double-delta aluminum wings had been designed, manufactured, and tested by Grumman under a $40 million subcontract awarded by the prime Space Shuttle contractor, Rockwell International Corp., in March 1973. (JSC Release 75—38)
NASA announced selection of Martin Marietta Aerospace for a $22.8 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for checkout, control, and monitoring of subsystem hardware for the Space Shuttle launch processing system (LPS). Martin would design, fabricate, test, and install hardware for the subsystem, composed of hardware assemblies communicating directly with computers and with flight and ground equipment of the Space Shuttle. The LPS was designed to use automated and modular techniques to meet Space Shuttle launch, maintenance, and refurbishment requirements. (NASA Release 75—219)
NASA Life Sciences Director, Dr. David L. Winter, issued an invitation to scientists to help plan NASA’s future life sciences program in space. The invitation, sent to 30 000 biological scientists in the U.S., said that NASA was considering a series of manned laboratories staffed by scientists, engineers, and technicians to be launched aboard the Space Shuttle. One entire lab devoted to life-science experimentation would be launched every 6 mo. Other small highly automated life-science experiments could be performed during Spacelab and Space Shuttle missions dedicated to other disciplines; NASA estimated that as many as 200 life-science flight experiments could be conducted in space during the 1980s. The invitation stated that “in order to take maximum advantage of future research opportunities, NASA intends to involve a large cross section of the Life Sciences community in shaping scientific program objectives, in selecting spacecraft laboratory equipment, and in the planning and execution of Flight Experiments.” NASA estimated that approximately 200 scientists could participate as principal investigators of future flight experiments and that 50 of those could perform their research in space as crew members. As part of the first phase of the life-science program, NASA requested that interested scientists suggest general topics for future research and identify equipment needed to carry out life-science investigations. (Winter letter, text; NASA Release 75-140; UPI, ATT, 9 May 75, 7)
The aft fuselage for Space Shuttle Orbiter 101 arrived at Rockwell International Corp.’s Palmdale, Calif., assembly facility after a 160-km truck journey from Rockwell’s Downey plant. The aft fuselage joined the midfuselage, vertical tail, and wing panels delivered earlier by Rockwell subcontractors. The forward fuselage was due in Palmdale in October, with rollout of the first orbiter scheduled for the third quarter of 1976. Approach and landing tests would begin during the second quarter of 1977. (JSC Roundup, 12 Sept 75, 4)
The Space Shuttle was, in many ways, the “ultimate recycling program,” Robert Anderson, president and chief executive officer of Rockwell International Corp. said on Transportation Day at the Canadian National Exhibition in Toronto. Anderson said that the Shuttle program, with its international scope and emphasis on reusability, was the first major step toward economical and effective use of space. More advanced Shuttle-launched satellites Would benefit the world by aiding crop control; locating new sources of minerals and fossil fuels; monitoring weather, pollution, and localized disasters such as oil slicks and forest fires; mapping oceans and urban areas; and improving communications. “For the job of transportation is not just to move people and goods from point to point—it is to also move history forward by enabling the pioneers to explore the new frontiers and by enabling society to capitalize on their discoveries.” (Text; Rockwell Inti Release R—42)
West Germany was studying the possibility of purchasing a Spacelab pressurized module for use on the U.S. Space Shuttle, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. The German Spacelab would be configured for research in space processing, a field of considerable interest to Germany. Its missions on Spacelab, launched by NASA aboard the Space Shuttle on a cost-reimbursable basis, would be separate from missions conducted by the European Space Research Organization. {Av Wk, 21 April 75, 27)
Rockwell International Corp., holder of the prime contract with NASA to build the Space Shuttle Orhiter, announced that more than $109 million in subcontracts for the Space Shuttle main engine had been awarded by the Rocketdyne Div. since work on the engine began 3 yr ago. Figures to date showed that firms in 40 states were participating in the Space Shuttle program. Rockwell reported that Space Shuttle development would funnel an estimated $5 billion into the U.S. economy by 1978 and create employment for approximately 50 000 workers. (Rockwell Int’l Release RO—9)
NASA announced the award of a $2 376 400 contract to Reinhold Construction Co. for phase 2 of the Space Shuttle landing facility, including the landing aids control building, Orbiter landing instrumentation facilities, and related communications and utility systems. Phase 2 was scheduled for completion by the end of 1976. Phase 1, which began in April 1974 as a $21 812 737 contract with Morrison Knudsen Co., included construction of the 4570-m-long, 91-m-wide runway, towway apron, and towway. Site preparation was nearing completion and the paving with nearly 200 000 cu m of cement would begin in July. Phase 1 was scheduled for completion by the summer of 1976. (KSC Release 62— 75)
NASA and Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. had signed a $1.8-billion supplemental agreement for the follow-on development of the Space Shuttle Orbiter, NASA announced. The agreement formally incorporated into an existing contract awarded for Orbiter design, development, and test and evaluation, the construction of Orbiters 101 and 102, approach and landing tests, and six orbital flight tests. The supplemental agreement for the additional work brought the value of the Rockwell contract to more than $2.7 billion. (NASA Release 75—266; JSC Release 75—90)
The preliminary design review of Space Shuttle Orbiter 102 for the first manned orbital flight was completed on schedule. (NASA Gen Mgmt Rev Rpt, 17 March 75, 39)
DOD announced the award of a $3 500 000 firm-fixed-price contract to TRW, Inc., for software support of the Space Shuttle. (DOD Release 83-75)
Approximately 31 000 contractor personnel in 47 states were current .at work on the development of the Space Shuttle, NASA announced. That number was expected to increase to 34 000 by June and to reach a maximum of 50 000 persons within 2 yr. (NASA Release 75-63)
NASA Black Brant VC sounding rockets would be used to carry materials-processing experiments as a low-cost way of expanding observations made during the 1973—1974 Skylab missions, NASA announced. Three flights a year aboard the sounding rockets were planned from 1975 through 1980 to provide a better understanding of material behavior during melting, solidification, and heat treatment without the effects of gravity. Although the sounding rockets would provide only 6 min of low gravity—one ten-thousandth of the gravity on earth—rocket missions were the only way to get low-gravity materials-processing data between the July 1975 manned Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and the Space Shuttle flights in the 1980s. (NASA Release 75—12)
Assembly of the first main engine of the Space Shuttle had been completed by Rockwell International Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. 1 mo ahead of schedule, NASA announced. After assembly the engine was automatically checked out—for the first time in history—by the engine’s internal controller and integral digital computers for functional, electrical, and mechanical operations. Known as the Integrated Subsystems Test Bed, this engine was not built for flight but for static firing tests at the National Space Technology Laboratories. The Space Shuttle would use 3 of the liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen engines. Designed to perform at high internal pressures for greater specific impulse, each engine would produce more than 2.1 million newtons thrust and would be used for up to 55 missions before overhaul, with between-mission maintenance comparable to techniques used by commercial airlines. (NASA Release 75—83; Rocketdyne Release RD—7)
NASA announced award of a $46.8-million cost-plus-award-fee contract to International Business Machines Corp. for developing and testing the Space Shuttle avionics software system. IBM would design, develop, test, and maintain the avionics software for the data-processing system on the Shuttle Orbiter that would include electric and electronic systems for guidance, navigation, and control capability; communication; computation; displays and controls; instrumentation; and electrical power distribution and control for the orbiter, external tank, and solid-rocket boosters. (JSC Release 75—63)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported out H.R. 4700 authorizing FY 1976 appropriations to NASA. Changes recommended by the committee would raise the NASA authorization by $5.7 million to $3,545 billion. Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the Senate Committee Program Difference from Submission (millions) Recommended Authorization (millions) Purpose Research and Development: Space shuttle 0 1206.0 Accepted as presented Space flight operations -4.0 203.1 Allocation of reduction left to discretion of NASA Advanced missions -1.5 0 Recommended deletion of this item; activities to be integrated with similar and related functions in other programs Physics and astronomy +7.0 162.8 To increase knowledge of upper atmosphere, identifying problems and developing new technology for dealing with them Lunar and planetary exploration 0 259.9 Accepted as presented Launch vehicle procurement 0 166.9 Accepted as presented Space applications +8.9 183.9 To increase emphasis on weather research, LACIE program, advanced communications research, and Space Shuttle payload definition Aeronautical research and technology 0 175.4 Accepted as presented Space & nuclear research & technology 0 74.9 Accepted as presented Energy technology appHcations 0 5.9 Accepted as presented Tracking & data acquisition -2.2 240.8 To seek economies in the program Technology utilization 0 7.0 Accepted as presented R&D Totals: +8.2 2686.6 Research and Program Management: Basic submission 0 776.0 Accepted as presented R&PM Totals: 0 776.0 Construction of Facilities: Modification of 11-by-ll-ft transonic wind tunnel at ARC 0 2.7 Accepted as presented Addition to Lunar Sample Facility at JSC -2.5 0 Deleted from funds Addition for composite model and metal finishing shops at LaRC 0 1.9 Accepted as presented Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the Senate Committee (continued) Program Difference from Submission (millions) Recommended Authorization (millions) Purpose Construction of Facilities: (cont.) Space Shuttle facilities 0 47.2 Accepted as presented Rehabilitation of facilities at various locations 0 16.0 Accepted as presented Minor construction of new facilities or additions to old facilities 0 5.0 Accepted as presented Facility plannirig and design 0 9.3 Accepted as presented C of F Totals: -2.5 82.1 Grand Totals* +5.7 3544.7
Manufacture of unique items in space is nearing reality with the availability of the Space Shuttle, scientists from TRW Systems Group told the 6th U.S.—European conference on partnership for space applications. Five practical processes in the space environment would be crystal growth, purification and separation, mixing, solidification, and processes in fluids. The gravity-free environment would permit the manufacture of items such as contamination-free glass for laser requirements, pure crystals for semiconductors, and highly pure vaccines. Also, if materials like copper-lead alloys that do not mix on earth could be combined in zero gravity, retd breakthroughs in aircraft and automotive parts manufacture might be possible. (SBD, 14 Oct 75, 221)
The vertical tail assembly for the Space Shuttle arrived at Rockwell International Corp., in Palmdale, Calif., after being shipped by Shuttle subcontractor Fairchild Republic Co. The tail unit, more than 8 m high, had a root chord of nearly 7 m. (FRC X-Press, 6 June 77, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 76, 25)
Astronaut-pilots in training for the Space Shuttle program had used a simulated shuttle—a Grumman Gulfstream 2 twin-engine jet— in approach-and-landing maneuvers over the southern New Mexico desert at White Sands Missile Range, the New York Times reported. Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, JSC director, who recently watched the training at White Sands, said that the latter installation might eventually become a space port for launch and recovery of the shuttle. The pilots were to test an actual space shuttle—the Enterprise, unveiled this fall by Rockwell Inti.—some time next year; the first vertical launch of the shuttle had been scheduled for 1977 from KSC at Cape Canaveral, Fla. (ATT, 19 Dec 76, 41)
A launch-abort system for the Space Shuttle, for use in case of malfunction during the first 2.5 min of flight, was “quietly” removed by NASA 3 yr ago although such a system had been designed into the Shuttle late in 1971, according to the Washington Post. (In 2.5 min the Shuttle would reach a 40-km altitude from which it could “fly” to earth.) Staff writer Thomas O’Toole said that in 1973 NASA “reversed itself and dropped the launch-abort system ... a decision understood to have met with dissent inside the space agency.” The abort system designed for the Shuttle consisted of 2 huge solid-fuel rocket motors, one on each side of the Shuttle tail, that could be fired to separate the spacecraft and its occupants from the booster engines and main-engine fuel tanks in case of trouble; however, the abort motors weighed 43,500 kg—half as heavy as the entire 68 000-kg Shuttle carrying an average 18 000-kg pay-load—and even after they fired, the Shuttle would fall for 2 or 3 sec before being lifted away from the boosters. Elwood W. Land, director of system operations for the Shuttle program, defended the decision to remove the abort system, saying that it was not needed because of redundancy built into the spacecraft and its engine. Land noted that, in 58 manned space flights, neither the U.S. nor the USSR had resorted to a launch-abort system to rescue spacecraft crews, notwithstanding 2 close calls: Gemini 6 astronauts had almost fired their ejection seats when their engine shut down on the pad in 1965, and the Soyuz 18 cosmonauts never reached earth orbit but flew their spacecraft to a landing in southeast Siberia. The 1-man Mercury capsule had a rocket-boosted escape system to carry the spacecraft cabin away from its rocket engines and fuel tanks; the 2-man Gemini had ejection seats to fire astronauts from the cabin like jet pilots from disabled aircraft; and the 3-man Apollo carried a large solid-fuel rocket motor that could pull the 18 000-kg spacecraft away from its tower of engines sec after trouble hit the engines or fuel tanks. Only remaining provision for the Shuttle was a pair of ejection seats for pilot and copilot of the first 4 orbital test flights; the seats would be removed when 5 more crew members were added for subsequent tests and for operational flights. “There is no way to install 7 ejection seats in the shuttle,” the article noted. (WPost, 7 May 76, A-3)
RockwelLIntl. Corp. inspectors testing their inventory of transistors after a government warning to watch for counterfeit semiconductors had found 11 of 11 transistors of one type to be fakes, the New York Times reported. Rockwell had concluded that bogus parts had been “unwittingly built into [NASA’s] major current project, the Space Shuttle, for which Rockwell is the prime contractor.” The NYT said that “a rash of discoveries of bogus devices” had plagued the electronics industry for the last year and a half. The Defense Electronics Supply Center (DESC), a DOD agency that procured almost all electronic devices for defense, found 20 of 60 components taken randomly from stock to be “suspect” and had returned them to the makers for tests to determine authenticity. “Counterfeit” components—devices altered physically to misrepresent their true type or quality, by relabeling, renumbering, or adding false reliability information or dating— would not necessarily be nonfunctional; however, as the purpose of the alteration would be to indicate falsely that a part had passed certain quality tests, and would therefore be much more valuable, the part might fail under strenuous application. Failure of a single component could have consequences far outweighing its 25-cent cost. The transistors tested at Rockwell had been marked to indicate suitability for use in the most rigorous applications; upon disassembly, the parts showed no indication of having undergone any of the extra testing signified by the external markings, which had increased the cost fivefold. Although one trade organization (Electronics Industries Assn.) set up a task group to combat the problem of counterfeiting, “all sectors of the electronics industry are working against . . . major procedures to alleviate counterfeiting,” said the NYT report. At issue was the use of distributors, intermediary between producers and end users, who had a “heavy financial interest in maintaining the current system,” the report said. Most semiconductor producers sold rejects to junk or surplus dealers for their metal content; the items not disfigured were a very inexpensive source for remarking, and could be introduced into the market as high-quality low-cost items. Virtually all counterfeit components could be traced to the big defense contractors, said the NYT. Industry sources contended that 'the DOD had loose procurement practices, with a purchasing-policy rule that component contracts must go to the lowest bidder. As a DESC spokesman pointed out, “We are simply not allowed to pay a premium price on any contract,” even if the low bid is suspiciously below the going rate—“a strong indication that something may be wrong,” the NYT noted. Accepted methods of the industry made it impossible to guarantee the authenticity of any part that did not come directly from the manufacturer, the report added. Although vendors had predicted that a 1974 DESC edict calling for a strict and immediate upgrading of tests on military-grade components would disrupt the supply, few problems had arisen after the regulations had taken effect. (NYT, 24 Oct 76, 3F; Newsweek, 25 Oct 76)
MSFC announced it had shipped to GFSC the experiment payload for SPAR III, third in a series of about 15 space-processing applications rockets being flown over a 15-yr period to obtain space-processing data in near-zero gravity until Space Shuttle flights become available in the 1980s. The scientific payload built by MSFC would be integrated with GFSC components—igniter, separator, control and recovery systems—and shipped to the U.S. Army White Sands Missile Range, N.M., for a scheduled mid-December launch. SPAR payloads recovered by parachute would be forwarded to investigators for analysis. The SPAR flight would provide about 5 min of near-zero gravity in which to perform materials processing. (MSFC Release 76-204)
MSFC announced launchings of two giant helium-filled polyethylene balloons carrying cosmic-ray detectors, last week’s flight for a French-Danish team investigating isotopic composition of primary cosmic rays, the upcoming flight to evaluate instrumentation for a planned HEAO launch and for other Space Shuttle experiments. The HEAO flight scheduled for 1979 would survey and map gamma-ray and cosmic-ray flux. The balloon launch site near Sioux Falls, S.D., was chosen because earth magnetic-field lines there would deflect fewer cosmic rays, and the low population density and open terrain facilitated payload recovery. The balloons would reach an altitude of about 41 km, above 99.6% of earth’s atmosphere (which fragments cosmic rays), and remain aloft for 40 to 60 hr sending data to the ground. Upon electronic command from the ground, the instrument payloads would separate from the balloons and return to earth by parachute; the balloons would be destroyed by ground command over unpopulated areas. Telemetry tapes and recovered instruments would go to the investigators for analysis. (MSFC Release 76-172)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. and the Singer Company’s Simulations Products Division for parallel negotiations, leading to award of a contract to one of the companies for maintenance, modification, and operational support of Johnson Space Center’s simulator complex to be used in training flight crews for the Space Shuttle. The 2-yr contract beginning 1 July would provide for optional additional periods of 24 mo and 6 mo respectively. The training complex, consisting initially of a Shuttle procedures simulator and a crew procedures evaluation simulator, would have added to it an orbiter aeroflight simulator and a Shuttle mission simulator. General Electric and Computer Sciences Corp. also submitted proposals. (NASA Release 76-87; JSC Release 76-30)
Modifications of the test stand to be used at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories for static firing of the combined Space Shuttle propulsion system had been finished 2 wk early, MSFC announced. The stand had been built for tests of the Saturn V first stage and converted for use in the Shuttle program by Industrial Contractors, Inc., of Idaho Falls, Ida. In the tests, scheduled to be conducted late in 1977 by workers in Rockwell Inti. Corp.’s Space Division under MFSC direction, the main engines of the Shuttle would be connected to a structure resembling the orbiter; this simulator, using both flight and nonflight hardware, would be attached to an external tank, the Shuttle element containing liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen for the three main engines. Firing of this combination (known as the Main Propulsion Test Article) would be the first time the three main engines were fired as a system. Engineers would combine acoustic tests with the MPT A firings to obtain data for determining optimum vibration and sound levels; they would also use the data to check tanking procedures. Hardware for the tests would arrive at NSTL next summer. (MSFC Release 76-178)
Pilot training for the Space Shuttle would begin in October at White Sands Missile Range, the Washington Post reported, with instructors completing their training by mid-October. Two of the instructors—David Griggs and Ted Mendenhall—were scheduled to make practice approaches at the range 29 September; chief instructor A1 Manson and copilot Ed Rainey made a similar test in August. Aircraft used in the Shuttle training are modified Grumman Gulfstream II jets fitted with Shuttle orbiter controls and instrumentation. (WPost, 26 Sept 76, A20)
No immediate serious problem appeared to exist in modification of the stratosphere, according to a report released by an interagency task force on inadvertent modification of the stratosphere (IMOS) prepared by the Interdepartment Committee for Atmospheric Sciences (ICAS). Assessing presently postulated manmade modifiers of the stratosphere other than fluorocarbons, the report considered 6 kinds of possible hazards: nitrogen fertilizers, brominated compounds, other chlorinated compounds, particles, the Space Shuttle, and carbon monoxide. The report concluded that concern over modification of the stratosphere was so far speculative, and that it was based on compounds not yet released to the upper atmosphere in quantities believed sufficient to produce a hazardous effect. Although a large number of substances had been considered, only those appearing most potentially harmful were singled out. Also, cumulative effects from several substances might become significant later, the report said, even if the effect of any single substance were relatively slight. The report urged increased research into stratosphere modifiers and prevention of inadvertent modification now and in the future. (IMOS report, 30 Mar 76)
The Hugh L. Dryden Flight Research Center, formerly the Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., was formally dedicated in a ceremony by NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first administrator of NASA from 1958-1961; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; and Mrs. Dryden, guest of honor, who unveiled a bust of her late husband that would be placed in the Center’s lobby. After the ceremony, visitors were invited to a display of aircraft in the main hangar, including the 747 aircraft that would be used for the Space Shuttle orbiter approach and landing tests next year. Center efforts to transfer space technology to industry were represented by a solar-energy display and low-drag truck exhibits. Dr. Dryden in 1947 had been named to the newly created post of director of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics; when Dr. Glennan, then head of the Case Institute of Technology, was selected as NASA’s first administrator, he insisted on Dr. Dryden as his deputy. When James E. Webb was chosen NASA’s second administrator, he also made the condition that Dr. Dryden remain as his deputy; he had served in that position until his death in 1965. (NASA X-Press, 26 Mar 76; program)
First test firing of the second Space Shuttle main engine—Engine 0002, first to have a flight-type engine-mounted controller—achieved the programmed 1.5-sec duration, firing through a diffuser used for altitude simulation when production engines were throttled in testing. Engine 0002, a flight configuration that would not be flown, was a developmental engine instrumented for test purposes. It was fired on the National Space Technology Lab’s Stand A-2, used in Saturn V tests during the 1960s and modified and reactivated for the Space Shuttle program. NASA planned to fire each engine on the A-2 throttling test position before using it on a Shuttle flight. Stand A-l, the sea-level test position, had been used for about a year to test the first SSME, a test version known as the integrated subsystem test bed; A-l was also developed for the Saturn program and modified for Shuttle tests. (MSFC Release 76-57; Rockwell Release RD-7)
NASA announced successful static test firing of one of two Space Shuttle main engines for 650 sec at main-stage operating level (50% rated thrust level) at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss., under the direction of MSFC. The firing, on 30 Sept., was the longest test firing of an SSME to date. Previous firings had aimed at testing engine-throttling control, engine start and shutdown sequence, and engine power balance. The current series of tests, conducted by personnel of Rockwell Intl.’s Rocketdyne Div., would obtain component- and system-operation data at increasing levels of power. The NSTL test program combined development and acceptance testing; each Shuttle engine would be fired at NSTL before being certified for flight. (NASA Release 76-162)
NASA asked scientists to submit proposals for scientific experiments to be carried on the first Spacelab mission in late 1980, according to Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science. Primary objective of Spacelab 1 would be to verify performance of systems and subsystems and to measure the environment surrounding NASA’s Space Shuttle; secondary objectives would be to obtain scientific, applications, and technology data and to demonstrate Spacelab’s abihty to perform space research. The first flight would emphasize stratospheric and upper atmosphere research, but proposals from other scientific disciplines were also solicited. Objectives of the Spacelab 1 mission had been planned jointly by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA); the NASA announcement of opportunity would be sent to U.S. scientists and those in all other nations not members of ESA, and ESA would make a separate solicitation to its 11 member states. Responses would be coordinated between the two agencies. (NASA Release 76-49)
Despite lower profits in its work on the Space Shuttle and increased losses in business aircraft, Rockwell Inti, reported higher sales and earnings for both the last quarter and the full fiscal year ending 30 Sept. 1976. Earnings were $121.1 million, up 29% in fiscal 1976, and sales increased 8% to a record $5.2 billion. The figures did not include discontinued operations in Rockwell’s industrial components area, sold in Dec. 1975. Four of the company’s five operating areas reflected better management and lower interest costs: automotive operations, electronics operations, consumer operations, and utility and industrial operations. The aerospace operations figures reflected fewer award-fee opportunities, Rockwell said. (Rockwell Release R-40)
The Michoud Assembly Facility operated for NASA by MSFC at New Orleans was nearing production capability for the Space Shuttle external tank, MSFC announced. Delivery of all required items to Michoud would require an estimated 225 trucks, about three fourths of them carrying loads classified as oversize. By the time all 225 trucks arrived, total “train” length would have reached more than 3 km. Getting the equipment from the suppliers located at faraway points such as Dallas, San Diego, Baltimore, and Nashville had presented problems because of the size of the loads; special escorts were required for oversized loads, and travel time at New Orleans for oversize loads was restricted to the period between 10 pm and 4 am. Tooling and fixtures being installed at Michoud would give Martin Marietta, prime external tank contractor, the capability needed to meet flight schedules; each Shuttle flight would require a new external tank, and NASA had planned more than 400 flights between 1979 and 1989. Launches should number 60 per year by 1984. (MSFC Release 76-60)
NASA announced plans for rollout of the first Space Shuttle orbiter on 17 Sept, at NASA’s Rockwell Inti. Space Div. at Palmdale, Calif. The ceremony was scheduled for 9:30 am PDT, and media representatives were alerted. (JSC Release 76-51)
The NY Times reported that the General Accounting Office, Congress’s investigative arm, had told the lawmakers to consider delaying completion of the Space Shuttle fleet, originally planned to include five ships. Two had been built so far. GAO said Congress should go ahead will building a third Shuttle but should put off construction of the other two until “there is sufficient confidence in the shuttle development program and more information is available on the space transportation system operations cost and plans for future space activity.” Today noted that this report was “the most sweepingly and harshly critical” of a number of negative assessments of the Shuttle issued by GAO. Among its charges were that the Shuttle would cause sonic booms over Calif, and Fla. upon landing; that its tires would blow out and cause a crash when it tried to land; that it could make too few orbits; that there was no proof it would reduce the costs of carrying cargoes into space; and that hardly anyone would want to use its services except DOD and NASA itself. GAO pointed out that other nations, led by Japan, had been developing their own launch vehicles and were likely to use them instead of paying to use the Shuttle; it also said NASA had erred in setting its fees low to encourage users to change over from expendable launchers. NASA’s plan to recover expenses later, when costs had fallen with increased use, might never be possible, the GAO said. Former NASA administrator James C. Fletcher said he disagreed with most of GAO’s comments: NASA would solve the technical problems as it had solved others, he said, and delaying acquisition of the fourth and fifth Shuttles would be wasteful. “If they are procured while tooling and assembly lines are in place, they unquestionably can be procured at far less cost than would be incurred by delay.” A 3-yr delay would run up the program cost by from $3 billion to $4.5 billion, he said. (NYT, June 5/77, 43; Today, June 4/77, 8A)
The USAF announced it had issued contracts to Martin Marietta Aerospace at Denver and General Dynamics Corp.’s Convair Divison at San Diego for design of a large space structure to be carried into orbit on the Space Shuttle and erected and deployed in space. The contracts, each for $750,000, called for conceptual design of a flight-demonstration model of an antenna-like structure to be assembled and deployed in a form exceeding the size of the orbiter cargo bay (60ft long by 15ft in diameter). Plans called for automated assembly in space with manned supervision. The flight article would also serve to verify the Shuttle’s ability to deploy other DOD craft that might require assembly in orbit. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 77, 4)
KSC announced it had awarded a $39 812 contract to Ky. State Univ. for continuing research on effects of prolonged exposure of experimental animals to variations in the atmospheric level of oxygen. Previous studies in the field had been on short-term exposure to 100% oxygen, but little was known about prolonged exposure to oxygen at low to moderate concentrations. Ky. State’s first grant for this work in March 1974 had exposed vinegar flies to higher levels of oxygen than normal and drastically shortened the life span, whereas exposure to lower than normal levels had greatly reduced reproductive capacity. This work had also suggested that certain individuals might prove better adapted genetically for survival in abnormal oxygen environments. The findings would be useful in planning atmospheres for long-term manned space missions aboard the Space Shuttle or on space colonies. (KSC Release 91-77)
NASA announced it had identified about 40 payloads to be carried on 11	Space Shuttle flights in its first yr of operation, beginning in 1980. Three civilian firms had deposited “earnest money” with NASA for payloads on 8 flights; NASA had plans for 5 payloads, and DOD had plans for one. Chester M. Lee, STS operations director, said NASA also had forecast 12	non-NASA civilian payloads, 10 NASA payloads, and 4 DOD payloads for launch during 1980 and 1981. Allocating the payloads to specific flights would not be firm until about a yr before launch, he noted. A working model for Shuttle traffic in the first 12yr, totaling 560 Shuttle flights, would show NASA flying about half the missions on its own; 20% would be DOD missions; 6%, other U.S. government agencies; 12%, commercial firms; and 12%, foreign customers. (NASA Release 77-175)
JSC announced award of a $2 752 000 contract to Hamilton Standard Division of United Technologies Corp., Windsor Locks, Conn., for development and production of a Space Shuttle portable oxygen system for use independently or connected to the orbiter’s oxygen system. Consisting of a face mask, rebreather loop, heat exchanger, oxygen bottle, and recharge kit, the system would operate during emergencies and for prebreathing before spacewalks to denitrogenize the crew’s circulatory systems. (JSC Release 77-18)
MSFC announced a $1 046 100 amendment of a contract with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Inti. Corp., Canoga Park, Calif., contractors for the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME). The amended contract, totaling more than $66 million, would include equipment to build SSME. (MSFC Release 77-37)
The possibility of teleportation-transfer of objects from one place to another by radio waves came closer with the announcement of a new way to create identical copies of a three-dimensional object by using a sculpture-photography system based on the same principles of chemistry and electronics now used in making printing plates. As reported in the Chicago Tribune, Wyn Kelly Swainson, a young man with a degree in English literature and some training in science, had obtained his first patent on a device being developed with the help of the Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, Ohio. Swainson began with the idea of reproducing great works of sculpture without painstaking handwork: a plastic material hardened by light rays would be targeted by intersecting laser beams, controlled by a computer programmed with the image of the object to be copied. Swainson said IBM had already produced an instrument to record computerized shapes, convert the electronic data into light rays, and feed them through the lasers scanning a container of plastic. Where the beams intersected, they would cause a chemical reaction hardening the plastic; washing off the unhardened material would leave an exact copy of the object previously computerized. In theory, a three-dimensional hologram of an object even of complex metals could be analyzed for its precise composition, converted to electronic data, transmitted, and reproduced as often as desired. (C Trib, Jan 30/77, 1-5) Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, with tailcone covering engine-nozzle location, moves on a 90-wheel rig January 31 from the Rockwell plant to DFRC 3 5mi away in preparation for approach and landing tests. (NASA 77-H-77) January 30—February h Enterprise, the first Space Shuttle, towed atop a 90-wheel trailer from Rockwell Intl.’s plant in Palmdale, Calif., made its first trip to Edwards AFB 57km away. Escorted by a convoy of security and patrol cars, the Enterprise moved at 8kph and drew hundreds of spectators to view its configuration (24m wingspan and 21m vertical tailfin). Tests of the 38m-long space vehicle would begin Feb. 18 with a series of “captive” flights; first manned flight to an unpowered landing would occur July 22. (WStar, Jan 30/77, A-7, NYT, Jan 31/77, 12; W Post, Feb 1/77, A-3) ORIGINAL PA&E IZ OF POOR QUALITY	n
NASA announced a successful 60-sec firing of the Space Shuttle main engine on Mar. 12 at rated thrust conditions of 2 082 560 newtons. Employees of the Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell Inti. Corp., contractor for the SSME, conducted the test at NASA’s Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA Release 77-54)
MSFC announced arrival June 24 at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories of a huge steel structure to simulate the Space Shuttle or-biter in main propulsion-test article firings later in 1977. The article would include the simulator with an aft fuselage, an external tank, and three Shuttle main engines; first test would take place in Dec. The simulator, about 29m (95ft) long and weighing about 110 000kg (243 0001b), had moved from the Michoud assembly facility near New Orleans to NSTL in Miss, on the barge Pearl River, having traveled from Calif, to Michoud via the Panama Canal on the NASA barge Poseidon [see May 10]. (MSFC Release 77-118; NASA Release 77-132)
JSC announced it had signed a supplemental agreement with Rockwell Inti. Corp. Space Division deleting two items from the Space Shuttle orbiter contract: a neutral-buoyance trainer, and vibroacoustic tests on the aft fuselage of the orbiter. This work had been scheduled for Rockwell’s plant in Downey, Calif., with support from JSC and KSC field offices. The decrease of $25 334 750 had lowered the value of the cost-plus-award-fee contract with Rockwell to $3 013 971 603. (JSC Release 77-38)
Two giant crawler-transporters that had ferried Saturn V rockets to the launch pad at KSC and were scheduled for similar work in the Space Shuttle program had been designated National Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmarks, Today newspaper reported. At ceremonies held Feb. 3 beneath one of the vehicles, more than 100 persons watched the unveiling of a plaque noting the creation of the 18th national landmark identified since the Am. Society of Mechanical Engineers began singling them out in 1973. Present at the ceremony were KSC employees who had helped build the pair of 2.7-million-kg platforms; ASME officials and members from across the U.S. on their way to a national meeting in southern Fla.; and former astronaut Donn F. Eisele, who had been command-module pilot on the 1968 Apollo 7 flight that resumed moonshots more than a yr after the fatal fire in an Apollo training exercise. Eisele had since become a manager for Marion Power Shovel Co., the Ohio firm that built the transporters at a cost of $14 million. Ray Clark, KSC director of design engineering, accepted the plaque from Dr. Stothe P. Kezios, presidentelect of ASME, with the comment that the transporters were “barely broken in” with mileage on each at just over 800km; they might accumulate 10 times that amount carrying Shuttle equipment during their second yr of operation, he added. (Today, Feb 4/77, 10A)
JSC announced it had signed a $40 million letter contract with Rockwell Inti. Corp. Space Division for modifications to the first Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise and for starting design of a third orbiter. Funded in part by the Economic Stimulus Bill, the contract had been directed at generating more employment opportunities. (JSC Release 77-37)
A cryogenically cooled infrared telescope carried aboard the Space Shuttle would become the major infrared research instrument in space, AvWk reported. NASA studies had indicated such a telescope could gather spectroscopic data on objects 1000 times fainter than now visible. (AvWk, Mar 7/77, 11)
DFRC announced that a malfunction during a June 2 test of the Space Shuttle orbiter’s auxiliary power system would delay the orbiter’s first manned captive flight from June 9 for 1 or 2 weeks, depending on successful completion of ground tests. (DFRC Release 22-77)
KSC announced award of a $95 025 000 contract to the Space Division, Rockwell Inti. Corp., Downey, Calif., for activation of the Space Shuttle facilities and systems, and for Orbiter support during checkout, launch, and postflight operations, in the first six Space Shuttle missions. Rockwell would also support postflight operations at the DFRC landing site for the first four missions. (KSC Release 92-77)
Rockwell Intl.’s Space Division and Autonetics group had won an Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) design competition for a Teal Ruby sensor to detect and track aircraft targets from space, AvWk reported. The DOD sensor, using up to a quarter million mosaic infrared detectors with charge-coupled processors, would fly on the Space Shuttle in 1980. A Lockheed-Grumman team had also competed. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 13)
JSC announced that NASA and the Soviet Academy of Science would send representatives to a meeting Nov. 14-17 in Moscow to discuss a joint program for the 1980s using the flexible delivery and large capacity of the Space Shuttle and the Salyut’s longer stay time in orbit. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, would head the U.S. delegation, and Dr. Boris Petrov, chairman of the academy’s Intercosmos council, would head the Soviet delegation. (JSC Release 77-78; NASA Release 77-234; FBIS, Moscow Dom Sv in Rusn, Nov 18/77)
NASA announced it had signed an agreement with McDonnell Douglas Corp. allowing the company as a commercial venture to design, manufacture, and test an upper-stage system, including integration services, for Space Shuttle missions having payloads weighing up to 2000kg. Carried into low earth orbit on the Shuttle, the upper stage called SSUS-A (for spinning solid upper stage, Atlas Centaur class) would take payloads into transfer orbit where a kick motor would put it into a circular geosynchronous orbit 35 900km above earth. A similar agreement last yr with McDonnell Douglas was for an upper stage called SSUS-D (for Delta class) suitable for use with payloads weighing up to 1100kg, like those being orbited on Delta vehicles. NASA had planned to procure SSUS-A systems only from firms with which it had such an agreement; under the agreements, firms would be free to sell stages either to NASA or directly to customers. The agreements would specify performance requirements, define a delivery schedule to meet NASA’s Shuttle schedule, and establish unit ceiling prices and a ceiling profit. (NASA Release 77-29)
NASA announced it had awarded Computer Sciences Corp. a $41 million contract for support services to communications and instrumentation at KSC, the major site for Space Shuttle launches beginning in 1979. Services would be in 2 categories: the first, covering 3yr, would include modification, installation, operation, and maintenance of an operational intercommunications system, operational TV system, and checkout-control-monitor subsystem. The second category, lyr with 2yr option to renew, would cover KSC work on communications, measurements, telemetries, computer services, data storage and retrieved, program planning, and reliability and quality assurance. (NASA Release 77-104; KSC Release 104-77)
ARC announced selection of 10 women volunteers aged 35 to 45 with nontechnical backgrounds as test subjects in an experiment to help set medical standards for future Space Shuttle passengers. The experiment, ope of a series using varying ages and sexes, would require 9 days of total bedrest to simulate weightlessness, and occasional spins in a centrifuge to simulate Shuttle reentry. Results would show whether or not age and gender affected the ability to cope with spaceflight. (ARC Release 77-15; NASA Release 77-61)
A Space Shuttle orbital-maneuvering system engine had completed acoustic environment testing at JSC, and a second engine had fired 1000 times in life-cycle testing at the White Sands, N.M., test facility, Aviation Week reported. The latter achievement demonstrated the engine’s ability to perform 100 missions, a project requirement. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 13)
MSFC announced award of a $110 096 contract to General Dynamics Convair Div., San Diego, Calif., to study and define ideas for an automatic structural-beam fabrication machine for use in the Space Shuttle [see Mar. 1]. The beams, made of a composite material, would support large scale space structures and act as electrical and thermal insulators. (MSFC Release 77-72)
NASA announced it had selected 5 materials-processing experiments to be flown on an early orbital-test flight of the Space Shuttle beginning in 1979. The Materials Experiment Assembly (MEA) would offer scientists an interim opportunity to conduct studies before Spacelab missions began; it would be automated and unattended, containing its own power source and a minicomputer to collect data. Principal investigators and their experiments were Dr. J. Bruce Wagner, Jr., Ariz. State Univ.—solid electrolytes containing dispersed particles; Ralph A. Happe, Rockwell Inti.—containerless preparation of advanced optical glass; Dr. Herbert Wiedemeier, Rensselaer Polytechnic Inst.—vapor growth of alloy-type semiconductor crystals; Dr. John W. Vanderhoff, Sinclair Laboratories, Lehigh Univ.—large-particle-size monodisperse latexes; Dr. S.H. Gelles, Gelles Associates, Columbus, O.—liquid miscibility gap materials. (NASA Release 77-222)
The Washington Star reported that the first Space Shuttle fuel tank emerged from the Michoud assembly facility near New Orleans on its way to tests at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratory in Miss. NASA contractor Martin Marietta had built the 520 OOOgal tank, half as long as a football field, at a cost of about $2.5 million. If successful, as many as 500 similar tanks would be built during the next 15 to 20yr. The 153ft-long tank, almost 30ft in diameter, was built of aluminum alloy and was disposable, designed to fall away and disintegrate in the atmosphere just before the Shuttle reached orbit. Shuttle flights would cost about $10 million each, as compared to $150 million each for earlier launches. (W Star, Sept 10/77, A-3)
NASA announced it had awarded a cost-plus-fee contract worth about $43.5 million to McDonnell Douglas Technical Services, Inc., Spacelab Integration Division, Huntsville, Ala., for Spacelab integration. The contract, lasting from March 1977 through Dec. 1983, would include design, development, manufacturing, and operational testing of NASA’s Spacelab components. NASA planned to provide all operational services including flight operations, crew training, and maintenance, after the European Space Agency delivered the lab. Spacelab would remain in the Space Shuttle cargo bay to perform earth observations and experiments in materials science, physics, life science, communications, navigation, and space systems. (NASA Release 77-47)
NASA announced that its administrator, Dr. Robert A. Frosch, and Hans Matthoefer, minister for research and technology for the Federal Republic of Germany, had signed a memorandum of understanding for participation in a Jupiter orbiter/probe mission to be launched by the Space Shuttle in 1982. The mission would send an orbiter and a probe on the most detailed investigation to date of the environment and moons of Jupiter, the first opportunity for 114 investigators to measure Jupiter directly as well as remotely from various orbital positions over a long period of time. The orbiter, carrying 10 instruments, would circle Jupiter for at least 20mo; the probe, carrying 6, would plunge into the atmosphere. West Germany would provide a retropropulsion module to inject the orbiter into its path around Jupiter, as well as the scientific instruments and the services of 14 German investigators in preparing the two spacecraft and analyzing their data. JPL would manage the U.S. project, ARC the probe, JSC the Space Shuttle. An office in West Germany would manage FRG’s share. (NASA Release 77-211)
Spacelab, ESA’s manned reusable space laboratory scheduled to fly on the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments in life, physical, and materials science, Nature reported. Although Spacelab’s multinational management and unique financing scheme (ESA members would pay for the laboratory on a voluntary basis) could limit its scientific potential, participants would receive a proportionate share of construction contracts and experiment facilities. Management problems included the question of apportioning payment of NASA’s $10 million launch fee. (Nature, April 7/77, 491)
Project Halo (high-altitude large optics), a space-based system proposed by DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency to detect and track foreign missiles and aircraft, would require 6 Space Shuttle payloads to orbit its structures and equipment, AvWk reported. ARPA’s Halo research had focused on systems analysis, infrared focal planes, optics, cryogenic cooling, power sources, data utilization, and phenomenology. CAvWk, Mar 28/77, 11)
NASA announced it had issued proposals to buy 6 spinning solid fuel upper stages (SSUS) for boosting spacecraft launched from the Space Shuttle into higher orbits. The decision was the first step following agreement earlier this yr with McDonnell Douglas and Boeing Aerospace, allowing them to design, build, and test the devices and market them independently of NASA. The agency as part of a procurement agreement would normally bear cost of development and production; the current bidding would be limited to the 2 companies that had agreed to develop the stages with private funds. The purchase would include hardware, analyses, logistics, and services needed to put a spacecraft into higher orbit after launch and orientation by the Space Shuttle. The contractor would build the vehicle, provide services, and operate the systems. First delivery in Dec. 1979 would be a flight demonstrator; 3 others would launch advanced Intelsat V comsats; the other 2 would serve for other missions. (NASA Release 77-101; MSFC Release 77-90)
NASA reported that MSFC had received 119 proposals for experiments in materials processing to be performed on Space Shuttle and Spacelab flights. As lead center for the Spacelab program, a cooperative venture of NASA and ESA, MSFC had been given project management responsibility for the first three Spacelab payloads. An MSFC team had evaluated the proposals, and the center would announce selection of between 10 and 20 experiments by the end of July. (NASA Release 77-103; MSFC Release 77-91)
MSFC announced it had awarded a $276 597 contract to Bryson Construction Co., Decatur, Ala., for modification of the Redstone Arsenal airfield to accept the Space Shuttle and its Boeing 747 carrier aircraft. The contractor would install a concrete pad 75m long and 55m wide for a derrick to unload the orbiter from the 747. (MSFC Release 77-56)
MSFC reported plans to request another $18 610 000 in NASA’s FY 1978 budget for construction or modification of facilities to be used in building the Space Shuttle external fuel tank (ET) at the Michoud assembly facility (MAF) near New Orleans. With addition of a chemical waste-treatment plant and alterations of the manufacturing, vertical-assembly, final-assembly, and checkout buildings, MAF could produce 28 ETs each yr. (MSFC Release 77-35)
The $500-million Space Shuttle with no crewmembers aboard took its first ride over the Calif, desert, carried piggyback on its converted Boeing 747 for a 2hr test at nearly 5km altitude. Operating the 747 were veteran NASA test pilot Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr.; copilot Thomas C. McMurtry; and flight engineers Victor W. Horton and Lewis E. Guidry, Jr. The Enterprise, prototype of the reusable craft designed to carry cargo and scientists into space in the 1980s, was secured to the 747 by mounts at its nose and tail; the combination craft stood almost 20m from the ground to the top of the orbiter’s tail. The explosive bolts provided to separate the two craft in free flight were armed during this first test, in case of emergency. NASA officials said the weight of the Enterprise (about 65 000kg) did not strain the capacity of the 747, which weighed nearly 200 000kg empty and had carried much greater loads in cargo and passengers. “Most of the time we couldn’t even tell the Shuttle was here,” Fulton said after the flight, which reached speeds of about 450kph as the crew turned and banked the combined ships, shut down some of the 747 engines, and performed other maneuvers to check stability. The Enterprise would be unmanned during the next 5 combined test flights; in May, a 2-man crew would conduct 6 more tests of the 747/orbiter combination, and in July the orbiter would be released from its carrier for a series of unpowered flights. (W Post, Feb 19/77, A3; W Star, Feb 19/77, A-8)
The Washington Post said NASA was looking for “someplace else to land the space shuttle.” Its second free flight had been postponed when Hurricane Doreen turned the planned landing strip (a dry lakebed at Edwards AFB) into a “mud puddle.” A NASA source said officials had investigated other sites for the flight, tentatively rescheduled to Sept. l.(W Post, Sept 1/77, A-27)
MSFC announced that a special hammer developed in the 1960s for Saturn fabrication had solved a major problem of manufacturing external tanks for the Space Shuttle. Martin Marietta Aerospace, prime contractor for the tanks, in welding four large sections of a liquid-oxygen container at the Michoud assembly facility, had found that peaking of the weld joints left some areas as much as 5° out of tolerance. The special tool MSFC had created for removing distortions in component welds would not impact a surface in the usual sense but, when in contact with the metal, would send a hydrodynamic force uniformly into the thickness of the metal when an electrical charge dumped into the hammer’s coil created an expanding magnetic field. The field would exert an evenly distributed three-dimensional force that would remove the distortions without leaving hammer marks on the target. After Robert M. Avery of MSFC’s Materials and Processes Laboratory showed how to use the tool at the Michoud facility, the contractor was able to remove most of the distortions during the week of demonstration. Two working hammers would remain at the plant for future use. (MSFC Release 77-21)
MSFC announced it had selected General Electric Co. of Valley Forge, Pa., to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for a prototype Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) to be flown on a number of Spacelab missions carried by the Space Shuttle [see June 22]. The prototype with software and spares was due for delivery to MSFC by Oct. 1, 1979, and to KSC for Shuttle launch by Jan. 1, 1980. (MSFC Release 77-124)
JSC announced award of a $5 189 500 supplement to an existing contract with Rockwell Intl.’s Space Division, Downey, Calif., covering 8 engineering changes in the Space Shuttle orbiter to accommodate the European-built Spacelab in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. (JSC Release 77-26)
JPL announced that NASA had followed its recommendation and selected a 12-bladed spinning solar sail spacecraft as a candidate for the automated interplanetary shuttle to be used within earth’s solar system in the 1980s and beyond. Also known as a heliogyro, the set of extremely long blades or sails made of reflective aluminized plastic would be deployed in two tiers of six each by centrifugal force after its spacecraft had been launched from the Space Shuttle late in 1981. The spacecraft and its scientific payload, mounted at the center of the heliogyro, would be propelled by photon radiation from the sun to rotate once every 3min. The spinning-sail concept had been chosen by program engineers and designers for development as being more feasible than a square-sail concept that would have used an 850sq.m (half-mile square) sail configuration. NASA would choose in mid-Aug. between the heliogyro and a proposed ion-drive (solar-electric propulsion) spacecraft for a Halley’s Comet mission in 1986. JPL had been working with other NASA centers and a dozen industrial and research groups on parallel efforts to develop low-thrust long-life spacecraft for the 1980s. (JPL Release 826)
MSFC reported that NASA had issued a request for proposals to integrate mission payloads, in preparation for the first three Spacelab missions and the sixth Space Shuttle orbiter flight test. Integration would include combining a number of experiments into a compatible payload; controlling the configuration during instrument development, testing, and flight operations; and disassembly of the payload after the mission. Proposals, due Aug. 15, would be reviewed by a source evaluation board. (MSFC Release 77-131)
MSFC announced it had requested price quotations on designing a space spider (a device capable of building large-scale structures). The spider, containing prefabricated materials, would attach itself to the core of a planned structure and spin a larger structure, of any diameter, around the core. MSFC engineers had sought estimates of costs and data on the best size of spider to fit inside the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 77-62)
A 25-article series in Science News by Jonathan Eberhart on the Viking mission won the 1976 AAAS-Westinghouse science writing award Feb. 22, Science reported. Henry S.F. Cooper’s New Yorker article on the Space Shuttle received honorable mention. (Science, Mar 4/77, 864)
NASA announced that four customers had signed up for “getaway special” payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle on a space-available basis beginning in 1980. The small self-contained payloads must weigh no more than 90kg (2001b) each, measure no more than 0.15m3 (5ft3), and require no services such as electrical power or deployment into space. Owners of the research and development packages were R. Gilbert Moore of Utah, a private citizen who offered half his payload to Utah State Univ., which in turn would make the space available to high school students who submitted proposals to fly their own experiments; Dr. L.R. Megill, chairman of the space science experiment committee at Utah State, who funded a payload as a follow-on to Moore and also planned to invite student proposals; and Reiner Klett, representing independent West German researchers, who signed for two payloads, one biological and one for space processing. (NASA Release 77-4)
MSFC reported that the NASA barge Poseidon was on its way to Seal Beach, Calif., to pick up a Space Shuttle orbiter simulator and deliver it to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Mo., to stand in for the orbiter during firings next year of the main propulsion test article, consisting of the simulator with an external tank and thrust structure covering 3 main engines. MSFC had used the Poseidon in the 1960s to move stages of Saturn rockets. (MSFC Release 77-84)
NASA reported it had halted MSFC preparations for vibration tests of the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise May 12, when the upper dome of the prototype liquid oxygen tank buckled inward while being filled with water. Pressurizing the tank to lib later removed the wrinkles. The tank implosion would delay Enterprise vibration testing, but the program office would have to review delay of the overall Space Shuttle program. (JSC Roundup, May 26/78, 1; Marshall Star, May 10/78, 1)
MSFC announced it had awarded RCA Government Systems Division an $880 000 contract to develop and deliver three video-instrumentation tape recorders for use on Spacelab 1 and subsequent missions. Under the contract, RCA would deliver three STAR-4 units before April 1980 for integration into Spacelab program equipment before the first launch planned for 1981. Spacelab crew members would use the units to record visual and analog data during communications blind spots, while the Space Shuttle was out of contact with NASA ground stations. The information would be played back for transmission when communications were reestablished. The units, capable of about 500 record-playback operations between tape changes, could record for 45min simultaneously on one video and two audio channels under computer control. Video bandwidth was 5MHz, audio bandwidths 50 to 8000hz. The instruments would undergo rigorous testing for high performance and reliability, and to ensure equipment compatibility with the manned-spacecraft environment. NASA would install two STAR-4s as part of the Spacelab 1 payload and keep the third as a spare. {Marshall Star, Nov 29/78, 4)
KSC reported that NASA’s 4-engine Jetstar aircraft had completed the second of five flight tests of the microwave scanning beam landing system (MSBLS) installed at the orbiter landing facility. The first three flight tests were to verify the system’s ability to land the unpowered Space Shuttle orbiter safely on the 15 000ft runway; the final two would be to commission (declare operational) the runway-landing system. Because orbiters could approach KSC from either the northwest or southeast, the center would have to commission the system twice. Each of the first tests had taken about a week, as the Jetstar had made daily 2hr passes over the runway at different altitudes and azimuths. Precision laser tracking system instrumentation that could locate an aircraft at distances of 14mi and altitudes of 100 to 20 000ft had locked on to special instrumentation in the Jetstar, continuously tape recording the Jetstar’s position while the MSBLS tape recorded the same data. The tapes had been fed into a computer and compared; any positional errors in the MSBLS could then be corrected, aligning the landing system. (Spaceport News, July 7/78, 2)
KSC announced award to the International Hydrodynamics Co., Vancouver, British Columbia, of a contract for systems to recover expended Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket-booster (SRB) casings. The $1 million contract would cover fabrication, testing, and delivery of the recovery systems with associated equipment and hardware. Recovery of SRB casings would mean sizeable savings to the Shuttle program; estimating 19 reuses of a casing, the savings realized by reuse (including cost of retrieval and refurbishment) would be $47 million. (KSC Release 37-78)
Boeing had awarded a $2 million contract to United Technologies’ Chemical Systems Division to build seven servoactuator systems (and two actuators for preflight testing) that would raise the inertial upper stage (IUS) to deployment position in the Space Shuttle payload bay, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Each system would consist of two servoactuators (one for backup), composed of an actuator and electronic controller positioned on either side of a tilt table in the payload bay to which the IUS would be secured. On command, the system would physically tip the tilt table to a predetermined position (e.g., 58°) for IUS deployment. The actuator motor would drive an extendable shaft 41 to 57in long to rotate the tilt table. Pyrotechnic devices on the tilt table would release the IUS, and springs would launch it into space. First flight of the IUS on board the Space Shuttle was scheduled for 1980. (D/SBD, Dec 20/78, 239)
Engineers from Rocketdyne and NASA were trying to determine why a liquid-oxygen heat exchanger on a Space Shuttle main engine had failed during a test at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss., Av Wk reported. This was the first failure of a heat exchanger (an engine component converting liquid oxygen to gaseous oxygen to pressurize the Space Shuttle’s external propellant tank). Earlier in 1978 the Natl. Research Council’s Assembly of Engineering had noted that, although the exchanger had not encountered any difficulties, the system “poses a potential threat to the total shuttle system” from a single-point-failure standpoint. The committee said that, whereas redesign to add systems redundancy was impractical at that point, the system warranted continued examination for potential design improvements. NASA agreed with that assessment. Inflight heat-exchanger failure might start a serious fire or explosion that could result in loss of the spacecraft. Failure during the test had resulted in some engine damage, but none to the test-stand. Testing with different engines was continuing. (AvWk, Dec 18/78, 8)
MSFC reported that the USAF had redesignated an interim upper stage (IUS) for Space Shuttle as the “inertial upper stage,” to reflect its inertial-guidance capabilities as compared to the NASA-sponsored spinning solid upper stage. The new name would also indicate that DOD payloads would use the stage well into the 1980s. (Marshall Star, Feb 1/78, 1; Spaceport News, Feb 17/78, 3)
NASA announced the five Pioneer Venus atmospheric-entry craft reaching Venus and the companion craft in orbit around Venus were the highlights of its space-exploration activities in 1978, the agency’s 20th anniversary yr. NASA had conducted 20 launches in 1978, mainly for other organizations and agencies; it was the third yr in NASA history with a 100% launch-success record. It had also seen completion, of major milestones in preparing for crew-carrying Space Shuttle missions scheduled to begin late in 1979. (NASA Release 78-190)
JSC announced it had selected General Electric Co., Space Division, Valley Forge, Pa., for negotiations leading to a contract for the Space Shuttle orbiter food system galley. The estimated $1.2 million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, beginning December 1978 and ending January 1981, would be for a facility including food-preparation equipment (hot and cold water dispensers, oven, water heater) and serving equipment (meat trays). (JSC Release 78-43)
MSFC reported that a failure in Skylab’s power system July 9 had caused loss of vehicle attitude; MSFC engineers had reconfigured the system and fully charged the spacecraft’s batteries, before performing reorientation maneuvers to return it to its minimum-drag attitude. Skylab was now about 240mi above earth, rolling at about 2 revolutions per hr. Engineers had planned maneuvers to stop the roll and place the vehicle first in a solar-inertial attitude, then in an end-on velocity vector that would encounter minimum atmospheric drag. However, Dr. Chris Kraft, JSC director, said in a copyrighted interview with the Dallas Morning News reported in the Washington Post: “I don’t believe Skylab is going to live long enough for us to get to it with the Space Shuttle . . . We’re going to have to live with the fact that Skylab is going to die a natural death.” (Marshall Star, July 19/78,1, July 12/78,1; JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 1; ARC Astrogram, July 13/78; 1; W Post, July 21/78, A14)
JSC announced that technicians had installed four radiator panels and a flash evaporator system (FES) in a chamber of Building 32 to prepare for Nov. tests of the Space Shuttle heat rejection system. Radiator panels that would reject heat and maintain a livable temperature for Space Shuttle crews would contain Freon. 21 flowing continuously through system loops, picking up heat throughout the ship and depositing cold; heat would be pumped to a central location and vented into space. From 14 000ft to orbit, the FES would cool the ship; in orbit, it would supplement panels that would open and, using ship’s maneuvers, reflect heat. The Nov. tests would close off the 120-ft-high chamber and pump liquid nitrogen through tubes in the black walls, dropping temperatures to -320°; infrared lamps would then increase temperatures to the level required in space. This would be first testing of all system components as a unit. (JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 1)
NASA reported it had amended a contract with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Inti. Corp. to procure 9 Space Shuttle main engines, in addition to the 7 already on order. The amendment had authorized Rocket-dyne to manufacture and test the 9 engines during a 180-day period in which prices would be negotiated. Estimated cost of the amendment had been $250 million. The 9 engines would support the Space Shuttle program through the first 4 orbiters approved for production; the present contract had covered engines for the first Space Shuttle flight scheduled for 1979 and had included 3 ground-test engines and 1 spare. (Marshall Star, May 31/78, 3)
NASA announced it had selected Teledyne Brown Engineering, Huntsville, Ala., for negotiations leading to award of a contract for payload/missions integration for the sixth Space Shuttle orbital flight test and for the first 3 Spacelab missions to be managed by MSFC. An experiment-integration contractor, Teledyne Brown would ensure that the group of experiments for each mission was compatible with the Space Transportation System scheduled to carry it into orbit. The contract would provide for manpower, materials, and associated services required for integration and operation of Spacelab payloads. Flights scheduled during 1980 to 1981 would offer opportunities for scientific investigations on Spacelab missions in the planning stage with scientists from throughout the world participating. These missions would give scientists the first chance to go into space as payload specialists and conduct their investigations in earth orbit. (Marshall Star, Feb 22/78, 1)
NASA reported successful static firing of a Space Shuttle main engine Oct. 30 at the National Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss. The firing lasted for more than 13min, testing its ability to return the Shuttle orbiter to a landing site in case of mission abort during launch. The main engine operated continuously for 823sec, longest burn time an engine should require during an actual mission. A Shuttle orbiter would use 3 main engines having a normal burn time of about 8min. (NASA Release 78-173)
ESA’s Spacelab program board had turned down NASA’s proposal to barter Space Shuttle launch services for the second Spacelab NASA was committed to acquire, and the action was seen as final, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. NASA had hoped to exchange launch service in return for the Spacelab in order to reduce costs [see Sept. 12]. Although ESA itself favored the barter plan, the European governments had refused to commit themselves in advance to Space Shuttle flights. In lieu of the barter deal or any increased NASA funding, ESA might be asked to prefinance work on the second Spacelab until NASA could get the money. (D/SBD, Nov 8/78, 39)
ESA’s Geos2 had apparently suffered a collision in space that did not affect its payload performance but had badly disturbed experiments studying the low-energy plasma, Nature magazine reported. Geos 2 had become fully operational Aug. 2, with all onboard instruments functioning well; prospects for a full 2-yr, mission had been excellent until 07.13 GMT Aug. 5, when UHF telemetry temporarily shut off. The fault had seriously affected the low-energy plasma experiments: the electrical-reference potential of the spacecraft appeared to have jumped 12v for half of each 6-sec spin cycle. This seemed to be the result of slight damage to a solar-array panel that apparently shorted the output of a string of cells to the structure whenever they became illuminated. The design of Geos 2 had attempted to eliminate differential charging; the conductive indium oxide coating of the solar cells was supposed to offer a shorting path in the case of mechanical damage. The Space Shuttle might some day serve as a vacuum cleaner to gather the many manmade objects floating in space. In the meantime, the geostationary corridor had rapidly become crowded, and spacecraft designers would have to consider the probabilities and consequences of space collisions. (Nature, Aug 17/78, 631)
Europe’s space industry was looking beyond Spacelab to future programs that would maintain technological advances and employment as well as joint development activities with the U.S. in manned spaceflight, AvWk reported. With delivery of the first Spacelab scheduled for next yr, European industry said U.S. delay in ordering a second flight unit might disrupt skilled manpower employment and management performance. Also, European industry officials had told NASA that its charges for Space Shuttle flights were too high, and that Europe should have special treatment in Space Shuttle/Spacelab use. W. Germany’s ERNO, Spacelab prime contractor, had proposed to NASA and ESA a second Spacelab as the basis for a barter agreement [see Sept. 12] under which costs of the second Spacelab would offset future Space Shuttle services for Europe. An ERNO spokesman had warned that NASA should not increase Spacelab 2 technical requirements to a point where the cost to Europe’s space industry was unreasonable. On the other hand, the barter agreement should not give the U.S. full autonomy in operating Spacelab or producing future Spacelabs. Commercialization of the Space Shuttle was essential, because “twenty million dollars (1975 price basis) for a standard Shuttle launch and possibly the same amount for a standard Spacelab flight service Eire hardly suited to arouse the interest” of European users, particularly industry, the spokesman said. (AvWk, Oct 23/78, 17)
The Marshall Star announced it had begun ground-vibration tests of the Space Shuttle, using a computerized shaker system turned on by engineers in instrumentation trailers located near the test stand. The shaker system, the Shuttle modal test and analysis system (SMTAAS), had applied vibration cycles and force inputs and had acquired response information from the vehicle suspended inside a tall stand and canted 9° from vertical. In upcoming months engineers would use SMTAAS to “tune in” to the vehicle’s various vibration modes, comparing responses to mathematical predictions. Results of the tests would allow engineers to verify predictions of Shuttle reaction to the much more severe vibrations expected during launch. (Marshall Star, June 7/78, 1; JSC Roundup, June 9/78, 1; DFRCX-Press, June 16/78, 2; AvWk, June 19/78, 75)
DFRC announced it had begun a 2 wk flight program with Calspan Corp., using the total inflight simulator (TIFTS) to investigate advanced flight-control systems like those used in the Space Shuttle. TIFTS, a small twin-engine commercial passenger aircraft with the nose modified to include an additional pilot’s cockpit, was one of the largest airborne simulators equipped with variable stability and 6 deg of freedom. Test pilots had flown the simulated mission from the nose cockpit (with safety pilots in the normal cockpit) to improve understanding of the flying qualities of advanced craft when landing, especially in actual touchdown under differing pilot-task conditions. (DFRC X-Press, June 30/78, 2)
JSC announced it had signed a contract with Itek Optical Systems Division of Lexington, Mass., for the Space Shuttle orbiter camera payload system. The $4 890 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract would cover the first flight system with an option for a second. Planned for spaceflight on pallets and test racks built by NASA or ESA in the orbiter’s 15 by 65ft cargo bay, the system would be a flexible photographic array for earth-imaging surveys, remote sensing, and supplementing nonimaging systems. The second option (to produce a large-format camera for the USGS) would, if exercised, increase the contract value by $1.5 million. (JSC Release 78-42)
NASA reported that a flight-configured Space Shuttle engine fired in tests at NASA’s Bay St. Louis, Miss., facility had exceeded 5000sec, the level to be met by a production engine to certify the main propulsion system for manned flight. Testing of the Space Shuttle main engine had increased dramatically, both in number of tests and time accumulated, since Aug. 12, 1978. Two engines had each accumulated approximately 7100sec of testing time, putting total engine-testing time over 25 OOOsec in 342 tests. Among these were five consecutive runs of 520sec, the length of time needed to put the Shuttle into orbit, on one engine at rated power level. Preliminary flight certification, which required a flight engine to have run 5000sec, was expected in the spring of 1979. Full-duration testing of the complete main propulsion system (a cluster of three engines) would resume in early 1979 when the first manned orbital flight configuration engines would become available. (NASA Release 78-144; JSC Release 78-40; Marshall Star, Sept 13/78,1)
NASA announced that a frame structure for mounting experiments inside the Space Shuttle orbiter’s payload bay had arrived by ship in Savannah, and would be transported by tug to the vehicle assembly building at KSC. Called an OFT (orbital flight test) pallet, the structure, fitted with NASA-developed subsystems, would provide electrical and other support to the experiments. This was the first of two pallet systems destined for use on two of the first six Space Shuttle flight tests. Designed and assembled by British Aerospace Corp. for ESA as part of the joint ESA/NASA Spacelab program, the pallet structure was nearly identical to that of experiment pallets to be used in Spacelab missions beginning in 1981. It was 3m (10ft) long and constructed in a U-shape to fit into the 4.5m (15ft)-diameter orbiter payload bay. Later in the Spacelab program, five pallets would be available for space missions. MSFC was responsible for delivery and system integration of the OFT pallets. (NASA Release 78-182)
In its “Profile of a Mission,” Lewis News reported that a new era of opportunity in space had become available. The Space Transportation System (the Space Shuttle) would open the door to activities ranging from experiments in basic research on physical and chemical process, to using the weightlessness and vacuum of space as an environment for manufacturing products. LeRC’s Space Experiments Integration Office (SEIO) would help principal investigators proposing experiments that needed a space environment, by preventing duplication of effort and standardizing paperwork required for project approval. SEIO had management responsibility for one facility and four experiments, three of which were to fly on the long-duration exposure facility (LDEF) managed at LaRC: —The advanced photovoltaic experiment (APEX) on the LDEF consisted of three related approaches to investigating the solar spectrum and the effect of exposure to space on advanced photovoltaics and materials. For the first time, space-calibrated solar cells would be available as laboratory standards for assessing performance of new solar cells. —The space power experiment (SPEX) on the LDEF would evaluate the use of commercially available components for a space-power system. With three LDEF trays carrying commercially available terrestrial solar cells and a fourth carrying commercial power electronics and batteries, successful operation of these components in space could significantly reduce costs of future space-power systems. —In the ion-beam texturing and surface-coating experiment on the LDEF, which would expose such surface samples to launch stress and near-earth space, ground tests before and after exposure would record the optical properties of the surface of each sample and compare durability of ion-beam-textured surfaces with that of state-of-the-art surfaces. If the ion-beam-textured surfaces exhibited higher durability, use of thermal-control coatings for spacecraft would increase. —The cryogenic fluid-management experiment (CFME), a payload attached to a Spacelab pallet, would obtain long-duration low-gravity engineering data on systems for storage/acquisition/supply of liquified gas (subcritical) to verify the possibility of successfully operating such a system in space. The zero-gravity combustion facility (OGCF), a versatile reusable assembly that would permit a Spacelab experimenter to study combustion free of earth’s buoyancy forces, would carry out tests ranging from rapid burning to long-term smoldering of a variety of liquid, solid, and gaseous fuels. {Lewis News, June 9/78, 3)
AvWk reported that the Soviet Union had labeled the U.S. Space Shuttle a killer-satellite development, and U.S. officials planning talks with the USSR had been debating how to refer to the Space Shuttle in these discussions. NASA had been concerned about the effect on the Space Shuttle program of antisatellite negotiations, although U.S. negotiators had stated they had no intention of trading away Space Shuttie capability for USSR concessions. Informal negotiations on limitation of antisatellite-weapons tests had been set for May; U.S. officials said that NASA must have expected the Space Shuttle to be part of antisatellite discussions. As the Soviets had not cited the Space Shuttle by name, but rather as a “manned system of dual use,” U.S. officials had not decided whether the concessions sought by the USSR would be on overall Shuttle capability, on individual Shuttle capabilities, or on individual potentially antisatellite Shuttle missions. (AvWk, Apr 17/78, 17)
LaRC reported on its Jan. 17-19 seminar on Large Space Systems Technology (LSST) attended by more than 200 persons who had exchanged ideas on the technology needed to build large space systems in the future. The group had tried to guess what research and technology the multimission needs of the Space Shuttle would be in 1985 to 2000; NASA had scheduled no definite programs for 1985 to 2000, but wanted to ensure performance of economical and well-organized future missions. Seminar subjects included predictions of structural behavior in space, particularly under loads and stresses; advanced materials and techniques for joining various kinds of structures; distribution of controls for large structures; and electronics equipment needed for operation and control of structures. Those attending had represented six NASA centers, 24 aerospace firms, 8 universities, and 4 DOD centers. To continue cooperation between government agencies and industry, LaRC planned to hold a similar seminar yearly. (LaRC Release 78-3; Langley News, Jan. 27/78, 1)
NASA announced it had tentatively selected 4 more experiments for its Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) scheduled as a major Space Shuttle payload in 1980. The four scientific experiments—to study hazards to man of ion particles in space, the chemistry of micrometeoroids, the interstellar wind, and cosmic-ray nuclei—would join 23 technology experiments selected for LDEF earlier in 1978 [see Jan. 9]. LDEF, an unmanned reusable free-flying facility carrying technical and scientific experiments mounted in special trays, would offer an easy and economical way to expose primarily passive experiments to the space environment during 6 to 9 mo of LDEF orbit. Selected experiments and principal investigators were: free-flyer biostack experiment, Dr. Horst Bucker, Universitat Frankfurt-am-Main, W. Germany; interstellar gas experiment, Dr. Don Lind, Johnson Space Center; high-resolution study of ultra-heavy cosmic ray nuclei, D. V. Domingo and Dr. K. P. Wenzel of ESA (the Netherlands), and Prof. C. O. Ceallaigh, Dr. D. O’Sullivan, Dr. A. Thompson of the Dublin Inst, for Advanced Studies, Ireland; and chemistry of micrometeoroids, Dr. Fred Horz, JSC. (NASA Release 78-20; LaRC Release 78-5; JPL Universe, Feb 3/78, 1; ESA newsletter, Feb 78, 3)
NASA had officially changed the date of the first Space Shuttle orbital flight from Mar. to June of 1979 because of engine problems, the NY Times reported. NASA said the June date would be tentative until additional tests confirmed that the Shuttle’s three main engines were free of problems. There had been signs the engine situation was improving. Launch date had been important because of NASA’s plan to use the Shuttle to rescue Skylab from an uncontrolled fall to earth next year, possibly by early summer. (NYT, May 18/78, B-10)
MSFC announced it had begun preparations for stress tests of the Space Shuttle orbiter at Lockheed-Calif.’s 430ton (390 metric tons) steel test rig at Palmdale, Calif. The 6-story “reaction frame” rig had more than 350 hydraulic jacks exerting loads on the orbiter to simulate those to be encountered at launch, during spaceflight, and on reentry into earth atmosphere. Lockheed would perform the tests under contract to Rockwell Inti., builder of the orbiter. (Marshall Star, May 17/78, 2)
NASA reported that DOD had lent it 5 Navy divers to support simulated weightlessness tests in the Space Shuttle program. The divers, all fleet-salvage men selected for their expertise in erecting or dismantling underwater structures or equipment, had been assigned to the neutral buoyancy simulator at MSFC. Working underwater in full-scale segments of the Space Shuttle, they would assist test engineers with contingency procedures, equipment operation, evaluation of space-construction techniques, and other activities scheduled for Shuttle and Spacelab missions. (NASA Activities, Jan 78, 5)
JSC announced it would issue an RFP for management-consulting firms to answer questions such as: Would controlling 40 to 60 Space Shuttle flights per yr limit JSC’s ability to perform its basic R&D job? How could JSC keep costs low to encourage maximum use of the space transportation system? How would increased Shuttle activity affect JSC relationships with other NASA centers and contractors? If Shuttle launches reached the expected rate of one or two per wk by 1985, JSC officials wanted to be sure these operations did not deplete already limited personnel and other resources JSC would need to remain a major R&D arm of the space agency. JSC planners had drafted an operations plan for the full-use era of the Shuttle, whose onboard capabilities had exceeded those of previous spacecraft. The plan would reduce the number of flight controllers now assigned to real-time ground operations, and would increase the effort put into flight planning. Because JSC flight control work would affect NASA-wide operations and JSC would have large responsibilities in future spaceflight R&D, center management wanted an outside examination of the plan and alternatives before making a commitment. (JSC Roundup, Aug 18/78, 1)
NASA announced that President Jimmy Carter had presented 1977 presidential management-improvement awards to Curtis Helms and Thomas Winstead of MSFC’s structures and propulsion laboratory. The two were among 7 awardees, selected from 50 nominees, honored at a May 23 ceremony in the White House rose garden. Their redesign of the Space Shuttle external fuel tank, eliminating one of the two vent-relief valves, had reduced vehicle weight and program costs while still meeting venting requirements and reliability standards, resulting in total savings of $5.6 million. (NASA Actv., July 78, 27)
NASA announced it had selected Global Associates, Oakland, Calif., to provide operating services at the Michoud Assembly Facility, New Orleans, La. Services provided under the contract would support NASA program activity and missions of the Depts. of Agriculture, Defense, and Commerce tenanted at the Michoud facility, as well as refuse collection and telecommunications services at Slidell Computer Complex, Slidell, La. MSFC managed both facilities. Under the 1-yr cost-plus-award-fee contract, with four 1-yr options for extension, Global Associates would provide management, personnel, and materials for plant engineering, maintenance, telecommunications, and property and supply, as well as mail, transportation, medical, and food services. Proposed cost over the 5-yr period was approximately $26.5 million. NASA’s primary program at Michoud was manufacture and assembly of external tanks for the Space Shuttle, including those for service as test articles, on test flights, and on operational missions. (NASA Release 78-192)
MSFC announced successful completion of the first test of the Space Shuttle external tank, a major milestone leading to firing tests of the Shuttle’s main propulsion system. The Dec. 21 test assured that the main propulsion test article (the test facility and associated hardware) could handle super-cold propellants, liquid hydrogen, and liquid oxygen used by the Shuttle main engine. Propellants used to fill the external tank had flowed through connecting piping to the 3 engines until stopped by the main-engine valve; test engineers then made sure the engines had cooled down to operating temperature, several hundred degrees below zero. A series of static firings of the external tank, a simulated orbiter with a flight aft fuselage, three main engines, and associated piping would validate system operation. (Marshall Star, Jan 11/78, 4)
NASA announced plans to develop hardware systems to support materials-processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle in mid-1981. The materials-processing in space (MPS) program would take advantage of near-weightlessness in earth orbit to eliminate sedimentation in liquid materials and to reduce movement of liquid caused by heat, allowing precise control of processes such as casting and crystal growth. MSFC had asked industry to submit proposals by Feb. 23 for support of 8 materials-processing experiments. on 1981 Shuttle/Spacelab missions, specifically a fluids-experiments system and a solidification-experiments system using a high-temperature furnace; other hardware systems to be developed would support individual experiments and related earth-based systems. The fluid-experiments system would use an area in the Spacelab for optical observation of fluid phenomena; it would accommodate a variety of cells for use in a broad range of experiments. The solidification experiments system would require a multiuse system for processing metals, alloys, eutectics, semiconductors, crystals, ceramics, glasses, etc., in orbit by melting, refining, and resolidification in near weightlessness. Scientists at MSFC’s ground control laboratory would process “control samples” under conditions identical (except for gravity) to those on the spacecraft. (MSFC Release 78-20; Marshall Star, Feb 22/78, 2)
NASA announced it had invited scientists to submit proposals for life sciences experiments to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle and Spacelab in the early 1980s. The experiments would study physical effects of spaceflight on humans and other living systems, and would test equipment and procedures. These experiments would be performed in the pressurized cabin of the Space Shuttle orbiter, in a pressurized Spacelab module, or (if requiring continuous exposure to the space environment) attached to an unpressurized Spacelab pallet. Proposed investigations would have to meet one or more of the following life sciences objectives: investigate and understand physiological, performance, and biochemical changes observed in humans who had flown in space; identify and investigate significant biological phenomena that might occur during or after exposure to the space environment; and/or test and demonstrate under operational conditions the equipment and procedures that would be needed by the NASA life sciences program. (NASA Release 78-64)
NASA announced that JPL had selected TRW’s Space Systems Division, Redondo Beach, Calif., to negotiate a contract estimated at $80 million for designing, building, and testing one of two spacecraft to explore the Sun’s polar regions in the 1980s. A second spacecraft would be developed by ESA. The solar-polar mission sponsored jointly by NASA and ESA would study the Sun, cosmic rays, and magnetic fields in uncharted areas of the solar system. The four-year mission would begin with launch of both spacecraft by the Space Shuttle in 1983; a gravity-assist flyby of Jupiter in 1986 would put the craft over the solar poles in 1986 and again in 1987. This would be the first mission using spacecraft out of the plane in which Earth and other planets orbit the Sun. JPL would manage the project for NASA’s Office of Space Science. The TRW contract covered the spacecraft system and ground-support equipment, integration of the science payload, tests and launch preparation, and spacecraft-system support during the mission. (NASA Release 79-100)
NASA reported successful completion December 17 at NSTL in Mississippi of a full-duration 9-minute 10-second run of the Space Shuttle main-engine test article, a time longer than that needed to launch an actual Shuttle into orbit. This was the first time the whole system was operated for full duration. No problems occurred, and MSFC test managers said that all goals were achieved. The test article consisted of a cluster of three main engines mounted in a simulated orbiter aft section, drawing propellants from a flight-type external tank. The three engines were throttled back from 100% rated power level to 90%, 80%, and 70%; engine gimbaling and pulsing were successful. To check out two-engine performance, one engine was cut off early as planned, and the remaining two were operated at 70% rated power level for the last 5 seconds of testing. (NASA Release 79-178; MSFC Release 79-133)
MFSC reported that the first Space Shuttle engine tested for flight acceptance had “passed with flying colors” a 520-second endurance test May 12 that simulated launch conditions. Scheduled for use on Columbia, this engine would undergo electrical and mechanical checkout before formal acceptance. The tests began April 25 with 1.5-second ignition-test firing, followed by a 100-second calibration-test firing May 2. After formal acceptance, the engine would go by truck to KSC for installation. The other two of the cluster of three Rockwell-built engines to be used on Columbia were at Space Technology Laboratories for the same series of tests. (MSFC Release 79-45; NASA Release 79-68)
MSFC reported that the NASA barge Poseidon carrying a Space Shuttle external tank and other components had begun an 11-day trip to KSC by way of the Tennessee River and the Gulf of Mexico. KSC would use the items to check out assembly and movement of the components in the vehicle assembly building and to train personnel in stacking the Shuttle on its mobile launch platform. MSFC said the waterways to the Gulf, swollen by recent rains, had receded enough to permit a normal trip to KSC. (MSFC Release
NASA announced that it had named the first four Space Shuttle orbiters that would operate in space to honor U.S. explorer ships. The first orbiter (102) scheduled for launch later in 1979 was named for the Columbia, which located the Columbia River in 1792; Captain Robert Gray named the river for his sloop. Challenger (orbiter 099) was named for the ship that gathered data December 1872-May 1876, filling 50 volumes on Earth’s oceans. Discovery (orbiter 103) was the ship looking in 1610-1611 for a northwest passage from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific Ocean by exploring Hudson’s Bay. Atlantis (orbiter 104) was the first U.S.-operated vessel designed for ocean research, a two-masted ketch that logged half a million miles between 1930 and 1966. Enterprise, the first orbiter built, was named for a vessel exploring the Arctic from 1851 to 1854, as well as for the flagship in television’s Star Trek; as the test orbiter, it was not intended for use in space. (NASA Release 79-10; Washington Post, Jan 26/79, C-2; WSJ, Jan 26/79, 1).
JSC reported that it had amended its contract with Rockwell International Corporation to cover 56 engineering changes in the Space Shuttle orbiter. The first amendment, covering 32 changes, would cost $14,338,000; the second, covering 24 changes plus testing, repairs, and spares, would cost $2,869,833. The control value was now about $3.43 billion. (JSC Release
MSFC reported the successful conclusion October 26 of three separate static-firing tests of the Space Shuttle main engine. The three test engines had completed a scheduled total of 1245 seconds of firing time in less than 12 hours; two engines were tested at NSTL in Mississippi; the other, in California. One of the pair tested in Mississippi fired for 520 seconds, the running time needed for Shuttle launch; the other fired for 665 seconds, the time required for a mission abort. Both these tests were part of a preliminary flight certification series. NASA had postponed a 510-second static test scheduled for October 24 [see October 25] because of a faulty sensor that indicated a hydrogen leak. (MSFC Release 79-119)
NASA reported that a scheduled 510-second firing of the main Shuttle propulsion system test article’s three-engine cluster at the National Space Technology Laboratories had failed November 4 when a sensor detected excessive pressure in the oxygen pump of the No. 3 engine and shut the test down after 9 seconds. The No. 1 engine was damaged during the cutoff sequence, when a hydrogen line ruptured near the base of the engine nozzle. Extent of the damage was unknown; the engine would be sent to Rockwell’s California plant for inspection and repair. MSFC and the contractor were investigating the failure and the possibility of replacing the damaged article in the test stand. Impact on Shuttle schedules had not been assessed. Meanwhile, the orbiter Columbia had successfully passed a series of “ hot fire” tests at KSC of the auxiliary power units to steer main-engine nozzles during launch and to drive control surfaces during atmospheric flight. The tests simulated ascent and descent phases of a Shuttle mission. Next milestone for Columbia would be an integrated test of all systems. (NASA Release 79-146; MSFC Release 79-122)
MSFC said a long-duration test firing of the Shuttle main propulsion system scheduled June 12 was successful, even though a glitch in the automatic-cutoff instrumentation had terminated the test about 50 seconds into the 520 second program. Frank Stewart, test manager for MSFC’s Shuttle projects office, said that the test was successful “in the sense that the system performed as predicted and yielded a great deal of valuable data” needed before the first Shuttle flight. Stewart said the firing sequence was excellent. For the first time in test firing of three flight engines, the rated power level was attained, and the test produced pogo pulsing (a deliberate oscillation from very low to very high frequencies generated by a piston in the liquid-oxygen manifold, to show if vibrations in flight would constitute resonance dangerous to structures). This first long-duration firing of the clustered flight-type engines and propulsion system had already been delayed by malfunction of a development engine during single-engine tests. Inspection after the failure revealed a crack in the coolant pipe, requiring removal of the engine nozzle. Engineers modified a spare nozzle for installation in the test article. Stewart said the event should not delay the total test schedule, which included extra time for unforeseen difficulties. System verification should be complete “in ample time for the first Shuttle flight,” he said. (MSFC Release 79-58)
JSC announced that all Space Shuttle orbiters would have an optical landing aid presently used by pilots of more than 20 U.S. and foreign commercial and military aircraft. Rockwell International, prime contractor for the Shuttle, would provide for the commander and pilot of all orbiters a “head up” system to project instantaneous displays of spacecraft speed, rate of descent, altitude, and other critical flight factors on a transparent viewing glass located above the cockpit window to be pulled down like the sun visor of an automobile. The system would be placed on Columbia in time for the first operational flight, expected early in 1981 after completion of the flight-test program, and in JSC simulators and trainers. (JSC Release 79-64)
The Washington Star reported that NASA had reestablished radio contact with Voyager 1 speeding toward Saturn after the spacecraft apparently became disoriented December 13 during a commanded course correction and aimed its antenna in the wrong direction. JPL controllers had managed to make it “reorient itself and aim its antenna directly at earth.” (W Star, Dec 17/79, A-4) The press reported that a 14-hour dry-run test of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia got under way at Cape Canaveral December 16 after a day’s delay for routine checks. The orbiter integrated test would check out Columbia’s systems using equipment and engineering teams in control centers at the Cape and JSC. (NY Times, Dec 17/79, D-15; W Star, Dec 17/79, A-2; W Post, Dec 17/79, A-28) Dr. Paul MacCready, builder of the lightweight Gossamer Albatross that made the world’s first manpowered flight across die English Channel in June this year, saw his creation go on display in Philadelphia’s Franklin Institute, the Washington Star reported. MacCready was now planning a solar-powered Albatross, the paper said. {W Star, Dec 17/79, A-2)
MSFC reported that 1.5-second ignition-test firings May 4 of a cluster of three Space Shuttle main engines at National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) had been successful, clearing the way for the second phase of verification tests. The three flight-type engines, previously acceptance tested individually at the facility, had undergone the cluster test in an assembly including the engines, a simulated orbiter midbody, and a flight-type aft fuselage to which the engines were fitted. Frank Stewart, MSFC test manager, said that sequencing was good and that he foresaw no problems with the first long-duration firing scheduled for May 15. The tests would evaluate system performance in a static-firing environment as a step in verifying the system for the first manned orbital Shuttle flight. Cluster firings would take place about once per month through July; the third phase of long-duration firings would begin in September and conclude in November, after the equipment had been modified. (MSFC Release 79-47)
MSFC announced that NASA would buy from Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International, 12 more main engines for the Space Shuttle under a $365.7 million amendment of the original 1972 contract that would bring its value to $1,263,215,058. The original contract was for purchase of 27 engines; the amendment would bring the total ordered to 19. The amendment also called for overhaul and test of 10 engines to 109% of rated power level, plus a second overhaul and flight test of the 3 engines being used for propulsion testing. Rocketdyne had delivered the engines for the first Shuttle flight, three ground-test engines, and a spare flight engine under the original 1972 contract. The three flight engines delivered to KSC had been installed on Columbia for next year’s first spaceflight. (MSFC Release 79-117)
ESA reported that the West German firm, Dornier System, leader of the STAR industrial consortium, would be prime contractor for a European spacecraft to participate in the international solar-polar mission (ISPM), a cooperative ESA-NASA project. The contract would cover design, development, manufacture, and testing, at a cost of more than 47MAU (million accounting units, worth U.S. $1.2 in 1979). The ISPM would make measurements outside the ecliptic plane and observations of the Sun using two spacecraft, one each from ESA and NASA, to be launched in February 1983 on the U.S. Space Shuttle. (ESA Release 25)
NASA reported that MSFC had chosen Ball Aerospace Division to negotiate a $9.5 million contract for design, development, and manufacture of a chemical release module for use in the first large-scale controlled investigations of dynamic phenomena outside Earth’s atmosphere. Information on such processes in Earth’s magnetosphere, ionosphere, and upper atmosphere was hard to obtain because the areas were so enormous and the dynamic activity was invisible. Scheduled for mid-1983 launch on the Space Shuttle, the self-contained free-flying module would release in space chemical elements that would absorb sunlight and reflect distinctive colors; other chemicals would glow when reacting with oxygen particles in the upper atmosphere. Motion of atoms and ions colored in this way could be tracked. During the module’s six-month lifetime, it would make 20 to 30 chemical releases for visual, camera, and radar observation. (NASA Release 80-99; MSFC Release 80-89)
Eighteen years after he blasted away from a launch pad at Complex 14, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, to become the first American to orbit the Earth, Sen. John Glenn (D-Ohio) returned to dedicate a marble memorial of his flight and those of Mercury astronauts Scott Carpenter, Walter Schirra, and Gordon Cooper, donated in 1978 by the American Monument Association but held back for dedication until gantries at the site were removed and sold for scrap. The Washington Star said the site was now desolate, “surrounded by palmettos and visited only by an occasional alligator or rattlesnake.” About 600 persons at the ceremony heard Glenn describe the new U.S. goal of routine and economical access to space with the Space Shuttle. {W Star, Feb 21/80, A-2; Today, Feb. 12/80, 1QA; NASA Actv, May 80, 19)
NASA announced that, contrary to recently published reports, it was not taking reservations for travel on Space Shuttle missions. Recent articles on NASA plans to carry small experimental payloads on the Shuttle had mentioned a deposit of $500 to reserve payload space; the reference to a reservation had been taken to imply passenger space. NASA said that it would not offer seats on Shuttle flights to paying passengers. (NASA Release 80-2)
MSFC reported the first sustained operation of the Space Shuttle main engine at full power level, 109% of rated power for 6 minutes, in static firing tests March 31 at NSTL. The engine ran for 10 minutes, 10 seconds, reaching the objectives attempted in an aborted run the previous week. (MSFC Release 80-47; NASA Release 80-42)
NASA announced selection of two firms, McDonnell Douglas and TRW, to receive parallel $1 million one-year contracts for design-definition studies of 25-kilowatt power systems for the STS. The power systems, using solar energy to support large payloads left in orbit, would be placed in a fixed orbit by the Space Shuttle to provide electric power, heat rejection, attitude control, communications, and data handling for a variety of payloads freeing the Shuttle from extended time in orbit and reducing payload cost per day in orbit. MSFC would manage the study contracts and any follow-on development flight system. (NASA Release 80-63)
NASA reported successful testing April 14 of a Space Shuttle main engine at 109% of rated power for six minutes, in the second such test in two weeks conducted by Rockwell International at NSTL. The 10-minute, 10-second test met all objectives; NASA said that it planned at least one more firing in this series on this engine, which had accumulated 183 minutes of firing time in two series of preliminary flight-certification tests. (NASA Release 80-49; MSFC Release 80-55)
Ground testing of Space Shuttle engines suffered another setback, the New York Times reported, when three engines shut down prematurely during a static test firing in Mississippi. The engines, identical to three now on the Columbia at Cape Canaveral, were supposed to fire for 9 minutes, 41 seconds, the time it would take to put a Shuttle into orbit. NASA said that instruments indicated overheating in part of a turbopump. This 11th firing of the three engines in the test series would have been the 5th for the full time needed to launch a Shuttle. Columbia was scheduled for its maiden launch in March 1981. (NY Times, Nov 4/80, C-3)
NASA announced that MSFC had awarded a $230 million cost-plus-award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace for full-scale production of Space Shuttle external tanks, the only part of the: Shuttle not recovered for reuse. Martin Marietta had an earlier contract for design, development, and delivery of nine tanks—three test articles and six flight articles—for Shuttle test flights. The new contract, for delivery of 7 flight tanks to support Shuttle operating missions, included long lead-time procurement of components and subassemblies for 5 additional tanks and raw material for 24 other additional tanks. Manufacturing of the external tanks would take place at NASA’s Michoud assembly facility. (NASA Release 80-100; MSFC Release 80-90) —MSFC announced that it planned to reduce the weight of the Shuttle external tank by 6,000 pounds, a change that could increase the Shuttle’s payload-carrying capability by about the same amount. The center amended its tank design and development contract with Martin Marietta, adding more than $42.9 million to cover the weight-reduction effort and modify tools used in future production. The change would affect tanks built under a new contract for full-scale tank production to support operational Shuttle launches. The first lightweight external tank would be delivered in the summer of 1982. (MSFC Release 80-93; NASA Release 80-102)
NASA announced a student involvement project, a joint activity with the NSTA. Up to 200 semifinalists in a competition to develop experiments for flight on the Shuttle and their teachers would attend preliminary conferences in 10 regions to discuss the proposals with other students as well as NASA and industry scientists; many of the regional conferences would be at NASA centers. NASA awarded the science teachers’ group a contract to conduct the competition and select the winners. From the 200, 10 would be selected whose concepts would best use the capabilities of the Shuttle. The 10 national winners would attend a special conference at KSC late in 1981; all entrants would receive a certificate of participation. Shuttle flights should begin in March 1981; the winning experiments might go on flights in 1981 or 1982. (NASA Release 80-132)
NASA reported a major milestone for a Shuttle main engine February 8, with completion of a second series of flight certification tests at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) near Bay St. Louis, Miss. In the two series of tests (mostly run for 520 seconds at 100% of rated power level), the engine accumulated more than 10,000 seconds of firing time, equivalent to that required for 19 Shuttle flights; in one test, the engine ran at 102% of rated power, and in another it ran for 823 seconds to simulate an aborted mission. The first series of tests last year began March 27 and ended June 27. (MSFC Release 80-19; NASA Release 80-26)
MSFC reported successful completion March 13 of the first full-power test (10% of rated power level) of the Space Shuttle main engine. The test consisted of a 125-second run on a single engine, 10 seconds at 109%; a total of 26 seconds ran above normal rated power. This major step toward certification of the engine for full-power abort capability envisioned possible malfunction of a single engine, requiring thrust in excess of rated power from the other two engines to ensure achievement of orbit or return for safe landing. Rockwell International, prime Shuttle contractor, conducted the tests at NSTL in Mississippi. (MSFC Release 80-36; NASA Release 80-36)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Rocketdyne officials had decided that widespread modification of Space Shuttle flight-engine welds made with welding rods from a suspect lot would not be necessary. Last month the company reported that it might have to straighten a large number of welds, but it had now decided to limit the modifications to an area of hydrogen line located near the base of the engine nozzles. The modified engines would be reinstalled on Orbiter 102 by mid-March, the magazine said. (AvWk, Jan 14/80, 21)
Today reported that Rockwell International, prime Space Shuttle contractor, had made “key management changes and major organizational realignments.. .similar to ones made within the space agency recently.” The paper said NASA now hoped to launch the Shuttle in September, two years behind schedule. {Today, Jan 4/80, 12A)
NASA reported selection of Hughes Aircraft’s space and communications group for negotiation of a $40 million contract to be managed by ARC for a carrier spacecraft to transport the Galileo probe to Jupiter. Launched from the Space Shuttle in March 1984, the probe would reach the planet by July 1987, separate from the carrier, and enter the atmosphere to measure it for about one hour down to a level where pressure would be 10 times that of Earth’s. The carrier would be powered by two radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs); solar energy at Jupiter’s distance would be too weak to furnish power to the carrier, which would maintain contact with Earth during the entire mission, returning data both in real time and for playback on tape recorders. The carrier would receive data from the probe during its entry and descent into Jupiter’s atmosphere, transmitting it to Earth stations. Data on Jupiter’s atmosphere, believed to consist of the original material that formed the stars, would give scientists better understanding of Jupiter’s and Earth’s weather mechanisms. (NASA Release 80-171; ARC Release 80-79)
NASA had no plans to carry tourists into outer space, the Washington Star said, even though its offices around the United Slates had floods of requests for rides since the Space Shuttle project was unveiled in 1977. At least 15,000 people had tried to book seats, and 1,200 new requests arrived each week. “Non-astronauts may be aboard some missions to conduct experiments,” said Chester M. Lee, NASA’s director of space transportation systems, “but we’re not ready to book tourists. There is absolutely no provision or thought for non-working passengers.” (W Star, July 8/80, A-2)
JSC announced NASA selection of two California aerospace firms to negotiate contracts for production of solar cells as a supplemental power source for the Space Shuttle orbiter. Applied Solar Energy Corporation and Spectrolab would each receive a $300,000 contract to develop a large-area low-cost solar cell for NASA’s proposed power-extension package, to be produced at the rate of 144,000 space-qualified solar cells per year, reducing the cost to $30 per watt. (Solar cells now cost from $80 to $120 per watt.) The power-extension item would be a 2,000-pound package folded into the orbiter cargo bay; in orbit, the item would be moved out by a remote mechanical arm, the 177-foot wings unfolding to supply the Shuttle with 26 kilowatts of electric power. (JSC Release 80-032)
The Washington Star quoted Defense Secretary Harold Brown’s statement before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation that NASA’s Space Shuttle program was “critical” to defense planning. The committee was considering the FY81 budget requests of NASA and DOD. (WStar, Feb 8/80, A-5)
NASA announced award of its largest contract so far to a small business firm. KSC entered a fixed-price contract of $6,689,666 to W&J Construction Company of Cocoa, Fla., for work on Pad B of Launch Complex 39 where the Space Shuttle would be launched in 1982 when it became operational. W&J would put in long-run pipes and cables to pump and monitor fuels, coolant, nitrogen and gaseous helium, compressed air, and hydraulic fluids, from storage areas to the fixed and the rotating service structures. Connections to the Space Shuttle would be from the two service towers. The contract would be completed in 20 months. (NASA Release 80-152) •
NASA reported “highly successful” completion of a third static test on a Space Shuttle main engine at NSTL April 19, last of a series simulating power levels necessary to abort at full power in a Shuttle launch. Previous tests were on March 31 and April 14. The engine used (2004) was fired for 10 minutes, 10 seconds with 6 minutes at the 109% power level; this engine had a total firing time of 12,911 seconds (3.58 hours), equivalent to about 25 Shuttle flights. It would now undergo preliminary flight certification tests, 13 static firings at 102% of rated power level. (NASA Release 80-55; MSFC Release 80-58)
Changes made during the past year to the three main engines designated for the first flight of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia had led NASA to set up further tests, the agency announced. Modifications included high-piessure turbopumps, valves, and nozzles. Acceptance-tested between April and July 1979, the engines would be shipped from KSC to NSTL in Mississippi for reacceptance firing and return to KSC. The two- to three-month testing would not affect the timing of the first flight, now scheduled for a date between November 1980 and March 1981. About 6 weeks before the planned launch, the engines would be fired again for 20 seconds on the launch pad. (NASA Release 80-60; JSC Release 80-030)
NASA announced that it would maintain an expendable launch-vehicle capability at the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) in Florida as a backup to the Space Shuttle during transition to Space Transportation System (STS) operation. It would use the standard Delta launch vehicle, capable of putting spacecraft weighing up to 1,100 kilograms (2,400 pounds) into orbit. NASA would charge commercial Delta users $22 million per launch at the outset. (NASA Release 80-22)
JSC reported signing of a letter contract with Martin Marietta Aerospace for development and production of an in-orbit tile-repair kit to be used on llie Space Shuttle. The letter preceded an official award of contract and aulliorized llie firm to go ahead willi design and development of llie kit. Estimated value of llie contract was $2.1 million. (JSC Release 80-004)
NASA announced that it and the ESA had selected 37 scientific experiments for the first flight of Spacelab, scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle late in 1982. The experiments were in five categories: atmospheric physics and Earth observation; space plasma physics; material sciences and technology; astronomy and solar physics; and life science. NASA would sponsor 13 of the 37; ESA (a consortium of 11 nations), the others. Deferred for assignment to later flights were three NASA experiments and a major ESA facility; the factor preventing selection of all the experiments was mass. Each agency would be allowed to fly 1,392 kilograms (3,062 pounds) of equipment on the mission. Unlike Skylab, Spacelab would not be left unattended in space; it would remain in the Shuttle and be returned to Earth for use in another mission. (NASA Release 80-62; MSFC Release 80-66; ESA Info 9)
MSFC said that the Michoud facility near New Orleans had begun assembling the lightweight external-propellant tank for the Space Shuttle. Built by Martin Marietta Aerospace, the modified tank would weigh 6,000 pounds less than its predecessor, increasing Shuttle payload capacity by about that amount. Recent structural tests showed that reducing thickness of skin panels would not affect tank integrity; changing materials of some components would also take advantage of recent research. The external tank (actually two tanks connected by a collar-like intertank) would contain liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants for the three Shuttle main engines and would be the only major element not recovered for reuse. First of the lightweight tanks should be ready for delivery in the summer of 1982 for the fifth Shuttle launch. (MSFC Release 80-155)
MSFC reported successful firing of three Space Shuttle main engines mounted in a test article for 535 seconds in the eighth test of the main propulsion system. A similar firing for 555 seconds occurred 3 weeks ago. In the latest test, engineers for the first time gimbaled the engines while including a “pogo” effect (a phenomenon of cyclic pressures in the propellant system that had occurred in earlier launch vehicles) to demonstrate the engine accumulator’s ability to prevent pogo during flight. Another successful first was the simulation of failure in thrust-vector control to see whether redundant systems would perform properly. The test had been planned for early morning so that engineers could observe ice and frost conditions on the external tank when it was filled with supercold propellants during nighttime hours, in the absence of heat from the Sun. Rockwell International’s space systems group conducted the main propulsion-system testing for MSFC at NSTL. (MSFC Release 80-41)
Space shuttle Columbia was still awaiting its trip to KSC’s Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) because of a delay in the orbiter integrated test that had been scheduled for July 23. The test had to wait until technicians finished wiring the remote manipulator’s system for emergency jettison of its $100 million Canada-built “bionic arm.” That system would have to be retested before the major integrated test could begin, probably not before August 9. The delay would not affect launch date of STS-2, NASA said. (MSFC Release 81-90, 81-91; NASA Release 81-109; W Star, July 27/81, A-2)
During the early-morning move of space shuttle Columbia from it KSC hangar to the VAB, a forklift “accidentally banged into” the spacecraft, damaging two tiles on the left elevon, according to KSC spokesman Rocky Raab. Engineers and technicians were expected to replace the tiles by nightfall so that raising Columbia and bolting it to its mobile launcher could proceed. The three-times-delayed rollout began at 3:54 a.m EDT and took 26 minutes to cover the quarter-mile distance. (NY Times, Aug 11/81, C-3)
NASA said that the third shuttle flight, now scheduled after January 1982, would carry the first biology experiment specifically designed for the Shuttle: the effect of gravity on formation in plants of lignin, the woody substance giving plants structural stability. Monitoring growth in the microgravity environment of space should show how wood is formed. The plants should grow upward in response to the presence of artificial sunlight, but root development was unpredictable. (NASA Release 81-166; ARC Release
Nine minutes before launch time, NASA grounded the Space Shuttle Columbia until April 12, because one of five computers in its nose was failing to communicate properly with the other four. The decision to scrub the launch came after a three-hour delay from the original 6:50 a.m. liftoff time; a fuelcell warning light showed in the cockpit just 16 minutes beforehand. No sooner was that problem solved than a second one appeared, when the program in the backup computer did not match that of the four primary computers controlling the ship. (W Star, Apr 10/81, A-l)
The external tank (ET) for the third shuttle flight (ETA) left the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans on a NASA barge for KSC. Unlike those used in the first two flights, this tank would be light brown, the natural color of the insulation sprayed on the tank’s exterior. The white paint on the first two tanks weighed about 600 pounds. Since the tank went almost all the way to orbit, elimination of the paint would add nearly 600 pounds payload besides saving several thousand of dollars in handling and would not affect the tank’s fire-retardant or water-repellent qualities. (MSFC Release 81-122)
NASA announced that it would launch the next Shuttle flight (STS-2) on September 30, if turnaround procedures went smoothly. JSC spokesman Robert Dotts said that the thermal-protection system “exceeded our expectations” and that the amount of repair needed would not affect turnaround time. Only 10 or 12 of the foamed-glass tiles protecting Columbia’s fuselage during reentry would need replacement. Inch-deep gouges all over the surface of the Shuttle mostly occurred during takeoff. NASA cautioned that the orbiter would be undergoing turnaround for the first time, and unforeseen problems could affect the flight schedule. (NASA Release 81-65; MSFC Release 81-61; W Post, May 16/81, A-2)
The Japanese government accepted a U.S. proposal to use the U.S. Air Forces’ Kadena Airbase on Okinawa Island as an emergency landing area for the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia, the Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS) reported. Tokyo Kyodo said NASA was arranging sites for emergency landings at six airports, three domestic and three abroad. The agreement with Japan covered only four test flights; other flights would need further negotiations. Officials of Japan’s foreign and defense ministries would discuss safety measures because nearby Naha airport was in constant use for both civil and military flights. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Mar 5/81)
MSFC reported a joint-endeavor agreement signed by NASA’s Office of Space Sciences and GTI Corporation of San Diego that might lead to flight of a GTI materials-processing device on four future Shuttle flights. The agreement was a new NASA approach to government-industry partnerships in developing future applications or technologies for space-flown devices. The agreement would have three phases: design by GTI of a low-cost multichamber alloy-solidification furnace operable in low-gravity space; development, testing, and integrating the GTI furnace into the Shuttle; and flight on the Shuttle. GTI’s interest was in the manufacturing in microgravity of space alloys that would not be immiscible on Earth, where many theoretical alloys were not possible because of the density variations of the elements and the effect of gravity on the heavier elements. GTI would fund development and testing; NASA, the integration and flight. (MSFC Release 82-13; NASA Release
NASA said that the three main engines that powered Space Shuttle Columbia on its five missions would be modified and retested to certify them for operation on the orbiter Atlantis. Rocketdyne would disassemble, inspect, and reassemble the engines before forwarding them to MSFC’s NSTL for acceptance tests and certification. They would be installed in Atlantis for its first mission in 1985. Columbia would get three new engines for its Spacelab mission in 1983. (MSFC Release 82-104)
NASA successfully completed a 30 second flight-readiness firing of the new higher power space shuttle main engines at KSC. The test was to verify llight readiness of the three new engines and demonstrate in a launch-day environment the proper integration of all elements before the STS-6 mission. The successful test was a major step in preparation for STS-6, scheduled for launch in January 1983. Pre- and post-test activities included personnel from KSC, JSC, and MSFC. This was the second time in history for static-firing the primary propulsion system of a manned spacecraft on the launch pad. A similar test of Columbia’s three main engines occurred Febraury 20, 1981, before the first Shuttle launch. Challenger’s more powerful engines, each generating 390,000 pound of thrust at sea level, had been fired individually at NSTL but were fired for the first time today in a flight configuration. The most significant problem was a high level of gaseous hydrogen in the aft compartment. NASA said that so much work remained in the crew compartment that Rockwell employees at KSC were scheduled to work in that area over the holidays. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 21/82; NASA Release 82-187; MSFC Release 82-111)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC since 1972, said that he would retire from NASA after the fifth (and first operational) Shuttle flight, now scheduled for November. He had begun working at the Langley laboratory of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1945. When NASA was established in 1958, he was selected as an original member of the space task group to manage the Mercury project: that group was the nucleus of NASA’s manned spacecraft center, which became JSC in 1973.	Kraft was flight director of all the Mercury missions and many of the Gemini missions; in 1972 he succeeded Dr. Robert Gilruth, who had been the first director of JSC. Kraft said he had no definite plans for the future. (NASA Release 82-62; NY Times, Apr 15/82, B-4; W Post, Apr 15/82, D-2)
MSFC said that it had shipped the external tank for the fourth Shuttle mission from Michoud Assembly Facility on the NASA barge Orion for a five-day trip to KSC. The fourth launch was set for mid-1982. (MSFC Release 82-12) —MSFC reported shipment of the monodisperse latex reactor, an experiment “with major medical and industrial applications,” to KSC for flight on the third Shuttle mission. Dale Kornfeld of MSFC’s space sciences laboratory said that the instrument would produce identical-sized microspheres of polystyrene latex, resembling tiny beads, to measure the size of intestinal pores for cancer research and of pores in the eye for glaucoma research and to act as a carrier of drugs and radioactive isotopes for treatment of cancerous tumors. On Earth, the beads could be produced only up to about 3 microns in size; the low gravity of space would permit them to “grow” up to 20 microns while remaining identical. The National Bureau of Standards had indicated interest in using the beads to calibrate medical and scientific equipment. (MSFC Release 82-9)
NASA rolled out the first lightweight external tank for the Space Shuttle at its Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. The tank, structural backbone of the Shuttle launch assembly, included an oxygen tank, a hydrogen tank, and a connecting intertank housing the instrumentation. At 66,824 pounds the new tank was more than 10,000 pounds lighter than the one used for the first Shuttle flight in April 1981; the reduced weight would add payload capability almost pound for pound. The new tank, loaded on a NASA barge for shipment to KSC, would be prepared for the sixth shuttle mission scheduled for January 1983. (MSFC Releases 82-81, 82-83)
ESA said that it would begin a follow-on program with Spacelab. Financial contributions from member states for this purpose had reached 80% of the goal April 15, permitting work to start immediately. Part of the new program would be development of a European retrievable carrier (EURECA) to be launched and retrieved by the Space Shuttle as well as a core payload for the first mission consisting of microgravity research emphasizing material and life sciences, with first flight scheduled for the end of 1986. Weighing about 1,500 kilograms, EURECA would have a design life of six months or more in orbit, providing services for its payload including electrical power and heat protection. Its low gravity-disturbance level would be essential to microgravity research. After deployment, an on-board propulsion unit would put it in a higher orbit with less drag on its large solar arrays. Once in orbit, its experiments, although highly automated, would be operated by remote control and monitored from the ground. It would reassume low orbit for recovery by the Shuttle and return to Earth for refurbishment. (ESA Info
The Washington Post said that an experiment on the next U.S. Shuttle flight was canceled because of the shooting down last month of a South Korean airliner by the Soviet Union. The experiment would have made the first mapping photographs from orbit of the entire area of Afghanistan, whose government the Soviet Union supports. Cancellation was a joint decision of NASA and ESA, which built the $1 billion Spacelab scheduled to make its first flight October 28 in the Shuttle Columbia’s cargo bay. This mission would take the Shuttle farther north and south than any previous manned U.S. flight, going 55° from the equator over the end of Argentina as well as the Hudson Bay region of Canada and the upper areas of Scotland. Columbia and Spacelab would also fly over most of the Soviet Union (including Moscow for the first time) but would take no photographs of the Soviet Union. (W Post, Oct 4/83, A-2)
MSFC said that it had installed the reusable orbital-research Spacelab in the cargo bay of the Shuttle Columbia at KSC. Designed, developed, and funded by ESA, Spacelab had undergone tests for three months in a cargo-integration test equipment (CITE) stand at KSC. Columbia would carry Spacelab and a four-member crew into orbit October 28 to perform more than 70 individual investigations in five research areas during a nine-day mission. (MSFC Release 83-59; ESA Info 36)
LeRC issued a request for proposals to design, build, and launch an ACTS system, including flight spacecraft, ground system, and operations. Launched by the Space Shuttle in 1988, ACTS would serve for two years in communications experiments. (NASA Release 83-28; LeRC Release 83-14)
A colony of carpenter ants flown on the shuttle Challenger in June had apparently not survived the trip. Press reports said that no signs of life were seen through the clear plastic top of the casing housing the 151 ants. The sponsors, students from two New Jersey high schools who flew to Cape Canaveral with a teacher to recover the experiment, checked heat and light supply to the canister, as well as the cameras—one making periodic exposures and the other recording on television tape—that monitored the ants in flight. Everything worked. RCA Corporation had supported the experiment with a $10,000 grant. Press reports noted that the ants had been inside Challenger’s cargo bay almost two months before launch and might have died before the flight; however, two control colonies in New Jersey had survived under the same conditions. The canister would be opened in New Jersey in the presence of two biology professors from Temple University who were advisers to the students. (IV Post, July 7/83, A-2) The incident had “amazingly coincided” with a preplanned exercise in “urgent escape from the station.” Journalists “could not help asking” how long it would take for the crew to abandon station. Deputy flight director Victor Blagov said that the “minimum required time is 15 minutes, but we consider 90 minutes—that is, one orbit—to be standard time” during which the crew could take all steps needed for an emergency mothballing of the station and enter the return module. The cosmonauts could “spend several days [there] in absolute safety,” Blagov added, but if necessary they could “splash down in the reentry vehicle in the ocean, or touch down in one of the reserve landing ranges in the USA, France, and other countries. There is an international convention on that score.” (FBIS, Tass in English, July 15, 22 , 27/83)
The 3M Corp. and McDonnell Douglas joined as a team to produce and market a proprietary drug that McDonnell Douglas produced on board the Space Shuttle to treat patients who had lost their ability to produce red blood cells, Aviation Week reported. The ability of the drug erythropoietin to stimulate the body to produce red blood cells could benefit persons who were anemic or had a variety of other disorders in which red blood cell levels were a factor. And it had the potential in a number of medical situations to reduce the need for blood transfusions that carried the risk of complications. Erythropoietin was not widely used because current production techniques could not filter out by-products harmful to the body. A batch of the material to be produced in an electrophoresis machine on the next flight of Space Shuttle, mission 61-B, would be given to the first human test patients soon. It was expected the drug could be available for sale in 1988 pending Food and Drug Administration approval. McDonnell Douglas was completing arrangements to bring 3M's Riker Laboratories Div. into the program as the drug company that would market the product in place of Johnson & Johnson's Ortho Pharmaceuticals Div., which recently dropped out of the program in favor of producing the substance through earth-based bioengineering. Ortho believed it would be able to bring the drug to market a year sooner, while McDonnell Douglas believed space processing would be far more efficient and less costly. McDonnell Douglas was also completing arrangements with a French drug company, Roussel Pharmaceuticals of Paris, to begin processing starting the next summer of a French drug on the Space Shuttle as a second commercial space product. The French product would be purified in the same mid-deck unit that brought erythropoietin to the animal and human test phase. NASA and McDonnell Douglas were completing arrangements to keep the middeck system operational for research and to help generate new products under their joint endeavor agreement. (AvWk, Nov 18/85, 16)
U.S. Rep. George Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), author of an amendment to prohibit tests of the antisateilite miniature homing vehicle (MHV-ASAT) against objects in space, suggested that in light of the successful ground-based laser test with the orbiting Space Shuttle [see Space Transportation System, Military Applications, June 21], the U.S. should drop the MHV in favor of a laser antisatellite system, Defense Daily reported. Brown said that ". . . This very successful demonstration raises the question of whether the United States should spend several billion dollars on the technologically less-advanced MHV ASAT system, still in the testing stage, when we could have a more technologically advanced, far more versatile system available for deployment in the same timeframe . . . and probably at a lesser cost." Brown emphasized the significance of the laser test, which he noted had hit a target on the Space Shuttle "less than a foot in diameter, much smaller than an ICBM, traveling faster than a missile, and there is no question but that a missile would be just as easy to hit." Although lethality was not demonstrated in the test, the U.S. had "demonstrated lethality more than 10 years ago when we knocked down a drone airplane with a laser, and we have now in the inventory lasers with about a million times the energy of the one that was used" in the Space Shuttle test, Brown added. "There is no question that lethality is achievable with existing technology." (D/D, June 26/85, 318)
Rep. Norman Mineta, (D-Calif.) introduced legislation today for the planning and construction of an expansion of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum at Washington Dulles Airport, the Congressional Record reported. When introducing H.R. 3403, Mineta said, "This legislation is proposed to solve two major problems confronting the Air and Space Museum. First, as my colleagues know, this is perhaps the most popular museum in the world. The public's demand for exhibits and information concerning our aviation history is enormous, and growing. We need the additional facilities to respond to this demand. "But why Dulles? Why not build the new facility in downtown Washington? The answer is simple: there is no site large enough for the needs envisioned and of paramount importance, there is no other site adjacent to a major airport. "An airport site is critical because of the second problem we are trying to solve, which is how to display objects of the scale of the space shuttle or other modern aircraft. The museum needs to be at Dulles Airport because that is the only site to which these exhibits can be transported and displayed. "In particular, this legislation authorizes the transfer to the Smithsonian of land at the airport. This bill authorizes a total of $2.4 million in funds for planning of the new museum, to be appropriated in the 1986 to 1988 period. "In addition, the bill authorizes the appropriation of $42.6 million in Federal funds beginning in 1989 to finance half of the cost of actually constructing the museum. These Federal funds would not be available unless and until a private fundraising effort has raised an identical amount." (Cong. Record, Sept 20/85, E4165)
France's Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) space agency was planning to select by midyear a prime contractor for the Hermes manned shuttle and would open the program to participation by other European countries before the end of 1985, Aviation Week reported. CNES had established a competition between Aerospatiale and Dassault-Breguet for the Hermes leadership role, and the two companies would make technical presentations in April. After review of the data, CNES would make a selection within several months. Normally the two companies had their separate niches in the aerospace field, but CNES had forced them into head-to-head competition over Hermes. In the competition, Dassault-Breguet would draw on expertise gained from its Mirage, jaguar, and Alpha jet military aircraft and related electronics/ avionics systems; Aerospatiale would emphasize its work on military missiles, reentry vehicles/nuclear warheads, the Ariane launcher, communications satellites, and civil aircraft such as the Concorde and Airbus Industrie A300/A310/A320. CNES Director General Frederic d'Allest said several countries had shown interest in joining the Hermes program following the European Space Agency's (ESA) council meeting at which ministers approved Phase B definition work for the Ariane 5 launcher [see Feb. 4], Ariane 5 would be capable of orbiting Hermes. France planned to retain a 50% share in the Hermes program and open the rest to participation by other European nations. The 1985 and 1986 budgets for Hermes totaled $12 million, followed by about $20 million in study work in 1987. France would supply most of this money in 1985, because other European countries wouldn't be involved until at least October. Hermes would carry two to six crew members and be about half the size of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Its approximate length would be 59 ft. and wingspan, about 33 ft. Payload bay volume would be 377 sq. ft.; diameter of the bay, 9.8 ft. A typical mission would carry 7,700 to 9,900 lb. of useful load to a 248.5-mile circular orbit inclined 0-30°. Mission duration with four to six crew members would be eight days, extending to 30 days with a reduced crew. Start of full-scale Hermes development in mid-1988 would permit a first flight in 1997, according to CNES scheduling. (AvWk, Mar 11/85, 19)
NASA said today it postponed the December 18 launch of the Space Shuttle Columbia on mission 61-C for 24 hours because tired workers had fallen behind in countdown tasks, the Washington Post reported. "Essentially there were too many tasks to complete and too little time to complete them," NASA spokesman George Diller said. "We felt it was more prudent to delay than to take a chance on making a mistake." Diller added that crews used up more than eight hours of contingency time built into the countdown as they worked through the night December 16 to complete checkout of the engine compartment. NASA rescheduled the launch for 7 a.m. December 19. (WPost, Dec 128/ 85, A17)
NASA announced today that Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), chairman of the subcommittee on space science and applications, would fly as a payload specialist aboard Space Shuttle mission 61-C scheduled for launch no earlier than December 20. NASA said it was willing to schedule flights for the chairmen of its four Congressional appropriations and authorization subcommittees in connection with their NASA oversight duties. Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the subcommittee on HUD/independent agencies, was a payload specialist the previous April aboard mission 51-D. NASA assigned Nelson to mission 61-C after reassigning Gregory Jarvis, a Hughes Communications, Inc. payload specialist, from that flight to mission 51—L which was scheduled for launch January 22, 1986. Hughes's decision not to launch its Syncom IV-5 spacecraft on the December mission eliminated the need for a company payload specialist on that flight. Jarvis would conduct experiments in fluid dynamics on the January flight. (NASA Release 85-141)
U.S. Air Force's imaging reconnaissance spacecraft had observed the USSR's 200-foot tall oxygen/hydrogen-powered rocket hardware, to be used in both their space shuttle and new unmanned heavy booster programs, being frequently mounted and removed from its Tyuratam launch pad, suggesting Soviet dissatisfaction with the ground test results and leading U.S. space experts to believe the troubles could greatly slow the Soviet's ability to launch large new space station elements or space weapons such as laser battle stations, Aviation Week reported. The Soviets had not test flown any of the new heavy space shuttle or new unmanned-booster hardware, and serious delays in their flight test schedules would undoubtedly arise from the ground test problems. However, U.S. reconnaissance had also discovered the Soviet shuttle program recently had added a significant new element—a second large space shuttle orbiter vehicle—observed sitting partially in a hangar at the Soviet Ramenskoye Flight Test Center east of Moscow. The other Soviet heavy orbiter was sitting outside the hangar. The orbiters were almost identical in size and design to the U.S. Space Shuttle orbiter, and the discovery of the second vehicle showed a forward program direction. (AvWk, May 27/85, 21)
Chilean government member Admiral Jose Toribio Merino said today that he favored accepting the NASA request to build a Space Shuttle emergency landing airfield on Easter Island and that it was essential to build a port for the operation of larger and faster ships, FBIS Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish reported. "If someone offers to extend the Easter Island airport," Merino said, "we should accept because Chile does not have the money to do it." The need to supplement the project with the construction of a port for security reasons was a new element added by Merino to the NASA proposal. Merino explained that the operation of an international airport near the sea called for fast ships to act in case a plane went down in the ocean. It was imperative to have a port for the operation of such ships, and Easter Island had only a small bay, he said. "If someone offers to build a port, I would let them," he added. In referring to criticism of the project because of possible military uses of the airfield, Merino said that those who said that about the project were "ignorant people who were politicians in the past but not now." (Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish, June 12/85)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers announced that 10,690 teachers applied for a Space Shuttle flight. The Council was responsible for application and screening processes; NASA would choose the teacher to go into space. The Council's review panel would screen all applications to eliminate those not meeting basic requirements and forward the remaining applications to state-review panels to select two teachers per state by May 1, 1985. A national panel would then review applications of the approximately 118 nominees (two per state plus the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, territories and trusts, and Department of Defense and independent schools) to recommend 10 semifinalists to NASA's spaceflight participant evaluation committee. All nominees would attend a teacher-workshop and orientation program from June 24 to 28, 1985, in Washington to learn of current developments in the aeronautics and space-education program and to undergo further evaluation and screening; 10 semifinalists would report to JSC for thorough medical examinations, in-depth briefings, and interviews by NASA's evaluation committee. NASA's administrator and the evaluation committee would select a primary and a backup candidate to undergo training. NASA had not decided on a specific flight opportunity, but was aiming to fly the teacher on a mission in late 1985. California had the greatest number of applications, 926. (NASA Release 85-26)
Digital computers would serve as the focal point for the Centaur flight-control system, processing data from the other flight boxes including the multiplexer units. They would also provide the hardware capability to interface with the orbiter and ground system^ NASA scheduled the first Centaur launch—the Ulysses mission—for May 15, 1986, from the Space Shuttle payload bay followed on May 21, 1986, by the Galileo mission. (LeRC Release 85-58)
NASA announced it had delayed for at least a week the February 20 Space Shuttle flight that would carry Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), because of thermal tiles problems and a backlog of paperwork, the Washington Post reported. A chemical reaction in the thermal tiles' adhesive on the orbiter Challenger's underside had caused about 4,000 of the more than 30,000 tiles to loosen during return to earth on the orbiter's last flight. Although NASA had replaced all but 47 of the faulty tiles, it had not certified the repair work. (W Post, Feb 6/85, A12)
After 16 Space Shuttle flights, NASA believed it had solved the spacecraft's commode problems, as reports of the last two missions indicated the improved waste-disposal system performed perfectly, the Washington Post reported. A $12 million-GE design had transformed the commode from a multipronged, motor-drive blender, which had fogged the Space Shuttle's air with particles of noxious dust or frozen liquid, to a device using a blast of air from a fan to carry waste into the toilet bowl; by pressing a lever, the user closed the commode top and opened a valve in the side of the Space Shuttle, where the waste was frozen and dried by the cold and vacuum of space. A tube collected urine and directed it to a holding tank for later overboard disposal. (W Post, Feb 11/85, A5)
NASA and the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) announced the first sales of a product manufactured in space—tiny polystyrene spheres to serve as NBS standard reference material. The spheres could improve microscopic measurements made throughout the economy in electronics, medicine, and other high-technology areas. A chemical process developed for NASA by Lehigh University produced billions of the 10 micrometers (1/2500th of an inch) in diameter spheres during several space Shuttle flights. Earthbound processes could not yield sufficiently uniform materials in usable quantities; when produced in a low-gravity environment, the spheres grew uniformly in size and shape. NBS had packaged the spheres into approximately 600 Standard Reference Material (SRM) units priced at $384 per unit. Each unit was a 5-milliliter vial that contained about 30 million spheres in a 0.4% concentration by weight; the remainder was water. NASA and NBS shared sales proceeds equally. (NASA Release 85-106)
There were five Americans aboard the Space Shuttle, but commander Daniel Brandenstein decided Nagel took the 100th honor because three Americans sat in front of him on Discovery's flight deck. "Shannon Lucid was the first runner-up," Brandenstein said. "She got to space three inches ahead of Steven Nagel." To mark the occasion, which was televised back to earth, Brandenstein presented Nagel with a cake that had "100th" written on it. "I'm not sure if that's true," Nagel said. "Although I sat three inches behind Shannon, my nose is about three and a half inches longer than hers is." (W Times, June 20/85, 3A)
NASA announced that a mishap investigation board had completed its report on a March 8 accident in which the Space Shuttle Discovery's payload bay door was damaged and a technician was injured during prelaunch preparations for mission 51-D at KSC [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Launch Schedules, March 8]. In its executive summary, the board reported that "the immediate cause of the mishap was the failure of a master link in one of the two redundant hoist systems that raise and lower the payload bay access platform." The report then noted, "The mishap can be characterized as the culmination of a series of events and conditions that pushed the mechanical components to and beyond their limits." In the accident, a payload bay access platform used to provide access to the orbiter's cargo bay fell from its stowed position on a rolling bridge crane. Tracing the events and conditions that led to the accident, the board noted that "Operators of the payload bay access platforms customarily stowed the platforms by raising them until the telescoping tubes contacted the (single) upper-limit switch that stopped its upward travel. "On March 4, a Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) technician reported a broken upper-limit switch that had caused the telescoping structure to impact the supporting structure. In crane and hoist parlance, this is called 'two-blocking.' The inboard master link failed at this time, and cable overwrap was noted on that portion of the winch. The entire up-down portion of this system was tagged out with a 'Do Not Operate' tag, since only one half of the redundant hoist system remained intact. This tag was placed on the operating controls along with two other similarly appearing tags, both several months old, describing limitations on the operation of the platforms.'' The board's summary then noted the platforms were operated at least twice and stowed at least once between March 4 and the March 8 accident. "During the stowing operation(s), given the fact of a broken upper-limit switch and the standard operating procedure, it is an inescapable conclusion that additional two-blocking occurred. This imparted extremely high loads to the master link in the remaining wire rope assembly, fracturing it almost to the point of sufficient separation for the assembly to fall. When the bridge assembly was moved on the morning of March 8, the resulting jolt was enough to complete the break, and the platform assembly fell." The board recommended that there be a revision of operating procedures and operator training to ensure the upper-limit switches not be used as operational stops, of tagout/lockout procedures to prevent unauthorized use of equipment that had been identified as unsafe, and of the platform preventive maintenance procedures to meet all KSC and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards; a modification of the design of the payload bay access platform to include the addition of an operational stop and 'load sensing device in the wire rope system; and a redesign of the telescoping tubes to facilitate the required inspection of critical linkages. The board estimated damage to Discovery and access platform at $200,000 and noted that the accident delayed rollover to the vehicle assembly building from March 8 until March 23. (NASA Release 85-95) Technology Transfers
NASA scheduled the Space Shuttle Challenger to take today four high-tech cans each of Pepsi-Cola and Coca-Cola, the world's two largest-selling soft drinks, into orbit for the first time, the Washington Post reported. Stocking Challenger with both Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola resulted from a compromise reached after weeks of highly sensitive negotiations. NASA had not previously flown carbonated drinks in space because no containers were available to control and dispense carbonated liquids in zero gravity. It took the companies more than two years to develop and test the cans. Pepsi-Cola said its can cost its supplier, Enviro-Spray, $14 million to develop. Pepsi-Cola filled its can with eight ounces of cola and a plastic pouch that expanded when chemicals were mixed inside it to create carbon dioxide gas, which then inflated the pouch and forced the beverage out. Coca-Cola's can was lined with a laminated plastic bag filled with cola that overlaid a second plastic bag containing carbon dioxide under 50 lb. of pressure. The carbon dioxide forced the cola out of the can. A drawback to both cans was that they must be drunk unchilled. NASA retained the legal right to use whichever container worked best, the Washington Times reported, and to fill it with the drink of its choice. (WPost, July 12/85, A3; W Times, July 8/85, 3A)
NASA announced award of a $2,374,800 fixed-price contract to Stearns Catalytic Corp. to modify a test stand at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), Hancock County, Mississippi, to give NSTL a third test position to static-fire individually Space Shuttle main engines. The structural, mechanical, and electrical modifications would begin no later than March 1985 for completion in a year. Space Shuttle main-engine testing had begun at NSTL in June 1975, using test stands A-1 and A-2 for single-engine testing of flight and nonflight engines. Later NASA used the B-2 test position to certify the main propulsion system in a series of three-engine cluster firings. The additional test position would support projected increases in main-engine test requirements, including increased turbopump production rates. NASA would initially use the new B-2 position to test new and overhauled engine turbopumps using a testbed engine. NASA had originally used the B-2 test stand in the 1960s to flight-certify the Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle's first stage. (NASA Release 85-19)
NASA announced it reached agreement with the Department of Defense (DOD) on a pricing and reimbursement policy for DOD use of the Space Transportation System during the period FY 89 through FY 91. The agreement established an average price of $60 million (in 1982 dollars) for each DOD launch, an average which was based on the estimated cost to fly and an exchange of launch and range support services between DOD and NASA. The price reflected a fixed-base component of $30 million for each planned flight and an incremental component of $30 million for each actual flight. The annual fixed-based component total—$270 million a year, based on DOD projections of nine equivalent flights—would be paid regardless of the number of actual flights, while the $30 million incremental component would be paid for each actual flight. By combining a fixed annual charge with a low variable cost per flight, the agreement insured that NASA would be able to cover its funding needs and DOD would continue to rely on the Space Shuttle as DOD's primary space launch vehicle. (NASA Release 85-169) Scientific Research
NASA and the Defense Department (DOD) with White House concurrence abandoned any consideration of transferring the management of Space Shuttle operations to a commercial venture or quasi-public corporation for the foreseeable future, Aviation Week reported. The decision would thwart plans of commercial ventures that had sought the combined Space Shuttle management/marketing role. The Shuttle Operations Strategic Planning Group, a team made up of officials from NASA, DOD, the White House, and private enterprise, said ". . . the suggestion that the space shuttle should or could be transferred, sold or leased to private enterprise for its operation, marketing and future development is simply not a viable alternative for the foreseeable future." Although some commercial space officials called the group's study a "whitewash," others believed the decision could introduce more Space Shuttle launch and cost stability, a critical issue with a large segment of commercial space ventures that needed Space Shuttle transportation no matter who was managing it. DOD Space Shuttle military space-flight requirements, including the potential for Strategic Defense Initiative Space Shuttle activity, were key elements in the decision not to take management of the program away from NASA. As a result of the decision, NASA would have to create a new management structure in order to get the Space Shuttle out of existing development-oriented management. "As the shuttle evolves and the flight rate increases," the strategic planning group said, "organizational realignments within NASA will become necessary to ensure that NASA's R&D and shuttle operations do not detract from one another but are mutually supportive." (AvWk, Apr 29/ 85, 42)
When the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-F landed today, it successfully concluded the third mission of the European-developed space laboratory, Spacelab 2, which NASA used for the first time in its pallet-only configuration, NASA reported. All Spacelab subsystems but one provided excellent data, and NASA verified for the first time two new Spacelab systems, the "Igloo" and the instrument pointing system. NASA would fly many of the Spacelab 2 instruments on future missions, so the 51-F mission provided opportunities not only for scientific data collection but also for engineering checkouts of the new equipment. Since instruments are brought home, engineers could evaluate and refurbish them to improve their performance or modify them to meet different scientific objectives in response to results from prior flights. Through Spacelab 2's four ultraviolet and visible light instruments, researchers observed a sun that, although it was in a fairly quiet phase of its activity cycle, displayed sunspots, filaments, granules, spicules, and prominences. These solar features changed over periods as brief as five to ten minutes and from orbit to orbit, day to day. The solar ultraviolet universal polarimeter (SOUP) started its program late in the mission after an unexplained shutdown and startup. Thereafter, the instrument performed almost perfectly, observing the strength, structure, and evolution of magnetic fields in the solar atmosphere. Scientists were confident that despite abbreviated operations SOUP data would be the best and longest run of solar granulation data ever collected. Although loss of altitude and propellant during initial Space Shuttle ascent jeopardized part of the plasma depletion experiment, planners managed to schedule four of the eight anticipated burns, two over Millstone Hill, Massachusetts, and one each over Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and Hobart, Australia. Preliminary data indicated that the burns did produce "holes" or troughs of depleted plasma that persisted in the ionosphere for more than an hour. The crew observed resultant airglow after the nighttime burns, and there were reports of visual observations from the ground. The Hobart site reported the reception of low-frequency cosmic radio emissions through the window the burn temporarily opened. In the properties of superfluid helium in zero-gravity experiment, the cryostat performed up to expectation, maintaining a temperature low enough to keep the helium in the superfluid state. Temperature was readily controlled, and the cryostat recovered well from temperature increases. These findings were important to the use of superfluid helium as a cryogen on future missions. During the gravity influenced lignification in plants experiment, pine seedlings, oats, and bean sprouts grew in self-contained growth chambers. The crew daily monitored chamber temperatures and photographed the chambers early and late in the mission. The oat and bean seeds germinated in orbit, and sprouts grew to a height of five to six inches as expected. The pine seedlings also showed normal growth. Researchers would analyze the plant tissues to determine whether there was any difference in the production rate of lignin between plants grown in space and in a control group grown in a ground laboratory. (NASA Prelim Spacelab Mission Science Report, Aug 6/ 85; ESA release Aug 7/85)
NASA confirmed successful launch on January 24 from KSC of the Space Shuttle with a Department of Defense inertial upper stage deployed and an aggregation of red blood cells experiment for the University of Sydney completed. Spacecraft orbital parameters were classified. The mission had lasted three days, one hour, and 33 minutes, with landing at KSC. Unusually cold weather, causing icing on the external tank, had delayed launch for one day. (NASA FOR M-989-51-C [post flight] Mar 5/85)
NASA announced it signed with Rockwell Internatl. Corp. a memorandum of understanding (MOU) covering Space Shuttle flight assignments for Rockwell's materials-processing laboratory, which flew on STS 41-D and, using the float-zone technique, grew a single indium crystal with a lattice structure originating from a crystal seed. The agreement called for Rockwell to develop an industrial space-processing program under which research institutions and commercial firms would install and operate experiments in the modular laboratory. Rockwell designed its fluids-experiment apparatus (FEA), the first zero-gravity laboratory for basic and product research in low-earth orbit, to fit in the Space Shuttle's mid-deck stowage area where crew could operate and monitor it. Experiments could range from processing applications to liquid chemistry, fluid physics, thermodynamics, crystal growth, and biological-cell culturing. The laboratory, about the size of a 19-inch TV, could heat, cool, expose to vacuum, and manipulate experiment samples that might be gaseous, liquid, or solid, and could mix or stir, remove, and change samples during a mission. A motion-picture or video camera would record sample behavior and instrument data displays. (NASA Release 85-2)
NASA announced it had signed with the International Space Corp. (ISC) an agreement for development of the Normal Freezing Furnace, a high-temperature furnace for producing several types of infrared semiconductor crystals in the microgravity environment of spaceflight. The furnace would produce materials through a directional solidification crystal growth process. The agreement call for NASA to fly the furnace aboard six to eight Space Shuttle missions to perfect the proposed crystal production process, and ISC would make the experimental equipment available to NASA for the agency's exploratory space processing operations. NASA anticipated that the experiments would lead to new space manufacturing techniques for producing crystal materials, thus enhancing the U.S. electronic industry's position in the highly competitive worldwide semiconductor market. (NASA Release 85-173)
The Department of Defense's 1985 edition of Soviet Military Power pointed out that the Soviets were developing a version of the U.S. Space Shuttle, a space plane, and directed-energy weapons and were engaged in military-related experiments abroad the Salyut 7space station, the Washington Times reported. The book concluded that the USSR's grand strategy was to attain global supremacy "by means short of war—exploiting the coercive leverage inherent in superior forces, particularly nuclear forces." (W Times, Apr 1/85, 1 A)
The Wall Street Journal reported that a Reagan administration interagency group would soon recommend that NASA discontinue commercial and foreign launches. NASA objected to the idea because of the likely permanent loss of the business to foreign competitors. The group also recommended a replacement for the Shuttle Challenger and a greater supply of expendable launch vehicles, but did not suggest how these costs could be met. (WSJ, Apr 3/86)
USA Today reported that 40yearold Karen Kofoed, a reporter for the Camden CourierPost, was the first journalist to apply to be part of a crew aboard a Space Shuttle into space. As of January 6, only 20 of the 4000 reporters who requested applications had submitted the completed forms, which were due by January 15. The contest for the first journalist in space was administered for NASA by the Association of Schools of Journalism and Mass Communications at the University of South Carolina. (USA Today, Jan 6/86)
For the sixth time, launching of the Shuttle Challenger was scrubbed, this time because of a stuck fuel valve in one of the main engines. (CSM, Jan 9/86; W Times, Jan 9/86; NY Times, Jan 9/86; P Inq, Jan 9/86)
NASA released a list containing 748 critical parts of the Space Shuttle that could lead to disaster if they did not function properly. All of these components lacked a backup system and were therefore placed in the "Criticality 1" category. Unlike the fuselage or heatshielding tiles, for example, 617 of the0*critical parts could be covered by backup equipment, but engineers waived the measure as they felt confident that failure of them was unlikely. Arnold D. Aldrich, Manager, National Space Transportation System, said, "We are reviewing in detail all the items on the Critical Items list." (Nat Sp Trans Sys: Critical Items List; W Post, Mar 18/86; W Times, Mar 18/86; B Sun, Mar
United Technologies Corporation proposed implementing the launch propulsion and guidance system used in NASA's Space Shuttle for an untended space vehicle. The guidance system, they averred, would allow untended rockets to deliver much heavier'B0*payloads at a cheaper cost than the Shuttle. Operation, they claimed, would begin about three years after NASA approved the plan. (AP, Nov 8/86)
NASA said it had canceled 18 Space Shuttle missions over a 5year period for Spacelab because of the Challenger accident. The agency further stated that it planned to release a list of other scrubbed missions. (W Post Sep 1/86)
NASA signed an agreement with the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company (3M) allowing the company to fly 62 materials processing experiments aboard future Shuttle flights. The microgravity experiments in organic and polymer science were to be conducted on a spaceavailable basis, and NASA would have use of 3M's experiment equipment for scientific investigations. (UPI, Dec 9/86)
NASA announced that it had postponed three launches: the Ulysses mission to investigate the poles of the sun; the Galileo mission to orbit Jupiter and send a probe into the planet; and the Astro1 mission, an ultraviolet astronomy laboratory mounted in the Shuttle's payload bay that was to examine quasars, "hot" stars, galaxy centers, and Halley's Comet. The Ulysses and Galileo missions were scheduled for launch from a Shuttle in May, but both launches were dependent on certain relative positions of Jupiter and Earth, occurring only once every 13 months. The Astro1 had to be launched in the MarchApril timeframe in order to observe Halley's Comet, and with that opportunity gone no new date was requested. The delays were caused by the January Space Shuttle accident. (NASA Release 8611; NY Times, Feb 11/86)
The InterAgency Consultative Group (IACG) on Halley's Comet encounter was scheduled to meet March 49 in Moscow and March 1214 in Darmstadt, Federal Republic of Germany. Formed in 1981, the IACG comprised representatives from NASA, the European Space Agency (ESA), the Soviet Union's Intercosmos Council, Japan's Institute for Space and Astronautical Studies (ISAS), and the International Halley Watch. ESA's Giotto, the Intercosmos Council's VEGA 1 and 2, and the ISAS Suisei (Comet) and Sakigake (Pioneer) spacecraft were launched in the previous 15 months to observe the Comet's passage around the Sun. NASA's Launching of a Spartan UV telescope and an Astro UV telescope to observe the Comet from Earth orbit was terminated because of the Challenger accident. But NASA's PioneerVenus spacecraft (launched in May 1978) had already completed five of its seven planned weeks of viewing the Comet, and the International Cometary Explorer spacecraft (launched in August 1978) was scheduled to monitor Halley's solar wind upstream. (NASA Release 8619; P Inq, Feb 28/86; NY Times, Mar
The steering problem that halted the Shuttle Columbia's launch in December of 1985 was traced to a tiny electrical component that led ground computers astray. (W Times, Jan 3/86; NY Times, Jan 3/86)
The United States Space Foundation outlined plans to provide a focal point that would raise funds for a replacement of the Space Shuttle Challenger. The Challenger 7 Fund reached out to individuals and organizations for contributions while hoping that Congress would authorize the replacement. (NASA Release 8618)
The cause of the faulty engine valve that was responsible for Shuttle Columbia's sixth delay was discovered to be a 5inch thermometer that was broken during fuel loading. After engineers removed the thermometer, they were hopeful for a launch later in the day, but feared that overcast weather might cause yet another delay. (W Times, Jan 10/86; W Post, Jan 10/86; B Sun, Jan 10/86)
In a response to the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the establishment of the Office of Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance and the appointment of George A. Rodney, from Martin Marietta Corporation, to head the office as Associate Administrator. Objectives of the office were to ensure a program that monitored equipment status and designed validation problem analysis and system acceptability in Agencywide plans and programs. Rodney's responsibilities were to have oversight of safety, reliability, and quality assurance functions related to all NASA activities. (NASA Release 8687; W Post, Jul 9/86; W Times, Jul 9/86; B Sun, July 9/86; P Inq, Jul 6/86)
Top officials at Rockwell International, builder of NASA's orbiters and closely tied to the Shuttle program, testified that they believed cold weather had made launch of the Challenger unsafe. The President's panel concluded that NASA's launch decision process was flawed because criteria for approval should not have been changed at the last minute. The New York Times concluded, "The picture emerging from the inquiry into the loss of the Space Shuttle is one of chronic failure in the space agency and its contractors to communicate lifeanddeath problems up the chain of command." (W Post, Feb 28/86; NY Times, Feb 28/86; C Trib, Feb 28/86; WSJ, Feb 28/86;
NASA announced another test of a Space Shuttle engine to take place later in that week. The purpose was to collect additional data to be added to the previous test of the same engine, that ran for 250 seconds, at the National Space Technology Laboratory. (NASA Release 8697)
Documents released by the Roger's Commission investigating the Challenger accident revealed that the Space Shuttle Columbia had narrowly avoided a severe mishap on January 6 when it came within 31 seconds of launch after 18,000 pounds of liquid oxygen had been inadvertently drained from its external tank. The mistake would have left the ship without enough fuel to obtain orbit; the error was blamed on fatigue among the ground crew, who were pursuing a rigid schedule. (NY Times, Aug 6/86; W Post, Aug 6/86; W Times, Aug 6/86; B Sun, Aug 6/86)
NASA planned to shift its original plan of carrying a mixture of scientific, military, and commercial payloads and give greater emphasis to the military when Shuttle flights resumed. The military, they added, always had top priority and five to seven of the flights slated for next year were devoted to them. NY Times, Mar 24/86)
Unpublished test results done for the Presidential Commission studying the Challenger accident showed that cold weather on the morning of the Challenger launch made failure inevitable. Other findings by the commission concluded that a second joint on the righthand booster rocket ruptured seconds after the Challenger breakup, suggesting that the joint was unduly fragile; reusable booster rockets ballooned about twohundredths of an inch after each previous flight, and segments of the ill fated rocket did not match well; a breach of the bottom of the external tank led to a structural failure but the nose cone of the booster rocket crashing into the fuel tank was not responsible for the final breakup; and the Shuttle did not explode, but rather a hydrogenoxygen flash fire caused it simply to fall apart. (NY Times, Apr 30/86)
NASA located a video tape concerning the Shuttle mission 51E Flight Readiness Review (FRR) that contained twoandonehalf minutes of discussion on previous oring erosion. Because there was no requirement to record audio or video of FRR's, no cataloging of the tape was made. The Presidential Commission was provided with the tape but informed NASA that no new information was on it. (NASA 8677)
NASA released transcriptions of the prelaunch intercom tape of the 51L, Space Shuttle Challenger, for public consumption. The tape was about an hour long, beginning when the crew first entered the craft to two minutes and five seconds before liftoff. It contained nothing that was relevant to the';0*accident and was not provided to the Presidential Commission in support of the investigation. Because the intercom channel provides a private mechanism for exchanging spontaneous comments and recording information of a personal nature, NASA had not released these transcripts previously. Because of media inquiries, however, the prelaunch tape was transcribed. (NASA Release 86135; 86137; 51L Transcript Folder; NY Times, Oct
Recovery operations for the Space Shuttle Challenger crew cabin were completed. Scattered debris and the remains of all seven crew members were located in an effort that was hampered by heavy seas, high winds, and reduced underwater visibility. Final forensic work and future planning in accordance with family requests were expected to finish shortly thereafter. (NASA Release 8646; C Trib, Apr 21/86; NY Times, Apr 21/86)
NASA announced that secondary payloads for the next Space Shuttle mission would include five microgravity experiments, life sciences, atmospheric science and infrared communications experiments, as well as two student experiments. (NASA Release 87144)
NASA said it had completed negotiations with Rockwell International Corporation for a new Space Shuttle. The new space vehicle, to replace the Challenger lost in the 1986 accident, was expected to be delivered in April 1991. The cost of the new Space Shuttle was estimated at $1.3 billion. (C Trib, Aug 2/87; H Post, Aug 1/87; LA Times, Aug 1/87; B Sun, Aug 1/87)
NASA announced that the three Space Shuttle main engines are undergoing acceptance testing at its National Space Technology Laboratories in Mississippi. The Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International performed the tests. The engines tested were to be used in the next Shuttle mission, STS26, scheduled for launch in June 1988. The tests were to be completed in December 1987. (NASA Release 87130; CSM, Sept 5/87)
The NASA Advisory Council recommended that the space agency acquire a diversified fleet of expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) to preserve the Space Shuttle for missions requiring unique capabilities. (NASA Release 8730)
NASA and West Germany signed a cooperative Earthh)!0*0*0*observation agreement. Under the agreement, West Germany, together with Italy, was to provide an Xband synthetic aperture radar (XSAR) to fly with the spaceborne imaging radarc (SIRC) on the Space Shuttle. The SIRC will allow the Shuttleborne imaging radar mission to view a site from different angles and at different radar frequencies. An advanced XSAR was expected to combine later with the NASA Earth Observation System to fly on a NASA polar platform, providing a third frequency to the combined mission. (NASA Release 87149)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was rolled out to Launch Pad 39B for a scheduled launch in late November of STS27, a classified Department of Defense mission. (NASA Release 88171) '&0*November 6: A classified Department of Defense payload was successfully launched into orbit aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle. Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988)
EG&G Florida, Inc. was awarded a $635,529 contract to make modifications to the Space Shuttle Landing Facility (SLF). This work would include grinding a 3,500foot section at each end of the runway to smooth the surface texture, removing cross grooves and adding longitudinal "corduroy grooving." Additionally, existing landing zone light fixtures were to be modified and markings on the entire runway and overruns repainted. These modifications were intended to enhance landing safety by reducing Space Shuttle orbiter tire wear during landing operations. The SLF is 15,000 feet long and 300 feet wide, with a 1,000foot paved safety overrun at each end. Work was scheduled to begin January 26 and be completed by midMarch 1988. (NASA Release 8810)
After an aborted first attempt on August 4, a 22second flight readiness firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Discovery's main engines was conducted on the launch pad at the Kennedy Space0*Center's Launch Complex 39B. The first FRF attempt had been halted inside the T10 second mark because of a sluggish fuel bleed valve on the number 2 main engine. The faulty valve was replaced prior to the FRF. (AP, Aug 10/88; UPI, Aug 10/88; NY Times, Aug 11/88; W Post, Aug 11/88; WSJ, Aug 11/88; CSM, Aug 11/88; W Times, Aug 11/88; B Sun, Aug 11/88; P Inq, Aug 11/88)
NASA announced that it would remove and inspect the liquid oxygen turbopumps aboard the Shuttle Discovery, a move that was expected to delay Discovery's launch beyond the scheduled date of August 4. The pumps will be inspected to ensure that critical bolts in the devices are properly tightened and have not been stripped. Delays resulting from the inspection are expected to push back Discovery's launch date until late August. (UPI, Apr 2/88; W Post, Apr 3/88; USA Today, Apr 4/88; P Inq, Apr 4/88)
A Wet Countdown Demonstration Test (WCDT) of the Space Shuttle Discovery's External Tank (ET) was conducted following several unplanned holds as a result of problems with ground support equipment. The WCDDT, carried out with Discovery deployed for launch at the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Complex 39B, consisted of loading the ET with liquid Oxygen and Liquid Hydrogen in mock preparation for a Shuttle launch. (NASA STS26 Press Kit)
A Space Systems Development Agreement was signed by NASA and Spacehab, Inc., a private firm that was developing a Shuttlebased pressurized module for commercial applications. According to the agreement, NASA agreed to provide Shuttle payload bay space for Spacehab's middeck augmentation module on six Shuttle flights beginning in 1991. Spacehab would pay $28.2 million (adjusted for inflation) for standard services for each flight. The Spacehab module, to be constructed by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntsville, Alabama, would be a metal truncated cylinder measuring 10 feet in length by 13 feet in diameter, designed to fit in the Shuttle's cargo bay. Shuttle crew members would access the module through a tunnel from the Shuttle's middeck. The company would make available to customers a variety of locker and rack accommodations, with associated support and integration services. Spacehab was specifically identified in the President's Commercial Space Initiative, announced in February, in which the Reagan administration committed to make the best efforts to launch the commercial module in the early 1990s.(NASA Release 88114)
It was announced in a recent NASA press briefing that there had been a total of 230 reported "close calls" since the Challenger accident. A "close call" was defined by NASA as an incident in which there is no injury, no damage, and no impact on schedule, but which possesses the potential for a more serious mishap. (NASA Release 12988)
President George Bush chose the name "Endeavour" for the new Space Shuttle orbiter being built to replace the orbiter Challenger. The name "Endeavour" resulted from a nationwide orbiternaming competition supported by educational projects created by student teams in elementary and secondary schools. Endeavour was the name of the first ship commanded by James Cook, a British explorer, navigator, and astronomer. Cook commanded the Endeavour on its maiden voyage to the South Pacific on an astronomical and mapping mission. The new orbiter, designated OV105, was scheduled to be completed in 1991 and to fly its maiden voyage in March 1992. (NASA Release 8970, May 10/89)
A launch attempt of the Space Shuttle Atlantis was scrubbed 31 seconds before scheduled liftoff because of a power surge on a pump that recirculates liquid hydrogen fuel for one of the Shuttle main engines. Shuttle technicians were working to replace the pump and a leaky fuel line that was discovered after the scrub. A new launch attempt was expected to be made as early as Thursday. (UPI, Apr 2930/89; AP, Apr 30/89; W Post, May 1/89; NY Times, May 1/89; USA Today, May 1/89; B Sun, May 1/89; P Inq, May
Antinuclear activists in Florida protested the launch aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis next month of the Galileo space probe, which would carry two plutoniumfueled radioisotope thermoelectric generators. The protesters claimed an accident aboard the Atlantis similar to the Challenger explosion could contaminate large parts of Florida and lead to hundreds of cancerrelated deaths. NASA and the White House maintained that the0*chances of a plutonium leak in the event of an accident was negligible. Galileo was scheduled to reach Jupiter in late 1995. AP, Sep 12/89; UPI, Sep 12/89; USA Today, Sep 13/89)
Threetime spaceflight veteran Navy Captain Frederick Hauck, Commander of the first postChallenger Shuttle mission, announced he would leave NASA on April 3 to join the Pentagon staff of the Chief of Naval Operations. (NASA Release 8939, Mar 23/89)
NASA announced it had granted a $1.3 billion extension of the contract to Lockheed Corporation, Calabasas, California, to continue Space Shuttle processing operations for three more years. (NASA Release, Sep 27/89; AP, Sep 26/89; W Post, Sep 27/89)
NASA signed an agreement to support the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) study of the feasibility of using the Shuttle's external tanks as research, storage, or manufacturing facilities. Space Shuttle fuel tanks were used to carry 500,000 gallons of liquid hydrogen and oxygen for launch and initial insertion into orbit. The agreement followed a June 1988 NASA announcement requesting commercial and academic uses for expended tanks. (NASA Release 9026)
Columbia's flight in early January, NASA announced, was made with a flawed backup oring inspectors had overlooked. A disaster similar to the Challenger accident 4 years previously could have occurred if the primary seal had failed. Inspectors also missed inferior welds on a critical pump that supplied one of the Atlantis main engines with fuel. The problem was0*corrected while on the launch pad in preparation for the upcoming
NASA declared its Shuttle fleet "leak free" as Columbia passed a fueling test after two defective seals had been replaced and nuts and connectors in the engine compartment had been tightened. Space Shuttle Atlantis had passed its fuel test a week earlier and was scheduled for liftoff November 9. (NY Times, Oct 31/90; W Post, Oct 31/90; NASA Release N9086)
Two Space Shuttle crew commanders were grounded by NASA for disciplinary reasons. Robert L. Gibson was grounded for one year after he flew a stunt plane, in a July 7Texas air show, that collided with another plane and killed the second pilot. David M. Walker was grounded for 60 days because the T38 jet aircraft he piloted in May 1989 nearly collided with a Pan Am Airbus 310 over Dulles Airport, according to the second pilot. (P Inq, Jul 10/90; W Times, Jul 10/90; NY Times, Jul 10/90; NASA Release 9096)
Launching of the Shuttle Atlantis and deployment of a classified payload mission on February 22 were canceled because the mission Commander had a sore throat and headache, coupled with the prediction of wind and rain over Cape Canaveral, Florida. This was the first time a NASA mission had been scrubbed because of crew illness. (NY Times, Feb 22/90; Feb 23/90; W Post; Feb 22/90)
The hydrogen leak that was detected in the Space Shuttle Atlantis reappeared, and engineers determined that the Shuttle would have to be taken off the launch pad and rolled back to the hanger for a closer look. Columbia, undergoing repairs for a similar leak, was expected to be on the launch pad early in August. The Atlantis liftoff with its classified military payload were rescheduled for November, bumping another launch into 1991 (#and reducing the projected number of flights in 1990 to seven. (P Inq, Jul 26/90; NY Times, Jul 26/90; W Times, Jul 26/90)
NASA announced the selection of two payload specialists for the International Microgravity Laboratory mission aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia, scheduled for launch in December 1990. Dr. Roberta Bondar of the Canadian Space Agency and Dr. Ulf Merbold of the European Space Agency were to conduct the first of several microgravity investigations using the Spacelab Module. (NASA Release 909)
NASA took the Space Shuttle Columbia off its schedule for 1990 launches, operating under the assumption that the orbiter was prone to fuel leaks. Still unable to pinpoint the exact location of the last hydrogen leak, NASA hoped that the craft would be able to fly in early 1991. A team of nine engineers was working on the problem. (NY Times, Sep 21/90; W Post, Sep 20/90; C Trib, Sep 20/90; NASA Release 90127)
The Ulysses spacecraft launched from Space Shuttle Discovery and developed a problem on its trip to rendezvous with Jupiter in 1992, from which it would slingshot to achieve polar orbit around the Sun. It was believed that the difficulty came from a 241/2foot antenna boom meant to study radio signals in space and waves in the solar winds. Scientists ascertained that the boom was bent, perhaps from the Sun's rays, and was causing the craft to wobble. Because of the wobble, the main dishshaped antenna would not be able to focus on Earth and relay data gleaned from the star. Scientists were confident that the problem would be solved before the craft's 1994 mission began. (C Trib''0*Dec 15/90; NY Times, Dec 16/90)
NASA granted a small Alexandria firm, Global Outpost, rights to find ways of using empty Space Shuttle fuel tanks, used to carry 500,000 gallons of liquid hydrogen and oxygen for Space Shuttle launch and initial insertion into orbit, as a platform for military, civilian, and commercial experiments. The agreement followed a June 1988 NASA announcement requesting commercial and academic uses for expended tanks. (W Times, Jan 29/90; NASA Release 9014)
A fuel leak that postponed Space Shuttle Columbia's
The media reported that the launch of Shuttle Columbia was again postponed because of problems with the navigation equipment. (UPI, Jun 1/91; AP, Jun 1/91; P Inq, Jun 2/91; W Post, Jun 2/91; NY Times, Jun 2/91; LA Times, Jun 2/91; CSM, Jun 3/91; USA Today, Jun 3/91)
The media reported that on October 31, a Federal grand jury in Iowa had indicted the Rockwell International Corporation and two of its employees on charges of overbilling NASA for work on the Space Shuttle program. On November 8, NASA announced its suspension of Collins Commercial Avionics, Cedar Rapids, Iowa, a division of Rockwell International from further government contracts because of the indictment. (NY Times, Nov 1/91; WSJ, Nov 1/91; P Inq, Nov 1/91; B Sun, Nov 1/91; W Times, Nov 1/91; AP, Nov 1/91; UPI, Nov 1/91; NASA Release 91-186; AP, Nov 9/91; Fla Today, Nov 11/91; W Post, Nov 11/91; WSJ, Nov 11/91; UPI, Nov 11/91)
NASA announced the naming of M. Rhea Seddon as Payload Commander for Spacelab Life Sciences-2 Space Shuttle mission, scheduled for launch in July 1993. (NASA Release 91-175)
An article about the 900 telephone area code cited the use of a 900 number by the National Space Institute in 1982, allowing callers to listen in on conversations between mission control and Space Shuttle crews. (AP, Mar 25/91)
An editorial summarized the achievements of 10 years of Shuttle flights. (B Sun, Apr 23/91)
The Wall Street Journal featured two inventors, of whom one, Khanh Dinh of Vietnamese origin, with NASA's assistance developed an innovative heat pipe technology. His company won a NASA contract to work on the heat-removal system for the Space Shuttle and also won a federal award for helping to commercialize space technology. (WSJ, Aug 27/91)
The media in a series of articles anticipated the launching of Shuttle Discovery, discussed preparations for blast off, and outlined tasks to be performed. (NY Times, Apr 23/91; W Post, Apr 23/91; USA Today, Apr 23/91; CSM, Apr 23/91)
USA Today reported that five years later NASA was still tracking down debris from Challenger in the hands of collectors because the Space Shuttle was government property. (USA Today, May 21/91)
Smithsonian officials scaled back plans for a National Museum of Air and Space annex from $325 million to $162 million. The site must be within one hour's drive of Washington and would be used largely to store airplanes. In other testimony, officials said the Space Shuttle Enterprise would not be leased to a Japanese television network. (W Post, Mar 22/91)
PR Newswire reported that Loral Space Information Systems awarded Control Data a $6.5 million contract for a Flight Analysis and Design System to modernize mission planning for NASA's Space Shuttle program. (PR Newswire, May 15/91)
Space Shuttle Discovery blasted off in what mission director Ronald D. Dittemore said was "probably the most complex flight flown to date." More than 60 Shuttle maneuvers were planned and 17 instruments were to be used to study the Shuttle's exhaust plumes, chemical releases, and the Earth's atmosphere. A problem with a tape recorder delayed the launch half an hour; after the launch further problems were experienced with two tape recorders. (NY Times, Apr 29/91; USA Today, Apr 29/91; W Post, Apr 29/91); B Sun, Apr 29/91; CSM, Apr 29/91; P Inq, Apr 29/91; LA Times, Apr 29/91; AP, Apr 29/91; C Trin, Apr 29/91; UPI, Apr 29/91)
The Baltimore Sun reported that Johns Hopkins University astrophysicist Sam Durrance, who flew with Shuttle Columbia's Astro flight in December 1990, lobbied for an Astro-2 flight to continue use of the telescopes and other equipment that made significant scientific discoveries. Some NASA and other officials were giving the possibility serious consideration. (B Sun, May 14/91)
The media stated that Space Shuttle Discovery was rolled to the launch pad to prepare for its scientific research mission in late January 1992. (AP, Dec 19/91; W Times, Dec 20/91; USA Today, Dec 20/91; LA Times, Dec 20/91)
A NASA crew hauled the Shuttle Discovery to its launch pad to prepare for takeoff approximately April 25. (UPI, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; W Times, Apr 2/91)
An editorial commended the Space Shuttle record as remarkably positive over the past 10 years. (Fla Today, Apr 12/91)
NASA announced that its newest Space Shuttle, Endeavour, would be rolled out April 25 at a ceremony at Rockwell International's Space Division Facility, Palmdale, California. (NASA Editor's Note N-91-25)
An independent government panel, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, praised NASA for grounding the Space Shuttle fleet in 1990 to fix fuel leaks and not sacrificing flight safety to meet a demanding launch schedule. (UPI, Mar 22/91)
NASA released its first in a new series of educational video products entitled "Space Basics," illustrating orbital science. A teacher's guide is also available. NASA planned that each future Shuttle mission would have a teacher's guide, "Mission Watch," and following the mission a summary report, "Mission Highlights." (NASA Release 91-29)
NASA announced the postponement of the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia because of last minute problems discovered: two computer devices and nine four-inch temperature sensors. The flight was to be delayed at least 11 days. Reasons for the delay in finding the flaws were discussed. (P Inq, May 22/91; NY Times, May 22/91; W Post, May 22/91; USA Today, May 22/91; AP, May 22/91; UPI, May 22/91; LA Times, May 22/91; P Inq, May 23/91; NY Times, May 23/91; W Post, May 23/91;  USA Today, May 23/91; AP, May 23/91; UPI, May 23/91)
NASA announced crew members for eight future Space Shuttle missions, of which the first, a Microgravity Laboratory mission, is scheduled for May 1992. (NASA Release 91-137; AP, Aug 23/91; UPI, Aug 23/91; LA Times, Aug 24/91; AvWk, Aug 26/91)
The media reported that Shuttle Discovery was hauled to its launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Scheduled for a March blastoff, its mission was to learn more about how to detect rockets in flight, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative missile defense program. (UPI, Feb 15/91; LA Times, Feb 16/91)
According to AP, Space Shuttle Columbia returned home to Florida after a one-week trip from the West Coast. Reportedly, NASA would save $1 million, in addition to travel time, by landing a Shuttle in Florida. (AP, June 21/91)
The Chicago Tribune featured Elmhurst College professor Frank Mittermeyer who has been growing tomatoes from some 1,000 seeds that orbited Earth for six years and were retrieved by Space Shuttle Challenger in 1990. Mittermeyer noticed the second generation of space tomatoes were not as robust as the first. (C Trin, Sep 23/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to preparations for the launch of Shuttle Atlantis, scheduled for November 19. Coverage included mention of a "spy camera" designed to take detailed pictures of installations on Earth from space. (P Inq, Nov 17/91; W Times, Nov 17/91; USA Today, Nov 18/91; B Sun, Nov 18/91; W Times, Nov 18/91; NY Times, Nov 18/91; C Trin, Nov 18/91; LA Times, Nov 18/91; AP, Nov 18/91; UPI, Nov 18/91; NY Times, Nov 19/91; USA Today, Nov 19/91; W Post, Nov 19/91; UPI, Nov 19/91)
The media covered preparations for launching by the crew of Shuttle Columbia. (AP, Jun 4/91; UPI, Jun 4/91; NY Times, Jun 5/91; W Times, Jun 5/91;  USA Today, Jun 5/91; W Post, Jun 5/91; B Sun, Jun 5/91; P Inq, Jun 5/91)
NASA announced it modified its Space Shuttle orbiter production contract with Rockwell International Corporation, Space Systems Division in Downey, California. The modifications, at a cost of $93.5 million, extend the mission duration of Columbia flights from 10 days to 16 days, plus a two-day contingency. Measures required include a regenerative carbon dioxide removal system, improved waste collection provisions, added gaseous nitrogen and crew stowage provisions, and additional power furnished by an Extended Duration Orbiter cryogenic pallet holding spherical tanks of liquid oxygen. (NASA Release C91-c)
Thousands of people watched Atlantis take off from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The external fuel tank from Space Shuttle Atlantis broke off after takeoff and was seen over Hawaii streaking toward Earth. Some accounts gave biographic data of crew members. (AP, Apr 5/91; W Post, Apr 6/91; LA Times, Apr 6/91; NY Times, Apr 6/91; P Inq, Apr 6/91; B Sun, Apr 6/91; LA Times, Apr 7/91)
NASA spokeswoman Lisa Malone said three days of torrential rain at Cape Canaveral, Florida, had failed to damage Space Shuttle Atlantis. (B Sun, Mar 19/91; USA Today, Mar 19/91)
NASA announced that the second Astro mission, dedicated to astrophysics, would fly aboard the Space Shuttle. The success of the first Astro mission and the ability of the instruments to acquire high-quality scientific data were major reasons for the decision. The following instruments were to fly on Astro-2 to observe the ultraviolet part of the electromagnetic spectrum: the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope, which performs spectroscopy; the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope, which produces images of components of nebulae, stars, and galaxies; and the Wisconsin Ultraviolet Photopolarimeter Experiment, which measures light polarization. (NASA Release 91-76; AP, May 20/91; B Sun, May 21/91)
The Huntsville Times quoted Aerospace America as saying that Soviet officials confirmed reports that the Soviet military was preparing a manned space fighter with a crew of two to use against the U.S. Space Shuttle. The story cited a visit by General Dynamics technology analyst Richard Ward with Soviet designers. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 22/91)
NASA prepared to begin countdown for Shuttle Discovery, despite predicted bad weather. (P Inq, Apr 20/91; W Post, Apr 21/91; B Sun, Apr 21/91; USA Today, Apr 22/91; W Post, Apr 22/91; AP, Apr 22/91; UPI, Apr 22/91)
The Washington Post carried an article about the difficulties Spacehab Inc. was having commercially. NASA said there was a need for its product: a 10-foot-long pressurized module that fits in the cargo area of the Space Shuttle, expanding the cramped living and storage quarters. Problems arose, however, over NASA's ability to cancel contracts unilaterally (which might occur if Congress in its annual appropriations cut NASA's funds) and Congress's ability to cut funds for Spacehab in spite of any commitments NASA made to it. The lengthy article reviews the history of Spacehab and its operations. (W Post, Jul 8/91)
According to the wire services, two of three generators on Space Shuttle Atlantis were inadvertently left running after the landing. As a result, the generators were flooded with water, a byproduct of the power-generating process, and were being checked. (AP, Aug 13/91; UPI, Aug 14/91; O Sen Star, Aug 15/91; Fla Today, Aug 15/91)
AP reported that Japan planned to start developing a small unmanned Space Shuttle in 1992 and wanted to launch it by 2000. (AP, Jun 18/91)
President George Bush received the crew of Space Shuttle Atlantis. (UPI, May 8/91)
Hours before Space Shuttle Discovery was to blast off on its "Star Wars" mission, NASA canceled the launch because of the failure of an electrical sensor that measures pressure on an oxidizer turbopump on the engine. (AP, Apr 23/91; UPI, Apr 23/91; NY Times, Apr 24/91; W Post, Apr 24/91; W Times, Apr 24/91; USA Today, Apr 24/91; LA Times, Apr 24/91; C Trin, Apr 24/91; AP, Apr 24/91)
NASA announced that a new Crew Transport Vehicle (CTV) had been developed to allow the crew efficient egress after Shuttle flights to facilitate life science or medical investigations. The CTV was a renovated "people mover." (NASA Release 91-80)
NASA announced that the U.S. and Spain had signed a space cooperation agreement providing for the use of Spanish bases and installations as alternative landing sites for the U.S. Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 91-109)
Ham radio operators in Long Beach, California, made history when they successfully transmitted a television picture to the Space Shuttle Atlantis. (LA Times, Apr 8/91)
The Marshall Islands commemorated the tenth anniversary of US Space Shuttle flights by issuing a block of four stamps. (AP, Apr 12/91)
The press reported that Space Shuttle Discovery left California on September 24 enroute back to Florida, flying piggyback aboard a jetliner. (LA Times, Sep 25/91; UPI, Sep 26/91; NY Times, Sep 27/91)
NASA issued a preliminary report on findings of the June Spacelab Shuttle mission. The human body's adaptation to weightlessness began on the launch pad and researchers needed to develop new ways to counteract these physiological effects. These effects include weight loss, loss of body fluid, drop in red blood cell production, and reduced heart pumping capacity. (UPI, Sep 19/91; AP, Sep 20/91; NY Times, Sep 20/91; W Post, Sep 20/91; USA Today, Sep 20/91)
NASA discovered cracks in the protective thermal layer of the wings of Discovery, the third Space Shuttle to experience this problem. (AP, Oct 3/91; W Times, Oct 4/91)
A pressurized laboratory to be used on Space Shuttle Columbia's late May mission was damaged when a technician removed a latch and the module tilted, making a slight tear in the module's insulating thermal blanket. NASA spokesman Mitch Varnes said damage appeared minor and should not delay the mission. (AP, Mar 22/91)
NASA announced it had modified its Space Shuttle contract with Rockwell International Corporation's Space Division at an additional cost of $27.6 million. The modification entailed the design, fabrication, testing, and installation of main propulsion system 14-inch disconnects into orbiter umbilicals in order to increase flight safety. Two other companies were involved in the work: Parker Hannifin and Martin Marietta. (NASA Release C91-g)
The Washington Times reported that the Smithsonian Institution had decided to keep the National Air and Space Museum Annex at Dulles International Airport and scale down the project, which is to include the Space Shuttle Enterprise. The cost at Dulles would be $8 million less than at Baltimore-Washington International Airport, and Virginia could make a larger contribution than Maryland to total costs. (W Times, May 9/91)
Rockwell International announced that it would lay off 450 workers assembling the Space Shuttle Endeavour after its delivery to NASA in late April. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 10/91)
NASA said small cracks were found in the thermal seals on the wings of a second Space Shuttle, the Columbia. The cause of the cracks remained undetermined. (AP, Oct 2/91; Fla Today, Oct 2/91; W Times, Oct 3/91)
The media reported a problem with an electronic component in Space Shuttle Atlantis but it was not expected to delay the launch. However, another power supply problem with the data processor might cause difficulties. (AP, Jul 17/91; UPI, Jul 17/91; USA Today, Jul 17/91)
After four days of trying, laser signals beamed up from Florida were received aboard the Shuttle Discovery. That success came a day after NASA had decided to cancel a major experiment in tracking space debris because of a dead battery aboard the Shuttle. (NY Times, Dec. 7/92; The Sun, Dec 7/92; USA Today, Dec 7/92; AP, Dec 7/92; UPI, Dec 5/92; W Post, Dec 7/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92)
The scheduled launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis was canceled because of fuel leaks, but NASA decided it was a fleeting problem that posed no danger. Launch director Bob Sieck said he was confident the trouble was not a recurrence of the hydrogen leaks that grounded the Shuttle fleet for almost six months in 1990. The launch was rescheduled for the next day. (W Post, Mar 24/92; NY Times, Mar 24/92; W Times, Mar 24/92; P Inq, Mar 24/92)
The Space Shuttle Endeavor roared into orbit on September 12 on a history-making seven-day mission. It carried the first married couple, Mark Lee and Jan Davis, the first black woman, Mae Jemison, and the first Japanese, Mamoru Mohri, to fly on a U.S. spacecraft. It also carried fish, frogs, hornets, flies, and fertilized chicken eggs, all subjects of the research mission. Endeavour's flight was also the first U.S. space mission devoted to Japanese research. Japan supplied 34 of the 43 Spacelab experiments, the United States seven, and two were shared. Japan contributed $90 million of the estimated $363 million cost of the flight. (CSM, Sept 14/92; W Post, Sept 13/92; W Times, Sept 13/92; NY Times, Sept 13/92; The Sun, Sept 13/92; P Inq, Sept 13/92; W Times, Sept 12/92; W Post, Sept 12/92; The Sun, Sept 12/92; C Trib, Sept 12/92;)
NASA announced that Dr. Chiaki Mukai of the Japanese National Space Development Agency had been designated as the prime payload specialist for the second International Microgravity Laboratory mission scheduled for launch aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia in July 1994. She was to be the first Japanese woman to take part in a U.S. space shuttle mission. Dr. Jean-Jacques Favier, a scientist with the French Atomic Energy Commission, was selected as an alternate payload specialist. (NASA Release 92-173; UPI, Oct 20/92)
Teledyne Industries paid a record $17.5 million in criminal fines for falsifying tests on electronic relay switches used in high-tech weapons and spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle. Teledyne pleaded guilty to 35 criminal counts. (W Times, Nov 10/92; WSJ, Nov 10/92; USA Today, Nov 10/92; AP, Nov 9/92; UPI, Nov 9/92)
NASA announced that more than 700 researchers from around the world would convene on March 16-20, 1992, at Johnson Space Center's (JSC) Gilruth Center in Houston, Texas for five days of discussions on research on the universe, with much of the focus on Venus and findings from NASA's Magellan probe. Magellan, deployed from the Space Shuttle Atlantis in 1989, has mapped about 97 percent of the Venusian surface with its remote sensing cameras. An overview of the Magellan program called "Magellan at Venus: The Global Perspective Emerges," start was scheduled to the conference on March 6, 1992. (NASA Note N92-19)
The new Space Shuttle Endeavour was slowly hauled to its seaside launching pad for work to ready the ship for an engine test firing in April and its maiden flight in early May. Mounted atop a powerful Apollo-era crawler-transporter, Endeavour began the 4 1/2 mile, six-hour trip to pad 39-B at 7:18 a.m. EST. Engineers spent the afternoon hooking up fuel lines and various mechanical, hydraulic and electrical systems. (UPI, Mar 14/92; AP, Mar 13/92; P Inq, Mar 14/92)
Scientists at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California announced plans to blast an 11-pound projectile from a 155-foot-long cannon into a California hill. The test shot was intended to demonstrate that an ultra-high-velocity gun hitherto used only for laboratory research can be adapted to send payloads into space at only about one-fortieth of what it costs to orbit them by Space Shuttle. The gun was the product of a program called the Super High Altitude Research Project. (NY Times, Sept 29/92)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, in its annual report to officials of NASA, questioned the agency's decision to save money by eliminating several engine improvement programs, which could compromise the safety of future Space Shuttle flights. Although the panel said NASA was generally doing a good job on safety issues, the panel said it was unwise for the agency to stop developing a new main combustion chamber for the engine and a new hydrogen fuel pump. (NY Times, Mar 18/92)
Amid concerns over cold weather, the Shuttle Discovery was prepared for lauch from Cape Canaveral at 8:53 a.m. EDT. (USA Today, Jan 22/92)
Space Shuttle Mission STS-45 was designated for the first flight of the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS-1). The ATLAS-1 was to measure long-term variability in the total energy radiated by the sun and measure the Earth's middle atmospheric constituents over one 11-year solar cycle. (NASA Note N92-14)
Weather conditions forced postponement of the Space Shuttle Columbia's return, lengthening what is already NASA's longest Shuttle mission into a full two weeks. (P Inq, Jul 9/92; LA Times, Jul 9/92; W Post, Jul 9/92; NY Times, Jul 9/92; W Times, Jul 9/92; The Sun, Jul 9/92)
NASA announced signature of a $59.3 million supplemental agreement with Rockwell International's Space Systems Divison for the design, development, test, and evaluation of a new system to update Space Shuttle orbiter cockpit displays. (NASA Release C92-15)
A division of Rockwell International agreed to pay $1.42 million and to permit the federal government to lecture employees about honesty to settle a fraud case involving Space Shuttle work. Prosecutors said they would drop charges that Rockwell's Collins Commercial Avionics Division in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, which makes and repairs Shuttle flight instruments, had defrauded NASA by altering time cards for work done on the Shuttle program. (P Inq, Jul 22/92; NY Times, Jul 22/92; WSJ, Jul 22/92; AP, Jul 21/92)
The Space Shuttle returned to earth with its seven-member crew, two Japanese carp, four frogs and assorted tadpoles, hornets, and flies. This was the first Shuttle flight devoted to Japanese research. (NY Times, Sept 21/92; P Inq, Sept 21/92; The Sun, Sept 21/92; W Times, Sept 20/92, Sept 21/92; W Post, Sept 20/92, Sept 21/92; AP, Sept 20/92, Sept 21/92; UPI, Sept 21/92; USA Today, Sept 21/92; LA Times, Sept 21/92)
The Justice Department accused a large military electronics maker of falsifying results of tests on sophisticated weapons and spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle. The department joined a $250 million civil lawsuit that accused Teledyne Relays, a Teledyne Inc. unit, of falsifying tests to ensure the reliability of electromagnetic relays, according to court papers. Government contracts accounted for about a third of Teledyne's $3.2 billion in sales last year. (AP, Apr 23/92)
Explorers reported that the lost city of Ubar, called "the Atlantis of the Sands" by Lawrence of Arabia, had been found in Oman using pictures taken from the Space Shuttle Challenger in October 1984. The city was thought to have been inhabited from 2800 B.C. until A.D. 100. (USA Today, Feb 5/92; W Times, Feb 5/92; P Inq, Feb 5/92; NY Times International, Feb 5/92; B Sun, Feb 5/92)
The Space Shuttle Columbia and its crew set a record for the longest Space Shuttle flight on the 11th day of a laboratory research mission. Columbia passed the previous Shuttle endurance record of 10 days, 21 hours, and one minute set in 1990 by another Shuttle Columbia crew. (W Times, Jul 7/92; The Sun, Jul 7/92; W Post, Jul 7/92; AP Jul 7/92; UPI Jul 76/92; USA Today, Jul 7/92)
Belgium's Prince Philippe, who is the nephew of King Baudouin and heir to the throne, called the crew members of the Space Shuttle Atlantis to congradulate them on their launch and to honor Dirk Frimout, the first Belgian in space. (AP, Mar 26/92; UPI, Mar 26/92)
A company spokesman for Rockwell Corporation said that NASA was negotiating with Rockwell to build spare parts in the Antelope Valley for the Space Shuttle program. Rockwell was negotiating the terms of a $55 million contract to build a midbody fuselage and a tail for the Space Shuttle fleet. The work would be performed in the hanger where the company built all of the Space Shuttles for NASA. Work would begin with 70 employees and was expected to last until 1999. (Daily News, May 18/92)
NASA announced that the first flight of the IML-O1 (International Microgravity Laboratory), was set for January 22, 1992, aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery. Over 220 scientists from 14 countries were to be represented in this unprecedented international effort to conduct research in both materials and life sciences in the microgravity environment. (NASA Note N92-3)
NASA said that engineers have launched a review of the Space Shuttle Columbia's liftoff to identify debris seen near Columbia's three main engines.  A spokesman said that the Shuttle performed flawlessly during its ascent, but that officials were intrigued by video images that captured an object "of unknown origin" falling into the fiery engine plume about 45 seconds after liftoff. (RTw, Oct 19/93)
A spokesman for Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California said that a pressure buildup ripped apart an experimental supergun designed to fire objects into space. The accident delayed a demonstration scheduled for this spring. Scientists hoped to use the gun, which is like an enormous air rifle, to shoot payloads into space at a fraction of the cost of sending them into orbit via a Space Shuttle. (AP, Mar 18/93; USA Today, Mar 18/93;
A biography of Christa McAuliffe, the teacher-astronaut who was killed when the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, is the subject of a new biography, written by her mother, Grace George Corrigan. The biography, A Journal for Christa, published  on September 7, by the University of Nebraska Press, lends weight to arguments that NASA pressed ahead with the high-profile flight to win mention of it in President Reagan's State of the Union Message, which had been scheduled for January 28, the day of the launch. (AP, Sep 7/93; NY Times, Sep 8/93; B Sun, Sep 8/93)
NASA announced that a mysterious glitch had caused the Ulysses solar explorer spacecraft to shut down its instruments and stop sending data over the weekend. Eight of the instruments were working by the Tuesday following the shutdown, and NASA predicted that the ninth instrument would be operational within days. A similar, still unexplained malfunction occurred in 1991. Ulysses was released from a Space Shuttle in 1990 on a $750 mission to study the sun's poles in 1994-95. (AP, Feb 16/93; W Post, Feb 17/93); USA Today, Feb 17/93; AP, Feb 17/93)
NASA spokeswoman June Malone said a broken pin was responsible for a leaky engine valve removed from Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled to lift off on an atmospheric research mission next week. The alignment pin broke while technicians were removing plumbing from around the valve for leak tests ordered after the March 22 main engine shutdown of Columbia. (AP, Apr 1/93)
The House of Representatives voted to deny funding requests for two science projects: President Clinton's request for $640 million for the superconducting Super Collider and $4 billion for NASA's request to build a more powerful Space Shuttle engine. (AP, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 20/93; USA Today, Oct 20/93, Oct 21/93; NY Times, Oct 20/93; W Post, Oct 21/93, Oct 22/93; C Trib, Oct 22/93; B Sun, Oct 25/93)
The launch of Space Shuttle Discovery's eight-day scientific mission, scheduled for 2:32 a.m. April 6 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, was aborted 11 seconds before liftoff when computers detected a problem. It was the second aborted launch in two weeks for the Shuttle program. The previous launch, involving the Shuttle Columbia, was halted three seconds from liftoff on March 22.
NASA said that the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour would be delayed for at least two weeks because the Shuttle's engine maker, Rocketdyne, had failed to correctly document whether one of the engine's parts was reliable. In a review of Rocketdyne's operation, NASA discovered many problems with how the company documented its work. In one case earlier in the year, a paperwork problem made it impossible for NASA to determine whether a Shuttle's engines contained proper seal retainers or older, phased-out models.
NASA began replacing Space Shuttle Discovery's main engines in preparation for another launch attempt next month.  The third countdown for Discovery ended on August 12 with an engine shutdown three seconds before launch.  Engineers traced the problem to a sensor that was supposed to monitor the flow of fuel in main engine No. 2. (AP, Aug 18/93)
NASA announced that a German-chartered Space Shuttle mission was scheduled for launch March 14 after a delay of more than two weeks. NASA said the delay was caused by a false alarm with the space shuttle Columbia's main engines, which were suspected of containing outdated parts. (W Times, Feb 27/93)
NASA announced that, despite transmitting problems, the on-board data recovery system of Space Shuttle STS-56 had captured 103 orbital sunrises and sunsets observed by the Atmospheric Trace Molecule Spectroscopy (ATMOS) instrument aboard the Shuttle. (NASA Release 93-118)
Working with a team of Hopkins scientists last spring, Kimberly Ennico, a 20-year-old junior at Johns Hopkins University, discovered a small flaw in the video camera that acts as a range finder for the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope scheduled for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in January 1995. Ms. Ennico discovered that the telescope's video range finder slightly distorted the positions of stars and distant galaxies. Her discovery allowed astronomers to compensate for the flaw by adjusting their computations. (B Sun, Jan 28/93)
NASA delayed the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour, scheduled to blast off on June 20, because of poor weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. A second launch attempt was expected for Monday morning, June 21. (RTw, June 20/93; UPI, June 20/93, June 21/93; Ap, June 21/93; NY Times, June 21/93; LA Times, June 21/93; W Post, June 21/93; USA Today, June 21/93; W Times, June 21/93; B Sun, June 21/93)
According to Neal Pellis of the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, a research project from the Cancer Center aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour could provide "a big step in developing better treatments for cancer patients." The experiment will attempt to find out more about the human immune system and why it doesn't work as well in long-term space travel. (H Post, Jan 6/93)
A last-minute glitch in a computer system that monitors Shuttle takeoffs to ensure people's safety on the ground forced NASA to scrub the launch of Shuttle Columbia on a medical research mission. NASA said that it would try for an October 15 launch, if the weather cooperated.
NASA halted the countdown for Space Shuttle Discovery less than an hour before scheduled liftoff because of a bad electrical circuit controlling a set of launch pad safety locks.  A second launch attempt was expected to take place no earlier than late next week. (AP, Jul 17/93; UPn, Jul 17/93; RTw, Jul 17/93; USA Today, Jul 19/93; P Inq, Jul 18/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93; W Times, Jul 18/93; W Post, Jul 18/93)
A NASA study of safety in the Space Shuttle program found that honest mistaken go unreported if workers fear blunders can cost their jobs.  The study found no major safety concerns but said managers had not bridged the communications gap identified in the investigation of the 1986 Challenger disaster. The report said that "exaggerated" news coverage of safety-related incidents led to the mistaken perception among workers that reporting incident and mistakes might result in punitive action. (Rtw, Jul 26/93)
A NASA official said that Rocketdyne might lose as much as $29 million in profits on its Space Shuttle engine program because of manufacturing problems at its Canoga Park plant. The company could lose the funds, known as award fees, if NASA determined that the company had performed poorly between November and April. NASA was completing a review of Rocketdyne's space shuttle engine manufacturing operation. (Daily News, June 3/93)
NASA announced an August 4 launch attempt for the Space Shuttle Discovery. (RTw, Jul 7/93; USA Today, Jul 28/93)
A recent Space Shuttle experiment on rats some day may lead to the discovery of the genes that direct bone cells to produce more bone.  The third Physiological and Anatomical Rodent Experiment (PARE-3) studied changes in the activity of bone-forming cells after nine days of spaceflight.  It also investigated whether these changes were reversed within three days of return to Earth. (NASA Release 93-181)
NASA announced that three engine pumps that had been removed from Space Shuttle Columbia for fear that the seal retainers in the pumps were an old variety that required inspection after each flight were a newer version that did not need automatic pre-flight inspection. The confusion stemmed from a paperwork mixup at the Rockwell International Corporation, maker of the engines. (NY Times, Feb 19/93)
NASA reported that the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia had been halted three seconds before liftoff because of a main engine failure caused by a malfunctioning engine valve. When the Shuttle's computers detected a faulty valve, the safety system shut down the Shuttle's main engines. Officials stressed that the crew on the $1 billion German-charted research mission was never in any danger because of the aborted liftoff. Repairs were expected to take about three weeks. The shutdown was the third launch pad abort in Shuttle program history. (Reuters, Mar 22/93, Mar 23/93; AP, Mar 22/93; UPI, Mar 22/93; B Sun, Mar 23/93; P Inq, Mar 23/93; CSM, Mar 23/93; NY Times, Mar 23/93; USA Today, Mar 23/93; W Post, Mar 23/93; W Times, Mar 23/93; WSJ, Mar 23/93)
After a month of delays, NASA prepared for launch  of the Shuttle Columbia's German mission. Forecasters were predicting a 70 percent chance of favorable lift-off conditions. The flight would be Columbia's 14th in 12 years.
The Smithsonian Museum put the Air and Space Museum Annex proposed for Dulles Airport on its priority list for 1993. The annex would display, for the first time, such pieces of aeronautical history as the Enola Gay atomic bomber, the Space Shuttle Enterprise, and the SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane.
NASA released 45 photos of the Space Shuttle Challenger's smashed crew cabin, after they were given to the New York Times by a man who had obtained them under the federal Freedom of Information Act. The pictures were taken after the crew cabin was recovered from the Atlantic Ocean in 1986. (AP, Feb 15/93; B Sun, Feb 15; W Post, Feb 15/93; USA Today, Feb 15/93; P Inq, Feb 15/93; NY Times, Feb 13/93)
Rocketdyne, the Canoga Park unit of Rockwell International, was blamed for the last-minute blastoff delay of Space Shuttle Discovery.  The shutdown was traced to a faulty fuel sensor in one of Discovery's engines, built by Rocketdyne.
NASA announced at least a two-day delay in the planned March 14 launch of Space Shuttle Columbia because of a ruptured hydraulic hose that had sprayed fluid in the engine compartment. This was the second delay in three weeks for the German Spacelab mission. (AP, Mar 3/93, Mar 4/93; UPI, Mar 3/93; P Inq, Mar 4/93; USA Today, Mar 4/93; RTw, Mar 3/93)
NASA announced that NASA personnel had moved the Space Shuttle Discovery to the launch pad on Monday March 15. Discovery was scheduled to be launched in April on an atmospheric research mission. Meanwhile preflight work resumed on Columbia, which was scheduled to be launched in less than a week. (W Times, Mar 16/93; USA Today, Mar 16/93; AP, Mar 15/93)
NASA announced that the Space Shuttle Discovery would be sent on its eight-day atmospheric research mission next week, pushing Columbia's German-sponsored science flight into late April. The Columbia was scheduled for launch April 24. (UPI, Mar 30/93; W Post, Mar 31/93; RTw, Mar 31/93)
China's state-run media reported that China had reached its first agreement with the United States to rent payload space in the U.S. Space Shuttle program for scientific research projects.  Jian Jingshan, director of the Center for Space  Science and Applied Research at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, said his center had rented eight payload booths to carry equipment for experiments in space physics. (C Trib, Dec 5/93)
USA Today reported that an article in Florida Today suggested that cuts in quality-control staffs at NASA and workers' fear of admitting error were creating potentially deadly problems for the Space Shuttle program. (USA Today, June 14/93)
NASA postponed a scheduled launch of Space Shuttle Discovery until August 12 because of the Perseid meteor shower.  This was the third time the mission had been delayed.  The Perseid meteor shower occurs each August; it was expected to be more intense than usual this August, raising the possibility that a spacecraft in Earth orbit could be damaged by a piece of debris. (UPI, Jul 30/93; Rtw, Jul 30/93; AP, Jul 31/93; W Post, Jul 31/93; NY Times, Jul 31/93; B Sun, Aug 4/93; USA Today, Aug 10/93, Aug 11/93, Aug 12/93)
Astrophysicists reported that data from an x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour might have come from a million-degree gas produced by a nearby and fairly recent supernova, or exploding star. Scientists have puzzled over these x-rays for 25 year. Wilton T. Sanders from the University of Wisconsin commented, "There's a lot more analysis that needs to be done before we can start pinning down the exact origin of these x-rays. At this point, we're just very happy with the results that we're getting. The x-rays do seem to clearly be from a thermal process." (W Times, Jan 19/93; B Sun, Jan 19/93; NASA Release, Jan 21/93)
NASA added a spacewalk to Space Shuttle mission STS-51 aboard Discovery, set for launch in July. The spacewalk would continue extravehicular activity tests that began with the addition of a spacewalk to NASA's first Shuttle flight in January of this year. (NASA Release 93-21)
Space Shuttle Endeavour's spacewalkers were the first to wear new spacesuit gloves that provide not only more thermal protection but also a better sense of touch than earlier models. The gloves are the first to have breaks in the gray silicone-coated Keviar finger and palm surface so joints can bend easier.  They are also insulated with Nomex felt for added warmth in space, where temperatures can plunge to hundreds of degrees below zero. (USA Today, Dec 7/93)
NASA announced that results from a Spacelab crystal growth experiment flown aboard the Space Shuttle last summer had brought researchers closer to understanding the molecular structure of proteins; such understanding would aid scientists in developing more effective disease-fighting, anti-parasitic drugs. (NASA Release 93-166)
The Los Angeles Times reported that NASA was using a new x-ray machine, called the Reverse Geometry x-ray system, to examine parts of the Space Shuttle. The new technology, produced by the Digiray Corporation, eliminates fuzzy images and displays a 3-D picture almost instantly. (LA Times, Apr 25/93; AP, May 24/93)
NASA completed its review of the flight readiness of Columbia Shuttle Mission STS-55, a mission dedicated primarily to the German Space Agency for research in life and microgravity sciences. During the review, inspectors decided to replace the Shuttle's high pressure oxidizer pumps.
An article in Flight International featured the U.S. Spacehab, the world's first privately owned, manned microgravity-laboratory. The Spacehab was scheduled to be lifted aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour mission on June 3.
Technicians re-entered the engine compartment of Space Shuttle Discovery to replace what was believed to be a bad temperature sensor. The problem delayed some launch countdown preparations but, according to Shuttle Test Director Mike Leinbach, posed no threat to the launch, scheduled for the morning of August 12. (B Sun, Aug 12/93; RTw Aug, 11/93, Aug 12/93; UPI, Aug 11/93; P Inq, Aug 12/93; W Post, Aug 12/93; USA Today, Aug 12/93)
NASA announced that June 20, 1993, had been set as the new launch date for the next flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour. The launch originally had been scheduled for June 3. (NASA Launch Advisory)
The Christian Science Monitor, noting that Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission would symbolize what NASA called "the year of commercial space," reported that companies had been slow to exploit the commercial possibilities of space. For example, although NASA had leased 200 of the 300 locker spaces available on Spacehab's first six flights, the agency had few customers for the other 100 lockers. (CSM, June 3/93)
A panel of experts tasked with examining the Space Shuttle's main engines said that they were safe to fly provided that technical checks were made "vigorously and rigorously." The panel noted that the engines were so fussy that they needed constant maintenance. Such attention was one of the factors that had driven the cost of each Shuttle flight to about $500 million. The panel suggested that NASA continue to press forward on a number of technical improvements already in the works. (AP, Feb 12/93)
NASA removed scientific samples and volatile fuels from the Space Shuttle Columbia on Tuesday. The Shuttle was grounded for at least three weeks because of an engine shutdown that had occurred three seconds before liftoff. (AP, Mar 24/93; UPI, Mar 24/93)
NASA said that two ozone monitors aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery were having difficulty sending measurements to ground controllers. Two monitors--one German and the other American--had trouble sending measurements to the ground. The U.S. monitor, which was supposed to supply most of the atmospheric research data, was also in danger of losing information. Timothy Miller, mission scientist for NASA, said a backup recorder for the U.S. ozone instrument could hold just over half the amount of data sought. Nasa ground controllers were attempting to solve the problem. (B Sun, Apr 9/93; NY Times, Apr 9/93; USA Today, Apr 9/93; W Post, Apr 9/93; UPI, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 9/93)
NASA canceled the Space Shuttle Columbia launch, scheduled for April 24, because of problems with a key navigational aid. The launch was rescheduled for 10:50 a.m. April 26. (UPI, Apr 24/93; RTw, Apr 24/93; P Inq, Apr 25/93; NY Times, Apr 25/93; B Sun, Apr 24/93)
The countdown began for the launch of Shuttle Columbia scheduled for July 8. (W Times, Jul 6/94; USA Today, Jul 6/94)
NASA was scheduled to test fly Pratt & Whitney's new high-pressure oxidizer turbopump on only one of Discovery's three main engines in June 1995 before committing itself to the advanced design pump's use on all Space Shuttle engines. The new pump was intended to simplify Shuttle processing and increase the margin of safety. It was designed to fly 10 times before removal or replacement was required, compared with the single-flight ability of the current pump. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
NASA announced the selection of 34 scientists to participate in the experiment definition phase of the Neurolab Space Shuttle mission. This was to be a 14- to 16-day mission jointly with the National Institutes of Health, devoted to brain and behavioral research and was scheduled for launch in early 1998. Various domestic and international partners also were participating, such as Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, and Nigeria. (NASA Release 94-100; Reuters, Jun 22/94)
NASA announced the names of the remaining members of the second U.S. Microgravity Laboratory mission scheduled for the fall of 1995 aboard Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 94-195)
Space Shuttle Columbia stopped at Huntsville en route to Rockwell International's facility at Palmdale, California, for scheduled maintenance. Thousands of people came to the airport to see the Shuttle. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 9/94)
NASA announced that the Ulysses spacecraft had become the first robotic exploration vehicle in history to reach a polar region of the sun when it passed over the sun's southern polar area June 26 after a journey of almost four years from Earth. The European Space Agency built Ulysses, and Space Shuttle Discovery deployed it in October 1990. In February 1992, Ulysses spent nearly 11 days exploring unknown regions of Jupiter before it gained enough momentum to loop into an orbit that passed over the poles of the sun. The sun has a global magnetic field and magnetic poles, but many details concerning the polar caps and magnetic fields, including the influence of incoming cosmic rays, remain unclear. (NASA Release 94-104; Fla Today, Jun 29/94)
NASA announced the signing of a contract with the Paton Welding Institute in Kiev, Ukraine, to develop a plan for flying a space welding tool aboard the Space Shuttle in October 1997. The Ukrainian Universal Hand Tool was an electron beam welding device developed at the Institute and used by Salyut 7 cosmonauts in 1984 and 1986 in the first electron beam welding in space experiments. (NASA Release 94-196)
NASA spokesman George Diller said that as a result of an engine leak discovered in California, NASA had decided to check the welds on all engine nozzles of Shuttle Discovery. This fact, combined with the decision to replace one of Discovery's auxiliary power units, might result in a delay of the scheduled February 2, 1995 launch of Discovery. (O Sen Star, Dec 20/94)
NASA announced the rescheduling of the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour to April 8 to allow further inspections of metallic vanes in the high pressure oxidizer preburner pump volute housings of its main engines. (NASA Release 94-028; AP, Apr 4/94; UP, Apr 4/94; Reuters, Apr 4/94; P Inq, Apr 5/94; W Times, Apr 5/94; USA Today, Apr 5/94)
Laurie Boeder, NASA Associate Administrator for Public Affairs, discussed NASA's struggles to fund NASA Select, a television channel that covered Space Shuttle missions for broadcast on cable and use by commercial networks. (SP News, Apr 4-10/94)
NASA announced that the official launch date of Space Shuttle Columbia would be March 3. During the 14-day flight, a five-person crew was to conduct numerous scientific experiments ranging from materials processing to biotechnology and environmental monitoring. (NASA Editor's Note N94-18; AP, Feb 16/94; Reuters, Feb 16/94; W Times, Feb 17/94)
NASA announced the selection of Kathryn C. Thornton and Catherine G. Coleman for the 16-day Microgravity Laboratory mission scheduled for launch in the fall of 1995 aboard Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 94-47)
The celebration for the return of Space Shuttle Columbia to Palmdale, California for modifications and inspections was also the occasion for celebrating the return to work of some 200 laid-off Rockwell Corporation employees. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Nov 19/94)
An obituary of Myron S. Malkin described him as the physicist who was the first director of the Space Shuttle program from 1973 to 1980. He served as a consultant to NASA and was in the control room for the Shuttle's first flight in April 1981. (AP, Oct 25/94; NY Times, Oct 26/94)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Columbia was to conduct the second flight of the International Microgravity Laboratory-2. The flight would entail world-wide research into the behavior of materials and life in the weightless environment of Earth-orbit. Experiments were to include studies of subtle forces that affect microgravity and the reaction of living organisms to microgravity. Scientists from NASA, the European Space Agency, the French Space Agency, the German Space Agency, the Canadian Space Agency, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan cooperated in planning the experiments. (NASA Release 94-96)
The countdown began for the launch of Shuttle Discovery on September 9. (AP, Sep 6/94; UP, Sep 6/94; Reuters, Sep 6/94; W Post, Sep 7/94; USA Today, Sep 7/94; AP, Sep 7/94; UP, Sep 7/94; NY Times, Sep 9/94; USA Today, Sep 9/94; W Post, Sep 9/94; W Times, Sep 9/94; CSM, Sep 9/94; Daily Press, Sep 9/94; Virginian-Pilot, Sep 9/94)
NASA announced that Shuttle Columbia was scheduled to take off in March on a two-week mission to conduct various experiments entailing such areas as materials processing, biotechnology, microgravity, medical concerns, and environmental monitoring. (NASA Release 94-25)
The countdown began for the liftoff on March 3 of Shuttle Columbia. Columbia was scheduled for a basic 14-day research flight featuring materials development and protein crystal growth as well as medical experiments. (B Sun, Feb 28/94; AP, Feb 28/94; UP, Feb 28/94; Reuters, Feb 28/94)
The Justice Department joined a whistle-blower, David Vosoughkia, in a lawsuit accusing the Rockwell International Corporation of overcharging NASA by millions of dollars for contracts to build parts for the Space Shuttle. (Reuters, Apr 28/94; UP, Apr 28/94; NY Times, Apr 29/94; WSJ, Apr 29/94)
NASA announced it had begun planning for a new multidisciplinary life and microgravity sciences Spacelab research mission to be flown on Space Shuttle Columbia in mid-1996. (NASA Release 94-212)
NASA announced that its geologists were using radar images and photographs taken during Endeavour's recent Space Shuttle mission to study possible new lava flows from Mount Klyuchevsky on Russia's Kamchatka peninsula. The daily Shuttle tracking of the eruption provided the most detailed documentation of such an eruption ever obtained from orbit. (NASA Release 94-179)
NASA announced members of the crew for the second Wake Shield Facility Shuttle flight aboard Endeavour, scheduled for mid-1995, under the command of David M. Walker. (NASA Release 94-112)
NASA announced the signing of a contract modification with Rockwell International Space Systems Division, Downey, California. The contract provided for the production of the Multifunction Electronic Display Subsystem (MEDS) to be installed in each of the four Space Shuttle orbiters. MEDS is to replace some of the current electromechanical flight instruments and meters in the shuttle cockpit. (NASA Release C94-n)
NASA prepared to begin the countdown on September 27 for the scheduled September 30 launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on its environmental mission. The Shuttle was launched on schedule on September 30. (Reuters, Sep 26/94; USA Today, Sep 27/94; AP, Sep 28/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; USA Today, Sep 30/94; B Sun, Sep 30/94; Fla Today, Sep 30/94; AP, Sep 30/94; Reuters, Sep 30/94; W Post, Oct 1/94)
Space Shuttle Endeavour passed over four U.S. sites--forests in Michigan and North Carolina, waterways in Oklahoma, and desert lands in California--twice a day on its flight, allowing much data to be collected. Such data were now being studied as regarded Michigan's Upper Peninsula and specifically, the Hiawatha National Forest. They would provide insights as to how forests were affected by timber-cutting, development, and global warming. (Kalamazoo Gazette, Nov 13/94; Grand Rapids Press, Nov 14/94)
NASA announced the postponement of the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia until March 4 because of a severe storm. (AP, Mar 2/94; Reuters, Mar 2/94; NY Times, Mar 3/94; P Inq, Mar 3/94; USA Today, Mar 3/94)
Ulysses, a European spacecraft deployed by U.S. Shuttle Discovery in October 1990, took three and a half years to travel the 93 million miles from Earth to the sun's south pole. Between June and the fall of 1995, when it was due to pass the sun's north pole, it would exhaustively examine the sun--the first time the sun had been observed from pole to pole. Ulysses was to examine the sun's magnetic field, which influenced the solar cycles as well as the climate on earth. The spacecraft also was to search for the source of gamma and gravity rays and to examine solar flares. (W Times, Jun 12/94)
NASA announced the addition of Jerry M. Linenger to the crew of the fall 1994 flight of Space Shuttle Discovery. The mission of this flight was scheduled to be complex, including a rendezvous, proximity operations, and a spacewalk; thus crew operations needed to be more efficiently distributed. (NASA Release 94-31)
Lockheed said it could arrange private financing for a low-cost, reusable launch vehicle (RLV) if the U.S. government would give it all the Space Shuttle and Titan business for at least five years. In return, Lockheed estimated that the government would get $2 billion a year savings. To make such a RLV, Lockheed would call on Rocketdyne for propulsion, Rohr Corporation for high temperature structures, and Martin Marietta-Denver for tanks for liquid oxygen and hydrogen. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
NASA stated that it planned to launch Space Shuttle Endeavour on August 18 for a 10-day Earth-monitoring mission. (AP, Aug 4/94; Reuters, Aug 4/94; USA Today, Aug 5/94)
The ashes of "Star Trek" creator Gene Roddenberry were flown on a Space Shuttle after his death in October 1991, at the request of his widow, according to a NASA spokesperson. (AP, Apr 28/94; UP, Apr 28/94; Reuters, Apr 28/94)
A feature article described some of the findings of spacecraft Ulysses, which used Jupiter's gravity to enter an orbit perpendicular to those of the planets and for the preceding four months had been studying the sun's polar regions. These were hitherto unexplored areas, and Ulysses mapped the sun's magnetic field and its cosmic rays, providing a wealth of data about solar dynamics. Ulysses was launched from a Space Shuttle in October 1990. (NY Times, Dec 20/94)
When Tropical Storm Gordon blew through Florida in November, a tugboat pulling NASA's $50 million external fuel tank for Shuttle Atlantis lost power and was rescued by a tanker. The tanker could claim salvage rights from NASA or claim the tank, and NASA had no insurance to cover law suits on the fuel tank. (O Sen Star, Dec 10/94)
Launch of Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-73). During the mission Columbia provided a calm, stable platform for 16 days of on-orbit research using the Microgravity Laboratory (USML-2) Spacelab that consisted of over 40 fluid-physics, material science, and biotechnology experiments. Columbia landed on November 5. Columbia�s window was nicked by space debris. The Space Shuttle also received a 1 cm crater in its cargo bay door, the biggest impact to date. (NASA Release 95-152; NY Times, Oct 21/95, Oct 22/95, Oct 27/95 & Nov 5/95; W Post, Oct 29/95 & Nov 6/95; Fla Today, Oct 27/95, Nov 3/95 & Nov 4/95; USA Today, Nov 6/95; Space News, Nov 6/95 & Dec 4/95; AvWk, Nov 13/95)
Launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour (STS-69). It deployed and retrieved two scientific spacecraft. One was the second flight of the Wake Shield Facility-2, a 12-foot diameter disk for growing semiconductor films. The other was the Spartan 201 on its third flight. Its mission was to study the outer atmosphere of the Sun and its transition into the solar wind that constantly flows past the Earth. (NASA Releases 95-121 & 164; NY Times, Sep 3/95, Sep 14/95, Sep 15/95, Sep 16/95, Sep 17/95, Sep 18/95 & Sep 19/95; W Post, Sep 8/95, Sep 11/95, Sep 12/95, Sep 17/95, Sep 18/95 & Sep 19/95; USA Today, Sep 11/95 & Sep 13/95; Fla Today, Sep 11/95, Sep 12/95, Sep 14/95 & Sep 17/95; CSM, Sep11/95; AP, Sep 7/95, Sep 8/95, Sep 10/95, Sep 12/95, Sep 15/95 & Sep 18/95; Reuters, Sep 9/95, Sep 11/95 & Sep 14/95; UPI, Sep 7/95; AvWk, Sep 11/95 & Sep 18/95)
NASA expects to select a single prime contractor for its Space Shuttle program within a year and turnover shuttle operations in 1998. (W Post, Aug 22/95; USA Today, Aug 22/95; Space News, Aug 28/95; WSJ, Aug 22/95; AP, Aug 21/95; UPI, Aug 21/95; AvWk, Aug 28/95)
Launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour (STS-67) on a 17-day mission. The mission included the use of three unique ultraviolet telescopes mounted on the Astro 2 observation platform. It built on the findings of Astro�s first flight in December, 1990, when the Instrument Pointing System was balky. (NASA Release 95-18; NY Times, Mar 3/95, Mar 7/95, Mar 12/95 & Mar 13/95; W Post, Mar 3/95, Mar 7/95 & Mar 10/95; Reuters, Mar 5/95)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel reported its findings on the safety of the Space Shuttle program, concluding that aggressive cost-cutting measures had not increased risks. The review responded to critics who had suggested that measures, such as outsourcing flight operations, had been too drastic, causing a precipitous decline in NASA workers’ morale. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, responsible for making NASA a more fiscally lean organization, praised NASA’s “clean bill of health.” However, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel warned NASA about challenges that would arise during the assembly of the ISS, cautioning those in favor of cutting the budget against trimming NASA’s funds too drastically.(NASA, “Panel Review Finds Space Shuttle Safe,” news release 96-257, 13 December 1996.)
Mission STS-75, the 19th mission of Shuttle Columbia, launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral,
The television series Home Improvement aired an episode showing members of Shuttle Columbia’s crew in scenes shot in space. The Shuttle’s crew had captured the film during Mission STS-73 in October 1995. The airing marked the first time that NASA had allowed the filming of operations in space, specifically for a television series. The NASA crew included Kenneth D. Bowersox, Catherine G. Coleman, Frederick W. Leslie, Kathryn C. Thornton, and Albert Sacco Jr. Bowersox, who had appeared previously on Home Improvement, praised the event as a public relations achievement for NASA.(Ann Hodges, “‘Home Improvement’ Project Takes On a New Kind of Space,” Houston Chronicle, 12 February 1996.)
scientists had designed to harness new sources of power for the Space Shuttle. An attempt in
Republican presidential candidate Patrick J. Buchanan announced that he would cancel a controversial political advertisement using images of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. Responding to harsh criticism from New Hampshire residents, Buchanan removed the footage of Challenger from the television spot. Buchanan stated that the purpose of the advertisement, his first in the crucial primary state of New Hampshire, was to demonstrate his service to President Ronald Reagan during difficult times. However, in the home state of teacher-astronaut Christa McAuliffe, who had died in the accident, many residents felt that the campaign’s use of the images exploited the event for political gain. The political controversy brought to the foreground the lingering public dismay over the lost Challenger, even as the 10-year anniversary of the tragedy neared.(Howard Kurtz, “Television Ad Backfires on Buchanan,” Washington Post, 12 January 1996; Associated Press, “Buchanan Chastised for Using Challenger Image in TV Ad,” 12 January 1996.)
NASA announced that it had rescheduled for July 1997 Space Shuttle Columbia’s Microgravity Science Laboratory (MSL) mission, cut short in early April because of a fuel cell problem. The quick repair and relaunch plan used the same crew and set the same objectives as the initial Mission STS-83. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated, “we are now in the position to do everything possible to complete the MSL mission with minimal impact to downstream flights.” He also pointed out that the attempt to complete the MSL mission provided NASA with a “unique opportunity to demonstrate our ability to respond to challenges.” In its decision to insert Columbia’s Mission STS-83 into an already arranged Shuttle docket, NASA acknowledged that it would have to push back slightly other flights, already staffed and planned.(NASA, “Microgravity Science Laboratory Mission Set for July; Remaining 1997 Shuttle Manifest Adjusted Slightly,” news release 97-81, 25 April 1997; Seth Borenstein, “Space Shuttle Columbia Gets Chance To Finish What It Started,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 18 April 1997.)
Space Shuttle Discovery encountered its first malfunction during Mission STS-91, when the KU- band system failed to switch on after Discovery’s crew deployed its antenna upon reaching orbit. The KU-band downlink carries broadcasts with a high rate of data. The system failure prevented the Shuttle crew from sending televised images or high rates of information to Mission Control. This problem had never occurred before. NASA spokesperson James Hartsfield stated that it was unclear whether the trouble originated with the antenna, transmitter, or other associated equipment. Hartsfield also mentioned that the failure would “prevent immediate analysis of data from the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer.” The S-band antennas worked normally, and the crew was able to talk with ground controllers as usual.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91”; Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Shuttle Soars Toward Final Mir Docking, but Antenna Won’t Send TV Signals,” 3 June 1998; Aerospace Daily, “Lightweight Tank Perfect on First Flight; KU-Band a Problem,” 4 June 1998.)
Ending one of NASA’s “most successful and historic missions” with a rare night landing, Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after its weeklong linkup with the new ISS. Before departing the ISS on 13 December, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow flew around the station slowly, while the crew photographed the ISS, permitting ground controllers to see the station for the first time. NASA’s Deputy Station Chief Frank L. Culbertson Jr. remarked that the mission was as historically significant as that of Apollo 8, the first piloted mission to the Moon, and that the hardware of ISS was the foundation of “what will put humanity in space forever.”(Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup”; United Press International, “Shuttle Lands in Florida,” 15 December 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-88,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-88.html.)
The contractor operating the Space Shuttle program, United Space Alliance (USA), announced that it would cut 500 jobs at KSC by 30 January, to reduce total workforce by 10 percent. The announcement raised concerns in Congress about Shuttle safety.(Robyn Suriano, “500 KSC Layoffs Jan. 30 Expected: Budget Shortfall Will Reduce Work Force 10 Percent,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 January 1998; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Latest Round of KSC Layoffs Needs Congressional Scrutiny,” 15 January 1998.)
NASA announced its decision to ground the entire Space Shuttle fleet while technicians continued detailed inspections of the fleet’s wiring. During the first month of inspections, following the discovery that faulty wiring had caused a short circuit during Columbia’s 23 July launch, technicians had located dozens of nicked or exposed wires. Shuttle managers had decided to extend the inspections to allow technicians to examine additional parts of each Shuttle. Technicians had replaced damaged wiring, encased some wires in plastic tubing, added Teflon wrapping to others, and replaced some connectors, to protect the wiring systems against future damage. Manager of the Space Shuttle Program Ronald D. Dittemore explained that the wiring problems “appeared to have been caused by work-related mechanical damage”⎯from being rubbed or stepped on or from having “heavy objects set down on them.” The age of the wiring, normal wear, or vibrations from Shuttle operations did not appear to have caused the damage.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Fleet Is Grounded by Damage to Wiring,” New York Times, 4 September 1999. 219)
NASA announced that, after Space Shuttle Columbia’s return to Earth on the night of 27 July, engineers had found “three little holes” in its right engine nozzle, confirming that the Shuttle had leaked hydrogen fuel during liftoff. The holes, 0.25 inches (0.64 centimeters) in size, had caused the craft to lose up to 5 pounds (2.3 kilograms) of fuel during each second of its 81⁄2-minute climb to orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Confirms Hydrogen Leak in Columbia Shuttle,” 29 July 1999.)
Commander Eileen M. Collins became the first woman to “land a spaceship of any kind, anywhere,” when she guided Space Shuttle Columbia to a safe late night landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, the 12th nighttime touchdown in the Shuttle program’s 95-flight history. A few hours after the landing, NASA confirmed that hydrogen fuel had leaked from one of the craft’s main engines during liftoff on 23 July. Columbia’s mission, lasting just five days, was the shortest planned flight in nine years.(Atlanta Journal (GA), “Shuttle Columbia: Woman Commander Kept Cool During Snafus,” 28 July 1999; Los Angeles Times, “1st Shuttle Led by Woman Lands Safely in Florida,” 28 July 1999.)
NASA announced the selection of two missions as part of its Discovery Program, which had as its objective low-cost, highly focused scientific missions using innovative methods to enhance scientific understanding of the solar system. One of the missions NASA had selected was Dawn, a spacecraft that would orbit the solar system’s two largest asteroids, Vesta and Ceresto, to help scientists understand early planetary formation in the solar system. The other mission, Kepler, was a space-based telescope that would search for Earth-like planets outside of the solar system, to help scientists learn more about planetary formation and the possibility of life on other planets. NASA had selected the missions―both scheduled to launch in 2006―from a pool of 26 proposals made earlier in 2001.(NASA, “NASA Selects Missions To Explore Two Large Asteroids and Search for Earth-Like Planets,” news release 01-254, 21 December 2001; NASA Discovery Program, “Discovery Mission: Kepler,” http://discovery.nasa.gov/kepler.html (accessed 19 December 2008).)
After a one-day delay because of rain, Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-104 landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, having completed its mission successfully. The crew had installed a new hatch, allowing spacewalkers easier access in and out of the ISS. Officially called the ISS Airlock and also known as the Joint Airlock, the new pressurized unit gave ISS spacewalkers a portal that oxygen-nitrogen tanks could quickly pressurize. NASA planned for all future spacewalks on ISS to begin and end at the new site. In addition to installing the airlock, Atlantis’s crew delivered to the ISS the EarthKAM, a new camera that U.S. high school and middle school students could direct from the ground, enabling them to take pictures of some 2,000 points of interest on Earth, thus, participating in ISS research.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573; Washington Post, “Shuttle Lands After Extra Day in Space,” 25 July 2001.)
Engineers at NASA’s KSC completed the installation of a new main engine for Space Shuttle Atlantis. Modifications of previous engine designs included a new high-pressure fuel turbopump, strengthened and made more durable by a casting process, rather than by welding. During the roughly 81⁄2 minutes that the engines operate during a Shuttle launch, they must perform at temperatures reaching 6,000°F (3,300°C). The improvements continued NASA’s practice of regularly updating the Shuttle’s components.(NASA, “New Main Engine Promises Even Safer Shuttle Ride,” news release 01-79, 26 April 2001.)
NASA launched Space Shuttle Discovery STS-105/ISS-7A.1 at 4:10 p.m. Central Daylight Time (CDT). Shuttle crew consisted of Mission Commander Scott J. Horowitz, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, Mission Specialists Daniel T. Barr and Patrick G. Forrester; and Expedition 3 crew members, Frank L. Culbertson Jr., Vladimir N. Dezhurov, and Mikhail Tyurin. One of the main purposes of the mission was to transport the Expedition 3 crew to the ISS, returning Expedition 2 crew members to Earth. Another objective was to use an Italian-built, 9,000-pound (4,100-kilogram) Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM) called Leonardo to deliver supplies to the ISS. Leonardo would deliver six resupply stowage racks, four resupply stowage platforms, and two scientific experiment racks for the station’s laboratory. Discovery’s payload also included NASA’s scientific project, the Materials International Space Station Experiments (MISSE).(NASA, “STS-105: A New Crew Arrives at the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts-105/ (accessed 7 November 2008); NASA KSC, “STS-105,” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-105/mission-sts-105.html (accessed 7 November 2008).)
NASA announced the first significant group of awards for its Space Launch Initiative (SLI)a program dedicated to finding safer and more cost-effective modes of sending humans into space. NASA’s SLI board had awarded a total of US$767 million in contracts to 22 groups. NASA clarified that the purpose of the contracts was to find a long-term solution to replace the costly Shuttle program. Therefore, NASA intended that grantees focus on conceptual designs rather than on vehicle specifics. NASA had designed the program to facilitate the development of a new space vehicle by the middle of the 21st century. Those receiving the funds had to meet ambitious standards; NASA wanted awardees to design a craft that would be 10 times safer than the Space Shuttle, with 100 times higher rates of crew survival, at a 10th of the cost of the current Shuttle program. The SLI board had consulted more than 100 experts to determine which proposals should receive funding.(Marshall Star (NASA MSFC), “NASA Awards $767 Million in SLI Contracts,” 24 May 2001, 1, 6; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Begins Bid To Improve Its Launchings,” New York Times, 18 May 2001.)
NASA awarded a US$1.14 billion contract to the Boeing Company’s Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power division for maintenance and support of the Space Shuttle’s main engine during the ensuing five years. Under the terms of the contract, Rocketdyne was to provide flight and test engineering; engine refurbishment; and manufacture, assembly, test, and delivery of three additional Space Shuttle main engines. The contract also required Rocketdyne to provide engineering support for NASA’s main engine facilities at NASA’s KSC and SSC. From 1972 until the company signed the contract, Rocketdyne had assembled 106 main engines for NASA’s Shuttles.(NASA, “NASA Awards $1.14 Billion Space Shuttle Main Engine Contract to Boeing Rocketdyne,” news release c02-h, 3 May 2002.)
NASA announced that it would delay the selection of designs for the RLV that would replace the Space Shuttle under the US$4.8 billion SLI program. NASA had planned to select a pool of proposed designs in November 2002, eventually limiting the pool to two designs before 2006. However, a NASA official said that NASA had slowed the selection process while awaiting the results of studies on various unresolved issues with the SLI program. The results of those studies could affect the program’s objectives, as well as the design of the RLV that NASA planned.(Gwyneth K. Shaw, “NASA Taps Brakes on Shuttle Replacement,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 October 2002.)
Scientists from NASA’s JPL announced the release of high-resolution topographic data of the continental United States acquired during the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) on Space Shuttle Endeavour in February 2000. Project scientists planned to process the digital- elevation-model (DEM) data, sampled at an interval of one measurement every 30 meters (98 feet), into the most detailed three-dimensional topographic maps ever made of Earth. The SRTM data would eventually include 1 trillion measurements, representing nearly 80 percent of Earth’s landmass between 60° north and 56° south of the equator, a mapped area in which nearly 95 percent of the world’s population resides. SRTM project scientists anticipated that the maps produced from the mission would provide the most valuable and universally beneficial data produced by any scientific mission. Scientists would be able to use the data in applications ranging from flood control to transportation and urban planning.(NASA, “Pictures from the Real Edge: NASA Posts U.S. Topography Data,” news release 02-15, 22 January 2002.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 lifted off at 4:44 p.m. (EST) from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The object of STS-110/ISS Assembly Flight 8A was to attach to the ISS a 43-foot-long (13-meter-long) truss structure called the Starboard Zero (S Zero or S0). The mission’s payload included several science payloads, the S0 Truss, and the Mobile Transporter (MT). NASA had designed the MT to move the completed truss and to act as a work platform for a mechanical arm, which the crew would install in the future. The crew included Mission Commander Michael J. Bloomfield and astronauts Stephen N. Frick, Lee M. E. Morin, Ellen Ochoa, Jerry L. Ross, Steven L. Smith, and Rex J. Walheim.(NASA, “Framework for Expanding Station Research: STS-110,” press kit, 20 March 2001, http://www.shuttlepresskit.com/STS-110/spk-110.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008); William Harwood, “Shuttle on Haul to Space Station,” Washington Post, 9 April 2002.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:22 a.m. (EST). Weather, mechanical issues, and other concerns had prompted NASA to postpone Columbia’s launch several times, from its original launch date of 19 November 2001. Officially designated STS-109, the mission’s objective was to service the HST, the fourth such mission (designated Mission SM3B) for the HST. The payload consisted of various technology updates for the HST, including a new camera and solar arrays. In addition, Columbia carried seven crew members: Mission Commander Scott D. Altman and astronauts Duane G. Carey, Nancy J. Currie, John M. Grunsfeld, Richard M. Linnehan, Michael J. Massimino, and James H. Newman.(NASA, “STS-109,” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-109/mission-sts-109.html (accessed 10 August 2008); William Harwood, “Cooling Glitch Mars Shuttle’s Hubble Trip,” Washington Post, 2 March 2002. 197 Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002”; ESA, “Envisat Overview,” http://www.esa.int/esaEO/SEMWYN2VQUD_index_0_m.html (accessed 10 August 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:27 a.m. (EST). While in orbit, the Shuttle’s crew had performed four spacewalks to connect the S0 Truss to the ISS and to prepare the MTa track-mounted platformfor use. The crew had used the robotic arms of both Atlantis and the ISS to install the truss. STS-110 was the first mission in which the crew had used the ISS’s robotic arm to maneuver crew members around the station as they performed spacewalks. In addition, it was the first mission in which the crew’s base for all of its spacewalks was the ISS’s Quest Airlock. The Shuttle’s crew had also engaged in joint operations with the ISS’s Expedition 4 crew. The total duration of STS-110 was 10 days, 19 hours, and 42 minutes.(NASA, “STS-110 Extravehicular Activities,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-110/eva/index.html (accessed 12 August 2002); NASA, “STS-110: A Framework for Station Expansion,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-110/ (accessed 12 August 2002).)
President George W. Bush released details of NASA’s new Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP) in an amendment to his budget request for FY 2003. The ISTP included a number of changes in NASA’s spaceflight programs that, together, would encompass a comprehensive effort to coordinate NASA’s investments in the ISS, the Space Shuttle program, and the replacement vehicle for the Shuttle. The new plan would provide more resources for completing the assembly of the ISS, as well as an increase in the number of annual Shuttle flights to the ISS. Shuttle flights to the ISS would increase from four to five flights annually, enabling transport of more researchers and more science-based payloads. Moreover, the ISTP would restructure the Space Launch Initiative (SLI), making the program’s immediate objective the development of the Orbital Space Plane (OSP), rather than development of a replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. The OSP, which would be smaller than the Shuttle, would function as both the crew transport vehicle and the emergency escape vehicle for the ISS, and NASA would use the Shuttles for heavy cargo delivery. NASA stressed that, although the ISTP would change NASA’s five-year budget plan, the program’s costs would remain within the original FY 2003 budget.(NASA, “NASA’s Integrated Space Transportation Plan Released,” news release 02-220, 13 November 2002; Warren E. Leary, “NASA To Delay Decision on Shuttle Replacement,” New York Times, 14 November 2002.)
NASA released two reports of an audit conducted by the independent firm Pricewaterhouse- Coopers, noting several problems with NASA’s system of financial management and record keeping. In one report, PricewaterhouseCoopers stated that NASA had not provided auditors with timely and sufficient documentary evidence of its financial transactions. Thus, auditors could not determine the accuracy and completeness of NASA’s reported financial obligations, expenses, and equipment, including those related to the ISS and Space Shuttle programs. The audit did not state that waste or fraud characterized NASA’s financial management; rather, the report concluded that NASA’s incomplete financial records obviated any definitive assessment of its finances. In the second report, the auditors enumerated several problems with NASA’s internal controls over financial reporting, but also stated that they would not provide an opinion on the merit of those internal controls.(Karen Masterson and Mark Carreau, “NASA Bookkeeping in Disarray,” Houston Chronicle, 1 March 2002; PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Report of Independent Accountants” (report, Washington, DC, 22 February 2002), http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/oig/hq/igfy01fsaudit.pdf (accessed 5 August 2008); PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Report of Independent Accountants on Internal Control” (report, Washington, DC, 22 February 2002), http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/oig/hq/lrreport022602.pdf (accessed 5 August 2008).)
The CAIB held its final public hearing, moving its focus beyond the cause of the disaster to a probe of the overall state of NASA’s management. Witnesses identified several key weaknesses in NASA’s management of its personnel, which could have affected safety issues in the Space Shuttle Program. Allen Li of GAO, which had issued a report in 2001 about NASA workforce issues, noted that NASA had faced substantial challenges in attracting and retaining a highly skilled workforce. Therefore, key areas of NASA’s programs had an insufficient number of qualified workers, and the remainder of the staff showed signs of overwork and fatigue. In response to the 2001 report, NASA had developed new systems for monitoring such issues, and Li said that NASA had made noteworthy progress. However, NASA was still requesting congressional approval of personnel reforms that would help ameliorate the situation, reforms that would give NASA the authority to streamline the hiring process and the ability to offer larger recruitment and retention bonuses. Marcia S. Smith of the Congressional Research Service provided the CAIB with a history of NASA’s budget situation but remarked that the CAIB would have difficulty tying budgetary changes directly to safety issues and Shuttle operations. Russell D. Turner, the former CEO of the prime contractor for Shuttle operations, United Space Alliance, defended the work of the firms involved in the Space Shuttle Program.(Tom Shoop, “NASA Needs Management Overhaul, Shuttle Investigators Told,” Government Executive, 13 June 2003.)
The NASA Accident Investigation Team (NAIT) presented to the CAIB the results of its ongoing analysis of the Columbia disaster. Ten members of the CAIB were either present or listening via telephone, and 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel participated in the private briefing. The CAIB indicated that the Space Shuttle Program required more work in four areas―aerothermal analysis, foam-impact testing, testing of flown RCC panels, and metallurgical analysis from debris. According to the CAIB, NAIT had “provided an overview of the latest data-recorder information, and the CAIB issued its guidance based on that data and board investigators’ continuing analysis of the latest orbiter debris.”(William Harwood, “NASA, CAIB Investigators Compare Notes on Disaster,” Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003. 424 Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Next Shuttle Crew Named as Columbia Probe Proceeds,” 25 April 2003.)
NASA released to the public recovered photographs and video that Columbia’s crew had taken during its mission in January. The CAIB had determined that the material was not relevant to their investigation into the Shuttle’s demise. The imagery included nearly 10 hours of recovered video and 92 photographs. The Shuttle had carried 337 videotapes, of which 28 had recoverable footage, and 137 rolls of film, of which only 21 contained recoverable photographs. Search-and- recovery crews had located more than 84,000 pieces of debris.(NASA, “New Space Shuttle Columbia Images Released,” news release 03-212, 24 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03212_columbia_images.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
NASA released documents showing that the Columbia accident was not the first time that superheated gas had invaded an orbiter’s wing when it reentered Earth’s atmosphere. The documents showed that in 2000 Atlantis had entered orbit with a 0.25-inch (0.64-centimeter) breach in its wing’s leading edge, allowing plasma to enter the wing during the orbiter’s reentry. The incident had caused only minor damage. Improper insulation installation during Atlantis’s overhaul in 1997 had caused the gap to form. Instead of filling up the gap, the insulation had been “folded up and pushed away,” leaving an exposed cavity.(John Schwartz and Matthew L. Wald, “Earlier Shuttle Flight Had Gas Enter Wing on Return,” New York Times, 9 July 2003.)
Alex Roland, a history professor at Duke University and former NASA historian, and Brian E. Chase, Executive Director of the National Space Society and a former congressional aide, testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space concerning problems in NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. Roland stated that the Shuttle was not sustainable as a safe, reliable, and economical launch vehicle and recommended its phaseout. Roland faulted NASA for ignoring the findings of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission), which had paved the way for the Shuttle to return to flight after the Challenger disaster in 1986. The Rogers Commission had recommended that NASA begin developing a next-generation launch vehicle immediately. However, 16 years later, NASA continued to rely on the Space Shuttle and had no replacement in sight. Chase recommended the short-term maintenance of the remaining Shuttles and endorsed the George W. Bush administration’s plan to develop an Orbital Space Plane (OSP) ready to transport crews to the ISS by 2010. He also recommended that NASA use commercial heavy-lift launch vehicles for hauling cargo to the space station.(Jefferson Morris, “Former NASA Historian Urges Phaseout of Shuttle,” Aerospace Daily, 4 April 2003; Larry Wheeler, “Experts Disagree on Future of Shuttle,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 April 2003.)
Investigators of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident stated that the recently recovered Orbital Experiment Support System, which stored data about temperature, aerodynamic pressure, vibration, and other variables, appeared to contain information up to a fraction of a second before the orbiter broke apart over Texas. Technicians had located a time tag on the tape indicating that it had stored data until 9:00:18 a.m. (EST) on 1 February.
NASA announced that it had settled negotiations with United Space Alliance, increasing the value of its two-year extension of the spaceflight operations contract (SFOC) by US$59.91 million. The finalized SFOC extension supporting the Space Shuttle Program brought the total value of the two-year contract to US$2.90 billion. The extended contract would run through 30 September 2004.(NASA, “NASA Finalizes Contract with United Space Alliance,” news release C03-001, 31 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/contract/2003/c03-001.txt (accessed 15 July 2008).)
NASA released pieces of the debris from Space Shuttle Columbia to a nongovernmental agency for study and testing. The release of the materials was the first implementation of NASA’s new policy for the use of materials from a destroyed Space Shuttle. Henceforth, instead of burying Space Shuttle materials, as it had done after the Challenger accident, NASA would use materials from destroyed Space Shuttles for research. The company that received the partsthe Aerospace Corporation of El Segundo, Californiawas one of several organizations that had requested NASA’s permission to study Columbia’s debris. Under the terms of the release, the company would keep the Shuttle parts for one year, using them to analyze the effect of atmospheric reentry on materials.(NASA, “First Columbia Debris Loaned for Research,” news release 04-165, 20 May 2004; James R. Asker, “In Orbit,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 22 (31 May 2004): 19.)
NASA awarded a US$814 million contract to Hamilton Sundstrand Space Systems International (HSSSI) to provide equipment and services supporting spacewalks performed by Space Shuttle and ISS crew members. Under the contract―formally called the Extravehicular Activity (EVA) Systems Contract―Hamilton Sundstrand would provide EVA hardware, training support, real- time mission support, and other products and services related to spacewalks. The contract had a five-year base period and five additional one-year options.
The GAO released an analysis of NASA’s budgetary outlays for fiscal years 2002 through 2004. Under Pub. L. No. 106-391, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000, GAO was required to verify NASA’s accounting of its funds obligated against established budgetary limits for the ISS and for Space Shuttle support for the ISS. Under the Act, NASA’s obligations were limited to US$25 billion for the ISS and US$17.7 billion for Shuttle support. GAO’s report noted that NASA had not provided sufficient documentation for the amounts it had reported as obligated against budgetary limits. Thus, GAO could not verify the amounts that NASA had reported to Congress in its budget requests for fiscal years 2002 through 2004. Similarly, NASA had not reported any documentation of its FY 2004 budget obligations in its FY 2005 budget request to Congress. NASA officials acknowledged that NASA’s accounting system presented some difficulties for GAO’s auditors, but explained that those difficulties were the result of NASA’s having reported budgetary figures based on the amount it was authorized to spend rather than on the amount it was obligated to spend.(Patty Reinert, “GAO Says Lax Bookkeeping Thwarts Space Agency Audit,” Houston Chronicle, 7 April 2004; U.S. General Accounting Office, “International Space Station and Shuttle Support Cost Limits” (report no. GAO- 04-648R, Washington, DC, 2 April 2004), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04648r.pdf (accessed 19 March 2009). 623 British National Space Centre, “Beagle 2” (report, ESA/UK Commission of Inquiry Swindon, UK, 5 April 2004), http://www.bnsc.gov.uk/assets/channels/resources/press/report.pdf (accessed 31 March 2009), 3–7; ESA, “Beagle 2: Lessons Learned and the Way Forward,” ESA news release 27-2004, 20 May 2004.)
NASA announced its approval of a new design of the particular part of the Space Shuttle that may have critically contributed to Space Shuttle Columbia’s accident. The part―called a bipod fitting―connects a Shuttle’s external fuel tanks to the orbiter during launch. The newly designed bipod fitting eliminated the use of foam covering in favor of four rod-shaped heaters, reducing the risk of falling debris during launch. Investigators believed that the Columbia disaster might have resulted from the impact of insulating foam, which had fallen from the bipod fitting, damaging the orbiter’s left wing. According to NASA, the approval of the redesigned bipod fitting was a significant step in its efforts to resume safe Shuttle flights. Engineers would begin using the new fitting on the external tanks for the next Space Shuttle mission.(NASA, “NASA Approves New Design for Shuttle External Tank Fitting,” news release 04-240, 26 July 2004.)
An independent panel of experts released an interim assessment of NASA’s progress implementing recommendations of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB). The U.S. Congress had chartered the group―formally called the Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG)―to provide independent evaluations of NASA’s progress in meeting the CAIB’s recommendations. The CAIB had enumerated safety and operational practices that NASA must implement before resuming Space Shuttle flights. In its interim assessment, the Task Group stated that NASA had successfully implemented two of the CAIB’s recommendations: to define foreign-object debris and to create computer-accessible digital images of Shuttle hardware, taken at various stages of development and launch preparation. The Task Group would assess NASA’s progress toward satisfying the other CAIB recommendations in future reports.(NASA, “Stafford-Covey Task Group Announces July 22 Public Meeting,” news release N04-108, 19 July 2004; NASA, “Statement of Sean O’Keefe, Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Before the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, United States Senate” (statement of testimony, Washington, DC, 8 September 2004), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf64686main_aok_/ 64686main_aok_ testimony_090804.pdf (accessed 28 April 2009).)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery had reached a major milestone, arriving at Launch Pad 39B at NASA’s KSC in preparation for its Return to Flight Mission, scheduled for 15 May. Over more than two years, Discovery had undergone 41 major modifications in response to the Columbia accident, including the addition of the new sensor system at the far end of the orbiter boom; cameras and laser systems to inspect its thermal protection system while in space; sensors in the leading edge of its wings to monitor for debris impacts; and a new digital camera for viewing the external tank during launch.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Discovery at Launch Pad for Return to Flight,” news release 05-095, 7 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05095_Discovery_Roll_Out.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
NASA announced that it would once again ground the Space Shuttle fleet, because mission personnel had discovered that Shuttle Discovery had experienced a problem similar to the one that had fatally damaged Columbia. Specifically, analysts had discovered that, during launch, Discovery’s external fuel tank had shed portions of foam insulation. At least one of the pieces of insulation had come from the same area of the tank as the foam that had ended the Columbia mission. Although the problem did not affect Discovery’s launch, the Shuttle’s crew had spent much of their first full day in orbit closely examining the orbiter’s exterior to determine the extent of the problem.
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) provided an update on NASA’s efforts to comply with the Columbia Accident Investigation Board’s (the CAIB’s) recommended safety and operational practices for Shuttle launches. The Task Group stated that it had approved NASA’s efforts regarding five of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, bringing the total number of CAIB recommendations with which NASA had complied to 12. Among the five recommendations that NASA had implemented were the installation of cameras on the Shuttle to observe critical events and steps to ensure that budgetary issues and other outside pressures would not influence flight schedules in the future. The Task Group stated further that, although NASA had not yet complied with three of the CAIB recommendations, it saw no circumstances that might prevent NASA’s planned launch of Space Shuttle Discovery in July 2005. The three CAIB recommendations that NASA had not yet implemented were establishing in-orbit repair techniques for the orbiter, preventing catastrophic debris from falling off the orbiter’s fuel tank during launch, and fortifying the orbiter against debris impacts.
NASA announced findings from its investigation into the causes of the foam loss on Discovery’s external tank during the Space Shuttle’s launch in July 2005, a problem similar to the one that had caused the destruction of Space Shuttle Columbia in February 2003. A team of NASA investigators stated that they had uncovered several possible factors that may have caused a 3- foot (0.9-meter) portion of insulating foam to separate from Discovery during launch. They reported that the most likely cause was inadequate methods of applying and repairing the foam on Discovery’s external tank. The investigators stated that workers might have sprayed the foam in a manner that introduced fissures into it and might have crushed the foam while standing on it in the course of conducting the repairs on Discovery. Although the foam debris had not damaged Discovery, the incident had prompted NASA to suspend Shuttle launches until May 2006, so that engineers could identify the problem and correct it.(Guy Gugliotta, “Discovery Launch Is Still On for May,” Washington Post, 15 October 2005. 264)
The joint ESA-NASA Ulysses spacecraft commenced its third passage over the Sun’s south pole, an event that scientists expected would reveal new information about changes in the Sun and the effects of those changes on space. Carried into space in 1990 by the Space Shuttle Discovery, Ulysses was on a mission to explore the heliosphere—the region of space influenced by the Sun and its magnetic field. Data gathered during Ulysses’s orbit of the Sun, once every 6.2 years, was enabling scientists to study the Sun’s 11-year cycle of maximum and minimum solar activity. Moreover, Ulysses had accomplished 17 years of orbit, making it possible for scientists to study the Sun during its entire 22-year magnetic cycle. The spacecraft had first passed over the Sun’s south pole in 1994 and over its north pole in 1995, both passes occurring during a phase of minimum solar activity. Ulysses’s second set of polar passes, in 2000 and 2001, had occurred during a period of maximum solar activity. The spacecraft’s third passage over the Sun’s south pole was occurring during another period of minimum solar activity, but this pass would provide new data because the Sun’s magnetic field had reversed in polarity since the spacecraft’s first passage over the south pole. Ulysses is part of the Heliospheric Network, a spacecraft fleet that includes NASA’s Cassini, the joint ESA-NASA Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), and other spacecraft.(NASA, “NASA-European Spacecraft Swoops Under Sun’s Pole,” http://www.nasa.gov/vision/universe/ solarsystem/ulysses-20070207.html (accessed 14 September 2010); ESA, “Ulysses Embarks on Third Set of Solar Passes,” http://www.esa.int/esaSC/SEMWPIUXJUE_index_0.html (accessed 14 September 2010).)
NASA launched Space Shuttle Atlantis (STS-115) from NASA’s KSC at 11:15 a.m. (EDT). The mission’s principal objective was to deliver and install a girder-like structure to the ISS. That structure, called the Port 3/Port 4 (P3/P4) truss, contained arrays—large, wing-shaped solar panels—designed to increase significantly the station’s power capability. The mission’s crew members included Commander Brent W. Jett Jr., Pilot Christopher J. Ferguson, Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper, Joseph R. Tanner, all U.S. astronauts, and CSA astronaut, Mission Specialist Steven G. MacLean.(NASA, “STS-115,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-115.html (accessed 11 March 2010).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis returned to Earth, landing at NASA’s KSC at 6:21 a.m. (EDT) to complete its 12-day mission (STS-115). During that mission, the crew had resumed construction of the ISS after a four-year hiatus. The mission highlights included three spacewalks to install the P3/P4 truss on the ISS and to prepare new solar panels on that truss for future production of electricity at the orbiting space station.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-115.”)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched at 8:47 p.m. (EST) from NASA’s KSC on Mission STS-116. NASA anticipated that STS-116 would be one of the most complex missions ever made to the ISS. The crew of ISS and Discovery planned to reconfigure the station’s electrical and cooling systems, making the solar arrays that the previous mission (STS-115) had delivered fully operational. In this unprecedented operation, the ISS’s ground control would shut down and reroute the ISS’s power in an iterative process. In addition, crew members would install the P(NASA, “NASA Honors Distinguished Astronomer with Medal,” news release 06-005, 10 January 2006, http://nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06005_Bahcall_AAS_Award.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
Shuttle Commander Frederick W. Sturckow guided Space Shuttle Atlantis through an end-over- end rotational pitch maneuver (RPM), to allow ISS crew to photograph the Shuttle’s fragile heat shield. Atlantis’s Mission STS-117 ended in a trouble-free rendezvous and a flawless docking with the ISS. Since the Columbia tragedy, the RPM had become a routine element of flights to the ISS. ISS Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov shot close- up digital photographs of the craft from inside the ISS, images that NASA engineers would examine to determine the need for additional inspections.(William Harwood, “Atlantis Arrives at the Station After Smooth Rendezvous,” Spaceflight Now, 10 June 2007. 81 NASA, “Rededication of NASA’s Space Power Facility in Sandusky,” news release 07-017, 6 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/news/pressrel/2007/07-017_SPF_Rededication.html (accessed 21 May 2010); Maggie Reid, “Plum Brook To Put New NASA Vehicle to the Test,” Toledo Blade (OH), 12 June 2007.)
NASA announced that it had signed a US$1.2 billion contract with Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne of Canoga Park, California, to design, develop, test, and evaluate the J-2X engine that would power the upper stages of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 launch vehicles. The Ares 1 and Ares 5 would launch the spacecraft that replaced the Space Shuttle. The contract allowed the continuation of the work that had begun in June 2006 under a preliminary letter contract with Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne, extending the performance period through December 2012. The J-2X was an evolved version of two historic predecessors—the J-2 engine, which had propelled the Apolloera Saturn -1B and Saturn-5 rockets, and the J-2S, a simplified version of the J-2 engine that NASA had tested in the 1970s. Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne had designed and developed both of those engines. According to Jeffrey M. Hanley, Manager of NASA’s Constellation Program, NASA had selected Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne without competitive bidding because the company was the only manufacturer that could meet the Ares design requirements and schedule goals.(NASA, “NASA Awards Upper Stage Engine Contract for Ares Rockets,” news release C07-030, 16 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_C07030_J2X_Contract.html (accessed 8 June 2010); Mark Carreau, “NASA Seals Deal on New Engine for Moon Rocket,” Houston Chronicle, 17 July 2007.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at NASA’s KSC after completing a 15-day mission to the ISS. Highlights of STS-120 included the successful delivery of the Node 2 module called Harmony, which would provide attachment points for future European and Japanese laboratories; the relocation of a solar array and truss to its permanent position, a move that required two spacewalks; and an unprecedented spacewalk to repair damage to the newly relocated solar array, which had failed to deploy properly.(NASA, “Shuttle Discovery Crew Returns Home After Successful Mission,” news release 07-249, 7 November 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/nov/HQ_07249_STS-120_Discovery_landing.html (accessed 20 October 2010); John Schwartz, “Eventful 15-Day Mission for Shuttle Discovery Ends,” New York Times, 8 November 2007.)
SPACEHAB announced that, at the end of October, the company had completed a formal systems requirements review for its Advanced Research and Conventional Technology Utilization Spacecraft (ARCTUS). The company was developing ARCTUS for NASA’s COTS program under an unfunded Space Act Agreement. SPACEHAB had designed ARCTUS to deliver and return pressurized cargo to and from low-Earth orbit, in support of NASA’s requirement to fill the ISS cargo-transport gap following the retirement of the Space Shuttle. NASA had scheduled the Space Shuttle program to end in 2010.(Bettina Haymann Chavanne, “Spacehab Finishes COTS Vehicle Review,” Aviation Week, 21 November 2007. 173 Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Astronauts Take Spacewalk,” 21 November 2007; Mark Carreau, “Much Accomplished During Spacewalk: Astronauts Get the Space Station Ready To Receive European Module,” Houston Chronicle, 21 November 2007.)
The ISS crew detached the 34,500-pound (15,649-kilogram) Harmony module from its temporary location and moved it to its permanent location at the front of the laboratory complex. ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson worked from a computer inside the Destiny module, sending commands to release 16 motorized bolts and to detach Harmony from its mounting point. Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani then operated the robotic arm slowly, to move Harmony and to position the module at the front of Destiny. The operation, the most significant relocation of a module ever conducted in the absence of a Space Shuttle, took a little over an hour to complete. The relocation of Harmony prepared the ISS to receive the European Columbus module, scheduled to arrive in December 2010, and the Japanese laboratory, scheduled to arrive in 2011.
NASA announced that it had developed a new wireless tile scanner and was using it to inspect Space Shuttles before launch, looking for cracks and other imperfections. NASA intended for the new method to replace manual inspection of Space Shuttles. Wireless scanner inspections had begun on Endeavour, scheduled to launch to the ISS on 8 August. Technicians were using six new scanners, designed and built at NASA’s ARC in California, to check for problems in some of the 24,000 tiles covering Endeavour. Instead of using small hand-held scales to measure dents and cracks and to estimate the volume of flaws to a worst-case value, the technicians were able to use the new devices to scan flaws and to archive the data. The scanner’s software measured the archived data to determine accurately the depth and volume of flaws and their locations, allowing engineers to examine three-dimensional images of the flaws. NASA had developed the same technology further, to create a larger, desktop version of the scanner. NASA was using the larger version to study samples of material for the heat shield that was under development for Orion.(NASA, “NASA Develops Wireless Tile Scanner for Space Shuttle Inspection,” news release 07-171, 7 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07171_Shuttle_Tile_Scanner.html (accessed 14 June 2010).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from NASA’s KSC on STS-118 for an ISS assembly mission. STS-118 crew included Commander Scott J. Kelly; Pilot Charles O. Hobaugh; Mission Specialists Tracy E. Caldwell, Richard A. Mastracchio, Barbara R. Morgan, Benjamin A.
NASA named Macro-Fiber Composite (MFC), a device that acts like muscle and nerves to expand and contract surfaces, as the 2006 NASA Government Invention of the Year. A team of researchers at NASA’s LaRC had created the flexible material using ceramic fibers. Voltage applied to the MFC made the ceramic fibers change shape and expand or contract, causing material to bend or twist. The device had industrial and research applications, primarily for vibration monitoring and dampening. The MFC had improved research on helicopter rotor blades and assisted in detecting pipeline cracks. NASA had used the MFC to monitor the vibrations of support structures near the Space Shuttle launchpads during launches.(NASA, “NASA Names New Composite Government Invention of the Year,” news release 07-287, 21 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07287_Invention_of_the_Year.html (accessed 20 October 2010).)
NASA announced that it had signed a contract with ATK for the design, development, testing, and evaluation of the first stage of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 launch vehicles. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, which would replace the current Space Shuttle fleet. NASA intended to use Ares 5, a heavy-lift launch vehicle, to launch a variety of payloads for science and exploration activities. ATK planned to develop the Ares-1 first stage as a five-segment SRB, basing it on the four-segment design that the company had used for the Space Shuttle. The company planned to draw on current hardware, facilities, and manufacturing equipment qualified for human-rated SRBs. The contract, valued at US$1.8 billion, continued work that had begun in April 2006 under a temporary agreement, extending the performance period through December 2014. It included the delivery of five ground-static-test motors, two ground-vibration-test articles, and four flight-test stages.(NASA, “NASA Awards First Stage Contract for Ares Rockets,” contract release C07-36, 10 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_C07036_Ares_first_stage.html (accessed 14 June 2010); Edmond Lococo, “Alliant Techsystems Wins $1.8 Billion NASA Contract,” Bloomberg, 11 August 2007.)
SPACEHAB announced that it had filed for a formal dismissal, with prejudice, of all litigation against NASA relating to losses incurred because of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident in 2003. SPACEHAB stated that the potential benefits of continuing litigation no longer outweighed the benefits of the case’s dismissal. At the time of the Columbia accident, NASA had been SPACEHAB’s largest customer. SPACEHAB had initiated a contract claim against NASA in January 2004, seeking US$87.7 million in damages for the loss of its Research Double Module (RDM). Claiming that its liability was limited under the contract, NASA had paid SPACEHAB US$8.2 million, including interest, in October 2004. SPACEHAB had filed an appeal with the Armed Services Board of Contract Appeals, and the two parties had proceeded with preparations for a hearing, which the court had scheduled for July 2008. SPACEHAB had also filed a tort claim in November 2004, seeking US$79.7 million in additional damages, but the court had granted a motion in June 2006 to stay the case until resolution of the contract claim appeal. Dismissal of the claim required SPACEHAB to pay US$500,000 to Lloyd’s of London, the RDM insurer.(SPACEHAB, “SPACEHAB Dismisses RDM Claim with NASA,” news release, 21 February 2007, http://www. spacehab.com/news-and-events/news/spacehab-dismisses-rdm-claim-with-nasa (accessed 13 January 2010); Houston Business Journal, “Spacehab Drops Suit Against NASA,” 21 February 2007.)
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) released a report assessing the implications of possible delays in the retirement of the Space Shuttle and the commencement of Constellation Program flights. The report determined that NASA had a 20 to 60 percent probability of being able to fly the 10 scheduled Space Shuttle missions in the next two years. CBO had studied the gap in NASA’s ability to launch human spaceflight after the retirement of the Space Shuttle and had determined that a one-year delay in the retirement of the SSP would result in a corresponding one-year delay in initial flights of the Constellation Program. Furthermore, CBO had found that that the gap could grow longer if NASA proved unable to meet the technological challenges of developing the Ares and Orion vehicles. Based on an analysis of 72 past NASA programs, CBO estimated that the cost growth of the Constellation Program would be approximately 50 percent and that the program would require as much as US$7 billion more than NASA had budgeted. Therefore, if NASA did not have real growth in its budgetary allocation, the additional costs could delay the initial operating capability for Ares I and Orion by as much as 18 months. CBO projected that funding of the Constellation Program would increase after 2013; however, CBO also reported that NASA had determined that additional funding would not change the date that the Ares and Orion vehicles would reach initial operation capability.(Becky Iannotta, “Report: Space Shuttle Retirement Date in Jeopardy,” Space.com, 4 November 2008, http://www.space.com/6062-report-space-shuttle-retirement-date-jeopardy.html (accessed 25 August 2011); U.S. Congressional Budget Office, “An Analysis of NASA’s Plans for Continuing Human Spaceflight After Retiring the Space Shuttle (report, Washington, DC, November 2008), http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/98xx/doc9886/11-03-NASA_ Letter.pdf (accessed 25 August 2011).)
NASA announced that it had signed a Space Act Agreement with Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, for a contract to develop a commercial launch system that would be capable of ferrying cargo and crew to the ISS. NASA had funded the contract, worth US$170 million, under the Commercial Orbital Transportation Services Project (COTS), an initiative designed to encourage private enterprise to create space transport systems that would be available for use after the retirement of the Space Shuttle. NASA had collaborated with seven other corporations through COTS, including SpaceX of El Segundo, California, the only other company to receive NASA funding.(NASA, “NASA Partners with Orbital Sciences for Space Transport Services,” news release 08-058, 19 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/HQ_08058_COTS_Selection.html (accessed 28 December 2010); Brian Berger, “Orbital Wins $171 Million Space Station Re-Supply Demo Deal,” Space.com, 19 February 2008, http://www.space.com/4995-orbital-wins-171-million-space-station-supply-demo-deal.html (accessed 14 January 2011).)
NASA announced the retirement of David A. King, Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. King was retiring from NASA to accept a position in the private sector, effective immediately. NASA appointed Robert M. Lightfoot, MSFC Deputy Director, to serve as Acting Director until the appointment of a successor. King’s departure ended a NASA career that had begun in 1983 at KSC, where he had served as Director of Space Shuttle Processing and Shuttle Launch Director. King had served as Director of MSFC since June 2003.
