NASA  SP-4005 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D  
A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4  

C h r o n o l o g y   o n   S c i e n c e , T e c h n o l o g y ,   a n d   P o l i c y  

Prepared   by  the  NASA   H istor ica l   Staff ,  
Office  of  Po l i c y   P lann ing  

Scientific and  Technical Information Division 
1 9 6 5  
N A T I O N A L   A E R O N A U T I C S   A N D   S P A C E   A D M I N I S T R A T I O N  
Washington, D .  C .  

~ 
FOR   SALE   BY  THE   SUPERINTENDENT  OF  DOCUMENTS .   U S .  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE 
WASHINGTON .  D.C..  20402 - PR IC E   11.75 

Foreword 

The  year  1964,  the  seventh of  the  space age,  was  a  year  6: achievement, 
especially in  space science.  It was  also a  building year  in which many com- 
ponents  and  techniques basic  to  manned  flight  capability  were  proved  out. 
Because of  the foundations laid in  1964, we  can proceed with  more  sureness 
toward  the long-duration manned missions, culminating with  the moon  land- 
ing, scheduled fo r  the coming years. 
The dramatic flight of  RANGER VII  leads the list of  accomplishments. 
Before 
crashing  into  the moon,  the  satellite snapped more  than  4,000  photographs 
of  its surface.  Many  of  the pictures were  of  such  high  resolution  that  they 
amounted  to   a  thousand-fold  improvement  over  the  best  taken  by  earth- 
mounted telescopes.  MARINER IV  is well started  on  its long journey to Mars. 
Early in  its flight, it was ordered to perform an intricate midcourse maneuver. 
The  spacecraft  followed  its  instructions to  the letter;  and  barring  accident it 
will pass within 5,400 miles of  its objective a s  planned. 
NIMBUS I, the first of  the second generation of  meteorological satellites, func- 
tioned long enough to demonstrate tha t  its TV cameras and infrared scanners 
could provide day and night weather coverage fa r  superior to that supplied by 
its predecessors. 
The data produced by these and the numerous other investigations of  space 
noted in this chronology were sent to  more than 2,300 scientists and engineers 
in  more  than  a  hundred  university  laboratories  and  space centers for  study 
and  analysis.  These  researchers  a re   thus  obtaining  a  broader  and  deeper 
scientific and technical base  for their  future  activities.  Scientists and  engi- 
neers not  in  space-related work  benefit  from  the  creation  of  a  facility  that 
permits storage and retrieval of  data resulting from space experiments. 
The buildup of  the national capability in advanced research and technology 
in the area of  aeronautics and  astronautics has been more  rapid  than  in  any 
previous period. 
As  this  chronology shows, many  of  the  basic  components and  techniques 
required  for manned  flight were proved  out  during 1964.  The seventh  suc- 
cessful  test launch  of  the Saturn  I booster  paved  the way  to  the  next  phase 
of  the Apollo project.  More particularly,  it assured that  this booster’s more 
powerful successors, the  Saturn  I  and  the  Saturn  V,  can  be  relied  upon  to 
discharge their appointed roles in the lunar landing program. 
Centaur passed the half-way mark  on its way to operational status. 
Aloqg 
with the other test activities, the Centaur flights proved that  the use of  liquid 
hydrogen as an engine fuel had been mastered. 
The  unmanned  Gemini capsule  testing  was  completed  except  for  a  h a 1  
ballistic shot to determine the ability  of  the heat  shield to withstand the tem- 
peratures  generated  by  high-speed  reentry.  The  way  was  thus  opened  to 
proceed in 1965 with manned flights, to practice rendezvous and docking, and 
to  undertake  long-duration  orbital  missions.  Such  missions  will  provide 
essential information  on the effect of  weightlessness and other  aspects of  the 
m 

IV 

FOREWORD 

space environment  on  the  human  organism.  Additionally,  the  checkout  of 
many of  the components,  stages, and subsystems that will go into the Saturns, 
the Apollo capsule, and the LEM was finished. 
The construction of new ground facilities for housing, handling,  and launch- 
ing  the  giant  boosters  t o   come was  well  advanced.  Progress was  made  in 
expanding Cape Kennedy to  meet the future needs of  the program. 
During 1964, good headway was made in focusing the resources needed for 
the execution of  the Apollo program and other manned missions.  Some 1,600 
prime  contractors  and  thousands  of  subcontractors  went  forward  with  the  
design, production,  and test  of  a  variety of  equipment made fo r  ground test- 
ing.  ’  NASA’s  comprehensive system of  ground-testing  was  largely  completed. 
In   this  system,  many  aspects of  the space environment  are  simulated  on the 
ground,  giving  us  a  capability  to   subject  the  equipment  to  conditions  that 
will be encountered in flight and thus to  uncover difiiculties and find solutions 
for  them before flight testing begins. 
This  has  a  double  significance. 
I n   the  coming  months,  equipment  will 
be  coming  off  the  production  line  in  greatly  increased  volume,  imposing  a 
heavy  requirement  fo r   testing  which  we  will  be  able  to  meet.  Secondly, 
the  problems  that  the  simulated  environmental  testing  uncovers,  the  need 
for  alterations or  improvements  that  are   revealed,  can  be  quickly  fed  back 
to the production  lines so that what has been  learned can be promptly  applied 
to equipment in the process of  fabrication. 
As a  result, when  the flight-test stage is reached we  have  greater assurance 
that the flight equipment  delivered by  the contractors will perform  according 
to specifications and that we can execute the missions that have been scheduled. 
Our  experience  with  ground  simulation  of  the  space environment  has  also 
supplied  information which- has  enabled  u s  to  upgrade  equipment  so  that  i t  
will  outperform  its design  specifications.  Because  of  this system  of  ground 
testing, the thrust of  some of  the new boosters has been substantially increased. 
Improved  manqgement  techniques  which  enhance  the  effectiveness of  the 
all-up system wherein  the complete unit  is tested a t   once have  been  put  into 
effect.  Configuration  control has  been  tightened  t o  ensure that  systems and 
subsystems are  compatible  and that  design  requirements  are met. 
These  and  other  significant  improvements  were  made  in  NASA’s  overall 
management  system  for   the  production  and  flight  of  very  large  and  very 
complex  rockets  and  spacecraft.  I n  many  ways  this  system  is now  further 
advanced than  any previously developed on a n  equivalent scale. 
The sum  of  this chronology  is an  encouraging  increase in our  space capa- 
bilities  and  experience.  The  developments  cited  herein  are   proof  that  the 
space effort is moving forward on a broad front a t  a steadily accelerating pace. 
These  facts  give  assurance  that  the  National  requirement  of  preeminence 
in space will be met. 
ROBERT C.  SEAMANS, JR., 
Associate  Administrator. 

Contents 

Preface 

This chronology  is a  first step in  the historical process of  documenting the 
dynamic  and  complex  undertaking  of  space  exploration  and  exploitation. 
I t   was  prepared  from  open  public  sources  to  provide  a  ready  reference for 
current  use  as  well  as  for  future analysts and historians.  This  chronicle of 
the  seventh  year  of  the  Space  Age  also will  assist  other  scholars,  students, 
and  writers. As  the years  pass perhaps  its value may  actually increase. 
Previous volumes  in  this  series may  be  of  interest  to  new  readers.  They 
are: 
Aeronautics  and  Astronautics,  1915-1960  (Washington:  NASA,  1961, 
available from Supt.  of  Documents,  GPO,  $1.75). 
@ 
*  Aeronautical and  Astronautical Events  of  1961  (published  by the House 
Committee on  Science and  Astronautics,  June  1963, available  from 
Supt.  of  Documents, GPO,  $1.50). 
Astronautics and  Aeronautics, 1963  (Washington:  NASA,  1964, SP40M ,  
available from Supt. of  Documents, GPO,  $2.00). 
In   the  preparation  of  Astronautics and  Aeronautics, 1964, Dr.  Frank  W .  
Anderson,  Assistant  NASA  Historian,  carried  major  responsibility.  Mrs. 
Helen  T. Wells  drafted the  bulk  of  the  text  and  also  prepared the  list  of  ab- 
breviations.  In  the last  two months of  the year,  the Science and Technology 
Division  of  the  Library  of  Congress  took  over  responsibility  for  the  text. 
Miss  Nancy  Ebert  (ATSP) prepared  the  index, while  Miss  Sara  Corbett  was 
responsible  for   preparation  of  the  copy,  ably  assisted  by  Dema  Nappier 
(A F E E - 1 ) .   Lloyd  Robbins  and  Creston  ‘Whiting  (ATSS-T) 
continued  to 
provide  timely  translations  of  Russian  materials.  Center  historians  and 
historical  monitors  were  helpful  in  validating  material  as  well  as  providing 
items.  Without the comments of  busy scientific and technical personnel, th is  
volume  would  have  been  much  the  poorer. 
Appendix A,  “Satellites, Space Probes, and Manned Space Flights -1964,” 
was  prepared  by  Dr.  Anderson,  as  was  Appendix  B,  “Major  NASA  Launch- 
ings, 1964.”  As historical documentation and analysis are  dynamic processes, 
comments and  criticism are  welcomed a t  any time. 

EUGENE M.  EMME 
N A S A   Historian  ( A P P H )  
O f ice  of  Policy Planning 
V I I  

January  19M 
January  1:  NASA  position  paper  on  DOD’S  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory, 
embodying  eight  principles  of  NASA  policy  toward  the  MOL,  was  made 
public.  The paper  stated: 
“The  DOD  Manned  Orbital  Laboratory  is  a  single  military  project 
( a   specific  goal;  not  a  broad  program)  within  the  overall  National 
Space Program.  . . . 
“The  MOL  should  not  be  construed  as   the  national  space  station,  a 
separate  program  currently  under  joint  study  by  NASA  and  the  DOD. 
Such  a  space  station  project  would  be  considered  under  the  terms  of 
the Webb/McNamara  agreement  on manned  orbital research and devel- 
opment  systems  larger  than  Gemini  and  Apollo.  The  MOL  is,  rather, 
a  specific experimental  test bed  utilizing NASA’s Gemini project and  the 
Titan  111  for  certain  potential  military  space  applications  not  within 
the  scope  of  NASA’s activities.  . . .”  (Text;  Simons,  Wash.  Post, 
1/2/64,1;  A&A ,  2/64,90;  A F  Mag.,  74 )  
*  Head designer of  Soviet spacecraft, name not  identified, was  interviewed in 
Izvestiu.  His predictions for the next  five years:  “. . . permanently  op- 
erating orbital  stations  consisting  of  sputniks  having  various purposes 
weather,  monitoring  the  radiation  conditions  in  space,  etc.;  . . . an 
such as providing  service in investigating the Earth, the Sun, forecasting 
all-purpose radio  and  TV system  for  transmitting through  space,  with 
the  aid  of  the  so-called ‘hanging’  (‘stationary’)  satellites;  . . . ways  of 
using  space  . . . for mail-freight deliveries, requiring  high  speed, and 
finally  passenger  service;  . . . permanent  orbiting  stations  [where] 
regular  shifts  of  scientific  workers  of  the  most  diversified  specialties 
will  live  and  work.  . . .  In   general,  during  this  period  flights  into 
near  space and  return to Earth will  become very  commonplace.  I think 
that  in  the  next  five  years, many  comrades  will  sojourn  in  space.” 
Regarding  “direct  investigations  in  the  region  of  the Moon  and  on 
its  surface,”  the  designer  said:  “In  all  likelihood,  in  the  imminent 
years  such studies can  be  accomplished only with  the a id  of  small auto- 
(Zzvestia, 
matic  devices  transmitting  the  data  to  Earth  by  radio.” 
1/1/64,1,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
Two mathematicians  a t  Lawrence Radiation  Laboratory of  Univ.  of  Calif. 
achieved  first  accurate description  of  the orbit of  Mars,  Univ.  of Calif. 
announced.  The  mathematicians,  Joseph  L.  Brady  and  Edna  Vienop, 
calculated  the  planet’s  orbit  w i th   aid  of  computers  used  to  develop 
nuclear  weapons.  Brady  said  calculation  left  Mercury  as   the  solar 
(AP, 
system’s  only  planet  without  accurate  description  of  its  orbit. 
Wash. Post,  1/2/64,  A3 )  
Beginning of  cable circuit connecting New York and Offenbach, West Ger- 
many, announced by Dr. Robert M. White, Chief of  U S .  Weather Bureau, 
f o r  exchange of meteorological information  between North America and 
Inauguration  of  cable  circuit,  expected  to  yield  improved 
Europe. 
1 

2 

ASTRONAU’M.C!S  A N D   AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  

reception  of  weather  data  because  of  freedom  from  radio  propagation 
occurring on  radioteletypewriter circuit,  represented  major  achievement 
in  global  exchange  of  weather  information. 
International  meteorolo- 
gical  community  now  was  planning  for  future  exchanges  using  high- 
speed  computers  and  communications  satellites. 
(Commerce  Dept. 
Release  WB  Sal) 
January  1 : Fiftieth  anniversary  of  first  scheduled  airline  flight,  from  St. 
Petersburg  to   Tampa,  Fla.,  by  Benoist  flying boat.  Plane  made  two 
round-trip flights daily,  six  days per  week  across Tampa  Bay.  18-mi. 
flights took  2 hrs. by steamer, 6 hrs. by car  and  12  hrs. by rail.  During  ‘ 
50th  year  (1963) , U S .   scheduled  airlines  carried  71,418,000  revenue 
(Aerospace, Summer  1964) 
passengers  50,361,300,000 mi. 
January  2 :   NASA  Deputy Administrator  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  appearing on 
CBS radio  program  “Capitol  Cloakroom,”  said  tha t   before  U S .   and 
U.S.S.R.  could  cooperate  in  a  manned  space  flight effort,  the  U.S.S.R. 
would  have  to  radically  change  its secrecy policy  in  space  exploration. 
Some changes might  be  required  in U S .   space policies also.  “To  con- 
duct cooperative manned  flights,”  Dr.  Dryden  said, “I think you’d  have 
to  . . . start  from  the  beginning  with  a  joint  team  to  consider  all  the 
problems  together.”  Regarding  U.S.4.J.S.S.R.  agreements  reached  on 
weather  satellites, communications  satellites, and magnetic  field studies, 
Dr.  Dryden  commented  that  “implementation  of  the  agreements  has 
been  proceeding  rather slowly.  . . . We hope they’ll  give u s  some clear 
indication  as  to  whether  they  are   ready  to  exchange  cloud  pictures  in 
1964,  or   not.” 
Regarding  Project  Apollo  timetable,  Dr.  Dry den  said  that  if  Con- 
gress supported the proposed  budget  for the project i t  should be possible 
to   land  a  man  on  the  moon  by  1970.  However,  two  year’s  ccslackyy 
built  into  the  schedule  to  allow  for  contingencies was  lost  by  the  FY 
(UPI,  N .Y .  Her.  Tr ib . ,   1/3/64;  Wilson,  Min- 
1964, budget  reduction. 
neapolis  Morning  Tr ib . ,   1/3/M) 
*  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  said  in   article  fo r   The  Journal  of  the  Na- 
tional  Education Association: 
“The  nation  that  has  the  schools has   the  future.  No  less  than  our 
rocket thrusts  into outer space, there  is urgently needed  a  national  edu- 
cation  thrust  of  massive proportions that  will  help  u s  master  the prob- 
lems of  o u r  age. 
. . . figuratively and physically we  are building not  only  a pathway 
CL 
to   the  stars  but  also-hopefully-bridges 
of  understanding  here  on 
earth. 
“It is here on earth that ou r  task begins.  And for that task, the educa- 
tion  attainments  of  our  fellow  Americans  are,  in  some  categories,  far  
less than they should be.  . . .”  (AP, NYT ,  1/3/64,  21) 
Rep.  George P.  Miller  (D.-Calif.) , Chairman  of  House Committee on  Sci- 
ence  and  Astronautics,  announced  agreement  with  National  Academy 
of  Sciences that  the  academy  would  serve  a s  adviser  to  the  Cong rm .  
I n   recent  years  NAS,  created  a  century  ago  by  act  of  Congress,  has 
established  active  working  relationship  with  Executive  Branch.  To- 
day’s  agreement  was  to  establish  similar  relationship  with  the  Con- 
gress.  Agreement  was  result  of  recommendation  by  Subcommittee  on 
Science, Research  and  Development,  chaired  by  Rep.  Emilio  Q .  Dad- 
dario  (D.-Conn.) , which has   been  investigating relationship  of  science 

3 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 
(Finney,  NYT,  1/3/@,  9;  Simons,  Wash.  Post, 
and  Government. 
1 / 3 /w  
January 2:  AFSC  established Hq. National Range Division  (NRD )  , Provisional, 
a t  Patrick  AFB,  Fla.,  with Maj.  Gen. Leighton  I.  Davis  (USAF), as  com- 
mander.  Replacing  General  Davis  a s   AFMTC  commander  was  Brig. 
Gen. Harry  J.  Sands, Jr.,  vice commander of  AFMTC.  At the same time, 
AFSC established Air  Force  Space  Test  Center, Provisional  (A F S TC ) ,   a t  
Vandenberg  AFB,  with  Brig.  Gen.  Jewell  C.  Maxwell,  commander  of 
659th  Aerospace  Test  Wing  (SSD) a s   commander.  To  become  fully 
operational on July  1, Hq. NRD would  coordinate  activities of  AMR  (man- 
aged by AFMTC  commander)  and of  that portion of  PMR  transferred from 
USN  to USAF  (managed by  AFSTC  commander).  (AFSC Release 41-5-1; 
SBD,  1 / 7 / a ,   26 ;  M&R ,   1/13/@,  10 )  
DOD  announced  additional  $30,414,000  had  been  obligated  to   Martin 
Marietta  Corp.,  Denver,  on  cost-plus-incentive-fee contract  fo r   design, 
development,  and fabrication of  Titan  I11  space booster. 
(DOD   Release 
3-64) 
According to  survey by the Foundation  Library Center, U S .  philanthropic 
foundations  have  assets  totaling  $14.5  billion,  increase  of  $3  billion 
since 1960.  Foundations  make  grants at  rate  of  $779 million per year, 
increase  of  more  than  $150  million  since  1960.  Education  receives 
most  in  foundation  grants,  $315  million;  sciences receive  fifth  largest 
amount, $86 million.  (Hechinger, NYT, 1/3/64,18) 
January  3:  RELAY  I  communications  satellite continued  transmitting despite 
an  onboard timer set to  turn  i t  off  after  one year.  Electrolytic solution 
was  supposed  to  have  eaten  through  main  power  lead  to  switch  off 
transmission  power.  NASA  and  RCA   experts  speculated  erosion  was 
slowed because environmental temperatures  were cooler than anticipated. 
Launched  into orbit Dec.  13,1962, RELAY  I has been used for 2,000 com- 
munications experiments with more than 290 hours of  transmission  time, 
most  of  which was wideband transmission  o r  TV. (NASA   Release 6d-1) 
AEC   announced  preliminary  evaluation  of  mockup  space  reactor  re-entry 
flight  (R FD - 1 )   , conducted May 22,1963, with a Scout booster, indicated 
that  “space  reactors  can  be  designed  to  break  apart  and  disintegrate 
when  they  re-enter the earth’s  atmosphere.”  During  re-entry, telemetry 
recorded  disassembly  events  and  measured  heating  rates  a t   critical 
points  on  the  reactor  “until  blackout  of  radiofrequency  occurred-just 
before  disassembly  of  the  reactor.  The  data  on  the  temperature rises 
and  the  times  of  the  disassembly  events  transmitted  by  the  telemetry 
system  were  essentially  a s   predicted.”  Test  results  were  still  being 
evaluated  by  Sandia  Corp.  and  Atomics  International  in   an   effort  to  
substantiate the  conclusions  inferred  from  optical tracking  of  re-entry. 
(AEC   Release G 1 )  
NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  announced  selection  of  RCA  to  build  and 
install  ultrahigh-vacuum  chamber  and  associated  equipment  a t   MSC, 
the  fixed-price contract  totaling  $245,000. 
( MSC Release  64-41) 
Seven  noctilucent  clouds  visible  in  southwest  US. in  past  six  months 
probably  were caused by  PMR  rocket launchings, according to  Dr.  Aden 
B.  Meinel  and  Carolyn  P.  Meinel  in  Science magazine.  The  Meinels, 
astronomers  a t   Univ.  of  Arizona’s  Stewart  Observatory  (Tucson) , 
described  cloud  appearing  Nov.  2  a t   mean  altitude  of  35  mi.  By 
measuring  speed  and  direction  of  cloud’s  drift,  Meinels  traced  it  back 
 
I
.

4 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  AERONAUT IO S ,   1 9 6 4  
to vicinity of ~ m ,  
jus t  a s  they had traced 44-mi. altitude cloud of  June  15. 
Dr. Meinel and colleagues had  described  the  clouds  in Science  last Sep- 
tember,  tentatively linking the June  15 cloud to  Scout launching  a t  PMR. 
Now,  despite fact that no  firing was announced  for Nov.  2, Meinels con- 
cluded  that  “the  coincidence of  the clouds  of  June 15 and 2 November 
1963  with  a  dr if t   vector  indicating  origin  from  the  Pacific  Missile 
Range  would  appear  to  remove  the  probability  of  a  fortuitous  occur- 
(Science, 1/3/64, 
rence  that  could be  argued  from one cloud  alone.” 
CSM, 1/6/64) 
January 4 :  1,100 students at  131 colleges and universities would  participate 
in  NASA  graduate  training  program  during  196445 ,  NASA  announced. 
Students  in  space-related  predoctoral  fields would  be  selected  by  the 
participating  universities.  Each  student  would  receive $2,400  stipend 
for  twelve months,  plus dependents’ allowance up  to  $1,000.  Program 
is  administered  by  Grants  and  Research  Contracts  Div.  of  NASA  Office 
of Space Science and Applications.  (NASA Release 64-2) 
January 5:   Evidence  obtained  from  instruments  carried  aloft  by   balloons 
supports the theory  that  supernovae  are  a  source of  electrons in cosmic 
rays  reaching  vicinity  of  earth,  scientists  reported  in  Physical  Review 
Letters.  Experiments  revealed  primary  cosmic  rays  in  earth’s  upper 
atmosphere  contain  average  of  three  times  a s  many  electrons  as  posi- 
trons.  The  high-altitude  balloon  experiments,  conducted  last  summer 
near  Ft.  Churchill,  Manitoba,  by  physicists  of  Univ.  of  Chicago  and 
Argonne  National  Laboratory,  also  demonstrated  for  first  time  the 
( Wush. Post,  1/6/64; 
existence of  positrons  in  primary  cosmic  rays. 
Schmeck, NYT ,  1/6/64,47) 
*  Dr.  Richard  Head,  formerly  Associate  Director  in  NASA  Office  of  Plans 
and  Program  Evaluation,  was  appointed  Deputy  Director  of  Policy 
Planning  Division,  NASA  Office  of  Technology  Utilization  and  Policy 
Planning.  Dr. Thomas P. Murphy, Assistant to Assistant Administrator 
fo r  Technology Utilization and  Policy Planning,  was  appointed  Acting 
Director  of  Policy  Planning  Div.  pending  selection  of  permanent 
(NASA  Announcement 64-3) 
Director. 
January  6 :   Supersonic Transport  Evaluation  Group,  formed  under  overall 
management  of  FAA, convened  in Washington t o  begin  i ts  task  of evalu- 
ating  airframe  and  engine  manufacturers’  initial  design  proposals  for 
I ts  210 members representing  FAA,  NASA,  CAB,  USAF,  USN,  and Dept. 
SST. 
of  Commerce,  the  group  would  complete  evaluation  of  proposals  by 
early  March.  Concurrently,  10  airlines  would  conduct  independent 
evaluations  of  the  proposals,  and  on  March  25-26  joint  Government- 
airline  discussions would  formally  review  the results  of  their  respective 
evaluations.  By  May  1, FAA Administrator  Najeeb  E.  Halaby  would 
announce which  direction the U S .  SST effort would take. 
(FAA  Release 
64-21 
*  Dr.  Edward  C. Welsh,  Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman,  National 
Aeronautics  and Space Council,  said  in Space  Business Da i ly   interview 
that  major  U S .   space accomplishments during  1963 were:  decision to 
develop Manned Orbiting Laboratory  (MOL), progress  of  Saturn launch 
vehicle,  orbiting  of  Syncorn  communications  satellites, L.  Gordon  Coo- 
per’s  22-orbit Project Mercury  flight,  the successful Atlas-Centaur flight 
test,  and  the  military  achievements  in  space.  Dr.  Welsh  pointed  out 
that  in  1963 “70%  of  all U S .  orbital shots” w e r e  made by  the military. 
(SBD ,  1/6/tX,  18-19) 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4 

5 

January 6 :  NASA  MSC  announced Gemini test  vehicle for  training  astronauts 
in  recovery  procedures  had  arrived  at  MSC,  and  water  tests  with the 
astronauts  and  recovery forces would be conducted in nearby Galveston 
Bay.  ( MSC Release &2) 
*  Lt.  Col.  Peter  Romo,  staff  meteorologist  of  AFMTC, said  his  office was 
using photographs  from TIROS  V ~ I  
in  its weather predictions  f o r  missile 
launchings  from  Cape  Kennedy.  APT  (Automatic  Picture  Transmis- 
sion)  ground-receiving station  was  installed in mobile trailer  at AFMTC 
(M& R ,   1/6/64,  16) 
fo r  receiving the TIROS VIII  photographs. 
USAF  F-104  squadron  completed  first  nonstop  tactical  fighter  deployment 
from U.S.  West Coast to  Europe,  flying from  George AFB, Calif.,  6,150 
mi.  to Moron Air Base,  Spain,  in  10 hrs.  20 min.  The 18 aircraft were 
refueled in flight six times.  ( DOD Release 11-64) 
Januarr 7 :  NASA  Manned Spacecraft Center  issued  request  for  urouosals for 
s t idy  of  deep space la&  acquisition and trackingtechniquks h manned 
space missions.  Specifications called  for high  priority  development of 
laser  tracking  techniques  between  earth  and  a  manned  deep  space 
vehicle or between a satellite and two manned deep space vehicles.  Sys- 
tem  must  be  capable  of  handling  two-way  telemetry  and  voice  com- 
munications,  a s  well  as  spacecraft-to-ground TV. 22  companies were 
invited  t o   bid  on  the  six-  to  nine-month study.  (MSC Release  64-3) 
NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  announced  that  tests  of  flashing  beacon 
were  being  conducted  with  a  T-33  aircraft  for  evaluation  of  similar 
beacons  for  use  in  Gemini  rendezvous  operations.  Beacon  is  a  white 
sphere,  weighs  10 h., has  flashing power  of  12  candleseconds. 
(MSC  
Release 64-1) 
First  power  tool  built  specifically  for  use  in  space was  demonstrated  by 
its  co-producers, Martin  Co.  and  Black  &  Decker  Manufacturing  Co., 
who  developed  it  for WAF.  Similar  in  shape  and  size to  home power- 
drill,  the  battery-powered “electric minimum  reaction  space  tool”  has 
99.97% less reactive torque  than  ordinary  utility  drills,  a feature made 
possible by its freely revolving casing rotating in opposite direction from 
revolution  of  the  motor.  Tool  has  been  tested  in  simulated  100-mi. 
(Hines, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  1/8/64;  SBD ,  
altitude  space  environment. 
1/8/64,37) 
NASA submitted to Bureau of  the Budget i t s  proposed reports on three patent 
bills:  H.R.  4482, to  prescribe  national  policy encouraging  invention by 
providing  for  administration  of  property  rights  to  inventions resulting 
from  research  financed  by  public  funds;  S.  1290,  to  establish  uniform 
national policy for  property  rights to  inventions resulting from publicly 
financed work;  and S.  lM, to  amend National Aeronautics and Space 
Act  of  1958 to waive US. proprietary  rights to  inventions. 
(NASA  LAR 
11/21 
Senate Committee on Commerce held  hearings  on S. 1278, to provide that 
the  National  Bureau  of  Standards study practicability  of  U.S.  adoption 
of  the metric system.  (NASA LAR  II/1) 
John  Stack,  vice  president  and  director  of  engineering  a t  Republic Avia- 
tion,  predicted  that  early  in  the  1970’s  a  traveler  flying  westward  in 
supersonic  transport  will  be  able  to  keep  up  with the  sun:  “Whether 
it  is a  Mach 2  plane o r   a Mach  3 or better,  you  could  leave London at 
8  A.M.,  arrive  in  New  York  a t  8 A.M.,  refuel  and  be  in   Los  Angeles 
(UPI,  NYT, 
before  8 A.M.,  refuel  again  and be  in  Hawaii  a t  8 A.M.” 
1/8/64 13) 

6 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICEIS,  1964 
Jm u a r y   7:  In   keynote  address  to  10th National  Symposium  on  Reliability 
and  Quality  Control, Lt.  Gen.  Howell  M. Estes,  Jr.  (U SA F ) ,   AFSC  Vice 
Commander,  reviewed  the  reasons  for  reliability  in  missile and  space 
systems and specific measures  taken  by  AFSC  to  improve  reliability  and 
quality  control.  Discussing  space  systems  he  said:  L L .   . . Payload 
weight will always be a major factor in the systems effectiveness equation 
for space systems. 
In  unmanned  systems, redundancy  can never be  ac- 
ceptable but only  reluctantly tolerated.  Even  in manned  space systems, 
any provisions for  in-flight maintenance  or  replacement  of  components 
will  reduce payload weight which might  otherwise be  available for  more 
productive  use.  Ou r  greatest challenge thus lies in space.  . . .,’  (Text, 
AFSC  Release 41-R-4) 
USN  launched  Polaris A-3  missile from land  site  a t  Cape Kennedy  in  suc- 
cessful flight test down AMR.  This was 14th success in 23 land launches 
(M&R ,   1/13/M,  10) 
of  the A-3. 
First  Week  in January: NASA  lifted hiring  freeze on  about six manned  space 
flight  projects,  including  Apollo work a t  North  American Aviation, Inc. 
( L . A .  T imes ,  Miumi Herald, 1/10/64;  N A A  S&ID  Skywr i ter ,  1/10/64,1) 
e  North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  began  testing  prototype  Apollo  environ- 
mental  control  system,  developed  by  Garrett  Corp.’s  AiResearch  Div. 
Unmanned  tests  would  continue  for   about  six  months,  with  manned 
( A v .W k . ,  12/25/63,23) 
tests scheduled to begin June 1. 
January  8:  X-15  No.  1, piloted  by  Capt.  Joe H.  Engle  ( U S A F ) ,   reached 
139,500-ft. altitude  and  3,716  mph  (mach  5.36)  in  test  near  Edwards 
AFB,  Calif.  Flight  plan  called  for   Capt.  Engle  to  shut  off  X-15’s  Sta- 
bility Augmentation System  (SAS )  , then the Alternate Stability Augmen- 
tation  System  ( A S A S ) ,   to   evaluate basic  stability of  the  aircraft  during 
re-entry.  At  peak  of  flight the X-15’s  altimeter, a i r  speed,  and rate-of- 
climb instruments  failed, but  Capt. Engle followed flight plan and landed 
the  X-15  safely  on  Rogers  Dry  Lake  with  assistance from  a  ground 
( F R C   Release;  AF’, Balt.  Sun,  1/9/64;  UPI,  N .Y .  Her. 
control  station. 
T r ib . ,  1/9/64) 
0  In  his State of  the Union  message to Congress, President  Lyndon B.  John- 
son said: 
. . . ou r   ultimate goal  is  a  world  without  war,  a  world  made  safe 
L C  
for  diversity, in  which  all men,  goods and ideas can   freely move across 
every border and boundary. 
“We  must  advance  toward  this  goal  in  1964 in  a t  least  ten  different 
ways, not a s  partisans but as  patriots.  . . . 
“Fourth,  we  must  assure  our   preeminence  in  the  peaceful  explora- 
tion  of  outer  space, focusing  on  a n  expedition to  the moon  in  this  dec- 
ade--in  cooperation  with  other powers  if  possible, alone  if  necessary.” 
(Text, N Y T ,  1/9/M,  16 )  
Second  rocket  in  India’s  space  program,  a  Nike-Apache,  was  launched 
from  Thumba  Range  on  southern  tip  of  Indian  peninsula,  releasing 
sodium vapor  clouds used  to  study  high-altitude conditions.  The Nike- 
Apache’s  peak  altitude  was  estimated  a t   106 mi.  The  Physical  Re- 
search  Laboratory  of  Ahmedabad  provided  the  instrumented  payload 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL;  Reuters, NYT ,  1/9/6LE,  15 )  
fo r  the NASA  rocket. 
a  Dr. Edward  C.  Welsh,  NASC  Executive  Secretary  and  Acting  Chairman, 
spoke a t   10th National  Symposium on  Reliability  and  Quality  Control 
on misconceptions  about national  space policy : 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

7 

“First,  the lunar project  should  not  be  confused  w i t h   our  total  space 
effort.  Of  course, it  is a complex,  expensive,  and difficult task,  but  it’s 
just  a  par t   of  our  young  and  growing  national  space  program. 
I t s  
major  significance is  that  i t   sets  a  goal  for  an  orderly  development  of 
competences--all  of  which  will  be  useful  for  a  wide  range  of  space 
activities in the future. 
“Second,  the national security aspects of  space a re  not being neglected. 
The  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Act  requires  that  they  receive 
attention  and  they  are  receiving  it,  Careless  thinking prompts  critics 
to  assert  that  practically  nothing  is  being  done  by  the  military  in  the 
space field.  For example, about two-thirds of  all our space flights in  the 
past two  years  have been  launched  by  the Department  of  Defense.  And 
just  a s  careless  thinking  assumes  that  a  larger  space  budget  for  NASA 
than for Defense means  a  neglect of  the latter.  While  one need  not  be 
satisfied with  the  rate  of  progress  in  either  the  civilian or  non-civilian 
aspects of  space,  nevertheless i t   is  worth  noting  tha t   national  security 
objectives  are   being  pursued  by  both  NASA  and  the  Defense  Depart- 
ment.  . . .  The  fact  that  we  do  not  plan  space  programs  for  aggres- 
sion  does  not  mean  that  we  have  a  national security  space g ap  o r  that 
we will allow one to develop. 
“Third,  there  is  another misconception to  the effect  that  the national 
space program is employing an  unduly  large portion  of  our engineering 
and  scientific manpower.  Added  to  this  misconception  is  the  parallel 
view  that the space program is creating a shortage of  such talents which 
otherwise would  be  applied  in   our  civilian economy.  Actually,  profits 
in  private  enterprise  are  a t   a n   all-time  high  and,  in  general,  higher 
in  the  non-space  and non-defense companies than  in  those whose busi- 
ness  is primarily  government-financed for  space  and  defense.  If  those 
very profitable companies do not hire scientists and engineers to  engage 
in  research  and  development,  i t   is  not  because  they  can’t  get  them  as 
their  profit  position  gives  them  remarkable  bargaining power.  Rather, 
failure  to   employ  such  scarce  talents  in  large  numbers  is  the  result  of 
deliberate decisions on the part of  private entrepreneurs and not because 
there  are   no  such  persons  available.  . . .  Furthermore,  government- 
financed  research  and  development-particularly 
in  such  challenging 
fields  as   space-is 
having  a  salutary  effect  in  stimulating  an   increase 
in  the  number  of  highly  trained  scientists and  engineers. 
“Fourth,  there  has  also  been  some  criticism  and  confusion  on  the 
subject  of  international  cooperation  in  the  space  program.  We  have 
formed  a  useful  base  for   peaceful  and  constructive  relationships  with 
some  60  other  countries  in  space  activities.  The  benefits are  mutual. 
Some  of  our  projects  could  just  not  have  been  conducted  successfully 
without  the  tracking  facilities,  sites,  and  other  cooperative  efforts  of 
security  through  such  cooperation,  and  we  do  not  plan  to  do  so.  . . . 
countries  around  the  world. 
In   no  case  do   we  impair  our  national 
“Fifth,  there  a re   those  who  argue  that  it  would  be  better  to  slow 
down-or 
even  stop-our 
space  effort  in  order  to  divert  the  resources 
to   education,  slum clearance,  medical  research,  and  other  such  pur- 
poses.  As  much  as   we  need  to   do  more  in  those  important  a r e a ,   it 
were  desirable  t o   attempt  the  shift.  . . .  What  is  more,  there  is  no 
is  unrealistic  t o   believe  that  the  resources  a re  transferab le-even   if  it 
public  housing  jus t  because  it voted  less for  space.  . . .”  (Text) 
assurance  tha t   the  Congress  would  vote  more  funds  for  education  or 

8 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTIOS ,   19  6 4 

Janucry 8 :  Edward  Z.  Gray, Director  of Advanced Studies in NASA  Office of 
Manned  Space Flight, said in Space  Business Da i ly  interview that when 
NASA  builds  a  manned  space  station  it  would  be   “more  sophisticated” 
than  the DOD Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (M O L ) .   NASA  now  ha s   13 
studies dealing  with  concepts  leading toward  development of  a n   orbit- 
ing  manned  space  station;  when  these  studies  are   completed,  N A S A  
would  be  able  to  appraise  “the  space  station  requirements  and  what 
will  be  the  best  method  of  pursuing  the  development  of  a manned 
(SBD ,   1/8/64,  34) 
orbiting  space  station  system.” 
*  DOD announced  W.  S.  Bellows  Construction  Corp.  and  Peter  Kiewit  and 
Sons,  Inc.,  were  awarded  $4,211,377  contract  for  construction  of  Mis- 
sion  Simulation  and  Training  Facility  and  the  MSC  Center  Support 
Facility a t  NASA  Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Tex.  Contract was 
(DOD Release 21-64) 
awarded  by  Army Corps  of  Engineers. 
*  Mating  assembly  of  Saturn V  rocket  sections would be  accomplished  with 
aid  of  a i r   cushions, Marsha22  S tur   reported.  General Motors’  Defense 
Research Laboratories  was developing for MSFC a special tool-basically 
20  “air  pads”-for 
lifting  rocket  section and  its wheeled  carrier.  Air 
pads  would  lift  the  huge  sections about  1%  in.  from  the  floor.  Tool 
designers  were  also working  on  mechanical  mover  for  the  air-cushion 
device so  that  one man  would  be  able to  move  the  stages forward  and 
laterally.  (Marshall Star, 1/8/64,  1-2) 
*  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  Eugene M.  Zuckert,  addressing  Harvard Busi- 
ness  School  of  Washington,  presented  an   appraisal  of  U.S.  aerospace 
power  in  1964: 
“My  appraisal  for  1964  indicates  continuing  increase  in  airpower. 
All  of  the  ATLAS  and  TITAN  missile squadrons were  operational by  the 
end  of  1963.  Our   total  U.S.  strategic  power,  the  backbone  and  start- 
ing point  of  deterrence, w i l l   more  than  double  in  1964 when  new  MIN- 
UTEMAN  strategic missile wings become  operational.  . . . 
Today’s  appraisals of  airpower  must  also  cover  the  space front. 
L L  
“The  Air  Force  space  program  will  have  a  Manned  Orbital Labora- 
tory  as   its  central project.  The switch  from  Dynasoar  to  MOL   reflects 
a  change  in  emphasis  toward  on-orbit experiment  rather  than  re-entry 
experiments.  . . .” 
(Text, DOD Release 1 M )  
*  C A B  Chairman  Alan  S.  Boyd  told House Committee on  Interstate and For- 
eign  Commerce’s  Public  Health  and  Safety  Subcommittee hearings  on 
recent  jet  airliner  crashes  tha t   investigation showed  a ir   turbulence  no 
(Witkin,  NYT ,  
more  hazardous  fo r   jets  than  for  other  airliners. 
1/9/64,  52) 
*  Washington  Evening  Star editorialized about  recent  discovery that  “Mars 
is  covered  by  great  yellow  clouds  of  gaseous  compounds  of  nitrogen 
and  oxygen,  or   smog”  and  about  scientists’  conclusion  that  the  clouds 
preclude any chance of  man’s finding life on Mars: 
L‘Quite the  contrary. 
This  clearly  indicates  that  Martian  life exists 
and  the  Martians  are  one,  hopefully  two,  generations  ahead  of  us   in 
smogging  up  the  atmosphere.  As  for  landing  there,  all  we  need  are 
(Wash. Eve. Star, 1/8/64) 
spacemen from Los Angeles.” 
January  9 :  USN  announced  a  solar-powered, 120-lb. satellite was  launched 
pickaback  last  Sept.  28  along  with  a  previously  announced  nuclear- 
powered  satellite.  On  board  the  solar-powered  satellite were  six  tran- 
sistors  and  several radiation  detectors, testing  means  of  protecting  the 
transistors  from  radiation  damage. 
(AP,  NYT ,   1/10/64,  86) 

9 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AEBONAUTICS,  1 9  6 4 
stated  in   Portsmouth,  N.H., 
January  9:  Sen.  Barry  Goldwater  (R.-Ariz.) 
press  conference:  “I  don’t  feel  safe  at  all  about  our  missiles,  to  tell 
you  the truth.  I wish  the Defense Department could tell  the  American 
people how  undependable the missiles in  our silos actually are.”  Secre- 
tary  of  Defense Robert McNamara announced that  Senator Goldwater’s 
charge  was  “completely misleading, politically  irresponsible,  and  dam- 
aging  to  the  national  security.  There  is  no  information,  classified  or 
otherwise, to  support the  false implications that  our  long-range missiles 
cannot  be  depended  upon  to  accomplish  their  mission.  . . .”  ( N Y T ,  
1/10/64,1,14) 
Following  Senator  Goldwater’s  charge  that  U S .  missiles  a re  undependa- 
ble,  unnamed  official sources a t  Cape Kennedy pointed  out that  newest 
and   Titan  II’s--can  be  fired  in  less  than a 
US .   IcBM’s-Minutemen 
minute’s  notice,  have been  successful in nearly  7 out  of  10 test  firings, 
partially  successful in 2  out  of  10, and  completely unsuccessful in  only 
1 out of  10 firings.  (UPI,  NYT ,  l/lO/a, 14) 
NASA  Administrator  James E.  Webb  told  University  Club  in   New  York 
that  NASA’s last  25  attempts to  place  satellites in  orbit  were  all  success- 
ful.  Of  the 25, only one payload failed to function.  Mr. Webb pointed 
out  that  in   1959, NASA’s first  fu l l  year  of  operation,  the  record  showed 
6 successes and  13 failures.  By  1961, rocket reliability  “had  improved 
to  the  point  that  we  had  54  successful space  flights with  five  successes 
( N Y T ,  1 /1O /a ,   85) 
for each failure.” 
January 10: Static-test firing of  Titan I1 rocket for first Project Gemini flight 
was  postponed a t  Cape Kennedy  until  Jan.  14 because of  possible mal- 
(UPI,  Wmh. 
function of  first-stage propellant valve during countdown. 
Post, 1/11/64;  AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/64) 
Preliminary  design for  re-entry spacecraft for manned Mars missions dur- 
ing  1971-75  period  was  submitted to  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft Center 
after  six-month  study  by  Lockheed  Missiles  and  Space  Co.,  MSC  an- 
nounced.  The earth re-entry module would  travel  to Mars and Back  at- 
tached  to 4- to  6-man Mars spacecraft, then would be detached and used 
for  last  eight  hours.  It  is  designed  to  withstand  re-entry  heating  of 
about 35,000’  F.  a t  speeds up to  44,000 mph, protecting crew with abla- 
( MSC Release 64-6;  MSC Roundup, 
tive heat shield about 3%  in. thick. 
1/22/&,  1 , 3 )  
a  USAF  Office of  Aerospace Research  announced Dr.  Sanford  Freedman  of 
Tufts  Univ.  and  Dr.  Richard  Held,  Prof.  of  Experimental  Psychology 
at  MIT,  had  been  conducting  experiments  of  human  performance  in 
space  and  had  expressed  less  optimism  toward  man’s  adaptability  in 
space than  previously had been  felt.  The experimenters studied human 
performance under conditions of  reduced and abnormal visual and audial 
inputs  related  to  restriction  of  body movements.  They  found  that  the 
subject  was  able  to  adapt only when  he was  allowed  free movement  of 
his body o r  appropriate limb.  Besides supporting the  view that accuracy 
of  performance  was  degraded  under  prolonged  exposure to  conditions 
not  permitting  a  correlated  motor-sensory feedback,  the  experimenters 
concluded  that  stimulus  changes  accompanying  body  movements were 
an  important  source  of  order  in  human  adaptation.  This  order  was 
dependent  upon  relative  constancy  of  environmental  factors,  such  as 
gravity.  Where  one  or  more  of  these  factors wa s   a b s e n t - su ch   a s   in 
space-body 
coordinations depending upon  their  regularizing  influence 
may in time be lost.  (OAR Release 1 4 4 - 1 )  
W f3 -~0 -65 - - -2  

10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 

January 10:  Contradictory  speculation among scientists about nature  of red 
spots observed recently on the moon, William J.  Perkinson of  Baltimore 
Sun  said,  should  force NASA  “to  step up  its  badly  lagging  Ranger  and 
Surveyor  programs  for  unmanned  exploration  of  the  moon,  and  also 
force NASA  to  reconsider the standards that  at  this  time ba r  any trained 
(Balt. Sun,  1/10/64) 
scientist from  becoming an  astronaut.” 
*  More  than  20  Martlet  rockets were  launched  from  Barbados  site  during 
first  year  of  the  high-altitude  research  project  conducted by  Canada’s 
McGill  Univ.,  N e w   Yo rk  Times reported.  Fired  from  16-in. naval can- 
non, Martlet  has motor  that  ignites once the  rocket is in  flight,  sending 
rocket  to  altitudes  between  60  and  100 mi. 
I t   lands  about  100 mi. 
southeast  of  Batbados  in   the  Atlantic.  200  shots,  financed  by  US., 
were planned fo r  1%4. 
(AP, NYT ,  1/11/64) 
*  DOD announced  award  of  $15,599,775 contract  to  Boeing Co.  for  Project 
Hibex  (Hi-G  Booster  Experiment),  an  ARPA  research  experiment  in- 
( DOD  Release  38-64) 
vestigating  high  performance  missile  boosters. 
January 11 : Philco  Gorp.  had  begun  cable and pneumatic tub s   installation 
in the Mission Control Center under construction at NASA Manned Space- 
craft  Center,  MSC  announced.  Philco  was  prime  contractor  for  flight 
control  equipment  fo r   the  Project  Gemini/Apollo  facility,  which  was 
scheduled  for  occupancy  in   mid-1964. 
(MSC   Release  64-8) 
*  USAF  launched Thor-Agena D booster  from  PMR  with unidentified satellite 
payload.  It  was  later  disclosed  that  five  satellites were  orbited  with 
the single booster. 
(HHN-4   8 ) 
*  James  J.  Haggerty,  Jr.,  predicted  that  assignment  of  Manned  Orbiting 
Laboratory  to  DOD was  “an  ominous harbinger  of  a  reversal  in   trend, 
an indication that  the military  services may play  a more prominent  role 
in future space exploration  at NASA’s expense.  . . . 
“MOL  is a starting point.  Whether you label it development platform, 
satellite  or  laboratory,  it  is clearly  intended  as  a  beginning  for  space 
station  technology.  I t   is  also clearly the  intent  of  this  Administration 
that, at least in the initial stages, space station development shall be under 
military rather than civil, cognizance.  . . .”  (A -N -AF   J&R ,  1/11/64, 
10 )  
January  12:  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket with  sodium-vapor payload 
was  launched  to  106-mi.  altitude  from  Thumba  Range,  Trivandrum, 
India,  in  joint  effort  of  NASA  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  and  Physi- 
cal  Research  Laboratory,  Ahmedabad,  India.  Rocket  performed  a s  
predicted,  sodium ejected as predicted, and temperature  and  turbulence 
measurements were  made  with  ground-based  cameras  and  instrumen- 
tation. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  Three  USAF  test  pilots  entered  Apollo  command  module  at  Martin  Co., 
(AP,  NYT ,  
Baltimore,  f o r   simulated  7-day  lunar  landing  mission. 
1/13/64,9) 
*  USN evacuated staff  and  dependents  (25 persons)  a t  NASA  tracking  station 
in  Zanzibar, where military  coup overthrew the government of  the one- 
month-old nation. 
(GSFC  Historian) 
*  Cosmonaut Valentina Nikolaveva-Tereshkova. wife of  Cosmonaut Andrian 
G.  Nikolayev,  was  an  expectant  mother;  Moscow  sources  reported. 
(UPI,  NYT ,  1/13/64,5) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AEBONAUTICS,  19 0 4 

11 
Janzmry 13:  Management  changes  in  propulsion  programs  in  NASA’s Office 
of  Advanced Research and Technology were effective this date.  John L. 
Sloop,  head  of  QART  Div.  of  Chemical Propulsion  and  Power  Genera- 
tion,  was  appointed  t o  new  position  of  Assistant Associate Administra- 
tor  fo r  Advanced  Research  and Technology, assisting Dr.  Raymond L. 
Bisplinghoff.  Propulsion  division  was  redesignated  Div.  of  Chemical 
Propulsion,  with  Adelbert  0. Tischler of  NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space 
Flight  as Director.  At  the  same  time,  management  of  M-1  engine 
project  was  transferred  from  QMSF  to  Div.  of  Chemical  Propulsion, 
(NASA  Release 64-4) 
OART. 
0  In   White  House  Ceremony,  President  Johnson  awarded  1%3 National 
Medal of  Science to the recipients: Drs.  Jerome B.  Wiesner, Cornelius B. 
van Neil, Luis W.  A lva ra ,  Vannevar Bush, John R. Pierce, and Norbert 
(Simons, Wash. Post, 1/14/64) 
Wiener. 
0  USN launched  three  Polaris A-2  missiles  in   first  operational  tests  of  new 
steam  ejection  system,  the  launchings  conducted  from  U.S.S.  Nathan 
Hale  submerged  off  Cape  Kennedy.  Second  of  the  three  firings  was 
successful, the  first  failing when  second-stage motor  d id  not  ignite  and 
the  third  veering  off  course  after  15 sec.  of  flight  (destroyed  by  range 
( M & R ,   1/20/64, 11 )  
safety  officer). 
0  DOD announced Army Materiel Command award  of  $1,170,751 contract  to 
Western Electric Co.  for work in  support of  Project Sleighride, re-entry 
vehicle vulnerability test program.  (DOD Release 36-64) 
January  14 :   Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  was  launched  from  Wallops  Is- 
land, Va.,  with  Rice Univ. experiment “Sammy 1’’ to measure and study 
causes of  auroras and  airglow.  Vehicle carried 68-lb. payload, designed 
and  built  by  professors  and  students  in  Rice  Space  Science Dept.,  to 
peak  altitude  of  56 mi.  before  impacting  74 mi.  downrange  in  the  At- 
lantic  Ocean.  No   recovery  operation  was  conducted;  telemetry  data 
during flight would  be  analyzed by  the  Space Science Dept.  This  w a s  
first  of  fou r   similar  experiments  to  be  conducted  under  NASA  grant; 
remaining  three  flights  would  take  place  at  Ft.  Churchin,  Canada. 
(Wallops Release 6 3 )  
0  NASA  and  Canada’s  Defence  Research  Board  announced  reaching  agree- 
ment  for  joint  multi-satellite ionosphere-monitoring research  program, 
designated  Isis  (International  Satellites  fo r   Ionospheric  Studies) . 
Agreement called fo r  orbiting of  a  second Alouette and  Isis A,  B,  and  C 
satellites  at  intervals  between  1965  and  1970.  The  satellites  would 
continue  and  expand  experiments  of  ALQUETTE  I  topside  sounder,  and 
data  obtained  from  the  satellites would  be made freely  available to the 
scientific community.  Under terms of  the agreement, DRB would design, 
construct, and test  the satellites, provide basic onboard  experiment,  and 
operate  at  least  one  ground  station  io  supply  data  on  spacecraft  oper- 
ation.  NASA  would provide  fou r  launch vehicles,  conduct launch  oper- 
ations,  and   provide  and  launch  up  to  five  sounding  rockets  to   test 
components, subsystems,  and  experiments fo r  the  satellites.  NASA  also 
would  launch  an  Explorer  satellite in  conjunction  with  the A louew  to 
obtain  coordinated  direct  measurements. 
(NASA  Release 64-6) 
Static  test-firing of  Titan  I1 at  Cape Kennedy postponed  for  a week,  this 
second  postponement due  to  failure  of  gas generator  starter cartridge. 
(M&R, 1/20/64,12) 

12 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONATJT IB ,   19  6 4 

January 14:  Senate received President Johnson’s  nomination  of  Dr.  Donald 
F.  Hornig  to be Director  of  Office of  Science and Technology, succeed- 
ing Dr.  Jerome  B. Wiesner. 
( C R ,  1/14/64,371) 
I n   keeping  with  NASA  reorganization,  subcommittees of  the  House  Com- 
mittee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  were  revised  as  follows:  Manned 
Space  Flight;  Space  Sciences  and  Applications;  Advanced  Research 
and  Tracking;  and  Science,  Research,  and  Development. 
(NASA  LAR 
I I I /6 )  
*  Maj.  Gen.  Ben  I.  Funk,  Commander  of  AF   Space Systems Div.,  said  in 
speech before Tennessee Valley Post of  American Ordnance Association, 
Redstone Arsenal,  Ala. : 
“Space  can  be  nothing less  than  a  total  national  undertaking. 
“Space  has   to  do  with  our  future,  with  ou r   country’s  future,  and 
with  the  progress  of  civilization.  I t   also  has  t o  do  with  our  personal 
and our national security.  . . . 
“I personally believe  that  the working partnership  between  NASA  and 
the  Department  of  Defense  will  grow  increasingly  close  in   the  months 
and years  just  ahead,  and  that  joint efforts in  ventures  such  a s  Gemini, 
and  the  lunar  expedition,  will  serve  to  identify  this  country’s slate  of 
space activities as  national programs.  . . .” 
Discussing  role  of  the  military  in  space,  he  said:  “AS  a  national 
policy,  we  have  declared  that  space  will  be  reserved  fo r  peaceful  pur- 
poses.  This, I submit,  serves to put the military  into space-not  restrict 
space to purely non-military activities.  . . . 
“In  describing  the  military  mission,  I  like  to  say  that  the  Defense 
Department’s  job is to  insure that space is used  for us-not 
against us.” 
(M a r s h d l  S ta r ,  1/15/64,1-2) 
*  Engineers  Joint  Council would  request this session of  Congress for  charter 
to   establish  National  Academy  of  Engineering,  EJC   president  Eric  A. 
Wake r   said  in Washington  press  conference.  NAE  would  be  patterned 
after  National  Academy  of  Sciences, which  was  working  with  EJC   in 
setting  up  NAE,  but  the  two   bodies  would  have  no  organizatiohd  ties. 
(M& R ,  1/20/64,  10 )  
*  Boeing  Go.  scientists  announced  invention  of  lightweight  telescope with 
more  than  lO@mi. range  for   use  by  astronaut  in  satellite  interceptor 
( S BD ,  1/15/64,  74) 
in  spotting another orbiting  spacecraft. 
January 15:  President  Johnson  sent to Congress his propowd $5.304 billion 
authorization  f o r  NASA  in  FY  1965,  $600 million less than  NASA  earlier 
had  requested.  The  proposed  legislation  (H.R.  9641)  was  introduced 
in the House by Rep. George P. Miller  (D.-Calif.)  and referred to  Com- 
mittee on  Science and Astronautics.  Of  this  sum,  $641,000,000  would 
be  for   administrative  operations;  $281,000,000  for  construction  of  fa-  
cilities;  and  $4,382,000,000  fo r   research  and  development.  Of  R&D 
amount,  $3,011,900,000  would  be  for  manned  space  flight-$2,677,- 
500,000  for   Project  Apollo;  $308,400,000  for  Project  Gemini;  and 
$26,000,000 for advanced missions.  At  press conference on the budget, 
NASA  made public its plans to  request $141 million  supplemental appro- 
priation for  F”Y 1%4, to  restore some of  the budget cut by Congress.  The 
NASA  position,  as  expressed  by  Associate  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C. 
Seamans,  Jr.:  “We have now been  cut back  to  a point  where we’ll  have 
to  admit we  cannot  carry  out the  [lunar  landing]  program  in this  dec- 
ade without  the  full  support  of  Congress for   the supplemental  and  for 

13 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4  
our  1965 request.”  Of  supplemental request,  $31 million would be for 
Apollo  spacecraft  development and  the  rest  for  Saturn  launch  vehicle. 
(NASA  LAR  111/7;  Finney,  NYT ,   1/16/@,  1; V S J ,  1/16/@;  Dodd, 
Chic.  Trib.,  1/16/64) 
January  15:   Nike-Apache  launched  from  Wallops  Island,  Va.,  in  flight  to 
measure  light  intensity  and  particle  fluxes  from  150,000 ft.  to  apogee. 
Good data were received throughout the flight, but  experiment was only 
partially  successful because Nike-Apache reached only 56.1-mi. altitude. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
USAF  launched Titan  I1  rocket  from AMR  on  successful 5,000-mi.  flight  to 
test  its  ability  to  function  both  as  an  ICBM  and  as  booster  for  Project 
Gemini manned  spacecraft.  The  Titan  I1 carried  Gemin’, malfunction 
detection system and damping device to counteract vibrations.  (M&R, 
1/20/64,11) 
0  Senator Clinton P.  Anderson  (D.-N.  Mex.) , Chairman  of  Senate Commit- 
tee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, addressed National Capital Sec- 
tion of  AIAA  and questioned whether hazard of  intense solar radiation  in 
the  1968-70  period  might  postpone  Project  Apollo  lunar  flight.  H e  
pointed  out  that  1968-70  is  period  of  maximum  solar  activity  in  the 
11-year solar cycle, and radiation  intensity might require “very substan- 
tial shielding for the Apollo capsule.”  This raised  question  of  whether 
heavy  shielding  imposes too  great  a  weight  penalty  on  Apollo.  Citing 
recent  scientific recommendation  that  there  was  “relatively  low  prob- 
ability” of  Apollo crew’s  encountering solar flare, he questioned whether 
maintaining  the  schedule  would  be  worth  such  a  gamble. 
(Finney, 
NYT ,   1/16/M,  1; SBD ,   1/16/a,  8 0 4 1 )  
Army  Corps  of  Engineers  awarded  $2,295,220  contract  for  Saturn  S-I1 
stage test-site development a t  NASA  Mississippi Test Operations to  C. H. 
Leave11 and Co.  and Peter Kiewit and Sons, Inc,,  DOD announced.  (DOD 
Release 50-64) 
Bendix Products Aerospace Div.  was awarded $99,973 NASA  study contract 
for shock absorbing device to permit soft landing on moon, NASA Manned 
Spacecraft  Center  announced.  Bendix  would  test  various  sizes  and 
shapes of  crushable  aluminum honeycomb structures  to  determine per- 
formance  characteristics  under  lunar  environmental conditions.  ( MSC 
Release 64-9) 
0  Three  airframe  manufacturers  and  three  engine manufacturers  submitted 
initial  design  proposals  for  the  U S .  supersonic transport,  FAA Deputy 
Administrator  for  Supersonic Transport  Development  Gordon M.  Bain 
announced.  The  airframe  manufacturers:  Lockheed  Aircraft,  Boeing 
Co.,  and  North  American  Aviation;  engine  builders:  Curtiss-Wright, 
General  Electric  Co.,  and  Pratt  &  Whitney  Div.  of  United  Aircraft. 
(FAA Release 6 4 4 )  
a  Rep.  Harold  M.  Ryan  (D.-Mich.) 
said on House floor  that  if  NASA’s pro- 
posed  electronics  research  center  were  located  in  Michigan  it  “would 
provide  a  stimulus  to  the  heartland  of  America,  and  bring  into  geo- 
graphical  balance  the  national  capability  in  the  field  closely  related 
with the electronic industry. 
“It is important that the resources of  our part of  the country be taken 
into  consideration  and  the  fact  recognized  that  they  are not  presently 
being  used  to  their  fullest  capacity.  . . .”  (CR, 1/15/64,43&35) 

14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICB,  1 9 6 4  

January 15:  France’s  preparations  fo r  hydrogen  bomb  development  in  the  
South Pacific were  reaching  unexpectedly large proportions,  New York 
Times  reported.  Gaston  Palewski,  French  Minister  for  Scientific Re- 
search,  had  recently  said  in   Papeete  that  “France  ha s  engaged  he rb l f  
in  Polynesia  for  a  very  big  task.”  Test  site  and  military  installations 
were  ‘being  constructed  a t   Mururoa  in  the  Tuamotu  Islands,  720  mi. 
southeast  of  Tahiti.  French  sources indicated  France would  become  a 
(NYT,  1/16/64,4) 
thermonuclear  power  by  late  1967 o r  early  1968. 
January 15-16:  Series of  f o u r   sodium-vapor experiments was  launched  on 
Nike-Apache sounding  rockets from  NASA  Wallops Station  in   sunset-to- 
sunrise comparative measurements of  winds and turbulence in the upper 
atmosphere.  First  two  rockets were  launched  at  sunset,  third  a t  mid- 
night,  and  fourth  at  sunrise.  First  flight  was  unsuccessful  because 
Nike-Apache reached  only  28.4mi.  altitude  instead  of  desired  118 mi. 
The  remaining  three  rockets  fired  successfully,  their  70-lb.  payloads 
ejecting  sodium  vapor  trails  from  about  25-mi.  to   as high  as  123-mi. 
altitudes.  Pink  and  reddish  clouds  were  visible  fo r   several  hundred 
miles.  Photographic  observations  of  the  clouds  would  be  analyzed 
by Geophysics Corp.  of  America, which provided payloads f o r  the GSFC- 
(NASA  Release  6&7;  Wallops  Release  64-5;  NASA 
managed  project. 
Rpts.  SRL) 
Mid-January: Work  on  test  site  for  Project  Apollo  at  White  Sands Missile 
Range was halted by  strike of  operating engineers.  (SBD, 1/15/64+, 72) 
January 16: NASA  announced selection of  Air  Products  and Chemicals, Inc., 
to supply liquid  hydrogen to NASA Mississippi Test Operations and Mar- 
shall Space Flight Center  for Saturn launch vehicle test program.  Con- 
tract  called  for  supply of  up to  30  tons  of  liquid  hydrogen  per  day  by 
no later than mid-1965, would be renewable annually through December 
(NASA  Release 64-10) 
1970. 
*  X-15  No.  3 flown by  NASA  pilot Milton 0. Thompson to  3,170 mph  (mach 
4.80)  and   70,000-ft.  altitude  in  test  to  investigate  heat-transfer  rates 
with  sharpleading-edged vertical  tail.  The sharp  leading  edge  on  top 
portion  of  aircraft’s  vertical  tail  is  l/loo-inch radius,  a s   compared  t9 
previous blunt  edge of  %-inch  radius.  Change was  designed to  reduce 
complexity  of  air  flow  around  aircraft’s tail  surfaces;  this would  cause 
difference  in  heat-transfer  rates.  During  flight  Thompson  performed 
( FRC   Release; 
several control maneuvers to  evaluate aircraft  stability. 
FRC X-15  Flight Log) 
*  The lowest  altitude  at which demarcation line between a i r  space and outer 
space  should  be  assigned  is  100 km.  (60  mi.) , according  to  Norman 
Sissenwine,  USAF  Cambridge  Research  Laboratories  scientist  and  co- 
chairman  of  U.S.  Committee on  the  Extension of  the  Standard  Atmos- 
phere.  Sissenwine’s definition had been  requested by Hyman, Hayman, 
and  Harris  law  firm,  which  was  attempting  legislative  interpretation 
fo r   the  International  Astronautical  Federation  and  the  International 
Institute  of  Space  Law.  Sissenwine acknowledged that  ultimately  the 
line  must  be  drawn  arbitrarily,  explained  considerations  favoring  100  
km.: “Aerodynamic  forces  on  most  of  the  ballistic  re-entry,  lifting 
re-entry,  and  boost-glide  orbital  aerospace  vehicles  can  generally  be 
neglected  a t  altitudes  above  100 km.  (This may  vary  from  80  to  120 
km,  depending upon  the vehicle concept, but  I believe 100  km is a good 
nominal altitude to  use.)  . . .”  He pointed out that atmosphere’s basic 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4  

15 

composition begins  to  change  near  100 km.  “Spec,ifically  it  has  been 
determined that  disassociation of  molecular  oxygen  into  atomic oxygen 
should be depicted at an altitude of  90 km  in  the  Standard Atmosphere. 
. . .’,  Another  consideration  was  that  relationships  of  temperature 
and  pressure  fields to  wind  fields  are  generally  constant t o  nearly  100 
km.  This  is also  t rue  for  speed of  sound, coefficient of  viscosity, kine- 
matic viscosity,  and  thermal  conductivity.  Finally, he pointed  out that 
meteors  entering  the  atmosphere  generally  disintegrate  below  120-km. 
altitude,  and  most  meteor  trails  formed  in  atmospheric  entry  are  ob- 
served below  100 km. ( OAR  Release 1-644) 
January  16: U S .  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  awarded  $63,366,378 contract 
fo r  NASA  to  joint bidders Pau l  Hardeman,  Inc.,  Morrison-Knudsen Co., 
Inc.,  and the Perini Corp . ,  fo r  construction of  Saturn V-Apollo assembly 
( N Y T ,  1/17/64,32;  W S J ,  1/17/64) 
building  a t  Cape Kennedy. 
Sen.  John  Stennis  (D.-Miss.)  , Chairman  of  Senate Armed  Services’ Pre- 
paredness Investigating Subcommittee, said he  had  directed his staff “to 
upd a t e  and review the current  information and data relating to the relia- 
bility  and  dependability  of  the Nation’s  long  range  ballistic missiles as 
(AP,  Wash.  Post,  1/17/64;  Raymond,  NYT ,  
soon  a s   possible.” 
1/17/64,13) 
*  In   interview with Space Business Daily, Rep.  George P.  Miller  (D.-Calif.) 
cited two  factors he believed would improve NASA’s relations with House 
Committee on  Science  and  Astronautics this  session.  First,  committee 
members now have more knowledge of  NASA’s problems and needs, hav- 
ing  visited  NASA  installations and  learned  first-hand  about NASA’s activ- 
ities.  Last  session, he pointed out,  10 of  committee’s 31 members were 
new  to  space  legislation.  Second,  NASA  was  perfecting  i t s  procedures 
of  informing  Congress,  improving  the  information  flow  and  clarifying 
(SBD ,  1/16/64,80) 
its justifications. 
*  34 scientists fled East Germany to  West Germany in 1963, German Ministry 
for  Refugees reported.  Since  Jan.  1, 1958,  the Ministry  added,  1,710 
(UPI,  NYT ,  
scientists  had  emigrated  from  East  to  West  Germany. 
1 /16 /64 ,2 )  
*  USAF  fired two Minuteman ICBM’s,  one from AMR  and one from PMR.  AMR 
flight was  test of  devices on warhead design to  confuse enemy defenses; 
(M& R ,   1 /27 /64  
PMR  flight was  routine training  launch by  SAC  crew. 
1 0 )  
January  17:  Four-stage  Javelin  (Argo  D -4 )   rocket  vehicle  was  launched 
at  12:Ol  a.m.  EST from  Wallops Station,  Va.,  carrying  120-lb. instru- 
mented payload to  587.22-mi. altitude.  Payload  experiments : magnetic 
mass  spectrometer  to  identify  ions  in  upper  atmosphere  and  measure 
their  distribution;  Lyman-alpha radiation experiment to  determine spa- 
tial  variation  of  atomic  hydrogen  in   atmosphere;  and   experiment  to  
measure altitude distr$bution and intensity of  night airglow from atomic 
Impact  occurred  727  mi.  downrange  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean. 
oxygen. 
Data  were  telemetered  to  ground  stations  and  no  recovery  operation 
was  attempted.  Experiment was designed  and  built  by  E.  0. Hulburt 
Center fo r  Space Research at US. Naval Research Laboratory  and flown 
in   cooperation with  NASA Goddard  Space Flight Center.  (Wallops Re 
lease 64-6) 
0  In   Columbus, Ohio, Lt. Col.  John H.  Glenn,  Jr.,  first American  astronaut 
to orbit  the earth, announced that he would be a  candidate for the Ohio 

16 

ASTRONAU’MCS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  
Democratic  nomination  fo r   US. Senator  in  the  May  5  primary.  He 
added  that  he  was  retiring  from the  US. Marine  Corps after  22 years 
of  service.  After  explaining his  party  affiliation, he   said  Congress “is 
an  area  in  which  I have  had  a  life-long interest.  To  serve  in  a  body 
whose  actions  help mold  the  destiny  of  America and  the   free world  is 
certainly a challenge and a high calling.” 
Regarding  his  departure  from  the  space  program,  Glenn  said:  “It 
could  very  well  be   wishful  thinking  on  my  pa r t   to  train  fo r   another 
six or seven years for  flights for which I might be  too old. 
“I have chosen this course because I feel that  it provides the best op- 
portunity  to  make  use  of  the experience  I have  gained  in   22  years  of 
Government  service.  Today,  well  over  half  our  national  budget  goes 
toward  the support of  our military  forces, our space program  and other 
research  and  development activities.  These a re  areas with which  I am 
well acquainted.  . . .”  (Ap, Parks,  Wash. Post, 1 /18 /a ,   A l ;  Finney, 
N Y T ,  1/17/641,17) 
January 17:  James  C.  Elms,  Deputy  Director  of  NASA Manned  Spacecraft 
Center, resigned to  accept a position with  industry,  Director  Dr.  Robert 
R.  Gilruth  announced.  Resignation  would  be  effective  in   February. 
( MSC Release 6 4 1 3 )  
New  Yo rk  Times editorialized that delay of  the 1969 target date for Project 
Apollo  “may  increase the  chance  that  the project  of  landing  a  man  on 
the moon will become an international effort, mobilizing all the resources 
of  world  technology.  That  certainly  would  be  most  appropriate  for 
( N Y T ,  
man’s  first  landing  in   the  cosmos  beyond  this  tiny  planet.” 
1/17/64,42) 
*  MSC reported that Astronaut Man B.  Shepard had had a small benign tumor 
(AP, Wash. Post, 1/17/64+, 
removed from his thyroid gland by surgery. 
A21 
January  18:  At ceremonies dedicating the new  National Geographic Society 
headquarters in  Washington, D.C.,  President Lyndon B.  Johnson  called 
for  international  sharing  of  knowledge:  “The  last  four  centuries  of 
advancement of  the frontiers of  man’s knowledge  . . . 
human  experience  have  been  centuries  of  exploration,  discovery  and 
“America,  as we  know  it-freedom, 
as  we  know  i t - c o u l d   well  not 
exist  tomorrow  for  our  children  and  their  children  if   we  should  lose 
from  our national  life that  confidence in the future  and that enthusiasm 
fo r   exploration  which  has  brought  u s   to  this  high  moment  of  history 
and  hope. 
the  continents explored. 
“All  the  seas have  been  sailed-all 
“The  highest  mountains  have  been  scaled-the 
darkest  jungles 
penetrated. 
“We  have reached into the  realms of  space-and 
domain of  the stars. 
“This  generation  of  Americans  is  challenged  to  live  a  life  of  high 
adventure.  If we  a r e  to  keep  our  trust  of  freedom, we must-in 
these 
last fou r  decades of  this century-undertake  explorations in  many realms 
which dwarf  all those of  the  last  four  centuries.  . . . 
“Scientific  exploration  and  research  know  no  national  boundaries. 
Human  knowledge  is  never  the  captive  of  international  blocs. 
“Common sense dictates that all nations lend their learning to all other 
nations.  This is a  loan  in which the science of all nations  is the bemfi- 

outward toward  the 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A ERONAU T IC S ,   19 6 4 

17 

ciary and the good of  all mankind  is advanced.  The more w e  share with 
each other, the less we misunderstand each other  . . . 
“This  Nation  is committed now  to the most  intensive effort ever made 
by any peoples t o  advance the frontier of  human knowledge. 
“We shall remain  committed  . . . 
I 
“The  United  States shall  welcome  any  who  wish  to   join  with  us  in 
seeking  to  serve the  common  good  of  mankind.  But  if  others  are  not 
join  with  u s   our  own  endeavors 
willing-or 
if  they  a re   not  able-to 
will not slacken  . . .”  (Text, V a s h .  Post, 1/19/64,  A6) 
January  18 :   President  Johnson  sent  letter  to  Soviet  Premier  Khrushchev, 
replying  to Khrushchev’s Dec.  31 letter which declared  “the  use  of  force 
for  the solution of  territorial disputes is not  in the interest of  any people 
or  any country.”  President  Johnson  said:  “Let u s  emphasize  . . . our 
agreement  on  the  importance  your  letter  places  on  preserving  and 
strengthening  peace,  and on  the need  to  accompany efforts for disarma: 
ment  with  new  efforts to  remove  the  causes of  friction  and  to  improve 
the world’s  machinery  for peacefully settling disputes.  In this spirit, let 
us   both  present  new  proposals  to  the Geneva  Disarmament  Conference, 
in   pursuit  of  the  objectives we  have  previously  identified:  To  prevent 
the  spread  of  nuclear  weapons;  to   end  the  production  of  fissionable 
material  for weapons;  to transfer  large amounts  of  fissionable materials 
to  peaceful  purposes;  to  ban  all nuclear  weapons  tests;  to place limita- 
tions on  nuclear  weapons systems;  to  reduce the risk  of  war by  accident 
o r   design;  to   move  toward  general  disarmament.  . . .”  (Text,  C R ,  
1/22/64,  812-13) 
January  19: George  M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  
Manned  Space  Flight,  was  named  Deputy  Director  of  NASA  Manned 
Spacecraft  Center,  replacing  James  C.  Elms.  Low  would  assume  his 
new  duties  in  February,  would  continue  present  position  until  May  1. 
Low  joined  NACA  Lewis Research  Center  in  1949,  became  Chief  of 
Manned Space Flight Programs upon formation  of  NASA  in October 1958. 
(NASA  Release 64-13) 
*  By  this date U S .  still did not  know whether  U.S.S.R.  would participate in 
tracking  Echo  I1  balloon  satellite,  scheduled  for  launching  Jan.  23. 
Earlier  this month  NASA  sent  cable  to  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences out- 
lining launch  schedule and inquiring about Soviet tracking plans, agreed 
on  in  principle last  summer.  NASA  received  cable in  reply, acknowledg- 
ing  receipt  of  US .   message  but  providing  no  details  of  Soviet plans. 
NASA  planned  to  launch  the  satellite as   scheduled, hoped  to  hear  fu r -  
(Finney, NYT,  1/19/64) 
ther word from U.S.S.R. 
*  USAF  launched Thor-Agena D booster  from Vandenberg  AFB  with unidenti- 
fied  satellite.  I t   was  later  disclosed  that  two  satellites were  placed  in 
( M & R ,  1/27/64,10;  H H N - ~ S )  
orbit. 
January  20:  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Hugh  L.  Dryden  announced 
U.S.S.R.  had  notified U S .   that  i t  would  participate in  space  communi- 
cations  experiments  using  Echo  I1  passive  communications  satellite 
which  NASA  would  orbit  in  the  coming  week.  Soviet officials  planned 
to begin  optical and radio  experiments with the 135-ft.-diameter balloon 
satellite a  week  after  i t  was  orbited.  Soviets would  photograph  Echo  I1 
and  track  it  with  telescopes  as   it  passed  over  U.S.S.R.,  bounce  radio 
signals  off  the  balloon  between  U.S.S.R.  and  England.  US.-U.S.S.R. 
cooperative  experiments  were  based  on  1963  agreement  reached  by 

18 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I B ,   1 9 6 4  
Dr.  Dryden  and  Soviet  Academician  A.  A.  Blagonravov. 
(Simons, 
Wash.  Post, 1/21/64) 
January 20:  I n  his  Economic Report  to  the  Congress, President  Lyndon  B. 
Johnson  reviewed  progress  toward  economic  goals  and  presented  his 
programs  for  “achieving  our  national  economic potential.”  On  trans- 
portation  and  technology,  he  said  that  the  “.  . . Federal  Government 
provides major  support for the  research and  development which  under- 
lie  our  striking technological  advances.  I n   the  past  much  of  our  re- 
search  and   development  has  been  connected  with  national  defense. 
Now, a s  military outlays level off, we face: 
“ 0   A challenge to apply the nation’s growing scientific and engineering 
resources to new socially profitable uses; 
‘ ‘0   An  opportunity  to  accelerate  the  technological  progress  of  our 
civilian industries. 
“The Federal  Government should join  with private  business and  o u r  
universities in speeding the development and spread  of  new  technology. 
I  have  directed  the  Department  of  Commerce to  explore new  ways  to 
accomplish this.” 
(Text, NYT,  1/21/M,  16) 
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson  (D.-N.  Mex.) , Chairman of  Senate Committee on 
Aeronautical  and  Space Sciences, amplified his concern for  solar  radia- 
tion danger in Project Apollo manned flights in 1969-70,  saying it would 
be  a  “sound”  decision  to  delay  the Apollo flight  into  the  1970’s to  in- 
crease safety.  “We  don’t  know  all there  is to  know  about these  flares.” 
He  repeated  that  adding  shielding  to  ApoIIo  spacecraft  could  impose 
weight  penalty,  added  that  NASA  was  “intensifying”  its  study  of  solar 
(SBD,  1/21/64,1M) 
radiation. 
*  Bill to  authorize  appropriations  to  NASA  for FY  1965  (S. 2446)  was  intro- 
duced  in  the Senate by  Sen.  Clinton  P.  Anderson, Chairman  of  Senate 
Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences,  and  referred  to  the 
(NASA  LAR 1II/9) 
Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. 
0  Bill  to  establish  a  Commission  on  Federal  Expenditure  Policy  (S. 2 4 1 )  
was  introduced  in   the  Senate  by  Sen.  Jacob  K.  Javits  (R.-N.Y.)  on 
behalf  of  minority  of  Joint  Economic Committee, and  was  referred  to 
the Committee on  Government Operations.  The  proposed Commission 
would be composed of  16 members from the  Executive Branch, Congress, 
and private life, would  review Government expenditure policy and make 
specific studies and policy  recommendations.  Bill was  also introduced 
in th e  House, by  Rep. Thomas B.  Curtis  (R.-Mo.)  .  (NASA  LAR  III/lO; 
C R ,  1/20/&,  592-96) 
*  NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator  for Manned Space Flight Operations 
Walter  C.  Williams  said  in   Space  Business  Daily  interview  that  “we  
are over the hump financially on the Gemini program and that the Apollo 
target  of  mid-1969 is  still  realistic  with  proper  funding  and  if  an  in- 
ordinant  amount of  problems  doesn’t  appear.”  He  added that  Project 
Gemini was on schedule if  the December 1 M  flight was  successful and 
( S BD ,  1/24/64,  98)  
if  no new  “pacing headaches” arose. 
AFSC Ballistic  Systems  Div.  awarded  $1,218,500 obligation  on  previous 
contract  to  Aerojet-General Corp.  for  Titan  I1  propulsion  systems and 
related  spare parts;  and  $2,578,000 obligation  to  AC  Spark  Plug  EV. 
of  General Motors fo r  production of  gyros and accelerometers for Titan 
11.  (DOD Release 67-64) 

19 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
January 20:  USN  successfully launched Polaris A-3  missile from surface ship 
off  Cape Kennedy on 2,000-mi.  flight down  the Atlantic Missile Range. 
(AP, N Y T ,  1/21/64,4) 
9  USAF  planned  four  tests  of  the  six-vehicle Asset  re-entry program  during 
the coming year.  The first test, in September 1963, was very successful. 
The  second  test  shot,  in  March,  was  planned  to  attain  re-entry  speed 
of  18,000 fp s ;  later tests would attain maximum series velocity of  19,500 
fps.  First  five vehicles would  have zirconium-rod nose caps and  sixth 
(M&R ,   1/20/64,  17; USAF Astro- 
vehicle  a  coated tungsten nose cap. 
nautics Div.,  DCS/R&D) 
*  Program  to   encourage  development  and  use  of  “crash  locator  beacons” 
was  announced  by  FAA,  which  was  inquiring  whether  industry  can 
produce  crash  locator  beacons  a t   reasonably  low  prices  and  whether 
individual  aircraft owners would  buy  o r  rent  them  if  available.  Direc- 
tor  of  FAA  Flight  Standards  Service  George  S.  Moore  said  tests  con- 
ducted  by  FAA  “clearly  indicated  that  such  a  beacon  can  successfully 
radiate energy to permit suitably equipped search aircraft to  identify and 
(FAA Release 64-5) 
‘home-in’ on the  transmitted signal.” 
FAA  announced  Australia’s  Qantas  Empire  Airways  had  requested  six 
supersonic  transport  aircraft,  bringing  total  of  reservations to  51 held 
by  8 airlines. 
(FAA Release 64-6) 
0  With nuclear  explosives new  sea-level canal  could be  built  across  Isthmus 
of  Panama  for  $500  million  o r   less,  according  to  Lawrence  Radiation 
Laboratory’s  Gerald  W.  Johnson,  Director  of  AEC  Project  Plowshare. 
Technical  and  economic  feasibility  of  such  a  project  was  discussed  in 
letter  from  Johnson  to  Sen.  John  0. Pastore  (D.-R.L)  , Chairman  of 
Joint  Congxessional  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy.  Use  of  nuclear 
explosives  to  dig  new  Panama  canal had  been  under  study  since  1958, 
when  Panama  Canal Co.  requested Lawrence Radiation Laboratory  for 
(Finney,  NYT ,   1/21/64, 
preliminary  feasibility  study  of  the  project. 
10 )  
*  Retiring science editor  of  New  Yo rk  Times William L.  Laurence was  hon- 
ored  at  dinner  in  New  York  by  wide  range  of  scientific  societies. 
Laurence  was  science journalist  for  34  years,  winner  of  two  Pulitzer 
( N Y T ,  1/21/64,1) 
Prizes. 
January 21:  RELAY  11  active  communications  satellite  launched  into  orbit 
with  Thor-Delta launch  vehicle from AMR  (4,606-mi. apogee;  1,298-mi. 
perigee;  195-min.  period;  46.3’ 
inclination  to   the  equator).  The 
184-lb. satellite  would  continue  communications tests  of  RELAY  I,  still 
orbiting  the earth,  and  provide evaluation of  improvements in  the  new 
comsat.  RELAY  II  completed  its  first  communications  test  during  its 
first  orbit,  receiving  radio  signals  and  TV test  pattern  from  Mojave, 
Calif.,  ground  station  and  beaming  them  back  to  earth.  RELAY  II  was 
initially  in  excellent mutual  visibility  position  between  North  America 
and Europe fo r  TV transmission between the two hemispheres.  Mutual 
visibility  with  Japan,  about  40  min.  at  maximum,  would  decrease 
gradually  to nothing by mid-July and continue with no mutual visibility 
again  until  mid-November.  RELAY  II  was equipped  fo r   transmitting 
one-way wideband  communications  (one-way TV,  300  one-way  voice 
channels o r  high-speed data)  o r  two-way narrow-band  communications 
(12  two-way  telephone  conversations or  teletype,  photo-facsimile and 
data).  Unlike its predecesor, RELAY  11  had no  automatic cutoff  device; 

20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTIC%,  19 6 4 

it  had  negative-on-positive (n-on-p)  solar  cells  for  greater  resistance 
t o   radiation  than  RELAY  1’s  p-on-n  solar  cells.  RELAY II  was  22nd 
straight launch  success of Thor-Delta launch  vehicle. 
( GSFC  Historian: 
Goddard News, 1/27/64,1;  AP, N Y T ,  1/22/64,17) 
January 21 :   Both stages of  first Titan  I1 launch  vehicle  for  Project Gemini 
were  successfully  static-fired  for   30  seconds  at  Launch  Complex  19, 
Cape  Kennedy,  producing  combined  total  thrust  of  more  than  half  a 
million pounds.  Purpose  of  test was to  evaluate overall Gemini launch 
vehicle  system  performance-fueling, 
countdown,  ignition  and  cutoff 
commands,  guidance  control,  and  telemetry;  and  to  verify  engine per- 
formance by thrust generation and engine gimbaling.  The stages were 
mounted  side-by-side  on  separate  mounts;  electrical  signal  cut  off 
first-stage engine  after  30  sec.,  then  started  second-stage engine, which 
was  cut  off  by  radio  signal  from  ground  computer  just  as   in  actual 
flight.  Charles  W.  Matthews,  Gemini  Project  Manager,  MSC,  said 
( MSC Release  6&9  ; 
static-firing test  met  all  prelaunch  requirements. 
M&R ,   1/27/64,10) 
Presidefit  Johnson  sent  $97.9  billion  N  1965 budget  to  Congress. 
Of 
space research and technology, he said : 
“Our  plan  to  place  a  man  on  the  moon  in  this  decade  remains  un- 
In  addition  to   pro- 
changed. 
I t   is an  ambitious and  important goal. 
viding  great  scientific benefits, i t  will  demonstrate  that  our  capability 
in  space  is  second  to  no  other  nation’s.  However,  i t   is  clear  that  no  
matter  how  brilliant  our  scientists  and  engineers,  how  farsighted  our 
planners and managers  o r  how  frugal our  administrators and contract- 
ing personnel, we cannot reach this goal without sufficient funds.  There 
is no second-class ticket to space. 
“Appropriations enacted  fo r   1964 for  the  National  Aeronautics  and 
Space  Administration  were  $6001 million  below  the  amount  requested. 
A s   a  result, major  development programs leading to  the manned  lunar 
landing have  fallen behind  schedule.  Careful replanning  of  the  entire 
program, including  a  reduction  in  the number  of  test  flights, will  offset 
some  of  this  delay.  Even  so,  more  funds  are  needed  in  1964, and  I 
am  therefore  recommending  a  supplemental  appropriation  of  $141 
million for this year. 
“For  1965, I am requesting  appropriations of  $5.3 billion, $63 million 
above  the  19M  amount,  including  the  proposed  supplemental  appro- 
priation.  The 1964 and  1965 recommendations represent the minimum 
amount  needed  to  achieve  our   goals in  space.  The  estimated  increase 
of  $590 million in  expenditures  in  1965 is  due principally  to  payments 
required  ,by  commitments made  in  1964 and  earlier  years.  With  the 
leveling off of  appropriations,  annual  outlays  should  remain  relatively 
stable in subsequent years. 
“In  addition  to  the  manned  space  flight  program,  though  related 
to   it,  funds are   included  to  support  unmanned  space  flights  for  lunar 
exploration  and  supporting research and development.  Funds are  also 
included  fo r  scientific satellites, planetary  probes,  and experiments with 
meteorological and communications satellites. 
The programs of  the National  Aeronautics  and Space Administration 
< <  
are designed to  maintain  American  supremacy  in  space  and to  demon- 
strate this  supremacy  by  achieving  a  manned  landing  on  the moon  i n  
this  decade.  . . 

21 
ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   A eRONAUT ICS ,   19  6 4 
“The level of  activity in support of  the 3-man Apollo lunar  spacecraft 
development  program  will  reach  its  peak  during  1965  with  13  flight 
spacecraft in  production  by  the end  of  the  year.  The Saturn V  rocket 
program will be proceeding  rapidly along its development cycle in  prep- 
Janwtry 21 : i he Federal  budget f o r  N 1965 estimated expenditures  for R&D 
aration  for launching the Apollo  spacecraft, and will  account  for abou t  
$850 million  of  the  estimated  1965 expenditures.  . . .”  (Text,  NYT, 
1/22/64,19-21) 
in FY 1965 a t  $15.3 billion, only a three per cent increase over FY  1 9 a .  
For past decade Federal R&D spending  averaged 20% increase each year 
over  the preceding  year;  a  decade  ago,  Government  spent  $3.3 billion 
(Finney, NYT ,   1 /22 /a ,   18) 
on R&D. 
e  I n   the  President’s proposed  budget  for  FY  1965, DOD  expenditures  were 
estimated  a t  $51.2 billion, of  which $5.5 was  for   research  and develop- 
ment  (including military  space  expenditure) .  Requested  budgets  for  
operation  of  ranges:  $231 million for AMR ,   $159 million  for   PMR,  and 
(N Y T ,  1/22/64,21,22;  M&R ,   2/3/64,  9 )  
$93 million f o r  WSMR. 
e  17-nation  Disarmament  Conference  resumed  in  Geneva. 
I n   his  letter  of 
Jan.  19 to  the  Conference,  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  said:  “There 
is only one item on the agenda  of  this conference-it 
is the leading item 
on the agenda  of  mankind-and 
that one item  is peace. 
Already this conference has  led to more concrete and effective results 
Lb 
than  any disarmament  conference  in modern  history.  Your  efforts and 
deliberation  laid  the  ground  work  for  the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty-for 
for  
the  communications  link  between  Washington  and  Moscow-and 
the  U.N.  General  Assembly  action  against  nuclear  weapons 
in 
space.  . . .’, 
President Johnson then  proposed  five major types of  potential agree- 
ment:  to  stop spread of  nuclear  weapons to nations not  now  possessing 
them;  to  accept  observation  posts  on  both  sides;  to   stop  all  produc- 
tion  of  fissionable material;  to  ban  threat  o r   use  of  force  in  changing 
boundaries  or   controlling territories;  and to   freeze numbers  and  kinds 
of  strategic  nuclear-carrying vehicles  (aircraft  and  missiles) .  (Text, 
C R ,  1 / 2 2 / a ,   812; “Statement  to American People,”  CR,  122/64,  813) 
*  Vice  president  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  Mikhail  A.  Lavrentev’s 
disclosure  tha t   U.S.S.R.  had  been  forced  to  abandon  attempt  to  .drill 
through the earth’s crust was reported by Howard Simons in Washington 
Post.  Soviet  drillers  reached  depth  of  about  20,000  f t .   near  Caspian 
Sea  when  economic  and  technical  difficulties  forced  them  to  give  up  
the  project.  Lavrentev  said  Soviet scientists now  were  “seeking  more 
effective  methods  of  drilling  and  shoring  up   the  hole.”  Project  was 
akin to  U.S.  Project Mohole,  directed by  National  Science Foundation, 
which would  attempt  t o  drill through  sea  floor  to penetrate  earth’s  crust 
(Simons, Wash. Pos t ,  1/21/64) 
and sample the mantle beneath. 
*  Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of  NASA Lewis Research Center, was presented 
1964 Sylvanus Albert  Reed  Award  at  AIAA  dinner  in  New  York.  Dr. 
Silverstein was  cited  for  “major  contributions  toward  the  development 
of  propulsion  systems  for  aircraft  and  spacecraft  and  for   outstanding 
leadership in  the  nation’s  programs  of  scientific satellites and  manned 
space flight.”  Also presented  were AIAA’S  Research Award  to Henry M. 
Shuey  and  Space  Science Award  to  Herbert  Friedman.  (LRC Release 
64-6;  “MAA  Honors & Awards”) 

22 
ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  
January  21: Rep.  Edward  J.  Gurney  (R.-Fla.) 
included  in  Congressional 
Record  a  resolution by  Florida Library and Historical Commission  ap- 
pealing  to  the  President,  the  Florida  Governor,  and  the  U.S.  Board  of 
Geographic Names “to  carefully consider the possibility of  retaining the 
name,  Cape CanaveraI, a s  the  geographic  designation  only  of  the  east- 
ernmost  tip  of  the  land  formation known  as  Cape  Canaveral  ( tha t  tip 
upon  which  no  portion  of  the  missile  complex  is  located)  thereby  de- 
tracting  none  whatever  from  the  widespread  desire  to  honor  our  late 
President John  F.  Kennedy.” 
( C R Y  1/21/64,  A214) 
*  Testimonial  dinner for Dr.  Jerome  B.  Wiesner,  resigning  to  return  to MIT 
a s  Dean  of  Science, held  in Washington.  For  three  years  Dr. Wiesner 
had  been  Director  of  the  Office  of  Science and  Technology,  Chairman 
of  the  Federal  Council  of  Science  and  Technology,  Chairman  of  the 
President’s Science Advisory  Committee,  Special Assistant to  the Presi- 
dent,  and  Acting  Director  f o r   Telecommunications  Management. 
(Miller, Wash .  Daily New s ,  1/22/64) 
January  22:  First  intercontinental  communications  tests  conducted  with 
RELAY  11  communications  satellite  were  successful : NASA  officials  de- 
scribed  the  satellite’s  performance  as   “excellent.yy The  tests  were  con- 
ducted  between  ground  stations  at  Nutley,  N.J.,  and  Raisting,  West 
Germany,  consisted  of  voice  transmissions  and  radio  signals. 
(AP, 
NYT ,   1 /23 /64 ,7)  
NASA  announced  selection of  Eclipse-Pioneer Div.  of  Bendix Corp.  for  ne- 
gotiation  of  cost-plus-incentive-fee contract  for  stabilization  platforms 
for Saturn IB  and Saturn V  launch  vehicle guidance  systems.  The ST- 
124-M  platform  systems were modifications of  Bendix  ST-124  systems 
used  in  Saturn  I launch  vehicle,  the  modifications resulting  in  simpler 
system and reduced weight  and cost. 
(NASA  Release 64-17) 
0  Cape Canaveral  Missile Test  Annex was  officially  redesignated  Cape Ken- 
(Special Order  GA-7, 
issued  by  USAF  CofS 
nedy  Air  Force  Station. 
Curtis E. LeMay, in KHN - 1 )  
*  Evidence  that  the  electron  is  smallest  indivisible unit  and  tha t  the proton 
lacks  a  core,  as  had  been  postulated,  was  reported  a t   annual  meeting 
of  American  Physical  Societv in  New  York.  Experiments  were made 
with  electron  accelerator  built  by  Harvard  Univ.  and  MIT  and  were 
described  bv  Dr.  Rov  Weinstein  of  Northeastern  Univ.  (Boston).  Dr. 
Richard Wiison  of  Harvard,  and  Dr.  Louis  S.  Osborne  of  MIT. 
(Sul- 
I ,  
livan, NYT ,  1/23/64,  20) 
*  Dr.  Edward Teller,  nuclear  Dhvsicist,  testified  before  House  Select  Com- 
mittee  on  Government R&earch  on   the  Federal  Government’s  role  in 
research.  Dr.  Teller  criticized DOD’S  secrecy in  scientific developments, 
saving practice  had  been  to  keep  them  secret unless it  could  be  proved 
without  a  doubt  that  making  them  public  would  be  in  the  national 
interest.  “I think  the  burden  of  proof  should  be  on  the  other  side,” 
Dr.  Teller  stated.  “I  am  pretty  well  convinced  that  the  Russians  have 
all our  secrets and  I am even afraid  they  have  the  secrets we  are going 
to  discover  in the next  two years.  Our  industrv  and  our  citizens don’t 
(NASA  LAR  III /11 ;   AP, NYT ,  1 /23 /64 ,9 )  
have those secrets.” 
January  23:  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  was  fired  from  Wallops  Island 
with 82-lb. payload containing grenades, detectors, and absociated equip- 
ment.  the grenades e im t ina  and exdod ing  a t   altitudes raneine; from  24- 
to 59-mi. altitudes.  This flight was followed 20 min. later by Nike-Cajun 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 

23 

sounding  rocket  launched  from  Fort  Churchill, Canada,  with  identical 
payload,  a  less  successful flight  because  second-stage motor  failed  to  
ignite.  Grenades  were  ejected  and  detonated  but  a t   altitudes  too  low 
to  obtain useful data.  The  close-order firings were  first  two  in  current 
MASA  series t o  gather  comparative  data  on  winds  and  atmospheric  tem- 
peratures  up  to   55-mi.  altitude  a t   widely  separated  locations  on  near- 
simultaneous basis.  (Wallops Release 64-7) 
January  23:  Rep.  Thomas  M.  Pelly  (R.-Wash.) 
introduced  a  concurrent 
resolution  to  change  the  goal  of  the  manned  lunar  landing  to  before 
1975  instead  of  before  1970  (H.  Con.  Res.  257).  “The  change  of 
policy  . . . is  to  allow  our  scientists greater  flexibility in  meeting  the 
challenging  technological problems  of  the   Apollo  project.  Especially, 
I have  in  mind  the  desirability  of  eliminating the  pressures of  meeting 
time  schedules, of  minimizing  perils such as solar radiation, and frankly 
I would  stretch  out  the  fantastic cost  of  the manned  space  exploration 
program over a longer period of  time.  . . . 
“My  new  resolution  is to  invite the  opinions  of  qualified experts and 
knowledgeable  persons  on  this  subject.  . . . Congress  should  provide 
for  an overall  reappraisal of  such a  costly manned  flight activity which 
accounts for two-thirds of  the $5 billion space budget.  Certainly, I can- 
not  believe  there  is  any valid reason  why  the  Space Administration  and 
those engaged  in the manned space research venture should not be given 
more  latitude  in  the scheduling  of  the  program.  Any  slippage in  time 
schedules due to  reasons  of  safety  and  increasing assurance  of  success 
should  not  require any  apology or  excuse.  Nor  should  the program be 
speeded for prestige a t  the cost of  added risk.  Congress by adopting my 
resolution  would  be  setting  a  policy  of  proceeding  a t   an   orderly  and 
normal  speed  and of  avoiding  undue  risks in  establishing any  deadline. 
Finally  this  greater  latitude  should  allow  for   tighter  budgeting  and 
(CR, 
contribute  to  reductions  in  the  level  of  annual  appropriations.” 
1 /23 /64 ,932)  
e  New  evidence of  possible explosions in Milky Way  galactic core,  reported 
by  Soviet astronomer  Dr.  Iosif  S.  Shklovsky, was  discussed by  British 
astronomer  Dr. Fred Hoyle a t  American Physical Society meeting in New 
York.  Dr.  Shklovsky  discovered  that  spurlike  structures  above  and 
below  the  galaxy  are  connected  in  a  single  figure-8 configuration,  its 
center  a t   the  galactic  core. 
I t   is  possible  that  the  loops,  which  are 
strong  sources  of  radio  emissions,  are  magnetically  trapped  particles 
which  may  have  been  forced  from  the  core  by  a  past  eruption. 
(Sul- 
livan, NYT,  1/24/64,48) 
e  Rep.  John  W.  Davis,  (D.-Ga.)  said  DOD had  turned  over  the  large  solid- 
propellant  rocket motor  project  to  NASA,  the  decision made because  no 
definite military  mission  was  assigned  for  the  technology.  In  FY  1965 
NASA  w i l l   cover  cost  of  the  large-motor MD;  in  FY  1964 USAF  carried 
the cost.  NASA  officials said they  planned  to  request $13 million for the 
project,  with  about  half  that  going  to   contractors  Thiokol  Chemical 
(Atlanta Const., 1/24/64) 
Corp.  and Aerojet-General. 
e  NASA  Administrator  James E.  Webb  stated  Boston  still appeared  to Be the  
most  suitable  site  for  NASA  electronics  research  center.  NASA’s Elec- 
tronics  Site  Selection  Committee  had  reviewed  presentations  by  50 
groups  representing 19 geographical  areas,  in  accordance with P.L.  88- 
113  (NASA   Authorization  Act  for  FY  1964).  Mr.  Webb  still  had  not 

24 

ASTRONAUTIOS  AND   A E R O N A W m ,   1 9 6 4  
( S B D ,   1/24/64, 
officially  notified  Congress  of  NASA’s site  selection. 
129) 
January 23 :   NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  awarded  $9.2 million increase 
to  contract  with  North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  calling  for  construc- 
tion  a t   Downey,  Calif.,  of  seven  new  buildings  and  modifications  to 
existing  structures to  permit  expansion  of  NAA’S  research  and  develop- 
ment.  NAA  is prime contractor for Apollo command and service module 
under  contract  signed  with  MSC  Aug.  14,  1963. 
(AP,  Tulsa  Daily 
Vork-l, 1 / 2 4 / a )  
*  USAF  launched  Titan  I1  ICBM  from  underground  silo  a t   Vandenberg  AFB 
(M & R ,  
in  successful  flight  5,000-mi.  down  Pacific  Missile  Range. 
2/3/64,  10 )  
*  Paper on Government’s relationship with  universities, by  Delphis C.  Gold- 
berg,  staff  member  of  Subcommittee  on  Intergovernmental  Relations 
of  House  Committee  on  Government  Operations,  inserted  in  Congres- 
sional Record: 
(( There  is much  to  be  said  for  disbursing a  substantial portion  of  re- 
search  project  funds through  universities as  a  partial  substitute for  the 
selection  of  individual grantees a t  the  Federal  level.  However,  I would 
doubt  the political feasibility and wisdom  of  allocating very  large sums 
to  institutions to  be expended a t  their discretion.  Instead, I would pro- 
pose  that  Federal  agencies  set  standards  for   university  project  review 
committees and require approval  of  the grant management policies and 
procedures  of  an  institution  as  a  condition  to  its  eligibility  for  ais- 
tributing Federal  research  funds.  . . . 
“AS the  funds  available  for  science and  for  each  of  its  major  com- 
ponents become more  scarce relative to demand, Federal  agencies will be 
increasingly  confronted  with  the  necessity  of  making  hard  choices  in 
the  allocation of  money  between  research fields a s  well  as  between  com- 
peting  projects  within  each  specialized  field.  The  multi-disciplinary 
committee, consequentIy, will likely become a  valuable device in helping 
t o  determine  priorities  for  Federal  science expenditures  as the pressure 
for  efficient  resource  allocation  grows.  The  university  project  review 
committee,  which  included  representation  from  a  variety  of  disciplines 
and  specialties, might  serve  in  this  capacity  a t   the  local  level.  . . .,’ 
(Text, CR,  1/23/64,  A286-87) 
e  Dr.  Romney  H.  Lowry,  former  head  of  Boeing  Co.  bioastronautics  orga- 
nization,  was  named  Chief  of  Research  and  Education  Div.  in  FAA  
Office  of  Aviation  Medicine  by  Dr.  M.  S.  White,  FAA Federal  Air  Sur-  
geon.  ( FAA Release T64-1) 
January  23-24:   More  than  100 representatives of  European  electronics and 
aeronautical  firms met  in   Brussels where  they  discussed  feasibility  of 
development  project  for   manned  shuttle  service  between  earth  and 
orbiting space  stations  (U S .   and Soviet).  Recent  cancellation of  US. 
Dyna  Soar  project  spurred  the  discussions.  German  delegation  was 
headed by Dr. Eugen Saenger.  (M & R ,  2/3/&,  9) 
January  24:   Pau l  L.  Styles,  Chief  of  NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center’s 
In   the 
Industrial Relations Office, was named  Labor  Director  of  NASA. 
new  position, which  he  assumed  in  addition  to  his  present  one,  Styles 
would advise NASA management officials at Hq.  and all field  installations 
on  all aspects of  labor-management  relations,  also would  serve as  NASA 
representative w i t h  Dept. of Labor,  NLRB,  President’s Missile Sites Labor 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AEBONAUTICS,  19 0 4 

25 

(NASA 

Commission, and   Federal  Mediation  and  Conciliation Service. 
Release &14) 
January  24:  Development  of  astronaut  techniques  for  egress  from  Gemini 
spacecraft  began  th i s   week  at  NASA  Manned  spacecraft  Center,  MSC 
announced.  Boilerplate model of  Gemini spacecraft floats in water-filled 
tank;  two  subjects in the  closed spacecraft practice  egress and the man- 
( MSC Release 
ner, procedure, and time required a r e  recorded for study. 
64-19) 
*  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  announced  seven  floors  of  the  nine-floor 
Project Management building  had  been  accepted  fo r   occupancy.  The 
structure was  expected  to  be  ready  for  tenancy  Feb.  20.  To  date,  13 
MSC  facilities  at  the  Clear  Lake  site  had  been  certified  a s   ready  fo r  
occupancy. 
( MSC Release 64-18) 
*  NASA  Lewis  Research Center employees Robert  Steinberg  and  William B. 
Schwab won  $700  NASA 
incentive award  for  invention  of  method  and 
device  for  rapidly  mapping  neutron  flux  of  each  section  of  nuclear 
research  reactor.  Other LRC  awards:  John W. Macomber won  $500 fo r  
invention  of  nuclear  reactor  control  rod  assembly with  improved  driv- 
ing mechanism; Joseph M.  Savin0 and Chester D.  Lanzo, $200 award f o r  
developing simulated  fuel  assembly  fo r   nuclear  reactor;  and  John  C. 
Sturman,  $100  award  for  transistorized  logic  circuit  to  handle  data 
accumulated by  satellites and  transmit  i t   back  to  earth.  (LRC Release 
6d-8) 
Pierre  Chatenet,  president  of  Euratom,  said  in   Pa r i s  that  nuclear  energy 
developments  and  advances  in  space  technology  called  fo r   revision 
of  NATO.  “The  Atlantic  alliance  originally  was  drafted  in  a  certain 
context  which  has  now  changed.  For  one  thing,  access  to  space  pre- 
sents  us  with  a  new  battlefield.”  He  also  declared  that  six-nation 
European  Economic Community planned  $7  billion  nuclear  energy  de- 
velopment program  over  the  next  15 years,  to  include  construction  of 
80   to  90  power  stations  for  the   peaceful  use  of  nuclear  energy.” 
66  
(O’Toole, NYT, 1/26/64,17) 
Janmry  25:  NASA’s  ECHO  11  passive  communications satellite was  placed  in  
near-polar  orbit  by  Thor-Agena B  launch  vehicle  launched  from Van- 
denberg AFB,  Calif.  The second-stage Agena fired shortly after booster 
separation,  coasted,  then  reignited  over  South  Africa,  injecting  into 
orbit the canister  containing the laminated mylar plastic  and aluminum 
balloon.  Canister  opened  and  released  the  535-1b.  balloon-satellite 
which inflated to 135-ft. diameter.  Initial orbital data:  apogee, 816 mi.; 
perigee,  642  mi.;  period,  109  min.;  inclination  to  equator,  81.5”. 
(NASA  Release 64-11;  AP,  Wash. Post,  1/26/64;  Becker,  NYT, 1/26/ 
64, 1 )  
*  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket with Univ.  of  New  Hampshire  instru- 
mented payload was launched from Thumba Range, Trivandrum,  India, 
to 102-mi. altitude.  Payload  instrumentation included densitometer and 
baroswitch, to determine altitude and intensity of  electric current systems 
in  the  ionosphere  near  the  magnetic  equator.  Performance  of  both 
rocket and  instrumentation  was  considered good;  telemetry  signal was 
received  f o r  395 sec.,  and  good  data  were expected. 
(NASA  Rpt,  SRL) 
*  Liquid-hydrogen-powered rocket  engines  fo r   Saturn  1’s  S-IV  s tage   ex- 
ploded  during  preparations  for  static-firing  a t   Douglas  Aircraft  Co.’s 
Sacramento, Cal‘if.,  facility.  Explosion, which demolished the test stand, 
was  evaluated  by  NASA  to  determine  if  forthcoming  Saturn  SA-5 
ra3-588 +&5--*1 

26 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   1964  

flight test a t  AMR  should be delayed;  NASA  officials decided the explosion 
was  not  sufficient  reason  to  interrupt  the  SA-5 
launch  prepara- 
(AP, Wash.  Eve. Star,  1/25/&;  AP, Vash. Po s t ,  1/26/64) 
tions. 
January  25:  Britain  had  expressed  interest  in  joining  U S .   and  European 
countries in  financing and use of  global communications satellite system, 
John  Finney  reported  in New  York  Times.  After  months  of  favoring 
cables for international  communications in the immediate future, British 
Post Office expressed approval of  participation  in global satellite system 
and urged  similar decisions by European nations,  a t  meeting of  satellite 
committee  of  European  Conference of  Postal  and  Telecommunications 
(Finney,  NYT ,   1/26/6$,  1 )  
Administration  in  Karlsruhe,  Germany. 
*  DOD announced plan  fo r  aiding economic readjustment  of  contractors  per- 
forming work on major projects that  are canceled, including Dyna Soar 
and Typhon projects.  Plan  called for  continuing work with  a  continu- 
ing  value  to  the  Government,  to  identify  additional  work  requiring 
these  skills,  and  to  expedite placement  of  contracts  which  would  nor- 
mally  be  awarded  to  these  contractors.  Military  departments  must 
submit detailed plans  in accordance with this policy  as soon as possible 
and no  later  than  45 days  after  decision to  terminate  a  major  project. 
(SBD, 1/27/64,135;  M& R ,   2/3/64,  13 )  
Army-Navy-A ir  Force  Journal and  Register  Space  Editor  James  J.  Hag- 
gerty,  Jr.,  said:  “The  major  reservation  about  MOL  is  the   fact  that  it 
will  employ  existing o r   in-development hardware  . . . rather  than  ad- 
vances in  technology.  . . . 
‘LWith the  Dyna-Soar  experience  in  mind,  it  could  be  a  big  minus 
from the  standpoint  of  developmental continuity  in  later  years.  Dyna- 
Soar  was  killed  for  a  number  of  reasons, but  one of  them was  the fact 
that  i t  was not a very advanced spacecraft for its day  (1965-66  flights). 
Suppose that,  along about  1966 when  M O L  is in  ‘tin-bending’ status but 
still  a  year  or  two away  from  flight status,  someone takes  a  long  look 
at it and says ‘What have we  got?’ 
“By  that  time,  NASA  will  have  accumulated close  to  1,000  hours  of 
manned  space  flight  experience and  will  have  tested  a  number  of  new 
and advanced  systems;  it will have  conducted the all-important rendez- 
vous  tests  with  the  Gemini  spacecraft;  the  earth-orbiting  version  of 
Apollo,  which  can  stay  aloft  for  two  weeks  a s  a  space laboratory,  will 
be in  or near flight status. 
In that frame of  reference, the sho9-duration, 
non-rendezvousing MOL   could go  the way  of  Dyna-Soar, offering ‘insuf- 
project.’  . . .”  (A-N-AF  J&R, 11225/64,21,30) 
ficient technological advancement to  justify  the  cost  of  completing the 
January 26:  Potential  of  the gas-core nuclear  rocket was  outlined  at  recent 
press  conference  by  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Council  staff- 
member  Maxwell W.  Hunter,  Jr.,  and  Welsey  Kuhrt  and  George Me 
Lafferty of  United Aircraft  Corp . ,  which is performing  research on gas- 
core  nuclear  rocket  under  NASA  contract.  Maximum  specific  impulse 
for  gas-core  nuclear  rocket  would  be  between  2,000  and  3,000  (con- 
trasted  with MO  fo r  the best  chemical propellants  and  1,000 for  solid- 
core  nuclear  rocket).  United  Aircraft  calculated  useful  payload  sent 
to moon  and back by  gas-core nuclear rocket would be 10-30%  of  take- 
off  weight,  compared to  a  fraction  of  1% fo r  chemical rockets.  Power 
of  gas-core  rocket would  be  so great there would  be  no  need  fo r  rocket 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  0 4  

27 

staging;  single-stage rocket  could  take  off  from  earth,  land  on  moon, 
take  off,  return  to earth,  and  land  safely.  Such a  rocket vehicle would 
(Witkin, NYT ,  1/36/64.,  32) 
be reusable. 
January 26: DOD was reconsidering its tentative plans for a military communi- 
cations satellite system,  instead  would  rely  on  satellites of  Communica- 
tions Satellite Corp.,  John Finney  reported in N e w   Yo rk  Times.  Partly 
in response to Congressional pressure, Finney reported, DOD was propos- 
ing  to  delay  development of  ground  stations  and  defer  or  prolong  the 
completion of  its military  comsats.  Final decision would be  dependent 
upon  outcome  of  DOD negotiations  with  ComSatCorp,  still  underway. 
(Finney, NYT ,  1/27/M) 
January  27:  Soviet Academy  of  Sciences announced Soviet ground  stations 
were  tracking  ECHO   11  passive  communications satellite,  in  first  joint 
US.-U.S.S.R. 
space experiment.  Academician A.  A.  Blagonravov said 
Soviet ground stations observed the 135-ft. balloon as it inflated in  space 
and  three  observatories  succeeded in   photographing  the  satellite.  Ob- 
servation  stations  reported  the  satellite  appeared  very  bright,  varying 
from magnitude-1  to  zero.  “Observers in Arkhangelsk report  that two  
additional  objects  a r e  moving  in   front  of  and  slightly  faster  than  the 
satellite  proper,  and  a  third  object  is  moving  behind  it.  The  results 
of  the  first  observations a r e  being  forwarded  to  th e  U S .   The  optical 
stations will continue tracking  the ECHO  II. The radio  communications 
( N Y T ,  1/27/64.;  N .Y .  
experiment is  slated to  begin  somewhat later.” 
Her .  T r i b . ,  1 / 2 7 / a ;   Zzvestiu, 1/28/64,6,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
*  NASA  Hq.  received  telegrams from  Soviet Academy  of  Sciences containing 
first data from Soviet optical observations of  ECHO  11 passive communi- 
cations  satellite.  The  data  we re   obtained  Jan.  25  from  Soviet  optical 
observation  stations  a t   Tashkent,  Ashklabad,  Erevan,  Vologda,  Arch- 
angel,  Dushanbe,  and  Vorkuta,  were  being  analyzed  along  with  ob- 
servations  made  at  NASA  stations  around  the  world.  Soviet  Academy 
also  indicated  photographs  of  ECHO  11  were  obtained  a t   five  stations. 
(NASA Release 6 6 2 1  ) 
*  President  Johnson  transmitted to Congress his annual space report,  United 
States  A e r u m t i c s   and  Space  Activities,  1963  (H.  Doc.  207).  I n  his 
accompanying message the  President said : 
. . . Our  space  program,  in  both  its  civilian  and  military  aspects, 
b< 
is  peaceful  in   purpose  and  practice.  Moreover,  it  combines  such  Orb- 
jective with a policy of  international cooperation based upon a mutuality 
of  participation  and   benefits  as  well  as  the  wide  dissemination  of 
knowledge. 
“Space progress  is essential if  this Nation is to lead in technology and 
in  the  furthering  of  world  peace.  Such  progress  requires  the  use  of 
substantial  resources, which must  be employed efficiently and effectively 
in  order  that  we  obtain  the   maximum  benefits  with  a  minimum  of 
waste.  . . .” 
(Text, CR, 1 /27 /a ,   1045) 
Launching  of  Saturn  I SA-5  rocket  from AMR  was postponed  a t  T - 100 
min.  h u s e  blind  fiange  in   liquid  oxygen  line  to  S-I  stage  had  not 
been  removed  after  recent  pressurization  check.  Launch  was  resched- 
(Vctsh. Post,  1/28/64.;  Marshdl  Star, 1/29/64  1 )  
uled  fo r  Jan.  29. 
Performance  of  its  two  nuclear-test  detection  satellites  h a s   been  excel- 
lent  in  all  respects, DOD announced.  The  two satellites, launched  more 

28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 0 4  

than  two  months  ago  fo r   ARPA  by  WAF,  were  performing  almost  per- 
fectly,  and  their  reliability  has   been  excellent.  DOD anticipated  the 
satellites would  provide  data  on  background  radiation  and  other meas- 
urements  in space for useful lifetime of  more  than six months.  Success 
of this initial detection effort “has moved the research  program forward 
by more than one year,”  DOD said.  (DOD Release 30-64) 
January 27:  Secretary  of  Defense Robert  S. McNamara  testified in  military 
posture hearings before House Committee on Armed Services, emphasiz- 
ing  that  US. missile  and  bomber  force  was  neither  too  large nor  too 
small  for  today’s  “damage  limiting”  military  strategy.  He  pointed  out 
tha t   missiles  are  more  reliable  than  bombers,  being  mechanically  re- 
liable, capable  of  surviving  enemy  attack,  and able to  penetrate  enemy 
defenses  in   war-time, while  the  bombers  are   vulnerable  to   enemy  at- 
tack  and less likely to  reach  target  enemy  defenses. 
(Fryklund, Wash. 
Eve. &ar,  1/28/&) 
NASA  and  Rocketdyne  announced  Saturn  IB  launch  vehicle  would  use 
cluster of  eight uprated H-1  engines for manned  earth-orbital missions, 
each  engine  developing 200,000 lbs.  of  thrust  for total of  1,600,000 lbs. 
(M&R ,   1/27/64,9;  Marshall Star, 1 /29 /64 ,1)  
0  FAA released  summary  statements on  the  supersonic  transport  by  the  six 
companies that submitted  initial  design  proposals-three 
airframe com- 
panies  (Boeing, Lockheed, and North American)  and three  engine man- 
ufacturing  companies  (Curtiss-Wright, General  Electric,  and  Pra t t   & 
Whitney Div.  of  United Aircraft).  Boeing’s  proposed  SST.WaS based  on 
basic arrow-wing shape, designed to carry  150 passengers,  and cruise  a t  
mach  2.7.  Lockheed’s  proposed  SST  was  based  on  advanced  “double 
delta” wing shape, designed to  carry 218 passengers, and cruise a t  mach 
3.  North American’s  proposed  SST  was  based  on  modified  delta  shape 
wing,  was designed  to  carry  u p  to  187  passengers, cruise  a t  mach  2.65. 
Curtiss-Wright’s summary  said its proposed  turbojet  engine would  pro- 
duce  thrust  about  twice  that  of  current  transport  jet  engines.  GE’s 
proposal  offered  choice  between  advanced  turbo jet  or  turbofan  engine 
types  suitable  f o r   cruising  speeds  a t   mach  2.5  to  mach  3.  Pra t t   & 
Whitney  offered  two  configurations  of  turbofan  engine  for  aircraft 
flying up to  mach 3. 
( FAA   Release 64-8) 
0  DOD announced  $6,261,000  contract  had  been  awarded  by  Army  Corps 
of  Engineers  to Blount  Construction  Co.  for  construction of  NASA  Cen- 
tra l   Instrumentation Facility  a t  Merritt Island,  Fla.  (DOD Release 84- 
64)  
*  Revival  of  George  H.  Darwin’s  1879  theory  that  moon  was  formed  by 
breaking  off  the  earth,  by  two  independent  scientists, was  reported  in  
Newsweek.  Geologist Donald U. Wise believes that when earth was mol- 
ten mass,  heavy material flowed into core, causing  instability  in  its rota- 
tion and irregular elongation of  its form.  Then centrifugal forces pulled 
smaller knob  away,  sending  it  into  orbit  to   become  the  moon.  Frag- 
ments breaking away a t  same time fell on moon and caused pock-marked 
surface.  Related  theory  offered  by  A.  G.  W. Cameron,  Canadian  phy- 
sicist at NASA’s Goddard  Institute for  Space.Studies, was  that  earth lost 
a t  least half  its mass,  “enough material for  ten moons,”  in large chunks, 
some of which clumped together to form the moon while  others shot ou t  
to  become asteroids.  (Newsweek, 1/27/64) 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

29 

January  27:  First  flight  tests  of  new  16-in. rocket  motor  in   Project  Ha rp  
(High-Altitude Research Project)  were expected in May at Barbados Is., 
B.W.I.,  Missiles and  Rockets  reported.  Static  tests on  the motor  were 
now underway.  The rocket motor would be used to boost gun-launched 
payloads in  the McGill University-US.  Army  project.  The May  series 
would  include some 30  firings of  the rocket vehicle and new  versions of 
the  Martlet-series  missile.  Project  sources  indicated  use  of  multiple 
staging with new  rocket motor could make possible the orbiting of  50-70 
lb. payloads into 60-100  mi.  earth orbit. 
(M&R ,  1/27/64,22) 
*  Article  advising  small  business  firms  on  obtaining  space  contracts  and 
subcontracts,  by  former  counsel  to  House  Science  and  Astronautics 
Committee  Spencer  Beresford,  introduced  into  Congressional Record 
by Rep. Joe L.  Evins (D.-Tenn.)  : 
“There  are a  few simple rules  to  follow.  They can be  listed  quickly, 
but a re  often ignored. 
“An  even  bigger  stumbling  block  is  attitude.  Paradoxically,  many 
businessmen take  a political rather  than  a businesslike view of  the Gov- 
ernment, even when  doing  business with  it.  What  needs  to  be  stressed 
is that  they  would  do  better  to  treat  the Government like  a  prospective 
a demanding one, at that  . . . .”  ( C R ,  1/27/64,  A304) 
customer-and 
DOD  announced  appointment  of  new  Chairman  and  fou r   new  members 
of  Defense  Science  Board.  New  Chairman  was  Dr.  Frederick  Seitz, 
President  of  National  Academy of  Sciences, succeeding Dr.  Clifford C. 
Furnas,  President  of  New  York  State Univ.  at Buffalo,  whose  term  ex- 
pired Dec.  31,1963.  (DOD  Release 82-64) 
Total  face  value  of  Titan  I11  program  increased  only  1/3 of  1%  during 
first  10 months  of  the  program,  according  to  Maj.  Gen.  Ben  I.  Funk 
(AFSSD)  in  Missiles  and  Rockets.  When  all  present  contracts  a re   de- 
finitized, increase will amount to about 1.2% of  original values.  (M&R ,  
1/27/64,9) 
January  27-30:  About 400  scientists and  engineers  representing  34 private 
industries  and  eight  Government  agencies met  at  NASA  Marshall  Space 
Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.,  fo r  Symposium of  Manned Interplanetary 
Missions Studies Performed  by  Industry  fo r  NASA  in  1%3/64. 
(Ma r -  
shall S ta r ,  2/5/64,  l )  
January 28:  100th flight of  the X-15  rocket aircraft was  conducted near Ed- 
wards ME,  Calif.,  with Maj.  Robert  Rushworth  (U SAF )   as  pilot.  X-15 
No.  1  reached  3,682  mph  (mach  5.4)  and  107,000-ft. altitude  in  its 
“fully  successful  mission.”  The  X-15  was  launched  over  Delamar 
Lake, Nev.,  its engine burning 76 sec.  and the flight lasting 11 min. 
X-15  program  was  initiated  in  December  1954 with  signing  of  for- 
mal memorandum of  understanding by  NACA,  USAF,  and USN.  Contracts 
were  awarded  to  North  American  Aviation  for  construction  of  three 
X-15  aircraft  and  to  Thiokol  Chemical Corp.’s  Reaction  Motors  Div. 
fo r  manufacture  of  rocket engines.  X-15  was designed to  fly at mach 6 
and  250,000-ft. altitude, objectives often  exceeded in  flight.  First pow- 
ered  flight of  X-15  was made Sept. 17, 1959, by  NAA test pilot A.  S c m  
Crossfield.  X-15  research program  has provided  information  on aero- 
dynamics,  structures,  flight  control,  and  physiological aspects of  high- 
speed,  high-altitude flight.  Follow-on program,  begun  in  1962, utilizes 
X-15  as  test-bed for  scientific experiments beyond  earth’s  atmosphere. 
(Twx, FRc to NASA  Hq. ; FRC  Release  2-64) 

30 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND AERONAUT IQ S ,   19  6 4 
January 28: In  Komsomolskaya Pravda, Soviet Academician A.  A.  Blagonra- 
ECHO   11:  “. . . in  time,  international  space  cooperation  will  acquire 
vov was  interviewed by  Tass correspondent  regarding  the  launching of 
decisive  significance.  Each  country  will  contr?bute  i ts   best  efforts  to  
the peaceful  conquest of  space.  The knowledge obtained  will  accrue  to  
the benefit  of  all mankind.  Certain  long-range communication  problems 
will  be  clarified by  the joint investigations of  the U S .  and U.S.S.R.  sci- 
entists.  There  are   other  equally  fruitful  points  of  contact.  The  CO- 
ordination  of  the  program  of  space  experiments  envisages  the  use  of 
satellites for weather  service on  a world-wide scale.  Also  the combined 
use of  sputniks for compiling charts of  the Earth’s  magnetic field will be 
a  significant contribution t o  world  science.  These projects  are  part  of 
( T~ss, 
the Soviet-American collaboration in the interests of  mankind.” 
Komsomolskaya Pravda, 1/28/64,4,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
Early  telemetry and radar   reports indicated ECHO  II appeared to  be losing 
its  spherical  shape  and  high  reflectivity,  NASA  spokesman  announced. 
Telemetry  showed  ECHO   II  pressure  “has  decreased  more  rapidly  than 
anticipated.”  However, “optical observations tell us we have a beautiful 
balloon.”  Analysis  of  TV  photographs taken  by  camera  mounted  on 
Agena  stage  showed  sphere  had  inflated  properly;  but  inflating  gas 
apparently leaked out after two hours instead  of  lasting for 20 hours a s  
Colun&us,  Ohio,  and  between  Dallas,  .H” ex.,  and  Stump  Neck,  Md.  was 
planned.  However,  quality  of  radio  s i   als  between  Rome,  N.Y.,  and 
reported  to   be  good.  Spokesman  indicated  telemetry  reports  of  pres- 
sure  decrease  could  be  false  due  to  possible error   in   the  observations. 
(W a sh .  Post,  1/28/64;  Chic. Trib.,  1/28JM;  Finney,  NYT,  1/29/64, 
12 )  
*  NASA  conducted  three  grenade  experiments  with  Nike-Cajun  sounding 
rockets  launched  from  Wallops  Island,  Va. ; Fort  Churchill,  Canada; 
and  Ascension  Island  in  the  South  Atlantic,  part  of  current  series  to 
gather  comparative  data  on  high-altitude winds  and  atmospheric  tem- 
peratures  a t   widely  separated  locations.  At  Wallops  Island,  Nike- 
Cajun  lifted  off  a t   11:ll p.m.  EST,  followed  by  Nike-Cajun  a t   For t  
Churchill  a t  11:17 p.m.  EST,  and Nike-Cajun a t  Ascension  Island, 11:18 
p.m.  EST.  Grenades  were  ejected  and  detonated  a t   altitudes  ranging 
from 23  to  56 miles.  The  series of  experiments was under direction  of 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center. 
(Wallops  Release  64-11) 
*  Aerobee  300A  vehicle  launched  from  NASA  Wallops Station carried  95-lb. 
instrumented,payload to 192-mi. altitude in experiment to measure simul- 
taneously  electron  and  neutral  particle  temperatures  in  the  upper 
atmosphere.  Secondary  objectives  were  to  obtain  data  on  ion  and 
neutral particle densities.  After  101/2-min. flighq  payload  impacted  156 
mi.  downrange  in  the Atlantic Ocean.  Experiment  was  fourth  in  series 
of  ionosphere  studies,  joint  project  of  Univ.  of  Michigan  and  NASA 
Goddard Space Flight Center.  (Wallops Release 68-10) 
NASA  Aerobee  150 sounding rocket  launched  from White  Sands,  N.  Mex., 
sent  instrumented  payload  t o   117-mi. altitude  in  successful test  of  the 
sounding  rocket’s  attitude  control  system  with  the  improved  inertial 
reference  system.  Payload  was  recovered  immediately  after  impact 
and found to  be in  excellent condition. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
George M.  Low,  MSC Deputy  Director  and NASA  Deputy Associate Admin- 
istrator fo r  Manned Space Flight, said in  Space Business Daily interview 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19 0 4 

31 

that  crew  “aboard  the  Apollo  spacecraft  w i l l   be  more  than  adequately 
shielded from  solar  flare  radiation.”  Low  cited  National  Academy  of 
Sciences’  opinion  that  solar  radiation  dosages  to  Apollo  astronauts 
would be five to  10  times less than maximum tolerable dosage, and “the 
astronauts would be  safe on their  t r ip  to  the Moon  if  it is made  during 
its presently scheduled time.”  He pointed  out  that  special solar-radia- 
tion advisory committee  (see Dec.  9,1963)  did not take into account the 
NAS  information and the GSFC tables which show that solar flares during 
(SBD ,  
1969-70  would  not  be  as  dangerous  as heretofore  thought. 
1/28/64,144) 
January  28:  NASA  and  India’s  Dept. of  Atomic Energy announced they we re  
jointly  conducting  series  of  fou r   sounding  rocket  launchings  from 
Thumba  Equatorial  Rocket Launching  Station  to  investigate equatorial 
electrojet,  electric  current  flowing  along  earth’s  magnetic  equator  at 
about  60-mi.  altitude.  Thumba  range  is  located near  southwestern t ip  
In  the  four  electrojet  experiments, 
of  India,  on  the  magnetic equator. 
India’s Dept.  of  Atomic Energy provides launching  site  and supporting 
facilities;  personnel  for  sounding  rocket  launch  operations,  acquisition 
of  data  and  data  analysis;  and  supporting  ground  magnetometer and 
meteorological observations.  NASA  provides Nike-Apache rockets, loans 
the  launcher,  telemetry  equipment,  and  supplementary magnetometers. 
Indian  launch  and  telemetry  personnel were  trained  by  NASA.  Rocket 
magnetometer was built by Univ.  of  New  Hampshire through NASA  con- 
( NASA Release 64-19) 
tract. 
*  Spain and U S .  announced agreement to construct and operate space track- 
ing  and  data  acquisition  station  about  30 mi.  west  of  Madrid.  Coop- 
erating agencies were NASA  for the U S .  and Instituto Nacional de Tecnica 
Aeroespacial on behalf  of  Spain’s National Space Research Commission. 
To  be  used  primarily  in  NASA’s Deep  Space Network,  the  $1.5  million 
installation  would  include 85-ft.-diameter parabolic  antenna  and  equip- 
ment  fo r   transmitting,  receiving,  recording,  data  handling,  and  com- 
munications with spacecraft. 
( GSFC Historian) 
Army Corps of  Engineers awarded $5,154,551 contract to Robert E. McKee, 
General Contractor,  Inc.,  fo r   construction  of  NASA’s Lunar  Excursion 
Module  Test  Facilities  a t  White  Sands Missile Range.  (DOD Release 
89-64) 
*  Discussing U.S.  supersonic  transport  program,  Lockheed  Aircraft  Co rp .  
vice  president  Dudley E.  Browne told  American Bankers Association’s 
conference in Philadelphia  that  Lockheed had  proposed  “increased  use 
of Government capability to underwrite  both risk and financing, balanc- 
ing this with  sufficient risk  assumption and  financing by  the  contractor 
to justify  returning him a reasonable profit.  . . . 
“Whatever  final  plan  is  adopted,  the  banks  w i l l   be  called  upon  to 
play a significant part. 
“When  they  are,  I  think  they  will  find  themselves  participating  in  
a  program  whose  magnitude  they  have  never  encountered  before,  a 
total program  cost that may  run  into  something like $8  o r  $10 billion, 
may  involve  loan  limits  for  aircraft  of  a s  much  as 20  years  in  place 
of the present  10  o r  12, and may  require supplemental participation  of 
other financing organizations like insurance companies.  . . .”  (Clark, 
NYT, 2/2/M,  9 0 )  

32 

ASTRONAUTXCS  AND  AERONAUT IW ,   19  6 43 

January 28:  USAF  fired third  and last  interim Minuteman missile, a Wing 11 
version with Wing VI second stage,,  from Cape Kennedy.  This was 30th 
( M & R ,   2/3/M,  1 3 )  
success i n  45 Minuteman attempts from AMR. 
*  Distinguished Flying Crosses were  presented to  1 4  members of  U S .  Army 
and  USAF  fo r   record  mass  free-fall parachute  jump  Dec.  16, 1963,  as 
part of  Operation Halo.  ( DOD Release 87-64) 
J c ~ n u a ~ r  29:  NASA  launched  Saturn  I  SA-5  from  AMR   in  first  successful 
flight  tkst  of  both  stages of  the  rocket.  The  1.5-million-lb.-thrust S-1 
stage performed as planned, and the 90,000-lb.-thrust upper stage (S-IV) 
powered  by  six  liquid-hydrogen’ & lo  
engines  separated  and  burned 
properly  fo r  eight minutes,  attaining  orbital  speed.  The  orbited  body 
(spent S-IV  stage, instrument  unit,  payload adapter,  Jupiter  nose cone, 
and  11,500 lbs.  of  sand ballast)  weighed 37,700  lbs.,  nearly  20,000  lbs. 
of  which  was  payload.  As  the  first of  the  Block  I1  Saturn  I’s,  SA-5 
was  first  flight  test  of  both  Saturn  stages  and  only  the  second  flight 
test  of  a  liquid-hydrogen  powered  rocket  stage  (see  Centaur  AC-2, 
Nov.  27,  1963).  The   five  Block  I1  Saturn  1’s  differ  from  Block  I 
predecessors in  that  they  have  live upper  stages,  S-I  propellant  tanks 
a r e   extended  to  provide  100,000  lbs.  usable  propellant,  and  tail  fins 
a r e  added fo r  stability.  During the flight eight onboard motion picture 
cameras photographed various operations of  the rocket and a TV camera 
provided  real-time  photographs  of  separation  and  ignition  of  S-IV 
stage.  Shortly  after  S-I  burnout,  the  motion  picture  cameras  were 
ejected,  impacting  downrange  where  pararescue  men  recovered  seven 
of  them.  This  test  of  the  world’s  largest  known  rocket  proved  flight 
capability  of  Saturn  I’s  liquid-hydrogen,  clustered-engine upper  stage 
and  demonstrated  the  vehicle’s  capability  to  orbit  20,000-lb.  payload. 
(Marshall Star,  2/5/64,  1; NYT,  1/30/64,  1; M& R ,   2/3/64,  17-18) 
*  Following  successful  launching  of  Saturn  I  two-stage  SA-5,  President 
Johnson  issued  statement  saying  U S .   had  now  “proved  we   have  the 
capability of putting great payloads into  space.  . . . 
“We  have  come  a  long  way  from  the  31 pounds  of  EXPLORER  I  on 
January  31,1958, to th e  some 37,000 pounds which has just been placed 
into orbit by  Saturn I. 
“We  have  demonstrated not  only  enormous boost  capability,  but  we 
have  proved  the effectiveness and  the  practical  use  of  liquid  hydrogen 
a s   a  rocket  fuel  fo r   space  flight.  . . .”  (Knighton,  Balt.  Sun, 
1 / 3 0 / a )  
*  At  Cape Kennedy press conference following Saturn I SA-5  launch, NASA 
Associate Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans stated,  “There  is  little 
question  that  it  took  u s   ahead  of  the  Russians  in  our capability.”  He 
noted  that  payload  equivalent  of  SA-5’s  orbiting  body  was  between 
19,000 and  20,000 lbs.,  far exceeding the 14,292 lbs. reported fo r  heaviest 
Soviet satellites. . ( M & R ,   2/3/64,  18 )  
*  RELAY 11  communications satellite transmitted  portions  of  Soviet-American 
championship hockey game of  the  1964 Winter  Olympics a t  Innsbruck, 
Austria,  to  the US . ,   the first public  demonstration  of  RELAY 11.  Trans- 
mission  of  the event was made via  French  ground  station  a t  Pleumeur- 
Bodou and  US. ground  station at Andover, Me.  By  this time numerous 
communications  tests  of  the   satellite  had  been  made,  and  NASA  scien- 
tists said  that  all communications experiments were of  excellent quality. 
BELAY 11  also  wa s   sending  back  information  on  radiation  collected by 
( GSFC  Historian;  NASA  Release 64-a) 
onboard  instrumentation. 

33 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  
Junuury  29:  Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  Director  of  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft 
Center, said in  speech at Macalester College,  St.  Paul, Minn.:  “Although 
we  have not yet equalled the Soviets in  the number of  hours for manned 
flight, I am convinced we have gained  full dollar value fo r  ou r  Mercury 
program.  The  total project  cost was  less than  one percent  of  our mili- 
tary  budget  fo r  one year.  The project  was successfully completed with 
Gordon  Cooper’s  flight of  22  orbits  and  34  hours  length  in  May  1963. 
Needless to  say  I  am very  proud  of  this team  effort and  the  short time 
that  passed  from  the  day  we  were  told  to  get  on  with  the  project  until 
it was  finished.  . . .” 
(Text) 
e  NASA  spokesman  said  ECHO  11  balloon  satellite  was  still  operating  with 
6 6  great  success”  despite preliminary  radar  reports  that  it was  deflating 
and  losing  its  reflectivity.  The  135-ft. balloon  w a s   tested  in  transmis- 
sion between Rome, N.Y.,  and Ohio State University at Columbus, Ohio. 
( UPI,  NYT,  1/30/64,12) 
Senator Clinton P. Anderson  (D.-N.  Mex.) , Chairman of  Senate Committee 
on  Aeronautical  and  Space Sciences, noted  on  Senate  floor that  100th 
flight  of  X-15  was  made  yesterday.  “During  the  past  4%  years  the 
program  has  achieved  a  very  commendable record,  providing  a  wealth 
of  research  data  for  the  aeronautical  and  space program  of  the  United 
States.  The past accomplishments of  the X-15  program  reflect a  superb 
job   of  management,  flight-test operation,  and  cooperation  between  the 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  the  Air  Force,  and 
the   Navy.  . . . 
“The X-15  program  not  only  has  contributed  to  the  increased confi- 
dence  of  designers  of  current  high-performance aircraft  but,  in  doing 
so,  has  focused  attention  on  a  few  areas  which  require  additional  re- 
search.  The  planned  program  will  be  directed  toward  these  areas. 
This  program  is  providing  information  for  the next  logical step in   the 
flight research program, the  hypersonic. 
“In  addition  . . ., the X-15  program  is going to produce information 
NASA’s 
of  value,  I  believe,  to   the  development  of  supersonic  commercial air- 
planes.  This  data  w i l l   include  flight  controls,  materials  and  surface 
temperatures. 
“The lesson from the X-15  is that cooperation among agencies having 
(CR, 1/29/64,1358-59) 
an interest in a project pays off.” 
e  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  announced  award  of  $1,356,000  con- 
tract  fo  Blaw-Knox  Co.  for  design  and  fabrication  of  three  85-ft.- 
diameter  dish-shaped antennas  to be  used  in manned  space flight track- 
ing network  for Project Apollo lunar mission.  (GSFC Release G-4-64) 
*  NASA  announced  $300,000  contract  award  to  Wayne  State University  to 
establish  program  to   accelerate  industrial  application  of  ae ro spam  
related  technology.  Organized under  Wayne State’s  Center  fo r  Appli- 
cations of Science and Technology, the program would receive and would 
process  technical  information  through  NASA;  evaluate  applicability  of 
the  information  to  prospective industrial  users ; and  train  applications 
engineers to match  needs of  specific industries with  specific innovations 
o r  new knowledge. 
(NASA Release &23) 
e  Former  President  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower,  in  press  conference in  Detroit, 
remarked  that  the  US .   since  1955 had  obtained  “a  great  deal  of  de- 
pendability”  in  ballistic missiles.  “ . . . I do have confidence that  we 
(Jones, NYT ,  
do  have just  as good missiles a s  there a r e  in the  world.” 
1/30/%  1) 

34 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTIiCtS,  1 9  0 4 
lanumy 29: Maj. Gen. Don R.  Ostrander, Commander of  USAF Office of  Aero- 
space Research, addressed National Space Club in Washington: 
‘‘I am sometimes asked how military space research differs from space 
research  conducted  by  civilian  institutions  or  other  government  agen- 
cies.  The answer, of  course, is that there  is no  difference, except in  the 
ultimate  purpose  for which  it  is conducted.  As  a matter  of  fact,  there 
is  very  close  liaison  in  this  field  between  my  Command,  the  National 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  the   Office  of  Naval  Research, 
and  the   scientific  community.  We  make  every  effort  to  keep  them 
informed  about the work we   a re  doing  o r  sponsoring,  and  we  a r e  con- 
stantly  exchanging  information  with  them  about  our  findings  on  the 
characteristics  of  space.  Our  job,  however,  is  specifically  t o   support 
the Air  Force mission  in space.  . . . 
“I  know that  you  a re  all familiar  with  the potential radiation  hazards 
to  man  in  space,  particularly  with  the  deadly  proton  showers  that  ac- 
company certain  solar flares.  We have made great  strides in predicting 
the onset of  these showers a t  our  Sacramento Peak  Observatory in  New 
Mexico. 
b b  We  can  predict  safe  periods  with  increasing  accuracy-better 
than 
there  is  still  a  large  gray 
most weather predictions here  on  earth-but 
area in  which we  do not know whether conditions will be safe or  unsafe. 
It is possible that  we  could narrow  this gray  area  significantly with that 
which penetrates the atmosphere and can be picked up a t  the observatory. 
“If  we had this knowledge, i t  would extend the time we  could operate 
in   space with  absolute  assurance  of  safety.  It  would  also  give  us  ad- 
vanced early warning that would enable u s  i f   necessary to get our  astro- 
nauts out of  danger. 
“Even  in the present state of  the art, our  Sacramento Peak predictions 
have  been  crucial  to  the  safety  of  the  astronauts  participating  in  the 
Mercury  program.  We  have  been  able  to  give  NASA  absolute  assur- 
ance of  safe conditions, insofar  as proton  showers are concerned.  when 
the  astronauts  have gone into  orbit;  and warnings  of  potential  danger, 
a t  other times.  . . .” 
(Text) 
U.S.S.R.  opened  first  section  of  its  21-acre  radiotelescope  55  mi.  south 
of Moscow, Tass announced.  The section, consisting of  east-west portion 
of  the  cross-shaped antenna,  was  being  used  to  measure with  great  ac- 
curacy radio waves originating in the outer solar corona, part of  an IQSY 
( N Y T ,  1/30/64,12) 
projed. 
January 30:  NASA  launched  RANGER  VI  lunar  probe  with  Atlas-Agena  B 
launch  vehicle  from  AMR  in  lunar  landing  mission  to  photograph  the 
moon’s  surface.  The Atlas booster  fired properly  and,  after  stage sepa- 
ration, the Agena B stage ignited and attained orbital speed.  After coast- 
ing  in  parking  orbit  of  about  110-mi.  altitude,  the  Agena  B  reignited, 
sending RANGER VI  through the “launch window” on a course which would 
pass within 600 mi.  of  the moon.  A midcourse correction maneuver was 
planned so that the spacecraft would impact the lunar surface.  The only 
scientific instruments  onboard  the 804-lb. spacecraft were  six TV  cam- 
eras, designed to provide more than 3,000 photographs of  the lunar  sur- 
face during the last 10 min. of the 66-hr. flight.  This was the first Ranger 
launch since October 1962, when  extensive review of  the Ranger  project 
was  undertaken  because of  previous  Ranger  failures.  Fo r   RANGER  vr, 
changes were  made  in  subsystems  to  improve  reliability  and   provide 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AEXtONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 

35 

redundancy  in  some areas ; also,  sterilization  requirements  for  Ranger 
spacecraft  were  relaxed,  since excessive heat  was  suspected  of  causing 
(NASA  Release 6416 ;  Witkin, NYT, 1/31/ 
some previous malfunctions. 
a, 1; LRC  Release 6 4 1 0 ;  Miles,  Wash.  Post,  1/31/64,  1 )  
January 30:  U.S.S.R.  announced  orbiting  of  two  satellites, ELECTRON  I  and 
ELECTRON  11,  with  a  single  launch  vehicle.  Soviet  news  agency  Tass 
said  the  satellites were  studying  “the  internal  and  external  radiation 
belts  of  the  earth  and  physical  phenomena  connected  with  them.” 
ELECTRON I was orbiting at 7,100-km.  (4,412-mi.) apogee;  406-km.  (252- 
mi.)  perigee;  2-hr.,  49-min. period;  and 61”  inclination;  ELECTRON  11 
was  orbiting  a t   68,200-km.  (42,379-mi.)  apogee;  460-km.  (286-mi.) 
(Tass;  Wush. 
perigee;  22-hr.,  40-min.  period;  and  61”  inclination. 
Post,  1/31/64,  A14) 
0  At  American  Meteorological  Society  meeting,  ucu  campus,  Lewis  D. 
Kaplan  presented  paper  on  current  ideas about  atmosphere  of  Mars- 
surface  pressure  is  considerably  lower  than  previously  estimated  and 
CO,  concentration  is  considerably  higher-and 
discussed  significance 
of  these  findings  for Martian-atmosphere  entry  spacecraft. 
(AMS  Pro-  
gram, 717) 
0  NASA  submitted  to  the  Congress  its  report  on  H.R.  6651,  t o   provide  for  
study on establishment of  a National  Space Museum.  NASA  position was 
that since the National  Air  Museum of  the  Smithsonian  Institution  had 
undertaken  to preserve and display space objects, enactment of H.R.  6651 
(NASA  LAR  III /15)  
was considered  unnecessary. 
0  NASA’s equal opportunity  employment activities were  commended on  Sen- 
ate floor by Sen.  Jacob  K. Javits  (R,-N.Y.).  Senator Javits  introduced 
in the Congressionul Record letters from  NASA  indicating specific meas- 
ures  taken  in  broad-based  equal  opportunity  program,  especially  in 
(CR, 1/30/64,  1328-29) 
Huntsville, Ala.,  and Wallops Station, Va. 
President  Johnson  appointed  Dr.  Herbert F.  York,  Chancellor of  Univ.  of 
Calif.  at  San Diego  and  La  Jolla,  to  the  President’s Science Advisory 
Committee succeeding Dr.  George B.  Kistiakowsky.  (AP, NYT,  1/31/ 
6411) 
Interviewed  in Houston, where he toured  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center, 
NASC Executive Secretary  Dr. Edward C, Welsh commented that U.S.S.R. 
leads  U S .   in   “total  manned  [space]  flying  hours,  aggregate  weight 
lifted into space, and some phases  of  biomedicine. 
But  we  a re   ahead  in  space  navigation,  communications,  weather 
6 6  
satellites, and boosters. 
“I  doubt  tha t   they  now  can  equal  the  thrust  of  Saturn  I,  although 
(Houston  Chrun.,  1/31/&; 
I  think  they  eventually  will  do   so.” 
Houston Po s t ,  1/31/64) 
Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  Executive  Secretary  of  National  Aeronautics  and 
Space Council,  addressed Texas City  Chamber of  Commerce, discussing 
these summarized points : 
1. The space program is a sound investment to  improve the economic 
66  
health of  the country and is not  a wasteful expenditure  of  funds so long 
as  the program is handled on a business-like basis. 
“2.  The  space  program  is  being  carried  out  as   a  partnership  with 
private enterprise  and  requires  cooperation  with  communities  through- 
out the country. 

36 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  

3.  The space program does not  and should not  dra in  resources  from 
66 
other important projects,  such  as schools and housing;  in  fact, it stimu- 
lates both. 
4.  The space program is essential to  our  national  security-through 
66  
both its NASA  activities and its Department  of  Defense activities. 
5.  The  lunar  program  is  a  key  feature  in  the  space  program,  as   it 
66  
provides  a  clear  objective  and  it  requires  the  orderly  development  of 
a  wide  range  of  competences,  all  of which  will  have  value  for  future 
space performance. 
6.  International cooperation  in  our  space program  can  be mutually 
66  
beneficial and  will  not  impair  our  national  security  o r   inhibit  the  de- 
velopment of  our own space capabilities. 
7.  The space program stimulates the  supply of  trained scientists and 
c c  
engineers, but  does  not  require them  in  such  quantities  as  t o   interfere 
with the constructive employment of  the vast majority  of  them  in  other 
lines of endeavor.” 
(Text) 
January 30:  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  addressed  World  Affairs 
Council of  Northern California, in San Francisco, discussed national and 
international  aspects of  the U S .  space program : 
“The competition is tough.  The U.S.S.R.  has the ability to concentrate 
its efforts without  public  debate  and  without  the  regard  for  individual 
freedom  of  choice or  living standards which  enjoy  high  priority  in  our 
own  country.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  our  own  space  effort  should 
be similarly concentrated.  The implications of  space are broad, broader 
than we can now know, and they do not  end on the moon.  The necessary 
technologies are enormously demanding and therefore enormously prom- 
ising.  And,  whatever we  do  in  space, we  are critically  dependent  upon 
a  thorough knowledge of  the  space environment.  Moreover, the  Soviet 
program,  which  has  appeared  to  many  of  us  to   be  so  narrow  and  di- 
rected  almost  exclusively  to  prestigious  exploits, more  recently  gives 
signs  of  broadening  to   include  considerable  basic  research  as   well  as 
practical investigations, for   example,  through  the  use  of  weather  satel- 
lites in  which we pioneered. 
Therefore,  we  must  not  be  trapped  into  a  narrow  competition- 
6 6  
focusing  our   energies on  one  mission  o r   even  on  manned  flight  alone. 
Our preparations must  be broad  enough  to   give us  a  flexible base  suit- 
able f o r  a  continuity  of  effort and ability  to move  in   a  direction or   di- 
rections perhaps still unknown. 
The  projects  and  programs,  national  and  international,  in  which 
L <  
we are engaged have unprecedented scope and potential.  It is this scope 
and  this  potential  which  make  space  activity  a  valuable  instrument  of 
national and  international policy.  It is a  many  faceted tool  to  be used 
for  the economic and social advance  of  this  and  cooperating  nations  as  
well  as   for  the  preservation  of  our  technological  and  political  leader- 
ship in the world.  This tool  and its  importance  should  be  fully  under- 
stood and appreciated.  At the same time, as Lord Hailsham ha s  said, we 
should  remember  tha t   international cooperation  is  not  a  substitute  for 
national excellence. 
In   the 
“Europe  has  not  been  alone  in  recognizing  these  factors. 
complex of  UN   organizations, great interest ha s  been  evidenced  among 
nations  great  and small in  the  problems  and  benefits of  space. 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AEBONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 

37 

“Here  again,  space  ha s   served  to  bring  East,  West,  and  neutrals 
together  in  a  code  of  legal  principles  to  govern  space  activity,  which 
was  unanimously  adopted  in   the  last  session  of  the  General Assembly. 
In  the associated forum  of  the  International  Telecommunications Union 
agreements were  reached  on  the  assignment  of  radio  frequencies  fo r  
space research and space communications.  Without these arrangements 
the future of  communications satellite systems would be heavily clouded. 
And  in  another  UN   agency,  the  World  Meteorological Organization, 
a  start  has  been  made  in  the  evaluation and  planning of  requirements 
fo r  a world weather  satellite system which  also  promises  real  economic 
and human benefits. 
“Thus  it  is  clear  that  o u r   national  effort  in  space  research  and  ex- 
ploration  is  becoming a  powerful  force  in   developing greater  interna- 
tional  cooperation-cooperation  which  is  not  limited  to  the  nations  of 
It  is  in  
the  Free  World,  but  which  spans  the  Iron  Curtain,  a s  well. 
this context, as a force which joins all mankind against a common enemy, 
the  hostile  environment  of  space,  rather  than  against  each  other,  that 
the  space effort may  bring the most  significant and  enduring  rewards.” 
(Text) 
January 30:  In  its annual report to the Congress, AEC reported that “substan- 
tial increases” had been made in explosive power of  thermonuclear war- 
heads fo r  Polaris, Minuteman,  and Titan  long-range missiles.  AEC  also 
said progress had been made in developing nuclear weapons that produce 
less  radioactive  fallout.  The  advances were  made  in  1962 test  series 
(Finney, NYT,  1/31/64,  1) 
of  atmospheric explosions in  the Pacific. 
January  31 : Midcourse maneuver  for  RANGER  VI lunar  spacecraft  was  exe- 
cuted  from  NASA-JPL  Tracking Station, Goldstone, Calif.,  16 hrs.  after 
the  spacecraft  was  launched  from  AMR.  The  radio  signal  activated 
an  onboard  motor  which  fired  for  69  sec.,  aiming  the  spacecraft  on 
collision course  with  the  moon.  Target  fo r   the  lunar  spacecraft:  Sea 
(Witkin, NYT,  2/2/64,  1 ; Houston Chron., 1/31/64) 
of  Tranquility. 
Sixth birthday  of  EXPLORER   I,  first U.S.  satellite, which was  launched  into 
team.  EXPLORER  I  has 
orbit  with  a  Jupiter  C  vehicle  by  JPL-ABMA 
traveled around the earth 26,315 times covering some 775 million miles. 
With  initial  orbit  of  1,573-mi. apogee, 224-mi. perigee,  and  114.8-min. 
period,  EXPLORER  I now orbits a t   1,011.6-mi. apogee, 212.5-mi.  perigee, 
It  was  originally  expected  to  re-enter  atmos- 
and  104.6-min. period. 
phere  and  disintegrate  after  five years,  was  now  expected  to  last  until 
1966.  Its  smaller  transmitter  relayed  information  for  105 days;  the 
larger  transmitter,  31  days.  Onboard  instrumentation  discovered 
radiation  belt  around  the  earth,  named  after  Dr.  James  A.  Van  Allen 
(Marshall  Star,  1/29/64,  4;  “NASA 
who  provided  the  experiment. 
Chronicle of  Earth Sat. 81 Space Probes, 1 9 5 7 4 0 ” )  
*  In  letter  to  Speaker  of  the House  and President  P r o  Tempore of  the  Sen- 
ate,  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  indicated  NASA  electronics re- 
search center  should be located  in  the  Greater Boston  area.  “It  is  our 
carefully  considered  opinion  tha t   to  meet  the  specific requirements  of 
the NASA  program in respect to time and in respect to existing resources, 
the  center  should  be  located  in  the  Greater  Boston  area.” 
I n   accord- 
ance  with  P.L.  88-113,  NASA  had  reviewed  some  50  locations  as  pos- 
(NASA  LAR  111/18;  UPI,  Houston Chron., 
sible  sites  fo r   the  center. 
2/1/64) 

38 

ASTRONAUTIGS   AND AERONAUTICIS,  1 9 6 4  

January 31:  Successful testing  of  design  of  radar  antenna  100 times more 
sensitive  than  world’s  largest  radiotelescope  (Arecibo,  P.R.)  was  an- 
nounced  by  USAF  Office of  Aerospace Research.  The multiple antenna 
was  designed by  Dr.  Allan  Schell of  OAR  Cambridge Research Labora- 
tories,  a s  space surveillance and  tracking  radar  system and  for use  as a 
radiotelescope.  Oneyea r   evaluation  of  test  section  verified  predicted 
performance  characteristics  of  full-size antenna.  The ‘multiple antenna 
would  consist  of  some  5,000  flat  metal  plates  each  2O-ft.-bydO-ft.  ar- 
ranged  in   fou r   elliptical  areas  around  1,000-ft. tower.  Studies  were 
continuing  to  determine optimum size from  standpoint  of  economy and  
(OAR   Re- 
performance,  tower  stability,  and  antenna  control  system. 
lease 1-2) 
*  Sen.  Warren  G.  Magnuson  (D.-Wash.)  was  quoted  a s  saying:  “In  view 
of  the tremendous success of  the  Saturn flight,  perhaps  further  savings 
in  the cost of  the space program might be  possible between  now  and the 
first  Saturn  V  flight by  leap-frogging  some of  the  intermediate  steps.” 
(SBD ,  1/31/64+, 169) 
*  Rep.  J.  Edward  Roush  (D.-Ind.)  said  in  the  House:  “On  Wednesday we 
saw  the  successful  launching  of  the  Saturn  rocket  carrying  into  orbit 
around  the  earth  18  tons.  This  included  the  largest  payload  ever 
placed  in  orbit by man  and  exceeds the largest  Russian payload  by  11 
tons.  For  several  years  now  this  Nation  has  been  plagued  with  the 
uncomfortable  knowledge  that  the   Russians  were  ahead  of  u s   in  the  
space effort.  This has been  based  primarily  on  the  fact  that  they  had 
a greater  lift  capability.  The United  States  is  now  ahead  in   lift  capa- 
bility  and  in  every  other  phase  of  the  space  program.  . . .”  ( C R ,  
1/31/64,1443) 
*  RELAY 
I  communications  satellite  continued  operating  normally  and  the 
one-year onboard timer had not cut off  a s  of  this date.  (GSFC Historian) 
*  Communications Satellite  Corp.  submitted  its  annual  report  to  the  Presi- 
dent and  the Congress on  its activities February  1-December  31,  1963. 
ComSatCorp  reported  it  had  made  plans  for  development  and   estab- 
lishment  of  commercial  communications  satellite  system  with  global 
capability,  calling  for  launching  of  one  o r   more  synchronous-orbit 
satellites over the Atlantic Ocean in  1965 o n  a n  experimental-operational 
basis  and  initial  launching  of  satellite  fo r   the  comsat  system  in   1966. 
(ComSatCorp Rpt.,  1/31/64+) 
*  DOD announced  award  of  $7,112,913 contract  to  Franchi  Construction c o .  
fo r  construction of  NASA  launch operations center headquarters bFilding 
a t  Merritt  Island,  Fla.  Contract  was  awarded  by  Army  Corps  of  En- 
gineers.  (DOD Release 96-64) 
During  January:  President  Johnson  sent  letters  to  all major  space/defense 
contractors urging them to achieve significant reductions in expenditures. 
I n   separate  letters  from  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb,  contrac- 
tors  were  told  of  three  areas  offering greatest  potential  for  significant 
savings : purchasing  a t  lowest price compat?ble with  reliability  require- 
ments,  placing  greater  emphasis on  incentives,  and  reducing  operating 
costs. 
( NM  S&ID  Skywriter, 1/10/64?,  1 )  
NASA  began  installation of  aerospace ground  equipment a t  Cape Kennedy’s 
Launch  Complex 19 fo r   Project  Gemini, work  beginning  ahead  of  pre- 
viously  expected date in  effort to  expedite first Gemini flight.  (M&R, 
1 / 1 3 / a ,   9) 

39 
ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AEBONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 
During fanua ry :  Snap-1OA  space nuclear power  system completed a  record 
90-day  continuous test  operation,  in  test  conducted f o r  AEC  by Atomics 
International.  Purpose  of  the   test,  conducted  with  mockup  of  the 
Snap-lOA,  was  to check  operation  of  various  components a s  a  system 
under conditions closely simulating space environment.  (SBD ,  1/27/64, 
136) 
a  NASA  awarded Maizin Co.’s  Baltimore Div.  a $1,499,111 contract fo r  P a r t  I1 
study of  post-Saturn launch vehicles, a  oneyea r  study to  include overall 
vehicle definition and preliminary  design.  (Marshall Star, 1/15/6p,  1 ; 
M&R ,   1 /13 /64 ,9 )  
Ryan Aeronautical Corp. w a s  awarded contract from RCA  to design landing 
radar f o r  the  Project Apollo Lunar Excursion Module.  RCA,  responsible 
for  major  LEM  subsystems,  would  integrate  landing  rada r   with  LEM’S 
(M& R ,  1/13/@, 10-11) 
overall sensor system. 
e  Twelfth  session  of  Mexico-US.  Commission for  Space Observations held 
in  Mexico  City  to  consider  report  on   construction  a t   Guaymas  track- 
ing  and data acquisition station to modify it fo r  Project Gemini.  Guay- 
mas station was one of  five being built or updated fo r  Gem in i  tracking- 
Carnarvon,  Australia;  Bermuda;  Canary  Islands;  and  Cape Kennedy. 
(SBD ,  1/13/64,59) 
*  W.  V.  Pangborn  and  Co., Inc.,  and Lowery Electric,  Inc.,  submitted joint 
bid  of  $1,443,289.20  fo r   NASA-USAF  contract  to  build  frequency  con- 
trol  and calibration  facility  a t  Cape Kennedy’s Merritt  Island.  Facility 
would become part of  AMR tracking network, would be aimed at support- 
ing Titan I11 and Saturn V. 
( M & R ,   1/20/64+, 1 2 )  
NASA  released  to   industry  its  first  technology  utilization  report,  entitled 
“An  Improved  Precision  Height  Gage.”  NASA  Ames  Research  Center 
(NASA  SP-5001) 
developed the report. 
Seth W.  Booth, Group Director, Re-entry Feasibility Group, San Bernardino 
Operations  of  the  Aerospace Corp.,  was  presented  AFSC’S  Outstanding 
Achievement  Award  by  Maj.  Gen.  W.  Austin  Davis,  Commander  of 
AFSC  Ballistic Systems Div.  Booth  was  cited  for  his  exceptional tech- 
nical  direction  to  BSD contractors  for  various  re-entry  programs  from 
(A-N-AF  J&R,  1/18/64,10) 
1956-1963. 
120-in.  solid-propellant  rocket  motor  being  developed  by  United  Tech- 
nology  Center fo r  USAF  was static-fired for nearly two minutes,  a  “com- 
(SBD ,  1/30/64,,  163) 
pletely successful” test. 
Reviewing  the worth  of  scientific results gained  in  the  first  years  of  U S .  
space  exploration,  Fortune  magazine  said:  “. . . new  knowledge  is  a 
dukedom  whose  great  wealth  and  resources  cannot  even  begin  to  be  
estimated or  exhausted.  Already the new  knowledge acquired  in space 
exceeds by  f a r   the  value  of  funds  so  fa r   spent.  For  knowledge,  more 
(NASA  FY 
than  guns  and  butter,  is  the  true  power  of  modern  states.” 
1965 Auth. Hearings, Pa r t  I, 3 )  

February  1964 
February 1 I President Johnson stated in press conference: 
“This past week  the United  States has  demonstrated in   at least  eight 
different  situations  this  Nation’s  determination  to  insure  both  peace 
and freedom in the widest possible areas. 
“Progress  toward  these ends  is frequently  slow  and  rarely  dramatic, 
lines.  . . . ,, 
but  it  should  be  viewed  in  the  perspective  of  history  and  not  head- 
The President listed the first seven situations, then 
“And  finally,  we   have  witnessed  and  the  whole  world  has  witnessed 
with  pleasure  the  remarkable  success  of  ou r   Saturn  rocket,  the  most 
powerful rocket thrust known  to man.  This rocket,  I am happy  to  say, 
was first recommended by our committee [Senate Preparedness Subcom- 
(Transcript,  Wash.  Post, 
in  1958.” 
mittee,  chaired  by  Johnson] 
2/2/64,  A7) 
*  Editorial in  Christian Science Monitor said: 
“‘It is one thing to question the wisdom of  spending so much so quickly 
to  put  an American hopefully on  the moon  in  this  decade,  a  time  limit 
that  the  economy drive  in  Washington may  remove.  But  it  would  be 
less than wisdom  to  cut  back  sharply  on  space funding  under  the  false 
assumption  that  the  United  States  is pulling  ahead  of  the  Soviets.  It 
(CSM ,  2/1/64) 
is stillcoming up  from behind.” 
*  Roscoe  Drummond,  i n   his  Washington  Post  column,  said  success  of 
Saturn I SA-5  “. . . means that the major  advantage which the Soviets 
have had so long and which has yielded  them their  principal  space spec- 
past.  . . . 
taculars-the 
long Russian lead i n  rocket power-is 
now  a  thing  of  the 
’ 
“There  should  be  no  minimizing  what  the  Soviets  have  already 
done.  . . . 
“But  the  United  States  accomplishments  have  been  more  diverse. 
We  have  put  almost  four  times  as  many  spacecraft  into  orbit  as  the 
Soviets.  We have made  f a r  more  progress  in   the  application  of  space 
technology in communications, weather,  and navigation.  We both have 
compiled a large volume of  scientific data about outer  space and neither 
is significantly ahead. 
“As Dr. Edward C.  Welsh,  Executive Secretary of  the  National Aero- 
nautics  and Space Council, puts it,  ‘the space race continues and  it will 
be  a  long  one.’  ”  (Drummond,  Wmh. Post,  2/1/64,  in   CR,  2/1/64, 
A 4 1  ) 
*  Nuclear  “breeder”  reactor  using  thorium  fuel,  pioneered  by  Vice  Adm. 
Hyman  G.  Rickover,  was  under  consideration  by  AEC and  Calif.  Dept. 
of  Water Resources f o r  a nuclear power plant, according to recent letter 
from  AEC Chairman  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg  to  Sen.  John  0.  Pastore, 
Chairman  of  Joint  Congressional Committee on  Atomic  Energy.  Built 
around  the “seed-and-blanket” design developed by  the  Rickover team, 
40 

41 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AEBONATJTICS,  1 9 6 4  
the thorium-fueled reactor appeared to  have “unusual 
erating economic nuclear power  and  for  breeding.” 
Seaborg said, the concept would  “represent  a major 
technology and an important milestone  in our national objective of  con- 
(Finney, NYT ,  2/2/64,  1 ,30)  
serving nuclear fuel resources.” 
February 1 : At Washington press conference,  National Bureau  of  Standards 
and  team  of  visiting Soviet metrologists announced  preliminary  agree- 
ment  for  extended cooperation in measurement  and  standards data  ex- 
change.  Agreement provided for exchange of  (1 )   data on observations 
of  standard time and frequency signals from radio stations,  ( 2 )  calibra- 
tion  information to  compare measurements of  electrical  and  electronic 
quantities, and  ( 3 )   publications of  National  Bureau  of  Standards and 
Soviet Committee on  Standards, Measures, and Measuring Instruments. 
(M&R ,  2/10/64,10-11) 
e  specid  A F s c   management  office  for  the   Manned  o rb i t ing   Laboratory 
(MOL) program was established in AFSC  Hq.,  headed by Col. R.  K. Jacob- 
son, Assistant  Deputy  Commander  for  Space  for  MOL.  (AFSC  Release 
41-R-16) 
e  According to  USAF  authorities in Berlin,  preliminary  examination  showed 
that  the T-39  jet  trainer which  crashed  in  East  Germany  last  Jan,  28, 
killing  the  three  Americans  aboard,  was  shot  down  by  Soviet  aircraft. 
Denying charges made by  East Germany, USAF  spokesman said the  air- 
craf t  carried no  arms  or photographic equipment, was  incapable of  re- 
connaissance.  (Wa sh .  Post, 2/2/64,  A16) 
*  Soviet  Chief  A i r   Marshal Konstantin  A.  Vershinin  said  in   Red  Star  that 
Soviet a ir   force can destroy any  enemy land,  sea,  or   air  target.  Soviet 
a ir   power  now  is   based  on  supersonic, rocket-carrying planes  capable 
( UPI,  Wash. Post, 2 /2 /@& ,  A16) 
of  operating in all weather conditions. 
February  2:  RANGER  VI  crashed onto the moon  on target in  the Sea of  Tran- 
quility, but  its onboard camera system failed to return TV photographs 
Indications were  that  the  two  “V  systems  re- 
of  the  lunar  surface. 
sponded to Central Computer and Sequencer  ( C C S ~ S )  command to warm 
up,  but  the  cameras  did  not  complete  the  warm-up  to  picture  taking. 
RANGER  VI’S  cameras  (two wide-angle  and  four  narrow-angle)  were  to  
have  made more  than  3,000  photographs during  i ts  last  10 min.  The 
photographs were  to  have provided  scientific data on  lunar  topography 
and supported the Surveyor unmanned soft-landing spacecraft and Apollo 
manned lunar landing program. 
Dr.  William  Pickering,  Director  of  JPL   which  is   responsible  for 
Ranger project management  as well  as i ts  tracking and communications 
through Deep Space Network, said of  RANGER  VI: 
“I t  was a sad finish to something that was going so good. 
“Our  accuracy  was  a  very  significant  achievement.  The  failure  of 
the  camera system isn’t  going  to  discourage us.  I’m  quite confident in 
our ability, and we will succeed in exploring the moon  on a fu ture  shot.” 
NASA  planned  three more  Ranger TV flights  this  year. 
(Witkin, N Y T ,  
2/3/64;  UPI,  Wash .  Post,  2/3/64;  AP,  Wash .  Post,  2/3/64) 
*  Sir Bernard  Lovell,  Director of  Jodrell Bank  Experimental Station which 
tracked  RANGER  VI  on  its  course  to  the  moon,  said  of  the  spacecraft’s 
accurate  impact  of  the  moon:  “I  think  this  represents  a  very  great 
achievement for American rocket engineers. 
7-8-4 

42 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  A E R O N A m U S ,   1 9 6 4, 

“This  achievement  is underlined  by  the fact  that  it is  now  four  and 
a  half  years  since  either  the  Russians  or  the  Americans have  made  a 
direct hit of  this nature on the lunar surface, despite repeated attempts.” 
Kenneth W.  Gatland,  Director  of  the  British  Interplanetary  Society, 
referred  to the failure of RANGER  VI’S cameras to take pictures:  “I should 
say this is one of  the most bitter  disappointments of  the space age 90  f a r  
i n  having  come so near  to  success in  a vital reconnaissance.”  He spec- 
ulated  that  the  cameras may  have  failed  to  work  because the  tempera- 
ture caused a relay to stick or a component t o  fail.  (AP, NYT, 2/3/M) 
February  2 :   Tass  announced  ELECTRON  I and  ELECTRON  11 scientific  satel- 
lites  were  continuing  their  elliptical  orbits  of  the  earth.  By  6:OO 
p.m.  Moscow time Feb. 1, ELECTRON  I had passed repeatedly through the 
inner  radation  belt  in  its  19 orbits  and  ELECTRON  11 had  moved  fou r  
times through  the  outer  radiation  belt  in  its  two  orbits.  Tass  said  the 
following  studies  were  being  made  with  aid  of  onboard  equipment: 
outer  and  inner  radiation  belts;  charged  particles  having  low  energy; 
concentrations of  electrons and  positive ions;  magnetic fields and  radi- 
ation  belts of  the  earth;  nuclear component of  cosmic radiation;  short- 
wave  solar  radiation;  propagation  of  radio  waves;  radio-radiation  of 
galaxies;  and  densities  of  meteoritic  material.  Tass  said  the  studies, 
being  accomplished under  a  unified  program  in  various  areas  of  outer 
space,  were  being  conducted  fo r   the  first  time.  These studies  were 
important  fo r   conducting  the  program  of  the  IQSY and  f o r  permitting 
collection  of  data  to  assure  radiation  safety  of  manned  space  flights. 
Tass  said  all onboard  equipment was  functioning normally and  ground 
stations were   receiving scientific data  from  the  satellites.  (Tass, Kras- 
naya Zvezda, 2/2/64,1,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
0  300-ft.-high  helium-filled  balloon  with  550-lb.  instrumented  payload  was 
recovered  30  mi.  west  of  Williamsport,  N.C.,  after  seven-hour  flight 
from  Palestine, Tex.,  where it was  launched by  the National  Center for 
Atmospheric Research.  Scientists from Case Institute, which  sponsored 
the  launching, said  the cosmic-ray-studying instruments performed per- 
fectly during the flight.  (Houston Chron., 2/3/64) 
February 3: NASA established RANGER VI  Review Board, composed of  members 
from  NASA  Hq.,  Langley  Research  Center,  and  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center,  and  chaired  by  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  fo r   Industry 
Affairs Earl D.  Hilburn,  to  review program  effect of  RANGER  VI  failure. 
The Board would  review  resuIts  of  failure  analyses and  corrective  pro- 
cedures being prepared  by  JPL,  then  make recommendations regarding 
remainder of  Ranger &ght program. 
At  press  conference,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C. 
Seamans, Jr.,  explained that  the  single aim  of  the Board  wa s   to  deter- 
mine when  Ranger 7 would  be launched.  Until  the mystery  of  RANGER 
VI’S  fa i lu re  was  solved, NASA  was  delaying  launch  of  Ranger  7,  which 
(NASA  Re- 
also  would  have  mission  of  photographing  lunar  surface. 
lease 64-26;  Simons, Wash. Post, 2 /4 /M ;   Finney, NYT,  2/4,/6d) 
Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  was  launched  from  Wallops  Island,  Va.,  in 
coordination  with  Nike-Apache  launch  a t   Ascension  Island,  th i rd   set 
in  current  NASA  series  to  obtain  data  on  high-altitude winds  and  at- 
mospheric temperatures.  A correlated  launch  from  Ft.  Churchill, Can- 
ada, was postponed due to sound interference problems.  The Wallops ex- 
periment  w a s   timed  to  coincide with  the  annual  east-tewest  ‘‘warming 

43 
ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AEBONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
trend",  was to  measure its effects on the upper atmosphere.  The expeeri- 
ments were  designed  to  obtain  measurements at altitudes  ranging up to 
55 mi.  The Wallops experiment used  grenade payload;  fo r  the Ascen- 
sion experiment, the grenade payload was replaced with Pitot-static probe 
to measure densities, pressures, and temperatures.  The series was being 
conducted  for  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center. 
(Wallops  Release 
6 4 4 2 ;  NASA  Rpt. s 
. Dept.  of  Commerce announced agreement to  de- 
February 3 :   NASA  and 
velop  National  Operational  Meteorological  satellite  system  (NOMSS) . 
Signed by  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  and  Secretary  of  Com- 
merce  Luther  H.  Hodges,  agreement provided  for  NOMS  which  would 
be based  on  NASA-developed Tiros technology and  would  become  oper- 
ational  in   1965.  Compared with  earlier  plans,  this  joint  program  was 
expected  to  save Dept.  of  Commerce some $125,000,000 over  five-year 
period.  Once NASA  orbited the  satellites, Weather Bureau would operate 
and control the system and analyze, process, and distribute the meteoro- 
logical data  gathered by  the  satellites.  Under  reimbursable order  from 
Weather Bureau, NASA  would design, procure, test, launch, and track  the 
weather  satellites.  (NASA Release  64-25;  Commerce  Dept.  Release  G 
&20;  Text, NMI  2-3-30) 
*  14  men  selected  last  October  fo r   astronaut  training  reported  to   NASA 
Manned  Spacecraft Center to  begin  training  for  the  Gemini and Apollo 
(MSC  Release 64-24) 
space flight crew pool. 
*  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  Director  of  NASA  Marshall  Space Flight  Center, 
said  at  Washington  press  luncheon  that  the  two  astronauts  in   Project 
Apollo's  Lunar  Excursion Module would  stand  u p   during  the  descent 
to  the  moon.  He  described  support  gear-like 
elasticized  parachute 
harness-which  would  cushion  the  landing  fo r   the  crewmen.  Elim- 
ination  of  chairs  and  rearrangement  of  LEM'S  gear  permitted  weight 
reduction  of  1,000 lbs.,  he  said. 
(Halsell, Houston Post,  2 /4 /M)  
*  FAA began sonic-boom study program  at Oklahoma City, Okla.,  generating 
sonic booms a t  the  levels predicted  for  supersonic transport  operations 
to  determine  public  acceptability  of these  levels.  Data  acquired  from 
the  26-week  program  would  be  used  in   planning  and   design  of  US .  
supersonic transport.  FAA conducted the program  with  cooperation  of 
USAF  and  NASA;  USAF  provided  F-104  aircraft  to  generate  the   booms 
and   NASA  researchers  provided  ground  instrumentation  to  measure 
booms and boom effect.  (FAA Release 68-3) 
Interviewed in Boston Globe, Dr.  Albert J.  Kelley,  Director  of  Electronics 
and  Control  Section  of  NASA  Office  of  Advanced  Research  and  Tech- 
nology,  said  NASA  planned  a  gradual buildup  of  personnel  for  the  pro- 
posed  electronics  research  center  to  a  maximum  of  2,100  in   1969. 
Year-by-year buildup:  1964, 50;  1965,  250;  1966,  550;  1967,  1,000; 
1968,  1,600;  and   1969, 2,100.  Nucleus  of  the  center's  staff  would  be 
(White, 
electronics  task  force  currently  operating  in   Washington. 
Boston Globe, 2/3/64) 
*  NASA  submitted  report  to  Congress on  patent  legislation:  to  House  Com- 
mittee on  the Judiciary  on  H.R.  4482, to  provide  administration  in  the 
public  interest  of  property  rights  to  inventions  resulting  from  R&D 
financed wholly  o r  partially  by  public  funds;  to  Senate  Committee on 
the Judiciary  on  S.  1290, to  establish uniform  national policy  fo r  pro- 
prietary rights to inventions made through expenditure of  public funds; 

44 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 ,  
and to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and  Space Sciences on S.  1444, 
to  amend  National  Aeronautics  and   Space Act  of  1958 to  waive  pro- 
prietary interests of  the U.S.  in inventions.  ( NASA  LAR III/19) 
February 3:  Secretary  of  the Air  Force  Eugene M.  Zuckert testified before 
House Committee on Armed Services: 
“In  the  field  of  military  applications  of  space,  our  views  as  to  the 
future  remain  unchanged.  We believe that  we  must  vigorously exploit 
the most likely avenues of  interest, though we  are not yet able to be defin- 
itive enough to describe man’s  military  space role  adequately to  project 
specific weapon systems.  . . . 
“The Manned  Orbiting Laboratory  ( M O L )   program,  which  replaced 
the Dyna-Soar, is a  research  program  aimed  at  giving man  the  oppor- 
tunity  to  operate  in space so that  we  may  determine whether  and when 
the  manned  space vehicle will  be  m i l i tar i ly   significant.  The  MOL  pro- 
gram  will  provide  much  of  the  supporting  knowledge  for  indicated 
future  manned  space  systems.  The  timing  of  the  program  is  based 
upon  a  technical  decision  that  our  primary  need  is  to  know  what 
functions  man  can  perform  in  orbit,  before  exploring,  as  completely 
a s   Dyna-Soar would  have,  the  problems  and  techniques  of  controlled 
reentry.  This  latter  will  now  be  studied  on  a  more  limited  develop- 
(Text, A F  In fo .  Pol. Ltr.,  2 J a )  
mental basis.” 
Maj. Gen. T. C.  Bedwell, Jr., Cdr. of  USAF Aerospace Medical Div.  a t  Brooks 
AFB,  reported that four airmen spent 30 days in pure oxygen atmosphere 
with  no  apparent  ill  effects.  The  volunteers were  confined  in   special 
chamber  a t  Brooks AFB  for six weeks.  During the first  two weeks they 
were  in  mixed-gas  atmosphere while  they  were  acclimating to  the  sur- 
roundings  and  practicing  space-related techniques;  then  the  chamber’s 
atmosphere  was  converted  to  100 percent  oxygen.  With  no  initial 
harmful  effects, the  airmen  would  continue under  medical  surveillance 
fo r   a  long  period.  “Longer  tests  of  this  t y p e   a re   planned,”  General 
Bedwell said.  “We  need  many  statistics, not  just  a  few  samplings,  to 
(AP, Houston  Post,  2 /4 /@)  
draw  any  definite conclusions.” 
*  General Curtis E.  LeMay, Air  Force Chief  of  Staff, testified  before  House 
Committee on Armed Services: 
“The Air Force program  of  research and development seeks to  assure 
that  this  Nation  is  first  in  the  development  of  military  capabilities 
in  space.  We  have  some  cause for  optimism  in  this  area.  Ou r  Titan 
I11  program  is proceeding  satisfactorily.  I n   addition,  we  are  under- 
program.  . . . 
taking  the  development  of  a  medium  altitude  communications satellite 
The next major  step  toward  the  achievement of  future  space capa- 
66  
bilities is the Manned Orbiting Laboratory  (MOL) which was  approved 
fo r  development under Air Force management.  The MOL  will provide a 
means  to  fulfill  the  compelling  requirement  to  acquire  information 
essential  to  determining  accurately  the  threat  from  space,  the  use- 
fulness and the capabilities of  man-in-space, and the unique  advantages 
which may  accrue  from  military  space  operations.  It  will  also  serve 
a s   a  platform  to  support  testing  of  equipment  and  procedures  in   the 
environment in which they will be used. 
“Although  the  Dyna-Soar program  has been  terminated,  a  need  still 
exists  fo r   development  of  a  maneuverable  aerospacecraft  capable  of 
controlled  reentry  and  precision  recovery,  ferrying  missions  to  and 

45 
AI3TRONAUTICS  AND AEEtONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  
a  wide  range  of  other  roles.  . . .”  (Text,  AF  Info.  Pol.  L tr . ,   2/64) 
from a  space laboratory, transfer  of  men  and equipment in  space,  and 
Februury 3:  Rocketdyne engine reliability  of  100% in  135  orbital or   deep 
space vehicle  launchings over the last three years was  reported  in Space 
Business Daily.  (SBD ,  2/3/64¶ 175) 
February 3-5:  At  aerospace medicine conference held  a t  Brooks AFB,  NASA 
Langley Research Center assistant director, Clinton E. Brown, sa id  NASA 
was  proposing a  large space telescope in earth orbit capable of  orbiting 
with manned orbiting research laboratory.  “A preliminary step towards 
a very large scale telescope might consist of  an enlarged orbiting astro- 
nomical laboratory ( OAO)  with a IO0  to 120 in.  aperture, but specifically 
designed to  make use of  recoverable film and the adjustment and  opera- 
tional  advantages  of  a  manned  space  control  center.  . . 
Brown 
said  analysis made  by  Dr.  Lyman  Spitzer,  Jr.,  Princeton Univ.  astron- 
.’¶ 
omer,  showed that  “the moon  is not  the  place  for  such an  observatory 
(Av.  Wk., 
but rather a manned earth orbiting system is to  be desired.” 
2/24/64,71) 
*  At  space medicine Conference, Brooks AFB,  Lt.  Gen.  James  Ferguson, USAF 
DC/S  for  R&D,  said  space rendezvous maneuvers of  MOL with  a  winged 
ferry vehicle were under consideration: “We visualize such a  ferry craft 
to  be  a  lifting body  with  some  maneuverability  in  the  atmosphere  for  
precision  landing.  Undoubtedly  i t   would  be  able  to  carry  more  than 
two  men,  as  well  as  be  a  logistics  carrier.”  (M& R ,   2/10/64,  35) 
February 4:   U S .   Committee for   International  Quiet  Sun  Year  (IQSY) and 
USN  announced  satellite to  monitor  solar x-ray  emission,  instrumented 
by  Naval  Research  Laboratory  scientists,  was  launched  recently  to 
initiate continuous “watch  on  the  sun”  during  IQSY  (1964-65).  First 
signals from  the  satellite showed  the  sun  now  is  close  to  its minimum 
activity, reported NRL scientists Robert W. Kreplin, Talbot A.  Chubb, and 
Herbe& Friedman.  Any  solar  activity  tha t   occurs this  year  should  be 
isolated  and  relatively  uncomplicated,  permitting the  satellite to  record 
individual s tonn   centers,  in  contrast to   IGY which was  marked  by  suc- 
cession  of  overlapping  storms.  Observatories  in  14 countries  joined 
US. in  preparing  to  utilize  continuous  da ta   transmissions  from  the 
satellite. 
At  press conference, the  NRL  scientists  said  that  astronauts on  lunar 
flight would be under no more radiation danger during maximum period 
of  solar cycle than during minimum period.  Friedman  explained: “All 
available evidence indicates that solar minimum is a s  bad as solar maxi- 
mum  for  superflare eruption.”  To date,  superflares  occur  a t   random 
and  cannot  be  predicted. 
(NAS-NRC  Release;  USN  Background  State- 
ment;  Simons, Wash. Pos t ,  2/5/64) 
*  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  began  hearings  on  NASA 
authorization for  FY  1965.  NASA  Administrator James  E. Webb  testi- 
fied : 
“In  the  tight budget situation faced  by  the President  for Fiscal  Year 
1965  it was  necessary to  stress with  him  and  the Bureau  of  the Budget 
that unless the full $5.3 billion  authorization requested for  FY 1965, a n d  
the supplemental appropriation of  $141 million requested  for  FY  1964 
a re  approved,  the manned  space  flight  program  will  encounter further 
delays,  I t  will  then  not  be  possible to  achieve the national goal  of  ex- 
ploring the moon with men within this decade. 

46 

ASTRONATJTECS  AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 41 

“There may be some inclination t o  assume that  the adjustment of  our 
program to the reductions  imposed  for N 1964 indicates that  this will 
likewise be  possible i n  the  event  of  reductions  in   the  request  which  is 
before  you  at  this  time.  I  cannot  emphasize  too  strongly  that  this  is 
not the case. 
In  adjusting our program to compensate fo r  the reductions made in  
cc 
the  appropriation  fo r  FY 19@, we  have  already  sacrificed the margins 
and early target dates which we re  needed, and which  in  reality  a r e  still 
needed, in our effort to achieve the goals which have been  set for us.  I n  
fact, Mr.  Chairmgn, we  a r e  not  able to  maintain  a reasonably  balanced 
program,  and accommodate the entire reduction, with any strong assur- 
ance that we  can meet the 1970 lunar target  date.  The best we can say 
is that w e  have a ‘fighting chance.’ 
“To s u m  up our situation  in a sentence, if  we do not  receive the funds 
which the President h a  requested, there is nothing left  to  sacrijice except 
the National goal i tse lf .  
. . . whether  it  is  agreed  o r   not  that  international  considerations 
6‘ 
and  national  security  factors  require  that  we   hold  to  the  present  pace 
of  the   space  program,  the  fact  is  that  prudence  and  economy  will  be 
served.  Even i f   economy alone were to be the guiding consideration in 
the evaluation of  the NASA  request  for FY  1965, the cost of  establishing 
and  maintaining  superiority  in  space  will  be  less  i f   we  maintain  the  
pace,  the  momentum,  which  the  supplemental appropriation  and  this 
authorization request will provide. 
“.  . . Despite  the  difficulties which  have  been  experienced,  w e   can 
still  put  two  American  explorers  on  the  moon  in  this  decade,  and  we 
can do it for less than $20  billion.  . . .  [But]  if  the program  is further 
curtailed, if  the momentum is lost, if the Apollo program is stretched into 
the next decade, the cost will not  be under  $20 billion,  it  will  be  several 
billions more .   The  ultimate  cost will  increase  for  each  year  in  which 
achievement of  our goal is delayed. 
“.  . . [According  to  a  NASA  study],  the  cost  of  the  lunar  explora- 
tion  would  increase by  approximately $1 billion  for  each  year  that  the 
landing  is delayed.  A three year delay would cost $3 billion, a  six year 
delay  $6  billion,  with  no  corresponding  improvement  in   the  benefits 
obtained.  . . .”  (Testimony: CR. 2/5/64,  A545-48) 
February 4 :   NASA  Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L.  Dryden testified before 
House Committee on Science and Astronautics: 
‘‘Because  of  the initiative and the daring of  the Wright  Brothers, this 
nation  gave man  the  capacity  fo r   powered  flight,  freeing  him  forever 
from  the  bonds which  for  thousands  of  years  of  human  existence had 
confined  his  activities to  land  and  sea.  The United  States became  the 
first  country  in the world  to  possess a military  airplane when,  in  1908, 
the Army Signal Corps contracted for a Wright biplane. 
“Yet,.prior  to World War  I this nation was still so pre-occupied with 
conventional weapons systems that  it  totally  neglected  the  development 
force which  was  to  dominate  warfare  for  the  next 
of  aeronautics-the 
In  1914, the  United  States  possessed  fewer military 
quarter  century. 
aircraft  and  of  inferior  types  than  the  six leading  aeronautical  nations 
(including  Mexico).  The  United  States  in   1914 was  the   only  major 
nation  in  the  world  not  to  possess an aeronautical  laboratory  with  an 
up-to-date wind tunnel.  By November 1918, not one aircraft  of  Ameri- 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  & 8 0 N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4  

47 

can  design  and   manufacture  had  entered  combat  operations  during 
World Wa r  I. 
“In  the  30’s we were so pre-occupied with refinement of  conventional 
piston-driven  aeronautical  systems that  we  made  little  progress  in  jet 
propulsion.  Meanwhile,  the  Germans  set  out  to  build  a  bigger  and 
better  NACA  and  to  a  large  extent,  they  did,  developing jet  propelled 
military  aircraft and 5 s - t o n  V-2  rockets, which almost spelled disaster 
in  World War 11. 
“In  the  late  40’9,  despite  the  fact  that  Robert  Goddard  had  demon- 
strated  the  feasibility  of  a  liquid-fueled  rocket  engine  in  this  country 
in  1926, and  despite  the memory  of  V-2’s  raining  on  London  during 
the  blitz,  we  were  so  pre-occupied  with  mating  jet  carriers  to  o u r   ex- 
clusively held  atomic bomb capability that  we  neglected missilry while 
other  nations  forged  ahead.  And  finally,  in   the  50’s,  our  A-bomb ad- 
vantage gone, we  were so pre-occupied with  the development of  our bal- 
listic missile  program  that  we  neglected a  clear  opportunity  to   become 
first in space. 
“Today,  the nation  faces, we  all  face, this question:  Have we learned 
enough  from  the  often  bitter  and  always  costly  experience of  the  last 
half  century not  only to  carry out with  determination  this effort to meet 
the  requirements of  the  present  in   space  research  and  exploration,  but 
to  exercise the vision which  is  demanded  if  we  a r e  not,  once  again,  to 
find  ourselves  lagging  in  the  next  phase  of  this  most  challenging 
effort?  . . . 
“The  present  gap  in  manned  flight  activity  is  a  direct  consequence 
of  a postponement of  the  decision to  proceed beyond  Project  Mercury 
from September 1960, until May  1961, when  President Kennedy recom- 
mended  the  present  manned  lunar  landing  project  a s  a  national  goal. 
“The  decisions which  confront  us  today  are those  which  will  deter- 
mine  whether  this  kind  of  history  w i l l   repeat  itself  a  few  years  hence 
and  whether we  will  once  again  experience a  bitter  awakening  to  the 
fact  that  others  have  seized  the  initiative  in  the  more  advanced  space 
missions  of  the  future.  . . .”  (Testimony;  CR, 2/5/64,  A548-50) 
February 4 :   Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  with  grenade  experiments  were 
launched at Wallops Island,  Va.,  and  Ft.  Churchill, Canada,  in   current 
NASA  series of  comparative upper  atmosphere studies.  The experiments 
were  designed to  obtain  wind  and temperature  data and to  measure the  
effects of the “warming trend”  a t  altitudes ranging u p  to 55 mi.  Nike- 
Cajun launched from Wallops reached 73.8-mi.  altitude, with all 12  of  its 
grenades  exploding;  Nike-Cajun from  Ft.  Churchill  reached  78-mi.  al- 
titude,  with  11 grenades  functioning  normally  and  the  twelfth  ejecting 
but not exploding. 
(Wallops Release 64-14;  NASA Rpt. SRL) 
Dr.  Joseph F.  Shea, manager  of  Apollo Spacecraft  Office  a t  NASA  Manned 
Spacecraft  Center,  said  in  Milwaukee  speech  that  the  most  probable 
date  fo r  U S .  manned lunar  landing was late in  1968 or  early  in  1969. 
He  discussed goals of  Ranger  TV  probes,  Surveyor  lunar  lander,  and 
Lunar  Orbiter  probes,  which  would  provide  information  about  the 
moon  preparatory  to  manned  lunar  landing.  If  these  should  fail,  he  
said,  NASA would  plan  manned  A p l l o   reconnaissance  flights  to   orbit 
the moon before the  landing  flight.  “It might set our  landing back  six 
months to a year, but if  the other programs don’t  work, we aren’t  dead.” 
(Pease, Milwaukee Journal,  2/4/64) 

48 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

February 4: Scientists a t  Aerospace Medical Div.,  Brooks OB,  said in paper 
presented  by  Maj.  William B.  Clark  a t   space medicine conference that, 
with  proper  reconnaissance  training,  astronauts  in  space  could  easily 
spot  missile  bases,  encampments,  troop  movements,  and  “unsuspected 
targets  of  opportunity”  from  outposts  100-mi.  high.  The  scientists’ 
report was based on studies of  visual reports of  six US. astronauts who 
made  space flights and  relied  heavily  on  accounts by  Astronaut  Leroy 
Gordon Cooper (Maj.,  WAF).  (AP, N.Y.  Her. Trib., 2/5/64;  AP,  Phil. 
Eve. Bull.  2/6/64) 
Rep.  James  C.  Cleveland  (R.-N.H.),  member  of  House Select Committee 
on Government Research, wrote  in  Washington  Wor ld  magazine : 
“Fourteen  to  fifteen  billion  dollars  of  the  taxpayer’s  money  is  going 
The figure was only $2 billion 10 years ago. 
into R&D this year. 
“More  than  30  different  departments,  bureaus,  and  agencies  of  the 
Federal  Government  conduct  research  o r   have  it  conducted  f o r   them, 
ofteninthesamefields.  . . . 
“A  breakdown of  Federal  research  and  development  spending  shows 
that  five  organizations  account  fo r   90  percent  of  it.  These a re   the 
Department of  Defense, the National Aeronautics and Space Administra- 
tion,  the  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  the  Atomic 
Energy  Commission, ‘and the National  Science Foundation.  About  70 
percent  of  these  funds  support  military  research  and  development. 
About  10  percent  of  the  total  funds  is  channeled  to  colleges  and  uni- 
versities.  . . .” 
(CR, 2 / 4 / a ,   A563) 
NASA scientist John M.  Eggleston told space medicine conference a t  Brooks 
AFB  that  astronauts  o n  lunar  flight would  face  less  danger  from  space 
radiation  than  was  once  thought.  “If  the  Apollo  spacecraft  as  it  is 
now  designed were exposed to  the  largest  solar  flare seen in  the  latest 
solar  cycle,  the  astronaut  would  be  exposed  to  only  one  tenth  of  the 
critical dose designated for space flight. 
“An  exposure to  the critical  dose would probably  make  an  astronaut 
sick within a  few days.  . . . But  it would  not prevent him  from  finish- 
ing  the mission  and  returning  to   lead  a  normal  life.” 
(AP,  Hom ton  
Pos t ,  2/5/64) 
0  In  Washington Evening  Star  article, William  Hines  reported  Georgetown 
Univ.  astronomer Dr.  Carl C. Kiess’  conviction that  life cannot exist on 
Mars.  Dr.  Kiess’  spectrographic  observations  of  the  planet  convinced 
him no oxygen o r  water vapor existed there.  Nitrogen compounds have 
been  detected,  and  Dr.  Kiess  believed  Martian  atmosphere  is  97-99% 
pure  nitrogen  gas.  He  believed  density  of  a i r   at  Martian  surface  is 
greater  than  is generally believed, meaning that nitrogen tetroxide could 
above  ‘70’ F,  solid  below 
exist  as  gas,  liquid,  and  solid-gaseous 
14O  F,  and liquid  in between.  I n  laboratory experiments Dr.  Kiess had 
demonstrated  that  when  various  nitrogen  compounds  a re   subjected  to 
temperature  changes  they  turn  color  to  duplicate  “seasonal”  color 
changes observed  on  Mars,  even  creating  artificial  “snow  storm”  and 
simulating waxing and waning of Martian “polar caps.”  Dr. Kiess’ view 
was  minority  opinion,  refuted  by  majority  of  scientists.  Dr.  Lewis 
Kaplan  of  JPL said  in  interview that  Dr.  Kiess’ conclusions were  based 
on  spectrographic  analyses which  had  been  refuted  by  better  spectro- 
graphic  analyses  of  Vancouver,  B.C.,  scientists. 
(Hines,  Wash.  Eve. 
2 / w w  

s-9 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AEBONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

49 

announced i t  would  join  international tele- 
( AP, 
on global communications satellites. 
NYT, 2/6/64,6) 
*  DOD  announced appointment of  Thomas F.  Rogers,  MIT scientist, a s  Assist- 
ant Director  (Communications and Electronics), Defense Research and 
(DOD   Release  1 0 1 4 4 )  
Engineering. 
42  FAA flight  s eM c e   stations  were  going  to  be  converted  into  remote- 
control facilities with expected savings of  between $30,000 and  $4O,OOO 
per year per station, FAA announced.  (FAA Release 64-9) 
DOD  and  AEC  announced first at-sea automatic weather  station powered  by 
nuclear energy had begun operation in the Gulf  of  Mexico.  The 6O-watt 
Snap-7D nuclear  generator  was  expected  t o  last  10  years  a s  compared 
to  conventional  batteries  requiring  recharging  every  six months.  The 
NOMAD  (Navy  Oceanographic  Meteorological  Automatic  Device)  w a s  
forerunner  of  worldwide  network  of  unattended  weather  stations  d e  
(DOD   Re- 
signed  to  provide  meteorological  and  oceanographic  data. 
lease  103-64) 
February 5:  Preliminary evaluation of  Saturn I SA-5  flight Jan.  29 indicated 
there was  “no  significant deviation o r  malfunction,”  according to  MSFC 
Saturn Flight Evaluation Group.  Because insertion velocity was slightly 
greater than predicted, the 37,700-1b. orbiting body was in  an earth orbit 
slightly  higher  than  expected:  470-mi.  apogee,  70-mi.  higher than  ex- 
pected;  167-mi.  perigee,  7  mi.  higher  than  expected. 
,Timing  of  all 
significant  actions  in  the  launch  sequence  vaned  no  more  than  half  a 
second from prediction.  First  stage cutoff  occurred  after  slightly more 
than  146 sec.,  S-IV  stage  ignited  at  148 sec.,  and  insertion  into  orbit 
occurred a t  639 sec.  (KSC  Release 8-64) 
*  NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.,  testifying before 
House  Committee  on  Science and  Astronautics,  discussed  NASA  organi- 
zation, management, procurement, and programing. 
“The  management  and  programing  processes  . . . require  continu- 
ing  program  support,  assuming  reasonable  accomplishment  by  NASA 
compared with  our stated goals.  Little that we  start  in  one year  is com- 
pleted  in   that  year.  On  the  average,  flight  projects  require  three  or 
more  years  prior  to  launch,  while  total  programs have  a life of  ten  to 
fifteen  years.  The  governmental  process  for  allocating  resources  can 
lead  to  a  funding  pattern  at  odds  w i th   this  inherently  long-duration 
need.  We  plan  to  accomplish  major  objectives  over  the  period  of  a 
decade, but we  must  tailor  our actual accomplishment to those resources 
that we  receive  annually. 
“A  budget  of  $5.445  billion, in  our estimation, provides the necessary 
increment of  resources to  support the technical program  . . . . This is 
divided  into  $141 million,  requested as our FY 1964 supplemental,  and 
a  $5.304  billion  budget  for  FY  1965.  During the  preparation  of  this 
budget,  we were asked by  the  President  to make major  cost reductions, 
in part  by  introducing improved management practices.  This was done 
prior  to  submission  of  the  President’s  budget,  and  the   estimated  cost 
savings  a re  therefore  reflected  in   our  budgetary  request.  . . .  Within 
these estimates, we  propose  to  carry  out  this year’s  increment  of  NASA’s 
program  of  aeronautical  research, advanced technological  development, 
space hardware development, and  space  exploration.” 
(Testimony) 

50 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19 6 4 

February 5 :   I n   House  Science  and  Astronautics  Committee hearings,  Rep. 
James  D.  Weaver  (R.-Pa.) 
challenged  the  84%  figure  given  by  EASA 
Associate Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  a s   NASA’s 1963 
successes out  of  13  launches. 
I n   response  to  Rep. 
space  record-11 
Weaver’s questioning, Dr.  Seamans said NASA  had  planned 42 launches 
fo r  1963, 8 of  which  were backups.  Rep.  Weaver  replied  that,  on  this 
basis,  NASA’s 1963 space record could be interpreted  as 31% successful. 
(Wash. Eve. Star, 2/6/64,15) 
0  Testifying  before  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics,  NASA 
Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications  Dr. 
Homer  .E.  Newel1  discussed  objectives,  progress,  and  future  plans 
of  NASA’s programs  in  the  area  of  space  science  (space  environment, 
sun-earth  relationships,  geodesy,  investigation  of  moon  and  planets, 
investigation  into  nature  of  the  universe, exobiology)  and  applications 
(meteorological satellites, communications program,  and advanced tech- 
nological  satellites).  Some of  the  space  environment  results  obtained 
during the  past  year : 
1. The  existence of  a n   appreciable number  of  protons  in  the outer 
6 6  
Van Allen Belts was established. 
“2.  The  lifetime  in  the  belt  of  artificially  injected  electrons  was 
determined.  . . . 
3.  Trapping lifetimes and  rates of  enhancement of  electrons of  vary- 
<< 
ing energies in the outer  radiation zone have been  correlated with mag- 
netic storms. 
4.  Large low energy electron fluxes have been found on lines of  mag- 
c c  
netic  force which  appear  to  trail  off  to  immense distances out  into deep 
space. 
5.  Contours  of  constant  counting  rate  near  the  magnetic  equator 
u 
were  found  to  draw  closer  to  the  Earth  on  the  night  side  of  the  Earth 
than on the day side. 
6.  Repeated  observations  were  made  of  simultaneous VLF  electro- 
66  
magnetic  emission,  auroral  optical  emission,  and  particle  precipitation 
into the  atmosphere. 
“7.  I t  was  discovered  that  the  Earth’s  magnetic tail  in  the  antisolar 
direction extends at least half way to the Moon’s  orbit. 
“8.  Direct observations were made of  the way  in which  solar plasma 
on  the  sunward  side  of  the  Earth  piles up  outside the boundary  of  the 
Earth’s  magnetic  field,  and  in  so  doing  appreciably  compresses  the 
geomagnetic  field. 
“9. Direct  extended  observations were  made  of  the  particle  density 
and velocity of  solar  interplanetary plasma.  These densities and  veloc- 
ities  were.  found  to  have  direct  correlations  with  magnetic  activity  on 
the  Earth  and  calcium plage  activity regions  on the Sun. 
“10.  Extended measurements were made of  the  interplanetary  m a g  
netic  field and solar and  galactic cosmic ray  intensities. 
their  source on the  Sun was  deduced from  the  observational data.  . . . 
“11.  The  true  energy  spectrum  possessed  by  solar  cosmic  rays  at 
“12.  First  simultaneous measurements were made of  electron temper- 
ature,  positive ion  density,  and  neutral  atmospheric constituents in  the 
Earth’s high atmosphere. 
“13.  A  new  theory  was  developed to  account  fo r   the   types  of  ions 
found  in   the  ionosphere, specifically  the  ratio  of  helium  to  hydrogen. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1964  

51 

“14.  Sounding  rockets furnished  important information  on  the iono- 
spheric D region from 35 miles to 55 miles and the  origin of  the  sporadic 
effects in the E region  of  the  ionosphere a t  about 75 miles. 
“15.  Diurnal  and   seasonal  variations  in   the   ionosphere  were 
established. 
“16.  Sounding  rockets  launched  simultaneously  with  an  overhead 
pass  of  the satellite Alouette reached within  a  few miles of  the  satellite, 
thereby  connecting  up   ionospheric measurements  in   the  lower  atmos- 
(Testimony) 
phere  with  those  being made by  the  satellite.” 
February 5:  Senator  Wayne L.  Morse  (D.-Ore.) 
said  on  Senate  floor  that 
“the  most  recent  developments  in  the  strike  of  the   Florida  East  Coast 
Railway  by  the  11 nonoperating  railroad  unions,  which  is  now  in  i t s  
second year, point to the strong likelihood that we will have a major shut- 
down  of  the  vital  construction  work  at  Cape  Kennedy  by  tomorrow 
night.  . . . 
“The  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  has  just  an- 
nounced that,  contrary to the recommendations of  the President’s Board 
of  Inquiry  last October, it w i l l  permit  the Florida  East Coast, operating 
its trains with  strikebreakers, t o  use the  18-mile spur newly constructed 
by  the  Federal  Government  to  move  freight  into  Cape Kennedy.  . . . 
“This NASA decision, announced just yesterday, will,  I fear, lead to new 
labor  trouble  i n   the   Cape Kennedy  area,  for  the  FEC  strike  still  con- 
tinues.  . . .” 
(CR, 2/5/64,2035-36) 
Ernest  Brackett,  Director  of  NASA  Office of  Procurement,  was’ appointed 
Assistant Deputy  Associate Administrator  for  Procurement  Policy.  I n  
this  position,  Mr.  Brackett would  assist NASA Deputy Associate Admin- 
istrator  fo r   Industry  Affairs on  procurement policy,  “particularly  with 
respect  to  relationships  with  the  Congress, the Department of  Defense, 
and industry and industrial associations.”  George J. Vecchietti, Deputy 
Director  of  NASA Office  of  Procurement,  was  designated Acting  Direc- 
(NASA  Announcement 64-30) 
tor. 
0  DOD announced  it  had  undertaken  comprehensive review  of  procurement 
policies  and  practices  affecting labor-management  relations  at  missile 
and  space sites.“ NASA  was cooperating in  the study, which in  1964 was 
expected  to  involve the  following  sites : Vandenberg  AFB,  Warren  AFB, 
Minot  AFB,  Whiteman  AFB,  and  NASA’s  Mississippi Test  Facility.  The 
first  on-site review was  made  a t  Cape Kennedy  late  last  month.  (DOD 
Release 110-64) 
Dr.  Albert C.  Hall,  DOD Deputy Director for Space, Directorate of  Defense 
Research &  Engineering,  discussed the  objectives of  the military  space 
program  at  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronic  Engineers’  Winter 
Convention on Military Electronics, Los Angeles: 
“Our   problems  . . . are  twofold:  First:  the  United  States military 
space program  must  be one  of  action,  not  reaction.  We  must  concern 
ourselves with  military  space  developments-not 
necessarily  to  match 
or offset  any  Soviet development, but  to  sustain  and  augment  our  own 
versatility  and   strength.  The   successes  we  have  already  obtained 
should  encourage  u s   in   this  drive.  Second,  mindful  that  in  the  past 
we  often  have  been  optimistic  in   the  short  run   and  pessimistic  in  the 
long run,  we must expect that some of  the new  discoveries and  develop- 
ments  that  appear may  suggest  applications and  capabilities  in  wholly 
unplanned  ways.  Accordingly,  while we  pursue  efforts where  applica- 
tions are clear we must also lay a  foundation  of  technology, knowledge, 

52 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AEBONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4  

and experience which is sufficiently broad  in  scope to provide  for future 
contingencies a s  they  materialize  o r  a r e  identified. 
“From  these  considerations,  then,  a r e   derived  the  two  fundamental 
goals of  the  Defense space program: 
“First,  to  continue  with  the  development  and   exploitation  of  space 
systems and capabilities which measure up  on  a  cost-effectiveness basis 
to  meet clearly defined high  priority  national  defense requirements. 
“Second,  to  develop through a program  integrated with other govern- 
ment  agencies,  such  a s  NASA and  the  AEC, a  broad  base  of  technology 
and  experience to  permit  the   timely  development  and  exploitation  of 
space  systems  and  capabilities  which  may  be  needed  in   the  future, 
space  operations,  may  be  10  years  or  longer.  . . .”  (Text,  DOD  Re- 
recognizing that  lead  times  in  certain  areas,  such  a s  manned  military 
lease lo-) 
February 5 :  West German government issued  denial that  any West  German 
firm  was  producing  missiles  suitable  fo r  military  application.  Denial 
was  in  response  to  Soviet  diplomatic  complaint  that  missiles  capable 
of  carrying nuclear  warheads  were  being  produced  in  West  Germany, 
recalling  rocket test-firings last December by Weapons and Air  Equip- 
ment  Co.  of  Hamburg.  German  government  said  investigation  of  the 
Hamburg  company  established  that  it  possessed  no  manufacturing 
facilities.  Two  days later,  according to Missiles and Rockets, the  com- 
pany halted  production  of  rockets that  it “apparently planned  to  export 
to Middle Eastern Arab nations.”  Company officials told M&R  the deci- 
sion  was  made  voluntarily  to  prevent  further  embarrassment  to  West 
( N Y T ,  2/6/64,  5;  M&R ,   2/17/64,  9)  
German government. 
*  Lt.  Col.  Robert S.  Buchanan  (USAF )   of  Aerospace Research Pilots  School, 
Edwards  AFB,  told  space  medicine  conference  at  Brooks  AFB  that  the 
greatest potential  dangers  to  large  scientific space  station  with  crew  of 
15 or more men  would  be  fire and  collision with  a meteoroid  or  space 
debris.  Studies were considering possibility of  separating space stations 
into  individual  compartments  that  could be  sealed  off  in  case  of  catas- 
( AP, Houston Post, 2/6/M) 
trophes such as fire. 
a  NASA  Langley  Research Center awarded two  contracts  for  construction  on 
Vehicle Antenna  Test  Facility  to  aid  in  solving spacecraft  communica- 
tions problems:  $1,265,505 contract to Nat Harrison Associates for con- 
struction  of  the  building,  and  $280,630  contract  to  B.  F.  Goodrich 
Sponge Products  Div.  for  design and  installation  of  anechoic chambers 
fo r  the facility. 
(LaRC Release) 
British sources revealed Britain had  contracted to  sell 600 guided missiles 
to  Saudi  Arabia  fo r   estimated  $1.4 million. 
(AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
2/6/6451) 
February 6 :  In   testimony  before  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astro- 
nautics,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  fo r   Manned  Space  Flight  Dr. 
George E.  Mueller said that “1963 was a milestone year.  I t  was the year 
of  transition  to  hardware-now  we  can  fill  the  pipeline  and  move 
forward to a manned lunar landing in this decade.  . . . 
“The  resources  fo r   the  Gemini  and  Apollo  programs  are  moving 
forward.  The major developmental resources a r e  essentially completed; 
the  manufacturing  resources  a r e   under  construction  and  approaching 
our  goal;  the  test  and  operational  resources  have  been  initiated;  a 
logistics  program  is  being  formulated  and  our  personnel  build-up 
is progressing. 

53 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
“The  personnel  s t d h g  a t  the NASA  Centers  . . . is  increasing  from 
11,858  a t   the  end  of  FY  1963  to   13,711  a t   the   end  of  FY  1 9 M  
and  a  forecast  total  of  14711  a t   the  end  of  N  1965.  I n   addition 
to  the  government team  of  personnel  there  a r e  approximately  181,000 
contractor  personnel  who  a r e   working  on  Manned  Space  Flight  pro- 
grams.  With the continued buildup of  construction, manufacturing, test 
and  operations,  it  is  anticipated  that  this  figure  will  approximate 
300,000  personnel  a t   the  peak  of  the  Manned  Space  Fligh!  Pro- 
g r am . .   . . 
,, 
Discussing  planned  activity  in  manned  space flight  program,  he 
said:  “A  major  decision was made  in  1963 to  adopt  the ‘an-up’ testing 
concept  as a  basic  approach  to  our  flight  verification  test  program. 
‘All-up’  testing means,  all  flights will be scheduled with  complete space 
vehicles using live stages and flight type spacecraft.  . . . 
“There  are several advantages to  the ‘all-up’ approach.  It will permit 
us  to  land  an American astronaut  on  the moon,  and  return  him  safely 
to earth,  in  accordance with our  schedule even though  we  a re  operating 
this  year  on  a  reduced  budget.  It w i l l   permit  us  to  capitalize  on  suc- 
cessful  flights.  It will  also  allow  us  to  gather  a very  large  amount  of 
data  early  in   the  flight  program  and  thereby  provide  much  needed 
information  to  ou r  design organization.  It is planned  in  the Saturn  IB 
and  Saturn V  programs  to  launch  a  complete unmanned  space vehicle 
(Testimony) 
on  the  first  flight  in   an  earth  orbital  trajectory.” 
February  6:  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and 
Technology Dr. Raymond L.  Bisplinghoff, appearing before House Com- 
mittee  on  Science  and  Astronautics,  outlined  NASA’s program  of  ad- 
vanced  research  and  technology  and  proposed  activities  fo r   N 1965. 
Objectives in  advanced research and technology were summarized: 
“1.  Basic  research  aimed  toward  a n   understanding  of  the  natural 
laws underlying aeronautical and space technology. 
2.  Engineering  research  aimed  a t   the  application  of  these  laws 
c< 
and at codifying them in terms of engineering design principles. 
66 3.  Experimental  subsystem  development,  using  advanced  concepts 
and  components,  to  produce  test  ‘know-how’  for  the  design  of  future 
operational systems. 
“Our  aim  in  basic  research  is  to   contribute  to  the  fund  of  relevant 
scientific  knowledge  and,  in  so  doing,  to  maintain  the  best  possible 
contact  with  the  scientific  and  engineering  community.  Engineering 
research,  that  is  the  creation  of  engineering  design  principles,  is  also 
conducted by  these  same institutions  with  industry  playing  a  somewhat 
greater role than in  the case of  basic research  . . . . 
“A program of  [advanced]  research  . . . which looks beyond today’s 
technology  is  believed to  be  a pre-requisite  fo r   continued  advancement 
in  the  performance  and  efficiency of  aeronautical  and  space vehicles.” 
(Testimony) 
John F.  Kennedy  Space  Center,  NASA,  announced  major  reorganization. 
KSC Director  Dr.  Kurt H.  Debus said  objectives of  reorganization  were 
to:  ( 1 )   realign  Apollo  program  management  functions  in   accordance 
with concept of  NASA  Associate Administrator  for Manned  Space Flight 
Dr.  George  E.  Mueller  that  these  functions  be  standardized  at  NASA 
Hq.  and  the  three  manned  space  flight  centers;  (2 )   separate  and 
strengthen  administrative  and  technical  support  functions;  and  ( 3 )  

54 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  
reduce  number  of  offices  reporting  to  Dr.  Debus  and  delegate  more 
authority and  responsibility to Assistant Directors.  Under  realignment 
there  were  five  Assistant  Directors,  with  authority  to  act  for  Center 
Director  within  their  areas  of  responsibility:  Program  Management, 
Administrative Management, Launch Vehicle Operations, Technical Sup- 
port  Operations,  and  Instrumentation.  Program  Management  was  di- 
vided into two areas, Plans and Program Support Office and  the Apollo 
Program  Management  Office,  which  was  aligned  a s   counterpart  orga- 
nization with Apollo program  offices  in NASA Hq.  and the other manned) 
space  flight  centers  (Manned  Spacecraft  Center  and  Marshall  Space 
Flight  Center).  Unaffected by  the change were Launch Support Equip- 
ment Engineering Div.,  Facilities Engineering and Construction, and five 
staff  offices.  New  NASA  Hq.  office,  NASA  Regional  Inspections,  was  at- 
tached  to  KSC.  MSC’S  Preflight  Operations  Div.  was  renamed  MSC 
Florida  Operations  but  its  basic  relationship  to  KSC  was  unchanged. 
Other NASA  Center elements attached to  KSC,  such as GSFC  Field Projects 
(KSC Release.lO-64) 
Branch, remained unchanged. 
February 6:  Washington Post editorialized: 
“The  failure  of  the  sixth  straight  Ranger  spacecraft  hoists  aloft  the 
question of  whether the United States will  accomplish its goal  of  putting 
. . 
an American on the moon by the decade’s  end. 
“A  delay would  not  simply be  a  case  of  a stretchout  in  which  work 
would  continue but  a t  a  slower pace.  A delay  would  take much  of  the 
binding  and  motivating tension  from  Apollo.  I t   would  increase  costs 
by underusing men and facilities brought  together for a tighter schedule, 
and it would allow projects and personnel to drift out of  the main stream 
into  the  eddies  of  lower  priority.  A  delay  also  would  entail  loss  of 
prestige  for  NASA,  for  the  Administration  and  for  the  Nation  as  well. 
“No schedule, however, is sacred.  If  it is determined that  the landing 
of  a man  on the moon  by  Jan.  1, 1970, is simply not  feasible, o r  cannot 
be  done  with  reasonable  assurance  of  safety  for  the  astronauts,  then 
the space agency  and the country  will  have to  adjust  to  this  reality,  no 
matter  how  costly  and  comfortless  it may  be.  A manned  flight  to  the 
moon will be no less exciting o r  valuable for being  somewhat delayed.” 
(Wa sh .  Post, 2/6/64,18) 
*  Tass  announced  ELECTRON  I  and  ELECTRON  11  scientific  satellites  were 
continuing to send back “valuable scientific information.”  ELECTRON  I 
had made 53 orbits of  the earth and ELECTRON 11,  6 orbits.  (AP, Wash. 
Eve. Star, 2/6/64,6) 
*  Soviet  Academician Anatoli  A.  Blagonravov  announced  in  Moscow  that 
U.S.S.R.  would participate  in three-nation experiment of  bouncing radio 
signals  off  US .   balloon  satellite  ECHO  11  beginning  Feb.  22.  Signals 
would  be  transmitted  from  Jodrell Bank,  England,  to  ECHO  11,  and  re- 
flected  back  by  radioastronomy  observatory  near  Gorki.  (NYT, 
2/7/64) 
*  NASA  Telephone  and  Data  Distribution  Center  became  first  technical 
support element of  the John  F. Kennedy Space Center,  NASA,  to become 
operational  on  Merritt  Island,  KSC  announced.  Some  buildings  were 
being serviced by  telephone service through  the Center  and other build- 
ings would be phased  in as required.  Fully equipped to handle all types 
of  communications, the Center participated  in  its first technical support 
operation  during  launch  of  Saturn  I  SA-5,  when  it  provided  closed- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  

55 
circuit television  service to Washington and  other  areas. 
(KSC  Release 
11-69!) 
February  6:  President  Johnson  spoke  at  18th  annual  dinner  of  Weizmann 
“The  Weizmann  Institute  . . . is  a n   international  scientific  insti- 
Institute of  Science, held in New York: 
. 
tution  i n  every sense of  the word.  To  its buildings come students from 
scientific resources of  the world.  . . . 
all  over  the  globe.  It  has  helped  to  make  Israel  one  of  the  foremost 
“We,  like  Israel,  need  to  find cheap ways of  converting salt water  to 
fresh  water.  . . . This Nation  ha s   begun  discussions  with  the  repre- 
sentatives of  Israel  on  cooperative research  in  using nuclear  energy  to 
turn salt water into fresh water.  . . .”  (Text, CR, 2 /17 /a ,   A703-0d) 
*  Rep. E.  Ross Adair  (R.-Ind.)  said on  House floor that  a fifth transatlantic 
communications  cable  (TAT )   would  be  unnecessary:  “It  is  expected 
that  within  the next  6 weeks the  . . . [ComSatCorp] will announce its 
plans  for  financing a  communications satellite system and w i l l   tell Con- 
gress and potential  investors when  it expects to have a  system in opera- 
tion.  I understand that csc expects to design its first satellites to handle 
traffic between the United States and Europe. 
“. . . based  on  information  filed  with  the  FCC  by  the  International 
Carriers  having  an   interest  in   these matters  . . . I  am  convinced  that 
there  is  no  need  fo r   TAT  5.  If permission  is  granted  to  lay  TAT  5  it 
would  add  at  least  128 channels of  capacity  . . ., and this would mean 
that  there  would  be  no   economic  justification  for  orbiting  a  satellite 
system in the  immediate future  . . .” 
He  recommended  adopting  Mackay  Radio’s  proposal  to  change  the 
route planned for TAT 4: “. . . this route would not only make it possible 
to establish intermediate  relay  and terminal  facilities in  the Azores,  but 
also  to  provide  fo r  extension to  Spain  and  Portugal  and  even  down to 
the Canary  Islands. 
“The  US. military  might  well  prefer  cable  links  to  the Azores  and 
this  route could also sefve the interests of  the National Aeronautics and 
Space  Administration,  both  in  Spain  and  the  Canary  Islands,  where 
NASA  tracking  stations are  either  in  being  or  being  constructed.  . . .” 
( C R ,  2/6/64r, 2220) 
General Accounting Office made public  report  to Congress charging NASA’s 
“unrealistic  delivery  dates”  fo r   first  two   Os0  satellites had  cost  an  un- 
necessary $526,000.  GAO  was critical of  NASA  fo r  ordering backup  Os0 
eight weeks before scheduled launching of  the  first satellite, thus spend- 
ing  $273,000 that  was  not  needed.  The GAO  report  also said  NASA  had 
unnecessarily  limited  competition  for  Os0  construction. 
( AP,  Wash. 
Eve. Star, 2 / 6 / a ,   2 ;  Finney, NYT, 2/7/64,10) 
Col.  Daniel  McKee,  head  of  AFSC  Field  Office  at  NASA  Manned 
Spacecraft  Center,  said  in  Houston Post  article  that  USAF  would  par- 
ticipate  in  NASA  Project  Gemini  with  20  experiments, beginning  with 
the  second manned  Gemini  flight.  Some  of  the   areas  in  which  USAF 
would  conduct  experiments  include  radiation,  photography,  cornmuni- 
cations, and extravehicular activities.  (Maloney, Houston Post, 2/6/64) 
FAA Adminktrator  N. E.  Halaby  announced  formation  of  Future  Flight 
Manpower  Study  Board  to  investigate  future  manpower  requirements 
fo r  civil aviation.  Board was  headed by Dan A.  Kmball,  Board Chair- 
man  of  Aerojet-General Corp. and  former Secretary of  the Navy. 
(FAA 
Release 64-1  1) 

56 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTIW,  19 6 4 

Februwy   6 :  Welcoming Dr.  S.  Dillon Ripley  I1  as  eighth  Secretary  of  the 
quoted  Dr. 
Smithsonian  Institution,  Senator  Claiborne  Pel1  (D.-R.I.) 
Ripley in  the Senate: 
“ ‘In  the realm of  the humanities, in a r t  and the history of  our culture, 
a s  well as in  a  variety of  sciences ranging  from the  study  of  the  ocean, 
of  space  and  the  natural  sciences,  it  is  implicit  that  the  Smithsonian 
should assume a commanding position in education as well  as leadership 
in  the museum  world.  We  cannot  afford  to  overlook  any  possibility 
of  increasing  and  diffusing  knowledge  among  our  people,  young  and 
old,  at  all  levels-from 
exhibits  and  museum  lectures  and  demonstra- 
tions to postgraduate specialized research.  M u s e u m  and their  technical 
resources are important as never before  in these days of  crisis  in educa- 
tion.’  ”  (CR, 2/6/64,2161) 
FAA awarded  $1.3  million  contract  to  Skidmore, Owings  and  Merrill  fo r  
improvements at  FAA’s National  Aviation  Facilities  Experimental  Cen- 
(FAA  Release T 6 4 4 )  
ter  ( NAFEC)  in Atlantic City, N.J. 
February 7:  NASA  announced  it would join  with  Norwegian  Space Research 
Committee and the Ionospheric Research Laboratory  of  the Royal Tech- 
nical Univ. of  Denmark in three sounding rocket launches from Andoeya, 
Norway,  during  February  and  March.  The  Nike-Apache  sounding 
rockets would carry  experiments to  test  theories of  how D-region of  the 
ionosphere  is  formed.  Norwegian  Committee  was  providing  launch 
site  and  associated facilities;  Norwegian  Committee and  Danish  Iono- 
spheric  Laboratory  together  were  purchasing  sounding  rockets  and 
contributing  scientific payloads.  NASA  was  furnishing  certain  experi- 
ments  for  the  payload,  already  had  assisted  Danish  and  Norwegian 
scientists by providing training in rocket handling  and data  acquisition. 
(NASA Release 64-27) 
0  NASA  issued  its  first  exclusive  patent  license  to  Satellite  Div.  of 
Union  Carbide  Corp.  for  commercial  development  of  a  nickel  alloy 
invented by John C.  Freche, metallurgist  a t  NASA  Lewis Research Center. 
For  a s  long  as  it develops the  alloy  for  commercial use,  Union  Carbide 
agreed  to  spend a t  least  $20,000 a  year  for not  more  than  three  years. 
After  fully  developing  it, Union  Carbide would  hold  exclusive market- 
ing  rights  for not more  than  four years,  at which  time  exclusive license 
would expire  and  product  would  be made  fully  available to  the  public. 
(NASA  Release 6 6 3 0 )  
*  Australian scientist Victor Albert Bailey speculated that moon may possess 
far-reaching electrostatic field,  which  could  have  been  responsible fo r  
RANGER  VI  camera failure  by  interfering with  switches fo r  the  cameras. 
(SBD, 2/7/64,207) 
*  Two  balloons  with  instrumented  payloads  to  make  upper-atmosphere 
measurements were released  a t  Palestine, Tex.,  and  recovered.  Balloon 
carrying  550  Ibs.  of  instruments  to  study  cosmic  rays,  designed  by 
Case  Institute  researchers,  was  recovered  later  near  Roanoke,  Ala.; 
balloon  carrying  405  lbs.  of  instruments  to  take  oxygen  specimens  at 
varying  altitudes,  designed  by  MIT,  was  recovered  near  Derry,  La. 
( UPI, Phil. Eve. BuU., 2/7/64,) 
Life  science researchers  in   North  American  Aviation’s  Space  and  Infor- 
mation  Systems Div.  were  studying  effects  of  weightlessness  and  in- 
creased gravity on boa constrictors, NAA  reported.  The eyes of  the boas 
were of  special interest,  fo r  they  offered easily  observable reactions  to 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS ,   19 6 4 

57 

the  conditions.  Normally a  slit that  remains  vertic 
boa’s  eye  tilted  some  15  de 
centrifuge.  The  snakes were  ‘LgrossIy disoriented” 
(NAA  S&ID  Skywriter,  2/7/64,  2 )  
objects, they  missed widely. 
February  7:  Sen.  J.  Howard  Edmondson  (D.-Okla.),  member  of  Senate 
Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences,  and  Sen.  Kenneth 
Keating  (R.-N.Y.)  were appointed as advisers to U S .  representatives on 
U.N.  Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, replacing Senators 
(Tu lsa   Da i ly   Wo r ld ,  
Margaret  Chase  Smith  and  Howard  Cannon. 
2/8/64) 
*  FAA announced  Air  France  and  British  Overseas Airways  Corp.  had  re- 
served  six delivery  positions  apiece for  the  US .   supersonic  transport 
aircraft,  bringing  total  reserved  positions to  63 and number  of  airlines 
holding positions to  10.  (FAA Release W 1 2 )  
February 8 :  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  announced  $133,358 contract 
was  awarded  to  AiResearch Manufacturing  Co.  Div.  of  Garrett  Corp. 
fo r   design  and  produotion  of  extravehicular  pressurization  ventilation 
system  to  be  used  by  astronauts  in   Project  Gemini.  (UPI, Sun  D iego  
Union, 2/9/64!) 
*  Major  Robert A.  Rushworth  (USAF) , X-15  pilot,  said at Texas A&M  Univ. 
that “we stand about half-way in the amount of  work we want to do” with 
the X-15  aircraft.  “In  the  next  four years, we want  to get  another  one 
hundred  flights under  our  belts.”  Describing  the  X-15A-2  plane  fo r  
advanced missions,  he  said t h e  new  aircraft  would  range u p  to  80 mi. 
altitude  a t   speed  of  5,450  mph,  with  help  of  hydrogen-fueled ramjet 
engine  and  13,500  additional  pounds  of  fuel.  (UPI, Omaha  World 
Her&,  2/9/64) 
February 9:  NASA  announced FAA-NASA  Memorandum of  Understanding spec- 
ifying NASA’s role  in  development of  U S .   supersonic transport  aircraft, 
under  overall  responsibility  of  FAA.  NASA  would  furnish  facilities, 
background  research, technical advice, and  resources to  FAA and would 
conduct  advanced  flight  research. 
I n   addition,  NASA  would  conduct 
necessary  background  research  to  provide  supporting  tmhnology  and 
facilities  and  technical 
technical  assistance and  make  available  NASA’s 
resources. 
In   flight testing phase,  FAA would  be  responsible fo r  direc- 
tion  and  acceptance  testing,  and  certification  trials;  NASA  would  be 
responsible for  flight  research with  its own  funds,  instrumentation,  and 
(NASA  Release 64-28) 
resources. 
Balloon with instrumented payload to measure light given off  by  oxygen  a t  
high  altitudes was launched from Palestine, Tex.,  landing later  that  day 
at Roganville, Tex.  (Houston Chron., 2 / 1 0 / a )  
Project Amos,  ARPA  project to develop and operate full-scale infrared  astro- 
nomical observatory, was described by Howard Simons in  the Washing- 
ton Pos t .   To be installed on  lO,OOO-ft.-high Mt.  Haleakala on Hawaiian 
Island  of  Maui,  the observatory would be used  in twofold program:  re- 
search in locating and  identifying missile nose cones and satellites;  and 
study of  infrared characteristics of  missiles and satellites as well a s  earth’s 
(Simons,  W a h .  Pos t ,  
atmosphere, the  sun,  stars,  moon,  and  planets. 
2/9/64,  E3) 
* Information  conditioning  unit  that  converts  data  f o r   computer  use  much 
more rapidly  than any before had been tested on USN satellite, according 
to Applied Physics Laboratory of  Johns Hopkins Univ.,  inventor  of  the  
system.  System was  said to  reduce to  hours  the weeks  o r  months pre- 
t 7 6 4 % - 6 9 8 U  

58 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4  

viously  required  f o r   conversion  of  satellite  data  into  usable  scientific 
information.  After recent launch of  USN  satellite with the unit onboard, 
scientists  obtained  more  than  50  types  of 
information-analyzed, 
(UPI,  NYT, 
checked, and  printed-from 
the satellite within  1 2  hours. 
2/9/64,  91) 
February 10: President  Johnson  submiited to  the Congress his  1953 report 
on  the  activities and  accomplishments of  the U S .   program  to  establish 
and  operate  a  commercial  communications  satellite  system. 
In  his 
transmittal  message,  the  President  said : 
“The  year  1963 has  been  a  period  of  major  accomplishment toward 
the  objectives  established  by  the  Congress  in  the Communications 
Satellite  Act.  The  Communications  Satellite  Corporation  has  been 
organized,  established, has  employed  a  competent  staff,  and  is  imple- 
menting  plans  for  a  commercial communications satellite system.  All 
agencies of  Government concerned have  contributed  wholeheartedly  to 
the   furtherance  of  the  objectives  of  the  act.  . . .”  (CR ,   2/10/64, 
2714) 
*  USAF  Athena  missile  misfired  in  its  first  overland  test  flight  from  Green 
River, Utah,  and  pieces of  the vehicle and  instrumented payload landed 
in  sparsely  populated  southwest  Colorado.  No  person  or  property 
was  damaged,  and  USAF  officials  apologized  immediately  to  Colorado 
Governor John  A.  Love.  The &ton, 50-ft. missile was  supposed to have 
made  450-mi.  flight  from  Green  River  to  White  Sands Missile Range, 
N.  Mex.  USAF  sources later indicated that the missile’s  nosecone was  re- 
leased  when  pyrotechnic  charges  were  actuated  by   a  short  circuit  in  
second-stage junction  box.  A s  result  of  damage to  forward  wires,  sig- 
nals  for  first-stage jettison  were  lost  and  second stage ignited with  first 
stage  still  attached.  Pressure  forced  off  the  stage  fairing  as  well  a s  
second-stage fins,  but  the  vehicle  continued  to  travel-20” 
off  course. 
(AP, Balt.  Sun., 2/11/64;  UPI,  NYT, 2/11/64,  26; M&R,  2/24/64,11; 
Av.  Wk . ,  3 12/64? 36) 
*  120 delegates from 17  European nations met with U.S.  and Canadian dele- 
gations  in  Rome  for  exploratory talks  on European  participation  in   an 
international  communications  satellite  system  proposed  by  the  U S .  
( N Y T ,  2/11/64) 
Examining  the  failure  of  RANGER  VI  as  well  as  previous  Ranger  lunar 
probes, William Coughlin pointed  out  in  Missiles and Rockets  editorial 
that  Jet Propulsion  Laboratory,  Ranger  project  manager,  is  “the  only 
NASA  facility where NASA  owns all the land, owns all the equipment, pays 
all the bills and allows a  non-profit corporation  to run  the facility.  . . . 
An  academic environment  is  neither  comparable  nor  conducive to 
(4 
the  kind  of  hard-driving  industrial  atmosphere required  to  make  com- 
plex space hardware function in a highly reliable manner  . . . we think 
Congress should reopen the whole question of  the  JPL-Cal Tech relation- 
ship.”  (M&R, 2/10/64,50) 
*  NASA  announced  selection  of  Trans  World  Airlines  fo r   negotiation  of 
contract  to  provide  base  support  services  at  John  F.  Kennedy 
Space  Center,  NASA.  Under  this  contract  TWA  would  provide  general 
maintenance, utilities  operation,  and  supply  operations  on  a  cost-plus- 
incentive-fee basis ; and  janitorial,  fire protection and  prevention, secu- 
rity,  and  medical  services on  fixed-price basis. 
(NASA  Release 64-32; 
KSC Release 13-64) 

59 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 
February 10: Dr.  Eugen  Saenger, eminent Eur 
ace scientist, died  a t  
for his World War  I1 
Dr.  Saenger was  best 
58  in  West Berlin. 
study  “Rocket  Propulsion  of  Long  Range  Bombers”  and  his  post-war 
theoretical investigations of  photon-powered rockets.  He was one of  the  
first to investigate use of  liquid hydrogen as a  fuel and of  metal powders 
mixed with rocket  fuels.  Formerly head  of  Institute  of  Jet Propulsion 
Physics in  Stuttgart,  since last May he held chair of  space flight technol- 
ogy at Berlin Technical Univ.  Of  him, Dr. Walter Dornberger said:  “He 
didn’t  see the goal of  human endeavor as travel just in  our planetary  sys- 
He  made  very 
tem. 
He  wanted  to  see  travel  to  the  outer  galaxies. 
extensive studies in  this field, which one day-maybe  40,  50 years  from 
(NYT ,  2/11/6439) 
now-may  be looked at very seriously.” 
*  Rep. Glen P. Lipscomb  (R.-Calif.)  discussed on the House floor a document 
titled  “Common Action fo r  the Control of  Conflict:  An Approach to  the 
Problem  of  International  Tension  and  Arms  Control,”  prepared  by 
Vincent P. Rock of  Institute fo r  Defense Analysis under contract to  U.S. 
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.  Rep.  Lipscomb said the docu- 
ment “reportedly has been must reading for administration officials.  . . . 
[It]  becomes  an   important  document  because,  since  its  release  [July 
19631,  administration  policies seem to  have coincided to  a  high  degree 
with  its  recommendations.  Although  it  purports  to  be  nothing  more 
than  its  author’s  opinions,  it  ha s   turned  out  to  be  a  handy  advance 
guidebook  to  administration  actions.  . . .”  Citing  examples  of  Rock 
report’s  recommendations,  Rep.  L ipcomb   said  report  recommended 
US .   seek  Soviet  cooperation  in  future  space  efforts  and  in  scientific 
areas;  he noted NASA-U.S.S.R.  space cooperation  agreement announced 
Aug.  16,  1963,  and  President  Kennedy’s  proposal  fo r   US.-U.S.S.R. 
negotiations for lunar exploration cooperation presented Sept. 20,  1963. 
(CR, 2/10/64,2720) 
*  NASA  announced it would negotiate one-year cost-plus-incentive-fee contract 
with  General Electric Co.,  Computer Dept.,  for continuation of  engineer- 
ing  services  at  NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center’s  computation 
(NASA Release 64-31) 
laboratory. 
*  Florida  East  Coast  Railway  moved  a  freight  train  into  Merritt  Island 
with  non-union  workers,  a s   NASA  had  formally  authorized  on 
Feb.  8 .   Striking  railroad  workers  established  picket  lines  a t   all  en- 
trances to Merritt  Island and Cape Kennedy.  Army Corps of  Engineers 
said  apparently  all  4,541)  construction  workers  refused  to  cross  the 
(UPI,  How- 
picket lines, halting construction on more than 30 projects. 
ton  Chronicle, 2/10/64;  AF’, NYT ,  2 /11 /a ,   42) 
* Thomas L.  McGrath, director  of  R&D  Dept.  of  Greater Boston  Chamber of 
Commerce, said in  Christiun Science Monitor interview that NASA’s elec- 
tronic  research  center  would  be  a  stimulus  to  Boston  area  economy. 
When  the   center  is  completed  in   1969,  he  said,  a  “conservative”  esti- 
mate would be  $250 million contribution  to  income of  the  area.  “The 
center will pull in a lot of  capable people, and it’s impossible to say what 
they’ll  add to the income of  the area.  Also one good research discovery 
coming out  of  the center might be w o r t h  millions to   industry.” 
(Rus- 
sell, CSM, 2/10/64) 
* Soviet cosmonaut Valentina  Nikolayeva-Tereshkova left  London  fo r  Mos- 
cow,  ending  t o u r o f   Britain  during which  she was  presented  to  Queen 
(AP, Vm h .  Pos t ,  2/11/M) 
Elizabeth. 

60 
ASTRONAUTICS   A ND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  
February 10:  Air-India had reserved three delivery positions f o r  U.S.  super- 
( FAA Release f34-13) 
sonic transport aircraft, FAA announced. 
February  1 1 :   NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  announced  at  Hq.  press 
conference that  US.-U.S.S.R.  communications experiments with  ECHO 
11 balloon satellite would begin after Feb. 21. 
In  response to question, Mr. Webb said failure of  attempts to  acquire 
lunar photographs had  not  adversely affected Apollo schedule: “. . . up 
to  this  time we  have not had  to  make  any  changes in  the program  due 
to  this, nor do I think we will.” 
Asked whether  1969 date fo r  manned lunar  landing was  a “deadline” 
o r  a “planning date”, Mr. Webb said: 
“The view President Kennedy had . . . was that  he was setting a dead- 
line by which he wanted this nation to get the job done, and he was  pro- 
viding  resources fo r  us  to plan  the flight in  1967,  or early  1968, giving 
some leeway for intractable technical problems, f o r  unknown and unfore- 
seeable things, and also to avoid having to  put  into parallel development 
systems that would be more expensive if  done that way.  . . . 
“Now,  the  1%7,  early  1968 target  date  that  we  were  setting  was  to 
mobilize the effort, to  press forward  with  it,  but  not  to  do  so  in  such  a 
way  a s  to  run  this cost  up  from  $20  billion to  something much higher. 
(‘So  we  were  thinking  of  it  as pretty  much  of  a  deadline  that  it  was 
in the interests of  this nation to meet. 
“Now,  with  the  cuts  last  year  of  $600  million  and  the   reorganiza- 
tion  of  the effort to  all-up systems testing, the cancellation of  a  number 
of  Saturn  flights, things  of  this kind,  I  think  you’ve  got  to  think  of  it 
somewhat differently.  I  think  the  target  date  for  the  flights,  which  is 
a  tight  date but  still  attainable,  is  mighty  close to  the  January  1,  1970 
period. 
“. . . I  believe  we  can  do  it  within  the  latter  six  months  of  1969 
if   we   proceed  vigorously  under  the  plan  we  have  presented  to  the 
But  again  we  don’t  have  any  leeway.  . . . 
We  have  lost 
Congress. 
that,  and we’ve  got  no more than  what  I’d  call  a  fighting chance to  do 
this by January 1,1970.” 
Mr.  Webb  discussed  NASA  relationship  with  Cal  Tech’s  Jet  Propul- 
sion  Laboratory,  manager  of  NASA’s lunar  and  planetary  exploration 
programs.  The current  three-year contract  “expires  next  June  and  we 
have  now  for  some  months  been  examining  together  with  the  Cali- 
fornia Institute of  Technology ways and means to make a better  relation- 
ship  from  their  standpoint  and  from  NASA’s standpoint.”  Mr.  Webb 
said  NASA  was  seeking  a  reorganization  of  JPL to  achieve  a  “hard- 
(Finney,  NYT ,   2/12/@; 
headed  type  of  industrial  management.” 
Loory, N .Y .  Her. Tr ib . ,  2/12/64;  Simons, Wash, Post, 2/12/64;  M&R ,  
2/17/64,  16) 
NASA  announced  that  failure  of  RANGER  VI  spacecraft  to  take  pictures 
of  the  moon  may  have  been  caused  by  unscheduled  turn-on  of  cruise 
telemetry from the TV system at  about  the  same time  a s  Atlas  booster 
separation.  For  unexplained  reason,  telemetry  turned  on  for  about 
one  minute  and  relayed  measurements  in  the  TV system,  including 
battery  voltages  and  temperatures.  It  was  possible  tha t   TV  system 
could  have  turned  on  a t  the  same time;  if  so,  severe electrical  arcing 
would have occurred and damaged the system.  However, TV telemetry 
turned  on  17 min.  after  separation  from Agena  stage as scheduled, and 
nothing a t  that time indicated  any abnormalities in the TV system. 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A ERONAU T IC S ,   19  6 4 

61 
Tracking  data  showed that  RANGER  VI  impacted the  moon  w i d i  20 
mi.  of  its  target  and within  one  third  of  a second of  the  predicted  a r e  
(NASA  Release W 3 3  
rival time. 
February  1 1 :   Spokesman for  European  conference on  satellite communica- 
tions,  meeting in   Rome with  US. and Canadian  delegations,  said  con- 
ference had  reached agreement on principal points of  the U.S.  proposal 
to establish an international  comsat system.  “They  are now  discussing 
(N Y T ,  2/12/644, 
the details, upon which the accord isn’t  so extensive.” 
13) 
*  Communications Satellite Corp.  announced six  companies had  responded 
to its request for proposals fo r  designing international  commercial com- 
munications  satellite.  AT&T  and  RCA  submitted  a  joint  proposal; 
Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc.,  submitted proposal with ITT  as prin- 
cipal subcontractor;  Hughes Aircraft Co.  and Philco Corp.  submitted in- 
( W S J ,  
dividual proposals.  ComSatCorp was evaluating the proposals. 
2/12/64) 
*  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  awarded  two  NASA  contracts  fo r   work  to  be 
performed  a t   NASA  Mississippi  Test  Facility:  $3,801,146  contract  to 
Chaney  and  James  Construction  Co.,  Inc.,  for  construction  of  booster 
storage building, RP-1  dock, and booster transfer dock;  and $2,401,542 
contract  to  Farrell  Construction  Co.  for  construction  of  main  canal. 
( DOD Release 1284%) 
Annual report of  NORAD  indicated U.S. orbited 60 payloads  in  38  launches 
during  1963, compared with  17  by  U.S.S.R. 
(AP,  C SM ,  2/11/64) 
* Construction workers  a t  Cape Kennedy  refused  fo r   a  second  day  to  cross 
picket  lines  of  Railroad  Telegraphers  Union,  and  some  of  the  other 
9,000 union members at Cape Kennedy honored the picket lines.  Eater, 
at request of  National Labor Relations Board, U S .  District Court issued 
temporary  injunction  ordering  withdrawal  of  the  picket  lines  against 
(UPI,  Wush. Post,  2/12]64;  AP,  Wash. 
Florida  East  Coast  Railway. 
Eve. Star, 2/12/644;  UPI,  Wm h .  Pos t ,  2/13/64) 
* None  of  the  supersonic transport  bidders  was  willing  to  assume the  pre- 
scribed  share  of  cost  of  the  joint  Government-industry-funded 
SST 
program,  John  P.  MacKenzie  reported  in  Washington Post.  Under 
plan  presented  by  President  Kennedy,  SST  would  cost  $1  billion,  with 
Government paying  75%  of  the cost and manufacturers paying  remain- 
ing  25%.  MacKenzie said none  of  the six bidding  manufacturers  had 
met  the  25% participation  challenge,  and  “some  manufacturers  said 
the plane could not be developed fo r  $1 billion.”  Officials were reported 
to be studying independent report by  Eugene R.  Black, former president 
of  the World Bank, which unnamed sources said  recommended Govern- 
ment  finance 90% of  the  development cost.  Report  also  was  said  to 
have  proposed  transferring  SST  program  from  FAA  to  an  independent 
agency,  slowing  pace  of  the   SST  development  and  avoiding  interna- 
tional  “race”  with  U.K.-France  Concorde  development. 
(MacKenzie, 
Wash. Post,  2/11/64;  N .Y .  Her. Trib., 2/13/64;  Newsweek, 2/17/64) 
* Experimental  hot-electron propulsion  system had  completed  1,000 hrs.  of 
testing  at  RCA  David  Sarnoff  Research  Center  without  degradation  of 
( N Y T ,   2 /11 /a ,   5 3 ;  
components or  performance,  RCA  announced. 
M&R,  2/17/64,21) 

62 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   AERONAUT IC S ,   1 9 6 4  
February 11: Comparison of  amount of  earth’s heat  resulting  from radioac- 
tive breakup of  elements uranium,  thorium, and potassium was discussed 
in Science.  Half  of  all potassium heat wa s  released in  about first quarter 
of  earth’s  lifetime, while heat from uranium  and thorium was  released a t  
(Sci. Serv.,  NYT, 2/11/64,28) 
a more even rate. 
0  USAF  successfully launched 30th Minuteman  ICBM  from Vandenberg AFB,  a 
(M& R ,   2/17/@,  13) 
routine  training  launch  by  SAC  crew. 
February  12:  Continuing the current series of  sounding rocket experiments 
to  obtain  comparative characteristics of  the upper  atmosphere at widely 
separated  locations,  NASA  launched  three  Nike-Cajun sounding  rockets 
a t  Wallops  Island,  Fort  Churchill,  and  Ascension  Island.  The  rocket 
payloads ejected  12 grenades which  detonated a t  intervals up  to  55-mi. 
altitude.  (Wallops Release 6 6 1 6 )  
* NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., 
in test of  hinged-fin assembly with modified wedge designed to produce 
about 5 rps  a t  Apache  burnout  and  to  obtain  temperatures  in  flight  at 
various  points  on  the  fin  panel.  Rocket  reached  90-mi.  altitude;  pFr- 
formance  of  rocket  and  instrumentation  was  considered  good,  wth 
exception of  temperature  probes,  which  were  lost  shortly  after  lift-off. 
(NASA Rpt. SRL) 
0  Soviet news agency Tass said ELECTRON  I  and  ELECTRON  II  scientific satel- 
lites  continued  to  function  successfully.  By  6:OO  p.m.  Moscow  time 
Feb. 11, ELECTRON I had completed 104 orbits and ELECTRON  II more than 
(Tass, Krusnuyu Zvezdu, 2/12/@,  1, ATSS-T  Trans.) 
13 orbits. 
0  Dr.  S.  Fred  Singer,  Director  of  US. Weather  Bureau’s  National  Weather 
Satellite  Center,  said  that  the  modified  Tiros  meteorological  satellite 
system, using  presently available equipment, would  be  able to:  provide 
daily global coverage of  weather; use vertical cameras for more complete 
pictures;  aid  in  prediction  of  time  and  location  of  thundershowers; 
determine  if  clouds  are  storm  cover;  aid  in  studying  hydrology  and 
geology, mapping  earth’s  surface;  aid  airlines  in  tracking  jet  stream, 
( S B D ,  2/13/64,  239) 
especially on  transatlantic  flights. 
* Catalyst  for  use  with  monopropellant  hydrazine  rocket  engines  has  been 
developed  by  Shell  Oil  Co.’s  General  Chemistry  Dept.  working  with 
Jet Propulsion  Laboratory  in  NASA-sponsored project,  NASA  announced. 
Development  of  the  catalyst  permits  use  of  hydrazine  for  spacecraft 
guidance  and  control  rockets.  NASA  scientists reported  that  hydrazine 
compounds produced by the catalytic reaction were 50%  more energetic 
than monopropellant hydrogen-peroxide now  used. 
(NASA  Release & 
29) 
* NASA  Lewis Research Center  issued  requests  fo r  proposals  for  initial  con- 
struction of  500-ft. drop tower for producing zero gravity  environments. 
The  facility  would  be   largest  of  its  kind  in  the  U.S.,  would  be  able to 
provide weightlessness for periods  up  to  10 sec.  (LRC Release &12) 
0  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  awarded  $3,207,166  NASA  contract  to 
Peter  Kiewit  Sons Co.  and  C.  H.  Leave11 Co.  for  construction  of  two 
Saturn test  stand substructures  at NASA Mississippi Test  Facility.  (DOD 
Release 132-64,) 
Construction workers a t  Cape Kennedy returned to work after Federal judge 
temporarily halted picketing by the Railroad Telegraphers Union against 
(UPI,  Wush. Po s t ,  2/12/@) 
the Florida East Coast Railway. 

63 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  
February  121 Dpnamite  bomb  planted  along  Florida  East  Coast  Railway 
tracks near  Titusville was disarmkd by  four  boys.seconds  before freight 
train  passed  by,  th6  bomb  providing  authorities  with  clues  to  similar 
bombing  incidents  involving  FEC  property.  The  attempted  sabotage 
occurred  only two miles north  of  Cape Kennedy, where striking unions’ 
(UPI,  N.Y.  .Her. 
picket  lines  had  halted  construction  for  two  days. 
T r ib . ,  2/14/64) 
Trans-American Aeronautical Corp. of  Washington had reserved a delivery 
position  for US. supersonic transport  aircraft, FAA  announced.  Trans- 
American was expected to make the aircraft available to  a Latin Ameri- 
(FAA Release 64-14) 
can flag carrier through leasing arrangement. 
*  FAA said  during  first  week  of  sonic  boom  tests  over  Oklahoma  City  60 
damage  claims  were  reported.  Of  the  60,  only  two  persons  actuany 
signed affidavits, FAA said.  ( UPI,  Vmh .  Da i l y  News ,  2/13/64) 
USAF  successfully launched Atlas  F  ICBM  from Vandenberg AFB  in  routine 
(M&R ,  2/17/64+  13) 
training mission. 
*  USAF  successfully launched Minuteman  ICBM  from  Cape Kennedy,  first  in 
(M& R ,   2/17/64,  13) 
series  of  tests of  Minuteman’s penetration  aids. 
Fifth  Women’s  Space Symposium was held  in  Los Angeles, with  Dr.  Orr 
E. Reynolds, Director of  NASA Bioscience Programs,  as principal speaker. 
(S.  Thomas) 
February  13:  At  conclusion  of  Rome  meeting  of  European  Conference on 
Satellite  Communications with  representatives from  U S .   and  Canada, 
head  of  US. delegation Abram  Chayes said  “the most significant result 
of  the  conference  is  that  a  number  of  European  countries  a s  well  as 
Canada have now  expressed serious interest in joining  as copartners’’ in 
the  international  comsat  system.  Discussions  would  continue,  and 
another  meeting was  scheduled for  mid-March in Washington. 
(Woll- 
emborg, Wmh. Post, 2/14/64) 
*  NASA-AEC  Space Nuclear  Propulsion Office  (SNPO)   announced that the  Los 
Alamos  Scientific Laboratory  had  successfully completed a  major  cold- 
flow  test  series  on  the  Kiwi  B-4D-CF  reactor.  The  experiments were 
designed  to  verify  design  changes  incorporated  in  the  basic  K iw i   B 4  
reactor  to  prevent  flow-induced vibrations  under  nonpower producing 
conditions.  No  vibrations  were observed. 
( SNPO) 
NASA employees Christopher 6. Kraft, Jr.,  and  Dr.  John W. Townsend,  Jr., 
were  among  the  10  outstanding  young  men  in  Government  service 
awarded  the  1963 Arthur  S.  Flemming Awards.  Kraft  was  Assistant 
Director  fo r  Flight Operations, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center;  Town- 
send,  Assistant  Director  of  Space  Science  and  Satellite  Applications, 
NASA  Goddard  Space Flight Center. 
(NASA  Notice) 
*  Technology  from  $3 million  program  to  eliminate  vibrations  in  Project 
Gemini’s  Titan  I1  launch  vehicle  should  be  applied  to  other  large 
boosters, according to NASA  Chief  of  Launch Vehicle Systems Integration 
(Webb,  UPI,  Houston  Press,  2/14/64;  SBD ,  
Jerome  B.  Hammack. 
2/13/64,240) 
contract  fo r   construction  of  JPL Explosive S 
edy  was  awarded 
yd  Construction  Corp. 
Corps of  Engineers.  (DOD Rele 
* Sen.  Stuart  Symington  (D.-Mo.)  speaking  before  the  Annual  Meeting  of 
the Cape Girardeau, Mo.,  Chamber of  Commerce, said: 

64 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

“Our policies a r e  peaceful in nature, and our space program is peaceful 
national  security, economic as well  as military.  . . . 
in purpose and content;  but  it is also  a  sound investment for  our  future 
“Landings  on  the moon  will  add  to  our  knowledge of  the  origin  of 
the  universe, and also contribute to our knowledge of  the broad spectrum 
tions  . . . 
of  science and technology in such areas as meteorology and communica- 
“But  the  lunar  project  is  not  the  whole  space  program;  and  the 
military  significance of  the  program  cannot  be  judged  by  examining 
that  project  alone;  nor  can  anyone  today  estimate  the   great  wealth 
and  resources that  will  flow  from  this  new  knowledge.  Knowledge is, 
and  will  be,  the  basic  power  of  modern  states. 
space effort  . . . 
“Moreover,  the  Defense  Department  is  now  deeply  engaged  in  the 
“The  t rue  defense value  of  the  lunar  project  rests  with  the  develop- 
ment of  our  over-all space capabilities;  and  no  one can  say  today  how 
this  stockpile of  knowledge will  be  used  in  the  defense of  th i s  Nation 
o r  how important it will be.  . . .” 
(Text) 
February 13: Dr Willy Ley predicted at Texas A&M  Univ. that U.S.S.R.  would 
attempt  manned  orbital  flight  to  the  moon  during  1964.  He  did  not 
believe such a  flight would  “significantly  advance the  time of  an  actual 
landing  . . .  [because]  that  would  take  great  strides  in  new  rocket 
power.”  He  believed  U S .   had  a  “50-50  chance  of  being  the  first  to 
(Maloney, Houston Post,  2/14/64) 
get  there.” 
* New  York  Gov.  Nelson  Rockefeller, campaigning  in  New  Hampshire  Re- 
publican  primary  for  presidential  nomination,  said  there  was  a  “very 
serious question” whether  U S .  should abandon  Project  Apollo manned 
lunar project  and rely  instead on  instrumented spacecraft.  About 95% 
of  information  obtainable  by  men  on  the  moon  “for  a  half  an  hour” 
could  be  gathered  by  instruments,  he  said.  He  said  the   decision  for 
Apollo  came after the abortive Bay  of  Pigs invasion, when  the Adminis- 
tration  decided  the  U S .   needed  something  “dramatic.”  Rockefeller 
proposed  reconsidering  the  space  plan  advocated  by  President  Eisen- 
hower, calling fo r  a  slower, less expensive, “scientific”  program. 
(NYT, 
2/14/64,10;  AP,  Wash.  Post,  2/14/64) 
a Atlas missile caught fire and exploded  at silo site east of  Roswell, N.  Mex., 
demolishing  the  $1.5  million  missile  and  the  $10 million  silo.  USAF 
(UPI,  Wash. Post, 2/14/64) 
reported  no  personal injuries. 
February 14: NASA postponed indefinitely the launch of  Ranger 7 lunar probe. 
New launch date would depend on further study of  failure of  RANGER VI’S 
TV  camera  system before  impacting  the  moon  Feb.  2.  NASA-JPL 
in- 
vestigators still were  concentrating on unscheduled turnon  of  telemetry 
from  TV system which  occurred  at  about  same  time  as  separation  of 
Atlas booster engines. 
(NASA  Release 6 4A 8 )  
NASA-DOD  agreement that  instrumentation  ships  required  to  support  NASA 
and DOD  space programs would be pooled and operated by  DOD on behalf 
of  both  agencies was  announced.  By  end  of  1967 pool would  have  20 
operational tracking ships.  NASA would participate with DOD in all phases 
of  the program,  including s y s t em  engineering  and  development of  the 
plans  and specifications.  Navy  Dept.  would  have central  responsibility 
fo r   design,  construction,  and  modification  of  the  ships.  Military  Sea 
Transportation  Service ( MSTS)  would be responsible for ship operation, 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

65 

and  DOD  Range 
instrumentation 
$83  million  of  FY  1964  funds,  whi 
NASA-DOD  agreement.  The  funds 
from Maritime Reserve Fleet and to modify two ships for Apollo already 
(NASA Release 6 6 3 4 ;  DOD Release 137-64; 
in the joint tracking system. 
Wash.  Eve. Star, 2/14/64) 
Februmy 14:  Discussing MOL’S growth potential in  testimony before House 
Armed  Services Committee, Subcommittee on  R B ~ D ,  Director  of  DOD  Re- 
search and Engineering Dr.  Harold  Brown said:  “I want  to make a  dis- 
tinction between its ultimate capability and what is in  the  program.  . . . 
w h a t   is  in  the  program  is not  a  space station  in  that  sense.  It  is  an 
experimental laboratory.  But  . .  this  could  grow to  be  a  space  sta- 
tion,  if  and  after  . . . we  conclude  . . . that  a  man  can  have  a  sub- 
stantial  military  purpose  [in  space].”  Dr.  Brown  said  DOD  should 
move more aggressively into the manned space flight arena in  order  to 
<c 
explore more  fully man’s  utility  for  the  performance  of  military  space 
missions  and  to  develop  . . . his  fu l l   capabilities  in  any  area  where 
(SBD ,  2/17/64,  260;  M&R,  2/24/64,  15) 
potential exists.” 
* NASA  selected  Genisco,  Inc.,  to  develop,  fabricate,  and   assemble  motion 
generator for research into  guidance and psycho-physiological problems 
of  manned  space  flight.  The  fixed-price contract  was  expected  to  be 
valued  between $6 million  and $6.5 million.  Genisco  had  been  selected 
last July fo r  contract negotiations for the motion generator, major  com- 
ponent of  advanced space navigation  simulator  at  NASA  Ames  Research 
Center; however,  “during the negotiations a better understanding  of  the 
design  preblems  was  reached  and  it  was  determined  that  numerous 
changes were  desirable.”  NASA  then  directed  Ames  to  request  revised 
proposals  from  the  five  bidders.  When  the  companies  submitted  new 
proposals in January, Genisco again received highest technical rating and 
(NASA Release 64-35) 
proposed the lowest fixed fee. 
*  George Low,  recently  appointed  Deputy  Director  of  NASA  Manned  Space- 
craft Center, said  in  Houston  that  failure  of  RANGER  VI  lunar TV probe 
was  “a  grave  disappointment.”  Despite  Ranger  failure,  target  date 
for  manned  lunar  landing  was  still  1969,  he   said,  but  “we  certainly 
can’t  guarantee  there  won’t  be  technical  difficulties that  won’t  let  us 
do  it.  . . .  If  we   have  to  use  the  Apollo  as  a n   unmanned  reconnais- 
sance  craft  our  small margin  [of  time]  will  be  eaten  up.” 
(Houston 
Post,  2 /15 /a )  
* NASA  selected Honeywell Aeronautical  Div.  for  negotiation  of  contract  for 
three suborbital spacecraft to be used in Project S c v n e r  horizon defini- 
tion  experiment.  Valued  a t   about  $1,000,000, the  contract  called  for 
early 1965 delivery of  two Scanner payloads plus one backup.  Scanners 
would  be  flown  on  ballistic  trajectories  from  Wallops  Island,  Va. 
(NASA  Release 64-36;  LaRG  Release) 
*  President’s  Missile  Sites Labor  Commission adopted  statement calling  on 
aphers Union to  refrain from picketing at Cape Kennedy 
land while the Commission considered the dispute between 
the  union  and  the  Florida  East  Coast  Railway.  Statement also  called 
for the union  and the company to maintain  “full  and continuous opera- 
tions  at  the  sites”  while  the  Commission  had  the  dispute  under  con- 
(UPI,  NYT,  2/15/64) 
sideration. 

66 

ASTRONAVMCS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4  

February 14:  Patent  for design of  space propulsion system using jet  of  eIec- 
trically charged liquid particles had been  awarded to Washington inven- 
tor  Dominique M.  P.  Gignoux, president of  Cosmic, Inc.  The 500,000 
volts of  electricity to  charge  and  accelerate the particles  would  be  pro- 
(Jones, N Y T ,  2/15/64) 
duced by  onboard nuclear  reactor. 
February  15:  Rebuilt X-15  No.  2  was  rolled  out  of  North  American  Avi- 
ation,  Inc.’,  facility a t  Los Angeles.  Damaged  in  landing  at Mud  Lake, 
Nev.,  in Nov.  1962, the X-15  had been modified to  increase its top speed 
by  nearly  one  third.  The  rebuilt  rocket  research  aircraft  would  be 
capable  of  short bursts  of  flight  a t  mach O m o r e  than  5,300 mph. 
I t  
(N . Y .  Her.  Tr ib . ,   2/16/64; 
would  resume test  flights later  this  year. 
AP, Wash .  Post, 2/16/64;  FRC  X-Press, 2/20/64,1) 
* USAF  launched Thor-Agena D  booster  from  Vandenberg AFB  with  nniden- 
tified satellite.  (M&R ,  2/24/64,  11) 
* Two-man crew and backup crew for first manned Gemini space flight would 
be selected in  May  o r  June,  according  to  Astronaut  Donald  K.  Slayton 
a t  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center.  Flight  was   expected  in  late  1964. 
(Houston Chron., 2/16/64) 
* Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  Director  of  NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center, 
said  in  press  conference preceding  address  a t  Texas  A&M  Univ.  that  a 
geologist  would  be  in  crew  of  second  Apollo  lunar  landing  mission. 
Geologists  probably  would  be  sought  when  NASA  recruited  astronaut 
trainees  for  subsequent Apollo  lunar  flights.  I n   his  address,  Dr.  von 
Braun  advised  that  U.S.  must  protect  itself  from  any  hostile  force  that 
attempts to  “use  space as an unchallenged  avenue of  aggression against 
us.”  (Houston Post, 2/15/64;  Houston Chron., 2/16/64) 
* Rep.  Olin Teague  (D.-Tex.)  , Chairman of  Subcommittee on Manned Space 
Flight,  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics,  visited  NASA 
Manned  Spacecraft  Center  with  members  of  the  subcommittee.  Rep. 
Teague  said  at  MSC  that  the  manned  space  flight  budget  fo r   FY  1965 
“is  a  tight  budget  and  we   have  a  good  program.  No  major  cuts  a re  
foreseen.”  (Houston Chron., 2/16/64;  Houston Post, 2/16/64) 
*  Question of  how  US. would  use  or  dispose of  54  Titan  I launch  silos was 
raised  in  Christian Science  Monitor.  $1.5  billion  had  been  spent  on 
digging  and equipping  the  silos.  First  Titan  I  site became operational 
in April  1962.  Now  that  Titan  I1 had  become  operational  augmented 
by Minuteman missiles, Secretary of  Defense Robert  S. McNBmara  had 
declared Titan  I  would  be  eliminated after  June  30,  1966. 
(Fleming, 
CSM ,   2/15/64) 
Formation  of  six  F-105  supersonic  fighter-bombers flown  by  USAF  pilots 
from Guam to New  Zealand set unofficial nonstop distance record.  The 
jets completed the flight of  4,422 mi.  in 7 hrs., 45 min.  (AP, Wash. Sun. 
Star, 2/16/64) 
February  16:  USAF’S  big  Project  Forecast,  according  to  Richard  Witkin  in  
New  Yo rk   Times, anticipated  eventual need  for  four  new  manned  air- 
craft:  Advanced Manned Precision  Strike System  (AMPSS) , interconti- 
nental-range  attack  aircraft;  transport  capable  of  10,OOO-12,OOO  mi. 
range;  Vtol  attack-reconnaissance craft;  and  limited-range Vtol  trans- 
port.  Begun  almost  a  year  ago  at  request  of  Secretary  of  the  Air 
Force Eugene M.  Zuckert  and  Chief  of  Staff  General Curtis E.  LeMay, 
(Witkin,  N Y T ,  
Project  Forecast  was  said  to  be   virtually  completed. 
2/16/64,1) 

oid “the unwarranted 

Union  in   connection with  man 
ence  to  U.N.,  “since  other  existing  international  mechanisms  appear 
better suited to bring to bear the technical competence 
bility associated with national requirements necessary t 
operative projects of  this type”;  and, “the bipartisan 
port given to the civilian space program should be  continued on the basis 
of  the  national  benefits accruing  from  vigorous implementation of  this 
program.”  Subject to  these comments, NASA  had  no objection to  adop- 
tion of  the resolution. 
(NASA   LAR  IIIJ27) 
9  According to  breakdown of  FY  1965 budget  of  NASA’s Office  of  Advanced 
Research and Technology, NASA  would initiate preliminary  design study 
of  advanced fluorine-hydrogen (flox)  rocket engine  in  FY  1965.  The 
new  engine would be based on results of  experimental fluorine program 
(M&R ,  2/17/64,18) 
with R G l O  engine. 
*  Congressional Joint  Atomic  Energy  Committee had  sent  letters  to  NASA 
Administrator  James  E.  Webb,  Air  Force  Secretary  Eugene  Zuckert, 
AEC  Chairman  Glenn  Seaborg,  and  Budget  Director  Kermit  Gordon, 
Missiles  and  Rockets  reported,  indicating  it  would  authorize  funds  to 
AEC  for  flight-testing Snap  reactors.  DOD had  announced  it  had  “no 
stated  requirement”  for  the  nuclear  auxiliary  power  systems,  and  BOB 
had  refused  AEC  request for  $15 million  to  flight-test Snap 1OA,  cut $7 
million  from  Snap 50  development, and  cut  $5.5  million  from  systems 
improvement.  Committee action would provide funds in excess of  AEC’S 
(M& R ,  2/17;/64?,14) 
request. 
e House Committee on Science and Astronautics was planning  to hold  further 
hearings  on  the  NASA  proposed  electronics  research  center,  although 
Committee Chairman  George P.  Miller  (D.-Calif.)  had  described  NASA 
Administrator Webb’s  report to  the  Congress a s  “very  comprehensive.” 
(M & R ,  2/17/64,17) 
*  USAF launched Titan I1 ICBM from Vandenberg AFB on 5,000-mi. flight down 
(UPI ,   Houston Chron.,  2/18/64?) 
PMR. 
* Rep.  Carl Elliott  (D.-Ala.)  , Chairman  of  House Select Committee on  Gov- 
ernment Research, submitted to  the House the committee’s first progress 
report.  At  its preliminary  information-gathering hearings,  the commit- 
tee  heard  testimony  by  75  persons  representing  Federal  departments 
and agencies, private research organizations, institutions of  higher  learn- 
Elliott said:  “.  . . while we  hope to  be  able to  lay  sound  guidelines for 
ing, scientific and professional associations, and private  industry.  Rep. 
the fu tu re ,  we  shall also strive to  insure that  the incentives for engaging 

68 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1964  
Febrmry 17: Fuel cells producing power to operate all electronic equipment 
in   Apollo  spacecraft  would  also  produce  enough  drinking water  as  a 
by-product to  supply the  three-man crew  during  1 4 d a y  journey  to  the 
(MSC   Release 64-32) 
moon  and back, MSC  announced. 
New  gravity  gradient  stabilization  system  utilizing  earth‘s  gravitational 
field to orient the satellite and earth‘s magnetic field to assist in damping 
was  developed by  General  Electric  and  recently  tested  onboard  a  USN 
satellite, orbited  Jan.  11.  Within  three  days  the  system  stabilized the 
(M&R ,   2 /17 /a ,   10;  Av.  Wk . ,  
satellite  to  accuracy  of  2 5  degrees. 
2 /24/64,57) 
*  USN  fired  Polaris  A-2  missile from submerged submarine off  the  Florida 
(UPI,  Houston Chron., 2/18/64) 
coast in successful test. 
February  18:  Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted to recommend Sen- 
ate  ratification  of  radio  communications treaty,  drawn  up  at  70-nation 
conference i n  Geneva last fall.  Considered a step toward establishment 
of  global  communications satellite network, treaty revised radio  regula- 
tions,  Drovided  for  international  allocation  of  radio  frequencies  for 
( AP, 
comm&cations,  navigational,  and  meteorological  satefiites. 
NYT ,  2/19/64  ,15) 
NASA  announced two  industry  teams had presented to NASA  and other agen- 
cies their  feasibility  studies for  nonmilitary  navigation satellite system. 
General Electric Co.  and  Univac Div.  of  Sperry Rand  Corp. made  one 
study under  $156,000 NASA  contract, while Westinghouse Electric Corp. 
studied  another  approach  under  $225,000  contract.  The  proposed 
satellite  network  would  provide  worldwide,  all-weather  coverage  for 
(NASA Release 64-37) 
ships and aircraft. 
Dr.  Albert C.  Hall, Deputy Director fo r  Space, Defense Research and Engi- 
neering, said in address before National Space Club in Washington that 
the  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  would  be   the  first  phase  of  DOD’S 
National  Orbiting  Space Station  and would  provide means of  carrying 
out  experiments to  prove  or disprove the military  role  of  man  in space. 
MOL  would  carry  two  astronauts  fo r  30  days,  also would  carry  experi- 
ments  of  nonmilitary  nature,  primarily  fo r  NASA.  Discussing nonmili- 
ta ry   unmanned  space  program,  Dr.  Hall  disclosed  that  the  Army  had 
secretly  launched  SECOR  last month  and that  it  was performing  “excep- 
(SBD, 2/19/64,  274;  Simons, Wash. Post,  2/19/64) 
tionally well.” 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  fo r   Manned  Space  Flight  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller said in hearings  before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, 
House committee on  Science and Astronautics, that  for Project Gemini 
“the  year  1963 was,  quite  frankly,  one of  development headaches.  It 
was  the year  of  development and qualification testing  of  Gemini’s  many 
equipments.  The program  is now  largely  over  the  development hump, 
however,  and  all Gemini  spacecraft  and  launch vehicle subsystems will 
be  fully  qualified  in  1964.  Significant in  1963 also were a  number  of 
hardware  deliveries.  . . . 
“In  1964, three  vitally important  flights will be  made-the  third  one 
manned  and  orbital.  The  year  w i l l   be  characterized  by  production, 
test, and delivery of  spacecraft and launch vehicles.  . . .” 
Questioned about  return  to  earth and landing in Project  Gemini, Dr. 
Mueller  and  George Low  said  that  plans  now  called  fo r   the   two-man 
Gemini  spacecraft  to  land  on  water  rather  than  dry land.  NASA  had 
been  investigating both  procedures,  and  paraglider  fo r   land  recoveries 

69 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 8 4 
P 
was  still in  development  stage. 
about the time of  the  last two Gemini 
uled.”  Dr. Mueller added that water landing also would  be “character- 
(Testimony;  Finney, NYT,  2/19/a, 
istic” for manned Apollo flights. 
19; M&R,  2/24/a, 21) 
February  18: NASA Associate Administrator  for Space Science and Applica- 
tions Dr.  Homer E.  Newell  discussed Lunar Orbiter in  testimony before 
Subcommittee  on  Space  Science  and  Applications,  House  Committee 
on Science and Astronautics:  “In  1963, the  Lunar  Orbiter  was  defined 
and  a  contractor  selected.  This program  will  move  into  high  gear 
this  year  and  will  require  $49.3 million  in  Fiscal  Year  1965 to  meet 
its  targeted  first  launch  in  1966.  This will  be  a  tight  schedule  but 
because  of  the  importance  of  this  mission  in   support  of  Apollo,  every 
effort will be made to meet that date.  . . .” 
Questioned  by  Subcommittee Chairman  Rep.  Joseph  E.  Karth  (D.- 
Minn.),  Dr.  Newell  said  NASA was  thinking  about  adding  five  Lunar 
Orbiters  to  the  five already  approved.  The proposed  increase was  be- 
cause the Lunar  Orbiter  “will  be  a  most  important  spacecraft not  only 
for the support  of  the manned  lunar  landing effort,  but  for  continuing 
research  on  the  moon,  on  its  geodetic properties,  and  experiments  on 
radioactivity of  the lunar surface.” 
Of  the recently orbited  ECHO  11 passive communications satellite, Dr. 
Newell said: “The ECHO  II has shown some scintillation in tbe radio wave- 
lengths which might indicate  that  it has  some defect  in  shape-perhaps 
a tear,  maybe a  dent, or  something of  that  sort.  However,  it  shows no 
such  scintillation  on  the  optical  observations,  which  is  puzzling.  It 
remains, however, a completely adequate reflector  so that  whatever dis- 
tortion  in  shape  may  have  occurred  has  not  interfered  with  its  useful- 
ness.” 
(Transcript) 
*  Rep.  Carl  Vinson  (D.-Ga.)  , Chairman  of  House  Armed  Services  Com- 
mittee,  commented  on  Sen.  Barry  Goldwater’s  charges  of  missile 
unreliability : 
“.  . . I, the Armed Services Committee, the Secretary of  Defense, and 
the Secretary and Chief  of  Staff of  the Air Force a re  all wholly persuaded 
I  am  particularly  referring  to  our  interconti- 
that  our  missiles-and 
theywereintended.  . . .” 
nental  ballistic missiles-are 
fully  capable  of  doing  the  job  fo r  which 
Rep.  Vinson  was  appearing  before  the  House Rules  Committee  to 
set forth provisions of  proposed $19.6 billion military R&D  authorization 
(This  bill,  in 
bill,  already  approved  by  Armed  Services Committee, 
a  procedure  initiated  this  year,  covered  separately  the   RLW  portion  of 
overall $50.9 billion  proposed  defense authorization.)  One  provision 
of  bill  would  authorize  $52 million  for  development  of  new  manned 
bomber,  instead  of  $5 million  requested  by  the  Administration  fo r  
studies.  Rep.  Vinson emphasized that  his Committee favored the  USAF 
proposal,  explaining,  “Solid  testimony was  given  to  the Committee by 
General  LeMay,  clearly  indicating  the  urgency  of  starting out  on  a 
(N Y T ,  2/19/64t, 4) 
follow-on bomber  and a  new  interceptor.” 
* Attempt  by  Assistant Labor  Secretary  James  J.  Reynolds to   arbitrate  13- 
month-old  dispute  between  11 striking  unions  and  Florida  East  Coast 
Railway was  unsuccessful.  Unions’  representative  George W. Leighty 
refused  to   agree  t o   arbitration,  and  Reynolds  termed  talks  with  FEC 

70 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

Board  Chairman Ed  Ball  “completely  futile.”  Reynolds recommended 
to  Labor  Secretary Wirtz  that  FEC be  barred  from using  Government- 
(AP,  Balt.  Sun, 
owned  tracks  at  Cape Kennedy  pending  settlement. 
2/19/64;  M&R,  2/24/64  11) 
February 18: Rep.  Roland V.  Libonati  (D.-Ill.)  presented  to  the  House  a 
group report on AFSC,  SAC, TAC, and Air  Force Academy,  after Congres- 
sional delegation visited various USAF installations.  Listing  highlights 
of  AFSC  during 1963, report said: 
“Since March 1959, more than 460 space probes have been conducted 
from  Air  Proving  Ground  Center’s  Elgin  AFB,  Fla.,  aerospace  launch 
facility  on  Santa ,Rosa  Island.  The probes  included  a t   least  87  in  the 
Project  Firefly  program.  The project  actually  is the  intense  investiga- 
tion  of  the  earth’s  atmosphere  and  an  assault  on  the  secrets  of  ‘near 
space’.  . . . 
“AMRL  [Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, Wright-Patterson 
AFB]  initiated  the  first  lunar  gravity  research  in  1963.  Using  a  zero- 
gravity parabola,  aircraft  tests were conducted under actual lunar-one- 
sixth earth gravity-conditions.  . . .” 
( C R ,  2/18/64,  2906-35)  i 
* FAA  announced  Canadian  Pacific  Air  Lines  had  reserved  three  deliver 
positions for the U S .   supersonic transport plane, bringing  total reserve 
positions to 70 by  12 airlines.  (FAA Release 64-16) 
New York  State Atomic Research  and  Development Authority  signed  con- 
tract  with  General Electric  Co.’s  Aerospace  and Defense Service Engi- 
neering  Dept.  for  continued  operation  of  Malta  T e t   Station,  which 
New  York  recently  acquired  from  Federal  Government  through  com- 
petitive bidding.  Station has been  operated by GE for Federal Govern- 
ment  since its establishment in 1945, when  facilities were installed there 
to duplicate German V-2  facilities at Peenemunde.  New York Authority 
would  operate the  station’s expanded test  and  research facilities in  con- 
tinued  support  of  industrial  contractors  of  Federal  defense,  space,  and 
( C R ,  2/19/M,  2011-12) 
atomic  energy  programs. 
February 19:  X-15  No.  3 flown  by  NASA pilot  Milton 0. Thompson  in  third 
of  current  series designed  to  study  heat  transfer  rates  with  sharp-lead- 
ing-edge vertical tail.  Launched  from  B-52  near  Hidden  Hills,  Calif., 
the X-15  attained maximum speed of  3,504 mph  (mach 5.26)  and peak 
altitude  of  77,500 ft.  This  was  flight  101  for  the  X-15,  26  fo r  X-15 
(FRC  Release; NASAX-15  Proj. off.) 
No.  3. 
0  Boilerplate  Apollo  spacecraft  arrived  a t   Cape  Kennedy,  where  it  would 
be  orbited  by  Saturn  I  S A 4  in  April.  Three  separate  USAF aircraft 
transported  the  boilerplate  launch  escape  system,  command  module, 
service module, +related ground  service equipment, and  adapter.  With- 
in  a  few  hours,  S-1  stage  and  instrument  unit  for  S A 4  arrived  by 
barge after 13-day t r ip  from Huntsville, Ala.  (MSC Release 64-33;  MSC 
Roundup, 2/19/6p,  1 )  
* India’s Dept.  of  Atomic Energy and NASA announced signing memorandum 
of  understanding  for  Indian-US.  cooperation in  meteorological sound- 
ing  rocket program.  Data  gathered  in  the  program  would  contribute 
to  International  Indian  Ocean  Expedition,  a  continuation  of  research 
begun during IGY, concentrating on weather and atmospheric conditions 
related to   the Indian Ocean area.  Under the agreement,  India  Dept.  of 
Atomic  Energy  would  provide,  transport,  assemble,  and  launch  Loki- 
Dart  sounding  rockets  and  payloads;  operate  the  Thumba  Equatorial 

untries 
radar 
(NASA 
Release  64-39) 
February  19:  NASA  announced  FRC had  issued  requests  for  proposals  for 
construction  of  two  low-speed  lifting-body  gliders.  NASA  would  fur- 
nish  the  selected  contractor  with  information  obtained  in  research 
with M-2  concept a t  Ames Research Center and the &lo 
lifting-body 
at  Langley  Research  Center.  Both  vehicles  would  undergo  thorough 
testing  in  Ames  wind  tunnel,  then  be  tested  in  flight  a t   FRC.  (NASA 
Release  6 4 4 1 )  
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications  Dr. 
Homer E.  Newell told Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, 
House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics,  that  Scout  space  ve- 
hicle had not been performing with desired reliability.  Ground tests and 
modifications were  conducted,  and  when  a  test  vehicle  was   fired  the 
fixes  were  shown  to  be  “adequate.”  Subcommittee  Chairman,  Rep. 
Joseph E.  Karth  (D.-Minn.),  replied  that  “if  NASA  spent half  as much 
money  on  solids as  it  did  on  liquid vehicles,  the  solid  rocket program 
would have 100 per cent reliability.” 
Discussing  Surveyor  lunar  probe,  Dr.  Newell  said  first  nine  Sur- 
veyors would be reduced from 2,500 lbs.  to  2,100 lbs.,  and it was hoped 
flox upper-stage Atlas-Centaur space vehicles would be available to launch 
the subsequent Surveyors.  (SBD, 2/20/64,279) 
Edmond  C.  Buckley,  Director  of  NASA  Office of  Tracking  and  Data  Ac- 
quisition,  testified  before  subcommittee  on  Advanced  Research  and 
Tracking, House  Committee on  Science  and Astronautics : 
“We  are requesting $274.4 million to  support the Tracking and  Data 
Acquisition program  in  fiscal  year  1965,  as   compared  to  $307.7 mil- 
lion  in  fiscal year  l-, 
a  decrease of  eleven per  cent.  The  reason  for 
this  decrease is that most  of  our  new  station construction requirements 
in  all  three networks,  were  funded  in  fiscal years  1963 and  19M.  . . .” 
Mr. Buckley pointed out tha t  the largest  single item in OT&DA  budget fo r  
FY 1965 was $106.9 million  for  equipping the manned space flight net- 
work fo r  Projects Gemini and Apollo.  (Testimony) 
* Unnamed  NASA  spokesman denied  Feb.  15  statement  by  Dr.  Wernher  von 
Braun  that  scientist  would  be  included  in  crew  for  second  lunar  land- 
ing flight.  NASA said it had not been decided whether a scientist would be 
aboard  the  flight,  and  that  if  fully  qualified  scientists  did  make  lunar 
expeditions  they  probably  would  go  “later  than  the  second  flight.” 
(Houston Press, 2/19/64+; Houston Chron., 2/19/641) 
USN  request  that  NASA  include  four  of  its  experiments in  manned  Gemini 
(Av.  Wk., 
flights  was  revealed  in  NASA  Gemini  program  review. 
2/%/64,23) 
* Discovery of  the  omega-minus particle in  the  atomic structure was  hailed 
a s  a significant step toward  construction of  an ordered table of  elements 
for  the  atom 
the  periodic  table 
of  elements. 
a1 College, London, 
0-very in the British 
and a Fellow 
journal  New Scientist.  Prof.  Y. Ohnuki  had  suggested  in  1960  that 
the clue to   orderly relationship between  the  SO or  more known  atomic 
particleg might lie in a  type of  “spin”  which could only  be  described in 

72 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTI@ ,   1 9  6 4 

ma&ematicaI  terms  and  known  a s  “unitary  transformations.”  Several 
scientists in  various parts of  the  world, including Dr. Murray Gell-Mann 
in the U.S.,  began working on  this  theory.  Relationsh%p did  begin  to 
appear  among  particles;  also  it  became  apparent  that  one  more  sub- 
particle was needed.  Its characteristics could be  deduced from  its p
h ~  
in  the  atomic  relationship.  At  this  point  teams  of  scientists went  to 
work with the 33-billion-volt Alternating Gradient Synchrotron at Brook- 
haven National Laboratory  and others with equipment a t  the Center f o r  
European  Nuclear  Research  ( CERN)  at  Geneva,  Switzerland.  Analysis 
of  100,000 photographs  of  bubble patterns  made by  accelerated atomic 
particles  traveling  through  “boiling”  liquid  hydrogen  disclosed  two 
sightings of  particles with  the  characteristics predicted by  the  relation- 
ship table.  (Hillaby, N Y T ,  2/20/M,  1; Sullivan, NYT ,  2/23/64,67) 
February  29: Dr.  J.  Allen  Hynek,  Director  of  Lindheimer  Astronomical 
Research  Center  and  head  of  astronomy  dept.  of  Northwestern Univ., 
Evanston,  Ill.,  said  in  an  interview  that  remote control  telescope on  the 
moon was practical a s  well  as desirable.  Heart of  lunar telescope would 
be  image  orthicon,  comparable  to  picture  tube  in  TV  camera;  signals 
would  travel to  the  telescope and pictures would travel back  to  earth  on 
“. . . If  you  had  a  telescope on  the  moon,  you  could 
laser  beams. 
point  it  where you  want  to by  remote control  and  the picture would  go 
into an image orthicon to be flashed back to earth on the same laser beam 
(Hughes, Chic.  Tr ib . ,  2/19/64) 
that controls the moon telescope.” 
February 20: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, 
Canada,  carried  instrumented payload  to  127-mi. altitude,  in successful 
flight  to  obtain  data  on  charged  particles  responsible for  visual  aurora 
and  on  those  responsible for  auroral  absorption.  Instrumentation  in- 
cluded  five  charged-particle detectors,  an  aspect magnetometer,  and  an 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
accelerometer. 
0  NASA  announced  selection  of  biological  specimens  to  be  included  in  first 
biosatellite  in  late  1965.  Effects of  radiation,  weightlessness, and  ab- 
sence of  earth’s rotation would be studied on the 14 specimens, including 
pepper plants, wheat seedlings, amoeba, frog and sea urchin  eggs, bread 
mold,  f ru i t  flies,  and embryonic beetles.  The biosatellite payload would 
be  launched  into  orbit  by  a  Delta  vehicle  from  Cape  Kennedy  and 
(NASA  Release 64-40) 
recovered three days later  in the Pacific. 
AEC  issued special report  on Snap  (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) 
program,  stressing  need  to  flight-test  Snap  in  spacecraft  in  order  to 
develop  its  full  potential:  “The  Snap program  has  reached  a  point  in 
technology  where  its  importance  to  the  Nation  must  be  recognized, 
accepted  and  supported,  or  the  development and  performance of  ambi- 
tious  space  missions  will  be  handicapped  by  a  lack  of  adequate  and 
reliable power.”  Flight test of  Snap-1OA  had been canceled earlier this 
year when Bureau of  the Budget cut Snap funds requested for N 1965. 
(AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/20/64;  Simons, Wash. Post, 2/21/64) 
House  passed  (336-0)  military  R&D  authorization bill  of  $16,914,800,000 
for FY  1965.  Amendment to delete $52 million for design and develop- 
ment  of  new  jet bomber a nd  $40 million fo r  design and development of 
new  interceptor aircraft was defeated  (121-29).  The programs,  recom- 
mended by  Air  Force Chief  of  Staff  Genera1 Curtis E.  LeMay,  had  not 
been  included  in   Administration  budget  request;  Defense  Secretary 
McNamara had  requested  only  $5  million  fo r  studies  of  new  bomber. 
(Raymond, NYT ,  2/21/M,  1) 

73 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 
February 20:  Prime contractors of  NASA  Marshall Space Flight Center  were 
assuming additional responsibilities in  Saturn launch vehicles program, 
MSFC Director  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  announced.  Principal  con- 
tractors immediately  affected would  be Boeing Co.,  Chrysler  Corp., IBM 
Corp.,  and  General Electric Co.  Dr.  von  Braun  said  this was  “a  con- 
tinuation of  the Marshall policy  to  transfer  research  and developmental 
work, a s  well as fabrication, from ‘in house’  to contrtictor plants  as soon 
a s   practical.  Not  only  has  this  been  our  philosophy  but  prime  con- 
tracts in  most  c a m  have spelled  out the  eventual taking  over by  indus- 
t ry   of  full  responsibility  for   major  elements  and  stages  of  the 
vehicles.  . . .” 
MSFC  would  retain  overall  systems  management  responsibility  for 
the three  Saturn launch vehicles  and  continue to  “maintain  a  technical 
and  managerial  competence  in   our  own  organization.  Without  i t   we 
the quality and reliability tha t  a manned space program demands.  . . .” 
cannot monitor the  work  of  our contractors to insure that we  a re  getting 
(Ma r sha l l  S tar ,  2/26/@,  10) 
0  Edward  Z.  Gray,  NASA Director  of  Advanced Manned Missions, described 
manned  lunar  bases  under  study  for post-Apollo missions,  in  testimony 
before  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee 
on Manned Space Flight.  “The earliest  system we  can  see  for   extend- 
ing the capability of  Apollo would be  the Apollo logistic support system 
( ALSS)  . 
“I t   consists of  the launching on  the Saturn V of  an Apollo spacecraft 
with  an  unmanned  LEM,  wherein  we  have  replaced  the  ascent  stage  of 
the  LEM  with  a  cargo  compartment.  The  Apollo  spacecraft  and  un- 
manned  LEM,  or  LEM  truck  are  launched to  the  Moon.  The  LEM  truck 
is disengaged  from the Apollo  spacecraft in  lunar  orbit  and  lands in  an  
unmanned mode on the surface of  the Moon. 
“The payload  capability with  the  present  Apollo  launch  vehicles and 
spacecraft  would  be  approximately  7,000  pounds.  There  would  be  a 
payload volume of  about 2,000 cubic feet.  This would  provide  a shelter 
with  occupancy capability for  two men  for  about  14 days  on  the  lunar 
surface.  An  alternate payload  that  could  be  carried  by  the  LEM  truck 
would be a two-man roving vehicle  . . ., which would  have  a  capability 
to cover about 200 to  300 miles on  the lunar  surface in  the  14 days.  . . . 
“Then looking beyond to the time  when much greater staytime on the  
lunar  surface  would  be  desired,  we  show  a  lunar  exploration  system 
fo r  Apollo  (EESA)  which weighs about 25,000 pounds on  the  surface of 
the Moon.  These are Earth pounds. 
“ I t  would  be  launched with  a  Saturn V without  an Apollo  spacecraft 
and would be delivered in  an unmanned mode  directly onto  the surface 
of  the Moon.  I t  has  a  volume  of  over  3,000  cubic feet,  and  could pro- 
vide  satisfactory shelter and life  support for  3 men  to  stay 90  days on 
the surface of  the Moon. 
“The mode  of  operation would  be  to  launch this  unmanned  vehicle 
to  the  surface  of  the  Moon,  and  follow  it  up  with  an  Apollo  launch 
probably using a homing radar.  . . .” 
so  that  the  LEM  would  land  in  the  near  vicinity  of  the  LESA  payload, 
He  described  the  LESA concept  as expandable  through  addition  of 
modules;  for  instance,  three  modules  could  form  a  base  for  18 men, 
(1965 NASA  Auth. Hearings, P a r t  2,597- 
X  months occupancy time. 
99) 
% 3 6 4 9 8 0 -% 8 - - B  

74 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  

February  20:  USAF  announced 
ion  of  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.,  Martin 
Marietta C o w ,  and General Electric Co. for  orbital space station  study- 
contracts.  The studies would  aid  in  defining tests  and  experiments for 
USAF  Manned Orbiting Laboratory  f MOL f . 
(DOD  Release 148-64) 
* Lt.  Col.  Andrian  G.  Nikolayev had  replaced  Col.  Yuri  A.  Gagarin  as  head 
of Soviet cosmonauts, Krasnaya Zvezda reported. 
(UPI,  NYT ,  2/22/@, 
10 )  
*D r .   Herman  J.  Sander,  Behavioral  Scientist  in   USAF  OSR  Life  Sciences 
Directorate, was presented Air Force Exceptional Civilian Service Medal 
by  Maj.  Gen.  Don  R.  Ostrander,  OAR  Commander. 
(OAR   Release 
2-644) 
Martin Marietta  C o p  received $1,748,450  increment to USAF  contract  for 
R&D fo r  Titan I1 ICBM,  DOD  announced. 
(DOD  Release 1 4 W )  
*  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center began the  first increment of  its mass move 
to  the  new  facilities  a t   Clear  Lake  from  leased  temporary  facilities  in 
Houston  and  Ellington  AFB.  (MSC Release  64-35;  Houston  Chron., 
2/20/64) 
February 21: DOD  announced Army  Corps of  Engineers’ SECOR (Sequential 
Collation  of  Range)  geodetic  satellite  was  performing  “exceptionally 
well,”  confirming Dr.  Albert  Hall’s  disclosure of  Feb.  18.  The  40-b. 
satellite was  orbiting  at  about 600-mi. altitude  in  periods  of  about  100 
min.  SECOR  system  tests  were  being  conducted  by  Army’s  Geodesy, 
Intelligence  and  Mapping  Research  and  Development  Agency 
(GIMRADA) , which had contracted fo r  the satellite from ITT Federal Lab- 
oratories.  GIMRADA ground  stations were measuring distances by  send- 
ing and  receiving signals through  satellite’s  onboard  transponder,  then 
acquiring ranging  data  fo r  use  in   automatic data  reduction  process  by 
Army Map Service to  determine station positions.  AFSC/SSD  had  lofted 
the satellite into  orbit  for  GIMRADA;  NASA  Goddard  Space Flight  Center 
(DOD   Release 
was  providing  orbital  data  and  telemetry  support. 
156-64) 
* Astronaut  Alan B.  Shepard,  Jr., said  in  informal  press gathering  in Wash- 
ington that when NASA  had decided on 30 trainees  for its astronaut pool, 
it  had  anticipated  losing  4  of  the  30 men,  for  various  reasons, before 
completion of  Project  Apollo.  Commander Shepard  said,  “we  figured 
on two casualties a s  a  result  of  space flight,”  explaining that  the  figure 
was “just  pulled  out of  the  air”  but  was considered a  reasonable guess. 
NASA  Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L.  Dryden emphasized “We  have 
no  idea  what the  casualty  rate will  be.  We’re  hoping  it  will be  zero.” 
(Troan, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 2/21/&) 
*  aOO-ft.-diameter balloon  was  launched  by  AF Cambridge  Research  Lab- 
atories  personnel  from  Holloman  AFB,  N.  Mex.,  with  special  telescope 
to  make spectroscopic records  of  the planet  Venus.  The  telescope was 
carried  to  d t i tud e  of  87,500  ft.,  above  all  but  an  insignificant  amount 
of terrestrial water vapor. 
( USAF  OAR  Release 4-64-2) 
*  Dr. George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  fo r  Manned  Space 
Flight, said in  speech a t  Engineers’ Week  dinner, Los Angeles: 
At  present,  we  estimate that more  than  35,000  engineers and  scien- 
66  
tists  a re  at work  in  th e  Gemini and Apollo programs and the studies  of 
possible  advanced  manned  missions.  This  number  will  reach  a  level 
of  45,000,  about  2.8  percent  of  the  national  employment  of  scientists 
and  engineers, when  our  currently  approved programs  reach their  peak 
ofeffortnextyear.  . . . 

75 
ASTRONATJTICS  AND  AERONAUTICB,  1 9 6 4 
“In recent months, we have reviewed thoroughly the status of  program 
technology  . . .,  the  pace  of  the  program  fo r   i t s   impact  on  total 
cost  . . ., and  the  possible  effects  on  the  program  of  the  hazards  of 
interplanetary  space.  . . . 
“First,  with  respect  to  technology  . . . we  have  found  all  of  the 
knotty questions involved in  advancing the state of  the  art are yielding 
to  hard work.  We know  of  no  technological problems that would  pre- 
vent  our  accomplishing the Apollo program  in  this decade.  . . . 
“[Second],  . . . starting  with  the  level  of  funding  planned  for  the  
current fiscal year  there is sound economic justification for maintaining 
the program  on its present schedule.  To stretch out the program at t h i s  
time would  add to  the cost  and unnecessarily delay  this first major  step 
in  space exploration. 
“The  final area of  examination of  the  program  has been with  respect 
. . 
Estimates based on  pres- 
to  the  hazards  of  interplanetary  space. 
ent  information  indicate  that  meteoroids  w i l l   not  constitute  a  major 
problem  in  the  planning  of  the  first manned  lunar exploration.  . . . 
“Altogether,  the  present  evidence  indicates  that  radiation  does  not 
present  a  hazard  that  would  prevent ,accomplishment  of  manned  lunar 
exploration  in  this  decade. 
Indeed,  there  is  no  serious  evidence  that 
the   radiation  factor  would  inhibit  us  in   selecting the  time  of  a  lunar 
mission.  . . .”  (Text) 
February  21:  ccAstrometric” telescope of  the  U S .  Naval  Observatory went 
into operation  at  Flagstaff, Ariz.  The telescope featured world’s largest 
known telescopic mirror, 61 inches in diameter, ground from huge block 
of  synthetic  quartz.  New  telescope would  be  used  chiefly to  measure 
distances  to   nearby  stars  that  are  too  faint  for  such  study  by  other 
existing  telescopes,  thus  exploring  previously  unknown  regions  of  the 
universe.  (Sullivan, NYT, 2/25/64,14) 
* Sen. George McGovern  (D.-S.  Dak.)  referred  on  Senate floor  to  article  in 
recent  Business  Week  which  reported  sharp  drop  in  engineering  and 
scientific jobs due to  defense cutbacks.  Employment cutbacks “tend  to 
be  concentrated  in  certain  industries-aerospace, 
defense  installations, 
in  certain  parts  of  the  country-the  Boston 
and  atomic  energy-and 
area,  New  York, Pennsylvania, parts of  the Midwest, the Pacific North- 
(CR ,  2/21/64,3205) 
west,  and California.” 
Public sale of  stock in Communications Satellite Gorp. would be offered in 
April, New York sources revealed.  (NYTNS, Denver Post, 2/21/64) 
Board of  Directors of  US. Chamber of  Commerce recommended that Con- 
gress cut $119 million from NASA’s requested F‘Y  1%5  budget  and that 
the  $141 million  FY  1964 supplemental request be  denied. 
(Hornston 
Post,  2/22/64) 
*L t .  Col.  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.,  former  astronaut,  was  presented  the  George 
Washington  Award  fo r   1%3 by  the  Freedom  Foundation,  in  V d e y  
(Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/M) 
Forge, Pa.,  ceremony. 
February 22:  First  Soviet-American space communications experiment, with 
British  cooperation,  was  conducted  successfully at  2:OO  a.m.  Moscow 
time, Tass reported.  Radio signal sent from Jodrell Bank Experimental 
Station bounced off  ECHO n balloon satellite and was received by Zimenki 
Observatory near  Gorki.  Tass  said,  “This  marks  a  success of  the first 
experiment in   super-long distance international  cosmic radio  communi- 
(AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/64) 
cations on  ultra  short waves.” 

76 
ASTRONAUTICS  BND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  
February 22:  Published reports  about the SST study prepared  fo r  the White 
House  by  Eugene Black  and   Stanley  deJ.  Osborne  had  failed  to  men- 
tion  the  report’s  strong  endorsement  of  SST development,  Evert  Clark 
reported  i n  New  York  Times.  According to  Clark,  letter  transmitting 
the report,  still not  o5cially  released, said  development of  SST was  “of 
great  economic  importance  to  the nation.  . . . FaiIure  to  do  so  might 
well  leave  our  important  airline  and  aircraft  industries  in  potentially 
(Clark, NYT, 2 / 2 2 / a ,   1) 
dangerous  competitive situations.” 
Sir Bernard Lovell,  Director  of  Britain’s Jodrell  Bank  Experimental  Sta- 
tion,  advocated international  controls on  space experiments.  In  Satur- 
day Evening Post  article, he said:  “It is now  time for concern about the 
ethical standards which man must apply to embryonic dangers which a r e  
not  obvious.  We cannot  afford to wait until  the dangers become prac- 
tically  apparent,  since  some  experiments  may  create  an  irretrievable 
condition.  . . .” 
A s  an  example, he described the ozone layer,  and continued:  “. . . i t  
happens that  zone is rather  easy to destroy.  And  if  it is intentionally or 
accidentally removed,  then  the ultraviolet  radiation  would  penetrate  to 
earth.  If  this happened for a su5ciently long period, then human beings 
migh  suffer  severe  sunburn  and   possible  sterilization.  Further,  the 
temperature  distribution  in  the  atmosphere could  be  radically  altered 
and,  in  the  state  of  our  present  knowledge,  no  one  could  predict  what 
climatic changes might occur. 
“It is not difficult to estimate that  a  few tons of  suitable contaminant, 
deposited  in  the  atmosphere  25  miles above  the  earth,  would  destroy 
the ozone over several miles for a few hours.  . . . a rocket launched from 
earth to land a man on the moon might burn  up 2,000  tons of  fuel in  its 
passage through the earth’s  atmosphere . . . [and]  the launching  of  one 
such rocket a week might well lead to  a permanent transformation  of  the 
conditions  in ,the high  atmosphere,”  according  to  recent  study  by  the 
Advanced Research Projects Agency. 
“.  . . when  one  turns  from  the  contamination  as  an  accidental  by- 
product  to  an  intentional  act,  an  ugly  array  of  possibilities is  revealed. 
quantities a t  precise altitudes.  . . . The American  [ARPA ]   report  states 
To begin with,  specially selected substances could be deposited in  great 
that  25  tons of  fluorine would be sufficient to depopulate the ionosphere 
of  electrons and so blot out all long-distance radiotelephony.  The deposi- 
tion  of  large  quantities  of  gases like carbon monoxide a t  an altitude  of 
25  miles  might  radically  alter  the  temperature  distribution  and  the 
climatic conditions by absorbing some of  the sun’s  infrared radiation.  . . . 
‘‘The  human  race  therefore  faces  a  critical  situation  in  the next  few 
decades, because there is at the moment little evidence of  the moral and 
legal  controls which must  be  enforced if  man’s  continued  life  on  earth 
is not  to  be jeopardized by  the  accidental or  intentional results of  space 
research.  There  a re   large  areas  of  uncertainty,  so that  it  is  not  yet 
possible to  assess whether various other  space activities may affect man 
more directly  than  in  the inhibition  of  his  study of  the cosmos.  It  is a 
vital necessity of  our  age that  the political decisions on  these  problems 
should be based  on the  judgment  of  the  international  scientific commu- 
nity,  and  that  this  judgment  should govern the  future  space launchings 
of  the world.” 
(Sat. Eve. Post, 2/22/64,10,14) 

77 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 
February  24:  House Committee  on   Science  and   Astronautics,  meeting  in  
executive session, approved the  NASA  Electronics Research Center report 
(NASA LAR III/32) 
selecting the Boston area for the center. 
* NASA’s Group Achievement Award  was  presented  to  Paul  F.  Bikle,  Flight 
Research Center Director, and Brig. Gen.  Irving L.  Branch,  AFFTC  Com- 
mander, on  behalf  of  all Government personnel connected with the X-15 
program.  Dr.  Hugh L.  Dryden, NASA  Deputy Administrator, made  the 
presentation at FRC  ceremony, and  said in his remarks: 
“Earlier  this month  the Research Airplane Committee approved nine 
additional  test-bed  experiments  for  the  X-15  Program.  With  the  19 
experiments  approved  before  and   the  flights required  to  complete the 
original  research  program,  these  additional  experiments  w i l l   require 
X-15  flight tests until the end of  1968. 
“The  X-15  flight-test program  has  been  eminently successful during 
the  last  four  years.  The  Research  Airplane  Committee, by  its  action 
given concrete evidence of  its faith in the future program.  . . .”  (FRC 
this  month  in  approving  these  new  experiments fo r   the   program,  has 
X-Press;  Speech Text) 
*NASA   announced  the  nine  new  experiments  for  X-15  aircraft  would  be: 
ramjet  propulsion,  structures  research,  advanced  flight  data  system, 
s ta r   tracker,  horizon  scanner,  ionization  gage,  and  other  missions  in- 
volving  evaluation  of  advanced  vehicle  systems  and   structural  mater- 
ials.  ( NASA  Release 69-42) 
*NASA   Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller  said  in  Space  Business  Daily  interview  that  the  “major  prob- 
lem”  in Project Apollo “is not technical or environmental,”  but,  rather, 
Attainment  of  lunar  landing  goal  before  1970  de- 
proper  funding.” 
6 6  
pended  “more  on  funding  than  anything  else,”  he   said.  The  hiring 
freeze  imposed  on   Apollo  contractors  had  been  eased  on  a  “selected 
basis,”  with the only companies not  receiving the easement being Pram 
81 Whitney and General Dynamics.  (SBD ,  2/24/64,289) 
* Col.  Clarence J.  George was  sworn  in  as  NASA  Executive Secretary,  newly 
established position in  Office of  the Administrator.  A  former executive 
officer  for  the  late General George C. Marshall, Col.  George had  more 
than  28 years  of  military service including eight  years  as aide  to  three 
former  Secretaries of  the Army,  as well  a s  General Marshall’s tours  as 
Secretary of  Defense and Secretary of  State. 
(NASA  Photo) 
*  Atlas engine using flox  (30% fluorine, 70% liquid oxygen)  oxidizer with 
its normal  RP-1  kerosene  fuel  was  static-fired last  month  by  General 
Dynamics, Associated Press  reported, and  successful results  of  the test 
had prompted NASA  to  request N 1965 funds to accelerate development. 
NASA  requested  $17.5  million  in  N 1%5  for  flox  development, which 
preliminary  experiments  indicated  would  increase  Atlas  payload  ca- 
pability  from 30 to 90%. 
(AP, Wash.  Eve.  Star, 2/24/64) 
Analysis of  NASA  N 1965 budget  request revealed  that  NASA  construction 
had passed its peak.  I 3  1964 funding for construction was $637.5 mil- 
lion,  and  N  1965  request  was  for  $281  million.  Accentuating  the 
trend  was  the  fact  that  funding  of  major  new  facilities  fo r   Project 
Apollo-at  Cape Kennedy,  MSC, MSFC, and Mississippi Test  Facility- 
would be completed in N 1965. 
(M&R ,   2/24/64,  18) 

78 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS,  1 9  6 4 

February 24:  Sen. Mike Monroney  (D.-Okla. )  told  American Fight@ Aces 
Association, Washington chapter,  that  aviation was  “short-changed’’  in 
research and development.  He urged that more NASA  effort go into aero- 
nautical  RW,  particularly  on  the  supersonic  transport.  “NASA means 
I’m  worried  about 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space Administration. 
(Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
what’s  happening  to  the  A-for-Aeronautics.” 
2/25/64) 
0 Lew i s  Research Center announced awarding of  three contracts:  $3,117,387 
contract  for  continued  development  of  Centaur  launch  vehicle  stage 
and  $1,800,000  contract  for  Oao  shroud  system  a’nd  Pt.  Loma  test 
program,  both to General Dynamics/Astronautic;  and  $2,110,000 con- 
tract  to Aerojet-General Corp.  fo r  continued development of  M-1  rocket 
( WSJ ,  2/24/64) 
engine. 
0  NASA  signed contract with Reaction Motors Div.  of  Thiokol Chemical Corp. 
( S BD ,  2/26/64,304) 
fo r  research on oxygen difluoride propellants. 
~ U S A F  planned  71  Atlas-Agena  firings  during  1964-66  period  and  NASA 
planned  26  Atlas-Agena  and  five  Atlas  launches,  Av ia t ion   Week   re- 
Initial  launch  rate  planned  fo r   Titan  111 with  unmanned pay- 
ported. 
( A v .  Vk., 2/24/64,23) 
loads would be less than 10 a year. 
0  USAF  predicted  reddish  spots  on  the  moon-observed 
last  October  and 
reappear  June 4 and 5.  USAF  astronomers at Lowell 
November-would 
Observatory planned to take color photographs of  the  recurrence as well 
as  scan  Aristarchus  area  of  moon  with  sensitive photoelectric  spectro- 
(Finney,  NYT,  2/25/64, 
graph  to  determine  nature  of  the  “spots.” 
14) 
0  Missiles  and  Rockets  published  interview  made  last  summer  with  Dr. 
Eugen  Saenger,  who  died  earlier  this  month.  Dr.  Saenger,  whose 
World War  I1 concept of  rocket sled-launched orbital bomber was  later 
influential in design  of  X-20  (Dyna So a r ) ,  had  said:  “I am  assisting a 
German group within  Eurospace in  looking into  the  economics of  space 
transportation.  We  a re   considering  reusable  vehicles.  Dyna-Soar  is 
assumed to  be  the  necessary  first  step.  . . . We  consider  it  essential to 
develop an  aerospace plane able to  lift  off  from Earth,  go  up to  orbit  in 
the  form  of  an  airplane  with  wings,  return  like  the  Dyna-Soar along a 
glide path  to Earth and  land  like an  airplane so it can be  re-used.”  He 
said he had modified his chemical rocket-sled idea into steam-rocket sled 
and had  developed such a  rocket.  “1t.develops 30  tons  of  thrust.  We 
ran  hundreds  of  tests  on  it.  We  would  use  it  to   accelerate a  stage  to 
subsonic o r  perhaps supersonic velocity.” 
Dr.  Saenger  described  Egyptian  rocket  development,  which  he  had 
assisted  until  late  1961 when  West  German  government  asked  hi:m  to 
stop:  “I was asked in  the spring of  1960 by  the Egyptian government to 
give lectures at Cairo University and help the country by doing consult- 
ing work  on meteorological sounding rockets.  . . . 
“It’s  a  rocket only fo r  vertical launching and liquid  fuel.  There is no 
guidance.  Although  in  principle  the  rocket  could  be  launched  into  a n  
inclined flight,  there  is no way  of  knowing with  accuracy where  it will 
impact.  So I can’t  imagine how it would be used for military purposes? 
( M & R ,   2/24/64,35-38) 
Minuteman ICBM fired from Vandenberg AFB  after  sundown  left  spectacu- 
la r  trail across the sky seen from San Francisco to San Bernardino  a n a  
caused Redding and Chico areas to call civil defense alerts.  Cross winds 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4  

79 

distorted the  exhaust trail and i t  was lighted by  rays from the sun below 
the horizon.  (AP, NYT ,  2/27/68,17) 
February 25: USAF  launched  Atlas-Agena  D  combination  from Vandenberg 
AFB with undisclosed payload.  (M&R, 3/2/64,12) 
0  NASA  Associate  Administrator  f o r   Space  Science  and  Applications  Dr. 
Homer  E.  Newel1 said in testimony before  House Committee on Science 
and  Astronauties’  Subcommittee  on  Space  Sciences  and  Applications 
that  some  of  the  byproducts  of  space  research  included  cure  fo r   some 
types of  stuttering, diet that can sustain a man for a month  on one cubfc 
foot of  synthetic chemicals mixed  with water, and “fail-safe” method of 
producing  oxygen  and  food  for  orbiting space stations through electro- 
lytic  splitting  of  water  into  hydrogen  and  oxygen. 
(AP,  How ton  
Chron. 2/26/64) 
Rep.  Donald Rumsfeld  (R.-Ill.)  noted  in the House that House Committee on 
Science  and  Astronautics  had  approved  NASA’s report  providing  for 
electronics research  center in  the Boston  area.  “There  is,  in  my  mind, 
still  considerable  question  as  to  the need  f o r  this center.  Furthermore, 
there is considerable question  in my  mind as  t o  whether,  if  such a center 
is needed,  a s  opposed  to  developing additional electronics capability  a t  
existing  centers, the   criteria  used  for  selecting Boston  a s  the  site were 
sound.  . . .”  (CR ,  2/25/64,  A878) 
Senate Armed  Services Committee approved  $17,040,140,000 military  R&D 
authorization bill  for FY  1965.  Like the House,  the Senate Committee 
voted  $52 million for development of  new manned bomber.  But Senate 
Committee did not  support  House on $40 million for new  manned  inter- 
ceptor  aircraft.  Committee  made  other  reductions,  restored  several 
(Raymond, NYT ,  2 /26 /64 ,13)  
House cuts. 
Sen. Russell B.  Long  (D.-La.)  said on Senate floor that AT&T,  “the  world’s 
largest  protected  monopoly,”  had  a  “100-percent  monopoly  in   inter- 
national’ voice  communications,”  and  that  “steps  should  be  taken  to 
require  the  divestment  by  AT&T  of  its  international  operations.”  He 
recommended  that  RCA,  ITT,  and Western  Union  be  allowed  to  compete 
in  international communications and that  the Communications Satellite 
( C R ,  2/25/64,  3389-91) 
Corp.  become  a  competitor  in  this  area. 
USAF  fired  Atlas  E  ICBM  on  successful 5,000-mi.  flight  down  the  Atlantic 
Missile  Range,  testing  advanced  nose  cone  design.  Same  day,  USAF 
also  fired  Minuteman  ICBM  from  Cape  Kennedy  and  two  Minuteman 
ICBM’s from Vandenberg AFB,  Calif.,  within 45  min.  of  each other. 
( UPI ,  
NYT ,  2/27/64,17;  M&R,  3 /2 /64 ,12)  
* Maurice  Farman,  aviation  pioneer,  died  a t  96  in  Paris.  With  his  brother 
Henry  he  made  the  first  flight  of  more  than  a  kilometer  in  a  heavier- 
than-air  machine,  in  1908.  The  Farmans  manufactured  biplanes  for 
France,  Britain,  and U S .   during World War  I, in   1917 constructed  the 
(AP, NYT ,   2/28/64,  29) 
Goliath, forerunner of  passenger  airliner. 
February 26:  NASA  Aerobee  150 sounding rocket with  Johns Hopkins  Univ. 
instrumented  payload was launched  from Ft.  Churchill, Canada,  to  100- 
mi.  altitude.  Rocket carried  spectrophotometric  instrumentation  which 
measured  absolute intensity of  certain spectral features in  the f a r  ultra- 
violet  region  of  the airglow during an  aurora.  Although  rocket did not 
reach  predicted  157-mi. altitude,  the  experiment  provided  general  con- 
firmation of  the only previous experiment in that  region, and with much 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
higher  resolut?on. 

80 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 

February 26:  NASA  ann 
more  Delta  launch 
mented Delta  (TAD 
orbit a s  compared to 800 lbs. fo r  standard Delta. 
(NASA Release M 6 )  
0  A.  0. Tischler, NASA  Director  of  Chemical Propulsion,  Office  of  Advanced 
Research  and  Technology,  discussed  1.5-million-lb.-thrust hydrogen- 
oxygen M-1  engine and  the large  solid-propulsion rocket  motor  before 
Subcommittee on Advanced  Research  and  Tracking,  House  Committee 
on Science and Astronautics: 
“Last  year  this  engine project  [M-11,  which was  originally  planned 
fo r  completion  in  the late ~O ’S ,  was slowed down to  a minimum level of 
effort consistent with  such a  development program.  It  is our  intent  to 
maintain  the low level of  funding during the present critical years of  the 
manned lunar  landing program  and then  to accelerate this  development 
for Completion  in the early 70’s.  . . . 
“The  M-1  can  be  a  team-mate of  the  large  solid propellant  motors. 
Potentially  these  two,  if   used  in  vehicle  systems  together,  can  provide 
the United States with increased payload capability  at  reduced cost dur- 
ing the  1970’s.  . . . 
“. . . the  large  solid  motor  demonstrations  have  heretofore  been 
funded  by  the Department of  Defense and have been  carried out by  the 
Air  Force  in  compliance  with  NASA-defined  requirements.  . . . This 
year  NASA  is  requesting  funds  for  the   continuation  of  the  contracted 
. . 
work on the 260”  diameter solid propellant motors. 
“Each  contractor  [Thiokol  Chemical  Corp.  and  Aero jet-General 
Corp.]  will  fire  a  half-length solid  motor  during  the  fiscal  year.  . . . 
each  half-length  motor  will  produce  three  million  pounds  of  thrust, 
about  double the thrust  of  the Saturn I booster.  The full-length motor, 
fo r  which  we  would  intend  to  contract  if  the  half-length motor  firines 
are successful, will produce about six million pounds of  thrust.” 
(Testi- 
mony 1 
0  Dr.  George M.  Knauf,  NASA  Acting Director of  Space Medicine, described 
before Subcommittee on Manned  Space Flight  of  the House Committee 
on  Science  and  Astronautics  the  procedures  which  NASA  had  followed 
fo r  coordinating with  USAF  in  bioastronautics-space medicine programs. 
Upon  suggestions of  this  Subcommittee, NASA  had  “made  a  determined 
effort to coordinate our program with that  of  the Department of  Defense 
so  that  all  unwarranted  duplication  of  effort  would  be  eliminated.” 
Further, to  assure that  the coordination would be on a continuing basis, 
NASA  estahlished  Space Medicine  Liaison  Office  at  Aerospace  Medical 
Div.,  Brooks AFB.  NASA  also obtained assurances from Army, USN,  FAA, 
and U S .  Public Health Service that NASA  was not duplicating work being 
carried out by  those agencies. 
(Testimony) 
*  Lwkheed-California  Co.  released  details  of  its  recommendations to  NASA 
Manned Spacecraft Center on a  scientific space station program.  Lock- 
heed study concluded manned station with crew of  24 could be  orbiting 
the  earth  in  1968.  Total  cost  of  program-including 
logistics  space- 
craft  and  ground  support-for 
five  years’  operation  w a s   estimated  a t  
$2.6 billion.  Study recommended launching the unmanned station into 
orbit  with  a  Saturn  V  launch  vehicle,  then  launching manned  logistics 
(Maloney, Houston Pos t ,  
vehicle to rendezvous and dock at the station. 
2 /27 /64 ;  MSC Roundup, 3 / 4 / 6 4 , 8 )  

81 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 
February 26:  MSC  announced  issuin 
quests  f o r  proposals  f o r   six-month 
could conduct selenodetic measure- 
study of  how astronaut  on the 
ments  (lunar  surface surveys), making maximum use of  scientific equip- 
ment  already  planned  fo r  Apollo’s  Lunar  Excursion Module  and  Com- 
mand  Module.  Proposals  fo r   the  study  were  due  March  5. 
(MSC  
Release 64-37) 
e Sonny Liston-Cassius Clay heavyweight title match was  first  championship 
fight to  be telecast via communications satellite;  video tape of  the .match 
was  transmitted  to  11  European  countries shortly  after  1:00  a.m.  EST 
(NASA  Release  64-44) 
via  NASA’s RELAY 11  communications satellite. 
Amendment to $17  billion military procurement and R&D authorization  bill 
to  cut $52 million  for  development of  new  manned bomber was  offered 
by Senators George McGovern ( D . 4  Dak.) , Gaylord Nelson  (D. Wis.) , 
and  William  Proxmire  (D.-Wis.)  . Senator  McGovern  quoted  minor- 
ity report by the dissenting members of  the House Armed Services Com- 
mittee which pointed  out  that  “the  $52 million  is just  the  beginning  of 
a  program  which  will  cost  close  to  $5  billion  before  it  is  completed,” 
said his amendment would  “reduce the bomber  funds to  the  $5  million 
(CR, 
level  requested by  the  President  and  the  Secretary  of  Defense.” 
2/26/64,3602-04) 
0  FAA  disclosed  it  was  requesting  Coordinating  Research  Council  of  New 
York  City  to  study  comparative  safety  features  of  the  two  most  com- 
and  J P 4 .  
(Hudson,  NYT, 
monly  used  aircraft  fuels-kerosene 
2/26/64,21) 
John  F.  Kennedy  Space  Center,  NASA,  announced  14,760 visitors  to  the 
facility during 1963. 
(KSC  Release 16-64) 
0  FAA  announced Irish  International  Airlines had  reserved two delivery posi- 
tions  for U.S.  supersonic transport  aircraft. 
(FAA   Release 64-18) 
Jack  Anderson,  writing  in  Drew  Pearson’s  “The  Washington  Merry-Go- 
Round”  column  in  the  Washington Post,  charged  that  two  documents 
existed  “revealing  how  Texas’s  lanky,  laconic  Congressman  Albert 
Thomas used  his  influence to  get the  telephone contract  at  the Houston 
Space  Center  for  Southwestern  Bell.”  The  documents,  Anderson 
charged,  were:  ( 1 )   a  confidential memo  to  NASA  Administrator  James 
E. Webb  from  his  executive assistant  recounting  a  telephone  call  from 
Rep.  Thomas,  in  which  Thomas  recommended  Southwestern Bell  over 
the  other  bidder,  General  Telephone,  stating  that  General  Telephone 
had  a  reputation  in  the  Houston  area  for  poor  service;  and  ( 2 )   a 
Southwestern Bell memo  to  employees acknowledging Rep.  Thomas  as 
extremely helpful  to  our  company-providing 
necessary  information 
LC 
and  other  assistance-during 
the  negotiations  for  the  space  lab  com- 
( Wush. Post, 2/26/64,  D13) 
munications contract.” 
*  Party  of  scientists led  by  Nikolai Yerpylev,  scientific secretary  of  Soviet 
Academy  of  Sciences, left  Moscow  for  Cuba  to  “start  the  preliminary 
stage of the work’’  to establish Soviet satellite observation station on  the 
island.  Tass  said  equipment  fo r   the  station  already  had  been  sent  to 
( UPI,  NYT ,  2/27/64,12) 
Cuba. 
USAF  fired Titan  I1 ICBM from Cape Kennedy on successful flight down  the 
Atlantic Missile Range.  (M&R ,  3/2/64,12) 
0 Douglas  Aircraft  Co.  made  public  its  company-funded evaluation  of  its 
Icarus”  concept  (intercontinental  aerospacecraft, range  unlimited  sys- 
LC 
tem)  that could transport 132 tons of  cargo o r  1,200 fully-equipped troops 

82 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 

a t  speeds of  17,000 mph.  Concept featured  liquid-hydrogen propellant 
tanks  that  could be  jettisoned  after  takeoff  boost  and  recovered  intact. 
Douglas spokesmen said  Icarus could be  operational  in little more than 
a decade.  (SBD ,  2/26/64,305) 
February 27: U.S.S.R.  orbited COSMOS  xxv scientific earth satellite from  un- 
identified site in Soviet Union.  Initial orbital data,  according to  Tass: 
526-km.  (320.6-mi.)  apogee,  272-km.  (169-mi.)  perigee,  92.27-min. pe- 
riod,  and 49O  angle of  inclination to equator.  Scientific equipment and 
communication systems onboard  the  satellite were  said  to  be  function- 
ing normally.  (Tass, Pravda,  2/28/6rE,  1, ATSS-T  Trans.) 
* Senate passed  H.R.  9637,  authorizing  $17,040,141),000  FY  1965 funds  for 
DOD procurement of  aircraft,  missiles, and naval vessels, and  R&D.  The 
McGovern amendment to  reduce by  $52 million the  funds for  develop 
ment  of  new  manned  bomber  was  defeated.  Bill  would  go  to  Senate- 
House  conference  committee  for  compromise  with  $16,914,800,000 
(NASA  LAR  III/35;  Raymond,  NYT,  2/28/64,  1) 
House-passed  bill. 
9 At  NASA’s request,  DOD  had  declassified two  of  its experiments fo r  Project 
Gemini, New Yo rk  Herald  Tribune reported.  The previously classified 
experiments  involved “visual definition of  objects  in near  proximity  in 
space”  and  ‘‘radiometric  observations  of  objects  in   space.” 
(Loory, 
N .Y .  Her. Tr ib . ,  2/27/@) 
0  In  NASA  Hq.  ceremony,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden 
presented cash awards to 10  inventors in recognition of  their outstanding 
contributions to space science technoIogy. 
Awards under  the Space Act:  $1,000  to Conrad  Josias  of  JPL   for  in- 
vention  of  “bipolar  logarithmic  current-to-voltage transducer”  which 
made possible  the discovery of  interplanetary  plasma;  $1,000  to  James 
D.  Acord  and  Howard  C.  Vivian  of  JPL  fo r   invention  of  “space  ve- 
hicle  attitude  control”  employed  in  Ranger  and  Mariner  spacecraft; 
$2,000  to  Robert  C.  Baumann  and Leopold Winkler of  GSFC for  inven- 
tion  of  “spin  adjusting  mechanism”  used  on  os0  I,  SYNCOM  11,  and 
Aerobee soupding  rockets;  and  $4,000  to  Harold  R.  Kaufman  of  LRC 
fo r   invention  of  “ion  rocket  engine,”  representing  great  step  forward 
in  ion  propulsion  R&D-the  engine will  be  used  in  first  Space Electric 
Rocket Test flight  (Sert  I ) .  
Awards under  the Incentive Awards Act:  $1,000  to  Pleasant T.  Cole, 
GSFC, fo r  invention of  “system for recording and reproducing pulse code 
modulated data,”  capable of  achieving significantly larger  packing den- 
sity  on  magnetic  tape  to  reduce  weight  requirements;  and  $ 1 , N O   to  
William C.  Morgan, Jack B.  Esgar, and Richard H. Kemp of  LRC for in- 
vention of  “thin-walled pressure vessel”  for use in testing materials sub- 
jeoted  to  cryogenic  temperatures. 
(Hootman  Memo,  2/18/64;  NASA 
Release M 5 ;  LRC Release 64-16) 
*  Senator  Mike  Monroney  (D.-Okla.)  said  in  interview  that  aircraft  manu- 
facturers must bear the 25%  share of  supersonic transport  development 
cost,  rejecting  the  10% formula  advocated by  Eugene R.  Black  in  re- 
cently reported  study.  Senator Monroney said USAF  should be assigned 
task  of  developing SST’S  engine  and the  airframe manufacturers  should 
join together to  build  the SST  body.  He  said  the builder  of  the  aircraft 
would  “have the greatest property  ever owned in  aviation, a  superplane 
good  fo r   a t   least  20  years.  They’ve  got  to  take  some  risk.” 
(Steif, 
Wash. Daily News, 2 / 2 7 / a )  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERO 

major  effort  is  in  the  reactor  area.  It  includes  analysis  and  experi- 
mental work on all of  the components and subsystems of  our reactors with 
sufficient evaluation and testing to   give the  greatest  possible confidence 
in  the  successful operation  of  the  graphite  reactors  that  will  form  the 
basis  for  the first nuclear  rocket engines to be  developed in  the world. 
We are, however,  not  overlooking the potential 
the  metallic  tungsten  reactors.  We  are,  th  
gram to  evaluate the feasibility and advantages of  these systems, 
‘‘Our  NERVA  engine  and  non-nuclear  component  technology  work 
has  made  substantial  progress  in  those  difficult  areas  of  engine  tech- 
nology that  require extension of  presently available information  so  that 
system  development  can  eventually be   undertaken  rapidly  and  with  a 
high degree of confidence. 
“Sufficient  facilities  a re   available  or   are  being  constructed  for  the 
conduct  of  our  presently  planned  program.  Tests  to  be  conducted  in 
our  reactor  facilities  during  this  year  should  clearly  demonstrate  the 
success of  the solutions we  have designed to  avoid  the mechanical  prob- 
lems that have been  encountered  in the past and should demonstrate  the 
operating capabilities of graphite reactors.  Our advanced concept work 
is fundamental  in  nature;  it is long term; but it is being pursued because 
of  the  high,  theoretical  performance  potential  of  these  advanced  ideas 
for nuclear rocketry. 
‘< 
Out  of  th is  over-all nuclear  rocket  program,  I  am  convinced,  will 
come  a  new  family  of  rockets that will  open  the way  to more  extensive 
space  travel  than  is  possible with  the  chemical  combustion  rocket  sys- 
tems  upon  which  we  are  now  completely  dependent.  Although  new  in 
capability, the nuclear  rockets we  are  now developing are logical follow- 
ons  to  the  chemical  rocket  systems  and,  therefore,  do  not  involve 
basically  new  test,  development,  and  system  technology  or  scientific 
breakthroughs.  These  nuclear  rocket  developments  must  be  actively 
pursued  to  ensure tha t   this  country is not  prevented  from  undertaking 
missions  involving  higher  velocities,  energies,  and  payloads  than  are 
required  fo r   the  early  Apollo  manned  lunar  landing  mission.” 
(Testimony) 
Harlan Cleveland, Assistant Secretary  of  State for  International Organiza- 
tion Affairs,  addressed the Conference of  U S .  National  Organizations  of 
the U.N. : 
“The  technological i m p e r a t i v d e  impulse to  build  worldwide tech- 
nical  agencies-comes  of  course  from  the  headlong  pace  of  scientific 
discovery.  A  world  technical  community  is  in   the  making  because 
international communications, international transport,  and international 
economics demand  international organizations-and 
h c a u s e  you  can’t 
deal with world  health  or world  weather  or   radio  frequencies and a lo t  
of other things except on a world basis.  . . . 
“Taken  together,  three   new  kinds  of  technology-weather 
satellites, 
communications satellites, and computer  technology-now  make  it  tech- 
nically possible to  work out a global weather  reporting and forecasting 
system, a prospect  too valuable  to  all nations t o  leave unexploited.  T h e  

84 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   AERONAUTIC% ,   1 9  6 4 

United  States  is now  engaged in  a very  large program  of  research  and 
development in this field that  will involve the cooperation of  more than 
100 other countries.  This, together with what other countries a re  doing, 
will  fit  into  an  overall plan  for  a  World Weather Watch  being worked 
out  by  the World Meteorological Organization, a  specialized agency of 
the U.N. 
“In  jqst  2  years  our  first  Tiros  satellites  discovered  20  hurricanes, 
typhoons,  and  tropical  storms  and  observed the  behavior  of  62  others. 
warnings have been established in Washington and Moscow..  . 
And  world  data  centers  to  process  these  and  other  reports  and  issue 
(Text, 
.’9 
CR ,  3/18/64,5462-64) 
February 27: USAF  fired Minuteman ICBM  from Cape Kennedy  on  successful 
(M&R ,  3/9/64, 
routine  5,000-mi.  flight down Atlantic Missile Range. 
8 )  
Sen.  J.  William  Fulbright  (D.-Ark.) 
inserted  in  Congressional Record  a 
Wa l l  Street  Journal  article  on  the  “declining  demand”  for  engineers, 
and said : 
“According to the Wall Street Journal article, the current  slump in de- 
mand  for  engineers  results  primarily  from  uncertainty  about  future 
spending on defense and space programs.  Although the defense budget 
for the next fiscal year calls fo r  a reduction of  only $1.3 billion, the space 
budget  is  $200 million above last  year’s  appropriation.  If  this minute 
shift in defense spending is sufficient to bring  about a severe curtailment 
in the demand for  engineers and  other  skilled technicians, i t  makes one 
wonder  what  will  happen  to  our  economy when  there  is more  than  a 
token cutback in defense outlays. . . .”  (CR ,  2/27/64,3666-67) 
USN  disclosed it was developing seagoing tracking  system for  its ships  and 
submarines  to  “avoid  those  areas  of  the  oceans covered  at  intervals by 
spy satellites.  Submarines would stay submerged, surfacing only when 
(Wa sh .  Post, 2/28/64) 
the sky above is clear.” 
Visiting Oklahoma City, where FAA  sonic-boom study was being conducted, 
FAA  Administrator Najeeb Halaby  was  placed  under  police  guard  after 
( AP ,   Balt.  Sun, 
anonymous  telephone  caller  threatened  his  life. 
2/28/64) 
February 28: NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  with  instrumentation  to  
obtain  data  on  charged  particles  responsible  for  visual  aurora  and  on 
charged particles re&on&le  fo r  auroral absorptions was launched from 
t.  Churchill,  Canada,  to  127-mi.  altitude. 
Instrumented ’payload in- 
cluded  five  charged-particle  detectors,  aspect magnetometer, and  accel- 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
erometer.  All flight objectives were met. 
NASA  and  Australian  Ministry  of  Supply  announced  installation  to  com- 
mand  flight  of  Syncom  C  synchronous-orbit  communications satellite 
would be installed a t  Salisbury, Australia. 
Installation would have  two 
functions:  monitor  the   Syncom’s  attitude  and  command  its  apogee- 
motor  firing,  and  command  the  satellite’s  control  system  to  make  any 
necessary adjustments to maintain synchronous position. 
(NASA  Release 
64‘47) 
NASA  announced  Saturn  contract  modifications  totaling  $16,448,169  had 
been  awarded to  Chrysler Corp. Space Div.,  which was  assembling two 
Saturn  I  first  stages  and  12  Saturn  IB   first  stages  a t   NASA  Michoud 
Operations.  One award was fo r  expansion of  Chrysler’s Saturn booster 
reliability  testing  program  a t   Michoud,  Other  two  awards  were  fo r  

85 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 
increased  engineering  support  a t   Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  and 
(NASA  Release 64-48) 
John F. Kennedy S  ace Center, NASA. 
February 28: Dr. Hugh%. Dryden,  NASA Deputy Administrator,  said in letter 
to NASA Center Directors and Heads of  Headquarters Program and Staff 
Offices:  “I  call  upon  each  of  you  . . . t o  demonstrate  full  equality  of 
opportunity  without  regard  to   sex,  and  that  personal  attitudes must  not 
be allowed t o  operate  adversely against women,  or men,  in recruitment, 
selection,  training,  or promotion.  . . . I now  ask  your  full cooperation 
(NASA  Hq. PB 64-14) 
in meeting these stated objectives.” 
USAF launched Thor-Agena D launch  vehicle from Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif ., 
( UPI,  Wash.  Pos t ,  2/28/64;  HHN- 
with unidentified satellite payload. 
4 8 )  
* With  no  FY   1965 funds  authorized  for   Snap-1OA  flight  test,  AEC  would 
quietly continue to press for  authority to  conduct  flight  tests of  Snap- 
L C  
lOA,  even  without  the  cooperation  of  a  potential  customer,”  Jonathan 
Spivak  predicted  in   the  WaW  Street  Journal.  Estimated  cost  of  flight 
test  of  the   500-watt  nuclear  power  system  was  $12  million. 
(Spivak, 
W S ,  2/28/@) 
Thomas  Jefferson Wong,  40,  internationally  known  research scientist and 
head  of  manned  Mars  mission  studies  a t   NASA  Ames  Research  Center, 
died  after  apparent heart  attack.  Mr. Wong had been with Ames for 13 
( Pal0 Alto Times, 3/2/64) 
years. 
February  29:  ECHO   II  passive communications  satellite was  used  f o r   trans- 
mission  of  two  radiophotos  between  Britain’s  Jodrell  Bank  Experi- 
mental  Station  a t   Manchester  and  Gorki  University’s  radioastronomy 
observatory  a t  Zimenki.  A th ird   space  telegram  wa s   sent from Jodrell 
Bank  to Zimenki via  the moon,  and its quality was  comparable  to those 
received via  ECHO  n.  The  US. satellite was  termed  by  Tass  commen- 
tator “the Friendship Sputnik.”  ( UPI, Wash. Post, 3/1/64;  NYT ,  3/2/64, 
9 ;  Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/1/64,4,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
At  White  House  news  conference, President  Johnson  announced: 
“The  United  States  has   successfully developed  an   advance  experi- 
mental  jet  aircraft,  now  the  A-11,  which  has  been  tested  in  sustained 
flight  a t   more  than  2,000  miles  an  hour  and  a t   altitudes  in  excess  of 
70,000 feet. 
“The  performance  of  the A-11  far exceeds that  of  any  other aircraft 
in  the  world  today.  The  development  of  this  aircraft  has  been  made 
possible by  major  advances  in  aircraft technology  of  great significance 
to both  military  and commercial application.  Several A - l l   aircraft are  
now  being  flight-tested at  Edwards  Air  Force  Base  in  California.  . . . 
“The  development  of  supersonic  commercial  transport  aircraft  will 
also  be  greatly assisted by  the  lessons  learned  from  this A-11  program. 
For  example,  one of  the  most  important technological achievements in  
this  project  has   been  the mastery  of  the metallurgy  and  fabrication of 
titanium metal which  is required  for the high  temperatures  experienced 
by  aircraft  traveling at more  than  three  times  the  speed  of  sound. 
“Arrangements  are   being  made  to  make  this  and  ather  important 
technical developments available under  appropriate safeguards to  those 
directly engaged in the supersonic transport program. 
“This program was first started in 1959.  Appropriate members of  the 
Senate  and  the  House  have  been  kept  fully  informed  on  the  program 
since the  day  of  its inception.  The  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corporation  a t  

86 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4  

is  the  manufacturer  of  the  aircraft.  The  aircraft 
, was  designed  and built  by  the Pra t t   &-  Whitney  Divi- 
sion,  United  Aircraft  Corporation.  The  experimental  fire  control  and 
air-to-air missile system for the A- l l   was developed by  the Hughes Air- 
craft  Company. 
In   view  of  the  continuing  importance  of  these developments  to  our 
U 
national  security,  the  detailed  performance  of  the  A-11  will  remain 
strictly classified  and  all  individuals have been  directed to  refrain  from 
making  any  further  disclosure  concerning  this  program.  . . .” 
The President  also  announced  he  would  release on  March  2  Eugene 
(Transcript,  Wash. Pos t ,   3/1/64, 
Black’s  supersonic  transport  study. 
A20) 
February  29:  Distribution  of  space and  military  contracts was  of  growing 
concern for the Administration,  John Finney reported  in New York Times 
article.  “Space contracts have tended  to accentuate the existing research 
concentration  on  the  East  and West  Coasts.”  90%  of  space  contracts 
and 83% of  defense research  contracts were  awarded  to  only  10  states, 
and in  FY  1963 50% of  space contracts and 41.4%  of  military R&D con- 
tracts  were  awarded  in  California.  Finney  pointed  out  that  NASA was 
“attempting  to  broaden  the  economic  and  industrial  impact  of  its  rap- 
idly  expanding  program.  . . .  Working  through  universities,  the 
agency  is  attempting  to  enlist new  regions  in  its program  and  to  apply 
the  technological  developments  of  its  research  to  the  civilian  econ- 
omy.  . . .  In   fact,  James  E.  Webb,  the  agency  head,  has   become  a 
salesman  . . . to  enlist  new  regions,  new  universities,  new  indus- 
tries.  . . .”  (Finney, NYT,  3/1/64,1) 
*  In article on “The Politics of  the Space Age”  in the Saturday Evening Pos t ,  
President  Lyndon B.  Johnson  essayed his views on  the manner in  which 
space  exploration  may  bring  an  end  to  hostilities  among  nations  on 
earth. 
In  this  abridgement  of  forthcoming  volume  edited  by  Lillian 
Levy entitled Space: Its  Impact  on Man and  Society, President  Johnson 
said : “.  . . Any  discussion of  the  ‘politics’ of  the space age is, necessarily, 
a  discussion  of  politics  in   the  classical sense,  not  the  convention-and- 
campaign  sense.  If  the  space  age  has  not  eliminated  the   smokefilled 
room,  it has a t  least opened a window and given  a i r  to  fundamental  and 
sometimes obscured values. 
the  human  values  it  upholds- 
“The  fate  of  the  free  society-and 
is  inalterably  tied  t o   what  happens  in  outer  space,  as   humankind‘s 
ultimate dimension.  While the response of  our technology is important, 
no  less  important  is  the  response  and  the  role  of  our   political  institu- 
tions-both 
to   the  challenge  of  the  present  and  t o   the  opportunities 
of  the future. 
“The  vital  role  of  politics  in   the  space  age  has  been  evident  since 
October 4,1957,  when the Soviet’s  Sputnik I was launched.  The orbit- 
ing  of  that  first  unmanned  earth  satellite was  a  feat  of  science.  But 
the worldwide impact and importance were essentially political.  Sputnik 
I was proclaimed  by  the Soviets as  validation of  Communist prophecies 
been  proved  prematuTe  . . . 
about  the superiority of  their political  system.  Such  conclusions have 
“Why did this occur?  Self-examination is imperative.  In  retrospect, 
the answers seem to  be these: 

87 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS,  19  0 4 
Despite two  decades of  intensive scientific advance we  had  failed 
to establish adequate relationships between the scientific community and 
the  political  commun i ty - to   the  blanie  of  each  and  the  disservice  of 
both. 
was  the  influence  of  %“’ 
“2.  Inherent  in  the 
itical miscalculation toward  space exploration 
e  unfortunate  anti-intellectualism of  the  early 
1950’s.  . . . The  open  contempt with  which  the  Sputnik  I  success was 
greeted by  some  in   positions  of  political trust  betrayed  a  degeneration 
of  the  respect  fo r   intellect which  is  indispensable to  the governing of  a 
free and open society. 
“3.  Perhaps  the greatest  failure of  all  was  devaluation of  the  first- 
in our system: the responsibility to  lead.  . . . 
and  the  hardest-responsibility  of  elected representatives of  the people 
“In  the  years  since  1957 the American  political  system  and  its poli- 
ticians have acquitted themselves well,  as have our scientists.  An orderly 
unbalancing the values of  our free society.  . . . 
program  of  space  exploration  has  been  devised  and  financed without 
“Our  most  important  achievement  politically  in   the  space  age  has 
been  this  retention  of  basic  national  character,  purpose  and  political 
It is  reflected by  a  primary  objective of 
values in our  space program. 
our  program,  clearly  stated  at  the  outset,  to   gather  knowledge  for 
the benefit of  all nations and to join with all nations in this endeavor.  . . 
“Thus  f a r  the  space age  has been  characterized  as  a  period  of  com- 
petition.  It  is  important,  however,  that  we  keep  in  mind  the  fact 
that the competitiveness is between political systems, not between national 
scientific communities.  In   the  world  of  science the  logical  instinct  is 
toward  cooperation  without  regard  to  political  boundaries.  This  im- 
pulse  we   must  preserve.  The  real  challenge  of  the  space  age  i s   for 
the politician to tear down the walls between men which have been erected 
by his predecessors and contemporaries in the political field, rather than 
to  raise  its barriers higher  into the free and peaceful vastness of  space. 
If  the potentials  of  the  age of  space a re  fully  realized,  this  period  will 
blessed  by  all people on  earth-as 
someday be known-and 
the Golden 
(Sat. Eve .  Pos t ,  2/29/@,  22,  24) 
Age  of  Political  Science.” 
February  29:  Former  astronaut  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.  (Lt.  Col.  USMC) , hospi- 
talized with minor  concussion suffered in  accidental fall, announced he 
would remain on active duty in USMC until April 1; after this  retirement 
date, he would be free to campaign for Democratic senatorial nomination 
(UPI,  Wash. Post, 3/1/64,  A2 )  
i n  Ohio. 
During February:  Second 30-day test of  effectsof 100% oxygen on men began 
a t  USAF  School of  Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB.  The  four  subjects 
would  remain  in   space cabin  42  days,  with  12  days  at  sea-level atmos- 
phere before change to  oxygen atmosphere and pressure of  about 5 psia. 
(Av .   Vk., 2/24/64,27;  M&R ,   2/24/64,9) 
0  “Universal” upper  stage space vehicle powered by  restartable liquid-hydro- 
genfiiquid-fluorine engine was proposed by Douglas Aircraft  Co.’s  Mis- 
sile and Space System Div.  to  NASA.  Douglas proposed the concept as 
upper  stage  fo r   Thor  boosters,  said  it  also  could  be  used  with  Atlas, 
Titan,  and  Saturn  first  stages.  Douglas  said  the  high-energy  upper 
stage could be ready  fo r  use  in  three years,  would have the advantages 
of  heavy  payload  capability  and  adaptability  to  either  earth-orbit  or 
(SBD,  2/25/64,  300; A-N-AF  J&R,  2/29/6/1, 
space-probe missions. 
14 )  

88 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1964 
During Febizsary:  Severely  criticizing NASA’s Industrial  Applications  Pro- 
gram, Arthur  Kranish claimed in Western Aerospace  article:  “Years  of 
work  and  millions  of  dollars  have  resulted,  to  date,  in  a  handful  of 
dreary pamphlets and  a few sheafs of  mimeograph paper.  . . .”  Com- 
panies  writing  for  details  of  “NASA  ‘innovations’ ” had  “an  unpleasant 
shock awaiting them.  . . . Their requests sa t  for months  on  someone’s 
desk.  Finally, a brief mimeographed description of  the innovation was 
forwarded-along  with a n  unsubtle letter  from a  leading  research insti- 
tution  offering  to  perform  full  followup and  interpretive  work  for  the 
a  fee.” 
(Kranish,  Western  Aerospace,  2/64) 
interested  company-at 
*  Kennedy Space Center, NASA,  awarded $3,061,826 contract to  Ling-Temco- 
Vought’s  Range  Systems  Div.  for  services  at  Merritt  Island  Launch 
Area:  automatic  data  processing,  technical  information,  photographic 
support,  and  printing  plant  operation.  The  one-year  contract  would 
(SBD, 
be  renewable  fo r   two  more  years  through  annual  options. 
2 / 2 5 / a ,   2%) 
Impact of  global communications satellite systems was predicted by Arthur 
C. Clarke in Astronautics and Aeronautics magazine.  During the corn- 
ing  decade,  comsat  systems  would  bring  about  “orbital  post  office,” 
(6 orbital newspapers,”  and  “orbital  telephony.”  And  eventually  global 
comsat.  system  would  underscore  requirement  for  universal  language, 
which Clarke predicted would be met  with English;  would  educate mil- 
lions with TV  visual aids;  and  would  end barriers to  free flow  of  infor- 
mation  (such as censorship and jamming) 
“The  inexorable force of  astronomical facts will  destroy the political 
fantasies  which  so  long  fragmented  our  planet.  For  when  all  major 
artistic  productions,  entertainments,  political  and  news  events  (not  to 
mention disasters)  can  be  observed  and experienced simultaneously by 
th e  whole world,  the parochialism and  xenophobia  of  the past  w i l l   not 
“. . . another  [influence],  perhaps  even more  fundamental,  may  be 
be able to survive. 
reversal of  an historic  trend  which has  proceeded with  scarce1y.a break 
for  5000  years.  The  traditional  role  of  the  city  a s  a  meeting-place is 
coming to  an  end;  Megapolis may  soon go  the way  of  the  dinosaurs  it 
now  resembIes  in  so many  respeots.  This century  may  see  the  begin- 
nings  of  a  slow  but  irresistible  dispersion and decentralization of  man- 
kind-a  physical dispersion which w i l l  take place, paradoxically enough, 
(Clarke, A/A,  2 / a ,   45-48) 
a t  the same time a s  cultural unification.” 
*  Eastern Airlines announced its research on  wind-shear turbulence, or  clear 
air  turbulence  (CA T ) ,   had  yielded. the  significant  finding  that  CAT  is 
preceded  by  changes  in  temperatures  too  slight  to   be  read  on  present 
cockpit instruments.  Eastern found that  temperature change of  a s  little 
as  one degree Centigrade over  two-min. period  can  indicate  aircraft  is 
approaching area of  turbulence, either in clear a i r  o r  in clouds.  Eastern 
developed and  is  flight-testing “Cat-Spy,”  special instrument  which  re- 
cords  outside  temperatures  in   fractional  degrees,  activates  warning 
lights when  temperature  changes indicate  approach  to  area  of  possible 
turbulence. 
(Eastern Release) 
Frank Gifford of  U S .  Weather Bureau, Oak Ridge,  Tenn.,  postulated tha t  
“canals”  on Ma r s  a r e  actually sand dunes 2,500 to 3,000 mi.  long.  Size 
of  the dunes would  indicate surface pressure of  about 30 millibars, close 
to the 25 millibars calculated by JPL from spectrographic measurements. 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4  

89 

In  Martian  gravity  and a i r   density, wind  speeds would  have  to  be  five 
to  ten  times  those  on  earth  to  form  dunes,  and  such winds  have  been 
(M& R ,  2/17/64,21) 
observed in Martian dust storms. 
During  February:  NASA  Hq.  contracted  with  RAND  Corp.  for   evaluation  of 
alternate approaches to conducting Project Apollo and attaining its goal. 
(SBD ,  2/14/64,248) 
0  USAF  Space  Systems  Div.  reinitiated  its  program  to   develop  Astronaut 
Maneuvering  Unit  ( AMU )   for  extravehicular  space  activity.  Earlier 
this  year  SSD had  requested  bids  for  “remote  space  maneuvering  sys- 
tem,’  but  canceled this  in  favor  of  the AMU,  to  be  used  in Moboriented 
program.  AMU  would  consist  of  five  subsystemwhydrogen  peroxide 
propulsion,  environment  control,  attitude  stabilization, manual  control, 
(SBD, 2/17/64,  255) 
and  telemetry and voice communications. 
*  General  Dynamics/Convair  shipped  Little  Joe  I1  booster  to  White  Sands 
Missile Range,  where  i t  would  be  used  later th is  year  to  launch  Apollo 
boilerplate spacecraft in test of  the launch escape system. 
( MSC Round- 
up7  2/19/64,1) 
*  North  American  Aviation’s  Space  and  Information  Systems  Div.  was 
studying the  planaria  to  help  understand human  healing  process  under 
conditions of  weightlessness.  Planaria was capable of  regeneration  even 
(M & R ,  2/17/64, 
under extremes of  temperature,  vibration,  and shock. 
21) 
0  AFSC  awarded $100,000 study contract to Sylvania Co.  for feasibility study 
of  balloon-satellite communications network.  System would  relay  rela- 
tively interference-free signals over microwave radio beams by bouncing 
(SBD ,  
them  off  balloons  orbiting  earth  a t   about  2,000-mi.  altitudes. 
2/24/64,290) 
0  Lt.  Gen. Thomas P. Gerrity, AF  Deputy Chief  of  Staff/Systems  81  Logistics, 
described  the purpose  of  the military cost reduction  program : “Cost  re- 
duction  will  enhance  military  capability.  We’ll  save money  and  thus 
afford better weapon systems.  We a re  being  challenged as never  before 
to  perform  our  mission  with  less money;  this  is  a way  of  life we  can 
( A F  Mag.,  2/64,21-23) 
expect in the future.” 
Aerospace  Industries Association of America created Aerospace Technical 
Council  to  serve a s  technical advisory  board,  technical policy  planning 
group,  and  overall  supervisory  agent  for  AIA’S  Technical  Service  and 
(M&R 7  2/24/64,49) 
the AIA  technical committees. 
Indonesian  a ir   force  launched  Soviet-built  surface-to-air  missile  in  con- 
nection with  military  alert  exercises, according to  official  Antara  news 
(M&R ,  2/24/64,11) 
agency. 
*  Tory  11  C  series  of  reactors  expected  to  lead  to   low-altitude  supersonic 
vehicle  nuclear  propulsion  system  was  scheduled  t o   undergo  initial 
(M& R ,   2/17/64,9) 
tests a t  AEC  Nevada Test Site early this year. 
I n  70-sec. firing, modified Minuteman first stage was used  to test prototype 
gimbaling  nozzle half  as big  a s  one needed  for  156-in. solid motor  and 
(M & R ,  
four  times a s  big as  any gimbaled nozzle built o r  tested to date. 
2/17/64,  21) 
7@6-5980--65---7 

March  1964 
March  1 :  Sen.  Richard  B.  Russell  (D.-Ga.),  Chairman  of  Senate  Armed 
Services Committee, said in CBS  network  interview that  the U.S.  had d e  
veloped  11 or  12  of  the A-11  2,000-mph experimental  jet.  He said the 
A-11  had  been  “put  through  all kinds  of  tests,”  and tests were contin- 
uing.  The prototype  was  nearly  ready  for  USAF  acceptance.  President 
Johnson  had  disclosed  the  A-11’s  existence  a t   press  conference  the 
(Raymond,  NYT ,   3/2/64,  1; AP,  Wash .  Post,  3 /2 /64  
previous  day. 
A l )  
At  Oklahoma City, where FAA  was conducting sonic boom tests in prepara- 
tion  for  future supersonic transport  flights,  complaints about the booms 
were  outnumbered  by  supporters of  the  program.  After  one month  of 
tests, Mayor  Jack  S.  W ike s  said his mail was  540-1 in  favor  of  testing. 
Some  2,100  claims  for  damages  had  been  filed  with  FAA,  but  an  FAA 
spokesman said there had “been no proof yet of  damage directly attributa- 
ble  to  the  sonic  booms.’’  Testing  would  continue  five  more  months. 
(Janson, NYT ,  3 /2 /64 ,12)  
Frederic A.  Louden,  66,  former  aeronautical engineer  at  Navy  Bureau  of 
Aeronautics  until  retirement  in  1957, died  after  long  illness.  Louden 
was  former head  of  the Bureau’s  special research  liaison office for  NACA 
(Wash. 
and a  former member of  NASA’s Committee on  Aerodynamics. 
Post,  3/3/64) 
March 2 :  NASA  and DOD  established the National Space Station Planning Sub- 
Panel of  the NASA-DOD  Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board 
( A A C B ) ,   charged  with  studying  and  then  making  recommendations  to 
AACB  on  the  best  configuration  for  follow-on manned  space  station  to  
the  MOL.  Go-chairmen were  Dr.  Michael  I.  Yarymovych  of  NASA  Ad- 
vanced  Manned  Missions  Office  and  Col.  Kenneth  Schultz, Deputy  Di- 
( M & R ,   3/9/64, 
rector  of  Development Planning  for  Space, Hq.  USAF. 
13; SBD ,  3/11/64,383) 
Apollo  spacecraft boilerplate command module and  related equipment  for  
first full-scale test flight of  Apollo launch escape system arrived a t  White 
Sands Missile Range, N.  Mex.,  where it would be flight-tested with Little 
Joe I1 booster.  ( MSC Release 64-39) 
NASA  announced Hughes Aircraft Co. had been  awarded contract to develop 
and  build  five  Advanced  Technological  Satellites  (ATS )   based  on  Ad- 
vanced  Syncom  design  study.  The  650-lb. satellites would  be  used  to  
test  several  spacecraft  techniques,  particularly  spacecraft  stabilization 
(NASA  Release  64-50;  Goddard 
and  orientation  in  higher  altitudes. 
News, 3 /9 /64 ,8 )  
White  House  released  report  by  Eugene  R.  Black  and  Stanley  deJ. 
Osborne  recommending revision of  U S .  program to  develop supersonic 
transport.  As  previously  disclosed  (Feb.  11,  2 2 ) ,   the  report  urged 
Government financing be  increased from  ’75% to 90% and the program 
(MacKenzie,  Wash. 
be  administered  by  a  new,  independent  agency. 
Post, 3/3/64,  A24) 
90 

91 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  
March 2 :  Dr. Charles A. Berry  (M.D.)  was named Chief of Medical Programs 
for  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, MSC Director  Dr.  Robert  H.  Gilruth 
announced.  In   this  new  position  Dr.  Berry  would  be  in   charge  of  all 
medical  and  physiological matters  in  the  MSC  mission.  Promoted  to 
Dr.  Berry’s  vacated  position,  Chief  of  Medical Operations,  was  Dr.  D. 
( ~ S C  Release  69-40) 
Owen  Coons  (M.D.),  formerly  Deputy  Chief. 
AEC   released  report  from  its Advisory  Committee  on  Reactor  Safeguards 
concerning  NASA  Plumb Brook Reactor Facility.  After reviewing NASA’s 
application to  convert  its provisional Operating  license to   10-year oper- 
ating license,  the Committee concluded that  “with  careful planning  and 
operation,  the  NASA  PBRF  organization  can  continue  to  operate  this 
facility  without  undue  hazard  t o  the  health  and  safety  of  the public.” 
(AEC   Release (2-46) 
Sen.  Stephen  M.  Young  (D.-Ohio)  spoke  in  Senate  of  NASA’s selecting 
Boston  a s  site  for  new  electronics research center, charging that “there 
is little to  indicate that  thorough evaluation was  given  to  potential loca- 
tions  distant  from  the  Boston  area”  and  pointing  out  that  “in  a l l  
respects,  Cleveland  eminently  qualifies fo r   this  important  new  facility. 
“.  . . Each  time  a  new  facility  is  proposed,  we  hear  the  same well- 
worn  argument  that  i t   should  go  t o  an   area which  already  has   institu- 
tions with experience in this field.  As a result a vicious cycle has formed, 
and i t  can  almost  be predicted that any new  important space facility will 
go to  Boston, Houston, or  to  California.  . . . 
“Frankly,  I  a m  tired  of  the  argument.  I  rise  today  to  speak briefly 
in protest  of  what has  been  going on.  . . .”  (CR, 3/2/64,3943-44) 
*  Milton B.  Ames, Jr., Director  of  Space Vehicles in NASA  Office of  Advanced 
Research and Technology, testified before  House Committee on  Science 
and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced  Research  and Tracking: 
“.  . . space  vehicle  research,  first  of  all,  produces  knowledge  that 
permits  the  accomplishment  of  new  missions.  When  the  knowledge 
resulting  from  research  is obtained  well  in   advance  of  the  planning  of 
new  missions,  we  may  proceed  with  confidence  tha t   the  missions  are  
feasible.  For  this  reason,  the  generation  of  new  knowledge  through 
research  should, when  possible,  precede  developments that  are  beyond 
the  current  state  of  the  art.  Only  when  the  pressures  for  immediate 
development are  extremely great, as has been  the case in these first years 
of  our national space program, are  we justified in violating the principle 
of  order  in  favor of  expediency.  When  we  possess  adequate  research 
which we may wish to plan, but we  also  . . . lay the basis for improved 
data, we not only are  confident of  the feasibility of  any new miss:ons  for 
reliability  and efficiency and fo r  reductions in the weight and cost of  the 
space  vehicles required  for  these missions.  The tru th   of  these  princi- 
ples  has  been  demonstrated  many  times  in  the  past  by  costly  develop- 
ments which either had t o  be abandoned  for lack  of  the necessary tech- 
nical  capability  to  complete them -or  which  could  only  be  salvaged  by 
crash research programs. 
“We  must,  therefore,  strive through  research  to  develop new  knowl- 
edge that  will  make  new  space missions possible,  if  and when  national 
policy should dictate that any one of  these missions must be accomplished. 
A t   the  same time  we  must  conduct  the  research  required  to  ensure the 
success of  on-going  projects,  and  we  must  also strive through  research 

92 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   AERONAUTTCS ,   19  6 4 
to  pave  the way  for  increased  reliability and  efficiency of  space vehicles 
of  proven feasibility.  . . .”  (Testimony) 
March 2:  In  interview with Av ia t ion  Week and Space  Technology, Air Force 
Secretary Eugene M.  Zuckert replied to question  about MOL:  
I  am in  sympathy  with 
“I am  sure  that  the MOL must  go  forward. 
Mr.  McNamara’s pressing  us to t ry  to define what we  hope to do with  it. 
This can have  a  lot to  do with  the subsystems that you plan  to put in  it. 
Also,  the definition effort has to do with the cost, and with the time  it is 
going to  take us to do the job.  We haven’t suffered a t  any time in the last 
three years that I have been here by taking a few months to try  and work 
I  am  con- 
out  with  reasonable  precision what  we  are planning  to  do. 
vinced,  for   one,  tha t   the  studies and  program  definition  that  we  went 
through in the Titan 3 materially improved our chances of  getting a  fine 
booster  a t   lower  cost.  I  know,  as  Secretary  McNamara  knows,  that 
there is a limit to the precision with which you  can  define what you  are  
going to  do  with  something  you  haven’t  got.  But  the  effort should  be 
made t o  set out the parameters.  It has-the merit,  a t  least,  of  excleding 
some  of  the  things  you  know you  are not  going  to  try. 
I’m  convinced 
Mr.  McNamara  means  exactly what  he  says-that  we  have  to  get  this 
MOL  capability, and I’m  not disturbed by the efforts that  a re  being made 
to  attempt  to  define what  we  mean  by  a  capability.  . . .”  ( A v .  Wk . ,  
3/2/64,  73) 
0  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff  General  Curtis  E.  LeMay  said  in  testimony 
before  House Armed  Services Committee that  the Titan  I11  launch  ve- 
hicle program  was  “proceeding  satisfactorily”  and  that  USAF  was  “un- 
dertaking the development of  a  medium  altitude communications  satel- 
lite program. 
“. . . the  next  major  step  toward  the  achievement  of  future  space 
capabilities  is  the  Manned  Orbiting Laboratory  (MO L )   which  was  a p  
proved  for  development  under  Air  Force management.  The  MOL   will 
provide  a means  to  fulfill the  compelling requirement  to   acquire  infor- 
mation essential to  determining  accurately the threat from space, the use- 
fulness and the capabilities of  man-in-space, and the unique advantages 
which  may  accrue  from  military  space  operations. 
I t   will  also  serve 
as   a  platform  to  s up po a   testing  of  equipment  and  procedures  in  the 
environment in which they will be used.”  (AF Info. Pol. Ltr.) 
N e w   Yo rk  Times editorialized that the A-11  experimental  aircraft  “repre- 
sents  an   engineering  breakthrough  on  several  fronts  and  a  tribute  to  
Lockheed, but it will not  satisfy the need  for an advanced manned  inter- 
ceptor,  a  long-range  bomber  or  a  new  high-speed  commercial  craft.” 
( N Y T ,  3 /2 /64 ,26)  
Col.  John  C.  Nickerson  ( U S A ) ,   47,  a  key- figure  in  USA-USAF  Thor-Jupiter 
controversy, died  in  automobile  accident in Alamagordo,  N.  Mex.  (UPI, 
Wash. Post, 3/3/64,  A2) 
March 3:  Albert  J.  Evans,  NASA  Acting Director  of  Aeronautics,  said before 
Subcommittee  on  Advanced  Research  and Tracking,  House  Committee 
on Science and Astronautics : 
“The  Aeronautical  Research  effort  of  the  National  Aeronautics  and 
Space Administration  has one specific  goal:  to   provide  technical infor- 
mation  for  use  by  the  aircraft manufacturers  of  the  United  States,  in- 
formation which  is  sufficiently  fa r   advanced  to   permit  the  design  and 
production  of  military  and civil a ir  vehicles which a re  superior to  those 
of  any other nation. 

. 

93 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   ANI, A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  0 4 
categories  . . . : Aerodynamics,  Structures,  Air-Breathing  Propulsion, 
“Our  aeronautical program  is  classified  in   four   broad  disciplinary 
[and]  Operating Problems. 
“The  resources  utilized  in  accomplishing  the  NASA  Aeronautical  Re- 
search program  a re  found  primarily  in  the  highly-competent  technical 
staffs of  the  four Research  Centers  of  the NASA.  The in-house effort is 
supported,  as  required,  by a certain amount of  out-of-house contract re- 
search performed by  universities, non-profit organizations,  and private 
industry.  The  funds  requested  for  the NASA  Aeronautics  program  sup- 
port  these  in-house  and  out-of-house research  efforts.  The  program, 
however,  is  predominantly  an   in-house effort,  conducted  in  the   estab- 
lished  framework  of  the  theoretical  and  experimental  research  activity 
of  the NASA  Research Centers.  . . .” 
(Testimony) 
March  3 :   AEC  announced  plans  to   explode  two  experimental  nuclear  reac- 
a  S n a p l O A  for   spacecraft use  and the other a ground-based 
tors-one 
reactor  for  civilian power-during 
forthcoming  two  weeks.  The tests, 
to  be made a t  AEC’S  National Reactor Testing Station, Arco,  Idaho, were 
(AP, NYT,  3/4/64,5; 
intended  to  provide  “vital safety information.” 
AP,  Wash .  Pus t ,  3/4/64) 
a  Dr.  Evelyn  Anderson,  research  scientist  a t   NASA  Ames  Research  Center, 
was  among  the  six  distinguished’ career  women  to  receive  Federal 
Women’s Award a t  banquet  in Washington. 
(NASA Notice) 
a  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.  was  awarded  follow-on study  contract  for  Manned 
Orbital Research Laboratory by NASA  Langley Research Center, to refine 
the NASA  concept and examine the feas2bility of  cylindrical six-man space 
station using equipment providing intermittent artificial gravity.  Selec- 
tion  of  Douglas fo r   contract negotiation was  announced  last December. 
( LARC Release) 
Sen. Gordon Allott (R.-Colo.)  said on Senate floor: 
“. . . how  is  it that  this country develops a  plane  which costs a  vast 
sum  . . . and  now  it  is  declared  that  we  have  fully  and  successfully 
developed an  advanced experimental jet aircraft, but  the very committee 
which  has   to   approve the  appropriation  required  f o r   the  development 
of  that aircraft knows nothing about i t ?  
“. . . having  sat on  the Defense  Subcommittee of  the Appropriations 
Committee,  beginning  in  1959, and having  attended  a t  least 98 percent 
of  all the meetings  all the time tha t  subcommittee ha s  met,  the first time 
I  ever  heard  a  word  mentioned  about  the A-11  was  when  I  turned  on 
the  television,  over  the  weekend,  and  saw  the  President  make  the  an- 
nouncement.  . . .  Unfortunately,  I have  not  been  able to   ask  the dis- 
tinguished  chairman of  the subcommittee.  . . about this matter;  but all 
the  rest  of  my  colleagues on  the  subcommittee have told me  they  know 
nothing about the A-11.  . . .” 
(CR ,  3 /3 /64 ,400647 )  
inserted into the Congressional Record 
Sen. William  Proxmire  (D.-Wis.) 
an   editorial  from the  Fall  Street  Journal  concerning  Government par- 
ticipation in financing the supersonic transport : 
“. . . The question,  as we  see it,  is not  whether  there will eventually 
be  operational  supersonic  airlines,  or  even whether the Government has 
any  business  in  that  business.  Rather,  i t   is  a  question  whether  the 
Government  is  trying  to   rush  the  thing  before  its economic  time,  with 
too few charts and too little knowledge. 

94 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  

“A more cautious ffight into the unknown couid well make f o r  speedier 
to mention sounder investments.’9  (CR, 3/3/ 
progress in  the end-not 
64, 4067) 
March  3 :   Spokesman  fo r   Maser  Optics,  Inc.,  said  “laser  rifle”  had  been 
delivered  to  Army’s  Frankford  ArsenaL  “Laser  rifle,”  producing  in- 
tense bursts of  light, could be used  for  such tasks  as igniting  objects o r  
( UPI,  NYT ,  3/4/64,  23) 
detonating  explosives. 
March 3-6:  British  aviation  officials met  with  FAA representatives in  Wash- 
ington  fo r  technical policy  discussions of  civil aviation matters.  Meth- 
ods fo r  exchanging information  on environmental aspects of  supersonic 
transport  were  among  the matters  discussed. 
(FAA   Release &19) 
March 4 :   NASA  Administrator James E. Webb,  appearing before Senate Com- 
mittee on Askonautical and Space Sciences., said: 
“It  is  apparent to most persons who  are concerned with the national 
space effort that we have reached what you described recently, Mr. Chair- 
man,  as a  ‘critical mid-point’ in our  effort to achieve space pre-eminence 
for  the  United  States.  We  have moved  from  a  circumstance in Which 
the  Soviet Union  held  clear  superiority  in  space to  one  in which,  as  a 
result  of  the  driving  effort  put  forth  in   the  past  five  years,  we   have 
achieved a  degree of  parity with the Russians in  ou r  ability to penetrate 
and operate in the space environment. 
“As  a  consequence  of  this  significant  progress,  the  nation  i s   in  a 
position  to  consider  not  merely  what  it is  able to  do  in  space, but  also 
what  it  is  wise to  do  in   view  of  ou r   greatly  increased  scientific  and 
technical ability.  we have,  in  short, moved from  a period  in which we  
did everything we  could in  space, and regretted our  inability to do more, 
to  one  in  which  we  have  a  very  large  capability  and  a r e  increasingly 
confronted  with  hard  decisions in  the  selection of  the programs  which 
we will undertake. 
“This  is  the  position  in  which  NASA  found  itself  in  preparing  the 
program which is the  basis fo r  the FY  1965 authorization  request.  We 
have  deferred  or  eliminated  many  projects  which  were  worthy  con- 
tenders for a place in the program  and which,  I believe, when  ;budgetary 
limitations  are less restrictive, the nation w i l l  decide to  undertake.  The 
activities which a re  proposed for FY 1965 will,  in my judgment and that 
of  my  associates,  produce  the  greatest  benefits  fo r   the  country  within 
the limitations of  the national resources which the President ha s  decided 
a re  available  and  can  prudently  be  spent  for  the  NASA  program.  . . .” 
Mr.  Webb cited mounting evidence that  NASA’s need  fo r  scientists and 
engineers was not adversely affecting other areas: 
“At  the  beginning of  this  calendar  year,  approximately 74,000 scien- 
tists  and  engineers were employed in   the NASA  program-about 
12,000 
within  NASA,  and  62,000  under  NASA  contracts  and  grants.  This 
amounted to  approximately 4.9  percent  of  the 1.5 million scientists and 
engineers in  the  nation’s work force. 
“By  next  January,  it  is  estimated  that  about  82,000  scientists  and 
engineers will be working on the NASA  program;  about 5.2  percent of  the 
available  national  supply.  If  the  space effort  were  to  continue  at  the 
present level of  funding fo r  the remainder of  the decade, NASA’s program 
is not  expected to  require more than  5.5  percent  of  the national  supply 
of  scientists and engineers. 

95 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A ERONAU T IC S ,   19  6 4 
“Of  particular  interest,  however,  is the   fact  that  NASA’s requirement 
fo r  additional engineers has  peaked  at  an earlier  period  than  had  been 
anticipated.  Current  statistics  indicate  that  the  number  employed  on 
NASA  work  increased  by  about  30,000  during  the  last  calendar  year, 
rather  than  20,000  as  had  been  anticipated.  As  a  consequence,  our 
requirement  for  the  current  year  will  be  only  about  8,000  instead  of 
18,000  as had  been  projected.  We  w i l l   thus  require  a  much  smaller 
share than  had  been  anticipated  of  the  45,000 engineers who w i l l   com- 
plete their education this year.  . . .”  (Testimony) 
March 4 :   NASA  and French National Center for Space Studies  ( CNES)   agreed 
to proceed with cooperative space project of  launching satellite to  inves- 
tigate  characteristics  of  VLF electromagnetic wave  propagation  in  the 
ionosphere.  The  French  satellite would  be  launched  from  PMR  using 
a Scout vehicle provided by NASA.  This would be Phase I1 of  two-phase 
program  for  VLF  investigations, pursuant  to  Memorandum 
CNES-NASA 
of Understanding  dated  Feb.  18,  1963.  Phase  I  consisted of  two  sub- 
orbital  launches  of  French  experiments  with  US. Aerobee  sounding 
rockets,  to  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  scientific experiments  to  be 
(NASA Release 64-61) 
performed by the  satellite. 
0  NASA  announced signing preliminary  $800,000 contract with Ball Brothers 
Research  Corp.  fo r  construction of  five additional  Os0  (Qrbiting Solar 
Observatory)  satellites.  Ball  Brothers  already  had  built  two  Oso’s- 
one of  which was  orbited  in 1962 and the other  scheduled for orbit this 
year-and  was  in  the  process  of  building  a  third.  The  f ive  additional 
Qso’s  would study solar cycle through  periods of  increased activity dur- 
ing the late l%O’s. 
(NASA  Release 64-51) 
*  NASA  Administrator Webb submitted a report on long-range studies in space 
exploration  to  the House Committee on  Science and Astronautics’ Sub- 
committee  on  Advanced  Research  and  Tracking.  Emphasizing  that 
“all decisions on future missions must be national, not  solely NASA,  deci- 
sions,”  the report outlined “the  areas of  space mastery that  require seri- 
ous  attention  by  the Nation,”  surveying all  categories of  space explora- 
tion-including 
scientific, weather,  and  navigational  satellites, manned 
and  unmanned  flights  to  the  moon  and  the  planets.  The  report  said 
that  “development  and  operation  of  manned  space  stations  in   earth 
orbit will be  a necessary preliminary to  extension of  manned operations 
in  space,”  described  feasibility  and  design  studies  being  made  for 
(Text, 1965 NASA  Auth. Hearings, Pa r t  4,2729- 
manned lunar  bases. 
2804) 
NASA  announced granting  28 waivers  of  US. commercial rights  to  inven- 
tions resulting from work performed under NASA contracts, bringing total 
of  NASA’s patent  waivers  to  74.  Under  policy  “designed  to  encourage 
prompt  public  and  industrial  benefit  from  the  scientific byproducts  of 
its  research  and  development activities,”  NASA  granted  the patent  rights 
to  12  companies,  one  university,  one  research  organization,  and  two 
individuals  (jointly).  NASA  retained  royalty-free license  f o r   any  gov- 
(NASA Release fX-52) 
ernmental use of  the inventions. 
Rep.  Bob Wilson  (R.-Calif.)  said in  the House: 
“Atlas has more scheduled launches during the 1960’s than ever before 
fo r  missions of the Air Force Systems Command and NASA,  a demand 50 
great  that  a  new  standardized Atlas  space launch  vehicle  called  SLV-3 
o r  Atlas-3 has been  designed.  This  standardized  vehicle will produce 

96 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19 0 4 

lower  long-term costs while  increasing  flexibility  and  flight  reliability. 
Development of this  standardized vehicle is an excellent example of  how 
existing  space  systems  can  be  improved  to  satisfy  new  requirements. 
Improvement of  a  flight proven system such a s  Atlas is inherently more 
efficient and  economical than  designing new  vehicles fo r  new  missions. 
tainly proven its reliability.  . . .”  ( C R ,  3/4/64,  A1115) 
Research and development costs a re  already expended and Atlas has cer- 
March  4 :   ComSatCorp applied  to  FCC for  authority  to  construct  and  orbit 
over  the  mid-Atlantic a  synchronous-orbit communications satellite  to 
provide  commercial  service  on  an  “experimental-operational”  basis 
between  North  America  and  Europe.  The  satellite was  described  by 
ComSatCorp  as  a n   “initial  step  in  the  development  of  a  global  com- 
munications system.”  It would provide 24-hour communications service 
capable of  relaying TV  broadcasts  or  up to  240  telephone calls.  Plans 
called  fo r  the  satellite to be  orbited  in  spring of  1965 with  a  TAT-Delta 
booster  supplied  by  NASA  on  a  reimbursable  basis. 
(ComSatCorp 
Release) 
*  USAF planned  to  launch  six manned  orbiting  laboratories  (M O L )   over  an 
18-month period, beginning in late 1967 or early 1968, unnamed sources 
( UPI,  Omaha Eve.  World-Herald, 3/4/64) 
revealed  in  Washington. 
FAA announced  Lufthansa-German  Airlines  had   reserved  three  delivery 
positions for U S .  supersonic transport aircraft, bringing total of  reserved 
positions to 75 by 1 4  airlines. 
(FAA   Release 64-20) 
0  DOD   announced establishing fundamental policies  for  application  and con- 
duct of  Project Definition Phase  ( PD P )  . The technique would be applied 
to  all proposed engineering or  operational system development projects 
with  development,  test,  and  evaluation  costs  amounting  to  $25  million 
or  more  o r  with  production  costs  amounting  to  $100 million  o r  more. 
Major  benefits were  expected to  include reduction  of  technical changes 
during  development-production cycle,  decreased  cost,  improved  opera- 
tional  effectiveness  o r   early  cancellation  of  projects. 
( DOD  Release 
186-64) 
Soviet  Cosmonaut  Yuri  Gagarin,  touring  Copenhagen,  predicted  that 
U.S.S.R.  would  conduct  another  manned  space  flight  sometime  this 
(AP, Wash. Eve.  Star, 3 / 4 / a )  
year. 
March 5:  1,300-lb. instrumented payload was carried to 97,000 ft. by  balloon 
in  Coronoscope I1 project, sponsored jointly by om ,  NSF,  and NASA.  Re- 
leased  from  National  Center  for Atmospheric Research  near  Palestine, 
Tex.,  the balloon traveled about 105  mi.  eastward, then  doubled back t o  
travel  another 100 mi.  before  dropping its instrument payload on  radio 
command signal, 50 mi.  from the launch site.  Dr.  Gordon Newkirk of 
High Altitude Observatory a t  Boulder, Colo.,  said photographs made by 
the  instruments were expected to aid  in  study of  effects of  sun’s  corona 
(Houston Chron., 
upon  earth’s  magnetic field  and  upper  atmosphere. 
3/6/64;  Houston Pos t ,  3/6/64) 
NASA  Deputy Administrator Dr.  Hugh L.  Dryden,  appearing before Senate 
Committee on Aeronautical and  Space Sciences, reported on  NASA’s ac- 
tivities  in   international  cooperation  during  1963 : 
“Six new  international  satellites,  to  be  built  and  financed  by  three 
other  nations, were programmed as contributions  to  the  NASA  scientific 
satellite efFort  over  the  next  six  years,  bringing  to  ten  the  number  of 
such cooperative satellite projects  completed, in  process,  or  agreed.  . . . 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4  

97 
Seven  foreign  experiments were  selected in  competition with  domestic 
proposals fo r  flight principally on NASA  observatory satellites during the 
nextthree years.  . . . 
“Nineteen sounding rockets carrying scientific payloads were launched 
here or  abroad  in  joint  projects with nine countries, raising to forty-six 
the total of  such launchings to date. 
“New  agreements  were  concluded  with  India  and  Pakistan  under 
which both  countries will  join  the UK  and Australia  in  a  year-long test 
of  meteorological sounding rocket systems.  . . .” 
After  listing NASA  activities in  the categories of  international  ground- 
based experiments and relationships with European agencies  ( ELDO and 
ESRO) , Dr. Dryden  discussed  implementation of  the  US.-U.S.S.R.  bi- 
lateral agreement for space cooperation : 
“.  . . Correspondence has  been  maintained  [with  the  Soviet  Acad- 
emy  of  Sciences],  although  the  Soviet  side has  not  met  time  schedules 
on most agreed action items.  However, the Soviet Academy of  Sciences 
has  just  conducted optical  observations of  the  ECHO   11  satellite  during 
its early orbits and we were able to begin the telecommunications experi- 
ments with ECHO  11 between the Jodrell Bank Observatory in Great Brit- 
ain  and the U.S.S.R.  on  February 21.  While we  have not  yet  received 
detailed  data  of  the  optical  observations and  have  still  to  evaluate  the 
results of  the telecommunications tests,  which we  have received,  I  think 
the real significance is that we  a r e  taking advantage of  existing programs, 
approved  and executed on  their  own  merits,  to  provide  a n  opportunity 
for scientists and engineers of  both countries to gain experience in work- 
ing together  fo r  their  mutual  benefit.  This  is  obviously a  pioneer ven- 
ture and it has purposefully been  designed as a  coordinated rather  than 
a joint effort.  There is no provision fo r  exchange of  funds between the 
two countries, no  exchange of  equipment is involved and  all exchanges 
of  data  a re  to  be  on  a  reciprocal  basis  and made  available to  all other 
interested countries.  . . .” 
(Testimony) 
March 5:  I n  testimony before  Senate Committee on  Aeronautical  and Space 
Sciences, NASA  Associate Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  dis- 
cussed NASA’s relationship with JPL : 
“.  . . [A]  major  contracting  advance is taking  place  in   our  operat- 
ing  relationships  with  the  California  Institute  of  Technology  . . . 
[which]  manages the NASA’s Jet Propulsion  Laboratory  under  contract. 
Originally, the Laboratory  and the contract  for i t s  operation were trans- 
ferred  to  NASA  from  the Army  in  1959.  As  the  functions  of  the  Lab- 
oratory  have  expanded  and  changed,  we  have  modified  the  NASA/CIT 
relationships  to  meet  the  current  needs  of  the  program.  The  present 
contract  expires  at  the  end  of  this  year,  and  we  have  carefully  nego- 
tiated  its  extension under  terms  more  applicable to  current  agency re- 
quirements.  A  comprehensive  review  has  been  made  of  the  operating 
experience gained since the inception of  the NASA/CIT/JPL  relationship. 
As  a  result  of  this  study,  improved  operating  procedures  in  both  the 
technical  and  administrative  aspects  have  been  developed  and  imple- 
mented. 
In   addition  to  reflecting clauses  which  implement  the   above 
improvements in management,  the new  arrangements  include three ma- 
jo r  departures  from earlier  agreements: 
“First, the earlier contracts were based  on a  principle of  mutually re- 
quiring  CIT/JPL  concurrence  before  NASA  directions  would  be  carried 

98 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

out.  Thia  often  resulted  in  lengthy  ‘negotiations’  of  assigned  tasks. 
The new  contract restricts the principle of  mutuality to the broad  terms 
of  the operating  relationship, but clearly gives NASA  the  unilateral  right 
to  issue task  orders,  require  reports,  and  take  other  administrative  ac- 
tions a s  desired. 
“Second,  a  separate facilities contract  is  also being negotiated which 
will provide  the  government  a  more  direct  control  over  the  planning, 
construction, and utilization  of  the facilities  at JPL. 
“Third,  a new principle  is provided for  determining CIT’s  fee   fo r  the 
operation  of  the  Laboratory.  The  new  contract  contains  a  schedule 
which sets the upper and lower limits of  the f e e  on the basis  of  the dollar 
volume of  work  which NASA  places with  CIT/JPL.  The exact fee within 
these  limits,  will  be  determined  by  how  well  CIT/JPL  performs  in  the 
management  of  the  Laboratory.” 
(Testimony) 
March 5:  First  of  series  of  background  briefings on  scientific and  technical 
aspects of  NASA  programs was held  at NASA Hq.,  with Dr.  John E.  Naugle, 
Director  of  Geophysics and  Astronomy Programs,  reviewing the broad 
scientific objectives  of  the  space program.  Dr.  Naugle  revealed  NASA 
planned to  ask three  separate companies for  independent design  studies 
of  Advanced Ogo’s  and  Oao’s  (Orbiting Geophysical Observatories and 
Orbiting  Astronomical Observatories).  The  Advanced  Os0  (Orbiting 
Solar  Observatory)  design  work  by  contractor  Republic Aviation  was 
progressing,  and Aoso  should  be  in   operation  in   1969. 
(NASA  Memo; 
SBD,  3/6/64,360) 
*  In press conference, Secretary of  Defense Robert S. McNamara announced 
reduction  of  B-70  development  program  from  three  aircraft  to  two. 
“This  action  . . . is  a  result  of  a  very  comprehensive  review  of  the 
project  w e   have  just  completed,  and  i t   reflects  our  concern  over  the 
continued  delays  in  the  program  . . . brought  about  by  severe  tech- 
nical difficulties. 
“. . . the  first  flight  [originally]  was  scheduled fo r  December  1962. 
The  program  is  already  some  18 months  behind  that  schedule and  the 
first aircraft has not yet been completely assembled.  . . . 
“We  have been  plagued with  fuel leaks in  . . . [the Number Three] 
airplane.  . . .  I  am   told  . . . that  the  first  plane,  i f   it  flies  this 
spring  . . . or  certainly  before  mid-year,  w i l l   probably  fly  with  one 
tank not usable because of  continued leak problems. 
“Secondly, we  have  had  serious problems  in mating  the  wing  to  the 
fuselage.  It is a very,  very complex form of  construction.  We a re  using 
what  amounts to  a  steel sandwich in  the B-70 to solve the high  tempera- 
ture  problems  associated with  supersonic speed,  and  the  welding pmb- 
lems  associated with mating this steel sandwich wing  and  fuselage con- 
struction  have been  severe,  indeed.  . . .”  (Transcript,  NYT ,  2/6/64, 
12; DOD  Release 1 9 4 4 4 )  
*  Senate passed  compromise $16,976,620,000 military  authorization bill  fo r  
FY  1965 procurement  and  R&D.  The  Senate-House conferees retained 
$50 million for initiating development of  new  manned bomber,  dropped 
$40 million  approved  in  House  bill  for  improved manned  interceptor 
( N Y T ,  2/6/64,  3) 
aircraft. 
issued annual report of  its 1963 highlights and  accomplishments. 
I n  
AEX 
preface  summarizing  and  evaluating  significant  activities,  AFSC  Com- 
mander General B.  A.  Schriever said: 

99 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4  
“.  . . In  1963 AFSC made major  contributions to the nation’s defense 
and  space  exploration  programs.  These  included  delivery  of  ballistic 
missiles at an  average of  one per  day, completion of  vital early warning 
and  a i r   defense systems, first flight  of  the  transport  aircraft which w i l l  
make  world  wide  airlift  a  reality,  and  delivery  of  the  launch  vehicles 
which  made  possible  the  orbital  flights  of  Commander  Schirra  and 
Major  Cooper.  . . . 
“Cancellation of  the X-20  DynaSoar program in late 1963 and assign- 
ment  to  the Air  Force of  responsibility fo r  development of  a  near-earth 
(MOL )   represent  a  shift  in  emphasis 
Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory 
from  reentry  technology  to   on-orbit  experiments.  MOL, which  is  d e  
signed  to  provide  a  means  of  obtaining  hard,  factual  data  concerning 
man’s  capabilities  in  operational  space vehicles,  is  among  AFSC’S  most 
urgent  projects.  . . .”  (AFSC  Release 42-R-24;  AFSC  1963 Ann.  Rpt.) 
March  6:  “Boosted Arcas”  sounding rocket was launched from NASA  Wallops 
Station  to  59.5-mi.  altitude  with  sodium-lithium payload  designed  and 
built  by  Sweden’s  Uppsala  Ionospheric  Observatory  on  contract  to 
Swedish Space Committee.  The wide and  reddish sodium-lithium cloud 
ejected  in   the  atmosphere was  visible  for  many  miles  and  was  photo- 
graphed  from  several locations.  The test  was  in  preparation  for  series 
of  such  launchings  in  the  auroral  zone  in  northern  Scandinavia  later 
this  year,  to  study  cawes  of  aurora  and  airglow.  This  first  launch  of 
Boosted  Arcas  from  Wallops  was  quite  successful.  Small  booster  in- 
cluded  in   the  Arcas  increased  its  altitude  from  normal  225,000  ft.  to 
314,000 ft.  (Wallops Release 64-24) 
0  Nike-Cajun sounding  rocket  was  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station  to 
71-mi.  altitude  with  payload  of  12  explosive  charges  to  provide  data 
on  atmospheric  winds  and  temperatures  and  effects  of  the  “warming 
trend”  in the upper atmosphere.  Previous measurements had been made 
during  February  “warming  trend,”  which  moved  in  westerly direction 
across  the  northern  hemisphere.  This  second and  unexpected warming 
trend  appeared  to   be  moving  in   easterly  direction. 
(Wallops Release 
64-25;  NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
NASA Administrator  James  E.  Webb,  speaking a t   Chamber  of  Commerce 
dinner in Oxford, N.C.,  clarified the cost of  a U S .  manned lunar landing 
in  this  decade: 
“This  $20 billion  outlay fo r  manned  space flight  fo r  the period  1961 
through  1970 is  for  Projects Mercury, Gemini,  and Apollo.  . . . 
“Of  the  $20  billion  marked  fo r   manned  space  flight  in  the  present 
decade,  $18 billion  will be expended  fo r  the launch  vehicles and  space- 
craft,  the ground  facilities, the astronaut training,  and the management 
skills and  other human  factors that  a re  an  integral part  of  ou r  nation’s 
capital  investment.  These a re  all things we  must have - in   any event- 
to  achieve  the  across-the-board  competence  in   every  major  area  of 
manned space flight that  security, well-being, and progress of  the nation 
may demand. 
“The  portion  of  this  total  effort devoted to  landing on  the moon will 
is, sending three Americans on a  round- 
cost only about $2  billion-that 
t r ip   voyage  of  lunar  exploration,  along  with  everything  in  the  way  of 
spacecraft  and  special equipment that  the  expedition will  require.  . . . 
“I hope  that  this  brief  and   somewhat simplified explanation will  put 
the  correct price  tag  on  the extra cost of  the lunar mission.  Let  us  all 

100 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19 6 4 

endeavor  t o   put  the  emphasis  where  i t   really  belongs:  on  the  rapid 
growth  of  American  competence  in  all  areas  of  manned  space  flight 
particularly  in  the  area  near  earth  which  is  the  prime  importance  for 
national security.” 
(Text) 
March  6 :   Before  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences, 
NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Technology  Utilization  and  Policy 
Planning  Dr.  George  L.  Simpson,  Jr.,  said  that,  on  the  basis  of  the 
Aerospace  Research  Application  cen ter   ( ARAC) pdot  program,  NASA 
“judged  the  first  year  of  the  Indiana  University  experimental  program 
promising  enough  to   warrant  support  for  a  second  year.”  ARAC re- 
ceives  all  NASA  reports,  sends  pertinent  abstracts  to  subscribing com- 
panies  based  on  their  “interest  profiles.”  This  ‘‘model  of  a  regional 
technology  transfer  program”  was  being  observed  by  other  organiza- 
tions in  other regions.  Another  such program was underway  at Wayne 
(Testimony) 
State Univ.  and  two  others were  beginning. 
March 6-7:  NASA  astronauts made tr ip  to  the bottom  of  Grand Canyon  and 
back up, in field exercise to  train the astronauts a s  “competent observers” 
of  rock  and mineral formations.  Geologists from NASA  Manned Space- 
craft  Center  and  US .   Geological  Survey  served  as   field  instructors. 
( UPI,  Houston Press, 3/7/64) 
March  7 :  TIROS  v n ~  meteorological  satellite,  launched  December  21,  1963, 
was  performing highly  successfully  in   automatic  transmission  of  cloud 
pictures t o  ground stations around the world, NASA  announced.  “Reports 
from  47 ground  stations  around  the  world,  including  five foreign  sta- 
tions, show that with  one exception results have  been  satisfactory.  TV 
signal strength has been  good,  tracking  of  the spacecraft based  on  data 
furnished  daily  by  NASA  has  been  easy  for   the  ground  stations,  and 
picture contrast of  the cloud cover photos generally has  been excellent.” 
(NASA  Release 64-53) 
*  Beckman  Instruments,  Inc.,  of  Fullerton, Calif.,  said  it  received a  contract 
for  more  than  $1 million  from  Grumman  Aircraft  to  produce  a  data 
acquisition  system  to  be  used  in  development  and test  of  LEM  a t  White 
( UPI,  Houston  C h o n . ,  3 / 7 / a )  
Sands Missile Range. 
*  Univ.  of  Miami President  Henry King Stanford announced the university’s 
School  of  Environmental  and Planetary Sciences,  to  open next  autumn, 
would  be  the first of  its kind in the nation.  With Dr. S. Fred Singer  a s  
dean,  the school would  be  composed  of  the Institute of  Marine Sciences 
and three new institutes-planetary 
bioscience,  atmospheric  science, and 
space physics.  The institutes would  offer  courses  leading to  both  mas- 
(Mann, Miami  Herald, 3/8/64) 
ters’ degrees  and doctorates. 
Patent  for  system  of  space communications using  x-rays has been  granted 
to  Henry  R.  Chope,  executive vice  president  of  Industrial  Nucleonics 
Corp.,  Columbus, Ohio.  The  ly2-lb. transmitter employed radioisotope 
( NYTS,  Cleveland Plain Dealer, 3/7/64) 
as  source of  energy. 
March 8 :  A t  meeting  in Geneva,  US .   delegation to  the  U.N.  Committee on 
the  Peaceful  Uses of  Outer Space Legal  Subcommittee submitted  to  the 
Subcommittee drafts of  two  treaties.  One draf t  treaty  dealt with a id  to 
astronauts  in   distress,  calling  for   nations  to  take “all  possible steps  to  
assist  o r   rescue promptly  the personnel  of  spacecraft”  having  difficulty 
or  making emergency landings.  Astronauts making emergency landings 
would be  returned to  their own country “promptly  and safely,” and any 
spaceship  o r   its parts  falling  to  earth would  be  returned  to   country of 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4  

101 
ownership at the country’s request.  The second treaty,  dealing with lia- 
bility  fo r  damage  caused by  spacecraft, would  establish  a “simple and 
expeditious procedure  to  provide  financial protection  against  damage.” 
(NYT,  3/10/64?,  8 )  
March 8 :   Plans fo r  two-acre US. Space Park at New York World’s  F a i r  were 
announced  by  DOD  and  NASA.  The  Space  Pa rk   would  feature  largest 
exhibit of  full-scale USAF  and NASA  rockets and spacecraft ever assembled 
(NASA  Release &54;  DOD  Release 197-64) 
outside Cape Kennedy. 
March 9 :   Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking of  the House 
Committee  on  Science and  Astronautics  voted  (5-3) 
to  not  authorize 
the  $10 million NASA  requested for N 1964 for beginning construction 
(AP, NYT, 3/10/64,26;  SBD, 3/11/64, 
of  electronics research center. 
385) 
*  House passed H.R.  9637, FY 1965 authorization fo r  military procurement 
of  aircraft,  missiles,  and  naval  vessels,  and  fo r  research,  development, 
test,  and  evaluation.  Of 
the  $16,976,620,000 
total  authorization, 
$6,363,320,000  was for R&D.  (NASA  LAR  III/42) 
0  Atlas ICBM  exploded  in  its underground  silo near  Roswell, N.  Mex.,  a s  it 
(UPI ,   NYT, 
was  being  fueled.  USAF  said  there  were  no  casualties. 
3/11/64,14) 
*  USAF  conducted briefing on the technologies associated with A-11  advanced 
experimental aircraft  fo r  officials of  airlines and aviation manufacturing 
companies  involved  in  U S .   supersonic  transport  development. 
(FAA 
Release 64-21  ) 
Aviation  W e e k   and  Space Technology  reported  that  th e   A-11  advanced 
experimental  aircraft  had  “already  flown  long-range  reconnaissance 
missions over communist territory.”  Government officials flatly denied 
the  report,  maintaining  that  the  mach  3.5  aircraft  had  never  been  on 
any mission  outside U S .  territory. 
(A v .  Wk . ,  3/9/64,  16; UPI,  Wash. 
Post, 3/10/64) 
0  Federation  of  Italian-American  Democratic  Organizations  of  New  York 
presented  to   NASA  a  plaque  honoring  the  late  President  Kennedy  and 
Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci.  The plaque, which commemorated 
Vespucci’s  sighting  the  area  now  called  Cape  Kennedy,  was  accepted 
by  NASA  Administrator  Webb  in  ceremonies  a t   NASA  Hq. 
(NASA  An- 
nouncement  6 M 7 .   It  was  subsequently hung  in  the  Hq.  building  of 
Kennedy  Spme  Center,  NASA;  KSC  Release  61-64) 
*  Appointment of  David  S.  Johnson  as Director  of  National Weather  Satel- 
lite  Center, effective April  1, was  announced by  Chief  of  U S .  Weather 
Bureau  Dr.  Robert  M.  White.  ML  Johnson  succeeded  Dr.  S.  Fred 
Singer, resigning  to  become Dean  of  new  School of  Environmental and 
Planetary  Sciences,  Univ.  of  Miami.  Deputy  Director  of  the  Center 
since its formation in  1%2,  Mr.  Johnson had  been  engaged in  research, 
development, and technical management of  meteorological satellites and 
(Commerce Release WB  64-6) 
sounding  rockets since  1958. 
Murch  10:  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  voted 
(10-4)  to   approve  NASA’s report  on  the  elwtronics  research  center. 
(House  Science and  Astronautics  Committee had  approved  the  report 
(NASA  LAB III /43)  
Feb.  24.) 
Soviet draft treaty fo r  aid to astronauts in  distress and fo r  return  of  space- 
cra& was  submitted  to  Legal  Subcommittee of  U.S.  Committee  on  the 
Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer  Space  meeting  in  Geneva.  Draft.  treaty  dif- 

102 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  0 4 
fered  from US. draft by  providing  that  country  of  origin  reserve “ex- 
clusive right”  to search unassisted for the downed spacecraft on the high 
seas.  Soviet  draft  also  specified  two  conditions  for  returning  space- 
craft:  (1) the spacecraft must have been  launched “for  the purposes of 
peaceful exploration  and  use  of  outer  space”  and  ( 2 )   the  purpose  and 
launching  of  the  spacecraft  must  have  been  “officially  announced.” 
(NYT, 3/11/64,5) 
March  IO: Search  for  fragments  from  the moon  would  be  conducted  this 
spring in six western  Iowa counties by NASA  and US. Dept.  of  Agricul- 
ture,  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  scientist  Dr.  John  A.  O’Keefe  an- 
nounced.  Western Iowa was chosen after Dr.  O’Keefe had found  some 
promising”  specimens there on an exploratory t r ip  last summer.  Resi- 
6 6  
dents of  select counties were  requested t o  turn  over  any  unusual  stones 
found  during  spring  plowing  of  loess  soil  areas  to  local  USDA  offices. 
Stones seeming most  likely  to  have nonterrestrial  origins would be  for- 
warded  to  GSFC for  further  scientific examination  and  study.  (GSFC 
Release 6-6-64) 
*  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Lt.  Cdr.  James  A.  Lovell  Jr.,  and  Maj. 
Thomas P.  Stafford practiced  in the Gulf  of  Mexico  developing a  train- 
ing technique for escaping from Gemini spacecraft, both with  and with- 
( MSC Release) 
out flotation collar. 
Dr.  George G.  Manov, Director  of  Exhibits,  NASA  Office of  Public  Affairs, 
died in Washington after a heart attack. 
(NASA  Announcement 64-55) 
0  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  awarded  $1,860,884  NASA  contract  to  C.  H. 
Leave11  Co.  and  Morrison  Knudsen  fo r   construction  of  vibration  test 
laboratory  at NASA Manned  Spacecraft Center, Houston. 
( DOD Release 
207-64) 
*  Patent  grant  to  USN  space surveillance system, which  detects and  catalogs 
silent and “lost” satellites from its stations stretched across the  Southern 
US . ,   was  announced. 
( NYTNS,  Louisville Courier-Journ., 3/10/64) 
March 11  : House Committee on Science and Astronautics, considering NASA’s 
N  1965 authorization  bill,  cut  the  $3.54  billion  manned  space  flight 
request  by  $41.6  million.  “Not  one  single  penny  was  cut  from  the 
Gemini  and  Apollo  programs,”  Rep.  Olin  Teague  pointed  out.  The 
cuts  included  $3.9  million for  advanced planning;  10% of  $224.9  mil- 
lion requested fo r  construction; and 5% of  $304.9 million requested for 
administration  and  operating expenses.  Of  $777 million  requested for 
space  sciences, $742  million  was  approved  by  the  Committee,  cutting 
(L.A.  Times,  Wash .  Post,  3/12/&;  WSJ ,  
NASA’s request  by  4yZ%. 
3/12/64;  Hines, Wash. Eve.  Star,  3/12/&) 
*  USAF  announced  Atlas-Agena  D  launch  from  Pt.  Arguello,  Calif.,  with 
( UPI,  Wash. Po s t ,  3/12/64) 
undisclosed satellite payload. 
0  NASA  announced selection of  Lear Siegler, Inc.,  Electronics Instrumentation 
Div.  fo r   negotiation  of contract  to  install  new  electronic  systems  and 
modify  present  systems  at  East  Test  Area  of  Marshall  Space  Flight 
Center,  Huntsville,  Ala.  Contract  value  was  estimated  to  exceed 
(NASA  Release 64-59) 
$4,,,000,000. 
*  Rep.  J.  Edward  Roush (D.-Ind.)  proposed  on  the  House  floor  that  NASA 
establish a Midwest office,  similar  to  its North  Eastern Office  and West- 
ern  Operations  Office.  “. . . The  benefits  of  such  an  office  t o   NASA 
would be  great  and certainly  it would  be a  step  in  establishing a  work 
ing  relationship  between  NASA  and  the  Midwest. 
I t   would  also  assist 
NASA  in  exploiting the potential of  the Midwest.  . . . 

103 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4 
“I  cannot  stress  enough  the  need  fo r   a  more  equitable  geographic 
distribution  of  our  defense  and  space  activities.  It  is  in  the  national 
interest  that  steps  be   taken  to  spread  these  activities  throughout  the 
country.  My proposal for a NASA  Midwest office would  be a  step in  that 
direction.”  (CR, 3/11/64,4725) 
March  11 : Soviet news  agency Tass said Soviet scientists had concluded  the 
moon’s  surface  was  a  “loose  porous  substance”  and  the  interior  was 
solid  rock.  Conclusion was  said  to  be  based  on  study  of  radio  waves 
(AP, Wash Post, 3/12/64) 
from the moon. 
March 12: Scientific results from the EXPLORER XVIII  satellite-Interplinetary 
Monitoring Platform  (IMP)-W= 
topic of  discussion a t  GSFC  symposium. 
The  NASA satellite was  orbited in  November  1963, with  onboard instru- 
mentation  including two  magnetometers,  three  plasma  probes,  and  five 
sets of  low  and medium energy  particle detectors.  IMP  data revealed  a 
shock  wave  existed 53,600 mi.  above  earth’s  sunlit  surface,  formed  by 
interaction  of  interplanetary  magnetic  field  and  high-speed  constant 
wind  of  particles  from  the  sun.  Between  shock  wave  and  upper  edge 
of  Van Allen belts,  a region ranging in depth from 12,000 to 20,000 mi., 
there is great turbulence; moderately  energetic particles constantly flow 
into the region  and drain away.  (Simons, Wash.  Pos t ,  3/13/64;  NYT ,  
3/13/64;  Goddard News, 3/23/64,1-2) 
*  NASA  announced  establishment  of  new  research  program  with  Lockheed 
Missiles and Space Co.  to develop advanced technology  for large nuclear 
and  chemical  rockets.  The  program  would  continue  certain  research 
begun under Project Rift  (Reactor-In-Flight Test), principally insulation 
development,  cryogenic  testing,  structural  development,  application  of 
Rift  technology  to   Saturn stages, and  documentation  of  pertinent  tech- 
nology  for  future  use.  NASA  had  committed  an  initial  $500,000  letter 
contract to the program;  cost of  seven-month period  was expected to be 
about $1.5 mlllion. 
(NASA  Release 64-57) 
*  House Committee on  Science and Astronautics  approved  $7644  million  for 
advanced  research  and technology in  NASA’s  FY  1965 budget  authoriza- 
tion,  a  cut of  nearly  $30 million from  NASA’s request.  The Committee 
restored  $10 million  for   initiating  construction  of  electronics  research 
center, which  the Advanced Research  and  Tracking  Subcommittee had  
(Wash .  Post, 3/13/64) 
cut. 
NASA and Australian  Ministry  for  Supply announced  agreement  for  estab- 
lishment  of  space tracking  and  data  acquisition  station  in  the Orroral 
Valley near  Canberra,  Australia,  for ground  support of  NASA’s Orbiting 
Observatory  satellites.  The  facility  would  be  a  sister  facility  to   NASA 
stations  near  Fairbanks,  Alaska,  and  Rosman,  N.C.,  which  monitor, 
control,  and  command  the  Orbiting  Observatories,  as   well  a s  receive, 
record  and  forward  to   the  control center  information  transmitted  from 
(NASA  Release 6 6 5 5 )  
the satellite to the ground. 
*  Army  Missile  Command’s  new  R&D  center  a t   Redstone Arsenal  was  dedi- 
cated.  The  facility  was  named  for  Maj.  Gen.  Francis  J.  McMorrow, 
AMC  commander a t  the time  of  h is  death  last year.  (M&R, 3/9/64,9) 
March  13 :  X-15  No.  3  flown  by  NASA pilot  John  B.  McKay  near  Edwards 
AFB  with  a microphone  embedded  in the X-15’s  side to   record  noise  of 
turbulent  a ir   sweeping over  the  surface,  to  help  in  prediction  of  metal 
fatigue.  The X-15  reached maximum  speed of  3,239 mph  (mach 4.91) 
and peak altitude of  76,000 ft.  This was 102nd flight of  the X-15.  (NASA 
X-15  Proj.  Off.; UPI,  Wash. Pos t ,   3/14/641;  UPI,  NYT, 3/14/64,  39) 

104 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
March 13:  Fourth  stage of  four-stage Blue Scout rocket failed to  ignite after 
USAF  launch  from  Cape  Kennedy.  The  booster  was  to  have  sent  a 
USAF  scientific probe  23,000  mi.  into  space  to  study  earth’s  magnetic 
field.  Preliminary estimates indicated  the  33-lb.  payload  reached  alti- 
tude of  several hundred miles before it fell back into the Atlantic Ocean. 
(AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/13/64) 
S-I  booster  for Saturn  I SA-9  was  test-fired fo r  30 sec.  in  its initial firing 
at  NASA  jVarshall  Space  Flight  Center, Huntsville,  Ala.  This  S-I  was 
the  last  Saturn  I booster  built  by  MSFC;  future stages were being  built 
by Chrysler Corp.,  and  would be shipped to Huntsville fo r  static firings. 
Since  the  first  Saturn  I  booster  firing March  28,  1960, MSFC  had  con- 
ducted  more  than  50  firings  on  eight  flight  S I ’ S  and  one  ground-test 
(Marsha l l   Star, 
booster,  all  of  which  were  assembled  at  MSFC. 
3/18/64  1 )  
0  Publication  of Advanced Bearing Technology  (SP-38)  by Lew is  Research 
Center  engineers  Edmond  E.  Bisson  and  William  J.  Anderson,  was 
announced by  NASA.  The ‘book was described as “an important  step in 
NASA’s Technology  Utilization  Program  aimed  at  making  new  space 
(NASA  Release 64- 
technology  available to  all  branches  of  industry.” 
58; LRC  Release 64-22) 
USAF  fired Titan I1  ICBM  from Vandenberg AFB  more  than  5,000 mi.  down 
the Pacific Missile Range  in  10th and last  of  series of  R&D  tests at PMR. 
(AP, Wash. Pust, 3/14/64) 
0  AEC conducted low-yield underground  nuclear explosion a t  its Nevada Test 
Site. 
( UPI, NYT ,  3/14/64,38) 
March 14:  Soviet Air Marshal Madimir Aleksandrovich Sudets, Commander- 
in-Chief of  Soviet antiaircraft defenses, said in Izvestia interview that air- 
craft  of  the  A-11  type  were  “perfectly  attainable  targets”  for  Soviet 
( N Y T ,  3/15/64,21) 
antiaircraft  weapons. 
National  Science Foundation  plans  fo r  initiating  its  Science Development 
Program  this  spring  were  reported.  The  program  would  make  avail- 
able  grants  to  colleges  and  universities  “that  could be  given  a  shot  in 
the  arm that would have appreciable results and get them started toward 
becoming a center of  excellence,” as NSF  Director Dr. Leland J. Haworth 
(Finney, NYT ,  3/15/6d,  39) 
said. 
March 15: Aerospace Corp. confirmed  rumors tha t  Walter C.  Williams, NASA 
Deputy  Associate Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  and  veteran 
of  24  years’  service with  NASA  and  NACA,  had  resigned  to  become vice 
president  of  Aerospace Corp.  and general manager of  its Manned Space 
Systems Div.  Williams’ resignation was effective March 16. 
(Houston 
Chron.,  3/15/64;  Houston  Post,  3/17/64;  NYT ,   3/16/64,  34;  MSC 
Roundup, 4/1/64,11 
March 16:  38th anniversary of  first liquid-fuel rocket flight-that  of  Dr. Rob- 
e r t  H.  Goddard whose  rocket flew  184 ft.  in Zyz  sec.  at  Auburn, Mass., 
in  1926. 
(A&A/19IS-60,21) 
NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  testified  before  Senate Committee on  Aeronautical  and  Space 
Sciences  to  present  FY  1965  funding  requirements  for  the  manned 
space  flight program  and  to  discuss Project  Apollo schedule considera- 
tions in  detail.  Dr. Mueller observed: 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A ERONAU T IC S ,   19 6 4 

105 

“The funds thus far appropriated by the Congress represent about one- 
third of  the cost of  the manned space flight program-up 
to and includ- 
ing  the  first manned  lunar  exploration.  We  now  approach  the period 
of  maximum  effort.  The measure  before you  will bring  us about half 
way to the moon.” 
(Testimony) 
March 16: NASA  announced requesting from industry proposals fo r  feasibility 
and   design  study  of  possible  payloads  for  manned  lunar  exploration 
with  an Apollo Logistic Support System  (ALSS) .  One of  th e  payloads 
was  a  mobile  laboratory  capable  of  supporting  and  transporting  two 
Apollo astronauts for about 14 days;  the other payload concept included 
both a stationary base and a  smaller vehicle.  The ALSS  concept, making 
maximum use of  Apollo-developed systems, provided for Saturn V launch 
vehicle to launch  into earth-moon trajectory a manned Apollo command 
module, service module, and lunar  excursion module modified for  land- 
ing equipment rather than men  on  the.moon  and called the LEM  Truck. 
Following  ALSS  landing,  astronauts  would  land  nearby  in  unmodified 
Apollo  LEM.  MSFC  would  manage  the  nine-month  study. 
(NASA 
Release 64-62) 
0  Boeing  study  of  post-Apollo manned  lunar  bases  for  NASA  was  basis  for 
LESA  concept  (lunar  exploration  system  for  Apollo) .  LESA  provided 
that  a  25,000-lb. module would be  soft-landed on the moon  by  a  Saturn 
V  launch  vehicle.  Three crewmen  would  follow  by  means  of  Saturn 
V/Apollo.  The  module  would  have  3,000  cu.  ft.  volume  and  could 
support three men  for 90 days on the moon.  Boeing’s  lunar Base  was 
expandable  simply  by  adding  more  of  the  basic  shelter  modules,  and 
longer  visits  by  larger  crews  could  be  made  with  larger  lunar  bases. 
(M&R ,  3/16/@,  26-27) 
Article in Pravda described Soviet radar observations of  the planets Venus, 
Mercury, and Mars a s  “an outstanding achievement in Soviet science and 
technology.”  The  value  of  the  astronomical  unit  was  computed,  as  a 
result of  radarastronomy  measurements, to be  equal to 149,599,300 km., 
with an error of  +2,000  km.  Radar  fixes on planets Mercury and Mars 
in June  1962 and February  1963 confirmed their  reliability  i n  determin- 
ing the astronomical unit.  First radio communications via Venus, trans- 
mitted  in  November  1962,  also were  described.  Article w a s   signed by 
M.  Subbotin, Director,  Institute  of  Theoretical Astronomy, and Member 
(Prauda, 3/16/64,  4, ATSS-T  Trans.) 
of  U.S.S.R.  Academy of  Sciences. 
*  FCC  announced Communications Satellite Corp. planned  negotiation of  $8 
million contract with Hughes Aircraft Co.  for  development, fabrication, 
assembly, test,  maintenance,  and  service for  “Early  Bird”  communica- 
tions  satellite-the 
proposed  experimental-operational comsat  system. 
(UPI,  Hous- 
The proposed contract  would  be  subject to  FCC  approval. 
ton Chron.,  3/17\64;  Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/64;  M&R,  3/23/64,8) 
Murch  17:  Radio  command  signal  to  SYNCOM  11  communications  satellite 
pulsed onboard gas jets to increase the satellite’s 6,800-mph speed.  The 
satellite began  drifting  westward  a t   rate  of  about  1.3  degree per  day, 
was expected to reach vicinity of  the International Date Line in  mid-May. 
There  SYNCOM  11  would  serve a s  backup fo r  a  third  Syncom, kheduled 
for synchronous orbit over the  Pacific in May  and transpacific commu- 
(Finney,  NYT,  3 / 1 9 / a ,  
nications  experiments  during  the  summer. 
14) 
766-598-8 

106 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 0 4 
March 17: Launch of  NASA’s -8 
ionosphere explorer satellite (“Topsi”)  was 
postponed when  malfunction  was  discovered  in  Scout  vehicle’s  wiring 
system  during  prelaunch  checkout  at  Pt.  Arguello.  The  Scout  was 
returned  to  manufacturer  Ling-Temco-Vought  in  Dallas  for  repair. 
“Topsi”  was  to  have  continued  NASA’s program  to  gather  information 
on   structure  of  ithe  upper  ionosphere  pioneered  by  three  satellites- 
EXPLORER VIII,  ARIEL  I,  and  ALOUETTE  I-and 
a  number  of  sounding 
(NASA  Release 69-49;  Au .   Wk., 3/23/64, 23) 
rocket  flights. 
*  House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved H.R.  10456, NASA’s 
FY  1965 authorization  bill, for $5,193,810,500, which was $110 million 
less  than  the  $5.304 billion  NASA  had  requested.  Of  this  amount, 
$4,327,950,000 was  for  R&D;  $248,335,000 was  f o r   CofF;  and  $617,- 
525,500 was  for  Administrative  Operations. 
(H.R.  10456;  NASA  LAR 
I I I /48   and I I I /49 )  
*  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science 
and Applications, reviewed  1963 highlights  in  testimony before  Senate 
Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: 
“Although  direct  measurements  of  the   physical  properties  of  the 
Moon await successful lunar flights, our Earth-based work has continued 
with  some exciting results.  Lowell Observatory  scientists deteoted evi- 
dence of  gas escaping from three different spots in the area of  the lunar 
crater  Aristarchus.  This  obmva t ion   suggests that  the  Moon  may  be 
fa r  from inert, and  it has an  important bearing on how we  may conduct 
our  lunar  investigation.  For  example,  if  the  Moon  is  seismically  ac- 
tive,  the  seismograph may  play  an  important  role  in  the   investigation 
o f the luna r su r face .   . . . 
‘“Also, much  effort  was  applied  to  clarifying  the  data  from  Earth- 
based  or balloon  observations of  Mars.  One  important  subject  of  con- 
troversy  developed.  Whereas  it  had  been  believed previously  that  the 
pressure at the surface of  Mars is around 85 millibars, where 1000 milli- 
bars is roughly one atmosphere  of  pressure, it  is now  believed by many 
that  the  surface pressure on Mars may  be a s  low  a s  10 o r   11 millibars. 
This has serious  implications with regard to  landing a  capsule on Mars. 
If  the lower pressure is correct then retrorockets have to be used, whereas 
with  the higher  pressure  atmospheric drag could be used  t o  slow down 
the incoming capsule. 
“Significant  new  knowledge  on  the  fundamental  physical  nature  of 
the  universe  may  have  to  await  the  launching  of  the  first  OAO. 
In 
the meantime,  sounding rocket experiments continue to provide  data  in 
ultraviolet and radio astronomy.  . . . 
“Although the  formal development of  Scout had been  completed, ad- 
ditional  work  was  required  to  improve  its  reliability.  The  primary 
objective of  the  December 1963 Scout firing was  to  determine the  effi- 
cacy  of  the measures  taken  to  correct  observed deficiencies.  The  vir- 
tually  perfect  vehicle performance  during this  firing  encourages one to 
look  for  a high  success rate  in  future Scout firings.  . . . 
“Performance  of  all  Atlas-boosted  launch  vehicles  would  be  consid- 
erably  improved  by  introducing  a  mixture  of  fluorine  and  oxygen 
(FLOX) a s   the   oxidizer.  Careful  study  shows  this  can  be  done  with 
admixtures  of  up  to  30%  fluorine without major  redesign  of  the  pro- 
pulsion  system.  We  are,  therefore,  planning  to  FLOX 
the  Atlas. 
A  primary  objective of  this  program  is  to  provide  for  additional  pay- 
load  in the Surveyor investigations.  . . .’, 
(Testimony) 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONATJl’ICS,  1 9 6 4 

107 
March  17:  Sixth  anniversary  of  VANGUARD  I  satellite,  launched  into  orbit 
Mar.  17,  1958.  The satellite’s stability  of  orbit had provided  geodetic 
observations, including the  determination that the ea&  is slightly pear- 
shaped.  VANGUARD I was the only satellite orbited before  1959 tha t  was 
(A&A / I 9 1 5 - 6 0 )  
still transmitting. 
0  Dr.  Eugene  Fubini,  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  (Deputy  Director, 
DDR&E),  told  Military  Operations  Subcommittee of  the  House  Govern- 
ment Operations Committee that DOD  was “very  close to  an agreement” 
with the  Communications Satellite Corp.  on  working  out  a  system  for 
military  satellite  communications.  Although  decision  had  not  been 
reached  as  to  whether  DOD  would  develop  its  own  comsat  system  or 
lease  channels  from  ComSatCorp satellites,  Fubini  said  leasing  chan- 
nels  “has  proved  to  be  more  feasible  than  our  fondest  hopes.”  He 
emphasized  that  there  would  be  “no  compromise  on  security”  if  the 
(Finney,  NYT,  3/18/64,  15;  A v .  
commercial  system  were  chosen. 
Wk., 3/23/64,19) 
March  18:  COSMOS  XXVI  scientific earth  satellite  was  launched  into  orbit. 
Soviet  news  agency  Tass  said  the  satellite’s  initial  orbital  parameters 
were:  apogee, 403 km.  (250 mi.)  ; perigee,  271 km.  (168 mi.) ; period, 
91  min.;  angle  of  inclination  to  the  equatorial  plane,  49”.  Onboard 
scientific equipment, radio  system, and  instrumentation were  said  to  be 
(Tass,  Krasnaya  Zvezda ,   3/19/64,  1,  ATSS-T 
functioning  normally. 
Trans.) 
First  in   series  of  16  Judi-Dart  meteorological  sounding  rockets  was 
launched by  Pakistan  Space and  Upper Atmosphere Research  Commit- 
tee  ( SUPARCO)  under  cooperative agreement with NASA,  from Pakistan’s 
Sonmiani  Range near  Karachi.  This  was  first  launching  planned  a s  a 
direct contribution to the International  Indian Ocean Expedition  ( I IO E )  , 
a multinational  effort by scientific groups to  obtain  and correlate  infor- 
mation  on  the  Indian Ocean area’s oceanic and  atmospheric conditions. 
The NASA-SUPARCO  project was designed to gather data  on  the dynamics 
of  air circulation  at  100,000 to  200,000 ft.  above West  Pakistan’s coast 
during the coming year.  Pakistan purchased the Judi-Dart rockets and  
chaff  payloads  from  the  U.S.  fo r   assembly and  launch  from  Sonmiani 
Range;  NASA  loaned to Pakistan for one year the radar needed for track- 
ing  the  chaff-thousands  of  tiny  metallic threads  released  at peak  alti- 
tude-and  was  training  Pakistani  personnel in  rada r  equipment opera- 
tion.  ( NASA  Release &64;  Wallops Release 6 6 2 8 )  
NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  from  Ft.  Churchill,  Canada, 
with  Rice  Univ.  instrumented  payload  reached  9 4m i .   altitude  in   suc- 
cessful  experiment  to  measure  light  intensities  and  particle  fluxes. 
Rocket  performed  excellently  and  instrumentation-two  photometers, 
two  scintillators,  three  Geiger  counters, and  two magnetotneters-func- 
tioned  properly  except  for  one  scintillator,  which  failed  at  nose  cone 
ejection.  The  Sammy  I1  instrument  package  was  designed and  devel- 
(NASA  Rpt. 
oped  by  Rice University’s Satellite Techniques Laboratory. 
SRL) 
Rep.  Olin  Teague  (D.-Tex.),  chairman  of  Subcommittee on  NASA  Over- 
sight of  the  House Committee on Science and Astronautics, held special 
hearings  “to  emphasize our  interest  in seeing that  there  is progress”  in 
advanced  propulsion  systems.  A t   opening  session,  representatives 
of  four  industrial  firms  recommended  development  of  nuclear  rocket 

108 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTIC%,  1 9 6 4  

Officials  testifying  were  George 
am C.  House, Aerojet-General; Dr. 
Woodrow E.  Johnson, Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory;  and Dr. 
Theodore  B.  Taylor,  General Dynamics. 
(SBD, 3/19/64,  433;  M&R, 
3/23/@,  1 2 )  
March 18: House passed and  sent to  the Senate $1.6 billion military construc- 
tion  authorization  bill  for  FY  1%5  (H.R.  10300).  Discussing the bill 
on the floor, Rep.  William H.  Bates  @.-Mass.)  observed: 
66  This  year,  research,  development, testing,  and  engineering  for  our 
Federal Government projects will approximate $15 billion.  This repre- 
sents about  17 percent  of  our  entire Federal  budget  and  a  much  larger 
percent of  those funds over which we  actually have control. 
“In  the  various  military  services in  fiscal  year  1%5, we   will  spend 
approximately  $7.6  billion  on  research,  development,  testing  and 
engineering.  Izi  the bill before you  today about $90  million is set aside 
fo r  research and development facilities.  . . .”  (NASA  LAR  III/50;  CR, 
3/18/64,5356) 
*  Dr.  Raymond L.  Bisplinghoff, NASA  Associate Administrator  for Advan  ed 
Research  and  Technology,  testified  before  Senate Committee  on  Aelo- 
nautical  and   Space Sciences.  He mentioned  that  NASA’s Advanced Re- 
search and  Technology program encompassed more than  2,000  separate 
tasks  and  projects,  and  highlighted  a  few   areas  for  illustration. 
“. . . Considerable  effort  is  concentrated  on  commercial  supersonic 
transports,  a subject of  NASA  research for many  years.  Various aircraft 
configurations embodying widely differing design  features have resulted 
from  this  research.  All  of  these  designs  appear  promising,  particu- 
larly with regard to  supersonic performance.  In  September 1963, at the 
Langley  Research  Center, the  results of  preliminary  design studies and 
of  related  NASA  in-house research programs  were  presented  to  all  inter- 
ested  government agencies and  major  aircraft  manufacturers.  In   gen- 
eral,  it  was  concluded  that  a  supersonic  transport  for  airline  use is 
technically feasibly.  I t  was  stressed,  however,  that  additional  research 
will  be  required  in  order  to  raise  the  level  of  technology  to  the  point 
where  a  supersonic  transport  can  be  designed  which  is  economically 
attractive to the airlines.  . . .” 
(Testimony) 
*  In testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, 
Director  of  NASA  Office  of  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition Edmond  C. 
Buckley said : 
“We  assure  a  thorough  coordination  between  NASA  and  DOD in  the 
planning,  implementation, and  use  of  ground  instrumentation  facilities 
through several mechanisms and procedures.  . . . 
“I  feel  that  the  planning  within  NASA  and  the  cooperation  between 
NASA  and DOD is such that both NASA  and DOD a re  achieving an optimum 
utilization of  the existing ground  facilities and of  the currently planned 
augmentations  to  these  facilities.  I  can  assure  you  that  this  type  of 
coordination w i l l  continue. 
“I would  like to  emphasize one point, however.  The planning for the 
support  of  a  mission  involves  so  many  trade-offs and  compromises in 
launch vehicles, trajectories, weight, complexity, and cost that the funda- 
mental  responsibility  must  lie  in  the  hands  of  the   agency  responsible 
fo r  the program.  This is not only t rue  in the case of  NASA  projects, but 
it is equally true that DOD has to have full responsibility fo r  the planning 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

109 

and  trade-offs on  such  projects  a s  Discoverer,  Dyna-Soar,  and  the up- 
coming Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory.  These projects  a re  so complex 
and the things we  are trying to  do are so new  that divided responsibility 
would most seriously jeopardize the possibility of mission SUCC~SUFI. . . .” 
(Testimony) 
March  18: Dr.  Eugene G.  Fubini,  Assistant Secretary  of  Defense  (Deputy 
Director,  DDR&E),  disclosed  in  testimony  before  €Iouse  Committee  on 
Government Operations, Subcommittee on Military Operations, that DOD 
planned to  use  one of  the  Syncom communications satellites for  experi- 
mental communications, probably between Hawaii  and  the Philippines. 
(Finney, NYT,  3/19/6d,14) 
*  Dr. William A.  Mrazek, Director of MSFC Propulsion and Vehicle Engineer- 
ing Laboratory  since  1956,  was  appointed  chief  engineer  of  Saturn 
(Marshall Star, 
launch  vehicle project  in  MSFC  Industrial Operations. 
3/18/64,  1)  
Eleanor Pressly, head  of  Vehicle Section, Spacecraft Integration, Sounding 
Rocket Div.  a t  NASA  Goddard Space Flight Center and winner of  a 1963 
Federal Women’s Award, was guest speaker at Mrs. Lyndon B.  Johnson’s 
(Wa sh .  Post,  3 / 1 7 / a )  
White House  luncheon for “women-doers.” 
Dr.  Kurt H.  Debus,  Director  of  John  F.  Kennedy  Space  Center,  NASA, 
announced  US. Bureau  of  Sport  Fisheries  and Wildlife would  admin- 
ister  for  NASA  the   entire  buffer  zone  Merritt  Island  lowlands,  nearly 
40,000 acres. 
( KSC Release 34-64) 
Dr.  Norbert  Wiener,  69,  died  in  Stockholm. 
Considered  the  “father  of 
automation” and one of  the world’s ranking mathematicians, Dr. Wiener 
(AP ,  NYT,  3/19/64,1) 
was prof.  of  math  at MIT   from  1932 to  1960. 
In   the  U S .   fo r   speaking  tour,  Sir  Bernard  Lovell,  Director  of  Britain’s 
Jodrell  Bank  Experimental Station,  told  the Boston Globe:  “. . . I am 
terribly  impressed  by  the  dynamic effort  this  country  is making  to  be 
first  in  space.  It  appears  to  me  the  signs  a r e  extremely favorable  so 
fa r   a s   the  West  is  concerned  in  the  stake  it  ha s   in   America’s  space 
program.  . . . 
If  you’re  going 
‘This is  the  greatest  challenge man  has ever faced. 
insecond.  . . .” 
to be  the  leading  power  in  the  world,  you  simply can’t  afford  to  come 
Sir Bernard said press reports quoting him a s  saying the U.S.S.R.  had 
given up going to the moon were “completely erroneous. 
“I have every  reason  to  believe the Russians a r e  trying  to  get to th e  
moon every bit  as fast  as the Americans are.” 
(Leland, Boston Globe, 
3/19/64) 
March  19:  Attempt  to  orbit  NASA  Explorer  Beacon  satellite  (54-66) failed 
when  third stage of  Delta launch vehicle burned fo r  only 22 sec. instead 
of  normal  40.  This was  only the second Delta failure and  followed 22 
consecutive  successes.  The 120-lb. satellite  was  designed  to  transmit 
data  on   the ionosphere  directly  t o   worldwide network  of  ground  sta- 
tions. 
I n   addition  to  making  major  ionosphere  studies,  the  satellite 
was  to  have served as test  bed  fo r  two geodesic experiments-reflection 
of  a  laser beam directed from Wallops Island, Va.,  and transmission  on 
two  frequencies permitting  ground  stations to  study Doppler method of 
satellite  tracking  and  influence  of  ionosphere  on  Doppler  tracking. 
(UPI,  W a h .  Post, 3/20/64;  A v .  Wk., 2/23/64  25; NASA Release 64-60) 

110 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
Murch 19: NASA  Nike-Apache sounding rocket with  Rice Univ.  payload was 
launched  from  Ft.  Churchill,  Canada,  to  94-mi.  altitude.  Two  pho- 
tometers, two scintillators, three Geiger counters, and two magnetometers 
made  coordinated  measurements of  light  intensity  and  particle  fluxes. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  Two  U.S.  commercial  airline  pilots  reported  seeing  unidentified  object 
explode in a “spectacular flash” as it entered earth‘s  atmosphere over the 
Atlantic  Ocean,  about  200  mi.  west  of  Land’s  End,  England.  Press 
sources reported  speculation that explosion was part  of  jettisoned rocket 
(UPI,  NYT, 
used  the previous day in  Soviet launch of  Cosmos satellite. 
3/20/64,2) 
*  Report  by  Committee on  Science and Public Policy  of  the National Acad- 
emy  of  Sciences, Federal  Support of  Basic  Research  in  Institutions  of 
Higher Learning, was  issued by  NAS.  Prepared  in  response to  requests 
from American Society of  Biological Chemists and other  scientific socie- 
ties,  the  report  attributed  success of  Federal  scientific support program 
“in  no  small  measure  to   enlightened’policies  of  several  federal  agen- 
cies  . . . specifically  to  the  current  emphasis  on  support  by  research 
projects grants and by fixed-price research contracts.  . . . 
The record  shows a continuous regard fo r  the government’s responsi- 
r.c 
bility  for the money entrusted to it by  the people.  And  the  overwhelm- 
ing  majority  of  the  scientific  community  has throughout  the  record 
respected that responsibility.  . : .” 
(NAS-NRC  Release) 
AFCRL scientist Sheldon B.  Herskovitz had  created  a  theoretical model and 
operation of  an all-plasma radar system.  The hypothetical radar system 
was  based  on  some  devices already  developed,  some  representing  tech- 
niques  presently  available but  not  applied,  and  some  that  simply  were 
(OAR  Release 3-64-3) 
theoretically promising. 
*  DF. Robert L.  Barre, former NASA  Scientist for Social, Economic, and Polit- 
ical Studies, said  in  address before American Orthopsychiatric Associa- 
tion  in Chicago: “Space activities may be viewed either as a cause or  as 
a consequence of  social and cultural change.  From either point of  view, 
freedom  to  engage  in  scientific  activity  entails  significant  social 
responsibility.  . . . 
It  is  ironic  that  a  consequence of  the  extension  of  definite verifia- 
< L  
ble  knowledge,  the  primary  product  of  science,  should  be  to  extend 
confusion.  To  increase  knowledge,  not  only  adds  knowledge where  it 
did not previously exist, but corrects previously held mistaken knowledge 
In   so  doing,  it  alters  the  conditions  of  existence;  hence 
and  belief. 
man’s  relationship,  not  only  to  his  physical  environment, but  to   other 
men. 
“Scientists  produce  the  conditions  from  which  these  alterations  de- 
velop.  The  inescapable  responsibility  of  scientists  is  to  continuously 
inform society  of  the knowledge they  have,  o r  are trying  to  create,  and 
to explain its scientific significance. 
“The  institutional  locus and the  social role  of  the  scientist has tradi- 
tionally  fulfilled  this .responsibility.  The  scientist in  the  past  was,  not 
only  a  creator of  knowledge, but an integrator, a teacher-a 
transmitter 
of  knowledge.  New  knowledge could be  incorporated in its appropriate 
context and transmitted more rapidly than it could be produced.  Today 
we have altered these arrangements.  . . . 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 

111 

“While slowing down the system f o r  the transmittal  of  new knowledge 
and  reducing  the  proportion  of  the  educated p p u l a c e  who  have access 
to the existing system, we  a re  simultaneously speeding up the production 
of  new  knowledge.  While  ignoring  the  processes  of  evaluation,  i n t s  
gration,  interpretation,  and  assimilation  of  new  knowledge,  we   have 
fixedly  accelerated  the  processes  of  specialized  acquisition  of  new 
knowledge. 
“We  have  upset  the  equilibrium  between  invention  and  innovation. 
I submit that the social responsibility of  the scientist is obvious: to assist 
society restore the balance.” 
(Text) 
March 20:  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, was  presented 
the  Robert  H.  Goddard Memorial Trophy  for  1 9 a ,  a t  National  Space 
Club’s  annual Goddard Memorial Dinner  in Washington.  Other  Space 
Club awards:  Dr.  Harold A.  Rosen  and  Donald  D.  Williams of  Hughes 
Aircraft  Co.  received  the  astronautics engineer award fo r  contributions 
to  conception and  development  of  Syncom  satellite.  Tulane  Univ.  re- 
ceived a $1,500 grant to further advanced education in  the field of  science 
and   astronautics;  McDonneU  Aircraft  Corp.  and  General  Dynamics/ 
Astronautics received Nelson P.  Jackson Aerospace Award  for perform- 
ance on Mercury  spacecraft  and  Atlas  booster  of  Astronaut  L.  Gordon 
Cooper’s 22-orbit flight;  editors and staff  of  Fortune magazine  received 
the Space Club‘s  press  award  f o r  series of  articles ‘‘which  provided pro- 
vocative  insights  into  the  motivations and  accomplishments of  the  na- 
tion’s  space-exploration programs”;  Robert P. Walker, mathematics and 
physics student at Univ.  of  Maryland, received $1,500 Goddard Scholar- 
ship;  and  Robert  Cargill  Hall,  historian  of  Lockheed  Missiles  and 
Space  Co.,  received  $200  Goddard  Historical  Essay  award  fo r   second 
straight year.  ( NSC Release) 
Dr. Edward C.  Welsh, NASC  Executive Secretary, delivered keynote address 
at  the  Robert  H.  Goddard  Memorial  Dinner.  He  compared  U.S.  and 
Soviet space accomplishments : 
“1. A s   regards  that  key  feature  of  booster  power,  the  Soviets  a r e  
ahead  on  an  operational  basis,  although  we  a re   moving  u p   rapidly, 
having  attained  the  current  weight-lifting record  on  a  test  shot  by  the 
Saturn  I. 
“2.  We  have  placed  almost  four  times  as many  payloads  into  earth 
orbit,  while  they  continue  each  year  to  increase  their  absolute lead  in 
total weight of  net payloads orbited. 
“3.  Our numerical progress in orbiting  payloads is impressive.  Last 
year  alone, the U.S.  put  more  payloads into earth  orbit than  the USSR 
has since Sputnik I in  1957. 
“4.  The  increasing  reliability  of  our  launchings  is  also  impressive. 
three years, we  placed successfully in to  earth orbit 82% 
During the 
of  all the payloads which we  attempted to put there.  The Soviet record, 
while not identical, is comparable. 
“5.  The Soviet heavy  Vostok  class  of  vehicle has  accumulated some 
1600 orbits,  a s  compared with  37 for  our  smaller Mercury.  . . . 
“6.  The Soviets have devoted more of  their  attention  to far-out space 
than  we have.  As a percentage of  total  space launching  attempts,  they 
have  devoted  five times  as much  effort  to  escape-missions to  the  moon 
and  planets  as we  have.  The  opposite is t rue  a s   to  near-earth  orbits, 
in  which the U S .  emphasis has been much greater  than  theirs. 

I12 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS,  1964 

7.  Both  countries have made impressive strides in accumulating sci- 
6 6  
entific data  about space.  We may  even  be  ahead  in  this  regard,  but  it 
is not safe to  assume so. 
‘‘8-  The US. is clearly ahead  in world-wide sharing of  space research 
in   cooperative  programs,  and  in  direct  application  of  space  technology 
to   practical  use  in  communications,  weather  reporting,  geodesy,  and 
navigation. 
“In  summary,  we  have made enormous  gains in  the past  few years  in  
the race with our able and aggressive competitor. 
. . . I want  to emphasize that the Soviets have a  strong orderly pro- 
6 1  
gram,  with  every  indication  that  it  is continuing  vigorously, apparently 
unaffected  by  adverse  economic  factors  in  their  country.  Wishful 
thinking  to   the  contrary,  w e   dare  not  slow  down  unless w e   a re  willing 
t o  pay  the  terrific price  of  second  place.  . . .” 
(Text) 
March 20: General B.  A.  Schriever  ( USAF) addressed an Air Force Association 
squadron  in  New  York  City  on  the  subject  of  “The  Air  Force  in  the 
Years Ahead” : 
“A  major  consideration  in  long-range  planning  today  is  the  rapid 
pace  of  technical progress.  Since  the  early  days  of  World War  I1 we 
have  been  caught  up  in  a  massive technological explosion.  One  of  the  
most  important military products  of  this explosion is the intercontinental 
ballistic  missile,  which  today  forms  an  increasingly  important  part  of 
our nation’s strategic forces.  . . . 
“In   addition  to  its  direct  contribution  to   our  national  security  the 
Air  Force  ICBM  development  program  has  created  much  of  the  tech- 
nology,  hardware  and  facilities  that  have  been  utilized  in   the  nation’s 
space  program.  Most  of  the  nation’s  space  shots  to  date  have  been 
launched  by military boosters from  Air  Force facilities.  The Titan I11 
Standard Launch Vehicle, which  is currently  under  development  by  the 
Air Force Systems Command, is based on the technology and experience 
gained  in ICBM development. 
“The  Air  Force Manned Orbiting Laboratory  (MOL )   program  is the 
logical next  step in military  space  development.  The  MOL   is  required 
t o  help  us  answer  basic  questions  about  man’s  role  in  space,  such  as  
the  length  of  a  time  a  man  can  safely  remain  in  orbit,  his  ability  to 
useful  military  function  there.  . . .”  (Text,  AFSC  Release  43-R-32) 
make  full  use  of  his  faculties  in  space,  and  his  ability  to  perform  a 
0  Dr.  John  Peter  Minton  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute  confirmed  tha t  
infrared  laser  rays  had  killed  certain malignant  tumors  in   mice.  Dr. 
Minton  had  conducted  several  months  of  experiments  in  conjunction 
with  engineers  of  the  U S .   Army  Missile  Command  engaged  in  laser 
(DOD  Release 237-64) 
research. 
0  U.S.  and  Japanese  meteorologists ended  week-long  conference  in  Miami 
where  they  formulated  informal  recommendations  for  increased  inter- 
national  cooperation  in  problems  of  hurricanes  and  typhoons.  Satel- 
lites  and  rockets  were  expected  t o   play  key  role  in  the  program,  ad- 
ministered  by  Japanese  Research  Council  and  the  National  Science 
(M&R ,   3/23/@,  8 )  
Foundation. 
March 21 : In  experiment  to test reactions of astronauts under environmental 
conditions  they  would  encounter  outside  their  spacecraft,  three  out  of 
four  subjects  suffered the  bends.  Capt.  Eugene  A.  Degner,  ex er t   in 
body  metabolism  conducting  tests  planned  on  50  volunteers a t  brooks 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

113 

ne   [least  severe]  bends had 
chamber  pressure  dropped 
below that of  30,000 feet. 
“I was  surprised a t  the results, and a little worried  because the  three 
men  complained of  the  bends  and m$d  discomforts early  in  the experi- 
ment period. 
“I  was  afraid  they  would  keep  g&ng  worse,  but  th e   trouble  was 
intermittent  and not  severe enough to  abort the  [lo-hour]  test.” 
(UPI, 
Houston Chron., 3/21/646) 
March 22:  New  laser  rada r   system  using  three  lasers  operating  in   tandem 
was  under  development  i n   Sperry Rand  Corp.  Electro-optics  labora- 
tories,  according  to  Spew  announcement.  Using  the  three  lasers  in 
tandem  to  build  up  to peak  power,  the  device would  be   the  first  to  in- 
( N . Y .  Her. 
corporate  the  full  potential  of  laser  radar,  Sperry  said. 
Tr ib . ,  3/22/64) 
March 23:  USAF  launched  Titan  I1  on  successful test  flight from  Cape Ken- 
nedy.  The  nose cone,  carrying  malfunction  detection instrumentation 
to  be used  in  Project  Gemini manned space flights,  impacted 5,000 mi. 
down the Atlantic Missile Range.  (AP, NYT ,  3/24/64;  M&R ,   3/30/641, 
16 )  
Two NASA  Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched from Ft. Churchill, 
Canada, and returned  good data.  The  first  attained 95-mi. altitude,  its 
instrumented payload measuring light intensity and particle fluxes.  Rice 
Univ.  payload  included  two  photometers, one  scintillator,  three  Geiger 
counters, one Geiger tube,  and two magnetometers.  The  second rocket 
reached  117-mi. altitude  with  instrumented payload  to  obtain  data  on 
charged particles  responsible for the visual aurora  and  on  those respon- 
( M S A  Rpts. SRL)  
sible for auroral absorption. 
0  NASA  Electronics Research  Center  Site Evaluation Committee was  formal- 
ized by  Deputy Administrator  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden.  First  task  of  the 
six-man committee  would  be  to  draft  proposed  plan  for  criteria  and 
procedures to  be used  in  the site evaluation;  after doing  this, the  Com- 
mittee  would  begin  evaluating  proposed  sites  in  the   Greater  Boston 
area.  Col.  Robert  P.  Young,  NASA  Executive  Officer,  was  appointed 
(NASA  Release 6 M 7 ;  NASA Circular 311) 
Chairman of  the Committee. 
European  Space  Research  Organization  (ESRO)   announced  in  Pa r i s   its 
plans for satellite development program.  First two ESRO satellites would 
be launched into orbit from the US .  with Scout boosters;  launch vehicles 
fo r   later  satellites  would  be  supplied  by  member  nations.  ESRO  set 
( N Y T ,  3/25/64,  31;  A h A ,  
budget  of  $300  million  for  eight  years. 
5/&,  9 )  
Michael  L.  Garbacz  was  appointed  Program  Manager,  Meteorological 
Flight  Projects,  in  NASA  Hq.  Office  of  Space Science and  Applications. 
Garbacz had served a s  Acting Program Manager since Sept. 1963.  (NASA 
Announcement 64-59) 
0  By midnight  deadline, 197 communications carriers had  filed applications 
with  FCC  to  invest  in  Communications  Satellite  Corp.  (AP, NYT ,  
3/25/64,53) 
*  Ekonomic  analysis  of  short-haul transport  by  Systems Analysis  and  Re- 
search  Corp.  (SABC)   was  presented  to  FAA.  SARC  concluded  modern 
20-passenger, twin-engine aircraft would provide U.S.  airlines  the most 
favorable  operating  results  f o r   short-haul  requirements.  Study  was  

114 

A S T R O N A U T I O S   AND   AERONAUT IO S ,   1 9 6 4 

pa r t  of  FAA’s program  to promote development  of  economic,  short-haul 
transport t o  replace the DC-3. 
(FAA   Release 64-25) 
March 24: Mrs. Lyndon  B.  Johnson  visited NASA  Marshall  Space Flight Cen- 
ter,  where  she  toured  the  facilities,  witnessed  a  Saturn  I  and  an  F-1 
static firing,  presented  awards  to   MSFC  employees,  and was  honored  at 
luncheon  and tea with her  Alabama  relatives. 
At  awards ceremony,  Mrs.  Johnson  presented  30-year  service pin  to 
Michael  J.  Rabatin,  program  coordination  officer,  and  a 20-year  pin  to  
Mrs.  Mary  Derryberry,  engineering  designer.  She   presented  five  in- 
vention  awards:  $300  t o   Robert  J.  Carmody  for   invention  of  highly 
flexible  cellular  structure;  $400 to  Klaus  Juergensen  for   invention  of 
bilateral energy transfer system; WOO  to Lester Katz and Jack  J. Nichols 
for farce measuring  instrument;  and $300 to  Benjamin M.  Saunders for 
self-latching handle.  Group achievement award  of  $500 went to  Walter 
F.  Gillespie and Alonza J. Davis for contributions to  recoverable motion 
picture camera system developed for the Saturn I SA-5,  SA-6, and SA-7 
launch vehicles.  Mrs. Johnson also presented a $250 Sustained Superior 
Performance award to  Mrs.  Hazel T.  Atchley,  contracts assistant. 
I n   letter  to  MSFC  Director  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  the  First  Lady 
described  her  visit  a s  “stimulating, exhilarating,  informative.  . . . The 
(Marshal2 Star, 
significance  of  the  Saturn  has   come  home  to   me.” 
3/25/64,  1, 4 ;  Robertson,  NYT ,   3/25/64;  Marshall  S ta r ,   4/1/64,  1 )  
*  NASA  launched NikeApache sounding  rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada,  to 
111-mi. altitude, but telemetry transmitter failed.  Five charged-particle 
detectors, a n  aspect magnetometer,  and an  accelerometer were included 
in  the  instrumentation,  which  was  to   have  obtained  data  on  charged 
particles responsible for  visual aurora and those  responsible fo r  auroral 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
absorption. 
*  USAF  launched  Thor-Agena  booster  combination  from  Pt.  Arguello  with 
( UPI,  Wash. Post, 3/25/64) 
unidentified payload. 
USAF  conducted  second  flight  test  of  Asset  re-entry  vehicle  a t   AMR.  The 
second  stage  Qf the  Thor-Delta  launch  vehicle  failed  t o   ignite,  so  the 
1,100-lb. research  vehicle fell back  into the Atlantic  only  500  mi.  away 
from the  launch  site.  USAF  said the Asset  payload  had  reached  33 mi. 
altitude  and  was  traveling  a t   10,000 mph  a t   the  time  of  stage  sepera- 
tion, but  i t  was supposed to  have reached  12,000 mph at separation time. 
(AP, Houston Ckron., 3/24/64;  UPI,  Wash .  Pos t ,  3/25/64) 
Chief  engineer  of  Air  Transport Association’s  Supersonic  Advisory  Com- 
mittee, John  T.  Dyment,  estimated  it would  cost half-again a s  much  as  
the  $1 billion  estimated  by   the  Government t o  develop  the U.S.  super- 
sonic transport  and test  it adequately.  He  criticized plans to take  steps 
toward  manufacturing  before  prototype  testing  was  completed : “We 
must  have  supersonic  transports  built  and  flying  for  a  year  o r   so  to 
gain the experience and the reliability before we even start a  production 
line.  This is essential.  . . .” Detailed  findings of  the  committee’s  two-  
day meeting  in New York would be reported  to  IATA Technical Commit- 
tee May 5. 
(Clark, NYT ,  3/25/6d,  65) 
Export  of  U.S.  aerospace  products  in  1963 totaled $1.3 billion,  according 
t o  ‘Aerospace  Industries  Association  (AIA)  .  (AP,  Wash.  Eve. Star, 
3/24/64) 

115 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A ERONAU T IC S ,   1964  
March  25:   First  TV transmission  from  Japan  to  
U S .   was made,  using 
NASA’s RELAY  11  communications satellite.  Q 
of  the  live  pictures 
a s   well  a s   the  sound  was  excellent.  I n   the  telecast  Prime  Minister 
Hayato  Ikeda  offered his  country’s  apologies  directly  to   the  U.S. for 
the “unfortunate coincidence” of the stabbing of  U S .  Ambassador Edwin 
Reischauer by a  deranged Japanese youth the previous day.  The eight- 
minute  telecast was  seen  simultaneously on  the three national  networks. 
(NASA Release 64-63;  UPI,  NYT,  3/26/64,3;  AP, Wmh. Post, 3/26/64?) 
NASA  launched  N i bA p a c h e   from  Ft.  Churchill, Canada,  to  120-mi. alti- 
tude,  its  instrumented payload  studying particle  intensities  and  energy 
distribution of  electrons with energies greater than 50 kev.  Instrumenta- 
tion  performance was good, but  there was  some question  as to  validity 
of  data  from  the  plastic  scintillator  and  further  study  of  the  data  wa s  
planned. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
House of  Representatives v o a  (283-73)  to approve NASA  FY 1965 budget 
It defeated the only two amendments 
authorization  of  $5,193,810,500. 
offered:  one proposed by  Rep.  Donald Rumsfeld  (R.-Ill.) 
to  delete the 
$14  million  fo r   the  new  Electronics  Research  Center  in  the  Boston 
a rea ;  and one proposed by Rep.  Henry S. Reuss  (D.-Wis.) 
to  eliminate 
the  $24.7  million  for  aeronautic  R&D  on  supersonic  transport  aircraft. 
(CR, 3/25/64,6071-6123) 
Rep.  Melvin Laird  (R.-Wis.)  , speaking in  favor of  the amendment to elim- 
inate SST funds from the NASA  FY  1965 authorization,  discussed his  rea- 
sons fo r  sup  orting the amendment: 
“Within  %e  next  3  or  4  weeks  I  predict  there  will  be  announced 
a  new  single manager program  by  the  administration  as  f a r   a s  super- 
sonic  transport  craft  is  concerned.  It  will  not  be  a  responsibility  of 
NASA,  Defense or  FAA to  ca r ry  out  this program.  A  new  authorization 
to  transfer  appropriations will  be submitted to the Congress to ca r ry  out 
this program under single management. 
“As  long  as we  a re   going  to  have  a  new  program  submitted  fo r   a 
Polatis-type single manager  concept  it  is  not  necessary  to  include  this 
authorization  in the NASA  authorization bill.  I for  one heartily endorse 
the plans  of  the  administration  to  combine the management of  this new 
aircraft development program  in the hands of  a single manager responsi- 
ble to the President.  This is in  accordance with the Black report.  . . .” 
(CR, 3/25/64,6121) 
* NASA Lewis Research Center granted $900,000  authorization to AEC Hanford 
Atomic Products Operation for R&D  in connection with advanced nuclear 
rocket e n g i n e s f  zibrication, test,  and  evaluation  of  tungsten  uranium 
oxide fuel elements for advanced nuclear rocket engine now  under study 
at  Lewis.  The  agreement  brought  value  of  work  being  performed  at 
Hanford fo r  NASA  to more than $1.5  million. 
(LRC   Release 6 4 4 1 )  
NASA  awarded  two  contracts  to  Aerojet-General Corp.  fo r  development  of 
M-1  1.5-million-lb.-thrust  rocket  engine.  One  contract  was  fo r  
$190,075,635  and  provided  for  R&D  work;  the  other  contract  w a s   for 
$48,550,074 and provided  fo r  necessary test  facilities.  Development of 
the liquid  hydrogen/liquid  oxygen engine was under  technical direction 
(NASA  Release  6 4 4 6 ;   LRC  Release 
of  NASA  Lewis  Research  Center. 
64-31] 

116 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   AERONAUTIC%,  19  6 4 

March 25: With  the move of  the Advanced Spacecraft  Technology Div.,,NASA 
Manned  Spacecraft  Center  had  located 2,000 persons  a t   the  new  Clear 
Lake site.  One th ird  of  the 60 facilities at the site had been certified by 
the  U S .   Corps  of  Engineers  a s   operational  o r   ready  for   occupancy. 
( MSC Release 6 6 5 9 )  
Senators Albert  Gore  (D.-Tenn.)  and Ralph  Yarborough  (D.-Tex.)  said 
DOD  negotiations to   lease channels  from ComSatCorp w e r e   grounds for 
repeal of  the Communications Satellite Act of  1962.  Laheling the law a 
“giveaway”  of  a  national  resource,  Senator  Gore  said  it  would  be 
“remarkable and bizarre” for the Government to lease the system.  “We 
will  be  paying  for  using  what  we  have  given  away.” 
(Wm h .  Post, 
3/26/64) 
Minuteman  ICBM  exploded  shortly  after  launch  from  silo  a t   Vandenberg 
AFB,  and USAF  was  investigating cause of  the explosion.  This came five 
days  af ter   USAF  conducted  50th  launch  in  i ts  Minuteman  development 
program, a successful AMR  flight.  (M& R ,  3/30/64,16) 
March 25-26:  Government and airline technical officials met in Washington to 
review  findings in their  independent evaluations of  designs proposed  f o r  
the U S .   supersonic transport  aircraft.  On the basis of  further,  detailed 
consideration of  airline and Government evaluation findings, a  decision 
would  be  made  on  the  future course  of  the  SST program:  (1) selection 
of  an   airframe and  an   engine proposal  for  development,  (2)  selection 
of  two  airframe and two  engine  proposals for   one-year detailed design 
competition,  o r   ( 3 )   determination  that  the  program  should  be  termi- 
nated  o r   redirected  i f   i t   is  decided  that  none  of  the  proposals  meets 
established criteria.  (FAA  Release 64-26) 
March 26: Mockup of  the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module  ( LEM  )  was shown 
to the press a t  Grumman Aircraft Engineering  Corp.  after  three days  of 
design  inspection by  officials  of  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center.  Ob- 
jective  of  review  was  to   establish  design  freeze on  most  areas of  LEM 
design.  Under NASA  contract, Grumman would build 9 LEMS  for ground 
testing and 11 for flight.  (Clark, NYT ,  3/27/64,7;  M&R, 4/6/64,  26)  
Soviet satellite  COSMOS  XXIII  burned  up  in  the  atmosphere  between  the 
Great  Lakes and the northeastern Canadian  coast, according  to  NORAD. 
Observers  in Pendleton,  Ore.,  and Duluth,  Minn.,  reported  seeing fiery 
streak  in  the  sky,  and  Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory  officials 
a t   Cambridge,  Mass.,  said  they  assumed  the  streak was  the  reentering 
(AP, Balt.  Sun. 3/28/64;  AP,  NYT ,  3/29/64,31) 
COSMOS  XXIII. 
A t   close  of  18-day session of  U.N.  Outer  Space Committee’s  legal subcom- 
mittee in Geneva, US. delegate Leonard C.  Meeker praised  the “business 
like”  manner  in  which  the  subcommittee had  studied the  draft  treaties 
presented  by  the U S .   and the U.S.S.R.  The subcommittee would meet 
( N Y T ,  3/27/64,  9)  
again later this year. 
Space Science Board  of  National Academy of  Sciences concluded that Proj- 
ect West  Ford  dipoles placed  in  orbit  last  year  had  not  interfered with 
either  optical  or   radioastronomy  observations.  Board  Chairman  Dr. 
H.  H.  Hess  said  in  report  that  the  board’s  conclusion  “should  not  be 
taken  either  as  an  endorsement  of  the experiment  or  as  tacit  agreement 
to  the  launching  of  another  similar  belt  without  further  discussion.” 
Consideration  of  the  West  Ford  dipoles  would  continue  under  Space 
Science  Board’s  newly  established  Committee  on  Potentia1  Contam- 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 

117 

Release) 
ination  and  Interference  from  Space Experiments. 
(NAS-NRC 
March  26:  Joint  Congressional  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  voted  $14 
million  in  AEC’S  FY  1965 budget  for  flight  test  of  S n a p lOA   reactor. 
This action followed Budget Bureau letter to  the Committee acknowledg- 
ing  that  “reasonable  and  well  informed men  can  differ”  on  such  issues 
a s   the  Snap  flight test  and  stating  that  the  Administration  would  con- 
duct  flight test  i f .  Congress authorized the  funds,  as long as the Admin- 
istration’s  $2,651,542,000  request  for  AEC  was not  exceeded.  Late  last 
year the Administration had canceled orbital flight-test because of  lack of 
specific mission  for  the Snap ;   leaders of  the  Joint  Congressional Com- 
and  Rep. Chet  Holifield  (D.- 
mittee,  Sen.  John  0. Pastore  (D.-R.I.) 
Calif.),  had protested the decision, urging President Johnson to approve 
the flight test.  (NYT, 3/26,/64+  24) 
Dr.  Albert  J.  Kelley,  Director  of  Electronics  and  Control  in  NASA  Office 
of  Advanced  Research  and  Technology,  said  in   address  before  Aero 
Club of  New England, in Boston : ‘‘ . . . the NASA effort is not confined to 
a single objective such as landing men on the moon.  Rather, it is a broad- 
based  research  and  development  effort  which  is  designed  to  meet  the 
needs  of  any  agency  of  the  government  having  work  to  do  in   space. 
And  the  vigor  with  which  we   pursue  this  activity  will  determine how 
effectively those  agencies can  meet  their  responsibilities, and  cope with 
their problems in space, in the years ahead.  . . . 
“With  respect  to  such  a  large,  complex,  and  unknown  environment 
as space, and the still not precisely defined characteristics  of  the earth’s 
atmosphere, this  nation  would  be  be  oblivious to  the  lessons of  history 
if   it, in  every case,  required  that  exploratory  research  and  development 
be matched  to  a completely defined mission.  . . .” 
(Text) 
spoke  on  House  floor  urging  passage 
Rep.  Roman  C.  Pucinski  (D.-Ill.) 
of  H.R  8104, his  bill to prohibit  flight of  civil supersonic aircraft  gen- 
erating  sonic boom  overpressures above  1.5  lbs.  per  sq. ft.  Rep.  Pu- 
cinski cited  FAA’s current  sonic boom  experiment  in  which  flights pro- 
ducing overpressure of  1 to  1.5 lbs. per  sq. f t .   had prompted some 2,000 
complaints.  ‘(The tests  in  Oklahoma City  can  indeed  be  a  big  help  in 
this  whole  subject,  but  only  if  the  FAA  has  the  courage  to  increase  the 
booms to the overpressures which we  know the supersonic jets will have 
to  produce  to  be  efficiently  and  economically  operational.  . . . I  am 
firmly  convinced  that  the  2,000  complaints  . . . would  skyrocket  if 
the  FAA produced  sonic  booms  approaching  3  pounds  o r   more  over- 
pressure per square foot.  . . . 
“Mr.  Speaker, I submit that  this whole  [SST] project  must be  held  in  
a  state  of  abeyance until  after  the  F A A  has had  the  courage to  generate 
sonic boom  overpressures in excess of  2 pounds  per  square foot.  . . .” 
He  then  cited FAA and NASA  statements to  House Interstate  and  For- 
eign  Commerce Committee:  “The  FAA admits  that  sonic  booms  from 
2 to 3 pounds  overpressure per  square foot will do damage to  glass and 
plaster  in  isolated cases and  that  sonic booms  creating  overpressure  of 
3 to 5 pounds per  square foot will cause widespread window and plaster 
damage.  But  . . . [NASA]  states  that  tests  carried  out  by  NASA  in  co- 
operation  wilth  the US. Air  Force show that  the lowest overpressure a t  
which house windows were broken was  23 pounds per  square foot,  and 
most of  the windows tested survived pressures exceeding 56  pounds per 
square foot.” 

118 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
He  said  NASA  was  “way  off  the  pad  in   its  analysis”  and  added: 
“. . . here  we  have  so vital  a n   issue as  the health  and  welfare  of  mil- 
lions  of  Americans and  the safety  of  property  throughout  the  country 
damage due to sonic booms.  . . .” 
involved  and  yet  these  two  agencies  cannot  agree  on  standards  for 
(CR, 3/26/64,6193-97) 
March 26: U.S.  manned space flight plans were outlined in  Krasnaya  Zvezda 
(Red S ta r )   article with Col.  G.  Terent’yev byline.  Saying that the U.S. 
was  “not  leaving  a  stone unturned  in   trying  to  out&rip  the  Soviets in 
the   conquest  of  space  with  manned  space  vehicles,”  the  writer  gave 
particular  attention  to Gemini  and Apollo plans,  then  went  on  to  claim 
that U.S.  policy  “in  the conquest  of  space  is f a r  from  a  peaceful  one; 
it has a clearly evident military  (more accurately,  aggressive)  nature.” 
(Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/26/64,3,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
0  Wilbur L.  Pritchard, Group Director of  ComSat Systems, Aerospace Corp., 
before  Military  Operations  Subcommittee  of  the  House  Committee 
on  Government  Operations,  was  first  witness  to  speak  out  against 
military  usage  of  commercial comsat  system.  Speaking both  for  him- 
self  and  fo r   Aerospace  Corp.,  Pritchard  said  military  requirements 
would  be  50  different  from  commercial  requirements  that  either  the 
national  security  would  be  sacrificed  o r   ComSatCorp  would  have  to 
charge  such high  rates  that  there  would  be  no  savings  to  the  Govern- 
ment.  He proposed  alternative  system based  on  simple spin-stabilized 
satellite,  capable  of  growth  and  expansion  to  accommodate  increased 
(Av.  Wk., 3/30/64,  15; 
needs  of  military  satellite  communications. 
SBD, 3/27/64,479) 
March 27:  ARIEL 11  (UK-C)  scientific earth satellite, the second  in series of 
three  U.S.-U.K.  satellites, was  orbited  by  NASA  Scout booster  launched 
Initial  orbital data:  843-mi.  apogee, 180-mi. 
from Wallops Island, Va. 
perigee,  101-min.  period,  and  52”  inclination  to  the  equator.  Under 
overall administrative responsibility of  the British Office of  the Minister 
for Science, the three  onboard  experiments were  designed  and  built  by 
the  U.K.  to measure vertical  distribution  of ozone  in  the  upper  atmos- 
phere,  measure  galactic  radio  noise,  and  detect  micrometeoroids  en- 
countered by  the satellite.  The experiments were chosen by  the British 
National Committee on  Space Research, chaired by Sir Harrie Massey, 
in  consultation with NASA.  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center built and 
tested  the  spacecraft  and  contracted  with  Westinghouse Electric  Corp. 
(Wallops Release  64-30;  NASA  Release  64-56) 
for  subsystems. 
COSMOS XXVII satellite was  launched  into  orbit  by  U.S.S.R.  Announced 
orbital  data  were:  237-km.  (147-mi.)  apogee;  192-km.  (119-mi.)  peri- 
gee; 88.7-min. period;  and M.8” inclination to the equator.  Soviet news 
agency Tass said the satellite carried scientific instrumentation  intended 
fo r   the  “further  study  of  outer  space i n   accordance with  the  program 
announced by  Tass”  March  16, 1962, as well  a s   radio  transmitter  and 
telemetering  systems.  All  onboard  equipment  was  functioning  nor- 
(Tass, Pruvda, 3/28/641,1,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
mally. 
0  X-15  No.  1 flown by USAF pilot Maj.  Robert Rushworrth to  maximum speed 
of  3,920  mph  (mach  5.76)  and   altitude  of  101,OOO  ft.,  in  flight  near 
Edwards  AFB,  Calif.  For  the   flight  a  special  camera  was  installed  in 
the plane’s  fuselage to  test  optical  degradation  caused by  temperatures 
of  up  to   1,200”  F.  This  was  the  103rd  flight  of  the  rocket  research 
aircraft.  (NASA X-15  Proj.  Off.; UPI, Chic. Trib., 3/28/64) 

AERO 

119 

with  experimental data  obtained  from  spacecraft on  solar winds near 
the  earth.  His theory agreed, in order of  magnitude, with experimental 
data and  gave  estimate  of  interp 
electron  density  beyond  ob- 
. d o v e  the visible solar disc. 
served  range  out  from  the snn. 
critical altitude for  escape a t  
about four  solar radii,  about  1,3 
(OAR   Release 3-64t-5) 
World  Book  Encyclopedia announced  14 new  NASA  astronauts had  been 
added to  the   16 astronauts with  four-year contracts for   newspaper  dis- 
tribution rights to  their life  stories.  World  Book-a 
unit  of  Field En- 
terprises Educational Corp.--also  said  the  astronauts had  signed  sep- 
(AP, NYT, 3/28/64,20) 
ara te  con t r am  with Lije magazine. 
*  Severe  earthquake caused major  damage  in  southern Alaska,  and  Presi- 
dent  Johnson  declared a  major  disaster area  in Alaska.  There was  no 
apparent  damage  a t   NASA  tracking  station  near  Fairbanks,  although 
tremors were  felt.  Cape Kennedy  rose  and fell  about  2y4  in.  because 
of  seismic  wave  from  Alaskan  earthquake,  U S .   Coast  and  Geodetic 
Survey  said.  Earth  movement  at  Cape  Kennedy  was  greatest  in  U S .  
(NYT, 3/29/6d,  1 ; AP, Kmsm City Star, 5/10/a) 
*  NASA  Lewis  Research  Center  announced  award  of  $797,200  contract  for 
construction of  concretelined  shaft  for  the  500-ft.  gravity  facility,  to 
Patrick Harrison, Inc.  The underground shaft would be  first phase  of 
construction of  largest zero-gravity facility  in   the U S .   Completion of 
(LRC Release 64r30) 
the facility was expected this year. 
March 28:  In  conjunction with dedication of  the Center of  Science and Indus- 
try   in  Columbus, O.,  NASA Lewis Research Center sponsored a  compre- 
hensive  exhibit of  US. space program.  The new center w a s  designed as 
(LRC   Release 64- 
a  museum  of  science,  industry, health,  and history. 
25) 
March  29:   President  Johnson  told  a  Texas news  conference that  he would 
establish a  Seven-man  advisory board  for  the U S .  supersonic transport 
(SST) development.  Members of  the board would be: Defense Secretary 
McNamara,  Treasury  Secretary  Dillon,  Commerce  Secretary  Hodges, 
CIA  Director John McCane, NASA  Administrator Webb,  FAA Administra- 
tor  Halaby,  and  New  York  banker  Eugene  Black.  Asked  whether  he 
had  given  the  Supersonic Transport Advisory  Board  a  specific assign- 
ment, the President replied : 
I wanted you 
“The executive order w i l l  do that. 
I t  is being drawn. 
to  know that we  are  doing that. 
I t  has not  been  finalized yet. 
I t  may 
be  changed in  the details.  But we  want  to have the broad  spectrum of 
the Government interested in it, to get the best  judgments of all  of  our 
people in an advisory capacity.” 
Asked if  we were setting a deadline on the Board’s  report back to  him, 
the President answered: 
“No.  This w i l l  be  advisory.  I am not  asking  for   a  report.  I  am 
them to   advise in connection with the contracts and  all the mat- 
the  Black  report  and  by  the  report  that  I  made  in 

120 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  0 4 

connection with the  testimony before  the Congress.  The  Congress has 
already appropriated $60 million.  We have already had  a n  evaluation 
of  the   various  proposals.  But  we  just want  to  get  this  senior  group 
(Transcript, NYT ,  3/30/64; 
of officials to  sit in and counsel with us.” 
WS I ,  3/30/64) 
March  29:  Discovery by  two  astronomers  of  what  they  believed  to  be  the 
most  distant  object  identified to  date  was  announced.  Thought  to   be 
several billion  light-years away,  the  object-named 
con- 
36147-was 
sidered  to  be  from  1 0  to  20  per  cent  farther  away  than  3C-295,  pre- 
viously  considered the most  distant  object.  Both  objects were  “quasi- 
stellar radio sources,” which produce 100 times the brightness and energy 
of  an  entire galaxy  of  100  billion  stars.  Dr.  Thomas A.  Matthews lo- 
cated  the  new  object  by  observing  its  radio  emissions with  cal Tech’s 
twin  antennas.  Then  Dr.  Maertin  Schmidt  photographed  the  object 
from  Mt.  Palomar  Observatory. 
(Sullivan,  NYT ,   3/30/64,  27) 
Educator  Robert  M.  Hutchins,  writing  in  the  Omaha  Wor ld-Hera ld ,  said 
of  U S .  project to land a man on the moon:  “I think  it w i l l  not be argued 
that  the  primary  objact  of  this  venture  is  to  advance  knowledge.  It 
seems rather  to  be  designed  as  a  huge  public  relations  stunt.  The 
‘knowledge industry’ will restore  the prestige we  lost when the Russians 
outdistanced u5 in space.  . . . 
“If  we  were  dedicated  to  advancing knowledge,  we  would  have  had 
some  serious  debate  about  the  best  way  to  do  it.  Is  it to  improve our 
colleges and universities or to  put on scientific spectaculars?” 
(Omaha 
Sun. Wor ld-Hera ld ,  3/29/64) 
March  30:  Czechoslovakian  news  agency  Ceteka  reported  Czechoslovakia 
would  issue series of  eight  postage  stamps in April  bearing  faces of  10 
(Reuters, Houston Pos t ,  
Soviet  cosmonauts  and  American  astronauts. 
3/30/64) 
0  NASA  awarded $158,466,800  contract  to North American Aviation’s  Rock- 
etdyne Div.  for production  of  76  F-1  rocket  engines  for  the  Saturn V 
launch vehicle.  The action defined and detailed the procurement action 
initiated  with  letter  contract  in  June  1962.  Delivery  of  static-test  en- 
gines to  NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had  already begun,  and the 
(NASA   Release 64- 
first  flight F-1  would  arrive a t  MSFC  in  November. 
48; Marshall Star, 4/1/64,1) 
NASA’s newIy  created  Science  and  Technology  Advisory  Committee  fo r  
Manned Space Flight  convened fo r  first time a t  John  F.  Kennedy Space 
Center, NASA.  Formed to  advise Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate 
Administrator  fo r  Manned §pace Flight,  the committee met for briefings 
by NASA officials and tours of  NASA  facilities a t  Cape Kennedy and Merritt 
Island. 
(NASA  Release 64-72) 
MSC  operations  at  Cape  Kennedy,  renamed  Msc-Florida  Operations,  was 
reorganized  as “part  of  a  broad  NASA  organizational realignment aimed 
at  strengthening  Gemini  and  Apollo  management  structures  at  Wash- 
ington,  Houston,  and  Florida.”  The  organization  was  headed  by  G. 
Merritt  Preston,  responsible for MSC  operations at the Cape since 1961. 
( KSC Release 43-64;  MSC Roundup, 4/15/64,8) 
0  U.S.S.R.’s  unsuccessful  attempts  to  send  payloads  to  Venus  Feb.  26  and 
Mar.  4  were  reported  in  the  US. press.  Failures  were   attributed  by 
U S .  military  officials to  difliculties with  u p p - s t a g e  rocket supposed to 
send  the   spacecraft  out  of  parking  orbit  and  onto  its  interplanetary 
(Av.  Wk., 3/30/64!,  15; Finney, NYT ,  4/1/64,1,10) 
course. 

@ 

121 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  0 4 
March 30: USAF announced the nine major modifications to Titan I1 changing 
it  from  ICBM  to  a man-rated  launch vehicle for NASA’s 
two-man Gemini 
spacecraft : addition  of  malfunction  detection system; backup flight con- 
trol  system;  redundant  electrical  system  with  changes  for  additional 
launch  vehicle  equipment;  substitution  of  radio  guidance  for  inertial 
guidance;  elimination  of  retrorockets  and  verniers;  new  structure  on 
second  stage  to  hold  new  flight  guidance  and  control  equipment;  new 
second-stage skirt  assembly  to  join  spacecraft;  simplification  of  tra- 
jectory  tracking;  and  redundancy  in  hydraulic  systems. 
(AP,  Balt. 
Sun, 3/31/64t) 
MSC  announced  first  meteorite  ever  b u n d   in  Fisher  County,  Texas,  was 
turned  over  to  MSC  for  analysis  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bernard  W.  Neeper 
who  found  the  four-pound  meteorite  two  years  ago  on  their  farm. 
Meteorite investigations were made  at  MSC in cooperation with the U S .  
( MSC Release 64-61) 
National Museum. 
e  George  A.  Fuller  and  Warrior  Constructors,  Inc.,  jointly  received  a 
$1,967,868  contract  for  construction  of  electronics,  instrumentation, 
and materials  laboratory  a t   NASA  Mississippi Test  Facility.  The Army 
Corps  of  Engineers  awarded  the  fixed-price  contract.  (DOD Release 
257-64) 
*  Former  astronaut  Lt.  Col.  John H.  Glenn, Jr.  (U SMC )   announced his deci- 
sion  to  withdraw  from  the  Democratic primary  campaign  fo r   Senate 
candidacy  in  Ohio.  Colonel Glenn  was  still  convalescing from  severe 
injury  to  his  vestibular system in  the  inner  ear  sustained when  he  acci- 
dentally slipped and struck his head on a bathtub  Feb.  26.  In  Houston, 
NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  Director  Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth  said: 
“The  news  of  John  Glenn’s  continued  illness  is  upsetting.  Our  first 
concern  is  fo r   his  recovery.  . . . We  will  be  happy  to  discuss  with 
John   and  the-commandant  of  the  Marine  Corps his  future  if  John  so 
desires.  . . . We  wish  him a speedy recovery.” 
(AP,  NYT ,  3/31/64, 
1 ,18 ,19;  Burkett, Houston Chron.,  3/30/64) 
*  Dr.  V.  A.  Bailey, prof.  emeritus of  physics  at Univ.  of  Sydney, Australia, 
stated  in  the British  journal  Nature  his  theory  that  the  sun  has  a  large 
negative  electric  charge.  He  proposed  that  two  satellites be  launched 
around  the  sun,  one clockwise and  the  other  counterclockwise, to  learn 
whether o r  not the sun had  electrical charge and whether such a charge 
was negative or positive.  Most physicists believed sun had no electrical 
(Sci.  Serv.,  NYT ,   3/31/64t,  21) 
charge. 
*  Possibility  that  lasers might  someday be used  in preventing dental cavities 
and  in   repairing  existing  ones  was  reported  by  researchers  Dr.  Ralph 
H.  Stern  and  Dr.  Reidar  F.  Sognnaes of  UCLA  School  of  Dentistry  at 
International  Association  for  Dental  Research meeting in Los Angeles. 
The  investigators  emphasized  that  their  preliminary  study  dealt  with 
effects  of  lasers  on  dental  tissue  and  standard  dental  repair  material. 
(Sci.  Serv., NYT ,  3/31/64,24) 
e  Nicolai P.  Erpilev,  scientific secretary  of  the Astronomical Council of  the 
Soviet Academy  of  Sciences, announced in Havana  that  the  first  Soviet 
satellite tracking station  in  Cuba would be  installed in Havana in  a spe- 
cial observatory and another one would probably  be  established later a t  
( N Y T ,  3 /31 /a ,   26) 
Santa Clara. 
766-598  O--S--@ 

122 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4. 
M a r c h  3.2 : Unnamed “high State Department official”  told New  York He r&  
Tribune tha t   talks between  the U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  regarding Soviet  co- 
operation  in  worldwide comsat  network  had  been  mheduled  for  June 
in   Geneva.  The official said  the  talks  came  in  response to  Soviet gov- 
ernment’s recent expression of  interest in  such negotiations to  the U S .  
Embassy  in  Moscow.  Other  sources  indicated  Soviet  representatives 
had  visited  Communications Satellite Corp.  in Washington and  FCC  in- 
(Loory,  N .Y .   Herald  Trib., 
quiring  about  procedural  arrangements. 
4/1/64;  Av.  Wk., 4/6/64,15) 
*  USAF  fired advanced Minuteman ICBM down the Atlantic Missile Range and 
30 seconds later followed i t  with a Nike-Javelin  sounding rocket to  study 
(UPI, NYT ,  
This was  first  in  16-test series. 
the Minuteman’s  exhaust. 
4/1/64,60;  M& R ,  4/6/64,10) 
During  M a r c h :   NASA  Manned  Spacecraft Center  rmeived  design  recommen- 
dations  for  24-man Large  Orbital  Research  Laboratory  (LORL) that 
could be  operational by  1968-the 
six-month study conducted by  Doug- 
las  Aircraft’s  Missile  &  Space  Div.  and  IBM’S  Federal  Systems  Div. 
The cylindrical space station would operate under zero gravity conditions 
(Maloney, Houston Post, 3/21/64) 
in a 26O-mi.-high orbit. 
NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  accepted  the  first  of  three  new  F-1 
rocket engine test  stands a t  NASA’s engine test site at Edwards AFB,  Calif. 
(M& R ,   3/30/64,17) 
*  Article  in Fortune magazine said: 
“The U.S.  is  spending a  lot  of  money-but 
it  is  also  getting  a  lot  of 
results  in  technological breakthroughs,  any  one  of  which  would  have 
been regarded as wondrous only a few years ago.  The milestones passed 
since  last  summer  indicate how  fast  the  space  program  is  now  mov- 
ing.  . . . 
If  the 
“The Soviet Union  isn’t  going  to  collapse if  it  loses the  race. 
U S .   loses,  i t   isn’t  going to  collapse either.  For  both  countries,  there 
. 
Meanwhile, NASA  has much to be proud  of.  . 
are  other  goals  in  space that  may  yield  rich  rewards  in  both  prestige 
and scientific advance. 
“The superiority of  liquid hydrogen as  a  rocket fuel has been  proved 
and  the U S .   has d e h i t e l y   overcome the  Soviet  lead  in  big  boosters.” 
(Fortune, 3/64) 
Results and new research of  X-15  project were  detailed in Astronautics & 
Aeronautics  article by  Thomas  A.  Toll,  Chief  of  Research  Div.,  NASA 
Flight Research Center,  and  Jack  Fischel,  head  of  FRC  Manned  Flight 
“.  . . In  the area of  aerodynamics, problems  resulting from  the heat 
Control Branch. 
time of  the X-15  feasibility studies. . . . 
generated by  high-speed flight were  of  most  concern to designers a t  the 
“At  the   time  thermodynamic  design  of  the X-15  wa s   first  contem- 
plated,  it  was  thought  l i ie ly   that  fairly  extensive regions  of  laminar 
flow might be achieved in flight, thereby alleviating the problem of  heat 
proteation as  i t  would exist for  an all-turbulent condition.  This reason- 
ing was  based largely on rocket-model and  wind-tunnel results available 
a t  the time.  These results indicated a stabilizing effect on the b ou nd aq  
layer  a t  hypersonic speeds for  low  ratios of  the  surface temperature to 
the stagnation temperature.  As the design of  the  airplane progressed, 
it became evident that  the p r o b a b i l i i  of  obtaining laminar  flow  would 
be greatly reduced by  the presence of  unavoidable surface irregularities. 

123 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 
A s  a basis fo r  the  aerodynamic heating design, a  relatively low value of 
the transition Reynolds number (R,= lO0,OOO) was therefore stipulated. 
Flight  results have generally confirmed  this  design  approach,  inasmuch 
a s  i t  has been  found  that  a t  the lower altitudes, where the  heating  rates 
a re  highest, the boundary  layer is largely turbulent, due primarily  to the 
surface  irregularities.  Regions  of  laminar  flow  generally  are   limited 
to the immediate vicinity of  the leading edges and  a re  quite small.  The 
conditions  found  to  exist  on  the  X-15 a re   consistent  with  results  of 
refined w i n d m e 1  techniques now  being used.  . . . 
“Maximum  structural  temperatures  have  been  experienced  during 
X-15 operation  a t   high  speeds  and  comparatively  low  altitudes,  w i th  
accompanying normal-acceleration values  much  lower  than  those  ex- 
perienced during recovery  from high  altitudes.  . . . 
“By  way  of  assessing the   [structural]  failures experienced, there  ap- 
pear to  have been n o  cases in which  the structure deteriorated  to  such a 
degree  as  to  seriously  endanger  the  integrity  of  the  airplane. 
I t   is 
entirely probable, however, that  had  a less-conservative design been  fol- 
lowed  the  problems  noted  might  have  resulted  in  greater  deterioration 
with  more serious consequences.  . . .” 
(A&A ,   3/64,  20-28) 
During March:  Martin-Denver  revealed  design  concept  of  its  Astrorocket, 
a  proposed  reusable  aerospacecraft.  Launched  vertically,  the   vehicle 
would  have  two  stages-both  manned--equipped  with  auxiliary  fan 
je ts  a s  well  a s  rocket  engines.  After  stage separation,  first stage would 
re-enter  atmosphere  and  land  on  airstrip  like  conventional  airplane. 
Second  stage,  carrying  payload,  would  also  land  a t   a i r   base  after 
completing  mission.  Astrorocket  concept  employed  parallel  staging 
rather than conventional bottom-to-top staging.  Martin said advantages 
of  the Astrorocket  were  its reusability and its capability to  operate with 
(A-N-AF  J&R,  3/7/64,  38) 
existing  a i r   bases  for   space operations. 
a  FCC ruled AT&T must confine its use of  channels in  undersea cables to  voice 
and  related  service,  and  leave  the  services of  non-voice and  combined 
voice/non-voice  to  smaller message  companies.  Although  the  decision 
applied to  undersea  cables,  there was   speculation tha t   i t  could affect  fu -  
ture  commercial communications satellites.  As one FCC aide said, “The 
rationale of  the decision would  seem  to  extend t o  any type  of  facility.” 
(Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/20/64,) 
Brig. Gen.  Joseph S.  Bleymaier  ( USAF) was appointed t o  newly established 
position  of Deputy  Commander  for  Manned  Systems, AFSC Space Sys- 
In   this  capacity  he  would  be  responsible fo r   all aspects  of 
tems  Div. 
the Manned Orbiting Laboratory program.  (SBD ,  3/13/64,3#;  M&R, 
3/23/64,9) 

AprU  1984 
Aprid  I : Fourth  anniversary  of  TIROS  I,  first meteorological satellite, orbited 
with a Thor-Able booster  from AMR.  The spectacular accomplishments 
by the experimental TIROS weather satellites were to  develop into a global 
cloud-cover reporting system. 
NASA  launched Aerobee  150 sounding rocket  from White  Sands, N.  M a . ,  
with two cameras and two spectrographs to obtain spectra  of  nebulosites 
of  certain star  fields.  Rocket attained  118-mi. altitude  and instrumenta- 
tion  performed properly,  but  failure  of  the  attitude control  system pre- 
vented the rocket from  pointing a t  the targets and there were no  experi- 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
mental results. 
0  Five  men  emerged  from  30  days  of  isolation  in  sealed  chamber  where 
they  conducted  first  U S .   experiment  integrating  all  systems  for  self- 
contained  life  support  in   space.  The  test  was  made  in   Seattle by  the 
Boeing  Co.  for  NASA.  NASA  Director  of  Biotechnology  and  Human 
Research  Dr.  Eugene  B.  Konecci  called  the   successful  experiment  a 
“major  breakthrough”  in  research  on life support  systems fo r  extended 
space  flights. 
“The basic principles and techniques of  life-support systems have been 
Now  we   refine  and  advance  them. 
proved  workable and  sound. 
We 
(AP,  Balt.  Sun, 
are  already  looking  and  preparing  fa r   beyond.” 
4/2/64;  AP, Houston Chron., 4/2/64) 
NASA  Lewis Research Center  was  investigating  several techniques fo r  pro- 
ducing flexible, thin-film solar cells.  One of  the  techniques being inves- 
tigated was sputtering, which required  absolutely clean atmosphere and 
a  low  pressure  of  inert  gas.  Sputtering  apparatus  in  which  controls 
controlling  pressure,  temperature,  and 
were  fully  automated-rigidly 
voltage  in   relation  to  each  other-had 
been  built  at  Lewis.  With  this 
equipment,  researchers  were  attempting  to increase  efficiency  of  thin- 
film cells to that of  silicon cells. 
( LRC Release 64-28) 
Vice Adm.  Rufus E.  Rose  (USN,  Ret.) was  sworn in  a s  Director  of  Policy 
Planning  Div.,  NASA  05ce  of  Technology Utilization and  Policy Plan- 
ning,  by  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden.  The most 
recent  assignment during Admiral  Rose’s  M y e a r  career  was  as  Com- 
mandant  of  the Industrial College of  the  Armed Forces. 
(NASA  Release 
64-73) 
Picket  linea  were set  up at the entrances to Cape Kennedy and the Merritt 
Island Launch Area  (MILA)   by United Plant Guards Workers of  Amer- 
ica.  The  union  charged  that  Wackenhut Corp.,  subcontractor  to  TWA 
a t   the  Saturn/Apollo  site, was  employing nonunion  guards.  1,886 of 
2,5M  construction  workers  at  the  Saturn  V  complex  refused  to  cross 
the  picket  lines,  and  abouk  700  of  2,500  workers a t  the  USAF  Titan  I11 
site  were  absent.  William  Simkin,  vice  chairman  of  the  President’s 
Missile  Sites  Labor  Commission,  requested  that  the   building  trades 
(UPI,  Wash. Post,  4 / 2 / a ;   AP,  Balt.  Sun, 
unions  return  to   work. 
4/2/64;  UPI,  NYT ,  4/3/M) 
124 

AP 

air,  due either to  sudden heat  increase in  the “runaway”  o r  the contact 
of  water  with  the  reactor’s  liquid metal  coolant  (sodium  potassium). 
AEC  spokesman said core of  the  reactor was  damaged  as expected,  and 
test was completed with no 
r  the public.  Another 
to 
test  would  be  made  to  inv 
of  a  ground  landing. 
C 
(AP, Balt. Sun, 4 / 2 / a )  
*  NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed the American Assembly Stu- 
dent Conference a t  the Air  Force Academy, Colorado Springs: 
. . . in  assessing  the  future  one  can  always  learn  from  the  past, 
bG 
and i f   the thoughtful student of  history learns anything from a  review of 
the march  of  human progress, i t  is that the ultimate potential of contem- 
porary undertaking is almost never perceived. 
“So,  I believe,  it is with research and  exploration in space.  . . . 
“Today,  500  years  after Prince Henry  and  his  use  of  the  caravel to 
initiate  the  Oceanic  Age,  400  years  after  Copernicus  presented  his 
theolies about the solar system,  300 years after Newton worked  out the 
formula for  space flight, but  less  than  40 years  afiter  Goddard  devised 
the  vehicle  to  make  it  possible,  man  has  left  the  earth,  and  widened 
his horizons to  include the  entire solar  system. 
“Science today  has  a t   its  disposal  a  modern  caravel,  the  chemical 
rocket,  which  has  already  traveled  to  the  moon  and  Venus.  And,  as  
w i t h  Henry  and his explorations, w e  have improved navigation  systems 
to  guide them out and bring  them back  to make  steadily more accurate 
measurements of  the  environment of  space-that 
environment through 
which Gargarin and Glenn  and  others traveled,  and  through which  our 
own planet, Mother Earth, is also traveling around the sun a t  the relative 
speed of  67,000 miles per hour. 
“And  to  complete the parallel,  just  as Prince Henry  inaugurated an 
Age  of  Discovery which  led man  to  all  the  seas and  continents of  the 
earth,  and  into  the  atmosphere  up   to   twice  the  height  of  his  tallest 
mountains,  so  have we  today  embarked  on  a  new  Age  of  Discovery  in 
which there is no foreseeable horizon.  . . .”  (Text; CR, 4/6/64,6686) 
*  Atlas ICBM  launched by  USAF from Cape Kennedy sent new  deceptive war- 
head  5,000  mi.  downrange  and  carried  two  piggyback  rockets  which 
were  fired  from  a  7-ft.  pod  attached  to  the  Atlas.  The  small  rockets 
carried  radiometers to  measure  radiation  in   the  Atlas  engine exhaust. 
Another attached pod contained scientific experiments to study the  ionos- 
(AP,  Wush. Post, 
phere,  magnetosphere, and  radio  frequency noises. 
4/2/64;  M&R,  4/6/64,  10) 
According  to  Hebrew Univ.  sources, Dr.  Menahem  Steinberg of  Hebrew 
Univ.  in  Jerusalem  had  developed  new  oxidizer  for   use  in  solid-fuel 
rocket  engines, said  to  be  superior to   those in  general use  because the 
a  low molecular weight and 
ource9 said two years would 
discovery. 
(Reuters, Balt. 

126 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  
in  10 nations,  including  the  U.S., 
April  1 : At  zero  hour  GMT,  ast 
turned  back  their  atomic 
nth  of  a  second  to  adjust  them  t o  
(Plumb,  NYT ,  
time  measured  optically  by  the  passage  of  the  stars. 
4 /v64 ,   33) 
April 2: U.S.S.R. 
launched ZOND  I space probe “for  the purppose of  developing 
a  space system f o r  distant  interplanetary  flights.”  Final stage of  “im- 
proved  booster  rocket’’  placed  earth  satellite into parking  orbit;  then  a 
rocket  took  off  from  the  satellite  and  propelled  the  ZOND  I  to  escape 
velocity,  sending  it  into  flight  trajectory  “close  to  the  computed  one.” 
There  was  no  indication  a s  to  what  the  computed  course  was,  and  no 
details  of  the  prybe’s  weight,  size,  o r   destination  were  given. 
(Tass, 
Krasnaya  Zvezdo, 4/3/64,  1,  ATSS-T  Trans.;  CSFC SSR,  4/15/64) 
e  In letter to  chairmen of  Senate and  House space committees-Sen.  Clinton 
P.  Anderson  (D.-N.  Mex.)  and  Rep.  George  P.  Miller  (D.-Calif.)- 
NASA  Administrator  James E. Webb  detailed findings of  committees in- 
vestigating failure  of  RANGER VI  lunar probe.  Although the  committees 
had not yet identified any specific cause for failure, Mr. Webb’s  letter out- 
lined five major faults in the spacecraft: 
1. The  two  oaboard  TV  systems “were   more  complex than  required 
and were  not  completely redundant.  They  included a  number  of  com- 
mon  components in which a  single failure would lead to  disablement of 
both  television systems.” 
2.  “Possibilities  of  failure  . . . increased  a s   a  result  of  practices 
employed in  the design and construction of  the spacecraft.  . . .” 
3.  Preflight  ground  testing  “may  have  obscured  potentially  danger- 
ous situations which could have enhanced accidental triggering  of  criti- 
cal control circuits.” 
4.  The antenna for transmitting the lunar photographs had never been 
tested with the TV transmitters. 
5. “Because of  reluctance to risk possible damage to the space vehicle, 
pre-launch  systems  verification  was  not  complete.  . . .”  (Loory, 
HTNS,  Wash.  Pos t ,  4/3/64,8) 
e  Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft was mated to Saturn I S A 4  at Cape Kennedy 
(Marshall Star, 4/8/64,  1) 
in  preparation  for  flight  later  this  spring. 
Labor  dispute  continued  at  Cape  Kennedy,  with  1,973  of  4,068  con- 
struction workers at the Cape and MILA refusing to cross picket lines of 
the  United  Plant  Guards  Workers  Union.  National  Labor  Relations 
Board  began  investigating the situation, which was  further  complicated 
by  failure  of  Iron  Workers  Union  and  Patrick  AFB Contractors  Asso- 
ciation  to  work  out  a  new  contract,  causing  about  400 ironworkers  to 
walk off the  job, 
(UPI,  NYT ,  4/3/64) 
With  the  publication  of  the  name  change  from  Cape  Canaveral  to  Cape 
Kennedy  in  the  official decision  list  of  the  US .   Board  on  Geographic 
Names,  the  legal  procedure  involved  in   renaming  the  Cape  was  com- 
(AP, NYT ,  4/3/64) 
pleted. 
Vice Adm.  William F.  Raborn,  Jr.  (USN,  Ret.),  told  industry  delegates to 
conference at Georgia Tech  that  primary purpose  of  nuclear  and  space 
exploration  wa s   “the  maintenance  of  national  defense  to  guarantee  a 
continuation  of  our way  of  life.”  Technology assures “not  so much  a 
better  texture f o r  our bread but  the fact that  we  w i l l  have that  bread to 
eat,”  he maintained.  Conference was  sponsored by  Southern  Interstate 
Nuclear  Board  and  Georgia  Tech’s  School  of  Nuclear  Engineering  in 
cooperation with AEC and  NASA.  (Rutherford,  Atlanta Const., 4/3/64) 

APr 

and  on  the  continued  operation  of  the  powered  guidance  system were 
transmitted to the probe by radio from earth when  it reached 560,000 km. 
(347,967 mi.).  The probe was  said  to  be  in  a  flight trajectory  corre- 
sponding  “w i t h   a high  degree  of  accuracy”  t o  the  predetermined  pro- 
(Tam, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/5/64,1) 
gram. 
NASA  awarded $5,944,000 supplemental contract to the Boeing Co.  fo r  addi- 
tional R&D and planning in the manufacture of  Saturn V first-stage rocket 
(New  Orleans  Times-Picayune, 4/4/64; 
at  Michoud  Operations,  La. 
Marshall Star, 4/8/64,10) 
0  DOD announced  Army  Corps  of  Engineers had  awarded  $4,397,000 fixed 
price  contract  fo r   construction  of  propellant  facilities  at  NASA  Missis- 
sippi Test Facility to Broadway Maintenance Corp.  and Glantz Contract- 
ing Corp.;  and  $3,573,025 fixed price  contract f o r  construction of  high- 
pressure water heating facility at MTF  to Leslie Miller, Inc., Power Engi- 
neering  Co.,  and Donover  Construction Co. 
(DOD Release 278-64) 
0  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  received  honorary  de- 
gree  in  mechanical  engineering  from  the  Polytechnic  Institute  of  the 
(NASA  Release 64-74) 
University of  Milan. 
Lt.  Col.  John H.  Glenn, Jr.,  left the hospital and returned home to Seabrook, 
Tex.,  where  he  would  convalesce from  inflammation of his  inner  ear. 
(AP, Wash. Pos t ,  4/4/64) 
0  Secretary of  the Air  Force Eugene M.  Zuckert said in   address at  sixth Air 
Force Academy Assembly : 
“ I t  is not possible to predict  the course of  events, but there a r e  certain 
points  I want to make tonight  that might serve as benchmarks. 
“First,  the nation has no choice but to pursue the  almost limitless possi- 
bilities  of space with  energy  and  imagination. 
6 4  Second,  we  must  do  everything  poss?ble to  prevent  exploitation  of 
space  fo r   aggressive purposes,  and  be  prepared  to  defend  freedom  in 
space. 
“Third,  the  emerging defense responsibilities in  space exemplify and 
extend  the   requirements  for  professionalism in  the  military,  focusing 
sharply  on  the  mutual  responsibility  of  the  military  and  civilian  pro- 
fessionals in  science, industry,  and government. 
“Fourth,  despite  the  appeal  of  space  exploration,  we   must  continue 
to  increase our  investment of  brains  and money  in  the effort to  build  a 
a  decent life on earth i€ this nation is to continue as leader of  a n  expand- 
ing free world on the earth.”  (Text) 
0  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D.-Wis.) 
said  GAO  study showed that  USAF  could 
save more than $1 million a year  in administrative costs at AMR  through 
(AP, Houston C h o n . ,  
consolidation of  supply management functions. 
4/3/64) 
Atlas F ICBM 
(M&R ,  
4 /13 /64 ,1  

ded  on launch  pad  at Vandenberg AFB,  Calif. 

128 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19649 

ApriZ  4 :   U.S.S.R.  announced  routine  launching of  COSMOS XXVIII. 
Initial 
orbital data:  apogee,  395 km. (245 mi.)  ; perigee,  209 km.  (130 mi.) ; 
period,  90.38  min.;  and  inclination,  65”  to  the  equator.  Scientific 
equipment onboard the satellite was “intended for the further exploration 
of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass March 
16,  1962.” 
In  addition,  the  satellite  contained  radio  transmitter  and 
telemetering  system.  All  instrumentation  was  functioning  n o d l y .  
(Tass,  Krasnaya  Zvezda,  4/5/64,  1, ATSS-T  Trans.) 
At  18 hours Moscow time ZOND  I reached 837,000 km.  (520,097 mi.)  from 
the earth, Tass announced.  A t  that time the probe was in the following 
position:  right  ascension,  5  hrs.  and  56  min.;  inclination, minus  4O 
(Tass,  Krasnaya 
22  min.  Experimentation  with  ZOND  I  continued. 
Zvezda, 4/5/64,1;  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
0  Temporary  injunction  forbidding  United  Plant  Guards  Workers  of 
America  to  picket  at  Cape Kennedy  and  Merritt  Island  was  issued  by 
U S .  District Judge George C.  Young  at  request  of  the National Labor 
(UPI,  Wash. Pas t ,  4/5;/64.) 
Relations Board. 
Reporting its findings after series  of  hearings, Senate Subcommitte on Em- 
ployment  and  Manpower  forecast  “a  leveling  off  or  actual decline”  in 
the present  $55 billion  annual expenditure for  weapons and  space pro- 
grams.  Among  the  report’s  predictions:  thousands  of  scientists  and 
engineers may  have  to  seek  jobs outside the  aerospace industry;  thou- 
sands of  skilled workers may have to learn now  trades;  at least  10 states 
should  plan  now  for  converting  to  non-government  markets.  Sen. 
Joseph  S.  Clark  (D.-Pa.)  , subcommittee  chairman,  said  studies 
showed that “nearly one-tenth of  the Nation’s  work forces is employed in 
(Haakinson, AP,  Wash. Post,  4/5/64) 
defense-related enterprise.” 
*  Industry  sources  revealed  only  one  more  Ranger  lunar  probe  could  be 
launched before NASA’s contract with the Jet  Propulsion Laboratory ex- 
pired  in December.  If  Ranger  7 failed,  the soulrces said NASA  might re- 
move JPL from Cal Tech’s  management, might remove Director William 
H.  Pickering from his post, and might hire a “hard-headed businessman” 
(AP, Boston Globe, 4/6/64) 
to  manage the  facility. 
April  6: English-Russian  astronautical  dictionary  was  issued  in  MOSCOW, 
Taw  reported.  (AP, NYT, 4/6/64) 
April  6:  NASA  launched  Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  from  White  Sands, 
N.  Mex.,  with  two  cameras  and  two  spectrographs to  obtain  spectra  of 
nebulosities  of  certain  s tar   fields.  Abnormal  coning  motion  of  the 
rocket and subsequent pitch-roll coupling caused the rocket to reach only 
46-mi. altitude; and the attitude control system had no chance to point a t  
the programed targets,  so no  experimental data were  obtained. 
(NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
First  large batch  of  unusual  stones  arrived  from  Iowa  at  NASA  Goddard 
Space Flight Center  fo r   analysis  in  Project Moon  Harvest.  Residents 
of  six Iowa counties were gathering the specimens, which GSFC scientists 
were analyzing to  determine if  they were  of  lunar origin.  Dr.  John  A. 
O’Keefe,  project  scientist,  theorized  that  pieces  of  the  moon’s  surface 
were chipped off the moon by  meteorite impapt and  attracted by gravity 
(Goddard News, 4/20/64,  4; GSFC Release  6 1 3 - 6 4 )  
to  the earth. 
9  About 450 iron workers stayed off the j a b  a t  Cape Kennedy because union 
and  management  negotiators  had  failed  to  work  out  a  new  contract. 
Most of  the other 3,500 construction workers returned to their jobs after 

129 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS,  1964  
(UPI,  Chic. Tr ib . ,  
picket  lines  kept  workers  away  the  previous week, 
4/7/64) 
April  6 :  By  this  date USAF  had made 21 manned drop-tests of  the  ballute  at 
El  Centro, Calif.,  from C-130  flying a t  altitudes  up  to  35,000  f t .   Basi- 
cally  a  d rag  balloon,  the  ballute  was  under  development by  Goodyear 
Aerospace Gorp.  with NASA  funds.  To  be  installed  in  the ejection  seat 
system of  Gemini spacecraft, the  self-inflating ballute would stabilize the  
astronaut during free fall down to  l0,OOO  ft.,  where final recovery para- 
chute would  deploy.  (Yaffee, Av .   Wk . ,  4/6/64,4&45;  MSC  Roundup, 
4/15/64L  8 )  
* Researchers  at  Lankeneau  Hospital  in  Philadelphia  had  concluded  that 
orthostatic  hypotension  such  as  occurred  in  Astronauts  Schirra  and 
Cooper  after orbital space flights could be caused  as much by  dehydra- 
tion as by weightlessness, Missiles and Rockets  reported.  (M&R ,  4/6/64, 
5) 
Glide  parachute  achieved  glide  ratio  of  up  to  2 : l   i n  wind-tunnel tests  a t  
NASA  Ames  Research  Center,  it  was  reported.  Northrop  Ventura,  the 
parachute  developer, was proposing it to NASA fo r  later phases of  Project 
(ARC ;   M&R, 4/6/64,  25 )  
Gemini. 
0  Of  the  formerly  operational  Thor  missiles  that  were  being  converted  to 
space missions, NSAF spokesman said:  “This program  ha s  proved that  it 
is possible to take  a complex vehicle that was designed as a weapon  and 
convert it to peaceful uses at a  substantial saving and without sacrificing 
reliability.  We can expect that there w i l l  be more than this.”  AFSSD  esti- 
mated converted booster cost up to $150,000 less than new Thor booster. 
(M&R ,  4/6/@,  31) 
USAF  was considering developing new 40,000-lb. thrust third stage fo r  Titan 
I11  launch vehicle, Aviation Week reported.  Burning high-energy fuels, 
the  new  stage  would  replace  the  16,00&17,000-lb.-thrust  transtage. 
Meanwhile  USAF asked  six  firms  for  proposals  for  a  back-up  and/or 
replacement rocket engine system for the transtage, said to be experienc- 
ing  development difficulties.  But USAF  was not  asking f o r  upgrading  of 
( A v .  Wk . ,  4/6/64,  13; SBD ,  
the  16,000-lb.-thrust system a t  this time. 
4/10/64,59) 
Apr i l   6 -8 :  US. officials met  in London with  representatives of  six European 
countries  for  further  talks  on  investing  in  the  global  communications 
satellite network.  Spokesman said there was  “substantial progress” but 
no  concrete agreements were  reached,  and another meeting would  take 
(Kohlmeier, WSJ ,  4/6/64;  NYT,  4/9/64) 
place in   about  a  month. 
April  7 :  President Johnson ordered prompt removal of  NASA  tracking station 
from  Zanzibar shortly  after  President Abeid Karume requested that  the 
U S .   remove it  before  the end  of  this month.  President  Karume made 
the  request  to  Frank  Carlucci, US. Charge d’affaires  in Zanzibar,  and 
reportedly  told Carlucci that the action was  a  result of  statement by US. 
Ambassador-to-Kenya William  Atwood  at  New  York  prass  conference 
that  Red  China and East Germany we re  trying to turn Zanziibar  “into  a 
kind  of  non-African state to  be  used as a staging base fo r  political ma- 
n e u v e r ~ ’ ~  on  the  African  continent.  NASA  announced  in   Washington 
that  the  loss  of  the  station  would  have  no  adverse  effect  on  the   U S .  
manned space program.  The station had been on a stand-by basis since 
end  of  Project Mercury, would  have been  of  “minimum  use”  in  Project 
Gemini  and  not  used  at  all  in  Project  Apollo. 
(Simons,  Wash. Post, 
4/8/64;  Smith, NYT ,  4/8/64,11;  Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 4/8/64) 

130 
A S T R O N A V M C S   AND   A ERONAU T IC S ,   1 9  6 4 
April  7:  NASA  anounced  closing the  command  and control  station  fo r  Relay 
Space  Tracking  and   Data  Acquisition  Network  ( 5 tadan)  at  Blossom 
communications satellites at Nutley, N.J.,  and movin  the operation to the 
Point,  Md.  The  move  was  made  to  consolidate  personnel  and  equip- 
(NASA  Release 64-77) 
ment and save operation costs. 
0  Soviet news  agency Tass announced that  a human  being had  stayed €or 25  
days  in  pressurized  czbin,  breathing  a  combination  of  oxygen  and 
helium.  Test  results were said to  be good,  although a test subject with 
a  bass voice became  a  tenor  and scientists were still testing f o r  the right 
proportion  of  helium  to   use.  Reason  for  using  the  mixture  was to 
enable future space travelers to  “better  endure pressure fluctuations and 
high  temperatures  in   a  space  ship  cdbin,”  Tass said. 
(AP,  NYT ,  
4 f  8/64?) 
0  House  Committee  on  Government  Operations’  Military  Operations  Sub- 
committee heard testimony from NASA  witnesses regarding military oom- 
munications  satellites. 
In  response  to   questioning,  Leonard  Jaffe, 
Director  of  Communications and Navigation Programs in  NASA  Office of 
Space Science and Applications  (OSSA) and Robert F.  Garbarini,  Direc- 
tor of Applications in OSSA, said NASA had not participated in current DOD- 
ConzSatCorp  negotiations  for  possible  DOD use  of  commercial  comsat 
channels.  ComSat Act  of  1962 designated NASA  as technical advisor to 
ComSatCorp.  “We  a re  aware  of  the negotiations and we   expect  to  be 
(Av.  Wk., 
informed  so  that we  can  respond under  the act,”  Jaffe said. 
4/13/64,32) 
0  Striking United Iron Workers forced contractors to  lay off  500 other workers 
at Cape Kennedy.  Army Corps of  Engineers spokesman said the  walk- 
out  was  “definitely  crippling  some  of  the  most  crucial  of  our  projects 
(UPI ,   N Y T ,  
and  three  good  size  jobs  a re   completely  shut  down.” 
4/8/(54) 
0  Lt.  Col.  Yuri  A.  Gagarin  said  in  Moscow  press  conference that  he  and 
other  Soviet  cosmonauts were  training  fo r   new  space  flights.  “When 
we  go  and who  will go-that  we  do not  know.  We will wait  and  see.’’ 
(AP, N Y T ,  4/8/64,  10; AP,  Wash. Post, 4/8/64,  C6) 
ApZlil8:  Titan  I1  launched  unmanned Gemini spacecraft  into  orbit  in  first 
Project  Gemini flight  (GT-1)  , a  test  of  Titan  I1 launch  vehicle system, 
Gemini  spacecraft  structural  integrity,  and  spacecraft-launch  vehicle 
compatibility.  After an uninterrupted  countdown a t  Cape Kennedy, the 
Titan  I1 lifted  off  and  placed  the spacecraft in  orbit  of  204-mi. apogee, 
99.6-mi.  perigee,  and  89.27-min.  period.  Walter  C.  Willianis said  all 
systems functioned “well within manned tolerances.”  Only imperfection 
in the flight was Titan 11’s  14-mph excess speed  (17,534 instead of  17,520 
mph),  sending  spacecraft  2 1  mi.  higher  than  planned.  However,  this 
was within tolerance and, on manned flight, crewmen could easily correct 
the  extra  height.  The 7,000-lb.  spacecraft was  not  separated  from the 
spent  rocket  casing,  and  NASA  officials estimated the  orbiting  assembly 
would reen te r  the atmosphere and disintegrate in a l h u t  3% days. 
(NASA 
Release 64-70;  MSC Roundup, 4/15/64,1,3) 
*  X-15  No.  1 flown  by  Capt.  Joe  H.  Engle  (USAF)  to  maximum  speed of 
3,477 mph  (mach 4.8)  and altitude of more than  33 mi.  in test to prepare 
the pilot for future flights at higher altitudes.  The flight also conducted 
optical degradation  studies.  ( FRC Release; UPI, Wash.  Post, 4/9/64) 

131 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  0 4  
April  8 :   Test  of  parasail  for  space  craft  landings  was conducted  by  MSC 
officials in  Galveston Bay.  The  test  was  termed  only  a  partial  success. 
A model Gemini spacecraft was dropped from C-119  flying at 10,200 ft., 
and  the  drogue  parachute  opened  perfectly.  But  parasail  failed  to 
deploy  properly  after  its  nylon  lines  snapped,  and  engineers  had  to 
trigger  the  reserve  ringsail  parachute  to  lower  the  vehicle safely  to  the 
(Houston Post,  4/9/64;  MSC Roundup,  4/15/64,  8 )  
water’s  surface. 
*  Soviet  scientist  Sergei Vernon  said  at  Moscow  press  conference tha t   the 
ZOND  I  space probe  was  launched  to  study  radiation  hazards  in  space. 
The probe would “provide information about more remote areas of  space 
we know little about.”  (Balt. Sun, 4 / 8 / a )  
NASA Technology Utilization Division and the Food  and Drug Administra- 
tion  reported that preliminary  experiments by FDA%  Dr.  Jacqueline Ver- 
rett  indicated that  a  piezo-electric transducer  invented a t  NASA Ames Re- 
search Center  could,  for the first time, monitor th e  heartbeat  of  a chick 
embryo  quickly, continuously, quantitatively,  and  without egg  damage. 
Instrument  was  invented to measure  impact of  micrometeoroid dust  in 
space by A m ’  Vernon L.  Rogallo, who suggested its potential in chick 
embryo  research.  Through  its Technology  Utilization  program,  NASA 
informed FDA  of  the innovation.  FDA had been conducting research dur- 
ing past fou r  years using chick embryo technique, correlated with animal 
tests,  to  study  effects of  drugs,  pesticides,  and  food  additives. 
(NASA 
Release 64-76) 
a  Ironworkers who had walked off  the job at Cape Kennedy and Merritt  Island 
Launch  Area  (M ILA )   when  their  contract  expired  March  31  began 
returning to work a t  the request  of the Missile Sites Labor  Commission. 
Contract negotiations continued  in Washington.  Construction projects 
that  had  been  delayed by  the walkout  included three  MILA  buildings  of 
the Kennedy Space Center, NASA,  the Saturn Vertical Assembly Building, 
as well  as facilities  fo r  USAF  Titan  111, Army  Corps of  Engineers said. 
(UPI,  Wash. Pos t ,  4/9/64;  M&R ,   4/13/64,  10-11) 
*  Gov.  Nelson  Rockefeller  said  in  speech  a t  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.: 
“I believe strongly  that  it  is time  for  the American  people  t o  take  a 
long, hard  look at the political, military  and  scientific merit  of  the  ‘ on e  
shot,’  crash program to place a man on the moon by 1970. 
‘‘I  think we  ought to put a man on the moon. 
But we  must make s u r e  
that  our  program  is  sound, that  our  priorities are proper-that  we  are, 
in  short,  taking  maximum  advantage  of  the  virtually  unlimited  oppor- 
tunities  which  the  scientific and  technological  revolution  of  our times 
presents u s - t h a t   we  are not warping our  entire scientific effort fo r  th i s  
one  purpose. 
“I fear that  the present moon-shot program  of  the Democratic admin- 
istration  in   Washington  does  not  meet  the  criteria  fo r   a  soundly  con- 
ceived  program  of  scientific research  and  development in  the  national 
interest.  . . .”  (Text) 
* Soviet  military  newspaper  Krasnaya  Zvezda  (Red  S ta r )   announced  that 
Lt.  Col. Yuri Gagarin  had been  assigned head  of  its new  “Cosmonauts’ 
Desk”  (AP, Wash. Post, 4 / 9 / a )  
April 9:  EXPLORER IX re-entered  the  earth‘s  atmosphere  and  disintegrated 
after  more  than  three  years  in  space.  T h e  lightweight,  12-ft.-diameter 
balloon  wa s   NASA’s most  effective  satellite  fo r   measuring  atmospheric 
density  and  temperature.  Placed  in  orbit  Feb.  16,  1961, EXPLORER  IX 

132 

ASTRONATJTECS  AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

traveled more than 340 million mi.  during i ts  14,000 orbits of  the earth. 
I t  provided  a  better  understanding of  upper  atmosphere characteristics, 
determining more  precisely  the  relationships between  air  density  and 
solar  radiations.  Measurements  of  the  satellite’s  atmospheric  drag 
effects were correlated with those of a  similar inflated sphere, EXPLORER 
XIX,  orbited Dec. 19,1%3.  EXPLORER IX was the first satellite orbited by 
a  solid-fuel launch  vehicle  (Scout)  and  the  first  satellite  launched  at 
(NASA  Release 64-81 ; Wallops Release 64-35) 
Wallops. 
Ap r i l   9:  NASA  E I I I I I Q U ~ ~  
i t  would  negotiate with RCA  Data Systems Div.  for 
purchase of  19 additional ground computer systems fo r  checkout,  static 
tests, and launch of  Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles.  This would 
complete  the  required  26  computers  for  the  Saturn/Apollo  program; 
seven systems were ordered last year.  Total cost was expected to  exceed 
(NASA Release fX-79) 
$47 million. 
0  Titan I1  ICBM was  launched on successful USAF  test  flight dmvn the Atlantic 
Missile  Range.  This was  the 33rd  and  final R&D  firing of  the Titan 11. 
(UPI,  Wash. Post, 4 / 1 0 / a ;   Witkin, NYT, 4/12/64,31) 
0  French  Foreign  Ministry  announced  France  would  establish observation 
station in the Azores under an agreement with Portugal.  The installation 
would  give  France a  clear Atlantic firing range of  1550-mi. for its mis- 
siles and  rockets  launched  near  Biscarrosse  on  the  coast  of  southwest 
France.  (Reuters, Vmh. Post, 4/10/@) 
0  Dr.  Jeanette  Piccard,  widow  of  balloonist  and  atmospheric  scientist  Dr. 
Jean  Felix Piccard, was  appointed a  consultant to  NASA  Manned  Space- 
craft Center in  formulation of  effective program to provide information 
to US. scientific community.  ( MSC Release 64-66) 
0  Tass reported monument to  mark  man’s  first space flight would be erected 
in  Moscow.  The  monument  would  consist  of  bust  of  Maj.  Yuri  A. 
Gagarin and a meteorite of  white metal, both the work  of  Lev Kerbel, at- 
tached to  metal pylon about 80 ft. high.  (Reuters, NYT, 4/10/64) 
April 10: NASA  launched 250-lb. instrumented Ram  (Radio Attenuation Meas- 
urement)  spacecraft on  a  ballistic  trajectory from Wallops Island, Va., 
on  a  three-stage rocket system.  Experiment was  one of  se r ies  to  inves- 
tigate  the  problem  of  communications  through  the  ionized  plasmas 
created when  a spacecraft re-enters earth‘s  atmosphere a t  high velocities. 
Spacecraft was to  attain top  s  ed  of  18,400 fps.  Preliminary data  in- 
dicated  the  vehicle  and  p a y k d   performed  satisfactorily;  the   flight 
lasted  about 10 min.  and impact occurred approximately 650 mi.  east of 
Bermuda.  Flight  measurements,  telemetered to  ground  receiving  sta- 
tions would be reduced and analyzed a t  Langley Research Center, which 
designed and built the spacecraft.  Ram series was under LaRc  direction 
(NASA  Release 
for NASA’s Office of  Advanced Research and Technology. 
64-65;  Wallops Releases 64-29  and 64-34) 
Dr.  John  Strong,  Director  of  Johns  Hopkins  Astrophysics  and  Physical 
Meteorology  Lahoratory,  announced  definite  evidence  of  water  vapor 
around  and  on  the  planet  Venus.  His  determination  was  made  as 
the  result of  a  Feb.  21 daytime balloon  flight  to study Venus  by  means 
of  a unique robot telescope system.  The study was made under research 
grant  for  USAF  Cambridge Research Laboratories.  “Since i t   is known 
that cal“bon dioxide exists on  Venus,  proof  of  water  vapor  forces us  to 
re-examine every  previous  calculation  made  concerning  the possibiity 
of  some sor t  of  life existing on  the planet,”  Dr.  Strong said.  Amount 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAU!C’ICS,  1 9 6 4 

133 

April 10: Iron meteorite landed in  two pieces in  MuzzafFarpur,  India.  One 
piece was later sent to U S .   for  analysis  by  E.  P.  Henderson, curator of 
meteorites  for  the  Smithsonian  Institution,  and  by  the  Brookhaven 
( Wash.  Post, 5 / 2 2 jM )  
National Laboratories. 
* United  Plant Guards Workers of  America members who  had picketed Cape 
Kennedy and Merritt Island Launch Area agreed to six-month suspension 
of  picketing  while  negotiators  continued  trying  to  settle  the  dispute. 
Informed of  the  agreement, District Judge George C.  Young  dismissed 
the  temporary  anti-picketing injunction  against  the  guards which  had 
been  abtained by  the National Labor Relations Board on  behalf  of  NASA. 
(AP, Wash.  Sun.  Star, 4/12/64) 
*Airpo.rt towers  a t   277  airports  reported  record  31  million  takeoffs  and 
landings during  1963, FAA statistics  showed.  This was  almost  double 
the  16.8 million operations 10 years ago  and  was  a  10% gain over  the 
28.2  million  operations in  1962. 
(FAA   Release  64-33) 
April  11 : President  Johnson  announced  at White  House  press  conference: 
“The  world  record  for  aircraft  speed,  currently held  by  the  Soviets, 
has been  repeatedly broken in secrecy by  the United States aircraft A-11. 
The  President has  instructed the Department of  Defense to  demonstrate 
this capability with the procedure whidh, according to international rules, 
will  permit  the  result  of  the  test  to  be  entered  as   a  new  world  record. 
“The  Soviet  record  is  1,665 miles  an  hour. 
The A-11  has  already 
(Transcript,  NYT, 
flown 
in  excess  of  2,000  miles  an  hour.” 
4/Wf%  64) 
NASA  NikeApache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Ft.  Churchill,  Canada, 
with Univ. of  Alaska instrumented payload attained 107-mi. altitude and 
obtained data on the visible aurora and on vacuum ultraviolet emissions. 
This  information was  supplemented by  data  from  two  electron  particle 
detectors.  Three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors also 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
were  included  in  the  payload. 
Former  President  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower  said  in  Saturday Evening  Post 
article : 
“AS a  Republican  I  believe in  what  has  been  called  the  ‘conquest  of 
space,’  but which  I prefer to  think of  as a thorough exploration of  a new 
scientiiic frontier  to  improve  our  living here  on  earth.  This  is  a n  ex- 
ploration  we  should  pursue vigorously with  a  step-by-step program  in 
line with our means and  our needs.  That was  the aim of  the space pro- 
gram  as initially undertaken during my  Administration:  On the  advice 
of  eminent scientists we  conceived a  long-range effort,  not  a  stunt, with 
costs  to   be  stabilized  around  two  billion  dollars  a  year.  That  hardly 
could be called picayune by any reasonable standards. 
“But now,  under the Democrats, this program has been  blown up  out 
of  all proportion.  With  hysterical fanfare our  &pace research has been 
presented  as  a  crash effort,  as  a  ‘race to  the moon’  between  the United 
States and  Russia which  we  must  win  a t   all  costs.  And  the costs  a re  
tremendous:  They now  are  running well  over five billion  dollars a year. 
The  Government  now  has  more  than  73,000  engineers  and  scientists 
working  on  the  xionmilitary  space program,  either on  the  federal pay- 

134 

ASTRONATJTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

roll  o r   employed under  contract.  This  swollen  program,  costing laore 
than the development of  the atomic bomb,  not only  is contributing to an  
unbalanced budget;  it also has diverted a disproportionate share of  our  
brainpower  and  research  facilities from  other equally  significant prdb- 
lems, including education and automation. 
“We  are breezily  assured  that  the cost and dislocation  brought  &out 
by  this moon  race  are  worthwhile for  the  new  ‘prestige’ they will bring 
us.  There is no way  of  telling how t rue  tha t  may be, but we can be sure 
of  one  thing:  The voyage  to  the moon  will  set  a new  record  fo r  a t r ip  
(Sat. Eve.  Post, 4/11/64,17-19) 
taken  on  borrowed money.” 
April  12:  Comonautics  Day  in   the  Soviet Union,  commemorating  the  day 
when Yuri Gagarin made the first space flight in 1961. 
U.S.S.R.  announced steerable spacecraft POLET  n  had  been  placed  in 
orbit.  Purposes  of  the  launching  were  said  to  be  to   “further  improve 
space vehicles  capable of  maneuvering extensively in   all directions, and 
to  work  out  questions  concerning  the   problem  of  space  rendezvous.” 
After  being placed  in  initial orbit, POLET  11 was  maneuvered  in various 
directions by means of  special engine system.  “As a result of  one of  these 
maneuvers  in  the  area   of  the  equator,  the  space  vehicle  substantially 
changed  the  angle  of  inclination  of  its  orbital  plane.”  After  the  pro- 
gramed space maneuvers,  POLET  n  was  in  the  following  orbit:  apogee, 
500 km.  (311 mi.)  ; perigee, 310 km.  (193 mi.)  ; period, 92.4  min.;  and 
(Tass;  Shabad,  NYT, 
inclination  to  the  equator,  58.06  degrees. 
4/13/64,4) 
Gemini  spacecraft  launched  into  orbit  in   unmanned  test  April  8  (GT-1) 
re-entered  the  earth’s  atmosphere  and  disintegrated  midway  between 
South America  and  Africa.  Attached  to  the  11-ft.-long spacecraft was 
2O-ft.-long cylindrical  rocket  stage.  They  had  been  orbiting  the  earth 
(AP, Wash.  Post, 4/14/M; 
at  altitudes from between  100 and  190 mi. 
AP, Houston Post, 4/14/6p) 
April 13:  A t  Manned  Spacecraft Center press conference, MSC  Director  Dr. 
Robert  R. Gilruth announced Astronauts Gus Grissom and  John Young 
would  be  prime pilots  for  the first manned Gemini space flight  (GT-3), 
with  Astronauts  Walter  Schirra  and  Tom  Stafford  as  backup  pilots. 
Also  a t   the  press  conference  i t   was   disclosed  that  Astronaut  Alan  B. 
Shepard, Jr.,  was suffering from labyrinthitis.  MSC’S  Dr.  Charles Berry 
emphasized  tha t   Shepard’s  inner  ear   inflammation  was  not  caused  by 
space flight  but  by  infection  that  spread into  his  inner  left  ear. 
(MSC 
Press Conf.,  MSC Historian) 
NASA announced i t  would negotiate contract w i th  Space Technology Labora- 
nones,  Inc.,  for  two  additional  Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatories 
(Ogo) . Under  existing contract,  STL was  designing, developing,  fabri- 
cating, and testing three Ogo’s,  the first of  which was scheduled for launch 
this year.  Contract for additional two Ogo’s  was expected to  total about 
(NASA Release 6 4 4 3 )  
$17 million. 
RCA  announced  it  had  received  $22  million  subcontract  from  Grumman 
Aircraft  Engineering  C o p .  for  communications  system  to  be  used  in 
Project  A p l l o  lvnar  landing.  The  system would  transmit  continuous 
voice and  telemetry data to  earth,  provide communications between  the 
astronauts on the moon  and Lunar Excursion Module  (LEM) and Apollo 
command module.  (Phil. Eve. BUZZ.. U1416p) 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4  

135 

President’s Advisory Committee on  Supersonic Transport,  under 
rmanship  of  Defense Secretary Robert  S. McNamara,  held  its  first 
meeting.  The  Committee reviewed  status  of  US. supersonic transport 
program  and  began  discussing major  issues  involved  in   the  program. 
(DOD  Releases  2 9 5 -6 4 ,3034& )  
*  Lmkheed-California  Co.  announced  it  had  developed  concept  for  space 
shuttle  vehicle  that  could  be  available  in   1966.  The  “space  tug”  was 
designed p r i d y  as spacecraft-to-spacecraft cargo  transportation  sys- 
tem and was  result  of  study  sponsored by  AFSC.  (S3l3, 4/14/64,  75; 
A v .  Wh., 4/20/64,59) 
Invention  of  pocket-size x-ray  unit,  smallest  in  the  world,  was  announced 
by  IIT  Research Institute.  Device was  invented by Dr.  Leonard Reiffel, 
vice president  of  the Institute,  and developed by James J. Ezop,  Institute 
physicist.  Besides uses  by  doctors  for home calls, Dr.  Reiffel said  the 
instrument would be useful in testing mechanical parts in aerospace hard- 
ware.  (Chic. Trib., 4/14/64) 
Ap r i l   14: Atlas D  launch  vehicle sent NASA’s 200-lb. Project  F i re  spacecraft 
more than 500 mi.  into space from Cape Kennedy in test to  provide data 
on re-entry beating of  spacecraft returning from the  moon.  As the space- 
craft  fell back to earth,  a  solid-fuel Antares I1 motor  ignited  for  30 sec. 
to   hurl  it  through  the  atmosphere  at  the  speed  of  37,800  fps  (about 
26,000 mph ) .   With  exterior  heating  at  estimated  20,000  degrees,  in- 
struments in  spacecraft interior relayed data back to earth while cameras 
and  other  instruments  recorded  the  “flaming  meteor”  descent.  About 
32  min.  after  launch  the  Project  Fire  craft  impacted  in  the  Atlantic 
more  than  5,200 mi.  from  th e  launch  site.  Dr.  Raymond L.  Bispling 
hoff,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and   Tech- 
nology,  commented  that  the  experiment,  conducted  by  NASA  Langley 
Research Center, “recorded the highest speed ever reached by a manmade 
object  in   free flight.” 
I n   conjunction  with  the  Project  Fire  test,  NASA 
Nike-Apache sounding  rocket was  launched to 97-mi. altitude  from As- 
cension Island.  I t s  instrumented payload, provided by Univ.  of  Michi- 
gan,  measured  pressure,  temperature,  and  density  in  the  equatorial 
{NASA  Release 64-69; 
atmosphere using Pitot-static probe  technique. 
AP,  Wash..  Post,  4/15/64;  C inc .  Enqr. 4/16/fj4,  NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  was  launched  from  White  Sands,  N. 
Mex.,  with  JPL   payload  to measure  ultraviolet light  and  fluctuations in 
earth‘s  magnetic  field.  Rocket started  large yaw  maneuvers soon  after 
30 sec.  and  reached only  18.2-mi.  altitude;  no  new  scientific data  were 
obtained. 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
A  Delta  rocket’s  third-stage motor  (X-248)  inexplicably ignited  in check- 
out  building  a t   Cape  Kennedy,  burning  11  engineers  and  technicians, 
three  critically.  The  rocket  stage  had  just  been  mated  with  Orbiting 
Solar Observatcry  ( o s o )   in   reparation for prelaunch spin testing, when 
rose  from  the  alignment  stand,  hit  the 
the  motor  suddenly  ignittxf 
ceiling knocking off  the 090, and landed in a  fa r  corner.  NASA  and WAF 
inmediately  began  investigating  the  cause  of  the  ignition.  USAF  said 
this  was  the  “first serious incident  of  its kind  in  14  years of  operations 
(AP, Wash. Eue.  Star 
and  over  1,400 missile launchings”  at the Cape. 
4/14/64;  AP, Wash.  Post,  4/15/64;  Goddard  New s ,   4/20/64,  3 ;  
Marshall Star, 4/29/64+,  1,3) 

136 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

April  14 :   NASA  had  developed  lightweight and  inexpensive  shock  absorber 
that had no  recoil.  Built for space use, the shock absorber would break 
(Phil. Eve.  Bull.,  4/14/64) 
on  impact rather  than bounce back. 
British  Postmaster  General  Reginald  Bevins  said  in  House  of  Commons 
that,  under  the  right  conditions,  “the  United  Kingdom will  be  willing 
to  provide  up  to 315 million of  the  capital  cost  of  a  world  system”  fur 
satellite communications.  He said U.K.  would share in design of  comsat 
system,  share in  its  ownership,  and  play  full part  in providing  satellite 
launch vehicles and  other equipment.  He reported that in  recent meeting 
of  representatives of  European, US.,  and  Canadian governments on prob- 
lems of  establishing a  global comsat system, “good progress” was made. 
(UPI,  NYT, 4/16/@  9 )  
*  Dr. Smith  J.  DeFrance, Director  of  NASA  Am-  Research Center, was  one 
of  10 recipients of  the 1%  Career Service Award of  the National Civil 
Service League.  Director of  Ames  since 1940, Dr.  DeFrance was recom- 
mended for the  award on  the basis  of  his 43-year career as an  outstand- 
ing administrator and leader of  aeronautical and space research. 
(NASA 
Belease 64-75) 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas J.  Hayes, 111, Assistant to the Chief  of  Army Engineers 
for NASA  Support fo r  the past two years,  received certificate of  apprecia- 
tion  from  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb.  General Hayes super- 
vised such Engineer Corps activities as design and construction of  NASA 
facilities,  lunar  mapping,  and  advance  engineering  related  to   future 
programs.  He was cited by NASA particularly  fo r  his “skillful direction” 
in   the  “planning,  design  and   construction of  the  massive  and  complex 
(NASA  Release 
structures required  fo r  the manned space flight system.” 
-1 
*  House Committee on Science and Astronautics was briefed on comparative 
US. and  U.S.S.R.  space programs  by  National  Aeronautics and  Space 
*Council Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C.  Welsh  and  NASC  staff  mem- 
bers.  Committee Chairman Rep.  George P.  Miller  (DXa l i f . )   said  the 
executive session gave the committee a better  appreciation of  Soviet sci- 
entific  space  exploration  and  reaffirmed  his  belief  that  the  U S .   “must 
(Av.  Wk., 4/20/64,30) 
keep up  i t s  effort to  stay in the  space race.” 
*  Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin D.  Foulois  (USA,  Ret.)  was  presented a special Medal 
of  Recognition for  his more than  50  years of  dedication and  service to 
the development of  aviation, in ceremony at the Pentagon.  He had been 
a  member  of  the  NACA  while  Chief  of  the  Army  Air  Corps  (1932- 
1936).  ( DOD Release 309-64) 
*  FAA announced Braniff Airways had reserved two  delivery positions for U.S. 
supersonic  transport  aircraft  and  TransAmerican  Aeronautical  Corp. 
of  Washington had increased its delivery reservations fo r  SST from one to 
two.  (FAA Release 64t-35) 
0  Sen.  Barry  Goldwater  (R.-Ariz.)  , candidate  fo r   Republican  Presidential 
nomination,  released a  campaign paper  regarding  missile reliability : 
“I have raised,  and w i l l  continue to raise until all the facts are in, fun- 
damental questions about the reliability  of  our  intercontinental ballistic 
missiles.  It is not a question of  theoretical accuracy.  The fact is that not 
one of  our  advanced ICBM’s has ever been  subjected to  a  full test  under 
simulated battle  conditions.” 
Later  in  the  day,  DOD issued  listing  of  U S .   missiles,  bombers,  and 
missile-,bearing  nuclear  submarines  and  compared  them  with  Soviet 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

137 

strength  in   each  category.  MID said  it  was  acting to   prevent  another 
“missile-gap myth”  from  circulating.  (NYT, 4 /15 /64 ,1 ,6 )  
April  15: NASA  launched modified  four-stage solid-propellant Javelin  (Argo 
D4) sounding  rocket  from  Wallops  Island,  Va.,  carrying  120-lb.  in- 
strumented  payload  to  4 2  mi.  Approximately 15 min.  of  data  were 
telemetered to  ground stations before fourth stage and payload impacted 
in  the  Atlantic  Ocean  6p2  mi.  from  launch  site.  Primary  purpose  of 
flight  was  to  test  X-258  solid-propellant  rocket  motor,  and   secondary 
purpose wa s   to  conduct scientific investigations in  the ionosphere.  Test 
was  part  of  GSFC’S  development of  the X-258  f o r  NASA  use   in   satellite 
launch  vehicles  and  possibly  in   sounding  rockets. 
(Wallops  Release 
64-36) 
a  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  from  Ft.  Churchill, Canada, 
with Univ. of  Alaska instrumented payload attained %-mi.  altitude.  Ex- 
periment  objective was  to  dbtain  data  on  visible aurora  in   three wave- 
lengths  and  data  on  vacuum  ultraviolet  emissions.  This  information 
was  to  be  supplemented by  data  from  t w o  electron  particle  detectors. 
Payload  also included three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet de- 
tectors.  Good telemetry s i g n a l  was received for 383 sec., but door cover- 
ing  instrumentation  apparently came off  a t  about 20,000-ft. altitude and 
most  of  the  sensors were  damaged  by  the  severe environment. 
(NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
*  NASA  Nike- Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Ascension  Island  car- 
ried Univ.  of  Michigan instrumented payload to  %-mi.  altitude to meas- 
ure  atmospheric  pressure,  temperature,  density,  and  winds  using  the 
pitot-static  probe.  All  objectives  appeared  to  have  been  met. 
(NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
*  NASA  announced  selection  of  23  scientific  and  technological  experi- 
ments  to  be  flown  aboard  Gemini  spacecraft, selected  by  NASA  Manned 
Space  Flight  Experiments Board  from  almost  100 proposals made  by 
scientists  and  engineers  in  NASA,  DOD,  and  the  scientific community at 
large.  13 of  the  experiments-eight  scientific and  five technological- 
were  sponsored by  NASA;  ten  experiments, all technological, were spon- 
(NASA  Release 64178) 
sored by  DOD. 
At NASA  Hq.  news conference, NASA  Administrator James E. Webb said new 
contract  with  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  would  specify changes  to  im- 
prove  JPL’S   organization  and management.  “NASA  is  not  going  to  try 
to  impose  rigid  methods  of  organization  and  management  on  the  Jet 
Propulsion  laboratory.  We  believe they  know  a  great  deal  about  how 
to  succeed  at  this business.  But  neither  are we  going  to  abdicate  our 
own  responsibility for this expenditure of  public  funds  and fo r  the suc- 
cess of the missions. 
“We  a re  in a process by which we a r e  both working to solve the prob- 
If  this  process  produces  the  kind  of  organizational  changes and 
lem. 
the kind  of  ability  to  fix organizational responsibility  that  . . . [is de- 
looking fo r  some other arrangement.  . . . 
sired],  then we  will go  forward.  If  they don’t  both  we  and JPL  will  be 
“I  think  all  of  us  see the  total picture  better.  Each  of  us  tended  to 
see one part of  the  picture rather than the total picture.”  Under the new 
contract, JPL would be organized more like the NASA  Centers.  “. . . the  
United States government cannot find any arrangement under which the 
high  quality of  work which JPL has done and is capable of  doing in  the 
m6-508 -10 

138 

full meeting of  the minds.” 
Mr.  Webb stressed that  he was not singling out  anyone fo r  blame for  
Ranger lunar  spacecraft failures.  “Our objective is success on the next 
flight  and  not to   find  a  scapegoat for  this kind  of  thing.”  Of  the next 
Ranger  lunar  probe,  he  said,  “We  a re   still  striving t o  get  i t   off  about 
June,  but there a re  lots of  problems  that have to be settled.  Some of  US 
feel quite strongly that we  must have  a very strong assurance of  success 
before we  would  be  ready  to  launch.  But we  a lso  run into the problem 
if  we  don’t  launch  then  we  may  have  di%iculty  fitting into  the schedule 
later.” 
Asked about &ect  of the delay in  Congressional appropriation of $141 
million  supplemental  requested  for  FY I964   manned  space  flight,  he 
said:  “. . . this delay  is at least reducing what  the President gave us- 
a  fighting  chance.  I mean,  with  each  passing  chance  we   have  a  little 
bit  less  of  a  fighting  chance  to  do   the  job   within  this  decade.  . . . I 
would  say that  costs are  going to  increase fo r  the same amount  of  work 
with each passing month,  and tha t  each month roughly delays one month 
on the other end, o r  maybe more,  and that this does certainly reduce the 
fighting chance.” 
(Transcript) 
April  15:  NASA  Flight  Research  Center  formally  accepted  from  Bell  Aero- 
systems Co.  the  first of  two Lunar Landing  Research  Vehicles  ( LLRV) , 
to  be  used  in  extensive  flight  research  program  conducted  by  FRC in 
support  of  Project  Apollo.  The  program  would  investigate  possible 
operational  and  piloting  problems  tha t   might  occur  during  final  phase 
of  manned  lunar  landing  and  initial phase  of  lunar  takeoff. 
( F ~ R C  Re- 
lease 5-644 
*  Soviet news  agency Tass  said  25 communication sessions had  been  held 
with  ZOND I space probe since April 2,  and  a  great  deal  of  “interesting 
experimental data”  on  the operation  of  onboard systems  and individual 
units  had  been  obtained.  By  6:OO  pm.,  Moscow  time,  ZOND I  had 
reached 4,250,000 km.  (2,640,823 m i . )   from earth. 
(Tass, Komscrmol- 
skaya Pravda, 4/16/&,  1, ATSS-T  Trans.) 
Dr. George  E.  Mueller,  NASA Associate Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight,  said  in Space  Business  Daily  interview that  use  of  Centaur  a s  a 
th ird  stage for Saturn IB  launch vehicle was now  a “matter  of  study with 
a  serious approach to  the various alternatives”  it could serve.  He men- 
tioned  one  such  use  might  be  as a  booster  fo r   logistics  support vehicle 
called  Stay Time Excursion Module  (STEM) for  establishment of  lunar 
bases.  Dr.  Mueller  also disclosed that payload  for  Saturn SA-10  flight 
had been changed from an Apollo boilerplate to a micrometeoroid detec- 
tion  satellite (MW) , supplementing those for   Saturns  S A 4  and  SA-9. 
Added  MDS was to  further confirm that  skin thicknesses on boosters and 
spacecraft can be  reduced,  thus trimming weight requirements for Proj- 
ect Apollo.  (SBD ,  4/15/@,  83) 
*  Based  on  spectrographic  studies  of  about  100  stars  comparable  to  the 
sun, Carnegie  Institution  of  Washington  astronomers  concluded  the 
sun,  like these  stars,  was  radiating  less  heat  than  it  used  to.  Dr.  Olin 
of  Carnegie staff  found that  the sun must  have completed  its pe- 
greatest  radiation  activity long before life on earth began.  The 
d other planets must have  experienced much  stronger radiation. 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERO 

CS,  1964 

139 

Report  said this 

passing  interest for hypo- 
“of  m 
nd  0th 
features which  ultimately 
of  life.” 
(Henry,  Wash.  Eve. 
April 15: Thomas E.  Dolan, NASC  s t a g  member, prop0 
on Space Stations and Their Logistics Support in Pasadena that “saddle- 
bags”  be  attached  to  LEM  to  increase  its  carrying  capacity  fo r   use in  
equipping a  lunar base.  3,000-S,000 Ibs.  of  supplies would be attached 
to  manned  Lunar  Excursion Module.  The  system would  make  it pos- 
sible to  set  up  a lunar  base with  a  7- to  10-day staytime.  He said sad- 
dlebags mode  would  increase  total Apollo  spacecraft  weight by  15,000 
Ibs.,  but  Saturn  V/Apollo  system  theoretically  had  growth  option  of 
100%  and  15-20%  growth  was  entirely  possible.  “The  LEM  saddle- 
bag  concept would  avoid multiple launches, hardware development pro- 
g r am s   fo r   unmanned  landing  systems,  dependence  on  successful un- 
manned  landing system performance prior  to manned  landings, and de- 
pendence on  surface rendezvous.  As  such,  the p o s t - A l l o  exploration 
phase  could  be   carried  on  with  higher  mission  success  and  with  less 
(M&R ,  
total  investment  than  that  estimated  fo r   the  other  systems.” 
4/20/64,15;  SBD, 4/17/64,98) 
*  FCC approved  application  of  ComSatCorp to  build  communications satel- 
lite far its planned experimental-operational synchronous-orbit network. 
The  authorization  was  fo r   construction  only;  further  authorization 
would be required  for placing the satellite in orbit and using it in experi- 
mental or operational service.  (AP, NYT, 4/16/64) 
e  NASA  announced  appointment  of  Ray  Hooker,  Chief  of  Research  Models 
and  Facilities Div.  at Langley  Research Center, as NASA’s Senior Scien- 
tific Representative in Australia.  Hooker would replace Edwin P. Hart- 
man,  first NASA  Senior Scientific Representative in Australia,  now  com- 
pleting his second two-year term.  Hooker would leave in  June  for Mel- 
bourne,  where his primary  function would  be  liaison with  the Ministry 
of  Supply  af  the  Commonwealth  of  Australia,  the  cooperating  agency 
(NASA  Release 
which  builds,  staffs,  and  operates  NASA  facilities there. 
- 5 )  
*  Dr.  Raymond L.  Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator  for Advanced 
Research  and  Technology,  said  a t  University of  Cincinnati:  “We  have 
thanwemaybea l lowed todo .   . . . 
reached a  state where we  can d o  a  lot more things  [in  space exploration] 
can be done.  It may never be approved.  . . . 
“The work of  my office is to develop the concepts,  I can only say what 
The scientist and engineer cannot answer what is next.  He  can only 
66 
answer  by  outlining  the  options  which  science will  permit  a s  the  next 

is in fact done next must be determined by a n  assessment of  the 
’%khat 
scientific,  social,  economical  and   political  implications  of  these  op- 
tions.  . . .”  (Text) 
Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  S.  Bleymaier  (USAF) , USAF Space Systems Div.  Deputy 
Commander for Manned Systems, said at AIAA  space station symposium 
in   Pasadena  that  USAF  planned  to  assign to a  single contractor the task 
of  integrating the  Gemini spacecraft and the manned orbiting laboratory 
(MO L ) .   He  said astronaut  transfer  from  the Gemini to  the  MOL was  a 
major  problem  and   described  several  alternative  methods  of  transfer 
being studied.  ( A v .  Wh., 4/20/64,  39) 

140 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUTICPI,  1964  

space  station  design was described  before  Orange 
on of  u u * b y  Edward H.  Olling, head  of  MSC  Space 
Station Program Office.  The %man  station would b e  150 f t .  in diameter 
with three radial modules, rotate at maximum speed of  4 rpm.  Lifetime 
would be from one to five years.  Saturn V could launch it into orbit and 
Saturn  IB would  launch  logistics vehicles. 
(M&R ,  4/20/64,  22) 
T h e  planet  Jupiter,  more  than  10 times  the  size of  the earth,  has  density 
about that of  the sun and  major  elements probably consisting of  hydro- 
gen  and  helium,  according  to  Office  of  Naval  Research.  The  analysis 
was  based  on   observations  made  with  a  balloon-carried 
telescope 
launched  into  the  stratosphere  last  November  from  Palestine,  Tex. 
(NANA,  Houston Chron., 4/15/64) 
*  Prof.  Colin  0. Hines  of  Univ.  of  Chicago told  national  committee of  the 
International  Scientific  Radio  Union  meeting  in   Washington  that  an 
unexpected high  “jet  stream”  was  to  be blamed  fo r  disruption  of  long- 
distance  radio  communications.  The layer  of  strong winds occurred  at 
50-mi.  altitude,  where  shearing disturbed  the  ionospheric  layers which 
(Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
in   turn  disrupted  radio  communications, he  said. 
4/  15/64 1 
*  NASA  Assistant Administrator  fo r  Technology Utilization and Policy Plan- 
ning Dr. George L. Simpmn, Jr.,  said in Space  Business Daily  interview 
that  “we  a r e  beginning to feel that  progress is really  being made in  this 
In  many  instances, he  said,  use of 
[technology  utilization]  program.” 
technology  gained  through  various  projects  had  “advanced  the  state- 
of-theart” when  the various  data were  ‘$ulIed  together”-for 
example, 
the advancements in fuel cell prograniis, to  be made available to industry 
(SED ,  4/15/64,86) 
shortly. 
April  16:  NASA  launched  Nike-Apache sounding rocket  with  ionosphere  ex- 
periment payload  from Wallops Island, Va.,  to  peak  altitude of  105 mi. 
The payload carried instrumentation to  measure electron and ion density 
and solar radiation in the D and E regions of  the ionosphere;  it impacted 
114 mi.  downrange in the Atlantic Ocean.  Provided by Univ. of  Illinois 
and the  Geophysics Corp.  of  America,  the experiment was  an  investiga- 
tion  of  the  International  Year  of  the   Quiet  Sun  (1!%4-65)  (IQSY). 
(Wallops Release 64-37) 
*  Japan’s  first television transmission to  Europe by  communications satellite 
was received in Pleumeur-Bodou, France, and  fed  into France’s television 
network for European viewing.  Reception was excellent.  The relay was 
made by TELSTAR II communications satellite.  (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/17/64) 
*  NASA-AEC  Space Nuclear Propulsion Office announced successful completion 
of  cold-flow experiments on  a  Nerva  (nuclear  engine for  rocket vehicle 
application)  experimental reactor,  designated the NRX-AI, by  the  Aero- 
jet-General and We&inghouse  Electric Corporations.  The  experiments 
were designed  to check the structural stability and flow dynamics of  the 
NRX-A  reactor under nonpower conditions.  All test objectives we re  met. 
(SNPO )  
*  Asked  fo r  his  opinion  about developing a new  manned bomber, President 
Johnson  said  a t  White  House news conference that  USAF  Chief  of  St& 
General LeMay had  requested funds be  reprograzned to  study plans  f o r  
a  new  bomber:  “I told  him  I would give consideration to  his proposal. 
I understand that proposal has been formulated and is now going through 
channels,  and  will shortly come to the President.  When it gets to me,  I 

141 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 
will  study  it  as best  I can  and  make the  decision that  I think  is in  the  
(Transcript, Wush. Post, 4/17/64,  A18) 
national interest.” 
April  16: New  three-year labor  stabilization agreement, including no-strike 
clause,  was  signed  in  Washington  by  representatives of  AFL-CIO 
and 
Patrick  AFB Contractors’ Association.  Agreement  covered  MILA and 
Cape Kennedy a s  well  as  Patrick, was  retroactive to  April 1 when  pre- 
(AP,  NYT ,  4/17/64) 
vious two-year agreement had  expired. 
D.  Brainerd Holmes, vice president of  Raytheon Corp. and former director 
of  NASA  manned  space  flight  program,  was  interviewed  in  the  Boston 
Globe.  Asked i f   he still thought the 1970 manned lunar landing goal was 
realistic, he  replied,  “The  timetable now  is tougher than  it was,  but  still 
(White, Boston  G lobe ,  4/16/64,  CR ,  4/21/64,  A 2 0 0 2 4 3 )  
possMe.” 
launched  three  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  from  Ft. 
April  17:  NASA 
Churchill, Canada, and Wallops  Island,  Va.,  two  with grenade payloads 
to  investigate  winds,  temperature, density,  and  pressure  in  the  upper 
atmosphere.  T h e  first, a Nike-Cajun was launched from Wallops; i t  sent 
payload  to   about  57-mi.  altitude,  where  aluminum-coated mylar  plastic 
sphere was  ejected  and  inflated  to   26-in.  diameter.  The  sphere  con- 
tinued up to about 78.4mi. altitude before floating down to  earth.  Radar 
tracking  of  ascent,  descent,  and  drift  provided  data  for  calculating 
densities at various altitudes.  Less than two  hours later the Ft.  Churchill 
rocket was launched, sending 82-lb. payload which ejected grenades det- 
onating  at  intervals in  region  of  23  to  58 mi.  20 min.  later  the  final 
launched from Wallops Is- 
rocket-the 
second carrying grenades-was 
land,  with  grenades  exploding in  about  the  same altitude range.  NASA 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  conducted  the  flights to   observe charac- 
teristics  of  the  upper  atmosphere and  to  measure variations occurring 
through the period of  increased heating.  The grenade experiments were 
an  extension  of  series conducted  from  Jan.  23  to  Mar. 6 involving 13 
Nike-Cajun flights which  “yielded excellent  data  on  the  characteristics 
in  the upper atmosphere during winter conditions,” according t o  project 
scientist Wendell  S.  Smith.  Follow-up experiments  were  planned  for 
late summer when  solar heating would  be  near maximum, for compara- 
tive data.  (Wallops Release 6 6 3 8 )  
Sidney  J.  Dagle,  29,  Ball Brothers  technician,  died  of  injuries caused by 
ignition  of X-248  rocket  motor  three  days  earlier  a t   Cape  Kennedy. 
This wa s  the first death among the 11 injured personnel.  Next day, John 
W. Fassett,  30,  succumbed to  burns sustained in the accident.  An engi- 
neer  in  GSFC  Field  Projects Branch, Fassett was  the only  NASA  employee 
among the  11; the  others were employees of  Douglas  (booster contrm 
to r )   and  Ball  Brothers  (Os0  satellite contractor).  One  other man  re- 
mained  in  critical  condition. 
(AP,  NYT ,   4/18/64,  12;  UPI,  NYT ,  
4/19/64,80;  GorEdard News,  4/20/64,  3 ;  GSFC  PIO,  5/13/64) 
*  House  Appropriations  Committee  reported  $46,785,867,000  military  ap- 
propriations. bill  for  FY  1965.  Report said : “The  committee explored 
in  detail  the  question, of  missile  dependability.  . . . [The  committtw] 
i s  inclined to conclude with  the Secretary  [of  Defense]  that the missile 
force we  have programmed can be depended upon  to  carry out  its mili- 
tary mission under  all of  the  conditions we  can  foresee.”  The commit- 
tee  also  proposed  appropriation of  $47 million  for  initiating develop 
(Raymond, NYT ,  4/18/64,1) 
ment of a new  manned bomber. 

14.2 
A S T R O N A U l l C S   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1964:  
April 17: usu  communications exhibition  to be &own  in U.S.S.R. 
this sum' 
mer  was  previewed  by  Government, industry,  and p r e s  representatives 
in  New York.  Exhibition  covered US .   communications  in space satel- 
lites,  TV and   radio,  telephone, and business and  industry.  The  space 
portion  featured  models  of  nine  satellites and  live TV images  of  visi- 
tors bounced  off  working  model  of  Telstar  satellite. 
(Shanley, N Y T ,  
4/19/a,  47) 
0  NASA  Lewis Research Center announced  seven  researchers had won awards 
for  four  inventions, the  awards  totaling $l,MO under  provisions  of  the 
Government Employees  Incentive Awards Act.  Winners were : S.  Ste- 
phen  Papell, $500 for  low viscosity magnetic  fluid obtained  by  collodial 
suspension  of  magnetic  particles;  Paul D.  Reader  and Harold  R.  Kauf- 
man,  $500  for electrostatic ion engine with permanent  magnetic circuit; 
Robert J. Branstetter and Allen  J.  Metzler, $300 for  black-body furnace; 
John  R.  Jack  and  Paul F.  Brinich,  $100  fo r   improved  heat  exchangers 
for  electrothermal rockets.  ( WRC Release 64-38) 
*  Geraldine Mock,  Columbus,  O.,  housewife,  became  the  first woman  to  fly 
around  the world  when  she  landed  a t  Port Colurabus Airport,  0.  Mrs, 
Mock completed her 23,103-mi.  solo flight in  29 days,  11 hours, 59 min. 
The  flight  was  monitored  by  National  Aeronautic  Association. 
(NU  
Release) 
April 18: Second meeting  of  the President's  Advisory  Committee on  Super- 
sonic Transport was  held  in  the Pentagon.  The committee heard views 
of  airline  representatives regarding  economic  aspects of  SST, then  con- 
tinued  its discussion of  major issues involved  in the SST program. 
(DOD  
Release 320-64) 
*  His Majesty Hussein I, King of  Jordan, visited NASA Kennedy Space Center 
(NASA  Off. Int.  Aff.) 
and toured facilities a t  the Cape. 
April 19.-  NASA  Technology Utilization Report  (SP-5005)  on the retrometer, 
a  new  system of  voice  communications transmitted  on  a  beam  of  light, 
was published.  Invented  a t  NASA  Langley Research Center *by Numa  E. 
Thomas,  the  retrometer  differed from  previous  light  beam-communica- 
tions  systems  in  that  the  originating  station  required  no  power  other 
than  the  human  voice.  The T-U  Report  described  the  system, gave in- 
structions  for  building  experimental  retrometers,  and  suggested  many 
possible  applications of  the system. 
(NASA  T-U  Rpt.  SP-5005;  NASA 
Release 64-82) 
Soviet V-8  helicopter,  a  %-passenger  single-rotor  vehicle,  covered  1,530 
mi.  in  1 2  hrs.  3 min.  3 4  sec.,  to  claim  new  world  nonstop  records  for 
(AP,  Wash. Eve.  Star, 4/20/64; 
distance and speed,  Pravda reported. 
NYT ,  4/22/@,  77) 
April 20:  NASA  announced  it had selected IBM a s  lead contractor for develop- 
ment  and  fabrication  of  instrument  units  for  Saturn  IB  and  Saturn V 
launch  vehicles. 
IBM  was  selected last  October t o  design  and manufac- 
ture   the  da ta   adapters and  digital guidance  computers  and  be  respon- 
sible for  integration and checkout of  the units.  Now,  as lead contractor, 
IBM  would  assume additional  responsibility for  structural  and environ- 
mental control systems and integration of  all systems.  NASA would  sup- 
ply telemetry system and ST-124M  stabilized platforms. 
(NASA  Release 
64-89; KSC Release 5 M )  

143 

in convincing his supervisors and work force that what’s  good enough for 
the public just isn’t  good enough for the national space program. 
control f o r  the 
“NASA  ha s  set hi&  standards of  reliability 
into  space,  the 
boosters  that  send  manned  and  unmanned 
ment.  . . .”  (Text) 
spacecraft  themselves,  and  for  their  relate 
support  equip- 
*  NASA  and  DOD  signed  agreement  concerning  DOD contract  administration 
services fo r  NASA within the Philadelphia contract administrative services 
region,  the  pilot  test  intended  ‘‘to  avoid  duplication  of  effort  and   to 
achieve the most  effective and  economical utilization”  of  DOD  and  NASA 
resources  in   contract  administration  services  for  NASA. 
(Agreement, 
NMI  2-3-31) 
*  Western  Union  announced  it  had  completed  a  microwave  system  fo r  the 
next  lunar  spacecraft’s communications with earth.  The  system was in 
test  operation,  linking  Goldstone Tracking  Station  with  Jet  Propulsion 
Laboratory,  la mi.  away.  For  the  next  lunar  probe,  9s  well  a s  sub- 
sequent  lunar  and  planetary  probes,  data  obtained  by  the  spacecraft 
would  be  sent  through  Goldstone  to  JPL   fo r   computer  analysis;  cam- 
mands to  the spacecraft would be sent from JPL through Goldstone to the 
probe.  (Wash. Post, 4/21/64) 
Brig.  Gen.  T.  J. Hayes, Assistant to  Chief  of  Army  Engineers, told  Space 
Congress a t  Cape Kennedy  that  U.S.  should begin  immediately  to  plan 
building  a  lunar base.  A  lunar base would be the next logical step after 
Project  Apollo,  he  said,  and  such  an  installation  would  “require  soh- 
ing  unprecedented  engineering  problems  imposed  by  delivery-systFm 
limitations  and  the  harsh  environment  about  which  there  is  little  in- 
formation. 
“A significant program is needed to develop the equipment, techniques, 
(AP,  Balt.  Sun, 
and  reliability  necessary  for  this  d i6cu l t   task.” 
4 / 2 1 / a )  
*  President  Johnson  announced  U.S.  would  reduce  production  of  enriched 
uranium  over a four-year period.  Addressing AP in New York, he  said: 
“When  added  to previous reductions,  this will mean  an  overall decrease 
in the production  of  plutonium by 20 per  cent,  and of  enriched uranium 
by 41) per  cent.”  Soviet Premier Khrushchev simultaneously announced 
in Moscow  that  U.S.S.R.  would  discontinue construction af  two  atomic 
reactors for production of  plutonium;  reduce production of  aranium-235 
in  the  next  several  years;  and  allocate more  fissionable materials  for 
peaceful uses of atomic energy.  (Texts; NYT, 4/21/64,14) 
At  White House  ceremony,  with  President  Johnson  participating,  Dr.  W. 
ace I1 was sworn in as Director of  Space Medicine, NASA. 
/64) 
of  a steerable entry vehicle o r  steerable parachute 
system fo r  1969 Mars probe, Missiles and  Rockets reported, JPL wanted 
to  land  the   complete  vehicle  and   achieve telemetry  from  the  Martian 

144  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4. 

surface,  notably  on whether  or  not  signs of  life existed.  Chief  area of 
interest  was  Syrtis Major,  prominent  green  area  on  Martian  equator 
(M&R ,  
that  might  be  one  of  the  m o r .   likely  spots  to  support  life. 
4/20/64,11) 
April 20:  Interviewed in Missiles and  Rockets,  Presidential Science Adviser 
Donald  F.  Hornig  replied  to  question  about  U.S.  space  goals  after 
Project  Apollo : 
There  are   clearly  a  series  of  successively  more  difficult  scientific 
u 
objectives which  we  will  pursue  with  unmanned  spacecraft.  It’s  very 
difficult,  though, , t o  document a  convincing  case  for a national commit- 
ment  on  major  space  goals  that  are  f a r  in  the  future.  I n  any  case,  I 
can’t  believe that athe  momentum gained  by  our  space program i s  going 
to   be  allowed  to   be  lost  when  we  achieve  the  first  major  objective.” 
(M& R ,   4/20/64,35) 
Problem  of  nylon parachutes’  deteriorating in  space was suggested by tests 
conducted by Northrop Ventura.  Strength of  nylon, after two weeks in 
vacuum  chamber,  reduced  up  to  20% ; after  seven minutes  exposure  to 
normal  atmosphere the nylon  returned to  within  2.3%  original strength. 
(M& R ,  4/20/64,21) 
April  21:  NASA  launched  Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  from  White  Sands, 
N.  Mex.,  with  instrumental payload  to  obtain evidence of  hypervelocity 
micrometeoroid  impacts, samples of  low-velocity cosmic dust, and meas- 
urements  of  electron  densities.  Flight  failed  when, rocket’s  propulsion 
system  malfunctioned  and  the  rocket  attained  only  6.25-mi.  altitude. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  NASA  announced  Walter  L.  Lingle,  Jr.,  Deputy  Associate  Administrator, 
was  leaving NASA  May  15  to  return  to   private  industry.  Lingle  would 
be  succeeded  by  Earl D.  Hilburn, Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for 
(NASA  Release 6 6 9 0 )  
Industry Affairs. 
*  Rep.  Joseph  E.  Karth  (D.-Minn.)  addressed  the  National  Space  Club  in  
Washington: 
“The  great  promise  for  the  future of  the  space  and  defense  industry 
is t o  turn  some  of  the tremendous  imagination,  some of  the talents and 
energies  of  your  management,  your  scientists  and  engineers,  to  the 
major social and economic problems of  our country. 
“Your  industries,  I  submit,  are  eminently  qualified  to  cooperate  in 
this entirely different kind  of  takeoff  because of  your  unique experience 
analysis.  . . .,’ 
in  solving  inter-disciplinary problems  through  the technique  of  systems 
Emphasizingbthat  “space  is  not  a  WPA  program,”  h e  said  he  would 
not  support accelerated space expenditures merely t o  stimulate the econ- 
omy depressed by reduction  in defense spending because of  disarmament. 
(NSC  Release) 
*  Rep.  Roman  C.  Pucinski  (D.-Ill.)  , Chairman  of  House  Subcommittee on 
National  Research  Data  Processing  and  Information  Retrieval  Center, 
wrote in Washington Da i ly  News article: 
“The greatest challenge  in  this  changing  world  is the  solution of  the 
problem of  handling scientific and technical information. 
“I am deeply  concerned  with  the staggering acceleration of  scientific 
and  technical  information  which  is  the  life-blood in  the  heart  of  our 
research  and development effort.  . . . 

145 
ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS,  1 9  8 4 
“I am convinced  somewhere in  the  mountainous  scientific literature 
there is a cure fo r  cancer, a solution fo r  harnessing limitless energy from 
nuclear  fusion  and  a  way  to  solve the  food  requirement  of  a growing 
 News, 4/21/&) 
(Wash. M
y
world population.” 
A p r i l 2 1 :  Rep.  John Brademas (D.-Ind.) 
inserted in Congressional Record an 
Midwestern office,  broadcast  by  station  wowo: “. . . . We  agree with 
editorial  on  Rep.  J.  Edward  Roush‘s  proposal  that  NASA  establish  a 
Congressman Roush  that  i f   it  is in  the best  interests of  NASA  to  operate 
liaison  o f f im   to  aid  potential  contractors  in   securing  NASA  business, 
then  every  area  of  the United  States should  qualify  for this aid.  . . .“ 
(CR ,  4/21/641,  A 1 9W 9 9 )  
April  22:  NASA  launched  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  from  Ft.  Churchill, 
Canada, with Univ. of Alaska payload to obtain data on the visible aurora 
and  on  the  vacuum  ultraviolet  emissions.  This  information  was  t o  be  
supplemented  by  data  from  two  electron  particle  detectors.  Payload 
also  included  three  photometers  and  two  vacuum  ultraviolet  detectors. 
The rocket attained peak altitude of  103 mi.,  and the flight appeared sat- 
isfactory. 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
Michael  I.  Yarymovych,  Director  of  NASA  Manned  Earth  Orbital  Mis- 
sion Studies, said before Canaveral Council of  Technical Studies, Cape 
Kennedy,  that  NASA  was  coordinating  fully  with  DOD  in  exploring 
four different types of  orbital systems:  Extended Apollo, Apollo Orbital 
Research  Laboratory  (AORL) ,   Medium  Orbital  Research  Laboratory 
(MORL ) ,   and   Large  Orbital  Research  Laboratory  (LORL ) .   The  first 
three concepts were designed to be orbited by Saturn IB; LORL, by Saturn 
V.  Yarymovych said that  it was “becoming  increasingly clear that  the 
program.  . . . 
Extended Apollo  is  an  essential element of  an expanding  Earth  orbital 
“In  the  initial  stages,  i t  would  be  used  as  a  laboratory  and  latm  it 
could be  converted to  a  logistics system.”  AORL,  MORL, and  LORL were 
in  oompetition with each other, he said, and a decision would have to be 
made among them.  USAF’S  Gemini B/Manned  Orbiting Laboratory was 
being studied  a s  possible integral element of  Orbital  Research Labora- 
tory program.  (M&R, 4/27/64,16) 
NASA  announced Flight Research Center’s selection of  Norair Div.,  Northrop 
Corp.,  for  design and fsbrication of  two  “lifting body”  research gliders. 
The  fixed-price contract  was  expected  to  amount  to  about  $1 million. 
The research gliders would be used by FRC  in studying problems of  pilot- 
(FRC  Release 745%; NASA  Re- 
ing advanced spacecraft during  landing. 
lease 64-93) 
World’s  Fair  opened  in New York,  its U.S. Space Park  featuring such ex- 
hibits  as full-scale mockup  of  Saturn  V’s  first  stage  boattail,  Gemini- 
(Goddwd  News,  5/4/@, 
Titan,  Mercury-Atlas,  Delta,  and  the X-15. 
3) 
USAF  information  office was quoted by Stuart H.  Loory in  N e w  York Herald 
Tribune a s  saying that  since 1959, 12 SAC  operational training missions 
of  Atlas  ICBM had been failures.  USAF had called in General Dynamics 
(Loory,  N.Y. Her.  Tr ib . ,  
Corp.  engineers  to  help  solve  the problems. 
4/22/64) 
AFSC/BSD  commander Maj. Gen. W. A.  Davis, asked a t  Cape Kennedy press 
conference to  comment on  the  recently reported Atlas  ICBM failures  a t  
Vandenberg AFB, said: 

146 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19 6 43 

The re   are  several possible reasons  for  the  failures.  The Atlas  is  a 
complex piece of  machinery that has a habit  of  using u p  some of  its reli- 
ability  with  age.  SAC  ha s  been  taking  Atlases  off  of  operational  sites, 
where  they  have  been  for  a  year  o r  more,  placing  them  on  the  stand 
at Vandenberg and firing them. 
“I feel that this type of  test  is not  operational realism as SAC  calls it. 
You take the missile out of  its environment, load it on a plane, fly it 1,OOO 
or  more  miles, load  it on   another  stand  and  fire  it.  This requires  dis- 
connecting and  reconnecting w ires   and fuel lines and installing destruct 
(AP, 
packages  and  some  instrumentation  for  the  training  launches.” 
Vmh .  Post, 4/23/64) 
April 23: NASA  and NBC conducted one-hour test of  the SYNCOM 11 communica- 
tion  satellite hovering in  synchronous orbit near the West Coast, testing 
the  satellite’s capability  to  relay  video coverage from Tokyo’s  Olympic 
Games next  fall.  In  the test, signals we re  transmitted  from  an  antenna 
at  Fort  Dix,  N.J.;  signals  returned  from  the  satellite were  received  at 
Andover, Me.,  and  relayed to  NBC  studios by  land  lines.  Quality of  the  
pictures was  considered below standard commercial quality b u t  adequate 
for  brief  broadcasts  of  select  events.  NBC,  which  had  purchased  ex- 
clusive rights  to TV  coverage of  the 1964 Summer Olympics in the U S .  
and  Central  and  South America, would  now  decide whether to   attempt 
live coverage with satellites or to rely on ;tapes.  (Witkin, NYT ,  4/24/64, 
5 5 )  
0  USAF  launched  Atlas-Agena D  booster  combination  from  Point  Arguello, 
Calif.,  with unidentified satellite payload.  (AP, Howton Post, 4/2%/64; 
M&R,  5/4/@,  8 )  
*  AFSC  announced  that  36  projects  initiated  undm  the  canceled X-20  pro- 
gram would be continued in support of  USAF  manned orbiting laboratory 
(MOL)   and other programs.  Examples of  projects to be continued: X-20 
full pressure suit, search and rescue receiver/transmitter,  studies of  pilot 
control  of  %ooster trajectories,  nose  cap concept, X-20  heat  protection 
system, coated molybdenum panels, high temperature bearings, sensors/ 
transducers,  test  instrumentation  subsystem ground  station,  flight  simu- 
(AFSC  Release 43-1O-M) 
lation  instruments  and  controls. 
0  Dr. Robert M.  White, Chief  of  U S .  Weather Bureau, said in address before 
joint  American  Meteorological  Society-American Geophysical  Union 
banquet  in Washington: 
“Man  has  always had  to  contend with  hurricanes,  tornadoes,  seismic 
sea waves, floods, earthquakes, and the like.  His scientific, technological, 
and  social  advances have  now  brought  him  face to  face  with  new  en- 
vironmental  hazards.  I  am thinking  of  communications blackouts,  the 
effects of  atmospheric turbulence on high-speed aircraft,  radioactive fall- 
out, and radiation i n  space.  . . . 
“We  are  now  developing  revolutionary  new  methods  of  acquiring 
global information about our environment.  The space satellite, although 
still in k s  embryonic state, offers a potential for acquiring environmental 
information  over  the  entire  globe  in  a  manner  hitherto  unimaginable. 
However, satellites a re  extremely costly, and their cost will  require  that 
a  system be  devised for multiple uses.  A  satellite observational system 
fo r  environmental purposes will have to serve navigational and geodetic 
functions, make observations of  the weather, p r & e  the oceans, and sound 
the ionosphere. 

‘ 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

147 

“Any  observational platform  should  be  put  to mulciple  uses  if   it  is 
expensive to build and operate.  I am thinking not only of  space satellites, 
but  also  of  ships and  aircraft.  We  can no  longer  ignore the necessity 
of  using  expensive platforms  to  collect data  fo r  many  geophysical pur- 
poses.  The concept of  an oceanographic survey without a simultaneous 
atmospheric  survey  must  be  abandoned  by  force  of  economics 
alone.  . . .”  (Text) 
April  24:  NASA  investigative committee recommended  series  of  tests to  de- 
termine  whether  static  electricity  caused  accidental  ignition  of  Delta 
rocket motor  in  the  Spin  Test  Facility  at  Cape Kennedy last  April  14. 
In its preliminary report,  the fact-finding committee said there were four 
possible causes f o r  the ignition:  heat,  shock,  outside  radio  signals, and 
electrical impulse.  The first three po s sM i t ie s  seemed unlikely, but they 
would  be studied  further.  Committee considered it “possible, hopwever, 
that  static  electricity  could  have  built  up  in  such  a  way  as to  cause 
ignition.”  Until  the  committee completed  its  study  and made  its final 
report,  NASA would not fly  the X-248  motor. 
(NASA Release 64-98;  KSC 
Release 55-64?) 
USAF  OAR  announced  determination  by  Cambridge Research Laboratories 
scientists R.  k Skrivaneb R. K.  Soberman, a nd  Tom Ryan  that  nocti- 
lucent clouds were composed of  meteoric particles o r  of  residue of burned 
out meteors.  The determination was made after  extensive examinations 
of  noctilucent cloud particles gathered by  specially designed rocket nose 
cones  sent  aloft  on  Nike-Cajun  rockets  in  joint  AFCRL-NASA-U~~V. 
of 
Stockholm  program.  The  researchers  expected  that  another  series  of 
noctilucent  cloud  experiments to  be  conducted in  Sweden  this  summer 
- 
would confirm these results. 
(OAR Release M 4 - 3 )  
*  Douglas  D G 7  aircraft  crashed  a t   airport  near  Phoenix,  Ariz.,  in   con- 
trolled  test  conducted by  Flight  Safety Foundation  under  FAA contract. 
Damage wa s   worse @en  expected,  and  researchers were  delighted with 
the “perfect crash.’’  Main purpose of  test was to  obtain data on  fracture 
affecting passenger  survival,  evacuation, and  fire following impact.  A 
NACA/NASA  developed  system  to   protect  passengers  was  tested  in   the 
crash:  plastic  bag  which  can  be  inflated rapidly  to  hold  the person  in  
celeration  and  deceleration  forces,  hard  landings,  and   crash  s f ocks. 
his seat  and  thus provide cushion  against vibration,  buff&ng,  hi  h  ac- 
(NASA  Release 64-88;  FAA Release 64-30;  NYT,  4/25/64,1) 
0  NASA  announced Georgia  Institute  of  Technology would  receive $1 million 
grant  fo r  construction of  research  facilities fo r  projected  Space Science 
Technology  Center.  Grant  would  build  two-story building  containing 
about 51,000 sq. ft. to  accommodate laboratory  research in  atmospheric 
sciences,  materials  and  structures,  transport  phenomena,  and  systems 
engineering.  T o   complete  the  Center,  Georgia  Tech  would  build  a 
(NASA  Release &%) 
matching structure with funds from other sources. 
’ NASA  Flight  Research  Center’s  selection  of  Cornell  Aeronautical  Lab- 
oratories,  Inc.,  fo r   contract  negotiations  on  general  purpose  jet  air- 
borne  simulator  system  was  announced.  The  cost-plus-fixed-fee con- 
tract was expected to  amount to  about $1 million.  The new system would 
be installed in  Lockheed Jetstar  aircraft  (C-lMA),  purchased last year 
fo r  use in  extensive flight research directed toward problems of  a variety 
of aircraft types, including supersonic transport. 
(NASA  Release 6 6 9 7 )  

148 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

April 24:  NASA  selected six firms fo r  c 
leading to con- 
er, NASA:  Aero- 
tract  fo r  launch support services 
jet  General Corp.,  American Machine and  Foundry  Co.,  Bendix Corp., 
Chrysler  Corp.,  General  Dynamics  Corp.,  and  Westinghouse  Hectric 
Corp.  The  contract  would  b e  cost-reimbursement type  with  incentive- 
award  fee provisions,  and would be awarded fo r  one year with renewal 
options  for  two  more  years.  Total  cost  of  three-year  contract  was  ex- 
pected  to  be more  than  $20 million.  Most  of the  work  wouId  be per- 
formed  a t  new  facilities now  under  construction on NASA  Merritt  Island 
(NASA  Release 64-95) 
Launch Area. 
*  Dr.  Gerard  P.  K u i p r ,   head  of  Lunar  and  Planetary  Laboratory  of  the 
Univ.  of  Arizona,  said  at  meeting  of  American  Geophysical Union  in 
Washington  that  Mars  did  not  have  enough  water  to  support  any  but 
microscopic life forms.  He described recent &sewations  from McDon- 
ald  Observatory in  Fort Davis, Tex.,  that  showed Mars  to  be enveloped 
in sheath of  atmospheric ice crystals.  Dr. Kuiper said in Martian spring 
the frost covering its pole during the wintertime evaporates directly into 
the  a i r   rather  than  melting.  He  estimated Martian  air  to  be  t w o  parts 
nitrogen  t o  one  part  carbon  dioxide,  with  small  amount  of  argon  and 
even less water vapor and oxygen.  Dr. Hyron Spinrad of  Univ. of  Calif. 
(Berkeley)  described recent observations of  Mars from Mt. Wilson Qb- 
servatory.  He  said  Mars  was  so  cold  that  water  melted  only  in  the 
afternoon  and when Mars was  nearest  the  sun; amount  of water  in  the 
Martian  air was  a  thousandth  of  that  in  sea-level air  in  the  arid  south- 
western U S .   The speakers rejected the idea that Martian a i r  contained 
nitrogen-oxygen  compounds,  proposed  last  December  by  Georgetown 
Univ.  astronomer  Dr.  Carl C.  Kiess  and  chemist Dr.  Sebastian Karrer. 
(Sullivan, NYT,  4/25/€4,  8 )  
April 25:  President Johnson said in Washington press conference: 
“I  have  sent.  a memorandum  to  Mr.  Halaby  of  the Federal  Aviation 
Agency that states: 
“ ‘I realize that you had hoped to select the contractors to proceed with 
the development of  supersonic transport by May 1 of  this year, as a  result 
‘of  the  preliminary  design  competition conducted  over  the  past  several 
months among a number  of  airframe and  engine manufacturers. 
“ ‘As you have reported to  me,  however, the 2l0-member Government 
evaluation group, after analyzing the proposals in  depth, found that none 
of  the  proposed  airframe  designs met  the  minimum  range-payload re- 
quirements  of  the  F.A.A.  request  fo r  proposals  of  carrying  a  30,000- 
pound payload for a distance of  4,000 statute miles. 
“ ‘Moreover, none of  these designs met what you properly emphasized 
a s  a  basic  requirement, namely that the aircraft be capable of  economic 
operation. 
“ ‘As  you  have  also  emphasized,  it  has  been  the  objective  that  the 
development stage  of  the  supersonic transport  be   financed  75  per  cent 
by  manufacturers.  The  F.A.A.  request  f o r  proposals pointed  out  that 
“the  Government’s  decision  t o   proceed  with  the  supersonic  transport 
program  is based on  manufacturers’ participation  in a n  amount equiva- 
lent to 25 per  cent of  the  total cost of  the development through certifica- 
tion of  the tra11sp01-t.” 
“ ‘I  remain convinced that  it w i l l  be possible to  develop an American 
supersonic transport which w i l l  be economic to operate, will find a  swb 

149 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
stantial market  among the  airlines of  the worId  and will  help  to  main- 
tain American leadership in  the air. 
“ ‘In  view  of  the current  situation,  however,  I  recognize that it is no 
longer  appropriate  fo r  me  to   hope  for  a  recommendation b y  May  1. 
Difficult  and  complex issues a r e  now  presented f o r  resolution  so  that  I 
can determine how best to proceed. 
‘‘ ‘I have asked the members of  the President’s Advisory Committee on 
Supersonic Transport,  of  which you a r e  a member, to  study this program 
thoroughly,  after  which  I w i l l  expect recommendations from  the  com- 
mittee and  from you.’ 
“So  the call for  bids on May  1 is off  and we  cannot expect a  recom- 
mendation by then.” 
(Transcript, NYT ,  4/26/64,6p) 
April  25:  U.S.S.R  launched  COSMOS XXIX  into  orbit  from  unspecified  site. 
Soviet press  agency Tass  said  the   satellite was  in  the  following  initial 
orbit: 309-km. apogee (192 mi.)  ; 204-km. perigee (127 mi.)  ; 89.52 min. 
period;  and  65”4‘ angle of  inclination to the equator.  Tass said scientific 
equipment,  radio  systems,  and  onboard  instrumentation  were  function- 
h g  normally, and ground station was processing incoming information. 
(Tass, Komsomolshxya Pravda, 4/26/W 1, ATSS-T  Trans.) 
First  industry-produced  Saturn  booster  (S-I)  arrived  at  NASA  Marshall 
Space  Flight  Center  after  nine-day  barge  journey  from  Michoud  Op- 
erations.  To  be  used  on  SA-8,  the  booster  was  undergoing  static  fir- 
ings and other tests at MSFC befoFe being sent to  Cape Kennedy where it 
would be launched.  (MmsM  Star, 4/29/64,1) 
*  Harold Goldstein, Assistant Commissioner of  U S .  Bureau of  Labor Statis- 
tics,  discussed  changes  i n  the  labor  force  a t  symposium in  New  York. 
“We  now  have &out  1.2 million engineers  and scientists.  Their num- 
bers may rise to somewhere in the neighborhood of  2 million by 1970. 
“There  productivity  is  also  rising  rapidly. 
New  inventions  can  be 
made faster, because a s  science and  technology have progressed the tech- 
niques  availahle  for analyzing  a  problem,  the  knowledge  of  scientific 
principles that  can  be  brought  to  bear,  the  di&rent  types  of  hardware 
that a re  readily available to be adapted in a new invention a re  increasing 
at a geometric rate.”  [Lissner, NYT, 4/26/64,85) 
April  26:  NASA  Associate Administrator  Dr.  R c h r t  C.  Seamans said  Soviet 
spacecraft ZOND  I  apparently  was traveling  on  a  Venus trajectory.  Dr. 
Seamans was speaking on Mutual Broadcasting Systems, Inc.,  radio pro- 
gram “Reporters Roundup.”  Asked why he thought ZOND I was a Venus 
probe,  he  said that he understood U S .  
d  identified it as such and 
on.”  Also, he  added,  the 
that  “this  payload  is traveling  in  tha t  
firing  occurred  “at  the right  time  fo r   a  Venus  launch.” 
(AP,  Wash. 
Eve. Star, 4/27/64; AP, W a h .  Post, 4/27/a) 
NASA  Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L.  Dryden said in address before Na- 
tional University Extension Association in Washington: 
“The  exploration  of  space  is  a  continuation  of  the  geographical  ex- 
ploration  by  man  of  unknown areas  of  the  earth  from  the  days  of  the 
Phoenician  mariners  three thousand  years  ago.  The New  World,  the 
polar  regions,  the  depths  of  the  ocean,  the  limits  of  the  atmosphere- 
have  each  in  tu rn   been  th e   temporary  god.  Space  is  the   new  fron- 
tier.  . . . 
“We  have  as a  nation  accepted the challenge of  the new frontier, and 
this  year  are spending  a little more  than  five ‘billion dollars on  the ex- 

150 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

ploration of  space f o r  peaceful purposes.  This represents a n  expenditure 
of  approximately 50 cents per week  by  each of  the 200 million  inhabit- 
an t so fou rcoun t ry .   . . .”  ( T a t )  
April 26: NASA  announced 1964-65  Alfred P. Sloan Fellowships in executive 
development  were  awarded  to  three  NASA  employees:  Walter  C.  Scott, 
Chief  of  Chemical and Solar Power Generation Branch  in Office  of  Ad- 
vanced  Research  and  Technology;  Edward  J.  Lievens,  Jr.,  member  of 
Technical Staff, Plans  and Analysis,  in  Office  of  Manned  Space Flight; 
and  Neal  A.  Holmberg,  Aerospace  Technology  Program  Manager  at 
(NASA   Release 64-94) 
NASA Western Operations Office. 
Ap r i l  27:  NASA  announced Langley Research Center would conduct tests w i t h  
Boeing  707  air  transport  prototype  to  find  ways  to  lower  landing  and 
takeoff  distances required  for large jet transports.  NASA  pilots and engi- 
neers would  study  performance  and  handling characteristics of  the air- 
craft in three-month program.  ( NASA Release 66100 )  
House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee on  NASA 
Oversight began hearings  on Project  Ranger.  Subcommittee Chairman 
Rep.  Joseph  E.  Karth  (D.-Minn.) 
remarked  that  “the  action  that  pre- 
cipitated  these  hearings  are  letters  which  Mr.  Webb  addressed  to  the 
chairman  of  the  tw o   space  committees”  (March  31 letters  to   Senator 
Anderson  and  Representative Miller  outlining  problems  with  Ranger 
spacecraft).  (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/64t) 
*  Dr. Homer E.  Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and 
Applications, said  before House Subcommittee on  NASA  Oversight about 
Project Ranger: 
. . . From  the  outset, the concept was  advanced.  I t  was  conceived 
(6 
to  seize the  initiative  in  space exploration from  the  Soviet as well  a s  to 
obtain  important  information  about  the  moon.  Had  it  succeeded,  it 
certainly would  have been a major first fo r  this country, and it may still 
obtain  that  objective.  The  spacecraft  itself  is  quite  complex.  . . . I t  
is comparable  to  the most sophisticated launch vehicles in terms of  elec- 
tromechanical  system  complexity.  Launch  vehicles  developed  in   this 
country have typically taken  20 or more flights to achieve 50% reliabil- 
ity.  Some have not done much better than this after many more firings. 
Indeed,  we  have  read  recently that  last  year  there  were  13 consecutive 
failures  of  the Atlas. 
In  addition,  the  Discoverer  project  took  13 at- 
tempts  to  recover  its  first  payload  from  orbit.  Polaris  experienced 5 
initial  failures  before  its  first  success.  Skybolt  experienced  5  flights 
without  achieving complete mission  success.  I n  each  of  these projects, 
partial  success in  early  flights helped  improve later  flights.  Although I 
believe  Skybolt was  dropped  fo r   other  reasons,  Atlas,  Discoverer,  and 
Polaris  all  went  on  to  become vital  elements in  the  defense posture  of 
this country. 
“Ranger  is  going  through  this  same  process.  We  have  solved  some 
of  ou r  launch  vehicle problems to  the  point where the  reliability  is im- 
proving  appreciably.  The  basic  spacecraft bus  has  been  retained  and 
has now demonstrated its capabiIity to deliver a payload to  a precise spot 
on the lunar  surface.  We now must make the payload work.  The pay- 
load  also is pushing  the  state of  the  a r t  in  high  power television  telem- 
etry.  This was  necessary  to  obtain  high  resolution  photographs.  . . 
Our reviews of  the Ranger system continue to convince us of  its capa- 
LL  
bility  of  performing  the  mission.  While  we  h o w   we  cannot  have 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

151 
100%  reliability  with  launch  vehicle,  spacecraft,  or  payload,  we  ex- 
flights.  . . . 
pect  to  achieve at  least  one  complete success with  the  remaining  three 
“Ranger  is a tough  job.  Although  success has eluded  us,  it  is within 
our grasp.  We must  have the fortitude to proceed.  Space w i l l   only be 
conquered  by  those  who  do  have  such  fortitude.  It  might  be  well  to 
point  out that ou r  competitors i n  this area of  exploration are not lacking 
in  this  respect.  I t  is  reported  that  the Soviet Union  has  failed in  from 
15 to  20  consecutive lunar  and  planetary  mission  attempts since Lunik 
I11 photographed the back side of  the moon in 1959. 
“Even  should subsequent Rangers  fail through unforeseen causes, we 
must  move  ahead.  We  must  look  a t   the  totality  of  the  space  pro- 
gram.  . . .  The  over-all picture  is  very  good  and  is most  convincing 
The trends a re  all in our favor.  . . .”  (Testimony) 
of  this country’s  capability to  successfully complete these undertakings. 
April 27:  Oran W.  Nicks,  Director  of  NASA  Lunar  and  Planetary  Programs, 
presented history and status of  the Ranger project to the Subcommittee on  
NASA  Oversight,  detailing  in  particular  the  recommendations of  NASA 
Board  of  Inquiry  (Kelley  Board)  prior  to  RANGER  VI  and  the  Hilburn 
Board following RANGER VI.  Hilburn report outlined:  (1) design changes 
effected after  analyses of  RANGER VI  flight data;  (2 )   changes agreed  to 
be  desirable  “if  properly  evaluated and  qualified”;  and  (3) board  rec- 
ommendations “not entirely resolved by OSSA and JPL.”  Notable change 
in  the  first  category:  NASA  would  closely monitor  Ranger  test  program 
a t  JPL, would  have  to  concur  in   spacecraft’s  flightworthiness before  it 
could be shipped.  (Testimony) 
e  USAF  launched Thor-Agena D  booster  combination from Vandenberg  AFB, 
Calif.,  with  unidentified satellite payload.  ( UPI, Wush. Post, 4/28/64) 
*  Four-day  Conference  on  Space  Nutrition  and  Related  Waste  Problems, 
sponsored by NASA and organized with assistance of  National Academy of 
Sciences’ Space Science Board,  opened  in  Tampa, ma.,  with some  200 
engineers and scientists attending. 
I n  introductory remarks  a t  Conference, NASA Associate Administrator 
b r  Advanced  Research  and  Technology  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff 
said  that  in  both  the  life  sciences and  the physical  sciences,  “when  we 
strip  away  the  unessentials, we  a r e   really  dealing  with  the  conversion 
and  control of energy.  There  is the muscle with  its tiny  fibrils  on  the 
one hand  and  the chemical fuel energy converters on the  other.  There 
a re  the  electrical activities of  the  brain  and  nerve  impulses on  the  one 
hand.and the computer and feedback loop on the other. 
“The  state of man’s  technology in every age has depended o n  his abil- 
i ty   to  convert  and  control  energy.  The  Industrial  Revolution  brought 
of  the equivalence of  different forms of  energy.  . . . 
on  an  economic structure that  could not be operated without knowledge 
“The opportunities that a re  now presented f o r  advancements in energy 
conversion and control  axe breathtaking.  New  methods of  energy  con- 
version  from solar,  chemical,  and nuclear  energy sources which will  be 
useful to  all of  mankind are being pioneered in the space program.  . . . 
Perhaps  the most  dramatic  energy  conversion devices in  ithe  NASA  pro- 
gram a re  the propulsion devices that convert chemical o r  nuclear energy 
to  kinetic  energy.  The Nerva  rocket engine converts nuclear energy to 
kinetic vehicle energy by passing liquid hydrogen through a graphite re- 

152 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
actor a t  6000O R and ejects it through a nozzle.  I n  these devices we  will 
convert a s  much  energy  as is converted by the  Grand Coulee Dam  in  a 
device about the size of  an American motor car.  . . .”  (Text) 
Dr. Charles S.  Sheldon of  NASC staff said in  address a t  the  Conference: 
“.  . . As of April 24, the United States had orbited 203 payloads, and 
the  Soviet Union 65 since 1957.  But weight comparisons a r e  quite dif- 
ferent.  They have put up  about three times  a s  much net payload as we  
have.  What is more discouraging, every year fo r  the last five years, the 
lead  of  the  Soviet Union  i n  that  year  has  grown  larger than  it  was  fo r  
the year before.  . . . 
“My  ‘best assessment is  that  the  Soviet  [space]  program  has close to 
the  same variety  of  goals as our  own,  including undertaking  very com- 
plex missions.  Let us look at just the main outlines. 
“Scientific  Exploration  in  Earth  O rb i t :   . . . The  Soviet  Union  is 
clearly interested in more than spectaculars.  In , the  Earth-orbital regime. 
it  has  put  up  28 Kosmos  class  scientific and  engineering-test satellites 
with  a minimu,m of  fanfare,  and these have  included a range  of  experi- 
ments.  . . . Additionally  the  pair  of  Elektron  satellites a r e   providing 
synoptic measurements of  the  radiation belts out to  40,000  miles. 
“Space Applications:  When  it  comes to  practical  applications of  un- 
manned satellites, the United States has the lead in demonstrated accom- 
plishments.  . . . But  similar  flight  operations  a re   not  beyond  Soviet 
capabilities.  . . . 
“Lunar and  Planetary Probes:  . . . In  absoIute number of  Iaunchings 
the Soviet Union has made a  larger commitment to such  flights than we 
have.  As  a  percentage of  total  flight effort, their  commitment  for  that 
purpose is running about five-fold our own.  And they use larger vehicles 
by far.  Take a part of  the comparative planetary effort for example.  Of 
our two launch attempts to date, the 447-pound Mariner  I1 carried about 
40 pounds of  instruments near Venus and returned  some data.  We  are 
rightfully proud of  this accomplishment. 
“The  Soviet pattern  has  been  to  orbit  14,300-pound platforms  from 
which a probe weighing up to 2,000 exclusive of  the rocket casing can be 
launched  on  the  interplanetary  trajectory.  Between  1960  and  1962, 
ten  such  Iaunchings were  made.  Typically,  the   comparison  is  a  diffi- 
cult one to make.  We met with  a great  success in Mariner  11.  Not  one 
of  the Soviet craft attained its full objective.  . . . 
“While  neither  country  should  be  overly  proud  of  its  lunar  prdbe 
record,  the  pictures  taken  by  Lunik  I11  back  in  1959 a re  still  a  high- 
water mark. 
“Manned  Space  Flight:  . . . Through  the   1963 season  each  country 
had made six manned  launchings, and  neither  side had killed  an  astro- 
naut or cosmonaut.  Stories to  the contrary a re  fabrications.  . . . 
“Hurntwt  Safety:  . . . The  Russians sent  up without  recovery Laika, 
four years before Gagarin.  The Vostok ship itself  completed 100 orbits 
of  fully  controlled  flight,  including  successful  recovery  of  four  dogs, 
beforethefirstmanwassent.  . . . 
“Future Manned  Missions:  . . . To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  the 
Russians  have  not  yet  demonstrated  a  launch  system  capable  of  con- 
venient manned  flight to  the Moon  for  a landing  and return.  But then, 
if  we  chose to  practice Soviet-style security around  ou r  launch sites and 
the  United States is building  a lunar capability either.  . . . 
factories, there would  be  no  hard  evidence available  to  foreigners  that 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

153 

“Because  we   a re  not  permitted  to  inspect their  facilities, w e  have  to 
do  ou r  best by  inference to  judge  the truth  of  their  repeated statements 
tha t   they  intend  to  be  first  in  ambitious manned  flights.  . . . With  all 
this  circumstantial  evidence I feel  it  is entirely possible  and even prob- 
able  that  they  a r e  planning  officially to make  long-duration and  distant 
mannedflights.  . . . 
“I feel we  have  the knowledge,  the manpower,  the  resources,  and the 
facilities,  to  mount  the  finest  space program  in  the  world.  I  feel  i t   is 
worth undertaking  on i t s  own merits.  I am also aware that we  are in a 
race with a competent and tough-minded competitor.  We must recognize 
the nature of  this race  and organize to meet it, not by year-by-year reac- 
tions,  but with  sound, consistent planning.  . . .’,  (Text) 
April 27:  At American Physical Society Meeting, the planet  Jupiter was  re- 
ported  to  be  rotating  slower.  Prof.  Alex  G.  Smith  said  in  1961  radio 
sources showed an  abrupt  change in rotational rate; observations made 
by  radio  observatories in Florida and Chile showed that the rotation had 
slowed by  1.3 see.  Dr.  Smith said this was “almost  as surprising as  if 
the city of  Washington had begun t o  drift across the surface of  the earth 
at  a  rate  of  10  degrees longitude  a  year.”  Studies were  continuing t o  
determine whether Jupiter  itself  had changed its rotation  or whether the 
change was limited to  radio  sources.  (Finney,  NYT, 4/28/64,  19)  
*  The “complete success” of  Project Vela high-altitude nuclear-detection satel- 
lites led  DOD’S  Advanced  Research  Projects Agency  (ARPA)  to expand 
and revise the project.  Future launchings had been  rescheduled farther 
apart so that  sabsequent satellites could incorporate any major  improve- 
ments between launchings, according to  ARPA  Director Dr. R.  L.  Sproull. 
(M&R ,  4/27/64,11) 
*  Neutron  star,  detected  by  x-ray  instruments  aboard  sounding  rocket 
launched  last  year  from White Sands Missile Range,  was  discussed  in 
paper  delivered to  National Academy of  Sciences by  NRL astrophysicist 
Dr.  Herbert  Friedman.  The  invisible  star,  located  in  constellation 
Scorpio, emits  about  10 billion  times  more  x-ray  intensity  than  visible 
light, he said, and density of  the star was probably about one billion tons 
to  the  cubic  inch.  Star’s  surface  w a s   “so  hot  that  practically  all  its 
luminosity  is  in   the  form  of  X-ray.”  Another  experiment  to  detect  a 
suspected neutron  star in  the Crab Nebula was being planned for July 7. 
(Hines, Wash.  Eve. Star,  4/27/64;  Haseltine,  Wash.  Post,  4/28/64; 
Sullivan, NYT, 4/28/64,19) 
9  AFSC  announced  new  graphite  refractory  coatings  for  use  in   aerospace 
vehicles had been developed by Research and Technology Division’s Air 
Force $Materials Laboratory.  Materials research engineer Khodabakhsh 
S.  Mazdiyasni applied fo r  patent  on the process of  coating graphite with 
(AFSC  Release 43-13-64) 
zirconium oxide. 
*  Nine-member Republican study group on space and aeronautics, chaired by 
Rep.  Charles  S.  Gubser  (Calif.),  said  President  Johnson  had  shown  a 
“shocking  lack  of  confidence in  United  States  aircraft manufacturers’’ 
with  his  decision to  re-examine the U.S.  supersonic transport  program. 
Rep.  Gubser  charged  the  decision  would  “doom  the  United  States  to 
(AP,  NYT, 
second  place  in   the  high-performance  transport  field.” 
5 / 3 / w   68) 
76%5980--85---11 

154 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
April 27: Remarks of  Dr.  James R. Killian, Jr., president  of  MIT,  to an MIT 
alumni group, appeared in  Aviation Week:  
“The growth of  our innovation indu s t ry - sho r thand  fo r  ‘research,  de- 
a measure of  the progress of  the U S .  
velopment, test and evaluation’-is 
toward  becoming a  research-based society.  From  the very earliest days 
of  the  Republic,  it  has  ,been recognized  that  knowledge  is  power  and 
that  the  nation  grew  stronger by  taming  nature  than  it  could b y  fram- 
ing   ideologies.  So  today  we  have  the  research  society,  afiauent  in. the 
production  of  knowledge as well  a s  dollars, with planned discovery, in- 
novation,  and  experiment  constantly  renewing its vitality  and  harness- 
ing the future for the benefit of  the present.  . . .”  ( A v .  Wk . ,  4/27/64, 
21 1 
Prospect that  U.S. supersonic transport development program management 
would be  transferred  from  FAA to  DOD reported  in Av iu twn   Week .   “It 
naw  appears  that  Defense  Dept.  w i l l   be  assigned  over-all  manage- 
ment  responsibility  for  development, with  FAA acting  as a  oontracting 
agency.  . . .”  ( A v .  Wk . ,  4/27/64,3%) 
0  Plans  for  formation  of  National Academy  of  Engineering were drawn  up 
by  committee of  25   leading  engineers  appointed  by  NAS  president  Dr. 
Frederick  Seitz.  The committee, which would  seek Congressional char- 
ter  fo r   the  proposed  academy,  elected  Dr.  Augustus B.  Kinzel,  Union 
Carbide  Corp.’s  Vice  President  for  Research,  as  chairman. 
(NAS-NRC 
Release) 
0  Ray Romatowski, NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator  f o r  Legislative Af- 
fairs, was among the 1 2  Federal employees selected by Woodrow Wilson 
School of Public  and  International  Affairs to  study at  Princeton  Univ. 
during 1%&5  academic year.  (Wa sh .  Post, 4/27/fA) 
*  Astronomer Dr.  Willem  J.  Luyten  of  the Univ.  of  Minnesota  received the 
James Craig Watson Medal of  the National Academy of  Sciences at NAS 
Annual Meeting in Washington.  The medal, the  Academy’s  oldest, rec- 
ognized  Dr.  Luyten’s  contributions  to  understanding  of  white-dwarf 
stars.  ( NAS-NRC Release) 
*  DOD renamed  the A-11  supersonic aircraft the YF12A.  A-11  had been the 
code-designation by manufacturer Lockheed Aircraft Corp., while YF l2A  
would be a military designation.  DOD called it a n  “interceptor  aircraft.” 
( UPI,  Wash. Pos t ,  4/28/64) 
April 28:  Aerojet General Corp. successfully test fired ApoIlo service moduIe 
engine in long duration test  at Sacramento, Calif.  The multiple-restart, 
22,000-lb.-thrust  engine  was  activated  four  times  for  total  of  421  sec. 
(upr, Houston Chron., 4/29/fj4) 
Use  of  lasers  to  measure  craters  on  the  moon  was  reported  by  J.  S. 
Courtney-Pratt,  of  Bell  Telephone Laboratories,  to   Society  of  Photo- 
graphic Scientists and Engineers in New  York.  Based on computations 
made  w i t h  Iaser  beams  sent  to  crater  lips  and  then  to  crater  bottoms, 
(Devlin, NYT, 
lunar  craters  were  found  to  be  as  deep  as  20,000  ft. 
4 / 2 9 / a ,  15 )  
NASA  Administrator  James E.  Webb,  addressing Texas Technological Col- 
lege,  said  that  the  role  of  NASA  was “essentially the  same as that  of  its 
predecessor,  the  National  Advisory Committee fo r   Aeronautics.  Both 
were  created  in  an  atmosphere- of  chagrin  and   deep  concern  because 
prior  to  World War  I and  following World War  I1  the nation  had  for- 
feited early leadership in a new  field of  technological opportunity-aero- 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  64  

155 

nautics  in  1915 and  space  in  1957.  I n   recommending the  creation  of 
NACA  in   1915,  a  committee of  the  Smithsonian  Institution presented  a 
Memorial to  the  Congress which  began:  ‘This country  led  in   the early 
development of  heavier-than-air machines.  Today it is f a r  behind,  . . .’ 
“This  was  a t   the  outset  of  a war  in  which,  despite the  fact  that  the 
Wright  Brothers  had  first  demonstrated  powered  flight  a t   Kity  Hawk 
in  1903,  the  United  States  had  no  aircraft  design  or  manufacturing 
capability  of  its  own.  No  aircraft of  American design or manufacture 
flew  in   Europe  during World  War  I, and  it  remained  fo r  NACA,  in  the 
years which ensued, to provide the basic research and development upon 
wasbased.  . . . 
which  achievement  of  ultimate  US .   a i r   supremacy, civil  and  military, 
“The advent  of  Sputnik  I  in  1957  revealed that  once again,  this time 
in  space,  the  United  States had  neglected a  clear  opportunity  for  tech- 
nological leadership  and  to   overcome the  deficiency,  the President  and 
the  Congress  turned  once  again  to  the  formula  which  had  proven  so  
effective in  aeronautics fo r  more than 40 years.  It created the National 
Aeronautics  and  Space Administration  as  a  research  and  development 
agency  charged  with  restoring  the  nation’s  leadership  in   space by  de- 
veloping  the  rockets,  the   spacecraft, the  facilities, the  scientific knowl- 
edge,  and  the  operational  skill  required.  And  like NACA,  NASA  has  f u l -  
filled  its  mission  to the  extent  that  we   have  now  reached  a  point  of 
parity i n  space with the Soviet Union.  . . .”  (Text) 
April 28:  At annual meeting of  National Academy of  Sciences, in Washington, 
Dr.  Lloyd  V.  Berkner,  President  of  Graduate  Research  Center  of  the 
Southwest, was  elected to  a  second four-year term  as Treasurer. 
Also  at the meeting, NAS  elected 35  new  members on  the basis  of  d i 5  
t i n p i s h e d   and  continuing  achievements  in   original  research,  among 
them:  George Howard Herbig, astronomer and assistant director of  Lick 
Observatory;  and  Clark  Blanchard  Millikan,  professor  of  aeronautics 
and director of  the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laihratory. 
Election  of  six  distinguished  foreign  scientists  also  was announced, 
among  them:  Marcel  Gilles Josef  Minnaert,  Professor  Emeritus  at  the 
Univ.  of  Utrecht  and  co-inventer of  the stellar  curve  of  growth, one of 
the  most  significant  developments in  modern  astronomy;  and  Maurice 
Roy,  Directeur  General  de  l’O5ce  National  #Etudes  et  de Recherches 
Aerospatiales and currently President of  the International  Committee on 
Space Research ( COSPAR)  .  ( NAS-NRS  Releases) 
Quasars  (quasi-stellar  objects)  were  subject  of  discussion  at  American 
Physical Society meeting in Washington.  Too large to be stars, too small 
to be galaxies, quasars emanate tremendously strong  radio  waves even 
though they are billions of  light-years away. 
Dr.  Peter  Bergmann  of  Yeshiva  Univ.  said  pulsing  quasar  3G273 
must have been shining for a t  least a million years, because it must have 
taken  at least that  long for the jet of  luminous gas protruding from  one 
side  to  reach  i t s   presently  observed  length.  Dr.  Bergmann  presented 
his  theory  that  quasars  shine  because  of  gravitational  collapse-trans- 
formation of  mass  to  energy  by  gravitation  rather  than  stellar  fusion. 
Dr.  Louis Gold and Dr.  John  W.  Moffatt of  Martin CO.% Research In- 
stitute  fo r  Advanced  Studies  rejected  theories  that  quasars  operate  on 
stellar fusion principle,  theorized that  “ordered  oscillation” was operat- 
ing  inside the vast gaseous envelopes rimming quasars.  Laser effect, or 

156 

ASTRONATJTICB  A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4, 

coherence  of  particles,  occurred  in   the   gaseous  envelope,  which  wa s  
about 1 to  10 light years thick.  Dense core of  quasar must act as fusion 
furnace, providing particles which acquire coherence on their wa  t o  the 
outside.  (Sullivan, NYT ,  4/29/64,15; Haseltine, Wash .  Post, 4,&9/64; 
Hmes, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/29/64) 
A p d  29:  X-15 No.  1 was   flown by Maj.  Robert  Rushworth  (USAF)  to  alti- 
tude of  102,000 f t .   and speed of  3,903 mph  (mach 5.72) in  test  t o  de- 
termine  effect  of  shock  waves  on  photography.  Both  the  test  and  the  
105th flight of  the  X-15 were  successful. 
(UPI,  Wash .  Pos t ,  4/30/64; 
NASA X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
*  First  succesful, full-scale controlled test  of  parasail was  conducted by  NASA 
Manned  Spacecraft Center.  “It  could  not  have  been  more  successful,” 
Lee Noman, parasail project engineer said.  Model of  two-man Gem in i  
spacecraft  was  dropped  from  C-119 aircraft  from  11,OOO-ft. altitude. 
Small  drogue  parachute  immediately  deployed,  and   then  the  parasail 
quickly  deployed and stabilized the spacecraft’s fall.  After  7.8 min.  the 
spacecraft  hit  the  water  of  Trinity  Bay.  Previous attempt  to  drop-test 
the  parasail  wa s   unsuccessful  because  of  deployment  problems. 
(Maloney, Houston  Post, 4/30/6$) 
*  Unnamed  NASA  officials were  quoted  a s   saying  U S .   had  detected  Soviet 
failure  within  the  last  week  .in  an  attempt  to   launch  a  probe  to  the 
moon,  by  John  Finney  in  New  Yo rk  Times.  Failure was  said  to  have 
occurred within minutes after  rocket booster rose from launch pad near 
the Aral Sea.  (Fmney, NYT ,  4/30/641,9) 
*  NASA  announced  $1 million  facilities  grant  to  Texas  A&M  Univ.,  which 
would  build  an activation analysis laboratory for use in  its space-related 
research  program  fo r   remote  analysis  of  materials  through  n u c l a r  
(NASA Release 6 1 0 2 )  
activation. 
0  Philip  Donely,  Chief  of  Flight  Mechanics  and  Technology  Div.,  NASA 
Langley  Research  Center,  received  1964 Laura  Taber  Barbour  Air 
Safety  Award  of  the  Flight  Safety  Foundation.  Citation  said  that 
Donely’s  “diverse and unique contributions t o  a i r  safety during his serv- 
ice  of  over  30 years  with  the  NACA  and  NASA  have  made him  an   inter- 
nationally  recognized authority  in  the  areas of  aircraft  loads, operating 
problems,  and  airwerthiness  requirements.  . . . The  counsel  he  has 
given  to  industry,  operators,  and government  agencies  on  matters such 
as  airworthiness  aspects of  new  aircraft,  assessment  of  design  criteria, 
and  airworthiness problems related t o  aircraft  accidents has contributed 
significantly to  the development and operation  of  safe aircraft.” 
(NASA 
Release &92) 
0  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Dr.  Hugh L.  Dryden said  in  keynote  address 
a t  Fourth National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of  Space: 
“We have  chosen to go to  the moon because manned exploration of  the 
moon  involves every  facet  of  overall  space  capability this  nation must 
develop  if  we  a re   t o   become  a  leading  spacefaring nation.  Also,  the 
moon’s  pockmarked  surface, untouched by  water  or wind  erosion  since 
it has no atmosphere, bears the traces of  everything which ever occurred 
ithere.  . . . 
We  a re  carrying forward an  active national space program,  not  lim- 
<c  
ited to the  moon,  encompassing science,  advanced engineering, practical 
applications,  including manned space flight. 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

157 

“We  a re  building toward pre-eminence in every phase of  space activ- 
ity-all 
the way  from microscopic electronic components to  skyscraper- 
tall  rockets. 
“We a re  building a network of  large-scale engineering facilities, space- 
yards, proving grounds, and space ports to  a m b l e ,  test, and launch the 
space vehicles we need now and in  the future. 
We  are   creating  new  national  resources  of  lasting  value  in  these 
L6 
facilities;  in  the  industrial and  managerial capabilities we  are  develop 
ing ; and in the growing number of  scientists and  engineers who are  learn- 
ing about space and  space technology. 
“We  are filling the pipelines of  hardware and knowledge, and a s  meas- 
ured by the financial resources required, will be halfway toward our first 
manned lunar mission by mid-1965. 
“We  are  accumulating,  in  space,  the basic scientific knowledge about 
the earth, the solar system, the universe, and about man himself. 
“We  are  bringing benefits not  only  to  the United  States but to  all the 
world  through  the  use  of  space  and  space  technology,  employing  such 
new  tools  a s  weather,  communications,  and  navigational satellites,  and 
applying  spacebased  techniques, equipment,  and  materials  to   improve 
industrial products, processes and services. 
“We  are  providing a much-needed stimulus to  the  energies and  crea- 
tivity  of  people everywhere, particularly to  the minds  and  aspirations of 
young people. 
We  are  bringing about increased economic activity at a time when the 
<c  
effects of automation  on  our  society  are   beginning  t o   be  felt. 
“And  we  a re  making  certain,  through  our  sustained &orb,  that  the 
realm  of  space now  opening up to  us shall be a domain of  freedom. 
“ I t   is  for  these  reasons  that  we  have  mounted  the greatest peacetime 
undertaking in the history of  mankind.  . . .”  (Text) 
April 29:  Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for Manned 
§pace  Flight,  discussed  Project  Apollo  before  the   Conference  on  the 
Peaceful Uses of  §pace: 
“The  overall  time  phasing  . . . is  quite  conservative. 
The  Apollo 
spacecraft  is being  developed  on  a  schedule four  years  longer  than was  
needed  for  the Mercury spacecraft, and  two years longer than was taken 
to  produce the B-58  bomber.  The Saturn IB and  Saturn V launch vehi- 
cles are being developed on  a  schedule two yea?  longer than that  of  the 
Atlas missile, and  a  year  longer  than was  required  for  the Titan.  The 
total  duration  scheduled  for  the  Apollo program  is longer  than  that  of 
any  previous United  States research  and development effort. 
time  allotted.  . . . We  found  . . . that  if  the  remaining  six  years  of 
“The Apollo  jo%, of  course, is  a  big  one  and  we  will  need  all  of the 
work  [ in  Project Apallo]  were stretched out over 1 2  years the total cost 
of  the presently  approved  manned  space  flight program would  increase 
by  about 30  percent,  or  about  six  billion  dollars.  The economic con- 
siderations,  therefore,  support the maintenance  of  the present  schedule. 
It  is  six  billion  dollars cheaper  to   continue  on  the course  we  axe  now 
following than to set out on  a new  course at this late date.  . . . 
Among the benefits from Project Apollo is “the rapid  advancement of 
United  States  capability  in  spa-the 
ability  to  undertake  whatever 
space activities the national interest may require. 

158 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19 6 4 

indus- 
“There  are  seven  major  elements  in  this  capability-people, 
trial  base,  ground  facilities,  launch  vehicles,  spacecraft,  operational 
know-how,  and  the  ability  to  manage  research  and  development.  To- 
freedom of action in this new medium.  . . .”  (Text) 
gether,  they  add  up  to   space  power,  which  provides  this  country  with 
April 29:  Delta Air Lines had reserved three delivery positions for US. super- 
(FAA Release 64-37) 
sonic transport, FAA announced. 
*  Britain’s VC-10  long-range  jet  aircraft  made  its  first  commercial passen- 
ger flight-a 
BOAC  flighffrom London  to  Lagos,  Nigeria.  The aircraft 
featured rapid  lift, allowing it to use shorter runways than its US. coun- 
(Farnsworth,  N Y T ,  
terparts,  the  Boeing  707  and  Douglas  DC-8. 
4/30/64,  57)  
April  29-May  1 : Air  Transport  and  Space Meeting  and  Production  Forum 
held  in  New York,  sponsored  by  Society of  Automotive Engineers  and 
American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers.  At  the  meeting,  NASA 
Ames Research Center scientists reported  results of  a  study of  a manned 
Mars mission : Nova-class launch  vehicles  and  nuclear-propelled space- 
craft, combined with extensive aerodynamic  braking techniques  a t  Mars 
and Earth, would  allow manned Mars mission to  be made with a  single, 
direct  launch  from  Earth.  Use  of  aerodynamic  braking  at  Mars  and 
( M & R ,  
Ear th   would  reduce  total  velocity  requirements  50  per  cent. 
5/4/64  1 7 )  
*  Forum  on  Developments  and  Techniques  for  Air  Traffic  System  of  the 
Future,  sponsored  by  Radio  Technical  Commission  for  Aeronautics, 
held  in Washington.  At  the  forum,  details  of  Westinghouse  Electric’s 
concept  of  navigation  satellite  system  were  disclosed  by  E.  S.  Keats, 
Westinghouse  project  manager  for  navigation  and  surveying  systems. 
The  single,  synchronous-orbit  satellite  could  provide  navigation,  com- 
munication,  and trafEc service to aircraft over North Atlantic or Pacific. 
The  satellite  would  interrogate  each  aircraft  periodically,  measuring 
( A v .  Wk., 5/4/64,  69) 
time  to  determine  navigational position. 
ApriZ  30:  Full-scale paraglider  was  successfully  deployed  a t   Edwards  AFB 
in test conducted by  North American Aviation’s  Space  and  Information 
Systems Div.  for  NASA  to  demonstrate  the method  of  maneuverable  re- 
covery  of  manned  spacecraft.  After  an  air  drop  from  USAF  C-130 
transport  a t   33,000  k., the  31-ft.40ng  inflatable  wing  deployed  and 
(NU   S&ID  Skywriter, 5/1/64, 
assumed  the  programed  trimmed  glide. 
1 ; A v .  Wk., 5 /4 /64 ,27)  
NASA  Deputy Administrator  Dr.  Hugh L.  Dryden  and Astronaut  L.  Gordon 
Cooper revealed at luncheon meeting with newsmen  in Washington  tha t  
scientists would  be  invited to  volunteer for   training  for  luna 
* 
Plans had been  finalized a t  meeting between  NASA  officials an 
of  the National  Academy  of  Sciences’  Space  Science Board. 
scientists would  be selected  to   train  with  the  Gemini/Apollo  astronauts 
a t  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  during the  summer  months.  Then, 
perhaps two  years  before  a  lunar  landing,  NASA  would  select  some per- 
sons  from the  reserve  to  begin  full-time training  as   crew  members  for 
later lunar flights. 
(AP, 4/30/64) 
Harold  Gold,  head  of  Spacecraft  Branch  of  NASA  Lewis  Research  Cen- 
ter,  discussed  Sert  I[  project  a t   the  Air  Transport  and  Space  meeting 
in  New  York.  Scheduled  for  launch  on  a  ballistic  flight  this  summer, 
Sert  (Space Electric Rocket Test)  would  be NASA’s 
first electric engines 

159 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   AERONAUT IC S ,   1 9  6 4  
in space.  The two electric engines aboard Sert I would  differ : ( 1 )   built 
by  Lewis was  electron-bombardment  ion  engine  using  mercury  propel- 
lant;  ( 2 )   built by  Hughes Aircraft’s Hughes  Research  Laboratory was 
contact-ionization  thrustor  using  cesium  propellant.  Hughes  engine 
would  operate for  first half  of  flight, then  Lewis engine would  take over. 
“If  Sert I data  indicate that  beam  neutralization  i s  completely  effective 
the  development  of  ion  thrustors  for  space  missions  can  continue  in 
vacuum  chambers.  However,  if  beam  neutralization  is  of  limited  ef- 
fectiveness a  new  program  of  vacuum  chamber  and  flight tests may  be 
(NASA   Release  64-101  ; LRC  Release  6 4 3 9 )  
undertaken,”  Gold  said. 
Apr i2   30:  Development  of  highly  precise  laser  plasma  diagnostic  probe  by 
General Electric under contract to Cambridge Research Laboratories was 
announced by  USAF OAR.  The probe showed promise  as an   in-flight in- 
strument to  measure  electron density  distribution in  the  flow  field  of  a 
re-entering  hypersonic  vehicle  and  simultaneously  measure  electron 
(OAR  Release 4 6 4 5 )  
temperature of  the plasma. 
0  FAA  announced  Spain’s  Iberia Air  Lines had  reserved three  delivery posi- 
tions  for  the  U S .   supersonic  transport  aircraft.  This  brought  total 
( FAA   Release 64-40) 
reserved positions to 84  by  17  airlines. 
e  USAF  annual report of  unidentified flying objects said there were  382 sight- 
ings  in  1963 compared  with  469  in  1962  and  1004 in  record  year  of 
1957.  During  past  16 years,  report  said,  USAF  had  investigated more 
than  8,000  sightings,  all  but  7.7  percent  of  which  had  been  explained 
( UPI,  Houston  Chron., 5/1/64) 
by natural phenomena. 
During  April:  Aluminum  pressure  suit  designed  for  astronaut  use  on  the 
moon  was  undergoing  evaluation  a t   MSC.  Officially  called  a  “constant 
volume,  rigid  articulated,  anthropomorphic  protectic  suit,”  it  featured 
increased  mobility  and  constancy  of  pressure.  Rigid  suit  concept  was 
first introduced  by  Litton  Industries in  1956 for  use  in  pressure  cham- 
bers.  Advanced  version  for  space use,  with  adaptations and  improve- 
ments,  was  proposed  to  NASA by  Litton  last  G a r .  
(M S C   Ro indup ,  
4/15/64.8) 
, 
DOD tracking  station was established and began  operating in the  Seychelles 
I
,
 
Islands in the western Indian Ocean, some 1,000 mi.  northeast of  Zanzi- 
(M&R ,  4/13/64,  9 )  
bar, where  NASA  tracking  station had  been  closed. 
*  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s  Space  Operations  Control  Center 
established  that  Soviet  LUNIK  IV  spacecraft,  launched  April  21,  1963, 
was  in  a  barycentric  orbit-i.e., 
orbiting  around  the  center  of  gravity 
(4,600 km. from earth’s center)  of  the earth-moon system.  This unusual 
orbit  was  apparently  a  coincidence, because  final  Tass  announcement 
about the probe  had  said i t  would  become  a satellite of  the  sun. 
(GSFC ,  
and MSFC  SIN, 4/64,15-16) 
First production  5-2  rocket engine  was  accepted  by  NASA  Marshall  Space 
Flight Center from NAA’S  Rocketdyne Div.,  then  turned  over  to  Douglas 
Aircraft  Co.  for  use  in   ground  captive  tests  associated  with  Saturn 
S-IVB  stage work.  (Marshall S tar ,  5/6/64,1) 
*  Shipments  of  nearly  six  million  pounds  of  large  components  for  NASA 
Langley Research Center’s  $12.5  million  Space Radiation  Effects Labo- 
ratory  began  arriving.  Beginning  in  mid-1965,  the  new  facility would 
be operated  by Virginia Associated Research Center  (VARC )   , comprised 
of  representatives of  the College of  William and Mary,  U.  Va.,  and VPI. 
( URC  Release) 

160 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 0 4 

During Ap r i l :  NASA awarded  contract modification exceeding  $12 million to 
North  American  Aviation’s  Space  and  Information  Systems  Div.  for 
further  work  on  Saturn  V’s  S-I1  stage. 
(Murshall  Star,  4/22/64,  4 )  
*  Postmaster  General  John  A.  Gronouski  revealed  plans  for  issuance  of 
Robert Hi Goddard a i r  mail commemorative stamp this year.  The stamp 
would honor 50th anniversary of  Dr. Goddard’s first patent  registrations 
in  1914 fo r   solid/liquid  fuel  methods  and  multi-stage rocket  designs. 
( NSC Ltr. 4/1/64;  Guddard News, 4/20/64,3) 
Test  firing  of  Bell  Aerosystems  Co.  40,00O-lb.-thrust  fluorine-hydrogen 
rocket  engine  showed  combustion  efficiency  exceeded  95  per  cent  of 
( Aw.  Wk., 4/27/64,  69 )  
theoretically  obtainable  maximum. 
*  Dr.  Raymond L.  Bisplinghoff, NASA  Associate Administrator  for Advanced 
Research  and  Technology and  AIAA  Technical  Director,  said  in  Astro- 
nw t i c s  & Aeronautics editorial on  research exploitation : 
“Those  of  us  who  seek  specific  scientific  o r   technological goals  in 
ou r   free-enterprise  system  too  often  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  the 
resources made  available  for  this  purpose  cannot  continue  to  increase 
In  the  years  to  come,  it  will  be  increasingly  incumbent 
indefinitely. 
upon  the  individual  to  improve  the  effectiveness of  his  RQD  activities, 
and so conserve the nation’s  resources.  This  is  not  just  a  matter  to  be 
dealt with a t  the national level, but one which will require understanding 
( A& A ,  4/64,  18-19) 
and discipline at all levels of  our profession.” 
Rep.  Emilio Q.  Daddario  (D.-Conn.)  said  in A i r  Force  and  Space  Digest 
article on technological goals: 
“A   creative idea may  be  born  in  the mind  of  one man. 
Of  primary 
importance is the basic  and fundamental research necessary to spell out 
this  idea.  Here  the  financial  investment  is  probably  the  smallest, lim- 
ited to  the man, his  instruments, and the  time.  The amounts of  money 
a re   relatively modest,  except  for  capital  facilities.  Indeed,  sometimes 
this  money  is used  and  reused,  for  basic  research  is  often  done  in  the 
university  climate where  its  effects  nourish  graduate  students  as  well. 
The  planning,  the  adaptation,  and  the  oversight of  applied  research 
6 6  
and  development is  a more  resource-consuming operation.  By  skilled 
and  thoughtful  planning  project managers  can  avoid  difficulties which 
tend  to  d rag  on  important programs.  Here  the  important  resource  is 
people,  for  the decisions a re   difficult.  The history  of many  important 
programs  in  the  United  States in  recent decades affords case  studies of 
matters  where  waste might  have  been  avoided  if  top-level people could 
have anticipated and eliminated specific problems. 
“One  of  the  most  difficult  problems  facing  the  United  States  is  to 
determine  the  standards  by  which we  can  exercise the  necessary  judg- 
ment  to  avoid  moving  into  the  most  expensive  areas  of  technology- 
development, testing, and production-at  an  appropriate  time to  ensure 
that  we  do  not  become  prisoners  of  high  costs  and  unnecessary  use  of 
resources.  We need to exercise more  rigorous standards, more decisive 
(AF  Mag.,  4/64,  53-56) 
judgment,  and action.” 
*  Space Technology Laboratories,  Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, selected by 
JPL to provide throttleable vernier engines for Surveyor lunar spacecraft 
being  developed by  Hughes Aircraft  Co.  under  JPL supervision. 
(Aw .  
Wk . ,  4/27/64,30) 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 

161 

During Ap r i l :   European Space Research Organization  ( ESRO)  was planning 
to  orbit  i ts   first  two  satellites by  late  1967 o r   early  1968,  from  US. 
Pacific  Missile  Range.  Using  purchased  Scout  booster,  ESRO  would 
(Aw .  Wk . ,  4/27/64,  31) 
launch  the  200-lb. satellites into polar  orbits. 
Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy voted  unrequested  funds 
for flight-testing S n a p lOA  reactor  in  the AEC  authorization  bill  for  FY 
1965. 
In   voting  to  include  the  requested  amount  for   Rover  nuclear 
propulsion,  the  Committee  called  for  review  of  the  program  after  data 
from certain  critical tests were obtained.  “The  committee believes that 
the  Rover  project  is  of  great  importance  to  the  s p c e  program  . . . 
[and]  the committee therefore intends to  follow very closely the develop 
ments  of  the   coming  year  with  the hope  that  this  program  will  lead  to 
( M & R ,   4/20/64,  9 ;   M&R ,  
successful reactor  design  and  operation.” 
4/27/64,18) 
0  National  Science  Foundation  issued  study  of  scientist  and  engineer  man- 
power.  According  to  the  study,  “fewer  than  765,000  newly  trained 
scientists and engineers will become available to  fill more than 1 million 
(Newsweek, 4/13/64) 
openings  for  them  between  1960 and  1970.” 
*  President  Charles  de  Gaulle  approved France’s  plan  to  establish  satellite 
launching  center  on  east  coast  of  French  Guiana  as   an  alternative  to 
the  Hammaguir  complex  in  Algerian  desert.  Hammaguir  site  would 
come  under  Algerian  control  in  July  1967 unless  new  treaty  could  be 
concluded. 
Later  on,  Gen.  Robert  Aubiniere,  director-general of  France’s  cNES, 
said  in London  that  by  1966 France’s  space program  would  stabilize a t  
$100  million  per year.  By  1966 France  annually  would  launch  two 
Diamant-boosted  satellites,  about  100 sounding  rockets,  and  300  bal- 
(Av .  Wh . ,  4/27/64,30) 
loons. 
Col.  Francis  X.  Kane  (USAF)   said  in  Fortune  article  tha t   too  much  em- 
phasis  was  placed  on  “computerized  planning,”  thus  handicapping  our 
ability to prepare for the unpredictable.  “. . . discovery nearly always 
comes by chance,” he said.  He proposed “meta-planning,”  an  approach 
on planning.  . . .” 
to  “bring the whole of  experience  and of  the  human  personality to  bear 
(Fortune, 4/64,147ff) 
United  Aircraft  Corp.  Chairman  H.  M.  Horner  told New  York  Society of 
Security  Analysts  that  development  problems  of  supersonic  transport 
engine  were  being  underestimated.  U.A.’s  Pra t t   &  Whitney  estimated 
costs of  $1 billion  in  its proposal  to FAA,  the  figure based  on  estimated 
development costs of  $500 million and another $500 million to bring the 
(Aw. W k . ,  4/27/64,  47) 
engine up  to  airline standards of  reliability. 
*  DOD  accelerated construction of  two Thor launch  sites and ground  suppolrt 
equipment  a t   Johnston  Island,  par t   of  DOD’S commitment  to  maintain 
adequate  safeguards  against  U.S.S.R.’s  sudden  resumption  of  nuclear 
( M & R ,  4/20/64,16) 
testing. 
Spacecraft  Technology  and  Advanced  Re-entry  Tests  (S tar t)   established 
in  Advanced  Planning  Directorate  of  the  Deputy  for  Technology,  Air 
Force  Space Systems Div.  S tar t  included  two  activities:  Asset  re-entry 
vehicle  program  and  unnamed  glide  re-entry vehicle,  still under  study. 
( A v .  Wk . ,  4/27/64,30) 

May   1964 
M a y  1 : NASA  Associate Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans said  in  speech 
before Fourth National  Conference on  the  Peaceful  Uses  of  Space: 
“We  a re  searching for  a  type  of  contract  that  will  motivate  the  con- 
tractor  to  become  more  deeply  involved  in  performing  work  of  high 
quality with maximum speed and minimum cost. 
“In  this way  we  hope  to  reduce  the number  of  persons  presently  re- 
quired to  carry out what  are essentially policing  actions.  These  would 
be  largely  unnecessary  if  we  could  place more  of  the  responsibility fo r  
basic  decisions of  performance,  time, and cost  in  the  hands of  industry 
management.  Only  through  such  an  approach can  we  hope  to  reverse 
the constant escalation of  costs that  stems from  adding persons  on  both 
sides  of  the  equation.  That  is,  as   the  government  adds  people,  the 
contractor  has to  add people  to  respond  to  our people,  and  the  result  is 
not satisfactory to either side.  . . . 
“Let  me  emphasize  . . , that  there  are   three  factors  we  want  the 
contractor  to  be  involved  in-cost, 
time,  and  performance.  We  want 
contracts  to  be  written  in  such  a  way  that  industry  management  will 
carefully weigh  and  consider  what  any  change  in  his  operation  w i l l   do 
to  all three  items.  Obviously,  there  cannot  be  an  alteration  in  any  one 
of  them  without  a  concomitant  effect  on  the  other  two.  We  feel  that 
only  in  this  way  can  the  present  performance  be  improved  a t   the 
contractorlevel.  . . .”  (Text) 
President’s  Advisory  Committee  on  Supersonic  Transport  held  its  third 
meeting  in the Pentagon,  where  it heard executives of  the three  aircraft 
and three engine manufacturers that had  submitted preliminary  designs. 
(Clark, NYT, 5/2/64) 
NASA  announced  i t  would  award grants to Maryland  Univ.  and R ice  Univ. 
fo r   construction  of  aeronautical  and  space  science  research  facilities. 
Maryland’s  $ lS-m i l l ion  grant would  be  used  for  a  building  to  provide 
additional space for  research  in  such  areas  as  chemistry, physics,  fluid 
dynamics,  astronomy,  computer  sciences,  and  mathematics.  Rice’s 
$1.6-million  grant would  be used  for a  space science building  to   accom- 
(NASA   Release 
modate further research  in space-related scientific areas. 
64/104) 
Ma y  2:  Five-segment 120-in.  rocket motor  for  Titan  III   exploded  after  55 
sec.  during static firing a t  Edwards AFB,  Calif.  Explosion caused exten- 
sive  damage  to   new  $10-million  solid-motor  test  facility,  dedicated 
just  three  hours  earlied  by  SSD commanding  officer  Maj.  Gen.  Ben  I. 
Funk, who  had called the new  stand “the  most  sophisticated and highIy 
instrumented  facility  in  the  world.”  Stand  was  operated  for  USAF  by 
United  Technology  Center  ( U T C ) ,   and  further  tests  were  shifted  to 
UTC’S  test  facility  a t   Coyote,  Calif.  Cause  of  explosion  was  thought 
to be  failure of  casing weld  when  a  “booty’ in  the  bottom  of  the  motor 
(M&R ,  5/11/64,16) 
was removed. 
162 

163 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 0 4 
May 2: More  than  2,000  high  school  juniors  and  seniors  attended  Student 
Space  Conference  a t   Northeastern  Univ.,  Boston,  where  they  heard 
remarks  by  Astronaut  L.  Gordon  Cooper,  Bruce  T.  L 
John  D.  Nicolaides of  NASA,  Nancy G. Roman of  NASA,  an  
writer and biochemist.  (Boston Sun. Globe, 5/3/6L1) 
0  150th anniversary of  U.S.  weather  observation  network,  now  composed of 
more  than  13,000  stations  providing  records  of  U S .   climate. 
(Com- 
merce Release WB 6 4 4 )  
May 2-3: Lewis Research Center conducted drop tests down  a main  elevator 
shaft  at  Cleveland’s  Terminal  Tower,  dropping  model  experimental 
packages  from  heights  of  u p   to   400  ft.  to   gather  data  for   design  of 
decelerator  for  LRC’S  new  zero-gravity  facility. 
( LRC  Release  6 4 4 0 )  
May 4: Appearing a t  Project Ranger  hearings  before Subcommittee on  NASA 
Oversight, House Committee on  Science and Astronautics, NASA  Admin- 
istrator  James  E.  Webb  cited  recent management  changes  by  Cal Tech 
and JPL  in the continuing evolutionary  process of  management  relations 
with  NASA:  “These  changes  and continuing  improvements  are the  result 
of  management  cooperation  and  responsiveness  over  a  wide  range  of 
complex problems;  the  new  contract  we  hope  to  sign  soon  is  a further 
example of  this  effort.  In  this  contract,  NASA  will  endeavor  to   add  to 
the existing system  an  incentive fee approach,  a  separate facilities man- 
agement contract,  a  joint  semi-annual  review  with  cm  of  progress  and 
problems,  and  a  revised  overhead  determination  method.  We  will 
discard  the  concept  of  mutual  agreement  a t  the  level  of  every  task  and 
replace  it  with  a  contractual  statement  of  our  current  practice,  i.e., 
laboratory  acceptance  of  NASA  program  direction,  after,  of  course,  a 
full presentation of  its views. 
This  represents  the  position  we  have  achieved  in  our  negotiations 
C <  
looking  toward  the  new  contract  for  the  period  beginning  January  1, 
1965.  However,  NASA  has made  i t  clear that  i t  wishes to  see  the  agreed 
upon  relationship  put  into  action  prior  to  final  execution  of  the  con- 
tractual  document.  This  is  a  prudent  way  to  avoid  overlooking  some 
aspect  or  approach which might  yield  better  results than  those we  have 
reduced to contract language  in our negotiations.  . . .” 
Mr.  Webb discussed the report on RANGER  VI he had sent to  Chairman 
Miller  and  Chairman  Anderson : “This  was  an   important  flight;  the 
entire  country  desired  its  success.  When  i t   did  not  meet  its  mission 
objectives, I felt i t  was  our  responsibility to examine  the  reasons  there- 
fore and to  report these to  the Chairmen  of  the House  and Senate Com- 
mittees.  The  report  made  was  the  assessment  of  Dr.  Dryden,  Dr. 
Seamans  and  myself  of  the  technical  problems  we  have  encountered 
and  of  the  possible  causes  of  failure.  The  Ranger  6  failed  because 
something  did  not  work,  not  because  someone  did  not  work.  There 
had  been  unstinting  effort  dedicated  to  its  success;  this  effort  will  be 
combined  with  lessons  learned  from  the  Ranger  6  failure  to   provide 
the  best  assurance  of  Ranger  7 success.  We  have  invested  the  energy 
of some of  the best minds of  the country  in Project Ranger  and we-expect 
to  capitalize  on  that  investment  in  both  the  near  and  the  fa r   future.’’ 
(Testimony) 
e  At  conclusion  of  Ranger  management  hearings  by  Subcommittee  on 
NASA  Oversight,  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics,  Sub- 
committee Chairman  Rep.  Joseph  E.  Karth  (D.-Minn.) 
remarked  that 

164 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

testimony “indicated  to  me that  there was a  serious loss of  NASA  liaison 
o r  NASA  management.  This,  I  think,  is  primarily  the  question  that  is 
before ,the subcommittee, having arrived  at the conclusion  . . . that  the 
ple.  . . .”  (M&R,5/11/64,15) 
professional,  technical  people  a t   Cal  Tech  a re   extremely  able  peo- 
May  4:   General B.  A.  Schriever, AFSC  Commander,  announced organization 
for National Range Division  (NRD)  , commanded by Maj.  Gen.  Leighton 
I. Davis.  Air  Force Missile Test Center, Patrick AFB,  Fla.,  was redesig- 
nated  Air  Force Eastern  Test  Range  ( ETR) , and  Air  Force  Space Test 
Center  (Provisional)  at Vandenberg AFB was  redesignated the Air Force 
Western  Test  Range  ( WTR)  .  Both  ranges  would  be  assigned  to  NRD. 
General  Davis  also  was  assigned  responsibility  for  Satellite  Control 
Facility  (SCF)   , Sunnyvale, Calif.,  which has  operated  DOD R&D  satellite 
tracking  and  control  facilities.  With  Hq.  at  Andrews  AFB,  General 
Davis would  function  a s  both  NRD  Commander and  AFSC  Deputy  Com- 
( AFSC  Release 45-R-50) 
mander  for Global Range. 
Inserting i n  Congressional Record a Saturday Evening Post  article entitled 
“The  Great  A-11  Deception,”  Sen.  Gordon  L.  Allott  (R.-Colo.) 
re- 
marked  that  the A-11  had  “caused me  a  great  deal  of  concern.  . . . I 
still  believe  it  is  an  outrageous  imposition  on  our  system  when  $?OO 
million  or  more  is  spent  on  an  airplane  which  may  be  an  interceptor 
or  may  not  be,  but  which  very  few-and 
only  a  few-of 
the  people  in 
the Government knew about, including even some of  the  highest ranking 
(CR, 5/4/64,9579-81) 
military people.” 
*  President  Johnson  announced  formation  of  32-member FAA  Women’s  Ad- 
visory Committee on Aviation,  following ceremony  at  the White House 
in  which  he  presented FAA Decoration  for  Exceptional Service to   Mrs. 
Jerrie Mock  for her  recent 22,858-mi. global solo flight.  Mrs. Philip A. 
Ha r t   was  named  committee chairman  and  Mrs.  Mock,  vice  chairman. 
(FAA Release 6 4 4 1 )  
H.  J.  High  Construction  Co.  received  $1,012,800  NASA  contract  for  con- 
struction  of  third-floor  addition  to  Operations  and  Checkout Building, 
John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA  (Merritt Island).  Army Corps of 
Engineers  awarded  the  fixed-price contract. 
( DOD Release  3 5 7 6 4 )  
*  Unique  cost-plus-incentive-fee (CPIF)   contract  used  by  USAF  for  Titan 
I11  launch  vehicle  imposed  “strict  penalties  on  the  prime  contractor 
[Martin  Co.]  for  deviating  from  the  target  cost,  schedule,  or  flight- 
performance  objectives,”  Missiles  and  Rockets  reported.  DOD officials 
said  Titan  I11  was  “on  schedule  and  within  the  planned  funding.” 
(M& R ,  5/4/64,13) 
May 4-7:  Tenth  annual meeting of  American Astronautical  Society held  in  
,Honored by  AAS  were:  Maj.  L.  Gordon  Cooper  (U SA F ) ,  
New  York. 
the AAS Flight Achievement Award;  Dr.  Hube r tu s  0. Strughold, the Mel- 
bourne W. Boynton Award;  Col.  Charles Yeager  (USAF)   , the Victor  A. 
( A v .  W k . ,  5/18/64,21) 
Prather Award. 
At AAS  meeting in New  York,  Dr.  Thomas Gold, Cornel1 Univ.  Director  of 
the Center for Radio Physics and Space Research, said the  porous, crush- 
able material of  the  lunar  surface extended “to  a  depth of  tens of  centi- 
meters o r  meters,”  according  to  radio  thermaI measurements. 
I t   seems very  probable  that  a  few   per  cent  of  the  lunar  surface  is 
66  
ha rd  and rough, probably  in  the form of  many young craters, while  the 
rest is covered with material considerably less dense than solid rock.  . . . 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   AERONAUT IC S ,   1 9  6 4 

165 

[We must be prepared]  to find a crushable  surface material many meters 
deep and smoothly deposited, covering most  of  the moon,  and a  few per 
cent  of  rough  hard  rock  regions  covered  only  with  a  thin  layer  of  the 
fluff.  . . .” 
(Av. Wk.,5/18/64,83) 
May 4-7: At  same meeting, Dr.  Duane 0. Muhleman of  JPL criticized “fairy 
castle”  theory  of  lunar  surface  composition.  Dr.  Muhleman  said  the 
concept was consistent with  lunar measurements, but  tha t  “a  clever man 
in  the  laboratory  could  build  other  models  of  surfaces that  would  be 
(M & R ,  5/18/64,23) 
equally consistent.” 
May  5 :   Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences,  meeting  in  
executive session, favorably  reported  with  amendment  S.  2446, author- 
izing  $5.246 billion  for  NASA  in  FY  1965.  This  amount  restored  $52 
million of  the $110 million  cut by the House  in  its authorization  bill  in 
(NASA  LAR  II1/89;  Av. Wk.,  5/11/64,  24) 
March. 
*  Soviet  “automatic  interplanetary  station”  ZOND  I  was  10,137,000  km. 
(6,298,838 mi.)  from  the  Earth,  according  to  Tass,  and more than  60 
radio  communication  sessions had  been  held  with  the  spacecraft  since 
its  launch  more  than  a  month  ago.  The  spacecraft  had  sent  scientific 
information,  data  on  systems  operation,  and  “information  relating  to 
(Tass,  Komsomolskaya 
the  assigned  program  of 
investigations.” 
Pravda, 5/6/64,1,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics,  Subcommittee  on  Space 
Sciences  and  Applications, held  hearing  on  geographical  distribution 
and indirect costs of  Federal  research  and  development.  NASA  Deputy 
Associate Administrator  for   Industry  Affairs,  Earl  D.  Hilburn,  said  it 
was  NASA’s policy  to  “locate  and  fully  utilize  the  best  technical  com- 
petence  available  wherever  i t   might  be.” 
I t   was  not  NASA  policy  to 
award  contracts on  a  geographical  basis,  Hilburn  said,  but  NASA  tried 
to  “provide  opportunities  for   and  encourage  all  qualified  industrial 
firms,  universities  and  non-profit  organizations  to  participate  in  our 
program.”  He  added:  “NASA  makes  every  effort  to  award  negotiated 
procurements  to  contractors  who  w i l l   perform  a  substantial  proportion 
(NASA   LAR  III /89 ;   SBD, 
of  their  work  within  labor  surplus  areas.” 
5/6/64,30-31) 
*  Subcommittee  on  Science, Research  and  Development,  House  Committee 
on  Science and Astronautics, opened  hearings  on  problems  of  the  Gov- 
ernment-Science  relationship.  Rep.  Emilio  Q.  Daddario  (D.-Conn.)  , 
Subcommittee Chairman,  said the Subcommittee would  inquire into  ( 1 )  
geographical  distribution of  Federal R&D  contracts and grants,  and  (2 )  
allowance of  indirect  costs by  those performing  basic  research  for  the 
Government. 
(NASA LAR  III /85)  
*  Lt.  Gen. William  J.  Ely  (U SA ) ,   Deputy  Director  of  Defense Research  and 
Engineering  (Administration and Management), said  in  testimony  be- 
fore  House  Science and Astronautics  Committee’s  Research  and Devel- 
opment Subcommittee : 
For the past six years, over 80% of  the  net value of  RDT&E  contracts 
<< 
of  the  Department  of  Defense  has  been  to  companies  concerned  with 
aerospace  and  electronics.  Actually,  11  states  received 88.3% of  the 
awards in FY  1962; 18 states received  95.376  of  the total.  Five major 
Defense RDT&E  complexes, centered  around  Los Angeles,  the San Fran- 
cisco  Bay  area,  the  New  York  City-northern New  Jersey  area, Boston, 
and  the Washington,  D.C.,  area  accounted  for  about  58% of  the  total 
net value of RDT&E awards. 

166 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 
6C  . . . we  recognize that  Defense  R B ~ D  is concentrated  geographically 
and   that  this  concentration  w i l l   continue  for  the  foreseeable  future. 
The  Department  of  Defense,  of  all  the  agencies of  government,  is  the 
one that must  feel itself most  constrained  to  the  purpose  of  gebting  the 
best  results in RDT&E at the least cost.  We c a n n d  speak for the remains 
der  of  the government;  such agencies as  the National  Science Foundal 
tion and the National Institutes of  Health were created in part to support 
research,  and  therefore  have  legitimate  additional  criteria  fo r   their 
operations.  We tend  to  follow competence where we  find  it  and  there- 
fo re  consider  that  greater  uniformity  in  the  geographical  distribution 
of  our RCW  contracts and grants can only be  achieved to  the  extent that 
(Testimony) 
more uniform  competence is developed.” 
Muy 5:  Membership on the NASA  Policy Planning Board, established Novem- 
ber  1, was formaPy designated, with Langley  Research Center  Director 
Dr. Floyd L.  Thompson a s  Chairman  and NASA General Counsel Walter 
D.  Sohier a s  Vice Chairman. 
(NASA  Circ. 317) 
*  On  third  anniversary  of  his  historic  space  flight,  first  American  in   space 
Astronaut Alan B.  Shepard, Jr.  (Cdr.,  USN)   received the Langley Medal, 
highest award of  the Smithsonian Institution, in ceremonies at the Smith- 
sonian, Washington, D.C.  ( CRY  5/5/64,9767-68) 
0  L.  D.  Gable,  of  Longmont,  Colo.,  died  a t   Cape Kennedy  of  injuries  su e  
tained  in  the  Aptil  15 accidental  ignition  of  Delta  X-248.  The  Ball 
Bros.  technician was  third  victim  of  the  accident, which  was  still being 
investigated.  ( GSFC  PIO) 
NASA  Director  of  Biotechnology  and  Human  Research  Dr.  Eugene  B. 
Konecci  said  in  keynote  address,  Fifth  Annual  Conference  on  Human 
Factms in Electronics, in San Diego: 
“There is a great need today  for simplification through a more funda- 
mental  understanding  of  phenomena  we  take  fo r   granted.  Mathe- 
matical  theories  to  aid  in  simplification and   a  better  understanding  of 
the  cosmos  around  us   a re  needed.  Specifically in  Electronics we  need 
to re-examine our  traditional  complex circuitry  and  the  logic behind  it, 
so w e  can make even more  rapid  strides  in  solid  state physics  and elec- 
tronics  without  imposing  old  circuit  theory  and  wiring  diagrams  on 
new  active elements.”  In   50 years  an  electron tube  as we  know  it will 
be an archaic museum piece. 
The greatest need  in Human Factors research  is a better understand- 
(( 
ing of  man, his capabilities and  limitations.  The study of  human brain 
mechanisms promises the greatest rewards to science and technology and 
in turn  to the betterment of  mankind.  We need more cross fertilization 
between  neuro-  and  psycho-physiologists  and  electronic  engineers, 
through  a  new  kducational tool  ‘Systems Engineering’  that  includes the 
human element.  . . .” 
(Text) 
*  A U ~ A  1964 James  H.  Wyld  Memorial Award  was  presented  to  Brig.  Gen. 
Joseph S.  Bleymaier  (USAF)  head  of  USAF  Titan  I11  development  pro- 
gram,  fo r   his  work  on  Titan  I11  launch  vehicle.  AIAA  1964  Propul- 
sion Award  was  presented to David Altman,  United  Technology Center 
( A & A ,  
vice  president,  for  his  contributions  to  science  of  propulsion. 
6/M,  87; AIAA  “Honors & Awards”) 
Dr.  Alexander H.  Flax, Assistant Secretary  of  the Air  Force for  Research 
and  Development, addressed  AIAA  in  Cleveland:  “. . . the  number  of 
new  systems which  can  be  fully developed  is  limited.  The  future,  on 

167 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 
the other  hand,  is highly  uncertain.  The  inevitable  result  . . . is that 
the number  of  major weapon systems being  developed for the inventory 
is relatively small.  The number  of  concepts  and potential  weapm  sys- 
tems  being  explored  in  other  c a t e g d e s  of  R&D  are  very  large  but  still 
not  all  inclusive.  The  approach  which  we  are  taking  to  assure  the 
availability  of  proven  technology and  prototypes  of  critical system  ele- 
ments is through exploratory  and advanced development programs ; this 
does  not  usually  include  full  vehicle  or   system  prototypes  although  in  
some cases it may.  By  working  on  the critical  technical, cost o r  opera- 
tional  problems  of  a  potential  new  system  intensively while  ignoring 
the  other  elements  of  the  system,  we  are   placing  ourselves in   a  better 
position  to  decide  to  buy  that  system  and  to  get  i t   in  reasonable time, 
in the event that  either our own  national policy, the  international situa- 
tion  (especially the  actions of  our adversaries), or  obsolescence  arising 
from  new  technological  developments  in  counterweapons  make  neces- 
sary  the  rapid  acquisition  of  a  new  system,  and  we  a re   doing  this  at 
considerably  lower  cost  than  the  cost  of  developing  all  the  candidate 
systems  even  if  these  developments were  a t   a  very  low  rate.  For  ex- 
ample  research  and  exploratory  development  on  high  energy  fuels  for 
both  solids and liquids support potential needs  both  for  larger  and  im- 
proved  ICBMS  and  for  new  space  boosters.  The  120"  and  156"  solid 
rocket under  development  by  the  Air  Force  and  the  260"  solids being 
supported  by  NASA  provide  a t   the  prototype  level  the  necessary  com- 
ponents of  much larger ballistic missile and space launch  vehicle systems 
over  a  wide  range  of  payload  capacities.  The  application of  the  156" 
solid  technology  to   a  new  missile  in  the  Minuteman  tradition  would 
provide  a  payload  capability  many  times  that  of  Minuteman.  Studies 
a re  under way to  examine the payoffs and tradeoffs relating to the appli- 
cation of  high energy fuels to a  new  upper  stage suitable for  application 
to  both  DOD  and  NASA  launch  vehicles.  The  aim  of  these  programs  is 
to  reduce the degree of  uncertainty and the element of  risk which would 
be associated with  the decision to proceed with  such systems.  Yet  there 
is  no  assurance  that  these  developments  will,  in  fact,  be  used  in  their 
present form.  They may simply be stepping stones to a  later generation 
of  propulsion  systems  in  advanced  development.  The  coupling  of  re- 
quirements  for  economy,  reliability  and  commonality  has  led  to  the 
dictum  fo r   technical  advances  that  many  are   called,  but  few  are 
chosen.  . . ."  (Text, DOD Release 361-64) 
M@y 6:  MSC conducted  roughwater  egress  test  of  Gemini  spacecraft  using 
boilerplate  version  of  the  spacecraft  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  I n   waves 
running from six to eight feet high, Astronaut  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr., and 
Gordon  Harvey  of  MSC  Flight  Crew  Support  Div.,  practiced  egress 
maneuvers  with  the  boilerplate  spacecraft, which  was  loosely  tethered 
to NASA Motor Vessel Retriever.  (MSC Roundup, 5/13/64,1) 
e  AFSC  announced  experimental  arc-jet engine  for  space  use had  completed 
a  500-hour  endurance test  a t  Air  Force  Aero  Propulsion  Laboratory, 
Wright-Patterson AFB,  Ohio.  The  10-lb. regeneratively cooled,  hydro- 
gen-propelled  engine had  specific  impulse  greater  than  1,000  sec.  and 
efficiency of  55 per cent. 
(AFSC  Release 43-9448) 
e  At American Astronautical Society meeting in New York, MSC'S  Dr.  Charles 
A.  Berry  said Apollo  astronauts would  be  kept  in  isolation longer  than 
earlier  space  crews,  to  prevent  infection  and  disease.  Families  of 

168 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4  

crewmen  would  be  given  intensive  medical  care  to  ensure  the  good 
health of  the astronauts.  If  one member of  the  three-man crew becomes 
ill,  the  entire  crew  would  be  replaced,  he  said. 
(Houston  Chron., 
5 / 6 / 6 4 )  
May 6:  ComSatCorp filed registration statement with Securities and Exchange 
Commission seeking registration  of  1 0  million shares of  common  stock, 
one  half  to  be  offered  to   communications common  carriers  authorized 
by FCC and the other half to the general public, with 11 managing under- 
(ComSatCorp  Release  6 5 4 ;  
writers  of 
the  public  offering. 
Prospectus) 
NASA announced  selection  of  RCA   Missile and  Surface Radar  Div.  for  ne- 
gotiations  to  procure  C-band  radars  for  support  of  Project  Apollo. 
These  rada r s  would  be  part  of  instrumentation  on  the  tracking  ships 
being  designed  and  built  as  joint  DOD-NASA 
effort. 
(NASA  Release 
64-107) 
*  Westinghouse engineer Harry  L.  Thurman,  Deputy  Director  of  laser  pro- 
gram  in   Westinghouse’s  Defense  and  Space  Center  in   Baltimore,  told 
AIAA  meeting  in  Los  Angeles  that  faser  .may  someday  be  used  to  cook 
meals  in  microseconds.  Citing  many  present  and  future  applications 
of  laser,  Thurman  said  industry  spent  $1,000,000  on  laser  research  in 
1960  and  estimated  Government  laser  contracts  alone  in  1964 would 
amount to $27,000,000. 
(Roberts, Balt. Sun, 5/7/64) 
May 7:  EXPLORER  XVIII,  the  Interplanetary Monitoring Platform  (IMP)   satel- 
lite,  survived  sub-zero  temperatures  during  eight-hour  flight  in  the 
IMP  remained  in  the 
earth’s  shadow,  a  duration  record  for  satellites. 
shadow for so  long because of  its highly  eccentric orbit, carrying  it out 
122,000 mi.  at  apogee.  As  it  entered  the  shadow,  IMP  shut  off  auto- 
matically,  and  temperatures  on  IMP’S  surface  fell  to  more  than  400’ 
below  zero.  After  it  emerged once  again,  IMP’S  transmitter  signal was 
picked  up  by  NASA  tracking  station  a t   Santiago,  Chile.  Preliminary 
evaluation  of  telemetry  tapes  at  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center 
indicated  data  from  the  IMP  experiments were  of  good  quality. 
(NASA  
Release 64-111) 
*  First  anniversary  of  TELSTAR  11  communications  satellite.  AT&T  re- 
ported  its  second  communications satellite was  “functioning  normally 
in  every  respect”  and had  completed 2,340 orbits  of  the earth.  Nearly 
60 public demonstrations, most of  them overseas TV transmissions, were 
conducted  with  TELSTAR  11.  Radiation  data  collected  by  TELSTAR  11 
enabled scientists to  determine that  the very  high  intensity  of  electrons 
in  inner  region  of  the  Van  Allen  belt  had  decayed  slowly  during  the 
past  year.  Built  with  stronger  shielding  against  radiation  than  its 
predecessor and  equipped with  specially. developed transistors  to  better 
withstand  the  space  environment,  TELSTAR  11  was  orbiting  in  higher 
apogee  than  TELSTAR  I,  making  possible  communications experiments 
of  greater length. 
( AT&T  Release) 
At NASA  background briefing for news media,  Doctors W.  Randolph  Love- 
lace 11, Orr E. Reynolds, and Frank B. Voris made presentations on space 
medicine,  biosciences, and  effects of  space environment  on  man.  Dr. 
Lovelace described the close working relationBhip between the offices of 
Space Medicine, Biotechnology, and  Space Science and Medicine.  He 
pointed  out  Center  responsibilities  a s   well  as  the  “detailed  task-level 
technical coordination”  completed at the NASA-DOD  level “which ensures 
most  effective use  of  all existing  facilities”  throughout  the Nation.  I n  

169 
ASTRONAUT ICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
ments fo r  Mars:  “. . . we  had  hoped  that  it would  be  possible to  have 
question period,  Dr.  Reynolds discussed timing  of  life-detector experi- 
a  landing capsule on Ma r s  fo r  the  1966 mission.  Just  as the  plans  for 
tha t  were being developed, questions were raised  by  recent astronomical 
data about the density of  the atmosphere of  Mars that made it very  d i 5 -  
cult, if not impossible, to design the proper landing system. 
“At  the   present  time  we  are  hoping  to  have  a  landing  vehicle  for 
Mars  fo r   the  1969  opportunity.  This  is  not  a n   improved  program. 
It 
But  we  a r e  working on  the  development of  plans  in  that  direction. 
has  already  been  decided  that  the  biological sciences payload,  tha t   is, 
the life detector instruments, o r  whatever else  the biological community 
thinks  a re  most  appropriate  for  that  flight,  will  have  high  priority  on 
any landing mission. 
“So I think the best guess now would be  that certainly our first oppor- 
tunity would be  fo r  1969, and we certainly hope we will have such instru- 
ments  aboard.” 
Discussing  space  radiation,  Dr.  Reynolds  said:  “. . . a  number  of 
committees and meetings that  have been  held  by  the  radiobiologists  in 
this country  have  recommended  that  an  experiment  be  done  below  the 
radiation  belt  carrying  a  known  source  of  radiation.  The  reason  for 
this  is  that  there  have  been  reports, from  organisms,  living  organisms 
flown  in  the natural  radiation  belt,  of  a higher  than  expected  effective- 
ness  of  the  radiation.  There  is no  good  theoretical  basis  for  knowing 
why  this  should  occur.  . . :’  Experiment  fo r  checking this  would  be 
flown  in first flight of  Biosatellite, carrying  known  source and dosage of 
radiation  below the  area of  the Van Allen  belts.  Asked  about  the pre- 
vious data, Dr. Reynolds said: 
There a r e  experiments both by United States experimenters in piggy- 
( 6  
back  flights,  and  the  Russian  experiments  that  show  a  higher  than 
expected effectiveness of  the  ambient  radiation  in  genetic effect  and  in 
systemic effect.  These experiments we   strongly  suspect had  this  result 
due  to  lack  of  adequate  dosimetry,  measurement  of  the  aotual  dosage 
that  was  encountered.  For  this  reason  the  radiobiologists  who  have 
been advising us  have recommended this experiment with a known source 
so  a s   to  eliminate  any  question  of  whether  the  dosimetry  was 
wrong.  . . .” 
Dr. Voris discussed “our studies into the biological effects of  extremely 
low magnetic fields and into  alternating  and high magnetic field  forces. 
Because of  a  recently expounded theory  that  individual neurons possess 
individual  and  isolated  electromagnetic fields  of  their  own,  it  is  con- 
ceivable  that  the  functions  of  the  human  nervous  system  may  suffer 
impairment as a  result of  exposure to  electromagnetic fields that deviate 
markedly from ambient terrestrial levels.  . . .” 
Asked about slow rotation for manned space stations to provide partial 
gravity, Dr. Voris said that it presented “a  problem in disorientation and 
in th e  effects of  mal de mer.  Slow rotation  is fine if   you  can keep  your 
head  immobilized  and  become  acclimated  to  it  and  stay  in  one  spot. 
If you move around, move with the turn o r  away from  the turn,  o r  move 
from the periphery of  a circular station into the center, you are changing 
the field force there, you  a r e  developing what  is called  a  Coriolis effect, 
and  you  then  disturb  the  balance mechanism  o r   vestibular  mechanism 
of  the  body  and  you  develop  recurrent  effects  such  a s   seasickness.” 
(Transcript) 
7864?38 -12 

170 
ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  
May 7:  Anglo-French manufacturers of the supersonic airliner  Concorde re- 
vealed  a  long-range version  of  the Concorde was  in  development stage. 
British Aircraft Corp. and France’s  Sud-Aviation said the aircraft would 
have longer body and greater wingspan, greater fuel capacity and greater 
reserves,  increasing  passenger  load  from  100 to  118.  (UPI, Phil.  Eve 
Bull.,  5/7/64;  A v .  Wk., 5/11/64,36) 
*  NASA  Director  of  Manned  Lunar  Mission  Studies  Thomas  C.  Evans  dis- 
cussed  a t   AAS meeting  the  systems  that  might  be  used  fo r   post-Apollo 
exploration  of  the  moon.  The  concepts,  making  maximum  use  of  the 
investment in  Saturn  and  Apollo,  included:  Apollo  itself,  with  separate 
missions to each point  of  interest;  Apollo supplemented with Stay Time 
Extension Module (STEM), with increased payload capacity developed in  
Apollo  system to  transport  “saddle  bags”  of  supplies o r   surface equip- 
ment  attached  to  outside  of  LEM; Apollo  supplemented  with  Apollo 
Logistic Support System  (ALSS) , with  two flights-one 
to  transport  two  
astronauts, the other to deliver support equipment and supplies probably 
including  lunar  surface  vehicle;  and,  Apollo  supplemented with  Lunar 
Exploration  System f o r  Apollo  (LESA)  , with  2 3  flights and  payload  to 
include shelter-laboratory and roving vehicle.  (Text) 
’ In  paper  on  manned  lunar  scientific  operations,  prepared  fo r   AAS  meet- 
ing  in  New  York,  NASA’s  Dr.  Paul  Lowman  (Office  of  Space  Science 
and  Applications)  and  Donald  A.  Beattie  (O f h e   of  Manned  Space 
Flight)  said that “.  . . it  is apparent  that  the moon  is a  virtual  Rosetta 
stone  that,  if  properly  read,  may  permit  us  to  learn  how  the  solar 
system, the earth, and the continents on which we  live were formed.  . . . 
“Since the scientific investigations of  highest priority  are in the  fields 
of  geology  and  geophysics,  it  appears  that  there  is  definite  value  in 
extending  manned  lunar  exploration  by  the  use  of  modified  Apollo 
equipment.  Experience  has  shown  that  geophysical  and  geological 
mapping  investigations  of  large  areas  a re   continuing  tasks;  like  the 
painting  of  the  Golden  Ga te   Bridge,  they  a re   never  really  finished, 
because  new  concepts, questions,  and  methods  evolve  during  the  pro- 
gram.  The  occasionally-expressed view  that  the  major  questions about 
the  moon  could  be  settled by  a  f ew   landings  and  the  return  of  a  few 
samples ignore the experience of  several centuries of  terrestrial  geology 
and geophysics.  . . .” 
(Text) 
e  Maj.  Gen.  0. J.  Ritland  (USAF )  , Deputy Commander  for  Space, AFSC,  dis- 
cussed  in AAS luncheon address  the role of  USAF  in U.S.  space program, 
tracing history  of  ICBM  development: 
“The  task  fo r   the  Air  Force  in  those  early  days  was  a  tremendous 
It  had  full  responsibility  fo r   the  development,  acquisition,  and 
one. 
deployment  of  an  ICBM  force  capable  of  deterring  any  missile  threat 
the Soviets might  develop.  This meant  that  we  had  to  develop  reliable 
high  thrust boosters, materials that could withstand extreme heat  caused 
by  re-entry friction,  guidance components, and a  host of  subsystems fo r  
use  in  our  ICBM’s. We  had  to  develop command,  control  and  tracking 
systems, and a  wide  range  of  support  and  test  facilities for  launch  and 
retrieval.  We  had  to  recruit  and  train  a  tremendous  force  of  highly 
skilled specialists and  technicians.  I n  addition  we  had  to  set up whole 
new  management structures and  apply  expedited  management methods 
under which these tasks could be accomplished with the greatest possible 
speed. 

171 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 
“Time  was  the  critical  factor.  The  Soviets  had  a  very  substantial 
advance  in  technological lead  times  over  us.  For   this  reason  it  was 
essential that we  have  the  fullest cooperation  and  support  from a l l  seg- 
ments  of  ou r   society.  The  response  to   these  needs  was  characteristic 
OftheAmericanpeople.  . . . 
“We had  tremendous  support from many  government  agencies.  The 
National  Advisory  Committee  fo r  Aeronautics,  which  became  the  Na- 
tional Aeronautics  and  Space Agency  in   1958, gave  unfailing  support. 
For   example,  NACA’S  Moffett  Laboratories did  a  major  portion  of  the 
high speed wind  tunnel  testing  for  our nose cone development program. 
NACA’S  Cleveland Propulsion  Laboratories  provided  vital  support to   the 
Air Force in the rocket engine  field.  These are  just two examples of the 
highly  successful partnership which  has evolved  between  the  Air  Force 
as  the  primary  military  agency  in  space  and  the  NASA  as   the  primary 
civilian  agency  in   space.  The partnership  continues  to  be  one  of  the 
most vital and  dynamic aspects of the national space effort.  . . .”  (Text, 
AFSC Release 4S-R-51) 
Muy  7:  Martin  Marietta  recently  completed  NASA-funded,  Domconcurred- 
upon  study  of  Centaur  upper  stage mated  with  various  Titans.  Most 
for  heavy  Surveyor  spacecraft 
promising  configuration-particularly 
and  for  advanced  Mars  missions-was 
using  Centaur  a s   trans-stage 
( SBD ,  5/7/64,  34) 
for Titan  111-A  (without the  strap-on solids). 
*  FAA adopted  safety regulation  requiring that cockpit doors on  all commer- 
(FAA  Release  6 4 4 5 )  
cial aircraft be  locked throughout  flights. 
Ma y  8:  NASA  and Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory  had  begun  operat- 
ing “Prairie  Network”  in  midwestern  U S . ,  a  network  of  16  automatic 
camera  stations to  photograph  falling meteors  and  aid  in  tracking  and 
recovering  meteorites,  NASA  announced.  Photographic  measurements 
would  assist scientists in  determining  how  much mass  is  lost by  bodies 
during  atmospheric  entry  and  in  calculating origin  of  meteors. 
(NASA 
Release 6 6 1 0 6 )  
NASA  signed  $80-million  incentive contract with  Boeing  Co.  to  build  five 
Lunar  Orbiter  spacecraft.  Beginning  in  1966,  Atlas-Agena  boosters 
would  launch  Lunar  Orbiters  from  Cape  Kennedy  on  missions  to  take 
close-range photographs  of  moon’s  surface  for  scientific study  and  to 
(NASA Release 64-109) 
help select landing sites for Project Apollo. 
Four Soviet scientists reported  to Committee on  Space Research  ( COSPAR) 
in Florence that “a  distortion  of  sex ratio”  occurred  among offspring of 
fru i t  flies  that  bred  on  board  manned  spacecraft during four-day space 
flights.  The  abstract  prepared  for  COSPAR  preliminary  program  did 
not  explain  the  change in  sex  ratios,  did  say  that  experiments’ purpose 
was  to  study  effects of  space  flight-primarily  weightlessness  and  space 
the fruit  fly and i ts  cells.  (AP, Balt.  Sun, 5/9/64;  HTNS, 
radiation-on 
Wash. Post, 5/9/69) 
Soviet Academician  Anatoli  Blagonravov, chief  Soviet delegate to  COSPAR 
meeting  in   Florence,  indicated  to  newsmen  in  press  conference 
tha t   the next  major  Soviet space  flight might  be  a  year  away:  “We  a re  
trying  to   open  a  way  to  the  nearest  planet.  It will  take  a  long  time.” 
Asked  if  this  meant  that  no  launch  was  planned  for   the  present,  he 
replied:  “We  are   preparing  projects.  The  preparation  might  take   a 
(Levin, AP, 5/9/64?) 
year.” 

172 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 

M a y  8 :  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced scientists were  investigat- 
stimulate dental tissues and freshen the astronaut’s mouth.  . . .”  ( MSC 
ing use of  chewing gum for astronauts on long-duration space flights, “to 
Release  64-69) 
0  Patent award to Bell Aerosystems Co.  for electronic stethoscope, a by-prod- 
uct  of  space research, was announced.  The 20-oz. transistorized stetho- 
scope  enabled  physicians  for  the  first  time  to  eliminate  all  unwanted 
heart  sounds and focus on  only those desired.  Bell w a s  offering manu- 
(Jones,  NYT, 
facturing  rights  to  medical-electronics  companies. 
5/9/64,  31) 
Muy  9.- U.S.  delegation  to  international  Committee  on  Space  Research 
(COSPAR )   presented  annual  report  of  U.S.  activities  in   space.  Pre- 
sented by Richard W.  Porter of  National Academy of  Sciences, the chief 
of  U.S.  delegation,  the  report  said  900  small  rockets  and  100  large 
rockets for weather and scientific studies were fired by U.S.  in 1963, and 
56 satellites were successfully launched by  the U.S.  Porter  said  Project 
West  Ford copper dipoles placed  in  space in May  1963 fo r  communica- 
tions experiments had not interfered with astronomy as had been feared; 
however,  “no  further  experiments  of  this  kind  a re   now  contemplated 
by the United States.” 
(Levin, AP, 5/9/64) 
0  Soviet annual repont to COSPAR listed 21 satellite and  114 rocket launchings 
fo r  1963. 
Omitting  any  mention  of  when  U.S.S.R.  might  launch  major  space- 
craft,  report  said past manned space flight had  “set  some new  problems 
before  scientists  requiring  immediate  solution  fo r   successful  prepara- 
tion  and realization of  more prolonged space missions.  . . .”  A major 
question to  be  answered was  whether  it was  “possible for  an  astronaut, 
after  two  o r   three  weeks  stay  under  conditions  of  weightlessness,  to 
endure  satisfactorily  stresses  acting  on  a n   organism  during  re-entry.” 
Also  studies must  be made of  methods to  safeguard  astronauts’ cardio- 
vascular systems.  Longest section of  report was on medical and biologi- 
cal  problems  of  manned  space  flight;  it  offered  evidence  that  U.S.S.R. 
was  paying  increasing  attention  to  weightlessness and  other  problems 
of manned space flight. 
Soviet  report  was  first  such  version  ever  submitted  in  English  and 
was thought to be  strikingly free of  propaganda.  Possibly significantly, 
report  referred  to  U.S.  space  research  in  correlation  with  Soviet  re- 
search; for example, findings of  MARS  I were  said to correlate with  find- 
ings of U.S.  EXPLORER x and MARINER 11. 
( AP,  5/9/64;  Simons, Wush. 
Post, 5 /13 /M)  
M a y  11: XB-70  supersonic aircraft  w a s  unveiled  a t  North  American  Avia- 
tion  plant,  Palmdale,  Calif.  The  2,000-mph  intercontinental-range 
plane  would  be  used  to  investigate feasibility  of  long-range  high-speed 
flight.  Speaking  of  achievements in  the   program  thus  far,  Brig.  Gen. 
Fred  J.  Ascani  (AFSC  Aeronautical  Systems  Div.)  said:  “.  . . Not  all 
of these and other accomplishments can be termed radical breakthroughs 
(although  the  XB-70  program  has  produced  about  a  thousand  patent 
disclosures),  but  taken  together  they  have  helped  to  advance  a  tech- 
nology which constitutes a base fo r  a new generation of  civil and military 
aircraft  which  will  operate  at  sustained  supersonic  speeds.” 
( DOD 
Release 3 7 M ;  Witkin, NYT,  5/12/64,1;  AF Pol.  Info. Ltr.,  6/1/64) 

173 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1 9  6 4 
May 11: NASA announced appointment of  Dr. Alfred J.  Eggers,  Jr.,  Assistant 
Director of Ames Research Center, as Deputy Associate Administrator for 
Advanced  Research  and  Technology.  I n   the  newly  created  position, 
Dr.  Eggers would work  closely  with  staff  members  in  planning  NASA’s 
advanced and suppoFting research programs.  Specialist in problems of 
hypersonic  and  space flight research,  Dr.  Eggers made many  contribu- 
tions  to  theories  of  hypersonic  aerodynamics  and   atmospheric  entry 
problems of  motion  and heating.  Among his past  awards were Arthur 
S.  Flemming Award  in  1956 a nd  Sylvanus Albert  Reed  Award  (1962) 
(NASA Release 64-110;  NASA  Announcement 64-95) 
of  the IAS. 
*  Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight,  told  group  touring  Saturn-Apollo  industrial  facilities  at  NASA 
Michoud Operations that  astronauts  on flight to  the moon would  not be 
harmed  by  radiation  from  Van Allen  belts  or  solar  flares.  Project 
Apollo astronauts would be “safer than  test pilots  in  industry  have ever 
(Maloney, Houston Post,  5/12/64) 
been,”  he  declared. 
MSFC  Director  Dr.  Wernher  von  BTaun  discussed  Saturn  IB/Centaur 
launch  vehicle  at Michoud  tour  and  said  that  “there  will  be money  t o  
develop the booster in the FY ’66 space agency budget.”  Dr. von Braun 
said he  believed Saturn  IB/Centaur  would  compete on  cost-effectiveness 
basis with Titan 111; with the contemplated missions, cost of  $920 million 
per  launch  was  possible.  Dr.  von  Braun  also  disclosed  NASA  studies 
indicating manned  circumlunar  flight with Gemini  spacecraft was  feas- 
ible.  Such  a  mission  was  not  being  seriously considered  a t   this  time, 
however.  (M& R ,  5/18/641,17) 
AEC  announced  a  satellite carrying  small  Snap-9A  atomic  generator  had 
been  launched  on  Thor-Able-Star booster  from  Vandenberg  AFB  last 
April  21,  but  it  did  not  go  into  orbit.  Preliminary  data  indicated  the 
satellite burned up  upon  re-entry  into  earth‘s  atmosphere. 
(AP, NYT, 
5/12/64;  Av .   Wk., 5/18/64?,  38) 
Walter L. Lingle, Jr., NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in address 
to  the Missouri Bankers Association in  St.  Louis: 
“I cannot overemphasize the  importance of  incentive contracting  as a 
force for improving NASA’s own planning and decision making processes, 
as well as the contractors’. 
We  expect  to  write  more  than  $500 million  of  incentive  contracts 
6 6  
in the present fiscal year. 
“As  you  know,  President  Johnson  has  taken  a  very  personal  interest 
in the cost effectiveness and efficiency of  companies which a re  contractors 
to  the  Government.  We  regard  incentive  contracting  a s   a  primary 
means fo r  achieving the added efficiency which President Johnson  seeks. 
“More  than  incidentally, we  think  that  they  can  become  a  primary 
means  fo r  improving contractor  profit  levels.  It  is NASA’s policy  to  let 
a  contractor  substantially  improve  his  profit  ratios  if  he  can  achieve 
the  incentive targets  which we  mutually establish.  Some  recent  targets 
which we  have established will permit the contractor to more than double 
the  profit  ratio  . . .,  if  all  incentive  targets  a re   achieved.” 
(Text, 
CR, 5/12/64?,  10308-11) 
Sen.  J.  W.  Fulbright,  Chairman  of  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee, 
said a t  Copenhagen celebration of  50th anniversary of  Denmark-America 
Foundation:  “The  most  urgent  need  of  this  troubled  world  is  new 

J 

174 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 

thoughts  and  attitudes  toward  the  old  problem  of  human  relations,  as 
distinct from excessive preoccupation with traveling to the moon.” 
(AP, 
Kansas C i ty  T imes ,  5/12/64) 
May  11  : Dome  of  ancient  rock  at Vredefort,  South  Africa,  was  said  to  be 
one-mile-dia. meteor which impacted earth a t  36,000 mph about 250 mil- 
lion years ago.  Willian I. Manton, research geologist of  Johannesburg’s 
Univ.  of  the Witwatersrand,  said:  “‘It is almost  certain.that  a  meteorite 
struck  the  earth  at  Vredefort  and  completely  changed  the  geological 
structure  for  60 miles  around  the  point  of  impact.” 
(AP,  Phil.  Eve. 
Bull., 5/11/64) 
May  11-14:  35th  annual meeting of  Aerospace Medical Association  held  at 
Bal Harbour,  Ha.  At  the meeting, USAF  School of  Aerospace Medicine 
scientists led by  Dr.  Billy Welch reported  on  SAM’S  two  30-day experi- 
ments with 100% oxygen atmosphere and concluded that  100% oxygen 
was  acceptable fo r  30-day period.  USAF  doctors  also  reported  on  tests 
with oxygen-nitrogen mixture at 7 psi for Manned Orbiting Laboratory 
Problem  of  bends  in  test  subjects,  occurring  during  change  from  M01 
atmosphere  to  3.5  psi  atmosphere  in  Gemini  extravehicular  spacesuit 
(M&R, 
caused testers to extend denitrogenization period  to  4%  hours. 
5/18/64,16) 
e  At  Aerospace  Medical  Association  conference,  Dr.  Dietrich  E.  Beischer 
and  James  C.  Knepton,  Jr.,  of  Naval  School  of  Aviation  Medi- 
cine  said high magnetic fields, such as those under  study  for spacecraft 
shielding,  may  have  noticeable  effect  on  behavior  of  heart.  Squirrel 
monkeys  subjected  to  high  magnetic  fields  (20,000  to  70,000  gauss) 
showed  up  to 
decrease  in  heart  rate  and  marked  change  in  heart- 
beat’s  rhythm.  Dr.  Beischer  also  reported  sea  urchin  eggs  exposed 
to  140,000  gauss  were  retarded  in  their  development,  but  fruit  fly 
showed no effects after two-hour exposure to high gauss.  High magnetic 
fields  were  being  investigated  for  use  in  shielding  astronauts  against 
cosmic  radiation  and  other  space  hazards,  and  Dr. Cornelius  Tobias 
and  N.  M.  Amer  reported  that  magnetic  fields  around  3.5  kilogauss 
appeared  to have protective effect against  high  doses of  ionizing radia- 
(M& R ,  5/18/64,  1 6 )  
tion. 
a  At  Aerospace Medical Association meeting, Maj.  Gen.  Marvin  C.  Demler, 
Commander of  AFSC  Research and Technology Div.,  said USAF was study- 
ing  use  of  “space lifeboats”  for  astronauts who  might  have  to  abandon 
their  spacecraft.  The  self-contained unit  would  be  designed  to  sustain 
astronauts until they were rescued.  ( UPI, NYT ,  5/12/64,  43) 
May  12:  X-15  No.  3 flown  by  NASA pilot  Jack  McKay  to  speed  of  ‘3,OOO 
mph  (mach  4.55),  the  aircraft’s  skin  reaching  recorded  temperatures 
of  800”.  With  sharp leading d g e  on  top portion  of  vertical  tail  alter- 
ing  airflow over the tail surfaces, the X-15  was fitted with special sensors 
to measure effects of this altered airflow on skin friction and heat transfer 
rates.  Also,  special microphone  mounted  on  aircraft’s  side  measured 
(NASA  X-15  Proj. 
noise level of  boundary  layer  flowing over  surfaces. 
Off. ; FRC Release) 
e  Soviet  physicians’  report  on  behavior  of  human  heart  in  weightlessness 
of  space  said  increase  in  gravity  when  space  traveler  re-enters  earth’s 
atmosphere and  returns  to  earth would place heart muscle under  heavy 
stress.  Through  Moscow  broadcast  from  Tass, Drs.  Roman  Bayevsky 
and  Oleg Gazenko  reported  cosmonauts’ pulse  rate  slowed  as  did  elec- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  bERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 

175 

trical  conductance of  the  heart.  The  doctors  believed  tha t   the  “lower 
level of  the functioning of  the  heart and ‘readjustment’ of  the cardiovas- 
cular system to a new level should cause a certain weakening of  the heart 
muscle.  A s  f a r  a s  was known, not one of  the Soviet cosmonauts suffered 
any untoward permanent effects in the state of  weightlessness.  However, 
for  future prolonged  flights,  it  is  extremely  important  to  establish  the 
degree of  ‘weakening’ of  the heart.  . . .” 
(AP,  5/12/64) 
M a y  12:  FAA announced  Panagra  and  Aeronaves De Mexico  had  each  re- 
served  two  delivery  positions  for  US. supersonic  transport  airliner, 
bringing  total  reserved  positions  for  SST to  88  by  19  airlines.  (FAA 
Release  644%) 
District Judge issued temporary  restraining  order to halt FAA’s sonic boom 
flight-tests over  Oklahoma  City.  The  order  was  issued  in  suit  filed  by 
Attorney George Miskovsky alleging that  sonic boom  shock waves were 
destroying,  damaging  and  weakening  the  structures of  private  homes 
(6 
and business properties.”  Hearing was  set for May  19, after which the 
District Judge refused to halt the sonic boom tests  (see May  21) .   Sonic 
booms were said to have cracked  147 windows in downtown office build- 
(Miles, Wmh. Pos t ,  5/12/64;  AP,  Wash. Pos t ,  5/13/64) 
ings. 
May   13: Successful  test  of  Apollo  escape  system  was  conducted  a t   White 
Sands Missile Range  by  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center.  Boilerplate 
model  of  Apollo  spacecraft  (command  and  service  modules)  was 
mounted  on  Little  Joe  11.  At  altitude  of  17,000  f t .   the  Little  Joe  I1 
was  exploded. 
Instantly  the  rockets  in   the   escape  tower  ignited  and 
propelled  the  Apollo  command  module  away  from  the  exploding 
booster-to  maximum  altitude  of  24,000 fi.;  then  the escape tower  was 
jettisoned  automatically.  Drogue  parachute  opened  from  nose  to  sta- 
bilize  the  spacecraft  a s   i t   descended.  Then  at  about  7,500  ft.  three 
large parachutes were deployed from the nose.  First chute broke loose 
from the  spacecraft, but  the spacecraft landed  safely with two  chutes  at 
speed of  about  30  fps.  The 71/-min.  test  was  termed  successful, with 
(NASA  Release  64-108;  Freelander,  Houston 
all  objectives  achieved. 
Po&, 5/14/64;  Witkm, NYT ,  5/14/@,  18) 
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory successfully operated a K iw i  EL4  reactor, 
designated the  K iw i  M D ,  at n e x  full design power  for  approximately 
one minute, a t  Jackass Flats, Nev.  The  test  used  liquid  hydrogen  a s  a 
propellant and coolant with a  liquid-hydrogen-cooled nozzle a s  would  be 
required  in   a  flight  system.  All  principal  test  objectives  were  met. 
Operating time a t  the p ow e r  plateau had to be reduced from the planned 
eight  minutes  to  one  minute  because of  nozzle leaks,  but  reduced  test 
duration  did  not  compromise the  meeting  of  test  objectives.  Reactor 
performance  was  excellent,  and   the  test  w a s   considered  a major  mile- 
stone in  the NASA-AEC  program  to  develop technology fo r  using nuclear 
(Finger,  5/29&l;  SNPO) 
propulsion  in  space missions. 
Disclosed a t  press conference in Florence, Italy, in  connection with COSPAR 
meeting,  that  US.-U.S.S.R.  cooperative  space  negotiations  would  be 
ding US. team would  be  NASA 
held  i n  Geneva within  two  weeks. 
Deputy Administrator  Dr.  Hugh  L. 
den,  meeting with  Soviet  team 
(Simons,  r a s h .  Post,  5 /14 /a )  
led  by Anatoli  Blagonravov. 
Aerospace Medical Association honored  Dr. W.  Randolph Lovelace I1 and 
Col.  William K.  Douglas a t  its meeting in Miami.  Dr.  Lovelace, Presi- 
dent  of  Lovelace Foundation  fo r  Medical  Education  and Research and 

176 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4  

recently appointed  NASA  Director  of  Space Medicine,  received  the  1964 
Theodore C.  Lyster  award, a nd  Dr. Douglas, Assistant Deputy  fo r  Bio- 
astronautics  a t   AFMTC  and  formerly  personal  physician  to  the  original 
seven Mercury astronauts, received the Louis H.  Bauer Founders award. 
(Wash. Eve. Star, 5/14/64) 
May 13:  NASA  and DOD  announced Astronaut  M.  Scott Carpenter  (Lt.  Cdr., 
USN)  would  participate  in  USN  Project  Sea Lab  I  off  coast  of  Bermuda 
in  July.  The  submerged lab would  collect  and  evaluate scientific data 
o n  physiological and  psychological  reaotions  to  the   undersea  environ- 
(NASA  Release 6 6 1 1 2 ;  DOD Release 3 8 3 4 )  
ment. 
*  Launch of  Ranger 7 lunar probe was postponed from late June date to third 
quarter of  the year, to ensure most caTeful possible check  and  review  of 
(NASA  Release 6&114) 
ithe many  tests being made  on  the spacecraft. 
May   14:  ZOND  I  interplanetary  spacecraft made  a  course  correction  maneu- 
ver  13 million  km.  from  earth,  according  t o  Soviet  news  agency  Tass. 
Radio signals from ground command station brought the spacecraft “into 
an  assigned position,”  and  onboard  engine  “boosted  the  station’s  speed 
by  about 50  meters per  second.”  Tass  said the  maneuvers of  the  “test 
session”  were  performed  successfully,  “thereby  allowing  the  solution 
of  problems  connected  with  the  prmise  correction  of  trajeotory  of  the 
(Tass,  Pravda,  5/19/64,  ATSS-T 
automatic  cosmic  apparatuses.” 
Trans.) 
*  Completely assembled four-stage NASA  launch  vehicle was  transported  for 
first time in  an airplane, the  72-ft.-long Scout flown  from  NASA  Wallops 
Station  to Langley AFB,  Hampton, Va.,  in 6 1 3 3  transport.  Flight  was 
initial  test  of  procedures  being  considered  to  improve  efficiency  and 
(NASA  Release  64-11?;  Wal- 
reliability  of  launch  vehicle  operations. 
lops Release 64-42) 
*  NASA  announced Collins Radio Co.  and Philco  Corp. had  been  selected for 
final competition for prime contract  to provide Apollo Network  S-Band 
Systems.  Estimated  85-million contract  called  fo r   basic  purchase  of 
two complete tracking  and  data  acquisition systems with  30-ft.-diameter 
antennas and  three electronic subsystems.  The band would  handle such 
functions  as  tracking,  telemetry,  and  TV  and  voice  communication. 
(NASA  Release 6 4 1 1 6 )  
*  25-hour high-altitude balloon flight was  completed when  100-lb. instrument 
package was  dropped  from  the  balloon  ne=  Oakwood,  Tex.,  where  it 
was  “recovered  in  good  shape.”  Released  from  the  Palestine,  Tex., 
National  Center  for  Atmospheric Research  station,  the  balloon  carried 
instrumentation  to study cosmic rays to altitude of  120,000 ft. 
(Hous- 
ton Post, 5/15/64) 
*  JPL  dedicated its new  Space Flight Operations Facility a t  Pasadena,  Calif., 
the facility to  act  as command center fo r  future  unmanned  space flights 
to  the m o m  and  planets.  Participating  in  dedication ceremonies were 
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Rep. George P. Miller, Dr.  Robert C.  Seamans, 
Jr.,  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge,  and  Dr.  William  H. 
Pickering.  At  dedication ceremony, radar signal was bounced off  planet 
Venus,  the  83 million  mi.  round  trip  taking  seven minutes  and  25  sec. 
(SBD, 5/14/64,75-76;  AP, Houston Post, 5/14/64) 
At the dedication of  the J P L  Space Flight Operations Facility, Dr. Homer E. 
Newell,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applica- 
tions, remarked : 

Man  and his thinking are  the prime  ingredients of  science. 
ecomes simply a matter of  where the man 
“In  the Space P r o g a  
s  and  measuring  devices.  For  those 
i s   in  relation  to  his 
d,  man  is back  on  earth while his 
space missions that 
eyes and ears  and other senses are  extended electronically  and mechani- 
cally f a r  out into space by  the spacecraft and its instrumentation-  From 
his  remote  position,  he  must  monitor,  issue  commands,  receive  and 
record  data,  make  routine  or  emergency  decisions  as required  in  a 
continuing interchange with his inanimate partner out in space. 
“It  is  to  make  this  partnership  effective  and  productive  of  data, 
measurements, observations, and  information that  a  centralized  facility 
like the SFOF  is  necessary.  . . .”  (Text) 
May 14: Langley Research Center announced three key management appoint- 
ments:  Mr.  Eugene  C.  Draley  was  appointed  Assistant  Director  for 
Flight  Projects;  Dr.  John  E.  Duberg was  named  an  Assistant Director 
in charge of  the research activities of  the Dynamic Loads Div.  and the 
Structures  Research  Div.,  and  Mr.  Francis  B.  Smith  was  appointed 
Assistant Director  responsible for  the  Analysis  and  Computation Div., 
the  Instrument  Research  Div.,  and  the  Space Mechanics  Div. 
(LARC  
Release) 
0  NASA  announced  i t   would  negotiate  contract  with  General  Electric  Co.’s 
Valley  Forge  Space  Technology  Center  to   design  and  build  gravity- 
gradient  stabilization  system  for  Advanced  Technological  Satellite. 
Contract was  expected  to  exceed  $5 million.  The GE  devices would  be 
flown  on  three  satellites;  in  addition,  GE  would  supply  two  prototype 
and two engineering gravity-gradient system models plus  ground opera- 
(NASA  Release 66115) 
tions and data analysis. 
*  Tenth  anniversary of  directive to  accelerate  Atlas  ICBM  development pro- 
gram.  Ten  years ago General Thomas D.  White,  then  USAF  Vice  Chief 
of  Staff,  directed  that  Atlas  icBM  program  proceed  with  highest  USAF 
priority.  (AFSC Releases) 
Explosion and fire destroyed Atlas  F ICBM  site near  Frederick, Okla.  The 
missile was not armed, and there were no injuries in the explosion.  This 
was four th  such event in less than a  year  and prompted renewed  inquiry 
(UPI,  Wash. 
into the  situation by  Senate Preparedness Subcommittee. 
Pos t ,  5/15/64; M&R,  5/25/64,11) 
*  Federal Judge Stephen Chandler refused to  reinstate State District Court’s 
temporary restraining order against FAA’s sonic boom  tests at Oklahoma 
(AP, Wmh. 
City, and FAA  resumed i ts  schedule of  eight flights per  day. 
Pos t ,  5/14/64; AP, Balt.  Sun, 5/15/64) 
May 15: Soviet cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pave1 Popovich  (VOSTOK 
III  and  N )  had  orthostatic  hypotension  following  their  space  flights, 
V. Parin  revealed.  T h e  condition 
Soviet  physiologist  Prof. 
was noted in the cosmonau 
two days after the flight.” 
In  address 
a t   cospm-prepared 
and  delivered in  English-and 
in  the  discussion 
which followed, the Soviet Director of  Institute of  Normal and Pathologi- 
cal  Physiology,  Soviet  Academy  of  Medical  Sciences,  said  that  the 
cosmonauts “showed  no disturbances in their state of  health”  after their 

178 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 
prolonged  space  flights,  and  the  “transient  functional  reactions”  were 
said  to  have  “disappeared  in  seven  or   10 days.  . . .”  He  added  tha t  
“post-flight  disturbances  were  largely  related  to  the  central  nervous 
system,  the  cardiovascular  systems  and  metabolism.” 
Prof.  Nello  Pace,  head  of  Physiology  Dept.  a t   Univ.  of  California 
(Berkeley), closely questioned  Prof.  Par in   about his statements.  Prof. 
Pace considered that hypotension was “among  the most significant facts” 
disclosed  a t   the  conference.  He  noted  that  the  condition  had  been 
observed  in  U.S.  Astronauts  Schirra  and  Cooper,  and  tha t   NASA  had 
said that  implications of  blood pressure  responses “will have to be given 
very  serious consideration as  larger missions are  undertaken.’’ 
(Text ; 
Hillaby, NYT ,  5/16]64,8;  Burkett, Houston Chron., 5 /17 /64)  
M a y  15:  USAF  grounded  its fleet of  more  than  500 F-105  aircraft because of 
recent crashes.  The F-105  had been involved in 18  major accidents this 
year,  DOD spokesman  said,  and  four pilots had  been  killed in  10 major 
(Raymond, NYT ,  5/16/a, 8 )  
accidents since March  1. 
*  Hand-held navigational  device called  a  “stadimeter,”  conceived  by  USAF 
scientists  a t   Air  Force  Avionics  Laboratory,  was  displayed  by  AFSC. 
To  be  tested  in  Project  Gemini  manned  space  flights,  the  device  used 
only manual  and visual  alignment  and  required  no  electronics.  Astro- 
nauts would use stadimeter  to determine optically the range of  the space- 
(AFSC  Release 44-1&56) 
craft from the earth. 
*  General  order  from  AFSC  established  Eastern  and  Western  Test  Ranges 
of  the National  Range Division.  WTR  would  assume  range  support for 
ICBM  and satellite programs on a phased basis, gaining  full responsibility 
some time between Mar.  1 and Jun.  30,1965.  Until then, overall respon- 
sibilities  for  these functions continued  with  PMR ;   after  that  time,  PMR 
would  continue  to  operate  as  a  national  sea  test  range  under  the  Navy. 
I t  would  comprise  facilities  in  Pt.  Mugu-San Nicholas  Island  area  and 
certain downrange  stations in the area  of  Hawaii,  and would  be  respon- 
sible for Pacific Ocean-based launches. 
(AFSC   Release 45-R-61;  NASA 
Announcement 61-161) 
*  First  meeting  of  NASA  Historical  Advisory  Committee,  chaired  by  Prof. 
Wood Gray of George Washington Univ. 
M a y  16:  New  and more  detailed  information  about Van  Allen  belts  gleaned 
by  HITCHHIKER   I  satellite  was  reported  to   COSPAR  by  Ludwig  Katz, 
AFCRL  project  scientist.  HITCHHIKER   satellite was  launched  pickaback 
on  USAF  satellite and separated  last July  1.  I n  the AFCRL  measurements 
the  count  rate  for   protons  between  one  and  five  million  electron  volts 
(mev)  indicated that  for this energy  region  there were two  distinct Van 
Allen  belts.  The  count  was  significantly  lower  in  the   middle  region 
between  two  belts.  A  second  feature,  found  in measurements  between 
15  and 100 kev, was that more electrons were found  in energy region  of 
the radietion  belt,  although  there was  decrease  in total  flux of  electrons 
from   the  inner  to  the   outer  areas  of  earth’s  magnetic  lines  of  force. 
( USAF OAR Release 5-64-2) 
*  In   speech to  COSPAR  on  the  NASA  Biosatellite Program,  Dr.  Dale  Jenkins, 
Bioscience  Programs  Div.,  NASA  Office  of  Space  Science  and  Applica- 
tions, remarked: 
The United  States Biosatellite Program is  a  second generation  series 
c c  
of  carefully  planned  and  selected  experiments,  including  some  highly 
sophisticated experiments  which have  required several years of  baseline 

179 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 
.  This program  has 
( a )   zero  gravity  or 
( b )  the effects of  weightlessness combiied with a known source of  radia- 
tion,  and  ( c )   removal  of  living  organisms  from  the  Earth’s  rotation. 
These orbiting  recoverable Biosatellites provide  a n  opportunity  to  crit- 
ically test major biological hypotheses in the areas of  genetics, evolution, 
and physiology.  The  Biosatellite studies w i l l  delineate hazards to astro- 
nauts,  and  determine and  define  effects  on  degradation  of  human  per- 
formance.  Prolonged manned flights, fo r  example, may involve changes 
observed in  ten  days  of  bed  rest  such  as decalcification of  bones  (par- 
ticularly the vertebrae),  loss of  muscle tone and physical capability,  and 
certain  cardiovascular  changes.  The  effect  of  continued  sensory  dep- 
(Text) 
rivation  on behavior and performance is unknown.” 
M u y  16:  Results of  Soviet biological experiments reported  to  COSPAR meet- 
ing:  Discussing f ru i t  fly experiments in space  [see May 81, report said 
fruit flies mated in space apparently normally, but when  the eggs hatched 
in  the  laboratory  after  the  flight there  was  excess number  of  females. 
Furthermore,  report  said,  average  weight  of  male  fruit  flies was  lower 
than  of  flies bred  in  the laboratory.  Soviets disclosed that  Cosmonaut 
V.  Bykovsky  had  conducted  fixed  biological  experiments  during  his 
five-day VOSTOK v  space flight,  killing  specimens to  stop  their  develop- 
ment  a t   various  intervals.  In  another  biological  experiment,  Soviets 
reported  that  normal  cell  division  in  spores  of  Tradescantia  plant  was 
upset in  space environment, with rearrangements  of  plant  chromosomes 
(Simons, Wash. Post,  5/17/64) 
as well  a s  development of  freak cells. 
Eight  Tiros  meteorological  satellites  had  taken  more  than  350,000 
photographs from altitudes above 400 mi.  The speotacularly successful 
weather-forecasting satellites did  not  live  up  to  the  one-time charge  of 
“spying,”  fo r   of  all  the  pictures,  only  two  showed  any  indication  of 
existence ofintelligent  life on earth-and  both of  these pictures required 
(UPI ,   Phil.  Sun.  Bull., 
corroborative  knowledge  to  identify  them. 
5/17/64) 
Temperature  on  planet  Jupiter  was  reported  to  be higher  than  previously 
thought.  Geology-astronomy team  a t   Cal Tech  that  studied  the  planet 
with  heat-sensitive detector  fitted  to  200-in.  telescope  on  Mt.  Palomar 
found  sunlit atmosphere of  Jupiter  averaged 230  degrees below zero F. 
But  in  shadow  cast  by  one  of  its  moons-Ganymede-temperature 
jumped  to  minus  117 degrees.  Dr.  Bruce C.  Murray,  associate profes- 
sor  of  planetary  sciences, and  Dr.  Robert L.  Wildey,  research fellow  in 
astronomy  and  geology,  gave  two  possible explanations  for  the   unex- 
pected  rise  in  temperature:  “Perhaps  in  sunlight  the  atmosphere  is 
photochemically  stable,  and  the  shadow  removes  the  stability.  Then 
the atmosphere may start to break  down  into more transparent material, 
permitting the  heat detector t o  observe much deeper  into the atmosphere 
where temperatures a r e  higher.  Another possibility is that a breakdown 
of  the  shaded  atmosphere  may  result  in  a n   upwelling  from  deeper, 
warmer  zones of  the  atmosphere.”  Study  also  showed that  another  of 
Jupiter’s  moons4allisto-radiated 
twice  as  much  heat  a s   a  normal 
(Dighton, AP,  Wash.  Post,  5/17/64) 
moon would  be  expected to  do. 
May 17: Herbert Friedman of  Naval Research Laboratory repol?ted to COSPAR 
a new picture of  space cosmic rays, based on results of  experiments with 
rocket-borne  x-ray  telescope.  New  results  showed  that  less  than  one 
r 

180 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 

‘per cent  of  all  cosmic  rays  could  be  produced  in  intergalaatic  space. 
Therefore,  Friedman  said,  all  cosmic  rays would  appear  to  come  from 
exploding  stars.  He  said  these  findings  showed  that  there  were  too 
many  x-rays to support theory  that x-rays are produced  by  cosmic  rays’ 
colliding with  starlight, and  too  few  x-rays  to  support  theory  that  they 
neutron’s  disintegration  in  so-called “hot  universe”  theory) .  Further 
come  from  the  near-collision  of  electrons  and  protons  (formed  by 
(Simons,  Wash. 
experiments  were  planned  to  gather  more  evidence. 
Post, 5/18/64) 
May  17: Dr.  N.  A.  Kozyrev  of  Pulkovo Observatory,  U.S.S.R.,  told  confer- 
ence on geological problems  in lunar research  in New York  that volcanic 
activity was evident in two  of  the moon’s  craters--Alphonsus and Aris- 
tarchus.  Overall, he  said,  “the  Moon  had  an   internal  energy  which 
can  be  not  less  than  the  internal  energy  of  the  earth.”  And  from 
analysis of  certain  light wavelengths,  he  believed there was  “significant 
(AP, 
volcanic  activity  on  Venus  and  only  slight  activity  on  Mars.” 
Houston Post, 5/18/64) 
0  At  COSPAR,  Harvard  Univ.  scientist Dr.  Carl  Sagan said acetaldehyde  gas, 
believed  t o  exist in  atmosphere  of  Mars,  turns  to  sugar on  contact with 
ultraviolet  sunlight.  Martian  life,  which  probably  is  microorganic, 
possibly  gives off  the  acetaldehyde gas and then  feeds on  the  sugar  that 
falls  from  the  atmosphere,  Dr. Sagan  said. 
(AP,  Houston  Pos t ,  
5/18/64) 
0  Dr.  Thomas  Gold,  Chairman  of  Cornel1  Univ.’s  Astronomy  Dept.,  told 
COSPAB that  laboratory  experiments  to  simulate  conditions  on  lunar 
surface pointed  “toward  a  surface of  soft,  crushable material,  between 
6 and 10 times less dense than  solid rock.  I t  would  have  a texture some- 
thing  like  cake.  A  inan  walking  on  the  moon  might  sink  pretty  far  
into  the  soft  surface.  How  fa r   we  don’t  know.” 
(AP,  Houston  Post, 
5/18/164) 
May  18: House  Appropriations  Committee  voted  to  approve  $5.2  billion 
in  funds  for   NASA  in  FY  1965,  $245  million  less  than  the  requested 
$5.4425  billion  ($5.304 billion  for  FY  1965  and $141 million  FY  1964 
suppbmental  combined  by  the  Committee).  The  appropriation  was 
contained  in FY 1965 Independent Offices Appropriations  Bill. 
(Finney, . 
NYT, 5/19/64,1) 
U.S.S.R.  announced  routine  launching  of  COSMOS xxx satellite. 
Initial 
orbital data, according t o  Tass:  383.1-km.  apogee  (238 m i .) ,   206.6-km. 
perigee  (128  mi.),  90.24min.  period,  and  64.94’  inclination  to  the 
equator.  (Pravda ,  5/19/64,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
Discovery of  relatively cool region  inside three-million-degree solar corona 
was announced  a t  COSPAR  meeting by Dr.  Armin  Deutsch  of  Mt. Wilson 
and  Palomar  Observatories  and  Dr.  Guglielmo  Righini,  Director  of 
Astrophysical  Observatory  a t  Arcetri,  Italy.  The  corona  clouds  were 
believed to  contain  ionized  calcium  a t   relatively  cool  20,000  degrees. 
They  were  discovered  in  analyzing  spectrogram  taken  while  the  two 
astronomers  were  in  DC-8  “flying  observatory”  during  solar  eclipse 
last July.  (Reuters, Houston Post, 5/19/64) 
Sen.  Hubert  H.  Humphrey  introduced  in  the  Senate  a  bill  to  estab- 
lish  an   Office  of  Solar  Energy  in   the  Dept.  of  Interior  “to  foster  and 
coordinate  the  research,  development,  and  utilization  of  solar  energy 
to serve many terrestrial power needs.”  The bill  (S. 2853) was referred 
to  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  m d   Space  Sciences.  (CR, 
5/18/64,10800-02) 

181 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   ahTD  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4  
May 18 :   A.  0 .  Tischler, Director of Propulsion in NASA Office of Advanced Re- 
search  and  Technology,  said  $4  million  added  by  Congress  fo r   ad- 
vanced  propulsion  work  in   N 1965  would  allow  NASA  to  investigate 
a number of  new possibilities, including all the amines and  select hydro- 
carbons.  Also  there  would  be  heavy  concentration  on  materials  tech- 
nology and cooling techniques.  (M&R, 5 /18 /64 ,9 )  
Sen.  A.  S.  (Mike)  Monroney  (D.-Okla.)  wrote  in  Washington  Wor ld:  
6 C  Space research and development may be the glamour girl right now, 
but  the  lady-who  can  do  the work  for  us  is aviation.  . . . The market 
exists in the field of  aeronautics, while it is still too soon to start printing 
tickets for  round  trip  flights to  the moon. 
“Government  itself  is in  danger  of  being too yielding to  the  glamour 
girl.  My principal complaint is about NASA’s division of  the $55 billion 
it  will  spend  in  Fiscal  year  1965.  Only  $37  million  is  budgeted  fo r  
aeronautical  research.  The  percentage  for  aeronautics  is  only  seven- 
tenths  of  one per  cent.  Space exports  will  develop  as  we   excel  in  this 
field,  but  by  products-not 
s y s t em ew i l l   constitute  the  commodities. 
Aviation  has  immediate  economic  potential,  and  w e   must  pursue  it 
v igo r~u s ly . ’~  (Wash .  World, 5/18/64) 
Noting  there  we re   262  USAF  officers assigned  to  NASA  and  that  NASA  had 
requested  another  55,  and  pointing  out  areas  of  NASA-USAF  mutual 
research  and  test  support,  M i s s i le s   and  Rockets  editorialized  that  US. 
military  space e f fo r t  was  inadequate:  “.  . . We  would  like  to  see some- 
what  less worry  about  coordination  with  NASA and  considerably  more 
concern with  staying  ahead  of  the  Soviet Union  in  space  technology.” 
(M & R ,  5/18/64,  46) 
*  Aviatrix  Jacqueline Cochran claimed new  speed  record  for women-1,429 
mph  (mach  2.2)  at  37,100-ft.  altitude,  flying  in  F-104G  at  Edwards 
AFB,  Calif.  (AP, wash. Po s t ,  5/19/64) 
*  GSFC  announced  engineers  Barbara  Lunde  and  William  D.  Hibbard  had 
invented  a  valve  with  no  moving  parts  fo r   controlling  flow  of  liquid 
propellants to satellite reaction jets.  Valve freezes and thaws the propel- 
lant in the feed line.  (Goddard News, 5/18/64,2) 
Seventeen  of  the  buildings  programed  for  the  John  F.  Kennedy  Space 
Center, NASA,  in   the Merritt  Island  spaceport  area  had  been  completed 
(rtsc  Release 
or  were  about  ready  for  occupancy,  KSC  announced. 
69-64) 
USAF  advanced  development  program  to  investigate  laser’s  intelligence- 
gathering  capabilities  in   space  was  reported.  Called  “Lariat”  (Laser 
Radar  Intelligence Acquisition  Technology) , program  w a s   outgrowth 
of  three-year effort by AFSC  Aeronautical Systems Div.  to  develop satel- 
lite surveillance system at Cloudcroft, N .  Mex. 
( A v .  Wk . ,  5/18/64,104) 
*  Three persons were  killed  and  eight  injured  when  small  missile  exploded 
during preparations  for test-firing from an  airplane at Tyndall AFB,  Fla. 
(AP, Wash. Pos t ,  S / N / a )  
May 18-22:  Review of  recent accomplishments in advanced aeronautical and 
space research  w a s   held  during  Inspection  Week  a t   NASA  Langley  Re- 
search  Center,  with  Ames  Research Center  and  L ew i s  Research Center 
also  participating.  More  than  2,000 guests  from  aerospace  industry, 
Congress  and  Government  agencies,  and  educators  and  civic  officials 
attended  the  inspection.  At  the  tour,  LaRc  scientists  described  newly 
elastomer- 
developed  material  for  spacecraft  heat  shields-silicone 

182 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 

containing hollow glass and plastic spheres in  plastic honeycomb matrix 
to  provide  structural  strength.  Lunar  Landing  Research  Facility  and 
lunar mission simulators also were  among the  featured  attractions. 
In  
conjunction  with  the  inspection was  the  L a R c   Open  House  on  May  23. 
(Program; NASA  Release 64-99;  ARC,  LARC,  LRC Releases; AP, 5/18/64) 
NASA  Administrator  James E.  Webb  remarked  on May  18: 
“Years  ago,  the  National  Advisory  Committee  for  Aeronautics,  one 
of  NASA% ancestors, annually conducted field inspection t r ip s  so that  the 
nation’s  leaders in  aviation  could have  a  first-hand look  a t  the progress 
in  research made by the scientists and engineers of  NACA. 
“Today,  we   a r e  gathered  for  a  first-hand look  a t   advanced  research 
and  technology  not  only  in  aeronautics,  but  also  in  the  new  realm  of 
space. 
“ I t   is most  fitting that  the  revival  of  the  annual  field  inspection trip 
takes  place  first  a t   the  Langley  Research  Center,  fo r   Langley  was  the 
first research center of  the original NACA,  and is today,  as it was in  1917, 
working at  the frontiers of  scientific and technical knowledge.  . . . 
It is important to  remember that  NASA  is not an operating agency,  in 
G 
the  sense  that  the  Weather  Bureau  and  the  Air  Force  are.  Rather, 
NASA’s role  is much closer to  that  of  the NACA,  a  research  and  develop- 
mentorganization.  . . .,’  (Text) 
Ma y  19:  X-15  No.  1 flown to 196,000-ft. altitude and 3,477-mph speed  (mach 
4.85)  by  USAF  pilot Capt.  Joe Engle in flight to serve as  altitude buildup 
for  Captain  Engle.  The  flight  also  conducted  optical  degradation 
(NASA  X-15  Proj.  Off. ; FRC  Release) 
studies. 
e  Tw o  successful tests of  parasail  landing  gear were  conducted by  NASA  and 
U S .   Army at Ft.  Hood,  Tex.  Army helicopter dropped one-third scale 
model  of  Gemini  spacecraft  from  altitudes  of  about  10,000 ft.,  the  at- 
tached  parasail  maneuvered  by  radio  signals  from  the  ground. 
(UPI ,  
Houston Chron., 5/20/64) 
0  USAF  launched  an  unidentified  satellite  aboard  an  Atlas-Agena D  booster 
from Point Arguello, Calif. 
(AP, 5/19/64) 
MSC  began  10-day series  of  short  weightlessness tests  with  Gemini  space- 
craft installed inside a KC-135  jet aircraft.  Astronaut John Young took 
part  in the tests along with four  USAF  and McDonnell Aircraft Corp. test 
(Houston Chron., 5/19/64) 
pilots. 
U S .   National  Academy  of  Sciences and  Soviet Academy  of  Sciences an- 
nounced signing of  exchange agreement providing  for  each  academy to 
send 55  scientists to  the other  country for  inspection visits, lectures, and 
cooperative research.  This wa s   third  such agreement since the General 
CuItural Exchange Program wa s   begun  in  1959.  (Finney, NYT ,  5/20/ 
64,  4 )  
General  B.  A.  Schriever,  AFSC,  said  in  address  to  National  Space  Club: 
“There a re  three facts about the ballistic missile and space effort which 
I  would  like  to  emphasize:  first,  it  has  given  us  today  a  substantial 
strategic superiority;  second, it has built  a base of  experience, facilities, 
and  hardware for the national space program;  and third, it provides con- 
vincing  evidence  that  trained  and  dedicated  people,  who  are  properly 
motivated, can work together to achieve something that skeptics consider 
to be‘impossible.’  . . . 
‘‘These  five  factors  . . .-awareness 
of  the  competition,  rapid  ad- 
vancement of  technology, acquisition of  modern research and  test  facili- 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T 1  

183 

ties,  employment of  skilled and dedicated people, and use of  streamlined 
methods of  management-all  of  these were  vital  to  the  achievements of 
our ballistic missile and space efforts during the past ten years.  The same 
factors a re  vital to any future national effort. 
One very  clear  lesson emerges f rom  our  ICBM  experience,  and  it  is 
C L  
this-we 
cannot afford to rest on our past accomplishments.  Technology 
is not  standing still.  It keeps moving rapidly  ahead,  and we  must keep 
pace with it.  We must make use of our past  experience as we   tackle the 
(Text, AFSC  Release 45-R-62) 
challenges of  the future.” 
May  19: DOD announced Deputy Secretary of  Defense had  directed military 
departments and Defense agencies to establish central pool of  ftlnds and 
manpower spaces to be used for long-term education and training of  key 
( DOD Release 3954%) 
civilian DOD employees. 
May 20: White House announced new  development plan  fo r  US. supersonic 
transport,  authorizing  technical  d e i g n   competition  between  two  air- 
frame  manufacturers  (Boeing and  Lockheed)  and  two  engine  contrac- 
tors  (General  Electric  and  P ra t t   & Whitney).  Thus  North  American 
Aviation and Curtiss-Wright were eliminated from  airframe and  engine 
competition  respectively.  New  “program  of  action”  recommended  by 
FAA and  President’s  Advisory  Committee on  Supersonic Transport  and 
endorsed by  President  Johnson  called for:  Commerce Dept.  studies  and 
forecasts  of  overall economy  of  the  1970’s;  National  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences advice on sonic boom studies;  and Boeing and Lo+heed  examina- 
tion  of  purchase  cost,  operating  cost,  and  sonic  booms  a s   related  to 
various  designs,  sizes,  and  ranges  of  the  plane.  This  phase  would  be 
completed in November.  (Clark, NYT,  5/21/64,  1 ; Av.  Wk., 5/25/64, 
22) 
*  FAA  Administrator  N.  E.  Halaby announced National Academy of  Sciences 
had  assumed advisory capacity  in  connection with  sonic-boom research 
program,  a t   invitation  of  FAA.  First  step  in  NAS  program  would  be 
review  of  sonic  boom  study  now   being  conducted  at  Oklahoma  City. 
(FAA Release 64c50) 
During  annual  meeting  of  international  Committee  on  Space  Research 
(COSPAR)  , which  ended  today,  US. and  Soviet  scientists said  manned 
space  flights  had  raised  the  question  of  whether  a  man  could  tolerate 
more  than  five days  in  space,  with  present  equipment.  Scientists said 
astronauts showed effects of space flights, and last year’s  five-day manned 
space  flight  by  Soviet  cosmonaut was  about  the  longest  that  could  be 
attempted safely now.  (Levin, AP, 5/20/64) 
Independent  Offices  Appropriations  bill  (H.R.  112%)  was  introduced  in 
the House and discussed, with no resolution reached.  The bill provided 
$5.2zbillion  for NASA in N 1965.  (CR, 5/20/64,11063-66) 
*  NASA Marshall Space Flight Center selected Bendix Corp. and Boeing Aero- 
space Div.  for negotiations of  separate identical nine-month $1.5 million 
studies of  lunar  exploration payloads fo r  Apollo Logistics Support  Sys- 
tem  (ALSS).  Payload  would  be  carried  to  moon  by  Saturn  V/Apollo 
using modified LEM  (“LEM  truck”)  to  deliver  from  lunar  orbit to  lunar 
surface.  (Ma r sha l l  Star, 5/20/fj4.,  1) 
NASA  Administrator  James E.  Webb said in  speech to Armed Forces Com- 
munications and  Electronics Associaiion, Washington: 
“At  the National Aeronautics  and Space Administration,  it  has been 
estimated  that about  40 percent  of  our  booster  costs,  70  percent  of 

184 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19 6 4 
our  major  spacecraft  dollars,  and  90 percent  of  our tracking  and  data 
acquisition  funds  go  into  electronics.  Unfortunately,  as   Dr.  Albert 
Kelley  . . . recently  pointed  out  in  this  same context, a  vast majority 
of  our  flight failures, not  t o  mention  flight delays, arise from electronic 
all mission  accomplishment.  . . . 
failures.  Success  in  this  area  i s   obviously  a  major  factor  in  over- 
“In  space activity the United  States is now  a t  the mid-point  of  a  10- 
year program.  It might  be  said, in  a  sense not  entirely figurative, that 
we have r e a c h 4  the ‘mid-course maneuver point.’  Just a s  the Mariner I1 
Venus fly-by mhsion would have missed by almost a quarter of  a million 
miles  instead  of  coming  within  22,000-mile  target  area,  w e  can  fail  to  
iachieve our full potential if  we do  not seize every opportunity to correct 
our course as  we go along.  . . .”  (Text) 
May  20:  In   address  to  the  Wayne  State University  College  of  Engineering 
Honors  Convocation  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA 
Associate Administrator  fur  Manned Space Flight, said: 
In  the manned space flight program,  we have tried to  profit from +e 
c c  
experience  of  the  past.  We  are   creating this  very  great  capability  in 
advance  of  the  formulation  of  many  of  the specific operational require- 
ments,  which  inevitably will emerge when  i t  becomes clear what  can  be 
done.  There are  many  elements to  this  capability.  It  includes trained 
people,  a  base  of  industry  throughout  the United  States, ground  facili- 
ties,  launch  vehicles,  spacecraft,  operational  experience, and  the  ability 
to   manage  large  research  and development  efforts.  All  of  these things 
will enable the United  States to undertake whatever exploration of  space 
the  national interest may require. 
“In  the three years since 1961, the manned space flight effort has built 
up a t  a rapid rate until there are now 250,000 persons a t  work throughout 
than  90  percent  in  private  industry-and 
their 
the  country-more 
numbers will  increase t o  300,000  when we  reach  the peak  activity of  the 
presently approved  programs next  year.  About  1 5  percent  of  these are  
scientists and engineers.  The  program has become a major  element  in 
the   economic  life  of  the  country.  Prime  contractors  assign  work  to 
subcontractors, who in turn  engage second and third-tier subcontractors. 
As  the  program  progresses,  we  are   now  beginning  to  realize  some 
c c  
of  the benefits.  Whereas six years ago  we were extremely limited in  the 
power  available  to  place  objecrts  in  space,  we  are   now  approaching 
a  period  when  we  will  have  the  rockets  available to   do  things  beyond 
those being used in present programs. 
“The  time  is  approaching  when  we  must  give more  thought  to  the 
exploitation of  the capabilities provided  through ‘these efforts.  To avoid 
the  pitfall  into which  we  have  fallen  in  the past,  we  must  plan  for  the 
fu ture  even while we  press vigorously to  accomplish present  programs.” 
(Text) 
0  President  Johnson  presented  President’s  Safety  Award  for  1963 to  NASA 
a t  White House ceremony.  NASA  Associate Administrator  Dr. Robert  C. 
(NASA   Safety Off.; 
Seamans, Jr.,  accepted the award  on NASA’s behalf. 
MarshalZ Star, 5/20/&&, 2 )  
0  LRC announced  two  technical  staff members,  Richard A.  Terselic and  Dr. 
Louis Rosenblum,  had  applied  for  a  patent  on  a  portable electron-beam 
welder.  ( LRC Release 64-44) 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

185 
Muy  20:  Resolution  approved  a t   final session of  COSPAR recommended  that 
no  spacecraft  be  landed  on Mars if  there  were  more  than  one  chance 
in  10,000 that  it  was  carrying earthly micro-organisms  that  could  con- 
taminate Mars.  Resolution  also  said no nation  should  attempt  an  “un- 
sterilized  f lyby”   of  Mars  if   there  were  more  than  three  chances  in 
100,000 of  its  accidentally hitting the planet.  (AP,  Tulsa Daily World, 
5/21/64) 
NASA Administrator  James E.’ Webb was presented with Armed Forces Com- 
munications  and Electronics Association’s  Distinguished  Service Honor 
Gold Medal  Award  and Certificate at  the Association’s  annual banquet. 
(A-N-AF  J&R,  5 /23 /64 ,2)  
M a y  21:  X-15  No.  3 flown  by   NASA  pilot  Milton 0. Thompson  to  63,000-ft. 
altitude  and  2,045-mph  speed  (mach  3.10).  The  X-15  rocket  engine 
burned  d l  sec. before Thompson cut back power to  planned 40 per  cent. 
Then  engine unexpectedly  cut  off.  Thompson  could  not  restart  it,  and 
he had t o  make  emergency  landing on Cuddeback Dry Lake.  Cause of 
premature  shutdown  was  malfunction  in  engine  control  system.  This 
(NASA  X-15  Pro j .   Off.; 
was  fourth forced  landing  in  107 X-15  flights. 
AP, Balt. Sun, 5/22/64) 
0  First  two-way  telephone  call  between  US. and  Japan  via  a  communica- 
tions satellite was conducted by personnel of  NASA  Goddard  Space Flight 
Center,  Greenbelt, Md.,  and  Radio  Research  Laboratory  Station,  Ka- 
shima,  Japan, using RELAY II  satellite in  orbit  about 4,000 mi.  above the 
(NASA Release 64c122) 
Pacific Ocean. 
0  House passed  H.R.  112%  by  voice  vote, making  FY  1965 appropriations 
f o r   independent offices but excluding the $5.2 billion  for NASA.  Because 
Senate  had  not  yet  acted  upon  NASA  authorization  legislation  for  FY 
1965,  Congressional  rules  permitted  any  member  to  block  appropria- 
tions on  a  point of  order.  Rep.  John W.  Wydler  (R.-N.Y.)  objected  to 
the construction and administrative operation  appropriation-because  of 
$60  million  included  fo r   electronics  research  center  in  Boston-and 
his  objection  was  sustained.  Then  Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D.-Tex.)  , 
Chairman  of  Manned  Space  Flight  Subcommittee  of  House Committee 
on  Science  and  Astronautics, objected  to  remainder  of  the NASA  appro- 
priations,  thus  blocking  any  attempts to  cut  them  further. 
(NASA  LAR 
II1/102;  CR,  5/21/64,11241  f f )  
0  Following House  debate  of  Independent  Offices Appropriations  Bill,  Rep. 
Olin  E.  Teague  (D.-Tex.)  *told press  interviewers  that  cuts  from  FY 
1965 space appropriations came “very close t o  being the straw that broke 
the camel’s  back”  on  goal  t o  land man on the moon  by  1970.  $245 mil- 
lion less than  requested, the  $5.2  billion  appropriation would  leave “no 
place to   cut  this  budget.”  Without  the  $141 million  requested  supple- 
mental,  which  was  included  in  the  $245  million  cut,  Rep.  Teague  said 
he  feared  manned  lunar  landing  goal  was  lost. 
(AP,  5/21/64) 
0  Rep.  Louis  C.  Wyman  (R.-N.H.) 
submitted  his  separate  views  on 
NASA  FY 1965  appropriations,  which  he  had  filed  with  Independent 
Offices Subcommittee.  In  his report, he said:  “Two  things are  seriously 
wrong  in   our  space spending:  First,  the 1970 target  date for  a man  on 
the  moon;  and  second, advance  contracting fo r  Apollo  before we  know 
that Gemini is going t o  work.  . . . 
We  should  slow  down  in  our  spending  on  space, reassess the situa- 
6 6  
tion  and  bring  the  programs  back  to   a  more  realistic,  down-to-earth 
766-598 0-65---13 

186 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A ERONAU T IC S ,   1 9 6 4  
basis.  . . . We  should  cut  back  the present  space  appropriation  by  a t  
least a billion dollars, or to an appropriation for  fiscal 1965 of  $4.2  bil- 
lion.  This is not  going to  wreck  anything  except the  best-laid plans  of 
a few space contractors.  But it will help a great deal in  providing addi- 
tional funds for some of  the pressingly important things we must do now 
on  earth.”  (CR, 5/21JM,  A2704-05) 
May 21 .- Dr.  Eugene Fubini, Deputy Director of  Defense Research and Engi- 
neering,  told  House Military  Operations Subcommittee of  Government 
Operations  Committee that  Titan  I11  space booster  was  potentially  the 
most desirable and economical launch vehicle f o r  medium-altitude com- 
munications satellite system.  “.  . . if  we could use the Titan there would 
be a tremendous money saving’’  over the Atlas-Agena.  He said a shared 
commercial military comsat system would have “undeniable advantages” 
(NASA  LAR  111/102;  Av.  Wk., 5/25/64, 
over separate military  system. 
32 )  
NASA  said major  contractor  on  Project Apdlo,  North American Aviation, 
Inc.,  Space and Information Systems Div.,  would soon reduce its Apollo 
personnel by about 1,OOO.  The action was a cost-reduction measure, and 
was  not  indicative  of  either current  Congressional debate  o r   change  in 
Apollo  scheduling.  “We  a re  merely trying  to  keep costs down  as much 
as we  can,”  NASA  spokesmen said.  (AP,  W S J ,  5/22/64;  Finney, NYT ,  
5 /22 /64 ,9 )  
Dr.  Donald F.  Hornig,  Director  of  President‘s  Office  of  Science and Tech- 
nology,  testified  before House Committee on  Science and  Astronautics’ 
Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development in  its hearings on 
geographical distribution and indirect costs of  Federal MD.  Dr. Hornig 
said  Congress  was  cutting  administrative  overhead  funds  in   Federally 
financed  research  at  universities, and  universities were  forced to  divert 
funds  from  other  needs  to  help  pay  for  Federally  sponsored research. 
“Since  the  university  has  many  scholarly  functions  to  perform,  while 
Federal  funds  a re  devoted  generally to  the  sciences or  to  areas within 
science, it does not  seem to be in  the national  interest to pursue a policy 
which  diverts  private  funds  from  the  education  of  students or  the per- 
formance  of  scholarly  research  in   non-scientific  areas.”  Dr.  Hornig 
stated  Federal  support of  research  in past  decade had  produced “a  dis- 
persal  of  university  strength,”  adding that  Southeast and Mountain  re- 
gions now were producing proportionately more doctorates than 10 years 
(NASA  LAR 111/102;  NYT ,  5/22/64+, 8 )  
ago. 
Addressing American  Ordnance Association  in  Washington,  Dr.  Edward 
C.  Welsh, Executive Secretary of  National Aeronautics and Space Coun- 
cil, said : 
“It is my  thesis that mutual disarmament-and  prudence dictates that 
there should be no other kind-would 
greatly  increase the flow of  funds 
and effort  into  space exploration and  into the building  of  greater  space 
capability.  This  does not  necessarily mean  a  full  transfer  of  all  avail- 
able resources to  space applications.  But,  just  fo r  illustration,  suppose 
that  there  were  a  10% decrease  in  weapon. systems  spending.  With 
good  planning  a t   least  half  of  it  could  be   diverted  smoothly  and  e5 -  
ciently  into  an  increased  space  effort.  With  greater  di5culty,  the  re- 
mainder  might  be  directed  toward  mending  other  inadequacies  in  our 
society.  . . . 

6 4  

7 

in the process.  The basic objective is to strengthen our country.  . . . 
I n  conclusion, let me emphasize: 
cc 
“First. 
Disarmament, in the form of  decreased production of  weapon 
systems, does not need to  cause an economic depression. 
Resources made available as a result  of  decreased produc- 
“Second. 
tion  of  weapon  systems could most  effectively be  applied  to  accelerated 
development of space systems. 
While  it is important t o  keep private industry healthy, gov- 
“Third. 
ernment  financing of  research  and  development  is  not  in   conflict with 
such objectives.  In  fact, it may well  stimulate increased production  and 
increased employment by private companies. 
“And  finally, I do not suggest that there should be a sharp increase in 
spending fo r  space.  But I do believe space spending should  increase at 
a rate a t  least consonant with the  increase in our gross national  product, 
not only because increase in the  GNP  makes resources available for more 
space activities, but  also because space exploration  itself  stimulated the 
gross national product.” 
(Text) 
M a y  21 : US. District Judge  refused to halt supersonic flight tests over Okla- 
homa  City  in  FAA sonic boom  study,  after  19 Oklahoma  City  residents 
filed suit attempting to  halt  the flights.  (AP, NYT, 5 /22 /64 ,70 )  
*  NASA  announced  that  Joseph  T. Dickerson,  Jr.,  was  appointed  Special 
Assistant to Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator  for Manned 
Space Flight.  Mr.  Dickerson would  assist  Dr.  Mueller  in  the  areas  of 
management,  labor  .relations,  and  Government-industry relationships. 
(NASA  Release 64-119) 
M a y  22:  NASA  Deputy Administrator  Dr.  Hugh L.  Dryden stressed to  Scien- 
tific and Technical Subcommittee of  the U.N.  Co,&ttee  on the Peaceful 
Uses ,of  Outer Space, a t  opening of  its third session in  Geneva, that US. 
scientists shared the concern of  those from other countries over possible 
contamination of  Mars and other planets.  (NYT, 5 / 2 3 / 6 4 )  
*  Dr.  W.  Randolph  Lovelace 11,  NASA  Director  of  Space Medicine,  said  in 
Dallas : “Physiologically, women  would make excellent astronauts.)) 
However,  he   added,  “They  lack  the  experience in  flying high-speed 
planes and handling  the  complicated equipment used in  the program. 
“All  of  our astronauts a r e  seasoned  test  pilots o r  men with much ex- 
perience in  combat flying.  It would be very  difficult for any woman to 
(DaUas Norning News, 5/23/64) 
gain such experience.” 
*  FAA Administrator  Najeeb E.  Halaby  said FAA had prepared new proposal 
for  Government-industry sharing  of  supersonic  transport  development 
costs.  Details were not given, but Halaby said the plan “spreads the risk 

188 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4 

present noise research and said:  “NASA  spending on aircraft noise abate- 
ment  research  has  increased  by  628  percent  since  1962,  rising  from 
Space Committee  . . . has  tentatively  approved  a  sum  of  $1.4 million 
$148,OOO  in  that  year  to  $24’7,000  in   1963,  to  $931,000 in   1 W .   The 
for  this program  next  year,  a  decision which I strongly  support.  . . .” 
(CR ,  5 / 2 2 / 6 4 , 1 1 W )  
Muy 22:  Capt. Robert E.  Jasperson  (USN ,   Ret.)  recently received patent for in- 
vention  of  “satellite  alert,”  a  hand-held computer for  informing  ships’ 
officers  when  to   expect  radio  reports  from  navigation  satellites  and 
meteorologists when  to expect readings from weather satellites.  (Jones, 
N Y T ,  5 / 2 3 / 6 4 )  
Muy 23:  AEC  spokesman said about 2.2 lbs.  of  plutonium 238  had  been  lost 
over the west coast of  Africa last month after USN satellite carrying  it had 
failed to  orbit  (see May  11 ) .   Onboard  as fuel for S n a p 9 A  generator, 
the plutonium  apparently  vaporized on  re-entry  into  earth’s  atmosphere 
and now was  dispersed in very fine particles a t  the edge of  space, where 
it would  gradually  lose its radioactivity.  I t  posed “no  health  hazard  to 
( UPI,  Wash. Post, 5/24/ 
the world’s  population,” AEC  spokesman said. 
64) 
Dr. Ted FOSS, geologist a t  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, described model 
of  the moon  to  be  constructed  at  MSC  for  conducting  time  and  motion 
studies  with  astronauts  in  their  space  suits.  To  be  covered  with  slag 
rocks  and  ash, the  area would  be  about  340  ft.  in  diameter  and  feature 
several craters about 50 ft.  in  diameter and  about  15  f t .   deep, a s  well  as 
ridges  a s  high  as 12 ft.  U S .  Army  Corps of  Engineers would  perform 
basic work  on   the $50,000 construction  job.  (Houston Chron., 5/24/ 
64; AP, 5/23/64) 
NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center held Open House with more than 4,200 
(Goddard News, 6/1/64) 
visitors attending. 
Open House at Langley Research Center, in  conjunction with  field  inspec- 
tion during the past week,  featured specially prepared  exhibits and other 
items  of  interest  fo r   citizens  of  Virginia  and  nearby  areas. 
(NASA 
Release 64-99;  NASA Announcement W 9 )  
The  U S .   Fighter  Aces  Association  awarded  Astronauts  Walter  Schirra, 
Alan  Shepard,  Virgil  Grissom,  and  Donald  Slayton honorary  member- 
(H o w t o n  Chron., 5/14/64) 
ships. 
New program  combining study of  science with study of  U.S.S.R.  at Colum- 
bia  University’s Russian  Institute  was  announced  by  Institute  director 
( N Y T ,  5/24/64,21) 
Prof. Alexander Ddlin. 
George C.  Marshall Research Library  dedicated by  Presidents  Eisenhower 
(Wash .  
and  Johnson  at  the Virginia  Military  Institute, Lexington, Va. 
Pos t ,  5/24/64) 
May  24:  Interviewed in  Washington Sunday  Star, NASC  Executive Secretary 
and Acting Chairman Dr.  Edward C.  Welsh was asked how far US. now 
was on its way  to the  moon. 
“I suppose we  went  a  good  way  toward  the moon  objective when  the 
decision wa s  made.  Consequently, I would  say that  we   a re  much more 
than a third of  the way to the moon at the  present time.” 
Asked  about  Administration  policy  to  classify Saviet  space  failures, 
Dr. Welsh replied: 
olicy  of  classifying Soviet  space  failures  was  developed 
ect  sources of  information, many of  which in  those days 
were individuals actually in  the  Soviet Union. 

justification.  . . . 
“I think we will continue to examine this policy to see whether  or  not 
it  can  be  relaxed,  to  see  whether  there  is  any  justification  a t   all  for 
keeping  from  the  American  people  information  in   regard  to  Soviet 
failures.”  (Wash. Sun. Star, 5/24/64) 
Ma y  24:  Recently published testimony by NASA Administrator  James E. Webb 
before  a  House  subcommittee indicated  for  the  first  time  that there was 
more  than   jus t   presumption  to   indicate  U.S.S.R.  might  be   developing 
larger space booster  to  compare with  Saturn I.  In  response to question, 
Mr.  Webb said that  “there is some evidence,  although  it  is not  sufEcient 
to  draw  a  firm conclusion, that  they  [the  Soviets]  are  proceeding  with 
larger  developments.  . . .  There  is  some  evidence  that  they  are   not 
stopping  with  their  present  [space]  vehicle  and  a re  expecting  to  move 
into  larger  categories.  I t  will  take  a  longer  period  of  time  to  evaluate 
(Finney, NYT,  5/25/64,  1, 4 )  
tha t  evidence clearly  and be  sure.” 
.Vuy  25:  Third  anniversary of  President  Kennedy’s  address  to  Congress on 
urgent national needs in which he said: “.  . . I believe this nation should 
commit  itself  to  achieving  the  goal,  before  this  decade  is  out,  of  land- 
ing a man on the moon and returning him safely t o  earth.” 
Douglas Aircraft Co.  Missile and Space Systems Div.  summarized study on 
Manned  Orbital Research  Laboratory  (MORL )   made  for  NASA  Langley 
Research  Center.  Douglas  said it would  be  possible for  US. to  have  a 
six-man  operational  space  station  within  the  next  five  years.  MORL 
would  be  launched  with  Saturn  IB,  would  remain  in  orbit  just  over one 
year.  (Houston Post, 5/25/64) 
*  Major  improvements  in  performance  of  supersonic  transport  shapes 
had  come  from   aerodynamic  refinements  a t   NASA  Langley  Research 
Center, NASA announced.  Applied to the wing design of  supersonic trans- 
port  concept known  as “Scat  15,” the refinements  achieved much  better 
flight characteristics  and more  than  15 per  cent  increase in  range.  The 
now  regarded  more  favorably  in 
improved  concept-Scat 
15F-was 
comparison  with  the  two  established concepts,  Scat  16 and  17. 
(NASA 
Release 64-120) 
Compilation  by  NASA  Procurement  Office showed that  two  thirds  of  the  $1 
billion  in  subcontract work  assigned  by  NASA’s 12  largest  contractors 
during 1962 and 1963 went to 2,697 different subcontractors i n  46  states. 
(NASA  Release 64-118) 
e  Delegates from  US., Canada, Australia,  and Japan met  with  the  European 
body  representing  15 
Conference  on  Satellite  Communications-a 
European nations-to 
further negotiate formation of  a world-wide com- 
munications  sateliite system.  Francis  Trew,  secretary  of  the  European 
Conference,  said  a t   the  London  meeting  he  was  hopeful  an  agreement 
“would  be  ready  for  ratification  in  the  ‘near  future.’  ”  (Farnsworth, 
NYT ,  5/26/64,11) 
*  NASA  announced  it would  negotiate with  Douglas Aircraft  Co.  for   S-IVB 
stage mockup to  be used with Saturn V launch  vehicle simulator  a t  NASA 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center.  Expected  to   cost  about  $5 million,  the 
mockup would  be used  in study of  prelaunch,  launch,  and orbital check- 
out of third stage. 
( NASA Release 64-123) 

190 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19 6 4 
M a y  25:  United Technology Center  (UTC )   had developed hybrid rocket com- 
bining  best  features  of  solid  and  liquid  propellants  and   20%  more 
powerful  than  any  solid-propulsion rocket  operational  today.  Rocket 
used solid fuel-butadiene 
rubber-and 
liquid oxidizer-liquid  oxygen. 
UTC Assistant Manager  of  Advanced Technology Douglas D.  Ordahl said 
the  rocket  also was safer than solid-fueled rocket motors  and was simpler 
( W S J ,  5/26/54?) 
and more  reliable than  liquid-fueled rockets. 
Muy  26:  NASC  Executive Secretary Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh  said  a t   dedication 
of Aerojet General’s Dade County  (Fla.)  plant: 
“Leadership  in   propulsion  is  . . . synonymous  with  leadership  in 
both military  and non-military  purposes.  We cannot  afford 
space-for 
to  relax in this area.  There is no  room  for complacency,  only  room  for  
urgency.  . . . 
“In  supporting the thesis tha t  there  is real danger from complacency, 
I list the following points: 
“1.  The  USSR  is  having  some  economic  difficulties,  particularly  in  
agriculture.  Yet, their space program is expanding. 
“2. The  USSR  is  fa r   ahead  of  the  United  States in  manned  flight ex- 
perience.  Even  their  female cosmonaut  has  flown  more  orbits than  all 
of  OUT astronauts combined. 
“3.  The  USSR  has  flown  their  heavier  Vostok  spacecraft  in   manned 
and  unmanned  flights some 45 times  as  many  earth  orbits  as we  have 
flown our  much smaller Mercury. 
“4.  Practically  all  of  the  competences developed  for  space  could  be 
used for aggression as  well as  for peaceful purposes. 
“Please  do   not  misunderstand  what  I  am  saying.  We  have  made 
great strides, particularly  in  the past three years.  We a re  actually ahead 
of  the  Soviets in   some  applications  of  space,  such  as communications 
and meteorology.  We are, however, not yet ahead overall.  But, our rate 
of  progress  is very  impressive. 
“Probably  what  I am  warning  about more than  anything else is  the 
danger  that  we  might  slow  down  our  rate  of  progress-that  we  might 
heed  the voices  of  defeatism  and  impracticality.  This is the one thing 
we cannot  afford.  We cannot  afford to  lose the momentum which stems 
from a  growing  program.  To  slow  down  is to   be  content  with  second 
place.  This we should not do.  I n  fact, we dare  not do  it.”  (Text) 
*  Soviet  scientists had  established existence of  cosmic-dust cloud  averaging 
437 mi.  deep surrounding the earth, Tass said.  Cloud was believed to be 
composed of  residues from burned up meteorites after they entered earth‘s 
atmosphere.  (Reuters, Wush. Post, 5/27/64~) 
*  General  Bernard  A.  Schriever, AFSC,  said  in  speech t o  the  Aviation/Space 
Writers Association in Miami, regarding the USAF/USN  F-111  : 
“The  outstanding  characteristic of  the  F-111  is  its  versatility.  The 
F-lll A-the Air  Force  ve r s ion -can   penetrate  supersonically  on  the 
deck  for  interdiction  or   low  altitude tactical  reconnaissance.  For  pur- 
poses  of  close support,  it must be able t o  maneuver well  a t  low  altitudes 
and be  able to carry a variety of  conventional weapons.  I t  must also be 
able  to   loiter  for   extended  periods  while  awaiting  target  assignments 
from  the local  ground  commander.  Combined  with  this  low  altitude 
capability, the F-111  requires a very high  altitude capability  for  recon- 
naissance  flexibility and  a i r   superiority missions.  It  must  be  capable 
of  high altitude deployment between theaters without tanker support. 

tactical  fighter in TAC’S  inventory  with  a  capacity to  operate  from short 
austere fields.  This means greater dispersal and flexibility and, of course, 
quicker  responsiveness to  support Army requirements  for immediate and 
effective  close  air  support,  a i r   superiority  and  interdiction.  In   short, 
the  F-111  represents  a  quantum  step forward  in  the  development  of  a 
tactical  a i r   weapon  system  providing  optimum  combat  effectiveness  a t  
the lowest cost and  with the  greatest possible flexibility. 
“The  F-111B-the  Navy version-has 
a primary  role of  a ir  superior- 
ity.  I t  will  be  armed with  the Phoenix missile system and will  be  able 
to  loiter  a t   the  outer  defensive perimeter  of  the  fleet  for   much  longer 
periods  of  time  than present  day Navy  fighters.  I t   will  also be  able to 
accelerate  out  of  a  subsonic  loiter  condition  and  maneuver  fo r   super- 
sonic attack. 
“It  is  easy  to   see  that  both  the Air  Force  and  Navy  versions  of  the 
F-111  call for  a  number  of  conflicting inflight performance  characteris- 
tics.  The requirements  for  high  subsonic cruise efficiency and for short 
takeoff  capability call  for maximum  lift  from  the wing  area.  I n  other 
words,  you need wings swept fully forward.  On the other hand,  super- 
sonic low altitude flight calls for  swept back wings, since the body design 
itself  provides  sufficient  lift  to  support  flight;  and additional wing  area 
only  induces  instability.  At  altitude  more wing  area  i s   required,  but 
the  higher  speeds  obtainable  dictate  either  very  thin  straight  wings  o r  
else a higher degree of  sweep. 
The  answer  is 
“How  do  you  answer  these  conflicting  demands? 
obvious-develop 
a  varidble  sweep  wing  aircraft.  Contrary  to  some 
impressions,  the  variable  sweep  design  is  not  new.  A  variable  sweep 
design was  used  in  the Bell  X-5, which  was  developed under  Air  Force 
sponsorship  and  flown  at  Edwards  in  1951.  A  similar  principle  was 
utilized  in  the  Grumman  F-1OF  prototype  which  flew  in  1952.  But 
there  is  a  major  difference between  those  designs  and  the  one  t o   be 
used  in  the F-111,  The early  designs required  a  bulky  internal mech- 
anism to move the wings.  That mechanism is not  required for the newer 
designs, and consequently the use  of  a  variable  sweep wing  has become 
practical.” 
(Text,  AFSC Release  45-R-64t) 
M a y  26:  Kingman  Brewster, Jr., president of  Yale Univ.,  testified before  the 
House Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of  the Com- 
mittee on Science and Astronautics: 
“.  . . if  we  would  do  our best  to  see to  it that  the Government’s  sup- 
s  as little  as   possible  the  competitive 
port  of  scientific  activity 
allocation of  talent  in  the 
c market  place,  we  must  not  penalize 
the universities in competition with industrial and consulting firms;  and 
we  must not penalize the less well  endowed o r  supported  universities in 
competition with their  richer rivals.  Anything  less  than full reimburse- 
ment of indirect costs [of  research] does exactly this.” 

192 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19 6 4  
He  continued:  “.  . . it  seems  to  me  wholly  unwise  to   permit  con- 
siderations of  political geography to control the choices of  faculties and 
students  alike,  to  keep  them  from  working  wherever  they  think they 
would be most productive.  Because the excellent a re  so few,  and because 
modern  science cannot  very  often  be  pursued  in   isolation  from  a  com- 
munity  of  one’s  peers,  a  productive science policy  is bound  to  lead  to  a 
high degree of  concentration in relatively few centers of  advanced educa- 
(CR, 6/17/M,  A3307) 
tion and research.” 
May  27:  NASA  launched  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  at  White  Sands, 
N. Mex.,  the  rocket serving as a  test  round  for  a  series of  rockets to  be 
flown  in  Sweden  in  July,  and  containing  micrometeoroid-particle 601- 
lector as follow-up to Aerobee  150 experiment three  years before.  De- 
spite extremely low peak altitude  (about 30 mi.-the 
second stage broke 
up  after  about  4.5  sec.  of  burning),  instrumentation  functioned  until 
impact  except for  aspect  sensor  and  Dovap.  No  useful  scientific data 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL)  
were obtained. 
0  NASA  announced  the  large  air-filled  bag  safety  system  performed 
successfully in DC-7  crash  experiment conducted April  24.  Results in- 
dicated that  i f   a man had sat in for the  dummy, he would have survived 
the  crash.  Martin  Co. designed the airbag system under  NASA  contract, 
for  poss3ble  use  by  both  airline passengers and  astronauts. 
(NASA  Re- 
lease 64-121) 
0  Brig. Gen.  Joseph S. Bleymaier  (WAF) told Aviation/Space Writers’ Asso- 
ciation  that  USAF  would  seek bids  fo r  the Manned Orbiting Laboratory 
, (MO L )   by  Dec.  1.  DOD  had  released  $6 million  fo r  the project May  1, 
opening  the  door  to  preliminary  study.  Under  present  schedule,  he 
said,  hardware development  could begin  in   about  a  year,  with  first  un- 
manned flight  late in  1967 or early 1968.  (Benedict, AP,  5/27/64) 
*  Maj.  Gen.  Leighton  I.  Davis  (U SAF ) ,   Commander of  National Range Div., 
presented  to  Aviation/Space  Writers  Association  meeting  at  Patrick 
AFB,  Fla.,  a  “status  report”  on  newly  organized  NRD:  “The  activation 
of  the  NRD  and  the  renaming  of  its organizations has  already  been well 
pu’blicized..  Basically  we   have  brought  the  old  Atlantic Missile Range 
and the  ICBM  and satellite test  range portion  of  the Navy’s  Pacific Mis- 
sile Range  under  single management.  Additionally, my  job  a s  the DOD 
representative  in  support  of  NASA’s Projects  Gemini  and  Apollo  has 
moved  with  me  to   the .new   organization.  . . .”  (Text,  AFSC  Release 
45-R-61) 
*  ComSatCorp disclosed  its  initial  stock  issue  ( 5  million  shares)  had  been 
:oversubscribed by  27%  by  163 firms  in  the  communications industry. 
Of  the   5  million  shares,  2,895,750 were  bought  by  AT&T.  The  other 
5  million  shares  were  scheduled  fo r   sale to  the  general  public  June  2. 
(AP, Wash. Post, 5/28/64;  MacKenzie, Wash. Post, 5 / 2 8 /@ )  
M a y  28:  Saturn  I  S A 4  flight  was  conducted successfully from  Cape Ken- 
nedy,  the  huge  two-stage launch  vehicle boosting  into  orbit  an  Apollo 
boilerplate spacecraft attached to  the S-IV second stage.  The one mal- 
function  in   the flight was premature  shutdown of  one of  the  eight first- 
stage engines, cutting off  24 sec. early.  Preliminary analysis of  telemetry 
da ta  indicated that  the  remaining  seven H-1  engines burned  additional 
two  sec.  to  compensate for lost  thrust  of  the eighth engine, and the Sat- 
urn  1’s  guidance system corrected course deviations caused by the shut- 
off engine, so that orbital parameters  (140-mi. apogee, 123.9-mi.  perigee, 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4 

193 

88.5-min.  period,  and 31.8”  inclination to  the equator)  came very  close 
to  those predicted.  This was first Saturn I flight test of  active guidance 
system  to  inject  upper stage and  attached ApoUo  spacecraft  into  orbit. 
Eight  movie cameras mounted on  the Saturn I to photograph  propulsion 
and  fuel  operations were  ejected  and  recovered.  Main  purpose  of  the 
flight was  further  qualification of  the  Saturn  I launch  vehicle  and  con- 
tinued development of  technology necessary  to  build the more powerful 
Saturn  IB   and  V  launch  vehicles, 
( M a r s h a  star,  6/3/64,  1; NASA 
Releases 64-113  and 64-130;  M&R,  6/8/64,10) 
Muy  28:  Seventh  test  in   paraglider  series was  conducted  by  NASA  Manned 
Spacecraft  Center  a t   Edwards AFB,  Calif.  Simulated  Gemini spacecraft 
was  dropped  from  33,000-ft.  altitude  and  paraglider  deployed  accord- 
ing  to  plan  and  lowered  the  spacecraft  to  15,000 ft.,  where  parachute 
(AP,  Phil.  Eve.  Bull., 
opened  for  remaining  portion  of  descent. 
5/29/64) 
0  Plans  for  first  operational  weather  satellite  system,  to  be  called  Tiros 
Operational  Satellite  ( TOS) system, were announced.  NASA  had  selected 
RCA’S  Astro  Electronics Div.  for negotiations leading  to manufacture  of 
five  Tiros  operational  weather  satellites, at  cost  expected  to  exceed  $9  
million.  Dept: of  Cornmercerneather Bureau would  finance TOS system, 
provide overall management, and be responsible for its operation.  NASA 
was  responsible for spacecra4t procurement,  launch, and initial checkout 
after satellite is in  orbit.  After  system begins in late 1965, two meteoro- 
logical  satellites  would  be   in   orbit  a t   all  times,  photographing  cloud- 
(NASA  Release 64-125;  Commerce 
cover  of  the entire earth every day. 
Dept.  Release WB 64-9) 
*  Successful static  firing  of  156-in. solid  propellant  rocket motor  was  con- 
ducted  a t  Lockheed  Propulsion Co.,  Potrero,  Calif.  The 110-sec. firing 
was  considered  successful in  all  respects.  Brig. Gen.  Joseph  Bleymaier, 
Deputy  Commander  for  Manned  Systems,  AFSSD,  said  the  test  signified 
a  completely new  era  with  regard  to  the  size of  solid motors  for  bal- 
6 b  
( M & R ,   6/8/64, 
listic missiles,  and  in particular,  for space boosters.” 
25 1 
USAF  destroyed Athena missile about 70 sec. after launch from Green River, 
Utah,  when  “it appeared  to  be  progressing  out  of  the  flight corridor.” 
(M&R ,  6 /8 /64 ,10)  
*  NASA  signed  $237  million  contract  with  General  Dynamics/Astronautics 
for  d&elopment  of  Centaur  launch vehicle stages..  The contract, a  con- 
firmation  of  letter  contract  issued  January  1963, called for  delivery of 
1 4  flight  stages, exclusive of  inertial  guidance  system  being  developed 
by Honeywell Co.,  and liquid hydrogen-fueled R G l O  engine being  built 
(NASA   Release 64- 
by  Pra t t   &  Whitney  Div.  of  United  Aircraft  C o rp .  
127) 
*  NASA  announced  i t  would  negotiate with Douglas Aircraft Co.  for purchase 
of  eight  additional  S-IVB  stages  for  Saturn  I’B  launch  vehicle.  The 
eight  stages  would  be  flown  on  vehicles  number  5 through  12.  Esti- 
mated  at more  than  $110  million,  the  contract  would  call  for  building 
the  eight  stages,  supplying  automated  ground  support  equipment  for 
Sacramento  test  site, providing  launch  support  services  a t   Cape  Ken- 
nedy,  and  furnishing  spare  parts  for  entire  Samturn  S-IVB  program. 
(NASA  Release 64-126) 

194 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

May  28:  NASA  awarded  $100,000  contract  to  North  Carolina  Science  and 
Technology Research Center for establishment of  experimental program 
for   transfer  of  technology  developed  in  U.S.  space  effort  to  civilian 
industry.  Other  participants  in  the  program would  be  Univ.  of  North 
Carolina, Duke Univ.,  North Carolina  State College,  and Research  Tr i-  
(NASA Release 64-124) 
angle Institute. 
0  Republican  Critical  Issues Council  of  the  Republican  Citizens Committee, 
chaired by Dr. Milton Eisenhower, issued statement calling upon U.S.  to  
abandon  the  1970 goal  of  a  manned  lunar  landing.  It  also  called  f o r  
increased  international  cooperation  in  space  exploration:  “. . . The 
exploration  of  our universe  is a goal  too vast,  too hazardous,  too  costly, 
and too  important to  all mankind  to  be  financed  and conducted  by  one 
country alone,  and least  of  all  in  an  atmosphere  of  unfriendly  competi- 
tion.”  Council also deplored claims for  military value  of  space explora- 
tion:  “We  are aware of no  compelling argument  thus far  for  the devel- 
opment  and  deploying  of  weapons  in  space.  . . .”  (Text,  CR,  5/28/ 
64,11775-77) 
*  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller, addressed  banquet  of  Aviation/Space  Writers’ Association  in 
Miami.  Discussing possible hazards to  Apollo  astronauts,  he  said  tha t  
based  on data from EXPLORER  XVI  satellite it was “not  anticipated a t  this 
time  that meteoroids will  constitute a major problem  in  the planning  or  
scheduling  of  the  first  manned  lunar  exploration.”  Radiation  did  not 
present  a hazard  either:  “. . . In   the  case  of  solar  flares,  we  compared 
the  allowable safe dose with  what  would  have been  produced  within the 
Apollo command module by  the worst flares on record, that of  July  1959. 
If  an  Apollo spacecraft had been  in flight on a lunar mission at this time, 
the  astronauts  would  have  received  only  15  percent  of  the  safe  dose, 
calculated on  the basis  of  a  report  by  a  group  established by  the  Space 
Science Board of  the National Academy of  Sciences.  . . . 
“Very  recently  there  have  been  suggestions that  space  f l igh t-even  
relatively short duration flight-is  harmful to man.  There is no evidence 
from Project Mercury  to  support these fears.  Based  on  our  experience 
in  Mercury,  which  included  a  flight  of  34  hours  by  Gordon  Cooper, 
there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  flights  of  two  weeks  or  less  will  be 
harmful.  . . .” 
Dr.  Mueller  then  outlined nine  medical  experiments  to  be  conducted 
(Text; 
during  the  two-man  orbital  space  flights  of  Project  Gemini. 
NASA Release 64c128) 
Three  researchers  from  North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  stepped  out 
of a rotating capsule after three days of  rotation and one with the capsule 
at rest.  The  capsule, about  twice the  size  of  an  Apollo capsule, was  on 
the end  of  a  23-ft.-radius arm which  traveled a t   a  rate  of  five  rotations 
per  minute,  producing  a  g  force  of  1.08.  The  test  was  preliminary  to 
more extensive ones intended  to study living and working  conditions in 
a  manned  orbital  laboratory.  While  in  rotation,  the  researchers  shot 
darts,  maneuvered  on  a  teeter-totter, worked  puzzles  and  mathematical 
problems.  Conclusion  was  that by end of  second day, performance  was 
back to normal. 
( NAA  S&ID  Skywr i ter ,  6/12/64,2) 
*  B.  K. 0. Lundberg,  Director General of  the Aeronautical  Research Institute 
of  Sweden,  predicted  a t   Aviation/Space  Writers Association  in  Miami 
that  more  than  15,000  passengers  would  be  killed  each  year  by  the 

195 

g the  aviation 
year  1990 unless avi 
(“we  are  now 
industry’s  emphasis 
apparently on the verge  of  plunging  ourselves into  a  supersonic  adven- 
ture”) ,   he stressed that the “No.  1 challenge to  aviation and the aeronau- 
tical scientists” was  aviation safety, and urged the world to   adopt “new, 
(Morrow,  N Y T ,  5/31/ 
radical  and  long-term  aviation  safety  policy.” 
64,78) 
Ma.y 29:  At  Aviation/Space  Writers Association meeting,  Harold  B.  Finger, 
Manager  of  AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Office  and  Director 
of  NASA  Nuclear  Systems and Space Power,  said that  in  the Kiwi M D  
reactor  test  last  May  13 the  “planned  power  and  temperature  of  the 
reactor were exceeded.  . . .  [Also,]  there were no  flashes in  the jet  as 
had been experienced  in  the Kiwi B 4 A  reactor test  in November  1962, 
detected  in  this  test,  and  extensive data  . .  [were]  recorded  on  the 
none  of  the  vibrations  that  had  caused  damage  to  that  reactor  were 
reactor performance. 
“. . . I  think  we  can  safely  say  that  our  structural  problems  have 
been overcome and nuclear rockets can be developed for the performance 
(Text) 
of  future missions beyond Apollo.” 
*  NASA  appointed  Breene  M.  Kerr  as  Deputy  Assistant  Administrator  for 
Technology  Utilization,  effective  June  1.  As  deputy  to   NASA  Assistant 
Administrator  for  Technology  Utilization  and  Policy  Planning  Dr. 
George L.  Simpson, Kerr would have operating responsibility for NASA’s 
(NASA  Release 64-129) 
Technology Utilization program. 
*  Soviet Premier Khrushchev was quoted by former U S .  Senator William H. 
Benton  (now U S .  representative to UNESCO  in Par is)   as saying:  “If  you 
wish,  I  can  show you  photos  of  military bases  taken  from  outer  space. 
I will  show them  to  President Johnson  if  he  wishes.”  Mr.  Benton  said 
Premier  Khrushchev  suggested  that  U S .   could  maintain  adequate  in-  
spection  of  Cuba  with  satellites  and  therefore  should  discontinue  its 
(Middleton, NYT ,  5/30/ 
aerial reconnaissance  flights over  the  island. 
6471) 
30: NASA  Administrator James E. Webb addressed Missouri Cotton Pro- 
ducers Association in Sikeston, Mo.: 
“Whether  the  Russians  are   attempting  to  build  a  rocket  and  space- 
craft  to  match  Saturn V  and  Apollo,  we  simply  do  not  know.  When 
they  start  flight tests of  such  a  rocket,  we  should  be  able to  identify  it. 
Flight tests of  our Saturn V will not begin until the 1967-68 period, and 
i t   is quite possible that  the Russians may  also be  testing a  super  rocket 
by  then. 
“This  much we  do  know:  It would  be very  foolish on  our  par t   to  sit 
idle  o r   to  delay  the  Saturn V  until  we  could  confirm  that  the  Soviets 
were  also  building  super  rockets.  By  that  time,  it  would  probably  be 
too late for  us  to match  them  again  in  this  century. 
In our national space program we are  moving rapidly and vigorously 
( 6  
to  do  the  things  we  need  to  do  as   a  nation  to  prevent  technological 
surprise,  to  prevent  another  major  Soviet  initiative  based  on  space 
superiority. 
“We  believe that  peace  and  security  and  the possibility of  useful  co- 
operation  with the Soviet Union  a l l  depend on our making  doubly  clear 
that  they  can  hope  to   have  no  monopoly  of  space  achievement  to  ex- 
ploit for the  purposes of  communism. 

196 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 

Some people seem to think  that  our present space effort can be justi- 
L <  
fied only  if   we  a r e  in   a  neck-and-neck race  to  the moon.  These people 
miss  the point.  Our aim  is not  to  race  the  Soviets, but  to  thoroughly 
discourage them from making an all-out effort to  use  space as a political, 
propaganda,  or military  weapon for greater  power  on  earth. 
“I don’t  believe the American people a re  investing $20 billion in  the 
Saturn-Apollo program  of  manned  space  flight  in  this  decade  just  to 
keep  even with  the Soviets.  I think  the American people want  to  lead, 
and lead without doubts and excuses.  . . .”  (Text) 
*  At  Missouri  Valley  College commencement exercises,  NASA  Administrator 
James E. Webb said:  “For  some time we  in  NASA  have been  concerned 
with doing our part  to help build up the nation’s  supply of  scientific and 
engineering  manpower,  and  to  ensure  that  our  national  competence 
grows rather than diminishes.  Accordingly, in 1962, the agency initiated 
i t s  present program  of  ,training graduate students in  space-related fields, 
and nearly 900 students a r e  already in training. 
“This  fall  the  number  of  schools participating  will  grow  from  88 to 
131,  located  in  47   states-with 
four  of  these colleges  here  in  Mis- 
souri.  . . .”  (Text) 
Muy  31 : Saturn  I S A 4  satellite, consisting  of  boilerplate Apollo  spacecraft 
and S-IV  second stage of  the Saturn  I vehicle,  re-entered earth’s  atmos- 
phere and disintegrated over the Western Pacific Ocean about 8:30  p.m. 
EDT, during its 50th orbit of  the eaith. 
(NASA  Release 64-130) 
NASA Administrator  James E.  Webb said in remarks at  Univ.  of  Alabama: 
“ In  the 51 / ,  years since the launching of  Explorer  I  in  January  of  1958, 
scientists in the nation’s universities and in government laboratories, sup- 
ported by the engineering competence of  American industry, have made 
an  impressive record.  I n  this 5% years 42 different university sponsored 
experiments have  been  orbited  on  22  NASA  satellites.  Twelve of  these 
experiments on  five satellites a re  still  operating.  There  a r e  pending  at 
the  present  time  a  total  of  123 experiments  representing  36  different 
experimental concepts contributed  by  nineteen  universities.  These  ex- 
periments  have  been  approved  and  will  be  flown  on  19 NASA  satellites 
including the orbiting geophysical observatories, the orbiting astronomi- 
cal observatories, the orbiting solar observatories, and the Explorers.  Of 
great significance is the fact that some of  these experiments will be flown 
on  future  international  satellites,  particularly  the  United  States-United 
Kingdom series.”  (Text) 
Reported that John  Stack of  Republic Aviation believed U.S.S.R.  probably 
would  beat  the West with  supersonic transport.  Stack  revealed  Soviets 
had  developed  1,200-mph  delta-wing  bomber,  “the  Bounder,”  which 
could  quickly  be  converted  into  transport  “because  the  Soviets  have 
lower  performance  standards  than  the  US. for  their  aircraft  and  a re  
(Parade, 
not worried  about the effects of  sonic booms on  their  cities.” 
5/31/64) 
During May: Sylvania Electric Products,  Inc.,  recommended to  NASA  that  a 
data collection satellite system could be provided by  a  single satellite in 
polar  orbit between 500 and 700 n.  mi.  altitudes.  Satellite would collect 
meteorological and  oceanographic  data  from  about  1,200 sensors  per 
day, store the  information on magnetic tape, then relay it upon command 
to ground  station.  Sylvania’s study was  performed  under  $97,000 con- 
(M&R ,   6/1/64,  11; SBD,  5/13/a, 
tract  awarded  last  year  by  NASA. 
68 )  

197 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  AERONAUT ICB ,   19 6 4 
During Ma y :   Sert I  (space electric rocket  test)  payload began  final series of 
tests in  large vacuum tank  a t  NASA Lewis Research Center,  in preparation 
(Lew is  News, 6/5/64,2) 
for space flight later this summer. 
0  David  B.  Clark  Co.  began  building  eight  flight  suits  for  Project  Gemini 
astronauts.  MSC suit engineer  Henry  Friloux  said  the pressurized suits 
(M&R ,  5/25/64,  31) 
would protect astronauts up to 150-mi. altitudes. 
Flight-rating test  for  F-1  rocket engine was  delayed  from mid-year  to end 
of  the  year,  and  tests  leading  up  to  the  qualification  would  begin  in  
(M&R ,  5/25/64,9) 
September. 
0  On  20-day  shakedown cruise  in  the  Chesapeake Bay,  tracking  sh ip  Rose 
Knot  conducted  tests  with  instrumented  Lockheed  Super  Constellation 
( M & R ,  
aircraft  equipped  to   simulate  systems  of  Gemini  and  Agena. 
5 /25 /64 ,9)  
USAF  antisatellite  system,  utilizing Thor  missile,  completed  successful op- 
erational  testing  and  became  operational. 
(Transcript,  Defense  Secy. 
McNamara  News  Conference,  9/18/64) 
0  Bell  Aerosystems  study  for  NASA  concluded  that  design  studies  of  lunar 
surface vehicles could not be made in detail until data were obtained from 
Ranger  and  Surveyor  lunar  probe  programs.  General  results  of  the 
lunar  surface analysis indicated the best  possibility for  surface locomo- 
tion would be wheeled vehicle.  ( S B D ,  5/21/64,  117)  
0  Results of  meteoroid-protection  research were presented  a t  AIAA  Structures 
and  Materials  Conference in   Palm Springs.  North American  Aviation 
said  its  research  suggested that  current  protective requirements  against 
impact  hazard  might  be  reduced.  GM  Defense  Research  Laboratories 
reported  on  hypervelocity impact  studies that showed meteoroid  bumper 
concept  may  do more  harm than good a t  lower  impact velocities.  NASA 
Ames Research Center research  indicated use of  honeycomb material for 
meteoroid  proteotion  would  increase  damage  from  impacts,  because 
honeycomb walls  channel  sprayed particles  into highly  damaging  clus- 
ters  of  pulverized material  that  blast  through  rear  sheet of  target  mate- 
Investigation of fiber metals by IIT Research  Institute showed that 
rial. 
fiber metal  bumpers  were more  efficient than  solid bumpers  in  prevent- 
ing damage to target material.  (M&R ,  5 / 2 5 / a ,   29) 
USAF  began  awarding small study contracts to  industry to  explore  various 
aspects of  the Manned Orbiting Laboratory.  Directed  toward  the orbit- 
ing  of  a  4-ton  laboratory  in  1968 to  help  DOD  determine  the  military 
role  of  manned  space  flights,  M O L  would be  launched  by  a Titan  1114 
rocket  and  would  orbit  fo r   approximately  one month.  Contracts  were 
let  last month  to ,the Martin  Co.  to  study  the role of  Titan  111-C  in  rela- 
tion  to  launching  the  laboratory.  Hamilton  Standard  Div.  of  United 
Aircraft Corp. and the AiResearch Div. of  the Garrett Corp. got contracts 
(Sehlstedt,  Balt.  Sun, 
for  study  of  environmental  control  systems. 
6 / 5 / 6 4 )  
USAF  Aerospace Research  Pilot School at Edwards  AFB,  Calif.,  acquired  12  
more  students, bringing enrollment  to  35.  The school's  one-year course 
was  designed to produce  pilots, project managers,  or  consultants for fu- 
(A -N -AF   J&R, 5/30/64,  1 7 )  
ture  manned  space programs. 
0  In   Astronautics  &  Aeronautics  article  on  Germany's  space  program, 
Dietrich E.  Koelle discussed recoverable sounding rockets being  studied. 
Preliminary  research  and  development  as  well  a s  testing  had  been  be- 
gun  on   the   new  guidance  system  for  these  rockets, which would make 

198 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 

guided descent with assistance of  Rogallo wing.  Largest  German space 
project  was  production  of  third  stage  for   ELDO  launch  vehicle,  which 
(A&A ,  5/64,  66  f f )  
would have  its first  live flight-test in  1966. 
During May :   At annual meeting of  Soviet Academy of  Sciences, Academician 
L.  A.  Artsimovich, physicist, observed that U.S.S.R.  did not have a  lead- 
ing   role  in  astronomy  because  of  inadequate  facilities.  He  said  that 
astronomy  was more  important  than  high-energy  physics, but  “our  ex- 
penditures  on  high-energy  physics  many  times  exceed  thaw  on  astron- 
omy.”  Head of  the Academy M.  V.  Keldysh replied: 
“There  a re  some areas of  science in  which  it is necessary for u s  under 
all conditions to  maintain a high level.  But we don’t have to try  to  main- 
ta in  such a level in absolutely all sectors.  In  scientific development,  i t  is 
necessary to  base oneself  on international scientific cooperation. 
“I think  that  it  is  from this aspect we must  examine  the problems  of 
astronomy’s  development  and  in  this  area  broadly  utilize international 
cooperation.  It  is  not  obligatory  to  try   t o   have  in  our  country  the 
world’s  largest telescopes and radio telescopes, and telescopes in balloons, 
(Schwartz,  N Y T ,  6/1/64,  2 )  
and  on  sputniks, etc.” 
*  Richard  L.  Schleicher of  North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  received  Royal 
Aeronautical  Society  of  Great  Britain’s  George Taylor Gold Medal  for 
1963  for  paper  on  X-15  structural  design  which  he  presented  to  the 
Society.  ( A v .  W k . ,  6 / 1 / a ,   13) 
*  USAF’S  “Summary  of  Lessons  Learned  from  Air  Force  Management  Su r -  
veys”  found that cause of  management deficiencies was  absence of  three 
essential  elements:  program-oriented  management  structure;  compre- 
hensive  written  procedures  spelling out guidelines in  all  foreseeable sit- 
uations;  and effective discipline.  (Armed  Forces Mgmt., 5/64,37) 
Canadian Air Marshal C.  R.  Slemon retired as Deputy NORAD CinC a t  Colo- 
rado   Springs to   become  Director  of  Aerospace  Educational  Center  a t  
(A-N-AF  J&R,  5 / 1 6 / a ,   4 )  
USAF  Academy. 

June 1 :   In   an  interview with  U.S. N e w s   & World Report, Dr.  WeAher  von 
Braun,  Director  of  NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center,  defended  the 
US. program to land a man  on the moon by  1970 and stated that  i t  was 
his  belief  that  a t  the present  time  the  chances  were  “better  than  50%” 
that the project would  be successful by  the target date.  In   commenting 
on reports that the Russians had  forsaken  a race to  the moon, von  Braun 
ventured  that  it  was  possible  that  the  Russians  had  “picked  another 
focusing point  besides the moon  for  their manned  spaceflight program” 
such as  the development of  a large manned space station orbiting earth. 
In   addition, he  commented:  “I  don’t  think  the Russians  have  ever  said 
they  aren’t  going  to  the  moon.  But,  even  if  w e   are   going  alone,  this 
would  not  hur t   one  bit.  The  purpose  is  not  so much  to  race  the  Rus- 
for  that  matter.  even  to   land  on  the  moon-but 
to  design  a 
sians-or. 
” 
hard-hitting program  to  develop  an  American  space-flying  capability.” 
(US. N e w s ,  6/1/64) 
0  Dr.  George E.-Mueller, Associate Administrator  for  Manned  Space Flight, 
NASA,  asserted that “we learned we  had more work to do’,  in commenting 
on the fact that one engine in the Saturn I booster  (SA-6)  had  shut down 
prematurely.  Because  the  Saturn  I  booster  was  designed  to  operate 
successfully with  one  engine  out,  no  damage  was  done  by  the  early 
(Houston Pos t ,  6/2/64) 
shutoff  and the  test was  successful. 
0  NASA  awarded a $1.2 million contract  for the design, development, and con- 
struction  of  a  new  simulator  system  for  installation  in  a  subsonic  jet 
transport  to Cornell Aeronautical  Laboratories, Buffalo,  N.Y.  The new 
system,  called the General  Purpose Airborne Simulator  (GPAS) ,   was  to 
provide  airborne  simulation  of  advanced  aircraft  with  particular  em- 
phasis on  the proposed  supersonic  transport.  The  system  should  allow 
inflight evaluation of  specific configurations for  a wide  variety  of  flight 
( FRC  Release 13-64) 
conditions of  speed, altitude, and  attitude. 
M i s s i l e s   and  Rockets  reported  that  NASA  planned  two  Mariner-type  flights 
to Mars in 1969 and a Voyager mission to Mars in  1971.  M&R  reported 
that  D.  P.  Hearth,  of  the  office  of  Advanced  Lunar  and  Planetary  Pro- 
grams  in  the  NASA  Office  of  Space  Sciences,  said  that  he expected  both 
new  projects to be  funded  in  the FY ’66 budget.  According  to  Hearth, 
neither  project had  won  program  approval  by  top NASA  officials, but  the 
chances for both sppeared good.  Both 1969 and 1971 would  offer attrac- 
tive  launch  windows  because  propulsion  requirements  to  complete  the 
missions  would  be  the  smallest  of  any  period  in  the  next  15  years. 
(M&R ,   6/1/64,  15) 
NASA  contributed  $177,000  to  the  Univ.  of  Houston  to  support  10  pre- 
doctoral  students studying space-related sciences and  technology.  The 
fellowships were  for   a three-year period  and  brought  the  total  to  20  in 
the  NASA-sponsored  study program.  With  this  grant,  the  space  agency 
raised  its  total  contribution  to   $354,000  in  fellowship  grants  to   the 
(Houston Post, 6/1/64) 
university. 

199 

200 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

June 1 : New  Yo rk  Times reported that AEC   and USAF  were jointly supporting 
work on a  relatively simple nuclear  rocket engine  (Project Poodle)  that 
was  likely  t o  be  flyable in  the  next  five years.  The  rocket  would  be 
clustered  to   propel  a n   upper  rocket  stage,  and it was  reported  that  the 
newly  designed device might  save more than $300 million on space a i s -  
sions which had already been planned  and for which conventional upper 
stages had been  contemplated.  The novelty  of  the new  engine stemmed 
from the fact that  i ts  power would be  derived  not  from a  controlled nu- 
c1ezt.r  reaction but  from the decay of  radioactive polonium  210.  Propul- 
sion would be provided  in gentle acceleration uf  about y4  lb.  thrust  sus- 
tained for periods of  weeks.  (Witkin, NYT ,  6/1/64) 
*  I n  a letter t o  Aviation Week ,  S.  B.  Kramer suggested that, on the basis of  his 
computations,  the  U.S.S.R.’s  ZOND  I  probe  was  on  a  trajectory  that 
would  bring  it  on the  sunlit side of  Venus  around  July  24,  1964.  His 
calculations were  based  on  bulletins  on  ZOND  I  issued by  Tass,  and  he 
asserted that they  led him  t~ two conclusions:  first, tha t  ZOND  I was on a 
trajectory that would  lead  it to  approach Venus closely; second,  that the 
trajectory was  such  that  the probe  could  return  to  the  vicinity of  earth 
(Av. Wlc., 6/1/64,102) 
during the latter half  of  March 1965. 
*  The policy committee of  the Cornell Guggenheim Aviation Safety Center  of 
New  York  urged  the Government to   begin  immediately to  develop  pro- 
cedures  for  the selection and training of  crews for  the supersonic trans- 
ports now  in  the  design  stage.  The group urged  the initiation of  inten- 
sive studies of  the  “operating  environment”  of  supersonic  aircraft now 
i n  use by  the military,  and  the development of  joint management-union 
programs for selection of  crews based  upon physical and technical com- 
(AP, NYT ,  6/2/64, 
petence  rather  than  upon  the  seniority principle. 
63) 
*  Marilyn  Link,  Executive  Secretary  of  the Link  Foundation of  New  York, 
was  named  winner  of  the  national  Frank  G.  Brewer  Trophy  for  1963. 
The   trophy,  awarded  by  the  National  Aeronautic  Association, honors 
“distinguished  and outstanding  meritorious  service to  the Air Youth  of 
America in Aero Space Education.” 
(NU Release) 
9 -  Mise  Jacqueline  Cochran  flew the Edwards  AFB 100-km. circular course  a t  
1,302 mph t o  recapture the international woman’s record  held by Jacque- 
line Auriol.  Miss  Auriol had  averaged  1,266 mph  on  June 4,  1963, to 
capture  the  100-km.  record  from  Miss  Cochran. 
(AP,  Wash.  Post, 
W5 /W  
June 2:  At  his news  conference, President  Johnson  stated, in  reply to  a ques- 
tion  a%out reconnaissance  of  Cuba  by  means  of  planes  and  satellites: 
“I will  say this:  that we,  at the time of  the Cuba missile crisis, attempted 
to   work  out  an  agreement  for   inspection  and  that  was  refused.  This 
nation,  in  order to protect  its people,  must have  a  knowledge of  what  is 
taking  place and  we  propose  t o  keep  informed.  As  t o  what  offers the 
( N Y T ,  6/3/64,  25) 
best method,  we  will have  t o  determine  that.” 
The  Senate Committee on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences approved  au- 
thorization  of  $5,246,293,250 in   the  next  fiscal  year  for  NASA.  This 
figure would  be $52,482,750 more than was voted by the  House, but  still 
$57,706,750 less than the  budget  requests.  The Senate Committee’s rec- 
ommendations  included  restoration  of  budget  cuts by  the  House  from 
the  unmanned  Surveyor program,  the  Orbiting  Geophysical  Observa- 
(W m h .  
tory  program,  and  funds  for  tracking  network  operations. 
Post, 6/3/64;  Au .  Wk . ,  6/15/@,  30) 

requests of  other  states for 
the  installation  “a  mere  front”  hiding  the  fact  that  the  decision  had 
already  been  made.  Senators Keating and  Javits  (R.-N.Y.)  , and Case 
(R.-N.J.) 
joined  Lausche  in  criticizing  NASA’s refusal  to   divulge  the 
( C R ,  6/2/64,  11951-52;  UPI, 
contents  of  its  site  selection  studies. 
Boston Globe, 6/2/64?) 
*  PIASA  named  two companies t o  enter competitive negotiations fo r  providing 
instrumentation  support  services a t  the Merritt Island Launch Area  and 
the  NASA  facilities  located  within  the  Cape  area.  The  two  companies 
were Federal Electric Corp. of  Paramus, N.J.,  and Chrysler Corp., Florida 
Missile Operations, Cape Kennedy, Fla.  The total period of  performance 
would be for three years,  a t  a cost of  $4.5 million.  (KSC Release 80-64) 
NASA  engineers  a t   the  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  were  puzzled  by  the 
question of  how a colony of  fleas managed to infiltrate a special chamber 
which was  supposedly protected against invasion even by bacteria.  The 
chamber  had  been  designed and installed to  test,  under  conditions simu- 
lating those of  space, optical equipment  to be placed on  board the Orbit- 
ing  Astronomical  Observatory.  One possible explanation  for  the  pres- 
ence  of  the  fleas  suggested  that  they  entered  concealed in  the  fur-lined 
parkas  worn  by  technicians  adjusting  equipment  inside  the  low-tem- 
(Wash.  Da i ly   News,  6/2/64) 
perature  chamber. 
NASA  Flight Research Center  awarded  a $1.2 million contract to  the Norair 
Div.  of  the  Northrop  Corp.  of  Hawthorne,  Calif.,  for  the  design  and 
construction  of  two  full-scale lifting  body  research  vehicles.  The  two 
research  vehicles  ( the   M-2 and  HL-10)  were  to  be  used  initially 
by  NASA  for  full-scale wind  tunnel  testing  and  for  free  flight  tests  as  
manned subsonic gliders. 
(FRC Release 1 M )  
*  Representative  H.  R.  Gross  (R.-Iowa) 
told  the  House  that  Breene  M. 
Kerr,  son  of  the  late  Sen.  Robert  S.  Kerr  (D.-Okla.)  and  recently 
named  Deputy  Assistant  Administrator  for  Technology  Utilization  of 
NASA,  would  have  to  exercise great  care to  avoid  conflicts of  interest  in 
his new  job.  He warned that Kerr’s new  assignment “will  require some 
serious thinking  on  his  par t   if  he  is  to   avoid  actions that  may  tend  to  
confuse the Kerr financial interests with the interests of  the government.” 
(Mollenhoff , Des Moines Register, 6/3/64) 
I n  a House debate over the patent policy for the proposed Water  Resources 
Research  Center, Rep. Chet Holifield  (DICa l if .)   criticized current DOD 
and NASA  patent  policies.  He  urged  that the policy  be  revised  to permit 
any  industry  to  “use  any kind  of  a  device or   any kind  of  a  patent  pro- 
( C R ,  6/2/64,12045) 
cedure which is paid for by  federal funds.” 
*  The  FAA awarded  contracts totaling  $6 million  each  to  the  Boeing  Com- 
pany  and Lockheed  Aircraft Corp.  for the design  of  a  supersonic  trans- 
I n   addition,  contracts  totaling $5 million each  were  awarded  to 
port. 
the  General  Electric  Co.  and  the  Pra t t   &  Whitney  Division  of  United 
Aircraft Corp.  for designs  for  the engines of  the transport.  Boeing and 
Lockheed  would  do  extensive  design  work,  wind  tunnel  testing,  and 
structural  studies aimed  a t   refining designs to   conform  to  the  technical 
and  economic  requirements established  by  the  FAA.  The  two  engine 
( AP, 
contractors would  develop  detailed  preliminary  layout  designs. 
NYT, 6]3/64,16;  FAA Release 64-55) 
766-598  0-66----14 

202 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONATTTICS,  1 9 8 4 

June  2 :   Alexander Kuzin,  Soviet member  of 
the Effects of  Atomic Radiation,  said that 
radioactive  substances were  disappearing.  By  the  end  of  the  current 
year,  it would be practically impossible to  trace any such contamination 
(AP,  NYT, 
of  the   earth,  Kuzin  said  in  a  speech  reported  by  Tass. 
6/4/@4  4 )  
*  A  $lOO-rnillion issue of  Communications Satellite  Corp.  stock was  put  on 
the market  and  almost immediately sold  out.  Five million shares were  
involved in  the stock issue.  The maximum allotment was 50  shares per 
customer  from  each  security  house, but  the  average was  only  about  15 
shares because of  the great  public  demand.  The  par  value of  the stock 
was  $20 per  share,  and  it  closed a t  around  $23 after  having  reached  a 
(NYT,  6/3/64,  59) 
high  of  $27  in   the  first  few  minutes  of  trading. 
June 2 - 3 :   New,  improved solar  cell  was  described  a t   Conference  of  Photo- 
voltaic Specialists by  Joseph Mandelkorn, head  of  group  at  NASA  Lewis 
Research  Center  that  developed the  solar  cell.  The  new  cell  was  made 
of  pure  silicon  with  small  amount  of  aluminum  added.  Before  1960, 
solar  cells  were  made  of  silicon  with  small  amount  of  phosphorus 
added. 
In  1960,  Mandelkorn  discovered  that  substituting  boron  for 
phosphorus  made  cells  with  greater  radiation  resistance;  these  cells 
were used  on TELSTAR  I, whose orbit passed through Van Allen radiation 
belts.  The  newest  cells,  even  more  radiation  resistant,  were  expected 
to  have  useful  lifetime  of  25-50  times  that  of  silicon-phosphorus type. 
(LRC   Release 6 6 5 1 )  
June  3 :  NASA  launched  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  from  Wallops  Island, 
Va.,  to  86.6-mi.  altitude,  but  nose  cone  failed  to  release.  Using  CW 
propagation  transmitter,  Gerdien condenser probe,  and  ion  trap,  experi- 
ments were  to  have measured  ambient  electron  and  ion  density, moni- 
tored  integrated  ultraviolet flux from the sun,  and tested  two  12.267-mc 
shroud  antennas.  The  propagation  experiment  obtained  good  data 
from  83 see.  to  peak,  but  no  other  experimental results were  obtained. 
(NASA Rpt. SRL) 
*  A  new  division was  formed  within  the  NASA  office of  Advanced Research 
and Technology.  The new  Programs  and  Resources Division  of  OART 
would be  headed  by Merrill  H.  Mead  who  came to  Hq.  from  the Ames 
Research  Center.  Dr.  R.  L.  Bisplinghoff,  Associate  Administrator 
fo r   Advanced  Research  and  Technology,  said  the  new  division  was 
created  to  “improve  the program  planning  capability  and provide com- 
mon  objectives  toward  which  all  of  the  elements  of  the  office  can  be 
(NASA Release 64-132) 
directed.” 
*  NASA  revealed  that  it spent  a  record  $1,939,000,000  in  the  first  half  of  the 
current  fiscal year,  July  1, 1963, to  December  31,  1963, for  goods  and 
services.  The  total  sum was  $15 million more  than  the  previous high, 
for the six months ending June 30,1963.  44 states participated  in direct 
awards  of  NASA  prime  contracts  of  $25,000  o r  more.  Of  these 44,  Cali- 
fornia  received  by  f a r   the  largest  amount  in  money  terms,  more  than 
(Sehlstedt, Balt.  Sun, 6/4/64) 
$700  million. 
A  $700,000  contract  was  awarded  to  the  Defense  and  Space  Operations 
Division  of  the Westinghouse Corp.,  Baltimore, Md.,  Operations Center 
by  the  Goddard Space n i g h t  Center.  The  contract  called  for  the  com- 
plete  integration,  checkout,  and  testing  of  the  ground  communications 
system  for  NASA%  Rosman,  N.C.,  Stadan  (Space  Tracking  and  Data 

203 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 
Acquisition Network) station’s second 85-ft. antenna system which would 
support the new Advanced Technological Satellite  (ATS) .  ( GSFC Release 
G 1 6 - 6 4 )  
June 3:  Sh.  P.  Darchiya, an  astronomer  from the Pulkovo Observatory, suc- 
ceeded  in  photographing  details  of  the  lunar  surface on  the  unexposed 
side of  the lunar disk, i.e.,  under  conditions of  earthlight.  Astronomers 
had  previously  recorded  the  luminescence  of  individual  details  of  the 
lunar  surface on the unexposed  side  of  the  lunar  disk, but  according to 
A.  A.  Mikhailov,  Director  of  the  Observatory,  this  phenomenon  had 
(Zzvestia,  6/3/64, 
never  been  confirmed  by  instrument  observation. 
4, ATSS-T  Trans.) 
It was reported that U.A.R.  planned to  soon launch its own earth satellite- 
a 40-70  Ib.  satellite boosted  by  a  three-stage rocket.  A  source close  to 
German  rocket  scientists  in  U.A.R.  said  the  launching  would  probably 
be purely  a  prestige  gesture,  having  little  or  no  scientific value. 
(UPI, 
Wash. Post, 6/4/64) 
e  HF-24  fighter-bombers  designed  by  a  team  of  18 German  aeronautical 
engineers  and  manufactured  in  Bangalore  a t   the  Hindustan  Aircraft 
Co.  were  reportedly  being  delivered  to  the  Indian  government.  The 
chief of  the team designing the HF-24  w a s  reported to be Dr. Kurt Tank, 
principal  designer  for  Germany’s  World  War  I1  Luftwaffe. 
(NANA ,  
Wash.  Eve. Star, 6/3/64) 
e  Miss Jacqueline Cochran claimed her  third  jet  speed  record  in  less than  a 
month,  flying a Lockheed F-104  fighter aircraft.  Flying at  1,135 mph 
over  a  500-km.  closed  course  a t   Edwards  AFB,  Calif.,  Miss  Cochran 
%bettered her  own  international  record  of  680.75 mph  which  she estab- 
(NU   Release; AP, 
lished over the same course on September 17,1961. 
Wash. Post, 6/5/64) 
*  WAF  launched  unidentified  satellite payload  aboard  a  Scout vehicle from 
(M& R ,  
Pt. Arguelto,  Calif.  Purpose  of  the  shot  was  not  announced. 
6/15/64,10) 
June   4 :   The  House Republican Conference’s task  force  on  space  and  aero- 
nautics  charged  that  NASA  was  disregarding  the  safety  of  astronauts  in 
its  haste  to  place  men  on  the  moon.  The  report  specifically criticized 
the  agency  fo r   not  developing  means  of  rescuing  astronauts  stranded 
in  orbit  and  called  for  a  slowdown in   the program  until  the  feasibility 
of  “rescue  ships”  could  be  explored.  The  criticisms  were  directed  at 
the Project Gemini flights.  The report suggested that NASA’s reluctance 
to develop a Gemini space rescue system resulted from a fear that it would 
(Finney, NYT, 6 / 5 / 6 4 )  
slow the  Apollo project. 
Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  Deputy  Administrator  of  .NASA,  said  he  hoped  for 
cooperation  on  space flights between  the  US., the  U S S R . ,   and  other 
countries  a t   some  future  time.  He  asserted  that  such cooperation was 
not  possible  a t  the  current time because of  the secrecy that  surrounded 
(N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/5/64) 
Soviet space efforts. 
0  A  $1,313,000  contract  was  awarded  by  the  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  to 
Carpenter  Brothers  of  Dallas,  Texas,  for  the  construction  of  a  test 
maintenance  building  at  the NASA  Mississippi  Test  Facility. 
(DOD 
Release 438-64) 
e  USAF  and  USN  astronomers  planned  special  telescopic  observation  of  the 
moon  on  June  4 and  5  in   an  attempt  to  identify  the  mysterious  red 
spots  first  observed  by  Sir  William  Herschel  in  1738.  The  spots, 

204 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A ERONAU T IC S ,   1 9  6 4. 

located  in   the  crater  Aristarchus,  were  observed  in  October  1963 by 
astronomer  J.  6. Greenacre  from  the  Lowell Observatory  in  Flagstaff, 
Ariz.  They  indicate  the  possibility  of  volcanos  below  its  barren  sur- 
(Ubel, N .Y .  Her. T r ib . ,  6/4/64;  AI?,  Balt. Sun, 6/5/64) 
face. 
June 4 :  Conference on New Technology at Lewis Research Center was opened 
by  LRC  Director  Dr.  Abe  Silverstein:  “The  vehicles  and  spncecraft 
launched  from  Florida  a re   the  visible  results  of  our  nation’s  space 
effort.  Less  evident  i s   the  body  of  technology  that  makes  these  and 
future  flights  possible.  Almost  half  of  NASA’s 30,000  employees  a r e  
among  those creating  this  technology.”  Attending the  two-day confer- 
ence  were  some  350  representatives  of  industry ; area  development 
groups;  universities;  Federal.  state, and local government;  labor;  bank- 
ing;  and NASA  Hq.  and Centers. 
(Lew i s  N e w s ,  6 /6 /64 ,1 )  
e  It was  announced that  the  British  government  was  spending $2.8  million 
to  enlarge  i t s   space  communications  facilities  at  Goonhilly  Downs. 
Future  communications  satellites  would  require  more  powerful  re- 
(AP,  Phil.  Eve.  Bull.,  6/4/64) 
ceivers because  of  higher  orbits. 
e  Soviet scientists disclosed that they were planning to grow fresh vegetables 
in   future  Soviet  spacecraft.  Izvestia  reported  that  scientists  had  al- 
ready  grown  cabbage,  beets,  tomatoes,  and  carrots  in   synthetic  soil 
( AP,  Chic.  T r ib . ,   6/5/64) 
in  simulated  spacecraft  conditions. 
France  and  Spain signed  an  agreement to  set up  a  joint  satellite tracking 
(UPI,  Wash .   Da i ly  
station  in  the  ISpanish-owned Canag-y  Islands. 
News, 6/5/64) 
*  New  FAA Statistical  Handbook  showed  substantial  increases  in  aviation 
activity.  Since  1950,  domestic  and  international  a i r   passenger  t r a 5 c  
Do- 
The  same was  true  for  a i r  cargo  traffic. 
had  more  than  tripled. 
mestic  flights  carried  56  million  -passengers  in  1962. 
International 
and  territorial  flights  carried  6.6  million  passengers.  Revenue  ton 
miles  flown  by  all U S .   airlines,  scheduled  and  nonscheduled, exceeded 
6.6  billion  in  the  same  year.  Employment  within  the  aeronautical 
industry increased from 668,500 in 1961 to 707,300 in 1962, an increase 
of six per cent. 
(FAA Release 64-57) 
June  5:  The  U S .   and  the  U.S.S.R.  reached  further  agreement  during  ne- 
gotiations conducted in Geneva on cooperative efforts in space research. 
A joint weather satellite program would  go into operation  by  the end of 
this  year.  The  weather  program  would  consist  of  the  U.S.  and  the 
U.S.S.R.  launching meteorological satellites on a  coordinated basis with 
the data being exchanged via  a special telegraphic link between Moscow 
and Washington. 
In  addition,  preliminary  agreement was  reached  f o r  
extension of  scientific cooperation in  space matters to  cover biology and 
medicine.  Although details of  this agreement were not  available, it was 
reported  to  cover a wide exchange of  information  on  the biological and 
medical problems  raised  by  prolonged manned  space  flights.  The  ne- 
gotiations were  conducted by  Dr.  Hugh Dryden, Deputy Administrator 
of  NASA,  and  A.  A.  Blagonravov,  a  member  of  the  Soviet Academy  of 
Sciences; both  agreements were subject  to  the formal  approval of  their 
(Wa sh .  Pos t ,  6/6/64;  NYT ,   6/6/64;  UPI,  Wash. Daily 
governments. 
News, 6/6/64) 
NASA  and the Swedish Space Committee agreed to extend fo r  another  year 
their  cooperative sounding  rocket  studies of  the  upper  atmosphere  and 
noctilucent  clouds.  Under  the new  agreement, the U.S.  would  provide 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  AERO  

n  a  loan  basis. 

port  operations would  be  carried  out by  Swedish personnel.  The joint 
studies,began in 1961. 
(NASA Release 64-131) 
June  5:  USAF  Secretary  Eugene  M.  Zukert  said  that  the  Titan  I11  rocket 
would make its maiden  flight during the  coming  summer.  Eventually, 
Titan I11 would launch  the USAF’S  Manned Orbital Laboratory, probably 
sometime in  1967 o r   1968.  In   addition,  Zuckert  announced  that  three 
firms,  Douglas Aircraft  Co.,  General Electric Co.,  and Martin Co.,  had 
been  authorized  to  go  ahead with work  on  orbital  space-station studies. 
( UPI, Louisville Courier-Journal, 6/6/64) 
Prof.  A.  A.  Blagonravov,  chief  delegate of  the U.S.S.R.  to  the  U.N.  Com- 
mittee  on  Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer  Space,  told  a  news  conference  in 
Geneva that the Soviet Union had  no  set plan  for  landing a  man  on  the 
( AP,  Houston Post,  6/6/64) 
moon  “within  the  present  decade.” 
USAF  launched  an   unidentified  satellite  aboard  a  Thor-Agena  D  booster 
(M&R ,  6/15/64,10) 
from Vandenberg AFB,  Calif. 
*  Britain  successfully  launched  a  Blue  Streak  rocket  from  the  Woomera 
Range  in  Australia.  The rocket  reached  an   altitude of  110 mi.  and  a 
top  speed  of  6,400  mph.  Because  the  engines  cut  off  seven  seconds 
earlier  than  had  been  planned,  the  rocket  fell 382  mi.  short  of  impact 
area.  The  rocket traveled 620 mi.  northwest  of  Woomera  and  disinte- 
(NYT, 6/6/64) 
grated over Western Australia. 
0  Dr. I. M. Levitt, Director of  the Fels Planetarium in Philadelphia, displayed 
in Tel Aviv  a  clock  designed  fo r   lunar  explorers.  The  clock,  designed 
by Dr. Levitt, accounted for the fact that a lunar day and night would be 
more  than   28  times  as   long  as   the   earth’s  24-hour  cycle.  His  clock 
showed Greenwich  time  on  earth a s  well  as local time  for any  point  on 
(NYT, 6/7/64,78) 
the moon. 
0  Astronomers  a t  Lowell Observatory,  Flagstaff, Ariz.,  failed  in  an   attempt 
to  sight  and  photograph  red  spots  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Aristarchus 
region  of  the moon.  Conditions were  about the same a s  on Oct.  29 and 
Nov.  27  when  Lowell  observers  had  sighted  the  red  spots. 
(AP, Balt. 
Sun, 6/6/64) 
A spokesman for Stanley Gibbons Ltd.  of  London, one of  the world’s lead- 
ing stamp  dealers,  cast  doubt  on  recent  reports  that  the  U.S.S.R.  had 
issued a commemorative stamp honoring three cosmonauts lost  in orbit. 
He  stated,  “We  get  all  new  issue  stamps  from  the  Soviet Union.  We 
(AP, Chic. T r ib . ,  6/6/64) 
know  nothing  about this one.” 
The  orbit had  the 
June  6:  U.S.S.R.  launched  earth  satellite  COSMOS XXXI. 
following initial parameters:  period of  rotation,  91.6 min.;  apogee,  508 
km.  (309 mi.)  ; perigee, 228 km.  (141.67 mi.) ; inclination  to  equator, 
(Izvestin, 6/7/64,1,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
49O. 
Amateur  astronomers  in Riverdale, the Bronx, saw a  red  spot on the moon 
between the craters Aristarchus  and Herodotus a t  4:20 a.m. 
I t  vanished 
a t  5:lO  a.m.  before the moon had come into v iew   of  the western observa- 
tqries  which  had  observed  spots  near  Aristarchus  last  Oc t .   and  Nov. 
( N Y T ,  6/18/64) 
0  It  was  reported  that  U S .   and  Soviet  officials  would  meet  in   Geneva  on 
June  15 and  16 to  discuss a  possible Russian  role in a  global space  com- 
munications  system.  The U S .   was  already  in  the  process  of  working 

206 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 41 

out a n  agreement with the Europeans,  and it was believed that the system 
would  be  greatly  strengthened  by  Russian  participation.  The  Geneva 
meetings,  which  would  involve  the  US . ,   European  nations,  and  the 
U S S R . ,   would  include  a  general  discussion of  recent developments in 
space  communications. 
I t   was  also  reported  that  before  the  Geneva 
meeting a negotiation session in London between the U S .  and European 
nations would work on a preliminary agreement on an interim organiza- 
tion for a space communications system.  (Farnsworth, NYT, 6/7/64,6) 
June  6:  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Bleymaier,  Deputy  Chief  of  Staff  for  Manned 
Space Flight, AFSC,  said that USAF  would sharply increase its participation 
in   NASA’s manned  space  flight  program;  USAF  astronauts  might  be 
assigned  for  training  as   crew  members  on  some  Gemini  and  Apollo 
flights,  and  100  officers  would  help  staff  Integrated  Mission  Control 
Center  (IMCC) at MSC. 
[George Low, MSC Deputy Diricetor, denied this 
claim three days later  (see June 9) .] 
General Bleymaier  disclosed  that:  (1)  flight crews  of  Manned Orbit- 
ing Laboratory  (MOL )  would  come  from nine  Dyna-Soar  pilots now  at 
Aerospace Research  Pilot School, Edwards AFB;  (2 )   USAF  would  begin 
discussing specific  flights aboard  Gemini  and Apollo  when  Sec.  of  De- 
fense Robert  S. McNamara  gave  approval  for  production  of  MOL ;   (3)  
17 Titan  111-C  launches were planned,  two  allocated to  MOL;  (4)  pay- 
loads of  6,000  lbs. would  contain  scientific research  projects,  with  NASA 
experiments  to  be  accommodated.  (Houston Post,  6/10/M;  M&R, 
6/15/64,  12) 
0  Speaking  a t   commencement  exercises  a t   New  Mexico  State  University, 
University  Park,  N.  Mex.,  Dr.  George Mueller,  NASA  Associate Admin- 
istrator  for   Manned  Space  Flight,  noted  that  the.NAsA  program  €or 
manned  space  flight  has   recorded  16  successes  in  16  attempts.  He 
explained  this record:  “A  rather  simple formula has  contributed  to  the 
success to date.  We fly a spacecraft, manned  or  unmanned,  only after a 
comprehensive  set  of  ground  and  flight  tests  has   been  completed  and 
every deviation from expected performance has been explained.  We a re  
continuing to follow that policy.” 
(Text) 
0  Dr.  Joseph  Shea, manager  of  MSC  Apollo Spacecraft  Office,  said that U S .  
would  land  men  on   the moon  before  Dec.  31,  1969.  He  stated  that  in 
his  jndgment “we have  a much  better than even  chance”  of  landing the 
first  two  astronauts  on  the  lunar  surface  ahead  of  the   1970  deadline 
(UPI,  Wash.  D d y  News ,   6/6/64) 
set by  the  late President  Kennedy. 
0  Lt.  Gen.  James  H.  Doolittle  (USAFR) was  awarded  the  Pennsylvania  Mili- 
ta ry  College Engineering  Centennial Medal. 
In   his  acceptance speech, 
General  Doolittle  spoke  on  USAF  Project  Forecast  report,  which  con- 
sidered “national  policy,  technological opportunities, and capability” i n  
i ts   IO-year predictions.  Based  on  the  technological opportunities eval- 
ulated  (including  materials,  propulsion,  aerodynamic  development, 
special  weapons,  and  guidance),  there  would  be  eight  important 
possible  technical  advances : Advanced  Manned  Precision  Strike 
System  (AMPSS) , very  accurate  ICBM’s, very  precise  air-to-ground 
missiles,  a  Vtol  fighter,  a  Vtol  light  transport,  a  large  cargo  aircraft 
(cx-x),  Mobile Air  Defense,  and  a  hypersonic  mach  6 reconnaissance 
aircraft.  General Doolittle concluded:  “.  . . our  national security and 
our   national  welfare,  in  future,  will  depend  very  largely  on  military 
technology and, of  wwm ,  as dways, on the spirit and will of  out citizens. 
* 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

207 

science and technology. 
me and remain superior 
This  is  one 
and   better  scientists and  engineers. 
of  the  very  important  challenges to  Pennsylvania Military  College and  
to all of  the  other fine educational institutions of  our land.  . . .”  (Text, 
CR ,  8/31/64,  2040446)  
June 6-7:  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft Center near Houston held its first public 
open house,  with more than 52,000 visitors attending.  Visitors walked 
among  the  27  buildings  and  viewed models of  the  Gemini  and Apollo 
spacecraft set up inside the auditorium, a s  well as viewing a film on NASA. 
( MSC Roundup, 6/%/64,2) 
June  7 :  Speaking a t  the commencement of  the Univ.  of  Vermont iri  Bu r l ing  
ton,  James  E.  Webb,  Administrator  of  NASA,  said  that  “historians  and 
psychologists  see  a  universal  interest  and participation  in  space efforts 
a s   providing  mankind  with  a  moral  and  creative  substitute  fo r  war.” 
He  remarked  that  the US. was  ahead  of  the  U.S.S.R.  in   weight-lifting 
power in space.  He stated that the U S .  was building a national capacity 
fo r   operating  in  the   new  environment  of  space  that  would  serve  the 
(Text; NYT ,   6/8/64,  22) 
national  purpose  for  many  years  to  come. 
e  P a r a d e   magazine’s  Intelligence  Report  said  the  U S .   had  50  Samos 
surveillance  satellites  in  orbit  photographing  Soviet  military  installa- 
tions.  Photographs  were  reported  to  be  parachuted  to  earth  between 
Calif. and Hawaii.  Russians were said  to have similar  satellites spying 
( P a r a d e ,  W a s h .  P o s t ,  6/7/64) 
on U S .  
e’  It was  reported  that  the  Army was  seeHpg ways  to  increase  the  forward 
speed  of  helicopters.  To  speed  its  rotor-borne  craft,  and  thus  lessen 
their  chances of  being  shot  down  by  enemy  a i r   o r   ground  forces,  the 
Army was  reported  to  be interested in  adding short conventional wings 
and  small  jet  engines.  The  resultant  craft,  called  a  compound  heli- 
copter,  was  considered  capable  of  flying  above  200  mph.  Research 
contracts  were  awarded  to  the  Lockheed-Georgia Co.  and  the  Kaman 
i( NYT ,  
Aircraft  Corp.  for  development  of  helicopter  modifications. 
6/8/64,  58) 
*  The USAF  was  reported  pushing  the development of  a  new  material which 
offered promise  of  revolutionizing the manufacture  of  planes,  missiles, 
and many  other  products.  The material  was  a  combination  of  boron 
fibers and  epoxy  resins  to  bind  the  fibers  together,  reported  to  be  fa r  
stronger  and  stiffer  per  unit  weight  than  any  existing  structural mate- 
rial.  According  to  Gen.  Bernard  Schriever, Commander,  AFSC,  i f   the 
development  program  were  adequately  funded,  the  technology  could 
(Witkin,  NYT ,   6/7/64,  63 )  
be  perfected  in  five  to  seven  years. 
Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate Administrator  fo r  Manned  Space 
Flight,  an sw a ed   GOP critics,  complaining  of  a  “crash  program”  to 
reach the moon, with a “Not  so.  The eight years devoted to  the Apollo 
Project  is  a  longer  period  than  the  duration  of  any  previous  United 
States research  end  development program.”  He  continued:  “Apollo’s 
time  scale fo r  development is  four  years  longer  than  the time  scale fo r  
the  Mercury  spacecraft,  two  years  longer  than  the  B-58  bomber  and 
one year  longer  than  the  X-15.” 
(Houston Post,  6/7/64) 
e  Dr.  S .   Burman  Long,  Worcester,  Mass.,  minister,  delivered  address  on 
religion  in the space age a t  the  73rd  convention of  the General Federa- 
tion of Women’s  Clubs in  Atlantic  City, N.J.: 

208 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4 
. . . My  religion  in the  space age  confirms my  faith  in  a  spiritual 
b6 
heaven  as  real  as my  humble earthly home.  The  sooner  that  mankind 
accepts an orderly and  unlimited universe, the earlier we  will have faith 
in  truth.  Our  cosmology  has  changed  because  our  knowledge  has 
changed.  It  has  changed  before.  Once  a  new  continent  was  dis- 
covered.  We no  longer  limit  the universe to  hell  below,  heaven  above, 
He  always  has  been.  . . .” 
and  some of  both  between.  The God  of  creation  is  in  control  now  as 
(Text,  C R   7/24/64,  A3801-02) 
Early June:  Air  Force Space Systems Div.  announced 10-ft. delta wing glider 
able to  travel  almost  around  the  world  as goal  of  improved Asset  pro- 
gram. 
Glider wo,uld be ready for launch in two years. 
This  improved 
Asset  program  was  said  to  be more “realistic”  prospect fo r  manned re- 
(M&R ,  6/15/64,  10) 
entry  vehicle  than  canceled Dyna-Soar project. 
June 8:  NASA  Deputy Administrator  Hugh L,  Dryden announced to newsmen 
the  bilateral  agreement  negotiated  between  US. and  U.S.S.R.  in  June 
1962  (the “Dryden-Blagonravov Agreement”),  by  which  the two  coun- 
tries would cooperate in  space programs  fo r  communications, meteorol- 
ogy,  and  geophysics,  was  discussed  by  him  and  Academician  Blagon- 
ravov  at Geneva.  Cooperation in  Soviet-American communications for 
global meteorology was to  be implemented by  the two  countries’ sharing 
costs  equally,  each  supporting  the  program  in  alternate  months;  a 
bilaterally  financed  communications link  between  Moscow  and  Wash- 
ington  was  to  be  solely  for  the  purpose  of  exchanging cloud  pictures. 
The  1962  agreement  grew  out  of  correspondence ,between  President 
Kennedy and  Chairman Khrushchev in  Feb.  and March  1962.  Dryden 
and  Blagonravov  also  discussed American-Soviet cooperation  in  space 
biology.  Agreement  was  reached,  subject  to   review  before  final  ap- 
proval,  by  which  American  and  Soviet space biologists  would  prepare 
bilingual reports on similar subjects. 
Soviets had  proposed  cooperation  in  biology  and  medicine,  both  of 
which  had  great  bearing  on  manned  space  flight  when  exploration 
(Wash.  Post,  6/9/64;  NASA  Tran- 
extended  beyond  the  moon. 
script, 6 /8 /a [  21  “Background Information,”  “News Conference.”) 
*  NASA  announced  industry  design  competition  for  Automated  Biological 
Laboratory  (ABL)   for  detecting possible life  on  Mars.  An  ABL  would 
be  landed  by  Voyager  spacecraft to  be  flown  in  1970’s.  Proposals  re- 
sulting  from  preliminary  studies would  lead  to  contract  for  a  one-year 
effort  to  review  scientific  objectives,  define  an  experimental  payload 
suitable  for  landing  and  operation  on  Mars,  and  establish  spacecraft 
and  launch  vehicle  requirements.  ABL  would  incorporate  several  life- 
detection  devices  still  in   developmental stages  and  would  be  equipped 
to  analyze  and  describe  any  organisms  discovsred  by  such  devices. 
(NASA Release 64-134) 
*  It was  reported  that  technicians had  experienced some difficulty returning 
to  their  spacecraft couches  during  test  designed to  see how  well  astro- 
nauts  would  be  zble  to  perform  certain  functions  in   weightless  space 
flight.  The tests were  performed  inside  a mockup of  a  Gemini capsule 
meunted  in a KC-135 flown to  produce short periods  of  weightlessness. 
The difficulty was caused by pressure suits swollen by pressurization and 
couches designed  to   fit  the  astronaut  only  when  his  suit  was  not  pres- 
surized.  Dr. M.  Debrovner  of  MSC said  that  the  difficulty would  soon 
be overcome.  (Houston Post, 6/9/64) 

in  a  miniature 

e  Federal  investigators  and  a n   attorney  from  the  NLRB  were  dispatched to  
Cape  Kennedy  to  seek  a  solution  to  labor  troubles  which  halted  work 
on  America’s  programs  for  landing  on  the  moon  and  fo r   orbiting  a 
manned  space laboratory.  An  estimated 80% of  workers on  the  Verti- 
cal  Assembly  Building  for  Project  Apollo  and   the  launch  complex for 
the USAF’S  Titan 111 refused t 
icket lines thrown u p  by  the  Broth- 
erhood of  Maintenance of  Wa 
yees in protest to use of  a Govern- 
tment-owned  railroad  spur which had  been  operated since Jan. 23,  1963, 
by  nonunion  personnel.  Cost  of  the  projects affected by  the work  halt 
was estimated at $215 million.  (Ch ic .  Tr ib . ,  6/9/64;  Balt. SUR ,  6/9/64) 
ComSatCorp said it would award three additional study contracts fo r  design 
of  communications satellites  systems.  AT&T  and  RCA  would  design  a 
system of  18 satellites to  be placed in  random  orbits.  TRW  Space Tech- 
nology  Laboratories  would  engineer  a  system  of  12  satellites  in   con- 
trolled  orbits.  Hughes Aircraft  would plan  an  improved  synchronous- 
orbit  communications  satellite.  Based  on  these  preliminary  studies,  a 
choice  was  to  be  made  for  use  in  the  initial  comsat  system  to  begin 
operation  in   1966-67. 
(ComSatCorp Release;  Wash. Post,  6/9/64; 
Balt. Sun, 6/9/64;  NYT ,  6/9/@,  25) 
0  A daughter  was  born to  Soviet Cosmonauts Valentina Nikolayeva-Teresh- 
kova  and Andrian Nikolayev.  She was first child t o  be born of  parents 
(Houston Chron., 
who had flown in space, and no i l l  effects were noted. 
.  6/10/64;  Balt. Sun, 6 / 1 1 / a )  
Nuclear  submarine Daniel Webster completed  a  perfect  series  of  tests  by 
firing  two Polaris A-3  missiles from beneath the surface of  the Atlantic. 
(Wash. Post, 6/9/64+) 
June  9 :   George  M .   Low,  NASA  MSC  deputy  director,  said  all  pilots  in 
Projects  Gemini  and  Apollo  would  be  astronauts  trained  by  NASA  fo r  
its own manned space projects.  Brig.  Gen.  Bleymaier  ( USAF) , in  inter- 
views at Houston, had previously said he  thought pilots selected by USAF, 
whose  M O L  project  he  heads,  would  participate  in  Apollo  and  Gemini 
in  order  to  acquire  experience  for  the  M O L  project.  Without  NASA 
training  for  its  astronauts,  USAF  would  have  to  orbit  its men  without 
previous space flight experience or launch its own Gemini training flights. 
(Maloney, Houston Post, 6/10/@;  Houston Chron., 6/10/64) 
Managing  underwriters  of  ComSatCorp’s 10-million-share public  offering 
at $20 a share announced the offering was oversubscribed and the books 
closed.  Thus  ComSatCorp had  enough  money  to  launch  the  fleet  of 
satellites that  was  expected  to  be  handling  global  communications by 
1967.  ( W S I ,  6/9/64;  NYT ,  6/12/64,  47) 
*  A  new  British  jet,  the  Hawker-Siddeley DH-125,  was  expected  to  be  the 
first of  five new  models of  aircraft  to  get  government approval  fo r  use 
as  a  private  passenger  carrier.  The  new  small  jets  were  being  built 
fo r  the business executive market.  The British plane was to cost $750,000 
and  fly  about 500 mph. 
(N Y T ,  6/9/64) 

210 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 

June  9 :   Soviet Ministry  of  Defense  said  Pentagon  was  spying  on  Russian 
military  and space installations in Moscow,  via radio and radar monitor- 
ing stations on borders of U.S.S.R.  and other Socialist nations and satel- 
lites.  Allegation  called  for  increased  Soviet  vigilance  against  such 
espionage.” 
American  embassy  in  Moscow  called  statement  “non- 
L L  
( N Y T ,  6/11/64,10) 
sense.” 
AFSC  reported  completion  of  a  portable  hydrogen-fire  detector,  for  use 
with  the  volume  of  hydrogen  anticipated  with  future  space  boosters. 
The  unit  detected ultraviolet radiation  emanating  from  invisible hydro- 
gen flame.  ( AFSC  Release 43-89-67) 
June 10: NASA launched an Aerobee rocket from White Sands Missile Range, 
N.  Mex.,  to  a  height  of  95 mi.  The  payload,  an  inflatable paragliaer 
equipped with mylar-sandwich-type meteoroid penetration  sensors, was 
flown  in  a  meteoroid shower  to  investigate meteoroid hazards  in  space. 
Experiment  performed  as  planned,  vehicle  worked  successfully,  and 
(M& R ,   6/15/64,  10;  NASA Release  66141, 
payload  was  recovered. 
641135) 
Nike-Apache  launched  from  Wallops  Islarid,  Va.,  to  90.6-mi.  altitude,  in 
flight  to  detect  quiet-day  ionospheric  electric  currents  using  for  first 
time  a  very  small  rubidium  vapor  magnetometer  designed  fo r   use 
in  small  rockets.  Experiment  was  project  of  NASA  Goddard  Space 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
Flight Center. 
Tass  reported  Soviet Union  had  launched  COSMOS XXXII,  latest  satellite in 
series  of  launches  initiated  in   March  1962.  Initial  orbit:  333-km 
apogee  (206.9  mi.),  209-km.  perigee  (130.5  mi.),  89.78-min.  period, 
and 51.28O  inclination t o  the  equator.  COSMOS XXXII  re-entered earth’s 
in  MSFC  S I N ,   7/64;  GSFC 
atmosphere  June  18. 
(P ravda ,   6/11/64, 
SSR, 6/30/64) 
Two-stage French  Rubis  rocket  reached  altitude  of  1,800 km.  (1,118.49 
mi.)  in launch  from Hammaguir  base.  First  stage of  Rubis was  Agate 
rocket  and  second  stage was  third  stage  of  France’s  satellite  launcher 
Diamant.  (M&R ,  6/29/64,12) 
A  Japanese  astronomer  of  the  Kurashika  Astronomical  Observatory  ob- 
served  a  new  comet.  It  had  been  earlier  sighted  by  a n   observer  at 
Tokyo Astronomical Observatory on June 7,  as well a s  by  an Australian. 
On  June  9,  Soviet  astronomer  Anatoli  Bakharev  discovered  what  was 
described as  a  9th-magnitude comet moving rapidly  with  respect to  the 
(AP,  N Y T ,  6/15/64;  Pravda,  6/13/64,  6,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
stars. 
American  Institute  fo r   Biological  Sciences expressed  concern  that  NASA 
was  not  giving  sufficiently high  priority  to  the  investigation  of  extra- 
terrestrial  life.  The  Institute,  a  federation  of  biologists,  said  NASA 
should  begin planning  a  project  for  detection of  possible  life  on  Mars 
when  the  planet  comes  into  favorable  position  in  1969.  Search  fo r  
extraterrestrial  life  also  was  advocated  by  NAS Space  Science  Board 
nearly  two  years  ago.  NASA  originally had  hoped  to  perform  the  Mars 
biology mission in  1964, but technical, scientific,  and political obstacles 
delayed the attempt.  (Finney, N Y T ,  6/11/64,2;  Wash.  Pos t ,  6/11/64) 
NASA  announced  replacement  of  Dr.  Richard  B.  Morrison  by  Vincent  L. 
Johnson  a s  Director  of  Launch  Vehicle and Propulsion  Programs  Div. 
of  Office  of  Space  Science  and  Applications,  effective  June  14.  Dr. 
Morrison wa s  to  return to Univ.  of Michigan where he had been on leave 
of  absence  as Prof.  of  Astronautical  Engineering  since  1962.  (NASA 
Release 64-136) 

21 1 
ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 
June  10: Rep.  Roman  C.  Pucinski  ( D A I . )   called  attention  to  CBS broad- 
cast  by  correspondent  Stuart  Novins  in   which  he  discussed Soviet  ef- 
forts to provide  an efficient system for the  retrieval  of  data  from  scien- 
I n   the  Soviet Union’s  Institute  of  Scientific and  Tech- 
tific  research. 
nical  Information,  thousands  of  specialists read  the Scientific literature 
and  abstract  the   contents  of  scientific  publications  from  around  the 
world.  Last  year  they  abstracted  the  contents of  770,000 reports,  and  
it was  decided  to  publish  an  annual  s umm a r y   of  world-wide scientific 
results,  an achievement  probably  of  the  widest  scope  yet  attained  in 
retrieval of  scientific information.  ( C R Y  6/10/M,  A3174) 
Rep.  Roman  C.  Pucinski  (D.411.)  called  attention  to  an  article  in  the 
Chicago Sun-Times on  the Midwest’s  dissatisfaction with  the  distribu- 
tion  of  Federal  R ~ D  projects.  President’s  science adviser  Dr.  Donald 
F. Hornig said two  Congressional committees were  investigating wheth- 
er  research  contract  funds  had  been  concentrated  in  too  few  areas  of 
the  country  to  the  detriment  of  other  regions.  Dr.  Hornig  also  said 
tha t   th i s   investigation  showed  that  science  can  no  longer  ignore  the  
political process.  (CRY  6/10/64,  A3138) 
*  House  and  Senate  received  from  NASA  Administrator  reports  on  a  grant 
to Cornell Univ.  of  $1,350,000  for construction of  facilities for research. 
Reports  were   referred  to   the  twa  Congressional  space  committees. 
(NASA  LAR,  III/116) 
*  I n  answer to Air Transport Assoc. president Stuart 6. Tipton’s disapproval 
of  FAA’s policy  of  publicizing  its  test  plane  crashes, FAA Administrator 
N.  E.  Halaby  said  FAA  would  continue  informing  the  public  on  its 
safety  research.  Tipton  had  said  the  publicity  “scared  the   daylights 
(Wash.  Eve.  Star,  6/11/64) 
out  of  people.” 
*  American  scientists  began  a  two-year  experiment  a t   the  South  Polar  ice 
cap in which they would study c om i c  rays of  solar  and galactic  origin. 
Located  a t  the  South Pole  so  that  the  same background  of  stars would 
be  present  a t  all  times,  experiment  was  to   investigate  any  regularities 
in  solar  outbursts  of  cosmic  rays,  as  well  a s   reason  for  cosmic  rays 
from  sun  and  galaxy.  Cosmic  rays  could  be  lethal  to  astronauts. 
(Wash. Eve. Star, 6/10/64) 
*  US. Army  Missile  Command  awarded  contract  to  Perkin-Elmer  CO. 
for  Optical  Re-entry  Instrumentation  System,  Project  Glow,  which 
would gather  “signature”  data  from vehicles re-entering  cprth’s  atmos- 
phere, in various wavelengths.  Program to use system was  being  spon- 
sored  by  ARPA, a s   part  of  Project  Defender,  and  by  Army  Materiel 
(Marshall  Star,  6/10/64,  7 )  
Command’s  Nike-Zeus  Project  Office. 
*  First of improved H-1  engines, whose thrust had  been upped from  188 ,OOO  
lbs.  to  200,000  lbs.,  were delivered  recently  by  North  American  Avia- 
tion’s  Rocketdyne Division  to   NASA  Michoud  Operations.  Cluster  of 
eight H-1  engines was to improve thrust of  Saturn booster,  augmenting 
thrust  of  1.5 million Ibs.  for  Saturn  I  to  1.6 million Ibs.  fo r  Saturn  IB. 
(Marshall Star, 6/10/M,  1) 
*  Gen.  B.  A.  Schriever  (USAF) ,   Commander  AFSC, at  a  10th  anniversary 
commemoration  of  USAF  ballistic  missile  and  space  programs,  said 
Communist  drives  toward  world  domination  presented  challenge  to 
U S .   to  maintain  technological superiority  a s  war  deterrent.  At  same 
time  we  should  develop military  flexibility  to  deal  with  conflict  levels 
I n   future  such  flexibility  would  be  provided  by 
below  all-out  war. 

212 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

manned  aircraft  of  novel  design,  to  be   used  for  support  as well  a s  
actual fighting. 
Next  step  in  space  would  be  to  investigate  military  strategy  of 
manned  space  flight.  This  was  a  major  purpose  o f   USAF’S  recently 
acquired  mission  of  developing  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (MOL). 
Another  possibility  to  investigate would  be  recovering  used  boosters 
to   save  new  construction  costs.  “This  would  be  a  very  important 
( AFSC  Release  46-R- 
building block  for  future operations  in  space.” 
72)  
June 10:  Soviet aviatrix Marina  Popovich,  wife  of  Cosmonaut Pave1 POPO- 
vich,  flew  a  jet  trainer  at  speeds  of  600 km/hr  (373  mph)  , 5 km.  (3.1 
mi.)  above  the  ground.  This  was  said  to   be   an  excellent  result  for  
(Zzvestia, 6/12/64,4,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
such a light aircraft as  the 6 2 9 .  
June  11:  NASA  announced  plans  to  let  contracts  for  improving  thrust  of 
Delta  launch  vehicles.  Boosted  energy  was  to  have  been  achieved 
by  enlarging 2nd-stage  fuel  tanks.  Some Deltas  to  be modified  would 
use three solid-propellant motors  strapped to  the Thor main  stage, being 
called  Thrust  Augmented  Deltas  ( T A D ) .   With  larger  tanks,  TADS 
could  place  1,200 Ibs.  into  earth  orbit  or  225  lbs.  into  escape  velocity, 
as   compared  to  100 lbs.  for  standard  Delta. 
(NASA  Release  64-133) 
*  Goodyear  Aerospace  Corp.  developed  solar  collector  for  USAF.  The 
4-story-high  mirror,  to   be  used  in  tests  of  electricity  sources  for 
manned space station, was capable of  setting fire to buildings or  blinding 
(Wash.  Eve.  Star,  6/11/64) 
people  with  a  single flash of  sunlight. 
0  1.5 million-lb.-thrust S-1-8  Saturn booster  was successfully  fired in  a  full- 
duration  static  test  a t   MSFC.  Built  by  Chrysler  Corp.  a t   Michoud 
Operations plant  near  New  Orleans, the booster  was  the  first to be pro- 
(AP, 6/12/64) 
duced by private  industry. 
0  Cook Electric Co., Chicago, unveiled a $2 million observatory to be included 
in NASA’s first Oao.  Cook built  the equipment  for  NASA  under  contract 
to  Univ.  of  Wisconsin,  where  astronomers  were  planning  observations 
in the f a r  ultraviolet region  of  the spectrum. 
(Houston  Post, 6 /12 /64)  
*  In  an address to Plans for Progress Seminar, NASA  Administrator  James E. 
Webb  said  American  success  in  space  technology  represented  several 
accomplishments and  potentialities:  we  can  make  benefits available  to 
other nations; space achievements are  vital  in maintaining technological 
balance  of  world  power;  and  it  gives  opportunity  for  utilizing  all  ou r  
human  resources  in  carrying  ou t   the  broad-gauge programs  necessary 
for  making  significant inputs  into  space knowledge,  regardless  of  race, 
creed, o r  color. 
(Text) 
0  A  Federal court ban on picketing of  railroad workers a t  Cape Kennedy  that 
was issued June  10 went  into effect, and construction of  the  Saturn and 
Titan  I11  launch facilities resumed.  3,824  members  of  building  trades 
union effected the work stoppage.  The District Judge who handed  down 
(AP ,  
the  temporary  injunction  also  scheduled  a  hearing  with  NLRB. 
6/11/64?; UPI,  Houston Chron.,  6/11/64) 
NASA  MSC  officials  announced  first Gemini  spacecraft for  a manned  space- 
flight  (GT-3)  had  passed  design  and  engineering  inspections;  project 
manager Charles W. Mathews declared  i t  would  perform  its mission  in 
(Houston  Chron.,  6/11/64;  MSC  Roundup, 
satisfactory  fashion. 
6/24/64,8) 

213 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4 
June 11  : House Appropriations Committee cut off  developmental funds for the 
AX’S  Pluto  low-flying,  nuclear-powered  missile,  proposing  the  missile 
be mothballed until DOD  decided whether  it needed the weapon.  Having 
gone  through  nearly  10  years  of  development  costing  $196  million, 
Pluto was nearing the  flight stage.  The committee provided  $1 million 
to  mothball  it.  AEC  had  requested  $8  million  additional  funds  to  get 
(Finney, NYT,  6/12/64,  1 , 2 3 )  
the missile to operating stage. 
NASA  announced  appointment  of  two  directors  in  Advanced  Manned 
M.  J.  Raffensperg 
Missions Program, Office of  Manned Space Flight. 
assumed duties last week  a s  Director  of  Manned Earth Orbital M i s s iox  
Studies.  F.  P.  Dixon  would  become  Director  of  Manned  Planetary 
Mission Studies on June 15. 
(NASA  Release 6 6 1 3 7 )  
June 12: It was  reported  that  the Atlas ICBM  program had  cost  $5.4  billion 
for  129 Atlases. 
In  the  closing  year  of  his  administration  President 
Eisenhower  had  objected  to  the  $35 million  cost  of  each  Atlas  on  the 
(Wash. Eve. Star, 6/12/64) 
launching pad. 
Soviet  Defense  Ministry  newspaper  reported  a  trainee  cosmonaut  had 
narrow  escape  recently  when  he  jumped  with  defective  parachute. 
(AP, 6/12/64) 
NASA  intended  to  award  contracts fo r  studying  feasibility of  improving  the 
weight-lifting capacity  of  the  Saturn V  by  more  than  one third  in  case 
the needs of  the moon program dictated such an  increase.  Preliminary 
studies were  to  cost  about $2 million.  Proposals  were being  sought  by 
MSFC.  With i ts  7.5-million-lb.-thrust booster, Saturn V would be able to 
launch  either  120 tons  into  earth  orbit  or  45  tons  to  the moon. 
(AP, 
6/12/64;  NASA Release 6 6 1 4 0 )  
J u n e  13:  USAF  launched  Thor-Agena  D  booster  combination  with  unidenti- 
(AP,  Chic. Trib., 6/14/64; 
fied  satellite  payload  into  a  polar  orbit. 
UPI,  rash. Post, 6/14/64) 
launch  vehicles:  “. . . In   any  head-to-head  clash between  the  two  pro- 
Space editor James J. Haggerty,  Jr.,  compared  Saturn IB  and Titan  111-C 
grams,  Saturn IB  must  be  considered  the favorite.  Titan 111-C’s  quick 
reaction  capability  may  be  handy  some  day,  but  not  in  the  next  few 
years,  since there are  no  military manned  spacecraft to do the  reacting. 
Saturn IB  starts out with  a 25%  payload  advantage and  i t  has consider- 
ably more ‘stretchability.’  For instance, adding the same 120-inch solid 
motors  i n   the Titan  111-C  design  to  the  Saturn  IB’s  lower  stage would 
permit  boosting  65,000  pounds  into  a  100-mile  earth  orbit.  Other 
improvements  being  considered  could  give  IB  a  120,000-pound  earth 
orbit capability. 
“Thus, Saturn IB poses a threat to  continued  development of  the only 
( A - W A F   J&R ,  6/13/64,  15 )  
heavy  payload  military  launch  vehicle. 
It was reported  that former astronaut John Glenn had recovered sufficiently 
from  his  inner  ear  ailment  to  work  in  his  yard  and  walk  around  the 
(Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/13/64) 
neighborhood. 
Resolution of  the policy committee of  Cornell-Guggenheim Aviation Safety 
Center,  headed  by   former  FAA  Administrator Elwood  R.  Quesada, was 
inserted in Congressional Record:  
“(  1 )   That the Government agencies and the broad  aviation  industry 
recognize  and  avoid  the  danger  and  economic waste  that  could  result, 
if  the  exacting  technological  task  of  developing  a  sound  supersonic 
transport were permitted  EO become a  race to  be first o r  a psychology of 
haste. 

214 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

“ (2 )   That the pressures of  prestige and competition not be  permitted 
to  overcome the  more  worthy  considerations  of  public  safety  and  eco- 
nomic logic. 
“(3)   That all design and economic factors be  deliberately tested and 
evaluated  to  assure  maximum  effectiveness of  the   solutions  selected to  
insure  that  the  end  product  be   first  in  point  of  excellence rather  than 
(CR, 6/13/64,13226) 
first in  point of  time.” 
June 13:  Johnson Administration was expected to postpone until next year a 
decision  as  to  whether  the  U.S.  should  establish  antimissile  defenses 
around  the  country  in  a  $15  billion  program,  as  advocated  by  Gen. 
Maxwell D.  Taylor  (USA ) .   Such a  defense system would work  in  con- 
junction  with  civil  defense  facilities.  Question  seemed  to  be  whether 
( N Y T ,  
proposed  system7s  effectiveness  wo dd   warrant  the  cost. 
6/14/64,72) 
June 14: Space Pa rk  at New  York World’s Fair, sponsored by  NASA and DOD, 
had not  turned  out to  be a prominent  drawer  of  crowds, although those 
who  visited found  it  one of  the most  instructive and  rewarding  exhibits 
( N Y T ,  6/14/64,79) 
at the Fair. 
Sen. Gaylord Nelson  (D.-Wis.)  said General Accounting Office had, in spot 
audits  of  military  financial  records,  discovered almost  $500 million  of 
Included  in   the  alleged  waste  was  Navy’s  ordering  of  24  air- 
waste. 
craft  to  be built  before  satisfactory model  had been  developed and con- 
tract  monies  paid  by  military  to   builders  of  planes  and  missiles  who, 
doing no work themselves, made profits on work done by  subcontractors. 
(Houston Post, 6/15/64) 
*  Dr.  Abe  Silverstein, Director of  NASA  Lewis Research  Center, was  awarded 
honorary Doctor  of  Applied Science degree by  Fenn College, Cleveland, 
0.  (Lew is  News, 6 / 1 9 / a ,   2 )  
June  15:  FRC  test-flew modified  X-15  No.  2  with  Maj.  Robert  Rushworth 
(USAF)   as pilot,  the  aircraft  remaining  attached  to B-52  mother  craft 
for  airborne  checkout  of  the  aircraft  systems.  Flight  was  first  for this 
X-15  since  Nov.  1962  landing  accident.  Modifications,  completed  by 
North American Aviation,  included four astronomical cameras mounted 
on  fuselage,  designed to  take  stellar  photographs  above ozone  layer  of 
earth’s  atmosphere,  and  external  propellant  tanks  which  would  enable 
engine to  increase top  speed by  at least 1,000 mph, to a maximum speed 
(FRC   Release  15-64;  NASA  Release  64-138) 
over  5,000  mph. 
*  NASA’s leading 12 contractors  issued $1,027,000,000 in subcontracts during 
1962  and  1963  to  2,697  firms  in  46  states,  Aviation  Week  reported. 
( A v .  Pk., 6/15/64,71) 
FAA  fire  tests  began  in   cooperation’ with  USAF  at  FAA’s National  Aviation 
Facilities  Experimental  Center  to  determine  whether  rotor  downwash 
from  helicopters can  disperse flames and  cool the  fuselage of  a crashed 
and  burning  plane.  Five  surplus  USAF  Stratocruisers were  burned  in 
(FAA Release G 6 2 )  
the  tests. 
0  NASA  granted  nine  companies  16  waivers  of  U.S.  commercial  rights  to 
inventions that resulted from work performed on NASA contracts, bringing 
to  90 the  number  of  patent  waivers  granted  by  NASA. 
(NASA  Release 
64-141 ) 
NASA  Summer Faculty Fellowships, a unique 10-wk. summer program, began 
at  Lew is   Research  Center.  The  12  Fellows,  all  young  professors  and 
instructors  in   engineering  and   the  physical  sciences, would  work  on 

Q 

Q 

Q 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

215 

and  would  attend  a  special  graduate 
a t   Case  Institute  of  Tech- 
June  15:  William  G.  Gisel,  President  of  Bell  Aerosystems  Co,,  said  before 
N.Y.  Society of Newspaper Editors, Niagara Falls: “I cannot contemplate 
the space exploration project  . . . without a tremendous  surge of  pride 
We  are  going to  the stars, gentlemen. 
in the human  race. 
The human 
race  will travel  to  the  planets  and,  in  time,  to  other  solar  systems  and 
in  doing so  will  fan the  spark  of  greatness which  in  spite of  ourselves 
has  carried  u s   from the  cave  to  the   threshhold  of  space.  Man  can  go 
to  the  moon  in  this decade.  The  important  question  is,  will  it  be  an 
(NASA R&SC  Div.) 
American?” 
June 15-16:  U.S.  began  exploratory  talks  in  Geneva with  U.S.S.R.  on  the 
use of  artificial satellites in  a global communications system.  This was 
first talk between American and Soviet representatives to  discuss possible 
Russian  participation. 
Informed  sources  in  Geneva  said  the  Soviets 
were  friendly  but  showed  no  current  interest  in  a  global  satellite corn- 
I n   joint  communique  a t   end  of  two  days  of  ex- 
munications  scheme. 
ploratory talks,  Soviet and American  officials said only that  “both  sides 
recognize  the  usefulness  of  the  exchange  of  opinions.”  No   future 
Simons,  Wash .   Post, 
(N Y T ,   6]16/64; 
meeting  was  scheduled. 
6/17/64;  M&R ,   6/22/64,  10; NYT ,   6/18/64) 
June  16:  NASA ordered  a third Oao  (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory)  and 
took  a n   option  on  two  more,  from  Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering 
If  only one satel- 
Corp.,  prime contractor  for the current Oao program. 
$lite were  purchased  the  contract would  be  more  than  $20 million, and 
i f   all three were purchased  the contract would  total  more  than  $50 mil- 
( NASA  Release 64-142) 
lion. 
*  House  Subcommittee  on  NASA  Oversight  of  House  Committee  on  Science 
and Astronautics  issued a  report on its hearings  on  the repeated  failures 
in the Ranger  spacecraft program.  The  committee concluded  that NASA 
provided  too  little  direction  on  Ranger,  while  JPL   was  too  resistant  to 
following NASA orders when they were issued. 
To  strengthen  management  over  JPL,  the  committee  recommended : 
( 1  )  JPL   should  be  restricted  to  doing  the work  of  a center  rather  than 
that  of  an  industrial  contractor;  ( 2 )  a  general  manager  with  industrial 
experience should be  appointed  as  deputy t o  JPL  director  to be  in charge 
of  complex  projects  such  as  Ranger;  (3)  NASA  should  streamline  its 
relationship  to  JPL   to   achieve  JPL   responsiveness  to  NASA  direction. 
(Text;  Finney,  NYT ,  6/17/64;  Wush. Pos t ,  6 / 1 7 / a )  
*  Scientist R. M.  Lemmon  told lunar exploration  symposium a t   MSC that  he 
would  recommend  officially  that  astronauts  returning  from  trips  t o  the 
moon  be  quarantined  for  a t   least  three  weeks  “for  the  protection  of 
everybody.”  He  said  that  astronauts  might  pick  up   disease-causing 
organisms  during  their  stay  on  the  moon  “which  may  be  totally  dif- 
(Wash. Post, 6/17/64) 
ferent  from  anything we  have here on earth.” 
*  Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  NASC  Executive Secretary, dedicated J4 propulsion 
engine  test  cell  a t  Arnold  Engineering  Development  Center.  He  said: 
“In   recent  years,  there  has   been  much  talk  about  a  ‘space  race’. 
There  is such  a  race  and  we  should  not  forget  it  for  a  minute.  How- 
ever,  we  must  not  let  the pace  of  ou r  national space program  be deter- 
mined jus t  by  the  actions of  others.  Actually,  the real  opponent  in the 

216 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 41 
space race is time.”  We must continue ‘ 
and   “recognize  the  importance  to   the 
quate technical facilities.” 
I n   answer  to  reporters’  questions  following  dedication,  Dr.  Welsh 
said  the  U.S.S.R.  still  led  the  US. in  the  space race  and  was  speeding 
(Text; Clark, NYT,  6/17/@) 
up its program. 
June 16:  Western Materials Co.  was  awarded  a  $1,178,517  contract  by  the 
Army Corps of  Engineers fo r  construction of  roads at NASA’s Mississippi 
(DOD  Release 6 4 - 6 4 )  
Test Facility. 
*  FAA  announced  plans  to   celebrate  the  formal  beginning  of  postwar  inter- 
national  cooperation  in  civil  aviation  twenty  years  ago.  I t   was  in 
November  1944  that  the  U.S.  convened  the  International  Civil  Avia- 
tion Conference in Chicago, resulting in the Convention of  International 
Civil Aviation signed by the 52 attending nations. 
(FAA  Release 64-60) 
J u n e   17:  Space  and  Information  Div.  of  North  American  Aviation,  Inc., 
announced that  it would  lay  off  workers a t  a rate that would  total  2,500 
firings by  July  1, 19M, as a  result of  “continuing  studies of  changes in 
the  moon  program.”  But  a  NASA  spokesman  said  the  reduction  was  
caused by  termination  of  the  tooling-up phase  and  start  of  the produc- 
(Wash. Eve. Star, 6/18/64) 
tion phase in Project Apollo. 
0  FAA announced  award  of  $1,659,460 contract  to  Raytheon  Co.  to  design, 
develop,  and  manufacture  data-filter  equipment  to   give  the  air  trafEc 
controller  a  means  of  selecting out  desired  information  f o r   dispIay  on 
his  radarscope.  Delivery  of  the  equipment  would  be  completed  in 
March 1965. 
(FAA Release 69-59) 
NASA  announced  it  had  selected  Collins Radio  co .   fo r   procurement  of  a 
major  portion  of  the  S-band  tracking,  data  acquisition,  and  communi- 
cations  system  to  be  used  in  Project  Apollo.  Nine  systems with  30-ft.- 
diameter parabolic  antennas we re  to  be provided,  at  a  cost  of  approxi- 
(NASA Release 68-146) 
mately $20 million. 
0  NASA  purchased  hingeless rotor  helicopter, the XH-51N  Research Vehicle, 
from  Lockheed Aircraft  Gorp.  for  use in  flight  research  at  LaRc.  The 
cost  would  be  $556,158.  I t   would  be  used  a s   a  flying  laboratory  to 
assess  the  loads  and  flying qualities  problems  that  a r e  likely  to  be  en- 
countered  by  operational  aircraft  of  the  hingeless  rotor  type. 
(NASA  
Release 6P-147; LaRc Release) 
*  XC-142A  V/Stol  aircraft,  built  by  Ling-Temco-Vought for  the  Army, 
USN,  and  USAF,  was  unveiled  in  Dallas.  The  aircraft’s  four  turboprop 
engines act  like  helicopter rotors  for  takeoff  and  landing, when  the air- 
craft’s  wings  a re   tilted.  Once  aloft,  the  aircraft  flies with  wings  and 
propellers in conventional position and attains top speed of  over 400 mph. 
(U.S. New s ,   6/29/64.) 
NASA  announced  Purdue  Univ.  had  been  awarded  grant  of  $84+0,000 
to  finance  expansion  of  Purdue’s  Jet  Propulsion  Center.  The  con- 
struction would enable Purdue to  conduct studies of  ultra  high pressure 
(NASA  Release  64-145) 
combustion  in  rocket  thrust  chambers. 
Scientists  from  the  U.S.  and  Norway  sent  three  gigantic  balloons  across 
the North Atlantic above the Arctic Circle to Alaska during the summer 
to  measure  cosmic  radiation  and  other  phenomena  a t   an  altitude  of 
(AP, NYT ,  6/19/64,16) 
115,OOOft. 
June 18: USAF launched Thor-Agena D  booster  from WTR with  unidentified 
It was later disclosed that  two satellites were orbited 
satellite payload. 
with one launch vehicle.  (HHN-48) 

9 

217 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4 
J zme  18: Lewis Research Center completed wind tunnel tests to study the aero- 
dynamic  forces which  would  occur  on  the launch  vehicle when Mariner 
(LRC   Release  6 4 S 5 )  
spacecraft  was  launched  toward  Mars. 
Edward  2.  Gray,  Director,  Advanced  Manned  Missions  Program,  Office 
of  Manned  Space  Flight,  addressed  the  National  Space  Club: 
“From  [the objectives of  the  Space Act of  19581, the objectives of  the 
Manned  Space  Flight  Program  a re   .  . derived.  They  are: 
“1.  The  conduct  of  manned  scientific space  flight  missions  . . . as  
an   integral  part  of  a  total  program  to  expand  our  knowledge  of  the 
universe. 
“2.  The  development of  launch  vehicles, spacecraft,  lunar  and  plan- 
etary  surface  equipment  . . . and  a  broad  foundation  of  industrial 
support,  all  of  which  a re   required  to   support  manned  space  flight. 
“3.  The  utilization  of  the  space environment  to  provide  direct  bene- 
f i ts to theear th .   , . . 
“4.  The  application  of  manned  space  flight activities to  promote  the 
national  security  and  to  stimulate  the  national  economy,  scientific 
achievement, technological growth, and educational capability.” 
(Text) 
e  USAF  fired  Atlas-D  5,000 miles  downrange  from  Vandenberg  AFB  a s  par t  
of  an   advanced  re-entry  systems  rogram,  and  indicated  shot  was  suc- 
( UPI,  Wash. Eve. Star, 6/plS/64) 
cessful. 
NASA  granted  Dr.  George  Wharton,  Ohio  State  Univ.  scientist,  nearly 
$70,000 for a three-year research  program to determine  the least amount 
(Wash. Daily News, 6/18/64) 
of  water  necessary to sustain earth life. 
0  Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  NASC  Executive Secretary,  delivered an  address  on 
occasion  of  the Martin  Co.  Honors Night  Banquet.  He  suggested  that 
private  industry  was  not  doing  its  share  in  the  job   of  educating  “the 
public  to  the value,  the significance of  space progress, space  leadership, 
I t   should  not  be  possible fo r   anyone  to  take seri- 
and  space  benefits. 
ously  the public diatribes against the national space program.  Anyone 
who knows anything about ‘crash programs’ or the space program would 
never  talk  [about  ‘moondoggle’] .  Crash  programs  have  unlimited 
funds, unlimited  overtime, and parallel approaches to  the end  objective. 
None of  these aspects applies to  the space program  o r  even  to  the lunar 
project.” 
Dr. Welsh said that in educating the general public, the contribution of 
the  space  program  to  education,  national  security,  technological  and 
managerial  innovations, international status,  and  the  national economy 
should  be  emphasized.  He  concluded:  “The  national  space  program 
is  a  creative  force  in  o u r   society.  As  we  marshal  o u r   progressive 
strengths,  let  us  use  them  to   stamp out  the  evils  of  ignorance  and  mis- 
. .”  (Text) 
understanding. 
*  AFSC  revealed  a  device  known  as  RMU   (Remote  Maneuvering  Un i t) ,  
which  is designed  to  be  launched  from a  manned  orbiting mother  craft 
and carries a television camera to examine other nearby  objects in space. 
The RMU  would televise its image to  the crew  of  the mother  ship.  Built 
by  Ling-Temco-Vought, the device weighed  less than  125 lbs.  and meas- 
ured  less than  21/-ft.  long.  I t   is  propelled  by  a  nitrogen  reaction  gas 
ejected  from  one  o r   more  of  16  nozzles  on  the  RMU. 
(AFSC  Release 
42-43-76) 
NASA  issued  list  of  its  Technology  Utilization  publications,  designed  to 
acquaint the public with useful innovations from space research. 
(NASA 
Release 64-149  ) 
76B-598  ih-6&--15 

218 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6  4 
June  19: TIROS VII completed one year  in  orbit with all components working 
as  well  as the day  it was  launched.  During the  past  year,  the  satellite 
transmitted  about  70,000 pictures  to  earth,  90 per  cent of  them  usable. 
and  spotted  16 hurricanes  and  typhoons. 
(NASA  Release  64-144) 
President  Johnson  was  shown  lunar  landing  research  vehicle  and  X-15 
during visit  to   Edwards AFB.  It  was  first  public  showing  of  the   lunar 
craft.  The  President  said:  “No  one  can  come  here  and  doubt  that 
America  is,  and  will  remain,  first  in  the  world  in  the  strength,  the  di- 
(N . Y .  Her.  Trib.,  6/20/64) 
versity,  and  the  genius  of  i ts   defense.” 
*  USAF  launched  Thor-Agena D  booster  from WTR  with  undisclosed  satellite 
payload. 
( F IHN - 4 8 )  
0  Navy  dedicated  61-inch  astrometric  reflector  telescope  a t   Naval  Observa- 
Its  quartz  primary  mirror  was  largest  quartz 
tory,  Flagstaff,  Ariz. 
reflecting surface manufactured  to  date.  I t  would  be  used  primarily to 
(Wa sh .   Post, 
study  white  dwarf,  red  dwarf,  and  sub-dwarf  stars. 
6/18/64) 
Labor  Dept.’s  new  edition  of  government handbook  on  job   classifications 
was to  include 6,000  job  titles not  in existence when  the  last edition was 
published  several  years  before,  a  reflection  of  the  technological  up- 
(Houston  Post, 
heaval  which  had  occurred  in  science  and  industry. 
6/19/64) 
lune   20:  NASA  announced  that AC  Spark Plug Div.  of  General Motors Corp. 
would  become  the  prime  contractor  fo r   production  of  the  complete 
guidance  and  navigation  systems  for  Project  A p l l o .   Formerly,  in  the 
design  and development phase of  the systems, AC  shared  responsibility 
with  Kollsman  Instrument  and   Raytheon  Missile  and  Space Div.  The 
latter two  f i rm s  now become subcontractors to AC.  In  this realignment 
of  contractor  relationships,  Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate Ad- 
ministrator for Manned Space Flight, said : ‘ b .   . . i t  has been determined 
that  the  most  effective management  of  manufacturing  complete systems 
(NASA  Release 64-148) 
can  be  achieved  through  a  prime  contractor.” 
First  full-scale development  firing  of  uncooled  M-1  engine  was  cut  short 
after  1.6 seconds instead  of  the planned  three seconds  because  of  mal- 
function  in   the  liquid  oxygen  system.  The   engine  reached  800,OOO-lb. 
thrust  in  test  programed  for  1,000,000  lbs.  (Av. Wk., 6/29/64,  2 5 ;  
H&R ,  6 / 2 9 / a ,   11) 
0  Third  internationa1 working  conference on satellite communications ended 
in   London  after  three  days  of  consultation  between  delegates of  US . ,  
U.K.,  Canada,  Australia,  Japan,  and  European  nations.  Next  confer- 
( N Y T ,  6/22/64,45) 
ence would  be held  in Washington in July. 
0  USN  commissioned the guided missile sh ip  Nor ton  Sound a t  Baltimore, Md. 
For  1 2  years  previously  Norton  Sound  had  served  a s  a  seagoing  test 
platform  far   various missile  systems,  particularly  for  numerous  sound- 
(DOD Release 4 6 W )  
ing rocket and “Rockoon”  launches. 
June 21 : Ranger 7 arrived  a t  Cape Kennedy  after  cross-country tr ip  by  van 
from  JPL.  Spacecraft  was  to  undergo  series  of  tests with  Atlas-Agena 
launch  vehicle before the planned  launch  in late July o r  August. 
(NASA 
Release  64-152) 
France planned  to  launch  a series of  constant-level balloon weather stations 
in  the southern hemisphere and a satellite t o  “interrogate”  them on their 
findings.  Named  Project Eole,  it was  scheduled  for  1967.  Up  to  256 
balloons  were  to   be  sent  aloft,  each  carrying  four  pounds  of  weather 
and  communications  equipment,  to   remain  a t   fixed  altitudes  between 

219 
A S TRONAU T IC S   AND  A ERONAU T IC S ,   1 9 6 4  
ft  for a t  least ten  days.  The French  satellite would 
twice during a single pass  overhead. 
(Simons, 
jects voted  by U.N. Special Fund was $582,000 
June 
grant  to  help  India  establish  a  satellite  tracking  station  and  perform 
(L.A.  Times, Wmh. Pos t ,  6/22/64) 
research  in space communications. 
June 22:  U.S. Senate passed H.R.  10456, autborizing $5,246,293,250  budget 
for NASA  in N 1965.  Included in this amount was $52,482,750 restored 
by  Senate Space  Committee from the  $110,189,500 reduction  made by 
the  House.  The bill would  authorize  $4,354,150,000  for  research  and 
development ; $262,880,500  for   construction  of  facilities;  and  $629,- 
262,750  for  administrative operations.  Bill  was  passed  by  voice vote, 
(CR ,  
was  reintroduced  two  days  later  for  record  vote  (see June 24) .  
6 / 2 2 / a ,   14069-78) 
*  NASA  announced  initiating Atlas  flox program, involving addition of  about 
30%  fluorine  to  the  rocket’s  oxidizer  to  obtain  "flax,)'  which  would 
significantly increase  booster  performance. 
In   first  phase  of  program 
possible  hazards  and  operation  problems  of  flox  would  be  studied, 
including  component  compatibility  tests  and  rocket engine  static-firing, 
a t   estimated  cost  of  $8  million.  Second  phase,  not  yet  funded, 
would  conclude with  R&D  launch  of  flox Atlas with  dummy upper  stage 
in  1966.  NASA  L ew i s   Research  Center  would  negotiate  contracts with 
GD/A  for  work  on  the Atlas and with  Rocketdyne Div.  of  NAA  for work 
(NASA Release 64-150) 
on the engines. 
0  First manned Gemini space flight  (GT-3)  was scheduled for late December, 
MSC  public  affairs  o5c ia l   Ben  Gillespie  told  reporters  a t   weekly  press 
(Maloney, Houston  Pos t ,  6/23/64?) 
briefing. 
0  NASA Wallops Station  announced  selection  of  General  Electric Co. to nego- 
tiate 21-month $1.5-million  contract for  real-time impact prediction  and 
data  processing  system.  The  system  would  enable  Wallops  Station  to 
more  accurately predict  impact  points  for  launch  vehicles  a t   any  time 
during flight a s  well  as  to process telemetry, radar,  and general purpose 
(NASA   Release 64-151; 
data  in larger quantities and a t  greater  speeds. 
Wallops Release  6d-50) 
0  Radiation hazards  to  Project  Apollo  astronauts bound  for the moon were 
described  at American  Medical Association  conference by  Dr.  Hermann 
J.  Schaefer,  scientist  a t   US. Naval  School  of  Aviation  Medicine.  Dr. 
Schaefer predicted  tha t  in 1969 proton  streams from the sun could range 
from deadly  “downpour”  to very  light  “showe~ .~’  He calculated chance 
of  lethal-dosage proton  stream  was  three in  10,OOO;  chance of  moderate 
but  incapacitating  “rain”  would  be  one  in  1,000;  and  chance  of  light 
“shower”  would  be  one  in  100.  Dr.  Schaefer  emphasized his  forecast 
was based on predictable solar behavior  and that the weather of  the sun, 
like  that  of  the earth,  could  be  unpredictable.  (Justice, Houston Po s t ,  
6/23/@) 
*  Communications  Satellite  Corp.  announced  it  had   filed  application  with 
FCC  for  authority to modify AT&T  ground station a t  Andover, Me.,  so  it 
could  be  used  with  ComSatCorp  synchronous  satellite  scheduled  for 
launch  in   March  1965.  The  application  requested  FCC  approval  of 
technical  characteristics  of  the  modified  station.  ComSatCorp  a lso  
filed proposed  agreement  with  AT&T f o r  modification  and  operation  of 
the  station. 
(ComSatCorp Release) 

220 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   198 4 

June 22:  NASA Flight Research Center Director Paul Bikle said in Missiles and 
Rockets  that  rocket  engines to  power  M-2  and  HL-LO  Iifting  bodies 
would accelerate the manned mockups to mach 2 for investigation of  their 
handling  characteristics.  “The  maximum  altitude  they  reach  will  not 
be  very  high,  maybe  70,OOO  o r   80,000  ft.” 
FRC  planned  to  select  the 
engine by  mid-July.  (M&R ,  6/22/64,20-21) 
Dr.  U r i   Shafrir,  head  of  cosmic  dust  and  hydrodynamics  labs  of 
UCLA,  conducted  drop  tests  under  NASA-NSF  grants  program.  Tests 
proved  Dr.  Shafrir’s  conviction  that  spherical  objects  descend  in  ir- 
regular  corkscrew  pattern  of  spirals  rather  than  straight  down. 
I n  
the three drops a t  Pt. Arguello, aluminum spheres 16-in. in diameter and 
10 lbs.  in weight were dropped from USN helicopter at 10,000-ft. altitude. 
As  the  spheres  descended,  plume  of  red  smoke  from  sphere  marked 
400-ft. width  in  the  spirals.  Two  skydivers falling within 40 .Et.  of  the 
spheres  photographed  them  during  descent,  and  ground  observers 
tracked them with radar, survey instrumentq  and cameras.  ( L A  Times, 
6/23/64;  AP, Balt. Sun, 6/23/64) 
Aviation  Week reported  that  NASA  and  JPL  were  seeking a compromise to 
House subcommittee  recommendation  that  NASA  appoint  a  general 
James E.  Webb, NASA 
manager  to  act as deputy to the director  of  JPL .  
Administrator,  opposed the  suggestion that  NASA make the appointment. 
It was reported that JPL was seeking someone mutually acceptable to  the 
( A v .  Wk., 6/22/64,25) 
committee, NASA,  and JPL. 
*  Hearings  on  S. 2602, to  establish a  national  a i r  and  space museum in the 
Smithsonian Institution, were held  by Subcommittee on the Smithsonian 
Institution  of  the  Senate  Committee  on  Rules  and  Administration. 
(NASA  LAR I I I /125 )  
*  In   letter  to  New  Yo rk   Times,  FAA Administrator  Najeeb  E.  Halaby  en- 
dorsed  suggestion in  Times  editorial  that  two  or  more  aircraft  manu- 
facturers  join  together  to  develop U S .   supersonic transport.  Halaby 
said  he  would  welcome  such  a  partnership  and  would  recommend  to 
Justice  Dept.  that  it  “interpose  no  objection  on  antitrust  grounds”  be- 
cause  of  “the  clear  national  interest  factors  in  the program.” 
(Clark, 
N Y T ,  6/23/64,66) 
*  Based on reports circulated at recent COSPAR meeting, Missiles  and Rockets 
flight  fo r   about  a year  but  that  flight  probably  would  be  an  o r  B ita1 
said  that  U.S.S.R.  probably  would  not  attempt  another  manned  s  ace 
rendezvous mission.  (M&R ,  6/22/64,  33) 
Jum 23:  COSMOS XXXIII  launched into orbit with the following initial param- 
eters:  apogee,  293 km. (182.06  mi.)  ; perigee,  209 km.  (129.87  mi.)  ; 
period,  89.38 min.;  and  inclination to  the equator,  65”.  Tass said  the 
satellite carried  scientific apparatus  designed for  investigation of  space 
in   accordance with  program  announced March  16, 1962, and  onboard 
instrumentation  was  operating  normally.  (Tass, Komsomolskaya 
Pravda, 6/24/6d,  1 ,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
Army  Map  Service  announced  completion  of 
its  topographic  study 
of  the  moon.  Prepared  under  agreement  with  NASA,  the  lunar  map 
was  the most complete ever made,  the first to  show variations  in heights 
over  all  the  visible  surface  of  the  moon.  Map covered  area  of  about 
8,000,000 sq. mi.,  and more than  5,000  surface features were  identified 
by  name.  The  topographers  established that  the moon’s  highest peaks  
reach  about 35,000  f t .   above its lowest points-making  the lunar moun- 

221 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 
tains  about  6,000  ft.  higher  than  Mt.  Everest. 
(NYHT ,   Ymh .  Post, 
6/24/64;  SeMstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/24/64) 
June 23:  At  request of  Senator Wayne Morae  (D.-Ore.)  and  by  unanimous 
consent  to  motion  of  Senator  Mike  Mansfield  (D.-Mont.)  , Senate  re- 
quested House to return H.R.  10456, NASA  authorization bill for FY 1965. 
Senator Morse was  requesting record vote on the bill;  action of  the pre- 
vious  day  was  taken  without  quorum  call  a nd   with  only  voice  vote. 
(NASA  LAR 111/126;  CR, 6/23/64,14234-35  and 6/24/64,14392) 
*  NASA  announced formal award of  $24 million  contract  to  General Electric 
for  development of  six  flight  model  Biosatellites plus  additional  space- 
craft  for ground  testing.  GE  was  selected for  the  contract  last August 
and  had  been  working  under  preliminary  $5  million contract,  now  in- 
( Y S I ,  6/24/64) 
cluded in formal contract. 
*  NASA  Group Achievement Award  presented to  Centaur  “E”  Stand Project 
personnel at NASA Lewis Research Center’s Plum Brook Station for their 
( 6  significant  contributions  resulting  in   the  successful  completion  of  re- 
search  testing  of  the Atlas  116 D  booster  under  simulated loading  and 
. Speech by   Peter  Hackes of  NBC  News  inserted in Congressional Record  by 
environmental  conditions  and  [for]  providing  data  vital  to  the  first 
( LRC Release 64-56) 
flight of  the Centaur vehicle.” 
Rep.  Emilio  Q.  Daddario  (D.-Conn.) 
advocating  a  progressive  space 
program.  Hackes said: 
“Some  of  those  who  have  studied  space  age  economics  tell  us  that 
by  the mid-1970’s ou r  space spending will  return  to  the American econ- 
omy  a  dime for every nickel we’re  spending now.  Aside from the  very 
obvious  race  with  Russia  to  be  first  to  land  on  the moon;  in  addition 
to  advancing  science  to  the  point  where we  may  locate life  on  another 
planet  and  might  discover  the  secrets  of  the  beginnings  of  mankind; 
and  besides  the  use  of  space to  defend  ourselves militarily-besides 
all 
these  reasons,  the  U.S.  space program  will bring  us  two  other  exceed- 
ingly important  dollars and cents lhnefits : a  sizable advance in  industry 
and  employment.  And  an  as-yet  uncalculated  fallout  in  new  civilian 
products.  . . .”  (Text, CR ,  7/2/64,  A3690-92) 
*  Nuclear  submarine  John  Adams, 
submerged  off  Florida  coast, 
successfully  fired  Polaris  A-2  missile  about  1,500 mi.  to  i t s   target  in 
the  Atlantic  Ocean.  This  was  last  American missile-firing submarine 
(UPI,  N Y T ,  6/24/64,  38) 
to  be  equipped with  the A-2  model. 
June  24:   Senate passed  (78-3)  H.R.  10456 authorizing  funds  for  NASA  for 
FY  1965.  Senate adopted the committee amendments en bloc.  Amend- 
ment  introduced  by  Sen.  Fulbright  to   reduce  R&D  funds  for  Project 
Apollo  by  $267,750,000 was  rejected  by  vote of  42-38.  Bill would  be 
(NASA  LAR 111/127;  CR ,  
sent  to  House-Senate conference committee. 
6/24/64,  1436744 )  
*  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center made its final move from all leased facili- 
ties,  with  more  than  700  employees moving  to  the  Clear  Lake location 
between now  and June 30.  (MSC Roundup, 6/24/64,1) 
15  NASA  astronauts  began  three  days  and  two  nights  of  jungle  survival 
training in the Panama Canal Zone, under supervision of  the USAF  Tropic 
Survival School.  ( MSC Roundup, 6/%/64,8) 
Theory  that  moon’s  surface  resembled  cotton  candy  and  was  only  about 
19% solid was expounded by David D.  Cudaback of  Univ. of  California’s 
radio  astronomy  laboratory  at  Berkeley.  Based  on  his  four  years  of 

222 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUT ICS ,   I9 0 4 

research  with microwaves from the moon,  Dr.  Cudaback said moon had 
highly  porous  surface extending  down  to  a  depth  of  “at  least”  nine  o r  
10 ft.,  and   “very  possibly”  deeper.  He  said  only  one  other American 
scientist had obtained  the same figures on  high porosity, but that “quite 
a  few  Russians”  had  produced  findings  similar  to  his  own. 
(Justice, 
Houston  Post,  6/25/64) 
June 24: I t  was reported DOD may  coordinate  a geodetic survey program com- 
bining  Secor satellite, a planned Transit satellite, ECHO  11,  and a planned 
Anna  satellite.  A  ground  station  would  correlate the  flashing light  of 
Anna,  the  optical  system of  Secor, and the  doppler  radar   system of  the 
(SBD,  6/24/64) 
Transit,  using  ECHO   11  a s  a  reference point. 
June  25.- Maj.  Robert  Rushworth  (USAF)   flew X-15  No. 2  to  83,OOO-ft.  alti- 
tude and 2,966-mph speed  (mach  4.49).  Engine  of  the  rocket research 
aircraft  burned  76  sec.  This  was  the  first  flight  of  the  rebuilt  No.  2 
(NASA   X-15  Proj. Off .) 
aircraft, and performance  was  successful. 
NASA  launched  companion  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  from  Wallops 
Island, Va.,  with instrumentation to  detect quiet day  ionospheric electric 
currents  and  to  detect  and  study configuration  of  ionospheric  currents 
under  disturbance  conditions.  Each  payload  contained  a  dual-cell 
rubidium-vapor  magnetometer  t o   measure  magnitude  of  the  magnetic 
field.  Both  rockets  performed  and  transmitted  excellently,  the  first 
(launched  a t   10:57  a.m.)  reaching  92.5-mi.  altitude  and  the  second 
(NASA  Rpts.  SRL) 
(launched  a t  8:52  p.m.)  reaching  96.7-mi.  altitude. 
First  tracking  station  to  be  built  for  Project  Gemini  was  dedicated 
a t   Carnarvon,  Australia,  a  site  close  to   the  antipodal  point  to  Cape 
Kennedy,  the  launch  site.  Carnarvon  was  first  land station  over which 
Gemini spacecraft would  pass  as  i t  went  into orbit.  NASA Administrator 
James  E.  Webb  participated  by  telephone  in  the  ceremonies,  and  his 
remarks initiated the new station into “SCAMA,”  the NASA  13-country net- 
work of  operational voice communications connecting the manned space 
(NASA Release 64-155) 
flight tracking network. 
*  Scout rocket launched  by USAF  from Pt. Arguello, Calif.,  exploded in flight. 
(M & R ,   7/6/64,  8 )  
NASA  announced  award  of  three-year, $3.6-million contract t o  Federal  Elec- 
tr ic   Corp.  for  instrumentation  support  services  to   the  Merritt  Island 
(NASA  Re- 
Launch  Area  of  the  John  F.  Kennedy  Space  Center, NASA. 
lease  64-156) 
First  four   divisions  of  NASA  Lewis  Research  Center  had  completed 
moving  into  new  Development  Engineering  Building,  LRC  announced. 
Occupancy  of  the  building  by  LRC  units  temporarily  housed  in  a 
Cleveland  shopping  center  would  be  completed  by  end  of  summer. 
(LRC  Release  6 6 5 8 )  
Dow Chemical Corp.  selected by  Kennedy Space Center, NASA,  for contract 
to   provide  engineering  support  services at Merritt  Island  Launch Area 
facilities.  Cost-plus-fixed-fee contract was estimated  a t  $1.4 million for  
the first year, with two one-year options for  extensions.  (SBD, 6/26/64, 
315) 
DOD announced  Aeronca  Manufacturing  Corp.  was  receiving  $1,809,724 
contract from Office of  Naval Research for design, fabrication, and instal- 
lation of  an  advanced antenna tracking system for NASA Wallops Station. 
(DOD  Release  4 5 - 6 4 )  

223 

ASTRONAUTICS BND AERONAUTICS,  1964 
June 26:  NASA  announced  it  had  requested proposals from  scientists for  ex- 
periments  on  Advanced  Technological Satellites to   be  launched  from 
Cape Kennedy in  196668.  Primary mission of  ATS would be to  evalu- 
ate  advanced  oommunication  techniques,  meteorological  components, 
and  gravity  gradient  stabilization  systems,  but  additional  space  fo r  
(NASA  Release  64c153) 
scientific experiments was  available. 
0  NASA  Lewis Research Center  program  of  metal  fracture toughness testing 
was  helping  make  supersonic  transport  possible,  according  to  William 
F.  Brown,  Jr.,  Chief  of  LRC  Strength  of  Materials  Branch.  Co-author 
of  paper on fracture toughness test methods with John E.  Strawley, Head 
of  Fracture  Section at  LRC,  Brown said listening to  amplified sounds of 
metal cracking under stress was one of  the techniques of  testing fracture 
(LRC  Release 64-59) 
toughness. 
*  Curtiss-Wright X-19  Vtol transport was flown successfully for the first time 
in series of short-duration tests.  (Av.  Wk., 7/6/64., 278) 
June 27:  Analysis  of findings by  Stratoscope I1 balloon-astronomy investi- 
gation  last  November was  announced  by  National  Science Foundation 
and  Princeton  Univ.  astronomers.  Dr.  Martin  Schwarzschild, director 
of  Project  Stratoscope  11,  reviewed  first  findings  of  the  telescope  and 
instrument  package  carried  aloft  by  balloon.  Studies  of  the  moon 
showed  lunar  surface  material  reflected  more  solar  light  in   the  infra- 
red  band  than  in  the visible spectrum.  Other findings included confir- 
mation  that  water vapor  exists near  red  giant  stars-for 
example, there 
is  “about  as much water vapor  above one square mile of  Mira as there 
(NYT,  6/28/64, 56; Burkett, 
is  above  one  square  mile  of  Earth.” 
Houston Chron., 6/28/f%%) 
June  28:  NASA  Administrator  James E. Webb  said i n  open message to  AIAA, 
convening in Washington, that  Saturn V  space booster,  used  i n  Project 
Apollo, would  enable U.S.  to  ‘‘catch  u p  with  and pass the Russians” in  
space.  “But the development and  flight testing of  this rocket have been 
delayed by  a  reduction  of  $600 million in  the NASA  ‘budget for this fiscal 
year  and  efforts are now  being made  to  further  delay  it through reduc- 
tions  of  up  to  $500 million for the next fiscal year.  This effort to  slow 
up  and  hold  back  the  progress  both  President  Kennedy  and  President 
Johnson have recommended is a matter of  important and immediate con- 
cern as the MAA meets. 
“Members  of  AIAA  will  do  well  to  study  and  understand  the  very 
large  foundation  of  space  operational  capability  which  is  now  being 
put in place by  this country and consider the  long-range future of  space 
will be very large.  . . .” 
::-, 
in terms of  the  proper use of  a c 
(Text, Wash. Pos t ,  6/28/64) 
New maps of  the moon made by USAF  Aeronautical Chart and  Information 
Center,  St.  Louis,  were  termed  “the  best  lunar  maps  ever  made”  by 
E.  A.  Whitaker,  astronomer  a t   Lunar  and  Planetary  Laboratory  in 
Tucson,  Ariz.,  and  Dr.  Eugene M.  Shoemaker, lunar  geologist  of  U S .  
Geological Survey Observatory in  Flagstaff, Ariz.  Maps were on  scale 
(Burkett, Houston Chron.,  6/28/6d) 
of  one  inch  equals eight  miles. 
June  29:  New  research  project  would  study  feasibility  and  design  concept 
of  advanced  hypersonic  ramjet  engine,  NASA  announced.  The  work 
would  extend  ramjet  propulsion  technology which  NASA  and  NACA  had 
been  developing fo r  more  than  15  years.  To  be  conducted under  di- 
rection  of  Langley Research  Center,  the  project  was being  organized 

224 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

to  determine  potential  of  the  ramjet  as  a  propulsion  system fo r  hyper- 
sonic  flight.  Project  would  use  hydrogen  as  fuel. 
(NASA  Release 
64-158) 
June 29:  George Friedl,  Jr.,  was  appointed NASA  Deputy Associate Adminis- 
trator for Industry Affairs, succeeding Earl D.  Hilburn, who was recently 
named  Deputy  Associate  Administrator.  Since  1962  a  management 
consultant  in  Santa  Ana,  Calif.,‘Friedl  served  from  1960  to   1962  a s  
Chairman  of  the  Board  and  President  of  Matthews  Corp.  and  from 
1956  to  1%0  as  Corporate  Vice  President  of  Litton  Industries,  Inc., 
and  General  Manager  of  its  Electronic  Equipment  Div. 
(NASA  An- 
nouncement 69-140;  NASA Release 64-157) 
8  GSFC reported  that  NASA  w a s   considering development of  a  satellite-borne 
radiotelescope to investigate low frequency radio emissions from galactic 
regions,  distant  planets,  and  stars.  Long  antennas  would  be  required 
t o  receive the very-lowfrequency radio emissions.  The program would 
study  the  development  and  effects  of  sporadic  radio  noise  bursts  from 
the   sun  and  the  sporadic  decameter  radio  emission  from  Jupiter,  de- 
termine  the  low  frequency  spectra  of  galactic  and  extra-galactic radio 
sources,  and map  the  spatial  distribution  of  galactic  and  extra-galactic 
radio sources at low frequencies.  ( Goddard News, 6/29/64,3) 
Appointment of  Maj.  Gen.  Alvin  R.  Luedecke  (USAF  Ret.)  as Deputy  Di- 
rector  of  Cal Tech’s  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  was  announced by  JPL 
Director  Dr.  William H.  Pickering.  General manager of  AEC  since his 
retirement  in  1958,  General Luedecke would  replace  Brian  Sparks  ef- 
fective August 1. 
(NASA Release 6 6 1 5 9 )  
8  NASA  awarded $16,975,000 contract  to Blount Brothers Corp.  for construc- 
tion  of  three  major  elements  of  space  environment  facility  known as 
Space  Propulsion  Facility,  to  be  built  at  Plum  Brook  Station  of  NASA 
Lew i s   Research  Center.  The facility would  simulate  temperatures  and 
pressure  conditions  at  altitudes  up  to  100  mi.  from  earth,  permitting 
evaluation  and  development  testing  of  spacecraft,  chemical propulsion 
systems, and  nuclear  electric power generation  and propulsion  systems. 
(LRC  Release 64-61) 
8  Studies  of  two-stage recoverable lifting  body  space vehicle, by  NASA  Mar- 
shall Space Flight Center were reported  in Av ia t ion  Week .   Envisioned 
primarily  a s   a  passenger/supply  space  ferry,  the  system  could  be 
launched  by  track-mounted rocket  sled  or  take  off horizontally  similar 
to  conventional aircraft.  Both  stages would  be  manned,  the  first with 
only a  flight  crew and  the pickaback second  stage with  10-19  men  and 
supplies. 
In   this  concept,  both  delta-shape  stages  would  be  recover- 
(Av.  Wk . ,  6/29/64,  38) 
able. 
NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  interviewed 
Washington Wo r l d ,  replied t o  interviewer’s question : 
As a matter 
“Yes, Gemini is really necessary to the Apollo program. 
of  fact,  Gemini would  be  necessary  a s  the next  major  step  in  manned 
space flight even  if   there were  no Apollo mission.  Gemini provides the  
United  States  large  increments  of  manned  space  flight  capability. 
Gemini is vital to the Apollo program  since our  astronauts must  learn- 
techniques of  rendezvous and  docking  in  space before 
and perfect-the 
attempting the trip to the  moon and back.  . . .” 
(NASA) 
*  NASA  completed  negotiations  with  Honeywell  Aeronautical  Div.  fo r   con- 
tract  to  furnish  three  spacecraft for  Project  Scanner horizon  definition 

in 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAW’MCS,  19 6 4 

225 

experiment.  The  $1,224,616  contract  included  design, fabrication,  in- 
tegration,  qualification,  environmental  testing,  and  certain  launch  sup- 
port  services.  Project  Scanner payloads would  be  flown  on suborbital 
trajectories from Wallops Island, Va. 
( L ~ R C  Release) 
June 29: Future Delta launch vehicles with larger propellant tanks, the Thrust- 
Augmented Delta  (TAD) ,  would  be used  to  launch  payloads  in  the Bio- 
satellite,  Pioneer,  and  meteorological satellite  families,  GSFC reported. 
(Goddard News, 6/29/64r,  1 )  
Senate’s  narrow  margin  of  defeating  amendment  to  cut  NASA’s FY  1965 
Apollo  authorization  by  10%  was  subject  of  editorial  by  Robert H o b  
“. . . There  should  be  little  satisfaction  fo r   supporters  of  the  US. 
in Aviation  Week:  
space  program  in   the  narrow  margin  by  which  the  Fulbright  amend- 
ment  was  defeated.  It  indicates  clearly  what  a  long,  hard  pull  still 
lies  ahead  to  educate the  people  of  this  country  fully  on  the long-term 
needs  to  maintain  this  nation’s  pre-eminence in  the  vital  area  of  space 
technology.  There  will  never  be  any  lack  of  criticism  of  any  legisla- 
tive program that has progress as its goal.  But it should be  the genuine 
concern  of  the  supporters  of  the US. space program  to  state their  case 
w i th   such  force  and  clarity  that  this  conservative  carping  from  Sen. 
Fulbright  and  his  ilk  w i l l   produce  only  the hollow echo in  history  that 
( A v .  Wk . ,  6/29/64,11) 
it merits.” 
Aviation  Week   reported  that  President  Johnson  had  inspected  USAF- 
Lockheed  YF-12A  (A-11)  supersonic aircraft  at  Edwards AFB  during 
his recent tour of  West Coast defense installations.  ( A v .  W k . ,  6/29/64, 
15 )  
‘ohn H.  Boyxrton of  MSC discussed pilot’s  role in Mercury space flight sys- 
tems  failures,  in  paper  to  AIAA  first  annual meeting.  He summarized: 
“For  the  two  unmanned  missions,  M A 4  and  MA-5,  control  system 
difficulties made  impossible  the   successful completion  of  a three-pass 
orbital  flight, which was the  design mission  fo r  the Mercury spacecraft. 
But  in  both  cases,  the  presence of  a  pilot  and  the  capability  to   control 
the  spacecraft  attitudes  manually would  have made  the  three-pass mis- 
sion  possible.  This  fact  was  demonstrated  in  the  M A 4  mission  in 
which  a  similar malfunction  occurred  but  in  which  the  astronaut com- 
pleted the flight by using h i s  manual control modes.  . . . 
“For  the M A 4  mission,  . . . the flight would undoubtedly have been 
terminated  before  the  planned  time because of  an excessive rate of  fuel 
I n   the  successful MA-7 
consumption in   the  automatic  control  mode. 
flight, manual initiation of the retrorocket-ignition sequence prevented the 
horizon  scanner  malfunction  from  significantly  delaying  this  critical 
event.  Although  an   error  in  yaw  angle  caused  the  spacecraft  to   land 
somewhat beyond  the  planned  landing  area,  this e r ro r  would  have  un- 
doubtedly been  much greater  had  the pilot  not  been  present.  The six- 
pass MA-8  mission was  successful, although a problem of  an abnormal 
increase  in suit temperature  could  have terminated  the  fli  ht  early had 
no means been available for reducing this temperature.  T%e pilot, how- 
ever,  was  able  to  correct  this  situation  by  manual  adjustment  of  h i s  
coolant  flow  valve.  Short  circuits  in   the  automatic  control  circuitry 
during  the  MA-9  flight  made  it  essential  f o r   the  pilot  to  control  the  
spacecraft manually during retrofire and  reentry.” 
(Text) 

226 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4; 
June  29:  C .  A.  Syvertson  and  David  H.  Dennis  of  NASA  Ames  Research 
Center,  in   paper  for  AIAA  first  annual  meeting,  reviewed  problems  of 
atmospheric  entry,  atmospheric  exit,  and atmospheric  cruise, suggesting 
that  “future vehicles in each of  these areas will differ significantly from 
their  current-day  counterparts.  For  example,  entry  vehicles  for u s e   in 
the interplanetary missions which may follow the lunar mission will enter 
the  Earth‘s  atmosphere  a t   speeds u p  to   twice  that  of  Apollo.  At  these 
speeds,  radiative  heating  predominates  and  dictates  the  use  of  more 
slender configurations  than  the  very  blunt  Apollo.  The  interplanetary 
entry  vehicles will  also  require very  precise guidance  and control both 
when approaching the Earth and when  flying within the atmosphere. . . . 
“For  cruise  aircraft  that  follow  the  supersonic  transports,  the  most 
characteristic feature will  be  the  probable use  of  hydrogen  fuel.  This 
high-energy  fuel  provides  excellent  payload  and  range  capabilities  fo r  
transports flying up to about twice the speed  of  the supersonic transport. 
The  low  density of  the  fuel  results in  aircraft with  very  large fuselages 
which  may  be  twice  the  size  of  current-day  subsonic  jet transports.” 
(Text) 
*  At  AIAA  meeting and press conference, Dr.  Bernard M.  Wagner,  Chairman 
of  New  York  Medical  College’s  pathology  dept.,  reported  Soviets had 
decided  not  to  send  any  more  women  cosmonauts  into  space.  Soviet 
doctors  were  not  satisfied with  performance  of  Valentina  Tereshkova, 
first  woman  cosmonaut.  She  had  been  too  excited  during  the  space 
flight,  as  seen  by  wide variations in her  pulse rate,  and she did  not  re- 
cover  from  effects  of  space  flight  as  quickly  as   the  male  cosmonauts. 
Dr.  ,Wagner  visited  in  Moscow  earlier  in  June  a t   invitation  of  Prof. 
Vassily  V.  Parin,  Director  of  Institute  of  Normal  and  Pathological 
Physiology.  Dr. Wagner  reported  Prof.  Parin,  prominent  in   Soviet 
space program,  believed  artificial  gravity would  be necessary  for astro- 
nauts on  long space  flights,  and Soviet space planners were considering 
possibility  of  equipping  Vostok  spacecraft  with  centrifuge  providing 
periodic spin of  1/3 earth‘s  gravity for  the crew.  Dr. Wagner  added that 
Soviets were preparing  for  another manned  space  flight before  the  end 
(Loory, N.Y.  Her .  Trib.,  6 / 3 0 / 6 d )  
of the year. 
First meeting  of  the  AIAA  Technical Committee on  History  of  Aeronautics 
and Astronautics  held  in Washington,  NASA  Historian  Eugene M.  Emme 
as  Chairman. 
*  Employment  in  aerospace  industry  during  the  past  year  reflected  overall 
downward  trend,  according  to   Aviation  Week  survey.  Exceptions  to  
the  general  trend  were  McDonnell  Aircraft  Co.  and  Douglas  Aircraft 
Co.,  the former mainly due to work on Gemini spacecraft and F -4  Phan- 
tom  I1 aircraft  and  the  latter  due to  increased work  for  Saturn launch 
( A v .  Wk . ,  6/29/64,  20) 
vehicle  program  and  commercial  programs. 
Reported  that  legislation  was  being  drafted  that  would  apply  system 
of  US. agricultural  extension  service  to   industry  to   heIp  solve prob- 
lems of  economic dislocations due to decreased defense spending.  Pres- 
ident  Johnson  said  such  an   industry  extension  service  would  “do  for  
urban  America  what  the  agricultural  extension  service  ha$  done  for  
(Av.  W k . ,  6/29/64+, 21) 
rura l  America.” 
Pilots of  South  African  Airways  had been  warned  to  fly  a t  least 9,SOO-ft. 
above  sea-level  altitude  when  over  Muden  on  the  route  between  Jo- 
h a m a b u r g  and Durban,  because large citrus estate a t  Muden was shoot- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 

227 

ing rain-making rockets into storm clouds.  The estate had been plagued 
by  hailstorms  and  was  experimenting with  rockets to   reduce  the  fruit- 
damaging  hailstones.  With  eight  launch  pads  on  the  estate,  it  was 
possible to  launch 50 Italian rockets at once to a height of  6,000 ft.  (AP, 
NYT ,   6/29/6,4,  30) 
June 30:  A t la scen tau r  3 (AC-3)  was launched from ETR in partially success- 
ful development test which NASA  officials termed “highly  successful from 
an  engineering point  of  view.”  Five of  the six primary  objectives were 
fully achieved : nose  fairing and insulation panels withstood flight-loads 
and jettisoned properly;  structural integrity  of  Atlas and Centaur stages 
during  all phases of  flight were verified;  Atlas-Centaur separation  oper- 
ated satisfactorily;  operation  of  the guidance system was demonstrated; 
and  capability  of  Atlas-Centaur to  be  launched  a t  scheduled  time was 
demonstrated, the vehicle lifting off  only four minutes after pre-planned 
launch  time.  The  sixth,  partially-achieved objective was  ignition  and 
burn  of  Centaur  stage$  two  RG lOA 3   liquid  hydrogen  engines:  They 
ignited  properly  but  cut  off  127 sec.  before  programed  380  sec.  burn 
time.  Four  seconds  after  engine  ignition,  hydraulic  pump  to  engine 
actuators had failed,  so that hydraulic  system did not actuate the engine 
swiveling mechanism  to  maintain  control  of  the  stage during powered 
flight.  The  Centaur  began  to  roll.  Increasing  roll motion  forced pro- 
pellant  to  side  of  propellant  tanks,  uncovering feed-line outlets;  engine 
cut  off  after  253  see.  because  of  lack  of  fuel.  Stage  maintained  its 
trajectory,  however,  and  at  programed  cutoff  time  thk  stage  attitude 
control  system  regained  roll  control  and  remaining  inflight events  oc- 
curred  as planned.  Because of  the  shorter  engine burn,  A 6 3  reached 
speed of  only  11,425 mph  instead  of  the 17,400 mph which would have 
put  it,  incidentally,  into  orbit.  Spent stage re-entered and  impacted  in 
Atlantic Ocean 2,706 mi.  from Cape Kennedy. 
(NASA  Release 6 6 1 4 3 ;  
CR,  7 / l / a ,   15086-87; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/1/64;  Wash. Eve. S tar ,  7 / 2 / a ,  
A5) 
0  X-15  No.  1 piloted  by  John  B.  McKay  (NASA)   reached  only  98,000- 
ft.  altitude and 3,375-mph speed  (mach 5.10)  in flight near Edwards AFB, 
Calif.  Within  seconds  after  launch  from  mother  ship,  all  guidance 
equipment on the rocket aircraft failed, forcing Pilot McKay  to cut back 
speed and altitude.  Flight had been planned to reach 180,000-ft. altitude 
and  3,550-mph speed  in  test  fo r  future X-15  flights to  photograph  the 
stars  from  above  atmospheric  interference.  The  rocket  engine burned 
(NASA  X-15  Proj.  Off.; Vu sh .  Post,  7/1/6LE) 
83 sec. 
House  and  Senate  conference  committee  agreed  on  $5,227,506,000 
as  compromise between  the  two versions  of  H.R.  1M56, the  NASA  Au- 
thorization  Act  for  FY  1965.  This  was  $33.7  million  more  than  the 
House had  voted  and  $18.8 million  less than  the  Senate had  approved. 
( M S A  LAR  II1/129-131;  Confr. Rpt.,  House Rpt. 1529) 
New  York  Times  editorialized  on  the four-vote margin  of  the Senate  de- 
funds by  10%.  “.  . . The narrowness of  the margin may be illustrated 
feat  of  Sen.  Fulbright’s  amendment to  reduce  FY  1965 Project  Apollo 
by  the  fact  that  i f   there  had  been  abstentions  by  the  Senatars  from 
even three of  the states having direct economic interest i n  tb most rapid 
prosecution  of  the  moon  race-say,  California,  Texas  and  Florida- 
Senator Fulbright’s  amendment would have been adopted. 

228 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 0 4 
“.  . . [Senator  Fulbright]  lost  his  battle  on  the  authorization  bill, 
but he will have another  chance when  the bill actually appropriating the 
funds  is  considered.  The  new  mood  in   Congress  suggests  that  this 
battle  may  produce  a  decision  to  scrap  the  artificial  1970  deadline. 
. . .”  ( N Y T , 6 / 3 0 / 6 4 )  
June  30:  NASA  Associate  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  said 
a t  AIAA  Luncheon in Washington: “.  . . the concept of  the lunar landing 
was not  new  when  NASA  was  founded  in  1958.  Research w a s  continu- 
In  1959, in- 
ing  on  the  various  technical  aspects of  such  a  mission. 
house work  began  on  mission  definition.  In the fall of  1960, three  six- 
month  feasibility  design  study  contracts  were  awarded.  In   January 
1961 NASA  received  these  interim  findings.  There were  two  basic  ve- 
hicle  approaches  to  be  considered-direct  ascent  and  rendezvous.  In  
May  of  1961, the  study  contract  results were  available,  and  supported 
our  interim  findings,  and  the  recommendation was  made  to  the  Con- 
gress that the nation proceed with the mission.  . . . 
“There will be missions after Project Apollo.  We a r e  already examin- 
ing  their  feasibility,  cost,  and  potential  return.  We  a re   carefully  es- 
tablishing  a  variety  of  future  space  missions,  both  manned  and  uw  
manned, that  exploit the near  earth, lunar,  and planetary  environments. 
No  decisions have been made and we   are not  ready  to  recommend them 
yet.  As  the  information  becomes  available  and  as  the  results  a r e  
analyzed,  we  w i l l   be  able  to  present  the  country with  a solid  spectrum 
of  achievable,  well-conceived  mission  alternatives  and  options.  The 
selection will  be a  national,  not  an agency, decision.” 
(Text) 
0  Self-sealing  structural  walls  for  spacecraft  application  were  demon- 
strated  at  AIAA by  Arnold  J.  Tuckerman, Hughes Aircraft  Co.  materials 
scientist.  Tuckerman and his  colleagues fired  .22 pellets at pressurized 
chamber  with  walls  in  which  polyuretanes and  polyamide prepolymers 
were  impregnated  within  the  laminations  of  the  walls.  As  the  pellets 
pierced  the  chamber, they  triggered  chemical  reaction  causing the seal- 
ant  to  foam  instantly,  hardening  into  an  airtight  plug  that  would  last 
(Haseltine,  Wmh.  Post, 
up  to   two  weeks  without  major  leakage. 
7/1/64) 
A.  0. Tischler,  NASA  Director  of  Propulsion  and  Power  Generation, said 
in paper for AIAA : 
“At  this  time  the United  States  stands  on  the  threshold  of  transport 
in the space environment.  Until now,  with the  exception of  a relatively 
few  payloads  such  as  Syncom,  payloads  launched  into  space were put 
on their  trajectory by  the launch vehicle.  Only minor path  corrections 
were  applied  by  the  on-board  propulsion  systems.  Even  the Mercury 
capsule returns were made by  a  relatively minor  slowing of  the orbiting 
capsule,  with  aerodynamic  braking  providing  the  rest  of  the kinetic 
energy  change.  However  in  Gemini which may fly with men  this year, 
and which will later effect  rendezvous of  separate payloads in space, and  
in  Apollo,  which  will  perform  an  intricate  series  of  space maneuvers, 
we  recognize  systems  that  carry  significant propulsion  capability  into 
space for use entirely  in that  environment.  The time is rapidly coming 
when  space  is  no  longer  something we  throw  darts  into  but  is  an  en- 
vironment  in  which  working  propulsion  systems  will  maneuver  and 
transport spacecraft payloads and eventually convey these payloads back 
to the earth‘s  atmosphere for descent to the surface to be used again.  . . . 

229 
ASTRONAU’I’JCS  AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 0 4  
“[Spacel  . . . booster  engines  have  passed,  or  in  the  case  of  the  
Saturn V  engines,  are approaching their preliminary  flight rating tests, 
while  the more  conservative spacecraft propulsion  systems have not yet 
arrived  a t   that  milepost.  While  these  spacecraft  engines  may  be  ex- 
pected  to  come  along  a t  a faster  pace  than  the  big  booster engine  de- 
velopments, the  fact is that  they  are presently  in  a  tail  chase situation. 
I think we must observe that a t  this moment the status of  spacecraft pro- 
pulsion systems under development lags the development status of  launch 
vehicle engines and  is additionally behind  in 
That  is  the  area that warrants  propulsion 
June 30:  Paper  surveying  space  nuclear  propulsion  by  Harold  33.  Finger, 
“. . . a  major  forward  step  has  been  taken  in   the  milestone estab- 
James Lazar, and James J. Lynch of  NASA and AEC was presented to m. 
lished  by  the  Los  Alamos  Scientific Laboratory  in  its design,  develop- 
ment,  operation,  and  analysis  of  the  KIWI-B4D  nuclear  rocket  reactor 
experiment.  This  test  provides  good  reason  for  confidence in  the  suc- 
cessful  execution  of  the  tests  to  be  conducted  this  year  and  next  and 
provides a good basis for confidence in the availability of  nuclear rockets 
when  they  will  be required  f o r  the performance of  advanced space mis- 
sions.  The  availability  of  these  nuclear  rocket  propulsion systems will 
give  this  country  a  propulsion  capability  f a r  advanced over  any  other 
rocket  propulsion  system  available.  . . 
“Progress  has been  made  in  electric propulsion,  particularly  in   the 
thrustor  area,  but  important  research  data  and  technology  a r e  also b e  
ginning  to  be  provided  in  the  difficult area  of  nuclear  reactor  electric 
generating systems required  for prime electric propulsion in space. 
“Beyond  these  systems,  other  advanced  nuclear  propulsion  concepts 
a r e   not  yet  well  enough  understood  to  justify  undertaking  significant 
development efforts.  Careful  and  systematic accumulation of  research 
information  to  evaluate the feasibility of  these concepts and to  arrive at 
(Text) 
a  real  understanding  of  them  appear  appropriate.” 
0  Appearing &before Special Subcommittee on Air  and Water Pollution of  the 
Senate Committee on  Public Works,  NASA  Assistant Associate Adminis- 
trator  fo r  Advanced Research and Technology John  L.  Sloop said: 
“The  NASA  activities having a bearing  on  a i r  and water pollution a r e  
almost  entirely  in  the  area  of  nuclear  and  chemical propulsion.  Even 
in this area, however, only a fraction of  the work offers a pollution threat. 
“With  regard  to water pollution, i t   is standard practice  at  NASA Cen- 
ters  and  in  the  rocket industry  to  capture water  used  in  test  operations 
and,  if   necessary,  treat  it  before  re-use or  discharge. 
In   considering  a i r   pollution,  the  NASA  uses two  approaches : 
66  
“ ( 1) Isolated locations and  atmospheric dispersion,  and 
“(2) Containment  and  neutralization.  . *  . 
“In  . . . our  nuclear  propulsion  activities,  neither  routine  reactor 
development testiilg and  flight operations nor  conceivable accidents a re  
expected  to  release  sufficient  radioactivity  into  the  atmosphere to  con- 
stitute  a hazard to  public health  and safety. 
“In  chemical  propulsion,  there  are  some  propellants  that  are  toxic 
prior  to combustion and  some rocket exhausts that  contain  toxic prod- 
ucts.  Fortunately,  the NASA  space program is primarily  concerned with 
non-toxic  propellants.  In   our  largest  program,  the  Apollo  effort,  fo r  
example, the giant  Saturn I and  V boosters both burn oxygen and kero- 

230 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19 0 4 

sene in their  first stages and oxygen and hydrogen  in their upper stages. 
The  Ap01l.o  spacecraft  uses  toxic  nitrogen  tetroxide  and  a  mixture  of 
hydrazine  and  unsymmetrical  dimethylhydrazine,  but  the  quantity  is 
small  compared  to   that  used  by  the  Saturn boosters  . . . [and  is  not 
used]  until  the Apollo  is well  into  space  under  normal operation.  . . . 
“In  most  rocket  testing  and  in  vehicle  launches, the  rocket exhausts 
directly  into  the  atmosphere.  The  very  high  exhaust  temperature and 
velocity  serve to rapidly  disperse the exhaust  products.  I n  some rocket 
testing we  must  simulate  the  low pressures  encountered  a t   altitude.  I n  
these facilities, the  rocket exhausts  into  a  duct where there is an  oppor- 
tunity  t o   scrub  the  products  with  water  before  discharging  into  the 
atmosphere.  A  unique  facility,  an   example  of  the  containment  and 
treatment  method  for  use  in  populated  areas,  was  built  a t   the  Lewis 
Research  Center  in  Cleveland,  for  rockets using  fluorine.  This facility, 
put  into  operation  in  1956,  was  designed  to  handle  hydrogen-fluorine 
rockets  up  t o   20,000  pounds  thrust.  . . .” 
(Testimony) 
June 30: Vernon G .  MacKenzie, Chief  of  Public Health  Service’s Div.  of Air 
Pollution,  testified before  Senate  Committee  on  Public Works’  Special 
Subcommittee on  Air  and Water  Pollution  that  investigation should  be 
made  of  “suitable  means”  t o   insure  that  rocket-fuel development  tests 
by  private  organizations  be  conducted  under  “suitably  controlled  con- 
ditions.”  He  said  PHS  had  “full  confidence”  that  Federal  agencies 
would apply  appropriate precautions  of  health protection of  rocket fuels 
“insofar  as  these are under  the direct control of  Federal  agencies.”  He 
named  beryllium  among  “the  most  toxic  and  hazardous  of  the  non- 
radioactive  metallic substances  used  in   industry  today,”  and  cited  also 
fluorine  as a  potentially  dangerous  component. 
(M&R ,   7/6/64,  11) 
*  Museum  of  Modern  Art  in New York  opened exhibition  titled  “20th  Cen- 
tury  Engineering,”  which  featured  195  spectacular and dramatic struc- 
tures  combining  beauty  with  utility.  NASA  Langley  Research  Center 
wind-tunnel was  represented  among  the  dams,  antennas,  observatories, 
(Huxtable,  NYT,  6/30/64,  29) 
skyscrapers, and  other structures. 
*  Arthur  Kantrowitz  delivered  1964  von  KBrmAn  Lecture  a t  MU  annual 
meeting. 
During June: Analysis of  infrared radiation measurements of  TIROS 11 meteor- 
ological  satellite was  detailed  by  R.  s. Hawkins  of  AFCRL.  Hawkins 
suggested that when  discrepancies ‘between data  from satellite and from 
other  sources  are   understood  and  accounted  for,  infrared  data  from 
meteorological  satellites could  provide  an   invaluable  tool  for   plotting 
and predicting course of  cold fronts as well a s  for  obtaining information 
on  structure of  frontal zones  and  regions  of  convective  activity. 
(OAR  
Research  Review,  6/64,  3)  
*  Total  number  of  contractor  and  civil  service  personnel  a t   NASA 
Michoud  Operations  passed  the  10,000 mark.  Of  the  total,  281  were 
(Marshall Star, 6/24/64,9) 
employees of  NASA. 
*  Water-cooled  space  suit,  employing  plastic  tubing  sewn  into  long under- 
wear,  was  in  research  and  development  a t   NASA  Manned  Spacecraft 
Center.  Begun  by  Royal Aircraft  Establishment  in  1962,  suit was un- 
dertaken  by  MSC  in  1963  when  Dr.  John  Billingham  left  RAE  to  join 
MSC.  Dr.  Billingham  said,  “In   operation  and  in  theory  the  suit  looks 
(M&R ,  
acceptable.  But  we must  test  it  much  more  for  reliability.” 
6/22/641,28) 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

231 
During  June:  Detailed  report  on  global satellite weather  prediction  system, 
“Swami”  (Stanford Worldwide Acquisition of  Msteorological Informa- 
tion), was completed by 31-man team of  Stanford Univ. students.  Three 
1,200-mi. circular  polar  orbit  satellites orbiting  120”  apart  would  re- 
ceive  meteorological  data  from  global  network  of  weather  balloons, 
transmit  the  stored  information  after  each  two-hour  orbit  to  a  single 
(M& R ,  6/22/64,25) 
ground command station. 
NASA-DOD-AEC  committee studying  space power  requirements of  U.S. space 
program  through  1975 presented  its  report  to  Aeronautics  and  Astro- 
nautics Coordinating Board  (AACB) . 
(M& R ,  6/22/64) 
*  NASA  Reliability  and  Quality Assurance  Office published  “Quality Assur- 
ance  Provisions  for  Government  Agencies,  June  1964  Edition”  ( NPC 
20&1A),  a  complete  revision,  reflecting  experience  gained  by  NASA 
(NASA  Re- 
and DOD  agencies at  supplier  operations on  behalf  of  NASA. 
lease 6 6 1 5 4 ;  NASA Announcement f3l-129) 
*  First  of  two  main  experiment  units  for  Orbiting  Astronomical Observa- 
tory  (Oao)  was  delivered  to  NASA  by  Univ.  of  Wisconsin.  Designed 
and  built  by  Cook  Electric  Co.  under  contract  to  the  university,  the 
experiment  consisted  of  clustered  16-in.  nebular  photometer  telescope, 
four 8-in. stellar photometer telescopes, and two scanning spectrometers. 
( A v .  Wk . ,  6/29/64,55) 
At  Institute  of  Navigation meeting in New  York,  panel discussion on pro- 
posed  civilian  navigational  satellite  system  reportedly  indicated  only 
mild  interest  by  potential  users of  the system.  Unnamed NASA  05c ia l s  
were  said  to  be  optimistic that  NASA-FAA-Commerce-DOD-Interior repre- 
sentatives would agree “in  the near future” on setting up an ad hoc com- 
(M& R ,   6/22/64, 
mittee  to  study  the  requirements  of  such  a  system. 
17 )  
*  A  60-ft.  pad  was  rapidly  fabricated  a t   Moffet  Field,  Calif.,  for 
full-scale evaluation  using  the  Bell  X-14  vertical  take-off  aircraft. 
In  
this  test  neither  the. 1,500”  F  temperature  nor  the  wheel-loading  ad- 
versely  affected  the  rapidly  prepared  pad,  AFSC  Research  and   Tech- 
nology  Div.  reported,  The  instant-landing  pad,  a  ground-hardener  of 
polyester  resin,  was  K i n g   developed  by  Air  Force  Aero  Propulsion 
Laboratory f o r  rapid preparation  of  landing sites fo r  future jet  vertical 
take-off  and   landing  (Vtol)  aircraft.  Operational Vtol  aircraft  would 
drop  or  spray  the  semi-liquid  Preparation  in  forward  combat  areas, 
land on it 15 min.  later.  (AFSC RTD Biennial R ~ E . ,  7/62-7/64,23) 
*  Douglas Missile &  Space Systems Div.  concluded  in   its manned Mars  ex- 
ploration  study for  NASA  Marshall f, .  ?light  Center that futur,  it-ter- 
planetary  space travelers  should be  no  taller  than  5’7’*  and  no  heavier 
than  145  lbs.  Six of  these “20 percentile” men-smaller 
than  approxi- 
mately  80 per  cent of  American m e n - o n  a manned Mars flight would 
require  ly3 lbs.  less  food per  day  than  larger  men,  thus  saving nearly 
500  lbs.  of  food=cargo weight  on  a  one-year trip.  Study  said  70,000 
Ibs.  could  be  saved  in  gross weight of  Mars  spacecraft if  the  six astro- 
(DMMSD  Apogee, 6/64) 
nauts were 20 percentile men. 
*  Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for Manned Space 
Flight,  described  in Astronautics & Aeronautics the future space capa- 
bilities  being  developed  fo r   the U.S. through  Project  Apollo.  T h e  
Saturn  IB,  Saturn  V,  and Apello manned  spacecraft would  provide ca- 
pabilities  including extended lunar explorations, orbiting laboratory re- 

232 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6  4 

search,  manned  escape missions, and long-duration  operations-includ- 
(A&A ,  6/64,26-29) 
ing satellite inspection and repair. 
During  June:  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff,  NASA  Associate Administrator 
for  Advanced  Research  and  Technology,  said  in  Scientific  American 
article  on  the  supersonic  transport  that  NASA  Langley  Research  Center 
and  Ames  Research  Center  had   “devised  several  aerodynamic  designs 
for what  they  call a  SCAT,  which  is an  acronym  for  ‘supersonic commer. 
cial  a i r   transport.,  Four  of  these designs,  known  a s  SCAT’S  4,  15,  16, 
and  17,  are  the products  of  eight  years of  research.  Each  design  has 
characteristics  that  make  it  somewhat  different from  the  others..  . . . 
NASA  engineers conducted extensive wind-tunnel tests of  the four scm 
6 6  
models  a t  the Langley  and Ames centers to  evaluate and compare  their 
aerodynamic  characteristics.  . . . It  is  evident  that  we  must  discover 
how  to  combine the supersonic  L/D  [lift-drag ratio]  characteristics of 
SCAT  4  with  the  subsonic  performance  of  SCAT  16.  we  are  optimistic 
that  this can be  done.  . . . 
Discussing  special  structural  problems  of  SST  designs,  Dr.  Bispling- 
hoff  said the metal  fatigue would be accelerated under exposure  to high 
temperatures  of  supersonic  flight,  but  a t  the  same  time  it  was  essential 
that  the airframe provide  safety and serviceability fo r  more than  10 yrs. 
or  30,000-50,000  hrs. flying time. 
bC Prolonged  screening  of  materials  by  NASA’s Langley  and Lewis  lab- 
oratories has identified a titanium alloy  that  appears to meet  the unique 
and stringent  requirements  for strength, stiffness and high  temperatures 
of  an  SST.  The alloy contains 90 percent  titanium, 8 percent  aluminum, 
1  percent  molybdenum  and  1  percent  vanadium.  . . .”  ( S c i .  Amer., 
6/@) 
*  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  Director  of  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center,  was 
(Marshall 
awarded  an   honorary  degree  by  Iowa  Wesleyan  College. 
Star, 6/17/64,1) 
*  Article written by Sen. Barry Goldwater, Republican nominee for President, 
in  which  he  laid  down  his  views  on   the  fo rm   the  US. space  program 
should  take,  appeared  in  Science  and  Mechanics:  “The  concept  that 
speeding  men  to   the  moon  i s   the  same  as  jockeying  trotters  over  a 
muddy  track  must  ‘be abandoned,  regardless  of  Kremlin  propaganda. 
The idea that we  can  cooperate  with the Russians  t o  do the job  quicker 
and  cheaper  i s   too  ludicrous  for   comment.  We  axe  spending  entirely 
too much money  on the manned moon program, when a carefully plotted 
program  using  unmanned  lunar landing equipment could  steadily build 
up  a  solid  body  of  scientific knowledge  about  the  lunar  environment 
that  would  increase the  safety factor fo r  astronauts much  later.  Auto- 
matic  landing  equipment  could  be  designed  a t   minimum  cost.  The 
program  should  expand  in  easy  steps,  each  one  leading  t o   the  next. 
The billions of  dollars thus saved could  be  profitably  invested in  other 
aspects of  space research.” 
Speaking  of  the  military  role  in  space, he  said:  “All  manned  space 
research  should be  directed  by  the military, with  national security and 
control of  the accesa to space as primary  goals.  The threat  from space 
now  and  in  the  foreseeable  future  is  from  spatial  regions  withi4  a 
thousand  miles  of Ear th   and  not  from lunar  distances.  Routine  daily 
surveillance  of  these  regions  must  be  established,  and  the  additional 
capabilities  of  positive  identification,  interception,  and   destruction  of 

233 
ASTRONAUTICS   AM,  AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 
hostile enemy space vehicles w i l l  be necessary.  This would be  the great- 
est  deterrent  to  an  enemy’s military  space  aspirations.  It  would  also 
give us  the means of  developing experienced space pilots,  scientific and 
technological methods,  and  new  scientific knowledge which  could  be 
used  later  in  sending men  to  the moon and the planets.  The hardware, 
on  a  routinely  reliable  basis,  would  be  available  off-the-shelf. 
“It might  be  added  that  almost every successful NASA  launch  to  date, 
manned and  unmanned, has been made with military support-with  mis- 
sile  rocket-boosters, launch  facilities, technical  know-how, communica- 
tions  (including  air  transport  of  boosters)  or  safety  p ro c e d u r e s -o r  
with  all  five.  . . . 
“Finally,  I believe that an immediate initial step of  any effective mili- 
tary  space program  must  be  a  manned  station  in  near  orbit  about  the 
Earth,  w i th   necessary  support  equipment.  . . .” 
Senator Goldwater  also stated  that  in  his  opinion there was th e  need 
for  two  crash programs  in  space research.  The first would develop the 
Nike-Zeus  antimissile  missile,  and  the   second  would  develop  the   po- 
tentiality of  lasers for use a s  military weapons.  (Science und Mechanics, 
6 / 6 4 ;  Wash. Pos t ,  7/21/64) 
During  June: France’s  Office  National  $Etudes  et  d e   Recherches  Aero- 
spatiales  ( ONERA) revealed i t  had successfully flight-tested hybrid rocket 
engine in  a rocket launched April 25 from Ceres sounding rocket facility 
on the  Ile du  Levant  in  the Mediterranean Sea.  Engine employed com- 
bination  of  liquid  nitric  acid oxidizer and unidentified solid fuel.  ( A v .  
Wk., 6/29/64,  24) 
Trustees  and  President  of  Clark  Univ.  announced  Clark’s  proposed  new 
library  would  be  named  the  “Robert  Hutchings  Goddard  Library”  in 
honor  of  the  distinguished  rocket  pioneer,  who  was  an  alumnus  and 
professor  of  physics  at Clark. 
(Clark Announcement) 
0  Pan American Airways’ Guided Missile Range Div.  was awarded one-year, 
$112 million  contract  from  USAF  for  continued operation  of  Air  Force 
( A v .  Wk., 6/29/a,  25) 
Eastern  Test  Range. 
During  Muy  and  June:  Project  Taper  (Turbulent  Air  Pilot  Environment 
Research)  was conducted by FAA and NASA to study turbulent air hazards 
for jet  aircraft  and ways for pilots  to  deal with them.  Project  involved 
flights into light-to-moderate turbulence at high altitudes by FAA Convair 
880 flown  by  FAA and NASA  pilots.  Data  on  motion  effects experienced 
in the cockpit, gathered in  the 800 flights, we re  used  in NASA  laboratory 
tests  on  motion  simulator.  I n   second  series  of  flight  tests,  using  FAA 
Boeing 720 airliner,  instruments recorded pilot  control actions and air- 
craft  response  in  turbulent  air,  also  tested  autopilot  and  yaw  damper 
(Hudson, N Y T ,  5/1/@&, 58) 
fo r  their  gbility  to  maintain  control. 

July  1964 

July  1 : Referring  t o   Centaur  rocket  (AC-3)  which  splashed  into  Atlantic 
an   engineering  point  of  view  the  flight  was  highly  successful.  . . .’, 
on  June  30  af ter  failing to  orbit,  NASA officials pointed  out  that  “from 
Five of  six test objectives were achieved, and the sixth-liquid-hydrogen 
engine  start  and  run-was 
partially  achieved.  Grant  Hansen,  vice- 
p re iden t   of  General Dynamics/Astronautics,  which  built  Centaur,  said 
examination  of  instrument  readings  from  the  flight  indicated  failure 
of  a  nylon  coupling  which  joined  two  shafts in  hydraulic system  asso- 
ciated  with  one  of  Centaur’s  two  engines.  Coupling  seemed  to   have 
failed about four seconds after Centaur stage ignited.  (Wash. Eve. Star, 
7/2/%  A5) 
Soviets launched  COSMOS XXXIV  artificial  earth  satellite equipped  for   sci- 
entific study of  outer space.  It was par t  of  program announced by Tass 
on March  16,1962.  Period was 90 min.,  apogee was 360 km.  (223 mi.), 
perigee  was  205  km.  (127 m i . ) ,  and equatorial  inclination was 64~96” .  
(Tass, Kumsomolskaya  Pravda, 7/2/64,  1, ATSS-T  Trans.) 
*  President  Johnson  congratulated  American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics  (AIAA)  on   its  first  annual  meeting  and  technical  display, 
held  June 29-July  2,  Washington.  He said:  “I  am particularly  pleased 
that  you  have  selected  this  occasion  to  honor  the  highly  respected and 
capable  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space 
(AIAA Booster,  7/2/64+, 1) 
Administration.” 
NASA’s  George E.  Mueller  reported  to  AIM  that  “beginning  in  1958 with 
the  first  United  States satellite  launching,  the  Explorer-Jupiter  C,  and 
continuing  through  the Thor, Atlas,  Thor-Delta,  and Thor-Agena  to the 
Saturn  V  in   1968 through  1970,  the  cost  of  payload  in  orbit  will  be 
reduced  by  about  three orders of  magnitude. 
“This  remarkable  decrease  in  costs  results  from  the  growing  relia- 
bility  and  operational  effectiveness of  o u r  launch  vehicles  and from  the 
trend  towards  larger  and   larger  weight-lifting capacity.  The   relative 
incT2ase has been greate:  ‘- .’ 
;e  vehicles because  of  the economies 
associated  with  their  operation.” 
Regarding  the  extension  of  capability  of  existing  launch  vehicles, 
Mueller  reported:  “Basically,  our  launch  vehicle  technology  i s   sound, 
and  it  is  advancing  in  an  orderly, evolutionary  fashion.  We have mas- 
tered  the design, manufacturing, transporting, checking out, and launch- 
ing of  small, medium,  and large launch vehicles. 
“Existing  space  boosters have  done  a  creditable job.  Engine  relia- 
bility  has  been  exceptionally  good;  the  clustering  of  relatively  large 
numbers  of  engines  is now  a proven  technology;  uprating of  engines in  
thrust  and  efficiency  ha s   been  possible;  and  further  uprating  can  be 
accomplished to  meet  additional payload  demands. 
234 

235 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
“We  a re   developing  a  basic  launch  vehicle  industrial  and   techno- 
logical  capability  that  can  be  extended  and  expanded  fo r   both  future 
space exploration and exploitation. 
“For  the  future,  we  a re   building on  today’s  firm foundation. 
New 
high-energy propellants and nuclear  rockets have great promise.  Large 
solid-propellant motors  are   being  employed.  Much  progress  is  being 
made  in   correlating  high-energy  propellants and  engine  materials  and 
engineering  technology. 
“Increased  emphasis  will  be  placed  on management  and the develop- 
ment  of  reliability.  Management responsibilities will  continue  t o  grow 
more  complex,  while  cost effectiveness w i l l   continue to   be stressed.  A 
smaller  inventory  of  vehicles  will  be  developed  whick;  have  greater 
reliability and broader utility. 
“All  in all, we  can look forward t o  a new  and challenging era of  prog- 
ress in launch vehicle technology.” 
(Text) 
J d y  1 : Paul G.  Johnson  of  AEC-NASA  SNPO  said a t  AIAA  meetings  that  early 
explorers of  Mars may  pass  by  planet  Venus  on  way  back  to  earth,  to 
slow down  spacecraft to   safe re-entry speed.  Side  tr ip  would  lengthen 
voyage by  a  few months.  Johnson  also  said that nuclear  rockets might 
make Mars  tr ip   possible in  1980’s.  Mission  could  involve six to  eight 
(NASA   Release 6 1 6 5 )  
crewmen and take from 400  to  500  days. 
*  Dr.  Eugene G.  Fubini, Deputy Director  of  Defense Research and Engineer- 
ing,  called on  defense  industry a t  AIAA  meetings  to  stop what  he called 
unjustified  and  potentially  dangerous  “gloom  and  doom  talk”  about 
future  defense  spending.  He  said  Pentagon  R&D spending,  currently 
a t  a  $5.5 billion  annual level,  should  remain  relatively stable  in coming 
years.  Such  pessimistic  fears  on  part  of  industry,  based  on  recent 
very  small  decrease  in  defense  budget,  Fubini  said,  could  prompt  top 
engineers and scientists to move into other industries and thereby weaken 
U S .   military  posture  by  reducing  industry’s  capability  of  generating 
(A IAA   Booster, 
new  ideas  for  DOD  and  developing  new  weapons. 
7/2/64;  N Y T ,  7/2/64+  32M; Av. Wk., 7/13/64,19) 
President Johnson  transmitted NASA’s Ninth Semiannual Report  to  the Con- 
gress  on  progress  and  projects  for  period  from  January  1,  1963,  to 
June  30, 1963.  President’s  covering  message  stated  that  “the  breadth 
of  performance  promises  subsequent  periods  of  even  greater  accom- 
plishment  in meeting the challenge of  space.” 
(NASA  LAR  III /132)  
Richard H.  Nelson,  Boeing’s  project manager  for production  of  Saturn V 
rockets, said production  was about 10 weeks behind  schedule because of 
a  parts  shortage.  However,  first  rocket  scheduled  for  flight was  t o  be 
delivered  on  schedule  in  late  summer  or  fall  of  1966.  Present  delay 
affected  Saturns  designed  to  test  design  and  engines  in  ground  firings 
a t  MSFC.  Last  10 of  Saturn V’s  were expected  to  be  delivered to  Cape 
Kennedy  by  late  1968.  Nelson  was  addressing  Aviation  Writers  As- 
sociation in Houston. 
(Houston Chron., 7/2/64) 
*  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  since  1958,  received 
the  AIAA premiere  award,  the  Louis W.  Hill  Award  fo r   1961, for  the 
Outstanding  Contribution  to  Space  Transportation.  Dr.  Dryden  was 
honored  for his  fluid mechanics research  leading to space era,  technical 
leadership of  NACA  and NASA  teams which made civilian space program 
a  reality,  and  personal  contribution  t o   research  in  the X-15  program. 
He was called “a symbol of ou r  aerospace success.” 

236 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A ERONAU T IC S ,   1 9 6 4 
In  his address a t  the AIAA  Honors Night Banquet, Dr. Dryden said that 
those  involved  with  our  space  program  must  consider  broad  national 
goals  in   addition to  scientific details.  Other  goals mentioned  by  Dry- 
den were  “to  obtain maximum  benefit  t o  the welfare of  the Nation  and 
to   all mankind”  and “to  provide  not  only material  benefits to  free man 
in  a  peaceful world,  but  also incentives for  mental  and spiritual growth 
and  accomplishment.”  While  recalling  the  day  about  40  years  ago, 
“when  a n   airplane  was  essentially the  product,  from  concept  to  final 
machine,  of  one man,  the  designer  with  the  aid  of  two  or   three  assist- 
ants,’,  Dr.  Dryden  said  today’s  space  technologist “. . . must  search 
for  knowledge  of  the  facts,  conduct  our  work  with  devotion  to  intel- 
lectual honesty  and  objectivity, and  realize in  our   activities the highest 
moral aspirations and ideals of  which we a re  capable.” 
Dr.  Dryden  expressed  confidence that  the  Nation  would  continue  t o  
support comprehensive space exploration program  because of  sum total 
of  goals  space  planning  strove  for.  These  included  national  prestige, 
national  defense,  human  knowledge  of  space,  development  of  efficient 
space vehicles, and  utilization and international exchange of  technologi- 
cal  information.  He  added:  “I  believe  that  the  rate  and  scale of  the 
program are  not excessive in view of  the great resources of  this country.” 
(AIAA,  The  Louis  W .  HZ  Award  pamphlet,  7/1/64;  AIAA  Booster, 
7/2/64,  1 ; Speech Text; NASA Release 64-161) 
July I : At AIAA banquet, G.  Edward Pendray Award was presented to Andrew 
G.  Haley for his “pioneering  contribution to the analysis of  governmental 
and  international  legal  questions  arising  from  the  rapid  development 
of  space  travel  and  space  exploration,  a s   exemplified  by  his  book, 
Space  Law  and  Government,  published  in  1963.”  AIAA  Lawrence  B. 
Sperry  Award  was  presented  to   Daniel  M.  Tellep, Manager  of  Launch 
and Entry  Thermodynamics Research  and Engineering  a t  the Lockheed 
Missiles and Space Co.,  for Tellep’s “contributions  to re-entry technology 
through participation  in  the United  States’ first  re-entry  flight  test  pro- 
gram  and  for  advancements  in  the  field  of  heat  transfer  as   reIated  to  
aerospace  programs.”  Also  presented  were  the  1964  Graduate  and 
Undergraduate Student Awards to Richard C.  Lessman and Lawrence S. 
(AIAA  Annual Mtg. Program; AIAA Booster, 7/2/64) 
Iwan. 
*  At  AIAA  former  American  Airlines’  vice  president  William  Littlewood 
said problems  of  sonic boom and economics might postpone introduction 
of  supersonic  airliner  from 1970 target date to  some time between  1975 
and 1980.  Problems  of  practicability and noise would have to  be solved 
before supersonic  transport became  reality, Mr.  Littlewood s a i d   (F in-  
ney,  NYT,  7J2/64,  28) 
NASA  awarded  $1,125,040 contract to  Ling-Temco-Vought for construction 
of  Dynamic  Crew  Procedures Simulator which  would  allow  astronauts 
to  simulate orbital, lunar, and interplanetary  flights in model spacecraft. 
Simulator’s  completion was  scheduled  for May  1965, when  it would  be 
(MSC   PAO;  Denver  Pos t ,   7/5/64) 
delivered  to  MSC. 
*  NASA  announced  award of  contract  to  North American  Aviation’s Rocket- 
dyne  Div.  to   provide  four  RN - 6   liquid-hydrogen-cooled nozzles  to  be 
used  in  tests.  Three  nozzles  were  to  be  used  for  Nerva  program,  the 
fourth  for  Lewis  Research  Center’s  Advanced  Nuclear  Rocket  Systems 
(NASA  Release  64-162) 
Analysis  Program. 

237 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 
July 1 : NASA  awarded contract to  Documentation, Inc.,  of  Bethesda, Md.,  for 
$4.9 million to  operate NASA  Scientific and Technical  Information Facil- 
ity for another year.  Maintaining world’s  largest collection of  aerospace 
literature,  facility was  to  operate  selective dissemination  of  information 
program  during  coming  year,  using  automatic  equipment  t o   notify 
individual scientists and engineers  of  new  developments in  their  special 
(NASA  Release  64-163) 
fields. 
*  Dr.  Oscar  E.  Anderson,  Jr.,  was  appointed  Director  of  International Or- 
ganizations  Div.  of  NASA’s Office of  International  Programs.  He  was 
previously  Project  0 6 c e r   in  Cooperative  Projects  Div.  of  same office. 
Before coming t o  NASA  in 1962, Anderson was a historian a t  AEC. 
(NASA 
Announcement  64-135) 
*  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.,  discussed with NASA  Administrator  James E. Webb  the 
possibility of  the  former astronaut’s  returning  to   NASA  in  advisory  ca- 
pacity,  according to  NASA  spokesman,  but  nothing had  been  decided by 
(UPI,  Wash. Post, 7/2/64;  AP, Wash. Eve.  Star, 7/2/64,  A8) 
the two. 
*  Dr.  Allen  E.  Puckett,  vice  president  of  Hughes  Aircraft,  said  world’s 
first  commercial  communications  satellite,  Early  Bird,  being  built  for 
ComSatCorp, would  be  completed  in   less than  one year  and  ready  for 
launch  a month  later.  Early  Bird  was  a  first  step  toward  global  tele- 
communications  and   was  a  commercial  version  of  Hughes’  Syncom 
satellite.  (Miles, L. A.  Times, 7/1/64) 
NASA-USAF  Memorandum  of  Understanding  defined  responsibilities  of 
NASA  and various USAF  organizations which loan  aircraft to NASA  o r  pro- 
vide logistical support for such aircraft. 
( NMI  2 -334A )  
July 1-2:  NASA’s  Science and  Technology Advisory  Committee for Manned 
Space  Flight  was  holding  three  days  of  meetings  with  MSC officials  on 
problems  related  to   Project  A p l l o .   Members  of  Committee,  estab- 
lished By  NASA  Administrator  James  E. Webb  in  December  1963, and 
which  functioned  in  advisory  capacity  to  NASA  Associate Administrator 
for  Manned  Space Flight,  Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  delved  into problems 
posed  by  launch vehicle systems,  spacecraft systems, launch  operations, 
science program,  and   space medicine. 
MIT  physicist  Dr.  Charles  Townes  said  a t   MSC  meeting  of  the  Com- 
mittee that  he believed  astronauts,  not  scientists, should  be first men  to 
explore  moon.  Scientists,  he  said,  would  concentrate  on  their  own 
specialties  in  exploring  the  moon’s  surface,  but  astronauts  trained  in  
scientific  principles  would  bring  back  important  information  on  the 
( MSC Roundup, 7/8/64,1;  Houston Chron., 7/2/64) 
moon as  a whole. 
*  Manpower  needs  of  civil  aviation  were  discussed in Washington  by  FAA’s 
Aviation  Human  Resources Study Board.  (FAA Release  64-61) 
July 2:  House adopted  by voice vote the conference report on NASA  FY  1965 
authorization bill  (H.R.  10456) and sent bill  to Senate.  Senate adopted 
conference  report,  clearing bill for President’s signature.  Bill provided 
NASA  authorization of  $5,227,506,000  of  which  $4,341,100,000 was  for 
research  and  development,  $622,880,500  was  for  construction of  facili- 
ties  and  8623,525,500  was  for  administrative  operations. 
(NASA   LAR 
III/133) 
*  Sen.  J.  W.  Fulbright  (D.-Ark.)  called for  10% cut  in  NASA’s Apollo  FY  
1965 budget,  in  statement  submitted  to   Senate Appropriations  Commit- 
tee.  He stated  1970 Apollo goal had  already been  missed, SO  that cut in 
funds would have no serious effect, and that NASA’s past estimates of  costs 

238 

A S TRONAU T IC S   AND  A ERONAU T IC S ,   1 9  6 4 

and  time  were  not  reliable,  so that  little  confidence could  be  placed  in 
(Wash.  Eve. Star, 7/2/64,  AS) 
NASA’s meeting  its  1970 deadline. 
Jdy 2:  USAF  launched  Thor-Agena  D  space  booster  from  WTR  with  undis- 
closed satellite payload. 
(HRN - 4   8 )  
0  At  AIAA,  William  G.  Huber  of  MSFC  outlined  NASA’s plans  for  space 
projects beyond  Apollo project.  According  to   one set  of  plans  for  the 
1970-1990  period,  space  program  costs would  be  $6,97O,OOO,OM) per 
year  for  20  years.  This figure was highest yet  publicly discussed by  a 
NASA  official.  Huber  was  outlining  possibilities  for  the  future  in   his 
(Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
discussion  of  large  post-Saturn  launch  vehicles. 
7/3/64] 
0  Paul  D.  Reader,  Head  of  Lewis  Research  Center’s  Electrostatic Thrustor 
Systems Section, presented  test results of  experimental  ion engine which 
was  six  times  larger  than  any  other  electric  engine.  Large  engine 
ejected  beam  of  charged  particles 20  in.  in  diameter  with  power  of  30 
kw.  Development of  large,  high-powered ion  engines, which may  pro- 
vide  thrust  for   extended  deep-space exploration,  was  step  in   direction 
of  solving weight  problem  posed  by  electrical circuitry for   smaller ion 
( LRC  Release 64-60) 
engines. 
0  Columbia  Univ.  Electronics  Research  Laboratories  announced  develop- 
ment  of  plasma-jet  generator  that  produced  continuous  jet  of  hot 
to  20,000° F-and 
plasma-8,000 
that  required  no  confining jacket  or 
( A & A ,  9/64,97) 
chamber. 
0  In   satellite  communications  demonstration  a t   ALAA  Washington  meetings, 
Lt.  Cdr.  J.  F.  DeboId,  Commanding  0 5 c e r ,   U S .  Naval  Research  and 
Development  Satellite  Communications  Group,  spoke  via  SYNCOM  11 
satellite with his second  in command on  board USNS  Kingsport.  K ings-  
por t ,  which  can  acquire,  track,  control, and communicate via  a  satellite 
while  cruising  at  sea,  was  built  by  Navy  to  complement  two  Army- 
developed  communications  terminals on  East  and West  Coasts. 
( AIAA 
Booster,  7/2/64,  2 )  
*  Engineers  proposed  development  of  intercontinental  ballistic  troop  trans- 
port  capable of  carrying 1,200 troops to  any trouble spot on earth  in 45 
minutes.  Such  an  Ithacus  rocket transport  would  be  ideal  for  helping 
stamp  out  “brush  fire”  conflicts,  according  to  engineers  Philip  Bono 
and George C.  Goldbaum of  Douglas Aircraft who  spoke a t  A IM   annual 
If  funds were committed to project, they  considered  the ICBM 
meeting. 
transport  system  might  be  operational  by  1975. 
(Hous ton   Chron . ,  
7/3/64) 
0  Final Polaris A-3  in test program was  launched  from Cape Kennedy. 
Ad- 
vanced  Polaris’ 2,500-mi.  flight was  41st  in program  begun  in  summer 
(M& R ,  7/13/64,14) 
1962. 
July  3 :   In   preparation  for  launching  of  seventh  Saturn  I  rocket  (SA-7), 
NASA  had completed major phase of  evaluation of  flight records of  SA-6. 
Review  of  S A 4  data,  in  form  of  magnetic  tapes,  strip  charts,  oscil- 
lograms,  photographs,  etc.,  was  made  in  collaboration  with  major  ve- 
hicle contractors.  Analysis  reaffirmed  the  success of  previous  flight on 
May  28  despite  loss  of  one  engine  23  sec.  before  engine  programed 
(NASA   Release 64-160) 
cutoff. 
July 5: NASA  extended contract with Mason-Rust Co.  for provision  of  support 
services  at  Michoud  Operations  near  New  Orleans.  New  $6,839,069 
modification  awarded  by  MSFC,  to  continue  in  force  till  end  of  1964, 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19 6 4 

239 

(Marshall  Star, 
increased  total  Mason-Rust  contract  to  $17,751,806, 
7 /8 /a ,   1 )  
July 5:  Library of Congress had distributed to 30 large city and state libraries 
copies of  Braille translations of  books  on  space exploration.  These in- 
formation  aids for the blind had  been published  by Library of  Congress 
(Las Cruces Sun-News, 7/5/64) 
under a NASA grant. 
*  Effective  this  date,  USAF  Western  Test  Range’s  facility  a t   Point  Arguello 
became par t  of  Vandenberg AFB,  and its facility a t  Kwajalein  Island was 
turned  over  to   the  Army.  Organization  plans  for  National  Range  Di- 
vision  with  i ts   Eastern  Test  Range  and Western  Test  Range  had  been 
( L . A .  Times, 7/2/68) 
announced M9y 4. 
*  During 1,OOOth  session  in U.S.S.R.  on  radar probing  of  planets, Tass said, 
Soviet  scientists  used  newly  designed  equipment  and  high-speed  com- 
puter  to  successfully  gather  data  on  topography  of  planet  Venus. 
(P ravda ,  7/5/64,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
*  Second  US .   manned  rocket  flight  was  made  20  years  ago  today,  when 
Northrop  MX-324  flying wing was  towed  aloft  and propelled  by  200- 
1b.-thrust Aerojet  rocket engine  and flown  for  four minutes by  test  pilot 
(Clark, NYT,  7/5/64, 
Harry  Crosby  over  Harper’s  Dry  Lake,  Calif. 
44; A&A ,   1915-60 ,47)  
*  Reported  that new  125-fk. radiotelescope opened  a t  England’s  Jodrell Bank 
Radio  Astronomy  Station early  in  June  could give insight into creation 
of  universe.  Radiotelescope was  to  detect  and  analyze high-frequency 
radio  pulses  emitted  by  stars  6  billion  light-years  distant. 
(Reuters, 
Chic. Trib., 7/6/64) 
During week  of  Ju ly   5-11:  Unmanned  paraglider  wing  designed  to  make 
air-to-ground cargo  deliveries t o  forward battle  areas successfully com- 
pleted  series  of  three  flight  tests  at  U S .  Army  Yuma  Proving Ground, 
A r k .   The paraglider,  also  designed to be a spacecraft recovery system, 
slipped  three  1,000-lb.  cargo  packages  to   earth  without  mishap  from 
3,100 ft.  Demonstration was performed  by Space and Information  Div. 
of  North  American  Aviation  under  program  called  Precision  Aerial 
( NAA  S&ID  Skywriter, 7/17/64,  1) 
Delivery System (PADS ) .  
July  6 :   USAF  launched  Atlas-Agena  D  space booster  from  Vandenberg  AFB, 
(M&R ,   7/13/64,  14 ;  SBD,  7/8/64, 
Calif.,  with  unidentified payload. 
33 1 
European  Space  Research  Organization  (ESRO )   made  first  launching,  a 
British  Skylark  sounding rocket,  to  altitude  of  125  mi.  from  Salto  d i  
( N Y T ,  7/11/64,  5 )  
Quirra  range  in  Sardinia. 
*  NASA  selected  International Business Machines Corp.  Federal  Systems Div. 
to   supply  technical  services for  support  of  Goddard  Space  Flight  Cen- 
ter’s  computer  facilities.  The  computation  services and  allied systems 
permitted  GSFC  to  acquire high-speed  raw  data  from  spacecraft  and  to 
convert  it  almost  instantaneously  into  intelligible  information concern- 
ing the spacecraft.  Contractor  was to staff  and operate computer  facili- 
ties related to launch monitoring  system a t  Cape Kennedy, the early flight 
tracking  station  on  Bermuda,  and  GSFC control  center. 
(NASA   Release 
64-166) 
MSC  announced  approval of  improved  Gemini spacesuit for  use by  Apollo 
astronauts  in  the  earlier  flights  in  earth  orbit.  Adoption  of  Gemini 
spacesuit would  allow more  time  for  development  of  Apollo  suit, which 
would  allow  astronauts  greatest  mobility  for  walking  on  surface  of 
moon. 
(Houston Post,  7 /7 /M )  

240 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

airlines pilot who used a weather map based on information trans- 
a Tiros meteorological satellite  on  a  flight from New 
ar, Africa, said “. . . the map was 50 accurate as to be 
e.  . . . in  my  estimation we   have  found  the  answer, 
let’s  send  up  more Tim.”  Weather maps based  on Tiros  information 
were   being  given  to  pilots  flying  international  routes,  a s   a  matter  of 
(Las Cruces Swn-News, 7/6/64) 
course. 
*  I n  Aviation  Week editorial,  Robert  Hotz  said that  until  the past  two years 
most nations in the world considered space technoIogy to be monopoly of 
the  competing U S .   and U.S.S.R.  Now  they  we re  beginning to partici- 
pate  in  space p r o g r am   themselves.  Two primary  reasons  given  were 
technical success of  weather and  communications satellites and  “enlight- 
ened  and  effective”  program  in  international  cooperation  operated  by 
NASA.  Hotz  saw  international  space  cooperation  as  the  most  powerful 
force binding nations of  the world if  early promise of  international space 
technology  is  realized. 
“Perhaps  the  most  heartening  aspect  of  the  international  expansion 
of  space activity is the manner  in which the hard  technical and financial 
facts  a re   persuading  nations  to  work  together  on  cooperative projects 
ranging  from  global  satellite  systems  to  booster  development  and 
scientific exploration. 
“Pa r t  of  this has been  achieved through the NASA  international  coop- 
eration  program  for  which  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  Deputy  NASA  Admin- 
istrator;  Arnold  Frutkin,  head  of  the  international  programs  office  of 
NASA;  and  Dr.  Harry  Goett,  director  of  Goddard  Space Flight  Center, 
deserve special credit. 
“The  other portion  has been  achieved through  Communications Satel- 
lite  Corp.,  currently  organizing  global  communications  system  with 
heavy  international  participation,  and  through  the  US. Weather  Bu- 
reau’s  leadership  in  developing a global weather satellite system.  . . .” 
( A v .  W k . ,  7/6/64;  CRY  7/31/64,  A4040-41) 
Today  with 
0  McDonnell Aircraft  Corp.  ceIebrated  its  25th  anniversary. 
facilities worth  $90  million,  a  )backlog of  $1  billion  in  contracts,  and 
35,000  employees,  the  company  looked  back  to  the  day  in  1939 when 
James  S.  McDonnell’s  office had  a  typewriter,  one  employee,  and  no 
contracts.  ( AP,  New  Orleans Times-Picayune, 7/6/64) 
*  Scholars  o n   UCLA faculty,  having  judged  that  space  age  overemphasized 
science  in  education  at  the  expense  of  the  humanities,  sought  support 
for  proposed  independent  National  Humanities  Foundation.  Founda- 
tion  was  to  be  structurally  similar  to  NSF.  Proposal,  drawn  up by  M)- 
man  Commission  on  the  Humanities,  was  already  in  the   hands  of 
(Hartt,  L .A .   Times,  7/6/64) 
President  Johnson. 
July  7 :  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  S.  McNamara  reported  to  President 
Johnson  that  DOD’S  cost-reduction efforts  had  saved  GovernmGnt  $2.5 
billion,  iastead  of  previously estimated $1 billion,  during  FY  1964.  I n  
next  three  years  DOD’S  annual  savings would  total  at  Ieast  $4.6  billion. 
McNamara singled out Titan 111 contract with Martin Co.  as one of  best- 
managed contracts DOD had,  as result  of  incentives applied  to program. 
Spending on Titan 111 program w a s  1% below cost estimate.  McNamara 
assured  reporters  that  savings  were  not  being  achieved  a t   expense  of 
defense posture.  ( N Y T ,  7/8/M,  1, 3;  M&R ,   7/13/64.,  11) 

ASTRONATJTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

241 
Ju2y  7:  U.S.  Army  presented  two  pioneer  communications satellites,  Score 
and  Courier,  to  Smithsonian  Institution  during  opening of  Museum of 
History  and  Technology’s  Hall  of  Electricity.  Both Satellites were de- 
veloped  a t   present  Army  Electronics  Command,  Ft.  Monmouth,  N.J. 
(Balt. Sun, 7 / 8 / a )  
*  In  study  financed  by  NASA,  a Mexico City matador  had his heart beat,  res- 
piratory  rate,  and  body  temperature  monitored  during  the  height  of  a 
bull  fight.  Readings from sensors fixed to his skin were telemetered to 
instruments inside bull  ring.  Doctors at  MSC used information  in  study 
to  determine  how  much  physical  stress  human  body  could  withstand 
and  what  effect  stress  had  on  performance.  I t   had  been  determined 
previously  that  many  athletes  undergo  more  physical  stress  than  do 
astronauts in flight.  (AP, NYT,  7/8/64.,  1 2 ;  MSC Roundup, 7/22/64,7) 
Yevgeny F.  Loginov, head  of  Soviet Union’s  airline,  Aeroflot,  said Soviet 
designers were   working on  supersonic airliner.  He  indicated U.S.S.R. 
hoped  to  have  one  in  operation  before  the  U.S. 
(AP, NYT,  7/8/64, 
58 )  
July  8:  X-15  No.  3,  piloted  by  Capt.  Joe  Engle  (U SA F ) ,   flew  3,511  mph 
(mach 4.94)  and  gained  altitude  of  170,000 ft.  in  first  test  of  infrared 
horizon  scanner  designed to  give  sharper  outline of  earth to  astronauts 
re-entering  earth’s  atmosphere.  Flight  also  enabled  Engle  to  make 
pilot  checkout  of  adaptive  control  system  which  had  ability  to  sense 
atmospheric  conditions  surrounding  the  craft.  Flight  was  postponed 
(NASA  X-15  Proj. 0%; AP,  @ash. Post, 
twice before successful effort. 
7/9/64) 
*  Scientists  from  the  Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Laboratories,  the  
Swedish Space Committee, and  NASA  announced they would  investigate 
the  natuxe  of  noctilucent clouds during  a  period  starting  the  last week 
in  July  and Extending through Aug.  24.  This would  be the  second  in  
series  of  rocket-borne  experiments  to  be  conducted  f rom*  Kronogird 
Range  in   Northern  Sweden.  Principal  purpose  of  experiments was  to 
confirm results of  experimental flights completed in  August 1962, when 
it was  tentatively determined  that  noctilucent clouds  were  composed  of 
meteoric particles or the residue of  burned  out meteors.  Program calls 
fo r  the  firing  of  four  Nike-Apache rockets  fo r   collection purposes  and 
fou r  Nike-Cajun rockets to  measure  temperatures  and  winds  associated 
(OAR   Release 7-64-2) 
w i t h   the  presence o r   absence of  the  clouds. 
a  NASA  announced  grant  of  $1,125,000  to   univ.  of  Illinois  to   finance con- 
struction  of  research  laboratory  facilities  a s   wing  to  university’s  Co- 
ordinated  Science Laboratory.  To  be  called Aerospace Research Cen- 
ter,  the  facilities were  to  be  for  investigations of  ionosphere properties, 
propulsion,  molecular  densities,  rendezvous  problems,  and  plasma 
physics. 
(NASA  Release 64-169) 
*  After  two  previous  failures,  USAF  successfully  launched  four-stage, solid- 
fuel Athena missile.  Rocket  was  fired  from  Green  River,  Utah,  on es- 
timated 15-min., 475-mi. flight to White Sands, N. Mex.,  carrying one of 
series  of  subscale  experimental  re-entry  vehicles  being  tested  as  part 
of  program  to  develop advanced  re-entry vehicles  fo r  space travel  and 
( AP, Hartford Courant, 
ICBM’s. 
No  other details of  flight were given. 
7/9/64) 
Senate  Independent  Offices  Subcommittee  of  Committee  on  Appro- 
priations  concluded its hearings on H.R.  11296, FY 1965 appropriations 
for  independent offices  (including NASA). 
(NASA  LAB III/134-135) 

242 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 ,  

J d y   8:  European  Space  Research  Organization  launched  second  British 
Skylark  sounding  rocket  with  scientific payload  to  altitude  of  125 mi. 
from  Salt0  di  Quirra  range  in  Sardinia.  This  launch  and  identical 
one the  previous day were initial attempts of  the 10-nation organization. 
( N Y T ,  7/11/64,  5)  
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  told  Senate Appropriations  Commit- 
tee’s  Independent  Offices  Subcommittee that  15 Saturn  V  flights were 
planned  for  Project  Apollo  program,  the  lunar  landing  to  be  accom- 
plished  in the last three months of  1969 with the  fifteenth flight.  Webb 
also  said  that  i f   the  proposed  $5.3  billion  NASA  budget  for  fiscal  year 
1965 were  cut  so  that  the Apollo program  had  t o  be  slowed  down,  the 
cost of  the program would increase by a  billion dollars with each added 
year  of  delay. 
(Text) 
0  Rocketdyne Div.  of  North American Aviation  received  four  NASA  contract 
modifications worth  $22,378,626  on  existing research  and development 
production  contracts  f o r   the  F-1  engines, which provide  thrust  in  first 
stage  of  Saturn  V  launch  vehicle.  NASA  also  awarded  contract  modi- 
fications  to  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.  totaling  $31,471,836  for  additional 
work  on  the S-IV  and S-IVB  rocket  stages. 
(Marshall Star, 7/15/64, 
1,9; Nashville Tennessean, 7/9/64) 
Donald  K.  Slayton,  Assistant  Director  for  Flight  Crew  Operations,  MSC, 
announced specific assignments for astronauts. 
Included in  assignments 
was that of  Alan Shepard, Jr., who was named chief  of  Astronaut Office, 
taking place of  Slayton, who  had been  acting in the position  in addition 
( MSC Roundup, 7 / 8 / a ,   1) 
to other duties. 
*  Sir  Bernard  Lovell,  Director  of  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental  Station,  re- 
ported  in  N e w   Scientist that  technical  difficulties, and  not  a  deliberate 
slackening  of  effort,  were  hampering  Soviet  activities  in   getting  men 
to  the  moon.  He  noted  that  the  Russians  apparently  had  not  made  a 
probe  work  in  space  successfully for  more  than  a  few weeks  and  con- 
cluded  that  the  Soviets were  failinq  where “once  they  shone-in 
basic 
(Sirnons, Wash. Post,  7/9/64) 
rocketry techniques.” 
FAA  experiments  conducted  over  Oklahoma  City  during  prior  five 
months  showed  that  the  magnification  of  a  sonic  boom  under  certain 
atmospheric conditions  occurred  more  frequently  and  with  more  force 
than had been predicted.  The unexpected finding led FAA Administrator 
Najeeb  E.  Halaby to  declare  at  a  news  conference that  the sonic boom 
problem  presented by  a  supersonic  airliner  appeared  to  be  “more  sen- 
ous”  than  had  been  supposed.  Halaby  rejected  charges  that  nation’s 
supersonic  airliner  program  vias  k . 3   hasty.  He  said  tbat  those  most 
concerned with the plane’s  development felt that  they were “going about 
the right rate.”  Further  sonic boom tests would be made, he said, prob- 
(Finney, NYT ,   7/9/64,  12 ;   Wash. Post,  7/9/ 
ably  over  desert  areas. 
64) 
ComSatCorp announced that  six persons had  been  nominated by  its board 
of  directors  fo r  election to  the new  board  by public stockholders.  They 
were:  Leo D. Welch, Dr. Joseph V.  Charyk, David M. Kennedy, George L. 
Killion,  Leonard  H.  Marks,  and  Bruce  G.  Sundlun.  The  corporation 
announced  that  the  first  annual meeting  of  the  shareholders was  tenta- 
tively  planned  $or  Sept.  17  in   Washington. 
(ComSatCorp  Release, 
7/8/64;  NYT ,   7/9/64?,  43C,  4%) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19 64, 

243 

Ju2y 8: Dr. John P. Meehan, physiologist a t  Univ.  of  Southern California, an- 
nounced  he   would  begin  experiment  in  which  15  young  men  would 
lie  fiat on  their  backs  for  30  days,  then  be  put  in  a centrifuge and  be 
subjected  t o   forces  eight  times  normal  gravity  while  attempting  to 
operate  simulated  space  capsule  controls.  Purpose  of  the   experiment 
was  t o   duplicate  effect  of  long  periods  of  weightlessness  in  space  on 
body’s  heart-blood  system and  t o  devise ways  of  overcoming  it. 
(AP, 
Balt.  Sun,  7 / 9 / M )  
0  Teamster  President James  R.  Hoffa ordered  end to  picketing tha t  had tied 
(Wash.  Daily  News, 
up  vital  construction  work  a t   Cape  Kennedy. 
7/8/64) 
July 9 :  NASA  Nike-Apache vehicle  launched  a t  1 2 1 3  a.m.  EDT from Wallops 
Station carried 65-lb. instrumented  payload to 1M-mi. altitude in experi- 
ment  t o  measure  light intensity and charged  particle flux a s  functions of 
altitude.  Payload  and  spent  second  stage,  which  were  not  separated 
during  flight,  impacted  98 mi.  downrange  in  Atlantic  Ocean.  Experi- 
ment  was  fifth  in series t o  measure  and  study  the nature and  causes of 
aurorae  and airglow in the night  sky during the dark of  the moon, project 
‘of Rice Univ.  under  NASA  grant. 
(Wallops Release 64-53) 
Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  discussed  utiliza- 
tion  of  space  technology  f o r  commercial  application  before  American 
Management Association  in New York: 
In  the present  century, the lag from  basic discoveries to applications 
U 
has  become  progressively  shorter.  The  Space  Age  is  still  further  re- 
ducing  the  lag. 
“TWO major  programs  a re   under  way  to   meet  the  Congressional 
mandate  for  the  widest  possible  dissemination  of  the  results  of  space 
activities.  The first  aims to  make  available the primary  technical data 
t o   aerospace  scientists  and  engineers.  The  second  repackages  the  in- 
formation  and  moves  space-generated  technology  out  of  the  agency’s 
laboratories and the plants of  its contractors into the non-space industrial 
complex. 
NASA  collects,  organizes,  and  disseminates  scientific  and  technical 
4L 
information  on  its  in-house  and  contractor  work  by  means  of  the latest 
in computer,  microfilm,  and other methods.  Decentralization with local 
access  is the  keynote. 
“To be of most use this information must be identified and repackaged 
to meet the special needs of  nonaerospace industries.  Th is  is the purpose 
of  the Technology Utilization Program, the first national program of  its 
type:  Staffs a t   each  NASA  Center  are   systematically organizing  the  re- 
porting  of  new  or   improved  ideas,  materials,  methods,  and  technology 
developed  in  the   course  of  research  and  development  activities.  The 
more promising reports go for analysis to  a group of  industrial research 
institutes  familiar  with  current  industrial  needs  and  requ irmen ts .   If 
the  ana€ysis indicates  promise,  reports  are   published  and  indexed  so 
that  they  a re  readily  available to  any segment of  the economy that may 
find  them  useful. 
“NASA  is making significant contributions t o  the growth of  science and 
technology  in most major fields.  More  important,  NASA  is dealing  with 
the  organization  and  utilization  of  expanding  knowledge  in  a  highly 
advanced  and,  we  Believe,  very  effective manner.” 
(Text) 

244 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
J d y  9 :   Dr.  Robert R.  Gilruth, Director  of MSC,  was one of  featured speakers 
at  opening  of  Houston  Museum  of  Natural  Science  and  Burke 
Baker  Planetarium  in  Houston.  Dr.  Gilruth  said  MSC  was  negotiating 
with  museum  officials for  part  time  use  of  planetarium  for  Apollo 
(MSC   Roundup,  7/22/64,  1 )  
project. 
*  George Miskovsky, Oklahoma City  attorney,  said he would  seek reinstate- 
ment  of  Okla.  court  injunction against sonic booms  later  reversed by  a 
US. District Court.  He  termed  FAA  plans to  continue  sonic boom  test- 
ing over  Oklahoma City while  admitting i t  was  a more  serious problem 
than  originally believed  as  “more  bureaucratic double talk.”  ( AP, Balt. 
Sun, 7/10/64) 
*  Lt.  CoL  Floyd J. Sweet  (USAF,  Ret.),  member of NASA Administrator’s  staff, 
became  the  twenty-ninth  member  of  the  Helms  Hall  Soaring  Hall  of 
Fame.  He was cited for sustained leadership in U S .  soaring activities as  
a  pilot,  instructor,  club  organizer,  and  officer  of  the  Soaring  Society 
of  America.  Colonel  Sweet’s  first  glider  competition  was  in  1932. 
(Helms Release) 
July 10: Asked a t  news conference i f   he thought  Congressional budget-cutting 
would  preclude  lunar  tr ip   in   this  decade,  President  Johnson  said:  “I 
I hope  the  Congress will  act 
think  the  funds  requested  are  necessary. 
on this appropriation soon.  The committee has not  acted on the  appro- 
I don’t  know how  to  gauge the exact way  it will  exercise 
priation  yet. 
I have every reason  to believe that  i t  will  be  sympathetic 
its judgment. 
to our national objectives, and I would hope that they will be generous in 
(Transcript, N Y T ,  7/11/64, 
this  response  to  our  request  for   funds.” 
6)  
’ Dr.  Winston  Edward Kock,  vice  president-research for  Bendix  Corp.,  was 
named  Director  of  NASA’s Electronics Research  Center  to  be  located in 
the  Boston  area,  effective  Sept.  1.  As  director,  he  would  have  charge 
of  fundamental  work  in  space  and  aeronautical  electronics. 
(NASA  Re- 
lease 64-172;  UPI,  Wash. Post, 7/11/64) 
*  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite toward  polar  orbit  from  Vandenberg 
AFB  with  Thor-Agena  D  launch  vehicle. 
(UPI,  Wash.  Post,  7/11/64; 
NYT ,  7/12/64,  2 )  
*  Astronaut Neil Armstrong  addressed Aerospace Workshop  at Drake Univ. : 
“We  don’t feel at this time  i t  is particularly  important whether a n  astro- 
naut is masculine or feminine.  Astronauts  are picked  on the basis of  ex- 
perience  and training.  At  present there  are no women with  the proper 
qualifications available.  Some day  we  will  have  qualified women  and 
I’m  sure  they’ll  be  included  in  the  program.” 
(Des Moines  Register, 
7/11/64) 
9  Gen. Bernard A.  Schriever, AFSC,  said a t  a Los Angeles Rotary Club lunch- 
eon : “We have identified and produced  experimental  quantities of  revo- 
lutionary  new  high  strength,  lightweight, high  temperature  materials” 
among  which  is  one  formed  of  boron  fibers  and  a  new  plastic  binder. 
“The  advantages  of  such  a  material  for  construction  of  aircraft  and 
space  vehicles  are   obvious,”  pointing  out  that  it  would  allow  a  high 
increase  in   the  operating  temperatures  of  most  power  plants.  This 
would  permit  the use  of  fuels generating  higher thrust  levels for  greater 
(Text; AP, NYT ,  7/12/64,5) 
payloads and speed. 

245 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 
July IO: Univ.  of  Southern California’s  human  centrifuge, only facility of  its 
kind on a college or university campus in America, was to be modernized 
and  its  office  areas  enlarged  to   accommodate  expanding  biomedical 
and  aerospace  research  programs  under  two  NASA  grants  totaling 
( L A .  Times, 7/10/64) 
$280,000. 
*  James  E.  Webb,  NASA  Administrator,  talked  and  dined  with  Astronaut 
John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.,  a t   the  home  of  Dr.  Robert  R. Gilruth,  Director  of 
MSC,  i n   Houston.  Afterwards,  Col.  Glenn  told  an   interviewer:  “We 
talked  about  a  number  of  different  areas  in  which  I  could  work. 
I 
( N Y T ,  7/12/64) 
want a part-time job, a consulting job.” 
Reception honoring Dr.  Abe  Silverstein, Director  of  NASA  Lewis Research 
Center,  was  held  on  his  35th  anniversary  of  service  with  NACA-NASA. 
(Lew is  News, 7/17/64,3) 
July  I I  .- U.S.S.R.  announced  successful orbiting  of  two  satellites, ELECTRON 
~n and ELECTRON  IV,  with  a  single launch  vehicle.  Soviet news  agency 
Tass  said  the   satellites  were  studying  the  earth‘s  magnetic  field  and 
radiation  belts,  radiation  arriving  from  deep  space,  and  the  physical 
conditions  in  the upper  atmospheric  layers.  ELECTRON  111 was  orbiting 
a t   7,040-km.  (4,375-mi.)  apogee,  d05-km.  (252-mi.)  perigee,  2-hr., 
48  min.  period,  and  60.86”  inclination  to  the  equator.  ELECTRON  IV 
was  orbiting  a t   66,235-km.  (41,158-mi.)  apogee,  459-km.  (285-mi.) 
perigee,  21-hr.,  54-min.  period,  and  60.86”  inclination  to  the  equator. 
(Tass, Izvestia,  7/12/64,  1, ATSS-T  Trans.;  AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 7 / l l /  
64) 
Gemini-Titan  I1  (GT-2)  rocket  which  was  to   launch  unmanned  Gemini 
I t   arrived  by  C-133B  cargo 
spacecraft  arrived  a t   Cape  Kennedy. 
plane  from Martin  Co.  plant  in  Baltimore where  i t   had  undergone  test- 
( AP, Orlando  (Fla.)  Sentinel, 7/12/64) 
ing. 
USAP  Titan  I11  transtage  was  successfully static-test-fired for  more  than 
six minutes  to  verify  compatability  of  various  subsystems,  in  operation 
to  simulate  injection  of  MOL into  100-mi.  orbit.  Officials  said  firing 
went  as  expected,  including  length  of  burn  time,  although  no  mention 
was  made  as  to  whether  it  reached  312-second  specific  impulse  de- 
( S B D ,  7/14/64,66;  M&R ,   7 /20 /64 ,8)  
manded  by  Air  Force. 
*  Japan  successfully  launched  three-stage Lambda  111,  its  largest  and  most 
advanced  research  rocket,  on  a  flight to  collect  data  on  the  upper  layer 
of  the  atmosphere.  The  rocket  attained  an  altitude  of  600 mi.  in  the 
17-min.,  20-sec.  flight  from  Kagoshima  Space  Center  in   Kagoshima 
(AP, Wash. Post, 7/12/64;  NASA Off. Int. Aff.) 
Prefecture, Japan. 
*  The  Federal  government  was  critized  by  National  Academy  of  Sciences 
committee  for  plunging  into  such  major  undertakings  as  a  moon  ex- 
pedition  o r   a  supersonic  airplane  without  assessing the  effects  on  the 
Nation’s  limited  scientific and  engineering manpower  resources.  The 
study,  made public  by  President  Johnson,  said  that  since  the  Govern- 
ment  supported  about  three  fifths of  all  those engaged  in  research  and 
development,  it had  a  “massive  influence”  on the deployment  and utili- 
zation  of  scientists and  engineers.  This,  in  turn,  imposed  an   “entirely 
new  order of  responsibility” upon  the  Government to  prevent  “malutili- 
zation”  of  the  manpower  and  to   achieve  a  “balanced  allocation of  sci- 
entific  and   engineering  talent.”  Two  of  the  committee’s  principal 
recommendations : 

246 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 96  41 

( 1 )   Steps  be  taken  by  the  Executive  Office  of  the  President  t o   de- 
velop  an   integrated  program  for  collecting and  analyzing  information 
about scientific and engineering manpower. 
(2 )   “Before  the  government  reaches  a  decision  to   undertake  a 
great  technological program,  it  should  make  a  careful  assessment  of 
the  impact  of  the  decision on  the  deployment  and  utilization  of  scien- 
tists and engineers.” 
Nowhere in its report did the  committee suggest that the lunar expedi- 
tion  had  unduly  diverted  manpower  from  other  fields;  in   fact,  the  re- 
port  showed  that  slightly  less  than  30  per  cent  of  the  Nation’s  scien- 
tists,  engineers,  and  secondary  school teachers  of  science  and  mathe- 
matics were engaged in defense,  space,  and atomic  energy  research, and 
that space accounted for less than 5 per cent. 
The  study,  an   outgrowth  of  a  request by  President  Kennedy  in  1961 
for  a  review  of  the  Nation’s  scientific and  engineering  manpower  re- 
sources, was  prepared by  a  17-man committee headed  by  Dr. James  R. 
Killian,  Jr.,  science  adviser  to  former  President  Eisenhower  and  now 
(Finney, NYT,  7/12/64,  1, 33; 
chairman  of  the  corporation  of  MIT. 
Carey, AP,  Wash. Pos t ,  7/12/64) 
Ju ly   11  : Journal of  the  Armed  Forces  noted  that  Philip  Bono,  with  Missile 
and  Space Systems Div.  of  Douglas Aircraft Co.,  had  redeveloped  Itha- 
cus  (formerly  Icarus) , his  study  concept  of  a  spatecraft which  could 
move  132 tons  of  cargo  or  1,200 troops  anywhere  in  the   world  in  30 
Ithacus was  formerly conceived for launch  from  fixed  land 
or 40  min. 
site,  but  under  the  new  concept, there would  be  seaborne launch  from 
nuclear  aircraft  carrier  of  Enterprise  class.  This  would  reduce  vul- 
(Haggerty,  J / A m e d  Forces,  7/11/64,  2 )  
nerability  of  the  system. 
Council  of  Defense  and  Space  Industry  Associations  (CODSIA)  formed 
under  sponsorship  of  Aerospace Industries Association, National  Secur- 
ity  Industrial  Association,  and  Electronic  Industries  Association. 
Council would operate solely a s  coordinating  and communicating vehicle 
( J /  
between  Government  and  industry,  not  as   master  association. 
Armed Forces, 7/11/64,15) 
July  12:  NASA  announced  that  Europeans  in  nine  countries  would  be  able 
to  watch  the Republican  National  Convention  via NASA’s RELAY  11  com- 
munications  satellite.  Television  networks  in  England,  France,  Bel- 
gium,  Germany,  Denmark,  Sweden,  Norway,  Switzerland,  and  Italy 
were  to  use  RELAY  Ir  five  times  during  the  four-day  convention, July 
20-23.  Similar  coverage  would  be  provided  during  the  Democratic 
National  Convention,  beginning  August  24. 
(NASA  Release  6 4 1 7 0 )  
0  NASA  announced  that  four  flight tests of  liquid-hydrogen  stages in Centaur 
and  Saturn  rockets  had  established  liquid  hydrogen  as  a  new  high- 
energy  fuel  for  space  vehicles.  Liquid  hydrogen,  when  mixed with 
liquid oxygen, produced about 35 per cent more thrust than the kerosene- 
( NASA  Release 6 4 1 6 4 )  
type  fuels normally  used. 
I t   was  probable  that  the  Soviet  space  probe  ZOND  I,  was  nearing 
Venus  and  would  try   to  send  back  the  first  close-up television  pictures 
of  that  planet,  reported  S ir   Bernard  Lovell,  Director  of  Jodrell  Bank 
( UPI,  Wash. Post, 7/13/64) 
Radio Experimental Station. 
*  AEC  disclosed  decision to  discontinue  Project  Pluto,  attempt  to build  low- 
flying,  atomic-powered  missile,  despite  ten  years  of  effort  and  $9200 
million  investment.  Livermore  Radiation  Laboratory,  initiator  and 

ON  

247 

July  13:  President  Johnson  signed  NASA  Authorization  Act  (H.R.  10456) 
authorizing  $5,227,506,000  f o r   NASA  J?Y  1965. 
Largest  part  of  au- 
thorization  was  for  Project  Apollo,  $2,677,500,000,  The  bill  was 
( AP, 
$76,494,000  less than the Johnson Administration had  requested. 
NYT,  7/15/64,  15) 
The largest contract awarded to  date fo r  work on the NASA  Mississippi Test 
Operations facility was  awarded to  Koppers Co.,  Inc.,  Malan  Construc- 
tion  Department,  New  York  City,  fo r  the construction  of  the  first  test 
position on the S-IC  dual test stand.  The contract was for $17,280,157, 
and  was  awarded  by  the  U S .   Army  Corps  of  Engineers, Mobile  Dis- 
trict.  Work  on  the  stand would  include construction of  three  concrete 
tiers  each  about  158  f t .   high,  a  tower  approximately  105  ft.  high,  a 
(Marshal2 Star,  7/15/64, 
steel  flame  deflector,  and  other  equipment. 
1 )  
DOD  announced  it  was  abandoning  plans  to  join  with  ComSatCorp  in  a 
space  communications  system  meeting  both  military  and  commercial 
needs.  Despite  the  economies  of  participation,  the  factor  of  inter- 
national  participation  in  the  satellite  system  and  the  control  foreign 
nations  would  have  over  a  communications  network  that  DOD wanted 
for emergency command control over its forces finally tipped the balance 
(Finney, NYT, 7/14/64,15) 
against DOD cooperation. 
MSFC  planners  believed  a  post-Saturn  V  booster  would  be  needed  if 
the  U S .   were  to  undertake  a  manned  planetary  exploration  program, 
M i s s i l e s   and  Rockets reported.  They also favored the so-called Block  I1 
vehicle,  which  would  have  two  stages using  new  propulsion  techniques 
(M&R ,  
and  high-pressure engines.  First  stage would  be  recoverable. 
7/13/64,  9)  
Mercury  capsule  (MA-9)  in which Astronaut  L.  Gordon Cooper  flew  22 
earth  orbits  was  viewed  by  more  than  20,000  people  when  on  display 
in Nebraska State Capitol at Lincoln.  (Omaha E v e .  wor ld-Her . ,  7/13/ 
64 )  
Spatial  orientation  and  stabilization  of  Early  Bird,  ComSatCorp's  first 
experimental  satellite,  was  to  be  achieved  using  a  hydrogen-peroxide 
reaction  jet  control  system.  Developed by Walter Kidde  and  Co.,  and 
originally intended fo r  SYNCOM  11,  newer version would  be capable of  at 
(M& R ,  7/13/64,27) 
least a 10-yr. lifetime. 
NASA  announced that  it would  participate in  about  200 one- to  three-week 
aerospace workshops and  teacher  institutes  at  colleges and  universities 
in 48 states during the summer.  NASA  spacemobiles, films, exhibits, and 
lectures would be used to acquaint teachers with the latest in space activ- 
(NASA  Release W 1 6 8 )  
ities. 

248 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 0 4. 

July 13 :  Paul Haney, MSC  Public Affairs Officer,  said he  would make a  study 
of  facilities used for dissemination of  news a t  Republican National  Con- 
vention  in  effort to  develop efficient  techniques  for  disseminating  news 
(Malonqr,  Houston 
during  manned  space  flights  controlled  by  MSC. 
Post,  7/14/64) 
*  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  S.  McNamara  announced  that  the  week  of 
July 20 would be  Defense Cost Reduction Week as  an  occasion t o  honor 
civilian  and military  personnel  who  had  helped  trim  $2.5  billion  from 
defense costs and to stimulate efforts to reach  the projected  goal of  $4.6 
(Phillips, NYT,  7/14/64) 
billion  savings over  the next  three years. 
*  Largest  monolithic  solid grain ever poured was well into its 20-day curing 
cycle at Aerojet-Dade Div.  of  Aerojet-General Corp.  The 12ain.,  37-ft.- 
long  “Subscale  1”  would  be test-fired in  the same cast-cure pit  in mid- 
August.  Both  batch  and  continuous  mix  processes  were  used with  the  
continuous  mix  working  f o r  55  straight  hours  in  the  Z%-day  pouring 
job.  The  100-ton grain  was  to   produce  about  600,000  lbs.  thrust  in 
checking  out  the  nozzle,  materials, and.processes  developed  for  the up- 
(M&R ,  7/13/64,  11) 
coming 260-in.  large solid rocket test at Aerojet. 
*  Yelena  Andrianovena  Nikolayeva,  infant  daughter  of  Russian  cosmo- 
nauts  Valentina  Tereshkova  and  Andrian  Nikolayev,  was  t o   be  thor- 
oughly examined for next  few years t o  determine whether weightlessness 
(Snider,  CDNS,  Houston 
or   radiation  of  her  parents  had  any  effect. 
Chron.,  7/13/fj4) 
*  Observations  by  University of  Bern  (Switz.)  scientists for several years in 
the Simplon Tunnel showed that effects of  ionizing radiations also existed 
in a  radiation-free environment.  In  the tunnel, which had  proven to be 
free of  any traces  of  cosmic radiation,  artemia eggs showed  only  a  60- 
70% rate of  offspring, Hordexurn seeds became sterile after six months, 
(M&R ,  7/13/64,27) 
and algae did not  grow after a few weeks. 
July  14:  Rocketdyne  Div.  of  North  American  Aviation  and  Douglas  A ir-  
craft  Co.  received  three  contract  increments  totaling  more  than  $8 
,  million  fo r  work  on  S-IVB  stage of  Saturn IB and Saturn V launch ve- 
hicles  from  NASA  MSFC.  Additional  funding  of  $3.6  million  went  to  
Rocketdyne to   equip their  plant  for production  of  5-2  engines  and  for 
providing  static test  site and propellant  storage area.  Douglas received 
two  incremental  contracts.  One,  for  $2.3 million, was  for purchase of 
long-term  items  on  recently  ordered  additional  eight  S-IVB  stages. 
Other,  for  $2.2 million, was for purchase  of  additional set of  automatic 
(SBD,  7/14/641,  63; Marshall Star, 7/15/64,  9 )  
checkout  equipment. 
NASA  announced it had selected General Atomics Div.  of  General Dynamics 
Corp.  to  perform  preliminary  work,  estimated  to   be  worth  about  $1.7 
million,  on  development  of  advanced type of  nuclear  reactor  for use  in 
powering  spacecraft.  Company would  conduct  studies on  use of  tung- 
sten to contain  uranium fuel in compact high-powered reactor that might 
power  a  rocket.  Work  would  be  performed  for  Space  Nuclear  Pro-  
( NASA Release 64-173; 
pulsion O5ce  operated  jointly by NASA  and AEC. 
.WSJ ,   7/15/fj4) 
Pra t t   &  Whitney  received  $685,000  contract .from  NASA  MSFC  for  study 
and  integration  of  an   advanced  liquid-oxygen-hydrogen  rocket engne .  
Objective would be to integrate existing feasible concepts into one engine 
best  able to meet future requirements.  Work would be coordinated with 
other  advanced  mission  studies  such  as   Saturn  V  improvement,  post 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 

249 

Saturn, and the reusable  orbital  shuttle transport.  Configuration would 
be  an  engine with  a  single chamber turbopump iinit with variable mix- 
ture   ratio  control.  It  would  be  throttleable  and  capable  of  multiple 
restarts  and with  a  thrust  range  of  300,000  to   350,000 lbs.  One-year 
study  would  use  data  produced  under  several  separate  NASA  engine 
technology  contracts  a t   P ra t t   &  Whitney  with  inputs  from  Aerojet- 
General  Co rp . ,  Rocketdyne Div.  of  North  American Aviation, and Gen- 
(M&R ,   7/20/64,8;  SBD,  7/14/64,  63) 
era l   Electric C o .  
July  14:  Missile  and  Space  Systems Div.  of  Douglas  Aircraft C o .  has  sub- 
mitted  study  to   NASA  which  concluded  that  six-man  space  research  sta- 
tion, capable of  orbiting for  one year, could be orbiting earth within  five 
years.  Crew,  serving  on  staggerEd  schedule,  would travel to  and  from 
station  on  modified  Gemini  or  Apollo  spacecraft.  Station  itself  would 
provide  small  degree  of  artificial  gravity by  rotating  slowly and  would 
(AP,  N .Y .  Her.  Trib., 
include  centrifuge  to  simulate  re-entry  forces. 
7/14/64) 
Dr. Charles A.  Berry  of  NASA’s MSC  said that some communicable diseases 
could  develop  on  space  missions  of  up  to  14  days  if  astronauts  were 
exposed  during  preflight  preparation  period.  Therefore  NASA  plans 
included  turning the  spacecraft around  and returning to  earth in  severe 
cases  and  equipping  vehicles  with  emergency medical  supplies.  Also, 
doctors  might  be  trained  a s   astronauts  for  30-  to   60-day  missions. 
(Phil. Eve. Bull.,  7/14/64) 
July 14-15: NASA’s Wallops Station, Wallops  Island, Va.,  launched seven sci- 
entific experiments  in a  period  of  less than 10 hours.  All of  the experi- 
ments  involved  sounding  rocket  experiments  carried  aloft  by  Nike- 
Apache  rockets.  Four  of  the  payloads  carried  sodium  vapor  cloud 
experiments for GSFC  to provide  data on wind directions and speeds and 
at  various  altitudes  and  the changes  which  occurred  during the   period 
from  sunset to  dawn  (peak altitudes:  118 mi.,  119 mi.,  119 mi.,  and 119 
mi.,  respectively).  . The other three were ionosphere experiments for the 
Univ.  of  Illinois  and the Geophysics Corp .   of  America  (peak altitudes: 
97 mi.,  99 mi.,  and  106 mi.,  respectively).  The main  purpose  of  these 
from nighttime  t o  daytime,  as radiation  from the sun penetrated  l own- 
tests was  to  observe  and  measure  structural  changes  in  the  ionos  here 
ward.  All  seven  experiments  were  successful.  The  sounding  rocket 
experiments  were par t   of  the th ird   International Year  of  the Quiet  Sun 
( IQSY )   “quarter  day”  in  the  coordinated  solar  study program. 
(Wal- 
lops  Releases  64-54,  64-55,  64-56;  GSFC Historian;  NASA  Rpts.  SRL) 
July  15:  The  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS xxxv into  orbit. 
The  satellite’s 
initial  orbital  parameters  were:  period,  89.2  min.;  apogee,  268  km. 
(161  m i .) ;   perigee,  217  km.  (130  m i .) ;   inclination,  51.3”.  The 
satellite, carrying  scientific equipment  for   space  studies, was  reported 
(Tass, Izvestia, 7/17/64,1,  ATSS-T  Trans.; 
to be functioning normally. 
AP, N Y T ,  7/16/64) 
NASA  announced  that  it had  selected  22 scientific experiments  for  the  fifth 
Orbiting Geophysical Observatory  (Ogo-E) , scheduled  to  be  launched 
in 1966.  54 scientists from four  countries  (U.S.,  U.K.,  France,  and the 
Netherlands)  representing  universities,  government,  and  private  in- 
dustry would  take par t   in  designing  and  constructing  the  experiments. 
The  satellite was  scheduled to  be  launched  into  an  eccentric orbit, with 
an  apogee of  92,000 mi.  and  a  perigee  of  170 mi.  The  Ogo-E experi- 
768-598 0-69-1’7 

250 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19 6 4 

ments would study energetic particle  radiation,  earth and interplanetary 
magnetic fields,  effect of  solar  gases  on  the  earth’s  magnetic  fields  and 
radio  communication,  and  the  effect  of  solar  radiation  on  the  earth. 
(NASA  Release 64-171) 
July  15: DOD announced that  since early July  the Army had operated  a  spe- 
cial radar  at White Sands Missile Range, N.  Mex.  The radar,  the Multi- 
function Array Radar  (MAR) w a s  part  of  the Nike-X  anti-ICBM missile 
system.  Called  a  phased  a r ray   radar,  MAR  worked  on  the  theory  that 
radar beams could be “bent”  electronically by playing one beam  against 
another.  This  called  fo r   a  delicacy  and  timing  fa r   exceeding  man’s 
capabilities.  It  took  an  extremely  fast  computer  to  play  the  beam. 
The  MAR  was  to  replace three  radars  used  in  the Nike-Zeus Antimissile 
Missile  System:  acquisition  radar  fo r   detecting  missile  warheads  at 
long  ranges;  the  target  tracking  radar  fo r  pinpointing  the  location  of 
the  warheads;  and  the  discrimination  radar  for  sorting  l ive   warheads 
from decoys.  (DOD Release 519-64) 
In  a speech before the Briefing Conference on Government Contracting for 
Research  and  Development  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Bar  Association 
and the Bureau of  National Affairs, Inc.,  in Boston, Ernest W.  Brackett, 
NASA Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator  for Procurement Policy, 
spoke of  NASA’s policy towards  incentive contracts : “Incentive contracts 
are  not  the  answer  to  everything,  but  much  good  can  and  will  come 
from them.  They will effect more realistic cost proposals.  When a  com- 
pany’s  incentive fee  or  profit  is based  on  i t s  cost  proposal,  it  will  not 
be on  the low  side.  This means less cost overruns which a re  subject  to 
so much  criticism  and which  disrupt Government budgets.  . . . There 
w i l l   also be more careful  and  detailed work  definitions because  a  con- 
tractor  wants  to  know  what  he  is  expected  to  do  and  be  able  to  price 
it  out  if  his  incentive fee   depends on  performance  and  cost.  It  takes 
longer to negotiate incentive contracts and negotiations  are harder.  . . . 
Government personnel  will  be  more  careful,  particularly  in  the  tech- 
nical  areas,  when  incentive  provisions  a re   included.  Another  advan- 
tage should be fewer controls by  Government over contract  administra- 
tion  details,  such  as  approval  of  overtime  or  sub-contractor  selection. 
NASA would like to see contractors make higher profits but wants to have 
proof  they  have  earned  them.  The  health  of  the  aerospace  and  elec- 
tronics industries depends on their realizing a reasonable return fo r  what 
they  do.  Incentive methods  of  contracting  appear  to  be  the  best  way 
this can  be done.” 
(Text) 
The  platform  adopted  by  the  Republican  National  Convention  con- 
tained  a  number  of  statements pertaining  to  the  U S .   space  program. 
The  platform  stated:  “This  administration  has  delayed  research  and 
development  in  advanced  weapons  systems  and  thus  confronted  the 
American  people  with  a  fearsome possibility  that  Soviet  advances,  in 
the decade of  the 1970’s, may surpass America’s present  lead.  Its mis- 
use  of  cost effectiveness has stifled the creativity of  the Nation’s military, 
scientific, and industrial communities. 
It has  failed  to  originate a  single new major  strategic  weapons sys- 
$6  
tem after  inheriting  from  a  Republican administration  the most  power- 
ful  military  force  of  all  time. 
I t   has  concealed  a  lack  of  qualitative 
advance  fo r   the  1970’s  by  speaking  of  a  quantitative  strength  which 
by then will be obsolete.  I t  has not demonstrated the foresight necessary 
to launch as many a s  five satellites.  The system, called Multiple Orbit- 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  0 4 

251 

“It  has  endangered  security  by  downgrading  efforts  to  prepare  de- 
fenses against enemy ballistic missiles.  It has retarded ou r  own military 
development  fo r  near  and  outer  space,  while  the  enemy’s development 
moveson.  . . . 
“We pledge  . . . replanning  of  the  present space program  to provide 
for  a  more  orderly,  yet  aggressively  pursued  step-by-step development, 
remaining  alert  to  the  danger  of  overdivision  of  skilled  personnel  in 
critical  shortage from  other vital  areas  such  as health,  industry,  educa- 
(Text, CR, 7/28/64,  A3934, A3939) 
tion, and science.” 
Mid-July : The US. Weather Bureau prepared  a  letter to  the World Meteoro- 
logical  Organization  advising  that  Automatic  Picture  Transmission 
(APT)   pictures  from  TIROS VIII  were  no  longer  usable.  Useful  APT 
pictures totaled 4,067.  ( GSFC Historian) 
July  16:  NASA  Wallops  Station  launched  a  sounding  rocket  with  instru- 
mented  payload  to  determine  the  effects  of  the  ionosphere  on  delicate 
low-frequency radio radiation receiving sensors.  A Nike-Apache rocket 
boosted  the  payload,  designed  to  test  instrumentation  for  possible use 
in  the  space astronomy program,  to  an  altitude  of  85 mi.  Preliminary 
data indicated the experiment was successful.  (Wallops Release 64-57) 
0  U S .   Army’s  XV-SA 
“lift-fan”  research  plane,  a  craft  with  hori- 
zontal fans  buried  in  i t s  wings  and  nose,  made  its  first  vertical  takeoff 
and landing,  a t  Edwards AFB.  The horizontal  fans provided  downward 
thrust  fo r   the  vertical  takeoff.  The  fans  were  powered  during  takeoff 
by  the  exhaust  from  the  craft’s  jet  engines,  which  was  then  diverted 
straight behind  the plane  fo r  horizontal  flight.  This  technique had  the 
advantage  that  no  more  engine  power  was  required  for  vertical  flight 
than  for  normal  subsonic cruising,  and  hence  the  plane  had  more  eco- 
(DOD  Release  5 2 1 4 ;   Witkin,  NYT, 
nomical  fuel  consumption. 
7/18/64) 
0  White House  announced  that  the  U S .   and  the  U.S.S.R.  had  reached  an 
informal  agreement  on  limited  scientific  cooperation  in  developing 
methods  fo r   desalting  sea  water,  including  possible  use  of  atomic 
energy.  The  first  step  in  the  cooperative  program  was  to  be  an  ex- 
change of  inspection visits by  technical experts  of  the  two  countries to 
laboratories  and experimental desalinization plants  in the two  countries. 
In   addition  to  the  reciprocal  visits,  the  informal  agreement  called  for 
an  exchange of  scientific reports,  including  results obtained  by  the  two 
nations  from work  on  pilot  and  demonstration  desalting  plants. 
(Fin- 
ney, NYT, 7/16/64,1,6) 
0  I t  was  reported  that  NASA was  actively considering methods to  be used  for 
exploration  by  astronauts  on  the moon.  Two  devices were  under  con- 
sideration:  a  mobile  laboratory  (Molab)  in  which  men  could  work 
and  also  go  out  in  spacesuits  to  gather  rock  and  soil  samples,  and  a 
“lunar  hopper,”  a  helicopter  device  fo r   short  flights  to  sites  that 
could not be reached on foot or by Molab.  Parallel  studies of  the Molab 
concept were being undertaken by Boeing Co.,  Seattle, and Bendix Corp. 
of  Ann  Arbor,  under  contracts  of  $800,000.  Bell  Aerosystems  Co., 
Buffalo,  had  been  awarded  a $199,333  contract  to  study  the  lunar 
(AP, Balt. Sun, 7/17/64) 
hopper concept. 
0  I t  was  reported  that Douglas Aircraft  Co.,  Santa Monica,  had  submitted a 
proposal  to  NASA  for  a  system  which  would  enable  a  single  booster 
to launch as many a s  five satellites.  The system, called Multiple Orbit- 

252 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   196 4. 

Multiple Satellite  (MOMS),  consisted of  a  number  of  satellites fastened 
together  by  explosive bolts.  The  system was  designed  for  use  with  a 
Douglas Delta  launch vehicle.  Several successful  launches  of  two  and 
three  satellites  together  had  been  accomplished  before,  but  never  as 
many a s  five as proposed in the new  system. 
(Houston Post,  7/16/64) 
Jdy 16:  In a speech before a briefing conference on contracting for  research 
and  development  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Bar  Association  and  the 
Bureau  of  National  Affairs,  General  Bernard  Schriever,  AFSC,  stated 
that  in   his  opinion  “when  understanding  is  fostered  and  encouraged 
among  the  various  sectors  of  national  life,  such  as  industry,  the  pro- 
fessions, the scientific community,  and government, then  rapid  progress 
can  be  made  toward  national  objectives.”  He  cited  the  U S A F  ballistic 
missile  program  as  an  example  of  this  principle  a t   work  and  stated 
that  the  long-range USAF  planning  study  (Project  Forecast)  set  up  in 
1963 attempted also to  put  this principle  to  work,  by  employing broad 
participation  by  all  the  services,  several  Government  agencies,  and 
personnel from universities, corporations,  and  non-profit organizations. 
( AFSC Release 47-R-91) 
Astronaut  Scott Carpenter  was  involved in   a  motor  bike  accident  in  Ber- 
muda  and  suffered a  fracture of  his  lower  left  arm.  Carpenter  was  in 
Bermuda to participate in a Navy test in which he would have submerged 
in  Sea Lab  I diving chamber with  four  Navy  divers  to  a  depth  of  192 
feet,  but  his  injury  precluded  his  participation  in  the  test.  He  was 
(N.Y.  Her.  Trib., 7/17/64;  AP, 
reported  to  be  resting  comfortably. 
Balt. Sun, 7/17/64) 
Brig.  Gen.  David  Sarnoff, Chairman  of  the  Board  of  RCA,  addressed  Na- 
tional  Automation  Conference  of  the  American  Bankers  Association 
at the New York World’s Fair,  and predicted:  “Over  the next  20 years, 
I  am  convinced,  computers  will  touch  off  an  explosion  in  the  social 
sciences comparable to that which we  witnessed during the past half  cen- 
tury in  the physical sciences.  . . . 
“A  global  linkup  of  computers  w i l l   be  accomplished  through  com- 
munications  satellites,  high-capacity  transistorized  cables,  microwave 
conduits,  as well  a s  standard  telephone and  telegraph  links.  Data  will 
move  through  broadband  channels  a t   speeds  of  up  to  20  million  bits 
per  second,  thousands  of  times  faster  than  in  today’s  systems.  Ulti- 
mately,  laser  beams  may  transmit  vast  quantities  of  information  in- 
stantaneously in the form of  light through hoselike cables.  . . . 
“Such  advances will  inevitably bring  about  basic  transformations  in 
fields fa r  beyond  those  in  which  computers function  today.  Matching 
the technical prospects to the human  environment, I see society making 
profound  adjustments  in  many  directions.  The  five  main  areas  af- 
fected  a re   likely  to  be:  Work,  leisure,  education,  health,  and  poli- 
tics.  . . .”  (Text; CR, 8/3/64,  A4051-53) 
Ju l y   17:  USAF  launched  Atlas-Agena  D  booster  from  Cape  Kennedy  with 
triple-satellite payload.  Press  sources reported  the booster orbited  two 
DOD Nuclear Radiation Detection Satellites and a 4.5-lb. tetrahedral satel- 
lite.  The  three  satellites  were  reported  to   be  injected  initially  into 
elliptical orbits ranging  from  120 to  65,000 mi.  altitudes;  ground  com- 
mand  signal  maneuvered  one  NRDS into  65,000-mi. circular  orbit,  and 
similar  maneuver was planned  for the  other  NRDS two  days  later.  The 
“Pygmy,”  designed to  measure electrons in  the  Van  Allen  belts,  would 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 

253 

continue  in  the  elliptical orb 
twin  radiation detectors were 
to the first pair,  reported to h 
(AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 7]19/64;  A v .  Wk . ,  7/20/64,24;  M&R,  7/27/64, 
22) 
July  17:  The U S .   Weather Bureau  reported  tha t   a  hurricane  having  winds 
of  75 mph had been  located by TIROS  VII  satellite 1,000 mi.  southwest of 
(Sun  Diego  Union, 7/18/64;  US. Weather Bureau) 
San Diego. 
*  British scientists at the Jodrell Bank radio  astronomy station were  reported 
searching  the  skies  for  the  Russian  space probe  ZOND  I  which  was  be- 
lieved  to  be  approaching  Venus.  The  Russians  had  never  revealed 
the  precise  mission  of  the  probe  and  refused  to  supply  the  Jodrell 
Bank  scientists with  the  radio  frequencies  on  which  it  was  operating, 
but  it was believed that  the probe would closely approach Venus during 
(Reuters,  Minneapolis  Morning 
the  72-hr.  period  beginning  July  17. 
T r ib . ,  7/18/64) 
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center awarded  29 contracts  involving stud- 
ies of  advanced manned missions.  The 29 studies, which were designed 
to  look beyond  the  time when  American  astronauts  would have  landed 
on the moon, covered the  subjects of  launch vehicle development, earth 
orbital operations, lunar exploration, and planetary  exploration. 
(NASA 
Release 6 6 1 7 5 )  
In  speech accepting Republican  nomination  for  President,  Sen.  Barry  M. 
Goldwater said:  “I  can  see,  and  I suggest all  thoughtful men must  con- 
template,  the  flowering of  an  Atlantic  civilization,  the  whole  world  of 
Europe  reunified and  free, trading  openly across its borders,  communi- 
“This  is  a  goal  fa r ,   far  more  meaningful  than  a  moon  shot.  . . .” 
cating openly across the world. 
(Text, NYT ,  7/11/64?,  A10) 
*  Two  attorneys  in  Oklahoma  City  sought  a  Federal  court  injunction  to 
stop  unlimited  testing  of  supersonic  aircraft  over  the  city.  The  suit 
alleged  that  the  tests  being  conducted  by  the  FAA were  causing  undue 
mental and physical harm  to  Oklahoma City residents because  of  sonic 
booms.  (AP, NYT ,  7/19/64) 
*  The  British  Aviation  Ministry  was reported  to   have  recently  agreed  to 
pay  the equivalent of  $840 to a Welsh farmer, David Lloyd-Davies, who 
contended that  his mare  died of  fright when  a  sonic boom hit  his  farm. 
(UPI, NYT ,  7/17/64,12) 
A  report  from  GAO  to  Congress charged  that  USN  had  spent $13.3  million 
to  put  rocket  launchers  on  fighter  planes  and  then  had  taken  them  off 
again because they created too many problems.  The rockets had  caused 
the fighters to pitch  upward,  and in many cases a plane would  overtake 
and  collide with  a  rocket  it  had  launched.  The  GAO  report  said  that 
the Navy could have saved about $4 million if  it had  gotten information 
available  before  the launchers  were  ordered.  (UPI, Houston  Chron., 
7/18/64) 
0  An  article  in  the  Russian  publication  Krasnaya  Z v e zda   (R e d   S ta r )  
reported  a  speech  delivered  by  Russian  Premier  Khrushchev  before  a 
group  of  professors and  students  in  Mishkol’tse  in April  1964.  I n   the 
speech Khrushchev noted that in the U.S.  “the scientists to a considerable 
degree a re  not  Americans  , . . the US. has  pirated  i t s  scientific stafh 
from  the  representatives of  various  nations.”  T h e  article  went  on  to  

c 

2 

AERONAUTICS,  19641  

ments  in the field of  rocketry  and  cosmonautics, to  be  sure  in  all fields 
of  science and  technology,  a r e  due  to  the  brains  and  the  talent  of  the 
Soviet scientists alone, without any help  from the outside.”  (Krasnaya 
Zvezda, 7/17/64,4,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
Jzdy 18: It was  reported  that  NASA  was  considering  diverting  money  from 
some of  its other programs in an effort to  save the National goal of  land- 
ing men  on the moon  in the 1960’s.  Dr.  Robert C.  Seamans, Jr.,  Asso- 
ciate  Administrator  of  NASA,  said  in  an  interview  that  the  agency 
“faced  a  real  uphill  battle  in  the  next  five  years”  to  achieve  a  lunar 
landing  before  1970.  He  stated  that  the  probability  of  success  was 
“not  a s  high  a s  we’d  like it to be,  since this  is a  national  commitment.” 
Dr.  Edward C.  Welsh, Chairman of  the National Aeronautics and Space 
Council,  said  in  interview  that  any  further  schedule  slippages would 
inevitably throw the lunar landing into the  1970’s.  Space officials were 
still holding to the  1969 goal,  and, he added,  “We  haven’t  given this  up 
yet.”  At  the  current  time  NASA  was  $217  million  short  of  the   bare 
minimum  it  had  requested  fo r   FY  1965. 
(Hines,  Wash.  Sun. S tar ,  
7 / 1 9 / a )  
A  Naval  Research  Laboratory  team  under  Dr.  Herbert  Friedman  an- 
nounced  that  it  had  disproved  the  theory  that  the  Crab  Nebula  in 
the  constellation  Orion  had  a  superdense  neutron  star  at  its  center. 
The experiment was carried out July 7 by means of  x-ray detectors flown 
to  an  altitude  of  144 mi.  over  New  Mexico  by  a n   Aerobee  sounding 
rocket. 
(Hines, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  7/18/64) 
It  was  reported  that  USAF  was  planning  to  orbit  the  third  in  the  Oscar 
series  of  satellites.  These  satellites were  built  by  radio  hams  in  Cali- 
fornia  and  had  no  military  significance.  It  was  designed  to  receive 
and re-transmit  a  single word in M o r s p “H i . ”   The 25-lb. satellite was 
to  be  launched  as  a  pickaback  payload  on  some  USAF launch  from 
(J /A rm ed   Forces,  7/18/64,  8 )  
Vandenberg  AFB. 
*  A  report  in  the Journal of  the  Armed  Forces  noted  that  during  FY  1964 
199  new  objects  were  placed  in  orbit.  NORAD  Space  Detection  and 
Tracking  Center  (SPADATS)  , which .tracked  the  objects,  reported  that 
as  of  the end of  FY  1964 there  were  438  items  in  orbit.  The  items in- 
cluded  not  only  satellites  and  probes,  but  also  “junk”  items  such  as 
upper stages of rocket boosters.  As of  the date of  this report there were 
101 satellitw  or  probes  in  space.  The  U S .  had  been  responsible  for 
89 of  them,  the U.S.S.R.  fo r  9, the  U.K.  for  2,  and  Canada  for  1.  Of 
the  199 objects  launched  in  FY  1964,  122  were  pieces  of  debris,  and 
the  other 77 were payloads.  58 were U.S.,  28  were U.S.S.R.,  and  1 was 
(J /A rm ed  Forces, 7/18/64,8) 
from U.K. 
Clarence  L.  Johnson,  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  designer  of  the  F-12A 
(A-11)  aircraft,  said  that  the  airplane  could  easily outfly Russian  air- 
craft.  He stated that  the F-12A  could capture all  three absolute world 
( AP,  Kansas City T imes ,  
flight records currently held by the Russians. 
7/18/64) 
It was  reported  that  DOD  had  decided to  invest $200 million  in  a  military 
communications  satellite  system.  The  first  launching  was  said  to  be  

255 
ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUTICS,  19  64 .  
scheduled fo r  late  1965 o r   1966.  P lan s  called  for  seven o r  eight satel- 
lites to be placed  in  orbit  by  a  single Titan  111 booster.  The satellites, 
perhaps  a s  many  a s   24  simultaneously, were  to   be  placed  in   orbit  at 
around 6,000 mi.  altitude  (see July  13 ) .  
(UPI,  NYT ,   7/19/64) 
July 18:  Hanson Baldwin, military analyst for the New Yo rk  Times, reported 
that  the U.S.S.R.  Bad  developed and  was  presumably producing  an  im- 
proved ICBM:  The missile was said to have a  range of  more  than  6,000 
mi.  and  could  carry  a  multimegaton  warhead  to  its  target. 
In   addi- 
tion,  its accuracy was  believed to  be greater  than  the  first  Soviet l o n g  
I t   was  reported  that  it  was  designed  for  use  against 
range  missiles. 
the  below-ground silos  of  U.S.  Minuteman missiles. 
(Baldwin, NYT ,  
7/18/@) 
An  experiment  designed  by  youthful  rocket  scientists  ended  in  tragedy 
when “Gus,”  a two-ounce mouse, was killed in a mishap.  Several youths 
from  Schenectady had  designed  the  rocket, which  was  to  carry Gus  to 
an  altitude  of  6,000  ft.  The  rocket  went  off  at  an  angle upon  launch 
and  smashed into  the  ground  killing  its passenger.  The launch, which 
had  been  protested  by  local  humane  societies, was  viewed  by  a  crowd 
(AP, L .A .  Herald  Examiner, 7/19/64) 
of  400. 
July  19: The second of  two   DOD  satellites, reported  by  press  sources  to  be 
one  of  two  Nuclear  Radiation  Detection  Satellites,  maneuvered  into 
station 65,000 mi.  above the earth.  On signal from the ground  a  rocket 
motor  aboard the satellite fired, moving  it from an eccentric orbit with 
an  apogee  of  65,000 mi.  into  a  circular  orbit  at  that  altitude.  The 
motor  aboard  the  companion satellite,  boosted  by  the  same  launch  ve- 
hicle,  wa s   fired  successfully on   July  17.  (AF’, NYT,  7/20/64;  Wash. 
Post, 7/20/@) 
NASA  announced  it  had  begun  a  pilot  program  designed  to   help 
scientists  and  engineers  cope  with  the  greatly  increased  amount  of 
literature  on  new  discoveries and  developments.  The program,  called 
Selective  Dissemination  of  Information  ( SDI) was  being  developed 
for  NASA  under  a  contract  to  the Advanced Systems Development Divi- 
sion  of  IBM,  Yorktown,  N.Y.  The  SDI system  was  designed  to  notify 
those  enrolled  in  the  program  of  fresh  information  within  their  re- 
spective fields.  ( NASA Release 6 4 ~ 1 7 4 )  
Leo  D.  Welch,  Chairman  of  the Communications Satellite C o p ,  reported 
that  Soviet 05cials had  refused to answer a  question as to whether they 
were developing their own system of  communications by  satellite.  Welch 
said  that  the  Soviets would  say only that  they were conducting experi- 
ments  in  the   space  technology.  The  questions  were  asked  when  the 
Soviets attended a  meeting in  Geneva  in  June  at  which they  received  a 
briefing on the formation  of  the  18-nation communications satellite net- 
work.  (W a sh .  Pos t ,  7/20/64) 
* Preliminary  findings from  a  six-year study by  the  National Merit Scholar- 
ship Corp. found that many top students who as college freshmen wanted 
to   work  as engineers frequently  changed  their  minds by  the  time  they 
were  seniors.  The  report  also  stated:  “The  interest  of  able  students  in  
physical sciences and engineering has been  decreasing during the period 
covered by  this study  and interest  in the social sciences and humanities 
has been  correspondingly increasing.”  For both sexes biology, history, 
and mathematics  had  become more  popular.  At  the start of  the study 
13% of  the males  and 27%  of  the  females said  they expected to major 

July 19: In   editorial 
water.  The  Times lauded  the  agreement both  because  of  the.serious- 
and  also  a s  a 
ness  of  the  increasing  shortage  of  fresh water 
step in  the “trend  toward wider common effarts 
and  American 
scientists  in  areas  where  progress  will  bring  m 
enefits.”  The 
editorial  continued,  “.  . . a s  Americans  and  Russians  get  accustomed 
to  cooperation  for  common  benefit  in  scientific fields,  they  may  gen- 
erate  habits  and  attitudes  that  could  ultimately  spread  to  the  political 
( N Y T ,  7/19/64,  E8) 
field, again with mutual gains.” 
July 20:  Space flight of  NASA’s Sert I  (Space Electric Rocket Test)  spacecraft 
marked  first  successful operation  in   space of  an  electric rocket engine. 
NASA  launched the Sert I on a suborbital  trajectory  from Wallops Island, 
using four-stage Scout booster rocket which lofted the Sert I to 2,500-mi. 
altitude before  impacting in Atlantic Ocean  about 2,000 mi.  downrange 
from Wallops.  One of  the two ion propulsion engines aboard the 375-1b. 
Sert I was operated twice, for total run of  30 min.;  this engine was  built 
by  NASA  Lewis  Research  Center.  The  other  engine,  built  by  Hughes 
Research  Laboratories,  did  not  produce  thrust.  Primary  purpose  of 
the experiment was to verify that electrostatic ( ion )  engines can produce 
thrust  in  space,  and  all  technical objectives were achieved.  NASA  later 
announced  the  test  was  so  successful  that  a  second  test  would  not  be 
necessary  (Oct.  16).  (NASA  Releases  64-167,  66180;  LRC  Release 
6 4 4 3 ;  Wallops Release 64-58) 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  reported  to  the  President  that  NASA 
had  accomplished  cost  reductions  totaling  $128,783,000  in  N  1964. 
This  greatly  exceeded the  agency’s  target  of  $81,780,000. 
(NASA  An- 
nouncement  64-162) 
AEC  scientists were reported to be planning even more sophisticated nuclear 
radiation detection satellites to follow the two identified by press sources 
as having  been  maneuvered  into  patrol  positions  during  the  preceding 
weekend.  The advanced Sentries were reported  to  carry optical devices 
to  monitor  not  only  space nuclear  blasts  but  also  those  in  the   earth’s 
atmosphere.  (AP, Wash. Eve.  Star, 7/20/64) 
Sen.  Stuart  Symington  (D.-Mo.)  discussed  national  space  program  on 
Senate  floor:  “If  our  nation  is  to  remain  strong  and  a  leader  of  men, 
then  it  is  necessary  that  we   maintain  a  position  of  leadership  in  the 
greatest adventure of  our time. 
Not  only would  a  slowdown in this  program  have  an  adverse effect 
GC 
on US. leadership, but  it  would  cost  the  taxpayer  more money.  NASA 
estimates that for every year the program is stretched out a billion dollars 
would have to be  added  to  the  program.  That  is not  surprising.  Any 
major  R&D  program  requires a  tight  timetable  i f   it  is to  be  an  efficient 
program  and provide the necessary incentive.  Without a tight timetable 
the  work  drags  on  through  repeated  changes  and  indecision.  As  in 
most  human  endeavors  the  establishment  of  a  tight  schedule  in   fact 
provides  assurance that  the  program  w i l l   in  fact  be  accomplished. 
“For  the present,  however,  there  is  the  fact  that  the  huge  space  in- 
d  the  space  psychology  itself-has 
found  a  place 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 

257 

in the Nation’s  consciousness.  The United  States is more  than  six years 
away  from  its  first  puny  satellite, and  in  that  time  the  acceleration  of 
progress has been on the edge of  the fantastic.  The space age has barely 
been  born  but  we  cannot  see how  anyone  can  misread  the  promise  of 
( C R ,  7/20/64,15720- 
adventure and discovery in  the years to come.” 
21 1 
July 20: It was reported  that NASA  planned  to cancel its lease for a  Lockheed 
JetStar  a t   the  KSC  in  Florida  and  purchase  the  plane  outright.  This 
came out in  a  report  by  NASA  to  a  Senate  appropriations subcommittee. 
The report  indicated that NASA  planned  to operate  a  total  of  80  aircraft 
in  FY 1965, an  increase of  4  planes.  NASA  officials told  the  committee 
that  37  of  the  80 would  be  used  for  research,  20  for  proficiency and 
flight training,  and 23 for  administrative  aircraft. 
( A v .  Wk . ,  7/20/64, 
18) 
*  Premature  shutdown  of  the  U.K.  Blue  Streak  space  launcher  engines 
during its first flight for ELDO  a t  Woomera, Australia,  in  June had  been 
traced  to gain  settings of  the  autopilot  system,  i t  was  reported.  Calcu- 
lations showed  that  a  simple  change  in  autopilot  settings could  prevent 
( A v .  Wk . ,  7/20/64,  24) 
future recurrences  of  the problem. 
Aviation  Week recounted  an  exchange  between  Defense  Secretary  Robert 
McNamara  and  Sen.  J.  William  Fulbright  (D.-Ark.) 
in  which  Me- 
Namara stated tha t  the Apollo program had  psychological value  but  no 
direct military  worth.  In  response to  a  question about  the  effect  of  the 
Apollo program on the mission of  DOD,  McNamara said:  “. . . if   a psycho- 
logical victory  tha t  might  result  from  the  Soviets arriving a t   the moon 
first leads to a shift in  attitudes in the world,  tending  to reduce the belief 
in  the  strength of  the West,  and  in  increasing  the  Soviet’s  view  of  the 
weakness of  the West,  th is  is bound  t o  have  a military  effect.  This is 
exactly  what  occurred  in  connection  with  our  space  programs,  and  i t  
( A v .  Wk . ,  7/20/64) 
led  to a  very costly  response by  this country.” 
*  Aviation  Week stated that  a  technological war  plan  task  force  under  the 
cognizance  of  AFSC  had  been  established a t   Space  Systems Div.,  to  in- 
vestigate a variety of  subject areas as  a continuation  of  the USAF’S  Project 
Forecast.  Participants  were  expected  to  include  key  personnel  from 
industry and  NASA  as  well  as  AFSC.  Areas  to be  studied included  boron 
fiber  technology  €or  application  to  structural  materials,  operational 
requirements  of  biological  satellites,  manned  hypersonic  vehicles  to 
investigate thermodynamic  and  aerodynamic  regions,  and  laser  appli- 
( A v .  Wk . ,  7/20/64,  23) 
cations  and  requirements. 
*  USAF  was  reported  continuing to  seek  industry  support  for  avionics  sub- 
systems  studies for  DOD’S  manned  orbiting  laboratory  ( MOL )   program. 
The  Space  Systems  Div.  of  AFSC  asked  avionics companies  to  submit 
bids  for   a  study  of  an  image  velocity  sensor  subsystem,  which  would 
enable  orbiting  astronauts  to  acquire  and  track  space  targets  visually 
and  to   take  fixes  an  terrestrial  bodies  fo r   navigation.  SSD  also  asked 
Honeywell to  submit  a  sole-source proposal  for  a  study  of  the  labora- 
( A v .  Wk . ,  7/20/64,  24)  
tory’s  attitude  control  system. 
9  It  was  reported  that  contractors were  accusing  NASA  of  naming  a  Mars 
exploration  idea  “Project  Beagle”  just  to  appeal to  President  Johnson. 
NASA  officials  denied  this  and  stated  that  the  project  was  named  after 
( A v .  Wk . .  
the ship  in which Charles  Darwin  sailed  around the  world. 
7/20/64,  15) 

258 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A ERONAU T IC S ,   1 9  6 41 
July 21: NASA  invited  scientists to propose research experiments and studies 
fo r   manned  and  unmanned  space  flights  during  the   last  half  of  the 
1960’s.  The  announcement  of  deadlines  and  guidelines  f o r   the   sub- 
mission  of  proposals was  distributed  by  NASA’s Office  of  Space Science 
and  Applications to  domestic and  foreign  scientists  in  universities, in- 
dustries,  and  Government  installations.  The  agency  gave  the  world 
scientific  community  detailed  descriptions  and  timetables  covering  a 
wide  range of  space research  opportunities, including placing scientific 
experiments  in  avaiIable space  on  Gemini  and  Apollo  manned  flights, 
weather  satellites,  sounding  rockets,  the X-15  research  plane,  orbiting 
(NASA Release 64-177) 
observatories, and balloons. 
e  Col.  Robert  P.  Young  (U SA ) ,   Executive Officer  of  NASA  since  1%1, was 
awarded  NASA’s Medal  fo r   Outstanding  Leadership. 
I n   making  the 
award,  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  cited  Young  for  “his  out- 
standing  leadership  and  dedicated  service  displayed  in  all  aspects  of 
performance  while  serving  a s   executive  officer  of  NASA,  and  fo r   his 
significant and  noteworthy contributions  in co-ordinating internal  man- 
( NASA  Release &&--181 ; Wash. Post,  7/22/64) 
agement of  the agency.” 
8 The appointment of  Dr. Jerome Spar, Professor of  Meteorology and Oceano- 
graphy,  NYU,  as  Director  of  Meteorological  Research  fo r   the  U S .  
Weather Bureau w a s  announced.  (Commerce Dept. Release WB 64-12) 
Commenting  on  Republican  Presidential  candidate  Goldwater’s  recently 
published  v iews   on  the  space program,  Warren  Burkett,  science writer 
for the  Houston  Chronicle,  pointed  out  that  a  good  deal  of  research 
which  can  be  of  use   to  the  military  services was  being  carried  on  as 
part  of  NASA’s Project  Apollo.  He  suggested  tha t   an  Apollo  Orbital 
Research  Laboratory,  based  on  components  being  developed  in  the 
Apollo program, could be used for military  aspects of  the space program 
such  as  space  patrol  and  interception.  The  article  suggested  that  the 
Apollo  program  was  generally  developing  a  group  of  “off-the-shelf’ 
space systems which could be adapted for military use should this appear 
desirable.  (Houston C h o n . ,  7/26/@&) 
July  22:  NASA  and  ESRO  announced signing Memorandum of  Understanding 
fo r   project  involving  two  scientific  satellites.  Under  the  agreement, 
NASA  would  launch  into  orbit  two satellites,  ESRO  1 and ESRO  2,  for  the 
nine-nation  West  European  organization.  Both  satellites  would  be 
launched  on NASA  Scout rocket boosters into near-polar eccentric orbits 
and were  tentatively scheduled during  1967 from Western Test Range. 
(NASA Release 64-178) 
USAF  successfully sent  a  delta-winged Asset  glider  through  a  12,000-mph 
re-entry test  in  an  experiment designed to gather data  on  the  conditions 
that  future manned spacecraft might encounter when  returning to  earth 
from  space m i s s ion s4nc lud ing  skin heating  a s  high  as 4,000”  F.  The 
1,150-lb.  spacecraft was  lifted  to  a n  altitude  of  44 mi.  aboard  a  Thor- 
Delta  booster  launched  from  Cape  Kennedy, then  was  fired  downward 
fo r   a  1,650-116.  glide  through  the  atmosphere.  The  glider,  the  third 
in   this  series  of  experiments, was  recovered  in  the Atlantic  Ocean  by 
frogmen.  (UPI, NYT,  7/23/64,46;  Wash.  Post,  7/23/64;  Wash.  Eve. 
Star, 7/22/64) 
The  White  House  and  Communications  Satellite  Corp.  announced 
television  coverage of  the  Olympic Games  from  Tokyo to  the US .   and 
Canada  would  be  attempted  via  communications  satellite.  Project 
i 

ASTRONAUTICS 

of  TV  coverage  of  the  Games, which  would  take  place  Oct.  10-24. 
(ComSatCorp Release; Finney, NYT ,  7/23/64,42) 
Ju ly   22:  Details  of  method  to  be  used  in  first  U.S.  attempt  to  rendezvous 
a manned  and   unmanned  spacecraft  i n   space were  disclosed  by  NASA 
Manned  Spacecraft  Center.  Launch  of  Atlas-Agena  into  orbit  would 
be  followed 95  min.  later  by  launch  of  Titan  I1  with  two-man Gemini 
spacecraft.  Five  hours  after  Titan  I1  launch,  rendezvous and  docking 
Gemini  spacecraft  and  Agena  stage  would  be  accomplished.  (AP, 
Wash. Eve. Star, 7/22/64) 
*  Results  of  experimental  drop  tests  down  elevator  shaft  of  Cleveland’s 
Terminal  Tower  showed  that  Styrofoam could  be  used  successfully  as 
a  deceleration medium, according to  NASA  Lewis Research Center design 
engineer  Terrence  E.  Russell.  Purpose  of  the  deceleration tests,  con- 
ducted  by  LRC last May,  was  to  verify  use of  Styrofoam a s  filler in  cart 
used  to  “catch”  free-falling  test  packages  a t   LRC’S  new  500-ft.  zero- 
gravity facility.  (LRC Release 64-a) 
*  NASA  announced  Univ.  of  Arizona  would  receive  $1,200,000  NASA  grant 
to  construct  Space  Sciences  Center  on  the  campus  a t   Tucson.  The 
four-story  structure  would  “further  the  University  of  Arizona’s  multi- 
disciplinary  program  that  is  proving  invaluable  to  the  national  space 
effort,”  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  said. 
(NASA  Release 
64-183) 
0  NASA  selected Philco  Corp.  fo r   negotiation  of  contract  for  feasibility  and 
preliminary  design  studies  for  automated  biological  laboratory  ( ABL) 
to  detect  and  describe  indigenous  life  on  the   planet  Mars.  The  one- 
year  study  would  define  life-detection payloads  for  Voyager-class mis- 
sions,  which  were  under  study  bv  NASA  Office of  Space  Science  and 
(NASA ReleAse fj4-182) 
Applications. 
*  Japan  launched  its first meteorological sounding rocket from the National 
Space Development Center’s testing range on Nii Jima  Island.  The two- 
(AP,  NYT,  7J23/6p,  46; AI?, 
stage  rocket  reirched  68.2-mi.  altitude. 
Wash.  Post,  7/23/64) 
*  House  passed  H.R.  11611,  a  bill  to  establish  a  National  Commission 
on  Technology,  Automation,  and  Economic  Progress.  Bill  was  then 
referred  to Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. 
(NASA  LAR 
III/140) 
*  William  B.  Bergen,  president  of  Martin  Baltimore,  said  U S .   had  closed 
the so-called “space gap”  of  Russian  competition “without  fanfare,  and 
almost without knowing it ourselves.”  Addressing National Space Club 
in  Washington,  Bergen  said  that,  with  all  the  “Hollywoodian  propa- 
ganda”  about  enormous  Soviet satellites, “there  seems  little  doubt  that 
the  objective  part  of  the  scientific world  is  now  convinced  that  our 
modest-sized  couriers  into  space 
e  brought  back  f a r   more  useful 
information  than  has  been  coll 
by  the  Russians’  more  massive 
( AP,  Houston Post,  7/23/64) 
messengers.” 
FAA awarded  $975,000  contract  to  Bunker-Ram0 Corp.  fo r   study  of  all- 
weather  landing  instrumentation  of  modern  jet  passenger  aircraft. 
(FAA Release  -72) 

260 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1964 .  

h ? y  23:  Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by  NASA from Ft.  Churchill, 
Canada,  reached  14 .5 -m i .   altithde  in  experiment  to  study  very  low 
energy  cosmic  ray  heavy  nuclei.  Rocket  performance  was  good  and 
instrumentation  performance  was  satisfactory.  Two  of  three  trays 
containing  experimental emulsions did not  completely retract  and were 
damaged by heat and upon  impact by water.  Preliminary estimate was 
that  l,OO%  good  data  were  obtained  by  the  emulsion  that  functioned 
properly and 60% by  the two which did not retract. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  NASA  Langley  Research  Center  asked  industry  for  proposals  on  the  kind 
of  launch  vehicle  it  would  take  to  put  a  small  spacecraft  into  orbit 
around  the  ‘sun.  The  purpose  of  the  program  would  be   to  put  a n  
instrumented  satellite  into  position  for  a  clear  view  and  study  of  the 
(Newport News  Daily Press,  7/24/64) 
sun’s  plasma  corona. 
Senate passed S. 2602 to  establish National Air  and Space Museum under 
the  Smithsonian  Institution.  The  bill  was  then  sent  to  the  House. 
(NASA  LAR III/141;  CR,  7/23/64,16138-39) 
July  24:  At  international  conference in Washington, two  interrelated  agree- 
ments  for  establishment of  global commercial  communications satellite 
system we re  initialed by the negotiators from 13 participating  countries. 
Five other  nations planned to  join  the  agreement on or before Aug.  19, 
date  of  formal  enactment.  Under  these  agreements,  ownership  in  the 
$200 million enterprise would  be shared  among 18 nations and Vatican 
City,  with  the  United  States’  Communications Satellite  Corp.,  owning 
61% of  the  shares  and  serving  as manager  of  the  system  on  behalf  of 
all  participants.  Agreement  would  be  open  fo r   six  months  beginning 
Aug.  19 to   any  nation  belonging to  International  Telecommunications 
(ComSatCorp  Releases;- Finney,  NYT,  7 / 2 5 / a ;   N.Y.  Her. 
Union. 
Trib., 7/25/64;  WSJ,  7/27/64) 
0  1,000-hr.  operating  test  at  full  power  of  S n a p 4   experimental  reactor 
was completed in  a  ground test a t  Atomics International’s Nuclear  Field 
Laboratory,  contractor  to  AEC   for  the  reactor.  During  the  test,  the 
reactor  was  operated  a t  600  kw.  of  heat  output  and  1,300” F  coolant 
outlet temperature,  thus  exceeding the  current  Snap43 system require- 
ment of  450 kw.  of  heat.  Snap development was joint program  of  NASA 
(Marshall Star, 9/23/64,  8 )  
and  AEC. 
0  At  his  Washington  press  conference,  President  Johnson  announced 
successful development of  an  advanced,  long-range reconnaissance air- 
craft to be  employed by Strategic Air Command : 
“This  system employs the  new  SR-71  aircraft  and  provides  a  long- 
range,  advanced  strategic  reconnaissance plane  for  military  use  capa- 
ble of  worldwide reconnaissance f o r  military operations. 
“The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  when  reviewing  the  RS-70,  emphasized 
the  importance  of  the  strategic  reconnaissance  mission.  The  SR-71 
aircraft  rwonnaissance  system is the most advanced in  the world. 
“The  aircraft  will  0y  a t   more  than  three  times  the  speed  of  sound. 
It will operate at altitudes in excess of  80,000 feet.  It will  use the  most 
advanced  observation equipment  of  all  kinds  in  the world. 
“The  aircraft  will  provide  the  strategic  forces  of  the  United  States 
with  an  outstanding  long-range reconnaissance capability.  The system 
w i l l   be  used  during  periods  of  military  hostilities  and  in   other  situa- 
tions  in   which  the  United  States  military  forces  may  be  confronting 
foreign military  f o r m .  

261 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A ERONAU T IC S ,   19  0 4 
“The  SR-71  uses  the   same  J-58 engine  a s   the  experimental  inter- 
ceptor  previously announced, but  it  is  substantially heavier  and  it  has 
a  longer  range. 
The  considerably  heavier  gross  weight  permits  i t   to  accommodate 
L C  
the  multiple  reconnaissance  sensors  needed  by  the  Strategic  Air  Com- 
mand  to  accomplish the  strategic reconnaissance mission  in   a military 
environment. 
“This  billion-dollar  program  was  initiated  in  February,  1963.  The 
first  operational  aircraft  w i l l   begin  flight-testing in early  1965, and d e  
ployment  of  production  units  to  the Strategic Air  Command will  begin 
shortly  thereafter. 
“Appropriate  members  of  Congress have  been  kept  fully  informed 
on the nature  of,  and  the progress  in, this aircraft program. 
“Further  information  on  this major  advanced aircraft  system will be 
released  from  time  to  time  at  the  appropriate  military  secret classifi- 
(Transcript, NYT ,  7/25/64?,  6) 
cation levels.” 
July  24:   McDonnell  Aircraft  Gorp.  was  awarded  a  $81,189,500 fixed-price 
contract  for  study  of  Gemini  B  spacecraft  for  the  Manned  Orbiting 
Laboratory  (MOL )   program.  The  contract  was  awarded  by  the  USAF 
Space Systems Division. 
( DOD Release 545-64) 
*  NASA  announced  small  businesses  received  three  out  of  every  four  sub- 
contracts  awarded  by  NASA  contractors  in  the  first  three  quarters  of 
FY  1964.  Of  1,337  subcontractors,  983  ( o r  7 4% )   were  small  com- 
panies.  The  small  businesses  received  $119  million,  or  23%  of  the  
$526 million awarded  in  the  time period. 
(NASA  Release 64-179) 
Governors and senators from 12  midwestern states meeting in Washington 
held  under  consideration  a  suggestion  from  Gov.  James  A.  Rhodes 
(R . -0 . )   and  Sen.  Gaylord  Nelson  (D.-Wis.) 
that  a  regional  bloc  be 
formed in  Congress t o  obtain Federal contracts fo r  the Midwest: “When 
w e  refuse as a unit to support east and west coast projects until a sensible 
policy  of  government spending is established, then we’ll  get a  hearing,” 
Senator Nelson  said.  “We aren’t  going to support  the others and make 
(Dodd, CTPS,  Chic. T r ib . ,  7 / 2 5 / a )  
a  wasteland of  the  Midwest.” 
Cape  Kennedy  celebrated  its  14th  anniversary  as  a  missile  and  space 
vehicle launching  base.  The  first missile  from  the  Cape was  a  hybrid 
Bumper  (V-2)  booster  with  an  Army  Wac  Corporal  second  stage, 
launched  on  a  200-mi. trajectory  on  July  24,  1950.  Since  then  more 
than  1,400  launches had  been  made.  Since its  establishment in   1958, 
(Marshall Star, 7/29/64+,  9) 
NASA  had  been  responsible for 8 4  flights. 
I t  was  reported that USAF was  planning to  permanently preserve the launch 
complex  from  which  the  first  American  astronauts were launched  into 
space and to develop the area around it into an Air Force Space Museum. 
(Strothman, Miami Herald,  7/24/64) 
An  exhibition  of  U S .  communications equipment-including  a  model  of 
(AP Wire,  7/24/64) 
the  Telstar  sa te l l i te -opened  in  Leningrad. 
NASA  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  announced researchers  had  developed 
first  known  high-temperature-resistant  ceramic  potting  compound  in 
which  space  electronics could  be  imbedded  for  protection  against  ex- 
treme  heat.  The  ceramic  potting  compound  can  be  cured  a t   tempera- 
tures  as  low  as  150° F,  permitting  it  to  be  cured  in  place  around  the 
electronics without subjecting  the delicate equipment  to damaging heat. 
The ceramic potting compound  combined protection  against heat  u p  to 
2,500”  F with  protection  against  vibration. 
(GSFC  Release  618 -6 4 )  

262 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
J u l y   24:  Results  of  space  poll  of  2,000  r a  
members, 
selected  US 
nce.  To the statement, 
1,134 of whom responded, were publish 
“The vital national interests of  the United States require tha t  a high prior- 
ity be given to landing a man on the moon by 1970,”  31% of  the  respond- 
ents said ‘‘Yes,”  62%  “NO.” To the statement, “A  reasonable objective 
would be a lunar landing by  1970,1975,1980,1990,  [or]  Never,”  20% 
chose 1970; 23%,  1975; 19%, 1980; 9%, 1990; and 776, Never.  Asked 
to  select  “the  most  important  justification  for  manned  exploration  of 
the moon” from prepared list of  alternatives, respondents said: military, 
7% ; scientific, 58% ; resources on moon, 1% ; national  prestige, 13% ; 
technological  fallout,  6%;   spirit  of  adventure,  7%.  Asked  to  rank 
following fields “in order of  their potentiality  fo r  producing new  knowl- 
edge,”  respondents  said:  earth-based  astronomy,  2% ; manned  lunar 
research, 10% ; biomedical research, 51% ; oceanography, 6% ; physics 
research,  15% ; chemical  research,  9% ; other,  7%.  Asked  to  choose 
“what  fraction  of  the  total  federal  $15  billion”  R&D  funds  “should  be 
devoted to the space program,”  30%  chose O-lO%,  31%  chose 10-2076, 
14% chose 20-30%,  and  5%   chose 3 0 4 0% .  
Commenting on the poll,  Robert C.  Toth  of  Los Angeles  Times noted 
that  Science  editor  Philip Abelson was  “an  outspoken  opponent of  the 
moon program”  and that the survey did not directly ask the key question: 
Should  the  existing  program  be  slowed  down  now?  Journal  of  the 
Armed  Forces  space editor  James  J. Haggerty, Jr.,  pointed out  that  “it 
a11  depends on  who  you  ask.”  Of  the  1,134  respondents,  he  said,  “it 
turned out that  86%  were not connected with the space program.  As a 
matter  of  fact,  there  is  a  strong  suspicion  that  they  a re   all  medical 
researchers,  since  51%  of  them  indicated  that  biomedical  research  is 
the scientific field with the  potential  for  producing  the  greatest amount 
of  new  knowledge,  where  only  10  percent  thought  manned  lunar  re- 
search  would  contribute  anything  of  value.  . . .”  (J /A rm ed   Forces, 
8/8/64,  12;  Science,  7/24/64,  368;  Toth,  Wash .   Post,  7/27/64) 
July  25:  NASA  launched  A e r o b e   150  sounding  rocket  from  Ft.  Churchill, 
Canada,  with  instrumented  payload  to  study  very  low  energy  cosmic 
ray  heavy nuclei.  The rocket reached 133.7-mi.  altitude,  ejected recov- 
ery package.  After land  recovery of  the payload, examination  revealed 
the emulsion trays all had fully extended and fully retracted properly,  so 
that  very good data would be  obtained. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
8  According  to  press  reports,  the  twin satellites launched  July  17  by  USAF 
continued  to  send  back  clear  signals  from  space.  Press  sources  had 
indicated  the satellites were Nuclear Radiation  Detection Satellites, said 
one satellite was  in  almost perfectly circular  orbit  ranging  from  63,314 
mi.  to  a 9 1 5  mi.  altitude,  while  the  other  was  in  slightly higher  orbit 
(AP,  Balt.  Sun, 7J26/64; 
ranging  from  58,686  mi.  to  69,387  mi. 
Wash. Swn. S tw ,  7/26/64) 
8  Soviet  space probe  ZOND  I  apparently  was  unsuccessful  in  i t s  mission  to 
land  on  o r   fly  by   the  planet  Venus,  according  to  unidentified  official 
in  Washington.  Western  scientists had  predicted  ZOND  I  would  reach 
Venus  between  July  18 and  25,  but  no Soviet announcement had  been 
made.  ( AP, Wash .  Post, 7/26/64) 
8  Drew  Pearson wrote  in  his  syndicated  column that  there  were  about 500 
Germans in Egypt working on militarv rockets and other arms programs. 
Among  more  important:  Prof.  Wolfgang  Pitz,  former  Austrian,  and 

263 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 
expert  on  rockets;  Prof.  Pau l   Goercke,  expert  on  radar ;   Dr.  Hans 
(Pearson,  Wwh .   Post, 
Kkinsaechter,  expert  on  automatic  pilots. 
7/25/64t,  B11) 
July  26:  Details  of  a  report  financed  by  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center 
delving into the question  of  why  so few Negroes were qualified for jobs 
with  MSC  were made public.  The  report  on  manpower  available  from 
minority  groups  indicated tha t  Negroes  seeking scientific and technical 
jobs  in  the  space  age  would  have  to   change  their  attitudes  toward 
education,  shifting  from  traditional  subjects  to  those  needed  in   the 
space  age,  such  as   physics. 
I t   also  indicated  a  need  for  changes  in 
curricula  and  in  educational  emphasis by Negro  schools,  a s  well  as  im- 
proved  placement provisions  in  many  schools.  The  report,  financed  by 
a  $38,000  contract  from  MSG, was  prepared  by  Drs.  J.  A.  Pierce  and 
B.  A. Turner of  Texas Southern Univ. 
(Houston  Chron.,  7/26/64) 
0  Prime  Minister  Tunku Abdul  Rahman  of  Malaysia  toured  John  F.  Ken- 
nedy  Space  Center.  Rahman  stated  after  h is   tour:  “I can’t  say  what 
I t   was  so  scientific.” 
impressed  me most.  Everything  impressed  me. 
(AP, N.O.  Times-Picayune, 7/27/68) 
July  27:  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  named  Capt.  James  A.  McDivitt 
(USAF)  and  Capt. Edward  H. White I1  (USAF) a s  pilot  and copilot for 
the  second  manned  space  flight  of  Project Gemini  ( G T a ) ,  a  four-day 
earth-orbital mission  in early 1965.  Astronauts  named  as  backup  crew 
for   the  flight were Maj.  Frank  Borman  (USAF)  and Lt.  Cdr.  James  A. 
Lovell,  Jr.  (USN )  .  All  four   were  “second  generation’:  astronauts 
selected for  the NASA  program in Sept. 1962.  ( MSC Roundup, 8/5/64,1) 
NASA  announced  modifications  to   X-15  No.  1  rocket-powered  aircraft 
tha t   would  enable  it  to   carry  on  scientific  experiments  above  much 
of  the  earth’s  atmosphere  were  being  made  a t   NASA  Flight  Research 
Center.  The  aircraft would  have  new  inertial  guidance  system,  origi- 
nally  designed  by  Minneapolis  Honeywell  Regulator  Co.  for  the  USAF 
X-20,  and streamlined  compartments  for experiments  a t  each wing  tip. 
One compartment  would  contain  device to  collect micrometeoroids  and 
extraterrestrial dust  and special  spectrometer  to  measure  radiation  and 
polarization  of  daytime  sky l igh t ;   other  pod  would  contain  densitron 
(NASA  Release  64-184; 
to  measure  a i r   densities  a t   high  altitudes. 
FRC Release 19-64) 
0  Dr.  Robert  H.  Goddard was  named  posthumously  as  winner  of  the  1964 
(Wash.  Ewe.  Star, 7/27/64) 
Daniel  Guggenheim Medal. 
Ju ly  28:  NASA’s RANGER  VII  spacecraft was  launched  from  Cape Kennedy  on 
its flight to  the moon.  After  an   almost perfect countdown, Atlas-Agena 
launch vehicle boosted the 806-lb. spacecraft into a parking orbit around 
the earth,  and then the Agena  engines refired  to place RANGER  VI1  on  its 
trajectory  to  the  moon.  The  spacecraft  carried  six  television cameras 
designed to take and relay to earth closeup pictures of  the  lunar surface. 
Flight to moon would  take about 68 hours, ~ t h  
the pictures to be  taken 
during the last 15 min. before craf t  impacted on  the moon.  The launch- 
ing was so accurate that, even without the standard midcourse correction 
maneuver, RANGER  VII  would  hit  the moon.  However,  scientists wanted 
pictures  of  the  “Sea  of  Clouds”  region  and  planned  to  execute  mid- 
course  correction  to   ensure  impact  and  pictures  in  this  area.  (NYT, 
7/29/64;  NASA  Release  6 6 1 7 6 )  

264 
July  28:  NASA  Ae 

tude. 
Instrumentation  included  electrostatic  probe,  omegatron  gage, 
Bayard-Alpert  ion  gage,  a s   well  a s   a  solar  aspect  sensor  to  provide 
proper  attitude. 
Instrumentation  performance  was  satisfactory,  al- 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
though  the omegatron made  no measurements. 
*  Unspecified “informed sources” in  Paris  said tha t  the first foreign base on 
U S .   territory-a 
satellite tracking  station  in  Alaska-was 
to  be  estab- 
lished by  the  European Space Research  Organization.  It was  reported 
that  the  establishment of  the station had  been  agreed  to  in  principle by 
the U S .   State  Department,  and  that  a  formal  agreement  was  expected 
to be signed in the near future.  ESRO had plans for launching about 400 
sounding  rockets, 6 small satellites, 8 medium  satellites, 7 space probes, 
and  an  orbiting  astronomical observatory  during the  following 8 years 
and would use the station to  help track, control,  and communicate with 
these spacecraft.  ESRO  planned  a network  of  similar  stations extending 
from Alaska  across North  Pole to  the  Shetland  Islands,  Belgium,  and 
(Simons,  Wash.  Post,  7/29/64) 
Italy. 
The  USAF successfully  fired  a  Minuteman  ICBM  from  Vandenberg  AFB, 
Calif. (M&R ,  8/3/64,8) 
July 29:  RANGER  VII  spacecraft successfully completed its midcourse correc- 
tion  maneuvers  to  put  the  spacecraft  on  its final collision course to  the 
moon.  RANGER  VII  carried  out  series  of  orders  involving  switching 
from  the  directional  to  the   omnidirectional antenna,  folding  the  direc- 
tional  antenna  out  of  the  way  of  the  midcourse  motor,  pitch  and  roll 
maneuvers to properly orient the spacecraft, firing the midcourse motor, 
and reorientation by ear th  and sun acquisition after the midcourse motor 
had  been  fired.  Telemetry  indicated  that  everything aboard the  space- 
craft  was  normal  after  the  midcourse  correction  activities  had  been 
(NASA Release 64-187) 
completed. 
*  USAF  cap t .   Joe  Engle  flew  the   NASA-AirForce  X-15  No.  3  experimental 
plane  fromaEdwards AFB,  Calif.,  in   a  test of  the heat-resistant qualities 
of  special materials attached to  the  craft’s  fuselage.  The X-15  reached 
maximum speed of  3,511 mph  (mach 5.32)  and peak  altitude of  78,000 
k. 
(NASA  X-15  Proj.  Off.; AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 7/30/64) 
*  NASA  conducted  two  successful  test-flights  of  paraglider  vehicles  at  Ed- 
wards  AFB,  Calif. 
In   the  first  test,  a  simulated  Gemini  spacecraft 
manned  by  North American  Aviation,  Inc.,  test  pilot  E.  P.  Hetzel  was 
towed  aloft  beneath  a  pre-inflated paraglider  landing sysiem.  The tow 
test vehicle  (TTV)  + w a s  towed  to 6,000-ft. altitude by  C H 4 C  helicopter. 
While  airborne, Hetzel manually  controlled the TTV through preplanned 
maneuvers  to  its  landing.  I n   the  second  test,  a  similar  but  unmanned 
system was  dropped  from  a  C-130  aircraft  a t  32,000-ft.  altitude.  The 
paraglider was  automatically  deployed  and remotely controlled in  flight 
from  22,000-ft.  to  12,500-ft.  altitude, where  i t   was  separated  from  the 
Gemini  test  vehicle.  The  tests  were  par t   of  NASA’s continuing  evalua- 
tion  of  the  paraglider  system  a s   a  means  of  landing  and  recovering 
Research  Center  would  negotiate  with  J.  w. 
manned spacecraft (MSC Rolmdup, 8/5/64,1) 
NASA  announced  its 
Fecker  Co.,  division  of  American  Optical  Co.,  for   satellite  attitude 
control  simulator.  Contract  would  amount  to  about  $1 million.  The 

’ 

265 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
simulator  would  be  used  in  vacuum  chamber  to  evaluate performance 
of  systems  and  components  being  developed  for  attitude  control.  of 
(NASA  Release 64r188) 
spacecraft. 
July  29:  At  MSC press conference, Kenneth S.  Kleinknecht, Deputy Project 
Manager  of  Project  Gemini,  stated  that  an  experiment  assigned  to  the 
second manned flight  ( G T 4 )  in  Project Gemini would  involve the first 
exposure of  an astronaut to the  hazards of  outer space without full space 
vehicle protection.  He said tha t  the experiment would involve “stepping 
into space,”  but modified  this later  to say tha t  it might  involve nothing 
more than  the  crewman’s opening u p  the spacecraft hatch  and  standing 
up  in his seat. 
In  addition to  this experiment, the second flight  (sched- 
uled  fo r  early  1965)  also  would  include  other  scientific  assignments, 
including  medical  tests,  radiation  measurements, and  measurement  of 
(AP,  NYT ,  7/30/64) 
the earth’s magnetic field. 
*  Christopher C.  Kraft,  Jr., Assistant Director fo r  Flight  Operations of  NASA 
Manned  Spacecraft Center, was  appointed flight operations director for 
the   second  Gemini-Titan flight  (GT-2),  an  unmanned  suborbital flight 
scheduled  fo r   autumn.  Kraft  had  been  responsible for  flight direction 
in   Project Mercury and  in the  first Gemini-Titan flight.  For  the GT-2 
mission  he   would  replace  Dr.  Walter  C.  Williams,  who  resigned  from 
NASA  last  March  to  become  Vice  President  and  General  Manager, 
(NASA  Release 66185  1 
Manned  Systems Div.,  Aerospace  Corp. 
*  Communications  Satellite  Corp.  announced  its  Board  of  Directors  had 
elected  John  A.  Johnson  a s  Vice President-International.  Mr.  Johnson 
had  been  Director  of  International Arrangements of  ComSatCorp since 
Dec.  9,1963.  From October 1958 until he joined ComSatCorp in 1963 
he  had served as General Counsel of  NASA. 
(ComSatCorp Release) 
*  His  Excellency  Philibert  Tsiranana,  President  of  the  Malagasy  Republic, 
toured  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  and  received  briefings  on 
the Goddard mission by  GSFC Director Dr.  Harry Goett.  In his official 
party  were  his  wife,  the Malagasy Foreign Minister,  their  Ambassador 
to the US., and officials o i  the U S .  State Dept.  and NASA  Hq.  (Goddard 
New s ,  8/10/64,1) 
Dr.  Norman W.  Rosenberg, of  the A i r   Force Cambridge Research Labora- 
tories,  was  presented  th e   DOD Distinguished  Civilian  Service  Award, 
highest decoration for civilian employees.  Since joining AFcRL  in  1959, 
Rosenberg designed  and executed  a number  of  important  experimental 
studies in upper  atmosphere physics, most of  which were part of  Project 
(OAR  Release 7-64-3) 
Firefly. 
0  West  Germany’s  vertical  take-off  aircraft  successfully passed  the   speed of 
sound  in  a  test  flight.  The two-jet V J lO l   achieved  its vertical  rise  by 
tilting  its jets  downward and  then  went  into forward flight by  swinging 
them  up  to  a  horizontal  position.  The plane  was  being  developed  by 
the  West German firms of  Boelkow,  Heinkel,  and Messerschmitt.  (AP, 
Wash. Post, 7]31/64) 
*  USAF successfully fired  an  Atlas  ICBM  from  Vandenberg  AFB,  California. 
(M&R, 8/3/68,8) 
July  30:  The U.S.S.R.  launched another earth satellite,  COSMOS XXXVI.  The 
initial  orbital  parameters  were  a s  follows:  period,  91.9 min.;  apogee, 
503  km. (300  mi.);  perigee,  259  km. (155  m i . ) ;   inclination,  49”. 
(Krasnuya Zuezda, 7/31/64,1,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
7@3-598  0--6&---18 

266 
ASTEONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
July  30:  At  his  news conference, President  Johnson noted the  first anniver. 
sary  of  the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty:  “. . . a  year  ago  this  week  the 
nuclear  test  ban  treaty  was  signed  and  agreed  upon.  Today,  a  year 
later,  more  than  100  nations  have  joined  the  three original  signing 
countries.  We  have  also  seen  a  United  Nations  resolution  banning 
duction  of  fissionable materials.  . . . A  year  without  atmospheric test- 
weapons  of  mass  destruction  in  outer  space  and  steps to  cut  back  pro- 
ing has left our a i r  cleaner.  This is a benefit to every American family, 
and  to  every  family  everywhere,  since  all  radiation,  however  small, 
involves  some  possibility  of  biological  risk  to  us o r   to   our descend- 
ants.  . . .” 
President  Johnson  said  that  the  problems  of  economic  conversion 
posed  by  shifts  and  cutbacks  in  military  activities  had  been  “greatly 
relieved  by  our  general prosperity.”  In   a  report  delivered  at  his  news 
conference,  the  President  called  the  problem  of  economic  conversion 
“hard”  and “complex” and said that it “will not be solved in one month 
or  one year.”  But  he  stressed that  the main  element in  a  solution was 
to  keep  the  general economy prosperous.  (Transcript, NYT ,   7/31/64y 
8 ;  Dale, NYT ,  7/31/64) 
The Senate Committee on Appropriations marked up and ordered favorably 
reported  with  amendments H.R.  11296,  FY 1965  appropriations  for 
independent  offices.  The  bill  included  a  NASA  appropriation  of  $5.3 
billion. 
(NASA  LAR 111/143-46) 
*  The  USN’S  Sea Lab  I, with  four  Navy  divers  aboard,  began  ascent  to  the 
surface after 10 days on the ocean floor at a depth of  192 ft.  The experi- 
ment was terminated 11 days ahead of  schedule because of  an approach- 
ing  storm.  Astronaut  Scott Carpenter  was  to  have  participated  in  the 
experiment, but  was  forced  to  withdraw  because  of  the  broken  arm  he 
suffered recently.  ( DOD Release 558-64) 
*  USAF’S  Vice  Chief  of  Staff  General William  F.  McKee  was  presented  his 
third  Distinguished  Service  Medal  by  President  Johnson.  Retiring 
after  35  years  in  the  armed  forces,  General McKee  was  joining  NASA 
Sept.  1,  as  Assistant  Administrator  fo r   Management  Development. 
(Wash. Eve.  Star, 7/28/64;  AP, NYT ,  7/31/64,5) 
*  Professor  Wallace  Osgood  Fenn  of  the  Univ.  of  Rochester  School  of 
Medicine was named  recipient of  the Daniel  and  Florence Guggenheim 
Award  for  1964 of  the  International  Academy  of  Astronautics.  This 
was the first time the award had been given to a physiologist.  Prof. Fenn 
was  Secretary  General of  the  International Union  of  the  Physiological 
Sciences.  Previous winners of  the  award  included Sir Bernard  Lovell, 
( IAA   Release 21) 
Dr..James A.  Van Allen,  and Prof.  Marcel Nicolet. 
*  French  Premier  Georges  Pompidou  declared  that  France  would  take 
every  possible  precaution  to  prevent  harmful  fallout  in  forthcoming 
atomic  tests  in  the  Pacific.  He  said  that  a  special team  would  be  sent 
to  the Polynesian test  site area on Mururoa  Island  to  ensure that waters 
and air were not contaminated by the tests.  ( AP, Wash. Post, 7!31/64) 
*  The  nuclear submarine Daniel Boone  test-fired a  Polaris A-3  missile with 
a  dummy warhead  more ‘than 2,OOO  mi.  down  the  Eastern  Test  Range 
while  lying  submerged 30 mi.  off  the  Florida  coast.  This marked  the 
eighth  success in  nine  undersea  shots with  the  advanced-model Polaris. 
(UPI, Wash. Post,  7/31/64) 

ASTRO 

6 4  

267 

as seen from the  earth  by  a  factor  of  1,000.  The closest pictures  were 
snapped 2.3 see.  before impact,  a t  10.7” south latitude and 20.7” longi- 
tude, 6% hrs.  and 36 min.  after  takeoff. 
At  news conference on  preliminary  results  from  RANGER  VII,  held  a t  
JPL, principal  experimenter  Dr.  Gerard  P.  Kuiper  of  Univ.  of  Mi. 
graphs as they were shown to the public.  I n  rep P y to a question, he  said: 
Lunar and  Planetary Laboratory described Sam  l ing  of  the lunar photo- 
“. . . the thing that struck me most was that  the Moon, the region  of  the 
Moon, the dimensions which we have been able to observe.  . . this range, 
tremendous  range  of  new  knowledge  has  not  resulted  in  any  totally 
unforeseen problems. . . . 
records  show  a  continuity  of  features 
“The  Moon  has  shown-the 
from  the large  craters observable with  telescopes down  to  smaller sizes. 
‘Think  that  the rounded  features  of  the  large numbers  of  secondary 
craters is new.  Also their  large number  is new.  . 
. 
“It i s  a lm  clear that  primary  craters exist, little pits which have very 
much the  same shape.  . . .  They  a re  smaller, but  the  shape,  the  form, 
(. 
is the same as  the bigger  craters.  . . . 
“There  a re  some ridges shown.  These ridges  in  the maria  a re  rather 
of  the same nature,  of  the  same shape, sort o r  form,  a s  the larger ridges. 
“So  I would say, in summing up, that  the new  region of  knowledge is 
in  a t rue  sense an extension of  the earlier  knowledge.  I think  it  shows 
that  the craters continue to  occur  down  to  sizes  of  about  three  feet  in 
diameter,  about  one  foot  depth. 
“This  clearly  implies  that  we  a r e   not  dealing  here  with  enormous 
layers of  dust,  of  very. loose dust,  that  is, very loose material, where one 
would  not  expect any  small  features  to  b e  visible  at  all.  It  is not  like 
sand, in other words..  . . 
United  States.  . . . the  amount  of  information  that  has  been  gained 
“This  is  a  great  day  fo r   science,  and this  is  a  great  day  for  the 
(NASA  Transcripts) 
about the lunar  surface is truly  remarkable.” 
President  Johnson  personally  congratulated  scientists and  technicians  re- 
sponsible fo r  the success€d flight of  RANGER  VII.  He congratulated  Dr. 
William  Pickering,  Director of  JPL,  and Dr.  Homer Newell,  NASA Asso- 
ciate  Administrator  fo r   Space  Science  and  Applications,  and  then  is- 
sued a  statement  on  the experiment.  He  called  the  flight “a  basic  step 
forward  in  our  orderly  program  to  assemble the  scientific knowledge 
necessary for man’s  trip  to  the moon.  . . . The pictures obtained of  the 
lunar surface should prove extremely useful.  . . . They will be  a  guide 
in   constructing  the  lunar  excursion  module  and  in  phnn ing   the  trip. 
Now  we  shall  ‘h able  to   better  map  out  our  descent  route.  We’ll  be 
able  to  build  our  lunar  landing  equipment with  greater certainty  and 
knowledge  of  the  conditions  which  our  astronauts  will  encounter  on 
the  moon.  I  recognize that this  great  success  has  come  only  after  a 
number  of  failures  and   partial  failures  in   our efforts  to  send  probes 
to   the  moon.  This  success  should  spur us on  to   added  effort  in  the 

268 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  
future.  . . . On  behalf  of  a  grateful  nation,  let  me  again  congratulate 
you  on  this  magnificent  achievement.  AU  of  you  today  have  helped 
(N Y T ,  8/1/64) 
further  the peaceful exploration  of  space.” 
July 31 t  The U.S.S.R.  announced a new  program of  Pacific rocket firings, to 
begin  August  4  and  to  last  to  the  end  of  1964.  The  announcement, 
describing the impact areas south and west  of  Hawaii, said “test  flights 
of  new  types  of  rocket carriers for  space objects” would  be  conducted. 
The Soviet government requested that  ships and  aircraft  stay out of  th e  
(Balt.  Sun, 8/1/64;  Tass, 
impact  areas  during  announced  periods. 
Pravda, 8/1/64,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
W.  S.  Bellows  Construction  Corp.  and  Peter  Kiewit  and  Sons,  Inc.,  re- 
ceived  a  $2,061,358  fixed-price contract  for  construction  of  the  Con- 
tractor’s  Support  Facility  at  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center.  The 
contract  was  awarded by  the Army  Corps of  Engineers. 
(DOD  Release 
563-64) 
*  A  six-month study  was  concluded of  public  acceptability of  sonic  boons 
that  had  been  conducted  by  the  FAA  in  the  Oklahoma  City  area  since 
February  3,  19@.  The  study  was  designed to  gather  data  on  public 
reaction  to  the  noise  that  would  follow  the  supersonic airliners  of  the 
1970’s.  During  the  test  approximately  8  booms  a  day  (total  in  test, 
1,253)  were  created.  During  the 6 months the  agency received  12,588 
telephone  calls,  most  of  them  complaints.  I n   addition  to  these  direct 
manifestations  of  opinion,  the  Univ.  of  Chicago conducted  a  detailed 
public  opinion  survey in   conjunction with  the experiment.  Gordon M. 
Bain,  FAA  Deputy  Administrator  fo r   Supersonic  Transport  Develop- 
ment,  said  in   announcing  the  completion  of  the  study:  “Sonic  boom 
presents  the   most  imposing  single  challenge t o   design  and  operation 
of  a  supersonic  transport  plane.  The  people  of  Oklahoma  City  have 
Been  helping  explore  this  challenge as,  in  effect, major  participants  in 
th e  nation’s  supersonic transport  development program.” 
(FAA Release 
64-74;  Clark, NYT ,  8/1/64) 
*  Alvin H.  Parker soared his Sisu 1A sailplane from Odessa, Tex.,  to Kimball, 
Neb.  (644 mi.)  to  claim  new  world  soaring  distance  record  over  the 
previous 544.331-mi. distance  record. 
( SSA  Release) 
Dur ing   July:  Two  10-story buildings  had  been  completed  in  KSC Merritt 
Island Launch Area  and were turned  over to  NASA.  They were  the $7.8 
million  operations  and  checkout  building  for  the  Gemini  and  Apollo 
spacecraft, and the $1.3 million spacecraft pyrotechnic installation build- 
( AP,  Orlando Sentinel,  7/22/64) 
ing. 
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of  Senate Committee on  Aeronautical 
and Space Sciences, said  in Pageant  article: 
“Our  [US .]   drive since Sputnik I  has led skeptics to call the manned 
This is a fallacy. 
The moon 
lunar program only a race to  beat Russia. 
is not an advantageous spot from which to shoot nuclear-tipped missiles. 
We  already  have  rockets that  can  hit  the  Soviet Union’s  interior  in  20 
minutes.  Polaris missiles can hit Russia in  one or two minutes, maybe 
less.  It  would  take  two  and  a  half  to  three days  for  a  moon-based 
rocket to reach Russia. 
“But  the  Soviet Union’s  design  to  rule  the  world  makes  it  essential 
that we reach the moon.  This goal isn’t,  as skeptics argue, just  a couple 
of  weeks  of  good  publicity.  Sure,  we  have  a  s i p e d   United  Nations 
agreement  forbidding  any  nation  from  claiming  the  moon  or  space  as 

ASTRONAUTIC8   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  64  

269 

measurable  psychological  advantage.  Space feats  a re   an  index  of  a 
country’s  strength.  If  Russians were  the  only  earthmen  on  the  moon, 
you’d  hear  people  around  the  world  saying,  ‘If  they  can  do  that,  no 
telling what  they  can  do to  us.)  ”  (Pageant, 7/64) 
During July:  It was  reported  that  nine payloads had  been  chosen  for  flight 
aboard  the  research  and  development l a u n c h s  of  the  USAF  Titan  111. 
Five  of  the  experiments were said  to  be  experimental communications 
satellites built  by  the  MIT Lincoln  Laboratory,  and  the  sixth  a  backup 
communications satellite from Lincoln Lab.  The  remaining  three  were 
scientific satellites using the modified Arents spacecraft shell.  To  avoid 
confusion with  the  defunct Arents  program,  the  latter  spacecraft were 
(M&R ,   8/3/64,  8 )  
to  be  called Orbiting Vehicle 2  (OV-2). 
The Boeing Co. w a s  awarded the annual Missiles and Rockets New  Product 
of  the  Year Award fo r  its development of  a microminiature welder.  The 
award was presented to Boeing officials by Dr. Edward C. Welsh,  Execu- 
tive  Secretary  and  Acting  Chairman  of  the  National  Aeronautics  and 
Space Council.  Awards of  Honor went to Kollmorgen  Corp.  (for  com- 
pact pointing  interferometer),  and to Control Data  Corp.  (for  its  6600 
computer ) . 
(M& R, 8/3/64,8) 
0  Maj.  Gen.  Ben  I.  Funk,  AFSSD,  said  perfect  record  of  reliability  of  the 
Atlas  (LV-3)  during  14 consecutive flights in N 1964 had  resulted in 
savings of  $81 million.  Three additional flights, made since that  period, 
had  given  the  Atlas  100% reliability  record  for  17   straight  firings; 
five of  these were f o r  NASA.  General Funk  made the  statement in  letter 
to  J.  R.  Dempsey,  President  of  General Dynamics/Astronautics,  prime 
(Aw.  Wk., 8/3/6d,  1 9 ;   Missile/Space  Daily, 
contractor  fo r   Atlas. 
7/27/64) 
First  stage of  Titan 111-A  had been  installed  at Launch Complex 20, Cape 
Kennedy.  The second stage, transtage,  and an aerodynamic nose shield 
were expected to  arrive  a t  Cape soon.  Assembled vehicle, to form core 
of  Titan  111-C,  was  scheduled for  launch  in  late  summer.  Launch  of 
111-A  would be first from Cape Kennedy of  vehicle specifically designed 
(M&R, 7/20/64,  8) 
for a military space system. 
0  U.S.S.R.  submitted brief,  nontechnical report  of  its  space activities to  the 
United  Nations  and  donated  magazines for  new  U.N.  “space  library.” 
This  was  first  such  Soviet  report  submitted  to  the  U.N.  and  was  inter- 
preted  a s  evidence that  U.S.S.R.  was  willing  to  cooperate  in  space  re- 
(Teltsch, NYT, 7/18/64) 
search  and  share its findings with others. 
One  of  U.S.S.R.’s 
top   test  pilots,  Col.  Sergei  G.  Brovtsev,  was  killed  in 
( A u .  Wk., 8/3/64,  15) 
accident while testing  helicopter. 
Kenneth  W.  Gatland,  Vice-president  of  British  Interplanetary  Society, 
described space progress in Great Britain in  Astronautics & Aeronautics. 
He pointed out that Britain not only played a leading role in establishing 
ELDO but  also  was  contributing  to   ELDO  “the  300,000-lb.-thrust  Blue 
Streak  . . . a s  the  booster  fo r   a  three-stage satellite  launcher  [Europa 
11 .”  Other  activities-not 
counting  the  ELW 
contribution-had 
made  Britain,  in  cooperation  with  Australia,  “easily  the  biggest 
participant  in   space  rksearch  outside the  United  States  and  the  Soviet 
Union. 

270 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
“Upper-air  research  with Skylark  rockets began a t  Woomera in  Feb- 
ruary 1957 and has continued to the present time.  Black Knight r o c h  
have  reached  heights  of  500 mi.,  and  with  it  a number  of  interesting 
investigations  have  been  made  on both  re-entry  and  stabilization  and 
control of  rocket vehicles a t  high  altitudes.  The growth of  the Weapons 
Research Establishment a t  Woomera as a launching, tracking,  and com- 
munications center under joint  investment by the British  and Australian 
Governments, and  latterly  by ELDO and NASA, has made this  facility  the  
World..  . . 
finest  and  best-equipped  overland  rocket  range  in   the  Western 
“With  the advent of  Sputnik  1 in  October 1957, Jodrell Bank  [radio- 
astronomy facilities]  quickly established itself  on both  sides of  the  Iron 
Curtain  a s   an   important  center  for  space  tracking  and  communi- 
cations.  . . . 
“In  addition,  the  General  Post  Office  in  1961-62  built  an  experi- 
mental  ground  station  at Goonhilly Downs,  Cornwall, for  relaying tele- 
communications signals between the United States and the United K i n g  
dom via Telstar and Relay.  There a r e  plans to develop this station into 
a  ground terminal  for a global telecommunications network.  . . . 
“In  July  1%3,  it  was  announced  in  Washington  that  Black  Knight 
would  be  used  by  the United  States, Great  Britain,  and Australia  in  a 
over the Woomera rocket range. . . . 
joint  program  of  re-entry  research  [Project  DazzIeJ  to  be  conducted 
“[British]  universities and  indu s t ry .   . . [supplied]  scientific instru- 
ments fo r  the satellites S-51 and 5-52 built and launched by  the United 
States.  A third scientific satellite, 5-53, wholly engineered in the United 
Kingdom, will be launched by Scout in  1966. . . . 
tained  with  the  Skua meteorological rocket  . . . . a  cheap  and  simple 
“ In   the  small  rocket  field,  excellent  results  a r e  currently  being  ob- 
theupperatmosphere.  .  . 
tool  for the meteorologist to conduct routine  research measurements in 
“Finally,  . . . [studies]  a re  currently being made in the United King- 
dom  into  the  concept  of 
the  Aerospace  Plane,  or  space  Trans- 
porter.  . . .”  ( A & A ,   7/64, 18-26) 

August  1984 
August  I:  The  day  after  RANGER  VII’S  historic  photographs  of  the   moon 
climaxed a “textbook flight,”  President Johnson was  briefed on the mis- 
sion by NASA  Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications 
William H.  Pickering.  Discussing  the  lunar  surface  p h‘ otographs,  Dr. 
Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell  and  Jet  Propulsion  Laborator  Director  Dr. 
Newell  said  the  principal  investigators  (D r .   Gerard  Kuiper  and  Dr. 
Eugene  M.  Shoemaker)  had  tentatively  concluded  that  “because there 
exists  such  sharp  little  craters  here  on  the  surface,  this  indicates  that 
there  is not  a  deep layer  of  dust  in  this area.  There would  be  expected 
to  be   a  layer  of  dust  on  the  lunar  surface  . . . there  has  been  much 
speculation about how  deep it would  be.  . . .  Some people had  specu- 
lated  as much  a s   a  thousand  feet.  Many  as much  as  30  o r   do feet. 
Others  had  said  no,  it  can’t  be.  And  those who  said  no,  it  can’t  be, 
Dr.  Shoemaker now  thinks were  right.  At  least  a s  f a r   as  this  area  is 
concerned.” 
Asked  by  the  President  whether  the  RANGER  VII  success  confirmed 
‘khat you folks had known what you were doing,” Dr. Pickering replied: 
“Yes,  I think it does. 
“First of  all,  it confirms we know what we  are doing technically when 
we  design something t o  do this job.  Secondly, that  a s  fa r  as the Apollo 
Program  is concerned, it  confirms tha t  the  basic  assumptions that  they 
were making  about the sort of  surface we   a r e  going to  have to  land  on 
is probably correct.” 
The  President  asked, “What  similar  achievements, scientific achieve- 
ments, can be compared to  th i s?”  and  Dr.  Newell  replied:  “Dr.  Kuiper 
was asked this question yesterday.  He stated he  felt this was comparable 
to   the  photographing  of  the sun  in  the  ultraviolet  light  by  the  Naval 
Research Laboratory a number of  years ago. 
“Someone else said that this  amounts to  a  big  jump  in  lunar  science, 
equivalent to  the jump  that  occurred when Galileo turned  the  telescope 
on the heavens.’’ 
President  Johnson  said:  “If  we  were  to  conclude-if  I were  to  con- 
clude,  if  the Budget were to  conclude, o r  i f   the American people should 
conclude-that  we  want  to effect a  savings here of  a  few billion  dollars, 
would  it b.e  your  opinion, Doctor  [Pickering],  that we would be penny- 
w i se   and pound-fwlish?” 
Dr.  Pickering  replied:  “It would  indeed,  sir,  because  I  believe  that 
this is truly  an  investment not  only which is needed to demonstrate our 
leadership  in the relatively mar future, but  it  is a  long-term investment 
for the  future.” 
(NASA Transcript) 
Concluding his White House briefing by scientists on RANGER VII,  President 
Johnson  stated: 
‘? want  to  say that  all Americans a r e  very  proud  of  you  today.  We 
a r e  proud  of  this historic extension of  man’s  knowledge,  We a r e  proud 
271 

272 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

of  o u r  scientists,  our  engineers and  all the great  team under the leader- 
ship  of  one  of  the  greatest  of  all  Americans,  Jim  Webb,  who  a r e  re- 
sponsible fo r  this  success.  We can  be duly proud  of  our  free and  open 
society, our system of  government. 
“We  started  behind  in  space.  We  we re  making many  apologies just 
a  few years ago.  We had our failures, but we kept  our faith in the ways 
of  freedom, and we  did  not  follow  the  easy  or  the  inexpensive course. 
We  know  this  morning  that  the  United  States  has  achieved  fully  the 
leadership  we  have  sought for  free men.  . . . 
“I think  we  can  say  this morning  that  this  is a  victory  fo r  peaceful 
civilian  international  cooperation  in  this  hour  of  frustration,  when  so 
many  people  a re   getting  upset  at  some minor  disappointments. 
“I think  we  can  all take great pride  in this  development.  More than 
60  countries  all  around  the  world  work  for  us  and  work  for  peaceful 
progress and work for peaceful uses of  outer space. . . . 
These men don’t  wear a DSM this morning, and we  are not presenting 
(6 
them  any  Congressional Medal  of  Honor.  But  they  do  have,  and  all 
of  their  associates from  Mr.  Webb  down  to  the  fellow who  sweeps out 
the dust  in  the  remote test  laboratory,  the  gratitude  and the  admiration 
of  all Americans of  all  faiths,  of  all  parties,  of  all  regions. 
“You  a re  welcome  to  the White  House.  The  people  who  live  here 
(NASA  Transcript) 
a re  mighty  proud  of  you.” 
August  1: In   article  on  RANGER  VI1  flight,  Soviet  newspaper  Pravda  con- 
cluded: “Soviet scientists a r e  happy to note that the launching of  ‘Ranger 
7’-  a new  national achievement of  the USA  in its program to  investigate 
the   moon-represents 
a  contribution  to  the  study  of  outer  space.” 
Zzvestia published photograph  of  the lunar  surface taken by  RANGER  VII 
a s  illustration of  interview with Soviet astronomer Boris Levin, who  said 
the  RANGER  VII  flight  was  “definitely  an  important  contribution  to  the 
(Pravda, 8/1/64,  1, 
study  of  the  composition of  the  lunar  surface.” 
ATSS-T  Trans.;  USIA  Research Results, CR, 8/11/64,18370-73) 
*  I n   lead  editorial  on  the  RANGER  VII  flight,  New  Y o r k   Times  lauded  the 
success of  the  experiment but  expressed the opinion that  the  flight once 
more  emphasized the possibilities for  international  cooperation in  such 
efforts:  “. . . Proud  a s  this  country  has  reason  to  be  of  Ranger  7’s  ac- 
complishment,  we   can  only  conjecture  how  much  more  rapidly  and 
cheaply  its  photographs  could  have  been  obtained  had  Soviet  and 
American  scientists been  able  to  pool  their  efforts  and  resources years 
ago, rather  than being  required  to  pursue  their  efforts in  competitive- 
The  case  for  a  unified  international  effort  to 
and  costly-isolation. 
reach  the  Moon-as 
urged  by  Presidents  Kennedy  and  Johnson-is 
strengthened by  every consideration  of  the  needless waste and  duplica- 
tion  that  have  marked  humanity’s  space  exploration  to  date.”  ( N Y T ,  
8/1/64,20) 
*  Washington Daily News  editorialized  that  the success of  RANGER  ~ I ’ S  mis- 
sion  represented  “a  significant milestone on  a  historic  road  to  manned 
exploration  of  the  moon.”  The  lunar  flight  was  termed  “a  demon- 
stration  of  man’s  ceaseless,  boundless  quest  for  knowledge-and 
one which, i n  the end, is likely to pay off  as well  as similar past  vovages 
(Wash .  Daily News, 8/1/64;  CR ,  8/4/64.  A41141 
into the unknown.” 
*  Baltimore  Sun editorialized  on  RANGER  VII:  “.  . . we  hear  much  talk  of 
what  this means  in  international prestige,  and  to  what  extent  we  have 

ASTROI?ATJTICS  A N D   AERO 

CS,  1 9 6 4  

273 

e  surface  of  the 

enhanced by  its proximity  and by  the  fact  that  something could always 
be  seen there,  is a matter of  awe and wonder;  and that  is the main  thing 
(Balt. Sun, 8/1/64) 
about this moonshot.” 
August  I ;  Soviet  satellites ELECTRON  m and  ELECTRON  N were  successfully 
conducting scientific investigation of  upper  atmosphere and outer space, 
according  to  Soviet  newspaper  source.  Since  their  orbiting  last 
July 11,50 communication sessions had been held with ELECTRON III  and 
19 with  ELECTRON  IV, and  valuable scientific and  engineering data  had 
been  obtained. 
(Krasnaya Zvezda,  8/2/64,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
*  Clifford B.  Harmon Trust announced that Astronaut L.  Gordon Cooper, Jr. 
(Maj., USAF) , would receive the Harmon International Aviator’s  Trophy 
fo r   196d  fo r   his  34-hour  orbital  space  flight  (MA-9) 
in  a  Mercury 
spacecraft May  15-16,  1963.  Others  to  receive Harmon  Trophy  would 
be Aviatrix Betty Miller for her solo transpacific flight  and Lt. Col.  Fitz- 
hugh  Fulton  (USAF)  fo r   11,000-lb.  payload  of  B-58 
to  85,318-ft. 
altitude.  The Harmon  awards fo r  1963 and 1964 would be presented to 
recipients in  White House ceremony September 14.  ( N Y T ,  8/2/64,78) 
a  Expressing  congratulations  on  the  success  of  RANGER  VII  lunar  mission, 
Chancellor Ludwig Erhard  of  West Germany said  in  telegram to  Presi- 
dent  Johnson:  “We  a re   happy  with  the  American  people  over  this 
tremendous  technical  and  scientific  achievement.”  Other  response  to 
the successful lunar mission included statement by  President  of  Mexico 
Adolfo  Lopez  Mateos,  who  said  that  RANGER  VII  was  “without  doubt, 
up  to  the  present  moment,  the  most  brilliant  page  registered  in   the 
scientific  history  of  modern  times.”  British  astronomer  Sir  Bernard 
Love11 praised  the success of  RANGER  VII  and  said:  “The  results will  be 
o f .   . . critical  importance  to  the  American plan  fo r   a  soft  landing  of 
instruments  on  the  lunar  surface  next  year  and  for  Project  Apollo, 
involving a  manned  landing  at  the  end  of  the  decade.” 
(AP,  Wash. 
Sun. Star, 8/2/64) 
French  Dragon  rocket  was  successfully  fired  to  an  altitude  of  275 
mi.  from  a  ’base  in  Iceland,  National  Center  of  Space  Research  an- 
nounced  in  Paris.  Fired  in  cooperation  with  Icelandic  scientists,  the 
sounding  rocket  carried  instruments  to  measure  energy  and  direction 
(AP,  Wash.  Sun. Star, 
of  particles  from  Van  Allen  radiation  belts. 
8/2]64;  M&R ,   8/10/a, 11) 
August  2:  Giving his Sunday blessing to  the public, Pope  Paul  V I   referred 
to   th e   successful  U.S.  RANGER VII  lunar  flight:  “We  also  would  unite 
ourselves in   the  admiration  of  all  for  a  happening  that  concerns  the 
life  of  all  humanity  and  that  shows how  f a r   the  man  of  science and 
technology has progressed.  . . .” 
(AP,  Houston Post,  8/3/64) 
*  In  article  from  Houston,  UPI  reported  on  first  manned  space  flight  in 
Project  Gemini  (GT-3),  quoting  “informed  sources”  a s  saying:  “We 
cannot  possibly make  it this year.  It will be  early  1965.”  NASA’s offi- 
(UPI,  L .A .  
cially announced planning date was in last quarter  of  1%. 
Times, 8/2/68) 
Soviet newspaper Kmsnuya  Zvezda published erroneous map of  the target 
area in the Pacific fo r  its rocket tests which it had previously announced 

274 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
would  begin  August  4.  The map placed  the  impact  areas withim  l O Q  
mi.  of  populated  islands,  but  the  targets  as previously  defined  were 
several hundred miles from  nearest inhabited  areas and in  another pa r t  
of  the Pacific.  (Shabad, NYT ,  8/3/64) 
Augmt 3:  Rep. Carl Albert  (D.-Okla.)  , speaking on  the House floor, praised 
the  team  of  scientists and technicians  that  made the  successful RANGER 
ha s  been reconfirmed..  . .” 
VII lunar  flight possible, and  said that the “validity of  the space program 
Also  in  the House,  Rep.  Louis C.  Wyman  (R.-N.H.) 
said  the trans- 
mission of  lunar photographs was “a  great tribute to the scientific prog- 
ress  of  our  experts  in  America’s  space program,”  and  RANGER  VII  was 
“a  highly  technical  success . . . in  the  right  direction;  namely,  the 
use  of  machines”  rather  than  man  in  space  exploration.  He  added 
that  Project  Apollo  need  not  be  called  off,  but  he  felt Congress should 
“hold back  on the  appropriations for Apollo space vehicle procurement 
until we  have established that man can  rendezvous in  space by complet- 
ing successfully the present Gemini program.  . . .”  He  also  advocated 
elimination  of  a  target  date  for  US. manned  landing  on  the  moon. 
(CR, 8/3/64,17203) 
*  NASA  announced  Col.  Lawrence W.  Vogel  (U.S.  Army)  replaced Col.  R. 
P. Young a s  NASA  Executive Officer.  Colonel Vogel was detailed to NASA 
from  U.S. Army  Corps  of  Engineers. 
(NASA  Announcement  fX-172) 
Results  of  decompression  experiments  with  mice  in  atmospheres  of 
helium-oxygen,  nitrogen-oxygen,  and  argon-oxygen  were  reported  in 
Missiles and  Rackets.  Performed  by  group  a t  Purdue  Research  Facil- 
ity,  experiments showed mice  survived decompression markedly  longer 
in helium-oxygen atmosphere than in air.  I n  one experiment, eight mice 
decompressed in  helium-oxygen atmosphere survived a n  average of  6.1- 
min.  longer  than  six mice decompressed i n  air.  Extrapolation  of  these 
results  might  indicate  desirability  of  helium-oxygen  atmospheres  in 
spacecraft  for  prolonged manned  flights;  the  extra minutes of  survival 
would  provide  safety margin,  in  case  of  accidental decompression,  for 
(M&R ,   8/3/64,  32) 
crew  to   take  necessary  emergency measures. 
*  Discussing  President  Johnson’s  July  24  announcement  of  the  SR-71 
mach  3 aircraft  under  development for  SAC,  Robert  Hotz  editorialized 
in   Aviation  Week :   “. . . The  ‘SR-71’  was,  of  course,  the  A-11 
[YF-l2A]  with  still  another  designation  pasted  on  its  titanium 
skim.  But many  congressmen were fooled,  and unthinking  daily  news- 
papermen  and  w ire   service reporters failed  to  catch  the.  deception  and 
spread  the   news  across  the  nation  of  the  ‘new’  billion-dollar  aircraft 
program. 
“The  inception  of  this  program  also  was  conveniently  shifted  from 
1959  in  the  Eisenhower  Administration  to  1963 i n   the  Kennedy  Ad- 
ministration.  Anybody familiar with aircraft development cycles knows 
that  i f   this program were really started  in  1963, it would  be impossible 
President  Johnson  stated.  . . .” 
to  deliver  operational  aircraft  to  Strategic  Air  Command  in  1965, a s  
( A v .  Wk . ,  8/3/64,  1 1 )  
*  Preliminary  survey of  public  readtion  to  sonic  booms  in  Oklahoma  City, 
disclosed by  FAA, indicated that  10-20%  of  those interviewed expressed 
“varying  degrees  of  negative  reactions”  and   about  4%  made  formal 
complaints.  In  the  six-month test program  which  ended July 30, 1,253 
(Clark, NYT ,  8/4/64) 
sonic booms were  created  over the city. 

ASTRONAUT1 

tment  was  e 
NASA  research program  in electronics and control when  he was  assigned 
to  his  position  in  November  1%1;  he  joined  NASA  in  March  1960 to 
establish  development program  for  Agena  launch vehicle. 
(NASA  Re- 
lease 64-199) 
Sen.  Hubert  €3.  Humphrey  (D.-Minn.)  discussed  responses  he  had  re- 
ceived  to   bill  he  had  introduced  for  establishment of  Oflice  of  Solar 
Energy,  among  them  a  letter  from  George  Lof,  Acting  Director,  Solar 
Energy  Laboratory  of  Univ.  of  Wisconsin.  After  visiting  U.S.S.R., 
Mr.  Lof  related  that  the  solar  development  program  there  was  “weU 
directed,  well  staffed,  and  exceptionally well  financed.”  There  were 
about  10  institutions  in  various parts  of  the  U.S.S.R.  engaged  in  this 
(CR, 8/4/64+ 17471) 
work,  with 80-100  full-time scientific personnel. 
e  Rep.  Lionel Van  Derelin  (D.-Calif.)  said in a  telegram to  J. R.  Dempsey, 
president  of  Generd  Dynamics- Astronautics:  “Spectacular  success  of 
the  Ranger  moon  shot  should not  overshadow  the  equally  spectacular 
record  of  consecutive successful launchings by  Atlas boosters.  Ranger 
our space program. . . .”  (CR, 8/4/64,17368) 
shot was the  17th straight.  Such amazing reliability  is  the backbone of 
e  The  “strange  object’’  that  fell  from  sky   near  remote  Venezuelan  vil- 
lage was  identified  by  two U S .  Army  officers as  a U S .  satellite,  accord- 
ing  to  U S .  Embassy  spokesman in   Caracas.  The  175-lb. satellite had 
been  charred  by  re-entry  heat,  damaged  by  impact,  and  partly  dis- 
(UPI, Wash.  Post,  8/7/64) 
mantled  by  local  residents. 
Augzcst 5 :  RANGER VII briefing to members of  Congress, with  Harris  (“Bud”)  
Schurmeier, Ranger  Project Manager,  JPL, and Dr.  Gerard  P.  Kuiper, 
Director  of  Lunar  and  Planetary  Div.,  Univ.  of  Arizona,  as   principal 
speakers.  Dr.  Kuiper  said:  “I  do  not  think  it  is  an  exaggeration  to 
say that  a new  era  has begun in the exploration of  the Moon.  . . . 
“Here,  in  one step last week  a  gain of  a  factor of  2,000  was made- 
[earlier reported as  1,OOOl.  . . .” 
2,000  in   the  e f lk t ive  magnification  of  the  image of  the  lunar  surface 
Discussing preliminary  results of  the lunar  photographs, Dr.  Kuiper 
said:  “.  . down  to  the  size  of  approximately two  or   three  feet,  the 
primary craters caused by  direct impacts on  the moon  covered  . . . an 
area  amounting to  about  one  percent  of  the  lunar  surface.  So  this  is  
a very  great help  in   landing operations, either by  unmanned  soft land- 
ings,  such a s   Surveyor, or  manned  landings as planned  for  Apollo. 
. . . t b  innocent-looking  ray   systems,  such  as   one  has  around 
6 C  
Copernicus,  Tycho, Kepler, a number  of  craters really are  danger spots. 
When  you  look  a t   them  closely,  . . . one  sees  them  resolved  into mul- 
titudes,  clusters  of  secondary  craters.  . . .  I  wouldn’t  be  surprised 
if  slopes of  the  order  of  1 5  degrees would  be  found.  This would  be 
somewhat difficult.  This is a rather uncomfortable inclination on which 
to  land. 
“.  . . the  surface  between  these  craters  is  smoother  than  I  had 
thought.  . . . I have  . . . many  times hypothesized that if  you would go 
to  higher  and higher magnification, higher  and  higher  resolution,  that 

276 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
there  would  be  a  large number  of  cracks  on  the moon,  fissurea  similar 
to  those  one  finds  on   lava  fields  such  a s  on   Mauna  Loa,  Hawaii,  o r  
recent lava fields which have not yet been eroded. 
“This  apparently  is not  the  caw.  This  w a s  wrong  . . . these cracks 
a r e  not present.  It looks as i f   the surface of  the moon has been buffeted, 
the  cracks filled in the process. . . 
has  been  simply pounded  on,  and  has been  sort of  smoothed  out,  and  
“NOW the  question  is,  what  about  the  surface? 
what  is the nature 
of  the  surface.  . . .  It  is  not  just  a  loose  pile  of  sand,  dust.  It  has 
considerable  stiffness.  And  . . . while  we   know  from  other  data  that 
th e  top  structure is open,  it is sort  of  like snow or a biscuit,  a  cracker. 
I t  has an  open  structure;  nevertheless, it looks as if   the moon may have 
considerable bearing  strength.  That, however, is something which must 
be measured separately, with separate equipment. 
“However,  w e   can  say  that  there  a re   not  enormous  depths,  several 
feet,  ten,  o r  a  hundred  feet of  dust,  which  would  simply  not  have  per- 
mitted formation  of  the sharp little craters a s  we  observe them.” 
( NASA 
Transcript) 
Augm t   5 :   Success of  RANGER  M I  spotlighted NASA’s preparation  for  further 
lunar  and  planetary  exploration,  including  two  more  Rangers  (early 
next yea r ) ,  Surveyor soft-landing spacecraft, Lunar Orbiter photograph- 
ing  spacecraft, and  Project Apollo manned lunar  expedition,  as well  as 
two Mariner  spacecraft  to  gather  data  from  the  vicinity  of  Mars  (last 
quarter of  1964).  (NASA Releases 6 6 1 9 6 , 6 6 2 0 5 )  
Senate  passed  H.R.  11296  (N  1%5  appropriations  for  independent 
offices), after rejecting  (69-20)  amendment sponsored by  Sen. William 
Proxmire  to  reduce  NASA  funds  by  $68,594,000  for  Research  and  De- 
velopment;  by  $17,880,500  for  construction  of  Facilities;  and  by 
$13,525,500  for Administrative  Operations.  As  passed  by  the  Senate, 
NASA  appropriations  for N 1965 amounted to  $5.3  billion,  divided  as 
follows:  R&D,  $4,413,594,000;  CofF’,  $262,880,500;  and  AO,  $623,- 
525,500.  Bill was sent  to  conference. 
( C R ,  8/5/64,  17554-77) 
*  Boilerplate Gemini spacecraft was dropped from C-119  aircraft a t  1,500-ft. 
altitude,  sixth  in  series  of  such  tests  to  study  landing  on  solid  ground. 
The  tests  were  being  conducted  by  Landing  and  Recovery  Div.,  NASA 
Manned Spacecraft Center.  (AP, Houston Pos t ,  6/8/64;  MSC Roundup, 
8/19/64,3 1 
A t  NASA Hq.  awards  presentation  ceremony, Joseph Mandelkorn of  Lewis 
Research Center and William R.  Cherry of  Goddard Space Flight Center 
jointly  received NASA  Contributions Award for development of  improved 
(n-on-p)  radiation-resistant  solar  cells.  Mandelkorn  received  $5,000 
cash  award  and  Cherry,  $1,000.  William  W.  Smith,  formerly  of  Jet 
Propulsion  Laboratory,  and  Bruce W.  Schmitz of  JPL  received  $l,OOO 
award  for  their  contribution  of  Trajectory-Correction  Propulsion  Sys- 
tem, used recently in RANGER M I  lunar photography mission.  Wilmer H. 
Reed  111  of  LaRC  received  $1,500  award  fo r  his  contribution  of  a  Test 
Unit  Free-Flight  Suspension  System.  Howell  D.  Garner  and  Henry 
J.  E.  Reid,  Jr.,  of  Langley Research Center, received  $1,700  award  for 
their  contribution  of  Dynamic Precession  Damper  for  Spin  Stabilized 
Vehicles.  Awards were  presented  by  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Dr. 
Hugh L.  Dryden.  (Program) 

277 

ASTRONAUTICB  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6.4 
D 
ad  

booster  from 
, Wmh. Post, 
*  Senator John Stennis (D.-Miss.) 
said on the floor of  the  Senate: 
In  exploring space, our Nation as well as any  other nation  is strain- 
6 6  
ing  at the state-of-the-art and technology.  We a r e  movin 
where relatively little is known.  As we  move into  such 
confident that we can stay abreast in the field of  scientific discovery and 
its application to  space with any other nation.  In  this medium  it  is not 
a  case of  being able to defend ourselves by  building ten  planes to every 
five planes of  a potential  aggressor nation  o r   five ships  to  two  ships or 
three tanks to one tank  in order to establish our superiority.  By  staying 
abreast  of  advancements in  science and  technology  our  Nation will  be 
able  to  prevent  any  surprise  in  this  new  medium.  Our  national  space 
program  is  geared  to  this  accomplishment.  As  for  the  present,  our 
Nation  subscribes  to  the  philosophy  that  space  should  be  explored  for 
peaceful  purposes,  and  we  will  do  so.  However,  should  a n   aggressor 
attempt  to  utilize  this  medium  fo r   warlike  activities  in  the  future, 
I am confident that our Nation will be prepared  to defend itself.” 
(CR, 
8/5/64) 
*  National  Academy  of  Sciences announced  establishment of  10-man com- 
mittee  to  study  effects of  sonic boom  phenomena  as related  to  develop- 
ment  of  supersonic transport.  Chaired  by  Dr.  J.  R. Dunning,  dean  of 
School of  Engineering  and  Applied  Science, Columbia Univ.,  the  com- 
mittee  would  assist  Government in   planning  an  expanded  sonic  boom 
test  program  and  evaluating  the  data  obtained  in  the  program.  FAA 
would  continue  to  manage  the   test  program  operation,  with  support 
from NASA  and  USAF.  NAS  organized the committee upon  request  from 
President  J o h s o n .  
Release) 
( NSNRC 
Dave  W.  Lang,  Chief  of  MSC Contracts  and  Procurements  Div.,  said  in 
address  to Gulf  Area Development Committee of  the Houston Chamber 
of Commerce that MSC “ranked first in the agency in terms of  dollar  and 
percentage  awards”  to  contractors  for  the  first  half  of  FY  1 9 a .   MSC 
awards  totaled  $629.1  million,  or  32%  of  total  NASA  spending  in  that 
period.  (Maloney, Houston Post, 8/6/64) 
August  6:  NASA  and  Dept.  of  Health,  Education  and  Welfare  announced 
cooperative one-year research project  to study anti-cancer, carcinogenic, 
and  anti-radiation  potential  of  certain  chemical  compounds  closely 
related  to  plant  growth regulators.  Project would  extend studies made 
at North  American  Aviation’s  Space  and  Information  Systems  Div.  in 
NASA  research  program  to  protect  man  in  space.  To  he  conducted 
a t   *ID  under  $198,185  contract  with  HEW’S  Public  Health  Service, 
project  would  be  directed  by  PRS National  Cancer  Institute  and 
financed through  a  transfer  of  funds by  NASA  as part  of  its Technology 
Utilization program. 
(NASA  Release 6 6 1 9 0 )  
Nike-Caiun  sounding  rocket  with  upper  atmosphere  grenade  ex- 
lops  Island  to  73-mi.  altitude,  and 
periment  was  launched  f r  
series  of  12 grenades  was 
and  detonated  a t  intervals  from  23- 
to  58-mi.  altitude.  Experiment was  coordinated  with  similar  grenade 
shot from  Sweden’s  Kronogh-d Range  (81-mi.  ak  altitude)  and with 
another  experiment launched there on a Nike- 
rocket to measure 
noctilucent  clouds  (77-mi.  peak  altitude).  These  launchings  marked 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

278 
beginning  of  third  series  of  grenade  experiments  conducted  by  NASA 
GSFC  from Wallops  Island,  Fo r t  Churchill Research Range,  and Ascen- 
sion  Island,  with  Sweden joining  the  group  fo r  ithis  series.  The  Fort 
Churchill  and  Ascension  Island  launchings  were  canceled  because  of 
weather conditions.  (Wallops Release 6459; NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
August  6 :  Black  Knight  rocket  was  fired  a t   Woomera  Rocket  Range  i n  
U.K.-US.-Australia  Project  Dazzle.  Minister  of  Supply Allen  F a i r h d  
said  the  rocket  reached  370-mi.  altitude,  where  second  stage  rocket 
ignited  to  drive  instrumented re-entry package back  through the  atmos- 
(Reuters, Houston Post, 8/7/64) 
phere. 
0  Research  in   extrasensory  perception  as  a  means  of  communication with 
astronauts  on  space  flights was  advocated by  Harold  Sherman,  Presi- 
dent  and  Executive  Director  of  ESP Research  Associates  Foundation, 
Little Rock,  Ark.  Speaking  in  Los  Angeles,  Sherman  said:  “ I t   is  en- 
tirely  feasible for the  Air  Force  to  experiment  in  the  training  of  astro- 
nauts to  transmit and receive thoughts and,  in  this connection,  a battery 
of  ‘sensitives,’  who  can  communicate with  them  on  a  two-way  basis 
(L.  A.  H e r d -E x am i n e r ,  
while  they  are  traveling  through  space.” 
8/6/64) 
August  7:  NASA  launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Ft.  Churchill with 
grenade payload  to  obtain  atmospheric temperature, wind,  density,  and 
pressure  data.  The  rocket  attained  86.5-mi.  altitude  and  all  but  the 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL )  
first of  the 12  grenades detonated. 
*  First  manned  free-flight test  of  Gemini paraglider  landing system was  un- 
successful at Edwards AFB,  Calif.  The paraglider, with pilot E.  P. Hetzel 
of  North American Aviation in  mockup spacecraft slung beneath it, was 
towed t o   13,000 ft.  by  helicopter, then  was  cut  loose.  Pilot Hetzel lost 
control and at 3,000 ft. was forced to bail out.  The paraglider crashed. 
(Wash.  Eve. Star, 8 / 7 / a )  
*  NASA  and Netherlands Organization fo r  the Advancement of  Pure Research 
announced  agreement  fo r   joint  scientific  sounding  rocket  project. 
Under  the   agreement,  four  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  carrying 
sodium  vapor  payloads  would  be  launched  from  Coronie,  Surinam, 
near  the  equator  next  autumn.  Netherlands  would  provide  scientific 
payloads  and launch  site, as well  as other support facilities in Surinam. 
NASA  would  provide  the  rockets  and  launching  device and  train  Dutch 
(NASA  Release 64-197) 
launching personnel. 
USAF  Titan  I11  solid-fuel rocket  motor  was  fired  in  static  test  a t   United 
Technology  Center’s  Coyote,  Calif.,  test  facilities.  A  joint  in   the 
nozzle  skirt  failed  during  last  10 sec. of  the   112-sec. test,  causing  a 
fire that  did only minor damage t o  the  test stand, but  all test  objectives 
were met.  AFSC Space Systems Div. Deputy  Chief  of  Staff for Manned 
Spaceflight  Brig.  Gen. Joseph  Bleymaier  termed  the  test  a n   absolute 
success.  (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/7/@;  M&R, 8/16/64,  8) 
0  Research  in  use  of  laser  rada r   to  map  a i r   turbulence  in  the  skies  was 
described by Drs.  Ronald T.  H.  Collis and Myron G.  H.  Ligida of  Aero- 
physics  Laboratory  a t   Stanford  Research  Institute.  The  laser  equip- 
ment would be installed in  aircraft.  Dr.  Collis and  Dr. Ligida reported 
their research in  Nature. 
(N Y T ,  8/7/64,8) 
Discussing U S .  space  costs  in  terms  of  the  gross national  product,  Sen. 
Stuart  Symington  (D.-Mo.)  said  the GNP  was  nearly  $2 billion  a  day, 

279 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AER 
“and  I guess we 
to get t o  &.e  moon.” 
( AP,  Louisville, 
Augu s t   7:  AFSC  announced  fabrication  of  ultrahigh  strength,  lightweight 
steel  cases  for  solid-propellant  rockets.  Solid-rocket case  constructed 
of  18% nickel maraging  steel wa s  as strong a s  similar-size conventional 
steel case but was 25%  lighter.  The steel was developed under contract 
by Curtiss-Wright Corp. 
( APSC  Release &12%94) 
*  Michael V.  Lighthill, director  of  British laboratory involved in developing 
Anglo-French  supersonic  airliner  Concorde  and   reputable  expert  on 
sonic booms,  spoke optimistically i n   interview about outcome of  recent 
US. sonic  boom  experiments.  Lighthill  said  that  although  there  was 
not  yet  enough  information  from  the  Oklahoma  City  studies, prelimi- 
nary  reports  were  “very  encouraging.”  Damage  from  sonic  booms 
(Simons,  W s h .  
was  apparently  less than  many  experts  had  feared. 
Post, 8/8/6$) 
USN successfully launched Polaris  A-3  from  submarine  submerged 30 mi. 
east of  Cape Kennedy.  (M&R ,  8/11/64,9) 
*  Common  stock  of  Communications Satellite Corp.  had  risen  as  high  a s  
$35  since it was  put  on  sale to  the public  a t  $20  last  June 2,  surprising 
many Wall Street experts.  (Vartan, NYT, 8/7/64,33) 
A u g w t   8 :   President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  said  in   press  conference  at  LBJ 
ranch,  Stonewall, Tex.:  “. . . it  seems to  me  that  these last  seven  days 
deserve very  s p i a l  consideration  and  contemplation of  every  thinking 
citizen.  All week  long the Americans have been  doing what Americans 
do best-working 
together. 
“The results have  been  highly gratifying.  The week  has been  deeply 
reassuring.  Wherever  we  have  faced  them,  we  have  been  meeting our 
challenges-at 
the Gulf  of  Tonkin, the halls of  Congress, in  distant space 
of  our  universe and  all  sections of  our  Nation. 
“Only  a  week  ago, we  saw a  steady, stable, straight-forward  national 
course  yield  an  important  national  success  in  the  mission  of  Ranger 
7 . . . .  
9 ,  
The President announced : 
“The  Air  Force  will  proceed immediately with  the  program  to  orbit 
24  satellites  for  an  interim,  independent  defense  satellite  communica- 
tions  system.  This  system  will  provide  reliable,  worldwide  circuits, 
highly  resistant  to  jamming  and  physical  attack,  for  carrying  essential 
(Transcript,  AP,  Wash. 
military  communications in  times  of  crisis.” 
Post, 8/9/64, A12) 
DOD statement  on  military  communications  satellite  system,  announced 
earlier in  the day by President Johnson, described the  satellites as an “in- 
terim  system” designed to provide “extremely reliable duplex high-qual- 
ity voice circuits.”  The 24-satellite network would  be placed  into near- 
equatorial  orbits,  eight  at  a time,  by  three Titan  111-C  launch  vehicles, 
beginning with  the first launching of  eight satellites in early 1966.  This 
interim  system  would  be  replaced  after  about  three  years  by  a n   “ad- 
vanced”  military  comsat  system.  (NYT, 8/9/64;  UPI, Wash‘. Post, 
8/9/64) 
Addressing  Aerospace  Industries  Association  Council  in   Seattle,  Dr. 
Edward C.  Welsh, Executive Secretary of  the Nqtional Aeronautia  and 
Space  Council,  summarized  future  aerospace  trends.  He  foresaw  no 
immediate substantial  decrease  in  dollar  amount  of  defense  spending, 

280 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 

but  said industry should  be  able  to  shift emphasis  from  production  of 
weapon systems to “other  useful types and forms of  economic activity”- 
which  he  said  should  be  toward  an   expanding  space  program  and  a n  
increase  in  R&D  of  advanced  weapons  technology.  Of  space  program 
values  he  said: 
“The space program has  been a catalyst, a  stimulus to  education a t  all 
levels, with particular attention to science and engineering.  How much 
is i t  worth to have raised the educational  sights of  our  young people and  
a t  the same time to have increased  significantly the wealth of  knowledge 
with which to condition  them?  I cannot  put  a price on  it, but  I  believe 
its value will exceed the total cost of  the space program. 
“The  contribution of  our  space  program  to   our  national  security  i s  
also  considerable.  How  much  more  secure  are   we,  due  to  improved 
communications,  more  accurate  navigation,  more  complete  weather 
information,  and  better  world-wide mapping?  How  much  is  it  worth 
to  be better  informed  about potential sources  of  danger?  How  can  we 
assess  the  advantage  of  developing  competence  to  detect  and  offset 
possible aggression  from  space?  I  cannot  put  a  price  on  these  contri- 
butions  to  national  security,  but  I  am  confident  that  their  value  also 
exceeds the total  cost of  the  space program. 
“The  space  program  stimulates  the  development  of  new  products, 
new  productive  processes,  and  new  managerial  techniques.  I  cannot 
place a  precise value  upon  such  innovations, but  I would  estimate that 
such investment will  repay  itself  many  times over. 
“A  substantial  difference in  influence  in  world  a t a i r s   evolves  from 
whether  a  country  i s  in  a  first  position  or   a  second  position  in  power. 
To  a  significant degree, a  nation’s  relative position  depends  on  how  it 
stands  in  advanced  technology.  . . . 
Combining,  as  the  space program  does, the  best  talents  in manage-  7 
bC 
ment,  in  engineering,  and  in   science,  with  the  most  modern  facilities 
available, the net result is the production  of  progress.  A program which 
stimulates education, expands research and development, augments total 
productivity,  increases  employment,  and  improves  our  international 
relations,  is  a  program  of  the  greatest  economic  significance.  . . .” 
(Text) 
August 8 :  Brazilian sources reported  that Brazil was negotiating with British 
firm fo r  purchase of  unspecified number  of  Seacat ship-based guided mis- 
siles.  (Miller, Balt. Sun, 8/9/64) 
August  9:  Smithsonian  Institution,  under  grant  from  NASA, had  purchased 
collection of  meteorites from  estate of  Arthur  R.  Allen  who,  before  he 
died  in  1962,  collected  45  meteorites  and  several  hundred  other  rock 
(Wash. Post, 8/9/64,  B9) 
specimens. 
August  10:  Paraglider  landing system  definitely would  not  be  used  for  the 
scheduled Project Gemini  space flights,  MSC Public Affairs Officer Pau l  
Haney  announced.  Development  of  paraglider  system was  too  far   be- 
hind  for  the 12 scheduled flights.  After many  rumors and much  specu- 
lation,  this  statement  was  first  05c ia l   announcement  of  decision not  to  
use  the  paraglider.  I t   followed  by  three  days  the  first  manned  free- 
flight  test  of  the  system,  which  was  unsuccessful.  Development  and 
testing  of  paraglider  by  North  American  Aviation  would  continue, 
(Maloney, Houston  Pos t ,  8/11/64) 
Haney  said. 

281 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 
August 10: Ernest  W.  Brackett, NASA  Assistant  Deputy  Associate  Adminis- 
trator  (Procurement  Policy) , addressed  National  Association  of  Pro- 
fessional  Contract  Administrators  i n   Orlando,  Fla.  Discussing  some 
NASA  contract  matters  of  current  interest,  he  outlined  ways  in  which 
NASA  worked  similarly to  and  differently than  DOD contract  administra- 
tion, then said : 
“Perhaps  &he outstanding  difference  between  NASA  and  DOD in  the 
field- of. contract  administration  is  in  the  area  of  quality  control  and 
inspection.  NASA’s contracts  a r e   almost  wholly  fo r   research  and  the 
development of  satellites, space vehicles, engines,  etc.,  the like  of  which 
have  never  been made  before.  There are no  production  type  contracts 
a n d   these  probably  will  be  very  few.  The  system  of  inspection  and 
quality control as envisaged by  NASA  is quite different from the sampling 
type of  inspection used  on  a production  line. 
“We  buy  only  a  few  of  each  item  and  a  failure may  mean  the  com- 
promise of  a program.  Also, development items are very  expensive and 
the loss of  a shot may mean  the loss of  millions of  dollars.  There have 
been  failures where  the  cause has  been  traced  to  the  failure  of  a  small 
component  costing  a  hundred  dollars  or  so  which  might  have  been 
caught  with  proper  inspection.  The  Saturn  is  a n  example  of  a  project 
where very high  degrees of  quality  control have been  applied and very 
detailed inspection has taken place.  The six Saturn shots have  all been 
successful and i t   is  difficult to  criticize  success. 
“NASA  has had  over  100 space shots.  There have been  successes and 
failures.  In  1960 only 47%  of  the  shots were  successful,, but  in  1963 
successes had  risen  to  85% .   You  can  expect  continued  emphasis  on 
quality control from NASA.  Someone described that degree of  reliability 
to run  continuously fo r  a year without a single one failing. . . ? (Text) 
that  NASA  is looking for  a s  being the  equivalent of  1,000 TV  sets made 
The newest  1 4  NASA  astronauts  began  week-long desert survival  course  in 
Nevada, under  direction  of  USAF  3637th Survival  and  Special Training 
Squadron,  Stead AFB.  (MSC Roundup,  8/19/64,  2 )  
*  Interviewed in Missiles and Rockets, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario  (D.-Conn.) 
discussed  the  work  of  his  research  and   development  subcommittee of 
the House Committee on  Science and Astronautics.  One  current  activ- 
ity:  “The  National Academy  of  Sciences is undertaking  several  studies 
fo r  u s  through a  14-man committee headed by Dr.  George Kistiakowsky, 
science advisor to  former  President  Eisenhower.  I t  will look  into  such 
questions as what  is the level of  basic research that should  be  supported 
Federally  to  maintain  the  nation’s  security,  economy  and  industrial 
strength. . . .”  (M&R, 8 /10 /64 ,26 )  
*  Orbital tanker  study by  Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.  fo r  NASA  Marshall 
Space Flight  Center was  discussed in Aviation  Week  & Space Technol- 
ogy.  Tanker  would  be  unmanned  and  would  be  used  to  transfer  pro- 
pellants  to  other  unmanned  o r   to  manned  spacecraft  in  earth  orbit. 
Concepts  in  which  orbital  refueling  capability  was  underscored  were 
future manned planetary  flights and  potential  reusable  lunar  transport 
(Av .   Wk., 8/10/64,  55-57) 
ferries. 
*  US. Samos  (Satellite  and  Missile  Observation  Systems)  satellites, 
undiscussed  by  DOD since  secrecy  policy  was  adopted  in  late  1%1, 
had  been  orbited  “periodically”  ever  since  then,  Albert Ravenholt  said 
in New  Orleans  Times-Picayune article.  Even  though  Samos was  de- 
? W - 5 9 8 0 - 4 ~ ~  

282 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

a 

veloped a s  successor to U-2  high-altitude photographic  airplane,  Raven- 
holt  said,  U.S.S.R.  had  “made  n o   threatening  noises  about  Samos,” 
probably  because  some  Russian  Cosmos  satellites  a re   equipped  with 
cameras;  U.S.S.R.  has  no  missile  capable of  shooting  down  a  Samos; 
and, if  it could down one, the action would open whole new  vista of  legal 
(Ravenholt,  N.O.  Times- 
problems  about  control  of  outer  space. 
Picayune, 8 / 1 0 / a )  
August  10:  According to  unnamed DOD official,  U.S.S.R.  had  yet  to  demon- 
strate “even  the  beginnings of  U S .  solid  rocket  t e ~ h n ~ l ~ g y . ”  The  of- 
ficial said in Missiles  and Rockets that  this  fact, combined with  the fact 
that  Soviet operational  ICBM’s were  liquid-fueled vehicles stored  above 
ground  rather  than  in  hardened  silos,  had  greatly  influenced  defense 
planners’ viewpoint that US. could mount a  second strike and destroy a 
(Trainor,  M&R ,  
number  of  Soviet  ICBM’s before  they  were  fired. 
W10J6d) 
Soviet newspaper Izvestia  singled  out  Marina  Popovich, wife  of  Lt.  Col. 
Pavel  R.  Popovich,  a s  a  possibility  to  become  woman  space  traveler, 
saying the cosmonaut’s wife had “finished the higher  aviation school and 
has now  left for  a  distant business trip.”  Zzvestia  quoted Pavel  a s  say- 
ing:  “The  machine with which  she is now  familiarizing  herself  is con- 
siderably more  powerful than  the  one  in  which  she established  a  new 
(UPI, NYT ;   8/11/64,  3 ;   Wash .  
record  for  speed  two  months  ago.” 
Post,  8/12/64) 
August  11  : Echo,  Relay,  and  Syncom  communications satellites were  pre- 
sented to the Smithsonian Institution  in ceremony a t  Museum of  History 
and Technology.  Among the NASA officials participating  in  the presenta- 
tion were Deputy Administrator  Dr. Hugh L.  Dryden, Langley Research 
Center Director Dr.  Floyd Thompson, and Goddard Space Flight Center 
Director Dr. Harry Goett. 
Carl T.  Rowan, Director of  U S .  Information  Agency,  said  in address 
a t  the ceremony: 
“As  we  view  the  unfolding  drama  of  the  American  space  program 
it can be  clearly seen that one of  its most significant aspects is that it has 
been  carried  out  in  the  full,  open  view  of  an  interested  and  anxious 
world.  When  it was written  into  the  National  Aeronautics and  Space 
Act  of  1958 that  the activities of  the new  space agency were to be  open 
to  the  widest  practicable  and  appropriate  spread  of  information,  the 
Congress cast into law one of  the deepest instincts of  the  American peo- 
It  was  an   act  of  faith  to  specify  that  this  enterprise  should  be 
ple. 
carried on openly *before the  gaze of  those who wished us well  and those 
who hoped otherwise; it was truly an expression of  faith in freedom and 
the ability of  Americans to  meet the challenges and opportunities  of  an 
e ra  when each day unfolds new perils and new promises. 
“If  openness to public scrutiny was a basic concept in  the entire space 
program,  the decision to ca r ry  out a  satellite program  dedicated to free- 
verted in to  a highly meaningful fact.  . . . 
dom of  communications on  a global  scale represented that  concept con- 
“It  is  obvious that  the  over-riding  quality  of  communications satel- 
lites is their internationalism.  A practical  system based  on communica- 
tion satellites is inherently universal, for it would be of  little use  if  it did 
not mean communicating between the peoples of  widely separated lands. 
Its basic premise involves the inclusion of ai many countries a s  possible 
in the  interchange that the system allows. 

283 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
“This presentation of  communication satellites to our national museum 
of  science  and  technology  is,  therefore,  most  truly  a n   international 
occasion.  For  it  is  their  international  utility  in  the  cause  of  world 
understanding,  peace  and  progress  which  gives  them  their  deepest 
meaning.”  (Text) 
August 11 : NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket  launched from White Sands, 
N.  Mex.,  reached  107-mi.  altitude  with  four  spectrographs  to   obtain 
spectra  of  planets,  but  no  data  were  obtained  because  attitude  control 
system’s despin valve failed  and the rocket spun out  of  control. 
(NASA 
Rpt. SRL) 
*  USAF  Titan  I1 rocket was launched  successfully from  an  underground  silo 
on  flight  down  Western  Test  Range.  Same  day,  faulty  relay  box  in 
Thor-Agena launch vehicle postponed  launch of  NASA’s Nimbus meteor- 
(Wash.  Post,  8 /12 /M ;   M&R ,  
ological  satellite  into  polar  orbit. 
8/17/64,  9 )  
*  Communications  Satellite  Corp.  said  DOD’S 
last-minute  demands  on 
ComSatCorp to  change the  terms of  the  international  comsat agreement 
were  the  reason  why  DoD-ComSatCorp  negotiations  fell  through. 
ComSatCorp President Joseph Charyk said DOD  had insisted on changes 
which would have barred foreign members from any voice in letting con- 
tracts to build the  military portion  of  the network.  DOD’S  demands were 
presented  in  July,  shortly  before  the  conference that  created  the  new 
consortium and  after  all technical  details of  the  proposed military-com- 
(Toth, Wush .  Post, 
mercial sharing plan had been  agreed upon in June. 
8/12/64) 
Four  Soviet  parachutists  at  world  parachute  jumping  championships, 
Leutkirch, West Germany, set new world record for men’s team jumping 
from 1,000 meters, landing an average of  66.5 centimeters from center of 
target.  Previous  world  record  of  89.5  centimeters  was  set  two  days 
earlier by U S .  team.  (Reuters, NYT, 8/12/64,35) 
August  11-12:  Four  NASA sounding rockets  were  launched  in  coordinated 
studies of  the atmosphere from Wallops Island, Va.:  Ft.  Churchill, Can- 
ada;  and K ronog t rd ,  Sweden. 
Nike-Cajun launched from Ft. Churchill reached 77.5-mi.  altitude with 
12  grenades  ejecting  and  detonating  during  rocket  ascent.  Ground- 
based  microphone  array  recorded  time  and  direction  of  detonation 
sounds’  arrivals  to  obtain  atmospheric  temperature,  wind,  density,  and 
pressure data. 
Nike-Cajun launched from Wallops Island ejected  12  grenades during 
its ascent to 72-mi. altitude, with similar ground-based microphone array 
to obtain data. 
Nike-Apache launched from K ronog t rd  reached 75.5-mi. altitude with 
micrometeoroid-particle-sampling payload.  Although  sampling  cans 
did not seal completely, preliminary evaluation indicated that data would 
be  recovered.  Experiment  w a s   cooperative effort  of  USAF  Cambridge 
Research Laboratories  and Meteorological Institute  of  Stockholm Univ. 
Nike-Cajun  launched  from  Kronogtrd,  with  grenade  payload  func- 
tioned  properly,  but  no  usable  data  were  obtained  because  of  loss  of 
Dovap  near  Cajun  ignition.  For  same  reason,  peak  altitude  was  un- 
known. 
(NASA  Rpts. SRL) 
August 12:  X-15  No.  3 flown by  NASA  pilot Milton 0. Thompson  in   flight to 
test and measure heating effect of  atmospheric friction on certain aircraft 
structural  components.  Aircraft  reached  altitude  of  81,000  ft.  and 

284 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  
(NASA  X-15 P r o j  . Off. ; CR, 8/20/64, 
traveled a t  3,511 mph  (mach 5.32) in the 7-min. flight near  NASA  Flight 
Research Center, Edwards, Calif. 
20046) 
August 12: Senate-House Conference Committee on H.R.  11296 filed its Con- 
ference  Report  on  the  Independent  Offices  Appropriation  Bill  fo r   N 
1965.  Committee  recommended  $5,250,000,000 NASA  appropriation, 
which  was  $50,000,000  less  than  Senate-passed bill  had  provided  and 
$50,000,000 more  than  House  Committee  had  recommended.  One 
amendment, regarding use of  funds f o r  a manned lunar  landing by U.S. 
and another country, was reported in disagreement.  (House Rpt.  1781) 
*  Fourth  birthday  of  ECHO   I  passive communications satellite, still orbiting 
the earth in i t s  visible path.  G.  T.  Schjeldahl Co.,  builders of  the 100-ft. 
sphere  for  NASA,  said  ECHO   1’s  supply  of  gas  had  long  ago  leaked  out 
through holes made by micrometeoroids, but  even so, ECHO   I had  “dem- 
onstrated  the  practicability  of  employing large  inflatabIe and  erectable 
reflectors to  rebound  intelligent signals beamed a t  it.” 
(Schjeldahl Re- 
lease;  Wash.  Post, 8/11/64) 
*  NASA  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  announced selection of  GE  Command 
Systems  Div.  to  negotiate  contract  for  additional  spacecraft  tracking 
system for Stadan  (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network)  sta- 
tion  a t  Fairbanks, Alaska.  The new  system, known  a s  Goddard  Range 
and  Range  Rate  System  because  it  was  originally  developed by  GSFC 
engineers, was  designed  to  provide  improved  tracking  data  for  space 
probes,  satellites,  and launch  vehicles traveling  in  elliptical OF synchro- 
nous  orbits.  Two  previously  completed  systems  installed  a t   Rosman, 
N.C.,  and Carnarvon, Australia, had proved highly successful in tracking 
( GSFC Release 6-21-69) 
EXPLORER XVIII  ( I M P ) .  
*  Assistant Secretary  of  Defense fo r  Public  Affairs Arthur  Sylvester denied 
statement made  yesterday by  Communications Satellite Corp.  President 
Joseph  Charyk  that  DOD had  demanded, at  the  last minute, unmeetable 
conditions  fo r   military-civilian  comsat  cooperation.  Sylvester  said : 
“The  Department of  Defense  stated at  the outset of  negotiations that  i t  
would require  assurance that  the international  agreement be  so  drafted 
as  to  protect  the  technical  and  security  requirements  of  the  national 
(AP, NYT ,  8/13/M, 17) 
communications system.” 
*  IBM  Corp.  said  newly  developed  mathematical  methods  would  permit 
great  increase  in  use  of  computers  to  design  and  test  aircraft, 
missiles, and spacecraft.  Designers now could “simulate flight 15 to 20 
times faster than ever before possible on a general-purpose digital  com- 
puter.” 
IBM  had  used  the  new  technique  to  help  design  and  evaluate 
guidance computer for Gemini spacecraft.  ( N Y T ,  8/13/64) 
*  General B.  A.  Schriever, AFSC,  said in keynote address at Ninth  Symposium 
on Ballistic Missile and Space Technology, U.S.  Naval Training Center, 
San  Diego: 
“.  . . technology is a key to our nation’s  future.  This is t rue  not only 
in the military area but  also in  the economic area.  Technology  is vital 
not only to our security and survival, but also to our growth and general 
well-being.  Technology must be utilized to  support national  objectives. 
“Those of  us who a r e  responsible for the national security must ensure 
that  technical  progress  does  in  fact  serve  national  military  policy 
effectively.  To meet this responsibility there are three things we  must do. 
“First,  we must advance the  state of  the art a s  the necessary first step 
towardnewcapabilities.  . . . 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  

285 
“Second, we  need  to  identify  the  technological opportunities  during 
objectives.  . . 
the   next  ten  to  fifteen  years  and  relate  them  to  national  security 
“[Third,  we  need]  a means of  presenting  alternatives clearly  so that 
decisions  can  be   made  promptly  and  with  a  high  degree  of  con- 
fidence.  . . .”  In   this  regard,  h e  discussed  new  AFSC  Hq-  activity  to 
facilitate  decision-making process:  PROM  (Program  Management,  Re- 
sources Management, and Objectives Management).  (Text) 
August  13:  House  passed  conference  report  on  H.R.  11296  (Independent 
O f k e s   Appropriation),  providing  NASA  FY 1965  appropriation  of 
$5,250,000,000.  House also voted to  recede from  its disagreement with 
Senate-sponsored amendment which provided  that  no  part  of  the  NASA 
appropriation be used  “for  expenses of  participating  in a manned  lunar 
landing  to  be  carried  out  jointly  by  the  United  States  and  any  other 
(CR,  8/13/64, 
country  without  the  consent  of 
the  Congress.” 
18672-81) 
*  Rep. Emilio Q.  Daddario  (D.-Conn.) 
spoke in  the House of  recent  report 
by  Subcommittee on  Science, Research,  and  Development which  was  a 
preliminary  investigation  of  how  existing  Congressional  resources  of 
scientific  and  technical  information  can  be   made  more  effective. 
“. . . The  critical need  for  Congress to  study  and  evaluate  i t s  uses  of 
scientific information cannot be minimized.  I t  is imperative that  we  be 
prepared  to  assemble the  necessary  information  for  Congress  to  make 
complex policy  decisions in   order  to  meet  national  goals.  A s   I  have 
indicated we  a re  more concerned with the policy of  the decision than  its 
technical  aspects.  I n  making  these  decisions the  translation  and  con- 
version  of  scientific  and  technical  information  into  policy  terms  is 
essential.  . . .”  ( C R ,  8/13/64,18753) 
ComSatCorp  announced  in  its  first  report  to  shareholders  that  there 
were  more  than  130,000  public  stockholders  in  the  Corporation. 
President  Joseph Charyk said:  “It is good to  be  able to  report  that  the 
foundations  of  the Corporation  have been  solidly  placed-in 
technical 
preparations,  in the recruitment of  key  personnel, in  the development of 
a program to  create a  commercial communications satellite system, and 
in other ways. 
“It gives even greater satisfaction to report that the program to create 
a  satellite system is under  way  and on  schedule and that  the  documents 
setting upon  the  arrangements  for  foreign  participation  in  the  system 
have  recently  been  initialed  by  the  United  States  Government,  the 
Corporation, and a number of  foreign governments and telecommunica- 
tion entities.”  (ComSatCorp Release) 
August  14 :   X-15  No.  2 made  its  second  flight  since  major  modifications 
were made  on  the  aircraft, with Major Robert A.  Rushworth  (USAF)   at 
the  controls.  Flight  was  part of  series  of  flight  requalification  tests 
being conducted on the modified aircraft, which attained maximum speed 
of  3,580 mph  (mach  5.29)  and  altitude  of  99,000  ft.  The nose wheel 
popped out as the X-15  was  flying 3,068 mph  at 88,000-ft. altitude, but 
the  wheel  performed  normally  when  the  aircraft  landed  after  nine- 
( NASA  X-15  Proj.  Off. ; FRC  Release ; 
minute flight at Rogers Dry Lake. 
AP, Nilwaukee Journal, 8/15/64) 
*  Two satellites were orbited with single Atlas-Agena D booster, launched by 
USAF from WTR.  ( HHN-4  8 ) 

286 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 
August 14: Senate agreed to  report of  Conference Committee on H.R.  11296 
and cleared for  the White House the Independent Offices Appropriation, 
including  $5,250,000,000  for  NASA  in   FY  1965. 
(NASA  LAR  III/159) 
*  NASA  announced Syncom C communications satellite would be assisted into 
proper  orbit  later  this  month  by  its  sister  satellite  Syncom  11,  which 
would  provide  a  reliable  relay  point  in  space  for  communications be. 
tween  ground  stations  and  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center.  NASA 
Syncom Project Officer H.  N.  Stafford said:  “As fa r  as we  know,  this is 
the first time one satellite has been used to help in the launch of  another. 
Tiros satellites have  been  used  to  help  predict  weather  before  manned 
space flights.  The  Relay satellite carried  pictures  of  the Cooper  flight. 
But this appears to be the  first case of  direct use of  a satellite in an opera- 
( NASA Release 64-204) 
tional role during a launch.” 
U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  XXXVII  into  earth  orbit:  300-km. (186.42-mi.) 
apogee, 205-km.  ( 127.39-mi.)  perigee, 89.45-min. period,  and 65” angle 
of  inclination  to the equator.  Tass said the satellite contained scientific 
equipment  intended  for  carrying  on  space  research  according  to  pro- 
g ra m announced March  16, 1962. 
(Tass, K ra sm y a  Zvezda,  8/15/64, 
1, ATSS-T  Trans.) 
NASA  announced selection  of  the  name  “Pegasus”  for  its micrometeoroid 
detection satellite, to be launched into orbit with Saturn I rocket booster. 
Named  fo r   the  winged  horse  of  ancient  mythology,  the  satellite has  a 
wing-like  panel  96-ft.  long  and  14ft. wide  which  would  record  and 
(NASA  Release 6 6 2 0 3 )  
transmit  the penetrations of  meteoroids. 
ComSatCorp  petitioned  FCC   for  rule  to  give  it  exclusive  eligibility  for 
ownership  and  operation  of  the  initial  ground  stations  for  the  global 
commercial comsat network.  Under  Communications Satellite Act  of 
1962,  FCC  must  decide whether ComSatCorp or  other  commercial com- 
munications carrier, o r  both, shall build and operate the ground stations. 
( ComSatCorp Release) 
*  DOD announced  award  of  $2,750,000  initial  increment  to  Martin-Marietta 
Corp.’s  Space Systems Div.  on a letter contract for work on an advanced 
re-entry test program  fo r  AFSC  Space Systems Div.  Press sources identi- 
field the program  a s  Start  (Spacecraft Technology And  Re-entry Test), 
an expansion of  USAF Asset re-entry program,  and said this contract w a s  
just one of  10-14  areas which had been identified in  the program. 
( DOD 
Release 596-64;  M&R,  8/24/64,  10) 
*  Moscow Radio quoted Cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pave1 Popovich 
a s  saying  their  “standbys”  were  ready  f o r   space  flight  and  that  their 
scientists  were  “planning  new  experiments  in  space  exploration.” 
( Wmh. Post, 8/14/64) 
Sen.  Hubert  Humphrey  (D.-Minn.)  discussed in   the  Senate H.R.  11611, 
act  to  establish National Commission on Technology, Automation, and 
Economic Progress.  He said the legislation would “enable the essential 
fact-gathering” about technological change to be made.  He continued: 
I  have  intro- 
“I have long  been  interested  in  legislation  of  this  kind. 
duced  S.  2427 to  establish  a Hoover-type Commission to  work  broadly 
in  the  area  of  investigating the  impact  of  automation,  technology,  and 
employment.  I  have  also  joined  in  the  sponsorship of  S.  2274 which 
focuses  primarily  on  problems  in  the  defense  industry.  . . .”  ( C R Y  
8/14/64,19018) 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

287 
August 15:  In  memo to heads of Executive Departments and Agencies, Presi- 
dent  Johnson  said  that  in   th e  past,  US. had  not  done  enough  to  help 
international  organizations “secure  the  services of  highly  qualified men 
and women from private life and from government agencies.  . . .”  The 
President presented ways in  which all Executive Departments and Agen- 
cies should take “affirmative and continuing steps” to assist international 
organizations in gaining access “to  talented citizens of  this country who 
a re  qualified fo r  positions in the international agencies.’’ 
(White House 
Memo, 8/15/64) 
0  In White House press conference, President  Johnson  announced Secretary 
of  Defense  McNamara had  approved  “a  program  for  the  development 
of  an  aircraft designed specifically for a i r  support of  counter-insurgency, 
and  limited war  operations, and the Department of  the  Navy to  contract 
for the building of  seven prototype aircraft at a cost of  about $18 million. 
“This  counter-insurgency  (CO IN )   aircraft  w i l l  be  an  airborne equiva- 
It will be  able to perform peacetime emergency func- 
lent of  the ‘jeep.‘ 
tions  such as disaster  relief, medical missions or  riot control,  a s  well  as 
military missions to include light armed reconnaissance, helicopter escort 
(Transcript,  Wash.  Pos t ,  
and  attack,  and  support  of  ground  troops.” 
8/16/fj4) 
*  Patent for manned space station design was awarded to its inventor Emanuel 
Schnitzer, technical assistant  a t  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center.  The 
space  station  was  designed  to  erect  itself  in  space  after  being  lofted 
into  orbit.  Crewmen  could  be  sent  up  i n   an  auxiliary  spacecraft  or 
launched to it later in a ballistic “ferry.”  Until two weeks ago, Schnitzer 
was  at NASA  Hq.  in Advanced Manned Missions Program  office. 
(Jus- 
tice, Houston  Post, 8/15/64; NYTS, Cleveland Plain Deater, 8/15/64) 
Astronauts’  contracts  with  Field  Enterprises  Educational Corp.  and Time 
Inc. were  discussed in Editor and  Publisher  editorial,  which  stated that 
the  “principle  of  letting  the  astronauts  sell  their  stories  is all  wrong.” 
Before granting  personal  interview, editorial  said,  “astronaut  must  get 
permission  in  writing  from  Field  and  Time  which  will  grant  approval 
‘in  an  instance where the acceptance of  such  outside offers will  not ma- 
terially  affect  the  value  of  any  of  the  rights  granted.’  . . .  It  con- 
¶, 
cluded  by  saying  that  reporters  could  not  interview  these  “national 
(E&P ,  8/15/64) 
figures” unless two “competitors say it’s okay.” 
August 15-16:  Coordinated series of  fou r  NASA  sounding rocket launches was 
conducted  at  Wallops  Island,  Va. ; Ascension  Island;  and  Kronogird, 
Sweden.  A  Nike-Cajun was launched  from each  range with  exploding 
grenade  payloads  to  provide  temperature,  wind,  density,  and  pressure 
data.  Peak  altitudes:  rocket  launched  from Wallops,  75.9  mi.;  from 
Ascension, 77 mi.;  and from Kronogiird, 84 mi.  The  fourth experiment 
was a Nike-Apache launched to  74.3-mi.  altitude with payload to  collect 
micrometeoroid particles during a weak noctilucent cloud display above 
Sweden.  Meteorological  Institute  of  Stockholm  Univ.  participated  in 
in the Kronogsrd experiments. 
(NASA  Rpts.  SRL) 
August  16:  President  Johnson  announced  he  was  sending  a  set  of  lunar 
photographs taken by RANGER MI to leaders of  110 nations.  “The success 
of  the Ranger  7  exploration  ha s  been  greeted with  enthusiasm and  in- 
terest around  the world.  Men  of  all nations recognize this  is one of  the 
greatest extensions of  human knowledge about the lunar surface to occur 
in many centuries. 

288 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

“The  American  people  can  be  justly  proud.  We  started  behind  in 
the  space  age.  But  we  placed  our  trust  in  our open  society  and  free 
system.  Our  achievements in  peaceful exploration  of  space give us  all 
cause to be proud, grateful and  confident.  . . . 
6 6  More than  60 countries  now  work  together  voluntarily  in  this pur- 
suit.  We continue to hope that the extent of  such international  coopera- 
tion  will  be enlarged  and  that  all nations  will  join  through  the  United 
Nations to place the peaceful realms of  space off  limits to  the  designs of 
aggressors  on  earth. 
“I  am  sure  the  American  people  will  continue  to  support  what  is 
necessary  to  assure  leadership.  In   return,  they  will  rightfully  expect 
that ou r  program hold  to  the orderly  and responsible course which has 
brought such outstanding success in such a short period.” 
(Spivak, UPI, 
Wash. Post, 8/17/64) 
h g w t  16: Scientists  a t   AF  Cambridge  Research  Laboratories  discovered 
definite relationship between phases of  moon  and cloudiness around  the 
earth,  OAR  announced.  Statistics  covering  21,184  days  from  1905 to 
1962 indicated sunshine was slightly below seasonal averages fo r  a  few 
days  following  each  new  moon  and  slightly  above  average  between 
(S.F.  Chronicle,  8/17/64;  SBD, 
last  quarter  and  the  new  moon. 
8/18/64,  241) 
*  Analyzing the  U S .   aerospace  industry  Richard  Rutter  said  in New  Yo rk  
T ime s :  “There have been some reductions in employment here and there 
and some production  cut-backs.  On the whole, however,  the  aerospace- 
defense industry remains not only very healthy but still growing.  . . . 
“Change, of  course, has been  the hallmark  of  the  aerospace industry 
almost  since  its  very  beginning.  This  characteristic  continues.  At 
present, for instance, there  is some shift in production  and procurement 
from  aircraft  and missiles to  space vehicles and  related  space projects. 
This is not  yet  a  sha rp  trend,  but  it may be  indicative of  the  industry’s 
future course.  . . .”  (Rutter, NYT ,  8/16/64,  F1) 
*  USAF  reported experiments to develop chemical to be spread on aircraft and 
spacecraft windows fo r  protection  of  pilots’  eyes  against  a  nuclear  ex- 
(AP,  NYT ,  
plosion’s  damaging  flash  showed  promising  results. 
8/16/64,  92) 
*  Stuart G.  Tipton,  head  of  A i r   Transport  Association of  America  (ATA)  , 
was  quoted  a s   advocating  development  of  U S .   supersonic  transport 
“because  in  and  of  itself,  this  new  transportation  tool  is  good  for  the 
United States. . . . The advance here is speed and speed in transportation 
is good  in  itself.  Time,  after  all,  is ou r  one  irreplaceable  resource..  . . 
“Every  time  that  an  airline  o r  airliners have offered  to  the  public  a 
faster  t r ip  between two  points,  the  results have been  clear  and  positive. 
“When  an  airline  ordered  an  aircraft  which  would  cut  the  flying 
time from New York  to  Chicago from  10 hours  to  eight  o r  five to  two, 
that  airline  got  the  business.  . . .” 
(Clark,  NYT ,   8/16/64,  94) 
Augus t   17: Two  NASA  sounding  rockets  were  launched  from  Kronog%rd, 
Sweden,  in   early  morning  coordinated  launchings.  Nike-Apache with 
micrometeoroid-particle-collector payload  reached  77-mi.  altitude  in 
conditions of moderate noctilucent cloud display.  The payload impacted 
in a  lake and was recovered safely.  USAF  Cambridge Research Labora- 
tories  and Stockholm Univ.’s  Meteorological Institute cooperated in  the 
experiment.  Twenty  minutes  later,  Nike-Cajun  was  launched  with 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

289 

grenade payload  to 80-mi. altitude, providing good  data on atmospheric 
temperature,  wind,  a i r   density,  and  pressure.  Stockholm  Univ.’s 
Meteorological Institute  cooperated  with  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center in this experiment.  (NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
A u g w t  17: NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocketslaunched within 10min. of  each 
other  to  provide  data  on  evening  atmospheric  temperatures,  winds, 
densities, and pressures from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Wallops Island, 
Va.,  using  explosive-grenade technique.  Ft.  Churchill  rocket  reached 
77.5-mi.  altitude,  ejecting  and  detonating  all  12   grenades.  Wallops 
Island  rocket reached  74.9-mi.  altitude,  ejecting  and  detonating  all  but 
(NASA Rpts. SRL) 
the ninth grenade. 
0  NASA  launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Ascension Island  to peak 
altitude of  75.8-mi.,  in flight to measure wind and temperature and derive 
density and  pressure  from  1 2  grenade  explosions during  rocket  ascent. 
All grenades  ejected  and  detonated  as  programed,  and  ground  micro- 
phones recorded the sounds.  (NASA Rpt. SRL)  
Lightning  damaged  certain  electrical  systems  in  Titan  I1 
launch 
vehicle  and  ground  checkout  equipment  a t   Cape  Kennedy,  where  the 
boosier  rocket was  being  prepared  for  launching  of  unmanned  Gemini 
spacecraft  (GT-2)-  NASA  spokesman said:  “The  over-all effect of  this 
condition may  result  in  a  delay  of  the  first manned  flight  [GT-31  into 
(Houston Pos t ,  8/19/64;  UPI,  N Y T ,  8/19/64,15) 
next year.” 
U.S.S.R.  was  developing  an  “aerospace  craft”  capable  of  taking  off  and 
landing on  a conventional a i r  strip as we l l  as flight in outer space, Chief 
Air Marshal Konstantin Vershinin announced in Moscow.  “Our genera- 
tion  will  definitely  witness  the  f igh t   of  such  an  aerial-spacecraft,” 
(UPI, NYT, 8/18/64,17) 
Vershinin said. 
0  Numerous reports  of  an “unidentified  flying object”  observed in  the skies 
over northeastern  Ohio early  in  the morning  were  recorded, but  R.  A. 
Thompson,  Assistant  Director  of  the  Sohio  Tracking  Station,  identi- 
(Cleveland Plain Dealer, 8/18/64) 
fied  the UFO  as  ECHO   I. 
Plans fo r  military communications satellite system were described in  A u k -  
t ion  Week & Space Technology, which reported  that  latest DOD  plan  for 
interim  military  comsat  network  called  for  two  or  three  Titan  111-C 
boosters to place 16-24  satellites into near-equatorial orbit.  First launch 
(Av .   Wk., 8/17/64,  19 )  
was scheduled for February  1966. 
0  USAF  was  reported  to  be  interested  in  possible use  of  air-cushion vehicles 
(similar  to  “hovercraft”)  for  transporting  heavy  missiles  and  space 
boosters  over  land,  and  scientists  from  Republic Aviation  Corp.  were 
planning  presentation  to  USAF  on  this  adaptation  of  the  transporters. 
(Getler, M&R ,   8/17/64,  18) 
Dr.  Winston R.  Markey, Associate Professor  of  MIT Dept.  of  Aeronautics 
and  Astronautics  and  Director,  MIT  Experimental  Astronomy  Labora- 
tory, was named to succeed Dr.  Robert W.  Buchheim a s  Chief  Scientist 
of  USAF. 
( DOD Release 600-64) 
August  18: NASA  launched re-entrp heating experiment aboard  Scout booster 
at 2:06  a.m.  EDT from Wallops  Island, Va.,  in   test  of  low-density char- 
ring  ablator  materials’  ability  to  withstand  intense  heat  during  space- 
craft  re-entry  into  earth’s  atmosphere. 
In  addition  to  the  four  stages 
of  the  Scout launch  vehicle,  17-in. spherical rocket was  attached  to  the 
payload as velocity package.  First two Scout stages lofted remainder of 
the vehicle to  altitude  of  about 130 mi. ; then  the vehicle arced  over  in 

290 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9  0 4 

descending path  and  remaining  stages  fired  the  payload  back  into  the 
atmosphere,  attaining maximum speed  of  about  19,500 mph.  Payload 
impacted about  1,265 mi.  downrange after  11-min. flight.  No  attempt 
was made  to  recover  it.  Experiment w a s   devised by  NASA  Langley  Re- 
search Center scientists.  (Wallops Release 64-62;  NASA  Release 6 4 2 0 2 )  
August  18:  Results  of  five  “Sammy”  experiments  sent  aloft  with  NASA 
Nike-Apache sounding rockets were announced in Houston by Rice Univ, 
team of  experimenters, which assembled the Sammy payloads  and inter. 
preted the  data.  After  studying  data,  scientists concluded that  airglow 
and  aurora  were  of  different  origin.  Data  from  experiments probing 
aurora,  launched  last  March  from  Fort  Churchill,  showed that  aurora 
originated  when  electron  particles  from  space  bombarded  oxygen  and 
nitrogen  atoms  in  the  upper  atmosphere.  However,  data  from  two 
experiments launched from Wallops Island, Va.,  to probe airglow showed 
“there  weren’t enough particles  around  to account for  airglow” by  elec- 
(AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  8/19/64,  C20;  Houston 
tron  bombardment. 
Post,  8/19/64) 
*  U.S.S.R.  launched into orbit three earth satellites-cosMos  XXXVIII,  COSMOS 
XXXM,  and  COSMOS  XL-with 
a single booster  rocket  “of  a  new  type.” 
Tass  said  the  three  satellites were  orbiting  in  close  orbits  with  initial 
parameters  as  follows:  876-km.  (544-mi.)  apogee,  210-km.  (130-mi.) 
perigee, 95.2-min. period, and 56.16” angle of  inclination to the equator. 
(Tass, Krasmya; Zvezdu, 8/19/64,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
0  Addressing National  Space Club  in Washington, ARPA  Director  Dr.  R.  L. 
Sproull said the nuclear  detection satellites orbited  last month were  op- 
erating “without a hitch.”  He described the sateIlites a s  “experimental”, 
said they were being used “to determine the most appropriate Sensors and 
the  most  attractive  modes  of  processing  information  from  them.”  He 
said  the  success of  first launch  (October  1963)  enabled ARPA  to  revise 
the  program  with  fewer  launches.  The  satellites were  still  operating 
(SBD, 8/19/64, 
‘bexcellently” and providing information on radiation. 
246; NSC  Release) 
*  Thomas M.  Canning, chief of  Hypersonic Free-Flight Branch of  NASA  Ames 
Research Center,  described aerodynamic shape being studied  for  space- 
craft  of  the  future,  a t   Conference on  the  Role  of  Simulation  in  Space 
Technology, WI,  Blacksburg,  Va.  Canning  said  laboratory  tests were 
being  made  of  high-angle  (wing-shaped  craft)  a s   possible  optimum 
design  for  manned  spacecraft  entering  atmosphere  a t   speeds  ranging 
( AP, 
from  50,000-55,000  fps returning from  interplanetary  journeys. 
Wash. Pos t ,  8/19/64) 
Professor  Verner  E.  Suomi  of  Univ.  of  Wisconsin  was  appointed  to 
the newly  created post  of  Chief  Scientist of  the  US. Weather  Bureau. 
(Commerce Dept. Release WB 6 4 1 5 )  
August  19:  NASA’s SYNCOM  111  synchronous-orbit  communications  satellite 
was  launched  into  preliminary  orbit  high  above  the  earth  by  a  TAD 
(Thrust-Augmented Delta)  launch vehicle,  its premiere satellite launch- 
ing.  Preliminary  orbit:  23,675-mi.  apogee,  695-mi.  perigee,  11  hrs. 
35 min.  period,  and  16” inclination  to  the  equator.  Four  hours  after 
launch  from  Cape Kennedy,  the  satellite received  and  sent back  a  test 
recording  of  music of  “The  Star Spangled Banner” as well  as test voice 
and  teletype  message.  Further  maneuvers  during  the  next  10  days 
would  move  SYNCOM  111  into  a  synchronous  position  over  the  Pacific, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 0 41 

291 

where  it  would  be  able  to  communicate with  surface  stations  a t  Clark 
AFB in  the Philippines, at Guam,  and at Camp Roberts, Calif.  Work was 
underway to make it possible to transmit  the 1964 Olympic Games from 
Tokyo via  SYNCOM  III  in  October. 
(NASA Release 64-193;  NASA  Tran- 
script  of  Press Conference; AP,  NYT ,  8/20/64,  51) 
August 19:  NASA GsFc-launched aOl-ft.-diameter  balloon  carrying  160-lb. ex- 
periment  package from Moberly, Mo.,  a t  sunrise.  The  bdioon  flew  a t  
altitude  of  about  24 mi.  over  300-mi.  course,  ejecting  its payload  on 
signal about 12 hours  after launch.  The experiment package contained 
instruments to  record  and store data  on cosmic rays  in  the earth’s  mag- 
P  was  designed  and  built 
netic field, data which would be used to he1  map radiation fields around 
the  earth  and  in  space.  Experiment  p ay o a d  
by  NASA  Goddard  Space Flight Center ; the balloon was launched  under 
ONR’S  “Skyhook” balloon flight program. 
(GSFC Release G 2 2 - 6 4 ;   AP, 
NYT ,  8/19/64; K.C.  Times, 8/20/64) 
Rep.  Peter W.  Kodino  (D.-N.J.)  said  on  House floor:  “. . . Hardly  any 
problem  seems  beyond  solution  by  our  scientists  and  engineers.  We 
marvel  at  our  achievement  of  landing  a  vehicle  on  the  moon,  trans- 
mitting  pictures  of  its progress  to  the  very  instant  of  impact.  Yet,  we 
a re   doing  practically  nothing  to  solve a major  air  safety  problem,  or, 
worse yet,  to  discover  its cause.  I  refer  to  the  increasingly serious  jet 
age problem of  clear air  turbulence--ctll-a 
danger  to  every passenger 
flying commercial or  military  transport  aircraft.  . . . 
“Our  scientific and  industrial  communities must  be   given  adequate 
funds promptly  to  initiate work  on  the  problem;  and  that  can  best  be 
done through a coordinated  research  effort jointly  undertaken  by  Gov- 
ernment and private industry.  . . . 
“Our  failure  to  implement without delay  a  national  effort  to  develop 
an effective CAT  detection and avoidance system may-in 
fact, probably 
wilI--cost the lives of  many future a i r  passengers.  With  every gain  in 
air  traffic,  with  every increase  in  aircraft  speed, with  every  additional 
mile  flown  by  every  additional  plane,  the problem  becomes  more  seri- 
ous.  . . .”  He introduced into the Record an article on CAT by James A. 
(CR, 8/19/64,19715-20) 
Fusca in Space Aeronautics, August 1964. 
*  Western  Devices,  Inc.,  was  awarded  $1,615,111  NASA  contract  for 
work  at  Launch  Complex 39,  John  F.  Kennedy  Space  Center  Merritt 
Island  Launch Area.  Contract was  awarded  by  Army  Corps  of  Engi- 
neers. 
( DOD Release 605-64) 
*  Thomas D.  Morris,  Assistant Secretary  of  Defense  (I&L) ,   advised Army, 
Navy, Air Force,  and DSA  that  it was DOD  policy “to provide quality  and 
reliability  assurance  services to  NASA  in   a  manner  fully  responsive  to 
technical  requirements.”  Memo  clarified  use of  NASA  Quality 
NASA’s 
Status Stamps by  DOD  personnel  and  NPC  200-1A  a s  the  document es- 
(NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
tablishing  NASA’s quality  assurance  requirements. 
0  Communications Satellite Corp.  stock  reached  $48,  highest  price  since  it 
(Hammer, NYT ,  8/20/64,37) 
went public June 2 a t  $20. 
*  Cal Tech  announced  new  superconducting  alloy  of  gold  and  germanium 
was  made  by  a  new  ultra-fast  cooling  technique  that  opened  the  way 
(SciSenr., NYT ,  8/19/64,13) 
toward development of  other such alloys. 
Lockheed-California Co.  engineers disclosed concept f o r  a  reusable  rocket 
plane to transport 10 passengers between earth and orbiting space station. 
Prepared  in   a  study  for NASA  Marshall  Space Flight  Center,  the design 

292 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

concept was a winged, two-stage carrier with two-man crew in each stage 
and capable of  hauling three tons of  cargo in addition  to the passengers. 
Lockheed engineers said if  the vehicle system development program were 
begun in  1967, the transport could be operational  in 1975. 
(Huntsville 
Times, 8/19/&l) 
August 19-22:  50 amateurs competed in  national model rocket championship 
meet,  sponsored by  National Association  of  Rocketry,  a t  NASA  Wallops 
Station,  Ya.  Astronaut William A.  Anders made  trophy presentations 
(Wallops Release 6M1; AP, Wash.  Post, 8/19/6LE) 
on the 22nd. 
August  20:  SYNCOM  111  communications satellite, high  above Sumatra  in  the 
Indian  Ocean,  was  boosted  into  near-circular  orbit  above  the  equator 
by  its apogee motor.  The motor burned for  19.6 sec.  at the  command 
of  ground  station  a t  Salisbury, Australia, which  based  its command on 
computer calculations a t  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.  The satel- 
lite  was  now  in  orbit  of  23,550-mi.  apogee;.  21,235-mi.  perigee;  1 / O  
inclination;  and  1,Ug-min.  (24  hr. and  9 mm.)  period. 
It was  drift- 
ing westward a t  rate of  about  3%” per  day. 
(NASA  Press Conf.  Tran- 
script;  NASA  Release 64-193) 
*  NASA  Administrator  James E.  Webb  informed Mayor Edward A.  Crane of 
Cambridge,  Mass.,  that  29-acre  site  offered  by  Cambridge  had  been 
selected for NASA’s new  Electronics Research Center.  Decision was  re- 
sult of  four-month study of  160 proposed sites in the greater Boston area 
by NASA committee. 
(NASA  Release 64-208) 
*  NASA  announced $4.6-million  contract had  been  awarded by  MSC  to  Space 
Technology Laboratories fo r  mission analyses and trajectory  simulation 
work  in   Projects  Apollo  and  Gemini.  Contract  would  be  a  continua- 
tion of  Gemini spacecraft analysis project  begun  in September 1963 and 
an extension of  similar  activities in  Apollo. 
(NASA  Release 64-206) 
*  Speaking  on  the  floor  of  the  House,  Rep.  George  P.  Miller  (D.-Calif.) 
pointed out : 
“In  our  preoccupation  with  our  national  space  program,  we  often 
important and productive pa r t  of  the  whole NASA  program.  . . . 
overlook the  fact  that  aeronautical  research  and  development is  a  very 
“I  should  point  out  that  the  technology  that  has  evolved  from  the 
X-15  program has made possible the creation of  the A-11  and the RS-71, 
hypersonic  aircraft  i n   the  2,000-mile-an-hour range,  which  offer  great 
potential  to  our  Air  Force  as  versatile,  high-flying  reconnaissance ve- 
hicles.  NASA,  with  the x-15,  is contributing significantly to  the  super- 
sonic transport program through new materials, construction techniques, 
guidance  and control  systems,  and  aerodynamic designs that  a r e  avail- 
able now because the NACA had the foresight and determination to under- 
take the X-15  program  in  1954, in association with  the Air  Force  and 
the Navy. 
“In  1959, the first flight was made. 
Since then, the X-15  pilots have 
rocketed out into near space, where 99 percent of  the earth’s  atmosphere 
is below them, have reached speeds 6 times the speed of  sound that have 
made the plane glow red hot. 
“NOW, an advanced X-15  is ready to reach  for new heights and even 
greater  speeds.  Our  investment in  the  X-15  program  and  our  confi- 
dence in the men  and pilots who  have made  it so successful, have  paid 
off  handsomely for  the  individual  taxpayer  and  for  the  country.  Our 
world leadership and prestige in  aeronautics have been  enhanced mani- 

293 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4  
fold by  the  X-15. 
It ha s  played an  indispensable role  in  making  sure 
that America’s place in the search fo r  new knowledge of  flight will never 
(CR, 8/20/64,20046) 
be less than it is now.” 
August 20:  Dr.  Raymond L.  Bisplinghoff, NASA  Associate Administrator  for 
Advanced Research and Technology, spoke at C0nference.m  the Role of 
Simulation  in  Space Technology,  at VPI: 
“The history  of  applied science and engineering is really  a history  of 
s im u l a t i o n - a  history of  searching for methods of  observing apriori the 
systems in  order to  seek optimum results.  . . . 
behavior  of  engineering systems and  of  varying the parameters  of  such 
“Our  ability  to  develop the  engineering  systems of  atmospheric and 
space flight depends in  turn  upon  ou r  ability  to  simulate  in  the  labora- 
tory  and thereby  study new  concepts as well  as systems and  their  com- 
ponents  prior  to  flight.  In  general,  two  kinds  of  simulation  facilities 
a re  required.  Those which a r e  used to develop new  concepts and physi- 
cal  understanding  . . . [and]  the  larger  simulation  facilities  needed 
fo r   the  ad-hoc  testing  and  development  of  subsystems and  systems  in 
preparation  for flight.  In addition to facilities, however, there is needed 
a certain level of  knowledge of  the arts and sciences of  simulation.  . . .” 
(Text) 
e  Delegates from  10  nations  and the Vatican formally signed in  Washington 
an agreement fo r  a  global communications satellite system.  Previously 
initialed by  the  negotiators, the  agreement designated Communications 
Satellite Corp.  of  the US. as the partnership’s  “manager  in  the design, 
development,  construction,  establishment,  operation  of  the  space  seg- 
ment.” 
(Ward, Balt. Sun, 8/20/64) 
e  FAA’s publication  “General  Aviation  Aircraft  Owners  Survey- 
1962” showed more  than  20%  increase  in  number  of  general  aviation 
airplanes  since 1957, approximate increase of  32% in hours  flown,  and 
(FAA Release T 64-43) 
38% in miles flown. 
Augu s t   21:  A  basic  principle  in  bearing  technology,  discovered  by  NASA 
Lew is  Research Center engineers, wa s   hailed  in  53rd  Annual Report  of 
the  Fafnir  Bearing  Co.  a s  “carrying  bearing  technology  a  step  beyond 
conventional  upset  forgings.”  The  underlying  principle  was  first  re- 
ported  by  the  LRC engineers in   1957;  now  the principle was  developed 
into  a  manufacturing  process.  Walter  T.  Olson,  assistant  director  of 
Lewis, said this was one instance where results from exploratory research 
had  been  adapted  to  production  techniques, an  important  aim  of  NASA. 
( LRC Release 6 7 6 )  
e  NASA  announced  revision of  its patent  policy  and  regulations  fo r  waivers 
of  commercial rights to  inventions resulting  from  space program  work. 
Effective September 28,  the  revised  patent  waiver  and  related  procure- 
ment  regulations  implemented  Presidential  patent  policy  statement  of 
last  October which  established  guidelines for  a  more  unified  approach 
among Federal  agencies regarding  allocation  of  patent  rights  to  inven- 
tions  produced  in  performance  of  Government  contracts.  The  new 
regulations  also  reflected  more  than  three  years  of  intensive  study, 
including  public  hearings,  on  ways  to  improve  NASA  patent  policies. 
NASA ofEcials anticipated  that  they would encourage and  accelerate con- 
tractors’  efforts to  identify  and  report  technological advances,  thereby 
increasing  the  flow  and  dissemination of  technical  information  derived 
from the space program. 
(NASA  Release 64c209) 

294 
ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS ,   1 9  6 4 
August 21 : USAF announced it had  launched Thor-Agena D  satellite booster 
from V a n d e n b e r gm .   (AP, 8/21/64) 
August 22:  SYNCOM  111  was  in  near  equatorial orbit  over  the  Indian  Ocean, 
with  mean  altitude  of  22,395  mi.  and  y 4 O   inclination  to  the  equator, 
while  drifting  westward  at  the   rate  of  about  3” per  day.  On  ground 
command,  the  satellite ejected  two  bursts  of  steam, correcting  its  posi- 
tion  to  21,890  mi.  mean  altitude  (22,540-mi.  apogee  and  21,240-mi 
perigee)  and  inclination  of  less than  lo to  the  equator.  It  then  began 
drifting  eastward;  the  drift  would  be  halted  by  onboard  control  jets, 
fired  by  ground  command,  once  SYNCOM  111  reached  the  International 
Date Line.  (Hines, Wash. Sun. S ta r ,  8/23/64;  NASA  Release 66193  81 
Press Conf. Transcript) 
launched  COSMOS  xu, COSMOS  XLII,  and  COSMOS  XLIII 
*  U.S.S.R. 
earth  satellites  into  orbit,  the   last  two  with  a  single  rocket  booster. 
COSMOS  XLI  was  in  initial  orbit  of  39,855-km.  (24,775-mi.)  apogee, 
394-km.  (245-mi.)  perigee,  11 hr.  55 min.  period,  and  6LE”  inclination 
to  equator.  COSMOS  XLII  and  XLIII  were  in   initial  orbit  of:  1,099-km. 
(683-mi.)  apogee,  232-km.  (144-mi.)  perigee,  97.8-min.  period,  and 
(Izves t ia ,  8/25/64,6,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
49” inclination to equator. 
August  23:  Democratic Party  Platform  completed,  containing  space  plank 
which  stated: 
“In  four  vigorous  years  we  have  moved  to  the  forefront  of  space 
exploration.  The United States must never again settle fo r  second place 
in the race for tomorrow’s frontiers. 
“1. We  will  continue  the  rapid  development  of  space  technology 
for peaceful uses. 
“2.  We  will  encourage  private  industry  to  increase  its  efforts  in 
space research. 
3.  We  will  continue  to  ensure  that  any  race  in  space  is  won  f o r  
66  
(Text, AP, Balt. Sun, 8/24/64) 
freedom and fo r  peace.’’ 
*  In   videotaped  interview  broadcast  on  NBC-TV,  Mrs.  Lyndon  B.  Johnson 
was  asked  to  name  those  accomplishments  of  her  husband  of  which 
she was  most  proud.  The  First  Lady  named,  in  the  following  order, 
the  President’s  work  on  behalf  of  a  TVA-type project  fo r   Texas  in  the 
1930’s, the National  Aeronautics  and  Space Act  of  1958, and  the  Civil 
Rights Act of  1957. 
(NASA Memo) 
August 24:  MSC  Public Affairs Officer  Paul  Haney said  it was  doubtful  that 
there  would  be  a  manned  space  flight this  year.  The  two-man Project 
Gemini  flight  ( G T 3 )   had  previously  been  planned  for  late  1964. 
However,  lightning  damage  a t   Cape  Kennedy  where  Titan  I1  launch 
vehicle was being prepared for GT-2  unmanned flight would cause mini- 
mum delay of  three weeks in  GT-2,  Haney said.  Length of  time GT-3 
would  be  delayed  would  depend  upon  how  long  GT-2  would  be  de- 
(UPI,  NYT,  8/25/64;  Maloney, Houston Post, 8/25/64) 
layed. 
- 
0  SYNCOM  111  might  be  in   position  to  relay  television  pictures  from  Japan 
as soon  as  the  first  week  in   September, NASA  said.  The  satellite  was 
drifting  eastward  on  the  equator  a t   rate  of  a b u t  483 miles  per  day. 
(AP,  Balt.  Sun,  8/25/64) 
rocket  engines 
0  NASA  announced  it  would  purchase  102   additional  J-2 
fo r  Saturn  IB  and  Saturn  V  launch  vehicles a t  cost of  about $165 mil- 
lion.  Contract  would  be  negotiated  by  NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight 
Center with  Rocketdyne Div.  of  North  American Aviation,  Inc.  (NASA 
Release 64-211) 

295 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4  
August  24:  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  C 
announced  Sylvania  Elm- 
tronics Systems-East had been selected to negotiate $1.8 million contract 
fo r   transportable  ground  station  (“Advanced  Technological  Satellite 
Transportable  Ground  Station”) .  Sylvania  would  design,  fabricate, 
install, test, and check out the  system, which featured two-zxtremely  low 
noise  amplifiers:  one  a  maser  and  the  other  a  parametric  amplifier. 
These  amplifiers operate at temperatures  in  the  range  of  -440’  F and 
prevent  spacecraft  signals  being  overshadowed  by  heat-induced  noise 
( GSFC Release G-2344) 
generated inside the receiver. 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C. Seamans,  Jr.,  said  in   an 
address before Veterans of  Foreign Wars, Cleveland: 
“Today,  because  of  vigorous  United  States  space  effort,  the  early 
Soviet  leadership  has  been  largely  overcome.  We   now  must  demon- 
strate  our  determination  to  drive  ahead  toward  unchallenged  and 
enduring pre-eminence in space.  . . . 
To  be  secure  in   the  world  today  a  great  nation  must  maintain  a 
posture  of  strength.  . . . 
c c  
Space  research  and  national  security  are  also  intertwined  because 
L6 
of  the  potential  uses  to   which  the   fruits  of  our  research  can  be  put. 
Because the  consequences of  nuclear  war  are  potentially  so  disastrous 
for  the human  race,  economic competition has  assumed  increasing  im- 
portance  a s  a  measure  of  the  strength  of  competing ideologies.  More- 
over,  scientific  and  technical  research  and  development  have  become 
the basic elements in this competition.  . . . 
. . . for nations which a re  today  still floundering amidst conditions 
f.6 
less tolerable than those of  Colonial America, great hope for more rapid 
progress lies in the new  ideas, techniques and methods which are arising 
from  our  research  and  development  i n   space. 
“If  we  can  employ the scientific knowledge and technical ideas devel- 
oped  in  our  space  program  to  help  the  impoverished  nations  help 
themselves,  and  thus  reduce  their  requirement  fo r   direct  financial  aid, 
how  much  better  fo r   them  and  fo r   ourselves. 
Our  greatest hope  for  national  security, of  course,  lies  in  achieving 
L6 
in the world a  degree of  international amity which can lead to enduring 
peace.  Here,  again,  the  exploration  of  space offers great  promise,  for 
in   the  acceptance of  this  greatest  of  all  challenges,  man  can  join  in  
shooting  rockets  into  space,  instead  of  shooting  them  a t   each  other. 
Our  national  leaders  have  recognized  that  if   we  a re  to  arrive  a t   an 
a c  
understanding  w i t h   the  Soviet Union  which will permit  the exploration 
of  space to  become a mutual  project,  fo r  the benefit of  a l l  mankind, we 
must maintain a driving national  effort in  space to insure a technological 
balance  that  will  make  this  possible.  . . .” 
(Text) 
*  Dr.  O n   E.  Reynolds,  Director  of  NASA  Biosciences  Div., 
told 
Missiles and  Rockets  that  it  probably  would  be  1971  or  1973  before 
U S .   landed Automated Biological Laboratory  (ABL) on Mars:  “I  think 
it would be awfully optimistic to think that we could fly a fully integrated 
l abo rdo ry  system to the Martian surface in  1969.  I would like to hope 
such a  mission would  be feasible in  1971, and the  1973 launch window 
would also provide a good opportunity.”  Other unnamed NASA  officials 
were  said  to  have  considered launch  of  ABL  with  Saturn  V  booster  in  
1971 a s  improbable, citing the high cost and “problems with sterilization 
methods which have to  be solved.”  ABL missions would  be part of  the 
(M&R ,  8/24/64,15) 
voyager planetary program. 

propulsion  systems: 
CC . , . Space propulsion  using nuclear  energy  offers  a  capability  for 
accomplishment  of  high  energy  increment,  high  payload  missions  in  
space  beyond  the   capability  of  the  chemical  combustion  propulsion 
systems when  considering  practical  operating  limitations.  Work  now 
underway  in   the  United  States  indicates  that  nuclear  rockets  can  be 
anticipated  fo r  earliest  use  in  the  space program.  Reactor  tests  being 
conducted  during  this  year  should  provide  a  firm  technical  basis  for 
system  development.  Electric  propulsion  using  the   nucIear  reactor 
energy  source  offers  promising  storable  propellant  performance  if 
light-weight, long-life  power  supplies  can  be  developed.  Technology 
investigations a re  now  underway to evaluate the  feasibility of  achieving 
the  required  performance.  This  work  will  simultaneously provide  the 
information  that  is required  to provide  large  amounts of  electric power 
fo r   non-propulsive  purposes  in  space.  Beyond  these  systems,  a  host 
of  new  and advanced concepts have been proposed.  These are not  well 
enough  defined  or  evaluated  to  assure  that  their  high  performance 
potential can actually be achieved.  Some research work is underway on 
these systems.” 
(Text) 
Augmt  25:  NASA  launched  EXPLORER  xx scientific satellite  into  orbit  from 
Western Test Range,  Calif.,  using  Scout booster  rocket.  Initial  orbit: 
625-mi. apogee,  540-mi. perigee,  104-min. period,  and  80”  inclination 
to  the equator.  The  ionosphere Explorer  satellite, nicknamed “Topsi,” 
immediately began  mapping  the  ionosphere  and  sending  data  back  to 
earth.  The  findings of  this  satellite would be  compared with  those ob- 
tained by ALOUETTE,  the Canadian-developed “topside sounder.” 
( NASA 
Release  6 6 2 0 7 ;   Wash.  Post,  8/26/64;  AP,  Chic.  Trib., 8/26/64; 
Av.  Vk., 8/31/64,25) 
e  Team  of  NASA  space  scientists and  engineers,  including Astronaut Walter 
Cunningham outfitted  in  a  pressurized  spacesuit, began  weekdong mo- 
bility  tests  a t   McKenzie  Pass lava  area  in  central  Oregon’s  Cascade 
Mountains,  where  they  investigated man’s  ability  to  perform  on  sur- 
(AP, Balt. Sun, 8/26/6d) 
faces thought to  resemble that  of  the moon. 

viet  astronomer 

ng time.  He cited  two  develop 
years  ago  which  deserved  spe- 
with  use of  rockets  to  carry 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1964 

297 

instruments  beyond  the  earth’s  atmosphere;  and  discovery  that  at 
least  some  galaxies  have  cores  tha t   seem  to  have  tremendous  mass 
and  a nature unlike stars.  (Sullivan, NYT ,  8 / 2 6 / a )  
August 25:  USAF XB-70A  aircraft made fourth of  series of  taxi runs at Palm- 
dale, Calif.,  reaching fo r  first time the planned ground s p e d  of  140 mph. 
Flight  tests  of  the 185-ft. experimental  bomber  would  be  made  after 
one  or  two  more  taxi  checkouts  down  the  runway.  (AP, Balt.  Sun, 
8/31/64;  A v .  Wk . ,  8/31/64?,25) 
August  25-27:  Highlights  of  Democratic National  Convention  in  Atlantic 
City,  which  selected Lyndon  Johnson  and  Hubert  Humphrey  a s  Presi- 
dential  and Vice Presidential candidates, were broadcast to  15 countries 
in western Europe’s  Eurovision network via  TELSTAR 11  communications 
satellite.  ( AP, r a s h .  Post, 8/19/64?) 
August  26: X-15  No.  3 was  flown by  John  B.  McKay  (NASA)  to   altitude  of 
87,000 ft.  and speed of  3,716 mph  (mach 5.58),  in flight near  Edwards, 
Calif.  During  the  flight,  heat  transfer  and  noise  level  measurements 
(NASA  X-15  Proj.  Off.; AP,  NYT ,  
were  made  on  the  aircraft’s  skin. 
8/27/64) 
0  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket,  launched  from  Wallops  Island,  Va., 
reached  95.3-mi.  altitude  in  satisfactory  flight  to  measure  ambient 
electron  density,  measure  ion  densities,  and  monitor  solar  ultraviolet 
radiations. 
Instrumented  payload,  provided  by  NASA  Goddard  Space 
Flight  Center,  contained  CW  propagation  experiment,  probe  with 
Gerdien  condenser,  planar  ion  trap,  and  planar  secondary  emission 
detector.  Another  objective  of  the  flight  was  to  test  efficiency  of  the 
12.267 mcJs  shroud  antenna  a t  D-region altitudes;  one of  the antennas 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
performed unsatisfactorily. 
0  Radio  Corporation  of  America  announced  receiving  $27-million  con- 
tract  from NASA  to  build  19 ground  computer systems for  checkout and 
launch  of  Saturn  IB  and  Saturn  V  space boosters. 
(AP,  Wm h .  Pos t ,  
8/26/64) 
August  27: Dr.  Robert C.  Seamans, Jr., NASA  Associate Administrator,  visit- 
ing NASA  Manned  Spacecraft Center,  said  extended manned  exploration 
of  the moon  “does  make  considerable  sense”  as follow-on program  to 
Project Apollo.  He said such a program was one of  several which NASA 
would  present  as  possible  post-Apollo  goals  to  the  President  “in  a p  
proximately  a  month’s  time.”  Other  possibilities  would  include  such 
programs  as landing unmanned spacecraft on other planets. 
(Maloney, 
Houston Pos t ,  8 / 2 8 / a )  
Venus  was  found  to  be  rotating  backward  with  a  period  of  between  248 
and 258 earth days,  Dr.  Gordon H.  Pettingill  of  Cornel1 Univ.  reported 
a t  IAU  assembly in Hamburg.  The  new  value was  a  refinement  of  one 
made in late 1962 by JPL studies, which indicated  a rotation of  between 
239 and 293  (266 mean  period)  and was obtained by  radarastronomers 
using new  l,OOO-ft.-diameter antenna  at Arecibo, Puerto Rico. 
(Hines, 
Wash Eve. S a r ,  8/27/64;  Sullivan, NYT ,  8/28/&) 
Hurricane  Cleo  battered  Cape  Kennedy  rocket  launching  site  with  gale 
winds up  to  65 mph.  Technicians dismantled second stage of  Titan  I1 
fo r   GT-2  Gemini  flight  and  stored  it  in  hangar,  lashed  first  stage  of 
the Titan  I1 to  the  pad.  No  damage was done to  the Titan  I1 o r  other 
( Wm h .  Post, 8/28/&&; AP, Balt. Sun, 8/29/64?) 
lashed-down rockets. 

768-898 

298 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   196  4 
August 27:  NASC  Executive Secretary Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh  said  in  address 
a t   dedication  of  North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  Science  Center, 
James Howard  Kindelberger  Memorial Laboratories,  Thousand  Oaks, 
Calif. : 
“The  whole  complex  activity  of  exploring  s pw e   is  important  not 
only  because  the  many  private  and  governmental  organizations  con. 
tributing  to  space  flight  a re   continually  uncovering  new  facts,  new 
products,  and  new  processes which  bring  immediate benefits  to  man 
kind.  These  benefits  are  only  the  beginning.  Looking  beyond  them, 
we  see  vast  unknown  frontiers  opening  up, with  unguessable  dis- 
coveries  yet  to  be  made.  Step by  step  we  are  conquering  the  hostile 
environment of  space.  We  are accumulating new  knowledge about the 
heavenly  bodies,  and  disproving  old  beliefs  about  them. 
“I would  emphasize  several points  about  the  space program: 
“First,  it is here to stay; 
“Second,  i t   promises  a  profitable  return  on  investments  in  basic 
research ; 
“Third,  it will  be  an expanding  activity,  with  no  finite  limits  to  its 
potential; 
“Fourth,  it will  enhance our  national  security, stimulate our  accumu- 
lation  of  knowledge,  improve  our  standard  of  living,  and  further  the 
chances of  world peace.  . . .”  (Text) 
August  28:  NASA’s NIMBUS  I  meteorological  satellite  was  launched  into 
polar orbit from Western Test Range with Thor-Agena B launch vehicle, 
and  on  its  sixth  orbit  began  transmitting  weather  photographs  which 
were  called  “the  best  pictures  ever”  from  space.  Orbit  of  the  830-lb. 
satellite had  been  planned  as  circular  575-mi. altitude  orbit;  Agena  B 
engines  burned  fo r   only  .a sec.  instead  of  the  3.8  sec.  expected  for 
injection burn,  so the satellite was orbiting with 578-mi. apogee, 252-mi. 
perigee,  98-min. period,  and  81” inclination  to  the  equator.  NIMBUS  I, 
unlike  the  Tiros  meteorological  satellites, was  earth-oriented  and  sta- 
bilized in all three axes.  It contained Advanced Vidicon Camera System 
and  Automatic  Picture  Transmission  System,  both  of  which  operate 
during  daylight  portion  of  each  orbit;  High  Resolution  Infrared  Ra- 
diometer, first to be flown on NASA meteorological satellite, provided  first 
high  resolution night-time cloud-cover pictures  and  cloud-top tempera- 
tures  taken  from  a  satellite.  About 62  APT  stations,  including  those  in 
12 foreign  countries  and  4  owned  privately,  participated  in  NIMBUS  I 
picture  reception.  The  APT  system was  designed  for  Nimbus  and  was 
first tested-successfully-on  TIROS VIII  launched  last  December.  Rep. 
George  P.  Miller  (D.-Calif.)  said  at  NIMBUS  I  news  conference:  “. . . 
This much  is  certain:  We  a re  way  ahead  of  the  rest  of  the  world.  I 
am  certain  that  if  nothing  came  out  of  the  space  effort  but  the  com- 
munications satellite, the weather satellite, and the navigational satellites, 
which w i l l   soon be  flying, in  a  limited number  of  years,  it would more 
than  pay  back  all  of  the  investment  that  has  been  made  in  space.” 
(NASA  Release  64-195; GSFC  Press  Briefing  Transcript;  Wash.  Eve. 
Star, 8/29/64;  NASA R&SC Div.) 
Firing  of  hydrogen  peroxide  gas  jets  aboard  SYNCOM  III  communications 
satellite changed  its  drift  rate  from  7” east  per  day  to  3.3”  per  day. 
(NASA  Release@-217) 
*  NASA  presented RANGER VII  press briefing, essentially the same presentation 
a s  th a t  planned for the  IAU  three days later,  in which  refined  flight data 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

299 

were  announced. 
6 mi.  of  the plann 
the crator Tycho;  Dr.  Eugene 
expressed  opinion  that  the  c 
stated  the  impact area  was  not  typical  of  the  lunar  su$ace.  Of  the 
RANGER VII  lunar photographs, Dr.  Kuiper revealed  that the photographs 
resolved objects down to 10-15  inches, and the resolution was considered 
1,000 times better than  the very  best  earth-based observation and 5,000 
times better than routine earth-based observation.  200 more of  the lunar 
photographs were released. 
On the question of  the nature of  the lunar surface, no firm conclusion 
was  drawn.  Dr. Kuiper,  who  estimated  erosion  on  the  moon  to  be 
about  5  ft.,  said  it  was  “purely  a  guess”  that  there  was  “fairly  solid 
stuff  there.”  He  added  that  i t  was  not  possible to  obtain  such  data  as  
surface bearing strength from the RANGER VII photographs.  Dr.  Harold 
Urey,  whose  paper  was  read  in  his  absence,  also  expressed  his  belief 
that  the photographs did  not  answer  the  question  of  surface strength; 
however,  he  said  that  a  “spongy,”  “fairy  castle  structure”  could  be 
prevalent  many  feet  down.  Dr.  Shoemaker,  who  expressed  view  that 
moon  loses more  material  than  it  gains,  suggested  erosion  could  be 
on  the  order  of  50  ft.  He  said  U S .   Geological  Survey was  converting 
the  photographic  data  into  topographic  profiles,  and  the  results  were 
showing  that  moon’s  surface was  “smoother  than  I  had  ,dared hope.” 
He  said  average  slope in  the  area  being  studied  did  not  exceed  10”  
and  pointed  out  that  this  was  reassuring  for  Project  Apollo,  whose 
Lem  spacecraft had been designed to land safely on  slope of  15’. 
(NASA 
Press  Conf.;  Finney,  NYT, 8/29/64?;  Toth,  Wash.  Post,  8/29/6$; 
Watson, Balt. Sun, 8/29/@) 
August 28: U.S.S.R.  announced launching of  COSMOS XLIV earth satellite into 
the  following  orbit:  860-km.  (534-mi.)  apogee,  618-km.  (384rmi.) 
perigee,  99.5-min.  period,  and  65”  inclination  to  the  equator.  The 
satellite  was  said  to  be  carrying  on  the  Cosmos  program  announced 
(Tass, Pravda,  8/29/64,  1, ATSS-T  Trans.) 
March  16,  1962. 
*  NASA  Aerobee  150 sounding rocket  launched  from White  Sands, N. Mex., 
reached  110-mi. altitude in  experiment to  collect  data  on  celestial x-ray 
sources.  Despite  slight  underperformance of  the  rocket,  preliminary 
experimental  results  were  considered  good.  American  Science  and 
Engineering,  Inc.,  provided  instrumented  payload  consisting  of  four 
Geiger  counters,  one  photoelectric  detector,  two  scintillation  counters, 
(NASA Rpt. SRL) 
and two s tar  sensors. 
*  First  Apollo  spacecraft  preflight  acceptance  test  station  was  declared 
operational.  Built  by  GE  Apollo  Support  Dept.  with  associate con- 
tractors  Control Data  Corp.  and  Radiation,  Inc.,  the  station would  be 
used  a t   North  American  Aviation’s  Downey,  Calif.,  facility  in  ApoUo 
preflight testing.  Three others would  be located  a t  Grumman  Aircraft 
Engineering, Bethpage, N.Y.  ; NASA  Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, 
Tex.;  and  MSC Florida  Operations, 
d,  Fla.  (NASA  Release 

300 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  A IRONAUT IC S ,   1 9  6 4 

the  liquid  hydrogen  capacity  of  the  Jackass  Flats,  Nev.,  facility. 
(SNPO;  Ymh .  Post,  8 /29 /64 )  
August 28:  Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator  for Manned 
space  Flight,  said  a t   Apollo  electronics  panel,  1EEE  western  Electric 
Show and Convention, Los Angeles : 
“The United States is now  completing the  first decade of  the explora- 
tion  of  space.  During the  last five years major  strides have been made 
in exploring, understanding, and exploiting space.  Today we  have allo- 
cated almost half  the resources needed to carry out the greatest adventure 
in  the history  of mankind-the  manned lunar  landing which  is the  goal 
of the A p o l b  P r o g am .   This goal could not have been  conceived, much 
less achieved, without the amazing growth of  knowledge, techniques, and 
technology  in   the  field  of  electronics which  has  been  ever  accelerating 
since the last war.  Communications, guidance, power, control,  display, 
all these have passed and surpassed the maximum expectations of  a dec- 
ade  ago. 
“In  the Apollo Program we  are developing a  set of  capabilities which 
will  provide  for  manned  exploration,  understanding  man’s  proficiency 
in  space and  the vicinity  of  the  earth.  This  is  a  capability which  can 
be extended to  meet  the  needs of  this  Nation  for  science or  technology, 
fo r  transportation  or  observation,  for defense or  commerce. 
“Although the end is manned exploration of  space, the means, including 
the  production  of  space  vehicles,  is  being  created  here  on  earth.  It 
is based in large measure on the expansion and growth of  the electronics 
I t   depends  on  that  electronics  industry  to  meet  and  exceed 
industry. 
new  goals  for  reliability  and  quality  as  well  as  performance  in  their 
products.  . . .”  (Text) 
August 2 8 4 e p t em b e r  7:  In conjunction with  Cleveland’s  Parade of  Progress 
exhibit  commemorating opening  of  new  Cleveland  Convention  Center, 
NASA exhibited Centaur space vehicle, full-scale spacecraft such as Ranger 
and Mariner, Sert spacecraft, RANGER VII  moon pictures, Gemini two-man 
spacecraft, and other exhibits.  Space lectures and motion pictures were 
presented.  NASA Lewis Research Center coordinated the display. 
( LRC 
Releases  64-72,  -73,  -75,  -79,  and  -80) 
August  29:  Soviet  Premier  Nikita  Khrushchev expressed  his  pleasure  w i t h  
success of  U.S.  lunar-photography probe RANGER w, in  letter to President 
Johnson replying to  letter and photographs sent to him  by Mr.  Johnson. 
(Tass; Reuters, N Y T ,  8/30/64) 
USAF  announced launching  four-stage Blue  Scout,  Jr.,  rocket  combination 
(UPI ,   N Y T ,  
from  Vandenberg  AFB, Calif.,  with  undisclosed  payload. 
8/30/64) 
August  30:  FY   1965  Independent  Offices  Appropriation  Bill  containing 
$5.250  billion  NASA  appropriation,  was  signed  into  law  by  President 
Johnson. 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  issued  statement  on  the  effect 
of  the  appropriation,  saying that  NASA  would  “maintain  the  basic  mo- 
mentum  and direction  of  the program  as presented to  Congress but will 
make  a  number  of  adjustments  to  meet  the  Congressional reduction  of 
$195 million,  to  effect those specific changes directed  by  Congress, and 
to take advantage of experience gained from operations conducted during 
the nine months since the budget was  submitted. 
“Although these adjustments will  affect launch schedules and program 
milestones,  Dr.  Dryden,  Dr.  Seamans,  and  I  a re   convinced  tha t   it  is 

ASTRONAUTICS ANI, AERONAUTIC%,  19 64 

301 

best to make a maximum effort to gain operational leadership in manned 
space flight  and  that  the manned  lunar  landing should  continue to   be 
targeted within  this decade.  This will  stretch NASA  and  its contractors 
to  the  limit,  but  we  have  advised the President  that  we   are  not  a t   th is  
time willing  to   give up  this  goal which  is  so  challenging and  which  is 
our  programs.  . . . 
so  important as  a  focus for the efforts we  must continue to make  in  all 
Our  assurance that  it can 
“The  target date is only  five years away. 
be  met  is  less  than under  President Johnson’s  budget,  but  we  still hope 
that  w i th   hard  work,  dedication, continued  successes,  and  continued 
We  are  going  to  make  a  hard  try. 
support we  can meet  it. 
“This decision does not involve the transfer to manned flight of  funds 
from space science and applications programs or  advanced  research and 
technology  programs.  These programs will require some  adjustments, 
but  will not  be  drastically reduced a s  would  be necessary if  funds were 
reprogrammed  to benefit manned  space flight. 
“In the program for unmanned planetary exploration, the combination 
of  a  heavy  workload  at  the  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory,  the  short  lead 
time available,  and the importance of  applying our resources to  a major 
advance  beyond  the  limited  Mariner  make  i t   unwise  to  undertake  a 
Mars  mission  in  1966 with  the  current  Mariner-type spacecraft.  The 
development of  a  spacecraft with  much  greater  scientific  promise  for 
launch to Mars in 1969 is being initiated.  . . .”  (NASA Release 64-221) 
August  30:  NASA  announced  Franklyn  W.  Phillips  would  be  Assistant  Di- 
rector for Administrative Operations at NASA’s new  Electronics Research 
Center,  Cambridge, Mass.,  effective Sept.  1.  A  veteran  NACA-NASA  ex- 
ecutive, Phillips had been  serving as Director of  NASA  Northeastern Office, 
which would be absorbed within the new  Center.  As Assistant Director, 
Phillips would be  responsible for administrative matters,  including pro- 
curement,  personnel  affairs,  management  analysis,  administrative s u p  
port,  and  technical  information. 
(NASA   Release  64-218) 
Library  of  Congress  announced  i t   was  creating Science  Policy  Research 
Div.  within  its  Legislative  Reference  Service,  to  advise  Congress  and 
congressional committees on  scientific  and  technological developments. 
This  step was  seen  as  first  significant action  by  Congress  to   establish 
advisory  apparatus  in  R&D  subject  area,  a  topic  of  growing  concern 
(Finney, NYT, 8/31/64) 
and  debate. 
August  31:  RANGER VII  team  of  scientists  presented  lunar  photographs  to 
UU in  Hamburg,  Germany,  and  discussed  data  obtained  from  them. 
Dr.  Thomas Gold of  Cornell Univ.,  known  as an outspoken proponent of 
the  “fa iry   castle”  theory  of  lunar  surface  structure,  said  there  was 
nothing  in  the  RANGER  vn photographs that  would  give  him  reason  to 
revise his hypothesis.  Dr.  Gold  also disputed hypothesis of  Dr.  Gerard 
P.  Kuiper,  of  Univ.  of  Arizona,  who  identified  what  he   interpreted  as 
lava  flows on  the moon  (crater rays, essentially) ; Dr. Gold stated none 
of  the  photographs  showed  evidence  of  volcanic  lava  on  the  moon. 
( N Y T ,  9/1/644 
for  studying 
Placing  a  100-in.  telescope  in  orbit  by  1975-1980 
the  s tars  was  “not  an unreasonable goal,”  Dr.  Leo Goldberg  told  IAU 
in  Hamburg.  The  Harvard  Univ.  astronomer  summed  up  arguments 
fo r  telescope in space by  saying that he  could not agree with those “who 
prefer to look  a t  the universe through  a hazy,  dirty,  semi-opaque atmos- 
phere.”  Cost  of  such  a  project  could  be  justified,  he  said,  only  i f  

302 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICB,  19 6 4 

expected  lifetime  of  such  an  instrument  wa s   long.  However, he   cited 
Soviet  and  U S .   progress  toward  space  rendezvous  techniques  and 
expected increases in rocket booster power, and said:  ‘The  future looks 
(Sullivan,  NYT ,   9/1/64) 
terribly  exciting.” 
August  31:  Labor Dept.  said  industry  employed 885,ON  engineers and  sci- 
entists  in  1963, about 4% more than  in  1962.  715,000 of  the 885,000 
(AP,  N Y T ,  9/1/64,  22) 
were  engineers  and  170,000 were  scientists. 
During August:  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center received five Northrop T-38 
aircraft  on  loan  from  USAF  for  use  as  space-flight readiness  trainers  to  
( A v .  Wk., 8/31/64,  25) 
maintain  proficiency  of  astronauts. 
*  Douglas Aircraft  Go. Missile and Space Systems Div.  received nine-month 
study contract from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to study methods 
( A v .  Wk., 
of  uprating Saturn IB space vehicle and S-IVB  Saturn stage. 
8/31/64, 23) 
NASA  Administrator  James E. Webb said  in   article on NASA  and USAF  rela- 
tions  in   The Airman: 
“At  a  time  when  possible  military  missions  for  manned  spacecraft 
have not yet been clearly defined, the NASA  Gemini and Apollo programs 
and the Air  Force MOL program  a re  developing American manned space 
flight  technology  and  operating  experience at  a  rapid  rate. 
“We  believe  that  the  progress  called  fo r   in  the  Gemini,  Apollo,  and 
M O L  will  enable  u s   to  demonstrate  clear  superiority  over  the  Soviet 
Union  in manned space flight capabilities during this decade. 
Our  accomplishments in  these three programs  w i l l   prepare  us much 
b b  
better  for whatever further  steps may be  necessary to meet  our  national 
defense needs  in   space.  . . .” 
(A irman ,  8/64,  6-11) 
9  Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of  Research Projects a t  NASA  Marshall Space 
Flight  Center  and  AIAA  Board  Member,  said  in  Astronautics  & Aero- 
nautics editorial: 
“For  some years past,  it  has  been  asked  whether  electric propulsion 
meets a ‘requirement’ in our space program.  It may be well to remember 
that  the  airplane,  the  atomic  submarine,  the  radio,  and  the  first  satel- 
lite were  not  developed  in  fulfillment  of  ‘requirements.’  An  artificial 
atmosphere  is  certainly  a  requirement  for  an  astronaut  in  space,  and 
must  be  developed fo r  that  reason.  But the  astronaut  does not  go  into 
space because it is his requirement, but because our country ha s  decided 
to  excel  in  the  exploration  of  outer  space  with  the  most  appropriate 
means.  Electric propulsion  promises to  be  a  very  appropriate method 
of vastly  expanding  our  exploration  capability  in  space  beyond  that 
of  chemical  and  nuclear  systems.  For  that  reason,  its  development 
(A&A ,  8/64, 
should be  pursued with high  priority  and  great  vigor.’’ 
14-15) 
B.  K.  Heusinger of  NASA  Marshall Space Flight Center said in Astronautics 
& Aeronautics  article about present and future  improvements in  Saturn 
launch vehicle propulsion: 
“First and foremost, the  Saturn-I  testing program  has  already  made 
possible  an  additional  payload  capability  of  approximately  4300  lb. 
without  major  redesign  efforts.  A  substantial  portion  of  this  gain 
has come from altered operational  and procedural techniques developed 
during  the  normal  course  of  static  and  flight  testing.  The  impact  of 
major  redesigns will  not  be  felt,  as  a  result  of  the  lead  times involved, 
until the first of  the  Saturn-IB  vehicles.  . . .’,  (A&A ,  8/fj4,/  20-25) 

303 
ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  64, 
During A u p s t :   J.  S. Butz, Jr.,  said i n  A i r  Force and S p e  Digest article on 
the future of  aviation: 
“Aeronautics  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  promises  to  eclipse  anything 
of  the  past  in  both  scope and  the  performance  of  individual  aircraft. 
Although  missile  and  space  systems  will  continue  to  furnish  strong 
competition  fo r   national  support,  aviation  activity  in  the  decades 
ahead will be much more extensive and important than  it is today.  . . . 
“The  revolutionary  effect  of  the  new  technology  on   future  aircraft 
can be best  illustrated by  discussing two key  areas.  One is propulsion. 
The  other  is  materials.  Light,  more  powerful  engines,  and  li&ter, 
stronger  structures  always  have  been  key  design  objectives.  This  is 
stilltrue.  . . .” 
He  quoted  Dr.  Alexander  H.  Flax,  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Air 
Force  for  Research  and  Development:  ‘‘ ‘It  is  possible  today  to  begin 
the  development  of  lightweight  gas-turbine  engines  with  a  thrust-to- 
weight  ratio  of  better  than  10 to  1.’  Dr.  Flax  points  out  that  installed 
thrust-to-weight ratios  apparently  can  rise  to  higher  than  20  to  1  on 
the second generation of  future engines. 
“Ten  years  ago  such  a  statement  would  have  got  him  laughed  out 
of  most  scientific  and  engineering  meetings.  A  few  people  may  still 
argue  that  the  estimate  is  high.  But  the  main  argument  now  is  over 
how  best  to  achieve  this  truly  stunning  performance  rather  than  over 
the possibility of  achieving it.”  He detailed some of  the R&D  areas with 
great potential fo r  future aircraft, then said: 
“Technical evidence abounds to prove that an aeronautical revolution 
is  at  hand  and  that  the  first  step  in  that  revolution  can  have  great 
economic importance.  It clearly is time  for more resolute action.  Brit- 
ain  and  France,  and  possibly  the  Soviet  Union,  have  approximately 
the  same  opportunity  as  the  US  to  capitalize  on  what  is known  now. 
In  western  Europe,  at  least,  engine  and  materials  technology  is  well 
advanced.  . . .” (AF  Mag.,  8/64) 
*  Nuclear  physicist Dr.  Edward Teller  criticized DOD for  failure  to  proceed 
with  flight-testing  the  nuclear-powered  Low  Altitude  Supersonic  Ve- 
hicle  (LAW).  Speaking a t  Air  Force  Institute  of  Technology, Wright- 
Patterson AFB,  Dr. Teller said:  “For the sake of  an economy that amounts 
to less than 1% of  the Air Force budget this has been canceled.  I believe 
World  War  2 when  we  failed  to  develop the  ICBM. . . .”  ( A v .  Wk.? 
this  is  the  biggest  mistake  we  have  made  since  the  years  following 
8/17/64,65) 
DOD established 22 information  analysis centers to supply specific answers 
to  technical questions  asked  by  managerial,  scientific,  and  engineering 
(M&R ,  8 / 1 0 / a ,  
personnel employed by DOD and  by DOD contractors. 
10; Missile/Space D d y ,  8/5/64  and 8/6/64) 
AFSC was conducting research with quick-setting plastic to provide “instant 
landing sites” fo r  V/Stol  aircraft.  (Av ia t ion  Daily? 8/10/64?) 
*  Terence Prittie  said  in  Atlantic Monthly  article  that  the  “Egyptians,  with 
the  vital  help  of  German  a nd  other  foreign  scientists  and  technicians, 
have been working on a  crash program  fo r  the production  of  long- and 
medium-range rockets at  their  Factory  333  a t   Heliopolis,  a  few  miles 
east  of  Cairo.”  He  described  the  three  main  types  of  rockets  being 
developed : A1  Zafar  (“the  Victor”)  single-stage  liquid-fuel  rocket; 
AI  Kahar  (“the  Conqueror”)  single-stage liquid-fuel  rocket;  and   Al 
(A t lan t ic ,  8/6p) 
Raid  (“the  Explorer”)  two-stage rocket. 

September  1964 
September  1 : NASA  Electronics  Research  Center  was  formally  activated  in 
Cambridge, Mass.,  and  Dr.  Winston  E.  Kock  took  the  oath  of  office  as  
Director.  Electronics Research  Task  Group  from  NASA  Hq.  and  NASA 
North  Eastern  Office in  Cambridge were  absorbed  in  the  new  Center  to  
form  initial  nucleus  of  80  personnel.  Design  and  construction  of  the 
facility  would  begin  late  this  year  and  be  completed  in   four  or  five 
(NASA   Release  64-219;  NASA  Announcement  6&189;  NASA 
years. 
Circulars  320,  321) 
USAF  launched  Titan  111-A  space  booster  from  Cape  Kennedy,  and  the 
first  two  stages  burned  perfectly;  however,  because  transtage  engines 
shut down prematurely,  the Titan 111-A  fell slightly short of  orbiting its 
3,750-1b.  dummy  lead  payload.  AFSC’S  Brig  Gen.  Joseph  Bleymaier 
said  preliminary  investigation  showed  malfunction  of  onboard  helium 
pressure  valve  was  to  blame  for  the  shortened  burn  time  from  pro- 
gramed  406  sec.  to  about  391  sec.  He  also  said  the  test  was  95% 
successful-all  primary  objectives and  most  secondary  objectives had 
been met.  (DOD Release 625-64;  M&R ,   9/7/@,  11; Av .   Wk., 9/7/64, 
32 )  
*  Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va.,  reached 
96.5-mi.  altitude  in  successful flight  to   measure  brightness  of  stars  in  
the  ultraviolet.  Experiment  instrumentation  for  the  NASA  rocket  was 
provided  by  Space  Astronomy  Laboratory  of  the  Univ.  of  Wisconsin 
(NASA Rpt. SRL) 
General  William  F.  McKee  (USAF,  Ret.)  was  sworn  in   as   Assistant  Ad- 
In   this  position, 
ministrator  for  Management  Development,  NASA. 
General  McKee  would  be  responsible  for  review  and  development  of 
recommendations  concerning  major  management  matters  and  would 
report  directly to  NASA  Administrator  James  E. Webb. 
(NASA  Release 
64c216;  NASA  Announcement  64-190) 
*  MSFC Michoud Operations began mass movement of  about 5,000  contractor 
personnel  and  supplies and  equipment  from  temporary  quarters  in  the  
New Orleans area to the Michoud facility.  About 4,400employees would 
move  into the  new  Engineer  and  Office Building,  and  about 600 would 
move  into  existing  administration  and  engineering  buildings.  Being 
performed  after  normal working  hours,  the move was  to   be completed 
by  Nov.  1. 
(M a r sM l  Star,  9/2/64,  1, 12 )  
I n  honor  of  RANGER  VII,  the  International Astronomical  Union  meeting  in  
Hamburg,  Germany,  designated  the  region  where  the  lunar  probe  im- 
(Sullivan, NYT ,  9/2/64.,  14 )  
pacted on the moon as  “Mare Cogniturn.” 
USAF Captains Albert R.  Crews and Richard  E.  Lawyer emerged from two- 
week  stay  in  simulated-space  cabin  a t   GE  Space  Technology  Center, 
Valley Forge, Pa.  Officials said test showed that man can perform more 
(Wash.  Post, 
tasks  in  extended  space flight than  previously supposed. 
9/2/64) 
304 

AERONAUT1 

(DOD  Release  6364%) 
neering. 
U.S.S.R.  disclosed it had  succeeded in producing first nuclear-reactor sys- 
tem to  convert atomic energy directly into electric power,  small enough 
to  fit  aboard  a  spacecraft.  Report  was  made  to  Third  International 
(L.A.  Times-Wash. Post Serv., 
Atoms-for-Peace Conference in Geneva. 
Louisville  Courkr-Journal, 9/2/643) 
September 2 :   At press conference. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials 
said  N IMBU S ~ I  meteorological satellite was  pe iform in i   successfully  and 
sending back  cloud  cover  photographs  of  unexpectedly  good  quality. 
First nighttime pictures of  cloud cover, made with the satellite's  infrared 
sensor,  were  comparable  in  quality  and  resolution to  the  TV pictures 
made  by  Tiros  meteorological  satellites.  Unplanned  o rb i t -eccen t r ic  
the  satellite's  earth  coverage from  100% 
rather  than  circular-reduced 
every 24  hours  to  about 70%. 
(GSFC  Press Conf.  Transcript;  Finney, 
NYT,  9 / 3 / a ,   13) 
NASA's SYNCOM 11  and SYNCOM  111  crossed paths a t  the equator about 22,000 
mi.  above the Pacific Ocean  at  about 162" east  longitude.  SYNCOM  111, 
launched into synchronous equatorial orbit Aug.  19, was  drifting toward 
International Date Line,at rate of  3.3"  per day;  SYNCOM  11,  launched into 
orbit July 26,1963, was moving in  figure-8 pattern 33" north and south 
(NASA Release 64-217) 
of  the equator. 
DOD  a n n o & e d  $5,550,012 contract fo r  integrated navigation  systems  for 
three Project Apollo tracking ships had  been  awarded by  Naval Bureau 
(DOD  Release  6 3 M )  
of  Ships  to  Sperry Rand  Corp. 
September  3 :   NASA-modified  Arcas  sounding  rocket,  launched  a t   wallops 
Island,  Va.,  carried white rat in specially designed, instrumented payload 
compartment  in  nose  cone  of  the  rocket  to  114OOO-ft.  altitude,  where 
the payload  separated from the booster,  a  parachute  deployed,  and  the 
container  floated  down  to  the  surface of  the  ocean.  Package  was  re- 
covered  by  helicopter  a  few  minutes  later  about  20  mi.  offshore,  and 
the  rat was  returned to  NASA  Wallops Station for  observation and  anal- 
ysis.  During  the  flight,  biomedical  data  such  as  heartbeat  and  body 
temperature of  the  ra t   were  telemetered  to  ground  stations.  Launch 
was part of  Bio-Space Technology Training Program. 
(Wallops Release 
64-65] 
e Reorientation  maneuver  was  made  with  SYNCOM  111  communi- 
cations  satellite,  high  above  the  Pacific  Ocean,  to  align  the  commu- 
nications  antenna  atop  the  spacecraft  for  optimum  coverage  of  the 
earth.  This  positioned 
along  a  north-south  axis  per- 
effect  of  this  maneuver,  plus 
pendicular  to  the  orbita 
, was  to  reduce the  eastward drift 
an  orbital adjustment ma 
rate from 3.6" per day to less than 3"  per  day. 
(NASA  Release  64-230) 
to  altitude  of  77,000 
X-15  No.  3  flown  by  Milton  0. Thompson  (NASA) 
ft.  and  speed  of  3,543  mph  (mach  5.37),  the  flight  studying  heat 
transfer  rates  and  boundary  layer  noise on  specially  installed  surfaces 
(NASA  X-15  Proj.  Off.; FRC  Release) 
on  the  bottom  of  the  aircraft. 

306 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTIC@,  1 9  6 4 
September  3 :   Three NASA  astronauts began flights in  T-33  trainer  jets  simu- 
lating approaches to the lunar surface.  Maj. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.,  Capt. 
David R.  Scott, and Elliott M.  See, Jr.,  sent their  planes into dives from 
altitudes  of  about  15,000  ft.  toward  the  large,  rugged  lava  flow  in  
southern  Idaho;  cameras in the planes recorded the spproaches, and  the 
astronauts  made  their  own  observations  of  the  surface.  Planes  were 
(Hous ton  Pos t ,   9/3/@) 
leveled  out  at  about  3,000-ft.  altitude. 
*  NASA  announced  agreement had  been  reached  by  Malagasy  Republic and 
U S .   on  the  relocation  and  expansion  of  NASA  tracking  station  on 
Madagascar.  Previously  located  a t   Majunga,  the   station  was  being 
relocated  near  Tananarive  and   expanded  to  include  instrumentation 
fo r   Project  Gemini  monitoring  and  communicating  and  for  scientific 
satellite tracking  and   recording  data. 
(NASA  Release 6 6 2 2 2 )  
Lockheed  Constellation  “crashed”  near  Phoenix,  Ark . ,   in  test  conducted 
for  FAA by  Flight  Safety Foundation.  The  airliner,  with  2 1  passenger 
“dummies”  and  several  thousand  pounds  of  cameras  and  measuring 
instruments  onboard,  traveled  down  the  runway  a t   115 mph  to  crash 
into  barriers  of  wood,  earth,  and  steel;  it  slid  another  500   f t .   and 
stopped with  its  fuselage upright  but  cracked  in   two  places,  one  wing 
sheared  off,  and  the  other  wing  twisted.  Aircraft  remained  in  such 
good  condition  that  passengers  apparently  would  have  survived  the 
crash,  unlike  similar  test  of  DC-7  Iast  April,  in  which  the  aircraft  hit 
the barriers a t  160  mph  and was destroyed.  (Clark, N Y T ,  9/4/@,  53) 
September  4 :   NASA’s OGO  I  (Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory)  was 
launched  from  Cape  Kennedy  by  Atlas-Agena  B  rocket  booster  into 
highly  elliptical  orbit  (92.721-mi.  apogee,  175-mi.  perigee,  6 21S - h r .  
period,  and  31”  inclination  to  the  equator).  The  huge  1,073-lb. 
satellite  carried  20  experiments,  inaugurating  new  “space  bus”  series 
of  standardized observatories capable of  conducting many  related  space 
experiments  simultaneously  in  space.  However,  one  of  OGOI’S  long 
booms,  one  short  boom  including  the  omnidirectional  radio  antenna 
did  not  deploy.  This  resulted  in  abnormal  operation  of  the  automatic 
control  system,  and  most  of  the  control  gas  was  used  in  attempting 
to  lock  the  satellite  into  its  earth-stabilized  orbit.  Project  officials 
attributed  the  satellite’s inability  to  lock  onto  the  earth  to  the  fact  that 
its earth-seeking sensor was  obscured by  one of  the undeployed  booms. 
Scientists decided not to attempt turning on experiments for several days 
while  calculating  contingency  operations  fo r   a  spin-stabilized satellite. 
(NASA  Release 64-213;  GSFC Release 6-26-64;  AP,  N Y T ,  9/6/64,  26; 
Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/8/@) 
EASA  announced  signing  of  nine-month  contract  extension  for  Project 
Apollo  spacecraft  with  North  American  Aviation’s  Space  and  Infor- 
mation  Systems Div.  The  $496-miuion  extension  called  for  five  addi- 
tional  command  and  service modules,  three  additional  flight boilerplate 
spacecraft, a full-scale mockup, and nine adapter sections to house Lunar 
(NASA  Release 64-227) 
Excursion Modules. 
NASA  issued  supplemental  list  of  technology  utilization  publications,  de- 
signed  to  acquaint  the  public  with  useful  innovations  from  space  re- 
(NASA  Release 641-225;  TU List) 
search. 
Cornel1 Univ.  astronomer  Dr.  Thomas  Gold  said  in  Science  article  that 
absence  of  surface  rock  outcroppings  in   RANGER  vu close-up  lunar 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAKJTIOS,  1 9  6 41 

307 

photographs  supported  his  thesis  that  the  moon  is  covered  with  dust. 
Erosion  of  the  moon’s  surface  at  rate  of  one  micron  (1/25,000  in.) 
per  year  would  be  enough,  “over  geological  time,”  to  smooth  out  a 
once-rocky surface.  This erosion,  caused by  cosmic dust  and energetic 
solar  particles,  would  have  deposited dust  in  low  areas  had  gradually 
filled  them.  However,  Dr.  Gold  said  that  even  if  in  the   crate=  and 
seas the dust were a mile deep, it was  no  cause fo r  concern;  dust  on the 
moon,  like  tha t   on  earth,  would  not  necessarily be  loose  and  powdery 
(Wash.  Eve.  S tar ,   9/4/M) 
a t  depths  below  the  surface. 
September  5 :  President  Johnson  announced  in  his  news  conference  that 
Polaris  A-3  missile  “will  soon  become  part  of  our  strategic  missile 
force.  The  new  A-3  will  be  deployed  fo r   the   first  time  aboard  the 
nuclear  submarine uss Daniel  Webster when  she begins her  first patrol 
later this month. 
“The  A-3  missile,  which  was  put  into  accelerated  development  in 
1 9 a ,  has  a  range  of  2500  nautical  miles,  some  1000  nautical  miles 
greater than that of  the A-2  and more than double that of  the A-1.  . . .” 
The  President  also  announced  that  AEC  and   DOD were  “proceeding 
with  the development of  a  new,  high-powered, long-lived reactor,  which 
constitutes a major step forward in  nuclear technology.  . . . 
“Two  of  these  reactors  could  power  an  attack  aircraft  carrier  as 
compared  with  eight  reactors  required  for  the  uss Enterprise.  . . .” 
(Transcript, r a s h .  Post, 9/6/64) 
0  Lunar  photographs made by  RANGER VII  and  interpretations  of  their  find- 
ings were discussed in Saturday Review by Science Editor John Lear: 
“The  net  sum  of  the  evidence  here  recited  is  that  the  Congress 
and  the  people  have  been  misled  about  the  true  significance  of  the 
Ranger  VI1 mission.  The pictures  sent  back  home  by  the  ingeniously 
constructed  robot  dragonfly  contain  no  more  assurance  of  the  safety 
of  a manned landing on  the moon  than  existed  before Ranger  VI1 took 
off.  On  the  contrary,  one  sure  danger  has  been  discovered  that  had 
not  been  suspected  before.  The  apparent  disappearance  of  the  sup- 
posed  danger  of  impenetrable dust  is  accompanied by  the  equal danger 
of  a  landing  surface  that  may  be  as  fragile  a s  a  tea  biscuit.  Ranger 
VI1 couldn’t  possibly  have  seen what  matters  most  of  all when  human 
expeditions of  the moon  a re  being weighed:  the  bearing  strength  of  the 
lunar  face.  Given man’s  present  limited knowledge of  soil physics,  no 
photograph  could tell whether the  moon’s  surface will  hold  a  spaceboat 
o r  even a lone man.  . . .”  ( S R ,  9/5/@,  35-43) 
USAF’S  START  (Spacecraft  Technology and  Advanced  Re-entry Test)  pro- 
gram was  discussed by  James J.  Haggerty, Jr.,  in  I o u r d  of  the  Armed 
Forces.  START,  according to  Haggerty,  “appears  to  be  more  than  . . . 
an  expansion  of  the   ASSET  program.  . . . START  involves  a  dozen  or 
more areas of  investigation in  the general field of  re-entry.  It could lead 
to  development of  a  manned  re-entry vehicle  for  use with  the Manned 
Orbital Laboratory,  one which could make a maneuvering re-entry to  a 
landing field, a s  opposed to the ballistic flight path of  the Gemini space- 
craft which will be  the original  MOL re-entry vehicle.  Looking  farther 
down  the  road,  START  technology could provide  the  basis  for  eventual 
development of  a  large ferry  vehicle f o r  shuttling men  and  supplies to  
and horn an  orbiting space station.  . . .” 

308 

ASTRONADT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  0 4 

First contract fo r  this new  type of  spacecraft was awarded recently to  
Martin Marietta Corp. fo r  ablative-type re-entry body,  designated SV-5, 
capable  of  maneuvering  during  re-entry  into  earth’s  atmosphere  a t  
hypersonic-transonic speeds.  SV-5  was  said  to be  only  one  portion  of 
broad  START  program,  which  would  investigate  a aumbe r   of  other  re- 
entry  body  shapes,  possibly  even  lifting  body  types  such  a s  M-2  and 
HL-10  being investigated by NASA. 
( ] / A r m e d  Forces, 9/5/64,5) 
September 5 :  More emigrating scientists and engineers settle in  the US. than 
in  any  other  country,  according  to  Dr.  Charles V.  Kidd,  Associate Di- 
rector  for  International  Activities  of  National  Institutes  of  Health, 
writing  in   UNESCO  publication.  From  1949  through  1961,  43,000 
scientists and engineers (average of  3,350 per year)  immigrated to US., 
reaching peak of  5,800 per year  in  1957.  (O’Kane, NYT, 9/6/64,20) 
September  6 :  NASA  announced  ECHO  I  balloon  satellite had  been  used  this 
summer  by  French  National  Geographic Institute  to  accurately  locate 
satellite tracking stations being built  for France and ESRO  across Europe 
and  Africa.  According  to  reports,  French  National  Geographic  In- 
stitute  photographed  ECHO   I  simultaneously  from  precisely  located 
cameras  in  France  and Algeria,  in  order  to  join  the  triangulation  sys- 
tems of  France  and Algeria.  Its  aluminum-coated mylar  skin wrinkled 
and misshapen, ECHO I was no longer useful in radio-reflecting communi- 
cations, but it was still clearly visible in the nighttime sky after more than 
(NASA  Release 64-226) 
four years of  orbiting the earth. 
September  7 :  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists, via Rosman, N.C., 
tracking station, succeeded in turning on 14 of  the experiments onboard 
OGO  I  and received scientific data transmitted  from the satellite.  Power 
level  in  the  NASA  “space  bus”  was  said  to  be  satisfactory.  OGO  I  was 
obtaining  less  than  half  the  power  it  needed  fo r   full-time operation 
of  its  20 experiments, because  it  was  spinning  slowly  in  space  instead 
of  having  its solar panels  constantly  aimed  a t  the  sun. 
(Hines, Wash. 
Eve .  Star,  9/8/64;  AP,  NYT ,  9/8/64,31) 
*  NASA  announced  39  new  international  fellowships  in  space  science  had 
been  granted  for  one  year’s  graduate  study  at  universities  across  the 
U.S.  Initiated in 1961, program was administered by National Academy 
of  Sciences-National Research Council, with  NASA  providing  university 
costs and travel within  the U S .   So far,  34 fellows had  completed US. 
studies  under  the  program  and  17 countries  had  participated. 
(NASA 
Release 64-223) 
General  DyfiamicsJAstronautics received  $6  million  contract  from  USAF 
for  additional  standardized  Atlas  space  launch  vehicles.  Atlases  pro- 
duced  under  this  contract  were  said  to  be   fo r   sending  lunar-orbiting 
probes on photographic missions.  (San Diego  Union, 9/8/64) 
September  7-12:  15th  Congress of  the  International  Astronautical  Federa- 
tion  (IAF) held  in Warsaw.  Reported  that  700 scientists and  engineers 
representing  40  countries  attended;  largest  delegation  ( 100  persons) 
from  the  U S . ,  while  60 representatives  from  the U S S R  was  largest 
Soviet  delegation  ever  to  attend  such  a  conference.  180  papers  were 
given.  The  Polish  Government  issued  a n   IAF stamp  in   honor  of  the 
Congress,  while  Pravda  referred  to  Warsaw  as  the  “space  capita1 of 
the world.” 
Congress  opened  with  statement  by  President  Edmond  A.  Brun 
(France)  that deliberations “should  undoubtedly contribute  towards in- 

309 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 41 
creasing international cooperation in  the field of  astronautics.”  First re- 
port to the entire Congres was on the lunar mission of  RANGER MI by JPL 
Director William Pickering  and  Harris  Schurmeier.  RANGER w movie 
was shown five times during the week  to packed audiences.  Informative 
U.S.  papers  on  progress  o n  comsats,  weather  satellites  (including  NW- 
BUS I  photographs),  manned  luna r   landing  program,  and  bioastronau- 
tics,  a s   well  as Consideration  of  the  idea  of  a  Lunar  International 
Laboratory,  appeared highlights of  the 15th IAF Congress. 
(NASA  Hist.) 
September  7:  IAF paper  by  Soviet  bioastronautics  expert  N.  M.  Sissakian, 
read  for  him  in  his  absence,  stressed  conviction tha t   artificial  gravity 
must  be  created  in  spacecraft  fo r   long  manned  flights:  “.  . . We  see. 
the need for a new field of research called gravitational biology that would 
determine  the   general  laws  relating  acceleration  and  body  function.” 
Dr.  0. Gazenko  and  P.  K.  Isakov  reported  Soviet  cosmonauts’  space 
flights  of  up  to  five  days  raised  the  questions  of  whether  prolonged 
weightlessness would:  cause loss of body calcium and softening of  bones; 
affect  the  inner  ear  and  deteriorate  man’s  ability  to  concentrate,  or 
damage  the  brain;  weaken  body  systems such  a s  heart  muscle  so that 
they would be destroyed upon sudden re-entry into earth‘s  gravitational 
(AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  9/7/64;  AP,  NYT ,   9/8/64,  11; L.A. 
force. 
Times, P‘ash. Post, 9/8/M) 
September 8:  Hurricane Dora with her  125-mph winds approached the US. 
Atlantic  coast  from  Cape Kennedy to  Myr t le   Beach,  S.C.,  and  workers 
at  the  rocket  launching  center  dismantled  five  of  the  six rockets being 
prepared fo r  launch this fall.  Only the Saturn I SA-7  rocket w a s  secured 
in  its gantry ; removed were Titan  I1  (for GT-2  Gemini launch),  Atlas- 
Agena  (for Mars probe  launch),  mo r -De l ta   (for  Imp  launch),  Atlas- 
Centaur  (launch  vehicle  development launch),  and  Atlas  fo r   USAF  re- 
(UPI,  NYT ,  9/9/64,  1; Witkin, NYT ,  9/9/64,23) 
entry test. 
that  U.S.S.R. 
Soviet  scientist  Prof.  A.  G.  Kuznetsov 
told 
IAF 
had  conducted tests of  cosmonauts spending 25 days in  sealed chamber 
with  helium-oxygen  atmosphere.  He  said  in  one  test,  although  there 
were  no   adverse  effects  on  the   subject,  slight  changes  were  noted- 
quickened pulse and respiration  rate, faster blood circulation, and higher 
voice  pitch  to  7/1Oth  of  an  octave.  Prof.  Kuznetsov  noted  that  the 
manned Vostok spacecraft used mixture  of  nitrogen  and oxygen;  he  did 
not  disclose  whether  that  mixture  affected  cosmonauts  adversely,  but 
he said that  “helium offers a possible substitute  for nitrogen  that might 
prove more suitable for spacecraft requirements.”  Helium might reduce 
toxicity and provide a more hygienic  atmosphere, he  said. 
Dr.  Eugene  B.  Konecci  of  NASA,  cochairman  of  the  bioastronautics 
session,  said  US. had  not  pressed  development  of  helium  system  fo r  
three principal  reasons:  (1) helium’s  tendency  to  alter voice pitch;  ( 2 )  
helium’s  leak  qualities,  which  make  it  difficult to  contain  in  enclosure; 
and  (3) helium’s  high  thermal  conductivity, which might pose possible 
astronaut  heating problem.  “We still feel strongly about nitrogen.  We 
presently  see no   advantage  to  helium  that  would  cause  us  to  change. 
However,  we  will  continue  to  study  the  possibility  of  using it  in  case 
we  encounter  some  unforeseen  nitrogen  difEculty,”  Dr.  Koneoci  said. 
(Vmh .  Post, 9/9/64;  AP, BaIt. Sun, 9/9/64) 
Dr.  Eugene B.  Konecci,  NASA  Director  of  Biotechnology and  Human  Re- 
search,  in  paper  delivered  a t  ZAF in  Warsaw,  examined man’s  possible 
roles in space flight.  A s  a transmitter,  receiver,  o r  control mechanism, 

310 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4  

he  said,  man’s  capacity  and  speed  a re   limited  as compared  with  a 
machine’s.  Boredom, he  said, makes man  ineffective “in  tasks that  call 
fo r  long periods of  relative inactivity.”  However, he  said, man  “is the 
only available computer which  can  solve problems by  logical induction, 
although  unfortunately  he  cannot  keep  emotions  out  of  this  thought 
(NASA   Re- 
process.  He can make sense of  fragmentary  information.” 
lease 64-229) 
September  8 :   Communications Satellite Corp.,  authorized  two  years  ago  by 
law  as  a  private  corporation  to  establish  a  global  commercial  comsat 
system,  was  listed  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange. 
Incorporated 
Feb. 1,1963, ComSatCorp had offered 10  million shares at $20 each, f ive  
million  to  communications  common  carriers  and  five  million  to  the 
general public. 
(ComSatCorp Release) 
*  Sen. Mike Monroney  (D.-Okla.)  said  in  the  Senate that  “one  of  the  out- 
standing  accomplishments of  this  Congress i s  the  action  taken  to  solve 
the problem of  obtaining professional advice on scientific and technologi- 
cal  questions  involved  in  the  legislative  process.  The  appropriation 
of  funds  to  establish  a  Science Policy  Research  Division  of  the  Legis- 
lative  Reference  Service  of  the  Library  of  Congress  is  the  latest  in  a 
series  of  steps  taken  by  the  Congress  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of 
itsstaff.  . . . 
‘‘I  join  other  Members of  the House  and  Senate in  hopeful  anticipa- 
tion  that  the  new  Science  Policy  Research  Division  of  the  Legislative 
Reference Service, will  develop  successfully under  the  direction  of  Dr. 
Edward  Wenk,  Jr.  Dr.  Wenk’s  experience  in  both  the  legislative and 
executive  Branches  of  the  Government  is  invaluable  in  meeting  his 
new  responsibilities of  advising Congress on  science, engineering,  and 
(CR .  
public  policy.?’  The  division  would  begin  operation  Sept.  28. 
9/8/64,21030;  M&R, 9/14/64,15) 
September  9:  NASA’s  SYNCOM  III  synchonous-orbit  communications  satel- 
lite  was  178.12’  east  longitude  and  0.03”  north  latitude  a t   noon,  and 
was  traveling  along  the  equator  drifting  eastward  at  the  rate  of  2.8” 
per  day. 
I t  was expected to  reach  the  International Date Line  (180’) 
tomorrow.  SYNCOM  1x1 was  inclined 0.081”  to  the equator,  and  its orbit 
ranged  in altitude from 21,690-mi. perigee to  22,509-mi.  apogee.  Con- 
trol  maneuvers would  be  signaled  tomorrow  to  decrease  the  satellite’s 
apogee and  increase  the  perigee,  thus  giving  it  a  more  nearly  circular 
orbit. 
(NASA  Release  64-230) 
*  Cape Kennedy, prepared  for the onslaught of  Hurricane Dora  by  advance 
warnings including photographs by  NIMBUS  I satellite, escaped the second 
hurricane  in  a  month  with  virtually  no  damage. 
(AP,  9/9/64) 
*  Permanent Hall of Science was  dedicated at World’s Fair,  New  York City. 
Participating in dedication ceremony, NASA Administrator James E. Webb 
said  the  Hall  of  Science  would  “contribute  to  the  understanding  of 
those  many  disciplines  which  comprise  modern  scientific  under- 
takings.  . . .”  Robert  Moses, World’s  Fair  president,  noted  particu- 
larly  the  “extraordinary  public  interest  in  space  exploration”  in  his 
(Webb  Text;  NASA  W R   III/172-78;  NYT,  9/10/@) 
remarks. 
At  IAF,  NASA’s Dr.  Eugene B. Konecci,  cochairman with  a  Soviet delegate 
of  space medicine sessions, said:  L‘For the  first  time,  th e  Russians  a r e  
giving  us  technical  laboratory  data  on  their  space  research.  We  a r e  
quite  encouraged  by  this  exchange  on  a  scientist-to-scientist basis.” 
( AP,  Denver Post,  9/9/64) 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 

311 

September  9 :  British Minister of  Aviation Julian  Amery  announced at ban- 
quet of Society of British Aerospace Companies the government’s decision 
to   develop  Black  Knight  rocket  as  an  experimental  satellite  launcher. 
The  new  rocket,  designated Black  Prince,  would  be  a  three-stage  con- 
figuration  using hydrogen peroxide  and kerosene  in the  first two  stages 
and a solid-propellant spin-stabilized third  stage.  The first stage would 
be powered  by  a  cluster  of  eight  engines.  Also  announced were plans 
to  accelerate research  on  an  ocean-going hovercraft  to  fill  a  naval  role. 
(AP,  9/9/64;  A&A ,   11/64,  116) 
September  10:  Kiwi  M E  reactor,  operated  at  nearly  full  power  fo r   eight 
minutes Aug. 28, was restarted  and run for  a second time a t  power  level 
nearly identical to that achieved during the first experiment.  Test lasted 
abou‘t 2.5 min. and reactor performance was excellent.  This demonstra- 
tion  of  capability  to  rerun  reactors  came much  earlier  in  the NASA-AEC 
nuclear rocket program  than had been  anticipated ; officials considered it 
a  significant step toward economical development of  nuclear propulsion 
technology.  Harold  B.  Finger,  Manager  of  NASA-AEC  Space  Nuclear 
Propulsion  Office,  said:  “We  have proved  that  nuclear  rockets can  give 
the  kind  of  performance  that  is  needed  for  advanced  space missions. 
We  could use  essentially this  type of  reactor  for  experimental flights  in 
the early 1970s and have an operational system by  1975.”  Test marked 
(SNPO;  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  9/15/64) 
final  one  planned  for  K iw i .  
*  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  officials  successfully  made  the   first 
of  two final corrections in the orbit of  SYNCOM  111  communications satel- 
lite,  raising  the  satellite’s  perigee  closer  to  perfect  circle  22,289  mi. 
(Wash. Eve. Star, 9/10/64) 
above the earth. 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  scientists conducted  interrogation  of 
OGO  I  satellite through  Rosman,  N.C.,  tracking  station,  and  15  experi- 
ments were turned  on to confirm their  operation.  Signals were weaker 
than  previously received,  because OGO  1’s  solar  panels  were  not  locked 
onto the sun ;  the satellite’s solar panels were successfully commanded to 
turn  42”  into  a  more  favorable  sun  angle,  thus  ensuring  satisfactory 
power  levels.  As  of  this  date,  19 of  the  20  onboard  scientific experi- 
ments had  been  turned  on  and  had  transmitted  data,  which were  being 
(NASA  Release  6 6 2 3 2 ;   GSFC  Release 
evaluated  by  experimenters. 
6.26-64) 
*  In  Warsaw  a t  
the 
luncheon  of 
the 
International  Academy  of 
Astronautics  ( IAA)  , Rep.  George  P.  Miller  (D.-Calif.)  , Chairman  of 
House Committee on  Science and  Astronautics, expressed  the  intent  of 
the  U S .  to  engage  in   the  conquest  of  space  fo r  peaceful  purposes  as 
instituted  in  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Act  of  1958  and  imple- 
mented  by  NASA.  Prof.  C.  Stark  Draper  of  MIT  was  re-elected  as 
president  of  IAA  for  the  coming  year. 
In  Missiles  and  Rockets  interview while  in Warsaw,  Rep.  Miller  said 
that  “the  U S .  would be happy  to  open up  negotiations with  Poland  on 
space projects.’’  A  possible means of  such cooperation, he  said, might 
be  incorporation  of  Polish  scientific experiments on  U.S.  satellites and 
sharing  of  data  they  would  acquire,  a  program  such  a s  U.S.  already 
conducts with  U.K.,  France,  and  Italy. 
(NASA  Hist.;  M&R,  9/14/&, 
16) 
*  NASA 
responsibility  for 
announced  it  had  assigned  management 
Zarge  solid  rocket  motor  development  to  its  Lewis  Research  Center. 

312 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 

The  260-in. solid  motor  development  was  formerly  a  program  of  the 
Department  of  Defense.  Under  its  FY  1965  budget,  NASA  assumed 
funding  responsibility  fo r   the  program;  it  would  begin  management 
responsibility  for  it  next  July.  Two  contracts  f a r   the  program,  with 
Aerojet  General  Corp.  and  Thiokol  Chemical  Corp.  and  initiated  by 
the  Air  Force  in  June  1963,  had  been  transferred  to  NASA.  Smaller, 
156-in. solid  motor  program  continued  under  Air  Force  development. 
(NASA  ReIease 64-231) 
September  10: Joint  Navigation  Satellite  Committee  ( JNSC)   established by 
agreement  between  Depts.  of  Treasury,  Defense,  Interior,  Commerce; 
FAA; and  NASA. 
JNSC  would  evaluate  requirements  for  a  nonmilitary 
satellite system for air-sea navigation, traffic control, emergency and res- 
cue operations, and related functions.  If  JNSC  found navsat system to be 
the  most  advantageous  means  of  providing  these  services,  it  would 
recommend  appropriate  program  to  develop  the  satellite  system. 
(Agreement ; NMI  2-3-39) 
Sen. Hubert  Humphrey  (D.-Minn.) 
introduced  in  the  Senate a  joint  reso- 
lution  providing  for  establishment  of  a  President’s  Advisory  Staff  on 
Scientific Information Management  (PASSIM) ,   to  “deal forthrightly  with 
the  problem  of  evaluating,  developing,  and  operating  properly  struc- 
information  management  and  decision-aiding  systems.  . . . 
tured 
Positioned  at the Presidential  level the  staff  of  PASSIM  will be permitted 
to  necessary  overview  of  information  management  practices  within 
Government,  and  will  be  better  situated  to  develop  and  organize  data 
and  decision-aiding  systems  on  a n   interdisciplinary  and  interagency, 
intergovernmental,  interindustry,  or  intersector  basis.  . . .”  (CR ,  
9/10/64?,  21281) 
*  Findings  of  survey  on  distribution  of  Federal  research  and  development 
funds,  conducted by  Subcommittee on  Science, Research,  and  Develop- 
ment  of  the  House Committee on  Science  and  Astronautics, were  made 
public by subcommittee chairman Rep. Emilio Q.  Daddario  (D.-Conn.)  . 
Said  to  be  first  definitive,  Government-wide  survey  of  this  subject, 
survey  showed that  during  FY  1963  California  received  38.4% of  the 
total  $12  billion  spent  by  the  Government on  R&D, New  York  received 
9.2%, and  Massachusetts, 4.6%.  Nine  states  accounted  for  70.9%  of 
the  total,  and  the  41  remaining  states  had  less  than  2.5% each.  Re- 
gionally,  Pacific  Coast  states  received  41.8% ; Middle  Atlantic  states, 
15.7%; Mountain  region,  8.7%;  South  Atlantic,  8.5%;  East  North 
Central, 6.6%; New  England, 6.1%; West  South  Central, 5.5%; West 
North  CentraI, 3.6% ; and  East  South  Central,  2.8%.  (Finney,  NYT ,  
9/11/64?) 
NASA  Administrator James E. Webb said  in address a t  Midwest Governors’ 
Conference, Minneapolis : 
In   many  ways,  it  seems  to  me  that  a t   least  a  pa r t   of  the  answer 
cc 
to  the  problems  of  the Midwest  can  be  found  in  further  development 
of  your  great  universities  and  finding  new  ways  through  which  they 
can  work  with  industry  in   ways  that  wilI  speed  up  the  process  of 
utilizing  the  technology  that  builds  rapidly  on  the  scientific  base 
of university research. 
The  success  of  the  national  space  program  to  date  has  stemmed 
bC 
directly  from  cooperation  between  industry,  government,  and  universi- 
ties.  We a r e  convinced that the maximum advance can best be achieved 

313 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 
by close cooperation between these segments of  our society.  We believe 
that  this  cooperation  is  most  fruitful  when  it  is  broadly  based  or 
regional.  . . .”  (Text) 
September  10: U.S.S.R.’s  Ivan Cheprov,  speaking a t  symposium on  interna- 
tional space law held  in Warsaw in conjunction with IAF  congress, criti- 
cized  the  planned  global  communications  satellite  network  being  or- 
ganized by  Communications Satellite Corp.  He  said  it  appeased “that 
depend  on  the whims  of  Comsat.  . . . The  right  to  participate  in  the  
the  very  use  of  new  communications channels by  other  nations  would 
management of  the  space  communications system is  denied  those  who 
a re  not willing to subsidize and to  perpetuate  a monopoly in the sphere 
of  producing  communications satellites and  running  space communica- 
tions  business.  . . . The  other  participants  merely  form  a  chorus  fo r  
approving  any  decisions dictated  by  Comsat.”  He  said  the  U.N.  and 
the  International  Telecommunication Union  could  organize  an  inter- 
national  communications system “on  the basis  of  equality.” 
(Reuters, 
Wash. Post, 9/11/tX) 
*  Rep.  Joseph  E.  Karth  (D.-Minn.)  , speaking  at  Midwest  Governors’ Con- 
ference  in  Minneapolis,  recommended  establishment  of  a  national 
technology  commission  to  award  Federal  research  projects  to  promote 
nationwide  economic  development.  Rep.  Karth  said  concentration  of 
Government  R&D  contracts  to  industries  and  universities  on  East  and 
West  coasts  showed  that  “the  broad  national  economic  development  is 
(Higgins, S t .  Louis  Post-Dispatch, 9/11/64) 
not  being  served.” 
Jet-propelled back-pack, part  of  a  Modular Maneuvering Unit  (MM U )   for 
Gemini  astronauts,  w a s   described  by  AFSC,  whose  Aero  Propulsion 
Laboratory  conceived  the  device.  The  unit  would  enable  astronauts 
to  fly  outside  their  Gemini  spacecraft  for  up  to  a n  hour  and  travel  as 
fa r   a s   1,OOO‘ft.  from  the  spacecraft,  although  the  first  flight  would  be 
made  with  astronaut  on  a  200-ft.  tether  to  send  the  astronaut  forward, 
backward, up,  and  down.  In  addition  to  the back-pack, MMU  consisted 
of  a  chest-pack, furnished by  NASA,  which the astronaut would  use when 
leaving and entering the spacecraft, before donning and after  discarding 
the  back-pack.  First  flight  test  of  the  unit  on  Gemini  mission  was 
(AFSC  Release  47-22-113;  MSC  Roundup, 
planned  fo r   mid-1965. 
1/16/64,5) 
*  Col.  John M.  Stapp  (USAF)  said  a t  IAF  congress in Warsaw  that  pigs  and 
bears  had  been  used  in  tests  to  determine best  position  for  astronauts 
to be in when  Apollo spacecraft returning from the moon kits the earth. 
Human  volunteers were used  in  146 test  runs,  but  anaesthetized bears 
and  pigs  were   used  in   tests which  were  considered  too  dangerous  for 
human  subjects.  Results:  safest position  would  be  landing  backwards 
a t  45”  angle to  the  line  of  impact. 
(UPI,  Chic. Tr ib . ,  9 / l l / a )  
*  Rep.  William  Miller  (R.-N.Y.)  , Republican Vice  Presidential  candidate, 
said  he  felt  recent  successful RANGER VII  lunar  flight  had  “no  political 
implications” and was  “completely  a  scientific effort,  outside the  realm 
of  politics.”  Upon  questioning,  he   said  the  success  showed  US. is 
ahead  of  U.S.S.R.  in  space technology and  added  US. had  never  been 
(Sci.  Serv.,  S.F. 
behind  U.S.S.R. 
in  accumulation  of  space  data. 
Chronicle, 9/10/64l) 

314 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4. 

September  11 : SYNCOM  III was  positioned  into  near-perfect  stationary  o rb i t  
over the  Pacific Ocean.  Final corrective maneuvers were completed, and  
the  communications  satellite  appeared  to   hang  motionless  in   space 
above  the  equator  and  International  Date  Line,  where  it  could 
transmit  radio  and  television  signals  between  Japan  and  California 
(AP,  Wash.  Post,  9/13/64) 
*  1964 would  be  a  year  of  development  test  on  individual  systems which 
provide capability to carry out Project Apollo lunar landing,  according 
to  Dr.  Joseph  Shea, Manager  of  Apollo  Spacecraft  Program  Office  at 
NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center.  He  cited  the  test  of  Apollo  launch 
escape and earth landing systems a t  White Sands Missile Range last May 
and  launch  of  Apollo  boilerplate  aboard  Saturn  I  (SA-6)  also  last 
May  a s  two  important development flight tests-milestones  marking  the 
gradual  transition  of  Project  Apollo  to  flight  test  phase.  “However, 
there  is  still much  ground  testing  to  be  done.” 
(NU  S&ID  Skywriter, 
9/11/64,4) 
Dr.  Harrison  Brown,  Cal Tech geochemist, said  in Science article  that  as 
many  as 2,000  earth-like  planets  capable  of  supporting  life may  exist 
in the nearest corner of  the Milky Way Galaxy.  Based on studies of  this 
of  10,000  cubic  parsecs-Dr.  Brown 
portion  of  the  universe-volume 
theorized:  “Virtually every main  sequence star should have a  planetary 
system  associated  with  it.”  He  calculated  there  were  approximately 
1,000 such  stars  in the  region  and  60,000 dark  bodies  of  Mars’  size o r  
bigger,  o r  an  average 60  “dark  companions”  to  each  of  the  stars.  He 
determined  a  typical  star  should  have  four  such  planets,  and  of  these 
“on  the average some two planets per visible s ta r  might provide suitable 
environment fo r  the  emergence of  life processes which  a re  based  upon 
chemical systems  similar  to  those  on  earth.”  Dr.  Brown’s  paper  pro- 
pounded  higher  probability  of  life  in  the   universe  than  previously 
theorized.  (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/11/64) 
*  At  15th  IAF  Congress  in  Warsaw,  delegates  from  six  nations  in  panel 
session  discussed  possibilities  of  building  a  Lunar  International 
Laboratory  (LIL)  .  It  was  agreed  such  a  laboratory  could  be  estab- 
lished  in   the  1975-85 time  period  if   U.S.  and  U.S.S.R  had  conducted 
(Wash.  Pos t ,  
thorough  preliminary  lunar  explorations  by  that  time. 
9/13/64;  M&R, 9/21]64,16) 
*  FAA Administrator  Najeeb  E.  Halaby  said  in  London  that  he  had  urged 
U.K.  and  France  to  conduct  sonic-boom studies  such  as those  the  FAA 
had  sponsored  in   Oklahoma  City  this  year.  He  said  the  six-month 
test program  had  shown that  a  serious problem existed in sonic booms. 
U.K.  and France were developing supersonic transport  “Concorde.” 
NYT ,  9/12/64,38) 
*  “Highlights  of  Recent  Space Research,”  by  Robert  Jastrow  and  A.G.W. 
Cameron  of  Goddard  Institute  for  Space  Studies,  NASA,  appeared  in 
Science.  The article presented highlights of  recent space research in  the 
physical  sciences : geodesy,  meteorology,  the  upper  atmosphere,  mag- 
netosphere,  magnetopause,  atmosphere  of  Venus,  exploration  of  the 
(Science,  9/11/64, 
moon,  solar  physics,  x-rays  and  gamma  rays. 
GSFC  Reprint) 
*  USAF  announced it had  retired  two  squadrons  of  Atlas  ICBM’s and  would 
inactivate more  Atlases  and  Titans.  Total  of  105  of  the  liquid-fueled 
m i s s i l e s   would  be  retired,  rendered  obsolete  by  more  modern,  better 

315 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4. 
(AP,  Wash.  Pos t ,  

protected missiles  such  as Minuteman  and  Polaris. 
9 / 1 2 / a )  
September  11  : Awards  a t   1964. Air  Force  Association  national  convention 
included H.  H.  Arnold Trophy to General Curtis E.  LeMay  (USAF CofS) , 
who was named  “Aerospace Man  of  the Year”  fo r  h i s  “enlightened  and 
aggressive leadership  in behalf  of  the status and welfare of  t h e  military 
man”;  David C.  Schilling Trophy to Major Sidney J. Kubesch, SAC B-58 
pilot,  for his record Tokyo-to-London flight in October 1963; and Theo- 
dore von Kiirmiin Trophy  to  Clarence L.  Johnson, Vice President  (Ad- 
vanced Development Projects)  of  Lockheed Aircraft Corp.,  for designing 
the YF-12A  (A-11)  aircraft. 
Among the citations of  honor:  Dr.  Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secre- 
tary  and  Acting  Chairman,  NASC,  was  cited  fo r   his  “broad  under- 
standing  and vigorous pursuit  of  aerospace goals.”  Maj.  Gen.  Samuel 
C.  Phillips  (USAF) , deputy director  of  Apollo program  in NASA  Hq.,  was 
cited  for  his  contributions  to  Minuteman  ICBM  program  in  previous 
assignment with  AFSC/BSD.  Chief  M/Sgt.  Frank  M.  Davis  (USAF)   and 
Capt.  Joseph  H.  Engle  (USAF)   were  named  outstanding  airman  and 
outstanding  officer  of  1964 by  AFA.  Davis was  cited  for  leadership  in  
desert survival training including program for Gemini astronauts, among 
other citations.  Engle was cited f o r  “his  active and aggressive”  role as 
an X-15 test pilot. 
( A F  Mag.,  10/64, 33;  Vmh. Post, 9/12/64) 
0  Soviet  astronomer  Nikolai  Barabashov  said  Kharkov  Univ.  observatory 
ultraviolet  photographs  might  show  surface  of  Venus.  Tass  quoted 
taken  before  dawn,  and  % e  believed  this  indicated  a  clearing  in  the 
Barabashov a s  saying a lar  e dark spot appeared on the  planet in pictures 
‘‘The  position  of  the  spot  on  the 
clouds  normally  covering  Venus. 
disk  warrants  the  assumption  that  we  have  here  a  glimpse  of  a  part 
of  the  surface of  Venus,  the closest neighbor  of  the  earth.”  He  added 
that  further  studies and  analyses would be made.  (AP, Houston Post, 
9/12/64.) 
September  12 :  At  closing plenary  session  of  15th  IAF  Congress in  Warsaw, 
Dr. William Pickering, Director of  Cal Tech‘s  Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
was named new IAF  president. 
At  the IAF   banquet,  Dr.  Leonid  I.  Sedov  (U.S.S.R.)  said:  “When we 
tell  people we  can  land  on  the Moon  by  1971, they  say  to   us  ‘why  so 
long, what  is holding  you  up?’ ”  Also  at the  banquet,  Dr.  Wallace 0. 
Fenn,  thirty-five  years  prominent  in  biological  sciences  and  Dept.  of 
Physiology of  Univ.  of  Rochester Medical School, and Secretary General 
of  International  Union  of  Physiological  Sciences  since  1959,  was 
awarded  the  IAA’S  Guggenheim  International  Astronautics  Award  fo r  
( V a h .  Pos t ,   9/13/64;  M&R, 9/21/64,  16;  IAA  Annual  Rpt. 
1964. 
1%3-64) 
Japanese  Ministry  of  Posts  and  Telecommunications  conducted  its 
first  TV test  with  SYNCOM  III  communications  satellite  from  ground 
station  at  Kashima, 
receiving  return  picture  with  satisfactory 
resolution.  Purpose of  test was to investigate parameters of  the station. 
Transmission tests to  Pt.  Mugu,  Calif.,  via  the comsat were planned  for 
early October.  (Av.  Wk., 9/21/64.,  30) 
September  13 :  U.S.S.R. 
launched  COSMOS  XLV  into orbit,  carrying  scientific 
equipment to continue the space research program begun in March 1962. 
Initial  parameters  reported  for  the  satellite’s  orbits:  apogee,  327  km. 

316 
ASTRONAUT IC 8   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  0 4 
(203.067  mi.)  ; perigee,  206  km. (127.926  mi.)  ; period,  89.69  min.; 
(AP, N Y T ,  9/14/64;  FonF, XXIV,  313) 
inclination,  64”54‘. 
September  13.- Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D.-Tex.)  w a s   quoted  in  World  Book 
Encylopedia  Science  Service  article  a s   saying  NASA’s Apollo  three- 
man spacecraft  could be modified  f o r  military  missions to:  orbit  earth 
fo r  two-to-three months with  more  than  2j/z  tons  of  weapons or  recon- 
naissance  equipment  by  1967;  move  from  equatorial  orbit  to  polar 
orbit,  surveying earth  every  24 hrs.;  survey  a  single  strategic  portion 
of  the  globe  from  a  stationary  24-hr.  o rb i t ;   carry  six  500-lb.  rocket 
packages,  adaptable  to  containing  nuclear  weapons.  “If  we  do  not 
succeed in  developing  . . .  [such]  military  potential  fo r  Apollo,  it will 
be because of  lack of  funding and  direction, and not because of  technical 
problems,”  he  said.  “. . . our  ability  to  defend ourselves in  the future 
(WBEsciServ, Houston 
and  thus our whole future is tied  up  in  space.” 
Chrun., 9/13/64) 
September  14 :   NASA  announced  the  next  U.S.  manned  space  flight,  Project 
Gemini GT-3,  had been  delayed into  1965 because of  time lost  as result 
of  lightning  damage to  GT-2  launch  vehicle and  removal of  the  rocket 
from  launch  pad  during  hurricanes  Cleo  and  Dora.  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  fo r   Manned  Space  Flight, 
said GT-2  unmanned  suborbital mission would be made  in  last quarter 
of  1964.  GT-3,  with  Astronauts  Virgil  I.  Grissom  and  John  Young 
as crew  members,  was  scheduled  for  first  quarter  of  1965. 
(NASA 
Release 64-233) 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  scientists  Saul  H.  Genatt  and  Edwin 
Reid said they had seen “red  and blue bands”  on the moon  last Aug.  25 
through  a  16-in. telescope  at  GSFC, Greenbelt,  Md.  Reid  first  sighted 
the bands, which appeared  at the crater Aristarchus,  then he and Genatt 
continued to  observe them  fo r  an  hour.  Two  bands were  red  and  one 
was  blue,  Genatt said;  the  two  red  bands  lay  across  the  southern  half 
of  the  crater  and the  blue band  lay  across the  northern  half  parallel  to 
the  other two.  The colors were  “very  strong”  at  1O:OO  p.m.,  when  the 
men began observations, then gradually faded  in  intensity until the blue 
band  disappeared  a t   10:30  and  the  red  bands,  shortly  after  11:OO. 
Similar sightings had been  reported by  Lowell Observatory scientists in 
October and  November  1963, and  prior  to  that  time,  by  Soviet  astron- 
(Hines, Wash.  Eve. Star, 9/15/64;  Perkinson, 
omer Nikolai Kozyrev. 
Balt. Sun, 9/14/64;  A&A   63) 
*  USAF  launched  Thor-Agena D  satellite  booster  with  unidentified  payload 
(M & R ,   9/21/641,  1 1 )  
from  Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif. 
*  President  Johnson  presented  the  Presidential  Medal  of  Freedom,  highest 
U.S.  civilian award, to  Clarence L.  Johnson, designer of  U-2  and A-11 
aircraft,  and  29  other  distinguished  Americans  in  White  House  cere- 
(AP,  NYT ,   9/15/64,  26) 
mony. 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  said  in  New  Orleans  that  progress 
in   development of  vehicles  fo r   manned  lunar  flight  was  “very  good.” 
He  predicted:  “If  things  work  well,  we’ll  be  there  by  late  1969.  This 
would  not be  possible if  it were not fo r  Michoud  [NASA  Michoud Opera- 
tions] .”  At present, he said, 11,505 persons were employed at Michoud 
Operations and $927 million worth  of  contracts had been  let there since 
it opened.  Mr. Webb was in  New Orleans to  meet with former members 
of NASA  New  Orleans Coordinating Committee, formed in  1961 to  assist 

317 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4  
(N.O.  Times-Picayune, 

NASA  in   establishing  Michoud  Operations. 
9/15/64) 
September  14:  Communications Satellite Corp. stock had more than doubled 
in price since being  issued  to  the public  in  June  and was continuing to  
rise.  Michael Getler, in analysis of  the  situation,  attributed rapid price 
rise  to  “basically  an  amazing scarcity  of  shares  fo r   daily  +rading-in 
combination  with  some  rather  short-sighted  short-selliig  of  the   issue 
based  in  large  measure  on  early,  perhaps  overly  pessimistic,  views  of 
its likely performance.  . . .”  He quoted security consultant George P. 
Edgar:  “ ‘The  instinct  of  the  public,  in   this  case,  has  operated  better 
than  that  of  Wall Street.  For  the most  part,  professionals have  missed 
ComSat  and  the  public  took  the  ball  and  ran.’  . . .”  (Getler, M&R, 
9/14/64,  18) 
Rep.  Melvin  Price  (D.-Ill.)  , speaking before  International Convention of 
Military  Electronics  in  Washington,  criticized  cancellation  of  Pluto 
nuclear-powered,  low-altitude missile project:  “.  . . Repeatedly,  we  in 
Congress  were  told  that  it  would  constitute  a n   outstanding  weapons 
system and  would  supplement our  ballistic missile  system,  but  that  the 
main  problem  in  the  Pluto  concept  was  proving  the  feasibility  of  the 
reactor  portion  of  the  system.  . . . 
“We  know  of  nothing  that  ha s   happened  i n   the  last  few  years  to 
change  or  eliminate  the  original  requirement  for  Pluto.  If  the   need 
for Pluto disappeared years ago, the project  should have 9 n  promptly 
stopped;  if   the need still exists, the project  should be  carried through  to 
completion.  . . .”  (Finney,  NYT ,   9/15/64,  10) 
*  President  Johnson  presented  1963  Harmon  International  Aviator’s  Tro- 
phies  to:  Astronaut  L.  Gordon  Cooper,  for  piloting  FAITH  7  Mercury 
spacecraft  to  22  orbits  and  a  safe  return;  Aviatrix  Betty  Miller,  for 
making  first  east-to-west  transpacific  solo  flight  by  a  woman,  flying 
Piper Apache from Oakland, Calif.,  to Sydney, Australia;  and to Lt.  Col. 
Fitzhugh L.  Fulton  (USAF)  , fo r  piloting B-58  Hustler bomber to  85,318- 
ft.  altitude  with  payload  of  more  than  11,000  Ibs. 
( r a s h .  Pos t ,  
9/15/64) 
*  Space-General Corp. was  building  new  five-ton rocket vehicle  fo r   USAF  to 
use  in  testing  recovery  and  re-entry  parachutes  at  El  Centro,  Calif., 
Missiles  and  Rockets  reported.  Vehicle,  called  “Hi-Dive,”  would  be 
dropped  from  aircraft  at 45,000 ft.,  slowed down by  stabilization para- 
chutes  for  firing  of  rockets  to  speed  it  up  to  mach  5 .   Test  parachute 
would deploy at 30,000 ft. 
(M& R ,  
Delivery was expected next spring. 
9/14/64,  11) 
*  25th  anniversary  of  Igor  Sikorsky’s  flight  in  the  first  practical  helicopter 
in the Western Hemisphere. 
(Sikorsky Aircraft  Div.  of  UA) 
Accidental explosion involving liquid hydrogen demolished small building 
a t   NASA Lewis  Research  Center’s  Plum  Brook  Facility;  there  were  no 
(Cleveland  Plain  Dealer,  9/15/64) 
injuries. 
September  25: President  Johnson,  in   impromptu  visit  to  John  F.  Kennedy 
Space Center, inspected Saturn  SA-7  space booster  being prepared  for 
launch  and  space  probes  being  checked  out  for  interplanetary  flights, 
received  briefing  by  Astronaut  Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  on  two-man 
Gemini spacecraft, and made two brief speeches to space program person- 
nel.  “As long a s  I am permitted to  lead this country I will never accept 
a place second to any other nation  in  this field,”  the President  said.  “I 

318 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
am  proud  of  the  long,  wandering  road  we  have  traveled  and  I  look 
forward  to  more  productive  days  ahead.  .  . We  cannot  be  second 
in space and first in  the world.”  The 90-min. visit was his first a t  C a p  
(Yerxa,  NYT ,   9/16/64,  1 1 )  
Kennedy  since  he  became  President. 
September 15: Rep.  Carl Albert  (D.-Okla.)  submitted in  Congressional Rec- 
urd  “An  Accounting of  Stewardship 1961-1WF  which  included sum- 
mary of U S .  accomplishments in space: 
“Since  1961 the  United  States  has  pressed  vigorously  forward  with 
a  10-year,  $35-billion  national  space  program  for  clear  leadership 
i n   space  exploration,  space  use, and  all  important  aspects  of  space 
science and technology. 
“Already  this  program  has  enabled  the  United  States  to  challenge 
the   early  Soviet  challenge  in  space  booster  power  and  to  effectively 
counter  the  Soviet  bid  for  recognition  as the  world‘s  leading  nation 
in  science and technology.  . . .” 
Among  the  achievements listed:  Saturn  I  rocket’s  successful flight; 
Saturn  IB   and  V  development; mastery  of  liquid  hydrogen  a s   rocket 
fuel;  six  manned  Mercury  space flights;  Gemini  spacecraft  and  Titaq 
I1 launch vehicle test-flight ; Apollo  spacecraft  development;  first  closed 
up observations of  another planet  (Venus)  with MARINER 11 and pictures 
of  the moon with  RANGER MI;  orbiting observatory program  initiation; 
Tiros weather satellite operation;  and ComSatCorp establishment. 
“In  short,  the  United  States has  matched  rapid  p2ogress in  manned 
space  flight  with  a  balanced  program  for  scientific  investigations  in 
space, practical  uses of  space, and  advanced  research and  technological 
pioneering to  assure that  the new  challenges of  space in  the next decade 
can  also  be  met,  and  U.S.  leadership  maintained.” 
(CR ,   9/15/64, 
21498) 
FAA Administrator Najeeb E.  Halaby said  in Washington news  conference 
that U.S.  manufacturers  had not  submitted any satisfactory  design pro- 
posals  for  the  small  transport  aircraft  designed  to  replace  the  DC-3, 
and  FAA would  not  award  the  planned  $100,000  design  development 
contracts.  A  Iikely  substitute  prospect  was  French-built  Nord  262. 
On  subject  of  supersonic  transport,  Halaby  said  U S .   was  proceeding 
“very  deliberately,” but  he  hoped  that  FAA would  be  able  to  select  the 
best design by Nov. 1. 
(AP, Wash. Pos t ,  9 / 1 6 / a )  
*  Soviet Premier  Nikita Khrushchev was  reported  to  have told  visiting  Jap- 
anese legislators that  U.S.S.R.  had  developed  a  new  “terrible  weapon” 
capable  of  destroying mankind.  Two  days  later,  however,  Mr.  Khru- 
shchev clarified *his remark,  denying he had  said that  the weapon  could 
destroy  mankind.  “I  said  that  scientists  had  shown  me  the  terrible 
weapon, which  shows what  mankind  can  do.  We  did not  say  anything 
about  unlimited  power.”  He  also  said  the  weapon  was  not  a  nuclear 
bomb.  He  blamed  the  earlier  report  on  having  been  “misinterpreted” 
( N Y T ,  
in  translation  from  Russian  to  Japanese  and  then  to  English. 
9/16/64;  Shabad, NYT ,  9/18/@) 
NASA Astronaut  Donn F.  Eisele dislocated his  left  shoulder during weight- 
less flight  training  at Wright-Patterson AFB  in KC-135  jet  aircraft,  and 
was  placed  on  limited  duty  for  about  three  weeks. 
(Houston  Post, 
9/17/69! 1 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUT IW ,   1 9 6 4 

319 
September  15: Two NASA-USAF  memoranda  of  understanding  providing  fo r  
exchange of  technical management and  scientific personnel became ef- 
fective.  Signed by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr.  Hugh L. Dryden and 
USAF  Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert,  the agreements were based  on  rec- 
ommendation by joint USAF/NASA  Military Requirements Review Group. 
Previously  no  NASA  personnel  had  been  assigned  to  USAF;  under  the 
new  terms,  NASA  would  assign  personnel  to  USAF  on  a  “when-needed” 
basis.  NASA  personnel would  be  GS-13’s  and  above,  and  USAF  officers 
assigned  to  NASA  would  be  majors  or  higher  unless  “the  position 
offers  exceptional  opportunity  to  the  Air  Force,”  according  to  agree- 
ment.  Under  basic  agreement  dating  from  1959,  about  100  USAF 
officers were  now  on  duty  with  NASA,  including  13 astronauts,  not  af- 
fected, by the agreement, and 40 recent ROTC  graduates.  About 40 more 
senior officers were scheduled fo r  assignment to NASA  in  the near future. 
(NASA Release 64-234;  DOD Release 671-64) 
*  Dr.  Floyd  L.  Thompson, Director  of  NASA  Langley Research Center,  said 
in  speech before  National  Space Club in  Washington that  the problem 
of  maintaining  radio  communications with  astronauts  during  atmos- 
pheric  re-entry  may  have  been  solved.  He  said  L ~ R C  research  in 
Project  Ram  (Radio  Attenuation  Measurement)  showed  that  ejection 
of  small amount  of  liquid  into  the  a i r   “provides a n  effective means  of 
dealing with  radio  blackout,”  the  liquid  apparently  preventing  buildup 
of  an  ionized sheath  that  cannot  be penetrated  by  radio  waves.  While 
it  may  not  be  the  “completely  workable  answer,  it  looks  like  a  very 
(NSC  Release) 
promising method of  dealing with the  problem.” 
0  General Dynamics/Astronautics  Corp.  was receiving two  contract  actions, 
DOD announced:  (1) a  $15,551,509  increment  to   existing  contract  fo r  
Atlas  space boosters;  and  ( 2 )   a  $1,100,000  increment  to  $94,4&8,904 
contract  for  work  on  design  and  development  of  a  standard  space 
launch vehicle.  ( DOD Release 666-64) 
*  Personal  and  scientific papers  of  Dr.  Robert  H.  Goddard  had  been  given 
to  Clark  Univ.  by  his widow,  Clark president  Howard  B.  Jefferson  an- 
nounced.  (AP, Houston Post, 9/16/64) 
September  16:  NASA  Flight  Research  Center  announced  award  of  $82,000 
contract  to  General Electric Go.  fo r  study of  flight instrumentation  fo r  
u se  .on  a  research ramjet to be carried on the X-15A-2  aircraft.  Major 
portion  of  the  instrumentation  would be  thrust/drag  measuring  device 
and   appropriate  sensors  to  measure  net  thrust  or  drag  transmitted  to  
the  X-15  aircraft  from  the  ramjet.  Design  of  this  device  also  would 
(mc 
provide  capability  to  jettison  the  ramjet  from  the  aircraft. 
Release 21-64) 
0  OGO  I  satellite  probably  would  obtain  5O%-and 
perhaps  as  much  as 
7 5 % - 0 f   planned  scientific data,  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center 
Director Dr.  Harry J. Goett  said a t  Washington news conference.  The 
satellite was  still not  locked  onto  the earth  but  was  spinning  at  rate  of 
5  rpm.  All  20  experiments had  been  turned  on  and  had  transmitted 
data, but only 17 were sending back useful information.  Although OGO  I 
was “crippled,”  Dr.  Goett said, “we have quite a vigorous cripple.”  For 
example,  the  satellite  was  transmitting  10  times  morc  data  bits  than 
ever  received from  the most  advanced Explorer-class scientific satellite. 
(NASA  Transcript) 

320 
ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
September 16: Rep.  Joseph  M.  Montoya  (D.-N.  Mex.)  said  Aug.  28  test  of 
Kiwi  P I A  nuclear  reactor  was  “the  culmination  of  seven  previous 
begun  in   1959.  The  Kiwi  project  has  had  as its  basic 
tests--first 
objective the  development of  basic graphite  nuclear  rocket technology. 
With the completion of  the Kiwi project, Los Alamos  [Scientific Labora- 
tory]  will  be  directing  its  future  nuclear  rocket  eBorts to  development 
projectname,Phoebus.  . . . 
of  advanced,  higher  power,  graphite  reactor  technology  under  the 
“In  a  great  sense  the  groundwork  fo r  nuclear  space propulsion  has 
been laid  through  the success of  the K iw i  project.  We a r e  on the brink 
of  witnessing a  great  event-the 
beginnings  of  the  nuclear  space  age. 
We  might  even  compare  the  success  of  the  Kiwi  project  in  the  space 
age with the combustible engine and  i t s  profound  effect on the motorcar 
industry. 
“It is altogether fitting that  this  revolutionary  accomplishment in  the 
space  age  took  place  in   Los  Alamos-the  Kitty  Hawk  of  the  nuclear 
And  the  birthplace  of  the  atomic.bomb.  . . .” 
(CR,  9/16/64, 
age. 
A4719-20) 
9  Dr.  Ernst  Stuhlinger,  Director  of  Research  Projects  Laboratory,  NASA 
Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded the Hermann Oberth Medal 
by  the West  German  Association  fo r   Rocket  Research Technique  and 
Space Flight  at  annual  meeting of  West  Berlin’s  Scientific Association 
fo r  Air and Space Flight.  (Reuters, Houston Post, 9/17/64) 
September 17: NASA’s EXPLORER  x v n ~  (IMP-I)  satellite, silent since last June 
because of  low  power levels,  resumed data transmission;  i t  had  reached 
a  more  favorable  sun  angle  and  was  able  to  operate  on  power  directly 
from  its  four  solar  panels.  Data  received  from  the  satellite,  based  on 
(NASA  Release 6 6 2 4 2  
preliminary  analysis, were described a s  “good.” 
Addendum) 
e  President  Johnson said in  Sacramento, Calif.,  speech: 
“To insure that no nation will be tempted to use the reaches of  space as 
a  platform  for  weapons  of  mass  destruction,  we  began  in  1962  and 
1963 to  develop systems capable of  destroying bomb  carrying  satellites. 
“We  now  have  developed  and  tested  two  systems with  the  ability  to 
intercept  and  destroy  armed  satellites circling  the  earth  in  space.  I 
can tell you today  that these systems a re  in pIace, they are operationally 
ready, and they a re  on alert to protect this Nation and the free world. 
‘‘Our  only  purpose  still is peace.  But  should another  nation  employ 
toreply.  . . .” 
such weapons  in  sp’ce, the  United  States  will  be  prepared  and  ready 
radar,  which  would  “literally  look  around  the  curve  of  the  earth  . . . 
The  President  also  disclosed  U.S.  had  produced  “over-the-horizon” 
[and]  give u s  earlier warning  than  ever before  of  any  hostile  launches 
against this country.” 
(Text) 
e  In  its first five years of  powered flight, the X-15  aircraft amassed total of  17 
hrs.,  52 min.,  7.1 sec. of  flight, of  which 4 hrs.,  8 min.,  16.8 sec.  was pow- 
ered flight.  The rocket-pwered research aircraft accrued 4 hrs., 13 min., 
11 sec.  of  flight at  speeds above 2,000 mph  (mach  3 ) ,  fa r  more  flight 
time a t  mach 3 than any other aircraft.  It achieved a total of  2 hrs.,  39 
rnin.,  47.4 sec.  a t  mach  4  (about  2,700 mph) , a  speed  impossible f o r  
any  other  manned  aircraft;  40  min.,  45.1  sec.  above  mach  5  (about 
3,400  mph) ; and  11.6  sec. above  mach  6  (about  4,000  mph ) .   The 

321 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 
X-15  was  built  fo r   top  speed  of  4,000  mph  and  altitude  capability  of 
250,000  ft.  Piloted  by  Joseph  A.  Walker  (NASA) ,   the X-15  set unoffi- 
cial world speed record at 4,104, mph and unofficial world altitude record 
of  354,200 ft.  It held current official FAI world altitude record of  314,750 
ft.,  set  July  17, 1962, with Maj.  Robert M.  Rushworth  (USAF)  a s  pilot. 
The No.  2  aircraft,  modified  to  provide  longer  engine burp  time,  was 
as high  as mach  8 
expected  to  attain  much  higher  speeds-possibly 
(more  than  5,000 m p h ) .   In  its  first  five  years  the  X-15  made  116 
flights.  It  was  expected that  the  three  aircraft  would  bring  the  total 
to twice that many within about five more years. 
(NASA Release 64c265) 
September 17:  NASA  selected Brown  and Root,  Inc.,  with Northrop Corp.  for 
negotiation of  contract  to provide  operational  and maintenance support 
services a t  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft Center.  Cost  for  first  year:  about 
$2.5  million.  Two-year extension options to  the  contract  were contem- 
plated,  and  total  cost  requirements  for  three  years  would  be  about  $10 
(NASA Release 64-235) 
million. 
e  Sen.  John  Tower  (R.-Tex.) 
said  in  Houston  he  favored  continuing  ex- 
ploration  of  space and  landing  a man  on the  moon  as soon as possible, 
thus  differing with  Republican Presidential  candidate  Sen.  Barry  Gold- 
water.  Sen.  Tower  said:  “I  believe,knowledge is  needed  for  the   sake 
of  knowledge.  . . . I would continue space expenditures at their present 
(Hous ton  Chron., 9/17/64) 
level.” 
e  Vladimir  Kotelnikov,  member  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  proposed 
one-year radio  search  of  the  universe  for  signals  from  extraterrestrial 
civilizations, according to Tass.  He proposed that  network  of  antennas 
be assigned to  “listen  to”  specific target  points  in  space.  The  antennas 
would  be  connected  to  a  central  multichannel  receiver.  U.S.  radio- 
astronomers  at  National  Radio  Astronomy  Observatory,  Green  Bank, 
W.  Va.,  had  conducted  similar  experiment  in  1960  (Project  Ozma) 
(Reuters,  Wash.  Post,  9/18/64) 
without  detecting  messages. 
Communications Satellite  Corp.  held  its  first  stockholders’  meeting  and 
elected its first Board of  Directors-six 
representing public shareholders 
(Finney,  NYT,  9/18/64,  45) 
and  six,  communications carriers. 
September  18:  Saturn  I  SA-7  two-stage  rocket  was  launched  from  Cape 
Kennedy,  placing  in  orbit  a  nearly37,OOO-lb.  payload  consisting  of 
boilerplate Apollo spacecraft command and service modules,  instrument 
unit, and spent S-IV  stage,  The orbit  (145-mi. apogee, 112-mi. perigee, 
88.6-min. period)  was  similar  to  the  interim  orbit  fo r  future three-man 
Apollo lunar  missions.  All  major  test  objectives were met:  final devel- 
opment  testing  of  Saturn  I  propulsion,  structural,  guidance  and  flight 
control systems; development testing  of  ApolIo  spacecraft structure and 
design  during  flight  through  the  atmosphere;  and  demonstration  of 
physical compatibility of  launch vehicle and spacecraft and test-jettison- 
ing  of  spacecraft  launch  escape  system.  Except  f o r  minor  changes  in 
Saturn  I  vehicle,  test  was  similar  to  Saturn  I  S A 4  (May  28,  1964). 
For  third  time,  elaborate  system  Df  eight  motion  picture  cameras  and 
one TV  camera  was  mounted  in  S-I  stage  to  record  such  flight  events 
as  S-IV  stage  separation  and  ignition  of  S-IV  engines.  The  eight 
motion  picture cameras  were  ejected  following S-I  powered  flight,  but 
Hurricane Gladys was  located about 300-mi. from  camera  impact point, 
SO the recovery ship had to leave the area the previous day and recovery 
(NASA  Release  64-228;  UPI,  NYT, 9/19/64,  11; 
was  not  attempted. 
Marshall Star, 9/23/64,1;  MSC Roundap, 9/30/64,1) 

one of the systems was operated by the Army and used Nike-Zeus missile; 
other system was operated by USAF and used Thor missile. 
In tests both 
systems had  “intercepted  satellites  in  space,  their  missiles  passing  so 
close  a s   to  be  within  the  destruction  radius  of  the  warheads.”  Army 
system became operational Aug.  1,1963, and USAF system May 29,1964. 
(DOD   Release  673-64) 
Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  NASC  Executive Secretary,  said  in  address  a t   Com- 
mercial  Museum,  Philadelphia:  “It  takes  a  certain  type  of  ability  to 
manufacture  plausible-sounding myths,  and  unfortunately  such  ability 
has  been  working  overtime  regarding  the  space  program.  . . .”  He 
examined  “several  of  these  confusing  rumors”:  n a t i o d   securdy- 
“The  critic  who  belittles  what  is  being  done  in  space  to  strengthen 
the  nation’s  defense  is  either  ignorant,  irresponsible,  or  both.  . . . 
Progress  of  a  substantial  nature  is  being  made  in  strengthening  our 
national  security  through  space  competence”;  crash  program-“Crash 
programs  have  unlimited  funds,  unlimited  overtime,  and  parallel  ap- 
proaches  to  the  end  objective.  None  of  these  aspects  applies  to  the 
space  program  or  even  to  the  lunar  project  . . .”;  either/or  phil- 
osophy-“Actually 
investments  stimulate  other  investments;  they  do 
not  deter  them.  . . . What  is  more,  decreased  spending  in  education, 
fo r   example,  does  not  automaticalty  increase  the  funds  available  for 
space  exploration,  or  vice  versa  . . .”; and  slowdown--“such  an  ap- 
proach  would be of  great benefit to  the Soviets a s  i t  would make it easier 
for  them  to  increase their  lead  in  some aspects of  space  and  attain  the 
lead  in  others.  Do  not  think  for  a  moment  that  they  are  not  trying 
ha rd   to  do  just  that.  So  fa r   this  year,  the  USSR has  put  more  than 
twice  as many  spacecraft  into  orbit  as  they  had  put  into  orbit  by  this 
time  last  year.  In   a  sense,  they  a re   doubling  their  space  effort.  . . . 
To slow down  a  carefully  planned project,  such as Apollo,  would  be  to 
increase its cost and  reduce its likelihood of  timely success.  . . . Those 
who  propose  the  stretchout  or  slowdown  in  the  space  program  a re   in 
fact  arguing fo r  inefficiency and higher  costs as well  as delayed accom- 
plishments.”  (Text) 
’ Appointment of  Charles W. Harper,  authority  on  simulation  and  aircraft 
flight  research  at  NASA  Ames  Research  Center,  as  Director  of  Aero- 
nautical  Research,  NASA  Hq.  Office  of  Advanced  Research  and  Tech- 
nology, was announced by Dr.  Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA  Associate 
Administrator  for Advanced Research and Technology.  (NASA Release 
64-239) 
’ Dr.  Alan T.  Waterman, physicist and  former  director  of  National  Science 
Foundation, was sworn in as consultant to NASA  Administrator  James E. 
Webb.  He is also a member of  the NASA  Historical Advisory Committee. 
(NASA Release 64-24) 
’ IU.SA  MsC’S  Director, Dr.  Robert R. Gilruth, announced Astronaut M.  Scott 
Carpenter  (Lt.  Cdr.,  USN) would  serve as his  executive  assistant.  Dr. 
Gilruth called this a  “convalescent assignment,”  because Astronaut  Car- 
penter still had minor injuries from a motorbike accident several months 
ago.  Also  announced  was selection of  Carpenter  for  promotion  from 
Lt.  Cdr.  to Com 
(Wash. Eve.  Star, 9/18/64) 
r. 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 

323 

September  19:   Static  test-firing  of  NASA-USAF  120-in.-diameter  solid-fueled 
rocket motor  was  successful at Aerojet-General facility  south  of  Miami, 
Fla.  The motor  produced  about  600,000  lbs.  of  thrust,  met  its major 
objective of  proving  the design concepts, materials, and  processes to  be 
Initiated  by  WAF   in  1963, 
used  in  building  260-in.-diameter  motor. 
program  was  being  directed  by  joint  NASA-USAF 
team  under  existing 
contracts  until  the  end  of  this  fiscal  year,  with  project  management 
responsibility  assigned  to  NASA  Lewis Research  Center.  (LRC Release 
68-87;  Lewis  News,  10/9/@,  1) 
September  19-20:  About 5,000 persons attended Third Annual Open House 
at  NASA  Wallops  Station,  which  featured  the  base  and  launch  sites  as 
well  as  special  exhibits  of  rocket  models,  satellite  models,  and  other 
(NASA   Announcement  6 6 2 0 6 ;   Wallops  Release 
space  hardware. 
64-66) 
September 20:  Editorial in  Washington Sunday Star: 
“There  can be little doubt that President  Johnson has been  politically 
motivated  in  revealing  that  the  United  States  today  has  in  operation 
weapons  systems  capabIe  of  intercepting  and  destroying  armed  satel- 
lites  orbiting  the  earth  a t   very  high  altitudes.  . . . 
“In  effect, with the support of  guarded  detail  from  Defense Secretary 
way  that  tends  to  make  the Republican  candidate  look  a  bit  silly.  . . . 
McNamara, Mr.  Johnson has  lifted the lid  on classified information  in a 
“Our  presidential campaigns result in too much talk  about things  that 
might  better  be  kept  under  wraps  in  an  age  as  deadly  a s   the  present. 
“Still,  . . . it  is  reassuring  to  be  told  that  our  country  is  equipped 
with  devices  designed to  counter  the  most  advanced  Soviet  weaponry, 
including  rockets  which Nikita  Khrushchev claims  can  ‘hit  a  fly  in  the 
sky.’ 
Judging  from  the  President’s  remarks,  we  appear  to  be  at  least 
as  good  as  the  Russians,  if   not  better,  a t   that  Buck  Rogers’  game.” 
(Wash.  Sun.  Star,  9/20/64+) 
September  21:  USAF XB-70A  aircraft  took  off  from  Palmdale, Calif.,  on  its 
first flight in extensive test program.  The aircraft flew  about one hour, 
attaining 16,000-ft. altitude and subsonic speed, then  landed at Edwards 
AFB,  Calif.  Despite  trouble  retracting  the  landing  gear,  loss  of  one 
engine’s power, and  blowout of  two  tires  on  left main  landing  gear,  test 
was considered a “highly productive’’ first flight. 
( DOD Release 676-64; 
Witkin,  N Y T ,   9/22/M,  1) 
’ At White House news  conference,  President  Johnson  announced his  three 
appointees to  the board of  Communications Satellite Corp. 
“I  have  appointed  Mr.  Frederick  Donner,  who  is  chairman  of  the 
board  of  General Motors,  and  has  been  since  1958.  . . . 
“I  have bfr. George Meany, the president  of  the A.F.L.-C.I.O. 
I w i l l  
have Mr.  Clark Kerr,  president  of  the University of  California.  Those 
a re  the three Presidential appointees. 
“This  has  required  a  good  deal  of  study  and  discussion,  and  I  feel 
very  pleased  that  these men  have  indicated  their  willingness to  make  a 
sacrifice  to  lend  their  peculiar  and  unusual  talents  to  the   direction  of 
this  great  adventure  between  government and  free enterprise. 
“Needless to  say,  all of  them have a  good many  duties at the  present 
time,  but  because  I pointed out  the need  fo r   their  experience and  their 
(Transcript,  N Y T ,  
broad  knowledge,  they  accepted  membership.” 
9/22/64) 

324 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
September 21 : NASA Administrator  James E.  Webb said  in Aviation Week  & 
Space  Technology  that  U S .   space program  had  “entered  a  whole  new 
period,”  in  which US. was  faced with  exploring  all the practical  appli- 
cations  of  knowledge suddenly  gained  through  the  space  effort.  “My 
important tools yet  developed to  create stability  in  the world.  . . .  I n  
view  is  to  create  stability,  and  the  satellite  may  be  one  of  the  most 
this  effort, modern  technology  is  going  to  play  a  very  important  role. 
The  balance  of  technological power  may  be  more  important  than  any 
other  form of power balance  in the next decades ahead.”  He said NASA 
was  developing  a  broad  technological  capability  to  conduct  missions 
with  vast  international  application.  “This  will  enable  our  nation  to 
say  to  other  nations  of  the world,  ‘Join  with  us  and  we   w i l l   undertake 
these missions together.’  ” 
“Overt  expression”  of  this  new  focus  of  national  space  program 
planning would be expressed in forecast report  NASA  was completing fo r  
President  Johnson,  the  article  continued.  Report  would  emphasize 
broad  range  of  general  space  capabilities  available  in  the  future  and 
describe specific possible post-Apollo m i s s ion s - such   as  manned  lunar 
base, earth-orbiting space stations, Mars probes-stressing  that  selection 
of  such a  goal should be  a national decision.  ( A v .  Wk., 9/21/64,  22) 
*  Editorial in  Aviation V e e k  by Robert Hotz: 
“he hardware  for  the  second  generation  of  US. space  systems  is 
6 6  
already  in  the  flight test  stage  and  its feasibility  already  demonstrated. 
This  is  why  it  is  necessary  now  to  organize  a  new  type  of  national 
space program based not on the simple concept of  overtaking the Soviets 
but on utilizing the new  riches of  space technology to serve domestic and 
international goals of  U.S.  policy.  . . . 
“A  whole  new  spectrum  of  power  has  been  created,  ranging  from 
the  three  tons  of  thrust  per  second  of  the  huge  liquid-fueled boosters 
through electric, nuclear  and ionic power down  to systems whose power 
can be calibrated in micromouse burps and can function  fo r  years with- 
out  servicing.  Harnessing  these  new  energy  sources  for  earth  as  well 
a s   space  applications  may  be  one  of  the  most  technically  significant 
developments of  the next decade. 
NASA  is  picking  an  excellent  time,  aside  from  the  election  implica- 
( 6  
tions,  to  inventoiy  the  achievements of  space  technology  and  project 
them  into  a  future  format  that  will  give the  national  space program  a 
focus and purpose beyond  the Apollo lunar  landings.  For  the develop- 
ment of  space technology will continue to  open new  vistas for man  and 
his  universe that  cannot  yet  be  perceived  from  this  point  in  time  with 
( A v .  Wk . ,  
our  vision  still clouded by  the  earth‘s  atmospheric sheath.” 
9/21/64,17;  CR ,  9/23/64,  A4823) 
said on  the  floor of  the House:  “It was just  a 
Rep.  Hale Boggs  (D.-La.) 
short 3 years ago when Mayor Victor H.  Schiro  [of  New Orleans] made 
the first announcement about the reactivation of  the Michoud plant  [for 
production  of  NASA  space  boosters].  At  that  time  few  of  us  realized 
that  this  program  would  constitute  the  single most  important  industry 
that  has  come  to  south  Louisiana  since  we  were  admitted  into  the 
Union in 1812.  . . .”  Rep. Boggs had served on the NASA  New Orleans 
Coordinating Committee, formed in 1961 to help NASA establish Michoud 
operations.  (CR, 9/21/64,  A 4 7 a )  

325 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 
September 21:  Astronaut  L.  Gordon Cooper  (Maj.,  USAF)  was presented  the 
Gen.  Thomas  D.  White  Space  Trophy  by  Air  Force  Secretary  Eugene 
M.  Zuckert,  a t   the National  Geographic Society, Washington.  Award 
cited Major Cooper  for   “the  most  outstanding  contribution  to  the  Na- 
tion’s progress in  aerospace during 1963,” orbiting the earth 22 times in 
(Wa sh .  Pos t ,  9/22/64b 
Mercury  spacecraft  in May  1963. 
0  Information  about  the  Van  Allen  radiation  belts,  obtained  from  USAF 
satellite  about a  year  ago,  was  reported by  Dr.  Ludwig Katz,  of  USAF’S 
Space Physics Laboratory: 
‘’These low  energy particles are  not  a serious hazard to  men  in space. 
Over  a  period  of  time,  however,  they  could  affect  the  performance  of 
electronic equipment carried aboard a satellite. 
“The  instruments  carried  aboard  the  satellite  were  of  six  types:  a 
proton  detector, plasma  probe,  electron  detector, electrostatic analyzer, 
geiger counter and magnetometer.  The data were gathered  from more 
(Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/@) 
than 100 orbits.” 
0  Editorial  in  Washington  Evening  Star  said  postponement  of  manned 
Gemini  space  flight into  1965  came  as  “scant  surprise,”  since “as  long 
ago  as  last  Christmastime  a  ‘space forecast’ story  in   the  Star made  the 
prediction  that  this would  be  the  case,  and  for  several months  the   ‘last 
quarter of  1964’ target date has been hardly more than a tongue-in-cheek 
fiction a t  NASA  Headquarters.  . . . 
“Of  course, i t   is  fa r  better  to  delay  the flights than  to  run  the risk  of 
tragic  failure  due to  haste  or  carelessness.  Wouldn’t  i t  make  sense to 
forget  about  phony  schedules-and  phony  excuses  for   not  keeping 
them-and 
just carry on with  the space program  as  fast  and effectively 
(Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/64) 
as  possible?” 
September 22 :  Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft with attached  burned-out  Saturn 
S-IV  stage,  launched  into  intentionally  low  orbit  Sept.  18  by  Saturn 
I  SA-7,  re-entered  earth‘s  atmosphere  over  the  Indian  Ocean.  The 
orbiting  package  was  in  its 59th orbit  and  had  been  in  flight  for   three 
days, 19 hrs.,  37 min. 
(NASA  Release 64-250) 
NASA  announced  the details of  U.S.  geodetic satellite program,  designed  to 
provide  more  precise  mapping  of  the  earth’s  surface  and  its  gravita- 
tional  field.  Program  was  based  on  recommendation  of  NASA-DOD- 
Dept.  of  Commerce Geodetic Satellite Policy  Board  and  involved  three 
types  of  satellites:  Beacon  Explorer,  equipped  with  reflectors to  reflect 
laser beams  from earth  and with  Doppler  transmitter to  measure  effect 
of  irregularities  in  earth’s  gravitational  field;  Geodetic  Explorer 
(instrumented  to conduct more experiments  than  the Beacon Explorer) , 
containing flashing lights, variety  of  electronic beacons,  optical  reflec- 
tors,  and when  possible radar  reflectors;  and  passive  geodetic staellite, 
sunlight-reflecting  100-ft.-diameter Echo-type  sphere. 
(NASA  Release 
6 6 2 3 6 )  
Engine for  Apollo service module fired for one second in  programed  10-sec. 
test.  Automatic  cutoff  device shut  down  the  engine  because  of  excess 
vibration  due to  unstable combustion.  NASA  spokesman  called  the  test 
a  “minimal  successYy’ said  results were  “not  entirely  unexpected.  The 
engine  had  been  fired  three  times  previously  in  acceptance  tests,  but 
( AP,  L.A.  Times, 
it wasn’t  fired in as  complete a form as  i t  was today.” 
9/23/64) 

326 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  0 4 

September  22:  NASA  and  Univ.  of  Texas  signed  contract  fo r   %-in.  optical 
telescope  to   observe  the  moon  and  planets.  NASA  would  provide  $2.1 
million to build the telescope, and the University would provide $759,000 
observatory building and $1.2-million associated shop buildings.  Schedg 
uled  to   be  operational  in  1968, the  telescope would  be  fifth  largest  in 
(M&R ,  9 / 2 8 / a ,   13 )  
the world. 
*  Team of  geologists and astronomers a t  Ca l  Tech made  significant tempera- 
ture measurements  of  planet  Jupiter,  using  heat-sensitive detector  fitted 
to  Mt.  Palomar  200-in.  telescope and  discovered  that:  apparent  tem- 
perature  of  Jupiter’s  atmosphere  increases  more  than  100’  in  areas 
darkened  by  shadows of  its moons  (average temperature of  atmosphere 
is  -230°F 
in  sunlight  but  only  7117OF   in  shadows,  a s  penetrations 
go deeper,  atmospheric  temperature rises;  and the moon  Callisto seems 
to   radiate  about  twice  as much  heat  as  might  be  expected.  (Korman, 
CTPS, Chic. Trib., 9/23/64) 
Electron microscope with  new  television attachment,  10 times more power- 
fu l  than any  previous  microscope, was  demonstrated  by  RCA.  The sys- 
(AP,  NYT,  9/23/64,  41)  
tem magnified  objects by  two million times. 
September  23:  NASA  announced  SYNCOM  111  synchronous-orbit  communica- 
tions  satellite was  now  in  such  a  precise  orbit  that  its  rotational  speed 
was only five seconds slower than  that of  the earth.  Positioned over the 
equator a t  22,300-mi. altitude,  SYNCOM  ID  drifted  less  than  1/1OOth  of 
a  degree  per  day.  Orbital  parameters:  22,311-mi.  apogee,  22,164-mi. 
perigee,  1,436.158-min.  period,  and  .095”  to  the  equator.  Same  day, 
spokesman  for  Communications  Satellite  Corp.  announced  SYNCOM  III 
was successfully relaying test pictures across the Pacific and their quality 
was  “much  better  than  expected.”  The  experimental  transmissions 
between  Kashima,  Japan,  and  Pt.  Mugu,  Calif.,  had  begun  Sept.  21. 
(NASA  Release 64-241;  Finney, NYT,  9/24/64,  13) 
USAF  launched  Atlas-Agena D  satellite booster  from Vandenberg  AFB  with 
( M & R ,   9 /28 /64 ,9)  
an  undisclosed payload. 
NIMBUS  I experimental  weather  satellite ceased  operating,  after  producing 
more  than  27,000  remarkably  sharp  weather  photographs.  As  result 
of several days’ buildup of  friction  in  motor  that turned  satellite’s  solar 
paddles, the solar paddles locked, preventing  them from  rotating toward 
sun.  Lacking  adequate solar power  t,o recharge  batteries,  the  sateIlite 
control  system,  three  camera  systems,  and  associated electronic  equip- 
ment could no longer function.  NIMBUS  I  surpassed  all expectations both 
a s  a  research  spacecraft  and  as   a  storm-spotter.  During  i ts   380-orbit 
lifetime i t   provided  the  first  satellite  pictures  of  nighttime  cloud-cover 
and photographed  Hurricanes Dora, Ethel, and Florence, Typhoons Ruby 
(NASA  Release 64-243) 
and Sally. 
Attempted  flight  sf  X-15  No.  3,  with  Capt.  Joseph  H.  EngIe  (USAF)   a s  
pilot,  was  aborted  10 min.  before  scheduled  launch  from  EL52 mother 
(NASA X-15  Proj.  Off .) 
craft  because of  problems with c a b i i  pressure. 
*  Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight, said i n  speech before Professional  Group on Antennas and Prop- 
agation  of  the  IEEE,  Kennedy  Airport  International  Hotel:  “In  the 
development  of  national  [space]  capability,  NASA  is  carrying  forward 
the work  begun  a  half-century ago  by  its  predecessor  agency,  the  Na- 
tional  Advisory  Committee for Aeronautics.  Like  the  NACA,  the  space 
agency  is  concentrating  its efforts  on  research  and  development.  The 

also  carries  out  operations  in 
ds  of  operation  as  well  a s   the 

strate the  capability  of  transatlantic  flight.  . . .” 
(Text) 
September 23:  Committee for the Preservation  of  Cambridge Industry, made 
up  of  representatives from  each  of  the  94  industrial  firms  that  would 
be  disclocated  by  location  of  NASA  Electronics  Research  Center  on 
Kendall Square  site,  announced  it would  wage  a  legal battle  to  prevent 
NASA’s obtaining  the  site.  Committee  said  implementation  of  NASA’s 
plan  would  “disrupt  the  jobs  of  4,000  employees  within  this  area,” 
contended it would  cost  some of  the  industries $200,000 to  $400,000 to 
relocate although maximum renewal funds available for business reloca- 
tion  were  only  $25,000. 
(Lewis,  Boston  Globe,  9/23/64) 
e  Five surviving men  among the eight Army Air Service pilots who took part 
in  the  first  flight around  the  world  Po  years  ago were honored  by  Ex- 
plorers  Club  a t  dinner  in  Beverly  Hills,  Calif.  A  week  later,  the  men 
were  honored in  ceremonies at AFSC  Hq.,  which also honored Donald W. 
Douglas,  Sr.,  designer  and  builder  of  the  four  Douglas World  Cruiser 
( AP,  Balt.  Sun,  9/21/64) 
open-cockpit  biplanes. 
September  24: NASA’s astronomy program  was topic  of  background  briefing 
for  the  press  at  NASA  Hq.,  by  astronomy  program  chief  Dr.  Nancy 
Roman.  Dr.  Roman  disclosed  at  the  briefing  that  NASA  was  studying 
concept  of  a  manned  orbiting  telscope.  The  100-in.  telescope would 
operate in  space automatically, but man would have to make final adjust- 
ments  in  its  focus,  change  auxiliary  instruments  from  time  to  time  for 
varying  the  experiments, collect  photographic  film,  and  make  repairs. 
NASA  had  invited  members  of  the  astronomical  community  to  propose 
studies basic  to  the Mot  concept.  Several NASA  centers and Hq.  offices 
were  supporting  related  engineering  studies.  Dr.  Roman  said  design 
studies  fo r   a  Radio  Astronomy  Observatory  were  “pretty  well  com- 
pleted.”  Not  yet  an  approved  program,  Rao  would  have  four  750-ft. 
antennas  extended  in  two  V’s  to  receive  radio  emissions  from  space. 
(NASA  Transcript;  ATPH)  
U.S.S.R.  announced  routine  launching  of  COSMOS  XLVI  into  earth  orbit: 
apogee,  271  krn.  (168 mi.)  ; perigee, 215  km. (134 mi.)  ; period,  89.2 
min.;  inclination  to  the  equator,  51.3”.  (Tass,  Krasnuya   Zvezda, 
9/26/64,  1,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 

328 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

September  24:  DOD announced  $2,6441,430  contract  to  Akwa-Downey Con- 
struction Co.  for construction of  NASA  test buildings at John F.  Kennedy 
Space Center, NASA, Merritt IsIand Launch Area  ( MILA).  Contract was 
(DOD Release  688-64) 
awarded  by  Army  Corps  of  Engineers. 
USAF Minuteman  I1  “%ew according  to  the  book”  ,in  its  first  flight-test, 
USAF announced.  The  ICBM  was  launched  from  silo  a t  Cape Kennedy 
(AP,  Balt.  Sun, 9/25/64) 
to  target  site  about  5,000  mi.  downrange. 
President  Johnson  awarded  Robert  J.  Collier  Trophy,  US. aviation’s 
highest honor, to Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. designer 
and developer of  A-11  aircraft. 
( NAA Release) 
Redeye  guided  antiaircraft  missile  was  publicly  tested  in  series  of  four 
launches against drone craft, and performance was declared “technically 
successful.”  Smallest  known  guided  m i s s i l ew e i g h i n g   only  28  lbs. 
including bazooka-like hand-held launcher-Redeye  was being developed 
jointly  by  U S .   Army  and  USMC. 
(Witkin,  N Y T ,   9/25/64) 
September  25:  DOD announced  Chaney  and  James  Construction  Co.,  Inc., 
was  being  awarded  $3,884,955  contract  fo r   test  facilities  a t   NASA 
Manned  Spacecraft  Center.  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  awarded  the 
( DOD  Release  695-64) 
NASA-funded  contract. 
*  James  J.  Kramer,  research  scientist  at  NASA  Lewis  Research  Center,  was 
named Project Manager of  large  (260-in. 1 solid-propellant rocket motor 
(Lewis News, 9/25/64,  1) 
demonstration  project  a t  LRC. 
DOD announced Aerojet-General Corp. was being obligated $1,109,000 incre- 
ment to previously awarded contract for development and fabrication  of 
Titan  I1 propulsion  system for Project  Gemini.  AFSC/SSD awarded the 
( DOD Release  695-64) 
cost-plus-incentive-fee contract. 
*  US. Army awarded one of  its largest single contracts, worth nearly  a third 
of  a  billion  dollars,  to  Western Electric Co.  for  continued development 
and  testing  of  Nike-X missile  defense system.  The  cost-plus-incentive- 
f e e   contract  for  $309,664,200  was  to  cover  work  on  the  system  from 
Oct.  1, 1964,  to  Sept.  30,  1965. 
(DOD Release  694-64) 
September  26:  NASA  launched  second modified  Arcas  sounding  rocket  with 
white rat  as part of  the payload, the rocket carrying the  rodent to  21.4- 
mi.  altitude  where  payload  separated  from  booster  and  parachuted  to 
ocean  surface.  PayIoad  was  recovered  by  helicopter  a  few  minutes 
later about 27.8  mi.  from Wallops Island, Va.,  launch  site.  Total  flight 
time was 24.5 min.  Purpose of  this launch and the previous one Sept. 3 
was  to  demonstrate  feasibility  of  using  Arcas  to  familiarize  scientists 
with technological problems associated with space flight studies on  small 
animals. 
(Wallops  Release  64-67) 
NASA  Aerobee  150A  sounding  rocket  with  University  of  Pittsburgh 
and  NASA  Goddard  Space  Night  Center  instrumented  payload  was 
launched  from Wallops  Island,  Va.,  to  74.5-mi.  altitude.  Primary  ob- 
jective of  flight was  to obtain propulsion and environmental data  on the 
Aerobee  150A.  New  severance techniques also were employed.  Addi- 
tional experiments included low-energy gamma-ray measurements, study 
of  yellow  radiation  from  sodium vapor,  Dovap  transmitter  studies  for 
tracking  rockets,  nuclear  emulsions f o r  cosmic-ray studies,  and  attitude 
control  system  employing  new  techniques  for  pointing.  Rocket  per- 
formance  was  good,  and  excellent  propulsion  and  environmental  data 
were  obtained.  (NASA Rpt.  SRL) 

Sept 

(NASA  Release  64-238) 
ricated  and  assembled. 
*  MSC Gemini  Project  Director  Charles  Mathews,  asked  about  prospects  of 
lengthening  first  manned  Gemini  flight,  was  reported  a s   saying:  “We 
are   re-examining  the  possibility  of  a  day-long  mission  but  the  prob- 
ability  is  that  it  will  stay  three  orbits  [4;1/2 hours]  a s  planned.  . . .” 
Question  was  prompted  by  Astronaut Virgil  I.  Grissom’s  having  stated 
publicly  a  few  days  ago  that  he  wouId  Iike  to   have  the  flight  pIan  ex- 
tended  up  to  as many  a s  18 orbits  and  was  trying  to  persuade  project 
(AP,  Hartford  Courant,  9/27/64) 
officials  to  lengthen  it. 
0  U.K.  supersonic  TSR--P  aircraft was  test-flown for  the  first  time  in  14-min. 
flight  from  Boscombe  Down,  the  reconnaissance-bomber  performing 
satisfactorily.  Aviation  Minister  Julian  Amery  said  the  TSR-2,  to  be 
operational  in  about  three  years,  would  be  “a  formidable addition  to 
(Feron, NYT ,  9/28/64) 
Britain’s  power.” 
September  28:  X-15  No.  3  flown  by  Capt.  Joseph  H.  Engle  (USAF) 
to 
97,000-ft.  altitude  and  3,820-mph  speed  (mach  5.69)  from  Edwards 
AFB, Calif.  During  the  flight,  a  new  protective  coating  on  underside 
of  plane’s  tail  was  tested  for  aerodynamic  heating,  for  possible future 
(NASA X-15  Proj.  Off.;  AP,  Wash .  Post, 
application  in  X-15  No.  2. 
9/29/64;  M&R ,   10/5/64,11) 
0  NASA  instituted  revised  patent  waivers  and  related  procurement  regula- 
tions  in  accordance  with  the  late  President  Kennedy’s  directive  for  a 
more  uniform  patent  policy  among  Federal  agencies.  New  regula- 
tions  gave  contractors  greater  chance  to   obtain  patent  rights  to   their 
commercially  applicable  inventions  made  in  the  course  of  work  on 
Government contracts.  Announced  Aug.  21,  the  new  regulations  were 
expected  to  accelerate contractors’  efforts  to  identify  and  report  tech- 
nological  advances,  thus  enhancing  technology  utilization  from  the 
space program. 
( N I S A   Release  64-209;  Av.  Wk . ,  10/5/64,  26) 
USAF  launched  four-stage  Athena  re-entry  test  rocket  from  Green  River, 
Utah,  for a partially successful flight.  Flight  was  aborted automatically 
(M& R ,  
before  third-stage ignition  because of  an  inverter malfunction. 
10/5/64, 11) 
DOD announced  $1,245,601  contract  award to B.  B.  McCormick  and  Sons, 
Inc.,  for  road  work  a t  Merritt  Island  Launch  Area,  John  F.  Kennedy 
Space Center, NASA.  The NASA-funded  contract  was  awarded  by  Army 
Corps of Engineers.  (DOD Release 699-64) 
Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D.-Wis.) 
spoke  on  the  Senate  floor  on  general 
aviation  (“all  aviation  activity  except  the  airlines  and  the  military”) : 
Three  observations  about  general  aviation  are   worth  sharing. 
66 
GeneraI  aviation  has  greatly  expanded  our  horizons  for   recrea- 
u 
government 
atively  small  but  potent 
so  for many  more. 
of  people. 
the  pace  of  business  and 
a s   sharply  i 
political  competition.  By  reducing  the  unproductive  travel  time  of 
costly  personnel,  the   airplane,  particularly  in   general  aviation,  has 
acted  as a  labor  creator  rather  than  a s   a  labor  saver.  By making  it 
7M-598 0-65-22 

330 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 

possible to  do more  things,  the  airplane has  forced  people  to  do  more 
things  to  keep  ahead  of  the  competition. 
“General  aviation  in  the  rest  of  the  world  suffers under  an  oppres- 
sive  load  of  regulatory  restriction  to  so  great  an  extent  that  it  barely 
exists.  We  must  guard  against  burdening  U S .   general  aviation  with 
(CR, 9/28/64,  2224143 )  
similar controls producing the same result.” 
September 28: U.S.S.R.  was believed to be using over-the-horizon radar simi- 
la r   to  type  that  U S .   was  installing  (Sept.  17 ) .   Av ia t ion   Week  & 
Space  Technology  reported  U.S.S.R.  claimed  that  the  basic  technique 
in  over-the-horizon  radar-back-scattering 
of  high-frequency  radio 
waves f rom  the ionosphere-was 
first discovered by Soviet Prof. Nikolai 
Kabanov and Soviets termed it “Kabanov  Effect.” 
(A u .  Wk . ,  9/28/64, 
19)  
0  USN  launched  its  first  submarine equipped  with  Polaris  A-3  missiles,  the 
U.S.S.  Daniel Webs ter ,  from Charleston, S.C.  (Sehlstedt, NYT ,  9/29/64) 
0  Office of  Naval Research was studying submarine-based antisatellite missile 
system,  according  to  Avicction  Week  &  Space  Technology.  System 
would  use  Polaris  fleet  ballistic  missile  to  supplement  existing  Army 
( A v .  Wk . ,  9/28/@,  18) 
and  Air  Force  weapons. 
September  29:  USAF  launched  final  Minuteman  I  test  ICBM  from  Cape 
Kennedy.  First-stage  flight  was  satisfactory,  but  second  stage  veered 
out  of  control  and  had  to   be  destroyed by  range  safety officer  165  sec. 
after  launch.  In  launches  from  Cape Kennedy,  the  missile  scored  38 
successes,  8  partial  successes,  and  8  failures.  From  Vandenberg  AFB, 
it  scored  60 successes,  4  partial  successes,  and  2  failures. 
(AP,  Balt. 
Sun, 9/30/64;  M&R, 10/5/64,  11) 
President  Johnson  sent  nomination  of  Lt.  Col.  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.,  to 
Senate  for  promotion  to  full  colonel  (USMC )   in  recognition  of  his 
many  accomplishments while  in  the  service of  his  country.”  Former 
<c 
Astronaut Glenn  said the news came “as  quite  a  surprise”  to him,  since 
he  had  previously  expressed his  intention  to  retire  from USMC  and  had 
requested that he not be considered for promotion.  ( AP, NYT ,  9/30/64?, 
16; Houston Post, 9/30/64) 
*  NASA  announced it would  negotiate with  S a n d a s  Associates,  Inc.,  for  pur- 
chase of  seven  display  systems to  be  used  with  computers for  checkout 
and launch of  Saturn V launch vehicles.  Three of  the systems would be 
used  at NASA  Marshall Space Flight Center  and  four  a t  Kennedy  Space 
Center,  NASA.  Cost  of  the  cost-plus-incentive-fee type  contract  may 
exceed $5 million. 
(NASA Release 6 6 2 4 9 )  
NASA Goddard  Space Flight  Center  announced  selection  of  Univac  Div., 
Sperry Rand Corp.,  for negotiation of  contract  for Message Multiplexer 
communications processor systems.  Final contract would call for Univac 
to  supply, install, check out, program,  and document two  complete mes- 
sage handling  systems to be installed in NASA  communications switching 
centers  at  London  and  a t  an  undetermined  site  in  Australia.  Contract 
ted to amount to about $1.3 million.  ( GSFC  Release ( 3 6 2 8 )  
Sen. was Gay ord  Nelson  (D.-Wis.)  spoke  in  the  Senate  about  the  pattern  of 
Federal  R&D  expenditures  which  he  said  was  “having  an  unfavorable 
effect on the Midwest, home of  many  of  our  greatest industries  and  our 
greatest  universities.  . . . We  cannot  pursue  a  policy,  even  uninten- 
tionally, which  has  the  effect  of  wasting  the  industrial  and  intellectual 
potential  of  the  American  heartland.  . . .”  He  pointed  out  that  “not 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS,  19  5 4 

331 
all the blame fo r  lack of  Federal research  and development activity  can 
be  attributed  to  the  Government.  The   industries  and  universities  of 
the Middle West have not  in  all cases been  a s  aggressive as  they  should 
(CR,  9/29/64,22355-58) 
have been  in  seeking Federal  contracts.” 
September  30:  X-15  No.  2  flown  by  Maj.  Robert  Rushworth  (USAF)  to  
maximum altitude of  98,000  ft.  in  flight  that  reached  3,511 mph  (mach 
(NASA  X-15  Proj.  Off.; M&R, 
5.19),  from  Edwards  AFB,  Calif. 
10/5/64,11) 
0  Dr.  Gerard  P.  Kuiper,  Director  of  Lunar  and  Planetary  Observatory  a t  
Univ.  of  Arizona  and  chief  experimenter  on  RANGER  w lunar-photo- 
graphing probe,  said at  MIT conference that much  of  the moon’s  surface 
is naked  lava.  RANGER  VII  photographs  showed that  dark  regions  of  the 
moon,  particularly  its  seas,  were  of  volcanic  origin.  Dr.  Kuiper  said 
other  recent  photographs of  the  lunar  seas  in  various wavelengths,  in- 
cluding  infrared,  showed  sha rp   relief  features  in  the  lunar  seas  that 
were  lava  flows.  “There  cannot  ever  be  one  millimeter”  of  cosmic 
dust on the surface, he stated.  (Sullivan, NYT,  10/1/64) 
0  156-in. solid-propellant motor was fired by Lockheed  Propulsion  Co.,  pro- 
ducing  about  1.2  million  lbs.  of  thrust  in  burn   time  of  two  min.,  35 
sec.  This was second  firing of  the  motor  and was  rated  “successful  in 
all  respects”  by  AFSC/SSD  officials.  It  produced  30%  more  thrust  than 
first  firing  May  28   because  it  contained  about  30%  more  propellant. 
The test was particularly significant because it proved  out  a  new  nozzle 
concept;  spokesman  said  the  test  showed  “that  we  can  get  rid  of  the 
graphite  now  and  use graphite  tape-meaning 
that  essentially we  can 
(M&R ,   10/5/@,  11-12) 
go to a plastic nozzle.” 
Lockheed  A-11 
(YF-l2A),  fastest  known  jet  aircraft,  was  displayed 
fo r   first  time  a t   Edwards  AFB,  where  the  plane  was  flown  a t   only  450 
mph for  the spectators.  Also unveiled was air-to-air interceptor missile. 
USAF  spokesman  said  the  new  aircraft-missile combination  represented 
a  “tremendous  increase”  in  ability  to  intercept hostile  aircraft.  In   an- 
nouncing  the  aircraft  last  February,  President  Johnson  had  said  it  had 
been tested a t  speeds exceeding 2,000 mph and altitudes exceeding 70,000 
ft.  (Witkin, NYT, 10 /1 /64 ,1)  
Senate  confirmed  President  Johnson’s  nominations  to  Board  of  Directors 
of  the  Communications  Satellite  Corp. : Frederic  G.  Donner,  George 
(NASA  LAR  III/187-88) 
Meany, and Clark Kerr. 
NASA  announced  New  York  Univ.  and  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Brooklyn 
would  receive  grants  for  construction  and  renovation  of  space-related 
research  facilities.  NASA  grant  to  NYU  would  amount  to  $582,000  and 
(NASA  Release 64-255) 
to Brooklyn Tech, $632,000. 
Rep.  J.  Edward  Roush  (D.-Ind.),  speaking  in  the  House,  refuted  con- 
in  June issue of  Science and 
tention of Sen. Barry Goldwater  (R.-Ariz.) 
Mechanics  that  “ ‘all  manned  space research  should  be  directed  by  the 
military,  with  national  security  and  control  of  the  access  to  space  as  
primary goals.’ 
over  to  the military  would  be  contrary 
To  turn  all man 
6‘ 
ation established even before the begin- 
to  the purposes and 
I t   is  so contrary  i t   can  be  considered  reason 
f o r  the greatest of  alarm.  . . . 
ning  of  the  space  age. 
“[It]  would violate the very spirit as  well as  the underlying  principles 
of  the National  Aeronautics  and Space Act  of  1958.  To cause a  change 

332 
ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
in  such  control would  create  distrust  throughout  the  world  about  our 
intentions.  . . . 
“If  we  suddenly  announce  a  change  in  our  goal of  conquering space 
for  peaceful  reasons  to   one  of  military  reasons  I  am  convinced  we 
would  lose a  number  of  . . . [our  tracking stations].  Even  more  im- 
portant  we  would  lose the confidence of  the world  in  our  stand that we 
are a peace loving nation.  . . .”  ( C R ,  9/30/64,22454) 
September  30:  Stanford  Research  Institute  was  being  awarded  %1,409,346 
contract for  study  and evaluation of  Nike-X system’s potential effective- 
ness,  DOD  announced.  Nike-X  project  a t   Redstone  Arsenal,  Ala., 
awarded  the contract.  (DOD Release  708-64) 
Report  of  Aviation  Human  Resources  Study  Board,  created  by  FAA  last 
February and chaired by  Dan A.  Kimball, was  released by  FAA.  Study 
showed  that  career  planning  and  manpower  training  were  deficient 
for   meeting  needs  of  civil  aviation  for  the  next  20  years.  Com- 
paratively few people under 30 were now  learning to fly.  Enrollment  in 
aviation  courses  had  declined,  number  of  schools  offering  aviation 
training  was  decreasing,  and  only  a  few  military  trained  airmen  were 
seeking  professional  aviation  careers.  Number  of  professional  pilots 
needed by  airlines and general  aviation was  estimated  a t  3,650 in  1965, 
4,300  in  1970,  5,700  in  1975,  and  6,300  in  1980.  Report  urged  ex- 
pansion  of  on-the-job and  apprenticeship  training  programs,  scholar- 
ships, extensive career motivation programs,  and other measures. 
( FAA 
Release 64-89) 
September  30-October  1 : F A A  sponsored  National  Aviation  System  Sym- 
posium  in Washington,  which  was  attended  by  leaders  of  airlines  and 
aircraft manufacturing and  officials in  other Government agencies.  I n  
address  a t  the symposium FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby discussed 
current  national  a ir   space  system  and  forecast  the  future  of  aviation. 
He outlined some aviation goals: 
“It is in the national interest to see the products  of  our entire aviation 
industry sold to  the other nations  of  the world.  . . .  [Also,  we  must] 
promote  the use  of  our  concepts,  techniques  and procedures  of  m a n a g  
ing an airspace and an  airport system. 
“In my opinion, our  most important domestic goal is the establishment 
of  a truly effective a i r  transportation system.  I n  terms tha t  the traveling 
public can  understand,  this means the connection  of  any  two population 
centers within  the  United  States  by  a  door-to-door  travel’time of  not 
mo re than8hou r s .   . . . 
“Finally, there is an over-riding goal which must be uppermost  in  the 
minds  of  everyone.  None  of  the  accomplishments  I  have  already 
discussed will be possible if  they are  not  accompanied by  improvements 
in  a ir   safety  and,  here,  primary  reliance  must  be  on  the  aviation 
community itself.  . . .”  (Text, CR,  10/2/64,2304346) 
During September: After  DOD installed small ground  station  in Saigon, mili- 
tary   communications  experiments  using  SYNCOM  11  communications 
satellite began  between  Saigon and Hawaii.  Limited  experiments  also 
were made with  SYNCOM 111,  which  was  in  a  position  to  relay  messages 
from  Saigon  to   Camp  Roberts,  Calif.  SYNCOM  11  was  being  used  on 
a  virtually 24-hour  basis.  DOD had  been  experimenting  with  SYNCOM 
11  f o r  months-before 
installation  of  Saigon  station,  when  SYNCOM  11 
relayed  messages  between  Manila  and  points  in  the  US., and  even 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

333 

earlier,  when  the  satellite  relayed  military  communications  over  the 
Atlantic Ocean.  (Bus. WFC., 9/12/64;  Finney, NYT, 9/29/64,4) 
During September: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA  Associate Administra- 
tor   for  Advanced  Research  and  Technology,  described  use  of  nuclear 
‘‘E have  observed  repeatedly how  a given  technology  has been  ad- 
ener 
in  space propulsion  and  electric-power generation : 
vanced  By  the  military  requirements  and  how  this  technology  is  later 
borrowed  for   consumer  products.  However,  these  underlying  tech- 
nologies may be catalyzed with equal effectiveness by  significant peace- 
time objectives set by the President, as  exemplified by the Nation’s  space 
program. 
Therefore, the  nation  must support activities during peacetime which 
6G 
have  a s   their  purpose  large-scale  technological  goals  separated  from 
commercial  and military  needs.  The  application  of  nuclear  energy  to 
space exploitation offers such a g o a l - o n e  which  can  provide  enormous 
subsidiary benefits in  addition to  opening  the  gateway to  deep  space.” 
(GE Forum, 7/9/64,15-17) 
e  USAF  Missile Development Center reported seven-ft. monorail  sled  reached 
(M&R ,  
record  ground  speed  of  4,200  mph  in  test  a t   Holloman  AFB. 
9 /21 /64 ,9)  
*  U.S.S.R.  had  developed  nuclear  reactor  for  space  applications, according 
to  technical supplement of  Pravda.  Nicknamed “Romashka”  (“Daisy”), 
i t  used  enriched  U-235  and had  output  of  500 watts,  88 amps,  through 
It  weighed 
direct  control  of  reactor  heat  with  beryllium  reflectors. 
about 500 lbs.,  was  comparable  to  US. 950-lb.  Snap lOA  power  source 
in  its  power  levels.  Soviets  claimed  to   have  run  i t   continuously  400 
hrs. without failure.  (M & R ,  12/14/64,21) 
Aerospace industry sales for second quarter of  19fX rose t o  $4.006  billion 
from $3.808 billion in preceding  quarter, Securities and Exchange Com- 
( A v .  Wk., 9/21/64,34) 
mission-Federal Trade Commission  reported. 
e  U.S.S.R.  began  series of  long-range missile tests from Siberian launch  site 
to   impact  point  in  the  Pacific Ocean  near  Christmas Island.  The mis- 
siles had  range  of  more  than  7,000  mi.  This  series  would  last  until 
Nov.  1, and  a  second series would  extend  the  tests  to Dec.  30,  t o  target 
(Hughes, Miami Herald, 9/14/64) 
area near Howland Island. 
Interview  with  General  John  P.  McConnell  (U SAF ) ,   Vice  Chief  of  Staff, 
USAF,  in   The Airman.  General  McConnell gave  h is   opinion  of  USAF’S 
future role in  space:  “First, to  augment the existing defense capabilities 
of  the U S .   land,  sea,  and  a ir   forces  by  using  space  systems  for  such 
things  as   better  communications,  weather  reporting,  and  navigation. 
Second, t o  develop  a  military  capability  for protection  of  US. interests 
in space. 
“I think the Air Force, by virtue of  its overall mission and experience, 
as well  as  its Dowassigned  responsibilities  for  space developments  and 
boosters, must seek to  obtain space Capabilities for  our defense as  quickly 
as  they become economical and practical. 
“Our  role t o  support the national goals of  both  the scientific explora- 
tion  and  the high-priority defense projects should  continue. 
“I  also visualize that  in the long run, future manned vehicles will play 
It is essential that the Air Force vigorously 
a n  increasingly vital role. 
(A i r -  
pursue  space research  and  development  as  well  as operations.” 
man, 9/64,12-15) 

334 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 
During September:  Writing in  U S .  Navd  Institute Proceedings,  Capt.  R.  C. 
Truax   (USN, Ret.)  described  early  naval  rocket  development  work  a t  
Engheer ing   Experiment  Station,  Annapolis.  Captain  Truax  was  in 
charge  of  all  rocket  propulsion  work  for  USN  Bureau  of  Aeronautics 
(US. Naval Inst. Proc.,  9/M,  82-108) 
from 1946 t o  1949. 
0  Frederick  R.  Kappel,  chairman of the board  of  AT&T, was named  recipient 
of  the  1965 John  Fritz Medal by United  Engineering  Trustees, Inc.,  for  
“leadership  in   the  pioneering  of  space  communications.  . . .”  (Av. 
Wk., 9/14/64,23) 
*  William J.  Schulte, Assistant Administrator  for General Aviation, FAA,  was 
named  1964 winner  of  National  Business Aircraft  Association  Award 
(Av. Wk., 9/14/M,  23) 
for meritorious service to  aviation. 
e  General Accounting  Office  told  Congress that  DOD  was  making  only  “neg- 
ligible’’  progress  in  its  program  to  standardize electronic  parts.  GAO 
blamed  the  Services’  failure  “to  take  appropriate  and  timely  action  to 
complete  itern-reduction  projects  initiated  under  the  Defense  stand- 
ardization  program”  as   well  as   lack  of  DOD  “authoritative  direction 
and control.”  (Av. Daily, 9/24/64) 

October  I964 
October 1 : Sixth anniversary of  NASA. 
In Headquarters ceremony honoring 
the first  NASA  Administrator,  President  T.  Keith  Glennan of  Case  Insti- 
tute of Technology  (Aug. 1958-Jan.  1961), and the first Deputy Admin- 
istrator,  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden  (Aug.  1958--present),  official  portraits 
were  unveiled.  Administrator  James E.  Webb made  informal  remarks 
on the role of  NASA  in fulfillment of  the American concept of  power and 
purpose  in  human  &airs.  He  read  a  letter  from President  Lyndon B. 
Johnson which said, in part : 
“We  must be  first  in  space and  in  aeronautics to  maintain  first  place 
on  earth.  The  accomplishments  of  this  past  year  show  clearly  that 
we  a re  making  rapid  progress  to  achieve and  maintain  that  position. 
“Significant  as our  success has  been,  it  i s  but  indicative  of  the f a r  
greater  advances that  mankind  can  expect  from  our  aeronautical  and 
space  efforts in   the  coming years.  We  have  reached  a  new  threshold 
of  competence in  the  air  and  beyond  it  in  space which  opens to  US  the 
widest possibilities fo r  the future.’’ 
Associate  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  Seamans  ( l%%present) 
re- 
viewed  the  personal  contributions  of  Drs.  Glennan  and  Dryden  in  the 
initiation  and progress of  the US. civilian space program.  Friends and 
relatives  of  those  honored  and  official  NASA  guests  attended  the  cere- 
(Program;  Letter) 
mony. 
NASA  successfully launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to  89-mi. altitude 
from White Sands, N.  Mex.  Purpose was  to map photon-emitting night- 
sky  sources.  Gas-filled proportional  counters  were  used  to  detect  and 
measure  energy  of  the  x-rays.  The  rocket  performed  well  and  ex- 
perimental  results  were  good,  but  10-2076  of  desired  data  were  lost 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
because  yo-yo  despin  mechanism  failed  to  deploy. 
*  NASA  and  DOD  began  implementing agreement  on  a  single  new  system  to 
improvB  communication  and  coordination  of  research  and  technology 
information  between  the  two  agencies.  The  agreement  abclished  cer- 
tains  forms  and procedures which  the two  agencies had  used  independ- 
ently  for  reporting  on  research  and  technology  data,  and  instituted  a 
new  standard  reporting  form  for  common  use.  After  the  changeover 
is completed  (July 1, 1965), all  research  and  technology work  of  NASA 
and  DOD  will  be  covered  on  the  new  form,  and  any  scientist  or  staff 
member  from  NASA  or  DOD  will  be  able  to  obtain  full  information  by 
fast  machine  processing  on  any  given  type  of  work.  Signed by  NASA 
Associate  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  and  Director  of 
Defense Research and  Engineering Dr. Harold Brown, the agreement was 
worked  out  in   a  series of  conferences over  a  period  of  more  than  one 
It  was  sponsored  by  and  would  be  continued  under  the   Sup- 
year. 
porting  Space Research  and  Technology Panel  of  the  Aeronautics and 
Astronautics Coordinating Board  (AACB) .  (NASA  Release 64-258) 
335 

336 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 0 4 
October 1 :  Dr.  Gerard P.  Kuiper  told MIT  conference on  earth sciences that 
continuing research had  verified Mars’ atmosphere was too thin to allow 
spacecraft  to  land  by  parachute.  Density  of  Martian  atmosphere,  ac- 
cording  to  Dr.  Kuiper,  had  been  found  to  be  less than  two  per  cent  of 
that  at sea level on earth.  The new  measurement was  made by  spectro- 
graphic studies.  (Abraham,  Phil.  Ewe.  Bu l l . ,   10/1/64) 
*  NASA  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  announced selection  of  Reeves Instru- 
ment  Co.  for  negotiations  of  $2.5  million  contract  for  three  30-ft. 
Unified  S-Band Antenna  Systems.  The  antenna  systems would  be  in- 
stalled  in   tracking  ships  fo r  Project  Apollo. 
(GSFC  Release  -4-29) 
*  NASA  announced award  of  three-year contract  to Bendix Field Engineering 
Corp.  for  launch  support  services  a t   John  F.  Kennedy  Space  Center, 
NASA.  Contract  wa s   expected  to  cost  about  $2.8  million  for  the  first 
year  but  could  amount  to  a s  much  a s   $17  million  for  the  three-year 
(NASA  Release 64-256) 
period. 
0  NASA  announced appointment of  Gilbert W.  Ousley as NASA  European Rep- 
resentative for  NASA  Office of  International  Programs.  With GSFC  since 
1959, Ousley would be stationed within U S .  Embassy at Paris,  where he 
would  handle  NASA  relations  with  European  organizations. 
(NASA 
Announcement 64-225; NASA Release 64-252) 
After examining Col.  John H.  Glenn, Jr.  ( USMC)  , US. Air  Force doctors at 
San  Antonio  said  the  former  astronaut  was  on  the  way  to  “virtually 
complete recovery”  from  his  inner-ear  injury  resulting  from  accidental 
(AP, NYT ,  10/2/64,62) 
fall last February. 
*  Press reported  that  US. tracking  network  had  “detected  two  important 
Soviet  space  failures  within  a  month,”  according  to  “authoritative 
(L.A.  Herald Examiner,  10/1/@) 
sources in Washington.” 
FAA Administrator  Najeeb  E.  Halaby discussed  “aviation  in  1975”  before 
National  Aviation  System  Symposium in Washington.  He  referred  to 
“the  coming revolution in  aviation technology,”  a technology “just  now 
on  the  threshold  of  developments.  . . . Innovations  in  aerodynamics, 
improved  propulsion  systems and  fuel  properties  and  the  development 
of  new  metals  and  other  materials  will  produce  performance  charac- 
teristics  and  operating  economies which will allow aviation  solutions to 
fore.  . . .”  (Text) 
entire  ranges  of  problems  where  aviation  has  never  been  a  factor  be- 
*  Fifteen years ago Eastern Test Range was  activated at Long Range Proving 
Ground.  Hq.  were  established  at  Patrick  AFB,  then  still  the  Banana 
River  NAS, some 18 mi.  south of  Cape Kennedy  (then Cape Canaveral) 
(A&A ,  191540; AP, Tulsa Daily  Wo r ld ,  10/1/64) 
rocket launch site. 
October  2 :   NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  conducted  tests  of  astronauts 
floating in model  Gemini spacecraft  in  the open seas,  simulating astro- 
nauts  awaiting  recovery  after  splash-down  from  space  flight.  MSC 
project  engineers  considered  the  tests  successful,  despite  the  fact  that 
the two  astronauts  became ill while  the  enclosed spacecraft pitched and 
rolled  in  the  rough  Gulf  of  Mexico waters.  The  astronauts  considered 
the  heat  in  the  spacecraft  to  ‘be cause  of  sickness.  Tests were  ended 
after  16 hrs. rather than lasting the planned 36 hrs. because of  approach- 
ing Hurricane Hilda.  Astronaut  participants:  Lt.  Alan  L.  Bean  ( U S N )  
and  Lt.  Cdr.  James A.  Lovell,  Jr.  ( U S N ) .  
(Maloney,  Houston  Post, 
W 3 / W  

ASTRONAUT1 

Projects  Agency  (ARPA).  The  Titan  I1 was  launched  by  a  SAC  crew 
(AP,  Balt. Sun, 10/3/&;  M&R, 10/12/ 
on  routine  training mission. 
6 4 1 0 )  
*  John  Driscoll,  Chairman  of  Massachusetts Turnpike Authority,  met  w i th  
James E. Webb, NASA  Administrator,  “to  assure him we  a re  ready, will- 
ing,  and  able  to  discuss with  him  and  to  negotiate  with  NASA  for  our 
turnpike  location  [of  NASA’ EIectronics Research Center  in  Cambridge J 
in the event the Kendall-Sq. site is not  selected.”  After the meeting Mr .  
Webb  repeated  that  the Kendall-Sq.  location  “better  meets  the  require- 
ments”  of  NASA  than  any  other  proposal.  Meanwhile,  in   Boston,  Dr. 
John  J.  Brennan,  Chairman  of  the  Committee for  the  Preservation  of 
Cambridge Industry,  said in  press conference that the  committee would 
use  every  available  legal means to  prevent  location  of  the  NASA  center 
(Boston Globe, 10/2/64) 
in Kendall Sq. 
*  Sen. Everett Dirksen  (R.-Ill.)  , minority leader  in U.S.  Senate, filed in  the 
Congressional Record  his  report of  the  88th Congress’ activities.  The 
ortion dealing  with US. space program stressed “what priority  should 
Be  applied” to Project Apollo lunar landing program:  “Republican con- 
cern  over the  program  is engendered by  the belief  that  f a r  too much  of 
our  national technical talent  and scientific intellect is devoted to this one 
project while other, more needed and  worthy programs are permitted to 
flounder for  lack  of  competent,  imaginative direction.  . . . 
“The  controversy  . . . [isJ not  whether  man  w i l l   ultimately  reach 
the moon and beyond, but rather,  how shall it be done, and whether other 
aspects  of  human  needs  should Be  bypassed  or  overlooked  in  the  one 
spasmodic effort to achieve a lunar landing a t  once.  . . .”  (CR ,  10/2/ 
a, 23061-68) 
First  meeting  of  Interim  Communications Satellite Committee, with  rep- 
resentatives  of  15 nations,  adjourned  after  four  days. 
In   its  session, 
the committee approved rules of  procedure, appointed Committee Chair- 
man  (John  A.  Johnson,  ComSatCorp  vice  president  for  international 
affairs),  and heard  progress  reports on development of  global  commer- 
(ComSatCorp Release;  NYT,  10/4/@, 
cial  communications  system. 
74) 
In  presentation  to  NATO’s AGARD,  Frank  E.  Rom  of  NASA  Lewis  Research 
Center  discussed  fast  and  moderated  low-power,  lightweight  nuclear 
reactors  and  their  applications.  Both  one-  and  two-stage  nuclear 
rockets  had  significantly superior  performance  over  the  best  chemical 
rocket  systems,  Rom  said.  Further,  he  said,  “The  development  of  a 
low-power nuclear  rocket  would  be  the  quickest  and  least  costly  way 
to  achieve a  practical  nuclear  powerplant  fo r   space  use.  Since  early 
use  of  these  smaller  powerplants  would  be  possible,  operational  and 
flight experience would aid in the development of  larger nuclear rockets.” 
(LRC  Release 64-88) 
AFSC  announced  its  Research  and  Technology  Div.  had  completed  tests 
on  most  effective method  of  heating  high-pressure a i r  to  simulate aero- 
dynamic conditions of  earth’s  atmosphere.  Wind-tunnel a rc  air heater 
produced direct power current  of  5.1 megawatts [previous high was 4.2 

338 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 
megawatts].  During  the  5.1-megawatt  run,  3.85 megawatts were  con- 
tained  in the gas,  representing ihigher efficiency than had been predicted. 
New  designs based  on  the  test  would  extend  the  probable  lifetime  of  a 
projected  50-megawatt  heater  to  be used  in  electrogas-dynamic facility 
being  built  at  Wright-Patterson  AFB.  Both  AFSC’S  Arnold  Engineer- 
ing  Development  Center  and  NASA  Ames  Research  Center  would  use 
data  from the test  program  fo r  their  work with  similar  heaters. 
(AFSC 
Release 4.24%-119) 
October  2 :  AEC  exploded nuclear  device of  low-intermediate  yield  in  under- 
ground  test  a t   Nevada  site,  the  16th  weapons-related nuclear  test  an- 
(AP, NYT, 10/4/64,  34) 
nounced by  AEC  this  year. 
October  3:  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  said in  his  news  conference that 
Federal  nondefense  agencies had  reported  savings of “more than  $178 
million  on an  annual basis”  a s  result of  management improvements and 
cost  reductions  initiated  in  July  and  August.  “These savings  a r e   in 
addition  to the $100  million  reported last April, and to the $140 million 
reported  in  July.”  He  listed  NASA  with  the  second-largest  amount 
(Transcript,  Wash. Post, 
saved  in   July  and  August:  $44  million. 
1 0 / w 4 )  
0  USAF  successfully  Aew  Athena  re-entry  test  rocket  from  Green  River, 
Utah,  to  target  area  a t  White Sands Missile Range,  N.  Mex.  USAF  said 
that  “some  test  objectives  were  achieved.”  Launch  was  said  to   be 
second  time  in  five  launches  that  the  four-stage missile  completed the 
(AP, Phil. Inq., 10/4/64) 
357-mi. course. 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  addressed  Young  Presidents’  Or- 
ganization  Eastern  Area  Conference  in   White  Sulphur  Springs,  W. 
Va.:  “AS  the  national  space  program  moves  into  its  seventh  year,  the 
United  States has  reached  the  halfway  point  in  the  broad-based  accel- 
erated  program  for the present decade, a program  that was planned and 
has been  carried  forward by  the  three Administrations. 
“The National Space Program  is creating  for  the  United  States  new 
resources  for  whatever  use  the  national  interest  may  require,  whether 
that  interest  is  in  maintaining  national  security,  international  relations, 
stimulating  education,  or  implementing  scientific  and  technological 
progress.  . . . 
“In writing the Space Act of  1958, Congress stressed that the scientific 
and technical knowledge acquired as the national program moved ahead 
should be shared promptly with all who could use it.  . . . 
“To be of  most  use this information must be identified and repackaged 
to  meet  the  special needs  of  nonaerospace  industries.  This  is  the  pur- 
pose  of  the  NASA’s Technology  Utilization  Program,  the  first  national 
undertaking of  i t s  scope.  . . .” 
He  detailed how  the program works  and  enumerated outstanding ex- 
amples, then concluded: 
“NASA’S  major  contribution  here  has  been  to  provide  a  vital  com- 
munications link between activities where information  is developing and 
areas where it may be utilized. 
“We  a r e  convinced  that  NASA’s Technology Utilization Program  will 
be of  increasing benefit to the American economy.  It is the mechanism 
through  which  the  discoveries made  in  space  science  and  technology 
can  pay  substantial  dividends  to  American  business  and  industry.” 
(Text) 

339 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  
October 3:  co l .  Martin  L.  Raines  (USA,  Ret.)  was  named  manager  of  NASA 
MSC’S  facility  at  White  Sands Missile  Range,  Director  Dr.  Robert  R. 
( M ,  Tulsa Doily  Wo r ld ,  l0/4/64) 
Gilruth  announced. 
Rep.  F. Bradford Morse  (R,-Lowell)  of  Massachusetts said he had written 
letter to NASA Administrator Jame E. Webb recommending NASA abandon 
plans  to  locate Electronics Research Center in  Cambridge and,  instead, 
In   his  letter,  he  said:  “It 
select  another  site  in   a  nearby  community. 
cating in Cambridge when there is such intense opposition.  . . .”  (Bo s -  
is difficult to  understand  why  the administration  [NASA]  persists  in  lo- 
ton  Sun. Globe, 10/4/&%) 
James  J.  Haggerty,  Jr.,  space editor  of  Journal  of  the  Armed  Forces,  dis- 
cussed  the  Agena  rocket  stage,  calling  it  “a  highly  reliable,  extremely 
versatile piece of  hardware which serves triple  duty  a s  an  orbital injec- 
tion  vehicle  fo r   satellites,  a s   an   upper  stage  booster  for  lunar  and 
planetary  probes,  and  as  a  spacecraft.  From  the standpoint  of  fre- 
quency  of  usage,  Agena  is  fa r   ahead  of  the  field. 
In   the  seven  years 
since Sputnik  I went up,  there have been  about 290 spacecraft sent into 
earth  orbit  or  deep  space  trajectory;  Agena,  in  various  versions,  has 
I t  is currently being employed a t  
been  in on  142 of  them-almost  half. 
the  rate  of  about  30  shoots  a  year  and  it  will  figure  in  some very  im- 
portant  upcoming  projects.  . . .”.  Haggerty  descrihed  Agena  con- 
tributions,  notably  its  remarkable  accuracy  in  sending  RANGER  VII  on 
(JJAnn ed  Forces,  10/3/64,  8 )  
its course  to  the  moon. 
Hand-held,  photoelectric  sensor  that  vibrates  when  it  senses changes  in  
environmental  terrain  had  potential  as  an  aid  to  the  blind,  AFSC  an- 
nounced.  Developed  by  Santa  Rita  Technology  under  USAF  con- 
tract,  the environmental sensor detects changes in light values,  feeds the 
data  to  photo  resistor  which  changes  value  according  to  amount  of 
light,  then  passes it  to  oscillator, which creates pulse vibrations  against 
the user’s hand.  AFSC  said research  also was underway on device trans- 
(AP,  NYT,  10/4/64,  46) 
mitting  speech  through  tactile  transducer. 
The  84th  Congress adj.ourned without  acting  on  S.  1278, bill  instructing 
National  Bureau  of  Standards  to  study  practicability  of  U.S.  adoption 
(Library  of  Congress) 
of  the  metric  system. 
October  4 :  NASA  EXPLORER  XXI scientific earth satellite  ( IMP   B )   was  launched 
into  orbit  from  Cape Kennedy  with  a Thor-Delta  rocket  booster.  On- 
board  instrumentation  was  working  excellently, but  the  satellite’s  orbit 
(59,400-mi.  apogee;  120-mi. perigee;  34-hr.,  57-min. period;  33”53’ 
inclination to the equator)  fell fa r  short of  the  intended deep-space path 
which  would  have  enabled  the  Interplanetary  Monitoring  Platform  to 
measure magnetic  fields, cosmic rays,  and solar winds  in  interplanetary 
Robert H.  Gray,  Director  of 
Planned  apogee was  161,000 mi. 
space. 
Goddard Launch Operations, said minimum apogee required for mission 
success was  about 97,750 mi.  As  in  launch of  EXPLORER  XVIII  ( IMF   A ) ,  
the  Delta  rocket  used  higher-thrust  third-stage  motor,  the  X-258, 
to 
give the satellite its final boost into orbital injection.  Preliminary track- 
ing  data  indicated  this  stage  had  not  provided  the  required  thrust. 
Designed and built by NASA  Goddard Space Flight Center,  EXPLORER  XX I  
contained  nine  experiments.  Five  of  these were provided  by  GSFC  re- 
searchers and  four by experimenters a t  Univ.  of  Chicago, Univ.  of  Cali- 
fornia,  NASA  Ames  Research  Center,  and  MIT  respectively. 
(NASA 
Release  64-242;  AP,  Balt.  Sun, 10/5/M;  UPI, Chic.  Trib.,  10/5/64; 
M&R,  10/12/64, %) 

340 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

October  4:  Seventh  anniversary  of  the  Space  Age--orbiting  of  SPUTNIK  I 
by  the U.S.S.R.  on Oct.  4, 1957.  Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin  said 
in  Trud  interview  that  U.S.S.R.  was  preparing  a  manned  space flight: 
“We  a r e   working  and  making  studies  and  a r e   preparing  for  a  new 
I t   is not  our  custom  to  advertise, but  I’ll  tell you  that  new 
launching. 
(UPI,  Chic. 
and  more  complicated  research  work  is  in  store  fo r   us.” 
Trib., 10/5/6LE) 
I n   recent  interview  Sir  Bernard  Lovell,  Director  of  Jodrell  Bank  Ex- 
perimental  Station,  had  complained:  “American  military  radar  is  se- 
In   the 4-10 
riously  interfering with  our  studies of  the  universe.” 
megacycle  band,  he  said,  radar  signals  were  interfering  with  Jodrell 
Bank  radiotelescope’s  listening  t o   radio  waves  from  distant  points  in 
the  universe.  The  interference had Been  occurring  over the past  9-12 
months,  and  “we’ve  had  to stop one program  because of  it.”  Sir Ber- 
nard  and  other  astronomers  indicated the 406-410  megacycle band was 
“the only  relevant band”  for studying quasi-stellar objects  (“quasars”). 
U S .   Government  officials  acknowledged  receiving  similar  complaints 
from  astronomers at Cambridge Univ.  However, according  to William 
E.  Plummer, acting chief of  frequency management in US. telecommuni- 
cations coordinating office,  “No radar  of  any kind  is authorized to oper- 
(Toth, L.A.  Times, 10/4/64) 
ate on that Band.” 
October 5:  USAF  launched  Thor-Agena  D  booster  rocket  from  Vandenberg 
(UPI,  NYT,  10/7/64+,  19; 
AFB  with  unidentified  satellite  payload. 
HHN -48 )  
Addressing Oklahoma Frontiers  of  Science Foundation  in  Oklahoma City 
during ceremonies celebrating its tenth anniversary, NASA  Administrator 
James  E. Webb  pointed  out  that  “some  of  our  NASA  projects  in  educa- 
tion and in  the transfer  of  space technology to the general economy owe 
much  to  the philosophy and  concepts threshed  out  in  the early  days of 
the  Foundation.  . . .” 
(Text) 
Second flight-test of  XB-70  aircraft was  conducted at Edwards AFB,  Calif., 
with  pilot  Alvin  S.  White  (North  American  Aviation,  Inc.)  and  co- 
pilot  Col.  Joseph Cotton  (W A F ) .   The aircraft reached 600 mph  instead 
of  planned  700 mph  and  attained  28,000-ft.  altitude  instead  of  planned 
35,000 ft.  It was  forced to  land  prematurely because of  hydraulic  sys- 
(AP,  Balt.  Sun,  10 /6 /a;   A v .  Wk., 10/12/64,  29 )  
tem problems. 
e  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson  (D.-N.  Mex.) , Chairman of  Senate Committee on 
Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences, said  Rift  program  should  be  reacti- 
vated because “mechanical difficulties which  impeded early work on  the 
nuclear  propulsion  reactor  for  space  have  largely  been  Qvercome.” 
He  said  success of  recent  nuclear  reactor  test  for  Nerva  strengthened 
his  view  that  NASA  and AEC  receive funds  in  the coming fiscal year  (‘so 
that  we  can  develop  in   a  properly  phased  development  program  a n  
operational  nuclear  propelled  rocket.”  He  pointed  out  the  need  fo r  
proper  consideration  to  nuclear  energy  in  planning  new  space  mis- 
<C  
sions.  It  is  obvious  that  this  is  a  necesaary step and  one that  will  re- 
ration  of  target  dates  fo r   a n   actual  flight  test  of  a  nuclear 
(SBD,  10/5/64,  179; M&R,  10/12/64,17) 
.” 
USAF announced  an  ion  rocket  would  be  tested  in  90-day  orbital  flight 
next  spring,  using  Agena  vehicle.  Electrical  power  to  operate  the 
engine would be provided by Snap 1OA  reactor,  the first test  combining 
an  electrical propulsion engine and a nuclear reactor  in space.  Spokes- 

341 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
men  said  similar  rocket h - d  been  succest+fdly tested  in August  in  sub- 
orbital  flight from  Pt.  Arguello, Calif.  The  new  engine,  developed by 
Electro-Optical Systeme,  was  said  to  have  “developed  the  unheard-of 
specific impulse level  of  7,800 seconds-roughly 
20  times greater  than 
the  best  chemical  rockets  of  today.” 
(W m h .  Post, 10/6/64;  Hines, 
Wash.  Eve. Star,  10/6/64) 
October  5 :   NASA  Director  of  Personnel  Robert  J.  Lacklen  said  in  Aviation 
Week  he  had  ordered  a  “complete  re-write”  of  NASA  Management 
Manual  section dealing with  employees’ acceptance of  gifts  and  gratui- 
ties  from  aerospace  industry  representatives.  “The  same  thing  has 
jumped  us   off  on  a  re-write &a t   caused  the Defense Dept.  to  issue its 
new  orders.  That  is the  continuing appearance of  NASA  names on con- 
( A v .  Wk . ,  10/5/64,18) 
tractor entertainment lists.” 
US. airmail stamp honoring  Dr.  Robert H.  Goddard was  released  a t  Ros- 
well,  N.  Mex.  Stamp was  first U S .   stamp with rocket motif  since Fort 
Bliss stamp of  1946.  U.S.  stamps also had been issued  for Project Echo 
(1961) and Project Mercury  (1962). 
(NASA  Historian) 
a  Article  in  US. News  & World Report  assessing impact of  Project  Apollo 
on U S .   industry  quoted  unnamed  U S .  space official:  “ ‘Project Apollo 
In   terms  of  manpower  used, it 
is  the  biggest  single  job   in  history. 
It  is  five times 
dwarfs  the  building  of  the  pyramids  ‘by three  times. 
greater  in  cost than the wartime crash program  to build  the first atomic 
bomb.’ 
“Over-all price tag on moon exploration in this decade i s  20 billion dol- 
lars.  Ten billion  of  that  has been  s p e n t - o r  will  be  spent-on 
prelimi- 
nary programs  such as Projects Mercury and Gemini and  for new  facili- 
ties, Government  payrolls, tracking  stations,  communications.  . . . 
“At  a  time  when  Pentagon spending  on missiles and rockets is going 
down,  higher  spending  by  . . . [NASA]  comes a s  a  shot  in  the  arm  to 
thousands of  firms.  . . . 
“Apollo  is now  entering  a  critical  phase,  one entrusted  almost soIely 
to U.S.  industry.  At  the peak  of  the industrial pyramid  a re  four major 
aerospace firms,  supported  by  66  other major  companies holding  NASA 
contracts of  more than h a l f a  million dollars each.  . . . 
been  pulled  together  on  this  vast  project.  . . . To  people  in  industry, 
“What  is  bound  to   impress anyone  is  how  the  big  companies have 
working together in peacetime on  a ‘national goal’ is new  and satisfying. 
Explains one official:  ‘The  amazing thing is that  industry is finding that 
space is not only good business-but 
it is a  real adventure for  us,  too.’  ” 
(US. News, 10/5/64) 
October  6 :   U.S.S.R.  announced routine  launching of  COSMOS XLVII  artificial 
earth satellite “for  the  further  investigation of  cosmic space.”  Orbital 
data:  apogee,  413  km.  (256 mi.)  ; perigee,  177 km.  (110 mi) ; period, 
90  min.;  and  inclination  to  the  equator,  64.77O.  COSMOS  XLVII  de- 
(Tass,  Pravda, 10/7/64,  l, ATSS-T  Trans.;  GSFC SSR, 
orbited  Oct.  7. 
10/15/64) 
*  Final  S-I  booster  in  Saturn  I  rocket  program  was  static-fired  a t   NASA 
Marshall Space Flight Center f o r  its second and final time.  The 156-sec. 
test  was  “entirely  satisfactory.”  This  S-I  stage,  the  second  one  built 
by  Chrysler  Corp.  for  NASA,  would  power  the  last  (SA-10)  Saturn  I 
launch vehicle.  First Saturn  I booster was static-fired at MSFC in  April 
1961.  Today’s  firing  ended  about  three-and-a-half years  of  testing  in 

342 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

which R&D and flight vehicles underwent a total of  55  firings fo r  cumula- 
tive timeof 3,867 sec. 
(Marshall s ta r ,  10/14/64,1) 
October  6:  USAF  launched  Thor-Able-Star rocket  toward  polar  orbit  from 
Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif.,  but  did  not  disclose  payload  or  mission.  It 
later was revealed that the Thor-Able-Star placed three satellites in orbit. 
(UPI,  NYT ,  10/7/64+  19; S B D ,  10/8/64,202;  H H N - 4 8 )  
NASA  announced  appointment  of  Jennings  Pemble  Field,  Jr.,  as  Director 
of  Gemini  Program  Control  i n   NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space  Flight. 
In   this  position  Field  would  be  responsible for  Gemini program  costs 
and budget.  Field w a s   an  executive of  IMC  Industries,  Inc.;  from  1954 
to  1963  he   was  with  Bendix  Corp.,  and  from  1940 to  1%4$ he  was  a 
commissioned  officer  in   U S .   Navy. 
(NASA  Release W 2 5 7 )  
0  Soviet Government had  rejected the space agreement negotiated in Geneva 
b y   Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden  and  Soviet Academician  Anatoli  Blagonravov 
last  June,  Howard Simons reported  in the Washington Post.  After the 
negotiators had  returned  to  their  respective countries, Simons reported, 
U.S.S.R.  notified  US .   in  July  that  it  chose  to  reject  the  agreement. 
NASA  officials  had  no  comment  on  the  report,  but  other  sources  (un -  
named)  said  the  tentative  agreement had  called  fo r  exchange of  infor- 
mation  and publication  of  a  book  about  space medicine and  bioscience 
by  Soviet  and  U S .   experimenters.  U.S.S.R.  refusal  w a s   based  on  in- 
sistence that  topics be covered by  either U S .   or Soviet author,  although 
Blagonravov had agreed to U S .  proposal that each topic be covered by a 
Soviet and a U S .  author.  This was  said to be  first instance of  exercis- 
ing the usual option to reject the space agreement reached by  negotiating 
(Simons, Wash. Pos t ,  10/6/64) 
teams. 
0  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  remarked  at  Univ.  of  Notre  Dame 
that  the  establishment of  its  new  Aero-Space Science  and  Engineering 
Department  placed  Notre  Dame  “in  a  vigorous  and  growing group  of 
the nation’s leading educational institutions.  . . . 
What  is happening  this  fall  a t  this  university  is in   some ways sym- 
6 L  
bolic of  what  is happening  all over the nation.  For  the space program 
has been  a catalyst to science, to  engineering, to  research, and to educa- 
tion  at  all  levels.  The  power  of  the  modern  rocket  has  given man  a 
new,  and  in many ways,  an  unlimited  tool  for probing  the mysteries of 
the universe.  . . . .” (Text) 
NASA Administrator  James  E.  Webb  said  in  address  a t  Annual  Manage- 
ment  Banquet of  the National Management Association,  in South Bend, 
Ind.,  that  the  “most  important  trend  in  NASA’s procurement  activity 
today  . . . is  our  effort to  use more  incentive contracts. 
Three  years  ago  we   had  no  incentive  contracts.  Today  we   have 
c c  
52  totaling  more  than  half  a  billion  dollars.  And  we  expect  to  raise 
that to one billion before the end of  this year.  . . . 
So  f a r  we  have  experimented with  a  new  type  of  incentive contract 
called  the  award  fee.  . . . So  fa r   our  experience  with  this  type  of 
bC 
incentive contract has been good; and efficient contractors who  appear to 
he  saving  the  government  money  have.  earned  extra  profits  for  them- 
selves.  The  award  fee  contract  is especially applicable to  service con- 
tracts where targets  a r e  difficult to  fix.  We  feel that  the  award  fee has 
motivated contractors  to perform  better, to  cut costs, and to make quick 
expressed their  satisfaction with  this  new  procedure.  . . .” (Text) 
corrections  when  they  have  been  deficient.  Contractors, in  turn,  have 

AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  

343 

octo 

ducted  within  15 min.  of 
ionospheric  current system 
methylaluminum vapor trail up  to   107-mi. altitude, and the bluish-white 
cloud  was  visible  for  several  hundred  miles.  Payload  also  contained 
instruments  to  measure  electron temperature  and  density.  Second  ex- 
periment  carried  5&lb.  payload  of  instruments  to  measure earth’s mag- 
netic  field.  The  experiments  were  conducted  a t   dusk  and  would  be 
followed  by  two  similar ones  a t   dawn the next  day. 
(Wallops Release 
6 4 ~ 7 0 ;  NASA  Release 64-260) 
NASA Argo D 4  launch vehicle launched  from Wallops Island, Va.,  carried 
instrumented  payload  to   altitude of  about 625 mi.  in  18-min. flight ter- 
minating  in  impact  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  Designed  and  built  for 
NASA  by Lockheed Missile and Space Co.,  the experiment measured  com- 
position and density of  positive ions as  a  function  of  altitude Erom about 
(Wallops  Release  &71;  NASA  Release  64- 
150-mi. altitude  to  peak. 
260) 
*  Inauguration  of  SYNCOM  III  communications  link  from Tokyo  via  ground 
station  a t  Kashima,  Japan,  and  SYNCOM  111  hovering  above the  Pacific, 
to   receiving station a t  Pt.  Mugu,  Calif.,  for  transmission  to  US. televi- 
sion  stations.  Special  program  featured  pre-taped  appearances  by 
President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson,  Secretary  of  State  Dean  Rusk,  Foreign 
Minister  Etsusaburo  Shiina  of  Japan,  and  Communications  Minister 
Zitsuzo  Tokuyasu  of  Japan.  President  Johnson  called the new  wmsat 
link  an   opening  of  “new  vistas  of  friendship and  understanding  in  the 
fields  of  education,  cultural  exchange,  business  and  entertainment.” 
ComSatCorp officials were  said t o  be pleased  with  quality  of  reception. 
Opening ceremonies of  1W Olympic Games Oct.  10 were scheduled for 
(ComSatCorp  Release;  VS], 10/ 
transmission  via  the  comsat  link. 
8 / a )  
*  American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics  (MU)  announced 
nomination  of  Richard E.  Horner,  Senior  Vice  Prmident  of  Northrop 
Corp.,  as  AIAA  president for 1965.  Mr.  Horner served as  the first Asso- 
ciate Administrator of  NASA  (June  1959-July  1960)  and before  that  as  
Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  for  Research  and  Development. 
(N Y T ,  10/8/64) 
*  One-year  program  of  general  orientation  for  60  recent  university  gradu- 
ates beginning  t h d r  professional careers a t  NASA Langley Research Cen- 
ter  began  with  ceremony presided  over  by  LaRc  Director  Dr.  Floyd  L. 
Thompson. 
(LaRC Release) 
NASA  Administrator James E. Webb  said  in  his remarks in Grand Rapids, 
Mich.:  “We  have  a  fighting  chance  to   maintain  our   schedules  for  the 
manned  lunar  exploration mission  in  this decade.  By so doing, we will 
increase  our  ability  t o   operate  in  space  for  any  mission  the  national 
interest may require.  And we will be using space for p c e ,  discourag- 
ing  those  with  other  ideologies  from  political  propaganda  o r  military 
threats.  . . .”  (Text) 
, attorney for  the seven NASA Mercury  astronauts,  r  vealed 
aut John  H. Glenn,  Jr.  (Lt.  Col.,  USMC) had turn4 down 
( S t .  Lou&  Posh 
a  $l,OOO,OOO  contract with  private  industry  in   1963. 
Dispatch, 10/7/64) 

344 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4  

October  7 :  Celebrating  its  15th  anniversary,  East  Germany  displayed  two 
tactical  surface-to-surface missiles apparently  comparable  to  U.S.  300- 
(Balt. Sun, 10/8/M) 
mi.-range Sergeant missile. 
October  8:  NASA  launched  two  Nike-Apache sounding  rockets  with  instru- 
mented  payloads  from Wallops Island, Va.,  sending  them  aloft 11 min. 
apart.  The  first  payload  ejected  sodium  vapor  trail  up   to  99-mi.  alti- 
tude,  to measure  upper  atmosphere  winds.  The pink  vapor  cloud was 
visible  fo r   several  hundred  miles.  Second  experiment  carried  58-lb. 
payload  of  instrumentation  to  87-mi. altitude  to  obtain  measurements 
of  earth’s magnetic  field.  Experiments  were launched  closely  together 
so experimenters could study possible correlation of  ionospheric current 
systems and wind shears;  they were similar to two experiments launched 
a t  dusk  the  previous  evening. 
(Wallops  Release  64-71  ; NASA  Release 
&260) 
*  USAP Atlas-Agena  D  space  booster  was  launched  from  Vandenberg  AFB, 
(AP, Wash. Pos t ,  10/9/64,;  ~ ~ ~ - 4 8 1  
Calif.,  with undisclosed payload. 
Full-scale metal  mockup  of  Lunar  Excursion  Module  ( L EM )   for  Project 
Apollo was  review by NASA  Manned Spacecraft Center  officials a t  Grum- 
man’s  Bethpage,  N.Y.,  plant.  Mockup’s  appearance  was  highlight  of 
week-long analysis of  the mockup design with a  critique aimed  at defin- 
itizing  the  LEM  design. 
(MSC Roundup,  10/14/64,  1 )  
*  Apollo  program  review  was  presented  in  special day-long  session of  five- 
day national meeting of  Society  of  Automotive Engineers  (SAE)   in Los 
Angeles.  Another  highlight  of  the  meeting  was  emphasis  on  in-flight 
maintenance  problems associated with  long manned space flights.  Gen- 
era l  Dynamics/Astronautics  reported  its design philosophy  of  eliminat- 
ing  need  f o r   hand  tools  in   spacecraft  maintenance  and  repair. 
In  
address to  the  group,  NASA  Associate Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Sea- 
mans,  Jr.,  said  that  “virtually  none”  of  US. space  flight projects  had 
been  “successfully  completed within their originally estimated resources 
and  on  their  originally  laid  out  schedules  . . . historically,  schedules 
have often stretched out to  nearly  twice their length and costs have some- 
times  grown  by  factors  of  three  o r   four.  . . .  [However]  we  don’t 
accept  tha t   management  can’t  do   something  about  it.  . . .”  He  pre- 
dicted  fewer new projects would  be  initiated  unless industry  “can  show 
real evidence of  having overcome the point  of  view that says R&D cannot 
be  controlled.  . . .”  (NAA  S&ID  Skywr i ter ,  10/2/64+, 1; M&R ,   10/12/ 
(34,  18; A v .  Wk . ,  10/19/€4,32) 
*  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  said  before  National  Security  Indus- 
trial  Association  meeting  in  Washington  that  many  achievements had 
been  made  “in  that  area  where  science  and  technology  a r e   indivis- 
ible.  . . .  Many  of  the  most  significant  technological  advances,  for 
example, have been  made  in NASA’s space  science effort. 
“Outstanding  among  them  are ou r  proven  abiIity to  launch  payloads 
from earth orbit t o  deep space with consistent success; and the compzn- 
space.  . . .”  (Text) 
ion  ability  to   make  the  necessary  mid-course  corrections  fa r   out  in 
*  Dr.  Harry  J.  Goett,  Director  of  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  said 
in  address  a t   centennial  convocation  luncheon,  Worcester  Polytechnic 
Institute: 
“The  new  era promised  by  the  Space Age  perhaps  connotes  a  return 
to  what  was  once  called  natural  philosophy.  The unifying  element  of 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

345 

these developments of  the  space program  is  a  general  spirit of  inquiry 
It  represents a  re-direc- 
into the nature of  the external physical worId. 
tion  of  interest  away  from the  increasingly narrow  specialization which 
has characterized the physical sciences in the last decades. 
“The  second  distinguishing  feature of  the  scientific research  in  space 
is the fact that the various scientists have  only  been  able  to make  their 
observations  .. . . by  virtue of  the  hardware developed by  the engineer. 
This is in  distinct  contrast  to  the biologist who  could  invest  in  a  good 
microscope and  do  research  comparable  with  the  best.  . . . Generally, 
the engineer exploits and puts to practical use the knowledge acquired  by 
the  scientists.  But  in  space,  the  scientist  seems  to  be  particularly  de- 
pendent  on  the engineer  to  develop new  devices  and techniques.  Engi- 
neering,  in  this  context, has  become  a  more  creative  and  trail-blazing 
profession. 
“The third  and possibly  most  imposing  challenge of  the  space age  is 
the  potential  feed-back  of  its  developments  into  the  civilian  economy. 
In  the long run,  the justification of  our  space budget must  stand  on  this 
‘fall-out.’  . . .”  (Text) 
October 8:  Secretary  of  Defense Robert  S. McNamara was criticized by Mili- 
tary  Operations  Subcommittee  of  the  House  Government  Operations 
Committee  in  report  on  military  communications  satellite.  Subcom- 
mittee said his concern with economizing had  resulted  in “overmanage- 
ment  and underperformance”  in  the  comsat area.  “We  do  not  believe, 
however,  that  economizing efforts should  throttle  programs  essential to 
the national security.  Satellite communications  is one of  the most  vital 
and  relatively  less  costly  of  ou r   major  defense  programs.”  Subcom- 
mittee  said  Secretary  McNamara’s  proposal  last  October  for  joint 
military-civilian  comsat  system  was  “ill-advised,  poorly  timed  and 
badly  coordinated.  . . . Valuable  time  has  been  lost.  Had  the  de- 
partment  moved  ahead  according  to  plans  and  policies laid  down  two  
years ago by the Joint Chiefs of  Staff, a system could have been  operating 
now.  . . .” Subcommittee  also  recommended  DOD begin  comsat  pro- 
gram using  Atlas-Agena  satellite booster  instead  of  Titan  III-C  experi- 
(Finney, NYT,  10/9/64,  1, 16; M&R ,   10/12/ 
mental  launch  vehicle. 
64 , lO)  
Judge  Charles  Fairhurst  issued  temporary  restraining  order  preventing 
Cambridge  City  Council  from  voting  on  application  for   $663,000  in 
Federal  funds  for  survey  and  planning  the  proposed  area  for  NASA 
Electronics Research  Center.  Judge  Fairhurst  granted  the  order  after 
six  Cambridge  firms  requested  declaratory  decree  that  Kendall  Sq. 
“cannot  and  does  not  legally qualify  as   a  valid  subject  for  an   urban 
(Boston Globe,  10 /8 /@ )  
renewal project.” 
e  NASA  Astronaut  Coordinator  Donald  K.  Slayton  said  in  World  Book 
Encyclopedia  Science  Service  feature  article  that  physical  training  of 
US. astronauts  differed  greatly  from  that  of  his  Soviet  counterparts. 
He  pointed  out:  “There  is  a  basic  difference  in  philosophy  between 
Soviet  and  United  States  flight  crew  selection  and  training.  The 
Soviets select and train  bodies  a s  biological specimens for  space  experi- 
ments.  The United  States  selects and  trains engineer-pilots as   integral 
operators  of  spacecraft.  O u r   emphasis  is  on  intelligence and   skill  as 
opposed to   physical prowess.” 
(WBE   Sci.  Serv.,  Znd.  S tar ,   10/8/64) 
7tM-698 %65----2B 

346 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  0 4 

October 8:  DOD announced SR-71  strategic reconnaissance aircraft  would be 
assigned to  SAC  a t  Beale AFB,  Marysville, Calif,  SR-71  was  scheduled 
( DOD Release 7 2 6 4 % )  
to become operational in 1965. 
October  9:  NASA  launched  EXPLORER  XXII  ( BE-B)  beacon-explorer satellite 
with  four-stage  Scout  launch  vehicle  from  Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif. 
Orbital  data: 669-mi.  apogee,  549-mi. perigee,  104.7-min.  period,  and 
80” inclination to the equator.  EXPLORER  XXII  was  last of  five satellites 
in  first phase of  NASA’s ionosphere exploration and  first  of  five satellites 
in NASA’s geodetic satellite series. 
Ionosphere experiment involved sat- 
ellite’s  transmitting  radio  signals  down  through  the  ionosphere. 
Ground  stations around  the world  acquiring the signals measured  elec- 
tron  distribution  by  the Doppler shift method and  the  Faraday  rotation 
method,  The  international  scientific effort with  EXPLORER  XXII  was  the 
most extensive ever for a  US. space project.  Network of  more than 8 0  
ground  stations  was  being  operated  by  some  50  scientific groups  in 
32  countries.  Geodetic  experiment  involved  laser  beams  sent  from 
NASA  Wallops  Station  to  the  satellite,  on  which  were  mounted  360 
one-inch  “cube-corner”  reflectors  to  return  the  light. 
In  addition  a 
small  supporting  experiment,  electrostatic  probe,  measured  electron 
density  and  temperature  in  immediate vicinity  of  the  satellite. 
(NASA  
Release 64-237;  NASA News Conf. Transcript) 
*  NASA  launched  second  re-entry  experiment  for  AEC,  designated  Reentry 
on  a  Scout  booster  from  Wallops 
Flight  Demonstration-2  (RFD-z), 
Island,  Va.  Nonradioactive mockup of  nuclear  isotopic generator  was 
sent  to  800-mi.  altitude  by  three-stage  Scout,  before  the  payload  re- 
entered  atmosphere  on  its  ballistic  trajectory  and  impacted  about  250 
mi.  southeast of  Bermuda.  Primary  objective of  RFD-2  was  to  acquire 
data  on  generator  disassembly and  fuel capsule burnup  rate  for  use  in 
In  previous  flight  test  (RFD-1 in  May 
advanced  generator  designs. 
1963) , nonradioactive model of  Snap-1OA nuclear  reactor was  tested  in 
atmospheric  re-entry;  RFD-1  demonstrated  that  space  reactors  can  be 
designed to melt  down  and  disassemble upon  re-entry.  The  nonradio- 
active mockup in RFD-2  was  a model of  an  isotopic-thermoelectric gen- 
erator.  Earlier  testing  had  shown  that  heat  created  during  r e e n t r y  
could  be  used  to  burn  up  isotopic  generator,  leaving  very  minute 
particles  which  then  would  be  dispersed  at  high  altitudes  to  eliminate 
any  radiation  danger. 
(Wallops Release 64-72) 
Four  consecutive  full-duration  F-1  engine  test  firings  at  new  Rocket 
Engine Test Site at Edwards, Calif ., demonstrated the operational  readi- 
ness  of  the  site,  which  wa s   officially  accepted  by  NASA  Marshall  Space 
Flight  Center  Director  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  from  the Army  Corps 
of  Engineers.  In  the ceremonies, Dr.  von  Braun assigned site operation 
responsibilities to  Rocketdyne  Div.  of  North  American  Aviation,  Inc., 
which would  use the site for  qualification firings of  F-1  rocket engines. 
(Marshal2 Star, 10/14/64,  10 ;  NASA  Release 64-259) 
First  major  test  of  revamped  NASA  worldwide  tracking  network,  part  of 
preparation  for  manned  earth-orbital  space  flights  in  Project  Gemini. 
During  nine-day  drill,  simulated  flight missions were   conducted which 
involved  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  Mission  Control  Center,  and 
~ ( M S C  Roundup, 
eight  sites  in  the  worldm*de  tracking  network. 
10/14/64,1;  Goddard News,  10/19/64,  1) 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 

347 

October  9 :  DOD issued  rebuttal  to  report  issued the  day  before by  Military 
Operations  Subcommittee of  the House Government Operations Commit- 
tee criticizing DOD plans  for  a military communications satellite system. 
DOD said: 
“The  Defense  Department  is  being  operated  to  provide  the  highest 
degree  of  combat  readiness  a t   the  lowest  possible cost.  This policy  is 
being  followed  in  the  development  of  communications  satellites.  As 
a  result,  the  defense  establishment will  have  a  better  satellite communi- 
cations  capability  than  originally  foreseen  a t   anticipated  savings  of 
(Finney, NYT ,  10/10/64,1,14) 
$75-100  millions.” 
October  10:  Opening  ceremonies of  the Olympic Games in Tokyo were  tele- 
cast  live  in  U S .   via  ComSatCorp’s  communications  link  using  NASA’s 
SYNCOM  111  satellite.  Telecast was  deIayed  on  West  Coast  and  taped 
for  later  showing by  NBC,  which  said  it  was  avoiding  interference with 
Japan  was  reported  to  have  expressed  dis- 
commercial  programing. 
appointment  to U S .   State Dept.,  and State Dapt.  in turn  was  said to  be 
“deeply  concerned”  over  the  procedure.  NBC  confirmed  that  future 
coverage  of  Olympic  Games  would  be  taped  or  filmed. 
(ComSatCorp 
Release; Gould, NYT,  1 0 / 1 1 / a ,   1 , 2 5 )  
NASA  Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock announced 
appointment of  James T.  Dennison a s  Director of  Technology Utilization, 
ERC.  Dennison  joined  NASA  in  May  1963 as  a  consultant  and had been 
serving  as   acting  director  of  Technology  Utilization  Div.,  NASA  Hq. 
Appointment  was  effective  NOV. 1. 
(NASA  Release  &244+) 
*  Dr. Gerard P.  Kuiper,  Director  of  Univ.  of  Arizona’s  Lunar and Planetary 
Laboratory, charged that  John Lear’s  article  in Saturday Review  (Sept. 
5 )   on  RANGER  VII’S  findings was  “an  insidious  mixture  of  reasonably 
correct  quotations,  his  own  gross extrapolations, unfair allegations and 
personal  peeves.  .  . 
“One  implication  of Mr.  Lear’s  article  seems to  be  that  I  have  given 
him  information to  the  effect  that  scientists are under  pressure  to make 
statements  that  are   favorable  to  the  continuance  of  large  government 
This is complete fantasy.  . . .”  ( S R ,  10/10/64,  32) 
projects. 
*  Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. preliminary  study  oE  a manned Mars 
mission, called Project Deimos, was described by  James J. Haggerty, Jr., 
in  Journal  of  the  Armed  Forces.  Conducted  by  Douglas  engineers 
J.  L.  Woodworth, G.  A.  Ursini,  and Phil Bono,  the  study was  based  on 
six-man crew  making  830-day  round  trip.  Key  to  study was  chemical- 
fuel  rocket  booster  of  18,000,000-lb.-thrust power  capable  of  placing 
800,000 lbs.  in  earth  orbit.  Reusable  booster  would  be  fueled in  orbit 
(by  other reusable  boosters making  1 0  trips)  before sending spacecraft 
( J /A rm e d  Forces, 10/10/64,8) 
into Mars trajectory. 
October 11 :   Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned 
Space  Flight,  appointed  William  B.  Rieke,  president  of  Lockheed  Air- 
craf t  International,  Inc.,  a s  his deputy.  Rieke would succeed George M. 
LOW, who  had  become  Deputy  Director  of  N A S A   Manned  Spacecraft 
(NASA  Release 6 6 2 6 1 )  
Center. 
*  Sen.  Hubert  H.  Humphrey  (D.-Minn.)  , Vice-presidential candidate,  told 
rally  in Washington,  D.C.,  tha t  the Administration  would  form a  study 
group to  seek “the appropriate mechanisms of  development and resqarch“ 
(Pomfret, N Y T ,  10/12/64,15) 
by US .  industry. 

348 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
October 11  : Comparison of  science in U S .   and U.S.S.R.  was subject  of  arti- 
cle  by  Prof.  Robert  E.  Marshak,  Univ.  of  Rochester.  Distinguishing 
between “pure science or basic research and applied science or technolog- 
ical  development,”  he  said  US .   was  “doing  exceedingly well  in  basic 
science.  . . . The  striking  American  performance  in  pure  science  in 
recent years  results from  a  combination of  fortunate circumstances.  A 
primary  factor  is that the openness, freedom and emphasis on individual 
initiative that characterizes the American way of  life provide a favorable 
climate for the practice of pu re  science.  . . . 
“On the other hand,  in  applied science the U.S.S.R.  has demonstrated 
i t s   capability  of  organizing  large  team  undertakings  whose  favorable 
outcome depends as much on careful mobilization of  material and human 
resources  a s   on  scientific brainpower.  . . .”  (NYT   Mag., 10/11/64, 
59) 
October 12 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  into  orbit  VOSKHOD   I  spacecraft  with  three- 
man  crew:  pilot-cosmonaut, E n g .   Col.  Vladimir  Mikhailovich Koma- 
rov ; scientific co-worker cosmonaut,  Candidate  of  Technical Sciences, 
Konstantin Petrovich Feoktistov; and physician-cosmonaut, Boris Boris- 
ovich Yegorov.  This was  history’s  first multi-manned space flight and 
marked the entry into space of  a  scientist and a physician. 
Initial orbit 
( a s  given b y  Tass) : 4Q9-km.  (254-mi.)  apogee, 178-km. (110-mi.) peri- 
gee,  90.1-min.  period,  and   65”  inclination  to  the  equator.  Tass  an- 
nounced purposes of  the space flight were to : test new  multiseat manned 
spacecraft ; investigate work  capability  and  interrelationship,  in  flight, 
of  a group of  cosmonauts consisting of  specialists from various branches 
of  science and technology;  conduct scientific physico-technical research 
under  actual  spaceflight conditions;  continue study  of  effects of  space- 
flight  conditions  on  human  organism;  and  conduct  expanded medico- 
biological  investigations  under  conditions  of  prolonged  flight.  Tele- 
vision photographs of  the cosmonauts, wearing lightweight woolen  suits 
rather  than  spacesuits, were  received  in  U.S.S.R.  and  transmitted  both 
taped  and  live by  TV stations during  the  day.  On  its eighth  orbit,  as 
the  spacecraft  passed  over  US.,  the  crew  radioed  greeting:  “From 
aboard  the  spaceship VOSKHOD  w e   convey our  best wishes to the indus- 
trious American people.  We wish the people of  the United States peace 
(Tass, K rmm y a  Zvezda,  10/13/64,1, ATSS-T  Trans. ; 
and happiness.” 
Tanner, NYT ,  10/13/64,1) 
Prof.  Leonid I.  Sedov, Soviet space official,  said  in Zzvestia  interview that 
success of  VOSKHQD  I “opens  up new  horizons”  in space.  It now made 
realistic  any plans  about  building an  “orbiting  space platform,  a  flying 
space institute,”  which  could serve as a  “springboard  for  further  inter- 
planetary  expeditions.”  And  Lt.  Col.  Pave1 Popovich,  Soviet  cosmo- 
naut,  said  in Tass  interview that  flight  of  VOSKHOD  I was  of  great  sig- 
nificance “because our aim is to send space stations to  distant  planets.” 
(Tanner, NYT,  10/13/64,  1 ,1 8 )  
Yuri  M.  Vorontsov,  Soviet  delegate  to  U.N.  Legal  Sutcommittee  of  the 
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of  Outer Space, said  orbiting  of  three- 
man  VOSKHOD  I  spacecraft  represented  “a  great  achievement  of  Soviet 
science and  the  Soviet  people  ‘on  behalf  of  all mankind.’”  Dr.  N.  M. 
Sissakian, member of  presidium of  Soviet Academy of  Sciences, said  in 
Pa r i s  that U.S.S.R.  hoped to present scientific results of  VQSKHOD  I space 
flight to   international  symposium on manned  space flight in Paris next 
(AP,  Balt.  Sun, 10/13/M;  Sullivan, NYT ,   10/13/64,  18 )  
June. 

British  Labor  party  leader  Harold  Wilson  said  Soviet VOSKHOD  I  space- 
craft was  forerunner  of  missile-launching satellites that would make Po- 
laris missile obsolete.  Such space-based weapons, he said, “would mean 
that  the  all-American deterrent  on which Sir Alec Douglas-Home hases 
his defense argument will soon be made  obsolete by  space missile devel- 
opment.”  British election was three  days away. 
(CuPhane,  Balt.  Sun, 
10/13/64) 
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  Director  of  NASA  Marshall Space Flight  Center, 
said in Gatlinburg, Tenn.,  speech to NASA-AEC-USAF  symposium on radi- 
ation  protection  that  “not  too  fa r   i n   the  future  huge  nuclear-propelled 
spacecraft will take crews of  men  on long voyages deep into space.  . . . 
“Th e   problems  of  man-made  radiation  connected  with  these  space 
natural  radiation  in  space.  . . .” 
ships will  prove  fa r  more challenging in  the long run than  those of  the 
( N Y T ,  10/13/64,  18 )  
First  test  patterns  had  been  sent  over special cable link  between  Suitland, 
Md.,  and  MOSCOW, for  exchange  of  meteorological  data,  according  to 
US. Weather  Bureau.  The  link  was  considered operational, could  be 
used  .any time U S .   and U.S.S.R.  agreed on  scheduling and other details 
of  the cooperative exchange.  The cable was result of  cooperative space 
agreement reached  in 1962 by  NASA  Deputy Administrator  Dr.  Hugh L. 
Dryden for the US. and Academician A.  A. Blagonravov for the U.S.S.R. 
(Gustaitis, Wash.  Post,  10/13/64) 
0  First  meeting  of  Joint  Navigation  Satellite Committee,  composed  of  rep- 
resentativSs  from  NASA,  FAA,  and  Departments  of  Commerce,  Defense, 
Interior,  and  Treasury.  Committee  would  evaluate  requirements  for 
improved  navigation,  tr&c  control,  and  search-rescue  services,  then 
determine whether navsat system could meet  these requirements and  at 
(NASA  Proj.  Off.;  NASA  Release 64-253) 
what  costs. 
0  USAF  XB-70A  research  bomber  achieved  740-mph  speed  and  35,000-ft. 
altitude  in  its  third  flight  test.  Pilot  Alvin  S. White said  it  hit  super- 
sonic  speed  three  times  during  the  1 hr.,  35  min.  flight  near  Edwards 
AFB,  Calif.  (Wash. Post, 10/13/64;  AP, NYT ,  10/13/64,  31) 
0  Details of  Phoebus-powered nuclear  rocket engine, as described by  Harold 
B.  Finger,  Director  of  NASA-AEC  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Office, in 
series  of  Iectures sponsored by  NATO  Advisory Group  for  Aeronautical 
Research  and  Development  ( AGARD)  : The  second-generation nuclear 
rocket  would  have  250,000-lb.  thrust,  using  5,000-megawatt  Phoebus 
reactor.  In  clustered formation, the engines could launch manned space- 
craft  out of  earth orbit  on Mars trajectory.  Ground-test firings of  first- 
generation  (low-power) Phoebus  would  be  conducted in  1965-66,  and 
tests  of  the  heavier  Phoebus  reactor  in  1967.  (M&R, 10/12/64,  1 7 )  
sevenfold  since  1959, William  W. 
Safety  of  jet  airliners  had  impr 
Moss  told  17th  in 
fety  seminar  of  the  Flight  Founda- 
. Moss, a  Pan  American World Airways* pilot, 
tion  in  New  York. 
said  there  was  average of  one  fatal  accident per  690,000  flying  hours 
in first nine months of  this year, whereas there was one per 85,000 flying 
hours in  1959.  ( N Y T ,  10/13/64,74) 

350 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A ERONAU T IC S ,   19  6 4 

October  12-14:  Entry  Technology Conference  sponsored  by  AIAA  was  held 
in Williamsburg, Va.,  and NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, Va. 
Among  the  papers  presented  at  the  conference was  review  of  Project 
Fire by  Richard  C.  Dingeldein,  of  Langley’s  Flight  Re-entry Programs 
Office.  He reviewed results obtained from first Project Fire experiment, 
which  achieved  re-entry  velocity of  nearly  38,000 fps. 
(LaRC  Release; 
AIAA Bulletin) 
October 13; U.S.S.R.  announced three-man VOSKHOD  I spacecraft had  landed 
safely  after  orbiting  the  earth  for  24  hrs.,  17  min.  (16 orbits).  All 
three  crewmen were  reported  to. be  in   good condition  after  VOSKHOD  I 
landed  at  the  “pre-arranged  spot.” 
Indications  were  that  the  men  re- 
mained inside the craft to completion of  landing.  O5c ia l  announcement 
asserted  that  VOSKHOD  I  had  completed  its  task  before  landing  and 
was landing  according  to  schedule.  Soviet  news  report  indicated  the 
crew  had  requested  permission  to  continue  the  flight  “for  another  24 
hours,”  but  Chief  Designer had  replied  that  “we  shall  stay  within  the 
(AP, 10/13/64;  Tanner, NYT,  10/14/64,1,  18) 
program.” 
*  Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  Executive  Secretary  of  the  National  Aeronautics 
and  Space  Council,  said  U.S.S.R.’s 
successful  orbiting  of  three-man 
VOSKHOD  I  spacecraft “shows they  a re  actively in the race with manned 
spacecraft.”  He  noted  Soviet  emphasis  on  liie  sciences in  their  space 
program.  “They have done more in this field, I believe, than we have.” 
Asked  about  U.S.  chances  fo r   landing  a  man  on  the  moon  before 
U.S.S.R.,  he  replied:  “We  have  a  50-50  chance of  getting  there  first.” 
But, he  added, U.S.S.R.  might be first with  a  circumlunar flight.  Citing 
buildup  of  Soviet  space program,  Dr.  Welsh  said  ratio  of  their  space- 
c ra f t  launchings  in  1964 to  comparable  portion  of  1963 w a s   about  3- 
to-1.  He described VOSKHOD  I as a-”logical follow-on from a very rapidly 
stepped-up space program.”  (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 10/13/64) 
NASA Administrator  James E. Webb said in interview that  Soviet three-man 
VOSKHOD  I was a “significant space accomplishment. 
“It  is  a  clear  indication  that  the  Russians  are  continuing  a  large 
space  program  for  the  achievement  of  national  power  and  prestige.” 
He observed that Saturn V rocket, while not yet  available, represented 
U.S.  bid  fo r  space supremacy.  “It  is still a  good  bid  and  ou r  policy is 
to  proceed rapidly  to the flight stage although it is still two  years away.” 
He said  Saturn V was “ a  vehicle that  can put  240,000 pounds  in  orbit 
as  against  the  10,000-  to  15,000-pound  class  the  Russians  have  been 
flying.”  (Sehlstedt, Balt.  Sun,  10/13/64;  Houston Post,  10/13/64) 
Speculation about why  Soviet VOSKHOD  I  space flight was terminated  after 
24 hours was  proferred  by  experts around  the world.  U.S.  space engi- 
neers generally indicated Soviets operated according to plan by  terminat- 
ing  flight when  they did.  However, officials of  other Western countries 
speculated VOSKHOD  I was  brought  down prematurely, for  reasons vari- 
ously given as illness among the crew,  faulty  radio transmitter,  and  im- 
proper orbit.  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson  (D.-N.  Mex.) , Chairman of Sen- 
ate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said, “We  knew  the 
shot  was  coming  and   we  had  information  it  would  involve  a  week- 
that’s why they had the doctor along.”  He suggested technical problems 
had  caused premature ending of  trip.  Some sources pointed to Soviets’ 
own  announcement the  previous  day,  which  referred  to  “conditions  of 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4, 

351 

prolonged  f l igh t”   At  least one press analysis, i n  retrospect, said VOSK- 
th because of  political events in 
HOD  I  was perhaps  ordered back  to  
the Soviet Union-Soviet  Premier N i   Khrushchev was being removed 
from office by Presidium of  the Communist Par ty  Central Committee, a n  
(Ubell,  N .Y .   Her .   T r ib . ,  
occurrence  not  made  public  until  Oct.  15. 
10/14/68;  Simons,  Wash. Pos t ,   10/14/64;  Time, 10/.30/64,37) 
October  13:  Unnamed  NASA  official  quoted  by   Howard  Simons  in  Wash- 
ington  Post  as saying  there  was  “increasing  evidence”  that  U.S.S.R. 
was  building  powerful  new  rocket  booster.  However,  it  was  not  used 
in launching  three-man VOSKHOD I spacecraft.  U.S.  Government officials 
ers  . . . mated  into  a  multistage  rocket.” 
were  said  t o  believe  VOSKHOD  I  launched  by  “old,  reliable space boost- 
1ww 
(Simons,  Wash.  Post,  lo/ 
*  Analyzing  impact  of  VOSKHOD  I  flight, John  Finney  said  feeling of  U S .  
Government officials was  that  VOSKHOD  I  “probably  was  the  prelude to 
a  longer  flight  sometime soon  and t o  the  unveiling of  a  more  powerful 
rocket  for  launchings.” 
In   itself, VOSKHOD  I  flight  was  considered  of 
(Finney,  NYT ,   10/ 
more  psychological  than  technical  significance. 
14/64,  18) 
Sen.  Barry  M.  Goldwater  (R .-Ark)   , Republican  Presidential candidate, 
said in  Topeka, Kans.: 
The entry  of  the  Soviet Union  into  such  a  commanding  position  in 
( 6  
near-space  [VOSKHOD   I  flight]  also  requires  an  urgent  and  full  time 
consideration  by  all  concerned  branches  of  the  Federal  Government 
and, of  course, the President. 
“Near  space,  the  area  in  which  orbital  flight  takes  place,  is  the  key 
to  the  military  use  of  space.  The   nation  that  commands  near  space 
could,  after  developing proper  weapons  and maneuverable  space  craft, 
dominate  the earth. 
I  have pleaded  for years  for  a  realistic emphasis on  research  in  this 
< L  
area. 
Instead, this Administration  has dedicated billions of  dollars and 
the virtual entirety of  its space efforts, to  a moon shot. 
“The  military  possibilities  of  space  have  been  downgraded  by  this 
Administration,  as,  indeed, has most  research  into the advanced weapon 
systems which we so urgently need to keep the peace in the face of  Soviet 
advances scientifically, and Soviet threats politically. 
“Again, this is a fu l l  time and a full-scale problem  requiring immediate 
attention.  We  need  a  major  redirection  of  our  space research efforts.’’ 
(Text, SBD, 10/14/64,  236) 
Washington Star was informed  of  VOSKHOD  1’s  safe landing 25 min.  before 
Soviet Government ma&  the  official  announcement, when  Edward  Bas- 
kakov  of  the newspaper Soviet Russia  called from Moscow for a  reaction 
to   the  flight.  “Beat”  of  the  Star  was  based  upon  their  editorial  on 
SPUTNIK  I  in  1957. 
(Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/64) 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  officials  announced  they  believed  they 
had  successfully “hit”  EXPLORER XXII  satellite  with  laser  beams  fired 
one-per-second  across  more  than  500  miles.  Whether  the.  hits  were 
(AP, Balt. Sun, 
definitely achieved o r  not would await further analysis. 
10/14/68;  Wash. Pos t ,  10/14/64) 
October 14: U.S.S.R.  announced  routine launching of  COSMOS XLVIII  satellite 
into  orbit,  with  the  following  parameters:  295-km.  apogee  (183-mi.), 
203-km.  perigee  (126-mi.), 89.4-min.  period,  and  65.07”-inclination to 
(Tass,  Krasnuya  Zvezda,  10/15/64,  1,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
the  equator. 

352 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4  

October  14:  NAS 
ght  Center 
Co.,  prime 
contract  mo 
first  stage  (S-IC)  : $2,918,418  modification  for  design, 
of  components for  S I C  stage  umbilical  connection 
ware;  and,  $11,836,000  modification  for  structural 
static-load  testing  program  on  S I C  to  assure  structural  integrity  of 
the  7.5-million-lb.-thrust  rocket  stage.  These  modifications  increased 
total value of  the  S-IC  contract  to  $516,206,009. 
(Marshal2 S tar ,   10/ 
1 4 / a  9 )  
NASA  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  announced  two  firms  would  negotiate 
to   provide  three  Satellite  Telemetry  Automatic  Reduction  Systems 
(STARS) : Beckman Instruments,  Inc.,  and  Electro Mechanical Research, 
Inc.  Negotiations with  the  two  firms would  lead  to  final  selection  of 
single contractor fo r  $2.5-million award.  ( GSFC  Release 6-30-64) 
Three  Soviet  cosmonauts spent  the  day  undergoing  medical  checks  and 
post-flight  examinations,  following  their  24-hour  orbital  space  flight. 
(Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/15/64) 
0  Soviet  geophysicist  Academician  Yevgeny  Fedorov  said  in  Izvestiu  that 
VOSKHOD  I space flight proved Soviet space program was more advanced 
than that of  US . ,   adding:  “I  am sure that  in the future, both  Soviet and 
American cosmonauts will meet on  the moon.”  Pravdu  editorial writer 
Victor Mayevsky  said  on Moscow  TV that  the  flight  of  VOSKHOD  I was 
(Tanner, NYT ,   10/15/@,  8 ;  
a  “Pearl Harbor  in  space fo r  America.” 
UPI,  Chic. Trib., 10/15/@) 
*  Speculation  that  U.S.S.R. 
timed  their  three-man  VOSKHOD  I  space  flight 
“to take the edge off  the Chinese atomic demonstration which is expected 
very  soon”  was  offered  by  Max  Lerner  in  New  Yo rk   Post. 
(Lerner, 
N .Y .  Post, 10/14/641) 
*  Discovery  of  a  sixteenth  meson  particle  in  the  atomic  nucleus,  named 
epsilon,”  by  scientists led  by  Dr.  Bogdan  C.  Maglic  a t   the  European 
6 6  
(CERN)  , was  announced. 
( N Y T ,  
Center  for  Nuclear  Research 
10/15/64) 
October  15:  X-15  No.  1 flown  by  John  B.  McKay  (NASA )   to  2;932  mph 
(mach 4.44)  and 82,000 ft. near Edwards, Calif.  This was  first flight of 
No.  1 since  it  was  modified  fo r  high-altitude  flight  research  (wing-tip 
pods  containing micrometeoroid  and  dust  collectors,  spectrometer, and 
densitron;  new  inertial  guidance  system originally  designed for  use  in 
USAF   x-20).  Purpose  of  this  flight  was  operational  checkout  of  new 
equipment  and  evaluation  of  flight  characteristics  with  the  wing-tip 
(NASA  X-15  Proj. Off.;  FRC Release) 
pods added. 
MSC  conducted partially successful mt of  parasail landing system in Galves- 
ton  Bay,  using dummy Gemini spacecraft.  (AP, 10/16/64) 
*  Eighty-three scientists,  engineers,  and  operating  groups  received  medals, 
citations,  and cash awards totaling $7,900  for outstanding contributions 
to  US. civilian  space  program,  in  NASA’s 6th  Annual  Honor  Awards 
Ceremony.  Recipients of  awards fo r  exceptional scientific achievement: 
William R. Lucas,  MSFC;  Ernst StuhIinger, MSFC;  Frank  B.  McDonald, 
GSFC;  and Daniel G. Mazur, GSFC.  Recipients of  award  fo r  outstanding 
leadership:  Dr.  Kurt  H.  Debus,  Director,  KSC;   Dr.  Harry  J.  Goett, 
Director,  GSFC;  and  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  Director,  MSFC.  Group 
achievement  awards  were  accepted  by  Dr.  Debus  for  KSC  and  by  Dr. 
for  MSFC.  Recipients  of  awards  f o r   exceptional  service: 
arrick, Oran W. Nicks, and  Leonard Jaffe of  NASA Hq. ; Hans 

353 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 
F.  Gruene  of  KSC;   and  Wesley  L.  Hjornevik  of  MSC.  Public  service 
awards went  to Bernie P.  Miller,  of  RCA,  and Harris M.  Schurmeier  and 
Allen  E.  Wolfe,  of  JPL, for their work on RANGER VII  lunar-photography 
mission.  Special award was presented  to Newton W.  Cunningham, Hq., 
for his work on RANGER  vn.  Cash  awards for   inventions and contribu- 
tions  were  presented  to  personnel  from  Ames  Research  Center,  Lewis 
Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Jet Propulsion  Lab- 
oratory.  Personnel  from Hq.,  FRC,  L ~ R C ,  LRC,  MSC,  and MSFC  received 
Presidential  citations  for  contributions  to  economy  and  efficiency  in 
Government.  (Program; NASA  Release 64-263) 
October  15 :  22 ,000 - lb~h ru s t  rocket engine  for Project Apollo  service mod- 
ule,  to  return  Apollo  astronauts from  the  moon,  was  test-fired twice  a t  
Las Cruces, N. Mex.  (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/16/64) 
0  USAF  version of  F-111  tactical fighter plane, designed for use by both  USAF 
and  USN,  rolled  out  of  General  Dynamics’  Fort Worth,  Tex.,  plant,  in 
ceremony attended  by  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  S.  McNamara,  Sec- 
retary  of  the  Air  Force  Eugene  M.  Zuckert,  Secretary  of  the  Navy 
Paul  H.  Nitze,  and  other  officials.  Secretary  McNamara  said:  “For 
the  first  time  in  aviation  history,  we  have  an   airplane  with  the  range 
of  a  transport,  the  carrying  capacity  and  endurance  of  a  bomber  and 
the  agility  of  a  fighter-pursuit  plane.  . . .”  The  technology  of  the 
variable-geometry  wing  configuration  was  developed  a t   NASA  Langley 
Research Center.  (DOD Release 719-64;  Witkin, NYT, 10/16/64,1,  11; 
Fryklund, Wash.  Eve.  Star, 10/15/64;  A v .   Wk.,  10/26/64,  32)  
0  Soviet  newspaper  T rud   science writer  Leonid  Byshko  said  flight  to  the 
moon  was  “one  of  the  most  immediate  problems  of  cosmonautics.” 
After  lunar  flight, he  said,  next  goal  would  be  flights to  other  planets 
in  the  solar  system.  “For  this  purpose,  new  rocket  carriers  based  on 
atomic  energy  are  needed.  . . .  There  are  no  difficulties  in  principle 
for creating such nuclear  rockets.  Only a certain time  is required  for  de- 
( UPI,  Wash. Post,  10/16/64) 
signing, building  and testing.” 
U.S.S.R.  announced  Nikita  Khrushchev  had  been  “released”  of  all  his 
official  duties  f o r   reasons  of  “age  and  deteriorating health.”  H i s   suc- 
cessors were  named:  Leonid  Brezhnev  as   Secretary  of  the  Communist 
(AP,  Wash. Post, 
Party,  and  Alexei  Kosygin  as   Premier  of  U.S.S.R. 
10/16/64) 
*  Craig  Breedlove  bettered  his  own  world  land-speed  record  a t   Bonneville 
Salt  Flats,  Utah,  driving  his  three-wheeled  jet-propelled  vehicle  a t   an  
average  of  526.28  mph,  then  survived  crash  when  the  racer  veered  off 
the  course  and,  its  braking  gear  failing,  skidded  through  shallow  mud 
(UPI,  NYT,  10/16/64,  48)  
before  finally  halting  in  lS-ft.-deep pond. 
NRX-A2  Nerva  (Nuclear Engine  for  Rocket  Vehicle  Application)  experi- 
mental reactor, run at full power Sept. 24, was restarted in test of  reactor 
system  in  the  low-power,  low-flow  region  of  operation.  Analysis  of 
data  from  this  run  confirmed  design  predictions  and  indicated  no 
unusual  start-up or  control  problems.  Test was conducted  by  Aerojet- 
General  and  Westinghouse  Electric  Corporations  fo r   NASA-AEC  Space 
( SNPO ; NASA  Press  Conf.  Transcript, 
Nuclear  Propulsion  Qffice. 
11/12/64) 
October  15-16:  NASA’)s RELAY  n  communications  satellite was  used  to  trans- 
mit  television coverage  of  election events i n   Britain;  it  was  joined  by 
RELAY I on the 16th.  (NASA  Release 64-254) 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

354 
October 16: NASA announced the first electric-rocket engine space flight  (July 
20)  had  been  so  successful that  a  second  test  would  not  be  necessary. 
In   Sert  I  (Space  Electric  Rocket  Test),  electron-bombardment engine 
using mercury  propellant produced an ion Beam  developing .W55 lb. of 
(NASA  Release 64-264; LRC  Release 64-93) 
thrust. 
NASA  Langley  Research  Center  announced  that  a  foam  generator  devel- 
oped  f o r   poss2ble  use  in   recovery  at  sea  of  instrument  packages  r e  
turned  from  space  had  been  patented.  Attached  to  instrument  pack- 
ages,  generator mixes chemicals to produce  almost  instant plastic  foam 
a s  it parachutes  to water  landing,  filling a  bag which keeps the payload 
( LaRC  Release,  10/16/M) 
floating  on  the  surface awaiting  recovery. 
US.-Japan  telecommunications cable ‘broke  at  the peak of  traffic from the 
Olympic Games in Tokyo, including  sound track  for films telecast from 
Tokyo  and  sent  via  SYNCOM  111  communications  satellite.  Japanese 
officials estimated earliest repair date as Oct.  23. 
(N Y T ,  10/17/64,13) 
NASA  received  patent  fo r   life preserver  carried  by  Mercury  astronauts  on 
Invented  by  MSC  engineers Mathew  I.  Rad- 
all  orbital  space  flights. 
nofsky and Glenn A.  Shewmake, life-preserver was called “Ram’s  Horn” 
because  of  its  shape:  main pa r t   fits acrosa wearer’s  chest and  hook-like 
ends  fit  over  the  s4oulders. 
(Jones,  NYT ,   10117164,  35) 
Hovercraft,  also known  as  GEM’S (ground  effect machines) , probably  w i l l  
be  regulated  by  Coast  Guard,  Civil  Aeronautics  Board,  and  Federal 
Maritime  Commission,  according  to   tentative  positi’on  statements  re- 
leased jointly  by  nine Government agencies.  (AP, NYT ,  10/17/6$,  &; 
M&R,  10/26/641,45) 
Archeological relics dating as f a r  back as 3,500 B.C.  were being uncovered 
at  future  site  of  man’s  rocket  launchings t o  the moon-Merritt 
Island, 
(NASA  Space Sheet, 10/16/64) 
Fla. 
Communist  China  announced  it  had  detonated  its  first  nuclear  device. 
Three minutes  before  the  nuclear  detonation  a n   earthquake  occurred 
in  Mongolia, precluding the possibility of  detecting the nuclear explosion 
by  AFCRL’S  four  automatic  seismic  stations  in  northeastern  U S .   (OAR  
Review, 1/65,15;  Reuters, NYT ,  10/17/64+, 10) 
October  17:  USAF  launched  Thor-Agena D  space  booster  with  unidentified 
satellite  payload,  from  WTR. 
( H H N - 4 8 )  
e Under  Secretary of  the Air  Force  Brockway McMillan  said  in  Journal  of 
the Armed Forces article:  “The Department of  Defense and the Air Force 
in   particular  must  provide  every  reasonable means  of  support  to  NASA 
and I know of  no high official in DOD or the A i r  Force who does not share 
this conviction.  . . .”  He pointed to  “a conviction shared by both  DOT) 
and  NASA  that  there  must  be  a  maximum  of  cross-pollination between 
respective programs.  To  do  anything  less would  be   short  sighted and 
wasteful  and  would  certainly  indicate  that  we   had  failed  to   grasp  the 
essentiality of  the national space effort as a consensus.  . . .”  ( . I / A r m d  
Forces, 10/17/64+,  16-17) 
October 18: National Aeronautics and S  ace Council Executive Secretary and 
Acting Chairman Dr. Edward C. d l s h  said on “From the People” radio 
program  that  US .   has  “at  least a  5 0 5 0  chance of  getting to the moon 
ahead of [U S S R . ] .   . . ,  I’m  talking about landing on the moon and 
taking off  from the moon and returning safely to  earth. 
I’m  not talking 
about a  [circumlunar]  shot  around the moon which they might be able 
I) 
to  do even  w i t h  this [present]  equipment.”  Discussing Soviet’s  three- 

355 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 0 4 
man  VOSKHOD  I  space  flight,  he  said  the  fact  tha t   the cosmonavts  did 
not  wear  spacesuits was  “probably  one  of  the most  significant  aspects 
(AP, Houston Post, 10/19/64) 
of  the whole flight.” 
October 18: NASA  Administrator  James  E. Webb  said in  interview with  John 
Finney  on  the  subject  of  U.S.  and U.S.S.R.’s  space programs: 
“The  significance  [of  VOSKHOD  I  flight],  it  seems to  me,  is  the  clear 
indication  that  manned  flight  in  large  spacecraft  is  important  to  the 
Russians, and  offers opportunities for  them  for  the  future that  justifies 
the investment clearly required.” 
Asked i f   VOSKHOD  I flight meant U.S.S.R.  had “extended its lead over 
the United  States in manned  space flight,”  Mr. Webb  replied: 
“This  is  hard   to  answer  categorically  but  if  I  had  to  give  a  quick 
answer, I would say ‘Yw.’ ’’ 
Asked  when  U.S.  would  overtake  U.S.S.R. 
in  manned  space  flight, 
Mr.  Webb said: 
“Well,  first  I  think  we  must  always keep  in  mind  that  our program 
including  the developmental flights on  the Saturn IB  and the flights out 
to a quarter of  a million miles with Saturn V are  designed t o  meet United 
States needs for a n  operational capability out that  f a r  in space. 
“If  the  flight  capability  of  the  Russian  craft  is  extended  to  include 
these  additional  capabilities,  then  we  will  have  a  serious  problem  in 
catching  up  in  the next  few years. 
If  their  capability does  not  extend 
to  the  booster  power  necessary  for  the  full  range  of  operations  out  to 
the moon,  then we  will  pass  them  in  this  decade,  provided  our  present 
program  is  adequately  funded  and no  unknown  or  unanticipated  diffi- 
(Interview, NYT,  10/18/64,  E5) 
culties show up.” 
*  Soviet  space  scientists  Dr. Vladimir  Lebedev  and  Dr.  Oleg  Kuznetsov, 
writing in  Soviet Air  Force magazine, discussed U S .  Astronaut  L.  Gor- 
don  Cooper’s  sightings  of  houses  and  other  objects  from  space  as   he 
orbited  over  Tibet  in May  1%3.  The  scientists noted  that  some U.S. 
experts had attributed Major Cooper’s sightings t o  hallucinations caused 
by  spaceflight  conditions.  However,  the  Soviets  said,  their  own  ex- 
periments with men in soundproof,  dark  chambers simulating spacecraft 
led  them  to  conclude  that  Major  Cooper’s  olbservations were  “an  illu- 
(AP,  NYT, 
sion  of  recognition  caused  by  insufficient  information.” 
10/19/64+, 3)  
October 19:  NASA  launched  four-stage Javelin  (Argo M)  sounding  rocket 
from Wallops  Island, Va.,  with sixth payload  of  Japan-US. experiments 
in  cooperative  program  to   investigate properties  and characteristics  of 
the  ionosphere.  Psyload was sent to  521-mi. altitude before impacting 
in  Atlantic  Ocean  848  mi.  from  launch  site.  Telemetry  during  flight 
was  intermiwent, so preliminary  results  of  the experiments  were  incon- 
clusive.  For the  cooperative experiments,  Radio  Research  Laboratory, 
Tokyo,  supplied  radio  frequency  ( R F )  resonance probe  and NASA  God- 
dard  Space Flight Center  supplied  Langmuir probe. 
(Wallops Release 
64-75) 
Rally  in Moscow’s Red Square celebrated homecoming for the three Soviet 
cosmonauts who  orbited Oct.  12-13  in VOSKHOD  I  spacecraft:  Vladimir 
Mikhailovich  Komarov,  Konstantin  Petrovich  Feoktistov,  and  Boris 
Borisovich Yegorov.  This was first public appearance  of  new U.S.S.R. 
leadership,  and  principal  address  was  given  by  CPSU First  Secretary 
Leonid Brezhnev, who said: 

356 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 
“The  Soviet Union  has  still further  outstripped  the  United  States  of 
America in the ‘space race’.  . . . [We]  do  not regard our space research 
a s  a n   end  in   itself,  as  some  kind  of  ‘race.‘ 
In  the  great  and  serious 
cause of  the  exploration  and  development of  outer  space,  the  spirit  of 
of  the  tremendous constructive work  of  the  Soviet people  . . . in   con- 
the frantic gamblers is alien to us.  We see in this cause part and parcel 
formity with the general line of  our party  in all spheres of  the economy, 
science  and  culture  in  the  name  of  man,  for  the  sake  of  man.  . . .” 
(Tanner, NYT, 10/20/64,1,2;  AP, 10/19/64) 
October 19: NASA  announced Dr. George E.  Mueller, Associate Administrator 
for Manned Space Flight, assumed the role of  acting director  of  Project 
Gemini.  George M.  Low,  former  Deputy  Associate Administrator  for 
Manned  Space Flight  at Hq.  and since February  1964 Deputy  Director 
of  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center,  had  served  as  acting  director  of 
(NASA  Release 64-247) 
Gemini since last November. 
*  NASA  announced three-month expedition a t  sea  using  converted Navy  air- 
craft  transport  to  launch  sounding  rockets  would  be  conducted  next 
year  a s   part  of  International  Quiet  Sun  Year  (IQSY) .  40 or  more 
scientific experiments would be carried by Nike-Apache and Nike-Caj un 
sounding rockets as well  a s  Arcas and Hasp weather  rockets to  areas of 
the  upper  atmosphere  and  the   ionosphere  that  cannot  be  reached  by 
land-based rockets.  Exact  locations  of  the  launches  had  not  yet  been 
determined, but it had been decided that a number  of  experiments would 
be  made  in  region  of  the  magnetic  equator  in  eastern  portion  of  the 
South Pacific Ocean.  NASA Wallops Station was  assigned project man- 
agement  of  the  expedition  and  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  was  re- 
sponsible  for  coordinating  most  of  the  scientific  experiments,  being 
provided by universities, other Federal agencies, and  NASA  field centers. 
Project was  under overall direction of  NASA  Office of  Space Science and 
Applications. 
(NASA  Release &246;  Wallops Release 64-73) 
*  NASA  began  recruiting  10-20  scientistdastronauts fo r  future manned space 
flights.  Qualified  applicants-with  doctoral  degree  or  equivalent  ex- 
perience  in  natural  sciences,  medicine,  o r   engineering-would 
be 
screened and  evaluated according to  standards established by  NASA  and 
ad   hoc  Committee  on   Scientific Qualifications of  Scientist-Astronauts 
of  the  NAS  Space Science Board.  Before  iinal  selection  as  astronauts, 
applicants would receive training  in  a  limited space-simulation program 
designed  to  familiarize  them  with  space  environment  and  test  their 
ability  t9  withstand  physical  stresses of  space  flight.  Departing  from 
previous requirement that astronaut candidates be experienced jet pilots, 
NASA  said  selected  astronauts  not  already  qualified  pilots  would  be 
given  individual  flight  training  to  qualify  them  a s  pilots  of  high-per- 
formance aircraft  and helicopters. 
(NASA  Release 64-248) 
Maj.  Edwin Aldrin, Jr.,  from the newest group of  NASA  astronauts,  already 
was qualified as a scientist-astronaut, holding a doctorate in astronautics. 
Two  other  astronauts  were  nearing  completion  of  doctoral  studies:  R. 
Walter Cunningham  (physics)  and Russell L.  Schweikart (aeronautics/ 
astronautics). 
(Houston Post, 10/20/64) 
Astronaut Russell L.  Schweikart began week-long test  of  qontinuous living 
in  a Gemini spacesuit.  Before  donning  the  spacesuit  at  Edwards  AFB, 
he  had  biosensors attached  to  his  body.  Among his  activities  for  the 
test:  experiencing  weightlessness  in  F-104B  aircraft,  going  through 

that  he had predicted in 196 

this might still be 
manned spacecraft on a  lunar-orbiting mission-“and 
attempted soon.”  He  added:  “Nothing  that  occurred during the  recent 
three-man flight has caused me to deviate from the prediction I made  in 
1961.”  (Chic. Tr ib . ,  10/20/64) 
*  IPL  analysis  of  portion  of  last  lunar 
rface photographed  by  RANGER  VII 
found  that  median  slope was  about  1.6’  over  30-ft. distance,  not  con- 
sidered  a  problem  for  Appollo’s  Lunar  Excursion  Module  (LEM). 
( A v .  Wk . ,  10/19/64,23,30) 
Editorial  by  Robert  Hotz  in  Aviation  Week  summarized  significance of 
Soviets’ VOSKHOD I three-man space flight: 
“It establishes clearly that  the  Soviets have not  abandoned their  goal 
of a manned lunar landing.  . . . 
It establishes the scientific validity  of  the  Soviet manned  space pro- 
4L 
purpose  f a r  beyond  its propaganda  value.  . . . 
gram  and  should  convince  even  dullards  that  this  venture  has  sound 
“It  indicates  clearly  that  the  Soviets  are  prepared  to  continue  with 
their  own  across-the-board space  exploration  program  and  will  not  be 
dependent on any  cooperative ventures with  the  United States.  . . . 
“It  also confirms the  widening Soviet  lead  in  space medicine,  which 
is the key to all manned space flight operations.  . . . 
“It  spotlights the  ultra-conservatism shown  by  the  U S .   military  ap- 
proach  to manned space flight  in starting to  do now what  the  Pentagon 
planned  to  begin  on  a  lesser  scale  in   three  years.  . . .”  ( A v .  Wk . ,  
10/19/64,21) 
NASA announced appointment of  Charles F.  Yost, assistant director of  DOD’S 
Advanced Research Projects  Agency  (ARPA )   since 1960, a s  Director  of 
Office  of  Technology  Utilization,  NASA  Hq.,  effective  Nov.  1.  (NASA 
Release 6p-245) 
Reported  that  NASA  was  considering  University  Explorer  program,  under 
which universities would design  and  build  their  own  scientific satellites 
with  NASA  funding.  The  satellites  would  be  launched  from  Wallops 
Island with Scout boosters.  (Av. Vk., 10/19/64,  35) 
Univ.  of  Chicago president George W.  Beadle said a t  National  Electronics 
Conference  in  Chicago  that  communication  of  scientific  information 
among  industry,  Government,  and  universities was  too  slow.  He  said 
two main  things  should be  done:  “ ( 1 )  academic people must  do  better 
at translating  their  discoveries and  (2)   industry  and government  apply- 
ing  this  basic  research  must  do   better  at  keeping  up  on  new  develop- 
(Ch ic .  T r ib . ,  10/20/64) 
ments so they can take advantage of  them.” 

358 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 
October  19:  Royal  Crown  Cola  Co. president  W.  H.  Glenn  announced  Lt. 
Col.  John H.  Glenn, Jr.,  former NASA  astronaut, had been elected a direc- 
(Hammer, NYT,  10/20/6d,  49) 
tor of  the company. 
*  Ekplosion-fire of  fuel  f o r   USAF  XB-70  aircraft  at  Eawards  AFB,  Calif., 
caused four  injuries  and  one death  (Ivan W.  Mayo of  North American 
Aviation,  Inc.) . 
(UPI,  Wash. Post, 10/21/64) 
Republican  six-man study  group  headed  by  former  Secretary  of  Defense 
Neil  H.  McElroy  released  report  charging  that  Kennedy-Johnson Ad- 
ministration  had  neglected  research  and  development  of  new  weapon 
systems.  In  reply  to  the  charges,  DOD issued  statement  saying  it  was 
S b  pursuing  a  vigorous  and effective research  and  development program 
designed to keep this nation  the strongest in the world  . . .” and citing 
(AP,  NYT, 
more  than  200  major  new  projects  initiated  since  1961. 
10/20/64l) 
October 20: U.K.  successfully launched its second Blue Streak rocket booster 
from Woomera, Australia,  in development test.  Blue Streak wa s   slated 
(M& R ,  
to  serve  as  first  stage  of  ELDO’S  multistage  launch  vehicle. 
10/26/64,11) 
USAF  space  medicine  team,  in  paper  delivered  to  seminar  at  Brooks  AFB, 
reported  on experiment with  12 volunteers committed to  “absolute bed 
rest”  for four weeks,  in attempt to  simulate conditions of  extended space 
flight.  After  the  period,  subjects showed marked  increase  in  tendency 
toward  fainting, but when  protected with antigravity  suits this  tendency 
nearly  disappeared.  Heartbeat  rates  were  faster  in  stand-up  test  after 
the bedrest  than  in   similar  test before  it.  High  gravity  loads  in  centri- 
fuge  did  not  adversely  affect  the  subjects  after  their  long  rest.  The 
volunteers lost  about  one-fifth of  a  gallon  of  their  total  blood  volume, 
and  increase  in  calcium  loss  was  apparent,  but  was  not  considered 
(Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/64) 
hazardous. 
Rear Adm. Francis D.  Boyle,  Deputy Director of  Defense Communications 
Agency’s  Communications Satellite Project  Office,  told  National  Space 
Club  in  Washington  of  DOD plans  fo r   a  military  comsat  system.  He 
said  Titan  1114 launch  vehicles would  orbit  up  to  24  comsats  during 
the  first six months of  1966, placing six to eight  satellites in  orbit  each 
launch.  Orbiting  a t  more than  22,000 mi.,  the  satellites would  be  “ap- 
(AP, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  10/21/64) 
proximately synchronous.” 
Lt.  Col.  John  D.  Peters  (USAF) ,   engineer  at  Arnold  Engineering Develop- 
ment  Center,  said  in   §an  Antonio  that  the  four-legged  landing  gear 
designed fo r  Apollo’s  Lunar  Excursion Nodule  (LEM) was  “needlessly 
risky”  and  should  be  replaced  by  an  inflatable “doughnut”  to  cushion 
the  LEM’S  landing.  Tube a t   LEM’S  base  could  be  inflated  just  before 
landing, would allow a safe landing even if   exact nature of  lunar  surface 
is unknown.  (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/64;  SBD ,  10/22/64l,  283) 
Communications Satellite Corp.  requested bids  from  15  companies for  re- 
search data  and consultant services fo r  defining design and performance 
requirements of  ground  terminals fo r  global comsat system.  (ComSat- 
Con, Release) 
October *21: Astrobee  1500,  most  powerful  of  US .   sounding  rockets,  was 
flight-tested  from  NASA’s W a l l o p   Island,  Va, launch  site,  its  second 
stage  carrying  156-lb. instrument  package  to  1,212-m‘. altitude  before 
impact  in  the Atlantic Ocean 1,326 mi. from launch site.  This was sec- 
ond flight test of  the solid-propellant rocket ; adequate performance data 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 

359 

tion,  temperatures,  and  pressures,  and  from  preliminary  examination 
(Wallops Release 64-76) 
the test appeared successful. 
October 21 : Mstislav V.  Keldysh, president  of  Soviet Academy  of  Sciences, 
said  in Moscow press conference that  vehicle used to launch VOSKHOD  I 
spacecraft w a s  more  powerful “than  that  used  before to  put  into  orbit 
any  instruments  o r   astronauts.”  Keldysh  said VOSKHOD  I was  first  of 
a  series but  revealed nothing about future flights.  Konstantin P.  Feok- 
tistov,  scientist-cosmonaut aboard  VOSKHOD  I,  revealed  he  had  made 
astronomical  observations  during  the  space  flight,  practicing  “aero- 
navigation by means of  a sextant.”  He predicted that on interplanetary 
flights “it  will  be  possible to   fix  the  spaceship’s position  autonomously 
on  board  the  spaceship.”  Feoktistov  also  disclosed VOSKHOD  1’s  atti- 
tude control system was  based on ion propulsion engine.  He described 
VOSKHOD 1’s  return  to  earth  a s  a  “featherbed  landing.”  Of  the  space- 
craft’s  landing  system, Cosmonaut Vladimir  Komarov said  after  para- 
chutes were  opened,  a  second  retrorocket  was  fired  to  achieve the  soft 
landing.  Physician-cosmonaut Boris B.  Yegorov disclosed that  “sharp 
movements of  the head caused slight dizzy sensations, sensations of  gen- 
(Shabad,  NYT, 10/ 
eral  discomfort”  for  both  him  and  Feoktistov. 
22/64,  15; Clymer, Balt.  Sun, 1OJ22JM; AP,  Chic. T r ib . ,  10/22/M) 
Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  NASA Deputy  Administrator,  gave  the  1964 Third 
Bicentennial Marshall  Wood  Lecture,  Brown  Univ.,  Providence,  R.I. 
moon  “may  be  somewhat commonplace.  . . .  The  moon  will  also  be 
Dr.  Dryden  predicted  that  by  the  year  2000  astronauts’  trips  to   the 
serving  ,as an  important  scientific station  fo r   radio  astronomers  . . . 
[and]  many  other  kinds  of  scientists.  . . .  We  may  be  maintaining 
. . 
sizable installations on the moon. 
“Beyond  the moon  it  is probable  that  manned  flights will  have  been 
made to  Mars and possibly to  the vicinities of  other planets a s  well.  . . . 
In  space stations o*biting  above the  earth we  shall likely be fabricatirrg 
space vehicles;  it  is possible that  we  shall be using  rockets,  in  ballistic 
nent to  another.  . . . 
trajectory  through  space,  to  deliver  freight  shipments from  one  conti- 
It 
“Let  us let  our  imagination  roam  to  a  hundred  years  from  now. 
seems  certain  that  we  will  have  developed  the  capability  to  move 
throughout  the  solar  system  and  will  have  sent  at  least  exploratory 
expeditions  to  the  outermost reaches.  We  w i l l  be  considering  the  ex- 
tension  of  our  exploration of  space to the nearest  stars,  but  I am some- 
what  doubtful  that  we   can  even  in  this  period  discover new  sources of 
energy which will make this journey possible in the  lifetime of  one man. 
“It  seems  likely  that  within  100 years  we   will  have  established  out- 
posts in  the form  of  stations on the moon and Mars.  It is possible that 
we  will  have moved  to  a  certain degree of  colonization on Mars,  but  I 
doubt  that t h i s  w 
ace  on  the moon,  unless  the moon  turns  out 

cooperation  among the  nations  of  the  earth;  otherwise i t   is  not likely 
to  be accomplished.  . . .”  (Text) 

360 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4  
October 21 : FAA   announced new series of about 600 sonic-boom tests late this 
year  over  White  Sands  Missile  Range,  N.  Mex.,  creating  sonic  boom 
pressure  ranging  up  to   30  psf  above  normal  atmospheric  pressure  to 
measure effects on stxuctures.  NASA  and other  agencies would also  par- 
ticipate  in the research preparatory  to development of  a U S .  supersonic 
(Clark, NYT ,   10/22/M) 
transport. 
Nomadic  Lapps  in   northern  Sweden  had  registered  complaints  about 
ESRO’s  rocket launching plans  from  new  base being built about 100 mi. 
northeast  of  Kiruna.  Beginning  in  1966,  ESRO  would  fire  50  rockets 
per  year  120 mi.  into  the  ionosphere every year  fo r  eight  years.  But 
the Lapps,  living in   the target  area fo r  the  rockets, were fearful for the 
(Reuters, NYT ,  10/21/64+, 26) 
safety of  themselves and their reindeer. 
NASA  issued  a  Tech  Brief  describing  new  type  of  adhesive bonding  tech- 
nique  in   structural  assembly,  using  epoxy  resins  a s  an  adhesive which 
leaves no voids o r  a i r  pockets between the two surfaces joined  together. 
(NASA  Release 64-262) 
0  Dr.  Dwight F. Gunder, 61,  gpecial adviser on rockets and missiles to  Navy 
Bureau  of  Ordnance,  died  in   Loveland,  Colo.  Dr.  Gunder  had  re- 
ceived  citation which  said he  “provided  the guide  lines fo r  the  Polaris 
(AP, NYT ,  10/23/64+,  34) 
missile’s  development.” 
October 22: AEC  detonated five-kiloton nuclear device 2,700 ft.  underground 
in  the Tatum  Salt Dome,  in  southern Mississippi.  Called Project  Sal- 
mon,  the  test  was  designed  to  evaluate performance  of  seismographic 
equipment in  detecting underground  nuclear explosions.  Officials =ti- 
mated  the lblast created  120tO-ft.-diameter cavity  in the salt  dome.  (AI?, 
N .Y .  Her.  Tr ib . ,  10/23/64+) 
Secretary of  Defense Robert S. McNamara said in news conference: “.  . . I 
do  not  anticipate any  significant increase in  the Defense budget  fo r  the 
next  fiscal year  as a  result  of  last  week’s  events.  In  fact  . . . , I  feel 
quite confident that  the budget w i l l  decline a s  a  percentage of  the gross 
national  product,  while  supporting  what  is  recognized  as  the  strongest 
military  force  in  the  world.  . . .” 
( W D  Release  76.54%) 
John  L.  Sloop, Assistant Associate Administrator  for  Advanced  Research 
and   Technology,  NASA,  said  in  lecture  to   Santa  Clara  County  Science 
Teachers, at NASA Ames Research Center: 
“On  the momentous day  of  the first  flight to  the moon’s  surface,  the 
three  astronauts w i l l  be  using  the  results of  almost a  decade of  concen- 
trated  effort which  include knowledge,  skills,  and  equipment of  30,000 
people in ten NASA  Centers and over a quarter of  a million people in more 
than  5,000  companies.  They will  have  flight  experience in  space  100 
times  longer  than the  total  time  logged  in  Mercury.  They  w i l l   have 
the  knowledge  gained  by  dozens  of  unmanned  satellites  that  have 
probed  space about  the moon  and  beyond.  They will  have  the  result 
of  Ranger  photographs  of  the lunar surface plus more  detailed surveys 
. .”  (Text; 
made by  lunar  orbiting  and  the  Surveyor  lunar  lander. 
NASA  msc Div.) 
October 23:  NASA  launched  Javelin  (Argo D - 4 )   sounding rocket  from Wal- 
l o p   Island,  Va.,  with  90-lb.  payload  containing  instrumentation  to  
measure  low-level  cosmic  radio  noise.  The  experiment  was  timed  to 
coincide with passage of  EXPLORER  xx  (fixed frequencg topside sounder 
satellite), which also was being used to  investigate cosmic noise source 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

361 
a t   wavelengths  which  do  not  penetrate  to  earth  because  of  shielding 
effect of  ionosphere.  The Javelin was sent up through the region of  the  
satellite about  15 min.  after EXPLORER  xx had  passed  through  the  area 
a t  about 650-mi. altitude.  During  the  flight  18 min.  of  scientific data 
were  telemetered from  rocket payload,  which reached  660-mi.  altitude 
before  impacting  in   the  ocean  650 mi.  from  launch  site.  Preliminary 
analysis  indicated  flight  results  were  good. 
(Wallops  Release 64-77) 
October  23:  Gemini  Titan  GT-2  spacecraft  was  mated  with  the  Titan  I1 
launch  vehicle  at  Launch  Complex  19, Cape Kennedy,  preparatory  to  
( MSC Roundup, 10/28/64,3) 
unmanned ballistic flight later this year. 
*  USAF Atlas-Agena D  satellite booster combination was launched from Van- 
denberg  AFB,  Calif.,  with  unidentified payload. 
I t  was  later  disclosed 
(AP, NYT ,  10/24/64;  H H N - 4 8 )  
that  three satellites were  orbited. 
*  Test  of  parasail  spacecraft  recovery  system  for  manned  space  flight  was 
conducted  by  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  over  Trinity  Bay,  Tex. 
Unmanned  boilerplate  Gemini  spacecraft  c an y in g   parasail  system  in 
stowed position was  dropped  from  (2-119  aircraft  a t  11,000-ft. altitude. 
Parasail  deployed  properly  and  landing  rockets  reduced  impact  to  10 
fps, but because of  rigging error  in parachute  installation the spacecraft 
descended  straight  down  instead  of  making  programed  turn .   MSC’S 
John  Kiker  said  everything  functioned  in   proper  sequence  and  the  
( A v .  Wk., 12/14/64,  61) 
test  was  considered successful. 
*  Dr.  Eugene  B.  Konecci,  Director  of  Biotechnology and  Human  Research 
Div.  in  NASA  Office  of  Advanced  Research  and  Technology  since  July 
1962, resigned  from NASA  to  join  staff  of  the National Aeronautics and 
Space  Council.  Dr.  Walton  L.  Jones,  Jr.,  head  of  Human  Research 
Branch,  was  assigned  as  Acting  Director  of  the  Biotechnology  and 
Human Research Div.,  effective Oct. 26.  Dr.  Jones joined  the  division 
May  5,  previously  had  been  Director  of  Aviation  Medicine  Technical 
Div.  of  USN  Bureau of  Medicine and Surgery. 
(NASA  Release 64-268) 
0  NASA  Administrator  James E.  Webb  said  in  Tyler, Tex.,  that  the US., “in 
the  short  space  of  three  years,  has  more  than  tripled  its  industrial, 
scientific,  engineering,  and  governmental  space  capability.  This  was 
accomplished through the  close cooperation of  what might  be called the 
‘triad’ of  government, industry,  and the university community, in carry- 
ing  out  the  largest  peacetime  research  and  development  effort  in  all 
history.  Management  techniques  developed  in  coordinating  this  com- 
plex endeavor  are beginning to  find  their way  into  business and  indus- 
t r ia l   executive prucesses.  Experience has  been  gained  that may  prove 
useful in solving other difficult national and international problems. . . .” 
(Text) 
*  NASA  announced  preliminary  negotiations had  begun  to  lease Convair 990 
jet  transport,  with  option  to  buy,  from  Convair  Div.  of  General  Dy- 
namics  Corp.  The  aircraft  would  be  based  a t   NASA  Ames  Research 
Center.  Stripped  of  passenger  accommodations,  the  aircraft  would 
be  used  as  a  flying  laboratory  fo r   research  in  aeronautical  technology 
(NASA Release 64-269) 
and the space sciences. 
*  Rep.  Hale Boggs  (D.-La.)  asserted that  top management personnel would 
be moved  from NASA  Marshall  Space Flight  Center, Huntsville, Ala.,  to 
Michoud  Operations, Louisiana,  quoting  NASA  Administrator  James  E. 
Webb a s  saying that  NASA  was  analyzing the situation.  Mr.  Webb told 
Huntsville T i m e s  of  difficulties in  hiring  and keeping  top  executives for 
7 6 8 4 9 8  O-@g---2A 

362 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D   AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4 

the Alabama  installation, added:  “There’s  nothing  in  this  situation  that 
can’t be corrected, but it has to  be worked out.”  (AP, Wash. Sun. S tar ,  
10/25/64;  Hines, Wash. Eve.  Star, 10/26/64) 
October 23: French National Assembly approved 1965 funds f o r  U.K.-France 
Concorde supersonic transport.  (NYT, 10/24/64) 
Dr.  Bruno  Bettelheim,  professor  of  educational  psychology  at  Univ.  of 
Chicago,  said  in  address  before  symposium  on  American  Women  in 
Science, at MIT,  that women’s  “specific genius for nurtuTing, humanizing, 
and  preserving” should be made use of  in  all spheres of  living, in science, 
engineerihg, architecture, medicine, and all other professions. 
(Leland, 
Boston Globe, 10/23/64) 
October  24:  U.S.S.R.  announced  launching  COSMOS  XLIX artificial  earth 
satellite into  orbit:  apogee, 490 km.  (304 mi.)  ; perigee,  260  km.  (162 
mi.)  ; period,  91.83 min.;  and  inclination, 49’  to  the  equatorial  plane. 
Onboard equipment was said to be operating normally and ground track- 
(Tass,  Kra.snuya Zvezda, 
ing   station  was  processing  incoming  data. 
10/25/64,1,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
President  Johnson  announced U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  had  reached  final  agree- 
ment  on  exchange  of  meteorological  data,  tentatively  reached  in  the 
Second NASA/SOViet  Memorandum of  Understanding  of  June  6,  1964, 
and  approved by U.S.S.R.  Oct.  23.  Exchange of  conventional data via 
the  special telecommunications link would proceed soon.  Formal terms 
of  agreement  would  be  made  public  next  week  at  meeting  of  U.N. 
Committee on  the   Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer  Space. 
(UPI,  Wush. Post, 
lo/%/@;  NASA Off. of Int. Pro.) 
*  Subcommittee on  Science,  Research,  and Development  of  the House Com- 
mittee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  recommended steps to  be  taken  to 
distribute  Federal  funds  more  widely  throughout  the  country:  confer- 
ence of  representatives of  Government and  industry to  explore methods 
of  wider  distribution;  study  by  President’s  Office  of  Science and Tech- 
nology  to  identify  institutions  with  greatest  growth  potential;  addition 
of  NSF  funds  “for  the  specific  purpose  of  insuring  the  existence of  at 
least one center of  exceUence in  research and technology in each appro- 
priate  region  of  the  Nation”;  development of  long-range programs  hy 
the  Administration  to  be  carried  out  a t   under-used  science  centers. 
(Simons, Wm h .  Pos t ,  10/25/64) 
Republican Presidential  candidate  Sen.  Barry  M. Goldwater issued  report 
on science prepared by his Task Force on Space, Science, and the Atom, 
i n  which he had this to say of  Project Apollo : 
“Man  should  indeed  explore  the  moon,  but  I  see no  good  reason 
why we must  incur  the large unnecessary expense of  a  crash  program. 
The first man on the moon will probably not gain for us any vital military 
advantage.”  He  proposed  instruments  be  sent  to  the  lunar  surface, 
emphasis  be  concentrated  on  efforts  to  assure  the  “security  of  near- 
(Wash .  Pos t ,  10/25/64,  A9) 
space.” 
According  to  N OW   Commander-in-Chief Gen.  John  K.  Gerhart  ( USAF)  , 
manned Soviet satellites have passed over North America 44 times.  He 
added: “. . . strong modern aerospace defenses a re  indispensable;  they 
a re  a vital part of d e t e r r e n e t h e y  a re  essential to survival and they are 
( J /A rm e d  Forces, 10/24/64,6] 
our insurance to victory.” 

363 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 
October  24-25:  Employees’  Open  House  a t   NASA  L ew i s   Research  Center, 
with  employees  and  their  families  touring  the  facilities  and   exhibit 
(Lew is  News, lo/ 
areas.  Estimated 8,000 persons visited the Center. 
30/64,1) 
October  25:  Soviet  aircraft  designer  Artem  I.  Mikoyan,  brother  of  Soviet 
President Anastas  I. Mikoyan, remarked  in M e o w :  “Whatever  secrets 
surround the earth’s nearest neighbor,  they will be solved by man.  And 
one  would  like  to  believe  that  the  first  man  on  the  moon  w i l l   be  ou r  
Soviet cosmonaut.  We are confident of  this.  Confirmation of  this may 
be  seen  in   the  flight  of  the  spaceship  ‘sunrise’  [VOSKHOD].”  (AP, 
Wash. Post, 10/26/64) 
October  26:  NASA’s EXPLORER xx topside-ionosphere sounder  satellite  was 
providing  new  information  on  “the  arrangement  of  ionospheric irregu- 
larities”  and  “the  structure of  plasma resonances,”  according to Central 
(M&R ,  
Radio  Propagation  of  National  Bureau  of  Standards. 
10/26/@,  23) 
*  NASA  Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  was  launched  from  White  Sands,  N. 
Mex.,  to  119-mi. altitude  in  successful flight  to  collect data  on  celestial 
x-ray  sources.  American  Science and  Engineering, Inc.,  provided  pay- 
load  instrumentation,  which  included  four  Geiger  counters,  one  photo- 
electric  detector,  two  scintillation  counters,  and  two  star  sensors. 
Rocket  and  instrumentation  performance  were  considered good.  This 
was  the  500th  launch  of  an  Aerobee  liquid-propelled sounding  rocket, 
the  booster  that  carried  first U.S.  rhesus  monkeys  into  space on  high- 
altitude  flights  in  1951 and  1952.  Aerobee  w a s   outgrowth  of  rocket 
program  begun  in  1946 by  what  is  now  Aerojet-General Corp.,  which 
was  then  engaged  in  jet-assisted takeoff  ( Ja to )   research. 
(NASA  Rpt. 
SRL; Wash. Eve. S h r ,  10/28/@) 
*  NASA  Associate Administrator Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  said  in Missiles 
and Rockets  interview that  NASA was tentatively planning to  initiate pro- 
gram  definition  of  Apollo-X  spacecraft  in  FY  1965.  He  stressed, 
however, that NASA manned space station  of  from six-months to one-year 
lifetime would  receive no  hardware  funding  until  the  1970’s.  He  also 
said NASA’s Apollo-X study did not  compete with  USAX Manned Orbiting 
Laboratory  (MOL)   program:  “MOL is  important  for  the  military  as  a 
method of  determining  what  opportunities  there  a re  for  men  in  space. 
It  is  not  suitable  to  fulfill  NASA  requirements  to  gain  scientific knowl- 
edge.”  (M&R ,  10/26/64  , l a )  
*  Dr.  John  J. Brennan,  Jr.,  speaking for  Committee to  Preserve  Cambridge 
(Mass.)  Industries, said he would petition court to decide that proposed 
Kendall Sq. site for NASA,  Electronics Research Center did not meet urban 
renewal  standards.  Dr.  Brennan  said  he  received  reply  from  White 
House to his letter of  protest in which Presidential  aide Kenneth O’Don- 
nell  said  Kendall  Sq.  would  have  to  meet  all  legal  requirements? 
(Boston  Globe, 
urban  renewal  before  NASA  could  locate  there. 
10/26/64) 
*  Astronaut  Russell Schweickart removed  spacesuit a t  NASA  Ames  Research 
Center, where he had undergone three rides on centrifuge.  Schweickart, 
who  had  celebrated his 29th birthday  in the spacesuit, had  worn  it con- 
stantly since Oct.  19.  ( AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1 0 / 2 7 / a )  

364 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 0 4 
October  26:  Soviet  astronomer Nikolai  S.  Kardashev,  writing  in  U.S.S.R.’s 
Astronomical Jcrurnal,  proposed  that  tw o  sources of  strong radio  emis- 
sions-CTA-2  1 and   c ~ ~ - i o 2 -w e r e   possible  beacons  from  intelligent 
civilizations.  First  observed  in   1960, the  optically  invisible  “objects” 
a re  unique  among recorded sources in that  their  radiations emit a t  peak 
intensities  of  about  900  megacycles.  Kardashev  said  900  megacycles 
would  be  optimum  frequency  for  interstellar  communications,  since 
it is the  frequency where back  ound no i se -co sm ic  noise and quantum 
at a minimum.  (Susr‘y,,, NYT ,  10/26/64,1,36) 
noise-is 
*  Republican National  Committee Chairman Dean Burch said  in  open letter 
to   President  Johnson  that  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  was  en- 
gaging  “in  the  most  blatant  and  transparent  politics  by  suggesting he 
will  shift  the  top  space  scientists and  executives from  Huntsville, Ala., 
to New Orleans.  . . . This is political blackmail, pure and simple.  . . .” 
( CTPS,  Chic. Tr ib . ,  10/27/64+) 
European  Space Research Organization  ( ESRO) announced plans  to  build 
research  center  at  Noordwijk,  the  Netherlands.  Center  would  employ 
800-man  international  st&,  would 
include  laboratories,  proving 
grounds, and other facilities. 
( N Y T ,  10/27/64,5) 
0  London  betting  house  of  William  Hill  Ltd.,  announced  odds  of  100-to-1 
against  manned  lunar  landing  by  U.S.S.R.  before  Jan.  1,  1971  and 
150-to-1 against manned lunar  landing by  U.S.  before  same date.  Sev- 
eral  weeks  later  the  firm  improved  their  odds  by  changing  date  to 
(AP, &It.  Sun, 10/27/@;  SBD, 11/12/64+) 
Jan.  1,1968. 
October 27:  USAF  Project  Asset  space glider  was  launched  from  Cape Ken- 
nedy  with  single-stage Thor  booster  to  31-mi.  altitude before  returning 
downward a t  8,800-mph  speed  and  impacting  900  mi.  southeast of  the 
launch site in the Atlantic Ocean.  USAF  said the spacecraft temperatures 
had  reached about 2,000°  in the 25-min.  flight, which was  termed “very 
(AP,  Wash.  Pos t ,  10/28/64;  M&R ,   11/2/64,8) 
successful.” 
0  Red spot on the  moon was observed from 12:18 a.m.  to  about 1:00 a.m.  by 
three  lunar  observers in Po r t  Tobacco, Md.  Using 16-in. telescope, the 
astronomers  described  the  spot  as  a  “red,  pinkish  glow”  which  was 
“located on the base of  the central peak  in the Crater Alphonsus.”  This 
was  said  to  be  eighth  sighting  of  such  a  spot  on  the  moon  i n   the  last 
six years and the first in  Alphonsus since the discovery of  the phenome- 
non by a Russian scientist in 1958.  The three observers, associated with 
Trident  Engineer Associates  of  Annapolis, Md.,  were  using  equipment 
specially  developed  fo r   detecting  the  red  spots,  in  lunar  observation 
(Wash. Sun. Star, 11/1/64;  NASA  Release 64-2783 
project fo r  NASA. 
0  Maj.  Gen.  Samuel C. Phillips  (USAF), Apollo program  deputy  director  in 
NASA  Hq.  since last January,  was  appointed  director  of  the Apollo pro- 
gram.  NASA  Associate  Administrator  fo r   Manned  Space  Flight  Dr. 
George  E.  Mueller had  been  acting  Apollo  director  for  the  past  year. 
(NASA Release W 2 6 7 )  
0  Balloon launched  from Holloman AFB,  Tex.,  carried  telescope and  instru- 
mentation  t o  86,OOO-ft.  altitude,  where  it  focused  on  the  planet  Venus 
for more than  three hours.  F i n p c e d  by  USAF contract,  the  experiment 
was second such study of  Venus this year  by  Johns Hopkins Univ.  team 
headed by Dr. John Strong.  Scientific results would be aniiounced later 
this  year  (see Dec.  7 ) .  
(Fenton,  Balt.  Sun,  12/7/64;  Sullivan, NYT ,  
12/8/64) 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 46 

365 

up to a thousand miles to a n  accuracy within 30 meters.  Nine unknown 
points  were  expected to  be  located  in   the  Pacific during  the  first  year 
of  operations.  ( DOD Release 776-64) 
*  Writing  about  development  of  Vostok  and  Voskhod  spacecraft,  Soviet 
Lt. Gen. N.  Kamanin disclosed: 
“The  space flights of  the  six  ‘Vostoks‘  became  important  landmarks 
in  the history  of  mankind, having pointed out and illuminated the paths 
into the  unknown worlds of  the  universe.  The  first  spaceship-satellites 
began to be launched in  1960.  At that time,  Soviet science had  already 
progressed to a  systematic preparation  for manned space flights.  Many 
difficulties blocked the  way.  It was necessary to have a dependable space- 
craft  that  could  be  launched successfully into  the  stellar  fastnesses  and 
could  assure  the  safety  of  a  cosmonaut’s  flight  including  return  to 
E a r t h . .   . . 
“The  flight  of  the  ‘Voskhod’  spacecraft  demonstrates  that  the  time 
is drawing  near  when  man  can  penetrate  fa r   into  outer  space and  can 
realize the  ancient  dreams  of  flights to  the Moon,  Mars,  Venus  and  to 
even more  remote depths of  the  universe.  Mankind has  entered  a  new 
epoch in revealing the secrets of  nature hidden in the depths of  space. . . . 
“The  ‘Voskhod’  has increased  reliability,  improved  equipment  and 
an  expanded program.  We  still do  not  know  what  the next  spacecraft 
will be named.  We can  already say with certainty, however, that  it will 
be  a  further  step  along the  path  of  progress.  Just  as  aviation  became 
the means fo r  mass transport  of  passengers over the  airways, the space- 
ships will become the  connecting link  between  the  planets  of  the  solar 
system.  . . .” 
(Krasnaya Zuezda,  10/27/64,  ATSS-T  Trans.) 
e  Communications Satellite Corp. re-emphasized to  FCC its need to  own  and 
operate initial satellite terminal stations in U S .   I=omSatCorp was reply- 
ing  to  statements  filed  with  FCC by  communications common-carriers 
which requested FCC to deny ComSatCorp’s request, originally filed Aug. 
14.  (ComSatCorp Release) 
*  Lt.  Col.  John  H.  Glenn, Jr.  (USMC) ,   received his colonelcy from  President 
Johnson  in White  House  ceremony.  Since  the  Senate  had  not  gotten 
to the promotion list prior to  adjournment,  the President, after  consulta- 
tion  with  members  of  Congress,  had  made  a  recess  appointment  for 
(UPI,  NYT, 10/28/64,  38;  BaIt.  Sun, 10/28/64) 
Glenn. 
*  Art  Arfons  set  new  world  land-speed  record  of  536.71 mp h . in   his  jet- 
( AP,  NYT, 10/28/64,58) 
powered ca r  a t  Bonneville Salt Flats, Utah. 
October 28:  U.S.S.R.  announced orbiting  of  COSMOS L satellite into  the  fol- 
lowing  orbit:  apogee,  150 mi.;  perigee,  122  mi.;  period,  88.7  min.; 
(Tass, Krasnaya Zuezda, 10/30/6LE, 1, 
inclination to the equator, 51.3’. 
ATSS-T  Trans.) 
*  Titan  I1 rocket booster  fo r  fi 
manned Gemini  space flight  (GT-3)  was 
turned over to  the Government in  ceremonies a t  Martin Co.’s  Baltimore 
plant.  Charles W.  Mathews, Gemini  roject  m a n a g s  of  NASA  Manned 
Spacecraft  Center,  said parachute  l a n j ing  system and  spacecraft’s ejec- 
tion  seats  were  all  that  remained  to  be  flight-qualified, and  GT-3  was 

October 28:  U.S. and  U.S.S.R.  began  exchanging weather  data over  special 
teletype, Weather Bureau  spokesman said,  although  some operating  de- 
tails  had  not  yet  been  worked  out.  Spokesman said  U.S.  was  not  yet 
sending  to  U.S.S.R.  any  data  gathered  from  meteorological satellites. 
(AP, NYT,  10/29/64,58) 
0  Brig.  Gen.  Benjamin G.  Holzman  (USAF, Ret.)  was  sworn in by  Dr.  Ray- 
mond L.  Bisplinghoff, NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Advanced Re- 
search  and  Technology, a s  consultant to  NASA  for  planning  and  admin- 
istration  of  its  advanced  research  and  technology  program.  General 
Holzman would work  on staff  organization and formation  of  a  program 
(NASA  Release 64-271) 
for NASA  Electronics Research Center. 
Post-Apollo  possibilities  ‘being  considered  by  NASA  were  listed  by  NASA 
Associate Administrator  fo r  Space Science and Applications Dr.  Homer 
E.  Newel1  at  luncheon meeting  of  Institute  of  Electrical  &  Electronic 
Engineers’  Professional  Technical  Group  on  Nuclear  Science, 
Philadelphia : 
“Adaptation of  Gemini as a n  earth orbiting laboratory. 
“Adaptation of  Apollo as an earth orbiting laboratory. 
“Extension  of  Apollo  capabilities  to  create  a  six-man  (o r   so )   earth 
orbiting station. 
Creation  of  an  earth  orbiting  station  to  accommodate  a  score  or 
morepersons.  . . . 
( 6  
Creation of  an earth orbiting astronomical observatory in association 
b<  
with a manned orbiting station. 
“Ektended manned exploration of  the moon. 
“Extended unmanned exploration of  the moon. 
‘‘Establidunent of  a manned lunar base. 
“Establishment of  a lunar astronomical facility. 
“Establishment of  a lunar  radio  astronomy facility on the far side of 
the  moon. 
“Unmanned exploration of the solar system. 
“Manned exploration of  the planets. 
“Advanced  solar studies. 
“Advanced weather satellite system. 
Advanced communications satellite system. 
$6  
“Navigation satellite system. 
“Data  collection satellites. 
Nuclear power. 
L L  

of  the National  Acad- 

367 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 
to a  large-scale follow-on of  the  current manned lunar  landing p r o g am  
o r   to  manned  earth  orbital missions.  This,  I believe,  reflects  the gen- 
eral  opinion  of  the  scientific community,  and  is  a n   important  factor 
on what next.  . . .” 
to weigh with  a l l  the  other  $actors that must  be  considered in  deciding 
(Text) 
October  28:  NASA  Lewis  Research Center  announced contracts  for  construc- 
tion  of  facilities  at  LRC’S  Plum  Brook  Station:  $1,160,000 contract  to  
Roediger  Construction,  Inc.,  and  $1,386,000  contract  to  Mosser  Con- 
struction Co.  (LRC Release 64-100) 
FAITH  7  Mercury  spacecraft, in  which Astronaut  L.  Gordon Cooper made 
22  orbits of  the earth in  final space flight  of  Project Mercury, went  on 
display a t  NASA  Hq., Washington.  Nov.  2 the spacecraft would  resume 
its  tour  of  the  50  state  capitals. 
(NASA  Release,  unnumbered) 
October 29: Nobel Prize in  Physics awarded to Dr. Charles H.  Town- 
(MIT)  
and  two  Soviet  physicists,  Aleksandr  M.  Prokhorov  and  Nikolai  G. 
Basov,  fo r   research  in  quantum  electronics  leading  to  production  of 
oscillators  and  amplifiers  fo r   lasers.  Dr.  Townes  was  Chairman  of 
( N Y T ,  10/30/64,1) 
NASA Manned Space Flight Advisory Committee. 
e  Captive flight of  X-15  No.  3 was made with Milton 0. Thompson a s  pilot. 
(NASA  X-15  Proj.  Off.) 
*  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  told  Huntsville  Industrial  Expansion 
“w e   have  given  . . . [MSFC ]   the  job   of  managing  the  contractors 
Committee, meeting  at  NASA  Marshall  Space Flight  Center : 
who  will  assemble,  test  and  launch  giant  boosters,  and  much  of  this 
work is handled here in Huntsville. 
“We  have placed  this  management job  with  the Marshall Center  be- 
cause  the  management  of  industrial  development  contracts  involving 
hundreds  of m i l l ion s  of  dollars  per  year  requires  the  daily  support  by 
scientists  and  engineers  intimately  familiar  with  the  many-faceted de- 
And we  want to  keep this  arrangement. 
velopment problems. 
As  this 
very  large  program  progresses,  it  will  be  good  business,  and  in  the 
interests  of  efficiency  and  lowered costs,  to  move  part  of  the  contract 
management  functions  near  our  Michoud  Assembly  Facility  at  New 
Orleans o r  our  industrial  stage assembly plants  in  California. 
“We  have done this  in the past  and we  will undoubtedly do more  of 
it  in  the  future.  The  extent  to   which  we  may  have  to  move  more  of 
these management functions out  of  the Huntsville area will  directly de- 
tives  from  industry  to   th e   Huntsville  installation.  . . .”  (MurshaU 
pend  on  our  ability  to  improve our  record  of  attracting  senior  execu- 
S tar ,  11 /4 /a ,   4 )  
0  Weber Aircraft  Co.  of  Burbank,  Calif.,  demonstrated the  astronaut escape 
system  that  it  had  developed f o r  NASA.  System was  designed  to  boost 
astronauts  out  of  their  6em in i  spacecraft  and  open  escape  parachutes 
in   10  sec.  if  a  spacecraft  malfunction  should  develop. 
(Macomber, 
Sun D iego  Union7 10/30/64) 
0  ,Minuteman I1 ICBM  flight test  from Cape Kennedy marked second success 
in  a s   many  launchings.  USAF  said  the  advanced  missile  achieved  all 
(AP, Houston Post, 10/30/64) 
test objectives. 
October 29-30:  Conference on New Technology held  at NASA Lewis Research 
Center.  Pa r t  of  NASA’s Technology Utilization program,  the conference 
was a means of  disseminating new technology developed from  aerospace 
research to  other  segments of  the U.S.  economy. 
(LRC   Release 6 6 9 5 )  

368 
ASTRONATSTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 
October  30:  X-15  No.  3 was  flown  by  Milton  0. Thompson  to   maximum 
altitude of  82,000  ft.,  the  rocket-research aircraft  attaining  3,051 mph 
Proj. Off.) 
(mach4.62).  ( N A S A X - ~ ~  
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding  rocket from White Sands, N.  Mex.,  in 
successful flight to collect  solar spectral data in the x-ray and ultraviolet 
regions,  t o   test  adaptation  of  solar  spectrometer  designed  for   Oso-C 
satellite, and  to  measure  ionospheric  electron  density.  Rocket  reached 
117.5-mi., altitude  and  data  were  collected  in  all  experiments  during 
the flight. 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
*  NASA  pilot Joseph A. Walker flew Lunar Landing Research Vehicle  ( LLRV) 
a t   NASA  Flight  Research  Center.  Total  free-flight time  in  this  first  test 
(M& R ,   11/16/64,  8)  
was  less than one minute,  the LLRV  rising  10 ft. 
NASA  announced  selection  of  scientific satellites, IMP-D  and IMP-E, 
that will 
be placed  in orbit around  the moon  in  1966-67  to  study  interplanetary 
phenomena and earth-sun relationships  in cislunar space.  The eight ex- 
periments  selected  for  the  Interplanetary  Monitoring  Platforms  were 
designed mainly  to measure magnetic  fields, solar plasma,  micrometeor- 
(NASA  Re- 
oids,  and  energetic particles  in  the   vicinity  of  the  moon. 
lease 64-270) 
*  NASA  announced  appointment  of  Francis J.  Sullivan as Acting  Director  of 
Electronics and Control Div.,  NASA  Hq.  The position was formerly held 
by  Dr.  Albert  J.  Kelley,  who  became  Deputy  Director  of  NASA%  new 
Electronics Research Center.  Sullivan was Deputy Director  of  the  divi- 
sion since November 1963.  (NASA  Release W 2 7 6 )  
*  Appointment  of  Lt.  Gen.  Frank  A.  Bogart  (USAF )   as  Special Assistant to 
Associate Administrator  for Manned  Space Flight  announced  by  NASA. 
Appointment  would  become  effective  shortly  after  his  retirement  from 
USAF  Oct.  31.  General  Bogart  would  be  concerned  with  industry  rela- 
tionships  and  special  management  problems  of  program  control  and 
(NASA Announcement 64-255) 
contracting. 
0  U S .   Army’s  Redstone  rocket,  developed  by  NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight 
Center team when  it was formerly part  of  Army  Missile Command, was 
officially  retired  from  active  military  operation  in   ceremony  a t   Army 
Missile  Command,  Redstone  Arsenal,  Ala.  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun, 
MSFC  Director,  spoke on Redstone’s  contributions to U.S.  space explora- 
tion, including serving as launch vehicle for first and second U S .  manned 
space  flights.  Redstone  was  replaced  as military  missile  by  Army’s 
(Marshall S ta r ,  10/4/64,10) 
Pershing. 
*  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for Manned  Space 
Flight,  gave address  a t  dedication of  Magic Mountain Laboratory of  the 
Marquardt Corp., Van Nuys,  Calif.: 
“There  is  a  considerable  degree  of  misunderstanding  of  the  overall 
purposes  of  our  national space program.  Many people  seem to believe 
that  a  landing on the moon  is our paramount objective.  This is not  so. 
“Our  principal goal  is t o  make  the United  States first  in space.  The 
Apollo  mission  milestones-manned 
flight  in  earth  orbit,  into  deep 
space, and to  the moon  and back-provide 
a  focus for the  development 
of  the  total  capability  that  will  enable  the United  States to  compete  in 
theraceforspace .   . . .”  (Text) 

369 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 0 4, 
October  30:  Editorial  i n   North  American  Aviation’s  Space  8i  Information 
Systems Skywriter: 
“The company’s XB-70  ha s  now completed four test flights acquiring 
millions  of  items  of  information,  in  a  highly  significant beginning  of 
its test program. 
“So far, the airplane has flown a t  altitudes up to 45,000 feet, at speeds 
up  to  Mach  1.4;  with  the  wing  tips  deflected  and  up,  and  through 
various yaw,  flutter and stability tests. 
“ In  34 days,  during which test  flights were  accomplished, the XJ3-70 
has flown a t  supersonic speeds fo r  55 minutes.  Performance  at takeoff, 
flight  simulator  estimates.  . . .”  (NAA %ID  Skywriter,  10/30/64,  1 )  
liftoff, climb out, and  angle of  climb has coincided  almost exactly with 
DOD announced  award  of  $1,413,890  NASA-funded  contract  to  Smith  and 
Sapp  Construction  Co.  for  construction  of  launch  equipment  shop  at 
Launch  Complex 39,  Merritt  Island  Launch  Area,  Fla.  (DOD Release 
783-64) 
It was announced that in the first two-man Gemini flight, set for Feb.  1965, 
Astronaut Virgil  I. Grissom might become the first man in space to alter 
the  orbit  of  his  own  spacecraft.  The  change would  be  after  about  90 
minutes of  flight in  the first orbit  over Guaymas, Mex.  Major Grissom, 
the  command pilot, would be sitting on the left side of  the spacecraft and 
Lt.  Cdr.  John  Young,  pilot,  would  be  sitting  on  the  right  side. 
(AP, 
Sunday Oregonian, 11/1/64) 
*  Colonel  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.  (USMC), was  declared  fully  recovered  from 
inner-ear  injury  by  USAF  doctors  in   San  Antonio,  Tex. The  former 
NASA  astronaut was expected to  resign  from USMC  and become an  active 
director of  Royal Crown Cola Co.  (UPI, NYT ,  10/31/64,11) 
*  Dr.  Werner  R.  Kirchner,  vice-president of  Aerojet-General and  director 
of  Solid  Rocket Operations,  announced the  firing  of  a  small solid pro- 
pellant  motor  which  successfully  started  and   stopped  more  than  six 
times.  In  the test, Aerojet  used  a  4-in. motor with  6 Ibs.  of  propellant. 
(M&R, 11/23/64,9) 
Dr.  Alvin  Radkowsky, Navy  nuclear  scientist,  received  patent  for  design 
of  large  breeder  reactor  which  AEC   and  California  were  proposing  to 
use in 525-kilowatt steam-electric power plant. 
(Jones, NYT ,  10/31/64, 
35) 
*  West Germany’s Ministry of  Scientific Research said estimated 4,300 West 
German scientists had left to work  in  U.S. between  1949 and  1961, and 
(Reuters, NYT ,  10/31/64,8) 
number was expected to increase. 
October  SO-November  1 : Inventors’  Congress  and  Space  Symposium  held 
in   Little  Rock,  Arkansas.  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  spoke 
on American progress  and goals in  space.  He described “the  Southern 
Crescent of  the space p r o g r a m ” 4 a p e  Kennedy, Fla. ; MSFC,  Huntsville, 
Ala. ; Michoud  Operations,  LaJMississippi  Test  Facility;  and  MSC, 
Houston, Tex. 
“One  of  the  central  facts  about  this  great  complex  of  space  activi- 
ity  that many  varied  research, development and 
gravitate in this direction.  This is made likely 
d of  convenience. 
By and large, these w i l l  be activities that  require heavy contributions 
u 
from  science and  technology,  and  Arkansas  and  the  other  states of  the 
South a r e  now  in  a 
on  to  get  ready  to  take  full  advantage  of  the 

370 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4  
prospect.  Arkansas must be able to  advance in  such areas as electronics, 
in  the development and use of  new materials, in medical research related 
to  the  sever6  requirements  of  space,  and  the  like.  It  must  not  only 
make provisions fo r  suitable working and living conditions for scientists 
and engineers, it must also be farsighted  in training  its people as techni- 
tivity as the scientists and engineers.  . . .” 
cians and skilled workmen,  for these a re  as essential in  this kind  of  ac- 
(Text) 
October  30:  Morris  Forgash,  president  of  United  States  Freight  Co.,  gave 
his  predictions  of  transportation  in  the  year  2000, in  address  a t   Na- 
tional Defense Transportation  Association conference in Frankfurt, Ger- 
many.  Among his  predictions:  “By  the  year  2000 the hydrofoils  will 
be  the buslines of  the  oceans”;  “people  and  things  w i l l   be  transported 
between  all the more  distant  points  on  earth  by  rocket-powered craft.” 
He concluded : 
“Before  you  mark  off  anything  that  I  have  predicted  fo r   the  next 
three  and  a half decades look  back on  the  startling  developments of  the 
recent  past.  The  breaking  of  the  sound  barrier.  Space  travel.  Sub- 
stitution of  a  cushion of  a i r  fo r  the ageless wheel.  The broadcasting  of 
a message of  good w i l l  to the world by a  President of  the United States 
not  by  cable,  phone,  or  radio,  but  from  a  satellite circling  around  the 
globe in outer space-then 
the erasure of  the message and substitution of 
another  while the  satellite was in  orbit.  The Olympic games in Tokyo 
brought into the homes of people on the f a r  side of  the earth through the 
medium  of  a relay  station  in  space.  Multiply these miracles of  science 
by  the rate  of  change which  is being constantly compounded and  see  if 
my predictions  do not come out  on the modest side even to  the point  of 
reticence. 
“I believe the most  important  fact  for  us  to  understand  is  that trans- 
portation,  though  it opens new worlds and changes old concepts of  time 
and  distance, will  not  shape  the  world  of  2000 A.D.  Transportation 
is the servant  of  the people-the  genie which makes their  dreams  come 
true-the  magic  carpet  of  their  future-the  mobility  of  their  desires, 
their  aspirations,  and h e i r  resources.  . . .”  (Text, CR,  1/7/65,  A70- 
74) 
October 31 : Astronaut Theodore C. Freeman  (Capt.,  USAF)  was  killed when 
his T-38  jet  trainer  crashed  near  Houston.  The  former  experimental 
test-flight instructor was among third group of  NASA  astronauts,  selected 
last  October,  and was  first  U S .   astronaut  to  lose his  life. 
(AP,  NYT, 
11/2/64) 
Second anniversary  of  orbiting  of  ANNA  IB first  satellite  designed  fo r   use 
in measuring size and  shape of  the earth.  Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied 
Physics Laboratory,  builder  of  the satellite, said ANNA  IB  was still flash- 
ing  its  beacon  and  relaying  radio  signals  to  earth  upon  command. 
( AP, Houston Post, 10/30/64) 
Report  prepared  fo r   Republican  Presidential  candidate  Sen.  Barry  M. 
Goldwater by Adm.  Arthur Radford  (USN,  Ret.),  Gen.  Nathan  Twining 
(USAF, Ret.),  and  Gen.  Arthu’r  Trudeau  (USA, Ret.),  charged  the 
Administration with misrepresentation in its disclosure of  two  antisatel- 
l ib  defense systems last  September.  Republican Task  Force  said  the 
It 
systems were  “situated  on  test  sites”  and  “manned  by  test  crews.” 
claimed all components of  the  systems were  initiated  in  the Eisenhower 
administration.  DOD retaliated  to  the  “unfounded charges’’  and reiter- 

that  the program  has stimulated  a  level of  space activity  abroad  which 
might not  otherwise have been  achieved.  Purely  as a  by-product, then, 
cooperative space projects  have  created  limited  markets  for  American 
know-how and hardware overseas. . . .”  (Ae ro space ,  Fall 1964, 10-15) 
*  The  French  Government  reported  two  successful  firings  of  i t s   four-stage 
Berenice rocket, a mach-12 re-entry test vehicle,  from the  Ile  du Levant 
testing center in the Mediterranean.  Tests were conducted by  the Office 
National  d’Etudes  et  de  Recherches  Aerospatiales  ( ONERA ) .  The 
Berenice project  was designed to supply re-entry data for use in  France’s 
strategic missile program.  (Av. Wk . y  12/7/64,25) 
*  Interviewed  in  Data,  Maj.  Gen. Samuel  C.  Phillips  (USAF), director  of 
Apollo program  in NASA  Hq.,  replied to  question about “all-up” concept 
of testing in the Apollo program. 
“The  general  test  policy  requires  that  all-up testing  w i l l   be  the  basic 
approach  to  the  flight  test  program.  This  requires  that  where  prac- 
ticable,  all flights will  be  scheduled a s  complete space vehicles using  all 
live stages and as much  of  the  lunar  mission  flight hardware a s  can  be 
made  available.  This  policy  results  from  the  recognition  that  true 
operational  suitability  of  the  flight  hardware  can  only  be  obtained  by 
operating the systems in the space environment and that the  total number 
of development flights and total elapsed time can  be reduced by making 
all  flights  a s   fully  representative  of  the  operational  configuration  as 
(Da ta ,  lO/M,  7-13) 
possible.” 
*  William  C.  Schneider,  Gemini  program  deputy  director,  NASA  Hq.,  dis- 
cussed  flight  readiness  of  Gemini  launch  vehicles  and  spacecraft  in 
Datu interview: 
“The  launch  vehicle  is  leading  in  flight  readiness  and  this  is  as  it 
should be.  The Air Force Titan  I1 has been under development for over 
fou r  years,  and  33  flights have  been  made  in  the  program.  NASA  has 
benefited  fully  from  the  results  of  this  extensive  qualification  flight 

nson,  NASA  Director of  Launch Vehicle and Propulsion  Pro- 
grams,  was  interviewed  in D d a  on  Centaur  launch  vehicle. 

372 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERQNATJTICS,  1 9  0 4  

“At  this  point  in   the Centaur  development program,  the major  por- 
tion  of  the  ground  tests have  been  completed,  and  three  development 
flights have ‘ h e n  accomplished.  Three more devlopment flights remain 
before  the  vehicle  w i l l   be  considered  operational  in  a  single-burn con- 
figuration  in  early  1965.  The  two-burn capability  w i l l   be  certified by 
two  additional development flights providing  a  proven  operational  two- 
burn capability in 1966.  I would like to note, however, that lunar flights 
can and will be accomplished by single-burn Gentaurs in  1965 and 1966, 
and  perhaps  also  in  future years  during  those lunar  opportunities  that 
allow  single-burn  trajectories.  . . .”  (Data,  1O/M,  27-31) 
During October:  Lt. Cdr. M.  Scott Carpenter was awarded special gold medal 
by International Association of Man in  Space, commemorating Astronaut 
Carpenter’s  Project  Mercury  orbital  space  flight. 
(Dryden,  Ltr.  to 
Carpenter,  11/5/@) 
Dr.  Wolfgang Priester, after a  year’s  work  at Goddard  Institute  for Space 
Studies a s  a  senior  research scientist, returned  to Bonn Univ.  to become 
(Goddurd 
Director of  its Institute of  Astrophysics and Space Research. 
News, 11/2/64’  8) 
*  At  two  meetings  of  European  Conference on  Satellite  Communications in  
Geneva,  representatives  proposed  plans  for  regional  comsat  network 
independent  of  the  US.,  while  not  ruling  out  participation  with  U.S. 
(M&R ,  11/9/64,12-13) 
in global network. 

November  1864 
November 1 : NASA launched NikeApache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, 
Canada,  with  instrumented  payload  to  obtain  comparison  of  electron 
density profile with  wind  profile  and  to  measure  electron  temperature. 
Sodium vapor ejected a s  scheduled and Langmuir probe functioned well. 
Launch was to  have been one of  four spaced through a  single night, but 
high  winds and subsequent cloud cover forced cancellation of  the other 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
three. 
*  Experiment  conducted  by  National  Bureau  of  Standards’  Central  Radio 
Propagation  Laboratory  had  found  that  nitrogen  molecules rather  than 
oxygen molecules destroy helium ions in the earth’s atmosphere.  Chief 
experimenter E.  E.  Ferguson  explained  that  the  results  meant  helium 
concentration  in  upper  atmosphere  was  increasing,  upsetting  steady- 
state theory based on helium-ion-oxygen molecule reaction.  However, 
Ferguson said, recent samplings of  upper atmosphere by sounding rockets 
did  not  uphold  the  laboratory  findings:  100-to-1,000 times  less helium 
was  present  than  would  have  been  expected  if  helium  had  been  con- 
(Simons, Wash. Post, 11/1/64) 
tinuously increasing. 
November 2-4:  RELAY I and RELAY 11 communications satellites were used to 
broadcast  election  week  previews  and  results to  Europe.  Total  broad- 
cast  time  amounted  to  slightly  less  than  two  hours.  SYNCOM  11  syn- 
chronous  communications  satellite,  stationed  in  the  Pacific,  relayed 
nearly  eight hours  of  U.S.  Presidential election  returns  to  the F a r  East. 
(Goddard News, 11/ 
Voice  of  America transmitted  the  radio  signals. 
16/6d, 3 ;  NASA Release 64-279) 
November 2 :  WAF  announced launch of  Thor-Agena D  booster combination 
(UPI,  NYT ,  
with  unidentified satellite payload,  from Vandenberg AFB. 
11/3/64,  53; H H N - 4 8 )  
FAA  announced  that  the  t w o   airframe  and  two  engine  manufacturers 
participating  in  U S .   supersonic  transport  program  had  submitted  sec- 
ond-round design proposals for evaluation by  Government and  airlines. 
(Airframe  companies,  Boeing  Co.  and  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.;  en- 
gine  companies,  General  Electric  Co.  and  P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.  of 
United  Aircraft  Corp.)  120-member joint  Supersonic  Transport  Eval- 
uation  Group,  comprised of  specialists from  FAA,  NASA,  USAF,  CAB,  and 
USN,  would  conduct  Government  evaluation, with  aerodynamic  studies 
of  wind  tunnel  models  submitted  by  airframe  contractors  being  con- 
ducted  a t   NASA  Langley  Research  Center.  Both  Government  and  air- 
line  evaluations  were  scheduled  for  completion  Nov.  30.  Basis of  the  
Lockheed  design  was  still  a  delta  wing  with  a  small delta  a t   front  of 
fuselage,  but  the  company  said  that  a  larger,  thinner  wing,  aerody- 
namically  “cleaner”  design,  and engines with 25  per  cent more power 
gave it  “major  advances”  in  range  and passenger-carrying ability, with 
a  profit potential  of  30 per  cent return  on  investment.  Three different 
fuselage lengths, with capacity fo r  170 to  250 passengers,  were offered. 
373 

374 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  
The Boeing  Co.,  which  initially offered  two versions,  said  that  i t s  new 
design could match the economies of  current  jets  over  long ranges and 
would  seat 200  to  250  passengers. 
(FAA   Release 64c101; Clark, NYT ,  
11/4/64,52) 
November  2 :   Four-man panel  of  former  DOD  R&D  directors,  under  auspices 
of  Scientists and  Engineers  fo r   Johnson  and  Humphrey,  responded to 
Republican charges that Democratic Administration had “neglected and 
stifled innovation.  . . .” 
Panel said: 
“We  favor  maintaining  a  substantial  base  of  defense  research  and 
development which  is  essential  i f   we  are  to  maintain  the  flow  of  new 
ideas and  new  devices.  But  support of  R&D  does not mean the  innova- 
tion  of  a  large number  of  operational  systems without  regard  for  mili- 
tary  requirements  o r   without  ample  attention  to  technical  and  opera- 
tional  feasibility.  Senator  Goldwater  and  his  advisors  have  ignored 
the  fact  that  many  of  the  projects  cancelled  during  previous  adminis- 
trations had  proved  unfeasible o r   too expensive in   relation  to  the mili- 
tary benefits they would yield.  . . .” (SBD, 11/2/68,5) 
*  Soviet  members  of  the  U.N.  Committee  on  the  Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer 
Space  visited  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center.  They  were  Prof. 
0. G.  Gazenko, Prof.  Yu.  D.  Kalimin, and Mr.  I. V.  Milovidov. 
(God -  
dard News, 12/14/64,  2 )  
*  Av ia t ion  Week  editor  Robert Hotz  took U.S.  intelligence experts and  NASA 
officials  to  task  for  the   “considerable  disgruntlement  [that J  has  been 
generated  in   the  U S .   manned  space  flight  program”  since  Soviets’ 
VOSKHOD  space flight. 
“All of  this does not mean that the U S .  manned space flight program 
should  be  slowed,  diminished,  or  abandoned,  as  a  variety  of  critics 
have  suggested.  . . .  It means that  the U S .  manned  space flight pro- 
gram  is  not  overtckbg  the  Soviets  at  i t s   present  pace  and  must  be 
some  longer-ranging goals  beyond  the  lunar  landing.  . . . 
.accelerated,  expanded  to  yield  better  scientific  results  and   aimed  a t  
“We  always have  been  convinced  that  this  nation  has  the  technical 
resour- 
to  accelerate its pace  and  achieve the  eventual leadership  in  
man’s  exploration  of  space.  What  we   seem  to   lack  is  the  political 
leadership  and management organization that will  enable this complex 
partnership  of  taxpayer,  government  and  industry  to  proceed  a t   the  
pace  of  which  it  is  capable toward  goals that  will  surpass  its competi- 
tion.  For  a  nation  that  g rew   to  its  present  greatness on  the  strength 
of  its  competitive  surge,  we   a re  coming extremely  close to  losing  this 
(Av.  Wk., 1 1 / 2 / 6 4 1 1 )  
legacy in  space.” 
November  3:  NASA  Aerobee 150 sounding rocket  launched by  USN  from the 
White  Sands  Missile  Range,  N.  Mex.,  carried  a  spectrograph  payload 
prepared by  Princeton  Univ.  to  78.8-mi.  altitude before  the payload  re- 
turned  to  earth  by  parachute.  Primary  objective  of  studying  ultra- 
violet  radiation  of  three  stars  in  the constellation Orion was  achieved. 
Payload  was recovered  in  good  condition  and  the  film  extracted  and 
developed.  Princeton  said  it  lbelieved  this was  the  first  time  any  uni- 
versity  had  attempted  to  study  the  atmosphere  and  composition  of 
stars  by  means of  equipment  contained  in   a  rocket. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL; 
NYT ,  11/17/6&  72) 
NASA launched  a  Nike-Cajun sounding  roaket  from Wallops  Island  to  a n  
altitude  of  76.8,  with  grenade  payload  to  obtain  temperature,  wind, 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4, 

375 

density,  and  pressure  measurements.  Experiments  were  provided  by 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  (GSFC)  scientists.  Rocket  performance 
was  excellent but  instrumentation performance was unsatisfactory since 
grenades did not eject o r  explode. 
(NASA Rpt. SRL) 
November  3: NASA  announced signing Memorandum. of  Understanding with 
Norwegian  Space  Research  Committee  and  the  Ionospheric  Research 
Laboratory  of  the Royal Technical Institute of  Denmark to  extend joint 
sounding rocket program  of  investigations of  the ionosphere.  Tentative 
schedule of  new  series called for two Nike-Apache launches this year and 
two  more  early  next  year  from  Norway’s  Andoeya  Range  and   two 
Nike-Apache launches from U S .   facilities.  Scandinavian g roup s  would 
purchase  the  four  sounding  rockets  to  be  launched  in  Norway,  fund 
their  own  experiments,  and  operate Andoeya Range.  NASA  would  sup- 
ply  two  sounding  rockets to  be  launched  in US.,  fund  its experiments, 
and  provide  use  of  its Wallops Island,  Va.,  range.  There had been  11 
(NASA  Release 6 
successful launchings  in  this  program  since  1962. 
274) 
*  Appointment  of  Brig.  Gen.  David  M.  Jones  (USAF )   as  NASA  Deputy  As- 
sociate Administrator  fo r  Manned  Space  Flight,  effective Dec.  15,  was 
announced  by  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Manned  Space Flight 
Dr.  George E.  Mueller.  Gen.  Jones would be  primarily  concerned with 
major  development  problems  in  Gemini  and  Apollo  programs,  plan- 
ning for advanced missions and all mission operations.  His most recent 
assignment had  been  as  Deputy Chief  of  Staff  (Systems), AFSC. 
(NASA 
Release 6 2 7 7 )  
Gerald0 de Carvalho Silos  told  the  U.N.  Committee on  the Peaceful Uses 
of  Outer  Space  that  Brazil would  establish  a  rocket  center  near  Natal 
and  would  seek U.N.  sponsorship  for  the  facility.  The  U.N.  had  been 
asked  to  sponsor  a  similar  international  facility  a t   Thumba,  India. 
( N Y T ,  11/4/64,39) 
*  DOD announced  award  of  $1,692,001  contract  for  construction  of  dual 
vertical checkout and pneumatic test station Saturn  S-I1  facility at Seal 
( DOD Release 7 8 8 4 % )  
Beach, Calif. 
Nouember 4-6:  The AIAA/NASA  Third Manned Space Flight Meetingwas held 
in  Houston, Tex. 
Franklin  P.  Dixon,  NASA  Director  of  Manned  Planetary  Mission 
Studies,  said  in  a  speech:  “Our  studies  indicate  that  the  next  major 
phase  in  manned  earth  orbital  operations  should  be  a  space  station 
with  a  6-9  man  capacity.  This  would  be  specifically  designed  for 
long-duration earth orbital flights a nd  would directly further the routine 
exploitation of  near  earth  space for peaceful purposes.  The  studies on 
this  concept  have  shown  that  the  basic  station  module  should  have 
a  usable  total volume  in  the  order  of  8,000 cubic  feet  with  continuous 
‘floor’ areas of  not less than 300 square feet.” 
(Text) 
Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  Executive Secretary  and  Acting  Chairman  of 
the  National  Aeronautics and  Space Council, spoke at  the  awards  ban- 
quet:  “There  is  a  wonderful  thing  about  the  space business.  It  has  a 
vitality  and  a  deep  sense of  challenge,  which  most  other  activities  do  
If  it is not a way  of  life, it is a t  least a way  of  looking a t  life. 
not have. 
The space program  is the program  fo r  the  optimist,  the  person  who  is 
willing to  look ahead with confidence, the individual who  sees  no  limits 
to what can be done and no horizons t o  the scope of  doing.  One of  the 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

376 
greatest benefits already  obtained  from the space program  is its revital- 
izing &ect  upon  our whole e co nomy -o u r  whole educational system- 
our whole attitude  towazd the future.  Let  us  use  all our  power  of  per- 
suasion against  any  individual  o r  any group who  would  slow  down  the 
pace of  this program.”  Referring  to statements that the military  yossi- 
bilities of  space have been  “downgraded,”  Dr.  Welsh  said:  “During  the 
four-year  period  of  1957 through  1960,  space expenditures  for the DOD 
totaled  $ 1  billion.  On  the other  hand,  during  the  last  four  years,  that 
is  1961 through  19M,  the  DOD spent  about  $8.6  billion  on  its  space 
responsibility.  The fact is that  the Department  of  Defense  is  annually 
spending about a billion and a half  dollars in  space research and develop- 
ment.  This  includes projects  in  navigation,  communications, observa- 
tion,  detection,  booster  development,  scientific 
instrumentation, 
command  and  control  techniques,  interception,  and  manned  and  un- 
manned  space  flight.”  He  would  make  no  prediction  regarding  next 
year’s  space  budget,  but  suggested  that  “space  expenditures  over  the 
coming years,  even with occasional plateaus, would  be characterized by 
an  upward  trend.”  Dr.  Welsh  confirmed  the  Russians  were  relying 
heavily upon unmanned Vostok spacecraft in their Cosmos program.  He 
said  the Vostoks had  accumulated “more  than  2500 orbits”;  since  the 
seven Soviet manned flights to  date accounted for only 10%  of  this,  the 
balance must have been  achieved in the more than 20 Vostok flights from 
Tyuratam  range  at  the  65”  inclination.  Unlike  the  Cosmos  satellites, 
these unmanned Vostoks had been  recovered after as much as two weeks 
in orbit.  Dr. Welsh also disclosed that  Soviet launching reliability was 
“comparable” to  the 85% attained by  U.S.  in past  three years. 
(Text; 
A&A ,  11/64,116;  Dr. Edward C. Welsh) 
Dr.  Charles  S.  Sheldon,  staff  member  of  the  National  Aeronautics 
and  Space Council,  in  a  comparison  of  U.S.  and  Soviet  space  flights, 
said tha t  262 military  and civilian launch vehicles had been  launched by 
this country between 1957 and October of  this year as opposed to a t  least 
81  launched  by  the  Russians.  Of  the  total  U.S.  launch  attempts,  192 
were successful, and  231 payloads were put  into  earth  orbit,  eight were 
injected into escape trajectories,  and %I were listed as failures. 
(Text) 
Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  S.  Bleymaier,  AFSC  Space  Systems  Div.  deputy 
for  manned  systems,  said  that  studies by  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory 
and  by  General Electric,  under  JPL contract,  showed  that  payload  ca- 
pacities  of  both  Surveyor  and  Mariner  could  be  doubled  if   the  Titan 
111,  rather  than  the  Atlas-Agena, were  used  to  launch  them.  The  GE 
study, he  said,  determined  that  the Voyager Mars  soft-landing mission 
objectives could be  accomplished more  effectively i f   the  lander  and  or- 
biter were launched as two  separate Titan  I11 payloads, rather  than  as a 
( A v .  Wk., 11/9/64,27) 
combined package atop a Saturn  IB. 
AIAA  made the  following awards:  1964 Astronautics Award  to Walter 
C.  Williams, vice president and general manager  of  the Manned Systems 
Div.  of  the Aerospace Corp. and until April 1 9 a  NASA  Deputy Associate 
Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  Operations,  fo r   “outstanding 
and  continuing  achievements  in   successful  aerospace  systems  opera- 
tions”;  Octave  Chanute  Award  to  Fred  J.  Drinkwater  and  Robert  C. 
Innis,  USAF pilots at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif., 
for their work  on  the V/Stol  and Stol aircraft;  John  Jeffries Award  to 
Dr.  Eugene  Konecci  of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Council, 

377 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 
until  Oct.  19M NASA  Director  of  Biotechnology and  Human  Research, 
fo r  his  contributions  to  life sciences;  Robert  M. Losey  Award  to  Col. 
Robert C.  Miller  (USAF) , Kansas City Weather Bureau, for his work on 
(Av. Wk., 11/16/64,19;  MSC Roundup, l l / l l / M ,   1 )  
turbulence. 
Joseph  A.  Walker,  project  pilot  for  NASA%  Flight  Research  Center, 
described the first flight of  the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle  ( LLRV  1 .  
Walker said this was  the first of  several  pilot  familiarization  and  check- 
out  flights.  Simulated  lunar  missions were  scheduled  for  early  1965. 
The first flight consisted of  three  separate take-offs and landings.  Total 
free flight time  was  just  under  one min.,  with  a  maximum  altitude  of 
approximately  10 ft.  He  used  only  the  jet  engine  fo r   lift  power  and 
did  not  activate  the  lift  rockets.  All  eight  of  the  standard  control 
rockets were  operated  briefly. 
The  LLRV was equipped with  a  jet  engine that could be  automatically 
regulated  to  counterbalance  five-sixths of  the  vehicle’s  weight  to  com- 
pensate  for  the  gravitational  difference between  the  moon  and  earth. 
This  engine  was  also  used  to  provide  take-off  power.  During  forth- 
coming checkout flights, two  hydrogen-peroxide rocket motors, capable 
of  delivering from 100 to 500 Ibs.  thrust  each, would be used to  regulate 
lift.  The program,  in  support of  Project Apollo, was  designed to  study 
the piloting and operational  procedures involved during the  final phases 
of  a  manned  lunar  landing  and  during  the  initial  portion  of  the  lunar 
( FRC  Release 2 m )  
take-off. 
Paper  on  launch  vehicle engines by A.  0. Tischler,  Director  of  NASA 
OART Chemical Propulsion  Div.,  and Leland F. Belew,  Manager of  MSFC 
Engine  Program  Office,  covered  current  status  of  solid-  and  liquid- 
propellant  rocket  engines  fo r   Saturn  and  Titan  launch  vehicles.  The 
authors  reported  that  the  F-1  engine  represented  “the  largest  thrust 
engine  fired  to  date.  Started  in  early  1959 the  F-1  engine  has  been 
under  development for  six  years.  Five  F-1’s  w i l l   be  used  in  the  first 
stage of  the  Saturn  V  vehicle to  produce  a  take-off  thrust  of  7,500,000 
pounds.  . . . 
“Nominal  firing  duration  is  150 seconds and  we  expect better  than 
15  times that  life to be in the engine at qualification.  . . . 
[Design  refinements to  correct combustion-driven oscillations]  have 
( 6  
produced  an  engine  which  in  the  last  five  months  has  accumulated 
almost  as much  test  time  as  in  the  previous  five years.  . . .”  (Text) 
November  4: Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA’s Associate  Administrator  fo r  
Manned Space Flight, cited during a luncheon of  the AIAA Third Manned 
Space Flight Meeting in Houston four  important  decisions made in  the 
past  ten  years:  “The  first was  in  1954 when  as  the  result  of  the  Von 
Neumann  Committee’s  recommendations we  began  the  ballistic  missile 
program  on  a  top-priority basis.  . . . The  second decision  a  year  later 
was  to  undertake  the  Vanguard  program  as  the  second  priority  effort, 
completely separate  from  the ballistic missile program.  . . . The  third 
decision  . . . was  the  passage  of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space 
Act  of  1958.  . . . The fourth major  decision was  President  Kennedy’s 
1961 proposal  to  expand  and  accelerate United  States  space  activity.” 
Dr.  Mueller said that there  is no such thing as unmanned exploration of 
space.  “AS  sensor,  manipulator,  evaluator,  and  investigator  in  space, 
a s  the  scope  and  range  of  our  activities  continue  to  increase,  the  role 
of  man  assumes increasing  importance.  O u r   challenge is to  capitalize 
on his presence in space.” 
(Text) 
7 W 9 8  0--85----25 

378 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
November  4 :   us&  launched  Thor-Agena D  space  booster  from  WTR  with 
unidentified satellite payload. 
( H H N - 4 8 )  
0  Minuteman  ICBM  was  successfully  fired  from Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif.,  by 
a  Strategic Air  Command crew from Malmstrom AFB,  Mont.  The mis- 
(M&R ,   11/9/64+, 
sile traveled 5,000 mi.  down the  Western Test Range. 
10) 
0  Capt.  Theodore 6.  Freeman  (USAF)  was  buried  with  full military  honors 
in  Arlington  National  Cemetey,  Va.,  with  the  entire  astronaut  team 
(MSC  Roundup, 11/11/64,1) 
attending  the  services. 
*  Controller General Joseph Campbell said that the Federal Government could 
have  saved  $60 million  by  buying  rather  than  leasing electronic data- 
processing systems for use  on Government contracts.  He recommended 
that  a  central  management office be  set  up  with  authority  to  decide on 
the  least  expensive  methods  of  obtaining  data-processing  equipment. 
( N Y T ,  11/4/64+) 
November  5 :   MARINER  111  (Mars 64) was  launched into  interplanetary  orbit 
from  Cape Kennedy with  an  Atlas-Agena D  launch  vehicle,  but  s p a c e  
craft  communications failed  when  fairing  did  not  jettison,  preventing 
solar  panel  deployment.  The Agena  stage pushed  the  MARINER  III  into 
a  parking  orbit  around  the earth and coasted to the  proper position for 
injection  into  a  Mars  trajectory.  The  Agena  again  ignited  32  min. 
after launching and sent the spacecraft toward Mars. 
Tracking  data  indicated  that  the  second-stage Agena  D  booster  shut 
down  four  seconds early  on  the  second burn.  MARINER  111’s  four  solar 
panels, designed to  use power  from  the  sun to  recharge the spacecraft’s 
batteries,  were  prevented  from  deploying by  failure  of  nose  fairing  to 
jettison.  Further,  the  spacecraft  did  not  align  itself  properly  with  the 
sun so that the communications antennas would be properly pointed. 
In  addition  to  TV equipment for taking pictures  of  the Martian  sur- 
face, MARINER  111  carried instruments to study  radiation,  space dust, and 
magnetic forces near Mars and   in  unmapped  space after  swinging past 
the planet.  This launch marked the first use of  the USAF’S  new  Agena D 
upper  stage  and  also  the  first  U.S. space  mission  requiring  a  second 
(NASA  Releases 266, 288;  KSC Release 206- 
igniting of  the Agena  D. 
64;  MSC  Roundup,  l l / l l / M ,   7 ;   Sullivan,  NYT,  11/6/6d,  16;  Chic. 
Trib., 11/6/64;  Bak. sun, 11/6/64,1;  H H N - 4 8 )  
0  NASA  launched  a  110-lb.  instrumented  payload  to   measure  upper  atmos- 
pheric  d a   glow  emissions from Wallops  Station,  Va.,  aboard  a  four- 
stage  solilpropellant  Javelin  (Argo  D-4)  sounding rocket.  Dayglow 
studies were extended to higher altitudes than previous observations and 
tests  of  instrumentation  being  considered  for  future  orbital  missions 
were  conducted.  T h e  payload,  containing  a  spectrophotometer, ultra- 
violet  photometers,  and  a  rotating  filter wheel  photometer, was  carried 
to  an  altitude  of  548 mi.  as  scientific data  were  telemetered  to  ground 
receivers fo r  17 minutes. 
Impact occurred in  the Atlantic 930 mi.  from 
the  launch site.  (Wallops Release 6p-79; EASA Rpt. SRL) 
0  NASA  successfully launched  a  Javelin  sounding  rocket  from  Ft.  Churchill, 
Canada, to an altitude of  522 mi.,  with instrumented payload to measure 
the  earth‘s  geomagnetic field  from  the ground  to  Javelin  peak  altitude. 
Data  from this  experiment would  be combined with  that  obtained from 
a  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket launched 90  sec.  earlier.  This was  the 
(NASA  Rpt. 
first  Javelin  launched  from  the Churchill Research Range. 

379 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 
November 5:  Lockheed-Georgia Co . ,  Dawsonville, Ga.,  announced completion 
of  the nation’s  first facility  fo r  subjecting  space hardware to  the  simul- 
taneous exposure of  atomic  radiation  and  extreme cold.  The  company 
planned  to  produce  extreme  cold  through  the  use  of  liquid  hydrogen 
which would be a t   -427”  F.  Equipment would consist  of  an insulated 
1,000-gal. liquid-hydrogen tank mounted on  a railroad flatcar that could 
be  rolled  by  remote  control  into  the  nuclear  reactor  radiation  target 
( AP, NYT,  1 1/8/@,  26 )  
area. 
Air Force Office of  Scientific Research and Massachusetts Institute of  Tech- 
nology  announced  jointly  that  scientists  at  the  National  Magnet  Lab- 
oratory,  using  a  giant  water-cooled magnet, had  produced the  strongest 
continuous  magnetic  fields  generated  by  man  to  date-up 
to  255,000 
gauss.  Maximum  fields  were  maintained  for  periods  of  a  minute. 
(AFOSR  Release, 11/64,2S) 
0  George  H.  Arthur,  Deputy  Director  of  the  International  Telephone  and 
Telegraph Aerospace Laboratory  at Nutley, N.J.,  prcdicted that the Rus- 
sians  would  go  to  the  moon  before  1970 and  make  a  manned  circum- 
lunar  mission  in  two  and  one  half  years.  He  said  the  United  States 
would also be  able to  get  to  the moon by  1970 if  it had  as much success 
with  its developmental program  in  the Saturn IB  and Saturn V  as it had 
(Balt. Sun, 11/5/64) 
with Saturn I. 
Abraham  S.  Bass,  Chief  of  the  Technical  Assistance  Branch  in  NASA’s 
O5 c e   of  Manned  Space  Flight,  speaking  at  the  Liquid  Missile  Pro- 
pellants Symposium in Hershey,  Pa.,  pointed  out  that  development and 
operation of  the prime and  auxiliary  rocket engines required  by  NASA’s 
manned  and  unmanned  space  exploration  programs  would  push  pro- 
pellant  production  in  the  U.S.  to  unanticipated  heights.  NASA’s  liquid 
hydrogen requirement w a s  expected to  rise to 14 million lb. per  quarter, 
or  28,000  tons/year,  during  1967.  (Av. wh., 11/23/64,  64 ;   NASA 
Proj.  Off.) 
*  Dr.  Donald  F.  Hornig,  President  Johnson’s  Special Assistant  for  Science 
and  Technology,  arrived  in  Moscow  with  a  six-man group  that  would 
make a two-week tour of scientific and industrial  institutions in Moscow, 
Leningrad, Minsk, and Novosibirsk to study Soviet methods of  planning 
and coordinating scientific research.  (N Y T ,  11/6/64,19) 
Navy Secretary Paul H.  Mitze  formally approved the retirement  of  Marine 
Col.  John H.  Glenn,  Jr.  The retirement was set for Jan.  1.  (N.Y.  Her. 
Tr ib . ,  11/5/64;  NYT ,  11/5/64,11) 
November  5-6:  NASA  launched  four  grenade-bearing sounding rockets  over 
an  18-hour period  for meteorological studies  in  the  upper  atmosphere. 
Launched  from  Wallops  Island  a t   about  six-hour  intervals,  the  Nike- 
Apache  two-stage  solid-propellant  rockets  carried  payloads  containing 
1 2  special  explosive charges  which  were  ejected  and  detonated  in  the 
fou r   flights  at  altitudes  ranging  from  25  to  59  miles.  The  series  of 
flights  was  designed  to  provide  information  on  variations  in   wind 
directions  and  speeds,  atmospheric  densities,  pressures,  and  tempera- 
tures over a 24-hr. period. 
(Wallops Release 6 M O )  
*  NASA  launched  four  Nike-Cajun sounding  rockets  within  18 hours  from 
Wallops Island, Va.,  with grenade payload to  obtain  temperature, wind, 
density,  and  pressure  measurements up  to  55.9  mi.  All  rockets  and 
instrumentation performed excellently.  (NASA  Rpt. SRL) 

380 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 
November 6:  NASA  launched  295-lb.  EXPLORER  xxm  ( S - 5 5 ~ )  meteoroid  de- 
tection  satellite from Wallops Station, Va.,  aboard a Scout vehicle.  The 
satellite was  a  cylinder 24 in .   in   dia.  and  92 in.  long. 
I t s   orbital  ele- 
ments:  apogee,  614 mi.;  perigee 286 mi.;  inclination  to  equator,  52'; 
period,  99 min.  EXPLORER  M U ~ I  was  expected  to  have  a  useful  lifetime 
of  one year.  Its primary purpose was to  provide  accurate knowledge of 
penetration  capabilities  of  meteoroids  and  the  resistance  of  various 
materials to penetration,  thus facilitating design of  spacecraft. 
The payload  contained primary sensors  (pressurized cells)  designed 
to  record  the  rate of  meteoroid  penetration  in  two  different thicknesses 
of  stainless  steel;  a  capacitor-type  penetration  detector  to  determine 
effects  of  high-energy  radiation;  cadmium  sulphide cells t o  record  the 
size  of  impacting  meteoroids;  impact  detectors  capable  of  detecting 
three  levels  of  meteoroid  momentum;  two  separate  telemeter  canisters 
for  storing experimental data  and relaying  it  to  ground stations.  Also 
onboard the  Scout  rocket  was  an   experiment  to  measure  air  loads  on 
the structure  during  its  ascent  through the  atmosphere between  25,000 
and 40,OOO  ft. 
The spacecraft was the  successor to  EXPLORER XVL (S-55b)  , launched 
Dec.  16,  1962,  which  made  the  first  statistically  significant  sampling 
of  meteoroids  in  near-earth  space.  (NASA  Release  6 2 7 2 ;  Wallops 
Release  64-81;  Marshull  Star,  ll/ll/a, 1; NYT,  l l / 7 / a ,   9; M&R ,  
11/16/64+ 33) 
*  NASA  successfully launched  a Javelin  sounding rocket  from Ft.  Churchill, 
Canada,  to  an  altitude of  444 mi.,  with  instrumented payload  to  meas- 
ure  the  earth's  geomagnetic field  from the ground to  Javelin  peak  alti- 
tude.  Data from this experimmt would be combined with that obtained 
from  a  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched 90 sec. earlier. 
(NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
X-15 No.  2 piloted  by  John  B.  McKay  (NASA)  in  planned  captive flight. 
(NASA  X-15  Proj.  Off.) 
*  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  w i th   French  sodium-vapor  payload 
was  launched  from  India's  Thumba  Range  to  about  192-km.  altitude 
(about  119 m i .) .   Two  ground  camera  stations  photographed  sodium 
vapor  released  from  the  rocket  to  obtain measurements of  atmospheric 
(NASA Rpt. SRL) 
winds, turbulence, and  diffusivity. 
*  NASA  Langley  Research  Center  announced  that  power  supply  capability 
tests were being  conducted on  two  huge magnet coils at the Space Radi- 
ation  Effects  Laboratory. 
In   vperation,  the  magnet  coils  would  be 
capable  of  creating  a  pulling  power  greater  than  3,500  tons.  m e  
magnet  coils were par t  of  the 600-million electron volt  synchrocyclotron 
which  NASA  would  operate  to  study  the  effect  on  spacecraft  and  their 
systems of  the  particle  radiation  streaming  from the  sun  o r   trapped in  
the earth's magnetic field.  ( L ~ R C  Release) 
*  NASA announced that space scientists had adopted a new  analytical method- 
neutron  activation  analysis-to  help  them  determine  the  presence  and 
quantity  of  oxygen  in  alkali metals.  General Atomics  Div.  of General 
Dynamics  Corp.  undertook  this  oxygen-identification problem  under  a 
contract from Lew is  Research Center.  ( LRC Release 64-102) 
*  First  successful flight  of  a  fully  instrumented  four-stage Athena  re-entry 
research vehicle was  achieved.  Launched by  USAF  and USA  from Green 
River,  Utah,  the payload  covered approximately 417  mi.  and  impacted 

381 

No 

ex. 
(UPI, 
It was 
Vandenberg AFB. 
(AP, Wash.  Eve. 
base. 
S tar ,  11/5/64) 
Air  Force  Systems  Command‘s Research  and  T e c ho logy   Div.  reported 
the  High  Power Facility  a t  the Rome Air  Development Center  (RADC )  
was  operational.  It was  designed to  evaluate high-power transmitting 
tubes  and  radio  frequency components,  and would  support  research  in 
plasma  physics  and engineering where brute  force was needed in direct 
current  and  pulse  radio  frequency. 
(AFSC  Release  44-128-139) 
Italy’s  largest private monitoring center said it had  recorded radio signals 
indicating  a  new  Soviet space launch. 
I t  speculated that  the Russians 
might  have  placed  a  satellite  in   parking  orbit  around  the  earth  a s   a 
base for a Mars launch.  (Phil. Znq.,  11/7/64) 
*  The U.N.  Committee on the Peaceful Uses  of  Outer Space took  the follow- 
ing  actions:  (1 )   it  invited  the  Scientific and  Technical  Subcommittee 
to  study  and  submit  a  report  on  “the  possibility of  establishing  a  civil 
world-wide navigation  satellite system  on  a  non-discriminatory basis”; 
and  (2 )   it  decided  to  establish  a  working  group  to  examine  “the  de- 
sirability,  organization,  and  objectives  of  an  international  conference 
or  meeting  to  be  held  in   1967 on  the  exploration  and peaceful uses  of 
(NASA  Qff.  of  Int.  Aff.;  U.N.  Doc.  A/57-79;  NYT ,   11/ 
outer  space.” 
8 /64 ,12 )  
November  7 :  NASA  successfully launched an Aerobee  150 to  132-mi. altitude 
from White Sands, N.  Mex.  Purpose was to measure absolute intensity 
of  the  stars  in  the  ultraviolet with  50  Angstrom  resolution.  Payload 
was  recovered  about 65 mi.  from  the  launch site. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  Celebrating  the  47th  anniversary  of  the  Bolshevik  Revolution,  leaders  of 
the  Communist  world  watched  a  display  of  the  Soviet  Union’s  newest 
and  most  powerful missiles.  An  antimissile missile,  shown  among  six 
other  rockets  for  the  first  time,  appeared  to   be   of  greatest  strategic 
significance.  A  four-engine  missile,  60  to  65  ft.  long,  enclosed  in  a 
cigar-like tube  about eight  ft.  in diameter,  it was believed to  be capable 
(Clymer, Balt. Sun, 11/8/64;  Tanner, 
of  reaching very high  altitudes. 
NYT ,  11/8/64,  1 )  
West Germany’s  Scientific Research Ministry proposed  a  three-point  plan 
to  stem  the  flow  of  German  scientists  to  the  United  States.  The  plan 
would seek modernization of West German research institutes, higher pay 
fo r  scientists, and  quicker access to  the  top  of  the academic ladder  fo r  
(Reuters,  NYT ,   11/8/28;  Shabecoff, NYT ,   11/15/ 
young  scientists. 
64,141 
November 8 :   Pravda disclosed that the three crew members of  the spaceship 
VOSKHOD  I  never  used  seat  straps  during  their  24-hour  flight  except 
during the launching and landing stages.  These men  also said that their 
stem  that  made  it  possible  to 
craft was  equipped with  a  new  con 
on the dark side of  the earth. 
a s  
orient the vehicle even w 
(Shabad, NYT ,  11/9/64 
GAO  complained NASA  had  spent  money  unnecessarily  by  producing  four 
basically similar  films  on &e  flight of  astronaut  John  Glenn,  three  on 
the Alan  Shepard  flight, three  on  the Apollo  lunar  exploration  project, 
two on the Ariel satellite, and two emphasizing international cooperation 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

in the space program.  The cost of  the films ranged  from $216,000 for 
one  of  the  Glenn-flight productions to   $1,500  fo r   one  of  the  three  on 
(Orlando Sentinel, 11/4/64;  NYT, 11/4/64,40) 
Shepard’s flight. 
November  8 :  Dr.  Thomas B.  Weber,  formerly a t  Aerospace Medical Center, 
Brooks  AFB,  Tex.,  and  now  manager  of  advanced  research  for   space 
engineering a t  Beckman  Instruments,  Inc.,  Fullerton,  Calif.,  said  tha t  
all spacecabin simulation  experiments  so  f a r  have  had  to  be  called  off 
within a few days because of  accumulation of  toxic elements in the closed 
atmospheres.  “This may be the reason  Russia’s  recent three-man space 
flight,  which  was  expected  t o   last  several  days,  ended  after  only  24 
hours.”  Dr.  Weber  continued,  “Unless  an   answer  is  found,  this  is  a 
definite threat  to  our  own  plans  for  a  manned  orbiting  laboratory  and 
it could delay the Apollo program to land men on the  moon.” 
Working under USAF  contracts, Dr. Weber had devised instruments  to  
collect and identify more than 400 contaminants  given off  by the human 
body  and by  space cabin equipment.  So far  he had found that 20 were 
potentially lethal, including highly explosive hydrogen given off  by water 
used  in cooling  systems;  ozone,  given  off  by  eleotrical equipment;  and 
ammonia,  acetone, and  alcohol found  in  breath,  perspiration,  and  body 
wastes.  “None  of  these  occurs  in  dangerous  amounts  in  a  normal  en- 
vironment,”  Dr.  Weber  said,  “but  in  a  small  cabin  they  build  u p   to  
lethal  concentrations  in  short  periods  of  time.  . . . Our  longest  space 
flight so far  lasted less than two days, but  even on  that  one we  ran   into 
trouble filtering ou t  t h e  carbon dioxide exhaled by the astronaut.” 
(AP, 
Denver Post, 11/8/64;  AP, Wash. Eve .  Star, 12/16/64) 
*  I n  the Letters  t o   the  Editor column  of  the  New  Yo rk   T imes ,  Dr.  Martin 
Summerfield,  AIAA  Vice  President  for   Publications,  took  issue  with 
sources  quoted  by NYT   to  the  effect  that  Communist  China  would  not 
be  able  to  produce  military  nuclear-tipped rockets  for  another  decade 
o r  even a  generation.  “As for rocket secrets,”  he said, “there are  none, 
either  in  theory  o r   design.  All  one  needs  is  a  reading  knowledge  of 
English,  French,  or   German,  and  a  good  collection  of  recent  technical 
journals.”  He  said  it was  a  serious  underestimate  to  believe  that  the 
Chinese could  not  plan  and  execute  an   efficient  research,  development, 
and  production  program  for  practical missiles of  medium  range  and  a 
further  underestimate  to   believe they  were not  close  to   their  objective. 
(NYT, 11/8/64;  A&A ,  12/64,10) 
NwemBe r  9 :  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding rocket  with  French  sodium-vapor 
payload  was  launched  from  India’s  Thumba  Range  t o   about  192-km. 
altitude  (about 119 mi.).  Two  ground  camera  stations  photographed 
sodium  vapor  released  from   the  rocket  to   obtain  measurements  of  at- 
mospheric winds, turbulence, and  diffusivity. 
(NASA Rpt. SRL) 
*  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson  (D.-N.  Mex.) , Chairman  of  Senate Committee on 
Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences,  recommended  in  letter  to  President 
Johnson  that  USAF  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (MOL )   and  NASA 
Apollo-X programs be merged. 
Jointly operated  national  space station 
program would best utilize U S .  resources, according  to  his letter which 
Av ia t ion  Week cited in its Dec.  7 issue.  Senator Anderson  argued  that 
$1  billion  could  be  saved  over‘five-year period  if  MOL  were  canceled 
( A v .  Wk . ,  
and   USAF  funds  applied  to   the  Apollo-based  space  station. 
12/7/64,16;  NASA  Archives) 

383 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 41 
November  9 :  NASA  officials told  Missiles  and  Rockets  that  Phase  I  of  the 
floxed Atlas  development program,  which was  to  end  this  year,  would 
be  continued  until  mid-1965.  Also  delayed  was  the  decision whether 
to move on to Phase 11, which called for development of  flight hardware 
(M&R ,  11/9/64,9) 
and two flights in the 1966-67 period. 
*  A  scheduled  flight  of  the  X-15  rocket  ship  to  test  star-tracking  cameras 
was  canceled when  rain  soaked lakebeds used  as  landing  fields for  the 
plane.  No new date was scheduled.  ( r u s h .  Post, 11/10/64) 
United Press International  ( UPI) reported that the Air Force would attempt 
pickaback launch of a secret satellite  (OV-1)  next month from Vanden- 
berg m with  hopes  of  proving  a  method  which  would  save  the  tax- 
payers  $370,000  per  launch.  The  300-lb.  satellite,  carrying  its  own 
rocket  motor,  would  ride  into  space  on  the  side  of  a n   Atlas  missile 
making a  re-entry test.  Near  the Teak  of  the Atlas’ flight, OV-1  would 
spring away, coast fo r  a  few seconds, an d  be launched into  orbit by i t s  
(UPI,  NYT ,  
own  rocket.  The  Atlas  would  continue  on  its  mission. 
11/10/64,34) 
Air  Force  Systems Command  announced  that  Air  Force  pilots  would  fly 
a  high-altitude  Lockheed  U-2  aircraft  in   a  research  program  directed 
by  the  Research  and  Technology  Div.’s  Air  Force  Flight  Dynamics 
Laboratory,  to  measure  and  predict  high-altitude  clear-air  turbulence 
(Hi-Cat) . The U-2  would  gather Hi-Cat data at altitudes above 55,000 
ft.  fo r  developing a  worldwide statistical model  showing occurrence of 
clear-air turbulence.  ( AFSC  Release 47-30-144) 
*  Physicists  at  Columbia University  had  produced  a  “photon  echo”  effect 
in  a  synthetic ruby  crystal by  shooting two  successive flashes of  light at 
it, Physical Review Letters reported.  A ruby laser was the light  source. 
The  phenomenon,  which  scientists  had  not  been  sure  was  physically 
possible,  was  described  as  appearing  as  though  a  light  flashed  into  a 
dark,  empty  closet  received,  after  a  pause,  an  answering wink  of  light. 
Authors of  the research were Dr. Sven R.  Hartmann, Norman A.  Kurnit, 
and Dr.  Issac D.  Abella.  The photon echo effect would seem potentially 
valuable in designing computers because it occurred a t  186,000 mi./sec., 
the speed of  light, and because the nature of  the effect would seem readily 
adaptable to computer use.  (Schmeck, NYT ,  11/9/M) 
Air  Force  Systems  Command  announced  plans  to  orbit  an experimental 
fuel cell able to  produce both electricity for space power and pure drink- 
ing water for space crews.  The fu e l  cell would be orbited from Vanden- 
berg AFB early in 1965.  (AFSC  Release 43-11-145;  NYT ,  11/10/64,34; 
Houston Post, l l /10 /64 )  
*  California  Institute  of  Technology  radio  astronomers  Glenn  Berge  and 
David Morris  announced that Jupiter’s radiation belt  is centered 30,000 
or more miles from the center of  that 85,000-mi.-diameter planet, making 
the  zone  of  intense  radiation  lopsided.  Berge  and  Morris  said  they 
couldn’t  explain their  finding but  that  it  did  help to  explain  the  origin 
may result when Jupiter’s 
oper angle to beam radia- 
(AP, N.O.  T i m s  Picayune, 11/9/64) 
*  ComSatCorp  anno 
ix  companies  had  made  summary  proposals  to 
provide  research  data  and  consultant  services for  ground  terminal  sta- 
rican  Telephone  &  Telegraph  Co.;  ARCS  Industries,  Inc.; 

384 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19 64  

Daniel, Mann, Johnson & Mendenhall; Hughes Aircraft Co.;  Page Com- 
munications  Engineers,  Inc. ; Westinghouse Electric  Corp.  Of  these, 
one o r  more  contractors would be selected. 
( ComSatCorp Release) 
November  10:  NASA  launched  its  first  pair  of  ship-to-shore sodium  vapor 
cloud  experiments aboard  Nike-Apache sounding  rockets,  one  at  5 :25 
p.m.  EST from  a  launcher  on  the  deck  of  the  USNS  Croatan,  located 
&ut  75 mi.  off  shore south  of  Wallops Island, Va.,  the second at 5:28 
p.m.  EST from  a pad  on Wallops Island.  The payloads ejected  sodium 
vapor trails up to an altitude of  approximately 123  mi.  Purpose was to 
study variations in  wind conditions occurring  a t  different altitudes  and 
locations  and  to  test  shipboard  equipment  and  procedures.  Ground 
cameras photographed dispersion of  the sodium trails,  permitting  scien- 
tists  to  measure wind  velocities  and  directions  from  the  photographic 
(Wallops Release 64A3 ; NASA Rpt. SRL) 
records. 
*  NASA  NikeApache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor payload was 
launched  from India’s Thumba Range to  about  192-km. altitude  (about 
119 mi.).  Two  ground  camera  stations  photographed  sodium  vapor 
released  from the  rocket to  obtain measurements of  atmospheric winds, 
turbulence, and diffusivity. 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
At  the conclusion today  of  a  test  in which  four men whirled  for  five days 
in  a centrifuge, Dr.  Bernard D.  Newsom, Chief  of  Aerospace Medicine at 
General  Dynamics/Astronautics  in  San  Diego,  Calif.,  announced  that 
they had  adapted so  well  it  appeared  there  may  be  no  human  problem 
in  spinning future  spacecraft  to  create  artificial  gravity.  “We  are  ex- 
tremely encouraged with the results,”  he said, but he cautioned that more 
research  is necessary before  decisions could be made  on  the basic  goal 
of  the experiment-to  determine if  spacemen can adapt to live and work 
( L A .  Times,  11/11/64; 
for  long periods  in  a  rotating  environment. 
Wash. Post, 11/11/64) 
0  Speaking  a t   the  dedication  of  a  monument  a t   Cape  Kennedy  honoring 
Project Mercury and the nation’s  seven original  astronauts, Dr.  Edward 
C.  Welsh,  Acting  Chairman  and  Executive  Secretary  of  the  National 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Council  said:  “Mercury  served  to  lift  the  self- 
respect  of  ou r   nation  when  it badly  needed  such  a boost.  I know  that 
we  still have widespread public support of  our  national  space programs 
ll/ll/w  48; AP, Balt.  Sun, 11/9/64;  Rossiter,  UPI,  Miami  Herald, 
( N Y T ,  
in  spite  of  the  criticism  of  some  short-sighted  individuals.” 
11/11/64) 
November 11 :   The second set in a series of  three dual ship-to-shore sounding 
rocket launchings was conducted at 5:24 p.m.  EST from the USNS  Croatan 
and a t  5 :27 p.m.  from Wallops Island, Va.,  about 200 mi. apart.  Sodium 
vapor was ejected by the Nike-Apaches from about 25 mi.  up to   an alti- 
tude  of  approximately  125 mi.  The  reddish-pink  clouds  were  visible 
(Wallops Release 64 ,  
for  several hundred miles along the East Coast. 
84; NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
Paul  Haney,  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  Public  Affairs Officer,  told 
the  Radio  and  Television  News  Directors  Association  that  television 
viewers would  be  able  t o  watch  the  first  astronauts  land  on  the  moon 
from the comfort of  their  living rooms.  Television cameras carried by 
the astronauts would beam a signal back to earth which could be  relayed 
to  the majo? TV networks.  The  astronaut  on  the lunar  surface would 
also  take  pictures  a s  he  walked  along.  All  of  these would  be  relayed 

385 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 0 4  
back  to  eaxth, Haney  said.  (AP,  Balt.  Sun, 10/12/64;  Maloney, How- 
Pos t ,   11/12/649) 
November 1 1 :   Institute for Satellite and Space Research scientists in Bochum, 
W.  Germany,  reported  monitors had  pioked  up  both  radio  signals  and 
voice  broadcasts  on  the  same  frequency used  by  thR Soviet Union  for  
manned  spacecraft.  No  manned space  launch  had  been  announced  by 
U.S.S.R. 
(Sci. Ser., Wash. Daily News, 11/13/64) 
November  12:  The th ird  and final set in a  series of  dual ship-to-shore sound- 
ing  rocket  launchings  was  conducted  a t   5:53  a.m.  EST  from  the  USNS 
Croatan  and  a t   5:56  a.m.  from  Wallops  Island,  about  300  mi.  apart. 
Sodium  vapor  was  ejected by  the  NikeApache launched  from  the  ship 
up  to a n  altitude of  approximately  141 mi.;  sodium vapor  failed to eject 
from  the  payload  launched  from  Wallops  Island. 
(Wallops  Release 
64-85;  NASA  Rpt.  sm) 
e  Harold B.  Finger,  Manager  of  NASA-AEC  Space Nuclear Propulsion  Office, 
commented  in  NASA  Hq.  nuclear  rocket  background  briefing  that  the 
Kiwi  and  NRX power  reactor  tests conducted  during  1964 “constituted 
the largest advance  in rocketry  and in  rocket performance  that has been 
made  since  [Robert]  Goddard  started  flying  his  pump  liquid  rocket 
systems  in  the  ’20’s  and  ’30’s.  . . .”  (SNPO;   NASA  Press  Conf. 
Transcript) 
Air  Force  Systems Command  announced  first successful demonstration  of 
internal thrust  from   a  “scramjet”  (supersonic  combustion  ramjet)  en- 
gine.  The test was one in  a  series to demonstrate  that  scramjet  engines 
could  be  developed  for   very-high-speed  vehicles  and  was  conducted 
under  the  direction  of  Air  Force  Aero  Propulsion  Laboratory.  Test 
conditior,.  in  the  30-in.-long  scramjet engine  simulated  a  speed  of  ap- 
proximately  mach  six over  a  brief  burning period.  Frontal  area  of  the 
engine was approximately three-by-four inches.  Scramjets differed from 
conventional engines in  that they had moving parts only in the fuel feed- 
ing  system  and  produced  thrust  by  burning  fuel  in   a  supersonic  a ir  
stream. 
(AFSC  Release 4940-141) 
Institute  for  Strategic Studies, a n  international  organization  for  research 
on  defense, security,  and  disarmament,  reported  U S .  had  increased  its 
strategic superiority  over  U.S.S.R.  The  report  warned,  however,  that 
this  may  be  the  last  year  in  which  the  western  superiority  in  long- 
c c  
range striking power  is so marked.”  By  early next year the U S .  would 
have 925 intercontinental ballistic missiles,  compared  to U.S.S.R.’s  200. 
American  superiority in  fleet  ballistic missiles  had  increased to  four  to 
one  over  U S S R . %  less  advanced  counterpart  of  the  Polaris.  Soviet 
Union had maintained  her  superiority in submarine strength.  (Cerutti, 
Chic. T r ib . ,  11/13/64) 
*  I n  a  report  to   Parliament,  France  disclosed  plans  to  build  up   the  French 
nuclear  force  for  the next  five  years,  including  supersonic  bombers,  a 
Polaris-type submarine,  and tactical atomic weapons for the army.  Esti- 
mated  cost of  the program,  which would  extend  over  a  five-year period 
(1965-70),  was  $11 billion. 
(Wa sh .  Post,  11/13/64) 
0  The National  Academy  of  Sciences’ Panel on  Astronomical  Facilities pre- 
sented  a  10-year  program 
that  would  approximately  double  the 
nation’s  ground-based  astronomical  facilities.  Specific  recommenda- 
tions were  contained  in  a  105-page report,  Ground-Based Astronomy- 
A  Ten-Year Program.  The  total  cost  for  construction  and  operation 

386 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 
of  the new facilities outlined by the panel was estimated a t  $224 million 
over  the  10-year period,  the maximum  annual expenditure  of  $26 mil- 
lion  occurring  during the  fourth  and  fifth  years  of  the  program.  The 
panel  found,  in  analyzing  “the  present  serious situation”  with  respect 
to ground-based astronomy:  “Nearly every phase of observational astro- 
physics  is  hampered  today  because  the  rate  of  growth  of  new  astro- 
nomical  facilities  had  not  kept  pace  with  the  increasing  demand  for 
fundamental data. 
“If  astronomy  is  to   progress,  major  new  facilities  a r e   required.” 
(NAS-NRC  Release, 11/12/64) 
November  12: Dr.  Robert  L.  Sproull,  Director  of  DOD Advanced  Research 
Projects  Agency  ( A R P A ) ,   speaking  a t  the dedication  of  the Xerox Cor- 
poration’s  new  research and development laboratory in Rochester, N.Y., 
cautioned  that  the  “spillover”  from  the  Federal  Government’s  own  de- 
velopment  programs  would  in   the  future  be  less beneficial  to  industry 
than  it  had  in  the  past.  Dr.  Sproull  explained  that  this  would  come 
about because of  increased efficiency  in  Federal research programs  and 
good  management will  focus  funds and  attention  ever more  precisely 
(6 
on the specific mission and that mission  is not the stimulation of  Ameri- 
can  industry.” 
Dr.  Sproull offered two suggestions to  fill  the gap created  by  the dis- 
appearance  of  Federal  “spillover”:  ( 1 )   that  a  governmental extension 
service be set up to channel the university-scientific effort into businesses 
unable  to  provide  their  own  basic  research;  (2 )   that  there  be  more 
encouragement  of  industry-research  institutes  such  as  the  one  main- 
tained by the textile industry a t  Princeton, N.J. 
(Frost, NYT,  11/13/64, 
47) 
November  13:  NASA  announced  that  further  analysis  of  results  of  the  first 
experiments to  use  the  laser  beam  for  satellite tracking  indicated  that 
scientists had accompIished precision tracking of  a satellite with  a  laser 
device.  Tests were conducted on  10 passes  of  the  EXPLORER  XXII  satel- 
lite since the first  success on Oct. 11. 
(NASA  Release 6 6 2 8 5 )  
*  NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center announced that two  barnacle-encrusted 
capsules,  each  containing  100 ft.  of  color  motion-picture film  in  good 
condition,  were  found,  one  on  a  beach  at  Eleuthera  Island  in  the  Ba- 
hamas, the other near a beach in  San Salvador in Central America.  The 
capsules had heen  ejected from Saturn  I SA-7  booster  rocket launched 
(UPI,  NYT,  11/14/64,  24 )  
Sept.’18,  1964, f rom  Cape Kennedy. 
NASA9S h w i s  Research cen te r  announced that  it was testing a gas bearing, 
designed as a research tool,  in  a  vacuum simulating space environment 
,above 100 miles.  Suspended from  the top  of  a  6O-ft.-long,  15-ft.-dia. 
tank,  the  bearing  would  provide  complete  freedom  of  motion  to  any 
payload  attached  to   the  bearing.  A  suspended  payload  would  have 
three-axis mobility with a  10” swing in both pitch and yaw.  The bear- 
ing,  designed  to  carry  a n  ,average 350-lb.  payload, would enable scien- 
tists  to  evaluate  low-thrust  systems  fo r   attitude  control  or  station- 
( LRC Release Sa-105) 
keeping in  on-the-ground tests. 
*  United  Technology  Center’s  lZO-in.-dia.,  solid-propellant  motor  for  Air 
Force’s  Titan  111-C  booster  was  static-fired successfully fo r  more  than 
110 sec. with  a  new  ablative  nozzle-throat  which  probably  would  be 
(Av. 
sabstituted  for  the  carbon  throat  previously used   in  test  f ir ings .  
Wk., 11/23/64,34;  UTC) 

387 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A ERONAU T IC S ,   1 9 6 4 
November  13:  Dr. George  E.  Mueller,  NASA Associate  Administrator  for 
Manned  Space  Flight,  a t   the  National  Editorial Writers’ Conference in 
Cocoa Beach,  Ha.,  said:  “The  Apollo  development schedule is conserva- 
tive.  The Apollo spacecraft is being developed on a time scale four years 
longer  than the  Mercury  spacecraft,  two  years  longer  than  the  B58 
Bomber, and one year longer than  the X-15.” 
(Text) 
*  UNESCO decided t o  convene an  international meeting  of  scientists in  Par is  
late  next  year  to  study  the  use  of  space satellites in  mass  communica- 
tions media.  No exact da te  was set for the meeting. 
( N Y T ,  11/14/64, 
29) 
*  Harry  F.  Guggenheim,  president  of  the Daniel  and Florence Guggenheim 
Foundation,  was named  by  NAA a s  the recipient of  the Wright  Brothers 
Memorial Trophy for  1964.  (AP, NYT ,  11/14/64,31) 
November 14: NASA  successfully launched  an  Aerobee 150 to  128-mi. altitude 
from White  Sands,  N.  Mex.  Primary  purpose  was  to measure  absolute 
intensity  of  the  stars  in  the  ultraviolet  with  50  Angstrom  resolution. 
(NASA Rpt. SRL) 
*  President  Johnson  appointed  a  national  commission  to   study  the  impact 
of  technological changes  on  American  life.  Howard  Bowen,  an   econo- 
mist  and  president  of  the  TJniv.  of  Iowa,  was  nominated  chairman  of 
the  14-member panel which  would  submit  a  report  to  Congress and the 
President  on  four  areas:  the  role  and   pace  of  technological  change, 
both  past  and  future;  the  impact  of  technological change  during  the 
next  ten  years  on  the  Nation’s  economy  and  social  structure;  unmet 
community  and  human  needs  to  which  modern  technology  might  be 
effectively  applied;  the most  effective means  for  channeling  technology 
into promising directions.  (Wash. Post, 11/15/64, A6) 
Wolfgang  Cartellieri,  West  Germany  Research  Ministry  state  secretary, 
announced  that  preparations  had  begun  for   a  space  satellite program 
involving small research  and telecommunications satellites.  ( UPI,  NYT ,  
11/15/64,56) 
November  15: Astronomers  a t   San Miguel Observatory  near  Buenos  Aires, 
Argentina,  reported  seeing  a  red-colored,  unidentified  flying  object, 
traveling  at  four  and  a  half  times  the  speed  of  an   ordinary  man-made 
satellite, cross the sky from west to east a t  8:30 p.m.  local time,  from east 
to  west  five  minutes  later,  and  then  from  west  t o   east  at  9 :05   p.m. 
(Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/16/64) 
November  16:  NASA  launched  its  first  Project  Luster  payload  from  White 
Sands, N. Mex.,  on  an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket.  Primary objectives 
of  flight  were  to   evaluate  engineering  performance  of  Luster  micro- 
meteoroid-sampling  instrument  and  to  collect  meteoritic  debris  during 
the peak  of  the  Leonids meteor  shower.  The Aerobee  150 reached  97- 
mi.  altitude, and performance of  both  the rocket and the instsumentation 
was  considered  “very  good.”  Nose  cone  did  not  fully  retract,  so  the 
data  collected  during  the  flight  were  lost  in  re-entry  heating  and  at- 
mospheric contamination. 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
*  NASA launched an  Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., 
to an altitude of  117 mi.  The payload  contained  three experiments,  the 
most  important of  which  involved the  measurement  of  the  composition 
of the neutral atmosphere in the altitude region of  62-155  mi.  All three 
experiments operated satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. SRL) 

388 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS,  19  6 4 
November 16: X-15  No.  2 piloted by  John B.  McKay  (NASA)  in planned c a p  
Proj. Off.) 
tive flight.  ( N A S A X - ~ ~  
NASA’s Manned  Spacecraft Center in Houston  divulged that  i t s  post-Apollo 
study emphasis would be  on  a  Y-shaped 36-man National Multipurpose 
Space Station  that  could  be  launched  by  Saturn  V  and  be the  primary 
space scientific and technical experimental center for  at  least five years 
(Av.  Wk., 11/16/64,  51 )  
in   the  mid-1970’s. 
*  An  MSC  investigative board  announced that  a  snow goose, weighing about 
eight  lbs.,  with  a  wingspan  of  more  than  24  in.,  caused  the  fatal  crash 
of  Astronaut Theodore C.  Freeman  (USAF)   on Oct.  31.  The bird  struck 
the  left  side  of  the  airplane  canopy  causing  both  engines  to  flame-out 
on  impact.  Captain Freeman, however,  still had control  of  the aircraft 
and attempted to make a landing at Ellington.  He flew a looping pattern 
over  the Gulf  Freeway  and  lowered his landing gear  as he  approached 
the field.  When  he apparently  realized that  a  landing was  not  possible, 
he veered  to  the  left  into  an  open  field,  probably  to  avoid buildings  a t  
Ellington.  Seconds later,  at  slightly under  100-ft. altitude,  he  ejected, 
(MSC  Roundup,  11/25/64) 
too  late  fo r  his parachute  to  deploy  fully. 
*  Dr.  Albert  J.  Kelley, Deputy  Director  of  NASA7S newly  created  Electronics 
Research Center, said  in an interview with Missiles and Rockets that  ERC  
would issue between  35  and 40 contracts, averaging about $50,000  each 
for  a  total  of  $2  million,  within  the  next  four  months.  Most  of  the 
(M&R ,  11/16/&$,  10-11) 
contracts were expected to  run for one year. 
The  Sprint  antimissile missile was  partially  displayed  for  the Association 
of  the  United States Army  in Washington.  Only the  exterior  shell was 
coneshaped  missile 27  ft.  long  and  4%  ft.  wide  at  its base. 
shown-a 
Sprint, combined with  the Nike X, was  designed to take off  from  below 
(Watson, Balt. Sun, 
in a matter of  seconds. 
ground  and intercept ICBM’s 
11/17/64) 
An  announcement  issued  by  the  AEC  said:  “The  United  States  today 
recorded  seismic signals  from  a n   event  in  the  Soviet  nuclear  test  area 
in the Semipalatinsk region.”  This was the first apparent  Soviet under- 
ground  nuclear test noted  by  the United States since the treaty  banning 
all  but  underground  nuclear  tests was  signed  in  August  1963.  (NYT, 
11/17/64,3) 
The  report  that  the White  House might  establish  a  “space  czar”  cabinet 
post to direct DOD  and NASA space programs was discounted.  The White 
House was against it, as were Secretary of  Defense McNamara and  NASA 
(M&R ,  11/16/M,  7 )  
Administxator Webb. 
Col.  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.  (USMC )  , said  during  the  career  guidance  clinic 
held  at  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft Center  that  thcre was  a  need fo r  a  na- 
tional  information  center  to  make  new  space  knowledge  available  to 
educators.  (Lee, Houston Post,  11/17/M) 
November  16-18:  The  Third  International  Symposium  on  Bioastronautics 
and the Exploration of  Space, sponsored by the Aerospace Medical Div. 
of  AFSC  and  organized by  the Southwest Research  Institute, was held  in 
San Antonio, Tex. 
Dr. James A.  Van Allen, for whom the Van Allen radiation belts were 
named,  said  in  a  speech  that  radiation  from  solar  flares  would  have 
been  dangerous to space travelers only three days in the  past four years. 
After  his  address,  Dr.  Van  Allen  told  reporters  “there  would  be  no 
serious danger  to travel to  any point in  the solar system caused by solar 
flares.” 

Dr.  John W. Firor, Director of  the  High  Altitude Observatory at the 
National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo.,  said astro- 
nauts  on  the  moon  would  have  to  be  exposed  to  solar  flare  radiation 
for  “many  hours”  before they would  suffer serious damage.  Attempts 
to  forecast  solar  flares  accurately “have  not  shown  any  success,”  Dr. 
(Maloney,  How ton   Pos t ,   11/17/@;  Sullivan,  N Y T ,  
Firor  said. 
11/17/641,16) 
Dr. Frank J.  Malina, chairman of  the Lunar International Laboratory 
IL IL )   program  at  the  International Academy  of  Astronautics  in  Paris, 
said:  “The  principal justification for  the operation of  a manned  center 
on  the  moon  on  an  international basis  may  well  be  a  financial  one.” 
He  explained that  i t  was  estimated that with  present  rocket technology, 
it would  cost  about $5,000 per  pound of  payload carried from the earth 
to  the  moon,  and  that  one  man-hour  on  the moon  would  cost  as much 
as   $80,000.  Dr.  Malina  also mentioned  that  plans for  LIL’ were  begun 
before  President Kennedy  announced this  country’s  intention of  going 
(Maloney, Houston Post, 
to  the  moon  before  the  end  of  the  decade. 
12/19/64) 
Soviet  scientists reported  that  the  entire VOSKHOD I  space flight was 
conducted  by  the  three-man  crew  without  spacesuits.  U.S.S.R.  space 
physiologist,  Dr.  0. Gazenko,  said  that  the  absence of  spacesuits made 
it  possible to  perform  a  number  of  experiments using  sensors directly 
on  the skin, even  during boost  and re-entry.  Among  these were meas- 
urements  of  the  electrocardiogram, respiration  rate,  electroencephalo- 
gram, eye movements,  and seismocardiogram. 
Dr.  V.  V.  Antipov,  a  radiologist,  said  that  VOSKHOD  preliminary 
results  indicated  a  substantial  contribution  to  knowledge  about  the 
effects of  space  flight  factors upon  biological  organisms.  He  said  that 
significant  changes  revealed  in  tissue  experiments  showed  that  new, 
spherical fragments occurred  in  cells  in  all  stages of  division  and  had 
only 6een  duplicated in  Soviet research  under  extremely high  g  forces, 
such as &OOO  g.  They had  thus far  been  tied  to  the boost  and descent 
phase  of  the  flight,  with  the  greatest  number  of  changes  occurring 
during  the  first  hours  of  flight,  and  the  least  just  before  re-entry. 

390 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
helium would  eventually *be used  as  a  diluent gas for spacecraft atmos- 
phere instead of  the nitrogen gas  that had been used  on  all Soviet space 
shots to   date.  He  said  the  subject is  a  matter  of  scientific controversy 
in t!he  U.S.S.R.,  but that “undoubtedly” there would  be  a shift to helium 
(M&R ,   11/23/64,  1 6 1 5 )  
a t   some  time  in   the  future. 
At  a press conference, Dr.  0. G.  Gazenko reiterated that the VOSKHOD 
crew did not  use space or pressure suits a t  all.  He was asked when  the 
Russians plan  to  rendezvous and dock  two  spacecraft and if   they  would 
both  be  manned. 
feeling that i t  would be very nice to have two humans meet in space.  . . . 
“We  will,  of  course, try  t o  do this as  soon as  possible,  but  I have the 
I t  is possible one will be a man and one will be a woman.”  His answers 
were  relayed  to  reporters by  Dr. Boris  Mandiovsky,  a  librarian  from 
the Library of  Congress. 
Dr. Gazenko,  giving an *oral summary of  his much  longer paper, said 
medical  results  of  seven  Russian  manned  space  flights had  not  shown 
any insurmountable *barriers to  space flight. 
“The  analogy  of  the  physiological  data  obtained  during  manned 
orbital  flight  of up  to  five  days  duration  proves  that  man,  specially 
selected ,and trained, can satisfactorily tolerate all orbital flight stresses,” 
Dr.  Gazenko  continued.  “However,  a s   can  be  seen  in  the  material, 
important  individual variations  are  noted.  We  have t o  devote  special 
attention  to   this  factor  in  future  cosmonaut  selkction  and  training,” 
he  said. 
He  told  scientists  tha t   there are   problems still to  be  solved  for  true  
long  space flights,  and  expressed  the hope  that between  Russia  and  the 
United  States there  could  be  closer  cooperation  in  solving these prwb- 
lems.  (Houston Post,  l l / l 8 / a )  
Col. Charles E. Yeager, Commandant of  the USAF  Aerospace Research 
Pilot  School  at  the  Air  Force  Flight  Test Center,  Edwards  AFB,  Calif., 
called  for   an  end  to  the  use  of  heavy  work-retarding pressure  suits. 
“We  are relying entirely too much  on  the  suit to  pull  the guy  out  of  a 
(Hous ton  Pos t ,   11/19/64) 
problem,”  he said. 
Astronaut M.  Scott Carpenter called  for  a  ‘hew  approach” in  devel- 
opment  of  wearing  apparel  for  astronauts  in  space.  He  termed  the 
pressurized  spacesuit  “the  greatest  single handicap  we  have  to   opera- 
tions in space.  To  do useful work  is almost  impossible.  I’m  sure there 
is a better way.”  Carpenter said that he  had  proposed an investigation 
of  a  “spray-on”  spacesuit that  would  permit  astronauts to  move  freely 
(Webb,  Boston  Globe,  11/17/64; 
about  the  cabin  of  the  capsule. 
Houston Post, 11118/64;  NYT ,  11/18/64,24) 
Maj. Herbert H.  Reynolds  (WAF ) ,   Chief  of  the Comparative Psychol- 
ogy Branch  of  the Aeromedical Research Laboratory  a t  Holloman AFB, 
N. Mex.,  said that chimpanzees had performed so well  within an almost 
total vacuum that there w a s  hope space travelers could  survive a vacuum 
caused  by  a  puncture  of  their  vehicle  long  enough  for  the  hole  to  be 
(Sullivan, 
plugged.  Research was  conducted  at  Holloman  for  NASA. 
NYT ,  11119/64,19) 
Dr.  Cyril Ponnamperuma, biochemist a t  NASA Ames  Research Center, 
told newsmen that “there is a very good possibility  of  finding the answer 
to   the question of  the existence of  life in  our   own  planetary  system by 
an i n s p d i o n   of  the planets with  our  immediate  or  remote sensors.” 
(H o w o n  Post, 11/17/64,) 

D AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  

391 

N W  

two   sounding  rocket  launches  from  USNS 
d,  Va.,  to  determine whether  o r  not  ship’s 
ized-mylar  spheres with  s&cient  accuracy  to 
data.  Both payloads,  each  consisting of 
were  provided  by  Univ.  of  Michigan. 
, reached 136-mi. altitude and two spheres 
ejected and  inflated, but ship’s radar did not acquire track.  Land-based 
radars  d id  obtain  sphere  trajectory  data.  The  second  rocket,  a  Nike- 
Cajun,  reached  92.6-mi.  altitude,  its  spheres  ejecting  and  inflating  as 
planned  but  deflating  earlier  than  expected.  Ship’s  radar  provided 
questionable  position  data  which  would  have  to  be  analyzed  further. 
(Wallops Release 64436;  NASA Rp ta  SRL) 
0  The  National  Academy  of  Sciences released  a  statement  from  its  Space 
Science Board  recommending tha t   unmanned  exploration  of  the  planet 
Mars,  involving  both  physical  and  biological  investigations  and  ex- 
pressly the   search  for  extraterrestrial  life, be made  the  primary objec- 
tive of  the Nation’s  space eftort  in  the ten  to  fifteen years following the 
Project  Apollo  manned  lunar  landing  ( 1 9 7 1 4 5 ) .   Such  a  program 
would  be  planned  to  (1) capitalize  upon  each  stage  of  technological 
capability,  (2 )   yield  gangible,  meaningful  results  a t   appropriate  inter- 
vals  with  no  potentially  critical  gap,  (3 )   secure  environmental  data 
essential to manned  ventures,  and  ( L E )   provide time fo r  proper  develop- 
ment  of  extended  manned  activities  in   space. 
(NAS-h%C  Release 
11/17/64,;  Text, 10/28/M) 
NASA  Langley  Research  Center  issued  requests  for   proposals  for   the  con- 
ceptual  and  preliminary  design  of  a  hypersonic  ramjet  research  en- 
gine  to  be  used  in  the  Hypersonic  Ramjet  Experiment  Project  an- 
nounced by  NASA last June.  Since the project would  ultimately include 
guidelines included  a weig K: t  limitation of  800 Ibs.  fo r  the final research 
flight research with  the en  ‘ne mounted  on  the X-15  No.  2 aircraft,  the 
engine,  including  necessary  flight-test  instrumentation  and  dimensions 
compatible with mounting  the engine near  the  lower aft  fuselage of  the 
X-15. 
( L ~ R C  Release) 
US .  Army announced that the X V S A  lift-fan jet V/Stol  had made its first 
fu l l  transition  flight,  successfully converting to  conventional flight  after 
a  vertical take-off.  Tests were conducted a t  Edwards AFB, Calif.  The 
XV-SA  was  said to  have two big advantages over other types of  vertical- 
flight planes:  (1 )   it  was  much more economical in   fuel  consumption; 
( 2 )  because the downward flow of  air from the fans was  relatively cool 
and  gentle,  the  aircraft  would  have  no  trouble  operating  from  unpre- 
(Witkin, NYT, 11/18/64,17) 
pared d i r t  surfaces. 
James  E.  Webb,  NASA Administrator,  told  the  Council  on  World  Affairs 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

392 
pride o r  prestige.  I n  the view  of  other nations, the relative effectiveness 
of  the American  system of  free enterprise is,  in  a very  real sense, being 
tested in  space.” 
(Text) 
November  17:  Electro-Optical Systems,  Inc.,  reported  that  it  had  devised a 
high  temperature,  ultra  high-vacuum  thermionic  electron  emission mi- 
croscope  that  can  pictorially  record  critical  problems  associated  with 
metal  phase  and  grain  growth  change  in   missiles  and  hypersonic  air- 
(L.A. 
craft.  The  instrument  was  developed  under  contract  to  NASA. 
Her&  Examiner,  l lJ17 /@)  
Maj.  Gen. Marvin C.  Demler, Commander, Research and Technology Div., 
AFSC,  speaking  a t   the  Seventh Hypervelocity  Impact  Symposium,  said: 
“Another  example  of  advanced  development  hypervelocity in  nature  if  
you will,  is the ASSET  Program.  ASSET  stands for Aerothermodynamic/ 
Elastic  Structural Systems Environmental  Tests,  and  involves the   flight 
verification  and  demonstration  of  aerodynamic  and  structural  design 
concepts  for  the  lifting  re-entry  class  of  aerospace  vehicles.  Three 
ASSET  vehicles  have  been  launched  t o   date  of  which  two  were  quite 
successful.  The ASSET Program was originally conceived and conducted 
by  the Air  Force  Flight Dynamics Laboratory and has  now been  turned 
over  to   the  Systems Command’s  Space  Systems Div.  program  for  even 
(Text, AFSC  Release) 
more  advanced  vehicles.” 
Army  announced  it had  asked  industry to  submit  proposals  for a  study  of 
an  advanced  aerial vehicle fo r  use  as  a  weapons  platform which  might 
eventually  replace  current  armed  helicopters.  The  vehicle  was  con- 
ceived as  an  integrated aerial  fire support system to  include armament, 
avionics, and fire control equipment. 
(DOD Release 811-64) 
*  NASA  announced  award  by  Langley  Research  Center  of  $2.5  million  con- 
tract  to   Boeing  Co.  for  dynamic  flight  simulation  work  for  the  super- 
sonic transport program.  The Boeing 707 prototype  would  be modified 
by  installation  of  major  control  and  computer  equipment  to  permit 
complete  simulation  of  a  wide  variety  of  supersonic  transport  types. 
(NASA Release 64-286) 
November  18: A Thor-Agena D  booster  was  used  by  USAF  to   launch  an  un- 
(M& R ,   11/23/M,  8 
identified  satellite from Vandenberg  AFB, Calif. 
HHN -48 )  
*  Flights  to   study  the  effects  of  sonic  booms  on  structures  and  “to  obtain 
preliminary  data  on  sleep  disturbance”  began  a t   White  Sands Missile 
Range.  The flights would  be made  through  Dec.  17  and  from  Jan.  5 
through  Fsb.  4  under  the  direction of  the  Federal  Aviation  Agency,  as  
par t  of  the program to develop a supersonic  transport  aircraft. 
(Clark, 
NYT,  11/13/64,58) 
*  The Hermann Oberth Award,  presented  annually  by  the Alabama  chapter 
of  AIAA,  was  awarded  posthumously to Hugh M.  Taylor,  former  special 
assistant  t o  the Chief  of  the Guidance and  Control  Division,  NASA  Mar- 
shall Space Flight Center.  Taylor, who had worked  at Redstone Arsenal 
since  1951, was  killed  in  a  plane  crash  July  9  near  Newport,  Tenn. 
(Ma r shd l  Star,  l l / l l /M ,   1, and 11/25/M,  1) 
November  19: NASA  launched  a  Nike-Cajun  sounding rocket  from  Wallops 
Island,  Va.,  to   an   altitude  of  78  mi.,  to   test  the  prototype  Nike-Cajun 
grenade payload  produced  by Zimney  Corp.  Instrumentation  perform- 
ance was  satisfactory,  except  for  failure  of  12th grenade  to  explode. 
(NASA Rpt.  SRL) 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTLCS,  19 6 4 

393 
November  19:  NASA  conducted  two  se ts   of  experiments with  Nike-Apache 
sounding  rockets  launched  from  the  flight  deck  of  the  USNS Croatan: 
(1) an  experiment to measure pressure,  temperature, and density in the 
region of  about 20- to 75-mi. altitude f o r  the Univ. of  Michigan;  (2 )   ex- 
periments to measure electron density in the ionosphere for the Univ.  of 
Illinois.  (Wallops Release 64-86; NASA Rpt. SRL) 
* NASA  Lewis  Research  Center  undertook  supervision  a t   Lockheed  Missiles 
and Space Company, Sunnyvale, Calif.,  of  the design and development of 
a metal shroud section to replace the fiberglas section in Mariner 4. 
In- 
vestigations  had  indicated  that  the  fiberglas  fairing  of  MANNER 
111 
probably  had  structural failure when exposed to  the  flight  environment 
and  that  this  prevented  shroud  separation  from  the  spacecraft.  (KSC 
Release 206-64,) 
* In  press interview during Third  International  Symposium on  Bioastronau- 
tics and Exploration  of  Space, in San Antonio,  Major  Duane E.  Grave- 
line, a USAF doctor who  examined each of  the Project Mercury astronauts 
after  their  flights,  said  there  was  no  doubt  that  even  brief  forays  into 
space  created  a  certain  physical  debilitation.  “What  prolonged  space 
flights,  with  the  constant  state of  weightlessness and  no  gravity  as  we 
know  on  earth might  do  to  the human  body,  we   don’t  know  yet.  We 
know that the Russian cosmonauts have suffered from the effects of pro- 
longed weightlessness, and  that  U.S.  astronauts  Walter  Schirra  and  L. 
Gordon Cooper had  temporary  debility fo r  the  same  reason.  . . . What 
we  must  do  now  is  determine how  to  condition man  fo r   long-duration 
manned  orbital  missions  and  journeys  into  the  universe.  Frankly,  we 
(Macomber, Copley  News  Service,  Sun 
don’t  have  the  answers  yet.” 
Diego Union, 11/19/fX) 
Cornell  Univ.  announced  that  scientists  at  the  Ionospheric  Observatory 
a t  Arecibo,  Puerto  Rico,  bounced  a  radar  signal  off  the  planet  Mars 
while it was  about 138,000,000 mi. from earth today.  Cornel1 said this 
was  the  farthest  distance  a t   which  Mars  had  been  detected  by  radar. 
(AP, Balt. Sun, 11/20/64) 
* NASA  announced that  Francis  J.  Sullivan had  been  appointed Acting Direc- 
to r   of  the  Electronics  and  Control  Div.,  Office  of  Advanced  Research 
and  Technology.  The  position  formerly  was  held  by  Dr.  Albert  J. 
Kelley, who became Deputy Director of  the Electronics Research Center, 
(NASA  Announcement 64-274) 
Cambridge, Mass. 
Dr.  J.  Allen Hynek  of  Northwestern Univ.  said that  he  and his colleagues 
would  submit  a  p-oposal  to  NASA  for  a  24-in.  telescope  to  be  landed 
on  the  moon  Isy  the  mid-70’s.  Such  a  telescope  might  double  the 
size of  the optically observable universe from  its present radius of  about 
5  billion  light  years  to  perhaps  10 billion.  It would  also  “see”  radia.. 
tions  from  deep space that  are totally  excluded  by  earth’s  atmosphere. 
(Schmeck, NYT, 11/20/64) 
* Defense Secretary Robert S.  McNamara announced the closing  of  Atlas  E, 
Atlas  F,  and Titan  I missile installations.  The inactivation would  save 
$116.9 million  annually.  McNamara  said  he  took  the  action  because 
of  “our now sizeable inventory of  Titan I1 and  Minuteman missiles which 
have  f a r  greater  capabilities and  can  be  operated  and  maintained  a t   a 
( S B D ,  11/20/6LE;  DOD Re- 
fraction of  the  cost of  the  earlier  models.” 
Iease 822-64) 
7-598  o--.g5---26 

394 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4  

November  19:  The  Soviet  Union  marked  Rocket  Day,  a  new  observance, 
by  warning  the West  of  the  “stupendous power,’’  great  range,  and pin- 
point  accuracy  of  its missiles.  Marshal Nikolai I.  Krylov, chief  of  the 
rocket  farces repeated  the  Kremlin’s  claim  that  it had  antimissile mi% 
(UPI,  NYT ,   11/20/64,27) 
des .  
* A  Commerce  Dept.  reprint  of  a  Russian  scientific  article  indicated  that 
Soviet satellite COSMOS v had detected and reported a high altitude explo- 
sion of  US .  nuclear weapon over Johnston Island in the Pacific on July 9, 
( N Y T ,  11/20/64) 
1962. 
* A Pershing missile, fired from an Army range north of  Fort Bliss, Tex.,  by 
an  artillery  unit  from  Fort  Sill, Okla.,  as  part  of  a  training  exercise, 
crashed  40 mi.  off  course  somewhere in   the  mountains  near  Creede, 
(A€’, Balt.  Sun, 11/23/@) 
It was  not  armed with  explosives. 
Colo. 
November 20: General Creighton W.  Abrams, Jr.  (USA), presented  the Dis- 
tinguished  Flying Cross to  four  of  five Army pilots who  recently broke 
ten world records  for helicopters,  including two  records previously held 
by  the  Russians.  The  recipients  were:  Capt.  William  A.  Welter,  Jr.; 
Capt. Michael N. Antoniou;  cwo Emery E.  Nelson;  and cwo Joseph C, 
Watts.  The fifth pilot, Maj.  John A.  Johnston, was absent  on  an  over- 
seas assignment.  The records were fo r  speed, distance, and t ime - to -c l i ib  
in  class E-1,  E-lD,  and E l E  helicopters.  With official  recognition of 
the  new  records, the U.S.  would hold 26  marks  ( 5 2% ) ,  the  U.S.S.R.  1 4  
( 2 8% ) ,  France 9 (18% ) ,   and Czechoslovakia 1 ( 2% ) .   (DOD Releases 
793-64 and 8 2 M ;  NYT ,  11/7/64r,  53) 
0  After  analyzing  atmospheric debris from  Communist China’s  nuclear  test, 
nm lea r  physicist Seitaro Nakamura of  Tokyo Univ.  Institute fo r  Nuclear 
Physics  said  China  was  nearer  to  detonating her  first  hydrogen  bomb 
than France was.  Quantities of  U-238  and U-237  found in atmospheric 
samplings Oct. 17-25  over Japan suggested detonation had  been a “mod- 
erator  test”  of  the type  often made shortly  before  a  hydrogen  (fusion) 
( S t h t ,  11/20/64$481) 
test. 
November 21 : Two NASA Satdi-EXPLORER 
XXnr and EXPLORER XXV-were 
successfully launched into orbit from Vandenberg AFB,  Calif.,  aboard  a 
single  four-stage  Scout  rocket.  This  marked  the  first  time  NASA had 
orbited  dual spacecraft with a  single booster.  The double payload was 
designed to provide more detailed information on complex radiation-air 
density measurements. 
EXPLORER  XXIY  (A i r  Density  satellite)  was a  12-ft.-dia.,  19-lb. polka- 
It was  covered with 
dotted  sphere identical  to  EXPLORERS  IX and  XIX. 
aluminum  foil  to  reflect  both sunlight  and  radio  waves;  approximately 
4,000  white  spots  on  the   surface  provided  temperature  control.  EX- 
PLORER  X X ~ V  would  provide  three types of  global comparative measure- 
ments:  ( 1 )   high-altitude  air  density;  ( 2 )   sources of  atmospheric heat 
through  comparison  of  data  with  In jun   and  other  satellites;  and  ( 3 )  
density  and  temperature  variations of  the  atmosphere a s  a  function  of 
latitude.  Orbital parameters  were:  apogee,  1,550 mi.;  perigee, 327 mi; 
period, 116min.;  andinclination.  81”. 
EXPLORER  xxv  (Injun-B) , a  2-ft.-dia.,  %lb.  metal  satellite  bearing 
16 radiation  sensors to  measure protons  and electrons in  various  ranges 
of  energy, was  roughly  spherical  in  shape with  40  ffat  surfaces,  30  of 
them studded with  solar  cells.  Orbital parameters  were:  apogee,  1,548 
mi.;  perigee, 326 mi.;  period,  116 min.;  and inclination, 81”. 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

395 

Tracking da ta  after one complete orbit indicated that the satellites were 
close to   planned  orbit  with  all  instruments  operating. 
(NASA  Release 
64-284;  Goddard News,  11/30/64) 
November  21 : Univ.  of  Pennsylvania  announced  a  team  of  archeologists, 
using  a  rubidium  magnetometer  intended  for   outer  space,  had  found 
what may be  the 2,500-year-old ruins of  the fabled Greek city of  Sybaris. 
(AP, Omaha  Vo r ld  Herald,  11/22/64) 
Vice Adm.  Hyman G.  Rickover  (U SN )   was selected a s  recipient of  the 1964 
Enrico  Fermi  Award  for   h i s   contributions  to  development  of  nuclear 
power  for  submarines and  power-generating  plants.  Rickover  was  the 
first engineer-administrator  ever  t o  receive the  award.  (Phil. Inquirer, 
11/22/64). 
Novembdr 22:  Breene M. Kerr, who had been NASA’s Deputy Assistant Admin- 
istrator  for Technology Utilization, became Assistant Administrator  for 
Technology  Utilization.  He  thus  took  over  part  of  the  duties  of  Dr. 
George L.  Simpson, who  would  function a s  Associate Deputy Adminis- 
tra tor  and Assistant Administrator for Policy Planning. 
(NASA  Release 
64-291) 
Dr.  Thomas P. Murphy became NASA  Deputy  Assistant Administrator  for 
Legislative Affairs.  Dr.  PAurphy  joined  NASA  in  November  1%1  as  a 
Staff Assistant to the Administrator  and from July  1963 was Assistant to 
the Assistant Administrator  for Technology Utilization and Policy Plan- 
( NASA Release 64-292) 
ning. 
November  23:  NASA  successfully  launched  a  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket 
to  an   altitude  of  110.8  mi.  from  Wallops  Island,  Va.  Experimental 
objectives were:  ( 1 )   to measure  daytime  ion  and electron densities and 
solar ultraviolet flux in the region from 31-124  mi.;  ( 2 )  to test efficiency 
of  loop  antenna section for  extending  CW propagation  measurements to 
“D”  region  dtitudes. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  NASA announced that USNS  Croatan had completed  its successful shakedown 
cruise  off  the Virginia-North Carolina coast during which  a  number of 
sounding  rockets  were  launched  for  NASA.  Electronic  equipment  and 
operational  procedures  were  checked  out  in  preparation  for  using  the 
USNS  Croatccn as a  mobile  launch  platform  early  in  1965.  During  this 
three-month NASA expedition, forty or more scientific experiments would 
be launched from the USNS Croatan as  part of  NASA’s sounding rocket pro- 
gram in connection with the International Quiet Sun Year  (IQSY) , 1964- 
1965. 
(Wallops Release 64-86;  NASA Release 6 2 9 4 )  
* USAF  announced selection of  the  first six astronauts for  its manned  orbiting 
laboratory  (MOL) program.  An additional six would  be named in early 
1965.  Following  a  six-month  basic  training  course,  the  crewmen,  all 
graduates of  USAF’S  Aerospace Research Pilot School, would be assigned 
(Av. Wk., 11/23/64,25) 
specialty areas. 
* Paul  P.  Haney,  Public  Affairs Officer  a t   NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center, 
asserted  that  the  bulk  of  550 communications  regarding NASA  scientist- 
astronauts  had   to   be  classified as   letters  of  interest.  Swmty-five  per 
cent of  this number,  or  412, were lacking  some detail and about 100 had 
been  eliminated  altogether.  The number  of  applications was  ahead  of 
the number  received for  other  classes of  astronaut,  he said.  These fig- 
ures  clarified  figures given  by  Julian  Scheer,  NASA  Assistant  Adminis- 
trator  fo r  Public Affairs, who had  said on Nov.  22 that only 20 applica- 

396 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 

tions had been  received and that only nine of  these applicants qualified. 
(Houston Post,  11/24/64) 
November  23 :   Av ia t ion   Week reported  that  Soviet  space-medicine spe- 
cialists  were  considering  bacterial  compatibility  in   their  selection  of 
cosmonaut teams  for  the  three-man Voskkiod  spacecraft.  This  was  a n  
important consideration because of the difficulty of  preventing communi- 
cation  of  bacterial floxa,  which might  be harmless to  one man  and dan- 
gerous  to  another,  in  a  closed-cabin  environment.  It  was  not  known 
whether persons with similar metabolic processes would be selected f o r  a 
single  crew  o r   whether  those  with  extremely  different ones might  not 
compensate each other, nor had it been determined whether the VOSKHOD 
( A v .   W k ,  
I  flight  crew  was  selected  f o r   bacterial  compatibility. 
11/23/64,59) 
November  23-24:  NASA  Goddard  Space Flight Center was host  at the jointly 
sponsored Goddard-IEEE Short Term Frequency Stability Symposium to  
some  310  scientists  and  engineers  from  across  the  country,  England, 
Canada,  and  Switzerland.  The  symposium was  the  first  of  its kind  to 
study problems associated with generating stable frequencies in the micro- 
wave  region  for  the  control,  guidance, and  tracking  of  launch  vehicles 
(Goddurd News, 11/30/64,  1 )  
and satellites. 
November  2 4 :   NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  announced  selection  of 
Beckman  Instruments Corp. t o  negotiate final contract fo r  three Satellite 
Telemetry Automatic  Reduction  Systems  (Stars)  a t   slightly more  than 
$1,000,000.  The  contractor  would  be  responsible for manufacture,  in- 
stallation, and maintenance of  the system as well a s  training of  Goddard 
ptxsonnel.  This second phase of  the Goddard Stars project would pro- 
vide a highly automated method of  preparing large quantities of  data for 
later  analysis  by  the  scientific  community. 
(GSFC  Release  6-33-64) 
* At the Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB,  Ohio, 
four  college men  completed a test in  which they  lived on astronaut food 
fo r  28 days in  a spacecraft type of  capsule and  14 more days in  hospital 
isolation.  They ate what was called “freeze dehydrated foods” that came 
in  one-in. cubes of  beef, chicken, etc.  Liquid was distilled water, tea,  and 
fruit juices.  No ill effects were apparent. 
( N Y T ,  l l / 2 7 / 6 4 , 3 1 )  
0  Canada  announced  the  completion of  negotiations  for  building  a  150-in. 
optical telescope a t  Mt. Kobau, B.C.,  in commemoration of  the recent visit 
to Canada of  Queen Elizabeth 11. 
(Shaw, CSM ,  11/24/64) 
* Izvestia,  the  Soviet governrnent newspaper,  announced the  death  of  Y.  A. 
Korovin,  a  leading  Soviet  authority  on  international  and   space  law. 
( AP, Galveston Tr ibune ,  11/25/64) 
November  25 :   James  E.  Webb,  NASA  Administrator,  and  Allen  Fairhall, 
Australian Minister fo r  Supply, announced jointly that a tracking station 
to support the Apollo manned lunar flight would be established near Can- 
berra, Australia, as a part of  the worldwide unified S-band  Apollo track- 
ing  network.  The  station  would  be  equipped  with  an  8543.  diameter 
parabolic  reflector  antenna  to  support  the  lunar  phases  of  A p l l o  mis- 
sions. 
(NASA  Release 64t-290) 
The Lunar Landing Research Vehicle  ( LLRV) , piloted by  Joseph A.  Walker 
of  NASA’s Flight  Research  Center,  attained  an  altitude  of  30  ft.-the 
highest  point  in  five brief  flights-and 
landed  safely.  Walker  said  he  
was  highly  pleased  with  the  crafi’s  performance.  The  flight  was  con- 
(AP, NYT ,   11/26/64,  9 )  
ducted  a t   Edwards  AFB,  Calif. 

397 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9  6 4 
November 25: Launch of  Stratoscope 11 balloon was delayed at least 48 hours 
when  a tube used to  fill the 300,ooo-C~. ft.  balloon  with helium  slipped 
and punctured  the  plastic  skin.  Another  balloon  was  to be sent  to  the 
Palestine, Tex.,  launch site from the G.  T.  Schjeldahl Co.  in Northfield, 
(M&R, 11/30/6p,  29; N Y T ,  11/26/64,34) 
Minn. 
* In  a  speech to  the National Space Club in Washington, D.C.,  NASA’s Direc- 
tor  of  Advanced  Manned  Ear&  Orbital  Missions M. J.  Raffensperger 
said:  “Our limited flight experience to date indicates that any deleterious 
effects of  space flight can be controlled, but man’s  reaction to longdu ra -  
tion space missions is not  yet quantitatively understood.  Thus, the bio- 
medical and behavioral areas must receive major attention in the earlier 
extended  duration  earth  orbital  flights.”  Other  areas  that Mr.  Raffen- 
sperger  felt showed promise in providing beneficial returns to humanity 
were  “research  and  observation  of  meteorology from  a  manned  space- 
(Text) 
craft”  and “earth  mapping and survey.” 
* NASA  announced  it had  awarded 33  supplementary or  new  research  grants 
and contracts totaling $2,418,634  to 26 colleges, universities, and private 
(NASA  Release 64-295) 
research institutions. 
November  26:  A  Thanksgiving  Day  message  from  President  Johnson  was 
broadcast ‘by RELAY  I,  RELAY  11,  and SYNCOM  II  communications satellitm 
(Day,  Phil.  Eve .  BulL, 
to  American  armed  forces  all  over  the  world. 
11/%/6p) 
The ground  station  at Rao, Sweden, about 225 mi. southwest of  Stockholm, 
joined  the  world  network  of  communications satellite  ground  stations 
and would  receive taped  television messages via  NASA’s RELAY  I  satellite. 
The  station  was  the  joint  effurt  of  Norway,  Denmark,  and  Sweden. 
(M&R ,   11/30/64r,  20-22) 
* USN announced $36,000  contract  with  the  Convair  and Electric  Boat  divi- 
sions of  General Dynamics Corp.  for  analytical and  design  studies of  a 
flying submarine-a  small craft capable of  flying to and submerging for 
operations in  relatively closed waters.  (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/27/64) 
November  27:  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for 
Manned  Space Flight,  announced  that  about  100  of  the  1M  personnel 
in  the  Kennedy  Space Center  Launch  Support  Equipment  Engineering 
Div.  would  move  from  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  to  KSC by  Aug. 
(NASA Release 64c298; NYT, 11/28/64,16) 
1%5. 
*  The  European  Space Research Organization  (ESRO)  Council  approved its 
program  for  1965,  which  would  include  setting  up  tracking  and  tele- 
measuring  stations  in  Belgium,  the  Falkland  Islands,  and Alaska.  The 
program  would  also  include  41  experiments  during  28  rocket  firings, 
four  experiments with  the polar  ionospheric satellite Esro  1 to  be fired 
in  September, and six experiments with the Esro 2 satellite f o r  the study 
of  cosmic  rays.  Payment  of  $17.2  million  was  voted  and  contracts 
(AP, NYT ,   11/29/64,  20) 
worth  $34.6  million were  authorized. 
President  Johnson  named  Dr.  Charles  Stark  Draper,  head  of  Dept  of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics at Massachusetts Institute  of  Technology, 
a s  a  recipient  of  the National  Medal  of  Science.  Dr.  Draper,  a  leader 
in   developing aeronautic  and astronautic  instruments and  controls, was 
( N Y T ,  11/28/6p,  16) 
one  of  11 scientists to  be   so honored. 
November  28:  NASA  MARINER N Mars probe  was  successfully launched  into 
interplanetary  orbit  from  Cape  Kennedy,  ma.,  by  an Atlas-Agena  D 
launch vehicle.  The Agena D separated from the Atlas 115 mi. up  and  

398 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 
injected  itself  into  a  parking  orbit  around  the earth.  It  then  reignited 
and  injected  itself  into  a  Mars  trajectory.  MARINER  IV  was  detached 
and  locked  onto  the  sun  for  solar  power  and  stabilization  on  one  axis 
and  opened  its  solar  panels.  Later,  the  probe  would  lock  on  the  star 
first time a star would be used 
Canopus fo r  second-axis stabiliation-the 
for  an  attitude  reference on a long space mission.  I n  addition to equip- 
ment for televising the Martian  surface, MARINER IV  carried instruments 
t o   study  radiation,  space  dust,  and  magnetic  forces  near  earth,  Mars 
and  in  deep space.  The  trajectory  as presently  calculated would  carry 
MARINER  IV  within  151,000 mi.  of  Mars  by  mid-July. 
(NASA  Releases 
266,  288;  Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  11/29/64;  NYT ,   11/29/64;  Miles, 
Wash .  Pos t ,  11/30/64) 
November  28:  USAF  Athena  missile  was  destroyed  in  flight  over  south- 
eastern  Utah  when  high  winds  threatened  to  force  it  off  course.  The 
Athena was  used  to test re-entry procedures for ICBM’s. ( UPI,  S t .  Louis 
Post-Dispatch,  11/28/64) 
0  At  his news  conference in Johnson  City, Tex.,  President  Johnson  spoke of 
Vice  President-elect Humphrey’s  prospective  duties.  “I  know  he  has 
Space  Act  he  will  be  the   new  Chairman  of  the  Space  Council.  . . .” 
demonstrated  an  intense interest  in  our  space activities, and  under  the  
(Transcript, UPI,  V u s h .  Pos t ,  11/29/64) 
November 29:  Carbon 13 was observed in the comet Ikeya in about the same 
proportion  as  it  occurred  on  the  earth  by  Dr.  Jesse  L.  Greenstein  of 
the  Mount  Wilson  and  Palomar  Observatories  and  Dr.  Antoni  Stawi- 
kowski  of  the  Nicolaus  Copernicus  University  of  Poland  working  at 
Pdom a r  Observatory.  “This  lends credence,”  said  Dr.  Greenstein, “to 
the theory  that  comets, and there may be millions of  them, were formed 
in  about the same region of  the solar system as the earth a nd  were blown 
into their present, vast, elliptical orbits.  The fact that the carbon isotope 
ratio  is  similar  for  Ikeya  and  the  earth  argues  against  the  theory  that 
comets  a re   captured,  interstellar  wanderers  that  were  formed  beyond 
the solar system.  If  comets were born elsewhere, one would expect them 
( N Y T ,  11/30/64,11;  AFOSR  Release 11-64-3 9” )  
to be unlike earth.” 
It  was  announced  that  a  new   ultraviolet  radiation  spectrograph had  been 
developed at NASA  Goddard  §pace  Flight Center in an effort to  solve the 
mystery  of  “airglow.”  The  spectrograph  would  be  carried  aloft  by  a 
rocket and would be expected to reveal the constituents and mechanisms 
of  the airglow.  (NANA,  Sun Diego Union, 11/29/64) 
November 30: NASA  and Pan American Airways announced that  a  scheduled 
P an  Am  flight operating between  San Francisco and Honolulu had suc- 
cessfully received error-free teletype messages for one hour  from NASA’s 
communications  satellite,  SYNCOM  111,  which  was  in  stationary  orbit 
over  the  mid-Pacific.  NASA  said  that  the  relay  of  communications to 
an   aircraft  in   flight  from  a  station  on  the  ground  was  another  “first” 
(NASA  Release 64-297) 
fo r  SYNCOM III. 
MARINER  IV  Mars probe  finally  locked  its sensor on  the  star Canopus after 
fixes  on  three  wrong  stars.  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  05cials  noted 
that  picking  up  wrong  stars was  not  critical  in  the  early  stages  of  the 
flight.  If  the  MARINER  IV  had not  dropped these wrong fixes of  its own 
accord, the  action could have been  commanded from the ground.  Only 
if  Canopus were in the sensor’s sights would  the TV camera be aimed at 
the Martian  surface  when  MARINER  rv flew  past  the  planet  79$$ months 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4  

399 
from  now;  only with  Canopus  in  view would  scientists know  the  space- 
craft’s attitude with the precision needed for a midcourse rocket firing of 
maximum  accuracy  to   refine the course of  the trajectory  and  bring  the 
MARINER IV within about 8,600 mi. of Mars instead of  the presently antici- 
pated  distance of  151,000 mi. 
(Miles,  Wash. Post,  11/30/64;  Witkin, 
NYT ,   11/30/64,  1;  National  Observer,  11/30/64;  Witkin,  NYT ,  
12/1/64,  1 )   . 
November 30: NASA  launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, 
N.  Mex.,  with  experiment  to   obtain  optical spectra of  night  ultraviolet 
airglow.  Rocket  attained  113.5-mi.  altitude,  and  the  attitude  control 
system kept  the two fast spectrographs  pointed  accurately a t  the horizon, 
permitting  four-minute exposure  of  the  faint  molecular  oxygen  Herz- 
berg  bands.  Also included  in   payload  was  a  Nikon  camera  to  obtain 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
star-field backgrounds for aspect determination. 
Nike-Apache sounding  rocket launched  in U.S.-Pakistan  project  from Son- 
miani  reached  124cmi.  altitude.  Sodium  vapor  trail  ejected  during 
ascent  was  photographed  by  ground  cameras  to  measure  atmospheric 
wind  directions  and  speeds.  Launch  was  part  of  cooperative  program 
between  NASA  and  Pakistan’s  Space  and  Upper  Atmosphere  Research 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Committee. 
*  The Soviet Union launched ZOND  11 probe in the direction of  the planet Mars. 
The  purpose  of  the launching  was  said to  be  trying of  the station’s sys- 
tems  under  actual  conditions  of  prolonged  space  flight  and  gaining  of 
practical  experience.  Scientific  investigations  in  interplanetary  space 
would  be  carried  out  simultaneously.  The  probe  was proceeding  along 
(Taw,  Krasnaya  Zvezda, 
a  trajectory  close  to   the  computed  one. 
12 /2 /64   1, ATSS-T Trans.;  Simons,  Wash.  Post,  12/2/64;  Clymer, 
Balt.  Sun, 12/2/68) 
*  X-15  No.  2  flown  by  pilot  John  B.  MuKay 
to  86,000-ft. 
(NASA )  
altitude a t  maximum speed  of  3,000 mph  (mach 4.54).  The flight con- 
tinued  checkout of  the revised landing gear  system on  the No.  2 aircraft 
and checked modifications made to prevent nose gear from coming down 
prematurely.  Total  engine  burn  time  was  76  sec.  and  tests performed 
(NASA X-15  Proj. Off.) 
were successful. 
*  The National  Center for Atmospheric Research postponed the  launching of 
a  huge  balloon  equipped  to  carry  a  36-in.  telescope  15 mi.  into  the 
( UPI,  N Y T ,  
stratosphere  to  photograph  Jupiter  and  s tar   clusters. 
12/1/64,  2 )  
*  Dr.  Nancy  Roman,  Chief  of  NASA  Astronomy  programs,  told  Space 
Business  Daily  that  her  office  had  a  program  under  consideration 
for  a  50-55-in. 
telescopic  m irror   manned  orbiting  observatory  which 
might  orbit  in  the mid-1970’s.  Although  she emphasized that  all plans 
were in the “thinking  stage,”  Dr. Roman said the 50-55-in.  configuration 
would  provide  another  interim  link  between  the unmanned  Orbiting 
Astronomical  Observatory  series and  the manned  100-in.  configuration 
being  considered  for   launching  in   15   to  20  years.  “The  50-55-in. 
interim configuration should  be  such,”  she  said,  “that  it  could  be  used 
either manned  or  unmanned.  But  it will  have  as  its principal objective 
( S B D ,  
the   proving  of  man’s  ability  as   a n   orbiting  astronomer.’’ 
11/30/64,  132)  
NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center’s  deadline  for  industry  proposals  to  
design  a  lOO-lb.-thrust rocket engine for  manned  space systems.  Desig- 

400 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

nated “C-1,”  the engine would be powered by monomethylhydrazine and 
nitrogen  tetroxide, which would be hypergolic and storable.  The engine 
could be employed fo r  attitude control, maneuvering, and ullage control 
purposes.  ( A& A ,  12/64,75) 
Nmembe r   30:  Results  of  five  public  opinion  surveys conducted in  12 cities 
over 14 months for Thiokol Chemical Corp. and Grumman Aircraft  En- 
gineering  Corp. were announced.  Findings  indicated that most Ameri- 
cans supported  the national  goal  of  landing  men  on  the moon  by  1970 
but they felt no sense of  urgency about achieving it.  One third  of  those 
interviewed thought spending should be reduced.  ( N Y T ,  11/15/64,66) 
Gen.  Thomas S.  Power  (USAF)   retired  as Commander-in-Chief of  the Stra- 
tegic Air Command  ( SAC ) .   He was succeeded by Lt. Gen. John D.  Ryan, 
formerly  SAC  Vice Commander-in-Chief.  Ryan would be made a  four- 
star general.  ( N Y T ,  12/1/@,  46) 
Canaveral  District  of  the  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  announced  award 
of  $19,055,953  firm-fixed-price  contract  to  the  George  A.  Fuller 
eo.,  for construction of  Pad  B of  NASA’s  Saturn v complex 39 at Merritt 
Island,  Fla.  The contract  also provided for building  a  two-mile section 
of  crawlerway  for  transporting  launch  and  arming  towers  to  the  pad. 
(DOD Release 84a6LE; M&R ,   11/30/64,22) 
November  30-December  3 :  James T.  Ramey,  a  commissioner of  the Atomic 
Energy  Commission,  analyzed  the  use  of  cost-effectiveness techniques 
in a  speech to  the Atomic Industrial Forum  in San Francisco.  He said: 
L G  The  cost  effectiveness  technique  assumes end-applications o r   require- 
ments,  and  then  figures out  the costs of  alternative systems of  achieving 
equal  or  greater  effectiveness . . . it  would  seem that  the  requirements 
system, and the cost effectiveness techniques, tend to favor the status quo 
in technology, if not in economics or politics.  . . . 
“This  leads me to the conclusion that the underlying problem is really 
whose  judgment  and  recommendations should  receive  most  weight  in 
determining  which  development programs  and  projects  should  go  for- 
ward.  Should these decisions be made  by  the  science advisors and  co- 
ordinators, and budget specialists who have no  direct programmatic  re- 
sponsibility and are not  accountable for failure to carry out the directives 
of  the  President  and  the  Congress?  Or  should  the  judgment  of  the  
developmental agency which has the  statutory responsibility for the pro- 
gram  and  the  technical  depth  and  experience  receive  the  most 
weight?  . . . I  have  a  certain  affinity  for  giving  considerable weight 
to  the judgment  of  the development agency, which,  in  regard  to  atomic 
energy,  would  be  the  AEC  and  its  laboratories. 
In  regard  to  nuclear 
energy  in  space,  it would  be AEC  and  NASA,  and  to  some extent the Air 
Force.  . . . 
“I am quite optimistic about achieving the great possibilities of  atomic 
energy  in  space.  I  firmly believe  the  atom  will  provide  the means  fo r  
the  propulsion  and  servicing of  manned  space ships  for moon missions 
following Apollo, and to and from the planets  . . .”  ( A v .  Wk., 1/11/65, 
11 1 
During  November:   NASA’s Flight  Research  Center  completed  a  series  of 
wind-tunnel tests of  X-15  models with canard stabilizers mounted on the 
nose to determine if   a  canard’surface would permit  the X-15  to re-enter 
th e  atmosphere at higher  angles of  attack.  Tests were  carried out  in   a 
(M&R ,   11/9/64,,  9) 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory tunnel. 

ONAUTICS  AND  AER 

401 

the smaller star.  The two stars revolve about a common center so fast- 
&out  every  81%  min.-that 
they  should  radiate  gravitational waves, 
(N Y T ,  l Z / l / a ,   31) 
if  such waves exist. 
*  General Curtis E.  LeMay,  USAF  Chief  of  St&,  was  interviewed in  General 
Electric Forum and discussed aerospace power’s contribution to national 
security.  “In  recent months, the  area  of  direct technical concern  to  the 
Air  Force has Ibecome much broader.  For example, wemust now  press 
for  technical  superiority not  only  in   aircraft  but  also  in missiles, space 
systems,  and  command  and  control  systems  tha t   are   responsive  t o  the 
compressed time scale of  military  operations.  We  cannot afford to  fall 
5ehind in any of  these fields, because the potential enemy can be expected 
to  exploit  all  of  the  important  technical  gaps  that  might  appear.” 
LeMay said that “chiefly because of  the cost factor, we  a re  not exploiting 
anything  like  the   total  amount  of  technology  that  we  think  might  be 
useful.  Certainly we  would  like to do more,  but  ou r  R&D outlay already 
comprises 18 percent of  the Air Force’s total budget and must be balanced 
( G E  Forum, 10-12/64+, 1P-17) 
against other needs.” 
Linde  Division  of  Union  Carbide  has  “grown”  a  new  solid-state 
laser  material  for  use by  scientists  in   laser  research  at  the  Marshall 
Space  Flight  Center  Astrionics  Laboratory.  The  new  material  was 
yttrium  aluminum  garnet  doped with  neodymium.  It  supported  solid- 
state continuous-wave laser  action, with  common  tap  water  as the  only 
coolant.  Toughness of  the  garnet was  comparable to  that  of  ruby  laser 
(Marshall Star, 11/18/64,2) 
rods. 
*  In   an  editorial in  Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  H.  H.  Koelle said:  “Sup- 
pose  . . . that  a  space  station  could  be  made  available with  working 
area in  the station and a round-trip ticket purchased by individual coun- 
tries  for  their  scientists, and  that  an   advanced aerospace transportation 
system  will  be  developed  anyway  as par t   of  the  US.  space  program. 
Analysis  of such  an  operation  indicates  that  an   international  research 
station of  this kind could be built  in the late 1970s, and that the price of 
a  three-month field trip to the station might well be kept in the order of  a 
million  dollars  a  person.  Many  countries  . . . would  be  able  t o  pay 
this price and would  enthusiastically participate in the project.  During 
the  1980s,  . . . the  charges  should  be  reduced  considerably,  thus 

0 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTKCS,  19 6 4 

402 
building new  centers  of  science and  technology when  existing facilities 
in  research-concentrated areas become obsolescent.  The Subcommittee 
also called  fo r  the White Home to convene a Government-industry con- 
(M& R ,  11/16/64+, 11) 
ference to study such problems. 
During  November:  A  te rn   from  Lockheed  Propulsion  Co.  visited  NASA 
M a d a l l  Space Flight Center to  brief  scientists there on possible use of 
156-in.  soIid  motor  as a  strap-on for the  first  stage of  both  Saturn  IB  
and Saturn V.  (M&R ,  11/23/64+,  7) 
0  Marshall  Space Flight  Center  awarded  a  $2,017,400 contract  to  Granite 
Construction Co.,  Houston, Tex.,  fo r  construction of  a vehicle component 
supply building and a hazardous materials storage building a t  its Saturn 
rocket  production  plant  (NASA Michoud  Operations)  in  New  Orleans. 
(Marshall Star, 11 /18 /64 ,4)  
North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  announced  Fy 1964  sales  of  $2,189,- 
594,000, the  largmt  annual total ever  recorded  by  a  company predomi- 
(Av .   Wk., 11/16/64,29) 
nantly  in  the aerospace business. 

December  1964 
December  1 : First  full-power  static  firing  of  the  hydrogen-fueled  Saturn 
S-IVB  stage was achieved a t  the Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div., 
Sacramento,  Calif.,  Test Center.  The J-2  engines were  operated  a t  full 
200,000-lb. thrust fo r  ten seconds a s  planned.  This marked  the first use 
of  the new  NASA  Test Complex Beta,  consisting of  two  150-ft.-high steel 
and  concrete  stands capable  of  holding  down  rockets with  more  than  a 
million  pounds  thrust.  Primary  objectives of  the  ten-second test  were 
to  achieve engine  start,  advance  to  full thrust, stabilize main-stage oper- 
(Marshall  Star, 
ation  for   the  duration,  and  shut  down  on  schedule. 
12/9/641,9;  M&R,  12/7/64,9;  DMSSD Apogee,  12/64) 
USAF launched a new Advanced Ballistic Re-entry System experimental nose- 
cone  (Abres)  from  Vandenberg  AFB  5,000  mi.  down  the  WTR on   an 
Atlas-D ICBM .   The nosecone tests were being conducted to develop more 
effective re-entry systems for America’s intercontinental ballistic missiles. 
(AP, Wash.  Eve. Star, 12/1/64;  Houston Chron.,  12/1/64) 
0  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  successfully  launched  from  the  Argentine 
launch  range  a t  Chamical  to  study  the  ionosphere.  Payload contained 
continuous  wave  propagation,  electron  temperature,  and  ion  density 
experiments.  This  was  first  rocket  launched  by  a  South  American 
country  under  a  cooperative  arrangement  with  NASA.  Project  was 
administered  jointly by the Argentine National Commission of  Space Re- 
search  ( C ~ I E )  and  NASA.  Argentina  built  the  payloads  and part  of  the 
ground  station, while  NASA  trained Argentine  technicians and engineers 
and  provided  some  ground  support  equipment.  Argentina  purchased 
two  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  in  the  U S .   No  exchange  of  funds 
(NASA  Release 6 6 3 0 4 ;  NASA  Rpt. 
took  place between  the two  agencies. 
SRL) 
Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  reached  124-mi. altitude  in   US.-Pakistan 
experiment  from  Sonmiani.  Sodium  vapor  trail  from  the  rocket  was 
photographed  by  ground  cameras  to  measure  direction  and  speeds  of 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
upper atmospheric winds. 
Soviet Union  announced that the spacecraft, ZOND n, headed for Mars in an 
apparent  race  with  MARINER  IV,  had  run  into  difficulties.  The  Soviet 
report  said that  in  the  first  few  radio  contacts between  ZOND  11  and the 
ground  “the  power  supply on board the space station was about  half  of 
the expected level.”  Position information indicated the probe was 25,OqO 
(Witkin,  NYT, 12/2/64,  1; Simons,  Wash .   Pos t ,  
mi.  from  earth. 
12/2/64) 
*  Robert G.  Deissler, NASA Lewis Research Center, received the Heat Transfer 
Division  Memorial  Award  of  the  American  Society of  Mechanical En- 
gineers in New York City.  ( LRC Release 6 6 1 0 8 )  
Dr.  J.  E.  Geake of  the Manchester College of  Science and Technology said 
that  undamaged  material  on  the  moon  brought  to  the  surface  by   the 
impact  of  a  meteorite  or  by  possible volcanic activity could  account  for  
403 

404 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

patches  of  red  light  observed  &ere.  He  suggested  tha t   i f   the  impact 
were in  a region of  luminescent material, the rocks would emit light when 
hit  by  charged  particles.  The  impact  could  have  occurred  10,000  o r  
even  100,000 years before the luminescence was  observed. 
(Sci.  Serv., 
NYT ,  12/1/64,19) 
December  I : Former NASA  astronaut  Col.  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.  ( USMC) , com- 
pleted 15-day assignment a t  El Toro,  Calif.,  MCAS,  where he was on  TDY 
( J / A n n e d  Forces, 11/28/64,5) 
for flight refresher training. 
December  2:  Henry 0. Slone, S n a p 8  project manager  a t  NASA Lewis Research 
Center,  reported  a  successful 76-hr.  test  of  Snap-8’s  turbine  alternator 
assembly  (TAA) using  mercury  as the working  fluid.  “This  test  dem- 
onstrated  operational  capability  and  machine  performance  up  to  80% 
of  its  rated power,”  Slone said.  Snap-8 (System for Nuclear Auxiliary 
Power)  was designed to  supply electric power  onboard  a spacecraft and 
would  use nuclear  heat  to produce  35 kw.  of  power.  When  fully devel- 
oped,  it  would  have  the  capability  to  operate  unattended  in   space  for 
(LRC   Release 64-111;  M&R, 12/14/64,10) 
10,000 hours. 
0  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  awarded  contracts totaling  almost $1 mil- 
lion:  Garrett Corp.,  with  a  $384,665  contract, would  develop a portable 
life  support  system  to be worn  on  the  astronaut’s back  when  he would 
leave  his  capsule  in  space,  o r   for  moon  exploration;  Boeing  Co.  was 
awarded  a  $299,746 contract for  a  feasibility study  of  placing  a  labora- 
tory  capsule  on  the  Apollo  spacecraft;  the  US. Naval  Air  Equipment 
Center, Philadelphia, was given $45,000 to  evaluate the dependability  of 
the water-cooled undergarment  to be worn  by  astronauts in  space flight 
(AP, Balt. Sun, 12/4/64) 
and lunar exploration. 
0  A n  F-104  aircraft  participating  in  sonic boom  tests  for  supersonic  trans- 
port  program,  a t   Alamogordo,  N.  Mex.,  inadvertently  created  a  boom 
20  times  a s  great  as  those  expected  from the proposed  airliners and 10 
lbs.  psf  greater in pressure than  the 30-lb. upper  limit planned  for  these 
tests.  The incident  occurred  during a  demonstration  fo r  newsmen  and 
recorders  on  measuring  instruments  in  test  structures were  not  turned 
(Clark, N Y T ,  1 2 / 3 / a ;   T im e ,  12/11/64) 
on. 
The Federal Aviation  Agency  (FAA), following up  Defense  Secretary Mc- 
Namara’s  announced  deactivation of  19 airfields, called  attention  to  the  
procedures  by  which  surplus military  airfields  could  be  transferred  to 
state  o r   local  public  agencies  for   development  as   civil  airports.  The 
procedures  were established by  the Surplus Property Act  of  1944 and its 
amendments.  More  than 600 airports had been  transferred to  state and 
local  agencies under  this  statute since the end  of  World War  11.  (FAA 
Release W108) 
 (Phantom 11) jet  fighter aircraft 
Four  USAF  Tactical Air  Command  F 4
landed  a t  MacDill AFB,  Fla.,  after completing an   18-hr. flight of  almost 
10,000  mi.  The  Phantoms  refueled  several  times  from  KC-135 
jet 
tankers.  Flight,  which  set  a  new  unofficial  endurance  record  for  jet 
fighter  aircraft,  was  made  to   evaluate the  capabilities  of  the  F 4 C  air- 
craft during sustained, ultra-long-range flight and to  evaluate the physio- 
logical  and  psychological  effects  on  the  crews  under  these  conditions. 
( DOD Release 8 5 2 4 ;  Wash .  Post,  12/3/64) 
USAF  Electronic Systems Division  announced  award  of  $1,350,000  fixed- 
price contract t o  Space-General Corp. for  design, fabrication, and testing 
( DOD Release 8 N 4 )  
cif  satellite payloads. 

- 

405 
ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4  
December  2 :   The  New  York  Stock Exchange banned  stop orders  in   shares 
of  the  ComSatCorp.,  hoping  to  prevent  aggravated  price  swings  in 
ComSat  shares.  ComSat  had  finished  as  the  third  most  active  issue 
(Vartan,  NYT ,   12/3/64, 
fo r   the  day,  having  traded  as high  as 52%. 
69) 
*  Dr.  Raymond L.  Bisplinghoff, NASA  Associate Administrator  fo r  Advanced 
Research  and  Technology,  spoke  on  “New  Technology-Its  Selection 
and  Development”  before  the  Atomic  Industrial  Forum  conference  in 
San  Francisco.  His  address  made  the  following  points:  ( 1 )   pre- 
eminence in  space demands that  a program  of  development of  new  tech- 
nology be continuously supported;  ( 2 )  the formulation of  a responsible 
requirement requires the existence of  a n  underlying body of  technology; 
( 3 )  the development of  a  new  branch  or  extension of  a  branch of  tech- 
nology  should be directed at a related  class of  requirements rather  than 
a single requirement;  (4)  development of  a new  technology requires the 
existence of  a  focal point  in  the form of  advanced hardware;  (5) short 
and  long-term goals must be  related  to  the Nation’s  policies  and plans; 
(6) our goals must be continuously assessed;  (7 )   our work must be rele- 
vant  to  the goals which have been  set; and  ( 8 )  better  processes of  pro- 
gram management must be devised.  He said  in  conclusion:  “A balance 
of  technologies in  our  favor will,  however,  require wisdom  in the selec- 
tion  of  new  technologies in  which to  invest our resources and resolution 
(Text) 
in  their development.” 
December 3 :  Speaking a t  Georgetown Univ.’s  175th anniversary convocation, 
President Johnson said: “For almost the first time the interdependence of 
nations  is not  a remote goal or  a  ringing  slogan.  I t  is a  fact which we 
neglect at our peril. 
Communications satellites,  atomic  rockets  and  jet  transports  have 
( 6  
made  distant  capitals  into  close neighbors.  Our  challenge is  to  trans- 
form this reality  into an instrument for the freedom of  man. 
“Today  the  cost  of  failure  to  communicate is not  silence or  serenity 
(Text, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/64) 
but destruction and dissolution.” 
*  President  Johnson  directed  that  contracts  of  engine  and  airframe  manu- 
facturers  working  on  a  projected  supersonic  transport  plane,  which 
expired Nov.  30, be extended.  Four firms were affected: the  Boeing Co., 
and  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  which  had  airframe  contracts;  and  the 
General Electric  Co.,  and  the P ra t t   & Whitney Div.  of  the United Air- 
(AP,  Wash.  Post,  12/4/64) 
craft  Corp.,  which  had  engine contracts. 
*  A  joint  British-American  group  of  communications  engineers  was  pre- 
paring  recommendations for  a  communications base  in   the  Seychelles 
Islands, northeast of Madagascar.  Station would fill a wide gap between 
Atlantic and Pacific stations in  the present worldwide chain of  receiving- 
transmitting  stations for satellites.  Existing network, set u p  by  the US. 
Navy,  had  to  rely  on  shipboard  stations  fo r   Indian  Ocean  coverage. 
British  responsibility would  be  limited to  the  real  estate  involved while 
the  US .   would  build  and  equip  the  station  and  furnish  most  of  the 
*  Ei 
le 
Michoud Operations as part of  a  Life magazine-sponsored visit of  space 
facilities  across  the  country.  They  were  briefed  by  Dr.  Wernher  von 
Braun,  director  of  NASA’s Marshall  Space Flight  Center,  and  Dr.  G.  N. 
(N.O.  Times-Picayune, 12/4/64) 
Constan, Michoud manager. 

406 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  0 4  
December 3 :  Alamogordo, N.  Mex.,  sonic boom test site for  supersonic air- 
liner program was  repaired 2 4  hours  after  it was battered  by  the boom 
from an  F-104.  A  spokesman fo r  the FAA said:  “The  damage w a s  not 
a s  extensive a s  we  first  feared.  We  a r e   still on  schedule, and  should 
complete the tests a s  planned  in  February.”  (Av. Wk., 12/14/64,  31) 
*  USN  nuclear submarine Stonewall Jackson  passed its first missile-firing test 
by  shooting  a  Polaris A-3  more than  2,000 mi.  to an ocean target  area. 
T h e  firing w a s  the 18th success in 19 A-3  training  launchings from sub- 
(UPI, NYT, 12/3/64,83) 
merged submarines. 
*  It  was  announced that  President  Johnson  had  designated December  1964 
as United States International Aviation Month to commemorate the 20th 
anniversary  of  the  International  Civil Aviation Organization  (ICAO)  , a 
d id s ion   of  the  United  Nations.  The  ICAO  was  responsible fo r  making 
the  international  rules  and  setting  international  standards  for  all  civil 
aviation activity, including the field of  general avaiation.  ( NAA Release) 
December 4 :  USAF  launched Atlas-Agena D from WTR with unidentified satel- 
lite payload. 
( H H N ~ )
 
*  Nike-Cajun sounding rocket reached 85-mi. altitude in  launch  from Cham- 
ical,  Argentina.  Instrumented  payload  apparently  obtained  good  data 
in  measurement  of  electron  density,  electron  temperature,  ultraviolet 
and solar x-radiation flux.  Test was second of  two Nike-Cajun launches 
by  NASA  and Argentina’s National Commission of  Space Research.  (NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
*  T h e  Athena  rocket was  successfully fired by  USAF  from Green River, Utah, 
to  a  target  area  in  the  White  Sands Missile  Range,  N.  Mex. 
(M&R ,  
12/14/64,  10) 
NASA  awarded 19 supplementary or new  research grants and contracts total- 
ing   $914,889 to  1 7  universities,  colleges,  and  private  research  institu- 
(NASA  Release 64-305) 
tions. 
Army  Corps  of  Engineers  announced  award  of  $8,079,003  (NASA  funds) 
fixed-price contract to Malan Construction Co.  of  Koppers Co.,  Inc.,  for 
construction  of  a  rocket  engine  test  stand  at  the  NASA  Mississippi Test 
Operations.  ( DOD Release 851i-64) 
AFSC  Space Systems Div.  announced that Lockheed Missiles and  Space Co. 
would  receive a  $3,180,000  increment to  a  previously  awarded contract 
for  work  on  the  Gemini program  target  vehicle  system. 
(DOD   Release 
856-64) 
*  Joseph  A.  Darr,  Jr.,  and  John  Reeves of  NASA  Flight  Research Center re- 
ceived  plaques  from  President  Johnson  fo r   their  dollar-saving contri- 
bution  to  the  X-15  research  rocket  airplane.  Darr  and  Reeves  were 
cited  for  the  design  and  construction  of  a  portable  engine  inspection 
cart  that  was  used  to  check  the  systems operation  of  the LR-99 rocket 
engine which powered the X-15.  Use of  the cart  saved 500 man hours 
and  about  $150,000,  NASA  estimated. 
(NASA  Release 64-303) 
*  Air  Force Systems Command reported that Rome Air  Development Center 
( W C )   , sponsoring  approximately  $1 million  annually  in  computer 
research and development, was  major Air  Force agency performing  re- 
search  in   the  computer field.  According to  Alan  R.  Barnum,  Chief  of 
RADC’S  Data  Processing Section, “RADC’S  primary  responsibility in com- 
puter  research  is  development of  high  speed computer devices and spe- 
cial  computers  to  meet  peculiar  Air  Force  problems.  A b ,  methods 
of  p r o g r a m i n g  computer instructions, development of  larger and faster 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4  

407 
computer memories and  research  in  a new  area  called  artificial  intelli- 
( AFSC  Release 1 1 4 )  
gence.” 
December  4 :   ComSatCorp  said  it  had  140,000 public  shareholders,  with 
more  than  half  holding ten  shares o r  less,  and with 95 per  cent holding 
50 shares o r  less.  This total did not  include a n  estimated 60,000 public 
stockholders whose  shares were  held  for  them  by  securities  firms  and 
banks  and,  therefore,  not  listed  in   their  own   names.  ComSat  stock 
climbed 6%  points to close at a new high of  55%  on the New York Stock 
Exchange.  It ranked as the second most active issue with a turnover  of 
134,200 shares. 
(ComSatCorp Release;  Vartan,  NYT ,   12/5/64, 39) 
December 5 :  MARINER  IV  underwent a  critical course change to make it pos- 
sible  for  the  craft  to  take  useful pictures  of  Mars  during  the  fly-by  in 
July  1965. I n  response to commands radioed from earth, a small rocket 
on  the  base  of  the  spacecraft,  which  could  add  anything  between  a n  
eighth of  a mile an hour  to 188 miles a n  hour  to  the  craft’s  speed, was 
fired.  Initial  indications  were  that  the  correction  was  successful  and 
accurate. 
Several days later, tracking  equipment and associated computers con- 
firmed that  the rocket firing had produced three changes in  MARINER IV’S 
flight path:  (1) the Mars fly-by from  151,000 mi. in front  of  Mars to  a 
closest  approach  of  5,400 mi.  behind  Mars;  (2) the  arrival  date from 
July  16, 1965, to  July  14; and  (3) the  flight path  past Mars  from  the 
leading edge to  the trailing  edge of  Mars.  The maneuver was followed 
by  sun  and   Canopus  reacquisition.  A  second  midcourse  maneuver 
would not be required. 
The midcourse rocket used  by  MAR INER   IV  was the  first to be used  by 
(NASA  Release 64-310; 
this cow t ry  that was capable of  a second firing. 
Witkin, NYT ,  12/6/64,67; Miles, Wash .  Post, 12/6/64) 
December  6 :  NASA  and  General  Electric  Co.  announced  they  had  accom- 
plished precision tracking  of  EXPLORER XXII  with  a  laser  device.  Tests 
were conducted a t  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center using a  ruby  laser 
mounted on  a  telescope.  With  the telescope aimed along the predicted 
path, the laser was flashed several times a s  EXPLORER  XXII,  containing  an 
array  of  corner  reflectors,  passed  overhead.  The  reflectors,  made  of 
quartz  crystal, were  designed  to  return  the  beam  of  the   laser  almost 
exactly where it came from.  The  optical signals were  displayed on  an 
oscilloscope.  As the laser  pulse traveled from the telescope to  the satel- 
lite, then  back  to  the.ground,  th e  elapsed time measured  could  be  con- 
verted into distance.  Expected accuracy was within 10 ft.  (Ch ic .  T r ib . ,  
12/7/64) 
*  James V.  Bernard0 was  appointed Director of  NASA  Educational Programs 
and  Services,  would  direct  programs  for  developing  an  understanding 
of  U.S.  aerospace  activities  among  students,  teachers,  and  the  general 
public,  and  fo r   providing  services t o  schools, colleges,  and  educational 
organizations.  Dr.  Aaron  P.  Seamster  was  named  Deputy  Director. 
(NASA Ann.  6La-293) 
December  7:  MARINER  IV  lost  its  lock  on  Canopus.  “Current  analysis  sup- 
ports the theory  that a  dust particle reflecting the light of  the sun passed 
through  the  field  of  view  of  the  Canopus tracker,”  NASA  said.  Loss  of 
lock  on  the  star  would  not  alter  the  spacecraft’s course,  would  merely 
affect  its  attitude,  which  would  be  of  importance only  when  the  space- 
craft neared Mars and attempted to photograph the planet.  NASA planned 
to command the spacecraft to reacquire Canopus soon. 

408 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTXS,  1 9  6 4 

JPL,  manager of  the Mariner program  for NASA,  reported  that  a  solar 
plasma probe experiment, which had functioned perfectly fo r  eight days, 
(AP,  Houston  Post, 
had  ceased  to  transmit  useful  information. 
12/8/64) 
December  7:  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Wallops 
Island,  Va.,  with  Univ.  of  N.H.  instrumented  payload  reached  90-mi. 
altitude,  but  experiment  results were  not  obtained  because of  telemetry 
failure  at  4.05  sec.  Primary  purpose of  flight was  to  check out  instru- 
mentation  for  NikeApache  sounding  rooket  experiments  to  be  con- 
ducted on the IQSY Mobile Launch Expedition in early 1965.  A second 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
checkout launch was scheduled for mid-January. 
Scientists  at  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  announced  ohema t ion s   from  an  un- 
manned balloon  on Oct.  27  that might  indicate  life on Venus.  Experi- 
ments  showed that  the  clouds covering Venus were composed of  water 
in the form of  ice particles and that  the surface temperature was close to 
-40’  F,  with  only  a  few   degrees difference between the light  and  dark 
sides  of  the planet.  An  earlier baloon  flight  in  February  had  revealed 
that  the  a i r   above  the   clouds was  rich  in  water  vapor.  The  scientists 
theorized that if  there were water vapor, some of  its molecules would be 
broken  up  by  ultraviolet sunlight into oxygen and hydrogen;  an atmos- 
phere with  oxygen  and water vapor  would  be  a  propitious  environment 
fo r  life. 
Radiotelescopes on  earth  and  on  the  MARINER  11  space probe,  which 
had passed within 21,000 mi.  of  Venus in  December 1962, indicated the 
surface temperature was 800’  F.  However, since interpretation of  radio- 
telescope waves  as an indication of  temperature had neither been proven 
nor  universally  accepted,  the  Johns  Hopkins  scientists  suggested  that 
previous  findings might  only  indicate  a  large  amount  of  lightning-like 
electrical  activity  in   the  turbulent  atmosphere  of  Venus. 
(Sullivan, 
NYT, 12/8/64;  Fenton, Balt.  Sun ,  12/7/64;  Wash. Post,  12/8/64) 
0  Aviation  Week and  Space  Technology  reported  on  a  letter  (dated Nov.  9, 
1964) from Sen. Clinton P. Anderson  (D.-N.  Mex.) , Chairman of  Senate 
Committee on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences,  to  President  Johnson 
in which he recommended a merger of  the Air  Force’s Manned Orbiting 
Laboratory  (MO L )   program and  NASA’s Apollo X program.  He argued 
that  $1 billion could %e saved over a  five-year period if  MOL  were to be 
cancelled  and  the  Air  Force  funds  applied  to   the  Apollo-based space 
station.  A  jointly  operated  national  space  station  program  would,  ac- 
cording  to Anderson,  best  utilize US. space resources.  Sen. Anderson 
felt  that  MOL   lacked  growth potential  because  it  could  not  progress 
beyond  its two-man,  30-day mission  without development of  a  resupply 
( A v .  Wk.,  12/7/64,16;  NASA  Archives) 
system. 
0  Plans  fo r   adding  a  transmitter  to  the  Pan  American Boeing  707  for  two- 
way communication tests using SYNCOM III as a relay point were discussed 
a t   an  Air  Transport  Association  meeting  attended  by  representatives 
of  FAA, NASA,  Bendix,  Pan   Am,  and  Hughes  Aircraft.  Teletypewriter 
messages had been  successfully transmitted  in  November from a ground 
station  at Camp Raberts,  Calif.,  to   a  Pan  Am  707 enroute  to  Honolulu. 
( A v .  W k . ,  12/7/64r,34) 
0  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  scientists  would  evaluate  two  H-10 
atomic hydrogen maser clocks for possible use  in high-precision satellite 
tracking a s  well  a s  experiments testing Einstein’s prediction of  the d e c t  

409 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 
of  gravity  on  time.  The  clocks were  developed  by  the Quantum  Elec- 
tronic Devices  activity of  Varian  Associate3 and would  use the  natural 
oscillation resulting from the interaction of  the proton  and the e h t r o n  
(M&R ,  12/7/64,17) 
in the hydrogen atom. 
December 7 :  USAF announced completion of  the highly successful Demonstra- 
tion and Shakedown Operations  (DASO) series of  test firings of  the Titan 
I I  intercontinental ballistic missile.  Five Titan 11s had been successfully 
launched  from Vandenberg  AFB  by Strategic Air Command  (SAC)   crews 
and had  landed  on target  down  the  WTR.  The  series was conducted  to  
test  lannch  techniques  and  lasted  from July  30  to  Nov.  4,  1964.  Said 
Lt. Gen. Thomas P. Gerrity, Deputy Chief of  Staff for  Systems and Logis- 
tics,  the   100 per cent successful “record  . . . is unequaled  in  ICBM  his- 
tory  and  will  provide  a  goal  for  future  missile  systems  in  the  years 
(Sehlstedt,  Balt.  Sun,  12/8/iX;  AP, Balt.  Sun,  12/9/64) 
ahead.” 
Missiles and  Rockets  reported  that  a  combination  vacuum cleaner and fire 
extinguisher  was  being  developed  by  Lockheed  Missiles  and  Space  Co. 
for  use  in  the  MOL.  Dubbed  VacGuard,  the  device would  operate on 
the  pressure  difference between  the  cabin  and  outer  space.  It  would 
control  cabin  fires,  remove  unwanted  solids,  liquids,  and  gases,  and  
control  sudden  leaks  in  the  space  cabin  wall.  The  device  would 
consist  of  an   adapter,  a  flexible  hose,  and  a  selector  valve.  (M&R, 
12/7/64,  17) 
*  AF  Cambridge  Research  Laboratories had  successfully  demonstrated  that 
communications could  be made through brain waves.  According  to Dr. 
Edmond  M.  Dewan,  trained  subjects  could  alter  the  pattern  of  their 
brains’  alpha  rhythm,  the  low-frequency wave  related  to  visual percep- 
tion.  The  alpha  rhythm  could  be  turned  on  and  off,  allowing use  of  a 
binary digit system or  Morse code for communication.  (M & R ,   12/7/64, 
17) 
0  Radar  and Doppler  velocity sensor  system  destined to  assist the Surveyor 
spacecraft  in  its  soft landing on  the moon  was  in   advanced  test  phases 
a t   Ryan  Electronics, Missiles  and  Rockets  reported.  Flight  tests of  the 
system  using  helicopters  a t   Holloman  AFB   and  at  the  Hughes Aircraft 
Co.  airport  had  been  successfully  completed  and  had  run  from  6,000 
( M & R ,  12/7/64,17) 
to 20 f t .  above the ground. 
*  I n   an  editorial, Robert  Hotz,  editor of  Aviation Week  and Space  Technol- 
ogy,  said:  “There is a  . . . good possibility that  the national space pro- 
gram may get  its most  severe shellacking to date i f   some plans  currently 
finding favor  within Administration  executive circles are,  in  fact, imple- 
mented.  One  of  these proposals  would  slice the  scientific programs  of 
the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  to   the  bone  and 
concentrate  the  NASA  budget  on  the  Apollo manned  lunar  landing pro- 
gram.  Some  portions  of  the  scientific  community  have  been  making 
this charge  without  much  justification  for  several years.  If  NASA  does 
virtually  abandon  its  highly  successful scientific exploration  program 
now,  the  howl  from  scientists will  rise  in  a  swift crescendo.  It would 
be a major mistake to make such a drastic switch in  what is now a pretty 
( A v .  Wk., 12/7/64,11) 
well-balanced NASA effort.” 
0  Houston “Colt  .Gs” National League baseball team changed its name to the 
Houston  “Astros”  to  exploit the city’s  claim to be the U S .  space capital. 
(Av. Wk., 12/7/64,  15) 
766-598  oc--85---2T 

410 
ASTRONAUTICS  ANI) AERONAUTJCS,  1 9 6 4  
December  7:  Carl  Brown  Harper,  expert  in  aeronautical  engineering who 
had  been  a  consultant  to  the  Dept.  of  Justice  since 1930, died  after  a 
heart attack.  Mr. Harper had held a number of  patents on the retractable 
gun  turret  and  on  aircraft  wing  designs  now  used on  the  Boeing  707, 
the  Douglas  DC-8,  and  other  high  speed  aircraft. 
( r a s h .  Post, 
12/9/64) 
December 8 :  Apollo spacecraft  (BP-23)  was  subjected  to  simulated  cata- 
strophic  failure  of  its  launch  vehicle  in  a  successful  test  of  the  abort 
escape system  a t  White  Sands, N.  Mex.  Apollo  command and  service 
boilerplate  modules  were  boosted  on  a  Little  Joe  I1  launch  vehicle to 
the  region  of  maximum  dynamic  pressure  a t   29,000-ft.  altitude  and 
launch  vehicle failure was simulated.  The escape vehicle, mated  to  the 
spacecraft  by  a  connecting tower,  yanked  the  Apollo  free  of  Little Joe 
and  carried  it  almost  two  miles  higher.  The  Little  Joe  rocket  fell  to 
earth;  the Apollo modules were returned  gently  to  the ground  by  three 
88-ft. parachutes.  This was  the  th i rd   successful test  of  functioning  of 
the  33-ft. launch escape tower designed to  jettison the command module 
and  three  Apollo astronauts  to  safety in   an  abort  before  o r   during  the 
launch  phase  of  a  Saturn V mission.  I t  was  the first  test  of  the  boost- 
protective cover  subsystem, a  contoured  shell  fitting over  the  command 
module and  designed to protect the docking mechanism of  Lunar Excur- 
sion Module  ( L EM )   from excessive heating during high temperatures of 
I t   also  protected  command  module  windows  f rom  
first-stage  flight. 
(NASA  Release 64-299) 
exhaust  of  the  launch  escape motor. 
A  Saturn  S-IVB  stage  began  a  6,000-mi.  land,  sea,  and  river  trip  from 
the  Douglas  Missile  and  Space  Systems Div.,  Calif.,  to  NASA  Marshall 
Space Flight  Center.  At  MSFC,  the  stage  would  be  mated  with  a  first 
stage  of  the  Saturn  IB,  built  by  MSFC  and  modified  by  the  Chrysler 
Corp.,  and  an  Apollo  spacecraft.  Tests  of  the  assembly would  check 
the  complete  Saturn-Apollo vehicle  for  i t s   ability  to  withstand  vibra- 
(Marshall Star,  1 2 / 9 / a  
tions  and  other  stresses  expected  in  flight. 
1-2) 
The  U S .   Army  Corps  of  Engineers  and  NASA  announced the  award  of  a 
contract  for master planning  of  NASA’s $60 million Electronics Research 
Center  to   the  joint  venture  firms  of  Edward  Durell  Stone,  New  York 
City;  Giffels and Rossetti, Detroit;  and Charles A.  Maguire Associates, 
Boston-Providence.  The contract was awarded by the New England Divi- 
sion  of  the Corps of  Engineers, which had  been  designated by  the Elec- 
tronics Research Center a s  NASA’s design and construction agent  for  the 
buildings  to  be  located  on  a  29-acre site  at  Kendall  Sq.,  Cambridge, 
(NASA  Release 64-307) 
Mass. 
0  Three  contracts were  awarded  by  NASA  Lewis Reseerch Center  to  Hughes 
Aircraft  Co.  The first  contract,  totaling  $1,151,370,  was a  12-mo. con- 
tinuation  of  a  previous  contract  fo r   research  and  development  of  a 
contact  ion  engine  using  cesium  as  a  propellant.  The  other  two  con- 
tracts were also  follow-on efforts:  a  contract  for  $202,915 provided fo r  
fabrication  of  porous  ailoy  and  solid  sintered  ionizers;  a  contract  fo r  
$243,061 covered tests and evaluation of  physical, electrical, and cesium 
ionization properties  of porous  ionizers and  evaluation of  the electrical 
properties  of  solid sintered  ionizer material. 
( LRC Release 6 1 1 4 )  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4  

41 1 
December  8: NASA  Lew i s   Research Center awarded a  $2,315,400  contract  to  
Rocketdyne Div.  of  North American Aviation,  Iw., for design, develop 
ment,  and testing of  an  Atlas launch vehicle sustainer engine that would 
use flox  (liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen).  The contract provided for 
firing  a  complete Atlas sustainer  engine for the  first  time  using  flox  as 
the  oxidizer;  RP-1,  a  type of  kerosene, would  still be the  fuel. 
(NASA 
Release 64-306;  LRC Release W 1 1 3 )  
ComSatCorp asked  16 companies to  propose  studies  on how  to  judge  the 
merits  of  launch  vehicles which  could  be  used  to   put  medium-altitude 
communications  satellites  into  orbit  around  the  earth.  ComSatCorp 
told FCC it planned to launch i t s  first satellite, the Early Bird, in March as 
a  communication link between  Europe  and North  America.  The Early 
Bird  would  be  able  to   transmit  two-way  telephone conversations, tele- 
vision computer data,  and  other types of  communications as  an experi- 
ment in synchronous satellites, placed above the e  uator  at an altitude of 
(ComSatCorp Release;  NYT ,   12/99/M) 
22,300  miles. 
A team of  Canadian scientists from McGill Univ.,  conducting Project H a rp  
(High Altitude  Research  Program),  was  using  a  ZSO-ton,  16-in. naval 
gun to launch scientific rockets to heights of  nearly 100  mi.  The method 
was  both  reliable  and  economical  (more than  80  shots had  been  fired, 
most  of  which  were  successful),  and  the  launch  procedure  relatively 
simple.  Objective  of  experiments was  to  find  the  secret  of  the  lower 
ionosphere’s influence on  radio  communications.  Dr.  Gerald Bull, who 
conceived the idea of  Project Harp, said that a new  technique was being 
developed whereby a combination of  gun and rocket could place a 100-lb. 
(Jeffrey, London Daily Telegraph, 12/8/64,14) 
payload in earth orbit. 
N e w   Yark Times reported  that  scientists might use an  infrared  radiometer 
to  predict  location  and  time  of  future volcanoes.  The  scanner had  al- 
ready  detected heat  changes  in  the  earth’s surface  in  volcanic areas  in 
(Sci. Serv., NYT ,  
Hawaii that correlated with  later volcanic eruptions. 
12/8/64,60) 
*  USAF successfully launched the fifth Asset  re-entry test vehicle in  i t s  series 
of  six from Cape Kennedy.  The glider rode pickaback aboard a single- 
(Wa sh .  Po s t ,  1 2 / 9 / a ;   M&R ,   12/14/64,10) 
stage Thor booster. 
*  The first landing by computer alone was made by a United Air Lines Cara- 
velle  jet  at  Dulles  International  Airport,  Washington.  With  no  direc- 
tions  from  the  pilot,  the machine brought  down  the  aircraft,  constantly 
judging  correct  altitude,  rate  of  descent,  and  speed  and  bringing  the 
craft  in  line with its decisions. 
I n  bad weather,  the system would make 
possible a computer landing at 100-ft. ceiling and quarter-mile visibility. 
Manual  landing  limits  were  200-ft.  and  one  half  mile.  (Tuck, Wash. 
Post, 12/9/64) 
0  NIMBUS I  meteorological satellite,  which  had  lost  its  electric  power  and 
stopped functioning Sept. 23, revived and was returning useful engineer- 
ing  data.  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  said  the  solar  paddles, 
which  had  been  locked,  had  apparently  directed  themselves at  the  sun 
long enough to recharge the spacecraft’s batteries but the gas fo r  stabili- 
zation had been  exhausted and the craft was tumbling a t  about 15 rpm. 
This  caused  photographs  to  be  fuzzy  and   useless.  (GSFC Release 
G-64-34) 

412 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

December  8 :  Soviet Union  said  it  continued to  be  in   “stable”  contact with 
ZOND  11,  then  1.53 million  mi.  from  earth.  No  further  reference  was 
( N Y T ,  12/8/64,54) 
made to  a partial power  failure aboard the craft. 
*  NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  awarded  a  $2  million  contract  to 
Motorola’s  Western  Military  Electronics Div.,  to  develop  the  Airborne 
(M& R ,   12/14/64,21) 
Ranging Orbital Determination  ( AROD )   system. 
*  Radio Corp. of  America introduced a new  line of  computers using tiny sili- 
con  chip  circuits  (monolithic  integrated  circuitry) .  A  silicon  chip 
circuit  would  barely  cover  a  typewritten 
but  would  contain  two 
electronic  circuits  with  15  transistors  and  13  resistors.  The  line  was 
named Spectra 70 because RCA felt it would provide a  complete spectrum 
of  computing,  peripheral,  and  communications equipment,  and  would 
meet the full range of  system and application requirements of  science and 
(Wash. Pos t ,  12/9/64) 
industry. 
*  On the eve of  his 85th birthday, M/G  Benjamin D.  Foulois  (USA,  Ret.)  was 
honored  for  his  achievements in  aviation  a t   a  dinner  at  A n d r ew s ‘m ~ .  
General  Foulois,  who  w a s   the  United  States’  first  military  pilot,  was 
elite group of  aerospace pioneers- 
inducted  into the Primus  Club-an 
and hailed  as “a  living link between the age of  the Wright Brothers and 
(Raymond, NYT ,  12/9/64,53) 
today’s astronauts.” 
December  9 :  X-15  No.  3  was  flown  by  NASA  pilot  Milton  0. Thompson to 
91,000-ft. altitude at maximum speed of  3,545  (mach 5.3) mph to check 
a i r  flow around the nose,  heating caused by  skin friction,  and boundary 
(NASA  X-15 
layer  a i r   flow at  different velocities and  angles of  attack. 
Proj. Off.; NYT ,  12/11/64,34) 
*  The  last  in  a  series  of  11 tests  of  the  F-2  Apollo  service module  engine 
was successfully conducted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center engineers 
at White Sands Missile Range, N.  Mex.  The engine was fired for 20 sec. 
and then  shut down fo r  a  five-min. “purge”  before a  100-sec. test  firing. 
The  F-2  rocket  engine  would  be  expected  to  bring  astronauts  back  to 
(Lee, How ton  Pos t ,  12/10/64) 
earth from the moon. 
*  FCC  postponed a decision on the question of  who would own and operate the 
ground  stations  to  be  set  up  as  part  of  the  communications  satellite 
system  and called  fo r  further  filings on  the  issue.  Detailed  arguments 
were  due  Jan.  5,  and  reply  comments on  Jan.  18.  It was  estimated it 
would  take  the  FCC  a  minimum of  six weeks to  evaluate all  comments. 
The  carriers  that  had  filed  protests  to  exclusive  ComSatCoF  ground 
station  ownership we re   American Telephone and  Telegraph Co.,  Inter- 
national  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Corp.,  Radio  Corp.  of  America, 
(Av.  Wk., 
Western Union  International,  and  Hawaiian Telephone Co. 
12/14/64,27;  AP, N.O. Times-Picayune, 12/10/64) 
*  A  committee had  been  set up  by  Prime Minister Harold Wilson to  review 
Britain’s  future  in   space,  it  was  announced.  The  committee  would 
examine the merits of a national satdlite-launcher program based on the 
Black  Knight  rocket  a s  well  as  Britain’s  commitment  to  the  European 
Launcher  Development Organization  ( ELDO) which would  hope to  start 
launching satellites two or three years from now.  The space committee’s 
(M a c h od ,  CSM ,  12/9/64) 
report would be expected in February. 
A  unique  optical system known as  a  laser  range finder was announced by 
RCA’S  Aerospace  Systems Div.  and  US. Army  Electronics  Command. 
The  unit  operated  by  sending  a very  narrow  beam  pulse  of  red  light 
toward the  target a t  the speed of  light.  After reflection from the target, 

ASTRONATCICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 9 

413 

the red  light  of  the laser beam was received and sensed by a phototube 
in   the  range  finder.  An electronic counter measured  the  elapsed  time 
between  the  transmitted  pulse  and  the  return  reflection  and  converted 
the elapsed time  instantaneously into a measure of  distance. 
Similar systems had suffered from loss of  alignment with use between 
the  receiving  telescope,  which  sensed  the  reflected  laser  light,  and  the 
sighting  telescope by  which  the  receiver  w a s   aimed  at  the target.  The 
new  design  combined these  two  telescopes into  one unit  that  allowed a 
lighter,  more  precise,  and  more  rugged  system  to   be  fabricated. 
(Marshall Star, 12/9/@,  5-6) 
December  9 :  Soviet  Premier Alexei Kosygin told  the  Soviet parliament  that 
expenditures  for  defense  would  d rop  by   four  per cent  or  500 million 
rubles ($555 million)  in 1965.  He also declared that his government had 
acted after being informed by American officials that U.S.  planned to re- 
duce its military  budget in  the coming year.  A  spokesman for  the U.S. 
Embassy said later that the embassy had no knowledge that such informa- 
tion  had  been  given to  the Soviet  government.  I n  his budget message, 
Premier A.  N.  Kosygin told the Supreme Soviet that  “people of  science 
must do a  lot  for u s  to  be  able to  provide more material  benefits for  the 
satisfaction of  the population’s growing requirements,”  complained that 
the  opportunities  for  doing  this  “have  been  by  no  means  exploited.” 
After  calling  for  scientific bretikthroughs  to  the  production  process  in  
chemistry, electronics, transistor technology, and biology, Kosygin said : 
( 6  There  a re   major  shortcomings  in  scientific  research  planning.  Our 
plans  do not make use in  good time of  all that  is progressive and useful 
in  research  discoveries.  For  this  reason,  scientific  discoveries  and 
technical  inventions  not  infrequently  become  outdated  and  lose  their 
practical worth. 
“Utilization of  the latest achievements of  science and technology should 
be made one of  the main  criteria in  the appraisal of  economic plans and 
their fulfillment.  Unfortunately, many people employed in industry con- 
tinue  to  regard  further  capital  investments a s  the main  and  only source 
of  increased  output and do not  really strive hard  fo r  the rapid  introduc- 
tion  of  scientific  and  technical  achievements, which  could  produce  a 
considerably  greater  &ect  than  additional  capital  investments.  Scien- 
tific and technical progress opens new horizons for a radical improvement 
(Av .  Wk., 
in  quality and an  expansion of  the range of  goods produced.” 
12/28/64,16;  Tanner, NYT,  12/10/64r;  WS], 12/10/64) 
December  10: Final Gemini unmanned flight test  (GT-2)  from ETR was post- 
poned  after  a  last-second engine misfire  on  the  Titan  I1  rocket.  The 
trouble occurred  1.7 seconds after  the Titan  I1 booster engines ignited: 
loss of  hydraulic pressure caused one of  the two engine nozzles to swivel 
out  of  place;  and  automatic  system sensed  this  and  immediately extin- 
guished both engines in the  rocket’s first stage one second before lift-off. 
A NASA  spokesman said that one of  the nozzle tubes received a slight crack 
a s  a result of  the malfunction and that  extensive checking of  all systems 
must  be  completed before  a decision would  be made  as  to  whether the 
entire first stage would be replaced. 
The Titan I1 w a s  to have lifted the 6,900-Ib. Gemini capsule to 106  mi. 
in  the  suborbital  flight  and  then  accelerated it  to  faster  and  hotter  re- 
entry  than  normal.  A  parachute landing in  the  Atlantic was projected 
for the capsule and  recovery planned.  Chief  goals of  the flight, second 

414 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONADTICS,  19  6 4 

in  the Gemini series, would have  been  to  test  the heat  shield a s  well a s  
control, life support, and other systems. 
NASA  said  the  delay meant  the  first  manned  Gemini flight would  not 
take place  until the second quarter of  1965.  GT-2  would  be attempted 
(Hoffman, N .Y .   Her.  T r i b .  12/10/64;  Balt.  Sun. 
again  in  January. 
12/10/64;  Witkin, N Y T ,  12/10/&) 
December  10:  USAF  Titan  111-A  space  booster  was  launched  from  Cape 
Kennedy and executed its first completely successful test flight.  Midway 
in  its  first  orbit,  approximately  115 mi.  above  the  earth,  the  5,250-lb. 
“transtage”  ( a  third  stage with multiple start-stop-restart  capability and 
ability  to   transfer  a  payload  from  one  orbit  to  another)  performed  a 
360” somersault to  align  the  platform’s  inertial  guidance  system gyro- 
scopes.  At  the  end  of  its  first  100-min. orbit,  explosive  charges  auto- 
matically  kicked  a  3,750-lb.  cylinder-shaped  dummy  satellite  into  a 
separate  orbit.  After  the  Titan  111-A  firing,  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  S. 
Bleymaier,  project  director,  said:  “The  success  confirmed  our  confi- 
dence in  the system.  We feel that the  Air Force now has a  real purpose 
( AP,  Balt.  Sun,  12/11/64;  Simons, 
in accomplishing space missions.” 
Wash. Post, 12/11/64;  AP, NYT ,  12/11/64,20) 
*  X-15  No.  1 was  piloted  by  Capt.  Joseph  H.  Engle  (USAF) to  112,000-ft. 
altitude at maximum  speed of  3,500  (mach  5.11)  mph  to  test  scientific 
instruments  ( a   densitron  and  daytime  sky  background  experiments) 
carried  in  pods recently installed on  the craft’s  wing tips  and  to  sample 
density  of  upper  atmosphere.  The  flight  also  served  as  a  checkout  of 
(NASA  X-15 
the  newly  installed  Honeywell  inertial  guidance  system. 
Proj. Off.; NYT ,  12/11/64,25) 
*  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  LI into  orbit. 
In  addition  to  scientific instru- 
mentation,  the  craft  contained  a  radio  system  for  the  precise measure- 
ment  of  orbital  elements and  a  radiotelemetry  system  for  transmitting 
data  to  earth. 
Ini- 
All  equipment on  board  was  operating  normally. 
tial orbital data:  apogee, 544 km.  (344.24 mi.)  ; perigee, 264 km.  (164 
mi.)  ; period,  92.5  min.;  inclination, $8.8”.  (Tass, Pravda, 12/11/64, 
1,  ATSS-T  Trans. ; Tass,  Komsomolskaya  Pravda,  12/11/64,  1,  ATSS-T 
Trans.;  VPI,  NYT ,   12/11/64,  43;  Wash. Pos t ,   12/11/64) 
An  unexpected  rise.in  the number  of  meteors bombarding  the  earth  from 
April  to  October  1963 was  reported  in  Science  by  two  Canadian  and 
two New Zealand scientists.  The rise was detected by  radar  echoes and 
the  number  of  meteors put  at  300  million.  Studies made  by  the New 
Zealand  group  after  the   great  increase  indicated  that  the  meteor  rate 
rise may be  recurring,  with decreasing strength,  once every six months. 
(Sci. Serv.,  NYT ,  12/25/64;  AP,  Carey, Wash. Post, 12/11/64) 
NASA  announced  that  it  would  negotiate  a  one-year contract  with  Mason- 
Rust  fo r   continued  support  services  a t   NASA  Michoud  Operations. 
(Huntsville Times,  12/11/64) 
December  11 : Atlas-Centaur  4  (AC-4)  hurled  its  Centaur  second  stage 
into  orbit  around  the  earth  with  a  mass  model  of  the  Surveyor  lunar 
spacecraft  in  its  nose.  The  first-burn  performance  of  the  Centaur 
sent  the  stage  into  a  nearly  circular  parkiig  orbit  of  100 mi. 
and  106  mi.  apogee.  The  second  burn  should  have  put  the 
rocket  into  an oval  path  taking  it  out  as  much  as 5,000  mi.  from 
earth;  however,  the  attempt  to  restart  the  R G l O  engines  failed  and 
the  stage  began  to  tumble  and roll.  After about  15 hr.  in  orbit,  the 

415 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 
Centaur  stage  and  its  Surveyor  dummy payload  re-entered the   atmos- 
phere  over  the  South  Pacific  east  of  Australia  and  disintegrated. 
NASA  said  all  prime  mission  objectives had  been  met,  including  the 
demonstration  of  the  structural  integrity  of  the  Atlas-Centaur  during 
powered  flight,  testing  of  the guidance  system which  was  flying closed 
loop fo r  the first time, verification of  the structural and thermal integrity 
of  the  Centaur  nose  fairing  and  insulation  panels,  and  verification  of 
the performance  of  the jettison  systems fo r  the nose  fairing and  insula- 
tion panels. 
Project  officials were  investigating what  caused  the  stage to   tumble, 
(NASA  Release  64c 
preventing  propellants  from  reaching  the  pumps. 
289;  Lewis  News, 12/24/64,  1; A v .   W k . ,  12/21/64,  24;  Wash.  Eve. 
Star, 12/11/64) 
December  1 1 :   First  launch  of  NASA  Aerobee 350 sounding  rocket was  con- 
ducted  a t  Wallops  Island,  Va.,  the   rocket  reaching  6,000-ft. altitude  in  
successful  test.  For  this  first  test  upper  stage  was  inert,  the  main 
objectives  being  to  demonstrate  compatibility  of  Aerobee  350  with 
Aerobee launch-tower rail  system and evaluate performance  of  Aerobee 
350  during  first-stage  (Nike)  boost.  Preliminary  evaluation  of  test 
indicated  NASA  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  could  proceed  with  plans 
to  launch  complete live Aerobee 350 without  redesign  of  the  rocket  or 
(NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
the launcher rail system. 
*  Developmental  spacecraft  landing  rockets  were  tested  using  a  Gemini 
boilerplate.  Spacecraft  was  dropped  from  a  C-119  aircraft  a t   7,000- 
ft.  altitude.  Two  12,000-lb.-thrust  rockets  were  fired  simultaneously 
when  the  spacecraft  was  ten  f t .   above  the  water  with  burn  time  one 
and  one half  sec.  Landing  speed  of  the  craft  was  slowed  from  27  f p s  
to about nine to  10 fps;  normal g-force of  seven to eight g’s  was  reduced 
to  approximately two  and  one half  g’s  on  impact.  A controllable para- 
chute  steered  by  radio  commands from  a  NASA  ship lowered  the  space- 
craft  into  the  waters  of  Trinity  Bay,  Tex.  The  landing  rockets  were 
not  a  definite  part  of  either  the  Gemini  or  Apollo  programs.  (MSC 
Roundup, 12/23/@,  7 )  
NASA  announced that  a  10-month study contract  for $191,835  to assess the 
technological problems of  designing, building,  and operating  a manned 
orbiting  astronomical  observatory had  been  awarded  to  the Boeing Co. 
Boeing would  study  possible ways  in  which  such a n  observatory might 
be operated, with particular emphasis on the role of  man  in  its scientific 
program.  A  requirement  of  the  study  was  that  the  orbiting  telescope 
be sufficiently adaptable to support a broad astronomical program.  The 
study would  assume that the telescope would be operated in conjunction 
with  a  proposed  Manned  Orbital  Research Laboratory  (MORL )   under 
study by NASA Langley Research Center for NASA Office of  Manned Space 
Flight. 
(LaRc Release) 
*  In  a Gemini suit comfort test, Hoyt Maples successfully completed a 96-hr. 
stay  in  a  S-ft.-dia.  chamber  in   the  Crew  systems  Laborato 
a t   NASA 
Manned  Spacecraft  Center.  The  suit  was  not  pressurized %ring  the 
test,  but  the test  chamber was  a pure oxygen environment with 5 lbs. of 
pressure,  the   same  environment  that  the  Gemini  spacecraft would  use 
a t  orbital  altitudes.  During the test, Maples followed a  four-hour-work, 
four-hour-rest cycle.  He  used  a  task  board  which  tested  his  mental 
alertness by matbematical calculations he made  on  a  series of  lights on 

416 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

the  panel  board.  Maples’  food  was  a  Gemini  flight  diet  consisting of 
freeze-dehydrated, dehydrated,  and  bite-size  food.  Other  tasks Maples 
performed during his stay in  the chamber included checks of  the environ- 
mental  control  system  and  exercise with  a  bungee cord.  Although  he 
did not  take off  his helmet during the test, he was  able to  open the face- 
plate  and  take  off  his  gloves.  With  this  test,  the  Gemini  suit  passed 
another  phase  of  its qualification for  use  in the manned Gemini flights. 
( MSC Roundup,  12/23/64) 
December  11 :   Formation  of  a  National  Academy of  Engineering  under  the 
charter  of  the  NAS  was  announced  by  Dr. Frederick  Seitz,  President 
of  the National  Academy  of  Sciences,  and  Dr.  Augustus  B.  Kinzel, 
President-elect of  the  National  Academy  of  Engineering.  Among  the 
founding  members  were  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  NASA  Deputy  Adminis- 
trator,  and  Dr.  William  H.  Pickering,  Director  of  the  Jet  Propulsion 
( NAS-NRC  Release;  Wmh. Post,  12/12/64,  20) 
Laboratory. 
*  The hydrogen-fueled J-2  engine that  would  power  the  upper  stages of  the 
Saturn  V  launch  vehicle  successfully  demonstrated  its  ability  to  stop 
and  restart  in  a  ground  test  carried  out  at the Santa Susana Field Lab- 
oratory  of  Rocketdyne Div.  The 200,000-lb.-thrust engine would  oper- 
ate  in  a cluster  of  five to  provide one million lbs.  of  thrust  for  the  S-I1 
second  stage  of  the  Apollo  moon  launch  vehicle,  as  well  as  operating 
singly in the  S-IVB  stage  of  the Saturn  IB.  The  test  engine was  oper- 
ated  initially  fo r   165  sec.  and  shut  down.  Following  a  75-min. 
“coast”  period,  the  engine  was  restarted.  After  seven  seconds,  it  was 
shut  down  fo r   six  minutes,  then  restarted  and  operated  fo r   the  full 
duration  of  310  seconds.  Among  specific objectives demonstrated  by 
the  test  were  automatic  repressurizing  of  the  start  tank  during  engine 
operation,  sustained  tank  pressure  during  the  orbital  coast  period,  and 
reliable  operation  of  the  electrical  and  pneumatic  systems  used  fo r  
(Marshall Star,  12/16/64,  1, 12 ;   AP,  Balt.  Sun, 12/12/64) 
restart. 
0  A  ten-second firing  of  the  “battleship”  stage  of  the   Saturn  S-11,  second 
stage of  the Saturn  V  moon  rocket,  was  conducted by  North American 
Aviation,  Inc.,  at  their  Santa  Susana  Field  Laboratory.  The test  dem- 
onstrated the  ability of  the battleship stage and  accompanying facilities 
to  operate  the  5-2  engine  at  fu l l   thrust.  The  S-I1  would  be  powered 
by  a  cluster  of  five  5-2 
liquid  hydrogen  engines,  developing  a  total 
thrust  of  a  million  pounds. 
(NAA‘  S&ID  Skywriter,  12/31/64,  2 ;  
Marshall star, 12/16/64,  1 , 1 2 )  
December 11-12:  MAIUNER  IV passed unscathed through the Geminid stream, 
the first  of  three meteor  streams it had to  cross  on  its 71/-mo.  journey 
(NASA  Release  64-323) 
to   take  television  pictures  of  Mars. 
December 12: USAF and the Atomic Energy Commission ( M C )   were reported 
to  be  negotiating  a  $13,000,000  contract  with  the  Garrett  Corp.  for  a 
33-month program  of  advanced development and  ground  testing  of  the 
Space  Power  Unit  Reactor  (Spur)  system.  Spur  was  one  of  two  ele- 
ments  in   the  Snap-SO/Spur  system-Snap-50, 
under  development  for 
AEG by  P ra t t  &  Whitney Aircraft,  being  the energy  producing  reactor, 
and Spur, the portion which converted heat to electricity.  The objective 
would be to provide a  flyable system in the 1970’s.  (Haggerty, .I/Armed 
Forces,  1 2 / 1 2 / a ,   8 )  
*  Thiokol  Chemical  Corp.  Wasatch  Div.’s  156-in.  solid-propellant  rocket 
motor was fired for  130 sec.  and  terminated within 0.5  sec.  of  predicted 

417 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 41 
action time,  although  the last 30 sec.  of  the firing was completed without 
the plastic nozzle extension, which parted a t  the metal attachment  flange. 
Severe erosion  of  the 5-ft. nozzle extension  skirt, which was constructed 
entirely  of  ablative  materials,  weakened  the  structural  integrity  of  the 
skirt and   it  blew  off  after  about  100 sec. of  motor  burning.  The firing 
continued  normally  after  loss  of  the  skirt  with  only  about  a n   8% 
degradation  in  thrust,  which  had  peaked  a t   just  over  1.4 million  lb. 
This was the first demonstration  of  thrust-vector-control using a movable 
nozzle.  The  rocket  motor  case  used  in   this  feasibility  demonstration 
was  undamaged,  would  be  used  in  the follow-on 156-in. program which 
(Av. Wh . ,  12/21/64, 26) 
was  awaiting  DOD  approval. 
December 12: Secretary  of  Defense Robert  S. McNamara held  a press confer- 
ence a t  which  he  responded to  questions regarding the MOL project: 
QUESTION:  “Mr.  Secretary,  Senator  Anderson  has  suggested  that  a 
billion dollars could be saved by merging the Air Force’s Manned Orbit- 
[See Dec.  7,  1964.1 
ing Laboratory with  NASA’s Apollo. 
Can  you  tell 
us how you feel about tha t?”  
SECRETARY MCNAMARA:  “I feel very strongly that we must avoid dupli- 
cate space programs.  There must be only one National  Space Program. 
The  great  bulk  of  the  expenditures  for  tha t   National  Space  Program 
should  be  in  NASA,  because  the  bulk  of  the  National  Space  Program 
will  be  oriented  toward  civilian  scientific and  other  objectives.  There 
is  a  place,  there  is a  requirement  for   a  military  component.  We must 
maintain  security,  a  high  level  of  security,  on  certain  elements  of  the 
space program  and that portion  of  the program must be  handled  by  the 
Defense Department.  I think Senator Anderson was simply emphasizing 
the  absolute essentiality of  fully coordinating the NASA  and  the Defense 
Department  programs.  With  that,  I  agree  100 percent.  . . . My  prin- 
ciple is a very simple one  . . . I believe we  are a military organization, 
we  are not  interested in  space except  insofar as it bears directly on our 
military  mission.  If  there  is anything that  NASA  can  do,  that  we can  in 
effect hire them to do as ou r  agent, I am 100 percent in favor of  doing so.” 
QUESTION : “A  related  question.  Could you  say,  specifically,  whether 
you are  backing the MOL or no t?”  
SECRETARY MCNAMARA : “Yes,  indeed.” 
QUESTION:  “That  could  go  ahead  under  the  Air  Force.” 
SECRETARY  MCNAMARA:  “Yes,  but  I  want  to   be  sure  that  the   MOL 
program,  the  details  of  it,  are   fully  analyzed  by  NASA  and  fully  taken 
into  account  when  NASA  establishes any portion  of  its  Apollo  Program 
not  directly  related  to  the  Lunar  Program.  .  . I  want  to   be  certain 
that  the  Air  Force, when  it established the  MOL,  takes  account  of  what 
NASA  is  required  to  do  as  par t   of  the   Apollo  Program  that  in  turn   is 
(Text;  MB iR ,   12/21/64, 
directly  related  to  the  Lunar  Program.’’ 
20; SBD ,  12/15/64) 
Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  S.  McNamara  announced  that  DOD would 
establish  a  Contract  Audit  Agency  whose  principal  function  would  be 
to  consolidate  the   activities  and  the  3,600 personnel  of  various  units 
formerly  engaged  separately  in   auditing  defense  and  space  contracts. 
He  estimated  tha t   this  would  result  in  a  “manpower”  saving  of  $1.8 
(NYT, 12/13/64) 
million. 

418 

ASTRONAUTICS  ANI, AERONAUTICS,  1 9  6 4 

December  12:  Britain’s  new  Labor Government had  reviewed plans  to  build 
the  Concorde  supersonic  airliner  and  was  reported  to  be  seeking  a 
compromise  with  France  over  the  project. 
I t   was  possible  that  the 
U.K.  would  propose  to   France  an   extension  of  the  Concorde  project 
over  a  longer  period  of  time  to  stretch  out  cost  of  development.  Also 
Britain would  like France  to  consider  the  possibility of  U.S.  participa- 
(Farnsworth,  NYT, 
tion  so  that  cost  could  be  split  three  ways. 
12/13/64,4) 
December  13:  RELAY  I  began  its  th ird   year  i n   orbit  and  could  still  send 
clear,  high-resolution  television  and  audio  signals  across  oceans  and 
continents.  The  communications  satellite had  circled  the  globe  5,685 
times  and  accomplished  186  demonstrations  and  2,139  experiments, 
with  a  transponder-on  time  of  334  hours.  The  RELAY  I  project  was 
directed by NASA Goddard  Space Flight Center.  (NASA Release 64-213) 
*  USAF launched  Thor-Able-Star  launch  vehicle  from WTR  with  unidentified 
satellite  payload.  It  was  later  revealed that  two  satellites were  placed 
in orbit  (HHN-48) 
Translations  of  reports  in  Russian  journals  indicated  that  space  flights 
lasting  longer  than  24 hours  produced  changes  in  the  human  body,  in- 
cluding bladder and kidney troubles, that could not be corrected.  Future 
Soviet flights would  be  aimed  at  detecting the  beginning  of  these  dis- 
orders  and attempting  to prevent  them.  The translations indicated that 
the  Russians  planned  to   send  up  more  doctors  and  physiologists  and 
tha t   the  primary  reason  for  the  l6-mo.  delay  between  flights  by  the 
U.S.S.R.  was  the  seriousness of  the  disorders affecting astronauts after 
flights lasting for  five  days.  Future crews would  be selected  “as  medi- 
cal  teams  as   opposed  to   individuals,”  said  one  Soviet  journal.  The 
men  would  also be picked  on  the  basis of  their medical compatibility- 
to   see  that  one man’s  personal  germs,  bacteria,  or   vim5 did not  infect 
(Burkett, Houston Chron.,  12/13/64) 
other members of  the team. 
December  14:  Dr.  Donald  E.  Hornig,  scientific adviser  to  President  John- 
son, was quoted on the controversial MOL  project and its possible merger 
with  NASA’s Apollo:  “MOL  is  still under  discussion, and  the  scope  of  i t  
is  still  in  a  state  of  flux.  The  Air  Force  certainly  has  a  role  to  play 
in space.”  Sources inside the White House said Dr. Hornig was against 
full funding of  the  MOL,  fo r  which  project  the Air  Force wanted  $175 
million in FY 1966.  ( A v .  Wk., 12 /14 /64 ,15)  
e  NASA designer  of  ECHO I,  William  J. O’Sullivan,  said  he  believed  the satel- 
lite  still  had  its  spherical  shape  after  over  four  years  in  orbit.  An 
optical  inyestigation made by   the  Goodyear  Aerospace  corp .   for   NASA 
Langley  Research  Center  indicated  that  the  satellite’s  aluminum  sur-  
f a c e w h i c h   made  the  balloon  highly  reflective  of  light  and  radar  
waves,  regulated  its  temperature,  and  protected  the  plastic  film  from  
space  haza rd s - s t i l l   reflected  like  a  mirror.  From  calculations  using 
the  known  reflective  characteristics  of  ECHO   I  when  it  was  launched 
and  his  interpretation  of  the  Goodyear  measurements,  O’Sullivan  con- 
cluded  that  ECHO  I  “is still  essentially spherical  and  that  its  very  thin 
coating of  aluminum  has   sufkered  no  measurable  degradation  in  spec- 
ularity or reflectivity.” 
(LaRC Release) 

419 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4  
December 14: Missiles and Rockecs reported  that NASA  was reviewing the pros 
and cons of  Project Orion  (an  advanced nuclear-pulse rocket propulsion 
concept)  to  determine  whether  the  agency  could  justify  a  mission  re- 
quirement  for  a  nuclear-pulse vehicle-such  as a  fast  manned  tr ip   to  
Mars. DOD was scheduled to drop its research  in January 1965, because 
the Air  Force  could not  establish a mission requirement.  Both W D  and 
AEC would  join in  financing a jo in t  program i f   NASA  established the mis- 
sion requirement.  Project  Orion  would  not  in  any case be  available in  
the  same time  period  as  solid-core nuclear  reactors, whose development 
(Wilks,  M&R,  12/14/64,12-14) 
was  already  well  underway. 
Langley  Research  Center  aerospace  engineer  Dewey  L.  Clemmons,  Jr., 
presented  a  paper  a t   the  Symposium  on  the  Establishment  of  a  Euro- 
pean  Geodetic  Network  for  Artificial  Satellites held  in  Paris,  France, 
describing  the  U S .   Passive  Geodetic  Satellite  (Pageos)  planned  for 
launch  during  the  first  half  of  1966.  He  said:  “The  satellite will  be 
an   aluminum-coated  sphere  100  feet  (30.48  meters)  in  diameter,  a 
near  replica  of  ECHO  I  (1960 Iota  1 )   that was  launched  by  the United 
States on August  12,  1960.  No  instrumentation  will  be  attached to  the 
surface  of  the  Pageos  satellite.  Pageos  will  serve  the  geodesist  by 
simply  acting  as   a  point  source  of  light  in  the  sky  as   i t   reflects  the 
incident sunlight.  Simultaneous photographs  of  this light source against 
the  star  background,  taken  by  two  or  more  widely  separated  ground- 
based cameras, will enable geodesists to determine the spatial coordinates 
of  each camera  position.  An  interconnected  series of  camera  positions 
can be established that will  cover the entire surface of  the earth, thereby 
permitting  geometric  determination  of  each  camera  position  within  a 
single reference system.  The use  of  this satellite for  geodetic  purposes 
will  continue  for  a t   least  five  years  during  which  the  necessary  photo- 
grammetric observations can be made and to provide  a purely  geometric 
(Text;  AP,  NYT, 
determination  of  the  shape  and  size  of  the  earth.” 
12/15/64,41) 
*  Dr. Eugene Konecci,  of  the NASC  staff, told Missiles  and  Rockets  tha t  there 
had  been  no mention  of  airlocks  in  public or  private discussions of  the 
Vostok  and Voskhod  spacecraft,  and  no  other  indications  of  plans  fo r  
extravehicular  operations.  Although  the  Soviets  were  aiming  a t  
rendezvous, this was expected to be strictly a vehicle maneuver.  “Soviet 
interest  in  the  use  of  helium-oxygen  atmospheres  for  longterm  space 
vehicles may indicate that they do not have capability for extra-vehicular 
experimentation,”  said Dr. Konecci. 
(Md iR ,  12/14/64,16) 
Among  the ten top scientific, medical,  and technological advances  in  1964 
a s  selected by Dr. Watson Davis, Science Service Director, were: 
1.  Close-up photographs of  the moon taken by RANGER  VII. 
2.  Orbiting of  the earth by three Russian  cosmonauts in  the VOSKHOD 
I spacecraft. 
3.  Discovery  of  quasars,  the  brightest,  most  violent,  and  heaviest 
sources  of  light and radio waves,  possibly fueled by  collapse of  gravity 
(Sci. Serv.,  T u s h .  Daily N m s ,  12/14/64) 
waves. 
*  NASA  announced  that  142  colleges  and  universities  would  participate  in  
NASA’s graduate training  program  during  the  1965-66 academic  year. 
(NASA Release 64-308) 

420 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
December  14: U S .   Army  announced  that  the  Lockheed-California Co.’s 
XH-51A  compound  helicopter  ( a  helicopter  having  wings  as  well  as 
rotor blades)  had flown 242 mph-“the 
fastest known speed of  any rotor 
craft in the world.”  The flight was made by a test pilot,  Donald Segner, 
(AP, NYT ,  12/14/64,  32) 
off  the Southern California coast. 
*  USAF  Air Defense Command l o t h  Aerospace Missile Sq.,  a fully operational 
unit of  ADC at Vandenberg AFB  which would man an antisatellite weapon, 
( A v .  Wk . ,  12/14/64,  13 )  
was  on 5-min.  alert status. 
December  14-1 7 :  Twenty-six aviation  officials from  23  countries  convened 
in  Washington  for  activities  celebrating  the  20th  anniversary  of  the 
formal beginning of  post-war international  cooperation in civil aviation 
after the Chicago Conference of  1944.  Dignitaries were honored guests 
a t   the  Wright  Memorial  Dinner  in  Washington  on  Dec.  17. 
(FAA  
Release 64-109) 
December 15: SAN  MA R CO I (SM-1)  was  orbited from NASA  Wallops Station. 
The  NASA-trained  Italian  crew  launched  the  2%&. 
Italian-designed 
satellite on a four-stage solid-propellant Scout to an orbit with an  apogee 
of  490.04  mi.,  a  perigee  of  124.62 mi.,  an  orbital  period  of  94.7  min., 
and  an   inclination  of  37.77’. 
I t   was  the  first  time  a  foreign  coun- 
try  had  designed, built,  and  launched  a  satellite in  orbit  in  the  course 
of  NASA’s 
international program.  The satellite would measure a i r  density 
and  ionospheric  characteristics  related  to  long-range  radio  trans- 
missions  and  would  qualify  satellite  and  train  crew  for  subsequent 
(Wallops Release 64-91) 
launches from sea platform in Indian Ocean. 
*  At  a  symposium  sponsored  by  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  Dr. 
Norman F. Ness likened the earth to a kind of  comet with a long magnetic 
tail  that  extended  fo r   an  unknown  distance.  The  “new  look”  was 
drawn  from  results of  the first detailed mapping  of  the earth‘s  magnetic 
field on the nighttime side of  the magnetosphere by  EXPLORER x v m  (IMP 
I,  Interplanetary Monitoring Platform), launched Nov. 26, 1963.  Until 
recently,  scientists  had  believed  that  the  earth’s  magnetosphere  was 
basically  spherical ; however,  data  from  EXPLORER XVIII indicate  that 
countless magnetic lines  of  force  stretched  out  like  the  tail  of  a  comet 
to an  unknown distance in space, apparently beyond  the moon.  Within 
this comet-like tail,  the lines  of  force in  the Northern  Hemisphere were 
directed  towards  the  sun ;   in  the  Southern Hemisphere,  away  from  the 
In  between,  there was  a  neutral  zone. 
sun. 
Dr. Ness characterized this neutral zone, which had been hypothesized 
but  never  before  detected, as a  thin  sheet which  was  a  permanent part 
of  the  earth’s  environment and  virtually  void  of  any magnetic activity. 
Though  the  neutral  zone’s  exact  role was unknown, Dr.  Ness  speculated 
that  it  might  be  responsible  fo r   formation  of  the  auroras,  creation  of 
the  Van  Allen  radiation  belt,  and  presence  of  the  gegenschein.  Ness 
concluded that  in view  of  the  evidence from  EXPLORER XVIII, “The  only 
difference between  the  earth  and  a  comet  is  that  the  earth  possesses  a 
(Simons,  Wash .   Pos t ,  
strong  magnetic  field  and  comets  do  not.” 
12/16/64;  Hixson,  N .Y .   Her.  T r ib . ,   1 2 / 1 6 / a ;   Wash .  Daily  New s ,  
12/16/64;  Toth,  Detroit  N e w s ,   12/16/64;  AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
12/16/64;  AP,  NYT ,   12/16/64,  30;  Av.  Wk . ,  12/21/64,  25) 
*  Dr.  Eugene  B.  Konecci  of  the  NASC  staff  addressed  the  National  Space 
Club  on  the  Soviet  bioastronautics  program.  He  said that  although 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

421 
some  American  scientists  had  been  critical  of  the  amount  and  kinds 
of  data released by  the Soviets, Soviet scientists appeared to be desirous 
of  further  opening  their  research  in  technological  areas  such  a s   life 
support. 
On choosing the  proper atmosphere for space flight, Dr. Konecci said: 
Some  American  scientists  . . . advocated  a  two-gas  system.  . . . 
Others chose a 5 psi 100% oxygen system.  . . . Animal and human ex- 
<< 
periments to date indicate that there are no apparent physiological effects 
due to 100% oxygen up to and beyond 30 days. 
“What  is  important  to  mention  is that we  had  the technology a s  part 
of  our  aircraft  system  in  handling  100% oxygen  in   low  pressure-high 
pressure  and  liquid  states,  and  we  have  extended  this  use to  space 
cabins.  The Soviets  . . . have not been confronted with  100% oxygen 
and  Voskhod flights  . . . they  were  concerned  more  with  weightless- 
problems.  Because  of  the  near  sea-level atmosphere  in  their  Vostok 
ness and radiation effects.  . . .” 
Dr.  Konecci said  that  both  US. and the U.S.S.R.  had much  research 
for the full designed parameter  . . . in  Vostok this was supposed to  be 
work  ahead.  “The  Soviets have  still  to  fly  their  life  support  systems 
ten  days  with  later  literature  indicating  a  twelve-day  capability.  I 
expect the Voskhod has the comparable  capability, that  is, about twelve 
days, but because of  the three-man crew this would in  fact mean a three- 
fold increase of  their  life support capability, i.e.  on a man-per-day basis. 
I  think  we  can  also  expect  the  Soviets to  attem#t  manned  rendezvous 
maneuvers.  I  really  do  not  believe  a t   this  time  that  they  will  attempt 
manned  extravehicular  experiments  until  (1) they  have  a  better  space 
suit, wSch  they appear to be working on;  ( 2 )   that they have a better fix 
on the poszible decompression sickness (bends or  dysbarism)  problems 
of  decompressing from  a  sea-level atmosphere with  nitrogen  to  a  com- 
patible  space  suit  environment;  and  (3)   until  we  perform  the  Gemini 
intentional  decompression  and  extravehicular  experiments.” 
(Text) 
December 15:  The New  York Stock Exchange banned  any new  margin  trad- 
ing  in  ComSatCorp stock  in  an  effort  to  stop  speculation.  The  effect 
of  the ruling was to cut off  the supply of  borrowed money that had helped 
traders push  the stock to  a  high  of  71% from 46, its price  a  little  over 
three  months  ago.  ComSatCorp  stock  had  proved  to  be  particularly 
volatile because many  of  the  5 million  shares offered to  the public  last 
June at $20 were in long-term accounts and were not for sale.  (Phalon, 
NYT ,  12/16/64,63) 
0  Col.  George  E.  Humphries,  President  of  the  .Engineering  Institute  of 
Canada,  said  in  an  interview  that  Canada was  gaining more  technically 
trained personnel, particularly  among university engineering professors, 
than  it  had  previously.  “Salaries  have  risen  here  during  the  past  5 
years,  and  for  every engineering teacher that  goes to  the United States, 
Canada  is  gaining  two  from  that  country,”  Colonel  Humphries  con- 
(Canadian Press, NYT ,  12/15/@,  7 9 )  
cluded. 
Jane’s  A l l   the  World’s Aircraft, 1964-65, published  in London,  said  that 
the U S .  probably  had  led the Soviet Union fo r  some years “in  terms of 
quality and  quantity of  scientific data  and military intelligence acquired 
Jane’s  said the strong US. lead was indicated by the photo- 
in  space.” 
graphs  of  the moon sent back  by  RANGER VII  last  year,  which it termed 
“one  of  the  great  astronautical  achievements of  1W.” 
(UPI, 
Post,  12/15/64!) 

422 
ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUT ICS ,   19  6 4  
December  16: Two NASA  Aerobee 150 sounding rockets were  launched from 
White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex.  The first rocket reached 126.5-mi. 
altitude  carrying  instrumented  payload  which  was  recovered  after  im- 
pact.  Electron  measurement  experiment  did  not  work,  but  the  other 
experiments apparently  were   successful:  hypervelocity micrometeoroid 
collectors, cosmic dust  collectors,  and momentum  and  energy measure- 
ments as correlative data fo r  the collectors.  The second rocket reached 
145.5-mi.  altitude  in   successful nighttime  test  t o   study  distribution  of 
Lyman-alpha radiation.  Scanning  ultraviolet  spectrometer  and  a  pho- 
tometer  were  used. 
(NASA   Rpts.  SRL) 
*  A hingeless Lockheed XH-51N  rotor  helicopter  for  advanced  research  in 
rotary wing aircraft had been delivered to NASA Langley Research Center. 
Studies would  be  made  of  the  loads  and  flying qualities  problems that 
might  be  encountered  by  operational  aircraft  of  this  type  and  of  the 
extent  to  which  their  potential  advantages  of  simplicity  and  improved 
flying  qualities  could  be  realized  in  practice.  Rotor  blades  on  the 
XH-51N  were held firmly to  the hub, which was  attached  rigidly  to  the 
engine drive shaft.  On  other helicopters, the blades were either  hinged 
at  the  side  of  the  rotor  h ub   or  were  gimbaled  atop  the  mast. 
(LaRC 
Release 12/16/64) 
0  Najeeb Halaby, Administrator of  FAA, said that the four aircraft companies 
designing the supersonic transport  ( SST)  had submitted proposals which 
showed  “very  substantial  progress  in  the  last  6  months.”  Halaby 
spoke  of  progress  in  the  three  principal  problem  areas  associated  with 
development  of  a  2,000-mph  airliner:  the  safety  and  economics  of  its 
operation  and  the  sonic booms created  in   i t s  wake.  The  two  airframe 
competitors were  the Boeing Co.  and Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.;  designs 
fo r   the  engine  were  submitted  by  General  Electric  and   the  Pratt 
(Toth,  Va sh .  Post,  12/17/64, 
Whitney Div.  of  United  Aircraft  Corp. 
Balt.  Sun, 12/17/64) 
0  USAF  announced  that  Aerojet  General  Corp.  would  receive  a  $2,7U,OOO 
increment  to  a  previously  awarded  contract  f o r   research  and  devel- 
opment  fo r  the  Titan  I11  transtage  engine,  from  Ballistic Systems Div. 
(DOD Release 888-64) 
of  Air  Force  Systems Command. 
USAF  announced that Douglas Aircraft Co.,  Inc., Missile and Space Systems, 
would  receive  a  $4,000,000  order  to  an  existing  contract  for  procure- 
ment  of  Thor  space  boosters  from  Space  Systems  Div.  of  Air  Force 
( DOD Release 888-64) 
Systems Command. 
0  NASA  used an  Aerobee rocket to  launch two experiments from White Sands 
Missile  Range.  The  experiments  were  to  measure  cosmic  dust  and 
(M & R ,   12/21/64,  8 )  
electron  densities  in  the  upper  atmosphere. 
NASA  also successfully launched a  Nike-Apache sounding rocket from 
White Sands, N. Mex.,  to peak altitude of  121  mi.  Objective was  to  ob- 
tain data on the electron density distribution  in the ionospheric D  region 
by  means  of  a  radio  propagation  experiment,  and  to  measure  photo- 
(NASA Rpt. SRL) 
emission currents. 
December  17:  MARINER  IV  Mars-bound space probe received  two  commands 
intended  to  cause  the  spacecraft’s  attitude  control  system  to  fix  and 
remain  on  the  star  Canopus.  The  first  required  the  tracker  to  break 
lock  with  the  star  Gamma-Velorum and  go  into  a  search  for  Canopus. 
Canopus was  reacquired.  The second command was  to  deter  MARINER 
(NASA  Release 64-323) 
IV from losing its lock  on  Canopus. 

423 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4  
December  17: NASA  extended  until  Dec.  31,  1966, its contract with  the Cali- 
fornia  Institute of  Technology for  research  and  development programs 
conducted  a t  the Government-owned Jet Propulsion  Laboratory.  Work 
that would be performed  included research and development in lunar and 
interplanetary  programs,  aeronautics,  development  and  operation  of 
deep space tracking facilities, providing NASA  with technical advice, scien- 
tific studies, and reports of  investigations, and providing  supervision  of 
related work given to  contractors. 
Requirements  from NASA  would be issued in the form of  written Task 
Orders,  and  the  cost  of  this  contract would  be  determined  by  the  sum 
of  these task orders. 
I n  addition,  the two parties would  negotiate each 
fiscal year  for   a  fixed  fee  for   the  management  of  the  Jet  Propulsion 
Laboratory. 
(NASA Release 64-320) 
*  Dynatronics,  Inc.,  Orlando,  Fla.,  was  selected  by  NASA  to   negotiate  an 
estimated  $3.5-million  contract  award  for  design,  manufacture,  and 
on-site engineering  support of 19 pulse code modulation  (PCM)   systems 
in  NASA’s worldwide Apollo Manned Space Flight Network,  with options 
fo r  additional systems. 
(NASA  Release 64-319) 
NASA  would  negotiate  with  the  Univac  Div.  of  Sperry  Rand  Corp.  for 
purchase  of  digital  data  processors  t o  be  used  in  the  Apollo  Manned 
Space  Flight  Network  ground  stations and  tracking  ships.  The  fixed- 
price  contract would  approximate  $4.5 million for the  ten  systems with 
(NASA  Release 64-318) 
options for additional systems. 
0  Kenneth  C.  McCracken,  head  of  cosmic  ray  research  of  the  Earth  and 
Planetary .Sciences Laboratory  a t   the Graduate  Research  Center  of  the 
Southwest  said  that  the  Imps  (Interplanetary  Monitoring  Platforms) 
scheduled to  be  shot  into earth orbit  in  1966 would  be  the best  tool  for 
studying cosmic  rays during the years  of  the quiet sun.  Besides lasting 
much  longer  than  either  the  “deep”  space probes  or   the balloons, they 
would  have  one  other  tremendous  advantage,  McCracken  said.  “The 
IMPS will have very eccentric orbits, skimming 200 miles over the surface 
of  the earth a t  the closest points of  their orbits, or  ‘perigees,’ and soaring 
185,000  miles  out  in  space  at  their  ‘apogees,’  or  farthest  points  of 
orbit.  . . .  That means  that  in  counting  and analyzing  cosmic rays we 
shall for  the first time be able actually to compare the virgin, or primary, 
rays with  the secondary  particles that have had  all the wear  and tear of 
passing  through  the  earth’s  atmosphere  and  magnetosphere.” 
(Getze, 
L.A.  Times, 12/17/64) 
Dr. Victor  F. Hess, co-winner of  the 1936 Nobel Prize and former Professor 
of  Physics  at Fordham Univ.,  died a t  the age of  81 in Mt.  Vernon, N.Y. 
Dr.  Hess  shared the Nobel  Prize with  Dr.  Carl  C.  Anderson  of  the Cal- 
ifornia  Institute of  Technology  for   his part  in  the  discovery  of  cosmic 
rays.  (NYT, 12/19/@,  29) 
*  Boeing announced  that Dr.  George M.  Knauf,  for the past  three years dep- 
uty  director of  space medicine  in  NASA’s  Office of  Manned Space Flight, 
would  join  the company as  chief  of  bioastronautics.  He would  manage 
groups working  on  life support and protection, engineering  psychology, 
(Seattle  Post-ZnteUigence,  12/18/fj4) 
and  program  support. 
Howard  Simons of  the  Washington Post  was  awarded  the  1964 American 
for   the  Advancement  of  Science-Westinghouse  Science  writing  award. 
His winning entry consisted of  stories on the Samos satellite, cybernetics 
(Wa sh .  Post,  12/18/64) 
in  Russia,  and  the  planet  Jupiter. 

424 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4 

December  18:  Tass  disclosed that  ZOND  11  was jxpipped  with  a  new  type  of 
rocket  engine  known  a s   a  plasma  accelerator  and  that  the  engine,  on 
radio  command  from  earth,  had  successfully  operated  the  a t t i tude  
control  system  that  oriented  the  spacecraft with  respect  to  the  sun.  It 
was  the  first  time  that  such  a  plasma  engine  had  been  tested  under 
conditions of  actual space flight.  Information continued to  be received 
on  the  operations of  the  systems and units aboard the spacecraft;  radio 
communication  with  the  station  w a s   stable.  (Tass, Komsom.obkaya 
Pravda,  12/19/64,  1,  ATSS-T Trans.;  Shabad,  NYT ,   12/18/64,  12) 
*  NASA  selected 14 firms for negotiation of  contracts to provide engineering, 
fabrication,  and  institutional  support  services  to  six  laboratories  and 
three  offices  of  the  Marshall  Space Flight  Center.  Work  would  be  in  
support of  the Saturn/Apollo  launch vehicle program with cost estimated 
(NASA Release 64-322) 
at  $68  million  fo r   one  year. 
*  More  than  900 persons had  applied  to  NASA  fo r  the  10 to  20 positions fo r  
scientist  astronaut  that  it  would  fill  next  year.  To  qualify,  a  scientist 
had  to  be  under  34 years old,  a US.  citizen, no taller  than  six feet, with 
a B.A.  degree and a  doctorate or the equivalent in experience.  Recruit- 
ment  would  end  Dec.  31.  Recommendations  would  be  made  by  the 
National  Academy  of  Sciences  to  NASA  in  the  spring  of  1965. 
(AP, 
Miami Her., 12/18/64) 
USAF  successfully launched a Minuteman I1 “instant  ICBM”  from Cape Ken- 
nedy.  The  test  warhead  hit  its  Atlantic  target  area  more  than  5,000 
(UPI ,   NYT ,   12/20/64,  41) 
mi.  from  the  launch  site. 
*  Present  dollar  volume  of  contracts  handled  by  the  NAsA-Michoud  plant 
(N.O.  Times-Picayune, 12/18/64) 
passed  $1  billion  during  1964. 
*  MemSers of  Local  1685, United Brotherhood of  Carpenters and Joiners  of 
America, ended a 24-hr. strike at the Merritt Island Launch Area  ( MILA)  
and nearby Patrick AFB  facilities.  The walkout had tied up $246 million 
in construction for space projects, including construction on an assembly 
building  for the Saturn  V  lunar  rocket,  and work  a t   the  Titan  I11  and 
Saturn  IB launch  areas.  Carpenters had  protested the use of  nonunion 
workers by  the Akwa-Downey Construction Co.,  a subcontractor on one 
of  the projects.  I t  was the fourth major labor difEculty a t  NASA Kennedy 
Space  Center  in  1964. 
(UPI ,   NYT ,   12/18/64,  39  and  12/19/64,  48; 
Chic.  T r ib . ,  12/18/64) 
December  18-19:  Total  lunar  eclipse occurred.  A  lS-ft.-dia.  dish  antenna, 
built  by Marconi Co.  and  designed  for Queen Mary College of  London 
Univ.,  was  used  for  the  first  time t o  view  the  eclipse.  I t  was  operated 
as a  radiotelescope at wavelengths of  about one mm.-possibly 
the larg- 
est ever  built  to  operate at  such short wavelengths.  The dish employed 
an epoxy-resins structure reinforced with glass fibers and having a zinc- 
sprayed surface. 
During  the  eclipse,  extensive  heat-map  measurements  of  the  lunar 
surface were  made  from  Egypt  by  team  of  Boeing  Scientific Research 
Laboratories  scientists.  Preliminary  analysis  of  their  measurements 
showed  hundreds  of  “hot  spots,”  or  surface temperature  anomalies,  on 
the  lunar  surface, although  the experimenters had  expected to  find  only 
a  few  dozen.  The  experimenters made  12  20-min.  scans  of  the  moon 
during  the eclipse, in both  the visual and infrared portions  of  the  spec- 
trum.  Measurements were   made  at  El  Kottamia  Observatory, 50  mi. 
east of  Cairo,  a t  invitation  of  United Arab Republic Astronomical Serv- 
(M&R ,   1/4/65,21;  NYT ,   12/22/64;  M&R,  1/18/65,28) 
ice. 

425 
ASTRONAUTICS   ANT) AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 
December  19:  A Gemini-type spacecraft was successfully landed  a t  Edwards 
AFB  in  first manned  test  of  the new paraglider  recovery  system.  North 
American  Aviation  test  pilot  Donald  F.  McCusker  guided  the  capsule 
back  t o   earth  following  a  four-and-a-half  minute  flight  beneath  the 
inflated wing,  after  being  released  from  a  helicopter  at  an   altitude  of 
8,500 ft.  McCusker  was  slightly  injured  when  the  paraglider  landed 
a t   about  25  mph-faster 
(L.A.  Times, 
than  had  been  anticipated. 
12/20/64~; Sun D i ego  Union, 12/20/64;  NAA  S&ID  Skywr i te i ,  12 /31 /a ,  
4 )  
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson  (D.-N.  Mex.)  , chairman of  the Senate Committee 
on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences,  issued  a  statement  related  to  his 
letter to  President  Johnson  [See Dec.  7 , 1 9 M ]  in which he had proposed 
a  merger  of  the   Air  Force  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (M O L )   and 
NASA  Apollo-X  programs:  “Department  of  Defense  and  NASA  officials 
have  informed  me of  an  agreement  they  have worked  out  in  relation  to  
the   Air  Force’s  proposed  Manned  Orbiting Laboratory  (MOL) and  the 
space administration’s proposed Apollo-X. 
“The  Department  of  Defense  and NASA  have  gone a  long way  toward 
answering  the  questions  I  raised  several  weeks  ago. 
I  suggested  a t  
that  time  that  perhaps  a  great  savings  could  be  achieved without  sacri- 
fice to   either the NASA  or Air  Force  responsibilities in  space  by  harmo- 
nizing MOL  and Apollo-X.  I have been  told that the Air Force and NASA 
will take advantage of  each other’s technology and hardware development 
with  all efforts directed a t  achievement of  a true  space laboratory  as  a n  
end  goal.  The  review  underway  by  both  agencies  will  strengthen  the 
total space effort. 
“We  should  take full advantage  of  the technology and ground-support 
systems developed  for Project  Apollo.  The object  of  the  Senate Space 
Committee in  raising questions about  MOL  and Apollo-X was  to  accom- 
plish  the wisest  use  of  personnel  and  money,  not  in  criticism  of  either 
project.” 
New  Y o r k   Times  reporter  John  Finney  interpreted  Sen.  Anderson’s 
statement as  an indication that the Administration  “had  gone along with 
his  [Sen.  Anderson’s]  suggestions.  Not  lost  upon  the  Administration 
was  the letter’s  implication  that  it would  be  diflicult  to  defend  the  pro- 
posed  $5.2 billion  space  budget  on  Capitol Hill  unless the Administra- 
(Text;  Finney,  N Y T ,  
tion  could  show  it had  eliminated  duplication.” 
12/20/64,45) 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Fight  Center  announced  plans  for  negotiation  with 
the  General  Dynamics-Electronics  Co.  €or purchase  of  approximately 
$1.25  million  worth  of  unique  ground  tracking  equipment  to  be  used 
in  the Applications Technology Satellite project.  ATS  Range and Range 
Rate  electronic  systems would  be  installed  in  three  ground  stations  to 
provide  ground  trackers  w i th   extremely  accurate satellite  position,  ve- 
locity,  and  range.  The  systems would  also  drive  displays  and  digital 
data  consoles.  The contractor  would  design,  manufacture,  and  test  the 
systems  under  a  cost  reimbursable  contract  with  incentive provisions. 
ATS  satellites,  designed  to  advance  technology  in  communications, 
meteorology, and  other  applications, would  require  unique ground  sys- 
(GSFC  Release 636-64) 
tems  ready  for   the  first  launch  {n  1966. 

426 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 
December  19: An  astronomer at Mt.  Wilson and Mt.  Palomar Observatories, 
Calif.,  Allan  R.  Sandage, told  the  2d  Texas Symposium on Relativistic 
Astrophysics  that  an  explosion  in  the  galaxy  36.2  may  indicate  the 
birth  of  a  quasi-stellar  force  ( Q S F ) .   A  quasi-stellar  force  would  be 
an entirely new  source  and kind  of  energy in  the universe which would 
(AP,  Ymh .   Post, 
not  follow  the  known  rules  of  physical  forces. 
12/17/64) 
*  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  on  Thor-Agena  D  booster  from 
Vandenberg AFB. 
( H H N - 4 8 )  
*  Tass  reported  that  a  Gorky  Univ.  team,  headed  by  Vsevolod  S.  Troitsky, 
the  leading  Soviet  authority  on   radio  emanations  of  the  moon,  had 
found evidence they believed showed that  the  upper  layer  of  the  moon’s 
surface was saturated with meteoric matter  distinguishing it  both  chem- 
ically and  in  mineral  content from  deep layers.  Results were obtained 
during the complete lunar eclipse of  last Dec. 30 observed from Ussurisk, 
in  far  eastern  Siberia.  Troitsky’s  group made  use  of  the  fact  that  the 
lunar  surface cooled during eclipses and  that  the  cooling caused a  drop 
in  the  intensity  of  radio  emanations.  The  Russians  worked  out  the 
relationship  between  the  decrease  of  radio  emanations  from  the  ob- 
scured  part  of  the  moon  and  the  physical  properties  of  the  surface. 
Investigating the properties of  the uppermost porous layer of  the moon’s 
surface  to  a  depth  of  about  four  inches,  the  Russians established  that 
its  electrical  conductivity was  50%  to  100%  greater  than  that  of  the 
underlying rocks and concluded that  the two’ layers  differed  in chemical 
composition  and  mineral  content.  The  conductivity  of  the  top  layer 
was found to correspond to that of  meteorites, confirming the hypothesis 
that  bombardment  bv  meteorites  and  the  settling  of  meteoritic  dust 
played  an  important part  in  shaping  the  uppermo; 
layer  of  the moon. 
(NYT ,  12/21/64) 
*  The  New  York  Times  reDorted  an  announcement this  week  by  the  Inter- 
national Atomic Ene r iy  Agency  (IAEA)  that  nuclear energy ‘had gained 
recognition  in  1964 as  an  economically  competitive source  of  electric 
power.  A  spokesman  fo r   the  IAEA  cited  a  515,000-kw.  nuclear  plant 
to  be  built  by  General Electric  for  the New  Jersey  Central  Power  and 
Light  Co.  near  Toms  River,  N.J.  The  bid  for  a  nuclear  p l a n t 4 6 6  
million-had 
been  lower  than  those  fo r   coal-powered  plants  despite 
(Grimes,  NYT, 
the  abundance  of  coal  in  southern  New  Jersey. 
12/20/64,8) 
December 20: MARINER  IV,  bound  for Mars, began passing through a second 
In  its first 23 days of  flight,  the craft had made 
stream  of  meteoroids. 
7%  million  scientific  and  engineering  measurements  in   interplanetary 
space and was 3,748,352 mi.  from earth, traveling at 6,970 mph relative 
Its velocity relative to the sun was 72,902 mph. 
The straight- 
to earth. 
line  distance  from  the  spacecraft  t o  Mars was  107,592,980 mi. 
(NASA 
Release 6 6 3 2 3 )  
NASA  announced that  it had organized  a moonwatch network to assist with 
development and operation of  the “Moon  Blink,”  an instrument designed 
to verify and locate color on the lunar  surface.  When alerted by one of 
the  stations, watchers at  scattered  distant  points  would  train  their  tele- 
scopes  on  the  moon  to   verify  a  sighting.  Professional  and  amateur 
astronomers  at  some 35 stations linked by  long-distance telephone were 
working with  NASA  to  give volunteer assistance to  the Moon Blink pro- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERO 

1964 

427 

gram.  The  instrument  was  being  developed b y   NASA’s 
rch  and Technology under contract with T 
, Annapolis, Md.,  and consisted essentially 
uld blink when red calor showed on the moon.  Although 
the  instrument  was  being developed fo r  detection of  unusual  coloration 
on  all  types  of  bodies  orbiting  in  space,  the  moon’s  surface  was  con- 
sidered  of  particular  interest  since the  red  color  could  signify  a  source 
of  gases  and  possibly  of  energy.  Any  source  of  energy  would  be 
significant to the NASA  lunar landing program. 
(NASA  Release 64-36! 
December  20:  Researchers  reported  the  centrifugal  experiment  conducted 
for  the Air  Force by  Douglas Aircraft  Co.’s  Missile and  Space Systems 
Div.  indicated  that  a  centrifuge  device  in  a  space station  could help  to  
recondition  astronauts  living for  prolonged periods  in  a weightless con- 
dition.  Tests  in   which  five  college  students  spent  42  days  in  a  hori- 
zontal  position  showed  that  tendency  to  faint  on  standing  diminished 
(NYT, 12/20/64,42) 
after periodic  centrifuge rides. 
*  Dr.  Boris  Yegorov,  the  Russian  doctor  who  orbited  the   earth  in  the 
VOSICHOD  I  spaceship, suggested that  persons suffering from high  blood 
pressure  and  heart  trouble  might  one  day  be  rocketed  into  weightless 
space  fo r   therapy.  By  relieving the  gravitational  load  on  the  patients 
and giving them drugs, he said, ‘5t will be  possible to heal a person and 
give his  wearied heart  a chance to  recuperate.”  Dr.  Yegorw  said  this 
novel  heart  treatment  would  be  possible  in  the  “foreseeable  future.” 
(Toth, Boston Sunday Globe, 12/20/64) 
December  21:  EXPLORER  XXYI,  Energetic Particles Explorer D  (EPE-D) , was 
launched into  an  eggshaped  orbit  atop  a  three-stage Delta  rocket  from 
Cape Kennedy.  The 101-lb. windmill-shaped satellite carried five experi- 
ments designed to learn how high energy radiation particles a re  injected, 
trapped,  and  eventually  lost  in   the  Van  Allen  radiation  belts. 
Infor- 
mation abtained from the mission was expected to make  important  con- 
tributions  to  the Apollo manned  lunar  landing program,  specifically in 
the  design of  protective spacecraft sl-;tlding  and in  planning flight trajec- 
Information  on  the  depth  of  penetration  of 
tories  for  moon  landing. 
the  geomagnetic  field  by  high  energy  solar  protons-particles 
of 
potential  danger  to  moon-bound  astronauts-might 
also  be  obtained. 
Preliminary orbital data:  apogee,  16,280 mi.;  perigee,  190 mi.;  period, 
7 hrs.  36 min.;  inclination,  20.15’.  The  satellite w a s   designed  fo r  an 
operational  life  of  one  year.  (NASA Release  64-302;  AP,  Benedict, 
Wash. Post, 12/22/64) 
USAF  launched an unidentified satellite on a Thor-Agena I) booster toward a 
polar  orbit  from  Vandenberg  AFB.  Purpose  of  the  shot  was  not  indi- 
(UPI,  Wash .  Post, 12/22/64) 
cated. 
*  USAF  launched  Blue  Scout,  Jr.,  probe  from  Vandenberg  AFB  on  a  non- 
orbital space mission.  Press sources reported this as the second success- 
ful  launch  of  a  contact cesium ion  engine, developed by  Electro-Optical 
systems, Inc.  (HHN -48 ;   MBR ,  1/4/65,11) 
Dr.  Winston  E.  Kock,  Director  of  NASA  Electronics  Research  Center  in 
Cambridge, Mass.,  announced that  Dr.  Lester  C.  Van  Atta  and  Dr.  W. 
Crawford Dunlap would head two of  the Center’s major operations.  Dr. 
Van  Atta  would  direct  research  in  electromagnetics, including  micro- 
wave  and  optical  research.  Dr.  Dunlap would  direct  research  in   com- 

428 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4 

ponent  technology,  including  solid  state  and  materials  and  qualifica- 
(NASA  Release 64-317) 
tions standards. 
December 21 : NASA  Administrator James E.  Webb told the Commercial Club 
of  Chicago:  “There  is  a n  analogy  between  our  national  space program 
and  our  national  history.  The exciting adventures  of  the  settlement of 
North  America  captured  popular  fancy.  But  it  was  the  quiet  develop 
ment  of  the free spirit of  Americans  and the growth of  our  form  of  self- 
government  that  were  to  weigh  heavier  in  the  scales  of  history  than 
Indian raids and campaigns of  the colonial wars. 
“Another  analogy  closer to us has been  the change in public attitudes 
that  has  led  Americans  to  adopt  new  scientific ideas  and  concepts that 
may have been rejected only a few years ago. 
“Today  w e   live  in a  period  of  unprecedented scientific and technolog- 
ical  explosion.  . . . To  be  visionary  is  no  longer  t o   be  labeled  as  
impractical.” 
(Text) 
Sen.  Clinton  P. Anderson  (D.-N.  Mex.) , Chairman  of  Senate Committee 
on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences,  told  Denver  Post  reporters  that 
the  manufacture  of  the  M O L  spacecraft would  be  delayed  until  the De- 
fense  Dept.  presented  an   “acceptable  definition”  of  the  program.  He 
said  that  President  Johnson  was  reviewing  the 1966 budget  which  con- 
tained  $155  million  for  MOL, but  that  the  money  would  not  be  spent 
until  Air  Force  objectives in  space were  defined  and accepted. 
(Par t-  
ner, Denver Post, 12/22/64) 
The Air  Force version  of  the controversial F-111  fighter-bomber, formerly 
called  the  TFX, made  a  successful  but  somewhat  abbreviated  maiden 
flight from Carswell AFB,  Tex.  ( the  site  of  the General Dynamics Corp. 
plant  that  built  the plane).  Piloted  by  Richard L.  Johnson  and Val  E. 
Prahl,  the  1,650-mph  aircraft  performed  all  the  items  on  the  test  pro- 
gram  that  were  possible  with  the  malfunctioning  wing  flaps.  The 
variable-geometry  wings,  capable  of  a  70’  sweep,  were  kept  in  26” 
In  21  min.  of flight, the F-111  achieved 
position during the first flight. 
an altitude of  17,000 ft.  and a speed of  230 mph.  On takeoff  it required 
less than  half  the  runway  used  by  conventional  jet  planes.  The  Navy 
(Witkin, NYT, 
version of  the F-111  was scheduled to fly by mid-1965. 
12/22/64,  12 ;   UPI,  Chic. Trib.  12/22/64;  Aviation  Daily,  12/23/64) 
A  study  a t  Northrop  Space  Laboratories was  reported  as  indicating  that 
a  fluid-filled “bladder”  might  offer  the best  form of  protection  to   astro- 
nauts during impact  acceleration.  Using  guinea pigs,  the  investigators 
found that the fluid-filled garment seemed to offer the same advantages in  
minimizing  internal  organ  displacement  as   did  water  immersion,  but 
(M & R ,  
without  the  risk  of  generating high  hydraulic  pressure pulses. 
12/21/645  21) 
Strategic Air  Command announced that the Chicago  area would  be  one  of 
two  test  corridors  for  an   exercise  in  which  a  squadron  of  SAC  B-58 
Hustler  bombers would  test  for pinpoint  accuracy  on  simulated  targets. 
The  three-month  exercise would  begin  Jan.  4.  (UPI,  NYT,  12/22/644, 
12) 
*  NASA  announced  award  of  35  supplemental  or   new  research  grants  and  
contracts  totaling  $1,%7,842  to  30  universities,  colleges,  and  private 
research  institutions. 
(NASA  Release 64-313) 
Missiles and  Rockets  reported  that  studies  carried  out by  Astro  Research 
Corp. for  NASA  indicated the feasibility of  forming large spheres in space 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

429 

by  blowing them  as   bubbles.  The technique  promised  space structure 
sizes  hitherto unattainable with  very  low  masses.  For  example,  a  100- 
ft.-dia.  ECHO  11-type sphere  of  two-micron-thick  film,  could  be  blown 
(M&R ,   12/21/64,  21)  
from 200  lbs.  of  viscous material. 
December  22:  X-15  No.  3 was  flown by Maj.  Robert  A.  Rushworth  (USAF) 
to   81,000-ft.  altitude  a t   maximum  speed  of  3,545  (mach  5.37)  mph 
to   test X-15’s  skin friction  a t  relatively high  speeds  and  low  angles of 
attack,  and  to  obtain  information  on  ablative materials.  The  10-min. 
flight  was  one  of  a  series  to  study  heat  buildup  and  air-flow patterns 
(NASA  X-15  Proj.  Off.;  AP,  NYT ,   12/24/64) 
resulting from  friction. 
United  Technology  Center  successfully  test-fired  its  120-inch-dia., 1- 
million-1b.-thrust  solid  propellant  rocket motor  for   nearly  two  minutes 
a t  Edwards  AFB,  Calif.  The firing was the fourth static test within  two 
months.  The  250-ton  rockets were  being  developed  for  the  first  stage 
of the Air Force’s Titan 111-C  standard space launch  vehicle, under  con- 
tract  to  the  AF’s  Space  Systems Div.  The Titan  111-C  was  scheduled 
to  orbit  a  variety  of  manned  and  unmanned  payloads,  including  the 
(M&R ,   1/4/65,  26) 
Manned  Orbiting Laboratory  (M O L ) .  
USAF’S  new  strategic  reconnaissance  plane,  the  SR-71,  made  its  maiden 
flight a t  Palmdale, Calif.,  exceeding an  altitude of  45,000  ft. and a  speed 
of  1,000  mph.  The  one-hour  flig2;t  was  reported  to  have  been  very 
successful;  all  test  objectives  were  met.  Powered  by  two  J-58  jet 
engines, the  SR-71  would  eventually fly  at  more  than  2,000  mph  and 
above  80,000  ft.  The Lockheed-built plane  was  flown  by  civilian  test 
pilot Bob Gilliland.  In   1965, the SR-71  would be  assigned to Strategic 
Air  Command  (SAC)  a t   Beale  AFB,  Marysville,  Calif. 
(DOD   Release 
902-64;  Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 12/24/64) 
*  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  S.  McNamara  announced  that  President 
Johnson  had  ordered  development  of  the  world’s  largest  airplane- 
a  giant military  subsonic  je t   transport  able to  carry 600 troops or   250 
tons  of  cargo  nonstop  for  7,000  mi.  a t   550  mph.  The  CX   (Cargo 
Experimental)  military  jet  transport  was  predicted  to  be  ready  for 
the  Air  Force  by  later  1968.  Development  costs  would  total  $750 
million.  According  to  McNamara  the  CX  would  “maximize  the  effec- 
tiveness’,  o f   eight  combat-ready  divisions  stationed  in  the  US. and 
reduce  “reaction  time  in  meeting  global  crisis.”  It  would  also  “have 
potential commercial  use  for  both  passenger  and  cargo  purposes.” 
I n  
addition the  CX  would  be  able to   carry  any  piece  of  divisional  equip- 
ment  used  by  an   Army  division,  which  present  aircraft  cannot  do. 
(Mohr,  NYT ,   12/23/64,  1; Glass,  N .Y .  Her.  T r ib . ,  12/23/64) 
*  It was  announced  that  an  advanced  experimental  radar  system,  built  close 
to  the  ground  and  designed  to  detect,  track,  and  identify  missile war- 
heads  and  to   assign  targets  to  antimissile  sites,  was  undergoing  tests 
a t  White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex.  The radar  system had no moving 
parts  and  no  moving  antennas;  energy  would  be  transmitted  directly 
from  the  many  elements  of  the  antenna  array   and  would  be  steered 
electronically by  shifting the  electrical phase  of  the  individual  antenna 
( N Y T ,  12/22/64,  45) 
elements. 
During  a  background  briefing  for   news  representatives  on  NASA  elec- 
tronics  and  control  research  activities, Francis  J.  Sullivan, Acting  Di- 
rector,  Electronics and  Control  Division, Office  of  Advanced  Research 

430 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

and  Technology  of  NASA  Hq.,  said:  “Past  analyses  of  the  NASA  R&D 
funds  indicate  that  approximately  4Q per  cent  of  our   R&D  dollars  that 
are   utilized  in  launch  vehicle  work  go  into  the  electronics  industry. 
The same applies to 70 per cent of  the spacecraft funds, and 90 per  cent 
of  the  tracking  and  data  acquisition  funds.  If  you  sum  up  these 
factors,  it  will  indicate  that  approximately  50  per  cent  of  NASA’s R&D 
dollars  in  any  one  fiscal  year  find  their  way  into  the  electronic  and 
control type industries.” 
(Transcript) 
December  22:  A  subcommittee  of  the  House  Armed  Services  Committee 
recommended  that  the  Department  of  Defense move  ahead  with  a  pro- 
gram  to  develop  fighter  planes  capable  of  vertical  and  short  takeoffs 
and  landings  (V/Stol).  The  subcommittee  urged  that  the  military 
services  “not  over  commit  themselves  to  the  helicopter  to  the  detri- 
ment  and interests of  V/Stol  transport  aircraft when  they  become avail- 
able.”  Furthermore,  it  was  the  judgment  of  the  subcommittee  “that 
none  of  these  programs  presently  being  supported  by  the  Department 
of  Defense  are   adequate  to  determine  the  operational  suitability ’of  a 
V/Stol  fighter aircraft for close tactical support.”  (Balt. Sun, 12/23/64) 
*  I n  spite of  the successful maiden  flight  of  the F-111,  Sen.  John  L. McClel- 
lan  (D.-Ark.)  said,  in   a  telephone  interview,  that  the  Senate  investi- 
gations  subcommittee would  not  discontinue  plans  to  try  to  determine 
whether  the  $6-billion General Dynamics Corp. contract  for  production 
of  the  F-111  was  actually awarded  to  the high  bidder on  the basis of  an  
inferior  design, and  if  so,  whether  influence was  involved.  No  specific 
date  was  mentioned  for  resumption  of  the  investigations.  (AP,  NYT ,  
12/23/64+, 1 5 ;  AP, Balt. Sun, 12/23/64) 
*  U S ~ F  announced i t  had  built the T-27  space flight simulator-a  $5,500,000, 
15-ton machine which would be used  for astronaut training a t  the Aero- 
space  Research  Pilot School at Edwards  AFB,  Calif.  The simulator was 
built  under  a  contract with  the  Link  Group  of  General  Precision,  Inc. 
(Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 12/23/64,  24-) 
Federal  Aviation  Agency  (FAA )   announced  that  Pakistan  International 
Airlines  (P IA )   had  reserved  two  delivery positions  for  the  U S .  super- 
sonic  transport  plane  bringing  the  total  of  reserved  positions  for  the 
SST  to 93  and the number  of  airlines holding positions to  21   (14  foreign 
flag and seven US. flag airlines). 
( FAA  Release 64-110) 
*  USAF  successfully fired  an   Atlas-F  ICBM   down  the  WTR  from Vandenberg 
(PPI, N Y T ,  
AFB-the 
third major launching  from the base  in two days. 
12/23/64,  28)  
13 th  consecutive success-from 
0  USN  launched  a  Polaris A-3-the 
the sub- 
(M& R ,   1/4/65, 
merged  submarine  Y o n  Steuben  off  Cape  Kennedy. 
11 1 
*  Secretary of Defense Robert  S. McNamara announced that Gen.  John  Pau l  
McConnell would  be  nominated  to  replace Gen.  Curtis E.  LeMay,  who 
would  retire as  Air  Force Chief  of  Staff  on  Jan. 31,1965, after 35 years 
in  the  armed  forces.  Gen.  McConnell would  assume his  new  position 
Feb.  1.  ( N Y T ,  12/23/64,11;  Barrett, HTNS,  Pa sh .  Pos t ,  12 /23 /6p ,2)  
December 23 :  NASA  announced  realignment  of  its manned  space  flight  orga- 
nization,  designed to  ( 1 )   provide  a  central  organizational element with 
the  overall operations  responsibility for  manned  space flight  programs, 
and  ( 2 )  make a  single organization responsible for the assembly, check- 
out,  and launch  of  the total Apollo space vehicle in manned  space flight 

431 
A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND A E R O N A U T I C S ,   19  6 4 
programs a t  Cape Kennedy and the Merritt Island Launch Area  ( M ILA ) .  
Key organizational changes would be effective Jan.  1 ,1965  : ( 1 )  appoint- 
ment of  E.  E. Christensen to  a new position, Mission Operations Director, 
in  NASA  Office of  Manned  Space  Flight,  supported  by  two  Mission  Di- 
rectors  with  overall  responsibility  for  the  individual  mission  to  which 
they were assigned;  (2)   creation of  a n  Operations Support Requirements 
Office,  headed  by  Porter  Brown  and  staffed  by  representatives of  each 
NASA program office, appropriate centers, and Office of  Tracking and Data 
Acquisition;  (3)  transfer of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Florida Opera- 
tions  to  Kennedy  Space  Center;  and  (4)   establishment  a t   KSC  of  the 
position  of  Director,  Launch  Operations.  Dr.  Kurt  H.  Debus  would 
also  act  as  Director,  Launch  Operations;  G.  Merritt  Preston,  head  of 
MSC  Florida Operations,  wo dd   become  Deputy  Director, Launch  Oper- 
ations.  Resident offices were provided a t  KSC for MSC and MSFC program 
(NASA Ann. 66301  ; KSC Release 224) 
managers. 
December  23:  NASA  and  ComSatCorp  jointly  announced  the  signing  of  an  
agreement  covering  the  launching  by  NASA  of  “Early  Bird”-the 
first 
communications  satellite intended  for  commercial use.  The  agreement 
provided  that  NASA  would  launch  Early  Bird  from Cape Kennedy,  Fla., 
into  synchronous  orbit at 22,300-mi.  altitude above the Atlantic as  soon 
after  Mar.  1 as   NASA  found  feasible.  ComSatCorp  would  pay  NASA 
approximately  $3.5  million  for  the  initial  launch,  whether  o r   not  the 
Thrust  Augmented  Delta  launch  vehicle  was  successful in  orbiting  the 
satellite, and  for  each  subsequent  launch under  the contract.  The $3.5 
million  would  reimburse  NASA  for  the  cost  of  the  Delta  vehicle,  other 
launch  services, propellants,  guidance  and  tracking  services,  and  data 
processing.  Should  the  first  launch  be unsuccessful,  NASA  would  try 
again on a second satellite.  The contract gave ComSatCorp the option of 
calling  for  additional  launches,  after  July  1, of  synchronous  satellites 
of  the same type. 
(ComSatCorp Release, 12/23/64) 
*  Jet Propulsion  Laboratory released figures on MARINER  IV,  valid as of  12:Ol 
pm: total miles to  trave1-325,000,000; 
total miles traveled-44,000,000 ; 
miles remaining to  travel-281,000,000  ; miles  from ear th-4 ,306 ,180  ; 
speed in  relation  to earth-7,023  mph;  speed  in relation to sun-72,532 
mph;  total days required for  trip-228; 
days already  in space-26; 
days 
(AP, Balt. Sun, 12/24/64) 
remaining  to travel-202. 
*  I t   was  reported  tha t   President  Johnson  would  give  special  attention  to 
science and  technology  programs  in  budget-making  conferences  a t   his 
Texas  ranch.  Dr.  Donald  S.  Hornig,  the  President’s  special assistant 
for   science and  technology,  said  in   Austin  Press  Conference  that  the 
significance of  his  presence  a s   a  participant  in  all  meetings  was  that 
Johnson  was  looking  a t   the  “totality”  of  the  various  Government  en- 
terprises  supporting  science  and  technology  in   a n   effort  to  pursue  a 
balanced  program.  Hornig  said  the  Federal  government was  spending 
about $15 billion-roughly  15% of  its  budget-on 
scientific research, 
technical  development,  test,  and  engineering  programs with  about  half 
this  amount  spent  by  DOD.  Dr.  Hornig  also  said he  believed  the  hun- 
dreds  of  millions  of  dollars  going  into  the  effort  to put  an   American 
on  the  moon  by  1970 was  well  spent  because  “the  moon  is  a  very 
interesting place scientifically.”  I t  will  “take  a  lot of  going”  to  achieve 
(Wash.  Eve. 
that  goal,  he  said,  but  present  schedules “will  allow  it.” 
Star, 1 2 / 2 3 / a )  

432 

ASTRQNAUT ICS   AND AERONAUT ICS ,   1 9  6 4 

December  23:  Prof.  Marcel  Florkin  of  Liege  Univ.,  a  member  of  the 
Committee  on  Space  Research  (COSPAR) ,   said  that  many  American 
and  Soviet scientists shared  his  belief  that men  cannot  survive weight- 
lessness in   space  for  more  than  f ive   o r   six  days.  He  said  that  Soviet 
scientists  had  produced  photographs  showing  abnormalities  in  cell 
division attributable to  the sustained weightlessness some of  their  astro- 
nauts  had  experienced.  Prof  Florkin  said  that  under  present  con- 
ditions, only space robots could visit the moon or Mars and that the onJy 
alternative would  be  space vehicles that could  produce  artificial gravity 
(O’Toole,  NYT ,   12/24/M) 
tb simulate normal  human  environment. 
Dr. Herbert Friedman,  chief of  astrophysics a t  the Naval Research Labora- 
tory  in   Washington,  D.C.,  told  a  meeting  of  the  American  Physical 
Society  a t   Berkeley  that  x-ray  detectors  carried  in   Aerobee  sounding 
rockets  had  picked  up  evidence  of  radiation  above  the  earth’s  atmos- 
phere which indicated the possibile existence of  a  “neutron star.”  The 
invisible object,  lying  in  the  constellation Scorpius and  relatively close 
to  the  earth,  emitted  streams of  extremely  feeble x-rays.  I ts   size was 
unknown.  The existence of  such a star would  offer  important confirma- 
tion  of  scientific theories  about  the birth and  death  of  all stars,  and  the 
distribution  of  elements throughout  the universe. 
I t  would  also be  the 
densest  collection  of  matter  in  the universe:  a  massive  lump of  nuclear 
(Perlman,  S.F. 
particles  weighing  a  billion  tons  per  cubic  inch. 
Chronicle, 12/24/64) 
NASA  Ames Research Center  announced that  the Carl N.  Swenson Co.,  San 
Jose,  Calif.,  had  been  awarded  a  $992,000  contract to  construct  a  rein- 
forced-concrete vacuum  chamber  and  Structural  Dynamics  Laboratory 
a t   ARC.  The  space  chamber  would  be  in  the  form  of  a  ten-story,  30- 
million-lb., hollow concrete pentagonal  tower with walls three  feet  thick, 
would  aceomodate full-scale segments or smaller-scale models of  rockets 
and  spacecraft, and could  be  evacuated to  a  pressure  of  ten  millimeters 
(ARC   Release  64-31) 
of  mercury. 
December 26: A Nationul  Geographic report,  based  on  findings by  NASA  and 
Air Force researchers, estimated that the earth‘s gravitational field picked 
up  several million tons  of  dust  and  small  particles  every  year  and   that 
the  total  accumulation  of  this material  on  the  earth’s  surface since  its 
formation  two  billion  years  ago  was  well  over  ten  feet. 
( N Y T ,  
12/27/64) 
e  I t  was  reported  that the Marconi  Co.,  Ltd.,  in  England,  was attempting  to 
perfect  a  safety  aid  that  would  make  gliders  more  visible  to   radar   to 
help  avoid  air-to-air  crashes  with  aircraft.  Carefully  calculated  pat- 
terns  of  thin  foil,  detectable by  different radar  wavelengths, were being 
mounted in and on a test glider flown ‘by the London Gliding Club. 
(Sci. 
Serv., NYT ,  12/26/64+, 9) 
*  Dr. Hugh L.  Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator,  said in an  article written 
for  the  Florida  Times-Union:  “Expansion’s  of  man’s  geographical 
horizons  have  almost  invariably been  linked with  surges  of  creativeness 
in  the  ar ts   and  sciences.  The  Space  Age  could  well  revitalize  human 
navigators that  ended  the stagnation of  the Dark  Ages  in  Europe.  . . . 
affairs  even  more  than  did  the  vigorous  world-ranging  of  Western 
“Already  some philosophers  see  the possibility that  world-wide inter- 
est  in  the   space  program  and  growing  international participation  in  i t  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

433 
could be the first steps toward providing  our  troubled  race with a moral 
and constructive substitute f o r  war. 
“It  is  entirely  possible  that,  along  with  broadening  of  perspectives, 
there  will  be  basic  changes fo r  th e  better  in man’s  aspirations a s  astro- 
nauts  of  many  nations  venture  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  vastness of 
space in  which  ours  is but  one small planet  circling  a  sun-star of  rela- 
tively  minor  importance.  . . .,’ 
(Fla.  Times-Union, 12/27/64+) 
December  26:  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  Director  of  NASA  Marshall  Space 
Flight  Center,  said  the  Florida  Times-Union:  “Any  statement of  what 
space exploration will be  like  100 years from  now  is  . . . in  the  same 
league a s  crystal  ball  gazing.  . . . Any  specific projects  which w e  may 
describe  . . . w i l l   fall  fa r   short  of  activities  that  w i l l   be  routine  a 
century from now. 
available.  . . . Airplanes  were  unknown. 
“One hundred years ago the ‘iron horse’ was the fastest means of  travel 
In  this  atmosphere  Jules 
Verne sat down and wrote  . . . ‘From the Earth to  the Moon’  published 
in  1865.  . . . His  spacecraft carried  three  men  (and  two  dog s ) ,  was 
launched from the east coast of  Florida,  circled the Moon, and  returned 
to Earth during a round t r ip  that took 11 days.  . . . Jules Verne used  a 
huge  cannon buried  in  the sand  to  boost  his capsule to  escape velocity. 
. . . Today  we   a r e  using Saturn  chemical rockets to  propel  our Apollo 
spacecraft outward for  its first trip to the Moon.  And by the year 2064 
altogether  new  means  of  propulsion  will  make  our  present-day launch 
vehicles  and  spacecraft  appropriate  relics  for  the  Smithsonian  Institu- 
tion.  . . .” 
(Fla. Times-Union, 12/27/6d) 
December  2 6 3 0 :  A  plasma  torch,  designed  and  built  by  scientists  at  the 
Univ.  of  California  at Los Angeles in  a  space chemistry program  spon- 
sored by the Air Force Office of  Scientific Research ( AFOSR )  , was demon- 
strated  publicly fo r  the first time at the annual meeting of  the American 
Association fo r  the Advancement of  Science  (AAAS)  , at Montreal.  The 
device provided the first laboratory source of  extremely hot,*pure plasma 
which  could  be  precisely  modulated,  and  whose  composition  could  be  
varied  widely,  thus  making  it  possible  for  scientists  to  simulate  the  
(AFOSR   Release  12-16-43;  M&R, 
chemistry  of 
the  hottest  stars. 
1/4/65,21) 
December  27:  In   the  Journal  of  the  American  Physical  Soc ie ty ,   Irwin  I. 
Shapiro  of  MIT’S  Lincoln  Laboratory  proposed  use  of  radar  as  a  test 
for  Einstein’s  general  theory  of  relativity:  radar  pulses would  be  sent 
to  one  of  the  solar  system’s  inner  planets,  either  Venus  or  Mercury, 
and the time-lapse before the radar echoes’ return measured on the earth. 
According to Einstein’s theory, when the radar beam passed close enough 
to  the sun to encounter a very strong gravitational field, the radar waves 
should  slow  down.  The  slowdown  should be  sufficient to  delay return 
of  the  radar  echoes by  a s  much  as 0.0002 seconds, a  time  interval accu- 
(Wa sh .  Pos t ,   12/28/64) 
rately  measurable  by  electronic  techniques. 
President  of  the  Delaware Academy  of  Science,  John  S.  Seney,  reported 
experiments he hoped would lead man to  fly under his own power, like a 
bird.  He had captured a turkey buzzard which he hoped to put through 
a series of  tests in  a wind-tunnel in the basement of  his home.  “If we’re 
going to  fly,  the only way to do it is to  fmd out what this bird’s  got  . . . 
and then  p u t   all this  together  in  relation  to what modern  materials  are 
available.  Then  maybe  we’ll  come  up  with  some sort  of  flying suit.” 
(N Y T ,  12/28/M,  51) 

434 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

December  28:  MARINER  IV passed  the 50-million-mi. mark  on  its 325-million- 
mi.  flight  to  Mars.  The  spacecraft was  operating normally  and  trans- 
mitting  items  of  information a t   a  ra te  of  331/3/sec.  Nearly  10 million 
scientific and engineering  measurements in space and outside the earth’s 
orbit  had been  transmitted  in  its first 29 days of  flight.  (NASA Release 
64-326) 
0  A  spokesman  for  the  Senate’s  Select Committee  on  Small  Business’  Sub- 
committee,  headed by  Sen. Russell  B.  Long  (D.-La.)  , reported  it would 
meet  shortly  after  Congress  convened  Jan.  4 t o  consider  senatorial re- 
quests  for  a n   investigation  of  charges  that  NASA had  given  away  to  
business  firms  valuable  patent  rights  developed  a t  public  expense  and 
worth millions of  dollars.  James E. Webb, NASA Administrator,  claimed 
the  agency  was  following  Federal  law  and  guidelines  laid  down  by 
President  John  F.  Kennedy shortly before his death.  (AP,  Wash.  Eve. 
Star, 12/28/64) 
U.S.  Navy  was  reported  to  be  defining  its  manned  orbiting  laboratory 
(MOL )   ocean  surveillance experiment  despite  the  proposed  merger  of 
the  Air  Force  MOL and NASA’s Apollo-X programs.  Navy  felt i ts  space 
mission  potential  should  be  explored  as   thoroughly  under  either  mili- 
tary  or   civilian  programs.  The  Navy  space  mission  was  first  envi- 
sioned  to  involve five major areas concerning  shipping:  detection;  loca- 
tion;  identification ; classification ; tracking  of  surface  and  subsurface 
craft.  (Fink, Av.  Wk., 12/28/€4,13) 
Support  f o r  theories  that  extraterrestrial forces influenced  rain  and  snow- 
fall  was  reported  at  a  meeting  of  the  American  Association  for  the 
Advancement  of  Science.  Glenn W.  Brier  of  the U S .  Weather  Bureau 
presented evidence that the moon, when new or  full, influenced the timing 
of  precipitation  by  gravitationally  nudging  unstable  atmospheric  con- 
ditions  into  rainfall  o r   snowstorms.  Dr.  E.  Keith  Bigg  of  Australia’s 
Commonwealth Scientific and  Industrial Research Organization  in  Syd- 
ney  reported  research which  substantiated his theory  that meteoric  dust 
particles  acted  as nuclei  for  ice  crystals to   form on  and  fell to  earth  a s  
rain  or   snow,  with  the whole process  taking  about  30 days.  (Osmund- 
sen, NYT,  12/29/64,6) 
0  U.S.  Army  announced  that  the  Corps  of  Engineers  awarded  a  $1,159,000 
(NASA funds)  fixed-price contract to Carpenter Brothers  for construction 
of  a  mobile  equipment  maintenance  building  at NASA’s  Mississippi Test 
Operations.  (DOD Release 908-64) 
GAO Comptroller General Joseph Campbell said that GAO would evaluate DOD 
policies  affecting nonprofit  organizations  performing  design,  technical 
direction,  and  systems  engineering  functions  for  the  military  services. 
“We  have  a  continuing  interest  in  finding  ou t   whether  salaries higher 
than the government scale paid by some of  these organizations axe really 
necessary  and  justified  o r  are only  a  way  of  indirectly  paying  higher 
[wages]  for  government work,”  Campbell said.  Another  area of  prime 
concern  to  GAO  was  relinquishment  to  nongovernment  organizations of 
technical direction and  similar activities i t  considered Government man- 
agement  functions. 
DOD had  already  clamped fiscal ceilings on  six of  these organizations 
to prevent  their growth  and was inviting increased  industry competition 
in the areas of  technical direction  and systems engineering. 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

435 
Campbell told  Aviation  Week  and  Space  Technology that  “if  we a r e  
faced  with  any  intention  t o   sustain  permanently  some  of  these  orga- 
, we would have to look into the situation 
nizations as arms o 
very carefully and 
In  commenting on NASA’s approach to nonprofit organizations, Ernest 
W.  Brackett,  Asst.  Deputy Associate Administrator,  noted that  although 
NASA  had  “inherited”  one  nonprofit  organization,  the   California  Insti- 
tute  of  Technology’s  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory,  i t  had  not  and  would 
not establish any “captive” nonprofit organizations.  Two other nonprofit 
organizations  were  also  performing  work  f o r   NASA-RAND  Corp.,  with 
contracts  totaling  $3.3  million,  and  MIT’S  Lincoln  Laboratories,  with 
contracts  totaling  over $7 million. 
( A v .  Wk . ,  12/28/6LE,  31) 
December  28:  Director  General  of  the  International  Air  Transport  Asso- 
ciation,  Sir William Hildred,  said  in  the  association’s  annual  a i r  traffic 
forecast,  “Thanks  to  increased  efficiencies and  economies,  the   balance 
between  revenues  and  expenditures  should  continue  to  improve. 
In  
fact,  it  just  seems possible  that  the  industry  will  succeed  in  making  a 
(UPI,  NYT, 
positive net  profit  in  1965 for  the  first  time  in   its  life.” 
12/29/64,50) 
*  Among  persons  listed  by  Av ia t ion   Week  and  Space  Technology  fo r   sig- 
nificant  contributions  to  the  progress  of  aerospace  in  the  US. during 
1964 were: 
Harold  Finger  and  Milton  Klein,  manager  and  deputy  respectively 
of  the  joint  AEC-NASA  Nuclear  Space  Propulsion  Office  fo r   “pushing 
the  Rover  program  through  four  successful  tests  of  a  nuclear  rocket 
reactor  using  liquid hydrogen  and  demonstrating the  technical feasibil- 
ity  of  caclear  propulsion  fo r   manned  interplanetary  flights  of  the 
future.” 
Harris  “Bud”  Schurmeier, Ranger  program  director  of  the  Jet  Pro- 
pulsion Laboratory  and  his  technical team  fo r  “their  tremendous  tech- 
nical  success  with  the  Ranger  7 that  produced  the  first  detailed 
photographs of  the lunar surface.” 
Paul F.  Bikle, Director of  NASA  Edwards Flight Research Center, and 
pilots  Milton  Thompson  and  Jack  Mackay  of  NASA  and  Maj.  Robert 
Rushworth and  Capt.  Joe  Engle  of  USAF  for  “their  continued operation 
of  the  North  American  X-15  research  aircraft  into  a  wide  variety  of 
unexplored  areas  both  in  performance  and  equipment  testing.” 
John  Mengel  of  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  for  “direction 
of  the global NASA  tracking and data acquisition network which produced 
an  average  of  50 mi.  of  taped  data  per  day  from  payloads  in  space.” 
Col.  Harold  W.  Robbins,  USAF  Space  Systems  Div.,  for  “technical 
direction  and support of  the large solid rocket program that  culminated 
this  year  in  the   successful  demonstrations  of  156-in.-dia.  motors  and 
the  initiation  of  a 260-in.-dia.  program.” 
( A v .  Wk . ,  12/%/64+,  9 )  
December  28-30:  Dr.  John  H.  Wolfe  of  NASA  Ames  Research  Center  sug- 
gested  the  probable  source  of  Van  Allen  belt  radiation  a t   the   meet- 
ing   of  the  American  Geophysical  Union  in  Seattle.  Dr.  Wolfe  said 
the Van  Allen radiation  belts  probably  had  their  source  in  the   comet- 
like  tail  of  the  magnetosphere extending  from  the  dark  side  of  earth 
away  from  the  sun.  Spiraling protons  and  alpha  particles  emitted  by 
the  sun  were   shielded  from  solar wind  in  this area.  Affected only by  . 

436 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

the geomagnetic field, they were picked up by the magnetic lines of  force 
and conveyed to the Van Allen belts. 
New  data collected by particle energy spectrometers and other instru- 
(Interplanetary  Monitoring  Plat- 
ments  aboard  EXPLORER  XXI  IMP-B 
form)  and  OGO  I  (Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory)  led  to  this 
conclusion.  Data  collected  from  as  f a r   into  space  as  96,000  mi. 
revealed  that  interaction  of  the  solar  wind  and  the   geomagnetic  field 
around  the  sunlit  side  of  earth  created  a  boundary  region  2%  earth 
diameters thick  at  a  distance of  five  earth  diameters  from  the  point  on 
earth  closest  to  the  sun.  This  expanded  to  six  diameters  thick  90” 
around earth. 
Hydromagnetic  effects  in  this  boundary  deflected  solar  radiation 
around earth and prevented it from penetrating  directly to  the relatively 
low  altitudes  of  the  Van  Allen  belts  except  during  the  more  energetic 
solar storms. 
Satellite data  also indicated that  the comet-like tail  of  earth extended 
directly  along  the  line  from  the  sun  through  earth,  rather  than  being 
slightly  deflected  as  had  been  believed.  Wolfe  said  the  tail  seemed 
less  tapered  and  more  nearly  cylindrical  than  had  been  expected,  and 
extended at least  as f a r  a s  the  orbit  of  the moon. 
(ARC  Release 65-2; 
AP, Detroit  News, 1/8/65;  M&R,  1/18/65,  28) 
December 29:   The first of  three giant Pegasus satellites arrived  at NASA  John 
F.  Kennedy  Space  Center.  A  Saturn  I  space  vehicle  (SA-9)  would 
launch the 3,200-lb. satellite into an orbit visible from earth and  ranging 
from about 310- to 465-mi. altitude, sometime in  the first quarter of  1965. 
Primary mission of  the Pegasus satellites would be to use its 2,000  sq. ft. 
of  capacitator  panels  to  measure,  record,  and  transmit  back  to  earth 
data  on the frequency, size,  direction, and  speed of  meteoroids in  near- 
earth  space.  This  information  would  be  important  to  development of 
(KSC Release 227-64) 
manned and unmanned spacecraft. 
*  The  first  Apollo  spacecraft  adapter  was  delivered  by  Army  CH-47A heli- 
copter  from  Tulsa,  Okla.,  to  NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center-Florida 
Operations  at  Merritt  Island.  The  4,000-lb.,  22-ft.-dia.,  28-ft.  long, 
cone-shaped unit  structurally  simulated t b  adapter  section  that  would 
house  the  Apollo  lunar  excursion  module  (LEM )   on  its  trip  to  the 
moon. 
I t   would  undergo  tests  to  determine  whether  the  mechanical 
fit was  adequate, if  sufficient access was  provided to perform  service and 
checkout of  the LEM,  and  to  determine its compatibility with  test  facili- 
ties  and  ground  handling.  Helicopter was chosen  over  other  forms  of 
transportation  because  of  the awkwardly large  diameter  of  the  section. 
( KSC Release 227-64) 
*  Soviet radio astronomy expert Iosif  Shlovsky said at a symposium on 1 9 a  
science conducted by Tass news  agency that  the biggest  success of  1964 
in  world  astronomy  was  an  experiment  by  Dr.  Herbert  Friedman  of 
the  US. Naval  Research  Laboratory.  The  experiment  showed  that  a 
large  region  of  the  Crab  Nebula  produced  x-ray  radiation.  Data  ob- 
tained by Friedman with an Aerobee rocket launched July 5 from White 
Sands Missile Range  “established how  the  flux of  x-ray  radiation  corn- 
ing  from  the  Crab  Nebula  changed  when  the  moon  passed  between  it 
and  the  rocket,”  Shklovsky  said.  Some  scientists  had  attributed  the 
radiation  to  a  tiny,  superdense “neutron  star.”  But  observations from 
the rocket a s  the moon  shut off  direct view of  the Nebula showed that  a 

437 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  B R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 
larger  area  was 
12/19/64r,  3 )  
December  29:  NASA  Flight  Research Center  requested bids  for construction 
of  a  high-temperature  heat  facility  at  Edwards,  Calif.  The completed 
facility  would  include  enough  test  area  to permit  heat  load  testing  of 
actual  aircraft  of  the  size  of  the  XB-70  and  the  proposed  supersonic 
transport.  It  could produce  temperatures  up to  3,000’  F on  small iso- 
lated a r m s  of  the test aircraft;  large areas could be heated up to 600” F. 
The contract would be administered by  the US .  Army Engineers.  (FRC 
Release 334%)  
Successful first  flight  tests  at  Dallas  of  XC-142A V/Stol  transport  aircraft 
that  could  take  off  and  land  vertically were   conducted by  Ling-Temco- 
Initial  hover  flights were   held  to  an  altitude of  five feet. 
Vought. 
Design plans called  for  the  aircraft  to  attain  speeds of  430 mph. 
Its 
wings could be tilted upward while the fuselage remained level.  Thrust 
from the engines would  lift the plane off  the ground to a  desired height; 
the  wings  could  then  be  tilted  back  in  place  fo r   conventional  flight. 
(AP, Wash. Eve.  Star, 12/30/&) 
*  Navy  radar  operators  at  Patuxent  Naval  Air  Station,  Md.,  reported  the 
sighting of  two high-speed unidentified flying objects which approached 
the  base  at  a  speed of  approximately 4,800  mph,  executed a  tight  turn, 
(AP, Phil. Inq.,  1/6/65) 
and disappeared. 
December  30:  In   a  New  Year’s  greeting  addressed  to  President  Anastas  I. 
Mikoyan  and  Premier  Alexgi  N.  Kosygin  of  the  Soviet  Union,  Presi- 
dent  Johnson  urged  agreement  on  a  series  of  United  States  disarma- 
ment  proposals  and  arms  control:  “Arms  control  remains  especially 
urgent;  nothing  can  contribute  more  to  the  hopes  of  mankind  fo r   the 
future.  During  the  months  ahead  I  hope  we  can  work  fo r   practical 
agreements to  this  end.  We  can  and  should move  to  limit  the  spread 
of  nuclear  weapons;  to  achieve  a  verified  worldwide  comprehensive 
test  ban;  to  make  a  cut-off  of  fissionable  material  production  for 
weapons coupled with measures to safeguard the peaceful uses of  nuclear 
power;  and to  agree on a  verified freeze in existing offensive and defen- 
sive strategic nuclear delivery systems. 
“By  progress  in  this critical  area,  our Governments can help to make 
this a  happier  and  safer world fo r  all people.  You  may  be certain that 
the American people and their  Government will  never be  second in  this 
(Mohr, N Y T ,  12/31/M,  1-2) 
effort.” 
policy statement  issued  by  the  Committee on  Science in  the Promotion 
of  Human  Welfare  of  the  American Association for  the Advancement 
of  Science  (AAAS) charged  that  social  and  political  pressures  on  the 
scientific community arising  from  such major  U S .   space programs  a s  
Apollo,  Starfish,  and  West  Ford  constituted  a  c‘serious erosion  of  the 
integrity  of  science.”  The  report was  issued following a  five-day meet- 
ing held by the association in Montreal, Canada. 
Commenting on the “spare  race”  aspects of  NASA’s program,  the com- 
mittee  said  the  pattern  for  orderly  development of  research  had  been 
altered  by  the  “essentially  political  decision to  pursue project  Apollo.” 
The  report  concluded  that  Apollo  did  not  appear  to  be  based  on  the 
orderly  systematic extension of  basic  scientific investigations. 
Another  NASA  program  t o   come  under  fire  a t   the  AAAS  meeting was 
the  Voyager Mars exploration project  attacked by Dr. Barry Commoner, 

438 
ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 0 4  
professor  of  plant  physiology  a t   Washington  University.  Dr.  Com- 
moner  said  finding  life  in  any  form  on  Mars would  have  tremendous 
scientific significance, and that  he was  not  opposed to  the basic  idea of 
searching for life  on  the planet.  “I simply feel this country  is not  yet 
prepared  to  make  a  commitment  of  this  scope,”  he  said.  “We  could 
a t  this time be a lot closer to  resolving this question if  the scientific com- 
munity  had  been  given  the  opportunity  to  fully  discuss  it.”  He  said 
even  though the  commitment had   been made it was not  too  late to   dis- 
cuss  fully  the  question  of  life  on  Mars  before  the  1971  launch.  He 
said  he  hoped  Congressional  space committees would  ask for  complete 
( A v .  Wk., 1/4/65,  18;  Abra- 
justifications  on  the  Voyager  project. 
ham,  Phil. Eve. BuU., 12/28/64;  AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/28/64) 
December  30:  Dr.  Harold Urey, Nobel prize-winning  chemist,  told  scientists 
a t  American  Geophysical Union meeting  in  Seattle that  the  structure of 
some  of  the  ridges  on  the  lunar  surface  photographed  by  RANGER VII 
(AP,  S t .   Louis Post- 
indicated  that  water  might  exist  on  the  moon. 
Dispatch, 12/31/&b) 
*  A  pea-sized rocket  motor,  called  a  cap motor,  weighing  less  than  three- 
hundredths  of  an  ounce,  might  be  given  its  first  trial  in   space  next 
year  as   a  stabilizing  motor  for  a  Tiros  weather  satellite.  Conceived 
by  the Wright Aeronautical  Div.  of  the  Curtiss-Wright  Corp.  in  Wood 
Ridge,  N.J.,  i t   was  made  entirely  of  plastic,  contained  igniter material 
which would  be touched  off  by  an  electrical impulse,  a  solid propellant, 
a  combustion  chamber,  and  a  flared  exhaust  nozzle.  A  string  of  the 
expendable motors would be mounted on a  tape that would  feed through 
a half-pound triggering device and fire them one a t  a time or in sequence. 
9 n e  cap motor  would  yield  a pound  of  thrust  for about two-hundredths 
of  a  second.  Two  cap  motor  units,  each  containing  300  cap  motors, 
would  be placed  on Tiros for the test in an  attempt  to lengthen  its useful 
life  beyond  an   expected  three  months.  The  satellite  must  spin  a t   a 
certain  number  of  revolutions  a  minute  to   stabilize  its  cameras;  the 
slight  friction in  its trajectory would  tend  to  slow  it down.  Computers 
on the ground would calculate the amount of  spin to be imparted; aboard 
(Hudson,  NYT, 
Tiros,  100 cap motors  would  be  fired  in  each  burst. 
12/30/64,1,17) 
*  Prof.  Rene  J.  Dubos  of  the  Rockefeller  Institute  charged  a t   the Montreal 
meeting  of  the  AAAS  that  present-day  biology  was  almost  completely 
irrelevant  to  the  study of  the  nature  of  man.  He  said  that  the  proper 
study  of  man’s  nature  should  concern  itself  with  the  evolved  patterns 
of  physiological responses  to  a  changing environment-what  he  would 
call “humanistic  biology.”  Not only would  this approach turn  up much 
new  knowledge about  “humaness,”  he  said,  but  it would  also provide  a 
better understanding  of  the uniqueness of  the individual. 
Prof. Dubos stated he was not discussing psychology,  a social science. 
Man  now  possessed  technical means  for  manipulating  his  mental  and 
physiological processes  and  might  soon  develop  ways  to   alter  his  in- 
heritance and so direct the course of  h is  evolutionary  fate.  “This  means 
that mankind  may  soon be  faced with  decisions of  immense importance 
that must  be  made  in  the  light  of  the  proper  kind  of  biological knowl- 
edge,”  he said.  “The  glory  of  the coming age,”  he  continued, “must  be 
conceived  within  the  framework  of  man’s  n a t u r m f   his  biological 
(Osmundsen, NYT, 12/30/64, 
limitations as  well  a s  his potentialities.” 
11) 

439 
ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS,  19  0 4 
December 30:  NASA Director  of  Personnel, Robert  J .   Lacklen, who had been 
with  NASA  since  i t s   inception,  resigned  to  accept  a  position  with  the 
Richardson Foundation of  Greensboro, N.C.  Mr.  Lackleu would head a 
Personnel Research Institute which would conduct research in personnel 
selection and appraisal.  Mr. Grove Webster was named Acting Director 
(NASA Ann.  64-300) 
of  Personnel. 
*  USN  awarded  a  $13  million  contract  to  General  Dynamics-Pomona 
for  funding,  development,  and  pilot  production  of  both  medium 
and extended range standardized versions of  a  Tartar/Terrier-type sur- 
face-to-air  missile.  The  standardized  antiaircraft  missile  would  use 
the  Tartar/Terrier  warhead  and  the  same  control  and  launching  sys- 
tems  with  minor  modifications  and  would  offer  improved  reliability 
and  performance  at  reduced cost.  (DOD Releases 910-64  and  911-64) 
The  Paris  Municipal  Council  had  voted  for  creation  of  a  fly- 
ing fire  brigade  unit  as  part  of  the Paris police  budget  for  1965.  The 
flying  firemen  would  have  three  helicopters,  would  deal  with  fires  in 
tall new buildings where expandable ladders would be ineffective.  (Reu- 
ters, NYT, 12/30/64,42) 
December 31:  NASA  announced  it  had  completed  its  experimental  research 
and  development program  with  SYNCOM  11  and  SYNCOM  111  and  would 
transfer  operation  of  the  synchronous satellites to  DOD, starting Jan.  1, 
1965.  The  transfer  would  be  completed  Mar.  31,  1965.  DOD would 
operate  the  satellites  fo r   the  remainder  of  their  useful  lifetimes  and 
would  provide  NASA  with  any  significant  telemetry  and  ranging  data. 
Communications ground stations used to relay transmissions via the two 
Syncoms had  been  furnished  by  DOD  fo r   th e   past  two  years. 
(NASA 
Release 65-5;  DOD Release 1/4/65) 
*  NASA  reported  that  a  magnetometer hammer  developed  at  NASA  Marshall 
Space Flight  Center to  remove distortions  from  rocket  fuel  tank  “gore 
segments” had  salvaged rocket hardware  valued  in  the  millions of  dol- 
lars.  (NASA Release 64.-328) 
*  Dept. of  Commerce announced opening of  World Weather Center i n  Wa&- 
ington, D.C.,  composed of  the Weather Bureau’s  National Meteorological 
Center  and  National  Weather  Satellite Center  with  assistance provided 
by other Weather Bureau components.  wwc would gather, process, and 
distribute weather observations and prepare weather analyses and  fore- 
casts fo r  a s  much of  the globe as possible;  provide  opportunity  for  the 
training  of  meteorologists from the U.S.  and abroad;  conduct basic and 
applied  research  on  large-scale weather  problems;  and  archive weather 
information  fo r  use of  the  scientific community for  research purposes. 
The  Center  would  utilize  the  new  direct  Washington-Moscow weather 
communications link  as well  a s  the existing international weather com- 
munications systems. 
Plans  fo r   the U.N.-sponsored World Weather  System would  include 
three  World  Meteorological  Centers : one  in  Washington,  another  in 
Moscow,  and a  third  a t  a  presently undesignated location  in  the  South- 
ern Hemisphere.  (Commerce Dept. Release G 64-184) 
*  Intelligence  information  reaching  Washington 
d  that  Red  Chma 
had begun to manufacture its own MiG  jet  fighters.  Significance of  the 
new  development was that  Red China might have  the principal  ingredi- 
ents of  a  nuclear  force-A-bombs 
and jet  fighter bombers. 
(Fryklund, 
Wash. Eue. Star, 12 /31 /a )  

440 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS ,   1 9 0 4 

During December:  Boeing Co.  was named  systems integration  contractor for 
NASA’s three-stage Saturn V  booster.  Work  would  be  performed  a t  the 
firm’s  launch  systems branch  a t  New  Orleans under  an $85 million sup- 
plement to   its contract a s  prime contractor for  the booster’s  first stage. 
Systems and  engineering  integration  would  be  conducted  in  three  ma- 
j o r   areas : the  vehicle,  systems  documentation,  and  systems  develop- 
ment  breadboard  faci&y.  On  the  vehicle itself,  Boeing  would  be  re- 
sponsible  for   mechanical  interface  engineering,  instrumentation  and 
telemetry systems, aerodynamics  and  flight  mechanics,  flight evaluation 
and   operation,  atmospheric  environmental  design  criteria, malfunction 
detection system,  structural  heating  and  environmental  control  system, 
( M & R ,  
structural  dynamics,  and  vehicle  assembly  documentation. 
1/4/65,10) 
9  National  Weather  Satellite  Center  was  seeking  sources  for  services  and 
material  for  advanced  development  models  of  water-borne  automatic 
unmanned weather stations by January 14,1965.  Companies with moor- 
ing  and  static  meteorology  sensor  technology  and  design  capabilities 
were being sought.  ( M & R ,  12/21/64,8) 
NASA  announced  that  its  Office of  Technology Utilization had  issued Tech- 
nical  Briefs  describing  two  instruments  for  measuring  the  rates  of  hu- 
man  respiration and heartbeat.  The devices were  a  pneumotachometer 
(Tech Brief  W 1 0 2 5 9 )   which would measure  respiration  rates per min- 
ute on  a breath-to-breath basis and a cardiometer  (Tech Brief  6 1 0 2 5 8 )  
which  would  compute  the heartbeat rate  from  the wave-form output  of 
an  electrocardiograph  (EICG)  and visually display the  data  in  beats per 
minute.  Both  were  developed  in  connection with  NASA’s manned  space 
(NASA  Release 64-311) 
Bight program. 
A NASA technology utilization report described the effects of  extremely 
low  temperatures  on  structural metals.  Based  on  studies a t   NASA  Mar- 
shall Space Flight  Center, the report  outlined some of  NASA’s experience 
with  various metallic materials and  their  Capabilities a t  cryogenic  tem- 
peratures. 
(NASA  Release 64-325) 
NASA Tech  Brief  64-10006  described  a  speed-sensing device  to  help 
power crane operators judge payload movements more precisely.  Visual 
and  audible  signals would  be produced  in  the  crane  cab  to  indicate  the 
rate  of  load movement.  The device would  eliminate the  necessity  of  a 
relay man to  transmit hand signals to the crane operator. 
(NASA  Release 
64-300) 
NASA  Flight Research Center completed the  first series of  flight  tests of  the 
Bell  Aerosystems  Lunar  Landing  Research  Vehicle  ( LLRV)   .  Program 
05cials  observed  that  the  LLRV could  simulate  many  nonaerodynamic 
space-flight maneuvers in  addition to  the lunar  landing for  which  it was 
primarily designed and asked for  a  full year  of  experimentation  with  the 
craft.  ( M & R ,   12/14/64,10) 
NASA  Kennedy  Space  Center  awarded  a  $1.5-million  contract  to  Monitor 
Systems,  Inc.,  of  Fort  Washington,  Pa.,  for  two  digital  telemetry  s y s  
tems to  be  installed a t  KSC’S Central  Instrumentation  Facility on Merritt 
Island.  The  systems  would  be  used  a s   intermediate  data  converters 
and  processors  during Apollo/Saturn  V  rocket  launches  from  Merritt 
Island.  (KSC Release 2 2 M )  
Pau l  G.  Johnson, of  the AEC-NASA  Space Nuclear  Propulsion Office, said in 
a n  article in Astronautics  and A e r o m t i c s  that solid-core nuclear  rockets 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 

441 

would power the next generation of  manned space vehicles.  “The exact 
way  in   which  nuclear  rockets  will  be  used  in  the   space  program  will 
depend  on  many  factors  other  than  payload  comparisons.  One  of  the 
primary  influences  will  be  the  relative  emphasis  placed  on  manned 
operations  in   earth  orbit,  on  the  moon,  and   to  the  near  planets.  An 
equally  strong  influence  will  be  the  experience  in   the  nuclear-rocket 
development  program,  which  will  indicate  the  possible  characteristics 
(A&A ,   12/64,  22-28) 
and  availability  dates  of  propulsion  systems.” 
During  December:  I n  the British  Interplanetary Society’s Spaceflight,  Brian 
J.  Ford  suggested that  the  first men on the moon might  be imperiled by 
the residue  of  a n  electric charge which he  said formed  its craters.  Mr. 
Ford proposed the theory that the moon’s craters were caused by a gigan- 
tic electrical discharge when the earth and moon were still hot  and close 
together,  and  said  that  he  had  reproduced  the  theoretical  conditions in 
miniature in  a laboratory.  Hi had found that electrical discharge created 
craters which showed the characteristic central peak of  a lunar crater and 
formed  other  corroborating detail.  He  suggested that  the moon  might 
still  carry  an  electrostatic  charge  from  this  original  discharge  which 
“might  seriously imperil” the first men to  land there.  ( UPI, Chic. Tr ib . ,  
12/28/64) 
In  a  report  to  the Atomic Industrial  Forum,  Frank  Deluzio,  staff  director 
of  the  Senate  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  Committee,  called  for 
increased funds  for K iw i  and Nerva  and  also  urged  that  the  suspended 
R i f t   nuclear  rocket program  be  reactivated.  He  suggested that  studies 
be begun  to  substitute a  nuclear reactor  fo r  the chemical engines in  the 
giant  Saturn  V  rocket.  “While  it  is  admitted  that  nuclear  propulsion 
comes &to  its own  in  the  large  scale manned  missions to  the planets,” 
Deluzio said,  “. . . nuclear  stages should  be  committed to  earlier  pro- 
grams, such  as lunar  landings late in the Apollo program.  The integra- 
tion  of  a  nuclear  stage with  the  Saturn  launch  vehicle should  be  done 
can  be  obtained  . . . This  will  increase  the  utility  of  the  Saturn  for  a 
at the earliest possible moment so  that proper experience and confidence 
great number of  years;  it means a high return to the nation for its invest- 
ment  in  the  Saturn,  its ground  support,  related  systems,  and  industrial 
capabilities.”  Deluzio  also  urged  that  nuclear  rocket  development re- 
main the province  of  AEC.  (McHugh, Copley News  Service, Sun D iego  
Union, 12/21/64) 
*  In   an  Astronautics  and  Aeronautics  editorial,  Burton  I.  Edelson,  Chair- 
man  of  the M A A  Communications Committee, said:  “In  applying earth 
satellites  to  practical  tasks,  we   have  long  passed  the  stage  of  demon- 
stration.  Now  a s  we  approach  the  stage  of  extensive  operations,  we 
face  another  major  challenge in  what  industry  terms  a ‘market survey.’ 
We must  be alert to the possibility of  entirely new markets which evolve 
once  an  initial  experiment  demonstrates  capability.  The  professional 
community  can  and  should  make  major  contributions  to   the  prompt 
( A&A,  12/64,  13) 
exploitation of  its brain-childs.” 
ev’s  Paper  Bear,”  Charles J.  B.  Murphy 
.S.  intelligence concerning  Soviet missile 
the first Sputniks, the  high- 
first ICBM’s, 
altitude  U-2  operations,  and  the  so-called  “missile  gap.”  He  related 
these to American decisions and politics.  Author submitted that Soviets 
failed to exploit early lead  in  missiles and  that  U S .  miscalculated rela- 
tive missile strength in  1960. 
(Fortune, 12/644,  114f.) 
766-698-29 

442 
ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 $ 6  4 
During  December:  Karl  G.  Ham, Jr.,  Prea.  of  Aerospace Industries Assn., 
editorialized:  “To  those familiar with the technical achievements of  the 
past  few  years  there  is no  doubt that  aviation  is on the threshold  of  its 
brightest  era.  . . .  Enough is known  of  the potential  of  the new  aero- 
nautical  technology  to  predict  that  all  types  of  aviation-military, 
air- 
line, and  general  aviation-will  be  completely transformed  in  the next 
two decades.  The day of  the manned military  airplane is far from over. 
Today’s  civil  jet  transports,  which  enjoy  a  high  reputation,  are  f a r  
from the ultimate in  economical flying machines.  The usefulness of  all 
types of  aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper 
to operate in  the future. 
“Perhaps  even more  important will  be the widespread benefits of  the 
new  aeronautical  technology  outside  of  aviation. 
In   the  past,  aero- 
nautical  technology,  which  has  provided  major  advances in  high  per- 
formance  engines,  efficient a i r   flow  design,  lightweight  structures  and 
material,  and  high  reliability,  was  put  t o  wide  use  after  it  was  given 
in aviation.  . . . This pattern of  transfer of  aeronautical technology will 
not  change.  In  fact,  th e   opportunity  should  be  greater  in  the  future 
because  the  jump  in  efficiency  now  considered  possible  for  aircraft 
structure  and  powerplant  technology  is  greater  than  anything  yet 
experienced.  . . .”  (Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) 
During  1964:  The  deepening  and  broadening  of  the  U S .   space  program 
continued  at  an  accelerated pace  in  1964,  The US. orbited  a  total  of 
76 payloads,  of  which four  were  deep-space prohes,  while the  U.S.S.R. 
orbited  35,  of  which  two  were  deep-space probes.  Of  the  US. total 
NASA  orbited  23  payloads.  Other  major  NASA  launches  (not  included 
in   orbital  total)  were  one  unsuccessful  attempt  at  orbit  (Beacon satel- 
lite)  and  5 suborbital  tests  of  a  burgeoning  roster  of  new  launch  ve- 
hicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. 
DOD’S  launch program  continued to be numerically larger than  NASA’s, 
with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. 
NASA’s most publicized  flight of  the  year  was  the RANGER  VII  flight to 
the  moon  with  its  close-in  photography  of  the  moon.  Other  solid 
achievements were  APT  weather  photos  from  TIROS  VIII  and  the  much 
improved clarity and coverage of  weather photos from the first advanced 
research  weather  satellite,  NIMBUS  I.  The  first  generation  of  active 
communications  satellites  concluded  with  SYNCOM  1x1,  which  was  ma- 
neuvered  into  the  first  truly  synchronous  orbit  of  the  space  age  and 
performed  beyond  design  requirements  as  a communications relay  be- 
tween Asia  and the US. A significant scientific contribution  was made 
by  EXPLORER  xvn,  which  in  1964 mapped  the  earth’s  magnetosphere 
and  found  it,  instead  of  the  sphere  it  was  previously  thought,  to  be  a 
tremendously  elongated  comet-like  shape. 
I n   flight  tests  Gemini  and 
Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated.  The Saturn 
I  completed  its  seventh  (out  of  7)  successful test  flight  and  orbited  a 
new  world  weight  record  of  39,000 lbs.  The  Centaur  continued  a 
successful  flight-test program  to  work  the  bugs  out  of  the  first  liquid- 
hydrogen  engines in   an operational space vehicle.  In  ground  tests  the 
Saturn  IB   and  V  launch  vehicles took  significant  strides  in  testing  of 
new  large  engines and  of  complete  stages.  I n   advanced research  two 
achievements of  high  promise  were   the   full-power  runs  of  solid-core 
nuclear  rocket  engines  that  confirmed  the  engineering  feasibility  of 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 

443 

nuclear  rocket  engines w i th   their  tremendous  increases  in  specific  im- 
pulse  over  chemical-fueled engines,  and  the  successful use  of  laser  in  
satellite tracking,  promising  a  new  order  of  tracking  accuracy  for  geo- 
detic and other uses. 
I n  DOD’S  launch program,  the most publicized flight was that  of  Titan 
111-A  on Dec.  10, when  the big  booster  for  the proposed  MOL success- 
fully  flight-tested its crucial transtage.  Also DOD continued  its policy of 
launch  economy  with  8  multiple-satellite  launchings,  including  one 
(Jan. 11)  in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. 
The most  publicized  event  of  the  Soviet space program  in   19% was 
its orbiting  of  VOSKHOD  I,  a  new  3-man spacecraft,  with  2  of  the crew 
not trained pilots. 
For  both  the U S .   and  Russia,  one major  effort  in   each program  re- 
mained  a  question  mark  a t   the  end  of  the  year.  Each  country  had  a 
deepspace  probe  (MARINER  IV  and  ZOND  11)  enroute  to Mars,  due for 
flyby  in July  1965.  Perhaps never  i n  its seven years had  the  space age 
offered  such  a  direct  confrontation  as  this  promised  to  be. 
(HHR-8;  
H H N - 4 8 ;   NASA Release 64-321;  &A,  64, passim.) 
During 1964: Soviet scientists P.  M.  Bayevsky and K.  I. Zhukov  reported  in  
the  U.S.S.R.  Academy  of  Sciences’ Journal,  Cosmic Research, that  two 
of  their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability  in their  heartbeats 
while  in   space.  The  condition,  cardiac  arrhythmia,  was  observed  in 
both Valery Bykovsky, who  spent five days aloft, and Valentina Teresh- 
kova, who  orbited  the globe fo r  71 hrs.  Both flights were made in June 
1963.  Changes were attributed to “normal”  reactions to weightlessness, 
but  the doctors warned that  the condition should be watched closely on 
future  iung-duration  flights  since  it  could  be  a  clue  to  more  serious 
“pathologic  changes,”  including  a  possibly  fatal heart  attack. 
Dr. W.  Randolph Lovelace, NASA  Director  of  Space Medicine, s aw  the 
electrocardiograms while  in   Russia  and  said  they  showed  only  “varia- 
tions we’d  expect.”  NASA  doctors agreed that  cardiac arrhythmia should 
be watched  as a  potential danger  signal but said they had seen “nothing 
dangerous”  so  fa r   in   U S .   astronauts’  heart  rhythm  changes. 
(TNS, 
Bylinsky, Huntd.!.?e Times, 12/27/64) 
0  The  impact  of  budgetary  restraints upon  the  Nation’s  research  and dew& 
opment  programs  w a s   marked  in  industry,  Government  agencies,  and 
the  university  scientific community,  John  Finney  claimed  in   the  N e w  
York  Times.  Employment  in  the  aerospace  industry  dropped  from 
1,186,000  in  August  1963  to  1,112,000 in  September 1964,  and  manu- 
facturers  we re   forced  to  turn  to  civilian  products  to  augment  sales. 
Limiting  of  NASA  funds  forced  postponement  of  some of  the  follow-up 
programs fo r  Apollo, such a s  a manned  orbiting  laboratory.  Universi- 
ties  whose  research  programs  depended  heavily  on  Federal  research 
support  were  having  di5culty  i n   obtaining  funds  t o   complete projects 
already  undertaken  and could no  longer expect liberal Government sup- 
(Finney,  NYT ,   1/11/65) 
port  for  their  research  proposals. 
*  FAA reported  record  number  of  applicants  fo r   private  pilot’s  licenses- 
51,548,  an  increase  of  18% over  1963 total  of  44,032.  FAA Adminis- 
trator  Najeeb  E.  Halaby  attributed  increased  public  interest  in  flying 
to  “cooperative efforts on the part  of  Government and industry  in mak- 
(FAA Release 65-1) 
ing private flying safer, easier, and cheaper.” 

444 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 4  
During 1964:  A  milestone  i n   ion  engine  development was  achieved when 
heavy-coated  barium  oxide  filaments operated  fo r   up  to  5,000  hrs.  in 
bell-shaped  vacuum  chamber,  NASA  Lewis Research  Center  announced 
on Dec.  31.  Until now,  filaments for producing  ions in  electric engines 
(L ewk  News, 1/8/65,2) 
had  had  a  life of  only a  few hundred  hours. 
9  Series of  six Sandia Corp. Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets was launched 
from May to August.  The six Nike-Tomahawks, which reached altitudes 
of  about  300 h. (186 mi.),  were  launched  from the  Island  of  Kania, 
a s  part  of  U.S.  readiness  program  for  use  if   space  testing  of  nuclear 
devices was  resumed.  Experiment  instrumentation  for  the  series  was 
provided  by  Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory  scientists.  Objective of 
the experiment was  to  obtain  precise measurements of  radiations i n  the 
sun's  corona.  Another purpose w a s  to  demonstrate  feasibility of  using 
relatively  inexpensive,  spin-stabilized, ballistically  pointed  rockets  fo r  
solar  x-ray  spectroscopy.  Results of  this  research  were  lated  reported 
a t   the  December  meeting  of  the  American  Geophysical Union  (AGU ) .  
(OAR  Review, 12/64,22) 
During the space  age:  A s  of the  close of  1 9 a ,  NASA  had placed  70 spacecraft 
into earth orbit,  lunar  trajectory,  or  solar orbit  since the  birth  of  NASA 
on Oct.  1,1958.  Of  this number 52 we re  still orbiting as of Dec. 3 1 , 1W ,  
and 21 were still transmitting signals.  Some 55 million data points were 
being  received  daily  at GSFC,  recorded, and  stored  on  magnetic tape  at 
the  rate  of  about  100,000  reek   per  year.  Three  of  the  70  spacecraft 
impacted on the moon ; 15 re-entered the earth's  atmosphere and burned 
up.  Of  the  31  silent satellites  in  orbit,  6  were  in   orbit  about  the  sun, 
25  about  the  earth.  Satellites  still  transmitting  meaningful  data  in- 
cluded one deepspace probe  ( MARINER IV) , 5  communications satellites 
(plus the beacon on passive communications satellite ECHO  11) , 3  weather 
satellites, 10 scientific satellites. 
(NASA Release 65-1) 

Appendix  A 
SATELLITES,  SPACE  PROBES,  AND MANNED  SPACE 
FLIGHTS 
A  CHRON ICLE   FOR  1%4 
The following  tabulation  was  compiled  from  open sources  by  Dr.  Frank 
W. Anderson,  Jr.,  Assistant  NASA  Historian.  Sources  included  the  United 
Nations  Public  Registry,  the  Satellite  Situation  Report  issued  by  the  Space 
Operations Control Center  a t  Goddard Space Flight  Center,  public  informa- 
tion  releases of  the Department of  Defense, NASA,  and other agencies, and the 
Report  to  the Congress from  the President  of  the United States:  United States 
Aeronrmtics  ~ n d  Space  Ac t iv i t ies ,   1964.  Russian  data  a re   from  the  U.N. 
Public Registry, the  SateUite Situation  Repor t ,  translations from Tass News 
Agency  statements  in  the  Soviet  press,  and  international  news  services’ 
reports. 
It might be well to call attention to the terms of  reference stated or  implied 
in  the  title  of  this  tabulation.  This  is  a  listing  of  payloads  tha t   have  ( a )  
orbited,  ( b )   as probes,  ascended to  at  least  the  4,000-mile altitude that  t ra -  
ditionally has  distinguished probes  from sounding  rockets,  etc.,  o r   (c )   con- 
veyed  one  or more human  beings  in   space.  Furthermore,  only  flights  that 
succeeded-or 
doing  one  of  the  
a t   least  are   not  known  to  have  failed-in 
above are  listed.  Date of  launch is referenced to local time at the launch site. 
An  asterisk  by  the   date  marks  those  dates  that  a re   one  day  earlier  in   this 
tabulation than in listings which reference to Greenwich time. 
In   these  categories  the  world  space  effort  continued  to   gain  momentum, 
with  a  total of  111 successfully launched payloads  in  a total of  90 launches. 
The US. program was up from 65 payloads in 44  launches in  1%3 t o  76 pay- 
loads  in  6Q launches  in  1 W  (DOD:  53  payloads  in   38  launches;  NASA:  23 
payloads  in  22  launches).  The  U.S.S.R.  doubled  its  program  from  a  nu- 
merical standpoint, with  35  payloads  in  30  launches in   1964,  as  opposed  to 
17 payloads in  17 launches in 1963.  It is interesting tha t  in  1964 the  U.S.S.R. 
blossomed  fo r th  with  four  multiple-payload  launches,  her  first  since  Feb- 
ruary 1961. 
As we  have  cautioned  in  previous  years,  the  “Remarks” column  of  these 
appendixes  is  never  complete  because  of  the  inescapable  lag  behind  each 
flight of  the analysis and  interpretation of scientific results. 

445 

446 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

it 
m 
4 
$n 
E 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19 6 4 

447 

I 

448 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

33 
d 

9 

1 
4 
$4 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4 

449 

8 
0 

a 

h El 
J 
2 

% 
J 
2 

N 
i 2 

m 
d 
2  2 
i 
L 

450 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4  

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 4  

451 

b 
.!I a 
m' 

452 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9  6 4 

W 

3 
k 

2
B 

2
0 
,-I 

 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 

453 

E 1 

b 

0 
d m 

a fi 
4: 
2 zp: 
-4 

454 

ASTRONAlTPICS 

9 6 4  

N 
N 
i  22 

N 
i  g s  
19 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4 

455 

P 
m 

m s 
a 

2 

i i i  
4 
4 
0 

d 
4 

3 

3 
4 

456 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

rl E 
f2 

$

4

 

4 

4 

ASTRON 

458 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AEBONAUTICSI,  19 6 4 

I 

8 ' s :  
d 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4 

459 

P 

s 
8 

8
j 

z

6 
 z 

6 
z 

5 
z 

5 z 

460 

I- 

D 

D 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 0 4 

461 

462 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  19 6 4  

Y f 
m 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   AND  A ERONAU T IC S ,   1 9 6 4 

d 
4 
z P- 
c 

Appendix  B 

CHRONOLOGY  OF  MAJOR  NASA  LAUNCHINGS 
JANUARY  1 ,   1964,  THROUGH  DECEMBER  31, 1964 

This chronology of  major  NASA  launchings  in  1!W  is intended to  provide 
an  accurate  and  ready  historical  reference,  one  compiling and  verifying  in- 
formation  previously scattered  over  several sources.  I t   includes launchings 
of  all  rocket vehicles  larger  than  sounding  rockets launched  either  by  NASA 
o r  under “NASA  direction”  (e.g.,  NASA provided vehicle,  launch  facilities, and 
tracking facilities to the  Italian crew who  launched SAN  MARCO I ) .  
An  attempt has been  made to  classify the performance of  both  the launch 
vehicle and  the  payload  and  to  summarize total  results  in  terms  of  primary 
mission.  Three  categories  have  been  used  for  vehicle  performance  and 
(S) , partially  successful  (P )  , and  unsuccessful 
mission  results-successful 
(U )  .  A  fourth  category, unknown  (Unk) , has  been  provided  for  payloads 
where vehicle nalfunctions  did not  give the payload  a  chance to  exercise its 
main  experiments.  These  divisions  a r e   necessarily  arbitrary,  since  many 
of  the  results cannot  be neatly  categorized.  Also they  ignore the  fact  that  a 
great deal was learned from shots that may have been classified as unsuccessful. 
A  few  unique  items  require  separate  treatment.  Their  dates  have  been 
kept  in sequence but  their  history  has been  relegated to  footnotes. 
Date  of  launch  is  referenced  to  local  time  at  the  launch  site.  A  double 
asterisk by  the date marks those dates that  a re  one day earlier  in this tabula- 
tion  than  in  listings  which  reference  to  Greenwich time.  Abbreviations  of 
two  launch  sites  change  in   midyear  with  the  establishment  of  the  USAF’S 
National Range Div. (5/15/64) : 
Previous 
Am-Atlantic  Missile Range 
Pm-Pacific  Missile Range 
ws-Wallops  Station 
WSMR--white  Sands Missile 
Range 

New 
ETR-Eastern  Test Range 
W T R - W ~ S ~ ~ ~  
Test Range 

Sources used were all open ones, verified where  in  doubt from the  project 
offices in  NASA  Hq.  and from the NASA  Centers.  For  further  information  on 
each item,  see Appendix A  of  this volume and the  entries  in  the main  chro- 
nology as referenced in  the index.  Prepared  January  1965 by Dr.  Frank W. 
Anderson, JT., Assistant NASA  Historian  (APPH) . 

465 

466 

ASTRONATJTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   19  6 4  

m m m P

  D

m

m

  .m 

m

m

  m 

m m m h

Y 
  g

m

m

  .m 

m

m

 

m m m m   D

m

m

 .m 

m

m

  & 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 6 4 

467 

m 

R 

m 

m 

m 

m

m

m

m

m

m

m

m

 

 

9 

.& 

m 

m

m

m

h

 

m 

m

m

m

P

 

.m 

P 

m 

m 

m

 

.

m

a

m

m

 

9

 

'm  

!a 

m 

m 

468 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

m  m 

m - m   m m  

m  g  m . m  

m m  

m 

m  m . m  

m m  

Appendix C 
ABBREVIATIONS  OF  REFERENCES 

Listed here  a re  abbreviations  for  sources cited  in  the text.  This  list  does 
not include all sources provided in the  chronology, f o r  some of  the references 
cited are not abbreviated.  Only those references which appear in abbreviated 
form a re  listed below. 
Abbreviations  used  in   the  chronology  entries  themselves  a re   cross- 
referenced in the Index. 

A&A  
A&A   64 
AEC  Release 
AF  Info.  Pol.  Ltr. 
AF  Mag. 
AFOSR  Release 
AFSC  Release 
AIAA  Release 
A-N-AF  J&R  
AP  
ARC  Release 
Atlanta  Const. 
ATSS-T  Trans. 
Av.  Da i ly  
Av.  Wk. 
Balt.  Sun  
Chic.  Trib. 
Commerce Dept. Release WB- 
ComSatCorp Release 
CR  
CSM 
CTNS 
DAC  Release 
DMSSD  Apogee 
DOD  Release 
FAA  Release 
FonF 
FRC  Release 
FRC  X-Press 
GE Forum 
Goddard  News 
GSFC  Release 
GSFC  S S R  

H E N - 4 8  

AIAA’S  magazine,  Astronautics & Aeronautics 
NASA  APPH,  Astronautics and  Aeronautics 1964  [this 
publication1 
Atomic Energy Commission News Release 
Air  Force  Information Policy Letter  for  Commanders 
Air Force and  Space Digest magazine 
Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific Research News  Release 
Air Force Systems Command News Release 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics 
News  Release 
Army-Navy-Air Force  Journal  & Register  (now Jow -  
nal  of  the  Armed  Forces) 
Associated  Press 
NASA  Ames  Research  Center  News  Release 
Atlanta  Constitution newspaper 
Translation  by  NASA  Scientific  and  Technical  In- 
formation Div.,  Translators 
Aviation Da i l y  Newsletter 
Aviation  Week and  Space  Technology magazine 
Baltimore  Sun   newspaper 
Chicago  Tribune newspaper 
Dept.  of  Commerce,  Weather  Bureau  News  Release 
Communications  Satellite  Corporation  News  Release 
Congressional  Record 
Christian Science Monitor  newspaper 
Chicago Tribune News Service 
Douglas Aircraft  Co.  News Release 
Douglas  Missile  and  Space  Systems Div.  Apogee 
Dept.  of  Defense News Release 
Federal  Aviation Agency  News Release 
Facts  on  File 
NASA  Flight  Research  Center  News  Release 
NASA  Flight  Research Center’s  FRC  X-Press 
General Electric Forum m-gazine 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s  Goddard  News 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  News  Release 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s  Satellite  Situa- 
tion  Report 
NASA  APPE,  Satellites,  Space  Probes,  and Manned 
Space F l i g h t s 4 9 6 4   (EEN-40)  

469 

470 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1 9  6 4 

Houston  Chron. 
Houston  Post 
RTNS  
J /A rmed   Forces 
JFL  Release 
KSC  Release 
Langley  Researcher 
L ~ R C  Release 
L.A.  Times 
Lewis  News 
LRC  Release 
M&R  
Marshall  Star 
MSC  Release 
MSC  Roundup 
MSFC  Release 
NAA  Release 
NAA   Release 
NAA  S& lD   Skywriter 

NANA  
N A S A   A a h .  Hearings 
NASA  Hq.  PB  
NASA  LAR II/50 
NASA  Off. Int. Aff. 
NASA  R&SC Div. 
NASA  Release 
NASA  c p t .  SRL 
NASA  X-15  Proj.  Off. 
NASC  Release 
NAS-NRC  Release 

NMI- 
NSC  Release 
N.Y.  Her.  Trib. 
N Y T  
NYTNS  
O A R  Release 
Phil.  Eve.  Bull. 
Phil.  Inq. 
Sat.  Eve.  Post 
SBD 
Sci.  Amer. 
Sei.  S e n .  
S R  
Testimony 
Text 
Transcript 

UP1 
U S .  Naval Inst. Proe. 
U.S. News 
Wallops  Release 
Wash. Daily News 
Wash.  Eve.  Star 
Wash.  Sun.  Star 
Wash. Post 
WBE  Sci. Serv. 
W S J  

How ton   Chronicle newspaper 
Houston Post  newspaper 
New  York Herald  Tribune  News  Service 
J o d  of the   Armed  Forces  (formerly  Army-Navy- 
A ir  Force  I o u r d &  Register) 
Jet Propulsion  Laboratory News  Release 
John  F.  Kennedy  Space  Center,  NASA,  News  Release 
NASA  Langley Research  Center's  Langley  Researcher 
NASA  Langley Research  Center  News  Release 
Los Angeles  Times newspaper 
NASA  Lewis  Research  Center's  Leuris  News 
NASA  Lewis Research  Center  News  Release 
Missiles and  Rockets magazine 
NASA  George  C.  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center's 
Marshall Stm 
NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  News  Release 
NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center's  Space  News 
Roundup 
NASA  George  C.  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  News 
Release 
North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  News  Release. 
National  Aeronautic Association News  Release 
North American Aviation, Inc.,  Space and  Information 
Systems Div.,  M I D  Skywriter 
North  American Newspaper  Alliance 
N A S A  Authorization  [FY  19651 Hearings 
NASA  Headquarters  Personnel Bulletin 
NASA  Legislative Activities  Report, Vol.  11, No.  50 
NASA  O5ce   of  International  Affairs 
NASA  Public  Ailairs,  Reports  &  Special  Communica- 
tions  Div. 
NASA  (Hq.) News  Release 
NASA  Report  of  Sounding  Rocket  Launching 
NASA  (Hq.) X-15  Project O5ce  
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Council  News 
Release 
National  Academy  of  Sciences-National  Research 
Council  News  Release 
NASA  Management Instrnction- 
National  Space  Club News  Release 
New  York  Herald  Tribune  newspaper 
New  York  Times newspaper 
New  York Times News Service 
Office  of  Aerospace  Research  (USAF )   News  Release 
Philadelphia  Evening  Bulletin  newspaper 
Philadelphia Inquirer  newspaper 
Saturday Evening Post magazine 
Space Business Daily newsletter 
Scientijic American magazine 
Science  Service 
Saturday  Review  magazine 
Congressional  testimony,  prepared  statements 
Prepared  report  or   speech text 
0 5 c i a l   transcript  of  news  conference  or  Congres- 
sional  hearing 
United  Press  International 
US. Naval Institute Proceedings magazine 
US. News and World Report magazine 
NASA  Wallops  Station News  Release 
Washington Daily News newspaper 
Washington Evening/Sunday  Star  newspaper 
Washington Post  newspaper 
World  Book  Encyclopedia Science Service 
Wa l l  Street  J o u d  newspaper 

Index 
A-11  (supersonic  aircraft)  (see  also  YF- 
150A, 304,328,387 
1 2 A ) ,   85-86,  90, 92,  93,  101,  104,  133, 
300,  264 
154,164,225,254,274,  292,328,331 
300A,  30 
AAAS.  See American  Association  for  the  
350,415 
Advancement  of  Science. 
Aerodynamics,  29,  122,  158,  217,  257, 
AACB.  See  Aeronautics  and   Astronautics 
290 
Coordinating  Board,  NASA-DOD. 
Aeroflot  (U.S.S.R.  a ir l ine) ,  241 
AAS.  See American AstronauticaI Society. 
Aerojet-General Corp.,  148,263 
Abella, Dr. Isaac D.,  383 
contracts,  18,  23,  78,  80,  115,  249,  312, 
Abelson, Dr.  Philip, 262 
328,  422 
ABL.  See  Automated  Biological  Labora- 
Dade County, Fla. plant,  190,248 
test,  140,154,239,323,327,369 
wry. 
Abrams,  Gen.  Creighton  W.,  Jr.  ( U S A ) ,  
Aeronautical  Research 
Institute 
of 
394 
Sweden,  194 
Abres.  See  Advanced  ballistic  re-entry 
Aeronautics, 46-47,  78,  154-155,  181, 292, 
system  (Abres). 
303 
Ac -3 .   See Atlas-Centaur 3. 
Aeronautics  and   Astronautics  Coordinat- 
Accelerometer, 18 
ing   Board,  NASA-DOD  ( A A C B ) ,   90,  231 
Accident, 92,  135,  147, 156, 166, 178, 181, 
Aeronaves de  Mexico, 175 
252,269 
Aeronca Manufacturing Corp.,  222 
Aero  PropuIsion Laboratory  (USAF )  , 167, 
Acetaldehyde gas,  180 
Acord, James D..  82 
313 
(General  Motors 
AC  Spark  Plug  Div. 
Aerospace (sub jec t) .   See Space, 
Corn.). 18.218 
Aerospace  and  Defense Service Engineer- 
r - l  I - - I   - - -  
“An-Accounting  of  Stewardship,  1961- 
ing Dept.  ( G E ) ,   70 
1964,” 318 
Aerospace Corp.,  104,118,265 
Activation  analysis 
laboratory 
(Texas 
Aerospace  Educational  Center 
(USAF 
A&M  Univ.),  156 
Academy), 198 
Adair, Rep. E.  Ross, 55 
Aerospace 
Industries  Association  of 
Adhesive, 360 
America  ( A I A ) ,   89,  114,  2%,  27%280, 
Advanced 
system 
re-entry 
ballistic 
442 
(Abres),  403 
Aerospace  industry,  75,  114,  288,  333, 
Advanced  Bearing  Technology  (sP-38   1, 
443 
104 
“Aerospace Man  of  the  Year,”  315 
Aerospace  Medical  Association  ( AMA )   , 
Advanced Manned Precision Strike System 
(AMPSS )   ( U S A F ) ,   66 
174,175 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories 
(ARPA),  10, 28 ,57 ,76 ,153 ,290 ,337 ,386  
(AF SC ) ,   70 
(AMRL )  
Advanced  Technological  Satellite  ( ATS)  , 
Aerospace medicine  (see  also  Bioscience, 
177 
Life science), 45,48,52 
Advanced  Vidicon  Camera  System 
Aerospace Plane  (U.K.  space transporter), 
(AVC S ) ,   298 
270 
Advisory  Committee  on  Reactor  Safe- 
Aerospace  Research  Application  Center 
guards  ( A E C ) ,   91 
(ARAC )   , 100 
Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research 
Aerospace  Research  Center  (Univ.  of 
and  Development  (AGARD),  349 
Illinois), 241 
AEC.  See Atomic Energy  Commission. 
Aerospace .Research Pilot  School  (USAF )  , 
AEDC.  See Arnold  Engineering  Develop- 
197,206 
ment Center. 
Aerospace Technical Council  (A IA ) ,   89 
Aero Club of  New England, 117 
Aerobee (sounding rocket),  82,95,254 
Aerospace Workshop, 244,  247 
launch, 210.363 
AFA.  See Air Force Academy. 
150,‘30,  79,  124,  128,  144,  192,  260, 
AFA.  See Air Force Association. 
262,  283,  299,  335,  368,  374,  381, 
AFAA.  See American  Fighter  Aces  Asso- 
3 9 , 4 2 2  
ciation. 

471 

472 
INDEX 
Air  Force Ballistic Systems Div.  (AFBSD)  , 
AFCEA.  See Armed  Forces  Communica- 
18 
tions  and  Electronics Association. 
Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Labora- 
AFCRL.  See  Air  Force  Cambridge  Re- 
tories  (AFCRL ) ,   74,  132,  147,  159,  178, 
search  Laboratories. 
Air Force Eastern Test Range  (ETR )   . See 
230,  241,  265,  288,  354,  409 
AFL-CIO  (American  Federation  of  Labor- 
Congress  of  Industrial  Organizations), 
Eas temTes t  Range. 
141,-323 
“The  Air  Force  in  the  Years Ahead,”  112 
AFML.  See  Air  Force  Materials  Labora- 
m+Y. 
Air  Force  Institute  of  Technology,  303 
Air  Force  Materials  Laboratory  ( A FM L ) ,  
AFMTC.  See Air  Force Missile Test  Cen- 
153 
ter. 
Air  Force  Missile  Test  Center  (AFMTC )  
AFOAR  See USAF  Office of  Aerospace Re- 
(now Eastern  Test  Range) ,  5,164 
search. 
Air  Force  National  Range  Div.  (AFNRD ) ,  
Africa, 134,188,308 
AFSC.  See Air  Force Systems Command. 
164 
Air  Force  O5ce   of  Aerospace  Research 
AFSSD.  See Air  Force Space Systems Div. 
( A F O A R ) ,   9,34,38,159,288 
AFSTC.  See Air  Force Space Test  Center, 
Air  Force  Oftice  of  Scientific  Research 
ProvisionaL 
Agate  (rocket),  210 
(AFOSR ) ,   379 
Air  Force  Research  and  Technology Div. 
Agena  (booster)  (see  also  Atlas-Agena, 
( A F R T D ) ,   381,383,392 
Thor-Agena),  25,60,  197,  275,  298,  339 
Air Force Space Museum, 261 
Agreement 
Air Force Space Systems Div.  (AF S SD )   , 12, 
Communications satellite  system, global 
74,  89,  123,  129, 208,  257,  261,  286,  328 
commercial,  260,  293,  431 
Air Force Space Test Center  (Provisional) 
France-Portugal,  observation  station, 
(AFSTC)  (see also Western Test Range), 
132 
France-Spain,  satellite  tracking  station, 
3,164 
Air  Force  Systems  Command  ( A F S C ) ,   6, 
204 
70,  74,  95-96, 135,  146, 153, 210,  217, 
M o r  stabilization, 141 
NAS-SoViet Academy of  Sciences, 182 
327 
contract, 89,278,279,328 
NASA 
management, 3,41,112,178,257 
Australia, 103 
Cmada ,  11 
report, 98-99 
research, 303 
Commerce, 43,312 
test, 167,313,337-338,383,385 
DOD,  64,143,312,319 
FAA,  312 
Air  Force  Western  Test  Range.  See 
India, 7 4 9 7  
Western Test Range. 
Interior, 312 
Air  France.  57 
Malagasy Republic, 306 
Air-India, 60 
“Air pads,”  8,289 
Netherlands, 278 
Air pollution, 229-230 
Pakistan, 97 
Sweden, 204 
Air Products & Chemicals, Inc.,  14 
Air  Proving  Ground  Center  (Eglin 
Treasury, 312 
U.S.S.R..  97.  342 
Fla.) , 7 0  
US.-Malagasy’ Republic, 306 
Air t r a 5 c  control, 158,216,332 
and  
Air  Transport  and  Space  Meeting 
US.-U.S.S.R.,  251,256 
Agriculture, U S .  Dept.  of  (USDA)  , 102 
158, 
Production  Forum 
(SAE-ASME)  , 
AGU.  See American Geophysical Union. 
158-159 
Ahmedabad, India, 6,lO 
Air  Transport  Association  of  America 
ALL  See  Aerospace  Industries  Associa- 
(ATA)  ,211,288,408 
tion. 
Airbag safety system, 192 
AIAA.  See  American  Institute  of  Aero- 
Airborne  Ranging  Orbital  Determination 
nautics and  Astronautics. 
(AROD )   system, 412 
A m .   See  American  Institute  of  Biologi- 
Aircraft, 293,303 
ca l  Sciences. 
attack, intercontinental  range, 66,  172 
Air cushion, 8,289 
suuersonic transuort  (Ss t)  . 
commercial,  supersonic.  See  Aircraft, 
Air  Force.  See  US .   A i r   Force  (USAF ) .  
A i r   Force  Academy  ( A F A ) ,   70,  125,  127, 
counter-insurgency (COIN), 287 
198 
foreign, 209 
Air  Force  Aeronautical  Systems  Div. 
interceptor, 72,79,92,98 
long-range  (SR-7 1 ) , 
(AFASD)  ,181  
reconnaissance, 
Air  Force  Aero  Propulsion  Laboratory, 
260-261 
167,313 
transport,  113-114,318 
A i r  Force and Space Digest, 160,303 
Aircraft,  supersonic commercial  transport 
Air  Force Association  (AFA ) ,   112,315 
(Scat)  (see also  Aircraft,  supersonic 
Air Force Avionics Laboratory, 178 
transport),  85-86,108 

AFB, 

INDEX 

Aircraft,  supersonic  transport  (Sst) , 5, 
57,85-86,101,117,142,147,189,213- 
214,220,223,246 
appropriations, 115,119-120 
contract, 201 
cost, 31,82,93,94,114,187 
crew training, 200 
115,  116, 
development, 4,  13, 28,  43,  78, 
161,  162. 
135.  148-149,  150.  153,  154, 
183,  194-195,  201,  236,  242,  268,  288, 
292-293,318 
Government-industry, 4,61,187 
program  study report, 76,85-86,90,115, 
119-120 
reservations  for,  19,  57,  60, 63,  70,  81, 
96,136,158,159,175,430 
takeoff  requirements,  150 
AiResearch  Manufacturing  Co.  Div. 
(Garrett Corp.),  6,  57,  197 
Airglow, 11, 15, 99,243,290,398 
Airlift, 98-99 
Airlines, 2 
The Airman, 302,333 
Airports, 133,332,904 
Airworthiness requirements,  156 
Akwa-Downey Construction  Go.,  328,  424 
A1 Kahar  (U.A.R.  rocket)  (“Conqueror”), 
303 
A1  Raid  (U.A.R.  rocket)  (“Explorer”), 

3 56 ‘  
Algae experiment, 248 
Algeria, 161,308 
Allen, Arthur R.,  280 
Allott, Sen. Gordon L.,  93,164 
Alloy, 291 
Alouette  (satellite)  (program), 11 
ALOUETTE  I   (Canada satellite), 11,106,2% 
Alphonsus  (moon cra ter) ,   180, 364 
Alss.  See Apollo Logistic Support System. 
Alternate  Stability  Augmentation  System 
(Asas), 6 
Alternating  Gradient  Synchrotron,  71-72 
Altman. David.  166 
Alvarez; Luis W.,  11 
AMA .   See American  Management Associ- 
ation. 
AMA .   See American Medical Association. 
Amateur  rocketry,  255 
Ambartsumian, Viktor A.,  296-297 
AMC.  See  Army  Materiel  Command. 
Amer, Dr.  N. M.,  174 
American  Association  for  the  Advance- 
ment  of  Science  ( A A A S ) ,   262,  433,  438 
American  Assembly  Student  Conference, 
125 
(AAS )   , 
American  Astronautical  Society 
167-168,  170, 170-171 
7 7 6 5 9 8   0-65-31 

473 
American  Bankers  Association, 31, 252 
American Federation of  Labor-Congress of 
(AFL -C IO )   , 
Industrial  Organizations 
141, 323 
American  Fighter  Aces  Association 
( A F A A ) ,   78 
American Geophysical Union  (AGU )  , 146- 
147.435-436.438.444 
Amencan Institute kor  Biological Sciences 
(A IB S ) ,   210 
American Institute of  Aeronautics and As- 
tronautics  ( A I A A ) ,   21,  139,  190,  166- 
167,  223,  225-226,  228,  228-229,  230, 
234-235,  235-236,238,343 
awards,  21,  166, 376-377 
committees, 226 
meetings,  197,  235-236,  350,  375-376, 
377 
National  Capital  Section, 13 
American Machine  and  Foundry  Co.,  148 
American  Management  Association 
( A M A ) ,   243 
American  Medical  Association 
( A M A ) ,  
219 
American  Meteorological  Society  ( A M S ) ,  
35,  146-147 
American Optical Co.,  264-265 
American  Orthopsychiatric  Association 
( A O A ) ,   110 
American  Physical  Society  ( A P S ) ,   22,  23, 
153,  155-156,  432 
American  Science  and  Engineering,  Inc., 
299,  363 
American  Society  of  Biological  Chemists 
(ASBC )   , 110 
American Society of  Mechanical Engineers 
( A SM E ) ,   403 
American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Co. 
(AT&T ) ,   61,  79,  123,  168,  192, 209,  219, 
334,383-384,412 
American Women  in  Science  symposium, 
362 
Amery, Julian, 311,329 
Ames. Milton B..  Jr.. 91 
Ames‘Research Center  ( A R C ) ,   39,85,  131, 
158, 202,  322 
bontract, 65,266265,339,432 
research, 71,197,226,290 
Structural Dynamics Laboratory,  432 
test,  129 
Amine,  181 
Amoeba,  72 
Amos,  Project  ( A R P A ) ,   57 
Amplifier, 295 
Ampss.  See Advanced Manned  Precision 
Strike System. 
AMR .   See Atlantic  Missile Range. 
AMRL.  See  Aerospace  Medical  Research 
Laboratories. 
AMS.  See  American  Meteorological  So- 
ciety. 
Amu.  See Astronaut maneuvering unit. 
Anders,  Capt.  William  A. 
(U SAF ) ,   292 
Anderson.  Dr.  Carl  C.,  423 

474 

INDEX 

Anderson,  Sen.  Clinton  P.,  33,  176,  350- 
351 
Apollo-X program,  408, 417,  425 
appropriations,  18 
lunar  program,  13,18,268-269 
Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  program, 
408,  417,  425 
Ranger failure, 126,150,163 
Rift  program, 344) 
Anderson,  Dr.  Evelyn,  93 
Anderson,  Jack,  81  
Anderson, Dr.  Oscar E.,  Jr., 237 
Anderson, William J.,  104 
Andoeya, Norway,  56,  375 
Andover, Me.,  32,1166,219 
Andrews APB,  Md.,  164,412 
ANL.  See  Argonne  National  Laboratory. 
Ann Arbor, Mich.,  251 
Anna  (satellite),  222 
A N N A  IB  (Satellite), 370 
Annapolis,  Md.,  334 
Anniversary,  2,  104,  163,  211,  216,  335, 
381,420 
Antares rr  (motor),  135 
Antenna,  33,  38,  222,  264,  297,  321,  424 
parabolic, 31,216,3% 
Antennas  and  Propagation,  Professional 
Group on, IEEE,  326-327 
Antiaircraft  missile,  439 
Antimissile defense system, 214 
Antimissile missile, 381,388,394 
Antipov, Dr.  V.  V.,  389 
Antiraaiation  compounds, 276 
Antisatellite defense system, 197,330,370- 
371 
Antonious,  Capt.  Michael  N.  (U SA ) ,   394 
AOA.  . See American Orthopsychiatric As- 
socmtion. 
Aoao. 
See  Orbiting  Astronautical  Ob- 
servatory, Advanced. 
Aogo.  See Orbiting Geophysical Observa- 
tory,  Advanced. 
AorI.  See  Apollo  Orbital  Research  Lab- 
oratory. 
Aoso.  See  Orbiting  Sofar  Observatory, 
Advanced. 
AP.  See Associated Press. 
APL.  See  Applied  Physics  Laboratory. 
Apollo  (program),  26,  83,  118,  129,  143, 
144,  192-193,  194, 207,  216,  224,  225, 
228,  237-238,  297,  326-327,  34J 
astronaut,  43, 66,  74-75,  158,  167-168, 
173,206,209,224,239 
criticism, 54,  64, 185486,203,257,  337, 
3fi2 
experiment, 258,313 
facilities, 10,14,15,24,77,209,.268 
funds  for.  2.  1%13.  18.  45-46.  77.  99- 
i oo , i o i ,   io4-ios,  221,  a4-Z25,*2i7- 
228,  237-238,  242,  247,  274 
lunar   landing  program,  16,  23,  47,  68- 
69,  171,  271-272,  275-276,  298-299, 
324,  391,  3% 
management,  5 34 4 ,1 20 ,   364,  375 

miIitary, 258,302,316 
plans  for,  33,  71,  74-75,  89,  157-158, 
185-186.276.314.321 
progress, 3,13,.5%54,60 
space  hazards,  13,  18,  3 0 3 1 ,   47,  173, 
194,219 
support  of,  20-21,  41,  69,  138,  168, 
176.  238.  244 
testink. 37 i  
Apollo  rspacecraft) , 65,  70,  126, 138,206, 
228,  292,  316,  318,  387 
adapter, 436 
Apolo-X,  363, 382 
boilerplate  model,  138,  175,  192-193, 
196, 314,  321,  325, %6,  467,  %8 
contract, 306 
equipment, 6 ,68 ,81 ,   134,218, 239,  299, 
300 
escape system, 175,314 
facilities, 299 
launch vehicle, 89,229-230,353 
modde,  105 
command. 175 
lunar   exkuision  (Lem),  39,  43,  73, 
81,  105,  116,  139,  183 
test,  6,  10,  89,  90,  154,  175,  192-193, 
314.321.325 
tracking, 216,305 
use of, 170,249 
Apollo/Apollo  Logistic  Support  System 
(Ass 1,170 
Apollo,  Extsnded,  (Apollo-X) , 145 
Apollo  Logistic  Support  System,  (Alss) , 
73,105,183 
Apollo/Lunar  Exploration  System  for 
Apollo  (Lesa) ,   105,  170 
Apollo  Orbital  Research  Laboratory 
(Aor l) ,   145,  258 
Apollo,  post, study, 388 
Apollo/Stay  Time  Extension  Module 
(S tem) .   170 
Applied Physics Laboratory  ( A P L )   (Johns 
Hopkins Univ.) , 5 7 5 8  
APS.  See  American  Physical  Societv. 
Apt.  See Automatic picture transmisiion. 
ARAC.  See Aerospace  Research  Applica- 
tion  Center. 
Aral  Sea,  U.S.S.R.,  156 
ARC.  See Ames Research Center. 
Arcas,  boosted  (sounding  rocket),  99, 
305,328 
Arcetri, Italy, 180 
Archangel, U.S.S.R.,  27 
Arc-jet engine,  167 
Arco, Idaho, 93 
ARCS  Industries, Inc.,  383-384 
Arctic Circle, 216 
Arents 
(Advanced  Research  Environ- 
mental  Test  Satellite)  spacecraft, mod- 
ified.  See Orbiting Vehicle 2. 
Arfons,  Art,  365 
Argentina, 403 
Argentine National  Commission  on  Space 
Research  (CNIE)  , 403 

INDEX 

475 

Argo  D-4  (Javelin)  (sounding rocket), 
15,  137, 355,  360-361,  380 
Argonne National Laboratory  (ANI.),  4 
ARIEL  I  (satellite),  106,453 
ARIEL  11  (satellite),  118, 452-453,  482.483 
Aristarchus  ( lunar   cra ter) ,   78,  106,  180, 
203-204,205,316 
Arizona. 239 
Arizona; Univ. of, 148,301 
Lunar  and   Planetary  Laboratory,  267, 
275-276,331 
Space  Sciences Center.  259 
Arkinsas,  369-370 
Arecibo, Puerto  Rico, 38,  297,  393 
Armed  Forces  Communications and Elec- 
tronics  Association  (AFCEA )   , 183-184, 
185 
Arms control, 437 
Armstrong, Neil  A.  ( N A S A ) ,   102, 244 
Army.  See U.S.  Army. 
Army Air Corps, 136 
Army  Ballistic  Missile  Agency  ( ABMA 1, 
37 
Army Corps of  Engineers, 59,130,274 
contract,  8,  13,  15,  28,  31,  38,  61,  62, 
63,  74,  102,  121,  127,  164,  203,  216, 
268,  291,  328,  329,  400,  410,  434 
Army Electronics Command, 241 
Army Map'Service, 74,220-221 
Army  Materiel  Command  ( A M C ) ,   11, 211 
A r m y   Missile  Command  (Redstone  Ar- 
sena l) ,   112, 211,  305 
Army-Navy-Air  Force  Journal  and  R eg -  
ister, 26 
Army Signal Corps, 46-47 
Arnold  Engineering  Development  Center 
(AEDC ) ,   215-216 
Arnold,  H.  H.,  Trophy, 315 
Arod.  See Airborne Ranging Orbital De- 
termination. 
ARPA.  See  Advanced  Research  Projects 
Agency. 
Artemia egg experiment, 248 
Arthur, George H., 379 
Artsimovich, L.  A.,  198 
Asas.  See Alternate  Stability  Augmen- 
tation System. 
- 
ASBC.  See American Society of  Biological 
Chemists. 
Ascani,  3 / G  Fred  J.  (U SAF ) ,   172 
Ascension Island,  30,  42-43, 62,  135,  137, 
277-278,287 
Ashklabad, U.S.S.R.,  27 
Asimov,  Isaac,  163 
ASME.  See American  Society of  Mechan- 
ical  Engineers. 
Asset  (Aerothermodynamic/elastic Struc- 
tural  Systems  Environmental  Tests) 
(see  also S t a r t ) ,  19,  114, 208,  258,  286, 
307,  392,  411 
Associated Press  ( A P )   ,7 7 ,1 43  
Association of  the  United States Army, 388 
Asteroid,  28 
Astro Electronics Div.  (R cA ) ,   193 
Astro Research Corp . ,  428-429 

Astrobee 1500  (sounding rocket],  358-359 
Astrometric telescope, 75 
Astronaut, 81,  120, i73 ,   183, 190,236-237, 
242,  %9,265,302,319 
- ,   . 
contract. life stow. 119.287 
death,  370 
performance, 4849 ,112 ,208  
politics,  15-16 
quarantine,  215 
rescue, 100,102,174,203 
scientists, 10, 356 
selection, 263 
training,  5,  25,  43 ,  66,  99-100,  102,  158, 
278,  281,  302,  306,  318,  356 
women as, 187,244,226 
Astronaut  Maneuvering Unit  (Amu),  89 
Astronautics and Aeronautics  (magazine), 
88,  122, 160,197-198,269,302,401 
Astronautics Award,  375-376 
Astronomers, 78,  126, 203,205,  296,  326 
Astronomical  Journal  (U.S.S.R.)  , 364 
Astronomy,  106,  223,  251,  262,  296,  327, 
385,436 
Astrophysical  Ohservatory, Arcetri,  Italy, 
180 
Astrophysics, 386,426 
Astrophysics  and  Physical  Meteorology 
Laboratory  ( J H U ) ,   132 
Astrorocket, 123 
See  Aviation/Space  Writers  As- 
A/SWA. 
sociation. 
AT&T.  See American Telephone and Tele- 
graph  Co. 
See  Air  Transport  Association  of 
ATA. 
America. 
Atchley, Mrs.  Hazel T.,  114 
Athena  (missile) 
( U S A F ) ,   58,  193,  241, 
329,  338,398,  4.06 
Atlantic  City, N.J.,  56,  297 
Atlantic  Missile  Range  ( AM R )   (see  also 
Eastern  Test  Range,  Kennedy  Space 
Center  ( N A S A ) ,   and  Cape Kennedy), 
5.  9,  19, 37,  38,  72,  113,  116,  144-145 
facilities, 38-39,  63,  77 
launch,  135 
booster,  13, 82,  113 
failure,  104 
Gemini, unmanned,  130 
missile,  5,  6,  31,  79,  81,  84,  122,  132 
probe,  34-35 
satellite,  19 
Saturn,  32 
sounding rocket,  122 
management, 127,192 
prelaunch  activities 
Gemini, 9 
Saturn,  7,  126,  149 
submarine launch, 11,19 
test,  114 
Atlantic Monthly, 303 
Atlantic  Ocean,  10,  11,  15,  30,  38, 104, 
110,  137,  14.0,  158,  209,  221,  227,  234, 
243,256,258,332433,378 

INDEX 

476 
Atlas  (missile),  111, 157-158, 177, 213, 
234,275, 309 
contract,  308, 319 
launch 
D,  135,217,403 
E.  79 
F;  63, 177, 430 
failures, 127, 145-146, 150,177 
operational, 8,64, 101, 125,265 
plans for, 78,87,106 
test,  78 
Atlas-Agena  (booster)  (see  also Agena) , 
78, 79, 102, 146, 171, 186, 218, 219, 
239, 252-253, 259, 263, 309, 326, 344, 
361 
B,  34-35, 60-61, 64, 306, 448, 453, 456, 
466,467 
D, 182,285,378,397-398,406,450,452, 
456, 458, 459, 460, 461, 467, 468 
A t l a s 3   (SLY-3),  95-96, 269 
AtIas-Centaur  (see  also  Centaur),  4, 71, 
309 
3 (AC-s), 227,466 
4 (AC-4),41@15,  461, 468 
Atlas 116 D (boos ter) ,221  
Atmosphere, 76, 149-150 
artificial, 302 
demarcation line, 14-15 
density,  131-132, 140 
helium-oxygen, 274,309 
temoerature. 22-23. 131-132 
upper,  measurement,  14, 47, 5051, 56, 
62, 62, 140, 141, 204-205,  244, 269- 
270,273, 277-278. 387 
Atmospheric  science,  institute  of 
(pro- 
posed),  100 
Atomic bomb,  46-47, 320 
Atomic clock,  126, 408-409 
Atomic  energy.  See Nuclear  energy. 
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) , 40-41, 
49, 51-52, 89, 91, 115, 126, 200, 22% 
229, 231, 237, 246-247, 307, 369, 388, 
400 
contract, 416 
funds,  48,  67, 85, 117, 161, 213, 400 
launch,  173 
report,  37,72,91 
test,  3, 63, 93, 104, 125, 175, 188, 256, 
338,360 
Atomic  Industrial  Forum,  400, 405,441 
Atomic  Research  and  Development  Au- 
thority, New York State, 70 
Atomics International, 3,39,260 
Atoms-for-Peace Conference, Third  Inter- 
nationaI, 305 
Ats.  See Satellite, Advanced Technologi- 
cal. 
Attitude  control, 82, 257, 264-265,  386, 
397-98 
Atwood,  U.S. Ambassador-to-Kenya, Wil- 
liam, 229 
Aubiniere, Gen. Robert  (F rance ) ,  161 
Auburn, Mass., 104 
Auriol, Miss Jacqueline, 200 

Aurora, 11,5051,99,243,290 
Aurora borealis, 107 
Australia, 84,103,139,205,210 
cooperation 
satellite  communications system,  189, 
218,292,330 
space, 96-97,269-2'70,284,396 
supersonic transport,  29 
Australian  Commonwealth  Scientific  and 
Industrial Organization, 434 
Automated  Biological  Laboratory  (ABL )   , 
20a,259,295 
Automatic  da ta   processing.  See  Com- 
puter. 
Automatic  Picture  Transmission  (Ap t)  
107 
pictures, 251,298 
receiving station, 5 
Automation, 286 
Autopilot, 257 
Avcs.  See  Advanced  Vidicon  Camera 
System. 
Aviation, 7%, 204,303,329-330,332 
civil, 94,216,237,332 
Aviation  Human  Resources  Study  Board, 
FAA, 237,332 
Aviation/Space  Writers'  Association 
( A / SW A ) .   190-191. 192.194. 194.-195 
-3  --  -  - - -  
Aviation Week  and  Space Technology,  78, 
- 7  
~ 
92,101, 129, 154,200,220,224,225,226, 
240, 257, 274, 281, 289, 324. 329. 330. 
340,341,357,395,396,408,4&,  434,4% 
Aviation Writers'  Association  (AWA )   , 235 
Avionics, 257 
AWA.  See  Aviation  Writers'  Association. 
Awards, 269 
government, US., 11, 32, 39, 63, 74, 77, 
93, 114, 136, 150, 154, 258, 265, 266, 
276,316, 325, 328 
incentive  (see also Inventions),  82, 114, 
142 
institutions  (univ., etc.),  232 
society,  75, 185, 188, 200, 235-236, 263, 
317.403 
aero&utics,  21 
astronautics, 21,111,164,235-236,315 
aviation, 317.334 
foreign, 101,.198,320 
medicine, 175-176,266 
space, 21,111,235,334,392 
Azores, 55,132 
B-52  (Stratofortress),  70, 214, 326 
B-68  (Hus t ler) ,  157-158, 207,317 
B-70  (Valkyrie),  98 
XB-7 0,172,358,369 
XB-?OA,  297,323,349 
Bacterial compatibility, 396 
Bahamas, 386 
Baikonur, Kazakhstan, U.S.S.R.,  468.469 
Bailey, Dr. Victor Albert, 56,121 
Bain,  Gordon M., 13,268 
Baker, Burke, Planetarium  (Houston), 244 
Bakharev, Anatoli, 210 
Bal Harbour, Fla., 174 
Baldwin, Hanson, 255 

INDEX 

477 

Ball Brothers Research Corp.,  95,141 
Ball, Ed, 69-70 
Balloon 
experiments, 4,258 
flight, 132-l33,176 
launch, 42,  56, 57,  74, 96,  216,  291,  364, 
448449,482 
Balloon astronomy, 223 
Balloon-parachute, 129 
Balloon-satellite communications network, 
89 
Balloon  weather  station  (France) ,   218- 
219 
Ballute  (balloon-parachute) ,129  
Baltimore, Md.,  10,202 
Baltimore Sun, 10,272-273 
Bangalore, India, 203 
Barabashov, Nikolai, 315 
Bambados Island, B.W.I.,  10,29 
Bamum, Alan R.,  406-407 
Barre, Dr.  Robert L.,  110-111 
Barycentric orbit, 159 
Baskakov, Edward, 351 
Basov, Nikolai G.,  367 
Bass, Abraham S., 379 
Bates, Rep. William H.,  108 
Bauer,  Louis  H., Founders  Award,  175- 
176 
Baumann, Robert C.,  82 
Bav of  Pies invasion. 64 
Baievsky;br.  Roman, 174-175 
Beacon, crash, 5 , 1 9  
Beacon  Explorer 
(satellite).  See  Ex- 
plorer Beacosl. 
Beadle, George W.,  357 
Beagle, Project  (Mars project),  257 
Beale AFB, Calif., 346,429 
Bean, Lt. Alan L.  (USN) ,336  
Bear landing test, 313 
Bearing technology, 146,293 
Beattie, Donald A.,  170 
Beckman Instruments,  Inc.,  100, 352,  382, 
3% 
Bedwell,  M/G  T.  C.,  Jr.  (USAF),  44 
Beet, 204 
Beetle exoeriment. 72 
Beischer,-Dr.  Die&ich E.,  174 
Belew, Leland F., 377 
Belgium,  246,264,397 
Bell  Aerosystems Co.,  138,  160,  172,  197. 
215,251,4443 
Bell Telephone Laboratories, 154 
Bellows, W. S., Construction Corp,  8,268 
Bendix Corp.,  148,183,251 
Eclipse-Pioneer Div.,  22 
Products Aerospace Div.,  13 
Bendix Field Engineering Corp.,  336 
Benoist flying boat, 2 
Benton,  Sen. William H.,  195 
Berenice (French rocket), 371 
Beresford, Spencer, 29 
Berge, Glenn, 383 
Bergen, William B.,  259 
Bergmann, Dr.  Peter,  155-156 
Berkner, Dr. Lloyd V., 155 

Berlin, Germany, 4 1 , s  
Bermuda, 39,132,176,239,252,487 
Bern, Univ. of  (Switzerland), 248 
Bemardo, James V.,  407 
Berry,  Dr.  Charles  A.,  91,  134,  167-168, 
249 
Beryllium, 230 
Bethesda,  Md.,  237 
Bethpage, N.Y., 299 
Bettelheim, Dr.  Bruno, 362 
Beverly Hills, Calif.,  327 
Bevins,  British  Postmaster Gen.  Reginald, 
136 
Bigg, Dr.  E. Keith, 434 
Bigg, Dr.  E. Keith, 434 
Bikle, Pau l  F.,  77,220,435 
Bikle, Pau l  F.,  77,220,435 
Billingham, Dr. John, 230 
Billingham, Dr. John, 230 
Bioastronautics, 80, 3 0 8 3 0 9 , 4 2 0 4 2 1  
Bioastronautics, 80, 3 0 8 3 0 9 , 4 2 0 4 2 1  
Biological  laboratory,  automated  (Abl) , 
Biological  laboratory,  automated  (Abl) , 
208,259 
208,259 
Biological  specimens  in  space,  72,  178- 
Biological  specimens  in  space,  72,  178- 
179,204 
179,204 
Biology,  168-169,  169,  178-179,  204,  255- 
256,438 
gravitational, 309 
space, 208 
Biomedicine, 35-36,245,262,305,310 
Bios.  See Biosatellite. 
Biosatellite  (Bios),  72,  168-169,  178-179, 
221,225 
Bioscience, 168-169,208,210 
Bio-Space Technology  Training  Program, 
305 
Bird flight, 433 
BIS.  See  British  Interplanetary  Society. 
Biscarosse, France, 132 
Bisplinghoff, Dr.  Raymond L.,  11, 53,  108, 
135,  139,  151-152,  160,  202,  275,  293, 
322,333,405 
Bisson, Edmond E.,  104 
Black 81 Decker Manufacturing Co., 5 
Black,  Eugene  R.,  61,  76,  82,  85-86,  90, 
115,  119-120 
Black Knight  (U.K. rocket),  269370,278, 
311,412 
Black Prince  (U.K. rocket), 311 
Black Report  (see also Black, Eugene R.) , 
115 
Blaikburg, Va.,  290 
Blagonravov,  Anatoli  A.,  17-18,  30,  54, 
171.  175.  204.  208,  342,  349 
.
.
 
B l aw - b o x  Co..'33 
Bleymaier,  B/G  Joseph  S.  (USAF),  123, 
139, 166,  192, 193, 278,  304,376, 414 
Block  II vehicle, 247,  448-449 
Blossom Point, Md.,  130 
Blount Brothers Corp.,  224 
Blount Construction Co.,  28 
Blue Scout  (rocke t) ,  104 
Jr., 300,427,450451,476-477 
Blue Streak  (U.K. booster), 205,257,269- 
270,358 
BNA .   See Bureau of  National Affairs, Inc. 
BNL.  See  Brookhaven  National  Labora- 
tory. 
Boa  constrictors, 56-57 

478 

INDEX 

BOAC.  See British Overseas Airways Corp. 
BOB.  See Budget, Bureau of. 
Bochum, West Germany, 385 
Boeing Co.,  10,  12,73,  105,  124,  18,171, 
269,352 
Aerospace Div.,  183 
contract, 251,404,405,415,441) 
supersonic  transport,  13,  28,  183,  201, 
373-374,392,41)5 
test, 155 
Boeing  Scientific  Research  Laboratories, 
424- 
Boeing  707  (Stratoliner),  150,  158,  392, 
408 
Boeing 720  (airliner 1,233 
Boelkow  Co.  (West  Germany),  265 
Bogart,  L/G  Frank  A.  (U SAF ) ,   368 
Boggs, Rep. Hale, 324,361362 
Bomber aircraft, 92,140-141 
congressional action, 69,  72,  79,  81,  82, 
98,141 
reliability, 28,136-137 
Bomber, rocket-sled-launched orbital, 78 
Bone decalcification, 178-179,309 
Bonn Univ.,  (West Germany), 372 
Bonneville Salt Flats, Utah, 353 
Bono, Philip, 238,246,347 
Boosted Arcas.  See Arcas, boosted. 
Booster, 10,143,170-171,258,324 
Booth, Seth W.,  39 
Borman, Maj. Frank  (U SAF ) ,   263 
Boron fiber technology, 207,244,257 
Boscombe Down, U.K.,  329 
Boston Globe, 43,109,141 
Boston, Mass.,  23-24 ,37 ,59 ,75 ,77 ,79 ,91 ,  
113.115.185.201.244.250.292 
Boulder, dolo.,'389  ' 
~~ 
Boundary layer stabilization, 122-123 
Bounder  (Soviet bomber),  196 
Bowen,  Howard,  387 
Boyd, Alan S.,  8 
Boyle,  B/A  Francis D.,  (USN), 358 
Boynton, John H.,  225 
Brackett, Ernest W.,  51,250,281,435 
Brademas, Rep. John, 14 
Brady,  Joseph  L., 1 
Braille  translations,  239 
Braking techniques, 158,2% 
Branch, B/G  Irving L.  (USAF ) ,   77 
Braniff  Airways,  136 
Bransteller,  Robert  J.,  142 
Brazil, 280,  375 
Bread mold experiment, 72 
Breedlove, Craig, 353 
Brennan, Dr.  John  J.,  Jr.,  337,  363 
Brewer,  Frank  G.,  National  Trophy,  1963 
(NAA )   ,200 
Brewster, Kingman, Jr., 191-192 
Brezhnev, First Secretary Leonid, 353,355- 
356 
Brier, Glenn W.,  434 
Brinich, Pau l  F., 142 
Britain.  See United Kingdom  (U.K.). 
British Aircraft Corp.,  170 

British  Interplanetary  Society  (B IS )  , 269- 
270 
British  National  Committee on  Space Re- 
search,  118 
British  Overseas  Airways  Corp.  (BOAC)  , 
57,  158 
Broadway Maintenance  Corp.,  127 
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory  ( B N L )  , 
71-72,  133 
Brooklyn,  Polytechnic Inst.,  331 
Brooks AFB,  Tex.,  44,  45,  48, 52,  80,  112- 
113 
Brotherhood of  Maintenance of  Way  Em- 
ployees, 209 
Brovtsev, Col.  Sergei G.,  269 
Brown and Root, Inc.,  321 
Brown, Clinton E.,  45 
Brown, Dr. Harold, 65 
Brown, Dr.  Harrison,  314 
Brown, Porter,  4 3 U 3 1  
Brown  Univ.,  359 
Brown, William F., Jr.,  223 
Browne, Dudley E.,  3 1  
Brun,  Pres.  Edmond  A.  (F rance ) ,   308- 
309 
Brussels, Belgium, 24 
Bubble  blowing technique,  428429 
Buchanan, L/'C  Robert S.  (U SAF )  ,52 
Buchheim, Dr. Robert W.,  289 
Buckley,  Edmond C.,  71,108-109 
Budget, Bureau of  ( B O B ) ,   5,117 
appropriations, 45-46,67,72 
Buffalo,  N.Y.,  199,  251 
Bull, Dr. Gerald, 411 
Bumper  (v-2  )  (booster),  261 
Bunker-Ram0 Corp.,  259 
Burbank, Calif.,  85-86,  367 
Burch,  Dean,  364 
Bureau  of  Aeronautics  (USN), 334 
Bureau  of  National  Affairs,  Inc.  ( B N A ) ,  
250,252 
Bureau of  Ships  (USN) ,305 
Burkett, Warren,  258 
Burlington, Vt.,  207 
Bush,  Dr.  Vannevar, 11 
Business  Week,  75 
Butadiene,  190 
Butz, J.  S.,  Jr., 303 
Bykovsky,  L/C  Valery  F.,  179,  443 
c- 1   (rocket eng ine) ,  3 9 9 4  
c -5 .   see  cx. 
c-97  (Stratocruiser) ,214 
c- i ia   (Flying Boxcar),  156,276,415 
C -130   (Hercules),  158,264 
c-i 3 3  ( Cargomaster) , 176, % 
C - 1 4 0 ~  ( Je t s ta r ) ,   147,  257 
CAB.  See  Civil Aeronautics Board. 
Cable, 1-2,55,123 
Cairo, U.A.R.,  303 
Cairo Univ.  (U.A.R.)  ,78 
Calcium, 180,309 
California, 40-41,  75,  85-86,  91,  120,  202, 
207,312,  314 

INDEX 

332-333, 

California  Institute  of  Technology  (Ca l  
Tech) ,  60,97-98,128,163,163-164,179, 
291.314.326.383.435 
California;  Univ.  of  (Berkeley),  1,  148, 
177-178,221,222,323,339 
(Ias  Angeles) 
California,  Univ.  of 
(UCLA )  ,220 ,240 ,433  
California, Univ.  of  Southern  (USC )  , 24.3, 
245 - - _  
Calilsto  (Jupiter’s moon),  179, 326 
Cal  Tech.  See  California  Institute  of 
Technology. 
Cambridge, Mass.,  116, 292,  301, 
304,327, 
345,363 
Camera, 41,  4142 ,   114, 118, 214 
, 2 1 7 , 2 6 3  
Camera station, automatic, 171 
Camera  System,  Advanced 
Vidicon 
(Avcs) , 298 
Cameron, A.  G.  W.,  28,314 
Camp  Roberts,  Calif.,  290-291, 
408 
Campbell, Joseph, 434,435 
Canada, 70,  116, 254,  258-259,  396,  421 
communications, 58,63,  189,218 
launch, 10 ,29 ,30 ,411  
satellite  program,  11 
sounding rockets, 3 0 , 4 2 4 3  
Canadian Pacific Air Lines, 70 
Canary Islands, 39,55,204 
Canaveral  Council  of  Technical  Studies, 
145 
Canberra, Australia, 103,396 
Cancer. 144-145.277 
Canning, Thomas M.,  290 
Canopus  ( s ta r ) ,   397-398,  398499,  407- 
408,422 
Cap motor, 438 
Cape Canaveral, Fla.,  name, 22,126 
Cape  Girardeau,  Mo.,  Chamber  of  Com- 
merce, 63-64 
Cape Kennedy Air Force Station, 22 
Cape Kennedy, Fla.  (see also Cape Canav- 
eral,  Atlantic  Missile  Range,  and 
Kennedy  Space  Center,  NASA ) ,   101, 
126,  166, 201,227,  279,  297,  309,  310, 
397,411,414 
construction,  15,  39,  51,  59,  61,  62,  63, 
65,77,124,130,131 
earthquake,  119 
labor relations, 209 
lightning damage, 289,294 
strike,  51,  59,  61,  62,  63,  65,  69-70,  124, 
126,  128,  130,  131,  133,  141,  212,  243 
“Capitol  Cloakroom”  (radio  program),  2 
Capsule, rotating,  test, 194 
Caracas, Venezuela, 275 
Caravelle ( j e t  transpor t) ,  411 
Carbon 13,398 
Carbon dioxide, 132-133,382 
Carcinogenic research, 277 
Cardiac arrhythmia, 4!3 
Cardiometer, 440 
Cardiovascular system,  174-175,  177-178, 
178-179 
Career guidance clinic, 388 

479 
Career  Service  Award  (National  Civil 
Service League ) ,136 
Cargomaster.  See C-113. 
Carlucci, Frank, 129 
Carmody, Robert J., 114 
Camarvon, Australia, 39,222,284 
Carnegie  Institution  of  Washington,  138- 
139 
Carpenter Bros.,  203,434 
Carpenter, Lcdr. M.  Scott  (USN), 176,252, 
266,322,372,390 
Cartellieri, Wolfgang, 387 
Carvalho Silos, Geraldode, 375 
Cascade Mountains, Oreg.,  296 
Case  Institute  of  Technology  (CIT),  42, 
56,214-215 
Case, Sen. Clifford P., 201 
Caspian Sea, 21 
Cat.  See Turbulence, clear air.  88 
Cat-Spy  ( ins trumen t) ,  88 
CBS.  See Columbia Broadcasting System. 
See  Central  Computer  and  Se- 
CCS. 
quence. 
Cellular structure, 114 
Centaur  (booster), 221,246,300 
AC-2,32 
AC-3,227,234,483 
AC-4,414415,476477,4?87 
development, 78,193,371472 
use of, 138,171,173 
Centaur “E” Stand Project  (Plum Brook), 
221 
Center  for  European  Nuclear  Research 
(CERN)  (Switzerland),  71-72 
Center  for  Radio  Physics  and  Space  Re- 
search  (Cornell  Univ.) , 164-165 
Center  of  Science  and   Industry,  Colum- 
bus, O.,  119 
Central America, 146 
Central  Computer  and   Sequence  ( c c a s )  , 
41 
Central  Radio  Propagation  Laboratory 
( NBS  ), 363,373 
Centre  National  d’Etudes  Spatiales 
(CNES )  .  See National Center  of  Space 
Research (France). 
Centrifuge, human, 226,243,245,249,427 
Ceramics, 261 
Ceres Missile Range  (France) ,  233 
CERN.  See Central  for  European  Nuclear 
Research. 
Cesium, 158-159,410,427,476479 
CH -46C   (helicopter), 264 
CH-47A  (helicopter), 436 
Chaff, tracking of, 107 
Chamical, Argentina, 403 
Chandler, Judge Stephen, 177 
Chaney  and  James  Construction Co.,  Inc., 
61,328 
Chanute, Octave, Award, 376-377 
Charleston, S.C.,  330 
Charyk,  Dr.  Joseph  V.,  242,283,  284,  285 
Chatenet, Pierre, 25 
Chayes, Abram, 63 
Checkout equipment, 248 
Chemical energy conversion, 151-152 

480 

n 

IX 

354, 

chemical propulsion, 83,296,302 
Chemistry, 262,288 
Cheprov, Ivan, 313 
cherry, William R, 276 
Chesapeake Bay,  197 
Chewing gum,  172 
Chicago,  Ill.,  110-111,  212,  288,  357,  428 
Chicago Sun-Times, 211 
Ghicago,  Univ.  of,  4,  140,  268,  339,  357, 
362 
Chick embryo research, 131 
chico, Calif.,  78-79 
Chile, 153 
Chimpanzee, 390 
China, Communist, 129,296-297,352, 
382,394,439 
Chope, Henry R.,  100 
Christensen, E.  E,  430-431 
Christian Science Monitor, 40 ,59 ,66  
Christmas  Island,  Pacific  Ocean,  333 
Chrysler Corp.,  73,  104,  148,  212,3414342 
Florida  Missile Operations, 201 
Space Div.,  84-85 
Chubb, Talbot, A.,  45 
Cincinnati, Univ.  of,  139 
Circumlunar flight, 173 
CIT.  see Case Institute of  Technology. 
Civil Aeronautics Board  (CAB), 4 , 8  
civil  aviation,  94,  216,  237 
Clark AFB,  Philippines,  2%291 
Clark, David B., Co.,  197 
Clark, Evert, 76 
Clark, Se?  Joseph S.,  128 
Clark Univ.,  233,319 
Clark, Maj.  William B.  (USAF ) ,   48 
Clarke, Arthur C.,  88 
Clay, Cassius, 81 
Clear  air  turbulence  (Ca t) ,   88,  291,  383 
Clear  Lake,  Texas, 25,  74,  116, 221 
Clemmons, Dewey L.,  Jr.,  419 
Cleo, Hurricane, 297 
Cleveland, Harlan, 83-84 
Cleveland, Rep. James C.,  48 
Cleveland,  Ohio,  91,  163,  166-167,  295, 
300 
Cloud, 287 ,288-289 ,46445  
cosmic-dust, 190 
noctilucent, 34147,204-205,241,277- 
278 
Cloud cover, 124 
Cloudcroft, N.M.,  181 
( c e n t r e   National  d’Etudes  Spa- 
CNES 
tiales).  See  National  Center  of  Space 
Research  (France) .  
CNES-NASA  program,  95 
CNIE.  See  Argentine  National  Commis- 
sion on Space Research. 
Cochran, Jacqueline, 181,200,203 
CODSIA.  See  Council  of  Defense  and 
Space Industry Associations. 
COESA.  See  U S .   Committee  on the   Ex- 
tension of  the  Standard Atmosphere. 
COIN.  See  Aircraft,  counter-insurgency. 
Cole, Pleasant T.,  82 

Colleges.  See Universities. 
Collier, Robert J,  Trophy, 328 
Collins Radio Co., 176,216 
Collii, Dr. Ronald T.  H.,  278 
Colorado, 58 
Colorado Springs, Colo.,  125,198 
Columbia  Broadcasting  System  (CB S ) ,   2, 
90.211 
C o l d - i a  Univ.,  188,238,277 
Columbus, Ohio,  15-16,  30,  33,  100,  119, 
142 
Combustion, 216 
Comet,  210,  398 
Commerce,  Dept.  of,  1-2,  18,  43,  75,  183, 
231 
Commercial Club, Chicago, 428 
Commercial Museum,  322 
Commission  on  Federal  Expenditure  Pol- 
icy  (proposed),  18 
Committee  on  Potential  Contamination 
and   Interference  from  Space  Experi- 
ments  (SSB) ,116-117 
Committee on  Science and   Public  Policy 
(NA S )  , 110 
Committee on Science in the Promotion of 
Human Welfare  (AAAS), 437 
Committee on  Space  Research  (COSPAR )   , 
155,  171,  172,  175,  177-178,  178-179, 
179,  17%180,  180, 183,  185,  220,  432 
Committee to Preserve Cambridge (Mass.) 
Industries,  327,  363 
“Common  Action  for  the   Control of  Con- 
flict,”  59 
Commoner, Dr.  Barry, 437438  
Communicable disease, 249 
Communication  (see  also  Communication 
satellite  systems),  50-51,  113,  142, 
189,  258-259,  333 
contracts, 105,  134,  176 
exhibition, USIA, 142, 261 
experiments, 3,17-18,22,55,60,75,105, 
132,  143 
extrasensory perception  in,  278 
international,  17-18,  22,  30,  60,  75,  79, 
111-112,208 
systems 
balloon-satellite, 89 
microwave,  143 
radio,  14Q 
satellite,  22,  32,  75,  81,  168,  185,  238 
tracking,  134,176,216 
voice,  22,89,134,142,319 
x-ray,  100 
Communications Satellite Act  of  1962,  58, 
116,130,286 
Communications Satellite  Corp.  ( CornSat 
Corp),  255 
agreement, 260,293,431 
contract, 61,  105,  209 
criticism.  313 
internatibnal  applications,  55,  79,  122, 
2444  258-259,  293,  347 
management, 219,260,286 

INDEX 

481 

military  applications, 27,  107,  116,  118, 
130,247,283,284 
operations,  75  113,  168,  192,  202,  209, 
279,285,291,310,317,321 
organization, 242,265,  318,321,323,331 
Plans, 38,s 
satellite  program  (see also Early B ird) ,  
96,  105, 139,  237,  247,  383-384 
stock,  75,  279,  291,  405,  407,  421 
terminal stations, 365,383-384 
test,  326 
Communications satellite  system, commer- 
cial, 3 8 , s  
Communications satellite  system,  interna- 
tional, 55,209 
agreement, 205-206,260,283,293 
cGticism. 313 
development,  61,  79,  96,  105,  129,  136, 
237,255,285 
contract,  105,  209 
establishment, plans  for, 38,  61,  68,  310 
impact of, 88 
international  participation,  26, 58,  61, 
63,  122,  129,  136,  189,  205-206,  215, 
218,  240 
management, 286 
military  use  of,  27,  55,  107,  116,  118, 
130,186,247,254,283,284 
Communications satellite  system, military, 
27,  55,  107,  116, 118, 130, 186,247, 254, 
279,  283,  284,  289,  332-333,  345,  347, 
358 
Computer, 142,269,383,412 
“satellite  alert,”  188 
systems,  132, 297 
use  of,  1-2,  161,-237,  252,  284,  411 
ComSatCorp.  See Communications Satel- 
l i te  Corp. 
Concorde  (U.K.-France)  supersonic trans- 
port, 61,170,279,314,362,418 
Conference,  Atoms-for-Peace,  Third  In-  
ternational,  305 
Conference .Group  of  U S .   National  Or- 
ganizations of  the   U.N.,  83-84 
Conference,  Midwest  Governors,  312-313 
Conference  of  Photovoltaic  Specialists, 
202 
Conference  of  Postal  and   Telecommuni- 
cations  Administration, European,  26 
Conference  on  aerospace  medicine,  45, 
48, 52 
Conference  on  Geological  Problems  in 
Lunar  Research, 180 
Conference  on  Government  Contracting 
for Research and Development, 250,252 
Conference  on  Human  Factors  in   Elec- 
tronics, F if th  Annual, 166 
Conference on  New  Technology, 204,  367 
Conference  on  Peaceful  Uses  of  Space, 
Fourth  National,  156-157,  157-158,  162 
Conference on  Satellite  Communications, 
European,  58,  61,  63,  189,  218,  260 

Space  Nutrition  and   Re- 
Problems,  151-152 
the   Role  of  Simulation  in 
Space Technology, 290, 293 
Congress,  2,  12,  23,  23-24,  244,  259,  260, 
260-261,  275-276,  279,  300401,  301, 
307,317,334,339 
Joint  Committee on Atomic Energy, 67, 
117.  161 
Joint kommittee on Economics, 18 
NASA budget,  12-13,  23,  181,  221,  227, 
30 030 1  
report to, 35,55,58,253,284 
Congress,  House of  Representatives, 8,  13, 
37,  69,  85-86,  115,  117,  189, 201,  221, 
237, 259,  274,  284, 291,  292-293,  320, 
324,  331-332 
bills introduced, 18,23,183 
bills  passed,  72,  101, 108, 185, 259,  285 
Committee on  Appropriations, 141,  180, 
183,  185, 213 
Subcommittee on Independent Offices, 
185-186 
Committee on  Armed  Services, 28,  44- 
45,65,69,81,92,430 
Committee on  Education and Labor, 
Subcommittee on  National  Research 
Data  Processing  and  Information 
Retrieval Center, 144-145 
Committee  on  Government  Operations, 
Subcommittee on Military Operations, 
107,  109, 118, 130,  186, 345,  347 
Committee  on  Interstate  and   Foreign 
Commerce,  8,  117-118 
Subcommittee on  Public  Health  and 
Safety, 8 
Committee on  the   Judiciary,  4 3 4 4  
Committee on  Rules, 69 
Committee on Science and Astronautics, 
2-3,  12-13,  15,  64-65,  77,  79,  101, 
102,  103,  106,  126,  136,  165,  200, 
211,281,311,401-402 
hearings, 45-46,  46-47,  49,  50,  50-51, 
52 53 ,   53 ,67  
Subcommittee on Advanced Research 
and Tracking,  12, 71,80,  83,  91-92, 
92-93,95,101,  103 
Subcommittee  on  Manned  Space 
Flight,  12,66,68-69,73,80 
Subcommittee  on  NASA  Oversight, 
107-108,  150,  150-151,  151,  163, 
163-164,  215,  220 
Subcommittee on  Science,  Research, 
and Development, 2-3,12,165,165- 
166, 186, 191-192,285,312,362 
Subcommittee on  Space  Science  and 
Application,  12,  69,  71,  79,  165 
Independent Offices Appropriations Bill, 
Fiscal  Year  1965,  180,  183,  185, 185- 
186,242,266,276, 284,285,286,300- 
301 
Republican  Conference, 203 
Select  Committee  on  Government  Re- 
search,  22,  67 

482 
- 
Conpress.  Senate  12.  37.  75.  79.  85-86- 
- I  --   - -  
93,  187-188,  '2OK  22i, 225,  227,  227: 
2 28 , 23 7 ,2 5 25 7 ,2 77 .   284,310,  329- 
330,330431,  331 
bills introduced, 18,180,312 
bills  passed,  79,  82,  98,  219,  221,  260, 
276,284 
Commission  on  Federal  Expenditure 
Policy, 18 
Committee on  Aeronautical  and  Space 
Sciences, 18,  43-44, 64-65,  94,  96-97, 
97-98,  100,  101,  104-105,  106,  108- 
109,126,163, 165~180,200,211,268- 
269,4Q8,425,41 
Committee on Appropriations, 237-238, 
257,266 
Subcommittee on Independent O5ces, 
242 
Committee on Armed Services, 79 
Subcommittee  on  Preparedness  In- 
vestigation, 15,177 
Committee on Commerce, 5 
Committee on Foreign Relations, 67,  68 
Committee  on  Government  Operations, 
18 
Committee on  the   Judiciary,  43-44 
Committee on Labor 
Subcommittee  on  Employment  and 
Manpower,  128 
Committee on Public Works 
Subcommittee on Air and Water  Pol- 
Iution, 229-230,230 
Committee on Rules and Administration 
Subcommittee on the Smithsonian In- 
stitution,  220 
Committee on Small Business, 434 
Conmess, International  Astronautical Fed- 
eration  ( IAF ) ,   15th  308-309,  313,  314 
Congress,  4th,  International  Council  of 
the  Aeronautical  Sciences, 296 
Congressional  Medal  of  Honor,  271-272 
Congressional Record,  22,  24, 35,  84,  145, 
164,187-188,213-214291 
economy, 213-214 
space program, 29,221,318,337 
supersonic transport,  93-94,  213-214 
Constellation  (Lockheed),  306 
Constellation,  Super  (Lockheed  I O ~ ~ G ) ,
197 
Contaminants, 382 
Contamination, atmospheric, 76 
Contract  (see also under agencies, such as 
NASA,  WAF,  etc.) ,214 ,281  
cost-plus-incentive-fee, 164 
fixed-price, 110 
geographical  distribution  of,  165,  165- 
166,261 
incentive, 171,173,250,342 
military. 26.86.165-166 
space, 29,86,162 
Contributions Award, NASA,  276 
Control Data Corp.,  269,299 
Convair 880  (a ircraf t) ,  233 
Convention  of  International  C i d  Avia- 
tion, 216 

INDEX 
Convention of  Military Elcctronics, Inter- 
national, 317 
Cook Electric Co.,  212,231 
CooIant, 125 
Cooling techniques, 181,291 
Coons, Dr. D.  Owen, 91 
Cooper,  Maj.  L.  Gordon  ( U S A F ) ,   4,  33, 
48,  98-99,  111, 129,  158, 163,  164,  177- 
178,  194,  247,  273,  317,  325,  355,  393 
Coordinating Research  Council  (CRC)  , 81 
Copenhagen, Denmark, 96,175-174 
Copernicus ( lunar  cra ter) ,  275-276 
Coperuicus, Nicolaus,  125, 398 
Coriolis effect, 168-169 
Cornell  Aeronautical  Laboratories,  Inc., 
147,199 
Cornell Guggenheim Aviation Safety Cen- 
ter, 200,213-214 
Cornell Univ.,  164-165,  180, 211,297,301, 
306307 ,393  
Corona, 34,96,119,180,260 
Coronie, Surinam, Dutch  Guiana, 278 
Coronoscope 11  (project)  (ONR -NSF -NASA ) ,  
96 
Cosmic dust, 190 
Cosmic radiation, 174,216 
Cosmic radio communications, 75 
cosmic  ray, 4, 42 ,5 051 ,5 6 ,   176, 179-180, 
211,  291 
Cosmic Research, 443 
Cosmonaut,  120,  130,  174-175,  183,  205, 
226,309,345,352 
Cosmonautics, 353 
Cosmonauts'  Desk, 131 
Cosmos  (U.S.S.R.  satellite),  151-153,357, 
379 
COSMOS  V,  399 
COSMOS XXIJI,  116 
COSMOS XXV,  450-451 
COSMOS XXVI,  107,110,448 
COSMOS  XXVII,  118,448 
COSMOS XXVIII,  128,449 
COSMOS  XXIX,  149,449 
COSMOS  XXX,  450 
COSMOS  XXXI,  205,451 
COSMOS XXXII,  210,451 
COSMOS XXXIII,  220,451 
COSMOS XXXIV,  234,451 
COSMOS  XXXV,  249,452 
COSMOS  XXXVI,  265,  453 
COSMOS  XXXVII,  286,453 
COSMOS XXXVIII,  290,454 
COSMOS XXXIX,  290,454 
COSMOS XL, 290,454 
COSMOS  XLI,  294,454 
COSMOS XLII,  294,455 
COSMOS  XLIII,  294,  455 
COSMOS XLIV,  299,455 
COSMOS  XLV,  315-316,  456 
COSMOS XLVI, 327,456 
COSMOS  XLVn ,   341,457 
COSMOS XLVIII,  351,458 
COSMOS  XLIX,  362,  4-59 
COSMOS  L,  365,459 
COSMOS LI,  414,461 

 

INDEX 

COSPAR.  See  Committee  on  Space  Re- 
search. 
Cost-plus-incentive-fee 
contract, 
(CPIF) 
164 
Cotton,  Col.  Joseph  (USAF)  ,340 
Coughlin, William,  58 
Council of  the  Aeronautical  Sciences,  In- 
ternational,  4th  Congress, 2% 
Council  of  Defense  and   Space  Industry 
Associations  (CODSIA),  246 
Council  on  World  AfEairs,  391492  
COURIER  (communications  satellite),  241 
Courtney-Pratt, J.  S.,  154 
Coyote, Calif.,  278,401 
Cpif.  See  Cost-plus-incentive-fee  con- 
tract. 
Crab Nebula, 153,254,436-437 
Crane, Mayor Edward A.,  292 
Crash,  178 
aircraft,  8, 41 
beacon, locator, 19 
test,  147,211,214,306 
Crater ray, 298-299 
CRC.  See Coordinating Research Council. 
Creede, Colo.,  3% 
Crews, Capt. Albert R.  (U SAF ) ,  304 
Crosby,  Harry,  239 
Crossfield, A.  Scott, 29 
Cryogenics, 101,  103 
CTA-21  (radio emission source), 364 
CTA -102   (rad io  emission Source), 364 
Cuba, 81, 195,200 
Cudaback, Dr.  David  D.,  221-222 
Cuddeback Dry Lake, Calif., 185 
Cunningham, Newton W., 352-353 
Cunningham,  R.  Walter  ( N A S A ) ,   296,  356 
Curtis, Rep. Thomas B.,  18 
Cnrtiss-Wright Corp.,  13,28,183,223,279, 
438 
cx  (military jet  transport  ~ 5 1 , 4 2 9  
Czechoslovakia.  120 
Dadda io ,   Rei:  Emilio  Q.,  2 4 ,   160,  165, 
221,281,285,312 
Dade Countv.  Fla..  190 
DagIe, Sidney J.,  141 
Dakar, Africa,  244) 
Dallas,  Tex.,  30, 106, 187, 203,  437 
Dallin. Prof. Alexander. 188 
Damping device, 13,276 
Daniel,  Mann,  Johnson  &  Mendenhall, 
383-384 
Darchiya, Sh.  P.,  203 
Darr, Joseph A.,  Jr., 406 
Darwin, George H.,  28,257 
Daw.  See  Demonstration  and   Shake- 
down  Operations. 
Data, 371,  371-372 
Data  acquisition, lpO,216,219 
Data  collection  satellite  system,  1% 
Data-filter equipment, 216 
Data processing equipment, 378 
Data retrieval, 305 
Davis, Alonza J.,  114 
Davis,  eh. M / S g t .   Frank  M.  (WAF ) ,   315 
Davis,  Rep.  John W.,  23 

483 
Davis,  M/G  Leighton  I.  (USAF ) ,   3,  164, 
192 
Davis, Dr.  Watson, 419 
Davis, M/G  W.  Austin  (USAF),  39,145-146 
Dayglow,  378 
Dazzle,  Project  (US.-U.K.-Australia  re- 
entry  research),  26%270,  278 
DC-3  ( transpor t) ,  113-114,318 
DC-7  ( transpor t) ,  147,192,306 
( transpor t) ,  158,180,410 
DC--8 
De Gaulle, Pres.  Charles  (France) ,  161 
Debold, Lcdr. J. F.  ( USN) ,238 
Debrovner, Dr. M.,  208 
Debus,  Dr.  Kurt H.,  5 3 5 4 ,   109, 352-353, 
43W1 
Decelerator, 163, 259 
Decompression experiment, 274 
Decoration for Exceptional Service ( F A A ) ,  
164 
Deep Space Network  ( N A S A ) ,   31 
Defence Research Board  (Canada),  11 
Defender, Project  (ARPA )   ,.211 
Defense and Space Operations Div.  (Wes- 
tinghouse Corp.) , 202-203 
Defense Cost Reduction Week.  248 
Defense, Dept. of  ( D O D ) ,   6-7,9,23,35-36, 
49,  51,  67,  75,  133,  136-137,  154, 
178, 201,  213,  214,  222,  282,  303,  305, 
334,335.430 
appropriations, 69,72,79,81,82,98,101, 
102,  103,  l@l-105, 
106,  108,  115,  141 
budget,  21,  48,  69,  80,  84,  88,  115,  360 
communications satellite system, 27,107, 
109,  116,  130, 247,  254-255,  279,  283, 
284,289,332-333,345,347 
contract,  3,  286, 305,  319,  338,  332,  369, 
375 
Contract Audit  Agency,  417 
cooperation. 231.  246-247 
NASA, 12,'6&, 
80,  82,  90,  108-109, 
143,  145,  166-167,  168,  171,  176, 
192,258-259,291,439 
Mol,  1,8,10,68,417,428 
NASA-AEC,  231 
cost reduction, 89,248 
Distinguished  Civilian  Service  Award, 
265 
expenditures, 235,240,434435 
information analysis center,  303 
launch.  442-443.  4 4 - 4 7 9  
management,  28,  49,  51,  96,  115,  164, 
183,281,311 
R&D, 23,26-27,48,69,165 
Defense  Research  Laboratories  (General 
Motors), 8,197 
Defense Science Board  (DSB)  ,29 
Definition  Phase  Project  (Pdp )  
9fi 
DeFrance, Dr.  Sm i t h  J.,  136 
Degner, Capt.  Eugene A.  (WAF ) ,   112-113 
Dehydration effects,  129 
Deimos,  Project  (Douglas  Aircraft  Co.), 
347 
Deissler, Robert G.,  4W3 
Delamar Lake, Nev.,  29 

(DOD ) ,  

484 

INDEX 

Delaware  Academy of  Science, 433 
Delta  (see  also  Thor-Delta),  72, 80,  109, 
145,212,225,251-252 
X--248,135,141,147, 166 
Delta Air  Lines.  158 
Delta,  Thrus t-Aumen ted   (Tad)   (boost- 
e r ) ,  80,  212,225,290-291, 431, 454, 467 
Deluzio. Frank.  441 
Demler;  M/C  Marvin C.  (U SAF ) ,   174, 392 
Democratic National  Convention, 246, 297 
394. -_ - 
Democratic Par ty   Platform  Space  Plank, 
Demonstration and  Shakedown Operations 
IDaso).  409 
.  - , , -  
Dempsey, J .  R.,  269,275 
Denmark, 49,56,173-174,397 
Denmark-America Foundation.  173-174 
Dennis, David H., 226 
Dennison, James T.,  347 
Densitron, 263 
Dey j ty ,   atmospheric, 50-51,131-132,141, 
Z W  
Dentistry,  121, 172 
Denver Post,  428 
de Orsey, C. Leo, 343 
Department  of  Defense.  See  Defense, 
Dept.  of. 
Derelin, Rep.  Lionel Van, 275 
Deny,  La.,  56 
Derrvberrv. Mrs.  Maw.  114 
Desert su&val  training,  281 
Detection system, malfunction,  13, 121 
Detector,  dectron,  103, 179, 210, 325 
Detroit, Mich.,  33, 143 
Deutsch, Dr.  Annin, 180 
Dewan,  Dr.  Edmond M., 409 
DH-125  (U.K.  je t  transport),  209 
Diamant  (French  booster),  161, 210 
Dickerson, Joseph T., Jr.,  187 
Dictionary,  astronautical,  English-Rus- 
sian,  128 
Dillon,  See.  of  Treasury Douglas, 119-120 
Dimethvlhvdrazine. 229-230 
Dingeldeii,  Richard  C.,  350 
Dipole,  116-117 
Dirksen, Sen.  Everett, 337 
Disarmament,  17, 21, 186-187, 437 
Disarmament Conference, 17, 21 
Discoverer  (satellite),  108-109,  150-151 
Disease, communicable, 249 
Distinguished  Civilian  Service  Award 
(DOD), 265 
Distinguished Flying Cross  (USAF) , 32 
Distinguished Flying Cross  (USA), 394 
Distinguished  Service Honor  Gold Medal 
Award  and   Certificate  (AFCEA ) ,   185 
Distinguished Service Medal  (USAF), 266 
Dixon, Franklin P.,  213,375 
Doctors,  medical,  trained  a s   astronauts, 
249 
Documentation, Inc.,  237 
DOD.  See Defense, Dep t  of. 
Dolan, Thomas E.,  139 
Donely,  Philip,  156 

Donner, Frederick G.,  323,331 
Donover Construction Co.,  127 
Doolittle, L/G  James H.  (U SAFR ) ,   206-207 
Doppler  tracking method,  109, 325 
Dornberger, Dr. Walter, 59 
Douglas  Aircraft  Co.,  80, 141, 238, 251- 
252 
contract, 189,193,242,248,422 
study, 74, 87, 205 
Missile and Space Systems Div.,  87, 122, 
189,246,249,302,403,422,427 
Saturn,  25-26, 159, 189, 193, 226, 242, 
248,302 
space station, 74,93,122,189,205,249 
studies, 81-82 
World  Cniiser.  327 
-------, 
Douglas,  Donald W.,  Sr.,  327 
Douglas,  Col.  William K. (USAF),  175-176 
Douglas-Home.  S ir  Alec.  349 
Dow-Chemical'Corp.,  222 
Downey, Calif.,  24,299 
Drag measurement, 319 
Dragon  (French  sounding rocket),  273 
Drake Univ.,  244 
Draley, Eugene C.,  177 
Draper, Prof.  Charles Stark,  311, 397 
Drinkwater, Fred  J., 376 
Driscoll, John, 337 
Drogue parachute,  131,156,175 
Drop test, 163,220,259 
Drummond, Roscoe, 40 
Dryden,  Dr.  Hugh  L.,  85, 113, 124, 143, 
158, 163, 282-283, 300-301, 319, 416, 
432-433 
awards by,  77,82,276 
awards to,  111, 127, 234, 235-236 
honored, 335 
international  cooperation, 96-97 
US.-U.S.S.R.,  2, 17-18, 175,203, 204, 
208,342,349 
space,  peaceful  use  of,  156-157 
space  program, 46-47, 74, l4%150,  187, 
224,240,243,43243 
DSB.  See Defense Science Board. 
Duberg, Dr. John E.,  177 
Dubos,  Prof.  Rene J.,  438 
DuBridge, Dr. Lee A,,  176 
Duke Univ.,  194 
Dulles International  Airport, Washington, 
D.C.,  411 
Duluth, Minn.,  116 
Dunning, Dr. J. R.,  277 
Durban, So. Africa, 226-227 
Dushanbe, U.S.S.R.,  27 
Dust, cosmic, 306307,331 
extraterrestrial,  263 
lunar,  267,271,275-276, 305-307 
Dyment,  John T., 114 
Dynamic  Crew  Procedures  Simulator 
(M SC ) ,   236 
Dyna  Soar.  See x-20. 
Dynatronics,  Inc.,  423 
Early  Bird 
(ComSatCorp  communiea- 
tions  satellite),  105, 139, 237, 247, 411. 
431 

INDEX 

485 

Earth,  106-107,125,152,158 
atmosphere, 70,  96, 117 
formation, 28,170 
gravitational field, 68,325 
heat,  62 
investigations of,  1 
magnetic equator, 31 
magnetic  field, 30,  68,  96, 104, 245,  250, 
265 
radiation,  solar, effects of,  291 
surface, 21 
Earthquake,  119,1%,  354 
Eastern  Airlines, 88 
Eastern  Test  Range  (ETR )   (formerly Air 
Force  Missile  Test  Center  (AFMTC) 
and   Atlantic  Missile  Range  (ABW ) .  
See also Kennedy space  cen ter ,  NASA, 
and  Cape  Kennedy),  221-222,  261, 
309-310,  336 
launch,  258-259 
booster development, 192 
missile, 266, 328,330 
plans,  171, 223 
satellite,  252,  264,  290,  30.5-306 
management,  164, 177,  192 
prelaunch  activities 
Ranger,  218 
Saturn,  235 
Titan,  269 
support  services, 239 
Echo  (satellite),  282 
ECHO  I  (communications  satellite),  284, 
308, 418 
ECHO  11  (communications satellite) 
communications experiment,  54,  60,  75 
launch,  25-26,  447,  449,  466 
performance,  29 
tracking,  international  cooperation,  30 
U.S.S.R.,  17, 27,  96-97 
use  of,  85 
Eclipse 
lunar,  424,  426 
solar,  180 
(Bendix  carp.),  22 
Eclipse-pioneer  ~ i ~ .
 
Economic Club of  Detroit,  143 
Economy,  national,  18, 38,  144,  183,  217, 
221,  266 
Edelson, Burton I.,  441 
Edgar,  George P.,  317 
Editor and  Publisher,  287 
Edmondson, Sen.  J. Howard, 57 
Education, 56,  197,217,247,263 
funds for, 3,7,  183,186 
need for, 263 
programs, 4,279-280,  407 
Edwards, AFB,  Calif.,  218,225,331 
Aerospace  Research  Pilot  School,  197, 
206 
engine  test  stand,  122 
engine tests, 429 
flights, 6,29,104,118,181,191,193,203, 
227,  251,  264-265,  297,  329,  352 
test flight, 85,278,323,349,425 
Eggers, Dr.  Alfred J., Jr.,  173 
Eggleston, John M.,  48 

Egg experiments, 72,174,248 
Eglin AFB,  Fla.,  70 
Egypt.  See United  Arab  Republic. 
EIA.  See  Electronic  Industries  Associa- 
tion. 
Eisele, Capt. Donn F.  (USAF)  ,318 
Eisenhower, Pres.  Dwight D.,  33,  64,  133, 
188,213,  246,  274 
Eisenhower, Dr.  Milton,  194 
EJC.  See  Engineers  Jo in t   Council. 
Ejection  seat  (see  also  Escape  system), 
129 
El Centro, Calif.,  129,317 
El  Kottamia  Observatory,  United  Arab 
Republic, 424 
ELDO.  See  European  Launcher  Develop- 
ment  Organization. 
Electric  propulsion,  228-229,  296,  302 
Electric  power,  nuclear  reactor,  229,  305, 
333 
Electricity, static,  147 
Electrojet,  31  
Electro Mechanical Research, Inc.,  352 
Electron  (U.S.S.R.  satellite),  152 
ELECTRON  I, 33,42,54,62,447 
ELECTRON  11,  33,42,54,77,447 
ELECTRON  III,  245,273,452 
ELECTRON w, 245,273,452 
Electron  accelerator, 22  ' 
Electron beam welder, 184 
Electron  bombardment, 290 
Electron  concentration, 43  22950-51 
Electron density, 119, 140 
Electron detector, 325 
Electron miscroscope, 326,392 
Electronic beacon, 325 
Electronic  Industries  Association  (E IA ) ,  
2% 
Electronic parts standardization, 334 
Electronic stethoscope, 172 
Electronics, 166,183,300 
industry,  13,  430 
systems,  102 
Electronics  Instrumentation  Div. 
Siegler, Inc.) , 102 
~ e c t r o n i c s ,  Military,  International  Con- 
vention,  317 
Electronics  Research  Center 
(NA SA ) ,   43,  59,  388,  393,  427 
appropriations,  115 
congressional  action,  77,  100-101,  185 
contract,  410 
location,  13,  37,  79,  91,  201,  292,  327, 
339,  345,  337 
organization, 301 
Site  Evaluation  Committee,  23, 113 
E1ectro-optical  systems, 
392 
3419 
Electrostatics, 56,  325 
Eleuthera  Island,  Bahamas,  386 
Elizabeth n, Queen, 59 
Ellington AFB,  TeX-9 74 
Elliott, Rep.  Carl, 67 
Elms, James C.,  16 
Ely, L/G William J.  (U SA ) ,   165 
Emme, Dr.  Eugene M.,  226 

(Lear 

(ERC )  

486 

INDEX 

Employment,  175-176,  226,  286, 288,  302, 
443 
Energetic  Particles  Explorer  D  (EPE-D). 
See EXPLORER  XXVI. 
b e r g y  conversion, 151 
Energy transfer,  114 
Engine 
arc-jet,  167 
ion, 82,238,256,444 
liquid  fuel,  87,  115,209 
ramjet,  77,  223 
reliability,  235 
rocket,  115, 160 
supersonic transport,  161 
turbofan,  28 
vernier,  throttleable,  199 
Engineering  Experiment  Station  (USN) , 
334 
Engineering  Institute  of  Canada, 421 
Engineers, 84 
and  scientists, 83,  7 4  94,  302,  308, 345 
space program, 6 , 3 5 3 6 , 1 8 4  
training,  255 
Engineers Joint  Council  (E JC ) ,   12  
Engineers’ Week,  74 
(USAF ) ,   6,  130, 
Eugle,  Capt.  Joseph  H. 
182,241,264,326,329,414 
Entry  Technology Conference, 350 
Environment  (see  also  Space  Environ- 
ment Weightlessness) 
atmospheric pressure,  56 
blood Dressure.  129.  177-178 
genetics, 169,171,179 
heart,  172,  174 
insect, 72,117,174,179 
nervous system,  169,178 
oxygen test, 44,87,130,174 
radiation, 48,169 
Environment, 
hazards of,  1% 
oxygen, 44,130,174 
space  cabin,  simulation, 87,  130 
space,  simulation,  39,  50,  112,  118, 224 
undersea,  176 
Environment control, 6 ,89  
Environmental sensor, 339 
Eole,  Project  (France) ,  218 
EPE-D.  See EXPLORER m. 
“Epsilon”  (meson  particle) , 352 
Equator,  305,314 
ERC.  See  Electronics  Research  Center 
(NA SA ) .  
Erevan,  U S S R . ,   27 
Erhard,  Chancellor  Ludwig  (W.  Ger.), 
273 
E r & v ,  Nimlai P.,  121 
Escape systems, 89,129 
Esgar, Jack  B.,  82 
ESP  Research  Associates  Foundation,  287 
ESRO.  See  European  Space Research  Or- 
ganization. 
Esro  1 (satellite),  2.58,  397 
Esro 2  (satellite),  !A%,  397 
Estes, L/G  Howell M.,  Jr.  (USAF ) ,   6 

( F A A ) ,  

ETR.  See Eastern Test  Range. 
Europa  1 (3-stage satellite  launcher),  270 
Europe, 5,58,%,  140,253 
Western,  297,  303 
European  Conference of  Postal  and  Tele- 
communications Administration, 26 
European  Conference  on  Satellite  Com- 
munications, 58,61,63,  189,372 
European Economic Community, 25 
European  Launcher  Development  Orga- 
nization  (ELDO ) ,   97,  198,  257,  269-270 
European  Space  Research  Organization 
(ESRO ) ,   97,  161, 242,  264 
agreement, 258 
Iaunch 
U.K.,  239,  242 
plans,  113, 364,  360 
tracking  station, 264,  308,  397 
(Western  Europe  TV  net- 
Eurovision 
work),  297 
Evans, Albert J.. 92 
Evans, Thomas C.,  170 
Evins,  Rep.  Joe  L.,  29 
Exceptional  Civilian  Service  Medal 
( W A F ) ,   74 
Exceptional  Service  Decoration 
164 
Exhaust,  rocket,  229-230 
Exhibit,  145,  214,  230,  247,  266,  300 
Exobiology, 50,  366 
Explorer  (program),  11 
EXPLORER I  (satellite),  37,%,  196 
EXPLORER VIII,  106 
EXPLORER  1~ ,131-132  
EXPLORER E, 172 
EXPLORER  XII,  479 
EXPLORER  XIV,  479 
EXPLORER  XV,  479 
EXPLORER  XVI,  194,380 
EXPLORER  XVIII,  103,  168,284, 320,339 
EXPLORER  XIX,  473 
EXPLORER  xx,  296,  360361,  363,  455,  467 
EXPLORER  XXI,  339,  436,  457,  %7 
EXPLORER  XXII,  346,351,386,407,457,467 
EXPLORER  XXIII, 380,459,467 
EXPLORER XXIV,  394,460,467 
EXPLORER xxv, 394,460,468 
EXPLORER  XXVI,  427,462,468 
Explorer Beacon  (satellite),  325,482,109 
Explorer, Geodetic (satellite) , 325 
Explorer-Jupiter C  (satelIite) ,234 
Explorers’ Club, 327 
Explosion, 25,104,  110 
Export,  114 
Extrasensory perception, 278 
Extraterrestrial  life,  210 
Ezop,  James J.,  135 
(rocket  engine),  114,  120,  122,  197, 
F-I 
242,346,377 
F-2  (rocket engine),  412 
~ - 4  (Phantom II), 226 
F - i o F   (aircraft),  191 
F-1  2~   ( A-i 1  supersonic a ircraf t) ,  225,254 

487 
INDEX 
(Starfighter),  5, 43,  181, 203, 404, 
Feoktistov, Konstantin Petrovich, 348,355, 
F - 1 0 4  
406 
359,469 
Ferguson, E.  E., 373 
F-106  ( Thunderchief ),66,178 
Ferguson, L/C  James  (USAF),  45 
~ - 1 1 1  (TFX ) ,   190-191,428,430 
F-II  1~  (USAF-TFX)  , 190-191 
Fermi, Enrico, Award, 395 
F-1  1 1 B   (USN -TFX )   , 191 
Fiber  metal,  197 
Fiberglas, 393 
FAA.  See  Federal  Aviation  Agency. 
Fafnir  Bearing  Co.,  293 
Field, Jennings Pemble, Jr., 342 
Field  Enterprise  Educational Corp., 287 
Fairbanks,  Alaska,  103, 284 
Fighter,  tactical.  See F-111. 
Fairhall,  Minister  of  Supply  Allen,  278, 
Finger,  Harold  B.,  83, 195, 229, 296, 311, 
3% 
349, 435 
Fairhurst,  Judge  Charles, 345 
Finney,  John,  26-27,  86,  351, 355, 425 
“Fairy castle” theory, 299 
Fire,  crash,  214 
FAITH  7 ,  367 
Fire,  Project  ( N A S A ) ,   135 
Falkland  Islands, 397 
Fire  1, (reentry  tes t) ,   135, 350, 483 
Farman, Henry,  79 
Firefly, Project  ( USAF ) , 70, 265 
Farman, Maurice, 79 
Firor, Dr.  John W.,  389 
Farrell  Construction  Co.,  61 
Fischel, Jack,  122 
Fassett, John W.,  141 
Fatigue,  metal,  103 
Fisher County, Tex.,  121 
Flagstaff, A r i r ,   75,20&205,218,223 
FBA.  See Federal Bar Association. 
Flare,  solar,  13,48, 173, 194,388-389 
FCC.  See  Federal  Communications  Com- 
Flax, Dr.  Alexander H.,  166,303 
mission. 
Fleas,  201 
FDA.  See Food and  Drug Administration. 
Fleming, Arthur S., Award, 63,173 
Fecker, J. W.,  Co.,  264 
Federal  Aviation  Agency  ( F A A ) ,   60, 80- 
Flight Achievement Award  (AAS )   ,164 
81, 113, 133, 164, 171, 216, 237, 296, 
Flight  control, 29, 
318, 332, 443 
( N A S A ) ,   70- 
Flight Research Center  (FRC )  
award,  164 
71, 77, 138, 145, 147-148, 218, 263 
contract, 56, 201,259 
contract, 201,319 
cooperation, 231,233 
flight, 214, 283 
Flight  Safety Foundation  (FSF) , 147, 156, 
organization, 24 
report, 293,332 
306 
tests,  214 
Flight  simulation, 146, 199 
safety, 147,211,306 
Flight  training, 332 
sonic boom  43. 63. 84. 117. 175. 177. 
Florence, Italy,  171, 175 
183, 187, 242, 253,268; 274; 277; 314; 
Florida, 68, 153,221,266, 
360 
Florida  East  Coast Railway, 51,59,61,63, 
transport,  supersonic, 201 
65, 69 
design and  development, 5,28,57,61, 
Florida  Library  and  Historical  Commis- 
148, 183,318 
sion,  22 
Florida  Operations  (M SC )   , 299 
management, 115,154 
reservations, %,  136,159,175 
Florida  Times-Union, 433 
Federal Bar Association  (FBA  1,250 
Florkin, Prof. Marcel, 432 
Federal  Communications  Commission 
Flotation  collar,  102 
( F C C ) ,   55, 105, 113, 122, 139, 168, 286, 
Flox  (fluorine-liquid oxygen), 77,106,219 
412 
Fluid  mechanics, 235-236 
Federal Electric Corp.,  201 
Fluorine,  76, 230 
Federal  government.  See  United  States 
Fluorine-hydrogen, 160,230 
government. 
Fly,  fruit.  See Fru i t  fly. 
Federal  Mediation  and  Conciliation  Serv- 
Flying  Boxcar.  See 6-1 10. 
ice  (FMC S ) ,   25 
Flying  saucers, 289, 387 
Federal  Support  of  Basic  Research  in  
Flying  submarine, 397 
Institutions  of  Higher  Learnina.  110 
Flying wing.  See MX - 3 2 4 .  
Federal  Systems Div.  ( IBM ) ,   122 
FMCS.  See  Federal  Mediation  and   Con- 
I
-
 
-I 
Federal  Trade  Commission  (FTC )  , 333 
ciliation  Service. 
Food and Drug Administration  (FDA ) ,   131 
Federal Women’s  Award, 93 
Food,  79. 145 
Federation of  Italian-American Democratic 
Organizations of  New York,  101 
Force measuring instrument, 114 
Fellowships, 308 
Ford,  Brian J.,  441 
Fels  Planetarium,  205 
(U SAF ) ,   66,  206, 252, 
Forecast,  Project 
Fenn College  (Cleveland, 0.),214 
257 
Forgash, Moms, 370 
Fenn,  Prof.  Wallace  Osgood,  266, 315 
Feodorov, Yevgeny,  352 
Fort  Bliss, Tex.,  394 

 

488 

INDEX 

For t  (=hur&iU  Research Range, Manitoba, 
278,290 
launch 
balloon, 4 
sounding rocket, 11 ,22 ,30 ,42 ,62 ,79 ,  
84,  107,110,113-114,l33,140-141, 
260,  262,  264,  277,  373,  378,  380 
For t  Davis, Tex.,  148 
For t  Dix,  N.J.,  146 
Ft. Hood, Tex.,  182 
Ft.  Monmouth, N.J.,  241 
Fort Washington, Pa.,  444 
Fortune  (magazine),  39,  111,  122,  161, 
441 
Forum  on  Developments and   Techniques 
for  Air  Traffic  System  of  the  Fu ture  
(RTCA ) .   158 

136,  412 
Foundation Library  Center, 3 
Fracture  toughness, 223 
France,  14,  79,132,245,266,303,314,385 
aircraft.  “Concorde”  (France4J.K.).  61, 
171, 314,  362 
communications, 140 
cooperation, 95 
launch,  210,  371 
rocket  engine, 233,  371 
space program,  161 
tracking, 32,132,204,308 
weather balloon, 219 
Franchi  Construction Co.,  38 
Frankford  Arsenal  (USA ) ,   94 
FRC.  See  Flight  Research  Center. 
Freche, John  C.,  56 
Frederick, Okla.,  177 
Freedman, Dr.  Sanford, 9 
Freedom Foundation, 75 
Freeman, Capt.  Theodore C.  (USAF)  ,370 ,  
388 
French  Guiana,  161 
French  National  Center for Space Studies 
(CNES ) ,   95 
French National Geographic Institute,  308 
Frequency control  and  calibration  facility 
( AM R ) ,   39 
Friedl, George,  Jr.,  224 
Friedman,  Dr.  Herbert,  21,  45,  153,  179, 
254-  4.32.  4% 
- - -  
_. - 
“Friendship  Sputnik“  (ECHO I I ) ,   85 
- - - 2  
7 
Friloux, Henry, 197 
Fritz.  John. Medal.  1%5.334 
Frog.egg experiment, 173 
“From  the   People”  (radio  program),  354 
Fru i t  fly, 72,171,179 
Frutkin,  Arnold W.,  240,371 
Fryd Construction Corp., 63 
FSF.  See  Flight  Safety  Foundation,  107, 
109,186,235 
FTC.  See Federal Trade  Commission. 
Fubini, Dr.  Eugene, 107,109,186,235 
Fuel,  32 
high-energy, 115,167 
safety of, 81 

solidfiquid,  160 
toxic, 230 
Fue l   assembly,  simulated,  for  nuclear  re- 
actnr- 25 
-----I  -- 
Fue l  cell, 68,140,383 
Fulbright,  Sen.  J.  William,  84,  173.  221. 
.
.
225,227,237,257 
Fuller, George A.,  Co., 121,400 
Fullerton, Calif.,  100 
Fulton, L/C Fitzhugh L.  (U SAF ) ,   273,317 
Funk, M/G  Ben  I.  (W A F   ) ,12 ,29 ,162 ,269  
Furnace, black-body, 142 
Fumas, Dr.  Clifford C.,  29 
Fusca, James A.,  291 
Future  Flight  Manpower  Study  Board 
( F A A ) ,   55 
Gable, L.  D.,  166 
Gagarin, Col. Yuri A.,  74,96,125,130-131, 
340 
Galactic radio noise,  118 
Galaxy, 297 
Galileo, 271 
Galveston Bay, Tex.,  5,131,352 
Ganymede (Jupiter’s moon),  179 
GAO.  See General Accounting Office. 
Garbacz, Michael L.,  113 
Garbarini, Robert F.,  130 
Garner, Howell D.,  276 
Garrett Corp.,  404,416 
AiResearch Div.,  6 
Garrick, I.  Edward, 352 
Gas bearing, 386 
Garland, Kenneth W., 42,269 
Gatlinburg, Tenn.,  349 
Gazenko,  Dr.  Oleg,  174,309, 374, 389-390 
GD/A.  See  General  Dynamics/Astronau- 
tics. 
GE.  See General Electric  Co. 
Geake, Dr. J. E.,  4.03 
Geiger counter,  325 
Gell-Mann, Dr. Murray, 72 
Gem.  See Ground effect  machine. 
Gemini  (program),  68 ,71 ,74 ,82 ,99 ,   118, 
121,129,192,224,274,356 
appropriation,  186 
cooperation, 12,55,71,82 
criticism, 203 
development of, 52,139,375-376 
experiment, 258 
plans for, 173,194,329 
tracking stations, 222,306 
Gemini  (spacecraft), 284,292,300,317 
astronaut training, 25,81,209 
equipment, 57,135,178,240 
facilities,  10 
GT-1,130,134,449,466 
GT-2,265,289,294,297,316 
GT-3,  212,  273,  289,  294 ,316 ,365366  
GT-4,263,265 
launch  vehicle  (Titan  111,  9,  13,  20,63, 
245,259,297,328,371,413 
recovery,  5 
landing.  See Paraglider. 
rendezvous, 26 

489 

George  C.  Marshall  Space  Eligkt  Center 
(NA SA ) .   See  Marshall  Space  Flight 
Center. 
George, Col. Clarence J.  (USA ) ,   77 
George Washington Univ.,  178 
Georgetown  Univ.,  148, 405 
Georgia  Institute  of  Technology  (Georgia 
Tech) ,  126,147 
Gerhart,  Gen.  John  K.  (U SAF )  , 362 
Germanium alloy, 291 
German rocket scientists, 254,262 
Germany, East, 15,41,129,34 
Germany, West, 265,273 
rocket, 52,78, 369,381 
scientist, 15, 369, 381 
space program,  197 
Gerrity, L/G  Thomas P.  (USAF ) ,   89,409 
Getler, Michael, 317 
Giffels and  Rossetti, 410 
Gibbons Stanley Ltd. of  London, 205 
Gifford,  Frank,  88 
Gignoux, Dominique M.P.,  66 
GillesDie.  Ben.  219 
Gilletpi;  Walter F.,  114 
Gilliland, Bob,  429 
Gilruth, Dr.  Robert R.,  16,33,91, 121,134, 
244-245. 322 
GIMRADA.  See  Geodesy,  Intelligence  and 
Mapping  Research  and  Development 
Agency. 
Gisell, William G.,  215 
GISS.  See  Goddard  Institute  for  Space 
Studies. 
Glantz Contracting Corp.,  127 
Glass fiber, 393 
Glenn,  L/C  John  H.,  Jr.  ( U SM C ) ,   75, 125, 
358,388,343,404 
accident, 87, 121, 336 
colonelcy, 365 
consultant. 237. 245 

INDEX 
test,  131, 156, 167, 174, 181, 193, 197, 
264, 276,278,318 
use of, 249, 307-308 
Gemini B /MO ~ ,  145,261 
Geminid stream, 415 
Genatt,  Sau l  H., 313 
General Accounting O 5 c e   (GAO)  ,55, 127, 
253,  334 
General  Atomics  Div.  (General  Dynam- 
ics) ,  248, 380 
“General  Aviation  Aircraft  Owners  Sur- 
vey-1962”,  293 
General Contractor, Inc., 31 
General  Cultural  Exchange  Program,  182 
General Dynamics Corp.,  77, 145, 148,353 
General Dynamics/Astronautics  (GD /A ) ,  
78, 111, 193, 234, 269, 275, 308, 344, 
384 
General Dynamics/Convair,  89, 397 
General  Dynamics/Electric  Boat  Div., 
397 
General  Dynamics/Electronics  Co.,  425 
General  Dynamics/General  Atomics 
Div.,  380 
General Electric  Co.  (GE )  , 68, 73-74, 159 
Aerospace  and  Defense  Service  Engi- 
neering  Dept.,  70 
Apollo Support Dept.,  299 
Command  Systems Div.,  2 
contract, 59,201, 219, 221, 248-249,319, 
4Q5 
study, 68,74,204-205 
Re-entry Systems Dept.,  337 
supersonic transport,  13, 28,183 
Valley Forge Space Technology, 177,304 
General Federation of  Women’s  Clubs. 207 
General Motors Corp.  (GMC )  ,323 
AC  Spark P lug  Div.,  18 
Defense Research Laboratories, 8,197 
General Precision, Inc.,  430 
General  Purpose  Airborne  Simulator 
(GPA S ) ,   199 
General Telephone Co.,  81 
Generator, 65, 172 
Geneva,  Switzerland, 17, 21, 100-101, 116, 
122,187,205,215,255,305 
Genisco, Inc.,  65 
Geodesy,  109 
Geodesy,  Intelligence  and  Mapping  Re- 
search  and   Development  A g e n c y  
(U SA ) ,   74 
(G IMRADA )  
Geodetic Explorer  (sa te l l i te) ,  325 
Geodetic research, 146,222,325 
Geodetic Satellite Policy Board, NASA-DOD- 
Dept. of  Commerce, 325 
Geological Problems in  Lunar  Research, 
Conference on,  180 
Geologist, 66. 100 
Geology,  170 
Geomagnetic field, 50,380 
Geophysics, 170, 208 
Geophysics Corp.  of  America, 14,141) 
George AFB,  Calif.,  5 
m - 5 9 a   0-65-32 

Glider, 71, 145,201 
glider, delta wing  (see also Asset), 208, 
258 
Glow,  Project  ( U S A ) ,   211 
GMC.  See  General  Motors  Corp. 
GNP  (Gross  National  Product),  187, 278 
Goddard Historical Essay Award,  111 
Goddard Institute  for  Space Studies  (GISS) 
( N A S A ) .   314,372 
Goddard  Range  and  Range  Rate  System 
(tracking  system),  284 
Goddard, Dr.  Robert H.,  47,104, 125, 160, 
263, 319 
Goddard,  Robert  H.,  airmail  stamp,  160, 
341 
Goddard, Robert  H., Library,  233 
Goddard, Robert H.,  Memorial Dinner, 111 
Goddard,  Robert  H.,  Memorial  Trophy, 
111 
Goddard Scholarship, 111 

490 

INDEX 

352 

Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  (GSFC) 
(NASA ) ,   42,  102-103,  181,  188,  u)o- 
201,224,276,305,311,316 
communications, 185, 285 
contract, 202,239,330,336,396 
cooperation, 10, 38,  118, 289 
experiment, 30,  169,  249,  308,  311,  319, 
37.5 
Iowa-rock,  102 
launch,  19,  109,  118, 290,  297,  306, 339, 
346.379-380.394.427 
management, 3%  ' 
test,  137,140,278 
tracking,  284 
tracking,  284 
Goett, Dr.  Harry J., 240,282,319,344, 
Goett, Dr.  Harry J., 240,282,319,344, 
Goercke, Prof.  Paul, 263 
Goercke, Prof.  Paul, 263 
I 
Gold alloy, 291 
Gold alloy, 291 
Gold, Harold,  158 
Gold, Harold,  158 
Gold, Dr.  Louis,  155 
Gold, Dr.  Louis,  155 
Gold,  Dr.  Thomas,  164, 180,301,306 
Gold,  Dr.  Thomas,  164, 180,301,306 
Goldbaum.  George C..  238 
Goldbaum.  George C..  238 
Goldberg, Delphrs C.,'24 
Goldberg, Dr. Leo, 301 
"Golden  Age  of  PoIitical  Science",  87  
Goldstein, Harold, 149 
Goldwater, Sen. Barry M.,  9,  69,  136, 253, 
258.321.331.351.362.370 
Goliath  (a ircraf t) ,  7 9  
Goliath  (a ircraf t) ,  7 9  
- I  
Goodrich, B.  F.,  Sponge Products Div.,  52 
Goodrich, B.  F.,  Sponge Products Div.,  52 
Goodyear Aerospace  Corp.,  129,  212,  418 
Goodyear Aerospace  corp.,  129,  212,  418 
Goonhilly  Downs,  Cornwall  (U.K.)  , 204, 
Goonhilly  Downs,  Cornwall  (U.K.)  , 204, 
270 
270 
Gordon,  Kermit, 67 
Gore, Sen. Albert, 116 
Gorki Univ.,  U.S.S.R.,  85,426 
Gorki, U.S.S.R.,  54,75 
(GAO  ) , 
Government  Accounting  Office 
381,434 
Government Contracting for Research and  
Development, Briefing  Conference,  250 
Government Employees  Incentive Awards 
Act,  142 
Government-industry relationship,  165 
GPAS.  See  General  Purpose  Airborne 
Simulator. 
Grain, solid, 248 
Grand Canyon, Ariz.,  100 
Grand Coulee Dam,  152 
Grand Rapids, Mich.,  343 
Granite Construction Co.,  402 
Grants 
government, 11, 104,110,162,211,216- 
217,259,397 
nongovernment, 3,111,219 
Graphite,  331 
Graphite reactor, 83 
Graphite  refractory  coating,  153 
Graveline, Maj.  Duane E. (usm MC), 393 
Gravitational biology, 309 
Gravitational collapse, 155 
Gravity, artificial, 226,309,384 
Gray, Edward Z.,  8 ,73 ,217  
Gray, Robert H.,  339 
Gray, Prof. Wood, 178 
Green Bank, W. Va, 321 

Green River, Utah,  58,  193, 241,  329, 338, 
381.406 
Greenacre, J. C., 2M 
Greenbelt, Md.,  185 
Greensboro, N.C.,  439 
Greenstein, Dr. Jesse L.,  398 
Grissom, Maj.  Virgil  I.  (USAF ) ,   134,  188, 
316,329,366,369 
Gronouski,  Postmaster  Gen.  John  A,  160 
Gross, Rep. H. R.,  201 
Ground-Based Astronomy-A Ten-Year Pro- 
gram, 385-386 
Ground  effects  machine  (Gem) ,   354 
Ground station, transportable, 295 
Group  Achievement  Award  (NA SA ) ,   77, 
221 
Gruene, Hans F.,  352-353 
Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.,  100, 
116,  215 
GSFC.  See Goddard Space  Flight  Center- 
GT-1;  See Gemini. 
GT-z  See Gemini. 
GT-8.  See  Gemini. 
GT-4.  see  Gemini. 
Guam  Island,  Pacific, 66,  291 
Guaymas, Mexico, 39,369 
Gubser, Rep. Charles S.,  153 
Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, 155 
Guggenheim, Daniel and  Florence, Award, 
1964  ( I A A ) ,   266 
Guggenheim, Daniel, Medal,  1964,263 
Guggenheim, Harry F.,  387 
Guggenheim  International  Astronautics 
Award,  I964  ( IAA ) ,   315 
Guidance, 142 
inertial, 121,193 
Gulf  Area  DeveloDment  Committee. 
' 
Houston  Chamber o'f  Commerce, 277 
Gunder, Dr. Dwight F., 360 
Gurney, Rep. Edward J.,  22 
Gus  (mouse),  255 
Gyros,  18 
H-1  (eng ine) ,  28,192,211 
H-10  (atomic clock), 408 
Hackes, Peter, 221 
Haggerty,  James  J.,  Jr.,  IO, 26,  213,  307, 
339,347,443 
Hailsham. Lord.  36 
Hailstone damage, 227 
- > - -  
I - -  
Halaby, Najeeb E.,  4,55,84,119,148,183, 
,
.
.
.
 
187,211.220,242,314.318.332,336.422 
Haley, Andrew G.,  236 
Hall, Dr. Albert C.,  51,68,74 
Hall of  Science, 310 
Hall, Robert Cargill, 111 
Halo, Operation  (U SA ) ,   32 
Hamburg, Germany, 297,301 
Hamburg Univ.  (Germany), 296 
Hamilton Standard Div.  (UAC ) ,   197 
Hammack, Jerome B.,  63 
Hammaguir, Algeria, 161,210 
Hammer, magnetic,  329 
Handle, self-latching, 114 
Haney,  Paul,  248,280,294,384,395 
Hansea Grant, 234 

Hardeman, Paul, Inc.,  15 
Harmon  International  Aviator’s  Trophy, 
273, 317 
Harp,  Project  (High-Altitude  Research 
Pro jec t)   (USA), 29,411 
Harper, Carl Brown, 410 
Harper, Charles W.,  322 
Harper’s Dry Lake, Calif.,  239 
Harrison, Nat,  Associates, 52 
Harrison, Patrick,  Inc.,  119 
Hart, Mrs. Philip A.,  164 
Hartman, Edwin P.,  139 
Hartmann, Dr.  Sven R.,  383 
Harvard  Business  School  Club of  Wash- 
ington, 8 
Harvard Univ.,  22,180,301 
Harvev.  Gordon.  167 
Havana. Cuba. 121 
Hawaii,’<  109: 207,268,332 
Hawaiian Telephone Co.,  412 
Hawker-Siddeley DH-125  (U.K.  j e t ) ,  209 
Hawkins. R.  S.. 230 
Haworth: Dr. Leland .T..  104 
Hawthome, Calif.,  201  - -  
Hayes, B/G  Thomas J.,  111  ( U S A ) ,   136,143 
Hazard, outer  space, 264-265 
Head. Dr. Richard. 4 
Health,  Education,  and  Welfare, Dept.  of 
( H EW ) ,   48,277 
Heart, 131,174,305 
Hearth. D.  P.,  199 
Heat exchanger, 142 
Heat-sensitive detector.  179 
Heat shield, 9, <45,1817 
Heat transfer, 14,70,236,305 
Heat  Transfer  Division Memorial Award 
(A SME ) .   403 
Heating,.i22-123 
aerodynamic, 290 
reentry,  9, 170-171, 226, 258, 289 
solar, 141 
Hebrew Univ.  (Israe l) ,   125 
Height  gage, 39 
Heinkel  Go.,  265 
Held, Dr.  Richard, 9 
Hehoo te r .   216. 392 
record, 394 
speed, 207 
use of, 305,439 
Heliopolis, U.A.R.,  303 
Helium, 130,140,309 
Helium-oxygen atmosphere,  309, 373 
Helms Soaring Hall of  Fame, 244t 
Henderson, E.  P.,  133 
Herbig,  George Howard,  155 
Herodotus  ( lunar  cra ter) ,   205 
Herschel, S ir  William, 203 
Hershey,  Pa.,  379 
Herskovitz, Sheldon B.,  110 
Hess, Dr.  H.  H.,  116 
Hess,  Dr. Victor F.,  423 
Hetzel, E.  P., 264,278 
Heusinger, B.  IC, 302 
HEW.  See  Health,  Education  and 
fare,  Dept.  of. 

Wd- 

H F - 2 4   (fighter a ircraf t) ,  203 
Hibbard, William D., 181 
Hibex,  Project  (Hi-G  Booster  Experi- 
(ABPA),  10 
ment) 
High-altitude  Clear-Air  Turbulence  (H i-  
Ca t) ,   383 
Hi-Cat.  See High-altitude Clear-Air Tur- 
bulence. 
Hidden  Hills,  Calif.,  70 
Hi-Dive  (USAF  rocket),  317 
High, H.  J.,  Construction Co.,  164 
High  Resolution  Infrared  Radiometer 
(H r i r ) ,  298 
“Highlights  of  Recent  Space  Research”, 
Hilburn  Board, 151 
Hilburn,  Earl  D.,  42, 144, 165, 224 
Hill, Louis W.,  Award, 235 
Hindustan  Aircraft  Co.  (Ind ia) ,   203 
Hines, Prof. Colin O., 140 
Hines, William, 48 
History, 255-256 
Historv  of  Aeronautics  and   Astronautics. 
. 
Technical Committee on  (A IAA )   ,226 
H ITCHH IKER   I (sa te l l i te) ,  178 
Hjornevik, Wesley L.,  353 
H G ~ O  (lifting-body),  71, 201, 220, 308 
Hodges, Luther H., 43,119 
Hoffa, James R.,  243 
Holifield, Rep.  Chet. 117,201 
Holloman  AFB,  N.M.,  91, 133, 333, 9.09 
Holmberg, Neal A.,  150 
Holmes,  D.  Brainerd,  141 
Holzman,  B/G  Benjamin  G.  (USAF,  Ret.), 
366 
Honeycomb structure,  13,197 
Honeywell  Co.,  193, 257, 263 
Aeronautical Div.,  65,224 
Hooker,  Ray,  139 
Hordexum seed  experiment, 248 
Horizon  scanner.  77. 279-280.  241 
Homer, H.  M.,  161  ’ 
Homer, Richard  E.,  343 
Hornig,  Dr.  Donald  F..  12, 144, 186, 211, 
379;418,431 
“Hot universe”  theory,  180 
Hotz,  Robert  B.,  225, 240, 274, 324, 357, 
374, 409 
House, William C.,  108 
Houston Astros, 409 
Houston  Chronicle, 258 
Houston Museum  of  Natural  Science, 24A 
Houston Post,  55 
Houston, Tex.,  8, 35, 65, 81, 121, 206, 209, 
235, 244-245, 273, 277, 290,  299, 321, 
409 
Houston, Univ. of, 199 
Hovercraft. 311.354 
Howland Island, 333 
Hoyle, Dr. Fred, 23 
Huber, William G.,  238 
Hughes Aircraft  Co.,  61,90,105,160,209, 
228,237,384,49410 
Research Laboratory, 159,256 
Human centrifuge, 226,243 

492 

INDEX 

Human factors research, 9,166 
Human  Factors 
in  Electronics,  F if th  
Annual Conference on,  166 
Humphrey, Sen.  Hubert H.,  180,275,286, 
297,312,347 
Humphrey,  Vice  President-elect  Hubert 
H.,  398 
Humphries, Col. George E.,  421 
Hunsaker, Dr. Jerome C.,  247 
Hunter, Maxwell W., Jr.,  26 
Huntsville, Ala.,  29,35,70,104 
Huntsville  Industrial  Expansion  Commit- 
tee, 367 
Hurlburt,  E.  O.,  Center  fo r   Space  Re- 
search  (NRL )  ,15 
Hurricane, 122, I%,  218,253 
Hurricane Cleo, 297,316 
Hurricane Dora, 309-310,316,326 
Hurricane Ethel, 326 
Hurricane Florence, 326 
Hurricane Gladys, 321 
Hussein I, King  (Jordan) ,  142 
Hutchins, Dr.  Robert M.,  120 
Hyatt, Abraham, 247 
Hydrazine, 62, 230 
Hydrocarbon, 181 
Hydtofoil, 370 
Hydrogen, 140,226 
atomic, 15 
liquid, 14,32 
propellant, 223 
Hydrogen bomb, 14,394 
Hydrogm-fire detector, 210 
Hydrogen peroxide,  89,247, 298 
Hydrology, 62 
Hyman,  Hayman, and Harris, 14 
Hynek, Dr.  J. Allen, 72,393 
Hypersonic flight, 33, 173 
Hypersonic  Ramjet  Experiment  Project, 
391 
HGr&onic  vehicle, 257 
Hypervelocity impact, 197 
Hypervelocity 
Symposium, 
Impact 
Scventh, 392 
Hypotension,  orthostatic,  129, 177-178 
IAA.  See International Academy of  Astro- 
nautics. 
IADR.  See  International  Association  for 
Dental  Research. 
IAF.  See 
International  Astronautical 
Federation. 
IATA.  See  International  Air  Transport 
Association. 
IAU.  See 
International  Astronomical 
Union, 
Iberia Air Lines  (Spa in) ,  159 
IBM.  See International Business Machines 
Corp. 
ICAO.  see  International  civil  Aviation 
Organization. 
Icarus  (Intercontinental  Aerospacecraft 
Range  Unlimited  System)  (see  also 
Ithacus) ,81432,246 
ICBM.  See  Missile,  ballistic,  interconti- 
nentaL 

Iceland, 273 
Idaho,  306 
IEEE.  See  Institute of  Electrical and  Elec- 
tronic  Engineers. 
IGY.  See International  Geophysical Year. 
IIOE.  See International  Indian Ocean Ex- 
pedition. 
IISL.  See International  Institute  of  Space 
Law. 
IIT  Research  Institute  (Illinois  Institute 
of Technology), 135,197 
Ikeda,  Prime  Minister  Hayato  (Japan) ,  
115 
Ikeya  (comet), 398 
I le  du Levant launch center  (France) ,  233, 
371 
Illinois, Univ. of, 140,241,393 
Image orthicon tube, 72 
Image velocity sensor, 257 
IMCC.  See  Integrated  Mission  Control 
Center  (MSC)  . 
IMP I  (Interplanetary  Monitoring  Plat- 
form).  See EXPLORER  XVIII. 
Impact  studies, 197 
Imperial College, London, 71 
“An  Improved Precision Height Gage”, 39 
India,  60,70-71 
cooperation, space, 31,% 
Dept.  of  Atomic Energy, 31,70 
launch, 6,10,25 
space program, 7 
Indian Ocean, 70,107,294,325,405 
Indiana  Univ..  100 
Indonesia, 89 . 
Industrial  applications  of  space  research, 
33,39,288 
Industrial  Nucleonics  Corp.,  100 
Industry extension service, 226 
Industry  Studies  on  Manned  Interplane- 
tary Missions  for  NASA,  Symposium on, 
29 
Inertial guidance, 121,193,263 
Information, 132,312 
distribution  of, 243,255,305 
exchange of, 1,310 
scientific  and  technical,  144, 237, 243, 
283,285,293 
Information  and   analysis  center  (DOD )   , 
303 
Information retrieval, 58 
Infrared,  57 
Infrared  astronomical  observatory  (Pro i-  
ect  Amos),  57 
Infrared horizon scanner, 241 
Infrared laser rays, 112 
Infrared  radiation, solar, 76,230 
In jun   (satellite),  473 
Innovations, 88,217, 280, 306 
Innis, Robert C.,  376 
Innsbruck,  Austria,  32 
Insect, 89,171,174,179 
Institute  for  Satellite  and  Space Research 
(W. Germany),  385 
Institute  for Strategic Studies  (U.K.),  385 
Institute  of  Astrophysics  and   Space  Re- 
search  (W. Germany), 372 

INDEX 

493 

Institute  of  atmospheric  science  (pro- 
posed,  U.  of  Miami),  100,147 
Institute  of  Electrical  and   Electronic 
Engineers  ( IEEE ) ,   51,  300,  306,  366 
Institute  of  Marine  Sciences, 100 
Institute of  Navigation, 231 
Institute  of  Normal  and   Pathological 
Physiology  (U.S.S.R.),  226 
Institute  of  planetary  bioscience  (pro- 
posed,  U.  of  Miami),  100 
Institute  of  Scientific  and  Technical  In-  
formation  (U.S.S.R.)  , 211 
Institute of  space physics  (proposed, U. of 
Miami),  100 
Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aerospacial 
(Spa in) ,  31 
Insulation,  103 
Integrated  Mission Control Center  (IMCC) 
(M SC )   , 206 
Interceptor  aircraft,  72,  154 
Intercontinental  Aerospacecraft,  Range 
Unlimited  System.  See  Icarus. 
Interferometer, 269 
Interim  Communications  Satellite  Com- 
m ittee .   3.17 
Interior,  Dept.  of,  231 
Office of  Solar  E n e r m   180.  275 
International  Academy  of  Astronautics 
( I A A ) ,   266,  311,  389 
International  agreements 
communications  satellite  system,  240, 
293 
India-NASA,  7ir-71 
NAS-U.S.S.R.,  182 
NBS -USSR . ,  41 
US -ESRO ,  264 
US-Ma lagasy  Republic, 306 
US.-U.S.S.R.,  251,256 
International  Air  Transport  Association 
(IATA),  114 
International  Association  for  Dental  Re- 
search  ( IADR ) ,   121 
International Association of  Man in Space, 
372 
International  Astronautical  Federation 
( IAF ) ,   14 
15th Congress, 308-309410,313-314 
International  Astronautics  Award,  Gug- 
genheim, 1964,315 
International  Astronomical  Union  (IAU)  , 
296-297-298-301 
International  Atomic  Energy  Agency 
( IAEA ) ,   426 
International  Atoms-for-Peace  Confer- 
ence, Third, 305 
International  Business  Machines  Gorp. 
( IBM ),73,142,284 
Advanced  Systems  Development  Div., 
239,  255 
Federal Systems Div.,  122 
International  Civil  Aviation  Conference, 
216 
International  Civil  Aviation  Organization 
(ICAO),  406 

communications  satellite 
International 
system.  See  Communications  satellite 
system, international. 
International  controls,  space experiments, 
76 
International  Convention of  Military Elec- 
tronics. 317 
International  cooperation,  16,  84,  96-97, 
198,251,287,295,308-309,324 
civil aviation, 216 
communications, 25,  32,  49,  55,  58,  61, 
75,  129,  185,  205,  215,  218,  247,  260, 
282-283,  285,  293,  313,  315,  330,  449 
IQSY, 45 
meteorology,  1-2 
nuclear,  72 
space  (see  also International  space pro- 
grams),  6-7,  16,  27,  29,  35,  38,  75, 
97,  112-113,  132,  194,  195,  203,  235, 
239-240,  250,  269-270,  271-272,  287- 
288,  311,  345 
tracking  stations, 264,306 
International  Council of  the  Aeronautical 
Sciences,  4th  Congress, 296 
International Date Line, 105,294,305,310, 
314 
International  Geophysical Year  ( IGY ) ,   45, 
70 
International  Indian  Ocean  Expedition 
( I IOE ) ,   71,  107 
International  Institute  of  Space  Law 
( I I SL ) ,   14 
International  Satellites  for  Ionospheric 
Studies.  See Isis 
International  Scientific Radio Union,  140 
International  space law,  symposium, 313 
International  space  programs  (see  also 
International  cooperation, space), 36- 
37,269-270,371 
FranceSpain,  204 
U.K.-Australia-Emo,  269-270 
U.K.-Italv.  311 
U.S.-Argentina,  403 
US.-Australia,  84,  139, 222,  284,  292 
US.-Canada,  10-11,  30,  42,  47,  63,  189, 
nr 0 L10 
US.-Denmark, 56,173 
U.S.-ESRO, 264 
US.-France,  311 
US.-India,  31,  70-71 
US.-Italy,  311,  476, 
U.S.Japan,  115, 140,294 
US.-Netherlands,  278 
US.-Norway, 56,216 
US.-Spain,  31 
US.-Sweden. 99.147.205.24J 
US.-U.K.,  118,311, &13,482 
US-U.S.S.R.,  2,  17,  30, 5 M 0 ,  97,  172, 
~ 
175.204-205,208.240 
International  Symposium on  Bioastronau- 
 
I
.
tics and the  Exploration of  Space, Third, 
388,  393 
International  Telecommunications  Union 
(ITU)  ,37,260,313 

INDEX 

International  Telephone  and  Telegraph 
Co.  (ITT)  , 61, 74, 79, 379, 412 
International  Union  of  the   Physiological 
Sciences  (IUPS) ,266,315 
International  Year  of 
the  Quiet  Sun  
(IQSY ),34,42,140, 356,395 
Interplanetary flight, 176,301 
Interplanetary  Monitoring  P 1 a t f o r m 
(Imp) .   See EXPLORER  XVIII,  EXPLORER 
XXI. 
Inventions  (see  also  Pa ten ts) ,   12, 25, 82, 
114, 142 
policy, national, 5,293 
property rights, 5,43 
waiver,  294, 329 
Inventors, 5,12,25,66,82 
Inventors’  Congress  and  Space  Sympo- 
sium,  369 
Ion  engine,  electrostatic,  142, 159, 238 
Ion  measurement, 15, 30, 50-51, 140 
Ion propulsion, 82,324,410 
Ion  thrustor,  159 
Ionization gage, 77 
Ionized  calcium, 180 
Ionized plasmas,  132 
Ionosphere, 76, 140 
effects of,  251 
measurements, 11,210,249,296-297,393 
research,  30, 50, 110, 125, 241, 468 
Ionospheric D  region,  51, 56, 140, 422 
Ionospheric E region, 51,140 
Iinospherib  Research  Laboratory  (Royal 
Technical  Univ.,  Denmark),  56 
Iowa,  102,128 
Iowa, Univ.  of, 387 
Iowa Wesleyan College, 232 
IQSY.  See International Year of  the Quiet 
Sun. 
Irish  International Airlines, 81 
Iron  Workers  Union  (mu)  (see  alw 
United  Iron  Workers),  126, 131 
Isakov, P.  K.,  309 
Isis  (International  Satellites  for  Iono- 
spheric  S tud ies) ,  11 
Israel,  55 
Italian-American  Democratic  Organiza- 
tions  of  New  York,  Federation  of,  101 
Italy, 227, 246 
cooperation, 311 
satellite  launch,  420, 476, 487 
tracking  station, 264, 381 
(formerly 
Ithacus 
(rocket 
transport) 
Icarus) ,238,246 
ITT.  See  International  Telephone  and 
Telegraph  Co. 
ITU.  See  International  Telecommunica- 
tions  Union. 
m da ta  adapter.  See Computer. 
IUPS.  See  International  Union  of 
Physiological Sciences. 
Iwan, Lawrence S., 236 
IWU.  See Iron Workers Union. 
Izvestia,  1, 104,204,272,282,348,3% 
5-2  (rocket  engine),  159, 248,  294, 403, 
416 

the  

J-4  (enpine).  215 
5-68  ( e i g i n e j  ,86,261,429 
Jack,  John R.,  142 
Jackass Flats, Nev.,  175,300 
Jackson,  Nelson  P., Aerospace  Award, 
111 
Jacobson, Col. R.  K. (USAF)  ,41 
Jaffe,  Leonard, 130,352 
Jane’s All  the  World’s A ircraf t ,  421 
Japan,  19,210,258-259,347 
communications,  185, 189, 219 
launch, 245,258-259 
meteorologists, 112 
TV  transmission, comsat,  115, 140, 294, 
314 
Japan  Broadcasting Corp.,  259 
Japanese  Ministry  of Posts  and   Telecom- 
munications, 315 
Japanese  Research  Council,  112 
Jasperson,  Capt.  Robert  E.  (USN,  Ret.), 
188 
Jastrow,  Dr.  Robert, 314 
Javelin 
(sounding  rocket).  See   Argo 
D-4. 
Javits,  Sen.  Jacob K.,  18,35,201 
Jefferson, Howard B.,  319 
Jeffries,  John, Award, 376 
Jenkins,  Dr.  Dale,  178 
Je t  airborne simulator system, 147 
Je t   control, 248 
Jet  Propulsios  Laboratory  (JPL) 
Tech) ,  37, 135,60,137 
awards, 246 
facilities,  177 
launches. 34.64.263.378.397 
Manner project;  30630c 338 
NASA management,  58,6041.97-98,128, 
137-138, 163-164, 422-423, 435 
organization, 137,220,224 
Ranger project,  42,58,64,128,137-138, 
151, 163-164, 215, 218, 266-267, 275, 
309 
research, 62, 144, 167, 297, 399400 
Jetstar.  See  C-lMA. 
Jet  stream,  140 
JHU .   See Johns Hopkins Univ. 
Jodrell  Bank  Experimental  Station 
(U.K.),  54575-76,85,97,242,246 
Jodrell  Bank  Radio  Astronomy  Station, 
(U.K.)  ,239,253,270 
Job 
(Dept. 
classification  handbook 
Labor),  218 
Johannesburg, So.  Africa, 174,226 
John  F.  Kennedy  Space  Center,  NASA. 
See Kennedy Space Center, NASA. 
Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  ( JHU )  , 57, 79, 131- 
132,408 
Johnson, Clarence L.,  315-316,328 
Johnson, David S.,  101 
Johnson, Gerald W.,  19 
Johnson, John  A., 265.337 
Johnson,  President  Lyndon B.,  6,55, 117, 
129, 143, 164, 188, 218, 234-235, 245, 
247.257.294.297.307.  323.330.397- 
.
.
,
.
 
398, 4Q8; 437. 

(Cal 

INDEX 

495 

aircraft.  287 
A-1  1 ‘( YF - 1 2A )   ,85-86,%,  93,133,255 
bomber,  140 
SR-71 ,   260-261,  274 
appointments, 12-13 
awards by,  11,184,316,328 
budget,  12,20-21,  244,300-301 
communications satellite system, 58,278, 
405 
defense, 320-321 
disarmament, 17 ,21  
economy, 18,38,40,257,265-266 
education, 2 
international  cooperation,  16,  265,  287 
peace,  17, 21,50,  143, 201,272,333 
RANGER  VII.  272.  287.300 
space  pro&am;  32, bo, 85-86,  223,  267, 
272,278-279,317418,335 
supersonic  transport,  85,  149,  153,  183, 
405 
technological change, 387 
Johnson, Mrs.  Lyndon B.,  109, 114,294 
Johnson, Pau l  G.,  235,440 
Johnson, Richard L.,  428 
Johnson, Vincent L.,  210,371 
Johnson, Dr. Woodrow E.,  108 
Johnston  Island,  Pacific,  161, 394 
(U SA ) ,   394 
Johnston,  Maj.  John  A. 
Joint Chiefs of  Staff, 260 
Joint  Navigation  Satellite  Committee 
( JN SC )   ,312 ,347  
Jones, B/G  David M.  (USAF )   , 375 
Jones, Dr. W&.m  L.,  Jr., 361 
Jordan,  142 
Josias. Conrad. 82 
Jour&l  o f  the Armed Forces, 246,254,262, 
307408 ,339 ,347  
Journal of  the National Education Associa- 
tion  ( N E A )  , 2  
JP -4   (fue l) ,   81 
JPL.  See Je t  Propulsion Laboratory  (Ca l  
Tech). 
Judi-Dart 
(NASA-PakiStan 
sounding 
rocket)  !see  also Da r t ) ,  107 
Juergensen, Klaus, 114 
Jupiter  (missile), 32 
Jupiter  (p lane t) ,  153,399 
atmosphere, 140,179 
radiation belt, 387 
temperature,  326 
Jupiter C  (booster), 37 
Justice, Dept. of, 220 
Kabanov  Effect, 330 
Kabanov, Prof. Nikolai, 330 
Kagoshima  Space  Center,  Japan,  245 
Kalimin, Prof. Yu.  D.,  374 
Kaman Aircraft  Corp.,  207 
Kamanin, L/G  N.,  365 
Kane,  Col.  Francis  X.  (USAF ) ,   161 
Kania, Island  of, 4& 
Kantrowitz, Arthur,  230 
Kaplan, Lewis D.,  35,48 
Kappel, Frederick  R.,  334 
Karachi, Pakistan, 107 
Kardashev, Nikolai S.,  364 

Karlsruhe, West Ger.,  26 
Karrer, Dr.  Sebastian, 148 
Karth,  Rep.  Joseph  E.,  69,  71,  114,  150, 
163.  313 
K&e, 
Pres.  Abeid  (Zanzibar),  129 
Kashima, Japan,  185,315,326 
Katz, Lester,  114 
Katz, Dr. Ludwig, 178,325 
Kaufman, Harold R.,  82,142 
K C - 1 3 0 F   (Hercules),  371 
K C - 1 3 5   (Stratolifter),  182,208 
Keating,  Sen.  Kenneth  B.,  187,  201 
Keats, E.  S.,  158 
Keldysh, Mstislav V., 198,359 
Kelley Board.  See NASA  Board of  Inquiry. 
Kelley, Dr. Albert J.,  43,111,184,275,368, 
388,  393 
Kemp,  Richard  H.,  82 
Kennedy Airport  International  Hotel,  326 
Kennedy, David M.,  242 
Kennedy,  President  John  F.,  22,  47,  58, 
6 0 6 1 ,   101,  189, 206,  208,  223,  246,  272, 
329,377 
Kennedy  Space  Center,  NASA  (KSC )   (see 
also Merritt  Island Launch Area) ,  81, 
101,120,263,  317 
accident, 135,141,147 
contract, 88,328329,336 
facilities, 39,77,276 
organization, 53-54 
support services, 85,331 
Kepler  (lunar cra ter) ,  275 
Kerbel,  Lev,  132 
Kerosene, 81,  229-230 
Kerr, Breene M.,  195,395 
Kerr, Clark, 323,331 
Kerr, Sen. Robert S., 201 
Kharkov  Univ.  Observatory  (U.S.S.R.) , 
315 
Khrushchev,  Premier  Nikita  (U.S.S.R.)  , 
17,143,195,253,300,323,351,353 
Kidd. Dr.  Charles V..  308 
Kidde, Walter, and  do . ,  247 
Kiess, Dr.  Carl C.,  48,148 
Kiewit,  Peter,  and   Sons,  Inc.,  8,  13, 62 
Kiker,  John,  361 
Killian, Dr.  James R.,  Jr.,  154,355 
Killion, George L.,  242 
Kimball, Daniel A.,  55,332 
Kimball, Neb.,  268 
Kindelberger,  James  Howard,  Memorial 
Laboratories,  NAA   Science  Center,  298 
Kinetic energy, 151 
Kinzel, Dr.  Augustus B.,  154, 416 
Kirchner. Dr. Werner R..  369 
kiruna,Sweden,360 
kiruna,Sweden,360 
’ 
’ 
Kistiakowsky, Dr.  George B.,  35,  281 
Kistiakowsky, Dr.  George B.,  35,  281 
~ 
~ 
Kiwi  (nuclear reactor),  385 
Kiwi  (nuclear reactor),  385 
Kiwi B-4A  (nuclear reactor).  195.320 
Kiwi B-4A  (nuclear reactor).  195.320 
Kiwi B-4D  (nuclear reactor) ; 195; 229 
Kiwi  B -4D -CF   (nuclear reactor),  63 
Kiwi B - ~ E  (nuclear reactor),  229,311 
Kiwi B-E  (nuclear  reactor),  299 
Klein,  Milton,  435 
Kleinknecht, Kenneth S., 265 

496 

INDEX 

Kleinsaechter, Dr.  Hans, 263 
Knauf, Dr.  George M.,  80,423 
Knepton, James C.,  Jr., 174 
Knudsen, Morrison, 102 
Kock,  Dr.  Winston Edward, 244,  304,  427 
Koelle, Dietrich E.,  197 
Koelle, H.  H.,  401 
Kollmorgen Gorp.,  269 
Kollsman Instrument Co.,  218 
Komarov, Vladimir Mikhailovich, 348-349, 
355,359,469 
Komsomolskaya  Pravda, 30 
Konecci, Dr. Eugene B.,  124,166,309-310, 
361,376,419,420-421 
Koppers  Co.,  Tnc.,  Malm  Construction 
Dept,  247,  406 
Korovin, Y.  A.,  396 
Kosygin,  Premier  Alexi  (U.S.S.R.)  , 353, 
413,437 
Kotelnikov, Vladimir, 321 
Kozyrev, Dr.  Nikolai A.,  180,316 
Kraft, Christopher C.,  Jr.,  63,265 
Kraft, Dr. Robert, 401 
Kramer, James J., 328 
Kramer, S. B.,  200 
Kranish, Arthur, 88 
Krmnaya  Zvezda  (see  also Red   Star), 74, 
118,131,253-254,273 
Kreplin, Robert W.,  45 
Kronoglrd  Range,  Sweden, 241,  277,  283, 
287-288 
Krylov, Marshal Nikolai I., 394 
Krzeminski, Dr. W., 401 
KSC.  See  Kennedy  Space  Center,  NASA. 
Kubesch, Maj.  Sidney J.  (WAF ) ,   315 
Kuhrt, Welsey, 26 
Kuiper,  Dr.  Gerard  P.,  148, 267,271,275, 
299,301,331,336,347 
Kurashika  Astronomical  Observatory 
( Japan ) ,   210 
Kurnit, Norman A.,  383 
Kuzin. Alexander. 202 
Kuznetsov, Prof. A:  G., 309 
Kuznetsov, Dr. Oleg, 355 
Kwajalein Island,  Pacific, 239 
6 2 9  (U.S.S.R.  a ircraf t) ,  212 
Labor, 24,  141 
Labor, Dept.  of, 24,218,302 
Lacklen, Robert J.,  341,439 
Lagos,  Nigeria, 158 
Laika  (dog,  U.S.S.R.),  152 
Laird,  Rep.  Melvin,  115 
Lambda  ~n  (Japanese  sounding  rocke t) ,  
245 
Laminar  flow,  123 
Landing, computer, 411 
Landing impact test, 313 
Landing instrumentation, 259 
Landing requirements, je t   transport,  150 
Landing pad, instant,  232 
Landing  site, 303 
Land’s End  (U.K.),  110 
Lang, Dave W., 277 
Langley AFB, Va.,  176 

Langley Medal  (Smithsonian Institution), 
A 8,  216, 
166 
Langley Research Center  ( m c )   NASA), 
42, 71,  135,  142,  181-182,  1 
230,260,276 
contract,  52 ,93  
experiment, 132, 135,290 
facilities,  159,  182 
inspection week,  181,188 
management,  177 
organization, 177 
research,  189-190,  223,  319,  327 
test,  150 
Langmuir probe,  373 
Lankeneau Hospital, 129 
Lansche, Jane  Elizabeth, 237 
Lanzo, Chester D.,  25 
URC.  See Langley Research Center. 
Large  Orbital  Research  Laboratory 
(Lor l) ,   122, 145 
Lariat  (Laser  Radar  Intelligence Acquisi- 
tion  Technology), 181 
Las Cruces, N.  Mex., 353 
Laser, 155,257,346 
deep  space 
acquisition, 5 
tracking  techniques,  5,  109-110,  386, 
407 
infrared  rays, 112,325 
use  of,  93,  121-122,  168,  181, 258,  383 
Laser  plasma  diagnostic  probe,  159 
Laser  Radar 
Intelligence  Acquisition 
Technology  (Lar ia t) ,  181 
Laser radar system, 113,278 
Laser  rifle,  94 
LASL.  See Los  Alamos  Scientific Labora- 
tory. 
Lasv.  See  Low  Altitude  Supersonic  Ve- 
hicle. 
Launch Complex 19  (KSC -M ILA )   , 20, 38 
Launch Complex 20  (KSC -M ILA )  ,269  
Launch Complex 39  (KSC-MILA)  , 2 9 1  
Launch vehicle 
development, 309, 
contract,  253,  260,  319 
expenditure, 99 
military, 213 
operations and  capability,  176, 234,  237 
Laurence. William L..  19 
Lausche, Sen. Frank,’201 
Lava  fields, lunar  surface, 276,  299,  301 
Lavrentev, Mikhail A.,  21 
Lawrence Radiation  Laboratorv  (Univ. of 
Calif.),  1 , 1 9  
Lawyer,  Capt.  Richard  E.  (U SAF ) ,   304 
Lazar, James, 229 
Lear, John,  307,347 
Lear  Siegler,  Inc.,  Electronics  Instru- 
mentation Div.,  102 
Leavell, C. H.,  and Co.,  13,62,102 
Lebedev, Dr. Vladimir, 355 
Legislative Reference  Service, Library  of 
Congress, 301,310 
Leighty, George W.,  69 

INDEX 

497 

Lem.  See L u n p  Excursion Module. 
Lem  Truck  (Lunar  Excursion  Module) 
(see also Apollo),  105 
LeMay,  Gen.  Curtis E.  (USAF ) ,   44,66,69, 
72,92,140,315,401,430 
L e m o n ,  R. M.,  215 
Leningrad, U.S.S.R.,  261 
Lerner, Max, 352 
Lesa 
(Lunar  Exploration  System  for 
Apollo) ,74 ,170  
Leslie Miller, Inc.,  127 
Lessman, Richard C.,  236 
Leutkirch, West Germany, 283 
Levin, Boris, 272 
Levitt, Dr.  I. M.,  205 
Levy, Lillian, 86 
Lewis Research Center  (LRC) (NA SA ) ,   25, 
62,  78,  115,  142,  lS8,  214,  219,  256, 
276,403 
contract,  119,367 
experiment,  124 
management,  311312  
organization, 328 
Plum Brook  Station, 221,224,317 
programs, 230,236,444 
research,  293 
test,  163,197,216,444 
zero-gravity facility, 62 
Lexington, Va.,  188 
Ley, Dr. Willy, 64 
Libonati, Rep.  Roland V.,  70 
Library  of  Congress,  239,  301,  310 
Lick  Observatory, 155 
Liege Univ.  (Belgium), 432 
Lievens, Edward J.,  Jr.,  150 
Life detector instruments, 169 
Life (magazine), 405 
Life preserver, 354 
Life  science  (see  also  Bioscience),  194, 
208,  309410,  350 
atmospheric pressure, 56 
blood pressure, 178,243 
disease.  communicable. 249 
genetiis,  169,171,179 
heart,  172,174, %l, 243 
helium  environmental effects,  309 
nervous system, 169,178 
nutrition, 151 
optics, 4.8 
oxygen  environmentpl test,  44, 87,  130, 
174 
radiation, 48,72,169,248 
weightlessness, 56,89,129,171,174,179, 
248,309 
Life  support  systems, 122 
Lift-fan aircraft  (XV - SA ) ,   251 
Liftingbody  glider, 71  
Lifting body space vehicle, 224 
Light  beam  communications  system,  142 
Light  intensity measurement,  13,243 
Lighthill, Michael V.,  279 
Lightning damage, 289,294 
Ligida, Dr.  Myron G. H., 278 
L i l   See Lunar  International Laboratory. 

Lincoln, Neb.,  247 
Lincoln Laboratory, 269,433,435 
Lindbergh, Charles A.,  326-327 
Linde Div.,  Union Carbide Corp.,  401 
Ling-Temco-Vought, hc.,  Range Systems 
Div.,  88,  106, 216,  217,  236,  437 
Lingle, Walter L.,  Jr,, 144, 173 
Link  Foundation  of  New  York, 200 
Link  Group,  General  Precision,  Inc.,  430 
Link,  Marilyn,  200 
Lipscomb, Rep.  Glen P.,  59 
Liquid  Missile  Propellants  Symposium, 
379 
Liston, Sonny, 81 
Little  Joe  II  (booster),  89,  90,  175,  410, 
483,487 
Little Rock, Ark.,  278,369-370 
Littlewood, William,  236 
Litton Industries,  159,224 
Livermore  Radiation  Laboratory, 246-247 
Lloyd-Davies, David,  253 
Llrv.  See  Lunar  Landing  Research  Ve- 
hicle. 
Loads, aircraft,  156 
helicopter, 216 
Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.,  31,  216 
( Y F - l 2 A ) ,   85-86,92,154,254,  328 
A -11  
contracts, 85-86,  405 
SR-71,  429 
supersonic  transport,  13,  28, 183,  201, 
373-374,  405 
u-2,  383 
XH - S lA ,   420 
X H - S l N ,   216,422 
Lockheed-California Co.,  80,  135, 291-292 
Lockheed-Georgia Co.,  207,  379 
Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.,  9,103,247, 
281,343,393,406 
Lockheed Propulsion Co.,  193,331,402 
Lof,  George,  275 
Loginov, Yevgeny  F.,  241 
Loki-Dart (sounding rocke t) ,  70-71 
London,  U.K.,  5,  46-47,  59,  129,  158,  161, 
189,205,218,314,330 
London Gliding Club, 432 
London Univ.  (U.K.)  ,424  
Long, Dr.  S.  Burman, 207-208 
Long, Sen. Russell B.,  79,434 
Longmont,  Colo.,  166 
Loory,  Stuart H.,  145 
Lorl.  See  Large  Orbital  Research  Lab- 
oratory. 
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory  (LASL), 
63,  175,  229,  299-300,  320, 444 
Los  Angeles,  Calif.,  5,  8,  66,  74-75,  121, 
165-166,  168,244 
Los Angeles Times,  262 
Losey,  Robert  M.,  Award,  376-377 
Louden, Frederic A,,  90 
Louisiana, 324 
Love,  Gov.  John A.,  58 
Lovelace Foundation  for  Medical  Educa- 
tion  and Research,  175-176 

498 

INDEX 

Lovelace,  Dr.  W.  Randolph, 11,  143,  168- 
165, i'5-176,  187,443 
Love?l, S ir  Bernard,  76,109,242,246,266, 
273.  340.  357 
,
.
 
  James  A.,  Jr.  (U SN ) ,   102, 
LOVPC J x d .
167,263, 336 
Low  Altitude  Supersonic Vehicle  (Lasv) , 
gnx 
LoG,-George  M.,  17,30-31,65,68-69,206, 
209,  347,  356 
Lowell Observatory, 78,106,203-204,205, 
316,  401 
Lowerv Electric. Inc..  39 
Lowman, Dr.  Paul, 170 
Lowry, Dr.  Romney H.,  24 
LRBM.  See  Missile,  ballistic,  long-range. 
LRC.  See Lewis Research Center  (NASA). 
Lucas, William R.,  352353  
Luedecke,  M/G  Alvin R.  (USAF  Ret.),  224 
Lufthansa-German Airlines, 96 
Lunar  (see also Moon) 
base,  manned, 73,  95,  105,  143, 389 
crater,  154, 180, 267,271,  275-276,  298- 
299,  364 
environment,  13 
exploration,  20-21,  170,  180,  253,  262, 
276.  366-367 
graviG,70 
photographs,  271,  272,  274,  275-276, 
287-288,301,306-307.307,357 
probe.  152 
surface,  164-165,  180,  197.  203,  263, 
267,  271,  272,275-276,  287-288,  298- 
299,301,306-307,331 
Lunar  and  Planetary Laboratory, 223 
Lunar  clock, 205 
Lunar eclipse, 424,426 
Lunar  Excursion  Module  (Lem) ,   (see 
also Apo lb  spacecraft), 39,73,100,139, 
183,  267-268,  298-299,  306,  344,  357, 
358 
Lunar  Excursion Module  (Lem)  Test  Fa- 
cilities  (NASA), 31 
Lunar Exploration Symposium, 215 
Lunar Exploration System for Apollo.  See 
Lesa. 
Lunar  hopper  (helicopter  device),  251 
Lunar  International  Laboratory  (Lil) , 
308309,314,389 
Lunar  Landing  Research  Facility  (LBRC) , 
181-182 
Lunar  Landing  Research  Vehicle  (LIrv), 
138,  197, 218,  368,  377,  396,  440 
Lunar map,  136,220-221,223 
Lunar Orbiter  (probe),  47,69,171,276 
Lunar  program  (US.) (see  also  Moon 
and  Lunar) ,  6-7,35-36,131,152,188- 
189,189,254,314 
appropriations,  12-13,20-21,40,  45-46, 
244 
cooperation, 12,35-36 
criticism, 131, 194, 245-246,  258,  362 
importance of, 63-64,  271,271-272 

manned  flight  and  landing,  13,  20-21, 
71,  77,  141, 158,  199, 206,  215,  228, 
262,  267-268,  268-269,  275-276, 
276.316-317.324.354-355.355.379 
.
,
 
simulation, 10,'181-182 
Lunar research, 362 
Lunar Research, Conference on Geological 
Problems in,  180 
Lunar science, 271-272 
Lunar  surface locomotion, 197 
Lunar telescope, 72 
Lunar  transport  ferry, reusable, 281 
Lundberg, B.  K.  O.,  194-195 
Lunde, Barbara, 181 
Lundin, Bruce T.,  163 
LUNIK  III  (U.S.S.R.  lunar  probe),  150-151, 
152 
LUN IK   IV (U.S.S.R.  lunar  probe),  159 
Luster,  Project,  387 
Luyten, Dr. Willem J.,  154 
Lyman-alpha radiation experiment, 15 
Lynch,  James J., 229 
Lyster, Theodore C.,  Award, 175-176 
M-1  (rocket  engine),  78,  80 
M-2  (lifting-body),  71,201,220,308 
MA-4  (Project Mercury),  225 
MA-5,  225 
MA-6,  2% 
MA+,  225 
MA--8,  225 
MA-9, 225,247,273 
Macalester College, 33 
McClellan, Sen. John  L.,  430 
McCone, John, 119 
McConnell, Gen. John P.  (USAF),  333,430 
McCormick, B.  B.,  and  Sons, Inc.,  329 
McCusker, Donald F.,  425 
MacDill AFB.  Fla..  404 
McDivitt,  Capt.  James  A.  (USAF)  , 263 
McDonald, Frank B.,  352 
McDonald Observatory, 148 
McDonnell  Aircraft  Gorp.,  lll, 182,  226, 
240,261 
McDonnell, James S.,  240 
McElroy, Neil H.,  358 
MeGill Univ.  (Canada) ,  10,29,411 
McGovern,  Sen. George, 75,81-82 
McGrath, Thomas L.,  59 
McKay,  John  B.,  103,  174,  227,  297,  352, 
380,  399 
Mackay. Radio  and Telegraph  Co.,  55 
McKee, Col. Daniel  (U SAF ) ,   55 
McKee, Robert E.,  31 
McKee,  Gen. William  F.  (WAF,  Bet.), 
266,  304 
MacKenzie, John  P.,  61  
McKenzie Pass, Cascade Mountains, Oreg., 
296 
MacKenzie, Vernon G.,  230 
McLafferty, George H.,  26,108 
McMillan, Brockway,  354 
McMorrow,  M / G   Francis  J.  (USA). 103 
McNamara,  Robert  S.,  9,  28, 66,-92, 98, 
119,  135,  206,  240,  248, 257,  287,  322- 
323,345,353,388,404,414,417,429430 

IND 
)EX 

499 

Macomber, John  W.,  25 
Madagascar, Malagasy Republic, 306 
Madrid, Spain, 31 
Magic Mountain  Laboratory, 368 
Maglic,  Dr.  Bogdan  C.,  352 
Magnet coil, 380 
Magnetic equator, 31,M 
Magnetic  field,  2, 50,  169, 174, 245,  250, 
379 
Magnetic fluid, 142 
Magnetic hammer,  329 
Magnetic storm, 50 
Magnetic tape, 82, 1% 
Magnetometer, 31,103,325 
rubidium vapor, 210,395 
Magnetometer hammer, 439 
Magnetosphere noise,  125 
Magnuson, Sen. Warren G.,  38 
Maguire, Charles A.,  Associates, 410 
Majunga,  Madagascar, 306 
Malagasy Republic, 306 
Malan  Construction Co.,  247, 406 
Malaysia, 263 
Malfunction  detection  system,  13, 121 
Malina, Dr.  Frank  J.,  389 
Malta Test Station  (GE), 70 
Manpowered flight,  433 
Manchester, U.K.,  85 
Manchester  College of  Science and Tech- 
nology  (u.K.), 403 
Mandelkorn, Joseph,  202, 276 
Mandiovsky, Dr. Boris, 390 
Manila, Philippines, 332 
Manned  Interplanetary  Missions  Studies 
Performed  by  Industry  for  NASA  in 
1963/64, Symposium  on,  29 
Manned  Orbital  Research  Laboratory 
(Morl) , 93, 189 
Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (Mo l) ,   74, 
146,206,307,429 
booster,  245, 429 
contract, 192,197,257 
Gemini B,  261 
hearings, 44,65,92,l08-109 
management, 11,41,123 
plans  for,  26, 45,  90, %,  139-140, 209 
proposed merger with Apollo-X, 382,418 
purpose.  2, 4-5, 8-9,  44, 68, 91-92, 99, 
112,211 
test, 174, 195 
Manned Orbiting Telescope  (Mo t) ,  327 
Manned Spacecraft Center  (M SC )  
( N A S A ) ,  
16,33,66,116,121,134,207,223,263, 
265,302 
astronant training, 5,25,43,66,100,159, 
263,336 
contracts,  277 
construction, 8,10,102,268,328 
service, 320-321 
study, 81,292,404 
facilities, 3,25,74,77,115,237 
Center Support Facilities, 8, 268 
Florida Operations, 54,299 
Mission Control Center,  IO, 206 

Mission  Simulation and  Training Fa. 
ciliQ, 8 
support services, 81-82 
manned space missions 
Apollo,  24, 43, 77, 116, 237, 239,244, 
292,297.299.314 
Gemi&,  5,- 25,-43, 57, 131, 168, 182, 
193, 212, 239, 259, 264-265, 276, 
292,294,329 
M a w  9 
space stations, 80,122,287 
tracking. 5 
organizatsn,  17,54,91, 242 
research, 81,103, 158,172,188,230 
Manned space flight, 26,%.  118,152. 197. 
.
.
.
 
294,301,326,-340 
appropriations, 20,46,185 
capability, 184 
circumlunar, 173 
cooperation, 2 
cost of, 20-21,23,99,104 
hazards, 48 
lunar  bases, 95 
lunar  exploration, 67,105 
lunar landing  (see also Lunar program), 
69,274,301 
appropriations,  20, 285 
criticism, 194,269 
goal, 23,46,52,300 
training, 296 
objectives, 217 
program,  5253, 156 
R&D, 65 
Manned Space Flight Meeting, Third, 375, 
377 
Manned space shuttle service, 24,135 
Manned space station.  See Space station, 
manned. 
Manov, Dr.  George G.,  102 
Manpower 
civil aviation, 55 
scientific and   engineering,  7, 246, 262- 
263 
Mansfield, Sen. Mike, 221 
Manton, William I.,  174 
Map 
lunar,  220, 223 
weather, 240 
Maples, Hoyt, 415 
Mar.  See  Radar,  Multi-function  Array. 
Marconi Co., 424 
Mare  Cognitum  (RANGER  VII  lunar  impact 
site), 304 
Marine  Sciences,  Institute  of,  100 
Mariner  (spacecraft),  82, 199, 2.12, 276, 
300301 
MARINER  11  (Venus probe),  152, 172, 184, 
318 
MARINER  111  (Mars  probe),  378, 459, 467 
MARINER  N  (Mars  probe),  393, 443, 444 
course, 398-399,407,422 
Geminid stream, 415,426 
launch, 397398,460,468 
performance, 431,434 
Markey, Dr.  Winston R, 289 

500 

INDEX 

Marks, Leonard H.,  242 
Marquardt  Corp., 368 
Mars  (p lane t) ,   1,  105,  180,  187,  393 
atmosphere,  8,  35,  48,  88-89,  106,  148, 
168-169,  180,  336 
exploration, 106,359,391 
flight 
manned, 9,158,185,235 
unmanned,  171,  199,  217,  257,  276, 
295,  301,  324,  470-471,  474-475 
life,  8,  48,  143-144,  148,  168-169,  180, 
208,210,259,437438 
surface, 88-89,106,148 
MABS  I  (U.S.S.R.  probe),  172 
Mars  spacecraft,  9,  106,  143-144,  168-169, 
309 
Marshak, Prof. Robert E., 348 
Marshall, Gen. George C.,  77 
Marshall,  George  C.,  Research  Library 
(VM I ) ,   188 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center 
(MSFC) 
( N A S A ) ,   29,  114,  122,  29-292,  302, 
320,329,397 
c-i  rocket  engine,  399-400 
contract, 73,120,424 
construction, 102,402 
study,  183,  248-249,  253,  281,  302, 
352 
support  services,  14,  59,  84-85,  238- 
239 
facilities, 77 
mankgement, 73,120,367 
oreanization. 5344 .109  
S&rn  (bodster),  8,  14,  49,  73,  84,  104, 
109,  114,  120,  149,  159,  189, 212,213, 
235,  247,  248,  294,  302,  330 
Saturn  Flight  Evaluation  Group,  49 
studies,  105, 224 
Marshall Star, 8 
Martin  Co.,  5,  10,  39,  155-156,  192,  197, 
205,217,240,245,259 
Martin Marietta Corp.,  123,171 
contract, 3,74,308 
Space Systems Div.,  286 
Martlet  (Canada4 .S .   rocket),  10,29 
Maryland, Univ.  of, 162 
Maser.  295 
MaApOptics,  Inc.,  94 
Mason-Rust Co.,  238-239,414 
Massachusetts. 312 
Massachusetts'  Institute  of  Technology 
(M IT ) ,   9,  22,  56,  154,  237,  245- 
246,  247,  289,331,  336,339,  362,379, 
397 
Lincoln Laboratory, 269,433 
Massie, Sir Harrie, 118 
Matador,  241 
Mateos, Pres. Adolfo Lopez  (Mexico), 273 
Materials, 156,181, M, 303 
heat-resistant,  181-182,  !&X,  289 
structural, 77,147,207,257 
Mathematics, 255-256 
Mathews,  Charles  W., 20,212,329,365- 
366 

Matthews Corp.,  224 
Matthews, Prof.  Pau l  T., 71-72 
Matthews, Dr.  Thomas A.,  120 
Maui Island, Hawaii, 57 
Mauna Loa, Hawaii, 275-276 
Maxwell, B/G  Jewel1 C.  (USAF), 3 
Mayevsky,  Victor, 352 
Mayo, Ivan W.,  358 
Mazdiyasni,  Khodabakhsh  S.,  153 
Mazur, Daniel G.,  352 
MBA.  See Missouri  Bankers  Association. 
MBS.  See  Mutual  Broadcasting  System, 
Inc. 
Mds.  See  Satellite,  Micrometeoroid  De- 
tection. 
Mead, Merrill  H.,  202 
Meany, George, 323,331 
Medal For  Outstanding Leadership, NASA, 
258 
Medal  of  Recognition  (U SA ) ,   136 
Medicine  (see  also  Life  sciences),  204, 
265,  397 
Medium  Orbital  Research  Laboratory 
(Mor l) .   See  Orbital  Research  Lab- 
oratory, Medium. 
Meehan, Dr.  John P.,  243 
Meeker, Leonard C.,  116 
Meinel, Dr. Aden B.,  3-4 
Meinel, Carolyn P.,  3 4  
Melbourne, Australia,  139 
Memorandum of  Understanding 
international,  70-71,  95,  258,  362,  375 
national,  57, 237,  319 
Mengel, John,  435 
Mercury  (p lane t) ,   1,  105 
Mercury  (pro jec t) ,  33,46-CE7,99-100,111, 
129,  157,  194,  207,  225,  228,  247, 
265,384 
award, 317,325 
flight,  4,  190,  273,  317,  318,  325 
Mercury  propellant,  158-159 
Mercurv-Atlas exhibit.  145 
Merrit; 
Island  Launch  Area 
(KSC)  ,109,120,354 
facilities 
construction, 28 ,38 ,39 ,   131,  164,  181, 
268,328,329,369 
support  services,  54-55,  88,  148,  201, 
222,  299 
launch complex, 38,268,291 
strike,  59,  65,  124,  126,  128,  131,  133, 
141,424 
Message Multiplexer, 330 
Messerschmitt Co.  (W. Germany),  265 
Metal  fatigue,  103 
Metal  fiber, 197 
Metal fracture toughness, 223 
Meta-planning, 161 
Meteor,  1 4 4 5 ,  52,  171,  174, 241,  414,  415 
Meteorite,  121,  128,  132,  133,  171,  190, 
280 
Meteoroid, 194,  197,286 
hazards, 210,389 
Meteoroid  detectioq  satellite,  380 

(M ILA )  

INDEX 

501 

Meteorological da ta  
acquisition  and   processing,  43,  49,  196, 
223 
exchange,  1-2 
Meteorological  Institute  (Univ.  of  Stock- 
holm),  288-289 
Meteorological  satellite.  See  Nimbus, 
Tiros, Tiros Operational System. 
Meteorology (see also Weather),  190,204, 
908 
MZL system, 5 ,339  
Metrology, 41 
Metzler, Allen  J.,  142 
Mexico,  46 
Mexico City, Mexico, 39,241 
Mexico, Gulf of, 49,102,167 
Mexico-US. Commission for Space Obser- 
vations, 12th Session, 39 
Miami, Fla.,  112,175,190,  194,323 
Miami, Univ.  of,  100 
Michigan,  13 
Michigan, Univ.  of, 30,  135,  137,210, 264, 
391,393 
Michoud Operations  ( N A S A ) ,   84,  127,149, 
173,  211,  212,  230,  238-239,  304,  316- 
317,324,402,405,414,424 
Micrometeoroid, 118,263,283 
Micrometeoroid Detection Satellite  (Mds) 
(see  also Pegasus),  138 
Micrometeoroid  dust  impact,  131 
“Micromouse burps”  calibration,  324 
Microscope, electron, 326 
Microwave  communications system, 143 
Midwest, 75,211,261,330-331 
Midwest Governors’  Conference,  312413, 
313 
Midwest Office  (NA SA ) ,   proposal for,  102- 
103 
MiG  ( j e t  fighter) , 439 
Mikhailov, A.  A.,  203 
Mikoyan, President  Anastas I.  (U.S.S.R.)  , 
437 
Mikoyan, Artem  I.,  363 
m L A .   See  Merritt  Island  Launch  Area. 
- .   - 
Milan, Univ.  of  ( I ta ly ) ,   Polytechnic Insti- 
tute,  127 
Military  bases,  satellite  photographs,  195, 
910 
MZ&ry  capability, 89 ,333  
Military  Electronics  Convention  (IEEE)  , 
51-52 
Military  procurement  and   R&D  authoriza- 
tion  bill,  69,  72,  79,  81,  82,  98,  101 
Military  Requirements  Review  Group, 
USAF/NASA,  319 
Military  Sea  Transportation  Service 
(MSTS ) ,   64-65 
Milky Way Galaxy, 23,314 
Miller,  Bernie P.,  353 
Miller, Mre.  Betty, 273,317 
Miller, Rep. George P.,  2 4 1 2 - 1 3 , 1 5 , 6 7 ,  
126,136,150,163,176,292-293,298,311 
Miller,  Col.  Robert  C.  (USAF ) ,   376377  
M d e r ,  Rep.  William, 313 
Bilillikan,  Dr.  Clark Blanchard, 155 

Milovidov, I. V.,  374 
Milwaukee, Wis.,  47 
Minnaert,  Marcel  Gilles Josef,  155 
Minneapolis  Honeywell  Regulator  Co. 
See Honeywell Co. 
Minneapolis,  Minn.,  312413,  313 
Minnesota, Univ.  of,  154 
Minor AFB, N.  Dak.,  51 
Minton,  Dr.  John   Peter,  112 
Minuteman  (missile),  8,  9,  66,  89,  166- 
167,  314-315 
bases.  255 
laun&  15,  32,  62,  6 3 , 7 a 7 9 ,  79,  84, 89, 
122,  264,  330,  378 
failure,  116 
I,  330 
11.  328.  367.424 
Mira  ired’s tar j ,   223 
Mishkol’tse,  U.S.S.R.,  253 
Miskovskv.  George, 175,244 
- 
Missile.  303 
air-td-air, 86,  331 
antisatellite,  330,  370371  
ballistic,  46-47,  98-99,  129,  136-137, 
182-183 
intercontinental  (Icbm) , reliability, 
9,  69,  112,  136-137,  170-171,  238, 
409 
long-range  (L rbm ) ,   15 
explosion, 181 
guided, 52,  280,328 
military  application,  foreign,  52 
nuclear, 213,  246-247 
reliability, 6, 9, 28,  33,  69,  136-137,  141 
transport  system, 238 
Missile,  Ballistic,  and   Space  Technology, 
Ninth  Symposium, 284-285 
Missile-bearing submarine,  136-137 
“Missile  gap”,  441 
Missile installations, 393 
Missile  Sites  Labor  Commission,  Presi- 
dent’s  (M SLC ) ,   24-25,65,124,131 
Missiles and  Rockets, 269,281, 317 
missile, 52, 282 
space 
cooperation, 311 
facilities, 58,  67 
plans,  19,  143-144,144,  199,220,247, 
295 
programs,  29,  164,  165,  181,  419 
research,  78,  129, 274,  383,  409, 428- 
429,  429 
Mission  Control  Center  (M SC ) ,   10 
Mission Simulation and  Training  Facility 
(M SC ) ,   8 
Mississippi Test  Facility  (MTF )  
51, -77 
construction,  13,  61,  121,  127,  203,  216, 
247.  434 
support  services, 14 
Missouri Bankers Association  (MBA )   , 173 
Missouri  Cotton  Producers  Association, 
1% 

(NA SA ) ,  

INDEX 
Missouri Valley College  (Marshall, Mo.) , 
1% 
MIT.  See Massachusetts Institute of  Tech- 
nology. 
Mmu.  See Modular Maneuvering Unit. 
Moberly, Mo.,  291 
Mock.  Mrs. Geraldine. 142.164 
Mod&  Maneuvering Unit  (Mmu) ,313 
Moffatt,  Dr.  John W.,  155 
Moffett Field.  Calif..  231 
Mohole, Project  (N S F ) ,  21  
Mojave, Calif.,  19 
Mol.  See  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory. 
Molab  (mobile laboratory), 251 
Mold,  73 
Molecular densities, 241 
Molybdenum, 146 
Moms.  See Satellite, Multiple Orbit-Mul- 
tiple. 
Mongolia,  354 
Monitor Systems, Inc.,  440 
Monomethylhydrazine, 400 
Monroney,  Sen. A.  S.  (M ike) ,  78,  82,  181, 
310 
Montoya, Rep. Joseph M.,  320 
Monument.  132.  384 
I~  , 
Moon  (see   also  Lunar  program),  28,  70, 
102,125,188 
and  cloud relationship. 288 
atmosphere, 106-107  - 
craters,  154,  180,267,271,299,364,441 
exploration  of,  2,  35,  69,  72,  81,  106, 
156,  170,  230,  240,  251,  272,  275,  297 
landing 
manned,  2,  6,  16,  20,  45, 52,  54,  95, 
100.  104-105.  116.  132.  152.  173. 
189;  204,  2 k 2 0 7 ;   258;  261;  268; 
278,321 
unmanned, 156-157,  176-177,  258 
map of, 220,223 
photographs,  271-272,  273,  307,  460 
surface  of,  69,  78,  103,  106,  128,  156, 
164-165,  180,  203,  220-221,  223,  237, 
267,  272-273,  275-276,  299,  307,  331, 
426427 
volcanic activity,  180 
water on,  223,  438 
"Moon  Blink",  426 
Moon  Harvest,  Project  ( N A S A ) ,   128 
Moon  suots.  red.  78.  203-204.  205 
Moore, George S..,  19' 
Morgan, Williim  C.,  82 
Morl.  See Manned Orbital Research Lab- 
oratory. 
Morl.  See  Orbital  Research  Laboratory, 
Medium. 
Moron Air Base,  Spain, 5 
Morris, David,  383 
Morris, Thomas D.,  291 
Morrison-Knndsen Co.,  Inc.,  15 
Morrison, Dr.  Richard B.,  210 
Morse, Rep. F.  Bradford, 339 
Morse,  Sen. Wayne L., 51  
Moscow  (U.S.S.R.), 
10,  21,  34,  54,  59, 
130,131,132,143,174,204-205,208,210, 
226,289 

Moses,  Robert, 310 
Moss, William W.,  349 
Mosser Construction Co.,  367 
Mot.  See Manned Orbiting  Telescope. 
Motion  picture,  382 
Motorola,  Inc.,  Western  Military  Elec- 
tronics Div..  412 
Mt.  Haleakala, Maui Island, Hawaii, 57 
Mt.  Kobau,  B.C.,  396 
Mt.  Palomar  Observatory,  120,  179-180, 
326,  398 
Mt.  Wilson Observatory,  148,  180,  398 
Mrazek,  Dr.  William  A.,  109 
MSC.  See  Manned  Spacecraft  Center. 
MSFC.  See Marshall Space Flight  Center. 
MSTS.  See  Military  Sea  Transportation 
Service. 
MTO.  See  Mississippi  Test  Operations, 
NASA. 
Mud  Lake,  Nev.,  66 
Muden, So.  Africa,  226 
Mueller, Dr.  George E.,  120,  187,  218,  234 
Apollo, 54,74,77,104-105,157-158,173, 
194,237,299-300,364, 
387 
Gemini, 68-69,  74,316,356 
hearings, 69,  104 
lunar program, 52-53,369 
Saturn, 138,173,199 
space flight, manned,  184,206 
space  program,  53,  326,  368-369 
Muhleman, Dr. Duane O.,  165 
Murphy, Charles J. B.,  441 
Murphy, Dr. Thomas P., 4,395 
Murray, Dr. Bruce C.,  179 
Mururoa,  Tuamotu  Islands,  14,  266 
Museum  of  History  and  Technology 
(Smithsonian  Institution),  241,282 
Museum of  Modem Art, 230 
Museum  of  National  Science  (Houston), 
244 
Mutual  Broadcasting  System, Inc.  (MB S )  , 
149 
Muzzaffarpur, India,  133 
(Northrop  flying wing),  239 
~ ~ - 3 2 4  
Mylar,  141 
N-on-p  (negative-on-positive) .  See  Solar 
Myrtle Beach,  S.C.,  309 
cell,  radiation-resistant. 
NAA .   See National  Aeronautic  Associa- 
tion. 
NACA.  See National  Advisory  Committee 
for Aeronautics. 
NAE.  See National Academy of  Engineer- 
ing. 
NAFEC.  See  National  Aviation  Facilities 
Experimental  Center.  FAA. 
Nakamura, Seitaro, 394 
NAPCA.  See National  Association of  Pro- 
fessional Contract Administrators. 
NAR.  See  National  Association  of  Rock- 
etry. 
NAS.  See National  Academy  of  Sciences. 
NAS-NRC.  See   National  Academy of  Sci- 
ences-National Research Council. 
NASA.  See  National  Aeronautics  and  
Space Administration. 

INDEX 

503 

NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion Office 
( SNPO ) ,   63,  140,248,311, 327,  385 
NASA Authorization  Act  (see  also  NASA, 
appropriations),  247 
NAS A Board  of  Inquiry  (Kelley  Board), 
151 
NASA  Central  Instrumentation  Facility, 
MILA, 28 
NAS A Contributions Award, 276 
NASA  Deep  Space Network, 31 
NASA-DOD Aeronautics  and   Astronautics 
Coordinating Board  (AACB )   ,90 
NASA-DOD agreement  on  operational track- 
ing  ships, 64-65 
NASA-DOD-Dept. 
of  Commerce  Geodetic 
Satellite  Policy Board,  325 
NAS A  Electronics  Research  Center  S i te  
Evaluation  Committee  (see  also  Elec- 
tronics Research Center, NASA),  23,113 
NASA Electronics  Research  Task  Group, 
304 
NAS A Group  Achievement Award,  77,  221 
NAS A Historical Advisory Committee, 178, 
322 
NASA-JPL  Tracking  Station,  Goldstone, 
Calif..  37.  143 
NASA  Manded-Space  Flight  Experiments 
Board,  137 
NASA  Medal  for  Outstanding  Leadership, 
258 
NASA  Midwest  Office,  proposal  for,  102, 
145 
NASA New  Orleans  Coordinating  Commit- 
tee, 316,324 
NASA  Ninth  Semiannual  Report  to  the  
Congress, 245 
NASA  North Eastern Office, 304 
NASA  Policy  Planning  Board,  166 
NASA  Science  and   Technology  Advisory 
Committee  for  Manned  Space  Flight, 
120, 237 
NASA  Summer Faculty  Fellowship, 214 
NASA-SUPARCO  Project 
( s e e   also  Jud i-  
Dar t) ,   107 
NASA Test Complex Beta, 403 
NASC.  See  National  Aeronautics  and  
Space Council. 
Natal,  Brazil, 375 
National Academy of  Engineering  ( N A E ) ,  
12, 154, 416 
National Academy of  Sciences  (NA S I ,   12, 
31,154-155,245,281,416 
agreements, 2,  182 
Panel  on  Astronomical Facilities,  385 
report,  109 
sonic boom,  183,227 
Space Science Board,  116,151,158,210, 
356,  366,  391 
National  Academy  of  Sciences-National 
Research  Council  (NAS -NRC ) ,   308 
National  Advisory  Committee  for  Aero- 
nautics  (NACA ) ,   136,  147,  154,171,  182, 
326 

National  Aeronautics  and   Space  Act  of 
1958, 5,44,217,282,294,  311,  331,338, 
377 
National  Aeronautics  and   Space  Admin- 
istration  (NASA),  25-26,  35,  51-52, 
54,71-72,102,117,136,154,156,171, 
206-207,  214,  216,  235,  261,  294-295, 
300-301,308,310-311 
agreement, 43 ,64 ,237 ,258  
international,  11,  59,  67,  7 1  
appropriations,  12, 20,  46, 115, 180, 183, 
185-186,228,237,242,266,276,285- 
286 
astronaut,  10,  209,263,  306, 318 
award,  77,  82,  150,  180,  276,  352 
budget, 7,49,66,181,223 
contract, 86,  162, 189, 214,  237,  261, 281 
booster,  27,  84,  160,  211,  212,  213 
engine,  115,  116,  120, 242,  294 
facilities, 39,61,63,  143,224 
fuel,  14, 77 
ground  systems,  103,  132,  176,  216, 
325 
incentive, 171,173,342 
spacecraft, 65,  90, 116,  134,  171,  193, 
306 
space  equipment,  142,  143,  177,  218 
study,  33,  105, 208,  248,  259,  292 
support services, 58,85, 148,168,236, 
237 
cooperation, 176, 231 
DOD,  51,64,167,176,325 
application,  33 
Gemini, 12,82,  192 
Mol,  10,68, 90 
DOD-AEC,  231 
USAF, 55,  80,  96, 117,  171,  206,  237, 
257,  292,  302,  319,  322,  354 
USN,  71,  292-93 
ONR, 3 4 9 6 ,  @6 
cooperation,  international,  96-97,  24Q, 
324 
Argentina, 403 
Australia, 84,  103 
Canada,  11,  23, 30,  42,  47,  62,  141, 
2%  
Denmark,  56 
ELDO, 269-270 
ESRO,  258 
France,  95 
India, 6,  31,70 
Italy,  115 
Japan,  115 
Netherlands, 278 
Norway,  56 
Pakistan,  107,403 
Spain,  31 
Sweden, 99,205,299 
U.S.S.R.,  17,27,30,54,59,75 
criticism  of,  56, 201,  203,  207 
economy, 38 
education,  136 
expenditures,  202 
experiment, 71,77,137,1% 

504 

INDEX 

National  Aeronautics  and   Space 
Administration-Continued 
facilities, 103, 109 
construction,  15,  38,  61,  63,  77,  102, 
136,  164 
ground  system,  132 
location, 91,  327 
support  services, 54 
funds.  48 
grants,  11,  156,  162,  199, 211,  216,  220, 
239,  241,  245,  259,  280.  331 
information  dissemination,  255,  282 
launch,  8,  258 
balloon.  96. 291 
deve lo imenc  launch  vehicle,  32,  192, 
227,  321 ,414415  
failure. 9.41.109.215.227 
probe, ’interplanetary,’ 378,  397 
probe,  lunar,  34,  263 
satellite,  8,  118,  290,  296,  298,  305- 
306,339,346,380,394-395.420.427 
sounding rocket.  11; 13.  14.22-23-  30. 

328,  335,  343, 355,  360-361;  363; 
368,  374,  374-375,  379,  380,  384, 
%4,  387,  387,  391,  395,  415,  422, 
422 
t a t ,  192-193,  256 
Apollo,  175, 192-193,  321 
equipment, 256 
Gemini, 130 
reentry,  132,  135.  289-290 
managem&  11;  2 42 5 ,   25,  41,  49,  51, 
60,  73,  137-138,  173,  187,  195,  220, 
281,  302,311-312 
organization, 4,11,  12,16,17,22,24-25, 
43,  49,  51,  53-54  77,  102,  113,  120, 
143, 144, 154,  173,  187,  195, 202,  210, 
213,  224,  265,  266,  268,  274,  287,  301, 
304,306 
patent, 56,95 
legislation, 5,  4 3 4 4  
policy,  201,  293,  434 
waiver,  214,  293,  329 
personnel,  6, 35,  52-53,  230,  237,  244 
policy,  165,173,250 
procurement,  49,  51,  80,  143,  189,  257, 
293,329 
p r o g r k s ,   181-182,  1%, 219,243,  257 
APOUO, 18,185-186,224,225,228,237, 
316 
astronomy, 327 
bioscience,  72,  80,  151-152,  178-179, 
210 
Gemini,  18,  55,  68-69,  71,  273,  316, 
325 
lunar  orbiter,  69 
Oao,  212,215 
Oeo, 249-250  308 
Ranger,  34-35,  41,  41-42,  42, 60-61, 
64,150,150-151,151,215,263,267, 
267-268,298-299 

Saturn, 238,330 
space,  8,  20-21,  26,  35-37,  49,  50-51, 
5 2 4 3 ,   69,  71,  77,  94-95,  98,  106, 
117,  141,199,206,228,258,324 
space  station, 8,  80,  90 
Syncom, 286,  290-291,326 
Tos,  193 
Tracking  and  da ta   acquisition,  71, 
202-203 
report,  5,  35,  39,  43 44 ,  67,  95,  101, 104, 
142, 217,  235,  257,  263,  306 
research,  47,  53,  78,  277,  293,  326-327 
aeronautical,  78,  108,  117-118,  187- 
188, 292-293 
fuel,  246 
nuclear,  26-27,  83,  103,  229,  248 
DroDulsion,  23.  223-224 
scieniist  and   en’gineer,  94-95,  110-111, 
196 
standards,  reliability  and  quality,  143, 
281 
studies. 45.  95.  98.  241 
supersonic’ transport,  4,  43,  57,  78,  115, 
117-118,  119-120 
test,  71,  137,  147,  182,  192, 296 
communications, 3,  17-18,  22, 32,  1% 
tracking  station,  10,  27,  55,  103,  129, 
159, 306 
universities, 4,  100,406,428 
training,  4,  419 
X-I5,29,33,77,263 
National  Aeronautics  and   Space  Council 
(NA SC )  ,136,186-187,269,279-280,350, 
354-355,  361 
National Air  and  Space Museum (Smith- 
sonian  Institution)  (formerly  National 
A ir  Museum),  260 
National  Air  Museum  (Smithsonian  In- 
stitution),  35,  260 
National  Association of  Professional Con- 
tract  Administrators  (NAPCA ) ,   281 
National  Association of  Rocketry  ( NAR )  , 
292 
National  Automation  Conference  (Ameri- 
can  Bankers  Association),  252 
National  Aviation Facilities  Experimental 
Center,  FAA  (NAFEC ) ,   56,  214 
National Aviation System Symposium, 332, 
336 
(NBC )  , 1%, 
National  Broadcasting  Co. 
221,  294,  347 
National  Bureau  of  Standards  (NBS ) ,   5, 
4 ,33 9 ,363 ,3 73  
National  Business  Aircraft  Association 
(NBAA )   Award, 334 
National  Cancer  Institute,  PES, 112,  277 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
( N C A R ) ,   42,96,176,399 
National Center of  Space Research  (CNES- 
Centre  National  d’Etudes  Spatiales, 
France) ,  95.  273 
National Civil Service League Career Serv- 
ice Award, 1964,  136 

INDEX 

505 

National  Commission on  Technology, Au- 
tomation,  and   Economic  Progress,  259, 
286 
National Conference on the Peaceful Uses 
of  Space, Fourth,  156-157 
National  Defense  Transportation  Associa- 
tion,  370 
National  Editorial  Writers’  Conference, 
3x7 
NiGonal  Education  Association 
(NEA )  
J o u r a l ,  2 
National  Electronics  Conference,  357 
National Geographic Society ( NGS) , 1 6 1 7 ,  
325,  432 
National  Humanities  Foundation  ( N H F )  
(proposed),  240 
National  Institutes  of  Health  ( N I H ) ,   165- 
166.  308 
NGio&Labor  Relations  Board  (NLRB )   , 
2&25,61,126,128,133,209,  212 
National Magnet  Laboratow,  379 
National  Management Association, 342 
National Medal of  Science, 11,397 
National Merit Scholarship Corp.,  255-256 
National Meteorological Center,  439 
National Multipurpose Space Station, 388 
National  Operational  Meteorological  Sat- 
ellite System  ( N o m s )   (USWB ) ,   43 
National  Orbiting  Space  Station  (Noss) 
(DOD), 68 
National  Radio  Astronomy  Observatory, 
NSF,  321 
National  Range  Division  ( N R D )  
( A F S C ) ,  
3,  164 
Eastern Test Range  (ETR )  ,178,192,239 
Western  Test  Range  ( W T R ) ,   178,  192, 
239 
National  Reactor  Testing  station,  AEC, 
93 
National  Science  Foundation  ( N S F ) ,   21, 
48,  96, 104, 112,  161,  165-166,  220,  223, 
240,  3 6 2 , 4 0 1 4 2  
National  Security  Industrial  Association 
(N S IA )  , 246,344 
National Space Club, 34,68,111,144,182- 
183,217,259,290,319,358,397,420421 
National  Space  Development  Center 
( l a p a n ) ,  259 
National  Space  Research  Commission 
(Spa in) ,  31 
National  Space  Station  Planning  Sub- 
panel,  AACB,  90 
National  University Extension Association 
(NUEA )  , 149-150 
National  Weather 
USWB, 101,439,4.41) 
NATO  (North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organiza- 
t ion) ,   25,  349 
Nature  (British  journa l) ,   121,  278 
Naugle,  Dr.  John  E.,  98 
Naval Research Laboratory  (NRL )  , 15,45, 
179-180,  254,  271,  432,  436437  
Naval  School  of  Aviation  Medicine,  174, 
219 
776598 0-65-33 

Satellite  Center 

Navigation,  111-112,  125,  146-147,  305, 
333 
Navigation  satellite.  See  Satellite,  Navi- 
gational. 
Navy.  See U.S.  Navy. 
Navy  Oceanographic  Meteorological  Au- 
tomatic Device.  See Nomad. 
NBAA.  See  National  Business  Aircraft 
Association. 
NBC.  See National  Broadcasting Co. 
NBS.  See  National  Bureau  of  Standards. 
NCAR.  See  National  Center  for  Atmos- 
pheric  Research. 
NEA  Journal  (National  Education  Asso- 
ciation),  2 
Nebraska,  247 
Neeper,  Mr.  &  Mrs.  Bernard  W., 121 
Negative-on-positive  (n-on-p) . See Solar 
cell, radiation resistant. 
Negro,  space-age training,  263 
Nelson,  a v o   Emery  E.  ( U S A ) ,   394 
Nelson,  Sen.  Gaylord,  81,  214,  261,  330- 
331 
Nelson,  Richard  H.,  235 
NEO.  See  North  Eastern  Office,  NASA. 
Nema  (Nuclear  Engine  for  Rocket  Vehi- 
cle Application),  83,  140,  151-152,  236, 
327,353 
Ness,  Dr.  Norman F.,  420 
Netherlands, 249-250,  278 
Netherlands Organization for the Advance- 
ment of  Pure  Research, 278 
Neutron  flux mapping device,  25 
Neutron  star,  153,  254,  432,  436-437 
Nevada,  281 
Nevada Test Site, AEC,  104 
New  Hampshire, 64 
New  Hampshire, Univ.  of,  25,  31,  408 
New  Jersey,  165 
New  Jersey  Central  Power  and  Light Co., 
426 
New  Mexico,  34,254 
New  Mexico  S ta te  Univ.,  206 
New  Orleans, La.,  212,  238, 304,  316-317, 
324 
New  Orleans  Times-Picmyme, 281-282 
New  Product of  the Year Award  (M iss i les  
and  R o c k e t s ) ,  269 
New  York, 75, 231 
Atomic  Research  and  Development 
Authority, 70 
New  Yo rk   Herald  Tribune,  82,  122,  145 
New  York  Medical  College,  226 
New  York,  New  York,  1, 5,  19,  81,  129, 
142,  165, 200,  230,  240,  247,  288, 310 
meetings,  9,  21,  22, 23,  112,  114,  143, 
149,  154,  158,  158,  164,  167,  180,231, 
243 
New  Yo rk  Pos t ,   352 
New  York  Society of  Newspaper  Editors, 
215 
New  York  Society  of  Security  Analysts, 
161 

INDEX 

New  York  Times,  lO , ld ,  16 ,19 ,26 ,27 ,66 ,  
76,  86,  92, 156,  200,  220,  227-228,  255, 
256,272,288,382,411,436 
New  York Univ., 331 
New  York  World's  Fair, 101,  145,  214, 
310 
New Zealand, 66,414 
Newell, Dr.  Homer  E.,  176,  176-177 
moon,  106 
post-Apollo, 366-367 
Ranger,  150-151,267,271 
space programs, scientific, 50-51,69,71, 
79 
Newkirk, Dr. Gordon, 96 
News,  dissemination of, 248 
Newsom, Dr. Bernard D.,  384 
Newsweek,  28 
Newton, S ir  Isacc, 125 
NGS.  see  National  Geographic  Society. 
NHF.  See  National  Humanities  Founda- 
tion. 
Nichols, Jack   J.,  114 
Nickel  alloy,  56 
Nickerson, Col.  John  C.  (U SA ) ,   92 
Nicks, Oran W., 151,352 
Nicolaides, John D.,  163 
Nicolet, Prof.  Marcel, 266 
NIH.  See National  Institutes  of  Health. 
Nii Jima  Island, Japan,  259 
Nike-Apache  (sounding  rocket) 
launch 
foreign, 56 
Canada,  72,  84,  110,  113,  114,  115, 
133,  137,  145, 373,  378,  380 
India,  6 , 1 4 3 8 2 ,   384 
Pakistan,  107,399,@3 
Sweden, 277-278,283,287,288-289 
US.,  11,  13,  14,  42-43,  62,  140,  192, 
202,210,222,243,249,251,287,297, 
343,  344,  379,  384,  391,  392,  395, 
422 
use of, 31,241,278,290 
Nike-Cajun  (sounding rocket),  147 
launch 
foreign,  277-278,  283,  287,  403,  406 
US., 22-23,  30,  4 24 3 ,   47,  62,  99, 
141,277-278,283,287,374-375,391, 
392 
use O f ,% l  
Nike-Javelin  (sounding rocke t) ,   122 
Nike-Tomahawk  (sounding  rocket),  444 
Nike-X  (anti-Ichm  missile  system),  250, 
328,  332,  388 
Nike-Zeus  (antimissile  missile  system), 
211,  250,  322 
Nikolayev,  L/C  Andrian  G.,  10,  74,  177- 
178,209,248,286 
Nikolayeva, Yelena  Andrianovena, 248 
Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, Valentina,  10,  59, 
209,  226,  248,  443 
Nimbus  (meteorological sa te l l i te) ,  283 
NIMBUS  I  (meteorological  satellite),  298, 
305,  326,  442,  464465,  485 
photographs, use of, 309,310 
Nitric  acid  oxidizer, 233 

Nitrogen, 217 
Nitrogen-oxygen atmosphere,  309 
Nitrogen  tetroxide,  48, 229-230,  399-400 
Nitze,  Pau l  H.,  353,  379 
NLRB.  See  National  Labor  Relations 
Board. 
Nobel  Prize,  367 
Noctilucent  clouds,  3-4,  147, 241 
Noise  (see also  Sonic boom),  236 
aircraft,  reduction,  187-188 
boundary layer, 174,305 
galactic, radio,  118 
radio  frequency, 125 
turbulent  air,  103 
Nomad  (Navy Oceanographic Meteorolog- 
ical Automatic Device),  49 
Nomss.  See  National  Operational  Me- 
teorological Satellite  System. 
Noordwijk, Netherlands, 364 
NORAD .   See  North  American  Defense 
Command. 
Norair  Div.,  Northrop  Corp.,  145,  201 
Nord  262  (French  transport),  318 
Norman,  Lee,  156 
North American Aviation, Inc., 6, 66,  172, 
198,  214,  264,  278,  299,  402 
contract,  24,29 
research,  194,197,280 
Rocketdyne Div.,  45,  120,  159, 211,  219, 
236,  242,  248,  249,  294,  346 
Science  Center,  James  Howard  Kindel- 
berger  Memorial  Laboratories,  298 
Space  and   Information  Systems  Div., 
56-57,89,158,  160,186,216,239,306 
supersonic  transport  design,  13,  28,  183 
North  American  Defense  Command 
(NORAD ) ,   61,198,362 
Space  Detection  and   Tracking  Center 
(SPADATS)  , 254 
North Atlantic  Treaty  Organization.  See 
NATO. 
North  Carolina  Science  and  Technology 
Research  Center,  194 
North  Carolina State  College,  194 
North Carolina, Univ.  of,  194 
North  Eastern  Office,  NASA  ( N E O ) ,   102 
Northeastern  Univ.,  163 
Northrop Aircraft  Corp.,  321 
Norair  Div.,  145 
Ventura  Div.,  129,  144 
Northwestern Univ.,  393 
Norway,  56,216,246,  397 
Norwegian Space Research Committee, 56, 
375 
Nose  cone, missile, 57,  113,  171, 403 
NOSS. 
See  National  Orbiting  Space  Sta- 
tion. 
Notre Dame, Univ. of, 342 
Nova  (booster),  158 
Novae  Sagittae,  401 
Novins,  Stuart, 211 
Nozzle,  gimbaled, 89,  236,  331 
NRD.  See  National  Range  Division. 
Nrds  (NucIear  Radiation  Detection  Sat- 
e l l i te) .   See Vela,  Project. 

NRL.  See Naval Research Laboratory. 
(experimental  nuclear  reactor), 
NRX-A 
327,  385 
Al.  140 
-, - - -  
A2,327,  353 
NSF.  See National Science Foundation. 
NSIA.  See  National  Security  Industrial 
Association. 
Nuclear  energy,  17,  19,  21,  37,  104,  126, 
161,  266,288,295,337,360,426 
peaceful  use,  1,  25,  40-41,  143,  251 
power,  25,  40-41,  49,  145,  151-152,296, 
324.  333 
~- 
propilsion  system, 83,  89,  93,  228-229, 
296,302,305,320,333 
reactor. 25,  40-41.  83,  195.228-229.248, 
,
,
 
296,305;  311,320 
rocket,  gas-core, 26-27,  83 
Nuclear  energy  conversion,  151-152 
Nuclear-powered Low Altitude Supersonic 
Vehicle  (Last.),  303 
Nuclear  radiation  detection.  See  Vela, 
Project,  and Sentry. 
Nuclear  Rocket  Systems  Analysis  Pro- 
gram, Advanced, 236 
Nuclear  submarine, 221,  266,  302,  PO6 
Nuclear test  ban  treaty,  266 
NUEA.  See National University Extension 
Association. 
Nutley,  N.J.,  22,  130 
Nutrition,  151 
Nylon  parachute,  144 
Oakland, Calif., 317 
Oakwood,  Tex.,  176 
Oao.  See Orbiting Astronomical Observ- 
atory. 
OAR.  See  USAF  Office  of  Aerospace  Re- 
search. 
Oberth, Hermann, Award, 392 
Oberth,  Hermann,  Medal  (West  German 
Association  for  Rocket  Research Tech- 
nique  and  Space  F l igh t) ,  320 
Oceanography, 49,  146-147,  196,262 
Odessa, Tex.,  268 
O'Donnell,  Kenneth, 363 
Offenbach, West  Germany, 1 
Office National $Etudes  e t  de Recherches 
Aerospatiales  (ONERA  )  (formerly Office 
National  d'Etudes  e t   de   Recherches 
Aeronautiques) , 155,  233,  371 
Office  of  Naval  Research  ( O N R ) ,   34,  96, 
140,222,330 
Office  of  Science  and  Technology,  Presi- 
dent's,  12,  186 
Office of  Solar Energy  (D e p t  of  Interior), 
180,275 
Ogo.  See Orbiting  Geophysical Observa- 
tory. 
Ogo-E.  See  Orbiting  Geophysical Obser- 
vatory. 
Ohio,  15,  87,  121,289 
Ohio State Univ.,  33,217 
Ohnuki, Prof.  Y.,  71 
O'Keefe, Dr.  John  A.,  102,  128 

507 
INI)EX 
Oklahoma City,  Ob., 43,63,  84,  90,  175, 
177,  183,  187,  242,  244,  253,  268,  274, 
279,314 
Oklahoma  Frontiers  of  Science  Founda- 
tion,  340 
Olling, Edward  H.,  140 
Olson, Walter  T., 293 
Olympic  Games,  1964,  32,  146,  258-259. 
261,347 
Olympus (space station),  247 
Omaha World-Herald, 120 
Omega-minus particle,  7 1  
ONERA.  See Office  National  #Etudes  e t  
de  Recherches  Aerospatiales. 
om.  See Office  of  Naval  Research. 
Optical degradation, 118 
Optical  Re-entry Instrumentation  System, 
211 
Optical  reflector,  325-326 
Orange County, Calif.,  140 
Orbital operations, earth, 253 
Orbital  Research  Laboratory,  Large 
(Lo r l ) ,  122,  145 
Orbital  Research  Laboratory,  Medium 
(Mor11 , 145 
Orbital shuttle transport,  249 
Orbital systems, 145 
Orbital  tanker.  281 
Orbiting Astronomical Observatory  (Oao) , 
78,  106,  196,  201,  212,  215,  2311 
Orbiting  Astronomical  Observatory,  Ad- 
v a n c d   (Aoao), 98 
Orbiting  Geophysical Observatory  (Ogo) , 
196,200,436 
OGO-I,  306,  308,  311,  319,  456,  467 
Ogo  E,  249 
Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory,  Ad- 
vanced  (Aogo) ,98 
Orbiting observatory program, 258,  318 
Orbiting Solar  Observatory  (Om),  55,  95, 
135,  1% 
os0 I, 82 
Orbiting  Solar  Observatory,  Advanced 
(Aoso) , 98 
Orbiting  Vehicle  1 (ov-I) ,   383 
Orbiting  Vehicle 2  (ov-2) , 269 
Ordabl, Douglas D.,  190 
Orion  (constellation),  374 
Orion,  Project,  419 
Orlando, Fla.,  281 
Orroral  Valley,  Canberra,  Australia,  103 
Orthicon, image, 72 
Orthostatic  hypotension,  129,  177 
Osborne,  Dr.  Louis  S.,  22 
Osborne, Stanley de J..  76,90 
Oscar satellite  series, 254 
Om.  See Orbiting  Solar  Observatory. 
OSSA.  See NASA  Office  of  Space  Science 
and  Applications. 
Ostrander, M/G  Don  R. (USAF), 34 
O'Sullivan, William J.,  418 
Ousley, Gilbert W.,  336 
Outstanding  Achievement Award  (AFSC)  , 
39 

508 

INDEX 

Outstanding  Leadership  Medal  (NA SA ) ,  
258 
See  Orbiting  Vehicle  1. 
OV-I. 
ov-2.  See  Orbiting  Vehicle  2. 
Oxford, N .C ,99  
Oxidizer, 77,79,125,  190 
Oxygen, 15 ,230 ,290  
environment test, 44,87,130 
liquid,  190, 246 
measurement, 56-57 
Oxygen difluoride propellant,  78 
Oxygen-helium atmosphere, 309 
Oxygen-hydrogen fuel,  230 
Ozma,  Project,  321 
Ozone.  76.  118 
P-on-n.  See  Positive-on-negative. 
PAA.  See Pan  American Airways. 
Pace, Prof. Nello,  177-178 
Pacific  Missile  Range  (pm)  (see  also 
Western  Test  Range),  3 4 ,  95,  161 
budget,  21 
launch 
mipsile 
- Atlas  F,  63,  127,  145-146 
-.___. 
Minuteman,  15,  62,  78-79,  79,  116 
Titan 11.24.67.104 
satellite  misdon,'  10,  17,  25,  66,  78- 
79,  85,  102 
management, USAF,  34,178,192 
Pacific Northwest, 75 
Pacific Ocean,  37,  105,  158, 178,  185, 196, 
266,  268,  273-274,  290-291,  305,  305, 
314,  326,  333 
Pack, back, jet-propelled, 313 
Pads.  See Precision  Aerial Delivery Sys- 
tem. 
Page   Communications  Engineers,  Inc., 
383-384 
Pageant,  268-269 
Pageos  (Passive  Geodetic  Satellite),  419 
Pakistan,  96-97,  107,  399,  403 
Pakistan  International  Airlines  ( P IA ) ,   430 
Palestine,  Tex.,  42,  56, 57,  96, 140,  176, 
397 
Palewski. Gaston. 14 
Palm  Springs, c&,  197 
- __. . ... 
I  -  - - - - -  
Palmdale,  Calif.,  172, 297.  323.  429 
Pan   American  Airways  ( P n A ) ,   233,  398 
Pan American-Grace Airways, Inc.  (Fana- 
gra),  175 
Panama  Canal  Co.,  19 
Panama C a d  Zone, 221 
Panel  on  Astronomical  Facilities  (NA S ) ,  
38-86 
Pangborn,  W.  V.,  and  Co.,  Inc.,  39 
Papeete,  Tahiti,  14 
Papell, S. Stephen, 142 
Parabola,  zero-gravity, 70 
Parachute,  129,  144,  193,  317,  367 
drogue, 131,156,175 
jumps, 32,213,283 
Parade  of  Progress,  Cleveland,  O.,  300 
Parade magazine  (Washington Post), 207 
Paraglider,  68-69,  280 
test,  158,193,210,239,264,278,425 

Parasail,  131,  156, 182, 352, 361 
Parin,  Prof.  Vasily  V.,  177-178,  226 
Park ,   France,  14,  25,  79,  113,  264,  273, 
326-327,  439 
Parker,  Alvin  H.,  268 
Particles, energetic, 103, 249-250,  306-307 
Pasadena,  Calif.,  139, 139, 176 
PASSIM.  See President's  Advisory Staff  on 
Scientific  Information  Management. 
Pastore,  Sen.  John  O.,  19, 40-4.1,  117 
Patents  (see also Inventions),  56,  95,  100, 
102, 153, 184 
award, 66,172,188,287 
legislation, 5,  43-44 
policy,  5,  43-44,  201,  293,  329,434 
waiver,  214,293,329 
Patrick  AFB,  Fla.,  3,  164,  192,  424 
Patrick  AFB  Contractors' Association, 126, 
141 
Paiuxent  Naval Air Station, Md.,  437 
Pdo.  See Proiect Definition Phase  (DOD )   . 
Pau l  VI,  Pope, 273 
Pearson, Drew,  81, 262-263 
Pegasus  (micrometeoroid detection  satel- 
l i te ) ,  138, 286, 436 
Pell, Sen. Claiborne, 56 
Pelly, Rep. Thomas M.,  23 
Pendleton, Oreg., 116 
Pendray,  G.  Edward,  Award,  236 
Pennsylvania, 75 
Pennsylvania  Military  College  Engineer- 
ing  Centennial Medal, 206-207 
Pennsylvania, Univ.  of, 395 
Pepper  plant  experiment, 72 
Perini  Corp.,  15 
Perkin-Elmer Co.,  211 
Perkinson, William J.,  10 
Pershing  (missile),  394 
Personnel  exchange  agreement 
U SAF ) ,   319 
Peters,  L/C  John  D.  (U SAF ) ,   358 
Pettingill, Dr. Gordon H.,  297 
Phantom 11.  See F-4   aircraft. 
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  129,  143, 205,  322 
Philco CorD..  10.61.176.259 
Philippine;  '109' 
I
.
 
Phillips, Franklyn W.,  301 
Phillips,  M/G  Samuel C.  (U SAF )  ,315,364, 
371 
Phoebus  (graphite  reactor),  320 
Phoenix, Ariz.,  147, 306 
Phoenix  (missile),  190-191 
Photoelectric sensor, 339 
Photography, 55,271,315 
Photon echo effect, 383 
Photovoltaic cell,  202 
Physical  Review  Letters,  4,  383 
Physical  sciences,  151-152,  255-256,  344- 
345 
Physical  stress measurement, 241 
Physics, 198,241,262,265 
Physiological research,  29 
PIA.  See  Pakistan  International  Airlines. 
Piccard, Dr.  Jean  Felix, 132 
Piccard,  Dr.  Jeannette,  132 

(NASA -  

INDEX 

509 

Pickering,  Dr.  William  H.,  41,  128,  176, 
224,  267-268,271,  308-309,315, 416 
Pierce, Dr.  J. A.,  263 
Pierce, John  R.,  11 
Piezo-electric transducer,  131 
Pioneer  (space probe),  225 
Pilot,  110,233, 288,443 
Piper Apache  (a ircraf t) ,  317 
Pittsburgh,  Univ.  of, 328 
Pitz, Prof. Wolfgang, 262-263 
Planaria,  89 
Planetarium,  244 
Planetary  spaceflight, 176,297, 300-301 
Plans  for Progress  Seminar, 212 
P lan t  experiment, 179 
Plasma, 82,  132,  159 
Plasma  accelerator, 424 
Plasma-jet  generator, 238 
Plasma  physics, 241 
Plasma  probe, 325 
Plasma  torch,  433 
Plastic,  303 
Plastic  honeycomb  matrix,  181-182 
Platform,  stabilized, 22 
Pleumeur-Bodou, France,  32,  140 
Plum  Brook  Station,  LRC,  221,  224,  317, 
367 
Plummer, William E.,  340 
Pluto  (nuclear missile),  2 1 3 , 2 6 2 4 7 , 3 1 7  
Plutonium,  14.3 
PMR.  See Pacific Missile Range. 
Pneumotachometer, 440 
Point  Arguello,  Calif.,  102,  106,  114   146, 
182,203,220,239 
Point  Loma,  Calif.,  78 
Pt.  Mugu,  Calif., 178,  315,  326 
Poland,  311 
Polaris  (missile),  150,  268,  307,  314-315, 
330,  349 
launch 
A-Z,11,68,221 
A-3 ,6 ,19 ,238 ,266 ,279 ,406  
submarine firing, 209,430 
POLET  II  (U.S.S.R.  spacecraft),  134,  450 
Politics  and   science,  86-87 
“The  Politics  of  the  Space Age,”  86-87 
Polonium, 200 
Polyamide prepolymer, 228 
Polynesia,  14,  266 
Polyuretanes, 228 
Pompidou, Premier Georges (France) ,  266 
Ponnamperuma, Dr.  Cyril, 390 
Poodle,  Project  (USAF-AEC)  (see also Ro- 
ver) ,   200,209 
Popovich, Marina,  212,  282 
Popovich, L/C  Pave1 R.,  177,212,282,286, 
348 
Port Columbus Airport, O.,  142 
Porter,  Richard  W.,  172 
Portsmouth, N.H., 9 
Port  Tobacco, Md.,  364 
Portugal,  55,  132 
Positive-on-negative (p-on-n) , 19-20 
Positron, 4 

Potassium, 62 
Potrero,  Calif.,  193 
Power,  Gen.  Thomas S.  (USAF) , 4 0 0  
Power Engineering Co.,  127 
Prahl, Val E., 428 
“Prairie  Network”  (meteorite  tracking 
stations),  171 
Prather, Victor A.,  Award,  164 
P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.  (United  Aircraft 
Corp.) ,. 7 7 , 2 4 8 4 9  
construction  contract,  85-86,  193 
supersonic  transport  contract,  13,  28, 
161,183,201,373-74,405 
Pravda,  105,  142,  272,  308, 333,  381 
Precision  Aerial  Delivery  System  (Pads) 
(See  also Paraglider),  239 
Preflight  Operations  Div.,  MSC, 54 
Presidential  Medal  of  Freedom,  316 
President’s  Advisory Committee on Super- 
sonic Transport,  135, 142,  149,  162,  183 
President’s  Advisory  Staff  on  Scientific 
Information  Management  (PASSIM),  2, 
71 
President’s  Board  of  Inquiry,  51 
President’s  Missile  Sites  Labor  Commis- 
sion, 24-25 
president’s  Office  of  Science  and   Tech- 
nology,  12,  186,362 
President’s  Safety  Award,  184 
President’s  Science  Advisory  Committee 
(PSAC ) .   % 
Press  conference,  12,  40, 130,  140,  171, 
200,319,  323,  327 
A -11 ,   85,  133 
Apollo, 43 
international  cooperation, 74-75,  129 
JPL  management,  137 
missile reliability,  9, 33 
Mol  project,  417 
radiation  hazards, 45,131 
RANGER WI, d2 
Saturn, 32,4Q 
supersonic transport,  119,  148-149,  318 
Pressly, Eleanor,  109 
Pressure measurements, 379 
Pressure  suit,  146,  159,  197,  239-240 
Pressure  valve,  helium, 304 
Pressure  vessel,  thin-walled,  82 
Preston,  G.  Merritt,  120,431 
Price,  Rep.  Melvin,  317 
Priester,  Dr.  Wolfgang, 372 
Primus  Club, 412 
Princeton  Univ.,  154,223,374 
Pritchard, Wilbur L.,  118 
Prittie,  Terence, 303 
Probe,  20,263 
atmospheric, 42-43,  103,  159,  325 
lunar  (see  also  Ranger) ,   4 7 4 8 ,   143, 
152,308 
planetary  (see also  Mariner),  198,  208, 
295 
Products Aerospace Div.  (Bendis  Corp.) , 
13 

510 

INDEX 

Professional  Group  on  Antennas  and  
Propagation,  IEEE,  326 
Prokhorov, Aleksandr M.,  367 
Prom  (Program  Management,  Resources 
Management,  and   Objectives  Manage- 
men t) ,   285 
Propellant grain, 
Propellant,  78 ,229 ,235  
Propellant  tanks,  82 
Propellant  valve,  9,  181 
Propulsion, 190 ,241 ,302303  
chemical, 229 
electric, 229,  302,  324 
hydrogen peroxide, 89 
ion, 82,324,410,429 
jet, 47 
nuclear,  2%230,2%,  320,324,333 
ramjet,  77,  224 
rocket,  334 
Propulsion  Award  (A IAA )   , 166 
Propulsion  system,  22,  66,  107,  228,  2% 
Proton, 22,34,50,178,219 
Proton  detector,  325 
Proxmire,  Sen.  William, 81,  93,  127,  !276, 
329 
PSAC.  See  President’s  Science  Advisory 
Committee. 
Pucinski,  Rep.  Roman  C.,  117,  144,  211 
Puckett,  Dr.  Allen E.,  237 
Pulkovo Observatory  (U.S.S.R.)  , 180, 203 
Pulse  code modulation, 423 
Purdue  Univ.,  216,274 
Pygmy  (tetrahedral  satellite),  252 
Qantas  Empire  Airways  (Australia),  19 
“Quality Assurance Provisions for Govern- 
ment Agencies”  (NPC   Z O O - i ~ )  
,231 ,291  
Quality control, 6,  l rE 3  
Quarantine,  astronaut,  215 
Quasar  (quasi-stellar  ob jec t) ,   155,  340, 
419 
Quasar 3G273 ,155  
Quasi-Stellar Force  (Qsf) ,426  
Quasi-stellar radio source, 155 
Queen Mary College, London, 424 
Quesada, Elwood R.,  213 
Rabatin, Michael J.,  114 
Rabom,  V/A  William  F.,  Jr.  (USN, Ret.), 
126 
Radar,  30,168,239,429 
laser,  112, 278 
Multi-function  Array  (Ma r ) ,   250 
over-the-horizon, 320, 330 
Radar  astronomy, 105,297 
Radar  interference, 34Q 
Radar  reffector, 325 
Radford, Adm.  Arthur  (USN,  Ret.),  370 
Radiation,  55,  138-139,  194,  202,  291 
cosmic,  174, 216 
damage, 8,  131 
effects, 72,  169,  171,  179,  219,  248,  265 
energetic  particle,  250 
ionizing, 174, 24S 
measurement,  125,  169, 245,  265 

 

Solar 
effects of,  13,  18, 34,  45, 48,  75,  173, 
250 
measurement, 45,140,444 
shielding from, 13,31 
study of,  18,  132 
space, 146,169,349 
measurement, 28,32,245 
ultraviolet.  76 
. ..  . 
Radiation,  I&.,  299 
Radiation belt, 35,3?,  42,  50,  152, 168,245 
Van  Allen.  37.  50.  168.  169.  173.  178. 
273,325;  4 g  
I
,
,
.
,
Radiation  detector, 8 
Radio  and  Television  News  Directors As- 
sociation, 384 
Radioastronomy,  106,  116, 321 
Radio  Attenuation  Measurement  (Ram) ,  
132,319,  487 
Radio blackout  prevention, 319 
Radio communication treaty,  68 
Radio  Corp.  of  America  ( R C A ) ,   3,  61,  79, 
168,193,209,252,412 
computer, 326,412 
contracts, 3,39,134,  297 
Radio frequency, 37,68,125 
Radio noise,  galactic,  118 
Radio propagation, 2 
Radio  pulses,  high-frequency, 239 
Radio  Research  Laboratory  Station 
( J a p a n ) ,  185, 355 
Radio  Technical  Commission  for  Aero- 
nautics  ( R T C A ) ,   158 
Radio  thermal  measurements, 164 
Radio waves, 34,103,319,330 
Radioactive fallout, 146,202 
Radiobiologist, 169 
RadioisotoDe.  100 
Radiomet;, 
125, 411 
Radiometer,  Infrared,  High  Resolution 
(H r i r )  , 298 
Radiometric observations, 82 
Radiotelephony, 76 
Radiotelescope, 34,  38,  224,  239,  424 
Radkowsky, Dr.  Alvin, 369 
Radnofsky, Mathew I.,  354 
RAE.  See  Royal  Aircraft  Establishment. 
Raffensperger, M.  J.,  213,397 
Rahman,  Prime  Minister  Tunku  Abdul 
(Malaysia),  263 
Railroad  Telegraphers  Union  (RTU )  , 61, 
62 ,65  
Raines, Col.  Martin  L.  (USA, Ret.),  339 
Rain-making rocket,  227 
Raisting, West Germany, 22 
Ram  (Radio  Attenuation  Measurement 1, 
Project,  132,319, 487 
Ramjet  engine, 77,223 
Ramey,  James T., 400 
R A N D  Corp.,  89,  435 
Ranger  (program),  128,163,197,300 
failure  (see  also RANGER  V I ) ,   215 
management, 138,  163-164 
objective,  47 
program review, 34-35,42,58,150,150- 
151 

INDEX 

511 

Ranger  B  (see also  RANGER  w) ,2 18  
RANGER  VI  ( lunar  probe),  37,  82 
failure,  54,  56,  58,  60-61,  64,  65,  138, 
451,482 
hearings,  150,  150-151,  151,  163, 215 
landing,  41,  4 1 4 2  
launch, 34-35,448,466 
Review Board, 42,126 
RANGER  VII (lunar  probe) ,  42,64,128,176, 
218,  272.  275,275-276,276,  279,287- 
288,  300,  304,309 
briefing,  275-276,  298-299 
comments,  267-268,  271-272,  272,  272- 
273,273,300,313 
data, 267,271,301,331 
launch, 263,453,467 
performance,  264,  267 
photographs, 306-307,307,318,419,421, 
435,  438 
Rao,  Sweden, 397 
RAS.  See  Royal  Aeronautical  Society  of 
Great  Britain. 
Rat  experiment, 305,  328 
Ravenholt, Albert,  281-282 
Ray,  cosmic, 4,  42,  50,56,  176, 179-180 
Raytheon Co.,  216,218 
RCA.  See Radio  Corp.  of  America. 
Reaction Motors  Div.  (Thiokol  Chemical 
Corp.) , 29,  78 
Reactor, 3 ,25 ,  40-41,  83,93,143,  176,248, 
260,  296,  299-300,  305,  311,  317 
graphite, 83,  151-152,320 
Reactor-in-Flight Test.  See  Rift,  Project 
( NASA -AEC )  . 
Reader, Pau l  D.,  142,238 
Records,  66,  268 
helicopter, 394 
soaring, 268 
speed, 321 
women,  181,200,203 
Recovery  technique,  spacecraft,  158 
Red  China.  See  China,  Communist. 
Red  Star  (see  a lso   Krasnaya Zvezdu) , 41, 
253-254 
Redding, Calif.,  78 
Redeye  (anti-aircraft missile),  328 
Redstone  (missile), 368 
Redstone  Arsenal,  Ala.,  12,  103,  332 
Reed,  Sylvanus Albert,  Award,  21,  173 
Reed, Wdmer H.,  III,  276 
Reentary, 99,132,  159 
heating,  135, 173 
research, 8,  103, 278,  307-308 
vehicle, 3,  9,  11, 135,  161, 241,  307-308, 
309 
Re-entry  Flight  Demonstration,  289-300, 
468 
RFD-1,3 
RFD-8,  346,468 
Reeves Instrument  Co.,  336 
Reeves,  John,  4% 
Reflector, 325 
Regeneration, 89 
Reid,  Edwin, 316 
Reid, Henry J.  E., Jr., 276 

Reiffel, Dr. Leonard, 135 
Reischauer, Edwin O.,  142 
Relativity theory,  433 
Relay  (communications  satellite),  130, 
282-283 
RELAY  I  (communications satellite),  3,19, 
38,286,353,373,397,418 
RELAY  11  (communications satellite),  22 
launch,  19, 446 
transmissions, 32,  81,  115,  185, 246,  397 
use of,  270,353,  373 
Reliability,  45,  143,  234-235,  281 
missile system, 6,129 
space  system, 6 
symposium, 6,  6-7 
Religion and space, 207-208 
Remote  Maneuvering  Unit  (Rmu ) ,   217 
Rendezvous,  224,  228,  241,  259,  301-302, 
357,  419 
“Reporters’  Roundup”  (radio  program), 
149 
Republic  Aviation  Corp.,  98,  196,  289 
Republican  Citizens  Committee,  Repub- 
lican Critical Issues Council, 194 
Republican National Convention, 246,248, 
250-251 
Republican  study  group  on  space  and 
aeronautics,  153 
Rescue  receiver/transmitter  system, 1% 
Rescue ships, 203 
Research Airplane  Committee, FRC,  77 
Research  and  development,  33,  78,  181- 
182, 279-280,295,  300-301, 303,  326- 
327 
aeronautical,  292-293 
Federal  S U D W ~ ~ .  18.  108.  165.  165-166. 
185-186,*i11,  ’31g  33Ok31,’ 374 
’ 
funds  for, 20-21,21,  33,  48,69,  72,  160, 
300301.  401-402.  429-430 
industry, 7 ,154  
information,  distribution  of,  144-145, 
312,386 
management, 160, 344 
planning,  long-range, 67,  160,  166-167, 
344 
Research Award  (AULA ) ,  21 
Research, basic,  8,  24,  33,  53,  91-92,  160 
Research  Institute  for  Advanced  Studies 
(Martin  Co .) ,   155 
Research Triangle  Institute,  194 
Retrometer, 142 
Retrorocket, 106,121 
Reusable  spacecraft,  123,  249,  391-392 
Reuss, Rep. Henry S.,  115 
Reynolds,  Maj.  Herbert  H. 
(U SAF ) ,   390 
Reynolds, James J.,  69-70 
Reynolds, Dr.  Orr E., 63,168-169,295 
See Re-entry flight demonstration. 
RFD-1. 
Rhodes, Gov.  James A.,  261 
Rice  Univ.,  11,  107,  110,  113,  162,  243, 
290 
Richardson Foundation, 439 
Rickover, V/A  Hyman G. (USN) ,40 ,39 5  
Rieke, William B.,  347 

512 

INDEX 

(Reactor-in-Flight  Test) 
Rift,  Project 
(NASA-AEC),  103,340,441 
Righini,  Dr.  Guglielmo, 180 
Ripley, Dr. S.  DiUon, 11,56 
Ritland,  M/G  0. J.  (WAF ) ,   170-171 
Riverdale, the  Bronx, 205 
(liquid  hydrogen  rocket  engine), 
m-10 
32,67,193,414 
A 3 ,   227 
Rmu.  See  Remote  Maneuvering  Unit. 
RN-6  nOZZleS,  236 
Roanoke, Ala.,  56 
Robbins,  Col.  Harold  W.  (U SAF ) ,   435 
Rochester,  Univ.  of,  School  of  Medicine, 
266,  315 
Rock,  Vincent P.,  59 
Rockefeller Institute,  438 
Rocket,  59,  159,  190,  215,  229-230,  248, 
258 
chemicaI, 83,  125 
foreign. 268.  303 
nuclear, 83, ‘107-108,  115, 195,229,234- 
235,235,236,296,311 
Rocket case,  solid propellant, 279 
Rocket Day  (U.S.S.R.),  394 
Rocket  engine  (see  also  Rocket  motor), 
25-26,  171,219, 239 
electric, 256 
hybrid,  233 
ion,  82,  256 
liquid  propellant,  47,  67,  248-249 
nuclear,  115, 200,  234 
reliability,  45,  234 
solid  propellant,  23,  39,  80,  167 
Rocket  launcher  installation, 253 
Rocket, model, 292 
Rocket  motor,  solid  propellant  (see  also 
Rocket engine),  193, 235,311-312,  323, 
328 
“Rocket  Propulsion  of  Long  Range 
Bombers,”  59 
Rocket sled, 78,224 
Rocketdyne  Div.  See  North  American 
Aviation, Inc.,  Rocketdyne Div. 
Rodino, Rep.  Peter W.,  291 
Roediger Construction, Inc.,  367 
Rogallo, Vernon L.,  131 
Rogallo wing,  198 
Roganville, Tex.,  57 
Rogers  Dry  Lake.  Calif.,  6,  285 
Rogers.  Thomas F.. 49 
RoG,  Frank  E.,  337 
Roman, Dr. Nancy G.,  163,327 
“Romashka”  (“Daisy”)  (U.S.S.R.  nuclear 
reactor),  333 
Romatowski, Ray,  154 
Rome, Italy, 58 ,61 ,63  
Rome, N.Y.,  30,33 
Rome  Air  Development  Center  (RADC ) ,  
381,  406 
Romo,  L/C Peter  (USAF) , 5  
Rose,  V/A  Rufus E.  (USN, Ret.),  1% 
Rosen, Dr.  Harold A,  111 
Rosenberg,  Dr.  Norman  W.,  265 
Rosenblum, Dr. Louis, 184 

( R A E ) ,  

Rosman, N.C.,  103, 202-203,  308, 311 
Roswell, N.M.,  64,101 
Rotary  Club,  Los Angeles, 244 
ROTC  (Reserve  officers  Training  Corps), 
319 
Rotor  downwash,  214 
Round-the-world flight, 327 
Roush,  Rep.  J.  Edward,  38,  102-103,  145, 
331332  
Rover  (nuclear  rocket  engine)  (see  also 
Poodle, Pro jec t) ,  209,  435 
Rowan,  Carl  T.,  282-283 
Roy,  Maurice,  155 
Royal Aeronautical  Society of  Great  Brit- 
ain  ( R A S ) ,   198 
Royal  Aircraft  Establishment 
(U.K.),  230 
Royal Crown Cola Co.,  358 
Royal  Technical  Univ.,  Ionospheric  Re- 
search  Laboratory  (Denmark),  56,  375 
RS-70  (a i rc ra f t ) ,  260-261 
(a ircraf t) ,   292 
RS -71  
RTCA.  See  Radio  Technical  Commission 
for Aeronautics. 
RTU.  See Railroad Telegraphers Union. 
Rubidium vapor magnetometer, 210 
Rubis  (French  rocket),  210 
Rumsfeld, Rep.  Donald,  79,  115 
Runway traction  equipment, 2% 
Rushworth,  Maj.  Robert  (U SAF ) ,   29,  57, 
118,  156, 214,  222,  285,  321,  331,  429 
Rusk,  Secretary of  S ta te  Dean,  343 
Russell, Sen.  Richard B.,  90 
Russell, Terrence E.,  259 
Russia.  See U.S.S.R. 
Russian  Institute  (Columbia  Univ.),  188 
Rutter,  Richard, 288 
Ryan Aeronautical Corp.,  39 
Ryan, Rep.  Harold M.,  13 
Ryan,  L/G  John  D.  ( U S A F ) ,   400 
Ryan, Tom, 147 
(ionosphere explorer  satellite),  106, 
5 - 4 8  
296 
S-51  (U.K.  satellite),  270 
S-52  (U.K. satellite),  270 
5-53  (U.K.  satellite),  270 
s e e  Explorer, Beacon. 
s-66. 
s-I.  See Saturn  I. 
s-IC.  See Saturn V. 
See  Saturn  I  (SA -8 ) .  
+I-8. 
SN.  See Saturn  I, Saturn  IB. 
SA-6,  etc.  See  Saturn  I. 
SA--6, 
SAA.  See  South African Airways. 
SAC.  See  Strategic  A ir   Command. 
Sacramento, Calif.,  25,  154,  193,  320,  403 
Sacramento Peak  Observatory, 34 
“Saddlebags” for  Lem,  139 
SAE.  See  Society  of  Automotive  Engi- 
neers. 
Saenger, Dr. Eugen, 59,78 
Safety,  air,  156.  171,  192.  211,  214,  291, 
306,  332 
Safety Award,  President’s,  184 
Sagan, Dr.  Carl, 180 
Saigon, S.  Vietnam,  332 
Sailplane,  record, 268 

St. Louis, Mo.,  173,223 
St.  Petereburg-Tampa Airboat  Line,  2 
Salisbury, Australia, 84,292 
Salmon, Project  (AEC ) ,   360 
Salt water  conversion, 55 
Salt0  di  Quirra,  Sardinia,  239, 242 
SAM.  See USAF School of  Aerospace Med- 
icine. 
Sammy  (sounding  rocket  experiment), 
290 
Sammy I  (sounding rocket),  11 
Sammy I1  (sounding rocke t) ,  107 
Samos  (Satellite  Military  Observation 
System), 207,281-282 
San Antonio. Tex..  388 
San Bernardho,  Calif.,  78 
Sandia Corp.,  44, 
San Diego,  Calif.,  166,253,284 
San  Francisco,  Calif.,  36, 78, 165 
(Italian  satellite), 
SAN  MARCO   I  (SM-I) 
420,462,&8 
San  Miguel  Observatory,  Buenos  Aires, 
.187 
Island,  Calif.,  178 
Sa;-hcholas 
San Salvador, 386 
Sandage, Allan R.,  426 
Sandar, Dr.  Herman J., 74 
Sanders Associates, Inc.,  330 
Sandia  Corp.,  3 
Sands,  B/C  Harry J.,  Jr.  (USAF ) ,   3 
Santa Ana,  Calif.,  224 
Santa Clara,  Calif.,  360 
Santa Clara, Cuba, 121 
Santa Rita Technology, 339 
Santa Rosa Island,  Fla.,  70 
Santa  Susana  Field  Laboratory, 416 
Santiago, Chile,  168 
SARC.  See Systems Analysis and  Research 
Corp. 
Sarnoff, David, 252 
Sas.  See Stability Augmentation System. 
Satellite,  2, 254, 255, 281, 284, 302 
armed,  interception  and   destruction, 
322, 323 
cooperation, international,  97, 264,  282- 
283 
foreign,  203,  264 
surveillance system, 102,181 
use of,  2, 30, 118, 146-147, 324 
Satellite,  Advanced  Technological  (Ate), 
50,90,203,223 
“Satellite alert” comuuter.  188 
Satellite,  biological-  (see   -also  Biosatel- 
lite), 257 
satellite,  communications,  20, 140, 204, 
209, 238,240,241, 269 
cooperation, international, 49,84,96-97, 
189, 282-283, 313 
US.-U.S.S.R.  2.  17-18 
med im -  altitude, &4,  927-186 
military  use of,  27, 118, 130, 186, 247, 
-255,279,289 
synchronoussrbit  (see  also  Syncom  C 
and   SYNCOM  m ) ,  84, 139, 209,  290- 
291 

513 
INDEX 
Satellite  Control Facility  (SCF),  164 
Satellite,  da ta   collection  system,  1% 
Satellite Div.  (Union  Carbide  Corp.),  56 
Satellite,  ESRO,  113, 161 
Satellite,  geodetic  program,  325 
Satellite, ionosphere explorer ( 5 - 4 8 ) .   See 
T o p i .  
Satellite,  Ionospheric  Studies,  Interna- 
tional.  See  Isis. 
Satellite  launcher  (see  also  Europa  I ) ,  
269-270 
Satellite  launching  center  (French) ,   161 
Satellite, meteorological, 20, 193, 224 
cooperation, 43 
international,  1-2,30,204 
use of, 50, 95, 157 
Satellite,  micrometeoroid  detection.  See 
Pegasus. 
Satellite,  navigational,  68,  95, 157, 158, 
188 
civilian  system,  68,  158, 231, 312, 381 
Satellite,  nuclear  powered,  8 
Satellite, nuclear  radiation  detection.  See 
Vela,  Project;  Sentry. 
Satellite  observation  station  ( U S S R . ) ,  
81 
Satellite,  orbiting  observatory  (see  also 
Oao, Ogo,  Oso,  Aoao, Aoso) , 103 
Satellite,  polar  orbit,  231 
Satellite,  solar-powered, 8 
Satellite,  solar x-ray monitor,  45 
Satellite stabilization, 68 
Satellite  Techniques  Laboratory  (Rice 
Univ.),  107 
Satellite  Telemetry  Automatic  Reduction 
Systems (S tars) ,  352,3% 
Satellite,  tetrahedral  (see  also  Pygmy), 
252 
Satellite  Tracking  and   Data  Acquisition 
Network.  See STADAN. 
Satellite, twin  (ARPA )  .  See Vela,  Project. 
Satellite, unidentified, 275 
launch  vehicle 
Atlas-Agena,  79, 102, 146, 182, 239, 
285.326, 406 
Scout; 203‘ 
Thnr-Ahle-Star. 173. 342. 418 
- ._ _ _   . _ _ _   - 
Thor-Agena, 10,17,’66, 85, 114, 151, 
205, 213, 216, 218, 238, 244,  277, 
294. 316. 340. 354, 373, 378, 392, 
426; 427-  . 
Satellite, weather  (see also Satellite, mete- 
orological),  188,204,240,258,509 
S a tw d a y   Evening  Post,  ?6, 86, 133, 164 
Saturday  Review, 307 
Saturn  (program),  4, 13, 124, 170, 226, 
238,302 
achievements, 38, 40,  281,317, 318,379 
contracts, 14, 39, 62 
facilities,  construction  of,  62, 211, 347 
management, 73,169 

INDEX 

514 
Saturn  I,  114, 318 
booster, 80,104,149,286,341 
engine, 25-26, 211 
propulsion,  229-230, 246, 302 
stage, 84, 246 
S-N,  25,  192, 196,242,321,325, 4% 
Saturn  I  (SA-5),32, 40, 54 
launch, 27,32, 44&7,W, 466 
performance, 32, 49 
preflight preparation, 26 
stage, 27, 32 
Saturn  1  (SA -B ) ,   196, 199, 238, 314, 321 
launch,  192-193, 450,4.66 
preflight preparation,  70, 126 
Saturn  I  (SA-?),  309, 325, 386 
launch,  321, 435, 467 
preflight  preparation,  238, 317 
Saturn  I (SA--81,  138, 149,212 
Saturn  I (SA--91,  104, 138, 436 
Saturn I (SA-10) , 138 
Saturn  IB,  213 
contract, 22, 84, 142, 189, 193, 213, 248, 
302 
development,  157, 192-193, 193, 318 
engine, 302, 402 
H-1,  211 
5-2,  159, 294 
equipment, 22, 132, 142,297 
plans for, 53, 140, 145,189 
stage, 84 
S-IVB,  159, 189, 193, 242, 248, 302 
Saturn  rB/Centaur  (booster),  173 
Saturn  V,  38, 145, 189, 195, 234, 235,248, 
329 
booster, 87, 105, 213, 223, 229-230, 247, 
377 
contract,  15, 22, 39, 120, 127, 142, 160, 
189, 213, 242, 248, 248-249, 297, 330, 
444l 
development,  20-21, 157, 193, 235, 318 
engine, 229-230, 402 
F-1,  120, 242, 346, 377 
.T-2,248,294 
equipment, 22,132,142 
facility,  15, 39 
ground  support  system, 297, 330, 400 
plans  for, 53, 80,  140,145,157,223,242, 
247,295,350 
stage, 8, 127, 160, 248 
Saturn  V/Apollo,  105, 124, 132, 139, 183, 
1% 
Saturn V,  post-, booster, 247 
Saturn  Flight  Evaluation  Group  (M SFC ) ,  
49 
Saturn  Vertical  Assembly  Bui1d:ng 
(VAB) (M ILA ) ,   131 
Saudi Arabia, 52 
Saunders, Benjamin M., 114 
Savino, Joseph  M.,  25 
Scams  (communications system), 222, 
Scandinavia, 99, 375, 397 
Scanner,  horizon, 77,224-225, 241 
Scanner,  Project  (NA SA ) ,   65, 224-225 
Scat.  See  Aircraft,  Supersonic  Commer- 
cial  Air  Transport. 

Scat  wing  design,  189 
SCF.  See  Satellite  Control  Facility. 
Schaefer, Dr.  Hermann J ,  219 
Scheer, Julian,  395 
Scbell, Dr.  Allan, 38 
Schenectady, N.Y.,  255 
Schilling, David  C.,  Trophy,  315 
Schiro, Mayor Victor H.,  324 
Schirra,  Cdr.  Walter  M.,  Jr.  ( US N ),  99, 
129,134,178,188,317,393 
Schjeldahl,  G. T, Co.,  284, 397 
Schleicher, Richard  L.,  198 
Schmidt, Dr.  Maertin, 120 
Schmitz, Bruce W.,  276 
Schneider, William C.,  371 
Schnitzer, Emanuel, 287 
School  of  Aerospace  Medicine  (SAM). 
See USAF  School of  Aerospace Medicine. 
School  of  Environmental  and   Planetary 
Sciences  (proposed,  Univ.  o f   Miami), 
loo, 101 
( W A F ) ,   98, 
Schriever,  Gen.  Bernard  A. 
112-113,  164, 182-183, 190-191, 207, 
211-212, 244,252, 284-285 
Schulte, William J.,  334 
Schultz, Col.  Kenneth  (U SAF )  , 9 0  
(“Bud”) ,   275-276, 
Schurmeier,  Harris 
309,353, 435 
Schwab, William  B.,  25 
Schwarzschild, Dr.  Martin,  223 
Schweikart, Russell L.,  356, 363 
Schwinghamer, Robert J.,  329 
Science, 2, 3, 16, 18, 24, 110-111, 149, 199, 
221, 240, 277, 280, 318, 344, 348, 357 
413, 437 
Science  (magazine),  3, 62, 262, 306, 314, 
414 
Science  Advisory  Committee,  President’s 
( P SAC ) ,   35 
Science and Mechanics, 331 
Science and  Dolitics,  86-87 
Science  a n d   technology.  See  Science; 
Technology. 
Science  and   Technology  Advisory  Come 
mittee for Manned Space Flight  (NA SA ) ,  
129,237 
Science Development Program  (NSF) , 104 
Science  Policy  Research  Div.,  Library  of 
Congress, 301, 310 
Scientific  and   Technical  Information  Fa- 
Cat)’,  NASA,  237 
Scientific Association  for  Air  and  Space 
Flight,  West Berlin  (Germany),  320 
Scientific  Committee  on  the  Effects  of 
Atomic  Radiation  (U .N . ) ,   202 
Scientist-astronaut, 395,424 
Scientists.  71. 110-111. 253-25.2 
and  eniineers, 74,94,128,149,156-157, 
161,1%,  29l, 302,308 
as astronauts,  10, 237, 245-246 
emigration of, 15,308 
exchange  program  (U.S.-U.S.S.R.), 182 
space  program, 7, 36, 139, 184, 1% 
training,  luna r   mission,  158 

515 

Scientists  and  Engineers  for  Johnson  and  
Humphrey, 374 
SCORE  (communications  satellite),  241 
Scorpio  (constellation),  153 
Scott,  Capt.  David  R.  (USAF), 306 
Scott, Walter  C.,  150 
Scout  (booster),  71,106,176 
lannch,  4, 118, 203, 289, 394, 451, 455, 
457, 459, 460, 462, 466, 4667, 468 
use of,  4, 95,  113, 132, 161, 258, 270, 
296 
“Scramjet”  (supersonic  combustion  ram- 
j e t ) ,   385 
SDI.  See Selective Dissemination of  Infor- 
mation. 
Sea  Lab  I,  Project  (USN), 176, 252, 266 
Sea  of Clouds  (moon),  263, 267 
Sea of  Tranquility  (moon),  37, 41, 4551 
Sea urchin  egg experiment, 72,174 
Sea  water  desalinization, 251, 256 
Seaborg,  Dr.  Glenn  T.,  4041, 67 
Seacat  (U.K.  guided missile),  280 
Seagoing tracking system, 84 
Seal Beach, Calif.,  375 
Seaiant,  228 
Seamans, Dr.  Robert  C.,  Jr.,  12-13, 32,42, 
50, 97-98, 149, 162, 163, 176, 184, 228, 
254 295, 297,  300301, 335, 344 
Seamster, Dr.  Aaron P., 4Q7 
Seattle, Wash.,  124,251,279 
SEC.  See  Securities  and   Exchange  Com- 
mission. 
Secor  (Sequential  Collation  of  Range) 
(geodetic  satellite)  (USA), 68, 74, 222, 
365 
Securities  and   Exchange  Commission 
(SEC)  . 168. 333 
Sedov,  fir. Lkonid I.,  315, 348 
See, Elliott M., 306 
Seed experiment, 2 M  
Segner, Donald,  420 
Seismograph, 106 
Seitz,  Dr.  Frederick,  29, 154,416 
Selective  Dissemination  of  Information 
(Sdi), 255 
Selenodetic measurements  (lunar  surface 
survey),  81 
Semipalatinsk  region,  U.S.S.R.,  388 
Sen, Dr. Hari K., 119 
Seney, John S., 433 
Sensor,  1%,  196,305 
image velocity, 257 
meteoroid  penetration,  210 
radiation  receiving, 251 
Sentry  (nuclear  radiation  detection  satel- 
l i te)   (see  also  Vela,  Pro jec t) ,   253, 256 
Ser t   (Space  Electric  Rocket  Test),  82, 
300 
Sert I, 82,158,197,256,354,467 
Seychelles Islands  (West  Indian  Ocean), 
159,905 
SFOF.  See  space  Flight  operations  Facil- 
ity  (JPL). 

INDEX 
Shafrir, Dr.  Uri, 220 
Shapiro,  Irwin  I.,  433 
Shea, Joseph F., 47,206,314 
Sheldon, Dr.  Charles S.,  152, 376 
Shell Oil Co.,  62 
Shepard,  Cdr.  Alan  B.,  Jr.  (USN), 16, 
134,166,188,242 
Sherman, Harold,  278 
Shetland  Island,  Scotland, 264 
Shewmake, Glenn A.,  354 
Shielding,  13 
Shiina,  Foreign  Minister  Etsusaburo,  343 
Ships, Bureau of,  (USN) ,305 
Ships,  tracking,  64-65, 168 
Shlovsky, Dr.  Iosif S., 23,436 
Shock absorber, 13, 136 
Shock wave, 103,156 
Shoemaker, Dr.  Eugene M., 223, 271, 299 
Short takeoff  canabilitv. 191 
,,- - 
Shuey, Henry M., 21 
Shuttle  transport,  orbital,  135, 249, 307 
Siberia  launch  site,  333 
Sikeston.  Mo..  195 
Sikorsky, Igoi,  317 
Silicon cells,  1% 
Silicon elastomer, 181-182 
Silverstein, Dr.  Abe,  21, 204, 214, %5 
Simkin, William, 124 
Simons,  Howard,  1, 21, 57, 342, 351, 423 
Simplon Tunnel,  248 
Simpson, Dr.  George L., 100, 140,195,395 
Simulation  in Space Technology,  Confer- 
ence on Role of, 290,293 
Simulator, je t  airborne,  147 
Simulator,  satellite  attitude  control,  264- 
265 
Singer, Dr.  S. Fred,  62, 100, 101 
Sissakian, N. M., 309,348 
Sissenwine, Norman,  14-15 
Sisu  I A  (sailplane),  268 
Skidmore, Owings & Mem l l ,  56 
Skrivanek, R.  A.,  147 
Skua  (U.K.  meteorological rocket),  270 
Skybolt  (missile), 150 
Skyhook  (ONR balloon  flight  program), 
291 
Skylark  (U.K.  sounding rocket),  239,242, 
270 
Slayton,  Donald  K.,  66, 188, 242, 345 
Sled, monorail, 333 
Sleighride, Project  (USA), 11 
Slemon, Air Marshal C.  R.  (Canada) ,  198 
Sloan,  Alfred  P.,  Fellowships,  1964-65, 
150 
Slone, Henry O.,  404 
Sloop, John  L., 11,229-230, 360 
s~v-3.  See Atlas-3. 
Small  business  and   Government,  29. 261 
Smith  and   Sapp  Construction  Co.,  369 
Smith, Prof.  Alex G.,  153 
Smith, Francis B., 177 
Smith,  Sen. Margaret  Chase, 57 
Smith, Wendell S., 141 
Smith, William W.,  276 

5 16 

INDEX 

Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory, 
116.  171 
S m i & & n   Institution,  35,  56,  133,  155, 
166,220,241,260,280,282 
Snakes, experiments, 56-57 
Snap   (System  for  Nuclear  Auxiliary 
Power),  67,  72 
Snap,  7D,  49 
Snap  8,  260,  404 
Snap  9A,  173,  188 
SnaD  10A.  72.  333 
f&ds  for, 67,72,85,117,161 
test, 39,93,117,125 
Snap  50,67,416 
Snow, 434 
Snow  goose,  388 
SNPO.  See Space Nuclear Propulsion  Of- 
. 
fice  (NASA -AEC )  
Soaring record, 268 
Soaring  Society of  America,  244 
Soberman, R.  K.,  147 
Social sciences, 255-256 
Society  of  Automotive  Engineers  (SAE )  , 
158, 344 
Society  of  British  Aerospace  Companies, 
311 
Society  of  Photographic  Scientists  and 
Engineers,  1% 
Society  of  Security  Analysis,  New  York 
(SSA ) ,  161 
Sodium-lithium experiment, 99 
Sodium potassium,  125 
Sodium  vapor  experiment, 6, 10, 249,  384 
Sognnaes, Dr.  Reidar  F.,  121 
Sohier, Walter  D.,  166 
Sohio Tracking Station, 289 
Solar  celI 
radiation-resistant  (n-on-p),  20,  202, 
276,  482 
thin-film, flexible, 124 
Solar collector  (m irror) ,  212 
Solar  corona,  34,  96,  119,  180, 260 
Solar cycle, 13,48,95 
Solar eclipse, 180 
Solar  energy  conversion, 151 
Solar  Energy Laboratory  (Univ.  of  W i d ,  
275 
Solar Energy, Office of  (Dept. of  In ter ior) ,  
180, 275 
Solar  flare,  13,  48,  173,  194, 388-389 
Solar gases, 250 
Solar heating,  141 
Solar  paddles,  326 
Solar  panel,  311 
Solar particles,  energetic, 307 
Solar plasma,  50 
Solar  radiation.  See  Radiation,  solar. 
Solar  system, 125,  157,  170, 366 
Solar wind, 119 
Solar x-ray emission, 45 
Solid  propellants,  39,  247,  331,  369,  377, 
416-417,429,435 

Sonic boom  (see also Noise),  277 
damage,  90, 117,  175,  242,  253 
results, 274,  279 
studies,  43,  63,  84,  90, 117-118,  175, 
177,  183, 187, 236,  242,  244,  253,  268, 
314,360,392,404,406 
Sonmiani  Range  (Karachi,  Pak is tan) ,  
107, 399,  403 
Sound,  speed of,  15 
Sounding rocket,  153 
experiments, 106,258,355 
international  programs, 97 
NASA-India,  31,  70,  380,  384 
NASA-Japan,  355 
NASA-Netherlands, 278 
NASA-Norway-Denmark, 56 
NASA-Pakistan,  107,  399 
NASA-Sweden,  99, 204-205,  241,  277- 
278 
U.S.-ESRO, 264 
launch 
France.  273 
. ._ 
Japan, ’245;  259 
NASA,  11,  13,  14,  15,  22-23,  30,  4% 
43,  62,  79,  99,  114,  115,  124,  128, 
%x 305;  328;  3351 343,’ 344,’ 3 6 6  
137.  14.0.  141.  145.  210.  243.  249. 
251:  260:  262:  264:  278:  283:  299: 
361,  363,  368,  374,  379,  384,  387, 
391.392.395,399.415,422 
Sweden, 99,  277 
u.K.,  239,242,278 
USAF,  122,  444 
South  Africa, 25 
South  African  Airways  ( SAA ) ,  226 
South  America,  134,  146 
South  Pacific,  14 
South  Pole,  211 
Southern Interstate  Nuclear Board,  126 
Southwest  Research  Institute  (SR I )  , 388 
Southwestern Bell  Telephone  Co.,  81 
Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  17,  27,  97, 
177,198,204,321,443 
agreement,  U.S. 
(NAS) ,  scientist  ex- 
change,  182 
Astronomical Council,  121 
Soviet Committee on Standards, Measures, 
and   Measuring  Instruments,  41 
Soviet  Institute  of  Norma1 and   Patholog- 
ical  Physiology,  177 
Soviet  Russia,  351 
Space  (medium),  179 
environment, 50,117 
exploration of, 2,  6, 67,  87, 95,  125, 126, 
133-134,  139,  149,  194,  277,  298,  321 
Space  Act  of   1958.  See  National  Aero- 
nautics  and  Space Act of  1958. 
Space Aeronautics, 291 
Space  age,  86,  24Q, 243,  257,  320,  432 
economics, 144,157,221 
Space  and   Upper  Atmosphere  Research 
Committee,  Pakistan  (SUPARCO) , 107, 
399 
Space biology, 208 

INDEX 
Space bus  (see also Orbiting  Geophysical 
Observatory, o m  I ) ,   306, 308 
Space  Business Daily, 4, 8, 15, 18, 30, 45, 
77, 138,140 
Space  cabin  environment  simulation,  44, 
87, 130,304 
Space  capability,  20, 32, 38, 92, 151-152, 
156-157, 184,  199, 207, 223, 302, 324, 
326,333 
Space,  challenge  of,  6, 87, 92, I n ,  155, 
298 
Space Congress, 143 
SpFcecraft, 90,100,102,289 
international  agreement, 100, 102, 116 
systems,  224, 228-229, 237, 361 
Spacecraft  Technology and  Advanced Re- 
entry Test  (S ta r t )   (see also Asset),  161, 
286,307 
“Space czar,”  388 
Space  Detection  and   Tracking  Center, 
NORAD   (SPADATS)  , 254 
Space  Electric  Rocket  Test.  See Sert. 
Space-General Corp.,  317,- 
Space  environment,  effects  of,  112-113, 
168-169.  174-175. 194. 204 
, -  
Space fer&,  224,307 
Space flight, 9,20,125, 173,217,258,298, 
304,309 
effects  of,  171, 183, 194, 309, 328 
Space  Flight  Operations  Facility  ( JPL) , 
176 
Space:  Its Impact  on Man  and  Society, 86 
Space law,  313 
Space Law  a d  Government, 236 
Space lifeboats,  174 
Space maneuvering systems, 89 
Space  medicine.  See  Aerospace  medi- 
cine;  Bioscience;  Life  science. 
Space  Medicine  Liaison  Office,  NASA, 80 
Space,  military  use  of  (see  also  Space 
race,  military; 
station, 
Space 
manned),  7, 34, 194, 197, 206,  258, 
333 
manned  space flight, 302 
objectives, 12, 51 
Spacemobile, NASA, 247 
Space  Nuclear  Auxiliary  Power.  See 
Snap. 
Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Office  (SNPO) 
(NASA -AEC ) ,   63, 140, 248, 311, 353, 385 
Space Pa rk   (N.Y.  World‘s  Fair), 101,145, 
214 
space,  peaceful  use  of,  12, 64, 67, 157, 
190,268,277,288,311 
Space  physics, 
institute  of,  proposed 
(Univ. of  Miami),  100 
Space, politics and, 86-87 
Space port,  157 
space   program,  national,  112, 172, 207, 
215-216, 217, 258,  279-280, 292-293, 
295.312313. 324 
accomplishments, 4, 35, 35-36, 40, 42, 
169, 111-112, 122, 151-153, 156-157, 
182-183, 274, 279, 282-283, 294, 313, 
318, 338 

517 
cost  of,  23, 33, 38, 82, 128, 181, 234- 
235. 278-279 
-_. 
critic&.m  of,&  133-134, 185-186, 225, 
~ 
250-251,258,337,351 
military, 4, 12, 44,5162, 64, 181, 331- 
332.351 
need,’36-37,  44, 94-95, 127, 136, 256, 
277,322,324 
objectives,  27, 36-37, 86-87, 133-134, 
144, 195-196, 236, 297, 368, 371 
policy,  2, 6-7, 12, 36-37, 118 
prospects for,  109,221,355 
requirements, 232-233,302 
support  of, 67,177, 186-187,238,333 
Space  Propulsion  Facility  (P lum   Brook 
Station).  224 
Space  race,  7,215-216, 294, 303 
US-U.S.S.R.,  35,  111-112,  122, 136, 
215-216, 259,294, 295, 318,324, 348, 

booster,.  32,-35, 38, 111, 122, 190, 195, 
223,318,351,355,376 
manned  space  flight,  111-112, 118, 152, 
190.354-355.357.374 
to   moon,  40, 64, lh, 125, 152, I%, 
199, 221, 268-269, 322, 350, 352, 
357, 437 
military,  51-52, 118, 136, 181, 190,250- 
251, 258, 268, 322, 323,351, 385, 421, 
442 
payloads, 61,111,152-153,254,321,376 
probes,  150-151,152 
surveillance,  satellites.  207. 357 
weather, satellites, 35,‘112 . 
Space Radiation Effects Laboratory ( L R C ) ,  
159 
Space Research Committee  (Norway),  56 
Space  research  results,  79, 172, 306 
Space  science,  50-51, 102, 156-157, 177, 
301, 318 
Space  Science  Award  ( A I A A ) ,   21 
Space  Science  Board  (SSB)  (NA S I ,  116, 
151, 158, 194, 210 
Space Science Dept.  (Rice University),  11 
Space 
Science  Technology  Center 
(Georgia Tech) ,  147 
Space shuttle vehicle  (space tug) ,  24,135, 
249, 307 
Space station, manned  (see also Large Or- 
bital  Research  Laboratory;  Manned 
Orbiting  Laboratory;  Manned  Orbi- 
tal  Research  Laboratory;  and  Olym- 
PUS),  52, 80,  90, 95, 169, 211-212, 
249,258, 287,307,324,375 
foreign, 199 
Spacesuit  (see  also  Pressure  su i t ) ,   230, 
239, 296, 355, 363, 389, 390, 415-416 
Space  surveillance  system  (USN) , 102 
Space technology, 20, 25, 33, 40, 112, 157, 
181, 204, 211, 240, 243, 255, 284-285, 
295,302,312,318,324 
Space  Technology  Center,  Valley  Forge 
(GE ) .   177 

518 

INIlEX 

Space Technology Laboratories, Inc.,  160, 
209,292 
Space tools, 5,344 
Space Tracking and  Data Acquisition Net- 
work.  See STADAN. 
Space  Transporter  (U.K.  Aerospace 
P iane) ,   270 
Space tug,  135,249 
Space vehicle  research,  91,  224,  281 
Spaceyards, 157 
SPADATS.  See  Space  Detection  and  
Tracking  Center, NORAD. 
Spain, 31,55,159 
tracking stations, 31,204 
Spar, Dr.  Jerome, 258 
Sparks, Brian,  224 
Spectrogram, 180 
Spectrograph,  78,  398 
Spectrographic  analysis, 48,  138 
Spectrometer, 15,231,263 
Spectroscopy, 444 
Speed  record,  women’s,  181, 200,  203 
Sperry,  Lawrence  B.,  Award,  236 
Sperry  Rand  Corp.,  305 
Electro-Optics  Laboratory,  113 
Univac Div.,  68,  330,  423 
Sphere, drop test,  220 
S p P  adjusting mechanism, 82 
( K S C ) ,   147 
Spin  Test  Facility  ( s n )  
Spinrad, Dr.  Hyron, 148 
Spitzer, Dr. Lyman, Jr., 45 
Spivak, Jonathan,  85 
Sprint  (antimissile  missile),  388 
Sproull, Dr.  Robert  L.,  153, 290,  386 
SPSE.  See Society of  Photographic Scien- 
tists  and  Engineers. 
SPUTNIK  I,  86,  111,155, 268,  270,  340, 441 
Sputtering apparatus,  124 
S R - ~ I   (long-range  reconnaissance  air- 
c ra f t ) ,   260-261,  274,  346,  429 
SRI.  See Southwest Research  Institute. 
SRI.  See  Stanford  Research  Institute. 
SSA.  See  Society of  Security Analysts. 
SSB.  See  Space  Science  Board  ( N A S I .  
SSD.  See Air  Force  Space Systems Div. 
Sst.  See Aircraft, supersonic transport. 
ST-124-BZ platform  system, 22,  142 
STAB.  See Supersonic Transport Advisory 
Board. 
StahiIity  Augmentation  System  (Sas) ,   6 
Stabilization  system,  gravity  gradient,  68, 
177, 223 
Stabilized platform, 22 
Stack, John, 5,1% 
(Satellite/Space  Tracking  and  
STADAN 
Data  Acquisition  Network),  130,  202- 
203,  284 
Stadimeter,  178 
Stafford, H.  N., 286 
S t d o r d ,   Maj.  Thomas P.  (USAF ) ,   102, 
Standards,  41  
Stamps, postage, 120,160,205 
Stanford, Dr.  Henry King, 100 

Stanford  Research  Institute  (SRI),  278, 
332 
332 
Stanford  Univ.,  231 
Stanford  Univ.,  231 
Stanford  Worldwide  Acquisition  of 
Stanford  Worldwide  Acquisition  of 
Meteorological  Information  (Swami), 
Meteorological  Information  (Swami), 
3.11 
3.11 
St;&  Col,  John  P. (USAF), 313 
Star 
dwarf- 218 
inten&,  381,  387 
neutron, 153,254,432,436 
“The  Star S a a n d e d  Banner,”  290 
Star tracker;  77- 
Starfighter.  See F - 1 0 4 .  
Start.  See  Spacecraft  Technology  and 
Advanced Re-entry Tests. 
State, Dept.  of, 264 
State of  the Union message, 6 
Static electricity, 147 
Staisical Handbook, FAA ,   204 
Stawikowski, Dr. Antoni, 398 
Stay Time Excursion Module  (Stem),  138 
Stead  AFB,  Nev.,  281 
Steel, 279 
STEG.  See  Supersonic  Transport  Evalua- 
tion  Group. 
Steinberg, Dr. Menahem, 125 
~ 
Seinbere. Robert.  25 
Steller curve of  growth, 155 
Stellar  fusion,  155 
Stem.  See Stay Time Excursion Module. 
Stennis, Sen. John,  15,277 
Stern, Dr. Ralph H.,  121 
Stethoscope, 172 
STF.  See  Spin Test  Facility  (KSC). 
Stockholm, Sweden, 169 
Stockholm, Univ.  of  (Sweden),  147,  288- 
289 
Stone, Edward Durell, 410 
Stonewall, Tex.,  279 
Strategic  Air  Command  ( SAC ) ,   86,  260, 
274,428,429 
failures, Atlas, 145 
launch 
Minuteman, 15,62,378 
Titan  n, 409 
Stratocruiser.  See  c-97. 
Stratoscope  II  (balloon), ’ 223,  397 
Strawley, John  E.,  223 
Strikes 
Cape Kennedy, 51,59,61,62,65,6%70, 
124,  126,  128,  131,  133, 209,  212,  243 
White  Sands  Missile Range,  14 
Strong, Dr.  John, 364 
Structural materials, 77,429 
Structures, 29,77,147 
Structures  and  Materials  Conference 
(A IAA ) ,   197 
Strughold,  Dr.  Hubertus  O.,  164 
Student Space Conference, 163 
Stuhlinger,  Dr.  Ernst,  302,320, 352 
Stump Neck, Md.,  30 
Sturman, John C.,  25 
Stuttering cure,  79 

INDEX 

(U.S.S.R. 

Styles, Pau l  L.,  24 
Styrofoam, 259 
Subbotin, M.,  105 
Submarine 
flying,  397 
missile-bearing,  136 
nuclear, 221,266,302 
Submarine launching, 68,266 
Submarine  tracking,  84 
“Subscale 1” (solid rocket gra in) ,  248 
Sud-Aviation (France) ,  170 
Sudets,  Soviet  Air  Marshal  Vladimir 
Aleksandrovich,  104 
Sullivan, Francis J.,  368, 393, 429 
Sumatra,  Indonesia, 292 
“Summary  of  Lessons  Learned  from  Air 
Force  Management  Surveys,”  198 
Summerfield, Dr. Martin, 382 
Sun  (see also  Solar cell,  etc.) , 1,219, 271 
cosmic rays,  211 
electric  charge,  121 
corona, 260, 444 
radiation, 76,444 
Sundlan, Bruce G.,  242 
Sunnyvale, Calif.,  164 
“Sunrise.”  See  VOSKHOD  r 
spacecraft). 
Suomi, Prof. Verner E.,  290 
SUPARCO.  See  Space  and  Upper  Atmos. 
phere  Research  Committee, Pakistan. 
Supernovae theory,  4 
Supersonic  Advisory  Committee  (Trans- 
port Association),  114 
Supersonic  Transport  Advisory  Board 
( STAB ) ,   119 
craft, supersonic transport  (Sst) . 
Supersonic  transport  aircraft.  See  Air- 
Supersonic  Transport  Evaluation  Group 
(STEG ) ,   4, 148 
Support Facility  (MSC )   ,8 
Surveyor  (program),  10, 41, 106, 171,200 
lunar  lander, 47,275-276,276 
lunar probe, 71,160,197 
Survival and  Special  Training  Squadron, 
USAF,  3637th 281 
Survival training,  5, 25, 102, 221, 281, 315 
Suspension system, 276 
Sustained  Superior  Performance  award, 
114 
SV-5  (ablative-type reentry  body),  308 
Swami  (Stanford  Worldwide  Acquisition 
of  Meterological Information),  231 
Sweden, 246,397 
experiments, 99,  147, 277-278, 288-289 
Swedish  Space  Committee,  99, 204-205, 
241 
Sweet, L/C  Floyd J.  (USAFR ) ,   244 
Swenson, Carl N,  Co.,  432 
Switzerland, 2% 
Sybaris, Greece, 395 
Sydney, Australia, 317 
Sylvania Co.,  89 
Sylvania Electric  Products,  Inc.,  1% 
Sylvania Electronics Systems-East, 295 
Sylvester, Arthur, 284 

519 
Symington,  Sen.  Stuart,  63-64, 256-257, 
278-279 
Symposium on Ballistic Missile and Space 
Technology, Ninth,  284 
Symposium on Lunar Exploration, 215 
Symposium  on  Manned  Interplanetary 
Missions Studies Performed by  Industry 
for NASA  in  1%3/64,29 
Symposium  on  Reliability  and   Quality 
Control, 10th National, 6, 
Symposium on  Space  Stations  and  Their 
Logistic Support  ( A I M ) ,   139 
Symposium  on  the   Establishment  of  a 
European  Network  for  Artificial  SateI- 
lites,  419 
Synchrotron, 72 
Syncom  (program),  4, 90,  109, 228, 237, 
282 
SYNCOM  n  (communications  satellite), 
82, 105,146,238,247,286,305,332,373, 
397, 439 
SYNCOM  III  (communications  satellite), 
84, %,  139, 259, 286,290-291, 294, 298, 
305, 310, 311, 314, 315, 326, 332, 347, 
398, 458, 439, 442, 454, %7 
Syrtis Major  (on  Mars), 144 
Systems analysis, 144 
Systems  Analysis  and  Research  Corp. 
( SARC ) ,   113 
Syvertson, C.  A.,  226 
T-27  (space flight simulator), 430 
( je t   trainer),  5, 306 
T -33  
T-3  8  ( je t  tra iner) ,  302 
( j e t   tra iner) ,   41 
T - 3 9  
TAC.  See Tactical Air Command. 
Tactical  Air Command  (TAC ) ,   70,191 
Tad.  See Delta,  Thrust Augmented. 
Takeoff  requirements, je t   transport,  150 
Tampa, Fla.,  2,151 
Tananarive, Madagascar, 306 
Tank,  Dr.  Kurt, 203 
Tanker,  orbital,  281 
Taper,  Project  (Turbulent  Air  Pilot  En- 
(NASA-FAA),  233 
vironment  Research) 
Tarter/Terrier  (missile program),  439 
Tashkent,  U.S.S.R.,  27 
Tass, 30,34,35,42,62,75,82,85,103,107, 
118, 128, 130, 132, 138, 149, 159, 165, 
174 176, 190, 200,  210, 220, 234, 239, 
245,286,290,315,321,424, 426,436 
Tat.  See  Cable,  transatlantic  communi- 
cations. 
Tat.  See  Thor,  Thrust-Augmented. 
T a t 4  (cab le) ,  55 
T a t 5  (cab le) ,  55 
Tat-Delta.  See  Thor-Delta,  Thrust-Aug- 
mented. 
Tatum Sa l t  Dome, Miss.,  360 
Taylor, George, Gold  Medal,  1963 (=SI, 
198 
Taylor, Hugh M., 392 
(USA ) ,   214 
Taylor,  Gen.  Maxwell D. 
Taylor, Dr.  Theodore B., 108 
Teague,  Rep.  Olin  E., 66,  107-108, 185, 
316 

520 

INDEX 

Technology  (see  aIso  Space  technology), 
18,  20,25,53,  75,  83,  160,  167,173,  181, 
194,  199,  206-207,  234-235,  243,  257, 
277.  284-285,  286,  303.  312,  318,  324, 
.
_
.
 
336;  344 
Technology,  Automation,  and  Economic 
Progress, National  Commission on, 259, 
286 
Technology commission, national,  313 
Technology  utilization,  39,  140,  142,  217, 
243,  306,329 
Tel Aviv,  Israel,  205 
Telecommunication system  (see also Com- 
munications) , 26,  49,  270 
Telemetry,  3,  11,  30,  143,  150,  176,  264 
da ta  evaluation,  168 
system, 64,134,142,N 
Telephone  communications  via  satellite, 
185 
Telephone contract  (MSC) , 8 1  
Telescope, 12,  45,  72,  198,  326,  393 
astrometric, 75,  218, 
balloon-borne, 74,  132 
manned orbiting  (Mo t) ,  327, 
orbiting, 301,327 
radio,  224 
U.S.S.R.  34> 193 
stellar  photometer,  231 
x-ray rocket-bone,  179-180 
Television camera, 217,  384 
Television  transmission.  3.  19.  115.  1 4  

TELSTAR I  (communications satellite),  168, 
261.  270 
TELSTAR  11  (communications satellite),  140, 
168,  297 
Temperature measurements, 305 
atmosphere, 23,  30,  42,  47,  99, 131,  141, 
241.  379 
Tennessee Valley Post  of  AOA,  12 
Terent'yev,  Col.  G.,  118 
Tereshkova.  Valentina.  See  Nikolaveva- 
Tereshkova, Valentina. 
Terselic, Richard  A.,  184 
Test  facility,  solid-motor  (Edwards  AFB ) ,  
162 
Test stand, F-1  rocket  engine, 122 
Texas  ASM,  College  of,  57,  64,  66,  156 
Texas Southern Univ.,  263 
Texas  Symposium  on  Relativistic  Astro- 
physics, 426 
ological College,  154 
of,  326 
Tfx 
(Tactical  Fighter  Experimental). 
See F-111. 
Thermal  conductivity, 15 
Thermodynamics, 257 
Thermonuclear weapons, 14,37 
Thiokol  Chemical Corp.,  23,  80, 312,  400 
Reaction Motors Div.,  29,  78 
Wasatch  Div.,  416 
Thomas, Rep.  Albert,  81 
Thomas, Numa  E., 142 

Thompson, Floyd  I..,  166,  282,  319,  343 
Thompson, J. I., Co.,  296 
Thompson, Milton O.,  14,70,185,283,305, 
367,  368,  412,  435 
Thompson, R. A ,   289 
Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc.,  61,160, 
209 
Thor  (booster), 87,129,197,212,234,322, 
411 
Thor-AbIe-Star  (booster),  173,  342,  418, 
457,  461,463 
Thor-Agena  (booster),  124,  234 
launch,  10,  17,  66,  114,  151,  213,  216, 
218,  283,  294,  482 
B, 25,277,298,447,464,%5,  466,  467 
D,  238,  316,  340,  354,  373,  378,  392, 
446, 448,  4.50, 451,  452,  4.53,  454, 
456,  457,  458,  459,  460, 462 
Thor-Delta  (booster)  (see  also  Delta), 
114,  309,  434 
launch,  19,  446, 457,  462, 466,  %7,  468 
Thor-Delta,  Thrust  Augmented 
(Ta t-  
Delta)  (booster), % 
Thor-Jupiter  controversy  (USA-WAF)  , 92 
Thorium,  4041,  62 
Thousand Oaks, Calif., 298 
(Tad) .   See 
Thrust-Augmented  Delta 
Delta,  Thrust  Augmented. 
Thrust-Augmented  Thor-Delta 
(Ta t) .  
See  Thor-Delta, Thrust  Augmented. 
Thrustor,  contact-ionization, 159 
Thumba  Equatorial,  Rocket  Launching 
Station  ( Ind ia ) ,   6,  10,  25,  31,  70-71, 
375,380,382,384 
Thunderchief.  See  F-105. 
Thurman, Harry  L., 168 
Time,  Inc.,  287 
Times-Picayune (New Orleans),  281 
Tipton, Stuart G.,  211,288 
Tiros  (meteorological  satellite)  43,  62, 
240,286,298,305,438 
accomplishments, 84,  124,  179,318 
TIROS  I  (meteorological satellite),  124 
TIROS  II  (meteorological satellite),  230 
TIROS  VII  (meteorological  sateHite),  218, 
253 
(meteorological  satellite),  5, 
TIROS  VIII 
100,  251,  298 
Tiros  Operational  Satellite  (Tos),  193 
Tischler, Adelbert O.,  11,80,  181,  228,  377 
Titan  missile sauadrons.  8,  314-315 
Titan  11  (missife and  booster),  18,  66,  74, 
87,289,297,309 
launch 
operational,  13,  24,  63,  67, 
283,337 
w ,  113,  130,  132 
launch vehicle, Gemini, 9,  11, 
294,361,  371,  41-14 
449, 
propulsion system, 18,  328 
reliability, 9,  409 
tests, 20,318,  409 
Titan  III (booster),  92,  112,  124, 
186,  240 
contract  for, 3,164 

121, 
466 

2-59? 

171, 

173, 

81, 

101, 

INDEX 

521 

facility, 39,  131,209,212 
payload,  269,  376 
plans for, 78,129,205,255 
progress,  29,  44,  92 
test, 162,245,278,386 
Titan  111-A 
(booster),  269,  304,  414,  443, 
474 
Titan  III-C 
(booster),  197,  206,  213,  269, 
279,  289,  358,  386,  401, 429 
Titanium,  85 
Titusville, ma.,  63 
Tobias,  Dr.  Cornelius,  174 
Tokuyasu,  Communications  Minister 
Zitsuzo,  343 
Tokyo Astronomical Observatory, 210 
Tokyo, Japan,  1 4 , 2 5 8 , 2 9 1  
Tokyo Univ.  Institute for Nuclear Physics, 
394 
Toi,'Thomas  A.,  122 
Tomato, 204 
Tonkin, Gulf  of,  279 
Tools.  mace.  5.  344 
Topeka:  Kans.;  351 
Topsi  (Topside  sounder  satellite),  106, 
296,  484 
Tory b c  (reac tor) ,   89 
Tos.  See  Tiros  Operational  Satellite. 
Toth, Robert  C.,  262 
Tow Test Vehicle (T tv ) ,  264 
Tower,  Sen.  John,  321 
Townes,  Dr.  Charles  H.,  237,  367 
Townsend, Dr. John W.,  Jr.,  63 
Toxicity, 230,  382 
Tracking,  121,  170,  176,  200,222,270 
Doppler method,  109 
laser,  5 
optical, 3 
radar,  38 
S-band, 216 
seagoing system, 
stations 
Alaska  (ESRO)  ,264,  397 
Australia,  39,  103 
Belgium, 397 
Falkland  Islands,  397 
France-EsRo, 308 
France-Spain, 204 
Malagasy  Republic, 306 
Mexico,  39 
Spain,  31 
U.S.,  10,39,55,159,332 
Zanzibar,  129 
Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition  (see  also 
STADAN),  71,  176 
Traction,  runway,  equipment, 2% 
Tradescantia  (p lan t) ,   179 
Trajectory  control,  146 
Trajectory-Correction  Propulsion  System, 
276 
Trans-American  Aeronautical  Corp.  of 
Washington, 63,  136 
Trans World Airlines  (TWA ),58 
Transatlantic  flight capability, 327 
Transducer, 82,131,146 
Transit  (satellite),  222 
776-598 0-65-34 

Transistors,  radiation  damage,  8 
Transport,  reusable  shuttle,  orbital,  249, 
291-292 
Transport, troop, rocket  (see also Ithacus) , 
238,246 
Transportation  system,  air,  332 
Transporter,  air-cushion, 289 
Treaty 
astronaut  rescue and  aid,  100-101,  101- 
102, 116 
radio  communications, 68 
spaceship damage protection, 101,116 
Trew,  Francis,  189 
Trident  Engineer  Associates, 364, 
Trinity Bay, Tex.,  156,361,415 
Troitsky, Vsevolod  S.,  426 
Tropic Survival School, USAF,  221 
TRS  11  (tetrahedral  satellite),  252,  453 
Truax,  Capt.  R.  C.  (USN,  Ret.),  334 
T rud ,  340,  353 
Trudeau,  Gen.  Arthur  (USA,  Ret.),  370 
TRW.  See  Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge. 
Tsiranana,  President  Philibert  (Malagasy 
Republic),  265 
TSR-2  (U.K.  supersonic aircraft),  329 
Ttv.  See Tow  Test  Vehicle. 
Tuckerman, Arnold J.,  228 
Tuscon, Ariz.,  3,223,259 
Tufts Univ.,  9 
Tulane  Univ.,  111 
Tunesten.  19.115.248 
Turbuofan engine,'28 
Turbojet  engine, 28 
Turbulence, 8,14,103,233,278 
atmospheric, 146 
clear air, 88,291,383 
Turner, Dr. B.  A.,  263 
TWA.  See Trans World Airlines. 
"20th  Century  Engineering"  (exhibit), 
230 
Twining,  Gen.  Nathan  (USAF,  Ret.),  370 
Tycho ( lunar  cra ter) ,  275,299 
Tyler, Tex.,  361 
Tyndall ~ m ,  fi., 181 
Typhon  (missile) , 26 
Typhoon, 112,218 
Typhoon Ruby, 326 
Typhoon Sally,  326 
Tyura  Tam  range,  U.S.S.R.,  375-376 
U-2  {photographic  airplane) , 282,  316, 
383,441 
UAC.  See United Aircraft Corp .  
U.A.R.  See  United  Arab  Republic. 
(Los 
Angeles) . 
See  California,  Univ.  of 
UCJA. 
Ufo.  See  Unidentified Flying  Objects. 
UIW.  See United  Iron Workers. 
U.K.  See  United  Kingdom. 
Ultraviolet astronomy, 106 
Ultraviolet observations, 212 
Ultraviolet  photography,  271,  315 
Ultraviolet radiation, 76,210,374 
U.N.  See United  Nations. 
Underground nuclear  test,  388 

522 

LNDEX 

(United  Nations  Educational 
UNESCO 
Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization), 
- 
308,  387 
Unidentified  Flying  Objects  (Ufo) ,   110, 
289,  387,  437 
Union Carbide, 56, 451 
Union  of  Soviet  Socialist Republics.  See 
U.S.S.R. 
Unitary  transformations, 72 
United Air Lines, 411 
United  Aircraft  Corp.  (WAC ) ,   13, 26,  197, 
405 
United  Arab Republic  (U.A.R.),  203,  303 
Egyptian  rocket  development,  78,  262- 
263,303 
United  Arab Republic Astronomical  Serv. 
ice, 424 
United  Brotherhood  of  Carpenters  and 
Joiners of  America, 424 
United  Engineering  Trustees,  Inc.,  334 
United  Iron Workers  (urn)  (see also Iron 
Workers Un ion) ,  130,  131 
United Kingdom  (U.K.),  52,59,61,79,94, 
158,  246,  253-254,  254,  280,  303,  311, 
314 
aircraft,  209,  329 
communications,  26,  75,  85,  136,  204, 
218,  455 
“Concorde” 
(U.K.-France  supersonic 
a ir l iner) ,  170, 279,  314 
House of  Commons, 136 
launch,  118,  205,  239,  242,  257,  278 
Office of  the Minister for Science, 118 
Post Office, 26,270 
space cooperation, 97,196,249,311,412, 
453 
space  program,  26%270,  278,  412 
United Nations  (U.N.),  219,266,269,288, 
313 
Committee  on  Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer 
Space,  57,  187,  205,  362,  374,  375, 
381 
Legal Committee, 348 
General Assembly, 21,  37 
Scientific Committee  on  the   Effects  of 
Atomic  Radiation, 202 
Space library,  269 
World Weather Center, 439 
United Press International  (UP I )  ,273,383 
United  P lan t   Guards  Workers  Union  of 
America,  124, 126, 128, 133 
United  States  (U S . ) ,   40,  46, 47,  58,  61, 
85-86,  90,  93-94,  128,  143,  154-155, 
156-157,  218,  254,  282-283,285,  292- 
293,  308,  332 
budget,  16,  18,  20-21,  45-46,  48,  108, 
244 
defense,  126,  214,  320,  322,  323,  331- 
332,333 
economy, 18,38,40,240 
goal, 6,  160 
Government, 28 
contracts,  R&D, 165,  165-166,  261, 
,  313 
criticism  of, 22,  93-94,  114,  122, 
245- 
246,  253-254 

RBD, 1 8 , 2 2 , 2 4 , 4 ,   103,  165,  186,211, 
262,  281,  312,  313,  330-331 
science and  technology,  110-111, 165 
missile  reliabilitv.  9.  10.  15.  28.  33.  69 
,
,
,
 
policy,  188-189,  524,’ 329 
security,  national,  7,  9,  12,  36,  99,  217, 
250-251,  258,  280,  284-285,  295,  298, 
“nn 
5Ld  
space 
accomplishments,  4,  33,  45,  61,  111- 
112,151-152,172~271-272,272,282, 
300,313,318 
activities,  27,  184,  268-269,  302,  377 
capability,  32,  38,  94,  158,  271-272 
power,  8,  12,268-269 
race,  133-134,  295 
United  States  Freight  Co.,  370 
United Technology Center  (UTC ) ,   39,162, 
166,190,278,386,401,429 
Univac  Div.  (Sperry  Rand  Corp.),  68, 
330,  423 
“Universal”  (upper  stage vehicle),  87 
Universe,  180, 239 
Universities,  4,  18,  24,  186,  196,  308,  312, 
397,  406,  419,  428 
federal  support,  110,443 
University Club, 9 
University Explorer  program,  357 
University  Park,  N.  Mex.,  206 
UPI.  See United  Press  International. 
Uppsala  Ionospheric  Observatory  (Swe- 
den) ,   99 
Uranium, 62,  143,248 
Uranium-235, 143 
Urey,  Dr.  Harold, 299,  438 
Ursini, G.  A.,  347 
U S .   See United  States. 
USA.  See U S .  Army. 
USACDA.  See U.S.  Arms Control and  Dis- 
armament Agency. 
U.S. Aeronautics  and  Space  Activities,  27 
USAF.  See U.S.  Air  Force. 
USAF  Aeronautical  Chart  and  Information 
Center, 223 
USAF  Aerospace Medical Division  (Brooks 
AFB,  Tex.),  44,48,80 
USAF  Aerospace  Research  Pilot  School 
(Edwards AFB)  ,197,206,395 
USAF  Air  Defense Command,  420 
USAF  Cambridge  Research  Laboratories. 
See  Air  Force  Cambridge  Research 
Laboratories. 
USAF  Electronics  Systems Command,  404 
USAF  Missile Development Center,  333 
USAF/NASA  Military Requirements Review 
Group, 319 
See Air  Force  Office  of  Aero- 
USAF  OAR. 
space Research. 
USAF  School  of  Aerospace  Medicine 
(Brooks AFB,  Tex.),  87,174 
USAF  Space Physics Laboratory, 325 
USAF  3637th  Survival  and  Special  Train- 
ing  Squadron, 281 
USAF Tropic Survival School, 221 

523 
INDEX 
US. Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  149 
U.S.  Air Force  (USAF) , 6,29,41,66,70,78, 
U.S.  Bureau of  Sport  Fisheries and  Wild- 
135,  178,  190-191,  203-204,  207,  211- 
life,  109 
212,  261,  278,  288,  289,  292,302,315, 
US. Committee  for  International  Quiet 
322,  325 
Sun  Year (IQSY ),45 
aircraft, 69,90,101,331 
US. Committee  on  the   Extension  of  the 
antisatellite  system, 197 
Standard  Atmosphere  (COESA),  14 
award, 32 
US. Congress.  See Congress. 
contract, 39,74,197,233,308 
USDA.  See  Agriculture,  US. Dept.  of. 
cooperation 
U.S. District Court  (Fla.),  61 
AEC, 200 
U.S.  District  Judge  
FAA, 214,277 
Florida,  212 
NASA, 80,  117, 171, 181, 206,237,277, 
Oklahoma City,  Okla.,  187, 244 
302,319,354 
U.S.  Embassy  (Moscow), 122 
Gemini,  55,  121,  182,  206,  209 
U.S.  Embassy  (Venezuela), 275 
NASA-USN,  33 
US. Fighter  Aces  Association,  188 
facilities, 39 
U S .   Geological Survey, 100,299 
launch, 258,  304 
failure,  104, 144,  145,  193,  222 
U.S.  Geological  Survey  Observatory,  223 
USIA.  See U S .  Information Agency. 
missile 
U.S. 
Information  Agency  ( U S A ) ,  142, 
operational,  15,  32,  62,  63,  79,  81, 
282-283 
84,  116,  122,  125,  132,  264,  265 
US .   Marine  Corps  (USMC) ,  16,  87,  328, 
R&D,  13, 24,  58, 67,  79,  81,  104, 113, 
330 
217,241,283,330 
USMC.  See US.  Marine Corps. 
plans, 78,254,279 
USN.  See US. Navy. 
probe,  1M 
U.S.  National Museum  (Smithsonian Insti- 
rocket.  300.329 
tution),  121 
satellite,  17,  27-28,  66,  79,  85,  102, 
U.S.  Naval  Air  Equipment Center, 4.04 
114,145,1%,151,178,182,203,205, 
US. Naval  Institute  Proceedings,  334 
213,239,244,252-253.277.294.316. 
U.S. Naval  Observatory (Flagstaff, A&.), 
326,342,373; 392 
.
I
,
.
75,218 
sounding rocket,  122,125 
U.S.  Naval  Research  and  Development 
management,  8,  11,  23,  92,  98-99,  127, 
Satellite  Communications Group,  238 
198,289,311412 
missile program, 112,252 
US .   Naval  School  of  Aviation  Medicine, 
Mol,  8,  11,  44,  74,  92, %,  99,  112,  139, 
174,  219 
192,  197,205,209,257,261 
U.S. Naval Training Center, 284 
report,  159,  198 
US .   Navy  (U SN ) ,  10, 29,  33,  45, 64,  71, 
rocket, 317 
84,  178,  190-191,  203-204,  214,  218, 
rocket motor,  solid propellant, 23,39,80, 
253,287,305,334 
311312,  323 
Polaris A-2,11,68 
space museum, 261 
Polaris A-3 ,6 ,19 ,279  
space program, 18,33,170-171,181,286, 
satellite,  8, 
333 
submarine, 330,397 
supersonic transport, 4 ,43 ,82  
space  surveillance  system,  102 
tests,  10,  19,  114,  117, 129,323, 328 
supersonic transport,  4 
Thor.  129 
U S .   Navy  Engineering  Experiment  Sta- 
Ti&  II, 66 ,74  
tion,  334 
Titan  11% 92,129,164,245,  278 
US. N ew s   and  World  Report,  199, 341 
US .   Arms  Control  and   Disarmament 
USNS  Croatan, 384,  391,  393,  395 
Agency  (USACDA )  . 5 9  
USNS  Kingsport, 238 
u.s.-A&y 
(U SA ) ,  80,  92,  207,  239,  241, 
USNS Rose Knot,  197 
275,  322,392 
US. Public  Health  Service,  80,  230,  277 
contracts,  11.  328 
cooperation. 328 
U.S.S. Daniel  Boone, 266 
iiternational,  Canada,  IO, 29 
U.S.S. Daniel  Webster, 209,  307,  330 
NASA, 182 
U.S.S. Enterprise, 2%,  307 
Corps  of  Engineers,  31,  116,  188,  274, 
U.S.S. John Adams, 221 
328 
U.S.S. Nathan Hole, 11 
contracts, 8,13,15,247,268,406 
launch, 68 
U.S.S.  Norton Sound, 218 
radar  (Mar), 250 
U.S.S.R.  (Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Re- 
XV-SA  (VtOl), 251,391 
publics)  (see  also  Soviet Academv of 
U.S.  Army  Yuma Proving  Ground, A r k ,  
Sciences, etc.) , 21,  188, 189, 190, i10, 
239 
275,  283,  340,348,353,367,  394,396, 
US. Board  of  Geographic Names,  22,  126 
413,427 

 

524 

INDEX 

U.S.S.R.-Continued 
achievements, 86,111-112,132,133,142, 
152,172,190,254,283,322,  350,315- 
376,  442-443 
aircraft,  41,  104, 133, 142,289 
astronomy,  198,  203-204,  315,  364,  436- 
437 
bioastronautics,  130,  171,  172,  174-175, 
177-178,  179, 204,  209,  226,  248,  309, 
345,  350,  352,  355,  357,  359,  389,  393, 
396,  418,  419,  421,  443 
booster  capability,  32,  35,  38,  111,  122, 
189,  195,  242,  302,  318,  351,  353,  355, 
359,379 
cooperation,  international,  34,  42,  101- 
102,  269,308-309 
comsat  network,  122,  205-206,  255, 
313 
Lil  (Lunar  Interplanetary  Labora- 
tory),  314 
cooperation, US.-U.S.S.R.,  2,41,59,116, 
128.  142.  195-1%.  203.  251.  295. 
342;  379 ' 
,
I
,
,
bioastronautics,  204   208, 310,  342 
communications, 208,  215 
ECHO  XI,  17,  17-18,  27,  54,  75,  97 
disarmament,  17,  21,  266,  437 
lunar  exploration,  2,  59,  60 
meteorology, 204,  208,  349,  362,  366 
competition,  US-U.S.S.R.  See  Space 
race. 
cosmonaut. 10.74.%.130.131.134.174- 
175,  1771178,  190, '209,'  213;  228,  248, 
282,  286, 309,  34Q,  345,  348,  349,  352, 
355,359, 381,  389,  393,396,  418,  427, 
443 
launch  (see also COSMOS v-LI;  ELECTRON 
I -N ;   POLET  II;  VOSKIIOD   I ;   ZOND  I 
and   I I ) ,   156, 171, 336,  385 
lunar  surface,  103,  180,  203,  426,  436- 
437 
manned  space  flight,  118,  190, 220,  282, 
286,  302,  309,  340, 348,  349,  350, 
357,359,385,393,3% 
to  moon,  40,  64,  111,  118,  I25,  154, 
156.  196,  199.  205.  221.  242.  268- 
26% 315,.353,354&5,367,362,365, 
374.  379 
.,  -  - 
126, 
planetary exploration, 105,112,120, 
149,  152,  172,  176,  199, 200,  246, 
253, 
262,  315,  348,359,365,  399,  403 
radiation,  169,  171,245 
scientists, 253-254,  379 
space  program  predictions,  2,  171, 
220,  379 
weapons,  250,  318,  323,  349,  381, 
388,  441 
Icbm's,  136-137,  170, 255 
U.S.S.  s tonewd l  Jackson, 406 
Ussurisk,  Siberia,  426 
U.S.S.  Von Steuben, 430 
U.S.  Weather  Bureau, 1, 43,  193, 240,251, 
Z5q 258,290,366 
UTC.  See United  Technology Center. 
Utrecht, Univ.  of,  155 

205, 
385, 

V-2  (missile), 47,70 
(helicopter,  U.S.S.R.),  142 
V-8 
Vab.  See  Vertical  Assembly  Building 
(KSC). 
Vacuum chamber, 3 
Valkyrie-  See * T O .  
Valley Forge, Pa.,  75,304 
Valley  Forge  Space  Technology  Center 
( G E ) ,   177,304 
Van Allen, Dr.  James A.,  37,266,388 
Van Allen radiation belt, 50,103,173,178, 
252,273,325,435-436 
Van Atta, Dr.  Lester C.,  427 
van Neil, Cornelius B.,  11 
Vandenberg AFB, Calif., 51,  254,  330, 
launch.  See  Pacific  Missile  Range; 
Western Test  Range. 
management,  164 
Vanguard  (program) ,  377 
VANGUARD  I  (sa te l l i te) ,  107 
Van Nuys,  Calif.,  368 
VARC.  See  Virginia  Associated  Research 
Center. 
 
Varian  Associates, 409 
Variable-geometry wing, 428 
Vatican,  260,  293 
vc-1  o  (U.K.  transport),  158 
Vecchietti, George J.,  51  
Vehicle Antenna  Test  Facility  (LBRC),  52 
Vela  Hotel.  See Vela,  Project. 
Vela,  Project  (ARPA), 
launch,  153 
performance,  27-28,  252-253,  255,  262, 
290 
Venezuela, 275 
Ventilation, 57 
Venus  (p lane t) ,   74,  105,  176,  200,  297, 
318,  364,  408 
flights  to,  120,  149,  184,  235,  246,  253, 
262,  453 
surface, 132-133,180,  239,314,408 
Vermont, Univ.  of, 207 
Vernier,  121 
Vernier  engine,  160 
Vernon, Sergei, 131 
Verrett, Dr.  Jacqueline, 131 
Vershinin, Air  Marshal Konstantin A.,  41, 
289 
Vertical Assembly Building  (Vab)  (R SC ) ,  
209 
Very low frequency.  See Vlf. 
Vespucci, Amerigo, 101 
Veterans of  Foreign Wars  (VFW)  ,295  
VFW.  See  Veterans  of  Foreign Wars. 
Vibration, 63 
Vibration  test  laboratory  (nsc) , 102 
Vienop,  Edna,  1 
Vinson, Rep.  Carl, 69 
Virginia  Associated  Research  Center 
(VARC ) ,   159 
Virginia  Military  Institute  (VMI),  188 
Virginia  Polytechnic  Institute  (VP I ) ,   159, 
290 
Virginia, Univ.  of,  159 
Visual observations, 82 

INDEX 

525 

Vivian, Howard C.,  82 
VJ  i o 1   (West Germany Vtol) ,265 
Vlf  (Very  low  frequency),  50,95 
VMI.  See Virginia  Military  Institute. 
vogel,  Col.  Lawrence w.  ( U S A ) ,   268, 274 
Voice of  America, 373 
Volcanoes,  180,411 
Vologda,  U.S.S.R.,  27 
von  Braun,  Dr.  Wernher,  43,  66,  71, 73, 
114, 173, 199, 232, 345, 349, 352, 433 
von  Ktirmtin,  Theodore, Lecture,  230 
von  Ktirmtin, Theodore, Trophy,  315 
von  Neumann,  John, Committee, 377 
Voris,  Dr.  Frank  B.,  168, 169 
Vorkuta, U.S.S.R.,  27 
Vorontsov, Yuri  M.,  348 
VOSKHOD I  (U.S.S.R.  spacecraft), 348,349, 
350, 351, 352, 355, 357, 363, 365, 374, 
381,389,3%,419,421,427,443, 458 
Vostok  (U.S.S.R.  spacecraft),  111, 152, 
190,226,309,365,421 
VOSTOK  IU,  177 
VOSTOK  IV, 177 
VOSTOK  V,  179 
Voyager  (program),  199, 208, 259, 295, 
437-438 
VPI.  See Virginia  Polytechnic  Institute. 
Vredefort, South Africa,  174 
v/stol  (Vertical/Short-Takeoff-and-Land- 
ing)  aircraft,  216, 303, 430, 437 
Vtol  (Vertical Takeoff-and-Landing)  air. 
craft, 66,223,251,391 
Wac Corporal  (Army missile),  261 
Wackenhut  Corp.,  124 
Wagner, Dr. Bernard M.,  226 
Walker, Dr.  Eric A.,  12 
Walker,  Joseph  A.,  321, 368, 377, 396 
Walker, Robert P.,  111 
Wa l l   Street  Journal, 84. 85. 93 
.
,
 
Wall,  self-sealing, 228 
Wallops  Station  (NA SA ) ,   35, 65, 109, 132, 
176. 292.323 
-, - -  
contract, 219,222,225 
launch 
re-entry  experiment, 289-290 
Ram, 132,487 
Reentry  Flight  Demonstration,  3, 
346,487 
satellite,  118,379,420 
sounding  rocket,  355 
Aerobee  160, 374 387 
Aerobee  1 5 0 4   304 
Aerobee  3008,  30 
Arcas,  Boosted, 99, 305, 328 
(Javelin),  15, 137, 343, 378 
Argo ~ - 4  
Nike-Apache,  11, 13, 14, 42-43,  62, 
14U, 202, 210, 222, 243,  249,  251, 
297, 343, 344, 3%  395, 408 
Nike-Cajun,  2243, 30, 4243,  47, 62, 
99, 141, 277-278, 283,287, 392 
scou t ,  256 
Warhead, 37,125,255 
w a r r e n  AFB, Wyo.,  51 

Warrior Constructors, Inc.,  121 
Warsaw, Poland, 308,309,311,313,314 
Washington Daily  News,  144145,272, 
Washineton.  D.C..  16. 21. 22. 40. %.  129. 
140;  153, 165; 208, 262, 270,-293, 325 
meetings, 4, 34, 63, 68, 78, 94, 111, 116, 
140, 144, 1%,  148, 149, 154, 155, 158, 
. 
183, 223. 226, 234. 237. 238. 242. 259, 
266 290,316; 319; 332. 
‘ 
press  conferences,  13, 41, 74-75,  131, 
148-149,260,317,320 
Washington Evening  Star,  8 ,  48, 325, 351 
Washington, George, Award,  75 
“The  Washington  Merry-Go-Round” 
(newspaper column), 81 
Vash ing ton   Post,  21, 40, 54, 57, 61, 81, 
342, 351, 423 
Washington  Sunday  Star,  188, 323 
Washington Univ.,  438 
Washington  World  (magazine),  48, 181, 
224 
Water, 217,383 
desalinization, 251, 256 
Water  pollution, 229-230 
Water Resources Research Center, 201 
Waterman, Dr. Alan T., 322 
Watson,  James  Craig,  Medal  ( N A S I ,   154 
Watts, cwo Joseph C.,  394 
Wayne State Univ.,  33,100,184 
Weapon  system  development,  186-187, 
250-251,320,322,323 
Weapons and Air Equipment Co.,  W. Ger., 
52 
Weapons platform, 392 
Weapons Research  Establishment, Woom- 
era,  Australia,  270 
Weather  (see also Meteorology), 146-147, 
156-157 
forecast, 2,5,62,112,333 
Weather  Bureau.  See  U.S.  Weather  Bu- 
reau. 
Weather map, Tiros, 240 
Weather  observation network,  US., WOth 
anniversary, 163 
Weather  prediction  system,  global  satel- 
lite, 231 
Weather  satellite  system,  global,  3637, 
240 
operational.  See Tiros  Operational  Sat- 
ellite. 
Weather station 
balloon, 218-219 
nuclear powered, 49 
Weaver,  Rep.  James  D., 50 
Webb,  James  E.,  43,67,81,101, 154155, 
182, 189, 222, 237, 245, 256, 259, 302, 
304h 310, 312313, 322, 335, 340 
appropriations,  45-46,  9495, 95, 242, 
300-301 
award by,  136,258 
award to,  185 
economy, 38,256 
JPL management,  137-138, 163,220 

INDEX 

Webb,  James  E . P o n t i n u e d  
lunar  landing, manned, 99-100,316317, 
343.367 
NASA  'Electronics  Research  Center,  23- 
24,37,67,292 
RANGER  VI,  126,  137-138,  150,  163,  272 
space achievements, 9,183-184,223,344, 
361 

suuersonic  transuort.  119 
U.3.S.R.  space  faunching,  357 
Weber, Dr. Thomas B.,  382 
Weber Aircraft Co.,  367 
Webster, Grove, 439 
Weiehtlessness.  effects of.  72.  208 
humans, 89,  129, 172,174-175,  179,243, 
248,427,432,443,469 
insects, 72,171 
plants, 72 
reptiles,  56-57 
Weinstein, Dr.  Roy, 22 
Weizmann Institute of  Science, 55 
Welch, Dr. Billy,  174 
Welch, Leo D.,  242,255 
Welder, 184,269 
Welsh,  Dr.  Edward  C.,  4,  6,  35,  40,  111- 
112,  136,  186-187,  188-189,  190,  215- 
216,  217,  254,  269,  279-280,  298,  315, 
322,350,353-354,375376,384 
Wenk, Dr.  Edward, Jr.,  310 
West Coast, US.,  5,  146, 225,  313 
West  Ford,  Project  (USAF ) ,   116 
Welter,  Capt.  William  A.,  Jr.  (U SA ) ,   394 
West  German  Association  for  Rocket  Re- 
search  Technique and  Space Flight,  320 
West  Germany.  See  Germany, West. 
Western Aerospace,  88 
Western Devices, Inc.,  291 
Western Electric Co.,  11,328 
Western  Operations  Office  (wo o ) ,   NASA, 
102 
Western Materials Co.,  216 
Western  Test  Range  (W T R ) ,   formerly  Air 
Force  Space  Test  Center  (see  also 
Pacific Missile Range and Vandenberg 
A F B ) ,   164,  178, 239 
launch,  283 
missile 
Atlas D,  217,4433 
Atlas F, 265,430 
Minuteman, 264,378 
Titan  11,  337,  409 
satellite missions,  182,  203,  205,  216, 
218,  238,  239,  244,  277,  285,  294, 
296,  298,  316,  326,  340,  342,  354, 
361,  373,  378,  392,  406, 418,  426, 
427 
wes tern   Union  International,  412 
Western  Union  Telegraph  Co.,  79,  143 

Westinghouse Electric  Corp.,  68, 118,140, 
148,158,168,202,327,384 
Wharton, Dr. George, 217 
Wheat. 72 
Wbipple, Dr.  Fred L.,  389 
Whitaker,  E.  A.,  223 
White, Alvin S., 349 
White,  Capt.  Edward  H.,  11  (U SAF ) ,  
263 
White House,  11, 76,  85,90,  133, 14.0, 
143, 
164,  183,  251,  258,  271,  273,  286, 
287, 
316, 323,  388 
White, Dr. M.  Samuel, 24 
White, Dr. Robert M.,  1,101,1& 
3  N. 
White  Sands Missile  Range  (WSMR) 
Mex.,  14,31,241,250,339 
launch,  30,  124,  128, 144,  153,  192, 
210, 
283,  299,  335,  363,368,  374,  381, 
387, 
422 
test,  58 
Apollo,  89,  90,  100,  175,  314 
Athena, 338,406 
F-2,412 
sonic boom, 360 
White,  Gen.  Thomas D.  (USAF,  Ret.),  177 
White,  Gen.  Thomas  D.,  Space  Trophy, 
325 
Whiteman AFB,  Mo.,  51 
Wideband  transmission,  3 
Wiener, Dr.  Norbert,  11,109 
Wiesner, Dr.  Jerome B.,  11,12, 22 
Wildey, Dr. Robert L.,  179 
Wilkes, Mayor Jack  S., 90 
William and Mary, College of,  159 
Williams,  Capt.  Clifton  C.,  Jr. 
(U SMC ) ,  
237 
Williams, Donald D.,  111 
Williams, Walter  C.,  18,  104, 130,265, 376 
Williamsburg, Va.,  350 
Williamsport, N.C.,  42 
Wilson, Rep.  Bob,  95 
Wilson,  Prime  Minister  Harold,  349,  412 
Wilson, Dr. Olin, 138 
Wilson, Dr. Richard, 22 
Wilson,  Woodrow,  School  of  Public  and 
International  Affairs, 154 
Wind,  15, 241 
upper  atmosphere,  14,  23,30,  42,47,99, 
141,249,379.384 
Wind  tunnel,  171,230 
Wing,  design, 28,  189, 191,  198,239 
Wing-shaped craft, 290 
Winkler, Leopold, 82 
Wirtz, W.  Willard,  70 
Wisconsin,  Univ.  of,  212,  231,  275,  290, 
304 
Wise, Donald U.,  28 
Witkin, Richard,  66 
Witwatersrand,  Univ.  of  the   (Johannes- 
burg,  S.  Africa), 174 
WMO.  See World  Meteorological Organi- 
zation. 
Wolfe, Allen E.,  353 
Wolfe, Dr. John  H.,  435 

INDEX 

527 

Women, speed record for, 181 
Women’s  Advisory  Committee  on  Avia- 
tion  (FAA), 164 
Women’s  Space Symposium, Fifth, 63 
Won& Thomas Jefferson, 85 
woo.  See  Western  Operations  Office, 
NASA. 
Woodworth, J.  L.,  347 
Woomera  Rocket  Range,  Australia,  205, 
257,270,278 
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 344 
World  Affairs  Council  of  Northern  Cali- 
fornia, 36 
World  Book  Encyclopedia,  119 
World  Book  Encyclopedia  Science  Serv- 
ice, 316,345 
World flight, first woman, 142 
World  Meteorological  0 r g a n i z a t i o n 
( W M O ) ,   37,84,251 
World War I, % ,79 ,154  
World  War  11,  47,  59,  78,  112,  154,  203, 
254 
World Weather Center, 439 
World‘s  Fair, N.Y.,  145,310 
wow0   radio  station,  145 
Wright Aeronautical Div.  (Curtiss-Wright 
C o r p . ) ,  438 
Wright brothers, 46,155 
Wright  Brothers Memorial  Trophy,  387 
Wright-Patterson  AFB,  Ohio,  167, 303,  318 
WSMR.  See White Sands Missile Range. 
WTR.  See Western Test Range. 
Wydler, Rep.  John  W.,  185 
Wyld,  James  H.,  Memorial Award,  166 
Wyman, Rep. Louis C.,  185,274 
X-5  (research  a ircraf t) ,   191 
(rocket  research  a ircraf t) ,   6,  122- 
X - 1 5  
123, 145,  207,  258,  292-293,315,  320- 
321 
award, 77,198,435 
flight 
canceled, 326,  383 
successful 
No.  1,  6,  29,  33,  118,  130,  156,  182, 
227,352,  414 
No.  2,  214,  222,  285,  321,  329,  331, 
380,  388,  399 
No.  3,  14,  70,  103,  174,  185,  241, 
264,  283-284,  297,  305,  329,  368, 
412.429 
Memo  of  ‘Understanding  (NASA-USAF- 
U S N ) ,   29 
modification, 66,263 

test, 6,  57,  77,  103,  182,241,319 
heat-resisting materials, 264,  283-284, 
329 
heat-transfer,  14,  70,  174,  297,  305- 
306 
noise,  boundary  layer,  174,  297,  305- 
306 
XV--6A  (VtOl),  251,391 
x-19  (Vtol  transport),  223 
x-20  (Dyna Soar) ,  8,78,206,208 
cancellation, 24,26 
replacement of, 26,  44,  99,109,  146,263 
(rocket motor),  135,  141,  147,  166 
X - 2 4 8  
(rocket  motor),  137 
X - 2 5 8  
XB-70  (supersonic  a ircraf t) ,   172,  3 4  
X E ~ O A   (supersonic a ircraf t) ,  297,  323 
x c - 1 4 2 ~  (V/stol  a ircraf t) ,  216,437 
X H - ~ I A   (compound helicopter),  420 
XH-5  1 N  (helicopter),  216,  422 
Xerox Corp.,  386 
X-rav. 153.254.296-297 
u k o f ,  100,179-180 
X-ray telescope, rocket borne, 179-180 
X-ray unit, miniature, 135 
Yale Univ.,  191 
Yarborough, Sen. Ralph,  116 
Yarymopych,  Dr.  Michael  I.,  90, 145 
Yeager,  Col.  Charles  E.  (USAF ) ,  
l@ ,   390 
Yegorov,  Dr.  Boris  Borisovich,  348,  355, 
359,427, %9 
Yerpylev, Nikolai, 81 
Yeshiva Univ.  (N.Y.),  155 
y F - 1 2 ~  ( ~ - 1 1  aircraft),  225,  254 
York, Dr.  Herbert F.,  35 
Yost, Charles F., 357 
Young,  Judge  George C.,  128,  133 
Young,  LCDR.  John  (U SN ) ,   134,  182  316, 
366.369 
Young  President’s  Organization  Eastern 
Area Conference, 338 
Young,  Col.  Robert  P.  ( U S A ) ,   113,  258, 
268;  274 
Young, Sen.  Stephen M.,  91 
Zanzibar, 10,129,159 
Zero-gravity, 62,70,119 
Zimenki Observatory (U.S.S.R.) 
Zimney Corp., 392 
Zirconium, 19,153 
ZOND   I  (U.S.S.R.  space  prohe),  126,  127, 
128,  131,  138,  149,  165,  176,  200,  246, 
253, 262,  444 
ZOND  II  (U.S.S.R.  space probe),  399,403, 
412,424, 443,461 
Zuckert, Eugene M.,  8 ,44 ,  66 ,67 ,92 ,127 ,  
205,319,325,353 

, 7 5 , 8 5  

“ T h e   aeronautical  and  space  activities  of  t h e   Un i ted   States  shall  be 
coiiducted  so  as  t o   contribute  . , . t o   t h e   expans ion   of  human   Kiiowl- 
edg e   of  pheiiomeiia  in t h e  a tmosphere  and   space.  T h e  Adm i i i is tra t ion  
shall  prov ide   f o r   t h e   w ides t   practicable  arid  appropriate  d issem ina t ion  
of  in forma t ion   concerniag  i ts   activities and  t h e  results  thereof .” 
-NATIONAL AERONAUTICS A N D  SPACL   ACT OF  1958 

Scientific and  technical  information  considered 
TECHNICAL  REPORTS: 
impor tan t ,  complete,  a n d  a  lasting  con tr ibu t ion   to   existing  knowledge. 

Informa t ion  less  broad   in  scope  but  nevertheless 
TECHNICAL  NOTES: 
of  importance  as  a  con tr ibu t ion  to  existing  knowledge. 

TECHNICAL  MEMORANDUMS: 
Information  receiving  limited  distri- 
bution  because of  preliminary data,  security classification, o r  o ther  reasons. 

CONTRACTOR   REPORTS:  Techn ica l   information  generated  in  con- 
nection  with a NASA contract o r  g ran t  and  released  under  NASA auspices. 

TECHNICAL  TRANSLATIONS: 
Informa t ion   pub l ished   in   a  fore ign  
language  cons idered  to  merit NASA  d is tr ibu t ion  i n  English. 

TECHNICAL  REPRINTS: 
Informa t ion   derived  from   NASA  activities 
a n d  initially  published  in  the  form  of  journal  articles. 

SPECIAL  PUBLICATIONS: 
Informa t ion   derived  from   o r   of  value  to 
NASA  activities  but  not  necessarily  repo r t ing   the   results  of  individual 
NASA-programmed  scientific  efforts.  Publications  include  conference 
proceedings,  monographs ,   data  compilations,  handbooks ,   sourcebooks, 
a n d  special  bibliographies. 

Details  on  the  ava i lab i l ity   of   these publications may  be  obtained  from: 

FIC  AND  TECHN IC  

IO 

Washington,  D.C.  20546 

