NASA  SP-4007 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D  
A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 6  

C h r o n o l o g y   o n   S c i e n c e ,  T e c h n o l o g y ,  a n d   P o l i c y  

Text  by  
Science  and  Technology  Division 
Library  of  Congress 

Sponsored  by 
NASA  Historical  Staff 
Office  of  Policy 

1 9 6 7  
Screntrfic  and  Technrcal  Information  Divisron 
NAT IONAL   AERONAUTICS  A N D   SPACE   ADMINISTRATION  
WaJhington, D.C. 

For Sale by  the Superintendent of  Documents, 
U.S. Government  Printing Office, Washington,  D.C.  20402 
Price 8 . 5 0   (paper  cover) 
Library  of Congrcss Catalog Card Nm b c r  66-60096 

Foreword 
. 
.. 
At  the  opening  of  the  tenth  year  in   the  era  of  man’s  mobility  in  outer 
space, we  can  look  back  on  1966 as  offering  convincing  evidence  tha t   th e  
United  States  had  gained  great  competence.  This  evidence  included:  five 
orbital  space  flights  by  ten   Gemini astronauts;  four  lunar  missions  under- 
taking the  orbiting of  and softlanding on  the moon; numerous contributions 
to  scientific knowledge by  unmanned  spacecraft  and  sounding  rockets;  and 
further  demonstrations of  the  practical  utility  of  operational  space systems, 
including  weather  and  communications  satellites. 
During  1966,  a  record  100 American  spacecraft  were  placed  into  earth 
orbit  or  on  escape  trajectories.  Thousands  of  revealing  and  useful  pictures 
of  the   earth  were  taken  from  space  and  of  the  moon  from  lunar  orbit  and 
on  its  surface.  The  Gemini  program  ended  with  rendezvous  and  docking 
experiments  and  extravehicular  activity  by  the   Gemini  test  pilots  as  the  
Apollo  R&D  test  flights  leading  to  the  manned  lunar  mission  came  into  the  
schedule.  Thirty-five major  scientific,  technological,  and  operational  mile- 
stones were cited  for  1966 by  the  President  in  his  Report  to the Congress on 
aeronautical  and  space activities  of  the United  States. This was  one measure 
of  the  American  commitment  to  share  in  the  peaceful  exploration  of  space 
for  all mankind. Another was  ou r  support  of  the final steps  toward a United 
Nations  space  treaty,  undertaken  to  ensure  tha t   the  peaceful  exploitation 
of  space had  juridical  basis  in  international  law. 
Spectacular  as  some  events  in  the  space  venture  were  in   1966,  they 
nonetheless  came  to  have  diminished  novelty  in  the   eyes  of  many  laymen. 
The multitude of  both  important  and  unspectacular  space activities  attained 
almost an  accepted and routine place. This volume, as well as its predecessor 
chronicles,  offers  a  ready  reference  on  the  major  as  well  as  the   less-well- 
known  events.  Beyond  the  welter  of  documented  details  on  the  complex 
nature  of  aeronautical  and  space  related  events  and  their  impact,  this 
volume helps  to  provide  a better  perspective upon  today  as we  contemplate 
tomorrow.  Such  intent  also  serves  fu tu re   historians  and  analysts  who 
cannot be unmindful  of  what  is herein  presented. 
When  the  Congress  created  the   National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Ad- 
ministration  in  1958, i t  charged NASA  with  the  responsibility  to  “contribute 
materially  to  . . . the  expansion  of  human  knowledge of  phenomena  in  the  
atmosphere  and  space’’  and  to  “provide  for  the  widest  practical  and  ap- 
propriate  dissemination  of  information  concerning  its  activities  and  results 
thereof.”  NASA  has  attempted  to  do  this  and  to  include  documentation  for 
the  historical  record.  The   relating  of  NASA  history  begins  with  this  day-by- 
day  chronicle  and  leads  to  more  specialized  studies  and  histories  of  the  
unprecedented  task  of  extending man’s  mobility and  understanding beyond 
his  planet.  While  a  chronology  cannot  in  itself  serve  as  a  full-fledged 
history,  the  size  of  this  annual  volume  alone  is  illustrative  of  the   scope 
and  complexity of  the  historical  task  yet  to  be  completed as memories fade 
and  the   records  disappear. 

EUGENE M. EMME 
NASA  Historian 

111 

Contents 

MAY 
JUNE 

PAGE 

i11 

vi1 
1 
39 
75 
125 
16 1 
202 
23 1 
255 
283 
3 10 
336 
364 

387 
417 

423 
427 
43 1 

Preface 

Before  the   commentator  or  the   administrator  or  the   scholar  can  analyze 
and  interpret  the   record  in   his  search  for  understanding and  lessons,  there  
mus t   be  a  factual  account.  This  chronology,  like  its  predecessors,  is  the  
beginning  of  such  a  record.  Drawn  from  open  public  sources,  i t   has  the  
serious  limitations  of  any  work  based  largely  on  quickly  available sources 
and  fur ther   of  being  done virtually  on   the  heels  of  the   events it chronicles. 
But  these  limitations  are   offset  by  the   assets  of  the   historical method;  by 
the   very  catholicity  of  material  and  interests  included  i t   helps  open  new 
vistas  of  relationship,  of  cause  and  effect. Because  a  chronology  is  limited 
for  the  user  who  does  no t   have  a  date  for  the  particular  item he   seeks, a n  
extensive  crossreference  system  is  presented  i n   the   detailed  index.  And 
to provide  the  broadest  possible context, we  have  included  worldwide space- 
related material,  to  the   extent  i t  was  available to  us. 
The   entire  NASA  Historical  Staff in   Headquarters  participated  in   source 
collection, review, and  publication.  The  Science and Technology Division  of 
the   Library  of  Congress was  responsible  for  drafting  of  the   text  proper,  in  
the   persons  of  Miss  Lynn  Catoe,  Mrs.  Anne  Horton,  and  Miss  Shirley 
Medley.  Miss  Jane  Adams  and  Mrs.  Carmen  Brock-Smith  translated  com- 
ment  edition  into  final  manuscript.  The  index  was  prepared  by  Arthur  G .  
Renstrom,  also  of  the   Library  of  Congress.  General  editor  of  the   volume 
was  Frank  W.  Anderson,  Jr.;  Mrs.  Helen  T.  Wells  was  technical  editor. 
Creston  Whiting  (uss)  provided  timely  translations  of  Russian  materials. 
Historians  and  historical  monitors  throughout  NASA  contributed  slseful 
materials.  Validation  wa s   the  constant  concern  of  many  busy  persons 
throughout NASA. 
Appendix A,  “Satellites,  Space Probes, and Manned Space Flights,  1966,” 
and Appendix B,  ‘?Major NASA  Launches,  1966,”  were prepared  by  Frank W. 
Anderson,  Jr. Appendix C,  ‘Summary Chronology of Manned Space Flights, 
1966,”  was  prepared  by  William  D .   Putnam,  Assistant  NASA  Historian  for 
Manned  Space  Flight.  Mrs.  Wells  prepared  Appendix  D,  “Abbreviations 
of  References.” 
This  preliminary  chronicle  is  bu t   a  first  step  in   the   historical  process 
of  documenting  the   dynamic and  complex  events  of  space  exploration  and 
exploitation.  Comments,  additions,  and  criticism  are  welcomed. 

FRANK W.  ANDERSON,  JR. 
Deputy  N A S A  Historian 
Ofice o f  Policy 

VI1 

January 1966 

January 1:  MSFC  Director Dr. Wernher von Braun named Dr. Jerry 6. McCall 
to organize and manage the Experiments and Applications Office-MSFC’S 
portion  of  Apollo  Applications;  Stan Reinartz would  assist  him.  (MSFC 
Release  65-307) 
0  The  strongest  nation  will  be  the   one  tha t   applies  chemistry  most  effec- 
tively,  wrote  Science  editor  Philip  Abelson  in   Saturday  Review:  “The 
long-range  interests  of  this nation  require  a  strong chemical profession 
and  basic  to   i t   are  strong  chemistry  departments  in  the  universities. 
Yet,  while  NASA  was  receiving  an  annual  $5 billion,  a  sum  that  repre- 
sented  almost  all  the   money  asked  by  the   agency,  chemistry  received 
only  a  small  fraction  of  its  requests.  . . . In  my  estimation, chemistry, 
for  the   long  haul,  is  ten  to  100  times  as  important  as  space,  yet  i t  
receives  only  about  one  percent  as  much  money.”  ( S R ,  1 /1 /66 ,   102) 
January  2:  Changes  in  organizational  s truc ture   of  NASA  Hq.  were  effective 
this date. Most important change was establishment  of  an   organizational 
un i t   called the  Office  of  the Administrator, which  included  the  Deputy 
Administrator and  his  staff,  the   Associate  Administrator  and  his  staff, 
and  the   Executive  Secretariat.  Dr.  Robert  C .  Seamans,  Jr.,  newly  ap- 
pointed  Deputy  Administrator,  was  continuing  to  serve  as  Associate 
Administrator.  Willis  H.  Shapley,  Associate  Deputy  Administrator, 
serving as  the  principal assistant  to Administrator James  E.  Webb  and 
to  Dr.  Seamans,  was  responsible  for  policy  planning  and  for  general 
supervision of  the  agency’s work  processes. The   Executive  Secretariat, 
headed by Col. Lawrence W. Vogel  (USA),  was  responsible  for channeling 
and  scheduling  work  within  the   Office  of  the   Administrator.  Earl  D. 
Hilburn continued  as Deputy Associate Administrator. 
Director  of  the  Office  of  Tracking and  Data  Acquisition,  Edmond  C .  
Buckley,  became  Associate  Administrator  for  Tracking  and  Data 
Acquisition.  (Other  Associate  Administrators . were  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  Manned  Space  Flight;  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  Space  Science 
and  Applications;  and  Dr.  Mac  C .   Adams,  Advanced  Research  and 
Technology.) 
Four  Deputy  Associate  Administrators  became  Assistant  Adminis- 
trators: William B.  Rieke,  Industry Affairs; D.  D. Wyatt, Programming; 
Adm.  W.  Fred  Boone,  Defense  Affairs;  and  John  D.  Young,  Admin- 
istration.  These were i n  addition  to  t h e  four  existing Assistant  Admin- 
istrators : Richard  L.  Callaghan,  Legislative Affairs ; Arnold  W. Frutkin, 
1 

2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

International  Affairs;  Julian  W.  Scheer,  Public  Affairs;  and  Breene 
M.  Kerr,  Technology Utilization.  Kerr  also  was  serving  as   Assistant 
Administrator  for  Policy  Analysis  (formerly  Policy  Planning).  (NASA 
Release  66-3; Organ.  Chart,  1 /2 /66 ;   NN  1132) 
January  2:  Dr.  Clark  Blanchard  Millikan,  director  of  Cal  Tech  Graduate 
Aeronautical  Laboratories  and  pioneer  in   the   development  of  multi- 
engine, high-altitude airplanes,  jet propulsion,  and guided missiles, died 
of  a  hear t   ailment.  Millikan,  chairman  of  the   board  of  JPL  in   i ts   early 
days, had been awarded the  Presidential  Medal  of  Merit for his work  i n  
wind  tunnel  research  during  World  War  I1  and  had  been  given  the  
British  King’s Medal.  (NYT ,  1 /3 /66 ,27 ;   AP, Balt.  Sun,  1/3/66; M&R, 
1/10/66,  13) 
January 3:  NASA  awarded  two  nine-month  study  contracts to  determine the  
impact of  a proposed  improved J-2 rocket engine on the  S-I1 and S-IVB 
stages of  the  Sa turn  V  launch vehicle:  (1) $148,000  contract  to  North 
American  Aviation,  Inc.,  developer  of  S-I1 stage;  and  (2)  $225,000 
modification  to  an   existing  contract  with  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.  MSFC 
Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory was  seeking to  simplify 
the   J-2  and  give  i t ,   and  the   stages  i t   powered,  more  flexibility.  (MSFC 
Release  66-1) 
0  COSMOS  LXXX,  LXXXI,  LXXXII,  LXXXIII,  and  LXXXIV,  launched  Sept.  3,  1965, 
by  U.S.S.R.,  would  orbit  the   earth  for more  than   1,000 yrs.,  reported 
Pruvdu.  COSMOS  c ,  launched Dec.  17, 1965, would  orbit  fo r   10 yrs.  and 
ELECTRON  I ,   launched Jan.  30,1964, and ELECTRON 111,  launched July  11, 
1964, would  orbit for a t  least 200 yrs.  Report said Soviet space tracking 
stations were  receiving  data  from more  than   20  sputniks.  (AP,  Wash. 
Eve.  Star,  1 /3 /66)  
0  GSFC  Nimbus  Project  Manager  Harry  Press  told  Aviation  Week   tha t  
Nimbus  B  would  move  NASA’s weather  satellite  program  into  a  second 
generation  research  and  development effort  by  starting  the   measure- 
ment  of  fundamental  quantities  in   the   atmosphere  necessary  in   new 
analytical  weather-forecasting  formulas.  Nimbus  B,  third  and  largest 
in   NASA’s meteorological  satellite  series,  would  carry  seven  major 
experiments : infrared  interferometer  spectrometer;  satellite  infrared 
spectrometer; image  dissector  camera system;  high-resolution  infrared 
radiometer;  monitor  for  ultraviolet  solar  energy;  medium-resolution 
infrared  radiometer;  and  interrogation,  recording,  locating  system.  I n  
addition, Nimbus B would carry Snap-19 radioisotope thermal generators 
capable  of  producing  60  w  of  power  to  supplement  solar  panels  and 
determine feasibility of  radioisotope generators for ultimate  operational 
weather satellite  system.  Scheduled for  launch  i n   1967 with Extended 
Thrus t  Augmented Thor-Agena D  launch vehicle,  Nimbus B would  use 
basic Nimbus  spacecraft  configuration, but would  require  strengthened 
s truc tura l  elements because of  i ts   additional weight. 
Press  said  the   two  major  control  difficulties  which  had  shortened 
the  August 1964 NIMBUS  I  mission had  been analyzed  and  corrected  on 
Nimbus  C,  scheduled  for  launch  i n   1966.  A  larger  solar  array  drive 
motor,  equipped with heat-conducting strap tha t  would  lower  operating 
temperature  of  motor  almost  100°C  and  with  improved  grease,  would 
be  substituted  on  Nimbus  C  for  smaller motor  whose  failure  had  left 
MMBUS  1%  solar  panels  locked  in   near-vertical  position  when  it  ap- 
parently  overheated  and  i ts   grease  failed  to  lubricate.  Also,  attempts 
would  be  made  during Nimbus  C  mission  to  rely  on  the   flywheels  to  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

3 

dampen  spacecraft  oscillations  and  to  use  th e   gas  thrus ter   system  as 
little as possible,  Press  said.  NIMBUS  I  had  spun about  its roll  axis when 
its depreciating power supply had  caused its batteries  to feed lower volt- 
ages  to  the   a t t i tude   control  electronics  system and  the   thrus ters   had 
fired  excessive  amounts  of  cold  freon  gas.  (A v .  W k . ,  1/3/66,  52 ,   5 3 )  
January 3: Report of  the  White House Committee on Meteorology concluded 
tha t   global  weather  experiment using meteorological satellite  and  ne t-  
work of  sensors on constant-altitude balloons, remote land stations,  and 
ocean buoys could be deployed in  four years for $50 million. Assignment 
of  overall  management responsibility  given  to  single  agency  to   begin 
design study was  discussed  in  Aviation  Week .  Designated  Ghost  (global 
horizontal sounding technique),  project would  attempt to   extend atmos- 
pheric  measurements  to  tha t   90%  of  the   earth’s  surface  no t   yet 
adequately  covered,  using  meteorological  satellite  in   600-mi.altitude 
polar  orbit  to  obtain  pair  of  readings from  all  global  points  every  12 
hrs.  In   addition,  1,000  to   3,000  super-pressure  balloons  would  be 
floated  a t   six  different  atmospheric  levels  to  measure  wind,  pressure, 
temperature,  humidity, and  overpressure. 
NASA  Nimbus  B  meteorological satellite,  scheduled  for  launch  i n  
1967, would  carry  interrogation,  recording,  and locating  system experi- 
ment  (Iris)  designed to perform ranging and data collection function on 
which  Ghost  was  based.  However,  NASA  would  attempt  only  limited 
experiments with  Iris  involving a check of  the  system’s  ability to locate 
fixed  sensor packages,  and  track  them  on  slow-moving and  fast-moving 
platforms,  Dr. Morris Tepper, Director,  Meteorological Programs Div., 
NASA  Office  of  Space  Science  and  Applications,  told  Aviation  Week .  
Tepper said  any agency  providing its own  transponders and funding  i ts  
own  equipment could participate i n  the  Iris  tests.  ( A v .  W k . ,  1/3/66,55) 
0  Missiles  and  Rockets  reported  prediction  of  Japanese  rocket  engineer 
Dr.  Hideo  Itokawa  that  Japan might  launch  60-lb. probes to  Mars  and 
Venus  after  orbiting  its  first  satellite  in   1968.  Itokawa  said  the   Mu 
series  launch  vehicle,  under  development by  Univ.  of  Tokyo  Ins t i tu te  
of  Space  and  Aeronautical  Science,  would  produce  enough  thrust- 
launch  interplanetary probes.  (M&R ,   1 /3 /66 ,   7) 
400,000  1bs.-to 
0  T-38 aircraft of  M/G  Irving  H.  Branch  (WAF ) ,   Commander of  Flight Test 
Center,  Edwards  AFB,  crashed  over  Puget  Sound  when  attempting  a n  
instrumented approach to  Boeing  Field,  Seattle,  during rainy  weather. 
Branch  was  enrou te   from  Edwards  AFB;  his  body  was  later  recovered 
from  Puget  Sound  by  divers.  (Seattle  Times, 1 /6 /66 ,   31) 
During  week  of  January  3:  Representatives of  U S .   Dept.  of  Agriculture’s 
Plant Quarantine Div. met with NASA’s Planetary Quarantine Committee 
to  discuss  handling  and  disposal  of  soil  and  rock  samples  brought  to  
earth from the  moon or other planets. A Dept. of Agriculture spokesman 
warned  tha t   without  precautions,  insects  and  microorganisms  from 
outer  space could  conceivably  be brought  to  earth on  returning space- 
craft and multiply unchecked in  a n  environment tha t  would not control 
them.  (NYT ,  1/9/66,  58) 
January  P:  NASA  MARINER  IV,  launched  from  ETR  Nov.  28,  1964,  for   Mars 
flyby July  14, 1965, was 216 million miles from e a r th - g r e a t e s t  distance 
i t  would  reach before gradually returning  to within 30 million miles  in  
1967-and 
still  operating.  Goldstone Tracking Station  of  NASA’s Deep 
Space  Network  (DSN)  tracked  a  signal  from  the   spacecraft,  bu t   no 
attempt was  made  to  receive data because of  the  extreme distance.  DSN  

4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

would  continue attempting  to  contact MARINER 
IV  once a month  to  see 
if  it  was  still  operating.  Daily  engineering and  scientific data  from  the  
spacecraft had  been  suspended Oct.  1, 1965, by  ground  command  tha t  
se t  new  space  communications  record  of  191,059,922  mi.-more 
than  
twice  the   distance from  earth  to   the   sun .   (NASA Release  66-7) 

January  4:  Apollo  spacecraft-command  module,  service module,  and  adapter section- 
is  raised  up  the  gantry  for mating  to  Saturn  IR  launch  vehicle  at  Launch  Complex  34, 
Eastern  Test  Range. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

5 

January  4:  NASA  awarded  five  contracts  to  Sa tu rn   contractors  to  continue 
studies  t o   improve  Saturn  concepts  of  a n   intermediate  vehicle  with  a 
payload  capability  between  tha t   of  Saturn  IB  and  the   Saturn  V.  On  
Saturn V,  Boeing Co. received $370,500; North American Aviation, Inc., 
$329,624;  and  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.,  $96,730.  Eight  variations  of  the  
Sa tu rn  V  vehicle  would  be  examined.  Boeing would  be  study  systems 
integration  contractor  for  all  prospective  configurations  involving 
the  S-IC  stage,  NAA  for  all  others.  On   Sa tu rn   IB,  Chrysler  Corp. 
received  $450,000;  Douglas,  $116,345.  Six  Sa tu rn   IB  configurations 
would  be  studied.  All  five  contracts  would  be  directed  by  MSFC.  (MSFC 
Release 66-3) 
Albert  Sehlstedt,  Jr.,  writing  in  the  Baltimore  Sun,  observed  that  th e  
‘?next twelve  months  in  space  should  give  earthbound  observers  one 
very  positive  impression:  men  are  really  going  to  land  on   the  moon 
in  a  few years.  . . .” He  discussed NASA  missions  for  1966:  (1) four  or 
five  Gemini  missions-two 
including  Eva  and  none  longer  than  two 
days-would 
attempt  to  rendezvous  and  dock  with  unmanned  Agena 
target  vehicles;  (2) first of  seven Project  Surveyor  attempts  to  softland 
on   the   moon   a  spacecraft  to  relay  to  earth  high-resolution  television 
pictures  of  the  lurain  and  texture;  (3)  first  of  five  Lunar  Orbiter 
attempts  to   orbit  the moon  a t  low altitude  taking pictures  to  determine 
the  height  and  slope of  moon’s mountains  and  craters  by  photometric 
techniques;  (4)  four  Saturn  IB  launches-two 
to  launch  Apollo 
command  and  service  module  models  into  nearspace,  one  to  test  the  
booster’s  upper  stage-S-IVB,  and  one  to  orbit  the  Apollo  command 
and service module around  the  earth for  two weeks;  (5)  first unmanned 
test  flight  of  Sa tu rn  V  launch  vehicle;  (6) launch  of  four  Tiros  Opera- 
tional  Satellites  into  polar  orbit  for  Weather  Bureau;  (7)  launch  of 
Pioneer probes  into  solar orbit; and  (8) launch  of  Orbiting Geophysical 
Observatories,  Orbiting  Astronomical  Observatories,  and  Orbiting 
Solar Observatories.  (SehIstedt, BaIt. Sun, 1/5/66) 
USAF  XB-70  No.  2,  flying  a t   2,000  mph,  reached  70,000-ft.  altitude  for 
three minutes in  112-min. test flight from Edwards AFB  to determine how 
aircraft  would  handle  during  increasingly  longer  periods  a t   top  speed. 
Flight broke  record  set hy XB-70 No.  1 Oct.  15, 1965.  ( N . Y .  Her .   T r ib . ,  
1/4/66) 
0  NASA  awarded  two  contracts  for  continuation  of  engineering  studies  relat- 
ing  to  a  manned  reusable  space  transport  system:  (1)  nine-month, 
$237,000 contract  to  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  to  study  possibilities of 
developing  a  reusable  transport  system  based  on  presently  approved 
launch  and  space vehicles;  (2)  six-month,  $51,000  contract  to  Martin 
Marietta  Corp.  for  comparison  study  of  launch  modes  for  reusable 
launch  vehicles.  Both  contracts  would  be  under  direction  of  MSFC. 
(MSFC  Release 66-2) 
January  5:  A  ten-year  lunar  exploration  program  emphasizing  manned 
missions  was  recommended  in   reports  released  by  six  working groups 
of  scientists who had  attended NASA  1965 Summer Conference on Lunar 
Exploration and Science in Falmouth, Mass., July 19-31,1965. Program, 
which  would  utilize  capabilities  already  under  development  by  NASA, 
would gradually include scientific experiments in  geology, geochemistry, 
geophysics, and bioscience. One or  two manned  lunar missions and one 
manned  lunar  orbital  mission  would  be  conducted  annually  through 
1979,  with  astronauts  remaining  on   the   moon’s  surface  for  longer 
periods after  1974. 

6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Reports  recommended four requirements for period  through 1974: (1) 
assurance  of  overlapping  operation of  instruments  placed  on  moon  by 
astronauts;  (2)  sufficient frequency  of  missions  to  provide  continuity 
i n   experiments;  ( 3 )  scheduling of  adequate  time  between  missions  to 
permit necessary modification of  experiments; and  (4) gradually increas- 
ing  staytimes  of  astronauts  on  moon.  Top  priority  for  early  Apollo 
landing  missions  would  be  re turn   of  lunar  material  samples;  second 
priority,  emplacing Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment  Package  (Alsep) ; 
third,  traversing  lunar  surface  to  describe  topographic  and  geological. 
features,  supplemented  by  stereoscopic  photography.  Report  urged 
immediate testing to determine amounts and effects of  atmosphere escap- 
ing  from  Lunar  Excursion Module  (Lem)  and  outgassing  of  astronaut 
suits. One Apollo Applications-Manned Lunar Orbiter mission  (Aa-mlo) 
was  recommended  prior  to  first  Apollo  Applications-Manned  Lunar 
Surface mission  (Aa-mls), with  minimum  of  three  manned  spacecraft 
missions  in  polar  orbit to make complete lunar survey; five or six Aa-mls 
missions  through  1974 were  suggested, with  larger  scientific payloads 
and  stays  fo r   the  astronauts  of  up  to  14  days. 
Reports  listed  basic  types  of  equipment  necessary  for  exploration 
program:  automatic position-recording  systems  to  relay  to earth  o r  Lem 
movements of  astronauts and  roving  vehicles; roving vehicles  to  carry 
one  or  two  astronauts  and  scientific  payload  of  a t   least  600  lbs.; 
manned  lunar  flying  vehicle  able  to  carry  300-lb.  scientific  payload 
about  10 mi.  to   study features  not  accessible with  roving  vehicle;  one- 
inch  drill  capable  of  penetrating  a t   least  10 f t .   in  rubble  or  solid  rock 
to  assist  heat-flow studies  and  provide  samples  of  possible  biological 
interest.  Scientific  training  for  astronauts  in  specific  rather  than 
general  areas  was  recommended,  with  emphasis  on  geology. 
For  post-1974  period,  the   scientists  recommended  surface  travel  by 
astronauts up  to 500 mi.  from landing point and fixed-site investigations 
lasting from two months to a year for measuring geophysical phenomena 
that  could  vary with  time;  studying lunar  surface processes;  deep-drill- 
ing  studies  to  obtain  information  on  early  moon  history  and  crustal 
composition;  construction  and  manning  of  large  radio  and  optical 
telescopes.  Roving  vehicles  fo r   t h e   post-Apollo  Applications  phase 
should  have  500-mi.  range,  shelter  for  three-man  crew,  two-month 
mission  capability,  and  no  requirement  to  re tu rn   to  starting  point. 
(NASA  Release  66-4; Conference  Rp t . ,   NASA  SP-88) 
January  5:  Twenty-one Long  Tank  Thors  were  purchased  from  Douglas 
Missile  and  Space  Systems  Div.  by  USAF  for  use  in   its  programs  a t  
Vandenberg  AFB.  Expected  to   succeed  the   present  Thrus t   Augmented 
Thor  (Tat),  t h e   Long  Tank  Thor  would  provide  increased  payload 
capability by  enlarging  the   volume  of  Thor’s  liquid  propellant  tanks; 
result would be a 20% increase in  payload  capability over Tat. Although 
i ts  total thrus t  of  330,000 Ibs. would be essentially the  same  as  tha t  for 
Tat,  the   Long  Tank  Thor  would  have  a  burn   time  of  216  sec.  as  com- 
pared  to  146  sec.  for Tat.  (AFSC Release 205.65) 
*  NASA  announced appointment of Robert E. King, formerly director of  labor 
relations for General Dynamics/Convair,  as NASA Director of Labor Rela- 
tions.  King  would  provide  overall  direction  for  NASA’s external  labor 
relations program;  personally  coordinate  major  policy  issues  and  deci- 
sions affecting labor  relations  with  DOD ,   AEC ,   and  Dept.  of  Labor;  and 
administer  a  positive  labor  relations  program  to  prevent  or  resolve 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

7 

labor  disputes  between  NASA  contractors  and  their  labor  unions.  He 
would  report  to  William  Rieke,  Assistant  Administrator  for  Industry 
Affairs.  (NASA  Ann.) 
January  6:  170 usable  terrain  photographs  from  GEMINI  v  mission  flown  by 
Astronauts L.  Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., Aug. 21-29,1965, 
included pictures of  South Africa which would provide valuable informa- 
tion  about continental drift,  GSFC  geologist Dr. Paul D.  Lowman said in  
interim report at NASA  Hq.  on 13 scientific and technological experiments 
carried  aboard  GEMINI  V .   Color photos  of  South Africa’s Namib  Desert 
revealed  7-million  to  8-million-year-old rock  formations.  Presence  of 
similar formations along east coast of  South America could indicate  two 
continents  had  once  been  closer  together,  Lowman  explained.  Photos 
also pinpointed  “a  major  diamond  area”  between  rock  formations  and 
the sand dunes. Kenneth Nagler, U.S.  Weather Bureau, told the meeting 
that GEMINI  v  pictures,  some in  color, had  provided meteorologists with 
more  detail  of  cloud  systems  than  had  orbiting Tiros  satellites.  (Text) 
NASA  officials  accepted  Gemini  8  spacecraft  from  McDonnell  Aircraft 
Corp.,  St.  Louis,  after  studying  data  supplied  by  nearly  6,000  sub- 
contractors  involving  close  inspection  of  over  6,000  test  points.  The 
spacecraft,  scheduled  for  launch  in  March,  would  be  encased  in   a 
plastic  shroud  and  flown  to  KSC  in   USAF  6-124  cargo  plane  Jan.  7. 
(Wilford,  NYT ,   1/7/66) 
0  Of  351 astronaut applicants,  192, including  all 6 female candidates, failed 
to  meet  minimum  requirements,  an   MSC  spokesman  reported.  The  
successful  15  would  be  announced  in May.  (MSC  Roundup, 1/21/66,  3 ;  
AP,  New  Haven  Register,  1/7/66) 
DOD  and  NASA  signed  agreement  specifying  funding  arrangements, 
responsibilities,  and  general  procedures  to  be  followed  in  acquisition, 
modification,  test,  and  associated  administration  of  the   Apollo/Range 
Instrumentation  Aircraft  (A/Ria) , which  would  provide  telemetry  and 
communication  relay  support  for  Apollo  and  other  national  missile 
and  space  programs.  National  Range  Division  (NRD)  of  AFSC  would 
exercise  overall  management  responsibility  for  A/Ria  project.  (Text; 
NASA  NMI  1052.67) 
e  Dr.  Seibert Dudley of  the Univ.  of  California’s Visibility Lab.,  San Diego, 
said  test  equipment  on  the  ground  and  in  the  GEMINI  v  spacecraft had 
definitely demonstrated  that Astronauts L.  Gordon Cooper and Charles 
Conrad, Jr.,  had  seen what  they  claimed they  had  seen below  on earth 
during their Aug. 21-29, 1965, mission.  On  a one-man Project Mercury 
spaceflight  May  15-16,  1963  (MA-9), Cooper  had  drawn  skepticism 
for  reporting  h e  could see dust  clouds, roads,  and  other  small features. 
(AP,  Houston Pos t ,   1/6/66) 
NASA’s decision  to  launch  Mariner  E-MARINER 1x1’s  backup  probe-to 
Venus rather than Mars was criticized by William Hines in the Washing- 
ton Evening Star:  “As  a Venus probe, just  about everything conceivable 
is wrong with Mariner-E. I t s  solar panels  are  too big, bu t  without them 
its center of gravity would be all wrong; its earth-seeking radio antenna- 
essential  for long-distance communication-is  oriented  the wrong way; 
i t   is  protected  against  cold  rather  than  heat;  its  instruments  are  de- 
signed to  explore a  small planet  with  a  thin  atmosphere  rather  than  a n  
earth-sized object  with  a  dense  one. 
“Another Mariner flight to Mars promises far greater  re tu rn  . . . than  
a  jury-rigged mission  to  Venus.”  (Hines, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  1/6/66) 

8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

January  7:  U.S.S.R.  launched COSMOS  CIV with scientific instruments  aboard 
for  investigation  of  outer  space, Tass  announced.  Orbital  data:  apogee, 
401 km. (248.4 mi.);  perigee,  204  km.  (126.1 mi.);  period,  90.2  min.; 
inclination, 65”. All  systems were  reported  to be  functioning normally. 
(Krasrzayu Zvezda,  1/9/66,  USS-T  Trans.) 
I t  was  one minute  after  Command  Pilot  Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  decided 
not  to eject in  the  Dec.  12, 1965, Gemini VI  launch  failure a t  ETR ,   that 
his  pulse  rate  increased,  reported  Gemini  medical  director  Dr.  Charles 
A.  Berry  in   the   American  Medical  Assn.  News .   Delayed  reaction  was 
viewed as supporting theory  that  fear  follows action in  an ernergency- 
particularly  in  the   case  of  a  highly  trained  subject.  (MSC  Morning 
New s  Flyer,  1/7/66) 
*  NASA  and  USN  completed  a n   agreement  calling  for  studies  by  U.S.  Naval 
Oceanographic Office to  define a series of  experiments aimed at enhanc- 
ing  oceanographic and marine-technology research  from  manned  orhit- 
ing spacecraft. Experiments would  be  considered for use  in NASA  Apollo 
Applications  earth-orbiting  missions  and  would  employ  existing  or 
modified  Apollo  hardware.  (NASA  Release  66-6) 
Augmented  Target  Docking  Adapter  (Atda) -backup 
target  vehicle  for 
in   final  stages  of  assembly  a t   McDonnell  Aircraft  Co., 
the   Gatv-was 
and would be shipped  to KSC  in early February for possible use in Gemini 
VI11  rendezvous  mission  scheduled  for  March,  the   New   York  Times 
reported.  Atda  would  cost  less  than  $1 million  and  could  duplicate 
Gatv’s  performance  except  for  maneuvers  in  space.  (Wilford,  N Y T ,  
W w 6 ,  5) 
Weather  modification  is  a  reality,  concluded  the  National  Academy  of 
Sciences’ Panel  on   Weather  and  Climate  Modification  after  two-year 
review  of  scientific aspects  of  weather  control.  I n   a  report  submitted 
to  NAS  President  Dr .   Frederick  Seitz,  recommendations  included : 
(1) immediate  study  by  one  agency  of  research  and  development  in  
weather modification;  (2)  raising agency  support from  1965 level  of  $5 
million to a t  least $30 million  in 1970; (3) early establishment of  several 
carefully designed,  randomized seeding experimmts to assess seedability 
of  different  storm  types;  (4)  careful  monitoring  and  regulation  of 
operational programs; and  (5) full U S .  support and  leadership in  estab- 
lishing advanced  global  observation  system.  Recognizing  tha t   research 
i n   th e   atmospheric sciences  would  contribute  to  the  goals  of  weather 
modification,  the   committee  urged  tha t   highest  priority  be  given  to 
studies  of:  atmospheric  water  budgets,  initially  on  vapor  transport 
over US. areas where potential of  cloud  seeding is important; boundary- 
layer energy-exchange processes; theoretical models of  condensation and 
precipitation machines; and meteorological  effects of  atmospheric pcllu- 
tion,  including carbon dioxide.  Report  strongly urged  that  appropriate 
recognition  be  given  to  international  implications  of  weather  control. 
(Text; NAS  Release) 
*  High-altitude  test  chamber  a t   USAF  Arnold  Engineering  Development 
Center was  being  expanded  for  test  of  “battleship”  model  S-IVB stage 
of  NASA’s Sa turn   IB  and  Saturn  V  launch  vehicles  to  verify  stage’s 
reignition  capability  under  simulated  high-altitude  conditions.  Stage 
would  arrive  at Arnold  from  Sacramento i n  late  January;  series  of  15 
tests  expected  to  last  six  to  nine  months  would  begin  in   mid-1966. 
(MSFC  Release  66-4) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

9 

January  7: NASA  awarded  RCA  two-year  $7,837,000  contract for logistic  sup- 
port of  computers used  to  check automatically Sa turn  IB and V booster 
stages  during  manufacture  and  a t   launch  site.  Major  equipment  fo r  
the  Saturn checkout systems would be the  RCA   llOA computer produced 
under  separate  contract with  NASA  MSFC .   (MSFC  Release  66-8; Marshall 
Star, 1/12/66,  1) 
Unidentified USAF  satellite launched by  Thor-Altair booster  from Vanden- 
berg AFB  did  not  achieve orbit.  (U&.  Public  Registry,  5/31/66) 
Thorough  knowledge  of  cosmic  dust,  particularly  interplanetary  dus t  
particles  near  the   asteroid  belt,  was  necessary  for  space  engineers  to  
successfully  design  manned  and  unmanned  probes,  wrote  M.  J.  S. 
Relton  of  Kitt  Peak  National  Observatory  in   Science. He  stressed  th e  
importance of  cosmic dust in  theoretical and observational astrophysics : 
“ I t   is  apparently  an  important  factor  in   the  process  of  star  formation. 
The   polarization  of  starlight  which  is  induced  by  aligned  particles  of 
interstellar  dust  gives  information  about  the   magnetic  field  in   galactic 
systems,  including  our  own.  . . . In   the  solar  system,  the   presence  of 
dust  in  planetary  atmosphere may  lead  to  misinterpretations  of  photo- 
metric and polarimetric  data  tha t  would otherwise give important infor- 
mation about  the  total mass  of  th e  atmosphere.  . . . And  finally, dust is 
responsible  for  such  interplanetary  phenomena  as  the   F  corona, 
zodiacal  light,  gegenschein,  and  type-I1  comet  tails.  . . .”  (Belton, 
Science,  1/7/66,  35-43) 
*  Murray Klein,  Head  of  Drafting  Section, GSFC,  died  of  cancer.  Klein  had 
supervised  the   design  and  construction  of  buildings  and  facilities  a t  
NASA  installations  throughout  the   Nation.  (Wash .  Post,  1/8/66) 
usaF/Lockheed  SR-71B  trainer  version  aircraft  was  delivered  to  SAC’S 
4200th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing a t  Beale AFB .   (O’Lone, Av. Wk . ,  
1/17/66,  33) 
January  8:  GEMINI IV  Astronaut Edward H. White  11 and GEMINI  v Astronaut 
Charles Conrad, Jr.,  were among th e  ten  outstanding young men of  1965 
announced  by  U S .   Junior  Chamber  of  Commerce  in   Tulsa.  (UPI, 
Wash. Post,  1/9/66) 
0  Radio  signal  from  Soviet  deep  space  tracking  station  in   th e   Crimea  was 
bounced  off  Venus  and  received  minutes  later  by  Jodrell  Bank  Experi- 
mental Station, U.K.  Experiment, part  of a program arranged in  1963 by 
Sir Bernard  Lovell, director  of  Jodrell  Bank,  and Vladimir  Kotelnikov, 
director  of  Soviet  space  tracking  station  in   the   Crimea,  was  repeated 
Jan.  9.  (AP,  IVYT,  1/14/66,  12) 
January  9:  Project  managers  for  the  Mariner  series  deep-space  exploration 
missions  to  Venus  and  Mars  were  announced  by  Alvin  R.  Luedecke 
(M/G,  UsAF-Ret.), Deputy Director of JPL:  (1) Dan Schneiderman would 
manage  th e  Venus  project  involving a  single spacecraft to be  launched 
i n   1967,  in   addition  to  continuing  his  duties  as  MARINER  IV   project 
manager  through  1967;  (2)  H.  M.  Schurmeier,  former  Ranger  project 
manager,  would  manage  the   Mars  project  involving  two  new  Mariner 
spacecraft  scheduled  for  launch  in   1969.  Effective  Feb.  1,  Geoffrey 
Robillard would replace Schurmeier as Voyager capsule system manager 
in  addition  to  continuing  his  present  duties  as  deputy Voyager  project 
manager.  (JPL  Release  372) 
U.S.  Bureau of  Standards chemists had developed a n  advanced rocket fuel 
which  might  be  used  in  spaceflights  to  the  moon  and  other  planets.  A 
mixture of  liquid and solid hydrogen  called  “slush  hydrogen,”  t h e  fuel 

10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

involved  a  freeze-thaw  process  which  could  be  used  to  produce  large 
quantities  for  storage.  (NANA,  Boston Sunday  Globe, 1/9/66) 
January  9:  National  Science  Foundation must  abandon  its  passive  role  and 
be  more  dynamic  if  scientific  progress  is  to  keep  pace  with  society’s 
growing  technological  needs,  concluded  a  report  released  by  the   Sub- 
committee  on  Science,  Research,  and Development  of  the House Com- 
mittee on Science and Astronautics.  Subcommittee viewed the  revitaliza- 
tion of  NSF  as “an  area of  the  government-science  relationship i n  which 
Congress  should  provide  a  large  share  of  t h e   leadership  essential  to  
significant  improvement  in   the  Nation’s  resources  and  development.” 
Some recommendations  of  the  report:  (1) NSF supplement its traditional 
philosophy  with  positive  plans  and  programs;  (2)  character  and  func- 
tions  of  the  National  Science  Board  be  strengthened;  (3) authority  of 
NSF’S  director  be  widened;  and  (4)  important  executive  and  policy 
problems  of  NSF  be  acted  upon  administratively or   legislatively in   the  
near  future.  (Text, Committee Print) 
President  Johnson  was  asked  to  invite  a  Russian  cosmonaut  to   join  an 
American  astronaut  in   a  space  mission  in  an   open  letter  in   Parade 
magazine written by  editor Jess Gorkin. Gorkin admitted  that,  officially, 
there had been little cooperation  in space science between  the  two coun- 
tries, bu t  said tha t   “Russian  and American  scientists, guided by  a  tradi- 
tion  tha t   scientific  research  belongs  to  all  men,  had  been  eager  to 
cooperate. On a person-to-person basis, they had already exchanged more 
space  data  than  their  governments have  officially  sanctioned.”  Gorkin 
envisioned  joint  space  mission  as  proof  tha t   U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  could 
work  together for  ‘?the good  of  all men  on  ear th”   despite disagreement 
on   “how  they want  to  live.”  (Parade, 1/9/66) 
Since AEC’S  plans  to  build  a  200-billion electric volt  (bev) atom  smasher 
were being complicated by site and  cost considerations, the  Commission 
was  considering  three  alternate proposals:  (1) Cornell  Univ.  physicist 
R.  R.  Wilson’s suggestion  for a  “poor  man’s’’  200-bev machine costing 
about $150 million;  (2) Columbia Univ. physicist S. Devons’ suggestion 
to  increase  the   energy  of  existing  33-bev  machine  a t   Rrookhaven 
National  Laboratory  to  150-bev,  costing  about  $150  million;  and  (3) 
incorporating changes  i n  the  200-bev machine being  designed by  Univ. 
of  California to  lower  costs.  (Sullivan, NYT ,   1/9/66,  E9) 
Soviet rocket  pioneer  Vladimir  Vasilyevich  Razumov,  presumed  to   have 
died  in   Stalinist  purges  of  Leningrad  during  World  War  11,  had  been 
located  and  interviewed  by  Leningradskaya  Pravda  reporters. Razumov 
had  headed  the   Leningrad  Jet  Study  Group  of  space  enthusiasts  until 
Stalin  abolished  i t   in   1935.  His  residence  was  not  disclosed, possibly 
because  of  his  continued  association with  missile manufacture.  (NYT ,  
1/10/66,  46C) 
January  10:  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops 
Station carried 51-lb. payload  to  115-mi.  (185-km.)  altitude and  impact 
88  mi.  downrange  i n   the   Atlantic.  Payload  instrumentation  failed  to 
function  properly,  however,  and  desired  results  were  no t   obtained. 
Flight was  last  i n   a  series  of  seven  similar  experiments conducted by 
NASA  fo r  Univ.  of  Illinois  to measure  seasonal  chang3s and other effects 
i n   the  D-  and  E-regions  of  the   ionosphere.  Previous  six  launches  had 
/ been  conducted  successfully  from  Wallops  Station  in  April,  July,  and 
November  1964; and  June,  September,  and  December  1965.  (Wallops 
Release  66-1; NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

11 

January  10: An  explanation  of  white dwarf  stars-based 
o n  study of  spectra 
of  four stars in  constellation Orion gathered during October  1965 NASA 
Aerobee  sounding  rocket  flight-appeared 
i n   report  released  by  Dr. 
Donald  C.  Morton,  head  of  Princeton  Univ.  rocket  program.  Results 
indicated  tha t   the   four  stars  a re   hurling  matter  toward  the   earth  a t  
about  4  million  mph.  This  loss  of  mass,  extended  over  a  long  period 
of  time,  would  eventually remove  up  to 95 per  cen t  of  the  stars’ mass, 
according  to  Dr.  Morton.  They  would  then   be  white  dwarfs.  (NYT ,  
1/11/66, 6 )  
Reported  tha t   the   European  Space Research  Organization  (ESRO) , which 
met  in  Paris Nov.  24-26, had  agreed  that  the  TD-2 satellite,  scheduled 
for  launch  in  1969  by  Douglas  Thor-Delta  booster  purchased  from 
NASA,  would  carry  nine  solar-ionospheric  experiments:  (1)  topside 
counter  to  measure  radio  waves;  (2)  solar  Lyman-alpha  radiation 
experiment;  (3)  a  far  ultraviolet  spectroheliograph  experiment;  (4) 
x-ray crystal spectrometer;  (5) solar particle flux experiments; measure- 
ments of  (6) low energy electron fluxes;  (7) energy and particle distribu- 
tion  of  charged  ionospheric  particles;  (8)  oxygen  and  nitrogen  light 
emissions;  and  (9)  neutral  ionospheric  constituents.  The   880-lb. 
satellite  would  be  launched  into  near-polar  orbit  with  620-mi. apogee 
and  218-mi.  perigee.  ESRO  planned  to  launch  TD-1 stellar  astronomy 
satellite  in   1968.  ( A v .  Wk.,  1/10/66,  33) 
US. domestic  and  international  scheduled  airlines  would  carry  nearly 
160 million  passengers  and  fly  nearly  113  billion  revenue  passenger 
miles  by  FY  1971,  according  to  FAA%  five-year aviation  forecasts.  Pre- 
dicted  airline activity would be almost twice  tha t  of  FY  1965 when  US. 
airlines  flew  95-million  passengers  and  63  billion  revenue  passenger 
miles.  (FAA  Release  66-3) 
NASA  was  considering landing  unmanned  Lunar  Excursion Module  (Lem) 
equipped  with  an  Apollo-type  lunar   television  camera  on  the   moon 
before  the   first manned  mission,  Aviation  Peek   reported.  Photographs 
from the  camera, which  would be mounted  externally and coupled  with 
a  scanning  device  to  permit  broad  coverage,  would  provide  mission 
planners  with  information  on   lunar  surface  characteristics.  (Av. Wk., 
1/10/66,  36) 
Negotiations by  U S .  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  to  acquire the   14,981-acre 
Sudden Ranch properties adjacent to Vandenberg AFB marked beginning 
of massive  expansion  operation for Manned  Orbiting Laboratory  (Mol) 
program,  Missiles  and  Rockets  reported.  B/G  Joseph  S.  Bleymaier, 
Deputy  Commander  for  Manned  Systems,  AFSC  Space  Systems  Div., 
predicted  tha t  within  five  years,  Vandenberg  would  have  “continuous 
manned  operations”  involving  40  o r  more  launches  annually.  (M&R, 
1/10/66,  35) 
Soviet  life-support  systems  used  in   Vostok  and  Voskhod  spacecraft 
appeared to use  a  sodium  superoxide compound  as a  source of  oxygen, 
Dr.  A.  TK’.  Petrocelli,  General Dynamics Corp.,  Electric Boat Div.,  told 
Missiles  and  Rockets.  Petrocelli  estimated  the   Russians  had  published 
three  times  more  basic  research  papers  than   U S .   scientists  on  these 
materials  and  were  continuing  efforts  to  improve life-support systems 
by  studying  compounds  such   as  new  superoxides,  peroxides,  and  
ozonides.  He  said  they  were  also  searching for  new  and   better  carbon 
dioxide absorbers.  (M& R ,  1/10/66,  33) 

12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

January  10: Reported  tha t   the  Westinghouse Apollo TV camera,  designed  to 
provide standard  ear th  receivers  near-continuous,  live, black-and-white 
coverage  of  manned  lunar   missions,  was  also  adaptable  for:  (1)  use 
i n  Eva to aid i n  rendezvous  and docking o r  close inspection  of  satellites; 
(2)  full-color  transmission  to  show  true   colors  of  lunar  surface  and 
space  objects;  and  (3)  instant  transmission  showing  effects  of  con- 
tinuing  spaceflight  in   a  biosatelIite  on   monkeys  and  other  subjects. 
(A v .  Wk . ,  1/10/66,  35) 
0  Synchronous-orbit  television  relay  satellite  capable  of  providing  direct 
service  to  home  receivers  fo r   a n   area  equivalent  to  one  sixth  of  con- 
tinental U S .   could  be  launched before  1970, according  to  preliminary 
company-funded design studies conducted by  RCA   and GE   and  presented 
to NASA  Hq.  officials, Aviation  Week reported. Both  companies conceded 
the   existence  of  technical  problem  areas,  including  the   design  of 
solar  cell  arrays  15  to  30  times  larger  than   any  previously  attempted 
and  the   lack  of  a  suitable  launch  vehicle  for   orbiting  6,000-lb.  t o  
8,000-lb.  satellite,  bu t   believed  solutions  could  be  devised  within  the  
existing state-of-the-art. ( A v .  Wk . ,   1/10/66,  115) 
Sen. Harry F. Byrd, Jr.  (D-Va.),  replaced Sen. Joseph  D.  Tydings  (D-Md.) 
on   the   Senate Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences. House 
Science and  Astronautics  Committee membership  remained  the   same. 
(NASA  LAR  V/1) 
Rep.  Donald  Rumsfeld  (R-Ill.)  inserted  into  the   Congressional  Record  a 
tribute to the  late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator:  “Dr. 
Dryden  was highly  respected  by  his  colleagues both as an administrator 
and  as  a  scientist-engineer. He  will  hold  an  eminent  place  when  the  
history  of  man’s  accomplishments  in   space  is  written.  Although  the  
country mourns  his  passing  he   wiu  be  long  remembered  for  his  many 
contributions  to  the  good  of  his  country.”  (CR ,  1/10/66,  29) 
0  NASA  appointed  George J.  Howick Director of  Technology Utilization Div. 
He would succeed Dr. Richard L. Lesher, Deputy Assistant Administrator 
for  Technology  Utilization  who,  in   addition  to  his  other  duties,  had 
been  serving  as  Acting  Director  of  the   Technology  Utilization  Div. 
Howick was formerly manager  of  industrial technology services for Mid- 
west  Research  Institute.  (NASA  Release  66-5) 
0  GEMINI  VII  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  and  his  family  were  welcomed  by  a 
parade  in   their  hometown  of  Tucson,  Ariz.  Borman,  who  was  given 
the   keys  to  the   city  and  told  tha t   a  $300,000 planetarium  would  be 
built  in   his  honor,  was  also  praised  in   a  special  resolution  passed 
unanimously  by  the  Arizona  legislature. He  told  a  press  conference he  
had  joined  the   space  program  to  go  to   the   moon  and  “that’s  what  I 
want  to do.”  (AP,  Chic.  Trib.,  1/9/66;  AP,  Balt.  Sun,  1/11/66) 
No new  communication-intelligibility problems were  created  i n  a  reduced 
pressure  environment  when  helium  was  added  to  same  oxygen  partial 
pressurc , reported  USAF  School  of  Aerospace  Medicine,  according  to 
Missiles  and  Rockets.  After  conducting  a  series  of  13  simulated  flights 
involving 25 subjects and four chamber  operators using 8,300 numbers 
and  words  and  2,200  words  in   sentences,  researchers  discovered  tha t  
problems  were  no  greater  in   50-50 oxygen-helium  atmosphere a t  7 psi 
than  in   pure  oxygen  at  3.5  o r   5  psi,  and  were  often  less.  (M&R, 
1/10/66,33) 
Prof. Victor  Bazykin, member  of  U.S.S.R.  Academy of  Sciences, said tha t  
Soviet VOSKHOD  11  Cosmonaut Pave1 Belyayev had  received slightly more 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

13 

radiation  (75 millirads)  than  had  his  copilot Alexey Leonov,  who  had 
received about 65 millirads, during the  26-hr. spaceflight Mar.  18, 1965. 
Bazykin said  the walls of  the spacecraft  did  not absorb radiation  evenly 
and Belyayev was  in  a more  exposed area.  (M&R, 1/10/66) 
January  10:  USN  “Southern  Cross”  program,  attempt  to  convert  fleet  com- 
munications  to  secure,  long-range  over-the-horizon  communications 
using techniques such  as satellite relay or  troposcatter, was  undergoing 
reevaluation because of  competitive pressure for funds for Vietnam war, 
Aviation  Week  reported.  Y o u t h e r n   Cross”  was  sponsored  by  USN 
Bureau  of  Ships  and  administered  by  Naval  Electronics  Laboratory. 
(A v .  Wk . ,   1/10/66,  36) 
January  11:   Prime goal  of  space exploration was  the  development of  scien- 
tific  capabilities,  but  i t   was  important  to  recognize  the  many  other 
benefits accrued  from  the  space program,  NASA  Administrator  James E. 
Webb  told  YMCA   meeting  in   Oklahoma  City:  “We  are  developing,  in 
government, in  industry,  in  ou r  universities,  the  sinews and nerves  our 
Nation  needs  for  healthy  growth.  Scientific discovery  is  no  longer  the  
sole province  of  the  lone  inventor.  I t  requires  an  all-systems endeavor 
that  calls  on  all  the  resources  of  a  na t ion . .   . . 
“NASA  reaches  across  all  industry.  About  90  per  cent  of  NASA’s 
budget goes ou t  under  contract  to American industry-to  pay  for work 
by  almost 400,000 men  and women  in  the  factories  and  laboratories  of 
20,000 prime  and  subcontractors.  . . .’, (Text) 
AEC   deliberately  destroyed  a  Snap-1OA  reactor  a t   National  Reactor 
Testing  Station,  Ida.  Safety test,  designated SNAPTRAN-2,  was  conducted 
to  verify ability  to  “predict  the   consequences  of  an  accidental  nuclear 
excursion  of  a  Snap reactor.”  (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 200) 
*  Potential  of  manned  space  flight  in  Apollo  Applications  program  was 
examined  by  Peter  Chew  in  National  Observer.  He  suggested  “ .  . . 
earth-orbiting astronauts . . . may be able to locate and track icebergs . . . 
spot  fish-feeding grounds  . . . support  oceanography . . . produce  agri- 
cultural,  mineral,  and  fresh  water  surveys.”  Manned  satellites  could 
provide  “worldwide television coverage”  and  serve as  “relay  points  for 
deep-space  communications.~’  (Nat’l.  Obs.,  1/11/66;  CR,  2/8/66, 
A609-10) 
0  FAA  announced  tha t   Washington  (D.C.)  National  Airport  would  be  open 
to  short-haul jet  traffic April 24.  (FAA  Release 66-5) 
January  11-12: USN  was  formulating  plans  for  a  Sealab  111 mission in  a n  
effort  to  expand  and  intensify  its  manned  undersea  activities,  Under 
Secretary of  the Navy Robert H. B.  Baldwin reported at the “Symposium 
of  Man’s Extension  into  the  Sea”  in  Washington,  D.C. 
James W.  Miller, Office  of  Naval  Research,  reported  that  results  of 
the Sealab I1 experiment had  indicated  tha t  a t  ocean depths 600 f t .   and 
below man  could perform  useful  tasks  such  as salvaging ships  and air- 
craft  if  he were  equipped with  electrically heated  diving suits,  diver-to- 
diver  communications,  and  underwater  swimming  aids.  Outside  of 
Sealab 11, the aquanauts had been cold, frustrated,  unable to  talk to one 
another,  limited in  their  visibiIity, and  constantly  in danger.  Inside the  
capsule, they had  experienced difficulty in sleeping and had had  speech 
problems  because  of  the  helium  atmosphere.  There  were  no  serious 
medical problems,  and  “an  unprecedented  amount  of  useful  work  was 
accomplished.”  (Text) 

14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

January  12:  President  Johnson,  in   his  S ta te   of  the   Union  address  to  the  
jo in t  session of Congress, proposed a “program  to construct and to flight- 
test  a  new  supersonic  transport  airplane  tha t   will  fly  three  times  th e  
speed of  sound-in  excess of  2,000 miles per hour.”  No  mention of  th e  
space program was made  in  th e  address. This  fact  received  comment in  
Aviation  Week: “Mentioned or not,  the  National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration has decided  to  stake ou t  a  top  spot  in  domestic prestige 
after Apollo.  . . . The agency  now  will  take  the  initiative.”  (Pres. Doc., 
1/17/66,  31; A v .   Wk., 1/17/66,  25) 
e  Successful launching of Boosted-Dart sounding rockets  carrying chaff pay- 
loads from Natal, Brazil, and NASA  Wallops Station marked first meteoro- 
logical  sounding  rocket  launchings  conducted  from  North  and  Sou th  
America  th e   same  day  under  coordinated NASA-COmiSSaO  Nacional  de 
Atividades  Espaciais  (CNAE)  experimental program.  Natal  launch  was 
first of  a series of  32 launches planned by  CNAE for 1966 as part of  In ter-  
American  Experimental  Meteorological  Sounding  Rocket  Network 
(EXAMETNET).  Brazil,  Argentina,  and  US., cooperating in   EXAMETNET, 
were  planning  a  north-south  chain  of  stations  through  the   Western 
Hemisphere  to   conduct  coordinated  sounding  rocket  launchings  to  
obtain  experimental  data  on  hemispheric  weather  patterns. 
(NASA 
Release 66-12) 
Ground-test version of  S-11, North American Aviation, 1nc.-built 2nd stage 
of  NASA’s  Sa tu rn   v  booster,  was  static-fired  a t   Santa  Susana  Field 
Laboratory for  354 sec.  in   successful  test  of  its  engine-gimballing and 
liquid-oxygen-cutoff systems. S-11, which developed 1-million-lbs. thrus t  
from  five  Rocketdyne J-2  engines,  had  been  previously ground-tested 
for  18 sec.  on Dec.  29,  1965. Firing was  monitored by  MSFC  engineers. 
(MSFC  Release  66-17) 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb,  discussing  applications  of  space 
technology a t   a  meeting  of  Dallas  County Medical  Society  in   Dallas, 
said  tha t   ccby adding  to   our  knowledge  of  space,  and  of  man  in   space, 
. . . we  are  building  a  very  large  bank  of  knowledge  tha t   will  serve 
generations of  man i n  all major fields of  activity.”  I n  a news conference 
i n   Dallas,  he   said  tha t   th e   Soviet  space  program  was  ahead  of  the  
U.S.’s  “and  will  be  for  the  next year  or  two.’’  He  said  he  felt  the  US. 
would beat  the  U.S.S.R.  to  a lunar landing, bu t  was  no t  as  confident  as 
12 mos.  ago:  “A  year  ago  I would  have said  the  Sa turn  V  would  be  far 
bigger  than  anything they  could do.  I’m  no t  so su re  now.  They have  a 
very  vigorous  program.  . . . This  year  they  have  flown  PROTON  I  and 
11-both 
four  times  the   size  of  Gemini-and 
they  have  announced  a 
big new rocket.”  Asked if the  Proton series promised ability to maneuver 
like  U S ’ S  Gemini  spacecraft,  Webb  replied:  “Anytime  you  can  pu t  
up  a  spacecraft  tha t  weighs  27,000  pounds,  you’ve  got  a  capability  to  
do a  lot  of  things  you  cannot do with  a smaller craft.  You  can develop 
the  maneuverability, bu t   it’s  hard  to develop  the  large capacity of  large 
spacecraft-and 
this is where we have been behind and are still behind.” 
(Text; AP, Denver Post,  1/13/66) 
Three  NASA  Gemini  astronauts-Charles  A.  Bassett  11,  Elliot M.  See,  Jr., 
and  Eugene A.  Cernan-scheduled 
for   a  spring  mission,  completed  a 
training program a t  Univ.  of  North  Carolina’s  Morehead  Planetarium. 
They  used  a  device  tha t   projected  simulated  Gatv  against  a  stellar 
background.  (WI, NYT,  1/13/66,  44) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

15 

January 12: FRC  awarded Martin Co. a six-month $200,000 contract to design, 
fabricate,  and  test  a  thermal  protection  system  for  X-15 experimental 
aircraft tha t  would  fly  a t   speeds  above  5,000 mph.  The  300-lb. system 
would be based  on  Martin’s MA-25s silicon ablator  and would maintain 
air-friction heating a t  well below  the  1,200“F safety limit.  Contract also 
called  for  establishment  of  refurbishment  procedures.  (NASA  Release 
66-11; Martin  Release) 
0  Royal  Aeronautical Society  of  Great  Britain  marked  100th anniversary. 
( J /RA S ,  1/66) 
January  12-13: “Technology  gap”  between  U S .   and Western  Europe was  
discussed a t  Paris meeting of  industry’s  scientific officials, sponsored by 
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD) , 
which  comprised  most  non-Communist  industrial  countries.  Recent 
OECD  report  had  stated  tha t   U S .   research  effort  was  a t   least  twice  as 
great  as  Western  Europe’s  and  tha t   Europe  could catch  up  in   civilian 
research only by  extraordinary effort, bu t   i t  could no t  catch up  in  mili- 
tary  and  space work.  Specific proposals for  international research  cen- 
ters,  international  fellowships,  and  general  increase  in   sharing  of 
scientific  effort  and  results  were  discussed.  U S .   was  represented  by 
Office  of  Science  and  Technology  Director  Dr.  Donald  F.  Hornig. 
(Mooney, N Y T ,  1 /13 /66 ,63 )  
January 13:  Experimental Hibex  (High-E Boost Experiment) missile booster 
was  successfully  fired  on  a  vertical  trajectory  and  responded i n  flight 
to preplanned maneuvers in  last  of  series of  10  tests.  ARPA  said “all test 
objectives of  the  program were met”:  to demonstrate feasibility of  high- 
acceleration booster and ability to guide and control a high performance 
vehicle  while  undergoing trajectory  maneuvers;  to  prove  feasibility of 
igniting,  burning,  and  launching a  booster from an   underground hard- 
ened  silo;  to  institute  turning  maneuvers  to  demonstrate  s truc tura l  
integrity  of  both  vehicle and propellant.  (M & R ,  1 /24 /66 ,9)  
0  National  Park  Service  team  inspected  18-sq.-mi.  trac t   of  proposed .park- 
land for Cape Canaveral National Seashore, adjacent to  KSC.  Team  later 
met with NASA  and USAF  officials, Florida s ta te  personnel,  and representa- 
tives  of  the  East Central Florida Planning  Council to  prepare develop- 
ment plans.  (Titusville Star Advocate, 1/14/66;  Miami News,  1/25/66) 
January  14:  Ground-test  stage  S-IC-F,  Boeing-built  first  stage  of  NASA’s 
Sa turn  V booster, was placed aboard the  barge Poseidon a t  NASA Michoud 
Assembly  Facility for  shipment to  KSC,  where it would  be  assembled a t  
Launch  Complex  39 ’s   Vertical  Assembly  Building  with  other  ground- 
test  vehicle  elements:  a  2nd  stage  (S-11-F) ; a  3rd  stage  (S-IVB-F) ; a n  
instrument un i t   (IU-F) ; and a  dummy Apollo  spacecraft.  Stage was  ex- 
pected  to arrive a t  KSC Jan. 21.  (NASA Release 66-10; MSFC Release 66-18) 
Memorandum of  understanding for  cooperative meteorological  sounding 
rocket  experiments was  signed  by  the   Spanish  Comisi6n  Nacional de  
Investigacicjn  del  Espacio  (CONIE)  and  NASA.  Purpose  of  project  would 
be  to  obtain  synoptic  information  on  wind,  temperature,  and  pressure 
a t   altitudes  between  18  and  36  mi.  Sixteen  Boosted-Dart and  Arcas 
sounding  rockets  carrying  chaff  (tuned  dipoles)  or  instrumented 
payloads  would  be  launched  from a  range  i n  Spain  to  be  operated by 
the   Instituto  Nacional  de  Tecnica Aeroespacial  (INTA)  . 
CONIE would  procure a n  Arcas  launcher, sounding rockets,  payloads, 
and  other  equipment. NASA  would  provide,  on   a  loan basis,  a n  MPS-19 
radar,  van,  Boosted-Dart launcher and additional equipment. NASA also 

16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

would  train  Spanish  personnel  i n   equipment  operations  and  mainte- 
nance.  Scientific results  of  project  would  be  made  available  t o   world 
scientific  community.  (NASA  Release  66-20) 
January  14:  NASA  invited  aerospace  industries  to  propose  definition  studies 
of  integrating  experiment  equipment  to  be  used  in  spacecraft  for 
manned Apollo Applications missions. Studies would define experiments 
integration work in  the  Apollo Lunar  Excursion Module, Sa turn  launch 
vehicle  instrument  units,  and  top  stages  of  Sa turn   IB   and  V vehicles; 
they would include consideration of mission analysis, experiment  equip- 
ment,  installation  and  integration  of  equipment,  specialized  crew  re- 
quirements,  launch  facility  requirements,  tracking,  and  other  support 
requirements.  Two  or  more  firms would  be  selected  for  negotiation  of 
parallel  nine-month s tudy  contracts.  (NASA  Release 66-14) 
NASA  Inventions and  Contributions Board  granted United  Aircraft Corp.  a 
waiver of  title rights  in  all  inventions made,  or   to  be made,  under  NASA 
contract,  which  involved  the   RL-10  rocket  engine.  (KB) 
Two  major  changes  effected by  reorganization  of  activities  of  NASA  LRC: 
appointment  of  Dr.  Seymour  C.  Himmel,  former  head  of  the   Agena 
Project office,  as Assistant  Director  for Launch  Vehicles and  establish- 
ment of a n  Air-Breathing Engine Div.,  to be headed by J. Howard Childs. 
(LRC Release  66-2) 
0  Astronaut Frank Borman returned to Gary,  Ind.,  to help the city celebrate 
Frank  Borman  Day  and  s tar t   a  pear-long  observance  of  its  60th  anni- 
versary.  He  said  a t  a  news  conference  that  “it  is  inevitable”  that  the  
U.S.  would lose a crew in  its space program and  tha t  he hoped  the  public 
was  “mature  enough  to  accept  the   sacrifice.”  (UPI,  N.Y.  Her.  Trib., 
1/15/66; AP,  N Y T ,  1 /15 /66 ,22 ;   AP, Wash. Eve.  Star,  1/14/66,  A2) 
Januazv  15:  Sir  Bernard  Lovell.  director  of  Jodrell Bank  Ewer imen ta l  Sta- 
ti&,  U.K.,  announced  tha;  Soviet  space  tracking  statio;  in  the  Crimea 
would  send  signals  to  Jodrell  Bank  via  Venus  for  an  entire  225-day 
Venusian  year.  Sir  Bernard  said  tha t   by  following  Venus  during  one 
complete  solar revolution,  scientists hoped  to  gain  fur ther   information 
on exact distances of  planets  from each  other and  the sun ;  nature of  the  
hidden  surface  of  Venus;  changes  in   the   very  slow  rotation  of  Venus; 
and  conditions i n  space between  earth  and Venus.  ( N Y T ,  1 /16 /66 ,24 )  
Dr.  Robert  C .   Seamans,  Jr.,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator, predicted  in   re- 
sponse to questions in  a n  interview  with  the  Chicago Tribune tha t   there 
would  be  a t   least  four  Gemini  flights  during  the   year:  “We  may  even 
get  off  a manned Apollo  flight before  the  end  of  t h e  year.”  Duration  of 
the  flight would depend  on  success  of  test flights of  unmanned Apollos. 
(Chic. Trib., 1/16/66) 
Second-stage  flight prototype  of  Lockheed Propulsion  CO.’S  156-in. solid 
motor  was  successfully  static-fired  a t   the   company’s  Potrero,  Calif., 
facility.  Burn-time was  72  sec.  for  total  1-million-lb. thrust.  Pressure 
was  655  psi  and  thrus t   vector  control  system  made  three  complete 
cycles as programed. This was  Lockheed‘s  second and final firing under a 
$5.5-million USAF  contract.  (M&R ,  1/24/66,  10) 
USAF  XB-70  research  bomber  flew  a t   45,000-ft.  to  47,000-ft.  altitudes  i n  
test  flight from Edwards AFB,  to  collect data  for  development  of  super- 
sonic  transports.  ( m ~ ,  NYT ,   1/16/66,  60) 
Sergey  Pavlovich  Korolev,  “chief  constructor  of  space  systems  for  the  
Soviet Union,”  died  in  Moscow during surgery, Tass  reported. Korolev 
had  been  active  i n   rocketry  since  the   early  1930’s  and  had  directed 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

17 

gathering of  information from  captured German  rocket  scientists after 
World  War  11.  As  head  of  space  system design  for  the   Soviet Union, 
Korolev’s  responsibilities had  ranged  from SPUTNIK I  i n  1957 to VOSKHOD 
11  manned  spacecraft.  He  also  designed  the   Luna  series  of  unmanned 
spacecraft  and  possibly  the   Zond  series.  (Tass,  1/15/66;  UPI,  r u s h .  
Post,  1/16/66,  A6; N Y T ,  1 /16 /66 ,82)  
January  15: Boeing  Co.  announced  plans  to build  and  equip an  $11-million 
laboratory  a t   its Vertol  Div.  facility, Morton,  Pa.,  for  R&D  of  vertical 
takeoff  and  landing aircraft.  (Boeing Go.  Release) 
January 16: Astronaut  David R.  Scott would  attempt-during 
about 90 min. 
outside earth-orbiting Gemini 8 spacecraft-to 
crawl  about using  hand 
holds,  move  through  space  using  a  maneuvering gun  with  nine  times 
the  capability  of  tha t   used  by  Astronaut  Edward  H.  Wh i te   11,  and 
unscrew  bolts  a t   small  mechanic’s  station  on   the  spacecraft,  NASA 
announced  a t  MSC  news  conference. Gemini VI11 mission,  designed  to  
test  man’s  ability  to  maneuver  in   space  and  the   first  rendezvous  and 
docking mission,  would  take place before  the  end  of  the  first quar ter  of 
1966. Charles  W.  Mathews,  Gemini  program  manager,  said  “the  main 
significance of  the  mechanical  work is that he   [Scott] will be  evaluating 
a tool that  is specifically designed for space.”  The special tool contained 
a  motor  to  eliminate  need  for  twisting  motion  by  the   astronaut  tha t  
would  swing his  body  around  when  he   was  weightless. Target  for  the  
rendezvous  and  docking-Gatv 
or   Augmented Target  Docking Adapter 
(Atda)-had  no t  been  chosen.  (AP, N Y T ,  1/17/66,  12) 
Dr.  Joseph  F.  Shea,  manager  of  MSC’S  Apollo  Spacecraft  Office,  said 
in an interview in Houston tha t  the  U S .  would achieve  its goal of  land- 
ing men on  the moon and  returning  them safely to earth before  the  end 
of  this  decade:  ‘?NO  new  inventions  are  needed.  No   breakthrough  is 
needed. This certainly doesn’t mean  that  i t  is going to be  easy. I t  is no t  
going  to  be,  bu t   the   technology  needed  to  do  the   job  is  known  now.” 
He stressed tha t  the  pace tha t  had been  set would have  to be maintained 
until  the  goal was achieved.  (Maloney, Houston Post,  1/16/66) 
a  CBS  newsman  Walter  Cronkite  received  the   annua l   TWA  award  for  out- 
standing  reporting  of  aerospace  subjects  a t   a  ceremony  in   Phoenix, 
Ariz.,  sponsored  by  the  airline.  (AP, N Y T ,  1 /18 /66 ,62)  
NAS  Space  Science  Board  issued  the   first  in   series  of  three  reports 
entitled  Space  Research:  Directions f o r   the  Future.  Report,  prepared  a t  
NASA’s request,  outlined research objectives for planetary and lunar ex- 
ploration in   1970-1985. Compiled by working group led by  Dr.  Gordon 
J. F. MacDonald of  the  Institute of  Geophysics and Planetary Physics a t  
UCLA,  Par t   I  repeated  NAS’  1964 recommendation  tha t   top  priority  i n  
post-Apollo  program  be  assigned  to   unmanned  exploration  of  Mars. 
Report suggested  secondary  importance be  divided  equally between  de- 
tailed  investigation  of  lurain and  unmanned exploration of  Venus,  and  
completed  priority  list with  other  major  planets,  comets  and  asteroids, 
Mercury,  Pluto, and interplanetary dust. Major  recommendations  were: 
launching an  orbiting planetary observatory,  delivering a drop sonde to 
resolve  question  of  high  Venusian  surface  temperature,  developing 
fine-pointing control, accurate to 10 sec. of  arc, for rocket guidance, and 
considering  enlargement  of  NASA  deep-space communication  capabilities 
beyond  present  plans.  To  support  outlined  scientific program,  report 
recommended : (1)  increasing manpower and facilities available to lunar 
and planetary science programs;  (2) development by NASA  of  substantial 

18 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

program  for  observation  of  planets  through  ground-based  telescopes ; 
(3)  early  opportunities  for  experienced  observational  scientists  to   ex- 
ore the  lurain;  (4)  joint  study by  NASA  OSSA  and  OMSF  of  early  use  of 
a tu r n  V  for planetary exploration, with  special emphasis on a Martian 
capsule landing  in  the  early  1970’s;  (5)  increased  attention  by  NASA  t o  
development  of  research  and  educational  capabilities  in  theoretical 
sciences related  to study of  the solar system. Regarding funding of space 
research,  the  report  said:  r r .   . . since we  believe tha t  the  exploration  of 
the   solar  system bears  s o  directly  on  the  major  central  scientific ques- 
tions of  ou r  time, we anticipate tha t  unmanned experiments will probably 
provide  the  most  significant contribution  to  the   program  of  planetary 
exploration  . . . we  recommend tha t  the  percentage  of  support  of  lunar 
and planetary exploration be maintained over the 1965-1985 time period 
and be devoted predominantly  to scientific objectives and tha t  programs 
whose  objectives are  other  than  scientific be  started  only  as  additional 
resources become  available.”  It said  there  should be  a  gradual  shi€t in 
emphasis  from  the   moon  to  the  planets,  progressing  toward  nearly 
equivalent expenditures for lunar and planetary exploration in the  1970- 
1985 period.  (Text; NAS-NRC  Release) 
January  17:  NASA  Aerobee  150A  sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA 
Wallops Station carried scientific payload to  estimated 83-mi. (134-km.) 
altitude  in   GSFC  experiment  designed  to  measure  spectral  irradiance  of 
the  stars Sirius  and Rigel.  Control  system,  star  tracker,  and  ultraviolet 
stellar spectrometer  performed  satisfactorily. Brief  data periods,  caused 
by  failure of  fine jet pressure  regulator  on control system gas supply re- 
sulting  in  high  th ru s t ,   had  possibly  aided  establishment  of  flux  values 
a t  discrete wavelength  intervals.  (Wallops Release 66-4; NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Urgency  of  NASA  decision  on  post-Apollo program was  discussed by  Karl 
Abraham in  Philadelphia Evening Bulletin. He noted Saturn V’s potential 
for  solar  system  exploration  and  many  scientists’  fear  of  overcommit- 
ment  to  investigation  of  the  moon.  Among  other  factors  involved, 
Abraham said, NASA  “must  consider how particular  programs will affect 
its farflung field centers and their specialized work.  . . some are so  highly 
specialized  tha t   a  sharp  change  of  direction  in  rocketry  or   spacecraft 
and satellite objectives would  tear  them  apart  unless  sufficient advance 
time  were  allowed  for  gradual  changeovers  to  the  new  missions.” 
(Abraham, Phil.  Eve.  Bull.,  1/17/66;  CR, 2/10/66,  A704) 
Air  traffic control radar  equipment which  could automatically  display the  
third dimension of  aircraft position-altitude-would 
go into service in 
New York City metropolitan  area by late 1967, according to FAA.  Present 
radar  equipment  employed by  FAA  air  traffic  controllers  provided  only 
two-dimensional-distance 
of  air  traffic.  (FAA 
and  direction-picture 
Release 66-6) 
0  AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg said in a speech a t  Georgetown Univ., 
Washington, D.C.,  tha t  man might be able to create life “before  the  end 
of  this  decade.”  Science, h e  said,  has  amplified man’s  senses  so thar h e  
could  now  “see”  stars beyond  what  was  once  thought  to  be  the  outer 
edge  of  the   universe,  rchear77 radio  signals  from  the   farthest  galaxies 
(and  one  day  might  hear  communications  from  intelligent  beings  far 
ou t   in  space),  and  observe magnetic  fields and  radiations  to  which  his 
original  senses  were  blind.  Human  beings  are  learning  how  to  replace 
diseased  organs  and  understand  the   nature  of  life  itself,  Dr.  Seaborg 
noted.  He  said  tha t   even  before  man  managed  to  create  life,  science 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

19 

might  discover how  to  control mental  illness,  live  and work  under  the  
sea  and  in  the  depths  of  space,  and  use  the  power  of  the   atom  to  cu t  
passes through mountains  or  fight cancer.  (Text; AEC  Release S-3-66) 
January  17:  Of  President  Johnson’s  State  of  the  Union  message,  Robert 
Hotz  said  in  Aviation  Week:  “The  President’s  statement  tha t   h e   will 
‘propose a  program  to  construct  and  to  flight  test  a  new  supersonic 
transport  plane tha t  will fly  three  times the  speed of  sound, in excess of 
2,000 mph.’  came as somewhat of  a surprise in view of  the stretched ou t  
program he had been sponsoring. Apparently, this statement means tha t  
some funds  for  actual prototype  supersonic transport  construction will 
be requested in Fiscal 1967, although the size of  this request may dismay 
the  management  entrusted  with  the  task  of  building  the   prototype  in  
time  to  remain  competitive with  the  Anglo-French Concorde.”  (Hotz, 
A v .  Wk., 1/17/66,21) 
January  17-18:  NASA  launched  five  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  from 
NASA  Wallops Station between 5:39  p.m.  and 6:31 a.m.  Each rocket was 
programed to eject a vapor cloud of  reddish or bluish color as its altitude 
increased from 30  to  130 mi.  Experiments were  to measure wind veloci- 
ties and directions  a t  various  altitudes; motion  of  the  trails was  photo- 
graphed from five camera sites within a 100-mi. radius of Wallops Island. 
Launchings  were  conducted  for  GCA  Corp.,  under  contract  to  NASA 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center.  (NASA  Release  66-13;  Wallops  Release 
66-4; NASA Rpt. SRL) 
Junuary  18:  Scheduled  test  of  Apollo Launch  Escape  System  (Les)  a t  WSMR 
was  postponed  indefinitely  due  to  heavy  cloud  cover.  Countdown  for 
the  Little  Joe  I1 had  proceeded  to  minus  30  min.  [See  Jan.  20.1  (WI, 
NYT ,  1 /19 /66 ,38 )  
NASA  Langley Research  Center  awarded  a  $5-million contract  to  Virginia 
Associated  Research  Center  to  operate  NASA  Space  Radiation  Effects 
Laboratory-a  $15-million facility established  by  L ~ R C  for  research  in  
support  of  national  programs  in  space  technology-through  mid-1970. 
(LaRC  Release) 
0  HL-10  lifting  body  vehicle,  designed and  developed  by  NASA  Langley  Re- 
search  Center  to  help  solve control  problems of  fu tu re  manned  space- 
craft  entering  earth’s  atmosphere,  was  formally  delivered  to  NASA  by 
its  builder,  Northrop  Corp.,  in   ceremonies  a t   company’s  Hawthorne, 
Calif.,  plant.  The  22-ft.-longY 4,600-lb.,  wingless,  tri-finned  research 
vehicle would be dropped from B-52 aircraft for flight tests a t  45,000-ft. 
altitude and mach  .8  (530 mph).  (LaRC  Release) 
Rep. Joseph E. Karth  (D-Minn.), emphasizing the  need for expanded efforts 
in  the  field  of  oceanography,  said  before  the  National  Space  Club  in  
Washington,  D.  C.,  tha t   oceanography was  becoming  increasingly  re- 
lated  to   space.  He  noted  the  recent  NASA-Nava l   Oceanographic  Office 
agreement whereby NOO  would  coordinate  all investigations  about pos- 
sible  applications  of  manned  earth  orbital  operations  in  the   field  of 
oceanography. He suggested tha t  this program “be expanded formally to  
with  national  gods,  “coordinated  by  one agency like  . . . [NASA]”  and 
include  unmanned  operations  as  well.”  He  urged  a  national  program 
given  adequate  funds--“an  all-wet NASA.”  Karth  said  h e  did  not  think 
that post-Apollo programs, such as manned expeditions to  Mars or to the  
moons of Jupiter would gain “general acceptance” until “we have  solved 
the continually worsening home planet problems of hunger and poverty.” 
(Text) 

20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

January  18: U.N.  Committee on Peaceful Uses  of  Outer Space had proposed 
a  world  conference  on  outer  space  to  be  held  in  New  York.  The  con- 
ference should examine the  impact of  space data on education and com- 
munications-issues  of major importance even to poor  and economically 
retarded  states.  ( N Y T ,  1/20/66,  12; SBD,  1/31/66,  185) 
0  Funeral  of  Soviet space designer Sergey Korolev was  held  in Red  Square. 
After  eulogies by  Leonid  Smirnov,  deputy  chairman  of  the  U.S.S.R. 
Council  of  Ministers;  Mstislav  Keldysh,  President  of  the  U.S.S.R. 
Academy of  Sciences; Nikolay Yegorychev, Moscow Gorkom Secretary; 
and  Cosmonaut  Yuri  Gagarin,  the  funeral  procession  moved  to  the  
Kremlin wall where  the  u rn  containing Korolev’s ashes was  placed in  a 
niche. 
Commentary in  the  New  York  Times:  “Death  has  finally declassified 
the  role  and  identity  of  Academician  Sergei P.  Korolev,  the  man  who 
provided the scientific and technical  leadership of  the vast Soviet rocket 
program.  The  extraordinary  pomp  of  his  state  funeral  in  Red  Square 
contrasted sharply with the  almost complete anonymity imposed on him 
while h e  w a s  alive. I n  the  most fruitful years of  his  career,  the man who 
led  the Soviet Union’s march  into  the  cosmos from  the  first  sputnik  to 
Leonov’s  ‘walk  in   space’ was  normally  referred  to  in  the  Soviet  press 
only as the mysterious  ‘chief designer.’ Korolev’s rockets were  powerful 
enough to send men into orbit and to put cameras into position to photo- 
graph  the  back  side of  the  moon. But  they were  too weak  to  break  the  
chains of  secrecy that denied him, while he lived, the world applause h e  
deserved.”  (Tass,  1/18/66;  N Y T ,  1/20/66,  31) 
January  19:  On  the  floor  of  the   Senate,  Sen.  Daniel  B.  Brewster  (D-Md.) 
paid  tribute  to  the  late  Hugh  L.  Dryden  and  proposed  “that  Wallops 
Island be renamed Dryden Island, asgin appropriate memorial to his  im- 
mense  contribution  to  space exploration.”  Dr.  Dryden was  born  on  the 
Maryland Eastern Shore in Pocomoke City.  (CR ,  1/19/66,  583) 
ComSatCorp awarded a $60,000 study contract to France’s Centre National 
#Etudes  des T616communications for  engineering analysis of  a  system 
of  phased  communications  satellites  operating  in  12-hr.  30”-inclined 
orbits.  I t  would  include  analysis of  a  12-satellite o r   15-satellite system, 
amount  of  coverage,  orbit  stability,  launch  conditions,  types  of  com- 
munications,  and  other  factors  required  to maintain  a given  quality  of 
service  over  a  five-year period.  Work  would  be  performed  within  180 
days.  (ComSatCorp Release) 
0  USAF launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster  from 
WTR.  (US. Aeron.  & Space A c t . ,  1966, 147) 
NASA’s contributions  to multidisciplinary  research  in  support  of  develop- 
ment were discussed by NASA Administrator James E. Webb a t  a meeting 
- 
of  the  West Point Society of  the District of  Columbia. Webb described 
how NASA  programs fulfilled need  pointed  ou t  by  the  late  NASA  Deputy 
Administrator  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden  in  1949 for  cooperative  research 
channeled  ‘‘into directions  permitting  early  application.”  (Text) 
Fred  J.  Drinkwater  111,  aerospace  research  engineer,  scientist,  and  test 
- 
pilot a t  NASA Ames Research Center, received the  Flight Safety Founda- 
tion’s Richard Hansford Burroughs Test Pilot Award  for his  “significant 
contributions  to  the   safety  and  efficiency of  flight  testing.”  Award  was 
established by United Aircraft Corp.  (A v .  Wk . ,  1/3/66, 13) 
Radiation,  Inc.,  announced  receipt  of  a $2-million contract  to  design and 
build  a  “data  acquisition  center”  for  the  British-French  1,450-mph 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

21 

Concorde supersonic aircraft  scheduled  to make  i t s  first f igh t  in   1971. 
During early performance tests,  data tape recorded in  f ig h t  would serve 
as design checks for the aircraft’s builders.  (N Y T ,  1 /20 /66 ,58 )  
January  19: Electronic multispectral sensors-high-altitude  scanners so  sen- 
sitive they  could  tell  when  apples were  ripe  enough  to  be  picked-had 
been developed for agricultural and forestry use, Boston  Globe reported. 
Sensors were intended for  use on orbiting  spacecraft to give reports  on 
an  entire forest or farmland  on  one pass;  they were being programed for 
a wide variety  of  applications, such as measurements of  a n  entire district 
of  orchards  and  grain  fields.  Signals would  be  converted  into  photo- 
graphic  form  for  quick  analysis.  (Barton,  Boston  Globe,  1/19/66,  6) 
January 20:  Little Joe  I1 launch vehicle boosted a five-ton unmanned Apollo 
spacecraft  to  15-mi. altitude  from  WSMR  in  test  of  ability  of  Launch 
Escape System  (Les) to  rescue  the  spacecraft from  an  abort a t  medium 
altitude.  Planned  pitch-up  maneuver  was  executed  and  satisfactory 
launch  escape  vehicle  performance  demonstrated;  successful  canard 
operation  caused command module to  stabilize in proper  attitude. After 
jettison  of  the  Les, the  hard  part  of  the boost protective  cover, and the  
forward  heat  shield,  command module  made  safe  descent  on  its  three 
main  parachutes.  Test,  conducted  a t   maximum-Q  conditions,  was 
slightly marred  by  telemetry  failure.  (NASA  Release 65-348; WI,  NYT, 
1/21/66,10;  AP, Balt. Sun, 1/21/66) 
*  NSF’S  Special Commission on Weather Modification issued a report recom- 
mending greatly  increased  research  on  international  weather  modifica- 
tion and the  behavior of  the weather and climate in general. Report also 
recommended thorough studies to gauge the biological, social, economic, 
political, and legal consequences of  all kinds  of  weather modification- 
both  “deliberate  attempts  to  modify  local  weather  conditions  for  the  
good  of  the  total  population”  and  changes  that  “man’s  increasingly 
large  and  complex  society  bring  about  inadvertently.”  Foundation’s 
report was  a companion to one published Jan.  7 by NAS.  (Text) 
H.R.  8210,  a  bill  to  provide  U S .   tax  immunity  to  the   European  Space 
Research  Organization,  was  reported  to  the   Senate  by  the  Finance 
Committee. Floor action had not yet been scheduled. (CR ,  1/20/66,719) 
Dr.  Pyotr  Kapitsa,  director  of  the   Institute  of  Physical  Problems  of  the 
Soviet Academy of  Sciences, deplored the  productivity gap between U S .  
and  Soviet  science  in  an   article  in   Komsomolskaya  Pravda.  He  urged 
U.S.S.R.  to  weed  ou t   unproductive  research  workers  periodically:  “It 
would  . . . be  possible  to  transfer  1 5  to  20  percent  of  our  staffs  from 
science  to  industry  every  year  and  to   take  into  research  well-prepared 
and qualified youth.  I n  this manner we  would improve the  quality of the  
scientific staffs and also  not  close the  door of  science in  the face of  the  
young.”  He  noted  tha t   the  number  of  scientific research  workers was 
dm o s t   the  same  in  the   two  countries-800,000  Americans  compared 
said  tha t   U S .   scientists  were 
with  700,000  in  the  Soviet  Union-and 
responsible  for  one  third  of  the  world’s  scientific ou tpu t   (in  terms  of 
research  papers  published)  compared with  only  one  sixth  for  Soviets. 
(Komsomolskaya Pravda,  1/20/66,  2;  Science,  1/28/66,  432) 
NASA  Assistant  Administrator  Breene M.  Kerr  presented  a  charter  to  th e  
recently  formed Northern Alabama Chapter of  the American Society for 
Public  Administration.  Kerr  announced  NASA  Administrator  James  E. 
Webb had  been  elected  to  succeed Harlan  Cleveland as  president-elect 

22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

of  ASPA.  Cleveland  had  resigned  when  appointed ambassador  to   NATO. 
(Marshall Star,  1/26/66,  1) 
January 20: Blanche W.  Noyes,  FAA  air marking specialist and veteran pilot, 
was  awarded  the   Brazilian  Medal  of  Merit  of  Santos  Dumont  a t   the  
Brazilian chancery in  Washington, D.C.,  for outstanding and meritorious 
services to  Brazilian aviation. Mrs.  Noyes  was  the   first  American  avi- 
a tr ix   to  receive  the  award.  (FAA Release 66-8) 
January 21:  Full 2X-min. duration test of  fourth Sa turn  IB booster (S-IB-4) 
was  conducted  on   MSFC’S  East  Test  Area  facility.  S-IB-4 would  leave 
MSFC  in  late January for Michoud Assembly Facility for post-firing check- 
out.  (MSFC  Release 66-25) 
0  Astronaut Donald K.  Slayton received a n  honorary Doctor of  Engineering 
degree from Michigan Technological Univ.  in  ceremony a t  MSC.  Degree 
was  conferred  “in  recognition of  high  attainments in  engineering.” As 
MSC Assistant Director for Flight  Crew Operations, Slayton directed  the  
Astronaut  Office, Aircraft  Operations Office, and  the  Flight  Crew  Sup- 
port Div.  (MSC  Roundup,  1/21/66,2) 
0  Discussing Federal subsidization of  scientific research  in   Science, Don K. 
Price,  dean of  Harvard Univ. Graduate School of  Public Administration 
and new AAAS  President,  said:  “We have to learn how  to  fit  the  research 
interests  of  free  scientists  into  a  pattern  of  public policy,  and  to  take 
account  of  the   need  for  balanced  national  development while  building 
up  ou r   existing centers  of  high  scientific quality. And  we  need,  equally 
obviously, to  devote our knowledge  to  the  service of human welfare,  as 
effectively as it has been enlisted  in  the  service of  national defense. We  
obviously have no t  ye t  learned how to do all these things. But we  can a t  
least  begin,  if  we  are  no t   afraid  to  make  some  changes  in   some  of  ou r  
most  stubborn political  and  administrative  habits.”  (Science,  1/21/66, 
290) 
France was  planning to   build  rockets  bigger  than  the  missiles  now  being 
developed  for  he r   nuclear  strike  force,  reported  an   article  in   Air  et 
Cosmos. One purpose was  to  enable France  to  orbit a European  comsat 
without  the   help  of  a n   American-built launch  vehicle.  A  second goal 
would be to provide France with advanced, solid-fuel boosters tha t  could 
carry  one-ton thermonuclear  warheads  over  intercontinental distances 
or  orbit military  surveillance  satellites.  (A i r  et  Cosmos, 1/21/66) 
*  K .   T.  Keller,  retired  president  and  board  chairman  of  Chrysler  Corp., 
died i n  London. He had been a special adviser to DOD,  in   1950 had been 
appointed director of guided missiles by  Gen.  George C. Marshall,  then 
Secretary  of  Defense.  (AP,  Wash. Post,  1/22/66,  B4) 
January  22:  COSMOS  cv  containing  “scientific  equipment  . . . designed  to 
continue  the   exploration  of  outer  space”  was  launched  by  the   Soviet 
Union,  Tass  announced.  Orbital  data:  apogee,  324  km.  (201  mi.); 
perigee,  204 km.  (126.7 mi.);  period,  89.7 min.;  inclination,  65”. In-  
struments were  functioning normally.  (Tass,  1/22/66) 
0  Dr.  George Veis  of  the   Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory revealed 
tha t  the  earth’s mean  radius,  measured from satellite  observations, was 
3,963.203 mi. Radius determination was  based on  analysis of  more than  
46,500 observations of  13 different satellites.  (Sci. Serv., NYT, 1/22/66) 
Advanced Minuteman ICBM was  launched from a modernized Minuteman I 
silo at Vandenberg AFB as part of  a series of  tests to verify modernization 
procedures  for  upgrading  of  Minuteman  I  silos  and  control  centers. 
(WI, NYT,  1/23/66,57) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

2 3  

January  23:  Environmental  Science Services Administration  (ESSA)  of  the  
US. Department  of  Commerce announced  creation  of  an   interagency 
committee to   coordinate Government research  efforts  in   clear  air  tur-  
bulence  (Cat).  (ESSA  Release 66-3) 
*  NASA Lewis Research Center,  first Government laboratory devoted  to flight 
propulsion in  all its aspects, celebrated i ts  25th anniversary.  Authorized 
by  Congress in   1940, the  NACA facility was  originally  called the  Aircraft 
Engine  Research  Lab.;  i t   was  renamed  the   Lewis  Flight  Propulsion 
Laboratory  in   1948 in   honor  of  Dr.  George  W.  Lewis,  former  NACA 
Director of Aeronautical Research (1924-47). I n  1958, when NACA facili- 
ties and personnel were  absorbed by  the  newly  created NASA,  the  facility 
became  the  Lewis  Research Center.  From  an   initial  Congressional  ap- 
propriation  of  $2 million in   1941, LRC  had  emerged as a major  research 
and development laboratory valued  a t  $200 million. 
Marking  the   anniversary,  LRC  Director  Dr.  Abe  Silverstein  said: 
“Man  isn’t  going  to  be  held  to  a  single  conquest  or  success.  The past 
decade has seen aviation and rocketry undergo phenomenal change, bu t  
we’ve  jus t   started  to  realize  its  potential.  The  present  generation will 
live  tco  fly  better  than 2,000 mph  in  commercial aircraft and  to  observe 
a t   close  range  the   interplanetary  exploits  of  US. astronauts. The  past 
25   years  have  witnessed  truly  remarkable  strides  in   aeronautics  and 
space activities.  In  1941, man  had  th e  capability to  fly  300 mph  and  to 
attain altitudes of perhaps 30,000 f t .  Today, he  orbits the  ear th  a t  17,500 
mph  and  in   a  few  years  will  se t   foot  on  the   moon  and  possibly  later 
(LRC  Release  66-1;  Lewis  News ,   1/23/66,  1-12; WI,  Miami 
Mars.” 
Herald, 1/24/66) 
0  NASA Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding rocket launched from Churchill 
Research Range carried  19-grenade payload to 78-mi. (125-km.) altitude. 
GSFC  experiment obtained temperature, wind,  density, and pressure data 
during  auroral  condition  a t   altitudes  to  56 mi.  (90  km.)  by  recording 
sound arrivaIs of  explosions of  all  19 grenades.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
January  24:  President  Johnson’s  message  to  Congress  on   the   FY  I967  
budget said in part:  “Just over 60 years ago man entered the  age of  con- 
trolled  flight.  Today, men  orbit  the   ear th   a t   speeds measured  in   thou- 
sands of  miles  an hour.  I n   1967, less  than 6 years  after  this Nation se t  
the  goal of  a manned landing on the  moon within the  present decade, we 
will  begin  unmanned  test  flights  of  the  giant  Sa turn  V  rocket  and  the  
Apollo  spacecraft-the 
complete space vehicle  required  for  achieving 
tha t  goal.  Later  on  in   the   1960’s, we  will  undertake  the  manned lunar 
mission itself. 
Our many space achievements-both  manned and unmanned-have 
C C  
dramatically  advanced  our  scientific  understanding  and  technological 
capabilities.  They  have  also  demonstrated  OUT remarkable progress  in  
the  peaceful exploration  of  space.  I n  1967, our large space projects w i l l  
be progressing from the  more expensive development phase in to  opera- 
tional  status,  and  new  projects  of  equivalent  cost will  no t   be  started. 
Accordingly,  expenditures of  the  National Aeronautics and  Space Ad- 
ministration  are  estimated to decline by $300 million in  1967 [as opposed 
to  the  new  authorization  requested in   the  FY   1967.budgetI. This level 
will sustain our progress in  space exploration and continue the  advance- 
ment of  science and  technology.”  (Text, CR,  1 /24 /66 ,861 ;   Pres.  DOC . ,  
1/31/66,  88-9) 
President Johnson sent FY 1967 budget request to Congress including total 

24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

space  budget  of  $6.8  billion.  Of  this  sum,  NASA  would  receive  $5.012 
billion  (NASA  had  originally requested $5.58 billion) ; DOD ,   $1.65  billion; 
AEC,  $173.7  million;  Environmental  Science  Services  Administration, 
$27 million; and National Science Foundation, $2.8 million. 
NASA  R&D  program was  a major  area  of  reduced  expenditure with  re- 
duction of approximately$186 million (comparedwith FY 1966 appropria- 
tion)  mostly  absorbed  by  the   sharp  drop  i n   requirements  for  Project 
Gemini. With  only  three  flights remaining  to  be made  in  FY  1967, the  
total  budget  dropped  from  $226.6 million  in  FY  1966 to  $40.6  million 
requested  for  FY  1967. Sum  included  $19.1 million  for  the  spacecraft 
and $8.5 million for mission support. There was also a reduction  of  some 
$54 million in lunar and planetary exploration and $12 million in physics 
and  astronomy.  Funding  for  Project  Apollo  increased  slightly-from 
$2.967  billion  in  FY  1966 to  $2.974 billion,  including  $1.2  billion  for 
spacecraft (as compared with FY  1966’s $l.l7-billion level). $100 million 
requested  for  Apollo  Applications  (Aa)  program-once 
considered  th e  
single  program  with  any  potential  for  new  major  funding-was 
not 
approved. 
Major  portions  of  the   DOD   space budget would  be  spent  on   develop- 
ment of  the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol)-which  would be slowed 
down  with  no  increase  in  funds  over  the  $150  million  allowed  in  FY 
1966; development and launch  operations  costs of  the Titan  I11  launch 
vehicle; continuation  of  the  reconnaissance  and Vela  nuclear  detection 
satellite programs; navigational satellite  launches; and  initial launch  of 
a  satellite  by  the  Defense  Communications  Satellite  System.  DOD  
budget  also provided for  initiation  of  procurement  of  the  FB-111B air- 
craft  and  development  of  a  new  short-range  air-to-surface  missile 
@ram) - 
AEC  s budget  allotment  for  space programs  included  $78 million  for 
Project  Rover;  $39.5  million  for  testing  of  the  Nerva  engine  system; 
and $8.2  million for testing of  the Snap-8 nuclear reactor. 
ESSAYS Tiros  weather  satellite  program  would  involve  expenditures 
in  FY  1967 of  $17 million  for  spacecraft  and  launchings  and  approxi- 
mately $10 million for  data acquisition,  processing, and  archiving. 
FAA’s  FY  1967 budget request  for $758 million contained $80 million 
for  six  more  months  of  supersonic  transport  research.  (Text;  Wash .  
Pos t ,  1/25/66,  A10; Schmeck, NYT ,  1 /25 /6 6 , 1 ;   A v .  Wk . ,  1 /31 /66 ,23 ,  
2 9 , 3 0 ;  M&R, 1 /31 /66 ,25 )  
January 24: NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  said  a t  
NASA  FY  1967 budget  briefing  that  the  “extremely  stringent  budget” 
($5.012  billion)  approved  by  President  Johnson  and  the  BOB   was  the  
result  of  pressing  needs  of  the  Vietnam  war  and  the  Great  Society. 
Major  loser  in   the  NASA  budget  reduction  was  the  Apollo  Applications 
(Aa)  program:  “The  option  to  go  ahead  or  not  [on  the  Aa  program] 
will  be  made  in   1968  [budget],”  he  said.  Although  NASA  had  wanted 
$5.58 billion to carry ou t  its FY  1967 program, Seamans said, the  $5.012 
billion would make i t  possible to continue  ‘‘a good space program” with 
most of  the  projects  intact. Yet, NASA did  ‘ b o t  have the  funds we  would 
like to  see”  for Apollo.  He said  the approved FY  1967 Apollo budget  of 
$2.974  billion  (compared to  $2.967  billion  in  FY 1966) would  give  the  
US. “a  chance of  lunar landing in this decade,”  but there were no funds 
“for  major  difficulties tha t  might  occur.”  (Transcript) 
e  NASA  had  begun  contract  negotiations  with  TRW  Systems  to   convert  the  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

25 

prototype Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo) in to  a flight observa- 
tory.  Negotiations might  also  include  option  to  fabricate  a n  additional 
flight  observatory.  Contract  was  expected  to  be  fo r   $9 million.  (NASA 
Release 66-16) 
January 24:  Major  decisions  on  the   fu tu re   of  space exploration facing  the  
Administration  received  comment  by  William  J.  Coughlin  i n   Missiles 
and Rockets: “History teaches us . . . tha t  such exploration is more likely 
to  come in  waves,  one overlapping the  other,  than  in  single units, each 
with a distinct  beginning and a distinct end. 
“Man  strives  for  the  most distant objective within reach  of  his  tech- 
nology.  And  as  the   first  explorers  try  and  try  again  on  tha t   far  reach, 
others-at 
first other explorers and scientists,  then  those scouts of  com- 
merce,  miners  and  trappers,  then   businessmen,  settlers  and  shop- 
keepers-follow 
in   their  wake  to  prove  and  develop what  courage has 
proven attainable.”  (Coughlin, M&R,  1/24/66,  46) 
NASA  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station 
carried  instrumented payload  to   estimated  104-mi.  (167-km.) altitude. 
Experiment  conducted  for  Univ.  of  Michigan  measured  ambient  a ir  
density  from  19-75-mi.  (30-120-km.)  altitudes  by  radar  track  of  two 
falling Mylar spheres ejected a t  plus  72  sec.  Flight also measured solar 
heating effects by  comparing diurnal variations  of  measurements.  (NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
0  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller said in  a speech a t  the  51st annual meeting of  th e  National Dairy 
of  our  space programs  is  the  prerogative of  NASA  alone.  . . . The  partici- 
Council in  Washington, D.C.:  “We in  NASA  do no t  feel tha t  the  planning 
pants should include men from all walks of  life-national,  political, and 
intellectual leaders,  the  business and agricultural  communities, and  all 
informed citizens-not 
just  scientists  and  engineers nor  those who  are  
presently  engaged in  the  space program.”  Describing the  launch vehicles 
Sa turn   I  launch vehicle  [formerly Sa turn  IB]  . . . is  capable of  placing 
and  spacecraft  in  the  Apollo  program, Dr.  Mueller said:  “The  uprated 
40,000 pounds in  orbit.  . . . The Sa tu rn  V launch vehicle . . . provides the  
power  to place  in  orbit loads weighing 280,000 pounds.  . . . The  Apollo 
mand Module  . . . houses  the  astronauts during most  of  their  journey. 
spacecraft  itself  consists  of  three  major  systems or modules. The  Com- 
The Propulsion Module  [formerly Service Module]  has  rocket  engines 
and  abundant fuel for mid-course maneuvering, for braking into lunar  
orbit, and for the  thrus t  to re tu rn  to  earth. The Lunar Module  [formerly 
Lunar Excursion Module]  is  for  descent  to  and  re tu rn   from  the   luna r  
surface.  . . . We  have the  ability to  fly  this equipment a t  an  annual ra te  
of  six Sa tu rn  I launch vehicles, six Sa turn  V  launch vehicles and eight 
Apollo spacecraft.”  (Text) 
0  Astronaut  M.  Scott  Carpenter  said  surgeons  would  have  to  remove  a 
callus,  formed  on  his  left  forearm  after  he   broke  it  in   a  July  1964 
motorcycle  accident  in   Bermuda,  before  he   could  be  considered  for 
another  spaceflight.  Ability  to  rotate  the   arm  properly was  hampered. 
(AP, Wash. Eve.  Star, 1/25/66,  A2; AP, Chic. Trib., 1/25/66) 
*  Prof.  Philip  Handler  of  Duke Univ.,  member  of  the   President’s  Science 
Advisory Committee,  said a t  the  Asia-Pacific Seminar tha t  the  U S .  was 
th e  only nation in  the  scientific revolution and tha t  the  U.S.S.R.,  U.K., 
and West  Germany  had  no t   yet  entered  it.  He  described the   scientific 
revolution  as  dependent upon man’s  brains  and  no t   upon  water,  coal, 

26  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

or iron, as was  the industrial revolution. The computer, h e  said, was the  
chief  symbol of  the  scientific revolution.  (AP, NYT ,  1/27/66,  3) 
January 24-26: At AIAA Third Aerospace Sciences Meeting in New York City, 
Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff was  elected  1966 AIAA  president.  Dr.  C .  
Stark Draper, chairman of  MIT’S  Dept.  of  Aeronautics and Astronautics, 
gave 29th annual Wright Brothers Lecture  on the role of  “informetics” 
i n  modern flight systems. 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications 
Dr. Homer E. Newel1 chaired a special “Space Sciences Report”  plenary 
session  which  considered  priorities  in  planetary  exploration  and  the  
interaction  of  solar  wind  with  the  planets.  Donald  L.  Hunter  of  Kitt 
Peak  National  Observatory  said  Venus  exploration  was  likely  to  be  as 
interesting  as  exploration  of  Mars; high  Venusian  surface  temperature 
did  not  rule  ou t   possibility  of  rudimentary  life  forms,  and  Venus’  en- 
vironment  might  be  less  hostile  than  tha t   of  Mars.  Manned  round 
trips to Mars could be shortened to 450-560 days by a Venus ccswingby,’y 
according  to  Rollin  W.  Gillespie  and  Stanley  Ross  of  NASA  Office  of 
Manned Space Flight; direct flights would  take 800 to 900 days. 
Dr. Robert C .  Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, was principal 
speaker  a t   the  Honors  Convocation.  He  said:  “Yesterday,  President 
. . . This  year,  the   process  of  sorting  ou t   priorities  and  allocating  re- 
Johnson presented his budget for the coming fiscal year to the Congress. 
sources has been  especially difficult. Abroad,  there  is  the  growing com- 
mitment  to  Vietnamese freedom.  A t   home,  there  is  the  growing com- 
mitment  to  freedom  from  poverty,  ignorance,  ugliness,  and  unemploy- 
ment.  I n   addition  to  these  and  other  commitments,  the  President’s 
budget once again reiterates the commitment made in 1958 and repeated 
year after  year:  to undertake  the  exploration  of  space fo r  the benefit  of 
mankind. Even in a year of extraordinary budget pressures, slightly more 
than $5 billion for NASA’s part in this enterprise have been requested.  . . . 
“ I t   is  within  this  framework  that  the  NASA  program  has  been  ham- 
mered  out-not 
representing  the  sum  of  our  program  demands. How- 
ever, as we  indicated in our budget briefing for  the Press  this past week- 
end,  we  believe we  have  a  balanced program  of  aeronautics  and  space 
research,  of  science and  technology, of  large scale manned  exploration 
and unmanned  probes and satellites. 
“We  recognize  there  is  an   enormous  responsibility  attached  to  the 
planning, justification, and direction of  a sum so large during a period so  
rich  in other needs.  . . . 
We  have reached a point where the exploration of  space is no longer 
re 
a  promise  bu t   a  hard  fact,  where  scientific data  and  tested  capabilities 
are in  hand instead of  in  the future. 
“. . . The program tha t  we  have laid ou t  for NASA  for  the coming year 
will meet  the  highest  priorities  of  scientific and  technological needs.  I t  
will  permit  flexible  evaluation  of  the  next  major  steps  open  to  us  in 
space.  It will maintain  the   forward momentum  tha t  has  been  built  up 
with  energy  and  care  over  the   past  years.  I t   will  permit  strong  com- 
petition  for  those who wish  to  outstrip us  and meaningful  cooperation 
for  those who  can  find  communities  of  interest with  us.  I t  will provide 
an  honest and practical balance between  the  many elements of  scientific 
investigation,  technological  application  and  operational  experience.  It 
provides  a  challenge  tha t  will  require  hard  work,  hard  judgment,  and 
careful appraisal a t  every step of translation from plan into execution.  It 

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

27  

does  no t   close  to  fu tu re  exploitation  the  many  options  that  have been 
built for the  nation in  the  past. Most importantly,  i t  recognizes tha t  t rue  
national  security  is  best  measured  by  the   useful  knowledge  in   men’s 
minds and that  the  great arena o f  space remains a battleground between 
the  intellect of  man  and  the  unknown.” 
Tribute to late Dr. Hugh L.  Dryden was made a t  the  Honors Convoca- 
tion by L/G  James Doolittle  (USAFR)  : “On the  second of December 1965 
the  world became poorer; our country lost  one of  i ts  foresighted leaders; 
aeronautics  lost a man  who  had  devoted a major part  of  his  life  to   i ts  
advancement; astronautics iost its great ambassador a t  home and a t  large 
and  those fortunate  of  us-who 
had been privileged  to  know  and work 
with him-lost 
a beloved, revered and respected friend and associate. 
“Dr.  Hugh  Latimer Dryden dedicated his  whole life  to  the  service  of 
his  fellow man.  He was  a  doer,  bu t   a gentle person-a  man who  strove 
prodigiously,  bu t   instinctively  did  the   kindly  thing.  He  was  eager  and 
hard and effectively up  to a few days before his death. . . . 
courageous. He  had  been  critically  ill fo r   several  years, bu t   he worked 
“Hugh  Latimer  Dryden:  engineer,  scientist,  administrator,  public 
servant, patriot,  theologian,  realist.  With  his  immediate family  and  all 
the   nation  we,  his  close friends and  associates, mourn  his  passing. We  
will  long remember him  with  affection,  admiration,  respect,  and  grati- 
tude,  for  excellence endures.” 
Goddard  Award,  AIAA’S  highest,  was  presented jointly  to  Hans  J.  P. 
von  Ohain, Chief Scientist, Aerospace Research Lab.,  Wright-Patterson 
AFB,  for   “his  contributions to  the  achievement in   1939 of  the  first suc- 
cessful  application  of  turbojet  propulsion  to  aircraft”;  and  to   A.  W. 
Blackman,  Chief  of  Propulsion,  United Aircraft  Corp.,  and  George  D. 
Lewis, Project Engineer, UAC  P ra t t  & Whitney Aircraft Div.,  for  “their 
contributions to  the   understanding  of  the   phenomenon  of  combustion 
instability  and  for  their  recognition of  acoustical  liners as  a method  of 
suppressing such  instabilities  in   turbojet  afterburners  and  rocket  en- 
gines.”  Sylvanus Albert Reed  Award went  to  Clarence L.  Johnson, vice 
president  of  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  and  designer of  the   U-2  recon- 
naissance aircraft and  the   YF-12A  interceptor,  for  his  “production  of 
two  triple-sonic  military  aircraft,  for  continuing  personal  design  in -  
novation,  imaginative engineering,  and  practical  manufacturing  tech- 
niques tha t  over the  years have aided immeasurably in  maintaining U.S. 
ascendeney in   defensive aerial  weaponry.”  1966 Research Award  was 
given to  Prof.  Shao-Chi Lin, Univ.  of  California (San Diego), for “basic 
research in   the  electric  and electromagnetic properties  of  ionized gases, 
and  for  significant contributions to  reentry physics.”  (Texts; AIAA  Re- 
lease; AIAA  Bulletin, 12/65, 693, 709, 710) 
January 25:  U.S.S.R.  launched COSMOS  CVI with  instrumentation to continue 
studies  of  outer  space.  Initial orbital  data:  apogee,  564 km.  (350 mi.); 
perigee,  290 km.  (180 mi.);  period,  92.8  min.;  inclination,  48.4’.  On- 
board  equipment was  functioning normally.  (”ass,  1/25/66) 
NASA  MSC  announced tha t  Astronaut John Young would be  command pilot 
of  Gemini  10 ;  pilot  would  be  Astronaut  Michael Collins.  No  date had 
been  se t  for  the  Gemini  X mission.  (UPI,  Wash. Daily  News, 1/25/66) 
*  FS-3 nuclear reactor  electric power system designed for  use in  space com- 
pleted  a  fu l l   year  of  generating  electricity  continuously  and  without 
external  control.  Test far  exceeded known continuous power  operation 
of  a nuclear  reactor  power  plant of  any  type.  FS-3 was  a prototype nu -  

28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

clear  reactor  space  power  system derived  from  the   500-watt Snap-1OA 
un i t   tha t  became  the  world’s  first nuclear  reactor  system  to  operate  in  
space in  April 1965.  (AEC Release J-19) 
January 25: Dr.  Philip Morrison,  MIT  physics professor,  called for $ 1  million 
from NSF  for  five  telescopes identical to  the   one on Mt.  Palomar,  pres- 
ently the  world‘s  largest. He said that “properly  situated in  various parts 
. . . and  perhaps  unlock  the   secret  of  the   origin of  the   universe.”  Dr. 
of  the  world, these instruments could peer almost to the  edge of creation 
Morrison  spoke  i n   a  panel  discussion  on   cosmology  a t   MIT.  (Hines, 
Wash.  Eve.  Star,  1/26/66,  A20) 
0  A 2,000-mph SR-71 (YF-12A) jet reconnaissance aircraft crashed  in  north- 
eastern  New  Mexico  after  an   explosion  during  a  routine  flight  from 
Edwards AFB.  Lockheed  test  pilot  James  T.  Zwayer  was  killed. Aircraft 
had  been  built  for   USAF  by  Lockheed  as  successor  to  the   U-2  and  had 
been  undergoing  tests since December  1964.  (UPI,  Wash. Post,  1/26/66, 
12; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/26/66,  A5) 
0  Wa l l  Street  Journal editorial on  the   FY  1967 budget:  “For  the   first  time 
since . . . [NASA]  was formed,  space spending will decline. The  $300 mil- 
lion  drop,  to  $5.3  billion  [in  expenditures],  is  attributed  to  lower  de- 
velopment  costs for  some major  programs  and  a decision  not  to  initiate 
big  new  efforts.”  (W S J ,  1/25/66,  6) 
International conference on  outer space to mark  10 th  anniversary of  first 
artificial satellite  (1967)  was  proposed  by  U.S.S.R.  Academician A.  A. 
Blagonravov to working group of  U.N.  Committee on the  Peaceful Uses 
of  Outer  Space.  European  site  was  suggested  for  conference,  which 
“would  provide information for peoples in  all countries and training for 
the   developing  countries.”  (Rossi,  CSM,  1/26/66) 
0  Dr.  Donald F.  Hornig,  Director  of  Office&f Science and Technology,  said 
i n  a n  interview  with  Robert  Cahn  of  Christian Science Monitor:  “There 
are   two  kinds  of  breakthroughs. There  are  those  which  come  through 
completely  new  insight  and  understanding,  which  is  what  we  usually 
mean  by  a  scientific  breakthrough.  You  might  consider  as  scientific 
breakthroughs the  discovery  of  a  new  kind  of  nuclear  force or  the  dis- 
covery of  a new fundamental particle. Then there are  the more common 
breakthroughs in   technology-the  harnessing of  principles  in  new  and 
unusual ways  to achieve  the  ends you want.  Sending a man  to  the moon 
and back  is one of  these.”  (Cahn, CSM, 1/25/66) 
January 25-27: House Committee on  Science and Astronautics and  its panel 
of  advisers  on   science  and  technology  held  7 th   annual  meeting  on 
“Government,  Science,  and  Public  Policy.”  In   keynote  address,  Vice 
President  Hubert  Humphrey  urged  closing  of  “gap  between  public 
policy and advancing  science and  technology  . . . when NASA  comes to a 
great university with  a grant,  i t  is like planting a field of  gold. There is a 
harvest  soon  to  be  reaped,  a  whole  new  partnership  that  creates  new 
wealth,  the  wealth  of  brain power,  of  scientific knowledge,  and  the  end 
product.” 
Guest  panelist  Lord  C.  P.  Snow,  joint  parliamentary  secretary  of 
U.K.’s  Ministry  of Technology,  told Committee  that U.K.  had  no inten- 
tion  of  becoming totally  dependent on  U.S.  technology:  “By  and large, 
ou r  technological position  is uncomfortable,  and we  have got  to change 
i t .  . . before we  get our economy sturdy again. . . . It will  take ten years 
to do all tha t  has  to be done. But i t  will be done.”  Lord Snow also made 
these points:  (1) if U.K. could no t  maintain a high competence in certain 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

29 

areas  of  advanced technology,  she  would  lose her  talented  young men, 
“slide  into  somnolence  and  be  no  good”  to   herself,  America,  o r   the  
world;  (2)  the  computer  or  cybernetic  revolution  would be  the  biggest 
revolution mankind had known;  (3) mathematics would “take  on a new 
relevance  in all advanced societies.” Noting danger tha t  allocational de- 
cisions for  research  in pure and appIied science may involve “too much 
concentration  of  power,”  Lord  Snow  added:  “The  scientific results- 
. . of  observational and  radioastronomy 
not the technological results-. 
have been greater by  an  order of magnitude than  the scientific results of 
space exploration.” 
In  discussion period, Dr. Lee A.  DuBridge, Cal Tech president,  com- 
mented:  “.  . . though  I  think  I  would agree with  you generally,  I hope 
you do not minimize the scientific results tha t  have come f rom .  . . recent 
space  exploration  flights-the  understanding  of  the   earth’s  magneto- 
sphere,  the   nature  of  the  solar  wind,  our  closeup views  of  Venus,  the  
Moon,  and  Mars  have  added  a  very  substantial  amount  to  our  under- 
standing  . . . of  these  objects and  of  interplanetary  space  . . .” When 
Lord  Snow  replied  that  %pace  things  are  interesting,  bu t   not  at  the  
moment  to  the   same  degree”  as  radioastronomy,  Dr.  DuBridge  said: 
‘%ive us  another 20 years.” 
Dr. Charles C. Price, Univ. of Pennsylvania  chemist, pleaded for sup- 
port  of more basic research  in  the  areas of  living systems and suggested 
tha t  (‘the more applied agencies such as NASA,  MH  and AEC  put increased 
emphasis  on  the  support  of  fundamental  research  and  education  in  
chemistry . . .” (Proceedings, House Comm. on Science and Astronautics, 
1125-27/66) 
January  25-27: John  S .   Foster,  Jr.,  DOD  Director  of  Defense Research  and 
Engineering,  and  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  NASA  Deputy  Adminis- 
trator,  told Military Operations Subcommittee of  the House Committee 
on  Government Operations, which had questioned DOD/NASA  cooperative 
agreements, that cooperation was necessary to effect coordination and to 
plan  fo r  best  possible use  of  national  ranges.  Cooperation had  been  es- 
tablished  through  May  1965  DOD/NASA  Agreement  on  Tracking,  Data 
Acquisition,  and  Communications Facilities which  stated  that  the   two 
agencies  were  to  “achieve  a  maximum  of  mutual  assistance,  to   avoid 
unwarranted  duplication,  and  to  realize  economies wherever  practical 
and  consistent  with  mission  requirements,  by  means  of  coordination 
and planning and efficient division of  responsibilities.” (House, Hearings, 
Missile and  Space  Ground  Support Operations) 
January 26:  Seven geophysical experiments were  selected by  NASA  to  be  in- 
cluded  in  three  150-lb. Apollo  Lunar  Surface  Experiments  Packages 
(Alsep)  and  one  backup  on  initial Apollo landing missions:  (1) passive 
lunar seismic experiment;  (2)  lunar  triaxis magnetometer;  (3) medium- 
energy  solar  wind  experiment;  (4) suprathermal  ion  detector;  ( 5 )  
lunar heat-flow measurements  to  provide information  on distribution  of 
radioactive  elements  and  thermal  history  of  the  moon;  ( 6 )  low-energy 
solar  wind  experiment;  (7)  active  lunar  seismic  experiment  to   study 
tremors  resulting  from  firing  of  mortar  projectiles,  designed  to  gather 
data on depths  to 500 ft.  (NASA  Release 66-17) 
0  Dr.  Alexander 6. Smith,  Univ.  of  Florida  physicist  and  astronomer,  dis- 
cussed  applications  of  orbiting  platforms  and  space  probes  in   radio- 
astronomy  a t  MSFC  Space Science Seminar. Of  current  theories  explain- 
ing powerful outbursts of radio noise from  Jupiter,  the  “most  plausible” 

30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
thermal work seems to  indicate tha t  Jupiter is probably a hot planet,  . . . 
was  tha t  radiation was  due to  a cyclotron  process,  Smith  said.  “Recent 
emitting more  heat  than  it  is  receiving from  the  sun-2 
to  4  times  as 
much.”  Smith,  asked  if  his  emphasis o n   orbital  experiments  meant  it 
was  unnecessary  to  go  to  the  moon,  replied:  “If  I  had  to  choose  my 
favorite site for low frequency radio astronomy,  i t  would be the  back side 
of  the  Moon, where one could put up large arrays and be screened by the  
bulk of  the  Moon from  terrestrial interference.”  (Transcript) 
January  26:  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  Dr. 
George  E.  Mueller  spoke  of  reliability  and  quality  assurance  in   the 
manned  space flight program a t  the  Annual Symposium on Reliability in 
. . had  to  organize our  mission  reliability 
San  Francisco:  “We  have 
around  the  concept  of  a  very  exhaustive  ground  test  program,  with  a 
detailed,  recorded  tracking  of  the  history  and experience of  every part, 
from the  original developer-fabricator’s plant,  through  the  entire chain 
of  subcontractor and contractor activities, to the  final, completed article 
on  the  launch pad.  By  this  thorough  and  repeated  testing  under  every 
environmental  condition  tha t   it  is  possible  to  simulate,  and  by  under- 
standing  and  correcting  each  test  failure  or  performance  discrepancy, 
we  believe we  can achieve the  required  high  reliability whereby we  will 
be justified in conducting major missions on  the second, third  or fou r th  
vehicle, rather  than  on the  thirtieth or  the hundredth as in Gemini and 
Mercury.”  (Text) 
USN  had  issued  to  General  Dynamics  Corp.  a  $20-million supplemental 
agreement  to  an   existing  contract  to  install  satellite  communications 
systems aboard  each  of  three  former Navy  tankers  that  would  serve  as 
ocean-going tracking stations for NASA’s Project Apollo.  (Gen. Dynamics 
Release 1267) 
Astronaut  Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  GEMINI  VI  command  pilot,  received  a 
tiny gold harmonica from the Italian National Union of Mouth Organists 
and Harmonica Musicians for  being  “the  first mouth  organist  in  outer 
space.”  (AP, Phil.  Eve. Bull.,  1/26/66) 
0  Commentary in New  York Times on difficulty of  allocating limited funds for 
scientific  research:  “The  eminent  Soviet  physicist  P.  L.  Kapitsa  has 
published an  article  [see Jan.  201  acknowledging that American science 
is  still  contributing  far  more  to  mankind’s  knowledge  than  its  Soviet 
counterpart.  He  attributes  the  United  States  lead  largely  to  the   wiser 
American technique for Government subsidy of  research.  . . . Ironically, 
several months ago President Johnson.  . . directed that Federal funds be 
more equally distributed  among the nation’s  universities and geographic 
areas  and tha t  a larger proportion  of  this money be allocated to univer- 
sities for distribution as their administrators see fit, rather  than directly 
to  research  scientists. 
“If  the  Kapitsa analysis is correct,  the  President’s order was a mistake 
and  may  lead  to  reduced  productivity  in  American  science.”  (NYT ,  
1/26/66,32) 
Detailed report  on  “Scientific and  Engineering Manpower  in  Communist 
China,  1949-1963,” by Dr.  Chu-yuan Cheng, of  the Univ.  of  Michigan, 
was  made  public by  NSF.  Communist China  had  been  strengthening  its 
scientific and engineering fields by putting thousands of students through 
colleges  and  universities.  Yet,  these  masses  of  young  scientists  were 
getting  less  comprehensive training  than  older generations  of  scientists 
and also lacked sufficient experience to  engage in  top  level research.  I n  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

31 

1963, many of  China’s  leading scientists  were  60 or  70 yrs.  old and en- 
gaged  in  basic  and creative research.  The  success or  failure  in  bridging 
the  gap  between  the  mass  of  young scientists  and  the   older  scientists 
would  determine  whether  Communist China  would  become  a  scienti- 
fically advanced power  in  the  next decade or two, Dr. Cheng said.  (Text) 
January 26:  U.K.  had  made  a  successful  underground  test  of  a major  com- 
ponent  of  i ts   own  nuclear  warhead  for  American-supplied Polaris 
missiles,  i t  was  disclosed. Prime Minister Harold Wilson told  th e  House 
of  Commons  the   test would  lead  to  a  considerable savings in  costs. An 
earlier  test  had  been unsuccessful.  (NYT ,  1/26/66,  39) 
January 26-29: American Physical Society met in  New York.  Dr.  Charles H. 
tha t   the  manne B lunar   landing planned for  the   end  of  this  decade was 
Townes,  Nobel  rize-winner and  MIT  provost,  said  in   a  dinner  speech 
both  economically  and  scientifically  feasible.  “Furthermore,”  he  
continued,  “ the   task  probably  will  be  accomplished  within  time  and 
money  limitations se t  four years ago. These envisage a moon landing by 
late  1969 a t  a  total  cost  of  about  $20 billion.”  Townes  announced  the  
appointment  of  “an  important  ad  hoc  Science Advisory  Committee” 
aimed a t  obtaining “ the  most  fruitful relationship between NASA and th e  
scientific community.” Headed by Prof. Norman Ramsey, the  new group 
would  “consider many  . . . problems,  concentrating particularly  on how 
to  carry ou t  the  most efficient and rich scientific program and what ways 
will  allow  the   scientific community,  including universities,  professors, 
and students to participate most easily and effectively in  the  interesting 
possibilities which are   now  emerging.” 
In  a panel  on  the  origin and possible  death  of  the  universe,  P.  J. E. 
Peebles and David Wilkinson of  Princeton Univ. and Robert W. Wilson 
of  Bell  Telephone Labs.  told  about  evidence indicating  tha t   space was 
permeated by black body  radiation.  If  this were so, i t  would  support the  
“big bang”  theory of  the  origin of  the  universe which held tha t  a t  first, 
all was a mass of dense energy; then  came expansion powered by much of 
the energy. The  original energy would have the  properties  of  the  energy 
emitted by  a  black  body-light, 
heat,  and radio waves  proportionate to  
i ts   temperature.  Because  no  other  explanation existed  for  the   energy 
the   Princeton  and  Bell  scientists  had  detected  uniformly  distributed 
over  space,  and  because  black  body  characteristics  were  so  clearcut, 
they  believed  confirmation could be  achieved  within  a  year. 
Yuval Ne’eman  of Tel Aviv Univ. proposed a new theory to explain the  
quasar  (quasi-stellar  radio  source) : the   force  represented  by  the   tend- 
ency of  the  universe to  expand had been suppressed in  some parts of the  
universe;  thus, these areas were highly dense. But because this tendency 
is  no t   suppressed under  all  conditions,  it  sometimes bursts  for th   and 
matter  tears  free  of  th e   intense  gravitational  attractions.  When  this 
happens,  enormous  amounts  of  matter  and  energy  are   emitted  and 
observers on  ear th  detect  the  event as a  quasar. 
Scientists  in   a  panel  discussion  on  scientific data  said  the   task  of 
coping  with  the   scientific  information  explosion  should  no t   become 
exclusively  a  Government  responsibility.  Discussion  was  based  on  
December  1965  report  of  Federal Council for  Science and Technology 
recommending  tha t   the   Government-with 
participation  of  private 
groups-establish 
a  national  document  handling  system  to  help  keep 
scientists  abreast  of  new  knowledge. 
I n  a  discussion  of  planetary  exploration,  Cal  Tech  Prof.  Robert  B. 

32 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Leighton,  scientist  in  charge  of  the  televising  by  MARINER  IV  of  Mars 
(July  14,  1965), said  there  was  still  hope  the  TV  pictures  would  yield 
information about Mars’ canals: “When we know more nearly where th e  
it  is  no t  known  very  clearly now  . . . we 
camera was  pointed-because 
, may be able to say tha t  th i s  picture was  taken a t  a place very near where 
a  canal  goes  across.”  Leighton  said  h e   had  agreed  to  collaborate with 
Prof.  Gordon  J .   F .  MacDonald  of  UCLA  on  a  television  experiment  f o r  
the   Mariner  spacecraft  scheduled  to  fly  by  Venus  in  1967.  (Texts; 
Wash.  Eve. Star,  1/27/66,  A3;  Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  1/28/66,  A4; 
Weil,  Wash.  Post,  1/27/66,  A2,  1/29/66,  A6,  1/30/66,  A7) 
January  27:  NASA’s PIONEER  VI  interplanetary  space probe  had  reported  its 
first  major  solar  events  and  the  highest  solar  wind  velocity  i t   had 
measured  since  launch  Dec.  16,  1965: a  stream  of  solar  particles  was 
rushing  past  the  spacecraft  and  the  earth a t  about  1,440,000 mph. This 
compared with  the  highest  solar  wind  speed  ever  measured  by  a  NASA 
spacecraft-EXPLORER  XVIII-of 
about  1,675,000  mph.  (NASA  Release 
66-2 1) 
0  Arnold  Frutkin,  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  International  Affairs 
and  U S .   representative  to  the  Working  Group of  the  U.N.  Committee 
on  the  Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer  Space, supported  U.S.S.R.  proposal  for 
an   international  conference  in  1967  to  commemorate the  first  decade 
of  space  exploration,  further  international  cooperation  in   space,  and 
promote  the  practical  benefits  of  man’s  exploration  of  space. He  sug- 
gested four  topics  for  the  conference:  (1) appraisal  of  contributions  of 
scientific  research  in  space  to  practical  applications  and  international 
cooperation;  (2)  opportunities  for  participation  in  space  exploration 
through  space  research  and  cooperative projects;  (3) applications  and 
economic  implications  of  space  research;  and  (4)  impact  of  space 
exploration  on  education.  (SBD ,  1/27/66,  170) 
0  Sen.  J.  W.  Fulbright  (D-Ark.)  spoke satirically  on  the  floor  of  the  Senate 
on  priorities  of  space,  as  opposed  to  social  problems,  in  allocation  of 
natural resources. He labeled as “small minded, selfish, and sentimental” 
the  Americans who  “tell  us  there  is  no  real  hu r ry   about  going  to  the  
moon when  tens  of millions of Americans . . . spend their  lives in dirty, 
dangerous,  and  unhealthy  cities, when  hundreds  of  millions  more  a re  
condemned to degraded lives of  poverty  and  early deaths of  preventable 
diseases.”  He  cited  a  recent  article  in  Britain’s  Punch  that  reproached 
those Englishmen who would complain about giving up an  iron lung and 
artificial  limbs  to   provide  the   aluminum  for  space  vehicles  “as  if  a 
nation’s prestige lay in  its free artificial legs, and not  up  there”-in 
the  
sky.  (CR ,  1/27/66,  1209) 
0  North  American Air  Defense Command  (NORAD)-nelVe 
center  of  North 
formal possession  of  new  head- 
American  air  and  space defense-took 
quarters  built  1,200-1,400  ft.  into  the   solid  granite  of  Cheyenne 
Mountain,  Colo.,  to  insure  survival  of  a  retaliatory  capability  in   th e  
event  of  nuclear  attack.  Eleven  interlinked,  steel-framed,  steel- 
sheathed,  three-story  buildings  constituting  the   command  post  were 
mounted  on  coil  springs  tha t   would  protect  equipment  frDm  ground 
shock  of  nearby  thermonuclear  blast.  (Eng. Opp.,  2/66,  20-28) 
January 28:  Senate Committee on Aeronautical  and  Space Sciences unani- 
mously  approved  nomination  of  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  as  NASA 
Deputy Administrator.  (Transcript) 
0  Glenn  Reiff,  Manager  of  Mariner/Pioneer  program  in   NASA  Hq.  OSSA, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

33 

summarized  in   an   article  in   Science  th e   “steps  taken  to   combine th e  
scientific instruments with  the  other vital  elements of  the   [MARINER  IV] 
spacecraft  to   create  a spaceworthy craft  capable of  a  reliable  10-month 
mission.”  He  said over  “1600 type-approval and flight acceptance tests 
were performed on  the  assemblies, and some 113 failures were reported. 
As  a  result,  more  than   75  design changes were  incorporated.”  (Reiff, 
Science,  1/28/66,  413-18) 
January  28:  Sa tu rn   V  crawler  completed  first  successful  load-carrying 
run  a t  KSC  since  track  support roller  bearings had been  crushed during 
7.9-million-lb.-load  test  July  25,  1965.  Crawler  lifted  447-ft.,  10.6- 
million-lb.  launcher  umbilical  tower  No.  1 (Lut)  and  moved  it  N mi. 
in  about nine hrs. KSC   Procurement Director Michael Haworth revealed 
costs  for  two  crawlers  ordered would  total  $14.2  million,  $5.1 million 
more  than  original  $9.l-million  cost-plus-incentive-fee  contract  with 
Marion  Power  Shovel Co.  (M&R, 2/7/66,  34) 
NASA  Administrator James  E.  Webb  said  i n  a  letter  to   MSFC  Director  Dr. 
Wernher  von  Braun  tha t   after  “careful  review”  he  had  approved  an  
agreement  between  MSFC  and  Lodge  1858,  American  Federation  of 
Government  Employees  (AFL-CIO) . Mr.  Webb  noted  tha t   agreement, 
negotiated after  MSFC  employee vote May  19, 1965, for AFGE representa- 
tion, was  “a  forward step  in   the  NASA  Employee-Management Coopera- 
tion  Program.”  (Marshall Star, 2/2/66,  1-2) 
USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  WTR  with  Scout booster.  (U.S. 
Aeron.  & Space Act.,  1966, 147) 
Commenting on  the  Federal budget  for  FY   1967, Science  said  it  was  the  
first budget since the  middle  1950’s which had no t  carried  a request for 
an  increase  in   total funds  for  research  and  development: ‘“rhis  down- 
tu rn   in   what  for  about  a  decade has  been  a  steadily  ascending curve 
reflects  the   major  rationale  of  the   new  budget:  to  provide  funds  to  
support  a  military  buildup  in   Southeast Asia  without  underfinancing 
of  Congress.  . . .” (Science, 1/28/66,  425) 
new education and welfare programs enacted during the  past two sessions 
*  Possibilities  of  studying  the   ocean,  i ts   storms,  currents,  shoals,  and 
marine  life  from  orbiting  spacecraft  were  being  actively  explored  by 
the   Naval  Oceanographic Office  in   cooperation with  the   NASA  Natural 
Resources Program Office, reported Harold M. Schmeck, Jr., in  the  New 
York  Times.  Early  studies  had  included  observations  tha t   might  have 
direct  practical  usefulness  and  others  tha t   could  give  man  a  more 
comprehensive picture  of  the   forces  determining climate:  photographs 
taken  from manned  spacecraft  a t  altitudes  over  100 mi.  could be  used 
to correct maps and give accurate indications of  water depths over shoals 
and  near  shore;  a global iceberg patrol  might be  possible  from manned 
or unmanned spacecraft; monitoring of sea roughness by radar would be 
useful  for  shipping;  measurements  to  detect  major  upwellings  of  deep 
ocean  curren ts  might be valuable to  the  ocean fishery industry; studies 
of  river outflow could be valuable i n  water pollution  control.  (Schmeck, 
NYT, 1 /29 /66 ,7 )  
Close  tie  between  President  Johnson and Dr.  Donald F.  Hornig, Director 
of  the  Office of  Science and Technology (OST)  and science adviser  to the  
President,  was  discussed in Science. During the  first six or so  months of 
Hornig’s  term  “ the  President  and th e  Wh i te  House inner  circle had a n  
unclear  notion  of  how  they  might  employ  OST” with  the   result  tha t  
“some  of  th e   science  staff members complained  tha t   they  were  bored, 

34 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

and  tha t   OST was  underemployed  or  involved  with  trivia.”  But  a 
transition had taken place, and as Hornig began his third year of service, 
“OST  and  i ts   surrounding  bodies-the 
President’s  Science  Advisory 
Committee and  the   Federal Council for  Science and  Technology-are 
heavily  involved  in   policy  formulation,  coordination  of  the   technical 
aspects  of  the  Great Society programs,  and  troubleshooting in  a variety 
of  areas.”  (Science, 1/28/66,  431) 
January  28:  A  “commercial missile”  tha t   could  transport  170  passengers 
from Bombay  to New York  in  39 min. was  described a t  the  Pacific Area 
Travel Association Conference in  New Delhi by B.  F.  Coggan,  corporate 
vice president  of  Douglas Aircraft Co.  He said the  rocket-which  would 
reach  a  speed  of  17,000 mph-would 
be  a  bell-shaped  vehicle  114 ft. 
high with a diameter of  from 33 to 49 ft. It would weigh more than  three  
million  pounds  a t   liftoff.  Passenger  compartment  would  have  45 
individual passenger couches arranged on each of  four decks; during the  
period of  weightless  flight,  passengers  would  be held  to  the  couches by 
belts.  On  a  typical  flight  plan,  Coggan  said,  the   rocket  would  reach 
125-mi. peak  altitude.  Then ,  i t   could  hover  and maneuver  horizontally 
before landing on four  extendable legs.  ( N Y T ,  1/29/66,  54) 
0  FAA and the  Agency for International Development (AID)  had  signed a new 
agreement under  which  FAA  would  continue to  provide  aviation  assist- 
ance to  foreign countries through AID.  Civil Aviation Assistance Groups 
(CAAG)  manned by 84 FAA aviation specialists would work in  17 countries 
under AID  sponsorship. They would  advise and assist  these  countries in  
planning and  organizing management and development of  all  phases of 
their  national  civil  aviation.  (FAA  Release  66-9) 
January  29:  Senate  confirmed  appointment  of  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr., 
as  NASA  Deputy Administrator.  (CR,  1/29/66,  1469) 
0  Fourth  flight  Sa turn   IB  booster  (S-IB-4)  left  NASA  MSFC  for  Michoud 
Assembly Facility aboard the  NASA barge Palaemon for post-captive-firing 
checkout.  (MSFC  Release  66-27) 
0  Many  first-rate  scientists  in   the   U S .   did  no t   receive  enough  financial 
support to   allow  them  to  develop  their  fullest effectiveness in   research 
work,  NSF  Director  Dr.  Leland  J.  Haworth said  in   NSF’S  annual  report. 
“This lack of  support is a detriment to  the  national  scientific capacity,” 
he  added. 
Discussing  progress  in   the   biological  and  medical  sciences,  the  
report  said  tha t   science was  in   the  midst  of  a  four th  biological  revolu- 
tion.  It  termed  this  revolution  comparable in   importance and  ultimate 
impact  on  mankind  to  the   three  earlier  revolutions  in   mankind’s 
knowledge tha t  led  to  development of  agriculture,  to  understanding  of 
infectious  disease  and  i ts   control,  and  to  the   understanding  of  bio- 
logical  evolution.  Report  referrred  to  curren t   biological  research 
clarifying  mechanisms  of  heredity  and  development  of  all  earth’s 
creatures.  (Text) 
January  30:  Minneapolis  Tribune  polled  600 Minnesotans  on  whether  U S .  
or  U.S.S.R.  led  in   space  exploration.  79% believed  US. was  ahead; 
11% gave  lead  to  U.S.S.R.  June   1965  poll  had  indicated  tha t   59% 
though t   US. led,  while  24% considered U.S.S.R.  in   front.  Increased 
confidence  in   U.S.  position  was  attributed  to  success of  GEMINI  VII-VI 
rendezvous Dec.  15,  1965.  68% thought  men  could  reach  the   moon 
and  re tu rn   safely,  56% believed  U S .   would  be  first  to  do  it,  and  25% 
considered trip  impossible.  (Minn. Trib.,  1/30/661 

35 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
January  31:  LUNA  IX was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  on   a  trajectory  toward  th e  
moon,  Tass announced. A l l  systems were functioning normally. Launch 
was  apparent  attempt  to  softland  on   the   lurain.  (Pravda ,   2/3/66, 
USS-T Trans.) 
Eighth  anniversary  of  first  US. satellite,  EXPLORER  I.  Despite  predic- 
tions  of  a  lifespan  tha t   would  no t   exceed  five years,  satellite continued 
to  orbit  th e   ear th   every  103.9  min.  Other  orbital  parameters,  as  of 
Jan.  15,  were:  apogee,  956.9  mi.  (15,406  km.); perigee,  211.9  mi. 
(341 km.). (MSFC  Release  66-26) 
President  Johnson  transmitted  his  annual  Report  to  the  Congress  on 
United States  Aeronautics  and  Space  Activities,  calling  1965  “ the   most 
successful  year  in   our  history.”  He  said  in   the   transmittal  letter: 
“As  our   space program  continues,  the   impact of  i t s   developments on 
everyday life becomes daily more evident.  It continues to  stimulate  our 
education,  improve our material well being,  and broaden the  horizons of 
knowledge.  I t   is  also  a  powerful  force  for  peace.”  He  cited  US. ac- 
complishments in   the   Gemini,  Ranger,  Mariner,  and  Early  Bird  pro- 
grams.  “Research and  development in   our  space program continued  to  
speed progress in  medicine,  in  weather prediction,  in  electronics-and, 
indeed,  in  virtually  every aspect  of  American science and  technology.” 
Among  chief  aeronautical  developments  report  cited  “design  refine- 
ment  and  wind-tunnel  testing”  of  Ss t   and  decision  to  build  C-5A  je t  
transport.  Among  successful  U S .   launches  during  1965,  DOD  had  67 
satellites,  34 of  which  were  unidentified.  Military space programs were 
discussed,  including  Project  West  Ford;  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory 
(Mol) ; Initial  Defense  Communications  Satellite  Project;  and  the  
geodetic  Secor  satellites.  Research  was  under  way  on  the   best  means 
of  determining  physical  characteristics  of  “uncooperating  objects  in 
earth  orbit”  through  observation  by  ground-based radar.  The   section 
on  AEC   said  tha t   a  third  pair  of  Vela  radiation-detection  satellites 
launched  in   July  1965  was  watching  for  nuclear  explosions  in   space 
and  measuring  x-ray  emissions from  the   sun.  I n   a  separate  chapter 
of  the  report,  the  NASC  said:  “This Nation’s  space achievements during 
the  year  were  so distinctive  in  quality  and quantity as  to   cause people, 
a t   home  and  abroad,  to   conclude  the   United  States  had  attained  the  
space leadership  of  the  world.”  The  Council said  tha t  in  many respects 
this  conclusion was  correct  “but  i t   would  be  incorrect  and  unwise  to  
minimize  the   vitality  and  size  of  the   space program of  th e   U.S.S.R.” 
(Text;  CR,  1/31/66,  A419; Pres. Doc.,  2/7/66,  149) 
*  Highlights  of  AEC’S  annual  report  to   Congress  for   1965:  studies  were 
made on large nuclear-powered water desalting facilities, including study 
of  requirements of  New  York-New Jersey metropolitan area;  Snap-lOA, 
first  nuclear  power  reactor  un i t   to  be  placed  in   orbit,  functioned  in  
space for  43  days  before  electronic  component failures  shu t   it down; 
two  AEC-instrumented  ve la   satellites  for  nuclear  test  detection  were 
launched, raising th e  total now  i n  orbit  to  six; 27 underground nuclear 
tests  were  conducted.  (Carey,  Wash. Post,  2/1/66,  A2) 
0  NAA’S  Rocketdyne Div.  a t  Edwards AFE  was  struck by AFL-CIO  United Auto 
Workers  in   a  wage  dispute.  An  estimated half  of  th e   227  workers  i n  
UAW  bargaining  un i t   stayed  off  their  jobs.  &.A.  Times,  Wash. Post, 
2/1/66,  A9) 
During January:  Series of  tests  was  being completed by  NASA  MSC’S  Landing 
and  Recovery  Div.  to   check  ou t   direction  and  finding  equipment  for  

36 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

homing  an   Apollo  spacecraft  for  post-landing  location  and  recovery. 
Tests were performed off Galveston Island in Gulf of Mexico using Apollo 
boilerplate  spacecraft  with  the  Apollo  Recovery  Beacon  and  Apollo 
Survival  Radio  transmitting  signals.  Homing  run s   were  made  from 
altitudes  of  28,000 ft.  to  500  ft.  to  determine  range  of  direction  finder 
receiver  onboard  a  USAF  HC-130H air  rescue  aircraft  with  the  Apollo 
Recovery  Beacon  and  Survival  Radio  on  the   spacecraft  in  the  Gulf. 
Equipment  had  performed  as  expected  with  line-of-sight  acquisition 
of  boilerplate Apollo  on  all homing run s  by  the  aircraft.  (MSC  Roundup, 
1/21/66,  3) 
During  January:  Eulogies  for  the   late  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  NASA  Deputy 
Administrator,  and the late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace 11, NASA  Director 
of  Space Medicine,  appeared  in  A i r   Force  an$  Space  Digest: 
Walter  T.  Bonney  said  of  Dr.  Dryden:  “Hugh  Dryden  was  a  deeply 
religious  man.  He  held  tha t   man’s  life  a t   its  fullest  is  a  trinity  of 
activity,  physical,  mental,  and  spiritual.  Throughout  his  life  he 
preached  the   compatibility of  religion  and  science,  and  h e   lived  what 
h e   preached.  No  less,  he  was  a  realist;  and  so,  as  in  1954, he  would 
often remind  his  listeners  that:  ‘I am not  one  of  those  few who believe 
tha t   we  can  abolish  the   use  of  force  in  the   world.  As  a  nation  we 
such strength is a greater contribution to the peace of  the  world . . . than  
find  i t   necessary  to  build  great  military  power.  I  am  confident  that 
military  weakness.’ 
“ In   1947, he  was  called  to  direct  the  work  of  the  National Advisory 
Committee for  Aeronautics.  His  tasks were  enormously difficult-radi- 
cally  new  and  expensive  research  facilities  had  to  be  provided,  but 
even more  important,  learning  the  nature  of  the  intricate  problems  of 
flight in  the new speed ranges and methods  for  their  solution demanded 
new  concepts  of  team  activity  and  functional  coordination.  His  leader- 
ship,  disarmingly light  and  unobtrusive,  was  amazingly perceptive  and 
effective.  Facilities  were  obtained  and  changes  were  made;  the  period 
1947-58 became what might be  truly  called NACA’S  golden age. 
“With  establishment  of  the  National Aeronautics and Space Admini- 
stration  (of  which  NACA  was  the  nucleus),  he  undertook  the  role  of 
scientific  leader,  reporting  to  the  Administrator,  and  made  of  i t   a 
position  of  paramount  influence.  He  rejoiced  in  the  US  policy  tha t  
activities  in  space should  be  devoted t o  peaceful  purposes  and worked 
to promote  international  space  cooperation;  but  no  less, he  saw in US 
exploration  of  space an   activity  essential  to  the  strength  and  security 
of  the  nation.  As  perhaps  never  before,  his  great  wisdom  and  his  un- 
excelled  mastery  of  the  a r t   of  the   possible  were  in  those  later  years 
valued  and used  to  their  fullest.” 
Editor  John  Loosbrock  said  of  Dr.  Lovelace:  “ In   widening  circles, 
the   full  import  of  Randy’s  untimely  death  becomes  apparent.  The  Air 
Force Association and  the  Aerospace Education  Foundation  have lost a 
distinguished  leader.  The  medical profession  is  poorer  for  the  passing 
of  a  brilliant  surgeon,  a n   imaginative  researcher.  The  United  States 
Air  Force  will  miss  his  sound  advice  and  pioneering  efforts  in  the  
special kind of  medical knowledge tha t  is required  for those who fly-in 
air  and  in   space.  The  National  Aeronautics  and  Space Administration 
must  find  new  leadership  for  its  space  medical  effort.  The  entire 
nation and  the world  itself will  find  tha t  Randy Lovelace’s death  leaves 
a  large  and well-nigh unfillable  niche.”  (AF I SD ,  1/66) 

37 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
During  January:  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff,  Special  Assistant  to  NASA 
Administrator,  paid  tribute  to  the  late Dr.  Hugh L.  Dryden,  i n  Applied 
Mechanics Reviews  on  Dr.  Dryden’s  scientific  and  engineering  accom- 
plishments.  Dr.  Bisplinghoff  noted  tha t   the  NACA,  under  Dr.  Dryden’s 
leadership,  ‘‘produced  a vast body  of  new knowledge which made possi- 
ble  routine  supersonic  flight  and  laid  much  of  the   ground  for  space 
flight  tha t  was  to  come. We discern here, perhaps as much as any other 
place,  the   impact  of  Dryden’s  leadership on  the   nation’s  destiny.  The  
development  of  high-speed  wind-tunnel  facilities  and  a  companion 
competence  for  theoretical  research  within  the   NACA  contributed,  i n  
the  opinion  of  the   author,  more  than   any  other  single  factor  to  the  
leadership  of  the  United  States  in  supersonic flight.  . . .”  ( AM R ,  1/66, 
1-5) 
0  An  air-transport  vehicle  that  had  attracted  the   special  interest  of  NASA 
aeronautics research was the  personal airplane, Charles Harper, Director 
of  Aeronautics Div.,  NASA  OART,  wrote  i n  Astronautics  & Aeronautics. 
Attempts  were  being  made  to   devise  aircraft whose  control  commands 
would  provide  a  response  “wholly  natural  to  the   operator”  and which 
could  be  operated  with  no  more  special training  than  required  for  the  
automobile.  Recent  scientific  developments  spurred  by  spaceflight 
activity  were  being  assessed  with  regard  to  the   problem.  (Harper, 
A&A ,   1 /66 ,24)  
I n  Reader’s Digest article, William Hines,  science editor of  the  Washington 
Evening Star,  charged  and  documented  what  h e  described  as a banding 
“together  in  a  unique  alliance,  [of]  NASA  and  the   Urban  Renewal 
Administration”  to  build  NASA  Electronics  Research  Center  i n   Cam- 
bridge,  Mass.,  at  the   cost  of  several citizens’ rights. He said: “It  was  a 
splendid  arrangement.  The   glamor  of  a  Federal  space  center  would 
grease  the  way  for  urban  renewal  which,  realistically,  didn’t  otherwise 
stand  a  chance  of  tearing  up  this  thriving  industrial  area.  NASA  had 
captured  a  prize  piece  of  real  estate  a t   a  bargain-basement  price- 
roughly  $4 million-thanks 
to  the   fact  tha t   urban  renewal  would pay 
most  of  the   ‘real’  cost  of  the   land  and would  take  on  the   expense  and 
dirty work  of  removing  the   occupants.  And  the  Cambridge-Boston area 
was  going  to  have  all  that  money  spent there. 
“There  was  only  one catch:  nobody had  bothered  to  ask  the  opinion 
of  the   94   businessmen  and  their  3,500  employees  who  were  o n   t h e  
Kendall  Square chopping block. Most didn’t realize what  had  happened 
until  they  read  the   newspaper  headlines  on   August  21:  $60-Million 
NASA  Plant  To  Be  Built  i n   Kendall  Square.’  ” (Reader’s Digest,  1/66, 
99-104) 
0  European  Space  Research  Ins t i tu te   (ESRIN)  had  begun  operations  i n   a 
temporary  locatio6 in   the   Park  Hotel,  Frascati,  Italy.  A  center  of  the  
European Space  Research  Organization  (ESRO) , i t  would  work  initially 
on  plasma  physics  and  its  application  to  spacecraft  control as well  as  
plans  for proposed  ESRO  astronomical observatory.  Permanent facilities 
were  planned  near  t h e   Italian  Atomic  Energy  Authority’s  research 
center.  (M&R,  1/24/66,  7) 
*  Report  of  the   first  US. Space  Industry  Trade  Mission,  which  visited 
Europe  under  sponsorship of  the   National  Space  Club,  indicated  tha t  
European space  industry offered  “a  potentially attractive market,”  and 
concluded  tha t  U S .  aerospace  industry could best develop i ts  European 
market potential by  “the sale of materials,  components  and subsystems; 

38 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

licensing  or   technical  support; outright  investment  in  European  firms; 
and  joint  ventures  with  European  firms.”  (Text) 
During  Januaiy:  Dr.  Donald  F.  Hornig,  Director  of  Office  of  Science  and 
Technology,  said  in   International  Science  and  Technology:  “.  . . a  tech- 
nological  society  has  to  have  first-rate  research  in  progress-in 
some 
cases  for  immediate  application  and  in   other  cases  simply  because 
we  realize  more  and  more  tha t   we  have  to  depend  on  how  much  we 
know  and  understand  in  order  to  build  a new  society  . . . So research, 
as  research,  is  an   important  goal,  and  in  accomplishing i t  we  end  up  
supporting  two-thirds  of  all  the   research  going  on  in   the  graduate 
schools  of  the  country.  . . . We’re  supporting some 26,000 students a 
year,  indirectly,  through  research  grants.  And  now  through  direct 
federal  grants  and  fellowships we’re  supporting a  little more  than  tha t  
many  again.  S o  tha t  even  if  we  had  no plan  whatever, we  already have 
a  mighty  effect  on  the   higher  educational  system.”  (Znt. Science  and 
Tech.,  1/66,  66-70) 
*  NSF  Reviews o f  Data on Science Resources indicated,  in a preliminary  report 
on  research  and  development  in  American industry  for  1964, tha t   the 
aircraft  and  missile  industry  was  responsible  for  44%  of  total  net 
increase  in  R&D  performance  funds  from  $6.6  billion  in  1956 to  $13.4 
billion  in   1964.  Report  attributed  17%  of  increase  to  the  electrical 
equipment  and  communication  industry,  noting  tha t   performance  of 
R&D   in  those  two  fields  was  “strongly  influenced by  the  requirements 
of  the  Federal  Government  in  the  areas  of  defense  and  space explora- 
tion.”  Only  those  two  industries  received more  Federal  than  company 
financing for  R&D; in  1964, 90% of  aircraft  and  missile  industry’s  R&D 
funds came from Federal Government, and 62% of those of the  electrical 
equipment  and  communication  industry.  Aircraft  and missile  industry 
employed  30%  of  total  number  of  R&D  scientists  and  engineers; 
January  1965  figure  of  101,200  for  these  personnel  showed  decline 
of  7,700  from  January  1964. Electrical  equipment  and  communication 
industry  accounted  for  22%  of  total-74,800 
scientists  and  engineers 
as  of  January  1965, 600  less  than  previous  January.  (NSF,  Reviews  o f  
Data  on Science Resources,  1/66) 
0  Dr.  George  P. Woollard,  president  of  the   American  Geophysical  Union 
and director  of  the Hawaii Institute  of  Geophysics, said in AGU  Transac- 
tions  tha t   there  was  a  “crisis  in   science”  requiring  bold  Government 
action.  Stating  tha t   less  and  less  of  NSF’S  budget  was  going  into  basic 
research, Dr. Woollard called on Congress to assess the overall scientific 
needs  of  the  country,  including  “ambitious”  programs in various  fields 
proposed  by  NSF  and  NAS  panels.  “Research  proposals  that  were  good 
enough  five  years  ago  to  obtain  NSF  support  now  would  not  stand  a 
chance,”  h e  said. “They would be turned down not because the projects 
lacked significance bu t  because funds are sho r t  and only the  most estab- 
lished  and  influential  researchers  win  out.”  (AGU  Transactions,  1/66) 

February 1966 

February  1:  Two  large  telescopes  orbiting  20,000  mi.  above  earth  and  oc- 
casionally requiring man to service them in  space should be the  ultimate 
goal  for  the   national  program  in   space astronomy, according to  Space 
Research:  Directions for  the Future  (Par t  11), second report of  NAS  Space 
Science Board’s  Summer  Study  (Woods  Hole,  Mass.,  1965).  Report, 
compiled by  a  working group  of  astronomers headed by  Dr.  George  P. 
Woollard, Univ.  of  Hawaii,  said  120-in.-dia. optical telescope and radio- 
telescope  with  extended  aperture  of  12  mi.  would  aid  study  of  many 
basic  scientific problems in  astronomy. It  recommended  tha t   NASA  sup- 
port,  in   addition  to   Orbiting  Astronomical  Observatories  (Oao)  and 
Orbiting  Solar  Observatories  (Oso) : more  rapid  growth  of  ground- 
based  solar astronomy in  accordance with 10-yr. projection  of  needs  for 
large  optical  and  radiotelescopes  contained  in   a  1964  report  by  th e  
Academy;  specialized  instrumentation  for  ground-based solar  as tron-  
omy; doubling of sounding rocket launches for research in  optical, solar, 
and  x-ray  and  gamma-ray  astronomy  and  for  improvements  in   the ir  
guidance and flight stability;  laboratory  studies for more efficient detec- 
tion  and  recording  of  radiation  in   all  readings  of  the   electromagnetic 
spectrum; substantial  increases  in  balloon  flights for radar and for x-ray 
and  gamma-ray  astronomy;  and  development  of  systems  to   reach 
altitudes  higher  than  present  100,000- to   150,000-ft. limit for balloon- 
borne  payloads.  (Text;  NAS  Release) 
Surveyor  soft-landing  retrorocket  system  was  successfully  tested  by 
Hughes Aircraft Co.  and JPL a t  Holloman AFB.  After test vehicle was  re- 
leased from balloon a t  1,450-ft. altitude,  three  throttlable liquid  engines 
operated  by  terminal  descent  guidance  system’s  radar  and  autopilot 
control  slowed  vehicle  to  simulated landing 500  ft.  above ground,  par- 
tially  demonstrating  performance  required  to  softland  on  the   moon. 
Three  engines were  then   shu t  down  and parachute system deployed  to  
lower  vehicle  to  ground.  I n   actual mission,  Surveyor would  cu t   off  i ts  
engines 13 ft. above moon’s  surface and free-fall remainder of  distance 
to  avoid  unsettling  lunar  dust  with  rocket  engines’  exhaust.  Test was 
second  successful  operation  of  the   three  liquid-fueled  engines  under 
radar  control.  (NASA  Release 66-24; Marshall Star, 2/9/66,  9) 
0  NASA  launched  three  Nike-Cajun sounding rockets,  each carrying payload 
of  19 acoustic grenades, from three launch sites-Point  Barrow, Alaska, 
Churchill Research Range;  and  NASA  Wallops  Station-to  gather  data 
on  atmosphere  between  20-  and  60-mi.  altitudes  over  widely spaced 
39 

40 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

geographic  areas.  Grenades  were  ejected  and  detonated  a t   programed 
altitudes, yielding information on wind directions and speeds and atmos- 
pheric  densities,  pressures,  and  temperatures.  Rocket  launchings  were 
first  in  series  of  nine planned  for February.  Similar experiments would 
be  conducted  throughout  the  year  to  observe  atmospheric  conditions 
during different seasons.  (Wallops Release 66-9) 
February 2:  NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with 300-lb. Princeton Univ. 
payload was  launched from WSMR  to  108-mi. (175-km.) altitude  to meas- 
ure  ultraviolet  radiation  from  the star Alpha Virginis, popularly known 
as  Spica. Although  rocket  performed satisfactorily  and  payload  was  re- 
covered, no stellar spectra were obtained because of arcs in the guidance 
voltage system which may have prevented  acquisition  of  the star.  (NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  by  Thor-Agena D  booster  from  Van- 
denberg AFB.  (M&R ,  2/7/66,  11 ;  U S .  Aeron.  & Space  Act.,  1966, 147) 
Secretary of  Defense Robert  S. McNamara and U.K.  Minister of  Defence 
Denis  Healey  signed  memorandum  providing  for  cooperation  in  R&D 
for  U S .   Initial  Defense Communications  Satellite  Project-system  of 
up  to  22  comsats  in  near-synchronous,  equatorial  orbit.  U.K.  would 
provide,  operate,  and  fund  several  ground  terminals  for  communica- 
tions  tests  and  experiments  using  DOD   comsats  free  of  charge.  (DOD  
Release 87-66) 
0  Prototype unfolding tool box containing  1 6  geological tools for  astronauts 
to  examine  and  obtain  samples of  lunar  rock  was  delivered  to  MSC  by 
Martin  Go.  Box would also provide storage area  for  rock  samples. Tools 
included  battery-powered  drill;  dust  scoop;  sample-weighing device; 
hand-held magnifier designed for use  through spacesuit visor; surveying 
instruments and rangefinder; and retriever to pick up small specimens of 
rock  which  pressure-suited  astronaut  could  no t   reach.  (MSC  Release 
66-9) 
0  MSC  awarded $70,000 contract  to Rodana Research Corp.  to develop emer- 
gency medical kits  tha t  would  “satisfy  all  inflight and  training  require- 
ments  for  the  Apollo  Command  Module  and  the  Lunar  Excursion 
Module.”  Two  training units would be delivered for each flight, in addi- 
tion  to  one  mock-up  and  six prototype  models;  they  would  contain 
loaded  injectors,  tablets,  capsules,  ointment,  inhalers,  adhesives,  and 
compressed dressings.  (MSC  Release 66-8) 
0  Proposal  for a n  “international  research  program  for  the  establishment  of 
contact  with  extraterrestrial  civilizations”  was  sen t   to  International 
Astronomical Union by  unidentified Soviet astronomers, Tass reported. 
The   scientists  believed  search  for  extraterrestrial  life  should  concen- 
trate first on radiation  from stars within  1,000-light-yr. radius  from  the 
three  nearest  galaxies.  Kommunist,  party’s  major  theoretical  journal, 
said  tha t   question  of  the   existence  of  other  civilizations, and  the   es- 
tablishment  of  contact with  them was  one of  three  “fundamental  mob- 
lems”  confronting  astrophysics.  (Zorza,  Wash. Post, 2/5/66,  A7;  AP, 
NYT, 2/3/66,9) 
0  Parachutist Nick Piantanida,  launched in  a balloon from Sioux Falls, S.D., 
reached  123,000-ft. altitude-unofficial  manned-balloon-altitude record 
-but 
failed to  achieve world’s free-fall record when his spacesuit oxygen 
hose  froze  and  h e   was  ordered  to  descend  in  the   balloon’s  gondola. 
Piantanida,  who  had  planned  to  jump  from  120,000-ft. altitude,  free- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

41 

fall to 7,000 ft.,  and then parachute to earth, said he had wanted to prove 
tha t  a  trained  parachutist could  free-fall from  100,000-ft. altitude with- 
ou t   stabilizing devices.  Experiment was  second  failure  by  Spaco,  Inc., 
private  firm  developing space  survival  and   bail-out  equipment.  (Balt. 
Sun, 2/3/66) 
February 2:  AEC  announced plans  to  develop a radioisotope-powered cardiac 
pacemaker  for  treatment  of hear t   block.  Proposed  instrument,  fueled 
with  plutonium-238,  would  be  inserted  in   the   body  by  surgery  and 
would  have  a  minimum  operating  life  of  10  yrs.  Currently  available 
battery-powered cardiac pacemakers had  operating lifetimes  of  three  to  
five  years.  (AEC   Release  5-26) 
European Launcher  Development Organization (ELDO)  Secretary-General 
Renzo  di  Carrobio,  addressing members  of  “Britain  in   Europe”  com- 
mittee in London, contrasted  “present hesitancy”  on space programs i n  
Europe with positive U S .  position. Americans, Carrobio said, were aware 
of  economic benefits  from  technological applications of  space research 
and  were  “making great  efforts  to  ensure  tha t   the   spin-off  from  their 
heavy  investment in  space research  is pu t   to  good  use  in  the  industrial 
sector.”  He noted tha t  U S .  $5-billion space budget meant $26 per capita 
annual expenditure, while Europe spent $200 million annually or $1.15 
per person.  (Science, 3/18/66,1372-4) 
February 3:  ESSA  I  (Tiros OT-3), first meteorological satellite  in  Tiros Opera- 
tional  Satellite  (Tos)  series, was  launched  from  ETR  for Environmental 
Science Services Administration  (ESSA)  by  NASA  with  three-stage Thor- 
Delta booster into nearly polar, sun-synchronous orbit to provide cloud 
coverage of  en t ire  sunlit portion  of  the  ear th  a t  least  once daily. Before 
achieving  orbit,  spacecraft  performed  three  precise  “dogleg”  ma- 
neuvers  initiated  by  airborne autopilot  system, injecting  i t   in to   orbit: 
apogee, 523 mi.  (842 km.) ; perigee, 433 mi.  (697 km.) ; period, 100 min.; 
inclination,  97.9”.  During  first  orbit,  ESSA  I  was  spin-stabilized  a t   10 
rpm with  spin  axis  in  plane  of  orbit.  Entering  second orbit,  spacecraft 
responded to ground control command  to begin  turn ing  on i ts  side in to  
cartwheel  position.  Maneuver  was  expected  to  be  completed  24   hrs. 
after launch ;  television cameras would be turned on 36 hrs .  after launch. 
Cartwheel shaped, ESSA  I  contained two W-in. vidicon cameras mounted 
180” apart  on  each  side  so  they  could  view  ear th   every  six  seconds. 
Camera  system  could  send  pictures  directly  to  command  and  data  ac- 
quisition  stations a t  NASA  Wallops  Station and  Gilmore  Creek,  Alaska, 
or   store  photos  on  its  tape recorder  for  readout  when  satellite  passed 
within 1,500-mi. radius of  a ground station. 
ESSA  I  (Environmental Survey  Satellite  No.  1)  was  11th  successful 
Tiros  (Television  Infrared  Observation  Satellite)  to  be  launched  by 
NASA  in   11 attempts.  It was  first  of  two Tos  operational meteorological 
satellites  planned  and  financed  by  ESSA  to  provide  daily  cloud-cover 
pictures  to   ground  stations  on  a  global  basis.  ESSA  (at  tha t   time  US. 
Weather  Bureau)  had  also  funded  TIROS  x  (OT-1), launched  by  NASA 
July  2,  1965. (NASA  Proj. Off.; ESSA  Release 66-7; UPI, NYT, 2/4/66,  37) 
First soft-landing on moon was made by U.S.S.R.  when LUNA  IX  spacecraft 
softlanded  an   instrument  package  near  Ocean  of  Storms  west  of  th e  
Reiner  and   Marius  craters.  Instrument  package  began  relaying  tele- 
metric  signals  to  ear th   immediately  and  Tass  said  “information  re- 
ceived from the  station is being processed and studied.” 
Landing sequence, as later described by Tass, began 8,300 km.  (5,155 

42 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

mi.)  above  moon  approximately  one  hour  before  touchdown  when 
LUNA IX  was oriented vertically to the moon. A t  77-km.  (47-mi.) altitude, 
48  sec.  before  touchdown,  radar  system  aimed  a t  lunar  surface  turned 
on the retrorocket and shock-absorbing system was  prepared. Less than 
one second before impact, after spacecraft had been slowed to  less than 
10 mph,  instrument  capsule  was  ejected.  Rocket  crashed  and  4  min. 
10 sec. after  instrument  capsule had  landed,  its petal-like covering and 
antennas opened and radio  transmissions began. 
Jodrell Bank Experimental Station announced LUNA  IX  had  transmitted 
facsimile pictures  of  the  moon  from the  time i t  landed  a t  1:45 p.m.  EST 
until  2:05  p.m.  EST,  gone  off  the  air,  and  then  resumed  signals shortly 
after  9:OO  p.m.  EST.  Soviet  spokesman  declined  to  confirm  report. 
British  scientists  were  unable  t o   translate  signals into  pictures  but  re- 
corded them  on magnetic  tapes. 
U.S.S.R.’s  fou r  previous attempts  to  softland spacecraft on the  moon 
had  failed:  LUNA  v,  launched  May  9,  1965; LUNA  VI,  launched  June  8, 
1965; LUNA  VII,  launched  Oct.  4,  1965; and  LUNA  VIII,  launched Dec.  3, 
1965.  (Tass,  Pravda,  2/4/66,  1,  USS-T  Trans.;  Simons,  Wash.  Post, 
2/4/66,  A l ,   A13;  Grose,  NYT,  2/4/66,  1,  37;  AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star. 
2/4/66,  A l ,  A6; 2/6/66,  A14) 
February 3:  President  Johnson  sen t  a  telegram  to  Nikolay Podgorny,  Chair- 
man,  Presidium  of  the   Supreme  Soviet,  U.S.S.R.,  on  the  success  of 
LUNA  IX:  “You  and the people of  the Union of  Soviet Socialist Republics 
are to  be congratulated for the  great success of  Luna 9. Your accomplish- 
ment  is  one tha t   can benefit  all mankind. And  all mankind  applauds it. 
Your  scientists have made a major  contribution  to man’s knowledge of 
the  moon  and  of  space.”  (Pres. Doc.,  2/7/66,  166) 
Breadboard version of  Nerva  (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Applica- 
tion)  was  successfully  tested  for  the  first  time  by  NASA  and  AEC   a t  Nu- 
clear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Four  hours after 
initial  ignition, engine  restarted  itself  under  test  conditions  simulating 
lower  temperatures  of  space,  thereby  demonstrating  its  capability  to 
s ta r t  using  only self-contained energy. Engine  system was  tested  below 
peak  power  and  temperature  levels:  exhaust  temperature  was  2,000”F 
compared with 3,500”F design  temperature;  reactor power was  440 mw 
compared with  1,100-mw design power. Test  was   first of  a  series  sched- 
uled by NASA-AEC  Space Nuclear  Propulsion  Office as part  of  the  Rover 
program to  develop nuclear  propulsion  for  space  exploration.  (AEC  Re- 
lease 5-35; Atomic  Energy  Programs,  1966) 
0  First  static  test  firing of  production  version  of  Apollo  spacecraft  launch- 
escape  solid-propellant  rocket  motor,  key  component  of  emergency 
Launch  Escape  System  (Les),  was  conducted  a t   Redlands,  Calif.,  by 
Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.  All  test  objectives were met,  with  motor  pro- 
ducing  scheduled  155,000  lbs.  th ru s t   for  programed  eight  seconds  to 
become first major Apollo spacecraft subsystem  to  complete NASA  quali- 
fication tests for future manned flights.  (Lockheed Release) 
0  Two NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched 7 hrs. 23 min. apart from 
NASA  Wallops  Station  reached  estimated  81-mi.  (131-km.)  and  95-mi. 
(152-km.) altitudes.  Experiment,  conducted  for  Univ.  of  Michigan, 
measured ambient air density from 19-75 mi.  (30-120 km.)  by radar track 
of  two  falling  Mylar  spheres  ejected  from  each  rocket  a t   +72  sec. 
Spheres  ejected  as  programed  in  first  launch,  but  radar  was  unable  to 
track  first  sphere  until  + 14   min.  Preliminary  indications  were  tha t   i t  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

43 

did not inflate properly. Radar tracked second sphere for 18 min. During 
second  launch,  both  spheres  ejected  and  inflated  properly,  and  radar 
tracking was  continuous  for 20 min.  Diurnal variations of  the measure- 
ments were  compared to measure solar  heating  effects.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
February 3: Statement  reaffirming US. demand  tha t   liability  for  individual 
air passenger fatalities be raised from $16,600 to $100,000 was delivered 
by  chief US. delegate A.  F.  Lowenfeld a t  a  special meeting  of  Interna- 
tional  Civil  Aviation  Organization  in   Montreal.  Lowenfeld  said  US. 
might  withdraw  from Warsaw Convention  i f   higher  liability  limit were 
rejected.  (NYT, 2/4/66,  53) 
“Informed  British  and  French  sources”  predicted  costs  of  developing 
supersonic  airliner  Concorde  would  reach  $1,112,000,000 compared 
with  August  1964  estimate  of  $924,000,000. Development  costs  were 
“despite  rising costs  . . . the  two Governments are going ahead.”  ( WS J ,  
being divided  equally between  the  two  countries  and  sources  said  tha t  
2 /4 /66 ,19 ;   Farnsworth, NYT, 2 /4 /66 ,53 )  
According to  count by North  American Air  Defense Command’s (NORAD) 
Space Defense Center, NASA’s launch of  ESSA  I  (Tiros OT-3) meteorologi- 
cal satellite brought  total  of  objects  currently  in orbit  to  1,000. Of  209 
earth-orbiting payloads, U.S. had  162; U.S.S.R.,  41; France,  two; U.K., 
two;  and Canada, two.  NORAD  counted  nine US. deep-space probes  and 
debris  of  eight  others; U.S.S.R.  had  ten,  with  debris  of  two more.  Re- 
maining  objects were  “space debris”  o r   “junk.”  Space Defense Center 
had  catalogued  1,982 objects, but  nearly  half  had  decayed  or  had  been 
intentionally  deorbited.  (NORAD  Release 66-2-2) 
February 4: Vice  President  Hubert  Humphrey  attended  ceremony  a t   NASA 
Hq.  celebrating  successful  launch  of  ESSA  I,  ESSA’S  first  operational 
meteorological satellite. During ceremony, first pictures  taken by  ESSA  I, 
launched  by  NASA  from  ETR  Feb.  3,  were  released;  NASA  Administrator 
James E. Webb administered  the   oath  of  office  to  NASA  Deputy Admin- 
istrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.;  and  the  Vice  President  presented 
NASA  Exceptional  Service medals  to  Dr.  Morris  Tepper,  NASA  Director 
of Meteorological Programs ; Herbert I. Butler, NASA Chief of  Operational 
Satellites,  GSFC;  and  David  S.  Johnson,  ESSA  Environmental  Satellite 
Center Director. Vice President Humphrey praised the  spirit of  coopera- 
tion  between NASA  and Dept.  of  Commerce, noting tha t   ‘‘science leaves 
no  room  for  jurisdictional  disputes.”  He  said  of  NASA’s Administrator 
and Deputy Administrator:  “I know of  no  two men who are more dedi- 
cated  to  our  space  program  than  Jim  Webb  and  Bob  Seamans.  Their 
devotion  is  almost sacrificial.”  (NASA  Release 66-29) 
*  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  and  Secretary  of  Defense Robert  S. 
McNamara  signed  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  establishing 
Manned  Spsce  Flight  Policy  Committee,  joint  NASA-DOD  committee 
which  would  meet  regularly  to   determine  top-level policy,  ensure  co- 
ordinated  planning,  and  resolve  matters  concerning  mutual  participa- 
tion  in  and support  of manned  spaceflight programs which  could no t  be 
resolved  at  lower  levels.  Co-chairmen of  the   committee would  be  Dr. 
Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  and  Dr.  John  S. 
Foster,  Jr.,  DOD  Director  of  Defense  Research  and  Engineering. Mem- 
orandum superseded Jan.  21,1963, agreement between th e  two agencies 
on Gemini program.  (NASA  Release 66-26) 
Reorganization of  NASA  Office  of  Space  Science  and  Applications  (OSSA) 
to   involve  its  operating  offices  more  deeply  in  planning  th e   use  of 
C C  

44 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

manned  spaceflight  capabilities for  scientific exploration  of  space” was 
announced  by  Associate Administrator for  Space Science and Applica- 
tions Dr. Homer E. Newell. Several individual programs were reassigned: 
Pioneer  interplanetary  probe  program  from  Lunar  and  Planetary  Pro-  
grams  to   Physics and Astronomy  Programs ; geodetic satellite  program, 
including Geos  and  Pageos,  from Physics and  Astronomy  Programs to 
Space Applications; management of  programs  leading  to  acquisition  of 
scientific data through remote sensing from Manned Space Science Pro-  
grams  to   Space Applications;  Manned  Space  Science Programs  office 
was  renamed  Manned  Flight  Experiments  Office/ossA, 
to  super- 
vise  all  OSSA  manned  flight  support.  Dr.  John  R.  Clark,  who  had  been 
Director of  OSSA  (Sciences) , was  named Deputy Associate Administrator 
for  SSA  (Sciences). Robert F. Garbarini, who  had  been  Director  of  OSSA 
(Engineering),  was  named  De  uty  Associate  Administrator  for  SSA 
(Engineering). All  OSSA advance dp study efforts under Advanced Missions 
Staff would  report  to  Dr.  Clark. Acting  director  of  tha t   staff  would  be 
Dr. John E.  Naugle.  (NASA Release 66-27) 
February  4 :  Soviet officials acknowledged  tha t   LUNA  IX  photos  were  being 
received in  U.S.S.R.  and said first LUNA  IX  photo would appear in  Feb.  5 
edition  of  Zzvestia.  (Wa sh .  Post, 2/5/66,  A6) 
Two  photographs  of  the   moon  produced  a t   Jodrell  Bank  Experimental 
Station  by  feeding  radio  transmissions  from  LUNA  IX   in to   newspaper 
telephoto  machine were  shown on  British  television.  Each picture  took 
eight minutes  to  receive and  was  recorded a t   100 lines  to  one  inch  for  
finished 10- by  11-in. photo. Sir Bernard Lovell, station director,  said in 
a  television  interview tha t  photos  “seem  to  destroy the  theory tha t   th e  
moon’s  surface  is  covered  with dust several  feet  thick.  There may  be  a 
few  inches  of  dust,  but  the   pictures  tend  to  confirm the   view  of  the  
moon’s  surface as hard,  spongelike pumice s tone  substance. 
“It  would  be  perfectly  satisfactofl  for  landing  not  only  heavy 
tall;  smal Y stones,  some  less  than   one  inch   in   diameter;  t h e   curved 
vehicles but  also men.” 
Lovell  ointed  ou t   rock-like pinnacles  estimated to   be  10- to  20-ft. 
horizon  of  the  moon;  and  sharp shadows which  indicated  the   su n  was 
casting th e  shadow. He  emphasized, however,  necessity of  knowing  th e  
sai B LUNA  IX   had  landed  in  a  location which  would  receive  sunlight for 
pro  er  scale  before  photos  could  be  meaningfully interpreted.  Lovell 
14   days,  thereby  permitting  solar  power  to   replenish  its  batteries. 
(Wush .  Post,  2/5/66,  A l ,   A6;  Sullivan, NYT ,  2/5/66,  1, 10) 
0  Dr.  Gerard P.  Kuiper,  director  of  Univ.  of  Arizona  Lunar  and  Planetary 
Laboratory, told  th e  New  York  Times  in   a  telephone  interview  tha t   he  
thought  from  photos  released  by  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental  Station 
LUNA  M was  resting  in  a  shallow crater and  th e   10- to  20-ft.-high rocks 
described by  Sir Bernard Lovell were the  result of  distorted  foreshorten- 
ing  of  the  most distant  rocks and  features.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,  2/5/66,  1, 
10) 
U S .   space officials did  not  feel  that  LUNA  IX’S  successful  soft-landing on 
the   moon  indicated  U S .   was  behind  U.S.S.R.  in   the   “moon  race,” 
reported John Wilford in  the  New  York Times. Vice President Humphrey, 
NASC Chairman, told Wilford in  an  interview tha t   ‘(so many systems and  
programs are   involved tha t   i t   is  very  difficult  to  say who’s  ahead  and 
who’s  behind.”  Dr.  Robert C.  Seamans, Jr.,  NASA Deputy Administrator, 
admired the   Soviets’  “solid,  aggressive and  expanding” space program 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

45 

and conceded tha t  although U S .  program was  broader-based  “ the  Rus- 
sians  are awfully good  a t  picking goals  and going after  them.”  Wilford 
said U S .  space officials were unwilling to  speculate on  who would make 
first manned  lunar   landing,  but  foresaw  no  significant changes  in   U.S. 
program because of  LUNA  IX’S  success. Dr.  Seamans said Surveyor proj- 
ect would  no t  be  curtailed  and could no t  be  speeded up:  “We’ve  got to  
gather our  own data because we  can’t  count on  the  Russians to  release 
their  own  data.  Besides, we  want  to  land  in   other  places  on th e  moon. 
Hopefully,  we  can  exchange data  with  the   Russians.”  (Wilford, N Y T ,  
2 /5 /66 ,   11) 
February 4: International scientific community commented on LUNA  IX’S  soft- 
landing  on  the   moon.  Dr.  William Pickering,  Director  of  JPL,  offered 
congratulations  and  said:  “The  difficulty  of  the   task  is  attested  to  by 
the   number  of  previous  attempts  to  accomplish a  soft  landing  on  th e  
moon. The success of  this mission has  already added  to  our knowledge 
of  the   lunar  surface.  We  now  await  with  interest  the   scientific  data 
which will be  received  in   the  next  few  days.”  Heinz Kaminski,  chief  of 
Bochum  Observatory,  West  Germany:  “American  space  flight  tech- 
nology  is  on  a  high  level  of  perfection  which  the   Russians jus t   can’t 
match.”  Dr. L. R. Shepherd, president of British Interplanetary Society: 
[Soft-landing on  the  moon is] much  more difficult than   the   orbit  ren-  
dezvous  achieved by  the  Americans.” Dr.  Shotaro Miyamoto,  chief  of 
Kyoto  Univ.  astronomical  observatory,  Japan:  “Soviet  landing means 
men  and materials  will  now  be  sen t   to  the  moon  and i ts  development 
accelerated.”  ( N Y T ,  2 /5 /66 ,   11 ;  2 /6 /66 ,   E l l )  
International  press  commented  on   LUNA  IX’S  soft-landing  on  th e   moon. 
New  York Times: “Two  facts indicate  the  magnitude of  th e  advance tha t  
has  now  been  made.  One  is  th e   known  failure  of  four   earlier  Soviet 
rockets  to  make the  soft landing finally achieved by Luna 9.  The  second 
is  the  unhappy  history  of  efforts  in   this  country  to  build  th e  Surveyor 
vehicle, which is  intended to  perform moon  reconnaissance of  th e  type 
in  which th e  Soviet ship is pioneering. The Surveyor project is curren t ly  
far  behind schedule. The  first f igh t  is no t  planned until  later  this  year, 
and i t  is  impossible even to  forecast when a Surveyor will duplicate th e  
soft landing of  Luna  9. 
“The  whole  process  demonstrates  again  the   wastefulness  of  th e  
Soviet-American moon  race.  Were  the   United  States  and  Russia  co- 
operating  fully,  rather  than   competing,  th e   hundreds  of  millions  of 
dollars spent on Surveyor would  have been applied to progress in  fields 
still  inadequately explored by  either  country.” 
Yomiuri Shimbun, Tokyo: “It is possible  to  say tha t  th e  Soviet Union 
is  considerably ahead of  th e  U S .  in  the  moon  development program.  It 
is  regrercable tha t   the  two  nations  have failed  to   exchange information 
and technology for  the  development of  outer space.” 
La Nazione,  Florence: “If  th e  Russians already know  how  to  land on 
the  moon,  they  still don’t  know  how  to   effect  a  crendezvous’ in   orbit. 
The  inverse holds,  naturally,  for   the  Americans.  This means tha t  both 
are  still faced by  formidable problems  and  tha t  t h e  great  contest  is still 
open.” 
Times of  India,  Bombay:  “At  this  rate  it is  no t   unreasonable to   pre- 
sume  tha t   a  Russian-manned probe  will  land  on  th e  moon  and  re tu rn  
i n  about  a  year  from  now,  beating th e  Americans  to   it by  about  three  
years.”  ( N Y T ,  2/6/66,  E l l )  

46 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
February  4:  Speech  by  th e   late  H.  J.  Bhabha,  director  of  Tata  Institute, 
Bombay,  and  chairman  of  the  Indian  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  a t  
January 1965 meeting of  th e  International Council of  Scientific Unions 
in   Bombay,  appeared  i n   Science.  Bhabha  explained  the   Indian  Radio- 
astronomy  Group  and  described  new  32-parabolic-dish  facility  near 
Bombay  for solar  radioastronomy work and project  to  build large cylin- 
drical  radiotelescope  a t  Ooty.  Bhabha was  killed  in   an   airplane  crash 
a t   the   top  of  Mt.  Blanc,  Jan.  21.  (Science, 2/4/66,  544-5) 
FebruuT  5:  U.S.S.R.  released  LUNA  IX’S  photographs  of  the  moon  for  first 
time  and  criticized  distortion  of  photos  publicized  by  Jodrell  Bank 
Experimental  Station.  Photos,  shown  on   an   eight-minute  television 
program, were analyzed by  scientists  Vladimir Yurovsky,  Yuri Mbelou- 
son, and  Ivan Koval. Moon’s  surface appeared very uneven  with many 
small depressions and mounds.  Surface near  th e  station had  no t   sunk  
in to   th e   soil  to  any  substantial degree.  No  visible  traces  of  dus t   were 
evident. At bottom of  first  picture, part of spacecraft, including an tenna  
and  two-faced mirror which reflected  th e  lunar  surface,  could be  seen. 
A  small  s tone   believed about  6% ft. from  the  craft  could  have  been  a 
meteorite or  could have fallen from a hill,  in  which case “we  could pre- 
sume  there   a re  some processes of  movement  on  the  moon’s  surface,” 
scientists  concluded. 
Tass  announced details  of  LUNA  IX’S  s truc ture   and  flight:  3,482.6-133. 
spacecraft  was  an   airtight  package  carrying  radio  system,  program- 
timer,  thermal-regulation system, power-supply sources,  and  television 
system ensuring 360” view of  the  landscape. Antennas mounted  on ou t-  
side of  craft were se t  to  open automatically after it had  settled  on lunar  
surface. Complete with shock-absorbing system and metal screens shaped 
like petals  to protect  it during touchdown, 220-lb. instrumented payload 
detached itself  from  engine immediately before landing,  and  two  un i ts  
landed a t  some distance from each other. 
Anatoli  A.  Blagonravov,  chairman  of  the   Soviet  Commission  for 
Ex  loration  and  Use  of  Outer  Space,  was  critical  of  Jodrell  Bank‘s 
pu bp lication  of  LUNA  IX  photos and said tha t  Jodrell Bank lacked  th e  cor- 
rect  vertical  and horizontal  scales:  “The  horizontal  scale of  the  British 
photographs had  been shrunk  by  approximately 2.5  times.” 
Photos  released  by  MOSCOW, vivid  in   detail  and  contrast,  showed  a 
landscape  less  pinnacled  and  strange  than   tha t   in   British  versions. 
(Sullivan,  NYT,  2/6/66,  76;  Grose,  NYT ,   2/6/66,  1, 76;  AP,  Wash. 
Eve. Star, 2/6/66,  A14) 
*  U.S.  monitors  had  received  photographs  transmitted  from  the   moon  by 
LUNA IX, Dr.  Edward C.  Welsh, NASC Executive Secretary,  told  the  press: 
“We  have  obtained some information  regarding those Luna 9 pictures 
from our own sources.  Such data a re  currently under study and evalua- 
tion.  I believe i t  is important for  the  public to know  that we  do no t  rely 
solely  on   Soviet  releases  or  Jodrell  Bank  pronouncements  for  our  in-  
formation.,’  (NASC) 
ComSatCorp  requested  FCC  permission  to   launch  satellite  which  would 
relay  network  television  programs  from  the ir   point  of  broadcast  to  
afliliated stations for transmission to  home sets.  Request also asked tha t  
similar proposal submitted  to   FCC  by  American  Broadcasting  Co.  (ABC) 
May  13,  1965, be dismissed.  (Denniston, Wash.  Eve.  Star, 2/5/66,  A5) 
0  Mystery of  how  th e  universe began  could  be  solved  within  15 to   20  yrs. 
if US. would use th e  $100 million spent on one manned Gemini mission 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

47 

for  five new  200-in.  telescopes,  MIT  professor  Dr.  Philip Morrison sug- 
gested a t  New  York meeting on cosmology. Morrison said three  or  four 
telescopes  equal to   the   one a t  Mt.  Palomar could be built  for  the  $60- 
to   $80-million  cost  of  one  Orbiting Astronomical Observatory  (Oao) 
and  would  provide more  information  on   th e   origin  and  na ture   of  th e  
universe  than   the   satellite.  Meeting was  sponsored by  American  Insti- 
tu te   of  Physics  and  National Assn.  of  Science Writers,  Inc.,  with NSF 
support.  ( N Y T ,  2/5/66) 
February 6:  “The  lunar research program by means of  Luna 9 has been  fu l-  
filled and successfully concluded,”  Tass reported after LUNA IX had com- 
pleted 48 hrs.  of  active life transmitting  a total of  10  panoramic photo- 
graphs of  lunar  surface.  Several hours after  th e  announcement,  Jodrell 
Bank  Experimental Station reported it had  received  2% more photos  of 
poor  quality. 
Third picture transmitted by  LUNA  IX’S  instrument package Feb.  4 was 
shown on Moscow television. During transmission,  camera was  inclined 
toward horizon and s un  was  to  the  east. Par t  of  spacecraft was visible i n  
the  lower  left-hand  corner of  the  picture and another part  i n  th e  lower 
light,  bu t   ou t   of  focus  because  of  sho r t   distance  from  camera  lens. 
Soviet astronomer Nikolay Barabashov told Tass photographs confirmed 
his theory tha t  moon’s  surface was  “highly pitted,  porous and probably 
covered with numerous  rocks and fragments.”  LUNA  IX  “has proved  be- 
yond  doubt  tha t   the   upper  layer  of  lunar  so i l   is  a  spongelike rough- 
textured mass  scattered  with  individual  sharp-edged fragments of  vari- 
ous sizes.”  ( N Y T ,  2/7/66,  1 ,  15; AP,  Wash. Eve. Star, 2/7/66,  A l ,  A5) 
February  7:  In   summary  of  NASA-USAF X-15 flight  operations,  FRC  revealed 
tha t   the   three  rocket-powered  aircraft  had  completed  253  f igh t   opera- 
tions  since first glide fhght  June   8,  1959: 156 were  actual flights,  eight 
were  planned  captive flights,  and  89 were  canceled because  of  weather 
or  mechanical problems.  The   three   aircraft had  flown  over 24  hrs .   of 
free flight; 6 hrs. 29 min. faster than  mach 3 ;  4 hrs.  13 min.  above mach 
4; 56 min.  above mach  5 ;  and  11 sec.  above mach  6.  On nine  separate 
occasions, five different pilots had  flown over th e  50-mi. astronaut quali- 
fying altitude:  L/Col.  Robert M.  White,  L/Col.  Robert A .   Rushworth, 
and Capt.  Joseph H.  Ehgle,  all USAF;  and Joseph A.  Walker and John B. 
McKay, both  NASA  civilians.  Four flights terminated in  emergency land- 
ings,  two  of  which  seriously  damaged  the  aircraft,  but  all  three aircraft 
were still being flown. One flight had  been made with modified X-15 No. 
2  using  external  propellant  tanks.  Six  curren t   X-15  pilots  included: 
L/Col.  Robert  A .   Rushworth,  Maj.  William  J.  Knight,  and  Capt. 
Joseph H.  Engle,  all  USAF;  and  William  H.  Dana,  John  B.  McKay,  and 
Milton  0. Thompson, all NASA civilians.  (FRC  Release 2-66) 
0  Jodrell Bank Experimental Station received signals transmitted from Soviet 
space tracking  station in  th e  Crimea  via  Venus.  Experiment, similar to  
one  conducted Jan.  8, was  part  of  a program between  Jodrell Bank  and 
Soviet station to  send signals via Venus for an  entire 225-day Venusian 
year.  (Reuters,  Fa&. Post, 2/8/66,  A8) 
0  NASA Lunar Orbiter, scheduled to  orbit moon in  spring 1966, might photo- 
graph  LUNA  IX t o  gain perspective dimensions of  lunar   surface and  de- 
termine  spacecraft’s  size  and  extent  of  damage  caused by  landing,  th e  
New  York Times speculated. LUNA  IX’S  landing area, th e  Ocean of Storms, 
was no t  included in  original Aight plan of 10  regions to  be photographed. 
(NYT ,  2 /7 /66 ,4)  

48 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

February  7:  Research  pilots  of   the  X-15,  in   front  of   X-15  No.  2  at  Edwards,  Calif.: 
Capt. Joseph H .   Engle  (WAF), Maj.  Robert A .  Rushworth  (USAF), John B. McKay  (NASA), 
Capt. William  J. Knight  (USAF), Milton  0. Thompson  (NASA), and William H .  Dana  (NASA). 

February 7:  Contact Feb. 6 with LUNA  IX  after  i ts  scheduled research had been 
completed  was  explained by  Tass:  “Since  the   craft  still had  a  certain 
amount  of  power  left  in   excess of  rated  level  an   additional 2-hr. com- 
mutation  session  was  held.  . . . 
“During  the   transmission  period  the   station  exhausted  practically 
a l l  its remaining supply of  electric energy and fur ther  radio communica- 
tions  with Luna  9 will be discontinued.” 
Moscow television showed photos of  a circular  panorama of  the  lunar 
landscape obtained from  LUNA  IX’S  television  system during  communi- 
cations  period Feb.  6 .  Panorama showed LUNA  IX  to  be resting on  com- 
paratively  even  area  of  th e   lu n a r   surface close  to   the   equator  on  th e  
eastern extremity of th e  Oceanus Procellarum. Surface of moon around  
s ta t ion  was  very uneven with many  hollows  and hillocks.  Some s tone-  
type  formations were  scattered  a t  different places,  Small cavities could 
be  seen in different parts  of  th e  panorama, specifically a t  its right  end. 
Slightly hilly  area  could be  seen along the  horizon.  Par ts  of  the  space- 
craft, including antennas of receivers, transmitters, and dihedral mirrors 
reflecting  sections  of  t h e   lunar   surface,  were  visible  in   forefront  of 
panorama. A t   th e  bottom,  lying  on   th e  ground,  was  section  of  rocket 
which had been  thrown aside during landing.  (Grose,  NFT, 2 /8 /66 ,  1, 
20; AP, Wash. Eve. Star9 2 /7 /66 ,  AI., A5) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

49 

February  7:  House passed H.R.  6125 amending Air Museum Act to  authorize 
construction  of  a  National  Air  and  Space  Museum  i n   Washington, 
D.C.,  to   replace  t h e  National Air  Museum.  Museum,  to   be  completed 
in   five  years  a t   an   estimated $41) million,  would  house  permanent  ex- 
hibits  of  space exploration  and be part  of  th e  Smithsonian Institution. 
The  NASA  Administrator would  serve  on  i ts   advisory board.  (NASA  LAB 
V / W  
Dr.  Gerald  W.  Johnson,  Lawrence  Radiation  Laboratories,  was  named 
director  of  Naval Laboratories.  (DOD  Release 114-66) 
0  AEC  had  developed  standby  capability  to   test  nuclear  weapon  research 
devices a t  high altitudes  and in  space if  t h e  1963 international test ban 
treaty  were  abrogated,  Aviation  Week  reported.  Standby  capability, 
based  on large launch vehicles developed as nuclear device carriers  and 
small  instrumentation  rockets  for  diagnosis,  would  concentrate on  at- 
mospheric testing  of  ICBM  and  a d I C B M  systems and  effects of  nuclear 
detonations  on  these systems.  (Av.  Wk . ,  2/7/66,  31) 
LUNA  E’S  revelations  of  th e  moon’s  surface  had  deprived  Iranian  poets 
of  a  source  of  inspiration  thousands  of  years  old,  Ebrahim  Sahba, 
speaking for   the  Iranian Poets Assn.,  told AP: “Now,  with th e  ugly  and 
coarse surface,  Iranian poets must search for something else to describe 
beauty.”  (AP, Wm h .  Post,  2/8/66,  A8) 
February  8:  Boeing  Co.  delivered  first  of  eight  Lunar  Orbiter  spacecraft- 
a n  85-lb. test model-to  KSC for engineering ground tests.  (Boeing Co.; 
Bus.  W k . ,  2/12/66) 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and  Development (OECD) , meet- 
ing in  Paris,  was  urged  by  a n  advisory group  on  fundamental research 
to  establish from 15  to  20  new  centers  for  advanced s tudy  and research 
which would  serve  scientists  from  any  member  country.  Each  center 
would  concentrate on  one field  and would be  established a t  the  univer- 
sity  in   a  member  country  tha t   had  shown th e  highest  achievement i n  
tha t   field.  In   addition,  a  program  of  international  fellowships  could 
provide funds to outstanding researchers.  (Sci. S ew . ,  NYT, 2 /8 /66 ,14)  
February 9:  NASA  launched 210-lb. Reentry E payload by Scout booster from 
NASA  Wallops  Station to  evaluate char integrity  of  low-density phenolic 
nylon  heat-shield  material  and  test  its  effectiveness  i n   withstanding 
actual  reentry  conditions.  I n   addition  to   four  stages  of  Scout  launch  
vehicle,  17-in. spherical rocket was  attached to  instrumented payload as 
velocity  package.  First  two  Scout  stages  lofted  payload  to   54-mi.  (87- 
km.)  altitude. Remainder of vehicle coasted upward to  110-mi. (177-km.) 
altitude and  a t  peak of  trajectory,  during 3rd-stage burn, guidance system 
began  positioning  vehicle  for  desired  reentry  angle.  Fourth  stage  fired 
during descent,  and then  velocity package motor ignited, driving reentry 
payload  to   a velocity  of  more  than   18,000 mph  through  earth‘s  atmos- 
sphere. Payload impacted 1,150 mi.  downrange i n  th e  Atlantic; recovery 
was  no t  attempted. 
Throughout flight,  continuous telemetry  channel furnished data  be- 
fore  and  after  th e   one-minute  communications  blackout  caused  by 
reentry,  and  aircraft photographed visible  portion  of  reentry.  Delayed 
telemetry system, used successfully on previous flights to  transmit dur-  
ing blackout period,  failed  to  operate because of  a transmitter malfunc- 
tion,  bu t   data furnished  by  continuous channel  o n  post-blackout  con- 

50 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

ditions  would  permit  evaluation  of  total  performance  and   correlation 
with previous ground tests. Flight, fifth in  series of  experiments in  Scout 
Reentry Heating Project designed to  investigate heating environment of 
a  body  reentering  earth‘s  atmosphere  a t   18,400 mph,  was  directed  by 
 (NASA  Proj.  off.; NASA  Release 66-18; WaIlops  Release 66-8) 
~ R C .
February  9:  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill 
Research Range  reached  111-mi.  (178-km.)  altitude.  GSFC  experiment, 
first  in   series  of  three,  successfully  measured  number  and  energy dis- 
tribution of  electrons ia energy range of  1-300 kev, which produce visual 
aurora.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  with  Thor-Agena D  booster  from 
WTR.  (US. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147) 
Soviet  aircraft  designer  Oleg  K.  Antonov,  interviewed  i n   Kiev  by  five 
Western European journalists,  said U.S.S.R.  was  developing An-154, a 
double-decked, 724-passenger aircraft.  It  would  be  larger  version- 
nearly  50  ft.  longer-of  An-22  and would  use  four  turboprop  motors. 
Two  preproduction models  of  An-22 were  undergoing flight  tests,  An- 
tonov  said,  and  Aeroflot  expected  i t   to  be  in   cargo  service  by  1968. 
(Nying Review International, 5 /66 ,544)  
February  10:  In   a White House  ceremony, President  Johnson  awarded  th e  
National Medal of  Science to  11 scientists,  including the  la te  Dr.  Hugh 
L.  Dryden, former NASA Deputy Administrator. Dr. Dryden was  cited for 
his  “contributions  as  a n   engineer,  administrator,  and  civil  servant  for 
one-half century  to   aeronautics  and  astronautics  which  have  immeas- 
urably supported the  Nation’s  preeminence i n  space.”  Mrs.  Dryden ac- 
cepted the  medal-first 
ever awarded posthumously-for 
her   husband. 
President Johnson told  recipients  tha t   “in  a nation of  millions and  a 
world of billions,  the  individual is still the  first and basic agent of  change. 
Without  the  unfettered  curiosity  of  individual men probing and reach- 
ing  for  new  t ru th   our  planet  would  be  a  dry  and  dreary place.”  (Pres. 
Doc., 2/14/66;  NYT,  2/11/66,  5; Wash.  Eve.  Star,  2/11/66,  A2; Balt. 
Sun, 2/11/66) 
Mstislav  Keldysh,  president  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences;  Alexander 
Lebedinsky,  .professor;  and  Alexander  Vinogradov,  geochemist,  held 
2%-hr.  televised  press  conference in  Moscow  on  the  LUNA  IX mission. 
KeIdysh said U.S.S.R.  had mastered the  soft-landing technique and was 
planning more  soft-landing missions in   1966 to   obtain  information on  
physical  conditions  on  th e  moon,  composition of  lunar  rock,  and varia- 
tions  i n   lunar   temperature.  He  said  th e   next  major  challenge would 
be  designing  a  spacecraft  capable  of  returning  men  to  ear th   from  the  
moon and  called  for US. “cooperation no t   competition” in   a  program 
for  manned  lunar   landing.  LUNA  IX’S  mission was  “only  to  photograph 
th e  surface of  th e  moon and measure cosmic radiation,”  Keldysh  said. 
The   fu l l  panorama  of  the   lunar   surface  included  6,000  lines  and  was 
transmitted  to  ear th   in   100 min.  Spacecraft  contained  no  solar  bat- 
teries. 
Lebedinsky  revealed  tha t   LUNA  IX  had  “shifted  between  the   second 
and th ird  transmissions of th e  panorama, and as a result,  the  inclination 
of th e  phototelevision camera changed several degrees, while th e  camera 
itself  shifted  its position  several centimeters.”  Keldysh  added:  “It may 
be  tha t   th e  station  landed  on   an  unstable  small stone,  or  perhaps  the  
ground  settled  slightly.  Such  a  very  small  deformation  could  occur 
because of  temperature  changes on   the  moon  or  a  certain mechanical 

51 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
impact by  the   station  itself."  He  expressed  confidence  tha t   the   lunar  
surface  could  support manned  spacecraft. 
Lebedinsky said LUNA  IX  had measured ra te  of radiation  in outer space 
a t  30  millirads a day and tha t  the  spacecraft had detected additional radi- 
ation  on lunar  s u r f a c e a p p a r e n t l y  produced by  nuclear reactions  from 
cosmic  rays  hitting  moon's  upper  layers-but 
he  did  no t   disclose 
amount.  Vinogradov  reported  tha t   lunar   surface  was  hard,  porous, 
volcanic  cracked  rock,  but  acknowledged  tha t   other  areas  might  be 
different.  Keldysh  announced  tha t   VENUS  XI  and  VENUS  111  spacecraft, 
launched  Nov.  12 and  Nov.  16,  1965,  respectively,  were  scheduled  to 
approach  Venus  March  1.  (W m h .  Post,  2/11/66;  Balt.  Sun,  2/11/66; 
Sullivan,  NYT ,   2/11/66,  17) 
February  10:  Apollo/Saturn  AS-201  successfully  completed  countdown 
rehearsal  a t   ETR  in   preparation  for  scheduled Feb.  22  suborbital  flight 
test.  (AP, Wash. Post,  2/10/66) 
0  NASA  launched two  sets  of  three  Nike-Cajun sounding rockets,  each carry- 
ing  payload  of  19 acoustic  grenades,  about  12 hrs.  apart  from  three  
launch  sites-Point  Barrow,  Alaska,  Churchill  Research  Range,  and 
NASA  Wallops  Station-to  gather  information  on   atmosphere  between 
20- and 60-mi.  altitudes  over wideIy  spaced geographic areas under  day 
and night conditions during winter.  Grenades were ejected and detonated 
a t   programed  altitudes,  yielding  information  on  wind  directions  and  
speeds,  atmospheric  densities,  pressures,  and  temperatures.  (Wallops 
Release 66-9) 
*  U.S.S.R.  launched COSMOS  CVII  containing scientific equipment for investi- 
gation  of  outer  space.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  322 km.  (200 mi.); 
perigee, 204 km.  (126.7 mi.) ; period,  89.7 min.;  inclination,  65".  Equip- 
ment was  functioning normally.  (Tass,  2/10/66) 
U.K.  would  build  $84-million  prototype  nuclear-power  reactor  of  th e  
breeder  type -de s igned   to  produce  large  amounts  of  new  fissionable 
atoms-at  Dounreay in  northeast Scotland, Technology Minister Frank 
Cousins  told  th e   House  of  Commons.  Sir  William  Penney,  head  of 
British  Atomic  Energy Authority,  told  news  conference  h e   hoped  to  
have  commercial models  of  th e  breeder  power  station  in   operation by 
1980.  (N Y T ,  2/10/66;  Wash. Eve. Star, 2/11/66,  A l )  
February  11:  U.S.S.R.  launched COSMOS  CVIII  carrying scientific instruments 
for  continued  space  research  in to   orbit  with  865-km.  (537.2-mi.) 
apogee; 227-km.  (141-mi.) perigee;  95.3-min. period;  and  48.9"  inclina- 
tion.  Equipment was  functioning normally.  (Tass, 2/12/66) 
NASA  and Swedish Space Research Committee (SSRC) signed Memorandum 
of  Understanding to  conduct  pulsed  laser  radar  experiments to   deter- 
mine  relationship  of  noctilucent  clouds  to   height,  distribution,  and 
scattering properties  of  cosmic  dust  and  aerosol  particles.  SSRC  would 
provide  optical  equipment  and  design  and  construct  light  transmitter 
optical system; NASA  would provide laser head,  power supply,  and other 
supp P y  and  the   responsibilities  it  would  undertake.  Results  of  experi- 
equi  ment.  Each  agency would bear th e  COSL  of  th e  equipment it would 
ments would be made available to  scientific world.  (NASA Release 66-35) 
Device to alter wavelength of a laser beam to  tune  it for specific tasks such  
as communications, surgery,  analysis  of  materials,  or  industrial appli- 
cations was  patented  by Bell Telephone Labs. physicists Drs.  Joseph A. 
Giordmaine  and  David  A.  Kleinman.  I n  patented  method,  laser  beam 
would  be  passed  a t  a  calculated angle through a  special crystal  so  tha t  

52 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

frequency  of  the  emerging light would be a multiple of  original beam’s. 
(Jones, NYT ,  2/12/66,33) 
February 11: Breadboard of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Appli- 
cation)  was  tested  by  NASA  and  AEC  a t   Nuclear  Rocket  Development 
Station, Jackass Flats, Nev.  Initial fixed-drum s ta r t  tested  control drum 
response; maximum power reached was 230 mw, compared with reactor’s 
1,100-mw design power. Test duration was  nine minutes, and maximum 
exhaust  temperature  was  1,540’F.  After  a  second  low-pressure s tar t  
was  aborted,  system was  given normal s ta r t ;  in   22-min.  test  i t  reached 
350-mw maximum  power  and   2,130’F  maximum  temperature.  Nerva 
engine had  been  successfully  started  twice  on  Feb.  3.  (Atomic Energy 
Programs,  1966, 186) 
*  Theoretical  possibility  of  self-supporting  tapered  cable  extending 22,000 
mi.  in to  space from ear th  and from extraterrestrial rotating  or revolving 
bodies  was  examined  in   Science  report  by  John  Isaacs,  Hugh  Bradner, 
and George E.  Bachus,  Scripps Ins t i tu te  of  Oceanography, and Allyn C. 
Vine, Woods  Hole  Oceanographic Institution.  Cable,  referred  to  as  a 
“skyhook,”  would  be  extended downward  from  a  satellite  in   synchro- 
nous orbit, become an  extension of  the  satellite,  and be held in  place by 
the  balance between  centrifugal  and gravitational  forces tha t  keeps  any 
satellite  i n  orbit.  Authors  of  the   report  conceded  in   a  telephone  in ter-  
view with Harold Schmeck of  the  New  York Times tha t  “present-day en- 
gineering is no t  yet  up  to  th e  task  of  making a cable strong enough and 
light  enough  for  th e  sky  hook  project  from  earth.”  (Science, 2/11/66, 
682-3; Schmeck, NYT ,  2/12/66,  12) 
DOD   would  use  Titan  I11  booster  to   launch  23   comsats  in   three   launch  
groups  to   form  a  global  communications system,  M/G  Ben  I.  Funk, 
Cmdr.,  AFSC’S  Space Systems Div.,  told National Assn.  of Manufacturers 
in   New  York.  Orbiting about  18,206 mi.  above earth,  satellites  would 
form system “of  high  reliability and reasonably long life, secure against 
interference,  and  with  sufficient  capacity  to  handle  a  high  volume  of 
unique and vital military  traffic,”  Funk said. He also revealed  tha t  USAF 
was  seeking solutions  to   problems  of  reusable  boosters,  maneuvering 
reentry,  lighter-weight materials,  and  higher performance fuels.  (Text, 
Av. Da i ly ,  2/15/66) 
February  12:  France  failed  to   launch  research  satellite  from  Hammaguir 
Range because of  malfunction i n  ignition system of  three-stage Diamant 
booster.  At  T -0  
in   countdown,  th e   Diamant  booster  remained  on 
launching pad.  (Reuters, NYT ,  2/13/66,3) 
0  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  outlining  the   NASA  manned  spaceflight  program  a t   American 
Assn.  of  School Administrators meeting in  Atlantic  City,  discussed the  
benefits  to  man on  ear th  of  the  Apollo Applications program: “.  . . man 
would have the  capability of  establishing world-wide, real-time television 
by  placing  large antennas  and powerful transmitters in to   synchronous 
orbit;  of  establishing  control  towers  in   space  both  for  aircraft  and 
ocean-going ships;  of  using  space observations  to  identify  and  exploit 
earth‘s  natural  resources;  and  of  controlling  the  weather.”  (Text) 
*  Three   U S .   scientists  were  elected  to  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences:  Dr. 
Severo Ochao, Nobel Prize-winning biochemist, New York Univ.  College 
of  Medicine;  Dr.  Richard  Courant,  mathematician,  New  York  Univ.; 
and Dr.  Herman F.  Mark,  chemist, Polytechnic  Ins t i tu te  of  Brooklyn. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

53 

Total U.S.  membership was now six; five Soviet scientists were members 
of  U S .  National Academy  of  Sciences.  (Schwartz, NYT, 2/12/66,2) 
February  12:  U S .   embassy  confirmed  tha t   West  Germany was  negotiating 
with  several unidentified American  aircraft companies  for  technical  as- 
sistance  i n   removgin  flaws  from  th e   F-104G  Starfighter  jet  aircraft. 
Since beginning of  1965,29 Starfighters had been destroyed i n  accidents 
and 16 Luftwaffe pilots killed.  (NYT, 2/20/66,9) 
February  13:  Agena  rocket stage identical  to  one a t  KSC  which NASA planned 
to  use as   target  vehicle  in   t h e  March Gemini VI11 mission suffered a n  
explosive  s ta r t   i n   ground  firing  a t   USAF  Arnold  Engineering Develop- 
ment  Center.  Failure,  which  followed  five  successful  test  firings,  was 
similar  to   explosion which  canceled Gemini VI  mission Oct.  25,  1965. 
(UPI,  r u s h .  Post, 2/14/66) 
February  14:  Benefits  of  U.S.  space  program  were  emphasized  by  NASC 
Executive Secretary Dr.  Edward C.  Welsh a t  AIAA  meeting i n  St.  Paul. 
He  cited  i n   particular  space  program’s  contributions  to   education, 
saying, “it  has added immeasurably to  total available knowledge of  man, 
of  the  earth, and of  the  solar  system.  . . . Funds have flowed from NASA 
. . . to our educational institutions i n  the  form of scholarships and fellow- 
ships,  in   the  form of  new  laboratories,  and  research opportunities.  I t  is 
estimated tha t   from this one source about  1,000 new  Ph.D.’s  are added 
annually to this resource of  th e  Na t ion .   . . and . . . i t  has been a catalyst 
and a stimulus to  education throughout  the  whole country.  . . .’, (Text) 
0  Threat of  contamination of Mars made search for tha t  planet’s  indigenous 
life, a t  any stage of  evolution from prebiotic to  extinct,  a n  urgent under- 
taking,  according to  Biology Working Group’s  section  on  exobiology i n  
third and final report of  NAS  Space Science Board Summer Study  (June- 
July  1965) a t  Woods  Hole, Mass.  Report, Space Research: Directions for 
the  Future,  Part  Three, said:  “. . . th e  exploration of  Mars,  with  initial 
emphasis on  the  detection  and characterization  of  possible Martian life, 
should  constitute  the  major  scientific goal  of  the   United  States  space 
program in  th e  period following the  manned lunar  landing.” High prior- 
ity in  field of  environmental biology was given to  study effects of weight- 
lessness, with particular  attention to “synergistic  or antagonistic  effects 
from  simultaneously imposed  stresses of  radiation  and weightlessness.” 
Orbiting research facilities with six- to eight-man crews to study effects 
of  prolonged  space  flight  preceding  extended  manned  missions  were 
recommended  by  Medicine  and   Physiology  Working  Group.  Report 
urged  series  of  manned  flights,  ground-based studies,  and  biosatellite 
experiments to   yield  data  for  planetary  exploration. 
Group examining NASA-university  relations  urged  increases  i n  tra in-  
ing budget and  facilities and  research grants,  plus  a program providing 
graduate  students-with  flight  opportunities.  (Text) 
a  D.  Brainerd  Holmes,  former  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  fo r  
Manned  Space  Flight  (1961-1963) and  now  with  Raytheon  Co.,  re- 
flected  upon  his  NASA  experience a t   National Space Club  luncheon  in 
Washington,  D.C.  “NASA  has  done  weIl”  to  date  bu t   today  deckions 
must  be shaping up   for  continuing space exploration beyond  th e  lunar  
landing by  an  American  by  1970.  “Whither  now  NASA?” was  th e  ques- 
tion, Holmes said, and in  the  democratic process of  decision a n  informed 
public must play a vital part.  He asserted  tha t  i t  was  no t  only NASA’s job 
to  inform  but  th e   du ty   of  everyone  aware  of  th e   significance and 
challenge of  space exploration to  the  fu ture  of  th e  U.S.  (EH) 

54 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

February 14: NASA Apollo Lunar Excursion Module  (Lem)  ascent engine tes t  
completed  a t  Arnold Engineering Development Center.  (AEDC) 
0  Col.  Jack  Bollerud  (USAF) was  named  Acting  Director,  Space Medicine, 
NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space Flight,  and  would  assume  all  duties  as- 
signed to  th e  late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace. He would  also continue to  
discharge the  functions of  Deputy Director,  Space Medicine, a position 
h e  had  held  since May  1965.  (NASA  Hq.  Bu l l . ,  2/14/66,  2) 
Vice  President  Hubert  Humphrey  designated  Col.  Donald  W.  Paffell 
(USAF) his Assistant for Aeronautics and Space Matters.  (USAF Hq. Bull., 
2 /14 /66 ,2)  
0  Development  of  sealed  cities  enclosed  by  domes  “utilizing  the   sealed 
[space]  cabin concept on  a more grandiose scale, such as  the  astrodome 
environmental module”  to   assure mankind  a n   environment  free  from 
air and water pollution,  was  urged by Dr.  Eugene Konecci,  of  NASC  staff, 
a t   th e   National  Cybernetics  Foundation  symposium  on  “Ecological 
Technology-Space, 
Earth,  Sea,”  a t   the   Smithsonian  Ins t i tu t ion .  
Konecci  envisioned  self-sufficient  community  “modules”  of  several 
thousand  persons  consisting  of  “a  series  of  astrodomes enclosing th e  
atmosphere,”  which  would  be  cleansed  and  regenerated  continuously. 
Each  community  would  have  ‘‘its  own  self-contained,  recirculating 
water  supply’’  and  facilities  for  converting  sewage  back  into  useful 
products.  Food  would  be  largely  synthetic,  but  there  would  be  “meat 
factories”  in  which  animals would be  raised  “in modern air-conditioned 
surroundings  and  fed  the   high  nu tr ien t   feeds  provided  through  bio- 
synthesis.”  (UPI,  NYT, 2/15/66,23) 
0  DOD  awarded General Dynamics Corp.  Convair Div.  $4-million contract to  
refurbish  and update 23  retired  Atlas  ICBM’s to  launch  upper-stage  ve- 
hicles  for  Abres  (Advanced  Ballistic  Reentry  Systems),  Nike  target, 
and scientific satellite programs. (General Dynamics Release) 
February  15:  President  Johnson  announced  he   would  send  Astronauts 
Walter M.  Schirra, Jr.,  and Frank Borman, command pilots  of  the  Dec. 
4-18 GEMINI  VII/VI  mission,  on  a  three-week,  eight-country  tour  of  the  
Far East to  demonstrate scientific, technological, and educational values 
of  U S .  space program and   to  visit  Far  Eastern countries  which had  co- 
operated with US. in   space programs.  Astronauts would  leave Feb.  21, 
and  visit  Japan,  Korea,  Taiwan,  Malaysia,  Thailand,  the   Philippines, 
Australia,  and New Zealand. 
The  President  had  sen t  GEMINI  IV  Astronauts  James  A.  McDivitt and 
Edward  H.  White  11,  to   the   Paris  Air  Show  in   June   1965;  GEMINI  V 
Astronauts  L.  Gordon  Cooper  and  Charles Conrad, Jr.,  on  an   African 
tour   in   September  1965;  and  John  Glenn,  first  American  to   achieve 
orbit,  on a European  tour   i n  October 1965.  (Pres. Doc.,  2/21/66,  221; 
NYT, 2/16/66,  54) 
0  NASA  converted  i ts   contract  with  Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering Corp. 
for development of Lunar Excursion Module  (Lem) from cos t-p lus-hed-  
fee  to   cost-plus-incentive-fee.  Under  new  four-year  contract,  which 
would bring total cost to  $1.42  billion,  Grumman would deliver  15  flight 
articles-four  more than  in  previous contract-10 
test articles, and two 
mission simulators.  (NASA Release 66-37) 
USAF  launched  three   unidentified  satellites  with  Atlas-Agena  D  booster 
from WTR.  (U.S.  Aeron.  & Space Ac t . ,   1966,  148) 
Rep.  Albert  Thomas  (D-Tex.), Chairman of  House Committee  on  Appro- 
priations’  Independent Offices Subcommittee, died of  cancer. A member 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

55 

of  th e  House for almost 30 yrs.,  Thomas had  been deeply  interested  in 
Congressional  funding  for  NACA,  NSF,  and  NASA.  (Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
2/15/66,  B8) 
February  15:  I n  speech a t  Univ.  of  Missouri on  impact of  Federal research 
and   development expenditures  on   American  colleges  and   universities, 
Leo  S. Tonkin, Executive Director of  D.C.  Commissioners’ Council on  
Higher Education, cited statement by  two  NASA  employees on  problems 
involved in  awarding research grants.  Dr.  Thomas P.  Murphy, Deputy 
Assistant  Administrator  for  Legal  Affairs,  and  Dr.  Thomas W.  Adams, 
Socio-Political Specialist  for  Office of  Policy Planning,  said  in   a paper 
presented a t  1965 annual APSA  meeting: “Can  a mission-oriented agency 
use  geography  as  a  criterion  in   awarding grants,  recognizing  fu l l   well 
tha t   i t   concomitantly  will  sacrifice  time,  quality,  and  money  in   the  
process? When  grants are  given to one institution on grounds other than  
merit,  there  is little basis for denying similar grants to other universities 
which would not normally merit them.”  (Text; CR, 2/23/66) 
0  Two  gallons  of  fue l   exploded  inside  drum  near  Sa turn   IB  launch  pad  a t  
ETR,  but  there  were no injuries  and no damage to  th e  booster or  launch 
complex,  AP  reported.  Sa turn   IB  was  scheduled  to  launch   unmanned 
Apollo  spacecraft  on  Feb.  22.  (AP,  NYT ,  2/16/66,  52) 
February  16:  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill 
Research Range  reached  130-mi. (209-km.)  altitude i n  second of  three  
GSFC  experiments to measure number and energy distribution of  auroral- 
producing electrons  i n  energy range of  1-300 kev.  Satisfactory data were 
recovered despite malfunction of  one detector.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  Multi-foil high-performance insulation system to  reduce supercold propel- 
lant  “boil  OF’ in  space had  been successfully tested  for 96 hrs.  a t  MSFC 
in   a  vacuum  chamber a t   pressures  approaching th e   vacuum  of  space. 
Since liquid hydrogen propellant,  already used  i n  Sa turn  IB  and  Sa turn  
V  upper stages, was  being  considered as a propellant  on  longer-duration 
missions,  cryogenic technology was  being extended a t  MSFC  to  meet  th e  
needs  of  fu tu re  space exploration programs.  (MSFC  Release  66-41) 
*  Cosmonaut Valery  Bykovsky,  who  orbited  earth  in   U.S.S.R.’s  VOSTOK v 
June  16-19, 1963, discussed problems  of flight to   the  moon i n  Av ia t s iya  
i Kosmonautika  and  suggested  three  possible methods  for  flight:  (1)  a 
launch directly from ear th  with a very powerful carrier rocket to  provide 
escape speed  for  a  huge payload  including the  spacecraft  and  facilities 
for  re turn   flight;  (2) a  launch  from  ear th  orbit  with separately  fueling 
low-power rockets  orbiting  th e  lunar   spacecraft;  (3)  a  landing from  a n  
orbit  near  th e   moon  (such  as  tha t   planned  for  U S .   Apollo  project) 
which would  “insure more dependable contact between  landing capsule 
and  th e  main  ship.”  Bykovsky  said work  “is  in   fu l l  swing”  to   design 
maneuvering  instruments,  but  U.S.S.R.  would  send  a  manned  space- 
craft  to   the   moon  only  when  th e   cosmonauts’  re tu rn   to   ear th   was 
guaranteed.  (Tass,  2/16/66) 
*  Joseph  C.  Satterthwaite,  former  S ta te   Dept.  foreign  service  officer, was 
sworn in  as a consultant to NASA Administrator James E.  Webb for  in ter-  
national  affairs “in  th e  general area of Western Europe.”  (NASA  Release 
66-39) 
February  17:  French-built  instrumented  scientific  satellite,  DIAPASON  1 
(D-IA) , was  successfully launched  from Hammaguir  Range with  three- 
stage Diamant booster.  Initial orbital  data:  apogee, 2,753.5 km.  (1,710 
mi.);  perigee,  503.1  km. (312  mi,);  period,  118.6  min.;  inclination, 

56 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1%6 

34.04’.  Designed  with  a  three-month  lifetime,  the   20-in.-dia.,  49-lb. 
satellite would  transmit  information  on   earth‘s  magnetic field  and  test 
France’s  tracking  stations.  Bretigny  Tracking  Center  near  Paris  was 
receiving  satellite’s  radio  transmissions normally. 
This was  second launch  of  a  French-made satellite  by  France’s  Dia- 
mant booster.  First was  Nov.  26,  1965, when  A-I satellite  carrying radio 
and radar transmitter, but no scientific equipment, was  orbited.  (French 
Embassy  Release;  AP, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  2/17/66,  A l ;   Wa sh .   Post, 
2/18/66,  A13) 
February  17:  NASA  launched  49-lb.  payload  with  ionosphere experiment  for 
Rice Univ. to 116-mi. (186-km.) altitude from NASA Wallops Station with 
Nike-Apache sounding rocket to  test  theory  that  intense electrical  cur-  
ren ts   flow  a t   high  altitudes  over  the   earth  and  are   strongest  a t   about 
120-mi. altitude.  Data  from magnetometer designed  to  detect  magnetic 
field caused by  the  curren ts  were telemetered from the  payload to ground 
stations a t  Wallops during flight.  (Wallops Release 66-11; NASA  Rpt. SRL) 
NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator for  Space Science and Applications 
Edgar  M.  Cortright,  testifying  before the  House Committee on  Science 
and   Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Space  Science  and  Applications, 
stressed  importance  of  selectivity  in   planning  space  science  program: 
“We have been looking a t  Apollo  applications for some time to  identify 
those areas of  scientific activity where th e  man  can be a real asset to  th e  
experiment, and  th e  areas  tha t   interest us most  are astronomy; natural 
resources,  which  is  looking  down  a t   the   Earth  with  various  types  of 
detectors;  biology,  which  is  concerned  with  long-duration weightless 
flight, from both  a fundamental biological point  of  view and in  prepara- 
. . . man is no t  an  asset in  space science experiments in  all cases. You 
tion  for  longer flights; and,  of  course,  continued  lunar  exploration. 
C t  
have  to  be  extremely selective  to  find  those  cases where he  will  be  an  
asset, and they do exist. We think tha t  astronomy in  the  seventies is one 
such   area;  also biology,  Earth  resources,  and  continued  lunar   explora- 
tion. But in  the  particles and fields work i t  is unlikely tha t  man will be an  
asset,  and  it is  unlikely  tha t   he  will  play  the  major role  in  applications 
where  what  we   really  want  is  long  lifetime.”  (N A S A  Auth.  Hearings, 
57-8) 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller told  the  Business Council in  Washington, D.C.,  tha t   ‘‘so  far  as 
overall manned space flight manpower  is concerned, we  have passed our  
peak”  in  engineering, we’re  “reaching our peak  in  manufacturing,”  and 
we’re  “at  our  peak  in   total manpower  costs.”  He  added:  “One  of  th e  
anomalies of  the   space  program  is  tha t   we  must  begin  to  ‘go  ou t   of 
business’  before we   fly  our  first  operational  vehicle.  . . . By  the   time 
parison with  th e  peak,  which occurred in   1965.  . . .” 
manned  flights begin,  th e   employment level  will  be  quite  low  i n   com- 
Commenting  on   post-Apollo  plans,  he  said:  “The  budget  for  the  
coming fiscal year permits NASA  to  hold open th e  option for  a program to  
procure additional flight vehicles beyond  those now programmed,  SO as  
to   employ  th e  Apollo  hardware and  capabilities a t  least  through  1971. 
If  we  do  no t   exercise  this  option,  in   the   decision  for  the   [FYI  1968  
budget we  will  have  to   begin a  phase  down  of  the  manned  space flight 
activities  and th e   ‘mothballing’ of  some of  our  facilities.”  (Text) 
0  AEC  Chairman Dr.  Glenn T.  Seaborg predicted  a t  Univ.  of  Texas  lecture 
tha t   if  man  decided  to   colonize  the   moon  or  planets,  he   would  need 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

57 

nuclear  energy to  make  t h e  environments habitable  for   human  beings 
and  large nuclear  reactors  to  provide  “planet  conditioning”-an 
outer 
space version  of  air  conditioning.  I n   addition,  reactors  could  furn ish  
power  “to  extract water from  th e  rock,  to   help produce synthetic food 
and  to  extract  minerals  and   other  materials  from  th e   surface.”  Dr. 
power  plants  on  manned  orbiting  laboratories:  “. . . it  is  desirable  to  
Seaborg said he foresaw in  th e  more immediate fu ture  th e  use of  nuclear 
operate these stations a t  the  relatively  low altitudes  of  between 100 and 
200  nautical  miles.  For  these  low  orbits  the   smaller  exposed  area  of 
nuclear power  systems results i n  greater  reductions  i n  th e  atmospheric 
drag-and 
i n  the  pounds of propellant  required to keep th e  station i n  i t s  
assigned  orbit.  An  unmanned  scientific or  defense system which  has  to  
operate  close  to   the   Earth  w i l l   similarly  have  the   advantage  of  low  
atmospheric drag if nuclear power systems a re  used.”  (Text; AEC  Release 
S-6-66) 
February  17:  Program  to  seek  basic  principles  of  sonic  booms-including 
flights over U S .  communities-was  being prepared by  a top-level, four-  
man  Government  committee,  Evert  Clark  reported  in   the   New  York 
Times. Program hoped to  obtain a t  least preliminary answers before Sept. 
1 so tha t  limitations  o n  boom making could be written  in to  Ss t  develop- 
ment contracts. Committee members: Dr.  Donald F.  Hornig, Director of 
Office of  Science and  Technology (OST)  and Presidential  science adviser; 
Dr.  Nicholas Golovin,  OST;  Secretary of  Defense Robert S. McNamara; 
and Dr. John R. Dunning, dean of Columbia Univ.’s  School of Engineer- 
ing and Applied  Science,  (Clark, N Y T ,  2/18/66,  8) 
Use  of  personal  radar  un i ts   by  astronauts  to   counteract  optical  illusions 
which they might encounter while assembling a space station or  explor- 
ing  th e  moon  was  recommended by  Cambridge Univ.  Prof.  Richard L. 
Gregory,  au thor   of  Eye  and  Brain:  The Psychology  of  Seeing, in  a  New 
York  press  interview.  Gregory  believed  astronauts  might  experience 
spatial distortion when seeing spacecraft’s srructural elements gleaming 
luminously in  sunlight or  sharply etched against a je t  black background. 
In  addition, he thought they might experience reversed depth perception 
which would cause distorted images. Gregory recommended aiding astro- 
nauts  with  tones,  heard  through  earphones,  of  a  variable  pitch  which 
would  be  determined by  a  beam  from radar un i t   each man would wear. 
Variations  in   pitch  would  indicate  distance  to  different  objects  and  
astronaut’s  ra te  of  approach or retreat from them. Gregory was  conduct- 
ing his  research a t  New York  Univ. on a senior foreign scientist  fellow- 
ship financed in  part by  NASA.  (Osmundsen, NYT, 2/17/66,31;  Houston 
Chron., 2/16/66) 
Dr.  Wilmot N.  Hess,  Chief  of  Laboratory for Theoretical Studies a t  GSFC, 
received one of  th e  Arthur  S. Flemming Awards presented  annually  to  
10  outstanding young men  in  Government service.  (NASA  Notice) 
*  Certificate promoting th e  late Dr. William Randolph Lovelace 11, to  rank  of 
major  general  in   U S .   Air  Force  Reserve was  presented  to   his  eldest 
daughter, Mrs.  John Sellman, a t  USAF  Satellite Test Annex, Sunnyvale, 
Calif.,  by M/G  Ben  I. Funk, AFSC’S  Space Systems Div.  Cmdr. Dr.  Love- 
lace,  former  NASA  Director  of  Space Medicine,  died with  his  wife  and 
their  pilot  i n   an   aircraft  accident  near  Aspen,  Colo.,  December  1965. 
(AFSC  Release  43.66) 
Question whether  “superrocketsyy for  th e  Apollo manned  space program 
should have liquid or  solid stages was  no longer debatable, said William 

58 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Hines  i n   th e   Washington  Evening  Star;  the   solids  had  been  “forced 
through  studied  neglect  to   default.”  He  continued:  “This  is  not  to  
suggest, however,  tha t   th e  whole liquid-solid debate is moot. 
“Between  Sa tu rn   I-B’s  35,000-pound orbital  capability  and  Sa tu rn  
V’s  250,000 pounds is a huge gap; between Atlas-Centaur’s 2,300-pound 
escape capability  and  Sa turn   V’s  95,000  pounds  is  a  gap  tha t   is  even 
greater,  proportionately. 
“A  wide variety  of  scientific and manned payloads  can be envisioned 
as  fitting  within  these  gaps.  A  flexible  booster  system  based  on   large 
solid  rockets  of  varying lengths  and  flight  characteristics  could  fill  th e  
gaps  quickly and a t  reasonable cost;  liquid  systems could  not.”  (Hines, 
Wash.  Eve. Star,  2/17/66,  A6) 
February  17: T .  R.  May,  vice  president  of  Lockheed-Georgia Co.,  disclosed 
plans  to   build  commercial version  of  the   C-5A military  fan  jet  which 
could  carry  up  to   900  passengers  and  thus   reduce  fares  drastically. 
May,  speaking a t   a n   Air  Force  Assn.  seminar  in   Salt  Lake  City,  said 
Lockheed  “fully  expects”  to   have  th e   aircraft,  designated th e   L-500, 
“flying commercial  routes”  in   the  early  1970’s. 
Lockheed-Georgia Co.  had  received  a  $1.4-billion  DOD contract Sept. 
30,1965, to  develop and build the  C-5A-a  military carrier  tha t  would be 
world‘s  largest  aircraft.  Delivery was  scheduled  for  mid-1968.  (DJNS, 
Wash.  Eve.  Star,  2/18/66,  D1; NYT ,   2/18/66,  53M) 
FAA proposed a  series  of  changes in  cockpit procedures and  crew  training 
on   the   Boeing  727   jet  aircraft  tha t   had  had  four  fatal  crashes  since 
August  1965-all 
as  the   aircraft  were  preparing  to   land--“to  assure 
th e  consequences of  th e   . . . others.”  Changes,  designed to   ensure  crew 
ourselves  tha t   an   aircraft  coming  in   visually  a t   night  will  no t   suffer 
awareness  of  their  descent  rate,  were  discussed a t   an   all-day meeting 
of  experts  from FAA and  17 airlines  operating the  Boeing 727, 
FAA  Deputy Director  of  Flight  Standards Cliff W.  Walker said:  “We  
do no t  know what caused these accidents. We  have searched, searched, 
searched . . . and we  have  no t   found any  cause to  be  suspicious  of  the  
727’s  airworthiness.”  (Hudson, NYT ,   2/18/66;  AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
2/18/66,  A2;  Simons,  Wash .  Post,  2/18/66,  A l )  
Soviet T u - 1 lGw o r l d ’ s  largest aircraft-crashed  on takeoff from MOSCOW~S  
Sheremetyevo Airport  for   Brazzaville,  Congo  Republic,  when  i t s   wing 
h i t  a  snowbank.  Unofficial Soviet sources said  48  of  70 persons  aboard 
were  killed.  Tass  reported  the   ‘ ‘ c a t a ~ t r ~ p h e ”  was  “caused  by  sharp  
worsening of  weather  conditions.”  It  was  th e   first  known  crash  of  a 
Tu-114, which  could  carry  220  passengers,  had  longest  range  of  any 
commercial aircraft,  and had  been  in  regular  service about eight  years. 
(Tass, 2/18/66;  AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/18/66,  A5; AP, NYT ,  2/18/66, 
1) 
U.S.S.R.  charged  a t   17-nation disarmament  conference  in   Geneva  tha t  
th e   crash  of  an   American  nuclear  bomber  in   Spain  in   January  was 
“flagrant  violation of  international law and of  th e  1963 Moscow Treaty” 
which  banned  all  but  underground  tests.  U.S.S.R.  claimed  flight  vio- 
lated  th e   treaty  because  “it  is  common  knowledge  tha t   th e   most 
t ion  of th e  atmosphere, outer space, and water.  . . . The sou thern  coast of 
important purpose of  this  treaty was  to  prevent  radioactive contamina- 
Spain  and adjacent sea areas have been  radioactively  contaminated  by 
American  nuclear  weapons.”  U.S.  chief  delegate  William  C.  Foster 

59 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
rejected  th e   allegations  as “false”  and  countercharged  tha t   U.S.S.R. 
was  guilty  of  a  “propaganda” maneuver.  (Tush. Post,  2/18/66,  A16) 
February  18:  President Johnson  submitted NSF’S  report on  weather modifica- 
tion  research  to  Congress and said  “highly encouraging steps a re  being 
taken  toward  establishing  safe  and   effective  programs  for  modifying 
th e  weather.”  The  President,  a  supporter  of  weather-control research, 
said:  “We  can  now  begin  to   see  th e   day  when  such   programs  ma 
(Pres.  Doc.,  2/21/66,  233;  N Y 3  
become  operationally  feasible.” 
2/19/66,29) 
NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  testifying  on  NASA 
N 1967 budget authorization  before the  House Committee on  Science 
and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on   Manned  Space  Flight,  discussed 
use  of  Apollo/Saturn  systems  i n   proposed  ApoIlo  AppIications  (Aa) 
program:  “ In   th e   last  half  of  FY  1966  and  during  FY 1967  we  will 
define those new and useful missions tha t  will be able to  take advantage 
of  exciting  opportunities  provided by  th e  capabilities of  th e  developed 
and  available flight  hardware. Together with  Project Voyager,  a  major 
new  unmanned  system  for   th e   exploration  of  th e  planets,  the   Apollo 
Applications effort represents tha t   next  family  of  major  flight missions 
which  we  will  be  recommending for  approval and  authorization  i n   th e  
coming years.” 
He  cited  three   basic  elements  of  Aa  effort  foreseen  by  NASA:  “We 
believe we  can improve the  basic Apollo space vehicle  capabilities with 
minor modifications  to  extend  the  manned  time  in   orbit  from 2  weeks 
to  45 days and longer; we  can procure additional  spacecraft and launch  
vehicles  for  new,  or  follow-on, missions beyond  th e   time frame of  t h e  
curren t   Apollo  schedule;  if  th e   program  can  be  carried  ou t   along  the  
lines  of  our   most  optimistic  scheduling,  we  will  find  tha t ,   within  th e  
tha t   can  be  used  for  a l terna te  missions  i n   the   perio B 1968  to  1970.” 
approved and programmed Apollo schedule, there  a re  u  to nine vehicles 
(N A S A  Auth. Hearings,  5-6) 
.25  scientific  experiments  for  sixth  Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory 
(OGO-F),  scheduled  for  launch  in to   polar  orbit  in   1968, were  selected 
by  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for   Space 
Science and Applications,  on  recommendation of  OSSA’S  Space Science 
Steering Committee.  Fifty-five scientists  a t   U.S.  and  foreign  universi- 
ties, industrial firms,  and Government laboratories would make  correla- 
tive experiments of near-earth  space phenomena based  on data from th e  
OGO-F  experiments.  (NASA  Release 66-36) 
February  19:  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  CJX  with  “scientific  instruments 
to  continue  the   s tudy   of  ou ter   space.”  Orbital  parameters:  apogee, 
309  km.  (192  mi.);  perigee,  209  km.  (130  mi.);  period,  89.5  min.; 
inclination,  65”.  Instrumentation  was  functioning  normally.  (Tass, 
2 /  19/66) 
0  Television system on U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  IX,  which  transmitted  first  pictures 
from moon  Feb.  3-6, weighed less than   1.5 kgs.  (3.3 lbs.),  disclosed  the  
Soviet designers  of  this  equipment  i n  an   Izvestzh  interview.  Since  the 
TV camera  had  to  “distinguish  minute  details  of  the   surface  and  
transmit to  ear th  simultaneously th e  landscape around the  spot where it 
landed,”  a  miniature Vega  photocamera  with  lens  tha t   could  “photo- 
graph  a t   distances  from  two  meters  to  infinity without  focusing”  had 
been  used.  First  “radio  communication session with  the  moon”  began 
within 4 min.  10 sec. after th e  soft-landing and first television reportage 

60 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

began  within  seven  hours.  Complete  panoramic  scanning  took  100  
min.  Fu ture  probes  of  moon’s  surface would  use  camera  coupled  with 
microscope for  minute  study  of  the   lurain.  (Zzvestiu, 2/19/66,  1) 
February 20:  MSFC  engineers Michael J. Vaccaro and Haydon Y. Grubbs, Jr., 
entered lunar  vehicle  simulator  to   begin  14- to  21-day final laboratory 
validation  tests  on interior  chamber d&gn  and investigation of  human 
factors of  an  enclosed cabin  environment.  Cabin,  10-ft.  cylinder  with 
7-ft.  diameter  and  5-ft.  ceiling,  had  stations  for  performing  various 
tasks-eating, 
sleeping,  taking  sample measurements,  and  completing 
geophysical  assignments. Study,  conducted  by  Honeywell,  Inc.,  under 
NASA  Office of  Advanced  Research and Technology (OART)  sponsorship, 
would determine:  (1) functional relationships  between  physiological re- 
sponses and behavior and the  time required to perform assigned tasks; (2) 
how  to design lunar roving vehicles to provide crew mobility and  utilize 
cabin space; and  (3)  how  to increase proficiency in  performing required 
tasks  during  extended  lunar   exploration.  Engineers would  be  isolated 
as  if  on moon,  wear  long-johns or  spacesuits,  and eat dehydrated food, 
bu t   would  have  radio  communications for  receiving  instructions  and 
equipment  to   record  physical  condition  continuously  during  test. 
(MSFC Release  66-449 
NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill  Research 
Range  carried  instrumented  payload  to  103-mi.  (166-km.)  altitude. 
Conducted  for  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.,  experiment  measured  auroral 
spectral emission lines in  the  upper atmosphere as a function of  altitude. 
Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA Rpt.  SRL) 
GEMINI  v  spacecraft  in   which  Astronauts  L.  Gordon  Cooper  and  Charles 
Conrad,  Jr.,  orbited  the   ear th   Aug.  21-29,  1965, went  on  display  a t  
Buenos Aires  (Argentina) Municipal Airport as part of  a U.S.-sponsored 
exhibit  on U.S.  advances in  space.  (USIA; Reuters,  Wash. Post, 2/21/66, 
A6) 
Soviet cosmonauts had  had  their “psychic state” monitored by  an   ins tru-  
ment  tha t   also  registered  “the  slightest  nervousness  or  lack  of  con- 
fidence,”  Ogonyek  reported.  Instrument,  first  tried  on  Cosmonauts 
Andrian  Nikolayev  and  Pave1  R.  Popovich  during  Aug.  12,  1962, 
VOSTOK  111-VOSTOK  IV  tandem  maceflight,  showed  them  nervous  before 
launch,  bu t   with  nervousnes;  disaGearing  during  flight.  (AP,  Phil. 
Eve.  Bull.,  2/21/66) 
February  21:  Former  Astronaut  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.,  consultant  to  NASA 
Administrator  James  E.  Webb,  attended  dinner  in   Rangoon,  Burma, 
given in  his honor by  Burma’s  Foreign Minister U  Th i  Han.  I n  Burma 
on  a  good-will  tour,  Glenn  earlier  had  given  an   illustrated  lecture  on  
U S .  space program.  (AP, NYT ,  2/22/66,  4) 
*  Russian-born Igor  I. Sikorsky, “father  of  the  helicopter,”  was  honored  as 
Air  Force Man  of  the  Year  by  the  New  York  chapter  of  the  Air  Force 
Assn.  He was  cited especially  for  the   outstanding work  helicopters  had 
done in   the  Vietnam war.  (N . Y .  News,  2/21/66) 
February  22:  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  ex containing  two  dogs-Veterok 
and  Ugolyek-on  whom  “biological  investigations”  would  be  con- 
ducted, Tass announced. Initial orbital data:  apogee, 905 km.  (562 mi.) ; 
perigee,  187  km.  (116  mi.);  period,  96.3  min.;  inclination,  51.54O. 
Equipment was  functioning normally. 
Tass noted  COSMOS  cx  launch marked  first  time since period  prior  to  
Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin’s April 12,1961, VOSTOK  I spaceflight tha t  dogs 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

61 

had  been  launched  and  added  tha t   “further  s tudy  of  outer  space,  the  
moon and the  inner planets of  the  solar  system” was  impossible without 
fur ther   development of  %pace biology  and medicine.”  Announcement 
was  first  indication  tha t   satellites  in   Cosmos  series  were  equipped  to  
carry  anything  bu t   instruments.  (Tass,  2/23/66;  Pravdu, 2/24/66,  1, 
USS-T  Trans.) 
February 22: Launch from ETR of  first unmanned Apollo spacecraft, scheduled 
for  Feb.  23,  was   postponed because  of  cloudy,  uncertain  weather  tha t  
would  hamper  visual  and  long-range photographic  coverage  of  liftoff. 
( N Y T ,  2/23/66,  20;  S tern ,   Wash.  Post,  2/23/66,  A l ;   Hines,  Wash. 
Eve.  Star, 2/23/66,  A6) 
Astronauts  Frank Borman and Walter M.  Schirra, Jr.,  began  eight-nation 
good-will tour  of  Asia with  four-day visit  to Japan.  ( N Y T ,  2/23/66) 
*  White  Paper  released  by  U.K.  Defence Minister  Denis  Healey  said  RAF 
would  buy  50  F-111 variable  wing  bombers from  U S .   for  2.1  million 
pounds  ($5,880,000)  each  and  tha t   plans  for   new  British  aircraft 
carrier  had  been  dropped.  F-111  aircraft  operating  from  land  bases 
would  take  over  the   strike-reconnaissance  and  air-defense functions of 
carriers.  First  Sea  Lord,  Adm.  Sir  David  Luce,  resigned  in   protest; 
Navy  Minister Christopher Mayhew  had  resigned  Feb.  19.  (AP, Wash. 
Eve.  Star, 2/22/66,  A l;  Lewis,  N Y T ,  2/23/66,  1, 5 ;  Meyer,  Wash. Post, 
2 /23 /66 ,   Al) 
February  22-23: American Astronautical Society met  in  San Diego. 
Reconnaissance satellites, adapted for  peaceful observations of  earth’s 
surface,  would  bring  revolutionary  scientific  and  economic advances, 
w i l l i s  B.  Foster,  Director of  Manned  Space Science i n  NASA’s  office of 
Space Science and Applications, predicted:  “Remote sensing from space 
has  unique  capabilities, particularly  in   the   opportunity  it provides fo r  
repetitive  synoptic  coverage  of  the   earth’s  surface.  . . . Spaceborne 
sensors  will  add  to  the   knowledge  of  the   figure  of  the   earth,  its mass 
distribution, and  i ts  magnetic and gravity  fields.  Movement  of  glaciers, 
growth of  deltas,  growth of  crops,  and  even  growth of  populations can 
all be  followed  with  this  type  of  survey.”  (Text) 
Austin M.  Stanton, president  and board  chairman of  Varo,  Inc.,  said 
features  of  space such as  airlessness, weightlessness, extreme tempera- 
ture,  and  radiation  could be  “exploited as  a completely  new  realm”  for  
manufacturing.  He  said  the   ear th   might  ultimately  be  encircled  by  a 
“vast doughnut-like ring 150,000 miles in  circumference,” of  articulated 
orbiting manufacturing facilities : “As  a businessman, I propose tha t  the  
time  is  ripe for  a profitable  industrial venture  in  space.  . . . It will  no t  
be  difficult  to  persuade  investors  to  ven ture   into  buying  stock  in   the  
new  companies for three reasons:  the  predictions  of  the  early advocates 
of  astronautics have  been  fulfilled;  the   efforts  of  space agencies  have 
been  spectacularly  successful;  and  . . . the   communications satellite 
venture  seems sound.”  (Hill,  N Y T ,  2/27/66,  60) 
The   massive  investment  in   technology  and  manpower  created  by 
space programs  could  be  used  to  handle  pressing problems  associated 
with  anticipated  population  growth  on  earth,  suggested  Dr.  Peter  A. 
Castruccio, director of  IBM’s  advanced space  ro   rams.  Satellites could 
survey  ear th   from  space,  pinpoint  tillable  fan!  and   examine  staple 
crops  using  infrared  techniques  to  detect  diseases  invisible  to   th e  
naked  eye.  Seas  could  be  mapped,  isolating  concentrations  of  fish 
and  edible  seaweed,  and  growing  consumption  of  water  offset  by 

62 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

using  satellites  to   map  snow  fields  and  glaciers.  Underground  rivers 
could  be  detected  from  space  by  measuring  the   tiny  difference i n   soil 
temperatures  above  them;  such  streams were  estimated  to  have  3,000 
times the  water present in  all known rivers. Other fields, such as weather 
control and geological survey searches  for  fuel and minerals,  could also 
be  handled  from space.  (M&R ,  2 /28 /66 ,9 ,   12) 
“The  ultimate  goal  of  weather  modification  and  control  may  be 
realized  only  if  man  himself  is  placed  in  a  Space Meteorological Lab,” 
suggested  Sidney  Sternberg,  vice  president  and  general  manager  of 
Electro-Optical  Systems,  Inc.  He  said  the   “ability  and  bandwidth  of 
transfer  of  information  between  experiments  and  experimenter  could 
no t   be  duplicated  by  unmanned  observations.”  (M&R, 2/28/66,  12) 
February  23:  Second  260-in.-dia.  solid-propellant  rocket  motor  (SL-2), 
Nation’s  largest,  was  successfully  test-fired for  NASA  in   Dade  County, 
Fla.,  by  Aerojet-General  Corp.  Fueled  with  polybutadiene,  aluminum 
and  ammonium-perchlorate  and  fired  nose  down  in   a  150-ft.-deep pit, 
motor  developed within  1%  of  the  predicted  3.5-million lbs.  th ru s t  and 
burned  for  almost  precisely  the  planned  126 sec.  Test  showed  repeat- 
ability  of  the   firing,  proved  tha t   manufacturing  techniques  were 
reliable,  and  demonstrated  tha t   the  motors  could  be  produced  a t   a 
predictable  cost.  First  260-in.  motor  (SL-1) was  successfully  fired  for 
two minutes  Sept. 25,  1965, producing  3.6-million lbs.  thrust.  Strength 
of  the maraging steel motor  case, s t ruc tu ra l  integrity  of  the  cast propel- 
lant,  insulation,  and  the  ablative nozzle were  tested. 
Large  solid motor  project  was  designed  to  demonstrate  feasibility  of 
building and operating solid motors  of  greater  size than those in cu r ren t  
use  for multistage  launch  vehicle systems carrying heavy payloads  into 
space.  (NASA  Release  66-31;  Stern,  Wash.  Post,  2/24/66,  A5;  Hines, 
Wash.  Eve.  Star, 2/24/66) 
Testifying  before  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Sub- 
committee  on  Advanced  Research  and  Technology,  NASA  Associate 
Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and  Technology  Dr.  Mac  C. 
Adams  said:  “During  1965 we  flew  the   three  X-15 airplanes  32  times, 
facility  capable of  providing  data  during  actual  hypersonic  flight.  . . . 
setting a new activity record.  These aircraft  comprise a unique research 
“A t   the  end  of  1965,  the  three  X-15 airplanes  had  been  flown  156 
times.  . . .” 
Referring  to  rocket  reactor  tests,  Adams  said:  “The  KIWI-NERVA- 
Phoebus  operations  during  1965  demonstrated  an   altitude  equivalent 
specific impulse of  over 750 lb-sec./lb.,  equivalent th ru s t  of  over 50,000 
lbs.,  and  total  duration  of  4200 seconds,  o r  over  an  hour.  The  experi- 
ments  have  shown  tha t   rapid  starts  and  restarts  can  be  made  and  tha t  
operation is  stable over  a wide range of  conditions. 
“On  February 3 ,   1966, we  made  the  first power  r un  with  a  complete 
nuclear  rocket  engine  system.  Although  the  major  components  were 
spread  ou t  and  connected  in  a  ‘breadboard’ fashion,  the  system started 
and  operated  as  a  un i t   with  no  external  power.  On  February  11,  the  
system was  operated again. We feel tha t  these  run s  are very  significant 
milestones  in   the   nuclear  rocket  programs.”  (N A S A  Auth.  Hearings, 
50,  57) 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications  Dr. 
Homer  E.  Newel1  summarized  achievements  and  status  of  NASA’s 
physics  and  astronomy  programs  at  hearings  before  the   House  Com- 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

63 

Feburary 23:  Test firing of NASA’s 260-in. solid-propellant rocket motor  at Aerojet-General 
Corporation’s  Dade  County,  Fia.,  facility. 

mittee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  o n   Space  Science 
and  Applications. Dr.  Newel1 said  tha t   from  a  scientific point  of  view, 
Explorer  program  had  been  “one  of  the   most  cost  effective means  of 
accomplishing the  scientific objectives in space physics and astronomy.’’ 
During  1965,  “seven  spacecraft  were  successfully  launched  including 
Alouette  11,  our  second  international  project  with  Canada,  and  FR-1, 
the  first  cooperative  satellite  project  with  France.  . . .” 
Of  the   OGO   program  he  said:  “.  . . as   of  early  January  1966,  data 
acquisition  from  OGO-I  included  3,522  hours  of  real-time  wideband 

a 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
telemetry,  approximately  800 hours  of  special-purpose  telemetry,  and 
2,800  hours  of  onboard  data  storage.  . . . Good  quality  magnetic  field 
data”  were  contributed  by  the  OGO  II  mission  to  the  World  Magnetic 
Survey  of  the   International  Quiet  Sun   Year  (IQSY). Results  of  OGO  I 
and  OGO  II  missions had  proven  the operational  capability of  the space- 
craft  and  underscored  the   validity  of  the   concept  of  a  laboratory  for 
correlative  geophysical  studies.  (NASA   Auth.  Hearings,  114,  147, 
159) 
February  23:  NASA  had  awarded  a  $38,000  contract  to  US. Public  Health 
Service on best approach to control and early diagnosis of viral infection 
in  astronauts during space flight. Dr. Walter Kemmerer, MSC’S  monitor 
on  the   virus  control  study,  said  in  an   interview:  “We  want  to  have 
techniques  to  enable us  to  prevent  this  from  happening,  and  to  detect 
tha t  it is happening. Also, we want to know how to prevent one astronaut 
from  transmitting  i t   to  another  inside  the  spacecraft.”  (AP,  Wash. 
Eve. Star, 2/23/66,  A l )  
Charles H. Ruby, president  of  the  Air Line Pilots Assn.,  charged  FAA  had 
implied  pilots  were  to  blame  for  four  recent  Boeing  727  jet  aircraft 
crashes  although  investigations  were  incomplete.  He  referred  to  “pre- 
mature and seriously questionable public assessment”  of  the 727 during 
a Feb.  17 FAA meeting a t  which  FAA  said  the  aircraft was  airworthy  and 
had  no   serious  defects:  “We  don’t  believe  this  [cause  determination] 
can  be  expected  t o   be  achieved  with  total  objectivity  by  closed  door 
meetings of  parties with a substantial stake in  the outcome.” Ruby added 
pilots  feIt  the   727  was  basically  a  “good  and  safe  aircraft.”  (WI, 
Wash. Pos t ,  2/24/66,  A2) 
February  23-24:  Gemini  Mid-Program  Conference  was  held  a t   MSC  to 
summarize Gemini  program  to  date  with  emphasis  on  results  obtained 
from  first  seven  Gemini missions.  Conference,  attended  by  more  than 
600 persons, was  conducted in the middle of  the Gemini program rather 
than  a t  th e  end so tha t  scientists and the  aerospace industry would have 
earlier  access  to  Gemini  experiences  for  application  to  other  space 
programs. 
Gemini program director  Charles W.  Mathews  announced  that  NASA 
had  canceled  plans  for  land  landings  of  Gemini  spacecraft  because  of 
‘‘development time constraint”;  U.S.  spacecraft would continue to make 
ocean  landings  “for  the   foreseeable  future.”  (Text;  Houston  Post, 
2/24/66) 
February  24:  First  Sa tu rn   V  launch  vehicle  (S-IC-1)  underwent  second 
successful  captive firing a t  MSFC  for  85  see.  (MSFC  Release 66-48) 
0  NASA’s second  space-tracking  station  near  Canberra,  Australia,  was 
officially opened by  Minister  of  Supply Denham Henty.  Rep. George P. 
Miller  (D-Calif.),  chairman  of  House  Committee  on  Science  and 
Astronautics,  attended  ceremony  and  praised  Australia’s  contribution 
to  US. space program saying:  “We  wiIl  explore space together  for  the  
benefit of mankind.”  ( N Y T ,  2 /25 /66 ,3 )  
0  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate Administrator  fo r   Manned  Space 
Flight, testified in  support O f  NASA’s  FY 1967 budget authorization before 
the  House  Science and Astronautics  Committee’s Manned Space Flight 
Subcommittee.  Questioned  by  Congressman  Emilio  Q.  Daddario 
(D-Conn.) about the  Apollo program schedule, Dr. Mueller said cu r ren t  
budget request left no room for a major problem; any test failure would 
be  directly  reflected  in   a  schedule  d ip .   In  connection  with  possible 

65 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
fur ther  use of Apollo/Saturn V 
nd  the  lunar  landing m i s -  
decisions on  the  FY  1968 
sion, Dr. Mueller stressed  nece 
budget.  Industrial  research,  development, and  manufacturing  employ- 
ment had already reached its peak and, ironically, would begin to decline 
sharply before  the   first  manned  flights  with  Apollo/Saturn  hardware. 
Facilities  now  becoming  operational  would  be  scheduled  for  “moth- 
balling”  within  two years  if  no  fur ther   use were  planned  for capability 
beyond  the   lunar   landing,  Dr.  Mueller  said.  (NASA  Auth.  Hearings, 
279-384; MSF Historian) 
February  24:  NASA’s lunar   and  planetary  programs were  discussed by  NASA 
Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for   Space  Science  and  Applications 
Edgar  M.  Cortright,  testifying  before the  House Committee on Science 
and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications:  “It 
is  important to  note  tha t  the  Mariner IV  photographs do no t  determine 
whether life exists on Mars.  Even before the  flight of Mariner IV, it was 
known  tha t   pictures  taken  a t   this  resolution  could no t  give  any direct 
evidence of  life  forms.  . . . 
“We  propose to   continue  th e  exploration of  Venus  and Mars begun 
from  the  K ariner  IV program.  This will be  launched on an  Atlas-Agena 
so well  with  Mariners  I1 and  IV,  respectively, by  utilizing for   the   1967 
Venus  op  ortunity  an  appropriate modification  of  the   spare spacecraft 
vehicle.” 
Cortright  presented  prepared  statement  by  Associate  Administrator 
for  Space Science and Applications Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell  summarizing 
comsat and sounding rocket launches:  “The first launching by  NASA  of  a 
satellite  for the  Corporation  [ComSatCorp] took  place on April 6, 1965, 
when  the   Early  Bird  satellite was  placed  in   orbit  using  a  thrust-aug- 
mented  Delta launch  vehicle.  The   launching was  carried  ou t  under  a n  
agreement between Comsat  and NASA,  signed  in  December  1964, which 
detailed  th e   services  to  be performed  by  NASA,  financial arrangements, 
etc.  . . . 
“Although  the   original  agreement gave  Comsat  options  for  as many 
as  seven  additional  launchings  through  March  1967,  none  of  these 
options has  been  exercised.  I n   th e  meantime, Comsat has  inaugurated 
the  HS-303A program, and  has  advised NASA  tha t  it will  require two  or  
three HS-303A launchings i n  1966, beginning in  August. The  HS-303A 
is  larger  and heavier  than  Early  Bird,  and w i l l   need  the   capabilities of 
the   thrust-augmented  improved  Delta  launch  vehicle.  Otherwise, 
launch services  are  expected to  be similar  to  those provided in  support 
of  the  Early Bird. 
“The  Corporation is  now  negotiating  for  development and  procure- 
ment of  spacecraft  for the  eventual global system.  These spacecraft a re  
expected to  be deployed beginning in   1968.” 
Referring  to   the   NASA  sounding  rocket  program,  Dr.  Newell  said: 
“Since  1959 to   the  present NASA  has launched 668 sounding rockets  for  
scientific investigations in  space and 516 of  these were for investigations 
in  the  areas of  physics and astronomy.”  He mentioned as significant the 
International Quiet Sun  Year  (IQSY)  Mobile Launch Expedition carried 
ou t   in   spring  1965  using  a n   aircraft  carrier  as   a  launching  platform: 
rockets  carrying instrumented payloads were launched  off west  coast of 
South  America  from  5”  nor th   latitude  to  60” sou th   latitude  with  the  
eatest concentration of  Egh t s  a t  the  geomagnetic equator near Lima, 
Feru.  45  Nike-Cajun/Nike-Apache  rockets  and  32  single-stage Arcas 

66 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

rockets were  flown  carrying  experiments  furnished by  NASA,  USN,  USAF, 
universities,  and  industry.  ( N A S A  Auth.  Hearings, 233-4,  359,  375-6) 
February  24:  Charles W.  Harper,  Director, Aeronautics  Div.,  NASA  Office  of 
Advanced Research  and Technology  (OART ) ,   testified  before  the  House 
Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Advanced 
Research  and Technology  on  the  NASA  aeronautics  program. Citing the  
need  for  close  coordination  between  scientific  groups  within  Govern- 
ment,  he said:  “Recognizing the Air  Force  interest in hypersonic  flight, 
a proposal was  made  to  the  Air  Force Systems Command Headquarters 
tha t   the   two  agencies prepare a single coordinate  program  representing 
a national effort in hypersonic technology with  each agency  supporting 
tha t   portion  most  appropriate  to  its  capabilities.  The  proposal  was 
accepted.  . . . Technical  approval  of  general  plans  is  through  the  NASA 
OART  Office and the AFSC  RTD  Office and generation and coordination  of 
program details are developed through appointed  technical groups from 
the   NASA  and  Air  Force  research  centers.  To  date  this  coordination 
activity  has  been  very  effective.  . . .” 
As major elements of NASA’s 1967 aeronautics program, Harper listed: 
(1)  a continuing effort in  advanced research;  (2) major e f fo r t  in support 
of  Sst with emphasis on flight operations and advanced propulsion;  (3) a 
substantial increase in research  in propulsion systems appropriate  to the  
whole  speed  range,  from  V/Stol  to  hypersonic  speeds  with  special 
attention  directed  to  the   noise  problem  and  supported  by  two  new 
facilities;  (4)  a  substantially  increased  effort  in  V/Stol  research  sup- 
ported  by  construction  of  the first research  facility  to  be  built  expressly 
for  conducting  research  on  problems unique to V/Stol  aircraft.  ( N A S A  
Auth.  Hearings,  170-1, 179) 
Astronauts Frank  Borman and Walter M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  met  with  Japanese 
space  scientists  in Tokyo  and  presented  Japanese  Premier  Eisaku  Sato 
with  a  letter  from  President  Johnson  and  a  color  photograph  of  their 
rendezvous  in  space.  (Wash.  Eve.  Star,  2/25/66,  A l ;  
GEMINI  VII/VI 
Wash. Post,  2/25/66) 
0  Two  solid-fueled Minuteman  ICBMS  were  launched  simultaneously  from 
Vandenberg AFB,  to  evaluate multiple-firing techniques which  could be 
used  “under  combat  conditions  a t   operational  bases.”  This  was  first 
salvo launch down WTR.  (SAC  Release 6-17) 
0  AFSC  announced  tha t   all-weather  landing  systems  (Awls)  developed  by 
USAF  and  FAA  would  be  installed  on  all  C-141 Starlifters within  two  o r  
three years  to enable the  huge fan jet  cargo-troop carriers to  land safely 
under  adverse  weather  conditions  with  a  minimum  of  ground-landing 
aids. Awls would program aircraft’s flight path, speed, angle of  approach, 
and  attitude;  generate  and  provide  data  to  pilot  o r   autopilot;  and  be 
nearly  self-sufficient. Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  had  been  contracted  by 
AFSC  in May  1965 to design, install, test, and obtain FAA certification for 
Awls  and  produce  a  flying  prototype  aircraft  by  spring  1966.  (AFSC 
Release 6.66) 
0  Lunar surface photograph from U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  IX mission “fully coincided 
with  the  photograph  of  a  model  of  the  moon  designed  by  scientists  a t  
Kharkov  University’s  laboratory  several  years  ago,”  Tass  announced. 
Nikolay  Barabashov,  chief  of  university’s  observatory,  hypothesized 
tha t   “ the  relief  a t  the  landing site of  the  Soviet station  is  typical of  the  
entire  lunar  surface,” which  he  claimed was  “porous,  spongelike, and 
su5c ien t ly  firm  to  hold  a  rather  heavy  body.”  (Tass, 2/24/66) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

67 

February  25:  NASA  postponed  third  attempt  to  launch  unmanned  Apollo 
spacecraft with Sa tu rn  IB booster 44 sec. before scheduled liftoff because 
of  continuing bad weather.  (W a s h .  Post, 2/25/66,  A7; WSJ, 2 /25 /66 ,1 )  
following  Feb.  13  hard  s ta r t   of  Agena 
Testing  of  Agena  stage-halted 
prototype-was 
resumed a t  Arnold Engineering Development Center  in 
preparation  for Gemini VIII/Agena  docking mission.  (SBD ,  2/28/66,1) 
*  ComSatCorp asked  FCC   for  authority  to  build  six  advanced  synchronous 
satellites-four 
to  be  launched  and  two  as backups  for  development of 
global  commercial  communications  system.  Proposed  satellites  would 
weigh  250  lbs.,  and  have  1,200 voice-quality  telephone  channels  and 
five-year operational  life  compared with 85-lb. EARLY  B IRD   1’s  240 voice- 
quality  channels  and  18-1110.  planned  life.  (ComSatCorp  Release; 
W S J ,  3/1/66,  32) 
NASA  EXPLORER  XX IX   (Geos-A) geodetic satellite,  orbited Nov.  6 ,  1965, had 
developed  problems  which  affected  planned  investigations:  accurate 
measurement  of  spacecraft’s attitude  had  become  difficult; had  precise 
attitude information could  not be included in Mutual Visibility Program 
for  observing  stations.  Failure  of  one  of  four  flashing  lights  had  re- 
duced utility of  some observing cameras, and  interference had  occurred 
between SECOR  transponder  and Doppler beacons.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
*  Estimated 7.5 billion microscopic meteorites hit earth daily, bu t  only about 
90  large  meteorites  weighing  up  to  10  lbs.  struck  earth  each  year, 
NationaI Geographic Society said.  (NGS  Release, 2/25/66) 
Pan  American  Grace  Airways  (Panagra)  asked  FAA  to  refund  $200,000 
which company had deposited to reserve delivery on Sst being developed 
under  FAA  contract.  This  was  first  Sst  cancellation  request.  (AP, 
NYT ,  3/28/66,  57) 
February 26: NASA’s Apollo/Saturn  AS-201 mission was successfully launched 
from  ETR  a t   11:12  a.m.  EST.  Unmanned  Apollo  spacecraft  (009)  was 
boosted  in to   suborbital  flight  by  two-stage Sa tu rn   IB  launch  vehicle 
(SA-201)  to  qualify  command moduIe  (Cm)  heatshielding  and  service 
module  (Sm)  of  spacecraft-launch  vehicle  combination  and  major 
spacecraft systems. Liftoff and powered flight events were as programed. 
After  ignition  of  liquid-hydrogen-powered 2nd  stage  (S-IVB), launch 
escape  tower  was  jettisoned  and  recoverable  cameras  ejected.  After 
seven-minute  burn,  2nd  stage  and  instrument  unit  separated  from 
spacecraft;  spacecraft  reached  310-mi.  (499-km.) altitude.  Descending, 
service  module  performed  ullage  maneuver,  firing  reaction-control 
system  rockets  for  30  sec.  to  increase  spacecraft’s reentry  speed; Sm’s 
main  propulsion  engine  was  fired  twice-once 
for  100  sec.  and  once 
for  10 sec. Sm was jettisoned  and Cm  reentered a t  27,500 fps-2,000 
fps 
faster  than  Apollo  reentry  from  earth  orbit-testing 
ability  of  space- 
craft’s  ablative  heat  shield  to  withstand  reentry  heat  of  about  4,000’ 
F.  Three main  parachutes  deployed  a t   12,000-ft. altitude,  lowering Cm 
to  splashdown  in  Atlantic  at  11:51  a.m.  EST  within  35  mi.  of  target. 
Recovery was  by  helicopter  from  carrier  U.S.S.  Boxer.  Spacecraft  was 
in  “good”  condition. 
Mission was  first launch  of  Sa tu rn  IB and Apollo  spacecraft.  Sa tu rn  
IB,  uprated  version  of  Saturn I, was  being developed under direction of 
MSFC  and  Apollo  spacecraft,  under  direction  of  MSC. 
(NASA  Release 
66-32; NASA  Proj.  Off.;  MSC  Roundup,  3/4/66,  1-2; Stern,  Wash .  Post, 
2/27/66,  A l ,   A8; Hines,  Wash.  Sun.  Star,  2/27/66,  A l ,   A6;  Wilford, 
NYT, 2/27/66,  1, 60) 

68 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

February 26:  NASA's first  Saturn  IB  booster  launches  unmanned Apollo  spacecraft down 
the   Eastern Test  Range. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

69 

February 26:  At  KSC  post-launch  conference, NASA  Associate Administrator 
for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller commented on AS-201: 
“This  test  was  of  extreme  importance  to  the   eventual manned  lunar  
landing  in   tha t   i t  provides  us  with  the   h s t   test  of  the   ablative  char- 
acteristics  of  the  heat  shield protection  for  th e  Apollo  spacecraft.  I t   is 
the   one  test  tha t  we  were  unable  to  perform  on  the   ground-the 
one 
test,  therefore, tha t  was  a qualification  test and which  will  be  repeated 
again  on  202,  which  is  the   next  flight  in   the   Apollo  system.”  (MCS 
Roundup, 3/4/66,  1-2) 
0  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Sonmiani,  Pakistan, 
carried  sodium  payload  to  124-mi.  (200-km.)  altitude  in   experiment 
conducted  for   Pakistan  Space and  Upper  Atmosphere Research  Com- 
mittee  to   measure  wind  direction  and  speed  a t   50-  to   124-mi. (80- to  
200-km.)  altitudes.  No  photography  was  possible  since  sodium  flash, 
observed  a t   +60  sec., was no t  followed by  sodium cloud release.  (NASA 
Rpt.  sm) 
Prerecorded  pictures  of  dogs  Veterok  and  Ugolyek,  transmitted  from 
Soviet satellite COSMOS  cx  launched  Feb.  22,  were  shown  on  Moscow 
television.  Announcement  described the   dogs  as  subjects  of  biological 
studies  and  said  such  studies  “will  precede  every  new  and  important 
step  of  man  in   space.”  Tass  said  “the  condition  of  the   space dogs  is 
quite  excellent.”  (Krasnaya  Zvezda,  2/27/66,  USS-T  Trans. ; Pravda, 
2 /27 /66 ,6 ,   USS-T  Trans.) 
0  Astronauts  Frank  Borman  and Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  received  rousing 
welcome  on  arrival  a t   Seoul,  Sou th   Korea.  Many  flag-waving  school- 
children had to be restrained by policemen during welcoming ceremonies 
a t  City Hall.  ( N Y T ,  2/27/66,  14 ;  N.Y.  J/Amer.,  2/27/66,  28) 
Astronaut  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  Astronaut  Donald  K.  Slayton  (MSC 
Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations) received gold medallions 
from  Gov.  Warren  P.  Knowles  in  Madison,  Wis.,  after  two-day home- 
coming celebration. Lovell, who had attended high school in  Milwaukee, 
in   tu rn   presented  state with  Wisconsin flag he  had  carried  for  14  days 
in   space during GEMINI  VII  flight  Dec.  4-18,  1965.  Slayton was  born  in  
Sparta, Wis.  (AP,  Chic. Trib., 2/25/66) 
February  27:  Two   Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  were  launched  from 
Ascension  Island,  24   and  36  hrs.  after  Feb.  26  Apollo  reentry  test. 
Experiment, conducted by  GSFC  and Univ.  of Michigan’s  Space Physics 
Research  Laboratory, was  designed  to  measure  pressure,  temperature, 
density,  and  winds  a t   altitudes  of  19-75 mi.  (30-120 km.)  using pitot- 
static  probe.  First  flight  obtained  necessary  data  for  Apollo  support 
program, attaining-82-mi.  (131-km.)  altitude.  No  useful  data  were  ob- 
tained  by  second  flight,  because  of  breakup  during  2nd-stage burn. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Scientists  were  considering “capturing an  asteroid”  and,  through  nuclear 
propulsion,  placing  i t   in   ear th   orbit  where  i t   could  be  analyzed,  re- 
ported John Wilford in  the  New  York Times. He said “experts”  believed 
cccapture of  an  asteroid will  be  possible as soon as  i t  is possible  to  send 
manned  expeditions  to  the   surface  of  Mars  or   Jupiter.”  Astronauts 
would  take with them a separate rocket engine which they would anchor 
to  asteroid’s  surface.  Rocket  would  have  to   “produce  long-duration 
burn   but  because  of  asteroid‘s  low  gravity  would  no t   have  to   be  very 
powerful  to   push  the   asteroid  toward  a  new  orbit.”  (Wilford,  NYT, 
2/27/66,  E7) 

70 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

February  28:  ESSA  11  (Tos  OT-2),  second  meteorological satellite  i n   Tiros 
Operational  Satellite  (Tos)  system,  was  launched  by  NASA  from  ETR 
for  ESSA  with  three-stage Thor-Delta booster.  Launch vehicle performed 
three  “dogleg” maneuvers before injection in to  near-polar, near-circular, 
sun-synchronous  orbit.  Initial  orbital  parameters : apogee,  885  mi. 
(1,425  km.);  perigee,  843 mi.  (1,357 km.);  period,  113.5 min.;  inclina- 
tion,  101.16”. 
A cylindrical, 18-sided polygon, 290-lb. ESSA  11  was  equipped with two 
Automatic P ic ture  Transmission  (Apt)  camera  systems for photograph- 
ing  local  cloud  cover.  During first  orbit,  spacecraft  was  spin-stabilized 
a t  10.9 rpm with bottom of  spacecraft toward ear th ;  during second orbit, 
orientation  maneuvers  initiated  by  ground  command  began  to   tu rn  
satellite on  i ts  side;  after 18 orbits-approximately  33 hrs.  after launch 
11 would be i n  cartwheel position. Combination of cartwheel con- 
-ESSA 
figuration  and  near-polar,  sun-synchronous orbit  would  permit  100% 
photographic coverage of  earth’s cloud cover during daylight hours  with 
a  given  area  photographed  a t   the   same  local  time  each  day.  Primary 
objective of ESSA 11  (Environmental Survey Satellite No.  2)  flight was  to  
provide direct readout  to  worldwide  network of  Apt  receiving stations. 
ESSA  financed, managed,  and  operated the  Tos systems. GSFC managed 
NASA participation  in  the  project. Tracking operations were responsibility 
of  STADAN.  First  satellite i n   Tos  system,  ESSA  I,  was  launched  Feb.  3. 
(ESSA  Release 66-14; NASA  Proj.  Off.;  AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/28/66,  A l ;  
UPI,  Wash. Post,  3/1/66,  ALE) 
e  NASA Administrator James E.  Webb, testifying before the  Senate Committee 
on Aeronautical and  Space Sciences as  i t  began  hearings on NASA’s  FY 
1967 budget  authorization,  said  U.S.S.R.  would  become  unchallenged 
leader  i n   space exploration  unless  US. soon  decided  to  support  post- 
Apollo  missions.  Webb  reviewed  U.S.S.R.’s  very  active  year  i n   space 
and said:  “More  important to  us than  any other  indication  from Soviet 
space activity is th e  clear commitment to a long-term effort. The fact tha t  
they  are  making such  a  commitment shows  the  importance they  attach 
to  advancing their capabilities in  space. Unless we  soon decide to  follow 
through  with  a  s trong  program in   the   years  after  we  have  achieved a 
manned  lunar   landing,  we  cannot  avoid  a  gap  in   our  flight  schedule 
while  they  forge  ahead  as  th e   unchallenged  contestant  in   th e   field.” 
Webb noted FY  1967 budget for NASA reflected  a Presidential  decision 
“to  hold  open  for  ano ther   year  decisions  which  cannot  be  delayed 
beyond th e  period of  th e  FY  1968 budget.’’  He added:  “The  programs 
we  a re   now  carrying  ou t   so   successfully,  the   new  knowledge  we  a re  
acquiring so  rapidly,  th e  ending of th e  period of  uncertainty as  to  what 
both  Russian  Cosmonauts  and  American  Astronauts  can  achieve  in  
space,  and  the   growing  utilization  of  t h e   long term  values  tha t   ou r  
investments  have  created  i n   reliable  launch  vehicles,  spacecraft,  and 
assembly  test  and  launch  complexes,  all  point  toward  decisions  to 
use  ra ther   than   lose  th e  values we  have  worked  so  hard  and  spent  so 
much  to   create.  And  so   I  believe  tha t   our  presentation  of  this  1967 
Budget  marks  no t   jus t   assertion  to   you  tha t   we  have  built  well  as  we 
have created a foundation for  space power, but also marks th e  beginning 
of a momentous era i n  which we must decide how we w i l l  use this power 
He assessed  the  national space program: “. . . we  have demonstrated 
i n   fu tu re   years.” 
tha t  we  can do  th e   tasks  we  se t  ou t   to   do.  An  important value  of  th e  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

71 

space program  is  this  demonstration  of  national  capability  in  science 
and  technology. Tha t  we  have  this  capability is  no  longer  a  matter  of 
opinion bu t   a demonstrated fact  tha t  is  clear to  all who  concern  them- 
selves with  th e  power  nations  can  and  do  develop  for  many  purposes 
from the  mastery of  a new  environment or  a  new  technology. We  have 
pu t   it on view  for all  the  world  to  see. The  world  knows  today tha t  t h e  
United States can digest  the  space-related problems of  long lead-times, 
can hold  i ts  position  i n  a  demanding competition, and  can forge ahead 
simultaneously  in   both  aeronautics and  space  and  in   those  advanced 
technologies  of  which  space  is  the   leading  symbol.”  (NA SA   Auth. 
Hearings,  15-17) 
February  28: Testifying  to  Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sci- 
ences on NASA’s FY  1967 budget, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert 
C. Seamans, Jr., said:  “We are  presenting the  budget tha t  reflects our best 
balancedprovision for four essential priorities,priorities  which must rank 
together  as  the   core  of  the   NASA  program:  The   need  to  press  forward 
the   development  of  the   Nation’s  capability  for  major  Manned  Space 
Flight operations,  to  be demonstrated by a manned lunar  landing within 
this  decade. 
“The need to  continue those important projects in  space sciences and 
space applications tha t  are  already underway and tha t  have already made 
such   valuable  contributions to   our  fundamental  understanding  of  t h e  
universe  and  to   the  use  of  space systems for human  benefit. 
“The  need  to  maintain  the  flow  of  advanced  research and technology 
effort  tha t   is  a t   the   hear t   of  the   Nation’s  ability  to   undertake  f u tu r e  
projects  in  aeronautics and space explorations. 
“The  need  to   take  certain  steps  now  to  avoid  an   otherwise  certain 
gap  in   fu tu re   space  capabilities  and  achievements.”  (NA SA   Auth. 
Hearings, 64-65) 
Summarizing NASA’s launch vehicle  and propulsion program in   testimony 
before  the   House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Sub-  
committee on Space  Science  and  Applications,  NASA  Associate  Admin- 
istrator  for   Space  Science  and  Applications  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell 
reported tha t  in  1965 “there were 18 successful orbits ou t  of  20 attempts 
for  a  90% success  record.”  Looking  to  the   fu ture ,   Newell  said:  “in 
order  to   assure  tha t   the   launch  vehicle  space  transportation  evolves 
a  logical  and  economical fashion  for  the  more  demanding.  . .missions 
which  are  beyond  the   capability of  present  vehicles,  it is  essential  tha t  
some effort continuously be pu t  into advanced studies of  fu ture  vehicles 
and  into  some  of  the   critical  launch vehicle  technoIogy  areas.” 
He  described research  in   behavioral  biology,  outlining prospective 
experiment  to   determine  whether  for  pocket  mice  in   ear th   orbit 
“circadian  rhythm  of  either  temperature or  locomotion changes when 
all  geophysical  variables  other  than   light  and  temperature  are  either 
removed or  sensed by  the   animals with  a  period  of  about 90 minutes 
(orbital period)  instead  of  2 4  hours.” 
By  the   end  of  FY  1966, NASA’s sustaining  university  program would 
be supporting 64  projects a t  54  institutions throughout US., Dr. Newell 
testified.  I n  FY  1967 it would  support approximately 70 projects  a t  60 
universities  a t  a cost of  $12 million. It was expected tha t  3,681 students 
would be i n  the  predoctoral training element of  the  program by Septem- 
ber  1966 and  th e   number  of  participating  universities  would  be  152. 
(NA SA  Auth. Hearings, 487,  568,  581, 589) 

72 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

February  28: Gemini Astronauts Charles A.  Bassett I1 and Elliot M.  See, Jr., 
were killed when their T-38 aircraft overran S t .  Louis Municipal Airport 
in  rain  and fog and crashed in to  the  McDonnell Aircraft  Corp.  building 
which  housed  Gemini  9  and  10   spacecraft.  The   jet,  cleared  for  an  
ins trumen t   landing,  was  left  of  center  in   i ts   approach  to  the   runway 
when  i t   turned  toward  the  McDonnell complex  1,000  ft.  from  ins tru-  
mented  Ianding strip.  It struck  the   roof  of  Building 101, bounced  in to  
an  adjacent  courtyard, and  exploded.  Several McDonnell employees  i n  
Building 101  were  treated  for minor  injuries.  See and Bassett,  enrou te  
to  McDonnell for  two  weeks  training  in  space simulator,  were  followed 
la ter   by  Gemini  IX  backup  crew  Thomas  P.  Stafford  and  Eugene  A. 
Cernan, who  landed  safely.  NASA  Hq.  officials announced  tha t  th e  back- 
up  crew  would  fly  the   Gemini  IX  mission  on  schedule.  (Wagner, 
Wa sh .  Post,  3/1/66,  A l ,   A4) 
Discussing  the   Apollo/Saturn  IB   program’s  fu ture ,   Dr.  Joseph  Shea, 
director  of  Apollo  spacecraft  development  a t   MSC,  told  Missiles  and 
Rockets  tha t   the   hoped-for early  end  of  the   program  (after  a  total  of 
seven  flights,  including four manned missions) would  depend on avail- 
ability of  the  Sa turn  V booster,  as well as success of  Sa turn  IB missions: 
“We   plan  to  end  the   series  a t   Apollo-207 if  the   Saturn  V  is  available 
on schedule.  If  not,  we  will probably  continue with Sa turn  IB flights for  
th e  Apollo-208 and 209 missions.”  (Taylor, M&R,  2/28/66,  17) 
0  Joint  Chiefs of  Staff  believed  U.S.S.R.  was  accomplishing much  more  in  
advanced weaponry than  Secretary of  Defense Robert S. McNamara was 
giving them credit for, reported Aviation  Week .  Gen. John P. McConnell, 
USAF  Chief  of  Staff,  was  said  to  be  especially  concerned  about  Soviet 
developments in   antimissile  missiles  and  their  radars,  maneuverable 
warheads  for  ICBMS,  military  space  systems,  and  advanced  aircraft. 
During hearings on the  FY  1966 budget, General McConnell had  said the  
decision  on  whether  to  proceed  with  full-scale  development  of  the  
advanced manned strategic aircraft  (Amsa) should be made  in  FY  1967. 
Av ia t ion  Week pointed ou t  McNamara did not make  tha t  decision in  the  
the  FY  1967 budget and dropped Amsa  one category-from  engineering 
development  to  advanced  development. Also,  in   a  posture  statement 
before the  Senate Armed  Services Committee’s Defense Appropriations 
Subcommittee, McNamara  appeared to  contradict  Secretary  of  th e  Air 
Force  Dr.  Harold  Brown’s  view  tha t   the   FB-111 was  only  a  stop-gap 
bomber un t i l  Amsa was approved. Comparison of  Boeing B-52C through 
F models,  McNamara  reportedly  said,  showed  “ the   FB-111  is  not  an  
interim  aircraft  bu t   is,  indeed,  a  truly  effective  strategic  bomber.” 
(Wilson, A v .   Wk . ,  2/28/66,  16) 
Astronauts Walter M.  Schirra, Jr.,  and Frank Borman and their wives met 
with Chinese Nationalist  President Chiang Kai-shek in  Taipei,  and gave 
him  a  letter  from  President Johnson  and  a  color  photograph  taken  in  
space.  Chiang gave  each  as tronau t  wings  of  the   Chinese  National Air 
Force. Astronauts  then  flew  to  Bangkok, Thailand,  to  begin  a  three-day 
visit during which  they would  give a  series  of  lectures  and be  received 
by  th e  King and  Queen  of  Thailand.  (AP, Wash.  Eve.  S tar ,   2/28/66, 
A2; NYT ,   3/1/66,  19) 
AFSC  awarded General Electric  Co.,  P ra t t  & Whitney Div.,  United Aircraft 
Corp.,  and  Curtiss-Wright  Corp.  contracts  totaling  $41,750,000  for  
development  of  vectored-thrust  cruise  propulsion  system  (lift-cruise 
engine)  for aircraft systems including V/Stol.  (AFSC  Release  13.66) 

73 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
sworn in  as  consultant  to NASA  Administrator James  E.  wp ebb  and NASA 
February 28: William J.  McWiIliams,  president  of  Republic Su  ply  Co.,  was 
Secretariat.  (NASA  Release 66-46) 
ComSatCorp  requested  FCC  authority  to  build  six 250-lb.  advanced syn- 
chronous  satellites,  for  global  commercial  communications  system. 
Launches would  begin  in  1968.  (ComSatCorp Release) 
0  Comparing U S .  and U.S.S.R.  Mars exploration efforts in Science, Bruce C. 
Murray, Gal Tech Associate Professor of  Planetary Science, and Merton 
E.  Davies,  RAND  Corp.,  said  of  NASA’s MARINER  IV  July  14, 1965, flyby: 
“The  American scientific community  should,  and  evidently  does,  feel 
proud and gratified tha t  the  Mariner mission to  Mars, through successful 
utilization  of  national  resources,  not  only  accomplished  a  remarkable 
technological feat bu t  also discovered extraordinary new facts . . . beyond 
the  reach of  earth-based instruments.”  Authors termed “disappointing” 
US. decisions to  terminate Mariner program,  fly extra Mariner C space- 
craft  to  Venus  in   1967, drop plans  fo r   1971  Voyager  launch,  and  “fill 
the   gap”  with  an   abbreviated  1969 Atlas-Centaur program.  U.S.S.R., 
they  noted,  had  spent  “between  five  and  ten   times  as  much  on   flight 
programs  for   planetary  exploration”  as  U.S.  and,  in   spite  of  “six  con- 
secutive failures  in  their efforts to explore Mars,”  may have developed a 
reliabie 2,000-lb.  spacecraft  for Mars  flyby.  Authors  predicted  U.S.S.R. 
would  launch   two  Zond  spacecraft  in   December  1966: “It will be  sur-  
prising to us if  a t  least o n e .  . . does no t  reach the   lane t  and re tu rn  new 
facts  about  it.”  They  suggested  1971 as  earliest P ikely  date  for   Soviet 
landing  of  survivable  payload  on  Martian  surface  and  concluded tha t  
by  1967 “ the  U S .  will be  ready to make an  enduring national  commit- 
ment  to  the  exploration  of  the   planets,  and  be  ready  to   demonstrate 
intellectual appreciation  of  discovery as  well  as  enthusiasm  for  tech- 
nological  achievement.”  (Science,  2/25/66,  945-54) 
Week of February  28:  NASA  delegation extended President  Johnson’s invita- 
tion  for  European  participation  in   U.S.  manned  and  unmanned  space 
programs  in   discussions with  officials of  West  Germany,  France, U.K., 
and  Italy.  Delegation had  been  instructed  no t   to  make  any  offers  or 
commitments bu t   to   express potential  opportunities  of  participation  i n  
fu tu re  U S .   space flights on  equal basis  with  U.S.  scientists.  (Normyle, 
Au .   Wk . ,  2/28/66,  23) 
During  February:  Dr.  Ernst  Stuhlinger, Director  of  MSFC  Research Projects 
Laboratory, summarized  progress in  development of  electric propulsion 
in   Astronautics  & Aeronautics:  “The  first  laboratory  experiments with 
electrostatic  thrus tors   began  in   1958.  I n   the   early  thrus tor   models, 
power  efficiencies  and  propellant-utilization  efficiencies were  20-30%; 
lifetimes did no t  exceed a few hours; ion-current densities were less than  
1 milliamp/cmZ;  the   probIem  of  beam  neutralization  was  unsolved- 
was  no t   even  well  understood. Mission  applications  seemed  far  in   th e  
future.  Today,  only  seven years  later,  electrostatic  thrustors  are  very 
close  to   flight  readiness.  Two  systems,  th e   ion-bombardment system 
and  the  surface-ionization system, have  reached power  efficiencies and 
propellant  efficiencies above  90%; they  produce  ion  currents  of  about 
20 milliamp/cm2.  Beam  neutralization  has  proven  in   the  laboratory a s  
hours   have  been  ;P emonstrated.  With  a  few  more  years  of  refinement 
well  as  i n   actual  s  ace  tests,  and  engine lifetimes  of  several-thousand 
and quality  engineering,  these  ion  thrustors will  be ready for  extended 
missions into  interplanetary space.  . . .” (A&A ,   2/66,  71-2) 

74 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

During February: Arnold  Frutkin,  NASA  Assistant Administrator for  In terna-  
6ona l  AfFiirs,  noted  two viewpoints on  achieving Soviet cooperation i n  
space research  i n  Astronautics  & Aeronautics: “. . . the   one holds  tha t  
the answer . . . lies in  finding a suitable device,  either bilateral  or in ter-  
national-a  new idea, a n  imaginative approach, a twist  . . . for example, 
a proposal for an  international space laboratory.  . . . 
‘“rhe  other view is tha t  the  device is substantially  irrelevant  and tha t  
it is the basic relationship  between  the  two  countries,  the  basic political 
and military  realities,  which will  determine a t  any  given  time whether 
cooperation is  feasible  or  not.”  (A&A ,   2/66,  20) 
Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff,  former  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for 
Advanced Research and Technology  and new  AIAA  president,  wrote his 
first  “President’s  Message”  in  Astronautics  & Aeronautics:  “One  of  the  
dilemmas of modern times is that science and technology can do a multi- 
tude   of  things-many 
of  which  the   community  may  not  necessarily 
desire  and so  will no t   support. As  professionals we  have  tended  to  pre- 
occupy  ourselves  with  the   potential  of  science  and  technology ra ther  
than   the  expressed needs of  the  community. A responsible professional 
society  of  the  fu tu re  must  find  . . . the  wisdom  among i t s  members  to 
relate  i ts  technologies to  human needs.  A wise professional society  . . . 
will convey th e  legitimate aspirations  of  its thinkers and men  of  action 
to  the   community a t  large.  . . .” (A&A ,  2/66,  29) 
Japan  scheduled  launch  of  he r   first  ear th   satellite  for  March  26   with 
four-stage,  8.6-ton Lambda  booster.  Planned  orbit would  have  723-km. 
(480-mi.)  apogee  and  290-km.  (180-mi.)  perigee.  If  successful,  Japan 
would  become  four th   nation  to  orbit  spacecraft.  (NYT ,  2/27/66,  33 ;  
UPI,  r a s h .  Post, 2/27/66) 
Commenting  on  national  space  goals  in   the   post-Apollo  period,  Henry 
Simmons said  in   Astronautics  & Aeronautics:  “NASA  over  the   past  year 
quietly  shifted  i ts   emphasis  from  an   AAP  exploiting  already  financed 
Apollo  hardware for  alternate missions to  a much vaster  AAP involving 
outlays  on  the   scale  of  the  Apollo  lunar  effort  itself  to  support an   in -  
tensive  follow-on effor t  extending perhaps  to  1975. Some NASA  Centers 
engaged  in   the   Apollo  program,  and  particularly  the   Marshall  Space 
Flight  Center,  are   already  confronted with  the   prospect  of  unemploy- 
ment among their most skilled andvaluable design personnel. ‘We are right 
now i n  the  position where  over  the  next  six months  the  engineers who 
did  th e   original  design  on   th e   Sa turn   and  probably a  year  from  now 
those who did it on  the  Apollo will be  o u t  of  work,’  NASA  Administrator 
Sciences  during  its  hearings  last  August  on  post-Apollo  goals.  . . .” 
James  Webb  told  the   Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space 
(A&A ,  2/66,  5) 
ARC  scientists  who  had  produced  organic material  in   simulated Jupiter 
atmosphere  said  presence  of  some  form  of  life  on  Jupiter  and  o ther  
planets was  possible, bu t  unlikely. They would  continue experiments to 
find ou t  more about chemical processes  tha t  occur a t  very  low tempera- 
tures.  (UPI,  NYT, 2/19/66,  44) 
MSFC  was  using seven vessels  to   transport Sa turn  IB and Sa turn  V  rocket 
stages  and  components  too  large  for  conventional  road,  rail,  or  air 
transport between manufacturing,  test,  and launch sites. MSFC’S  marine 
transportation had grown  from  one craft  in   1960 to present  size  of  six 
river  and  ocean-going  barges-Promise,  Palaemon,  Little  Lake,  Pearl 
River,  Orion,  and  Poseidon-and 
P t .   Barrow.  (MSFC 
one  ship-usrvs 
Release  66-36; Marshall Star, 2/16/66) 

March 1966 

March  1:  U.S.S.R.  VENUS  111  spacecraft  ‘‘reachedY7 the   surface  of  Venus  a t  
1:56  a.m.  EST  to   become  man’s  first  space  probe  to  land  on  ano ther  
planet,  Tass  announced.  Observers  believed  the   2,116-lb.  spacecraft, 
launched Nov.  16, 1965, had  crash-landed.  “Regular  radio  communica- 
tions,,  had  been  maintained  with  VENUS  111  throughout  the   flight  bu t  
were  lost  as  the  probe  approached the  planet;  no  telemetric  data were 
received  in   final  moments  before  impact.  Announcement  said  com- 
panion  spacecraft  VENUS  11,  launched  Nov.  12,  1965, had  passed  within 
14,900 mi.  of  Venus Feb.  27,  and was  continuing in  solar  orbit.  (Later, 
on March  5, U.S.S.R.  revealed  tha t  communications with VENUS  II were 
lost  as  the   spacecraft  approached Venus.)  2,123-1b.  VENUS 11  had  flown 
its  en t ire   course  without  a  corrective  maneuver  ‘‘insured  only  by  i t s  
correct  launching on   an   interplanetary trajectory,”  bu t   the   course  of 
VENUS  111  had  been  adjusted  in   Dec.  27,  1965, midcourse maneuver  to  
make  possible  precise  rendezvous  with  planet.  “The  experiment  con- 
ducted through the  work of  the  automatic stations Venus 2 and 3 allowed 
the  solution of  a number of  absolutely new tasks of  interplanetary flights 
and  the   obtaining  of  new  scientific  data,”  Tass  said.  Man’s  closest 
previous contact with  Venus  had  occurred Dec.  14,  1962, when NASA’s 
MARINER  11  (launched  Aug.  27,  1962)  had  passed  21,648 mi.  from  i ts  
surface  and  had  relayed  back  scientific data.  The  brief  Tass  statement 
said  VENUS  111  carried  pennant  bearing  Soviet  coat  of  arms  to   th e  
Venusian  surface.  Fur ther   details  of  the   spacecraft’s  instrumentation 
were  to be revealed later  [see March 51. 
Sir  Bernard  Lovell,  director  of  Jodrell  Bank  ExperimentaI Station, 
called  the   landing  “a  vivid  technical  feat”  bu t   regretted  tha t   “ the  
Russians  should  have  endangered  the   fu tu re   biological  assessment of 
Venus  by  contaminating  the   planet.”  (Pravda, 3/2/66,  1, 4;  Grose, 
NYT ,   3/2/66,  1 ;  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  3/1/66,  A l ;   Simons,  Wash.  Post, 
3/2/66,  A l )  
0  U.S.S.R. 
launched  COSMOS  CXI  unmanned  satellite  with  scientific equip- 
ment  to  continue  space investigations,  Tass  announced.  Orbital  data: 
apogee,  226  km.  (140  mi.);  perigee,  191  lun.  (119  mi.);  period,  88.6 
min.;  inclination,  51”.  (Tass, 3/1/66) 
Edgar  M.  Cortright,  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Space 
Science  and  Applications,  testifying  before  the   House  Committee on  
Science and Astronautics’  Subcommittee on  Space Sciences and Appli- 
cations in  support of NASA’s FY  1967 authorization,  discussed the  merits 
of  the   Apollo  and  Surveyor  programs:  “The  scientific  advantages of 
having  Surveyors  in   the   program  along with  Apollo  is  the   ability  to  

75 

76 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

sample more  sites  and  to   determine what  areas  of  the  moon  are  worth 
visiting  by  man,  for  example,  in   addition  to  going  to  sites  tha t   man  is 
no t  likely to  for  the  next decade or more-up  near the  poles and certain 
of  the   mountain  regions. 
“We  would  like  to   help  develop  this  total  strategy  of  exploration  of 
the  Moon  in  a sensible way.  We  think automated equipment continues 
to  have a role  to  play.  . . . 
“I think  there  is nothing we  can  fly  on Surveyor tha t  would  improve 
or  even come close to  equalling what  can be done by  the  Apollo  once i t  
gets there. In  other words, bringing a sample back is so much better than  
doing analyses on  the   lunar  surface.”  (Transcript) 
March  1: Astronaut  Alan  B.  Shepard, Jr.,  headed  six-man panel  of  investi- 
gators  tha t   began  attempt  to  reconstruct  St.  Louis  crash  of  T-38  jet 
plane  in  which  Astronauts  Elliot M.  See, Jr.,  and Charles A.  Bassett  I1 
died  Feb.  28.  MSC  Public  Affairs  Officer  Paul  Haney  told  UPI  tha t   full 
report would  no t  be  completed  for  “at  least six weeks.” 
The  tragedy prompted Rep.  Thomas M.  Pelly  (R-Wash.)  to  urge  the  
House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  to  investigate  flight 
training of  astronauts, particularly  th e  number  of  hours  of  flying  time 
required  and  the   justification  for  such  requirements.  (UPI,  NYT, 
3 /2 /66 ,22 ;   NASA  LAR  V/36) 
The   Feb.  28   deaths  of  Astronauts  Elliot  M.  See,  Jr.,  and  Charles  A. 
Bassett I1 received editorial  comment. 
Washington  Evening  Star:  “Yesterday’s  tragedy  is  all  th e   more 
shocking in  tha t  i t  needn’t have happened a t  all.  . . . 
It is assumed tha t  Bassett was  ‘logging flying time’ . . . See, a civilian, 
r c  
was  no t   eligible  for  flight  pay  but  as  an   as tronau t  was  encouraged to 
keep his hand as  an  airplane jockey, 
“It  is  difficult  to  see  why  i t  is  necessary for military  men  on  astro- 
nau t   du ty   to   fly  airplanes  to  qualify  for  ‘hazardous  duty’  p ay .   . . 
Let’s  save our  spacemen for  space, and let’s make i t  a bit  easier  for 
cr 
them  by  amending th e  military  pay  act  to  give  uniformed  astronauts 
those  few  hundred  extra  dollars  a  month  just  for  being  astronauts.” 
(Wash. Eve.  Star, 3/1/66,  A6) 
Houston Pos t:  “There is . . . an   element of  irony  in   the   fact  tha t   two 
men preparing for a  highly  hazardous space mission  should  die  in   this 
prosaic  manner,  but  actually,  under  the   procedures  that  are  followed 
in  space flights, there  a re  jus t   as great risks  on   the  surface of  th e  ear th  
and  in   its  atmosphere  as in   space,  and  they  probably  are  much  more 
numerous.  If  air  travel  is  safer  than   land  travel  today,  space travel  is 
probably even safer  . . .” (Houston Post,  3/2/66) 
Missiles  and  Rockets:  “By  emphasizing the  everyday  risk  taken  by  all 
th e  astronauts  in   the   course of  training,  th e   deaths of  Capt.  Freeman, 
Mr.  See  and  Maj.  Bassett  have  almost  certainly  lessened  the   outcry 
against  th e   space program  in   the   event  of  similar  losses  during  space 
operations. 
“Each time an  astronaut steps into a military jet aircraft, he  is running 
a  risk  perceptibly greater  than   tha t   he   takes  in   space.  . . . [NASA]  takes 
the   greatest  of  care  to   assure  tha t   manned  spacecraft  launches  are   as 
safe  as  th e   best  engineering  talent  in   th e   nation  can  make  them.  A 
launch  atop  a  Titan  11,  hazardous as  i t  may  be,  cannot  compare with 
th e  danger inherent  in  groping through  low  fog  for  an   elusive runway 
in   a jet  aircraft.”  (Coughlin, M&R,  3/14/66,  54) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

77 

March  1:  NASA  had selected Fairchild Hiller, General Electric  Co.,  and Lock- 
heed  Aircraft  Corp.  for  negotiation  of  contracts  totaling  $450,000 for  
parallel  six-month  feasibility  studies  of  missions  for   five  possible 
second-generation Applications Technology Satellites  (Ats) . Spacecraft 
would  contribute  information  useful  for   orbiting  data-relay  satellites, 
deep-space  tracking,  navigation  satellites,  data  collection,  galactic 
probes,  and  communication  with  aircraft,  other  satellites,  ships  and 
ground  vehicles,  and  broadcast  satellites.  (NASA  Release  66-45) 
*  Establishment  of  National Natural  Disaster  Warning  System  to   provide 
warnings  of  hurricanes,  tornadoes,  tidal  waves,  floods,  and  o ther  
natural  hazards  was  announced  by  the   Wh i te   House  i n   response  to  
proposal by  Secretary of  Commerce John T.  Connor. Warning System 
would  ccmake effective use  of  present technology and  existing facilities 
for  th e   distribution  of  all  warnings  over  a  single  au then t ic   channel 
between the  warning agency and the  public”;  i t  would eventually provide 
around-the-clock weather  intelligence  reaching  hundreds  of  communi- 
ties which had no t  previously had adequate warning service.  (Pres .  Doc., 
3/7/66,  303) 
The  advancement of  military technology contributed greatly to  th e  civilian 
economy  with  “higher  reliability,  new  management  techniques,  new 
materials,  improved  manufacturing  methods,  better  instrumentation, 
and  th e   expansion  of  technical  fields  such   as  cryogenics  and  micro- 
electronics,”  AFSC  Commander  Gen.  B.  A.  Schriever told  a Rotary Club 
meeting  in   Honolulu.  He  cited  in   particular  th e  development of  long- 
range  air  transportation  “which  clearly  has  both  military  and  com- 
mercial value”  and discussed the  progress tha t  had  been made  in  some 
key  technical  areas:  “. . . curren t   experiments  with  oxide-dispersed 
metals  for  strength  a t  high  temperatures  show  a  40  percent  improve- 
ment  over  the   findings  of  two  years  ago.  Boron  fibers  for  composite 
materials have already been  produced with a 20 percent greater  aver 
”I;.” 
s treng th   than   they  were  predicted  to  a t ta in   by  1970.  Their  month y 
production  is  more  than  20  times  th e   total  supply  tha t   existed  three 
years ago .   . . . 
“When  we  tu rn   to   the  propulsion  area,  we  find  tha t   a  new  aircraft 
engine is  presently  under  test,  which  surpasses  the  gains  predicted  for  
1970 i n  bypass  ratio,  high  temperature capability, and reduced specific 
fuel  consumption. The  supersonic combustion  ramjet,  or  SCRAMJET,  is 
showing great  promise  for  airbreathing vehicles  a t   speeds  of  mach  6 
strated  a t   simulated speeds of  mach  6  in  test  facilities..  . .” (Text) 
or  greater.  Supersonic combustion has  already been  repeatedly demon- 
*  Dr.  Jocelyn R.  Gill,  Chief  of  In-Flight  Sciences for  NASA  OSSA’S  Manned 
Space  Science  Div.,  was  one  of  six  Government  career  women  who 
received  the  Federal Woman’s  Award a t  a banquet  sponsored by Wood- 
ward  and  Lothrop,  Inc.,  department  store.  (Wush. Po s t ,   2/7/66,  C2) 
*  British  Royal  Society had  been  quietly  conducting exchange of  scientists 
with  Chinese  Communist Academy  of  Sciences  for   last  three   years, 
Royal  Society  spokesman told  th e  press  in   London.  About  15  British 
scientists  had  visited  China  during  three-year  period  and  varying 
numbers  of  Chinese had  visited  U.K.  for  periods  ranging from  several 
months  to   two  years.  A t   present  25  Chinese were studying wide  range 
of  scientific  subjects  a t   British  institutions.  (Schmidt,  NYT, 3/2/66, 
13) 

78 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

March  1-3:  “Space  Maintenance  and  Extravehicular  Activities”  meeting 
sponsored  by  USAF  Aero  Propulsion  Laboratory  and  Martin  Go.  was 
held  in Orlando. 
Goodyear Aerospace  Corp.  engineer Charles Brownell,  together with 
three  USAF  space engineers,  told  the  meeting tha t   construction in  space 
would  cost  approximately $100,000  per  hour,  but  added:  “These  costs 
will  be  reduced  drastically  i n   the   next  few  years.”  Brownell  said  tha t  
because space labor  would  be so  expensive,  efforts  were  being made  to 
automate  as  much  repair  work  as  possible.  (Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
3/1/66,  A4) 
Man  must  learn  how  to   rescue  orbiting  astronauts  stranded  in   a 
disabled spacecraft  because  “it  is  a  problem we  all know  will  one  day 
confront us,”  Col.  Emil 6. Beaudry, vice commander of USAF Air Rescue 
Service,  told  the   conference. He  said  one  expert  had  concluded there  
was  a  62 per  cent probability  of  a t  least  seven emergency situations in  
space involving 22 men in  the  next 20 yrs.,  and a 58 per cent probability 
of  two  or   three  emergencies within  10  yrs.  Beaudry  continued:  “There 
is  no  reason  today-or 
certainly  in   the   near  future-why 
an   opera- 
tional  rescue  spacecraft  could  no t   be  ready  and  standing  by  in   th e  
event  of  distress  or   tragedy  during manned  flights. 
“For  example,  a  launch  vehicle  such   as  the   Titan  3 with  i ts   great 
weight-lifting  capability  and  mission  versatility  could  easily  carry  a 
rescue  crew,  medical  facilities,  and  technicians  aloft  to  assist  in   any 
way  required.  . . .” (AP, New  Haven Register,  3/7/66) 
NASA  engineer  David  F.  Thomas  reported  on   his  “jet  shoes”  to  aid 
astronauts during extravehicular activity:  “This  device may  be thought 
of  as a pair of shoes with jets attached to the  shoe soles in  such  a manner 
as   to  produce  a  thrus t   vector  along the   subject’s  leg when  the  jets  are  
activated.”  Projecting  from  the   fron t   of  each  shoe  would  be  hinged 
toe-plate  which  as tronau t   could  depress  or  release  a t   will  to   operate 
an   electrical  switch  which  controlled  gas  jets.  Thomas  said  shoes, 
which would  be  slipped  on  over  space boots,  had  been  tested  success- 
fully  on   counterbalanced  harness  device  a t   LaRc.  (Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
3/2/66,  A18) 
Douglas Aircraft  Co.  engineers Thorne  L.  Runyan  and John M.  Dick 
reported  tha t   intensity  of  sunlight  and  blackness  of  shadows  would 
Cause astronauts  working  i n   space to   “confuse  spheres  with  points  of 
light,  cones with wedges,  and  pipes with strange shapes tha t  appear and 
disappear.”  To  counteract  these  distortions,  they   recommended  a 
bracket  of  s trong   lights  “looking  over  th e   shoulder”  of  a  working 
as tronau t   to  fill  in   shadows  and  lessen  contrast with  sunlight.  (Wash. 
Eve. Star,  3/3/66,  A5) 
Bell  Aerosystems  Co.  test pilot  Robert  F.  Courter reported  tha t   Bell 
had  developed  a  rocket  propellant  “flying  pogo  stick”  for  transporting 
men  and  equipment  on  ear th   or  over  th e   surface  of  the  moon.  Pogo 
stick  would  be  powered  by  hydrogen  peroxide jets  and  its  two  rocket 
nozzles would  be controlled  directly  by  pilot’s  hand,  arm,  and  shoulder 
movements.  (UPI,  Miami  Her.,  3/3/66) 
The   space  tool  kit  to   be  used  by  Astronaut  David  R.  Scott  during 
Gemini  VI11  mission  was  exhibited  for   the   first  time.  Developed  by 
Martin  Co.  and  Black  & Decker  Tool Co.  a t   a  cost  of  $124,000,  kit’s 
power tool used impact instead  of  torque as its motive principle because 
man  i n  space, with neither  friction nor  gravity  to  give him  a  firm  foot- 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

79 

ing, would  be  sen t  spinning counterclockwise by  th e  action  of  a  hand- 
held  tool  tha t  rotated  clockwise.  (Hines,  Wash. Eve. Star,  3/3/66,  A l )  
I n   a  luncheon  address,  Dr.  Eugene  B.  Konecci,  NASC  staff,  warned 
tha t   U.S.S.R.  might  soon  recapture  th e   lead  i n  manned  spaceflight: 
“They  don’t  lead  now  in  manned  spaceflight.  They may  again i n   the 
near  fu ture ,  but  they  don’t  now.”  Konecci said space experts  expected 
Russia  to   launch  a  “major  manned  program  i n   th e   near  future,” 
possibly a manned laboratory.  (UPI,  Miami  Her.,  3/3/66) 
March  2:  NASA’s PIONEER  VI  interplanetary  probe,  launched  Dec.  16,  1965, 
passed  near  ear th  after 76 days  of near-perfect  operation i n  solar orbit. 
Probe  was  84,190,800  mi.  from  the   sun ,   passing  7,775,600  mi.  closer 
than  ear th  does,  and  in   earth’s  orbital  plane on a  course which  would 
ultimately  take  it within  75.6  million mi.  of  the  sun .   Devised  to   s tudy  
interplanetary space,  PIONEER  VI  had  telemetered 250  million  readings 
from  its  six  scientific  instruments  covering  3,300  separate measure- 
ments and taken 2.5  million readings of  100 engineering measurements. 
It  had  also  registered  solar  wind  speed  of  1,636,000 mph  on  Feb.  23, 
close  to  highest  speed  previously  recorded  of  1,675,000  mph  by 
EXPLORER  XVIII  in   ear th   orbit.  Preliminary  scientific findings would  be 
presented to American Geophysical Union meeting in  Washington, D.C., 
April  19-22. Pioneer project was managed by ARC.  (NASA Release 66-43,) 
Vice  President  Hubert  Humphrey,  accompanied  by  NASA  Administrator 
James  E.  Webb  and  NASC  Executive Secretary  Edward  C.  Welsh,  flew 
by  helicopter  t o   GSFC  for   three-hour  tour,  during which  they  watched 
GSFC  technicians receive first photos from ESSA 11 meteorological satellite. 
Successful  operation  of  ESSA  11  officially  created  world’s  f i s t   fully 
operational weather-forecasting satellite network.  (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 
3/2/66;  AP, Balt.  Sun, 3/3/66) 
9  NASA  successfully launched two  companion sounding rockets five minutes 
apart  from  NASA  Wallops  Station  for  simultaneous  measurements  of 
properties  of  th e   neutral  atmosphere,  ionosphere,  and  solar  radiation 
intensities  a t   120- to   380-mi.  altitudes.  Aerobee  150A sounding rocket 
with  180-lb. AFcRL-instrumented payload  to   measure  solar  ultraviolet 
radiation  and  electron  temperatures  as  function  of  altitude  reached 
142-mi. (229-km.)  altitude. While Aerobee 150A was  still in  flight, four- 
stage solid-propellant Javelin  boosted instrumented payload  to   380-mi. 
(611-km.)  altitude to  obtain  simultaneous measurements of  neutral gas 
densities, temperatures, and composition; ion densities and composition, 
and  electron  temperatures  and  densities.  Data  from  both  flights  were 
telemetered  to  the  ground  and  would  be  correlated  to  study  effects  of 
solar  radiation  on ionosphere and upper atmosphere.  (Wallops Release 
66-12; NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Discovery  of  two  powerful x-ray  galaxies which might  indicate  existence 
of  a  whole family  of  celestial  objects was  reported  by  Naval  Research 
Laboratory  physicist  Dr.  Herbert  Friedman  a t   a  news  conference  in 
Washington, D.C.  The two ga lax ies-Cygnus  A and M-87-were  among 
the   strongest  of  the   10,000 galaxies  tha t   emit  radio  signals  and   had 
been  detected previously only by  optical  telescopes  and  by  the ir   radio 
emissions.  “The  startling  thing  about  these  extra-galactic  sources  is 
tha t   their  x-ray  ou tpu t  is  10 to   100  times greater  than   their  combined 
ou tpu t   of  light  and  radio  waves,”  Dr.  Friedman said,  and h e  suggested 
tha t   a n  x-ray  satellite  or  a  “fence-like  array  of  1,OOO  Geiger  counters 
erected  o n   th e  moon”  could  identify  th e   sources.  The   discovery sup- 

80 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

ported  theory of  an  “exploding universe”  whose evolution over billions 
of  years,  and  i n   the   fu ture ,   would  be  characterized  by  violent  cosmic 
explosions far  beyond  the   relative  calm  of  the  Milky  Way.  Dr.  Fried- 
man,  E. T.  Byram,  and T.  A.  Chubb obtained data  from an  April  1965 
Aerobee  sounding  rocket  f igh t .   (Clark,  NYT ,   3/3/66,  2 ;   S’ imons, 
Wush. Post, 3/3/66,  A3) 
March  2:  In   a  special  message  to  Congress,  President  Johnson  urged  the  
establishment  of  a  Cabinet-level Dept.  of  Transportation consolidating 
FAA  and  several  other  Federal  agencies  and  functions  “to  serve  th e  
growing  demands  of  this  great  Nation,  to  satisfy  the   needs  of  our  
expanding industry and to  fulfill the  right of  our taxpayers to maximum 
efficiency  and  frugality  in   Government  operations.”  The  President 
repeated  the  proposal  made  in   his  S ta te  of  th e  Union message  Jan.  1 2  
for  U S .   program  to  construct  and  flight-test  2,000-mph  supersonic 
aircraft.  He  requested  $200  million  in   FY  1967  to  initiate  prototype 
phase, including completion of  design  competition, expanded  economic 
and  sonic  boom  studies,  and  s ta r t   of  prototype  construction.  U.S. 
planned  to   conduct  first  flight  tests  by  1970, he  said,  and  to  introduce 
the  aircraft into commercial service by  1974. The President also directed 
his  Science Adviser  to   work  with  NASA,  FAA,  Dept.  of  Commerce,  and 
Dept.  of  Housing and  Urban  Development  to  devise  a n   “action  pro- 
gram”  to   attack  the   problem  of  aircraft  noise--cca  growing  source  of 
annoyance  and  concern  to   the   thousands  of  citizens  who  live  near 
many  of  our  large jetports.”  (P re s .  Doc.,  3/7/66,  304-12) 
I n   statement  presented  to  the   Senate  Committee on  Aeronautical  and 
Space  Sciences,  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  NASA  Associate  Administrator 
for  Space  Science  and  Applications,  summarized  significant  1965 
mission results:  “The  1965 successful  Space Science and Applications 
missions  totalled  16.  Of  these,  eight  were  scientific  satellites;  three ,  
applications  satellites ; three,  deep-space probes ; and  two  were  vehicle 
developments.  Science and   applications  experiments  have  also  been 
carried  on  five manned missions. 
“The  list  of  U S .   space firsts was  extended during  1965. Ranger  IX  
took  the   first  close-up pictures  of  the   floor  of a  lunar   crater.  For  the  
first time, as television pictures of  the  lunar surface were being obtained 
from  the  Moon,  they  were  sent on  a  real-time basis  to  home receivers. 
Mariner  IV  achieved  the   first  successful  mission  to  Mars.  I t   obtained 
th e  first close-up pictures of  the  Martian surface,  revealing the  cratered 
character  of  th e  planet.  By  October 1, 1965, Mariner  I V   had  extended 
the  long-range communication record  to  191  million miles;  i t  has since 
been tracked to  its maximum  distance of  216 million miles. The various 
measurements  of  the  Mars  magnetic field,  atmosphere, and  ionosphere 
constitute  significant  firsts.  Early  Bird  became  th e   first  operational 
commercial communication satellite.  The  first full global picture of  the  
Earth’s cloud cover in  a single day as i t  will be observed by  TOS was pro- 
vided  by  TIBOS  IX early  in   the   year.  I n   the   Gemini  program  excellent 
pictures  were  obtained  of  the   terrain  and  the   gegenschein,  a  faint 
reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary 
space.  It was  clearly  established  tha t   astronauts  can  perform scientific 
experiments  in   space,  producing excellent  usable  results. 
“During  1965, 138 sounding rockets  were  launched  to   continue  th e  
investigation  of  our  atmosphere,  and  to   carry  ou t   exploratory  space 
experiments. In support of  th e   International Quiet  Sun  Year,  the  ship 

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

81 

USNS  Croatan  launched  some 77  rockets wh 
coast  of  Sou th   America.  Over  9 0   per  c 
launches and about 80 per cent of  th e  payloads were successful, yielding 
data on  cosmic rays,  and t h e  Earth’s  atmosphere, ionosphere, and mag- 
netic  field.  A  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  sounding rocket  observed 
th e  planet  Mars  i n   th e   ultraviolet,  indicating  an   atmosphere pressure 
of  about  five millibars  a t   the   planet’s  surface,  which  agrees well  with 
th e   Mariner  IV  data.  Other  rocket  flights  made  ultraviolet  studies  of 
th e   [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of  1965, and of  th e  Sun  i n  ultraviolet  and X-ray 
wavelengths.”  (Testimony; NASA   Auth. Hearings, 341-5) 
March 2: NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acqui- 
sition, Gerald M.  Truszynski, testified before  the  Senate Committee on 
Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences:  “TO provide  effective  support  of 
flight  projects,  NASA  has  established  a  worldwide  network  of  tracking 
and  data  acquisition  stations.  . . . This  network,  a t   th e   present  time, 
consists of  ground stations which a re  operational or under construction 
a t  28 locations.  These stations are  located  in   th e  United  States and   16 
foreign  countries and  territories.  They  represent  a  total  capital  invest- 
ment of  over $600 million  and a re  operated by more than  2,500 highly 
trained  NASA,  contractor,  and  foreign  national  personnel.  . . . 
“Many  of  the   stations  being  used  for  Gemini  support  w i l l   also  be 
used  for   Apollo.  Capabilities  a r e   being  added  a t   these  stations  while 
missions . . . will consist of  1 0  fixed land stations with 30-foot antennas, 
other stations are being established. The  network for  support of  Apollo 
three  stations with  85-foot antennas,  1 transportable  station, 5 ins tru-  
mentation  ships,  and  8  instrumentation  aircraft.  I n   addition,  three  
85-foot antenna  stations normally used  for  deep space missions will  be 
used  for support of Apollo.  . . . 
“Our  efforts are directed toward having the  network fully qualified for 
lunar   mission  support  in   1967.”  (Testimony; NASA   Auth.  Hearings, 
383,  387) 
0  Dr.  Hermann  H. Kurzweg, NASA  Director  of  Research, OART,  in  testimony 
before  th e   House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Sub-  
committee  on   Advanced  Research  and  Technology,  discussed  t h e  
development a t   NASA  Marshall Space Flight  Center  of  a  new  automatic 
programmer  called  AMTRAN  (Automatic Mathematical Translator) : ‘‘In 
this  system, keyboards  and cathode ray  oscilloscopes, by  which  mathe- 
matical  commands  and  replies  to  and  from  a  central  digital  computer 
may  be  transmitted  and  received,  can  be  located  near  the   desk  of  th e  
mathematician,  and  operated  directly  by  him.  Experiments have  indi- 
cated  tha t   this  new  AMTRAN  computer  system  may  reduce  th e   time 
required  for  solutions  of  certain  problems  by  a  factor  of  100.  An 
additional  economical advantage  of  AMTBAN  is  tha t   se ts   of  keyboards 
and  display  screens,  all  working  through  th e   same  central  computer, 
may be located  in  a large number of  locations  for direct and immediate 
use.”  (Testimony; NASA   Auth.  Hearings,  600-02) 
FCC adopted a  Notice  of  Inquiry  inviting comments by  interested  parties 
to  be  submitted by  Aug.  1, 1966, on  five specific questions  concerning 
legality,  compatibility with  th e  Communications Satellite  Act  of  1962, 
and  economic and  technical  feasibility  of  proposed  FCC  authorization 
of  nongovernmental communications satellite  facilities.  (Text) 
U.S.S.R.’s  ZOND  III  interplanetary  probe,  launched  July  18,  1965,  was 
153,520,000  km. (95,397,328  mi.)  away  from  ear th   i n   heliocentric 

82 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

orbit gradually receding from  the  sun, Tass announced.  All  equipment 
was  said  to  be  functioning normally.  (Tass,  3/2/66) 
March  2:  Harold  B.  Finger,  Director  of  NASA  Nuclear  Systems  and  Space 
Power Div.,  speaking a t  the  Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, summarized 
the  history  and development of  electricity  in  space exploration and pre- 
dicted  i t  would play a n  increasingly important role  in  the  fu ture  of  t h e  
space program: “ I t   is  important  to  remember that  the  program of  space 
exploration is   s t i l l  young  and  there  is  still a  vast  sea  and many  space 
objectives  to  explore and to  learn about.  The  highest power  levels used 
i n   space  so  far  have  been  only  a  few  kilowatts..  . .” Orbital  research 
laboratories, 
lunar   bases,  broadcast  satellites,  and  interplanetary 
s  acecraft,  he  said,  would  require  increasing  levels  of  electric  power. 
(!iextl 
0  U.S.  scientists  were questioning whether VENUS  111’s landing on   the  planet 
had  been  a mistake,  reported  Walter  Sullivan  in   the   New  York  Times. 
He noted  that  the  Nov.  28,  1965, issue  of  Zzvestia  had  reported  the  two 
probes would pass on different sides of  Venus and tha t  Mstislav Keldysh, 
president  of  Soviet Academy of  Sciences, had  told  a Moscow press  con- 
ference  Feb.  10  tha t   both  probes  would  ‘‘approachyy the   planet  about 
March  1 ,  but  tha t   no  “soft”  landing would  be  attempted. Marvin  Miles 
of  the  Los Angeles  Times reported  tha t   U.S.  scientists,  emphasizing  the  
difficulty of  knowing the  exact track  of  distant planets,  said that a small 
trajectory  error  could  have  caused a  crash-landing  even  though  a  flyby 
might have  been  programed.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,  3 /2 /66 ,   22;  Wash. Post, 
3 /3 /66 ,   A21) 
Report  of  Feb.  1 5  firing  of  French  ballistic  missile  1st  stage  from  Les 
Landes  launching  site  sou th   of  Bordeaux,  France,  published  in   Air  et 
Cosmos  and  confirmed  by  French Ministry  of  Armed  Forces,  indicated 
base  was  operational,  Washington Post  reported.  Development  of  the  
base,  intended  to  bridge  the   gap  between  the   scheduled  1967  closing 
of  Hammaguir Range and the  1968 opening of  the  French Guiana base, 
had  been  kept  secret  and  “it  had  not  been  realized  tha t   the   base  was 
anywhere  near  ready  for  use,”  Post  suggested.  (Wash .   Post,  3/3/66, 
A16) 
0  Rupert  Wildt,  professor  of  astrophysics  a t   Yale  Univ.,  had  been  named 
to receive the  Eddington Gold Medal-highest  award of  Royal Astronom- 
ical  Society of  England.  ( N Y T ,  3/3/66,  58M) 
Home-built  photo-receiver  se t   of  RCA  electronics  engineer  Wendell 
Anderson in  Morristown, N.J.,  received  photos  of  North Atlantic  storm 
taken  by  ESSA  I  meteorological satellite-first 
known  usable  pictures 
ever received from  an  orbiting  satellite  on  home-made set.  Equipment, 
which included 25-yr.-old ham radio,  20  ft.  of  copper tubing,  television 
antenna, mast,  sheet  of  chicken wire,  wooden  laundry hangers, sawed- 
off  rolling  pin,  and  $25 microscope,  cost  $600-$31,000 
less  than   an  
ESSA ground station. Anderson used  antenna  to  pick  up  signals on ham 
radio,  taped  signals  on  recorder,  reducing  them  to  series  of  electrical 
impulses  tha t   could  be  changed  into  light  signals,  then   beamed  light 
through  reverse  end  of  a  microscope  onto  spinning  sheet  of  film  to  
record  photos.  (O’Toole,  N Y T ,   3/3/66,  31) 
March  3:  Breadboard  version of  Nerva  (Nuclear Engine for  Rocket Vehicle 
Application)  successfully  ground-tested  for  first  time  a t   full  power- 
1,100 mw,  corresponding to   55,000-lb.  thrus t   in   space-by  NASA  and 
AEC  a t  Nuclear Rocket Development  Station,  Jackass  Flats,  Nev.  Two 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

83 

and   one-half hours  after  initial ignition,  engine was  restarted  and  r u n  
for  1 5  min.  a t   varying  power  levels,  reaching  a  maximum  a t   slightly 
less  than   full  power.  Nerva  engine  had  operated  successfully  up  to  
partial  power-40  mw-Feb.  3.  (AEC  Release  J-54; Atomic  Energy  Pro- 
grams,  1966,  186) 
March  3:  Seven  scientific  experiments  for  the   1967 Mariner  mission  had 
been  selected  by  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  NASA  Associate  Administrator 
for  Space  Science  and  Applications,  on  recommendation  of  NASA’s 
Space  Science  Steering  Committee:  (1)  ultraviolet  photometer,  (2) 
S-band occultation,  (3)  dual-frequency  radio  occultation,  (4)  trapped 
radiation  detector,  (5) helium  vapor magnetometer,  (6) plasma  probe, 
and  (7)  celestial mechanics.  (NASA  Release 66-42) 
President  Johnson  submitted  ComSatCorp’s  third  annual  report  to  
Congress.  In   transmittal message he   said tha t  many  satellite communi- 
cations  facilities  would  be  used  by  the   Government only  “to  meet  i ts  
unique and   vital  national  security needs which  cannot be met  by  com- 
mercial facilities.”  He  said  the  capacity of  Government facilities  “shall 
a t   all  times be  limited  to  tha t   essential  to  meet  such  unique  needs.” 
Report  cited  ComSatCorp’s  1965  accomplishments :  operation  of 
EARLY  B IRD   I  comsat  in  synchronous orbit  above Atlantic;  initiation of 
program  to  furnish  communications service  for  Apollo  manned  space 
program  and  to  expand  commercial  service;  beginning  of  construction 
of  terminal  stations  in   Washington  s ta te   and  Hawaii;  pursuit  of 
expanded  research  and  development programs,  including  program  to  
establish global  commercial satellite  system by  launching synchronous 
satellites  in   1968;  and  issuance  of  requests  for  proposals  to  study 
(Text;  ComSatCorp  Release;  Pres.  Doc., 
multipurpose  satellites. 
3/7/66,  315) 
0  Harold  B.  Finger,  Director,  NASA  Nuclear Systems and  Space Power  Div. 
and  Manager,  AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Office,  discussed 
NASA  and  AEC  programs  to  provide  nuclear  energy  systems  for  space 
applications  before  the   Senate  Committee on  Aeronautical  and  Space 
Sciences:  “A  major new  program  initiated  by  the  AEC  a t  NASA’s request 
during  1965 is  the   development of  the   SNAP - 2 7   isotope-thermoelectric 
generator  to   power  experiments  tha t   will  be  left  on   th e  Moon  by  t h e  
(ALSEP)  is  intended to  transmit data  . . . for  a t  least a year. The SNAP - 2 7  
Apollo  astronauts.  This  Apollo  Lunar  Surface  Experiment  Package 
isotope power  supply will  provide 50 watts  to  the  experiments and will 
weigh  about  40  pounds.  It  will  use  a  single  plutonium  loaded  fuel 
capsule which  will  be  inserted  in to   the  generator on   the  lunar   surface 
by  th e  astronauts.”  (Testimony; NASA   Auth. Hearings,  541) 
0  Edmond  C.  Buckley,  NASA  Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data 
Acquisition,  i n  testimony before the  House Committee on Science and 
Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Advanced  Research  and  Technology, 
reviewed  NASA’s tracking  and   data  acquisition  network  program: 
“During  fiscal  year  1965,  the   network,  under  the   management  of 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  successfully  supported  four  Gemini 
missions,  two  of  which  were manned.  So far  in   fiscal  year  1966,  th ree  
manned  Gemini  missions  have  been  supported,  including  th e   highly 
successful  Gemini  V I I /V I   rendezvous  in   December..  . . 
“During  1965, an  average of  32  satellites was  supported a t  any given 
time.  This  included satellites  launched  in   prior  years  which were still 
transmitting useful  data plus  new satellites which were launched during 

8 4  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

th e  year.  I n   1966,  the   average  number  of  satellites  to   be  supported  is 
expected to   increase  to   more  than   35  including  flight  of  the   Orbiting 
Astronomical  Observatory,  the   Biosatellite,  and  Applications  Tech- 
nology  Satellite. 
“In  1967,  th e   average  number  of  satellites  to  be  supported  is  esti- 
mated to  exceed 40 with th e  spacecraft, collectively, contacting the  ne t-  
work  stations more  than  650 times  daily.  Contributing to  the  extensive 
workload in  1967 will be the  additional flights of  the  Orbiting Astronom- 
ical  Observatory,  Biosatellite,  Applications Technology Satellite,  and  
Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. . . . 
“During  fiscal  year  1965,  the   [Deep  Space]  network  successfully 
supported th e  Ranger VII,  VIII,  and  IX missions and  the   cruise phase 
of  th e   Mariner  IV   mission.  The   precise  operation  of  the   facilities  a t  
Goldstone and t h e  control center  a t  Pasadena i n  support of  the  Ranger 
missions was  essential  to  the   accuracy  achieved  in   impacting on  the  
surface  of  th e  moon,  and  to   the   activation  of  the   cameras  and  trans- 
mission of  live  television  pictures  of  the  moon’s  surface.  I n   fiscal year 
1965,85-foot antenna facilities a t  both Canberra, Australia, and Madrid, 
Spain,  became  operational  and participated  i n  Mariner I V  support.  . . . 
“The  excellent  support provided  the  Mariner  IV  mission permitted 
th e  spacecraft, after a flight of  325 million miles and a n  elapsed time of 
228 days,  to   pass Mars  with  a  deviation  of  only  1,000 miles  from  the  
projected  fly-by  distance  of  5,000  miles  and  to  take  the   first  close-up 
pictures of  th e  planet.  The  Deep  Space Network  continued  to  support 
th e  Mariner  IV   spacecraft  after  encounter  and  established  a  new  two- 
way  communications  record  of  191  million  miles  between  network 
stations  and  the   spacecraft.  . . . On  January  4,  1966,  the   Goldstone 
facility received  a signal from the  Maainer IV  spacecraft over a distance 
of  216 million miles.”  (Testimony; N A S A  Auth. Hearings, 608,  727-9) 
March 3: Canine alternates of  Soviet space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek orbiting 
ear th   aboard  COSMOS  cx  appeared  on  Moscow  TV  with  physician- 
cosmonaut Dr.  Boris Yegorov. Wearing space jackets  to  which  pickups 
and  feeding devices  were  attached,  dogs  showed  no  signs  of  anxiety 
when Yegorov placed  them  in  a cabin similar  to  COSMOS  cx and demon- 
strated  a  number  of  instruments  and  apparatus  used  onboard  COSMOS 
cx  such   as  pharmacological preparations  painlessly  introduced  into 
dog’s  aorta  through tube and cuffs with  built-in  sensors.  (Tass, 3/3/66) 
0  NASA  Aerobee  15OA  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station  carried  AFCRL- 
instrumented  payload  to   136-mi.  (219-km.)  altitude  in   experiment  to 
measure  incident  solar  radiation.  Rocket  vehicle  coning motion made 
accurate  solar  pointing  and  consequent  data  acquisition  possible  only 
60  per  cen t  of  th e  time.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Legislation  (H .R .  13266) to  provide for building prototype of  a commercial 
supersonic transport  (Sst)  without  using Federal funds was  introduced 
in   the   House  by  Rep.  Frank  T.  Bow  (R-Ohio).  Bow  proposed  tha t  
responsibility  for  development of  aircraft be shifted  from FAA  to  a  new 
Supersonic Transport Authority empowered to sell public $1.5 billion in  
development bonds. Bonds would no t  be obligations of  the  Government, 
bu t  Government would guarantee payment in  event of  default. Bow  said 
his plan  would  avoid  large  appropriations  of  public  funds  and  provide 
sound basis for determining industry’s  share of  development costs when 
commercial product was  realized.  (CR ,  3/3/66,  4640) 
9  U S .   plan  for  halting  spread  of  nuclear  weapons  was  unacceptable  to 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

85 

U.S.S.R.  because  i t  did  no t   bar  non-nuclear nations  from  sharing in   a n  
international atomic force o r  ban  transfer of  atomic arms to  army un i ts  
of  non-nuclear nations,  Soviet negotiator Semyon K .  Tsarapkin told  17- 
nation  disarmament  conference  in   Geneva.  Tsarapkin  joined  U S .  
delegate Adrian S. Fisher in  rejection  of demand by  nonaligned nations 
tha t   nonproliferation  treaty  contain  pledge  by  nuclear  powers  to  
liquidate  their  atomic arms.  (AP,  Wash .  Post,  3 /4 /66 ,   A l7)  
March  4:  NASA  had signed supplemental agreement with Boeing Co.  convert- 
ing Sa turn  V  1s t  stage  (S-IC) contract from fixed-price to  incentive-fee. 
Contract,  currently valued  a t  $850,114,303, was  first Sa tu rn  stage con- 
tract  to   be  converted  to  incentive  type.  (MSFC  Release  66-49;  NASA 
Release 66-48) 
*  Five NAA  Rocketdyne 5-2 engines designed  to  power Sa turn  V’s  S-I1 stage 
successfully  underwent  second  consecutive  full-duration  test  firing 
aboard  “battleship”  test  vehicle  a t  Santa  Susana, Calif.  Engines  were 
fired  for  360  sec.  and  developed  650,000-lbs.  thrust-comparable 
to 
1,000,000-lbs.  th ru s t   in   flight  operation.  (NAA  Skywriter,  3/11/66,  1) 
physics  in   Science:  ‘r.  . . many  illustrious  men  of  science,  physicists  in  
Prof.  Emilio  Segre  of  Univ.  of  California,  Berkeley,  reviewed  postwar 
particular,  have made  the  mistake of  thinking  tha t   the   end  of  physics 
up  of  completely new  fields.  . . . Space exploration and the  study of  the  
was  in  sight. They have consistently  been proved wrong by  the  opening 
interior  of  the   ear th   are   new  departures.  Here  we  do  no t   yet  see  any 
new  phenomena,  but  we  are   penetrating  in   unexplored  regions.  I t   is 
possible  tha t   these  regions  will  no t   yield  anything extraordinary,  such  
as  extraterrestrial  life.  However,  they  present  phenomena  on  scales 
impossible  to  reproduce  in   the   laboratory,  and  a  change  in  orders  of 
magnitude is  a  well-known source  of  surprises.  Furthermore, we  must 
no t   forget  tha t   particle  physics  originated  with  the   study  of  cosmic 
rays.”  (Science, 3/4/66,  1052-5) 
9  U S .   and  other  scientifically  advanced nations  have  a  solemn and  urgent 
duty  to   help  less-developed  countries  on  their  way  by  providing both 
knowledge  and  materials,  wrote  Frederick Seitz, president  of  National 
Academy of  Sciences, in  Science, but the ‘‘success of  this partnership . . . 
will ultimately depend on the  extent to which those in  the  less-developed 
lands  are   willing  to  sacrifice  themselves and  their  way  of  life  to   the  
pursuit  of  technological  development.  One  of  Homi  Bhabha’s  [late 
director of  Tata  Institute,  Bombay]  great  contributions to  India  lies  in  
the   willingness  he  had  to   mold  old  traditions  to  new  patterns  of 
development.”  (Seitz, Science, 3/4/66) 
Astronauts  Elliot  M.  See,  Jr.  (Cdr.,  USNR),  and  Charles  A.  Bassett  I1 
(Maj., USAF),  killed-Feb. 28 when their T-38 jet training plane crashed i n  
S t .  Louis, were buried in Arlington National Cemetery with full military 
honors  in   two  separate  ceremonies. Fifteen  astronauts attended,  12 of 
whom  served as pallbearers. See and Bassett had been selected as prime 
crew for  the  Gemini  IX mission scheduled for  spring  1966.  (Hoagland, 
Wash. Post, 3/5/66,  B1; AP,  NYT ,  3/5/66,  9) 
FAX  would  advance from Oct.  15 to  Sept.  1, 1966, date for  submission of 
final  design  proposals  by  two  airframe  and  two  engine manufacturers 
participating  in   supersonic  transport  (Sst)  development  program, 
announced  B/G  J.  C.  Maxwell,  director  of  FAA  Ss t  Devleopment.  FAA 
expected to complete its evaluation of  the  competing designs by Dec.  31 
as  scheduled. Boeing Co.  and Lockheed Aircraft  Corp. were  competing 

86 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

for  airframe  contract; General Electric  Co.  and  P ra t t   & Whitney  Div. 
of United Aircraft Corp.,  for engine contract.  (FAA  Release 66-23) 
March 4: Launch Umbilical Tower  No.  3  a t  KSC  was  lifted  by  crawler trans- 
porter  and moved  to  Pad  A  of  Launch  Complex 39-three  miles  away 
-for  placement  on  pedestals  in  checkout  of  procedures  for  Sa tu rn  V 
launch  operations.  (KSC Historian) 
0  Dr.  Norman  F.  Ness  of  GSFC  Laboratory  for  Space Sciences  described  in  
Science  the   new  view  of  earth’s  magnetic  field  afforded  by  satellite 
mapping. Among developments in  space physics, h e  pointed  ou t  studies 
in  planetary magnetism leading to comparison of  earth with a “magnetic 
comet”  and  results  obtained  by  MARINERS  11  and  IV  indicating  the  
unique strength of  earth’s magnetic field, compared with those of  Venus 
and  Mars.  He  noted  the   importance  of  these  data  and  other  satellite 
measurements  for  paleomagnetic research.  (Science, 3/4/66,  1041-52) 
0  FCC  authorized  ITT  World Communications, Inc.,  to provide live television 
coverage of  recovery  operations  for  March  1 5  Gemini VI11 mission.  A 
portable  station aboard  U.S.S.  Boxer  would  use  EARLY  BIRD  I  comsat  as 
i t  did  for  GEMINI  VII  and  VI  recoveries.  (UPI, NYT ,  3/5/66,  13) 
March  5:  Agena  target  vehicle  similar  to  one  to  be  used  on  March  15 
Gemini  VI11  rendezvous  and  docking  mission  had  apparently  passed 
series of  test firings necessary  t o  qualify for flight, Charles W. Mathews, 
NASA  Gemini program manager,  told  AP.  Data  from  tests  conducted  a t  
USAF  Arnold  Engineering  Development  Center,  Tenn.,  were  being 
evaluated.  (AP, Balt.  Sun,  3/6/66) 
After trip  from  Seal Beach, Calif., aboard USNS Pt. Barrow, S-11-F facilities 
stage-nonflight 
version  of  Saturn  V/Apollo  launch  vehicle’s  2nd 
stage-arrived  a t   KSC  for  use  in  testing  launch  facilities.  Stage  would 
be  mated  with  two  other  facilities  stages  and  an  Apollo  spacecraft 
mockup  to  form  the   365-ft.-tall  Sa tu rn  V  launch  vehicle.  This  would 
mark  first  time  all  major  components  would  have  been  joined  in  the 
Sa tu rn  V  configuration.  (MSFC  Release  66-47) 
Failures  of  VENUS  11  and 111  space probes were admitted by  U.S.S.R.  Tass’s 
original  announcement  had  reported  tha t   a  “softlanding”  had  been 
planned  for  VENUS  111, but  a  corrected  announcement  which  appeared 
two  hours  later  eliminated  the  word  “soft”  and  failed  to  confirm  tha t  
the  spacecraft  had  ejected  its  sterilized capsule. Tass  said  the  descend- 
ing  apparatus  had  consisted  of  parachute  system  and  23.6-in.  sphere 
containing  instruments  to  measure  Venusian  surface  temperature  and 
pressure,  to which  “heat-resistant  substance had  been  applied ensuring 
protection  from high  temperatures when  braking  in  the  dense layer  of 
the  atmosphere.”  VENUS  11  had  failed  to  transmit  photos  or  televise the 
planet’s  sun l i t  side  as  programed  because  of  a  breakdown  in  its  com- 
munications  system:  “The  last  radio  communications  with  stations 
Venus 2  and  Venus  3 as  they  approached  the  planet  were  not  held  for 
reasons  tha t  had  not  been  established.” 
Both  VENUS  11  and  VENUS  111  carried  equipment  to  measure  inter- 
planetary  magnetic  fields,  cosmic  rays,  and  streams  of  low-energy 
charged particles, in addition  to special “traps”  to determine magnitude 
of  solar plasma and micrometeorites;  however, slightly different instru- 
mentation was  used  to  obtain  cross-reading of  the  data. Both  spacecraft 
were similarly constructed  with  one  section for  flight equipment and a 
second  for  auxiliary  equipment.  Second  section  in  VENUS  11  carried 
television  photographic  device  for  use  during  flyby.  Tass  said  VENUS  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

87 

was  to  have  flown  “close  to Venus  on   the   side lighted  by  the   sun  a t  a 
distance no t   exceeding 40,000  km.  (25,000  mi.) ; VENUS  111  was  to have 
landed  o n  the   surface of  Venus  in   the  center  of  the  visible disc  of  the 
planet.”  89  successful  radio  exchanges  had  been  held  with  the   space- 
craft; data had  been  recorded  to  “obtain  a high  accurate forecast of  the  
movements  of  both  stations,”  Tass  said.  (Pravda, 3/5/66,  USS-T Trans.; 
N Y T ,   3/6/66,  78;  r a s h .  Post,  3/6/66,  A14) 
March  5:  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  S.  McNamara’s  statement  to  House 
Armed  Services  Committee  tha t   the   “Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory 
development  program  should  proceed  on  a  deliberate  and  orderly 
schedule” received  comment by James J. Haggerty, Jr.,  i n  Journal  o f t h e  
Armed  Forces:  “ ‘Deliberate’ is  a n   excellent  word  i n   this  context;  ac- 
cording  to  one  definition  . . . i t   means  ‘leisurely  in   movement  o r  
action.  . . .’ I n  these  terms  MOL  . . . shows promise of  becoming  one of 
the  most deliberate projects of  all time. 
‘‘ ‘Orderly’,  though,  is  no t   such   a  good  word.  Last  summer  DOD  ap- 
proved  hardware  development  and  set  a manned  flight  target  of  1968, 
then in  a matter of months, reneged on  the  schedule by whacking almost 
a  quar ter   of  a  billion  doIlars  ou t   of  the   planned  funding  program. 
cate  tha t   late  1969 is  now  an   optimistic target  . . . 
McNamara made no mention  of  a new schedule, bu t  other sources indi- 
“The  SecDef  reported  tha t   the  MOL  funding  figure for  fiscal  1967 is 
$159 million. This, together with  remaining funds from the  $150 million 
allocated  in   the   curren t   fiscal  year,  will  provide  for  ‘design,  definition, 
system integration,  development  of  specifications and  determination of 
firm  cost  proposals  . . . scheduled  for  completion  during  this  coming 
spring and  summer,  after  which  contract will  be  awarded for full-scale 
development  of  hardware.’  . . .” (Haggerty, J /Armed  Forces, 3/5/66,  8 )  
ver  100 scientists,  including U S .   space  officials,  would  visit  Greece  to 
observe  annular  eclipse May  20,  during  which  lunar   shadow  on   earth 
would  make  99  per  cent  of  the   sun   invisible  in   tha t   area.  Joint  NASA- 
Greek  National  Committee  for  Space  Research  project  would  launch  
seven  GSFC-instrumented  Boosted  Arcas  rockets  from  USNS  Range 
Recoverer  stationed  several  miles  off-shore  from  Koroni  in   sou thern  
Peloponnesos.  Experiments would  investigate ionization  below  56  mi. 
due  to  eclipse-caused  “changes  in   solar  ultraviolet  and  X-ray  flux.’’ 
Data  would  be  coordinated  with  those  obtained  by  nine  Arcas  and 
Centaure rockets which  European Space Research  Organization  (ESRO) 
would  launch from Euboea, Greek island in  Aegean Sea.  ( N Y T ,  3/6/66, 
10; NASA  Release 66-108; Wallops  Release 66-22) 
*  Astronaut James Lovell and nuclear submarine U.S.S.  Benjamin  Franklin’s 
crew exchanged mementos  of  a joint experiment conducted during Dec. 
4-18  GEMINI  VII  mission.  Benjamin  Franklin,  with  two  seconds  to  fire  a 
Polaris missile s o   i t  could  be  seen by  GEMIM  VII  Astronauts Lovell and 
Borman as they passed  over Cape Kennedy,  fired perfectly,  enabling the  
astronauts  to  track  the  missile visually.  I n  a  ceremony  aboard  the  sub- 
marine docked in  Newport News, Va.,  Lovell was presented gas generator 
plate  from  the   Polaris  missile and  crew  received  the   NASA  patch  from 
Lovell’s  GEM IN I   VI1  spacesuit.  (m, Wash.  Sun. star,  3/6/66) 
March  6:  USAF  announced  i t  was  designing  an   expandable  sidewall folding 
aircraft tire which would  deflate after  aircraft had  taken  off,  and inflate 
before  landing. New tire concept,  being developed by B.  F. Goodrich C O .  
for AFSC’s  Flight Dynamics  Laboratory,  would  give  large aircraft better 

88 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

ground  flotation capability  through  increased  contact  between  tire  and 
ground,  making  rough  field  landings  easier,  and  permitting  control  of 
tire pressure.  (AFSC  Release 197.65) 
March 6: USAF  awarded Sylvania Electric Products,  Inc.,  $46,000 contract  to  
continue  studying methods  of  eliminating  six-minute communications 
blackout  caused  when  friction  of  the  atmosphere  envelops  reentering 
spacecraft  in  a ball  of  hot,  electrically charged gases.  Dr.  Ronald Row, 
Sylvania Electronic Systems Applied Research Laboratory, told  the  New 
York  Times in  a  telephone  interview  of  the  development of  a  device  to 
simulate  the  flow  of  charged  gases  around  typical  spacecraft  antenna. 
He  said  Sylvania was  considering  shortening  pulses  of  signals so  they 
could  penetrate  gases  or  covering  antennas  with  plastic  or  ceramic 
shrouds  tha t   would  shield  them  from  gases  and  heat  but  still  permit 
radio  signals to  penetrate.  (Wilford, N Y T ,  3/7/66,  19) 
During  week  o f  March  6:  Possibility  that  residents  of  communities afflicted 
by  je t   noise  might  develop  psychotic  symptoms  because  their  dreams 
were  interrupted  a t   night  was  suggested  by  Dr.  Julius  Buchwald, 
psychiatrist, and Dr. Howard M.  Bogard, psychologist, a t  a hearing  held 
by  New  York  State  Assembly’s  Mental  Hygiene  Committee.  Dr. 
Buchwald  said  tha t   everybody dreams  a t   least  five  times  a  night.  If  a 
person  is  awakened  and  prevented  from  having  his  dreams,  psychotic 
symptoms from mild to ccmore severe” could occur, including paranoidal 
delusions,  psychoses,  hallucinations,  and  suicidal  and  homicidal  im- 
pulses.  Dr.  Bogard  said  persons  prevented  from  dreaming would  “tend 
toward  t rue  psychoses.”  He  urged  study  of  whether  residents  near  air- 
ports  ‘‘lose  out  on  dream  time,”  whether  such  communities  become 
“disoriented”  by  people  leaving,  and  whether  family  life  is  disrupted 
because  of  interruptions  of  ordinary  communications.  (Hudson,  N Y T ,  
3 /13 /66 ,66)  
March  7: All  primary mission objectives of  first unmanned  Apollo Saturn  IB 
mission Feb. 26 were achieved and flight was  very satisfactory according 
to  initial  evaluation  of  test  results,  NASA  announced.  Guidance  and 
control  systems  performed  well;  both  S-IB  and  S-IVB  trajectories 
and  velocities were  normal  and  no  structural  problems were  found  in 
either  stage  or  instrument  unit.  Quality  of  data  received  a t   ground 
stations  was  excellent and  few  losses  occurred  in  expected  1,300 meas- 
urements  telemetered. 
All  spacecraft  systems  and  subsystems  performed  as  planned  with 
two  exceptions:  (1)  one  of  the  main  parachute  harness  legs  failed  to 
sever  after  landing,  thus  retaining  chute  attached  to  module;  and  (2) 
Service Module  (Sm) propulsion  system  exhibited  below  nominal  per- 
formance  during  both  firing  periods  resulting  in  reentry  speed  about 
500  mph  less  than  18,500  mph  expected,  but  sufficient  to  evaluate 
performance  of  heatshield  for  orbital  missions.  Earth  landing  system 
functioned properly to safely recover Cm, and unsevered  parachute was 
recovered  for  post-mission examination.  Spacecraft would  be  flown  to 
Downey, Calif.,  for detailed  inspection by  NASA  and  NAA  Apollo officials 
and  tests  for  improvements.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.;  MSFC  Release 66-51) 
0  NASA  Assistant Administrator  for Technology Utilization Breene M.  Kerr, 
reviewing NASA  technology  utilization  program  for  1965  in  testimony 
before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee 
on Advanced Research and Technology, stated  tha t  the total  number  of 
NASA  Tech  Briefs  now  published  was  more  than  600.  He  continued: 

89 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 
“We  anticipate publication  of  approximately 700  Tech  Briefs  during 
calendar year  1966.  . . . we  estimate  the  average Tech Brief  is  seen by 
more than   10,000 persons.  . . . Industry interest i n  our  program  is  . . . 
Center Technology Utilization  Offices  during  calendar  1965.  . . . Two 
indicated by  the  fact tha t  approximately 1,500 persons visited our Field 
additional  Regional  Dissemination Programs have  been  started  in   the  
last year,  one a t  the  University of  New Mexico  in  Albuquerque and the  
other a t  Southeastern S ta te  College in  Durant,  Okla.  One hundred and 
established computer-based centers.  . . . Of  real  significance  . . . is  th e  
thirty-one  companies  are   now  paying annual  membership fees  a t   our 
service  from  these  centers.  . . . We  have  also  recently  concluded an  
fact  tha t  approximately 3,000  companies have  received  some degree of 
interagency agreement with the  Small Business Administration whereby 
several  of  tha t   organization’s  field  offices,  under  a n   experimental 
program,  will  be  providing NASA  technology  to   selected  small business 
concerns.”  (Testimony; NASA   Auth.  Hearings, 634-9) 
March  7:  Series  of  small  balloons  was  launched ‘from Christchurch,  New 
Zealand,  in  joint  U.S.-New  Zealand  pilot  project  to  examine feasibility 
of  Global Horizontal Sounding Technique  (Ghost)-plan 
for using satel- 
lite  to  locate  and  read  ou t   information  from  large  number  of  balloons 
floating around ear th  at constant altitudes. Balloons, circling hemisphere 
a t  20,000-ft., 40,000-ft., and 80,000-ft. altitudes, would be tracked by six 
stations equipped with high-frequency receivers,  stop watches,  and  sun  
tables.  Program would  determine whether  small superpressure balloons 
could  fly  for  extended  periods;  test  temperature,  humidity,  pressure, 
and radiation  sensors which might be  used  in  operational Ghost system; 
learn  whether balloons would  cluster  in  certain areas;  and acquire data 
on  planetary  circulation  in   Southern Hemisphere a t   various altitudes. 
Called  Sou thern  Hemisphere balloon experiment, project was sponsored 
by  ESSA  and NSF and had  the  endorsement of  U.N.  World Meteorological 
Organization.  Data  would  be  analyzed  by  National  Center  for  Atmos- 
pheric  Research  and  Information and  shared with  all  participants  and  
interested  nations.  (ESSA  Release  66-17) 
*  Sen.  Fred  R.  Harris  (D-Okla.),  speaking on  Sena te   floor  in   support  of 
Sen.  Carl  T.  Curtis’s  (R-Neb.)  resolution  calling for  National  Science 
Foundation  to  se t  guidelines  for wider  and more  equitable  distribution 
of  Federal  R&D  funds,  said:  “. . . expenditure  of  this  money  can  and 
should  be  an   investment  in   the   fu ture   of  each  of  the   several  states, 
without  regard  to  geographic  location  or  the   accident  of  history.” 
(CR ,  3 /7 /66 ,4917)  
March  7-11:  Third  Annual  Space  Congress  of  the   Canaveral  Council  of 
Technical  Societies  held  a t   Cocoa  Beach,  Fla.,  was  attended  by  more 
than  1,000  scientists  and  engineers.  Astronaut-aquanaut  M.  Scott 
Carpenter was  principal  opening day speaker.  (KSC  Historian) 
March  8:  NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  carried 
high angular resolution  x-ray collimators to estimated 103-mi. (165-km.) 
altitude in  NASA-heriCan Science and Engineering, Inc.-MIT experiment 
to  determine  size  and  location  of  strong  x-ray  sources  in   Scorpius. 
Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  successfully  [see  May  231. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  Solar electric propulsion of unmanned spacecraft to Mars appeared entirely 
possible  by  the  m id - 19 7 0 ’~~  reported  JPL  researchers  John  Stearns and 
Donald  W.  Ritchie  a t   AIAA  meeting  in   San  Diego.  Four  55-ft.-long 

90 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

folding rectangular solar-cell panels would  furnish power  th a t  could be 
harnessed  to  a  se t   of  small  ion-chamber  engines  to  propel  spacecraft 
with  approximate 7,000-lb. payload  toward Mars.  Trip would  take about 
300  days  and  culminate  in   orbit  around Mars.  Report  also  envisioned 
850-day mission  by  solar-electric-propelled spacecraft  to  and  beyond 
Jupiter  in  late  1970’s. (JPL  Release; NASA  Release 66-53) 
March  8:  NASA  Langley  Research  Center  awarded  General  Electric  Co. 
$3,000,000  incentive-type  contract  to   build  th e   sixth  spacecraft  i n  
NASA’s  Scout-launched reentry  heating  flight  series.  The   13-ft.  conical 
spacecraft would  be  launched  to measure heating  rates associated with 
turbulent  air  flow  close  to  vehicular  surface,  which  could  no t   be 
simulated  with  ground  equipment.  (LBRC  Release; NASA  Release  66-54) 
ComSatCorp  petitioned  FCC  to  deny  ITT’S  request  to  construct  a  four th  
satellite earth station in  Puer to  Rico.  ComSatCorp said  “public  interest 
would  best  be  served”  if  it,  rather  than   ITT,  owned  the  station,  and 
revealed plans  to  seek permission t o  construct and  begin  operating  the  
facility by mid-1968.  (Wash. Sun. Star, 3/1/66,  E l l ;  N Y T ,  3/12/66,22) 
0  Reps.  William  Green  (D-Pa.) and Earle Cabell  (D-Tex.) were  appointed  to 
House  Committee  on   Science  and  Astronautics,  replacing  Reps.  Bob 
Casey  (D-Tex.)  and Brock  Adams  (D-Wash.),  who  resigned.  (NASA  LAR 
VI411 
Lt.  Valentina  Tereshkova,  who  made  48-orbit  VOSTOK  VI  spaceflight  i n  
June   1963, was  promoted  to  major  in   the   Soviet  Air  Force,  reported 
Krasnaya  Zvezda.  March  8  was  U.S.S.R.  International Woman’s  Day. 
(Reuters, N Y T ,  3/9/66,  6; AP,  Wash. Eve. Star, 3/8/66,  A2) 
March 9:  Seven U S .  scientists had consented to serve on joint US.-U.S.S.R. 
Editorial Board provided  for in agreement on space biology and medicine 
reached by NASA  and Soviet Academy of Sciences representatives Oct. 8, 
1965, in  New York City: Melvin Calvin, Univ.  of California, Berkeley- 
U S .  co-chairman; Loren D.  Carlson,  Univ.  of Kentucky; Dr.  Robert W. 
Krauss, Univ.  of Maryland; Robert B.  Leighton, Cal  Tech; Dr.  John P. 
Marbarger, Univ.  of  Illinois; Dr. Orr  E. Reynolds, NASA;  and Wolf Vish- 
niac,  Univ.  of  Rochester. Agreement  provided  th a t  Editorial Board,  co- 
chaired  by  a  Soviet  and  a  U S .   scientist,  would  supervise  collection. 
preparation, and publication of materials on space biology and medicine. 
I t  would select compilers  to assemble and prepare materials and  authors 
-approximately 
equal number  of  Soviet and US.-to  write  the  mate- 
rial.  Work  was  expected  to  be  published  in  several  volumes,  in  both 
English  and Russian,  between  1967 and  1968. Cost  of  work  performed 
by  each  country would be borne by  that  country.  (NASA  Release  66-49) 
Successful mock  launching  of  Gemini  8 spacecraft  at  ETR  in  preparation 
for  March  15  three-day  rendezvous  and  docking mission.  Astronauts 
Neil  Armstrong  and  David  Scott  spent  two  and  one-half  hours  in  
Gemini  capsule  during  simulated  spaceflight.  (UPI, N Y T ,  3/10/66,  10) 
NASA  had  awarded  Lockheed  Propulsion  Co.  $96,000  contract  to  evaluate 
solid-propellant motor  which  could  stop and  restart  spacecraft  propul- 
sion units  on command.  Current solid-propellant rocket motors did  not 
have this  capability.  On  fu ture  space missions concept could be applied 
to  midcourse  correction,  probe  separation,  and  orbit  and  space-probe 
injection. Lockheed, under contract to JPL,  would conduct 18 test firings. 
(NASA  Release  66-56) 
USAF  had established and would  implement  in  FY  1967 procedures  for  the  
management  of  DOD’S  secondary  payload  space activities,  Dr.  John  S. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

91 

Foster,  Jr.,  DOD’S  Director  of  Defense Research  and  Engineering,  told 
closed hearing of  Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. 
Program would  provide  for  operation of  a  central business  office which 
would accept requests for DOD  launch support of  space experiments from 
NASA,  other  armed  services,  and  other  DOD   nonservice  R&D  activities. 
Arrangements  for  secondary  payloads  on  USAF  vehicles  had  previously 
been  handled  on  an  informal  basis.  (M&S  Daily,  3/9/66) 
March  9:  ComSatCorp proposed  to  FAA  a n   aeronautics  satellite  to  handle 
complex communications for  airlines and aid in  FAA’s air  traffic control. 
Two-channel, 210-lb. satellite would  be  launched  in   late  1967-two  or 
three  years  earlier  than  previous  proposals-into 
22,300-mi.-altitude 
synchronous  orbit  to  provide  more  reliable  very-high-frequency  radio 
communications  over  North  Atlantic  area  currently  served  by  high- 
frequency  radio  system  affected  by  bad  weather  and  sunspot  activity. 
(UPI,  V a s h .  Pos t ,  3/11/66,  D6; Cooke, WSJ, 3/10/66,  32 ;  Clark, N Y T ,  
3/10/66,  19 ;  Wash.  Eve.  S tar ,  3/11/66,  A8) 
e  USAF  launched unidentified satellite from W T R  with Thor-Agena D booster. 
(US. Aeron.  & Space  Ac t . ,   1966,  148) 
e  Flight  operations  through  national  airspace  system  in  1965 surpassed  all 
previous  years, according to annual FAA  Air Traffic Activity Report. The 
292  FAA  airport  traffic control  towers reported  37.9  million takeoffs  and 
landings during  the year-an 
11% increase  over  1964. Largest increase 
-nearly 
34%-was 
in  general  aviation  (nonairline)  flying;  airline 
activity  increased  by  only  14%.  (FAA  Release 66-25) 
March  10:  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb,  testifying  on  the   NASA  FY 
1967 budget request before the  House Committee on Science and Astro- 
nautics,  said  tha t  the  gap between  the U S .   and Soviet  space programs 
still  remained  and  “this  budget  will  not  close it.  We  are  as much  as 2 
years  behind  the  Soviet  Union  in   certain  important  aspects  of  space 
power.  I n   . . . 1965,  they  launched  52   Cosmos satellites;  successfully 
orbited  a  3-man  spacecraft;  demonstrated  a  communications  satellite 
capability with  2 Molniya  spacecraft; and  orbited  the   heaviest  payload 
by  anyone  in  the  world  to  date,  indicating  they  have  developed  a  new 
launch  vehicle  with  some 2%  to  3 million  pounds  of  thrust.  Since  the 
beginning  of  1966 they  have  achieved a  successful  soft landing  on  the  
moon  and  they  have  reached  Venus with  two probes. 
The  Soviet  program  shows  every  evidence  of a  continuing  major 
commitment  to  long-term,  large-scale  operations  in  space.  . . . The  
? r  
massive Soviet commitment to a rapid buildup  and a long-term program 
underlines  the  importance  they  attached  to  advancing their  space capa- 
bilities.  I t  will  require  a  strong and  increasing  effort  initiated  no  later 
than fiscal year  1968  and vigorously pushed in the  years after the  United 
States has achieved a manned  lunar Ianding to prevent  them  from forg- 
ing ahead as the  unchallenged leader in  space.  . . .” (Testimony; NA SA  
Auth.  Hearings,  5) 
Soviet space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, approaching the  end of  their  16th 
day in  space aboard  COSMOS  CX, were in   “quite  satisfactory  condition,” 
Tass  reported.  “This  is  indicated  by  telemetered  data  such  as  pulse, 
respiration,  electrocardiograms,  and  others--as  well  as  observation  of 
the   dogs  during  television  transmission  session.”  (Tass,  3/10/66; 
Reuters,  Chic.  Trib., 3/11/66) 
MSFC  engineers Michael J.  Vaccaro and Haydon Y.  Grubbs, Jr.,  ended  18- 
day stay  inside  lunar  vehicle  simulator  to  test  interior  chamber design 

92 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

and investigate human factors of  an enclosed cabin environment.  During 
experiment they performed assigned tasks inside chamber, went outside 
in spacesuits to simulate going onto lunar surface to gather rock samples, 
and  performed  emergency  tasks  when  the   compartment  walls  were 
‘‘punctured  by  meteoroids.”  Results  of  experiment,  conducted  by 
Honeywell, Inc.,  might be used in developing hardware needed in future 
exploration  of  moon.  (MSFC  Release 66-56) 
March  10: NASA  awarded Honeywell, Inc.,  a $230,000 contract  to  determine 
alternate  approaches  and  concepts  for  measuring  horizon  radiance 
characteristics  over  earth’s  surface-knowledge  essential  for  design  of 
space vehicle guidance and control systems. LaRc-directed study, includ- 
ing  investigation  of  factors  affecting horizon  radiance  profiles,  analysis 
of  measurements  and  evaluation  of  possible  flight  techniques,  would 
support Project Scanner rocket  flight tests.  (LaRC   Release; NASA  Release 
66-57) 
0  USAF  Agena  D  rocket  launched  from  Vandenberg AFB  with  Atlas  booster 
Feb.  15  exploded  into  a t   least  40  pieces  which  fell  from  orbit  during 
seven-day period, UPI reported. There was  no indication  tha t  the  payload 
itself was  damaged: “It is no longer in orbit,  but  i t  may  have been a  re- 
connaissance  satellite  which  was  brought  down  and  recovered,”  UPI 
explained. Explosive gas  in  the  otherwise  empty Agena  apparently  was 
detonated accidentally after booster had fired.  (UPI,  Chic. Trib., 3/11/66) 
GEMINI  IV  Astronaut Edward H .  White 11, first American to walk  in space, 
told AP tha t  the most  important word  of  advice he had given Astronaut 
David Scott,  scheduled for  extravehicular  activity  during the  March  1 5  
Gemini VI11 mission, was:  “Don’t  get in  a hurry. 
“Take  things  slow and  try  not  to hu r ry  and  rush,  because you  can’t 
do  things  in a  real  rapid manner up  there.  It’s better  to go  on  the  slow, 
deliberate  approach.”  (AP,  Chic.Trib.,  3/11/66) 
U.S.S.R.  would soon launch  single spacecraft with six cosmonauts farther 
into space than man had  ever ventured, possibly to the inner Van Allen 
radiation  belts  about  500 mi.  (805 km.)  above earth,  Veda a  Techniku 
Mladezi, Czechoslovakian technical journal reported. Last manned space- 
flight was  tha t  of  VOSKHOD  11  with cosmonauts Alexey Leonov and Pave1 
Belyayev  on March  18,  1965.  (A v .  Wk . ,   3/14/66,  34;  Simons,  Wash. 
Post,  3/10/66,  A4;  AP, Wash.  Eve.  Star, 3/10/66,  A l )  
March  11:  Dr.  Mac  C.  Adams,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Advanced 
Research  and  Technology,  outlined  the  highlights  of  NASA’s 1965 
advanced research and technology program before the House Committee 
on  Science  and  Astronautics,  citing  significant  contributions  to  such 
national programs as  the  supersonic  transport  (Sst)  and  the  USAF  C-5A 
transport,  and listing major accomplishments: landing studies of  reentry 
lifting bodies,  second Fire  experiment  to measure heat  transfer  a t  high 
reentry  velocities,  two  successful  firings  of  260-in.  solid-propellant 
rocket  motor,  series  of  successful  nuclear  rocket  firings,  2,600-hr. 
endurance  test  of  an   ion  engine,  and  endurance  tests  of  the   Snap-8 
nuclear  engine which  “demonstrated  altitude  specific impulse  of  over 
750  1b.-sec./lb.-almost 
twice  chemical rocket  values-and 
a  th ru s t   of 
over 50,000 pounds. Accumulated running time for the reactor tests was 
over  4200  seconds.  . . .” (Testimony; NASA   Auth.  Hearings,  169-78) 
0  Quasars a re  relatively small objects 10 million  to 1 billion yrs.  old and 30 
million to 300 million light years from earth tha t  have been sho t  a t  super 
speeds  ou t   of  another  galaxy  by  a  titanic  explosion,  astronomer  Dr. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

93 

Halton  C.  Arp,  Mt.  Palomar  Observatory, contended  in   Science. Alp’s 
theory contradicted prevailing view tha t  quasars could enable man to  see 
the   ends of  time and  space and possibly glimpse the  secrets of  creation 
because they were on the  rim of  the  u n i v e r s e 1 0  or more billion  light 
yrs. away-and  were almost as old as th e  universe-8  billion yrs. Astron- 
omers believed  tha t   the   quasars’  “red  shifts”  in  light-changes 
toward 
red  end  of  the   light  spectrum  as  objects  speed  away-were 
caused by 
extremely rapid motion away  from  our  own  galaxy.  Arp  suggested  tha t  
quasars might be very dense and compact, exerting a strong gravitational 
attraction  for  their  size which  could  shift wavelengths to  produce  ‘‘red 
shifts.”  (Science, 3/11/66;  Weil,  ZVush. Post, 3 /12 /66 ,2 ;   Sullivan, W T ,  
3/11/66,  28; Ubell,  N .Y .  Her.  Trib.,  3/11/66) 
March 11: NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George 
E.  Mueller,  testifying  on  FY  1967  budget  authorization  before  th e  
House  Committee  on  Science and  Astronautics,  stated  tha t   NASA  had 
reached a manpower  peak  of  300,000  people  in   the  manned spaceflight 
program: “We have passed our peak in  engineering, we are  reaching our 
peak  in  manufacturing,  and we  are  a t  our peak  in   total Manned  Space 
Flight manpower  resources.  . . . 
“A  striking anomaly of  the  space program is  tha t  we  begin  to  ‘go  ou t  
of  business’  before we  fly our first operational vehicle.  . . . The program 
to develop the  uprated Sa turn  I launch vehicle illustrates this situation. 
The decline in  manpower on this program has been underway for  several 
months,  bu t   the   first  flight  took  place  only 2  weeks  ago-and 
the   first 
manned flight is almost a year away. By  then,  the  employment level will 
be  almost  half  th e   peak  Ievel  of  1965.” 
Reviewing NASA  plans for a manned project  after Apollo, Dr. Mueller 
cited  five  major  program  alternatives  under  study.  The   alternatives 
“placed  emphasis on  (1) direct economic benefits to mankind,  (2) lunar  
exploration and  science,  (3) planetary exploration,  (4)  maximum  effort 
in  all program areas, and  (5) a  program balanced  over  the  whole  spec- 
trum  of  alternatives,  which could be  shifted as required to  meet national 
needs. 
“We  have  not made  a  decision  upon  which  of  these  courses we  will 
embark.”  (Testimony; NASA   Auth.  Hearings,  32-3,  148) 
0  Performance  of  Apollo  Command  Module  (Cm),  launched  Feb.  26   from 
ETB  on  AS-201 flight,  was  successful  enough  to  obviate  any  delay  i n  
schedule for a 1969 manned lunar  expedition, Dr. Joseph Shea, manager 
of  MSC Apollo Spacecraft Office, told Gladwin Hill of  the  New York Times. 
The  Cm, on display a t  North American Aviation, Inc.,  in  Downey, Calif., 
remained structurally intact, and the  few minor technical  problems  tha t  
had  developed  during  flight  were  not  serious  enough  to   cause  any 
engineering problems  in  th e  assembly-line production  vehicles for  sub- 
sequent  phases  of  the   testing  program,  Dr.  Shea  said.  “This  was  t h e  
first  major  confirmation of  design  processes and  it  went  quite  well.” 
(Hill,  NYT,  3/12/66,  8) 
o  Prince Philip of  U.K.  toured MSC  for three  hours,  accompanied by  depart- 
men t  heads explaining the  apparatus used in  spacefight.  With assistance 
of  Astronaut  James  A.  McDivitt,  the   Prince  spent  30   minutes  in   a n  
as tronau t   training  craft,  twice  steering  i t   in to   simulated  orbital  ren-  
dezvous  with  an   Agena  rocket.  “It  was  all  a  fascinating  experience,” 
he   said  later.  “When   you  a re   inside,  everything  seems  to  be  ou t   of 
context.”  Dr.  Robert  Gilruth,  MSC  Director,  presented Philip a  British 

94 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

flag  which  had  been  carried  aboard  GEMINI  VII  during  its  Dec.  4-18 
space mission  with  th e   intention  of  presenting  i t   to  the  Prince  during 
his  tour.  (MSC  Roundup,  3/18/66,  8 ;   Waldron,  N Y T ,   3/12/66,  8) 
March  11:  France’s  report  for  the   Register  of  the   U.N.  Committee  on  the  
Peaceful Uses of  Outer Space of  her successful Nov.  26,1965, launch of 
A-1 scientific satellite  from Hammaguir Range, marked first such report 
by  nation  other  than  U.S.  or U.S.S.R.  (Text) 
March  12:  Gemini  8  hatch  difficulty  which  threatened  to  delay  March  1 5  
mission was  solved by  Astronaut  David R.  Scott. After  KSC  technicians 
had  discovered  th a t  65-  to  70-lbs. pull  pressure  was  required  to  close 
cabin door because of  too-thick sealant around hatch edges, Scott worked 
with  hatch-closing mechanism  until  he  was  satisfied he would  have  no 
difficulty closing the  door  in  space.  Officials preferred  to  have  required 
pull pressure a t  40 to 45 lbs.,  but mission rules would  tolerate 80 lbs.  If 
hatch could not be closed properly, astronauts would be unable to repres- 
surize  their  cabin. 
Mission  review board  of  NASA,  USAF,  and  industry  officials reaffirmed 
March 15 launch date after studying all factors of  the  flight: Titan I1 and 
Atlas-Agena boosters,  Gemini 8 spacecraft,  control  centers  a t   KSC  and 
MSC,  global  tracking  network,  and  recovery  forces.  (AP,  Balt.  Sun 
3/13/66) 
Meteorite  crater  1,476 f t .   in  diameter and with a n  average depth of  100 ft. 
-third 
largest crater on record-was  discovered in the western foothills 
of  the Chilean Andes by  geological team led by  Dr.  William A.  Cassidy, 
Columbia Univ.  Lamont Geological Observatory,  and  Joaquin  Sanchez, 
Instituto  de  Investigaciones  de  Geologicas  de  Chile,  NSF  announced. 
Crater, which lies in a n  area  1,000 ft. above sea level accessible only by 
foot, was  discovered while team was  investigating a depression shown in  
a n  aerial photograph. Crater’s age had not been determined.  (Chic. Trib., 
3/13/66) 
Astronaut  Virgil  I.  Grissom,  in   Toronto  to  address  the  Canadian  Aer- 
onautics  and  Space  Institute,  said  a t   a  news  conference  that  although 
computers  predicted  tha t   only  one  of  the   first  three  manned  U S .  
attempts  to  land  on   the   moon  would  be  successful,  human  judgment 
would  perhaps  prove  them  wrong.  He  said  computers  had  predicted 
the   loss  of  two  of  seven  astronauts  on  the  Mercury  program  but  none 
was  killed.  (AP, Denver Post, 3/13/66) 
Soviet  biologist  Norair  Sissakian,  believed  to  have  played  key  role  in 
designing  life-support  systems  for  animal  and  human  passengers  in 
spacecraft,  died  suddenly.  His  official  obituary, signed  by  Communist 
Party  leader  Leonid  Brezhnev,  Premier  Alexey  N.  Kosygin, President 
Nikolay  Podgorny,  former  President  Anastas  I. Mikoyan, and  all  other 
members of  12-man ruling presidium of  Soviet Communist Party,  refer- 
red  to his important contribution  to  “the formation  and development of 
a new  science-space  biology.”  Sissakian would  be  buried  in Moscow’s 
Novodevichye Cemetery March 14. (Tass, 3/13/66;  Pravda, 3 /14 /66 ,3 )  
0  Sir Sydney Camm, British aircraft designer who designed the RAF Hurricane 
fighter used  in  World  War  11,  the Hunter  fighter,  the  P-1127 Vtol  air- 
craft,  and other  combat aircraft, died  in London.  Sir  Sydney, honorary 
fellow  and  member  of  council  of  Royal  Aeronautical  Society,  had 
received  the  Society’s Gold  Medal  in  1958  and  had  been  selected  to 
receive  the Guggenheim Medal,  highest  U S .  aeronautical  award, in  the 
spring.  ( N Y T ,  3/14/66,  31) 

95 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
March  13: NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill 
Research Range was  third and last fiight  [see Feb.  9 and 161 in  series of 
GSFC experiments  to  measure  number  and  distribution of  electrons  in  
energy range of  1-300 kev, which produce visual aurora. Although radar 
lost  track  early in  flight and peak  altitude was  no t  available,  rocket per- 
formance  was  near  predicted  and  series  was  considered  completely 
successful.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  Formation  of  Science  Advisory  Committee,  composed  of  astronomers, 
biologists,  physicists,  and  geologists  from  eight  universities,  to   advise 
NASA  on conduct of  fu ture  space projects was announced by NASA  Admin- 
istrator  James E.  Webb.  Chaired by  Dr.  Norman  F.  Ramsey,  Harvard 
Univ.  physicist,  c o w i t t e e   would  work  directly  with  Dr.  Homer  E. 
Newell,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space Science  and  Applica- 
tions,  but  would  study  fu tu re   space  activities  on  NASA-wide  basis, 
including manned and unmanned flight programs. I n  particular,  i t  would 
review  how best  to  conduct such  programs as Voyager planetary space- 
craft,  including  automated  biological  laboratory,  post-Apollo  lunar  
exploration  program,  and  National  Space Astronomy  Observations- 
projects recommended by NAS Space Science Board.  (NASA Release 66-55) 
U S .  would  land a man on the  moon before 1970 and before the  Russians, 
predicted Astronaut Walter M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  a t  a  news  conference held 
with  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  in   Sydney, Australia.  Schirra  said US. 
space program had  completed  three   basic  requirements  for  a  manned 
lunar  landing:  14-day spaceflight,  ability  to  rendezvous  in   space,  and 
controlled  reentry  into  earth’s  atmosphere.  Astronauts  Schirra  and 
Borman  were  visiting Australia  on  their  eight-nation  good-will tour  of 
Asia.  (Reuters,  NYT ,  3/14/66,  6 )  
Gradual and  unusually  frank  disclosures  by  U.S.S.R.  confirming failures 
of  VENUS  11  and VENUS  111 missions were  discussed by  Evert  Clark in   the  
New  York  Times. He  noted  Soviet scientists’  admission tha t   VENUS 111’s 
trajectory  would  have missed  the  planet by  37,500 mi.-passing  Venus 
when  neither  object  would  have  been  visible  in   Moscow-had 
i ts  
trajectory  no t  been  corrected by Dec. 27 radio command, and tha t  VENUS 
111  had  failed  to  eject  landing  sphere  covered  with  heat-protective 
material  to   measure  temperature  and  pressure  a t   planet’s  surface. 
(Clark, NYT ,  3/14/66,  7) 
U S .   physics  was  facing  severe  shortage  of  funds  necessary  to   sustain 
progress  in   research  and  education,  concluded  NAS  Physics  Survey 
Committee in   its  report  Physics:  Survey  and  Outlook.  Report  recom- 
mended  tha t  physics support by  Federal agencies be  increased by  1969 
to  two  and  one-half times  the   1963 $500-million  level  for physics and 
astronomy.  Assessing  U S .   s treng th   in   six  subfields,  report  noted  for  
astrophysics  “a  pressing need  for more  observational facilities.”  Based 
on  1964-65 studies by  an   18-member group headed by  George E.  Pake, 
Provost of Washington Univ.,  St. Louis, report stated:  “Our  strength i n  
observational astrophysics  with  optical  telescopes  has  long been  estab- 
lished with  the  200-in.  telescope on Mount Palomar, bu t  we  have many 
more bright astrophysicists and astronomers than  have access to the  two 
US  telescopes most  suited  for  frontier  research.  Our  relative  strength 
will  be  altered  with  the   implementation of  plans  for   construction  of 
several large telescopes in  the  Soviet Union. Any nation can, by placing 
a large telescope in  the  Sou thern  Hemisphere,  assume leadership in  th e  
observational  astronomy  of  stellar  evolution  and  cosmology,  because 

96 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

the  Magellanic  Clouds  are  the  nearest  of  all  external  galaxies.  The 
United  States has taken  the  initiative  in  the  expensive but highly prom- 
ising field  of  space-based optical and  x-ray astronomy. 
“ In   radioastronomy  the  United  States  now  has  an   impressive group 
of major  radio  telescopes, bu t   the US position  is  not preeminent. Even 
the  new  instruments  nearing  completion a t   the   California  Institute  of 
Technology and the  National Radio Astronomy Observatory are inferior 
to  existing  instruments  in Australia  and  the  Soviet Union  and  to  large 
new crosstype arrays nearing completion near Sydney and Moscow.  The 
US  position  in  space physics  and  cosmic radiation  is  good,  with  some 
question  whether  present  conditions  permit  further  strengthening  of 
tha t  position.  Research  o n  gravitation  is  a t   present  not  a  large  sector 
of  research, but th e  US effort is of  very high quality and is being increas- 
(NAS  Release;  Science,  3/18/66,  1363-6;  Physics 
ingly  recognized.” 
Today ,  4/66,  23-36) 
March  14:  Gemini VI11 launch would be  delayed a t  least 24 hrs.  because of  a 
leak  in  a  un i t  of the  spacecraft’s environmental  control  system and  an  
overflowing fuel tank in the Atlas booster, NASA  announced. Launch was 
reset,  NASA  announced  March  15,  for  March  16.  (Wilford,  N Y T ,  
3/15/66,  17; Sehlstedt,  Balt.  Sun,  3/15/66;  Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
3/14/66,  1) 
Global television relayed by  U S .  and U.S.S.R.  satellites could be  used as a 
political  instrument,  threatening  the  independence  of  some  countries 
and  causing  far-reaching  changes  in  world  relationships,  warned 
Eurospace,  organization  of  160  European  aerospace  industries,  in  a 
memorandum  released in London. When  ordinary home  television  sets 
began  to  receive  programs  from  these  satellites  “the  national  inde- 
pendence  of  developed  countries  without  similar  means  of  expression 
might  be  threatened  by  this  persuasive  new  weapon,”  memorandum 
said.  Eurospace  warning,  released  three  days  after  an   announcement 
tha t   U.K.  and  other  European  nations  had  joined  US.-dominated 
Intelsat  consortium  to  launch  system  of  world-spanning  comsats  by 
1968, urged Europe  to  play  its own major role in space “before  i t  is  too 
late.”  Intelsat’s  space  communications  system  would  utilize  Early 
Bird-type satellites which Eurospace did not  consider “powerful enough 
to   have  noteworthy  political  or  economic  repercussions.”  (Reuters, 
Wash .  Post,  3/15/66,  A16) 
a  Two  meteorologists  from  US. National  Environmental  Satellite  Center 
were  in Geneva to discuss with  their  Soviet  counterparts  a  cooperative 
approach  on  gathering  weather  information  by  satellite,  including  in- 
formation exchange about meteorological satellite design and operation, 
Aviation  Week  reported.  Full  review  of  US.-U.S.S.R.  agreement  was 
scheduled for May.  ( A v .  Wk . ,  3/14/66,  25) 
0  U S .  might achieve a manned lunar landing by  1968, Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, 
director  of  Univ.  of  Arizona’s  Lunar  and  Planetary  Laboratory,  told 
Phoenix Gazette.  “There  is  nothing on  the  moon’s  surface to prevent  a 
landing  and  subsequent  take-off.  The   surface  is  crunchy  but  solid.  I t  
will  support  the  Lem  (Lunar Excursion Module), and man  can walk  on 
it with relatively little trouble,”  Kuiper added.  (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/15/66) 
0  Investigations  of  seals’  habits  might  yield  valuable  information  for 
astronauts  exploring  the   moon,  particularly  with  regard  to  enduring 
extremes  of  cold  and  lack  of  oxygen,  Dr.  Carleton  Ray,  New  York 
Zoological Society, told the  New  York Times. Ray, who recently returned 

97 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
from Antarctica  expedition sponsored  by  the Society with NSF  aid, said 
tha t   of  pertinent  interest  would  be  ‘%easons why  seals  can  endure 
tremendous  cold,  sleep  under  water  without  breathing,  and  use  what 
appears to be a remarkable echo-sounding system for navigating in  total 
darkness  under  thick  ice  to  re tu rn   to  isolated  breathing  holes  needed 
sporadically to  help  them  remain  submerged in   a  state  somewhat akin 
to  semihibernation.”  (Devlin, NYT ,  3/14/66,  6) 
March  15:  U S .   delegate  to  the   Geneva  disarmament  conference  Adrian 
Fisher  urged  U.S.S.R. 
to  reconsider  President  Johnson’s  offer  of  a 
“verified  freeze”  of  the   production  of  missiles  and  other  strategic 
vehicles for launching nuclear bombs as a  “logical first step in  the  con- 
trol  of  the  growth  of  inventories  of  strategic  nuclear  vehicles.”  Soviet 
delegate  Semyon  K.  Tsarapkin  had  rejected  the  U S .   plan  March  3. 
(NYT ,  3/16/66,  10) 
*  Compaiiia Telefdnica Nacionale  de  Espaiia  (CTNE)-the  Spanish  national 
telephone  company  under  NASA  contract-awarded 
ITT  contract  to 
establish  a ground station  terminal  complex on Grand Canary Island  to 
support  communications  for  U S .   Apollo  mission.  Stations,  equipped 
with  42-ft.  parabolic  antenna  reflectors,  super-cooled low-noise ampli- 
fiers,  and  10-kw  transmitters,  would  furnish  multichannel  telephone 
and  telegraph  service.  (ITT  Release) 
0  New York Univ. announced completion of New York Univ.-NASA  aerospace 
laboratory in Bronx was  scheduled for June 1966. One-story, 15,000-sq.- 
f t .   facility  constructed  with  $582,000 NASA  grant  would  include  wind 
tunnel  capable  of  duplicating  speeds  of  up  to  1 4  times  the  speed  of 
sound  for  fou r   seconds;  models  of  supersonic  transports,  spacecraft, 
and  other  advanced  aerospace  designs  would  be  tested  there.  ( N Y T ,  
3 /16 /66 ,55 )  
a  A  laser  to  function  as   a  ground-based  device  to  recharge  an   orbiting 
satellite’s batteries  was  suggested by  Dr.  Charles H.  Townes, MIT,  and 
Dr.  Arthur  L.  Schawlow, Stanford Univ.,  co-inventors of  the  laser,  in a 
paper  before  the  Optical Society  of  America’s meeting  in  Washington, 
D .C .   Report  predicted  exploitation  of  the  laser  would  grow  into  a 
billion-dollar industry  by  1970.  (Clark, NYT ,  3/16/66,  45M) 
*  Employment  in  aerospace  industry  would  increase  to  1,266,000 by  June 
1966-a  gain of  94,000 or eight per cent from September 1965, reported 
Karl 6. Harr,  Jr.,  president  of  Aerospace Industries  Assn.  Aircraft  em- 
ployment was  expected to show greatest increase, with missile and space 
employment  remaining  relatively  stable.  (Aerospace News,  3/15/66) 
March  15-1 6:  AAS-NSC  Fourth  Goddard Memorial Symposium-“Space  Age 
held  in Washington,  D.C. 
in  the  Fiscal Year  2001”-was 
Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  delivering 
the first Annual Dr. Robert H.  Goddard Lecture, stressed the  importance 
of  the  contributions  of  men  such  as  Dr.  Robert  H.  Goddard  and  Dr. 
Hugh  L.  Dryden  to  the  dramatic  development  of  the   space  program: 
“The  history  of  NASA  reflects  much  of  Dr.  Dryden’s understanding  of 
how  progress  can  be  made  and  what  the  conditions  are  tha t   produce 
effective responses to  the challenges being faced. A pivotal  concept th a t  
has  guided  NASA  administration  has  been  tha t   of  the  relation  of  the  
research  and  development project  to  many  rapidly growing disciplines 
of science and technology. A project serves a larger purpose than its own 
defined immediate ends. A project  is  a  disciplined and  organized effort 
directed  to  a  specific  objective;  one  of  its  principal  characteristics  is 

98 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

tha t  it has a schedule. As  such  a project provides a creative and driving 
force  in   the   total achievement of  science,  engineering,  and  technology 
. . .” (Text) 
Wesley A.  Kuhr t ,   United  Aircraft  Research Laboratories,  predicted 
interplanetary  and  translunar  tourist  travel  for  FY  2001:  “A  six-day 
round trip to  the  moon via 35-passenger, nuclear-powered ‘clipper’ ships 
would cost each adventurer $10,000. For an  18-month trip to Venus, the  
passenger would pay  $32,000.  Steerage class to Mars, a  two-year under- 
taking,  would  cost  $35,000.  But  for $70,000 a passenger  could  ride  the  
Mars  Express  to  and  from  the  red  planet  in   11 months.  . . .” A l l   fares 
assumed  the  Government would  underwrite  the   cost  of  developing  the  
spacecraft,  Kuhr t   said.  Other  predictions  made  a t   the   symposium  in -  
cluded  teams  of  superhuman  astronauts bred  over  several  generations 
as  a  result  of  present  studies  in   genetics  and  molecular basis  of  life; 
communications between  ordinary persons in   their homes  and anyone, 
anywhere;  versatile  robots  to  perform  human  tasks;  cosmic  cargo 
transported  a t  $10 per pound; network of  satellites  to  link  everyone in  
the  world  so  they  could  speak  in   their  native  languages via  rapid  au to-  
matic translating  computers ; and man-shaped robots sending back three- 
dimensional  pictures  to  human  masters  hundreds  of  miles  away. 
Harvard  astronomer  Carl  Sagan  speculated  tha t   the   trip  from  other 
galaxies had  already been made  and tha t  ear th  had  already  been  visited 
from space a t  least  once.  (Text) 
Rep.  Joseph  E.  Karth  (D-Minn.)  told  a  luncheon audience  tha t   “we 
must  lay  ou t  basic  objectives  far  enough  ahead  that  they  will  serve  as 
relatively  fixed  goals-or 
in   non-technical  terms,  as  dreams.  Such  an  
early  dream of  man was  to  fly  like a bird;  later, we  gradually translated 
this  dream  into  making  i t   easy  for  everyone  to  fly  in  an  aircraft. We  
have these  dreams  and  they affect our progress  strongly.  . . . ” 
To  meet  these  ends,  Karth  recommended  forming a  “Hoover-type” 
Commission to  review planning and decision-making system in  the  area 
of  science and  technology. I n  addition he  cited  the  need for   “frequent, 
systematic,  large-scale  surveys  and  analysis  of  science  and  tech- 
nology  from  the  near-term to  the  distant frontiers of  knowledge.  . . .” 
(Text) 
I n  a prediction of what the  ccSpace Age Society” would be like in  2001, 
NASC  Executive  Secretary  Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh  told  the   symposium: 
“The  major  development over  the   coming  years  will  be  the   speed  of 
change.  We  already  have  great  difficulty maintaining  our  perspective 
regarding the  change which has taken place during the  last 8 or  10  years. 
is  coming in   the  future.  . . . 
Well,  tha t   ra te   of  change is  like  the   tortoise  pace  compared with what 
“Some  with  fertile  imaginations foresee  the   time when  there will  be 
large  scale  emigration from  earth  to  growing  settlements  on   the  moon 
and  the  planets. While  I see the  great  growth in   the  ability  to  travel to  
such   distant  spots  safely  and  speedily,  I  see  little  likelihood  of  any 
sizable  movement  of  population  even  though  nuclear  reactors  would 
furn ish  much of  the  competence to make conditions in  such  places both 
livable  and  productive.  My  reason  for  no t   predicting  such movement 
is  due  to  the   simple  belief  tha t   living  conditions  are   going  to  be  so  
improved here on ear th  tha t  few would want to leave. . . . 
As for space travel, we  can certainly  le t  our imaginations soar,  as we  
c c  
a re   now  only  in   the   infancy  of  growth.  The  space  child  has  barely 

99 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
learned to  walk. The fu ture  with i ts  space travel being almost as common 
as airplane travel  is  today  i s   yet  to   come  . . . bu t   it will  come.  in te r -  
planetary  trips,  a t   speeds many  times  what  we   now  attain,  will  take 
passengers aboard.  . . . 
place  in  craft as reusable as  the  jet plane is  today,  with a t  least as many 
“One more  thing I  can predict with  great  confidence. The  debate on 
the   worthwhileness  of  space  technology  and  space  exp lo ra t ion - s t i l l  
continuing on  the  par t   of  those  of  little vision-will  have  disappeared 
completely  within  a  decade  or  so.  The   benefits  will  have  become  so 
obvious and   the   potential  so  exciting  tha t   even  the  most  near-sighted 
will  be  aware of  the  r ich  space harvest.  . . .” (Text;  We&  Push. Post, 
3/16/66,  AID;  BoEmann, N .  Y. Her.  Trib., 3/16/66) 
Importance  of  materiaIs  science  and  space  vehicle  technology was 
discussed by  Milton  B.  Ames,  Jr.,  Director  of  Space Vehicle Research 
and   Technology,  NASA  Hq.  OART.  “The  s truc tura l   designer  of  fu tu re  
launch  vehicles will  face many  new  and  challenging problems.  Launch 
vehicles . . . [will be]  larger, complex, and more costly. If we  are t o  reuse 
these  launch  vehicles  without  having  to  spend  large  sums  of  money 
either  to   bring  them  back  o r   to  refurbish  them  after  recovery,  major 
advances  will  be  required  in  structural  and  materials  technology.” 
Development of new materials and methods, such as “superinsuIations” 
‘to prevent  heat  leakage;  stronger shielding materials  to  protect  space- 
craft  from  meteoroids  and  intense  radiation;  advanced  lifting-body 
designs fo r  greater  reentry precision; and folding spacecraft parts which 
could  be  reassembled  in   space,  would  play  a  major  role  in   US. space 
program before  the  year  2000, h e  said.  (Text) 
Dr.  CharIes  S.  Sheldon  11,  NASC  staff  member,  discussed  overall 
economic outlook for space age up  to FY 2001.  Sheldon noted tha t  U S .  
space program  took  about  one per  cen t   of  g ro s s   national  product  and 
estimated tha t   “Soviet  Union is  putting  about  two per  cen t  of  their GNP 
in to  space efforts . . . .The  close tie  with military  rocketry has speeded 
space development in  these  recent  years,  but  i t   has  also  saddled space 
technology  with  an  expendable  ammunition  philosophy  ra ther   than  
aiming  a t   th e   lower  operating  costs  of  a  recoverable  transport 
philosophy.  . . . 
“Today  we  probably  a re  headed  toward  an  age  of  conservation,  and 
one of  deliberate recycling . . . the task of the  remainder of  this century 
may  include  th e   development  of  closed  ecological  systems  for  long- 
duration space f igh t ,  and on a different scale, heroic measures to  recycle 
waste  water  and  to   reprocess  industrial  and  consumer  wastes  in to   re- 
usable  products.  . . . 
“If  our  urbanized  society  requires  closed  ecological  systems  even 
here  on  Earth, we  can,  in  effect, air condition whole cities.” 
Discussing  weather  modification  and  climate  control,  h e   said: 
“. . . whether we   bend  na ture   itself,  o r   create  new  sealed urban   units, 
each almost self-sufficient in  i ts  ability to  control  its  temperature,  clean 
and  recycle  i ts   air  and  water,  and  pu t   all  o ther   wastes  to  productive 
use, some such heroic measures w i l l  be needed as  this century run s  out.” 
CTeXt) 
March  16:  Gemini VI11 rendezvous and docking mission-world‘s 
first space 
a t  ETR w i t h   launch  of  7,000-1b.  Agena  Target  Vehicle 
docking-began 
(Gatv)  by  Atlas  booster  a t   1O:OO  a m .   EST, followed  100 min.  later  by 
launch of  GEMINI ‘6111 by  two-stage Titan I1 booster with Astronauts Neil 

100 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

A.  Armstrong,  command  pilot,  and  David  R.  Scott,  pilot.  Primary  ob- 
jectives of  the  mission-sixth  manned flight in  the Gemini series-were 
rendezvous  and  docking  of  GEMINI  VIII  spacecraft  with  GATV  and  per- 
formance of  extravehicular activity  (Eva) for one  orbit. 
GATV  was  injected  into  near-circular  orbit  with  186-mi. (299.5-km.) 
apogee and 184-mi. (296.3-km.) perigee; GEMIM  VIII  entered  initial orbit 
with  128.8-mi.  (206.4-km.)  apogee  and  74.9-mi.  (119.5-km.)  perigee. 
Near  third  apogee,  Armstrong  fired  aft  thrusters,  circularizing space- 
craft’s  orbit  a t   168-mi.  (270-km.)  altitude.  Trailing  GATV  by  139 mi., 
Armstrong  received intermittent  lock-on between  GEMINI  VIII  radar  and 
GATV’s  companion  transponder.  After  sighting  GATV  a t   66-mi.  range 
a t   04:12  GET,  Armstrong  fired  thrusters  and  Scott  read  out  computer 
data until  05:15  GET, when  they  switched from  catch-up to  rendezvous 
mode.  At  150  ft.  from  GATV, Armstrong  reported  h e   had  matched 
velocity for brief station-keeping exercise. Conditions a t  tha t  point were 
so  favorable  tha t  Armstrong passed  under  GATV  and  came up  80  f t .   i n  
f ron t   of  it,  where  he  was  able  to  read  some  data  on  GATV’s  status 
display. 
Successful  docking was  confirmed a t  6:33  GET.  Plan  had  been  to  re- 
main  docked  with  GATV  through  7%-hr.  sleep  period  until  beginning 
Eva,  bu t   a t  approximately 7:OO  GET  Spacecraft-GATV combination began 
to  roll  and  yaw  violently.  Unable  to  stabilize joined  spacecraft,  Arm- 
strong  fired  GEMINI  VIII’S 
thrusters  to  undock  and  maneuvered  away 
from the  GATV.  Once freed, however, GEMINI  VIII  began to roll even more 
rapidly; roll, pitch, and yaw  rates increased, approaching one revolution 
per min. For three minutes,  the astronauts fought to control GEMINI  VIII; 
finally,  with  OAMS  turned  off,  Armstrong  fired  his  Reentry  Control 
System  (RCS) rockets  in  final  attempt  to  counteract  violent  roll.  This 
maneuver  was  successful  and  eight  minutes  later,  a t   7:25:30  GET, the 
spacecraft was  stabilized. Within  a matter  of  minutes,  the problem was 
isolated  to  the   spacecraft’s  No.  8  thruster,  which  had  fired  inter- 
mittently  while  GEMINI  VIII  was  docked with  GATV  and  stuck  open  until 
Armstrong  managed  to  tu rn   off  OAMS.  I t   was  later  determined  tha t   a 
sho r t   circuit was  probable  cause  of  thruster’s  malfunction.  Premature 
use  of  reentry  rockets  forced  Gemini flight director  John  D.  Hodge  to 
order  an   emergency  landing,  with  recovery  planned  in   the   western 
Pacific during seventh revolution.  (Safety rules  of  the Gemini program 
required  immediate landing  of  any  spacecraft  once  its Rcs  squibs were 
blown;  if  the  flight were allowed  to  continue,  danger  of  Rcs  fuel deple- 
tion  would  jeopardize  firing  of  RCS rockets,  vital  to  safe  re tu rn   of 
spacecraft  and  crew.) 
Spacecraft  landed  500  mi.  west  of  Okinawa  in   regular  emergency 
recovery  area  a t   approximately  10:23 p.m.  EST-~O  hrs.  42  min.  after 
launch.  Landing  was  onIy  three  miles  from  intended  impact  point. 
Within  minutes  USAF  frogmen  parachuted  from  USAF  C-54 rescue  air- 
craft  and  placed  flotation  collar  around  capsule. At  1:30 a.m.  EST  cap- 
sule  and  astronauts  were hoisted  aboard  recovery  ship U.S.S.  Leonard 
F .   Mason. 
Despite  early  termination,  GEMINI  VIII  mission  accomplished  one  o f  
two  primary  objectives-rendezvous  and  docking.  Original  flight  plan 
had  specified four  GEMINI  VIII-GATV  dockings  and  two  hrs.  1 5  min.  of 
extravehicular  activity  by  Astronaut  Scott.  Five  scientific,  four  tech- 
nological,  and  one medical  experiment  were  to  have  been  conducted. 
Flight had been scheduled to last 44  revolutions-approximately  73 hrs. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

101 

(NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-52;Wilford, N Y T ,  3/17/66,1;Waldron, 
N Y T ,  3/17/66,  20; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star,  3/17/66,  1 ;  Simons, Wash. 
Post,  3/17/66,  1; Au. Wh., 3/31/66,  30-32) 

March  16:  Astronauts  David  Scott and  Neil  Armstrong  awaiting recovery  in   the   Pacific 
Ocean  after  their  GEMINI  VIII  space flight. 

March  16:  President  Johnson  issued  statement  after  GEMINI  VIII  carrying 
Neil  Armstrong  and  David  Scott  had  splashed down  safely  following 
difficulties  encountered  in  flight:  “They  are   disappointed  tha t   their 

102 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

mission could not continue, bu t  Gemini 8 accomplished the first docking 
in  space-a  major step on the  course we have set. The information  they 
have  acquired  will help  us  to  perfect  the  spacecrafts  tha t  will  carry  us 
even further. 
“From  their  skill  and  strength  we  all  take  heart,  knowing  tha t   th e  
personal  qualities  of  the  astronauts  and  their  colleagues will  ultimately 
prevail  in  the  conquest  of  space. We  are  very  proud  of  them.”  (Pres .  
Doc.,  3/21/66,  400) 
March  16:  COSMOS  CX,  launched  Feb.  22  with  dogs  Veterok  and  Ugolyek 
aboard, landed safely in U.S.S.R.  Tass reported  tha t  though  “the state of 
the   animals  after  landing  is  good,”  both  dogs  had  suffered  heart  beat 
irregularities  tha t  had  become more pronounced  toward  the  end  of  t h e  
22-day  flight.  Respiration  rate  had  changed  insignificantly.  During 
initial  period  of  weightlessness,  some  disruption  of  coordination  had 
been  revealed  in 
rocking  of  the  head.”  One  of  the  dogs  had  been 
“subjected  to  all  the   complex  of  irritants  to  indicate  the  reaction  and 
functional ability”  of  the  cardiovascular system; the  other was  used  for 
control  and  comparison.  Electronic  sensors  had  provided  continuous 
checks  on  blood  pressure,  pulse  and  respiration  rates,  and  other  data. 
Dogs had  been  fed a paste  injected  into  their  stomachs by  a pneumatic 
device.  Spacecraft  had  carried  300  thermoluminescent  dosimeters  to 
measure  radiation  doses in relation  to  shielding and  ten  sets of  nuclear 
emulsions  to  determine  the  composition  of  radiation.  Scientific  in -  
formation obtained from  the flight, which took  the animals through  the  
Van  Allen  radiation  belts  once during each  of  COSMOS  CX’S  330 revolu- 
tions,  ‘5-equired special processing  after  which  final  conclusions  about 
the  state  of  the  animals and  inferences  about  plans  for  f u tu r e  studies 
will be  drawn.”  (Tass, 3/16/66;  Av. Wk., 3/28/66,  28) 
President  Johnson  received  1966 Robert  H.  Goddard  Memorial  Trophy 
Award  of  the  National  Space Club  a t  White  House  for  “his  efforts  in 
shaping the space program from its  infancy while a U S .  senator  and as 
chairman  of  the  National  Space Council while  Vice  President  and  fo r  
providing  the  leadership  for  this  nation’s  preeminence  in  space  as 
President,”  and  affirmed: “We  intend  to  land  the  first man on  the  su r -  
face of  the moon and we  intend  to do  this  in  the  decade of  the  sixties.” 
He also said:  “I think  if  I were writing my  own  epitaph  this morning 
I  perhaps  would  prefer  to  be  remembered,  for  the  period  I  was  Vice 
President,  more  by  this  one  thing  than  any  other.  President  Kennedy 
asked me to attempt to organize and give direction  to the Space Agency. 
I  interviewed  about  19  men  through  the  United  States  and  finally 
selected  Jim  Webb.  I  prevailed  upon  him  to  come  and  begin  this 
undertaking. 
“Within  15 minutes  from  the  time  I  called  the  President  originally, 
Jim  Webb  was  out  here  being  announced  as  the  new  Space Adminis- 
trator.  I have been very proud  of  tha t  announcement ever since. 
“Your modesty, humbleness,  your  great executive ability, your  great 
courage, your Marine  spirit  and  determination  have made  us  the  envy 
of  the  world, Mr.  Webb,  and we  salute you publicly. 
reDr. Goddard was  a great  prophet,  a  true  prophet.  To  some  i t  seems 
almost  incredible  tha t   a  year  before  Lindbergh  had  ever  flown  the  
Atlantic he was dreaming and working to  take us  up into  the  stars. Like 
so many prophets,  he was  long without  honor  in his  own  country,  b u t  
he never lost faith because his faith was  founded  on fact. He could  tu rn  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

103  

aside  the   rebuffs  of  the   shortsighted;  he   could  laugh  a t   the   jokes  of 
his detractors. 
“I just wish  today  tha t  he   could  be here with us  to  observe what we 
have  jus t   seen.  I  don’t  think  he   would  be  the   least  surprised  by  the  
progress we  have made.  I  think  he  would  be  very proud.”  (Pres .  Doc., 
3/21/66,  399;  SBD ,  3 /8 /66 ,49 ;   CR, 3/21/66,  A1621) 
March 16: The  late Dr.  Robert Hutchings Goddard  launched the  first  liquid- 
fueledrocket from Auburn, Mass., 40yrs. ago. Annually on the  anniversary 
of  the   first  flight,  Goddard  is  honored  by  the  National Space Club a t  a 
memorial banquet in  Washington, D.C.  I n  1962, Vice President Johnson 
predicted  tha t   within 25 yrs.  there  would  be  a  permanent  base  on  th e  
moon.  Vice  President  Hubert  Humphrey, delivering  th e   1966 address, 
emphasized tha t   the   space budget  must  be  tightly  planned:  “I feel  the  
necessity  for  cost  consciousness.  This  is  the   need,  to  put  it  another 
way,  of  getting  the  most  space for the  tax dollar.  These are   times when 
we  must  exert  high  discipline  i n   public  expenditure  and  our  space 
program  cannot  be  exempt  from  tha t   discipline.”  Humphrey  said  he  
could  foresee  “dramatic  achievements  ahead”  i n   space  exploration, 
notably:  (1) exploration  of  th e   lurain  and  possible  establishment  of 
one or more permanent bases there ;   (2) development of  ‘‘a  whole family 
of  earth-orbiting  stations,  supplied  by  regular  ferry  services”;  (3) 
development of  “recoverable and reusable launch vehicles” and maneu- 
verable  spacecraft;  (4)  building  of  spaceports  around  the   country;  (5) 
improvement  of  propulsion methods  so   that  planetary  trips  could  be 
made  in   a  week  o r   less;  (6)  “launching  of  unmanned probes  to   every 
part of  the  solar  system-and  perhaps manned planetary expeditions as 
well.”  (Text; CRY 5/4/66) 
National Space Club  Press  Award  “in  recognition of  his  exceptional 
photographic documentation of  the  manned space flight program” went 
to   NASA  photographer William  P.  Taub;  Astronautics Engineer Award 
was  given  to  Gemini  program  manager  Charles W.  Mathews  “for  his 
contribution  to  the   nation’s  manned  space  flight  program  as  ’ii  key 
engineering  pioneer  to  investigate  the   feasibility  of  manned  space 
flight, culminating in  Project  Mercury. . . and  in  the  successful Gemini 
program,  as  well  as  in   the   establishment and  refinement of  th e  Apollo 
configuration”;  Nelson  P.  Jackson  Aerospace  Award  for  “mak,ing  a 
major  advance in   the   state of  the  a r t   of  space systems”  was  presented 
jointly  to  MSC,  USAF  Space  Systems  Div.,  McDonnell  Aircraft  Corp., 
Martin  Co.,  Aerojet-General  Corp.,  General  Electric  Co.,  IBM  Corp., 
and Westinghouse Electric  Corp.;  Robert H.  Goddard  Historical Essay 
Award was  made to Airman 2/C  Frank H.  Winter for “Danish Rocketry 
in   the   19 th   Century”;  Robert  H.  Goddard  Scholarship  ($1,500  to  
university  of  recipient’s  choice)  “in  recognition  of  th e  need for  higher 
scientific  education  of  American  youth  of  exceptional  merit”  was 
awarded  Benjamin  N.  Early,  a  senior  a t   Howard  Univ.,  Washington, 
D.C.  (Text;  Program) 
0  NASA  turned  ESSA  11  (Environmental Survey  Satellite)  over  to  ESSA  for 
operation  in   accordance with  June  30,  1964, agreement between  NASA 
and  Dept.  of  Commerce.  NASA  had  supervised design  and  construction 
of  the   satellite,  conducted  launch  operations  (Feb.  28),  and  tracked 
spacecraft  after  orbit  was  achieved; Dept.  of  Commerce  had  handled 
mangement and funding.  (NASA  Release 66-62) 
0  Breadboard  version  of  Nerva  (Nuclear Engine  for  Rocket  Vehicle Appli- 

104 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

cation)  was  tested  by  NASA  and  AEC   a t   Nuclear  Rocket  Development 
Station,  Jackass  Flats,  Nev.  Control positioning  error  in  initial  ignition 
led  to   automatic  flow  shutdown.  I n   18-min.  test  following  second, 
low-pressure  s tar t ,   reactor  reached  design  power  of  1,090  mw  and 
exhaust  temperature  reached  3,630”F  maximum.  Test  was  fourth  in 
series which  began  Feb.  3 and marked  system’s  eighth and n in th   s tar t .  
(A tom ic  Energy  Programs,  1966,  186) 
March  16:  Smithsonian  Institution  had  photographed  reflections  of  GEMINI 
VIII  and  GATV  from  tracking  station  20  mi.  nor th   of  Johannesburg  on 
spacecraft’s  first  orbit.  Photographs were  described by  station manager 
as  being  “not  of  the   space  vehicles  themselves,  bu t   of  the   sunshine 
reflected  by  them.  They  will  appear  on  the   film  as  dots.”  This  was 
reportedly  first  time  such   photographs  had  been  taken.  (AP,  N Y T ,  
3/18/66,  8) 
0  Rep.  Mark  Andrews  (R-N.D.)  introduced  a  resolution  calling  for  NSF  to 
make  recommendations  for  wider  geographic  distribution  of  Federal 
funds for research  and development.  ( C R ,  3/16/66,  5755) 
March  17:  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  C X I I  with scientific instruments aboard 
for  continued  space  research,  Tass  announced.  Orbital  parameters : 
apogee,  565 km.  (350.9 mi.) ; perigee, 214 km.  (132.9 mi.) ; period, 92.1 
min. ; inclination,  72”.  All  systems  were  reported  to   be  functioning 
normally.  (Tass,  3/17/66) 
0  NASA  selected  Bendix  Corp.  for  negotiation  of  a  $17-million  cost-plus- 
incentive-fee  contract  t o   manufacture  four   Apollo  Lunar  Surface 
Experiments Packages  (Alsep) . The  170-lb. packages containing scientif- 
ic instruments to measure lunar  surface characteristics  and atmosphere 
would  be  carried  to moon  in  Lunar Excursion Module  (Lem)  on   initial 
Apollo  landing missions  and would  transmit  data back  to  earth  for  six 
months to one year after crew’s departure from lunar  surface. Contract 
would  be managed  by  MSC.  (NASA  Release  66-63) 
0  Heinz  Kaminski,  chief  of  th e  Bochum  Observatory,  West  Germany,  said 
th e   emergency  abort March  16 of  the   GEMINI  V I I I   mission  showed  that 
control  systems  onboard  the   spacecraft  as  well  as  on   the   ground  were 
Americans  now  have  realistic  data  on  space  emergencies  and.  . .the 
versatile  enough  to  cope  with  even  the   most  serious  trouble:  “The  
mission  has  been  very  successful.  The  emergency  has  been  a  blessing 
in  disguise.”  (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 3/18/66) 
0  Tass  told  the   Soviet  people  that  GEMINI  VIII  had  achieved  history’s  first 
docking  i n   space,  and  added:  “But  its  program  was  carried  out  on ly  
partly.  I t s  main  elements-more  practice  in  linking up,  a  lengthy  stay 
by  a n  astronaut  outside his  ship and  th e  maneuvering of  the   ship  and 
(UPI,  N Y T ,  3/19/66,  41) 
astronaut-remained 
unsolved.” 
0  Taped  conversations between  Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  and  ground 
controllers disclosing th e  drama of  th e  emergency but revealing nothing 
of  th e  difficulty that  had caused emergency  landing March  16 of  GEMINI 
VIII  were  released  a t  MSC  press  conference.  There was  n o   indication  of 
panic aboard th e  spacecraft during motion.  I n  a n  “almost  matter-of-fact 
tone,”  Armstrong  had  reported to MSC:  “Well,  we consider th e  problem 
serious.  We  a re  toppling  end-over-end.  . . . W e  cannot  t u r n   anything 
off.”  It  was  announced  there   would  be  no  public  discussion  of  their 
mission  by  Armstrong  and   Scott  for  a t   least  nine  days  during  which 
they would  rest  and undergo debriefing a t  KSC. 
MSC  Director Robert  R.  Gilruth announced  tha t  preparations  for  th e  

105  
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
May  26  Gemini  IX   launching  would  continue  ‘‘just  as  if  nothing  had 
happened to  GEMINI VIII.  . . . While we  are expending every effort to  find 
the  cause of  the  GEMINI VIII  occurrence, preparations will move ahead fo r  
Gemini IX so when  the  results  of  this  flight become  available, we’ll  be 
as far along as possible with Gemini IX.”  (Waldron, N Y T ,  3 /18 /66 ,20 ;  
Simons,  Wash. Post,  3 /18 /66 ;   AP,  Wash. Post,  3/18/66) 
March  17: Problems  tha t  beset  eight  of  the  U.S.’s  12 manned  space flights 
were  listed  by  AP:  July  21,  1961, before  any  American had  achieved 
orbit, Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom had  had  to  swim for his  life when th e  
hatch  blew  off  the   LIBERTY  BELL  7  after  it  had  landed  a t   sea; Feb.  20, 
1562, Astronaut  John H.  Glenn had  had  to  take partial  manual control 
of  FRIENDSHIP 7 when a small jet thrus ter  failed; May 24,1962, Astronaut 
M.  Scott Carpenter was  forced to  use  the  horizon when a sho r t  circuit 
cut  off  th e   device  which  told  him  attitude  of  AURORA  7;  May  15-16, 
1963,  drinking  water  leaked  into  the   cabin  of  FAITH  7,  and  ground 
stations,  fearing  the   automatic  reentry  system might  have  been  sho r t  
circuited,  directed  Astronaut  L.  Gordon  Cooper  to  fly  the   spacecraft 
manually  in   reentry-the 
first  astronaut  to  do  so;  June   4-7,  1965, 
Astronauts  James  A.  McDivitt  and  Edward  H .   White  11,  because  of 
malfunctioning computers, controlled  GEMINI IV reentry on instructions 
from the   ground; Aug.  21-29,  1965, Astronauts  L.  Gordon Cooper  and 
Charles  Conrad,  Jr . ,   flew  GEMINI  v  through  120  revolutions  after  i t  
seemed  a  fuel  pressure  problem  might  force  them  down  after  six; Oct. 
25,  1965,  Gemini  VI  mission  was  canceled  when  the   Agena  target 
vehicle  exploded  before going  into  orb i t ;  March  16 ,   1966, Astronauts 
Neil A.  Armstrong and David R.  Scott brought GEMINI  VIII  under control 
from  a  spin  tha t   had  reached  a t   least  one  rpm  and  landed  i t   almost 
exactly in  the  planned emergency zone.  (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66) 
0  Press  commented on  the  GEM IN I  VIII  mission. 
New  York Times: “The docking maneuver thus successfully pioneered 
is  of  th e  utmost  importance. I t  is  through combining th e  loads brought 
into  space by  individual  rockets  tha t   the   great  structures  can  be  built 
that  will  be  necessary for  man’s  activities  in   the   cosmos  in   the   years 
ahead.  Tomorrow’s  stations  in   space  will  serve  as  laboratories  for 
astronomers  and  other  scientists,  as  terminals  for  transshipment  of 
passengers  and  freight  between  short-range  and  long-range  rockets, 
and  unfortunately-if 
the   fu ture   resembles  the   past-also 
as  military 
bases  reflecting  in   the   sky  the   tensions  and  hostilities  of  earth.  But 
whatever  purpose  they  serve,  these  islands  i n   space  will  have  been 
made  possible  by  repeated  use  of  the   same maneuver  tha t   Astronauts 
Armstrong and  Scott  performed  for  the   first  time  last  night.” 
Washington  Post:  Y p a c e   feats  have  become  so   commonplace  and 
have been carried  ou t  with such  precision  tha t  we  tend  to  forget about 
the   hazards.  The  abrupt  bu t   fortunately safe  re tu rn   of  Gemini  8 is  a 
timely  reminder  tha t   space is  still  a  frontier  and  tha t   the   exploration 
remains a t  best  an   inexact  science. 
“That Astronauts Armstrong and Scott enierged unharmed from the ir  
awesome experience with their  space capsule out  of  control is a tr ibu te  
no t   only  to  their  own  cool  judgment  but  also  to   the   extraordinary 
competence of  Space Agency  officials.  Americans  listening  to  reports 
of  the  emergency must  have applauded collectively when  the  crewmen 
made a successful reentry.  They survived a predicament i n  space which, 
had  it been  on  a highway, would  have meant disaster.” 

106 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Washington Evening  Star:  “In   addition  to  its  docking  achievement, 
the  mission was  a  success i n  th e  sense of  demonstrating the   care with 
which  emergency  devices were  built  into  the   space ship  and  th e   thor- 
oughness  of  the   planning  for  rescue  operations  in   event  of  a  forced 
landing.  It is possible,  indeed,  tha t  more can be  learned from a mission 
tha t  goes wrong than  from one which  is  successful all  the  way. 
“Incidentally,  there   is  a  commentary on  ou r   times  in   the   fact  tha t  
while th e  suspense-filled space  story was  unfolding,  Batman  was  being 
shown  on   television.  The   ABC  network  interrupted  the   program with 
special  news  announcements,  and was  rewarded  with  more  than   1,000 
phone  calls  from  complaining viewers.”  ( N Y T ,  3/17/66,  36M;  Wash. 
Post, 3/18/66,  A20; Wash.  Eve.  Star, 3/17/66,  A16) 
March  17: Discussing the   urgency  of  NASA’s deciding  “what  to  do  in   space 
after  the   first  Apollo  astronauts  re turn   from  the   moon  about  1970,” 
William  Hines said in   the  Washington Evening Star: “.  . . it is  hard  to  
forget  a  h in t ,   dropped  . . . by  a  leading  Russian  space official  several 
years  ago.  The   Soviet Union,  this  functionary  suggested,  might  very 
well  celebrate  the   50th  anniversary  of  i ts   great  revolution  by  having 
cosmonauts plant  a  flag  on  the   lunar  surface.  Tha t   deadline-if 
i t   is  a 
deadline-is 
now  less  than   20 months  away. 
“But  suppose the  Soviet Union  is  not  racing  us  to  the  moon,  or  for  
tha t   matter  suppose tha t   she   is.  I n   the   present  state  of  planning,  the  
US. with  the  moon  in  its grasp would be  very much like a  dog  chasing 
an   automobile-what 
does  he  do  with  i t   if  he  catches  i t?”   (Hines, 
Wash.  Eve.  Star,  3/17/66) 
USA-USAF-USN  X-22A  V/Stol  airplane,  designed  and  built  by  Bell  Aero- 
systems  Co.  under  Navy  contract,  completed  10-min.  first  flight  a t  
Niagara  Falls  (N.  Y.)  International  Airport.  The  four-engine,  dual- 
tandem, ducted-propeller craft made four takeoffs and landings,  reaching 
25-ft.  maximum  allowable  altitude.  While  hovering,  Bell  test  pilots 
Stanley J. Kakol and Paul Miller, Jr.,  executed a  180” counterclockwise 
tu rn   and  reported  tha t   X-22A  responded  to  “all  control  commands.” 
After  planned  225-hr.  flight  test  series,  Bell  would  deliver  their  two 
X-22A  research  aircraft  to  a  tri-service  group  a t   Patuxent  Naval  Air 
Test  Center,  Md.,  for  fur ther   evaluation.  (Bell  Releases  3/17/66, 
4/4/66-20) 
0  Dr.  S.  Bhagavantam,  scientific  adviser  to  Indian  Defense  Ministry, 
reported  a t   a  news  conference  tha t   India  had  developed  a  “limited 
guided missile.”  He  said  tha t   tests  of  the  missile,  which  could be  fired 
from  aircraft,  had  been  completed  and  arrangements were  being made 
to  produce i t  for  Indian armed forces.  (AP, N Y T ,  3/19/66,  3) 
*  Eighth anniversary of  launching of  VANGUARD  I ,   second U S .  earth satellite. 
(NASA  Historian) 
March  18: Astronauts Armstrong and  Scott landed safely  in  Honolulu  after 
KC-135 jet aircraft carrying them from Okinawa to  KSC  lost oil pressure 
in  i ts  number  two  engine about 800 mi.  east  of  Hawaii. Armstrong and 
Scott had earlier received an  enthusiastic reception-with  brass band- 
when  they disembarked a t  Okinawa from recovery ship U.S.S.  Leonard 
F .  Mason  for  flight  to   Honolulu.  (UPI,  Wash.  Post,  3/19/66,  A4;  AP, 
N Y T ,  3/18/66,  21) 
USAF  launched  two  unidentified  satellites  with  Atlas-Agena  D  booster 
from WTR.  (U.S.  Aeron.  & Space Act.,  1966, 149) 
Dr.  Donald F. Hornig, Director  of  Office of  Science and  Technology and 

107 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
said: “In  October 1965 I convened a n  ad hac  Je t  Aircraft Noise P an e l .  . . 
science adviser  to  the  President,  in  memorandum to  President Johnson 
I am pleased to be able to  present to  you the  report of  this Panel entitled 
‘Alleviation  of  Jet  Aircraft  Noise  Near  Airports.’  ” Principal  recom- 
mendations  were:  (1)  initiation  of  Federally-supported  studies  of 
expected scope of noise problem through 1975 and of public and  rivate 
programs  needed  to  combat  th e   problem;  (2)  creation  of  a  fede ra l  
task  force  to  analyze the   problem;  (3)  development of  valid,  broadly 
applicable  standards  of  noise  measurement;  (4)  pursuit  of  definitive 
technical  study  to   reduce  noise levels;  (5)  establishment  of  task  force 
to   investigate  methods  for  Federal participation  in   program  for   com- 
patible land utilization near airports;  (6) initiation of program to  modify 
operating  procedures  and  techniques  tha t   would  reduce  engine  noise 
without  compromising  safety.  (Pres. Doc.,  3/21/66,  404) 
March  18: First  anniversary  of  th e   VOSKHOD  11  mission  when  Soviet  Cos- 
monaut  Aleksey  A .   Leonov  became  th e   first  man  to   float  in   space. 
Interviewed on  Radio  MOSCOW, Leonov  said his  space walk  had  caused 
the  spacecraft  to  begin  rotating unexpectedly: “Down  on ear th  we  had  
trained  for  every  emergency,  but  no t   for  this  since  w e   had  though t  
my  weight  of  176 pounds would  have  no  effect on  a  six-ton ship.  Yet, 
my  weight  caused  the   ship  to   rotate.” 
Pravda  disclosed  that  VOSKHOD  11,  carrying Leonov and  Col.  Pave1 I. 
Belyayev,  had  landed  outside  th e   target  area  in   a  snowbank  near  th e  
city  of  Perm  i n   th e   Ural  Mountains:  “Searchers  took  more  than   24  
hours  to   reach  the   cosmonauts  and  another  2 4   hours  and  a  12-mile 
ski trip before the  men could be lifted ou t  of.the forest by  helicopters.” 
(Tass,  3/18/66;  r a s h .  Post, 3/19/66,  A4; WI, NYT, 2/21/66) 
*  Catalog  identifying  and  locating  every known  star  in   the  heavens  down 
to  the   n in th   magnitude, providing astronomers  with  ins tan t  reference 
to  the   en t ire   sky,  was  published  by  GPO.  Compiled  by  Smithsonian 
Astrophysical Observatory under  NASA  grant,  2,7OO-page,  four-volume 
catalog  unified  50  different  sources  to  provide position,  photographic 
and  visual  magnitude,  spectral  type,  and  other  essential  data  for 
250,000  heaveniy bodies.  (Sci.  Serv.,  NYT,  5/5/66,  21) 
Speaking in  Denver at Colorado Women’s  College, Dr.  Nancy  G .  Roman, 
NASA  Chief  of  Astronomy  Programs,  OSSA,  said  a  primary  reason  for 
lack  of  women  in   space was  tha t   few  had  the   scientific training.  Even 
NASA’s 300  women  professionals  were  few  compared  to   their  number 
in   other  agencies,  she   said.  Young  women  interested  in  a  career  in 
space science were  advised  to   concentrate first  on   th e   basics  of  the ir  
preferred  area  “because  t h e  fundamentals of  the  science used  i n  space 
study  are   no  different  from  those  in   more  traditional  fields.  Equally 
to  fmd  th e   facts  we  need,  no t   jus t   remember  them  . . . . Space as  a 
important is  to  learn how to  think, to  face and solve problems  and how 
career depends on the  individual who’s  considering it. It is glamorous- 
and it’s  also dirty  work.”  Dr.  Roman  said she  was  su re  there would be 
women  astronauts  “if  manned  space  flights  continue  as  we   expect 
them  to.”  (von  Ende,  Denver  Post,  3/19/66) 
9  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.  conducted  successful  acceptance  test  of  four th  
flight  Sa turn   S-IVB  (204)  a t   i t s   Sacramento  Test  Center.  Stage  was 
fired  for  about 455  sec.  (Marshall  Star,  3/23/66,  7) 
March  19: Statement from MSC  on  GEMINI  VIII  mission said tha t   “a  shor t  in  
the  circuits  controlling a spacecraft yaw  thrustor has been pinned down 

108 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

as  the   probable  cause  of  the   difficulty  which  cu t   shor t   the  flight  of 
GEMINI VIII.”  MSC  Director Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth said data ruled  ou t  any 
possibility  of  pilot  error  and  that  “in  fact,  the   crew  demonstrated  re- 
markable  piloting skill i n  overcoming this serious problem and bringing 
the   spacecraft  to  a  safe  landing.”  NASA  Associate  Director  for Manned 
Space Flight Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  who  had  participated  in  review  of 
data, joined Dr.  Gilruth in  saluting Astronauts Armstrong and Scott and 
commended  the   evaluation  team  for  “coming  up  with  the  answer”  in  
less than  72 hrs. following the  incident.  “This  w i l l  give us  time to study 
the   Gemini  9  configuration  and  make  any  adjustments  necessary  in  
order to press forward with our  Gemini flight test program.” 
16-mm.  color  films  taken  by  an   automatic  camera  mounted  on 
Armstrong’s window  in  the  GEMINI  VIII  were made public  by  NASA.  Films 
showed maneuvers of  GEMINI VIII  i n  docking with  GATV  and gyrations  of 
the   spacecraft  after  the   malfunction.  (Text,  N Y T ,   3/21/66,  19;  AP, 
Balt.  Sun,  3/21/66) 
March 19: Astronauts Neil A.  Armstrong and David R.  Scott arrived a t  KSC  to 
begin  an  intensive three-day conference  with  Gemini project officials to 
attempt  to  reconstruct  events  leading  to  their  loss  of  control  of  the  
GEMINI  VIII  spacecraft March  16. Scott  told  a  crowd  a t   the  airstrip  tha t  
“ the  lift off, launching, rendezvous, and docking were really tremendous. 
We  were  really  looking  forward  to  the   whole  mission.”  Armstrong 
agreed, adding:  ‘?We had  a magnificent  flight  in  the   first  seven  hours. 
I t  was  a magnificent  launch-without 
a  doubt  one  of  the   best  there’s 
ever  been.”  (AP,  NYT ,   3/20/66,  82) 
*  Rep.  John   W.  Wydler  (R-N.Y.)  said  in   a  speech  before  the   American 
Society  of  Tool  & Manufacturing Engineers  in  Westbury, N.Y.:  “Two 
years  ago  I  asked  Administrator  Webb  for  NASA’s fu ture   space  plans 
and was  told tha t  none existed.  I pointed  ou t  then  tha t  such plans were 
essential. Last year, we  received  assurance that  the presentations of  the  
fiscal  year  1967  budget  would  reveal  such  plans.  But  none  has  been 
issued.  Instead, NASA  Administrator  Webb has  told us  ‘the fu ture  of  the 
NASA  program  lies  largely  in   the   decision  for  fiscal  year  1968.’  . . . 
Our   space program  began  i n  an  atmosphere of  perplexity  and  fear. 
cr 
Our  adversaries  in   Russia  had  chosen  a  new  arena  for  the   struggle of 
international power and prestige. They threatened  to achieve impressive 
capabilities which we would  be unable  to match. But,  characteristically, 
the  United  States  rose  to  the   occasion  i n  one  of  the   biggest  sustained 
technological  efforts ever  seen. Today,  the  U.S.S.R.  is  denied  many  of 
the   options  for  surprising  space  spectaculars  which  they  once  had. 
From month to month, one country or  the  other may seem to  be leading 
the   so-called space  race,  bu t   our  proven  capability  shows  tha t   we  are 
no t   to be placed  a t  any military  or  strategic disadvantage. 
Therefore  it is  time again  for public  opinion to  assert  itself. Wha t  
C f  
do we  want  to  do  with  this  hard won  space  capability?”  (Text) 
USAF  successfully  launched  Nike-Javelin  combination  carrying  a  payload 
of  plume  measurement  instrumentation  seconds  after  launch  of  i ts  
target-an  Atlas-D  ICBM-from  Vandenberg  AFB.  Launch  was  first  in  
High Altitude Background and Signal to  Noise  (Hitab) program i n  which 
data  on   infrared  radiation  and  emission  characteristics associated with 
missile  exhaust  plumes  and  other  exhaust  products  were  telemetered 
back  to  Vandenberg  telemetry  station.  (UPI,  Chic.  Trib.,  3/20/66,  22; 
UPI,  NYT ,  3/19/66,  82; UPI,  Chic. Tr ib . ,  3/25/66) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

109 

March 20:  Tokyo Uniu.  Space and Aeronautics  Institute  announced  it  had 
launched a  two-stage meteorological sounding rocket,  last in  a  series of 
15,  from  test  center  in   Uchinoura,  K y u s h u - 6 0 0   mi.  southwest  of 
Tokyo.  (AP,  N Y T ,   3/21/66,  27) 
0  Astronomers  a t  Bochum Observatory, West  Germany,  reported  they  had 
sighted a giant new sunspot a t  the approximate center of  the  solar disc. 
Visible to th e  naked eye in early morning or just before sunset, sunspot 
had  88,000-mi. dia.  and was  expected  to  affect weather  conditions  and 
radio  communications o n  earth  during  the  next  few days.  Sunspot was 
unexpected since 1966 had been  designated “year  of  th e  quiet sun”  and 
scientists  had  expected  only  a  minimum  of  solar  disturbances.  (WI, 
Chic.  T r ib . ,  3/21/66) 
P r a t t   & Whitney  Div.,  United  Aircraft  Corp.,  announced  tha t   JTF-17A 
engine  developed  under  FAA  supersonic  transport  engine  competition 
would be tested a t  company’s West Palm Beach, Fla.,  center. Twin-spool 
turbofan  engine  would  develop  50,000-lbs.  thrust-more 
than  twice 
amount generated by  cu r ren t  commercial engines-by  burning fuel in  a 
full-length  fan  exit duct.  (P&w; N Y T ,  3/20/66,  83) 
Benefits  from  atomic  test-ban  treaty  signed  in   July  1963  by  U S .   and 
U.S.S.R.  were reported.  Fallout  from  strontium  90,  which might  cause 
bone  cancer  or  leukemia, was  decreasing; iodine  131, believed  harmful 
to  the  thyroid  gland,  had  virtually  disappeared from  the  milk  supply 
three years  ago.  (AP, Crowley,  Wash .  Post,  3/20/66,  A6) 
0  Proposal  by  Dr.  Herbert  Friedman  of  the  Naval  Research  Lab.  tha t   a 
scanning  system  be  mounted  in  a  lunar  crater  to  report  to  earth  the  
precise location  of  x-ray sources as  they appeared over  the  crater’s  rim 
because of  the moon’s rotation,  was discussed by Walter Sullivan in the  
New  York  Times. Recent  rocket  observations  [see Mar.  21  had  disclosed 
objects, some of them otherwise invisible, that strongly emitted x rays- 
part  of  the  spectrum  which  cannot  penetrate  earth’s  atmosphere.  “A 
systematic  survey  of  the  sky  in  this  wavelength,”  Sullivan said, would 
open  a n   entirely  new  window  on  the  universe.”  (Sullivan,  NYT ,  
C C  
3/20/66,  8E) 
e Commentary in  the Washington Sunday S tar:  “One  of  the  saddest lessons 
of  Gemini 8 is  tha t  bureaucrats  will  be  bureaucrats.  . . . NASA  officials 
suppressed  for  about  18  hours  tape  recordings  of  ground-to-orbit con- 
versations  under  circumstances  that  strongly  suggest their  only  reason 
for  the  suppression was  to make  sure nothing embarrassing was  on  the  
tapes. 
“For  as long as the  United  States has been active in space, it has  cul- 
tivated an  image of  openness in  contrast to the Russians’ obsession with 
secrecy. The  overnight gag  on  tape recordings-which 
turned  ou t  to be 
legitimate items  of  news  interest-only 
served  to  tarnish  this  image of 
candor.”  (Wash. Sun. Star, 3/’20/66, G1) 
Endorsement  of suggestion in Jan.  9 open letter to President Johnson  tha t  
h e   invite  “a  Russian  cosmonaut  to  join  an   American  astronaut  for  a 
space ride in  a two-man capsule” was  reported by letter’s author, Parade 
editor  Jess  Gorkin.  Newspapers  throughout  the   world  had  publicized 
the  idea and written  favorable editorials. Le  Figaro  (Paris)  had  given i t  
front  page  coverage.  Melbourne  (Australia)  Herald  had  said  the   idea 
had  “great merit.” 
Asahi  Shimbun  (Tokyo):  “As  long  as America  and Russia  accelerate 
space development  separately,  there will be much money wasted.  Both 

110 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
countries  will  probably  suspect  tha t   th e   other  party  is  engaged  in  
space development for military  purposes.  . . . If  the  United  States and 
the  Soviet Union  cooperate and  ‘all  the   families  of  the   earth’  pitch  in  
to  fu r the r   space  development,  war  on  ear th   will  gradually  become 
absurd.” 
New York  World Telegram: “What do we  have  to  lose? If  we  succeed 
and  the   two  men  orbit  the   earth  together  the  psychological  effect will 
be  tremendous.  If  Russia  turns   down  the   idea,  we  will  be  on  sounder 
moral grounds.”  (Gorkin, Parade,  3/20/66) 
o % jects  (Ufo’s)  near  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  were  reported.  Rep.  Weston 
Durin  week  of  March  20:  Several hundred  sightings  of  unidentified  flying 
Vivian  (D-Mich.)  said  h e   would  ask  DOD  to  make  an   investigation. 
(WI,  N Y T ,   3/22/66,  19; WI,  N Y T ,   3/23/66,  22;  Hines,  Wash.  Eve. 
Star,  3/23/66,  A l ;   WI,  Wash.  Po s t ,   3/25/66,  AZO;  AP,  Wash.  Eve. 
Star,  3/25/66,  A l )  
March  21:  U.S.S.R. 
launched  COSMOS  CXIII  with  scientific  instruments 
aboard  for  investigation  of  outer  space,  Tass  announced.  Orbital 
parameters:  apogee,  327  km.  (203  mi.);  perigee,  210  km.  (130  mi.); 
period,  89.6  min.;  inclination,  65”.  All  systems  were  reported  to  be 
functioning normally.  (Tass,  3/21/66) 
e  NASA  announced  final  results  of  Feb.  23   test  firing  of  260-in.-dia.  solid 
ropellant  rocket motor  by  prime  contractor  Aerojet-General Corp.  in  
b a d e   County,  Fla.:  maximum  chamber  pressure  was  recorded  40  sec. 
in to   test,  with  peak  thrus t   level  of  more  than  3.5  million  lbs.;  motor 
burned  114  sec.  near  peak  thrus t   before  tapering  off;  total  useful 
.1 sec.  more  than  engineering pre- 
thrus t   time  was  129.9  sec.-only 
dictions;  maximum  chamber  pressure was  601  Ibs.  psi  compared  with 
predicted 604 lbs.  psi.  Only difficulty was  delayed  operation of  quench- 
ing  system  which  caused  charring  damage  to  nozzle  expansion  cone. 
Program was  managed  by  LRC. (NASA  Release  66-61) 
Twelve  astronauts were  selected  for  fu ture  NASA  missions and  two  others 
assigned  earlier  were  shifted  to  a  different  mission.  Prime  crewmen 
for  the  Apollo earth-orbital mission scheduled in the  first quarter of  1967 
were  Virgil  I.  Grissorn,  Edward  H.  White  11,  and  Roger  B.  Chaffee; 
backup  crew  was  James  A.  McDivitt, David  R.  Scott,  and  Russell  L. 
Schweickart, NASA  civilian  employee.  Prime  crewmen  for  the   Gemini 
XI  mission scheduled in   the   last quarter  of  1966 were  command  pilot 
Charles Conrad,  Jr.,  and pilot Richard F.  Gordon, Jr.;  backup  crew was 
Neil  A.  Armstrong, command  pilot,  and William  A.  Anders,  pilot. 
James A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  backup  crew  for  the  
Gemini  X I   mission,  were  reassigned  as  backup  crew  for  Gemini  IX, 
Original Gemini IX  backups Thomas P.  Stafford and Eugene A.  Cernan 
became  prime  crewmen  for  that  mission  after  the   Feb.  28   deaths  of 
Astronauts  Elliot M.  See, Jr.,  and Charles A.  Bassett 11.  (NASA  Release 
66-67) 
a  NASA  and  DOD  signed  memorandum  of  agreement  establishing  Manned 
Space  Flight  Experiments  Board 
(MSFEB)  to  coordinate  scientific, 
technological  or  nonmilitary  experiments  on   DOD   and  NASA  flight 
missions.  Board  would  recommend  approval  or  disapproval,  assign- 
ment,  and  relative  priority  of  experiments submitted,  after  screening, 
by  sponsoring NASA  or  DOD  Program  Offices.  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller, 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  would  ac t   as 
chairman; other members would  be  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell, NASA  Associ- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

111 

a te   Administrator  for   Space  Science  and  Applications;  Dr.  Mac  C. 
Adams,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and 
Technology;  Daniel  J.  Fink,  DOD  Deputy  Director  for  Strategic  and 
Space  Systems;  and  Gen.  Bernard  A.  Schriever,  AFSC  Commander. 
(Text;  NASA  NMI  1154.4, 4/27/66) 
March  21:  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Andoeya, 
Norway,  carried  scientific  payload  to  estimated  133-km.  (82.6-mi.) 
altitude.  Experiment,  conducted  by  GSFC  and  Norwegian  Defense  Re- 
search Establishment  (NDRE),  was  designed  to  obtain measurements a t  
high  spectral resolution of  D-region composition,  using a new spectrom- 
eter  based  on   ion  cyclotron  resolution  principles.  Instrumentation 
functioned  properly,. and  clamshell nose  cone ejected at programed  55 
sec.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
e  Secretary  of  Commerce John  T.  Connor  announced  appointment  of  Dr. 
George  S. Benton,  Chairman  of  Dept.  of  Mechanics  a t  Johns  Hopkins 
Univ.,  as  director  of  ESSA’S  Institutes  for  Environmental  Research. 
Dr.  Benton,  an   authority  in   atmospheric,  oceanographic,  and  hydro- 
logical  sciences,  would  assume  his  new  duties  in   July.  (Dept.  of  Com- 
merce  Release 66-60) 
Merger  of  NASA  Apollo  Applications  program  with  the   USAF  Manned 
Orbiting  Laboratory  (Mol)  was  urged  in  a  report  by  the   House  Com- 
mittee  on Government Operations’  Military Operations Subcommittee: 
“Inasmuch as both programs a re  still research  and development projects 
without  definitive operational missions,  there  is  reason  to  expect  tha t  
with earnest efforts both agencies  could get  together on  a jo in t  program 
incorporating both  unique  and  similar  experiments  of  each  agency.  . . . 
Such a merger  should be  effected within  the   existing scale of  priorities 
which  accords  to  the  military  experiments greater urgency.”  (H.R.  No. 
1340, 4 6 )  
President  Johnson  announced appointment of  five  new  members  to  four- 
year  terms  on  President’s  Science Advisory  Committee:  Dr.  Ivan   L. 
Bennett,  director  of  dept.  of  pathology,  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.;  Dr. 
Sidney  D.  Drell,  professor  of  physics,  Stanford  Univ.;  William  R. 
Hewlett,  president,  Hewlett-Packard  Co.;  Dr.  Charles  P .   Slichter, 
professor  of  physics,  Univ.  of  Illinois;  and  Dr.  Charles  H .   Townes, 
provost, MIT.  (Pres. Doc.,  3/28/66,  421) 
0  Rocket  Propulsion  Research  Laboratory  a t   AFSC’s  Arnold  Engineering 
Development  Center  was  completed.  (AEDC) 
e  Lockheed-California  Co.  revealed  tha t   F-104  Starfighter  had  taken  off 
from  a  Zero  Length  Launch  (Zell)  platform  in   1963 a t   Edwards  AFB, 
using  a  Rocketdyne  booster  rocket  in  combination  with  aircraft’s 
General  Electric  5-79  engine.  After  80-min.  flight,  Lockheed’s  pilot 
Ed  Brown  said  of  no-runway takeoff:  “ I t   was  one  of  the   easiest.  . . I 
ever made.”  The  secret  tests,  conducted  under  contract to  the  German 
Air Force, had been made public following Luftwaffe announcement tha t  
new  series  of  Super  Starfighter  Zell  tests  would  be  carried  ou t   a t  
Lagerlechfeld  Base,  near Munich.  (Lockheed Release, 3/21/66) 
e  A  space  rescue  service,  “preferably  under  cooperative  auspices  of  the  
United  States and  the   Soviet Union,”  was  urged  in   a  New   York  Times 
editorial:  ‘‘Its  function  would  be  to  send  space  craft,  on  very  shor t  
notice,  to  aid  a space vessel marooned  in  orbit and incapable  of  re turn-  
ing to  earth  under i ts  own power.  I n  some  cases the  need might  be  for 
additional  rocket  fuel  or  replacement  parts;  in   others  the   primary 

112 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

function might be  to  save lives by  taking  aboard  the  crew of  a disabled 
“.  . . with  relatively  little  development,  tow-trucks  of  the  cosmos 
capsule. 
may  be a  regular  part  of  th e  safety arrangements  for  each  new  step  on 
the   road  to  the  moon.”  ( N Y T ,  3/21/66,  30M) 
March 21: Reporting on a January Thiokol Chemical Carp.-sponsored Trendex 
poll  on  public  opinion  of  the  U.S.  space  program,  William  Coughlin 
wrote in Missiles and Rockets: “Some 77% of  those interviewed now favor 
the  program as against  only 20%  opposed to  it.  This  is  a dramatic  gain 
from  1963, when only 59% were in  favor of  the  luna r  landing and  39% 
were opposed.  . . . 
“ In   the  four  cities  in  which  the  latest  poll  was  conducted-Cincin- 
nati,  Syracuse,  Pasadena  and  Des  Moines-the 
public  appears  to  be 
far  ahead  of  the Administration  in  its assessment  of  the  importance  of 
military  space. The  response was:  defense and  security, 38%; scientific 
and  non-military  benefit,  35%;  and  opportunities  for  economic growth 
and  employment,  18%.”  (Coughlin, M&R,  3/21/66,  46) 
e  GEMINI  VIII  Astronauts Neil A.  Armstrong and  David  R .   Scott returned  to 
their  families in  Houston  after  debriefing a t  K S C .   (AP,  N Y T ,  3/22/66, 
18) 
March  22:  President  Johnson  requested  Congressional approval  of  amend- 
ment adding $200 million to pending request for $80 million in FY  1967 
budget  for  FAA’s  Sst  development  program.  I n   a  letter  transmitting 
BOB  amendment  to  Speaker  of  the  House John  W.  McCormack, Presi- 
dent  Johnson  said  funds  would  be  used  “to  complete  the  design  com- 
petition,  for  expanded  economic  and  sonic  boom  studies  and  for  the 
s ta r t   of  prototype  construction.”  Work  carried  out  with  these  funds 
would  “bring  us  closer  to  a  supersonic  transport  which  is  safe  for  the 
passenger,  superior  in  performance  to  any  comparable  aircraft  and 
profitable  for  both  the  airlines  and  the   manufacturers.”  (Text,  Pres. 
Doc.,  3/28/66,  431) 
Construction  of  a  $3.5-billion  radiotelescope  of  10,000  steerable  dish 
antennas  was  proposed  by  Dr.  Bernard  M.  Oliver,  outgoing president 
of  IEEE,  a t   the  Institute’s  convention  in  New  York.  I t   could  gather 
1,000 times more  radio  energy  than  the  largest  radiotelescopes now  in  
use  and  could detect radio  signals emitted  in  space 200 light  yrs.  away. 
Dr.  Oliver  said  the  telescope  should  be  built  by  NASA  as  a  ‘(natural 
adjunct  to  the manned  and  unmanned  exploration  of  space.”  ( N Y T ,  
3/23/66,38) 
AEC  announced  selection  of  Martin  Co.  for  an  estimated  $10-million con- 
tract  to   develop  Snap-29-nuclear  power  source  for  short-lived  earth 
orbital  space  missions,  Generator  would  be  planned  to  produce  400 
watts  of  power-nearly 
ten  times  the  output  of  any  radioisotope space 
power  source  now  being  developed  by  AEC.  Weighing  about  400  lbs., 
i t   would  be  fueled  with  plutonium  210  and  would  draw  power  from 
decay  of  the   radioactive  fuel  without  mechanical  generators.  (AEC 
Release J-69; Martin  Co.) 
0  Heat  shields  on  th e  unmanned Apollo  spacecraft  tha t  underwent  reentry 
test Feb.  26 had developed three  “hot  spots,”  NASA  announced. Problem 
would  be  corrected  with  improved  insulating  compound.  No  delay  in 
Apollo program was  anticipated.  (AP,  Wash.  Eve. Star, 3/23/66,  A29) 
0  USAF  announced  Dr.  J.  Allen  Hynek,  chairman  of  Northwestern  Univ.’s 
Dearborn Observatory and  scientific  consultant  to  USAF’S  Project  Blue 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

113 

Book,  would  investigate  reported  Ufo  sightings  i n   the   Ann  Arbor, 
Mich.,  area.  (UPI,  NYT,  2/23/66,  2 2 )  
March  22-25; Air  Force  Assn.  held  its  20th  annual  convention  i n   Dallas, 
Tex. 
USAF   Chief  of  Staff  Gen.  John  P.  McConnell  told  the   meeting  tha t  
U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  had  enough  long-range  nuclear  weapons  to  make  a 
nuclear  war  between  them  extremely  costly  for  either  side,  b u t   tha t  
a  stalemate did  not  exist  between  them:  “ I t   follows  tha t   each  country 
has  its  own  nuclear  threshold,  tha t   is,  the   point  or  level  of  restraint 
above which  it may  no  longer  be  deterred  from war.  This  threshold  is 
by  no   means  static  bu t   dynamic,  as  i t   is  determined by  a  number  of 
factors  which  are  both  variable  and  unpredictable.”  McConnell  said 
the   strategic  superiority  of  USAF  during  the   past  20  yrs.  had  kept 
the  nuclear  threshold  of  all potential  aggressors  at  a  safe level.  (Text) 
USAF’S  first  priority-continued  maintenance  of  strategic superiority 
over  any  potential  enemy-required 
a  mixed  force  of  missiles  and 
manned  bombers,  Secretary  of  the   Air  Force  Dr.  Harold  Brown  told 
the  convention.  “We  will  continue  to  need  manned  bombers  i n   ou r  
strategic forces as far ahead as any of  us can see, and I think that should 
include a t  least  the   entire  decade  of  the   1970s. 
W.  . . There  is  no  doubt  about  the   technical  feasibility  of  advanced 
manned  bombers of  all sorts of  designs. The questions which have  to be 
answered.  . . are  how  we   propose  to  use  such  a  weapon  system  and 
tion.  . . . This  issue  is  under  intensive  study  by  the   Air  Staff.  . . .” 
how  i t  fits in   to  the  missions  of  assured destruction and damage limita- 
(Text) 
A  Citation  of  Honor-Air 
pre- 
Force  Assn.’s  highest  award-was 
sented  to  B/G  Joseph  s.  Bleymaier  for  “outstanding  management 
achievements  while  directing the Air  Force’s  development  program  for 
the  Titan  111-C space booster,’’ and  to  SSD’S  655th Aerospace Test Wing 
a t   Patrick  AFB,  for  “successful  missile  and  space  launches,  including 
six Gemini  launches which  placed  ten  astronauts in  orbit and  achieved 
t h e   first  manned  rendezvous  in  space.”  (AFSC  Release  48.66) 
March  23:  House  Science  and  Astronautics Committee’s  Space Science  and 
Applications  Subcommittee  recommended  cancellation  of  NASA’s pro- 
posed  1967 Venus  mission  and  proposed  tha t   $42 million  of  otherwise 
programed  money  be  used  in  the   Voyager  program  to  speed  explora- 
a  probe  on  tha t   planet  i n   1969.  Sub- 
tion  of  Mars-crashlanding 
committee  action would go  to full Science and Astronautics committee 
in   form  of  report  on   FY  1967  budget  authorization  for  NASA’s OSSA 
Such  reprograming  action  was  new  i n   space  effort.  Subcommittee 
Chairman  Joseph  E.  Karth  (D-Minn.)  said:  “Congress  is  for  the   first 
time  asserting i ts  prerogatives, using i ts  judgement,  setting priorities of 
its  own.”  (Wash.  Eve.  Star,  3/23/66,  6) 
*  President  Johnson,  in   World  Meteorological  Day  statement,  said:  “This 
day  symbolizes for  us-and 
for  all mankind-a 
new  dawn  of  hope  for 
a better,  safer,  and  more  meaningful  life.  It  looks  to  the   time  when  all 
ou r   science and  technology,  and  all  the  wonders  of  the   space  age,  will 
give  us  the   power  of  which  man  has  always  dreamed-not 
the   power 
of  one nation  over another,  b u t  the  power  of  the  human  race  over  the  
forces  of  nature. 
“The  instrument  of  this  program  is  the   World  Meteorological 
Organization-a 
specialized  agency  of  the   United  Nations  with  a 

114 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

membership  of  127  countries.  Through  the   World  Meteorological 
Organization,  the   concept  of  a  World  Weather  Watch  is  now  taking 
shape.  On  this  occasion,  I  am proud  to  say  tha t   the   United  States 
strongly  supports  international  cooperation  in   this  vital  field.”  (Pres. 
Doe., 3 /28 /66 ,439)  
March  23:  NASA  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill 
Research  Range  carried  instrumented  payload  to  estimated  180-mi. 
(290-km.)  altitude.  GSFC  experiment  measured  magnetic  and  electric 
fields and low-energy electrons and  protons  in   a visible  aurora.  Rocket 
aspect measurement and evaluation of  a xenon  flashing light  for  trajec- 
tory  determination were secondary objectives.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  Lowell  T.  Wingert,  AT&T  vice  president,  wrote  a  letter  to  ComSatCorp 
urging discussions on development of  a  large-capacity communications 
satellite  for   “long  hau l   domestic communications of  all  types,”  to  be 
owned and operated by ComSatCorp with  “equitable  access to  domestic 
common  carriers”  in   re tu rn   for  “bearing  their  share of  ComSatCorp’s 
charges.”  He  called  for  ComSatCorp and  other  interested  communica- 
tions  users  “to  undertake  a  joint  study  promptly  with  the   hope  of 
placing  this newest  type of  communications facility into early domestic 
use.”  (NYT ,  3/25/66,  48; AT&T  Release) 
F irs t   captive flight of  M2-F2 lifting  body  vehicle was  made  from Edwards 
AFB  to  check  ou t   systems  in   flight  while  M2-F2  remained  mated  to  
B-52  launch  aircraft.  (NASA  Release  66-89) 
March  24:  Initial  tests  of  Grst  liquid-hydrogen and  liquid-oxygen  turbo- 
pumps  for  NASA’s 1.5-million-lb.-thrust M-1 rocket  engine  technology 
program  had  been  successfully  completed  a t   LRC.  Pumps,  driven  by 
200,000-hp  gas  generator,  were  largest  ever  built  for  handling propel- 
lants  for  high-energy rocket  engine.  (LRC  Release  66-10) 
*  A $50-million, l8-mo. flight research program involving AFSC’S  supersonic 
XB-70  experimental  aircraft  was  scheduled  to  begin  in   spring  1966, 
AFSC  announced.  Joint  USAF-NASA  effort  would  acquire  experimental 
data  on   flight  dynamics,  flight  loads,  structures,  propulsion  and  air 
induction,  and  environmental  factors.  Overall  direction  would  be  by 
AFSC’s  Aeronautical  Systems Div.  (ASD)  ; technical  direction  would  be 
by  NASA.  (AFSC  Release  15.66) 
0  First  of  fleet of  nine,  135-ft. NASA  barges  for  transport of  liquid hydrogen 
and  liquid  oxygen  had  been  placed  in   service  on  inland  waterways 
between New Orleans and MSFC’S  Mississippi Test Facility, Air  Products 
and  Chemicals,  Inc.,  announced.  Company had  designed double-walled 
cryogenic tanks  for   mounting  on  modified  existing  hulls  according to  
requirements of NASA,  U.S.  Army Corps of  Engineers, and Coast Guard. 
The  three   25O,OOO-gal.-capacity  hydrogen barges  and  six  105,000-gal.- 
capacity  oxygen  barges  could  carry  “ the   largest  quantities  of  the   two 
liquids  ever  transported  in   individual   vessel^.^^  Docking  facilities  in  
test  stand  area  a t   MTF  would  permit  pumping  of  liquids  directly  into 
rocket  fuel  tanks.  (APN  Release,  3/24/66) 
0  NASA Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding rocket launched from Sonmiani, 
Pakistan,  carried  25-grenade payload  to  estimated  84-mi.  (135-km.) 
altitude. 20 grenades successfully  ejected  and  exploded  in   experiment, 
conducted for British National Space Research Committee and Pakistan 
Space  and  Upper  Atmosphere  Research  Committee,  to  obtain  wind, 
temperature,  and  other meteorological data  a t  31-93-mi.  (50-150-km.) 
altitudes.  All  grenade  flashes  were  photographed  by  K-24  ballistic 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

115 

camera network;  20th  explosion  occurred  a t   about  54 mi.  (87  km.). 
(NASA  fipt.  SBL) 
March  24:  NASA  would  negotiate  two  incentive-fee  contracts  totaling  $315 
million with Boeing Co. and North American Aviation, Inc.,  for procure- 
ment  of  additional  Sa turn  V  1s t   (S-IC) stages and F-1 rocket  engines: 
Boeing  Co.  would  supply five S-IC stages,  costing $165 million;  North 
American Aviation, Inc., would handle production, support, and sustain- 
ing engineering of  33 F-1 engines for $150 million.  (NASA Release 66-69; 
WSJ, 3/25/66,  10) 
GEMINI  VIII’S  GATV  had  developed  a  “pretty  serious  problem,”  MSC  Agena 
systems  engineer  Melvin  Brooks  revealed.  The  trouble,  apparently  in  
a  yaw  hydraulics  system,  had  developed  when  mission  controllers 
decided  to  fire  the   rocket  system  by  remote  control  to   shift  the   orbit 
from  186-mi.  (299.5-km.)  apogee  and  184-mi.  (296.3-km.)  perigee  to  
circular  orbit a t  253-mi.  (407.33-km.)  altitude-leaving 
it  as  a  rendez- 
vous  target  for  th e   flight  of  fu tu re  Gemini  spacecraft.  Rocket reached 
330-mi. (531-km.)  and then  442-mi.  (701.6-km.) altitudes.  Brooks called 
these  “pretty  serious  offheadings,  serious  misalignments.” Eventually, 
the   desired  orbit  of  253 mi.  (407.33  km.)  was  obtained.  GATV  was  ex- 
pected  to  drop gradually to  orbit of  about 184 mi.  (296.3 km.). 
GEMINI  VIII  flight director John  D.  Hodge  said  sho r t   circuit  tha t  had  
locked a yaw  thrus ter  on the  Gemini ins trumen t  module into wide-open 
position,  forcing  emergency  landing  of  th e   spacecraft  March  16,  had 
no t   been  found.  (UPI,  NYT,  3/25/66;  WSJ, 3/25/66,  1) 
March 25:  In   answer  to  charge tha t   the  “rush  of  Jodrell Bank  Observatory 
to  distribute  Luna  IX  pictures  and  of  scientists  both  in   the   U.S.  and 
U.K.  to  comment  on  the   pictures  can  only be   considered a  breach  of 
ethics  [see Feb.  4  and 51 ,” Sir Bernard Love11 said i n  an  open letter i n  
Science:  “We  did  no t   ‘rush’  to  distribute  the   Luna  IX   pictures  in  
advance of  the   Russians. Ou r  pictures  came  off  the   facsimile  machine 
several hours  after  the  Russians had  convened  a large press  conference 
in   Moscow  to  show  the   pictures  which  Luna  IX  had  transmitted  the  
previous night.  Why  they did no t  do  so ,   or publish them in  Izvestia the  
following  morning  remains  a  mystery.  As  for  commenting  on   th e  
pictures  before  the   Russians,  my  only  remarks  were  tha t   the   lunik 
seemed  to  be  resting  on a hard  surface with  little evidence of  dust,  and 
these  comments  had  previously  been  made  by  scientists  in   Moscow. 
Any  suggestion  tha t   we  published  a  scientific  analysis  of  the   results 
before the  Russians is  absurd.”  (Science, 3/25/66,  1477) 
*  Series  of  power  tests  for  breadboard version  of  Nerva  (Nuclear Engine 
for  Rocket  Vehicle  Application)  was  completed  by  NASA  and  AEC  a t  
Nuclear Rocket Development Station,  Jackass Flats, Nev.  Final  16-min. 
test  studied  duration  capability  a t   approximately design  power  and 
temperature--1,130  mw and 3,715”F. Engine system had been started 10 
times  dur ing  series  [see Feb.  3,  11, March  3,  and  161 and had  operated 
for  110 min.,  including 29 min.  a t  nominal full power.  (Atomic Energy 
Programs,  1966,  186) 
USAF  successfully  carried  ou t   second  launch  from  Vandenberg  AFB  i n  
High  Altitude  Background  and  Signal  to  Noise  (Hitab)  program  to 
investigate  and measure infrared  radiation  and emission characteristics 
associated  with  missile  exhaust  plumes  and  other  exhaust  products. 
Nike-Javelin  combination carrying payload  of  plume measurement was 
launched  seconds after  launch  of  its  target,  a  Titan  I1  ICBM,  and  data 

116 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966- 

were  telemetered  back  to  Vandenberg  station.  Preliminary  reports 
indicated  tha t  missile was  on   target  for  preselected Pacific  target area. 
(WI, N Y T ,  3/26/66,  27;  UPI,  Chic.  Trib.,  3/25/66) 
March 25: USAF  launched unidentified satellite from WTR  with  Scout booster. 
(US. Aeron.  & Space  Act.,  1966,  149) 
a  Low-level  penetration  flight  of  1,201.8  mi.-longest 
to  date-was  made 
by  a  USAF  F-111A  variable-sweep-wing fighter  from  Edwards  AFB  to 
General  Dynamics  Co rp . ’~  Fort  Worth,  Tex.,  plant.  L/Col.  R.  C.  W. 
Blessley,  director  of  F-111 joint  test  force  a t  Edwards,  flew  three-hour 
nonstop  mission  a t   an   even  1,000 f t .   above  uneven  terrain  varying 
from 500-ft. to more  than   10,000-ft. altitude.  (Gen. Dyn. Corp. Release) 
0  Provisional  analysis  of  LUNA  IX’S  photographs  by  Gerard  P.  Kuiper, 
Robert  G.  Strom,  Rudolph  S.  Le  Poole,  and  Ewen  A.  Whitaker  of  the  
Univ.  of  Arizona’s  Lunar  and  Planetary  Laboratory  appeared  in  
Science.  Referring  to  theories  tha t   spacecraft  landing  on  the   lura in  
might  encounter  electrostatic  dust  problems,  the  scientists  said: 
“There  is no evidence  tha t   this process  is important since the  Luna IX  
components  visible  on   the   record  appear  in   a  very  clean  condition. 
Also,  the  camera pictures  are clear and  sharp and  no  stray light appears 
above the  horizon.  Apparently  the  optics remained  clean upon  exposure 
a  few  minutes  after  landing.  The   cleanness  of  the   lunar   surface may 
also  explain  the   absence  of  a  visible  dust  cloud  from  the  impacts  of 
(Science, 3/25/66,  1561-63) 
Rangers  VI,  VII,  VIII,  and  IX.” 
0  Dr.  J.  Allen  Hynek,  Northwestern  Univ.  astrophysicist  and  scientific 
consultant to USAF’S  Project Blue Book,  discussed  a t  a press  conference 
the   findings  of  his  investigation  of  reported  Ufo  sightings  in  Hillsdale 
and  Dexter,  Mich.,  near  Ann  Arbor:  “The  majority  of  observers  . . . 
reported only  lights. They  have  not described  an object. Both  sightings 
were  i n   swampy  areas-a  most  unlikely  place  for  a  visit  from  outer 
space.  The  glow  was  localized  here.  I t   could  have  been  due  to  the  
release  of  variable  quantities  of  marsh  gas.”  Rotting  vegetation  in  
swamps  produces  the   gas,  Dr.  Hynek  said,  “which  can  be  trapped  by 
ice  and  winter  conditions.  When  a  spring thaw  occurs,  the  gas may  be 
released  in   some  quantity,  producing  flames  which  could  be  yellow, 
red,  or blue-green.”  In  the  Hillsdale case,  he  added,  the  sighting might 
have  been  assisted  by  youths  “playing  pranks  with  flares.”  Hynek’s 
conclusions  were  disputed  by  several  of  those  who  had  made  the  
sightings.  (AP, Wash.  Eve. Star, 3/26/66,  A3; Rugaber, N Y T ,  3/26/66, 
31) 
a  Rep.  Gerald  R.  Ford  (R-Mich.)  said  he   would  ask  the  House  Armed 
Services  and  Science  and  Astronautics  Committees  to  consider  “full- 
blown”  investigations  of  unidentified  flying  objects.  Several  hundred 
people  in   Michigan  had  reported  mysterious  lights  during  t h e   past 
week.  Ford said tha t  if  swamp gas  had  caused  the  lights as investigators 
suggested,  “USAF  should  have  no   hesitancy  in  explaining  tha t   to  a 
committee.”  (Clark, N Y T ,  3/27/66,  61) 
0  Detection  of  low  exposure ages  in   four  iron  meteorites-from 
4  million 
reported  in   Science  by  Dr.  James  C.  Cobb, 
to  50  million  years-was 
Brookhaven  (N.Y.)  National  Laboratory  geochemist.  Radioactivity 
measurements of  18 iron  meteorites  r e v q l e d  four with  unusually  low 
amounts  of  stable  isotope  argon-38,  compared  to  normal  amounts  of 
radioactive  product  argon-39.  Both  “are  produced  by  interactions  of 
cosmic rays with  the  meteorite while it is in space.”  Dr.  Cobb’s  calcula- 

117 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
tion  of  exposure  age,  based  on  ratio  between  the   two  isotopes,  “pro- 
vided  definite  evidence  of  an   overlap . . . between  the  chondrites  and 
the  iron  meteorites.”  Iron  meteorites  previously  had  been  thought  to 
range  in  age  from  120  to   2,200  million  years,  except  for  Braunau 
meteorite  estimated  a t   4.5  million  years.  (Science,  3/25/66,  1524) 
March 25:  Evidence tha t  Soviet scientists and engineers had acquired a deter- 
mining  voice  in  decision-making was  presented  to  the  Midwest  Slavic 
Conference by  Colgate Univ.  professor  Albert  Parry.  He  cited  a  report 
of  a plenary session of  the MGSCOW Communist Party Central Committee 
in  which  surprise  was  expressed  tha t   the  capital’s  700  scientific estab- 
lishments,  with  more  than  350,000  scientists,  engineers,  and  techni- 
cians, were escaping party control.  Prof.  Parry said  h e  saw  in  Siberia’s 
new  science  city  in  Novosibirsk  the  final  and  irrefutable  proof  of  the  
emergence  of  the  Soviet  scientist  as  a  dominating  force  in   society: 
“The experience in Siberia’s science city in  collecting and integrating so 
many  divergent  institutes  and  laboratories  in  one  place;  the  role  of 
computers  in  cutting  across  disciplines . . . all  this  is  sufficient proof 
tha t   Russia’s  science  and  technology  cannot  be  so  readily  or  lastingly 
thwarted  by  the   party  hierarchs  from  free  and  easy  cross-fertilization 
and  thus  from one  more  step  to  independence and political influence.” 
(Handler, N Y T ,  3/27/66,  10) 
0  W. Cameron Roberts, Jr., director of  Atlantic Research C o r p . ’~  Production 
Div.,  died  of  a  kidney  ailment.  Roberts,  a n   expert  on  solid-propelIant 
and  meteorological  rocketry,  had  conducted  extensive  research  fo r  
U.S.  upper-air  and  space programs,  and was  co-inventor  of  Arcas-one 
of  world’s  most  widely  used  meteorological  rocket  systems.  (Wash. 
Post,  3/27/66,  B10) 
March  26:  GEMINI  VIII  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong  and  David  R.  Scott 
received Exceptional  Service Medals  from  NASA  Deputy  Administrator 
Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  in  ceremonies  a t  MSC.  Armstrong  received 
a quality  step increase  in his  Civil Service pay,  and Major Scott  (USAF), 
promotion  to  lieutenant  colonel by  President  Johnson. 
At  a  televised  MSC  news  conference,  Armstrong  said  he  and  Scott 
developed  some  “anxiety”  bu t   that  they  never  for  a  moment  thought 
they  could  not  re tu rn   the  spacecraft  t c   earth.  Both  Scott  and  MSC 
Director  Robert  R.  Gilruth  said  tha t   if  the  trouble  had  occurred  over 
a  ground  tracking  station,  mission  might  have  been  salvaged.  Mal- 
function  would  have  been  localized  immediately and  the   information 
relayed  to  the  astronauts.  As  it  was,  they  had  had  no  idea  what  was 
wrong  or   even  whether  the  trouble  was  with  the   GATV IGEM IN I   VIII  or 
the  spacecraft  alone.  (Waldron,  N Y T ,   3/27/66,  64L;  Hines,  Wash. 
Eve.  Star,  3/27/66,  A l ;  Simons,  Wash. Post,  3/27/66,  A l )  
Secretary of  Agricultcre Orville Freeman announced tha t  the Department 
had  awarded a  contract  to NASA  for  use  of  remote-sensing equipment i n  
large-area surveys.  Photographic  and  other  instrumentation  carried  in  
spacecraft  would  identify  types  and  conditions  of  soil;  detect  plant 
diseases  in  early  stages;  determine  a  crop’s  vigor  and  agents  which 
could  cause  loss  of  water;  indicate  whether  soils  were  suitable  for 
certain  crops;  pinpoint  moisture  and  salt  content;  and  detect  con- 
ditions  such  as  drought  and  insect  infestation.  (DA  Release  918-66) 
March  27:  NASA  Nike-Apache  meteorological  sounding  rocket  launched 
from  Sonmiani,  Pakistan,  carried  25-grenade  payload  and  dummy 
trimethyl-aluminum  (TMA) canister  weighing  2 5   Ibs.  to  estimated 

118 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

118-mi.  (190-km.)  altitude.  23  grenade  flashes were  photographed  by 
K-24 ballistic  camera  network  in   experiment  conducted  for  British 
National  Space  Research  Committee  and  Pakistan  Space  and  Upper 
Atmosphere  Research  Committee  to  obtain  wind,  temperature,  and 
other  meteorological  data  between  31-93  mi.  (50-150  km.).  (NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
March  27:   FAA  lost  its  first  customer  for  supersonic  transport  (Sst),  paid 
Pan  American  Grace Airways  (Panagra)  $200,000 refund  requested by 
company  on   Feb.  25.  Panagra  was  one  of  eight  U S .   and  14 foreign 
customers which  had  deposited money  to  reserve  delivery positions  for 
Sst.  (AP,  NYT ,  3/28/66,  57) 
Possibility tha t  a random  or deliberate radio  signal caused  GATV’S  a t t i tude  
control  thrusters  to  fire  during  GEMINI  VIII  docking  period  March  16 
was  being  studied  by  electromagnetic  interference  experts,  Richard 
Lewis  reported  in   a  Denver  Post  article.  “So  far  in   the  space  age,” 
Lewis  said,  “there  has  been  no  record  of  any  radio-controlled  space 
vehicle  being  manipulated  by  any  power  other  than  the   one  tha t  
launched  it.”  Other  explanations  were  tha t   a  signal  sen t   to  GATV  to 
tu rn   on  its  tape  recorder might  have  activated  the   thrusters,  or  tha t   a 
docking  jar  had  caused  intermittent  shor t   circuit.  (Lewis, Denver Post, 
3/27/66) 
0  Soviet aircraft designer Col. Alexander Aykovlev said in Krusnaya  Zvezda 
article  tha t   U.S.S.R.  was  planning  a  supersonic  passenger  and  cargo 
aircraft with  cruising  speed  of  1,560-1,900  mph.  (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 
3/28/66) 
Light  aircraft  of  polyester  plastic  had  been  built  and  successfully  tested 
by  Wassmer  Aviation  (France), AP  reported.  Called  the  WA-50,  four-  
seater aircraft had  a  150-hp engine,  could  attain  180 mph,  and weighed 
about  one metric  ton  when  loaded.  (AP, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  3/27/66) 
March  27-30:  FCC  Chairman  E.  William  Henry  warned  the  broadcasting 
industry  tha t   the   day  might  come  when  direct-broadcasting  satellites 
would  outmode  “overnight”  local radio  and  television  stations.  Speak- 
ing  to  the   National  Assn.  of  Broadcasters  in   Chicago,  Ill.,  he   said 
direct-broadcast satellites were  still only 
tiny  cloud  on  the  horizon,” 
and  there  remained  “mountains  of  unsolved  problems.  . . . But  smaller 
clouds have often traversed higher  peaks and released a torrential down- 
pour  of  new  technology  and  new  service  o n   the   ground  below.  The  
resultant  floods have  swept  aside the   older  order.”  (W S J ,  3/30/66,  5) 
ComSatCorp  president  Joseph  V.  Charyk  told  the   NAB  convention 
tha t  communication by  satellites would recast the  (‘nature of  the  world: 
I t  may  profoundly  influence  the means  of  distribution  to  local  stations 
throughout  this  country.  It  may  establish  new  arrangements  and  new 
patterns  tha t  will have a profound  effect on  the  national  television and 
radio  picture.”  Charyk  said  this development  was  likely to  result  from 
satellite  linkage  with  metropolitan  communications  centers.  Linkage 
would  include  “color  television  and  stereophonic FM  radio,  aural  and 
visual  telephone  service,  high-speed  facsimile  data  and  newspapers, 
library  reference,  theatre  and  transportation  booking  services,  access 
to  computer  facilities,  shopping  and  banking  services  of  all  types,  and 
centralized charging  and billing.”  (Text) 
March 28:   First  fully successful launch  and  air-snatch recovery  of  the  Air- 
Launched  Air-Recoverable  Rocket  (Alarr)  was  made  over  WSMR.  A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

119 

modified  MB-1  Genie  carrying  instrumented  payload  for  upper  at- 
mosphere  research,  Alarr  was  launched  from  F-4C  Phantom  I1  jet 
fighter  a t   49,000-ft.  altitude.  Rocket  reached  150,000-ft. altitude  and 
180-lb. payload immediately separated. C-130B transport  operating from 
Edwards AFB made successful mid-air recovery of  payload a t  5,000 f t .   in 
second pass  a t  target.  Test,  conducted  for Kirtland  AFB,  was  to  develop 
new  technique  for  high-altitude  space  probes : launch  aircraft’s  speed 
would serve as first stage of a rocket-eliminating  need for a launch pad; 
descending  payload  would  be  recovered  to  prevent  damage  or  loss. 
(AP, Balt. Sun, 3/29/66;  M&R ,   4/4/66,  8) 
March  28:  Speech by  Rep.  Henry  S. Reuss  (D-Wisc.)  on  need  for  research 
and  development  on socioeconomic problems  such  as  transportation, 
construction,  and waste management was  inserted  in   the   Congressional 
Record:  “We  should  not  allow  heavy  concentration  of  research  and 
development in  the  three  fields of  space, defense,  and  atomic energy  to 
blind  us  to  the  potential  for  research  and  development  in  civilian 
technology. . . . 
“But much  of  the growth and success of  these three  . . . ‘giants’ must 
be  explained in  terms  of  the  remarkable men  associated with  them.  . . . 
“We  think  of  Admiral Rickover  and  the  n ud e a r   submarine.  Of  Jim 
Webb  and  the   space  program.  . . . Of  the  personal  sponsorship  of 
Presidents  Kennedy  and  Johnson  €or  o u r   manned  landing  on  the 
moon.  . . .” (CR ,  3/28/66,6529) 
*  Maj.  Donald  E.  Keyhoe  (USMC,  Ret.),  director  of  the  National  Investiga- 
tions Committee on Aerial Phenomena, demanded a t  a press  conference 
in   Washington,  D.C.,  tha t   Congressional  inquiry  be  made  into  Ufo’s 
and  USAF’S  handling  of  investigations  of  reported  sightings.  NICAP had 
long  charged  USAF  with  suppression  of  evidence  and  censorship. 
(Carmach, Wash. Daily News, 3/29/66;  Young, N.Y. JIAmer., 3/29/66,1) 
Redeye,  USA’s shoulder-fired  antiaircraft  missile  system  designed  for 
forward-area  defense  against  low-flying  aircraft,  had  successfully 
completed  Arctic  phase  of  service  testing  a t   Ft.  Greely, Alaska..  (Gen. 
Dyn.  Corp. Release) 
March  28-30:  AIAA-sponsored  “Stepping  Stones to Mars”  meeting was  held 
in Baltimore. Vice President Hubert H.  Humphrey,  in  a speech read by 
NASC  Executive  Secretary  Edward  C.  Welsh,  called  for  international 
cooperation  in  man’s  efforts  to  land  on  Mars:  ‘ r .   . . i t   is  indeed worth 
considering the possibility of  having man’s  first voyage to Mars become 
a truly  international undertaking. We in  this  country are eager to share 
the thrills and the benefits of  space exploration with other nations.  This 
enterprise  is  of  such  tremendous,  such  breath-taking  scope  tha t   there 
is  amp le   opportunity  for  many  nations  to  contribute  to  i t ,   each  in  its 
own  way.  There  are  many  imaginative  and  ingenious  scientists  and 
engineers  in  other  countries,  and we  welcome  their  ideas on how Mars 
may  best  be  reached  and  explored.’’  (Text) 
Dr. E rn s t  Stuhlinger, Director  of MSFC  Research Projects Laboratory, 
told  the  conference  tha t   “all  technologies are  sufficiently developed to 
make  flight  [to Mars]  in  1986 appear possible.”  Five  Saturn  V  launch 
vehicles  would  carry  the  components  of  electrically  powered  Mars 
spacecraft  and  of  Nerva  11-powered nuclear  earth-escape  stage  in to  
300-mi.-altitude  earth  orbit.  After  assembly  and  checkout,  nuclear 
stage would accelerate electrically powered spacecraft to escape velocity. 
Flight  time  to  Mars  on  a  direct  transfer  trajectory  would be  145 days; 

120 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

280 days would  be  required  to re turn   to  earth.  Spacecraft would  enter 
high  earth  orbit outside Van Allen  radiation  belt  and  astronauts would 
be brought back  to  earth by  commuter rocket.  Dr.  Stuhlinger said:  “Of 
the   key  developments  still  necessary,  the   electrical  power  system  un-  
doubtedly  requires  the   major  technological  and  funding  effort.”  Co- 
authors  contributing  to  the  paper  presented  by  Stuhlinger were  Joseph 
C.  King  and Dr.  Russell D.  Shelton of  MSFC  Research  Projects Labora- 
tory  and  Gordon  R.  Woodcock,  MSFC  Advanced  Systems  Office.  (MSFC 
Release  66-67) 
LRC   scientist  J.  Reece  Roth  described a n   electric  rocket  life-support 
system that would supply interplanetary  crews with meals which, when 
metabolized,  would  serve as  fuel  for  spacecraft’s  engine.  According  to  
Roth’s concept, some or all of  the propellant,  in the  form of food, water, 
and oxygen, would be metabolized by  crew to  carbon dioxide, water, and 
solid  wastes.  CO,  and  water  could  then   be  used  as  propellant  for  an  
electric  engine while  solid  residues would  be  small enough  to be  stored 
or  discarded.  Propellant  reserve  could  be  used  for  food,  navigational 
corrections,  and  radiation  shielding-enhancing 
safety  of  the   crew. 
Weight  savings  from  integrated  propulsion  and  life-support  system 
would  be  so   great,  Roth  said,  that  a  somewhat  less  efficient  thruster 
could  be used  with  no overall loss  in  performance.  (LRC  Release  66-12) 
Human experience most  similar  to   one-to-three year  space flight was 
life  on  submarine,  according  to  Dr.  S.  B.  Sells,  Director,  Institute  of 
Behavioral Research,  Texas Christian  Univ.  Dr.  Sells presented  results 
of  NASA-sponsored  study  designed  to  formulate  problems  of  “group 
organization,  structure,  and  interpersonal interaction  of  crew members 
in   the   environmental circumstances  of  a  typical space mission .’, Fifty- 
six  social  system  characteristics  of  extended  space  flight-such 
as 
motivation,  status,  background,  training,  and  command  s t ruc tu re   of 
crew,  as well as conditions of  confinement, isolation,  and environmental 
compared  with  those  of  11 other  social  systems.  (Text) 
hazards-were 
NASA  Deputy Associate  Administrator  for  Space Science and Applica- 
tions  Edgar  M.  Cortright  said:  “Thousands  of  dedicated  people  have 
laboriously la id .  . . stepping stones to Mars. This nation is ready and able 
to  step  up   the   exploration  of  Mars,  Venus,  and  the   rest  of  the   solar 
system. Ju s t  when  such a program will get a go  ahead depends on  many 
factors. This  coming year will be a  crucial one fo r  the  decision makers. 
“Of  one thing I am absolutely certain:  comprehensive exploration of 
the   planets  is  inevitable.  Who  will  be  leading  this  exploration  seems 
less certain; bu t  we  can  if  we  choose.”  (Text) 
March 29:  Launch of NASA Atlas-Centaur AC-8 rocket,  on mission to perform 
first  double-ignition of  a  hydrogen  engine i n  space, was  aborted  a t  ETR 
seconds before  liftoff when  a  power  cord  failed  to disconnect from  the  
booster.  Failure  automatically  stopped  th e   Atlas  engines  from  firing 
and countdown was halted a t  two  seconds.  No new launch  date was  set. 
(NASA Proj.  Off.;  AF’, Balt.  Sun, 3/30/66) 
0  ComSatCorp,  on  behalf of  Intelsat-the 
international telecommunications 
satellite  consortium-issued 
requests  for  proposals  (rfp’s)  for  210-lb. 
synchronous  satellite  capable  of  providing  “airplane-to-ground-to- 
airplane”  communications  with  two-way  channels.  Satellite  would 
supplement  high-density  North  Atlantic  communications and  “permit 
orderly  expansion  of  th e   aeronautical  service  on  a  global  basis.” 
(ComSatCorp Release) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

121  

March  29: Wilhelm Forster  Observatory  (West Germany)  reported  tha t   on  
127th orbit,  Soviet spacecraft COSMOS  CXIII  returned  to  earth  and  soft- 
landed  a t  Baikonur,  Kazakhstan.  (AP,  Wash. Post,  3/30/66,  A14) 
*  U.S.  Committee  on   Extension  to  the   Standard  Atmosphere  (COESA)  an-  
nounced  plans  to  publish  new  volume,  U.S.  Standard  Atmosphere 
Supplements, 1966, which would  tabulate and detail properties of  earth’s 
atmosphere a t  all altitudes up   to 600 mi.-information 
necessary  to in-  
vestigate atmosphere’s  effect on  aerospace vehicle operation and design. 
Sponsored  by  NASA,  ESSA,  and  USAF  Cambridge  Research  Lab.,  publica- 
tion would be based on data gathered  through tracking of  artificial earth 
satellites  and  instrumented  rockets  and  satellites.  (NASA  Release 66-72) 
Proposed  crew transfer  tunnel connecting a  Gemini  spacecraft and  a Mol 
vehicle was  tested  a t  Arnold  Engineering  Development  Center.  (AEDC) 
March  30:  USAF  successfully  launched  the   OVl-IV  and  OV1-V  scientific 
satellites into  circular  orbits from Vandenberg  AFB  with  Atlas-Agena D 
booster.  OV1-IV satellite bore  photosynthetic  organisms  to  determine 
effects  of  zero-g  and  four  types  of  thermal  control  coating  samples  to 
test  durability  and  resistance  to  heat  and  radiation. Each  of  two  ther- 
mally  insulated  sample holders  on  satellite carried  two  control surfaces 
and  four  circular  samples,  slightly less  than   an   inch  in   diameter.  Pro- 
tected  during launch,  coatings would be  exposed  to  space environment 
and  thermistor  measurements  of  erosion,  corrosion,  and  changes  in  
color  telemetered  during  anticipated  year  in   orbit.  OV1-V measured 
optical  radiation  of  earth,  background,  and  space.  (AFSC,  RTD Release 
37.66;  M&R ,   4/4/66,  8; U.S.  Aeron.  & Space  Act.,  1966,  149) 
Attempt  to  launch  NASA’s  Orbiting Astronomical  Observatory  (Oao)  was 
halted  by  failure  of  one  of  the   three  engines  in   the   Atlas  booster  to 
reach  full  60,000-lbs. thrus t   upon  firing. Launch  was  rescheduled  for 
April 2, later for April 8.  (UPI,  Phil. Znq.,  3/31/66;  UPI,  NYT ,  4/1/66,  15) 
*  USAF  launched unidentified satellite from WTR  with Thor-Agena D booster. 
( U S .  Aeron. & Space  Act.,  1966, 149) 
0  Addressing  the   AAS  in   Hampton,  Va.,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for 
Space  Science  and  Applications  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newel1  said:  c f .   . . as  a 
science,  space  astronomy  simply  cannot  thrive  in   separation  from 
ground-based astronomy. I n  fact,  the  phrase  ‘space astronomy’  is a dis- 
quieting  one.  The   discipline  is  astronomy,  the   objective  of  which, 
broadly  speaking,  is  to   advance  our   understanding  of  the   universe  in  
which we  live. The word  ‘space’ i n  space astronomy  refers simply to the  
fact  tha t   sounding  rockets,  satellites,  and  space  probes  are  new  tools 
that  the  astronomer can  use  in  wrestling  with  the  difficult problems  of 
astronomical  observation.  In   perspective,  the   astronomical  community 
has before  i t  the  task  of  using  these new  tools  in  effective combination 
with  ground-based  observing  so   as  to  best  advance  the   science  of 
astronomy.” 
Dr. Nancy G .  Roman, NASA  Chief  of  Astronomy Programs,  OSSA,  said: 
‘‘So  far,  all  space  astronomy  has  been  automated.  However,  as  the  
manned  space program matures, plans are  being made to incorporate the  
flexibility of  manned  operation  to  the   program  to  an   increasing  ex- 
ten t . .   . . We  recognize  that  even  simple  operations  by  man  could 
greatly extend both  the lifetime and  the  versatility of a n  OAO,  and there- 
fore  have  been  looking  into  the   possibilities  of  using  man  i n   such 
maintenance  activities.  Looking  fur ther   ahead,  we  aIso  realize  tha t  
eventually  astronomers  will  want  larger  telescopes  i n   space  than   are 

122  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

possible  with  the   cu r ren t   series  of  0 ~ 0 % .  Therefore  we   have  had  a 
study  conducted  on  the  possibility  of  building,  mounting,  and  using a 
telescope  of  approximately 120 inches  in   space.  The  problems  are   far 
f rom   trivial,  bu t   they  also  do  no t   appear  insurmountable,  given  the  
resources necessary for   the  job.”  (Texts) 
March  30:  ComSatCorp  asked  FCC  for  au thor i ty   to  build  $5-million  ear th  
station  near  Moorefield,  W.Va.,  to  supplement  ComSatCorp-operated 
facility  a t  Andover,  Me.  Station  would  be  in   operation by  late  1967, 
handling  all  types  of  commercial communications and  supporting  two 
Atlantic  satellites,  EARLY  BIRD  I,  and  the   proposed  Apollo  system. 
(ComSatCorp Release) 
0  Secretary  of  the   Air  Force  Dr.  Harold  Brown,  testifying  before  Senate 
Armed  Services  Committee  and  Subcommittee  on  DOD  of  Senate 
Appropriations  Committee,  said  USAF  was  “working  on9 ,  increasing 
procurements  directly  with  prime  contractors,  bu t   with  Government- 
furnished equipment. He added: “There  comes a point,  however, where 
the  trouble tha t  the  Government buys  itself by  furnishing equipment is 
more  than   the   money  it  saves  . . .,’  (Testimony;  Senate,  Military 
Procurement Auth. f o r  FY  1967, 907) 
0  Dr.  J.  Allen Hynek’s  report  on investigation of  Ufo  sightings in  Michigan 
received  commentary  in   th e   Christian  Science  Monitor:  “Many  saucer 
sightings have been merely glimpses  of  familiar  things  seen under  un-  
familiar  circumstances. I n  this  case,  Dr.  Hynek  says  i t  was  marsh  gas 
list of  well-documented sightings tha t  cannot yet be  explained.  . . . It is 
fire.  But he  also has  said  there is an  impressive and  constantly growing 
time for   the  scientific community to  conduct a  thorough  and objective 
study of  the   ‘unexplainables.’ ” (CSM ,  3/30/66,  A l )  
March 31:  U.S.S.R.  launched LUNA  x unmanned spacecraft toward  the  moon 
“ to   test  a  system insuring the  setting up  of  a n  artificial moon  satellite 
with the  aim of  exploring near-lunar outer space and also testing systems 
installed  aboard for placing  the  station in  a selenocentric  or  near luna r  
orbit,”  Tass announced.  Spacecraft was  following a  trajectory  close  to 
the   calculated  one  and  onboard equipment was  functioning  normally. 
(Pravda ,   4/1/66,  1, USS-T  Trans.;  Tass,  3/31/66;  Loory,  Wash .  Pos t ,  
4/1/66,  A3) 
0  Fifth  Sa turn  IB booster (S-IB-5) was successfully captive-fired by Chrysler 
Corp.  for  2%  min.-longest 
NASA  Marshall  Space 
duration  firing-at 
post-static-test  checks  and  woul g be  used  in   checking ou t   the   Apollo 
Flight Center. Stage would be shi  ped  to Michoud Assembly Facility for 
spacecraft, perfecting  rendezvous and docking techniques,  and  training 
astronauts i n  preparation for manned lunar landing.  (MSFC Release 66-69) 
B/G  J. C.  Maxwell  (USAF),  FAA deputy administrator  for   supersonic devel- 
opment,  told  a  Washington  meeting  of  Aerospace  Industries  Associa- 
tion’s Public Relations Advisory Committee tha t  total  cost of  delivering 
the  first American Ss t  for airline service may exceed four billion dollars. 
He explained:  “The  SST program has been, and still remains, a high risk 
program.  Tha t  fact,  combined with  the  sheer magnitude of  the  develop- 
ment  cost,  is  why  the   Government is  participating  in   the   program  to 
develop an aircraft aimed solely a t  a civil market.”  Adding tha t  the  cost 
estimate was  ccconsiderably more than  the  total net worth of  the  major 
aircraft manufacturers  combined,”  Maxwell said:  “Our philosophy for  
financing th e  SST program beyond  the  prototype construction and flight 
tes t   phase  is  to   encourage  industry  and  th e   financial  community  to 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

123  

assume as much  responsibility and risk  as practicable.  We  eagerly look 
foward to  the  day when we  can  tu rn   the  whole program over to  private 
enterprise.  Conceivably, this could occur when  the  prototype has flown 
and proven ou t  the design.  If  all goes well-and 
the  work performed by 
the   airframe  and  engine  manufacturers  during  the   past  nine  months 
gives  us  cause for  optimism-the 
SST  prototype will  take  to   the  air  in  
Iate  1969 or  early  in   1970 to  begin  an   intensive  period  of  testing.  At 
about  this  time,  production  development will  get  underway with  the  
first production model rolling off  the  line early in  1973 followed by  type 
certification and en try  in to  commercial service by  1974.”  Although the  
British-French Concorde was  expected to  be  in  airline service by  1971, 
Maxwell  said  this  three-year  timelag  would  be  offset by  the  U.S.  Sst’s 
advantages: (1) cruising  speed  of  mach  2.7,  compared with Concorde’s 
2.2;  (2) 250-passenger  capacity,  compared  with  Concorde’s  anticipated 
140  passengers; and  (3) growth potential  of  titanium construction con- 
trasted  with  volume-limited  aluminum  of  Concorde.  (Text) 
March  31:  Pra t t   &  Whitney  Div.’s  en try   in   Ss t   engine  competition-the 
JTF-l7A-was  operated  for   the   first  time  a t   P&w’s Florida  Research 
and  Development  Center,  W.  Palm  Beach,  Fla.  Twin-spool  turbofan 
“was  started  and  operated  for  the   programmed  time.”  (P&W  Release, 
4/1/66) 
*  FAA  had  submitted  to  aircraft  manufacturers  a  new  supersonic  transport 
(Sst) financing plan, reported William Chapman in  the  Washington Post. 
Manufacturers,  who  claimed  they  could  no t   afford  to  pay  25% of  ex- 
pected $1-billion cost of  next building stage, would be able to contribute 
a  lighter  share of  development costs  than   they  had  been paying  under 
the   7525%   cost-sharing  plan  arranged  by  President  Kennedy.  (Chap- 
man,  Wash. Post, 3/31/66,  H8) 
Australia’s Minister of  Supply Denham Henty announced tha t  U.S.,  U.K., 
and  Australia  would  cooperate  in   experiments  with  U.S.  Redstone 
rockets  a t  Woomera  Range  to  study  effects  of  rocket  reentry  into  the  
atmosphere.  (Reuters,  Wush.  Post,  4/1/66,  A20; Reuters,  NYT, 
4 /1 /66 ,24 )  
J  Japanese  Transportation  Ministry  announced  a  seven-year program  to 
establish  system of  navigation satellites  to  be  launched in   1972. A new 
ministry,  the   Satellite  Navigation  Research  Office,  would  begin  to 
develop  electronic  equipment, ground  stations,  and control  systems as 
soon  as  the   government’s  budget  for  FY  1966 was  approved  by  the  
curren t  session of  the  Diet.  R&D  program would be  carried ou t  entirely 
by  Japanese scientists.  (N Y T ,  4/1/66,  59M) 
*  Growing  “impatience,  mistrust,  and  hostility  of  news  media  and  con- 
gressmen toward NASA”  was  reported by William Hines in  the  Washing- 
ton Evening Star: “Newsmen  have long contended tha t  the  initials NASA 
stand  for  ‘Never  A  Straight Answer,’  and  on  a t   least  one  occasion a 
consistent  telling  of  inconsistent  stories.  . . . If  the   situation continues 
high-ranking official was  publicly  called  to  account  by  a  reporter  for 
unaltered,  the  space administration may  soon replace the  S ta te  Depart- 
ment and the  Central Intelligence Agency a t  the  bottom of  the  capital’s 
credibility list.”  (Hines, Wash.  Eve.  Star, 3/31/66,  A14) 
0  NAS  President  Frederick  Seitz  told  Charter  Assembly  of  the   Aerospace 
Science and  Technology  Branch  of  the   Research Society of  America, 
BoUing  AFB,  he   believed  the   scientific  community would  pursue  the  
interests  of  science  far   more  effectively  if  i t   recognized  its  unique 

124 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

opportunity to make the  space program scientifically valuable by lending 
support  to  those  components “which  do  have  a  significant bearing  on 
scientific knowledge.”  He  believed  the  knowledge we  could gain  of  the  
solar system through the  space program  represented “a  major  contribu- 
tion  to  our heritage of  knowledge,  fully as  important as  the  knowledge 
of the  earth we have gained in  the last 500 years through the  exploration 
which  began  with  Henry the  Navigator’s  systematic explorations of  the  
coast  of  Africa.”  (Seitz, Science, 6/24/66) 
March  31: Col.  Donald Boyer  Phillips  (USA,  Ret.), military  aviation pioneer, 
died of  pneumonia  at age 74 in Alexandria, Va.  Colonel Phillips,  native 
of  Washington,  D.C.,  had  designed, built,  and  flown  his  first glider  in  
1905. When he  retired in  1947, he had flown in  nearly 90 types of planes. 
(Wa sh .  Post,  4/4/66,  B2) 
During  March:  Study  o f   Vertically  Incident  Cosmic-Ray  Trajectories  Using 
Sixth Degree Simulations o f   the Geomagnetic Field-consisting 
largely of 
computer-generated  tables  of  cosmic-ray trajectories a t  more  than   130 
locations  around  the   world-was 
issued  by  AFCRL.  Since  cosmic  ray 
trajectories are directly influenced by  the  configuration of  the  magnetic 
field, which varies diurnally, seasonally, and with solar-cycle variations, 
it was  possible to derive information  on  the  changing magnetic  field by 
observing  cosmic-ray  events.  Also,  because  calculations  of  cosmic-ray 
rigidities  are   equally  valid  for  solar  protons,  calculation  techniques 
developed under this study could be  used  to evaluate the  trajectories o€  
these  solar particles  as well.  (OAR  Res.  Rev.,  3/66) 
0  Thirtieth anniversary of  Jet Propulsion  Laboratory  of  Cal Tech.  I n  March 
19% Dr. Theodore von Khrmln approved initiation of  rocket propulsion 
studies by Frank  J.  Malina with  the  assistance  of  John W.  Parsons and 
Edward  S.  Forman  a t  the   Guggenheim Aeronautical  Laboratory.  (NASA 
Historian) 
Seven  French-built  Centaure  rockets  carrying  experiments  for  study  of 
polar  auroras  were  successfully  launched  in   February  and  March  by 
ESRO  from  base  a t  Andoeya, Norway.  (M&R ,  4/11/66,  7) 

April  1966 

April  1:  Vice  President  Hubert  Humphrey,  speaking  to  a  group  of  Li$e 
magazine  executives  visiting  KSC,  remarked:  “. . . the   space  program 
has  added  greater meaning  to  our  lives.  I have  talked  to  a  great many 
Americans recently about the  benefits of  the space program,  and  I have 
found  tha t  my  fellow Americans  get a  thrill and a  sense of  accomplish- 
ment  and  satisfaction out  of  this  great  undertaking  of  ou r   nation. 
“Our  young people have  a new frontier to explore. And  this comes a t  
a  time  when  we  thought  all  the   frontiers  were  gone.  They  have  new 
and  exciting places to go  ou t  in   the  universe,  new  ideas to bring  home 
and  enrich  their  lives, new  challenges  to hone  their  character. 
“Yesterday  our horizon  was  limited by  the  globe of  earth, and  today, 
as  a  result  of  this  new  frontier,  our  horizons  are  as  limitless  as  the  
universe itself.”  (Text) 
e  NASA  announced transfer of project management of  the  RL-10-first  hydro- 
gen-fueled  rocket  engine-from  MSFC  to  LRC  and  of  Headquarters pro- 
gram  authority  from  NASA  OMSF  to  OSSA.  RL-10,  which  had  powered 
Sa turn  1’s  2nd  stage  (S-IV) in  six successful  flights prior  to  conclusion 
of  MSFC’S  Sa turn  I program  July 30,  1965, also powered Centaur  upper 
stage  launch  vehicle,  managed  by  LRC .   (NASA  Release  66-74) 
Soviet  Defense  Minister  Rodion  Y.  Malinovsky  told  Communist  Par ty  
Congress meeting  in  Moscow  tha t   Soviet  “anti-aircraft  defense  means 
assure the  reliable destruction  of  any  aircraft  and  many  enemy  rockets 
. . . calmly  and  confidently  we  are  guarding  the   peaceful  toil  of  ou r  
people especially now  tha t  the  construction of  our blue belt defense has 
been  completed.  . . .” U S .   military  experts  believed  the   “blue  belt” 
defense  referred  to  by  Malinovsky  was  the   Soviet  nuclear  submarine 
force.  (Gwertzman, Wash.  Eve. Star, 4/7/66,  A3) 
*  Astronomers in   six European  countries-Denmark,  Sweden, France,  the  
Netherlands,  Belgium,  and  West  Germany-had 
agreed  to  share  the  
expense  of  constructing  $7-million observatory  on Lasilla, a mountain 
peak  several  hundred  miles  north  of  Santiago,  Chile.  (Reuters,  NYT, 
4/2/66,  27; Reuters,  Wash. Post, 4/2/66,  A16) 
0  Launch  of  U.S.S.R,’s  LUNA  x  spacecraft  indicated  Soviet goals  and  tech- 
niques  for  reaching moon  were  similar  to  those  of  U S . ,   according  to  
William  Hines  in   Washington  Evening  Star,  and  raised  question 
whether  U.S.S.R.  would  attempt  manned  lunar  landing  in   November 
1967 to mark 50th anniversary of Bolshevik revolution. Lack of  evidence 
tha t   Russians  had  developed  a  large  booster  comparable  to  U S ’ S  
Sa turn  V suggested  they  would  use  earth  orbit  rendezvous  method  to  
reach  moon,  Hines  said.  (Wash.  Eve. Star,  4/1/66,  A l )  
*  ComSatCorp’s  third  annual  report  revealed  that  EARLY  BIRD  I,  operating 
since June  28,  1965, as  the   first  commercial communications  satellite, 

125 

126 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

had earned $2,138,577 as of Dec.  31,1965. Report omitted any corporzte 
earnings statement, explaining that “with Cornsat’s singular structure- 
and its newness-we 
are not yet  able to present  the  corporate  financial 
statements  in a conventional mode.”  With FCC  approval, “the  Corpora- 
tion  has  adopted  the  accounting  practice  of  deferring  all  revenues  and 
expenditures  un t i l   the  commencement  of  full  operations.”  Financial 
statement  showed, however,  tha t   $9,677,000 had  been  spent  for  “ the  
construction  of  the   Early  Bird  satellites,  the   cost  of  the  launch  in  
April  [6,]  1965 and  expenditures  for  satellite  system  equipment.”  By 
the   end  of  1965, 75  of  EARLY  BIRD  1’s  240  two-way voice  channels  had 
been leased-64  by AT&T,  nine by  Candian Overseas Telecommunication 
Corp.,  and one each by ITT  and RCA.  Corporation also earned $8,083,745 
in  income  from  temporary  investments,  compared  with  $4,312,714 in 
1964. Report  noted  tha t  membership of  International  Telecommunica- 
tions Satellite Consortium  (Intelsat) had grown from 20 to 48  countries 
during  1965, and  cited  plans  to  launch  two  improved  satellites  in   late 
summer  of  1966  “to  provide  communications  support”  for  NASA’s 
Apollo  program.  (Text) 
During  week  o f   April  1 :   Pulsed  laser  beam  communications  system  which 
could  penetrate  cloud  of  plasma  or  charged  gases  surrounding  space- 
craft  during reentry  and  avoid communications  blackout  was  patented 
by  General  Electric  Co.  engineers  Dr.  Kiyo  Timiyasu  and  James  R. 
Whitten.  Principal use  of  invention  would be  in line-of-sight communi- 
cations between earth stations and spacecraft, bu t  two  land stations not 
in  line  of  sight  also  could  exchange  information  by  using  cloud  re- 
flections.  (Jones,  NYT ,  4/2/66,  32) 
April  2:  124,000-mi.-long cluster  of  sunspots  which  could  affect  weather 
and  radio  and  television  signals  was  detected  by  West  Germany’s 
Bochum Observatory.  (AP,  Wush. Post,  4/3/66,  B7) 
Gatv  test  program-Project 
“Sure-Fire”-was 
completed  a t   Arnold 
Engineering  Development  Center;  priority  testing  began  when  Gatv 
failure  Oct.  25,  1965, caused  canceling of  Gemini VI  mission.  (AEDC )  
April  3:  Sir  Bernard  Lovell, director  of  Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, 
told  the  press  tha t   LUNA  x  spacecraft  had  gone  into  orbit  around  the 
moon,  but  tha t  “all may not be  well”  with  it.  He  suggested tha t  LUNA  x 
was  tumbling uncontrollably  in  orbit around moon a t  distance of  300 o r  
400  mi.;  this  theory  evolved  after  Jodrell  Bank  detected  a  series  of 
maneuvers beginning a t  12:50 p.m.  EST-15  min.  after Jodrell Bank had 
first picked  up  LUNA  x’s  signals. Frequency  of  the  signals had  begun  to  
decrease,  indicating  the  probe  was  under  the moon’s  gravitational  pull 
a t  a  distance  of  about  2,000  mi.;  signals  then  faded  out  entirely,  sug- 
gesting  that  the   retrorockets  had  been  fired and  the  probe  had  landed. 
A t  tha t  point Lovell said: “We  think Luna 10 landed a t  1:44 P.M.  [EST].” 
Minutes later, however, signals again picked up and the situation became 
extremely  obscure.”  He  concluded:  “At  last  hearing  our signals could 
c c  
be interpreted  as coming from a tumbling spacecraft. We find i t  difficult 
to  believe tha t   i t  is  meant  to  be  tumbling.” 
U.S.S.R.  had  announced LUNA  x’s  lunar-orbit mission after March 31 
launch.  Sir  Bernard‘s  theory  came  a  day  before  Soviet  announcement 
of  mission  results  [see  April  41.  (NYT ,  4/4/66,  9 ;   AP,  Balt.  Sun, 
4/4/66;  Wush. Post,  4/4/66,  A l )  
April  4: U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  x  unmanned  spacecraft  had  achieved  lunar  orbit 
(1,000-km.  [621-mi.] apolune, 350-km.  [217-mi.] perilune,  3-hr. period) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

127 

a t  1:44 p.m.  EST April 3 to become world’s  first artificial moon satellite, 
U.S.S.R.  announced a t  23rd Communist Party Congress meeting  in  the  
Kremlin.  Accomplishment  was  dramatized  by  direct  broadcast  from 
LUNA  x  of  the  Communist anthem,  “Internationale.” 
Tass released details  of  LUNA  X’S  structure  and flight.  3,530-lb. space- 
craft  consisted  of  two  main  parts:  moon  satellite  section  and  engine 
facilities  section.  540-lb.  satellite  was  a n   airtight  package  containing 
radio  equipment,  telemetry  system,  equipment  for  studying  the  moon 
and  near-lunar  space,  heat-regulation  and  power  supply  systems,  and 
small jet  engines  to  stabilize the  flight. 
Approximately 8,000 km.  (4,969 mi.)  from  the  lunar  surface,  space- 
craft was  oriented so that jet of the engine was directed against direction 
of  its  movement.  At  approximately  l:44  p.m.  EST  retrorockets  fired 
automatically,  slowing  spacecraft  to  1.3 km.  (.8 mi.)  per  second  and 
putting i t  in lunar orbit. Twenty minutes after switching off retrorockets, 
earth  command was  sen t  to  separate  instrumented  lunar  satellite  from 
engine  facilities  section,  and  first  radio  communications  session  was 
held.  Equipment  was  functioning  normally  and  radio  communications 
were  stable.  There  was  no  suggestion  that  photos  of  the  lunar  surface 
were  being  transmitted  to  earth,  or  tha t   LUNA  x  was  “tumbling”  [see 
April 31.  (Tass, 4/4/66;  AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 4/4/66,  A6; AP,  Wash. 
Pos t ,  4/5/66,  A12) 
Avril  4:  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  voted  to  report 
$4,986,864,150 NASA  authorization  bill-$25,135,580 
less  than  $5,012, 
000,000 NASA  had  requested  for  FY  1967.  (NASA  LAR  V/57-58) 
Nike-Apache launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station  carried  59-lb.  instru- 
mented  payload  to  108-mi.  (174-km.)  altitude  and  impacted  67  mi. 
downrange in  the  Atlantic.  Conducted for  ESSA  and Graduate Research 
Center  of  the  Southwest,  Dallas,  the   experiment  sought  to   obtain 
ionospheric  electron  density  profile  measurements  using  a  plasma 
resonance probe and  to obtain data  concerning sporadic E phenomenon 
in  the valley region between the E- and F-layers of  the  ionosphere. Data 
were  telemetered  to ground  stations  during flight. Experiment was  first 
of  three  to  compare  techniques  for  measuring  characteristics  of  upper 
atmosphere  and  ionosphere.  (Wallops  Release  66-16;  NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  NASA  announced  a  change in  sequence of  two Apollo/Saturn  IB  launches 
scheduled  for  late  1966:  AS-202  mission  was  rescheduled  to  follow 
AS-203 mission  to  “provide  additional  time  for  checkout  of  the  Apollo 
spacecraft  to be  flown  in  . . . AS-202.” AS-203 would  test  Saturn V 3rd 
stage  (S-IVB) and  verify  that  orbital  operations  features  of  the  liquid 
hydrogen  propulsion  system were  satisfactory.  (NASA  Release 66-78) 
e  NASA  announced  selection  of  19 pilots,  to  join  31-member NASA  astronaut 
team  in  early  May:  Vance  D.  Brand,  civilian;  Lt.  John  S.  Bull  (USN); 
Maj.  Gerald P.  Carr  (USMC ) ;   Capt.  Charles M.  Duke,  Jr.  (USAF);  Capt. 
Joe  H.  Engle  (USAF);  LCdr.  Ronald  E.  Evans  (USN);  Maj.  Edward  G. 
Givens,  Jr.  (USAF);  Fred  W.  Haise,  Jr.,  civilian;  Maj.  James  B.  Irwin 
(USAF);  Dr.  Don  L.  Lind,  civilian;  Capt.  Jack  R.  Lousma  (USMC);  Lt. 
Thomas  K .   Mattingly  (USN);  Lt.  Bruce  McCandless  I1  (USN);  LCdr. 
Edgar D.  Mitchell  (USN)  ; Maj.  William R.  Pogue  (USAF) ; Capt. S tua r t  A. 
Roosa  (USAF);  John  L.  Swigert, Jr.,  civilian; LCdr.  Paul J.  Weitz  (USN); 
and  Capt.  Alfred M.  Worden  (USAF).  During  recruitment,  which  began 
Sept.  10, 1965, NASA  received 351 applications of  which  159 met  basic 
requirements.  (NASA  Release 66-67) 

128 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
April  4: Defense Electronics,  Inc.,  received a $2,380,000  contract from USAF 
for  telemetry  equipment  for  Apollo  airborne  tracking  aircraft.  Firm 
would  supply  C-135  trackers  with  prediction  playback  monitors  and 
other  equipment  to  provide  communications  link  to  Apollo  spacecraft 
prior  to  insertion  into  lunar  trajectory.  (Wa sh .  Post,  4/5/66,  C7) 
0  FAA  Administrator  William  F.  McKee  announced  that  Dr.  Raymond  L. 
Bisplinghoff would  serve  as  a  consultant  on  FAA  research  and  develop- 
ment  efforts-particularly 
in   supersonic  transport  (Sst)  program- 
while  continuing  to  serve  as  Special Assistant  to  NASA  Administrator. 
(FAA  Release 66-30) 
Extent  of  the  impact  of  Bureau  of  the  Budget’s  new  directive  (A-76), 
stating tha t  “in  some instances  . . . i t  is  in  the national interest for  the 
government  to  provide  directly  for  products  and  services i t  uses  . . .” 
would  be  realized  this  month,  reported  George  C.  Wilson  in  Aviation 
Week.  BO B   official  George  C.  Mullins  told  Wilson  tha t   the   definitive 
standards in A-76 would facilitate a more consistent Federal contracting 
policy:  “The  high  sounding  but  unspecific language  in  60-2  [previous 
directive]  was  subject  to  different  interpretations  by  various  federal 
agencies.” Mullins added:  “We agree that  the private  enterprise system 
should be  preserved.  But  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a national  objective. 
By  acknowledging this  in  the  new  directive,  we  feel we  are  basing  our 
policy  on  a  much  stronger  foundation.  Preserving  the  free  enterprise 
system  is  one good reason”  for  contracting with private  industry,  “but 
i t  is no t   the  only reason.”  (Wilson, A v .   W k . ,  4/4/66,  26) 
e  UCLA  dedicated  new  center  for  space  sciences,  Schlichter  Hall,  made 
possible  by  $2-million NASA  grant.  Six-story  building,  named  for  Dr. 
Louis  Byrne Schlichter,  Prof.  Emeritus  of  Geophysics and  Director  of 
UCLA  Institute  of  Geophysics from 1947 to  1962, would  contain 30 large 
laboratories  and 50 research  and administrative  offices. 
Dr.  T.  L.  K.  Smull, Special Assistant  to  the  NASA  Administrator,  said 
in  a  dedication speech:  “NASA  thinks  tha t  this  is  a  singularly important 
type of  activity  as many  of  the problems  confronting NASA  in  the  space 
program  reach  across  disciplinary  lines  and  require  the   combined 
efforts  of  chemists,  physicists,  mathematicians,  engineers,  biologists, 
psychologists and even, on occasion, political scientists, social scientists 
and economists.’’ Other speakers were Dr. Thomas Gold, director of Cor- 
ne11 Univ. Center for Radiophysics and Space Research; Rep. Alphonzo 
Bell  (R-Calif.)  of  House  Committee on  Science and Astronautics; UCLA 
Chancellor  Franklin  D.  Murphy;  Dr.  Schlichter;  Prof.  Gordon  J.  F. 
MacDonald;  and  Nobel  Laureate  Willard  F.  Libby,  director  of  UCLA 
Institute  of  Geophysics and Planetary  Physics.  (UCLA Release,  4/3/66; 
Text) 
First  direct  measurement  of  minimum  amount  of  energy  required  to 
initiate  simple  chemical  reaction  was  announced  by  Cal  Tech,  where 
graduate  student John  Michael White  had  shown  that  one  third  of  an  
electron volt  of  energy was  necessary to  split a hydrogen molecule and 
link  a  deuterium atom with  one  of  the hydrogens. AEc-supported study 
had been  suggested to  White by  Dr.  Aron Kuppermann,  prof.  of  chemi- 
cal  physics,  who  said  measurement  would  make  i t   possible  to   learn 
“whether  bimolecular  chemical reactions  can  be  described by  the  laws 
of  classical  mechanics  o r   whether  i t   is  necessary  to  use  quantum 
mechanics.”  (Cal Tech Release, 4/4/66) 
USAF and  NASA  signed  agreement  to   establish  procedures  for  joint  space 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

129 

program  accident  investigation.  Ad  hoc  joint  boards,  consisting  of  a t  
least  three  voting members  appointed  by  USAF  Director  of  Aerospace 
Safety and three by NASA  Safety Director, would s tudy  particular  launch 
vehicle  accidents.  Chairman  would  be  from  agency  with  “primary 
responsibility  a t   time  of  accident,”  determined  by  circumstances  of 
each case.  (Text;  NASA  NMI  1052.74, 4/27/66) 
Apr i l   4-6:  The  importance  of  imagination  in   shaping  the   fu ture   was  em- 
phasized  by  AFSC  Commander  Gen.  Bernard  A.  Schriever  in   a  speech 
before Arnold  Air  Society’s  18th National  Conclave,  Dallas:  “Back  in  
the   1930s we  had  what  we  thought were  pretty  fantastic ideas  for  th e  
future.  We  thought  tha t   i t  might  be  possible  to  fly  a  plane  up  to  the  
sound barrier.  There were even people who  thought i t  might be possible 
least  for  shor t  periods.  A  few  people 
to   break  through  i t  somehow-at 
had  heard  about Dr.  Robert Goddard  and his  work  with  rockets.  They 
knew  tha t   he  had  already launched  a  rocket  several hundred  feet  in to  
the   air.  Science writers  were  speculating  tha t   we  might be  able  to  get 
something  ou t   in to   space  by  the  beginning of  the  next  century. 
“As  i t   turns   out,  even  the  most  fantastic  thinking 30 years  ago  has 
proved  to  be very  conservative. We  have  already flown planes like  the  
SR-71 a t  speeds greater  than mach  3 for extended periods.  The  experi- 
mental X-15 has flown a t  mach 6 and reached altitudes  of  over 50 miles. 
Our  long-range ballistic  missiles  have  ranges  of  from  5,000  to  9,000 
miles. And  our Mercury and Gemini astronauts have sped through space 
for  extended periods  a t  speeds better  than   17,000 miles per hour.  With 
the   Apollo  program we  are  no t   too  many  years  away  from  landing  a 
man on  the  moon.”  (Text) 
Entertainer  Bob  Hope  presented  General  Schriever  the   inaugural 
award of  Arnold Air  Society’s Eugene M.  Zuckert Trophy “to  recognize 
and  stimulate  the   growth  of  professionalism in   the   United  States  Air 
Force.”  General Schriever was  cited  for his  “outstanding  dedication to 
the  task  of  insuring the  development of  vitally needed modern weaponry 
for national defense” and the  gathering of  “highly qualified technological 
management teams required to perform this task.”  (AFSC  Release  74.66) 
April  5:  LUNA  x  was  continuing in   circumlunar  orbit  with  1,017-km.  (632- 
mi.)  apolune, 350-km.  (217-mi.) perilune,  2-hr. 58-min. period, and 71” 
inclination,  Tass  reported.  Eighteen  radio  communications had  been 
held with  the   satellite  ‘%luring which  a  large  volume  of  scientific data 
had been received.” Scientific equipment onboard included:  (1) recorder 
of  meteoric particles for investigating meteor showers along earth-moon 
route,  for  seeking dust  cloud  around  the  moon,  and  for  registering th e  
micrometeorites  in   circumlunar  space;  (2)  gamma-spectrometer for  
studying  the  gamma-radiation of  the   lunar  surface;  (3)  magnetometer 
for  refining  the   value  for  th e   strength  of  the   moon’s  magnetic field; 
(4) equipment for studying solar plasma in  circumlunar space; (5) equip- 
men t   for  recording  the   infrared  radiation  of  the   lunar   surface;  and 
(6) instrumentation for studying the  radiation  conditions in  the  moon’s 
environs.  Variations  in   the  satellite’s orbital  parameters would  be  used 
to  investigate  the   moon’s  gravitational  field.  (Tass,  Pravda,  4/6/66, 
1, USS-T  Trans.) 
NASA  had  invited  33 firms  to  submit proposals  on  a  12-mo. study of  Mars 
and  Venus  flyby  missions  in   1975-1982 period  using  Saturn/ApoUo 
hardware with  minimum modifications.  Study would  emphasize  ear th  
escape  stages  based  on  modifications  of  the   upper  stages  of  Sa turn  V 

130 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

launch  vehicle  (S-I1 and  S-IVB), orbital  tanking  and  assembly  opera- 
tions,  launch  windows,  spacecraft,  and  probes  to  be  launched  from 
spacecraft  to planet’s  surface.  (MSFC  Release 66-73) 
April  5:  NASA  MSFC  awarded  cost-plus-incentive-fee contracts  totaling  more 
than  $61 million for “engineering, fabrication, and institutional support 
services  in   . . . Sa turn   launch  vehicle  program”  to  nine  firms:  Sperry 
Rand Corp.; Vitro Corp.; Brown Engineering Co.;  Spaco, Inc.;  Northrop 
Corp.;  Hayes  International  Corp. ; Management  Services,  Inc. ; Rust 
Engineering  Co.;  and  RCA  Service  Co.  Awards  were  first  one-year 
renewals under  options  of  original  contracts  awarded  in   1965.  (MSFC 
Release  66-74) 
0  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  Dr.  Harold  Brown  testified  before  the   House 
Armed Services Committee tha t  Ufo  reports investigated by  USAF  under 
Project Blue Book  indicated  no  threa t  to  ou r   national  security: “Based 
upon  10,147  reported  sightings  from  1947  through  1965  . . . the  Air 
Force has  succeeded  in   identifying  9,501 of  these  objects. Virtually  all 
of  these sightings were derived from subjective human observations and 
interpolations.  The  most  common of  these were  astronomical sightings. 
. . . Other  major  sources  of  reported  sightings  include  . . . satellites, 
mirages, and spurious radar indications. The  remaining 646 . . . are those 
in  which  the   information available does  no t   provide an   adequate basis 
for analysis, o r  for which  the  information suggests a hypothesis but  the  
object  or  phenomenon  explaining  i t   cannot  be  proved  to  have  been 
there  o r   taken place  a t  tha t   time.”  Dr.  Brown  assured committee tha t  
USAF  would  contract  a  group  of  scientific  experts  to  conduct  an   “in 
depth  study”  of  selected  Ufo  sightings.  (Text;  AP,  Wash. Post, 
4/22/66,  A4) 
Success of U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA IX and LUNA x missions supported two important 
conclusions,  suggested the  New  Yorlc Times in  a n  editorial:  “The Soviet 
Union  is  now  well  ahead  of  the  United  States in   scientific exploration 
of  the  moon; MOSCOW’S scientists  are  straining to  beat  this  country  in 
achieving man’s  first round-trip to  the  moon.  . . . 
“But  no matter  which  nation  will  be  first to  conquer  the  moon,  i t  is 
important  to  clarify  the   legal  issues  arising  from  this  development. 
There should  be general international agreement that  the  moon  is  the  
property of  all mankind and not of  any one nation  . . . [and] is open  for 
research by  scientists  of  all  nations.  . . .” ( N Y T ,  4/5/66,  36M) 
April  6: U.S,S.R.  launched COSMOS  CXIV with “scientific equipment designed 
for  continuing the   outer  space research.”  Orbital  parameters : apogee, 
374  km.  (232  mi.);  perigee,  210  km.  (130  mi.);  period,  90.1  min.; 
inclination, 73”. Equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 4/7/66, 
10, USS-T Trans.) 
0  MSFC  had purchased 22 additional Sa turn  IB H-1 rocket engines from North 
American  Aviation,  Inc.,  under  $7,634,742 modification  to  previous 
contract.  I n   addition  to  the   205,000-lb.-thrust  engines,  which  would 
complete  engine  requirements  for  Sa turn   IB/Apollo  program,  NAA 
would  provide  three  years  of  support services.  (MSFC  Release  66-75) 
Astronauts had made more  than  1,000 “flights”  in  the  Rendezvous Dock- 
ing Simulator and other facilities a t  L ~ R C  to  help develop techniques for 
the   operation  of  vehicles  in   space.  Developed  by  L ~ R C  scientists  to 
explore,  under  controlled  laboratory  conditions,  man’s  qbility  to  com- 
plete  a  rendezvous in   ear th   or  lunar  orbit  during  final  200  ft.  of  the  
space-docking maneuver,  the   simulator  had  been  used  extensively by 

131 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
GEMINI  VIII  Astronauts  Neil A.  Armstrong and David R.  Scott, who per- 
formed  world’s  first  space docking March  16.  ( L ~ R C  Release) 
April  6:  FAA’s seventh annual report  to  the  President and Congress described 
“significant cost reductions achieved while meeting increasing demands 
for aeronautical services.” Activities for FY 1965 included:  (1) advance- 
ment  of  supersonic  transport  (Sst)  program  toward  initial  prototype 
construction by  end of 1966; (2) issuance of new rules requiring greater 
safety  margins  during  bad  weather,  higher  operational  standards  for 
small aircraft,  and new  standards for passenger evacuation in  emergen- 
cies;  (3)  beginning  of  field  tests  of  a  computerized  air-traffic-control 
system;  (4) commission of  first Distance Measuring Equipment-Instru- 
ment Landing  System  (Dme-11s)  combination  to  facilitate bad  weather 
approaches;  (5)  establishment  of  General Aviation  Jet  Training Stand- 
ards Board and  issuance  of  regulation  requiring biennial  requalification 
of  all  flight  instructors  to  assure  pilot  efficiency;  and  (6)  $20-million 
savings from cost-reduction program and other  substantial savings from 
increased  employee  productivity  and  joint  use  of  equipment  and  wire 
communications  services with  DOD.  (FAA  Release  66-31) 
*  DOD   announced  tha t   USA,  USN,  and  USAF  would  test  British-built  P.1127 
aircraft-redesignated  XVdA  V/Stol  by  US.-to 
determine  aircraft’s 
ability  to  meet  requirements  of  each  individual  service.  Evaluations, 
which  would  be  completed  by  July  31,  would  be  performed  a t   Fo r t  
Campbell, Eglin AFB,  Patuxent Naval Air  Station, and aboard an  aircraft 
carrier.  (DOD   Release 270-66) 
Dr.  Edmund  P.  Learned,  Harvard  Univ.  professor  of  business  policy, 
became  adviser  to  FAA  Administrator  William F. McKee  on  “economic 
and  financial  aspects  of  the   supersonic  transport  (SST)  development 
program.”  (FAA;  FAA  Release 66-38) 
*  ComSatCorp  suggested  separate  meetings  during  week  of  April  18 with 
AT&T  and  Western  Union  to   explore  use  of  multipurpose  domestic 
communications  satellites  and  discuss  ownership  of  ground  stations. 
Dr.  Joseph V.  Charyk, ComSatCorp president,  stated:  “We  believe  tha t  
there are no  inhibitions on Comsat’s ability to  provide domestic satellite 
service, and . . . we  view  earth stations as an  integral and critical part of 
a  satellite  communication  system which must  be  planned  and  operated 
in  concern  with  the  space  segment.  Accordingly,  we  feel  tha t   this 
responsibility  must  be  reflected  in  ownership.”  (ComSatCorp Release) 
AFSC  achieved more than $1 million in  savings or cost avoidance during the  
first  year  of  its  Internal  Zero  Defects Program,  AFSC  Commander Gen. 
Bernard  A.  Schriever said  in  an  Andrews AFB  ceremony where h e  pre- 
sented  AFSC  Zero  Defects  Achievement  Award  to  the   Air  Proving 
Ground Center, Eglin AFB.  (AFSC  Release 82.60) 
Senegalese President  Leopold Sedar  Senghor,  speaking a t  a  press  confer- 
ence  in   Dakar,  criticized  the   wealthy  nations  for  spending  money  o n  
space programs  and abandoning the  world’s poor.  He  said  tha t  was  the 
reason  h e  had  never  cabled  congratulations  to  heads  of  state  for  their 
countries’  space exploits.  (Reuters,  Chic. Trib., 4/7/66) 
*  London bookmaker William Hill,  who had  offered  1,000-to-1 odds  against 
a  manned  lunar  landing  by  the   end  of  1968,  cu t   the   odds  to  10 to  1 
after  LUNA  x  entered  a  lunar  orbit.  (WI,  Wush. Da i ly   News,  4/6/66) 
April  7:  NASA  Atlas-Centaur  AC-8  launch  vehicle  was  launched  from  ETR 
with  dummy  Surveyor  payload.  Centaur  stage’s  failure  to  achieve 

132 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

successful  double  ignition  in   space  caused  1,730-lb. dummy  Surveyor 
payload  to  remain  in   earth  orbit  with  the  Centaur  stage  rather  than  
enter  simulated  lunar  trajectory  as  programed.  Orbital  parameters: 
apogee, 208 mi.  (335 km.); perigee,  113 mi.  (182 km.); period, 90  min.; 
inclination,  31”. Eighty  minutes  after  launch  NASA  officials  a t   KSC  an- 
nounced  tha t   only  one  of  booster’s  two  hydrogen-fueled RL-10 rocket 
engines had fired the second time. Both engines were to have ignited for 
approximate  107-sec. bu rn   and  inserted  payload  into  lunar  trajectory. 
Later analysis of  data indicated the failure was because of  a malfunction 
in  Centaur’s  attitude  control  system  [see  May  31.  Purpose  of  AC-8 
mission was to demonstrate Centaur’s capability to restart its high-energy 
engines  in  the   space  environment  following  coast  period  in  earth 
orbit. Success of  this mission was vital to NASA’S  first operational mission 
which would attempt to land Surveyor spacecraft on the  moon. Centaur 
program was  directed by NASA  OSSA  and managed by  LRC.  (NASA  Releases 
66-58, 66-92; NASA  Proj.  Off.;  Wash. Post,  4/8/66,  A9; AP,  Balt.  Sun ,  
4/8/66) 
April  7 :  USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from 
WTR.  ( U S .  Aeron.  & Space Ac t . ,   1966,  149) 
New  USA  OH-6A helicopter,  developed by  Hughes Aircraft  Co.,  completed 
a  2,230-mi. flight-longest  nonstop  helicopter  flight  in  history-from 
Culver  City,  Calif.,  to   Ormand  Beach,  Fla.,  in   15  hrs.  1 3  min.  Flight 
broke record  set by  USN Sikorsky S A 3 A  helicopter, which flew 2,105 mi. 
nonstop on March 5,  1965.  (NYT ,  4/11/66,  70; Hughes Aircraft Corp.) 
NASA  Apollo  Service Module  (Sm) propulsion  engine  test  phase was  com- 
pleted  a t  Arnold  Engineering  Development Center.  (AEDC )  
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  was  elected  to  National  Geographic 
Society’s board  of  trustees.  ( N Y T ,  4/8/66,  3) 
April  8:  OAO  I  Orbiting  Astronomical  Observatory  was  launched  by  NASA 
from  ETR  with Atlas-Agena D  booster  into  parking  orbit  and  then  into 
planned  circular  orbit.  Orbital  parameters:  505.4-mi.  (813.3-km.) 
apogee;  493.2-mi.  (793.7-km.)  perigee;  101-min.  period;  and  35”  in- 
clination.  Satellite’s  solar  panels  and  instrumented  booms  would  be 
deployed April  10. 
First  of  four  spacecraft  scheduled  for  NASA’s Oao  program,  OAO   I- 
largest, heaviest,  and most electronically complex unmanned  spacecraft 
ever developed by  US-weighed 
3,900  lbs.,  carried  10 telescopes, and 
contained  44,000  separate  parts  and  30  mi.  of  electrical  wiring.  I t  
carried  four  scientific  experiments  t o   provide  astronomers  with  their 
first sustained  look a t  the  universe  from above the  earth’s  atmosphere, 
including Univ.  of  Wisconsin  broad-band ultraviolet  telescope package 
and  detection  devices  to  study  the  ultraviolet,  x-ray,  and  gamma-ray 
regions of  the  electromagnetic spectrum. Through  its  complex ground- 
command  spacecraft  attitude  control  system,  OAO  I  would  be  aimed  a t  
individual  objects  in  space with  precision  never  before  attained  by  an  
orbiting  satellite.  Information  from experiments would  be  radioed  back 
to  earth  in  the  form  of  digital data  for  analysis by  experimenters.  Oao 
program  was  managed  by  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center.  (NASA 
Release 66-60; N Y T ,  4/9/66,  7; N Y T ,  4/10/66,  10E) 
m  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station 
reached 99-mi. (159-km.) altitude and impacted 6 4  mi. downrange in the  
Atlantic.  Objectives of  flight were  to  compare  five  ionospheric  plasma 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

133 

probes using stable ionosphere as a laboratory  for evaluating the  probes 
and  to   check relevant  theories  of  probe  operation.  (NASA  Rpt.  sm) 
April  8:  FAA established a Noise  Abatement Staff  to  direct the   agency’s  par- 
ticipation  in  the  Government campaign to bring relief  to areas disturbed 
by  aircraft  noise.  Objectives  of  staff,  to  be  directed  by  Raymond  A. 
Shepanek  (Capt.,  USNR) , former  FAA  aeronautical  inspector,  included 
development of  aircraft  noise measurement  standards, formulation  of 
aircraft noise  standards, development of  a ir   traffic  procedures and  air- 
craft  operating procedures to minimize noise,  and initiation of  research 
programs  to  provide for  alleviation  of  the  various  features  of  aircraft 
noise.  (FAA  Release 66-33) 
*  Prospect  of  using  a  computer  to  simuIate vast  changes in   weather  and 
climate was  discussed  by  Walter  Orr  Roberts, director  of  the  National 
Center  for  Atmospheric Research,  Boulder,  Colo.,  in   an   editorial  in  
Science. Roberts suggested tha t  with data from World Weather Watch- 
an   experiment  proposed  by  the  National Academy  of  Sciences for  ob- 
serving  the   world’s  weather  continuously  in   three   dimensions--“an 
adequate  computer,  and  a  global  mathematical model,  a  vast  array  of 
experiments on weather and climate-modification can be  ‘performed’ by 
numerical  computation  rather  than   in   nature.  The  beneficial  con- 
sequences can  be  evaluated  and  compared  to  the   expected  costs.  The 
full effect  and  the  potential  hazards can  be  determined without  risk  to 
life and property.  . . .” World Weather Watch  system was  being studied 
by  ESSA  and  World  Meteorological  Organization.  (Roberts,  Science, 
4/8/66,  159) 
*  U.S.  Government’s  increased  interest  in   transatlantic  cooperation  on 
scientific  research  was  attracting  attention  in   Europe,  Victor  K. 
McElheny  reported  in   Science.  “The  most  dramatic of  the   suggestions 
made  recently  is  that  of  sending an   ‘artificial comet’  spacecraft  toward 
Jupiter  or close to  the  sun ,  or  to use such a spacecraft to investigate the  
belt  of  asteroids  between  Jupiter  and  Mars.  . . .” McElheny  said  NASA 
Administrator James E.  Webb was  planning to  visit West Germany and 
other European nations to discuss details of  the  project and to emphasize 
“ tha t  the  U.S.  is no t  thinking necessarily in  terms of  bilateral collabora- 
tion  with  individual  countries,  of  the   so r t  exemplified by  curren t  U.S. 
launching  of  satellites  for  Britain,  Italy,  and  France. 
“Where  i t  can,  the  U.S.  prefers  to work with multinational European 
organizations,  such  as  th e   European  Atomic  Energy  Community 
(Euratom) or  the  European Space Research Organization (ESRO)  . . .” 
(McElheny, Science, 4/8/66,  190-191) 
Ap r i l   9:  LUNA  x  had  detected  electrons  with  energies  higher  than  cosmic 
radiation,  Tass reported:  “Data have been obtained which may be  in ter-  
preted  as  evidence of  the  existence  in   the  near-lunar space of  ffuxes of 
electrons  with  energies  of  tens  of  thousands  of  electron  volts.  These 
ff uxes are 70 to 100 times more intense than  the  cosmic ray background. 
Possibly,  this  phenomenon  is  due  t o   the   earth’s  magnetic ‘tail.’  Later 
measurements will  permit  more  positive  conclusions on  the   radiation 
conditions  near  the   moon.”  I n   addition,  preliminary  data  analysis 
showed tha t  intensity  of the  moon’s qagne t ic  field was  “somewhat above 
the   level  of  magnetic  fields  in   free  interplanetary  space”  and  tha t  
meteorite  “particle  density”  near  the  moon  was  higher  than   in   “inter- 
planetary space.” 

134 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

UPI  reported  tha t   U S .   scientists, including Dr.  James  A.  Van  Allen, 
State Univ.  of  Iowa,  believed  radiation  observed  by  LUNA  x was  either 
the  earth’s  comet  tail or a  similar feature produced  by  the  moon  itself. 
Reported  level  of  radiation  would  be  no  threat  to  manned  operations 
near  the  moon,  they  said.  (Tass,  4/9/66;  UPI,  N Y T ,   4/10/66,  79;  AP, 
Wash.  Sun.  Star,  4/10/66,  A6) 
April  9:  Problems of  preventing space-probe contamination of  other planets 
were discussed by James L. Haggerty, Jr., in Journal of the Armed Forces. He 
noted  remarks  of  Boeing engineers C.  S. Bartholemew and D.  C.  Por ter  
at the  March 28-30 AIAA-AAS meeting in  Baltimore tha t  “sterilization and 
spacecraft reliability are  ‘competing characteristics.’ If you apply enough 
heat  to  kill  the  bacteria,  you  may  also damage  the   sensitive  electronic 
gear.  Alternatively,  you  can  use  chemicals  such  as  ethylene  oxide,  bu t  
i t  must  be  applied  wet  and  moisture  is  similarly  an   ‘enemy  agent’  to 
electronics  equipment.  . . . Boeing  engineers  feel  tha t   heat-sterilizable 
electronics  are   ‘within  reach,’  bu t   considerably  more  investigation  is 
required.”  (Haggerty, J/Armed  Forces, 4/9/66,  9) 
April  10: Main  battery  system  of  OAO  I  Orbiting  Astronomical  Observatory 
had  failed,  NASA  officials  a t  KSC  announced:  “Overheating  of  the   OAO. 
primary  battery,  a  problem  which  became  critical  late  yesterday,  has 
resulted  in   complications  leading  ;o  degradation  of  the  power  supply 
from all  three batteries  aboard  the  spacecraft,  and  telemetry signals no 
longer  are  being  received. 
“Efforts  to  overcome  the   problem  have  been  unsuccessful  and  the  
OAO  mission  appears  to  have been  lost.” 
Officials  added,  however,  that  before  satellite  had  failed  i t   had 
demonstrated a key maneuver of  the  OAO  program  by  successfully lock- 
ing  into  a  series  of  stars  for  precise  aiming.  OAO  I  had  been  launched 
from  ETR  April  8.  (AP,  N Y T ,   4/11/66,  71;  AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
4/11/66,  B10; AP,  Balt.  Sun, 4/11/66) 
*  The  19 astronauts selected by NASA April 4 would be  “too  late  to  take part 
in  the   first  lunar  landings  . . . [but  they]  should  get  into  some  of  the  
follow-on Apollo  flights and  take  some 60-day space  trips,”  Dr. Charles 
A .   Berry,  Chief  of  Medical  Programs,  MSC,  said in   a  press  interview  in  
Colorado  Springs.  (Gibney, Denver  Post,  4/10/66) 
0  First  full-scale  checkout  version  of  365-ft.  Sa turn   V  rocket  had  been 
assembled  a t  KSC  to  aid  installation of  electrical  and  plumbing  connec- 
tions  on  three  mobile  launching  towers.  (Marshall  Star,  4/6/66,  1) 
*  Aviatrix  Geraldine  Mock-who 
in  1964 became  first  woman  to  make  a 
solo  flight  around  world-set 
a  new  world  nonstop  distance record  for 
women in  a 4,550-mi., 31-hr. flight from Honolulu, Hawaii, to Columbus, 
Ohio,  in   single-engine Cessna  206.  Previous  distance  flight  record  of 
3,671 mi. had been se t  by three Russian women in  1938. ( N Y T ,  4/12/66, 
25;  Wash. Eve.  Star, 4/11/66,  A3) 
*  USNS  Kingsport,  first  ocean  link  i n  U.S.  research  in   satellite  communica- 
tions,  was  retired  from  NASA’s networks  and  returned  to  DOD.  I n   July 
1963  Kingsport  had  participated  in   world’s  first  demonstration  of 
communications  by  satellite i n  synchronous  orbit when  a message was 
sen t   in   45,000-mi.  loop  from  Kingsport  anchored  in   Lagos  harbor, 
Nigeria, to  SYNCOM  11  comsat  and back.  Several  days  later,  she  was  part 
of  first direct exchange  of  radio message via satellite, linking Lakehurst, 
N.J.,  terminal station with  land  circuits a t  Lagos.  On Aug.  4, Kingsport 
and Lakehurst  transmitted  and  received  via  SYNCOM  11  first  satellite ex- 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

135 

change of  news  copy  and photo  facsimile. Several days  later,  caught in  
a  squall  40 mi.  offshore,  she  became  first  terminal  station  to  establish 
satellite  communications  from  the   open  sea.  Two  months  later,  she  
participated  in  first  trans-ocean press  conference by  satellite:  stationed 
a t   Rota,  Spain,  she  connected  SYNCOM  11  communications  between 
United Nations  in   New  York  City  and  NASA  Hq.  in  Washington, D.C., 
with  the   International  Telecommunications  Union  Conference  in  
Geneva. Kingsport  first demonstrated the  practicality of communications 
by  satellite  during manned  space missions March  16, 1966, by relaying 
voice reports  from GEMINI  VIII  Astronauts Neil A.  Armstrong and David 
R.  Sco t t  via  SYNCOM  11  to  Hawaii  ground  station.  (NASA  Release  66-79) 
April  11:  NASA  Langley  Research  Center  would  negotiate  $450,000  study 
contract  with  Martin  Co.  for  11-mo.  study  of  “costs,  crew  size,  and 
complexity  of  a  flight  research  program  using  a  manned  lifting  body 
vehicle.”  In   conducting  the   study,  the   firm would  be  required  to  con- 
sider an  HL-10 lifting-body concept capable of  carrying one,  two,  fou r ,  
six,  or  eight  crew  members.  HL-10  was  considered  representative  of 
advanced  lifting  entry vehicles. 
NASA  had  specified  Titan  11,  Titan  111,  and  Sa turn   IB  as  potential 
launch  vehicles.  For  study purposes, Rogers  Dry Lake  a t  Edwards AFB 
would  be  a  probable  landing  site.  (NASA  Release  66-82; LaRC  Release) 
a  Clarence L.  Johnson,  Lockheed  Aircraft Corp. vice president  and designer 
of  numerous  aircraft,  was  named  recipient  of  the  Air  Force Academy’s 
1966 Thomas D.  White National Defense Award  for  “outstanding  con- 
tribution  to  the   national  defense  and  security  of  th e   United  States.” 
(UPI, Wush. Post, 4/12/66,  A18) 
light beam 250 billion times 
Development of  the  world’s brightest  laser-a 
brighter  than  the  sun-was 
announced  by  Dr,  Theodore  Maiman, 
president  of  Korad  Corp.,  a  subsidiary  of  Union  Carbide  Corp.  Laser 
had  an   intensity  of  250  trillion  watts  per  square  centimeter  when 
focused  to  a  point  1/1,000  of  an   inch  in   diameter.  (UPI, Wush.. Pos t ,  
4/12/66,  A5) 
April  12:  Cosmonautics Day  in   U.S.S.R.,  celebrating  fifth  anniversary  of 
first manned space f igh t  by Yuri Gagarin, was marked by condemnations 
of  military  orientation  of  U S .   space efforts and  predictions  of  Soviet 
space  successes.  Cosmonaut  Gagarin,  speaking  in   the   Kremlin,  said: 
ccAmerican scientists  and  cosmonauts  have  carried  ou t   a  number  of 
interesting  experiments.  This  is  to  their  credit.  I t   is  to  be  deeply 
regretted,  however,  tha t   American  cosmonautics is  increasingly  falling 
under  the   influence of  the  Pentagon, which  regards  outer  space as  th e  
theater of  fu tu re  military  operations.”  Gagarin pledged  “all  his  energies 
and  knowledge”  to  help  in   the  lunar mission and  said man must make 
himself  a t  home on the  moon  “to  establish stations which will  serve as 
points  of  departure for  longer  space voyages  and  also  as  astronomical 
observatories  and  scientific  laboratories.” 
Cosmonaut Gherman Titov,  speaking in  a  taped interview on Moscow 
television,  predicted  tha t   “builders  and  assemblers w i l l   one  day  exit 
into  space  and  pu t   together  various  parts  of  space  stations,  assemble 
spaceships and  stations  on  the   moon,  and  build  various  structures.” 
In   a  Pravdu  article  Marshal  Konstantin  Vershinin,  head  of  Soviet 
Air  Force,  predicted  a  new  manned  space  mission  tha t   could  take 
several  cosmonauts  through  the   Van  M e n  radiation  belts.  He  noted 

136 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
tha t  biomedical data from  the   COSMOS  cx flight would  “doubtlessly . . . 
be  used  in  preparing new  manned  space flights.” 
I n  an   interview  published  in   Prague,  Cosmonaut  Konstantin  Feok- 
tistov  predicted  tha t   man would  land on Mars and Venus between 1970 
and  1980.  (Pravda ,  4/12/66,  2 ;   Wash .  Post,  4/11/66,  A8;  AP,  N Y T ,  
4/11/66,37;  AP,  Wash.  Eve. Star,  4/11/66,  A8;  UPI,  N Y T ,  4 /14 /66 ,7 ;  
Wash .  Post,  4/13/66,  A14;  Loory,  N . Y .  Her.  Trib., 4/13/66) 
April  12: USAF  XB-70 No.  2  flew  20  min.  a t  mach  3-longest 
to  date-and 
reached  70,000-ft.  maximum  altitude  in   1-hr.  49-min.  flight  from 
Edwards  AFB.  Pilots  were  North  American  Aviation,  Inc.’s  chief  test 
pilot  Alvin  S. White  and  Col.  Joseph  Cotton  (USAF).  (Flight  log; AFFTC 
E O )  
0  U.K.’S  Associated  Electrical  Industries,  Ltd.,  General  Electric  Co.,  Ltd., 
and  Plessey Co.,  Ltd.,  had joined  forces  to  sell ground  terminals  a t   $4  
million  each  to   countries  tha t   wanted  to  pick  up  and  relay  telephone, 
telegraph,  and  television  signals  from  communications  satellites, 
reported  Clyde  H.  Farnsworth  in   the   New  York  Times.  The  British 
companies  believed  there  would  be  market  for  about  30   terminals  in  
the   next  two  to  three  years  and  about  70  to  80  in   the   next  ten   years, 
and  said  tha t   a t   least  seven  nations  were  already  interested  in   pur- 
chasing terminals.  (Farnsworth, NYT ,   4/1/66,  57) 
*  National  Broadcasting Co.  (NBC)  and  ComSatCorp.  presented  progress 
reports  on  their  separate  feasibility  studies  on   domestic  communica- 
tions satellite system a t  ComSatCorp-sponsored meeting i n  Washington, 
D.C.  Proposed systems, which could  provide 24-hr.  full-color television 
service  and  interconnected  facilities  for  radio  networks,  would  each 
cost  about $100 million and would  consist  of  four   to  six  three-channel 
synchronous  satellites,  back-up  satellites  and  boosters,  ground-to- 
satellite  stations,  control  stations,  and  ground  receiver  terminals. 
NBC’S  system would  serve only  television  and  radio  networks; ComSat- 
Corp’s  “common  carrier”  system  could  be  expanded  to  accommodate 
all  types  of  communications. Meeting,  attended  by  television  network, 
communications,  industrial,  manufacturing,  and  government  officials, 
was  first  in  a  series  to  be  held before final plans were  submitted  to  FCC 
for  approval.  (NBC  Release;  ComSatCorp;  Wash .   Post,  4/13/66,  D6; 
Wash.  Eve.  Star,  4/13/66,  D12) 
Ability  to   induce genetically a hibernation s ta te  in  man  tha t  would  lessen 
the  body’s  needs by  cooling could be  beneficial for  long space  voyages, 
suggested Dr.  R.  R.  Chaffee, Univ.  of  Missouri Space Science Research 
Center,  i n   a  speech  before  Federation  of  American  Societies  for 
Experimental  Biology  meeting  in   Atlantic  City.  Dr.  Chaffee  told  of 
genetic  experiments  i n   which  th e   ability  to  hibernate  gradually  was 
increased over several generations in  some families  of  Syrian hamsters 
and  reduced  i n   others,  indicating  tha t   only  a  few  hereditary  genes 
might  be  involved  in   th e   hibernation  process.  (Carey,  Wash .   Post, 
4/13/66,  A3) 
April  13:  Gamma-ray  spectrum  of  the   lunar   surface  obtained  by  LUNA  x 
indicated  tha t   the   moon’s  crust  was  similar  to   th e   earth’s,  Tass 
announced.  The  satellite  had  detected  lunar   gamma  rays  from  two 
sources:  one  was  “an  increased  intensity  of  gamma  radiation  caused 
chiefly  by  interaction  of  cosmic  rays  with  the   surface  layer  of  lunar  
material”;  the   other  was  “natural  radioactivity  from  th e   lunar   rocks 
associated with  uranium,  thorium,  and  potassium. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

137 

“Compared  with  th e   analogous  radioactivity  of  ear th   rocks,  th e  
observed  spectrum  comes  close  to   th e   radioactivity  of  basic  rocks- 
basalts.”  (Sullivan, NYT ,   4/14/66,  1, 21) 
April  13:  NASA  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill 
Research  Range  carried  GSFC  payload  to  184-mi.  (296-km.)  altitude 
for  simultaneous  measurements  of  magnetic  and  electric  fields,  low- 
energy electrons,  and low-energy protons in  a visible aurora.  Secondary 
objectives  were  rocket  aspect  measurement  and  evaluation  of  xenon 
flashing light  for  trajectory  determination.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  GEMINI  VIII  Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  and  his  family  were  honored 
with  a gala  parade on  their  arrival in  Armstrong’s  hometown of  Wapa- 
koneta,  Ohio.  Ohio’s  Governor James  A.  Rhodes announced  plans  for  
the   construction  of  a  $200,000 airport  near  Wapakoneta  to  be  named 
for  Armstrong. Sen.  Frank  J.  Lausche  (D-Ohio) and  Rep.  William  M. 
McCulloch  (R-Ohio)  announced  a  congressional resolution  of  tr ibu te  
to  Armstrong  and  his  fellow  GEMINI  vm  Astronaut  David  R.  Scott. 
(AP, Balt. Sun, 4/14/66;  Wush. Post, 4/14/66,  D16) 
Pan   American  World  Airways,  Inc.  (Pan  Am),  would  purchase  25 new 
Boeing  747  jet  transports-including 
twenty-three  490-seat  passenger 
models  and  two  all-cargo  models  which  would  carry  214,000  lbs. 
freight-for 
over  $525  million,  announced  Pan   Am’s  chairman  and 
chief  executive,  Juan   T.  Trippe.  Deliveries  of  order,  reported  to  be 
largest  and  most  expensive in   airline history, would  be  made  between 
September  1969  and  May  1970.  The   680,000-lb.  aircraft  would  be 
powered  by   new  P ra t t   &  Whitney  JT9D-1  fan-jet  engine  capable  of 
delivering 41,000-lbs. thrus t  and would have 45,000-ft.  cruise altitude- 
nearly  one mile  higher  than  curren t   transports-and  mach  .90  cruise 
speed-compared  with  mach 
.82  for  curren t   models-and  would 
provide  “safety  margins superior  to  any previous commercial  airliner” 
with  multi-gear  landing  system which  would  require  only  9,150  ft.  of 
takeoff  runway.  Trippe  forecast  lower  passenger  fares  and  reduced 
cargo  tariffs  because  of  747’s large capacity and efficiency of  operation. 
(Pan Am  Release; Bedingfield, NYT,  4/14/66,  1; Edwards,  Wush. Post, 
4/14/66,  K1) 
AFSC  Commander  Gen.  Bernard A.  Schriever was  presented  the  American 
Legion’s  General WiIliam  E.  MitchelI Memorial Award-highest  honor 
bestowed  by  the   Legion’s  Aviator’s  Post-at 
a  luncheon  ceremony i n  
New  York‘s  Wings  Club.  Schriever  was  cited  for   his  “outstanding 
contributions  to  the   aerospace  science  and  military  posture  of  th e  
United  States.”  (AFSC  Release  76.66) 
April  14:  Two  space  cooperation  agreements  were  confirmed  by  Spanish 
Foreign Minister Fernando Castiella and Secretary  of  S ta te  Dean Rusk 
in   a  S ta te   Dept.  ceremony  attended  by  NASA  Deputy  Administrator 
Robert C.  Seamans, Jr.  First  agreement provided tha t  NASA and Spain’s 
Ins t i tu to   Nacional  de   Tecnica Aeroespacial  (INTA)  would  share  i n   t h e  
operation  of  NASA  space  tracking  and  data  acquisition  station  near 
Madrid  which  maintains radio  contact with  unmanned  lunar  and  inter- 
planetary  probes  and would  support manned Apollo  mission.  Effective 
from May  1 ,1966 ,  to Jan. 28,1974, and in  accordance with government- 
to-government  agreement  between  Spain  and  U.S.  of  Jan.  29,  1964, 
contract  provided  tha t   Spanish  engineers  and  technicians  would  be 
trained  and  assigned  to  tracking,  telemetry,  communications,  and 

138 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

support. Some of  INTA’S  key  personnel had  already begun  special train- 
ing  a t   Deep  Space Facilities,  Goldstone,  Calif. 
Second  agreement,  par t   of  a  continuing  Spanish4J.S.  program  of 
cooperation in  space investigation,  provided for joint project  t o  launch 
four sounding rockets i n  Spain to  study winds and temperatures a t  high 
altitudes.  Agreement was  in   form  of  a memorandum  of  understanding 
between INTA  and NASA:  INTA would establish sounding rocket range,  con- 
s t ruc t  grenade-type payloads, provide two Nike-booster rockets, conduct 
launchings,  and  analyze and   publish  the   da ta ;   NASA  would  lend  range 
tracking  and  telemetry  equipment  and  a  launcher,  provide  two  Nike- 
booster rockets, provide prototype payload, and train Spanish personnel 
as  needed.  Both  agencies  would  bear  the   cost  of  discharging  their 
respective  responsibilities.  Results  of  the   experiments would  be  made 
available to   world  scientific community.  (NASA  Release  66-83) 
April  14: Two NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rockets were launched from WSMR: 
h s t  reached 114-mi. (183-km.) altitude and measured intensity of  ultra- 
violet  dayglow between  1160 A and  1400 A in   the  zenith,  in   the  nadir, 
and  on   th e   horizon;  second  reached  120-mi.  (192-km.)  altitude  and 
measured  the   profile  and  intensity  of  the   solar  Lyman-alpha  line. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
NASA’s ApoIlo  AppIications  program would  be  hampered  by  lack  of  pay- 
loads  unless  Congress  granted  additional  funds  in   FY 1968  budget, 
NASA  Administrator James  E.  Webb  told  press  conference a t   Colorado 
Women’s  College. NASA’s efforts to  obtain appropriations for post-Apollo 
projects  had  been  hindered  by  rising  costs  of  the  Vietnamese  war  and 
Congressional discontent  with  NASA’s increasing  administrative  costs. 
Webb said the  U S .  was  behind in  the  space race  “except for rendezvous 
and  docking,  and  the   Ranger mission. . . . Russia has  widened  the  gap 
during  th e   past  two  years,  launching  two  Pro ton   payloads  of  27,500 
pounds  each-which 
is  heavier  than   we  can  lift-recovering  payloads 
of  10,000 to  15,000 pounds,  and launching a three-man spacecraft. . . .” 
Questioned  about  th e   House  Government  Operations  Committee’s 
suggestion  tha t   NASA  abandon  the   Apollo  Applications  program  and 
participate  in   USAF’S  Manned Orbiting Laboratory program,  Webb  said 
he  did no t  believe a  “complete, common use”  of  facilities was  possible, 
noting  tha t   many  of  th e   countries  in   which  the   U S .   had  tracking 
facilities  would  no t   cooperate  if  installations  were  used  for  military 
projects.  (Denver Post,  4/15/66) 
a  First  simulated  exploration  of  th e  moon  had  shown  tha t   two  astronauts 
could live  and  intelligently  perform  tasks  for  a t  least  18 days  i n   cabin 
with  117 cu.  ft.  of  living-working space. Test was  performed in  support 
of  Apollo Applications program by  two  MSFC  engineers in  Minneapolis 
[see  Feb.  20,  March  101.  (MSFC  Release  66-80) 
e  Recent  Soviet  space  accomplishments  indicated  tha t   a  manned  space 
spectacular  was  imminent, suggested William Hines in  the  Washington 
soft-landing  on  the   moon  Feb.  3, 
Evening  Star.  He  noted  LUNA  E’S 
LUNA  X’S  launch  into  lunar   orbit  March  31,  and  the   22-day  flight  of 
two  dogs  in   COSMOS  cx  Feb.  22-March  16.  (Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
4/14/66,  A12) 
Secretary  of  th e   Air  Force  Dr.  Harold  Brown  issued  memorandum 
approving  recommendations  of  panel  appointed  to  investigate  USAF 
relations  with  “not-for-profit”  corporations and  ordering tha t   fees paid 
to   th e  corporations be  s u b s t a n t i d y  reduced.  I n   report,  issued  Feb.  1, 

139 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
panel  had  said  tha t   nonprofit  corporations  “. . . continue  to   be  a n  
indispensible  factor  in   developing  and  acquiring  complex  aerospace 
systems and in assuring  their  function  through command and control,” 
but  tha t   “guidelines . . . point  to   a  fee  substantially  lower  th an   a t  
present.”  (Text;  AP,  Wash.  Sun.  Star,  4/17/66,  A10;  Wash.  Pos t ,  
4/17/66,  A14) 
Apr i l  14: Inter-American Development Bank awarded Page Communications, 
Inc.,  $250,000 contract  to  “determine  the  most  economic locations  fo r  
ground  stations in South America which would be linked  to the satellite 
system,  and  the  means  of  connection  with  local  telecommunications 
systems.”  Study  would  be  carried  ou t   with  ComSatCorp cooperation. 
( IDB   Release;  Tush .  Post, 4/16/66,  C6) 
I n   a  lecture  a t   Rice  Univ.,  Dr.  Henry  Faul  of  the   Graduate  Research 
Center  of  the   Southwest’s  geosciences  division  insisted  on  the   terres- 
trial  origin  of  tektites  in  opposition  to  lunar-origin  theory  of  many 
experts:  “The  fatal  objection  to  th e   theory  tha t   tektites  a re   of  lunar 
origin  is  the   fact  tha t  the re  is  no  known mechanism  of  f igh t  tha t   can 
explain how  something  tha t  hits  the  moon,  generates  a  lot  of  heat  and 
is  melted  into  a  jet  stream,  is  somehow  dumped in   th e  widely  varying 
patterns  and areas  where  tektites  have  been  found  o n  earth.”  (Justice, 
Houston Post,  4/19/66) 
April  15:  Representatives  of  Intelsat  (International  Telecommunications 
Satellite  Consortium)  toured  NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  and 
received  briefing  on  MSFC  programs  and  research  projects.  (MSFC  Re- 
lease 66-77) 
0  NASA’s Procurement  Office reorganized into two main divisions: Policy and 
Review,  and  Contract  Management.  George  J.  Vecchietti,  Director  of 
Procurement,  named  Paul  A.  Barron,  formerly  GSA  Assistant  General 
Counsel  for  Regulations  and  General  Law;  Assistant  Director  of 
Procurement  for Policy and Review. William P. Risso,  formerly Special 
Assistant  to Director  of  Procurement,  was  named Assistant Director  of 
Procurement  for  Contract  Management.  Vecchietti  also  announced 
establishment  of  Procurement  Surveys Div.,  with Harvey M.  Kennedy, 
Jr.,  Director,  and Staff Operations Div.,  with Harold E. Pryor, Director. 
(NASA  Release 66-81) 
0  U.S.S.R.  had  constructed  two  stations  in   the   United  Arab  Republic  and 
Mali  to  photograph  artificial  earth  satellites,  Tass  reported.  Stations 
had  been  equipped  by  U.S.S.R.  and  were  being  operated  by  Soviet, 
U.A.R.,  and Mali specialists.  (Reuters,  NYT ,  4/16/66,  13) 
Vice  President  Hubert Humphrey  said  in  address  a t   the  Air  Force  Acad- 
emy, Colorado Springs, Colo. : 
“ I t   was  seventy  years  ago  this  May  tha t   Samuel  Pierpont  Langley, 
Secretary  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution,  launched  his  sixteen-foot, 
steam-powered model  airplane  off  the  Potomac River  and flew  a  half  a 
mile in  the  incredible time of  90 seconds. . . . 
“Seventy  years-in 
the   larger  scheme  of  history-is 
long time. 
“But  though  those seventy years  are but  the  average length  of  a full 
American  life,  they  reach  back  in to   an   incredibly  distant  world-a 
world  tha t  has  receded from us  by  a  quantum  of  change  tha t  no  other 
period  in   the  vast  sweep of  human  history  can  surpass. 
“One  measure  of  tha t  change is  flight itself. 
“I  flew  here  this  morning  from  Washington-nonstop-in 
and 20 minutes. 

not  a  very 

3 hours 

140 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

“Had  I  made  the  flight  from  Washington  to  Colorado  Springs  in 
Langley’s plane,  it would  have  required  127 days-and  we  would have 
had  to make 2,987 fuel stops along the way.  . . .’, (Text) 
April  15: USAF had accepted and funded a t  cost of $18.5 million more than one 
fou r th  of  the  unsolicited  proposals i t  had  received  from  industrial  and 
scientific  community  during  first  half  of  FY  1966. The  319  proposals 
accepted  promised  needed  technological  advances  in  operational  aero- 
space systems.  (AFSC  Release 71.66) 
GEMINI  VI  command  pilot  Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  received  an   honorary 
Doctor  of  Aeronautical  Engineering  degree  from  Lafayette  College, 
Easton,  Pa.,  during  convocation  commemorating  100  yrs.  of  science 
and engineering instruction on  the  campus.  (MSC  Roundup, 4/29/66,  1 ;  
UPI,  Wush. Post,  4/16/66,  D4) 
a  NASA  Administrator  ,James  E.  Webb,  incoming  president  of  American 
Society  for  Public Administration  (ASPA) , discussed  responsibilities  of 
administering  a  “Great  Society”  a t   ASPA  conference  in  Washington, 
D.C.  Webb  said  tha t   “.  . . with  the   seething  mass  of  humanity  all 
around  the world, not many of  them very happy today, we have a strong 
requirement  fo r  effective administration,  precision  in   the  use  of  public 
power,  for  prediction,  for  planned  use  of  limited  resources.  . . . 
“It seems to me tha t  the  public administrator in this period  . . . must 
be  a bigger, broader  person  than  has  been required  in  the  past because 
the  forces he must work with are so  much  larger, and yet so much more 
complex.  . . . Somehow h e   must  command  th e   respect  and  following 
tha t  will  convert criticism from  destruction of  ideas to  clarification and 
perfection  of  those ideas.  . . . I believe his performance will be measured 
. . . by  the  scope and sweep of  his vision and adjustment  to  some forces 
tha t  will  be  beyond his  ability  to  prediot  or   control; also his  ability  to 
ride  the  crest  of  the wave,  tha t  wave  of  the  incoming tide of  tomorrow 
tha t  is now bringing in the fruits of a vital and vigorous society.”  (Text) 
April  16:  Preliminary  results of  flight of  U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  X,  placed in  circum- 
lunar  orbit  April  3 to  become  moon’s  first  artificial satellite,  were  an -  
nounced  a t  Moscow press  conference. President  of  the Soviet Academy 
of  Sciences Mstislav Keldysh said  tha t  considerably less braking power 
had  been  required  to  pu t   a  spacecraft  in  orbit  around  the  moon  than  
had been required in a soft landing. This had made i t  possible to increase 
the  payload  in  LUNA  x  and  to  equip  i t  with  instruments  fo r   important 
studies  of  the moon  and  the  space surrounding  it. 
Academician  Aleksandr Vinogradov,  geochemist,  said  that  study  of 
radioactivity  of  rocks on  the  lunar  surface had  indicated the  overall in- 
tensity  of  gamma  radiation  on  the  lurain  was  comparable  to  the  in- 
tensity of gamma radiation emitted by  terrestrial granites  [see April 131. 
However,  part  of  i t  was  not  due  to  natural  radioactivity  but  to  inter- 
action  of  cosmic  rays  and  lunar  matter.  Such  radiation  was  absent  in 
terrestrial rocks because of  the  shielding effect of the earth‘s atmosphere. 
Lunar rocks were comparable in  natural  radioactivity  to basalt rocks on 
earth,  indicating tha t  “ the  processes of  the  formation of  the core of  the  
planets  of  the  earth  group  apparently  have  the   same  mechanism.” 
Prof.  Naum  Grigorov  said  readings  of  LUNA  x’s  magnetometer  indi- 
cated  presence  near  the   moon  of  a  weak,  homogenous,  and  regular 
magnetic field. Streams of  ions of small energies were registered. Analy- 
sis of  materials  transmitted by  LUNA  x showed the  intensity  of  particles 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

141  

in   the  moon’s  radiation  belt was  100,000 times less than  in   the  earth’s 
radiation  belts. 
Prof.  Alexandr Mikhailov, director of  the  Pulkovo Observatory, said 
existence  of  an   artificial  moon  satellite  was  important  no t   only  for  
physical  research,  bu t   also  for  determining more  exactly  the  mass  and 
shape  of  the  moon-information  vital  for  building  an   exact  theory  of 
the  motion of  the  moon  and for study of  the  unevenness of  the  earth‘s 
rotation. 
Replying  to  questions,  Academician  Keldysh  said  LUNA  x  did  no t  
carry  photocameras but  was  intended  for  physical  study  of  near-lunar 
space and the  moon  itself-its  na ture ,  ionosphere, radiations,  and fields. 
Satellite would  orbit the  moon  for “a  few years.”  Duration could no t  be 
predicted  since  parameters  of  the   moon’s  gravitational  field  were  no t  
known. Keldysh said tha t  since assembly of  large spacecraft in  orbit was 
an  important step  toward  the  conquest of  outer space, cosmonauts were 
preparing  for   the   solution  of  this  task.  Referring  to   the   problem  of 
manned  flights  to  the  moon,  he   stressed  tha t   the  most  difficult task  to 
be  solved was  re turn   of  the  spacecraft into earth’s atmosphere. Keldysh 
said  dogs  Veterok’s  and  Ugolyek’s  passages  through  radiation  belts  in  
COSMOS  cx had  had  no   apparently  serious  effect  on  them  bu t   tha t   pro- 
longed  observations were  necessary.  (Tass,  4/18/66) 
April  16: NASA  Assistant  Administrator for  International Affairs Arnold W. 
in  Philadelphia on international significance of  space program: “. . . the  
Frutkin addressed the  American Academy of  Political and Social Science 
United States has welcomed direct foreign participation  in  space research 
and  exploration.  The  U S .   has  contributed  i ts   boosters  to   launch  six 
satellites  which  were  conceived, engineered, instrumented  and  funded 
by  cooperating foreign  countries. Eight more  such   satellites  are  to   be 
launched by  us under existing agreements and, a t  this date,  other agree- 
ments are  in  early prospect. We have opened our own satellites to foreign 
experimenters. Some twenty experiments proposed by  scientists abroad 
have  been  selected  on   their  merits  for  flight  on   our  satellites.  These 
foreign experiments are  contributed to the  program; we contribute space 
in   the   satellite  and  i ts   support  systems  and  retrieve  the   data  for  th e  
experimenter. Even wider  cooperation-with 
twenty different countries 
-is  achieved through programs which utilize small, nonorbiting rockets 
to obtain data for which  satellites do  no t  commend themselves. I n  all of 
these projects,  we  have shared the  tasks  and costs in  literal cooperation 
without exporting a dollar.”  (Text) 
April  17:  New  evidence supporting  theory  tha t   Venus’  environment  could 
sustain  life  was  published  by  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  astrophysicists 
William  Plummer  and  John  Strong  in   Astrophysical  Journal.  Past 
measurements of  microwave  emissions from Venus  had  indicated  very 
high  surface  temperatures.  Plummer  and  Strong  concluded,  on  th e  
basis  of  recent  detailed  measurements  from  high-altitude  balloon 
observations by  Cal  Tech  radioastronomers, tha t   possibly  “30  percent 
of  the   observed  microwaves  i n   the   past  had  no  bearing  on  surface 
temperatures  bu t   ra ther   emanated  from  electrical  discharges  within 
the  cloudy atmosphere of  Venus.”  They  estimated Venus’  temperature 
ranges from 580°F at equator to  9°F a t  poles and said there  are  extensive 
reg ion s -g rea te r   than  earth’s  land  area--“where  man  would  find  the 
temperature  comfortable.”  (NYT ,  4/18/66,  4 ;   Wash .   Post,  4/18/66, 
A7) 

142 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

April  17:  Ufo was  sighted by  hundreds  of  people  in  Ohio and Pennsylvania, 
including two deputy sheriffs who followed i t  for 8 5  mi. USAF later attrib- 
uted sightings  to   combination of  a  satellite  and  the  planet Venus.  (UPI, 
N Y T ,   4/18/66,  4;  Wash. POSZ ,  4/18/66,  A7;  UPI,  N Y T ,   4/24/66,  95 ;  
Wash.  Eve.  Star,  4/23/66,  A2) 
April  18: ComSatCorp  filed  with  FCC  a  $31,985,000  fixed-price  contract 
with  TRW  Systems,  Inc.,  for  research,  development, and  production  of 
six  advanced  synchronous  satellites  for  global  commercial  satellite 
service.  Cylindrical,  240-lb.  satellites  would  have  1,200 two-way  voice 
channels  and   five-year  operational  life  and  would  handle  all  types  of 
communications.  (ComSatCorp  Release) 
Supersonic  transport  and  rocket  flights  in   the   next  few  decades  could 
raise  th e   average  surface  temperature  of  the   ear th   by  almost  half  a 
degree  by  spewing  tons  of  chemical pollutants  into  th e   atmosphere, 
said Dr.  Gordon  J.  F.  MacDonald,  UCLA  planetary  and  space physicist, 
in  an  interview with  the  Los Angeles Times. Heavy  burning  of  coal,  oil, 
and  gas  introduced  by  th e   industrial  revolution  in   the   19 th   century 
and the  automotive revolution in  th e  20th had  increased carbon dioxide 
in   th e   atmosphere  by  about  15  per  cent,  MacDonald  estimated.  The 
carbon dioxide created  a layer  of  gas  tha t   allowed heat  from  the  su n  to  
reach  the   ear th   but  stopped  i t   from  escaping when  i t   was  re-radiated 
back  from  the   earth.  This  was  the   “greenhouse  effect,”  which  raised 
the  temperature below  the  layer and Iowered th e  temperature above the  
layer.  “Four  hundred  supersonic  aircraft  flying  four  flights  a  day  on  
intercontinental  routes, would  affect  surface  temperatures  as  much  as 
the   whole  industrial  and  automotive  revolutions  have  to  date,”  Mac. 
Donald  said.  (Getze,  L A .   Times,  4/18/66) 
0  Striking members  of  International Union of  Electrical  Workers  (AFL-CIO) 
picketed  all gates of  Kennedy Space Center,  NASA,  in  wage  dispute with 
United  Technology  Center,  builder  of  solid-fuel  boosters  for  USAP 
Titan  I11  launch  vehicle.  UTC  had  about  175  workers a t   KSC,  one-third 
of  whom  were  IUEW  members.  Some  300  of  a  total  force  of  366  con. 
s truc t ion  workers  honored  the   picket  lines  and  failed  to  show  up   for 
work  on  the   Sa turn  V mobile  service  s truc ture   and Vertical  Assembly 
Building  (Vab).  Strike  was  first  a t   KSC  during  1966, but  the   n in th  
in   27  mos.  (AP, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  4/18/66,  A l ;   AP,  N Y T ,  4/19/66, 
18) 
0  A new  nuclear  particle-the  most  massive  and  most  stable  yet  found- 
had  been  discovered  by  physicists  a t   Argonne  National  Laboratory 
(ANL).  Three  and  a  half  times  as  heavy  as  the  proton,  the   particle  was 
a  ‘nucleon  resonance’  known  simply  as  N”3245.”  The   number 
f t  
“3245”  stood  for  3,245  million  electron  volts,  the   amount  of  its 
energy. According to Dr.  Alan D. Krisch of  Univ.  of  Michigan, nucleon 
resonances “may  be  ‘excited’ o r  highly  energetic  states  of  protons  and 
neutrons  . . . and  can  be  produced  only  i n   accelerators.  They  are   not 
observed  in   nature.”  Krisch,  along  with  John  R.  O’Fallon,  Keith 
Ruddick,  and Steven W.  Kormanyos of  Univ. of  Michigan, and Lazarus 
G.  Ratner of  ANL, made  the  discovery using Argonne’s  13.5-billion elec- 
tron   volt  (Bev)  zero gradient  synchrotron. They  said  this  “abnormally 
stable”  particle  has a lifetime  of  one ten-thousandth of  a millionth  of  a 
millionth  of  a millionth  of  a second, which is  “longer than   tha t   of  any 
of  i ts  family  of  nuclear particles.”  Krisch  suggested  N*3245  may  have 
“an  unusually  high  spin  which  prevents  it  from  decaying  easily.” 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

143 

Discovery  was  reported  in   Physical  Review  Letters.  (Phys. Rev.  Letters, 
4/18/66,  709; Amer.  Inst.  of  Physics Release,  4/18/66) 
April  18: Capt. Robert F.  Freitag  (USN,  Ret.),  Director of  Field Center Devel- 
opment, NASA  OMSF,  speaking in  Washington, D.C.,  before th e  Commu- 
nity  Development Conference of  the   16th District  of  Texas,  said  tha t  
the  magnitude and  importance of  the  investment in   th e  space program 
dictate  tha t   informed  citizens  from  all  walks  of  life  participate  in   a 
the  planning of  our space programs is the  prerogative of  NASA  alone. . . . 
national  dialogue  on  decisions  involved:  “We   in   NASA  do  no t   feel  tha t  
The  budget  for  the   coming  fiscal  year  permits  NASA  to   hold  open  the  
option for a program to  procure additional flight vehicles beyond  those 
now  programmed,  so  as  to  employ  the  Apollo  hardware,  facilities  and 
capabilities a t   least  through  1971. If  we  do  no t   exercise  this  option  in  
the  decision for  the  1968 budget, we  will have to  begin a phase-down of 
the  manned space flight activities  and  the   ‘mothballing’ of  some of  our 
facilities. At  a small fraction of  the  initial  cost we  can continue and we 
can  expand  our  operations  in   space for  the   next  ten   years  and  more. 
These  operations  will  have  tremendous  implications  for   our  national 
security  and  for  our  position  of  world  leadership,  in   addition  to  the  
benefits  of  scientific advancement and  the  betterment  of  man’s  life  on 
Earth.  . . . In   the   area  of  national  security, our  expenditures in  space 
probably  represent  the   cheapest  insurance policy  the   nation  can  buy 
for  the   future.”  (Text) 
April  18 ,19:   Press  commented  on  $525-million  order from  Pan   American 
World  Airways,  Inc.  (Pan  Am),  for  25  Boeing  747  aircraft  [see April 
131 : Order had  cast  doubt on market value for  Anglo-French Concorde 
Sst,  according t o   Andrew  Wilson  in   Washington Post.  BOAC  Chairman 
Sir  Giles  Guthrie  had  said  his  corporation  would  meet  with  Boeing 
representatives  during  week  of  April  18  to  discuss  purchase  of  about 
six  new  jets.  490-seat  Boeing  747  would  reduce  operating costs  by  as 
much  as  37  per  cent,  and  Pan  Am  order,  Wilson  said,  “makes  it 
inevitable  that  B.O.A.C.  will  follow  suit.”  (Wash. Eve.  Star,  4/15/66, 
C-3; Wilson, London  Observer;  Wash. Post,  4/19/66,  C7) 
?‘The 747  concept promises  to  be  as  revolutionary  in  relation  to   the  
curren t  generation of  jets as  the  initial 707s were  to  th e  piston-powered 
transports  they  superseded,” Aviation  Week editorialized. 
“Biggest  technical  advancement will  come  from  the   new  generation 
of  high bypass  ratio,  high  temperature,  large  turbofans  typified  by  th e  
Pra t t   & Whitney Aircraft  JT9D.  This  new  gas  tcrb ine   cycle promises 
as much  improvement in  load-carrying capacity and operating economy 
as  the   original turbofan  gained  over the  straight turbojet.  I t  is  th e  real 
root  of  the   economic and  technical  revolution  embodied  in   the   747 
concept.”  (Hotz,  Av .   Wk . ,   4/18/66,  21) 
April  19:  BOAC  grounded  four  Boeing  707 jets  after  precautionary  inspec- 
tion  had  revealed  hairline  cracks  around  bolt  holes  in   tail  assemblies. 
Following  BOAC  announcement,  FAA disclosed  tha t   22  Boeing  707  and 
720  jetliners,  all  three  or  more  years  old,  were  under  repair  for  tail 
assembly  cracks.  ( N Y T ,  4/20/66,  1; Ingraham,  N Y T ,   4/21/66,  66M; 
N Y T ,   4/22/66,  65;  Toth,  Wash. Post,  4/24/66,  M6)- 
0  USAF  launched unidentified satellite  from WTR  with Atlas-Agena D booster. 
(U.S.  Aeron.  & Space  Act.,  1966, 150) 
0  House  Committee on  Science and  Astronautics  filed  its  report  on  H.R. 
1441, th e  $4.986-billion NASA  budget  authorization.  (NASA  LAR  V/65-66) 

1 4  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

April  19:  International  Association  of  Machinists  and  Boeing  Co.  settled 
dispute  on  seniority  issues  under  Federal mediation,  averting  strike  of 
50,000 Boeing employees, including  those working on Saturn V boosters 
a t  Kennedy  Space  Center,  NASA.  (UPI,  N Y T ,   4/20/66,  48;  UPI,  Wush .  
Pos t ,  4/20/66,  A6) 
e  Eastern  Airlines  reserved  two  delivery  positions  for  U S .   supersonic 
transport  (Sst) ; transaction  raised  total  number  of  reserved  delivery 
positions  to  96  and  number  of  companies holding  reservations  to  22. 
(FAA  Release 66-36) 
April  19-20: American  Geophysical  Union  held  47th  annual  meeting  in  
Washington,  D.C.  Dr.  George P.  Woollard,  AGU  president  and  director 
of  Univ.  of  Hawaii’s  Geophysics Research  Center,  in  opening  speech, 
urged intensive study of  earth’s  interior.  As  an  example of  complexities 
of  th e   planet  brought  to  light  by  detailed  knowledge,  he  noted  tha t  
satellite  observations,  leading  a t   first  to  the   view  of  earth  as  “pear- 
shaped,”  had been supplemented by  new information on local variations. 
“We  will  probably  wind  up,”  Woollard  said,  “with  a  warty,  oblate 
spheroid.”  (Sullivan, N Y T ,  4/20/66,  47M) 
Univ.  of  Chicago  astronomer  Edward  Anders  told  AGU  that  organic 
compounds  in   certain  meteorites  were  result  of  “natural  chemical 
processes,”  not  “products  of  living organisms from afar.”  Hydrocarbon 
formation,  Anders  said,  “will  happen  whenever  carbon  monoxide, 
hydrogen  and meteoritic  dust  cool  on  a  rapid  time  scale.”  John  Wood 
of  Smithsonian’s Cambridge Astrophysical  Observatory  said  tha t   some 
meteorites  were  ‘‘ ‘truly  primordial’  matter,  formed  along  with  the 
rest  of  the   solar  system  from  a  solar  nebula.”  (Wu sh .  Post,  4/21/66, 
A3) 
Experimenters  presented  preliminary  reports  on  NASA’s PIONEER  V I  
spacecraft  a t   AGU  meeting.  Initial  data  gathered  by  140-lb. spacecraft, 
launched  into  heliocentric  orbit  Dec.  16,  1965,  indicated  tha t :   (1) 
low-energy cosmic radiation  generated  in  solar  flares  traveled  in  well- 
defined  streams  coming  from  varying  directions;  (2)  electron  density 
in   interplanetary  space, measured  by  Stanford Univ.  radio propagation 
detector, was  nearly  10 per  cu.  cm.;  (3)  solar wind  contained  not  only 
hydrogen  and  doubly-charged helium  ions  but  also  a  small  number  of 
singly-charged helium  ions ; and  (4)  interplanetary  magnetic  field  had 
structures  interpreted  as  filamentary  “stringers”  associated with  solar 
coronal  filaments seen during eclipses.  (NASA  Release 66-87) 
April  19-21: Nine  NASA  astronauts  visited  MSFC  for  briefing  on  Saturn  IB 
launch vehicles to be used  in  initial manned Apollo missions. Briefing- 
including  tours,  hardware  descriptions,  design  philosophy,  structural 
and  propulsion  tests,  and  flight  data  from  Feb.  26  AS-201 flight-was 
attended  by  Astronauts  Virgil  I. Grissom, James A.  McDivitt, David  R. 
Scott,  Russell  Schweickart,  Edward  H .   White  11,  Frank  Borman, 
Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  Roger  Chaffee,  and  Walter  Cunningham. 
(MSFC  Release 66-79) 
April  20:  COSMOS cxv scientific  satellite  was  launched  into  earth  orbit  by 
U.S.S.R.  “to  continue  space research,”  Tass reported.  Satellite was  said 
to have a n  apogee of  294 km. (183 mi.);  perigee of  190 km.  (118 mi.); 
period,  89.3  min. ; and  inclination,  65”.  Equipment  was  functioning 
normally.  (Tass,  4/20/66) 
International Union of Electrical Workers acceded to Government request 
to   remove  pickets  a t  KSC  from  entrance gates  used  by  building  trades 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

145 

workers. Electricians had  struck for higher  wages April 18 after expira- 
tion  of  contract  with  United  Technology Center.  (N Y T ,  4/21/66,  27) 
April 20:  H.  Julian Allen, Director of NASA Ames Research Center, was among 
27 elected  to National Academy of  Engineering “in  recognition  of  their 
outstanding contributions  to  engineering  theory  and practice  or  to  the  
pioneering  of  new  and  developing fields of  technology.”  (NAE  Release, 
4/20/66) 
0  GSFC  turned  over  all  Tiros  photographs  to   the  Environmental  Science 
Services Administration  (ESSA)  for  archival  purposes.  (GSFC  Historian) 
BOAC  announced grounding  of  two more Boeing 707 jetliners  for  repair  of 
tail  assembly  cracks;  four  707’s  had  been  grounded  April  19.  (Wash. 
Eve.  Star, 4/20/66,  A10) 
April 21: NASA  Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  reached 
96-mi.  (154-km.) altitude  in  Johns Hopkins Univ.  experiment designed 
to  observe  ultraviolet  emissions from  Venus.  Scattered  light  produced 
by solar illumination of  ITT  startracker  optics prevented acquisition and 
lock-on of  target Venus, bu t   good  data were  obtained  on  Lyman-alpha. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Senate Armed  Services Committee Chairman Richard  B.  Russell  (D-Ga.) 
announced unanimous vote to increase by $167.9 million DOD’S FY  1967 
budget  “to  provide  ‘long-lead-time’ production  items  for  the   Nike-X 
antimissile missile system.”  Senator  Russell  said  Committee’s decision 
had  been  influenced  by  information  reported  April  2 1   in  Washington 
Post  on  Soviet missile-defense buildup  and  “by  the   unanimous  recom- 
mendation of  the Joint Chiefs of Staff  to go ahead, during recent closed- 
door  testimony.”  Administration  budget  had  already  carried  $447 
million  for  missile  defense,  (Rosenfeld,  Wash.  Post,  4/21/66,  A I ;  
Norris,  Wash. Post, 4/22/66,  A4; Senate Rpt.  1136, 4/25/66) 
0  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  praised  development  of  the  Nerva 
nuclear  rocket  engine  following  a  tour  of  AEC’S  Las  Vegas,  Nev.,  test 
site.  He  observed  the  nuclear  engine was  capable of  producing  longer- 
duration  flights  than engine  systems  in  cu r ren t   use.  (W I ,   Houston 
Chron., 4/22/66) 
NASA  awarded  $50,000,  60-day  fixed-price  contracts  to  Douglas  Aircraft 
Corp.,  McDonnell Aircraft  Corp.,  and  Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering 
Corp. to perform definition and preliminary design studies and evaluate 
plan  to make  spent  Saturn  V  S-IVB stage hydrogen  tank  habitable  for 
manned  space missions of  up  to  30  days.  Contracts would  be  managed 
by  MSFC. 
(MSFC  Release  66-83) 
0  Immediate need  for  an  emergency space rescue  squad was  underlined  by 
the curtailed March 16 GEMINI VIII mission and by electrical malfunction 
aboard OAO  I  successfully orbited April 8, William Hines asserted in the 
Washington  Evening Star.  “Without  such  capability,” Hines suggested, 
“large  sums  of  money  and  vast  amounts  of  scientific-technolo ical 
effort are  being  dissipated, and  i t   is  only  a  matter  of  time  before bves 
will be placed in  jeopardy.  . . . Where manned missions are concerned, 
a  rescue  capability is  not  merely  desirable bu t   imperative.  . . . In  the 
next  five years somewhere between 25 and 30 missions involving about 
75  astronauts will be flown.  Durations will range from three to 45 days, 
and mission  objectives will  reach  as  far  as  the  moon’s  surface.  At  the  
most  conservative  estimate  there  are  probably  a  dozen  chances  for 
something to go seriously wrong on a typical mission. To pu t  i t  another 
way,  there  a re   somewhere  between  300  and  500  accidents  waiting  to 

146  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

happen  in   the   next  five  years-any 
one  of  them  potentially  tragic.” 
(Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 4/21/66,  A14) 
April  21:  U.S.S.R.  announced  annual  Lenin  prizes.  Winners  in  science 
included  anonymous  space experts  responsible  for  LUNA  IX and  LUNA  x 
missions.  LUNA  IX  made  the   first  softlanding  on  the   moon  Feb.  3; 
LUNA x became  the   first  manmade  satellite  of  the  moon  April  3.  Prize 
commemorated  Lenin’s  birthday  and  was  considered  highest  in  the  
Soviet Union.  (A€’, Wash. Post,  4/22/66) 
April  22:  AFSC  Commander  Gen.  Bernard  A.  Schriever,  who  directed  the 
development of  USAF’S  strategic missile force, would retire this  summer, 
the  White  House  announced.  General Schriever,  retiring  for  personal 
reasons,  would  be  replaced  Aug.  31  by  L/G  James  Ferguson,  USAF 
Deputy  Chief  of  Staff  for  Research  and  Development.  (AP,  NYT ,  
4/23/66,  5; Norris,  Wash. Post,  4/23/66,  A2) 
*  USAF  OV3-I  satellite  carrying  AFCRL-instrumented  152-lb.  payload  was 
launched  into  polar  orbit  from  Vandenberg  AFB  with  Scout  booster 
(SLV-1A). Reported  orbital  parameters  were:  apogee,  3,557  mi.  (5,724 
km.);  perigee,  219 mi.  (352  km.);  period,  152 min.;  inclination,  82”. 
Objectives were measurement of  charged particle  distribution  in  earth’s 
magnetic field and acquisition of  radiation  intensity data for comparison 
with  AFCRL  satellite measurements  in  1960-1963. Previously  scheduled 
for April 19, launch  had  been  postponed after  detection  of  malfunction 
in  launch  vehicle’s ground support system.  (OAR Release; U S .  Aeron.  & 
Space  Act.,  1966, 150) 
e  ComSatCorp Chairman  of  the  Board  James McCormack said ComSatCorp 
was  contacting  communications  and  broadcasting  companies  to  get 
largest  possible  consensus  on  costs  and  technological  feasibility  of 
domestic  multipurpose  communications  satellite  system,  and  would 
present  plans  to  FCC  by Aug.  1. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/23/66,  E?;  Bishop, 
W S J ,  4/25/66,  32) 
LUNA x comdeted  its  150th orbit of  the moon and marked Lenin’s birthdav 
~- by  beamfng  back  to  earth  the   Communist  anthem,  “Internationale.” 
(UPI,  NYT, 4/23/66,  5) 
Graduate  Research  Center  of  the  Southwest  president  Dr.  Lloyd  V. 
Berkner  addressed MSC  employees. Outlining postlunar  landing e2plora- 
tion,  Dr.  Berkner  said:  “The  very  broad  strategic  objectives  for  the  
exploration  of  the   solar  system  are  clearly  outlined  in  the  National 
Academy  of  Sciences  Summer  Study  tha t   was  done  last  summer.  . . . 
It  is  urgent  and  imperative  tha t   this  study  be  adopted,  or  something 
like it,  as our major basic strategy beyond  the  moon.  The first job  is  to  
adopt  a  national  strategy.  This  is  not  ju s t   a  decision  of  NASA; i t   is  a 
decision of  the administration, of  the  Congress, of  the American people. 
“And  second it is urgent  and  imperative tha t  this study be  translated 
by  joint actions of  NASA, the  National Academy of  Sciences and Ameri- 
can  scientists  into  specific  tactical  plans  for  a  specific program  with 
dollars  attached  to  it.  For  example,  in  my  opinion,  i t   makes  little 
sense  to  undertake  the   first  Martian  landing  without  some  precedent 
exploratory steps. We  must first orbit and map  the planet  and ascertain 
where a  landing would be profitable. 
“To  do  the   planetary  exploration  job  effectively,  we  now  need  a 
tactical  program  of  specific  flights  on  specific  dates  with  the  instru- 
mentation  necessary  to   plan  to  accomplish  those  tasks.  I  remind  you 
tha t  what  we  a re  doing  today was  planned  in   1961. And  yet,  when we 

. 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

14 1 

get to our planetary program in  the 1970’s, we don’t have corresponding 
specific plans.”  He  reemphasized  the   urgency by  saying:  “If  we  a r e  to 
achieve in  the  planetary exploration of  t h e  fu ture  i n  an  intelligent way, 
in   light  of  the   objectives of  the   Space Act,  the   time  has  come  to   get 
our scientists started now. Your vehicfe program is already ahead of us.” 
Dr.  Berkner  said  tha t   the   long-range program  should  meet  certain 
specifications:  “(1 j  step-by-step  advancement  of  experiments  in   the 
proper order;  (2) use o€ the  right vehicles to  carry ou t  the experiments; 
( 3 )  effective use of  Sa tu rn  capabilities, from unmanned missions to  the 
ultimate  manned  landing  on  Mars  and  perhaps Venus,  and  (4) proper 
phasing-in  of  smaller  vehicles  with  the   larger  ones,  and  reasonable 
time/cost  programming.”  (MSC Roundup,  5/27/66,  3 )  
Aprtl  22-23:  JPL  Director  Dr.  William  H, Pickering  received  American 
Philosophical  Society’s  Magellanic  Gold  Medal  at  society’s  annual 
meeting i n  Philadelphia “for his achievements in  the  fields of astronomy 
and navigation.”  (NYT, 4/24/66,83) 
AEC  Chairman  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg  told  APS  tha t   a  technological 
society must give the humanities  economic freedom in  order  to   assure 
development  as  a  “human”  suciety.  Discussing  role  of  National 
Foundation on the  Ar ts  and Humanities, established in  September 1965, 
Seaborg  said:  “The  new  support  of  the   ar ts   and  humanities  by  th e  
Federal  Government  should  help  break  down  some  of  th e   artificial 
barriers w e  have  created  between  the  world  of  science  and  technology 
and  tha t   of  th e   arts  and  humanities.  . .  though  science may  have  a 
any  clearcut  division  f etween  science  and  nonscience  in  interdis- 
pervading and  ascendin  in3uence in   our  lives  today,  there   cannot be 
ciplinary  civilization  which  a  livable  fu tu re  world  will  require.”  (CR ,  
5/4/66,  3-4) 
Apr i l   23:  Saturn V 2nd  stage test vehc le   (S-11-T) wa s   successfully  captive- 
weight,  all systems S-I1 stage.  33- P t.-dia.,  81-ft.-long stage-largest  and 
fired  for  15 sec.  a t  MSFC’s  Mississi  pi Test Facility in  first test  of  flight- 
most powerful  liquid-oxygen/liquid-hydrogen stage  known-developed 
3.-million-lbs,  thrus t   from  five  1-2  engines.  Test  also  marked  first 
operational  use  of  MTF,  (MSFC  Release 66-84) 
Russian  space  dogs  Veterok  and  Ugolyek,  in   orb i t   Feb.  22-March  16 
aboard COSMOS CX, appeared on Moscow television with Soviet physician- 
cosmonaut  Dr.  Boris  Yegorov,  who  told  viewers  tha t   “ the   dogs  had 
undergone many  tests  and were  found  quite  normal.”  The   dogs,  who 
has  passed  through  Van  Allen  radiation  belts  dur ing   each  o f   330 
revolutions,  would  be  adopted  as  pets  by  workers  a t   Russia’s  space 
center,  Dr.  Yegorov said.  (Taw,  4/23/66) 
Materials  Research  Center  a t   Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute-$1.6 
million,  NASA-sponsored  facility-and 
adjoining  Engineering  Science 
Research  Building-built  with  Rensselaer  funds   and  matching  NSF 
which  climaxed  two-day  “Man  and  Materia P s”  symposium,  was NASA 
dedicated a t   Troy,  N.Y.  Pr inc i   a l   speaker  at  ceremony, 
grant-were 
Administrator  James  E.  Webb.  Rensselaer  had  received  first  grant 
under  NASA  program  for  establishment of  interdisciplinary  centers  at 
selected  universities.  (RPI  Release, 4/2/66) 
a  In  an articfe  in  Krasnaya  Zuezda,  retired  Soviet  MJG  of  Aviation  B. 
Teplinskiy  said:  “In  1961. . . a t   th e   m.SJ  Defense  Department,  a 
was  created.  Controi of  military space plans was  assigned it. . . . It was 
special  command  for  developing weapons  systems  for  th e   air  forces 

148 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

April  23:  NASA  Mississippi Test  Facility  conducts  its  first  test  firing,  a  15-sec. test  of  the  
Saturn V  S-I1 stage. 

a t   tha t   time  tha t   Lt.  Gen.  Bernard  Schriever,  who  then  headed  the  
Air  Force  Systems Command  and  is  a  well-known fanatic  advocate  of 
the  militarization  of  outer  space,  stated:  ‘Our  military  space  require- 
worked  ou t   or  planned.’  . . . 
ments  cannot  be  fully  satisfied  by  the  civilian  programs  now  being 
“Not  all  people  agreed  with  this.  Prominent  American  scientist 
Dr.  Hugh  Dryden  declared  shortly  after  his  appointment  as  NASA 
deputy  administrator:  ‘I  have  learned-I  would  like  to  say  I  regret  to 
space work . . . has no military potential we will  not  receive correspond- 
have  learned-that 
i t   is  assumed  in   some  circles  that  if  our  outer 
ing  financial support  from  any  future  administrations  or   congresses.” 
(Krusnaya Zvezda, 4/23/66) 
April  24:  NASA  Administrator  James E.  Webb,  in  an  article written  for  AP, 
discussed  national  power  in   space:  “The  question  that  arises  is  this: 
in   terms  of  national  power,  is  there  going  to  be  a  real  contest  for  t h e  
control of  this new  environment? Is  there going to be a shared mastery 
or a n  effort a t  domination? 
“The  danger  is  clear  in  having  such  a  very  great  power  available to 
only  one nation,  and  especially to  the  Communist  nations  who  have  a 
strong, determined  drive  to dominate  the  world,  to  enforce  their  views 
on  others..  . . 
“The  US. space program  gives  us  a  mastery  of  the  space  environ- 
ment.  It  gives  us  the  knowledge which  permits  us  to  judge what  is  in  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

149 

our  own  interest.  I t  gives  us  the  assurance  tha t  we  are   going  to  be  a t  
the   decision  table  when  the   big  decisions  of  the   fu tu re   are  made.  It 
also gives us  the  image  of  a  ‘can do’ nation,  th e  image  of  a  nation tha t  
is  no t   going  to  focus  on  pure   commercialism  or  fail  to   respond  to   a 
great  challenge.  It  gives  us  also  the   power  to  exploit  space.”  (Text) 
April  24: Je t   aircraft operating from Washington National Airport.  (Wash. 
Sun. Star,  4/24/66,  Al) 
0  U.S.S.R.  began  series  of  carrier  rocket  tests  in   two  areas  of  the   Pacific 
west  and northwest  of  Midway Island.  (AP, NYT, 7 /5 /66 ,28)  
April 25:  Third MOLNIYA 
I  satellite was orbited by U.S.S.R.  to  assist “develop- 
ment  and fur ther   improvement of a satellite  radio  and TV communica- 
tion  system  (SOVCOMSAT) ,”  Tass  announced.  Orbital  data:  apogee, 
39,500 km.  (24,545  mi.) ; perigee,  499  km. (310 mi.) ; period,  11 hrs. 
50  min.;  inclination,  64.5”.  Equipment  included  broadcasting  system 
“as  well  as  instruments  of  a  command-measuring set,  a n   orientation 
system,  orbital  correction  devices,  and  power  supply”  for   “fur ther  
development  of  onboard  systems,  satellite  equipment,  and  onground 
tracking facilities.”  (Tass, Pruvdu, 4/26/66,  6, USS-T Trans.) 
0  Five-man Observatory Class Spacecraft Review Board had been appointed 
by  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space 
Science and Applications.  Robert  F.  Garbarini, NASA  Deputy Associate 
Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications  (Engineering) , 
would  head  the   board,  established  to  “study  all  phases  of  design, 
development,  testing  and  space  operations  procedures  of  the   orbiting 
observatory  spacecraft.”  Other  Review  Board  members were:  F.  John 
Bailey,  Chief,  Flight  Safety  Office,  MSC; Jack  N.  James,  Director  for  
Lunar  and  Planetary  Programs,  JPL;  Dr.  Albert  J.  Kelley,  Deputy 
Director,  ERC;  and  Francis  B.  Smith,  Assistant  Director,  LaRc.  (NASA 
Release 66-91) 
0  Tokyo  Univ.’s  Ins t i tu te   of  Space  and  Aviation  announced  successful 
launch  of  240-lb.  meteorological sounding  rocket  from  Uchinoura 
launching  range  in   Kyushu,  sou thern   Japan.  Single-stage  rocket 
reached  40.8-mi.  (65.7-km.)  altitude  in   2  min.  4  sec.  Data  were  tele- 
metered  to  ground  station.  (W u s h .  Pos t ,  4/22/66,  B2) 
0  NASA  would  ask $1 billion  for  Apollo Applications programing in FY  1968 
to   prevent  a  lapse  in   manned  space  flight  by  offsetting  reduction  i n  
expenditures  and  aerospace  industry  manpower  for  Project  Apollo, 
William  Normyle  reported in  Aviation  Week. He  continued:  “NASA  was 
permitted  by  the   Administration  to  request  only  $41.9  million  for  
Apollo  Applications in  Fiscal  1967. Some of  NASA’s  advanced  planners 
argued for $500 million in  the  Fiscal  1967 budget now under considera- 
tion,  bu t   the  agency went  to  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget with  a  request 
for  only  $270  million,  which  was  reduced  to   the   $41.9  million.” 
(Normyle,  A v .   Wk . ,  4/25/66,  30) 
0  Object  described as  green  and  yellow  with  a  long  fiery  tail-later  deter- 
mined by  scientists  to be a meteor traveling northwest a t   80- to   100-mi. 
sighted  by  thousands  of  people  i n   eastern  U S .   and 
altitude-was 
southeastern  Canada.  Scientists  estimated  tha t   meteor,  which  was 
observed a t  around  8:15  p.m.  EST,  might have  ranged in   size from size 
of  a football to  several hundred pounds, and had probably disintegrated 
between Albany,  N.Y.,  and Montreal.  ( T u s h .  Post,  4/26/66,  A l ;  NYT, 
4/27/66,  24) 

150 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

April 25:  Referring to NASA-DOD decision of  1964 to exchange experts in  each 
other’s  programs,  Aviation  Week  reported  the   score  to  date:  184 USAF, 
78 Army,  25 Navy,  and  six  USMC  officers assigned to  NASA;  transferred 
to   DOD   was  one  NASA  official,  Dr.  Michael Yarymovich, now  technical 
director of USAF’S Manned Orbiting Laboratory  (Mol) program.  (A v .  W k . ,  
4/25/66,  25) 
*  Federal  mediators  in  San  Francisco  announced  interim  agreement  in  
wage  dispute  between  International  Union  of  Electrical  Workers  and 
United  Technology Center.  Striking electricians  would  re tu rn   to  work 
by  April  28;  negotiations  for  a  new  contract  would  continue  until 
May  20.  AP  dispatches  from  KSC   reported  union,  which  had  limited 
picketing  to  one  gate  April  20,  had  resumed  picketing  all  five  gates, 
charging “bad  faith on the part of  UTC.”  (WI,  Wash .  Post, 4/26/66,  A6; 
A€’, NYT ,  4/26/66,14) 
Two  controversial  theories  about  the  earth’s  crust  to  be  tested  by  the  
Mohole  geological project  were  reviewed  in  Science.  One  theory  held 
tha t  material  flows  slowly bu t  constantly up  from deep in  the  earth and 
then  spreads  ou t   across  the   ocean  floors.  Second  theory  was   tha t   the 
earth‘s  magnetic  field  reverses  periodically so  tha t   successive bands  of 
rock  would  have  alternate  polarization,  depending  o n   the  time  the 
molten  material  had  frozen  and  locked  in  its  magnetism. Drills  would 
attempt  to  probe  different  rock  bands  to  determine  if  their  charges 
were  different  and  when  they  were  formed.  First  field  trials  were 
scheduled  for  early  1968.  (Science, 4/25/66) 
*  Dr.  Wallace  J.  Eckert,  Columbia  Univ.  prof.  of  celestial  mechanics  and 
director  of  IBM’S  Watson  Laboratory,  received  National  Academy  of 
Sciences’  19th  James  Craig  Watson  Medal  “for  his  pioneering  con- 
tributions  to  the   scientific  application  of  electronic  computers  and  to 
the  theory of  the motion  of  the moon.”  (NAS  Release, 3/29/66) 
April  25-28:  American  Physical  Society  met  in   Washington,  D.C.  Geo- 
physicist S. K.  Runcorn, Univ.  of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, U.K.,  suggested 
tha t  Jupiter’s great red spot may be “the top of  a 200-mi.-high column of 
‘stagnant  air’  carried  along”  by  a  meteorite  crater  in  the   planet’s 
hydrogen surface.  This view would  contradict a widely held notion  that 
the  spot  is  associated  with  a  high  mountain.  “We  don’t  believe  in 
mountain  ranges  on  Jupiter,  a t  Newcastle,”  Runcorn  said,  explaining 
tha t  Jupiter’s  crust  would  not  support  a  mountain.  He  noted  tha t   the 
large surface feature connected with the stagnant air column might be a 
depression  caused  by  impact  of  an   asteroid  or  “a  moonlet.”  Runcorn 
said  explanation  of  red  spot  as  column  of  gases  supported  theory  of 
Jupiter’s  fluid metallic  hydrogen  core.  (APS  Release, 4/20/66;  S’ imons, 
Wash. Post,  4/27/66,  A10; Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  4/26/66,  A3) 
Dr.  Harold Brown, Secretary of  the Air Force, examined management 
role  of  scientifically trained  people  and  invited  their  participation  in  
the  “governmental  decision-making process.”  Brown,  a  former  physi- 
cist,  attributed  rising  influence  of  technocrats  “to  the  increasing 
technical  content  of  modern  life”  and  to  “the  less  narrowly  technical 
orientation  of  the   technically  trained.”  He  noted  transition  from  part- 
time to full-time scientific advisers in the  late 1950’s as “one of  the major 
lasting  consequences  of  the   Soviet  Sputnik  achievement.”  (Text) 
NASA’s OGO  I,  launched  Sept.  4,  1964, and  EXPLORER  XXVIII  (IMP-c), 
launched  May  29,  1965, had  yielded  data  essential  to  evolution  of  a n  
accurate  physical  description  of  the  universe,  according  to  paper  on 

151 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
low-energy  cosmic  rays  presented  a t   APS  meeting  by  Dr.  Donald  E. 
Hagge  of  NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center.  Hagge  noted  satellite 
measurements  and  recent  “quiet  sun   year”  had  given  physicists  “an 
unprecedented  opportunity  . . . for  meaningful  cosmic  ray  research.” 
High-apogee satellites  permitted  measurement  of  low-energy particles 
‘‘not directly  observable on  the  surface of  the  earth”  due to protective 
atmosphere  and  influence of  earth’s magnetic field. Minimum of  ccsolar 
of  galactic particles  by  sun’s magnetic field 
modulation”-suppression 
upon  attempted  penetration  of  so lar   system-meant 
tha t   ‘particles 
observed during  1965 most  nearly  represent  the   t rue  situation  outside 
the  solar  system.”  (GSFC  Release, 3/27/66) 
J.  A .   Simpson of  Enrico  Fermi  Institute,  Univ.  of  Chicago, reported 
these  satellite  experiments  had  revealed  “new  features  in   the   cosmic 
radiation  regarding  the  energy  distribution,  the  chemical  and  isotopic 
composition  of  the   cosmic  rays  a t   hitherto  unattainable  energies.” 
Origin  of  “ultra-low-energy nuclei,”  which  reached  vicinity  of  earth 
during  1965 period  of  minimum solar modulation,  may  be  supernovae, 
Simpson suggested.  (Fermi Institute  Release, 4/27/66) 
Simpson  and  J.  J.  O’Gallagher,  also  of  Fermi  Institute,  presented 
results  of  study  of  solar  flare  particle  propagation  based  on  simul- 
taneous  observations  by  MARINER 
IV  space  probe  and  Imp  satellites. 
Evidence showed tha t  “protons  are confined by  interplanetary magnetic 
fields  to   narrow  channels  extending  outward  from  the  sun”  and 
“particles  in  these  channels  are  carried  around  the   su n   by  magnetic 
fields which co-rotate with  the  sun.”  (Fermi In s t i tu te  Release, 4/29/66) 
Paul  J.  Coleman, Jr.,  of  UCLA, presented  results  of  “a  recently  com- 
pleted  statistical  analysis  of  records  of  the  magnetic  field  and  plasma 
velocity,  obtained  in  late  1962 with  instruments  aboard  the  spacecraft 
MARINER  11,”  including  Pcexperimental evidence  tha t   [hydromagnetic] 
waves  do  exist  in  interplanetary  space.”  Discussing properties  of  solar 
wind,  Coleman  said  MARINER  11%  measurements  had  indicated  average 
temperature of  positive ions  in plasma was  about 200,000”K. He.noted 
tha t   its  high  temperature  and  low  density  “suggest  tha t   the  plasma  is 
completely ionized. ” (APS Release, 4/26/66) 
Discussing  importance  of  their  NASA-sponsored  stellar  wind  study, 
S.  H.  Lam  of  Princeton  Univ.  and G.  Sandri of  Aeronautical  Research 
Associates of  Princeton,  Inc.,  said:  “The  cosmic radiation  tha t  reached 
the   Earth,  o r   any  satellite  tha t   has  been  sen t   into  space by  man,  has 
been attenuated,  or as the  specialists say ‘modulated,’ by  the  solar wind. 
Therefore,  we  cannot  measure  directly  the  constitution  of  the   cosmic 
radiation  as  i t  exists  in  interstellar  space unaffected  by  the  solar wind. 
Yet,  to   be  able  to  understand  the  origin  of  the   cosmic  radiation,  we 
must  know  its  t rue   constitution  in  interstellar  space.  A  proper  under- 
standing  of  the   solar  wind  will  greatly  facilitate  this  difficult  task.” 
Lam  and  Sandri presented  electrostatic  mode1  for  stellar  winds  a t   APS 
meeting.  (APS Release,  4/29/66) 
Discovery  of  first  celestial  body,  “Cygnus  GR-1,”  identifiable as  a 
“point  source  of  high  energy  gamma  radiation,”  was  announced  to  
APS by  Univ.  of  Rochester  physicists J. G.  M.  Duthie,  Roland W.  Cobb, 
and Joseph Stewart. Discovery of source, which coincided with a region 
already identified as an  x-ray source known as “Cygnus XR-1,” climaxed 
five  years  of  research  sponsored  by  NASA  and NSF.  (Univ.  of  Rochester 
Release,  4/29/66) 

152 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Describing the Alfven Propulsion  Engine  (Ape) in  a paper  on hydro- 
magnetic propulsion  and drag in  space vehicles, M.  A.  Ruderman,  New 
York  Univ.,  said:  “A  source  of  electrical  power  (nuclear,  or  solar 
panels)  sufficient  to  power  one  hundred  common  light  bulbs  could 
raise  the   altitude  of  a  5-ton  satellite  about  100  miles  in   a  week  of 
operation.  By  allowing  the   motor  to  act  as  a  generator  the   orbital 
energy  of  this  same  satellite  can  be  converted  into  electrical  energy, 
contributing  sufficient  drag  to   lower  the   satellite  altitude  by  almost 
15 miles per  day.”  (APS  Release, 4/26/66) 
Cal  Tech  physicist  H.  Victor  Neher  described  latitude  survey  of 
cosmic  rays:  “Once  we  satisfied  ourselves  tha t   instruments  sent  by 
balloons up  to altitudes of  140,000 feet, near  the earth’s magnetic poles, 
gave  answers  directly  comparable  to  those  found  by  Mariners  I1 and 
IV,  i t  became less important  to depend on  spacecraft for  ou r  data. This 
was  good  news  because  we  have  a  flexibility  and  control  of  balloon 
flights  tha t   are  not  possible  with  spacecraft.”  (APS  Release,  4/28/66) 
April  25-28:  Radiotelescopes  trained  on  radio  galaxies might  discover  the 
quark, which had been proposed as the most elementary particle, Purdue 
Univ.  physicists  C.  S.  Shen  and T.  K.  Kuo  theorized  to  APS.  Suggested 
two  years  ago  by  Dr.  Murray  Gell-Mann of  Cal  Tech,  the  quark  was 
described  by  Shen  as  “a  very,  very  elegant,  beautiful  theory.  There 
are so many elementary  particles.  Physicists  are all confused as  to how 
they are  constructed.  If  they  are all  constructed from quarks,  i t  is very 
simple.”  (Clark, NYT, 4/26/66,  28; Wash.  Eve. Star, 4/29/66,  A14) 
April  26:  First  test  transmissions  of  long-range  radio  and  television  com- 
munications  between  Moscow  and  the  Far  East  via  third  MOLNIYA  I 
comsat,  launched  April  25,  were  successful.  Pictures  were  of  good 
quality.  Tass  said  th e   satellite  would  be  used  to   ‘‘further  refine  the 
system of  long-range, two-way television and  telephone-telegraph radio 
communications  and  pilot  operations.”  (Tass, 4/27/66) 
0  COSMOS  CXVI  scientific satellite was  launched  into  earth  orbit  by  U.S.S.R. 
to  continue  outer  space research,”  Tass announced.  Satellite was  said 
C C  
to  have  an  apogee of  478 km.  (297 mi.);  perigee  of  294 km.  (183 mi.); 
period,  92 min.;  and  inclination, 48’  25 min.  Equipment was  function- 
ing  normally.  (Tass, Kmsnuyu Zvezdu, 4/28/66,  1, USS-T  Trans.) 
0  NASA  Nike-Apache  meteorological  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Son- 
miani,  Pakistan,  carried  acoustic-grenade payload  to  118-mi. (190-km.) 
altitude  in  experiment  conducted  for  Pakistan  Space  and  Upper 
Atmosphere  Research  Committee  (SUPARCO)  and  British  National 
Space  Research  Committee.  Grenades  did  not  eject,  but  data  were 
obtained  from  trimethyl-aluminum  (TU) 
cloud  release  and  spectrum 
photography.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  ComSatCorp  requested  FCC  permission  to   construct  a  t6-million  high- 
capacity earth station a t  St. Croix, Virgin Islands,  to  “serve  the expand- 
ing  needs  of  the   Caribbean  area,  and  provide  for  reliable  service 
between  the  United  States  and  Puerto  Rico,  South  America,  Europe 
and Asia.” 
I n  a separate request, ComSatCorp petitioned  FCC  to  deny AT&T’S  and 
ITT  Communications,  1nc.-Virgin  Islands’  applications  to  build  and 
operate a cable between U.S.  mainland and St. Thomas, Virgin Islands. 
(ComSatCorp Release) 
USAF  selected  Martin  Co.  to  develop  SV-5P manned  lifting-body vehicle 
to  explore  flight  characteristics  and  atmospheric  maneuverability  of 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

153 

wingless  lifting  bodies.  Initially,  the   S,OOO-lb.,  24-ft.  wingless  vehicle 
would  be  dropped  from  a B-52 bomber  a t  40,000- t o  50,000-ft. altitude 
a t  500 mph  for  powerless, gliding flight, landing a t  Edwards AFB  a t   120 
to  150  mph;  in  later  powered  tests,  i t   would  accelerate  to  mach  2 
speeds  a t   100,000-ft.  altitude  and  then  maneuver  to   landing.  Airfoil 
shape  of  vehicle,  which  resembled  “a  delta  shaped  porpoise  with 
vertical  fins,”  provided  lift  normally  derived  from  wings.  Fu tu re  
vehicles,  developed  as  part  of  AFSC’S  Piloted  Low  Speed  Test  (Pilot) 
project,  would  be  launched  to   ferry  supplies  and  crews  between  ea r th  
(DOD   Release  343-66;  Wilford,  NYT ,  
and  orbiting  space  stations. 
4 /27 /66 ,22 )  
Apr i l   26:  NASA  convair  990  jet  aircraft  began  ARC-managed,  preliminary 
flights  in  support  of  NASA’s Nimbus  C weather  satellite  scheduled  for 
launch  from WTR  May  13. Four  GSFC  experiments  installed  in jet  would 
test  new  spacecraft  sensors  for  weather  measurement  and  collect  data 
a t  altitudes over 40,000 f t .   for comparison with da ta  obtained by Nimbus 
spacecraft  over  the  same areas.  (NASA  Release 66-107) 
DDR&E  Deputy Director  (Strategic  & Space Systems) Daniel J. Fink,  in a n  
address  before  t h e   National  Space  Club  in  Washington,  D.C.,  said: 
“We  in  the  Department  of  Defense have always looked upon  space less 
as a ma t te r  of  adventure  and more  as a matter  of  necessity; we  explore 
its  potential  no t   because  i t   is  ‘there’ but  because  we  have  needs  that 
are  ‘here.’  I t  is not  tha t  we  have  identified fundamentally  new missions 
since  the   early  days  of  our  space  effort.  We  have,  however,  begun  to 
recognize new  applications for  space-based systems, particularly  in  the  
tactical  field.  The  opportunities  are  tremendous-and 
sometimes  so 
are  the  problems.  We  are  no  longer  as  enamored  with  the  ‘how’  of 
developing a  satellite  system. We  now  take  a hard  look  a t  the  ‘why’ of 
choosing  one  approach  to  solving  a  military  need  over  another-and 
this  most  assuredly  includes  competing  earth-based  systems  as  well. 
We have  come  to  recognize  tha t   our  launch  vehicle  capability coupled 
with  better  sensors  permits  u s   to  do more missions from  synchronous 
orbit.  We  also are beginning to  sense  tha t   there  is  a high  potential  for 
combining  operational  functions  in   a  multiple-purpose  satellite  where 
common  sensor  packages  and  orbital  parameters  exist.”  (DOD   Release 
341-66) 
Editorial  comment  on  retirement  of  AFSC  Commander  Gen.  Bernard  A. 
Schriever:  ‘‘Few men had  a  larger hand  . . . in developing the  scientific 
‘mix’  of  manned  aircraft  and  missiles  tha t   is  today’s  US. Air  Force. 
“From  the  day  he was  put  in  charge of  our ballistic missile program 
in  1954  until  today  he  has  been  the  key  man  in  Air  Force  research 
and  development. 
“Only  last  August  he  was  given  what  is  probably  the  single  most 
important  scientific  assignment  in  Air  Force  history-developing 
the  
military Manned  Orbiting Laboratory  (MOL). . . .” ( Wush. Daily  News, 
4/26/66) 
*  LaRC  would test parachutes  for possible landing of  instrumented unmanned 
capsules  on  Mars  beginning  in   summer  1966,  in   support  of  NASA’s 
Voyager planetary  exploration  project.  Parachutes  would  be  carried by 
balloons  and  sounding  rockets  to  130,000-ft.  a l t i t u d e w h e r e   th in  
earth  atmosphere  simulates  Martian  atmosphere-and  would  then  be 
deployed behind  test  units  accelerated  to  mach  1.2  in   level  flight  [see 
Aug.  301.  (NASA Release 66-90; LaRC  Release) 

154 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

April  27:  Meteorological sounding rocket  launched  from  Chamical, Argen- 
tina,  was  first  in  series  of  launches  planned  for  NASA-Argentine Space 
Commission  (CNIE)  cooperative  program.  CNIE  had  scheduled  13 
launches  €or  1966  as  part  of  Inter-American  Experimental  Meteoro- 
logical Rocket  Network  (EXAMETNET),  in   which  Argentina,  Brazil, and 
US. would  cooperate  to  establish  in  the  Western  Hemisphere a  north- 
sou th  chain  of  stations  for  coordinated  sounding rocket  launchings  to 
obtain  experimental  data  on  weather  patterns.  Brazil  launched  first 
rocket  under  EXAMETNET  program  from  Natal,  Brazil,  Jan.  12.  (NASA 
Release 66-103) 
JPL 100-kw. radar  was  flown  successfully on  NASA  Convair 990 a t  3-6-mi. 
(5-10-km.)  altitude  in   preliminary  test  for  rocket  flight  [see  May  91. 
(JPL Release,  6/26/66) 
0  Third  MOLMYA  r  communications  satellite,  launched  in to   elliptical  orbit 
by U.S.S.R.  April 25, transmitted  television broadcast from Vladivostok. 
Transmission  of  televised  May  Day  celebration  from  Moscow  to 
Vladivostok via  satellite had  been  scheduled  for  May  1. All  equipment 
was  functioning  normally.  (Pruvda, 4/28/66,  4, USS-T  Trans.) 
Soviet press reported  tha t  Belka and Strelka, dog passengers on U.S.S.R.’s 
SPUTNIK  v  in  orbit more  than  24 hrs.  Aug.  19-20, 1960, were  alive  anp 
well.  (AP,  ru sh .  Post, 4/28/66,  B7) 
Army  Corps  of  Engineers  had  established  Extra-Terrestrial  Research 
Agency,  headed  by  geologist Alice  S.  Allen,  to  coordinate  studies  of 
luna r   surface  in  anticipation  of  moon  exploration  requirements. 
Comprehensive  study  of  such  surface  properties  as  soil  density,  light 
reflectivity, and thermal and electrical conductivity,  Corps of  Engineers 
believed,  would  permit  deductions  about  problems  of  “walking, 
digging, and moving of  surface loads . . . providing shelter, water supply 
and  necessary  construction  materials  and  tools. ” (Henry,  Wash.  Eve. 
Star, 4/27/66,  C3) 
o  Properly managed, the value  of  the  returns  from Government investment 
in   research  and  technology  outweighed by  “orders  of‘ magnitude”  the  
investment  itself,  Dr.  Chalmers W.  Sherwin, deputy  director  (research 
and technology) , Defense Department Research  and Engineering. told a 
meeting in  Chicago jointly  sponsored by  the  Patent Law Assn. of Chicago 
and  the   Chicago Assn.  of  Commerce  and  Industry.  Sherwin  said  the  
value  of  R&D  had  been  confirmed  by  “Project  Hindsight,”  a  study 
covering such systems as the Mark 46 torpedoes, Minuteman  11, Hound 
Dog,  Polaris,  Sergeant,  and  Lance missiles.  “We  are  not  su re  whether 
good  ideas  attract  ‘good’  (that  is,  flexible)  money,  or  if  innovative 
organizations ju s t   ‘happen’ to  always have  such money. Available tech- 
nology money simply must be  spread all  over  the place in  little pockets 
near  th e  need.  It is not  the  ivory  towers which need  flexible money  the  
most,  it is rather  the  organizations heavily involved in  real problems- 
particularly i n  the  early stages of  development of  new systems.”  (Text) 
0  A surface-based deep-sea search  and retrieval  system was  described by  its 
inventor, Willard N.  Bascom, president  of  Ocean Science and Engineer- 
ing,  Inc.,  in   a n   interview  with  William Hines  of  Washington  Evening 
Star.  Bascom,  holder  of  a  patent  on  C
said  his  system  could 
 
,
y
’
~
~
~
~
~
~
c
be  ready  in  a  year  and  tha t   “total  cost  of  a  ‘SEARCH’  vessel  ready  for 
operation anywhere in  the  world would not exceed $Y   million.”  He cited 
‘presently unrecoverable losses of spacecraft and experimental weapons 
as  a n  urgent  justification  for  developing a  deep-sea retrieval  system,” 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

155 

and  said tha t  he had  offered  “SEARCH”  to   th e  Navy.  “Similar  pro  o sd s  
have  been  submitted  to  the   Air  Force  and  NASA,”  Bascom  sa$  His 
system, an  outgrowth of  the  Mohole deep-sea drilling project,  would use 
scanning devices and grappling tools suspended from a  converted cargo 
ship.  (Hines, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  4/27/66,  A7) 
April  27:  FAA   had  total of 9,566  U S .  airports, heliports,  and  seaplane bases 
on  record  a t   end  of  1965,  76  more  than  1964 tally.  Texas,  with  846  
landing facilities,  led  o ther  states.  (FAA Release 66-43) 
Dr.  Eric  A.  Walker, president  of  Pennsylvania S ta te  Univ.  and  chairman 
of  the   National  Science Board,  was  elected  president  of  the   National 
Academy  of  Engineering.  (NAE  News) 
Dr.  Vamevar   Bush,  Honorary  Chairman  of  the   Corporation,  MIT, 
received  the   National Academy  of  Engineering’s  first Founders’ Medal 
a t  2nd annual NAE meeting in  Washington, D.C.  Dr. Bush, former pres- 
ident  of  Carnegie  Institution  of  Washington,  director  of  Office  of 
Scientific Research and  Development  during World War  11,  and  NACA 
Chairman  1939-41, was  cited  as  “ the   engineer  who  mobilized  this 
country’s scientific and technical resources for war and created the  blue- 
print  for  the   post-war cooperation  of  science and  government.”  (NAE 
Release,  4/19/66) 
0  About  25,000 acres a t  KSC  had been se t  aside as a national  wildlife refuge, 
the   National Geographic Society  revealed.  Cape  Kennedy  and  nearby 
Cocoa, Fla.,  were especially rich in  bird life; a record total of 204 species 
had  been  tabulated  by  the  Audubon Society.  (NYT ,  4/27/66,  52) 
April 28:  NASA  issued a fact sheet on U S .  international space programs which 
listed criteria applied to determine value and acceptability of  cooperative 
arrangements  in   space  activity:  (1)  cooperative  project  must  have 
scientific validity  and  mutual  in teres t ;   (2)  cooperative project  must  be 
conducted openly, with  the  scientific results  being made freely available 
to  the   world  scientific  community;  (3)  each  participant  must  accept 
financial  responsibility  for  its  own  contribution to  the  project. 
Since their  inception,  NASA’s 
international programs  had  involved  7 1  
countries  or   separate  jurisdictions  and  had  included  satellite  projects, 
individual  experiments  flown  on  NASA  satellites,  sounding  rocket  in -  
vestigations,  and  a  variety  of  programs in  which  foreign ground-based 
observations were  coordinated with  flight projects. 
U S .   had  concluded bilateral  agreements providing for  launch  of  1 4  
scientific satellites  instrumented  and,  in   all  but  two  cases,  engineered 
abroad.  Six  of  these  satellites  had  already  been  successfully  launched 
(one  each  for  France  and  Italy  and  two  each  for  Canada  and  U.K.). 
Other satellites  would  be  contributed  by  the  European Space Research 
Organization (ESRO ) ,   U.K.,  Canada,  Italy,  and  Germany. 
U.S.  had  also  opened  i ts   own  satellites,  manned  and  unmanned,  to 
participation  by  foreign  experimenters. Sixteen  such  experiments had 
been  accepted for  flight. 
Some 17  countries had  entered into agreements with  NASA  for one or 
more cooperative sounding rocket projects. Such investigations had been 
initiated  by  both  U.S.  and  foreign  proposals.  They  had  accounted for  
roughly  150   launchings  in   a  five-year  period  with  rockets  ranging 
widely  in  size and type,  from boosted  Darts and Arcas  to Nike  combina- 
tions,  Aerobees,  Shotputs,  British  Skylarks, and French Centaures. 
Ten  cooperating countries  made  substantial contributions to   exper- 
imental  communications satellite  work  by  constructing and  operating 

156 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

overseas ground terminals used for TV and radio  demonstrations. Con- 
ventional weather observations in  42  countries  helped  interpretation of 
cloud-cover photographs from weather satellites. 
A  1962 agreement with  U.S.S.R.  had  resulted  in :   (1)  one-way com- 
munications  demonstrations  using  ECHO  11, 
(2)  some  exchange  of 
ground-based magnetic field data in  anticipation  of  a n  agreed exchange 
of  satellite  data,  and  (3)  exchange of  conventional weather data  over a 
special  communications  channel  se t   up  between  Washington  and 
MOSCOW on a  shared-cost  basis pending the  availability of  satellite  data 
from U.S.S.R.  (Text) 
April 28:  European Launcher Development Organization (ELDO)  ended three- 
day, seven-nation Inter-ministerial Conference in  Paris without reaching 
decisive  conclusions.  Issues  involved  were:  (1)  Western  Europe’s 
independent space role  competitive with  U S .   and U.S.S.R.;  (2) extent 
of  collaboration to  keep  pace  with  technological  advance; and  (3)  con- 
tinuation  of  initial  ELDO project,  three-stage  Europa-1  rocket.  Cost 
estimate had more than  doubled to  $420 million,  and recent proposal  to 
move  Europa-1 in to   space  communications  would  add  $60  million. 
Another meeting was  scheduled for  June.  (Mooney, NYT ,   4/29/66,  8; 
UPI,  Wush. Post,  4/27/66,  A15;  NYT ,   4/28/66,  24) 
Fire in  altitude chamber used to simulate environment of  Apollo Command 
Module  (Cm)  a t   AiResearch  Manufacturing  Div.  Torrance  (Calif.) 
Facility severely damaged Apollo Environmental Control System, which 
had undergone 480 hrs.  37 min.  of  a 500-hr.-duration qualification test. 
Investigating board  concluded that probable cause  of  ignition  had  been 
tha t  some “ground test equipment and materials used  . . . were not su i t-  
failure  of  electrical  heater  tape  installed as  part  of  the   test  set-up,  and 
able  for  application  in   the  vacuum  and  5  psia  100% oxygen  environ- 
ments.”  Board  recommended  improvement in  selection of  ccsome mate- 
rials  used  in   the   Environmental Control System and Apollo  Command 
Module”  and  pointed IO a  “potential  fire  hazard  from  arcing  or  direct 
shor t  circuits.”  (Senate, Hearing, Apollo Acc iden t ,   Pt.  1, 2/7/67,  32-4) 
*  NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  carried  NRL- 
instrumented  payload  to   109-mi.  (175-km.)  altitude  in   experiment  to  
photograph solar  corona  and  disc  and  to  measure  solar  disc variations 
and  total  solar  flux  in   Lyman-alpha.  Performance  of  rocket  and  in-  
strumentation was  considered excellent.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  U.S.  Army  parachutists  made  first manned  flight  tests  of  NASA-developed 
parawing  a t  Army’s  John F.  Kennedy Center for  Special Warfare,  Fort 
Bragg.  Concept of maneuverable, parachute-like, flexible wing had  been 
originated by LaRC  scientist Francis M.  Rogallo and Gertrude S.  Rogallo 
i n  1948, and on July 18,1963, NASA had awarded $35,000 to the  inventors 
in   recognition  of  their  contribution to  aeronautics.  Parawing’s gliding 
and maneuvering capability results  from aerodynamic lift developed i n  
had  been  built  to  L ~ R C  specifications  and  could T: e  folded,  packed,  and 
flight; conventional parachutes are  drag devices and do not develop lift. 
Roughly triangular  and about 400 sq. f t .  in  area,  arawings used in  tests 
deployed like parachutes. Army Aviation Materiel Laboratories (AVLABS) 
had  recommended  evaluation of  parawings  for  personnel use,  and NASA 
engineers  and  observers  assisted  Army  with  technical  consultation. 
(NASA  Release  66-106) 
0  International  Air  Transport  Assn.  (IATA)  director  Knut  Hammarskjold 
announced tha t  most of  IATA’S  member  airlines would  accept U.S.  S ta te  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

157 

Dept.  demands  for  changes in   Warsaw Convention-an 
international 
treaty  which  limited  liability  of  airline  involved i n   international-flight 
crash  to   $8,300 per  passenger.  U S .  had  demanded  increase  in  liability 
to   $75,000 per  passenger and  an  absolute liability system under which 
carriers would be held liable for damages under all c i rcum s tance s -even  
in   cases  of  sabotage.  (IATA  News  12 ;  Long,  N Y T ,   4/28/66,  7;  N Y T ,  
4/29/66,  42) 
April  28:  Zzvestia  described how  the   Communist  Par ty   an them   was  trans- 
mitted from LUNA x to  ear th :  “Before  the  launching, an  electronic gener- 
ator was  installed  in   the  artificial moon  satellite  to  radiate  in  a definite 
sequence electric oscillations of  the  frequencies necessary for reproduc- 
ing  selected fragments of  the  melody.  . . . The  use  of  semi conductors 
made  it possible  to  substantially  reduce  the  weight  and  volume  of  th e  
set  and  considerably increase  the   range  of  transmissions.  The  ‘music’ 
signals  of  the  se t  installed  in   the  Luna  10  could be  received  even from 
the   neighborhood of  Venus. 
“The  increase  in   range  and  the   overcoming  of  cosmic  noise  were 
achieved  by  means  of  special  narrow  band-pass  filters.  The  cycle  of 
functioning  of  the   instrument  reproducing  ‘Internationale’  consists  of 
two parts: generating in  a certain sequence signals of various frequencies 
-10 
seconds-and 
creating  intervals  before  the   repetition  of  th e  
melody-45 
seconds. The instrument is switched on by a signal from th e  
earth.”  (Tass,  Zzvestia,  4/28/66) 
0  New  York  Times  reported  h in t   by  Leonid  I.  Dubrovin,  chief  of  11th 
U.S.S.R.  Antarctic  expedition,  broadcast by  radio  from Mirny Antarc- 
tic  station,  “ tha t   the   Soviet  Union  planned  to  use  the   Antarctic  as  a 
testing  ground  for manned  landings on  the  moon.”  Dubrovin had  said 
fierce Antarctic  conditions  would  test man’s  adaptability  and scientists 
could learn much  there  “ tha t  would help man to  survive i n  the  desolate 
conditions  of  the  moon.”  ( N Y T ,  5/1/66,  15) 
April  29:  One  of  th e   world’s  largest  and  most  sensitive  automatic  space 
tracking  and  telemetry  antennas was  officially  dedicated a t   Goldstone, 
Calif.  Newest  facility  in  NASA’s  Deep  Space Network  (DSN),  210,ft.  dish 
antenna was  U.S.’s  largest  fully  steerable  antenna  and  world’s  largest 
built  for   research  by  spacecraft.  Operated by  JPL ,   $14-million  antenna 
would  be  used  to  track  fu ture  Mariners and  other  spacecraft  to  Mars, 
Venus,  and even P lu to  on the  outer reaches of  the  solar system. Dedica- 
tion  ceremonies,  hosted  by  J P L   Director  Dr.  William  H.  Pickering, 
included addresses by  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.),  chairman 
of  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences Committee, and  Rep.  George  P. 
Miller  (D-Calif.) , chairman  of  Science  and  Astronautics  Committee. 
NASA  Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C.  Seamans, Jr.,  and Edmond C. 
Buckley, NASA  Associate Administrator for  Tracking and Data  Acquisi- 
tion,  also  participated.  (NASA  Release  66-88; MSC  Roundup,  4/29/66) 
0  NASA  had  selected  three  firms-Computer  Div.  of  Control  Data  Corp., 
Industrial Electronics Div.  of General Electric Co.,  and the  Univac Div. 
of  Sperry  Rand  Corp.-for 
competitive  negotiations  leading  to   a n  
estimated $20 million  contract  to   provide a  new  computing system a t  
MSFC.  (MSFC  Release 66-89) 
0  McDonnell  Aircraft  Corp.  received  a  $2,071,882  cost-plus-incentive-fee 
contract from AFSC for work on Gemini spacecraft heat shield for Manned 
Orbiting Laboratory  (Mol).  (DOD  Release  356-66) 

158 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

April  29:  NASA's alO-ft.-diameter Deep  Space  Network  antenna,  dedicated at  Goldstone, 
Calif.,  April  29. 

April 30:  Test pilots  saved one of two U.S.  $500 million XB-70 research air- 
craft  during  test  flight  from  Edwards  AFB  by  shor t   circuiting  two 
terminals with a paper clamp. When  a jammed door prevented hydraulic 
extension of  nose landing gear,  Col.  Joseph Cotton  (USAF),  co-pilot with 
North  American  Aviation,  Inc.'s  chief  test  pilot,  Alvin  S.  White,  re- 
moved paper clamp from his brief case  and  touched  i t  to  two  pin  termi- 
nals  in  a small  relay  unit,  following instructions radioed by  NAA ground 
engineers.  Gear  extended,  and  although  main  gear  burst  in to   flame  as  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

159 

185-ft.,  delta-winged  aircraft  landed,  NAA  reported  damage  was  light. 
(Wash .  Post,  5/3/66,  A l ;  NYT,  5/4/66,  23) 
April 30:  President Johnson issued Executive Order 11277 designating In ter-  
national  Telecommunications  Satellite  Consortium  (Intelsat)  as  an 
t h e  privileges,  exemptions, and immunities provide 8“ by Section 4(a)”  of 
organization  “entitled  t o   enjoy,  from and after Au  s t  20,  1964, all of 
the   International  Organizations  Immunities  Act.  (Text,  Pres.  Doc., 
5 /9 /66 ,600)  
LUNA  x  completed 218th  orbit  of  moon  after  a  total  of  120 radio  com- 
munications  periods,  Tass  announced.  Equipment  was  functioning 
normally,  and radio link was  said to  be  stable.  (Tass,  4/30/66) 
GISS marked  fifth anniversary with lecture by  Dr. Harold C.  Urey,  prof.  of 
chemistry  a t   large,  Univ.  of  California,  La  Jolla.  Reception preceding 
lecture  had  honored  Dr.  Urey’s  73rd  birthday  on   April  28.  (Goddard 
News,  5/30/66,  8) 
During  April:  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff,  Special  Assistant  to   NASA 
Administrator James  E. Webb and AIAA  President,  sought to  define th e  
role  of  a  professional  and  of  a  professional  society  i n   an   editorial  i n  
Astronautics  & Aeronautics. 
“.  . . in  my  reading of  the  history  of  science  and technology, I  have 
been  impressed by  th e  key  role  of  individuals who  related  science and 
technology  to   social  needs.  I  would  suggest  tha t   they  are   th e   profes- 
sionals,  and  tha t   a  t rue   profession  deliberately  exercises  science  and 
technology  to  meet  social needs. 
“Unlike most  professional  and  technical  societies,  AIAA  composes  a 
wide  variety  of  engineers and physical  and  life  scientists.  Yet  definite 
expressed  need 
social  concerns bind us  in   a  single  profession-society’s 
to  transport goods  and people  by  atmospheric j l igh t   and  to  explore  space. 
. . .”  (A&A ,  4/66,  30-31) 
*  Three  U S .   airlines-all 
their 
claiming to   be  Nation’s  oldest-celebrated 
40th anniversaries : United Airlines, April 6; Western Airlines, April 17 ;  
and Trans World Airlines  (TWA),  April  17.  (UPI,  NYT ,  4/3/66) 
*  Study  of  buoyant  Venus  probes  tha t   could  avoid  the   high  temperaiures 
close to  the  planet’s surface by staying in  static equilibrium a t  higher and 
cooler  altitudes  was  published  in   Journal  of  Spacecraft  and  Rockets. 
Report,  by  F.  R.  Gross  of  the   Goodyear  Aerospace  Corp.,  said  probes 
would  be  launched  by  Sa turn   IB  boosters,  have  isotensoid  shape,  and 
trail behind  the  instrument package.  To withstand reentry heating,  th e  
balloons  would  be  constructed  from high-temperature  fabrics  or  films 
now under development. To permit use of conventional instrumentation, 
probes would  be  designed  to   reach  equilibrium a t   altitudes  where  the  
ambient temperature was  160”  F.  Weight analysis had  shown tha t  in th e  
minimum  temperature  atmosphere,  worthwhile  biological  and  atmos- 
pheric  experiments could be  performed.  (J/Spacecraft, 4/66,  582-7) 
CAB s tudy  revealed tha t  i n  153  U.S.  air carrier accidents between 1955 and  
1964 caused by or resuIting in  fire, 297 of  1,955 fatalities would not have 
occurred had  fire been prevented.  1,628 persons died  of  impact forces, 
and 30 for o therreasons .  All fire victims were involved in  13 of the  acci- 
dents.  Report  recommended  strengthening of  s truc tures   to   withstand 
impact,  improvement  of  onboard  and  ground  fire-fighting and  rescue 
eqyipment,  continued  improvement  of  exit  facilities,  development of 
emergency  communication systems, and more detailed passenger  brief- 
ings.  (CAB,  BOSP,  7-6-3) 

160 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

During April: Men and women engaged in  the national space program should 
reverse  defensive  and  apologetic  attitudes  toward  the  commitment  to  
space  exploration,  according  to  Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  President 
Karl  G.  Harr,  Jr.,  addressing  American  Astronautical  Society  annual 
meeting in San  Diego. “If  we were the  only nation in the  world tha t  had 
th e   capability  to   proceed  in to   this  new  dimension,  we  should  do  it,” 
Harr  said. 
“We  should do  i t  as part  of  a  national  renaissance  on  all  f ron t s ;  for 
a  great  society  . . . cannot  confine its  attention  to  certain  challenges 
selected under  past  conditions,  but must  . . . move comprehensively to  
“. . . As th e  huge challenge of space generates and consumes and th en  
accept  th e   challenge  of  the   future. 
regenerates  ou r   material  and  human  resources,  so  does  i t   widen  t h e  
scope of  th e  environment  in  which ou r  citizens will exist and make their 
contribution  in   the  years  ahead.”  (Aerospace, 4/66,  7-9) 
*  Commentary  on  numerous  reports  of  Ufo  s i g h t i n g :  
Sir  Bernard  Lovell,  director  of  Britain’s  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental 
Station,  said Ufo’s  were  “purely  American phenomena.”  What  people 
really see “is most likely weather balloons, meteorites,  fireballs, re-entry 
of  nose cones or  other  space debris. No  trained  observer o r  astronomer 
has  ever  reported  such  a  sighting.” 
Philadelphia  Evening  Bulletin:  “Sir  Bernard  Lovell,  the   eminent 
British  astronomer  who  run s   the  Jodrell  Bank  space  observatory, 
believes  that  seeing UFOS  . . . is  strictly an American phenomenon. 
“Maybe  he  is  right,  but  I F  Americans  are  seeing UFOS,  and  I F  there 
a re  visitations  from  outer  space,  i t  may  be  tha t   the  terrestrial  visitors 
believe  tha t   only  America  is  worth  investigating.”  (Phil.  Eve.  Bull., 
4/26/66) 
Rev.  Francis J. Heydon, professor of  astronomy a t  Georgetown Univ., 
said  tha t  people  “are  seeing  things,”  but  tha t   reports  of  flying saucers 
would  ccdoubtless increase.  The  phenomenon  of  flying  saucers  is  100 
percent  imagination.” 
Roscoe  Drummond,  Washington  Post:  “History  is  littered  with 
things  couldn’t be  done  . . . and wrote with  great  displays of  scientific 
examples  of  th e   most  eminent  scientists  who  were  dead  certain  tha t  
evidence to prove  tha t  they  couldn’t be wrong. We need more objective 
investigation  than we  have been getting. The scientific unbelievers may 
be  right-but 
they  could  be  totally  wrong.  They  have  been  before.” 
Howard Simons,  Washington Post: “. . . scientists point  out tha t  even 
traveling a t  the  speed of  light, which is  186,000 miles per  second, who- 
ever  i t   is  tha t   is  buzzing America  in  a  flying  saucer  or  saucers  would 
have to  have left the  nearest galaxy 50,000 years ago.”  (AP, Wash.  Eve. 
Star, 4/25/66,  A2; Wash.  Eve.  Star, 4/18/66;  Drummond,  Wash. Post, 
4/6/66,  A25;  Simons,  Wash. Post,  4/24/66,  A25) 

May  1966 

May  1 :   NASA  launched  series  of  four  Nike-Cajun meteorological  sounding 
rockets  within  four  hours  from  Natal,  Brazil;  Point  Barrow,  Alaska; 
Churchill  Research  Range;  and  NASA  Wallops  Station.  GSFC  acoustic- 
grenade experiment  was  designed to  obtain  temperature,  pressure,  den- 
sity, and wind data a t  22-59-mi.  (35-95-km.)  altitudes during transition 
from  wintertime  westerly wind  circulation  to  summertime easterly pat- 
tern.  Natal  launch  was  first  in   cooperative  Brazil-US.  project  under 
agreement signed Nov.  15, 1965, by  NASA  and Brazilian Space Activities 
Commission  (CNAE).  (NASA  Release  66-101; NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Javelin  sounding  rocket  was  successfully  launched  by  USAF  Cambridge 
Research Lab. from Churchill Research Range, with payload designed to 
measure  total and component magnetic field values and primary electron 
and proton  fluxes during a magnetic-absorption event.  (M&R, 5/16/66, 
101 
0  Parachutist  Nick  Piantanida  suffered  critical  brain  damage  from  oxygen 
cutoff and  rapid  decompression during  emergency descent  in  a  balloon 
gondola near  Worthington,  Minn.  Gondola  was  electrically  severed  a t  
57,000-ft.  aItitude  in  response  to  Piantanida’s  emergency  cry,  but 
parachute  did  not  appreciably  slow  its  descent  until  about  20,000  ft. 
USAF  specialist  later  reported  tha t  pressure  su i t  had  failed,  resulting  in  
loss  oi  oxygen. 
Piantanida,  in  his  third  attempt  to  break world’s free-fall record,  had 
planned  to  jump  from  124,000 ft.,  free-fall to  7,000 ft.,  and  then para- 
chute  to   earth,  proving  that  trained  parachutists  could  free-fall  from 
100,000 f t .   without  health  impairment  and  without  stabilizing devices. 
(UPI,  NYT,  5/2/66,  40;  IF&.  Post,  5/2/66) 
0  Moscow’s May Day parade  featured no  new military weapons for first time 
in   three  years.  Soviet  commentators  emphasized  increased  mobility  of 
missiles  and  claimed  that  antiaircraft  rockets  had  “radioelectronic 
devices  [which]  home  the   rockets  on  their  targets,  even  if   they  take 
evasive action  or  use  radio  jamming devices as  a  cover.”  ( Wush. Post, 
5/2/66,  A l ,   A14) 
0  NASA’s 31 veteran  astronauts would lose over $6,000 annually from sale of 
their  personal  stories  if  1 9  new astronauts joined  them  in  contract with 
Time,  Inc.,  and  FieId  Enterprises  Educational  Corp.,  AP reported. 
Under  terms  of  contract,  Time,  Inc.,  and Field paid  $520,000 annually 
for  equal  division  among  ‘participating  astronauts,”  in  re tu rn   for 
exclusive rights  to all unofficial personal stories and photos.  (AP, Wmh. 
Post,  5/1/66,  N8) 

161 

162 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

May   1:  Australian  mobile  space  tracking  station  soon  would  begin  seven- 
week,  nonstop  operation on Thursday  Island  off  Cape York  Peninsula, 
according to  Australian News  and  Information Bureau  announcement. 
Minister  of  Supply  Denham  Henty  had  said  mobile  station,  part  of 
NASA’s Anna geodetic satellite project  for measurement of  size and shape 
of  th e   earth,  would  transmit  data  to  U.S.,  via  a  fixed  station  near 
Adelaide,  for analysis a t  Johns Hopkins Univ.’s  Applied Physics Labora- 
tory.  (NYT ,  5/1/66,  70) 
M a y  2:  Resources of  U S .  space program were minimal “while  the  Russians 
apparently are  increasing theirs,”  Dr. George E. Mueller,  NASA Associate 
Administrator for Manned  Space Flight,  told  a news  conference a t  MTF. 
Competition in  space is  not  lessening with  time,  but  rather  is  increas- 
r e  
ing.  Wha t  is needed  is a clear definition of  where the  nation  is going in  
space after  the  moon  is  explored.”  (Russell, Miami Her.,  5/3/66) 
0  Six-week NASA-sponsored  exploration trip to  search for plant  life in  Chile’s 
Atacama Desert-area 
resembling Martian terrain because of  its extreme 
aridity-was 
begun  by  Richard W.  Davies,  JPL  Advanced  Studies  Sec- 
tion,  and two  other J P L  scientists.  Explorers, who  planned to  send back 
1,000 lbs.  of  sandy soil for  analysis, would  concentrate on high  plateau 
near  Calama,  80  mi.  inland  and  5,000  to  8,000  ft.  above  sea  level. 
Similar tr ip  last year had  yielded a microflora in  top four inches of  sand. 
(JPL Release) 
0  A Soviet victory  in  the  race  to  achieve first manned lunar  landing “would 
be  a  worldwide  propaganda  disgrace  because  we  ourselves  chose  the  
target  . . . [and]  a  crushing political  blow  a t   home  to  the   President 
linked with i t ,  which the  present White House incumbent has been from 
t h e  inception,”  wrote William  J.  Coughlin in  Missiles  and  Rockets.  He 
suggested a possible solution:  “. . . extend the  US. national goal prior  to 
a manned lunar landing by  either the  U S .   or  the  Soviet Union. Then, if 
the   Russians were  the   first  to  arrive  on   the   Moon,  we  would  be  in   a 
position to  gracefully acknowledge their achievement while pointing ou t  
tha t   to   us  th e  Moon  was  but  a  way-station en   rou te   to  a more  distant 
objective.  If  we  accomplished  the  first  landing,  we  would  also have  th e  
benefits  of  victory.  But  we  would  no t   be  so  exposed  in  the   event  of  a 
defeat.  . . . 
“Without  establishment  of  a  higher  goal  and  a  greater  challenge, 
U.S.  space capability will dissipate. NASA  efforts to prevent this by getting 
a worthwhile Apollo Applications Program under way  have no t  met with 
notable  success.  This  provides  a  second  good  reason  for  lifting  ou r  
national  goal.  . . .” (Coughlin,  M&R,  5/2/66,  46) 
During week o f  May  2:  MSC  officials had not pinpointed exact cause, but had 
isolated probable cause of  faulty thrus ter  which prematurely terminated 
GEMINI VIII  mission March  16, Missiles  and  Rockets  reported.  Corrective 
action would  affect  all  these  components on  Gemini  9 and  later  space- 
craft,  Gemini  program manager Charles W.  Mathews  emphasized  tha t  
thrus ter   and  its  associated hardware and  electronics  were  contained in  
adapter module abandoned by  crew in  orbit prior to  reentry.  “If  we  can 
believe  telemetry data,  we  can isolate the  cause of  the  problem  to  either 
spacecraft  wiring  or  thrus ter   valve  solenoids,”  Mathews  said.  Specific 
trouble  spot  within  wiring  or  valve  solenoids  would  be  difficult  to  
determine without  testing  actual  equipment.  (M&R,  5/9/66,  17) 
May  2-4: AIAA  met  in  Washington, D.C.  Satellite  Educational and  Informa- 
tional  Television  (SEIT)-COnCept 
of  combining  television  and  com- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

163 

munications  satellites  to   raise  standards  of  living  in   less-advanced 
nations-was  discussed by Vincent P .  Rock, director of Communications 
Central.  He  emphasized  lack  of  literacy  requirement  for  television 
instruction  and  noted  tha t   i t   could  (1)  “transmit  skills  and knowledge 
required  for  modernization of  productive  activity;  (2)  transmit fantasy 
which  helps  a person understand th e  role  and techniques of  association 
required  for  participation  in   a modern  society;  and  (3)  transmit  infor- 
mation about events and goods required for action in  the  modern world.” 
Following his  speech, Rock  told  the  press  tha t   a  demonstration  SEIT 
system would cost about $30,000,000, excluding ground receiving equip- 
ment,  and  could  be  ready  in   three  years.  Transmissions from  satellites 
could  either  be  received  on  six-foot  “dish”  antennas  and  relayed  to  
individual  receiving  sets  or  relayed directly  to  home  sets.  (Sehlstedt, 
Balt.  Sun,  5/3/66) 
James  D.  O’Connell,  White  House Director  of  Telecommunications 
Management, warned of  frequency shortage for satellite communications 
by  1970 unless new  techniques were devised. O’Connell urged aerospace 
engineers who started “this communications explosion” to  “consider all 
ideas  and  conceptsyy tha t   would  squeeze more  talk  into  existing broad- 
cast  frequencies.  (Clark, NYT ,   5/4/66,  23) 
U S .  should assume active world  leadership in  direct satellite-to-home 
radio  and  television  broadcasts  which  offer  tremendous  potential  for 
mass  education  and  mass  propaganda,  suggested  Columbia  Univ.  law 
professor  Richard  N.  Gardner  in   a  panel  discussion.  Warning  tha t  
several nations had  already asked international bodies  to  outlaw general 
broadcasting from space for fear of  “unilateral  penetration”  or unwanted 
propaganda, Gardner  urged:  (1)  the   Administration to   proceed  imme- 
diately in  developing direct broadcast satellites;  (2) the  organization of  a 
pilot  demonstration project,  perhaps  in   India,  with U.N.  endorsement; 
(3) the   involvement of  AID  and  other  international lending agencies i n  
educational use  of  space communications; and  (4)  th e   reassurance  of 
friendly  nations  tha t   comsats  would  no t  be  used  for propaganda. 
Murray  L.  Schwartz, Univ.  of  Calif.  School  of  Law,  told  panel  tha t  
satellites were  one more example of  a technology tha t  might be moving 
too fast for existing social institutions. A “knowledge  explosion” heJped 
by  space  communications would  accelerate  homogenization of  society 
and  “one  of  the  great  problems is  to  make  sure   the  homogenization is 
no t   too  great,”  he  said.  (Clark, N Y T ,  5/5/66,  17; Simons,  Wush. Post, 
5/5/66,  A l )  
Muy  3:  House  passed  NASA  authorization  bill  for  FY  1967  (H.R.  14324) 
totaling  $4,986,864,150  as  follows:  $4,248,235,000  for  research  and 
development; $94,419,000 for construction of  facilities;  and $644,210,- 
150  for  administrative  operations.  NASA  had  requested  $5.012  billion. 
During debate preceding bill’s passage, Rep.  James G.  Fulton  (R-Pa.) 
offered  amendments,  subsequently  rejected,  to  eliminate  $41.9-million 
funding for   Apollo  Applications program  and  $9.l-million  funding for 
construction  of  lunar   sample  receiving  laboratory  a t   MSC;  to  reduce 
advanced missions  by  $5  million;  and  to  cancel  $10 million  of  prior 
authorizations  for  Facility  Planning  and  Design.  Rep.  Fulton  also 
offered,  but  later  withdrew,  a n   amendment  to  establish  an  Inspector 
General’s  Office  in  NASA. 
Commenting  on   NASA’s $5.012  billion  request  for   FY  1967,  Rep. 
Fulton  said:  “[It]  generally represents  a  tight  program i n  terms  of  th e  

164 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966“ 

allocation  of  resources  to   th e   programs  tha t   have  been  regularly  ap- 
proved  by  Congress  as  parts  of  the   Nation’s  effort  in   aeronautics  and 
space. 
“At  a level under  $4.9  billion,  I do  no t  believe  NASA  can  restructure 
i ts  Apollo program moon landing in  a form that would  not cast the  most 
serious doubt as to  i ts  ability to meet the  objective of  the  manned lunar  
landing within  this  decade. 
“At  $4.8  billion  the  moon landing objective could  no t  be met.  Below 
this  level  of  the   budget,  i t   would  become  clear  tha t   the   Nation  had 
bility  directed  toward  achieving space preeminence.  . . .” 
abandoned  th e   concept  of  developing  a  well-rounded total space capa- 
Rep. John Wydler  (R.N.Y.),  proposing an  amendment to earmark $20 
million  of  th e  total  R&D   funds  for  development work  on the  problem of 
aircraft  noise,  suggested:  “.  . . i t   is  incumbent  upon  us  to  bring  this 
[space] program closer to  the  people and show them some way  i n  which 
i t   can  benefit  them.  We  often  hear  there  is  going  to  be  a  fallout  as  a 
result of  this program-some  kind of  fallout  tha t  will affect the  civilian 
population beneficially. Here is an  opportunity to give them some fallout 
directly  tha t  will  be  of  benefit to  them.  . . .” Rep.  Wydler’s amendment 
was  defeated.  (CR ,  5/3/66,  9189-9223) 
May 3: Malfunction in  Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle’s attitude control system 
was  responsible for Centaur stage’s failure  to  achieve double ignition  i n  
space  during  April  7  AC-8  mission  from  ETR,  NASA  announced.  Pre-  
liminary analysis indicated  tha t   one or more small attitude control jets 
on  Centaur  stage  apparently  used  excessive  amounts  of  hydrogen- 
peroxide  gas,  causing  early  depletion  of  system’s  fuel  supply.  Exact 
cause  of  excessive  use  had  no t   yet  been  determined. Preparations  for 
AC-10 mission, which would launch dpmmy Surveyor payload  on direct 
ascent to  the  moon, continued on schedule a t  ETR.  (NASA  Release 66-92) 
Gemini 9 spacecraft was  mechanically mated  to  top  of  Titan  I1 booster a t  
ETR  in  preparation for May  17 launch  after  48-hr.  delay because of  tiny 
leak  i n   jet-powered maneuvering  un i t   stored  behind  spacecraft.  NASA 
officials said delay would no t   change launch date.  (AP, Phil.  Eve.  Bull., 
5/4/66;  AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  5/3/66,  A4) 
NASA  launched  four  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  carrying  acoustic 
grenade payloads  within  four  hours   from  Natal,  Brazil;  Point  Barrow, 
Alaska;  Churchill  Research  Range;  and  NASA  Wallops  Station.  GSFC 
experiment was  designed  to   obtain  temperature,  pressure,  density,  and 
wind  data  at  22-59-mi. 
(35-95-km.)  altitudes  during  seasonal  wind 
shift  from westerly  to  easterly  circulation.  First  group  0 ”  Nike-Cajuns 
had  been  launched  from  same  sites  May  1 as  shift  to  summertime 
easterly  pattern  began.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  Long-range HC-130H cargo aircraft equipped with Fulton Recovery System 
successfully  snatched  Capt.  Gerald  T.  LyVere  (USAF)  from Rogers  Dry 
Lake  a t   AFFTC  in   first  test  of  new  ground-to-air  recovery  system  for 
rescuing  downed  fliers  and  astronauts.  At  400-ft.  altitude  aircrzft 
clamped onto balloon-suspended nylon cable attached to harness dropped 
earlier  by  parachute,  pulled  Captain  LyVere  up  behind  aircraft,  and 
reeled  him over rear  ramp.  I n  later demonstration, Col. Allison Brooks 
(USAF)  and A-3C Ronald  Doll  (USAF)  were  recovered simultaneously in  
side-by-side two-man pickup using double harness.  Lockheed-built HC- 
130H, which would  become  operational  June  30,  could fly  missions to  
more than  2,000 mi.  from  its  base,  loiter  at sea level,  and rescue up  to 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS$ 1966 

165 

five persons in  multiple pickups from land or  sea. For NASA projects, air- 
craft  would  carry  complex UHF  spacecraft reen try  tracker  equipment to  
locate  reentering spacecraft.  (AFFTC  Release) 
M a y   3: Rep. Lester L. Wolff  (D-N.Y.)  pu t  in  Congressional Record  a telegram 
from Charles H. Ruby, president of International Air Line Pilots Associa- 
tion, opposing $75,000 absolute liability award to survivors  of  victims of 
international air accidents.  Proposal, Ruby  said, would  invite sabotage 
“. . . and would  offer  . . . criminals the  incentive  of  an  automatic payoff 
without  requiring  them  to  buy  insurance.”  (CRY 5/5/66,  A2474) 
0  Air  Transport Assn.  (ATA)  noted major developments i n  air transportation 
in   1966 annual report,  “Facts  and Figures”:  (1) airlines  accounted for 
59% of  all inter-city  common carrier services compared  to  14% in   1950; 
(2)  sustained  growth  rate  of  16.2%  over past  three  years  outdistanced 
all other major U S .  industries;  (3)  improved efficiency and economy of 
operations  enabled  airlines  to  absorb  steady  advances  in   wage  rates, 
material, and equipment prices ; (4) heavy airline investment in  modern- 
ization and improvement permitted reduction in  average fares and eased 
inflationary  pressures;  and  (5) more  than  85%  of  record  profits were 
reinvested  in   expansion and  improvement program.  (ATA  Release  39) 
0  Thailand and Malaysia joined Intelsat-International  Telecommunications 
total  number of 
Satellite Consortium headed  by ComSatCorp-bringing 
member  nations  to  50.  ComSatCorp said  i t   “warmly  welcomes  this  as- 
pect  of  the   development  of  the   consortium  and  the   intention  of  other 
countries toincrease Intelsatmembershipevenfurther in  the  near future.” 
Yugoslavia  and  Romania  had  also  shown  interest  i n   Intelsat  and  were 
considering joining.  (ComSatCorp Release; Clark, NYT ,   5/3/66,  9) 
0  Criticism of  Government research  and  development programs in  Richard 
J. Barber’s  The Politics  of  Research was  cited in  a review by Donald Mintz 
for  the  Washington Evening Star:  (1) DOD ,   NASA,  and AEC  contributions 
-90  per  cent  of  total R&D  support-indicated 
emphasis on defense and 
space at the  expense of  social and behavioral sciences;  (2) 70 per  cent of 
F&D  funds  was  directed  to  development; most  of  remainder  was  spent 
on applied, not basic, research;  (3) Government agencies had given little 
attention  to  consequences of  their  undertakings.  (Mintz,  Wash.  Eve. 
Star,  5/3/66,  A10) 
0  Former  Vice  President  Richard  Nixon  told  a  Republican  fund-raising 
dinner in  Houston that US. should divert  some of i ts  space exploration 
funds  to  the  Vietnam  war  effort.  (AP, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  5/4/66,  A36) 
a  Minuteman  I1  had  entered  operational  service  with  Strategic  Air  Com- 
mand, with delivery of  first 50-missile squadron a t  Wing 6, Grand Forks 
AFB.  (M / S  Daily,  5/3/66) 
Muy  4:  NASA  selected  Control Data  Corp.  and  IBM  for  competitive negotia- 
tions  of  a $15-million contract to   furnish a large-scale digital computer 
complex  a t  URC. 
(NASA  Release  66-102) 
0  Soviet  physicist  Pe ter   Kapitsa,  who  had  received  the   1966 Rutherford 
Prize  for Physics May  3 in  London, told  a  press  conference tha t  US.- 
U.S.S.R.  rivalry was good, stimulated research,  and produced variety  of 
solutions  to  different problems. Kapitsa said he  thought the  Soviet space 
program  was   ahead  of  US., but  could  no t   prove  it.  (Wa sh .   Post, 
5/5/66,  A20) 
0  NASA  had selected ARINC  Research Corp. and Im/Federal  Electric Corp. for  
competitive  negotiations  leading  to   $1,750,000,  one-year,  cost-plus- 

166 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

incentive-fee  contract  to  provide  technical  support  for  Sa turn   launch 
vehicle  reliability program a t  MSFC.  (NASA  Release 66-104) 
May  4:  A  Space  Sciences Division  in   the   Engineering  and  Development 
Directorate,  a  consolidated  medical  directorate,  and  title  changes  for 
key  management positions  became  effective  a t   MSC.  Medical  Research 
and  Operations Directorate would  be  headed  by  Dr.  Charles A.  Berry, 
formerly Chief  of  Center Medical  Programs. Medical  directorate  would 
include  Biomedical  Research  Office,  Medical  Operations  Office,  and 
Occupational and  Environmental Medicine  Office.  Addition  of  medical 
directorate brought  the  number  of  Center directorates  to  five. The  four 
Assistant  Directors  would  be  known  as  Directors:  Director  of  Admin- 
istration,  Wesley  L.  Hjornevik;  Director  of  Flight  Crew  Operations, 
Donald  K.  Slayton;  Director  of  Engineering  and  Development,  Dr. 
Maxime  A.  Faget;  and  Director  of  Flight  Operations,  Christopher  C. 
Kraft,  Jr.  (MSCI  1130.1; MSC  Roundup,  5/27/66,  1,2) 
0  Astronauts returning to ear th  after long space flights in  sterile environment 
might have  to  take  bacteria  pills,  suggested Dr.  T.  D.  Luckey, Univ.  of 
Missouri Medical  School,  a t   American  Society  for  Microbiology  con- 
vention  in   Los  Angeles.  Dr.  Luckey  suggested  that  astronauts’  sterile 
air,  food, and water  eventually could dangerously reduce the  amount of 
bacteria  in   their  systems,  resulting  in   bacterial  illness  when  they 
returned  to  earth.  Pills  could  restore  normal  degree  of  immunity  to 
terrestrial bacteria.  (AP,  Wash.  Eve. Star,  5/4/66,  A12) 
Time intervals of  less  than  a billionth  of  a  second were measured  for  first 
time  i n  a  laboratory  by  Dr.  Arnold  Shastak,  Office of  Naval  Research. 
Dr.  Shastak  reported  tha t   such  intervals  might be  significant  in   deter- 
mining  the   frequency  of  electromagnetic waves  and  in   research  in to  
s truc ture  and distribution  of  particles  in  atomic and molecular systems. 
(Henry, Wash.  Eve. Star,  5/4/66,  A27) 
Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn.  named  William  Hines  of  the  Washington 
Evening Star  recipient  of  the  Robert S. Ball Memorial Award  for  excel- 
lent writing.  Cited for his  continuing coverage of NASA’s MARINER  IV  Mars 
probe,  Hines  would  receive  a  trophy  and  $300  a t   the   Association’s 
annual  meeting  i n   New  York  May   24-26.  (AP,  NYT ,  5/5/66,  6 ;  AP, 
Wush. Post, 5/5/66,  B2) 
0  JPL  Director  Dr.  William  H.  Pickering  received  1965 Spirit  of  St.  Louis 
Medal  for  “outstanding  service  to  the   U S .   in   directing  the   research, 
design development, and successful  operation of  the  Ranger  unmanned 
lunar   reconnaissance spacecraft  and  the  Mariner  interplanetary  space- 
craft.”  Presentation,  by  ASME  and  the   City  of  St.  Louis,  was  made  a t  
National  Transportation  Symposium  in   San  Francisco.  (Av. Wk., 
5/16/66,  23) 
Muy 5:  Independent Offices Appropriations Bill H.R.  14921 for FY  1967 was 
reported to the  House and scheduled for floor action May  10. Appropria- 
tions  Committee recommended  $4,245,000,000  for  NASA  research  and 
development, compared  to  $4,248,235,000  authorized by  House;  $75,- 
000,000  for  construction  of  facilities,  compared  to  $94,419,000  au th -  
orized by  House; and $630,000,000  for administrative  operations,  com- 
pared to  $644,210,150 authorized by House. Total recommendation was 
$4,950,000,000,  compared  to  $4,986,864,150  authorized  by  House. 
(Text;  NASA  LAR  V/75,  5/5/66) 
0  NASA Administrator James E. Webb appointed Dr. John  F. Clark as Director 
of  GSFC.  Dr.  Clark,  formerly Deputy Associate Administrator for  Space 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

167 

Science and Applications (Science),  had  been Acting Director  of G SFC  
since July  1965. (NASA  Release 66-105) 
May 5:  Sen. Milton R .  Young  (R-N.D.)  introduced bill  (H.R. 3309) to au thor-  
ize  prototype  construction  of  supersonic  transport  (Sst)  financed  by 
Government-guaranteed bonds  under  Supersonic Transport Authority. 
Proposed  procedure  would:  (1)  eliminate  necessity  of  Government’s 
appropriating  up  to  $1.5  billion  for  project;  (2)  provide management 
guidelines and sound basis  for determining industry’s  share  in  develop- 
ment  costs;  (3)  make  use  of  development-phase assets  in   production 
phase;  and  (4)  permit  contractors  and  public  to  participate  as  stock- 
holders in   corporation  to  produce and sell  Sst.  (CRY  5 /5 /66 ,   9396) 
NASA’s  first manned Apollo flight might be made in  1966 instead of  1967, as 
originally  scheduled,  predicted  Dr.  Joseph  F.  Shea,  manager  of  NASA 
Apollo  Spacecraft Office  a t   MSC,  in  a  speech a t  NAA’S  plant  in  Downey, 
Calif.,  to   press  group  touring manufacturing  and  test  sites  for Apollo 
spacecraft  and  Sa turn   boosters.  “The  Apollo  program  is  about  on 
schedule in  time, cost and performance. We have found the  performance 
of  the  hardware some better  than  we  had  expected, on  the  basis  of  tests. 
All  testing  for  the   first  manned  flight  probably  will  be  completed  by 
the  end  of  June. 
“I  hope we  can make  the  first manned flight  this  year,  although it is 
not  scheduled  until  next  year.  I  think  that  the   first  lunar   excursion 
module w i l l   be  sen t  up  next  year. 
“I  am  su re  personally  tha t   our  first lunar   landing will  be  done com- 
fortably  before  the   end  of  the   decade.” 
C. R. Able, group vice president  of  Douglas Aircraft Co.’s  Missile and 
Space Systems Div.,  outlined  to  the   group  plan  for  converting empty 
hydrogen  tank  from  Saturn  V’s  3rd  stage  into  manned  space capsule. 
For conversion, series of metal balloons  containing liquid oxygen would 
be added to  original orbited payload, to  serve later for breathing and  for 
combination  with  hydrogen  to  operate  fuel  cells  for   producing  elec- 
tricity.  An  Apollo  or   Gemini  spacecraft  would  dock  with  empty  3rd 
stage, and astronauts would  emerge to  remove end cover plate in  end of 
the   tank,  after  purging  i t  of  any hydrogen remaining from launch. An 
airlock,  carried aloft as part  of  original payload  or launched later, would 
be attached  to opening left by removal  of  cover plate and tank would be 
repressurized  with  oxygen  from  metal  balloons  to   provide  astronauts 
with “shirtsleeve  environment.”  Tank walls would have about 100  sha l-  
low threaded holes  for mounting work benches, furniture, or other con- 
venient  items,  presumably launched  separately.  Able  emphasized  tha t  
purpose  of  stage  conversion-to 
offer  astronauts  relief  from  cramped 
quarters  and  extended  weightlessness-did  no t   duplicate  function  of 
USAF’S  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (Mol).  Douglas  Aircraft  Co., 
McDonnell Aircraft  Corp.,  and  Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering Corp. 
each had $50,000 NASA  contracts to  study use of  booster cases.  (Wallin, 
St.  Louis Post-Dispatch, 5/5/66;  UPI,  Miami Her.,  5/6/66) 
e  Technology and automation derived from U S .  space effort could not raise 
social,  educational,  moral,  or  religious  values,  Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh, 
Executive Secretary of  NASC,  told Churchman’s  Club  in  Baltimore,  bu t  
science and  technology do  increase  the   opportunity to make improve- 
? e  
ments. Where there  is more leisure, more accumulated knowledge, and 
greater  understanding,  there  is  also  increased  opportunity  to   improve 
character  and  raise  human  values.  Certainly,  the   opportunity  which 

168 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

such   progress  gives  toward  the   elimination  of  war  is  a n   impressive 
justification  for  the   entire  space program.”  (Text) 
Muy 5:  Small hydrogen-oxygen  engine  originally developed  for Sa turn  S-IV 
rocket stage was  being  adapted  to  serve as heater  for  expanding  helium 
gas used  in  repressurizing  S-IVB propellant  tanks  in  space. Burner,  pro- 
viding a n  800-lb. payload gain  through weight  reduction, would make  i t  
possible to meet pressure requirements by  using  supercold helium from 
bottles  immersed  in   liquid  hydrogen  inside  fuel  tank,  and  would  serve 
as  possible source  of  low-thrust ullage  control power  during weightless 
flight.  (MSFC  Release 66-92) 
*  Small semi-pressure weather  balloon  designed to drift indefinitely entered 
i t s  four th   orbit of  the  earth,  establishing world’s  record  for flight  dura- 
tion,  reported Walter Sullivan in  the  New   York  Times. Balloon  wa s   one 
of a series launched March  30 from Christchurch, New  Zealand, as part 
of  Sou thern   Hemisphere  experiment  to  examine  feasibility  of  Global 
Horizontal  Sounding Technique  (Ghost). Ghost-plan 
to  use  satellites 
to  locate and  read  ou t  information from  approximately  10,000 balloons 
floating  around  earth  a t   constant  altitudes-would 
express  s ta te   of 
entire earth’s atmosphere i n  numbers which would  then be processed by 
computer to achieve reliable forecasts for  two weeks ahead.  Participants 
i n  Ghost project  were  National Center  of  Atmospheric  Research,  ESSA, 
and  New  Zealand Weather  Service.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,  5/5/66,  16) 
Bell  Aerosystems  Co.  announced  plans  to  develop  ,254011  air-cushion 
vehicle  (Acv)  capable  of  carrying 90  passengers  or  12  tons  of  cargo. 
Capable of  amphibious  operations, hovercraft would be  56 f t .   long, 16% 
ft. high,  and have  cruising speed of  at  least  60 mph,  and  could be  avail- 
able within one and one half to two years.  (Bell Aerosystems Release 30) 
AFSC  Commander  Gen.  Bernard  A.  Schriever  received  Henry  H.  Arnold 
Gold Medal for “distinguished  service to augment progress and readiness 
in   air  and  space”  and , fo r   “distinguished  service  in   defense  of  ou r  
country”  a t  American  Ordnance Assn. meeting  in  Washington, D.C.  In 
his acceptance speech,  General  Schriever  quoted General Arnold’s  1S38 
prediction: 
‘Planes of  the   fu ture  may  have  telescopic wings,  which, 
once  in   f igh t ,   can  be  foreshortened,  telescoped,  or  pulled  i n   . . . thus  
greatly  accelerating  the   forward  progress  of  the   vessel  of  reduced  size 
and decreased  air resistance.’ This description  . . . anticipated  the  prin- 
ciple  which  is  employed  today  on   the   F-111 sweepwing  fighter.  . . .” 
(Text) 
Muy  6:  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  CXVII  carrying scientific instruments  for 
continued  study  of  outer  space.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  308  km. 
(191 mi.);  perigee,  207  km.  (129  mi.);  period,  89.5  min.;  inclination, 
65”.  Instruments  were  reportedly  functioning  normally. 
(Pruvdu, 
5/7/66,  USS-T Trans.) 
NASA research pilot John B.  McKay made  successful  emergency landing on 
Delamar Dry Lake, Nev.,  when engine of X-15 No.  1 aircraft shu t  down 
prematurely-probably  because  ammonia  fuel pump  ruptured-32 
sec. 
after aircraft had  been  dropped  from B-52 bomber  at 45,000-ft. altitude. 
McKay escaped injury,  and X-15 suffered only minor damage.  (Edwards 
AFB  Memorandum;  X-15  Proj.  Off.) 
First  of  uprated  5-2  rocket  engines  designed  to  power  upper  stages  of 
Sa tu rn  IB  and Sa turn  V launch vehicles had  been  delivered to  MSFC  for 
static  firing.  N U ’ S   Rocketdyne Div.  had  increased  engine’s maximum 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

169 

thrus t   to  230,000  lbs.  by  strengthening turbine wheels  of  turbopumps 
and  modifying  engine  control  system.  (MSFC  Release  66-91) 
May   6: Dr.  Athelstan F.  Spilhaus,  dean  of  Univ.  of  Minnesota Ins t i tu te   of 
Technology, received  patent  for  a n   astronomical  clock  to  keep  track 
of  the  movements of  the  sun, moon, stars, and tides; provide a perpetual 
calendar;  and  show  local  and  world  time.  Dr.  Spilhaus  said  his  clock 
could  aid  astronomers and  navigators.  (Jones,  N Y T ,   5/7/66,  35) 
0  NASA  had selected Computer Sciences Corp. and General Electric Computer 
Div.  for competitive negotiations  leading to  a one-year, $6-million, cost- 
plus-incentive-fee  contract  to  provide support services  to  MSFC’S  Com- 
putation Laboratory.  (MSFC  Release  66-96) 
Two  rocket  engines which  had  key  roles  in   US. space program-RL-10 
and W - 1   engines-were  being given to  Smithsonian Institution  by  MSFC 
for  National  Air  Museum’s  display  on  the   history  of  rocketry.  (MSFC 
Release  66-95) 
Muy  6-7:  Former Astronaut  John H.  Glenn attended annual meeting of  t h e  
Transatlantic Council, Boy  Scouts of  America,  in  Garmisch, Germany, 
and  participated  in   ceremonies marking  German-American  Friendship 
Week.  While  i n   Europe,  Glenn,  i n   his  capacity  as  NASA  consultant, 
would  speak  on U.S.  space program to  educational, scientific, and  tech- 
nical groups i n  Germany, England, Sweden, Finland, Norway, Denmark, 
Belgium,  France, and  Switzerland.  (NASA  Release 66-100) 
May   7:  President Johnson announced U.S.  would  seek a  treaty  through  th e  
United Nations “laying down rules and procedures for the  exploration of 
celestial  bodies.”  He  listed  a s   “essential  elements”  of  the   proposed 
treaty:  (1) the   moon  and  other  celestial  bodies  should  be  free  for 
exploration and use by all countries;  (2) no country should be permitted 
a  claim of  sovereignty;  (3)  there should be  freedom of  scientific investi- 
gation, and all countries  should cooperate in  scientific activities relating 
to  celestial  bodies;  (4)  efforts  should  be  made  to  avoid  harmful  con- 
tamination;  (5)  astronauts  of  one  country  should  give  any  necessary 
help to astronauts of  another country;  (6) no country should be permit- 
ted  to  station weapons of mass  destruction on  a  celestial body; and  (7) 
weapon  tests and military maneuvers should be  forbidden.  (Text; Pres. 
Doc.,  5/16/66,  622 ;  N Y T ,   5/8/66,  66) 
Editorial  comment  on  President  Johnson’s  proposal: 
. . . In  addition  to  rules  governing space exploration a body  of  law 
C C  
is  needed  t o  govern the   exploitation  of  useful  resources  tha t  may  con- 
ceivably  be  found  on  other  solar  bodies.  Omission  of  this  topic  from 
the   first  international  treaty  on  space  law  could  produce  fu ture   dif- 
ficulties.  But the  President may well have felt  tha t  any present attempt 
beyond  the   time  of  the   first  manned  Iunar  landing.  . . . There  is  no 
to  reach  agreement on  this  delicate matter might prolong negotiations 
time to  lose in  getting international agreement to  and ratification of  this 
essential document.”  ( N Y T ,  5/9/66,  36) 
. . . Someday such  a  treaty may  save us  from a  new  sort of  far-out 
C e  
interplanetary  imperialism.  As  revived  by  Mr.  Johnson,  however,  th e  
proposal  has  to  do with  a  problem  tha t  will  develop  sooner  and  closer 
to home.  After all between now and  1969 or  1970, Americans are  going 
to  be  lofted  to  the  moon’s  surface,  and s o  are Russians. This is  a pros- 
pect  full of  very great historic importance. I t  lends special force to   th e  
President’s  call  for  a  renewed  effort  . . . to  negotiate  an  understanding 

170 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

under  which  the   always  unpredictable  Russians  will  sign  a  treaty 
worthy of  the  name. . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star,  5/10/66,  A6) 
“The  first  manned  landing  on  the   moon  seems  likely  before  1970. 
The   implications  are   immense,  regardless  of  whether  the   first  one  is 
American o r  Russian. President Johnson’s  proposal  for an  international 
compact to govern this and outer space explorations makes much sense. 
“. . .Perhaps a willingness  by  Moscow  to  entertain a  treaty  on  space 
may  also  open the  door  to  discussions about pooling some of  the  costs, 
as  the  la te  President Kennedy proposed.”  (Boston Globe, 5/11/66) 
. . . Probably the  most  succinct  argument  against a  comprehensive 
( C  
treaty  of  th is   na ture   is,  ‘Who  needs  it?’  Monopolization  of  the   lunar 
surface  by  military  units  and  establishment  of  terror  weapons  on  the  
moon  o r   in   orbit  appear  to  be  neither  immediate dangers  nor  remote 
possibilities. The  bugaboo  of  a n   orbiting  multimegaton H-bomb seems, 
on  close  examination, to  be  more  trouble than   i t  would  be  worth.  . . . 
“There  is  no  slightest  indication  tha t   the   Russians propose  to   lay 
claim  to  th e  moon  if  the ir   cosmonauts get  there   first,  any  more  than 
we  do  if   we  win  the  race.  The  precedent  followed  by  both  countries  in  
Antarctica-nearest 
thing  to  the   moon  on  earth-is 
neither  to  assert 
nor  to  recognize  territorial claims. This was  U.S.  and  Soviet policy  be- 
fore  the   Antarctic  Treaty  was  signed  in   1959.  . . .,,  (Hines,  Wash. 
Eve. Star,  5/12/66,  A20) 
May  7:  Secretary of  Defense Robert S. McNamara’s contention tha t   Nike-X 
antimissile  missile  system  was  incapable  of  defending  U.S.  against 
Soviet  attack  and  should  be  kept  in   R&D  stage,  received  support  from 
Society of  American Scientists’  executive board.  In   a statement oppos- 
ing  Senate vote  providing $168 million  toward  deployment of  Nike-X 
system, the  SAS  board  said:  “These  expenditures,  truly  enormous  over 
extended  periods,  would  be  the   hallmark  of  a  frightened,  not  a  great 
society..  . .” (Wa sh .  Post, 5/8/66,  P14) 
Muy 8:  GEMINI VU Astronaut Frank Borman told a British television audience 
in  London tha t   the   space vehicle,  not  man,  was  limiting  the   length  of 
manned  space flight.  “We  are   finding  tha t   man  is  very  adaptable and 
tha t   if  you provide him  with  the  normal comforts he expects on ear th ,  
he  can function as well  a t  zero gravity as he  can  on earth.”  (AP, Wash. 
Eve. S tar ,  5/9/66,  A2) 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  chairman  Courtland  S.  Gross  described  flight 
in   proposed  U.S.  supersonic  transport  (Sst)  in   an   interview  for  This 
Week:  “ I t  will make th e  world  a lot  smaller. Its near two-thousand-mile- 
an-hour  speed  will  carry  passengers to  London and  Paris  in   two  and  a 
half  hours.  With  room  for  255  to  266  passengers,  five  abreast,  i t   will 
be a 222-foot walk  from the  tail  to  the  pilot’s  cabin. 
“But  the  biggest  thrill will be  cruising a t  70,000 to  80,000 feet above 
the  earth.  At  tha t   height  you will  enjoy the  kind of  stars and  sky  seen 
heretofore  only  by  U-2  pilots  and  astronauts-pinpoint 
icicles  sus- 
pended  i n   th e   blue-black  velvet  backdrop  of  space.  Most  of  the   at- 
mosphere is  below  the   supersonic transport’s  cruising  altitude,  so  tha t  
a t   night,  on  the   horizon,  there   will  be  the   bright  blue  band  first  re- 
ported  by  the   astronauts-light 
radiating  from  the   other  side  of  the  
earth.  When  flying  the  polar  routes  around  the  world,  passengers will 
enjoy  spectacular  electrical  displays  from  th e   ionization  of  gases  in  
th e  upper  atmosphere-great 
shimmering curtain;  of  color  that  flicker 
through th e  sky.”  (This Week, 5/8/66) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

1 71  

May  9:  NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  carried 
JPL  100-kw. radar  to  102-mi.  (164-km.)  altitude i n  experiment designed 
to  gather data  on behavior of  radar echoes as  a  function of  altitude for  
use  in   developing planetary  terrain  sounding  technique.  GsFC-managed 
flight  marked  first  successful  functioning  of  high-powered  radar  i n  
space.  Similar radar  had  been  flown  successfully  on  NASA  Convair 990 
April 27.  (JPL Release, 6/26/66;  PL,  Lab-Oratory, 6/66,  10) 
*  U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  x completed i ts  284th orbit  around moon and transmitted 
Communist  anthem,  “InternationaleYy’ on   command  from  Soviet 
center  of  deep  space  communications. Instruments  were  functioning 
normally.  (Pravdu, 5/10/66,  1, USS-T  Trans.) 
0  House  passed  bill  authorizing  appropriations  for  AEC  during  FY  1967 
totaling  $2,259,958,000:  $1,964,128,000 for   operating  expenses  and  
$295,830,000  for  plant  and  capital  equipment.  Rep.  James  G.  Fulton 
(R-Pa.)  urged  tha t   the   Appropriations Committee  consider  the   possi- 
bility  of  studying  lunar   materials  in   AEC  radiation  laboratories  ra ther  
than   building  new  NASA  Lunar  Sample  Receiving  Laboratory  a t   MSC. 
(NASA  LAR V/76) 
*  Commenting  on  President  Johnson’s  proposed  U .N .   treaty  banning 
sovereignty claims  on  the  moon,  Rep.  George P.  Miller  (D-Calif.)  told 
the   House:  “The  President  has  taken  a  very  progressive and  forward 
step . . . in   trying  to  establish  a  barrier  against th e  use of  the  moon  or 
outer  space a s   a  place  of  contest  for   the   nations  of  th e  world.  He  has 
asked  tha t   these  areas  be  internationalized  and  we   follow  in   space ex- 
ploration  tha t   principle  which  has  been  established  already  with  re- 
spect to   the  use of  nuclear wea  ons. 
“This  is  a great  step  forwar c f  by  the  President, and  w e  in   the  House 
should appreciate i t ,  and commend him for it.”  (CR, 5/9/66) 
Text of  Soviet Academy of  Sciences’ August  1965 proposal to  International 
Astronomical  Union  (IAU)  for   an  international  effort  to   search  for 
signals  from other worlds  was  made  public  in  Vienna. Proposal,  which 
implied  that  peculiar  objects  such  as  quasars  represented  the   kind  of 
beacon  a  civilization with  extraordinary  capability might build,  recom- 
mended  two  kinds  of  searches.  First  would  look  for  narrow-band sig- 
nals  which  a  “civilization  with  the  meager  energy resources  of  ear th”  
could  send  to  another  star.  Concentration  of  the   energy  into  narrow 
range  of  wavelengths  would  ensure  signals’  survival  for  hundreds  of 
light years.  Search would  be  confined  to   21-centimeter wavelength  i n  
the  spectrum emitted throughout space by  hydrogen. 
Second search would  be  for  signals  spanning much  of  th e   spectrum 
which  a  super  civilization  with  the   energy  resources  of  a  s tar   would 
generate.  Such signals would  be  difficult  both  to   decode and  recognize 
as  artificial.  Proposal,  which  recommended  round-the-clock  observa- 
tions  for   three   to  five  years,  would  be  discussed a t   IAU  General  As- 
sembly in   Prague  Aug.  22-31,  1967.  (Sullivan, NYT ,   5/10/66,  19) 
NASA Deputy Administrator Robert c. Seamans, Jr., said NASA would request 
$6 billion  for  FY  1968, including $900 million for Apollo  Applications 
and $100 million  for Voyager,  Aviation  Week reported.  Seamans’ state- 
ment  tha t   “Apollo  Applications  will  fill  the   post-Apollo  gap  and  tha t  
there  is no  need to define ano ther  goal now’’ was said to  conflict with th e  
recent  contention  of  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Admin- 
istrator for Manned Space Flight,  that  a clear definition of  the  Nation’s 
post-Apollo goal was  necessary.  ( A v .  Wk . ,  5 /9 /66 ,25)  

172 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

May  9:  AFSC  Commander  Gen.  Bernard  A.  Schriever,  a t   Armed  Forces 
Management  Assn.,  in   Washington,  D.C.,  predicted  a  management 
revolution commensurate with  the  explosive advance of  technology and 
th e  pressing na ture   of  military  requirements.  “I  th ink   tha t   th e  biggest 
challenge to management in   the  years ahead will  be  to  find ways  to  en-  
courage and use th e  full creative potential  of  individuals.  . . . We  must 
and judgment  can be  fully  developed and  employed.  . . .” (Text) 
create th e  atmosphere where the  unique human capacity for  innovation 
Communist China conducted r ra  nuclear explosion tha t  contained thermo- 
nuclear material”  over i ts  western  areas, Hsinhua, Chinese Communist 
press agency, reported. U.S.  officials in  Washington, D.C.,  surmised tha t  
explosion  indicated  China  was  on  the   verge  of  developing  a  thermo- 
nuclear  or   hydrogen  bomb.  (AP, N Y T ,   5/10/66,  4;  Topping,  N Y T ,  
5/10/66,  1) 
0  Indus try  bids to AFSC for study of  new  integrated satellite system as follow- 
on  to  the  Midas  early warning satellite would  be  due June 24,  Aviation 
Week reported.  Proposal request included studies for sensor payload and 
spacecraft.  Primary  sensors  would  be  optical,  covering  the   infrared, 
ultraviolet,  and visible spectra.  ( A u .  W k . ,  5/9/66,  23) 
USAF  announced  it  would  award  contracts  to  “individuals  within  the  
scientific  community”  to  conduct  “prompt,  in   depth  investigation  of 
selected  Ufo  reports.”  Funds  for  study,  which had  been  recommended 
by  Air  Force  Scientific Advisory  Board  in  March,  would  be  requested 
from FY  1967 and FY  1968 budgets.  (DOD  Release 388-66) 
Results of survey by DMS,  Inc., an  aerospace market research firm, indicated 
tha t   nearly  twice  as  many  aircraft  would  be  built  from  1966 through 
1975 in  the  non-Communist world as were produced during the  previous 
decade  as  a  result  of  continued  increases  in   airline  passenger  traffic, 
expansion  of  “private”  flying,  and  pr&sing  need  to   replace  obsolete 
military  aircraft.  This would amount to  about 260,000 aircraft for  total 
investment  of  $100 billion.  (DMS  Aerospace News) 
M u ,  10: House passed  Independent Offices Appropriation Rill  (H.R.  14521) 
for FY  1967 appropriating $4.95  billion  for  NASA.  Amounts  were  those 
recommended by  Appropriations Committee May  5. An  amendment pro- 
posed  by  Rep.  H.  R .   Gross  (R-Iowa) to  deny  funds  for  Lunar  Sample 
Receiving  Laboratory a t   MSC  was  defeated by  a  voice  vote.  (NASA  LAR 
V/77) 
First  perfect  dual  countdown rehearsal  in  Gemini series conducted at KSC 
i n  preparation for May  17 Gemini IX  mission.  (AP, NYT ,   5/11/66,  16; 
AP, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  5/11/66,  A6;  Wash. Post,  5/11/66,  A7) 
Accelerated  programs  for  launching  communications  satellites  had 
improved  prospects  of  earning  profit  in   1967,  reported  ComSatCorp 
president  Dr.  Joseph  V.  Charyk  at  annual  shareholders’  meeting  i n  
Washington,  D.C.  Predicting  a  100-fold  increase  in   ComSatCorp’s 
revenue potential  during five-year development plan,  Dr.  Charyk said: 
“. . . we  have  taken €irm steps  for  the   development of  even larger  and 
more versatile satellites for deployment on  a global basis in  1968. These 
spacecraft  will  weigh  approximately 240 pounds  in   orbit  and will  have 
a  capacity for  1,200 two-way telephone circuits  or  four television chan- 
nels.,’  He  also noted ComSatCorp had proposed  to  ESSA  tha t   i t  conduct 
joint  feasibility  study with  IBM  to  develop  satellites  to  collect, process, 
and  disseminate weather data on a global basis.  (Vartan, N Y T ,  5/11/66, 
65;  Fouquet,  Wa sh .  Post,  5/11/66,  E6) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

173  

May  10:  Alex  P. Aven,  owner  of  an   Oklahoma City,  Okla.,  petroleum  con- 
sulting  firm,  was  sworn  i n   by  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  as 
consultant to  the  Administrator on management. (NASA  Release 66-112) 
May  10-13: NASA  successfully  launched  18 Arcas  and   Hasp  meteorological 
sounding rockets  to  200,000-ft. altitudes  a t  intervals  ranging from four  
minutes  to  six hours  to  investigate  daily cycle of  wind  and temperature 
variations  in   upper  atmosphere,  compare  results  of  various rocket and  
balloon  measuring systems, and s tudy  effects of  radiation  from  th e  sun  
on  meteorological instruments.  Instrumented  payloads  descending by 
parachute  transmitted  atmospheric  temperature,  density,  and  pressure 
data,  and  ten   specially  instrumented  high-altitude  weather  balloons, 
interspersed  among rocket  firings,  transmitted  information as  they rose 
to  130,000 ft. Radar tracked both  balloon  and rocket payloads  to  deter- 
mine speed and direction  of high-altitude winds. Launches were managed 
by  NASA  Langley  Research  Center  and  sponsored  by  NASA,  USA,  USN, 
USAF,  and  ESSA.  (NASA  Release  66-118; Wallops  Release  66-25) 
May  10-19:  1966 Committee on Space Research  (COSPAR)  meeting was  held 
i n  Vienna. 
National Academy of  Sciences delegate Dr.  Richard W.  Por ter ,   sum-  
marizing activities  of  1965  U S .   space program,  said  a  manned  luna r  
landing  by  1970 would  be  a  “difficult  goal”  but  U S .   had  made  “sub- 
stantial progress. ,’ 
Dr.  Porter presented an  analysis of  data transmitted by  NASA  MARINER 
IV   Mars  probe  which  appeared to  support theory  tha t   ear th   sometimes 
has  comet-like  tail  stretching  past  orbit  of  Mars.  On  Feb.  5,  1965,  a 
peculiarly  timed solar  eruption sent series of  intense proton  clouds in to  
space, five of  which were  detected within 48  hrs.  by  MARINER  IV  and two 
other  U S .   satellites  in   near-earth orbit.  Second and  th ird   clouds were 
reported  by  MARINER  IV  three  to   five hours  prior  to  their  detection  near  
ear th ,  possibly because solar eruption had blown earth’s tail to enormous 
length,  forcing  two  clouds  to  detour  through  tail  in   order  to  penetrate 
earth’s  magnetic field.  (Sullivan, NYT ,  5/11/66,  16 ;  Toth,  Wash. Post, 
5/12/66,  A14) 
Chief  Soviet  delegate  Anatoli  A .   Blagonravov  summarized  1965 
U.S.S.R.  space  program,  and  said  LUNA  x,  which  entered  lunar   orbit 
April  3 ,   had  recorded  radiation  pattern  from  l u n a r   surface  similar  to  
tha t  from basaltic part of  earth’s  crust.  Apparently lunar  surface  exhib- 
ited  no  differentiation  equivalent  to  granite  on  earth,  indicating  tha t  
earth  and  moon  were  created  separately.  LUNA  x  had  found  level  of 
moon’s  magnetic field  barely  above  tha t   of  interplanetary space;  small 
increase was  attributed to moon’s  passing  through earth‘s  magnetic tail 
since liquid metal core wou f d  produce large magnetic field.  Report sug- 
a t  time of  measuremeat.  Im  lication was  tha t  moon is coId  throughout, 
gested  tha t   new  minerals  would  be  found  on  th e   moon  because  of 
unusual  chemical reactions  caused  by  its  extreme  temperature  range, 
the   impacts  of  micrometeorites,  and  rains  of  high-energy  radiation. 
(SulIivan, NYT, 5/11/66,  16 ;  Toth,  Wash. Post,  5/12/66,  A14) 
Soviet delegate A.  G .  Prishchep,  in  a joint  paper with colleague V.  I. 
Vashkov,  revealed  tha t   U.S.S.R.  planetary  probes  were  assembled  in  
clean rooms and sterilized with  two-fold process involving moist heat  to  
prevent  dryness and  a  gas mixture,  harmless to   th e  skin,  which  might 
have important surgical applications. Gas mixture contained  50% ethyl- 
ene   ox ide -ex t reme ly   poisonous  substance  which  is  dangerously 

174 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

explosive  when  combined  with  oxygen-d i lu ted   with  40%  methyl 
bromide for  safety  reasons. 
General Electric scientists H. G.  Lorsch and M.  6. Koesterer reported 
tha t  curren t  sterilization  cycles varied from  treatment a t  320” for  three 
hours  to baking a t  200°F for 1 4  days. They argued tha t  no more than  1 0  
billion  microbes should  exist  within  a  spacecraft  prior  to  beginning of 
sterilization if reasonable chance of killing virtually all of  them was to  be 
assured.  (Sullivan,  NYT ,   5/12/66,  79;  Beller,  M&R ,   5/16/66,  17-18) 
Drs.  Herbert  Friedman and  R.  W.  Kreplin,  Naval  Research Labora- 
tory,  reported  tha t   solar  radiation  level would  probably  exceed  highest 
ever  recorded  in   100  yrs.  during  1969-1970-time  of  first  projected 
manned  lunar   landing.  Basing  their  prediction  on  measurements  of 
solar  x-ray  emissions  taken  by  EXPLORER  xxx  (IQSY  Solar  Explorer) 
satellite,  Friedman and  Kreplin explained  that  x-rays, which  could  no t  
penetrate  earth‘s  atmosphere,  warned  of  approaching sunspots  before 
they  could be seen. Solar activities in  the  form of  sunspots and gaseous 
flares occurred in  11-12 yr.  cycles, but there  was also a gross cycle which 
reaches  i t s   greatest  intensity  every  80  to  100  yrs.  (Sullivan,  N Y T ,  
5/13/66,  19; Toth,  Wa sh .  Post,  5/13/66,  A12) 
Dr.  Bessel Kok,  Research  Institute  for  Advanced  Studies,  described 
a  small  ins trumen t  which  could  determine  the   existence  of  life  when 
landing  on  another  planet.  Designed  on  the   assumption  that  even  the  
simplest forms of  life use water and such common chemical compounds 
as phosphates and nitrates, device would  trace  the  transfer  of  nonradio- 
these  chemicals  to  water.  ( Wush .  
active  isotope-Oxygen 
18-from 
Pos t ,  5/13/66,  A12) 
Reports on little-publicized efforts were presented to  the  meeting:  (1) 
Italy’s  platform  for  launching San  Marco  earth  satellite  a t   sea  was  in  
African por t  of Mombasa and would  be  towed shortly to  site where U S .  
Scout booster would  launch  satellite  into  equatorial  orbit;  (2) Pakistan 
was  conducting monthly firings of  rockets tha t  injected copper chaff into 
stratosphere  to  disclose  winds  in   tha t   region  over  subtropics;  (3) 
U.S.S.R.  had  fired  150 meteorological  rockets-almost 
half  from  ship- 
board-and  U S .  was  firing about  120  monthly;  (4)  Romania  had  used 
orbital  data  from  Washington  and  Cambridge,  Mass.,  to  photograph 
ECHO  I  and  ECHO  II  comsats i n   coordination with  Soviet  expeditionary 
stations  in   Egypt  and  Mali;  (5)  Sweden,  Finland,  Russia,  and  East 
Europeans had  joined  in   observing orbital  flight changes of  ECHO  I  and 
ECHO  11  attributable  to   density  variations  in   wisps  of  air  a t   satellite 
altitude;  and  (6)  East German  scientists  reported  their  conclusions on 
upper  air  s truc ture   derived  from  real-time  transmissions  from  NASA 
EXPLORER XXII  satellite.  I t  was  estimated tha t  60  stations in  various parts 
of  the   world  were  monitoring  satellites  tha t   sen t   ou t   “blind”  data. 
(Sullivan,  NYT ,   5/15/66,  10E; Sullivan,  NYT ,   5/16/66,  88) 
Dr.  A.  I.  Lebedensky,  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  reported  that 
LUNA  IX  photos  revealed  lunar   surface was  steadily  eroding,  a t   least  in  
some places.  He suggested  tha t   erosion could be  caused  by  solar  winds 
or   impact  of  micrometeorites.  Lebedensky  pointed  out  two  peculiar 
features  on  LUNA  IX’S  photos  which  supported  his  theory.  First  was 
series  of  streaks,  resembling mineral veins  in   earth’s  bedrock, on  floor 
of  crater where LUNA  IX  had landed. It had previously been assumed tha t  
moon’s  surface was  buried deep in   debris  churned up  by  meteorite im- 
pacts.  Second  was  presence  of  rock-like  objects  on  small  pedestals 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

175 

similar  to   those  on  ear th  where soft  but  rock-strewn surface  had  been 
eroded. Stones, which  ranged in  size from one foot  to less than  one inch 
across  and whose pedestals  appeared as  high  as  they were wide,  “were 
the   most  unexpected and  important  result  of  the   flight,”  Lebedensky 
said. “Our  conclusion is that the  stone is harder than  the  ground around 
i t  and  screens  the  ground  underneath  from t h e  erosion effects of  solar 
winds  and  micrometeorites.”  Lebedensky admitted  the  possibility  tha t  
erosion  was  peculiar  to  the   crater  o r   a  particular  region  of  the  moon, 
but  saw  no  obvious reason  why  this  should  be  true.  (Sullivan,  NYT, 
5/17/66,  28; Toth,  Wm h .  Post,  5/17/66,  A17) 
Radio  occultation  measurements  from  MARINER  IV’S  July  14,  1965, 
Mars  flyby indicated  tha t   regions  on  the  surface of  Mars might vary  in  
height by three  miles (five kilometers), JPL scientist Dr. Arvydas J. Kliore 
reported.  (JPL  Release) 
Venus  was  rotating  clockwise only  once every 243  days,  but  during 
that  period i t   seemed to  be  synchronized with  earth, Dr.  Richard Gold- 
stein, chief of  JPL  Communications Systems Research, told  the  meeting. 
Dr. Goldstein zlso reported tha t  radar probes of  winter 1965 when Venus 
was  nearest  earth  indicated  prorninences with  the   ability  to   depolarize 
microwaves.  “They may  well  be mountain  ranges,”  Dr.  Goldstein said, 
“although  large  fields  of  boulders  would  also  depolarize  microwaves. 
On  earth,  of  course,  such areas usually  indicate  the  presence of  nearby 
mountains.”  (JPL  Release) 
Chief  Soviet  delegate  Anatoli  Blagonravov,  addressing  the   annual 
COSPAR press  conference, said France and U.S.S.R.  had been negotiating 
-within 
the   framework of  COSPAR-On 
cooperation i n   space research 
which  might  extend  to  incorporation  of  French  ins trumen ts  in   Soviet 
satellites  “if  this should be asked for.”  Asked if he  could imagine similar 
close  cooperation  between  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.,  Blagonravov  said  there  
was  no need for i t ;  if the  situation arose, i t  would be  better for them  to  
cooperate i n  processing data obtained from their own satellites.  (Reuters, 
Wash. Post,  5/20/66,  A5) 
May  11 :   NASA’s Surveyor spacecraft made  first successfuI soft-landing under  
its  own  power  in   test  at  Holloman  AFE.  36-sec.  descent  of  spacecraft, 
which had  been carried by  balloon to  1,000-ft. altitude,  was  slowed from 
velocity of  55 fps to  5 fps at point  of  impact by  its rocket engine. Test’s 
success was  necessary prerequisite  to May  30 Surveyor launch from ETR 
for soft-landing on  the  moon.  (AP, NYT ,  5/12/66,  39; AP, Wash.  Eve. 
Star,  5/12/66,  A16) 
e  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  CXVIII  carrying  scientific instruments  for  con- 
tinued  space research  into  circulsr  orbit  a t  640-km.  (398-mi.)  altitude 
with 97.1-min. period and 65” inclination.  Instruments were functioning 
normally.  (Tass,  5/11/66) 
0  NASA  was  negotiating  two  $300,000 contracts  with  SDS  Data  Systems and 
Perkin-Elmer Corp.  for   “design,  development, and  fabrication  of  two- 
gas  atmosphere sensor system”  for  fu ture  manned  spacecraft operating 
for 45  days or  longer. New  system would give a n  accurate measurement 
of  th e  mixed gases and  information on  presence of  carbon dioxide and 
water  vapor.  By  measuring partial  pressure of  each. component present, 
system  would  determine  correct  ratio  required  for  controlling  total 
atmosphere  pressure.  Manned  spacecraft  currently  used  a  single-gas 
system operating on  oxygen.  Longer missions  lasting  45  days  or more 
might require a two-gas system composed of  oxygen and either nitrogen, 

176 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

helium, or  another iner t  gas for crew health and safety. Contracts would 
(NASA  Release 66-113) 
be managed  by  URC. 
Ma y   11:  USN  successfully  conducted first guided  firing  of  Phoenix air-to-air 
guided missile over Pacific Missile Range. Missile, developed by  Hughes 
Aircraft Co., was fired from USN A-3 aircraft against drone target. All test 
objectives were met.  (USN  Release) 
NASA  selected  Dynatronics,  Inc.,  to  provide  18  additional  pulse  code 
modulated  (Pcm)  telemetry  decommut?tor systems  for  Project  Apollo 
communications under $2.3-million fixed-price contract. Systems would 
receive,  identify,  sort,  and  prepare  “real  time”  and  “onboard  stoi ed” 
data.  (NASA  Release  66-114) 
0  NASA  would  negotiate  $800,000  contract  with  RCA   for  design  s.udy  of 
imp  oved  Tiros  Operational  Satellite  (Tos)  for  national  operational 
weather  satellite  program.  Proposed 500-lb.,  cylindrical  satellite  would 
be  5  f t .   high  and  4%  ft.  in   diameter-compared  with  current  300-lb. 
satellites  2 ft.  high,  3% ft.  in  diameter-and  would  incorporate camera 
system now  carried in  two  operational spacecraft.  Stabilized by  flywheel 
and  magnetic a t t i tude   control  system,  satellite  would  always  point  to 
ear th ,   and  i ts   infrared  radiometers  would  scan  en t ire   world’s  cloud 
cover a t  night.  (NASA  Release  66-115) 
0  ITT,  RCA,  and  Western  Union  International requested  FCC  permission  to 
build  a $6-million ground station near Woodland, Ga.,  or  at Moorefield, 
W.Va.  The  three  carriers and AT&T also asked FCC   to deny ComSatCorp’s 
request  to   build  station a t  Moorefield.  ( V S J ,  5/12/66,  1) 
Ma y   12:  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  recom- 
mended  NASA  FY  1967 authorization  of  $5,008,000,000-$58,000,000 
more  than  House appropriation but  $4,000,000 less  than  NASA  request. 
Recommendations by  Committee included restoration  of  1967 Mariner- 
Venus mission and deletion of  amounts added by  House for  other flight 
projects in  lunar  and planetary programs; concurrence with NASA  request 
of  $3.5 million  for 260-in.  solid fuel rocket motor project;  reduction  of 
amoun t  requested for Lunar Sample Receiving Laboratory by $ 1  million; 
and  restoration of  $14,689,850 to  administrative  operation,  bu t   separa- 
tion  of  amount approved in to  two  categories: personnel  compensation, 
and benefits and  o ther   expenses.  (NASA  LAR  V/78-79) 
0  Lee  R.  Scherer, manager  of  NASA’s Lunar  Orbiter  program,  in   interview 
with  Seattle Times reporter Robert L .   Twiss,  expressed confidence  tha t  
t h e  Boeing-built  spacecraft  could  help  resolve many  unanswered ques- 
tions about th e  moon. With  funding and NASA  approval, Lunar Orbiters 
equipped with  devices  tha t   could  be  deployed  to  the   moon  could  be 
!aunched in  1969, yielding valuable scientific information, Scherer said. 
“We  could gain substantial information about  other areas  of  the  moon 
than   the   site  chosen  for  manned  landing.”  (Twiss,  Seattle  Times, 
5/12/66) 
0  West Germany’s lirst  satellite would  be  launched in   1968 with  U S .  Scout 
booster  to  study  inner   radiation  belts  and  aurora  borealis,  Science 
Ministry  i n  Bonn announced.  Orbit would  have  2,898-km.  (1,800-mi.) 
apogee  and  258-km.  (160-mi.)  perigee.  Nine  West  German  lirms  were 
participating  in   joint  NASA -W e s t   Germany  Science  Ministry  project. 
(Reuters,  Pu sh .  Post,  5/13/66,  A23; Reuters,  NYT,  5/13/66,  12) 
0  Results  of  nationwide Gallup  Survey  on  Ufo  sightings:  “More  than   five 
million  Americans  claim  to  have seen  something they  believed  to  be  a 
‘flying saucer.’ And  about ten  times as many people-nearly 
half  of  th e  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

177 

U S .   adult  civilian  population-believe 
tha t   these  frequently reported 
flying  objects,  while  no t   necessarily  ‘saucers,’  are   real  and  no t   just  a 
figment  of  the  imagination.”  (Gallup,  Wash. Post,  5/12/66,  K7) 
May  13:  156-in.-dia.,  glass-reinforced, plastic-cased, submerged-nozzle solid 
motor  reached  full  thrus t   of  300,000  lbs.  in   static  firing  a t   Thiokol 
Chemical Corp.’s  Wasatch Div.  Nozzle had expansion ratio of  3 4 : l   and 
directed  exhaust in to   83-ft.-long diffuser  tube  to   simulate high-altitude 
atmospheric  conditions.  Motor  was  one  of  two  units  being  built  by 
Thiokol  under  contract  to   AFSC  Space  Systems  Div.  to   demonstrate 
feasibility  of  a  high-mass-fraction,  high-performance, upper-stage 156- 
in.  solid motor.  ( A v .  Wk., 5/23/66,  29) 
Apollo  Spscecraft Lem  Adapter  (Sla)  was  transported  by  helicopter  from 
Tulsa  to   MSC  for  serles  of  vibration  and  acoustics  tests  in   conjunction 
with  other Apollo spacecraft modules and a  Sa turn  IB  instrument unit. 
(MSC  Roundup, 5/27/66,  1) 
Electrical fire broke out in  basement of  unoccupied room a t  JPL  and briefly 
interrupted communications with NASA  PIONEER  VI  interplanetary probe. 
Cause  of  fire had  not  yet  been determined.  (A€’, Wash. Post,  5/14/66, 
A4) 
0  World’s  first commercial model of  nuclear power generator was marketed 
by  Martin Co.  for  $63,000.  Designed  to  produce 25 w  of  electricity  for 
a t   least  five  years  without  refueling,  3,000-lb.  device  converted  heat 
from radioactive strontium-90 in to  electricity.  (Wilford, W I ,  5/13/66, 
55) 
AFSC  awarded  Martin  Marietta  Corp.  $3,115,200  increment  to  existing 
contract  to   study  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (Mol)  compatibility 
requirements  for  Titan  I11  program. Work  would  be  done  in   Denver, 
Colo.  (DOD  Release  413-66) 
NASA  was negotiating $35,000 contract with RCA for continued research on 
simplified  process  for  manufacturing microelectric  printed  circuits  by 
printing  patterns  of  paste  or  s lurry   through  screens  onto  a  ceramic 
wafer.  Utilizing  new  transistor  developed  jointly  by  NASA  and  RCA ,  
process would  enable transistor formerly inserted  by  hand to be printed 
onto the  wafer  simultaneously with  resistors  and  capacitors and permit 
several  connections  to   be  formed  a t   one  time.  Contract  would  be 
managed  by  IARC. 
(NASA  Release  66-109) 
‘‘Moonwalker”-device developed  by  Space General Corp.  for  astronauts 
to  travel  on  the  moon-had 
been  adapted for  crippled  children.  Built 
under  HEW  grant,  90-lb.  machine,  which  walked  on  eight  mechanical 
legs,  could  negotiate  sand  o r  mud,  climb  and  descend stairs, step up  a 
normal s tree t  curb,  and climb grades  of  15” or  more.  (Wash. Eve.  Star, 
5/13/66,  A l ;  Brevard  Sentinel,  5/13/66) 
May  14:  Gemini  10  spacecraft, manufactured by McDonnell Aircraft Corp., 
was  loaded  aboard USAF  transport plane  in  St. Louis  for  flight  to  KSC  i n  
preparation for launch i n  summer  1966. (UPI,  Wash. Post, 5/15/66,  A2) 
Potential of  U S .   space program  was  described by  Capt.  Robert F.  Freitag 
(USN, Ret.), NASA Director of  Field Center Development, OMSF, in  a speech 
before Michigan Assn.  of  the  Professions in  Detroit.  “Man’s  exploration 
of  space,  the  moon  and  the  planets  is  potentially  th e  greatest  inspira- 
tional  venture in  the  history  of man, and one in  which the  en t ire  world 
can share.  Thus,  the  exploration  of  the  space frontier  can well provide 
the  seed for new f lowe r ing spa rk ing  a Twentieth Century Renaissance, 
stirring  man’s  imagination,  ennobling  his  ambitions,  and  igniting  his 

178 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

spirit  with  fresh  hope  and  excitement.  As  the   European  Renaissance 
was  sparked by  th e  discovery of  new  continents and seas,  so a new  Age 
in to  space.  . . .” (Text) 
of  Discovery  in  many  arenas may  well  be  awakened  by  man’s  venture 
Ma y  14: USAF launched two unidentified satellites from WTR  with Atlas-Agena 
D  booster.  (U.S.  Aeron. & Space Act.,  1966,  150) 
Muy  15:  NASA  NIMBUS  11  (Nimbus C)  meteorological satellite  was  launched 
from WTR  with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena B booster in to  near-polar 
orbit  with  730-mi.  (1,175-km.)  apogee,  678-mi.  (1,091-km.)  perigee, 
108-min. period, and 80” inclination.  Flight plan had  called for 600-mi.- 
altitude orbit. 
NIMBUS  11,  three-axis  earth-stabilized  R&D  weather  satellite,  would 
flight-test  basic  technology  essential  to   meteorological satellites  and 
instrumentation necessary to study atmospheric structure. It would also 
extend meteorological observation to region of electromagnetic spectrum 
not  previously  covered.  Satellite  carried  Advanced  Vidicon  Camera 
System  (Avcs) and Automatic Picture Transmission System (Apt), both 
of  which operate during daylight portion of  each orbit; Medium Resolu- 
tion  Infrared Radiometer (Mrir)  to  store global medium  resolution  data 
on  earth’s  heat  balance;  and  High  Resolution  Infrared  Radiometer 
(Hrir)  to  provide  high-resolution  nighttime  cloud-cover photos  and 
cloud-top temperatures.  Addition  of  Hrir data  to Apt  system was  initial 
demonstration  of  stored  and  direct  readout  day-night  cloud  coverage 
capability. 3,000 weather photos would be taken daily by 912-lb. satellite 
and  transmitted  to  any  of  150 Apt  stations around the  world-eight  of 
which  had  been  modified  to   obtain  nighttime  cloud  cover.  Second  in  
NASA’S  Nimbus series of  meteorological satellites,  NIMBUS  11 was managed 
by  GSFC  under  overall direction  of  NASA  OSSA.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.;  O’Toole, 
NYT ,   5/16/66,  10) 
*  Boosted  Arcas  sounding  rocket  was  launched  from  deck  of  USNS  Range 
Recoverer  near  Koroni  Beach,  Greece,  as  test  for   flight  series  to   obtain 
data  on   electron  and  ion  density  distribution  in   ionospheric D  region 
dur ing  solar  eclipse May  20.  No  data  were  obtained because 2nd  stage 
failed  to   ignite,  but  problem was  corrected  to  ensure  successful  Rights 
during eclipse.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Gemini  IX Astronauts Thomas P.  Stafford  and  Eugene A.  Cernan passed 
the ir   h a 1  major  physical  examinations a t   KSC .   Mission  review  board 
confirmed May  17  launch date.  (Hines,  Wash. Eve.  Star,  5/15/66,  A l )  
*  Manufacturers  of  rocket  components, faced with  possible  work  shortage 
because of  NASA’s delay  in   formulating plans  for  post-Apollo missions, 
were making “frank pitches  to  the  U S .  Space Agency-and  presumably 
to  the  Defense Department-for  more business,”  wrote Alvin B.  Webb 
in  th e  Washington Post. Webb noted tha t   “Chrysler is expected to  begin 
building the  last of  i ts  Sa turn   1-B  boosters  by  the  end of  this year.  The 
same applies to Douglas production of  S4B upper stages for th e  Sa turn  5. 
“Boeing,  under  the  present schedule,  probably will  begin  to   r un   ou t  
of  work  on  the   Sa turn   first  stage  in   late  1967.”  (Webb,  Wush. Post, 
5/16/66,  D9) 
May  16:  NIMBUS  11 meteorological satellite was  reported “working beautifully” 
by  GSFC.  Among  the   thousands  of  photographs  transmitted were  those 
of  th e   Gemini  IX  recovery  area.  The  912-lb.  spacecraft  had  been 
launched May  15.  (UPI,  NYT,  5/17/66,  77) 

179 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
May  16: Live  commercial TV  coverage of  Gemini  IX  recovery  would  be 
provided  under  an   agreement  between  FCC,  ITT,  USN,  NASA,  and  Corn- 
SatCorp,  Aviation  Week  reported.  ITT  would  operate  a  station  on  the  
U.S.S.  Wa s p  in   the   Atlantic  Ocean  recovery  force.  Signals  would  be 
transmitted  to  the  U S .  via  EARLY B IRD  I  comsat. ( A v .  W k . ,  5/16/66,33) 
e  Soviet space doctors’ examination of  dogs Ugolyek and Veterok after  the ir  
22-day flight in  COSMOS  c x d u r i n g  which  they had  been harnessed and 
force-fed  through  stomach  tubes-indicated 
tha t   prolonged  stay  i n  
space  produced  functional  changes  in   animals  which  increased  upon 
re tu rn  to  ear th  and  then gradually disappeared. X-rays of  dogs’ skeletal 
systems showed  tha t  calcium had been  “washed  out.” Muscle mass had 
changed,  preventing  full  resumption  of  normal  motor  activity  un t i l  
eight  or  10  days  after  re turn .   High  pulse  rates  and  dehydration-find- 
ings  common  to  both  U.S.S.R.  and  U S .   manned  experiments-were 
observed, and on four th  to  fifth day after dogs’ re turn  there was  “ra ther  
considerable speedup”  of  erythrocyte  sedimentation  reaction  and  a n  
increase  in   number of  Ieucocptes in  blood,  both  apparently in  response 
to  normal  gravity.  In   summary,  doctors  said  tha t   while  functional 
changes did  occur during flight,  they were  no t   irreversible. Whether or  
not  zero  gravity  could  change  functional s ta te   of  organism to  extent 
tha t   i t   could not  re turn   to  normal was  not  yet  known.  (Tass,  5/16/66, 
USS-T Trans.; M&R,  5/23/66,  12) 
e  Sen. Karl Mundt  (R3 .D . )   informed Senate that Subcommittee on Govern- 
ment  Research expected  to  make  specific  recommendations to  improve 
Federally-financed research and development program, for which almost 
$16  billion  was  being  expended  during  FY  1966.  Sen. Mundt,  ranking 
minority member of  the  subcommittee, said primary task of group was  to  
determine and enunciate a more definitive, longer-ranging science policy. 
He  said  U S .   had  reached  the   crossroads,  where  “it  has  become  pain- 
fully  obvious  tha t  we  cannot  continue to  support all who  demand  sup-  
port,  but  must  be  selective  in   the   allocation  of  research  funds.”  This 
indicated that  one of  the  most pressing questions was how to direct NASA 
efforts, with Apollo program reaching its goal and no follow-on approved: 
now  is on the  threshold of placing a man on  the  Moon within this 
f
 
~
~
~
~
r
decade. After this what? This question  concerns the  leaders of  this  fine 
NASA  organization as  well  as  its  highly trained,  scientific and  technical 
staff. Where do w e  turn?  Shall the  space program continue on i ts  present 
course, or  shall i t  be broadened to better  serve the  everyday needs of  th e  
American  people?  This  is  a  priority  crossroads.  . . .”  (CR,  5/16/66, 
10212) 
NASA  awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and RCA  $90,000, six-month 
contracts  to   study  characteristics  for  proposed  Orbiting  Data  Relay 
System  (Odrs)  which  would  eliminate  gaps  in   communications  and  
provide  continuous  contact  with  spacecraft.  Studies  would  probe kind 
of  synchronous satellite and ground facilities required to  relay data from 
spacecraft in   earth  orbit  to NASA’s mission  control centers  a t  GSFC,  JPL, 
and MSC.  (NASA Release 66-119) 
e  ComSatCorp  had  negotiated  $44J,412  contract-largest 
ever  negotiated 
by  ComSatCorp with a foreign country-with  Nippon Electric Co.,  Ltd., 
Tokyo,  Japan,  for multiplex subsystem equipment for ear th  stations a t  
Oahu, Hawaii,  and Brewster Flat, Wash.,  which would  be  completed by 
1967.  System would  modulate  signals  received  from  communications 
carriers for transmission over satellite links, demodulate signals received 

130 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

from satellite  for  relay  to   land  distribution  systems, and  provide  con- 
tinuous monitoring for  quality  of  all  signals  being passed  through  the  
system.  (ComSatCorp  Release) 
May 16: Possible space developments in  1970’s were listed by Dr. Edward  C. 
Welsh,  NASC  Executive  Secretary,  in   a  letter  to   Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague 
(D-Tex.),  chairman of  House Committee  on  Science and Astronautics’ 
Subcommittee on  NASA  Oversight:  (1)  improved  propulsion,  including 
nuclear;  (2) merging of  aeronautics and astronautics  in  development of 
lifting bodies  and  winged  spacecraft  with  maneuverable reentry  capa- 
bility;  (3)  lunar surface exploration and possible establishment of  lunar  
bases;  (4) manned  earth-orbiting  space  stations;  (5)  unmanned probes 
within  solar system and manned expeditions to  planets  “whenever tha t  
becomes promising and practicable”;  (6) voice and TV direct  communi- 
cations  from satellites  to  home receivers  “throughout large sections  of 
the  world,”  and  advances in   operations  and  research  on  other  applied 
satellites.  (Text) 
0  Discussing “problems  of  prosperity”  confronting  airlines  in   the   jet  age, 
Robert Hotz said in  Aviation  Week tha t  growing number of  air travelers 
meant larger segment of U S .  population was  concerned with  “how much 
of  this  increasing  airline  prosperity  is  being  shared with  the   traveling 
public in  better  service and lower  fares.  . . .” Noting  that  CAB   chairman 
Charles Murphy had been urging airlines for about one year to  ‘‘revamp 
their  fare  s truc ture”   in   their  own  way  to  avoid  Federal intervention, 
Hotz said airlines could either  ‘?take a vigorous  industry approach”  tha t  
would  satisfy  customers  and  retain  corporate  solvency o r   “continue 
the ir  traditional  piston-powered attitudes and have an  angry public goad 
federal legislators and  regulators  into drastic  solutions  tha t   could leave 
both  the   airlines  and  their  customers in   a  worse  muddle  than   ever.” 
(Hotz, Au.  Fk., 5/16/66,  21) 
0  AFSC  had  completed  110 successful tests  of  Bak-11 (Barrier Arresting Com- 
ponent)--device  to  stop aircraft on  runway during emergency-at  Air 
Force  Flight  Test  Center  (AFFTC),  Edwards  AFB .   Device,  developed  by 
Research, Inc.,  consisted of  an  arresting  cable which  engaged main gear 
s tru ts  when actuated by aircraft’s wheels  rolling over switches mounted 
on  the  runway.  (AFSC  Release 46.66) 
Muy 16-27: U S .  sponsored communications satellite seminar to provide new 
and developing countries with basic knowledge and practical information 
on   economic  and  technical  requirements  for  ear th   stations.  Seminar, 
conducted under auspices of  International Telecommunications Union, 
included lectures, panel discussions, informal exchanges, and equipment 
exhibits  by  17 countries.  Talks were in  English with  simultaneous in ter-  
pretations  in   Spanish  and  French.  Representatives  of  44  nations 
attended.  (State Dept. Release  108) 
M a y  17:  Gemini IX mission was  scrubbed when Atlas booster  failed to  place 
Gemini Agena  Target Vehicle  (Gatv)  in  planned  185-mi.  (298-km.) cir- 
cular  orbit.  Launch of  Gemini 9 with  Command  Pilot  Thomas Stafford 
and Pilot Eugene Cernan was  to have followed 99  min.  after Atlas-Agena 
launch ;   Gemini  spacecraft  was  to  rendezvous and  dock  with  Gatv  to 
evaluate  ex traveh icdar   life  support  and  maneuvering  equipment  and 
procedures. 
Simultaneous countdown  of  the   Gemini Launch  Vehicle/Spacecraft 
and  the  Atlas-Agena had  progressed  smoothly and  the  Atlas  launch was 
normal  un t i l   121  sec.  after liftoff.  Then,  said  th e  Flight  Safety Review 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

181 

Board: “The Atlas No. 2 booster engine swiveled to an  extreme hardover 
position  about  10  sec.  before booster  engine cutoff.  The  other  booster 
engine and  the   sustainer  engine,  acting under  auto pilot  control,  con- 
tinued  to  work  to  counter  th e  asymmetrical thrus t .  
“After  booster separation,  th e  vehicle continued the  flight under SUS- 
tained thrus t   but a t  a down angle.  It had  also rolled to  a position where 
ground  guidance could  not  lock  on  or  reacquire.  Signals to   shu t  down 
th e  sustainer engine and inhibit ignition  of  the  Agena  engine were  sen t  
i nd  acted  upon  by  the  vehicle.  Agena  separated on  schedule and  both 
vehicles plunged into the  sea.” 
Gemini  IX-A  mission  was  scheduled  for  May  31-and 
later  re- 
scheduled for June  1-using  Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atda) 
as  target vehicle.  (NASA  Releases 66-97, 66-124; MSC  Roundup, 5/27/66, 
1; Wash.  Eve. Star, 5/17/66,  A l ,  A6;  Lewis,  Wush. Post,  5/18/66,  A l ,  
A6;  N Y T ,  5/18/66,  1, 26) 
Muy  17:  In  i ts  17 th  annual report, the  U.N.  Commission to   Study the  Orga- 
nization  of  Peace said the  General Assembly should “declare the   title of 
the   international  community”  to  the   high  seas  and  outer  space.  Six 
reasons were  cited:  (1) to  avoid  conflicts  over  them  between  nations; 
(2)  to   keep  their  resources  from  being  wasted;  (3)  to  prevent  their 
military  use;  (4)  to  prevent  their  contamination;  (5)  to  ensure  tha t  
all  nations  benefit  from  their  resources;  and  (6)  to  provide  the   U.N. 
with  an   independent  source  of  income. 
Report  continued:  “Member  nations  are   not  willing  to  pay  assess- 
ments  adequate  for   the   task  they  expect  the   United  Nations  to   per- 
form. The revenues of  the  United Nations must therefore  be augmented 
by  independent  sources  of  income.  No  one  can  estimate  now  what 
the   income  of  the  United Nations  might  be  from i t s  granting licenses 
fo r   the   exploitation  of  the   resources  of  the   seas  and  the   revenues 
which  should  accrue  to  i t   from  outer  space  communications.  It  is 
estimated, however, tha t   the   amount  of  money to  be realized  certainly 
should make  an   important  contribution  to  the  United Nations budget. 
Furthermore,  i t   should  help  pay  for  . . . technical  assistance  to  the  
developing  states.”  (AP,  Chic.  Trib.,  5/18/66;  Oatis,  Wush.  Post, 
5/19/66,  6 5 )  
*  150-sec. static  firing  of  Sa turn   S-11-T, a n   all-systems version  of  Sa turn  
V booster’s  2nd  stage, was  conducted a t  NASA  Mississippi Test Facility. 
I n   captive  ground  test  of  Nation’s  largest,  most  powerful  hydrogen- 
oxygen engine (200,000 lbs.  th ru s t ) ,  all major  test  objectives were  met: 
1,100 measurements  were  taken;  gimbaling  of  4  of  the   5  engines- 
which  in   flight  would  provide  stability  and  control  to  the   stage-was 
performed.  (MSFC  Rclease  66-108) 
0  U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  x spacecraft,  in   lunar   orbit since April 3, had  completed 
349 revolutions,  covered distance of  over 5 million km.  (3.1 million mi.) , 
and  transmitted  data  for  178 communications periods  with  all  ins tru-  
ments  functioning normally.  (Tass,  5/17/66) 
*  U.S.S.R.  had  developed  Polaris-type  missiles  which  could  be  fired  by 
remote  control  from  containers  planted  under  th e   sea,  diplomatic 
sources reported.  (UP I ,   NYT ,   5/18/66) 
0  Intensive  investigation  by  GSFC  and  contractors  had  no t   yet  determined 
causes  of  OAO  I  failure April  10.  OSSA  Review  Board  of  Observatory- 
class  Spacecraft would  continue analysis  of  failure  as  a primary objec- 
tive.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 

182  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

May  18: L/Col.  Robert A.  Rushworth flew  X-15 No.  2  for 81 sec.  in   test  to  
measure  stability  and  control  of  X-15  with  ventral  fin  attached.  He 
reached 3,689 mph  (mach 5.43)  and 99,000-ft. altitude.  Flight was  158th 
in  NASA/USAF  X-15 research  program.  (mc; X-15  Proj.  Off.) 
In   letter  to   Congress  transmitting report  on  the  Nation’s  oceanographic 
work,  President Johnson urged  tha t  funds be voted  to continue work on 
Project Mohole.  House Appropriations Committee had  denied  (May  5) 
$19.7-million  Presidential  request for NSF  work  on Mohole  in  FY  1967. 
Total cost was  estimated as  $110 million; about $25 million had  already 
been spent. President Johnson wrote: “The Mohole Project will provide 
the   answer  to  many  basic  questions  about  the   earth’s  crust  and  the  
origin of  ocean basins. It will  teach us how to drill in  the  ocean depths- 
the  prelude to   the  fu tu re  exploitation of  resources a t  the  bottom of  the  
sea.”  (Pres.  Doc.,  5/23/66, 6 6 1 ;  AP,  N Y T ,   5/19/66,  23;  Wash. Post, 
5/19/66,  A6) 
U.S.S.R.’s  third MOLNIYA  I  comsat, launched April 25,  successfully carried 
ou t   “first  experiment  in   observing  the   ear th   and  taking  television 
pictures  of  our  planet”  when  it  transmitted  photographs from  30,000- 
to   40,000-km.  (18,634- to  24,845-mi.)  altitude.  Lenses  and  light  filters 
of  television  camera,  focused on  earth by  means of  autonomous focus- 
ing  system, were  changed  to   obtain  images  of  earth  on W e r e n t  scales 
and   to  observe  earth’s  surface  elements  under  different  illumination. 
(Tass,  5/18/66) 
*  Summing  up  the   effect  of  May  17  loss  of  Gemini  IX  mission’s  Agena 
Target  Vehicle,  William  Hines  said  i n   the  Washington  Evening  Star: 
“. . . i t  is   obvious tha t   a t  the  very  least  the  American  space effort  has 
lost  three weeks  of  precious  time and possibly  $25 million in  money- 
the  cost of  the  lost hardware plus overhead. . . . 
“One  thing should be  clear from th e  experience of  Gemini 9. 
“There was  nothing  of  omission  or  commission  tha t   can be  charged 
against  NASA  in   the   failure  of  the   Agena’s  Atlas  launching  rocket.  If 
the   hackneyed phrase  ‘random  failure’  ever  was  properly  used,  i t  was 
in  describing yesterday’s  trouble. 
“The  Atlas,  as  a  standard  space  launching  vehicle,  has  had  49  suc- 
cesses i n  52 attempts over the  last three years-a  better  success record 
than  the  over-all American space program has enjoyed in  any year  since 
i ts  inception i n  1957.”  (Hines, Wash.  Eve. Star,  5/18/66,  AB) 
0  Eight photoelectric  photometer-telescopes were flown  from NASA  Wallops 
Sta.  on Aerobee  150A  sounding rocket  to  131-mi. (211-km.)  altitude to  
measure  stellar  ultraviolet  radiation  which  did  no t   penetrate  earth’s 
atmosphere  and  could  no t   be  observed  from  the   ground.  Readings  on 
light in  four spectral  bands were  telemetered to  ground stations during 
the  7%-min. flight conducted for Univ. of Wisconsin’s  Space Astronomy 
Lab. (NASA  Releases  66-30, 66-123; NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  Editorial  comment on  May  17  scrubbing of  Gemini IX mission: New  York 
Times: “For  the  third  time in   the  past  few months,  a  space experiment 
involving the  Atlas-Agena rocket  has  r u n  in to   trouble.  Late last year  a 
sequence of  events similar  to  yesterday’s  led  to  a  postponement of  the  
original  Gemini  rendezvous experiment,  while  in   March  of  this  year, 
Gemini  8 nearly  met  catastrophe  when  i t  was  docked  with  an   Agena 
target  vehicle.  There  may  well  be  no  connection  between  these  three 
separate incidents; but  since  the  Atlas-Agena has been  a highly reliable 
and  successful  ins trumen t   in   other  aspects  of  the   nation’s  space pro- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

183 

gram,  i ts   emergence as  the  weak  link  in   the  Gemini series poses  some- 
thing  of  a  mystery.  The   setback  caused by  last  year’s  failure  to   orbit 
an  Agena  target  vehicle was  made  up  for  by  the  brilliant  improvisation 
tha t  permitted Geminis 6 and  7  to  rendezvous Iast  December.  Warned 
by  tha t   earlier  experience,  space officials were  better  prepared for  this 
latest setback. The  substitute target  rocket they have on hand may per- 
mit  much  of  the  originally planned  Gemini 9 experiment to  take  place 
early next month. But for the  moment a t  least, a shadow has again been 
thrown over this country’s lunar  program.”  (NYT ,  5/18/66) 
Washington Post:  “We  shall  do  well  to  prepare  for  many  more  dis- 
appointments before man  reaches  the   moon,  including  the   possibility 
of  serious accident.  Wha t   remains  essential  in   the   competition is  tha t  
considerations  of  human  safety  not  be  sacrificed  to  too  feverish  a 
schedule.”  (Wa sh .  Post,  5/18/66) 
Washington Evening Star:  “The  simple fact  is  tha t  the  United States 
has  been  incredibly  lucky  tha t   no  catastrophic  accident has  yet  taken 
place dur ing  a manned  space flight.  The  fur ther  fact  is  tha t  the  nation 
cannot  logically  expect  this  luck  to  last  forever.  Progress  in   space,  as  
with  nearly  all  human  progress,  w i l l   come  a t   th e   cost  of  men’s  lives. 
And  the  nation  should be prepared for  the  day when  our luck runs  ou t ;  
prepared to accept tragedy as the  inevitable concomitant of  so  ambitious 
a voyage of  discovery.”  (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/18/66,  A18) 
May   18:  Lockheed  test  pilot  Ed  Brown  flew  American-designed,  German- 
built  F-1O4G  Starfighter  to   400  mph  in   8  sec.  from  Lagerfeld  Base, 
Munich,  Germany.  Rocket-assisted  takeoff  from  Zero  Length  Launch 
(Zell) platform  a t  30” angle  demonstrated aircraft’s  capability  to  carry 
ou t   combat operations from  hidden  areas  without  airfields.  (New  York 
News,  5/19/66;  Lockheed Aircraft  Gorp.) 
*  Unidentified  USAF satellite was  launched  from Vandenberg AFB  by  a Scout 
booster.  (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act.,  1966, 150) 
May  19:  Interplanetary  spacecraft  PIONEER  VI,  launched  by  NASA  Dec..  16, 
1965, reached perihelion-75.7  million mi.  from  sun-at 
10  p.m.  EDT. 
Among  findings  reported  during  probe’s  260  million  mi.  of  travel: 
exact  measurement  of  average  numbers  of  particles  in   interplanetary 
space; fact tha t  high-energy particles  thrown ou t  by  solar flares  (princi- 
pal radiation hazard  to man) traveled in  well-defined streams which were 
twisted  about  one  another;  and  solar  wind  did  no t   travel  in   straight 
lines.  PIONEER  VI  had  identified new  ion  (singly ionized helium)  in  solar 
wind,  had  found magnetic-field effects on solar wind  temperatures, and 
discovered tha t  sun’s magnetic field occurred in  filament-like “stringers” 
extending ou t  from i ts  corona. Spacecraft had  revealed tha t  regions  on 
sun   produced many  solar  flares  and  high  solar  wind  velocities,  as  re- 
ported by  MARINER  IV.  During its 154  days i n  solar  orbit,  spacecraft had 
transmitted  to  ear th   340  million  readings  of  3,000  separate  scientific 
measurements and  sent  back  3  million  readings  of  100 individual  en- 
gineering measurements.  Specifications called  for  operating life  of  six 
months  (complete on June  16, 1966), but  it could be  extended if  larger 
antennas  were  available  to  hear   PIONEER  VI  as  i t  moved  progressively 
away and ahead of  the  ear th  on i t s  smaller orbit around the  sun.  (NASA 
Release 66-122) 
XB-70A-only 
operational  aircraft  tha t   approximated size,  weight,  and 
speed  of  proposed  supersonic  transport  (Sst)-successfully  made  SUS- 
tained 2,000-mph (mach 3)  flight  a t  70,000-ft. altitude for  32 min. from 

184 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Edwards  AFB.  Although  air  friction  on  exterior  surfaces  caused  heat 
buildup  of  620”F,  crew  inside  cockpit  enjoyed  75°F  environment, 
proving  aircraft’s  skin  and  internal  systems  could  withstand  this 
temperature  range. Flight accomplished major goal in USAF’S  XB-70 test 
program  and  proved  tha t   sustained  “triple  sonic”  speed  was  possible 
for larger aircraft.  (AFFTC  Release 66-4-7) 
Muy  19:  Supersonic transport  (Sst) would  ‘‘grow  one foot  in  length”  when 
i t   reached  its  normal  cruising  speed  of  1,800 mph-result  of  metal’s 
expansion  and  contraction  during  transition  between  subsonic  and 
supersonic  flight-reported  AP.  “A t   altitudes  for  subsonic  flight,  an  
SST  will  be  exposed  to   temperatures  as  low  as  65 degrees  below  zero. 

Muy  19:  XB-70  research  aircraft,  shown  here  in  an  earlier  flight.  Later  this  year  NASA 
would  join  USAF in  using  XB-70  to  investigate  sonic  booms  and  other  high-speed flight 
phenomena. 

But in  17 minutes  i t  can reach  supersonic altitudes where  the  tempera- 
tu r e   on  the   outside  of  the   fuselage  will  be  450  degrees.’’  (AP,  Phil. 
Eve.  Bull.,  5/19/66) 
Cuba and U.S.S.R.  had signed agreement to improve Cuba’s meteorological 
service and hurricane  detection  system,  reported  the  New   York  T imes .  
Agreement  provided  for  “meteorological  laboratory”  equipped  with 
Soviet  radar  and  instruments  which  would  enable  Cuba  to  receive 
weather  data from all over th e  world and to exchange aerological sound- 
ings with  the  Soviet Union.  (NYT ,  5 /19 /6 6 , 8 )  

185 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
May  19: William Hines  charged  in  Washington Evening  Star  tha t  publicity 
given  to  proposed  U S .   supersonic  transport  (Sst)  was  “. . . part  of  a 
propaganda  barrage aimed  a t   the  American taxpayer,  who  in   the   years 
ahead will  be  called  upon  to  underwrite  deficits  clearly  predictable  in  
building and operating a costly fleet of  airplanes capable of  spanning the  
Atlantic in  two hours. 
“The  SST  program has been publicized  since  the  program’s  inception 
in  1963 with  the  same combination of  gobbledygook and public-relations 
hokum  used  so  successfully  in   merchandising  the   moon  program. 
Technological challenge, the  asserted psychological-spiritual imperative, 
and  the   added  spur  of  an   international  ‘race’-all 
are   cited  as  reasons 
compelling development of  a  2,000-mile-an-hour super-airliner. 
“Actually  the  SST, when built and placed in  operation, will be no more 
a  free-enterprise  product  than   the   Sa turn-5  moon  rocket  is.  It will  be 
built to government specifications, by contractors  selected by the  govern- 
ment,  with  development costs  largely  if  no t   entirely  underwritten  by 
the  government.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/19/66) 
May  20:  Test  version  of  Surveyor  spacecraft  designed  for   unmanned  soft- 
landing  on  moon  made  smooth  900-ft.  descent  from  a  balloon  over 
Holloman  AFB  in   successful  final test  prior  to  scheduled May  30 flight. 
Three  liquid-fueled  engines,  operating  on  information  from  two  radar 
systems aboard  spacecraft,  slowed  i t   from  descent  speed  of  about  50 
mph  to  about  3.5  mph  for  landing.  Test,  second  successful  Surveyor 
descent without  parachutes, had been  delayed more  than   two  hours by 
strong winds  and optical problems.  (AP, Wash. Eve.  Star, 5/20/66,  A I ;  
AP,  Chic.  Trib.,  5/21/66) 
*  Sa turn   V  all-systems 2nd  stage  (S-11) was  successfully  fired  a t   MTF  for 
355 sec.-its 
full duration.  The  big stage developed 1-million-lbs. thrus t  
from  five  hydrogen-and-oxygen-powered 5-2  engines.  (MSFC  Release 
66-116) 
Radio  astronomy  experiment  designed  to  measure  average  intensity  of 
cosmic  radio  noise  originating  outside  the   solar  system was  launched 
from  NASA  Wallops  Station  by  four-stage  Javelin  rocket  on  20-min. 
ballistic  flight  with  570-mi.  (918-km.)  apogee.  Measurements  were 
made  a t  frequencies which  could no t  be  accurately  detected by  ground- 
based  receivers.  Data  would  aid  study  of  galaxy’s  formation.  (Wallops 
Release 66-31) 
Five successful sounding rocket launchings were  conducted from the  deck 
of  USNS Range Recoverer during eclipse of  sun  in Greece, NASA  announced. 
Launchings of  the  Boosted Arcas  rockets,  par t   of  a  cooperative project 
of  the   Greek  National  Committee for  Space  Research  and  NASA,  were 
planned  to  investigate  ionization  of  the   upper  amosphere  during  solar 
eclipse.  (NASA  Release 66-32; NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
USN  announced  successful  completion of  flight  tests  of  V/Stol  XC-142A 
aircraft  aboard  U.S.S.  Bennington.  Tests  included  44   shor t   and  six 
vertical  takeoffs  a t   speeds  of  up   to  35 mph  backward  and  as  much  as 
400 mph  forward a t  25,000-ft.  altitude.  (DOD   Release  443-66) 
0  In  a press conference, NIMBUS 11 project  officials at GSFC said the  meteorolog- 
ical  satellite  was  “exceeding  all  expectations”  with  the   amount  and 
quality of  data  i t  was  returning  to  earth. Launched into nearly  circular 
orbit  May  15,  satellite  could  “produce  in   12  hrs.  as  much  refined 
weather data as  took  six months  to get out of  earlier  satellites.”  (Wash. 
Eve.  Star, 5/20/66,  A24) 

186 

AS 

6 

Muy 20: U.S.  and Greece launch Boosted Arcas  sounding rockets from USNS  Range Recov- 
erer  near Koroni Beach, Greece. 

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

187 

May  20:  Checks  of  distributions  of  Martian  and  lunar   crater  diameters in-  
dicated  tha t   the   visible  surface  of  Mars  was  2.2-to-3  X  109  years  old, 
Alan  B.  Binder,  Univ.  of  Arizona,  reported  in   Science.  This  result  im- 
plied  tha t  in   the   early  history  of  Mars  large-scale subaerial  erosion oc- 
curred.  Of 69 Martian craters  with diameters greater  than   10  km.,  13% 
had  central peaks. This compared favorably with  the  frequency  (11.7%) 
of  central  peaks  among  lunar   craters  and  may  indicate  the   peaks  re- 
sulted  from  the  impact mechanism ra ther   than  post-impact volcanism. 
Well-defined  system  of  lineaments  shown  in   MARINER  IV  photographs 
may  indicate  tha t  Mars had  lost appreciable angular momentum during 
its history.  (Binder,  Science,  5/20/66,  1053-5) 
NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding rocket  launched  from  WSMR  Carried  grazing 
incidence telescopes and bandpass filters to  estimated 107-mi. (172-km.) 
altitude in  GSFC  experiment to  obtain  solar x-ray photographs. Another 
GsFc-instrumented Aerobee  150 was  launched  from  WSMR  eight  hours  
later  to  121-mi.  (195-km.)  altitude  to  obtain  solar  spectral  data  from 
2-60  A.  Both  rockets  and  their  experiments  performed  satisfactorily. 
(NASA Rpt.  SRL) 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  held  a n   “open  house,”  including 
movies,  live  demonstrations, and  exhibits.  ~ G S F C  Release  G-7-66) 
May 21:  Boosted Arcas sounding’rocket, last in  series launched during solar 
eclipse from  USNS Range  Recoverer  near  Koroni  Beach,  Greece,  carried 
GSFC  experiment to  obtain data on electron  and ion density distribution 
in   ionospheric D  region.  (NASA Rpt.  SRL) 
Muy  22:  15-lb.  pigtailed  monkey,  connected  to   intricate  battery  of  mini- 
aturized  instruments,  would  be  launched  into  ear th   orbit  in   1967 to  
provide US. scientists with 30-day study of  his health, JPL announced. 
Monkey-an 
astronaut  stand-in-would 
be  par t   of  the   Biosatellite 
series  projected  by  NASA.  Particularly  meaningful  to   NASA’s space 
biology program would  be urinalysis  tests,  showing changes in  calcium 
and  other  primate  urine  constituents,  which  should  indicate  how 
astronaut’s  metabolism  might  vary  during  prolonged  space  flights. 
ARC  was  in   charge of  the  program.  (JPL Release) 
*  US. Army  claimed  21  world  records  for  its  new  light  observation heli- 
copter,  OH-6A.  Nu-supervised  flights  a t   Edwards  AFB  resulted  i n   12  
speed  records,  and  three  each  for  distance,  climbing,  and  sustained 
altitude.  Records  had  been  submitted  to  F6dkration  Aeronautique 
Internationale in   Paris for  official approval.  (Chic. Trib.,  5/23/66,  16) 
Muy  23:  Debate began  in  Senate  on   authorization  of  NASA  budget  for  FY 
1967.  Sen.  Margaret  Chase  Smith  (R-Me.)  said:  “It  is  important  to 
note  tha t   the  pressures  creating  the  great  surges  in  progress-whether 
i t   be  in   science,  technology,  exploration,  or   economic  and  social 
from  outside  forces  and  considerations.  . . . 
development-come 
“It  is  these forcing  functions which mainly se t  the  pace  of  progress 
and  development. Space  is  no  exception.  Indeed,  the   great  surge  in  
space  research  and  exploration  is  a  classic  example  of  this  historical 
pattern.  It was  these  forcing functions which set i n  motion  the  revolu- 
tion  in   science  and  technology which  has  brought  us  to  the   era   we 
know  as  the   Space Age.  And  it is  these  forcing functions which  today 
in  space.  . . . 
and tomorrow will determine our  fu tu re  course and  our  fu ture  policies 
“The  decisions which  confront us  today  are  those which w i l l  deter- 
mine  whether  the   history  of  th e   last  half  century  will  repeat  itself  a 

188 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

few  years  hence,  and  whether  we  will  once  again  experience  a  bitter 
awakening to  the fact  tha t  others have seized the  initiative in  the more 
advanced  space  missions  of  the  future.  Indeed,  in  today’s  cold  war 
arena,  the  question boils  down  to  whether  this Nation  can  afford such 
a  luxury,  i n   terms  of  our  very  survival.  For  i t   is  clear  tha t   fu tu re  
leadership  in   this  scientific and  technological competition-which  has 
such  great  economic,  military,  and  political  significance-will  not  be 
easily held,  nor  would  i t  be  easily  regained once  lost.”  ( C R ,  5/23/66, 
10681-2) 
May  23:  Important  information  on  one of  several x-ray sources,  observable 
only from space, had  been  obtained by  experiments  on March 8 sound- 
ing  rocket  flight  from  WSMR,  NASA  announced.  Initial  results  from  data 
analyzed revealed  tha t   the   angular  size  of  the  x-ray source  in  the   con- 
stellation  Scorpius,  Sco  X-1,  could  not  exceed  20  arc-seconds.  This 
discovery disagreed with  widely held  view  tha t   this  source  represented 
an   ancient  nearby  (Milky  Way)  supernova.  It  strengthened  cu r ren t  
speculation  that  the  sources  in  Scorpio  and  many  of  the   other  x-ray 
sources  are  an   entirely  new  class  of  celestial  objects  characterized  by 
small  angular  size which  are  either  undetectable  or  star-like  in  visible 
light  or  radio  emission. The  detail  with  which  the  angular  size  of  this 
x-ray  source  was  measured  was  more  than  20  times  greater  than  any 
previous measurement  [see June  17-18].  (NASA  Release 66-125) 
USAF launched  unidentified satellite from WTR  with Thor-Agena D booster. 
(US. Aeron.  & Space  Act.,  1966,  150) 
NASA  Administrator James E.  Webb announced appointment of  William B. 
Rieke,  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Industry  Affairs  and  former 
president  of  Lockheed Aircraft  International,  Inc.,  as Acting Assistant 
Administrator  for Administration. Mr.  Rieke would  assume new  duties 
beginning May  30,  replacing  John  B.  Young  who  resigned  to  become 
an  assistant  to  BOB  Director.  (NASA  Release 66-131; NASA  Ann.) 
NASA  semiannual  procurement  report  revealed  continuing  sharp  upsurge 
in  use  of  incentive  contracts.  During  six-month  period,  NASA  had 
awarded 41  new  incentive  contracts  and  converted  two  cost-plus-fixed- 
fee  contracts  to  incentive  awards.  Tar  e t   value  of  all  incentive  con- 
tracts  as  of  Dec.  31,  1965, was  $2.184 %illion-more 
than  three  times 
the  total  a t  the  end  of  first  half  of  FY  1965.  (Text) 
0  A  NASA  Contract  Administration  Services Representative’s  office-headed 
by  Donald  R.  Mulholland,  Deputy  Director  of  NASA’s  w e s t e r n   Opera- 
tions  Office-had 
been  established  a t  headquarters  of  AFSC’S  Air  Force 
Contract  Management  Div.  (AFCMD),  Los  Angeles,  Calif.  New  office, 
which  completed  network  of  representatives’  offices  in  major  DOD  
centers,  would  “provide  liaison  between  AFCMD  and  NASA  elements  o n  
contract administration services support.  . . .,’ (NASA Hq. Bull., 5/23/66, 
6) 
0  International  Galabert  Astronautical  Prize  was  awarded  jointly  to  MSFC 
Director  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  “for  the  whole  of  his  work  in  the 
United  States,  particularly  on  the   Saturn  project,”  and  to  French 
space  technicians  Jean-Pierre Causse, of  the  Centre National  $Etudes 
Spatiales  (CNES),  and Roger Chevalier, of  the  Societe pour  ]’Etude e t  la 
RBalisation  d’Engins  Balistiques  (SEREB) , “as  symbols  of  the   French 
space effort.”  The  $4,000 prize would be presented  a t  October meeting 
of  International  Astronautical  Congress  in  Paris.  (French  Embassy; 
Reuters,  NYT,  5/24/66,  11) 

189 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
May  23:  Britain’s  W.  J.  Strang,  deputy  technical  director  of  the   Anglo- 
French  Concorde Sst project,  dropped  all  references  to  the  Concorde’s 
being  “the  world’s  first  supersonic  transport”  from  the  prepared  text 
of  an  address  before  the  Aviation/Space  Writers’  Assn.  in  New  York. 
When  asked about  this  omission, Bernard A.  Darrieux  of  France’s  Sud 
Aviation Co.  replied  tha t  French  aviation  experts  who  had  visited  th e  
U.S.S.R.  and  who  were  informed  of  Soviet  Dlans  said  there  was  a 
“strong  possibility  the  U.S.S.R.  may  be  f i r s t ly  (Norris,  Wash.  Post, 
5/24/66,  A28) 
Astronaut  Scott  Carpenter  decided  not  to  attend  Second  International 
Congress  on   Oceanography  in   Moscow  after  learning  tha t   the  US. 
ocean research  vessel  U.S.S.  Silas  Bent  had  been  denied  permission  t o  
dock  a t  Leningrad in  connection  with  the  conference.  Carpenter,  who 
had  participated  in  the  Sealab  I1  experiment  in  living  and  working 
underwater,  would  have  attended as an  aquanaut  and would  have been 
the  first  astronaut  to  visit  Moscow.  NAS  had  designated  Silas  Bent  to 
respond  to  Soviet  invitation  for  oceanographic  ships  to   visit  Soviet 
ports  during Congress so delegates couId visit  them bu t  Soviet Foreign 
Ministry had  refused permission.  (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/24/66) 
NASA  Apollo  Lunar  Excursion  Module  (Lem)  descent  engine,  Phase  11, 
test  began  a t  Arnold  Engineering  Development  Center.  (AEDC) 
May  23-25: Harsh  indictment  by  A.  V.  Cleaver, chief  engineer  for  rockets 
a t   Rolls-Royce, of  European  politicians  and  civil  servants  involved  in 
the  European  Launcher  Development Organization  (ELDO)  opened  th e  
sixth  annual European  Space Symposium a t  Brighton,  U.K.:  “I believe 
the  fu tu re   of  ELDO  is  extremely  bleak,  unless  Europe  as  a  whole  and 
the  United  Kingdom  in   particular,  adopts  a n   entirely  fresh  approach 
to  its  problems..  . . Europe  could  have  made  a  better  showing  if  her 
politicians  had  been  of  equal  caliber  to  her  technical  men,  insofar  as 
their  grasp  of  20th  century  realities  was  concerned.  . . . The  lesson 
is this:  a t  any time, the  leading nations are those preeminent in technol- 
ogy,  usually  in   the  technology  of  transport.”  Cleaver  noted  that  the 
European  nations  in  ELDO  had,  among them,  about  120% of  the  U S ’ S  
population  and  more  than  50%  of  the   U S .   gross  national  product, 
and  should  be  doing  far  more  than   the present  one-twentieth of  t h e  
U S .   space  effort.  (Coleman, A v .   T k . ,  5/30/66,  32) 
0  Optimistic  assessment  of  prospects  for  exploring  Mars  during  the  next 
decade and  finding some form  of  life  there was  presented  by  scientists 
a t   the  AAs-sponsored  symposium  on  “The  Search  for  Extraterrestrial 
Life”  in  Anaheim,  Calif.  Carlos  De  Moraes,  director  of  planetary 
program  studies  for  Martin  Co.,  visualized  a  series  of  space  flights 
from  1969  to  1979  and  culminating  in   the  landing  of  two  3,500-lb. 
“space  buses.”  First  flight, in   1969, would  be  of  an   850-lb. spacecraft 
tha t   would  provide  televised  mapping  of  the  Mars  surface  and  take 
measurements  of  the  atmosphere.  After  a  series  of  intermediary 
flights,  the  space buses would  land  in  1979 and  release both  automated 
biological  laboratories  and  roving  vehicles  tha t   would  explore  and 
gather  samples a t  points  away  from  the   immediate  landing  area. 
Dr. Norman H.  Horowitz of  JPL  noted  that  “any  form of  life, however 
primitive,  found  on  Mars  would  be  of  immense  scientific value.”  He 
said  tha t   no   matter  how  bleak  the  picture,  the   possibilities of  life  on 
Mars  should  be  explored  to  the  fullest  because  tha t   planet  appeared 
to  be  the  likeliest  site  for  life  beyond  the   earth. 

190 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

GE  engineers  P.  G.  Thome  and  Ernest  J.  Merz  described  giant 
clamshell under  development  that  would  be part  of  a  system  launched 
by  a  Sa tu rn   V  booster  in   1973.  The  thick  disc-shaped  object  would 
open  like  a giant mollusk when  landed  on Mars,  releasing devices tha t  
would  start  gathering  information  on  atmosphere,  weather,  soil,  and 
life.  Information  would  be  telemetered  back  to  earth.  Disc  could  be 
powered by radioisotope-fueled generator tha t  could keep i t  in operation 
for  up  to  six months.  (Texts) 
Speculating  about  meetings  with  intelligent  beings  from  or  o n  
another  planet,  Harold  D.  Lasswell, Yale  Univ.  professor  of  law  and 
political  science,  asked:  “Would  earthlings  unite  o r   wage  interstellar 
war? Would  we  have  to  kow-tow  to  a  more  advanced  civilization,  or 
dominate  an   inferior  one?  Suppose  they  had  no  more,  o r   even  less, 
feelings  of  love  and  responsibility?  Might  meeting  with  an   advanced 
society  push  man  fu r the r   toward  creating  a culture  of  frantic fun?” 
(Ap, Balt.  Sun, 5/26/66) 
May  24:  Senate  unanimously  passed  by  voice  vote  the  NASA  FY  1967 
authorization bill  of  $5,008,000,000-$121,135,850 more  than  the  sum 
voted  by  the   House  but  $4  million  less  than  President  Johnson  had 
requested.  I n   speech  on  Senate  floor  during  passage  of  bill,  Sen. 
Spessard  L.  Holland  (D-Fla.)  said  that  if  the  U S .   failed  to  continue 
development  of  solid  propellants,  i t   would  fail  in  the  one  thing  i t  
“should  be  doing  to  catch  up  with  the  Soviet  Union  in  the  field  of 
space  effort.”  Senate  bill  included  only  the  $3.5  million  requested  by 
the   Administration  for  one  additional  firing  of  a  half-length  260-in. 
solid rocket  motor.  In   other  debate,  Sen.  Joseph  S.  Clark  (D-Pa.)  said 
h e   felt  tha t   national  priorities  were  “substantially  out  of  order  when 
the  Senate, in  the course of  5 or  10  minutes, passes a $5 billion authori- 
zation  bill  to  send  a  man  to  the  moon,”  and  that  he  hoped  the   space 
effort could be pu t  on a n  international cooperation and not a competitive 
basis. Clark was joined in his remarks against the  bill by Sen. J. William 
bill  relating  either  to  outer  space  or  the  military  . . . in  my  view, 
Fulbright  (D-Ark.), who  said  such  action  was  “typical,  today,  of  any 
i t   is  a n   outrageous  distortion  of  priorities.”  ( C R ,  5/24/66,  10715-20) 
NASA  Aerobee 150 launched  from WSMR  reached  82-mi.  (132-km.) altitude 
in   GSFC-Princeton  Univ.  experiment  designed  to  study  ultraviolet 
radiation  of  the   star  Zeta  Ophiuchus.  Burnthrough  in  rocket’s  com- 
bustion  chamber  a t   50.1  sec.  caused  underperformance,  and  payload 
did  not  observe  primary  target.  Most  data  were  lost  through  long 
exposure  of  payload  film  to  direct  sunlight  before  recovery.  (NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
0  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  C IX   carrying  scientific  instruments  for  con- 
tinued  space  research.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  1,305 km.  (810.5 
mi.);  perigee,  219 km.  (136 mi.);  period,  99.8 min.;  inclination,  48.5”. 
Instruments  were  functioning  normally.  (Pravda,  5/25/66,  2,  uSS-T 
Trans.) 
0  First Europa  1 booster  for European Launcher  Development Organization 
(ELDO) was  successfully  launched  from  Woomera  Range  although 
malfunction in  an  impact  indicator  a t  a downrange radar  station led  to 
early  reentry.  Booster,  composed of  British  Blue  Streak first  stage and 
dummy  French  and  German  second  and  third  stages, was  programed 
for  143-sec. flight. Range safety officer cu t  flight short by  eight  seconds 
when  radar  indicated  Europa  1 was  heading  off  course  to  the   left. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

191 

There was  no malfunction  in  the  rocket  itself.  Reduction  of  data  later 
showed  booster  had  been  on  a  correct  course  a t   30.3-mi.  (48.8-km.) 
altitude.  Hawker  Siddeley  Dynamics  officials  estimated  test  was  90% 
successful,  and  tha t   CCobjectives were  achieved.”  Europa  1 was  spon- 
sored  by  U .K . ,   France,  Australia,  Italy,  West  Germany,  the   Nether- 
lands, and Belgium. (UPI,  Wash. Post, 5/24/66,  A12; NYT ,  5/25/66,22; 
A v .   Wk., 5/30/66,  32) 
May  24:  NASA  and  West  Germany’s  Ministry  for  Scientific Research  had 
signed  cooperative  agreement  to  investigate  the  physics  of  comets, 
interplanetary medium, and earth’s magnetosphere. Initial experiments, 
to  be  launched  in  fall  1966,  would  release  vaporized  metal  in   upper 
atmosphere,  creating  artificial  ion  clouds  which  would  be  observed 
from  ground.  Results  would  be  reviewed  to  determine  desirability  of 
conducting  similar  experiments  on  larger  vehicle  a t   a  distance  of 
several  earth  radii.  Under  agreement,  BMwF  would  provide  rocket 
payloads,  supplementary  cameras,  and  photometric  equipment.  NASA 
would  furnish  one  Javelin  and  one  Nike-Tomahawk rocket,  launching 
range,  support  facilities,  and  equipment  for  optical  observations. 
(NASA  Release 66-121) 
0  Former  Astronaut  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.,  received  Great  Silver  Medal  of 
Paris  from  Mayor  Albert  Chavanac  for  being  “one  of  the  pioneers  of 
space,  who  was  able  to  give  a  human  aspect  to  the   experiment  he 
attempted  so   successfully.”  (AP, NYT,  5/25/66,  3 3 )  
May  24-25:  Representatives  of  NASA  and  its  major  spacecraft  and  launch 
vehicle  contractors  attended  Saturn  Manufacturing  Review meeting  a t  
MSFC’s  Michoud  Assembly  Facility.  Meeting,  sponsored  annually  by 
MSFC,  was  held  to  “promote  the  interchange  of  space  vehicle  manu- 
facturing  technology.”  (MSFC  Release 6-115) 
May  24-26: Aviation/Space  Writers’  Assn.  held  annual  meeting  in   New 
York. 
AFSC  Commander  Gen.  Bernard  A .   Schriever,  in   luncheon  address, 
cited  three  factors  which  could  restrain  full  advancement  of  technol- 
ogy:  “The  first  of  these  constraints  is  the   relative  silence  of  our 
opponents.  A  few  years  ago  the   headlines  were  full  of  Soviet  threats 
of  orbital  bombs, missiles tha t   could  ‘hit  a  fly  in  the   sky,’ and  similar 
new  weapon  developments. . . . The  second  constraint  is  the  argument 
weapons.  Today,  by  contrast,  the   Soviets are  not  boasting  about  their 
made  in   some  quarters  tha t   U S .   military  research  and  development 
could  be  ‘provocative’ to  our  opponents.  This  argument  overlooks  the  
opponents,  because  it  contradicts  their  theory  of  history.  . . . The  
fact  tha t   ou r   very  existence  as  a  free  society  is  ‘provocative’  to  our 
third  constraint  is  the   immediate  need  for  large  funds  to   support  our 
forces  in   Vietnam..  . .,,  To  overcome  these  constraints,  General 
Schriever  said,  “we  must  harness  our  management  experience  and 
technological  knowledge  to  serve  the   national  purpose,”  i n   an   effort 
involving  every  “segment  of  our  national  life.  . . .” (Text) 
Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned 
Space  Flight,  discussed  implications  of  1968 space  budget  decisions. 
He  said U S .   today was  ‘‘not ahead  in  this  deadly serious competition,” 
and  “strong  and  increasing  effort”  would  be  required  “to  prevent  the  
Soviets from forging ahead as the  unchallenged leader in  space.”  (Text) 
Nike X  system  had  been  improved s o   that  i t   could not  only destroy 
hostile  satellites but also provide defensive cover for  the  entire Nation, 

192 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

reported  Dr.  Oswald  H.  Lange,  chief  scientist  for  the   Nike  X  project 
office  a t   Redstone  Arsenal,  Ala.  He  described  the   Nike  X  system  as  
employing  two  interceptors-the 
long-range  Zeus  and  short-range, 
high  acceleration Sprint.  (NYT ,  5/26/66,  4) 
R.  I.  Mitchell,  vice-president  of  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.’s  JetStar 
program,  said  tha t   Lockheed  would  produce  advanced  version  of  four- 
engine  JetStar  business  aircraft  capable  of  taking  off  on  shorter  run -  
ways  and  carrying  more  cargo  and  passengers  than  previous  models. 
New  Dash  8 JetStar,  powered  by  Pra t t   &  Whitney  JT12A-8  engine, 
would  reduce  runway  requirements  from  6,425  ft.  to  5,550  f t .   and 
would  have  1,000 fpm  faster  rate  of  climb.  (Lockheed Release) 
Two space rescue  systems  being tested  for possible use  by  USAF  were 
discussed  by  Harold  L.  Bloom  of  General  Electric  CO .%   Re-Entry 
Systems  Dept.:  (1)  “Emergency  cocoon”-an 
inflatable  shelter  to 
maintain  astronaut in  a  “livable  environment”  while awaiting rescue- 
would  use  thin  silicone  rubber  membrane  i n  dacron  and Mylar  skin  to 
provide  CQ ,   and water  vapor  control;  (2)  one-man  reentry vehicle  for 
self-rescue--“Manned  Orbital  Operations Safety Equipment  (MOO SE ) ”  
-would  consist of  foldable heat shield bonded  to Mylar bag.  Astronaut 
would  zip  himself  into  MOOSE  bag,  leave  spacecraft,  and  initiate  poly- 
ure thane   foaming  process;  foam  would  insulate  and  support  him 
during  reentry  oriented  with  small  rocket  in   an   attitude/de-orbit 
package.  Form-fitting  couch,  designed  to  be  traveling  at  less  than  
30 feet per second a t  the  time of impact,  would also double as a life raft. 
(Text; Wilford,  NYT ,  5/8/66,  66) 
Muy  25:  NASA  successfully  launched  EXPLORER  XXX I I  
(AE -B )   aeronomy 
satellite from ETR  with  three-stage Delta  booster.  The  2nd  stage burned 
8 sec. longer than  planned-failing 
to  cu t  off  and running to propellant 
depletion-and 
boosted  the   satellite  into  a  higher  orbit  than  planned. 
Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  1,688  mi.  (2,717.7  km.),  as  opposed  to 
planned  750 mi.; perigee, 180 mi.  (289.8 km.) ; period, 116 min.;  inclina- 
tion  to  equator,  65”. Launch was  third  time  Delta  2nd  stage had  failed 
to s h u t  down on time and sent 3rd stage and payload  to higher  altitudes. 
Built  by  GSFC,  and  the  last  of  the   original satellites outlined by  NASA 
when it was  established in   1958, the  495-1b., 35-in.- dia. EXPLORER  XXX I I  
was  designed  to  investigate  temperatures,  composition,  densities,  and 
pressure  in   the   upper  atmosphere  and  their  diurnal,  seasonal,  and 
annua l   variations  on  a  global basis.  NASA  later  announced  tha t   adjust- 
ment  of  onboard  programing  of  spacecraft’s  sensors  had  compensated 
for  higher  apogee  and  useful  scientific measurements  would  be  taken 
tha t   were  not  planned  originally.  All  eight  experiments  onboard  were 
functioning  “as  expected”  and  spacecraft  was  spin  stabilized  a t   t h e  
required  30 rpm. 
First  aeronomy  satellite, EXPLORER  XVII,  was  launched April 3,  1563. 
Results  included  first  d irec t   measurement  of  neutral  helium;  first  in 
situ  measurements  of  concentrations  of  neutral  atmospheric  constit- 
uents  a t  satellite altitudes as a function of  time and  solar  activity; first 
data revealing  difference by  a factor of two  (approx.) in  value  for atmos- 
pheric density as determined from onboard  sensors and from  changes i n  
satellite’s  orbit;  first  detailed  description  of  diurnal  and  latitudinal 
behavior  of  summer  ionosphere  near  altitude  of  F,  maximum  over 
eastern  US. a t   time  of  solar  maximum.  Results  had  indicated  more 
specialized  measurements  were  needed  to  reveal  basic  atmospheric 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

193 

processes.  EXPLORER  XXXII  incorporated  many  improvements  aimed  a t  
achieving this  objective.  (NASA Releases  66-96, 66-139; AP, Wash. Post, 
5/26/66,  E17;  WS J ,  5/26/66,  1) 
May 25: Fifth  anniversary of President John ??. Kennedy’s  call before a jo in t  
session  of  Congress  to  undertake  a  manned  lunar   landing  in   this 
decade. 
0  Referring to  President  Kennedy’s  challenge five  years  ago  “ to   achieving 
the  goal,  before  this  decade  is   ou t ,   of  landing a man  on  the  moon  and 
returning  him  safely  to  earth,”  William  Hines  commented  in   the  
Washington  Evening Star  on  the   progress made:“Of  course,  Kennedy 
did  not  ‘invent’ space.  Nor  did  he,  in   a  single  1,100-word exhortation 
to  Congress,  create  all  the   conditions  needed  to  make  a  lunar  program 
possible.  The  United  States  had  quite  a  respectable  space effort  going 
for  several  years  before Kennedy spoke, and  indeed th e  first American 
astronaut  had  flown  a  brief  suborbital  mission three   weeks  earlier. 
“The  foundations  on  which  Kennedy  could  build  a  moon  program 
advice  and  urging  from many  advisers 
were  there.  What  he  did-with 
including  the   then  Vice  President  Johnson  and  the   la te   ‘grand  old 
set a goal.  . . . 
man  of  space,’ Hugh  L.  Dryden-was 
“The  call  to  leadership  in   space  came  a t   a  particularly  troublous 
time  in   the   new  Kennedy administration’s  development. I n   the  month 
jus t   past,  April  1961,  the   United  States had  suffered  two  tremendous 
setbacks  in   what  had  been  called  ‘the  battle  for  men’s  minds.’  On 
April  12 Cosmonaut Yuri  Gagarin  orbited  the  earth-a 
full  10 months, 
as  i t   turned  out,  before  Astronaut  John  Glenn would  match  his  feat. 
And  on  April  19 the   bottom  fell  out  of  the   ill-conceived Bay  of  Pigs 
adventure  to  overthrow  Fidel  Castro  in   Cuba.”  (Hines,  Wash.  Eve .  
Star,  5/25/66,  A l ,  A5) 
First  full-scale  Apollo/Saturn  V  booster-spacecraft  combination  rolled 
out  a t   NASA  Kennedy  Space  Center  exactly  five  years  after  President 
Kennedy committed U.S.  to manned lunar landing by  1969. Designated 
AS500-F,  the   365-ft.,  500,000-lb.  facilities  vehicle  was  moved  from 
Vehicle  Assembly  Building  (Vab)  on  3,000-ton7 diesel-powered,  steel- 
link-tread crawler transporter to Pad  A for use to verify launch facilities, 
train  launch  crews,  and  develop  test  and  checkout  procedures.  (MSFC 
Release 66-114) 
0  USAF  Flight  Safety  Review  Board  announced  i t   had  pinpointed  cause  of 
the  Atlas booster failure  during the  aborted Gemini IX mission May  17: 
gimbaling  of  the   booster  engine which  forced  the   Atlas-Agena into  a 
hardover  trajectory  was  caused  by  a  shor t   circuit  in   the   electrical 
command  system  of  the   engine  pitch  servo  valve.  Although  several 
other  failures  could  have  caused a  similar  occurrence,  the   Board  said, 
only  this one could  have caused  the  exact  set of  data received  from  the  
launch  vehicle. Malfunction was   called a  random failure,  but  to  ensure  
tha t   i t  would  no t   happen again,  new  tests  would  be made  on  the  Atlas 
and  electrical  connections  in   all  new  boosters  would  be  x-rayed. 
NASA  scheduled th e  mission,  redesignsted Gemini  IX-A,  for  June   1. 
(UPI,  Wash. Pos t ,   5/26/66,  E17;  NYT ,   5/26/66;  NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
U.S.S.R.  announced  successful  completion of  rocket  tests  in   th e   Pacific 
to  test  equipment  for  spacecraft  landings  a t   sea.  Another  series  of 
tests,  which  had  begun  April  24,  was  being  continued  to   improve 
booster  rockets  necessary  to  propel  manned  spacecraft  to  moon. 
(Tass,  5/25/66,  USS-T Trans.) 

194 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Muy  25:  NASA  had  selected Boeing Co.  for  negotiations  on $5-million,  three- 
year  contract  to   provide  “technology for  high-power  solar  arrays”  for  
manned  and  unmanned  space  missions.  Program-part 
of  research 
effort  to   increase  amount  of  power  for  each  pound  of  overall  power- 
generating  system-would 
include  design  and  fabrication  of  nonflight 
experimental model  of  a  1,25O-sq.-ft.  deployable  solar  panel  assembly 
which would  have  12.5-kw.  ou tpu t   if  completely  covered  with  electri- 
cally active solar cells. Completed model would be tested under simulated 
space environment conditions and would  serve as  test  model  in  solving 
major problems  of  deploying large-area structures,  compact  packaging, 
and design  of  th in   solar cells and  lightweight material.  Contract would 
be managed  by  JPL.  (NASA  Release 66-133) 
In  a press  interview, Capt. Charles Oglesby  (USAF)  of  the  North  American 
Air  Defense  Command  (NORAD)  tracking  center  in   Moorestown,  N.J., 
said scanners were checking on 1,100 items in  orbit,  including function- 
ing   payloads  and  debris.  95%  of  items  i n   orbit  were  from  th e   U.S. 
Of   payloads,  the   U S .   had  167; U.S.S.R.,  43;  U.K.  and  Canada,  two 
each; and France,  three.  (AP,  Balt. Sun, 5/26/66) 
*  USAF  awarded  Ling-Temco-Vought  (LTV)  Aerospace  Corp.  a  $353,000 
contract  to   develop  improved  techniques  and   materials  for  “rapid 
landing  sites”  for   V/Stol  aircraft  and  helicopters.  Contract  called  for  
quick-setting,  resinous  materials  tha t   could  be  sprayed  on  ground  by 
unskilled  persons  in   remote  areas  where  i t   would  be  too  costly  and 
time-consuming  to  build  conventional  landing  sites  and  permanent 
shelter facilities.  (AFSC  Release 96.66) 
*  Eastern  Airlines  president  Floyd  D.  Hall  announced  company  had 
bought  options  on  two  French-U.K.  Concorde  Sst’s  for  service  o n  
Pacific  routes  and  to  Denver  and  Seattle.  Eastern  previously  had 
taken  options  on  two  U.S.  Sst’s.  ( V S J ,  5/25/66,  14) 
Muy  25-27:  Twenty  astronauts  toured  MSFC  laboratories  and  test  facilities 
and  received  briefings  on  Sa turn   IB  and  Sa turn   V  launch  vehicles. 
(MSFC  Release 66-99) 
M a y   26.-  MARINER  IV  spacecraft,  which  took  the   world’s  first  close-up 
pictures of  Mars July  14, 1965, was  again in  contact with  ear th ,  report- 
ing  on  the  space environment  and  its own  operating performance after 
18 mos. of  flight. NASA  said  telemetry  from  MARINER  IV,  received over  a 
197.5-million-mi. radio  link  with  the  Deep  Space Network‘s  Goldstone 
Tracking Station,  indicated  tha t   all  spacecraft  systems were  operating 
properly.  Launched Nov.  28,  1964, MARINER  IV  had  exceeded i ts  design 
life  by  more  than   100% and  gave  indications  i t   might  function  un t i l  
1968.  (NASA  Release  66-135; JPL  Release) 
President  Johnson  issued  executive  order  directing  Federal  agencies  to  
“provide  leadership”  in   prevention,  control,  and  abatement  of  air 
pollution.  (Pres. Doc.,  5/30/66,  696) 
e  A  superior  glass-covered,  super-blue  solar  cell  for  space  use  had  been 
developed by  scientists  a t  LRC.  “Super-blue” referred  to cell’s extremely 
high  sensitivity  to  blue  light-the 
higher  frequency  rays  of  sunlight 
tha t   reach only the  top surface of  the  solar  cell. Since experiments had 
indicated  tha t   radiation  damage  was  most  severe  in   cell’s  response  to  
low-frequency red  light,  program  to  develop  cells  ultraresponsive  to 
blue  light  was  begun  and  the   thin,  lightweight,  super-blue cell evolved. 
(LRC  Release 66-25) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

195 

May 26: USAF awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. $12,916,000 contract 
for Agena  rocket  launch  services  from April  1966 to  September 1967. 
Work would  be  a t  Vandenberg AFB.  (DOD  Release  462-66) 
May  27:  Dr.  Walter A.  Radius,  career  Foreign Service officer who had  been 
on  detail  to  NASA  from  State  Dept.  since  1963,  was  appointed special 
assistant  to NASA  Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis, Breene M. 
Kerr.  Dr.  Radius  would  assume  new  duties  beginning  June   6.  (NASA 
Release 66-129; PIO) 
0  NASA  selected Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.  and Martin Co.  for negotia- 
tions  of  parallel  one-year  $1-million  fixed-price  study  contracts  on  
integration  of  experiments  and  experiments  support  equipment  in  
space  vehicles  and  spacecraft  for   manned  Apollo  Applications  (Aa) 
missions.  Companies  would  define  experiment  integration  work  (pay- 
load  integration  in  Apollo  lunar  module, Sa turn  launch vehicle ins tru-  
ment  unit,  and  S-IVB stages  of  Sa turn   IB  and  Sa tu rn   V  vehicles.) 
Contracts would  be managed  by  MSFC.  (NASA  Release 66-137) 
0  Breene  M.  Kerr,  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Policy  Analysis, 
announced  appointment  of  Dr.  Irwin  P.  Halpern  as  Director,  Policy 
Analysis Staff, Office of  the  Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis. 
Dr.  Halpern,  a  CIA  s p e c i a h t   on  Soviet  and  Chinese  Communist 
political  and  military  affairs  and  doctrine,  would  assume  new  duties 
beginning June   5.  (NASA  Release  66-130) 
0  New  F-4J  Phantom  je t ,   developed  by  McDonnell  Aircraft  Corp.  for 
carrier  use  by  USN  and  USMC,  made  i ts   first  public  flight  a t   Lambert-St. 
Louis Municipal Airport.  Aircraft  had  higher maximum  speed,  greater 
range,  higher  combat  ceiling,  shor ter   takeoff  distance,  and  greater 
combat  capabilities than   other  Phantom models.  (McDonnell Release) 
Memorandum  of  understanding  for  cooperative  meteorological project 
called  “Eole” was signed by NASA  and French Centre Nationale d’Etudes 
Spatiales  (CNES) .   To  gather  data  on  atmospheric  circulation,  Eole 
project  would  use  network  of  constant  level  balloons-which  would 
drift  with  the   wind  and  act  as  tracers  of  air  masses-and 
a n   ear th-  
orbiting  satellite-which  would  record  pressure  and  temperature  data 
telemetered  from  balloons  for  later  transmission  to   ground  stations. 
CNES  would  be  responsible  for  “development  and  launching  of  the  
balloons  and  their  payloads  and  for  the   design,  fabrication  and  testing 
of  the   proposed  satellite.’’  NASA  would  provide  Scout  rocket,  handle 
launching, and  train personnel.  (NASA  Release 66-156) 
May  28:  Second-stage ground  test  model  of  three-stage  Sa turn   V  booster 
exploded  while  being  removed  from  test  stand  a t   MTF,  injuring  five 
persons-none 
seriously.  Stage,  which  had  five  hydrogen-oxygen J-2 
engines  capable  of  generating  1 million  Ibs.  thrus t ,   had  been  tested 
May 25 in  ground firing which had been  terminated after  195 sec. when 
hydrogen  line  leak  caused  automatic  cutoff.  A t   time  of  explosion, 
technicians  were  trying  to   determine  cause  of  hydrogen  leak.  No 
hydrogen  was  in   tank  when  explosion  occurred;  cause  of  explosion 
had  no t   been  determined.  (UPI,  Wash.  Post,  5/28/66,  A18;  Wilford, 
NYT ,  5/30/66,  22) 
Gemini  IX-A  was  officially  cleared  for   launching  June  1 on  three-day 
mission  tha t   would  include  rendezvous,  docking,  and  extravehicular 
activity.  After  hearing  reports  from  the   astronauts,  launching  pad 
crews,  and   th e   worldwide  tracking  network,  William  C.  Schneider, 

1% 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

mission  director, declared  Gemini IX-A “ready  to go.”  (N Y T ,  5/29/66, 
58; UPI,  Wush. Post,  5/28/66,  A l )  
May  28: NASA Associate Administrator for Manned  Space Flight Dr.  George 
E.  Mueller,  speaking  a t   meeting  of  Texas  Radiation  Advisory  Board 
and  Texas  Atomic  Energy  Commission  i n   Freeport,  Texas,  cited 
reasons  tha t   i t   was  vital  t h e   U S .   be  pre-eminent  i n   space:  “First, 
consider  the   nations1  security,  or  peace-keeping,  aspects. 
“Although  our  space program  is  a peaceful  endeavor,  i t   cannot  help 
bu t   have  a  profound  effect  on   our  fu ture  military  position.  Although 
there  is  no  military  space  force  in   being  in   any  nation’s  arsenal,  i t  
would  be  disastrous  for  the  United  States to  lack  the  basic  understand- 
ing,  the   basic  technology,  and  the   basic  engineering  which  would  be 
required  if  a n  aggressor  should  choose  to make  space  a  battlefield..  . . 
“In   the  international arena,  our  space program-and  Manned  Space 
Flight  i n  particular-may 
be  considered  as  a measure  of  our   ability  to 
compete  with  a  formidable  rival,  and  as  a  criterion  of  our  ability  to 
maintain  technological  eminence. 
“The  influence  of  our  scientific  and  technological  progress  and 
prowess  is  and  has  been  one  of  the   deciding  factors  in   keeping  the  
Cold  War   peace  over  the   past  20  years.  . . . Should we  fall  behind  in  
t h e  area of space technology,  we would jeopardize our national interests, 
on  earth  as  well  as  in   space.”  (Text) 
Muy  29:   T h e  Nation  was  facing  a  crisis  i n   space  planning,  NASA  Adminis- 
trator James  E. Webb said in  a press interview  a t  NASA Hq. The question 
was  what  to  do  with  the   Apollo  project  after  men  had  landed  on  the  
moon.  The   answer  would  determine  whether  the   U S .   remained  a 
major  spacefaring nation,”  and must be found within  a year, he  said- 
C C  
long  before  the   first  lunar   landing  ya s   made.  Search  for  the   answer 
had  been  postponed  several times  because  the   problem  seemed  remote 
and  budgets  were  tight.  “It  is  extremely  important  not  to  think  you 
can  postpone  the   decision  again.  I  think  i t   is  imperative  to  have  a 
thoroughgoing  national  debate  on  whether  we  want  to  go  past  the  
point  of  no   return.”  If  the   Nation  did  not  mind  being  second  to  the  
moon  or  chose  to  “dismantle  the   Apollo  machine  without  recovering 
i t s   great  investment,”  h e   would  accept  that,  he   said.  But  he   did  not 
believe tha t   either  the  Congress or  the  public had  consciously  reached 
these  decisions.  He  feared  they  just  had  not  thought  about  them. 
(Clark, N Y T ,  5/30/66,  1, 22) 
Soviet  aircraft  designer  Andrey  N.  Tupolev  described  U.S.S.R.’s  Tu-144 
supersonic airliner i n  Soviet  trade-union newspaper  Trud. Four-engine 
aluminum aircraft would  carry  121  passengers  a t   1,500 mph  (compared 
with  U S .   supersonic  transport’s  250  passengers  a t   2,000 mph) ; speed 
had  been  deliberately  limited  to  allow  construction  ‘?of highly  durable 
aluminum  alloys,”  Tupolev  said.  Tu-144 would  be  needle-nosed  with 
small  delta  wing  far  back  o n   fuselage  and  four  je t   engines  i n   single 
container  under  rear  section.  Aircraft  would  be  operational  in  “ the  
by  1970.  (Anderson,  NYT ,   5/30/66,  36C) 
nearest  future”-possibly 
Muy  29-June 4:   Mapping  the   moon  for  man’s  first  lunar  landing  was  dis- 
cussed  by  leading  scientists  a t   an  11-nation International  Conference 
on   Selenodesy  a t   Manchester,  England.  (Reuters, N Y T ,  5/30/66,  22) 
Muy  30-June  I:  NASA’s SURVEYOR  I  was  successfully  launched  from  ETR  by 
Atlas-Centaur  (AC-10)  booster  on  63-hr.  direct  ascent  lunar  transfer 
trajectory.  Spacecraft-carrying 
survey  television  system  and  ins tru-  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

197 

mentation  to   measure  lunar  surface  bearing  strength,  temperatures, 
and radar  reflectivity-was 
first in  series  of  seven designed to prove ou t  
design,  develop  technology  of  lunar   soft-landing,  and  provide  basic 
scientific  and  engineering data  in   support  of  Project Apollo.  I t   would 
softland  on  the  moon  June  2. 
After  SURVEYOR  I  separated  from  Atlas,  spacecraft  pointed  i ts   solar 
panels  toward  the   sun   to  power  i ts   equipment;  a t   five  hours  GET, 
sensing devices  fixed  on  the   star  Canopus for  cruise  attitude  stabiliza- 
tion. 
SURVEYOR  I  spacecraft  successfully  completed  mid-course correction 
of  flight  path  on  electronic  commands  relayed  from  antenna  near  JPL. 
Only  flaw  in   launching  occurred  within  one  hour   GET,  when  radio 
signals  indicated  tha t   one  of  two  antennas  on   spacecraft  might  have 
failed  to  deploy.  JPL’S  Surveyor  project  manager  Robert  J.  Parks  said 
the   problem  was  “not  going  to  preclude  a  possibility  of  getting  full 
success  ou t   of  this  mission  since  one  antenna  is  sufficient  to   receive 
radioed  commands  unless  the   spacecraft  gets  in   a  position  where  the  
working  antenna  is  out  of  range  of  earth.”  The  other  antenna  was 
properly deployed and working perfectly. 
Surveyor program was  under  direction  of  OSSA  Lunar  and  Planetary 
Program  Div.;  project  management  was  assigned  to  JPL;  prime  con- 
tractor  for  spacecraft  development and design was  Hughes Aircraft  Co. 
Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle  was  under  direction  of  LRC.  (NASA  Release 
66-127; Wilford, NYT ,   5/31/66,  1,  33;  Simons,  Wash. Post,  5/31/66, 
A l )  
May  30:  Planned  expansion of  the  global  communications satellite network 
of  the   50-nation Intelsat  was  being  postponed  two  years  as  a  result of 
pressure  by  the   FCC   on ComSatCorp.  ComSatCorp was  majority share-  
holder  and  served  as  manager  for  Intelsat.  Basic  question  raised  by 
FCC   was  whether  the   expansion was   too  ambitious  for  the   traffic  tha t  
would  be  available.  Threatened  with  FCC  veto  or  modification  of  i ts  
application  to  construct six  1,500-channel satellites  for launch in   1968, 
ComSatCorp  notified  FCC  tha t   deployment  of  the   follow-on  6,000- 
channel  multipurpose  satellite  had  been  postponed  from  1969-70 to 
1972 or  later.  (A v .  Wk . ,   5/30/66,  31) 
0  U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  x  spacecraft,  which  entered  selenocentric  orbit  April  3, 
had  stopped  sending signals  after  219  transmissions,  Tass  announced. 
(AP, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  6/2/66,  A l )  
The   “breakthrough”  in   the   air  cargo  business  was  discussed by  Robert 
Hotz  in   Aviation  Week:  “There  is  no  doubt  tha t   air  cargo  is  on  the  
move.  Airline  cargo  performance  in   1965  surpassed  forecasts  by 
astonishing margins. Domestic cargo  soared 25% last  year  in   con t ra s t  
to  the   airline predictions  of  16%.  International  cargo  rocketed  46%- 
with  a t   least  one  carrier  recording  a  65%  gain-compared  with  fore- 
casts of  a 25% increase. Many airlines  are now watching their projected 
cargo goals  for  1970 become a  reality  i n  1966. 
“Stuart  Tipton,  president  of  the   Air  Transport  Assn.  and  always  a 
conservative  spokesman  for  the   airline  industry,  cited  figures  in   a 
recent  speech  tha t   forecast  5.2  billion  freight  ton   miles  annually  by 
1970 and  15.3 billion  by  1975. Mr.  Tipton  noted  that,  although  these 
levels  compared  with  1.7  billion  freight  ton  miles  flown  in   1965,  th e  
forecasts  for  a  decade  hence  might  well  ‘be  very  conservative.’  ” 
(Hotz, A v .   Wk., 5/30/66,  21) 

198 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

May  30: Astronauts Thomas P.  StaKord and Eugene A.  Cernan,  the  Gemini 
IX-A crew,  practiced space rendezvous procedures a t  KSC  in  preparation 
for  the ir   scheduled June  1 mission.  (NYT ,  5/31/66,  33) 
0  “The  First  Soft  Step,”  program discussing Project Surveyor and showing 
f igh t   operations  facilities,  was  broadcast  on  six  Alabama  Educational 
Television Network  stations.  Program,  hosted  by  MIT  science  reporter 
John  Fitch,  was  first  i n   13-week “Science Reporter”  series  which  had 
been  taped  on location  a t  four NASA  centers  and nine  contractor plants. 
Second program, to  be  telecast  June 6, would  be titled  “Landing  on the  
Moon”  and  would  concern  NASA’s Lunar  Excursion  Module.  (MSFC 
Release  66-117) 
0  Dr.  Donald P. Burcham, JPL Voyager program manager,  told Aviation  Week 
in  an  interview tha t   heavy  funding for  the  Voyager Mars  program was 
anticipated  with FY  1968  funds if  the  Vietnam war  did  not  create  new 
funding problems.  (A v .  W k . ,  5/30/66,  40) 
Adm.  William  F.  Boone  (USN,  Ret.),  Assistant  NASA  Administrator  for 
Defense  Affairs,  told  Missiles  and  Rockets  tha t   under  new  agreement 
between DOD  and NASA-expected 
to  be  signed  in   about  two  months- 
LRC  would  modify  a  liquid  hydrogen  J-85  jet  engine  with  200,000- 
500,000  lbs.  thrus t   for  use  in   air-breathing  technology development. 
As  i ts   contribution  to  th e   joint  program,  USAF  would  provide  F-106 
aircraft for flight tests  of  engine.  (M&R,  5/30/66,  31) 
Ma y  31:  Soviet proposal for keeping moon  free of  weapons was  presented to  
U.N.  Secretary General U Than t  by  Ambassador Nikolay T.  Fedorenko, 
head  of  the   Soviet  delegation  to  the   U.N.  Four  principles  were  sug- 
gested as  basis  for  international  agreement:  “1-The  moon  and  other 
celestial  bodies  should  be  free  for  exploration  and  use  by  all  states 
without  any  discrimination.  All  states  enjoy  freedom of  the   scientific 
exploration  of  the   moon  and  other  celestial  bodies  on  an   equal  basis 
and  in   accordance with  the  basic  principles  of  international law. 
“2-The  moon and other celestial bodies should be  used  for peaceful 
purposes only. No military bases and installations  including installations 
of  nuclear  and  other weapons  of  mass  destruction should  be  stationed 
on  th e  moon  and  other  celestial bodies. 
“3-The 
exploration  and use  of  the  moon and  other celestial bodies 
should be  carried  out for  the  benefit and in   the  interest of  all mankind. 
They  are  no t   subject  to  appropriation or  any  territorial claim. 
“ P - I n   the  course of  th e  exploration  of  the  moon and other celestial 
bodies, the  states proceed from the  principles of  cooperation and mutual 
assistance and carry on their activities with due account of  the  respected 
interests  of  other  states  for  the   purpose  of  maintaining  international 
peace and  security.”  Proposal paralleled  treaty  suggested  by  President 
Johnson May  7.  (Marder,  Wash. Post,  6/1/66,  A l )  
0  NASA  released  preliminary  report  of  board  investigating  explosion  of 
Sa turn  V  2nd  stage  (S-11-F) ground  test  version May  28  at  MTF.  Board 
chairman Dr.  Kur t  H.  Debus,  KSC  Director,  said  tha t   during  checkout 
tests  after five  successful static  firings,  hydrogen tank  pressure  sensing 
l ine  had  been  disconnected. Failure  to  reconnect  line  had  caused tank 
rup ture   when  pressurized  with  helium  beyond  design  limits.  (Marshall 
Star,  6/1/66,  1) 
NAS  issued  final report  of  Space Science Board  exobiology  study,  under- 
taken in  summer 1964 a t  NASA’s request,  including postscript  examining 
results of MARINER 111’s July 1965 Mars flyby in  relation  to  study’s recom- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

199 

mendation  tha t  Mars  exploration be  assigned  “highest  scientific  rior- 
ity.,,  Report,  Biology  and  the  Exploration  of  Mars,  was  re lea sezw i th  
companion anthology, Extraterrestrial  Life, which  contained 2,000-entry 
bibliography.  Advance  summary of  report  had  been  released  Apr.  26, 
1965.  (NAS-NRC-NAE News  Report, 6-7; NAS-NRC  Release,  5/31/66) 
May  31: ComSatCorp Chairman James McCormack told Washington Society 
of  Investment Analysts tha t   ComSatCorp  faced  two  issues  of  national 
and  international  significance:  (1)  “Responsibility for  U.S.  ear th   sta- 
tions, as between Cornsat and the  other U.S.  carriers” and  (2) “Designa- 
tion of  the  entities which may deal directly with Comsat.  . . .,’ He pointed 
ou t   tha t   present  international  agreements  would  be  renegotiated  in 
1969, and  tha t   some participants  were  “dubious  about  Comsat’s  con- 
tinuing  ability  as  th e   consortium’s manager  to  spend  their  money  i n  
the ir   interests  while  being  subject  to  the   detailed  regulation”  of  th e  
FCC.  (Text) 
Need  for  detection  instruments  to   warn  Ss t  pilots  of  excessive  radiation 
during solar  flares was  described in  papers by  Sidney Teweles and Ray- 
mond M.  McInturff of ESSA and Robert F.  Jones of  British Meteorological 
Office  a t   Geneva  meeting  of  executive  committee  of  World  Meteor- 
oIogica1 Organization. ESSA  scientists  said descent of plane from cruising 
altitude of  about  60,000 f t .   to  40,000  f t .  might be  necessary “three  or  
four  times a year during the  half  of  th e  11-year sunspot cycle when th e  
greatest  flares  occur.’’  ( N Y T ,  6/1/66,  77) 
*  Gen.  William Hugh  Blanchard, USAF  Vice  Chief  of  Staff,  died  a t   50 after 
suffering  hear t   attack  at  Pentagon  meeting.  General  Blanchard  was 
credited with landing first B-29 in  China in  March 1944.  (N Y T ,  6/1/66, 
43) 
During Muy:  Secretary of  the  A i r  Force Dr.  Harold Brown  said in  an  article 
written  for NATO’s  Fijteen  Nations  tha t   one  of  his  principal  tasks  had 
been  to  find  the   most  effective  way  of  integrating  technical  and  non-  
technical  advice.  Of  contributions scientists  had made to  the  process of 
defense  policy-making,  he  said:  “First,  the   scientist,  operating a t   the  
frontiers of  knowledge, may have anticipated many political and military 
problems  posed  by  scientific advance. Second, military  necessity made 
the  scientist a leader in  applying sophisticated rational  and mathematical 
analysis to th e  solution of  some problems-especially 
resource allocation 
-which  have  been  generated by  scientific advance. 
“At  the  same time i t  must be acknowledged tha t  advice from scientists 
had  been  far  from  infallible,  especially where the  advice touches  upon 
aspects of  a larger problem  on which the  specialist is less expert,  and in  
some cases, may no t  even be  fully informed.” (NATO’s Fijteen  Nations, 
4-5/66,  18) 
Dr.  Von  R.  Eshleman of  Stanford Univ.,  speaking a t  International Scien- 
tific Radio Union meeting in  Washington, D.C.,  urged greater  interplay 
between  ‘‘those  concerned  with  th e   design  and  communications  of 
spacecraft  and  those  who  decide  what  scientific  experiments  will  be 
aboard.”  He cited success of  NASA% MARINER IV  mission in  use of  telem- 
e try   signals  to  learn  tha t   Martian  atmospheric pressure was  1% tha t  
of  earth’s as example of accomplishment through co.operation in  bistatic 
radar  studies.  (Science News ,   5/14/66,  366) 
Three  Boeing  engineers  had  invented  a  jet  engine  inlet  which  could 
cCchoke77 supersonic  transport  engine-compressor whine  during  ap- 
proaches  to   airports,  thereby  avoiding  airport-area  nuisance.  Noise- 

200 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

choking feature was  in  addition to inlet’s primary  advantage-its  ability 
to provide  a smooth and  even flow of  a ir  to a jet  engine  a t  mach  2.7,  o r  
1,900 m  h,  the  planned  cruising speed of  the  U S .  Sst.  (Boeing Release) 
During May:!’ostulating  tha t  “many members of  the  House Space Committee 
a re  determined to become full partners with NASA  in  the development  of 
basic  objectives  and  policy,”  Space  Science  Subcommittee Chairman 
Rep. Joseph E. Karth  (D-Minn.) cited recent approach  by  Subcommittee 
i n  reallocation of  funds during hearings on NASA  FY  1967 authorization: 
“The Congress makes resources available for ou r  national space program 
in  the  name of  the  American people.  Therefore Congress believes tha t  i t  
should have a voice  in  the  allocation  of  these  resources. This principle 
was  reflected  in   the   actions  taken  by  the   Subcommittee.”  Karth  was 
writing  i n  Astronautics  & Aeronautics.  (Karth,  A&A ,   5/66,  26-8) 
0  Revolution in  military  communications  “to which  we  are now  fully  com- 
mitted  and which  we  are  actively pursuing,”  was  discussed  by  William 
Beecher  i n  Astronautics  & Aeronautics:  “At  this  writing,  the   Pentagon 
plans  a  May  launch  of  the   first  eight  of  a  series  of  14  to  22  repeater 
satellites in  i t s  Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project  (Idcsp) . 
The   first  eight,  riding  piggyback  on  a  Titan  111-C test  booster,  will  be 
deposited  into  random  orbits  about  21,000  mi.  up.  Within  60  days 
thereafter,  another  six  repeater  satellites  together  with  two  gravity- 
gradient experimental  satellites will  be  similarly orbited.  If  all  1 4  of  the  
communications satellites function perfectly,  sufficient coverage will  be 
provided  to obviate  the  need  fo r   a  third shot of  eight, Pentagon experts 
Sa?; 
Although  meant  primarily  to  perfect  the   technology  of  space  com- 
munications,  after  a  relatively  shor t   test-only  period,  this  Idcsp  would 
be  made  available  €or  high-priority worldwide  military  traffic-for 
in-  
stance, important communications  between Washington and Saigon. . . . 
“Then,  in   1969 or  1970,  the  Defense  Department hopes  to pu t   up  a 
fully operational system,  called the  Advanced Defense Communications 
Satellite  Project  (Adcsp).  As  John  S.  Foster,  Jr.,  Director  of  Defense 
Research  and  Engineering,  described  i t   in  recent  Congressional  testi- 
mony,  ‘This system will  take advantsge of advances  in  both booster  and 
communications technology  which  will  permit  t h e  establishment of  an  
economical,  highly  reliable  system  capable  of  providing  many  secure, 
jam-resistant,  long-range  communications  circuits  to  support  vital 
security operations wherever  they  occur.’ ” (Beecher, A&A ,   5/66,  10) 
0  New NASA-developed technique for mzking biomedical checks on test pilots 
was  being  used  a t   Univ.  of  Kansas  Medical  Center.  Method,  which 
replaced  bulky  sensors with  bare  wires  acting  a s   their  own  electrodes, 
permitted  doctors  to  send  instrumented patient  home  after  office  visit 
and  record  biomedical  data  while  patient  resumed  normal  activities. 
Wires  were  applied  i n   three-minute  operation.  Data  obtained  in   this 
way-rather 
than  while patient was on operating table-were 
considered 
more  meaningful  by  some  physicians.  Technique  was  conceived  by 
Dr.  James  A .   Roman,  chief  of  biomedical  research  a t   NASA  Flight 
Research  Center,  and  introduced  to  the   Univ.  of  Kansas  by  Midwest 
Research  Institute.  MRI  was  under  contract  to   NASA’s  Technology 
Utilization  Div.  i n  its program  of  transferring  aerospace  technology  to 
the  public.  (NASA Release  66-116) 
0  B/G  J.  C.  Maxwell, director  of  FAA  Sst development, discussed  supersonic 
air  travel  i n  Aerospace: 

201 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
. . . The  national  SST  program,  though small  (from a dollar point  of 
C C  
view)  when  compared  to  the  national  space program,  nevertheless  may 
well have a more immediate impact. The challenge inheren t  in  producing 
an  economically attractive supersonic aircraft has already identified and 
created  demands  for  improved  manufacturing  techniques,  simple  yet 
reliable  eIectronic  and  communications  equipment,  advancements  in  
extrusion  and  machine  tooling  techniques,  more  efficient  (and  less 
costly)  fuels  and  lubricants  and many  other needs. 
“The  economic aspects  are  more  easiIy  definable. 
Concerning the  potential  market for the  SST,  varying estimates have 
c r  
been made  based  on th e  expected growth of  air  transportation over the  
next  20  years  and  beyond.  . . . 
Conservatively speaking, we  now  look  for  a  three-fold  increase  in  
C I
 
long-haul revenue  passenger miles  flown  by  the   airlines  of  the   world 
of  this  traffic.  . . . 
by  1980 and  a  five-fold increase  by  1990. SSTS  could  carry  almost half 
“Obviously,  the   SST  program  will  have  a  significant  impact  on  th e  
U S .   balance-of-trade position.  Based  upon  past  experience along with 
curren t  encouraging signs, we  expect tha t  the  export market for  a U.S.- 
made  SST  will  be  about  half  of  the   total  production  rate.  Over  a  20- 
year period,  this could  result  in  a gold  inflow  approaching $10 billion.” 
(Aerospace, 5/66) 
During  May:  Space  research  programs  o f   the   U.S.S.R.  and  the   U.S.  were 
opening the  way  for solving earth’s  fu tu re  overpopulation problem  and 
mankind’s  fu ture   raw  material needs,  Soviet Prof.  E.  Kolman  wrote in  
Mirovaya Ekonomika i Mezhdunarodnyye  Otnosheniye, a publication of  the  
Soviet Academy of  Sciences. He referred  to estimates tha t  in  400 yrs.  the  
earth  would  have  a  population  of  about  900 billion  people,  equivalent 
to  about  10,000 people per  square mile.  I n  such a situation, this planet 
would  not  be  able  to  give  all  its  people  even  elementary  living  space, 
le t   alone  food.  Therefore,  he   said,  ccescape in to   cosmic space  . . . will 
become  inevitable.”  Professor  Kolman  mentioned  the   stimulating 
impact of  th e  space program  on progress in  science and technology and 
the  likelihood of developments useful in  more mundane areas of  human 
activity.  He  cited  th e  use  of  meteorological and  communications satel- 
lites  as  examdes   of  terrestriallv  useful  bvmoducts  of  mace  research. 
(NYT ,  5/22/66,  85) 
.I* 
Four  experimental  ramjet  missiles  launched  by  France’s Office  National 
$Etudes  e t   de  Recherches  A6rospatiales  (ONERA)  reached  speeds  of 
nearly 4,600 fps between 40,000- a&d 115,000-ft. altitudes. MisGles were 
part  of  a  10-flight program  code-named  STATALTEX,  to  generate  data 
applicable  to  eventual  development  of  an   atmospheric  booster  tha t  
could  reach  mach  5.  (M&R, 5/23/66,  9) 

June 1966 

June  1: Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atdaf for Gemini IX-A mission 
was  successfully  launched  by  Atlas  booster  from  ETR  into  planned 
185-mi.  (298-km.) circular  orbit,  but  officials  were  no t   certain  glass- 
fiber  shroud  protecting  docking  apparatus  had  been  jettisoned-a 
maneuver  essential  for  docking with  Gemini  9  spacecraft.  Gemini  IX- 
Titan  I1  launch  was  postponed  un t i l   June   3  when  malfunction  in  
electronics  data-processing  equipment  blocked  guidance  signals  being 
sen t  from KSC  launch  control center  to  Gemini spacecraft a t  T-3.  NASA 
officials said  postponement would  no t   change objectives of  the  mission 
-extravehicular  activity  and  rendezvous and  docking with Atda-but 
would  cause  some  revisions  in   timing  of  events.  (Wilford,  N Y T ,  
6/2/66,  1) 
Douglas  Aircraft  Co.’s  Huntington Beach,  Calif.,  faci P ity  to  company’s 
0  Sa turn  V  3rd  stage  (S-IVB) was  flown  aboard Super Gu  py  aircraft from 
Sacramento Test Center  for  static  testing.  The   33,000-lb. stage,  59  f t .  
long  and  21% ft.  in   diameter,  was  second  Sa turn   V  upper  stage  to 
arrive a t  Douglas  test  site.  (MSFC  Release 66-126) 
0  General  Accounting  Office  released  report  to  Congress  charging  tha t  
NASA  had  wasted  $2.5  million  on   Surveyor  program  by  continuing 
development  of  11  types  of  scientific  instruments  for  SURVEYOR  I 
after  1962,  when  weight  problems  had  forced  their  deletion  from 
planned  payload.  NASA  comments  in   report’s  appendix  included  letter 
from Deputy Associate Administrator Earl D.  Hilburn stating:  “Develop- 
ment  of  these experiments was  not ha l ted .  . . to  assure their  availability 
for  no t   only  later  Surveyor  flights  but  other  NASA  missions  as  well.” 
He  called  continuation  “prudent  in   the   light  of  development lead  time 
for  scientific instrumentation.”  SURVEYOR  I  had  been  launched Mav  30  
from  ETR  on  lunar   transfer  trajectory.  (Text;  Blair,  N Y T ,   6/1/66,’  26; 
Av .   Wk., 6/6/66,  25) 
0  JPL  scientists  Richard W.  Davies and Roy  E.  Cameron  completed  month- 
long  expedition in   Atacama  Desert  in’ Northern  Chile aAd  announced 
i n  Santiago that  analysis of  soil samples taken a t  altitudes  up  to  20,000 
ft.  would  test  theory  tha t   “more microorganisms are  found  under  the  
surface than   on  it.”  If  so,  Davies  said,  NASA  would  “redesign i ts  Mars 
exploration vehicles  to  look  for  subsurface life  as well  as  surface  life.” 
Atacama  region  so   resembled  supposed  surface  of  Mars,  they  said, 
tha t   JPL  team  would  attempt  fur ther   studies  in   area,  called  by  some 
the  driest  on earth.  (AP, Balt.  Sun, 6/2/66) 
0  William  L.  Green,  Jr.,  executive  assistant  in   NASA’s Office  of  Public 
Affairs  and  former  u s u   press  officer,  was  appointed  NASA  Deputy 
Assistant  Administrator  for   Public  Affairs.  (NASA  Release 66-140; AF) 

202 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

203 

June  1:  Three-month NASA-USAF  program to  measure reactions  of  s truc tures  
and people  to  varying types  of  sonic booms  and je t   engine noise began 
a t   AFFTC.  Program-in  which  over  100  residents  would  participate 
as  test  subjects-would  provide data  for  analysis and  later  application 
to  supersonic  transport  development.  (AFFTC  Release  66-5-6) 
Three  college students  se t   record  by  wearing  fully pressurized  spacesuits 
continuously  for five days  in   research  test  conducted for NASA  a t  Aero- 
space  Medical  Research  Laboratories,  Wright-Patterson  AFB.  Experi- 
ment-part  of  90-day study to  test food requirements for fu ture  manned 
space  f igh t s   and  emergency  food  comcepts  for   lunar   exploration- 
broke  24-hr.  record  se t   a t   Aerospace  Medical  Div.,  Brooks  AFB.  (AP, 
NYT,  6/2/66,  30) 
e  Astronaut  Frank  Borman,  a  1950 graduate of  West  Point,  gave Academy 
cadets  a  souvenir  from  space-the 
flag  of  the   cadet  company  he   had 
commanded-carried 
on  his  Dec.  4-18,  1965,  GEMINI  VII  mission.  (UPI, 
NYT ,  6/2/66,  4) 
June  2-14:  NASA  SURVEYOR  I  became  first  US. spacecraft  to   softland  on  th e  
moon  when it  touched  down  in   the   Ocean  of  Storms and began  trans- 
mitting  the   first  of  i ts   more  than   10,000 clear  and  detailed  television 
pictures to  JPL  Deep  Space Facilities, Goldstone,  Calif. 
Landing sequence  began  2,000  mi.  above  moon  when,  traveling  a t  
6,000 mph,  SURVEYOR  I  shifted  i ts   normal  cruising  attitude  to  position 
main  retrorocket.  Triggered  by  radar  ejected  a t   52-mi.  altitude,  main 
retrorocket  burned  un t i l   37,000-ft.  altitude, slowing  craft  to  400 mph. 
After  retrorocket  burnou t ,   smaller  guidance  rockets  ignited,  slowing 
SURVEYOR  I  to   3%  mph  a t   14-ft.  altitude.  Craft  then   free-fell  to  lunar  
surface  a t  8 mph.  Landing-so 
precise  that  spacecraft’s three  footpads 
touched  lunar   surface  within  19 millisec.  of  each  other-confirmed 
tha t   lunar   surface  could  suppor t   Apollo  Lunar  Excursion  Module 
(Lem)  and   proved  concept  of  automatically  decelerating  a  spacecraft 
from 6,000-mph speed  to  touchdown speed  of  3% mph. 
Photos  transmitted  by  SURVEYOR  I  before  i ts   camera  was  secured 
after  sunset  of  first  lunar  day  (June  14)  revealed  nearly  level  lunar  
surface  littered  with  rock  fragments  [see  During  June].  “Rubble 
scattered  over  the   surface  is   probably  a  fairly  general  characteristic 
all over  th e  
NASA  Surveyor Project  Scientist Dr.  Leonard Jaffe 
told  JPL  press  conference. 
Pictures  taken  June   4  dur ing   seven  two-second  firings  of  nitrogen 
gas  from  spacecraft’s  a t t i tude   control  jets  showed  no  disturbance  of 
th e  lunar  surface.  In  addition  to  wide- and narrow-angle lurain  photo- 
graphs,  SURVEYOR  I  obtained pictures  of  th e   stars  Sirius and  Canopus 
to   determine spacecraft’s  exact  location. 
Halting communication with  SURVEYOR  I  June  1 4  to   allow  spacecraft 
to   conserve  battery  energy  throughout  lunar   night  (June  14-29),  JPL 
announced:  “ I t   is  very  difficult  to   predict  if  Surveyor’s  batteries  will 
withstand the  -260°F  cold. If Surveyor survives, th e  engineers estimate 
it wiIl  be  several days after sunrise before the  batteries  thaw O U ~ ”  [see 
June  28-29]. 
Considerably more  complex  than   Soviet  LUNA  IX which  softlanded 
on  th e   moon-Feb.  3,  SURSEYOR 
I  apparatus  remained  a  closed  in tac t  
system  up  un t i l   touchdown.  A  tripod-legged  arrangement  of  cameras, 
antennas, and  other  equipment which used  solar  celIs  to  convert sun’s 
energy in to   electric  power  for  operation on   lunar   surface,  SURVEYOR  I 

204 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

June 2 -14 :   SURVEYOR I  returned this  photograph  of   its  footpad resting on   the  surface  o f  
the   moon. 

had  a  landing  system which  used  radars,  a  computer,  and  four   rocket 
engines to  adjust  i ts   own  speed,  attitude,  and  f igh t   path.  LUNA  IX  was 
crash-proof,  uncontrolled  photographic  instrument  package  jettisoned 
by  i ts   carrier  rocket  immediately before  impact, which  free-fell  under 
pull  of  lunar  gravity.  I t   had  transmitted  only  12 photos. 
The  near-flawless performance  of  SURVEYOR  I,  an   engineering model, 
far  exceeded  JPL  officials’  expectations.  rCThis, in  my  opinion,  puts  the  
Surveyor  program  ahead  a  year,”  Robert  F.  Garbarini,  NASA  Deputy 
Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications  for 
Engineering,  told  JPL  press  conference.  “We  thought  it  would  take 
three   or   four  flights  to  get  the   craft  operational.”  (NASA  Proj.  Off.; 
NASA Release  66-127; JPL  Transcript;  Spivak,  WS J ,   6/3/66,  2 ;   WS’J, 
6/15/66,  1; Shreveport  Times, 6/3/66,  12A; Clark, N Y T ,  6/3/66,  1, 22 ;  
6/4/66,  12;  6/5/66,  1; 6/6/66,  40M;  AP,  N Y T ,   17 ;   Hines,  Wash. 
Eve.  Star,  6/5/66,  C3;  AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  6/6/66,  A9;  Wash.  Eve. 
Star, 6/15/66,  A6; Berman,  Wash. Post, 6/5/66,  A14; AP,  Wash. Post, 
6/15/66,  A10) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

205  

June  2:  President  Johnson’s  statement  on   SURVEYOR  1’s  successful  soft- 
landing on  the  moon:  “Overnight  the  eyes  of  Surveyor  I have become 
the   eyes of  the   world  on  the  Moon.  Another  exciting  chapter  in   th e  
share.  . . . 
peaceful  exploration  of  the   universe  is  open  for  men  to  read  and  
“The  odds  against  achieving full  success  in   such  a  difficult mission 
on  the   first  flight were  understandably great.  This moment  of  triumph 
for  all  who  have  participated  in   the  Surveyor  project  has  been  well 
earned,  for  back  of  Surveyor’s perfect  performance  on  this  f i s t  flight 
are   years  of  hard  work,  painstaking care,  and  brilliant  engineering. 
“Today  our  Nation  salutes  the   highly  deserving team  of  scientists, 
engineers,  technicians,  and  managers-in  Government,  industry,  and 
the  universities-who  have a  vision  and  the  skills to  pursue  i t  success- 
fully. 
“As  the   day  approaches when  men  land  on  the   Moon,  i t   is  of  the  
greatest  importance  that  we  agree to  exchange openly  all  information 
tha t   could  affect  their  safety  and welfare.  I t   is  equally  important  tha t  
we  preserve  these  regions  for  peaceful,  scientific activities.  I  welcome 
the   constructive  approach  of  the   Soviet  statement  of  May  31  on  a 
treaty  I  have  proposed  to  cover  these  matters  and  hope  tha t   progress 
can  be  made  rapidly.”  (Pres. Doc.,  6/6/66,  728) 
NASA  SURVEYOR  1’s  successful soft-landing on the  moon  received worldwide 
acclaim. 
Daily  Telegraph,  London:  “There  is  magic  of  a  kind  in   the   latest 
achievement  of  American  exploration  in   placing  their  electronic 
Surveyor  almost  directly  on  its  target  on  the  moon.  . . . The  techno- 
logical  power  behind  the   enterprise of  putting  a man  on  the   moon  is 
mounting  with  visible  acceleration.  But  the   human  element  remains 
most vital.” 
Le  Monde,  Paris:  “In  succeeding with  their  first  attempt  a t   a  soft 
landing  on  the  moon  only  three   months  after  the   Soviets,  the   United 
States  has  shown  tha t   they  are   on  the   point  of  catching  up  with  the  
Soviets in   the   race  to   the  moon.  There is  only  one  experiment  left  in  
which  the   United  States  is  behind  the   Soviet  Union:  the   orbiting 
around  the  moon  of  a  lunar   probe  similar  to  Luna-10. This  lag  is  no t  
very  great,  since  the   first  trial  of  the   Lunar  Orbiters  is  se t   for  nex t  
month.” 
I1 Tempo, Rome:  “We  think  tha t   the   best  judgment,  even  if  purely 
a  prioristic,  of  the   Surveyor  is  tha t   given  by  the   Soviet Government, 
which,  the   day  after  the   departure  of  the   lunar   probe,  practically 
adhered  to  President  Johnson’s  initiative  of  March  7,  tending  to   a 
recognition  of  the   i-nternationalization  of  the   moon  and  other  extra- 
territorial bodies.” 
Tass:  “The  success  of  th e   Surveyor  is  an   important  part  of  th e  
American space program and  Soviet scientists  th ink  very highly of  it.” 
(NYT ,  6/5/66,  E13) 
Congratulatory  cable  from  Soviet  President  Nikolay  V.  Podgorny 
to  President  Johnson:  “On  th e   occasion  of  the   successful  soft-landing 
of  the   Surveyor  I  spacecraft  on  the  moon,  accept  . . . our  congratula- 
tions  for  the   American  specialists  who  ensured  the   success  of  this 
flight.”  (Reuters,  NYT ,  6/5/66,  80) 
0  Successful  overlapping  operation  of  PEGASUS  I,  11,  and  111  meteoroid- 
Feb.  16,  May  25,  and  July  30,  1965, 
detection  satellites-launched 

206 

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

respectively-had 
provided  full  year  of  data  which  defined  “more 
than   ever  before”  near-earth  meteoroid  environment,  NASA 
precise1 
r e p o r t e l   Data-including 
cumulative count  of  1,000 “hits”  on   target 
plate  thickness,  identification and location  of  specific panel h i t ,  a t t i tude  
of  spacecraft with respect  to   ear th  and su n  a t  impact time,  and time of 
penetration-confirmed 
“protective  adequacy” of  Apollo manned lunar 
landing  spacecraft  against  meteoroids ; provided  designers  of  fu tu re  
spacecraft  with  guidelines  on  probability  of  meteoroid  penetrations ; 
and  improved  mapping  of  South  Atlantic  anomaly  by  measuring 
electron radiation  density.  (NASA  Release 66-134) 
June 2:  V/Adm.  H.  G. Rickover (USN),  in  speech a t  Athens meeting of  Royal 
National Foundation, noted benefits to humanity  in  science and warned 
of dangers inheren t  in  misuse of technology. He urged tha t  technological 
capability be applied selectively to enhance human welfare and conserve 
natural  resources,  ra ther   than   to  “submit  meekly  to  whatever is  tech- 
nically  feasible.”  (Text,  CR, 6/21/66,  13114-17) 
June 3-6: NASA’s  GEMINI  IX  spacecraft,  with  Astronauts  Thomas P.  Stafford 
as  command  pilot  and  Eugene  A.  Cernan,  pilot,  was  successfully 
launched  from  ETR  by  Titan  I1  booster  on  GEMINI  IX-A  mission  to 
evaluate  extravehicular  life-support  and  maneuvering  equipment  and 
procedures, and  to  rendezvous and dock with Augmented Target Dock- 
ing  Adapter  (ATDA),  launched  from  ETR  June   1.  Initial  orbit:  174-mi. 
(280-km.)  apogee;  99-mi.  (159-km.)  perigee;  90-min. period;  and  30” 
inclination.  At T-3  ground  communications system malfunction which 
had postponed June  1 launch recurred, bu t  alternate procedures proved 
satisfactory  and  countdown continued. 
At  49 min.  GET  Stafford  executed first  course  correction  to  position 
GEMINI  IX  for  rendezvous,  firing  thrus ter   rockets  to  raise  perigee  to 
134  mi.  After two more orbital maneuvers, spacecraft was  within 25 f t .  
of  target.  Stafford,  sighting ATDA,  confirmed  suspicions  tha t   i ts   shroud 
had  no t  jettisoned,  and docking would be  impossible. He radioed ground 
control: “ I t   looks like a n  angry alligator ou t  there.”  NASA  later revealed 
tha t   shroud had  no t  jettisoned  because technicians,  following  “insuffi- 
ciently detailed” written instructions, had installed lanyards improperly. 
Complying with modified  flight plan,  astronauts photographed ATDA, 
executed  re-rendezvous  maneuver,  and  executed  rendezvous-from- 
above simulating Lunar Excursion Module  (Lem) abort from the  moon. 
After  this  maneuver,  which  depleted  fuel  supply  to  11%-only 
6% 
more  than   minimum  reserve-Stafford 
and  Cernan  were  fatigued  and 
recommended  24-hr.  postponement of  Cernan’s  walk  in  space. 
At  11:02  a.m.  EST  June   5,  Cernan  opened  hatch  of  depressurized 
spacecraft,  climbed  out,  and  retrieved  micrometeoroid impact detector 
attached to  side. He moved  to full length of 25-ft. tether  to  take photos. 
After one hour,  Cernan  returned  to  Adapter Section  to  don Astronaut 
Maneuvering Unit  (Amu)-a 
task  which  required  “four  or  five  times 
more work  than   anticipated.”  His  faceplate visor  began  clouding over, 
presumably because  environmental control  system  was  no t   absorbing 
moisture  quickly  enough.  Cernan’s  limited  visibility  and  discovery 
tha t   Amu’s  radio  transmissions were  garbled  forced  Stafford  to   recall 
him  to spacecraft. He had been scheduled to  disconnect from GEMINI IX’S 
oxygen  supply  and  maneuver  in   Amu  to  150  f t .   from  spacecraft. 
Reentry  on   June   6  was  normal.  At  1O:OO  a.m.  EST,  in   the   46th 
revolution,  GEMINI  IX  impacted  345  mi.  east  of  Cape  Kennedy-less 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

207 

June  3-6:  Augmented  Target  Docking  Adapter  with  unreleased  shroud,  photographed 
by  crew  of   GEMINI  IX. 

than  two miles from  target-in 
the  most accurate landing to date,  after 
total  mission  duration  of  72  hrs.  21  min.  Splashdown and  recovery 
were carried  on live television via EARLY BIRD I  comsat. Within minutes, 
USN  pararescue  team,  dropped from  helicopters,  placed  flotation  collar 
around  spacecraft.  A t   10:45  a.m.  EST,  spacecraft  carrying  astronauts 
was  hoisted  onboard U.S.S.  Wasp. 
Accomplishments  of  GEMINI  M-A  mission  were  summarized by. Dr. 
George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight,  a t   MSC  news  conference:  (1)  demonstration  of  three  new 
rendezvous  procedures-catching 
target  in   only  three  revolutions, 
locating  i t   without  radar,  and  approaching i t   from  above  ra ther   than  
below;  (2)  accurately  controlled  reen try ;   (3)  longest  period  of  extra- 
two  hours ;   (4)  new  information  on  man’s 
vehicular  activities-over 
ability  to  work  in   space necessary  for  manned  lunar   landing  and  for 
assembling  stations  in   space;  and  (5)  new  information  on  manned 
observation  of  another  spacecraft  in   orbit.  Five  experiments  were 
successfully  performed  i n   accordance with  modified  flight  plan.  Con- 
cerning  mission’s  disappointments,  he  said:  “We  will  try  to  do  as 
much as we  can on each of  our  Gemini flights. We won’t  always succeed 
in  meeting all  of  the   objectives.  But we  learned  a  great  deal about th e  
problems tha t  do  occur during the  course of  one of  these very difficult 
space missions.”  (NASA  Proj.  Off.; NASA  Release  66-97; Wilford, NYT ,  
6/4/66,  1,  10; 6/5/66,  1,  80; 6/6/66,  1,  40;  6/7/66,  1, 34;  6/8/66, 
1,29;  Hines, Wash. Eve. Star,  6/4/66,  A l ,  A2; 6/5/66,  A l ,  A6; 6/6/66, 

208 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

A l ,   A4;  6/7/66,  A3;  Simons,  Wash.  Post,  6/4/66,  A l ,   A8;  6/5/66, 
A l ,   A14;  6/6/66,  A l ,   A3;  6/7/66,  A l ,   A7,  A21;  6/8/66,  A3;  W S J ,  
6/7/66,  2;  6/8/66,  1; Tech.  Wk., 6/13/66,  14-15; A v .   Wk., 6/13/66, 
31-34) 
June  3:  USAF  launched  two  unidentified  satellites  from  WTR  with  Atlas- 
Agena  D  booster.  (U.S.  Aeron.  & Space  Act.,  1966,  151) 
0  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  signed  agreement  with  Junkers  of  Munich, 
Germany,  to   “provide technical  consultation,  perform  design work  . . . 
and provide  components” for ESRO’s  Highly Eccentric Orbiting  Satellite 
(Heos)-first 
to  be  designed  and developed in  Germany-to 
investigate 
charged  particles  in   space  and  the   effects  of  magnetic  fields  on  them. 
Overall  contract  for  satellite,  which  would  be  launched  by  NASA  into 
elliptical  orbit  in   late  1968, was  $5.5  million,  with  Lockheed’s  services 
valued  a t  $500,000.  (Lockheed Release) 
0  Accumulating  geochronologic  evidence  which  “indicates  more  and  more 
convincingly  tha t   tektites  were  formed  from  terrestrial  rocks  in  large 
meteoritic  impacts  on  the   ear th”   was  reported  in  Science  by  Henry 
Faul.  He  said  exact  process  of  tektite  formation  remained  a  mystery, 
bu t   tha t   age  measurements  were  beginning  to   show  ccwhere” th i s  
formation  occurred  and  could  ultimately  invalidate  the  lunar  origin 
hypothesis.  (Faul,  Science,  6/3/66,  1341-5) 
GEMINI  IV  Astronaut  Edward  H.  White  I1 and  GEMINI  VII  Astronaut  Frank 
Borman  received  National  Aviation  Club’s  Award  for  Achievement  in  
Washington,  D.C.  (Wash. Eve.  Star, 6/3/66) 
Edgar G.  Bush,  senior  technician  a t  GSFC  since  1959 and  designer  of  first 
micro-electronic circuitry  used  for  flight  computers,  died  of  a  heart 
ailment.  Bush  had  designed  computers  for  VANGUARD   111,  Explorer 
satellites, and Lunar  Orbiters.  (Wash. Eve.  Star, 6/7/66,  B5) 
June 4:  Role of NASA  in  aeronautical research and development was examined 
in  Policy  Planning f o r  Aeronautical  Research and  Development, 279-page 
report  released  by  Sen.  Clinton P.  Anderson  (D-N.Mex.),  chairman  of 
Senate  Committee  on   Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences.  Document 
noted  “space budget demands have probably hampered  what might have 
been  expected  to  be  a  normal  growth  of  the   level  of  effort  in  aero- 
nautics  within  the   agency”  and  questioned  adequacy  of  $124  million 
(about  2%)  earmarked  for  aeronautical  R&D   ou t   of  NASA  FY  1967 
appropriation  of  $5.012  billion.  Separate  budget  for  aeronautics  was 
suggested  as possible solution.  (Senate Doc.  No.  90,  5/19/66) 
It had  no t  yet been  determined whether space fatigue caused any physical 
or  psychological  problems,  bu t   examining  effects  of  this  phenomenon 
had  become  a  medical  goal,  Dr.  Charles  Berry,  Chief  of  Medical  Pro- 
grams,  MSC,  told  the   press.  Space  officials  believed  exhaustion  experi- 
enced  by  GEMINI  IX-A  Astronauts  Thomas  Stafford  and  Eugene  Cernan 
June  3 was  caused  by  lack  of  sleep  during  first  night  of  mission  and 
execution of  complicated and tedious  rendezvous.  GEMINI  VIII  Astronaut 
Neil  Armstrong  said  fatigue  would  be  an  important  consideration  in  
planning  a  lunar   flight which  might  take  as  long  as  14 days:  “.  . . we 
will  evaluate  tha t   particular  thing  to  insure   tha t   what  we  learn  from 
these Gemini flights will  be applied  to  tha t   situation  and  used.”  ( N Y T ,  
6/5/66,  80) 
First  seven  photos  transmitted  by  SURVEYOR  I  were  donated  to  Clark 
Univ.  by  JPL  Director  Dr.  William  H.  Pickering  as  the   school  broke 
ground  for  a  $5-million  library  honoring  the   late  rocket  pioneer  Dr. 

209 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 
Robert  Hutchings  Goddard.  (UPI,  NYT ,   6/6/66,  42;  Berman,  Vush. 
Post, 6/5/66,  A14) 
June  5:  NASA  appointed  Dr.  Richard  L.  Lesher  as  Assistant  Administrator 
for  Technology  Utilization,  replacing  Breene  M.  Kerr,  who  remained 
Assistant  Administrator  for  Policy  Analysis.  Dr.  Lesher’s  former 
position  of  Deputy  Assistant  Administrator  for  Technology Utilization 
was  filled  by  Melvin  S.  Day,  former  head  of  Scientific and  Technical 
Information  Div.  (NASA  Release  66-143) 
June  6:  NASA’s OGO  111  (Ogo-B)  Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory  was 
successfully  launched  from  ETR  with  Atlas-Agena B  booster  in to   orbit 
with  75,874-mi.  (122,157-km.)  apogee;  183-mi.  (295-km.)  perigee; 
48.6-hr.  period;  and  31’  inclination.  Third  of  seven  spacecraft  in  
NASA’s Ogo  program  and  first  to  successfully  operate  three-axis  stabi- 
lized  in  highly  elliptical orbit,  OGO  111  weighed  1,135 Ibs.;  it  carried  2 1  
number  ever  carried  by  U S .   scientific  space- 
experiments-largest 
craft-to 
study  solar  wind,  solar  flares,  magnetic  field  disturbances, 
radiation  belt  particles,  aurora  events,  ionization,  and  variations  in 
atmospheric  density.  Ogo  program  was  managed  by  NASA  Goddard 
Space  Flight  Center.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.;  NASA  Release  66-132; AP,  NYT ,  
6/8/66,  15 ;  AP,  V a s h .  Post,  6/7/66,  A7) 
*  GEMINI  IX -A   Astronauts Thomas P .  Stafford and Eugene A.  Cernan,  resting 
aboard U.S.S.  V a s p ,  received tributes from around  the  world. President 
Johnson,  telephoning  from  his  Texas  ranch,  said:  “We   are  very  proud 
of  both  of  you.  I have  been  watching off  and  on  over  the  weekend  and 
saw your  re tu rn   this  morning. 
“You  have  made  all  of  us   more  aware  of  what  performance  under 
pressure  is  all  about  and  tha t   includes  courage. . . .” 
Tass  science  commentator  said  the  Soviet  people  “give  their  due” 
to  the  courage  of  the  astronauts  and  congratulate  them  on  their  safe 
re tu rn   to  earth.  He  praised  the  flight as  an   “achievement  of  American 
astronautics.” 
Jodrell  Bank  Experimental  Station  director  Sir  Bernard  Love11 said 
the  success  of  SURVEYOR  I  and  GEM IN I   IX -A   had  made  the  week  one  of 
the  greatest  for  American  science.  “ I t   seems  tha t   the   Russians  will 
have  to   stage  a  spectacular  development  in  order  to  recapture  the 
lead  which  they  apparently  possessed  a  week  ago.”  (Kilpatrick,  Vu sh .  
Pos t ,  6/7/66,  A%; Balt. Sun, 6/7/66) 
*  Sun-powered  laser  developed  by  Dr.  C.  Gilbert  Young  of  American 
Optical  Co.  under  USAF  sponsorship  had  been  successfully  operated  in  
earth’s atmosphere, producing one watt  of  power  in  continuous,  highly 
intense  beam  of  invisible  infrared  light.  A  slender,  one-inch-long rod 
of  yttrium-aluminum-garnet  crystal  (Yag),  laser  was  connected  to  
telescope  which  trapped,  focused,  and  delivered  sun’s  rays-which 
replaced  conventional  lamp  and  electrical  apparatus  needed  by  other 
lasers  for  “initial  boost”-to 
crystal  rod.  Laser’s  beam  could  carry 
messages  between  spacecraft  and  could  be  used  as  intense  satellite 
beacon.  (AZP News 6) 
*  FAA’s “Staff  Study-General  Aviation  Occupant  Load  Factor”  report 
showed  tha t   general  aviation  (nonairline)  aircraft  in  the   U S .   carried 
39.4  million  travelers  in  1965,  while  domestic  airlines  carried  84.6 
million  passengers.  Estimates  were  based  on  information  gathered  by 
all  of  FAA’S  flight  service  station  facilities  during  August  1965.  (FAA 
Release 66-54) 

210 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

June 6: U.N. World Meteorological Organization announced award of  annua l  
prize  for   outstanding work  and  international  collaboration  in   meteor- 
ology  to  Prof.  Tor  Bergeron  of  Sweden.  Noted  for  pioneering  new 
techniques  in   air-mass  analysis,  weather  forecasting,  and  physics  of 
precipitation,  Professor Bergeron would receive a gold medal and $1,200. 
( N Y T ,  6/7/66,  12) 
0  Mrs.  Jane  Marshall,  editor  of  aeronautics  bibliographies  and  education 
sourcebooks  for  National  Aerospace  Education  Council,  was  named 
1965  winner  of  National  Aeronautic  Association’s  Frank  G.  Brewer 
Trophy for cCher  contributions to enlarged aerospace horizons for  those 
who  teach  our  nation’s  youth.”  (Na t l .  Aeronautic  Assn.  News) 
June  7:  Two-stage Wasp  (Weightless Analysis  Sounding  Probe)  sounding 
rocket  carried  1,500-lb. payload  to  148-mi. (238-km.) altitude  in   ballis- 
tic trajectory  from NASA Wallops Station in  experiment to study behavior 
of  liquid  hydrogen  under  near-zero  gravity  conditions.  Payload,  con- 
sisting of  scale  model  of  liquid  hydrogen  fuel  tank,  impacted 330  mi. 
downrange i n   Atlantic;  no  recovery  was  involved.  Experiment  under 
weightless  conditions,  continuing for  seven minutes,  was  recorded  by 
television  cameras  through  transparent lucite  tank  and was  telemetered 
back  to  Wallops.  Cameras,  mounted  on  five-foot  extension  booms, 
photographed  the   liquid’s  sloshing  motion  when  small  thrus ters   were 
activated  to  show  how  well  baffles  positioned  the   liquid  in  the   tank. 
(NASA  Release 66-147) 
MSFC  successfully  static-tested  S-IC stage  of  the   second  flight  Sa turn   V 
launch  vehicle for  125 sec. and recorded  1,200 measurements of  stage’s 
performance.  The  33-ft.-dia.,  135-ft.-long stage  developed  7.5  million 
lbs.  th ru s t  from five F-1 engines-four  of  which  were  gimbaled  during 
test.  This  was  only  captive  test  planned  for  this  flight  stage.  (MSFC 
Release 66-129) 
Dr.  Hans-Joachim  von  Merkatz,  member  of  West  German  Bundestag, 
charged in   report prepared for  delivery  before meeting of  Assembly  of 
the   Western  European  Union  that  U S .   was  trying  to  “break  up” 
Western  Europe’s  space  program  with  “tantalizing”  offers  for  joint 
US.-European planetary exploration:  “In   other words,  the  exploration 
of  Jupiter  could  divert  us  from  the   essential  economic benefits  to  be 
derived  from  space  through  the   exploration  of  communications satel- 
lites.  The   American  approach  to  date  has  definitely  been  aimed  a t  
insuring United  States monopoly and  leadership  in   this  field  as   in   the 
nuclear field.”  Western European Union was  composed of U.K.,  France, 
West  Germany,  Italy,  Belgium,  the   Netherlands,  and  Luxembourg. 
( N Y T ,  6/9/66,  3) 
0  The   Baltimore Sun  commended  four  companies  for   their  roles  in   GEMINI 
IX-A  flight: Martin Co.  for building and  testing  Titan  I1 launch vehicle; 
Westinghouse Corp.  for  developing sensitive  radar  equipment;  Bendix 
Corp.  for  engineering,  operating,  and  maintaining  NASA’s tracking 
system; and  ITT  Corp.  for giving “millions  of  television viewers  . . . all 
the   advantages of  a  grandstand  seat  for  the   dramatic  recovery.  . . .” 
(Balt.  Sun,  6/7/66) 
*  Editorial i n  Washington Evening Star:  ‘ T h e  United States has just passed 
through i ts  most ambitious and taxing week  to date  in  space. So this is, 
perhaps  a  fitting  time  to  ask  itself  jus t   where  i t   is  going  in   space and 
why.  James  E.  Webb,  the  head  of  the  National Aeronautics and  Space 
Administration,  has  been  asking  tha t   question  for  some  time  now, 

211 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
trying  to   get  a n   answer  from  the   Administration  . . . and  from  Con- 
gress.  . . . The  question  of  whether  to  pack  up  or  to  push  on  should, 
as  Mr.  Webb  suggests,  be  the  subject  of  a  major  national  debate.” 
(Wash.  Eve.  Star,  6/7/66) 
June 7:  U.K.  Foreign Office  issued following statement after  press reports  of 
Cabinet  decision  to  withdraw  from  European  Launcher  Development 
Organization  (ELDO) : ‘?For some time  the  Government  has had  serious 
doubts  about  whether  or  not  i t   should  continue  to  participate  in  the  
ELDO  programme.  These  doubts  were  centered  on  financial,  technical 
and economical assessments of  the  initial programme. 
“The  Government  has  concluded  after  a  very  careful  and  detailed 
consideration  of  all  the  factors  involved,  tha t   the  latest  proposals  for 
modifying  the  initial  programme  still  do  not  constitute  a  sufficient 
basis  for  continuing,  and  i t   has  s o   informed  its  partners.”  (British 
Embassy  INFORM  195/66,  6/7/66) 
June  8:  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  cxx  carrying  scientific  instrumentation 
for  continued  space  research.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  300  km. 
(186  mi.)  ; perigee,  200 km.  (124 mi.) ; period,  89.4 min.;  inclination, 
51.8’.  Equipment  was  reported  to   be  functioning  normally.  (Tass, 
6 /W66 )  
*  $500-million  XB-70  No.  2  experimental  bomber  and  its  F-104  chase 
plane  collided and burned  near Barstow, Calif., destroying both  aircraft 
and  killing F-104 pilot  Joseph  A.  Walker  and  XB-70 co-pilot Maj.  Carl 
S.  Cross  (WAF).  Walker,  NASA  test  pilot,  held  world’s  records  for  his 
4,104-rnph and  354,200-ft.-altitude flights in   X-15 rocket  research  air- 
craft.  XB-70 pilot  A1  White  ejected  in  seat  capsule  and  parachuted  to 
ground,  suffering arm  and  back  injuries.  On  basis  of  preliminary  USAF 
reports  tha t   F-104  apparently  h i t   two  vertical  stabilizers  on  XB-70 a t  
25,000-ft.  altitude  during  “routine”  flight,  President  Johnson  praised 
pilots who  gave  “their  lives  to  advancing science and  technology”  and 
added “immeasurably to the progress this nation is making in  the effort” 
to advance supersonic flight. USAF  later revealed tha t  aircraft were flying 
in  formation  as  close  as  10 ft.  with  T-38,  F-4B,  and  F-5 aircraft  “to 
allow  photographic  coverage  of  aircraft  powered  by  General  Electric 
engines”  for publicity purposes.  Disclosure prompted AFSC  Commander 
Gen.  Bernard  Schriever  to  establish  two  USAF  accident  boards  and 
Congress  to  designate House  Appropriations  Committee  to  investigate 
the  disaster.  (Edwards  AFB   Release;  Pres.  Doc.,  6/13/66,  748;  Wash. 
Post,  6/14/66,  A3) 
*  Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex.)  commented  on  coIIision  of  XB-70  and 
F-104 aircraft: “This  accident must serve as a reminder  to the American 
public and  to  the world  tha t  all of  the potential  hazards  of  aircraft and 
space  f igh t   can  never  be  entirely  eliminated  from  our  experimental 
program.  The  phenomenal success of  our manned  space flight programs 
Mercury  and  Gemini  and  the   remaining  flights  of  Gemini  and  the 
flights  of  Apollo . . . share  the  risk  tha t   Walker,  White,  and  Cross 
faced  each  time  they  flew  to  test  the  XB-70.”  (CR, 6/8/66) 
Nerva  (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) reactor  (NRX-A5) 
was  successfully ground-tested  by  NASA  and  AEC  a t  Jackass Flats,  Nev. 
Test, in  which  reactor  was  operated  a t   design power  of  1,100 mw  for 
15% min.,  was  first  in  series  to   “obtain  additional  data  on  reactor 
characteristics  under  extended  operating  duration”  under  joint  NASA- 
AEC  Rover  program.  (AEC  Release J-151) 

212 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

June  8: President Johnson had  sen t  SURVEYOR  I  photos  to  “Chiefs  of  State of 
more  than  100  foreign  nations  . . . and  to  the   world’s  scientific com- 
munity,”  Press Secretary Bill Moyers announced. “This  effort is made,” 
the  President  said,  “in  order  tha t  careful  study of  the  photographs will 
be  possible around  the  world. We  intend  tha t  the  knowledge we  derive 
from  space will be  available for  the  enrichment  of  our  common experi- 
ence and  the  advancement  of  peaceful undertakings  in  the  exploration 
of  space.”  (Pres. Doc.,  6/13/66,  748) 
Sen.  John J.  Sparkman  (D-Ala.), speaking on  floor  of  Senate, pointed  ou t  
the  contributions  of  small business  to  Gemini program and  SURVEYOR  I 
mission  and  said  they  were  “irrefutable  evidence  tha t   there  is  still  a 
significant place  in  ou r   economy for  the  ambitious  and  ta len ted .   . . in 
new  and growing business  firms.”  (CR,  6/8/66,  12053) 
June  9:  USAF  launched  three  satellites  with  a  single Atlas-Agena D  booster 
from WTR-One 
unidentified  satellite,  ERS  XVI  satellite  to  test  metal-to- 
metal  adhesion  of  space  propulsion  materials,  and  USA’S  SECOR  V I  
geodetic satellite.  (US. Aeron.  & Space  Act.,  1966, 152) 
NASA  oso 11  Orbiting Solar Observatory, activated by  GSFC  officials, trans- 
mitted scientific and engineering data from four of  its eight experiments. 
Launched  from  ETR  Feb. 3,  1965, os0 11  had  exceeded its six-month life 
expectancy  by  50% before  i t   was  turned  off  Nov.  3.  (GSFC  Release 
G-10-66) 
*  U S .   h ad   cu r ren t   “edge”  over  U.S.S.R.  in   overall  space  capability  but 
this  s t a t u s  had  been  “recently  acquired  and  is  not  sufficient  to  form 
even  the  slightest  basis  for  complacency,”  Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh, 
NASC  Executive  Secretary,  told  Armed  Forces  Communications  and 
Electronics  Assn.  Industrial  Luncheon  in  Washington,  D.C.  Dr.Welsh 
analyzed  the   areas  of  relative  accomplishment:  “(1) Number  of  space- 
craft.  The  United  States  has  placed  dmo s t   400  spacecraft  in to   earth 
orbit  and  on escape missions, while  the  USSR  has  put  slightly  less  than 
200  on  such missions..  . . However.  . . Soviets have  placed  each  year 
a  greater  total  weight  of  payloads.  . . . ( 2 )  Lunar  and  Interplanetary. 
The United States has been far less active but  considerably more success- 
fu l  in  its interplanetary activities.  . . . We  have photographed Mars and 
had  a productive  flyby  of  Venus while  the  USSR’s active  interplanetary 
program  has  been  primarily  plagued  by  failure.  I n   addition,  we  have 
taken  some  17,000 photographs  of  the  moon  and  are  taking  hundreds 
more  by  the   magnificent  Surveyor  spacecraft.  . . . (3)  Manned  Flight 
. . . U.S.  . . . has  a  distinct  lead  over  the   USSR  with  about  1500  man 
flight  hours  in   orbit  compared  with  about  50 0 .  . . with  the   longest 
individual  flight  as  well  as  the  longest  extra-vehicular  activity.  Also, 
the   U S .   has  had  two  controlled  rendezvous  maneuvers,  one  docking 
experiment,  and  considerable  manned  spacecraft  maneuvering  experi- 
ence.  So far,  the USSR  has achieved none of  these latter goals.  (4) Space 
Applications.  The  United  States  has  navigation,  weather,  and  com- 
munications  satellite  systems  in   regular  operation,  while  the   USSR  is 
still in  the  developmental stage in such activities.  (5) Scientijc D a t a .   . . 
the  larger number and greater variety  of U S .  scientific payloads, as well 
as  the  wider  and  freer  dissemination of  the  information obtained,  may 
well have  added more  to  the world’s  store of  knowledge.  (6) Propulsion 
. . . the  USSR  has  surpassed  the  United  States  in  the  field  of  propulsion 
so far as the  amount of  th ru s t  is concerned  [but]  this  th ru s t  advantage 
is much  less  t rue  today as both  countries have  in  operation  and  under 

213 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
development  larger  and  more  advanced  propulsion  systems..  . .” 
(Text) 
June  9: Changes in  Apollo  nomenclature were announced  by  Julian  Scheer, 
NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Public M a i r s ,   in  memorandum  from 
Project Designation Committee:  (1)  Lunar Excursion Module w o d d  be 
known  as  “Lunar  Module”;  (2)  Sa tu rn  IB booster  would  be  “Uprated 
Saturn  I” ;   and  (3)  Sa tu rn  V  stages  (S-11, S-IC, and  S-IVB) would  be 
“first,  second,  and  third  stages.”  Technical  designations  for  Sa tu rn  
stages, Scheer said, were confusing to  the public and would be dropped 
gradually,  except  in  NASA’s 
internal  and  technical  documentation. 
(Text) 
State  Dept.  disclosed  tha t   on  May  26  U.S.S.R.  had  given  U.S.  photos 
taken  by  LUNA  IX   after  it  softlanded  on  the  moon  Feb.  3.  (WI ,  N Y T ,  
6 /10 /66 ,8 )  
L ~ R C  engineers  Upshur  T.  Joyner  and  Walter  B.  Horne  received  Society 
of  Automotive  Engineers’  Arch  T.  Colwell  Merit  Award-presented 
annually to  authors of  papers  “of  outstanding technical  or professional 
merit”-for 
“Pneumatic  Tire  Hydrolapping  and  Some  Effects  on 
Vehicle  Performance.”  (Law Release) 
June  10:  USAF’S  OV3-IV  research  satellite  was  launched  by  NASA  from 
Wallops  Station  by  Scout  booster.  Orbital  parameters:  2,933  mi. 
(4,720 km.) ; perigee, 398 mi.  (640 km.) ; period,  142 min. ; inclination, 
41”.  The  173-lb. satellite  carried  plastic  spheres  of  simulated  human 
tissue  containing  linear  energy  transfer  spectrometers  to  record  effects 
of  space  radiation  and  determine  how  much  radiation  damage  a n  
astronaut’s  body  could  undergo  in   similar  manned  flight,  how  long 
man  could  stay  in  space  a t   one  time,  and  how  often  h e   could  safely 
return  to  space  environment.  Satellite  would  also  give  measurements 
on  Van  Allen  radiation  belts  and  gauge  decay  of  residual  radiation  i n  
man-made Starfish Belt. Equipment,  expected to relay data for one year, 
was  functioning  normally.  (Wallops  Release  66-35;  U S .  Aeron.  & 
Space  A c t . ,   1966,  152) 
*  Twenty  of  21  scientific  experiments  carried  by  NASA’s  OGO  111,  launched 
June  6  from  ETR,  had  been  turned  on  and  were  operating  well.  Th e  
remaining  experiment-an 
ESSA  radio  propagation measuring  device- 
would be  turned  on June 11. (NASA Release 66-149) 
0  Under  Secretary  of  the   Air  Force  Norman  Paul  told  Rep.  George  H. 
Mahon  (D-Tex.) , chairman  of  House  Defense  Appropriations  Sub- 
committee,  in   closed  session  tha t   USAF  officials were  unaware  tha t   the  
XB-70 which  crashed  June  8 was  to  be  used  for  commercial publicity 
purposes:  “The Air  Force  definitely does not  pu t   its  stamp on  this  sort 
of  business.  . . . Had  we  been  aware,  I  think  it  is  safe  to  say  i t  would 
not  have  happened.”  Representative  Mahon  said  Committee  would 
“insist  tha t   procedures  be  established  which  will  make  impossible  a 
recurrence  of  such  misuse  of  men  and  military  equipment.”  (Morris, 
NYT ,   6/11/66,  1 ;  Simons,  Wash .  Pos t ,   6/24/66,  A8) 
*  GEMINI  IX-A  Astronauts  Thomas Stafford and  Eugene Cernan were greeted 
by  their families on their arrival in  Houston after four days of  debriefing 
a t  KSC.  (WI, NYT ,  6/11/66,  62) 
*  Lockheed Missiles and Space CO.’S first high-reliability Agena was launched 
from  Vandenberg AFB as  upper  stage  on  Atlas  booster,  Aviation  Week  
and  Space  Technology reported.  High-reliability Agena  had  been  under 
development for  USAF  Space Systems  Div.  for  over  th ree  years  in  con- 

214 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

junc t ion  with Midas infrared early warning system under Program 461. 
(A v .  Wk.,  6/20/66,  31) 
June  11: Astronauts  Neil  Armstrong and  James McDivitt were  among over 
700  persons  who  attended  memorial  services  in   Lancaster,  Calif.,  for 
NASA  test  pilot  Joseph  A.  Walker,  killed  in   June  8 midair  collision  of 
XB-70  and  F-104 Starfighter.  (UPI,  Wash. Post,  6/13/66,  A17) 
*  “When  U.S.  spacemen  go  to   the   moon,  they  will  surely  meet  Soviet 
people  there,”  Cosmonaut  Yuri  Gagarin,  visiting  Sofia  for  World 
Federation  of  Democratic  Youth  congress,  told  Bulgarian  newspaper 
Narodna  Armiya.  (AP,  Wash.  Sun.  Star,  6/12/66,  A6) 
June  12:  General Dynamics  Corp.  announced  tha t   U.S.S.  Redstone,  one  of 
three  World  War  I1  T-2  type  tankers  being  converted  by  corporation 
in to   Project  Apollo  tracking-communications vessel,  had  undergone 
initial sea trials  ou t  of Quincy, Mass.  ( N Y T ,  6/12/66) 
June  13:  House  appointed to   House-Senate Conference Committee  on  NASA 
FY  1967  authorization  Reps.  William  E.  Miller  (R-N.Y.),  Olin  E. 
Teague (D-Tex.),  Joseph E.  Karth  (D-Minn.), Ken Hechler  (D-W. Va.), 
Emilio  Q.  Daddario  (D-Conn.),  Joseph W.  Martin  (R-Mass.), James  G. 
Fulton  (R-Pa.),  and  Charles A.  Mosher  (R-Ohio).  (NASA  LAR  V/95-96) 
*  Accomplishments  between  June   1 and  7-SURVEYOR 
I,  GEMINI  IX-A, 
OGO   111,  and Wasp missions-had 
given NASA  “ the  niost  rewarding week 
i n   i t s   sho r t   but  action-packed history,”  wrote  William  J.  Coughlin in  
Technology Week. “Big  shots and small,  i t  all  added up  to  an active and 
highly  promising  seven-day period  for  NASA.  As  someone commented, 
this was  indeed th e  week tha t  was.”  (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 6 /13 /66 ,54)  
*  V/Adm.  Rufus E.  Rose  (USN,  Ret.)  resigned  as  special  assistant  on policy 
studies and  analyses to  NASA  Administrator James  E.  Webb  to  become 
an assistant to  the  president  of  Allied Research Associates, Inc. Admiral 
Rose,  who  joined  NASA  i n   1964  after  44  years  USN  service,  would  be 
involved  with  “planning,  organization,  management,  and  overseas 
operation’’  a t   Allied.  (NASA  Release  66-148; Marshall  Star,  6/22/66,3) 
*  France planned  to   continue work  on large  space  boosters,  either alone o r  
with  other  interested  European  nations,  despite  British  decision  to 
withdraw  from  ELDO’S  Europa  rocket  program,  Aviation  Week  and 
Space  Technology  reported.  French  officials,  open  in   their  bitterness 
a t   th e   British  decision,  viewed  the   withdrawal  as  fur ther   proof  tha t  
U.K.  made  “a  poor European partner.”  (A v .  Wk., 6/13/66,  38) 
June 14:  Nike-Apache sounding rocket  launched  from NASA  Wallops  Station 
carried  50-lb.  instrumented  payload  to  115-mi.  (185-km.)  altitude. 
Conducted by  NASA  for Univ. of  Illinois  and GCA Corp.,  experiment was 
designed to  measure electron density  in  ionospheric D region.  (Wallops 
Release  66-36) 
*  Gen.  Maxwell D.  Taylor  (USAF),  special consultant to  President  Johnson, 
was  appointed  president  of  Ins t i tu te   for  Defense  Analysis  replacing 
Dr. J. P. Ruina, who would re tu rn  to MIT.  IDA  also named Dr.  Gordon J .  
F.  MacDonald,  of  UCLA’S  Dept.  of  Planetary  and  Space  Sciences,  vice 
president  for  research.  Both  appointments  would  take  effect  in   Sep- 
tember.  (IDA  Release) 
NASA’s PIONEER  VI  interplanetary probe launched  from ETR  Dec.  16,  1965, 
completed  six-month  nominal  mission  a t   a  range  of  54.6  million  mi. 
with  all  spacecraft  systems  performing  well.  Perihelion  had  been 
passed  May  20,  1966,  and  aphelion  passage  would  occur  Oct.  24. 
Preliminary  results  of  experiments  had  been  reported  Apr.  19   a t  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

215 

American  Geophysical  Union  meeting  in  Washington,  D.C. 
(NASA 
Proj.  Off.) 
June 15:  On  floor  of  House,  Rep.  George P.  Miller  (D-Calif.)  paid  tr ibu te  
to  SURVEYOR  I  and  GEMINI  IX-A  mission  successes  and  said  they  were 
possible because of  “ the   unity  of  purpose tha t  exists between  the  aero- 
space  industry  and  the   National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administra- 
tion.”  (CR ,  6/15/66) 
0  Propulsion  technology’s  short-term  potential  was  overestimated and  i t s  
long-term potential  underestimated, AFSC  Commander Gen.  Bernard A. 
Schriever  told  the   Second  Propulsion  Joint  Specialist  Conference i n  
Colorado Springs. “This means tha t  we  should push  technology without 
trying to  tie  i t  to specific system requirements. As a matter of  historical 
record,  i t   can  be  shown  tha t   exploratory  and  advanced development 
programs designed  to  push  technology have provided valuable savings 
i n   time  and  money  when  applied  to   an   engineering  development 
program  tha t  encounters serious and unexpected problems.  . . .” (Text) 
0  NASA  had  selected  Control  Data  Corp.  to  furnish  large-scale  computer 
complex  for  L ~ R C  under  $20-million,  fixed-price  contract.  Complex 
would  utilize  computers  with  wide  variety  of  simulators  and  increase 
LaRC’s  capability  and  effectiveness  in   conducting  advanced  research. 
(NASA  Release  66-152) 
e  Vice  President  Hubert  H.  Humphrey  proclaimed  Dr.  Jocelyn  R .   Gill 
“Multiple Sclerosis Woman of  the  Year”  in   ceremony a t  his  Washing- 
ton,  D.C.,  office  and presented her  with  engraved  bronze hope  chest- 
symbol  of  Multiple Sclerosis  Society.  Dr.  Gill,  an  MS  patient  for  over 
20  yrs.,  was  with  NASA  Manned  Flights  Experiments  Office,  OSSA.  Sh e  
formerly  had  been  Chief  of  In-Flight  Sciences,  OSSA,  and  on  March  1 
had  received  one  of  six  Federal  Women’s  Awards  of  1966.  (Wash. 
Pos t ,   6/16/66,  D1) 
0  NASA  Western  Operations  Office  (WOO)  was  disestablished  as  NASA  field 
instalIation.  woo  functions  had  been  assigned  to   two  component  field 
activities-Western 
Support  Office  (WSO),  which  would  serve  ‘,‘NASA 
Headquarters  and  installations  programs  and  projects  in   Sou thern  
California  and  Nevada,”  and  NASA  Office-Downey, 
responsible  for 
“overall  NASA  representation  with  North  American Aviation,  Inc.,  and 
for  providing support  to  field  installation  projects  at  the   contractor’s 
site.”  (NASA  Hq.  WeekZy Bull.,  7/19/66,  3) 
*  Boeing  Co.  revealed  new  design  for  i ts   2707  supersonic  transport  t o   be 
submitted  to  FAA  in   Sst  competition  with  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp. 
Sept.  6.  Major  s truc tura l   changes  included:  shifting  aircraft’s  four  
engines  from  under  wings  to  under  tail  to  provide  smoother  flow  of 
air  to  engine  and  quiet  compressor whine;  integrating  variable-sweep 
wing  with  horizontal  tail  to  form  single  lifting  surface  during  1,800- 
mph  flight;  and  increasing  length  (to  298  ft.)  and gross  takeoff  weight 
(to  600,000  Ibs.)  to   accommodate 300  passengers.  (Boeing  Release; 
Edwards,  Wmh. Post,  6/16/66,  C10) 
Hourly bus  tours-for 
a  f e e b e g a n  a t  KSC.  Announcing the  new  service, 
KSC  Director Dr.  Ku r t  H.  Debus said:  “We want  to  provide the  public 
with  as  meaningful  a  tour  as  can  be  permitted  without  interference 
with  mission  operational  requirements.  On  Sundays,  the   public  will 
continue  to  have  the   option  of  the   free   drive-through,  in   private 
vehicles, of the   [NASA]  center and the  Cape Kennedy Air Force Station.” 
(NYT ,  5/12/66,  21; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star,  6/13/66,  E l )  

216 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

June 15: GSFC  selected  Brush  Instruments  Go.  for  $900,000  contract  to 
provide 22 Unified  S-Band  (Usb)  Systems Monitors for  NASA’s  Manned 
Space  Flight  Tracking  Network.  Systems,  composed  of  high-speed, 
finite sensing and recording devices, would  provide  Ymmediate reading 
of  critical  subsystems  performance  while  simultaneously  recording 
operating events as  they O C C U ~ , ~ ’  
pinpoint and record trouble or failure, 
and serve as diagnostic tool  for remedial action.  (GSFC  Release G-11-66) 
June 16:  USAF  Titan  111-C booster  launched  from ETR  inserted  seven  Initial 
Defense Communications Satellite  Program  (Idcsp)  repeaters  and  one 
gravity-gradient  satellite  into  random,  near-synchronous,  equatorial 
orbit,  creating  nucleus  of  worldwide  military  communications system. 
Apogees  varied  from  15,911 mi.  (25,617  km.)  to  16,126 mi.  (25,963 
km.) ; perigees from 15,811 mi.  (25,456 km.) to  15,829 mi.  (25,484 km.). 
Average  period  was  22  hrs.  10  min.  All  seven  comsats were  reported 
performing nominally. Satellite  to  explore feasibility of  gravity-gradient 
stabilization  a t   very high  altitudes  had  successfully  deployed  its  52-ft.- 
long booms  and was  performing as  expected. 
Powered  flight  of  Titan  111-C  was  close  to  planned  parameters. 
Transtage  and  payload  were  inserted  in to   parking  orbit,  where  first 
transtage  burn  made  necessary  course  corrections.  Second  transtage 
burn-at 
110  min.  GET-moved 
stage  and  load  into  transfer  orbit. 
Third  transtage  burn-at 
06:03 : 12 GET-put 
satellite  dispenser frame 
and  i t s   eight  satellites  weighing  800  lbs.  total  into  near-synchronous 
orbit with  15,906-mi.  (25,608.6-km.)  apogee  and  15,801-mi.  (25,439.6- 
km.)  perigee. At 06:06:52  GET,  satellites were ejected one a t  a time over 
approximate  3-min.  period  into  their  preselected  orbits.  W i th in   six 
minutes,  telemetry  signals  were  received  and  surface-station  tracking 
and  communications  tests  begun;  within  two  hours,  circuits  were 
established  through  repeaters.  Launch was  four th   consecutive success 
of  Titan  111-C and  f m t   total  success of  i ts   transtage. 
Fifteen  additional  comsats would  be  launched by  late  1966 to  ensure  
against  failure  of  one  or  more  satellites.  New  ground  terminal  would 
be  installed  in  Vietnam  by  midsummer to  provide additional  command 
and control circuits.  (UPI,  N Y T ,  6/17/66;  14 ;  UPI,  Wash .  Post, 6/17/66, 
A4;  Tech.  Wk . ,  6/27/66,  16) 
0  U S .  gave U.N.  proposed  treaty on exploration  of  moon  and other celestial 
bodies  and  asked  tha t   U.N.  Outer  Space  Legal  Subcommittee  meet 
July  1 2  to  discuss  it.  Draft-based 
on  May  7  statement by  President 
Johnson urging treaty to reserve celestial bodies for peaceful purposes- 
declared such  bodies  open  equally  to  all  countries, subject  to  claim  by 
none,  and  off  limits  to  nuclear  weapons,  weapon  testing,  military 
maneuvers, and fortifications. Soviet source said U.S.S.R.  had submitted 
similar  treaty  earlier  in  day;  text  of  proposal was  no t  made public  [see 
June   171.  (AP, Wash .  Post, 6/17/66,  A4) 
0  Two  Nike-Cajun  meteorological  sounding  rockets  carrying  exploding 
grenade payloads were launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, and Church- 
ill  Research  Range  in   a  coordinated GSFC  experiment to  study  atmos- 
pheric  parameters  of  wind,  temperature,  pressure,  and  density  as 
summer  seasonal maximum of  noctilucent  cloud s ig h t in g  approached. 
Rockets  and  instrumentation  functioned  normally.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Mrs.  James  A.  McDivitt gave birth  in  Houston  to  a  daughter-first 
child 
conceived  by  an  American  astronaut’s  wife  after  her  husband  had  re- 
turned  from space. Astronaut McDivitt was  command pilot  on the  June 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

2 17 

Jun e   16:  USAF Titan  111-C  launch  vehicle  in  preparation  for  multiple-satellite  payload 
mission  from  Eastern  Test  Range. 
4-7,  1365, GEMINI  IV mission  during which  Astronaut  Edward H .  Wh i te  
I1 made his  21-min. Eva.  (AP,  Wash. Eue. Star, 6/17/66,  A2) 
June  17:  Washington,  D.C.,  National  Airport  marked  25th  anniversary 
facing  ground  congestion  problems  intensified  by  initiation  of  shor t-  
haul  je t   service April  24.  FAA  Administrator William  F.  McKee  told 
13 airlines  to   restrict  flights  at  National  or  risk  restriction  by  agency 
edict.  Flight  statistics released  by  FAA  June   3 had  shown  16,109 more 
passengers a t  National in  Msy  than  April. Dulles International Airport’s 
passenger  count  had  dropped  by  14,456.  (Golden,  Wash.  Eve. Star, 
6/20/66,  1 ;  Eisen,  Wash. Pos t ,  6/26/66,  B1,  B7) 

2 18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

June  17:  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  CXXI  for  continued  space research  in to  
orbit with  354-km.  (220-mi.)  apogee,  210-km.  (130-mi.)  perigee,  72.9” 
inclination,  and  98.9-min.  period.  Instruments  were  functioning 
normally.  (Tass,  6/17/66) 
e  GSFC  announced  completion of  OGO  111  checkout  program.  The  1,135-lb. 
spacecraft,  orbited  June   6,  wa s   “operating  well”  and  2 1  experiments 
onboard  had  recorded  and  transmitted  more  than   3,000  hrs .   of  data. 
Cause of  continuing problem in  receiving signals from range and range- 
ra te   tracking  beacon-  method  for  precise  determination  of  position 
i n   orbit-was 
under  study,  but  use  of  alternate  tracking  system  pre- 
vented  serious  effect  on  OGO  111  scientific mission.  (GSFC  Release;  AP, 
N Y T ,   6/18/66,  12) 
0  A t  MSC,  NASA  Deputy Administrator Dr.  Robert C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  presented 
NASA  Exceptional Service Medals  to  GEMINI IX-A  Astronauts  Thomas P. 
Stafford and  Eugene A.  Cernan  and  to   Richard E.  Dineen  (Col., WAF) 
who had helped solve problems in  the  Titan I1 booster that had launched 
th e   spacecraft.  Referring  to   difficulties  tha t   occurred  during  the   June  
3-6 GEMINI  Ix-A  flight,  Seamans said:  “We  know  tha t   if   we  had  been  a 
little sharper, if we  had  worked  a  little harder,  tha t   this would  not have 
happened. . . . We a r e .  . . dissatisfied with ourselves when technical and 
procedural failures  keep us  from our goals.”  He added he had  requested 
review of  plans for Gemini X,  XI, and XI1 missions for  “tightening up” 
of  procedures.  Summarizing Project  Gemini’s  results  to  date-“at 
th e  
three   quarter mark”-and 
forecasting  its  probable total  impact  on  t h e  
space effort,  Seamans  said:  “I  am  convinced that  this  program will  be 
completed with far greater re tu rn  to  the  nation in  scientific information, 
technology, and  operational  experience than   we  had  originally se t   ou t  
to   accomplish  when  we  began  the   program  in   1961.”  (Wash .   Post, 
6/18/66,  A2;  Waldron,  NYT ,   6/18/66,  10 ;  Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
6/20/66,  A10) 
0  GEMINI  IX-A  Astronauts  Thomas  P.  Stafford  and  Eugene  A.  Cernan  held 
the ir   first  post-mission press  conference. Cernan  said  tha t   during  his 
space walk  he   could no t   keep his  feet  from  floating, was  unable  to   use 
and  “had  to work continually against the  pressure suit.  . . , I was  devot- 
both  hands while  trying  to  don backpack containing maneuvering un i t ,  
ing 50 per  cent  of  my  work  load  just  to  maintain position.”  This  extra 
effort saturated the  environmental control  system and led  to  fogging of 
his  faceplate so  tha t  he  could not  tes t  th e  maneuvering unit.  About  th e  
same  time,  h e   felt  his  back  becoming  “extremely  hot.”  I t   was  later 
revealed  some  of  the   insulation  had  been  ripped  from  his  spacesuit. 
After recounting his  adventures, Cernan said:  “I  found no  new  voodoo 
ou t  there.  . . . You’re a t  home out th e r e .  . . I’m convinced we  can do just 
about  anything  we  want  to  do.”  (Wa sh .   Post,  6/18/66,  A2;  N Y T ,  
6/18/66.  A10) 
0  U.S.S.R. made public  i ts  draf t  treaty  for preserving universe for peaceful 
exploration and  research  in   interest of  all mankind  submitted  to  U.N. 
June   16.  One  difference  from  U S .   treaty  proposal,  also  submitted  to  
U.N.  June   16, concerned settlement  of  disputes:  Soviet plan  called  for  
consultation  and  negotiation  among  parties  involved;  U.S.  proposal 
would  refer  disputes  to   International  Court  of  Justice.  Platon  D. 
Morozov,  acting  head  of  Soviet delegation to  U.N.,  asked  to  have draft 
circulated  as  document  for  inclusion  on  agenda  of  21st  session  of 
General  Assembly,  to  open  Sept.  20.  (Daniell,  N Y T ,   6/18/66,  10) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

219 

June  17:  Gemini  XII  crew  was  named.  Prime  crew:  James  A.  k v e l l ,   Jr., 
command  pilot;  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  pilot.  Backup  crew:  L.  Gordon 
Cooper,  Jr.,  command  pilot;  Eugene  A.  Cernan,  pilot.  Mission  was 
scheduled for late October or early November 1966.  (AP, NYT, 6/18/66, 
10 ;  AI’, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  6/18/66,  A2) 
Praising June  16 flight of  Titan 111-6 booster which injected eight satellites 
into  orbit,  Secretary of  the  Air  Force Dr.  Harold  Brown  told  Pentagon 
news  conference  that  program  cost  included  $33 million  for  satellites, 
$45 million for ground stations, and $10 to $20 million for other system 
elements. Launch costs were excluded since they were covered by Titan 
111-C  development  funding.  Satellites  were  resistant  to   jamming  or  
interference, bu t   “anyone  who  pu ts   up  an   antenna”  of  the   right  kind 
could listen in .  What  they would hear  “may  or may  no t  be  comprehen- 
sible to  them”  since traffic would  be  coded. Asked if  U.S.S.R.  could use 
satellite system, Dr. Brown  replied affirmatively. However,  DOD   Deputy 
Director  of  Defense Research and  Engineering Dr.  Thomas F.  Rogers 
stated: “We have arranged so tha t  i t  would be very  difficult for them to  
have assured use of  it.”  (Transcript) 
0  U.K.’s  Cable  &  Wireless,  Ltd.,  would  build  three  ground  stations-at 
Hong Kong,  Bahrein Island,  and an  undisclosed site-for 
satellite  com- 
munications,  reported  the   Wa l l   Street  Journal.  Hong  Kong  station 
would  cost  $7  million  and  would  be  operational  by  1968.  Seventeen 
seven U S .   companies-had 
firms-including 
been  asked  to  bid  on  th e  
project.  ( WSJ ,  6/17/66,  12) 
*  President  Johnson  signed  into  law  Marine  Resources  and  Engineering 
Development Act  of  1966,  establishing national  goals  for an  expanding 
national  oceanographic effort.  Legislation,  sponsored by  Sen.  Warren 
G.  Magnuson  (D-Wash.) , provided for  Cabinet-level National Council 
of Marine Resources and Engineering Deve lopmen t -and  administrative 
and coordinating organization similar  to  NASC.  Chairman would  be Vice 
President.  Bill  also provided  for  15-member Marine Science, Engineer- 
ing and Resources Commission to   conduct  l8-mo. study of  US. ocean- 
ographic capabilities and  recommend Government  organizational  plan 
for  oceanography. (CR ,  6/2/66,  11490-92; Wa sh .  Post,  6/19/66,  A17) 
June  17-18:  Optical  identification  of  x-ray  source  Sco  X-1  was  made  a t  
Tokyo  Observatory. Photoelectric  and  spectroscopic  observations con- 
tinued a t  Mt.  Wilson  and Mt. Palomar Observatories through July;  data 
indicated  source might be  “an  uncatalogued old  nova.”  Optical search 
had  been  based  on  information  obtained from  NASA-American  Science 
and   Engineering,  InC.-MIT  experiment  flown  on  Aerobee  150 sounding 
rocket  launched  March  8 from  WSMR.  (Astrophys.  J.,  10/66,  316-21) 
June  18:  Discussing th e   “cost  to  land men  on   th e  moon”  in  Journal  of  the 
Armed  Forces,  James  J.  Haggerty,  Jr.,  said  late  RASA  Deputy  Admin- 
istrator  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  “without  much  detailed  information  on  
which  to  base  an   assessment,”  had  estimated  $20  billion.  Now  tha t  
work  on   all  major  contracts  was  well  advanced, NASA  had  made  new 
estimate tha t  validated original figure:  total cost would be  $22.7  billion 
with  possibility  of  adjustment tha t  would  bring  i t  down  almost  to  $20 
billion.  (Haggerty, J/Arrned  Forces,  6 /18 /66 ,8)  
*  Development  of  new  solid-fuel  improved  capability  missile  (Icm)  tha t  
could “penetrate  even the   tightest  Soviet defense” was  being  urged  by 
USAF,  Pentagon  sources  revealed.  Missile would  also  be  able  to  propel 
several  times  the   payload  of  present  Minuteman  and  Polaris  missiles 

220 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

toward targets  in  U.S.S.R.,  could  be  perfected in  about five years,  and  
would ensure  U.S.  strike capability even after surprise attack.  (Beecher, 
NYT ,  6/20/66,  1) 
June  19:  TIROS  VII meteorological satellite had  operated successfully in  orbit 
three  years, traveled more than 445,000,000 mi.,  and had  taken 123,000 
pictures  of  cloud  formations,  storms,  hurricanes,  and  typhoons  with 
two wide-angle vidicon TV  cameras.  Orbited from AMR  (now ETR)  June  
19, 1963, i t   tracked major hurricanes  and  provided  information aiding 
Ranger, Mariner, and Gemini missions.  (AP, Balt. Sun, 6/19/66 
Calculations by  computer a t  Astronomisches Rechen Ins t i tu t ,  Heidelberg, 
Germany,  and  Yale  Univ.  Observatory  had  helped  astronomers  re-  
discover Tempel-Tuttle Comet  responsible  for  Leonid  meteor  showers 
each November.  Comet  had  been  found  100 yrs.  ago and no t  seen again 
un t i l   summer  1965. Meteor shower  was  expected to  be  spectacular  in  
November  1966;  i t   would  occur  close  to  time  of  comet’s  re tu rn   to 
vicinity  of  earth.  (Sci.  Serv.,  NYT,  6/19/66,  26) 
0  Discussing  military  satellite  as  “necessity,  no t   adventure,”  article  in  
Houston  Post  said  DOD   had  reoriented  space research  toward  “develop- 
ment  of  a  many-purpose military  satellite.”  DOD  Deputy  Director  of 
Office  of  Defense  Research and Engineering Daniel J.  Fink  was  quoted 
as  saying proposed  vehicle  could:  (1)  locate  military  units  precisely; 
(2)  speed military  communications;  (3)  carry weather observation and 
reporting  equipment;  (4)  furnish  early warning against nuclear  attack; 
and  (5) detect  unannounced  nuclear  tests.  (Houston Post,  6/19/66) 
NASA’s  (‘new policy  of  calling a  spade a  spade-and 
a  failure  a  failure-in 
discussing th e  results of  i t s  manned operations  in  space” was  noted by 
William Hines  in   t h e  Washington  Evening  Star:  “NASA  has  been  sub- 
jected  to harsh  criticism-some  of  i j  bordering on ridicule-for 
the  past 
disinclination  of  i ts   officials  to  admit  . . . tha t   things  occasionally  had 
gone  wrong.  . . . Seamans’  outspoken  evaluation  [June  171  of  th e  
Gemini 9 A  flight was  regarded  here as  a signal  to  other NASA  officials  to 
lay  the   facts  on  the   l ine  when  things  do  no t   go  exactly  according to  
plan.”  (Hines, Wash. Eve.  Star,  6/20/66,  AlO) 
0  Stages in  development of  facilities a t  KSC  for Saturn/Apollo  launches were 
described  in   Aviation  Week  editorial  by  Robert  Hotz.  Now  tha t   the  
mission  was  “moving  so   close  to   realization,”  he   said,  bold  and  far- 
reaching  decisions  were  needed  “to  insure   in   the   post-Apollo  decade 
the   full  utilization  of  these  Apollo  launch  facilities  and  the   superb 
technical  team  that  operates  them.”  Citing  “dramatic  progress”  made 
by U S .  in  first decade of space age, Hotz added: ‘r.  . . i t  is hard  to under- 
stand  why  the   highest  level  of  national  leadership  now  shrinks  from 
making  th e   decisions  today  that  are   necessary  to  insure  this  nation’s 
capability for  tomorrow.”  (Hotz, Av .   Wk . ,  6/20/66,  21) 
0  Martin Marietta Corp.  was  receiving $7,622,000  fixed-price contract from 
AFSC  for work  on Titan  I11  booster.  (DOD   Release  536-66) 
0  Proposed  compromise  by  ELDO  reducing  U.K.’s  share  of  financing  was 
reported  in   Aviation  Week.  If  accepted  a t   July  7-8  ELDO  ministerial 
conference in  Paris,  financial participation  was  expected  to  be:  U.K.- 
27% of  fu tu re  ELDO  costs,  a  reduction from the  38.79%  initially agreed 
upon  in  1962-63; West Germany-27%, 
increased from 22.01%; France, 
25%, increased from 23.93%; Italy, 12%, increased from 9.78%;  Nether- 
lands  and  Belgium  would  share  9%,  increased  from  Belgium’s  2.85% 
and  Netherlands’ 2.64%.  (A v .  Wk.,  6/20/66,  30) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

221  

June  21:  NASA  awarded  Philco  Corp.  $3.5-million  contract  for  four  tri-axis 
magnetometers and supporting equipment to  be left on moon by Apollo 
astronauts. One of  seven geophysical instruments to  be  carried in  Alsep 
(Apollo  Lunar  Surface  Experiments  Package),  14.5-lb.  magnetometer 
would  determine presence  or  absence of  lunar magnetic field,  measure 
magnetic  penetrability  of  moon,  study  interplanetary  magnetic  field 
and  its  diffusion to  moon,  and  detect  electrical  curren ts   in   solar  wind 
above  lunar   surface.  (ARC Release  66-9) 
USAF  launched  unidentified satellite  with  Thor-Agena D  rocket  from WTR. 
(US. Aeron.  & Space  Ac t . ,   1966, 153) 
*  ComSatCorp president  Dr.  Joseph V.  Charyk, speaking a t  National Space 
Club  luncheon  in   Vashington,  D.C.,  disclosed  plans  for   a  $7- to  $9- 
million  laboratory  to  be  built  by  ComSatCorp  near  Washington,  D.C. 
Facility  would  employ  about  200  people  and  would  be  completed  by 
mid-1468.  (Clark, N Y T ,  6/22/66,  12) 
$3,000 block of magnesium  used  as vibration  test  fixture for Lunar Excur- 
sion Module’s  propellant-gaging system brought  $28.14  in  Los  Angeles 
junk  yard.  Two  trash  collectors had  diverted  block  from Apollo project 
into  their  disposal  truck  while  emptying trash  cans  a t   Giannini Corp., 
Duarte,  Calif.  They  were  booked  on  suspicion  of  grand larceny.  (UPI, 
Wash. Post,  6/24/66,  A6) 
0  Development of  chemical laser requiring no external energy was advancing 
so  rapidly i t  would  “probably  be achieved within a year or ~ w o . ”  Predic- 
tion  was  made  by  Dr.  George  C.  Pimental,  professor  of  chemistry  a t  
Univ.  of  California, Berkeley, a t  AFosR-sponsored seminar on  “Science 
Frontiers” a t  Albuquerque, N.  Mex.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,  6/21/66,  12) 
June 22:  U.S.  and U.S.S.R.-which 
had submitted to U.N.  (June 16) similar 
drafts  for  a  treaty  banning military  use  of  celestial  bodies-agreed 
to 
meeting  of  legal  experts  of  Committee on  the   Peaceful Uses  of  Ou ter  
Space in  Geneva July 12  to arrange compromise between drafts. U.S.S.R. 
had originally asked that proposals be included in  agenda of  21st session 
of  U.N.  General Assembly,  which  would  open  Sept. 20.  (Daniell, N Y T ,  
6/23/66,  1) 
0  Two  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  launches,  from  Point  Barrow,  Alaska, 
and Churchill Research  Range,  were  coordinated in  GSFC  experiment to 
obtain  atmospheric  data  as  time  of  summer maximum  for  noctilucent 
cloud  sightings  approached.  Rockets  and  instrumentation  functioned 
satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  Design  requirements  for  second-generation, recoverable-reusable  booster 
and  spacecraft  systems, outlined  by  NASC  staff  member  Dr.  Eugene  B. 
Konecci  a t   American  Astronautical  Society meeting  in   Wayne,  N.J., 
included:  new  pFopulsion  capability;  materials,  structures,  and  sub- 
systems  suitable  for  reuse;  and  system  designed  for  “full  use  of  the  
human  factor  capabilities  in   the   control  loop,  . . . minimum  (limited) 
ground  support  participation,  and  for  easy  maintenance  and  repair.” 
(Text) 
0  President  Charles de  Gaulle,  speaking a t   Moscow  S ta te  Univ.,  suggested 
tha t  France  and  the  U.S.S.R.  should work  toward  a  ( h ew  alliance”  for 
scientific and other intellectual  pursuits. He said tha t   ‘‘culture, science, 
and progress justify national  ambitions in  our epoch in  place of  former 
dreams of  conquest and  domination.”  (Grose, NYT ,   6/23/66,  1) 
Generator-burner  assembly  of  the   LORHO  pilot  facility  was  successfully 
ru n  a t   full power  a t  Arnold  Engineering Development  Center, marking 

222 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

first  application of  magnetohydrodynamic principles in  achieving high- 
velocity flow  in  a ground  environmental test  facility.  (AEDC) 
June  22: ComSatCorp denied ITT  World  Communications, Inc.’s  accusation 
of  “unjustly  and  unreasonably”  discriminating  against  ITT  in   quoting 
charges to   Defense Communications Agency  (DCA) for  30 satellite cir- 
cuits  between  Hawaii  and   Japan,  the   Philippines  and  Thailand:  “The 
ra te  quoted to  the  DCA for each of  t h e .  . . circuits is, in  fact, higher than  
th e  ra te   quoted  to   the   carriers,  as  i t   takes  into  account  the  additional 
service  costs by  Comsat to   carry  ou t  a  responsibility  to  provide end-to- 
end  service  to  DCA.  . . . ITT  Worldcom may  have  been  confused  by 
advance  knowledge  as  to  th e   Corporation’s planned  tariff  for  satellite 
channels to  be  furnished  to   authorized  common  carriers,  in  which  the  
$48,000  charge to  the   carriers  would  be  revised  downward  to  $45,000 
[and]  erroneously  assumed tha t   this  lower  charge,  which would  apply 
only to  authorized common  carriers,  had  been quoted by  Comsat  to   the  
DCA.”  (ComSatCorp Release) 
June 23:  NASA’s PAGEOS I  (Pageos A Passive Geodetic Earth-Orbiting Satellite) 
was  launched with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D  booster from WTR 
into  near-circular  polar  orbit:  2,645-mi.  (4,258-km.)  apogee,  2,603-mi. 
(4,191-km.) perigee,  182-min. period, and  87” inclination.  PAGEOS  I  was 
a n   aluminum-coated Mylar  balloon  of  the   ECHO  I  type.  Balloon  was 
folded and packaged inside spherical canister ejected in to  space as launch 
vehicle  reached  orbital  velocity.  Canister  then   separated  in   half  by 
explosive  device,  and  folded  satellite  automatically inflated  to  100-ft.- 
dia.  sphere.  PAGEOS  I  carried  no  instruments.  By  reflecting  sunlight, 
satellite would provide orbiting point source of  light to be photographed 
over projected  five-year perio’d  to  determine size and  shape of  ear th   to 
a degree never before possible;  in   orbit,  satellite  should be  as bright  as 
s tar  Polaris. Simultaneous observations from 41  portable camera stations 
around  world  would  be  used  to  construct  three-dimensional geodetic 
reference system. Resulting satellite  triangulation  network would make 
i t   possible  to  obtain  distance  between  two  surface  points  on  ear th  
3,000 mi.  apart  to  an  accuracy  of  32 ft.  Project  was  managed  by  JARC. 
(NASA  Release  66-150; ESSA  Release  66-32;  NASA  Proj.  Off.;  LaRC  Re- 
searcher, 7/1/66,  1 ,  6 ;   Wash .  Pos t ,   6/24/66,  A5) 
a t   full power  June  8 a t  Jackass Flats, 
0  NRX-A5 nuclear  reactor-operated 
Nev.-was 
restarted  and  operated  an   additional  14%  min.  a t   design 
power  of  1,100 mw  (55,000 lbs.  thrus t) .  Tested by Aerojet-General and 
Westinghouse Corp.  under joint  NASA-AEC  program,  reactor  consumed 
218,000 gal.  liquid hydrogen.  (AEC  Release J-160) 
0  NASA  would  negotiate  six-month  study  contracts  totaling  $200,000 with 
General  Electric  Co.  and  RCA  to  determine  “feasibility  of  a  satellite 
capable of  broadcasting directly  to  conventional home FM radio and /or  
sho r t  wave  radios.”  Contracts would  be  managed  by  NASA  OSSA.  (NASA 
Release 66-161) 
0  NASA  and Vocational  Rehabilitation  Administration signed agreement  “to 
accelerate  the   application  of  new  technology  to  the   problems  of  the  
disabled” by  making results  of  aerospace research available for applica- 
tion  to  rehabilitation  “on  a  continuing  basis.”  This  would  involve 
evaluation  of  NASA  technology by  V R A  scientists; adaptive engineering 
to  apply tha t  technology to  needs  of  disabled persons; demonstration of 
resulting devices, systems, and procedures; and commercial introduction 
of  new  devices  and  services.  (NASA  Release  66-160) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

223 

June  23: House Committee on  Science and Astronautics reported  favorably 
H.R.  14832 incorporating changes and improvements in  organization and 
operation of  NSF  recommended  in  Subcommittee on Science, Research, 
and  Development  report,  “The  National  Science  Foundation-Its 
Present  and Future.”  (House Rpt.  1650) 
e  FCC  ruled  tha t   users  of  satellite  communications must  operate  through 
common carriers  instead of  dealing directly with ComSatCorp to  prevent 
“serious  adverse  effects  upon  the   well-being of  the   commercial tele- 
communications  industry  and  the   general  public  it  serves.”  Ruling, 
which resolved controversy betweeii ComSatCorp and common carriers, 
would protect  carriers  from reduced t r a 5 c  volume resulting  from direct 
user-ComSatCorp relations.  (FCC;  V S J ,  6/24/66,  6) 
June  24:  NASA  awarded  Univac  $30-million7 five-year  contract  to  provide 
new  computing  system”  for  MSFC  beginning  in   1967.  Computer 
re 
Sciences Corp.  was  selected  to  provide support services  for  MSFC  Com- 
putation  Lab.  under  $5.5-million,  cost-plus-award-fee contract  with 
provisions  for  four  one-year extensions.  Services would  include  com- 
puter  operation, maintenance, and programing.  (NASA  Releases  66-164, 
165) 
NASA  had  awarded  $22-million  renewal  contract  to  TWA  for  continued 
support  services  at  KSC.  Two  contracting methods would  be  followed: 
cost-plus-award-fee for supply operations  and general maintenance; and 
fixed-price for   remaining services.  (NASA  Release 66-166) 
*  NASA  named  L/Col.  Robert  A.  Rushworth  (USAF)  to   receive  Exceptional 
Service Medal for  his  “outstanding  contributions”  to US. aeronautical 
research programs  “both  as a pilot  and as an  engineer”  on X-15 rocket 
aircraft.  Col.  Rushworth,  who  would  leave  X-15  program  in   summer 
1966 to  attend  Armed  Forces Staff  College, would  be  presented medal 
a t  NASA  awards  ceremony in  October.  (NASA  Release 66-159) 
USAF space launch crews were being familiarized with  new low-cost Burner 
I1 upper-stage booster developed by  Boeing to  inject payloads  into orbit 
and  then   orient  the  payload  accurately.  Small, guided,  solid-fuel stage, 
scheduled for  operation  in   late  1966, would  “economically  bridge  the  
payload  gap  between  th e  DOD-NASA  Scout  launch vehicle  and  the  Delta 
and  Agena  upper  stages.”  (Boeing Release) 
*  Potential  impact  of  aeronautical  technology  on   social  patterns  of  the  
nation  was  discussed  by  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff,  chairman  of 
MIT’S  aeronautics and  astronautics department, a t  meeting of  Aviation/ 
Space Writers’ Assn.  in   New  York  City.  I n   only  the   10 th  year  of  th e  
space age,  he  said,  the  world  was  “. . . a t  the  beginning of  a new  surge 
i n   science  and  technology stimulated  by  their  interactions with  each 
other  and with  social needs,  nourished  by  the   resources  and  needs  of 
space exploration.”  (Text; AF‘/SD,  8/66) 
.Tune 25:  France’s  President  Charles  de   Gaulle  watched  launch  of  COSMOS 
CXXII unmanned satellite  from Baikonur cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, in to  
625-km.  (388-mi.)  altitude circuIar  orbit with 65” inclination  and 97.1- 
min. period.  Tass said all instruments aboard satellite were functioning 
normally.  De Gaulle was  first Westerner  to  witness a  Soviet launching 
and  to   visit  Baikonur  space  center.  (Tass,  6/25/66;  Tanner,  NYT, 
6/26/66,  1; Wash. Post, 6/26/66,  A20; AP,  Wash.  Sun. Star, 6/26/66, 
AB) 
*  NASA  Administrator James E. Webb told National Conference of  Lieutenant 
Governors  i n   Cleveland  tha t   new  satellite  weather  reporting  system 

224 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

meant  “you  say  to  every o ther   nation  the  United  States  is  developing 
this power technique of  space, not to  get power over you, but to develop 
power  together  with  you  over  th e   limitations  of  nature.”  (AP,  Miami 
News,  6/26/66) 
June  25:  First  full-disc  photograph  of  earth,  taken  from  U.S.S.R.’s  third 
MOLNIYA  I ,   had  been  received  from  Soviet  Novosti  Press  Agency  by 
Donald  Zahner  of S t .  Louis,  publisher of  Review of  Popular Astronomy. 
Picture,  transmitted  May  30  and  authenticated  by  U S .   Government 
officials  and  by  Dr.  Gerard  P.  Kuiper,  director  of  Univ.  of  Arizona’s 
Lunar and Planetary  Laboratory, would  appear  in  July-August issue  of 
magazine.  Zahner  said  Soviet  officials  had  probably  sen t   photograph 
ou t   of  gratikide  for  article  published  by  magazine  in  spring  1966 on 
100th  anniversary  of  Pulkovo  Observatory.  (Tech.  Wk., 7/11/66,  12; 
AP,  Balt.  Sun,  6/26/66) 
June  26:  New  National  Oceanography  Assn.  (NOA)  “to  raise  the   level  of 
public awareness of  what impact oceans will have on fu ture  generations” 
became  operative.  I n   first  press  release,  NOA  said  i t   would  promote 
opportunities-for  national advancement, for  profit,  for  pleasure,  and 
e ?  
for meeting basic  human  needs-which 
lie just  across  the  threshold  of 
the  ocean.”  I t  said U.S.  lagged behind U.S.S.R.,  Japan, and other nations 
in  ocean exploration and  that  a  “high priority,  fullscale national  ocean- 
ography  program” was  needed  to  catch  up.  (NOA   Release) 
Siberian-born  scientist  Mikhail  K.  Yangel,  elected  to  Communist Party’s 
Central  Committee in   April  and  to  Supreme Soviet  June  12, had  been 
tentatively  identified  as  new  head  of  U.S.S.R.’s  space program.  Several 
other  scientists  known  or  believed  to  be  associated with  space program 
had  been  selected  to  Supreme  Soviet  for  first  time;  however,  since 
Yangel was  only one also to  occupy  seat  in  Central Committee,  this was 
taken  as  indication  he   occupied top  position.  (Shabad, N Y T ,  6/26/66, 
3) 
June 27:  U.S.S.R.  would  continue intensive exploration of  space in   1966-70 
period,  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  president  Mstislav  V.  Keldysh 
reported  to  general  meeting  of  Academy.  He  listed  these  general 
programs:  manned  space flights; exploration of  physical  conditions  on 
moon  and  nearest  planets;  and  development  of  use  of  satellites  and 
rockets  for  long-distance  communications systems.  (Tass,  6/28/66) 
*  Rep.  Hale Boggs  (D-La.)  told  House:  “.  . . no  businessman would  invest 
tens  of  thousands of  dollars in  a locomotive and then  allow i t  to  rus t   in  
th e   yard  for  lack  of  a  $5 par t .   Neither  can we  invest  tens  of  billions 
i n  a space program  and leave i t   to  falter for th e  lack  of  funds.”  Calling 
th e  present  budget  “austere,”  B o g s  warned  that  in   fu ture  budgets we  
could not pu t  important elements of ou r  capability into mothballs. “We 
must  use  it  o r  see  i t   rust.”  (CR ,  6/27/66,  13707-08) 
0  NASA  announced  conversion  of  contract  with  Douglas  Aircraft  CO.  for  
development  of  Sa turn   launch  vehicle’s  S-IVB stage  from  cost-plus- 
fixed-fee  to  cost-plus-incentive-fee. Under  revised  contract,  company s 
fee  would  be  increased  or  decreased depending on  “attainment  o f ’  the  
incentive  for  cost,  schedule  and  performance.”  Estimated  cost  was 
$700 million,  plus  fee,  (MSFC  Release  66-141) 
0  Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.  displayed  273-ft.,  full-scale mockup of  its  1,800- 
mph  revised  supersonic  transport model  to  be  submitted  to  FAA  in   Ss t  
competition with  Boeing  Co.  Sept.  6.  Made  primarily  of  titanium  and 
scheduled  for  first  flight  by  1970,  th e   266-passenger  Lockheed  2000 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

225 

would  have  double-delta wing  to   provide  “outstanding  flight  handling 
characteristics  at all speeds” and to  permit cruising a t  7,000-ft. altitude, 
and  ‘‘weather  vision”  nose  which  could  move  down  15” from  super- 
sonic cruise position  to  give pilot  visibility  during takeoff, landing,  and 
subsonic flight. Boeing design-revealed 
June 15-had 
featured variable 
wing swept forward for  takeoffs,  landings, and  subsonic flight and back 
for  supersonic  cruise.  (Lockheed Release) 
June  27: June  8  loss  of  XB-70 experimental aircraft would  delay NASA-DOD 
Ss t  research  program for  two  o r   three months,  Hal Taylor  reported  in  
Technology  Week  following  interview  with  Charles  Harper,  Director, 
NASA  Office  of  Aeronautical Research,  OART.  (Tech.  Wk.7 6/27/66,  18) 
NASA-sponsored  space science course-including 
lectures, demonstrations, 
at  (Washington)  D.C.  Teachers  College  to 
and  experiments-began 
help  local  elementary  school  teachers  understand  space-age  funda- 
mentals and  interpret  them  to   their pupils.  (Wash. Eve.  Star, 6/26/66, 
D9) 
0  Physicists  a t  Columbia  Univ.,  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Paolo Franzini, 
and  a t  S ta te  Univ.  of  New  York  a t  Stony Brook,  directed  by  Dr.  Juliet 
Lee-Franzini,  published  experimental  evidence  tha t   would  disprove 
theory  of  charge  conjunction  invariance-theory 
tha t   oppositely 
charged particles  behave symmetrically. Photographic analysis of  decay 
of  eta meson, a neutral nuclear particle, into three pions-one  positively 
charged,  one  negatively  charged,  and  one  neutral-indicated 
tha t  
positive  pion  traveled  away  from  decomposed  eta  meson  at  a  greater 
velocity  than   negative pion.  Results,  based  on  1,441 photographs, Dr. 
Franzini said,  had  “far-reaching  consequences regarding antiparticles” 
and  provided  means  of  identifying  “whether  a  particle  or  body  any- 
where in   the  universe  is  positively or negatively  charged.”  Experiment 
-conducted 
in   Columbia’s  Nevis  Laboratory,  Brookhaven  National 
reported in  Physical  Review  Letters. 
Laboratory, and Stony Brook-was 
(Phys. Rev.  Lett.,  6/27/66,  1224; AIP  Release,  6/26/66) 
0  Question  of  “garbage  problem”  in   space was  raised  during recent  House 
Appropriations Committee  hearings  on  Spacetrack,  which  maintained 
surveillance  on  over  1,800 orbiting  objects,  Drew  Pearson  reported  in  
Washington  Post.  Assistant  Secretary  of  the   A ir   Force  Alexander  H. 
Flax replied  there was no danger of collision “because of the  tremendous 
amount of  volume tha t  these 1,800 objects are disposed in. It is like the  
problem of  stepping on a flea i n  Grand Central Station. It could happen, 
but  i t   is  highly unlikely.”  (Pearson,  Wash. Post,  6/27/66) 
AFSC  had  awarded  Bell  Aerospace  Corp.  a  one-year  s tudy   contract  to 
develop Dual-purpose Maneuvering Unit  (Dmu)  tha t   could  be  worn  by 
astronaut  or   operated  by  remote  radio  and  TV  signals.  Dmu  would 
combine  “best  features”  of  Astronaut  Maneuvering  Unit  (Amu)- 
which  Astronaut  Eugene Cernan was  unable  to  test  during GEMINI  =-A 
flight-and  Remote Maneuvering Unit  (Rmu)-which  had  been  tested 
in   laboratory.  (AFSC  Release  116.66) 
0  American Astronautical Society had granted following awards for achieve- 
ments  in   1965:  W.  Raymond  Lovelace  Award  to   Dr.  Jeanette  Ridlon 
Piccard “for past experiments in  ballooning and continued contributions 
to space progress”; AAS Space Flight Award  (posthumously) to Dr. Hugh 
L.  Dryden  “for  outstanding  technical  and  administrative  leadership”; 
Melbourne W.  Boynton Award  to  Dr.  Charles A.  Berry  ‘(for managing 
successfully medical  program  for  astronauts”;  AAS  Flight  Achievement 

226 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
Award  to  Astronauts Walter M.  Schirra,  Jr., Thomas P.  Stafford, Frank 
Borman,  and  James  A.  Love11  “for  dual  outstanding achievements for  
first  successful  in-plane  rendezvous  (GEMINI  VI)  and  sustained  orbit 
operations  (GEMINI VII)  ”; Victor A.  Pra ther  Award  to Richard Johnston 
“for  outstanding contributions to   design and  technology of  spacesuits 
for  astronauts.”  (A v .  Wk., 6/27/66,  19) 
June  27:  Pointing  ou t   tha t   “space  triumphs”  had  made  “secrecy  and  the  
hoarding  of  scientific data  less worthwhile,”  editorial  in   the  Baltimore 
Sun concluded:  “. . . i t  is  no t   surprising  that,  despite  the   relationship 
between military  defense and   some  space  activity,  Russia  and  France 
seem  about  to  agree  to  cooperate  in   space  research-and 
t h e u n i t e d  
States and Russia likewise.”  (Balt.  Sun,  6/27/66) 
0  Several  small solid motors had  been test-fired during “last  three months” 
a t   Hercules,  Inc.’s  Bacchus, Utah,  facilities  under  classified  program; 
highest  impulse  recorded  in   Free  World  was  reported  to  have  been 
reached.  (Tech. Wk . ,  6/27/66,  3) 
June  28:  Analysis  of  data  from  aborted  March  16  GEMINI  VIII  mission  had 
indicated  three   of  10  ex  eriments  were  successfully  conducted  and  a 
four th  might later yield  c f  ata,  NASA  announced. Bioassays of  body  fluids 
had provided data on flight crew response to  spaceflight; frog-egg growth 
experiment had indicated fertilized frog eggs divide normally even under 
conditions  of  weightlessness;  nuclear  emulsion  experiment  had  func- 
tioned  correctly  and  had  completed  17% of  i ts  planned schedule when 
flight was  terminated. Four th  experiment was micrometeoroid collection 
device  aboard  GATV; exposed  surfaces  were  expected  to  yield  useful 
data  if  they  could  be  retrieved  from  GATV  during  Gemini  X  mission 
scheduled  for  no  earlier  than   July  18.  Six  experiments had  had  to   be 
canceled when GEMINI  VIII  mission was  terminated  after  electrical  sho r t  
circuit  i n   spacecraft  caused  continuous  firing  of  roll  thrus ter .   (NASA 
Release  66-163) 
Nike-Cajun  meteorological  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill 
Research Range  carried  19-grenade payload  in   GSFC  experiment coordi- 
nated  with  launch  from  Po in t   Barrow,  Alaska,  to  study  atmospheric 
parameters  of  wind,  temperature,  pressure,  and  density  as  summer 
progressed toward time of maximum noctilucent cloud sightings. Rocket 
and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
e  P ra t t  & Whitney Div.  announced i t  had successfully tested second version 
of  engine  being  built  for   U S .   supersonic  transport  program.  Engine 
developed more  than  600,000  lbs.  thrus t   a t  West Palm Beach  Facility. 
( W S ,  6/28/66,  9) 
0  U.S.S.R.  was  encountering difficulties  in   development of  its  supersonic 
jet aircraft so tha t  “on  th e  present showing it would  seem tha t  th e  Con- 
corde will  no t   only  take  to  th e  air  before  the  Tu-144 but will  be  flying 
commercially earlier,  too,”  experts  a t   Radio  Liberty  reported.  (DJNS, 
Wash.  Eve.  Star,  6/28/66) 
June  28-29: NASA’s  SURVEYOR  I,  which  had  softlanded  on moon  June  2,  did 
no t  respond to  daily 3%-hr. attempt by  JPL  to  reactivate  its instruments 
after  two-week lunar night.  JPL  spokesman said:  “ I t  may  or may  no t  be 
dead.  Variations  in  the   moon’s  temperature  might  have  caused  Sur-  
veyor’s  radio  frequency  to  change.”  Beginning  June   30,  JPL’S  Deep 
Space Facilities,  Goldstone,  Calif.,  would  try  nightly  to   contact  space- 
craft  using  preplanned  sequence  of  commands.  If  response  were  re- 
ceived, SURVEYOR  1’s  television camera would be commanded to  take one 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

227 

picture  of  spaeecraft’s  footpad  to   verify  camera  was  still  operational 
and preparations would be made to resume full program of  transmission 
of lunar  pictures.  (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/29/66,  A23;  UPI,  Wash. Post, 
6/29/66,  A9;  UPI,  Phil.  Eve.  Bull.,  6/30/66) 
June  29:  First  nuclear  power  generator  in   space marked  fifth  anniversary. 
Developed  by  AEC  to  supplement  solar  power  on  USN’S  175-lb. experi- 
mental  navigational  satellite  TRANSIT  IV-A,  5-lb.  Snap-3 generator  had 
traveled 724,000,000 mi.  (over 25,000 times around ear th) .  TRANSIT IV-A, 
launched June  29,  1961, from Cape Canaveral, became oldest operating 
US. satellite  in  May  1964.  (AEC  Release  J-159) 
Senatef 
assed  and  cleared  for  President’s  signature  H.R.  6125,  which 
woul  convert National Air Museum  to National Air and Space Museum 
with NASA representation on advisory board.  Bill authorized construction 
of  museum  building.  (CRY  6/29/66,  14041-2) 
Senate-House conference committee approved $17.5  billion  DOD   FY  1967 
more  than   DOD   request.  Bill  include a $137.9  million  increase  in   R&D 
authorization  bill-$377.3  million  less  than  House version and  $310.7 
million more than  Senate version.  Ap  roved  budget was  $553.8 million 
funds over  DOD   budget  request  but  House proposal to   add  $80 million 
to Mol program was  cut to  $SO-million increase. R&D  funds also included 
$14.4  million  for  Condor medium-range guided  missile;  $11.8  million 
fo r  Amsa  (Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft)  follow-on bomber; and 
$130.5 million for nuclear guided missile frigate authorized in  FY  1965. 
(Av .Wk . ,  7/4/66,  19; NYT ,   6/30/66,  13) 
0  S-IB stage  for  sixth flight  Uprated Sa turn   I  booster  (S - IBd ) ,  powered  by 
eight  Rocketdyne H-1  engines,  was  successfully  captive-fired  a t   MSFC 
for  145 sec.,  producing  1.6 million  lbs.  thrus t .   (MSFC  Release  66-124) 
Hughes  Aircraft  Corp.  received  $280-million  contract  from  NATO  Air 
Defense Ground Environment Project  to  build integrated  early-warning 
and  weapon-control  system-consisting  of  radar,  data-handling,  and 
from Norway to Turkey.  ( WSJ ,  
, communications equipment-extending 
6/30/66,  4;  Hughes) 
June 30:  On  the  floor  of  the  House, Rep.  Chet Holifield  (D-Calif.) discussed 
Committee changes made  in   Dept.  of  Transportation bill,  H.R.  13200. 
A  “clean  bill,”  H.R.  15963, was  introduced  giving  proposed Secretary 
of  department  responsibility  for  aviation  and making Federal Aviation 
Administration  (new  name for   FAA)  a  division  of  Dept.  of  Transporta- 
tion.  Civil Aeronautics Board aircraft accident investigation  un i t  would 
also be under Secretary of  Transportation.  (CR, 6/30/66,14272-5) 
0  Soviet  Foreign  Minister  Andrey  Gromyko  and  French  Foreign  Minister 
Maurice  Couve  de  Murville  signed  agreement  in   Moscow  providing 
basic  framework  for  space  cooperation  during  next  ten   years.  Major 
objectives  of  compact-which 
initially  scheduled  several  common 
experiments, including an   astronomy  test  to  be  conducted  from Arch- 
angel,  U.S.S.R.,  and  KerguBlen,  French  islands  in   the   Indian  Ocean 
-were  missions with  Imp-type satellites  and Lunar  Orbiter  spacecraft. 
(SBD ,  6/28/66,  344) 
0  NASA  selected Northrop Corp.  for final negotiations  on  $5-million contract 
for  design,  development, fabrication,  and  testing  of  “engineering me- 
chanics  subsystems for Mariner Mars  ’69  spacecraft.”  Contract would 
be managed  by  JPL.  (NASA  Release 66-170) 
Sens.  Ca r l   T.  Curtis  (R-Neb.)  and  Jennings  Randolph  (D-W.Va.)  urged 
tha t  appropriations no t  be sought for  construction of  National Air  and 

228 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Space  Museum-authorized 
by  H.R.  6125  passed  June  29-until 
the  war  in  Vietnam ended or  i ts  expenditures decreased.  (CR ,  6/30/66, 
14112-14) 
June 30: NASA might no t  in  fu tu re  be  able to  order aircraft carriers  and large 
ships for recovery of  astronauts, Chicago Tribune sources reported.  USN 
felt  vessels  could  be  pu t   to  better  use  to  support  or  relieve  forces  in  
Vietnam.  USAF  had proposed  to  NASA  use  of  new  long-range helicopters. 
(Chic.  Trib., 7/1/66) 
0  NASA  tracking  station a t   East  Grand  Forks, Minn.,  ceased  operation af ter  
five years  of  space tracking.  Advances in   tracking  technology and  orbit 
determination had made site no longer essential  for support of  scientific 
satellites;  some equipment would be sent to other stations.  (NASA Release 
66-117) 
0  USN’s  Pacific  &s i le   Range  reported  2,608  live  missile  firings  in   record 
total  of  13,155 operations  during FY  1966.  (SBD ,  7/19/66,  93) 
During  June:  Lurain  as  seen  by  SURVEYOR  I  Science  Evaluation  Analysis 
Team  after  preliminary analysis  of  data  was  a  dark,  relatively  smooth, 
gently rolling plain  “ the   consistency of  a freshly  turned  field,”  studded 
with  craters ranging in  diameter from one inch  to  several hundreds  of 
feet  and  littered  with  fragmental debris  ranging in   size from  few  hun -  
dredths  of  an   inch  to  more  than  three  feet.  Dr.  Eugene  Shoemaker, 
U.S.  Geological Survey, said terrestrial scenery most closely resembling 
the  lurain as seen by  SURVEYOR  I  would be Sedan crater a t  AEC’S  Nevada 
Test  site-large 
crater  covered  with  small  craters  and  “secondary 
ejecta”  resulting  from  explosion of  subsurface  nuclear  device.  Lurain 
appeared  to  be  composed  of  soil-like substance,  or  a  fine  sand,  with 
rougher  material  through  it.  I t   appeared to   be  about  three  feet  deep 
with  harder  surface beneath.  Surface had  dynamic bearing strength  of 
6-10  psi.  Leonard  Jaffe,  NASA  Pr6ject  Surveyor  scientist,  noted  that 
results  of  SURVEYOR  I  could  be  summarized  by  list  of  previous theories 
on na ture  of  lurain that  had  been disproved: surface was  not  composed 
of  hard  rock;  i t  was  no t   composed  of  one piece  of  very  porous  rock;  i t  
was  no t   covered  by  a  layer  of  loose dust  either  thick  or  th in ;   i t   was  a 
finely granulated material with particles  tha t   cohered to  each  other but 
did  no t   seem  particularly  attracted  to  spacecraft;  it  was  heavy  enough 
for  man  to  walk  and work  on  and  for  a properly designed spacecraft to 
land  on ;   and  it  reflected  accurate  radar  signal  from  surface,  no t   from 
subsurface substance.  Jaffe  noted  there  were  a  few  hazards  to  manned 
spacecraft,  mostly  from  large  rocks  and  possibility  of  sinkage,  but 
emphasized  data  so   far  indicated  surface  was  adequate  for  landing 
Apollo  Lem. 
There  appeared  to  be  two  different  types  of  rocks near  SURVEYOR  I: 
one with  pitted,  spongy  surface tha t   appeared  to  be  caused  by  molten 
rock tha t  had  cooled and from which gas had  escaped; the  other harder, 
smoother surfaced,  and  smaller grained. 
SURVEYOR  I  photographs were  considered superior  to  U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA 
IX results  because  (1)  camera was  higher  so  tha t   horizon was  10 times 
fa r the r  away;  ( 2 )  camera  resolution  was  greater  (down  to  1/50th  of  an  
inch ) ;   camera  worked  longer  and  took  more  photos  under  different 
light  angles.  SURVEYOR  1’s  pictures  of  i ts  own  footpad  had  yielded  data 
on  surface  and   subsurface  composition.  (Clark,  N Y T ,   6/8/66,  1; 
6/17/66,  15 ;   Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  6/17/66,  A4;  Sullivan,  N Y T ,  
6/19/66,  14F; SBD,  6 /20 /66 ,297)  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

229 

During  June:  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  writing 
in  Astronautics & Aeronautics,  outlined  choices  in   “potential  manned- 
spaceflight missions of  the   next generation”  and argued  for  taking  up 
the  preliminary options now.  He selected what h e  called  “three natural, 
potential  targets”  for  major  extensions  of  manned  space  flight.  First 
of  these  he   saw  as  “a  spacefaring  research  and  operations  center  in  
ear th  orbit,”  described as a  “large,  permanent, manned  space facility” 
that would  “make  possible whole new  ranges of  experiments, investiga- 
tions, and operations.”  Second choice was  “the moon i t se l f .  . . following 
up  the  initial  exploratory landings with  a permanent lunar  base.”  Th ird  
objective  could be  “manned  surface  exploration of  Mars”  within  con- 
text of  “extension  of  the  lunar-landing experience to  th e  near planets.” 
Citing both  advantages and  difficulties of  the   latter,  he   said:  “Such  an  
effort  would  represent  a  greater  national  commitment  of  far  longer 
duration than   our commitment in   1961 to a manned lunar  landing, and 
would  generate  proportionately  increased  industrial,  university,  and 
government  activities.  Significant  advances  in   virtually  every  field  of 
space-related  technology would  be  required.  The  increase  i n  scientific 
knowledge  from  direct,  firsthand  observation and  experimentation  on  
another planet,  however,  has  no t   yet  been  measured against th e  direct 
cost  of  its  achievement,  or  against  the   more  subtle  cost  of  longterm 
dedication to  a given course of  action, with  its inheren t  loss of  national 
flexibility  i n  allocation  of  the   limiting  resources-technical 
and  scien- 
tific manpower.”  ( A M ,  6/66,  30-33) 
Measurement of  angular  size of  x-ray  source Sco X-1 [see March  8, May 
23,  June  17-18] was  reported  by  Herbert  Gursky,  Riccardo Giacconi, 
Paul Gorenstein, and John R. Waters of  American Science and Engineer- 
ing,  Inc.  (ASE)  and MIT’S  Minoru Oda, Hale Bradt,  Gordon Garmire, and 
B.  V.  Sreekantan  in   Astrophysical  Journal.  Accompanying  article  by 
ASE’S  Oscar P. Manley  suggested source was a protostar; Giacconi group 
said source,  if  observable, wou ld  appear in  visible light as starlike object. 
(Astrophys. J . ,   6/66,  1249, 1253) 
0  AIP  Center  for  History  and  Philosophy  of  Physics  received  grant  from 
Ford  Foundation  “for  a  long  range  planning  study  to  determine  the  
fu ture   level  and  direction  of  the   Center’s  growing  activities  in   th e  
history,  philosophy and  sociology  of  twentieth  century  physics.”  (AIP 
Center,  Newsletter,  6/66) 
*  Purposes  of  Saturn/Apollo  Applications  program,  M/G  David  M.  Jones 
(USAF),  NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned  Space Flight, 
said in   an   interview in  Data magazine,  were  to  serve as  transition pro- 
gram  from  Apollo  to   next  space  goal  and  to  accomplish  “significant 
scientific experiments.” 
Apollo  Program  Director  M/G  Samuel  C.  Phillips  (USAF) said  in   a n  
interview  in   the   same  issue  tha t   “barring  some  major  setback,  some 
major  failure in  a static test  on  the  ground  or major  failure  on a  flight, 
i t  is reasonable to expect that th e  lunar landing . . , w i l l  be accomplished 
before the  end  of  1969.”  (Data, 6/66,  27,  32) 
0  Univ. of  Toronto Chancellor 0. M.  Solandt was named chairman of  newly 
created  Science Council  of  Canada;  Univ.  of  Montreal  Rector  Roger 
Gaudry was named Vice Chairman. (NAS-NRC-NAE News Report, 6-7/66,8) 
0  More  than  70  tethered  balloon  ascensions to  1,500-ft. altitude for  vehicle 
drop tests had been conducted by AFCRL  a t  Holloman AFB  over past  three 
years  to   test  Surveyor  spacecraft’s  retrofire  descent  and  impact  capa- 
bilities, OAR  Research Review  reported.  (OAR  Res.  Rev.,  6/66,  17) 

. 

230 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

During  June:  Dr.  Dorothy  Martin  Simon,  Avco  Corp.  vice  president  and 
director  of  Corporate Research,  received  1966 Achievement Award  of 
Society of  Women Engineers. She was  cited  for  “significant  contribu- 
tions to  engineering administration and space engineering, especially in  
th e   fields  of  combustion and  ablative  coatings.’’  (Tech. Wk., 6/27/66, 
46) 
0  S tar   RU  Camelcpardalis,  tha t   four  years  ago  varied  its  light  ou tpu t  
rhythmically  every  22  days  between  visual  magnitudes  8.2  and  9.1, 
had  become  constant  in   brightness  a t   magnitude  of  8.5-too 
faint  to  
be seen with naked eye. Cause of  change,  reported in  Sky  and  Telescope, 
was  unknown.  (Sci.  Serv.,  N Y T ,   7/4/66,  32) 
e  Ten-month  survey  was  reported  by  Cal  Tech  radioastronomy  research 
fellow  Dr.  John  D.  Wyndham.  He  found  tha t   a t   least  a  four th   of  the  
radio  sources reported beyond  this  galaxy  belonged  in   the  quasar  cate- 
gory.  If  a  four th   of  the   thousands  of  radio  sources  beyond  the  Milky 
Way  are   quasars,  t h e   la t ter   must  be  very  abundant,  the   report  said. 
(Henry, Wash.  Eve. Star, 6/29/66,  A26) 
0  U.S.  aerospace exports in   1365 totaled  $1,474,000,000-up  21.6  per  cent 
from  1 9 6 kA e r o s p a c e  Industries  Assn.  reported.  ( WS J ,  6/27/66,  5) 

July 1966 

July I :   NASA  successfully launched EXPLORER XXXIII (Imp-D) Anchored  In ter-  
planetary  Monitoring  Platform  (Aimp)  from  ETR  using  Thrust-Aug- 
mented  Delta  booster  with  FW-4s   3rd  stage  to  study  interplanetary 
radiation  and  magnetic fields,  Because  tracking  data  indicated  a t   3:30 
GET  spacecraft  was  in   excess-energy  orbit,  alternate mission  plan  was 
put  in to   effect  a t   4:30  GET:  retrorocket  was  fired,  injecting  EXPLORER 
XXXIII  into elliptical ear th  orbit with 278,990-mi. (449,174-km.)  apogee; 
18,975-mi.  (30,550-km.)  perigee;  13.5-day  period;  28.9"  inclination. 
Planned  parameters:  4,000-mi.  (6,4410-km.)  apolune;  800-mi.  (1,288- 
km.)  perilune;  10-hr.  period;  175"  inclination.  NASA  later  revealed 
booster's  2nd  stage had  produced 70-80 fps  over-velocity which  would 
have  caused  spacecraft  to  reach  moon's  vicinity  too  early  to   achieve 
lunar  capture.  Despite EXPLORER  XXXIII'S  failure to  achieve lunar  orbit, 
all  active  experiments  were  operative  and  high  scientific  yield  was 
expected. 
Fourth  of  seven  Interplanetary Explorers planned  by  NASA  and  first 
to  attempt  lunar   orbit,  206-lb.  EXPLORER  XXXIII  carried  six  scientific 
experiments and one engineering experiment-a 
solar cell damage study. 
Primary mission objectives were  to  study a t  lunar distances  the  earth's 
magnetic tail and magnetosphere in  interplanetary space twice a month 
by  means of  lunar  anchored spacecraft;  and  to  measure  interplanetary 
magnetic fields, solar  plasma,  and energetic particles  in   cislunar  space. 
Program was managed by  GSFC  under overall direction  of  NASA  Office of 
Space Science and Applications (OSSA).  (NASA  Proj.  Off.;  NASA  Release 
66-162; UPI,  NYT ,  7/2/66,  5; Strothman,  Wush. Pos t ,   7/2/66,  A2) 
0  L/Col.  Robert  A.  Rushworth  flew  X-15 No.  2  to  1,023 mph  (mach  1.70) 
and 44,800-ft.  altitude to  evaluate handling qualities  with  full external 
fuel  tanks.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
0  US. National Academy of  Sciences and Czechoslovak Academy of  Sciences 
announced initiation of three-year exchange program in  which scientists 
of  each  country would  visit  th e  other  country from  one month  to   one 
year to   lecture,  exchange professional  views,  and  conduct  research. 
Similar exchanges with  science  academies  in   Yugoslavia,  Poland,  and 
Romania  had  gone  in to   effect  this  year,  NAS  reported,  and  an   earlier 
exchange agreement w i th   Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences remained effec- 
tive.  (CAS Release) 
Administrative  History  of  NASA ,   1958-63  (SP-4101), by  Dr.  Robert  L. 
Rosholt and with a foreword bv NASA Administrator James E. Webb, was 
published  by  NASA.  Volum&first 
i n   history'  series  covering  major 
programs  and  other  aspects  of  NASA  operations-would 
be  available 
through  Superintendent of  Documents, GPO.  (NASA  Release 66-158) 

231 

232 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

July 1:  GEMINI IV  Astronaut Edward H.  White 11,  first U S .  astronaut  to walk 
i n   space,  received  the   General Thomas  D.  Wh i te   Space  Trophy  from 
Secretary  of  the   Air  Force  Dr.  Harold  Brown  a t   National  Geographic 
Society  ceremony  i n   Washington,  D.C.  Established  i n   1961  by  Dr. 
Thomas W.  McKnew,  chairman of  the  National  Geographic’s  Board  of 
Trustees,  trophy was  awarded  annually  to  the  USAF  officer  o r  un i t   tha t  
made  t h e  foremost  contribution  to  U.S.  progress  i n  aerospace. 
NASA  Administrator James  E.  Webb  said  a t   the   ceremony:  “I  think 
. . . tha t   no   factor  has  been  more  important  i n   the   advances  made  i n  
aviation  and  in   space  than   the  continued and  dedicated  driving leader- 
ship of  t h e  officers of  the  Air Force  and the  personal willingness to  take 
t h e   risks  involved  of  these  outstanding  test  pilots  and  combat  pilots 
and  those  who  have  done the   intervening jobs  from  transportation  to 
helicopter  work.  We  have  a  great  Air  Force.”  (Text; N Y T ,   7/12/66) 
*  Defense Communications Agency  (DCA )   said  i t  would  begin  “immediate 
negotiations”  with  ComSatCorp  fo r   contract  to   provide  new  military 
message-carrying  links  to  Far  East  as  par t   of  continuing  buildup  of 
activity i n  Vietnam.  (Denniston, Wash.  Eve.  Star, 7/2/66,  2) 
July 2:  Collection of more than  1,500 tektites-dark,  glassy objects suspected 
to  be of  lunar  origin-had  been  presented to  Geology Dept.  of  Pomona 
College, Claremont,  Calif.,  by Dr. Harvey H.  Nininger,  a  1917 alumnus. 
Dr.  Nininger  had  gathered most  of  the  tektites  i n  South Vietnam.  (AP, 
N Y T ,  7/3/66,  24) 
France  exploded  a n   experimental  atomic  bomb  from  tower  on   Mururoa 
Atoll i n  the  Pacific.  Estimated  yield was  less than  one megaton.  ( Wash. 
Post,  7/3/66,  A l )  
July  3:  Clotaire  Wood,  former  chief  of  Vehicle  Technology  Flight  Experi- 
ments  i n  NASA’s  OART,  became  NASA  European Representative,  Office  of 
International Affairs.  He  replaced  Gilbert W.  Ousley,  who would  leave 
Paris  office  and  re tu rn   to  GSFC  Aug.  1. (NASA  Ann.) 
0  John   A.  Edwards,  Director  of  Gemini Flight  Operations,  became  Deputy 
Director,  Gemini Program,  in   NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space Flight.  He 
replaced  LeRoy  E.  Day,  who  became  Director  of  Apollo  Test.  (NASA 
Release  66-176) 
July  4:  U.S.S.R.  was  entering  second  phase  of  space  medicine  research, 
seeking  the   “why”  of  physiological  changes,  V.  V.  Parin,  a  Soviet 
physician-scientist with  a  major  role  i n   selecting and  training  cosmo- 
nauts,  told  Technology Week in  a Moscow  interview.  In  phase  one  “we 
merely  made  objective observations  of  animals  . . . we  were  interested 
i n  jus t   keeping  them  alive,  i n  generating the   atmosphere,  maintaining 
thermal  control,  humidity,  pressure,  and  the   rest,”  Parin  said.  “Now 
we  want  to  know  the   intimate details  of  animal  adaptation”  to  space, 
because  lower animals  could be more intensively studied in  space flights 
than  man.  Par in  cited fou r  areas i n  which  improved medical technology 
could aid t h e  s tudy  of physiology:  measuring calcium loss in  astronauts; 
analyzing process  of  water  loss  i n   astronauts; measuring muscle  tone; 
and devising better telemetry.  Parin said h e  was  satisfied  with  the  inter- 
change of  space-medical data between  U.S.S.R.  and U.S.  (Beller, Tech. 
Wk.,  7/4/66,  12,  13) 
e NASA  might  have  attempted  to   send  Surveyor  spacecraft  to   the  moon  i n  
December  1965  bu t   was  effectively  discouraged  by  severely  critical 
report  on   the  program  published  by  House  Committee  on   Science  and 
Astronautics’  Subcommittee on  Space  Science  and  Applications, Avia- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

233 

tion  Week   contended.  NASA  had  wanted  to  rush   Surveyor  into  launch  
that  would  have  landed  during  lunar   night  rather  than   preferred  day- 
light  opportunity,  to  ensure  tha t   U.S.  achieved  first soft-landing before 
U.S.S.R.  (Av. W k . ,  7/4/66,  15) 
July 4:  Soviet tests  of  carrier  rockets  begun  April 24  “to  develop new  space 
systems”  had  been  completed,  Tass  announced.  Conducted  in   th e  
Pacific in  two  areas west  and northwest  of Midway Island,  tests were  to 
have  ended  July  31 ;   early  completion was  no t   explained.  (AP,  NYT ,  
7 /5 /66 ,28 )  
e  NAA’S  Rocketdyne  Div.  reported  single  J-2  rocket  engine  had  operated 
continuously  for  635.9  sec.-more 
than  two minutes  longer  than burn  
time required for an  Apollo lunar  launch. Test firing was  one of  a series 
of  104 during which  engine  had  accumulated a  total  of  12,120 set.- 
more  than   three  times  engine’s  specified  operating  life.  (Tech.  Wk., 
7/4/66,  4) 
July  5:  NASA’s  Apollo/Saturn  AS-203  mission  was  successfully  launched 
from  Complex  37  down  ETR  to  obtain  flight  information  on  2nd  stage 
(S-IVB) and  instrument  un i t   ( Iu ) ,  which  reflected  Sa turn  V  configura- 
tion  as  nearly  as  possible.  Two-stage  Uprated  Sa tu rn   I  (Saturn  IB) 
launch  vehicle  boosted  unmanned  payload  composed  of  S-IVB  stage, 
Iu ,  and nose cone in to  117-mi.-altitude circular orbit  (88.21-min. period, 
31.94’  inclination).  S-IVB engine  burned  once  in   earth’s  atmosphere 
and was  shu t  down.  Engine’s capability to  restart  after  coast,  as would 
be  necessary  during  the   Apollo  mission,  was  demonstrated.  No  re- 
ignition  was  planned  on  this  mission.  Photos  of  liquid  hydrogen  fuel 
behavior were  transmitted  to  four ground  stations by  one  operable TV 
camera; attempts to  repair malfunctioning second camera before launch 
had  failed.  During fourth  orbit,  while performing pressure  differential 
test  of  S-IVB stage  common  bulkhead,  internal  pressure  in   the   stage 
built  up  “well  in   excess  of  design  values,”  and  th e   stage  fragmented. 
Initial  evaluation  of  flight  data  indicated  that  all  mission  objectives 
were attained.  Success of mission--second  of  three preliminary missions 
preceding  first  manned  Apollo  flight-was 
critical  in   meeting  lunar  
exploration  timetable.  58,500-133.  S-IVB, heaviest  satellite  ever  orbited 
by  th e  US . ,  was developed by MSFC  and launched by  KSC  under direction 
of  NASA Hq.  OMSF.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.;  NASA  Release 66-157; Wilford, N Y T ,  
7/6/66,  1; UPI,  Wash. Post,  7/7/66) 
e  Reliable sources said France would  build  her  own  ccSaros’y comsat  system 
to  avoid  U.S.  domination in   the   field,  UPI  reported.  Decision  stemmed 
from  realization  that  if   France  did  not  act  soon,  the   Anglo-French 
supersonic  transport  Concorde would  have  to  be  flight-controlled  by 
U.S.  satellite  when  it  entered  service  within  th e   next  decade.  (UPI, 
Wash. Post, 7/6/66) 
FAA  awarded  contracts  totaling  $1.95  million  to   Philco  Corp.  and  IBM 
Corp.,  for  first  two  installations  of  nationwide semiautomatic air  traffic 
control  system  a t   FAA’S  National  Aviation  Facilities  Experimental 
Center  (NAFEC),  Atlantic City,  N.J.  (FAA  Release 66-62) 
July  6:  PROTON  irI  unmanned  scientific  space  station  was  launched  by 
U.S.S.R.  in to   earth  orbit  with  630-km.  (391-mi.)  apogee;  190-km. 
(118-mi.) perigee; 92.5-min.  period;  and 63.5” inclination.  Instruments 
-including 
“special  scientific  apparatus”  for   continuing  complex 
investigations  of  cosmic  rays-were 
functioning  normally.  (Tass, 
Krasnaya  Zvezda,  7/8/66,  1, USS-T  Trans.) 

234 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
July  6:  NASA  had  accepted  two  miniature  TV cameras  built  by  Teledyne 
Systems  Co.  under  $350,000  contract  for  experimental  use  in   space 
research.  Designated ccMicroeye,’’ camera  measured  1%  in.  by  4%  in., 
weighed  less  than   1% lbs.,  and  was  powered  by  small  rechargeable 
battery.  One  camera, which  included low-power transmitter and  could 
telecast  distances  up   to  100   ft.,  was  delivered  to  NASA  Hq.  OART  to 
evaluate  possible  applications  i n   biotechnology  and  human  research 
work.  Second  camera,  connected  by  wire  to  a  monitor  screen,  was 
delivered  to  MSFC  to  evaluate potential  use  with  more  powerful  trans-  
mitter  for   monitoring  functioning  of  launch   vehicle  subsystems. 
Feasibility of mounting camera on spacecraft and focusing on astronauts 
to  record  optical  responses  to  spacecraft’s  rotations  would  be  studied 
by  U S .   Naval  Aerospace  Medical  Institute,  Pensacola.  (NASA Release 
66-171; MSFC  Release 66-144) 
July 6-21: NASA’s SURVEYOR  I,  resting  on  the  moon,  revived  and  responded 
to  signals  from  Tidbinbilla,  Australia,  tracking  station  after  inactivity 
during  two  weeks  of  lunar   night  and  one  week  of  morning  sunlight. 
Responding to  command, spacecraft angled its solar panel toward  sun  to 
receive more  operating power  and began  transmitting engineering data. 
W i th in  a  few hours  after first response,  i t  was  declared  “a  fully  opera- 
tional spacecraft”;  its battery was  recharging; i ts  transmitters, receivers, 
and command system were working; and machinery that moved i ts  solar 
energy collector and high-gain antenna had been exercised. Performance 
amazed  JPL  officials who  doubted  spacecraft  could  survive  the   -260” 
cold  of  lunar   night. 
Spacecraft  continued  to  perform  satisfactorily  for  two  days  un t i l  
rapid  temperature  rise  i n   battery,  apparently  caused  by  sho r t   circuit, 
threatened  to  end  spacecraft’s  life.  Temperature  was  rising  a t   3” per 
hour ,  and reached  141°F. Near-fatal temperature subsided by  July  10  to  
115°F and  SURVEYOR  I  later  transmitted 257 photos-including  pictures 
of  a  shattered glass mirror on metal box  containing its battery.  BOX was 
insulated  to  maintain  temperature  between  40°C  and  125°C; segments 
of  mirrored glass helped radiate  away  heat  produced when  instruments 
were operating. JPL  officials believed shattering was  caused by  combined 
stresses of  heat  a t   lunar   noontime  and  cold  during  lunar  night  ra ther  
than   by  impact of  meteorites  or  heat  from  inside  compartment. 
Unexpectedly long  life  of  SURVEYOR  I  ended July  1 4  after  spacecraft 
transmitted  9 ou t   of  1 0  photos  commanded  by  Johannesburg  tracking 
station to  search for traces of  lunar  atmosphere tha t  might scatter light 
from ring of  gases erup t ing  from  the  sun .   JPL  officially terminated mis- 
sion  July  21 ;   spacecraft’s  solar  panels  would  be  checked  during  next 
period of  advantageous sunlight direction,  around Aug.  2,  to  determine 
if  SURVEYOR  I  were  transmitting  again.  Other  checks  would  be  made 
later  to   assure tha t  spacecraft’s  transmissions would no t   interfere with 
Surveyor  B,  scheduled  for  launch  in   fall  1966.  (Miles,  Wash.  post, 
7/7/66,  A4;  NYT ,   7/9/66,  1;  Wash.  Pos t ,   7/11/66;  Clark,  NYT ,  
7/7/66,  1; 7/13/66,  12; 7/15/66,  11; A v .   Wk . ,  7 /25 /66 ,30)  
JU ~ Y  7:  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Thumba  Equa- 
torial  Rocket  Launching  Station  carried  proton  magnetometer  and 
Langmuir probe  to  104-mi. (167-km.)  altitude  in   NASA-Indian  National 
Commission  for   Space Research  (INCOSPAR) experiment  to   determine 
intensity of  ionospheric electric  current  system near magnetic equator. 
Payload  had  been  developed  by  Physical  Research  Laboratory  in  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

235 

Ahmedabad,  India;  NASA  provided launcher,  ground  telemetry  system, 
and  rocket.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
July  7:  NASA  established new  program  offices a t  MSC  and MSFC  to  “handle  the  
increasing  level  of  activity  involving Apollo  Applications.”  Offices- 
headed  by  George  M.  Low  a t   MSC  and  Leland  Belew  a t  MsFc-would 
manage  “activities  concerned with projects  using  O I I O d v   hardware for 
purposes  in   addition  to   the  manned  lunar  landing.”  To  provide  “pro- 
gram management and  direction”  for  MSFC’S  consolidated research  and 
technology program  and  to  coordinate  activities  with  NASA  Hq.,  MSFC 
established new  Experiments Office headed  by  Dr. William G.  Johnson. 
(NASA  Release  66-172; MSFC  Release 66-151) 
NASA and ComSatCorp had  signed agreement €or satellite communications 
services  to  support Apollo program. ComSatCorp would  provide voice/ 
data  channels  and  teletype  channels  in   synchronous  satellites  to  be 
positioned over Pacific and Atlantic  oceans by NASA.  Draft  tariff  filed by 
ComSatCorp  with  FCC   estimated  tha t   cost  of  services  would  be  $8.95 
million  annually.  (NASA  Release  66-178; ComSatCorp Release) 
0  NASA  awarded  Zia  Corp.,  Las  Cruces,  N.  Mex.,  a  one-year,  $5-million, 
cost-plus-award-fee contract  to  provide  maintenance,  operation,  and 
miscellaneous services a t  WSMR.  (NASA  Release 66-173) 
1966 AIAA  fellows  were  selected  in   recognition  of  proIonged,  significant 
achievements in  aerospace technology: Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director  of 
NASA’s Goddard  Ins t i tu te   for  Space Studies;  Christopher  C.  Kraft,  Jr., 
Director  of  Flight  Operations, MSC ;  Prof.  Frank  E.  Marble,  Cal  Tech’s 
Guggenheim  Aeronautical  Laboratory;  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA 
Associate  Administrator for Manned Space Flight;  Francis M.  Rogallo, 
L ~ R C ;  Prof.  Ascher  H.  Shapiro,  MIT;  Dean  E.  Wooldridge,  director  of 
TRW, Inc.;  and  Robert  B.  Young,  vice  president  of  Aerojet-General 
Corp.  Awards  would  be  presented  Dec.  2  a t   AIAA’S  annual  meeting  i n  
Boston.  ( N Y T ,  7/8/66,  12) 
0  P ra t t   & Whitney  Div.,  United Aircraft  Corp.,  had  signed  agreement with 
U.K.’s  Bristol  Siddeley  Engines, Ltd.,  and  France’s SNECMA  to   develop 
jet engine for twin-engine air-bus being designed to  transport 250 to 300 
passengers  on  “medium-range” flights-as 
from  London to  Rome-by 
1970 or  1972.  (WSJ ,  7/7/66,  32) 
July 8:  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  CXXIII  carrying scientific instruments  for  
“further  investigation  of  outer  space”  in to   ear th   orbit  with  529-km. 
(329-mi.)  apogee;  263-km.  (163-mi.)  perigee;  92.2-min.  period;  and 
48.8’  inclination.  Equipment was  functioning normally.  (Tass,  Zzvestia, 
7/9/66,  4,  USS-T  Trans.) 
0  “Surveyor  I-A  Preliminary Report,”  covering first five days of  successful 
SURVEYOR  I lunar  mission, had been compiled and published by  NASA  and 
was   available  from  Clearinghouse for  Federal Scientific and  Technical 
Information. In  foreword, Dr. Homer E.  Newell, NASA Associate Admin- 
istrator  for Space Science and Applications, emphasized that  the  publi- 
cation  “does no t  attempt to present detailed measurements and analyses 
of  the   immense amounts  of  scientific data  tha t   the   spacecraft  has  tele- 
metered  to  Earth;  this  task  will  take  months  and  even  years.”  (NASA 
Release  66-177) 
0  ESRO  launched  British  Skylark  sounding  rocket  from  Salto  d i   Quirra 
Range, to study photochemical processes in  comets under meteorological 
research program which began  in   1964 and would  include 400 sounding 
rocket  launches  by  1972.  (Reuters,  Wush. Post,  7/13/66,  A21) 

236 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

J d y  8:  Mars polar caps are  white with dry ice, no t  frozen water in the  form of 
frost, wrote Dr. Robert B.  Leighton and Dr. Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech 
i n   Science.  Their  argument  was  based  on  MARINER  IV’S  July  14,  1965, 
flyby which indicated  tha t  planet’s  atmosphere is very  th in  and  largely 
composed  of  carbon dioxide which,  in   frozen form,  is  dry  ice.  Theory 
tha t  white on Mars polar caps is ordinary frost was based on observations 
of  i t s   reflectivity  in   the   infrared  and  on  manner  in   which  it  affected 
orientation of  light waves. Authors believed there might be frozen water 
on  Mars,  bu t   suggested i t  is all underground in   the  form of  permafrost. 
(Science, 7/8/66,  136-44) 
0  International Assn. of Machinists (IAM)  s truck  five major  airlines  including 
TWA,  which provided base support services a t  KSC.  Some work on Project 
Apollo  was  curtailed,  but  NASA  officials  said  essential  operations  were 
continuing.  (UPI,  N Y T ,   7/9/66) 
Vice  president  of  U.S.S.R.  Academy  of  Sciences Boris  Konstantinov dis- 
cussed mission of  Pro ton  spacecraft series  in  Tass interview:  “Research 
already  carried  ou t  with  th e  help of  th e  Pro ton  stations gives  reason to 
expect tha t   the  growing weight of  such laboratories  will allow scientists 
to   delve deeper  into  the  processes occurring within  the   universe.”  He 
revealed tha t  PROTON 111,  launched July 6, would  attempt  to  experimen- 
tally  detect   quark^,^^  fundamental particles  believed  to  appear during 
collision of  cosmic ray particles with  atoms of  interstellar  environment. 
Spacecraft  carried  “new,  complicated  instrumentation  which  is  more 
sensitive than   the   old  equipment.”  (Tass,  6/8/66) 
Oklahoma City welcomed home a favorite son, GEMINI  IX Astronaut Thomas 
P.  Stafford, and  conferred  honorary  state  citizenship  on  his  crewmate 
Eugene  A.  Cernan.  Both  astronauts  were  inducted  into  the   National 
Cowboy  Hall  of  Fame,  dedicated to  th e  memory  of  Western  frontiers- 
men.  (AP,  NYT ,   7/9/66,  29) 
* 
Aeronautical  exhibition  tracing  aviation’s  history  from  supercharger  to 
turbojet opened in  new Hall of  Aeronautical Propulsion a t  Smithsonian 
Ins t i tu t ion ,  Washington, D.C.  (Wa sh .  Post,  7/9/66,  B2) 
ITT  had  protested  to  U.S.  Comptroller General tha t   DOD   decision  to  pu r -  
chase communications services directly from ComSatCorp was  contrary 
to   recent  FCC   decision  requiring  all  Federal  agencies  to  buy  services 
from international  carriers.  ( W S J ,  7/8/66) 
July  8-10: During  plenary  meeting  in   Paris,  ELDO  members  agreed  to  (1) 
expand  the   present  rocket  development  program  from  three-stage 
Europa  1 to  five-stage ELDO  Asp  capable of  launching 200-kg. (440-lb.) 
comsats by  1971  or  1972;  (2)  limit  ELDO  spending to  $331 million  and 
cut U.K.’s  contribution from 39% to 27%; and  (3) launch  their comsats 
from  base  in  French  Guiana. U.K.-which 
had  threatened  to withdraw 
decision  to  remain  in   ELDO.  (AP,  Kansas  City  S tar ,  
-announced 
7/10/66;  Tech.  Wk., 7/18/66,  20 )  
July  9:  Sun   had  blinded  GEMINI  IX  Astronauts  Thomas  P.  Stafford  and 
Eugene  A.  Cernan  for   more  than   two  minutes  of  the   critical  liftoff 
period  June  3,  preventing  them  from  reading  control  gauges  o r   dials, 
KSC officials disclosed.  As  a  result,  NASA  was  considering fitting outside 
of  spacecraft  windows  with  tinted  coverings  on  launchings  when  sun  
might be a serious problem. Coverings would  be sprung free of  windows 
when  spacecraft  had  achieved orbit.  Cernan’s suggestion of  sung la se s  
would  probably be  rejected,  NASA  said,  because  i t   would  be  impossible 
to   wear  them  under  helmets.  (N Y T ,  7/10/66,  45) 

237 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
July 9:  ComSatCorp would  conduct communications test i n  which  U.S.  and 
European  computers would  “talk  with  each other”  for  a month  in   fall 
1966 via  EARLY BIRD  I  comsat, reported New York Times. Test could lead 
to  daily exchange by  satellite of  business,  scientific,  and technical  infor- 
mation, and to  establishment of  U.N.  “voice  of  peace”  agency-a  world 
bank  of  medical,  technical,  and  educational  knowledge-proposed 
a t  
November  1965 White House conference on international cooperation. 
(Clark, NYT, 7/10/66,  43) 
e  William  A.  Hyman,  internationally  known  air  and  space  lawyer  and  
au thor ,  died  i n  New  York  City.  (AP,  Wash. Post, 7/11/66) 
July 10:  William R.  Berry reached 19,000-ft. altitude before landing his ho t-  
air balloon “City  of  San Francisco”  near Antioch, CaIif.,  after 65-min., 
30-mi. flight from Livermore, Calif.  If  endorsed by  National Aeronautic 
Assn.,  altitude would break  15,600-ft. world  record  for hot-air balloons 
set by  Don  Piccard  in   1965.  (AP, Wash. Post,  7/11/66,  A8) 
L/C  Vladimir  Komarov,  pilot-cosmonaut  on  U.S.S.R.  VOSKHOD  I  space 
flight  Oct.  12-13,  1964,  told  second  Japan-U.S.S.R.  youth  festival  a t  
Lake  Yamanaka,  Yamanashi  Prefecture,  Japan,  tha t   U.S.S.R.  soon 
would  softland  an  unmanned spacecraft on  moon and re tu rn  it to  earth, 
then   make  similar  flight  with  dog.  Commenting on   U.S.  rendezvous 
and  docking achievements, Komarov  said:  “The  United  States  experi- 
ment was  a very interesting one.  But  I do no t  believe  that  in   the  series 
of plans to conquer space the  Soviet Union is behind the  United States.” 
(Tass,  7/14/66;  SBD, 7/25/66,  122) 
Ju ly   11:  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range  reached  126-mi.  (202-km.)  altitude  in   NASA-UniV.  of 
Michigan  experiment  to   measure  ambient  neutral  and  ion  composi- 
tion  and  density  as   function  of  altitude and  compare data  with  those 
obtained  on  February  1965  fights.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  per- 
formed  satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Ju ly   12:  NASA  Javelin  sounding rocket  launched  from NASA  Wallops  Station 
reached  631-mi.  (1,015-km.)  altitude  in   Univ.  of  Pittsburgh-Syracuse 
Univ.  experiment  to  observe  ionization  levels  of  exospheric  helium. 
Rocket and instrumentation performance was  satisfactory, with 18-min. 
telemetry  signal.  Unanticipated  high-energy  electron  particles  were 
measured, and data  were  under  study to  determine  their  source.  (NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
e U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  introduced  their  draft  space  law  treaties  a t   opening 
session of  U.N.  Committee on Peaceful Uses of  Outer Space’s Legal Sub- 
committee, meeting in  Geneva to discuss peaceful cooperation in  explor- 
ing  the   moon  and  other  celestial  bodies.  US. Ambassador  Ar thur   J. 
Goldberg told Subcommittee tha t  although drafts were differeni in  scope, 
they could be  re2onciled if  there  were good will and common purpose to 
reach  agreement.  Soviet  representative  Platon  Morozov  charged  U S .  
should no t  speak of  peace in  outer space while continuing its “shameful 
aggressive  war  on  the   peaceful  people  of  Vietnam.”  (Reuters,  NYT, 
7/12/66;  Wash. Post,  7/13/66,  A23) 
X-15 No.  1 was  flown  to  3,652 mph  (mach  5.34)  and  130,000-ft. altitude 
by  Maj. William .I. Knight  (USAF)  to  check  ou t  electrical loads, nonglare 
glass,  stick  kicker,  and  shade window.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
*  M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA  test pilot Milton 0. Thompson, 
was  successfully  air-launched from  B-52 bomber  a t   45,000-ft.  altitude 
and maneuvered  into  200-mph landing  four minutes  later  in   h s t  free 

238  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

flight  a t  Edwards  AFB. Thompson, Chief  Project  Pilot  for  FRC’s  Lifting 
Body  Program, noted  tha t   “With  today’s  test we  have jus t   about  com- 
pleted  our   whole  test  program  . . . the   next  area  to  be  explored  is 
whether such  a craft could survive reentry in to  the  Earth’s atmosphere.” 
The   2%-ton  wingless  vehicle  was  being  studied  “to  establish  th e  
technological base”  for design of  fu ture  spacecraft and to ferry men and 
equipment between  ear th   and  satellites.  (FBC Release  14-66; AP, N Y T ,  
7/13/66,  1; Tech. Wk., 7/18/66,  17) 
J u b  12: USAF  launched unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from 
WTR.  (U.S. Aeron. & Space  Ac t . ,   1966, 153) 
0  NASA  had tentatively  selected six experiments to  be  carried on two Mariner 
Mars spacecraft scheduled for  launch by Atlas-Centaur boosters between 
early  February  and  mid-April  1S69:  two  television  cameras,  infrared 
spectrometer,  infrared  radiometer,  ultraviolet  spectrometer,  celestial 
mechanics  experiment,  and  S-band  occultation  experiment.  Experi- 
ments  were  selected  to  extend  knowledge  of  Martian  atmosphere and 
visible  features of  Martian terrain and to  gather additional data to   con- 
t inue  planning for landing instrumented capsules o n  the  planet.  JPL had 
project  management  responsibility  for  Mariner  Mars  1969 missions. 
(NASA  Release  66-174) 
0  NASA  had  selected  Garrett  Corp.,  Los  Angeles,  Calif.,  for  negotiation  of 
$15-million contract  for  final  design,  development,  construction,  and 
testing  of  small  research  ramjet  engines  under  Hypersonic  Research 
Engine Project directed  by  NASA  Hq.  OART.  Engines-which  were  to  be 
compatible for mounting beneath aft fuselage  of  X-15 No.  2-would  be 
useful  for  hypersonic  transport  aircraft,  boosters,  and  for  spacecraft 
flying within  earth’s  atmosphere.  (NASA  Release  66-182) 
Paramount objective of  NASA’s  Apollo program was no t  to land man on the  
moon before U.S.S.R.  but to  make  “US. first in  space by  the  end of  this 
decade,  and  to  make  this  pre-eminence unmistakably  clear  to  all  the  
world,”  NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C.  Seamans, Jr.,  told IEEE 
Aerospace  Systems Conference in  Seattle, Wash. Apollo program was  a 
means  of  acquiring  th e   ability  to  operate  in   space  on  a  variety  of 
missions, Dr.  Seamans explained: “. . . we  are  building much more than  
a  rocket  and  a  spaceship.  We  are  developing,  in   government,  in   in-  
dustry, in  our  universities,  one of th e  most  remarkable teams tha t   has 
ever  been  assembled.  There   are  more  than   400,000  men  and  women, 
20,000  industrial  companies, and  more  than   150 universities  actively 
engaged in  the  NASA program. More than  9 0  percent of  NASA’s  five-billion- 
dollar-a-year budget goes  to  contractors.”  He  warned  against  failing  to 
look beyond  th e  near-term goal  of  manned  lunar  exploration and  said: 
“Programs of  th e  fu tu re  must be determined within the  total  context of 
national  need  and the  availability of  resources.  The Nation’s interest in 
space projects,  and the  level of  support accorded them must in  the  long 
r u n  be related  to  tangible benefits that can be derived from the  emerging 
technical  and  operational  capabilities.”  (Text) 
U.S.  had  reaped  many  unexpected  benefits  from  NASA’s  manned  space- 
flight program, NASA  Deputy Administrator Dr.  Robert C.  Seamans, Jr., 
told  Federal  Executive Board  in   Seattle,  Wash.  Specifically,  NASA  was 
generally  . . . [and  had]  se t  up  what  may  well  be  a  unique,  formal en- 
(1)  “making a definite effort to  stimulate the  development of  technology 
deavor  to  transfer  technology which  has  been  developed  in   the   space 
program  to  more  general  usage  in  the   industrial  community  . . . (2) 

239 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
striving  to   promote  a  rising  educational  level  among  the   people  . . . 
(3)  developing  industrial  skills,  management techniques,  and  a  high 
degree of  quality  control tha t   are   of  immense benefit  to   the  Nation in 
such  mundane  things  as  washing machines,  television  sets,  transistor 
radios, and o ther  household items . . . (4) helping to  assure the  country 
of  a  hard  core  of  engineers  and  scientists,  technicians  and managers, 
laboratories  and   industrial  facilities,  which  have  responded  t o   t h e  
challenge of working on  important projects in  aeronautics and astronau- 
tics.  . . .” (Text) 
Ju ly   12:  Five  leading European  aerospace companies  announced  formation 
of  consortium  to  seek European  space contracts.  Called  the   European 
Satellite Team, group’s  major goal was  $l8-million  design and construc- 
tion  contract  for  ESRO’S  800-lb.  TD-1  and  TD-2  research  satellites 
scheduled for  launch  by  NASA  in   1969 and  1970. Consortium was  com- 
posed  of  Elliott-Automation,  U.K.;  Compagnie  Francaise  Thomson- 
Houston,  France;  Fokker,  Netherlands;  Allmanna  Svenska Elektriska, 
A .B . ,   Sweden; and  Fabbrica  Italiana  Apparecchi Radio,  Italy.  General 
Electric  Co.’s  Missile and  Space Div.  would  serve  as  consultant.  (Wil- 
ford,  N Y T ,   7/13/66;  Chic.  Trib.,  7/13/66) 
Jzdy  12-13: NASA  launched  five  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  from  NASA 
Wallops Station between 9:00  p.m.  and 5:OO  a.m.  EDT.  Each  rocket was 
programed  to  eject  a  vapor  cloud  of  reddish  or  bluish  color  as  i t s  
altitude increased from 50  to 125 mi.  Experiments were to measure wind 
velocities  and  directions  a t   various  altitudes; motion  of  the   trails  was 
photographed from five camera sites within a  100-mi. radius  of Wallops. 
Launches were  conducted for GCA  Corp.,  under  contract  to  GSFC.  (NASA 
Release 66-181; Wallops Release  66-38) 
Ju ly   13:  Vice  President  Hubert  Humphrey  told  group  of  young  scientists 
visiting  Washington,  D.C.,  under  National  Youth  Science Camp  pro- 
gram to  devote some of  their talents  to solving problems on ear th  as well 
as in  space. “If we  can pu t  a Surveyor on the  moon to take pictures, why 
can’t  we  get  some one  in   from  La  Guardia  Airport  to   downtown  New 
York  City  before  he   collects  his  old  age  pension  . . . we  must  try  to 
harness our divergent and separated resources and our energies to  solve 
t h e  problems of  our earthly environment.” The  Vice  President  forecast 
scientific break-throughs for  the  year 2000, including the  elimination of 
bacterial and viral diseases, th e  correction  of  hereditary defects, landing 
of  men  on  Mars,  farming of  t h e  ocean, manufacture  of  syn the t ic  pro- 
teins,  control  of  weather  on   regional  basis,  and  creation  of  life  in   the  
laboratory.  (Text) 
*  NASA would negotiate $1.25-million  contract with Texas Instruments, Inc., 
for   design,  fabrication,  and  testing  of  telemetry  subsystem  for  1969 
Mariner  missions  to   Mars.  Motorola,  Inc.,  was  selected  for   design, 
fabrication,  and  testing of  command  subsystem fo r  Mariner  spacecraft 
under  SB2-million  contract.  Both  contracts  would  be  managed  by  JPL. 
(NASA  Release 66-186) 
NASA  had  assigned  MSFC  project  management of  Apollo  Telescope Mount 
(Am )  for  ApoUo Applications (Aa) missions. A combination of accurate, 
high-resolution,  solar-oriented  telescopes,  Atm  would  be  attached  to  
spacecraft  so  tha t   astronauts  could  manually  adjust  i t   to  select  and 
focus  upon  a  specific area  on   the   sun.  (NASA  Release  66-185) 
More  than   1,500 building  tradesmen staged  one-day strike a t   KSC  to  pro- 
test NASA’s method  of  awarding  construction contracts.  Work  on  three 

240 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

key  Apollo  projects was  delayed by  walkout,  which  had  been  called  by 
Brevard  (County) Building and Construction Trades Council,  bu t  prep- 
arations  for  July  18 Gemini  X mission  continued  uninterrupted.  (UPI, 
NYT ,  7 /14 /66 ,21)  
July  13:  Nation’s  most  modern  ship  for  oceanographic  research,  USC&GS 
Oceanographer, was   commissioned  at Washington  [D.C.]  Navy  Yard  i n  
commemoration  of  Environmental  Science  Services  Administration’s 
(ESSA)  first  anniversary.  President Johnson,  speaking  a t   the   ceremony, 
called for  international  cooperation  i n  oceanographic  research  and  in -  
vited  11 nations,  including  U.S.S.R.,  to  participate  in  first  round-the- 
world  expedition  of  the  new  research  ship.  (Text;  ESSA  Release 66-41) 
July  14:  Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station 
carried 52-lb. variable frequency impedance probe to  121-mi. (195-km.) 
altitude  i n   cooperative  West  German-US.  experiment  to  measure 
electron density i n  the  ionosphere.  NASA furnished two radio propagation 
experiments  and  sounding  rocket;  West  Germany  furnished  probe. 
There  was  no   exchange  of  funds  between  cooperating  a@nCieS-NASA 
and  West  German  Federal  Ministry  for  Scientific  Research.  Results 
would  be  made  available to  world  scientific  community.  (NASA  Release 
66-188; Wallops  Release  66-40) 
0  USAF’S  OV1-VIIIT satellite was  launched with  Atlas D  booster  from  Van- 
denberg AFB  in to  near-circular retrograde  orbit:  apogee,  627 mi.  (1,009 
km.) ; perigee,  619 mi.  (996 km.) ; period,  105 min.;  inclination,  144”. 
Balloon-shaped  satellite-made 
of  soft  aluminum  wire  mesh  covered 
with  a plastic “skin”  which  disintegrated after inflation-would  act as a 
passive comsat to reflect signals transmitted to i t  between earth stations, 
determine  whether  wire  would  be  rigid  enough  t o   maintain  spherical 
shape,  and  test  theory  tha t   C c ~ p e n - m e ~ h ”  
s truc ture   would  reduce  drag 
and  solar pressure  in  space environment.  (AFSC  Release  140.66) 
COSMOS  CXX IV   was  launched  into  earth  orbit  by  U.S.S.R.  for  continued 
space research.  Orbital parameters: apogee,  303 km.  (188 mi.) ; perigee, 
208 km.  (129  mi.);  period,  89.4  min.;  inclination,  51.8”. Instruments 
were  functioning normally.  (Tass, 7/14/66) 
0  NIMBUS  11  meteorological  satellite,  launched  by  NASA  May  15,  completed 
primary test objective of  two months  (800 orbits) continuous operation; 
all subsystems were  operating according  to  plan.  The  912-lb., lO-ft.-tall 
satellite had  traveled more than 20 million mi.,  taken more than  150,000 
pictures,  and  received  more  than  23,000  commands  from  ground  con- 
trollers.  NIMBUS  11  was  now  being  readied  for  extensive  infrared  photo 
coverage of hurricane breeding areas i n  Atlantic Ocean.  (NASA  Proj. Off.; 
NASA  Release  66-187; Marshall  Star,  7/27/66,  3) 
First anniversary of first close-up photos  of Mars taken by NASA’s MARINER IV  
from distance of  134 million mi. Spacecraft was  launched Nov.  28, 1964. 
(NYT ,  7 /26 /66 ,49)  
0  All  participants i n  t h e  Gemini X mission  rehearsed their parts in  prepara- 
tion for July 18 flight. Astronauts John Young and Michael Collins went 
over flight plan  from  liftoff to   splashdown  and  conducted review  of  all 
spacecraft  systems.  (Wilford,  NYT ,  7/15/66,  11) 
0  New program  to disseminate  information to industry was initiated by  NASA 
and AEC’S  Argonne  National  Laboratory.  Purpose  was  to  identify  tech- 
nological  innovations  resulting  from  Argonne’s  research  and  develop- 
ment  projects;  prepare  brief,  business-oriented  summaries  of  innova- 
tions;  and  distribute  them  to   industry.  Summaries-to 
be  known  as 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

241 

contain  information  not  customarily  re- 
AEC-NASA  Tech  Briefs-would 
ported  in scientific literature such as descriptions  of  devices, processes, 
and  techniques  developed  to   meet  specific  or  engineering  needs  a t  
Argonne  and  would  be  combined  with  similar  information  currently 
published  by  NASA.  (NASA Release 66-183) 
J d y  14:  Dr. Robert C.  Seamans, Jr., NASA  Deputy Administrator,  told World 
Affairs Council in Los Angeles U S .  civil space program “affords perhaps 
the  most  effective global projection  of  the  American personality  and th e  
American achievement  today  . . . 
CCThe  elements  of  this  favorable  projection  are  the   openness  with 
which  th e  program  is  conducted,  the   direct  benefits  to  others  through 
space  communications  and  weather  systems,  the   willingness  to   share 
both  research  and  results  in  projects  of  mutual  interest,  the   energetic 
. . . the  evidence of  high  national purpose.”  (Text) 
forward  th ru s t   toward  technological and managerial pre-eminence,  and 
0  If  MSFC  Director  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  should  obtain  assignment  to  
develop  an   orbital  payload  capability  between  Uprated  Saturn  1’s 
35,000-40,000  lbs.  and  Sa tu rn   V’s  250,000-275,000  lbs.,  “the  a r t   of 
rocketry  will  take  a  step  backward, a  promising  branch  of  space  tech- 
nology  will  suffer  another  reversal,  and  the American  taxpayer  will  be 
several  hundred  million  dollars  poorer,”  wrote  William  Hines  in   the  
Washington  Evening Star. Hines  contended  tha t  both  von  Braun’s  sug- 
gestions-increasing 
the  th ru s t   of  the  Uprated  Sa tu rn  I  a t   cost  of  $1.5 
billion or reducing the  capability of  the Saturn V a t  cost  of  $3.25 billion 
-would 
be  “fantastically  expensive.”  He  suggested  that,  “assuming 
that  there actually is  need for a n  80,000-100,000-pound orbital  capabil- 
ity,  this  requirement  could  be  filled  more  cheaply,  and  sooner,  by 
pushing  development  of  the   solid  [propellant]  rocket.  . . .”  (Hines, 
Wash.  Eve.  Star,  7/14/66,  A14) 
July 15:  NASA  Aerobee  150 launched  from  WSMR  carried  GsFc-instrumented 
payload  to  90-mi.  (145-km.) altitude  in  experiment  to  measure spectral 
irradiance  of stars  Alpha  Lyrae,  Lambda  Scorpii,  Zeta  Ophiuchi,  and 
Delta  Scorpii.  Flight  marked  first  successful  operation  above  earth’s 
atmosphere  of  Star  Tracking  Rocket  Attitude  Positioning  (Strap)  sys- 
tem.  The   330-lb. telescope  device  telemetered  almost  80  sec.  of  ultra- 
violet  data  and  was  recovered  undamaged  about  55  mi.  from  launch 
site  for  reuse  in  fall  1966. Data  would  give  experimenters  information 
on  s ta r   surface  temperatures, gravitational  field  intensity,  and  relative 
ages.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL;  GSFC  Release G-16-66) 
0  50th  anniversary  of  founding of  Boeing Co.  (EH) 
Possible explanation  of  astronaut’s  inability to see stars on earth’s daylight 
side was presented by physics professors Edward P. Ney and W.  F. Hugh 
in   Science: a  “spacecraft  corona”-cloud 
of  particles  formed by  waste 
materials  shed  from  spacecraft-might  produce  glow  that  would  hide 
stars  dimmer  than  fourth  magnitude.  Corona  had  been  discovered  by 
former Astronaut  John  H.  Glenn, Jr., who reported  during his Feb.  20, 
1962, orbital mission in FRIENDSHIP  7 tha t  h e  was being accompanied by a 
cloud  of  “fireflies.”  (Science,  7/15/66,  297-9) 
0  Analysis  of  available evidence concerning possibility of  an  advanced form 
of  life on Mars by  Univ.  of Maryland astronomy professor  Dr.  Ernst J. 
Opik appeared in  Science. Dr.  Opik said the most heavily eroded craters 
visible  in  photos  taken  by   MARINER  IV during  the   July  14,  1965, flyby 
dated  from  the  earliest  period  of  the   planet’s  history,  implying  tha t  

242 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Mars  had  never  had  a  dense,  moist,  earth-like  atmosphere for  any  ex- 
tended period and would  therefore  be a poor prospect for  life.  Dr.  Opik 
argued  strongly  for  a t   least  a  primitive  form  of  vegetation,  citing  i n  
particular a region  of  1.2 million sq. km.  tha t  had darkened rapidly from 
1946 to   1954. He  likened  this  to  the   change a  distant  observer would 
have  seen  on  ear th   as  a  consequence of  t h e  virgin  lands  development 
program  i n   U.S.S.R.  Vegetation  was  the   best  explanation  for  such  
changes;  however,  if   i t   were  no t   vegetation,  “it  must  be  something 
specifically Martian.”  The  planet,  he   added, ‘‘may  become  a  source  of 
great  surprises  in  the  future.”  (Science, 7/15/66,255-65) 
July  16:  Circular insignia of Project Apollo astronauts was  displayed for first 
time  a t   KSC.  Capital  letter  “A”  was  in   center with  its  crossbar  formed 
by par t   of  a  curving track  joining  earth  (at right) and moon  (at left)  of 
t h e   “A.”  Centered  on  th e   crossbar  were  three  twinkling  stars- 
symbolic  of  th e   three-astronaut  crew  of  each  Apollo  mission.  Ear th  
symbol was  dominated by  North American con t inen t ;  moon  was  repre- 
sen ted   i n   th ird   quar ter   phase  with  dark  part  dominated  by  a  man’s 
profile.  Moon,  earth,  and  letter  “A”  were  displayed  against  dark  blue 
background  studded  with  stars-representing 
outer  space.  Entire 
design  was  ringed  by  a  circle  with  ccApolloy’ a t   top  and  “NASA”  a t  
bottom.  (Wash. Eve.  Star,  7/16/66,  A l )  
Ju ly   16-1 7:  Five vapor cloud experiments were  launched from NASA  Wallops 
Station  on  Nike-Apache sounding rockets  between  8:56 p.m.  and  5:08 
a.m.  EDT.  Vapor  trails  were  ejected  a t   altitude ranges  of  30  to  130 mi. 
(48  to   209 km.) to  measure  wind  velocities and  directions.  Data  were 
obtained by photographing motion of  trails  from five camera sites within 
100-mi.  radius  of  Wallops.  Launches  were  conducted  for  GCA  Corp. 
under  contract  to  GSFC.  (Wallops  Release 66-41) 
Ju ly   17:  IAM  strike a t   KSC  ended when  an   agreement was  reached between 
Local  773  of  IAM  and  TWA,  sending  1,100 machinists  back  to  work. 
Labor-management observers cited  the   local agreement as  a  “firsty7 for 
KSC.  (KSC Historian) 
0  Commenting on th e  tiny US. flag packed in to  SURVEYOR I which softlanded 
on  th e  moon June  2,  Sydney Harris  said  in  the  Sun Francisco Examiner 
& Chronicle:  “If  we  begin  to  export  nationalism  to  the   moon,  we  a re  
defeating  th e   very  purpose  of  science  and  exploration.”  (Harris,  S.F. 
Examiner & Chron.,  7/17/66) 
Ju ly   18:  NASA  Aerobee  150  launched  from  WSMR  carried  two  far-ultraviolet 
image converters  to  83-mi.  (134-km.)  altitude in  NRL  experiment to   ob- 
ta in  stellar spectra and photographs; rocket and instrumentation did no t  
perform as  expected, and no useful  data were  obtained.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  X-15 No.  3 was  flown  by  NASA  test  pilot  William  H.  Dana  to  3,218 mph 
(mach  4.71)  and  96,100-ft.  altitude  to  check  ou t  MH  inertial  system, 
cockpit display,  horizontal  tail loads, and  stick kicker.  (X-15 Proj.  off.) 
System of  two  interconnected balloons  815-ft. long designed  to   test para- 
chu te  deceleration  system  of  NASA’s Voyager  spacecraft-scheduled  to 
lofted by  USAF  from Holloman  AFB.  Helium 
land  on Mars  in   1973-was 
i n  small upper  balloon inflated main  balloon-largest 
ever  launched- 
to  26-million-cu.-ft.  capacity as  both  rose  to   130,000-ft. altitude where 
atmosphere was   believed  to  be  as  th in   as tha t   on Mars.  1,800-lb. simu- 
lated  Voyager  spacecraft  payload  was  jettisoned  by  radio  command 
seven  hours  after  launch,  successfully  parachuted  to   earth,  and  was 
la ter  recovered near Plymlix, Ariz. Main balloon  rose to higher altitude 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

243 

and  ruptured  as  expected.  Parachute  program  was  managed  by  u a c ;  
Voyager  program by  JPL.  (Sullivan, NYT ,  7/19/66;  A v .   Wk., 7/25/66, 
34) 
July 18: Probability statistics for as tronau t  reactions  to  Apollo lunar  mission 
radiation  based  on  NASA-sponsored  study  a t   AEC’S  Oak  Ridge  National 
Ins t i tu te   of  2,100  persons  exposed  to  radiation  for  medical  reasons: 
basing  estimates  on  a  “better  than   50%  reaction  of  those  exposed  to  
each  dose,”  i t   appeared  tha t   a  100-Rad dose  would  produce  loss  of 
appetite;  150  Rads,  nausea  and  vomiting;  and  225  Rads,  diarrhea. 
(Tech.  Wk . ,  7/18/66,  4) 
House passed  H.R.  14838 revising operation of  National Science Founda- 
tion (NSF) to  (1) give new emphasis to  NSF’S  basic missions; (2) strengthen 
and  increase  functions  of  National  Science  Board;  (3)  unify  and 
s treng then  operational authority of  director; and  (4) modify and stream- 
l ine  NSF’S  organization and  s truc ture .   (CR, 7/18/66,  15180-4) 
*  John  F.  Stearns,  former  chief  of  National  Referral  Center  a t   Library  of 
Congress,  became Director  of  NASA’s  Science and Technology Informa- 
tion Div.,  Office of  Technology Utilization. He succeeded Melvin S. Day, 
who had been appointed Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology 
Utilization June   5.  (NASA  Ann.) 
e  USAF’S Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (Mol)  was  “moving  quietly  but 
quickly  toward  i t s   first  test  launch,  now  scheduled  for  Oct.  28   from 
Cape Kennedy,” Aviation Week reported.  OperationaI Mol would consist 
of  modified Gemini spacecraft  connected  to  a  ‘‘can-shapedyy laboratory. 
USAF  astronauts,  while  orbiting  in   space,  would  pass  through  door  in  
spacecraft’s  heatshield  to  reach  laboratory.  October  test  would  show 
whether  configuration would  endanger astronauts  in   spacecraft  dur ing  
reentry.  ( A v .  Wk . ,  7/18/66,  25) 
Delays  a t   major  U.S.  airports  totaling  20   million  minutes  cost  aircraft 
operators  $63.6  million  in   1965,  FAA  reported  in   a  staff  study.  One 
th ird  of total delays was  caused by  air traffic controls,  and th e  remainder 
by  airport  limitations  such  as  weather  conditions,  ground  congestion, 
and  construction.  (FAA Release 66-68) 
July 18-21:  GEMINI  x rendezvous and docking mission-eighth  manned flight 
in  Gemini series-touched  on all aspects of mission objectives for which 
two-man spacecraft  was  designed.  Mission  began  a t   ETR’S  Complex  1 4  
with  launch  by  Atlas  booster  of  Gemini Agena  Target Vehicle  (Gatv), 
followed  100  min.  later by  launch  from Complex  19 of  Titan I1 booster 
orbiting  GEMINI  x  spacecraft  with  Astronauts  John  W.  Young  as  com- 
mand  pilot  and  Michael  Collins  as  pilot.  GATV  x  was  placed  in   near- 
circular  orbit with 187-mi. (301-km.) apogee; 180-mi. (290-km.) perigee; 
and 90.5-min. period. The 8,248-1b. GEMINI  x was launched into elliptical 
orbit  with  initial  apogee  of  167 mi.  (268 km.)  and  99-mi.  (159-km.) 
perigee. 
Maneuvers were  executed as  planned,  with  docking of  GEMINI  x  and 
GATV  x occurring a t  5:58 GET.  Only about 380 lbs. maneuvering fuel of 
940  lbs.  a t   liftoff were  left,  whereas a  680-lb.  remainder  had  been  ex- 
pected. An  out-of-plane error  had  necessitated a major correction,  with 
excessive  fuel  consumption. Mated  spacecraft,  using  GATV  X’S  primary 
propulsion  system,  attained  476-mi.  (766-km.)  record  altitude  for 
manned  flight.  Burn  of  GATV  x’s  secondary propulsion system a t  22:38 
GET brought docked configuration in to  same orbit a s  GATV vIrr-launched 
March  16  for  GEMINI  VIII  mission-preparatory 
to  later  rendezvous. 

2 4  
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
ultraviolet  radiation  through  open  hatch.  Young  ordere z termination 
Standup  Eva  began  a t   23:27  GET  with  Collins  photogra  hing  stellar 
of Eva when both he  and Collins experienced severe watering and irr i ta-  
t ion  of eyes from an  unidentified source. Separation of GEMINI X-GATV x- 
which  had  remained  docked  38 min.  42  sec.-occurred 
a t   44:40  GET. 
Series  of  maneuvers  brought  GEMINI  x  within  50   ft.  of  GATV  VIII. 
Umbilical  Eva  began  a t   48:08  GET:  Collins  removed  fairing  from  GATV 
VIII  and  retrieved  micrometeoroid  detection  experiment-completing 
b s t  productive work ever accomplished on Eva mission. Collins lost Eva 
camera; photographic coverage was  limited  to  pictures  taken  by  Young 
from spacecraft. Eva was terminated after 2 8  min.  to conserve maneuver- 
ing fuel; 50 lbs. had been used, as against 35  lbs. estimated consumption 
for  planned  55 min. 
Th ird  ha tch   opening of  mission occurred when  astronauts,  cramped 
by  unstowed  equipment, jettisoned  12 items. 
Reentry July 21  after 70 hrs.  47 min. in  space and 43  revolutions was 
normal.  At  5:07  p.m.  EDT,  GEMINI x  splashed down  in   Atlantic  Ocean 
544  mi.  east of  Cape Kennedy-less 
than  three  miles off  target  and  five 
miles  from  recovery  ship  U.S.S.  Guadalcanal.  Within  minutes,  USN 
pararescue  team dropped from helicopters  had  attached  flotation  collar 
to  spacecraft,  and Young and Collins were  transported  by  helicopter  to  
recovery ship. 
GEMINI  x had accomplished  (1)  two  rendezvous, one involving longest 
docking yet  achieved,  the   other  a  close approach  to   a  passive  satellite 
from which an  object was retrieved;  (2) two Eva exercises;  (3) successful 
maneuvering  by  as tronau t   from  one  spacecraft  to  another  and  back; 
and  (4) use of powered, fueled satellite to provide primary and secondary 
propulsion for docked s  acecraft.  (NASA  Release 66-179; NASA Proj. Off.; 
Wilford, NYT ,  7 /19 /69   1; Hines, Wa%h. Eve. Star,  7/19/66,  A l ,   A3; 
7/20/66,  A l ,   A6;  Wilford,  NYT ,   7/20/66,  1 ;  Reistrup,  Wash. Post, 
7/22/66,  A l ,  A4;  Av. Wk., 7/25/66,  26-30) 
July  19:  House-Senate  Conference  Committee  on  NASA  authorization 
reached agreement on  a  $5,000,419,000  FY 1967 bill.  Compromise was 
$11.581 million below original NASA  request; $13.5 million above House 
version;  and $7.5  million  below  Senate version of  bill.  The $18 million 
for   1967 Mariner Venus  flyby  mission  tha t   House  Science and  Astro- 
nautics Committee’s Space Science and Applications Subcommittee had 
sought  to  cancel was  restored.  Three main  additions  to  NASA’s request 
were  $13 million for Voyager program; $4 million for 260-in. solid-pro- 
pellant  motor  development; and  $2 million  for  S n a p 8  nuclear  electric 
generator program. Conference report  (H.R.  14324) would be debated in  
House  and Senate.  (CR ,  7/20/66,  15551-4) 
NASA had selected Philco Corp. for negotiation of  $35-million, incentive-fee 
contract  for  “continued  systems engineering and  operational  support” 
of  Mission Control Center a t  MSC.  (NASA  Release 66-190) 
M2-F2 lifting  body  vehicle  was  successfully  air-launched from  B-52  air- 
craft a t  45,000-ft. altitude i n  second glide flight a t  Edwards AFB.  Purposes 
of  flight,  piloted  by  NASA  research  pilot  Milton  0.  Thompson,  w e r e  
determination  of  lateral  stability  control,  longitudinal  trim,  vehicle 
performance,  and  landing  characteristics,  and  checkout  of  onboard 
systems.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
*  NASA &shall  Space Flight  Center awarded Bendix Corp.  and Boeing CO. 
six-month, $350,000 contracts for parallel studies  to  “develop  specifica- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

245 

July  21:  GEMINI  x spacecraft, its  heatshield  forward, aboard recovery ship U.S.S.  G u a d d -  
canal. 

tions  and drawings”  for vehicles being proposed  to  transport astronauts 
on  lunar   surface.  (MSFC  Release 66-157) 
July 20: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket  was  launched  from  Churchill 
Research Range i n  engineering test preceding series of  five GSFC  launches 
t o  measure  intensity and  energy spectra  of  low-energy proton,  helium 
nuclei,  and  heavier  nuclei  during Polar  Cap Absorption event.  Rocket 
performance  was  near  predicted;  however,  nose  cone  did  no t   retract 
because  of  override  switch  heating  problem,  and  data  were  poor  in  
quality.  (NASA Rpt.  SRL) 

2% 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

launched  COSMOS  cxxv  carrying scientific instruments  for 
July 20:  U.S.S.R. 
continued study of ou ter  space into circular orbit with 250-km.  (155-mi.) 
altitude, 89.5-min. period,  and 65” inclination.  Instruments were  func- 
tioning  normally.  (?‘ass,  7/20/66) 
28-member Legal  Subcommittee of  the   U.N.  Committee on  th e   Peaceful 
Uses  of  Outer  Space began  article-by-article examination of  drafts  by 
U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  for  proposed treaty  governing exploration  of  space. 
U S .  Ambassador t o  U.N.  Arthur  J .   Goldberg announced  tha t   U S .  had 
agreed to  extend negotiations beyond proposal for treaty  to ban military 
use  of  moon  and  other  celestial  bodies  to  cover  “space  itself  along 
the   lines  proposed  by  the   Soviet  Union.”  Agreed  text  would  be  pre- 
sented  to  U.N.  General Assembly  in   New  York  in   September.  (NYT ,  
7/22/66,  11) 
NASA  announced  appointment  of  Maj.  Michael  J.  Adams  (USAF),  pilot  in  
USAF’S  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (Mol)  program,  to  X-15  research 
program,  replacing  Capt.  Joe  H.  Engle  (USAF),  who  had  transferred  to 
MSC  April  4  to  become  a n   astronaut.  Following extensive  training pro- 
gram, Major Adams  would  become  12th man  to  fly  the   rocket-powered 
aircraft.  (FRC  Release  15-66) 
*ARC’S  new  Hypervelocity Free ‘Flight  Facility  would  be  fully  operational 
by  the   end  of  July,  NASA  announced.  “Light-gas guns”  would  fire  free- 
flying  spacecraft models  into  three  wind  tunnels. Muzzle  velocities  up 
to  20,000 mph  against  an  air  stream  flowing  up  to  10,000 mph  in   the  
opposite direction would  enable models  to  achieve test  speed  of  30,000 
, mph,  simulating  atmosphere  reentry  flight  from  moon  or  planets. 
(NASA  Release 66-189; ARC  Release 66-10) 
Flight plan  for Lunar Orbiter I,  scheduled for  launch between Aug.  9 and 
Aug.  13,  had  been  changed  to  shift  trajectory  for  mission  s o   photo- 
graphic  spacecraft  would  pass  over  SURVEYOR  I  twice.  Stereographic 
photos,  with  resolution  down  to  three  feet,  could  thus   be  obtained. 
First  seven  areas  selected  for  Lunar  Orbiter  photography  remained 
unchanged and included examples of  all major types of  lura in  to permit 
assessment  of  suitability  for  Apollo  manned  landing  missions.  (NASA 
Release 66-193) 
0  France exploded an  atomic bomb, air-dropped over her  test site a t  Mururoa 
Atoll  in   the   Pacific,  almost  directly  under  flight  path  of  GEMINI x  one 
hou r  before  the   spacecraft passed.  NASA,  advised of  the  impending test, 
had  warned  Astronauts  John  W.  Young  and  Michael  Collins  to  “keep 
your  heads  down”  and  “not  to   look  a t   the   ear th  while  flying  over  th e  
atoll.”  ( W S J ,  7/22/66,  1; Sullivan, NYT ,  7/20/66,  22) 
0  House passed  $58.6  billion  DOD  FY  1967 appropriation bill  (H.R.  15941) 
-almost  $1  billion  more  than   the   Administration  had  requested  and 
largest  since World War  11-by  393  to  1 vote.  Negative  vote was  cast 
by Rep.  George E. Brown, Jr.  (D-Calif.), who was registering opposition 
to   Vietnam war.  (CR ,  7/20/66,  15516-51) 
been  ‘rphenomenal,” stated  Washington Post  editorial:  ‘r.  . . th e   people 
0  Achievements in  space since first flight in   Gemini  series March  1965 had 
of  this  country  can  feel  pride  in  th e   officials  o f .  . . [NASA]  who  have 
deliberately  but  confidently  advanced  th e   space  program  without 
catering  to  pressures  for  spectacular  s tun ts .  The   total  achievement, i n  
and  of  itself,  is  spectacular  beyond  th e   wildest  hopes  of  a  few  years 
ago.”  (Wa sh .  Post,  7/20/66,  A20) 

241  
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
July 21:  US. and U.S.S.R.  agreed in  discussions a t  Geneva  to  treaty article 
on  exploration  of  space  barring  any  s ta te   from  claiming sovereignty 
over space, including the  moon  and planets.  Article  was  also  approved 
by  28-nation  U.N.  Legal  Subcommittee drawing  up  treaty  from  draft 
accords  submitted  by  US. and  U.S.S.R.  Subcommittee also  accepted 
article binding s ta tes   to  conduct space exploration in   accordance with 
international law  and  in   the   interest  of  international peace.  (Reuters, 
NYT ,  7/22/66,  8) 
*  Maj.  William J.  Knight  (USAF)  flew X-15 No.  2  to  3,614 mph  (mach 5.12) 
and  192,300-ft. altitude  for  pilot  altitude buildup,  s tar   tracker  experi- 
ments,  and base drag studies.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
*  House  adopted  joint  House-Senate  conference  report  (H.R.  14324)  on 
1967 NASA  authorization  by  voice vote.  Authorization was  $5,000,419,- 
000.  (CR ,  7/21/66,  15887-96) 
0  MSFC  awarded  Emerson Electric  Co.  a  10-wk.,  $34,990  study  contract  to 
determine feasibility  of  recovering small metallic  coupons from  wings 
of  PEGASUS  III  meteoroid-detection satellite,  orbited  by  NASA  July  30, 
1965. Using sample wing with attached coupons, Emerson w o d d  analyze 
possible  approaches an  astronaut  could  make  to  satellite and  types  of 
equipment h e  would  need  to  perform  coupon-retrieving mission.  (MSFC 
Release  66-162) 
Application  of  space age  technology to  traffic control  was  near,  Chairman 
of  the  Board of  the  Ford Motor Co.  Henry Ford I1 told the  Young Men’s 
Business Club  of  Greater New  Orleans meeting in  New  York.  He  said 
plans  would  soon  be  presented  to   the   Government  for  a  nationwide 
traffic  control  system based  on  earth  survey  satellites  for  aerial  recon- 
naissance.  They would  be  linked  by  computers to  urban  traffic  control 
centers and  ‘*to the  stoplight  in  the  corner  and even the  car  radio.  . . . 
As  fantastic as i t  may  seem, we  believe such a system will be  technically 
feasible  and  economically  sound.”  Technical capacity  for development 
of  system had been gained  from  experience of  the  Philco Corp.,  a Ford 
subsidiary,  in   designing  and  operating  MSC’S  Flight  Control  Center. 
Philco’s  communication  system  w a s   being  used  on  Gemini  ’missions. 
( N Y T ,  7/22/66,  27) 
NSF  announced  tha t ,   under  $5.4-million  contract  awarded  Univ.  of 
California’s  Scripps Ins t i tu te   of  Oceanography,  scientists  would  bring 
up  core  samples  from  1,OOO  to  3,000  ft.  below  Atlantic  and  Pacific 
ocean floors. Two-year drilling program, to begin in  1967, was outgrowth 
of  Project Mohole.  (Wa sh .  Post,  8/22/66,  A7) 
*  The   Will Rogers,  41st  and  last  of  Nation’s  Polaris  ballistic  missile  sub- 
marines, was  christened in  Groton, Conn.,  ceremony by Mrs. Hubert H. 
Humphrey.  Launching  culminated  8%-yr.  construction  program  of 
nuclear-powered  submarines  capable  of  indefinite  submergence  and 
equipped  with  16  2,500-mi.-range missiles  with  nuclear  warheads. 
(Baldwin, N Y T ,  7/21/66,  5) 
July  22:  Senate approved by  voice vote $5,000,419,000  1967 NASA  authoriza- 
tion  recommended  in   joint  House-Senate  conference  report  (H.R. 
14324). Bill was  then sen t  to White House for  President Johnson’s signa- 
ture.  (CR, 7/22/66,  15981-4; Wash. Post,  7/23/66,  A6) 
*  GEMINI  x  Astronauts  John  W.  Young  and  Michael  Collins  flew  from 
recovery ship U.S.S.  Guadalcanal to  KSC  to  begin  1 0  days of  d e b r i e h g  
on  July  18-21 mission.  (Strothman,  Wash .  Post,  7/23/66,  A3) 

248 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Ju ly  22:  First move of  41)2-ft.-high,  9-million-lb. mobile service s t ruc tu re  by 
crawler-transporter from parking area a t  KSC to Pad 39-A.  (KSC  Historian; 
A v .   Wk . ,   8/1/66,  27) 
NASA  responded  to  47  questions  on  post-Apollo  programs  submitted  by 
Space  Science  and  S  ace  Technology  panels  of  President’s  Science 
Advisory  Committee; Xibliography  of  advanced  study  contract  reports 
was  appended  to  107-page document.  Information  would  be  used  in 
preparation  of  PSAC  report  on  post-Apollo goals.  (Text) 
0  Implications  of  the   GEMINI  x mission  received  editorial  comment. 
Watertown  [N .Y . ]  Daily  Times:  “The  mind  and  the  body  of  man 
have demonstrated  once again what brilliance  and discipline can  accom- 
plish.  They  have  also  demonstrated  once  again  that  fear  born  ou t   of 
ignorance  is  overcome by  those  who  will  prepare  themselves  through 
training  and perseverance.”  ( Watertown Daily  Times, 7/22/66) 
Los  Angeles  Times: GEMINI  x flight moved  U S .   ‘‘a  few steps  closer  to 
the  goal of  landing a man  on  the moon before  1970,” and  i t  showed the 
time  had  come  to  look  “beyond  the  Apollo moon  landing,  and  to  map 
new goals for manned  spaceflight.”  (L .A .  Times, 7/22/66) 
New  York  Times: “Useful  work”  accomplished by  Michael Collins in 
retrieving  micrometeoroid  experiment  from  GATV  VIII  portended  the 
day  when  “men  working  in  space  will  put  huge  structures  together, 
joining  vehicles  and  parts  that  were  rocketed  separately  and  even  a t  
widely separated intervals.”  Use  of  GATV X’S  propulsion  system to power 
docked  GEMIM  X-GATV  x  “opens  breathtaking  new  possibilities  in  both 
the  economics  and  technology  of  tomorrow’s  space  travel.”  (NYT ,  
7/22/66,28M) 
Ju ly   23:  U.S.S.R.  objected  to  a  U S .   proposal  to  allow military  equipment 
to  be  used  on  the moon  or  other  celestial bodies  for  peaceful purposes, 
Platon Morozov, deputy acting permanent U.S.S.R.  U.N.  representative, 
told  the  Legal  Subcommittee  of  the  U.N.  Committee  on  the  Peaceful 
Uses of  Outer Space meeting in Geneva to draft a treaty governing outer 
space  exploration.  He  said  such  a  provision  would  create  a  loophole 
for  violations;  he  was  prepared,  however,  to  accept  with  a  few  minor 
modifications  other  provisions  of  U S .   draft  article.  (Reuters,  Wash. 
Post,  7/23/66) 
Locating  GATV  VIII  during  Gemini  X  flight  was  called  “a  major  feat  of 
three-dimensional  navigation”  in  a  Hartford  Times  editorial,  which 
said  “use  of  Agena  8’s  fuel  also  brings  closer  the   day  when  manned 
laboratories  permanently  parked  in  orbit  around  the  earth  will  be  in 
use  for purposes both  experimental  and  immediately useful.”  (Hartford 
Times, 7/23/66) 
Ju ly  23-27: Three-axis stabilization for NASA’s OGO  111  spacecraft was  incapac- 
itated after 46 days of  flawless operation  by  failure of  a magnetic ampli- 
fier which shorted ou t  the  attitude control system power inverter.  Back- 
up  spin  stabilization  system  was  activated  July  27,  and  reorientation 
affected  only  six  experiments.  Primary  scientific  objectives  were  ex- 
pected  to be achieved, and  spacecraft’s spin axis would be  reoriented  in 
late December to increase power input.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
24:  Launch  crews  began  erecting  Titan  I1  booster  on  Pad  19 a t   ETR 
J u ~  
in  preparation  for  September  launch  of  Gemini  XI  mission.  (AP, 
Houston  Post,  7/24/66) 
US. Astronaut  Alan  Shepard  and  Soviet  Cosmonaut  Boris  Yegorov had 
same  positive  response  to   Parade  editor  Jess  Gorkin’s  suggestion  that 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

249 

an  American and a Russian fly  together in the same spacecraft. Shepard, 
contacted a t  MSC,  said it would be of  ‘‘enormous value.”  Yegorov indicat- 
ed tha t  U.S.S.R.  might already be preparing  for joint space exploration, 
saying:  “If  the  Americans  are  really  keen  on  the  idea  of  joint  flights, 
they  had  better  s ta r t  learning  Russian.  All  of  us  are  studying English 
already.”  (Anderson, Parade,  7/24/66,  4-5) 
July 24: Harris poll indicated  tha t  Americans, in  case of national emergency, 
favored first curtailing space and aid-to-cities programs and last curtailing 
health-assistance and college-education aid programs.  (Parade, 7/24/66) 
Ju ly   25:  Boosted  Arcas  2  rocket  was  successfully  launched  for  first  time 
from WSMR.  Equipped with  new Marc 42A1 1st stage, rocket  carried  16- 
lb.  payload to  90-mi.  (145-km.)  altitude.  (Tech. Wk . ,  8/1/66,  10) 
0  SURVEYOR  I  bounced  two  to  three  inches  upward  o n   first  impact  with 
lurain  June  2,  JPL  announced.  According  to  data  returned  by  620-lb. 
spacecraft,  signals  generated  by  strain  gauges  indicated  the   th ree  
shock-absorber  legs  had  all  landed  simultaneously  on  a  horizontal 
surface.  Eight-inch-diameter  circular  footpads  rebounded  clear  of  su r -  
face  before  settling  on  moon.  Spacecraft  exerted  pressure  of  about 
0.5  psi  on  lurain  after  i t   came  to  rest.  Pressure  of  footpads  a t   impact 
was  about  8  psi.  (AP,  Wash.  Post,  7/25/66,  A3;  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
7/25/66,  A12 ;   AP, NYT, 7/25/66,  C3;  Tech.  Wk., 8/1/66,  9) 
GEMINI  X Astronauts  John  w. Young  and  Michael Collins  flew  from  KSC 
to  MSC  for  reunion  with  families  and  continued  debriefing.  News  con- 
ference had  been  set  for Aug.  1. (AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  7/25/66,  A12) 
Editorial  on  five years  of  “outstanding  service”  by  NASA  Administrator 
James  E.  Webb  appeared  in  Technology  Week: “. . . i t   is  time  to  state 
. . . ou r  belief  tha t  Mr.  James  E.  Webb has  done  a n  outstanding job  as 
NASA  Administrator.  He  has  presided  over  an   explosive growth  of  the 
agency  which  would  have  overwhelmed  a  less  capable  administrator; 
he has met  and  solved some exceedingly thorny management problems; 
he  has  dealt  effectively with  some  of  the  world’s  most  temperamental 
scientists;  h e   has  successfully  steered  the  space  agency’s  budget 
through  the perils  of  both Administration  and Congressional financing; 
he  has  given  the   space  program  a  nationwide  base  of  facilities  and 
political  strength;  and,  most  important  of  all,  h e   has  forged  a  team 
which  is  writing  an   unparalleled  record  of  technical  accomplish- 
men t . .   . .”  (Coughlin,  Tech.  Wk . ,   7/25/66,  152) 
0  Ludlow  King,  head  of  Ludlow King  Associates and  former  executive  of 
Owens-Corning Fiberglas  Corp.,  had  been  appointed  as  a  consultant 
to  NASA.  He  would  study means  of  making  relationship  between  NASA 
and  industry  more  effective.  (NASA  Ann.) 
0  MsFC  had  selected  Boeing  Co.  and  Westinghouse  Electric  Corp.  for 
parallel  feasibility  studies  of  reflector  satellite  to  provide  illumination 
over  land  masses  a t   night,  Technology  Week  reported.  Studies,  which 
would  be  worth  about  $120,000 each  for  90-day effort, would be  made 
for NASA  and  DOD.  (MSFC  PAO;  Tech.  Wk . ,  7/25/66,  16) 
General Electric Co.  announced  ccsuccessful initial  running”  of  600,000- 
1b.-thrust  GE4  turbojet  engine  developed  under  FAA  contract.  Engine 
“was  started  and  accelerated  to  idle  speed  on  July  18, and  run   up  to 
100 per  cent speed on  July  20,  nine days ahead  of  the  contract  testing 
date.  . . .” GE  was  competing  with  P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.,  United 
Aircraft  Corp.,  for  Government  contract  to  build  engine  for  Sst.  (GE 
Release) 

250 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

July  25:  Tr ibu te  was  paid  in   Aviation  Week  to  “some  of  the   men  whose 
efforts  played  a  significant  role  in   bringing  th e   Surveyor  program 
through  i ts   technical  and  managerial morass”  to  success:  W.  Eugene 
Giberson;  Robert  Garbarini;  Benjamin  Milwitzky;  Rep.  Joseph  E. 
Kar th   (D-Minn.);  Fred  Adler;  Leo  Stoolman;  James  D.  Cloud;  John 
Bozajian;  Richard  Cheng; Robert  Roney ; Ralph  Colbert;  Theodore  F. 
Gautschi;  Edward  Pfund;  Marshall Johnson;  Richard  Gun ter ;   Robert 
J.  Parks;  Fielding  Hedges;  Thomas  Lund;  Donald  Zimmet;  Richard 
Davis;  R.  L.  Roderick;  Richard  Iverson;  R.  E.  Sears;  and  George 
Kerster.  (A v .  W k . ,  7/25/66,  21) 
“Businesslike  international  negotiations”  in   Geneva  to  draft  treaty 
ensuring peaceful exploration  of  space received  comment in   New  York 
Times:  “. . . Space  law  will  help  confine  national  rivalries  within  the  
edges  of  th e  atmosphere, beyond which all men must work  together  in  
the  gigantic task  of  exploration,  a  task  to which  there  is no  conceivable 
end.”  ( N Y T ,  7 /25 /66 ,26)  
*  General aviation  (nonairline)  pilots  in   1965 flew  record  2.6  billion  miles 
in   16.7 million hours  with  95,442 aircraft, while  achieving lowest  fatal 
accident ra te  in  history,  according to  FAA% “Selected  General Aviation 
Statistics.”  The   8%  increase  during  1965-largest 
annual  increase 
since  195P-included  382  million  more  miles  and  one  million  more 
hours   than   in   1964,  with  “business  flying”  continuing  to  be  busiest 
segment of  general aviation  operations.  (FAA  Release  66-72) 
e  Boeing Co.’s  board of  directors  approved building 747 jet aircraft capable 
of  carrying 350-490 passengers a t   speeds up  to  600 mph.  (UPI,  Wush. 
Pos t ,   7/26/66,  A12) 
e About  80 U S .   companies  were  experimenting with  crystal  fibers  to  pro- 
duce  strong  lightweight  materials  for  aerospace  use,  the   Wa l l   Street 
Journal  reported.  Laboratory  tests  had  shown  tha t   tiny  crystal  fibers 
added  to metals and plastics produced rigid, almost unbreakable plastics 
and  featherweight  metals  tha t   remained  hard  under  temperature  and 
pressure  extremes.  (Martin,  W S J ,  7/25/66,  1) 
U S .   domestic  airlines  flew  25   per  cent  more  revenue  passenger  miles 
actor % ing  to   Air  Transport  Assn.  report.  Nearly  30.2  billion  revenue 
durin  first  six  months  of  1966 than  during  comparable 1965 period, 
passenger miles were flown during first half  of  1966 by  scheduled trunk ,  
local  service,  and  helicopter  carriers  compared  with  24.1  billion 
revenue  passenger  miles  during first  half  of  1965.  (A v .  W k . ,  7/25/66, 
40) 
During week  of  Ju ly   25:  Pa ten t   was  granted  to  Wolfgang  G.  Offik,  senior 
s taff  engineer  for  Chrysler Corp.,  for  escape  system to   rescue workers 
from  booster-launch  gantry  in   case  of  explosion  or  fire.  Equipment 
included  series  of  rescue  cabins,  each  suspended in   i ts   own  cable  a t   a 
different level in  f ron t  of gantry.  I n  emergency, workers  and astronauts 
still  outside  spacecraft  would  en ter   cabins  and  drop  in   them  in to  
underground  shelter,  protecting  them  from  flames  on  gantry  and  on 
ground.  (Jones,  N Y T ,  7 /30 /66 ,29)  
July  26:  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  agreed  in  principle  tha t   countries  were  in ter-  
nationally  liable  for   damage  caused  to   other  states  by  objects  they 
launched  into outer  space. U.S.  accepted, with minor  changes in  word- 
ing,  article on   liability  in   Soviet treaty  on  space law  under  discussion 
in   Geneva  by  Legal  Subcommittee  of  U.N.  Committee  on  Peaceful 
Uses  of  Outer  Space.  (Wa sh .  Post,  7/26/66,  A12) 

251  
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
J d y  26: At  Pentagon  ceremony,  Chief  of  Naval Operations  A h .  David  L. 
McDonald  presented  astronaut  wings  to  Astronaut  Eugene  A.  Cernan 
(LCdr.,  USN)  who  set  a  world  record  for  length  of  “walk  in  space” 
during  June  3-6  GEMlNI  IX-A  mission.  McDonald  suggested  to  NASA 
officials  tha t   “you  get  your  own  Navy”  for  astronaut  recovery  opera- 
tions.  USN  felt  smaller  ships  no t   needed  in  the   Vietnam  war  could  be 
used  as  effectively  for  this  task  as  the  aircraft  carrier  and  dozen  ships 
assigned  to  NASA. 
Speaking later  a t  NASA  Hq.,  Cernan  said  tha t  what  a  man  needed  in  
space  to  do  useful  work  was  a  “three-point  restraint  system”- 
three  points  of  contact  with  th e   spacecraft  for  stabilization.  (Norris, 
Wush .  Pos t ,   7/27/66,  A l ,  A6) 
0  Negotiations  were  underway  between  LRC  and  Martin  Marietta  Corp.  on 
a  $150,000  study  contract  to  investigate  feasibility  of  obtaining  data 
on  Venusian  atmosphere  using  “a  balloon  o r   other  inflatable buoyant 
device or devices floating in the  planet’s  clouds.”  (NASA  Release 66-196) 
MSFC  awarded Univ.  of  Michigan  two-month,  $29,930  study  contract  to 
develop 20-channel  “infrared  sensing  technique  to  survey  the   earth’s 
natural   resource^.^^  Operating  on  orbiting  satellite,  system  would 
survey  possible  mineral  deposits,  analyze  soil  for  growth  potential, 
diagnose  “health”  of  crops,  and  predict  bountiful  fishing areas.  (MSFC 
Release 66-167) 
0  Hundreds  of  people  along  Eastern  seaboard  reported  sighting  several 
Ufo’s.  Robert  A.  Bennett,  FAA  watch  supervisor  a t   Fulton  County 
(Ga.)  Airport Tower, sighted three o r  four objects which slowly changed 
colors  from  red  to  green  to  blue.  (UPI,  Wush .  Post,  7/27/66,  A6) 
July 27:  Eleven  scientists  formerly  associated  with  the   International  Geo- 
physical  Year  (IGY)  and  International  Quiet  Sun   Year  (IQSY)  urged 
permanent  cooperation  in   international  studies  of  earth  in   letter  to 
the  London  Times:  “These  worldwide  cooperative  scientific  projects 
have  shown  conclusively  tha t   however  many  and  serious  are  the  
political  problems  tha t   trouble  the   human  race,  i t   is  possible  f o r ’ a l l  
the   nations  of  the   world  to  work  closely  together  in  great  enterprises 
for  the   common  good.”  Signers  included  U S .   representatives  on  IGY 
Committee  Dr.  Lloyd  V.  Berkner,  former  chairman  of  the   NAS  Space 
Science Board,  and  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  NASA  Associate Director  for 
Space  Science  and  Applications,  and  U.S.S.R. 
representatives  Dr. 
Vladimir V.  Belossov and N.  V.  Pushkov.  (NYT ,  7/27/66,  12) 
0  WAF  pilots  Col.  Robert L.  Stephens and L/Col.  Walter  F. Daniel received 
official  certificates  from  President  Johnson  for  establishing  three 
absolute  and  six  jet-class  world  records  May  1,  1965,  in  W-12A  air- 
craft.  Col.  Stephens had  set  new  speed  record  of  more  than  2,070 mph 
and  new  altitude  record  of  80,259  ft.  Col.  Daniel  had  set  new  speed 
records  for  straight  course  of  over  2,000 mph  and  on  closed  course  of 
(Pres .   DOC . ,  
1,688  mph.  Records  were  formerly  held  by  U.S.S.R. 
8/ 1/66,  1000) 
Sydney  (Australia)  Univ.  physicist  S tua r t  Thomas  Butler  said  tha t  U.S., 
U.K.,  and  U.S.S.R.  were  studying  the   possibility  of  using  a  “nuclear 
rocket’’  to  prevent  the   asteroid  Icarus  from  colliding with  earth,  UPI 
reported.  Icarus  would  pass within  four million miles  of  earth  in  June 
1968.  Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory,  world  clearinghouse 
for  all  astrophysical  information,  said  it  had  no  knowledge  the   three 
nations  were  studying  the   possibility.  Two  authorities  o n   asteroids, 

252 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Dr.  Paul  Herget,  Univ.  of  Cincinnati,  and  Dr.  Gerald  Clemence, Yale 
Univ.,  said  there was  not  “one  chance  in a billion”  Icarus would strike 
earth.  (WI,  Chic. Trib., 7/28/66) 
July 27: Westinghouse Electric Corp.’s  Defense and Space Center had devel- 
oped a 7X-lb. TV camera tha t   could be  carried  inside Apollo spacecraft 
and  by  astronauts  as  they  explored  the   lurain.  Prototype  had  been 
delivered  to  NASA  and  a  commitment  obtained  for  live  TV  coverage. 
(Gibbons,  WSJ, 7/27/66,  1) 
July 28: U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  CXXVI  to  “continue  exploration  of  outer 
space”  into  earth  orbit  with  359-km.  (223-mi.)  apogee;  212-km. 
(132-mi.)  perigee;  51.8”  inclination;  and  90-min.  period.  Equipment 
was  functioning  normally.  (Tass, 7/28/66) 
X-15 No.  1 was  flown  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  B.  McKay  to  3,682  mph 
(mach  5.19)  and  241,800-ft.  altitude.  Mission  objectives  included 
micrometeoroid  collection  and  evaluation  of  pace  transducer,  horizon 
scanner,  nonglare  glass,  and  stick  kicker.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
a  NASA  in  conjunction  with  the  Brazilian  Space Commission and  Canadian 
Research  Council  would  launch  10 Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  with 
80-lb. acoustic grenade payloads from Natal,  Brazil; Churchill Research 
Range;  Point  Barrow, Alaska;  and  NASA  Wallops Station.  Four  rockets 
would be launched from Churchill and two from each of  the  other sites. 
Experiments  would  begin  whenever  noctilucent  clouds  appeared  over 
Churchill  area  and  would  be  conducted  over  24-hr.  period.  Project 
would  be  coordinated  by  GSFC.  (NASA Release  66-199; Wallops Release 
66-42) 
ComSatCorp announced  in financial statement  that  revenues  from operat- 
ing  EARLY  BIRD  I  comsat  had  totaled  $2,107,000  for  first  half  of  1966 
while  income  from  temporary  cash  investments  was  $4,472,000.  Cash 
and  temporary  cash  investments  totaled  $186,534,000  on  June  30. 
(ComSatCorp) 
a  Expansion  of  behavioral  and  social research  to  keep  pace  with  scientific 
and  technical  advance  was  urged  by  Dr.  Eugene  B.  Konecci,  NASC 
staff member,  a t  NDEA  Institute  for  Advanced  Study  in  Industrial  Arts 
Education  a t   Univ.  of  Maryland.  “One  of  the   biggest  problems  con- 
fronting  us,”  he  said,  “is  tha t  we  tend  t o   train  ou r   young  people  for 
today’s  world  rather  than  prepare  them  for  the  new  developments  of 
the  future.  Aerospace  systems  approach  can  help  to  neutralize  this 
problem  by  outlining  the   parameters  and  making  a  model  to  help 
predict  the  fu tu re   requirements.  . . . Fear  of  innovation  is  based 
generally on  lack  of  knowledge, so  we  must  educate our  entire popula- 
tion  to  our  rapidly  changing world.”  (Text; AF ISD ,   10/66) 
July 29: Sa tu rn  V 3rd  stage  (s-IVB)  was  static-fired for  full flight duration  a t  
Douglas Aircraft Co.’s  Sacramento, Calif.,  test facility, MSFC  announced. 
During  captive  firing-simulating  operation  of  propulsion  system  dur- 
ing  normal  3rd  stage  flight  in  a  lunar  mission-stage  burned  150 sec., 
s h u t   down  for  1%-hr.  simulated  coast  period,  then  reignited  and 
operated  290  sec.  Stage  was  powered  by  Rocketdyne  5-2  hydrogen- 
oxygen  engine  tha t  would  develop 200,000-lbs. th ru s t   in  flight.  (MSFC 
Release 66-173) 
*  First  launch  of  USAF’S  Titan  111-B-Agena launch  vehicle from Vandenberg 
AFB  placed  an  unidentified satellite  into polar  orbit.  (SAC  TWX;  A v .   Wk., 
8 /8 /66 ,29 )  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

253 

July 29: NASA  pilots Robert Champine and Ron Gerdes were among 15 pilots 
participating  in  “extensive  evaluation”  of  USA’s XV-5A V/Stol  aircraft 
a t  Ft.  Eustis,  Va.  Pilots’  observations and  evaluations were being  com- 
piled  and  studied  by  USA  “for  application  on  fu tu re  XV-SA  tests”  and 
V/Stol  aircraft  in  general.  Test  program  would  continue  through 
September  1966.  (Langley Researcher, 7/29/66,  4) 
DOD   announced  tha t   USA’s OV-1  Mohawk  surveillance  aircraft  had 
claimed five new world aviation  records:  (1)  time to  climb 3,000 meters 
(9,842  ft.)-3  min.  46 sec.;  (2)  time  to  climb 6,000 meters  (19,685 ft.) 
-9  min.  9  sec.;  (3)  sustained  horizontal  flight  altitude-32,000 
ft.; 
(4)  nonstop  straight-line  distance-2,422  mi.  a t   255-mph  average 
speed;  and  (5)  average  speed  over  100-km.  (63-mi.)  closed-circuit 
course  a t   5,000-ft. altitude-292  mph.  Records  claimed  had  been  filed 
with  Fkdkration  Akronautique  Internationale  under  new  category  for 
land-based  turboprop  aircraft  weighing  13,227  to  17,636  lbs.  (DOD 
Release 643-66) 
NASA-sponsored space  exhibit  opened  in  Arts  and  Industries  Building  of 
the  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.;  exhibit  would  begin 
US. tour  Sept.  5.  (EH) 
Ju ly   30:  Dr.  C.  V.  Raman,  1930 Nobel  Prize  winner  in  physics,  said  in 
convocation  address  a t   Indian  Institute  of  Technology  in  Madras  tha t  
i t  was  “nothing  bu t   sheer  raving  lunacy”  to   spend  millions  of  dollars 
“to  shoot men  into  space and make  them walk  there.”  Dr.  Raman  said 
i t  was  “mere  pretence’’  to  say  these exploits were intended  to  find  ou t  
what  was  happening  on  the  moon.  “It  is  militarism,  very  thinly  dis- 
guised.”  Dr.  Raman  said  he  thought  spaceflight was  the  “most  sinister 
aspect”  of  the progress of  science in  the last 60  yrs.  (NYT ,  8/1/66,42) 
During July: Te6filo M. Tabanera, president  of Argentina’s Comisi6n Nacional 
de  Investigaciones  Espaciales  (CNIE) , reviewed  accomplishments  and 
current  plans  of  space  program  in  the  A ir   University  Review.  Since 
creation  of  CNIE  in   1960, Argentina  had  organized meetings  to promote 
interest  in  space  research  and  conducted  experiments  in  aeronomy, 
ionospheric  studies,  cosmic  radiation,  and  meteorology,  launching 
balloons  and  rockets  from  Chamical  Rocket  Range.  Current  plans 
included:  (1)  continuation  of  Centaure  sounding  rocket  launches  for 
wind  studies,  using  “luminous-trails”  technique;  (2)  cooperation  in 
inter-American  experimental  meteorological  sounding  rocket  research 
network  (EXAMETNET)  under  agreement  with  NASA  to  launch  boosted 
Darts  and  Arcas  rockets;  and  (3)  launchings  of  sounding  rockets  to 
study  cosmic radiation  and ionospheric phenomena.  (A i r  Univ. Review, 
7-8/66) 
Quasars,  once believed  rare,  might  account  for  28  per  cent  of  the  radio 
sources  in  space,  Dr.  John  D.  Wyndham,  research  fellow a t  Cal  Tech, 
reported  on  the   basis  of  10-mo. research  project.  Dr.  Wyndham  had 
located  all  328  sources  listed  in  Third  Cambridge  Catalog  of  Radio 
Objects,  then  identified  many  of  them  with  visible  light  sources,  in- 
creasing the  number  of  identifications to more  than  150. Identification 
of  radio noise source with  a visible light source was  h s t  step in  deter- 
mining  its  distance  and  confirming tha t   i t  was  a  quasar,  h e   explained. 
(AP,  NYT ,   7/6/66,  35) 
0  Six years  of  exploratory  work  a t   JPL  and  NASA  centers  o n   practical  prob- 
lems  of  landing  on Mars  was  summarized by  R.  P. Thompson  of  J P L  in  
Astronuutics  &  Aeronautics.  He  concluded  that:  (1)  design  of  first 

254 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

lander  should  be  simple  and  conservative,  and  capable  of  thorough 
testing  so tha t  no single failure mode would  cause cccatastrophic failure 
of  mission”;  (2)  independent  backup  should  be  provided  for  every 
c r i t ica l   event  in   landing  sequence  with  fcselective’’ redundance  to  
achieve  high  reliability;  and  (3)  capsule  should  be  instrumented  to 
allow diagnosis  of  failures.  (A&A ,  7/66,  66-73) 
During  Jdy: David  H.  Stoddard,  M.D.,  Director  of  NASA  Occupational 
Medical  Division,  cited  in   Hospital  Topics  two  “ideal”  physiological 
monitors developed  i n   space medicine-biotelemetry,  which  permitted 
immediate observation of  data,  although subject was aware he  was being 
monitored;  and   electrocardiocording,  which  did  no t   allow  immediate 
observation bu t   “permits  the  subject  to go where he pleases, do what he 
pleases  and  to  almost  forget  tha t   he   is  being  monitored.”  (Hospital 
Topics, 7/66,  39) 
Czechoslovakian  radio  correspondent  Jan  Petranek  reported:  “Usually 
well-informed Moscow  circles  have  stated  tha t   in   the   next  few  years 
the   Soviet  Union  will  have  a  spaceship weighing  100 tons  a t   i ts   dis- 
posal.”  (Wash. Post,  7/25/66,  A2) 
Pa ten t  for  system with direction  finder  tha t  would  assure ground  stations 
continuous  and  efficient  communication  with  orbiting  satellites  was 
granted  electronics  engineers Henry P. Hutchingson, Applied Research 
Lab.,  Sylvania  Electronic  Systems,  and  Dr.  Pau l   R.  Arendt,  Army 
Electronic  Command  Labs.,  Fort  Monmouth,  N.J.  Equipment  could 
also  correct  “Doppler  frequency  effect”  caused  by  relative  movement 
of  satellite and  station.  (Jones, N Y T ,  7/23/66,  29) 
*  60 per  cen t  of  the  Nation’s  commercial airlift capability was  immobilized 
by  the   International Assn.  of  Machinists walkout, which  began  July  8. 
( A v .  Wk . ,   7/25/66,  41) 

August 1966 

August  1:  I n   MSC  ceremony,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C. 
Seamans, Jr., presented GEMINI  x Astronauts John W.  Young and Michael 
Collins NASA  Exceptional Service Medals for  “outstanding  contribution 
to  space  flight  and  engineering,”  and  the   astronauts  reviewed  their 
July  18-21 mission  for  the  press.  Pilot  Collins revealed tha t  maneuver- 
ing  difficulties during  his  walk  in  space  had  forced  him  to  approach 
GATV  VIII  three  times  before  successfully  retrieving  a  micrometeoroid 
experiment.  He  felt  the  “basic  problem”  in   Eva  was  th a t   “without 
some  sort  of  handholds  o r   restraining  devices,  a  large  percentage  of 
the astronaut’s  time  is going to be devoted to  torquing his body around 
until  i t   is  i n   the  proper  position  to  do  some  useful  work.”  Command 
Pilot  Young  said  mission’s  fuel  shortage  had  been  caused  by  large 
out-of-plane  error,  not  human  error  as  previously  believed:  “We  had 
to  use  a  brute  force  method  of  rendezvous  [with  GATV  X I .   That  takes 
quite a  lo t  of  fuel.”  (Transcript) 
0  NASA  had  signed  $339  million  supplemental  agreement  with  Chrysler 
Corp.’s  Space Div. converting contract for production of  Uprated Saturn 
I  (Saturn  IB)  1 s t   stages  (S-IB)  from  cost-plus-fixed-fee  to  cost-plus- 
incentive-fee.  Under  contract  managed  by  MSFC,  Chrysler would  manu- 
facture,  assemble,  and  test  12  stages  and  provide  support  services 
through  February  1969.  (NASA Release  66-201) 
0  NASA  selected  Warrier  Constructors,  Inc.,  for  final  negotiations  of  a 
$3.5-million,  cost-plus-incentive-fee contract  to  complete  construction 
and  equip a lunar  receiving Iaboratory a t  MSC  by end  of  1967. A central 
complex where  samples  of  lunar  surface  material  collected  by  Apollo 
astronauts  could  be  received,  examined,  and  processed,  laboratory 
would  also  be  equipped  to  quarantine  spacecraft  and  crew  after  flight 
to moon.  (NASA  Release 66-200) 
0  USAF fired  Minuteman  I1  ICBM  equipped  with  Mark  1 2   reentry  vehicle 
from silo at ETR  to  target site about 5,000 mi.  downrange. Test was  15th 
straight  success for Minuteman  11.  (AF News Bureau,  NYT ,  8/2/66,  2) 
I n   unpublished  letter  to  Science,  Dr.  J.  Allen  Hynek,  head  of  North- 
western Univ.’s  Dept.  of  Astronomy and USAF  consultant  on Ufo’s  since 
1948,  criticized  the   “American  scientific establishment”  for  failure  to 
investigate  persistent  Ufo  phenomena  [see  Oct.  211.  (Lewis,  Wush. 
Pos t ,  8/29/66,  A12) 
0  Radio  Corp.  of  America was  being  awarded  a  $4,450,000 USAF  definitive 
contract  to  supersede previously awarded letter contract  for production 
of  communication  and  electronic  components  for  unspecified  space 
satellites.  Contract  would  be  managed  by  ASFC’S  Space  Systems  Div. 
(DOD  Release 652-66) 
N.  A.  Zakharov, chief  of  Soviet  Civil  Aircraft  Research  Institute,  an- 

255 

256 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

nounced tha t  U.S.S.R.  would construct 220-passenger, 560-mph Tu-154 
subsonic airliner  to  replace  the  Tu-104, 11-18, and An-10. New  Yak-40 
short-haul  aircraft,  designed  to  carry  24   passengers  up  to  375-mi. 
distances a t  275 mph, was already under  construction and would replace 
the  Li-2 and An-2.  (Pravda, 8/1/66,  6) 
August  1:  Team  of  33 US. technical  experts  from Lockheed Aircraft  Corp. 
arrived  in   Noervich,  W.  Germany,  to  reorganize  maintenance  on 
F-104G  Starfighter  je t   aircraft  and  correct  “technical  difficulties” 
which  had  caused crashes  of  6 1  Starfighters and deaths  of  36 Luftwaffe 
pilots  since  1961.  (Reuters,  Wash. Post, 8/2/66,  C1) 
0  I n  reply  to March 2  invitation  by‘Fcc to  submit  comments on whether  or 
no t   private  entities  should  be  allowed  to  establish  special-purpose 
communications  satellite  systems  for  domestic  use,  18  organizations 
filed  responses. 
Ford  Foundation  proposed  tha t   consideration  be  given  to  formation 
of  a  nonprofit  nationwide  television  system-operating  under  Broad- 
casters  Nonprofit  Satellite  Service  (BNs)--which  would  carry  an  
extensive  schedule  of  educational  programs  financed  by  transmission 
of  commercial TV  programs.  Foundation  contended  FCC   had  power  to 
authorize  such  a satellite  system and  tha t   the  act  creating  ComSatCorp 
had  anticipated  additional  systems  to  meet  unique  national  needs. 
ComSatCorp filed brief saying there was  no legal basis for authorizing 
private  organizations  to  establish  special-purpose  communications 
satellite  systems  for  domestic  use  and  tha t   i t   would  be  in  the   public 
interest to assign ComSatCorp a monopoly on all such systems. Opinion 
was  accompanied by  full technical proposal for multi-use, high-capacity, 
four-satellite  system  for  domestic  distribution  of  TV,  voice,  and  data 
signals  tha t  would be  operational  by  1970 a t  estimated  cost  of  between 
$110 and  $126  million. 
AT&T  argued  i t   would  be  against  ccexpressed national  policy”  to 
authorize  satellite  systems  outside  the  framework  of  commercial  com- 
munications  carriers  and  urged  FCC   “to  conclude  in  this  finding  tha t  
there  can  be  no  authorization  of  private  satellite  systems.” 
Carnegie Commission on Educational Television said i t  was  encourag- 
ing  a  study  of  a  comsat  system  tha t  would  be  specifically designed  for 
noncommercial  television.  While  conceding  tha t   national  satellites 
might  be  advantageous  in  some  cases,  Carnegie  Commission  warned 
tha t   such  a  system  presented  problems  of  “educational  monopoly and 
centralized  control  of  instructional  and  other  material.”  FCC  was 
requested  to  take  no  definitive  action  until  Carnegie’s  forthcoming 
report  on  educational  television  was  published  in  late  1966  or   early 
1967. 
Briefs  of  broadcasting  industry  cited  urgency  for  domestic  satellite 
service  to  cu t  costs  of  distributing  television  and  radio programs.  This 
cost  reduction  for  the   three  networks-css,  ABC, and  NBC-was 
esti- 
mated  a t  approximately $50 million a year.  NBC   said a determination as 
to  how  this  satellite  service  should  be  obtained  could  not  be  made  in  
the  abstract  bu t   “would  depend  o n .  . . a  comparison of  the  respective 
merits  of  specific proposals.’’ 
National  Assn.  of  Manufacturers  told  FCC  tha t  manufacturing  com- 
munity should have full freedom of  choice either to lease channels from 
ComSatCorp  directly  o r   establish  private  systems.  ( C R ,   8/2/66, 
17131-3; Gould, NYT, 8/2/66,  1, 18; Av. Wk., 8/8/66,  27-8) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

257 

August 1: All transatlantic flights ou t  of major European ports of  embarkation 
were  sold out, and 2,100 tourists were stranded in  Europe as a result of 
IAM  strike against five major US. airlines which began July 8. (A v .  Wk., 
8/8/66. 42) 
Auguit 2:  NASA’;  Lunar Orbiter A spacecraft was mated to  i ts  Atlas-Agena D 
booster  in   preparation  for  scheduled Aug.  9  launch  from  ETR.  (Tech. 
Wk., 8/8/66,  3) 
NASA  was  negotiating with RCA  for  $13-million cost-plus-award-fee renewal 
of  previous  contract  to   operate  and  maintain  three   data  acquisition 
facilities.  Renewal  called  for  engineering and  operations  services  for 
NASA’s unmanned  Space  Tracking  and   Data  Acquisition  Network 
(STADAN),  operation  of  weather  satellite  control  centers  a t   GSFC,  and 
operation and maintenance  of  tracking  stations a t  Rosman, N.  C.,  and 
Fairbanks,  Alaska.  (NASA  Release  66-202) 
Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator (1958-1961), was  elected a 
director  of  Air  Products  and  Chemicals,  Inc.,  producer  of  industrial 
gases and chemicals.  Dr. Glennan was  currently president of  Associated 
Universities  which  operated Brookhaven National Laboratory for  AEC  
and  National  Radio  Astronomy  Observatory  under  NSF  sponsorship. 
( N Y T ,  8/3/66,  50) 
August  3: X-15 No.  2  was  flown  to  3,443 mph  (mach  4.85)  and  249,000-ft. 
altitude  by  Maj.  William  J.  Knight  (WAF)  on  star-tracking mission. 
(X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
*  Two  tape  recorders  in  NASA%  NIMBUS  11  meteorological satellite had  failed 
but spacecraft  continued to  transmit daytime and nighttime cloud-cover 
photos. Loss  of  first recorder,  used  to  store data  from Medium  Resolu- 
tion Infrared Radiometer (Mrir) , would  prevent scientists from receiving 
information  on  earth’s  heat  balance,  water vapor,  and  temperatures  in  
the   atmosphere.  Failure  of  second  recorder,  used  in   measuring  satel- 
lite’s engineering performance, would force NIMBUS 11 to transmit informa- 
tion  each  time  i t  passed  a ground  station  instead  of  storing  i t   for  more 
convenient  playback.  Since  i ts   launch  by  NASA  May  15, NIMBUS  11  had 
met  all mission objectives and  transmitted  more  than   200,000  weather 
photos  on  a  global scale.  (NASA  Release 66-203) 
First  manned  Apollo  mission  might  be  launched  in   late  1966, predicted 
Astronaut  Virgil  Grissom during news  conference held  by  Apollo  crew 
and  backup  crew  a t   North  American  Aviation,  Inc.’s  Downey,  Calif., 
facility. Mission  was  officially scheduled for  1967.  (Transcript) 
Senate  Committee  on  Appropriations  reported  FY  1967  Independent 
Offices Appropriation bill  (H.R.  14921) , which included $4,991,600,000 
appropriation  for  NASA:  $4,246,600,000 for  R&D;  $95,000,000  for  con- 
struction  of  facilities;  and  $650,000,000  for  administrative  operations. 
(NASA  LAR  V/126) 
*  Tokyo  Univ.’s  Ins t i tu te   of  Space  and  Aviation  announced  successful 
launch  of  Japan’s  first  television-equipped  sounding  rocket:  1.4-ton 
rocket  carried  22-lb.  TV  camera  to  200-mi.  (322-km.)  altitude.  (UPI, 
Wash. Post,  8 /4 /66)  
0  NASA  modified  existing  cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts with  North  American 
Aviation,  Inc.,  and  IBM  Corp.  for  Apollo  program  services  with  new 
agreements  totaling  $252.6  million:  under  $145.6  million  cost-plus- 
incentive-fee  contract  extended  through  December  1968, NAA  would 
provide 52  additional J-2 engines for  launch vehicles as well  as support 
services;  IBM  would  receive $107 million  under multiple-incentive  con- 

258 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

tract,  extended through February 1970, for  design, development, imple- 
mentation, maintenance,  and  operation  of  MSC’S  Real  Time Computer 
(NASA  Release 66-205; MSFC  Release  66-176) 
Complex  (RTCC). 
August 3: Dr. Leonard Roberts, a specialist on reentry heat shielding a t  LBRC, 
was  named  Director  of  the  Mission  Analysis  Div.,  NASA  Office  of  Ad- 
vanced Research and Technology, effective Sept.  1.  He would  succeed 
Clarence A.  Syvertson, who would become Assistant Director for Astro- 
nautics  a t  ARC.  (NASA  Release 66-198) 
US. Court  of  Custams  and  Pa ten t   Appeals  rejected  a  challenge  to  the  
validity  of  a key patent  in   laser development granted  to  Dr.  Charles H. 
Townes,  former  provost  of  MIT,  and Dr.  Ar thur   L.  Shawlow,  Stanford 
Univ.,  in   1958.  Plaintiff  R.  Gordon  Gould,  a  Columbia  Univ.  graduate 
s tuden t  when Dr.  Townes was doing research  there,  argued  tha t  he  had 
initiated a critical portion of  the  laser design-the  mirror principle-in 
November  1957.  The   patent  for  his  idea,  granted  af ter   the   Townes- 
Shawlow patent,  was  held by  a subsidiary of  Control Data  Corp.  (NYT ,  
8/6/66,  10) 
August  4:  Legal  Subcommittee  of  U.N.  Committee  on  Peaceful  Uses  of 
Ou ter   Space reached  accord  on  nine  substantive articles  for  proposed 
trea ty  on space law before adjournment after three  weeks  of  negotiation 
i n  Geneva. Agreement provided  tha t   (1) planets  should be  freely acces- 
sible to  all  nations;  (2) no nation  should appropriate any part  of  them; 
and  (3) man’s  conduct i n  space should he reserved to peaceful purposes 
and  ruled  by  conce  ts   of  international law  and U.N.  Charter.  Two  key 
provisions p ropo se1  by  U S .   on  reporting  of  ou ter   space  activities  and 
on  open  access  to  stations, equipment, and  spacecraft  on  planets  were 
rejected  by  Soviet delegate  Platon  D.  Morozov,  bu t   U S .   Ambassador 
Ar thur   Goldberg  told  the   press  he   hoped  outstanding issues  could  be 
resolved  when  Subcommittee reconvened  in   New  York  in   September. 
(AP,  Wash.  Eve. Star,  8/5/66,  C4;  Wash .  Post,  8/5/66,  A16) 
*  X-15 No.  3  was  flown  by  NASA  test pilot  William H.  Dana  to  3,682 mph 
(mach 5.34) and 132,700-ft. altitude  in  his  third flight. Primary purpose 
was  pilot  checkout.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.;  UPI,  Chic.  Trib., 8/5/66) 
USAF  launched  OV3-I11 satellite with  Scout  booster  from WTR  to measure 
charged particle hazards to  space payloads.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee, 
2,781 mi.  (4,475 km.) ; perigee,  223 mi.  (358 km.) ; period,  136.9 min.; 
inclination,  81”.  (US. Aeron.  & Space  Ac t . ,   1966, 154) 
0  NASA  assigned  LRC responsibility  for  development of  space vehicle  design 
criteria  in   the   area  of  chemical  propulsion.  Howard  W.  Douglass, 
former  director  of  LRC’s  Flox  Project  Office,  was  appointed  Chief  of 
Design  Criteria  Office  and  Assistant  Chief  of  Chemical  Rocket  Div. 
(LRC Release  66-40) 
President Johnson appointed BOB Director Charles L. Schultze chairman of 
committee to oversee final review of  recommendations made by Nov. 28- 
Dec.  1,  1965, White House  Conference on   International Cooperation. 
Schultze would be assisted by Conference’s executive director, Raymond 
D.  Nasher,  and  White  House  special  assistants  Walt  W.  Rostow  and 
Joseph A.  Califano,  Jr.  (Pres.  DOC., 8/8/66,  1025) 
0  American  Federation  of  Government  Employees  (AFGE)  a t   KSC  had 
charged  NASA  with  preferential  hiring  of  retired  military  officers  for  
choice  civilian  jobs-a 
practice  which  was  “demoralizing”  career 
officials and  damaging the   space program. AFGE’S  charge was  supported 
by  House  Civil  Service  Manpower  Subcommittee,  which  had  been 

259 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
investigating  the   situation  for   several  months.  (Young,  Wash.  Ewe. 
Star,  8/4/66,  A2) 
August 5:  President  Johnson signed H.R.  14324 authorizing $5,000,419,000 
NASA  appropriation for FY  1967, and then  warned  tha t  he  might have to 
cu t  back  expenditures on space and other programs if prices and wages 
‘%ise in   an   inflationary  way.”  He  made  no  direct  mention  of  curren t  
steel  price  hike  or   demands  of  International  Assn.  of  Machinists  i n  
airline strike,  bu t   added:  “If  we  are   to   continue  our  space effort  and 
continue  to  make  the   magnificent  progress  represented  by  our  past 
achievements,  we  can  do  so  only  if  business  and  labor  leaders  w i l l  
make  their  contribution  by  responsible  pricing  and  bargaining  deci- 
sions.,’  (Pres. Doc.,  8/8/66,  1026) 
MSFC  awarded North American  Aviation,  Inc.,  a  $23,438,532 modification 
to  an   existing contract for  “additional  work  in  building and  testing  the  
Sa turn   V  launch  vehicle’s  second  stage  [S-II].”  Work  would  include 
redesign  of  stage’s  umbilical  system  and  additional  testing  of  stage’s 
hardware under simulated flight conditions.  (MSFC  Release 66-181) 
0  German  scientists  Drs.  Otto  Hahn,  Lise  Meitner,  and  Fritz  Strassman 
were  named  jo in t   recipients  of  AEC’S  1966  Enrico  Fermi  Award  for  
“their  combined  and  individual  efforts  in   discovering nuclear  fission, 
and  for   their  extensive  experimental  studies  which  led  to  this  vital 
discovery.”  1966  winners  were  first  foreigners  to  receive  award;  Dr. 
Meitner was  first woman  recipient.  (NYT ,  8/6/66,  4) 
August  6:  GEMINI  VI  Astronauts  Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  and   Thomas  P. 
Stafford  and  GEMINI  VII  Astronauts  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  Frank 
Borman  were  named joint  winners  of  the   1966 Harmon  International 
Aviator’s  Trophy  for  achieving the   first  rendezvous i n   space  by  two 
separately  launched,  maneuverable  spacecraft  Dec.  15,  1965.  Award, 
established  by  late  pioneer  aviator  and  balloonist  Col.  Clifford  B. 
Harmon  (USAF)  “for  exceptional feats  of  pilotry,”  would  be  conferred 
in  fall 1966.  (NYT ,  8/7/66,  4; Wash. Sun. Star, 8/7/66,  A18) 
0  Third  anniversary  of  limited  test-ban  treaty,  ratified  by  112  nations, 
barring  nuclear  tests  in   the   atmosphere,  under  water,  and  in  outer 
space.  (Marder,  Wash. Post,  8/7/66,  1) 
August  6-23: 25th  anniversary  of  first U S .  manned  rocket-assisted aircraft 
flights  made  by  Homer  A.  Boushey,  then  Capt.,  USA  Air  Corps,  in  
Ercoupe  monoplane  specially  fitted  with  jet-assisted  takeoff  (Jato) 
units  “to  determine  if  military  aircraft  could  use  rockets  to  get  in to  
the   air  faster  from  shor t   runways  with  heavy  payloads.”  During  Jato 
test  series,  conducted  by  USA Air  Corps  from  March  Field,  Calif., 
under  direction  of  the  late Dr.  Theodore von KBrmin,  Boushey made: 
two  takeoffs with Ercoupe on rocket power alone;  11 takeoffs combining 
rocket  and   aircraft power; and  four  flights  in  which  rockets  were  fired 
while airplane was  a t  altitude.  On Aug.  6, he first flew on rocket power; 
on  Aug.  12,  he  made  first  rocket-assisted  takeoff;  and  on  Aug.  23  he  
made  two  takeoffs on rocket power  alone.  Three rockets  under each  of 
Ercoupe’s  wings  produced  total  th ru s t   of  168  lb.  for  12  sec.  Von 
K&m6n7s group formed  company now known as Aerojet-General COT. 
to  manufacture Jato  units.  (Tech.  W k . ,  8/8/66,  12) 
August  7:  New  “~e l f -hea l ing ’~  solar  cell  believed  a t   least  50  times  more 
radiation  resistant  than   conventional  power  supply  cells  had  been 
developed  by  RCA   for  GSFC.  Unlike previous  cells  which were  made  of 
silicon and protected by  transparent shields of  quartz or  sapphire,  new 

260 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

cells  contained  small  lithium  additive  which  sealed  gaps  produced  by 
bombardment of  high-energy radioactive  particles  and  reduced  weight 
of  shielding by  up  to  90%. GSFC  physicist Milton Schach described the  
new  cell  as  a  “major  accomplishment”  and  predicted  i ts   use  would 
permit flights of  over 1,000 days  through center of  Van  Allen  radiation 
belts.  Applications  were  also  foreseen  for  communications  satellites, 
high-altitude  military  reconnaissance  spacecraft,  and  missions  to  
Jupiter,  surrounded  by  high-energy electron  radiation  belt.  (Wilford, 
N Y T ,  8/7/66,40) 
August  7:  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding rocket  was  launched  from  Churchill 
Research Range i n  GSFC-Univ.  of  Michigan  pitot-static  tube  experiment 
to   observe  the   fine  atmosphere  temperature  s truc ture   a t   noctilucent- 
cloud  altitude.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  Two series of  coordinated NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched 
from  NASA  Wallops Station, Churchill Research  Range,  Po in t   Barrow, 
Alaska, and  Natal,  Brazil,  in  GSFC  experiment to gather data-by  means 
of  exploding grenade  technique-on 
atmospheric  wind,  temperature, 
pressure,  and density  as  summer maximum  of  noctilucent  cloud sight- 
ings  approached.  Rockets  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfac- 
torily,  except  one  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station  did  no t  
achieve predicted  altitude.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  First  new  comet  in   1966  was  discovered  by  Stephen  Kilston,  recent 
Harvard  Univ.  graduate,  a t   Lick  Observatory,  San  Jose,  Calif.,  and 
confirmed  Aug.  9  by  Central  Telegram  Bureau,  Smithsonian  Astro- 
physical  Observatory. Named  for  its  discoverer,  Comet  Kilston  had  a 
magnitude of  plus  10.6 and  could be seen in  the  constellation Hercules, 
apparently moving  southeast.  (AP,  N Y T ,   8/10/66,  5; AP,  Wash. Post, 
8/10/66,  AS;  AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, &J10/66, B4) 
0  First  microscope  tha t   could  either  superimpose  or  rapidly  alternate 
images was  being used a t  Cal Tech to  detect changes in  position  or  size 
of  metal  crystals  tha t   might  cause  structural  failure.  Microscope  was 
assembled  by  David  S. Wood,  Thad Vreeland,  Jr.,  and David  P .  Pope. 
(Sci.  Serv.,  N Y T ,   8/7/66,  39) 
Proposal  for  a  permanent  international  program  of  science  cooperation 
made  by  11  leaders  of  th e   1957-58  International  Geophysical  Year 
program and  1964-65 International Year  of  the   Quiet  Sun  program  in  
le t ter   to  London  Times  [see  July  271  was  praised  by  the   New  York 
Times:  “The  initiative  taken  by  the   eleven  scientists  represents  a 
promising new  attempt to  cu t  through . . . [political] limits  on coopera- 
tion  and  thus   promote  more  effective  research  on  behalf  of  all  man- 
kind.”  ( N Y T ,  8/7/66,  8E) 
0  Hughes Aircraft  Co.  engineer’s  smuggling of  a  small U S .   flag  on  NASA’s 
SURVEYOR I  spacecraft  which  softlanded  on  the   moon  June  2  was  a 
breach of  discipline and a violation  of  international space policy, wrote 
Joshua  Lederberg  i n   th e   Washington Post.  “. . . NASA  policy  requires 
‘minimum  contamination’ s o   tha t   the   moon  can  remain  a  useful  pre- 
serve  for  th e   detection  of  any  life  tha t   might  be  transported  by,  say, 
meteorites.  This  calls  for   ‘clean  room’  standards  during  the   assembly 
of  spacecraft  components. 
“A  bootlegged  flag which could no t  have been subjected to  such con- 
trol  for   decontamination is  a  clear  violation  of  a  policy  to   which  this 
country’s honor  has  been attached  and  calls  for  strenuous disciplinary 

ASTRONAUTiCS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

261 

measures to  insure  th e  integrity  and credibility of purpose of our  fu tu re  
exploratory missions.”  (Lederberg,  Wash .  Post,  8/7/66) 
August  7: French-Soviet June  30 agreement on space cooperation was  arous- 
ing  speculation  about  Soviet  participation  in   French  Guiana  launch 
site,  reported Richard Lewis  in   Chicago Sun  Times. Use  of  large Soviet 
launch  vehicles--which  were  also  missiles-at 
French  Guiana  range 
would  “open  a  missile  corridor  to  the   soft  underbelly  of  th e   United 
States  early  warning  system,”  and  “undoubtedly  generate  serious 
tension  i n   th e   Western  world  and  in   Europe,’’  Lewis  suggested.  But 
French  restriction  tha t   all  satellites  launched  from  site  use  French. 
boosters and crew “would make th e  Guiana port useless to  the  Russians 
for  space  research,  since  the   only  space  launcher  the   French  have 
developed  is  the  Diamant”  whose  payload  capability was  equivalent  t o  
tha t   of  th e   Scou t - sma l le s t   booster  i n   U.S.  inventory.  (Lewis,  Chic. 
Sun  Times, 8/7/66,  11) 
August 8:  COSMOS  CXXVII  was  launched into  ear th  orbit by  U.S.S.R.  to   con- 
t inue   exploration  of  outer  space.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  279 km. 
(173 mi.);  perigee,  204 km.  (127 mi,);  period,  89.2 min.;  inclination, 
51.9”. Instruments were functioning normally.  (Tass, 8/8/66;  Krasnuyu 
Zvezda,  8/10/66,  1, USS-T  Trans.) 
Senate  began  consideration  of  FY  1967 Independent  Offices  Appropria- 
tion  bill  (H.R.  14921), which  included $4,991,600,000  NASA  appropria- 
tion.  Two  amendments proposed  by  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.) 
to  reduce  NASA’s appropriation-one 
by  $998,320,000,  the   other  by 
$150,000,000-were 
defeated.  (NASA  LAR  V/128) 
*  NASA  had  selected Bendix Corp.,  Federal Electric  Corp.,  and Philco Corp. 
for  competitive  negotiations  of  a  five-year,  Qg60-rnillion contract  for  
operation and maintenance  services for Deep  Space Network.  Contract 
would  be managed  by  JPL.  (NASA  Release 66-210) 
NASA  Pasadena  Office  (Napo),  formerly  the   NASA  Resident Office-JpL, was 
established “as a component field activity”  of  th e  Office of Space Science 
and Applications (OSSA),  NASA Hq.  In  addition  to negotiating, executing, 
and  administering NASA  contracts with  Cal  Tech  for  operation  of  JPL, 
new  Nap0  would  provide procurement,  contract  administration,  patent 
and  technology utilization,  and  related  services i n  support of  OSSA  and 
other NASA  organizational elements.  (NASA  Hq.  Bull.) 
*  Lack  of  major manned  spaceflight goal  beyond  Apollo  Applications (Aa) 
program was  causing NASA  to   delay  Sa turn   booster  development for  a t  
least  two  years,  reported  George  Alexander  in   Aviation  Week. Major 
Sa turn   contractors,  facing  end  of  curren t   production  contracts,  won- 
dered  which  derivatives  would  be  chosen  for  development and  when 
development and production  would  begin.  Although curren t  inventory 
of  Uprated  Sa turn   I  (Saturn  IB)  and  Sa turn  V  vehicles was  sufficient 
for  programs  through  Aa,  fu ture   missions  might  require  a  “super 
booster”  with  280,000-lb.  payload  capacity  o r   a n  intermediate  vehicle 
with  40,000-lb. payload  capacity.  (Alexander, A v .   W k . ,  8/8/66,  59-78) 
*  Atlas F advanced ballistic reentry  system ICBM  fired from Vandenberg AFB 
apparently  exploded  and  fell  into  th e   Pacific.  USAF  was  investigating 
causes of  the  failure.  (UPI,  NYT ,  8/9/66) 
*  FAA  was  proposing  extensive  changes  in   regulations  for  determining 
crashworthiness of  transport aircraft and for meeting passenger  evacua- 
tion  standards.  Proposed  changes included:  (1)  possibility  of  evacua- 
tion  of  aircraft in  90 sec.-instead 
of  120 sec.;  (2)  increase  i n  number 

262 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

and  size  of  emergency  exits  and  more  uniform  distribution  of  exits 
throughout  passenger  cabin;  (3)  improvement  of  emergency  lighting 
systems;  (4)  extensive preflight  briefing  of  passengers;  (5)  increase  i n  
number of  flight attendants per passenger; and  (6)  changes i n  design of 
landing gear, fuel lines, and electrical cables for greater safety.  ( A v .  Wk., 
8 /8 /66 ,34)  
August  8: New method of  averting aircraft crashes on landing or  takeoff was 
demonstrated  a t   London’s  Royal  Aircraft  Establishment  when  a  jet 
fighter traveling 80  mph down runway stopped sho r t  in  three  seconds on  
40O-ft.-long7 7-ft.-deep gravel  bed.  Establishment  spokesman  estimated 
th a t  pilots of large passenger aircraft could stop in  10  sec. on long s tr ip  of 
ordinary gravel.  ( W T ,  8/9/66,  62) 
August 9:  NASA should submit to  Congress by Dec.  1 its recommendations on  
possible major national  space objectives, including costs and benefits  of 
s  ecific  missions,  concluded  439-page  staff  report  prepared  for  House 
g i e n c e   and  Astronautics  Committee’s  NASA  Oversight Subcommittee. 
Subcommittee would  hold  hearings  “at  an  early  date”  to   define fu tu re  
space  goals.  Study-based 
on   testimony  of  NASA  center  directors,  in- 
dustrial  managers,  scientists,  and  other  interested  parties-recom- 
mended  greater  interagency  coordination  in   planning  and  urged  NASA 
to   “aggressively  pursue  possible mechanisms for  more  comprehensive 
program  of  international  cooperation  . .  . y 7   Fu ture   space  programs 
should  be  evaluated i n   relation  to  national  economy  and  include  “in- 
creased emphasis on  minimum cost logistics vehicles within the  s ta te  of 
th e   a r t   to   assure  tha t   economical  logistics  and  rescue  systems  a re  
available in the  early  1970s and tha t  similar emphasis be placed  on new 
generation  of  spacecraft  design  capable  of  ground  recovery  a t   lower 
cost.”  (Text) 
0  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  with  Thor-Agena  D  booster  from 
WTR.  (US. Aeron.  & Space Ac t . ,   1966,  154) 
Computer  technique  developed  by  JPL  scientist  Dr.  Robert  Nathan  and 
applied  to  12  photos  of  th e   lunar  surface  transmitted  by  NASA’s SUR- 
VEYOR  I  spacecraft  revealed  details as  small as  1/50 of  a n   inch  and,  i n  
some  cases,  apparently  doubled  observable  characteristics.  Enhance- 
ment  process  had  been  used  successfully  to   intensify  photos  trans-  
mitted  by  NASA’s three   Ranger  spacecraft  and  MARINER  IV  Mars  probe. 
(NASA  Release 66-206; JPL  Release) 
0  NASA awarded Dow Chemical Co. a $4-million, cos t-p lus-ked-fee  extension 
to   previous  contract  for   KSC  support services  through  June  30,  1967. 
(NASA  Release  66-212) 
August  10: NASA’s LUNAR  ORBITER I  (Lunar Orbiter A)  unmanned  spacecraft 
was  successfully  launched  by  Atlas-Agena D  booster  from  ETR  i n  first 
U.S.  attempt  to   orbit  the  moon  and  photograph  possible  landing sites 
fo r  Apollo  astronauts  [see Aug.  14-31]. 
Agena  2nd  stage  fired  to  boost  850-lb.  spacecraft  into  100-mi.  (161- 
km.) altitude  parking  orbit,  reignited  after  28-min.  coast  period,  in-  
jecting  spacecraft  into  90-hr.  translunar  trajectory,  and  separated.  On 
schedule,  LUNAR  ORBITER  I  deployed  its  four   solar  panels  and  two 
antennas  and  locked  i ts   five  solar  sensors  on  the   sun.  Only  difficulty 
occurred  when  spacecraft’s  startracker  failed  to  lock  on  Canopus  and 
flight  engineers were  forced to  lock  it  on  the  moon-a  weaker  naviga- 
tional  reference point.  Assistant  Project  Manager  James S. Martin,  Jr., 
of L ~ R C  was  “still quite confident” about achieving lunar orbit, but noted 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

263 

it might be more difficult to  obtain desired precision and exact positions 
required  for  optimum photos  of  lunar  surface.  At  approximately 00:28 
GMT  Aug.  11 planned  midcourse maneuver  was  successfully  executed, 
and JPL  scientists  predicted  spacecraft would miss  original aiming point 
by  only 50  mi. 
Primary objectives of  NASA’s  LUNAR  ORBITER I mission,  fu-st in series of 
five,  were  (1) to  place  three-axis  stabilized  spacecraft  into  lunar  orb i t ;  
and  (2)  obtain high-resolution  photos  of  various types of  lunar  surface 
to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor space- 
craft  and   improve knowledge  of  the  moon.  Photos would  cover  3,000- 
mi.  s tr ip  along moon’s  equator,  concentrating on nine potential  landing 
areas.  Spacecraft would  also attempt  to  photograph  SURVEYOR  I  landing 
sites; provide precision  trajectory  information; and monitor meteoroids 
and  radiation  intensity  in   lunar  environment.  Lunar  Orbiter  program 
was  managed  by  LaRC  under  direction  of  NASA’s Office of  Space Science 
and Applications. Tracking and communications were  the  responsibility 
of  JPL-operated  Deep  Space  Network.  (NASA  Release  66-195; Wilford, 
NYT,  8 /8 /66 ,   3 ;   8/11/66,  1, 12;  8/12/66,  51;  O’Toole,  Wash. Post, 
8 /11 /66 ,   A l ;  8/12/66,  A l ;  8/13/66,  A l ;  8/14/66,  A l ,  A6; AP,  Wash. 
Eve.  Star,  8/11/66,  A3) 
August  10:  Senate  passed  FY  1967  Independent  Offices  Appropriation bill 
(H.R.  14921) 82-2  with NASA appropriation a t  $4,991,600,000 as reported 
by  Committee on Appropriations.  (NASA  LAR  V/130) 
0  Rice  Univ.  scientists  successfully  launched  500-ft.-long  helium-filled 
balloon  from  National Center  for Atmospheric Research balloon  flight 
station, Palestine, Tex.,  to obtain electronic  data on radioactivity within 
the   Crab  Nebula.  When  balloon  reached  132,000-ft. altitude,  900-lb. 
electronic  gamma-ray  telescope  began  recording  data.  Payload  was 
dropped by  parachute  on   electronic  signal  from ground  and  recovered 
near  Midland,  Tex.  Study was  third  in   series  financed  under  $166,500 
USAF grant and was  termed “highly s u c c e s s f d . ~ ~  (Houston Post, 8/11/66) 
August  1 1 :   NASA  test  pilot  John  B.  McKay  flew  X-15 No.  1 to  3.,511 mph 
(mach  5.06)  and  251,000-ft.  altitude  to  collect  micrometeorites.  As 
secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to check horizon scanner, 
electrical  loads,  and  wing-pod  flutter.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
0  MSFC  would  negotiate  with  Chrysler Corp.  and  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.  fo r  
procurement  a t   $5-10 million  of  long  lead  time  items  for  additional 
Uprated  Sa turn  I  (Saturn IB)  launch vehicles.  In terrup t ion  of  produc- 
tion  capability  after  completion  of  presently  approved  12  vehicles 
would  thus   be  avoided.  Chrysler  was  building  th e   S-IB  1st  stage; 
Douglas was  manufacturing  S-IVB  2nd  stage,  (MSFC  Release  66-183) 
0  Horace  Sheely  of  the   National  Survey  of  Historic  Sites,  Dept.  of  t h e  
In ter ior ,  inspected Pakachoag Hill, Auburn, Mass.,  site of  first  success- 
ful  liquid-fuel  rocket  flight  made  by  Dr.  Robert  H .   Goddard.  Accom- 
panying  Sheely were  members  of  th e  Auburn  Rotary  and  Lions  Clubs 
joint  committee to  preserve  the  Goddard  site.  (Joint  Comm.  Ltr.) 
August 12: X-15 No. 2 was flown by Maj. William Knight  (USAF)  to 3,473 mph 
(mach 4.90)  and 231,000-ft.  altitude to  conduct  startracker experiment 
and  base  drag study  and  test  alternate pitot  static system.  (X-15 Proj. 
Off.; AP,  NYT,  8/14/66,  8) 
0  Comprehensive report on June  8 collision of  XB-70 and F-104 aircraft near 
Barstow, Calif.,  compiled by  two investigative boards-one 
to  determine 
transmitted 
causes,  the  other to  examine command responsibility-was 

264 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

to  Secretary  of  Defense Robert  S. McNamara  by  Secretary  of  the  Air 
Force  Harold  Brown.  Inadvertent  movement  by  F-104  into  position 
“from  which  recovery  was  virtually  impossible”  was  cited  as  “most 
probable  cause”  of  collision;  failure  of  Maj.  Carl  Cross  (USAF)  to   eject 
from  XB-70  before  crashing  was  attributed  to  a n   escape  system  mal- 
function.  Among  report’s  recommendations  were:  improvement  of 
AFFTG’s  operational procedures; modification of  XB-70’s  escape system; 
and  establishment  of  standards  for  formation  flights.  I n  accompanying 
memorandum,  Secretary Brown  said tha t   Col.  Joseph F.  Cotton  (USAF), 
XB-70 tes t   director; Col.  James  G .   Scott  (USAF),  Edwards  AFB  informa- 
tion  officer; and  John  S. McCollom,  Director  of  Research Vehicles  for 
Aeronautical  Systems Div.,  had  been  reprimanded  and  Col.  Albert M. 
Cate (USAF)  relieved of  duties as Deputy for Systems Tests a t  AFFTG.  (CR ,  
8/15/66,  18505-10;  W I ,   NYT ,   8/16/66,  15 ;   Maffre,  Wash.  Post, 
8/16/66,  6 )  
August  12: New  absorption bands, probably  caused  in  part by  reduced gases 
in  the  Martian atmosphere, had been found in  near-infrared  spectrum of 
Mars  by  Fourier  spectroscopy,  Lewis  D.  Kaplan,  JPL,  and  Janine  and 
Pierre  Connes,  Observatoire  de  Meudon  and  Centre  National  de  la 
Recherche  Scientifique,  France,  reported  in   Science.  The   au thors  
believed the  presence of  such constituents might have “important  impli- 
cations for the  possibility and nature of  life on Mars.”  (Science, 8/12/66, 
739-40) 
e  NASA  had  selected Honeywell,  Inc.,  for  negotiation  of  $5-million contract 
to   design,  fabricate,  and  test  attitude-control  and  scan-control  sub-  
systems  for  two  Mariner  spacecraft  to  be  launched  in   1969.  (NASA 
Release 66-216) 
0  Boeing  Co.  awarded  subcontracts  totaling  $1.5  billion  to  Avco  Corp., 
Martin  Co.,  North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  Northrop  Corp.,  Fairchild 
Hiller  Corp.,  and LTV,  Inc.,  for work  on  Sst prototype.  (Boeing Release 
s-8928) 
e  Dr.  T.  L.  K .   Smull resumed his  duties as Director  of  the  Office of  Grants 
and  Research Contracts,  NASA  announced.  Since Dec.  1,  1965, he  had 
been  on   leave  from  tha t   Office,  serving  as  Special  Assistant  to  the  
Administrator  on  NASA-university  relationships.  (NASA  Ann.,  8/12/66) 
M2-F2 lifting body  vehicle, with  NASA  research pilot  Milton  0. Thompson 
as  pilot,  was  successfully  air-launched  from  B-52 aircraft  at  $5,000-ft. 
altitude in   third glide  flight  from Edwards  AFB.  Purposes of  flight were 
determining  effect  of  increasing  mach  number  and  minimum  damper 
requirements,  and  testing  of  longitudinal  and  lateral  stability  and 
control.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
August  13:  Five-man NASA  board  and House  Science and Astronautics Com- 
mittee’s NASA  Oversight Subcommittee had begun separate inquiries  into 
failures of  OGO   I,  11,  111,  OAO  I ,   and  NIMBUS  I.  Questions under investiga- 
tion  included:  (1)  Is  the   expenditure  on   observatory  satellites  wise? 
(2) Are  th e  projects  being carried  out  on  an   efficient  basis?  and  (3)  Is 
the   taxpayer’s  interest  being  protected? 
GSFC  Director Dr.  John  F.  Clark told AP  he believed  there   had  been 
“technical  goofs  but  no  management  problems”  associated  with  th e  
failures.  “Scientifically,  we  have  not  had  a  failure  in   OGO .   Something 
less  than   100 percent  but  more  than   75  percent  of  OGO’S  experiment 
re tu rn   has  been  outstandingly successful.  OGO   1 and  OGO  2-although 
classified  as  spacecraft  failures-gave 
us  more  data  than   all  other 

265 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
satellites  combined  up   to  tha t   time.”  ( N Y T ,   8/14/66,  1,  70; AP, 
Wash.  Eve.  Star, 8/14/66,  A23) 
August  13:  Recent Trendex poll  taken for Thiokol Chemical Corp. indicated 
tha t  71.4 per  cent  of  Cincinnati residents  were  in  favor of  the  Nation’s 
lunar  program.  (Haggerty, J /A rmed  Forces,  8/13/66,  8) 
Research  by  NASA  and  Air  Transport  Assn.  indicated  tha t   wet-pavement 
skidding by  aircraft  could  be  substantially  reduced  by  cutting 
to 
W-in.-deep  grooves one  to  two  inches  apart  in   runways. Test  runways 
%“s- 
would  be  equipped with  grooves a t   cost  of  $70,000  by  early  1967 fo r  
fur ther   experimentation.  (Hudson,  N Y T ,   8/14/66,  90;  UPI,  Chic. 
Trib.,  8/15/66) 
August  13-14: Alternate  system  kept  U S .   tracking  station  a t   Robledo  d e  
Chavela,  Spain,  in  operation when  500-600 ft.  of  cable were burned by 
forest  fire raging nearby.  Station, which played  a  critical  role  in  NASA’s 
Lunar  Orbiter  program,  was  expected  to  receive  photos  of  the   lunar  
surface in  several days.  (NASA  Release  66-219) 
August  14-30: NASA’s photographic spacecraft  LUNAR  ORBITER  I  became  first 
US. spacecraft to  enter lunar orbit-only  15  mi. off target-after  92-hr., 
236,319-mi.  flight  from  ETR.  Orbital  parameters:  apolune,  1,152  mi. 
(1,854 km.)  ; perilune,  119 mi.  (192 km.) ; period, 3 hrs. 37 min.; inclina- 
tion,  12’.  JPL  reported drop in  spacecraft’s apolune Aug.  17 to  1,150 mi. 
(1,851 km.), and rise in  perilune to  126 mi.  (202.8 km.) ; moon’s  gravita- 
tional  field  was  considered  cause  of  orbital  variations.  After  taking 
engineering photos  transmitted  to   JPL  Aug.  18-20, spacecraft  was  in -  
jected  into  close-in orbit  by  re tro thrus t  maneuver initiated  Aug.  2 1  for 
medium- and  high-resolution  photography  of  lurain.  Tracking experts 
said  36-mi.  (58-km.) perilune  was  “within  a  city  block”  of  where  it 
should be. 
Spacecraft’s  cameras  had  exposed  211 dual  frames of  film  to  photo- 
graph nine potential  Apollo  and Surveyor landing sites during mission’s 
photo  acquisition  phase,  announced  complete on Aug.  30. Readout was 
expected  to  be  completed  by  Sept.  15. Medium-resolution camera  re- 
turned  good  images; however, except for  an   excellent photo  of  moon’s 
far  side,  all  exposures made with  the  high-resolution  camera  were  dis- 
appointing.  Camera’s  malfunction  was  attributed  Aug.  25  to  spurious 
signal generated by  spacecraft’s film  transfer  motor  a t   31-mi. perilune. 
Signal  was  tripping  high-resolution  camera  shu t ter   and  causing  film 
smear; LUNAR  ORBITER  1’s  perilune was  lowered  to  23  mi.  (37 km.)  to  
eliminate  signal.  Unprogramed  photograph  of  earth,  commanded  Aug. 
23 and received  a t  NASA’s  tracking station a t  Robledo de Chavela, Spain, 
Aug.  25,  showed  appearance of  earth’s  terminator-line 
dividing sun-  
lit and shadowed portion of planet-from  distance of  about 240,000 mi. 
(386,400  km.).  Spacecraft  also  photographed  SURVEYOR  I  landing  site. 
(NASA  Proj.  Off. ; NASA  Releases  66-228, 66-230, 66-233; Wilford, N Y T ,  
8 /15 /66 ,1 ,23 ;   8 /16 /66 ,15 ;   8 /19 /66 ,1 ;   8 /20 /66 ,8 ;   8 /21 /66 ,1 ;   8/22/ 
66,  8 ;  AP,  N Y T ,   8/24/66,  15 ;  N Y T ,   8/25/66,  A5;  8/26/66,  13 ;  AP, 
NYT, 9 /1 /66 ,2 ;   O’Toole,  r a s h .  Post, 8/15/66,  A l ,  A13 ;   8/19/66,  A l ;  
8/20/66,  A l ;  8/21/66,  A l ;  AP,  Balt. Sun, 8/18/66;  Av .   Wk., 8/29/66, 
18) 
August  14:  Coordinated  NASA  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  series  was 
launched  from NASA  Wallops  Station, Churchill Research Range,  Point 
Barrow,  Alaska,  and  Natal,  Brazil,  in   GSFC  experiment to   study atmos- 
pheric  parameters  of  wind,  temperature,  pressure,  and  density  as 

266 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

August  25:  First  picture  of  earth  from  the  vicinity  of  the  moon, taken  by  NASA’S  LUNAR 
ORBITER  I .  

summer  maximum  of  noctilucent  cloud  sightings  approached. Rocket 
and  instrumentation  performances were  satisfactory.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
August  14: The  critical  voices  raised  during Aug.  8-9 Senate debate on  th e  
NASA portion of th e  Independent Offices Appropriation bill  (H.R.  14921) 
indicated  the  U S .  space program was  in   ‘political trouble,”  concluded 
New  York  Times  editorial.  ‘?Fundamental questions  are   being  asked 
about whether  this  coun try  should  have  gotten  involved  in   th e  moon 
race i n  the  first place, and invidious comparisons are  being drawn about 
the  dividends from  money  spent  in   space  and  those  tha t   might  have 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

267 

been  realized  had  those same  funds  been  used  to  meet  urgent  human 
needs.  . . . 
“There  are  important and  useful  things  to  be  done  in   a  post-Apollo 
space program, but  i t  is doubtful in  the  extreme that  the  nation should 
go on  indefinitely paying five billion dollars or more annually for such a 
program..  . .” (N Y T ,  8/14/66,  E10) 
August  14:  Capt.  Chester M.  Lee  (USN,  Ret.),  Operations Planning  Chief  in  
Mission  Operations, NASA  Office of Manned  Space Flight, was  appointed 
Assistant Mission Director,  Apollo.  (NASA  Ann.,  9/15/66) 
*  Successful  test  firing  of  supersonic  Chaparral,  USA’s newest  air  defense 
guided missile system, was  conducted a t  WSMR.  One  of  two  weapon  sys- 
tems  selected  by  USA  for  new  air  defense battalions,  Chaparral met  all 
test  objectives when  i t   intercepted  Firebee target  missile i n  continuing 
series  of  development  firings.  (AF  News  Bureau,  NYT ,   8/14/66,  16) 
0  Hurricane seeding plans  for Project Stormfury-joint  USN-ESSA  hurricane 
announced. Between Aug.  1 and  Oct.  15, 
control study program-were 
17-plane force  would  be  on  alert  in   Puer to   Rico  to  seed  storms  with 
silver iodide  and  then  monitor  temperature,  atmospheric pressure,  and 
s truc ture   of  cloud. Project  Stormfury was  begun  in   1961 : experiments 
had  been performed on hurricanes Esther in   1961  and Beulah  in   1963, 
and on  tropical  cumulus clouds in  1963 and 1965. (DOD  Release 654-66) 
*  Comment  in   the   Washington  Sunday  Star  called  US. Ss t   program  a 
“dubious”  venture moved by  extraordinary pressures:  “This is a project 
the   taxpayer should view  with  more  than   a  little interest,  if  not  appre- 
hension, for i ts  cost is coming ou t  of  his  pocketbook and the  price  tag is 
escalating.  Indus try  may  repay  th e   cost  some day,  but  no  one is  su r e  
jus t   when.  The   SST,  in   fact,  has  become  a  symbol  of  national  prestige. 
If  we  do no t  produce such  a plane,  American  leadership  in   the  aircraft 
industry  will  sustain  a  loss  of  face  from  which  it  could  not  recover. 
Perhaps  i t   is  impossibIe  to  back  away  from  the   situation.  But  th e  
American  public  is  a t   least  entitled  to  know  what  kind  of  mare’s  nest 
this  rivalry  has  got  us  into,  and  the   hazards  tha t   must  be  faced.” 
(Wash.  Sun, Star,  8/14/66,  C1) 
August 15:  NASA  Javelin sounding rocket with new  4 th  stage ignition  system 
was  launched  from Wallops  Station  to  434-mi.  (698-km.)  altitude,  In -  
strumented payload  measured  positive  ion  composition of  ionosphere, 
electron density,  and  temperature; and mapped  distribution of  Lyman- 
alpha  radiation  to  determine  amount  of  atomic  hydrogen  in   earth’s 
atmosphere.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
e  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding rocket  launched  from  WSMR  reached  100-mi. 
(161-km.)  altitude  in   Dudley  Observatory  (AIbany,  N.Y.)  micro- 
meteorite particle  collection  experiment a t  a  time of  33-year maximum 
for  Leonid  meteor  shower.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed 
satisfactorily;  since  radar  signals  were  lost  after  265  sec.,  intensive 
search  was  necessary  for  payload  recovery.  Chief  objective  was  no t  
accomplished because  of  range  scheduling,  and  launch  was  used  for 
control  shot.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
e  Chrysler COT.  had  announced  it was  building  10 more Redstone rockets 
for  Sparta-joint  US.-U.K.-Australian reen try  measurements program 
-Technology  Week  reported.  TRW  Systems  had  prime  contract  for 
program; LTV Aerospace Corp. was  building two-stage solid fuel velocity 
package  to  propel  reentry  vehicles  back  in to   earth’s  atmosphere  a t  
speeds simulating ICBM  reentry.  (Tech. Wk.,  8/15/66,  12) 

268 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

August 15: George A.  Lemke, Director of  Apollo Reliability and Quality, NASA 
Office of Manned Space Flight, died a t  age 54. A veteran of more than 26 
years  in  aircraft and space industry, Mr.  Lemke had  formerly been NASA 
Apollo  Project  Resident  Manager  a t   North  American  Aviation,  Inc. 
(NASA  Hq.  Bull.) 
0  Program  Evaluation  Review  Technique  (Pert) -multi-level 
scheduling 
program  used  to  spot  potential  problems  before  they  developed-had 
made i t  possible during 1966 to  meet every “major milestone” in  NASA’s 
Saturn-Apollo  site  activation  program  for  KSC’S  Complex  39,  Tech- 
nology  Week reported.  Earlier,  only about 2 /3   of  the   target  dates  were 
being met.  Using  computer programed  with data  categorized into  three  
levels  of  detail  on   individual  contractor’s  needs,  abilities,  and  timing, 
Per t  set up work schedules based  on key milestones as periodic progress 
reminders.  Frequent  computer  checks  of  programed  work  provided 
officials with  definite  reading of  status  of  remaining tasks.  (Tech.  W k . ,  
8/15/66,  40) 
B/G  Paul  T.  Cooper,  Vice  Commander  of  AFSC’S  Space  Systems  Div. 
(SSD),  would  replace M/G  Ben  I.  Funk, retiring Sept.  1, as Commander 
of  SSD,  AFSC  Commander  Gen.  Bernard A.  Schriever  announced.  (AFSC 
Release  169.66) 
August  16:  NASA  successfully  launched  550-lb.  Project  Scanner instrument 
package from Wallops Station to 380-mi. (612-km.) altitude on 13.5-min. 
suborbital  flight:  two-channel  radiometers  measured  infrared  energy 
emitted  from  earth’s  horizon  by  carbon dioxide and water  vapor;  s tar-  
mapper  telescope provided attitude  orientation  data. Managed  by  L ~ R C ,  
Project  Scanner was  advanced research program to   obtain  data  for  de- 
signing and developing improved horizon-scanning instrumentation for 
space missions.  (Wallops Kelease  66-43) 
WAF  launched two unidentified sate1lites”with Atlas-Agena D booster from 
WTR.  (U.S.  Aeron. & space  Ac t . ,   1966, 154) 
*  AFSC  Commander  Gen.  Bernard  A.  Schriever  received  National Aviation 
Club’s  (NAC)  1966 Award  of  Achievement for his  “significant  contribu- 
tions  to  the  creation of  the  Air Force strategic missile force.”  The award 
would  be  presented Aug.  16 in  Washington, D.C.  (Tech. Vk., 8 /8 /66 ,  
13) 
*  More  than   1,000 sheet metal workers  out  of  1,300 staged  strike a t  KSC  to  
protest  NASA’s permitting  nonunion  workers  to  install  plumbing  and 
sheet metal on Sa turn  V mobile service tower. Confined to  construction 
jobs,  strike was  not  expected to  seriously  affect major schedules unless 
prolonged.  (AP, NYT ,   8/17/66,  18) 
North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  received  a  one-year,  $48,223  contract 
from MSFC  to  “investigate the  best methods and hardware for performing 
systems  . . . as  a  stepping stone  to  manned  landing missions.”  (MSFC 
manned  Mars  and  Venus  flybys with  maximum  use  of  Apollo/Saturn 
Release 66-187) 
0  General  Dynamics  Corp.  was  being  issued  a  $5,723,878  increment  to  a 
previously awarded  (USAF)  contract  for work  on  design and deveIopment 
of  an  unspecified  standard  launch vehicle.  Contract would  be managed 
by  AFSC’S  Space Systems Div.  (DOD   Release 701-66) 
Senate Judiciary  Committee reported  S.  1603, Federal Inventions  Act  of 
1966.  Bill  would  “establish  a  uniform  national  policy  concerning 
property  rights  in   inventions  resulting from  the   expenditure of  public 
funds for  experimental, developmental, or  research work,”  superseding 
present  law  governing  NASA  patent  policy.  (NASA  LAR  V/145;  Text) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

269 

August  16:  In  Houston  Pos t   Edward  W.  O’Brien  cited  need  for definition of 
fu tu re   national  space  effort,  pointing  ou t   tha t   ‘‘the  mighty  industry- 
government team  tha t  has been mobilized  for manned  flight is  tapering 
off.”  Employment, a t  the  pezk,  had  been  400,000; by  th e  end  of  1967, 
total  would  be  200,000;  by  1968,  only  100,000.  Wha t   the   U.S.  must 
soon  determine  is  “whether  this  unique  assembly  of  brainpower  and 
mechanical  skill  should  be  held  together,  or  whether  it  should  be 
applied  elsewhere to  better public  advantage.”  (Houston Post, 8/16/66) 
I n   scheduling  manned  space  flights,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for 
Manned  Space Flight  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller  told  t h e  National  Space 
Club in  Washington, D.C.,  crew  safety was  the  principal  consideration, 
followed  by  accomplishment  of  program  goals.  He  pointed  ou t   th e  
open-ended“ aspect  of  Apollo  mission scheduling and  expressed  con- 
C ?  
fidence  tha t   lunar   landing  would  be  achieved  before  the   end  of  the  
decade based  on present program posture.  During question  and answer 
session, Dr. Mueller said that while NASA  and i t s  contractors had studied 
possible  methods  of  rescuing  astronauts  in   space and  would  continue 
to  do  so,  the   cost,  complexities,  and  uncertainties  made  i t   appear  to 
date tha t   the  money  and  effort would  be  better  spent  in  making  flights 
safer in  the  first place. He added:  “We don’t  exactly have instant rescue 
for people  flying around  in   airliners  and  this  is  a  large segment of  the  
population.”  (Text; Clark, NYT,  8/17/66,  16) 
August  17: NASA’s PIONEER  VII  (Pioneer  B) ,   second  in   new  Pioneer  series, 
was  successfully launched  from  ETR’S  Launch Complex  17A by  Thrus t-  
Augmented  Improved Delta booster into  orbit  around  the  sun  where it 
would  chart  magnetic  fields  emanating  from  the   sun ;   measure  the  
quantity, energy levels, and direction  of  the  solar wind; and differentiate 
between  solar  and  galactic  cosmic  rays.  The   140-lb.,  drum-shaped 
satellite had  perihelion  of  1.01 astronomical units  (au) ,  o r  93.93 million 
mi.  (151 million  km.);  aphelion  of  1.125  au,  or  104.625  million  mi. 
(168.45  million  km.) ; period  of  402.95  days;  inclination  of  0.0946O. 
All  systems were  reported  turned  on  and  operating satisfactorily.  TWO 
days  following  launch,  PIONEER  VII  successfully  completed  maneuver 
which  locked  i ts   high  gain  antenna  on  ear th   and  stabilized  its  orbital 
path.  First of  five flights in  curren t  Pioneer program-managed  by  ARC- 
was  PIONEER VI,  launched Dec.  16, 1965. Overall program  objective was 
to  provide  continuing  measurements  over  the   solar  cycle  a t   widely 
separated  points  in   interplanetary  space.  (NASA  Release  66-211; NASA 
Proj.  Off.;  AP,  r u s h .  Post,  8/18/66,  L1; Wilford, NYT ,  8/18/66,  15 ;  
UPI,  r u s h .  Post, 8/20/66,  A9) 
*  Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was  launched by  NASA  from Wallops Station 
on  second development flight of  series. The 53-ft.-long rocket developed 
60,000 lbs.  thrus t  and reached 222-mi. (357-km.) altitude before impact- 
ing  in   Atlantic  Ocean  some  106  mi.  from  launch  site.  Preliminary 
examination  of  data  indicated  rocket’s  performance  was  close  to  
predicted.  Direction  of  sounding  rocket  program  was  under  OSSA. 
(NASA  Release 66-221; Wallops  Release 66-44) 
U.S.S.R.  announced  tha t   COSMOS  CXXII,  launched  June  25,  was  collecting 
meteorological data which would be sen t  to  other nations in  accordance 
with 1962 agreement with  U.S.  Satellite carried  “instruments  for taking 
TV  pictures  of  th e   clouds,  cameras  to  photograph  clouds by  infrared 
rays on the  day and night sides of  the  ear th ,  and instruments to measure 
radiation  i n   the   earth’s  atmosphere.”  (Tass,  8/17/66) 

270 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

August  17:  Dr.  Car l  Schreiber,  Procurement Specialist with  NASA  Hq.  Office 
of  Indus try  Affairs  since Aug.  2,  1964, died  i n  Washington,  D.C.  Dr. 
Schreiber,  NACA  employee since 1939, had been Assistant Procurement 
and Supply Officer from  1958-64.  (NASA  Hq.  Bull.) 
Soviet  Air  Marshal  V.  A.  Agaltsov  claimed  in   Tass  interview  that  th e  
U.S.S.R.  could  fire  long-range  nuclear  missiles  from  aircraft.  He  said 
th is   meant  Soviet bombers  could  be  beyond  limits  of  enemy’s  antiair- 
craft defense zone and accurately  fire missiles  from distance  of  several 
hundred miles.  (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/17/66,  18) 
9  Martin  Co.  had  been  awarded  a  three-month,  $75,000 contract to   design 
and  develop  a  flight-qualified, lightweight,  hand-held lunar   core driller 
for  use  on Apollo missions,  MSC  announced.  Similar contract,  also  for 
$75,000, had  been  awarded  Northrop  Space Laboratories.  (Chic. Trib., 
8/18/66) 
August  17-18:  Senate Commerce Committee’s  Subcommittee on  Communi- 
cations  held hearings concerning Ford  Foundation’s Aug.  1 proposal to 
FCC to   create a  nonprofit  domestic satellite  system which  would  carry 
“an  extensive schedule” of  educational television programs financed  by 
transmission of  commercial TV programs. 
Ford  Foundation  president  McGeorge Bundy  said  tha t   although  th e  
use  of  profits  from  a  commercial  business  to   finance a  noncommercial 
undertaking  might  be  novel  to   television,  creation  of  a  special  carrier 
service  in   the  public  interest  was  no t   without precedent.  He  cited  th e  
Government’s  granting of  special mailing privileges  to  newspapers  and 
magazines.  Bundy  disclosed  the   Ford  Foundation  was  planning  to 
arrange  “a  series  of  meetings  in   various  parts  of  the   country  with 
potential  users  of  a  noncommercial satellite  system.” 
Fred  W.  Friendly,  TV  consultant  to   Bundy,  described  what  he  said 
was  the  underlying irony of modern TV:  commercial networks  had  the  
money to  do qualitative  public service but lacked sufficient  time on  th e  
air, while  educational TV  had  the  time  but  lacked the  money. 
ComSatCorp chairman James McCormack  said  the  heart  of  the  Ford 
proposal called for the  “funneling  of  savings” tha t  might be enjoyed by 
commercial communications carriers  in to   support  of  a  cultural  under- 
taking.  While  acknowledging the   value of  educational TV,  McCormack 
said he  felt only Congress could ru le  whether one segment of a diversified 
society  could be compelled to  support another segment without benefit 
of  specific legislation  to  tha t   end. 
AT&T  vice president Richard Hough, ITT  executive Bertram B.  Tower, 
and  Western  Union  Telegraph  Go.  vice  president  Earl  D.  Hilburn 
challenged th e  proposal  saying  tha t   any  such   communications system 
should  adhere  to   t h e   common  carrier  principle  of  serving  all  users 
ra ther   than   any  particular  group  such   as  broadcasters.  While  these 
witnesses supported th e  objective, they questioned the  feasibility of  the  
plan  o n   economic and  technical  grounds.  Tower  suggested  tha t   con- 
sideration be given to permitting special rates for educational TV services 
through   existing  common  carriers.  Hilburn  said  tha t   ra te  adjustments 
in  favor  of  educational broadcasters might  be  authorized if  some form 
of subsidy were determined to  be  in  th e  national  interest. 
Sen. John 0. Pastore  (D-R.I.),  who had  called the  hearings,  said they 
were  a  “prelude”  to   ac t ion   by  FCC  and  noted  tha t   Congress  almost 
certainly  would want  to   explore th e   implications  of  the  Ford  proposal 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

27 1 

as it related to a private corporation.  Hearings were completed Aug. 23. 
(ComSatCorp Releases; Gould, NYT, 8 /18 /66 ,59 ;   Wash. Post, 8/18/66, 
A12; AP,  Wash. Post, 8 /19 /66 ,   A2) 
August  18:  U.S.S.R.  transmitted  to   U S .   for first time information obtained 
from  i ts   only  known  meteorological satellite,  COSMOS  CXXII,  launched 
June  25.  Previously,  U.S.S.R.  had  relayed  only  conventional  observa- 
tions from land stations,  ships, and balloons. Direct telecommunications 
channel between Moscow  and Washington,  D.C.,  had  been  established 
after March 1963 signing of bilateral agreement for exchange of meteor- 
ological satellite data under June   1962 space cooperation accord.  (Bird, 
IVYT, 8/20/66,  1; AP,  Wash. Post,  8/21/66,  A6) 
*  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  with  Scout  booster  from  WTR.  (U.S. 
Aeron.  & Space  Act.,  1966, 155) 
*  NASA  test pilot William H.  Dana flew X-15 No.  3  to  3,545 mph  (mach 5.20) 
and  178,000-ft. altitude  in  flight  test  for  altitude  buildup.  As  secondary 
mission, pilot performed  maneuvers to  check  out boundary-layer noise, 
horizontal  tail  loads,  and heat  transfer panels.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
U.N.  Ambassador Ar thur   J.  Goldberg  told  Senate Committee on  Foreign 
Relations  he  was  “encouraged”  about  chances for  reaching agreement 
with U.S.S.R.  on treaty to  ensure peaceful uses  of  outer space but  tha t  
several  key  issues”-including  U.S.S.R.’s  position  on  reporting  i ts  
< C  
activities  i n  space-still  posed  obstacles after  24 days of negotiations in  
Geneva. Goldberg said that  despite this and other problems,  he  believed 
“ the   basis  for resolving  the   outstanding issues has already been  agreed 
upon.”  (AP,  Wash. Post,  8/18/66,  A l )  
*  Joint Senate-House Comference Committee on Independent Offices Appro- 
priations  reported  ou t   H.R.  14921 which  included  a  $4,968,000,000 
NASA  FY  1967  appropriation:  R&D,  $4,245,000,000;  construction  of 
facilities,  $83,000,000; administrative  operations,  $640,000,000.  (NASA 
LAR  V/136) 
e  National Labor Relations Board settled AFL-CIO  sheet metal workers  strike 
tha t   began  a t   KSC  Aug.  16 to  protest  use  of  nonunion  labor  to  install 
sheet metal and plumbing on Sa tu rn  V mobile service tower.  Over 1,000 
of  1,300  construction  workers  had  honored  picket  lines.  (AP ,  Phil. 
Eve.  Bull.,  8 /  18/66) 
Helicopter-like  atmosphere-entry-and-descent  system  employing  un- 
powered  rotor  was  undergoing wind  tunnel  testing  a t   ARC  as means  of 
returning  to  ear th   from  space.  System  could  land  on  any  solid,  level 
surface  and re tu rn  vehicles of  wide  range of  shapes from orb i t ;  most  of 
the  lift  would  be  supplied by  auto-rotor and  not  by  aerodynamic shape 
of  vehicle.  In  orbit,  blades  for rotor system would be folded and stowed. 
On  approaching  earth,  blades  would  be  released  and  passage  through 
atmosphere would  s tar t   them  turning.  (NASA  Release  66-217) 
e  Government of Pakistan announced plans to use comsats to  relay telephone 
communications between East and West Pakistan. Two satellite tracking 
stations would  be  built-one 
in  each province-and  would be  operative 
by  1968.  (Reuters, NYT, 8 /18 /66 ,38 )  
0  Colonization of ocean floor would be more useful to man than  colonization 
of  th e   moon,  said  B.  G.  Anderson,  senior  research  psychologist  for  
General Dynamics  Corp.’s  Electric  Boat  Div.  a t   joint  AIAA-USN  Marine 
Systems Conference in  Los  Angeles.  The  food and minerals available  to 
man in  and under  the  oceans were more important natural resources- 

272 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

and more easily retrieved-than 
any likely to  be  found on  t h e  moon o r  
elsewhere i n  th e  solar  system.  (L.A.  Times,  Wa sh .  Post,  8/18/66,  H4) 
August  19:  USAF launched USA’s SECOR VII  geodetic  satellite,  ERS-xv  satellite, 
and an  unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB,  using Atlas-Agena D 
booster.  (US. Aeron.  &  Space  Ac t . ,   1966, 155) 
0  NASA  selected  McDonnell Aircraft  Corp.  for  negotiation  of  $9-million, 
fixed-price  contract  to   provide  an   airlock  for  a n   experiment  in   which 
astronauts would enter empty hydrogen tank of a spent Uprated Sa turn  I 
(Saturn  IB)  2nd  stage  (S-IVB).  Airlock  would  be  stacked  on  space 
vehicle  between  Sa turn   and  Apollo  un i ts   using  lunar  module mounts. 
I n  orbit,  command  and  service modules  would  separate  and  dock  with 
airlock  un i t ,   and  the   crew  would  activate  systems  to  pressurize  spent 
hydrogen tank for habitation; hatch  in  airlock would permit  astronauts 
to  egress in to  space without depressurization of  tank or spacecraft. First 
mission  in   MsFC-managed  program  would  be  carried  ou t   %o  earlier 
than   1968.”  (NASA  Release  66-223; MSFC  Release 66-189) 
0  Fuel line leading to  Sa turn  V launching pad a t  KSC  ruptured, spilling more 
than   800,000 gallons  of  liquid  oxygen.  Spokesman  said  i t  was  no t   yet 
known  whether  line  break  would  delay  qualification  of  pad  to  receive 
flight  version  Sa tu rn  V  during  September  1966 for  launching  early  in  
1967.  (AP,  Wa sh .  Post,  8/20/66,  A7) 
About 600 construction workers staged strike a t  KSC-One 
day after end of 
dispute  with  McGregor- 
three-day  sheet  metal  workers’  strike-in 
Werner Co.,  which  provided  administrative  services to  KSC.  (AP, NYT ,  
8/20/66,  26) 
0  International  Assn.  of  Machinists  (IAM)  voted  17,727  to  8,235  to  ratify 
three-year  contract  negotiated  Aug.  15,  ending 43-day  strike  that  had 
halted  five major U.S.  airlines.  ( F  on F ,   8/18-24/66,  317) 
August  22:  NASA  had  canceled  hardware  development  and  fabrication  of 
Apollo  experiments pallet  whibh  was  designed  to  hold  modular  experi- 
ments and to  fit  into a section  of  the  Apollo service module. Four firms 
selected  in   November  1965  for  four-month  Phase  1A   design  studies 
had  been  advised  of  decision:  Lockheed  Missiles  & Space Co.;  Martin 
Co.;  McDonnell  Aircraft  Corp.;  and  Northrop  Space  Laboratories. 
(NASA  Release 66-224) 
0  Twenty-two non-U.S.  airlines-14 
tha t  had  reserved delivery positions for 
Ss t  and  eight  that  might  be  potential  customers-had 
been  invited  to 
conduct  independent  evaluations  of  the   competing U.S.  Ss t   designs, 
Av ia t ion  Week reported.  ( A v .  W k . ,  8 /22 /66 ,26)  
0  Many  Ufo’s  might be  corona discharge-balls  of  ionized  air-originating 
along  high-tension  electric  power  lines,  suggested  Phillip  J.  Klass  in  
Av ia t ion  Week. After comparing corona discharge and reported behavior 
of  Ufo’s,  Klass  found  tha t   they  were  similar  in   everything  but  size. 
Discrepancy in  size might be  from  illusionary  na ture  of  light,  fright  of 
the  observers, o r  lack  of  familiar objects for  comparison.  Klass  empha- 
sized  tha t   his  theory  could  no t   explain  all  such  sightings, bu t   urged 
USAF to continue investigating corona discharge theory.  (Klass, A v .  W k . ,  
8/22/66,  48-60) 
0  The  s tudy  of  fu tu re  national  space objectives by  the  House Committee on  
Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  NASA  Oversight  was 
termed  a  “timely  and  thoughtful”  document  in   Technology  Week 
editorial by William J. Coughlin. Noting tha t   its major contribution (‘is 
to  focus attention  on   the  urgent  need  for a major  decision concerning 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

273 

the  nation’s space program,”  Coughlin added:  “Not  only does Congress 
have  a  role  to  play  in  such  decisions,  but  the  Teague  subcommittee  is 
moving to fill a vacuum in the  decision-making process. The Administrg- 
tion  has  shown  itself  reluctant  to  bring  forth  decisions  in   this  area. 
NASA  itself has backed away from defining the  next space objective. The 
subcommittee  is  performing  a  valuable  national  service  in   attempting 
to bring  the  matter  to  a head.”  (Tech. W k . ,  8/22/66,  50) 
August 22:  I n  editorial  on cu r ren t  public  debate over  need  for  space rescue 
system, Robert Hotz noted  in Aviation  Week tha t  NASA  had  “spent  con- 
siderable time, money and ingenuity in designing safety into its manned 
spaceflight hardware” and in “developing sound operational procedures” 
tha t   minimize  the  opportunity  for  disaster.  He  added  tha t   hearings 
Spaceflight  J ubcommittee  of  the   House  Committee  on  Science  and 
conducted  b  Rep.  Olin  Teague  (D-Tex.),  chairman  of  the   Manned 
Astronautics, and a RAND  Corp. study commissioned by NASA  should pro- 
vide  “much  useful  data  o n   which  to  base  a  technically  sound  and 
economically  feasible  program  tha t   can  provide  the  maximum  space 
safety  possible  without  jeopardizing  the  basic  goals  of  the   missions.” 
( A x  W k . ,  8/22/66,  11) 
0  USAF School of  Aerospace Medicine had  concluded 15-day test  to  evaluate 
effects  of  increased  carbon  dioxide on  four  airmen  in  spacecraft  cabin 
simulator.  One of  a series of  such  experiments, the  latest  took th e  level 
of  experience  up  to  the  4%  CO,  mark,  compared with  normal  ground 
level conditions of  0.033% CO,.  Aim was  to  assess problems astronauts 
might  have  to  face  with  a  partial  failure  of  their  life  support  system. 
(Tech. W k . ,  8/22/66,  4) 
August  23:  A E C   Chairman  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg  discussed  space  role  of 
nuclear  energy  in  keynote  address  a t   Western  Electronic  Show  and 
Convention in Los Angeles.  I n  addition to advantages of nuclear propul- 
sion, Dr.  Seaborg said Snap  (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) sys- 
tems offered:  (1) independence of  sunlight, permitting use  in shadow of 
a  planet  or  moon  and  a t   great  distances  from  the  s u n ;   (2)  reduced 
atmospheric  drag  and  propellant  weight  for  maintaining  low  orbits  of 
manned  orbiting  stations;  and  (3)  larger  quantities  of  electric  power. 
He suggested nuclear  power  systems assembled  on  the moon  could not 
only  provide  heating,  cooling,  and  electric  power,  but  could  extract 
water  and  minerals  and  help  produce  synthetic  food.  (Text) 
0  General  Electric  Co.  announced  tha t   GE4  turbojet  engine  had  reached 
full  power  without  augmentor  in  excess  of  40,000 lbs.  thrust.  GE  was 
competing with  P ra t t   & Whitney  Div.  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.  for  Sst 
engine contract.  ( G E  Release 66-51) 
August  24:  U.S.S.R.  launched  3,608413.  LUNA  XI  space  station  toward  moon 
for  “further  testing  of  systems  of  an   artificial  moon  sputnik  and 
scientific explorations of  near  lunar  space.”  Preliminary  data indicated 
tha t   spacecraft  was  traveling  close  to  calculated  trajectory  and  equip- 
ment was  functioning  normally.  (Tass, 8/24/66) 
0  Senate unanimously approved House-Senate conference report on FY  1967 
Independent Offices Appropriations  (H.R.  14921). Funds for NASA were: 
.$4,245,000,000;  construction  of  facilities,  $83,000,000;  and 
R&D, 
administrative  operations,  $640,000,000.  (CR ,  8/24/66,  19598-600) 
NASA  extended for one year a contract  with  Documentation,  Inc.,  to  oper- 
ate  its College Park,  Md.,  Scientific and Technical  Information Facility 
-containing  world’s  largest  collection  of  aerospace  literature-during 

274 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

FY  1967 a t  cost  of  $5,150,000. Monitored  by  NASA  Hq.  Scientific and 
Technical  Information  Div.,  contractor  would  also  operate  Selective 
Dissemination  of  Information  Program,  using  computer  techniques  to 
notify  NASA  scientists  and  engineers  individually  of  new  developments 
of  direct  interest  to  their  work.  (NASA  Release 66-227) 
August  24:  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill 
Research Range  reached  98 mi.  (157 km.)  in NASA-UniV.  of  New  Hamp- 
shire  experiment  to  provide  data  on  neutron  intensity  a t   different 
latitudes,  solar  x-ray  fluxes,  Lyman-alpha  radiation,  and  ionospheric 
electron densities.  Rocket performed  satisfactorily and instrumentation 
performance  was  considered excellent.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  Two  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  launched  90   min.  apart  from 
NASA Wallops Station reached  102-mi. (164-km.) and  105-mi. (169-km.) 
altitudes  in   GCA  Corp.-Univ.  of  Illinois  experiment  to  measure  recom- 
bination  coefficients  of  major  E-region  constituents  and  investigate 
importance  of  metallic  ions  in   lower  ionosphere  a t   three  solar  zenith 
angles.  Both  rockets  performed  satisfactorily,  and  instrumentation  on 
first  flight-except 
for  ion-mass  spectrometer-obtained  good  data. 
Telemetry deteriorated a t  lift  off  on second flight, and transmitter  failed 
a t  about  145 sec.  Some data might  be  extracted  through  special treat- 
ment  of  telemetry  record.  Third  flight i n  series was  postponed  to  allow 
investigation  of  ion-mass spectrometer  difficulty.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  M2-F2 lifting body vehicle was  air-launched  from B-52 aircraft  a t  45,000- 
ft. altitude in  fou r th  glide flight a t  Edwards AFB  with NASA  research  pilot 
Milton  0. Thompson  as  pilot.  Purpose  of  flight  was  determination  of 
control  damper  requirements,  lift-drag  ratio,  elevon  response  and  flap 
effectiveness, and  longitudinal  stability  and  control.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
*  House  debated  H.R.  935  on  establishment  of  a  Dept.  of  Transportation. 
Rep. Benjamin J.  Rosenthal  (D-N.Y.)  proposed tha t  it include  an  Office 
of  Aircraft  Noise  Control  and  Abatement  to  assume  duties  of  noise 
abatement  research  groups  presently  operative  in   several  Government 
agencies, including  NASA.  ( C R ,  8/24/66,  19509-33) 
August 25:  NASA’s Apollo/Saturn  AS-202 mission was  successfully launched 
from  ETR’S  Complex 34  a t   1:16  p.m.  EDT :   56,000-lb. unmanned  Apollo 
spacecraft  (011)  was  boosted into  suborbital flight by  Uprated  Saturn  I 
launch  vehicle  generating  1,600,000 lbs.  th ru s t   in  second  flight  test  of 
major  spacecraft  systems;  second  performance  check  of  command 
module  (Cm)  heatshielding;  and  third  flight  test  of  Uprated  Saturn  I. 
Liftoff  and  powered  flight  were  as  programed. After  spacecraft  separa- 
tion,  21,500-lb.-thrust  service  module  (Sm)  propulsion  engine  burned 
3  min.  3 5   sec.  to  boost  spacecraft  to  706-mi.  (1,128.6-km.)  altitude. 
Sm’s  engines  ignited  three more  times  to  test  rapid  restart  capabilities, 
with last burn  separating Sm. Cm  reentered  earth’s atmosphere a t  more 
than  19,900 mph.  Maximum  temperature  of  spacecraft’s  surface  was 
calculated  to  be about 2,700”F;  temperature  inside  Cm  was  70°F. Main 
parachutes  deployed  a t  23,850-ft.  altitude,  lowering Cm  to  splashdown 
in  Pacific Ocean some 500 mi.  southeast  of  Wake  Island-200  mi.  from 
target-at 
2:49  p.m.  EDT.  Recovery  was  by  aircraft  carrier  U.S.S. 
Hornet.  Apollo  heatshield  well  withstood  high  heat-load  test,  and  the 
spacecraft was  in  “stable  condition  1.’’ 
Officials  said  tha t   during  flight,  minor  problem  developed  in  unit 
which  was  to  cool  drinking  water  and  various  electrical  components. 
They  did  not  consider problem serious. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

275 

NASA  Associate Administrator  for Manned Space Flight Dr.  George E. 
Mueller  told  postflight  press  conference  tha t   “the  results  of  today’s 
flight-once  examined-will  provide us with the information necessary” 
to  make  a  final  decision whether  to  commit  the  next  Apollo  flight to  a 
manned  mission.  (NASA  Release 66-213; NASA  Proj.  Off.; Hines,  Wash. 
Eve.  Star, 8/26/66,  A4; AP,  Wash .  Post,  8/26/66,  A3;  Wilford,  NYT ,  
8/26/66,  1) 
August 25: X-15 No.  1 was  flown  to 3,511 mph  (mach 5.00)  and 257,500-ft. 
by  NASA  test  pilot  John  B.  McKay  to  conduct  series  of  high-altitude 
scientific  experiments:  micrometeorites  and  extraterrestrial  dust  were 
collected in  special container in wing-tip pod;  intensity and spectral dis- 
tribution  of  daytime  sky  conditions  measured;  and  horizon  scanner, 
electrical  loads,  and wing-pod flutter  checked  out.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
Rep.  Joseph  E.  Karth  (D-Minn.),  chairman  of  the  Space  Sciences  Sub- 
committee  of  the  House  Science  and  Astronautics  committee,  said  a t  
a luncheon  of  the Aviation/Space  Writers’  Assn. in Washington,  D.C., 
tha t  the war  in Vietnam and the  needs of  “the Great Society in general” 
would  keep  the   space budget  from  expanding soon.  He  said  the  budget 
of  ‘Znore  than  $6  billion”  tha t   NASA  planned  to  ask  Congress  for  in  
January  1967  (‘is  financially  not  in  the  cards  for  the   near  future.” 
(Text) 
*  Lawrence  Levy,  founder  and  president  of  Allied  Research  ASSOC., Inc., 
and  former  Defense Adviser to U S .  Ambassador to NATO, was  sworn in  
as  a  consultant  to NASA  Administrator  James E.  Webb  on  “cooperation 
with  western  Europe  and  fu tu re   space  programs. . . .,,  (NASA Release 
66-231) 
NASA  selected  Martin  Co.  for  negotiation  of  $3-million,  incentive-fee 
contract  to  build  11 experimental  spacecraft  equipped with  parachute 
payloads  “to  investigate  parachute  designs and  techniques  for  landing 
instrumented  capsules  on  Mars.”  Four  would  be  launched  by  high- 
altitude balloon  systems and  seven  by  Honest  John-Nike rockets  under 
.  LaRc’s  Planetary  Reentry  Parachute  Program.  (NASA Release  66-229) 
A  phased-out  Bomarc missile, serving as  target  for  USAF  and  USN  missiles, 
exploded  shortly  after  i t   was  fired  from  Vandenberg AFB.  (UPI, Wush .  
Post,  8/27/66,  A3) 
Gov.  Edmund  Brown  of  California  told  aerospace  executives  meeting  in 
Los Angeles of plans  to  create state-level Office of  Science and Technol- 
ogy  to  provide  liaison  between  Government  and  industry  in  using 
aerospace  skills  to  solve  civilian  problems.  Five  state  contracts  had 
been  let  for  preliminary  study  of  the  problems,  using  the  aerospace 
systems  engineering”  approach.  Brown  said  state’s  studies  ‘‘not  only 
c c  
demonstrated  tha t   the   systems  analysis  concept  would  work”  but  also 
tha t  “in  some cases i t  was  the  only  concept tha t  would  cut through  the  
red  tape  and  the  customs  arising  from  generations  of  solving  social 
problems  in  the  same  old  ways.”  (Sederberg,  L .A .   Times, 8/26/66; 
CR ,  8/29/66,  20129-30) 
*  U.S.S.R.  began  rocket  test  series  in   the  Pacific Ocean.  (Tass, 9/6/66) 
August 26: NASA  officials revealed a t  Hq.  news briefing that data accumulated 
thu s   far  from  LUNAR  ORBITER  I  indicated  the  moon’s  shape  departed 
from  tha t   of  a  perfect  sphere with  a  bulge  of  about  W  mi.  a t  its  north 
pole,  a  depression  of  about  W  mi.  around  the  Northern  Hemisphere, 
a  W-mi.  bulge  around  the   Southern  Hemisphere,  and  a  depression  of 
about W mi.  a t  the  South Pole.  Conclusions were based  on  assumption 

276 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

moon’s  density  was  uniform.  (AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  8/27/66,  A3; 
Av .   W k . ,  8/29/66,  1%) 
August 26: USAF  Titan  111-C carrying eight  Initial  Defense Communications 
Satellite Program  (Idcsp)  repeaters  destroyed  itself  some 80  sec.  after 
launch  from  ETR’s  Launch  complex  41.  Preliminary  observations 
indicated breakup of payload fairing a t  about 85,000-ft. altitude; trouble- 
detecting system sensed  erratic  behavior of  rocket  and  triggered device 
tha t  destroyed it.  Available data showed “no  abnormality  in  any  of  the  
vehicle’s  other  systems.”  Detailed  study  of  telemetry  and  film  record 
would  be  necessary  before  cause  of  fairing  malfunction  could  be 
determined. Launch was attempt to duplicate June 16 mission of identical 
Titan  111-C tha t   placed  seven  Idcsps  and  one  gravity-gradient satellite 
into  random,  near-synchronous  equatorial  orbits  as  part  of  worldwide 
military  communications  system  which  would  eventually  include  23  
comsats.  (Wash.  Eve.  Star,  8/26/66,  A l ;   UPI,  N Y T ,   8/27/66,  14 ;  
AP,  Wash. Post, 8/27/66,  A3) 
Four  sounding  rockets-an  Aerobee  150A,  two  Nike-Tomahawks, and  a 
launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops  Station  a t   pre- 
Nike-Apache-were 
determined  intervals  between  2:13  p.m.  EDT  and  3:11  p.m.  EDT  in 
conjunction  with  passage  of  EXPLORER  XXXII  satellite.  Objective  of 
series  was  to  correlate  measurements  of  properties,  characteristics, 
and  conditions  of  upper  atmosphere  obtained  by  rocket-borne  experi- 
ments  with  similar  measurements  made  by  EXPLORER  XXXII,  second 
U.S.  Atmosphere  Explorer,  launched  May  25.  Project  was  conducted 
by  GSFC  under  overall  direction  of  OSSA .   (Wallops  Release  66-45; 
NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  President  Johnson  spoke  a t   AEC’S National  Reactor  Testing  Station  in 
Arco,  Ida.  (where world’s  first electricity  from nuclear  power  had  been 
produced),  on  his  hopes  for  compromise agreements preventing spread 
of  nuclear  weapons  and  ensuring  peaceful  uses  of  space.  He  urged 
recognition  “that  a t   the  heart  of  our  concern  in  the  years  ahead must 
be  our  relationship with  the   Soviet Union.  . . . 
“1 believe  tha t  the Soviets share a genuine desire  to  enlarge the  area 
of  agreement.  This  summer  we  have  been  negotiating.  . . a  treaty  tha t  
would  limit  fu tu re   activity  on  celestial  bodies  to  peaceful  purposes. 
This  treaty  would,  for  all  time,  ban  weapons  of  mass  destruction,  not 
only  on  celestial bodies,  bu t   also  in  orbit  around  the  e a r th . .   . .” 
He  announced  that  treaty  negotiations  would  resume  Sept.  12, and 
continued: 
. . . Peace  will  n o t   dramatically  appear  from  a  single agreement  or 
c c  
a  single utterance  or  a  single meeting. 
I t  will be  advanced by  one  small, perhaps  imperceptible, gain  after 
c c  
another,  in  which  neither  the pride nor  the prestige  of  any large power 
is  deemed  more  important  than  the  fate  of  the   world.”  (Text,  Pres. 
Doc.,  9/5/66,  1160-64) 
August 27: NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  from NASA  Wallops 
Station  reached  94-mi.  (151-km.)  altitude  in  GSFC-Univ.  of  Michigan 
Pitot-static probe experiment  to  measure atmospheric density, pressure, 
and  temperature.  Experiment,  designed  to  observe  diurnal  variations 
in  fine  s t ruc tu re  of  region  from  9-68  mi.  (15-110  km.),  was  launched 
in conjunction with thermosphere probe experiments launched Aug.  26. 
Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA Rpt.  SRL) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

277 

August 28:  COSMOS  CXXYIII  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  into  earth  orbit  with 
364-km.  (226-mi.) apogee;  212-km.  (132-mi.)  perigee;  90-min.  period; 
and  65” inclination.  Equipment,  carried  to   “continue  space  investiga- 
tions,”  was  functioning  normally.  (Pruvda, 8/28/66,  3) 
NASA  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops 
Station  reached  187-mi.  (301-km.)  altitude  in   GSFC-univ.  of  Michigan 
experiment  coordinated  with  Aug.  26  and  27  flights.  Simultaneous 
measurement  of  N2 and  electron  density  and  temperature,  measure- 
ments of  atmospheric ion and neutral composition, and comparative data 
from  two  mass  spectrometers  and  other  experiments  were  obtained; 
rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Damage  to  a  900,000-gallon stainless-steel  storage  tank  for  Sa tu rn   V 
booster’s liquid oxygen fuel would delay booster’s first flight-scheduled 
for  first quarter  of  1967-by  a t  least 45 days, NASA  announced. Damage 
had  occurred  during Aug.  19 first-stage tanking  test  when  pipeline had 
ruptured  spilling  800,000  gallons  of  liquid  oxygen;  vacuum  thu s  
created  inside  tank  had  caused depression  in   tank‘s  2%-in.-thick dome. 
Laboratory  tests  would  determine  extent  of  resulting  structural  weak- 
ness.  ( N Y T ,  8/29/66,  8) 
U.S.S.R.’s  official  silence  on  fate  of  LUNA  XI  artificial  moon  satellite 
launched  Aug.  24   prompted  speculation  tha t   spacecraft  had  switched 
off  its  beam  in  orbit,  overshot  the  moon,  o r   crashed.  ( r u s h .  Post, 
8/28/66,  A10; Wash.  Sun.  Star,  8/28/66,  A l )  
Cal Tech  scientists Eric E.  Becklin and James A.  Westphal  reported  find- 
ings  from  19-day  telescopic  study  of  comet  Ikeya-Seki  that  began 
Oct.  14, 1965:  temperature  of  comet was  “entirely  dependent”  on  the 
sun,  varying  from  700°F  to  1,200”F in  direct  proportion  to  distance 
from  sun ;   nucleus  and  tail  were  same  temperature;  and  comet  was 
composed  of  “ lo ts   of  metallic  material”  rather  than  ice  and  dust  as 
previously  suggested.  (Wa sh .  Post,  8/29/66,  A9; Bird,  N Y T ,  8/29/66, 
11) 
e  Commenting  on  President  Johnson’s  Aug.  26  appeal  for  agreement  on 
nuclear  nonproliferation  and  peaceful  uses  of  space,  New   York  Times 
editorialized  tha t   issues  of  reporting  space  activities  to   U.N.,  and 
reciprocity  and  timing  of  visits  to  space  vehicles  and  installations 
“would  all  appear  to  be  soluble  in   time  given  a  genuine  desire  for  a 
treaty  on  both  sides. . . . But  the  unanswered  question  is  whether  a n  
East-West  breakthrough  on  space  can  in  fact  come  a t   all  while  the  
Vietnam  impasse continues.”  ( N Y T ,  8/28/66,  E6) 
August  29:  Two  NASA  Boosted  Arcas  sounding  rockets  were  launched  one 
hour  apart  from  WSMR  in  GSFC  experiment  to  provide  simultaneous 
measurements  of  D-region  ions  and  electrons.  Flights  marked  first 
launches  of  high-velocity  Boosted  Arcas  rockets  from  rail  launcher. 
Radar  coverage was  not  provided,  but  rockets  appeared  to  perform  as 
predicted.  Instrumentation  functioned  normally;  however,  parachute 
systems-designed 
to  gather  data  for  Polar  Cap  Absorption Program- 
were  deployed  too  high  and  “streamered”  entering  dense  atmosphere. 
(NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  carried  GSFC- 
instrumented  payload  to  128-mi.  (206-km.)  altitude  to  obtain  dayglow 
measurements.  Rocket and  instrumentation  performed well.  (NASA  Rpt. 
SRL) 

218 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

August  29:  Pictures  from  U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  XI spacecraft  tha t   apparently 
entered  lunar  orbit  were  received  and  tape  recorded  by  Jodrell  Bank 
Experimental  Station.  Although  unable  to  immediately  decipher 
. . they  appear  to  be  similar  to  those 
pictures,  Station  officials  said 
of  Luna  9  and  the   American  Lunar  Orbiter  transmissions.”  U.S.S.R. 
had  made  no  official  statement  since  Aug.  24   launch.  (UPI,  NYT, 
8/29/66,  11; UFJI,  Chic.  Trib., 8/30/66;  UPI,  Phil.  Eve.  Bull.,  8/30/66) 
*  Plans  for  manned  solar  astronomical  mission  to   orbit  earth  in   Apollo 
spacecraft  during period  of  maximum  solar  activity  beginning in   1968 
were  announced  by  NASA.  Mission objectives would  be  to  acquire  high- 
resolution  measurements  and  observations  of  structure  and  behavior 
of  s un  above earth’s  atmosphere  and  to  test man’s  capabilities for  con- 
ducting  astronomical  observations  in   space.  MSFC  would  have  project 
and  experiment development responsibility.  (NASA  Release 66-232) 
told  Space 
NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr., 
Business  Daily  th a t   NASA  had  presented  several  proposed  FY  1968 
budgets  to  BOB ,   including  one  for  “just  over  $6  billion”  and  another 
for $5.5 billion. He said tha t  in  the $5.5-billion budget about $500-$600 
million  would  be  for  Apollo  Applications  (Aa);  the  $6-billion budget 
would  include  about  $ 1  billion  for  Aa.  Emphasizing tha t  major  funds 
for Aa must be  included  in  the  FY  1968 budget if  the billions of  dollars 
spent  on  Apollo  technology were  not  to  be  wasted, he  indicated  tha t  a 
budget of  about $5 billion would  end plans  for  an  adequate Aa  program 
to   follow  Project  Apollo.  He  noted  th a t   under  a  $5-billion  budget, 
there  would  be  a  greater  percentage  cu t  back  in  contractor  operations 
as  opposed  to  inhouse  NASA  efforts, but  that  with  a  $5.5-billion budget 
the  cu r ren t   ratio  would  remain  about  the  same.  Seamans  confirmed 
th a t   the  fmt  manned  Apollo  lunar  landing  could  come  as  early  as 
1968,  but  said  i t   is  “most  likely”  to  occur  in  1969.  (SBD ,  8/29/66, 
317-8) 
*  ComSatCorp  confirmed  i t   was  developing  a  plan  which  would  have  all 
commercial  users  of  a  domestic  satellite  communications  system- 
telephone  and  telegraph  companies  as  well  as  commercial  television 
networks-underwrite 
educational  TV.  Funds  would  come  from  a 
portion  of  anticipated  savings to communications users  after a domestic 
satellite system was  established. Details  of  plan  would  be  submitted  to 
Carnegie  Commission  on  Educational  Television-a 
private  group 
making  study  on  needs  of  educational  TV.  Carnegie  study-to 
be 
released i n  late 1966 or  early  1967-was  expected to be  relied  on when 
Congress  considered  renewal  of  Educational  Facilities  Act-due 
to 
concerned  educational  TV.  (W S J ,  8/30/66,  10 ;  
expire  in   1967-which 
AP,  r a s h .  Post,  8/30/66,  D8) 
AT&T  would  sell  i t s   Andover,  Me.,  ground  station  to  ComSatCorp  fo r  
$4,981,000,  pending  FCC   approval.  Station,  which  transmitted  and 
received  signals  from  EARLY  BIRD  I  for  transatlantic  telephone,  tele- 
vision, and data communications, had been  leased by  ComSatCorp since 
January  1965.  (ComSatCorp Release) 
*  Death  of  Nick  Piantanida,  33-yr.-old parachutist  in  a  coma  since  oxygen 
supply  failed  a t   57,000-ft.  altitude  during  May  1 attempt  to   break 
world’s  freefall  record.  (N Y T ,  8/30/66,  41;  Wash. Post,  8/31/66, A6) 
*  Aerial Coast Patrol of  U S .  Coast Guard established 50 years ago. 
August  30:  X-15 No.  2  was  flown  to  3,614  mph  (mach  5)  and  102,200-ft. 
altitude  by  Maj.  William  J.  Knight  (USAF)  to  conduct  heat  tests.  Pilot 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

279 

conducted  base-drag  studies  and  checked  ou t   stability  and  control, 
ablative materials,  and wing tip accelerometer. It was  170th flight of  the 
X-15 and  7 th  during August.  (FRC  Release  16-66; X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
August  30: Tass announced  tha t  LUNA  XI  had  become second U.S.S.R.  satel- 
lite  to  circle moon  when  i t  entered  lunar  orbit Aug.  27 with  1,200-km. 
(745-mi.) apolune;  160-km. (99-mi.) perilune; 2 hr.  58-min. period;  and 
270” inclination.  I n  first official statement since Aug.  2 4  launch, agency 
reported  tha t   midcourse  maneuver  had  been  successfully  executed 
Aug.  26 and  tha t  onboard  equipment was  functioning normally. LUNA  x 
began  orbiting  moon  April  3-first 
spacecraft  to  do  so-but 
did  not 
transmit  photos  to  earth.  (Tass, Pruvda,  8/30/66,  1; AP,  r u s h .  Post, 
8/25/66,  A3) 
8  First  of  series  of  high-altitude  experiments  to  investigate  parachute 
designs  and  techniques  tha t   might  be  incorporated  into  Voyager 
spacecraft  scheduled  for  unmanned  soft  landing  on Mars  in  1973 was 
conducted  by  NASA  from  Walker  AFB.  The  15-ft.-diameter,  1,600-lb. 
disc-shaped flight unit  containing  packaged  test  parachute,  instruments 
to  record  loads and parachute deployment, and ring  of  12 small rockets 
for  acceleration  was  carried  by  balloon  to  120,000-  to  125,000-ft. 
altitude  then  released  on  ground  command.  Acceleration  rockets 
apparently  ignited  as  planned,  propelling  unit  upward  a t   about  850 
mph  into  arching  trajectory.  Parachute  deployed;  system  descended 
in planned  recovery  area a t  WSMR.  Test was  apparent success; extensive 
performance  analyses were being made. Balloon system had been  tested 
July  18. Parachute  project  was  managed by  LaRC  and  coordinated with 
JPL,  which  managed  Voyager  program.  (NASA  Release  66-225;  AP, 
Balt.  Sun,  8/31/66) 
8  House  passed  H.R.  15963, bill  to  establish  Cabinet-level Dept.  of  Trans- 
portation.  Amendments  proposed  by  Reps.  Benjamin  J.  Rosenthal 
(D-N.Y.) and John W.  Wydler  (R-N.Y.)  that would have established  a n  
Office  of  Aircraft  Noise  Control  and  Abatement  in  the  Department 
were  defeated.  (CR ,  8/30/66,  20342-84) 
8  New  York   Times  editorial:  “The  Soviet-American race  to  the  moon  is 
heating  up.  Even  as  the  United  States-built  satellite,  Lunar  Orbiter, 
finished  photographing  the   moon,  Moscow’s  huge  Luna  11 also  went 
into  lunar  orbit.  The   indicated  success  of  the  second  unmanned  flight 
of  the  Apollo  moonship-another 
step  toward  putting  the  first  Ameri- 
cans  on  the   moon-undoubtedly  will  speed  initial  tests  of  a  Soviet 
lunar  vehicle.”  ( N Y T ,  8/30/66) 
August 31: U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  X I   tha t  entered  orbit  around  th e  moon  Aug.  27 
was  described  as  containing  “an  entire  orchestra  of  rocket  engines.” 
Vladimir  Orlov,  writing  in   Pruvdu, said  the   spacecraft  contained  in  
addition  to  its  main  power  system  a  braking  engine  installation  and 
fou r   directing  engines  with  comparatively small  thrust.’’  (AP,  NYT ,  
C C  
9/1/66,  2) 
8  Columbia  Univ.  professor  of  business  administration  Dr.  Leonard  R .  
Sayles was sworn in as consultant  to NASA Administrator  on organization 
policy and managerial practices  and  procedures.  (NASA  Release 66-235) 
8  Photographic proof  tha t  two  clouds of  ‘‘cosmic rubble’” were  orbiting the 
earth  in  the  same  path  a s   the   moon  was  announced  by  Lockheed 
Missiles & Space Co .  engineer J.  Wesley Simpson. The  ccrubble7’ might 
have  come  from  all  over  the   universe  and  could  offer  clues  to  the 
earth’s  origin,  solar  winds,  and  the  possibility  of  life  in  outer  space. 

280 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

August  30:  Hurricane  Faith  (white  mass  at  left)  as  photographed from  700-mi. altitude 
by  NASA’S  NIMBUS 11  satellite. 

Although  photographic  images  were  too  faint  to  be  reproduced  on 
paper,  they were visible on  negatives and when  projected  on  a  smooth 
white  surface.  (UPI,  NYT,  9/1/66,  24) 
During August:  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff, head  of  MIT’S  Dept.  of  Aero- 
nautics and Astronautics  and Special Consultant to NASA  Administrator, 
wrote  in   Air  Force  and  Space  Digest tha t   there  appeared  to  be  wide- 
spread  lack  of  public  understanding  tha t   aeronautical  and  space 
developments might have a profound effect on transformation of society: 
It  is  not  so  much  the   possession  of  the  new  technologies . . . tha t  
< c  
counts.  Of  more  importance  are  the  quickened  spirits,  the  sharpened 
intellects,  and  the   developed  resources  tha t   can  permeate  th e   whole 
fabric of  a  society.”  (AF / SD ,  8/66,  86-7) 
*  I n  letter  to House Committee o n  Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee 
on   NASA  Oversight,  Dr.  H.  H.  Hess,  chairman  of  NAS  Space  Science 
Board,  said  tha t   the   national  space  program  had  become  too  big  to  
make  it practical  to  focus  on  any  single f u tu r e  goal:  “To pick  one and 
virtually  abandon  the  remainder  would  give  a  far  smaller  re tu rn   than  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

281 

a balanced  program aimed a t  several major  objectives, even though  the  
advantage  of  strong  focus  is  being  given  up.”  Three  possible  major 
goals suggested by Hess were:  (1) unmanned exploration of  the  planets, 
primarily  Mars  and  Venus,  “with  a  subsidiary  effort”  on   Jup i ter ;  
(2)  continued manned  lunar   effort;  and  (3)  earth-orbiting astronomy 
platform  with  optical,  X-ray,  gamma-ray,  and  radio  telescopes  “with 
ultimately manned maintenance.”  ( A v .  W k . ,  8/22/66,  95) 
During  August:  First  space disaster  was  among predictions  for  1967  in  new 
edition  of  Old Moore’s  Almanack,  a  volume  published  in   U.K.  for  270 
years.  (UPI,  N Y T ,  8/22/66,  37) 
*  Role  of  Venus  in   NASA’s  fu ture   space  sciences  program was  reviewed  in  
report  by  OSSA  to  House  Science and  Astronautics  Committee.  Report 
suggested  tha t  NASA  might increase  interest in  Venus with combinations 
of  Mars-Venus  flights  and  single  missions  to  Venus  using  Mariner, 
Voyager,  and  advanced Automated Biological  Laboratory spacecraft  to  
investigate  “ the  possibility of  life  forms. . . . From almost every aspect 
. . . Venus  is  an   important,  puzzling,  and  paradoxical planet,  meriting 
continued  examination  by  space  flight  missions.”  (Text;  Tech.  Wk . ,  
9/12/66,  18-9) 
0  U S .  Ss t  program had  been assigned  “Dx”  priority-highest  manufactur- 
ing  priority  usually  reserved for  key  defense and  space programs-by 
President  Johnson  in   April  without  public  announcement,  the   press 
reported.  The  New  York  Times questioned  secrecy and priority implied 
by  President’s  decision:  “It was  a n  error   to  keep t h e  decision  secret.” 
(Clark, N Y T ,  8/7/66,  1; WSJ, 8/9/66,  1; N Y T ,  8/8/66,  C26) 
Summarizing two  years  of  negotiations  between  France  and  U.S.S.R.  on  
cooperative satellite  communications program in   Astronautics & Aero- 
nautics, Andrew  6. Haley  said questions  of  (1) access  of  French  scien- 
tists  and  technicians  to  Soviet  launch   sites,  and  (2)  size  of  orbit  for 
French satellite  to  be  launched with Soviet vehicle were  still unsettled. 
(Haley,  A&A ,   8/66,  15-6) 
*  Sharing  of  research  with  U S .   industry  under  NASA’s  technology utiliza- 
tion  program  was  commended  in   Petroleum  Today  article  by  Clay  Hor- 
nick.  December  1965  Conference  on  Selected  Technology  for  the  
Petroleum  Industry  a t   Lewis  Research  Center,  Hornick  said,  had 
encouraged  utilization  of  space  research  discoveries  in   fields  of  com- 
bustion,  lubrication,  and nuclear resonance.  (Hornick, Petroleum Today ,  
Summer 1966, 16-19) 
0  U S .   Army’s  aviation  role  would  increase,  no t   diminish,  as  result  of 
USA  Director  of  Aviation  B/G  Robert  R.  Williams  told  Da ta .   “. . . I 
recent USA-USAF  Chiefs of  Staff agreement on  tactical  airlift capabilities, 
assure you  that  the  Army will  continue to  exploit the  inheren t  capabili- 
ties  of  aircraft to  support the  conduct of  prompt and  sustained combat 
operations on  land.  Just as we  will  continue to  receive aviation support 
from the  other services, so  will we  continue to provide organic aviation 
responsive to  the  direct  control and planning of  the  Army  commander. 
control  systems which are uniquely capable of  fulfilling . . . the  require- 
Fur ther ,  we will develop and acquire aircraft and aircraft command and  
ments  of  immediate  availability  for  sustained  operation  in   a  field 
environment.  . . .,’ (Da ta ,  8/66,  9-10) 
*  Comment  on LUNAR  ORBITER  I  mission: 
New  York Times: “Unfortunately,  the  decision made a half  decade ago 
was  to  give  priority  to  the   Apollo  program  for   landing a  man  on  the  

282 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
moon . . . Lunar  Orbiter’s  achievements  remind  us  tha t   there  is  no 
pressing  necessity  for  putting  manned  lunar   flight  first.  If  President 
Johnson  should  decide to  slow down  the  Apollo  project  by  cutting i t s  
budget  appreciably,  scientific  investigation  of  the   moon  with  instru- 
ment  satellites  could  continue and  be  richly  productive. 
“In   a few years pictures  of  the earth’s  orb as  seen from distant space 
will  become  commonplace. Tomorrow’s  schoolchildren will  find  it hard 
to  believe  there   was  a  time  when  no  human  eyes  had  seen  the   full 
crescent  arc   of  earth’s  globe  from  the   perspective  of  the   moon  or 
beyond.” 
Philadelphia Evening  Bulletin:  “Looking  rather  like  a  crumbly piece 
of  Roquefort, there it was-Earth, 
as  seen from  the  Moon  by  a  camera 
aboard  Lunar  Orbiter  1. The  picture  was  a  black-and-white, bu t   no 
matter.  Since  the   Moon  has  no  appreciable  atmosphere,  Earth  will 
never  take  on  the   bright  orange  and  yellow  hues  of  a  harvest  moon. 
And  since  there  are  no  forests,  no  lakes,  no  oceans,  no  snowcovered 
fields on the  Moon, Earth will  never be  framed, for lunar  lovers,  in   the  
sylvan or  aquatic settings  tha t  lend so  much  enchantment and mystery 
to  earthly views  of  the  Moon.” 
Sam  Shenton,  leader  and  secretary  of  the   International  Flat  Ear th  
Society,  claimed  tha t   the   circular  body  shown  in   LUNAR  ORBITER  1’s 
photos  Aug.  25  was  no t   really  earth,  but  “one  of  the   non-luminous 
bodies between  us and the  moon.”  He  admitted tha t  photos of  the  ear th  
had  been  “a  great  shock”  to  the   24-member  society.  ( N Y T ,  8/19/66, 
29;  8/27/66;  Phil.  Eve.  Bull.,  8/27/66;  Reuters,  Wash. Post,  8/29/66, 
A31 
During August-September: USAF  Chief  of  Staff Gen. J.  P. McConnell discussed 
military  fu tu re   of  manned  aircraft  in   NATO’s  Fifteen  Nations.  Aero- 
nautical  technology in   fields  of  propulsion  and  composite  materials- 
and  less  radical  improvements  in   performance,  navigation  aids,  fire 
control systems, and  conventional ordnance-indicated 
tha t   “by  1975 
we  will  have  increased by  major  increments  the   speed,  range,  altitude, 
payload  and  over-all versatility  of  manned  aircraft  for  military  roles.” 
Noting tha t  X-15 could  fly  faster  and higher  than  V-2  ballistic  missile, 
General McConnell said  he  believed  “ tha t   well  in   advance  of  the   esti- 
mates  tha t   most  people  would  make,  Air  Force  pilots  will  be  flying 
genuine  aerospace  craft  tha t   can  take  off  under  their  own  power, 
operate  in   space  and  re tu rn   t o   a  controlled  landing.”  (NATO’s  Fqteen 
Nations, 8-9/66) 
During  Summer:  First  four  sessions  of  Legal  Subcommittee  of  the   U.N. 
Committee on the  Peaceful Uses  of  Outer Space were summarized in  an  
article by NASA Deputy General Counsel Paul G. Dembling and Daniel M. 
Arons, Attorney-Adviser, NASA  Office of  General Counsel, in  Journal  of 
A i r  Law and Commerce.  ( J / A i r  Law and  Commerce, Summer/66,329-86) 

September 1966 

. 

September  1 :   Lewis  Research  Center  awarded Aerojet-General Corp.  a  $10- 
million  contract  for  fabrication  and  static  test  firing  of   260-in.-dia. 
solid  propellant  rocket  motor.  An  advanced  version  of  two  motors  of 
the   same diameter  previously  tested  by  Aerojet,  new motor  would  use 
propellant  with  higher  burning  rate  and was  expected  to   develop  5.25 
million  lbs.  peak  th ru s t   when  test-fired  for  80  sec.  in   June   1967. 
Earlier  versions  had  produced  3.6  miIlion  lbs.  th ru s t   during  114-sec. 
tests.  (NASA  Release 66-236; LRC  Release 66-52) 
Explosion  of  Saturn  V  booster’s  2nd  stage  (S-11-F) a t   MTF  May  2 8  was 
caused  by  inadequate  test  procedures  and  faulty  hydrogen  line  fitting, 
NASA  investigative  board,  chaired  by  KSC  Director  Dr.  Ku r t   H.  Debus, 
concluded. Board  reported  tha t  first shift workmen had  failed to  attach 
pressure-sensing  line  to  stage’s  hydrogen  tank  or  to  inform  second 
shift  workmen  of  disconnect,  with  result  tha t   test  conductor’s  gauge 
registered  zero  reading  when  stage  was  actually  under  pressurization 
with  gaseous  helium.  Tank  ruptured  a t   23   psig-far 
below  38-psig 
design  pressure-because 
of  poor  hydrogen  line  fitting.  Board  recom- 
mended  “tighter  control”  over  MTF  test  procedures.  (MSFC  Release 
66-196) 
NASA  Nike-Tomahawk launched  from  Churchill  Research  Range  reached 
150-mi.  (242-km.)  altitude  in  first  of  a  series  of  four  NASA-UniV.  of 
California,  Berkeley,  experiments  to  obtain  proton  and  electron 
measurements  over  energy  range  of  1-300  kev.  Rocket  and  instru- 
mentation  performed  satisfactorily  [see  Sept.  6 ,   161.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  NASA  appointed  Paul  A.  Barron  Deputy  Director  of  Procurement  and 
Gordon H. Tyler,  formerly GSFC  procurement  officer, to  succeed Barron 
as  Assistant  Director  of  Procurement  for  Policy  and  Review.  (NASA 
Release 66-234) 
Gen.  James  Ferguson,  Deputy  Chief  of  Staff/R&D,  Hq.  USAF,  assumed 
command  of  AFSC,  replacing  Gen.  Bernard  A.  Schriever,  who  retired 
Aug.  31.  (AFSC  Release  184.66) 
0  USAF  would make electronic portraits  of  satellite  shapes to develop catalog 
of  radar  images  of  possible  space  vehicle  shapes,  AFSC  announced. 
Measurements  on   some  24   satellite  models  would  be  taken  by  AFSC 
Electronic Systems Div. a t  Holloman AFB in  2,000 hrs.  of  tests extending 
through  December.  (AFSC  Release  156.66) 
0  L/C  Harry  W.  Peterson  (USAF,  Ret.),  former  chief  of  Contract  Division, 
Contract  Administration  Services,  Hq.  USAF  Defense  Supply Agency, 
was  appointed  Director,  Contract  Administration  Division  of  NASA 
Procurement  Office.  (NASA  Ann.,  10/7/66) 
September  2:  Tape  recorder  for  Advanced  Vidicon  Camera  System  on  
NASA’s NIMBUS  11  meteorological  satellite  had  failed,  b u t   camera  could 
still transmit cloud-cover photos  when within range of  North American 

-4 

283 

284 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966- 

receiving  stations.  Launched  from  WTR, NIMBUS  II  had  successfully 
passed  its  final  test  objective  of  two  months  of  continuous  operation 
July  15.  Automatic  Picture  Transmission  (Apt)  camera  system  and 
High Resolution  Infrared  Radiation  (Hrir)  system were  still  operating. 
(NASA  Release 66-243) 
September 2: Data from onboard cameras and other recovered instruments had 
confirmed success of NASA’s first high-altitude  experiment  to  investigate 
parachute  designs  and  techniques  tha t   might  be  used  to  land  in s t ru -  
mented  capsules  on  Mars.  Launched  aboard  a  balloon  Aug.  30  from 
Walker AFB,  experiment had  “provided  a solid data base with which we 
can  compare  and  correlate  the  results  of  later  flight  tests  involving 
parachutes  and  flight  units  of  different  sizes  and  shapes,”  Project 
Manager  John  C.  McFall  reported.  (NASA  Release 66-241) 
0  Eight  Government  agencies,  headed  by  FAA,  formed  Inter-Agency  Bird 
Hazard  Committee  to  exchange  and  consolidate  data  in  an   effort  to 
develop methods  for  reducing  danger  of  collisions between  birds  and 
aircraft:  Dept.  of  the  Interior;  USN;  HEW ;   CAB;   NASA;  USA;  and  USAF. 
Since  1961,  FAA  had  spent  more  than  $500,000  for  research  on   bird 
habitats,  migration,  and  preventive  and  corrective  methods  to  reduce 
collisions-which  had  averaged 300  per  year.  (FAA  Release 66-84) 
0  NASA  Langley Research  Center  had  invited  four  aircraft  manufacturers- 
Boeing Co.,  Lockheed Aircraft Corp.,  Douglas Aircraft  Co.,  and General 
submit  by  Sept.  30  proposals  for  a  research  pro- 
Dynamics  Corp.-to 
gram  to  reduce  noise  generated  by  commercial  jet  transports.  (NASA 
Release 66-242) 
New  Eastman  Kodak  film  processing  system  for  fast  reaction,  high- 
quality  aerial  reconnaissance  photography  tha t   simultaneously  devel- 
oped  a  negative and  a  high-resolution positive  transparency  in  30 sec., 
had  been demonstrated  by  USAF  a t  Wright-Patterson AFB.  (AFSC  Release 
142.66) 
0  H.S.  Becker,  former  North  American Aviation,  Inc.,  executive,  had  been 
appointed  Deputy  Director  of  MSFC’S  Advanced  Systems Office.  (MSFC 
Release 66-199) 
North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  was  awarded  a  $1,550,000  initial  incre- 
ment  to   a  $5,671,000  USAF  contract  for  development work  on  vertical 
takeoff  and  landing  (Vtol)  aircraft.  Contract  would  be  managed  by 
AFSC’S  Systems Engineering Group.  (DOD   Release 760-66) 
0  M2-F2  lifting  body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  research  pilot  Milton  0. 
Thompson,  was  launched  from  B-52  bomber  a t   45,000-ft.  altitude  i n  
fifth glide flight at Edwards AFB.  Purposes  of  flight were  evaluation  of  a 
360’  overhead  approach  using  visual  cues  only  and  determination  of 
control  damper-off handling  qualities.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
September  2-3: Three  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  were  launched 
from  Churchill  Research  Range  in   GSFC  experiment  to  measure  in -  
tensity  and  energy  spectra  of  low-energy protons,  helium  nuclei,  and 
heavier  nuclei  present  during  a  Polar  Cap  Absorption  event.  Rockets 
and  instrumentation-except 
for  solid-state  detectors  on  first  flight- 
performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
September  3:  Reports  by  Volunteer  Flight  Officers  Network-new 
tracking 
system  in which  22,000  commercial pilots  on  51  airlines  searched  the  
skies  for  reentering  space hardware-had  proved  valuable to  Smithso- 
nian  Institution’s  Astrophysical  Observatory  and  USAF  in   improving 
computer  methods  and  clearing  records.  Network  was  founded  by 

285 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
amateur  astronomer  Herbert  E.  Roth,  director  of  Denver  Moonwatch 
team.  (Clark,  N Y T ,  9/4/66,  68) 
September  4:  U.S.S.R.’s  12-ton PROTON  111  unmanned  spacecraft-launched 
into  ear th   orbit Ju ly   6 to  study  cosmic  rays  and  atomic particles-was 
still  functioning  normally  and  transmitting  data  to   ear th   regularly, 
Trud  reported.  (AP, N Y T ,   9/6/66,  74) 
Invention  of  reusable  turbo-rocket  engine,  which  could  launch  space- 
craft  for   1 /10   curren t   U.S.  costs,  was  announced  by  ROUS Royce  a t  
British  Assn.  for  the  Advancement of  Science meeting in  Nottingham, 
U.K.  Engine  had  been  designed  in   titanium,  bu t   compressor  blades 
could be made  of  hifil-new 
fiber-reinforced plastic  five  times  as stiff as  
titanium,  more reliable,  lighter,  and less expensive. Partly air-breathing 
turbo-rocket-cross 
be  fueled 
between  jet  engine  and  rocket-would 
on  kerosene  and  liquid  oxygen.  Battery  of  48  turborockets-each 
weighing 1,000 lbs.  and capable of  generating 22,000 lbs.  thrust-could 
boost Apollo spacecraft  to 25,000-ft. altitude in  fraction of  a second and 
then   be  landed  by  remote  control.  Reported  cost  of  launch  would  be 
$2.8  million  compared  to  $28  million  with  US. booster.  (Houston 
Chron., 9/5/66) 
Soviet  cosmonauts  had  no t   been  troubled  by  perspiration,  breathing 
difficulties, or high heartbeat rates  as was  Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, 
Jr.,  during  GEMINI  X I   mission,  Soviet  physician-cosmonaut Dr.  Boris 
Yegorov  said  a t  press  conference in   Geneva.  Probable reason was  tha t  
cosmonauts  worked  in   “completely  normal”  atmospheric  conditions 
and  breathed  ordinary  air,  while  astronauts  used  artificial air  mixture 
containing more  oxygen  than   normal,  he  said.  Yegorov,  one  of  three  
crew  members  in   Oct.  12,  1964,  VOSKHOD  I  mission,  was  attending 
congress on space biology.  (Reuters,  Wash .  Post,  9/22/66,  A3) 
September  5:  Administration  officials  had  no  indication  tha t   U.S.S.R.  was 
man-rating a new booster for manned lunar landing program, Technology 
Week reported.  They also doubted reports tha t  U.S.S.R.  would  attempt 
landing  mission  in  October  1967--fiftieth 
anniversary  of  Bolshevik 
Revolution-but 
anticipated  another  Soviet  manned  earth-orbital 
flight in  1966. (Tech. Wk . ,  9 /5 /66 ,3 )  
0  Gen.  Bernard  Schriever, who  retired  as  AFSC  Commander  Aug.  31,  was 
saluted  by  Technology  Week:  “The  nation  owes  an   immense  debt  to 
Gen.  Schriever,  for   he  and  a  handful  of  other  far-sighted men  almost 
literally  dragged  this  country  into  the  missile  era a t  a  time when the re  
were  few  who  believed  tha t   the   intercontinental missile  was  a  feasible 
weapon. 
“Moreover,  once the  decision had been made it was  to Gen. Schriever 
tha t   th e   task  fell  of putting  together  the   organization to  tackle  such   a 
formidable assignment. 
“The  success story  tha t   followed  is  well-known in   the   industry  and 
the  na t ion . .   . .,, (Coughlin,  Tech.  W k . ,  9/5/66,  50) 
0  Fu ture   of  consortium  agreements  between  U.K.  and  European  nations 
was  still uncertain despite success of  European Launcher Development 
Organization  (ELDO)  and  progress  of  Concorde  supersonic  transport 
program,  L.  L.  Do ty   reported  in   Aviation  Week.  “. . . dissensions over 
the   distribution  of  work  loads,  allocation  of  procurement,  financial 
sharing  and miscalculations  of  projected  costs  are  threatening present 
consortiums, and possibly discouraging formation of  others.” 
In   addition,  nationalism  “which  is  accelerating  the   drive  for  inde- 

286 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
pendence i n  aerospace activities  . . . tend[s]  to  draw governments away 
from  th e   consortium principle.  . . .” (Doty, A v .   Wk., 9/5/66,  29) 
September  5:  Dr.  Clifford A.  Spohn  (Col.,  USAF,  Ret.)  had  been  appointed 
director  of  operations  a t   ESSAYS National  Satellite  Center,  succeeding 
Ar thur   W.  Johnson,  who  had  been  appointed  deputy  director  of  the  
facility.  (ESSA Release 66-8) 
Prevailing  theory  tha t   nuclear  particles  are   symmetrical  throughout 
na ture ,   challenged two  months  ago  by  Dr.  Paolo  Franzini,  Columbia 
Univ.,  and  his  wife  Dr.  Juliet  Lee-Franzini,  State  Univ.  of  New  York 
[see  June   271 , was  reinforced  by  results  of  experiment  conducted i n  
Geneva  by  European  Center  for  Nuclear  Research  (CERN)  scientists 
and reported  a t  Rochester  Conference a t  Univ.  of  California,  Berkeley. 
Validation  of  Franzini  discovery,  which  had  stirred  wide  interest  in  
scientific circles, would  force physicists  to derive new  or  more sophisti- 
cated  explanations for  basic  na ture   of  matter.  CERN  experiment, based 
on analysis  of  10,665 photographs of  eta-meson decay into  three pions, 
found  no significant difference in  energy levels  of  positive  and  negative 
pions.  Franzini had  observed greater  energy in  positive pion  than  nega- 
tive. Franzini and CERN groups planned fur ther  experiments, and similar 
te s t  would  be  conducted by  Columbia Univ.  physicist  Leon  Lederman. 
(NYT ,  9/6/66,  30) 
0  “Nobody  has  yet  found  any  space goals  tha t  will  s t ir   the   Europeans  the  
way  manned  space  flight  and  the   race  toward  a  lunar  landing  have 
generated  tremendous  technical  impetus  in   the   U S .   and  U.S.S.R.,” 
Robert Hotz  reported  in  Aviation  Week.  “If  new  fomulae can he  found 
to  fit  changing European  requirements,  the   prospects for  applying  t h e  
spearhead technology of  the  aerospace industry will  never be  brighter. 
For  t h e   United  States,  th is   w i l l   require  a  more  realistic  government 
policy  in   permitting  more  first-line  technology  to  be  exported  to  our 
allies.  For  Europe,  i t  will  require a  more  realistic  appraisal  of  how  i ts  
technical  resources  can  be  applied  to  compete  successfully  in   the  
world market.”  (Hotz, A v .  W k . ,  9 /5 /66 ,21)  
September  6: President Johnson signed  FY  1967 Independent Offices Appro- 
priation  Bill  (H.R.  14921) , which  included  $4,968,000,000  NASA 
appropriation-below 
$5   billion  for  first  time  since  FY  1963.  (NASA 
LAR  v/14) 
9  Boeing  Co.,  Lockheed  Aircraft  Co.,  General  Electric  Co.,  and  Pra t t   & 
Whitney Div.,  United Aircraft  Corp.,  submitted final designs for   1,800- 
mph  Ss t   to  FAA.  Evaluation  team  of  Government  and  airline  experts 
was  expected  to  submit engine and airframe choices to FAA  Administra- 
tor  William F.  McKee  by  Nov.  1. Final  selection  would  be  announced 
by  President  Johnson  in   late  1966.  (AP,  Wa sh .   Post,  9/7/66,  D7; 
Clark,  N Y T ,  9/7/66,  26) 
e  Rebutting  Aug.  14  Washington  Sunday  Star  editorial  which  called  the  
U S .   Ss t   program  “a  dubious  venture  moved  by  extraordinary  pres- 
sures,”  Sen. Warren G.  Magnuson (D-Wash.)  told Senate tha t  program 
was  “moving  forward on a logical basis”  to make Sst available for  com- 
mercial use  in   1974 at  total  cost  of  about  $4.5  billion-25%  of  which 
would be paid  by  manufacturers.  Senator Magnuson  said  tha t  planners 
were  “well  aware”  of  potential  hazards  of  excess  radiation,  internal 
heat,  lack  of  maneuverability, and  s truc tura l   stress  suggested  by  Star 
and  assured  the   Senate  tha t   aircraft  had  been  designed  “to  preclude 

287 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
catastrophic  conditions.  . . .’,  ( C R ,   9/6/66,  20909-10;  Tech.  Wk., 
9/5/66,  17) 
September  6:  Two  NASA  Nike-Tomahawks  launched  about  six  hours  apart 
from Churchill Research Range  reached 145m i .   (238-km.)  and  150-mi. 
(243-km.)  altitudes.  They  were  second  and  third  in   series  of  four 
NASA-UniV.  of  California,  Berkeley,  experiments  to  obtain  proton  and 
electron  measurements.  Both  rockets  and  instrumentation  performed 
satisfactorily;  first  rocket’s  nose  cone did  no t   eject  un t i l   after  apogee, 
bu t  good data were  received  [see Sept. 1, 161.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  Soviet rocket  tests  begun  Aug.  25  in   the   Pacific had  been  completed  six 
weeks  ahead  of  schedule,  Tass  announced.  (Tass,  9/6/66;  WI, N Y T ,  
9/7/66) 
*  NASA  awarded  facilities grants  totaling  $3.2  million  to  Univ.  of  Wisconsin 
and  Univ.  of  Washington  to  provide  “urgently  needed”  quarters  and  
specialized  facilities  for  space-related  research  and  training. 
(NASA 
Release  66-244) 
*  NASA  awarded  George  Washington  Univ.  a  three-year,  $750,000  gran t  
“to  undertake a multidisciplinary  program  of  policy  studies  in  science, 
technology,  and  public  administration.”  Program  was  expected  to 
contribute  to  analysis  of  various  policy  questions  related  to  develop- 
ment  of  the   space program  and  utilization  of  knowledge  derived from 
it.  (NASA  Release  66-240) 
*  A 1967 world  conference on space to be  held  in  Geneva,  Paris,  or  Vienna 
was  proposed  by  Soviet  professor  Anatoli  Blagonravov  to  Legal  Sub- 
committee of  U.N.  committee on Peaceful Uses of  Outer Space meeting 
in   New  York.  U S .   had  favored  1968  meeting  in   New  York.  ( N Y T ,  
9/7/66) 
*  Proposal  to  produce  first  worldwide  live  telecast  in   June   1967 was  ou t-  
lined a t  Geneva meeting of  European Broadcasting Union. AX,  CBS,  and 
NBC   news executives expressed  interest in  proposal but would  no t  com- 
mit  themselves until  details  of  program,  under  supervision  of  British 
Broadcasting Corp.,  were  resolved. Live  television transmission around 
the   world  would  be  possible  after  ComSatCorp’s  planned  launching  of 
two  communications satellites  in   fall  1966-one  over  the  Atlantic,  the  
other  over the  Pacific.  (Adams, N Y T ,  9/7/66) 
*  1966’s second new  comet-first  with  a  tail-had 
been  discovered  by  Dr. 
Roberto  Barbon,  Italian  astronomer  visiting  Mt.  Wilson  and  Mt. 
Palomar  Observatories,  and  confirmed  by  Smithsonian  Astrophysical 
Observatory. Named  for  its  discoverer,  n in th   magnitude object  was  i n  
constellation  Cetus.  (Sci.  Serv.,  N Y T ,  9/6/66,  46) 
September  7:  Thunder  and  lightning  brought  down  NASA  meteorological 
balloon  near  Austin,  Tex.  The   10-million-cu.-ft.  balloon,  launched 
from  Minneapolis  Aug.  24  by  Litton  Systems,  had  failed  to   deflate 
automatically after  its payload  had  been detached and was  slowly drift- 
ing toward  the  Gulf of Mexico.  USAF had  been prepared to  shoot i t  down 
because i t  “was  a menace to jet aircraft.”  (WI, Phil.  Eve. Bull.,  9/7/66) 
9  New  mineral  named  ctdjerfi~herite”-a  copper-iron  sulfide-had 
been 
found in  meteorites.  Since i t  does not exist naturally  on  ear th   and could 
be formed only a t  high temperatures, it was speculated tha t  djerfisherite 
might  have  originated  in   the   sun’s  outermost  layer.  Report  of  finding 
was  released  through  American  Assn.  for  the  Advancement of  Science 
by  Dr.  Louis  H.  Fuchs.  (Henry, Wash. Eve.  Stat, 9/7/66,  D2) 

288 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

September  8:  NASA  test  pilot  John  B .   McKay  made  successful  emergency 
landing  of  X-15  No.  1 a t   Smith’s  Ranch,  Nev.,  after  malfunction 
developed  in   aircraft’s  fuel  system.  There  was  no  damage  to  aircraft 
and  no   injury  to   pilot.  Primary  purpose  of  flight  was  photometer 
measurements  of  sharpness  of  earth’s  horizon  for  use  in   Apollo  pro- 
gram.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.;  UPI,  Wush. Post,  9/9/66,  BlO) 
Rep.  Ogden  Reid  (R-N.Y.)  introduced  H.R.  17604  to  amend  National 
Aeronautics  and  Space Act  to provide  a NASA  R&D  program  for  aircraft 
noise  abatement. Program  would:  attempt  to  develop workable measur- 
ing  system  for  correlating  intensity  and  quality  of  aircraft  noise  with 
effects  on  persons  on  the  ground;  develop  quieter  aircraft  through 
research  and  development;  compile knowledge on methods  and  devices 
for  aircraft  noise  abatement;  coordinate  research  relating  to  aircraft 
noise  abatement;  and  determine  cause  and  develop solutions  for  other 
“related  nuisances.”  (NASA  LAR  V/146) 
0  Dr.  Winston  E.  Kock,  first  director  of  ERC,  had  resigned  to  re tu rn   to 
Bendix Corp.,  effective  Oct.  1. James  C.  Elms,  NASA  Deputy  Associate 
Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  would  replace  him.  (NASA 
Release  66-247) 
0  US. should  divert  funds  from  NASA’s Apollo  program  and  from  Federal 
highway projects  to improve urban  housing  and  transportation  systems, 
Sen.  Eugene  J.  McCarthy  (D-Minn.)  suggested  t o   International  Con- 
ference  of  Social  Work  in   Washington,  D.C.  (Honsa,  Wush.  Post, 
9/9/66,  A14) 
Development of  a  “magnetic hammer”  a t  MSFC  had  saved the Government 
some $2,130,000 in   1965 and netted  its  inventors  $2,500 each-largest 
joint  invention  award  ever  made  a t   MSFC.  A  portable  device  which 
created  a n   intense  magnetic  field  to  move  metal  uniformly  without 
marring  the  surface,  hammer  had  been  used  to  replace  mechanical 
stretching  of  Sa tu rn  V bulkhead  gore  segments  and  restore  previously 
rejected  segments.  Inventors were  Robert  J.  Schwinghamer, MSFC,  and 
Leslie  D.  Foster,  formerly  of  MSFC  and  currently  with  Comprehensive 
Designers,  Inc.  (MSFC  Release 66-206) 
FCC’S  Oct. 1 deadline for filing comments on whether o r  not private entities 
should be  allowed to  establish special-purpose communications satellite 
systems  for  domestic  use  was  extended  to  Nov.  3.  Initially  FCC  had 
requested  tha t   comments  and  proposals be  submitted  by  Aug.  1. Com- 
plexity of proposals submitted by  ComSatCorp and  the Ford Foundation 
on  tha t   date  and  resulting  questions  and  discussion  had  necessitated 
two  extensions  of  the  deadline.  (Adams, NYT ,  9/9/66,  77) 
I n   response  to  allegations tha t  F-111 aircraft  was  unacceptable  as  an   all- 
purpose  military  aircraft,  DOD   told  Sen.  S tua r t   Symington  (D-Mo.) 
that:  (1)  production  of  F-111A  for  USAF  was  on  schedule with  first 
deliveries  planned  in   1967;  (2)  performance  of  the  aircraft  would  be 
close  to  1962 evaluations;  (3)  aircraft  would  be  superior  to  any  other 
tactical  weapons  system  in   the   world  in  C c ~ r i t i ~ a l ) 7  
factors  of  range, 
payload,  speed,  and  versatility;  (4)  cost  variations  were  “typical  of 
large  scale development  programs”;  and  (5) goal  of  one  basic  aircraft 
for  two  services was  being met.  (CR ,  9/8/66,  21207) 
September  9:  Validity  of  satellite  measurements  of  micrometeoroid  fluxes 
in  which  piezoelectric  microphones  had  been  used  as  detectors  was 
challenged  in  Science  by  Carl  Nilsson,  Australian  scientist  working 
a t   GSFC.  Although  these  measurements  had  given  rise  to  theory  tha t  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

289 

ear th  was  surrounded by  dus t  cloud,  analysis  of  100  hrs.  of  data  from 
NASA’s OGO   11  satellite  revealed:  (1)  there had  been no detectable signals 
from  sensors  tha t   could  have  been  caused  by  micrometeoroid impact; 
and  (2)  the  microphone systems had  been emitting noise.  Nilsson  con- 
cluded  tha t   in   past  satellite measurements, microphone noises had  no t  
been  caused  by  micrometeoroid impact but  by  reaction  of  microphone 
crystals  to  temperature changes.  (Nilsson, Science, 10/9/66,  1242-6) 
September 9:  House  of  Commons’ Committee of  Public Accounts said devel- 
opment  costs  for   Anglo-French  supersonic  airliner  Concorde  would 
total $1.4  billion-compared 
to  original  $476 million  estimated cost- 
before  i ts   completion in   1973, according to  the   New  York  Times. The  
“massive  increase” in  cost was attributed to changes in  design, increases 
in   wages,  and  “underestimation  in   the   earlier  estimates.”  ( N Y T ,  
9/9/66,  76) 
September  10-1 6:  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  made  unpublicized 
trip  to  West  Germany  to  discuss  three  new  space  agreements;  co- 
operative  projects  would  involve  a  German-built  advanced  solar 
exploration spacecraft to be launched by NASA,  a jo in t  aeronomy satellite 
to  study  solar  radiation,  and  participation  in   Apollo  Telescope  Mount 
for  observation  of  sun’s  s truc ture   from  above  earth’s  atmosphere. 
(Tech.  W k . ,   10/3/66,  18) 
September  10:  Chemical  reactions  in   gases  produced  by  a  “Q-switched” 
ruby  laser  suggested  a new  method  for  studying very high  temperature 
reactions,  reported  Westinghouse  Research  Laboratories  scientists  L. 
M.  Epstein  and  K.  H.  Sun   in   a  le t ter   t o   Nature.  Studies  establishing 
dependence of  yield  on  intensity  and  configuration  of  focal  spot  were 
recommended to  prove  usefulness  of  method  as  an  absolute dosimeter 
for  laser  shots.  (Epstein and Sun ,  Nature, 9/10/66,  1173-4) 
September  11: Andrew  6. Haley,  early  advocate of  outer  space rule  of  law 
and au thor  of the  “metalaw” concept to govern the  conduct of  terrestrial 
beings  in   outer  space,  died  in   Washington,  D.C.  At  the   time  of  his 
death, Haley was  general counsel to  International Astronautical Federa- 
tion  ( IAF ) ,   counsel and  fellow  of  AIAA,  IAF  observer  to   U.N.,  and  aca- 
demician  of  International  Ins t i tu te   of  Space  Law.  He  authored  th e  
book  Space  Law  and  Government  in   1964.  (W a sh .  Post,  9/12/66,  B7; 
Wash.  Eve.  Star,  9/12/66,  B5) 
0  USAF  had  launched  reconnaissance  satellite  over  U.S.S.R. 
tha t   could 
photograph Soviet military  bases and re tu rn  film packages on command 
from ground control, Dick Lyons reported in  Wushington Post. Key com- 
ponents  were   high-powered  camera  tha t   could  photograph  objects 
several feet in  diameter from 100-mi. altitude; cluster of  film packages- 
cassettes-that 
could  be  dropped  from  satellite  a t  random  and  picked 
up  by  recovery aircraft;  and  an  Agena  vehicle  which  could be  maneu- 
vered  from ground.  A  new  version  of  Samos spacecraft,  satellite  could 
remain  in   orbit  for  weeks  or months-until 
i ts  supply of  film packages 
was  exhausted-and  might also be able  to  transmit TV pictures  to  U S .  
ground  stations.  (Lyons,  Wush. Post,  9/12/66) 
September  12: Balloonist  Tracy Barnes landed a t  Rio  Grande, N.J.,  complet- 
ing  first  hot-air  balloon  flight  across  the   continental  U S .   Barnes  left 
San Diego April  10.  (Wu sh .  Post,  9/12/66,  D11) 
Shift  of  management  of  NASA’s Apollo  Telescope  Mount  mission  from 
GSFC to  MSFC  was evidence of NASA’s effort “toward inhouse development 

290 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

of  major  space  projects7’ to  “offset  threatened  loss  of  personnel”  a t  
NASA  manned space flight centers as Apollo program passed i ts  personnel 
peak,  Aviation  Week reported.  (A v .  W k . ,  9/12/66,  80) 
September  12: U.S.S.R.  was  developing booster  with  7.5-  to  10-million-lbs. 
thrust-enough 
to   send  a  man  to  the   moon  or   past  Mars,  unnamed 
sources reported.  Evidence presumably had been gathered by U.S.  recon- 
naissance  satellites.  (Clark,  NYT,  9/13/66,  28 ;   Simons,  Wash .   Pos t ,  
9/11/66,  A l )  
September  12-15:  Three-day  GEMINI  X I   mission-ninth  manned  flight  i n  
NASA’s Gemini  series-began  with  launch   of  Gemini  Agena  Target 
Vehicle  (GATV)  by  Atlas  booster  from  ETR’S  Complex  14,  followed  97 
min.  later by  launch  of  GEMINI XI  by  Titan I1 booster from Complex 19. 
Astronauts  were  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  command  pilot,  and  Richard  F. 
Gordon,  Jr.,  pilot.  GATV  entered  near-circular,  185-mi.-altitude  orb i t ;  
GEMINI XI  entered elliptical orbit with 175-mi. (280-km.) apogee; 100-mi. 
(161-km.)  perigee;  90-min.  period;  and  33”  inclination.  GEMINI  XI 
docked with GATV 94  min.  after liftoff to  become first manned spacecraft 
to  achieve  first-revolution  rendezvous and docking-mission’s  primary 
objective.  Other  accomplishments  included  extravehicular  activity 
(Eva),  maneuvering  of  docked  GEMINI  XI-GATV  configuration  to   record 
851-mi.  altitude,  station-keeping  using  te ther   to  link  two  spacecraft, 
computer-controlled  reentry,  and  completion  of  several  experiments. 
After  initial  docking,  crew  executed  four   practice  docks  and  spen t  
sleep period  attached  to  GATV.  Gordon began  planned  107-min. Eva  on 
schedule  a t   23:58  GET,  bu t   ten   minutes  later,  after  setting  up  movie 
camera,  retrieving  micrometeoroid experiment,  and  attaching Agena’s 
100-ft.  te ther   to  GEMINI  XI’S  docking  bar,  had  to  rest  astride  GATV. 
When   blinded in his  right  eye by  perspiration,  Gordon was  ordered  by 
Conrad  a t  24:02  GET  to  cancel  power-tool evaluation  experiment  and 
re tu rn   to   cabin. 
At  40:58  GET,  following  crew’s  second sleep period, mated  spacecraft 
used GATV’s  primary propulsion system (pps) to a t ta in  orbit with 851-mi. 
apogee-record  altitude for  manned  space flight. After two  revolutions, 
second  pps  burn   restored  docked  configuration  to  approximately 185- 
mi.-altitude  circular orbit. A t  46:58  GET Gordon opened  hatch  to  begin 
2 hr. 8 min. standup Eva during which several photographic experiments 
were conducted. Tether dynamics exercise followed: GEMINI XI  undocked 
from  GATV  and  moved  to  end  of  100-ft. te ther   which  was  supposed to 
hold  two  spacecraft  on   vertical  line  pointing  earthward,  proving  tha t  
two  objects  could  fly  in   formation  for  long  duration  without  using 
maneuvering fuel.  When   vehicles began  to  drift,  Conrad  initiated  slow 
rotation  with  appropriate spacecraft  maneuvers,  creating  slight  centri- 
fugal force which  kept te ther  tau t  and spacecraft a t  controlled distance. 
After  separation  from  Agena  during  sleep  period,  Conrad  executed 
successful  re-rendezvous-added 
to  flight  plan  because  of  GEMINI  XI’S 
-
-
 
favorable  fuel  supply. 
Reentry  Sept.  15 in   45th  revolution  after  7 1  hrs.  17 min.  of  flight 
was  first h U.3.  space program to  be guided  automatically by  computer 
which  fed  commands  directly  to  thrusters.  Splashdown  of  GEMINI  XI 
in  the  Atlantic 700 mi. from Cape Kennedy-within 
two miles of  target- 
and  recovery  operations  by  crew  of  U.S.S.  Guam were  carried  on   live 
television  via  EARLY  BIRD  I  comsat. USN pararescue  team, dropped from 
helicopters,  attached  flotation  collar  to  spacecraft.  Astronauts  were 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

291 

(NASA  Proj.  Off.;  NASA  Release 
flown  by  helicopter  to  recovery  ship. 
66-226; Hines, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  9/13/66,  A l ,   A6;  9/14/66,  A l ,   ‘A14; 
9/15/66,  A l ,   A6;  Reistrup,  T u s h .   Post,  9/13/66,  A l ,   A3;  9/14/66, 
A l ,  A3;  9/15/66,  A l ,  A6; 9/16/66,  A l ,  A5; Wilford, NYT ,  9/13/66,1, 
28;  9/14/66,  1, 32;  9/15/66,  1, 26;  9/16/66,  1, 24) 
September  12-16: Jo in t   Royal  Aeronautical  Society  (me s )   Centenary  Con- 
gress and Fifth Congress of  the  International Council of the  Aeronautical 
Sciences  (ICAS)  held  in  London. 
Pr ince  Philip,  Duke of  Edinburgh  and  honorary mes  president,  said 
in  a  centenary address tha t   “. . . making the  right selection  in  research 
programmes  and development projects  has become  crucial  to  the  whole 
of  aeronautical evolution.  . . .” Risks  involved in   th e   total investment 
necessary for success, he said, had led European nations to “ the  obvious 
answer”-international 
cooperation:  “If  it  is  important  to   see  tha t  
aviation  is  fitted  into  the  national economy in  such   a way  as  to  enable 
i t   to  function  most  efficiently,  i t   is  even  more  important  to  work  o u t  
an  international s truc ture  which will enhance and encourage the  chances 
of  success rather than  frus tra te  and defeat them.”  (Hersey, A&A ,  11/66, 
126-30; Text, A&A,  12/66,  32-4) 
September  13:  U.N.  Ambassador  Ar thur   Goldberg,  attempting  to  clear  ob- 
stacles  to  early  completion  of  space  law  treaty,  announced  two  U S .  
compromises  to  Legal  Subcommittee  of  U.N.  Committee  on  Peaceful 
Uses  of  Ou ter  Space meeting in  New  York:  (1) U S .  would  no t  require 
tha t   space stations  and  vehicles  be  “open  a t   all  times”  for  inspection, 
bu t   would  allow  tha t   visits  be  made  on   “a  basis  of  reciprocity”  with 
“reasonable  advance notice”  to  hos t   government;  (2)  U S .  would  no t  
demand  submission  of  comprehensive reports  on  space exploration  to 
U.N.  members and  scientific  community,  but  would  have  reports  sub- 
mitted  “to  the   extent  feasible  and  practicable.”  U.S.S.R.  demand tha t  
nations  granting  tracking  facilities  to  any  space  power  provide  same 
facilities  on  identical  terms  to   o ther   space  powers  was  modified  by 
Soviet delegate Platon  D.  Morozov  to  include  provision  tha t   expenses 
incurred  in  rendering tracking  aid would be reimbursed.  (Teltsch, NYT, 
9/14/66,  32) 
0  Rep.  George P.  Miller  (D-Calif.),  chairman  of  House  Science and Astro- 
nautics Committee,  praised NASA’s GEMINI  X I   mission on  the  floor  of  th e  
House:  cr.  . . the   Gemini  11 crew  successfully  accomplished the   first 
rendezvous  and   docking  in   space  within  one  revolution,  by  far   th e  
quickest of  any  rendezvous attempted  to  date.  It is  significant to   no te  
a t  this point  in   the  mission tha t   the   . . . flight is  following the  planned 
schedule  of  events  closer  than   any  other  Gemini  flight  to  date.  . . .” 
(CR ,  9/13/66,  21495) 
0  U.S.S.R.  pilot Aleksey Anosov had established new world’s  distance record 
for  helicopter  with  1,509-km.  (938-mi.)  flight  in  M I -1  helicopter  from 
Sumi  in   the   Ukraine  to  th e   Orenburg  region  in   the   Urals.  Previous 
record of 900 mi.  (1,lzCes km.) had been se t  by Capt. Chester R. RadclBe, 
Jr.  (USAF),  July  5,  1962.  ( T u s h .  Post,  9/14/66,  B2) 
September  13-14: First Logistics Management Symposium attended by  some 
400 industrialists and  government officials met a t  MSFC  to  discuss logis- 
tics  support of  activities  in   the  free  world  and in  space.  I n  the  keynote 
address,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  Dr. 
George  E.  Mueller  stressed  tha t   effective  logistics  management  was 
essential  to  th e  success of NASA’s Apollo program.  “For  the  first  time in  

292 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
a NASA  manned  space flight program,  the  greater  par t   of  logistics is  no t  
being provided by  the  Department  of  Defense.  . . . 
“However,  th e  need for increasing the  emphasis on logistics manage- 
ment  for  Apollo  is  great.  . . . 
“The  Apollo  Sa tu rn   space  vehicle  involves  20,000  contractors  and 
subcontractors and has more than 900,000 individual parts.  The Sa tu rn  
V  first  stage  holds  56  tank  cars  of  propellants.  The   second  and  th ird  
stages of  Sa tu rn  V  transported by  water  dur ing  th e  Apollo program w i l l  
spend  a  total  of  700  days a t  sea.  Apollo  program  transportation by  all 
modes  will  require  coordination with  n ine   Government  agencies.  The  
launch   windows  for  th e   Apollo  lunar   mission  a re   relatively  small, 
malfunctions  on  the  pad  must  be  kept  to  a  minimum while  corrective 
maintenance must be  extremely fast and reliable. All  of  these  elements 
make  the   Apollo  logistics  program both  complicated  and  costly.  . . .” 
(MSFC  Release  66-202; Text) 
September  13-15: Series  of  five  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  was 
launched  from  Churchill Research Range  in   GCA  Corp.  experiment  to 
compare, by  means  of  Langmuir probe  and  trimethyl-aluminum  (TMA) 
cloud  techniques,  electron  density  profile  with  wind  profile.  A  NASA 
aircraft  obtained  supporting  photographs  of  vapor  clouds.  All  rockets 
and  instrumentation performed satisfactorily;  TMA  did  no t   eject  during 
second  flight  in   series,  but  useful  data  were  obtained  from  Langmuir 
probe.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
September 14: X-15 No.  3 was flown to 3,580 mph  (mach 5.11) and 254,200-ft. 
altitude  by  NASA  pilot  William  H.  Dana  for  altitude  buildup,  micro- 
meteoroid  collection,  measurements  of  total  solar  flux  and  broadband 
light  distribution  by  JPL spectroradiometer,  and  radiometer  measure- 
ments of ultraviolet  exhaust plume  characteristics.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.;  FRC 
Release; JPL  Release  408) 
8  LUNA  X I ,   U.S.S.R.’s  second  lunar  orbiting  satellite,  launched  Aug.  24, 
was  continuing  to  orbit  moon  and  had  completed  1,410 revolutions, 
Tass  announced.  All  equipment  was  functioning  normally.  (Tass, 
9/ 14/66) 
8  U.S.S.R.  astronomers had scanned the  Milky Way  in  six-centimeter wave- 
length  for  first  time,  using Pulkovo Observatory’s  huge  radiotelescope 
and  parabolic  antenna.  Observations  did  no t   confirm  curren t   theory 
tha t   radio  emanations  were  primarily  linked  with  radio  glow  of  “ho t  
gas”  (ionized hydrogen) in   our galaxy, but  showed  tha t   “even  in   these 
wave-lengths a  considerable  role  is  played  by  the   emanation  of  fast 
electrons  moving  in   magnetic fields  a t   speeds  close  to  tha t   of  light.” 
Simultaneously, Pulkovo  astronomers  conducted  detailed  study  of  80 
o ther   clouds of  ionized  hydrogen to  “help  determine more exactly  the  
physical  conditions  which  exist  in   the   most  interesting  parts  of  the  
Milky Way and  their relationship  with  the   continuous radio emanation 
of  our  galaxy as  a  whole.”  (Tass,  9/14/66) 
September  15:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB 
with  Thor-Burner  11  booster.  (Tech.  Wk . ,  9 /26 /66 ,   15;  U.S.  Aeron.  & 
Space Act.,  1966, 156) 
8  Recent  developments  in   space  technology  were  discussed  by  President 
Johnson  and  President  of  Republic  of  the   Philippines  Ferdinand  E. 
Marcos in  White House discussions.  President Marcos expressed  desire 
to  encourage greater  training of  Philippine  scientists  and  engineers in  
the   peaceful  application  of  space  technology,  and  President  Johnson 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

293 

offered  appropriate  fellowships  for   s tudy   in   U S .   institutions.  (Pres. 
Doc.,  9/19/66,  1296) 
September  16:  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  reached  impasse  over  question  of  access 
to  tracking  facilities tha t  would be part of  U.N.  treaty on space explora- 
tion.  U.S.  Ambassador Arthur  J.  Goldberg blamed  U.S.S.R.  for  halting 
agreement  on  treaty,  voicing  US. contention  tha t   tracking  facilities 
must  be  negotiated  by  bilateral  agreements  and  no t   guaranteed  by 
treaty.  Compulsory access  to  tracking  facilities,  Goldberg  said,  would 
constitute sovereignty violation. Soviet Ambassador Platon D. Morozov 
defended  proposal  as  means  to  correct  a  discriminatory  situation  in  
which  U.S.  had  certain  advantages because  of  i t s   alliances  with  other 
nations.  (Teltsch,  N Y T ,   9/17/66;  Sanger,  Wash. Post,  9/17/66,  A4) 
*  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station 
reached 103-mi. (166-km.) altitude.  NASA-univ. of Maryland experiment 
was  designed  to  (1)  evaluate  pulse  and  thermal  equalization  probes  as 
research  tools,  (2)  investigate  electron  energy  distribution  in   normal 
daytime ionosphere,  and  (3)  investigate  use  of  wing-slope  techniques 
with  Langmuir  probes.  Rocket  and   instrumentation  performed  satis- 
factorily.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  NASA  Nike-Tomahawk launched  from  Churchill  Research  Range  reached 
151-mi.  (243-km.)  altitude  in   Iast  of  four  NASA-UniV.  of  California, 
Berkeley, experiments  [see Sept. 1 ,6 ] .  Rocket and ins trumen ta t ion  per- 
formed  satisfactorily,  and  measurements  of  flux,  energy  spectrum, 
pitch  angle distribution, and time variations  of mirroring and precipitat- 
ing charged particles  were  obtained.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  USAF  launched  two  unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D  booster from  
WTR.  (U.S.  Aeron.  & Space Act.,  1966, 156) 
GEMINI  X I   Astronauts  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  and  Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr., 
arrived  a t   KSC  from  recovery  ship  U.S.S.  Guam  to   undergo  physical 
examination  and  to   begin  debriefing.  (Wilford,  N Y T ,   9/17/66,  11) 
*  A  40-ft.  strip  of  16-mm. film  “of  excellent  quality”  sho t   by  Astronauts 
Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.,  and  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  during  Sept.  12-15 
GEMINI  XI  mission  was  released  a t   MSC.  One  sequence  showed  Gordon 
straddling  Agena  to  tie  tether  from  GATV  to  GEMINI  XI.  Movie  revealed 
Conrad  had  described scene accurately  when  he  had  radioed  to  ear th :  
cCHeys  riding  i t   like  a  cowboy.” 
In   Washington,  D.C.,  White  House  announced  Gordon  would  be 
promoted  from  USN  lieutenant  commander  to  fu l l   commander.  (AP, 
Wash. Post, 9/17/66,  F1; AP, Wash. Eve.  Star, 9/17/66,  A5; UPI,  N Y T ,  
9/18/66,  1 ,  82) 
*  M2-F2 lifting body  vehicle, piloted by  NASA  test pilot Bruce Peterson, was 
air-launched from B-52 aircraft a t  $5,000-ft.  altitude i n  sixth glide flight 
a t   Edwards  AFB.  Purpose  of  flight  was  checkout  of  new  pilot.  (NASA 
Proj.  Off.) 
*  President  Johnson  announced his  intention  to  nominate  Dr.  Werner  A. 
Baum,  Vice  President  for  Scientific  Affairs  of  New  York  Univ.,  as 
Deputy Administrator of  ESSA  to  succeed V/Adm.  H.  Arnold  Karo who 
would retire Jan.  1, 1967.  (Pres. Doc.,  9/19/66,  1305) 
*  LRC  Director  Dr.  Abe  Silverstein  discussed LRC  studies  on  use  of  liquid 
methane  as   an   aircraft  fuel  a t   the   5 th   Congress  of  the   International 
Council of  the  Aeronautical Sciences  (ICAS)  meeting in  London. Since 
liquid methane had  higher heating value,  greater  cooling capacity, and 
lower  price  per  pound  than   present  jet  fuels,  i ts   use  in   commercial 

294 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

supersonic  transport  might  increase  Sst  payload  by  30  per  cent  and 
similarly reduce direct operating cost.  Dr.  Silverstein pointed ou t ,  how- 
ever,  tha t   much  more  would  have  to  be  learned  about both  flight and 
ground equipment before liquid methane could be seriously  considered 
as  an  aircraft fuel.  (LRC  Release 66-56) 
September 16: New  York Times editorial:  ‘‘Space historians will have to invent 
new  superlatives  to  describe  the  contributions of  Gemini  11 and  astro- 
nau ts   Conrad  and  Gordon  to  man’s  en try   in to   the   cosmos.  From  the  
link-up with  the  Agena  in  th e  very first  orbit to  the  incredibly accurate 
automatic re tu rn  to  earth, the  three-day flight demonstrated a new  level 
of  capability  far  surpassing  that  shown  in   any  previous  flight  by  any 
nation.”  ( N Y T ,  9/16/66,  34M) 
e  Soviet  newspaper  Trud  said  that  although  Sept.  12-15 GEMINI XI  mission 
had se t  new altitude record, it otherwise only repeated “already achieved 
results.”  Trud  added  tha t   some  of  these  results  were  “worse”  than 
before, citing the  lesser length of  time spent in  Eva by Astronaut Richard 
F.  Gordon, Jr.  (AP ,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 9/16/66,  A2) 
0  Air  Force Assn.  honored  four   officers for  exceptional achievement a t   its 
second annual fall meeting in  Washington, D.C.:  Col. Robert A.  Berman, 
Wright-Patterson  AFB,  Logistics  Executive  Management  Award;  Col. 
Spencer S. Hunn ,  Hanscom Field, Mass.,  AFSC  Distinguished Award  for 
Management;  Col.  Gregory  C.  Frese,  Jr.,  Washington,  D.C.,  AFSC 
Meritorious  Award  for   Support  Management;  and  L/Col.  Martin  H. 
Brewer, Vandenberg AFB,  AFSC Meritorious Award for Program Manage- 
ment.  (J /A rmed  Forces,  9/10/66,  25) 
September  17:  U.S.S.R.  launched  five-  to  six-ton  spacecraft,  possibly  from 
Cosmos series, which  exploded into  51 pieces  detectable  by  radar.  GSFC 
Satellite  Situation  Report  would  later  reveal  tha t   nine  pieces  of  debris 
remained in  orbit on Oct.  15, the  rest having reentered beginning Sept. 
20.  Launch  was  first  unannounced  U.S.S.R.  space  flight  since  Jan.  4, 
1963. Evert  Clark  said  in   the  New York  Times tha t   launch marked  first 
U.S.S.R.  49” inclination  launch  from  Tyura  Tam  and  tha t   Kapustin 
Yar  had been  used  for all previous 49” launches.  (GSFC  SSR ,   10/15/66, 
22-5; Clark,  N Y T ,  11/1/66,  19; Wilson,  Wash. Post,  11/1/66,  3) 
NASA  reported tha t  smudgy spacecraft windows and exposure problems had 
compromised quality  of  most of  movie  film taken by  Astronauts Charles 
Conrad,  Jr.,  and  Richard  F .   Gordon,  Jr.,  during  Sept.  12-15 GEMINI  xi 
mission.  Still pictures  were  all  “of  good  quality”  and  showed  earth’s 
curva ture  more clearly  than  on any  other manmade photographs.  (AP ,  
Wash.  Sun.  Star,  9/18/66,  A8) 
September 18:  Records se t  by GEMINI XI mission tha t  had made “space history” 
were  detailed  in   Chicago American  editorial:  “The  greatest  speed  ever 
attained by man-18,129  mph-as  well as  the  slowest yet  flown by  any- 
one   i n   orbit  . . . 15,402 mph;  the   greatest  altitude ever  reached,  850 
miles;  t h e  first  ‘direct ascent’  rendezvous with  an  orbiting  satellite;  th e  
first multiple docking i n  space . . .; the  first rendezvous using on-board 
equipment, with  no  help from the  ground.”  (Chic. Am.,  9/18/66) 
0  Optimism  about  man’s  ability  to   perform  useful  work  in   space  was 
expressed by  Dr.  Charles Berry,  MSC  Director  of  Flight  Research  and 
Operations,  i n   telephone  interview with  Washington Post  writer  J.  V. 
Reistrup.  Astronaut Richard F.  Gordon, Jr., had demonstrated problems 
involved  when  he   had  left  GEMINI  XI  spacecraft  Sept.  13  to   perform 
seemingly  simple  tasks  and  had  exerted  enough  energy  to  raise  his 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

295 

hear t  ra te  to  peak  180  beats  a minute.  Berry said there  was  a  “tremen- 
dous amount  of  effort involved in  getting  into position  for performing 
basic  tasks”;  once  “positioning”  was  solved,  jobs  could  be  done.  The  
problem was to  se t  up  each activity to  require minimum effort.  (Reistrup, 
Wa sh .  Post,  9/18/66,  A4) 
September  18:  USAF  Aerospace  Medical  Div.  chief  scientist  Dr.  Hubertus 
Strughold stated  in   telephone interview with Washington Sunday  Star’s 
William  Hines  tha t   NASA  had  no t   given  adequate  a t ten t ion   to  keeping 
astronaut’s  vision  unimpaired during Eva.  He said tha t  in  normal ear th  
gravity,  man  could  orient  himself  by  means  of  sight  sense  (eyes); 
balance  sense  (otoliths  of  inner   ear) ;   and  pressure  sense  (Meissner 
corpuscles concentrated primarily in  palms  of  hands  and soles of  feet). 
I n  space there  was  no gravity, so otoliths and Meissner corpuscles could 
no t   function.  When   vision  was  also  lost  or  impaired,  orientation  was 
impossible.  Strughold  pointed  ou t   tha t   vision  impairment  had  been  a 
factor  in   curtailment  of  three   of  four  Eva  missions  to   date.  He  said 
advances in  training and in  spacesuit design were urgently needed. USAF 
had  been “working on  the  problem” but had  no t  been asked by NASA  for 
advice or  assistance.  (Hines,  Wash.  Sun. Star,  9/18/66,  A7) 
September 19:  NASA Aerobee  150 launched  from WSMR  reached  102-mi. (165- 
km.)  altitude in  GSFC-PrinCetOn Univ. Observatory experiment to  study 
ultraviolet  radiation  from  t h e   s tar   Epsilon  Canis  Majoris.  Although 
spectrograph recording was limited by rocket’s low altitude, good spectral 
resolution  was  obtained and wavelength limit was  extended shortward 
to   lines  never  before observed.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  Proposal  by  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  to  
establish  nonmilitary  global  navigation  system  had  been  rejected  by 
interdepartmental committee after two-year study.  Leonard Jaffe,  Direc- 
tor   of  NASA’s Communication  and  Navigation  Programs  Div.,  and 
chairman  of  the   committee, said  in   interview with  Aviation  Week tha t  
fu r the r   research  and  development were  required.  “Low-keyed”  study 
effort  planned  by  NASA  would  include  award  of  more  feasibility  study 
contracts to   industry and tes t   of  navigation equipment on Applications 
Technology Satellite  (Ats)  mission,  during  which  voice  transmissions 
would  be  made  to  aircraft.  Report  of  committee,  which  included 
representatives  from  NASA,  FAA,  DOD,  and  Dept.  of  Interior,  would  be 
submitted  to   Congress  in   several weeks.  ( A v .  Wk . ,  9/12/66,  38; Tech. 
Wk . ,  9/19/66,  3) 
e  Employment i n  th e  aerospace industry would reach 1,349,000 i n  December 
increase  of  11 per  cent  over  December  1965-Aerospace 
1966-an 
Industries Assn.  estimated in  a  semiannual survey.  Estimate was  based 
on  reports from  267 plants  and facilities of  59 companies which repre- 
sented nearly 80  per  cent of  en t ire  industry.  (AIA  Release 66-55) 
e  Gen.  Bernard A.  Schriever  (USAF, Ret.),  former AFSC  commander, became 
chairman  of  Aerojet-General Corp.’s  newly  established  advanced plan- 
ning  advisory  board.  He  would  serve  as  senior  consultant.  (Wash. 
Eve.  Star, 9/20/66,  A16) 
*  The generalaviation  (nonairline)  fleet  would  “be  8 0  per  cent  larger  and  
90  per  cent busier”  in   1975 than  in   1964, FAA estimated in  a staff study 
and forecast.  Study, which would  be used to  plan  aviation  facilities and 
services  during  next  decade,  predicted  tha t   160,000 general-aviation 
aircraft would  fly  30  million  hrs.  in   1975, compared  to   88,742  aircraft 
and 15.7 million hrs.  in  1964.  (FAA Release 66-87) 

296 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

September 19: I n  telegram to companies which had submitted Sst airframe and 
engine designs Sept.  6-Boeing  Co.,  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  General 
Electric  Go.,  and  P ra t t   & Whitney  Div.,  United  Aircraft  COTp.-FAA 
said i t  would  no  longer approve “the  public  release  of  any  information 
on the  supersonic transport program which  could be  construed as being 
intended  to  influence anyone’s judgment,”  relative  to  evaluation of  Ss t  
designs, un t i l  “conditions permit.” Selection of  contractors was expected 
i n  la te   1966.  (Clark, NYT ,  9/24/66,  50) 
FAA Administrator William F.  McKee  told  the   Economic Club of  Detroit 
tha t   by  bringing  closer  together  the   industrialized  and  developing 
nations,  supersonic  aircraft would  make  possible  “a  better  way  of  life 
for all.  . . . The social meaning of  this greater ability  to  communicate is 
difficult  to  imagine.”  Calling  air  travel  one  of  the   Nation’s  fastest- 
growing  businesses,  General  McKee  said  tha t   rate  of  increase  had 
averaged  14  per  cent  over  recent  years  and  had  jumped  to  25 per  cent 
for  the  first half  of  1966. (NYT ,  9/20/66,  76) 
Dr.  W.  C.  J.  Garrard,  George  K.  Williams,  and  William  W.  Williams, 
Lockheed-Georgia Co.  engineers,  had  been  named  recipients  of  Wright 
Brothers  Medal  by  Society of  Automotive Engineers  for  group  report 
on   development  of  soft-field  and  rough-field  landing  gear.  ( A v .   Wk . ,  
9/19/66,  25) 
September 20-22:  NASA’s 2,204-1b. SURVEYOR  11  (Surveyor 3) was  successfully 
launched from ETR’S  Complex 36 a t  8:32 a.m.  EDT.  After  excellent injec- 
tion by Atlas-Centaur (AC-7) launch vehicle on trajectory  toward moon’s 
Sinus Medii, spacecraft successfully accomplished all required sequences 
up  to  midcourse maneuver.  Initiated a t   1 :OO   a.m.  EDT  Sept. 21,  the  9.8- 
sec.  thrus t  phase was  unsuccessful because one of  three vernier engines 
failed  to  ignite,  which  caused  spacecraft  to   tumble  a t   about  1 rps. 
Thirty-nine  additional  attempts  were  made  to  s tar t   all  three  engines. 
I n  all cases,  the  same two  engines ignited;  the  third  did  not. 
JPL  engineers, uncertain  of  cause of  malfunction,  speculated i t  might 
be result of  stuck valve or insufficient power  to  operate engine’s trigger- 
ing mechanism. They  said  unless  i t   was  corrected,  SURVEYOR  11  could 
no t   softland  since  all  three  vernier  engines were  needed  to  stabilize 
spacecraft  dur ing  decelerating  descent to   lunar   surface. 
On  Sept.  22,  when  it  became  apparent  th e   mission  could  not  be 
completed, engineering experiments were performed to  obtain  as much 
data  as  possible  on  spacecraft  performance.  All  communication with 
spacecraft  was  lost  30  sec.  after  main  retro  ignition  a t   5:34  a.m.  EDT. 
Probable cause was  mechanical failure within  telecommunications sub- 
system  due  to  centrifugal  forces  generated  by  high  tumbling  rate. 
SURVEYOR  11  impacted in   area  of  moon  southeast  of  crater  Copernicus 
about  11:18 p.m.  EDT. 
Spacecraft was  second in   series  of  seven flights  to  prove  ou t   design, 
develop  technology  of  lunar   soft-landing,  and  provide  basic  scientific 
and   engineering data  in   support of  Project Apollo;  i t   contained survey 
television system and instrumentation to measure lunar  surface bearing 
s treng th ,   temperatures,  and  radar  reflectivity.  SURVEYOR  I,  identically 
equipped, was  launched May  30, successfully softlanded on moon June  
2 i n  region of  Oceanus Procellarum, and transmitted  10,338 pictures  to  
ear th .   Surveyor  program  was  under  direction  of  OSSA’S  Lunar  and 
Planetary Div. ; project management was  assigned  to  JPL;  Atlas-Centaur 
booster  was  managed  by  LRC;  prime  contractor  for  spacecraft  develop- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

297 

ment  and  design  was  Hughes Aircraft  Co.  (NASA  Release  66-248; NASA 
Proj.  Off.;  AP,  Wash. Post,  9/21/66,  A l ;  Wilford,  NYT ,  9/22/66,  2; 
NYT.  9/23/66.  25) 
September.20:  During Wh i te  House meeting with  President  Johnson,  NASA 
Administrator  James  E.  Webb  discussed  curren t   s ta tus   of  national 
space program  and  showed  President  two  previously  unreleased  color 
photographs-one 
of  sou thern   Texas,  the   other  of  Baja  California- 
taken  from  180-mi. altitude dur ing  Sept.  12-15 GEMINI  XI  mission.  Fol- 
lowing meeting, Webb announced tha t  Astronauts  Richard F.  Gordon, 
Jr.,  and Neil A.  Armstrong would  leave Oct.  7 for three-week tour  of  1 0  
Latin American nations : Venezuela,  Ecuador, Colombia, Peru ,   Bolivia, 
Brazil,  Paraguay,  Uruguay,  Argentina,  and  Chile.  (Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
9/21/66,  A4) 
Project Eros  (Earth Resources Observation Satellite)-program 
to  gather 
facts  about  earth’s  na tura l  resources  from  earth-orbiting satellites with 
remote  sensing observation instruments-was 
announced by  Secretary 
of  the   In ter ior   Stewart  L.  Udall:  “Facts  on  distribution  of  needed 
minerals,  our water supplies and  the  extent  of  water pollution,  agricul- 
tura l  crops and forests  and human  habitations,  can be used  for  regional 
and  continental  long-range  planning.”  Udall  named  Dr.  William  T. 
Pecora, Director of  U.S.  Geological Survey, to head program. (Beckman, 
Chic.  Trib.,  9/21/66;  CR, 9/27/66,  23171-2) 
*  Simulated Aerobee 150 was launched from WSMR  to 2-mi.  (3.2-km.)  altitude 
in   GSFC  flight  test  of  proposed  new  Aerobee  booster.  Instrumentation 
performed satisfactorily,  and  booster performance was  excellent.  (NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
*  USAF  launched unidentified satellite with  Thor-Agena D booster from WTR. 
(US. Aeron.  & Space  Act.,  1966, 156) 
Rep.  George  P.  Miller  (D-Calif.), chairman  of  the   House  Committee on 
Science and Astronautics,  told  the  National Space Club in  Washington, 
D.C.,  tha t   the  national  space program provided the  best  possible work- 
shop  for  gathering  of  vital  science and  technology necessary for  o ther  
important  goals  on  ear th :   “ In   other  words,  from  space  research  and 
development have  come  new  methods  of  thinking,  new  techniques  of 
management, new marriages of  scientific disciplines, and a new illumina- 
tion  on  possible  interrelationships  of  human  problems  to   scientific 
knowledge.”  During question and answer period, Rep.  Miller said there  
would  be  a  “very  definite mission”  for  the  260-in.-dia.  solid propellant 
motor  in   the   U.S.  space  program,  although  tha t   mission  could  no t  
presently  be strictly defined.  He said the  Nation would have  to  develop 
space  rescue  capability  and  one  apparently  promising way  to   do  th is  
was  through  the   use  of  solids.  Solids,  he  pointed  ou t ,   were  storable 
and  could be  readied  and  launched  on  shor t  notice.  (Text; M I S  Daily, 
9/21/66,  22) 
M2-F2  lifting  body  vehicle,  piloted  by  L/C  Donald  Sorlie  (USAF),  was 
air-launched  from  B-52 aircraft  a t   45.000-ft.  altitude  in   seventh  d i d e  
flight  at  Edwards  AFB;   purpose  of  flight  was  checkout  of  new  $lot. 
(NASA  Proi.  Off.) 
September  21:  I u a n  T.  Trippe,  chairman  and  chief  executive officer  of  Pan  
American World  Airways,  in  remarks made when he  received  National 
Defense Transportation Assn.  Award  in   Dallas,  urged  development of 
both  Boeing  and  Lockheed  supersonic  transport  prototypes:  “Only 
fur ther  competition between  these  two manufacturers,  during the  three  

298 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

years  required  to   buiId  and  flight-test  the   prototypes,  can  insure   tha t  
t h e   American  supersonic  transport  ultimately  selected  will  have  th e  
maximum attainable  performance.”  (Text; Av .   Wk., 9/26/66,  21) 
September 21: NASA  awarded Honeywell,  Inc.,  a  $$.Z-rnillion,  fixed-price con- 
t rac t   to  provide  six  computer  complexes  to  support Apollo  command- 
module  and   lunar-module simulators  a t   MSC  and  KSC  by  March  1967. 
(NASA Release 66-254) 
0  Dr.  Robert H.  Cannon,  Jr.,  professor  of  aeronautics and  astronautics a t  
Stanford Univ.,  succeeded Dr.  Robert G. Loewy as USAF’S  chief scientist. 
Appointment  was  for   one  year.  (DOD  Release  791-66;  M I S   Daily, 
9 /20 /66 ,21)  
September 22:  Dr.  Otis  E.  Lancaster,  professor  of  engineering education  a t  
Pennsylvania S ta te  Univ.,  was  sworn i n  as a consultant to  NASA  Admin- 
istrator.  He  would  advise  on  the   subjects  of  NASA-university  relation- 
ships,  methods  fo r  strengthening engineering education programs, and 
ways  to  provide stronger  engineering/administrative  ties.  (NASA  Release 
66-256) 
In   proclamation  designating Oct.  12 Columbus Day,  President  Johnson 
said  Columbus’  conquest  of  the   Atlantic,  “ the   ‘outer  space’  of  the  
fifteenth  century,’’  was  as  meaningful  to  Americans of  the   space  age 
“as  it  was  to  our  forefathers who  pushed  across  the   vast  expanses of 
this continent.”  All  ou r  frontiers were no t   conquered, for  “new  shores 
of  promise await  those who,  like Columbus,  push  on undaunted by  the  
failures  of  the   past  or  fear  of  the   uncharted  future.”  (Pres.  Doc . ,  
9/26/66,  1340) 
0  I n   address  to  U.N.  General  Assembly  in   New  York,  U S .   Ambassador 
Ar thur   J.  Goldberg  said  U S .   would  provide  “tracking  coverage  from 
United  States  territory”  for  Soviet  rocket  launchings  if  a  “mutually 
beneficial  agreement”  could be  made.  Stressing  tha t   tracking  facilities 
were  a  matter  for  “bilateral  negotiation  and  agreement,”  he  said  the  
treaty  to  govern  activities  in   outer  space  was  “too  urgent  and  too 
important to  be  delayed.  . . . It  is all  the  more  urgent because of  man’s 
rapid  strides  toward  landing on  the  moon.”  Impasse had  been  reached 
in  discussions  in  Geneva  because  U.S.S.R.  had  insisted  pact guarantee 
tha t   states  granting  tracking  facilities  to  any  country  provide  same 
facilities  to  other  countries.  (Text;  NYT ,   9/23/66,  12) 
0  M2-F2 lifting body  vehicle, piloted by  NASA  test pilot Bruce Peterson, was 
air-launched  from  B-52  aircraft  a t   45,000-ft.  altitude  in   eighth  glide 
flight  from  Edwards  AFB.  Purposes  of  flight  were  pilot  checkout  and 
tests  of  longitudinal  and  lateral stability  and  control  with  dampers on 
and off  a t  slightly higher  speeds.  (NASA Proj.  Off.) 
September 23:  NASA  Lewis Research Center had  awarded  General Dynamics’ 
Convair Div.  a $15,565,331,  fixed-price contract to  fabricate  and assem- 
ble  five  additional  Centaur  stages  for  fu tu re   space  missions.  (NASA 
Release  66-253) 
0  S-IC-3 booster  for  first  Sa turn  V  flight was  shipped from NASA’s Michoud 
Assembly  Facility  aboard Poseidon  to  MSFC  for  static-testing  scheduled 
for  late October.  (NASA  Release  66-218) 
0  Practical  dividends from investment in  space program were  cited by  MSFC 
Director  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  in   an   address  a t   Midwest  Space 
Exposition,  Jackson,  Mich.  In   addition  to  ‘‘tangible  re turns”   from 
advances i n  navigation,  meteorological,  and  communications satellites, 
he  noted  uses  of  space technology for  surveying earth’s  resources  and 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

299 

suggested  ultimate  benefits,  as  yet  unpredictable,  would  “dwarf ,   those 
he  had  named.  (Text) 
September  24:  Four-stage  Javelin  sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA 
Wallops  Station ejected multicolored barium  clouds over  eastern U.S. 
a t   310-mi.  (499-km.)  and  570-mi.  (917-km.)  altitudes,  Cooperative 
NASA-German Ministry of  Scientific Research  (BMWF)  experiment meas- 
ured electric fields and wind motion in  upper atmosphere by photograph- 
ing  and  tracking  ionized  clouds;  secondary  objective  was  observation 
of  interaction between  cloud and  solar  wind.  Launch  was  followed by 
reported  sightings  of  “brilliant”  Ufo’s.  ( N A ~ A  Release  66-245; Wallops 
Releases  66-46,  66-48;  AP,  Wash.  Pos t ,   9/25/66,  A23;  AP,  Wash. 
Sun.  Star,  9/25/66,  A3;  NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  Boeing  Co.,  General Electric  Co.,  and  P ra t t   & 
Whitney  Div.,  United Aircraft  Corp.,  charged  tha t   FAA  was  attempting 
a  form  of  censorship  by  restricting  advertisements  and  release  of 
information  on  proposed  Ss t   designs.  FAA  replied  tha t   the  temporary 
restriction  had  been  imposed  Sept.  19 to  keep  the  public  from getting 
only  fragments of  overall Ss t  s tory  and  to  relieve burden  of  ccclearing’y 
new  advertisements for publication  while  designs were  being evaluated 
by  the   Government.  (Clark, N Y T ,  9/24/66,  50) 
0  10-nation ESRO’S  new  rocket-launching base  opened a t  Sekkujokki, Sweden 
-inside 
the  Arctic Circle.  ESRO  would  launch some 400 British  Skylark 
and  French  Centaure  rockets  from  $7.6-million  base during next  eight 
years  to  study  aurora  borealis.  (Reuters,  N Y T ,  9/25/66,  42) 
0  Evidence for volcanic origin  of  lunar   craters was  presented  in   a  letter  to 
Nature by Univ. of Western Australia geologist 6. J. H. McCall. Eleventh 
frame of  photographs by NASA’s MARINER  IV  spacecraft revealed scalloping 
in   walls  of  Martian  craters  comparable to  scalloping in   terrestrial  cal- 
deras-such 
as Krakatau,  Indonesia, Aso,  Japan,  and Crater Lake, Ore. 
McCall had  also detected  scalloping in  lunar  craters, which  he  believed 
closely  resemble  terrestrial  volcano-tectonic  craters.”  Taking  “pro- 
c c  
nounced  scalloping  . . . to  be  a  valid  indication  of  volcano-tectonic 
subsidence,”  McCall  questioned  whether  lunar  craters  could  be  ex- 
plained by  hypervelocity impact.  (McCall, Nature,  9/24/66,  1384-5) 
0  US. offer  a t  U.N.  Sept.  22  to provide U.S.S.R.  with  tracking  facilities on 
US. territory  for  Soviet  space program received  editorial  comment in  
facilities  for  their  own space program,  th e  . . . offer  . . . should be most 
New  York  Times:  “If  all  the   Russians  are   after  is  improved  tracking 
agreeable  to  Moscow.  Conclusion of  a  Soviet-American treaty  for  this 
purpose  would  very  likely  help  smooth  the   way  for  similar  bilateral 
agreements between  the  Soviet Union  and other non-Communist coun- 
tries.  . . . Ambassador Goldberg’s suggestion points  the  way  to  satisfying 
legitimate  Soviet  needs  without  forced  infringement  on  the   national 
sovereignty  of  others.”  ( N Y T ,  9/24/66,  22) 
September 24-25:  Society of  Experimental Test Pilots’ conference in  Beverly 
Hills, Calif. Astronaut John W .  Young said space crews needed  “another 
se t   of  arms”  before  they  could  do  useful  work  in   orbit;  he   suggested 
rigid  arm-like  clamps  built  into  or  attachable  to  spacesuit.  Discussing 
early  fears  . . . tha t   zero  g  (weightlessness)  might  prove  a  physical 
problem,  Young  commented:  “There  is   simply  no t   tha t   difference 
between  zero-G  and  one-G  [earth’s  gravity].  Men  will  die  of  old  age 
before they are bothered by  zero-G.” Referring to present landing mode, 
Young said Gemini data had helped substantiate belief  tha t  land landings 

300 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

September  24:  Javelin  rocket  launched  from  Wallops  Station  releases  barium  cloud 
visible  over much  o f  eastern  United  States. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

301 

were  feasible  and  tha t   “development of  a  land-landing capability must 
be  vigorously pursued.” 
NASA  test  pilot  Milton  0. Thompson  was  awarded  SEW’S  1966 Iven 
C. Kincheloe Award, presented annually to the  outstanding experimental 
test  pilot  of  the   year,  “in  recognition  of  outstanding  professional 
accomplishment  in   the   flight  testing”  of  M2-F2  wingless  lifting-body 
vehicle.  (NASA Release  66-252;  FRC  Release  18-66;  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
9/24/66,  A2) 
September 25:  Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA  WaIlQps 
S ta t ion  ejected  mixture  of  barium  and  copper oxide  a t  about  125-mi. 
(201-km.)  altitude  during  ascent  and  a t   160-mi.  (258-km.)  altitude 
dur ing  both  ascent and descent.  Three  distinct  clouds,  visible for  h un -  
dreds of  miles, were  photographed and  tracked  in   second NASA-German 
Ministry  of  Scientific Research cooperative launch  to  measure  electric 
fields  and  wind  motions  in   upper  atmosphere  [see  Sept.  241.  (NASA 
Release  66-248; Wallops  Releases  66-46, 66-49; NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
Indications  were  increasing  tha t  President  Johnson would  accede to pres- 
sure   from  Wh i te   House  fiscal  advisers  to   cu t   $1 billion  from  Project 
Apollo budget as par t  of  effort to  reduce proposed N 1967 Government 
spending by  $4  billion,  Leslie  Carpenter  reported  in   the   Washington 
Sunday  Star.  It was  contended  tha t   reduction  would  postpone manned 
lunar landing by  only two years,  pu t t ing  i t   between  1970-72 rather than  
1968-70. NASA Administrator James  E.  Webb, opposing the  move, argued 
i t  would  raise  the  overall cost  and permit  the  U.S.S.R.  to  beat th e  U.S. 
to   the  moon.  (Carpenter,  Wash.  Sun.  Star,  9/25/66,  A21) 
Data  transmitted  from NASA’s PIONEER  VII  spacecraft  (launched from  ETR 
Aug.  17)  to  Johannesburg  DSN  station  indicated  spacecraft  had  pene- 
trated  earth’s  magnetic tail  a t   3.25 million  mi.  from  earth,  NASA  Ames 
Research  Center  announced.  Spacecraft measurements  of  solar  wind 
flux  suggested  PIONEER  vi1  had  emerged  from  and  repenetrated  tail 
several  times.  PIONEER  VI  (launched Dec.  16,  1965) had  observed tha t  
solar wind  does  no t   flow  from  th e  sun   in  straight lines  but  blows mag- 
netic tail from side to side; this “flapping” was reason spacecraft entered 
taiI  several  times.  (ARC PAO,  9/26/66) 
September 26:  Astronaut Richard F.  Gordon, Jr.,  pilot  of  Sept.  12-15 GEMINI 
X I   mission,  said  a t   MSC  mission summary news  conference tha t   80  per 
cent of  his energy during Eva was  spent trying  to  hold still and in  keep- 
ing  his  arms  and  hands  in   fron t   of  him while  connecting spacecraft  to  
Agena with te ther :   “. . . a little simple task tha t  I had  done many times 
in   training  to  the   tune   of  about  30  seconds lasted  about 30  minutes.” 
Gordon  recommended  development of  restraint  system  to  keep  astro- 
nauts  in   position  to   use  both  hands  while  outside  spacecraft.  He  said 
stiff spacesuit worn on  mission hampered his movements; his  arms and 
legs  tended  to   float  upward  because of  spacesuit’s  configuration.  (MSC 
Roundup,  9/30/66,  1-2; Waldron,  N Y T ,  9/27/66,  14 ;  AP, Wash.  Eve. 
Star,  9/27/66,  A4) 
0  Japan’s  first attempt to  orbit satellite failed when Lambda 4 s -1  rocket went 
off  course af ter  ignition  of  4th  stage.  The   8.&-ton,  55-ft.  booster was 
launched  from  Uchinoura  Range,  Kyushu  Island,  and  carried  57.2-1b. 
ins trumen t   package  designed  to   radio  back  scientific  information  on 
the   ionosphere.  Scientists  from  th e   Univ.  of  Tokyo  had  scheduled 
second launch attempt-using  39-ton Mu  rocket-for  December.  (NYT, 
9/27/66,  16; Tech.  Wk.,  10/3/66,  13) 

302 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

September 26: U.S.S.R.  began  carrier rocket  tests  in   the  Pacific, to  last un t i l  
Oct.  25.  Tass said  center of  area with  74-km.  (46-mi.)  radius  had  coor- 
dinates  of  37’14’  nor th   latitude  and  172’49‘  east  latitude.  Ships  and 
aircraft were  requested  no t   to   en ter   this  area daily  between  noon  and 
midnight local time.  (Tass,  Prauda, 9/25/66,  2) 
*  NASA  and NAS-NRC  jointly  announced  tha t   a  “limited  number”  of  appoint- 
ments  as  scientist-astronauts was  being  made  available.  To  qualify,  a 
scientist must  be  a  U.S.  citizen  on  or  before  March  15,  1967,  be  no 
taller than  six feet, be  born  after  Aug.  1, 1930, and have a doctorate in  
the  na tura l   sciences,  medicine,  or   engineering.  Applicants would  also 
be  required  to   meet  physical  qualifications  for   pilot  crew  members. 
After  th e   Academy  had  done  initial  screening,  NASA  would  make  final 
selection.  Deadline for   applications was  midnight,  Jan.  8,  1967. Appli- 
cants  would  be  informed  of  the ir   s ta tus   by  March  15,  1967.  (NASA 
Release 66-255; NAS-NRC  Release) 
NASA Administrator James E. Webb expressed appreciation  to  USAF,  on  i ts  
19 th  anniversary,  in  a  le t ter   to  Air  Force Awn.  President  Jess  Larson: 
“The  technology developed by  the  Air Force for its needs  in  th e  period 
before 1958 has served as the  foundation for the  manned and unmanned 
missions which NASA  is  carrying out.  . . . 
“An.  . .important  aspect  of  the  growing  aerospace strength  of  the  
United  States is  the   close cooperation between  the  Air  Force and NASA 
in  planning for  fu ture  projects.  . . .” (Text; AF / SD ,   11/66, 85) 
*  Comparing ear th  to  a  “manned  spaceship hur t l ing  through  the  infinity  of 
space,”  Vice  President  Hubert  H .   Humphrey  said  i n   address  a t   San  
Fernando S ta te  College tha t   exploration  of  space would  bring home the  
fact  tha t   “earth  is a mere speck in  the  universe.”  He said i t  would  seem 
increasingly  absurd we   had  no t  better  organized our  living  together  on 
this planet:  “Our  experience in  space can be  a powerful stimulus to  all 
of  us, wherever w e  live, to  move towards a world of  law, a world without 
war.  And  may  we  find  also  in   the   space  effort  tha t   ‘moral  equivalent 
of war’ for  which philosophers have been searching over many centuries. 
Like war,  i t  stretches our human capabilities to  the  utmost.  I t  demands 
all  tha t  we  possess  of  ingenuity,  determination,  persistence,  and  intel- 
l i g e n c e a n d ,   on  th e  par t   of  our  gallant  astronauts,  the  highest  degree 
of  courage and  resourcefulness  in   the   face  of  danger.  Space activities 
- e v e n   competition  in   space-can 
be  a  subs t i tu te   for  aggression,  a 
bridge  fo r   mutual  understanding  and  th e   identification  of  common 
in teres ts  with  other  nations,  and a major  tool  of  arms  control  and  dis- 
armament.”  (Text) 
*  Columbia  Univ.  oceanographic research  ship  Vema  was  fixing  position 
off  t h e  coast of  Iceland by means of  three  USN Transit navigational satel- 
lites.  This  marked  first  civilian  use  of  space  navigation  systems  for 
oceanographic  research.  Primary  function  of  satellites,  launched  in  
July 1964, was t o  help guide USN  ships and Polaris submarines. (Wilford, 
NYT,  9/26/66,  41) 
*  Pan   American World  Airways’  fan-jet Falcon  claimed  new  speed  record 
for   business  aircraft  when  it  flew  from  St.  John’s,  Newfoundland,  to  
Lisbon,  Portugal,  covering 2,388  mi.  in   4 hrs.  38 min.  28  sec.  North 
American Aviation’s  Sabreliner  had  set  previous  record  of  4  hrs.  45 
min. 59.4  sec.  on Oct. 26,  1963. Both flights had  been piloted by  George 
Eremea of  Petit Jean Air  Service.  (NYT, 9/29/66,  86) 

303 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
September 26:  U.S.S.R.’s  “period  of  inactivity  i n  manned  space flight”  re- 
ceived  editorial  comment in  Kansas City Star: ccAbout all  the  West  can 
do is wait un t i l  something happens. Meanwhile, the  U S .  program moves 
ahead  with  significant  achievements.  But  whiIe  guessing  can  be  fun ,  
a word  of  caution: Let’s  no t  make th e  mistake of  counting the  Russians 
ou t  of  th e  space race.”  (Kansas City  Star,  9/26/66) 
September 27:  U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  XI-which 
entered lunar  orbit Aug.  27-was 
studying gamma  rays  and x-rays  emitted  from  lunar   surface  “to  deter- 
mine  i ts   chemical  composition more  exactly,”  Tass  reported.  (Tass, 
9 /27 /66 ;   AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  9/27/66,  A l )  
e  Space negotiations  played  important  role  in  visit  of  West  German Chan- 
cellor  Ludwig  Erhard  to  U S .   Following  discussions  with  President 
Johnson,  jo in t   statement was  released  from  Wh i te  House:  “The  Pres- 
ident  and  the   Chancellor discussed possibilities for  increased  coopera- 
tion  in   technology and  science  and  in   particular  in   the   field  of  space 
research.  The  Chancellor expressed his  satisfaction  tha t   effective steps 
toward  increased  cooperation  in   space  research  have  been  initiated 
since  his  last  meeting  with  the   President  in   December  1965.  The  
President  and  the   Chancellor  welcomed  the   decision  to  expand  the  
present  cooperative satellite  program reached  as  a  result  of  the   recent 
discussions  in   Bonn  between  NASA  Administrator  Webb  and  Minister 
of  Science  Stoltenberg. 
“The  President and  the  Chancellor agreed  tha t  scientific cooperation 
should be  pressed forward for the  mutual benefit  of  both  countries and 
the   advancement  of  human  knowledge,  preserving  opportunities  for 
additional  nations  to  participate  and  contribute.” 
President  Johnson  and  Chancellor  Erhard,  accompanied  by  NASA 
Administrator  James  E.  Webb  and  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  S. 
McNamara,  later  flew  from  Washington,  D.C.,  to  Cape  Kennedy  for 
tour   of  KSC.  During  speech  in   Vehicle  Assembly  Building,  President 
Johnson  said  he   was  discussing  “with  the   Chancellor, as  well  as  other 
leaders, my  hope  tha t  our   scientists  can join  in  jo in t  endeavors to  reap 
the  full benefits  of  space research.”  He  said  he  had  authorized Admin- 
istrator  Webb  “to  discuss  whether  solar  physicists  from  Europe  may 
wish  to  be  associated  with  the  American solar  physicists”  i n  program 
for  Apollo Telescope Mount  (Atm)  to  be  flown  “on  an   Apollo  flight  in  
order  to  s tudy  the  sun  a t  the  height  of  the  solar  cycle.” 
Appealing  to  the  U.S.S.R.  for  early  conclusion of  a  treaty  on   outer 
space  exploration,  Johnson  said:  “1  earnestly  hope  tha t   the   Soviet 
Union-whose 
space achievements have  been  very  great-will 
feel  as 
we  feel  in  America:  tha t   the  rapid  evolution of  space technology makes 
. . . a treaty between us governing the  use of  space a most urgent matter 
. . . as we explore the  vastness of  space, and as we  dream of new horizons, 
we  work,  too,  for  the  manmade controls  tha t  w i l l   keep  these  efforts a t  
the  service of  man and a t  th e  service  of  peace.”  He noted  tha t  the  U S .  
sought and would  continue to  seek  cooperation in  space with  U.S.S.R.: 
“We  have  an   agreement  to  exchange certain  kinds  of  space data.  . . . 
We   will  soon  publish  jointly  American and  Soviet material  on  space 
biology  and  medicine.”  The   President  also  mentioned  tha t   the   U S .  
was  “on  schedule in  our  plan and our determination to pu t  men on  the  
moon  before  1970.”  (Pres. Doc.,  10/3/66,  1365-6, 1370; Wash.  Eve. 
Star,  9/28/66,  C1) 

304 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

September  27:  West  Germany’s  Chancellor  Ludwig  Erhard  and  President  Johnson  are 
briefed by  NASA officials at  Kennedy  Space Center. 

September  27:  President  Johnson,  in   10th  anniversary  edition  of  Russian- 
language  America  Illustrated,  published  by  USIA  for  distribution  in  
U.S.S.R.,  appealed  to  Soviet  people  for   new  era   of  friendship  and 
understanding  between  the   two  countries.  Johnson  said  “constructive 
steps”  toward  tha t  goal would  be  “progress  in  the  field  of  disarmament 
and  in   greater  cooperative  efforts  . . . in   space  exploration,  medical 
research,  and  communications.” He  added:  “We’ve  got  to  get  in to  the  
habit  of  peaceful  cooperation.  The  test  ban  treaty  was  a  significant 
step.  There   have  been  others  since  1963. We  have  agreed  no t   to  put 
bombs  in   orbit, we  are  working  together  on  . . . desalination,  weather 
information,  exchanges  of  scientists,  artists,  and  yes,  magazines.” 
(Pres. Doc.,  10/3/66,  1360-3) 
In  awards ceremony a t  NASA Hq., Administrator James E.  Webb presented 
Charles  Conrad, Jr.,  command  pilot  of  Sept.  12-15 GEMINI  XI  mission, 
gold  ribbon  attachment  to   NASA’s Exceptional  Service Medal  awarded 
to him after August  1965 GEMINI v spaceflight;  pilot Richard F.  Gordon, 
Jr.,  received Exceptional Service Medal. 
Webb announced tha t   during Sept.  10-16 visit  to West Germany for 
preliminary negotiations  of  space agreement, he  had  been authorized t o  
offer  room  on  manned  and  unmanned  spacecraft  for  valid  scientific 
experiments submitted by West Germans. Offer applied also to scientists 
of  other  nations.  (AP,  N Y T ,   9/28/66,  21;  T u s h .  Post,  9/28/66,  A$; 
Tech.  Wk., 10/3/66,  18) 
NASA,  to  “allow  a better  time and motion evaluation of  the  workloads and 
stresses”  experienced by  a n   as tronau t   during  extravehicular  activity, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

305 

had  canceled  plans  to  test  USAF  Astronaut  Maneuvering  Unit  (Amu) 
on Gemini XI1 mission. NASA  and  DOD  would study plans  to  reschedule 
experiment  on  later  manned  spaceflight.  (NASA  Release 66-258) 
September  27:  Prominent  details  of  the   moon’s  far  side  photographed  by 
ZOND  111  i n  July  1965 had  been  named  by  Soviet astronomers  for  great 
scientists, Tass reported.  Among them were the Korolev  thalassoid and 
the  craters  of  Confucius,  Spinoza,  Mendel,  Zhukovskiy,  and  Galois. 
Information  relayed  by  ZOND   111  would  be  included  in   second  part  of 
Atlas  of 
the  Other Side  o f   the Moon,  currently  under  preparation.  First 
part  was  published  i n   October  1960.  Prof.  Yuri  Lipski,  in   charge  of 
preparing  the  atlas,  said  one  of  the  photos  taken  by  LUNAR  ORBITER  I 
tha t  had been  “kindly  supplied by American researchers,”  had  revealed 
approximate 
overlap  of  details  in   photo  taken  by  ZOND  111  while 
remainder  of  photo  coincided  in   part  with  photos  taken  by  LUNA  III. 
(Tass,  9/27/66) 
0  Dr.  Eugene M.  Shoemaker,  chief  adviser  o n  geology  for  Interior  Dept.’s 
Geological Survey, proposed 10-yr. lunar exploration program following 
first  Apollo  astronaut  landings  late  in   this  decade  th a t   “would  have 
nothing  to  do  with  exploiting  natural  resources  of  the   moon.”  He 
explained:  “We  are  using  our  mineral  resources  a t   a  fantastic  rate. 
What  we  really  need  to  sustain  our economic needs  in  the  years  ahead 
is a  . . . theory  about how the  earth was  formed. A good way  to develop 
this  theory  would  be  by  comparison with  another  celestial body-and 
the moon  is ju s t  such a body.”  Cost would be  some $1.5  billion  a year. 
Proposal  was  made  during  interview  with  William  Hines,  Washington 
Evening  Star.  (Hines, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  9/27/66,  A9) 
September 28:  USAF  launched  an   unidentified  satellite  from Vandenberg AFB 
using  Titan  111-B-Agena D  launch  vehicle.  (UPI,  Wush. Daily  News, 
9/29/66,  24;  U S .  Aeron.  & Space Act.,  1966, 156) 
0  700-seat auditorium  would  be  built  a t  National  Academy of  Sciences and 
a  special award  established  as  a memorial to  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  late 
NASA  Deputy  Administrator.  Financing  would  be  by  Hugh  L.  Dryden 
Memorial  Fund,  established  by  Dr.  Dryden’s  personal  friends  and 
scientific associates shortly after his death in  December 1965. Announce- 
ment  was  made  jointly  by  Mrs.  Dryden,  NASA  Administrator  James  E. 
Webb,  and  NAS  President  Dr.  Frederick  Seitz. 
Commenting  on  proposed  memorial,  Webb  said:  “To  a  very  large 
degree  NASA  and  NASA’s program  owe  their  existence  and  success  to 
Hugh  Dryden.  . . . His wise leadership as Deputy Administrator  of  NASA 
and  as  NASA’s first  scientist,  played  a  leading  role  i n   creating  effective 
working relationships  between  Government,  industry,  and  the  univer- 
sities of  the  Nation  to meet the  tremendous new scientific and engineer- 
ing  tasks of  the space age.” 
Dr.  Seitz said:  “ I t   is particularly appropriate  tha t  funds raised  in  the 
name  of  Hugh  Dryden,  who  served  the  Academy  for  ten  years  as  its 
Home  Secretary,  be  used  to  provide  the  Academy  with  an   auditorium 
in  which  scientific  and  engineering  questions  of  national  importance 
could  be  discussed and  considered. Dryden’s remarkable personal  gifts 
as  fundamental  scientist,  engineer,  and  public  administrator  were 
responsible,  in great measure,  for  this nation’s preeminence  in aviation 
and  its  successes  in  space. To  all his  activities,  he  brought  ethical and 
professional standards tha t  were deeply admired by all who knew him.” 
(NAS-NRC Release; NAS-NRC-NAE  News Rpt.,  1;  Wash. Post, 9/28/66,  B4) 

306 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

September  28:  L ~ R C  awarded  7-mo.  study  contracts,  valued  a t   $390,000 
each,  to  Northrop  Corp.  and  Fairchild-Hiller  Corp.  to  design  V/Stol 
aircraft  for   research  on  handling  qualities  and  operation  during  in-  
s trumen t   approach  in   th e   terminal  area.  Aircraft  would  be  used  by 
NASA and USAF to gather flight research information necessary to improve 
operation of  V/Stol  jet aircraft in  hovering and  transition speed  range. 
(NASA  Release  66-259) 
0  US. invited NATO  allies to   use i ts  military  comsat system temporarily and 
to  collaborate  i n  joint  development of  new  system  specifically  for  th e  
alliance.  U S .  would  make  time  available on   i t s  seven-satellite military 
network launched by  USAF Titan I11 rocket June   17. To adapt system to  
NATO’s  needs, it was proposed tha t  new ground station be built  in  Naples 
to  operate with one under  construction in   the  Netherlands and ano ther  
operating in  West Germany. I n  early  1968, satellite  would  be  launched 
from  U S .   site  in to   synchronous  orbit  a t   22,300-mi.  (35,903-km.) 
altitude  for   alliance’s  exclusive  use.  I t   could  be  built  by  consortium 
of  member countries.  Eventually,  comsat system was  envisaged whose 
relays  would  permit  use  of  ground  stations small enough  to  be  carried 
on  a  truck which could  be used  by  military  un i ts  on  the  move.  Cost  of 
plan  was  said  to  be some $50 million.  Proposal would  be  on  agenda of 
nex t  meeting of  NATO’s  foreign ministers,  se t  tentatively  for Dec.  15-16. 
(Mooney, NYT, 9/29/66,  1; Nossiter,  Wash. Pos t ,   9/29/66,  A22) 
M2-F2  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  L/C  Donald  Sorlie  (USAF),  was 
air-launched  from  B-52  aircraft  a t   45,000-ft.  altitude  in   n in th   glide 
f igh t  a t  Edwards AFB.  Purposes  of  flight were  to  complete pilot  check- 
ou t  and  to  extend  th e  M2-FZ’s flight  envelope.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
Soviet  physicians,  according  to   Tass,  had  reported  tha t   highlanders  or 
people  who  had  lived  for  a  long  time  in  mountain  areas made  the  best 
as tronau t   candidates  since  they  “spend  the   energy  of  their  organism 
much more e c ~ n o m i c a l l y . ~ ~  They  used  less oxygen when  doing physical 
work; had  approximately 30 per cent greater  resistance  to oxygen shor t-  
age;  and possessed  “heightened  resistance  to  infrared, ultraviolet,  and 
cosmic radiations.”  (Tass,  9/29/66) 
September  29:  Crew for  second manned Apollo mission,  scheduled for  1967 
as open-ended ear th  orbital flight up to  1 4  days, was announced by NASA: 
Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  command  pilot;  Donn  F.  Eisele,  senior  pilot; 
and Walter Cunningham, pilot. Backup crew:  Frank Borman,  command 
pilot;  Thomas  P.  Stafford,  senior  pilot;  and  Michael  Collins,  pilot.  I t  
would  be  first  space mission for Eisele  and Cunningham.  (NASA  Release 
66-260) 
0  NASA  Marshall Space Flight  Center had  awarded three new study contracts 
totaling  $400,000  to  investigate  launch vehicle needs and best methods 
for sending manned spacecraft on planetary flyby trips : North American 
Aviation,  Inc.,  received  $100,000  to  s tudy   feasibility  of  modifying 
Sa tu rn  V 2nd stage  (S-11)  for use as  an  orbital  injection  stage; Douglas 
Aircraft Co.,  $100,000 for feasibility of  using Sa turn  V 3rd stage (S-IVB) 
as  par t   of  a  planetary  vehicle;  and  TRW  Systems,  Inc.,  $200,000  for 
alternate mission modes for manned Mars and Venus orbital and landing 
missions.  (MSFC  Release 66-223) 
0  Soviet  scientists,  in   report  distributed  by  Tass,  said  i t  was  now  possible 
to   protect  spacecraft  from  radiation  with  a n   electromagnetic field  in  
place  of  heavy metal  shielding  tha t   had  begun  to  limit  possibilities of 
space  travel.  “The  proposed  electrostatic  protection  is  much  lighter, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

307 

with its weight consisting only of  the  electrodes, insulators, and sources 
of  power.”  Tass also  quoted  Soviet scientists  as   saying  tha t   danger of 
man’s  becoming  overheated in   space during prolonged work  in   a n  air- 
tight  su i t   would  disappear  if  the   su i t   were  ventilated  from  within. 
Experiments  had  shown  tha t   man  wearing  a n   unventilated  spacesuit 
might  develop  first  symptoms  of  overheating  on  fou r th   day;  on  fifth 
day,  body  temperature might  rise and  hear t   ra te   increase,  resulting in  
considerably decreased ability  to work.  (Tass, 9/29/66;  AP, Wash. Post, 
9/29/66,  A l )  
September 29:  Boeing Co.  unveiled a  $2-million,  full-scale mockup of  1,800- 
mph  Sst-featuring  variable-sweep wings, 350-passenger capacity, and  a 
in   Government-sponsored  competition  for  Sst 
movable  nose-built 
production  contract.  Specifications were  suhmitted  to  FAA  Sept.  6,  for  
evaluation.  (Boeing  Photos; Clark, N Y T ,  9/30/66,  45; Wash. Eve.  Star, 
9/30/66,  B9) 
*  AIA.4-sponsored tour  of  European aerospace companies began in  Paris with 
briefing  arranged  by  Eurospace,  the   Council  of  European  Indus tr ia l  
Groups. AIAA  President Raymond L.  Bisplinghoff led  the  combined tour ,  
which  then   broke  into  three  groups  for  visits  to   facilities  in   France, 
U.K.,  Belgium,  the  Netherlands, West  Germany, and  Italy. 
In  a  welcoming address in   Paris, Eurospace President Jean  Delorme 
said  his  group  would  (1) urge  establishment  of  a  “European  Space 
Authority”  modeled  after  ESRO,  (2)  encourage greater  national  invest- 
men t   in   cooperative  R&D  progress,  and  (3)  point  ou t   discrepancy 
between  Europe’s high  economic potential  and low  investment in  aero- 
space R&D.  (Newbauer and  Hersey, A&A,  1/67,  46-56) 
September 30:  NASA’s Blossom Point, Md.,  tracking station, prototype station 
for  Project  Vanguard,  was  closed  “because  of  technical  progress  in  
space  communications.”  Blossom  Po in t   Station,  which  had  tracked 
every  unmanned  earth-orbiting  NASA  satellite  since  EXPLORER  I  was 
launched  Jan.  31,  1958, would  become  part  of  STADAN  Network  Test 
and Training Facility a t  GSFC.  Facility, to be operational by Jan.  1, 1967, 
would  test  equipment, modes,  and  procedures and  train  personnel  for 
STADAN  stations.  (NASA Release  66-117) 
*  Three earth-orbiting objects not identified  “with  any launching or country 
of  origin”  were  reported  by  GSFC  Satellite  Situation  Report.  Two  had 
inclination  of  85” and  the  third,  35”.  (GSFC  SSR ,  9/30/66;  Clark, N Y T ,  
11/1/66,  19) 
September 30-October 2:  Series of  Nike-Cajun and one Nike-Apache sounding 
rocket  were  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station  and  Natal,  Brazil, 
in   GSFC  experiment to  obtain  temperature, wind,  pressure, and  density 
data  a t   intervals  throughout  24-hr.  periods  near  fall  equinox.  Using 
exploding  grenade 
thermally 
technique,  experiment  investigated 
driven  diurnal  tide  theory  of  upper  atmosphere.  Wind  motion  was 
studied  by  photographically tracking  smoke  puffs  from  upper  grenade 
using  Apache  rocket  motor.  Rockets  and  instrumentation  performed 
satisfactorily.  (NASA Rpt.  SRL) 
During  September:  Vice  President Hubert  Humphrey,  in   a n   interview with 
Technology  Week ,  predicted  tha t  U.S.  would  land men  on  the  moon  in 
before  U.S.S.R.  He  said  the   Johnson  Administration 
1969-probably 
had  definite plans  for   “very  active  post-Apollo s ~ h e d u l e , ’ ~  bu t   refused 
to  “put  a  time  schedule  on   what  comes  next.”  Post-Apollo activities 
would  include  exploring  the   moon,  increasing  our   knowledge  of  the  

308 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

planets,  expanding earth-orbiting capability, both  manned and   unman- 
ned,  and  developing  maneuverable,  reusable  spacecraft.  The   Vice 
President  foresaw  no  possibility  of  merging  USAF’S  Manned  Orbiting 
Laboratory  (Mol)  program with  any   of  NASA’s  manned  projects.  (Tech. 
JYk.,  9/5/66,  12,  13) 
During  September:  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  were  exchanging  daily  six  to  eight 
weather  satellite photographs with  nephanalyses. First  U.S.  transmittal 
began Sept. 6 with pictures from ESSA I meteorological satellite, launched 
Feb.  3.  On  Sept.  11,  U.S.S.R.  began  sending  pictures  from  COSMOS 
CXXII,  launched  June  25.  Regions  photographed-primarily  Atlantic 
Ocean and Western Europe-had  been matched so  operations of  satellite 
systems could be compared. Joint effort to  improve transmission quality 
had  been proposed  since  transmission seemed  to  degrade  photographs : 
U.S.  scientists  found Soviet photos  “poor”  in  quality;  Soviet scientists 
described U.S.  photos  as  “usable.” 
Receipt  of  photos  from  COSMOS  CXXII  had  enabled U.S.  to  analyze 
satellite’s instrumentation: COSMOS  CXXII  carried pair  of 48’ TV cameras 
canted  16.5” to  each  side  of  orbital  plane  to  provide coverage  of  about 
690 mi.  of  earth.  Cameras  overlapped field  of  coverage  by  1”; frames 
transmitted  so  far  had  10  per  cent  overlap.  ( A v .  Wk., 9/26/66,  26-7; 
Schmeck, NYT,  9/27/66,  15) 
Scientific and  technological  knowledge  must  be  directed  to  the   “making 
and  keeping  of  peace,”  Dr.  Donald  F.  Hornig,  Director  of  Office  of 
Science  and  Technology  and  science  adviser  to  the   President,  told 
General  Electric  Forum. 
ccScience will  no t   be  the   sole  contributor  toward  this  end.  . . . Its 
role  must be  to  relieve  those pressures  tha t  have  traditionally  been  the  
causes  of  political,  social,  and  economic instability-pressures  which 
have  always  led  to  an  upheaval of  social order.  By  helping to  alleviate 
poverty,  ignorance  and  disease,  and  by  improving  food  supplies  and 
living  conditions,  science can help  to  remove th e   causes of  war.  . . .” 
(GE  Forum, 7-9/66,  8 )  
0  Honors  and  elections  reported  by  Aviation  W e ek :   (1)  George  Galipeau, 
president  of  Van  Dusen  Aircraft  Supplies,  was  elected  president  of 
National  Pilots  Assn.  (NPA) ; (2)  Paul  Poberezny, president  of  Experi- 
mental  Aircraft  Assn.,  was  named  1966 NPA  Pilot  of  the  Year; and  (3) 
H.  M.  Horner,  United  Aircraft  Corp.’s  chairman  and  chief  executive 
officer,  was  named  recipient  of  National  Aviation  Club’s  Award  for 
Achievement  for  his  “life-long  devotion  to   the   advancement  of  air 
power  and space power  for world  commerce and Free World Defense.” 
( A v .  m., 9/12/66,  23) 
0  Rep.  Joseph  E.  Karth  (D-Minn.), chairman  of  House  Science and  Astro- 
nautics  Committee’s  Space  Sciences  Subcommittee,  recommended  in  
Astronautics  &  Aeronautics  tha t   manned  and  unmanned  earth-orbital 
missions be given major  emphasis in   the   next  few  years.  He  suggested 
lower  priority  be  assigned manned planetary  exploration  and  establish- 
ment  of  manned  lunar   bases,  bu t   tha t   unmanned  Voyager  Mars  and 
Venus missions be  given more  extensive support.  (A&A ,  9/66,  12-14) 
NASA  released its 1,OOOth Tech Brief, one which described development of 
improved titanium alloy  of  possible value  in  field  of  medicine. 
Potential  industrial  uses  of  inorganic  fibers  developed  as   reinforce- 
ments in  materials for spacecraft were discussed in  Non-Glassy Inorganic 
Fibers  and  Composites, issued by  NASA  Office of  Technology Utilization. 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

309 

Techniques  used  to  monitor  astronauts’  blood  pressure  could  be 
adapted  to  prolong  the   lives  of  persons  with  certain  types  of  hear t  
disease,  concluded  Westinghouse  Research  Laboratories  engineers 
William  J.  Jones  and Wyatt  C.  Simpson in  monograph entitled  NASA 
Contributions  to   Cardiovascular  Monitoring.  Study  was  conducted  for 
NASA’s  Office of  Technology Utilization.  (NASA  Releases  66-238, 66-246, 
66-250) 
During September: USAF had begun evaluation studies of  Adam  (Air Deflection 
and Modulation) II-a 
revolutionary typeof aircraft with engines located 
inside  the  wings-at  Wright-Patterson AFB.  A  full-span, powered model 
of  the   propulsive-wing V/Stol  aircraft  would  be  designed,  built,  and 
tested by LTV Aerospace Corp. under a  ls-mo., $439,000 contract jointly 
funded by  USAF  and USA.  Wind-tunnel tests would be made  a t  LaRC.  Air- 
craft  could be  used  in   both  military  tactical  and  commercial passenger 
versions.  (AFSC Release 154.66) 

October 1966 

October  1:   Eighth  anniversary  of  NASA,  established  by  the   National  Aero- 
nautics  and  Space Act  of  1958. 
Rufus E.  Miles,  Jr.,  director of  mid-career programs a t  Princeton  Univ.’s 
Woodrow Wilson School of  Public and International AfTairs  and former 
HEW  Assistant  Secretary  for  Administration,  was  sworn  in   as  a  NASA 
consultant  on  management  operations.  (NASA  Release  66-277) 
October  2:  ESSA  111  (Tos-A),  third  meteorological  satellite  in   Tiros  Opera- 
tional  Satellite  (Tos)  series  and  first  to  include  Advanced  Vidicon 
Camera  System  (Avcs),  was  successfully  launched  for  ESSA  by  NASA 
from  WTR  using  three-stage  Thor-Delta booster  on  mission  to  provide 
daily  global  cloud-cover photos.  Satellite  achieved  nearly  polar,  sun-  
synchronous  orbit  with  922-mi.  (1,486-km.)  apogee;  858-mi.  (1,381- 
km.)  perigee;  114.5-min. period;  and  101” inclination.  I t  was  expected 
to  transmit first photos  to Gilmore Creek, Alaska, receiving station Oct. 
3.  An  advanced version  of  the  cartwheel configuration,  325-1b. ESSA  111 
carried  two  Avcs  systems  to  provide  cloud  coverage  and  an   infrared 
sensor  (Ir)  to measure earth’s  heat balance. Launch was  first for Thor- 
Delta  booster  from WTR. 
ESSA  financed,  managed,  and  operated  the   Tos  system;  GSFC  was 
responsible for  procurement, launch,  and initial  checkout of  spacecraft 
in   orbit.  First  two  satellites  in   system-ESSA 
I  and  ESSA  11-were 
launched Feb.  3 and  Feb.  28,  respectively.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.; AP,  NYT ,  
10/3/66,  11; AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  10/3/66,  A12) 
NASA  ended  series  begun  Sept.  30  of  ten   Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets 
carrying  acoustic  grenades  launched  a t   six-hour intervals  from  Natal, 
Brazil,  and NASA  Wallops Station to  gather meteorological information 
on  atmosphere  between  20-mi.  and  60-mi.  altitude.  Grenades  were 
ejected and detonated a t  programed altitudes  to  study diurnal  variations 
in  winds,  temperatures, densities, and pressures.  Launchings completed 
international  series  of  experiments for  meteorological research  i n   th e  
upper atmosphere carried  ou t  under Nov.  15, 1965, agreement between 
Brazilian  Space  Commission  (CNAE) and  NASA.  (NASA Release  66-265; 
Wallops Release 66-52) 
Zenith  Radio  Gorp.  demonstrated  experimental  systems  for  displaying 
television  pictures  which  substituted  laser  beam  for  conventional 
cathode-ray tube.  Small nozzle  placed  on  one wall  projected  television 
image  on  opposite wall  in   same  fashion  as  movie  projector.  Clarity  of 
images  produced  by  laser  beam  was  only  slightly  below  tha t   of  con- 
ventional  TV  sets.  (Kotulak,  Chic.  Trib., 10/3/66) 
9  NAS  Council approved statement urging scientists to  “help maintain ICSU’S 
[International Council of  Scientific Unions’]  nonpolitical  traditions by 
avoiding  controversial  nonscientific  activities  while  participating  in  
union-sponsored meetings.”  (NAS-NRC-NAE  News  Report,  10/66,  11) 

310 

311 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
October 2: President of  th e  Republic of  the  Philippines Ferdinand Marcos was 
seeking to postpone Asian  summit conference on Vietnam from Oct.  18 
to  Oct.  24  to  allow  time for   comsat, scheduled for   launch  over Pacific 
Oct.  19 by  NASA  for  ComSatCorp,  to   become  operative.  Comsat  would 
assure worldwide mass  media  coverage of  event.  (Reuters,  Wash. Post, 
10/3/66) 
*  “The  answer to   the  housing problem lies  on  the  way  to   the  moon,”  tech- 
nologist  and  Sou thern   Illinois  Univ.  research  professor  Buckminster 
Fuller  told  Wolf  Von  Eckardt  of  the   Washington  Post.  Much  of  th e  
complex apparatus used  in  development of  closed ecological systems fo r  
long manned  space flights  could be  used  in   terrestrial  housing,  Fuller 
said.  He  envisioned  enclosing  the   necessary  machinery  in   a  “little 
black  box.  . . . We are investing  $7  billion  in  it.  I t  weighs  500 pounds. 
We can probably mass-produce i t  for $2 a pound. 
“That means we  can give all the  things they need foremost in  a house 
-water,  hea t ,  cooling and waste  regeneration-for  $1000.  And  we  can 
give  i t  to   them without  tying  them  down  to  real  estate with  i ts  waste- 
fully  expensive water pipes  and  sewers  . . . with  high-pressure sprays 
and  chemical regeneration,  a man  can quench his  th irs t  and clean him- 
self  for a  long  time with jus t   a  glass  of  water. 
“[I t]   . . . also  solved  the   pollution  problem.  . . .”  (Von  Eckardt, 
Wash. Post,  10/2/66,  G11) 
October  3: USC&GS  ship  Oceanographer,  $9.2-million  “floating  laboratory,” 
left  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  on   11-week,  14,000-mi.  expedition  to  conduct 
marine scientific studies off  eastern coast of  Sou th  America and partici- 
pate in  observations of  total eclipse of  the  su n  Nov.  12. Expedition was 
being  conducted  by  ESSA.  (ESSA  Release  66-57) 
e  Absence  of  statement by  President Johnson  and West German Chancellor 
Erhard  after  their  September  meeting  i n   Washington,  D.C.,  on  sug- 
gested  US.-Western  Europe  program  of  unmanned  exploration  of 
Jupiter  indicated  tha t   the  proposal had  been  “killed  for  the  foreseeable 
fu ture ,”   Technology  Week speculated.  (Tech. Wk . ,   10/3/66,  3) 
0  Anticipating launching  of  Pacific  satellite  in   late  1966, ComSatCorp filed 
tariff  with  FCC   for  Pacific  services.  Monthly  rates  ComSatCorp would 
charge authorized common carriers would be $2,700 between U S .  main- 
land and Hawaii; $4,900 from U S .  mainland to Japan; and $3,800 from 
Hawaii  to  Japan.  Tariff  for  service  to  NASA  for  Project Apollo would  be 
equivalent  to  level  of  charges  applied  to  other  commercial  satellite 
channels.  ComSatCorp  also  said  it  planned  reduced  rates  for  Atlantic 
services,  to  apply  when  second  satellite  became  operational.  (ComSat- 
Corp Release) 
*  M/G  John  D.  Stevenson  (USAF,  Ret.),  former  commander of  Joint  Task 
Force  Eight  of  the   Defense  Atomic  Support  Agency,  was  appointed 
Special  Assistant  to  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller  to   assist  with  general  management  of 
manned  space flight activities.  (NASA Ann.) 
e  Tonnage of  U S .  bombs  dropped on Vietnam i n   1966 would  surpass  tha t  
dropped by  U S .   in   the   en t ire  Pacific  during World  War  I1 or  during 
three  years  of  the  Korean War,  Ted  Sell reported  in   the   World J o u d  
Tribune. U.S.  planned to drop 638,000  tons  of  bombs in   1966 compared 
to  502,781 tons dropped by  USAF  i n  the  Pacific between 1941 and  1945. 
(Sell,  W J T ,  10/3/66,  4) 

312 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

October 3-8: MsFc-sponsored space sciences exhibit tracing history of  rocketry 
into  the   fu tu re   of  space  exploration,  with  models  of  rockets,  rocket 
engines, and  spacecraft, was  featured  a t  Alabama S ta te  Fair  in  Birming- 
ham.  (MSFC  Release  66-224) 
October  4:  Ninth  anniversary  of  orbiting  of  SPUTNIK  I  by  U.S.S.R. 
*  U.S.S.R.’s LUNA  XI spacecraft,  which  entered  lunar  orbit  Aug.  27,  stopped 
transmitting a t  2:30  GMT  Oct.  1 when  i ts  batteries  were  exhausted, Tass 
reported.  Spacecraft had  completed  277  orbits  around  moon  and  had 
sen t   137 transmissions of  scientific information  and  trajectory  data  to 
monitoring  stations on  earth.  Results  would  be  published later.  (Tass, 
10/4/66;  Tass,  Pravda,  10/5/66,  1, USS-T  Trans.) 
NASA  announced  plans  to  launch  two  ion  engines into  polar  orbit  in   late 
1968 satellite mission to  advance development of  ion engines as propul- 
sion un i ts  for  fu ture  long-duration space missions.  Second part  of  LRC’S 
Space  Electric  Rocket  Test  (Sert)  program,  mission  would  evaluate 
inflight  performance  of  electron-bombardment  ion  engines  for  six 
months or  more and analyze effects of  thrus ters  and their  electric fields 
on o ther  satellite  components. LRC  conducted first  successful  operation 
of  ion  engine  in   space July  20,  1964, in   50-min. Sert  I  ballistic  flight 
from NASA  Wallops Station.  (NASA Release  66-262) 
e  Dr.  Ren6 Dubos, microbiologist and pathologist a t  Rockefeller  Univ.,  was 
selected  to   receive  Pacific  Science  Center’s  1966 Arches  of  Science 
Award  for his  “outstanding  contribution  to  the  public understanding of 
the   meaning  of  science  to   contemporary  man.”  (Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
10/5/66,  A8) 
*  France  exploded  last nuclear  device  in   i ts   test  series  a t  Mururoa  Atoll  in  
the  Sou th  Pacific. There was no official estimate on size of  the  explosion. 
Test  series  began  July  2.  (Reuters,  Wa sh .   Post,  10/5/66,  A21;  AP, 
Wash.  Eve.  Star,  10/5/66,  A9) 
October 4-7: NASA-Lewis  inspection  held  a t   LRC  to  commemorate 25th  year 
of  operation  as  aeronautical  and  space propulsion  research  laboratory; 
Lewis-managed  launch  vehicles  and  the   GEMINI  VII  spacecraft  were  on 
display  for  congressional,  Government,  university,  and  industrial 
leaders  touring facility.  (LRC  Release 66-60) 
October  5:  Revised  Soviet  draft  for  space  law   treaty  circulated  to  U.N. 
members  contained  three   apparent  concessions  to  U.S.  position:  (1) 
equal  access  to   all  nations’  tracking  facilities  would  be  arranged  by 
bilateral  negotiations;  (2)  all  parties  would  inform  U.N.  Secretary 
General,  the   public,  and  international  scientific  community of  na ture  
and  results  of  their  activities  in   space  “to  th e   greatest  extent  feasible 
and  practicable”;  and  (3) space stations and vehicles of  any party on the  
moon  and/or  o ther   celestial  bodies  would  be  open  to  visitors  “on  a 
basis  of  reciprocity”  with  “reasonable advance notice.”  (Teltsch, NYT ,  
10/6/66,  6 ;  Wa sh .  Post,  10/6/66,  A20) 
USAF  launched USA’s SECOB VIII  geodetic  satellite  and unidentified satellite 
with  Atlas-Agena  D  booster  from  WTR.  (U .S .   Aeron.  &  Space  Ac t . ,  
1966 ,156 )  
M2-F2  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  L/C  Donald  Sorlie  (USAF), was 
air-launched  from  B-52  aircraft  a t   45,000-ft.  altitude  in  10 th   glide 
flight  a t   Edwards AFB;  purpose  was  to  explore lateral and  longitudinal 
stability  and  control  characteristics  with  dampers  on  and  off.  (NASA 
Proj.  Off.) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

3 13 
October  5:  NASA  Astronaut  Michael  Collins  presented  U.S.  flag  carried  on 
July  18-21 GEMINI  x mission to  St.  Albans School i n  Washington, D.C., 
as  ‘‘a  token  of  my  appreciation  for  getting  me  started  on  this  road.” 
Collins and three  other alumni were honored by  St. Albans a t  a banquet 
and reception.  (Adams, Wash. Eve. Star,  10/6/66,  B1) 
October  6:  In   his  first  X-15  flight  test,  Maj.  Michael  J.  Adams  (USAF)  flew 
X-15  No .   1 to   2,045  mph  (mach  3.0)  and  75,400-ft.  altitude  before 
making  successful  emergency landing  a t   Cuddeback  Dry  Lake,  Calif., 
when  fuel  tank  unported  SI0  sec.  after  launch.  There  was  no  aircraft 
damage  or  pilot  injury.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
*  Press  briefing  was  held  a t   L aR c   on  results  of  NASA’s LUNAR  ORBITER  I 
mission,  launched Aug.  10 from ETR  to  orbit  the   moon and photograph 
possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts. 
The   more  than   200  photos  transmitted  by  the   spacecraft  revealed 
a rugged  lunar  landscape covered with  thousands  of  craters. Ridges and 
hills  were more gently  sloped  near moon’s  center  and  became progres- 
sively  smoother  in   the   west.  Presence  of  large  rocks,  o r   “blocks,” 
proved tha t   surface  was  firm  enough  to  support manned  spacecraft.  Of  
the  nine sites photographed, the  Ocean of  Storms where SURVEYOR I was 
resting  appeared safest  for manned landing. Classified as  a dark mare- 
flat, waterless plain with  relatively few craters-it  had  20 per  cent fewer 
craters  than   any  of  th e   other  sites. 
U.S.  Geological  Survey  scientists  Dr.  Harold  Masursky  and  Dr. 
Lawrence Rowan suggested tha t  the  photos showed evidence of  volcanic 
activity.  Citing  a  small  cone-shaped hill  on  line  of  a  geologic  r if t   near 
SURVEYOR  I  and  a large crater o n  the  back  of  the  moon, apparently filled 
with  congealed lava, Dr.  Masursky  said:  “The moon is not a cold, dead, 
lifeless  planet.  I t   looks  close  to  being  as  dynamic  as  the   earth.”  Dr. 
Rowan  noted  tha t  major  faults  on  the   lunar   surface  seemed  to  r un   in  
two  general  directions-northeast-southwest  and  southeast-northwest 
-and 
concluded tha t  much  of  th e  volcanic activity  probably  occurred 
along these  lines. 
LaRC  scientist  William  Michael  said  nonphotographic  data  on  th e  
satellite’s  orbit  indicated  moon  might  tu rn   flat  side  toward  earth,  no t  
bulgy  side as generally believed. He  said displacement of  moon’s  center 
of  mass  toward  ear th   could explain  both  a  flat  face  and  moon’s  slight 
wobble, which had been accounted for previously by the  ‘‘bulge”  theory. 
Micrometeoroid detection  experiment  had  no t   recorded  any  “hits” 
during satellite’s eight weeks in  lunar  orbit  in  contrast to earth-orbiting 
satellites  which  often  registered  a  h i t   every two  weeks. 
Project  Manager  Clifford  H.  Nelson  announced  tha t   Lunar  Orbiter 
E - second   of  five satellites  in  series-would  be  launched between Nov. 
6  and  11 to  photograph  area  slightly  north  of  tha t   scanned  by  LUNAR 
ORBITER  I.  (Clark,  NYT ,   10/7/66,  5;  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  10/7/66,  A3; 
O’Toole,  T u s h .  Post,  10 /7 /66 ,   A l )  
*  NASA  Javelin sounding rocket Launched from NASA Wd lops  Station reached 
404-mi.  (650-km.)  altitude  in   GsFC-Canadian Defence  Research  Board 
Telecommunications  Establishment  experiment  to  measure  ion  and 
electron density  and  temperature.  Although rocket  did  not  perform  as 
expected,  all  instrumentation  functioned  normally  and  “excellentyy 
data were received.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  Apollo  Command  Module  (Cm)  hardware  could be  recovered and  refur-  
bished  for use on  extended earth-orbital missions and long stays on th e  

314 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

lunar  surface,  North American Aviation,  Inc.,  Vice  President Dr.  John 
McCarthy  suggested  a t   AIAA-AAS  Forum  discussing  “After  Apollo- 
Wha t   Next?”  i n  Washington,  D.C.  “Such  refurbished  hardware  could 
be  available within  18 months  a t   no  interference to  th e   lunar   landing 
program  and  would  permit  the   gathering  of  vital  data  and  experience 
for  the  more difficult task  of  exploring th e  planets,”  Dr. McCarthy  said. 
He  recommended  a n   integrated  space  program  which  would  include 
developing one advanced ear th  reentry module,  single basic  laboratory 
module,  and modular  launch  vehicle  system;  he   emphasized  th e   need 
to  determine the  Nation’s  10-yr. space objectives “as soon as possible.” 
(Text) 
October  6:  U.S.S.R.  might  use  data  from  published  accounts  of  NASA’s 
Gemini space flights to   “reap  th e  benefits of  our efforts”  and “leapfrog” 
th e   U.S.  in to   th e   next  phase  of  the   moon  race,  Astronaut  Michael 
Collins told th e  Yale Club of Washington, D.C.  As examples of  data tha t  
would  assist  Soviet  scientists,  Collins  noted  tha t   Gemini  f igh t s   had 
demonstrated  the   feasibility  of  rendezvous  and  docking missions  in  
space,  as  well  as  man’s  capability  to  withstand  long-duration  space 
flights.  (Wash. Eve. Star,  10/7/66,  A7) 
0  Because  “procedural  difficulties”  had  delayed  approval  for  construction 
of  new  high-capacity ComSatCorp ear th   station  a t  Moorefield,  W .  Va., 
ComSatCorp  asked  FCC  to   authorize  construction  of  second  large 
an tenna   a t   Andover,  Me.,  “to  meet  pressing  demands  for   greater 
satellite communications capacity.”  ComSatCorp stressed  tha t   even  if 
th e   Andover  application  were  approved,  it  would  shortly  update  th e  
Moorefield application and  “continue to  seek approval of  i t ,”   because a 
second East Coast station site would be required for flexibility, diversity, 
and survivability.  (ComSatCorp Release) 
Clark Univ.’s  Robert Hutchings Goddard Library announced plans to  bury 
a  time  capsule  containing  100  “early  Space Age”  artifacts,  including 
tape recording of  former Astronaut  John Glenn’s  communications with 
ground  control during his  Feb.  20,  1962, MA-6  flight  in   FRIENDSHIP  7. 
Capsule would  be  se t  to  be  opened i n  500 yrs.  (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 
10/6/66,  A4) 
0  Lockheed-Georgia Co. engineers Dr. W. C.  J. Garrard, George K. Williams, 
and  William  W.  Williams  received  Society of  Automotive Engineers’ 
(SAE)  Wright  Brothers Medal  for  their  group report on development of 
soft-field and  rough-field  landing gear.  Presentation was  made  a t   SAE’S 
National  Aeronautic  and   Space  Engineering Meeting  in   Los  Angeles. 
(Lockheed Southern Star,  9/15/66,  1) 
October 6-7: Conference on   s ta tus   of  spectroscopic observations of  Martian 
atmosphere was  held  a t  NASA’s request  by  NAS  Space Science Board  i n  
woul bars,z 
Washington.  Fktimate of  atmospheric pressure would  determine space- 
craft design  for Mars  landing.  If  pressure were  no  lower  than   15  milli- 
arachute  landing would  be  possible,  bu t   full re tro thrus t   system 
be  necessary a t  5 millibars.  Recommendations of  the  conference 
(NAS-NRC-NAE  News 
would  be  made  available  “in  th e   near  future.” 
Report,  10/66,  4) 
October  7:  NASA’s Eighth  Annual  Honor  Awards  Ceremony  was  held  i n  
Washington, D.C. 
NASA  Administrator James E.  Webb  accepted from Mr.  and Mrs.  C. 
Thomas  Clagett,  Jr.,  for   placement  a t   KSC  a  replica  of  th e   bronze 
Kennedy  bust  sculpted  by  Felix  de Weldon  for   the   John  F.  Kennedy 

315 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
Memorial Library;  and  from  t h e  American  Society of  Civil Engineers, 
the   1966 Outstanding Civil  Engineering Achievement Award  for   KSC’S 
Launch  Complex 39. Mr.  Webb presented NASA’s Distinguished Public 
Service Medal  to   Dr.  Lloyd V.  Berkner,  chairman,  Graduate Research 
Center of  th e  Southwest’s Board  of  Trustees,  who  emphasized the  need 
for  careful  and immediate post-Apollo planning in  his  keynote address : 
“We  now  have  a  powerful  machinery  for  th e   command  of  space- 
trained  specialists, mighty rockets,  a  technological dexterity  tha t  is un-  
surpassed.  But  to  keep  th is   capability, we  must  have  new  strategic  ob- 
jectives.  And  tha t  there  are  many worthwhile and compelling objectives 
there   can be no  doubt.  . . . 
“I would  assert tha t  it is  now  imperative  tha t   more  advanced  space 
strategies  be  adopted-and 
quickly-if  our  space program is  to   remain 
efficient  and  effective. And  I  would  suggest tha t   whatever  this  fu r the r  
mechanisms, and skill.  . . .” 
strategy,  i t   employ  and  advance  ou r   full  capability  in   science,  men, 
Recipients  of  Distinguished  Service  Medal:  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden, 
former  Deputy  Administrator  (posthumously) ; Dr.  T.  Keith  Glennan, 
first  NASA  Administrator;  and  Gen.  Bernard A.  Schriever  (USAF,  Ret.), 
former AFSC  Commander.  Recipients of  Exceptional Scientific Achieve- 
ment Medal: Richard F. Arenstorf, MSFC;  Helmut J. Horn, MSFC; Norman 
F.  Ness,  GSFC;  and  George  F.  Pezdirtz,  L ~ R C .  Outstanding  Leadership 
Medal:  John F.  Clark, GSFC;  Edgar M.  Cortright,  Hq.;  Robert L. Krieger, 
Wallops;  George  J.  Vecchietti,  Hq.;  Harold B.  Finger,  Hq.;  Harry  H. 
Gorman,  MSFC;  Edmund  F.  O’Connor,  MSFC;  Eberhard  F.  M.  Rees, 
MSFC;  and  Herman  K.  Weidner,  MSFC.  Exceptional Service Medal:  M. 
Helen  Davies,  ARC ;   Herbert  A.  Wilson,  LaRc;  Robert  A.  Rushworth, 
WAF;   Roll  D.  Ginter,  Hq.;  David  S.  Gabriel,  LRC;  Edmund R.  Jonash, 
LRC;  J.  Cary Nettles,  LRC;  Wilfred  E.  Scull,  GSFC;  Harry  Press,  GSFC; 
Leland F.  Belew, MSFC;  Lee  B.  James, MSFC;  William G.  Johnson, MSFC; 
and  Peter  A.  Minderman,  KSC.  Group  Achievement Award:  JPL;  LRC; 
L ~ R C  (2 ) ;   and  Hq.  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Office.  Public  Service 
Award:  Grant  L.  Hansen,  General  Dynamics  Corp.  (Program;  Text 
AF / SD ,   1/67/54-5) 
October 7:  NASA  announced selection  of  Bendix Field Engineering Co.  to  pro- 
vide  maintenance  and  operations  support  of  the  Deep  Space Network 
under  a  three-year,  $37-million,  cost-plus-award-fee  contract  to  be 
managed by  JPL.  (NASA  Release  66-268) 
*  Willson H.  Hun ter ,  Assistant  to   the  Director  of  LRC,  had been  appointed 
NASA’s  Senior Scientific Representative to  Australia,  replacing Ray  w. 
Hooker,  who had been named  Special Assistant  for  Industrial Affairs a t  
WRC .   (NASA  Release 66-267; LRC  Release 66-64) 
0  General Dynamics  Corp.  received  eight-month, $275,000 MSFC  contract to  
investigate  concepts  of  large  space  s truc tures   having  possible  post- 
Apollo use. Three s truc tures  which could fly as  Apollo Applications (Aa) 
payloads  on  Sa turn   launch  vehicles would  be  selected,  evaluated,  and  
validated  for  immediate  useful  application  in  space.  (MSFC  Release 
66-245) 
*  USAF awarded Univ.  of  Colorado  a  15-m0.,  $300,000 research  contract  to  
“conduct independent investigations in to  unidentified flflq object (Ufo) 
reports.”  Study would be headed by Dr.  Edward U.  Condon, a professor 
of  physics a t  the  university.  (DOD  Release 847-66) 
0  Arthur G.  Wimer, Jr.,  assistant deputy  chief of  staff  for  science and tech- 

316 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

nology  in   th e   Air  Research  and  Development Command,  was  named 
chief  scientist  for   AFSC,  replacing  Dr.  Bernhard  H.  Goethert  who  had 
resigned  to   become  director  of  Univ.  of  Tennessee  Space  Institute. 
(AFSC  Release 206.66) 
October  8:  NASA’s  SURVEYOR  I  spacecraft,  which  softlanded  on  th e   moon’s 
Ocean of  Storms June  2,  responded to signals from Johannesburg track- 
ing station  almost three  months  after  i t  had  been  turned  off  following 
successful  completion  of  i ts   mission.  Batteries  had  been  recharged 
during la t ter  par t  of moon’s  14-day period of  sunlight. JPL scientists  said 
a n  attempt might be made  to  obtain additional photos  of  th e  lunar   su r -  
face from  the  spacecraft  before sun  set about noon EDT  Oct. 9.  (Wash. 
Sun. Star,  10/9/66,  A4) 
Executive  Committee  of  International  Council  of  Scientific  Unions 
meeting  i n   Monaco  approved  statement  underlining  importance  of 
agreement  tha t   scientific meetings  “shall  no t   be  disturbed  by  political 
statements  or  by  any  activities  of  a  political  nature.”  (NAS-NRC-NAE 
News Report,  10/66,  11) 
0  Small-scale lunar  roughness resulted  from impact of  small meteorites,  no t  
from  internal  volcanic effects,  according to   J.  A.  Bastin,  Queen Mary 
College,  London,  in   a  le t ter   to  Nutru-e. He  advanced  arguments  tha t  
(1) roughness lacks horizontal  directionality  associated with  vulcanism, 
and  (2)  from  known  distribution  of  meteorites  by  size,  taken  with 
estimates  of  age  of  lunar   surface,  “it  can  be  shown  tha t   th e   surface 
should  be  virtually  covered  by  craters  of  millimetre  and  centimetre 
size.  . . .,, (Bastin,  Nature,  10/8/66,  171-3) 
October  9:  Astronaut  M.  Sco t t   Carpenter  (Cdr.,  USN),  speaking a t   national 
convention  of  Naval  Reserve  Officers  Assn.  in   Denver,  described his 
astronaut-aquanaut occupation as a liaison between  space and undersea 
exploration. He said there  were plans  to  train astronauts under water to  
better  withstand  th e   tiring work  of  maneuvering outside  spacecraft-a 
major  problem  of  recent  space  flights.  Models  of  spacecraft  would  be 
used;  astronauts would  wear  spacesuits  and would  work  without  swim 
fins.  Carpenter,  who  had  volunteered  in   May  1964  for  USN’s  Project 
Sea  Lab,  said  aquanauts  could  work  in   water  un t i l   they  became  tired 
or  hungry.  (Denver Post,  10/9/66) 
October  10: NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  told  press  conference  i n  
New York  tha t  U.S.S.R.  had  “a  better  chance now  than   two  years ago9’ 
to land a man on the  moon before the  U S .  Basing his view on the  Soviet 
lead i n  payload-orbiting capability, Webb said:  “They have been launch- 
ing and recovering 10,000-pound spacecraft  for  four years. You  cannot 
work  in   space without  large   booster^.^'  He  suggested  tha t   the   10-mo. 
period  of  Soviet  inactivity  in   manned  space  flight  would  end  “very 
soon.”  (Loory,  NYT,  10/11/66) 
0  Gemini Astronauts  Richard  F.  Gordon, Jr.,  and  Neil  A.  Armstrong were 
received in  Bogota by Colombian President Carlos Lleras Restrepo during 
the ir  three-week tour  of  Latin America.  (UPI,  Wush. Post,  10/11/66,  B2) 
*  L ~ R C  awarded  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.  a  one-year,  $145,204  contract  for 
management services  and  facilities  related  to  Design  Criteria  Program 
for space vehicle structures. Program-with 
total contract estimated a t  
$500,000-was  established by NASA to acquaint contractors  and program 
managers with recommended  design-problem solutions  tha t  had  evolved 
from experience in  space technology and alert them to  possible pitfalls. 
(NASA  Release 66-264) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

3 17 
October 10: Johnson Administration could no t  increase NASA’s  FY 1968 budget 
because  of  Vietnam war,  but  i t  could make  a policy  decision on a post- 
Apollo program, wrote Robert Hotz,  in  Aviation  Week .  
“What  it w i l l   take  to get  this effort going is some political courage to  
restate the  necessity  of  proceeding beyond Apollo,  a decision to   chart a 
specific course from  the   available alternatives  and  some modest Fiscal 
1968 funding to  retain  the  technical  resources tha t  will  be required for 
th e   future-particularly 
engineering  and  scientific  manpower.  This 
combination of  activity  has  already been  deferred  one  year  beyond  i ts  
critical moment by  the  Johnson Administration. Delay  for  another fiscal 
year  could  impose  a  braking  effect  from  which  eventual  acceleration 
would  be  much  more  costly and much  less  effective.”  (Hotz, A v .   Wk . ,  
10/10/66,  21) 
0  Dr.  James  A.  Hootman,  executive  secretary  of  NASA’s Inventions  and 
Contributions  Board,  retired  after  30  years  Government  service  to   be- 
come  a  professor  of  physics  a t   Pensacola  (Fla.)  Junior  College.  (NASA 
Ann.) 
October 10-15: XVIIth  International Astronautical Federation  Congress was  
held  in   Madrid.  Opening  ceremony,  attended  by  Prince  Juan   Carlos, 
son  of  pretender  to   Spanish  th rone ;   Princess  Sophia,  his  wife;  and 
Queen Mother Fredericka of Greece, included speeches by  IAF President 
Dr.  William  H.  Pickering;  International  Academy  of  Astronautics 
President  Dr.  Charles  Draper;  International  Ins t i tu te   of  Space  Law 
President  Dr.  I.  PBpin;  Spanish  Astronautical  Assn.  President  Pedro 
Huarte-Mendicoa y  Larraga; and Spanish Air  Minister Gen. Josk  Lacalle 
Larraga.  (GE  Congress Reporter,  10/11/66,  1) 
Dr. Hilliard W. Paige, vice president of  General Electric Co.,  reported 
first  known  satellite  collision:  i n  April  1965 two  experimental gravity- 
gradient-stabilized  satellites  launched  pickaback  by  Naval  Research 
Lab.  March  9,  1965, locked  booms  in   their  1,756th  revolution.  After 
collision,  satellites  separated  and  quickly  were  stabilized  by  gravity- 
grzdient systems. They were still in  orbit.  Paige said NASA  was  currently 
reviewing  GE  study  to  equip  a  Sa turn   V  3rd  stage  with  three-axis 
gravity-gradient  system  to  orient  vehicle  as  manned  space  laboratory. 
(GE Congress Reporter,  10/11/66,  1, 2) 
Jack  L.  Bromberg  and  T.  J.  Gordon,  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.,  Inc., 
Missile  and  Space Systems Div.,  said  th e   asteroids  between  Mars  and 
Jupiter  could  be  investigated  by  utilizing  basic  Apollo/Saturn  launch 
vehicles,  launch   facilities,  tracking  system,  and  manufacturing  and 
engineering  expertise.  Bromberg  said  a  three-stage  Sa turn   V  could 
propel  a  7,000-Ib.  unmanned  research  payload  in to   the   asteroid  belt 
and  a  four-stage  Sa tu rn   V  could  propel  a  22,000-lb.  payload  to  same 
target.  (GE Congress Reporter,  10/11/66,  3) 
Dr.  Luis Tapis Salinas, president  of  IX  Colloquium on  Law  of  Outer 
Space, urged  changing present laws  to  cover  situations tha t   could  arise 
in   outer space.  (GE Congress Reporter,  10/13/66,  1) 
Richard Johnston, Chief  of  MSC  Crew Systems Div.,  said tha t   to work 
effectively  in   space,  a  fu ture   as tronau t  would  require  a  more  stream- 
lined spacesuit, a better self-propulsion system, and an  anchoring device 
such as  “stable  work platform which will permit his energies to be used 
in  accomplishing the  task  and  no t  in   overcoming body  instability.”  He 
said  tha t   dur ing   extravehicular  activity  on  NASA’s  Gemini  missions 
nearly 80 per  cent of  the  astronauts’  energy had been expended to  keep 

318 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

still and avoid tumbling. Johnston also recommended  fur ther   investiga- 
tion of metabolic expenditures required to  perform work in  space:  twice 
Gemini  astronauts had  been  forced to  re tu rn   to  their  spacecraft,  over- 
heated  and  exhausted,  after  struggling  with  relatively  simple  tasks. 
(Wilford, NYT, 10/12/66,  24) 
Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for   Manned 
Space Flight,  presented  a  comprehensive review  of  NASA’s Gemini pro- 
gram  and   Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  Director  of  Medical  Research  and 
Operations  a t   MSC,  gave  a  detailed  biomedical  report  on  th e   Gemini 
missions.  Observations on  th e  effects of  spaceflight on man’s system had 
revealed significant changes involving only  cardiovascular,  hematopoi- 
etic, and musculoskeletal systems, bu t  even these changes appeared to be 
adaptive in  na ture   and were  no  cause for  concern,  Dr.  Berry  said.  Re- 
su l ts  of  a  study on  red  blood  cell loss during spaceflight were  inconclu- 
sive,  Dr.  Berry  reported;  hyperoxia, lack  of  iner t   diluent gas,  relative 
immobility of  crew,  dietary  factors,  and weightlessness were  being ex- 
amined as possible  causes.  (Tech. W k . ,  10/17/66,  16) 
Soviet scientists V.  E.  Belai, P .  V.  Vassilyev, and 6. D.  Glod  reported 
significant  changes  in   t h e   effect  of  various  pharmaceutical  prepara- 
c r  
tions”  under  spaceflight conditions  and emphasized tha t  new  medicines 
adapted and tested  for space were  necessary.  Report indicated U.S.S.R. 
used  drugs  in  manned  spaceflight both  for  “therapeutic purposes or  to 
increase  the  resistance  of  the  human  organism  to  unfavorable effects.” 
Drugs mentioned  included narcotics,  to   relax  cosmonauts; stimulants; 
cardiovascular  preparations ; and  antiradiation  medications.  (Tech. 
Wc.,  10/24/66,  13) 
Soviet scientists  A.  A.  Gurjian,  A.  V.  Yeremin, and V.  I.  Stepanzov 
said the  dynamics of  men working in  free space was  one of  the  most  im- 
portant  problems connected with  manned  spaceflight. They  had  devel- 
oped  a  series  of  arm  and  leg movements for   cosmonauts  to  maneuver 
into  working  position,  which  included  raising  one  hand  over  the   head 
and  rotating  arm  in   cone-like  fashion  to   cause  an   opposite  body  re- 
action and enable cosmonaut to  face  about.  (Au .  W k . ,  10/17/66,30-31) 
Ph i l  Bono, Douglas Aircraft Co.,  Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., 
encouraged  by  recovery,  virtually  undamaged,  of  forward  section  of 
GEMINI  v-Titan  I1  booster  from  the  Atlantic  in   September 1965 and  of 
an  intact Atlas-Centaur insulation panel in  November  1565, proposed a 
near-term technique  for  the   land  recovery  of  an   earth-orbital stage” 
c c  
to   be  applied  specifically to  the  Uprated  Sa turn   1’s  2nd  stage  (S-IVB). 
(A v .  W k . ,  10/24/66,  32) 
H.  B.  Bjurstedt,  Karolinska  Ins t i tu te   of  Sweden,  suggested  tha t  
moon’s  low gravity field might lead  to  an  accompanying loss  of  normal 
g-tolerance. He acknowledged  tha t   this  was  a n  uncertain  extrapolation 
and  tha t   physiological  effects  of  such   exposure were  as  yet  unknown. 
(Tech.  W k . ,   10/24/66,  13-14) 
Soviet delegate Vassily V.  Parin narrated new  film  showing postflight 
activities  of  space dogs  Veterok  and Ugolyek,  launched  Feb.  22,  1966, 
in   COSMOS  CX .   Dogs,  who  lost  up   to  one  third  of  their  preflight  body 
weight during 22-day mission, appeared very weak and dazed when they 
emerged  from  capsule,  but  film  sequence  taken  four  months  later 
showed them completely recovered. Parin said flight had  studied neuro- 
logical  regulators  of  cardiovascular system.  (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66,  13) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

319 

Dr.  Luigi Napolitano, Univ.  of  Naples,  was  elected new  president  of 
IAF.  (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66,  13) 
October 11: NASA  Aerobee  150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR  reached 
89-mi.  (144km.)  altitude  in   NASA-American  Science  and   Engineering, 
Inc.,  experiment  to  make  a  high-resolution  survey  of  celestial  x-ray 
sources.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
0  NASC  Executive  Secretary  Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  speaking before Metro- 
politan  Washington  Board  of  Trade’s  Science Industry  Committee, re-  
plied  to   criticism  tha t   the   national  space program  is  highly  expensive 
and  wasteful:  “The  national  space  program  is  the   largest  concerted 
effort  undertaken  by  a n y   nation  to  advance  the   frontiers  of  human 
knowledge. As  such, it is  a  seedbed of  invention, a  spur  to  our produc- 
tivity,  a  source  of  insurance  for  ou r   national  security,  a  stimulus  to 
learning,  and  a  world-wide  ambassador for  peace.  Because  of  it,  our  
chances of  improving medical research and finding a cu re  for cancer or 
hear t  disease are  greater,  not less. Because of  it, our chances of  improv- 
ing  our  educational system and  solving a vast  range  of  social problems 
are  greater,  no t  less. 
“The  issue  is  really  no t   tha t   of  substituting space progress for prog- 
ress  in  some o ther  worthy field, because th e  space program contributes 
importantly  to  advances in  practically  all  other  lines  of  endeavor, and 
it stimulates  th e  national  economy a t  the  same time.  . . .” (Text) 
Lockheed  Missiles  and  Space Co.  engineer Dede  Sonnichsen claimed  six 
new  world  records when  he   flew  an   AX-4 hot  air  balloon to  21,000-ft. 
altitude  from  Tracy,  Calif.,  and  landed  i t   15  mi.  away.  Of  10  ho t   air 
balloon classifications,  Sonnichsen’s claims were  to  altitude records  in  
AX-4, 5,  6 , 7 ,  and 8 categories and to establishment of  record for 15-mi. 
distance.  ( L . A .  Times, 10/12/66) 
International  cooperation  on  patents  procedures  and  mechanized  infor- 
mation  retrieval  was  urged  a t  Washington,  D.  C.,  meeting of  National 
Association of  Manufacturers’ Patents  Committee.  U.S.  Commissioner 
of  Patents Edward J. Brenner said tha t  “most of  the  search or examining 
work  in   anywhere from  15%  to  80% of  the  applications  . . . could  be 
eliminated” if  patent offices exchanged information.  (Beller,  Tech. Wk., 
11/7/66,  20) 
October 12:  M2-F2 wingless lifting body was  launched from B-52 aircraft and 
flown by  Capt.  Jerauld R.  Gentry  (USAF)  in  45,000-ft. glide to  powerless 
landing a t  Edwards AFB;  maximum  speed was nearly 400 mph.  This was 
11th  test  mission  for  6,000-lb.  research  vehicle  developed  for  NASA  to  
study possible  design  for  fu tu re  spacecraft  tha t   could maneuver  in   at- 
mosphere  after  reentry  from  orbit.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.;  L .  A .  Times,  10 /  
13/66) 
Dr.  Lee Arnold, chairman  of  New  York Univ.’s  Dept. of  Aeronautics and 
Astronautics and director  of  Daniel Guggenheim School of  Aeronautics, 
was  sworn in  as  a  consultant to  NASA  Administrator James E.  Webb on 
technology utilization.  (NASA  Release  66-271) 
USAF  launched  two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from 
WTR.  (US. Aeron.  & Space Ac t . ,   1966, 157) 
0  Prof.  Leonid I.  Sedov, head of  Soviet delegation to  IAF Congress, told news 
conference in  Madrid tha t  U.S.S.R.  had to investigate and solve a “num- 
ber  of  difficult problems” before  i t   could  attempt a manned  lunar  m i s -  
sion.  Asked  if  he  believed  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  would  ever join  together 

320 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

October  12:  MZ-FZ  lifting  body  mated  to  B-52  launch  aircraft  at  NASA  Flight  Research 
Center, in preparation  for  flight  tests. 

for a space mission, Sedov said i t  would be economically and scientifically 
feasible, but  “we  don’t  have any plans  for joint  launchings. The situa- 
tion is no t  technical  but political and I  think the  international s i tua t ion  
i n  these  days cann’ot change this.”  (Wilford, NYT, 10/13/66,12) 
October  12:  IAF  conferees  toured  the   NASA-INTA  Robledo  de  Chavela  Space 
Tracking  Station outside Madrid.  (GE  Congress Reporter,  10/14/66,  1) 
*  NAS  Committee on  Public  Engineering Policy  (COPEP)  held  first meeting 
i n   New  York  City;  chairman  was  Dr.  Chauncey  S tarr ,   president  of 
Atomics  International Division of  North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  and 
as   of  January  1,  1967,  UCLA  Dean  of  Engineering.  (NAS-NRC-NAE  News 
Report,  10/66,  1 , 3 )  
0  UCLA announced plans  to  build  i t s  own  satellite to  study  earth’s magnetic 
field  and  interplanetary  space.  Feasibility  studies  financed  by  $55,000 
NASA  grant  were  being  conducted  by  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.  and  Philco 
Corp.  (UPI,  NYT,  10/15/66,33) 
October  13:  U.  S.  and Brazil would  cooperate in  sounding rocket program to  
s tudy  total solar  eclipse in   South America  Nov.  12. Nineteen sounding 
rockets  would  be  launched  to  altitudes  as  high  as  175  mi.  (280  km.) 
from Rio Grande launch s i te  located near path  of  total eclipse. Program 
was  based  on   July  1965  agreement  between  NASA  and  Brazilian  Space 
Commission  (CNAE) . (Wallops Release 66-51) 
*  Washington  Post  commented on  report  of  satellite  collision made  by  Dr. 
Hilliard  Paige a t   IAF Congress  in  Madrid:  “Belated  disclosure  tha t   two 
Air  Force space vehicles  collided  in   space in   April,  1965,  ought  to  re- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

321  

mind  the  country  tha t  part  of  its  space program  is being  carried  o n  be- 
hind  a cloak  of  secrecy  as absolute as  tha t  which  conceals  space opera- 
tions  i n  the  Soviet  Union.  The  open  policy  of  NASA,  which  has  done s o  
much  to  keep  the   whole  nation  interested  in   and  excited  about  space 
progress,  is  i n  sharp  contrast  to  the  policy of  the  Air  Force.  . . .” [Ed. 
note:  Satellites were USN,  no t  USAF.]  (Wash. Post,  10/13/66, A22) 
October  13:  Western  Union  International,  Inc.,  announced  receipt  of  DOD  
order fo r   10 Pacific satellite communications channels, permitting com- 
pany  to  file with  FCC  for  ra te   reductions  on  all  i ts   cable  and  satellite 
service  i n   the   Pacific area.  Order  and  rate  reductions  were  dependent 
on  FCC’S  approving  Western  Union’s  previously  announced  request  to 
lease and  operate up  to  65  satellite  channels i n  the  Pacific area.  (DJNS, 
Wash. Eve.  Star,  10/13/66,  A13) 
October  13-14:  Use  of  satellite  navigation  and  communications  system  to 
guide merchant  ships was  urged  by  General  Electric  Co.  engineer Roy 
E. Anderson a t  Ins t i tu te  of Navigation meeting a t  U.S.  Merchant Marine 
Academy, Kings Point, N.Y.  Ships could be equipped for $2,000 to au to-  
matically  obtain  position  fixes  anywhere  i n   the   world,  Anderson  esti- 
mated.  He  believed  operational  system  could  be  designed  and  built 
within  two years.  (NYT ,  10/17/66,  60) 
October  14:  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  CXX IX   into  earth  orbit  with  307-km. 
(191-mi.) apogee; 202-km.  (126-mi.) perigee; 89.4-min.  period;  and 65” 
inclination.  Equipment  “for  continuing  explorations  of  outer  space” 
was  functioning normally.  (Tass, 10/14/66) 
*  Control of  ESSA  111  meteorological  satellite, launched  by  NASA  Oct.  3 from 
WTR,  was  turned  over to  ESSA .   (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
NASA  awarded  IBM  Corp.’s  Federal  Systems Div.  a  $51-million, sole-source 
contract  to provide  Sa turn   instrument  un i t   launch  support services  a t  
KSC  through June  30,  1470.  (NASA  Release 66-275) 
0  Sixteenth-century manuscript “On  Rockets”  by  Conrad Haas  (circa 1550) 
received  a t  IAF  Congress in  Madrid.  Concepts  of  rocket  construction  in-  
cluded  multistage  rockets  and  a  design  of  a  house-like  upper  stage. 
(Text) 
MSC  Director Dr. Robert R.  Gilruth accepted  the  1566 Daniel and Florence 
Guggenheim  International  Astronautics  Award  a t   the   IAF  Congress  in  
Madrid.  Dr.  Gilruth  said  i n   his  acceptance  speech:  “The  spaceflight 
achievements  of  Mercury  and  Gemini,  now  entered  in   the   history  of 
man’s  exploration of  the  universe,  took  origin i n  the  ideas, aspirations, 
and  technical contributions  of  many  persons  in  many  countries. Astro- 
nautics has  an  international birthright,  just as its fu ture  has great mean- 
ing  for  all  of  mankind.”  (A&A ,  1/67,  66) 
Dr.  Oleg G.  Gazenko,  member  of  Soviet delegation  to  IAF  Congress,  told 
press  conference  in   Madrid  tha t   U.S.S.R.  was  “doing  very  serious 
preparatory work” for another manned mission tha t  would be “a serious 
new  step  in   space exploration.”  He  disclosed  no  details  bu t   indicated 
mission  might  include  extravehicular  activity.  Asked  why  there  had 
been  no   Soviet manned  spaceflight since  March  18,  1965, VOSKHOD  11 
mission,  Gazenko  explained  i t   reflected Soviet desire  to  make  a major 
advance with each flight rather than  repeat proved techniques.  (Wilford, 
NYT ,  10/15/66,  11) 
October 15:  President  Johnson  signed into law  H.R.  15963 creating Cabinet- 
level Department  of  Transportation.  (Pres. Doc.,  10/24/66,  1498) 

322 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

October  15:  Close  of  IAF  Congress  was   dramatized  when  Spain  launched 
he r   first  sounding  rocket-Carabela  &from  Arencillo  base,  near 
Huelva.  British-built  rocket,  which  cost  approximately $1,700, carried 
12-lb. instrumented  payload  to   81-km.  (50-mi.)  aItitude  and  then   im- 
pacted  LEO mi.  downrange in   the  Atlantic.  Two  NASA  officials-William 
Hausman,  Assistant  Administrator  for  International  Affairs,  and 
Clotaire  Wood,  NASA  European  Representative-observed 
the   launch, 
first  of  six  i n   a  long-range program  to  study  meteorology.  (Wilford, 
N Y T ,   10/16/66, 78) 
Communist  sources  speculated  tha t   U.S.S.R.  would  launch  “a  large 
satellite carrying several men  . . . jus t  before the  Nov.  7 anniversary  of 
th e   Bolshevik  Revolution,”  and  another,  the   world’s  largest  satellite 
and  carrying  eight  men,  by  the   end  of  1966, A P   reported.  (AP,  N Y T ,  
10 /16 /66 ,28)  
October  16:  Third  year  in   space  began  for  two  experimental Vela  nuclear 
detection  satellites  launched  by  DOD   Oct.  16 ,   1963, into  near-circular 
orbit  a t   52,174-mi.  (84,000-km.)  altitude.  Satellites  had  demonstrated 
successful  R&D  program and  had  provided  effective capability  to  detect 
nuclear  explosions  i n   space.  DOD   had  overall  responsibility  for  Vela 
program; ARPA  had  overall direction with  support of  AEC.  (AFSC  Release 
205.66) 
October 17:  NASA had begun study of how to  keep  two o r  more small monkeys 
in   ear th   orbit for  up  to   one year  to  assess  long-term effects of  weight- 
lessness  on  primates  and   evaluate  problems  related  to  humans  under- 
taking extensive work  in   space.  Industrial firms had  been  asked  to   sub-  
mit by  Oct. 27  “preliminary design study”  for Orbiting Primate Space- 
craft  capable  of  being  carried  in to   ear th   orbit  during Apollo  program. 
LaRC  would  manage  study.  (NASA  Release 66-273) 
0  France’s  Dragon  sounding  rocket  was  successfully  launched  from  Nor- 
wegian  range on  Andoeya  Island  by  Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales 
(CNES).  (Tech. Wk., 10/31/66,  13) 
At dedication of  Sherman Fairchild Technology Center, Germantown, Md., 
plans  to  use  Nimbus  B  meteorological satellite-scheduled 
for  launch 
la te  i n   1966-in 
elephant-tracking  experiment were  revealed  in   speech 
prepared  for  delivery  by  MSFC  Director  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  and 
read  in  his  absence by  MSFC  PAO  Director,  Bart J.  Slattery, Jr.  Satellite 
would  home  in   on  25-lb.  portable  transponder  strapped  to  back  of  an  
elephant.  Experiment would  test  use  of  satellites  to  monitor  wildlife, 
learn  more  about  animal  migration,  and  develop  means  of  protecting 
species  threatened with  extinction.  (Wash.  Eve.  Star,  10/18/66,  A14; 
Wa sh .  Post,  10/18/66;  Balt.  Sun,  10/18/66) 
*  Mew  studies of  Martian atmosphere had  rekindled hope  of  finding  life on  
Mars,  Dr.  Lewis  D.  Kaplan  of  JPL  reported  a t   Western  meeting  of 
American  Chemical  Society  in   San  Francisco.  French  scientists  Drs. 
P ierre   and  Janine Connes of  the  Observatory of  Haut-Provence, using 
improved spectroscopic  equipment designed  by  Dr.  Connes,  had  found 
concentration of hydrogen compounds around Mars  1,000 times greater 
than  in  earth’s atmosphere. Dr.  Kaplan, who  analyzed  observations ob- 
tained,  said  the   hydrogen  compounds-considered  necessary  to  life- 
probably  included  methane  derivatives  and  perhaps  methane  itself. 
Methane  appears  on  ear th   as  gaseous  hydrocarbon  product  of  decom- 
posed  organic matter  and  is  known  to  be  produced  by  anaerobic bac- 
teria  no t   requiring  the   oxygen  essential  to  most  life  on  earth.  Dr. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

323 

Kaplan’s  work  was  sponsored by  NASA  and by  France’s Centre National 
#Etudes  Spatiales  (CNES)  and  the   Meudon  Observatory.  (AP,  N Y T ,  
10/18/66,  9) 
October  17:  Boeing  Co.  announced  it  had  awarded  $10  million  in   sub- 
contracts during planning phase  (Phase 11-C) of  Government-sponsored 
Ss t  design competition. Phase  11-C was  being conducted  under  18-1110. 
Government-industry cost-sharing  contract which  would  end  Dec.  31. 
Boeing  and  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  had  submitted  final  airframe  de- 
signs to  FAA  Sept. 6.  (Boeing Release) 
0  Plan  for  500-mph, 80-passenger Vtol  air-bus service,  developed  by  MIT’S 
Flight  Transportation Laboratory to   ease  transportation  congestion on 
the   East  Coast  in   the   1970’s, was  announced  by  the   Commerce  Dept. 
(UPI,  NYT ,   10/18/66,  76) 
During week of  October 17:  House Committee on Government Operations, in  
report  based  on  August hearings by  Subcommittee on  Military  Opera- 
tions, urged  a  ten-  to twenty-fold expansion of  DOD’S  initial comsat  sys- 
tem by  increasing number  and improving performance of  both  satellites 
and ground  terminals.  “Neither  the  Communications Satellite Corpora- 
tion  nor  the   other  commercial  carriers  need  fear  they  will  lose  the  
Defense Department as a good  customer”  as a  result  of  this  expansion, 
the  report  said.  (A v .  Wk . ,  10/24/66,  29) 
0  NASA’s Advanced Manned Missions program office issued Rfps on $300,000, 
nine-month  analysis  of  economic potential  of  orbiting  manned  natural 
resources  laboratory.  I t   was  specified  tha t   firms  interested  “must 
possess  strong  economic  expertise  a t   the   national  and  international 
levels  and  must  not  be  involved in   the   production  of  space or  experi- 
mental  hardware.”  Replies  were  due  a t   NASA  Hq.  Nov.  21.  (A v .   W k . ,  
10 /24 /66 ,28 )  
0  MSC  Director  of  Medical  Research and  Operations Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry 
received AIAA’S  1566 John Jeffries Award  “for  outstanding contributions 
to  the  advancement of aeronautics through medical research.”  Presenta- 
tion  was  made  a t   AIAA  Military  Aircraft  Systems  Meeting  in   Dallas. 
(MSC  Roundup,  10/28/66,  1) 
October  18:  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb,  in   interview  with  Look, 
rejected  report  tha t   U.S.S.R.  had  lost  men  in   space:  “Every  bit  of  in-  
formation we  have shows  tha t   they have been  as  carefui  with  the  lives 
of  cosmonauts as we  have been with astronauts. As  far  as  I know,  they  
have no t  lost a single man in  flight. They have lost them on the  ground, 
they  have  lost  them  in  airplanes,  jus t   like we  have.”  (Look, 10/18/66) 
Research  and  development  in   essential  space  programs  would  no t   be 
seriously  affected  by  demands  of  th e   Vietnam  conflict,  USAF  Under 
Secretary  Norman  S.  Pau l   told  a  National  Space  Club  meeting  in  
Washington,  D.C.  Asked  during question  and answer period for  rough 
estimate of  military manned spaceflight expenditures in  the  1970s, Pau l  
said  tha t   currently  DOD  was  spending $1.3 billion  of  its  $?-billion  R&D 
budget  on  space and tha t  it was  “a  safe guess  this  amount will  go  up.” 
Asked  if   there   might  be  NASA  programs  competitive with  USAF’S  Mol, 
Pau l   said  there  was  “not  the   slightest  possibility.”  (Text;  MIS DuiZy, 
10/19/66,  20) 
DOD  announced  USAF  would  buy  99   improved  F4E  Phantom  jet  aircraft 
equipped  for  first  time  with  internally  mounted  20-mm.  Gatling gun 
capable  of  firing  6,000  rounds  a  minute.  Aircraft  would  give  US. 
superiority  over  Soviet-made MiG-21s  used  by  North  Vietnam.  (AP, 
NYT ,   10/20/66,  27) 

324 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

October  18:  Dr.  Jan  H.  Oort,  head  of  Leiden  Observatory,  the  Netherlands, 
and  former  head  of  International  Astronomical  Union,  received  1966 
Vetlesen  Award  in   ear th   sciences.  Administered  by  Columbia  Univ. 
for  the  G.  Unger  Vetlesen  Foundation,  the  prize was  awarded for  ‘‘out- 
standing achievement i n  the  sciences resulting i n  a  clearer  understand- 
ing of  earth.” 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications 
Dr. Homer E.  Newel1 noted in  speech  a t  award dinner tha t  “through  t h e  
space approach  . . . the  domain of  the  geosciences”  had  been  strength- 
ened  and  extended:  “The  theories,  instruments,, and  skills needed  and 
developed  to  study  the   earth  can  now  be  applied  to  investigating  t h e  
moon and planets  a t  first hand.  Comparative  studies of  the  planets  and 
their atmospheres, ionospheres, and magnetospheres,  promise  increased 
understanding of  our  own planet, earth.”  (Text; Sullivan, NYT,  10/19/ 
66,  36) 
October  19: NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  and  the   late  NASA  Deputy 
Administrator Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden  were  awarded  the   1966 Robert  J. 
Collier Trophy for “representing all of  the  Gemini program  teams which 
significantly  advance  human  experience  in   space  flight,’’  a t   special 
ceremony i n  Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. 
Trophy was  presented  annually by  Look  and National  Aeronautic Assn. 
for the  greatest achievement i n  aeronautics or astronautics in  America, 
with  respect  to  improving  the  performance,  efficiency,  or  safety  of  air 
o r  s  ace  vehicles.” 
V!ce 
President  Hubert  H.  Humphrey,  presenting  the   trophy,  said: 
“I can think of  no more fitting choice for this distinguished  award than  
spacecraft to ren  B ezvous  and  first  to  dock  with  another spacecraft; and 
Project Gemini and all those who made i t  such a success.’’ He noted tha t  
Gemini manned  s  acecraft had spent 875 hrs.  in  space; Gemini was  first 
four  Gemini  astronauts  had  walked  in   space  for  total  5  hrs.  52  min. 
Administrator Webb, accepting trophy,  said:  “Gemini  has broadened 
o u r  vision,  validated our   concepts,  proved  out  our  technology,  and has 
provided a much sounder s truc ture  of knowledge as to the  importance of 
no t   accepting  a  position  of  second  best  i n  space.”  Attributing  Gemini 
program’s  success  to  “ the   application  of  ou r   scheduling principles,” 
Webb noted  crmilestones’’: beginning  of  unmanned  flights  in   1963; first 
manned  flight  i n   1964; rendezvous,  docking,  and  first  extravehicular 
activity in   1965; first use of  Agena  for orb i t  change and  first closed-loop 
guidance  i n   1966;  completion  of  program  i n   1967.  “We  missed  t h e  
first  two  milestones.  From  then   on,  with  t h e  exception of  docking,  we 
have  accomplished  each  milestone  ahead  of  or  on  schedule and  we  do 
expect  to complete  t h e  Gemini program  ahead of  schedule next month.” 
(Text;  NASA  Ann.;  NAA  News, 10/16/66;  Wash.  Post,  10/20/66,  B7) 
e  Wilhelm Forster Observatory,  West Berlin, reported U.S.S.R.  had  launch- 
ed a satellite at 7:20 a.m.  EDT from space center in  Baikonur.  Spokesman 
said  i t  had  not  been  determined whether  spacecraft was  manned.  NASC 
Executive  Secretary Dr.  Edward C.  Welsh  said report appeared  to be  in  
error   and  had  apparently  stemmed  from  misinterpretation  of  Soviet 
transmissions  associated  with  tracking of  previously  launched  Cosmos 
spacecraft. He added tha t  if  the  U.S.S.R.  did attempt launching, nothing 
got  in to   orbit.  U.S.S.R.  made  no  comment.  (AP, Balt.  Sun,  10/20/66) 
U.S.  did not have women astronauts because “we  have no t  yet been able t o  
find a n  applicant  sufficiently qualified  i n  both scientific and  engineering 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

325 

background,  who also possesses the  required test pilot experience,”  said 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller  a t  dedication  of  Cedar Crest College’s science  center  in  Allen- 
town,  Pa.  He  said NASA  has  always had  t h e  same  requirements  for both 
men and women;  “there  had  never been any discrimination with  regard 
to  sex or  on  any  other  basis.”  (Text) 
October 19: MSFC  awarded Martin Co. a one-year, $100,000 contract for design 
feasibility  study  of  2,000-w  nuclear  power  system  consisting  of  four 
Snap-29 radioisotope  generators-each  delivering  500 w-for 
possible 
use  on long duration post-Apollo missions.  Study would be performed  a t  
Martin’s Baltimore plant.  (MSFC  Release 66-251) 
Study of  Ufo’s  had  been  “relegated  to  the  bottom of  t h e  barrel”  by  USAF, 
Dr.  James  C.  McDonald, Univ.  of  Arizona  professor,  charged  a t  Wash- 
ington,  D.C.,  American  Meteorological  Society  meeting.  Attacking 
USAF’S  Project  Bluebook  as  “extremely superficial and  of  a  low  level of 
technical competence,”  he  urged  tha t   Ufo responsibility  be  taken away 
from  USAF  and  pu t   “into  scientific  hands.”  The   hypothesis  tha t   Ufo’s 
might  be  “extraterrestrial  probes”  could  no t   be  ruled  out,  h e   said. 
(Adams, Wash. Eve.  Star,  10/20/66,  C14) 
October  20:  U.S.S.R.’s  launch  of  two  satellites was  observed  by  leaders  of 
eight Communist  nations visiting U.S.S.R.  for summit talks o n  Vietnam 
and Communist  China. 
COSMOS  CXXX,  for  continued  space  research,  entered earth  orbit with 
340-km.  (211-mi.) apogee; 211-km.  (131-mi.)  perigee;  89.9-min. period; 
and 65” inclination.  Equipment was  functioning normally. 
Fourth MOLNIYA  I  comsat,  for  “further  testing o f .  . . long range  two- 
way  television  and  telephonic-telegraphic  radio  communication,”  had 
orbital parameters of  apogee, 39,700 km.  (24,658 mi.) ; perigee, 485 km. 
(301 mi.);  period,  11 hrs.  53 min.;  and  inclination,  64.9”.  Equipment, 
including  broadcasting  system,  orientation  system,  orbital  correction 
devices, and power  supply, was functioning normally.  (Tass, 10/20/66) 
Sounding  rocket  launched  by  Spain  from  Arencillo  base  fell  to  earth 
within  a  hundred  yards  of  launching  site.  Officials  blamed  failure  in  
guidance  system.  Launch  was  part  of  series  begun  Oct.  15 to  collect 
meteorological  data from region  a t  30- to 60-mi.  (48- to 97-km.) altitude. 
(Ch ic .  Trib.,  10/21/66) 
No  video  information was  on   tape  recorded by  SURVEYOR  I  on  Oct.  9  and 
transmitted  to  Deep  Space  Tracking  Station,  Johannesburg,  South 
Africa, Oct. 10, JPL reported.  Scientists said they had no t  been  too hope- 
ful, and had been  surprised tha t  spacecraft had  responded  a t  all on  Oct. 
8.  SURVEYOR  I ,   which  had  landed  o n  moon’s  Ocean  of  Storms June  2, 
entered i ts  fifth lunar night shortly after Oct.  8 telemetry was  returned. 
It  had  completed  i ts   second  lunar   day  operations  on   July  13.  (Wash. 
Eve.  Star,  10/20/66;  Tech.  Wk., 10/17/66,  10) 
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee o n  Science 
and Astronautics, told Clear Lake  (Tex.) Chamber of  Commerce tha t  he  
foresaw  n o   curtailment  of  space program  because  of  Vietnam  war.  If 
there were curtailment,  “it will  be  aimed a t  all Government programs.” 
(Amerine, Houston  Chron.,  10/21/66) 
Dr.  Homer E.  Newell, NASA  Associate Administrator  for Space Science and 
Applications, visited MSFC  to review technological  and scientific progress 
on   work  being  conducted by  MSFC  for  OSSA  projects,  including Apollo 
Telescope  Mount,  x-ray  astronomy  experiment,  and  several  other 

326 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
astronomy  experiments. Accompanying  Dr.  Newel1 were  his  deputies, 
Octo B er 21:  U.N.  World Meteorological Organization-in 
Edgar  M.  Cortright  and  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  and  directors  of  OSSA 
rogram offices.  (MSFC Release  66-256) 
report on plan  for 
World Weather Wa tch  to  be injtiated between  1968 and  1970-warned 
it would be  “foolhardy”  for  man to  attempt to  modify weather on large 
scale with  curren t  limited  knowledge of  atmospheric forces. Plan called 
for  use of satellites; a relatively dense network of  land and ocean weather 
stations,  manned  and  unmanned;  drifting  sea  buoys;  balloons;  and  
o ther   instruments  to   probe  th e   world’s  atmosphere.  High-speed  tele- 
communications systems would centralize findings for analysis and relay 
latest  detailed  information  to  meteorologists everywhere. This  would 
enable them  to  forecast  th e  weather “both with improved accuracy and 
for a longer time ahead.”  (NYT ,  10/22/66,, 12) 
0  I n  a le t ter  to  Science, Dr.  J. Allen Hynek of  Northwestern Univ.  said  “we 
suffer,  perhaps,  from  temporal  provincialism”  i n   dismissing  th e   Ufo 
phenomenon with a shrug. He said tha t  when h e  was scientific consultant 
to  USAF’s  Project  Blue  Book-Ufo 
registry  at  Wright-Patterson AFB- 
some of  th e  most  coherent reports had  come from scientifically trained 
people.  “Hard data”  cases had  contained frequent allusions to recurren t  
kinematic,  geometric, and  luminescent  characteristics.  “I  have  begun 
to   feel  tha t   there   is  a  tendency  in   20th  century  science  to   forget  tha t  
there  will be  a 21st century science, and indeed a 30th century science, 
from  which  vantage points  our   knowledge of  the   universe may  appear 
quite different.” He had urged USAF  “to ask physical and social scientists 
of  s ta ture  to  make  a  . . . scholarly  study’’  of  Ufo’s.  Hynek‘s  letter was 
written  before  Oct.  17  announcement  of  $300,000 USAF  contract  to  
Univ. of Colorado for Ufo investigation  [see Aug.  11. (Science, 10/21/66, 
329; A&A,  12/66,  4) 
*  Radar signature analysis  (Rsa) for  “spatial  detective work” was  discussed 
i n   Time.  Using  Rsa,  scientists  could  reconstruct  characteristics  of 
foreign  satellite from  radar  pulse  pattern  reflected to   tracking  station: 
by  measuring  amplitude  of  reflected  pulses,  satellite’s  size  could  be 
calculated;  by  analyzing variations  in  pulse amplitude, satellite’s shape 
could  be  determined;  by  determining  periodicity  with  which  pulse 
pa t tern   repeated  itself,  speed  of  tumbling,  rolling,  or  spinning  around 
spacecraft’s axes  could  be  inferred.  Computerized Rsa  was  being devel- 
oped so  tha t  in  event of  war,  warhead radar  signatures  could be spotted 
quickly  enough  to  order  interception  and  destruction  by  defending 
missiles.  (T ime ,   10/21/66) 
USAF OAR had proved capability of  new  dust separation  device which could 
provide  longer  engine  life  for  gas-turbine-powered engines,  especially 
helicopters  being  used  i n   Vietnam.  Device  was  designed  to  prevent 
erosion of  compressor section  in  engine and glass formation on engine’s 
ho t   surfaces  by  removing dust particles  and  other foreign  objects  from 
air  before  they  could  be  sucked  into  engine.  Tests  had  demonstrated 
a.r.erage 92 per  cent efficiency.  (OAR  Release) 
October  22:  LUNA  XII  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  on   trajectory  toward  the  
moon  “to  study  t h e   systems  of  th e   artificial  satellite  and  near  lunar  
space,”  Tass  announced.  All  systems were  functioning  normally,  and  
spacecraft  was  traveling  close  to  planned  trajectory.  (Tass,  10/23/66) 
*  NASA  Aerobee  150 launched  from WSMR  reached  93-mi.  (149-km.)  altitude 
in  third  mc-managed  Project  Luster  experiment  to   collect  meteoric 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

327 

debris  during peak  of  Orionid meteor  shower. Luster micrometeoroid 
sampling  instrument  deployed  successfully  during  flight;  debris  was 
vacuum  sealed  a t   recovery.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed 
satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt.  s a )  
October  22:  U.S.S.R.  was  seeking  experienced  scientists  between  ages  40  
and  50  as  cosmonauts, AP  reported  Soviet  scientist Pyo tr   Yegorov  as  
saying.  Yegorov claimed  there were no medical reasons men in   this age 
group  could  no t   participate  i n   space  flights.  (AP,  Phil.  Sun. Bull., 
10/23/66) 
October 23:  France  had  requested  tha t  Astronauts  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  
Edwin E.  Aldrin, Jr.,  photograph sodium vapor  trail of  Centaure sound- 
ing rocket during NASA’s Gemini XI1 mission scheduled for launch Nov. 
9.  Sounding rocket-to 
study winds  up  to  400 mph  a t  high  altitudes- 
would  be  launched  from  Hammaguir  Range  on   signal  from  Gemini 
Mission Control a t  MSC. Experiment would be first by foreign government 
to  be par t   of  a  US. manned  space flight.  (Wa sh .  Post,  10/23/66,  A10; 
AP,  Wash.  Sun. Star,  10/23/66,  A7) 
0  JPL had  awarded  $200,000  contract  to   Avco  Corp.’s  Space Div.  for  task 
work  in   JPL’S  new  $1.5  million  Sterilization  Assembly  Development 
Laboratory  (SADL) . Starting  in   mid-1967,  SADL  would  be  sterilization 
testing headquarters €or Voyager spacecraft, scheduled €or Mars landing 
in   th e   1970s.  (JPL  Release) 
October 24:  NASA Director of  Program Review William A.  Fleming reiterated 
NASA hopes of landing a man on th e  moon by mid-1968 a t  IEEE conference 
in  Milwaukee. Fleming said plans  for post-Apollo space activity had  no t  
been completed but might include fur ther  exploration of  moon, possibly 
with  a  roving  vehicle;  drilling  to   sample the   subsurface of  the  lura in ;  
or  establishing manned space stations. Manned  space flight to  Mars was 
still a t  least  20  yrs.  away,  he  said.  (Milwaukee J . ,   10/25/66) 
0  Miniature  data  recording  system  tha t   could  be  strapped  to   pilot’s  leg  to  
record physiological information during aircraft flights in  which missiles 
were  fired  was  being  developed  a t   Naval  Missile  Center,  Point  Mugu, 
Calif.  NMC   electronic  engineer  and  inventor  of  device Clifford  Phipps 
said: “In   testing th e  whole weapons system, it is important to  know how 
the  man  reacts,  too.”  (PMR  Release  1411-66) 
Fred  W.  Friendly,  former  president  of  CBS  News  and  curren t   television 
adviser  to   Ford  Foundation,  said  a t   National  Assn.  of  Educational 
Broadcasters convention  in  Kansas City tha t   th e  nonprofit  comsat pro-  
posed  by  th e  Foundation to  FCC  Aug.  1 would provide a “second  service 
appealing  to   excellence.”  He  said  educational  broadcasting  was  now 
inefficient because  i t   lacked  “ the   interconnections  to   bring  events  to  
0  ComSatCorp propose l to FCC  a reduced, flat ra te  for transatlantic TV trans- 
people  as  they  hap  en.”  (AP, NYT,  10/20/66,  78) 
missions,  effective with  commercial operation  of  new  Atlantic  comsat 
i n  late  1966.  Proposed ra te  for   one-way, black-and-white transmission: 
$1,000 for first 10 min. and $30 each additional minute per half  channel. 
Current  rates  varied  from  $1,800  for   first  10 min.  and   $32  each  addi- 
tional  minute  during nonpeak  hours,  to   $3,000  for  first  1 0  min.  and  
$48 each  additional  minute  during peak  hours.  (ComSatCorp Release) 
0  Roll D.  Ginter, NASA Centaur Program Manager, became Director of OART’S 
newly  established  Space Flight  Programs Div.  He would be responsible 
for   mission  planning,  management,  and  coordination  of  technology 
space flight projects and experiments within OART. (NASA Release 66-276) 

328 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

October 24: Former Astronaut John H.  Glenn, Jr.,  was  appointed chairman of 
the   board  of  Royal  Crown  Cola  International,  Ltd.  (AP,  Wash.  Post, 
10/25/66,  C8) 
0  Dr.  Ivan  L.  Bennett,  Jr.,  Deputy  Director  of  White  House’s  Office  of 
Science and Technology, warned  in   speech a t   seminar  on  Research  in  
t h e  Service of Man  i n  Oklahoma City tha t   unless scientists  “educated” 
th e   President  and  “other  intelligent,  concerned  laymen”  about  the  
applicability of  the ir  work,  their  fields of  research would suffer. Science, 
he  said, could no longer hope to exist  “through some mystique, without 
constraints  or   scrutiny  in   terms  of  material  goals,  and  isolated  from 
th e  competition for  allocation of  resources which are  finite.”  (Sullivan, 
NYT,  10/25/66,  78M) 
0  USAF was awarding Thiokol Chemical Corp. $1,075,507 contract for design, 
fabrication,  and  testing  of  thrus t   vector  control  system  €or  156-in. 
solid rocket motor.  (DOD   Release 897-66) 
0  Proposed  fur ther   reduction  in   NASA  FY  1967  appropriation  because  of 
Vietnam war  would  amount  to  ‘(national disaster,”  Ira C.  Eaker wrote 
i n  Sun Antonio  Express:  “Such  desertion  of  our  present space program 
would  give  t h e  Soviets  an   advantage they  are  now  striving mightily  to  
achieve.  The   U.S.S.R.  is   now  spending  about  twice  what  the   U S .   is  
spending for  space research.”  (Eaker, San  Antonio  Express,  10/24/66) 
October  25:  Propellant  tank  rup ture   occurred  on  Apollo  spacecraft  017 
service module during proof pressure  test  a t  240 psi  conducted by  NAA 
a t  Downey,  Calif.;  inflight  operating pressure would  be  180 psi.  No  test 
personnel  were  injured.  NASA  had  established  board  of  inquiry  to  
investigate.  (NASA  Release  66-285;  NAA  S&ID  Skywriter,  10/28/66,  4; 
AP,  Wash. Eve.  Star,  10/28/66,  D18) 
0  U.K.’s  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental Station  reported  tha t   U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA 
XII  spacecraft had  apparently entered orbit around moon  and was  trans-  
mitting  telemetry  bu t   no  photographic  signals.  U.S.S.R.  had  made  no 
official statement since Oct. 22 launch.  (UPI,  NYT, 10/26/66,  10; Wash .  
Post,  10/26/66,  A16) 
0  NASA  Aerobee  150  and  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  launched  35   min. 
apart  from  WSMR  reached  116-mi.  (186-km.)  and  74-mi.  (119-km.) 
altitudes  in   GSFC-ESSA  Ins t i tu te   for  Telecommunication  Sciences  and 
Aeronomy  experiment.  Aerobee  rocket  and  instrumentation,  designed 
to  measure micrometeoroid and  cosmic dus t   impacts and  electron  den- 
sities,  performed  satisfactorily.  Although  Nike-Cajun  did  no t   reach 
predicted  altitude and   two  of  seven experiments to   obtain data  on  ion- 
ospheric  D-region did  no t   function properly,  satisfactory  results  were 
obtained.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
MSFC  had  awarded  Univ.  of  Wisconsin  a  $679,101  contract  to   develop 
sensors  for  galactic  x-ray  mapping  experiment  to  be  flown  on  a n   Up- 
rated  Sa turn   I  (Saturn  IB)  launch  vehicle  i n   1968.  Sensors  would 
explore x-ray  sources  other  than  sun  and  Crab Nebula.  (MSFC  Release 
66-258) 
0  Potential  for  application  of  biomedical  knowledge  acquired  in   space 
research was discussed by  Dr. Richard L.  Lesher,  NASA Assistant Admin- 
is tra tor   for   Technology Utilization,  a t   the   Conference  on  Biomedical 
Knowledge,  Oklahoma  City.  He  described  two  experimental  efforts 
conducted by  NASA’s technology utilization  program : (1)  an   agreement 
with Vocational Rehabilitation  Administration to  make  available infor- 
mation  from  aerospace  research  to   solve  ‘problems  of  restoring  th e  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

329 

disabled to  productive life,”  and  (2) interdisciplinary biomedical applica- 
tion  teams  a t   research  centers  under  NASA  contract  to   define  medical 
problems and identify aerospace technology applicable to their solution. 
(Text) 
October  25:  British  Research  Council had  offered  to  pay  one half  the  $11.2- 
million  cost  of  constructing  a  150-in. telescope  in  Australia,  largest  in  
Southern  Hemisphere.  Similar  offer  from  Univ.  of  California  was 
pending  before  Australian  Government.  ( N Y T ,  10/26/66,  1) 
October  25-28:  75th  anniversary  convocation,  “Scientific  Progress  and 
Human Values,”  was  held a t  Cal Tech.  Dr. Lee A.  DuBridge in welcom- 
ing address noted meeting represented  “a  time for self appraisal. . . . We 
a t  Cal Tech are seriously seeking to  take a hard  look a t  ourselves, a t  the 
world of  science  and  technology of  which we  are part,  and a t  the  world 
of  human  beings  who  may  either  benefit  o r   possibly  suffer  from  what 
we  do.” 
NASA  Associate Administrator  for Manned  Space Flight  Dr.  George E. 
Mueller said  tha t   “through  the   creative use  of  the   capabilities  tha t  we 
are  building  up,  space may  . . . be  used  as  one  of  many  approaches  to 
alleviate”  problems  of  “famine,  disease,  over-population,  and  the  need 
for  more  and  better  education”  facing  developing nations. 
Dreams  of  eventual  space  travel  were  “pure  fantasy,”  according  to 
Cal  Tech  astronautics  professor  Dr.  Jesse  L.  Greenstein.  He  urged, 
however,  th a t  a greater portion  of  national  expenditures be  devoted  to 
achieving  interstellar  communications-a 
task  tha t   ‘‘may  ultimately 
become  the  greatest  scientific  adventure.” 
Dr.  Robert  P.  Sharp,  professor  of  geology  a t   Cal  Tech,  noted  tha t  
although  “earth  scientists”  were  playing  important  role  in  national 
space  program,  i t   was  also  important  tha t   they  “look  downward  into 
our  own  planet.  . . . Our  understanding  of  these  distant  bodies  will 
depend  to  a  good  degree  upon  how  well  we  understand  our  own  plain 
earth.” 
Likelihood  t h a t   revolutionary  improvement  in  communication  on 
earth would  transform  society was suggested by John R. Pierce, research 
director  of  Bell  Telephone  Labs.  Communications  Sciences Div.  Satel- 
lites  would  greatly  expand  potential  of  backward  countries  and  would 
help  build  a  sense of  national  identity  in  underdeveloped areas. 
“Technology  is  moving  faster  than  ou r   ability  to   assimilate  i t ,”  
scientist and  industrialist Dr.  Simon Ram0 postulated.  Dr.  Ram0 urged 
development of  new  class of men called ~ C ~ ~ c i o - t e c h n ~ l o g i ~ t s ~ 7  
who could 
“effectively  link  scientific  developments  with  social  betterment.” 
Dr.  Murray  Gell-Mann, professor  of  theoretical  physics  a t  Cal  Tech, 
said  society  mu s t   give  new  direction  to  technology,  diverting  i t   from 
applications  tha t   yield  higher  productive  efficiency  into  areas  tha t  
yielded  greater  human  satisfaction.  A  symbol  of  this  so r t   of  change 
would  occur  when  man  n o   longer  wanted  to  channel  resources  in to  
“building  bigger,  noisier  aircraft”  or  when  society  decided  to  divert  a 
new  highway  around  a  virgin  forest  rather  than  build  through  it. 
(Texts;  Bart,  N Y T ,   10/26/66,  23; Duscha,  Wash. Post,  10/26/66,  A9; 
N Y T ,   10/30/66,  52) 
October  26:  NASA’s  Atlas-Centaur  9  (AC-9)  launch  vehicle  successfully 
carried  ou t   first  full-thrust  restart  in  space  of  liquid  hydrogen  engine 
during  two-burn  indirect  ascent  mission  launched  from  ETR. Flight- 
eighth and last planned Centaur development test flight-almost  exactly 

330 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

followed prelaunch plans:  AC-9 Centaur  stage  burned  for  328  sec.  and 
again for 107 sec.,  first  to  drive itself  into  temporary 100-mi.  (161-km.) 
altitude parking orbit and  then   to  inject mass model  of  Surveyor space- 
craft  on   simulated lunar   transfer  trajectory.  Preliminary  tracking  data 
indicated  dummy  spacecraft  was  aimed  accurately  and  on  course. 
Centaur project  had  been managed  by  LBC.  (NASA  Release  66-274; NASA 
Proj.  Off.;  LRC  Release 66-69; AP,  Vush. Post, 10/27/66,  A7;  Av. Vk., 
10/31/66,39) 
October 26: U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  XII  was  probably less  than   100 mi.  from moon, 
reported  director  of  U.K.’s  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental  Station  Sir 
Bernard  Lovell.  He  said:  ‘Zas t   night  the   signals  from  the   probe  were 
steady and indicated  that,  contrary to LUNA  x and XI,  it was  ejected in to  
orbit without rotation.  Tha t  means tha t  potentially  i t  was a more success- 
fu l   exercise.”  (AP, Balt.  Sun, 10/27/66) 
Four-stage USAF  Trailblazer was  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station  in  
second  of  a  series  of  six  Air  Force  Avionics  Laboratory  launches  to 
study  communications  blackout  during  space  vehicle  reentry.  (Tech. 
Vk., 11/7/66,  10) 
Cosmonaut Aleksey  Leonov was  quoted by  Tass as  saying  tha t   he  was  in  
favor of  s tr ic t  international law governing cooperation in  space. Through 
agreement, all  stations,  equipment, and spacecraft  sen t  to  moon  or  the  
planets  could be  available for use by  representatives  of  other  states, he  
noted.  “However,  all  this  would  be  justified  only  if  the  moon  and  the  
other  celestial  bodies  are   used  by  all  treaty  participants  for  peaceful 
purposes.”  (Tass,  10/26/66) 
0  NASA  awarded  North  American  Aviation,  h e . ,   a  $37-million,  cost-plus- 
award-fee  contract supplement for   launch preparation  and  checkout of 
ten   Sa tu rn  V 2nd  stages  (S-11).  (NASA  Release  66-281) 
0  W - F 2  lifting  body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Capt.  Jerauld  R.  Gentry  (USAF), 
made  12 th  glide  flight  a t  Edwards  AFB  after  air-launch from  B-52  air- 
craft  a t   45,000-ft.  altitude.  Purposes  of  flight  were  to  obtain  data  on 
stability and  control  a t   7” and  11” angles  of  attack  and  on   upper  flap 
effectiveness.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
October  26-29:  Second  International  Congress  on  Air  Technology met  a t  
Hot Springs,  Ark. 
Need  to develop a V/Stol  aircraft as an  “air  bus” for faster short-haul 
transportation  of  cargo  and  passengers within  large  urban  areas  was 
rapidly  increasing  with  growth in  population,  asserted  Jack D.  Brewer, 
program manager  for V/Stol  research,  NASA  Hq.  By  1985, according to 
the  U S .  population- 
prediction,  more  than  130 million persons-half 
would  be  living  in   super  metropolitan  areas  a t   San  Francisco-Los 
Angeles, Buffalo-Chicago, and Boston-New York-Washington, D.C.  (NASA 
Release 66-282) 
Cooperation as well  as  competition would  be necessary to meet  chal- 
lenges  of  fu tu re   air  transportation,  John  C.  Brizendine,  Douglas  Air- 
craft  Co.,  Inc.,  Aircraft  Division  vice  president  for  engineering,  told 
th e   Congress.  He  said  progress  in   solving  problems  such  as  noise, 
limiting effects of  weather, congestion of  airports and airways, and rapid 
transportation needs between airports and cities,  should be accelerated. 
. . if  society  is   to  realize  the   progress  and  benefits  technology can 
offer, we  as  leaders  of  large  segments of  society  also  must  display  in- 
creasing  unity  of  purpose  in   striving  to  overcome the  major  environ- 
mental problems common to  all  of  us.”  (CR ,  1/23/67,  5729-31) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

331 

October  27:  NASA  launched  ComSatCorp’s INTELSAT  11-A  comsat  from  ETR  by 
three-stage  Thrust-Augmented  Improved  Delta  booster  in to   elliptical 
transfer  orbit  in  preparation  for  geostationary  orbit.  Transfer  orbit 
parameters:  apogee,  23,382  mi.  (37,646  km.) ; perigee,  186 mi.  (299.9 
km.);  period,  11 hr.  9  min.;  inclination,  26.4’.  A t   n in th   apogee-on 
Oct.  30-ComSatCorp 
fired  the   apogee  motor.  Apparently  the  apogee 
motor  nozzle was  blown off  shortly after the motor  ignited, and INTELSAT 
11-A entered orbit with 23,330-mi. (37,545-km.) apogee; 2,072-mi.  (3,334- 
km.)  perigee;  12 h r .   16 min.  period;  and  17” inclination  rather  than 
planned  22,300-mi.-altitude  synchronous  orbit  over  Pacific.  ComSat- 
Corp  announced  that  192-lb. satellite,  nicknamed  “LANI  BIRD,”  could 
receive  and  transmit  televisidn  and  other  forms  of  communications, 
but  tha t   “significance of  this  potential  remains  to  be  assessed.” 
First  satellite  in  ComSatCorp’s  two-satellite  Intelsat  I1  system  to 
provide  transatlantic  and  transpacific  comsat  coverage,  INTELSAT  11-A 
had  been  scheduled  to  extend  commercial service  to  the  Pacific;  assist 
in  fulfilling Project  Apollo  communications  requirements;  and  provide 
capability  for  live  transpacific TV  by  handling  TV,  data  transmission, 
or  up  to  240  voice  channels  between  “first  class”  ground  stations. 
Intelsat  11-B was  planned  for  launch  in  early  1967. INTELSAT  I  (“EARLY 
BIRD”)   had  been  orbited  April  6 ,   1965.  (ComSatCorp Releases;  NASA 
Proj.  Off.) 
0  No  photographic  signals  had  been  detected  by  Western  monitors  from 
U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  XII,  which  had  apparently  entered  luna r   orbit  Oct.  25. 
I t   was  speculated  tha t   spacecraft  had  been  shu t   down  temporarily  to 
conserve  battery  power.  U.S.S.R.  had  made  no  official statement  since 
Oct.  22  launch.  (UPI,  NYT ,   10/28/66,  21) 
0  ComSatCorp  asked  FCC  for  authority  to  construct  a  $6,500,000  high- 
capacity  earth  station  in  Peach  Tree  Valley,  Calif.,  to  communicate 
with, and perform tracking, telemetry, and command duties for, orbiting 
satellites.  ComSatCorp would  withdraw Oct.  6 application  for  a  second 
antenna  a t   Andover,  Me.,  station  pending  FCC  action  on  California 
application.  (ComSatCorp Release) 
0  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  accepting  the 
New  York  Board  of  Trade’s  20th  annual  Business  Speaks  Award  on 
behalf  of  NASA,  noted  “the  most  important  lesson”  learned  in  manage- 
ment  of  the  space effort:  “.  . . when  pressing forward and  coordinating 
the  efforts  of  a  large  group  of  teams  and  individuals  . . . i t  is  of  para- 
mount  importance  to  provide  objectives  for  each  and  to  assure  tha t  
these  objectives  a re   tailored  to  the   mind  and  capability  of  the  group 
attacking  them.  If  the  task  is  ever  going  to  be  accomplished,  i t   must 
seem achievable  . . . to  the man  undertaking it.  And  . . . each  segment 
of  the  overall task must be accurately  tracked and timed  to be properly 
completed  and  fitted  into  the  appropriate  sequence  even  as  the  work 
goes  on.’’  (Text) 
0  Communist  China  exploded  on  target  over  its  own  territory  a  nuclear 
weapon carried by a guided missile. Test was  fourth  in series  of  nuclear 
explosions:  first,  Oct.  16,  1964;  second,  May  14,  1965; third,  May  9, 
1966.  (NYT ,  10/28/66,  1, 18) 
October 28:  USAF’S  OV3-I1 research  satellite  was  launched  from Vandenberg 
AFB  by  Scout rocket  into orbit with 991-mi. (1,595-km.) apogee; 198-mi. 
(319-km.)  perigee;  104-min. period;  and  82’  inclination.  Launch  was 
planned  so  satellite  would  be  in   orbit during Nov.  12 South American 

332 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

solar  eclipse  to  provide  data  on  charged particle  variations  in   extreme 
upper  atmosphere  before,  during,  and  after  eclipse. Satellite,  designed 
to  remain active in space a t  least one year, would also extend knowledge 
of  electron  and  ion  density  structure  found  in   outer  radiation  belt  by 
NASA’s DISCOVERER  XVII.  (Vandenberg  AFB  PIO;   UPI, Phil.  Sun.  Bull., 
10/30/66) 
October  28:  First  manned  Apollo  spacecraft  (AS-204) would  be  orbited  in  
first quarter  of  1967, NASA  announced.  Mission  would  verify  spacecraft 
systems performance and crew operations. NASA  had hoped for December 
launching,  bu t   modification  of  environmental  control  system  (Ecs) 
would  necessitate  fu r the r   ground  testing  of  spacecraft.  Prime  crew 
would be Virgil I.  Grissom, command pilot; Edward H.  White  11,  senior 
pilot;  and Roger Chaffee, pilot.  Backup crew would  be  James McDivitt, 
command pilot; David Scott, senior pilot; and Russell Schweikart, pilot. 
(NASA Release 66-284) 
0  NASA  awarded  Boeing  Co.  a  $4.5-million contract  modification for  design 
and procurement  of  Sa tu rn  V  1st stages. Hardware included  propellant 
ducts and valves and pressurization  switches and gauges.  (NASA Release 
66-283) 
0  General Electric Co.  successfully  tested prototype GE4 turbojet  engine  a t  
52,600  lbs.  thrust-believed 
to  be  record  for  air-breathing  engines  of 
all  types.  GE4 was  developed in  FAA  competition with  P r a t t  & Whitney 
Div., United Aircraft Corp.,  for S s t  engine contract.  (GE Release 66-51) 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  said  in  a  speech  at  Mills  College, 
Oakland,  Calif.,  tha t   the  “complex  interdevelopment  of  technological 
power  and  of  the   social  organization necessary  to  control,  direct,  and 
exploit i t   . . . is  a  central  element of  the space  age.  . . . The  success  of 
our  space  program  is  helping  to  p o v e   to  ourselves  and  to  the   world 
tha t  we  have the will and the  capacity to establish far-reaching, difficult 
goals  and  bring  them  surely  to  fruition.  This  kind  of  proof  is  a  major 
basis  for  national  prestige  and  international  cooperation.”  (Text) 
*  U.S.  Army Corps of  Engineers awarded $1,071,205 contract for  construc- 
tion of  foundations a t  ERC  to Coleman Bros. Corp., Boston.  (MSC  Round- 
up,  10/28/66,  %;  DOD   Release 879-66) 
Recent  “booming”  in  Chicago  area  precipitated  editorial  comment  in 
Chicago Daily  News: “We  grant  that  the   supersonic  age  is  upon  us. 
But  i t  is also an  age  of  human  beings with  human  rights.  One  of  these 
is the  right not  to be buffeted around by sonic booms, and i t  is evidently 
going to  take  eternal vigilance to keep  th a t  right from being obliterated 
in   the   name  of  some  totally  unsupportable  need.”  (Chic. Daily  News, 
10/28/66) 
Plan  to  shift headquarters of  USN’S  manned  spacecraft  recovery fleet  (Task 
Force  140)  from  Norfolk  to  Houston  was  under  study  by  DOD,  fleet 
commander  R/Adm.  Conrad  Abhau  told  AP.  Abhau  said  h e   and  his 
staff had  been  absent  from Norfolk  on  recovery  operations  4+0 per  cent 
of  the   time  during  th e  past  12 mos.  (AP,  Wash .  Post,  10/29/66,  E16) 
FCC  had  granted  ITT  World  Communications,  Inc.,  permission  to  provide 
facilities  on  U.S.S.  Wasp  for  televising  recovery  of  Gemini  12 space- 
craft;  three-day  mission  was  scheduled  for  Nov.  9 launch.  TV  signals 
would  be  transmitted  by  EARLY  BIRD  I  for  relay.  (Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
10/29/66,  A16) 
October  29:  LUNAR  ORBITER  I  impacted  on  moon’s  hidden  side  a t   9:30  a.m. 
EDT on   command from  earth.  The  spacecraft  was  deliberately  crashed 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

333 

to  obviate possible  interference  with  mission  of  second  Lunar  Orbiter 
(Lunar  Orbiter  B)  scheduled  for  launch  Nov.  6.  First  U S .   spacecraft 
to  orbit  and  photograph  moon,  LUNAR  ORBITER  I,  launched  Aug.  10, 
became first satellite to be deliberately destroyed in  space by NASA.  (NASA 
Release 66-287; O’Toole,  Push. Post,  10/30/66, A10) 
October 29: LUNA XII  had photographed  lurain with  “a  special phototelevision 
device,”  Tass announced  in first official statement relating to  spacecraft 
since  Oct.  22  launch.  Satellite  had  entered  lunar  orbit  Oct.  25  with 
1,740-km. (1,081-mi.) apolune;  100-km.  (62-mi.) perilune;  and 3 hr.  25 
min. period. First photos  transmitted-shown  on Moscow television less 
than  an   hour  after  announcement-showed 
clearly  distinguishable 
details  of  craters  and mountain  ranges. 
LUNA  XII  was  ninth  photographic  mission  to  moon.  Five  had  been 
from  U S . :   RANGERS  VII,  VIII,  and  IX ,   SURVEYOR  I ,   and  LUNAR  ORBITER  I ;  
four  from  U.S.S.R.:  LUNA  111,  ZOND   111,  LUNA  IX ,   and  LUNA  XII.  (Tass, 
10/29/66;  AP,  N Y T ,  10/30/66,  43) 
Dr.  Serge A.  Korff, director of  New York Univ.’s cosmic research program, 
told a youth  science seminar a t  the  Explorer’s Club in New York tha t  h e  
believed  many  Ufo  sightings  had  been  of  giant  balloons  sent  aloft  by 
NYU  to  test  the   upper  atmosphere:  “[They]  are  300  to  400  feet  across 
and  because  they  are  partly  inflated,  assume  strange  shapes  as  they 
ascend. A t   high  altitudes  they often  reflect sunlight  and become  visible 
to viewers below  in  areas where  the  sun  has  set  or before  i t  has risen.” 
( N Y T ,  10/30/66,  45) 
“Whole  towns”  on  the  moon,  complete with  dome-like buildings  linked 
by  tunnels  and  parks  under  transparent  hoods,  might  be  constructed 
in  20th  century,  Soviet  architect  Nikolay  Kolomiyets  suggested  in 
Krusnuyu  Zvezdu.  Kolomiyets  said  the  moon  town  should  provide  a 
safe shelter  for  its  inhabitants  and be  attractive  as well.  Best  construc- 
tion  material  would  probably  be  lunar  rocks.  “ I t   can  be  expected  tha t  
after  treatment with  alkalis, lunar  rocks  can be  used  to  build walls and 
roofs by  pouring,  ju s t  as they  are made  on  earth by  pouring concrete.” 
(Tass, 10/29/66) 
October  30:  U.S.S.R.  Antaeus  cargo aircraft  lifted  88 tons,  103 kg.,  in  flight 
from  Podmoskovnoye  airport  (Moscow)  piloted  by  I.  Y.  Davidov, 
Krusnuyu Zvezdu announced. Previous cargo record  had been 53 metric 
tons,  479  kg.,  lifted  Dec.  16,  1958,  by  U S .   MATS  C-133 Cargomaster 
piloted  by  Col.  John  M.  Thompson  (WAF ) .   (Tass, 10/30/66) 
Sst would be limited  t o  speed over land  of  660 mph  to avoid sonic booms, 
Evert  Clark reported  in  New   York   Times.  (Clark,  N Y T ,  10/31/66,  1) 
October 31:  NASA  launched four-stage Pacemaker rocket from Wallops Station 
to  test  performaace  of  spacecraft  heat  shield  design.  First  two  stages 
lifted  135-lb. payload  to  75,000-ft.  altitude.  As  payload  began  to  fall 
back  to  earth,  last  two  stages were  fired  to  drive  i t  downward a t   about 
6,800 mph.  Information was  obtained by  tracking  and photography  and 
from  the   payload  itself,  which  was  recovered  after  parachute  descent 
into  Atlantic.  (Wallops PAO;  UPI,  N Y T ,   11/1/66) 
*  Japan  successfully  launched  four-stage  Mu-1  rocket  from  Uchinoura 
Space  Center,  Kyushu  Island,  to  test  1st-stage  fuel  combustion  and 
booster  propulsion.  The  70-ft.-long7 solid-fueled  launch  vehicle  was 
launched  a t  69” inclination and  impacted in Pacific after  3-min. 20-sec. 
flight.  Scientists  called  test  ‘‘a  success.”  Mu  was  scheduled  to  orbit 
Japan’s  first satellite  by  1968.  (AP,  N Y T ,   11/1/66) 

334 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

October  31:  Ss t  design  proposal evaluations were  submitted  to   FAA by  235- 
member  Government  team  and  30  domestic and  foreign  airlines;  FAA 
Administrator  William  F.  McKee  would  study  evaluations  and  make 
recommendation; President Johnson would  make final decision by  Jan. 
1, 1967.  (Wa sh .  Post,  11/1/66,  B7) 
*  A  revolution  in   1970’s of  air  transport  industry  tha t  would  ccchange its 
scope  and  character  even  more  than   the   switch  from  piston-engine 
equipment  to  jets  did  in   the   1960s,” was  predicted  by  Robert  Hotz  i n  
Aviation  Week. Transformation would be stimulated by  the  “sharp  spur 
of  advanced technology arriving i n  the  midst of  changing economic and 
social problems.”  Hotz observed tha t   “no  other  major business  i n   the  
industrial  history  of  th e   world  has  had  to   cope  with  such  a  series  of 
technical  revolutions  in  such a  sho r t  time span as  the  airlines.”  (Hotz, 
A v .   W k . ,  10/31/66,  21) 
U.S.S.R.  planned  to   build  two  additional  satellite  tracking  stations  in  
Cuba  and  had  sited  one  near  Santiago,  Aviation  Week  reported.  ( A v .  
W k . ,  10/31/66,  23) 
USAF  had  awarded  Boeing  Co.  $142.3-million  firm  fixed-price  incentive 
contract  to   develop  and  produce  A G M - ~ ~ A  Shor t  Range  Attack Missile 
(Sram) to  be  carried  by  FB-111 bombers and  adaptable to  late  model 
B-52 bombers.  (DOD   Release  925-66) 
Franco-Soviet cooperative space agreement was  being viewed with  skepti- 
cism  by  French  scientists  who  foresaw  effort  would  break  down  for  
same lack of Soviet candor tha t  had stymied useful information exchange 
between U S .  and U.S.S.R.,  Aviation  Week reported.  I n  addition, French 
Communists were  protesting  to  Kremlin  tha t   high  Soviet  sanction  of 
President De Gaulle’s space program was weakening Communist political 
s ta ture   i n  France.  ( A v .   W k . ,   10/31/66,  23) 
Cost-sharing dispute between DOD   and NASA  over use  of  ETR was  reported 
by  Aviation  Week. DOD   wanted NASA  to pay  share  of  continuing costs- 
possibly  as  much  as  $100 million  annually-instead 
of  only  expenses 
for  launches.  ( A v .  W k . ,  10/31/66,  25) 
Discussing  the   manned  spaceflight program  in   press  interview  a t   Texas 
. . . to get  to  th e  moon first is no t  important, bu t  who  stays  there  and 
Technical College, physicist and atomic scientist Dr.  Edward Teller said: 
t r  
exploits th e  knowledge to  be gained  from the  moon is more important.” 
Teller, attending symposium on  arid and semi-arid land, said U S .  should 
settle a colony of  scientists on  moon to  determine feasibility of  using it 
as  a base for  reaching Mars.  (AP,  Balt.  Sun,  11/1/66,  8) 
0  NASA  was  planning total of  11 lunar  landing missions, reported  Technology 
Week ,  citing  procurement  request  issued  by  MSC.  Number  of  missions 
was  included as  guideline for firms asked to submit bids on  development 
of  crew recovery quarantine  equipment.  (Tech.  W k . ,  10/31/66,  3) 
FAA  predicted  flying activity  a t   the   303  airports with  FAA control  towers 
would break all records in   1966: a n  estimated 45.1 million landings and 
takeoffs were foreseen-a  19 per  cent increase  over 1965.  (FAA Release 
66-95) 
During  October:  NASA  published  Vacuum  Technology  and  Space  Simulation 
(SP-105) , a  comprehensive  manual  available  to   public  through  the  
Superintendent  of  Documents,  GPO. (NASA Release  66-279) 
FAA  cautioned airline executives during briefing  in Washington, D.C.,  no t  
to  le t  desire for a “fly-off competition’’ keep them from making as clear- 
cu t  a  first  choice as possible  for  the   supersonic  transport.  If  they  did 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

335 

not,  they might get  aircraft they  did  not want  or  Congressional critics 
might use indecisiveness to  s t d l  o r  kill program.  Possibility tha t  proto- 
types of  both  the  Boeing and Lockheed airframe designs would be built 
was  virtually ruled  out.  (A v .  Wk . ,   10/31/66,  25) 
During  October:  Secretary  of  the   Air  Force  Dr.  Harold Brown  summarized 
USAF’S  position  on i ts  fu ture  in  space in  an  interview with Armed  Forces 
Management:  “It  is  no t   a  matter  of  desiring  to  conduct  military  cam- 
paigns in  space bu t  rather  to preclude any aggressor from using space as  
an  area of  operations  for launching attacks  against  the  U S .   . . . 
“We  should  no t  be  doing things  just  to  be  doing them. Rather,  they 
must  have  direct  relation  to  establishing military  needs. 
“Space  is  no t   a  mission bu t   a  place  to  perform  a  mission.  When   a 
mission can be performed from space, the  Air Force will perform i t  from 
there.  . . .” (Armed Forces  Management,  10/66,  69) 
0  NASA  made  available  a  list  of  abstracts  of  NASA-owned  inventions  fo r  
foreign  licensing  through  the   Assistant  General  Counsel  fo r   Pa ten t  
Matters,  NASA  Hq.  (NASA Release  66-266) 
0  AFSC  awarded  12-mo.  study  contracts  totaling  $900,000  to  Lockheed- 
California Co., North American Aviation,  Inc.,  and McDonnell Aircraft 
Corp.  to  develop  a  high-altitude,  hypersonic  Scramjet-powered cruise 
vehicle with  potential  military  applications.  (AFSC Release  188.66) 
NASA  Deputy Administrator Dr.  Robert  C .   Seamans, Jr.,  said  in   Znteravia 
tha t   in   addition  to  possible  “definite  and  direct”  economic and  tech- 
nological  benefits,  the   “greatest  impact  the   continuing exploration  of 
space will have upon man  will be upon his  own philosophy: tha t   is, his 
view of  himself  in  relation  to  the  universe as he imagines it.”  (Znteravia, 
10/66,  1479) 
0  USAF  School of Aerospace Medicine had  completed 46-day simulated space- 
flight in  which bite-size food diet was  tested,  Technology  Week reported. 
Four  airmen, divided into two  teams,  spent several days a t  ground-level 
conditions,  then   entered  two  high-altitude  chambers  a t   simulated 
27,000  f t .   Atmosphere was  70%  oxygen,  30%  hydrogen for  one  team; 
70%  oxygen,  30% nitrogen  for  second. Final  sixteen  days were  spent 
a t  ground level. Results had no t  been released.  (Tech. Wk . ,  10/31/66,4) 

November 1966 

November  1:  X-15 No.  3 was  flown  by  NASA  test  pilot  William  H.  Dana  to 
3,750 mph  (mach  5.34)  and  306,900-ft. altitude  in  flight  test  to  collect 
micrometeoroids. As  secondary mission,  pilot  performed maneuvers  to 
check  dual  channel  radiometer,  tip-pod  accelerometer,  and  precision 
attitude.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
An  8,189-hr.  test  of  cesium  electron-bombardment engine  performed  for 
LRC  by Electro-Optical Systems,  Inc.,  ended when supply of  cesium fuel 
was  exhausted.  Conducted  i n   space  simulation  chamber,  test  was  part 
of NASA’s  electric engine research program.  Studies had shown that  such 
systems  could  result  in   increased  payloads  in  unmanned  and  manned 
spaceflight missions.  (NASA  Release  66-306) 
U.S.S.R.  successfully launched  and  recovered  aerostat  containing 7.6-ton 
high  altitude  automatic  astronomic  station,”  to  20-km.  (12-mi.)  alti- 
r c  
tude  for  rcexploration of  physical  processes  i n   the   solar  photosphere.” 
Equipment,  including  optical  and  radio-technical  apparatuses,  had 
functioned normally, and results  were being processed.  (Tass,  11/5/66; 
AP, Wash.  Sun.  Star,  11/6/66,  E26) 
0  Test-firings  of  XE nuclear  rocket  engine-last  major  step before develop- 
ing hardware  for flight-rated nuclear  engine-would  begin  in  latter  half 
of  1968,  Milton  Klein,  Deputy  Manager,  NASA-AEC  Space  Nuclear 
Propulsion  Office,  told  Atomic  Industrial  Forum  in  Pittsburgh.  Klein 
also  disclosed  tha t   his  office  had  begun  preliminary  design  of  new 
facilities with  two  test  positions,  each  capable  of  testing a  200,000-1b.- 
th ru s t  engine o r  an  entire propulsion  module  under  simulated  altitude 
conditions.  (Text) 
Gen.  Jacob E.  Smart  (USAF,  Ret.),  former Deputy  Commander-in-Chief of 
U.S.  European  Command,  was  sworn  in   as  a  special  assistant  to  NASA 
Administrator  James  E.  Webb.  (NASA  Release  66-288) 
0  George  C.  White,  Jr.,  chief  of  NASA  Hq.  Apollo  Spacecraft  and  Vehicle 
Test  Performance  Office,  was  appointed  Director  of  Apollo  Reliability 
and  Quality.  (NASA  Ann.,  11/18/66) 
0  Survival  of  17 chimpanzees without  permanent  damage  after  3% min.  i n  
simulated  space  environment  offered  hope  tha t   an   astronaut  outside 
his  spacecraft  could  be  rescued  if  his  spacesuit were  to  spring a  leak. 
I n  18 tests  conducted a t  Holloman  AFB  during one year,  chimps placed 
in   a  decompression  chamber  for  time  periods  tha t   were  gradually 
increased from 5 sec. to 3%  min.  suffered only temporary abnormalities. 
L/Col.  C. H. Kratochvil, commander of Holloman’s aeromedical research 
laboratory, said close relationship bet%-een chimps  and humans made i t  
possible  to  assume  tha t   findings  would  be  applicable  to  astronauts. 
(Nelson,  Wush. Post,  11/2/66,  ALE) 
*  Dr.  Hugh  Odishaw was  appointed executive secretary  of  the  NRC   Div.  of 
Physical  Sciences.  Space  Science Board,  Geophysics  Research  Board, 

336 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

337 

and  Committee  on  Polar  Research-groups  with  which  Dr.  Odishaw 
had been  closely associated-would  be shifted  into MC   as joint respon- 
sibility  of  Div.  of  Earth  Sciences  and  Div.  of  Physical  Sciences.  They 
previously  had  been  among  12 NAS  groups  tha t   functioned  outside  th e  
formal  NRC   divisional  structure.  (NAS-RRC-NAE  News  Report,  11/66,  1) 
November  1:  Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  launched  by  AFCRL  from  WSMR 
reached  150 mi.  (241 km.)  in  experiment to measure extreme ultraviolet 
solar  radiation.  (OAR  Res.  Rev.,  1/67,  8 )  
0  ComSatCorp  signed  agreements to purchase  210-acre site  in  Montgomery 
County, Md.,  for $7- to $10-million Research and Development  Center. 
Construction  would  begin  in   1967.  (ComSatCorp Release) 
November  2:  U.S.S.R.  launched  spacecraft,  possibly  from  Cosmos  series, 
which exploded  into 32  pieces  detectable by radar. GSFC Satellite Situation 
Report would  later reveal that  12  pieces  of debris remained  i n  orbit Nov. 
15; 20  had  reentered.  Spacecraft was  second  Soviet satellite to  explode 
in  six  weeks  [see Sept.  171.  (GSFC  SSR ,   11/15/66) 
NASA  had  extended  operational  lifetimes  of  its  three  Pegasus  meteoroid 
detection  satellites  12   additional  months  because  of  their  successful 
operation.  Satellites  would  continue  to  provide  meteoroid  data,  b u t  
researchers  would  concentrate  on   studying  durability  of  spacecraft 
systems  and  components.  PEGASUS  I  was  launched  Feb.  16,  1965: 
PEGASUS  11,  May  27,  1965; and  PEGASUS  111,  July  30,  1965. All  had  been 
scheduled  to   operate  18 mos.  (MSFC  Release  66-264) 
USAF  launched  two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg AFB with Atlas- 
Agena  D  booster.  (Tech. Wk., 11/7/66,  10;  U.S.  Aeron.  & Space  Act., 
1966,  157) 
*  JPL  selected  Litton  Industries,  Inc.,  Guidance  and  Control Systems Div., 
for  negotiation  of  a  $3-million  contract  to  design,  fabricate,  and  check 
ou t   data  automatic  subsystem  (Das)  for  1969  Mariner  (unmanned) 
flights to Mars.  JPL  had management  responsibility  to NASA  for Mariner/ 
Mars  project.  (NASA  Release  66-289) 
*  General  Precision  Equipment  Corp.  received  $8.6-million  NASA  contract 
to  provide  three  sets  of  equipment  to  modify  Apollo  simulators a t  KSC .  
( E Y ,  11/2/66,  3) 
*  Man  must  learn  to  operate  effectively and  efficiently  in  space  before  h e  
can  reap  the   full benefits  of  space exploration, Dr.  George  E.  Mueller, 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space Flight,  told  the   Wis- 
consin State Chamber  of  Commerce in  Milwaukee:  “TO employ Apollo 
flight hardware  and  capabilities  beyond  the  manned  lunar  landing,  and 
to  extend  the   capability of  th e  Apollo  spacecraft would  make  efficient 
use  of  our   national  investment. Missions a re  available  to make  use  of 
the  equipment for flights in  earth orbit,  in lunar orbit, and to the  moon’s 
surface.  Experiments are  being defined  to  determine  the   value  of  such  
missions.  Users  have  expressed  interest  in  the   results  of  such   experi- 
ments.  But  first  we  must  develop  the   ability  to  operate  i n  space.  . . .” 
(Text) 
Leningrad  In s t i tu te  of  Cytology  scientists  had  designed  special  device  to 
permit  biologists  to  study  effects  on  microorganisms  of  “pure”  solar 
radiation.  Device,  called  “Photostate  I,”  consisted primarily  of  18-liter 
chamber  in  which  wide temperature range could be created and observa- 
tions made  under  any intensity of  solar radiation  in  th e  field  of  visible 
and  ultraviolet  light.  (Tass,  11/2/66) 

338 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

November  2:  BCA  received  $2,500,000  fixed-price  USN  contract  for  fabri- 
cation,  testing,  and  delivery  of  six navigation satellites.  (DOD  Release 
933-66) 
November 3:  XB-70 No.  1 experimental supersonic bomber, piloted by L/Col. 
Joseph  Cotton  (USAF)  and  NASA  test  pilot  Fitzhugh  Fulton,  reached 
mach  2.1  and  60,000-ft.  altitude  during  two-hour  flight  to  evaluate 
sonic booms  and conduct  noise measurements  for  FAA.  Flight  was  first 
since  June   8  crash  of  XB-70  No.  2  near  Barstow,  Calif.  (XB-70 Proj. 
Off.;  UPI,  Chic. Trib.,  11/4/66) 
0  USAF  Titan  111-C booster  launched  from  ETR released  unmanned  Gemini 
spacecraft  on  reentry  trajectory  and  inserted  canister  containing  nine 
experiments and  three   satellites  in to   high,  circular  orbit  i n  successful 
mission marking first flight test of  hardware for  DOD’S  Manned  Orbiting 
Laboratory  (Mol). 
Power flight of  Titan 111-C was  close to planned parameters. Modified 
Gemini  spacecraft was  released  a t   125-mi. altitude in   test  to  determine 
whether  new  heat  shield  with  hatch  could withstand  reentry  tempera- 
tures.  Traveling  17,500 mph,  spacecraft  followed  5,500-mi.  trajectory, 
landing only seven miles  off  target in   the  Atlantic.  Recovery was  made 
by  U.S.S.  LaSaZZe.  Titan  111-C’s  transtage  restarted  twice  to  achieve 
planned  184-mi.-altitude circular  orbit and   release  38-ft.  experimental 
canister,  proving  booster’s  ability  to  launch   long  payload.  Canister- 
OV4-111-ejected  OV4-IR  and  QV4-IT  comsats  and  QVl-VI  satellite, 
which  achieved separate,  circular  orbits.  Launch,  sixth  in   series  of  12 
designed  to  qualify  composite Titan  111-6 for  operational  service,  was 
characterized  by  USAF  officials  as  a  “major  step”  in   the   Mol  program. 
(Wilford,  N Y T ,   11/4/66,  1 ,   10;  AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  11/3/66,  A l ;  
AP, Wash .  Post,  11/4/66,  A l ;  A v .   W k . ,  11/14/66,  30; U.S.  Aeron.  & 
Space  Ac t . ,   1966, 158) 
0  Decisions on the  direction of  post-Apollo activities  in  space would  require 
a  “two-pronged effort  by  the   par t   of  our  economy  interested  in   the  
evolution  of  space  products,”  suggested  Boeing  Co.  vice  president 
George H.  Stoner before AIAA Forum on “After Apollo, Wha t   Next?”  in  
Washington,  D.C.:  “.  . . industry  must  assist  NASA  and  the   federal 
government  in   formulating  succeeding  national  space  goals  for  the  
research  tha t  will  produce  fru i tfu l  progress  toward  understanding  our 
universe  and  toward  building  a  store  of  knowledge  about  specialized 
space  techniques.  . . . Indus try   and  government  agencies  other  than  
NASA must explore and continue to  find ways  to  compete successfully in 
the  world  market  place  and  in   the   international  technological  race  on  
society.  . . .” Stoner offered  several specific suggestions for post-Apollo 
the   large  scale  development  projects  tha t   characterize  our   modern 
activities:  (1)  communications satellites  tha t   would  take  advantage of 
th e   na tura l   access  to   anywhere  on  ear th   provided  by  spacecraft;  (2) 
applications  of  space-based activities  to  ballistic  missile  defense;  (3) 
expansion and  refinement of  equipment for  survey of  ear th  affairs from 
space;  (4)  dramatic  reduction  of  launch  costs;  and  (5)  continuing 
exploration of  space and  i ts  technologies by NASA  astronauts and  scien- 
tists  to  learn more  about our  universe.  (Text) 
0  Apparent inactivity  in  Soviet manned space program might reflect  “grow- 
ing  dismay over the   tremendously high cost of  astronautics where men 
are involved,”  wrote  William Hines  in   the   Washington  Evening  Star. 
“The Russians may feel they have better things  to do with their money, 
just as  the  United States would  have if  the  Kennedy ‘moon message’ of 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

339 

1961 had  no t   been  hung like  a n  albatross  around  the  national neck  as  
a  commitment involving American prestige  before  th e  world.”  Cost  of 
Project Gemini  was  about $700,000  per man hour.  (Hines,  Wash.  Eve. 
Star,  11/3/66,  A12) 
November 3:  1966 Nobel  Prizes  for  chemistry  and  physics were  awarded  to  
Drs.  Robert  S.  Mulliken, Univ.  of  Chicago,  and  Alfred  Kastler,  Ecole 
Normale Superieure in  Paris,  respectively. Professor Mulliken was  cited 
for  “his  functional work  concerning chemical bonds and  the  electronic 
s truc ture   of  molecules  by  the   molecular  orbital  method”;  Professor 
Kastler,  for  “ the   discovery  and  development  of  optical  methods  for  
studying Hertzian resonances in  atoms.”  (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/3/66, 
A l ;  Wiskari,  N Y T ,   11/4/66,  1, 28) 
e  U.S.  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament  Agency  announced  plans  for  a 
“field  exercise”  in  Ariiona,  Nevada,  and  California,  to   test methods  of 
identifying  underground  nuclear  explosions.  Project,  which  would 
begin  in   la te   1966  and  continue  through  May  1967,  would  develop 
methods by which international inspection  teams might police  a ban  on 
underground  nuclear  tests.  (UPI,  Wash. Post,  11/4/66,  A23) 
November 4:  U.S.S.R.  had launched Yantar I ionospheric laboratory equipped 
with gas plasma ion engine to altitudes of  100 to 400 km.  (62 to 249 mi.) 
in   October  “to  study  the   outlook  for  guided  flight  in   the   upper  layers 
of  the   a t m ~ s p h e r e , ~ ’  Tass  announced.  Data  on  propulsion-system per- 
formance  in   electrically  charged  ionosphere  would  be  analyzed  and 
results  published  in  magazines  of  the   Soviet Academy  of  Sciences. 
Both NASA  and USAF  had  already conducted several ground  and flight 
tests  of  electric engines,  and  another  series  was  scheduled to  begin  in  
late  1966.  Jerome  P.  Mullin,  of  OART’S  Nuclear  Systems  and  Space 
Power  Div.,  told  the   New  York  Times  in   a  telephone  interview  tha t  
electric engines  had  “demonstrated  their  practical  utility”  for maneu- 
vering and  stabilizing spacecraft  in  flight.  (Tass,  11/4/66;  Grose, N Y T ,  
11/5/66,  12; Wilford, N Y T ,   11/5/66,  12) 
Cosmonaut-pilots would  head  crews of  all spacecraft  landing on  the  moon 
in   the   fu tu re   because  landing  recanno t  be  fully  trusted  to  machines,” 
Soviet Cosmonaut Pave1 Belyayev predicted in  Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. 
Belyayev,  who  manually  landed  VOSKHOD 11  March  19,  1965, said  tha t  
two  methods  of  braking  were  possible:  jet  engines  and  use  of  aero- 
dynamic  forces.  (Tass,  11/4/66) 
Four th   stage  of  Mu-1,  Japan’s  newest  and  most  powerful  booster,  was 
successfully tested  in  low-pressure chamber in  Noshiro, Univ. of  Tokyo 
scientists  reported.  Mu  was  scheduled  to  orbit Japan’s  first satellite by 
1968.  (AP,  Balt.  Sun,  11/8/66) 
e  U.S.  Ambassador-at-Large and  newly  appointed Ambassador  to   U.S.S.R. 
Llewellyn E.  Thompson and Soviet Minister for Civil Aviation Yevgeni 
F.  Loginov  signed  agreement  authorizing  direct  commercial  airline 
would begin  in  spring 1967 with weekly flights by PP an  American World 
flights between New York and Moscow a t  State De  t. ceremony. Service 
Airways  and  U.S.S.R.’s  Aeroflot.  (Eder,  N Y T ,   11/5/66,  1; Roberts, 
Wash. Post,  11/5/66,  A l )  
a  Radioastronomers were  relying  increasingly  on  ancient  Oriental records 
of  novae and  supernovae because the  phenomena could be observed  so 
rarely,  Xi Ze-zong and Po Shu-jen, Academia Sinica,  Shanghai, reported 
in  Science. Only one supernova had appeared within Milky Way during 
last 360 yrs.,  and few of  the  average of 50 novae tha t  appeared annually 
could be  seen with  the   naked eye.  (Xi and Po,  Science,  11/4/66,  597) 

340 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

November 5:  NASA  conducted first rocket-launched  test  of  parachute  landing 
system for Voyager spacecraft a t  WSMR.  Honest John-Nike rocket boosted 
200-lb.  experimental package  to  104,000-ft. altitude,  b u t   ground  com- 
mand  transmission  did  no t   correctly  trigger  deployment.  Successful 
balloon-launched  test  in  the  LaRc-managed parachute experiment series 
had  been  completed  Aug.  30.  Voyager  project  was  managed  by  JPL. 
(NASA Proj.  Off.) 
Astronauts  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  passed  their 
medical examinations for th e  Gemini XI1 mission,  scheduled for launch 
from  ETR  Nov.  9.  ( T u s h .  Post,  11/6/66, A17) 
November 5-6:  FAA, Office  of  Emergency  Planning,  and New  York  City  offi- 
cials successfully staged “Metro  Air  Support ’66,”  a n  exercise in  which 
more than  200 Vtol aircraft  and helicopters  took off  and landed a t  piers, 
parks,  and  streets  with  emergency  supplies,  technicians,  and  Govern- 
men t   officials  to  demonstrate  how  aircraft  could  be  used  if  other 
transportation  were  paralyzed  during  emergency  o r   disaster.  (FAA 
Releases  66-90, 66-96; Nevard,  N Y T ,   11/6/66,  1)  
November  6:  NASA’s LUNAR  ORBITER  11  (Lunar  Orbiter  B)  unmanned  space- 
craft was  successfully  launched by  Atlas-Agena  D  booster  from  ETR  in 
second U S .  attempt to  orbit the moon and  photograph possible landing 
sites  for Apollo  astronauts  [see Nov.  10-301. 
Agena  2nd  stage fired  to  boost  850-lb. spacecraft  into  100-mi.  (161- 
km.)  altitude  parking  orbit,  reignited  after  14-min.  coast  period, 
injecting  spacecraft  on  94-hr.,  232,000-mi.  translunar  trajectory,  and 
separated.  On  schedule LUNAR  ORBITER  11  deployed  its  four   solar  panels 
and  two  antennas  and  locked  its  five  solar  sensors  on  the   sun .   Only 
difficulty occurred when spacecraft’s star-tracker los t  its fix on Canopus, 
delaying  critical  midcourse  maneuver  eight  hours.  Correction  was 
accomplished  a t   44:09  GET  and  JPL  predicted  spacecraft  would  come 
very  close  to  original aiming point. 
Primary  objectives  of  NASA’s LUNAR  ORBITER  I I   mission,  second  in 
series of  five, were  (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar 
orbit;  and  (2) to obtain high-resolution photos o n  various lunar surface 
areas  to  assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor 
spacecraft,  and  to  improve  ou r   knowledge  of  the   moon.  Photos would 
cover  13 primary  target  sites,  located  generally  within  nor thern   half 
of  the  Apollo  zone  of  interest  on   the  moon’s  front  face.  I t  would  also 
monitor micrometeoroids and radiation  intensity  in  lunar environment 
and  refine  definition  of  moon’s  gravitational  field.  Lunar  Orbiter  pro- 
gram was managed  by  LaRC   under direction of NASA’s  OSSA.  Tracking and 
communications  were  the   responsibility  of  JPL-operated  Deep  Space 
Network.  (NASA Proj.  Off.;  NASA  Release  66-286; O’Toole,  Wush. Post, 
11/7/66,  A l ,   A3;  Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  11/7/66,  A3;  UPI,  N Y T ,  
11/9/66,  77;  AP,  Tush .  Post,  11/10/66,  A2) 
President  Johnson  announced  appointment  of  Under  Secretary  of  Com- 
merce Alan  Boyd  as Secretary of  the   new  Cabinet-level  Department  of 
Transportation.  (Pres.  Doc.,  11/14/66,  1620-21) 
GEMINI  x  spacecraft  was  viewed  by  more  than   13,000 people  when  it  was 
displayed for the  day a t  a Tokyo department store.  ( T u s h .  Post, 11/7/66, 
November  7:  Clarence C .  Gay,  Jr.,  Acting  Director  of  Gemini  Test,  became 
Chief,  Apollo  Spacecraft  Test,  Apollo  Test  Directorate  a t   NASA  Hq. 
(NASA Ann.,  11/18/66) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

3 41  

November 7: Western  Union Telegraph Co.  asked FCC’s  permission  to  create 
domestic  comsat  system  to  transmit  telegrams. Ground  stations  would 
be  constructed  in  Oregon,  Iowa,  Colorado,  Louisiana,  Alabama,  and, 
possibly, West  Virginia.  (WI ,  N Y T ,  11/8/66,  15) 
Moscow  parade  celebrating 49th  anniversary of  the  Bolshevik Revolution 
included  rocket which Russians  claimed was  immune to any antimissile 
defense  system and  could  be  dropped  ou t   of  orbit  from  any  direction. 
(AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  11/7/66,  A l ,  A6) 
a  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb was  presented  Gen.  Benedict Crowell 
Gold  Medal  by  American  Ordnance  Assn.’s  Cleveland  Post.  (Lewis 
News,  11/10/66,  1) 
November  8:  NASA’s  SURVEYOR  I  spacecraft,  which  softlanded  on  the  moon’s 
Ocean  of  Storms June  2,  responded  to  JPL  signals almost  four  months 
after  scientists  had  announced  its  “death.”  Spacecraft  did  not  take 
additional photos  of  the  lunar  surface as commanded.  (UPI,  Wash .  Post, 
11/10/66,  A7) 
In   test  of  hydrogen  peroxide  attitude  control  thrusters,  INTELSAT  11-A 
( “LANI  BIRD”)  was  moved  in to  elliptical  orbit  with  23,306-mi.  (37,523- 
km.)  apogee; 2,609-mi.  (4,201-km.) perigee;  17” inclination;  and  12-hr. 
10-min. period. Systems would be used in fu tu re  attempt to place comsat 
in “modified orbit with a  12 hou r  period,”  to  make possible communica- 
tions with  line-of-sight earth stations for a few hours  daily. Preliminary 
investigations  indicated  tha t   INTELSAT  11-A’S  failure  to  achieve  planned 
synchronous  equatorial  orbit  Oct.  30  was  due  to  apogee  motor  mal- 
function; launch  of  Intelsat  11-B, scheduled for Nov.  23, would be post- 
poned  until  exact  cause  of  malfunction  was  determined.  (ComSatCorp 
Release) 
a  NASA  Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station 
reached  134-mi.  (216-km.) altitude  in   GSFC  experiment  to  evaluate  the  
method of  the double floating probe as a tool for monitoring ionospheric 
electric  fields.  Rocket performance  was  excellent,  and  data  obtained by 
one of  two  independent antenna  systems was  in quantitative  agreement 
with  the  double  floating probe  theory.  Other  antenna  system  failed  to  
deploy  properly.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
USAF  launched  an   unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg AFB  with  Thor- 
Agena  D  booster.  (UPI,  N Y T ,   11/9/66,  4 ;   U.S  Aeron.  &  Space  Act., 
1966, 158) 
Secretary of  Defense Robert  S. McNamara was  considering USAF  proposal 
for  an   advanced  manned  strategic  aircraft  (Amsa)  which  would  cost 
$1.5-$2  billion  to  develop, William  Beecher  reported  in  the   New  York 
Times. Bomber would  reportedly  be  able to  carry internally  25 nuclear- 
tipped  sho r t   range  attack  missiles  (Sram),  plus  nuclear  bombs;  have 
unrefueled  range  of  7,000  to  10,000 mi.;  and  be  capable  of  traveling 
1,625 mph-about  2%  times  the   speed  of  B-52  aircraft,  the   mainstay 
of  cu r ren t  bomber  force.  (Beecher, N Y T ,  11/8/66,  1) 
Concept  of  “flying  saucersyy violated  physical  laws  of  solar  system,  Rev. 
Francis J. Heyden, Georgetown Univ. astronomer, declared in  Washing- 
tan  Post  interview.  Ufo  reports,  none  of  which  could  be  adequately 
studied  scientifically, were either misinterpretations  or hoaxes, he said. 
(Casey,  Wush .  Post,  11/8/66,  B3) 
FAA  awarded $65,000 contract  to North  American Aviation,  Inc.,  to study 
competing  Boeing  Co.  and  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  Sst  designs  for 
possible size reduction tha t  would reduce sonic boom.  ( W S J ,  12/5/66,12) 

342 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

November  9:  NASA  launched  from  Wallops  Station  an   Argentine-designed 
and  -produced  single-stage  solid-fuel  Orion  I1  sounding  rocket  with 
ayload for  upper atmosphere research. Reaching altitude of 51 mi.,  pay- 
road  was  captured by  helicopter  as  i t  descended by  parachute  to  2,500 
ft.,  marking  Wallops’  first  such  mid-air  recovery.  Test  was  second 
successful  Orion  I1  flight  in   three-flight  series  which  began  Nov.  4; 
Nov.  7  launch   failed.  Six  Argentine  engineers  and  technicians  from 
Aeronautical and Space Research Ins t i tu te   (IIAE)  assisted Wallops per- 
sonnel with  launch  operations.  Arrangements were  made  by  NASA  and  
Argentine  Space  Commission  (CNIE) . (NASA  Release  66-291; Wallops 
Release 66-53) 
0  USAF  launched  Arcas  solid-fuel  rocket  from  Vandenberg AFB  to  collect 
information  on  atmospheric  temperature,  pressure,  and  movement 
above  98,400-ft.  altitude.  Data  collected  would  be  used  to  plan  glide 
paths  of  vehicles  reentering ear th  atmosphere.  (AP, Phil.  Inq . ,   l l / l O /  
66) 
AFSC  announced  plans  to  use  seven  defense  communications  satellites, 
launched from ETR  June  16, in  series of  experiments to  gather data  for 
design of  improved  communications systems between  ground  stations 
5,000  to  6,000 mi.  apart.  Using  specially equipped (2-121 communica- 
tions  research  aircraft,  Air  Force Avionics  Lab.  engineers would  test: 
(1)  relay  of  voice and  teletype  communications through  satellite  from 
e i ther   aircraft  or  ground  station;  and  (2)  transmission  of  airborne 
meteorological reconnaissance data  to  the  ground  via  satellite.  Signals 
often  would  travel  50,000 mi.  between  terminal  points.  (AFSC  Release 
143.66) 
S ta te   Dept.  disclosed  tha t   “a  very  small  amount”  of  radioactivity  had 
leaked  in to   the   atmosphere from AEC’S  Sept.  12  underground  nuclear 
test,  bu t   the   incident  did  no t   violate  limited  nuclear  test  ban  treaty 
because  no  radioactive  debris  had  circulated  outside  U.S.  Disclosure 
was  in   response  to   a  Soviet  inquiry.  (WI,  Wash .  Post,  11/10/66,  A2) 
November  10:  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding rocket  launched  from  Churchill 
Research Range reached  120-mi. (193-km.) altitude in  flight to evaluate 
experiments for NASA-west  German  cooperative satellite  program. Pre- 
mature  ejection  of  payload  cylinder doors caused overheating and mal- 
function  of  an   electron  detector, bu t   all  other  instruments  performed 
satisfactorily.  Rocket  performance,  though  slightly  in  excess  of  pre- 
dicted,  was  within  normal  tolerance  range.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
0  XB-70 No.  1 experimental  supersonic  bomber,  piloted  by  L/Col.  Joseph 
Cotton  (USAF)  and   NASA  test  pilot  Fitzhugh  Fulton,  reached mach  2.52 
and 60,000-ft. altitude in  flight from Edwards AFB  for the  national  sonic 
boom  program.  (XB-70 Flight  log) 
0  Dirty windows which  obscured astronauts’ vision moderately to  severely 
in  many  of  NASA% Gemini missions had  been  caused by  volatile  vapors 
produced  by  silicones  used  in   window  seals,  Gemini  program  director 
Charles W.  Mathews  told  news briefing a t  MSC.  Problem would  be  cor- 
rected by curing silicone seals in  a vacuum.  (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/11/66, 
A4) 
Groundbreaking ceremonies were held for  ERC’S  t6O-million headquarters 
complex  in   Cambridge,  Mass.  (Boston  Her.,  11/11/66;  AIAA  Daily, 
11/29/66,  1) 
0  Three USAF Athena missiles were successfully launched within three  hours  
from  Green River,  Utah,  to   target  area  a t  WSMR,  in   test  to  determine 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

343 

how  to  distinguish  armed  missile  from  decoy missile  dur ing  reentry. 
(AP, N Y T ,   11/13/66,  23) 
November  10:  Secretary  of  Defense Robert  S.  McNamara,  after  conferring 
with  President Johnson,  told  newsmen  a t   the  Texas White House  tha t  
there   was  “considerable  evidence”  tha t   U.S.S.R.  was  building  and 
deploying an   antiballistic missile system around  i t s  cities, which  might 
require an   increase  in  US. offensive capacity. He  said  the  Administra- 
tion would probably recommend to Congress tha t  US. begin production 
and  deployment of  Poseidon missile-a 
large submarine-launched mis- 
sile with greater  power  to  penetrate  sophisticated  defense system than  
Polaris  missile.  The  Secretary reported  tha t   no  decision  had  yet  been 
made  on   deployment  of  Nike-X  antimissile  missile,  on  which  $500 
million had  already been spent for research and development. (Semple, 
Jr.,  N Y T ,   11/11/66,  1,  19; Wilson,  Wash. Post,  11/11/66,  A l ,   A10; 
Horner,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  11/11/66,  A l )  
MSFC  had  awarded  General  Electric  Co.  a  $147,884,  12-&o.  contract  to 
study  design  and  systems  requirements  of  an   electrically  propelled 
space vehicle  for manned Mars  landing missions and  to   identify  areas 
of  technology in  which  concentrated research would produce maximum 
benefit  to  manned planetary  program.  (MSFC  Release  66-271) 
Najeeb  E.  Halaby,  vice  president  of  Pan   American  World  Airways  and 
former  FAA  Administrator,  suggested  tha t   Government  build  two  Ss t  
prototypes-one  Boeing  and  one  Lockheed-using 
same  prototype 
power plant for both before selecting the  final design.  “There is no  sub- 
s t i tu te   for  flight  testing,”  he   said.  “The  whole  world  would  benefit  in  
the  economics  and  safety of  a  flight-tested plane.”  Airframe designs by 
Boeing Co.  and Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.  and  engine designs by  General 
Electric Co.  and P ra t t  & Whitney Div. had been submitted to FAA Sept. 6 
for   evaluation.  President  Johnson  would  announce  final  selection  in  
late  1966.  ( N Y T ,  11/11/66, 73) 
Columbia Univ.  announced creation  of  Ins t i tu te  for the  Study of  Science 
in  Human Affairs which would seek to clarify present and potential  roles 
of  science in  society. Funded by  $1-million grant  from Alfred  P. Sloan 
Foundation, Ins t i tu te  would work through existing university  s truc ture ,  
on  both  graduate  and  undergraduate  levels,  to  stimulate  teaching and 
research  and  possibly  establish  visiting  professorships.  The New  York 
Times later  editorialized:  ‘‘Its  goal  is  to  increase  public  understanding 
of  the  basic issues arising from the  scientific revolution-and 
to develop 
wise men  to  lead  tha t  revolution. 
“. . . I ts  beginnings are  modest, bu t  the  need for i t  is great and so, too, 
we  believe,  is  i ts   promise.”  (Sullivan,  N Y T ,   11/11/66,  32;  Aarons, 
Wash. Post,  11/13/66,  L4;  N Y T ,   11/13/66,  1OE) 
Sociological  repercussions  of  the   space age  might  be  most  important  to  
historians,  suggested Robert Toth in  the   Washington Post:  ‘‘In ju s t  n ine  
years  since the  first man-made moon went  aloft,  th e   fact  that  man  can 
escape his  Earth  has  become  so  accepted Americans are   almost  blase 
about new manned flights. 
“It is too early for anyone to guess how such  developments may affect 
th e   deeper  thoughts  of  self  and  one’s  place  in   - the  world  and  in   t h e  
universe.  But  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that,  even before man  reaches 
the  moon, he  has begun  to get a new perspective of  himself and his place 
in   the  universe  from  th e  space adventure.”  (Toth,  Wash. Post,  l l / l O /  
66, P6) 

3 4  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

November 10-30: NASA’s LUNAR ORBITER 11,  launched from ETR Nov. 6, became 
second U S .   spacecraft  to  en ter   lunar   orbit;  five  days  later  i t  was  suc- 
cessfully  transferred  to  final  close-in  orbit  for   photography.  Orbital 
parameters:  apolune,  1,163 mi.  (1,870  km.);  perilune,  122  mi.  (196 
km.) ; inclination,  12.2”; period,  3 hr .   38 min.  Spacecraft recorded two 
ever detected by  U S .   spacecraft  in   moon’s 
micrometeoroid hits-first 
vicinity.  I t   performed  205  attitude  changes  and  responded  t o   2,421 
commands. 
A  total  of  211 medium- and  high-resolution  photos  of  13 potential 
Apollo  landing  sites  were  taken  during  mission’s  photo  acquisition 
phase. Readout would be completed Dec.  13. Among photos transmitted, 
described as  “consistently  high  in  quality,” was  a picture of  the  crater 
Copernicus  taken  from  an   angle  inaccessible  to  earth  cameras.  Dr. 
Martin  J.  Swetnick, NASA  Hq.,  describing  the   closeup as  “one  of  the  
great  pictures  of  th e   century,”  said:  “It  provides  new  information, 
which  certainly  will  lead  to  better  understanding  of  the   processes and 
s truc tures  on  the  moon.”  (NASA  Proj.  Off.;  AP,  r u s h .  Post,  11/16/66, 
A18; Sullivan,  NYT ,   12/1/66,  1, 36) 
November  11-15:  GEMINI  XII  rendezvous-docking and  Eva  mission,  last  of 
Gemini  series,  began  with  launch  of  Gemini  Agena  Target  Vehicle 
(GATV)  by  Atlas booster from  ETR’S  Complex  14, followed  1 hr .   38 min. 
later  by  launch  of  GEMINI  X I I   with  Titan  I1 booster  from  Complex  19. 
Astronauts  were  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  command  pilot,  and  Edwin  A. 
Aldrin, Jr., pilot. GATV entered near-circular  orbit with  188.5-mi. (303.5- 
km.)  apogee  and  182.8-mi.  (294-km.)  perigee.  GEMINI  XII  entered  orbit 
with  167.9-mi.  (270-km.)  apogee  and  100-mi. (161-km.)  perigee. 
Docking  of  spacecraft  with  GATV  was  in   2.3  revolutions-4:14  GET. 
After plans to use GATV propulsion system to place GEMINI XII  into higher 
orbit  had  to  be  abandoned  because  of  GATV  malfunction,  GEMINI  X I I  
rendezvoused with Nov.  12 total  solar  eclipse  over South America  and 
made  motion  and  still pictures  of  eclipse  through  spacecraft  windows. 
Aldrin  then   began  first  of  two  standup  Evas:  hatch  opening  was  a t  
19:29:01  GET  with  closure  2  hrs.  29  min.  later.  Nov.  13’s  activities 
revolved around Aldrin’s umbilical Eva: hatch opening was  a t  42:46  GET 
with  closing 2  hrs.  8 min.  later. While  on  30-ft.  umbilical,  Aldrin per- 
formed  measured  work  tasks  a t   Agena  docking  adapter  and  a t   work 
station  in   spacecraft  adapter  section.  He  also  attached  100-ft.  te ther  
stowed  i n   Agena  adapter  to   Gemini  docking  bar  in   preparation  for 
tethered operations. GEMINI X I I  backed ou t  of  Agena docking collar about 
47:37  GET and gravity gradient  appeared to  be established by  one revolu- 
tion  later.  Tether  exercise  lasted  4  hrs.  17  min.  After  failing  twice  to 
sight  sodium  vapor  clouds  released  in   upper  atmosphere  by  French 
sounding  rocket  launched  from  Hammaguir  Range  and  performing 
experiments with  a  space  sextant,  crew  began  experiencing problems 
with  maneuvering  thrus ters   on  spacecraft.  I n   second  standup  Eva, 
Aldrin  jettisoned  unused  equipment  and  conducted  additional  experi- 
ments  and  photography.  Hatch-open time  was  66:04  GET  for  51-min. 
duration.  Total  Eva  time  for  GEMINI  XII  mission  was  5  hrs.  28   min. 
Retrofire took place Nov.  15 a t  94:OO:Ol  GET;  reentry in  59th revolution 
after  94  hrs.  34  min. in   space was  normal.  Splashdown  in   the   Atlantic 
was  a t  94:34:31  GET.  GEMINI XII  landed  about three miles  from recovery 
ship U.S.S.  V u s p  and  about  four miles  from  aiming point.  Astronauts 
were  picked  up  by  helicopter  within 20  min. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

345 

November  10-30:  Two  historic  lunar  photographs  returned  by  NASA’s LUNAR  ORBITER 11: 
one,  the  first  close-up photograph  of  the   crater Copernicus,  taken  Nov.  23,  is  an  oblique 
view from 28-mi. altitude; the other, the  first detailed view of lunar  domes,  taken Nov.  25, 
confirms th e  moon’s  long history of  volcanic  activity.  The  domes  range  from 2 to   10 mi. 
in  diameter  and  from 1,000 to  1,500 ft.  high; they  are best  seen  to  the  south  and west  of 
the   crater Marius  (upper  right). 

Wh i te   House  announced  promotion  of  Aldrin  from  USAF  major  to 
lieutenant  colonel.  Love11  had  been  promoted  to  USN  captain  af ter  
GEMINI  VII  mission. A Presidential  statement read by Press Secretary Bill 
Moyers  said  th e   flight  was  “ the   culmination  of  a  great  team  effort, 
stretching back to  1961, and directly involving more than  25,000 people 

346 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

November  11-15:  Gemini Agena  Target  Vehicle  is  shown at  the  end  of  tether  securing  i t  
to  the  GEMINI XII  spacecraft. 

in  th e  National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the  Department 
of  Defense,  and  other  Government  agencies ; in   the   universities  and 
other  research  centers;  and  in   American  industry.”  (NASA  Proj.  Off.; 
NASA  Release  66-272;  MSC  Roundup,  11/25/66,  1,  2 ;   Wilford,  NYT ,  
11/12/66,  1,  14;  11/13/66,  1, 34 ;   11/14/66,  1,  2 ;   11/15/66,  1,  17 ;  
11 /16 /66 ,1 ,30 ;   O’Toole,  Wush. Post, 11/12/66,  A l ,  A4;  11/13/66,  A l ,  
A4;  11/14/66,  AI.;  11/15/66,  A l ,  A10;  Pres.  Doc.,  11/21/66,  1701-2) 
November  12:  Total  solar  eclipse  which  moved  across  South  America  a t  
2,000 mph  €or 2 hrs.  42 min.  received  extraordinary scientific scrutiny: 
800 scientists  from 12  nations  utilized  $90 million of  equipment. NASA’s 
activities  were  conducted  in   cooperation with  Argentine and  Brazilian 
scientists  as  part  of  a n   international program.  Eclipse  formed  55-mi. 
s tr ip  of total blackout beginning in  Pacific Ocean west of  Peru,  crossing 
sou thern   Peru ,   Bolivia,  nor thern   Argentina,  southern  tip  of  Brazil, 
and  extending in to  Sou th  Atlantic. NASA-hes Convair 990A jet aircraft 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

347 

“Galileo,”  a  flying  research  laboratory  carrying 26  scientists,  success- 
fully  rendezvoused with  four  other  instrument-equipped  aircraft  and 
raced  the   eclipse a t  575 mph  as  it moved  ou t  over  th e  Sou th  Atlantic. 
Other NASA  activities  included: five NASA  Nike-Apache sounding rockets 
launched  within  two  hours   from  Cassino,  Brazil,  in   Univ.  of  Illinois- 
GCA  Corp.  experiment to measure D and E region  electron densities  and 
temperatures,  absorption  profiles  1216 A  and  1450 A,  and  collision 
frequencies.  First  rocket  ejected  trimethyl-aluminum  (TMA) cloud  for  
comparison of  electron  density  profile  with  wind  profile;  however,  no 
photographs of vapor cloud were obtained. Third rocket carried Brazilian 
experiment  to   study  extreme  ultraviolet.  All  rockets  and  instrumenta- 
tion,  except  for  mass  spectrometer  on   third  flight,  performed  satis- 
factorily.  Specially  constructed  launch  and  tracking  site  was  manned 
and  operated by  personnel  of  Wallops Station and  th e  Brazilian  Space 
Commission.  Photographs  were  taken  by  NIMBUS  11  meteorological 
satellite and   by  Astronauts  James  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  Edwin  A ldr in ,   Jr.? 
orbiting  in  GEMINI  XII  spacecraft. 
AFCRL  launched  three  Nike-Hydac sounding rockets  from a  s i te  near  
Rio  Grande,  Brazil.  Instrumented  payloads,  which  reached  71-mi. 
(115-km.)  altitudes,  measured  positive-ion  mass  composition,  solar 
radiation,  electron  density  and  temperature,  and  positive-ion  density. 
Data were  telemetered to  ground  receivers. 
Scientists  from Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, Japan, th e  Nether- 
lands, U.K., New Zealand, and France participated i n  observations which 
would  increase knowledge of  the  solar  forces and their effects on earth’s 
atmosphere and provide data  for use  in  space travel,  radio  communica- 
tions,  and  weather  prediction.  (NASA Release  66-285; Wallops Release 
66-55; De  Onis,  N Y T ,   11/13/66,  35 ;  A€’, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  11/13/66, 
A16;  AP,  Wash.  Post,  11/12/66,  A16;  OAR  Res.  Rev.,  1/67,  8;  NASA 
Rpt.  SEU) 
November  12: U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  CXXXI  for space research  into  ear th  
orbit with  360-km.  (224-mi.)  apogee;  205-km.  (127-mi.)  perigee;  89.8- 
min.  period;  and  72.9” inclination.  (U .N .  Public Registry,  1/9/67) 
0  NASA  Aerobee  150  launched  from WSMR  reached 94-mi.  (151-km.)  altitude 
in  GSFC  experiment to obtain solar x-ray photographs; rocket and ins tru-  
mentation performed satisfactorily. 
NASA  Aerobee  150  launched  25   min.  later  to   109-mi.  (174-km.) 
altitude  in   NASA-Naval Research  Laboratory  experiment  photographed 
outer  solar  corona  with  moon  near  edge  of  field  of  view  and  sun l i t  
particles  near  the  rocket. Flight also obtained heliograms showing inne r  
corona and solar disc and data on solar flux in  Lyman-alpha. Rocket and 
instrumentation,  except  for  a  spectroheliograph,  performed  satis- 
factorily.  (NASA Rpt.  SRL) 
0  Deactivation of  Gemini launch pad  a t  ETR’S Complex 19 began.  Equipment 
tha t   could  be  used  in   other  space programs would  be  salvaged;  o ther  
components would be reduced to  scrap. (0, Wash. Sun. Star, 11/13/66, 
A61 
0  New  York Times praised  success of  NASA’s LUNAR ORBITER  II and GEMINI  XII 
missions: “This week has seen two impressive demonstrations of United 
States space capabilities.  . . . 
re It is no derogation of  th e  important Soviet contributions  to  conclude 
tha t   the  United States efforts have contributed most  of  what men now 
know  about  th e   moon  and   about  th e   possibilities  and  problems  of 

348 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

manned  space flight.  I n  par t   this  lead  is  th e  result  of  th e  long and  un -  
explained halt  i n  th e  launching  of  Soviet passenger-carrying rockets.” 
( N Y T ,  11/12/66,28) 
November  12: Congress had  “unwittingly”  broadly endorsed Ss t  program  by 
approving obscure phrase  in  Dept.  of  Transportation  bill  (H.R.  15963) 
empowering  Secretary  of  Transportation  to   “develop  and  construct  a 
civil supersonic aircraft,”  Evert Clark reported  in   the  New  York Times. 
Action strengthened position  of  the  Administration and  other  Ss t  sup- 
porters  and  lessened chances  tha t   congressional critics might  abandon 
the  multibillion  dollar project.  (Clark, N Y T ,  11/13/66,  77) 
0  Satellite  to   be  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  in   near  fu tu re  would  carry  French 
instrumentation,  French  Minister  of  Research  Main  Peyrefitte  an -  
nounced  i n   Caen.  France  and  U.S.S.R.  had  signed  a n   agreement  for  
joint  scientific  cooperation  June  30.  (Reuters,  N Y T ,   11/13/66,  45) 
Pho tos  and temperature data gathered by  satellites  could be used to  study 
ice movements on Canada’s  lakes  and  rivers,  G.  P.  Williams,  Canadian 
National Research Council, suggested to  Canadian Press.  Williams  said 
predictions  of  the   formation  and  breakup  of  ice  would  be  valuable  to  
forestry  workers  who  used  the   waters  to  float  logs,  and  aviators  who 
landed on nor thern  lakes.  (Can. Press,  N Y T ,  11/13/66,  46) 
November 13:  Sunspots as large as 12 times th e  earth’s diameter were detected 
by  Bochum  Observatory, West Germany.  One  group  reportedly  meas- 
ured  about 97,200 mi.  across; smaller  sunspots were  about 27,000 mi. 
wide.  (Reuters,  N Y T ,   11/15/66,  61;  Reuters,  Wash .  Pos t ,   11/14/66, 
A23) 
IBM  Federal  Systems Div.  received  $218,000  AFSC  contract  to  investigate 
means  of  reducing  operating  costs  and  reaction  time  of  fu tu re   space 
missions through  streamlined guidance and control procedures.  (Wash. 
Sun. Star,  11/13/66,  D15) 
November  14:  Team  of  JPL  scientists  left  Cal  Tech  on   first  NASA-sDonsored 
investigation  of  Antarctica.  Scientists would  spend 2% mos.  i;  Wright, 
Victoria,  Taylor,  and  Beacon  Valleys  taking  samples  and  conducting 
tests tha t  might prove valuable in  fu ture  unmanned exploration of Mars. 
(JPL  Release,  11/13/66) 
NASA  selected Martin Co.  for negotiations  on a $1-million, 18-1~10. contract 
to   design,  develop,  fabricate,  and  test  meteoroid  detectors  for  fu tu re  
NASA  experiments to   study penetration hazard  in  space. Contract would 
be managed  by  URC .  
(NASA Release 66-293) 
ELDO  successfully  test-fired  three-stage  Europa  rocket  from  Woomera 
Range, Australia. Booster was  blown up over Simpson Desert 6 min. 42 
sec.  after  launch.  (Tech. Wk . ,  11/21/66,  8 )  
M2-F2 lifting  body vehicle, piloted  by  Capt.  Jerauld R.  Gentry  (WAF),  was 
launched  from  B-52  aircraft  a t   45,000-ft.  altitude  in   13 th  glide  flight 
a t  Edwards AFB.  Purposes of  this  unpowered  flight were tests of  stability 
and  control and  determination  of  vehicle  performance characteristics. 
(NASA Proj.  Off.) 
Military  should  increase  i ts   interest  in   the   Nation’s  technological  base 
ra ther   than  rely  so  heavily on  the   civilian sector  for  basic  and   explor- 
atory  research,  suggested  William  Coughlin  in   Technology  Week.  He 
noted  the  Manned  Orbiting Laboratory (Mol)  program:  “. . . . much  of 
the   technology on  which this military  effort is  based was  developed by 
th e  National Aeronautics and Space Administration on programs deliber- 
ately tied to  the  peaceful uses of  space. It is a fair question to  ask where 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

349 

a  military  space program  would  be  today  vis-a-vis the   Soviet Union if 
the  technological base  had  not been developed under NASA  funding. 
“Other  areas  of  military  importance have  no t   been  as  fortunate be- 
cause they lack  a  civilian counterpart. Steps must  be  taken  to  see  tha t  
development of  a  technical  base  in   these  areas  is  no t   overlooked.  It  is 
not easy to  justify  expenditure of manpower and funds in  this somewhat 
invisible arena.  . . .” (Coughlin,  Tech.  Wk . ,   11/14/66,  54) 
During  week  o f   November  14:  Increasing  application  of  engineering  tech- 
niques developed in  space program to medical problems was  reported by 
participants  a t   19th  Annual  Conference  in   Medicine  and  Biology  i n  
San  Francisco. Among  developments reported:  application  of  computer 
techniques to detection  of  pathological conditions and to  mass diagnosis 
of  heart  disease;  automation  of  classical  laboratory  techniques  in  
hospital, resulting in  increased accuracy and speed; use of  new engineer- 
ing  devices  to   obtain  information  for  better  diagnoses;  application  of 
new  engineering to  treatment,  including refinements on  artificial hear t  
and  control  of  photosensitive  epilepsy  with  a  real-time  computer. 
(Tech. Wk . ,   11/21/66,  30) 
November  15:  NASA’s  Project  Gemini  officially  ended.  From  first  manned 
flight  in  March  1965, Gemini  had  achieved i ts  goals:  demonstration  of 
ability  to  rendezvous and  dock  with  target  vehicle;  demonstration  o f  
value of  manned spacecraft for scientific and technological experimenta- 
t ion ;   performance  of  work  by  astronauts  in   space;  use  of  powered, 
fueled satellite to provide primary and secondary propulsion for docked 
spacecraft;  long-duration space flights without  ill  effect  on  astronauts; 
and precision landing of spacecraft.  Records se t  during Gemini program 
included:  (1) longest  manned  space  flight  (330  hrs.  35   min.);  (2) 
altitude  (851 mi.);  and  (3)  longest  total of  Eva  (5 hrs .   28 min.)  in   one 
flight. Total U.S.  man  hours  in   space  to  date:  1,993 hrs .   34  min.  MSC 
Director Dr. Robert R.  Gilruth told a news  conference:  “We  have done 
all  the  things we  had  to  do as  a  preIude to  Apollo.  I believe  the  Gemini 
(NASA  Proj.  Off.;  Wash.  Post, 
program  has  been  most  s ~ c c e s s f u l . ~ ~  
11/16/66,  A6;  Tech.  Wk . ,   11/21/66,  16 ;  N Y T ,   11/20/66,  2E) 
0  NASA  announced  tha t   NIMBUS  11  meteorological satellite had  taken  nearly 
1 million photos since its launch  from WTR May 15. “ I t  has been working 
better  than   a  finely  tuned  engine,”  said  GSFC  project  manager  Harry 
Press.  “I ts   performance  has  exceeded  everyone’s  expectation.”  (GSFC 
Release G-19-66) 
0  NAS  Space  Science  Board  chairman  Harry  H.  Hess,  Princeton  Univ. 
geology  professor,  received  Geological  Society  of  America’s  Penrose 
Medal  “for  distinguished  achievement  in   th e   geologic   science^^^  a t  
society’s  79th  annual  meeting  in   San  Francisco.  (NAS-NRC-NAE  News 
Report,  11/66,  6) 
November  16:  GEMINI  XII  Astronauts  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  Edwin  E. 
Aldrin,  Jr.,  arrived  a t   KSC  to   begin  debriefing.  Addressing  some  700 
workmen,  Lovell  said  “everyone  here  has  done  an   outstanding  job  to  
get us  in to  space”; Aldrin described the  four-day mission as a “ trea t   to  
me as a n  individual  tha t   I would  like  to  have shared with every person 
in   the  world.”  (Sehlstedt,  Balt.  Sun,  11/17/66) 
0  NASA  released first  140 f t .   of  more  than   1,500 ft.  of  color movies taken by 
Astronauts James A.  Lovell, Jr.,  and  Edwin  E.  Aldrin, Jr.,  during the ir  
Nov.  11-15 space flight.  Photography was  of  high  quality.  (AP, Wash. 
Eve.  Star,  11/17/66,  A4) 

350 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
November 16: Eighth Uprated Sa tu rn  I booster successfully underwent short- 
firing a t  MSFC.  (MSFC  Release 66-288) 
duration-35-sec.-static 
Site  a t   Pakachoag Hill  outside  of  Auburn,  Mass.,  where  Dr.  Robert  H. 
Goddard  launched  world’s  fks t   liquid-fuel  rocket  f igh t   on  March  16, 
1926, was  approved as a national  landmark by  Secretary of  th e  In ter ior  
Stewart Udall.  (Dept.  of  In ter ior ;  SBD,  11/23/66,  119) 
launched  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  from  WSMR  to   117-mi. 
e AFCRL 
(188-km.)  altitude  to   collect  micrometeorite  particles  during  Leonid 
meteor shower.  (OAR  Res. Rev . ,   1/67, 8) 
ComSatCorp  requested  FCC  permission  to   construct  $6.5-million,  high- 
capacity ear th  station a t  Barrio Monte Llano, Puer to  Kco ,   to  handle a l l  
types  of  communications in   th e   Caribbean area  via  EARLY  BIRD  I  and 
Virgin  Islands,  was  withdrawn  \ ecause  military  communications- 
m T E u A T   II-A  comsats.  April  25  a  plication  for  station  a t   St.  Croix, 
electronics  equipment  there   “might  cause harmful  interference.  . . .” 
(ComSatCorp Release) 
Ss t  development might  be  delayed  because of  curren t  pressures  to   limit 
Federal spending; growing apprehension tha t  Ss t  would  cause excessive 
property damage and noise from sonic booms; serious safety and techni- 
cal  problems;  and  Sst  evaluators’  indecisiveness,  Fred  L.  Zimmerman 
reported  in   the   Wa l l   Street  Journal.  (Zimmerman,  WSJ ,   11/16/66, 
23) 
*  Possibility  tha t   US. astronauts might land  on moon  in   1968 ra ther   than  
1969 “should  serve to  hasten  agreement on international treaty  aimed 
a t   making  ou ter   s  ace  exclusively  a  dimension  of  man’s  peaceful 
activity,”  postulates  editorial  in   New  York  Times.  “Hard  decisions” 
about post-Apollo research  should be made  soon, especially since there  
were “far more possibilities for fru i tfu l  activities in  space than  even the  
United States can afford to  carry  on simultaneously.”  (N Y T ,  11/16/66, 
42M) 
*  Daniel  J.  Haughton,  president  of  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  suggested  a t  
American Petroleum Ins t i tu te  meeting in  New  York  tha t  aerospace and  
petroleum industries combine their technical strengths for joint explora- 
tion  of  earth’s  continental  shelves.  He  said  tha t   within  35   yrs.  th e  
world’s  population  would  have  doubled  and  a  large  segment  of  this 
population would be hungry:  “The oceans represent the  last great source 
for   feeding them  and  providing the   chemicals and minerals and  water 
to  meet all t h e  fu tu re  needs of  man.”  (AI?, Wash. Eve. Star,  11/16/66, 
C12) 
November  16-18: National  Conference  on  th e   Management  of  Aerospace 
Programs was  held  in  Columbia,  Mo. 
NASA  Apollo  Program  Director  M/G  Samuel  C.  Phillips  (USAF),  in 
report  on  CCManagement Scheme  for Apollo,”  concluded: “There  is no  
single  approach  to  program management  tha t   will  guarantee  success. 
The  development of  and  experience with various management systems, 
techniques  and  tools  i n  th e  past  several  years  have  contributed  exten- 
sively to  a more scientific approach. The  ‘art’ element remains, however. 
The   integrated  implementation of  those  concepts and  their  associated 
procedures  and  disciplines  is  sometimes confronted  with  considerable 
resistance  within an organization. This has merit,  for  it forces manage- 
ment  to   thoroughly  screen new  concepts as   to   validity,  feasibility and  
salability.  Once  a  new  management  system  is  approved,  however,  it 
deserves  and  requires  t h e   personal  support  of  the   program  director 

351 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
through  l ine   channels  t o   stimulate  its  overall  implementation  and 
ass  roots  level.  . . .’, (Text) 
acceptance a t  th e  
DeMarquis D. $att, 
NASA Assistant Administrator for  Programming, 
said  tha t   NASA7S  cost  model  had  “significantly  facilitated  management 
decision making  i n   complex  on-going programs by  providing a n  over- 
night computational capability of great  capacity. The computer program 
is capable of  handling th e  interrelated cost influences of  up to  60  differ- 
en t   hardware  configurations at  a n  unlimited  number  of  plants  and  a n  
unlimited  number  of  production  lines  within  each  plant.  It  can  . . . 
summarize program  costs  for  as  many  as  24   fiscal  years  and  can  sub- 
divide and  allocate  these  costs  to   up   to  8 different  funding  sources  or  
users..  .” (Text) 
Franklin  P.  Dixon, Director,  Planetary Mission  Studies,  NASA  OMSF, 
outlined  manned  Mars  landing  program  for  consideration  as  U.S. 
national  space  goal.  Proposal  called  for   seven-step  program  based 
principally  on  extension  of  mission-duration  capability  and  including 
earth-orbital “Space  Station/Mission Module,”  Mars  and Venus  flybys, 
and Mars  landing.  Discussing  long-range NASA  planning,  he  noted:  “At 
includes subsystem developments for long deration manned flights.  . . . 
th e  present  time planning for  the  Sa tu rn  Apollo  Applications Program 
This provides a  logicat growth pattern  toward manned  planetary  travel 
with th e  easier flyby missions within technological reach by th e  1975 to  
1980 time  period  for  actual operational  flights.”  (Text) 
November  17:  NASA  announced  schedule  changes  i n  manned  Apollo  flights 
because of  launch vehicle and spacecraft development problems : second 
manned  flight  of  an   Apollo  spacecraft  (AS-205),  schedded   for  spring 
1967, was postponed and no new da te  se t ;  AS-205 prime crew Walter M. 
Schirra, Donn F.  Eisele,  and Walter  Cunningham became backup crew 
for  AS-204  mission-first  manned  Apollo  f l igh t-schedu led   for  fks t  
quarter  of  1967.  (NASA  Release  66-295) 
0  Some 1,000 meteors a minute were recorded a t  height of Leonid shower by 
Northwestern  Univ.’s  Observatory  near  Las  Cruces,  N.  Mex.,  Dr.  J. 
Allen  Hynek reported.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,   11/18/66,  39M) 
0  Referring to   successful  completion of  Gemini  series  of  space flights  as  a 
“historic triumph for mankind,”  editorial  in   Washington Post suggested 
tha t   “as  th e  conquest of  space proceeds  it  . . . gives  the  world  a nobler 
and  higher  destiny  and  purpose  than   fratricidal  s tr ife  for  nationalistic 
objectives.”  (Wa sh .  Post,  11/17/66,  A22) 
November  18:  Maj.  William J. Knight  (USAF)  flew X-15 No.  2  to  4,250  mph 
(mach  6.33)  and  98,900-ft.  altitude  during  9-min. flight,  successfully 
using full external propellant  tanks  for first time and setting new  speed 
record  for  X-15 aircraft. Previous 4,104-mph  (mach 6.059)  record had 
been  se t   by  the   late  Joseph A.  Walker  (NASA),  June   27,  1962.  (X-15 
Proj.  Off.;  UPI,  N Y T ,   11/19/66,  24) 
e  NASA  Nike-Apache  launched  from  WSMR to   100-mi.  (161-km.)  altitude 
carried NASA-Dudley  Observatory  (Albany, N.Y.)  experiment to  collect 
micrometeorite particles  a t   time  of  33-yr. maximum of  Leonid  meteor 
and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily,  bu t   payloa %  was  n o t  
shower and  GSFC  experiment  to   determine vehicle  slant  ran   e.  Rocket 
recovered and no  data were  obtained.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
a  U S .  had notified Government of  Nigeria  that,  with  conclusion of  Gemini 
program,  NASA  would  close  tracking  station  a t   Kano.  (NASA  Release 
66-296) 

352 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

November  18:  George  Cooper,  ARC’S  Chief  Test  Pilot  and  Chief  of  Flight 
Operations,  received  Admiral  Luis  de  Florez  Flight  Safety  Award  a t  
International  Air  Safety  Seminar  in  Madrid.  He  was  cited  for  “his 
contribution to the  safety of air transportation  through improved under- 
standing of  the  relation  between pilot and aircraft.”  (ARC  Release 66-17) 
November 19:  U.S.S.R.  launched COSMOS  CXXXII  for continued space research 
in to   ear th   orbit  with  280-km.  (174-mi.)  apogee;  207-km.  (129-mi.) 
perigee;  89.3-min.  period;  and  65”  inclination.  Equipment  was  func- 
tioning  normally.  (Tass,  11/19/66) 
November  20:  U.S.S.R.  began  new  carrier  rocket  tests  in   th e   Pacific  tha t  
would  last  un t i l   Dec.  30.  Tass  said  area  with  56-km.  (35-mi.)  radius 
had  coordinates  of  O”5’  sou th   latitude  and  163”45‘  west  longitude. 
Ships and  aircraft were  requested  not  to   en ter   this  area  daily  between 
noon  and midnight local  time.  (Tass,  11/19/66) 
ESRO  successfully  launched  France’s  Centaure  rocket  from  range  a t  
Paksuniemi,  Sweden,  to  study  the   aurora  borealis.  (Reuters,  Wush. 
Post,  11/21/66,  A14) 
0  High military  potential  of  space was  discussed by  Hanson W.  Baldwin  in  
New  York  Times: “. . . the  advent of  th e  military man in  space is  inevi- 
table.  For man  can supply t h e  judgment  tha t   no machine can  offer; he  
can monitor and  correct and in terpre t  th e  ins trumen ts  and aids essential 
to  space  flight;  he   will  be  able  to  repair  satellites  and  assemble space 
platforms.  He  will  pilot  tomorrow’s  fighting machines  in   th e   cosmos. 
And  i n   time  he   may  actually  be  able,  with  a  whole  host  of  scientific 
aids,  to   control th e  weather with  all the  tremendous military  and social 
consequences this  implies.”  (Baldwin,  N Y T ,   11/20/66,  A7) 
November  21:  NASA  successfully  conducted  second  rocket-launched  test 
[see  Nov.  51  of  a  Mars  en try   parachute  as  par t   of  an   advanced tech- 
nology  effort  to   investigate  possible  parachute  landing  systems  for 
Voyager  program.  Two-stage Honest  John-Nike  rocket  launched  from 
WSMR  ejected  parachute  a t   120,000-ft.  altitude.  Parachute  descended 
to   ear th   40  min.  later  carrying  200-lb.  payload  with  instrumentation 
for  measuring  shock  of  parachute  opening and  its  oscillation  charac- 
teristics.  Ekperiment series was managed by L ~ R C .  (NASA Release 66-298) 
MSFC  awarded  North  American Aviation,  Inc.,  a  $ l4 l-m i l l ion ,   cost-plus- 
incentive-fee  contract  to   provide  30  F-1  rocket  engines,  beginning i n  
November  1967,  and  varied  support  services.  (NASA  Release  66-297) 
0  NASA  Aerobee  150  launched  from  WSMR  to   102-mi.  (164-km.)  altitude 
carried  GSFC  experiment  to  obtain  ultraviolet  spectral  scans  of  bright 
stars  from  1110 A  to  4000 A.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed 
satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
*  Commenting on  success of  Project Gemini  in   developing techniques  and 
experience  vital  for  manned  lunar   landing,  William  J.  Coughlin  said 
i n   Technology  Week:  “Gemini  technology w i l l   . . . be  applied  to   th e  
manned scientific space stations still to  come.  This fanning ou t  of  tech- 
nology  from  th e   direct-line effort  to   effect  a  manned  lunar   landing  is  
a  dramatic  demonstration  of  th e   rapid  maturing  of  th e   national  space 
program.”  (Coughlin, Tech.  W k . ,  11/21/66,  50) 
Final glide flight of M2-F2 lifting body vehicle before installation  of X L R l l  
8,000-lb.-thrust  rocket  engine  [see Dec.  301  was  made  a t   Edwards  AFB 
with  Capt.  Jerauld  R.  Gentry  as  pilot.  Purposes  of  flight,  14 th   in   un -  
powered  series, were  testing  of  stability  and  control and determination 
of  vehicle  performance characteristics.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 

353 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
November 21:  Reported  tha t   USAF  Titan  I1  launch  vehicle,  which  launched 
1 2  ou t  of  12  missions in  th e  Gemini series, was  expected to  win  a USAF 
incentive  fee  of  over  $2  million  for Martin  Co.,  th e   prime  contractor 
for  two-stage  booster.  ( A v .  W k . ,   11/21/66,  28) 
*  U.S.S.R.  had  orbited  an   atomic  clock  of  the   ammonia  type  in   COSMOS 
XCVII,  launched Nov. 26,1965, a brief article  in  Pravda disclosed. Soviet 
Academician  N.  G.  Basov,  explaining possible  uses  of  an   ammonia fre-  
quency standard in  a satellite,  said i t  ‘perm i ts  carrying on communica- 
tions  with  space  devices,  control  over  them,  and  transmission  of 
telemetric  information for  very great  distances.  I n  addition,  there  is  i n  
this  case  a  considerable increase  in   the   operating precision  of  program 
timer devices and systems for determining the  trajectory  of  the  satellite’s 
movement.”  ( A v .  W k . ,  11/21/66,  36) 
*  Beryllium ball  floating in   electrostatic field  and  spinning a t   some 60,000 
rpm  was  par t   of  new  electrostatic gyroscope  (Esg)  being  flight-tested 
by  USAF  a t   Wright-Patterson  AFB  aboard  C-124 Globemaster aircraft. 
Instability formerly found in  th e  spinning gyroscope had been eliminated 
in  Esg since there  was  virtually  no  friction between th e  sphere and  its 
cavity.  Sphere would  spin  for  three   years without power  source.  (AFSC 
Release 221.66) 
*  Pressure  for  early  action  to   establish  Canadian  domestic  comsat  system 
was  rising,  both  within  the  Canadian government and i n  telecommuni- 
cations  and   broadcasting industries,  Aviation  r e e k   reported.  Govern- 
ment  advisory  team  was  planning  to  complete report  by  end  of  1966 
making  recommendations  to   Canadian  Cabinet  on   technical  aspects 
of  system and on controversial  policy  issues. Team was  under direction 
of  Dr.  J.  H.  Chapman, deputy  chief  superintendent, Defence Research 
Telecommunications Establishment,  Dept.  of  National  Defence.  ( A v .  
W k . ,  11/21/66,  35) 
*  Guy  Warner  Vaughn,  president  and  chairman  of  Curtiss-Wright  Corp. 
and  among  first  to  apply  mass-production  techniques  to   aviation 
industry,  died  in   New  Rochelle,  N.Y.,  a t   82.  (NYT ,  11/22/66,  39M) 
November  22:  GSFC  awarded Hughes Aircraft  Co.  a  $4.275-million, cost-plus- 
incentive-fee  contract  for  reconfiguration  of  three   gravity-gradient 
Applications Technology Satellites  scheduled  for  launch   in   1967 and 
1968.  (NASA  Release 66-299) 
*  NASA  awarded  Perkin-Elmer  Corp.  and  Chrysler  Corp.  nine-month, 
$250,000  contract  extensions  to  continue  evaluating  optical  experi- 
ments  for  possible  fu ture   extended Apollo  space flights.  (NASA  Release 
66-300) 
0  AFSC  presented first USAF Craftsmanship Awards in  Industrial Zero Defects 
Program  to  RCA’S  Astro-Electronics  Div.,  Communications  Systems 
Div.,  and Missile and  Surface Radar  Div.;  GE’s Flight  Propulsion  Div. 
and  Evendale  Facility;  Lockheed  Missiles  and  Space  Co. ; Aerojet- 
General  Corp.,  Sacramento  P lan t ;   and  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.,  Inc., 
Missile and  Space Systems Div.  (AFSC  Release  245.66) 
November 23:  GEMINI XII  pilot Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.,  told MSC  news conference 
tha t  with  proper equipment, like  the  waist  straps and foot restraints h e  
used during Eva,  a man  could work  outside with  no  fear  of  fatigue-if 
he  were  well  trained.  Following press  conference, Astronauts James A. 
Lovell,  Jr., and Aldrin together with a group of  MSC,  KSC,  NASA  Hq., and 
industry  Gemini program participants  flew  to   LBJ  Ranch  for  visit  with 
President  Johnson,  who  said:  “The  splendid performance  of  man  and 

354 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

machine  i n  Gemini  has  been  a  product  of  t h e  American system  a t   its 
“The months ahead will no t  be easy as we reach toward t h e  moon.  . . . 
best. 
But  with  Gemini  as  t h e  forerunner,  I am  confident  tha t   we  will  over- 
come t h e  difficulties  and  achieve another  success.”  Group re turned   to  
MSC  fo r   formal  awards  ceremony. 
Receiving NASA  Exceptional Service Medal  were  GEMINI  XII  crewmen 
James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.;  Col.  John  G.  Albert 
(USAF), ETR;  Osro H.  Covington, GSFC;  and John  D.  Hodge,  MSC. 
NASA  Distinguished  Service  Medal:  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  OMSF; 
and Charles W.  Mathews,  MSC. 
Outstanding  Leadership Medal:  Robert  F.  Thompson,  MSC;  John  J. 
Williams,  KSC;  and M/G  Vincent G.  Houston  (USAF),  ETR. 
NASA  Exceptional  Scientific  Achievement  Award:  James  A.  Cham- 
berlin,  MSC. 
NASA  Public  Service  Award:  John  F.  Yardley,  McDonnell Aircraft 
Corp.;  Bastian  Hello,  Martin  Co.;  Bernhard  A.  Hohmann,  Aerospace 
Corp.;  Walter  D.  Smith,  Martin  Co.;  Walter  F.  Burke,  McDonnell; 
Louis  D.  Wilson,  Aerojet-General;  Lawrence  A.  Smith,  Lockheed; 
William  B.  Bergen,  Martin  Co.;  George M.  Bunker,  Martin  Marietta; 
B/G  Pau l   T.  Cooper,  AFSC  Space  Systems  Div.;  Daniel  J.  Haughton, 
Lockheed;  Roger  Lewis,  General  Dynamics;  James  S.  McDonnell, 
McDonnell Aircraft;  R.  I. McKenzie, Aerojet-General; L.  Eugene Root, 
Lockheed;  David  S.  Lewis,  McDonnell;  and  Jack  A.  Bowers,  Martin 
Marietta. 
NASA  Superior Achievement Award:  Ar thur   W.  Vogeley,  Richard  J. 
Allen,  LeRoy  E.  Day,  John  A.  Edwards,  Eldon W.  Hall,  Vearl  N.  Huff, 
and William A.  Summerfelt, NASA  Hq.;  and Anthony L.  Liccardi. 
NASA  Group Achievement Award:  Gemini  Astronaut  Team,  Manned 
Spaceflight  Network  Team,  Gemini  Spacecraft  Launch  Team,  Gemini 
Program  Office a t  MSC,  Gemini Program Office a t  NASA  Hq.,  and Gemini 
Support Team  a t   MSC.  (MSC  Roundup,  11/25/66,  1, 8; Sheehan, N Y T ,  
11/24/66,  36;  Pres.  Doc.,  11/28/66,  1718-9) 
November 23: XB-70 No.  1 supersonic aircraft, piloted  by  North  American 
Aviation,  Inc.,  test  pilot  Van  H.  Shepard  and  L/Col.  Joseph  Cotton 
(USAF),  reached mach 2.51  and 60,000-ft. altitude in  flight from Edwards 
AFB  for  th e  national  sonic boom  program.  (XB-70 Flight Log) 
November 24:  European  conference on  satellite communication, meeting a t  
The  Hague,  Netherlands, requested  ESRO  to   s tudy  feasibility and desir- 
ability  of  European  comsat.  (NYT ,  11/25/66,  4) 
*  Airport  built  on  artificial  island  on  Goodwin’s  Sandbank-12  mi.  off 
coast  of  England  in  English Channel-was  London consulting engineer 
G.  E.  Bratchell’s  answer  to  noise  problem  anticipated  from  projected 
Anglo-French Concorde Ss t  and  other  planned  supersonic jet  aircraft, 
Reuters  reported.  Takeoffs  and  approaches  would  be  made  over  sea, 
avoiding danger  of  crashes  in   populated  areas.  By  time  aircraft  was 
over  land,  it would  be  a t  height where noise was  no  longer a  problem. 
A  na tura l   gas  fog-dispersal system would  make  the   airport  accessible 
every day of  th e  year.  (Reuters,  Wash. Post,  11/24/66,  K10) 
November 26:  President Johnson established Wh i te  House committee headed 
by Dr.  Donald F. Hornig to  study ways  to  help West  European nations 
improve the ir   technology. Serving with  Dr.  Hornig would  be  represen- 
tatives  of  Depts.  of  State,  Defense,  and  Commerce; NASA;  AEC;  and 

355 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
Council of  Economic Advisers.  (AP, N Y T ,   11/27/66,  41;  Wash.  Post, 
11/27/66,  A6) 
November 26: U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA XII,  launched in to  lunar  orbit Oct. 22, had com- 
pleted  220  orbits,  taken  “unique  photographs,”  and was  continuing its 
mission,  Tass  reported.  Satellite  had  transmitted  data  on  lunar  x-ray 
and  gamma  radiation  and micrometeoroids.  (Tass,  11/26/66) 
U.S.  and U.S.S.R.  were  reported  to  have reached basic agreement on  text 
of  treaty  for   free  and  peaceful  exploration  of  moon  and  outer  space. 
Text  would  be  presented  within  next  two  or  three  weeks  for  approval 
of U.N.  General Assembly. U S .  was said to  have agreed tha t  all countries 
-not 
jus t  U.N.  membe r s - shou ld   be allowed to  sign treaty. Communist 
China, East Germany,  North Vietnam, and North Korea would  then  be 
free  to  adhere t o  i t  if  they chose.  (AP, NYT ,   11/27/66,  78) 
0  High-quality photographs  of  ear th   taken  during  Nov.  11-15  GEMINI  XII 
mission had  revealed  substantial inaccuracies  and omissions  in  geologic 
maps,  GSFC  scientist Pau l   D.  Lowman,  Jr.,  said  in   press  interview.  He 
added  tha t   space photography might  someday  help solve  such geologic 
problems  as  continental  drift,  the   relationship  of  volcanic  activity  to  
mountain  building,  and  the   formation  of  regional  sand  dune   fields. 
(AP, NYT ,   11/26/66,  26) 
0  U S .   was  studying  feasibility  of  defense  against  nuclear  missiles  for  all 
or  part  of  Western  Europe,  New  York  Times  reported.  Administration 
officials  said  tha t   although  there  would  be  political,  financial,  and 
technical  problems, missile  shield  could be developed  a t  estimated cost 
of  $3-$12 billion.  ( N Y T ,  11/27/66,  9) 
November  27:  Two  propulsion  developments  emerging  from  engineering 
research might open Jupiter,  th e  regions  outside  the   solar  system, and 
even  th e   sun   to  closeup inspection  during  1970s,  said  Dr.  Homer  Joe 
Stewart, manager of  JPL’S  Advanced  Studies Office. Developments were 
use  of  planetary gravitational  drag and solar-electric propulsion. When  
a spacecraft neared a planet,  it would gain speed from gravitational pull. 
While  traveling  under  planet’s gravitation  attraction,  i t  would  pick  up 
planet’s  own  sun-orbit speed.  This,  added  to  spacecraft’s  momentum, 
would  be  enough  to  propel  spacecraft  past  planet’s  gravitational  field 
and  toward  another  planet.  Travel  between  gravitational  fields  would 
be  powered  by  spacecraft’s  solar-electric  system.  Solar-electric propul- 
sion  would  double  useful  payload  for  a  Mars-orbiter  mission,  Dr. 
Stewart said,  and it would  offer  th e  advantage of  high  specific impulse 
€or  a  Jupiter  flyby.  (JPL  Release; A&A ,   12/66,  26-31) 
0  Gen.  Bernard  A.  Schriever  (USAF,  Ret.)  said  on  ABC-TV’S  “Issues  and 
Answers”  tha t  the  U S .   should concentrate on  developing better missiles 
ra ther   than   antimissile  defense  system.  He  said  there   was  “a  grave 
question  with  respect  to  t h e   effectiveness”  of  an   antimissile  system 
aimed a t  stopping th e  sophisticated weapons th e  U.S.S.R.  probably had. 
On  the   other  hand,  th e  U S .   could build  a  defense against  th e  type of 
missile  the   Communist  Chinese were  presently  capable of  launching. 
Schriever  said  he   believed  US. missiles  would  get  through  the   anti- 
missile  system  reportedly  being  deployed  in   U.S.S.R.  (AP, NYT, 
11/28/66,  53) 
Analysis  of  NASA  LUNAR  ORBITER  1’s  orbit led  to   assumption  tha t  moon  is 
homogeneous,  no t   layered,  Dr.  6 .  L.  Goudas  of  Boeing  Scientific. 
Research Laboratories said  i n  a n  interview with Walter Sullivan  of  th e  
New  York Times, He  said  i ts  shape--flattened 
a t   th e  poles with  several 

356 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

bulges  a t   th e  equator  and  slightly pear-like-was  no t   “dominated by  a 
‘frozen  tide.’  ” Gamma  ray  recordings by  U.S.S.R.’s  LUNA  x  spacecraft 
indicated  similar  conclusion;  lunar   surface lacked emissions typical  of 
granites,  which are  associated with layering.  (Sullivan, NYT ,  11/27/66, 
E71 
November  28:  NASA’s MARINER  IV  had  completed  two  years  in   space,  flown 
1,025,082,830  mi.,  and  continued  to  operate  properly,  reporting  i ts  
condition  to   ear th  three   times a week.  Launched Nov.  28,  1964, space- 
craft  had  completed  primary  mission Aug.  2,  1965,  after  transmitting 
to   ear th   22  pictures  of  Martian  surface.  Photos  were  made  when  it 
flew  within  6,118 mi.  of  planet  July  14,  1965.  (NASA  Release  66-304; 
JPL  Release) 
0  NASA  awarded  contracts totaling  $825,000 for  s tudy  of  methods to  explore 
t h e  planets  and  to  design  advanced launch vehicles : Lockheed Missiles 
and  Space  Co.,  $200,000; Boeing  Co.,  $150,000; Lockheed-California 
Co.,  $250,000; and North American Aviation,  Inc.,  $225,000.  Contract 
management  would  be  performed  by  NASA  Hq.  Mission  Analysis  Div. 
(NASA  Release  66-302) 
0  Wh i te  House announced agreement for  establishment of  an  ESRO station 
near  Fairbanks, Alaska,  to   receive  telemetry  from  and  send  commands 
to   ESRO  scientific satellites.  This  would  be  first  foreign  ground  station 
on  U S .  soil.  (Pres. Doc . ,   12/5/66,  1740) 
Partial  nationalization  of  U.K.’s  two  large  airframe  manufacturers- 
British  Aircraft  Corp.  and  Hawker  Siddeley  Aviation  Go.-was 
being 
planned  on grounds no  real  competition existed between  the  two  firms, 
Aviation  Week reported.  Also,  U.K.’s  Ministry of  Aviation would merge 
with Ministry of  Technology and be represented on Cabinet by  Minister 
of  Technology Anthony  Wedgewood  Benn.  ( A v .  W k . ,   11/28/66,  23) 
U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  CXXXIII  into earth orbit with 232-km.  (144-mi.) 
apogee;  181-km.  (112-mi.)  perigee;  51.8”  inclination;  and  88.4-min. 
period.  Equipment  was  functioning normally.  (Tass,  11/28/66) 
U.S.S.R.  was  showing increasing  signs  of  having  conceded manned  lunar  
landing race  to  U S .  as par t   of  vastly  revamped  space program, Donald 
C.  Winston postulated  in   Aviation  Week. Significance of  new  program 
was  tha t  i t  reflected  emphasis Premier Alexey Kosygin had  fomented in  
Soviet planning. Brezhnev and Kosygin, who  came to power while three-  
man  VOSKHOD  I  was  still  in   orbit  in   October  1964, ordered  th e   space- 
craft  to   ear th  prematurely  as  one  of  their  first moves  even  before  the  
overthrow of  Nikita Khrushchev was made public. It was  no t  long before 
Kosygin  grounded  th e   rest  of  the   Voskhod  series,  which  was  to  have 
continued with  a t   least  five  launches  through  1965. Only  VOSKHOD  II 
was permitted off  the  ground after Kosygin took power. The March  1965 
mission  was  conducted  because  planning  had  reached  a n   advanced 
stage by  the  time Khrushchev was  ousted and because Cosmonaut A.A. 
Leonov’s  Eva-first 
in   history-had 
high  propaganda  value.  Winston 
theorized  tha t   the   new  space  philosophy  could  produce  a  much  less 
complex manned  circumlunar mission without landing within  the  next 
year.  ( A v .  W k . ,  11/28/66,  22) 
NASA  selected Bendix Corp.  for negotiation of  a $6.9-million MSFC  contract 
to   develop  and  produce  three   pointing-control-system (Pcs)  un i ts   for 
the  Apollo Telescope Mount  (Atm) . (NASA  Release  66-309) 
Week  of  November  28:  French  space  officials  reported  partial  success  for 
first  firing  of  an   experimental Coralie  rocket  from Hammaguir  Range. 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTIC§,  1966 

357 

Rocket,  second  stage  of  ELDO’S  Europa  booster,  underwent  nominal 
countdown, launch,  and  flight  un t i l  T + 6 2   sec.,  when  circuit  malfunc- 
tion  prevented  monitoring  to  T+100   sec.  as  planned.  (Av .   E%., 
12/5/66,  30) 
November  29:  President  Johnson  said  a t   news  conference  a t   Texas  White 
House  tha t   there  would  be  $60-million program reduction in   NASA  FY 
1967 budget  requiring  some  contract  cancellations.  About  $30 million 
in   expenditures  was  involved.  Asked  if  changes  in   th e   NASA  budget 
Johnson  said:  “.  . . $30-million  ou t   of  some  several  billion  dollars 
would cause postponement of target  dates for any of the  space programs, 
wouldn’t  cause  a  change  in   the   target  date  of  th e   moon  schedule,  if 
you  are   talking  about  that.”  (Pres. Doc . ,   12/5/66,  1741; Transcript, 
N Y T ,   11/30/66,  18) 
X.15  No.  3 was  flown  by  Maj.  Michael  J.  Adams  (USAF)  to   3,204.5  mph 
(mach  4.65)  and  92,100-ft.  altitude  in   pilot  familiarization  flight.  As 
secondary  mission,  pilot  performed  maneuvers  to  evaluate  aircraft’s 
controllability  and natural  stability.  (X-15 Proj.  Off.) 
Canada’s  ALOUETTE  11  had  traveled  about  135 million  mi.  in   4,037  orbits 
since  launch  Nov.  28,  1965, Defence Research Board  announced.  The  
32-lb.  spacecraft  had  obeyed  11,200  commands; all  experiments  had 
been  carried  ou t   as  planned.  (AP, NYT,  11/30/66,  9) 
Eighth Uprated Sa turn   I booster was  static-fired successfully  a t   MSFC  for 
145 sec.  First  stage performed as  expected,  developing 1.6 million  Ibs. 
thrus t .   (MSFC  Release 66-288) 
November  29-December 2:  AIAA’s  Third  Annual Meeting  and  Technical  Dis- 
play  was  held  in  Boston.  I n  keynote  address, NASC  Executive Secretary 
Dr.  Edward  C. Welsh  described the  manned spaceflight program as  th e  
most  successful  technological  feat  ever  undertaken  by  th e   Nation. 
Panel discussion  followed  on  fu ture   of  U S .   space program. 
Dr.  Gordon  J.  F.  MacDonald,  Ins t i tu te   for  Defense Analyses,  pre- 
dicted  tha t   man  would  be  needed  in   space primarily  as  a  ccrepairmany’ 
for  scientific instruments.  “The  science  . . . will be  carried  out  on  th e  
ground  where  enormous  facilities  for  computing, analysis,  and  discus- 
sion  are a ~ a i l a b l e . ~ ~  
Gen.  Bernard  A .   Schriever  (USAF,  Ret.)  said  emphasis  on  space 
activities  should no t  be only on peaceful purposes but  also on preserva- 
tion  of  peace; th is   would  inevitably  require  sending military  men  into 
space.  W i th   advances in   technology, U S .   must  convert  from  “throw- 
away”  hardware  concept  to  use  of  maneuverable reentry  vehicles  and 
recoverable boosters,  he  added. 
This  idea  was  echoed  by  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned 
Space Flight Dr. George E.  Mueller, who  said:  “. . . all  of  the  hardware 
developed for futiwe projects would  reflect our concern over  . . . greater 
cost effectiveness,  through the  development of  reusable launch vehicles 
and  reusable  spacecraft.”  Mueller  said  there  would  be  manned  space 
stations  tha t   could stay  in   orbit  a  year  or  longer but  said there was  no 
need  for  crews  to  stay  aloft  for  such periods.  A  ferry vehicle would  be 
used  for  resupply  of  both  equipment  and  crew.  He  listed  potential 
benefits  of  space  technology in   the   next  decade,  describing  air  traffic 
control  towers  in  space,  direct-to-home international TV  broadcasting 
systems,  and  possibilities  for  predicting  and  controlling  th e   weather. 
Rep.  George  P,  Miller  (D-Calif.)  said  one  of  th e   problems  of  the  
House Committee on Science and Astronautics-of  which he  was  chair- 

358 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

man-was 
educating  the   people  of  t h e   Nation  to   th e   benefits  of  the  
space program.  It was  a  d i5cu l t   task,  h e  said,  to   ‘ustify space expendi- 
tures   against  the   costs  of  Vietnam,  foreign  ai (i , and  Great  Society 
projects.  But,  he   insisted,  ‘‘it  is  the   translation  of  space  technologies 
in to   useful  benefits  tha t   is   the   overall  value  of  the   space  program.” 
(Texts;  AIAA  Daily,  11/30/66,  1, 3; Wash.  Eve. Star,  11/30/66,  A7) 
Results  from  NASA’s EXPLOBEB  XXXIII  had  shown  for   first  time  tha t  
tail of  earth’s magnetosphere “extends more  than  75,000 miles  beyond 
the   orbit  of  the  moon,”  reported  GSFC  scientist Dr.  Norman  F.  Ness. 
Findings were  contrary  to   those  of  Soviet  scientist  Dolginov  and  col- 
leagues who  had  reported  they  were  unable  to  detect  magnetospheric 
tail  a t   lunar   distances  on   basis  of  data  obtained  from  LUNA  x  between 
April 3 and May  4,  1966. Ness suggested as  reason  for  this tha t   LUNA  x 
data were probably obtained when spacecraft was  near or within neutral 
sheet region of  magnetosphere where very low magnetic fields would be 
expected.  (GSFC  Release  20-66) 
I n  session  on Fu ture  Large  Subsonic Transports, John Borger  of  PAA 
said problems in   air  transport  industry  “are  being created  by  the   phe- 
nomenal  growth  ra te   of  our   business.”  Since  th e  growth  ra te   showed 
no  signs of  slackening i n  the  coming years,  continued development and 
extensive use  of  large subsonic jet  aircraft were  not  only desirable but 
essential.  Borger  pointed  ou t   tha t   the   engine  for  the   Boeing  747- 
which  would  carry  2%  times  more  passengers  than   present  in ter-  
continental  transports-was 
being  developed  with  only  commercial 
airlines  as  potential  customers.  This  was  the   first  time  i n   air  history 
tha t   a  new  aircraft  powerplant  had  been  undertaken  on  this  basis. 
Borger  noted  tha t   a  major  requirement  for  th e   “jumbo jets”  was  tha t  
they  be  available a t  least  5 to  6 yrs.  ahead of  the  proposed  Sst so  tha t  
initial development and  operation  costs  could be  recovered. 
H.  F.  Klnmp, general manager  of  cargo traffic and sales for Deutsche 
Lufthansa Airlines, sounded a warning about the  subsonic jet  aircraft’s 
cargo capacity: unless airports expanded  their freight  handling facilities 
enormously,  they  would  no t   be  able  to  handle  volume  of  material 
“dumped  on   them.” 
W.  D.  Perreault,  program  director  €or Lockheed  500-a 
giant  com- 
evolution  of  the   500 
mercial  cargo  aircraft  for  the   1970s-discussed 
from C-5A transport under development for USAF.  After reviewing three 
proposed commercial versions of  the  aircraft,  he said one of  them  “will 
provide  for  the   first  time  a  cargo  plane  with  direct  operating costs  of 
less  than  2#   er ton  s ta tu te  mile.”  (AIAA Daily,  11/30/66,  1 , 3 1 ;  Hines, 
Wash.  Eve. &ar,  11/29/66,  A10) 
Commenting on  the   report  of  the   AIAA  Launch  Vehicle  and  Missile 
Technical  Committee,  “The  Next  Generation  of  Launch  Vehicles- 
Evolution  or  Bold  Step?”  N.  E.  Golovin  of  the   Office  of  Science  and 
Technology said: “. . . if a family of reusable boosters  is  to  be  developed 
€or reasons  of  economy  then   development cost  per  booster must  he  so 
low  tha t   economical  amortization  must  be  possible  over  a  relatively 
small  number  of  flights  for   each  type;  or,  if  only  a  single  reusable 
booster is to  be developed i ts  use must indeed be so cheap tha t  it would 
pay  to  employ it for payloads which are  bu t  a small fraction  of  its orbit- 
ing  capacity.  This  reasoning  . . . casts  considerable doubt  on  th e  Com- 
mittee’s  suggestion  tha t   a  ‘bold  step’  leading  to   the   development  of 
reusable  boosters  is   justified  a t   this  time.”  (Text) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

359 

NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator for  Space Science and Applica- 
tions  Dr.  Edgar  M.  Cortright,  participating  in   a  panel  discussion  on  
“DO  We   Need  New  Propulsion  Systems  for  Lunar  and   Planetary 
Flight?”,  concluded tha t  unmanned missions during th e  next  ten  years 
would  probably  “not  require  either  new  propulsion  systems  or  new 
launch  vehicle  stages.  They  probably  w i l l   require  adding  a  modified 
Centaur as an  upper stage on th e  Sa turn  IB o r  th e  Titan IIIC. They may 
require and   certainly  could  use  a  260  inch  solid  first  stage  under  th e  
S-IV-B Centaur.  . . .” Cortright  recommended  th a t   cu r ren t   launch 
capability be  pu t   “to  effective use  i n  exploring space and  in  developing 
practical  applications  of  space  flight.”  (Text) 
During panel  on  -Space and  Public  Policy,  “poor  communications” 
between  scientists  and  the   general  public  was  suggested  reason  for 
death  of  Project  Mohole-killed 
by  Congress  because  it  would  have 
cost  a t   least  three   times  th e   original  estimate.  NAS  president  Frederick 
Seitz said  such  escalations  in   cost  were  “not  unusual”  for  such  scien- 
tific  ventures  and  revealed the  project  would  soon  be  renewed  under  a 
different  name such  as  “deep  ocean drilling.” 
“The  goals  of  space exploration  are  primarily  those  of  science,  no t  
technology,”  asserted  panelist  Hun ter   Dupree,  science  historian  and 
history  professor  a t   Univ.  of  California,  Berkeley.  Chairman  of  the  
President’s  Science  Advisory  Committee’s  Panel  on   Space  Science 
Louis  Branscomb  replied  tha t   no  one wanted  to  see the   space program 
purely  as  a  “spectator  sport,”  and  tha t   space programs should  be  con- 
ceived  to  “maximize  their  scientific returns.”  Commenting on  the  same 
subject,  NASA  Deputy Administrator Robert C.  Seamans, Jr.,  said:  “We 
must grapple with  th e  problem  of  what we  w i l l  do with t h e  moon.  This 
is no t  an  esoteric problem.” Concerned about th e  lack of  AIAA  advice to  
Congress  on  questions  of  scientific  policy,  Rep.  Emilio  Q .   Daddario 
(D-Conn.) , member of  House Committee on  Science and Astronautics, 
said  the   loudest  critics  of  the   space program were  scientists  in   other 
disciplines eying  the   space money.  “I call  on AIAA  to  come  to  Congress 
with  a  sharpened  viewpoint.  You  can  speak  with  th e   consensus  of 
35,000 members.” 
Avco  Corp.  vice  president  Ar thur   Kantrowitz  feared  tha t   “AIAA  is 
no t   equipped”  to   do  th e   suggested  job  because  unanimity  within  the  
society  could  no t  be  achieved on  policy questions.  And  unless  it could, 
the  assignment r‘would  induce strains within AIAA  and  change its  com- 
plexion.”  (AIAA  Daily, 12/2/66,  1, 29) 
Four  major AIAA  awards were  made  a t  Honors Convocation: Dr.  W. 
Randolph  Lovelace  I1  (posthumously),  the   Louis  W.  Hill  Award  “to 
honor  his  many  outstanding contributions  to  th e   biomedical  sciences 
i n  the ir   applications  to  space and  in  particular  his pioneering develop- 
ment  of  protective  devices  enabling th e   human  body  to   function  and 
operate  safely  in   t h e   aerospace environment”;  Joe  H .   Engle  of  NASA 
FRC,  th e   Lawrence  Sperry  Award  for  “outstanding  contribution  to  
aeronautics  as  th e   youngest  pilot  to   fly  th e   X-15  in   various  space- 
probing research programs since June   1963”; Warren  J.  North  of  MSC, 
t h e  De  Florez  Training Award  for  “contribution  to   astronaut  training 
and operational  crew procedures development in  support of  th e  manned 
space flight program”; and Dr.  A. K. Oppenheim, the  6. Edward Pendray 
Award  for  “outstanding  contributions  to  the   field  of  aeronautical  and 

360 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

astronautical  literature  in   the  area  of  gaseous  detonation and gas  wave 
dynamics.”  (AIAA Daily,  11/29/66,  30; A v .   W k . ,  11/28/66,  19) 
November 30:  NASA  launched two-stage, 30-ftAong Nike-Tomahawk sounding 
rocket  from Wallops Station in  cosmic ray and  ionospheric experiment 
for  Univ.  of  New  Hampshire.  120-lb. payload  reached  altitude  of  223 
mi.  (359  km.)  and  impacted  142 mi.  downrange  in   Atlantic  Ocean. 
Measurements  obtained  were  radioed  back  during  flight  and  recorded 
a t   ground  receiving  stations.  (Wallops Release  66-56;  NASA  Rpt.  SRL) 
NASA  Aerobee  150 launched  from WSMR  reached  136-mi. (219-km.)  altitude 
i n   NASA-Univ.  of  Minnesota  experiment  to  measure  atmospheric  tem- 
perature  and  composition  from  62-  to  124-mi.  (100-  to  200-km.) 
altitude.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
0  Charles W. Mathews,  MSC  Gemini Program Manager,  was  named  Director 
of  Saturn-Apollo  Applications  in   NASA  Hq.  Office  of  Manned  Space 
Flight. He would  replace M/G  David M.  Jones  (USAF), Deputy Associate 
Administrator for Manned  Space Flight Programs, who  had  been Acting 
Director.  (NASA Release  66-310) 
0  First  AEC-NASA  Tech  Brief  was  published,  launching  joint  program  for 
announcing  to  U S .   industry  useful  technical  innovations  resulting 
from  their  research programs.  Tech Briefs would  be  issued  in  five cate- 
gories:  electrical  and  electronic;  energy  sources; materials  and  chem- 
i s t ry ;  life  sciences ; and mechanical.  (NASA  Release  66-307) 
National  Science  Foundation  and  National  Foundation  for  th e  Advance- 
men t   of  Arts  and Humanities urged  i n  comments filed  jointly with  FCC 
th a t  satellite system be  devised tha t  would  “permit  th e  distribution  of 
high-quality programs  in   th e   arts,  humanities,  and  sciences  t o   remote 
areas  in   th e   Nation  where  educational and   cultural  opportunities  a re  
often  minimal.”  Comments were  filed  in   response  to  FCC  request  for 
suggestions o n  establishment of  comsat facilities by  organizations other 
th an   Government  and  communications  companies.  (AP,  Wash .  Post, 
12/1/66,  A18) 
During  November:  Two  tests  important  to  launch  of  NASA’S  first  manned 
Apollo  mission  had  been  successfully  completed  a t   MSC.  First  was  six- 
day manned Apollo systems test of  spacecraft 008  which  was  conducted 
i n   Space  Environmental  Simulation  Laboratory  chamber.  Second  was 
entry-egress training  in   Gulf  of  Mexico  for  AS-204 prime  and  backup 
crews.  (MSC Roundup,  11/11/66,  8; NAA  S&ID  Skywriter,  11/11/66,  1, 2 )  
ComSatCorp  conducted test  transmissions via  INTELSAT  11-A  (“LAN1 BIRD”) 
comsat,  launched  by  NASA  Oct.  27,  which  included:  first  live  color 
programs  between  U S .   mainland  and  Hawaii,  featuring  Notre  Dame- 
Michigan  State,  Army-Navy,  and  Green  Bay  Packers-Chicago  Bears 
football games; first live news  and public affairs programs between U S .  
and  Japan;  and   first  live  telecast  between  Great  Britain  and Australia. 
Comsat  had  failed  to   achieve  desired  synchronous  orbit  Oct.  30,  bu t  
i ts   communications  system  was  functioning  well  and  could  be  used 
for shor t  periods of  time when  in  line-of-sight of ground stations.  Orbit 
would  be  adjusted  i n   early  December  to  maximize  use  of  comsat  for 
transmissions  between  ComSatCorp  earth  stations.  (ComSatCorp 
Release; Reuters,  Wash .  Post, 11/26/66,  A4; Wash. Eve. Star, 11/25/66, 
AS;  AP,  Wa sh .  Post,  11/28/66,  A l )  
0  Management  organization to direct Apollo Telescope Mount  (Atm) project 
a t   MSFC  was  announced  by  MSFC  Director  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun: 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

361 

Leland Belew,  Program Manager; 
Keathley,  Project  Experiments 
Officer;  and  Dr.  Erns t   Stuhlinger, 
entist.  MSFC’S  Astrionics 
Lab.,  headed  by  Dr.  Walter  Haeussermann,  Director,  and  William 
Horton,  Assistant  Director,  would  be  responsible  for  overall  technical 
aspects  of  Atm  development.  (MSFC  Release 66-270) 
During November: Two experiments developed a t  ARC and flown on Nov. 11-15 
GEMINI  XII  mission  were  highly  successful.  Five  run s   with  hand-held 
sextant  proved  it  could  deliver  required  accuracy  of  10  see.  of  arc  
(1/360th of  one degree of a circle)  in  actual  space flight.  I n  experiment 
to  study  effects  of  weightlessness  on  living  cells  using newly  fertilized 
frog eggs,  astronauts arrested  cell growth a t  programed intervals  during 
mission.  Data  were  being  analyzed.  (ARC  Releases  66-15,  66-16;  ARC  
Astrogram,  11/23/66,  1, 4) 
NASA  selected  Westinghouse Electric  Corp.  for  an   $&million  contract  to  
install  semiautomatic systems in   tracking  stations to  speed  compilation 
of  satellite  data.  The  data  acquisition  system would  be  used  in   NASA’s 
Applications Technology Satellite  (Ats)  program;  it  would  make  pos- 
sible reduction of  data within 90  days of  satellite launch.  Systems would 
be  installed  at  Rosman,  N.C.,  Goldstone  facility,  and  Toowoomba, 
Australia,  tracking  stations.  ( W S J ,  12/1/66,  8) 
0  NASA  Hq.  OSSA  issued  report  for  NRC   Space Science Board  describing past 
achievements and  outlining  plans  for  fu tu re  missions.  (Text) 
Boeing Co.  awarded  subcontracts totaling more than  $25 million to  Lock- 
heed  Aircraft  Corp.,  General  Precision  Equipment  Corp.,  Litton 
Industries,  Inc.,  North  American Aviation,  Inc.,  General Telephone & 
Electronics  Corp.,  and  Universal Match  Corp.  for  help  in   developing 
a short-range attack missile  (Sram) . Boeing had  received  $142.3-million 
USAF  contract  Oct.  31.  ( W S J ,  11/8/66,  13) 
0  Human  voice  was  successfully  relayed via  DOD’s   Initial Defense commu-  
nications  Satellite Project  (Idcsp)  from  terminal  in   Nhatrang,  South 
Vietnam,  to  Camp  Roberts,  Calif.  U S .   Ambassador  to  South  Vietnam 
would  probably  use  military  system  to  talk  to  President  Johnson  in  
times  of  crisis.  (Wilson,  Wash .  Post,  11/10/66,  M7) 
*  French  Minister  of  Research Alain  Peyrefitte,  commenting on  th e   1967 
space  budget,  disclosed  tha t   France  planned  to  launch  two  D-1-type 
satellites  from  Hammaguir  Range  in   February  1967 and  one  D-2-type 
satellite  from  Guiana  Range  in   1969,  Technology  Week  reported.  He 
said a Super  Diamant booster was  under development to  launch French- 
built  satellites  from  Guiana,  but  stressed  tha t   main  French  effort was 
centered  on  continuing  development  of  ELDO  booster.  (Tech.  W k . ,  
11/14/66,  3) 
*  Joint  PUS-NAE  Committee  had  been  established  to   provide  continuing 
advisory  services  in   science  and  engineering  to  ESSA.  Verner  Suomi, 
professor  of  meteorology  a t   Univ.  of  Wisconsin,  had  been  named 
chairman.  (NAS-NRC-NAE News Report,  11/66,  3) 
Biologist  Dr.  Colin  S.  Pittendrigh,  Dean  of  Princeton  Univ.  Graduate 
School,  said  in   Astronautics  & Aeronautics  tha t   biological  exploration 
of  the  planets  would  be  “a  milestone in  modern  science,”  but  such  a n  
undertaking,  he  cautioned,  would  first  require  scientific readiness  and 
organization. Without  adequate preparation,  outright commitment now 
would  risk  the   political  consequences  tha t   would  attend  failure  of  a 
major,  costly  project.  “Could  commitment  now  to  the   opportunities 

362 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

i n  mid-1970s  fail  to   freeze  an  inadequately formulated strategy?  Could 
it  avoid  outright  assignment  of  responsibility  and   th e   authority  for 
decision  on   design  and  tactical  detail  to   one  of  several  single  labora- 
tories,  no   one  of  which  can marshal  th e   necessary scientific  talent  to  
ensure  a  competent  project?  . . . The   task  immediately  confronting 
those  of  us  anxious  to  see Voyager  go  in   th e   1970s is  thus  more  orga- 
nizational  than  scientific.  . . .” (A&A ,  11/66,  76-89) 
During  November:  Department  of  Transportation would  be  the   means  and 
choice  to  begin  a  new  era   in   transportation  planning,  Alan  S.  Boyd, 
Under Secretary of  Commerce for Transportation, wrote in  Astronautics 
& Aeronautics.  “.  . . transportation  policy-making today  necessitates 
a  resolving  of  three   different  elements: The  methodology for planning 
and  programming; th e   organization  to   parallel  such   methods;  and  th e  
combine B i n   an   effective manner.  . . . If  th e   nation  takes  this  oppor- 
leadershi 
to   carry them  out.  These  three   ingredients  have never  been 
tunity,  benefits  to   t h e  public and  to   t h e  users  of  transportation will  be 
tremendous . .   . .” (A&A ,  11/66,  112-116) 
*  DOD  was  successfully using SYNCOM  11  comsat 12  hrs.  daily and  SYNCOM  111 
comsat  22   hrs.  daily  for  military  communications  across  th e   Pacific, 
Technology Week reported.  DOD  had  assumed control of  both  satellites 
-launched  by  NASA  July  26,  1963,  and  Aug.  19,  1964,  respectively- 
July  8,  1965.  (Tech. Fk., 11/21/66,  9) 
*  “The outstanding achievements of  air transportation and associated social 
and  economic gains  have  been  paced  in   th e   main  by  the   continued 
development of  th e   gas-turbine  propulsion  system,”  LRC  Director  Dr. 
Abe  Silverstein  wrote i n  Astronautics  & Aeronautics.  “Despite th e  ou t-  
standing developments of  the  past  20 years,  however, there still remain 
large  gains  in  performance and  operational  capability  to  be  achieved.” 
Potential  for major  advances, Silverstein  continued,  existed  i n  several 
areas : noise  reduction,  engine  cooling,  engine-inlet matching, develop- 
men t   of  improved  materials,  determination  of  engine  temperature 
values,  and  use  of  liquid-methane fuel.  (A&A ,   11/66,  96-104) 
*  Trendex  poll  indicated  favorable  a t t i tude   toward  NASA’s Project  Apollo 
had increased 13% over past  three years; negative a t t i tude  had decreased 
40%.  Sentiment  to   speed  up   program was  greater  than   to  slow  down, 
but majority of  respondents were  content with present progress. While 
there   was  evidence of  some  increase  in   desire  to  reduce  expenditures 
on   space  program,  this  a t t i tude   was  i n   l ine   with  public’s  increasing 
concern  with  governmental  expenditures  of  all  kinds  because  of  th e  
defense  buildup.  Public  appeared  receptive  to  news  and  information 
of  fu r the r   space programs and  plans.  (Text) 
*  “In   th e   last  analysis,  the   only  reason  for  having  a  space program  is  to  
satisfy  the  needs  of  society,”  editorialized AIAA  President Dr.  Raymond 
L. Bisplinghoff in  Astronautics & Aeronautics. ccUnless the  space program 
serves people  in a useful  way,  i t  will  be transitory and fade in to  history 
as  a curiosity.  It w i l l  no t  even be enough for the  program to  serve people 
by  measuring  interesting scientific  data.  It  must  eventually  serve  th e  
masses  of people of  th e  Earth, if it is to command substantial resources.” 
Communications,  geodetic,  navigation,  and  meteorological satellites, 
and   other  satellites  designed  to   study  and manage the  world’s  na tura l  
resources  could,  i n   Bisplinghoff‘s  estimation,  contribute  to  meeting 
man’s  needs,  but  international  cooperation would  be  essential.  (A&A ,  
11/66,  54-55) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

363 

During  November:  Viewing  space  program  in   “historical  perspective,” 
Solomon W. Golomb wrote in Astronautics & Aeronautics:  “The Manhat- 
tan Project  established tha t  we  could run  a program for  three years and 
two  billion  dollars. This was  the   size limit  for maj o r  technological proj- 
ects  until  Apollo  escalated  the   level  to   ten  years  and  thirty  billion 
dollars.  The  next  major  goal  will  be  the  establishment  of  permanent 
colonies  on  other  planets.  This may  mean  a  commitment  of  50  to   90 
years  and  a  price  tag measured  in  Terabucks.”  (A&A ,   11/66,  14) 

December 1966 

December  1:  Deadline  for  outlining  major  national  space  objectives  a s  
requested  by  House  Science and  Astronautics  Committee’s NASA  Over- 
sight  Subcommittee on Aug.  9.  NASA  told  subcommittee  chairman  Rep. 
Olin E.  Teague  (D-Tex.) tha t  “any  detailed report  on fu tu re  goals mu s t  
be made  in  light  of  our  fiscal  1967 operating  and  the  President’s  fiscal 
1968  budget  request.  Since  these  budgetary  considerations  are  no t  
resolved now  . . . any elaboration  on  fu tu re  goals  cannot be made.  . . .” 
Representative  Teague  agreed  NASA  was  powerless:  “Until  the   Bureau 
of  the  Budget and the  President make a decision, there  isn’t much  NASA 
can do.  . . .” (NASA  Hq.  PAO;  SBD,  12 /2 /66 ,159 ;  A v .   Wk . ,  12/5/66,22) 
Successful  384-sec.  captive  firing  of  first  flight  model  of  Saturn  V  2nd 
stage  (S-11)  was  conducted  a t  MTF  by  North  American Aviation,  Inc., 
prime  contractor.  State was  powered  by  five Rocketdyne 5-2 liquid-hy- 
drogen-fueled  engines  capable  of  developing  a  total  of  1 million  lbs. 
thrust.  (MSFC  Release 66-290; UPI,  Wash. Post, 12/1/66,  A4; AP, Wash. 
Eve.  Star,  12/1/66) 
*  Problems  of  construction  industry were discussed by  William Rieke, NASA 
Assistant  Administrator  for  Industry  Affairs,  at  Construction  Industry 
Joint  Conference  in  Washington,  D.C.  Rieke  praised  accomplishments 
such  as  KSC’S  Vertical  Assembly  Building  but  urged  management  to  
increase  its  effectiveness,  labor  to  expand  apprentice  programs  and 
control  rate  escalation,  and  Government  to  examine labor  policies  and 
maintain  knowledgeable labor  relations  staffs.  (Text) 
0  McDonnell  Aircraft  Corp.  study  prepared  for  FAA  concluded  tha t   new 
family  of  100-passenger V/Stol  aircraft  operating  from  small  airports 
close to  downtown city  areas  could  offer  both  greater  convenience  and 
reduced  ground  travel  time  between  city  and  airport  than   the   present 
air  travel  system.  (FAA  Release  66-102) 
December  1-6: LUNAR  ORBITER  11  continued  transmitting  photos  of  the   lunar 
surface  [see  Nov.  10-301.  On  Dec.  6-one 
day  early-spacecraft’s 
photography  readout  terminated  when  high-power  transmitter  failed. 
Breakdown resulted  in   loss  of  three  medium-resolution  and  two  high- 
resolution  photos  of  primary  site  I,  but  full  coverage  of  site  had  been 
provided  by  medium-resolution  photography  readout.  Environmental, 
engineering,  and  selenodesy  tracking  data  continued  to  be  received 
through  low-power transmission.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
December  2:  NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  was  launched  from  wSMR 
to  142-mi. (229-km.) altitude  to measure  atmospheric  composition and 
temperature  a t   62-  to  124-mi.  (100- to   200-km.)  altitude  range.  (NASA 
Rpt.  SRL) 
NASA  announced  sponsorship  during  1967  of  seven  specialized  summer 
programs  of  research  and  study  for  about  245  college  and  university 
faculty  members  in  engineering  and  science.  Developed  by  NASA  and 

364 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

365 

American  Society for Engineering Education, programs would  combine 
space  research  a t   NASA  centers  and  parallel  seminar-type  studies  a t  
adjacent  universities.  Fellowships  would  be  available  for  about  225  
faculty  members.  Participating  were:  (1)  Univ.  of  Alabama,  Auburn 
Univ.,  and  MSFC;  (2)  Case  Ins t i tu te   of  Technology and  LRC;  (3)  Univ. 
of Houston, Texas A&M  Univ.,  and MSC;  (4) Univ.  of Maryland, Catholic 
Univ.,  and  GSFC;  (5)  Virginia  Associated  Research  Center  (Univ.  of 
Virginia,  Virginia  Polytechnic  Institute,  and  College  of  William  and 
Mary)  and  L ~ R C .  Also,  NASA  would  sponsor  five-week  summer  faculty 
program i n  space physics a t  Yeshiva Univ.  in  cooperation with Goddard 
Ins t i tu te   of  Space Studies.  (NASA  Release  66-305) 
December 2: The   Washington Post  commented on criticism of  NASA  spending: 
“Wha t   an   uproar  there  was  in   1957 when  Sputnik showed us  we  were 
second  in   space!  The  Eisenhower  Administration  was  roundly  con- 
demned.  Congressmen and  Senators  clamored  for  a  stepped-up space 
program and promised  all the  money needed.  President Kennedy, in  his 
1960 campaign  . . . said  repeatedly:  ‘I am  no t   satisfied  to  be  second in  
space.’ 
“Well,  we  are  no  longer  second  in   space.  And  the   critics  of  the  
Johnson  Administration  are  now  no t   satisfied  to   be  first  in   space- 
unless it can be done cheap. As  a result of  the  space program we  are  no t  
only going  to  be  first  on  th e  moon  and  first  in   space.  We   are  going  to  
be  first  in  a  thousand  fields of  science,  education,  and  industry. 
“This  country does no t  have to  choose between  a space program tha t  
will  keep  i t   in   first  place  and  a  poverty  program tha t   will  keep  i t   first 
. . . in   national  exertion  for  th e  disadvantaged.  It  can  be  and  ought  to  
be  first  in  both.”  (Wa s h .  Post,  12/2/66,  A16) 
e  First  program  to   provide pilots  with  curren t   satellite  photos  adapted  for 
the ir   use  in   flight  planning  began  a t   Kennedy  International  Airport 
under  ESSA  direction.  Photos  transmitted by  ESSA  11  and  111  and  NIMBUS 
11  were  composited  by  computer  into  a  single  picture  showing  cloud 
patterns  over  eastern  North  America  and  th e   North  Atlantic  and 
analyzed  by  meteorologists.  (ESSA  Release) 
e  USAF  awarded  contracts totaling  over $6 million  to  Lockheed-Georgia c o .  
and  North  American Aviation,  Inc.,  to  advance Vtol  aircraft  develop- 
ment.  NAA  received  $5,671,000  to  develop  and  demonstrate  a  Vtol 
integrated  flight  system; Lockheed  received  $975,000 to  modify XV-4A 
“Hummingbird”  to   new  system  with  direct  lift  and  diverted  th ru s t  
engines.  (AFSC  Release  288.66) 
AEC  Chairman Dr.  Glenn T.  Seaborg believed man  could modify weather 
in  this century through a global center operating a vast satellite system, 
AP  reported.  With  international  cooperation,  he   said,  a  worldwide 
forecasting  system  could  become  operational  in   20  yrs.;  later  it might 
be possible  to  actually  control th e  weather.  (AP, NYT,  12/2/66) 
December 3:  ComSatCorp’s  INTELSAT  11-A  (“LANI  BIRD”)  comsat,  launched by 
NASA  from ETR  Oct.  27,  began  commercial service under  temporary FCC 
authorization  which  would  expire  Feb.  2,  1967.  Satellite,  which  had 
failed  to   achieve  planned  synchronous  equatorial  orbit  Oct.  30,  had 
been  moved  into  modified  12-hr.  orbit  Dec.  1,  to   provide  maximum 
visibility:  eight  to  nine hours daily between U S .  mainland and Hawaii; 
over seven hours  between U.S.  and Japan; and about four hours between 
U.S.  and  Carnarvon,  Australia.  Authorized  communications  carriers 
could use  satellite for  television  and  telephone  communications about 

366 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

t  hours   daily.  (ComSatCorp  Release;  Wash.  Post,  12/2/66,  F1; 
W S J ,  12/5/66,  15; Wash. Eve.  Star,  12/3/66,  A3) 
December 3: U.S.S.R.  launched COSMOS cxxxw into ear th  orbit with 319-km. 
(197-mi.)  apogee; 214-km.  (133-mi.)  perigee;  89.6-min.  period;  and  65” 
inclination.  Equipment  “for  continuation  of  th e   exploration  of  outer 
space”  was  functioning normally.  (Tass,  12/5/66) 
9  AEG  conducted  350-ton  nuclear  detonation  for  DOD  near  Hattiesburg, 
Miss.,  i n   underground  cavity  formed  by  previous  nuclear  explosion. 
Purpose of  test was  to  determine extent  of  decoupling-a 
reduction  of 
ground  shock and  other  seismic signals.  (AEC  Release 5-273) 
December  4:  Secretary  of  th e   Air  Force  Dr.  Harold  Brown  had  indicaten 
tha t   fu tu re   US. military  exploration  of  space would  concentrate  od 
existing  and  proved  technologies,  Dr.  I.  M.  Levitt,  director  of  Fels 
Planetarium,  reported  in   th e   Philadelphia  Inquirer.  Dr.  Brown  had 
isolated  three   areas  of  vital  interest  to  th e   military:  (1)  electronic 
systems  which  would  ensure   long  life  and  reliability  i n   orbit;  (2) 
reusable  materials  for   spacecraft,  launch  vehicles,  and  propulsion 
systems;  and  (3)  space electrical  power  systems which would  provide 
better  power-to-weight ratios a t  reduced  cost  per  kw  for  long duration 
missions.  (Levitt, Phil.  Znq.,  12/4/66,  5) 
December 4-6:  At 43rd annua l  convention, National League of  Cities meeting 
in   Las  Vegas  adopted  resolution  challenging  priority  given  to   U S .  
space program  and  th e   Vietnam  war  and  urged  President  Johnson  to  
establish  “a  national  reb ir th   of  the   American  city.”  Detroit  Mayor 
Jerome  P.  Cavanagh  argued  tha t   if  funds  for  low-income  housing, 
poverty,  and  education were  restored  by  cutting NASA’s  appropriation, 
space programs would  be  delayed  only  a  few  weeks.  Budget  requests 
for housing and urban development, he  charged, had been cu t   17  times 
as  much  as  th e   NASA  budget.  (Janson,  NYT ,   12/5/66,  1 ;  Wash.  Post, 
12/6/66,  A8) 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  responded  to   accusations  tha t  
h e  was  more  concerned with  life  on  Mars  than  with  life  in  Chicago  or 
Los  Angeles:  “Neither  I nor   any other  leader  i n  the  space program has 
ever  suggested  tha t   t h e  space program  should  have  any  priority  over 
the  needs of  the  American City.  . . .” He agreed tha t  cities needed more 
Federal funds, bu t   suggested tha t  they  fust  offer greater  assurance  tha t  
other  fie1 f s added  dimensions to mace Drogram far bevond  th e  value of 
the ir   pro  ams  would  work  well.  Benefits  in   medical,  industrial,  and 
(TranscriGt ; Janson,  NYT, 
the   lunar-landing  program  alone:  he  ;aid’: 
12/6/66,  C34) 
December 5:  Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned 
a  speech  before  ARCS  (Achievement Rewards  for  Co P lege  Scientists) 
Space Flight,  c o k e n t e d  on  national  impact of  U S .  s  ace program in  
and  in all  of  i ts  ramifications has  become a powerful force  . . . socially, 
Foundation  in  Los Angeles:  “Space  exploration in  its broadest meaning 
economically, politically, and even morally. . . . It is  the  creator of  new 
technologies, new  techniques, and new methods of  management. It has 
great  significance  for   our   national  security.  It  is  a  stimulus  for  our 
economic and national  growth. I t  is a catalyst to  the  achievement of  th e  
explore  space  for  the   benefit  of  all  mankind.”  (E; 
goals  of  our society.  And  i t  provides us  with  the  dimensions of  a 
challenge-to 
0  Project  Makai-program 
to   construct  manned  laboratories  a t   various 
underwater  depths  near  Honolulu  to   increase  man’s  ability  to   work 

367 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
described in New  York Times interview 
productively under the  sea-was 
by Wayne Collins of  Oceanic Institute, which was  cosponsoring project 
with  several  industries.  First  phase  was   $3-million,  3-yr.  effort  to  
establish  two  test  ranges a t  70 and 200 ft.  below  sea  level.  Each  range 
would  consist  of  multilevel  habitat  and  laboratory  linked  to   shore   by 
an  “umbilical cord”  and capable of  housing four to  six men for a t  least 
one  month.  Work  environments  under  consideration  for   aquanauts 
included  a  simulated oil  field,  an   experimental mining  area,  a n  under- 
water  “weather”  station,  and   ins trumen t   and  material  testing  sites. 
(Brody,  NYT,  12/5/66,  56) 
December 5: AFSC would offer research opportunities  in  17 scientific disciplines 
through   National  Research  Council  postdoctoral  resident  research 
associateships during 1967 and 1968. Associateships would be suppsr ted  
by  ten  separate AFSC  laboratories  and  research  centers located  in  Ohio, 
New Mexico,  Texas,  New  York,  and Alaska.  (AFSC  Release 249.66) 
0  USAF  launched unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from WTR. 
(U.S.  Aeron.  & Space  Ac t . ,   1966,  159) 
December  6:  NASA  released  summary  of  report  on  observatory-class  ear th  
satellites.  Recommendations included:  (1)  redesign  of  outmoded  elec- 
tronic equipment tha t  had  performed poorly in  space;  (2) rigorous pre- 
flight  testing  with  prototype models  under  simulated  space conditions; 
(3) stronger management of  observatory program within NASA;  and  (4) 
increased  surveillance  of  performance  a t   contractors’  plants.  Report 
was  compiled by  five-man board  appointed April  21  by  NASA  Associate 
Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr.  Homer E.  Newel1 
and  chaired  by  his  Deputy  for  Engineering  Robert  F.  Garbarini.  It 
studied OAO I mission, which failed two days after April 8 launch because 
battery  overheated,  and  reviewed  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory  (Oso), 
Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory  (Ogo) , and  Nimbus  meteorological 
satellite project  practices.  All  programs were  managed  by  GSFC.  (NASA 
Release 66-313; UPI,  NYT,  12/8/66,  53) 
*  U S .   must  continue  to  press  for  advanced  technology  to  ensure   T h e  
fundamental  s treng th   of  our   society  for  all  purposes,”  Karl  Harr, 
president of  Aerospace Industries Assn.,  told Town Hall in  Los Angeles. 
Because  technological  advance  is  largely  indivisible,  a  nation  either 
rc 
opts  for   technology or  it  doesn’t.  As  some sister  nations have  learned, 
you  either  move  with  the   tide  of  technological  advance  or  you  fall 
behind  on   all  fronts.  . . . 
Today  the  question becomes  the  same for us.  It is no t  should we  as 
‘ C  
a nation have  space or  other  things,  bu t   ra ther   can we  have  the   ‘other 
things’  if  we  reject  th e   technological  reach  required  by  space.  . . .” 
(Text) 
*  USAF had  successfully penetrated  ion-sheath blackout phase  of  an  Athena 
missile’s  reentry  i n   test  a t   WSMR,  AP reported.  (AP, Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
12/7/66) 
0  All F-104G Starfighter aircraft in  West Germany’s Air Force were grounded 
indefinitely as result of  Nov. 28 air crash which killed pilot.  Since 1962, 
65 of  Luftwaffe’s 700 Starfighters had crashed, killing 37 pilots. Aircraft 
was  manufactured  by  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  (Shabecoff,  NYT, 
12/7/66,  15) 
December 6-7: NASA’s ATS  I  (Ats-B), first satellite  in  Applications Technology 
Satellite  (Ats)  program,  was  successfully  launched  from  ETR  by  Atlas- 

368 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Agena  D  booster in to   elliptical  transfer  orbit with 22,831-mi.  (36,758- 
km.) apogee;  114-mi.  (183-km.)  perigee;  650-min.  period;  and  31” 
inclination.  At  16:30 GET, apogee motor was  fired  to  place satellite in to  
near-synchronous  22,300-mi.-altitude  orbit.  I t   would  be  allowed  to 
dr if t   12  days  to  stationary position  over  th e  Pacific a t   151” west  longi- 
tude. 
One   of  the   most  versatile  satellites  ever  developed,  775-1b.  ATS  I 
carried  1 5   communications,  technology,  and  scientific  experiments, 
including  camera  systems  for  cloud-cover photos;  two-way  VHF  trans- 
ponder  for  voice  communications between ground  stations and  aircraft 
i n  flight;  electronically  despun  antenna  to  continuously  direct  a  radio 
beam  toward  ear th ;  and  low-thrust resistojet  which produced th ru s t  of 
450 millionths  of  a pound.  Capable  of  multiple-access communications, 
satellite would be able to  transmit TV and voice communications among 
stations in  North America, Asia,  and Australia.  I t  would  also be used  to 
send  weather  data  from  ESSA  facility  a t   Suitland, Md.,  to  Automatic 
P ic ture   Transmission  (Apt)  stations  in   U S . ,   Japan,  and  Australia. 
Mission  objectives were  to  inject  spacecraft  in to  synchronous orbit and 
place  i t  on station; operate spacecraft for a t  least  30 days; and  conduct 
experiments.  Ats  program-a 
five-satellite  project  managed  by  GSFC 
under  OSSA  direction-sought 
to  investigate  technology  common  to  
various  spacecraft  applications  through  flight  experiments  carried  on  
spin-stabilized  and  gravity-gradient-stabilized  spacecraft.  (NASA  Proj. 
Off.;  NASA  Release 66-308; Marshall  Star,  12/7/66,  1,  4 ;   Wash.  Post, 
12/8/66,  A2;  UPI,  N Y T ,  12/9/66,  57; UPI,  Wash. Pos t ,   12/21/66,  A15) 
December  7:  U S .   confusion  and  concern  over  U.S.S.R.’s  space  objectives 
had increased because of  th e  “long gap”  in  Soviet manned space flights 
and  three   recen t   Soviet  launches  “surrounded  by  unusual  secrecy,” 
Evert  Clark  reported  in   the   New  York  Times.  Two  of  the   spacecraft, 
secretly launched  Sept.  17 and Nov. 2,  had  exploded  in  orb i t ;  the  third, 
Nov.  28,  had been  announced as  COSMOS CXXXIII  bu t   orbital  inclination 
usually given i n  Cosmos launch reports was  not disclosed. Clark warned 
tha t   U S .   experts  might  be  “underestimating  the   Soviet  Union’s  com- 
mitment  to  space exploration”  and  suggested  U.S.S.R.  was  e i ther :   (1) 
preparing  to  secretly  launch  manned  spacecraft  with  three- to  six-man 
crew  in   early  1967;  (2)  conducting  tests  to  precede  new  missions  to 
Mars  and   Venus;  (3)  changing  i ts   emphasis  from  manned  lunar   ex- 
ploration  to  manned  earth-orbiting stations;  o r   (4)  trying  to  provide 
maximum  coverage  of  US. by  launching  additional  reconnaissance 
satellites.  (Clark,  N Y T ,   12/8/66,  1) 
FCC  ruled  tha t   ComSatCorp must  share ownership  of  i ts  ground  stations 
with  US.-owned  international  common  carriers.  Effective  un t i l   late 
1969, decision-which  gave ComSatCorp controlling  interest in  existing 
and  fu tu re   ground  stations-modified 
FCC’S  May  12,  1965,  interim 
ruling  awarding ComSatCorp  “sole  responsibility”  for  stations a t  least 
during  “critical  early years.”  (UPI,  N Y T ,   12/8/66,  52;  WSJ, 12/8/66, 
3) 
0  AFSC  awarded  $B.S-miuion,  fixed-price-incentive-fee contract  to  Douglas 
Aircraft  Co.,  Inc.,  for  design,  development, and   fabrication  of  Titan 
I11  launch  vehicle  components.  (DOD  Release  1029-66) 
December  8:  President  Johnson  announced  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  had  reached 
agreement on  space law  treaty under  consideration by  U.N.  Committee 
on   t h e  Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer  Space since May  7.  Calling  agreement 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

369 

“ the  most  important arms  control development since th e  Limited Test 
Ban  Treaty  of  1963,”  the   President  said  he   would  seek  fast  Senate 
approval so U S .  would  be  first  nation  to  ratify it.  Primary provisions: 
(1)  moon and  other  celestial bodies  should be free for exploration,  use, 
and  scientific research  to  all  countries and  international  organizations 
a  claim  of  sovereignty or  appropriation;  (3)  no  country  sho u p  d  be  per- 
exclusively for peaceful purposes;  (2) no  country  should be  ermitted 
mitted  to   place  weapons  of  mass  destruction,  establish  military  bases, 
or  conduct  military  activities  on   moon  and  celestial  bodies;  (4)  all 
outer  space activities  would  be subject to  international law  and  should 
be  reported  to  U.N.  Secretary  General;  (5) cooperative efforts  should 
be  made  to   avoid  harmful  contamination,  conduct  scientific research, 
and assist all astronauts in  need of  aid; and  (6) all stations,  installations, 
and  space vehicles  on moon  and  other  celestial  bodies  should  be  open 
to   other  countries  on  reciprocity  basis.  Use  of  ICBM’s,  reconnaissance 
satellites,  and  USAF’S  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (Mol)  were  no t  
affected. 
Treaty  would  be  considered  by  U.N.  General  Assembly  Dec.  19. 
(Frankel, NYT ,  12 /9 /66 ,1 ,18C ;   Gwertzman, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/9/66, 
A l ;  Pres.  Doc.,  12/12/66,  1781-2; Roberts,  Wush. Post,  12/9/66,  A l ,  
A8,  A10; NYT,  12/20/66,  6) 
December 8: LUNAR  ORBITER  11  executed plane change-possibly 
the  first ever 
accomplished  by  satellite  in   lunar   orbit-to 
obtain  information  about 
moon’s  gravity  field  and  gain  experience  in   flight  operations  a t   high 
ind ina t ions .   (NASA  Proj.  Off.;  NASA  Release  66-316) 
December  9: NASA’s ATS  I  satellite  took  first U.S.  high-quality  photos  of  the  
ear th  from synchronous orbit altitudes.  Photos showed changing cloud- 
cover pattern  over 40  per  cent  of  the   earth’s  surface.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
NASA’s  second  Project  Scanner  instrument  package  was  successfully 
launched by  three-stage  solid  propellant  Trailblazer booster  from  NASA 
Wallops  Station  on  suborbital  trajectory  to  gather  information  on  
earth’s  horizon.  Two-channel  radiometers  measured  infrared  energy 
emitted  from  earth’s  horizon  by  carbon dioxide  and water vapor;  s tar-  
mapper telescope provided data on  a t t i tude  of  spin-stabilized spacecraft. 
Project  Scanner was  a  phase  of  horizon  definition  research  conducted 
by  LaRC.  (Wallops  Release  66-58) 
Complexities  of  modern  society  required  a  new  concept  of  management, 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  told  graduation  class  of  Harvard 
Univ.’s  Graduate  School  of  Business  Administration.  “The  kind  of 
challenges tha t  we  i n  management are  facing today  . . . call for new  and 
experimental  approaches  to   organization.  One  . . . is  the   question  of 
an  organization peaked  in   th e  chief executive.  . . . However,  as  organi- 
the   chief  executive  function.  I n   traditional thinking,  th e   s truc ture   of 
disciplinary  . . . there   has  been  a n   increasing  tendency  to   experiment 
zations  have  become  more  complex  and  their  challenges  more  in ter-  
with  the  idea  of  t h e  multiple executive.  . . . We  saw  this kind  of  need 
a t  the  very  beginning of  NASA’s history.  We  evolved,  therefore,  a part- 
nership  arrangement  which  included  Dr.  Hugh  Dryden,  Dr.  Robert 
Seamans,  and  myself.  We   all  had  many  common  ideas,  and  yet  each 
brought to  our  work on the  critical decisions affecting the  nation’s  space 
effort certain specialized experience. To do it any other way would have 
deprived us  of  t h e  kind of  mu tua l  support and broadly-based leadership 
tha t   I  th ink  we  achieved.”  (Text) 

370 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

December 9: French President Charles de Gaulle and Soviet Premier Aleksey 
Kosygin signed extension  of  scientific,  technical,  commercial, and  cul- 
tural cooperation between U.S.S.R.  and France provided  for by  June  30 
agreement.  Declaration  followed  eight-day  visit  to  France  by  Kosygin 
who had  toured t h e  Center  for  Nuclear Studies and Air  Liquide labora- 
tory   and  inspected  prototype  of  the   Concorde  supersonic  aircraft. 
(Reuters,  NYT ,   12/10/66,  16;  Nossiter,  Wa sh .  Post,  12/8/66,  A32; 
Mooney,  NYT ,   12/6/66,  C10) 
Report on national  document-handling systems in  science and technology 
prepared  by  Federal Council for  Science and Technology’s  Committee 
on   Scientific  and  Technical  Information  (COSATI)  was  summarized in  
Science  by  Launor  F.  Carter,  vice  president  of  System  Development 
Corp.-a 
participant  i n  th e  study.  Report had recommended  tha t   Office 
of  Science  and  Technology:  (1)  accelerate  its  efforts  to   organize  a n  
integrated  national  network  of  information  and  document-handling 
systems i n   science  and  technology;  (2)  collaborate with  other  Federal 
agencies and  private  organizations  to   develop  comprehensive, coordi- 
nated  program and  sponsor effective legislation;  (3)  encourage private 
sector  to   formulate  plans  for  its  consideration;  and  (4)  encourage 
Federal  support  of  experiments  in   information  technology,  including 
prototype  information  systems.  (Carter,  Science,  12/9/66,  1299-1304) 
December 10: Editorial  comment  on  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  agreement on   space law 
trea ty   announced Dec.  8. 
New  York Times: “No  one has yet  demonstrated tha t   there  would  be 
any  military  advantage to   placing  bombs  either  in   orbit or  on  celestial 
bodies. But there  is a clear need both for space law and for reducing th e  
wasteful competition in   space exploration.  The  ability  of  Moscow  and 
Washington  to  reach  agreement  . . . offers  hope  of  fur ther   East-West 
cooperation on space problems.”  (N Y T ,  12/10/66,  36C) 
Washington Da i ly  News: “. . . reason and  peacefulness have prevailed. 
And  we  will  all  benefit.  There   will  be  no  military  bases  or  forts,  no 
testing  of  weapons  and  tactics-nor 
the ir   threa t   or  expense. And  no 
claims  to  territory  i n   space,  and  thus   no  arguments  and  battles  over 
conflicting claims.”  (Wa sh .  Da i ly   News,  12/10/66) 
Washington Post: “. . . the  treaty can be applauded for the  good  tha t  
it has achieved as of  today; and it can be praised for the  larger good tha t  
it will  do  tomorrow when  th e  practical  aspects  of  space  relations  have 
become  infinitely more  pressing.  The  world  will  surely  have  occasion 
to  look  back  to  this  day  as  one  tha t   se t   th e   nations  on  the   right  path 
and on  which  the  great powers made a wise decision to shun  the  military 
exploitation  of  celestial bodies and  of  outer  space for  narrow, national- 
istic purposes.”  (Wa sh .  Post,  12/10/66) 
0  NASA  successfully  completed  th ird   rocket-launched  test  [see  Nov.  5 and 
211  of  Lam-managed parachute landing system for Voyager  spacecraft. 
Honest  John-Nike rocket launched  from WSMR  deployed  30-ft.-dia.  disc 
gap band parachute a t  approximately 130,000-ft. altitude.  Voyager  pro- 
gram was  managed  by  JPL.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
December 11 :   USAF successfully launched OV1-IX and OV1-X research satel- 
lites pickaback from Vandenberg AFB with Atlas D booster.  Each 220-lb. 
spacecraft  carried  12   radiation-measuring  experiments.  (AP,  Wash. 
Eve.  Star,  12/12/66,  A l ;   Tech.  W k . ,  12/19/66,  13) 
Ford  Foundation  President  McGeorge  Bundy  announced  $10-million 
grant  to   show  potential  of  educational  television  through  a  series  of 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

371  

national  programs.  Series  would  be  carried  by  Nation’s  125 noncom- 
mercial educational TV  stations joined by  coaxial  cable and microwave 
relay  for  th e   demonstration.  I n   a  brief  to   be  fded  with  FCC, Bundy 
defended Foundation’s Aug.  1 request for formation of  nonprofit nation- 
wide satellite system tha t  would  carry  extensive schedule of  educational 
programs  financed  by  transmission  of  commercial programs.  (NYT ,  
12/12/66,  1, 95;  Wash. Post,  12/12/66,  A l ,   A4;  AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 
12/12/66,  A3) 

December  11:  Photograph of  earth  from  ATS I,  in   22,300-mi. synchronous orbit.  This  is 
one   of   seven pictures  which  together  show  changing  cloud pattern  over  the  earth  for  an  
entire day.  ATS I  began  its photography Dec. 9. 

December  11: Aerospace ra ther   than  shipbuilding companies were competing 
for  $1-billion Fast Deployment Logistic Fleet  (Fdl)  program because of 
USN’S  new  contract  policy,  Robert  Wright  reported  in   the   New  York 
Times. Under new policy,  firms were  required to  bid  for total package- 
of  construction  only. 
concept,  design,  and  construction-instead 
Vernon A.  Johnson,  a Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.  vice president,  believed 
Lockheed,  General Dynamics  Corp.,  and  Litton  Industries,  Inc.,  were 
competing exclusively for contract because shipbuilding industry lacked 
resources  and   experience for  total-package systems design.  Goal  of  Fdl 
program was  fleet  of  30-40 ships  capable  of  remaining a t  sea fo r  indefi- 
nite  periods  and  making  fast  delivery  of  heavy  supplies  to  fight  small 
wars.  (Wright, NYT,  12/11/66,  12) 

372 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

December  12:  XB-70 No.  1 experimental  research  aircraft,  piloted  by  NASA 
test  pilot  Fitzhugh  Fulton  and  North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  pilot 
Van  Shepard reached mach 2.52  and 60,000-ft.  altitude during national 
sonic  boom  program flight.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
*  Howard  H.  Haglund,  formerly  Deputy  Project  Manager  and  Spacecraft 
System Manager  for  Surveyor a t  JPL,  had  been named Manager  of  JPL’S 
Surveyor  Project  Office.  He  succeeded  Robert  J.  Parks,  who  returned 
to his former position  of  JPL  Assistant Director for Lunar and  Planetary 
Projects.  (JPL  Release 426) 
0  Efficient management in  both  industry and Government was  the  key  to   a 
continuing successful space effort, Dr. Edward C.  Welsh, NASC Executive 
Secretary,  told  th e  Management  Club  a t  Patrick AFB .   “The  space chal- 
lenge is unique. To face up to i ts  imperatives calls for new ways of  doing 
things.  The  pacing  item  is  as  much  managerial  competence  as  i t   is 
technology or   money.  . . . 
“Under  the   stress  and  pressure  of  getting  th e   job  done,  there  is 
imposed a harsh necessity which breeds  innovation. So  long as purpose- 
fu l  men accept such  challenges, this nation will flourish and its economic 
and political systems will  continue to  lead  the  way.  On  the  other hand, 
should we  slip  in to   th e  path  of  the   familiar  and  decline  to  accept  the  
challenge of  the  new,  this  nation will  suffer  a grievous loss and so will 
the   eoples  throughout  th e  world.  . . .”  (Text) 
MSFC  &rector  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  discussed  U.S.  space  objectives 
and  accomplishments  in   U S .   News  &  World  Report  interview.  Im- 
mediate objective, he explained, was  “to  land a n  American on  the  moon 
in   this  decade  and  bring  him  back  alive”;  far-reaching  goal  was  “to 
develop  a  broad,  national  spaceflying capability.”  He  described Gemini 
program  as  ‘‘a  smashing  100  per  cent  success.  . . . The   purpose  of 
. . . and we  did make  some surprise discoveries, for which we  are  more 
Gemini was  to   learn  th e  kind  of  things  you  can’t  learn  on  th e  ground 
than  grateful.  . . .” Dr.  von Braun said there  was a “distinct  possibility” 
US. might land a man on th e  moon in  1968. ( U S .  News, 12/12/66,62-7) 
e  U.S.S.R.  launched  COSMOS  cxxxv  into  earth  orbit  with 662-km.  (411-mi.) 
apogee,  259-km.  (161-mi.) perigee,  and  48.5”  inclination.  (U .N .  Public 
Registry,  1/9/67) 
*  New  Soviet launch  site near  Archangel  was  discovered by  British  school- 
boys  after  they  had  tracked  several Cosmos  satellites  and  fed  informa- 
tion, including data on orbital  intersections,  into a computer. U S .  later 
confirmed  U.S.S.R.  had  been  launching  satellites  from  large  military 
base  sou th   of  Archangel.  Only two  Soviet launch  sites-Baikonur 
and 
Kapustin  Yar-had 
previously  been  publicized.  Schoolboys’  informa- 
tion,  which  appeared  in   Flight  International,  represented  important 
break  in   secrecy surrounding  Soviet  reconnaissance satellites.  (Wa sh .  
Post,  12/13/66;  12/19/66,  A l ,   A8;  N Y T ,   12/21/66,  25;  Time,  12/ 
30/66) 
December  13:  Versatility  of  ATS  I  satellite,  launched  by  NASA  from  ETR  Dec. 
6, was  demonstrated  in   program a t   GSFC.  I n  first  test,  satellite  relayed 
color  TV  show  from  Goldstone,  Calif.,  to   GSFC  via  Rosman,  N.C., 
ground  station.  I n   second  test,  voice  signals  transmitted  from  GSFC  to 
Goldstone and  beamed  by  dish  antenna  to  satellite  were  successfully 
relayed  to  three   aircraft  in   flight,  demonstrating publicly  for  the   first 
time  tha t   50,000-mi.  earth-to-space circuit  could be  used with  existing 
airline  radio  equipment  in   VHF  range.  Concurrent  with  these  tests, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

373 

satellite  transmitted high-quality  photos  of  weather  over  eastern Asia, 
Pacific  Ocean,  and western US. I t   had  begun  relaying  photos  Dec.  9. 
NASA  Deputy Administrator Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  told  th e  press 
ATS  I  was  ‘‘a  major  step  forward”  toward  practical  satellites  and would 
have  “an  impact  on  everyone in   th e  world.”  (Clark,  NYT ,   12/14/66, 
38 ;   Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  12/14/66,  A4;  Reistrup,  Fa& .   Post, 
12/14/66,  A12) 
December  13:  NASA  had  eliminated  final  three  Surveyors  because  of  good 
results  from  Ranger  series,  SURVEYORS  I  and  11,  and  LUNAR  ORBITERS  I 
and  11.  It  had  been  determined tha t   five remaining  Surveyor spacecraft 
would  provide  necessary  additional  information  about  the   moon  to 
support  Apollo  manned  lunar   landing mission.  (NASA  Release  66-318) 
0  Aerobee  150 sounding rocket launched  by  NASA  and Brazilian Space Com- 
mission  (CNAE)  from  mobile  facility  a t   Natal,  Brazil,  carried  225-113. 
payload  of  four  x-ray detectors  on  ballistic  trajectory  to  120-mi. (193- 
km.)  altitude.  Payload,  which  impacted  66  mi.  downrange  in   th e  
Atlantic,  telemetered scientific data to  ground  stations.  First  NASA  x-ray 
astronomy  experiment  on  a  sounding  rocket  in   the   Sou thern   Hemi- 
sphere,  flight  searched  for  specific  galactic  x-ray  sources,  observed 
Magellanic clouds for x-ray emissions, and obtained spectral information 
on  known  x-ray  sources.  (NASA  Release  66-311) 
0  Sen.  Clinton  P.  Anderson  (D-N.Mex.),  Chairman  of  the   Senate  Aero- 
nautical  and  Space Sciences Committee, told  AP he  saw  “no  urgency’’ 
in   landing  on   the   moon  first.  Discounting  the   theory  tha t   a  manned 
lunar  landing would  have military  significance,  Senator Anderson said 
“had  the  United  States  and the  Soviet Union  cooperated from the  s ta r t  
in   space  exploration,  more  knowledge  a t   less  expense might  have  re-  
sulted.”  (AP, NYT,  12/15/66,  34) 
e  Informed  sources  said  U.S.S.R.  had  cu t   its  nonmilitary  space budget by 
one  th ird   and  increased  general  military  spending,  according  to  AP. 
Report  could  no t   be  confirmed.  (AP,  NYT,  12/14/66,  3 ;   AP,  Wash. 
Ewe.  Star,  12/14/66,  A7) 
e  There   might  be  a  connection  between  period  of  inactivity  in   Soviet 
manned  space flight and Soviet efforts to  create  a n  effective antimissile 
system,  speculated  Crosby  S.  Noyes  in   the   Washington  Evening  Star. 
“. . . The  Russians, in  assessing the  present s ta te  of  the  world,  [might] 
have  radically  readjusted  their  priorities  in   favor  of  earthly  defenses 
over  celestial  exploration..  . .”  Noyes  suggested US. might  have  to 
choose soon “between the  astronomical costs of  continuing exploration 
of  space,  and  those  of  the   best  possible  antimissile  defense  system. 
If  the   Russians  have,  in   fact,  already  made  their  choice,  our  own 
dilemma  should  besas ier   to  resolve.  But in  any event, the  new Russian 
defense system  raises military  and  political  problems which  cannot be 
simply ignored.”  (Noyes,  Wash.  Ewe.  Star,  12/13/66,  A l l )  
December  14:  U.S.S.R.  had  successfully  completed  series  of  carrier  rocket 
tests  in  the  Pacific 16 days early, Tass reported.  Nov.  20 Tass statement 
had  said  tha t  tests  would  continue until Dec.  30.  (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 
12/14/66,  D11) 
e  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  with  Titan  111-B-Agena booster  from 
WTR.  (US. Aeron.  & Space  Act.,  1966, 159) 
NASC  Executive Secretary  Dr.  Edward  6.  Welsh  spoke at  the   dedication 
of  Boeing  Co.’s  Industrial  Research  Center  in   Huntsville,  Ala.  “I 
believe  tha t   the   next  decade  will  find  us  marrying  more  closely  the  

374 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

major  features of  aeronautics and  astronautics so   tha t  manned  space- 
craft  will  take  off  and   re tu rn   to  spaceports  with  reusable  propulsion 
systems and  reusable  spacecraft.  The  near  fu tu re  will  find  us  engaged 
i n   th e   exploration  of  th e   lunar   surface,  the   development  of  manned 
ear th   orbiting  permanent  space stations,  unmanned  and  then   possibly 
manned  travel  to  the   planets,  as  well  as  in   th e  progressive  utilization 
of  space  technology  i n   such   fields  as  communications,  navigation, 
meteorology, and  observation. 
“In   addition,  I  believe  the   next  decade  holds  great  promise for   the  
utilization  of  space systems technology in   th e  solution of  many  of  th e  
economic and  social problems of  this complex  civilization.  . . .” (Text) 
December  14: NASA  Hq.  released LUNAR  ORBITER  11  photo  of  Ocean  of  Storms 
which  confirmed moon’s  history  of  volcanic  activity. Taken  Nov.  25  
from  an   oblique  angle  at  28-mi.  altitude,  photo  showed  an   array  of 
lunar   dunes  2-10  mi.  in   diameter  and  about  1,000-1,500  f t .   high 
which  resembled volcanic  domes  of  nor thern   California  and  Oregon. 
Scientists believed  they  had  been  caused  by  upwelling  of  molten  rock 
from  moon’s  interior  “which  warped  the   overlying rock  and  in   some 
cases  spilled  ou t   on   th e   surface  as  lava.”  Dr.  Lawrence  Rowan,  U.S. 
Geological  Survey,  commented:  “It  is  the   most  spectacular  evidence 
of  volcanism tha t  we’ve  had  yet.”  (O’Toole,  Wash. Pos t ,   12/15/66,  E2; 
UPI,  N Y T ,   12/15/66,  34 ;   Tech. Wk., 12/9/66,  19) 
Skin  from  three  Soviet researchers  had  been  orbited  in   special sterilized 
bottles  onboard LAMBDA  satellite Aug.  19, 1960, and successfully grafted 
back  th ree   days  later  to  test  effects  of  space  travel,  Trud  reported. 
Experiment  had  convinced  Soviet  scientists  tha t   human   organisms 
would  no t   be  dangerously  affected  by  cosmic  rays.  (Reuters,  Wash. 
Post,  12/15/66,  E l )  
December  14-1 7:  NASA’s  BIOSATELLITE  I  (Biosatellite A)  carrying  more  than  
10-million  tiny  living  organisms was  successfully  launched  from  ETR 
by  two-stage  Thrust-Augmented  Improved  Thor-Delta  booster  on 
mission  to  study  effects  of  weightlessness  and  space  radiation  on 
growth  of  plants  and  animals.  Orbital  parameters:  197-mi.  (317-km.) 
apogee;  191-mi.  (308-km.)  perigee;  91 min.  16  sec.  period;  and  33.5” 
inclination.  After  47  orbits,  satellite  had  been  scheduled  to   reenter 
earth’s  atmosphere  over  the   Pacific,  deploy  a  parachute,  and  be  re- 
covered  aerially  for   re tu rn   to   NASA  laboratories.  Retrorocket failed  to 
fire, however, and satellite  remained in  orbit. 
First  of  three   spacecraft  in   NASA’s  Biosatellite  program,  936.5413. 
BIOSATELLITE  I  carried  13 biological experiments  to  study physiological 
effects  of  weightlessness a t   three  different  levels:  (1)  growth  and  form 
of  en t ire   plants  and  animals;  (2)  s truc ture   and  growth  of  cells  and 
tissues;  and  (3)  basic  biochemistry  of  the   cell.  Mission  also  studied 
effects  of  radiation  on   organisms  in   weightless  environment.  Bio- 
satellite program was managed  by  ARC   under OSSA  direction.  (NASA  Proj. 
Off.;  NASA  Release  66-312; AP, Wash.  Eve.  Star,  12/15/66,  A3;  AP, 
N Y T ,   12/18/66,  86; WI,  N Y T ,   12/19/66,  66) 
December  15: Vice  President Hubert H.  Humphrey presented  1966 Harmon 
International  Aviator’s  Trophy  in   Washington,  D.C., 
to  GEMINI  VI 
Astronauts Walter M.  Schirra, Jr.,  and Thomas P.  Stafford  and  GEMINI 
VII  Astronauts  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  Frank   Borman  for  achieving 
first  rendezvous  in   space  by  two  separately  launched  maneuverable 
spacecraft  Dec.  15, 1965. After  the   ceremony, the  Vice  President  told 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

375 

newsmen  h e  was  one   of  those  “manning  the   ramparts”  against  those 
who  failed  to  see  any  direct public  benefit  from  space exploration.  He 
though t   the   space  program  had  resulted  in   a  superior  educational 
system,  increased  industrial  competence,  new  products,  “and  if  it 
hasn’t  done  anything  else  it  has  taught  us  to  manage”  vast  under- 
takings.  (Clark, NYT,  12/16/66,  21) 
December  15:  President  Johnson’s waning  interest  in   space was  postponing 
NASA’s decision  on  a  post-Apollo program,  William  Hines  suggested  i n  
the  Washington Evening Star.  “NASA  . . . is more  to  be pitied  than   cen- 
sured for this  silence. The agency has been led  down  th e  primrose path 
by  . . . [President Johnson] who  suddenly los t  in teres t  in  the  now shop- 
worn  ingenue. 
“NASA  has  no plans because  . . . [he] has  permitted  i t   to  make  none; 
aspirations yes, bu t  plans no.  . . . ” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/15/66, 
A2 3) 
e  NASA  would  negotiate  $lS-million  fixed-price  incentive  con trac t   with 
Douglas  Aircraft  Co.  for  1 4   improved  2nd  stages  for  Delta  launch  
vehicle.  GSFC  would  manage  contract.  (NASA  Release  66-321) 
e  AFSC  announced  awards  to  four  aerospace companies: Lockheed Missiles 
and  Space Co.,  $2-million initial increment to  a  $14-million fixed-price 
contract for production of  Agena launch vehicles; Douglas Aircraft Co., 
$2.5-million  initial  increment  to   a  $17.5-million  fixed-price  letter 
contract  for  production  of  Thor   launch  vehicles;  and  Aerojet-General 
Corp.,  $2.9-million  initial  increment  to  a  $54.5-million  contract,  and 
TRW  Inc.,  $2.9-million  initial  increment  to   a  $5O-million  contract, 
both  for  R&D  in  an   unmanned  space technology program.  (DOD  Release 
1048-66; W S J ,  12/16/66,  4) 
December  15-16: ComSatCorp  and  AT&T  filed  separate  plans  with  FCC  to 
establish  domestic comsat system. AT&T  would  orbit three  synchronous 
satellites  starting in   1969, eventually replacing them with four satellites 
of  advanced  design  by  1976;  under  AT&T  plan,  ComSatCorp  would 
own  the   satellites,  and  common  carriers,  the   ear th   stations.  ComSat- 
Corp,  in   i t s   filing,  proposed  launching  four-satellite system beginning 
in   1969; more  powerful  comsats would  be  launched  in to   synchronous 
orbit  over  equator  and  spaced  over  Nation’s  time  zones  in   1973 and 
1978.  Both  AT&T  and   ComSatCorp  objected  to  Ford  Foundation’s 
Aug.  1 proposal  for   nonprofit  comsat  system  whose  income  would  be 
used to  support educational TV.  (ComSatCorp Release; NYT ,  12/16/66, 
85M;  12/17/66,  59;  Wash.  Pos t ,   12/17/66,  C16;  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
12/16/66,  A24) 
0  News briefing on Project Apollo was held a t  MSC.  Dr. Joseph  Shea, manager 
of  NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at MSC,  said NASA hoped to launch three  
manned  Apollo missions in   1967 involving “essentially  every  test  tha t  
needs to get done in  order to insure  tha t  the  lunar  operation is  proper.” 
He  outlined  the   flights:  (1)  AS-20&three-man,  earth-orbital mission 
of  up  to  14  days  to  check o u t  crew,  spacecraft,  and ground  equipment; 
to  12-day  flight  in   which  Uprated  Sa turn   I 
(2)  AS-205/208-10- 
boosters  would  launch  a n   Apollo  spacecraft  with  three-man crew  and 
an   unmanned  Lunar  Module  (Lm)  on  successive  days  for   rendezvous 
mission;  and  (3)  AS-503-full-duration 
lunar   mission  rehearsal  in  
ear th   orbit  i n   which  single  Sa tu rn   V  would  launch  manned  Apollo 
spacecraft  and  Lm.  Shea  warned  against  undue  optimism  about  a 
manned  lunar   landing  in   1968.  “It  is  literally  t rue   tha t   there   is  no  

376 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
planned  date  a t   the   present  time  for  the   lunar   opera t ion .   . . and  I 
don’t  see  how  there   can  be  until  we  have  had  hardware  in   orbit  to 
understand  what  vestigial  problems  still  remain.” 
Donald  Slayton,  MSC  Director  of  Flight  Crew  Operations,  said  tha t  
third,  nonflying  crew  had  been  added  to  each  Apollo  mission  for  addi- 
tional  ground  support.  He  also  revealed  tha t   training  for  astronauts 
selected  for  Apollo  lunar   missions  would  be  40  weeks-14  weeks 
longer than  Gemini training course. 
Comparing Mercury and Apollo training programs,  AS-204 Command 
Pilot  Virgil  I.  Grissom  said:  “When  we  started  training  for  Mercury, 
we  didn’t know what  to  train for. So  we  did  everything. . . . Training for 
Apollo  has  been  pretty  straight  forward.  We  know  what  we  need  to 
know  and  we  know  tha t  we  have  to  learn  about  the   spacecraft,  how  to 
operate  i t   and get  our  flight plan  and  ou r  mission  rules  squared  away. 
Back  early  in   M e r c u r y . .   . we  were  worried  about  whether  a  man 
could live and survive . . . s o  we  did  a lot  of  things like spinning around 
i n   3  axis  machines  tha t   we  don’t  feel  you  really  need  anymore. . . .” 
Grissom  confirmed  tha t   AS-204  mission  would  carry  camera  for  live 
television  coverage.  (Text;  Hines,  Wash.  Eve.  Star,  12/7/66,  A3) 
December 16: XB-70 No.  1 experimental research  aircraft, piloted by  North 
American  Aviation,  Inc.,  test  pilot  Van  Shepard  and  NASA  test  pilot 
Fitzhugh Fulton,  reached  mach  2.55 and  60,300-ft. altitude in  national 
sonic boom  program  flight.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.) 
Almost  all  orbiting  West  Ford  dipoles  (launched by  USAF  May  10,  1963) 
had  reentered  the  atmosphere during period  of  several months centering 
o n   predicted  Jan.  1 reentry  date,  Irving  I.  Shapiro  wrote  i n   Science. 
Some dipole clusters had  remained  in   orbit,  bu t   these,  with  few  excep- 
tions,  were  expected  to  re tu rn   to  earth  within  two  years.  Experiments 
performed  while  dipoles  were  in   orbit  had  verified  calculations  tha t  
predicted interference with  optical and  radio  astronomical observations 
would  be  negligible.  (Shapiro, Science,  12/16/66) 
*  New  York Times correspondent Evert Clark was  selected for AAAS-Westing- 
house  science writing award  for  reporters  on   newspapers  with  100,000 
or  more  circulation.  Clark  was  cited  for  nine  articles  about  NASA’s 
SURVEYOR  I  published  between  May  31 and July  14.  (Science,  12/16/66, 
143 1) 
e  U.S.S.R.  would  cooperate  with  “any  country  in   developing  space  com- 
munications,”  Deputy  Communications Minister  Nikolay  Talyzin  told 
Tass  i n   a  Moscow  interview.  He  claimed  tha t   four  Soviet  Molniya  I 
comsats  could  ensure  multi-channel  telephone,  telegraph,  and  photo- 
telegraph  links  between  countries  in   the   Northern  Hemisphere  such 
as US . ,   Japan,  Cuba, and Southeast Asia.  (Wash. Post,  12/17/66,  C16) 
0  DOD’S  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  (ARPA) announced  establish- 
men t  of  a n  Office of Advanced Engineering  under Dr.  Chiao Jen Wang, 
former  Booz-Allen  Applied  Research,  Inc.,  executive. 
(DOD   Release 
1053.66) 
*  AEC  had  selected Weston,  Ill.,  site near  Chicago  for proposed  ZOO-billion- 
electron-volt  (bev)  proton  accelerator.  Six  sites  recommended  by  NAS 
had  been  under  s tudy  since March.  (AEC Release  J-282) 
December  17:  Dr.  J.  Allen  Hynek,  head  of  Northwestern  Univ.’s  Dept.  of 
Astronomy  and  USAF  consultant  on Ufo’s,  writing  in   Saturday Evening 
Post,  offered  four   possible  explanations  for  the   Ufo  phenomena:  (1) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

377 

hoaxes  o r   hallucinations;  (2)  military weapons  being  tested  i n   secret; 
(3)  something from  outer  space;  (4) unknown  na tura l  phenomena.  Of 
the   15,000  cases  tha t   had  come  to  his  attention,  Hynek  considered 
several hundred  “puzzling”  and perhaps one i n  25  of puzzling incidents 
“bewildering.”  Because  of  these  arresting  cases,  h e   urged  serious 
study  of  Ufo’s  and  suggested,  as  two  initial  steps  to  help  solve  t h e  
problem,  computerization of  data  and  improved  photography  of  Ufo’s. 
(Hynek,  Sat.  Eve.  Post,  12/17/66) 
December  17: 63rd anniversary of  first powered  flights by Orville and Wilbur 
Wright  from  Kitty  Hawk,  N.C. 
December  18:  USAF  awarded  Boeing  Co.  $6-millionY 2%-yr.  contract  t o  
develop  automatic  flight  control  system  tha t   could  double  useful  life- 
time of large, flexible aircraft such  as B-52, XB-70, and C-5A by dampen- 
ing  s truc tura l   oscillations  and  reducing  stresses  from  wind  gusts  and 
maneuvering  loads,  all  of  which  caused  metal  fatigue.  (AFSC  Release 
234.66) 
0  Dr.  Jan  H.  Oort, recipient  of  Columbia  Univ.’s  1966 Vetlesen  Award  for 
his  work  i n  ear th   sciences,  told  Washington Post  tha t  Univ.  of  Leiden 
Observatory,  which  h e   directed,  was  building  world’s  largest  radio- 
telescope.  A  one-mile-long  row  of  twelve  83-ft.-dia. parabolic  disks  i n  
a  remote  area  of  the   Netherlands,  device  would  enable  Oort  and  his 
colleagues  to  extend  their  explorations  beyond  earth’s  galaxy.  1968 
was  scheduled completion  date.  (Wash .  Post,  12/18/66,  B19) 
0  U S .   and  Soviet  scientists  had  advanced  two  related  theories  to  explain 
radio  emissions  tha t   made Venus  seem  lethally  hot,  Walter  Sullivan 
reported  in   the   New  York  Times.  Soviet  scientists  V.  M.  Vakhnin  and 
A.  I.  Lebedinsky,  writing  in   Zemlya  i  Vselennaya, proposed  tha t   the  
two  halves  of  Venus’  atmosphere,  the   sun l i t   and  the   dark,  were  of 
opposite  electric  charges,  and,  where  the   two  halves  met,  lightning 
flashes could  account  for  emissions.  U S .   scientists  Dr.  Paul  Harteck, 
Dr. Robert R.  Reeves,  Jr.,  Dr.  Barbara  A .  Thompson, and D.  C.  Apple- 
ton  of  Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute,  i n   Journal  of  Geophysical 
Research,  reported  on   effects  of  electric  discharges,  such   as  lightning, 
i n   a  simulated  Venus  atmosphere  of  carbon  dioxide  and  sulphur 
dioxide.  Investigation  revealed  tha t   such  discharges  produced  intense 
radio  emissions  in   same  region  of  microwave  spectrum  as  observed 
emissions  from  Venus.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,   12/18/66,  35) 
0  FAA  announced  allocations  of  $72.5  million  i n   Federal  matching  funds  
to  help  local  communities  construct  and  improve  341  civil  airports 
under  Federal-Aid Airport  Program  for FY  1967.  (FAA  Release  66-107) 
0  25th  anniversary  of  Reaction  Motors,  Inc.  Formed  to  develop  James  H. 
Wyld’s  liquid-fueled  rocket,  corporation  became  i n   1958  Reaction 
Motors  Div.  of  Thiokol  Chemical  Corp.  (Thiokol,  Aerospace  Facts, 
11-12/66,  2) 
December  19:  U.N.  General  Assembly  unanimously  approved  space  law 
treaty  agreed  upon  by  U S .   and U.S.S.R.  Dec.  8.  Treaty would  become 
effective when ratified by five nations which mus t  include U S . ,  U.S.S.R., 
and U.K.  ( N Y T ,  12 /20 /66 ,6 )  
0  NASA  personnel  changes:  (1)  Samuel  H.  Hubbard,  Director,  Gemini 
Flight  Operations,  had  been  redesignated  Special  Assistant  to  the  
Director,  Gemini  Program  Office;  and  (2)  General  Counsel Walter  D. 
Sohier had resigned  effective Dec.  31,  to en ter  private practice.  Deputy 

378 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

General  Counsel  Pau l   G.  Dembling  would  succeed  him.  (NASA  Ann.; 
NASA  Release 66-322) 
December  19:  U.S.S.R. 
launched  COSMOS CXXXVI  for  space  research  in to  
ea r th   orbit  with  305-km.  (190-mi.)  apogee,  198-km.  (123-mi.)  perigee, 
and  64.6”  inclination.  (U .N .  Public Registry, 1/9/67) 
December 20:  XB-70 research  aircraft,  flown  by  Col.  Joseph  Cotton  (USAF) 
and  NAA  pilot  Van  H.  Shepard,  reached  mach  2.53  and  60,800-ft. 
altitude  in  flight  to  generate  sonic  booms  over  instrumented  sites  and 
test  s t ruc tu re s  a t  Edwards AFB.  (NASA  Proj.  Off.; UPI,  N Y T ,   12/22/66, 
20) 
0  NASA  announced  sponsorship of  four  institutes  in   the   summer  of  1967 to 
acquaint  about  160 nationally  selected  undergraduates  with  problems 
of  space  science  and  engineering.  The  institutes  will  be  carried  ou t  by 
th e   following universities  and  NASA  field  centers:  Columbia Univ.  and 
Goddard  Institute  for  Space  Studies  (space  physics),  USC  and  JPL 
(spacecraft  technology) , Univ.  of  Miami  and  KSC  (environmental and 
planetary  sciences) , and  UCLA  and  ARC   (space  physiology).  (NASA 
Release 66-324) 
0  MSFC  awarded  $7.2-million  contract  modification  to  Chrysler  Corp.  to 
begin  procurement  of  long-lead-time items  for  12  additional  Uprated 
Sa tu rn   I  1 s t  stages  (S-IB).  (MSFC  Release 66-295) 
Japan’s  second attempt  to orbit a satellite failed when 4th  stage of Lambda 
4 s - 2  booster  failed  to  ignite.  First  failure  was  Sept.  26.  Both  launches 
were  conducted  from  Uchinoura  Range,  Kyushu  Island.  ( Wush. Post, 
12/20/66,  A13; UPI,  Wush .  Post,  12/21/66,  A2,  A24) 
Karl  Harr,  president  of  Aerospace  Industries  Assn.,  spoke  before  the  
Aviation/Space  Writers’ Assn.:  ‘?AS we  stand  a t  the  end  of  one  record 
year  of  achievements  and a t  the  beginning of  a year  tha t  we  confidently 
predict  will  establish  new  records  on  all  fronts,  will  historians  view 
this  point  of  time  as  having  any  particular  significance from  an   aero- 
space point  of  view?  After  all  we’re  not  going  to   the  moon  next  year 
and  we  didn’t  inject  man  in to   space  for  the  first  time  last  year.  . . . 
“I  believe  historians  may  come  to  regard  about  this  point  of  time 
as being  the point when  the  aerospace business  completed its  transition 
from  a  matter  of  only  peripheral  concern  to  the   total  public  interest, 
in to   the  mainstream  of  American  life.  . . .” (Text) 
0  West  German Defense Ministry  ordered  limited  resumption  of  flights by 
F-104G  Starfighters-Lockheed-manufactured 
aircraft  which  had  been 
grounded  since  Dec.  6  after  37  pilots  had  been  killed  in  series  of  6 5  
crashes.  (AP, N Y T ,   12/21/66) 
December 21:  USAF  SV-5D lifting body  was  successfully  launched  from  WTR 
by  Atlas  booster  on  reentry  mission,  bu t   ‘qdue to  an   undetermined 
malfunction in the final phases of descent”  was  not  recovered. Released 
a t  desired  altitude,  the  900-lb. vehicle had  deployed parachute  to  slow 
its  descent rate  and  reentered  planned  recovery  area using  lifting  body 
principle.  Goals  of  mission-first  of  fou r  in  USAF’S  Precision  Recovery 
Including  Maneuvering  Entry  (Prime)  program-were 
to  study  aero- 
dynamic  characteristics  of  SV-5D  shape,  heat  shield  performance, 
guidance  and  flight  control  systems,  instrumentation,  and  recovery 
system.  (WI,  Wash .  Post,  12/22/66,  A4) 
U.S.S.R. 
launched  two  unmanned  spacecraft.  LUNA  XIII,  on  mission  to 
study  the   “moon  and  its  close environments,”  was  following trajectory 
close  to  calculated  one.  COSMOS  CXXXVII,  carrying  instruments  for 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

379 

further  investigation  of  outer  space,  was  in  orbit  with  1,672-km. 
(1,032-mi.)  apogee;  225-km.  (140-mi.)  perigee;  104-min.  period;  and 
49”  inclination.  (UPI,  Wash.  Post,  12/22/66,  A3;  Anderson,  NYT, 
12/22/66,  20) 
December  22:  NASA  named  crews  for  second  and  third  manned  Apollo 
missions,  scheduled  for  1967.  Prime  crewmen  for  AS-205/208  were 
James  A.  McDivitt,  David  R.  Scott,  and  Russell  Schweickart;  backup 
crew was  Thomas P.  Stafford, John  W.  Young,  and Eugene A.  Cernan. 
Prime  crewmen for AS-503,  first manned  flight using  Sa tu rn  V  launch 
vehicle,  were Frank  Borman, Michael Collins,  and William A.  Anders ; 
backup  crew  was  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.,  and 
C.  C.  Williams, Jr.  (NASA  Release 66-326) 
0  First  free  flight  of  NASA’s HL-10  lifting  body  vehicle  was  successfully 
conducted  a t   Edwards  AFB.  Air-launched  from  B-52  bomber  flying  a t  
45,000  ft.  and  450  mph,  vehicle  was  maneuvered  by  NASA  test  pilot 
Bruce A.  Peterson  to  200-mph landing  three minutes  later.  Purpose of 
flight  was  complete  design  and  systems  checkout  and  evaluation  of 
basic  stability  and  control.  NASA  and  AFFTC  were  studying  lifting body 
concept  inflight  to  help  establish  the   technological  base  for  design  of 
fu tu re   manned  spacecraft  capable  of  maneuvering  inflight  to  pilot- 
controlled ground  landing.  (FRC   Release 29-66) 
0  NASA  announced  sponsorship  in  1967  of  three  specialized  summer  pro- 
grams  in  systems engineering  design  for  engineering  faculty members. 
Undertaken  as  cooperative  efforts  between  NASA  research  centers  and 
adjacent  universities,  programs  would  enable  faculty  members  from 
various  engineering  disciplines  to  work  together  as  a  team  to  design  a 
complex  space  system.  Fellowships  would  be  available  for  about  70  
faculty  members.  Participating  universities  and  cooperating  NASA 
centers:  Stanford  Univ.  and  ARC ;   Auburn  Univ.,  Univ.  of  Alabama, 
and  MSFC;  and  Univ.  of  Houston,  Rice  Univ.,  and  MSC.  (NASA  Release 
66-325) 
0  U S .  R&D  funding  in  1967 would  total  about  $23.8 billion-$500  million 
more  than  in  1966-Battelle  Memorial  Institute  said  in  its  annua l  
forecast.  For  the  first  time  in  a  decade,  the  Government  would  not  be 
the   dominant  factor  in  the  growth;  80  per  cent  of  predicted  increase 
would  come  from  industry,  universities,  and  nonprofit  institutions. 
(BMI  Release  124-66) 
Static  test  of  Sa tu rn  V  2nd  stage  (S-11)  a t  MTF  was  postponed  2  min.  31 
sec.  before  ignition  when  electrical  cable  in  one  of  its  two  engines 
short-circuited.  (UPI,  NYT ,   12/23/66,  12;  12/25/66,  32;  AP,  Wash. 
Pos t ,   12/23/66,  A2) 
0  Tests  showed  tha t   as  little  as  one  or  more  inches  of  continuous  snow 
cover  could  be  reliably  identified from  satellite  photos,  ESSA’S  Office  of 
Hydrology reported.  Associate Director  of  the  Weather Bureau William 
E.  Hiatt  commented:  “An  increased  capability  of  assessing  snow 
accumulations,  especially in remote sections where observation stations 
are  limited,  could  result  in   faster  appraisal  of  river  conditions  and 
contribute  to  more  timely  release  of  river  forecasts  and  flooding 
warnings.”  (ESSA  Release 66-71) 
0  Inactivity  in  Soviet manned  space program  could be  explained by  “strict 
economy”  and preparations for  ambitious new manned missions, Radio 
Prague’s Moscow correspondent  reported.  The  new missions--“flights 
include  “a  flight  of  man  to  the  
of  much  higher  standards”-would 

380 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%6 

moon  and  t h e   creation  of  a  large  orbiting  laboratory.”  Correspondent 
also  predicted  tha t   the  U.S.S.R.  would  launch  a  “group  of  rockets7,- 
( N Y T ,  
presumably  unmanned  ones-toward  Mars  about  Jan.  4. 
12/23/66,  12) 
New  York  Times  later  editorialized:  “. . . The   possibility  is  raised 
tha t   the  Soviet strategy for a manned  lunar  landing may be  based  on  a 
direct  earth-moon  trip.  I n   tha t   case  there   would  be  no  need  for  the  
rendezvous  and  docking  maneuvers..  . . Enormously powerful  rockets 
would be required  . . . bu t  if Moscow has them they might make possible 
the   spectacular  achievement  of  a  goal  the   Kremlin  mus t   want  very 
much:  a manned lunar  landing on  the  moon by  the  fiftieth anniversary 
of  the  Bolshevik  Revolution next  Nov.  7.”  ( N Y T ,  12/26/66,  20) 
December  23:  NA SA   announced  Atlas-Centaur  booster  would  replace  Atlas- 
Agena  for  launching  Orbiting  Astronomical  Observatory  (Oao)  satel- 
lites  and  Applications  Technology  Satellites  (Ats)  D  and  E.  Launches 
were  scheduled  to  begin  i n   1968.  Centaur  stage-first 
t o   use  liquid 
capable  of  boosting  about 40  per  cent greater 
hydrogen as  a  fuel-was 
payload  than   the  Agena  into near-earth orbit  and  about three  times  the  
payload  on  lunar   trajectory.  (NASA  Release 66-328) 
0  NASA  Administrator James  E.  Webb  appointed  B.  L.  Dorman,  vice  presi- 
den t   of  Aerojet-General  Corp.,  Assistant  Administrator  for  Indus try  
Affairs,  effective Jan.  16,  1967,  and  Gen.  Jacob  E.  Smart  (USAF,  Ret.) 
Acting  Administrator  for  Administration,  effective Jan.  1,  1967.  Both 
positions  were  formerly  held  by  William  B.  Rieke,  who  resigned  to 
re tu rn   t o  Lockheed  Missiles and  Space  Co.  (NASA  Release  66-327) 
0  NASA  awarded General  Electric Co.  $22.3 million  to  continue in   its four th  
year  as general  support  contractor  for  NASA’s  Mississippi Test  Facility. 
Award  was  for  period  November  1966  to  July  1967.  (MSFC  Release 
66-298) 
0  Bell  Telephone  Laboratories  had  developed  experimental  method  of 
impressing  over  57,000  two-way  telephone  conversations  on  single 
laser  beam-a 
process  essential for  the   commercial  use  of  the   laser  in  
communications,  Wa l l   Street  Journal  reported.  Researchers  hoped  to  
eventually replace  coaxial cables, which  could carry  only  about 32,000 
telephone  conversations, with  cables of  laser  beams.  ( W S J ,  12/23/66, 
12) 
December  24:  Tass  reported  tha t   detailed  char t   of  earth’s  magnetic  field 
which  would  enable  cosmonauts  to  determine  radiation  conditions  i n  
earth’s  environs  had  been  compiled  by  scientists  using  data  from 
Cosmos  satellites.  (Reuters,  Wush. Post,  12/25/66,  A3)  
0  Subrahmanyan  Chandrasekhar, Univ.  of  Chicago  astrophysicist, was   one 
of  11 scientists  named  by  President  Johnson  to  receive  1966 National 
Medal  of  Science.  (Pres. Doc.,  1/2/67,  1832-3) 
December  24-31:  U.S.S.R.  achieved  her   second  soft-landing on  the   moon 
when  LUNA  XIII  spacecraft  landed  an  ins trumen t  package near  Ocean  of 
Storms  to  photograph  and  test  the   lunar   surface. 
Landing  sequence  began  when  spacecraft was  oriented  vertically  to 
the   moon.  At  43-mi.  (69-km.)  altitude,  radar  system  aimed  a t   lunar 
surface  and  turned  on   retrorocket,  and  shock-absorbing  system  was 
prepared. Less  than  one second  before  impact, after  spacecraft had  been 
slowed  to  18  mph,  ins trumen t   capsule  was  ejected  and  softlanded. 
Four minutes  later,  i ts  petal-like covering  opened,  its  antenna  opened, 
and  radio  transmissions  began. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

381 

18 hrs.  after  touchdown,  LUNA  XIII  began  photographing  a  panorama 
of  the   moon’s  surface.  Pictures  showed  barren,  heavily  pitted  land- 
scape littered  with  stones  ranging  upward  in  size from  one inch,  which 
Soviet scientists  concluded had  resulted  from either  volcanic eruptions 
or   impacting  meteoroids.  There  was  no  evidence  of  a  thick  layer  of 
dust. 
I n   addition  to  photographic  equipment,  spacecraft  also  carried  two 
mechanical  manipulators  to  test  firmness  and  density  of  luna r   soil: 
(1)  a  rod  which  was  driven  into  surface  with  specific force;  and  (2)  a 
meter  which  measured  soil’s  resistance  to  radiation.  Analysis  of  data 
indicated  tha t   lunar  surface  could  bear  manned  spacecraft  and  th a t  
soil  from  8- to  12-in. depth  was  similar  to  medium-density  terrestrial 
soil.  Also  onboard  were  a  dynograph  which  tested  firmness  of  luna r  
surface  by  recording  duration  and  force  of  impact  impulse,  and  a 
radiation  meter  which  revealed  tha t   moon’s  surface  reflected  about 
25  per  cen t  of  electrically-charged particles  which  struck  it. 
Tass commented  on LUNA  XIII’S  successful mission:  “There is no doubt 
now  tha t   i t   is  these  cosmic  stations  tha t   can  supply  the   information 
permitting a new  approach  to  solve such  important  problems of  science 
as  the   origin  of  the  solar  system,  the   origin and development of  life on 
other  planets,  and  the  internal  s t ruc tu re   of  celestial  bodies.’’  ( N Y T ,  
12/25/66,  1,  40 ;   12/26/66,  1 9 ;   12/31/66,  6 ;   AP,  Wash.  Eve.  Star, 
12/26/66,  A3; 12/27/66,  A4; UPI ,   Wash. Post,  12/27/66,  A l ;  12/31/66, 
1’ 7) 
December  25: Nationalist  China would build  $10-million ground communica- 
tions station by  early 1969 to participate in Intelsat’s planned worldwide 
satellite  communications  system,  Reuters  reported.  (Reuters,  N Y T ,  
12/25/66,  40) 
December 26: NASA,  Japanese  Science and Technology Agency,  and Japanese 
Meteorological Agency  agreed  to  launch  jointly  10  Japanese  MT-135 
sounding rockets  beginning  in March  1967 to  study rocket  and payload 
performance  and  gain  information  on  diurnal  cycles  of  wind  and 
temperature  in  the   stratosphere.  MT-135  could  boost  6.6-lb.  payload 
to  200,000-ft.  (322,000-km.) altitude.  (NASA  Release  66-331) 
December  27:  Clear  air  turbulence  (Cat)-unexplained 
disturbances  en -  
countered  by  pilots  flying a t  high  altitude  in  seemingly calm weather- 
should be  studied  by  NASA,  DOD ,   FAA,  and  Dept.  of  Commerce, National 
Committee  for  Clear  Air  Turbulence  recommended.  One  committee 
official estimated  tha t   Cat  had  been  “highly  suspect”  in  six  recent  air 
crashes.  (Balt.  Sun,  12/28/66) 
0  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb,  speaking  a t   Univ.  of  New  Mexico, 
urged  establishment  of  a  seminar  where  experts  could  exchange 
scientific  and  industrial  knowledge  to  bridge  “the  tremendous  gap 
between  physical  development  and  social  inventions.”  Mr.  Webb  also 
recommended  a  national  rocket  foundation  to  provide  facilities  for 
amateur  rocket  enthusiasts.  (AP, N Y T ,  12/28/66,  4) 
0  “The  American  Space  Outlook”  for  1967  was  summarized  by  Albert 
Sehlstedt,  Jr.,  in  the   Baltimore  Sun.  “.. . 1967  shouId  be  a  year  of 
genuine  accomplishments  in   space  for  men  and  machines. 
“. . . astronauts  will  begin  to  fly  around  th e   earth  in   the  kind  of 
spacecraft  tha t  will  carry  them  to  the  moon  in  1968 o r   1969. . . . 
“New  unmanned  spacecraft will  climb into orbit  for  additional views 
of  the  earth’s  weather.  Other  craft will  fly  away to  study the  science of 

382 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

the  sun ;  make fu r the r  on-the-spot examinations  of  the  moon’s  surface, 
probe  the  nature  of  the   stars  and  take  another  close look a t  Venus. 
cr.  . . the   Defense Department  will  lay  the  groundwork  for  the   1969 
launching  of  a  manned  orbiting  laboratory  to   study  possible  military 
roles  of  men  in  s p a c e . .   . the  people  who  make  airplanes  will  be 
will  go  faster  than  the   speed  of  sound.  . . .”  (Sehlstedt,  Balt.  Sun, 
planning  th e   big  jumbo  jets  and,  in  Europe,  fashioning  airliners  tha t  
12/28/66) 
December 27:  Communist China exploded i t s  fifth  nuclear device a t  Lop Nor 
test  site  in  Sinkiang  Province.  (Roberts,  Wash .  Post,  11/29/66,  A17) 
0  Astronaut  Bruce  McCandless  11,  discussing  role  of  manned  space  flight 
in   science  in   address  before  Washington,  D.C.,  Junior  Academy  of 
Sciences’ annual meeting,  concluded:  “Man  is  flexible; he  is  capable of 
responding  to  unforeseen  situations  intelligently  and  effectively.  He 
has  a  limited  and  on-the-spot redesign  capability built  in   and  contrib- 
utes  to  mission  success  through  improved  reliability.  He  is  capable  of 
evaluating and screening information and making decisions accordingly 
and  independently.  As  long  as  these  elements  are  required,  man’s 
participation  will  be  beneficial.”  (Text) 
December 29:  Aerospace industry  believed  4,000-mph hypersonic  transport 
(Hst)  could  be  ready  for  commercial  service  in  1990’s-but 
only  if 
Government  would  support  its  development,  Richard  Cooke  reported 
in   the   Wa l l  Street Journal.  ccAerospace. . . officials agree  tha t   the  rate 
a t  which  new developments in air  transportation  come along will hinge 
in   large  measure  on  Government  policy.  They  note  that  the   military 
has  sponsored  the  development of  every  large American jet  engine.  . . . 
A military  version  of  the  craft will almost certainly have to precede  the  
commercial  one-but 
right  now  there’s  no  driving  military sponsor a t  
high  level behind  these advanced materials  and engines.”  Development 
of  Hst would require  new heat-resistant materials,  a more  efficient fuel, 
and  higher-capacity  engine.  (Cooke,  W S J ,  12/29/66) 
American  Astronautical  Society  (AAS)  held  symposium  on  th e   moon  in  
Washington,  D.C.,  as  part  of  American  Association  for  the  Advance- 
ment  of  Science’s  (AAAS)  annua l  meeting. 
Dr.  Eugene  Shoemaker,  U.S.  Geological  Survey,  said  NASA’s  LUNAR 
ORBITER  I  photos  had  revealed  “mass  wasting”  on  the  moon-a 
proc- 
ess  similar  to  “downhill  creep”  which  produced  slopes  of  fragmented 
d i r t   and  rock  debris  o n   earth.  Accelerated  by  small  local  earthquakes 
caused  by  impacting  meteorites,  wasting  process  was  rapidly  covering 
all  of  moon’s  small  craters,  Shoemaker  said.  He  believed  majority  of 
lunar  craters  were  caused  by  high-velocity  explosive  impacts  of  me- 
teorites. 
Dr.  Donald H.  Menzel, Harvard Univ.,  told  the  press  tha t  man would 
make  profound  changes  on  the  moon  in  15-20  yrs.-particularly 
if 
lunar  rock  were  found  to  contain  water  of  crystallization.  ccThere is  a 
real  possibility  for  m a n .  . . to  establish  self-support  expeditions  on 
get  water  and  then  use  the   debris  f o r  building  blocks.  Lunar  gardens  . 
th e  moon.  Using  solar  o r   atomic  energy  for  melting  rocks,  man  could 
could be established and animals could be  raised  there.”  (Hines, Wash. 
Eve.  Star,  12/29/66,  A l ,  A6; Clark, NYT ,  12/30/66,  8) 
0  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  with  Thor-Agena  D  booster  from 
WTR.  (U.S.  Aeron.  & Space  Act.,  1966, 160) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

383 

December  29:  National  Aviation  Hall  of  Fame  announced  six  additions: 
Glenn L.  Martin  and William F.  Boeing,  both  aircraft designers;  Adm, 
John  H.  Towers,  commander  of  first  attempt  a t   trans-Atlantic  flight; 
B/G  William  Mitchell,  pioneer  advocate  of  aerial  bombing;  Robert 
Hutchings  Goddard,  U S .   rocket  pioneer;  and  Lincoln Beachey,  early 
designer of  dirigibles.  All  were  deceased.  (AP,  NYT,  12/29/66,  14) 
*  Robert L.  Hallett,  Head  of  Communications and  Control Section a t  NASA 
Wallops  Station,  retired  after  20   yrs.  with  NACA  and  NASA.  (Wallops 
Release  67-1) 
December  30:  NASA  and  ESRO  signed  first  agreement  under  which  foreign 
country  or  organization would  purchase  satellite  launch  services from 
U S .   on  reimbursable  basis.  ESRO  would  furnish  flight-ready  scientific 
spacecraft and NASA  w o d d  provide launch vehicle,  range and launching 
facilities,  and  other  support  including  initial  tracking  and  telemetry 
reception.  ESRO  would  reimburse  NASA  for   launch  vehicles  and  all 
identifiable  direct  costs  of  equipment  and  services  furnished  by  or  
through  NASA.  First  launch -~ s~O ’ s   Heos-A  interplanetary  physics 
scheduled for   late  1968.  (NASA  Release 66-332) 
satellite-was 
Successful full-duration  static  firing  (364 sec.)  of  the   S-11-1, first  flight 
model  of  Sa turn  V’s  2nd  stage, was  conducted a t  MTF.  This was  second 
and  last full-duration acceptance firing for  the  stage, which  would  now 
be  shipped to  KSC.  (MSF  Historian) 
NASA  announced plans  to  begin powered  flights of  M-2 and HL-10 manned 
lifting  bodies  a t   Edwards  AFB  in   early  1967.  Equipped with  8,000-1b.- 
thrus t   rocket  engine,  vehicles would  be  flown  a t  altitudes  up  to  80,000 
ft.  and  speeds  of  1,000 mph  in   series  of  8-min. test  flights  designed  to  
simulate spacecraft  reentry  conditions.  (NASA  Release  66-329) 
0  John  A.  Edwards,  NASA  Deputy  Director,  Gemini  Program,  had  been 
designated  Director  of  Operations  for  Saturn/Apollo  Applications  in  
OMSF.  (NASA  Ann.,  12/30/66) 
*  MSFC awarded Douglas Aircraft Co. a $300,000 9-month contract t o  analyze 
needs  of  an   orbital  support  facility  for   fu ture   astronomical  research 
from  space.  (MSFC  Release 66-302) 
0  NASA  awarded  one-year,  $360,094,  cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  to  Philco 
Corp.  for  engineering  support  services  a t   Wallops  Station.  (Wallops 
Release  66-60) 
Dr.  Robert M,  Page,  retired  as  chief  scientist and director  of  research  a t  
Naval  Research  Laboratory af ter   nearly  40  yrs.  service.  One  of  fore- 
most U S .  experts on radar and a pioneer in  space exploration and rocket 
astronomy,  Dr.  Page  warned  tha t   U S .   research  was  being  threatened 
by  “dangerous  trends and  con tro ls . .   . . A  complete lack  of  confidence 
is  being shown in   the  integrity and judgement of  responsible  operating 
officials  which  w i l l   certainly  lead  to   bad  management  of  Federal  pro- 
grams.,’  (Naval Research  Lab.;  Kluttz,  Vmh.  Po s t ,   1 /8 /67 ,   A2) 
December  31:  Boeing  Co.  and  General  Electric  Co.  had  been  selected  to  
continue  development and  refinement  of  designs  for   first  U.S.  super- 
sonic  transport  (Sst),  FAA  announced.  Decision  climaxed  30  mos.  of 
intense  competition between  Boeing  Co.  and  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp. 
for  airframe  design;  and  GE  and  United  Aircraft  Corp.’s  P ra t t   i?z 
Whitney  Div.  for  engine  design.  Boeing’s  350-passenger, 1,800-mph, 
variable-sweep-wing  model  would  be  powered  by  four   4.5-ton  GE 
engines  capable  of  generating  600,000 lbs.  thrus t .   Approval  for  proto- 

384 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

type  construction was  expected in  early 1967.  (FAA  Release; AP,  Wash. 
Post,  1/1/67,  A l ;  Wash.  Sun.. Star,  1/1/67,  A10) 
December 31: New  York  Times characterized  1966: “ In  all fu ture  histories of 
lunar   exploration  the   year  1966  will  hold  an   honored  and  important 
place.  I n  effect, it was  the  year of  the  moon,  th e  year in  which a dazzling 
array  of  Soviet  and  American  instrumented  capsules  photographed, 
measured  and probed  the  moon  to  an  extent  never  before  known.  As  a 
result  of  th e   successful  flights  of  the   Soviet  Luna  vehicles  and  of  th e  
American  Surveyor and Lunar Orbiters, i t  is probable tha t  more detailed 
information  about  earth’s  natural  satellite was  gained  i n   1966  than   i n  
all  th e  rest  of  human  history.  . . .”  ( N Y T ,  12/31/66,  18C)  
e  Four th   earth-orbiting  object  [see  Sept.  301  no t   identified  “with  any  
launching o r   country  of  origin”  was  reported  by  GSFC  in  Satellite  Situ- 
ation Report.  Object  apparently decayed  Dec.  30.  (GSFC  SSR ,   12/31/66) 
During  December:  NRC’S  Space Science Board  was  studying possible  harmful 
effects  to  astronomy  and   other  sciences  of  proposed  NASA  project  t o  
orbit  large  reflecting mirror  that  could  illuminate  land masses  a t  night, 
NAS  announced. NASA’s support for the  study was expressed by Associate 
Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications  Dr.  Homer  E. 
Newell  i n  a letter  to Dr.  Harry H.  Hess,  Chairman of  NAS  Space Science 
Board:  “I  am  gratified  th a t   the   committee  has  promptly  undertaken 
work  on   this  task  and am looking  forward  to  their  review  for guidance 
with  regard  to  the   possible  adverse  effects  of  such   a  project.”  (NAS- 
NRC-NAE  News  Report,  12/66,  7 )  
*  Proposal  for  fleet  of  25  stand-by  spacecraft  which  could  be  launched 
within  three   hours  of  a  distress  signal  to  rescue  astronauts  stranded 
in   orbit  was  submitted  to  NASA  by  MIT  aeronautics  students.  Each 
13,000-lb., four-man Nero  (Near  Earth  Rescue  Operation)  spacecraft, 
designed with wing-like lift similar to M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, would 
be  launched  with  Titan  111-C  booster  to  rendezvous  with  target;  i t  
would  glide  to  a  landing  a t   a  jet  airport.  Vehicles  could  also  repair 
crippled  satellites,  resupply  manned  orbiting  laboratories,  inspect 
unidentified  satellites,  and   remove  orbiting  debris.  System  could  be 
implemented  with  curren t   technology  and  be  in  operation  by  early 
1970’s a t  total  cost  of  $2 billion.  (Wilford, N Y T ,  12/6/66,  60C) 
e  NAS  published  History  of 
the  Proceedings  o f   the  National  Academy  of 
Sciences;  40-page  study  was  prepared  by  Edwin  B.  Wilson,  managing 
editor  of  Proceedings from  1915  until  his  death  in   1964.  (NAS-NRC-NAE 
News Report,  1/67,  8 )  
*  “Love  as  an  emotion will play  a  very  important  role  in   the   f u tu r e  in   th e  
populating  of  outer  space,”  Soviet  scientist  Igor  Zabelin  wrote  in  
Moskva.  “In  th e  fu tu r e  when mankind will  fulfill its mission of populat- 
ing  outer  space,  men  and women  will  be  sen t   in  spacecraft somewhere 
for many years.”  Noting th a t  “when  a  couple lives  together fo r  five  to 
seven years,  they  may  get  sick  of  each  other  and  very  often  there  is  a 
divorce,”  Zabelin warned tha t  such  coolness could cause grave problems 
in   ou ter   space.  (mi, Wash .  Post,  12/4/66,  M7) 
During  1966:  I n  1966, NASA  attempted 36 major  launches with 34 successes. 
Of  29 NASA  missions, 22 were  successes. DOD   orbited 70 payloads  in  43 
launches.  U.S.S.R.  launched  43  payloads  and  France,  one. 
Highlighting  NASA  space  achievements were  closeup  photographs  of 
th e  moon provided by  SURVEYOR  I  and LUNAR  ORBITERS  I  and 11,  th e  soft- 
landing on th e  moon by  SURVEYOR  I,  and the  five two-man Gemini space 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

385 

flights.  SURVEYOR  I  transmitted  more  than  10,000 photographs  of  the  
moon;  the   two  LUNAR  ORBITERS  returned  a  total  of  635  lunar  photo. 
graphs.  Engineering data from these  spacecraft  indicated  Apollo  Lunar 
Module  (Lm)  could  land  and   operate  safely  on  the   lunar   surface.  I n  
Project Gemini, NASA  conducted five two-man space flights, successfully 
concluding  the  project  [see  Nov.  151  and  bringing  US. manhours  in  
space to  1,993 hrs. 34  min.  (compared to 507 hrs.  16 min.  for U.S.S.R.). 
Major ground and flight tests in  Project Apollo accelerated preparatory 
to  1s t   three-man  Apollo/Saturn  spaceflight,  planned  for   early  1967. 
Three  Uprated  Sa tu rn  1’s  were  launched;  Sa tu rn  V  stages  for  the   1s t  
flight model  passed  the ir   final ground  test firings. 
Atlas-Centaur liquid-hydrogen-fueled booster  completed  its  develop- 
ment  testing,  demonstrating restart  capability in   space. 
Applications satellites  launched  were  NIMBUS  11  meteorological satel- 
lite,  three  ESSA  satellites  inaugurating ESSA’s  operational meteorological 
satellite  system,  and  INTELSAT  II-A  communications  satellite  for   Com- 
SatCorp. The first Applications Technology Satellite, ATS I,  was launched 
into  synchronous  orbit.  Scientific  achievements  included  orbiting  of 
OGO  111,  PAGEOS I ,   EXPLORERS  XXXII  and XXXIII  satellites,  and PIONEER  VII 
interplanetary spacecraft. 
More  than   300  meteorological sounding  rockets  and  100 scientific 
sounding  rockets  were  launched.  A  total  of  20  flights  of  the   X-15 
research  aircraft were  conducted;  X-15 No.  2 piloted  by  Maj.  William 
J.  Knight se t  a  new  record  speed  of  4,233 mph  (mach 6.33).  NASA-USAF 
flight  research  investigating  sonic  booms  got  underway  in   six  flights 
with XB-70 aircraft; research for the  U.S.  supersonic transport program 
continued.  M2-F2  lifting-body vehicle made  1 4  unpowered flights,  and 
HL-10 lifting  body  made  i t s   first  flight. 
Among  the  highlights  in   propulsion  technology was  static test  firing 
of  the  260-in.-dia. solid-propellant rocket motor,  producing 3.5  million 
Ibs.  of  thrus t .  Two test series of Nerva nuclear reactors were conducted. 
One,  in   110 min.  of  power  operation,  demonstrated stability  and  con- 
trollability  of  the   hot-bleed  cycle  nuclear  rocket  engine.  The  other 
involved  first  successful  full-power  operation  and  a  restart  operation, 
ending  the   program with  an   accumulation  of  more  than   105 min.  of 
reactor  operation a t  full or  near-full power. 
USAF  flight  tested  i ts  powerful Titan  111 booster  and  used  i t   to  orbit 
the  first seven Idcsp satellites of  an  eventual worldwide military  comsat 
system. 
Of  the   43 Soviet payloads,  34  were Cosmos  satellites  and  five, Luna 
spacecraft.  Notable  among  these  were  COSMOS  CX,  orbiting  two  dogs 
for prolonged period;  COSMOS CXXII,  apparently first Soviet weather satel- 
l i te ;   LUNA  IX,  achieving  first  soft-landing  on  the   moon;  and  LUNA  X ,  
achieving first orbit of  the  moon. Also  orbited were  two MOLNIYA 1 com- 
sats and  the  12-ton PROTON  111  unmanned  spacecraft used  for  cosmic-ray 
research;  Yantar  I  ion-engine payload  was  flown  in   suborbital  space- 
flight  test. 
France  orbited  her  first  instrumented  scientific satellite,  DIAPASON  I, 
the  second satellite built and launched by France.  (NASA Release 66-319; 
Major  NA SA   Launches;  NASC;  Tass;  U S .  Aeron.  & Space  Ac t . ,   1966 ,  
passim; A&A   1966, pass im)  
During  1966:  International  space  events  were  highlighted  by  the   U.N.’s 
agreement on a space treaty to govern “activities of  states in  the  explora- 

386 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

tion  and  use  of  outer  space,  including  the   moon  and  other  celestial 
bodies.”  The  draft treaty-suggested  by  President Johnson May 7-was 
negotiatedby the  LegalSubcommitteeof theU.N. CommitteeonthePeace- 
fu l  Uses  of  Outer  Space.  On  December  19 the  U.N.  General Assembly 
adopted a  resolution  endorsing the  treaty, subject  to  ratification by  five 
nations  including US . ,   U.S.S.R.,  and  U.K. 
By  th e   end  of  1966, 72  countries  had  cooperated with  the   U S .   in  
space research activities. 
Six countries joined  the   International Telecommunications Satellite 
Consortium  (Intelsat),  bringing the   total membership to  54. 
France  and  U.S.S.R.  entered  in to   agreement  on  cooperative space 
research,  including  experiments  in   astronomy  and  communications. 
(US. Aeron. & Space  Ac t . ,   1966 ,  passim;  A&A   1966 ,  passim) 

Append ix   A 

SATELLITES,  §PACE  PROBES,  AND  MANNED 
SPACE  FLIGHTS 
A  CHRONICLE   FOR  1966 

The  following  tabulation  was  compiled  from  open  sources  by  Dr.  Frank 
W.  Anderson,  Jr.,  Deputy  NASA  Historian.  Sources  included  the   United 
Nations  Public  Registry;  the   Satellite  Situation Report  issued  by  the   Space 
Operations Control Center a t  Goddard Space Flight  Center; public  informa- 
tion  releases  of  the   Department  of  Defense, NASA,  and  other  agencies;  and 
th e  Report to  the  Congress f rom  the President of  the  United States:  United States 
Aeronautics and Space Activities,  1966. Russian data are  from the  U.N.  Public 
Registry,  the  Satellite  Situation Report,  translations  from Tass News  Agency, 
statements  in   the   Soviet  press,  and  international  news  services’  reports. 
I t  might be well to  call a t ten t ion  to the  terms of reference stated or implied 
in   the   title  of  this  tabulation.  This  is  a  listing  of  payloads  tha t   have  (a) 
orbited,  (b)  as probes,  ascended to  a t  least  the  4,000-mile altitude tha t  tradi- 
tionally has distinguished probes from sounding rockets, etc.,  or  (c)  conveyed 
one  or more human beings in  space. Furthermore, only flights tha t  succeeded 
-or 
a t   least  are   no t   known  to  have  failed-in  doing one  of  the   above a re  
listed.  Date  of  launch   is  referenced  to  local  time  a t   the   launch  site.  An 
asterisk by th e  date marks those dates  tha t  a re  one day earlier  in  this tabula- 
tion  than   in   listings  which  reference to  Greenwich  time. 
This was  the  year in  which world  space activity leveled out.  After a decade 
of  virtual doubling  of  activity  each  year,  1966 showed  only  a  slight  rise  in  
total launches-116  against  102 i n  1965-and  a decline  in  th e  total number 
of  payloads orbited-143  against th e  record 160 in  1965. At first glance there  
seems to  be  an   inconsistency in  a  rise  in  number  of  launches and  a drop i n  
number  of  payloads;  the   answer  is  found  in   the   abrup t   switch  away  from 
multiple payloads  tha t  was  one  of  the  notable  changes of  direction  in   1966 
(DOD  still flew16 multipayload flights totaling 42 individual payloads, including 
the   8-satellite Titan  IIIC,  but  th e   Soviets launched  none,  compared  with 7 
flights  for  a  total  of  23  payloads  in   1965, and  NASA  none,  compared  with  3 
flights for a total of 6 payloads in  1965). Of  th e  1966 total,  the  U.S.  launched 
92   boosters  carrying  100  payloads  (compared  with  61 /94   in   1965),  th e  
U.S.S.R.  launched 43   (compared with 50 launches for a  total of  66 payloads 
in   1965), and France joined the  space club with one  satellite i n  1966. Of  the  
U.S.  total,  DOD   accounted  for 70  payloads  and  42  launches  (compared with 
67 /39  in   1965), NASA  30  (compared with 27 payloads in  22 launches in  1965; 
one  of  th e  30  was  a  Don-NASA  mission,  INTELSAT  II-A,  launched  by  NASA fo r  
ComSatCorp).  Two  areas  of  concentration were  again  significant:  th e   U.S. 
continued  to  dominate manned  space  flight,  with  5  Gemini  manned  flights 
during  the   year,  while  th e   Soviets  had  no  manned  flights  (compared  with 
511 in  1965) ; the  Soviets continued the ir  numerical edge in  lunar  exploration 
with 5 lunar   flights  to  4  for  the  U.S.  (compared with  5 /2   i n  1965). 
As we  have  cautioned  in  previous years,  the   “Remarks”  column of  these 
appendixes is  never  complete because  of  the   inescapable lag  behind  each 
flight of  th e  analysis  and  interpretation  of  scientific results. 

387 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

W N r( 

W m 

t- N rl I 

0 D rl 

I 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

389 

Y 
m 0 

2 rl 

B 
N 

0 0 r( 
3 

a 
N W 

c9 
d 
rn 

2 
a 

2 
m 

t- 
N rl 

r'l co 
W 

0 
0 N 

@? 
W m 

2 
rl 

z 
Lo 

Y 
m W 

m 
01 

m 
Y 
m 
W 

c 

3 
m 

~ 

m 
N 

dc lo rl 

a 
Lo 4 

a a 
rl 

m 

N 
d c 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

n 3 
0 dc 

'4 2 
rl 

N 
rl 0) 

0 rl f 

* 
KJ 
a 

-4 
n rl 
d 
m 
W 
rl 

0 dc 
u! 
rl Lo 

2 
a2 

W 
rl rl 

N W Lo 

Lo W 

2 
m 

0 
m 
rl 

N 
m 
rl 

K 
c1 

* 
2 

m 
%-I 
c 
Ji 

N N 
L 
J i  

0 rl 
0 rl 

Lo 
m 
00 

le 
Y A B 6 
;1 
1 
rl 

W W 
a2 
rl 

00 N 

J i  

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

391 

0 2 

0 W 
N 

W m rl 

c- 
W rl 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

m 2 

rl m 

rl Lo n 

t- m rl 

V J  
m 

W * rl 

2 
0 

m 
0 N 

:: 
Lo 

m m 
'0 

:: 
Lo 

L- 
c.j W 

'4 
Lo 0 rl 

b 0 W 

N 
W (0 

N 

W W 
m 
rl 

N 
2 
W W 

2 
W m 
rl 

$
N 

W W 
m 
rl 

g 
rl N 

 

3
N 

W W 
m 
r( 

2
N 

W W 
m 
rl 

8 
N 

W (0 
m 
rl 

10 N 
0 0 
c 
c 
i  i 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

393 

2 
0 rl 
P 
m 

0 
m 
4 
5 
nr 

.- 
I. 
9 
!i 
sl 
E 
$
N 

W W 
m 
rl 

(Y 4 
.- 
E 
Y 

3
N 

2 
W W 

 

c 
0 
2 
m 

0 2 

N m N 

t- 
9 
W 
t- 

W rl 
rl 

t- 
W r( 

rl m 
0 

0 m 

e: 
Fi 

m 
0 N 

1
N 

W W 
m 
M 

2
N 
&
m 
W 
rl 

%
$
m 
rl 

 
 

0 m 
rl 01 
i 
i 
i  i 

t- 
t- 
W 
i  i  i 
4 
4 
4 

394 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

0 In co 

co 
m a 

In 0 W 

0 
? 
W 
rl ,-I 

8 

0) co N 

0 W 
4 
N m 

W W 

3 
rl 

1 
l-4 

m 
rl El 

c- 
W 
s a 

0 vi 

O 
l4 0) 

Lo a 
a N 

Lo N k 
4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

395 

1 
m 

0 
m 
%-I 

Y 
m m 

m 
E: 

c 
m 

m m 
n 

2 
m 

n m 

2 
m 

N N 
n 

m 
0 %-I 

m 
t- W 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

4 a 
0 rl 

'9 m 
W 

I 
m 

(d rl rl 

m 
B
rl 

a
0 )  N 
R 

* 
a
N 
R 

 B 
W 
N 

B 
0 m 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

397 

5 

W W 
rl 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

t 
0 0 
W 

d: 
W 00 

% 

L- 
A 

0 
% 

2 
m 

le 
L- 

10 L- 

0 
rl 
CO 

" 
W 
3 
m " m 

3 
3 

0 " 10 
o? 

x 
0 d 
m 

W 
9 
0 
m 

d 1 

" 
Lo rl 

W 0 " 

m 

W 

m 

m 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

399 

n .- 
m 

El 
rl 

2 
ha 
W (0 2 

s 
00 

m 
00 00 2 
t 2 
N 

W rl 1 
h 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

x 
9 
0 

9 m 

0 
3 

0 
N N 

0 m 
2 
W 

0 m 

-I 
2 

-I N 
N 

s 
0 

N W -I 

m 
0 
'p 
N 

u) -# 
'9 
N 

m 9 
N 

0 In W 

I 
t- 
o) 

W m 
W 

W W n 

3 
u) 

W (D 
m 
-I 

1 
In 

W (0 
m 
-I 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

n! 
2 2  

m 
W rl 

m 
m N 

2 
m 

m m 

2 
0 rl 

2 
W 

N 
W rl 

E- N W 

2 
m 

m 3 

m m 
rl 

0 Y 
m W 
x 
m 

m 
rl rl 

rl m m 

d 
10 

W W 
m 
rl 

W 
3' 
h 

rl 2 
m 

t- 
4 rl 

z 
rl 

la 

3 
h 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

0 
P- 
2 N 

2 
m 

b 
m 
r( 

2 
0 
0 

2 
m 
m 

Lo W H 

m 
r( 
4 
h 

L4 8 

0 
m 

2 
m 

Lo 
Lo H 

C I )  N N 

0 * r( 

0 N i

m N 
h
i

m 
 
g
N 

 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

403 

0 L- 2 
m 

n 
N N 

rl m 
k 
N 

P 
4 

2 
0 
10 

2 
m 

L- 
N rl 

0 r! 
8 
rl 

N. m m 

m 
rl H 

2 
N 

2 
H 

m 

m 

0 rl 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

W 1 
0 
m 

0 % 
m 9 

(0 d 
3 
4 

P- d 
3 
4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

405 

0 
9 
10 
m 

a 
co 
0 
m 

N 2 
0 
m 

0 4 2 
m 

0 co 
9 
N 

ID W 

ld f 
4 
$2 
4 
$
L- 
W W 4 

LI 

v1 
S
P- 

W W 
m 
rl 

 

C
L- 

(0 W 
2 

2 
z 
W 
m 
rl 

1 
3 m 
rl 

$06 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

I 

a 
N 
dl 

m 
Lo Lo 

m 
r( 

a 
0 N 

z 
N 

0 0 
a 

3 

$ 

I 
B ra 
,oun 
2. 
E 

I 

4 

0 B 
B 2 
Y 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

407 

o
N

m
N

 
 

40% 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Ip  I P  
a 3  

La m 

3 
m 
l-4 

m 
0 3 

a 
0 3 

m m cv 
N 

m m 
N, 
N 

0 4 - 
E .- 
Y 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

409 

Lo W 
-+ m 
m 

W N rl 

Q? 2 

1 
f- 

rl 
0 co 

0 Lo 
W 
2 

rl 
$: 

Lo 0 
N 

N W 

W 4 .- 
E 
* 
2 
3
m 

W 
W 01 

s 4 
E 
2 
CI 
1
m 

W W 
m 
rl 

 

o 
4 
B 
$ * 
K 
$
m 
(0 W 
m 
rl 

o B 4 2 
2 
+) 
9
I 
W W 
m 
rl 

 

3 m 
m W W 
rl 

24 
0" 
J 

0 
N 
8 
J 

0 N 
8 
J 

N N 
8 
J 

410 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

3 N 
0 

'4 
8 
W 

0 '4 
2 

c 
m 

0 16 
m 
d 
0 )  

m m 

0 0 rl 

2 
0 
0 
s 
m 

2 
rl 

2 
0 rl 

m 2 

m 
N 
J 
B 

N 
5 
2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

411 

3 m 

f 

2 
0 Lo 
m 
2 
m 

m 2 

d 2 

m 
m 
N eo 

2 
m 

F 
rl 

0 eo m 
I 

2 
m 

0 00 
F 4  

N 2 

A 
0 rl 

W W 
m 
4 

1 
f W 
01 rl 

0 
m I 
dl 

2 
m 

F 
rl 

c- 
m 
rl 

B 
2 
m 
W 
rl 

412 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

W 4 N 

N El 

2 
CQ 
s 
rl 

0 m 

W W rl 

I 
z 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

413 

0 0 rl 

P- 
W r( 

0 )  n rl 

m 
N rl 

N 
rl rl 

1 
OD 

W W 

3
0 rl 

W W 
m 
rl 

1
0 rl 

W W 
m 
rl 

3
0 rl 

W W 

rl 

1
0 rl 

W W 
m 
Fl 

1
0 
rl 

W W 
m 
rl 

 

rl rl 

N rl 

m 
rl 

W 
N 

co 

10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

0 d 
2 
m 

O u2 
N. 
N 

5 
m 
m 

c- P- d 

2 
0 
m 
co 

2 
0 
63 

d E 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

415 

t- 
m a 

m 

s 
rl 

416 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

(4 
W 

a 
N rl 

 

1
rl rl 

m 
W 
rl 

1
,-I 
dl 
rl 
m 
W 
rl 

m * 
0 

2 
0 
N 
c. 

0 * rl 

N a 3 

0 0 
a 

m 
a N 

- .- 
W 4 
E
* 
$
rl 74  

W 0 
m 
rl 

 

 

B 
Ld 
?
ga 
E 
1
74  
rl 

(0 W 
m 
rl 

6 
d 

d 
4 

4 
B 

6 
B 

App end ix   B 
CHRONOLOGY  OF   MAJOR  NASA  LAUNCHINGS 
JANUARY   1 ,   1966,  THROUGH   DECEMBER  31 ,   1966 

This chronology of major  NASA  launchings  in  1966 is  intended  to  provide 
a n   accurate  and  ready  historical  reference,  one  compiling  and  verifying 
information previously scattered over several sources.  I t  includes  launchings 
of  all rocket  vehicles  larger  than  sounding  rockets  launched  either by NASA 
or  under  “NASA  direction”  (e.g.,  NASA  provided  vehicle,  launch  facilities, 
and  performed  the   launch  for  the   ComSatCorp INTELSAT  11-A). 
An  attempt has been made to  classify the  performance  of  both  the  launch 
vehicle  and  the  payload  and  to  summarize  total  results  in  terms  of  primary 
mission.  Three  categories  have  been  used  for  vehicle  performance  and 
(S) , partially  successful  (P) , and  unsuccessful 
mission  results-successful 
(U) .   A  fourth  category,  unknown  (Unk),  has  been  provided  for  payloads 
where vehicle malfunctions did  not give the  payload a chance to  exercise its 
main  experiments.  These divisions  are  necessarily  arbitrary,  since many  of 
the  results  cannot  be  neatly  categorized.  Also  they  ignore  the   fact  tha t   a 
great deal was  learned  from shots tha t  may have been classified as unsuccess- 
ful. 
Date of  launch is referenced  to local time a t  the  launch  site.  Sources used 
were all open ones, verified where  in  doubt  from  the   project  offices in  NASA 
Hq.  and  from  the NASA  Centers.  For  further  information  on  each  item,  see 
Appendix A  of  this  volume and  the  entries  in  the main  chronology as refer- 
enced  in  the  index.  Prepared January  1967 by  Dr.  Frank W.  Anderson, Jr., 
Deputy  NASA  Historian  (EH) . 

417 

418 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

m

m

m

m

m

m

  m 

  m 

  rn 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

F4 

PI 

m 

F

4 m  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

419 

m 

m 

m 

:, 

m 

m 

5 

B
3 

"

m 

 

a:, 

5 

m 

m 

m D  

m

m

m

m

m

m

  m 

  m 

  PI 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

420 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

m 

& 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

9 

9 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

2 
n 

0 .-I 
7" 
4 

2 
9 
4 

10 
< 
N 
M 

N .-I 
a 
t 

0 N 
Q 
m 

N 
* 
- 

W N 
* 
:: 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

421 

* d 

m 

P4 

v1 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

Append ix   C 
CHRONOLOGY  OF   MANNED  SPACE  FLIGHT,  1966 

This  chronology contains  basic  information  on  all manned  space  flights 
in   1966.  The   information  was  compiled  by  William D.  Putnam,  Assistant 
NASA  Historian  for Manned  Space Flight. 
The  year  1966 was  marked by  th e  last five missions of  th e  United States' 
Gemini  program  and  continuation  of  th e   hiatus  in   Soviet  manned  space 
flights  (since  VOSKHOD  11  in   March  1965).  Major  historic  milestones  in  
manned space flight were rendezvous and docking with another space vehicle 
on  GEMINI  VIII,  th e   use  of  a  propulsion  un i t   placed  separately  in to   orbit  to  
propel the  assembled combined spacecraft  to   new  altitude and speed records 
on  GEMINI  x  and  XI,  and  extensive  as tronau t   extravehicular  activity  on 
GEMINI  x,  XI,  X I .   Numerous  technological  and  scientific  experiments  con- 
ducted in  Gemini made  significant  contributions to  man's  knowledge of  th e  
space environment,  the  ear th   as  observed from  the  vantage point  of  space, 
and astronomical phenomena. 
By  the  end of  1966, the  United States had conducted a to ta l  of  16 manned 
space flights,  14 of  these orbital, with a total of  19 different  crewmen.  Seven 
of  the   19  American astronauts  had  participated  in   two  flights.  The  Soviet 
Union  had  conducted  a  total  of  eight  manned  flights,  all  orbital,  with  11 
different  crewmen.  No  Soviet  cosmonaut  had  yet  experienced  two  space 
flights. Cumulative totals  for manned  spacecraft hours   i n  flight had  reached 
1,023 hours  45 minutes for  the  United  States and 432 hours  33 minutes for 
the   Soviet Union.  Cumulative total  manhours  in   space  were  1,993  hours  
36  minutes,  and  507  hours  9  minutes,  respectively. 
Data on United States flights  are   the   latest  available to   date within NASA. 
Although  details  are   subject  to   modification  as  information  is  refined,  the  
major  aspects  of  United  States manned  f l i h t s   have  been  subject  to  direct 
observation by  th e   interested citizens  of  the  world. 
Weight  given  is  the   weight  of  the   total  spacecraft  as  placed  in   orbit. 
Maximum altitude is chosen from many possible performance measurements 
because it represents  a world-record category as recognized by the  FBdQation 
AQonautique  Internationale. 

423 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

m W 2 

W 

a 
1 
h 

W 
,-I 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

425 

t- rl 
d B 
4 t- 

n 
Lo W 

* * 

t- * 
d a" 
0 t- 
W t- * 

m * 

m 
4 

A 
;? 

426 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

m 
10 

t 8 

Append ix   D 

ABBREVIATIONS  OF   REFERENCES 

Listed  here  are  abbreviations  for  sources  cited  in  the   text.  This  list  does 
not  include  all  sources  provided  in   the   chronology,  for  some  of  the   refer- 
ences  cited  are  not  abbreviated.  Only  those  references  which  appear  in 
abbreviated  form  are  listed  below.  Abbreviations  used  in   the  chronology 
entries  themselves are  cross-referenced  in  the  Index. 

A & A  
A & A  66  

ABC 
AEC   Release 
AF  Info.  Pol. Ltr. 
AF ISD  
A F O S R  Release 
AFSC  Release 
AGU  Transactions 
A IAA   Release 
A IP  News 
A M R  
AP 
ARC   Release 
A t lan ta   JIConst. 
Atomic Energy  Programs,  1966 
A v .  Da i l y  
A v .   W k .  
Balt.  Sun 

CSM 
CTNS 
DAC  Release 
DJNS 
DMSSD Apogee 
DOD  Release 
EH 
EPH 
ESSA  Release 
FAA Release 
FonF 
FRC  Release 

AIAA’S  magazine,  Astronautics  & Aeronautics 
NASA’s Astronautics  and  Aeronautics  1966  [this  pub- 
lication] 
American  Broadcasting Com  any 
Atomic  Energy  Commission %ews  Release 
Air  Force  Information Policy  Letter  for  Commanders 
A ir  Force  and  Space  Digest  magazine 
Air  Force  Office of  Scientific Research  News  Release 
Air  Force  Systems  Command  News  Release 
American  Geophysical Union  Transactions 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics 
News Release 
American  Institute of  Physics  News 
App l ied  Mechanics  Reviews 
Associated  Press 
NASA  Ames  Research  Center News  Release 
A t lan ta   Journal  and  Constitution news  aper 
AEC,  Major  Activities  in   the  Atomic  L e r g y  Programs, 
1966 
Aviation  Da i ly   newsletter 
Av ia t ion   Week and  Space  Technology magazine 
Baltimore  Sun newspaper 
Columbia Broadcasting  System 
Chicago  Tribune news  aper 
Communications  Sateylite  Corporation News  Release 
Congressional  Record 
Christian  Science  Monitor newspaper 
Chicago Tribune News  Service 
Douglas Aircraft Co.  News Release 
Dow Jones News Service 
Douglas Missile  and  Space Systems Div.  Apogee 
Dept.  of  Defense News Release 
NASA  Historical Staff  (former1  EPH) 
NASA  Historical Staff  (now E& 
Environmental Science  Services Administration News 
Release 
Federal  Aviation  Agency  News Release 
Facts  on File 
NASA  Flight Research  Center News  Release 

427 

42% 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

FRC X-Press 
GE Forum 
Goddard News 
GSFC  Release 
GSFC  SSR  
Houston Chron. 
ATNS 
Int.  Science and  Tech. 
J  /Armed Forces 
JPL  Release 
KB 
KSC  Release 
Langley  Researcher 
L a R c   Release 
L.A.  Times 
Lewis News 
LRC  Release 
M&R  
Marshall  Star 
Minn.  Trib. 
MSC  Release 
MSC  Roundup 
M I S  Daily 
MSFC  Release 
N A A  Skywriter 
NAA  Release 
Nat’l.  Aeron.  Assn.  Release 
NANA 
NASA  Ann. 
N A S A  Auth.  Hearings 
NASA  Hq.  Bull. 
NASA  Hq.  PB  
NASA  LAR  V 150 
NASA  Off.  Int.  Aff. 
NASA  Proj.  Off. 
NASA  Release 
NASA  R  t.  SRL 
NASA  SF-4006 
NASA  X-15 Proj.  Off. 
NASC  Release 
NAS-NRC  Release 
NAS-NRC-NAE  News Report 

NBC  
NMI- 
NN 
NSC   Release 
N.Y.  Her.  Trib. 
N.Y.  J  IAmer. 
N Y T  
NYTNS 
OAR  Release 
Orl. Sent. 
P&W  Release 
Phil.  Eve.  Bull. 
Phil. Inq. 
Pres.  Doc. 
Sat.  Eve.  Post 
SBD  
Sci. Amer. 
Sci.  Serv. 

NASA  Flight  Research  Center’s  FRC  X-Press 
General Electric Forum magazine 
NASA  Goddard Space Flight Center’s  Goddard News 
NASA  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  News Release 
NASA  Goddard  Space Flight  Center’s  Satellite Situation 
Report 
Houston  Chronicle newspaper 
New  York Herald Tribune News  Service 
International Science and  Technology magazine 
Journal of  the Armed  Forces 
Jet Propulsion  Laboratory News  Release 
NASA  Inventions  and  Contributions Board 
John F.  Kennedy  Space Center,  NASA,  News  Release 
NASA  Langley  Research  Center’s  Langley  Researcher 
NASA  Langley Research  Center  News  Release 
Los Angeles Times newspaper 
NASA  Lewis  Research Center’s  Lewis News 
NASA  Lewis  Research Center News  Release 
Missiles  and  Rockets magazine 
NASA  George  C.  Marshall  Space Flight  Center’s  Mar- 
shall Star 
Minnea  olis  Tribune newspaper 
NASA  d n n e d  Spacecraft  Center  News  Release 
NASA  Manned Spacecraft Center’s Space News Roundup 
Missile Space Dail  newsletter 
NASA  George C.  d r s h a l l  S  ace Flight  Center  Release 
North American  Aviation, Pnc.,  Los  Angeles Skywriter 
North American  Aviation,  Inc.,  News  Release 
National Aeronautic  Association  News  Release 
North American  Newspaper  Alliance 
NASA  Announcement 
N A S A  Authorization  FY 19671 Hearings 
NASA  Headquarters’  Weekly Bulletin 
NASA  Headquarters  Personnel  Bulletin 
NASA  Legislative Activities  Report,  Vol.  V,  No.  50  
NASA  Office of  International Affairs 
NASA  Project  Office 
NASA  (Hq.)  News  Release 
NASA  Report  of  Sounding Rocket  Launching 
NASA  S  ecial  Publication  #4006 
NASA  (6s.)  X-15 Project Office 
National Aeronautics and Space Council News Release 
National  Academy  of  Sciences-National  Research 
Council News  Release 
National  Academ  of  Sciences-National  Research 
Council-Nationd  Academy  of   Engineering  News 
Report 
National Broadcasting  Company 
NASA  Management  Instruction- 
NASA  Notice 
National S  ace Club News  Release 
New  York herald  Tribune newspaper 
New  York Journal-American newspaper 
New  York  Times newspa  er 
New  York  Times News  gervice 
Office  of  Aerospace  Research  (USAF)  News  Release 
Orlando Sentinel newspa  e r  
P ra t t  & Whitney  Div.  J ew s  Release 
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin  newspaper 
Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper 
National Archives and Records Service’s  Weekly Com- 
pilation  of  Presidential  Documents 
Saturda  Evenin  Post  magazine 
space  d s i n e s s  A i l y  newsletter 
Scientijc  American magazine 
Science Service 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

429 

S.F.  Chron. 
S R  
Tech.  Wk. 
Testimony 
Text 
Transcript 

UP1 U.S.  Aeron. & Space Act.,  1966 
U.S.  Naval  Inst.  Proc. 
U.S.  News 
USS--T 
Wallops Release 
Wash. Daily  News 
Wash. Eve.  S tar lWash .   Sun.  Star 
Wash .  Post 
W B E  Sci. Serv. 
WSJ  

San  Francisco Chronicle newspaper 
Saturda  Review  magazine 
Technol?l 
Week  magazine  (formerly  Missiles  and 
R o c k e g  
Congressional testimony, prepared statements 
Prepared  report  or  speech text 
Official transcript  of news  conference or  congressional 
hearing 
United Press  International 
President’s  Re  ort  to   Congress,  United  States  Aero- 
nautics and  8pace  Activities,  1966 
U.S. Naval  Institute Proceedings magazine 
U S .  News and  World Report magazine 
Translation  by  NAS A Scientific and  Technical  Infor- 
mation  Div.,  Translators 
NASA Wallops Station  News  Release 
Washington Daily  News  newspaper 
Washington  Evening /Sunday  Star  newspaper 
Washin  ton Post  newspaper 
World  gook Encyclopedia Science Service 
Wa l l  Street  Journal  newspaper 

INDEX 

A-1  (French satellite),  56,  94 
Aa.  See Apollo Applications program. 
MAS.  See American  Association  for  t h e  
Advancement of  Science. 
AAS.  See American Astronautical Society. 
ABC.  See American Broadcasting Co. 
Abelson, Dr.  Philip H.,  1 
Abhau,  R /A&.  Conrad  (USN), 332 
Able,  Charles R.,  167 
Abraham, Karl,  18 
Abres.  See  Advanced  Ballistic  Reentry 
Systems. 
Academia  Sinica, 339 
Accelerator, 376 
Accident  (see also Aircraft,  accident), 25, 
55,  129, 183, 281 
Acv.  See Air-cushion vehicle. 
Adam  (Air Deflection and Modulation)  I1 
(V/Stol  aircraft),  309 
Adams,  Rep.  Brock,  90 
Adams,  Dr. Mac C.,  1, 62,  92,  111 
Adams,  Maj.  Michael  J .   (USAF), 313,  357 
Adams,  Dr. Thomas W.,  55 
Adcsp.  See  Advanced  Defense  Commu- 
nications Satellite Project. 
Adelaide,  Australia,  162 
Adler, Fred,  250 
Administrative  History of  NA SA ,   1958-63, 
231 
Advanced  Ballistic Reentry Systems 
(Abres), 54  
Advanced  Defense Communications 
Satellite Project  (Adcsp),  200 
Advanced  Manned Strategic Aircraft 
(Amsa), 72,  341 
Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(ARPA), 15,  322,  376 
Advanced Vidicon  Camera System  (Avcs), 
178, 283,  310 
AEC.  See Atomic Energy Commission. 
AEDC.  See Arnold  Engineering Develop- 
ment Center. 
Aegean Sea, 8 7  
Aerial  Coast  Patrol  (US. Coast  Guard), 
278 
Aerobee (sounding rocket) 
150 
booster  test,  297 
micrometeoroid  sampling,  326,  328, 
350 
radar  test,  171 
solar  astronomy,  156,  187,  337,  347 
ultraviolet  astronomy,  145, 190, 241, 
242> 295,352 
upper atmosphere data, 60,  138, 277, 
360 
x-ray astronomy, 89, 219,  319 

150-A 
ultraviolet  astronomy,  18,  182 
upper atmosphere data,  79,  84,  276 
350-269 
Aeroiot,  50, 339 
Aerojet-General Corp.,  62,  103,  110, 235, 
259,  283,  295,  353,  375 
Aeronautical and Space Research Ins t i tu te  
(IIAE), 342 
Aeronautical  Research Associates of 
Princeton,  Inc.,  151 
Aeronautics, 66, 208, 223,  280,  323 
Aeronomy  satellite  (see  also  EXPLORER 
X ~ X I I ) ,  192 ,289  
Aerospace,  200 
Aerospace Corp.,  354 
Aerospace Education  Foundation,  36 
Aerospace Industries Assn.,  97,  122,  160, 
230,  295,  367,  378 
Aerospace industry,  97,  230,  295,  350, 
372 ,378 ,382  
Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, 
203 
Aerospace medicine.  See  Space biology. 
Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Third, 26 
Aerospace Systems  Conference, 238 
AFA.  See Air  Force Assn. 
See Air Force Cambridge Research 
AFCRL.. 
Laboratories. 
AFFTC.  See Air  Force Flight Test Center, 
Edwards AFB,  Calif. 
See American  Federation  of 
AFL-CIO. 
Labor-Congress  of  Industrial  Organi- 
zations. 
See Air  Force  S  stems Command. 
Agaltsov,  Air  Marshal $: A.,  270 
AFSC. 
Agena  (booster)  (see also Atlas-Agena, 
Thor-Agena), 54,  67,  92  
High-reliabilit  213 
Agena Tar  et Vebcle.  See Gemini Agena 
Target gehicle. 
Agency  for  International Development 
-(AID),  34 
AGM - 6 9A   (Short  Range Attack Missile), 
334 _. 
Agreement, 179, 208 
FAA-AID,  34 
international,  125,  155,  198, 220,  236, 
285,  330 
NAs-Czechoslovak  Academy of  Sciences, 
231 
NASA 
-Argentina, 253 
-Brazil,  14, 161, 310,  320 
-ComSatCorp, 235 
-Department of  Commerce,  103 
-DOD,7,29,43,110,150,198,305,334 

43 1 

432 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

-ESRO,  383 
-France,  195 
-Naval  Oceanographic Office,  19 
-Spain,  15,  137-138 
-USAF, 128-129 
-USN,  8 
-U.S.S.R.,  90,  156 
-Vocational  Rehabilitation  Admin- 
istration.  222.  328 

370,  386 
Agriculture,  Dept.  of,  3,  117 
AGU.  See American Geophysical Union. 
Ahmedabad,  India,  235 
See American  Institute of Aeronau- 
AIAA. 
tics  and Astronautics. 
AIAA-USN  Marine Systems Conference, 271 
A ID .   See Agency for International 
Development. 
Aimp.  See Anchored  Interplanetary 
Monitoring Platform. 
Air  cargo,  197 
Air-cushion vehicle  (Acv),  I f 8  
Air et  Cosmos, 22, 82 
Air  Force Academy,  139 
Air  Force Assn.  (AFA)  , 36,  58,60,  113, 294 
Air  Force  Avionics Laboratory,  330,  342 
Air Force  Cambridge Research Laboratories 
(AFCRL),  79,  84,  124, 146, 161, 337,  350 
Air  Force  Flight Test  Center  (AFFTC), 
Edwards AFB,  Calif., 3,  180, 264 
Air  Force  Man  of  the Year,  60 
Air  Force Systems Command  (AFSC),  6,  57, 
66,  77,  87,  111, 129,  172, 188, 285, 
295 ,316  
Aeronautical  Systems  Div.,  114 
arresting gear,  aircraft,  180 
associateships, 367 
award,  168, 268, 294, 315, 353 
contract,  72,  88, 159, 177, 220,225,284, 
335,348,368,  375 
Electronic Systems Div.,  283 
experiment,  342 
Flight  Dynamics Laboratory,  87 
personnel,  146,  148 
Space Systems Div.,  255,  268 
Systems Engineering Group,  284 
Air-Launched Air-Recoverable Rocket 
(Alarr),  118-119 
Air  Line Pilots Assn.,  64 
L’Air Liquide, 370 
Air Museum Act, 49 
Air  pollution,  142, 194 
Air Products and Chemicals, Inc.,  114, 257 
Air  Proving Ground Center  (Eglin AFB, 
Fla.),  131 
Air  Research  and  Development  Command, 
316 
Air  traffic control.  1 8  
Air  Transport Association of America 
(ATA),  165, 197, 250,  265 
Air  University Review,  253 

Aircraft  (see  also  individual  aircraft,  such 
as  B-52,  X-15,  etc.),  139-150,  267, 
282.329 
- - - ,  ~- 
accident,  3 ,28 ,58 ,64 ,76 ,159 ,211 ,214 ,  
250,  263,  367,  378 
liability,  43,  165 
prevention,  159, 262,  265,  284 
anniversarv.  259.  377 
bomber,  6i,’ 72,153,270,  341 
cargo,  164,333,  358 
carrier,  228 
fighter,  94,  111, 116,  119,  168, 195, 256, 
262.  288.323.  367.  378 
foreign,  43;  50, ‘58,  118,  196,  226,  235, 
270,333 
general-aviation, 250, 295 
helicopter,  60,  132,  187,  194, 290,  291, 
326.340.344 
hypersonic; 66,  382 
interceptor,  27 
personal,  37,  134 
reconnaissance,  27,  28,  251,  253 
record,  62,  132, 134, 187, 250, 251,  253, 
291,  302,  333,  351,  385 
research,  5,  16,  47,  62,  114,  129,  158, 
211, 223,  225, 338, 378,  385 
statistics, 172, 210 
tracking,  128 
training,  76, 85  
trans  ort  (see also Aircraft,  V/Stol, 
JeTtol;  Supersonic transport) 
air-bus,  323, 330 
jet,  58,  137,  143,  145,  149,  153, 235, 
250,  285,  330, 334,  358 
military,  57,  281 
variable-sweep-wing, 61,  116,  168, 215, 
38.1 
V / s t l ,   72,  106, 131, 185, 194, 253, 309, 
330 ,364  
Vtol.  94, 284,  340, 365 
Airlessness‘, 61  
Airlines,  180, 223,272,334, 339 
anniversary,  159 
forecast,  11, 172, 197 
statistics,  165, 209,  250 
strike,  236, 254, 257, 272 
Airlock, 272 
Airports,  91,  155, 217,  243,  330,  354,  364, 
377 
AiResearch  Manufacturing Div.,  156 
Alabama, 341 
Alabama, Univ.  of, 365, 379 
Alarr.  See  Air-Launched  Air-Recoverable 
Rocket. 
310, 
Alaska,  161,  216,  221,  226,  260,  265, 
356,367 
Albert,  Col.  John  G.  (USAF),  354 
Albuquer  ue,  N.  Mex.,  221 
Aldrin, LqC Edwin E.,  Jr.  (USAF),  110, 
* 
327, 340,  344,  349,  353 
Alexander, George, 261 
Alfven Propulsion  Engine  (Ape),  152 
All-weather landing system  (Awls), 66 
Allen, Alice S.,  154 
Allen,  H.  Julian,  145 
Allen,  Richard J.,  354 

219, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

433 

Allentown,  Pa.,  325 
"Alleviation  of Jet Aircraft Noise Near Air- 
~ r t s ' '  (report),  107 
ied  Research  Associates,  Inc.,  214,  275 
Allmanna  Svenska  Elektriska,  A.B.,  239 
ALOUETTE 11  (Canadian  satellite), 63,  357 
Alph a v4" irginis  (star),  40 
Alpha L  ae  (star), 241 
Alsep. 
See  Apollo  Lunar  Surface  Experi- 
ment  Package. 
AMA.  See American  Medical Association. 
America Illustrated, 304 
American  Academy  of  Political  and  Social 
Science,  141 
American Association for the  Advancement 
of  Science  (AAAS), 22,  382 
American  Association  of  School Adminis- 
trators,  52 
American  Astronautical  Society  (AAS),  61, 
121,  134,  160,  189,221,225,314,382 
American  Broadcasting Co.  (ABC),  46,  256, 
287,  355 
American  Chemical  Society,  322 
American  Federation of  Government 
Employees  (AFGE),  33,  258 
American  Federation  of  Labor-Congress  of 
Industrial Organizations,  271 
American Geophysical Union  (AGU),  38,  79, 
144,  215 
American  Institute of  Aeronautics and 
Astronautics  (AIAA),  74,  159,  307 
award,  323 
fellows,  235,  289 
meeting, 26-27,89-90,119-120,134,162, 
235,  271,  314,  338,  357-359 
American  Institute of  Physics,  4 6 4 7  
Center  for  History  and  Philosophy  of 
Physics,  229 
American  Legion,  137 
American  Medical Assn.  (AMA ) ,   8 
American  Meteorological Society,  325 
American  Optical Co.,  209 
American  Ordnance Assn.,  168,  341 
American  Petroleum  Institute, 350 
American  Philosophical Society,  147 
American Physical Society, 31-32,  150-152 
American  Science and Engineering,  lnc., 
89,.219,  229,  319 
American  Society  for  Engineering  Educa- 
tion,  365 
American  Society  for  Microbiology,  166 
American  Society for Public Administra- 
tion  (ASPA),  21-22,  140 
American  Society of  Civil Engineers,  315 
American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers 
(ASME),  166 
American Society of Tool & Manufacturing 
Engineers,  108 
American  Telephone & Telegraph  Co. 
(AT&T),  114,  126,131,  152,256,278,375 
Ames, Milton  B., Jr.,  99 
Ames Research  Center  (ARC),  258,  378 
award, 20,  145,  352 
H  erveIocit  Free  Flight  Facility,  246 
r%e,  79,2&,  301 
groject Luster,  326 
research,  74,152-153,271,347,361,374 

Amsa.  See Advanced Manned  Strategic 
Aircraft. 
AMTRAN.  See Automatic Mechanical 
Translator. 
Amu.  See Astronaut Maneuvering  Unit. 
An-2 (U.S.S.R.  airliner),  256 
An-10  (U.S.S.R.  airliner),  256 
An-22  (U.S.S.R.  airliner),  50 
An-154  (U.S.S.R.  double-decked  airliner), 
50 
Anaheim,  Calif.,  189 
Anchored  Interplanetary  Monitoring  Plat- 
form  (AimD). 231 
Anders, Edw&d,  144 
Anders, William  A.,  110,  379 
Anderson,  Sen. Clinton P.,  157,  208,  373 
Anderson,  Roy  E.,  321 
Anderson,  Wendell,  82 
Andoeya,  Norway,  111,  124,322 
Andover,  Me.,  122,  278,  314,331 
Andrews AFB,  Md.,  131 
Andrews,  Rep.  Mark,  104 
ANL.  See Argonne National Laboratory. 
Ann Arbor,  Mich.,  110,  113,  116 
Anna  (geodetic satellite), 162 
Anniversary,  15,  193,  278,  304 
flight 
manned,  107,  135,259 
unmanned,  103,  240 
Government,  123,  217,  224,  302,310 
industry,  159,  241,  347 
institution,  217,  329 
LRC,  23,312 
satellite,  28,  35,  106,  227,  312,  322 
Anosov, Aleksey,  291 
Antaeus  (U.S.S.R.  cargo  aircraft),  333 
Antarctica,  157,  170,  348 
Antenna, 88,  157,  197,  372 
Antimissile missile,  72,  170,  343,  355 
Antioch,  Calif., 237 
Antiparticles,  225 
Antonov,  Oleg K.,  50 
AP.  See Associated Press. 
Ape.  See Alfven Propulsion  Engine. 
Apollo  (program), 238,246 
astronaut,  57,  110,  144,  241,  243,  269, 
306,375,379 
ex  eriment,  15,  29,  255,  322 
iydrogen tank  conversion,  167,  272 
facilities,  122,  176,  311,  331 
funds  for, 24,  288,  301 
launch  (see also Apollo spacecraft) 
AS-201,  67 
AS-202,274 
AS-203;  233 
lunar exploration,  5,  11,  25,  314 
landing  site,  96,  296,  313 
management,  268,289,291 
plans for, 5,64,72,75,93,127,167,229, 
332,350,375 
' 
progress,  95,  167,  179,  193,  362 
test,  127,  167,  375,  384-385 
tracking,  30,  81,  128 
training,  40,  144,  360,  376 
Apollo  (spacecraft),  25,  193,  332,  351 
Command Module  (Cm),  21,  25,  40,  67, 
93,156,272,274;  298;  313 

434 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

heat shield, 67,  112, 274 
launch 
AS-201,  51,  67,  93 
AS-202,274 
launch vehicle. See Saturn. 
Lunar Module  (Lm), 25 ,40 ,% ,   272,375, 
385 
Service Module  (Sm), 25,  132,272, 274, 
328 
test,  328,  360,  385 
Launch  Escape System  (Les),  19,  21, 
42 
recovery, 35 
Apollo Applications (Aa)  program 
contract,  195, 315 
funds for, 23,  138, 149, 171, 278 
management, 235,239 
plans for,  13, 52,  59,  261 
proposed merger, 111, 137,307 
Apollo  Lunar  Surface Experiment Package 
(Alse  ),  6, 29,83,  104, 221 
Apollo k a n g e   Instrumentation  Aircraft 
(A /Ria), 7 
Apollo  Telescope Mount  (Atm),  239,  289, 
303,  325,  356,  360 
Appleton,  D.  C.,  377 
Applications Technology Satellite (Ats)  (see 
also ATS  I), 77,  84,  295,353,361,  372, 
380,385 
launch, 367 
Ap  lied Ph   sics Laboratory (APL)  (Johns 
iopk in s  bniversity),  162 
Apt.  See Automatic Picture Transmission. 
Aquanaut, 316,367 
ARC.  See Ames  Research Center. 
Arcas  (sounding rocket)  (see also Boosted- 
Arcas), 15, 65, 87,  117, 173, 342 
Arches of Science Award,  312 
Archangel, U.S.S.R.,  227, 372 
Arm,  Ida.,  276 
ARCS  (Achievement Rewards for  College 
Scientists) Foundation, 366 
Arctic Circle, 299 
Arencillo, Spain, 322, 325 
Arendt,  Dr.  Paul R.,  254 
Arenstorf, Richard F.,  315 
Argentina,  14, 60,  154, 253,  297,  342,  346 
Argentine  Space Commission  (CNIE),  154, 
253,342 
Argo  D 4  (sounding rocket). See Javelin. 
Argonne  National  Laboratory  (ANL.),  142, 
240 
A /Rim.  See Apollo /Range  Instrumenta- 
tion Aircraft. 
ARINC  Research Corp.,  165 
Arizona,  12 ,339  
Arizona, Univ. of, 44,96,116,187,224,  325 
Arlington National Cemetery,  85 
Armed  Forces Communications and 
Electronics Assn.,  212 
Armed Forces Management,  335 
Armed  Forces Management Assn.,  172 
Armstrong, Neil A.,  110,137,208,214,297, 
3 16 
117 
m (  

101,104,105,106, 

107, 112,  117,  131 
training, 90,  131 
Army Aviation Materiel Laboratories 
(AWABS),  156 
Army Corps of En  ‘neers, 11, 114,154,332 
Army  Electronic roommand  Labs.,  254 
Arnold Air  Society, 129 
Arnold Engineering Development Center 
(AEDC),  8,  53,  54,  67,  86,  121,  126, 
132,  189, 221 
Rocket Propulsion Research Laboratory, 
111 
Arnold,  Gen.  Henry H.  (“Ha 
),  168 
Arnold, Henr  H.,  Gold  Medi:  168 
Arons,  DanieKM.,  282 
Arp,  Dr. Halton C.,  93 
ARPA.  See Advanced  Research  Projects 
Agency. 
Asahi Shimbun, 109 
Ascension  Island, 69 
Asia,  54,  61,  95,  152 
Asia-Pacific Seminar, 25 
Asia,  Southeast, 376 
See American Society of  Mechani- 
ASME. 
cal Engineers. 
Aso,  Japan, 299 
Asp  (booster), 236 
See American Society for  Public 
ASPA. 
Administration. 
Assembly of the  Western European Union, 
210 
Associated  Electrical  Industries,  Ltd.,  136 
Associated Press  (AP),  55,  149,  161, 264, 
322,  327,  332,  365,  367,  373 
Associated Universities, 257 
Asteroid, 69,  317 
Astronaut  (see also Extravehicular 
activity),  25,  98,  109,  189, 203,  213, 
217 ,246 ,248 ,313 ,323 ,381 ,382  
Apollo mission, 106, 110, 351,  360, 376, 
379 
contract, life story,  161 
death, 72,76,  85 
flights 
GEMINI IV, 9,  105,208, 232 
GEMINI  v.  9.  105.  304 
GEMiNI  vi-A  (Gemini VI), 8 ,30 ,5 4 ,  86, 
226,259,374 
GEMINI  VU,  12,  54,  86,  87,  170,  203, 
208,226,259,374 
GEMINI VIII,  17, 53,86,96,99,100,104, 
105,145,162,226 
GEMINI  IX-A  (Gemini IX), 85,105,110, 
192,  178,  180,  206-207,  208,  209, 
213,  218,  236 
GEMINI  x,  27,226, 240,243-244,  247, 
248,  249,255 
GEMINI XI,  110,290,293,294,297,301, 
304 
GEMINI  XII,  218,327,340,  344,347 
former, 54,  60,  105,  169, 191, 242,  314, 
328 
good-will tour,  54,60,69,  72,  169,297 
honors,  9,  12,  16,  22,  30,  69,  87,  191, 
208,209,225,232,236,255,259,304, 
374 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

435 

performance,  7,  69,  243 
physiolog 
166, 243,  273,  285,  308 
press congrenee,  92,218,257,301,353, 
375 
record,  251 
rescue, 78,  111, 145, 164, 192, 250,  269, 
297,  336.  384 
scientist-astronaut,  302 
selection,  7,  127,  134 
training,  14, 76,  122, 130, 198, 240, 
375-376 
vision,  7,  57,  78,  236,  294,  342 
women  as,  7,  107, 324 
Astronaut Maneuvering Unit  (Amu), 206, 
304 
Astronautics & Aeronautics, 37,73,  159,200. 
229,253,281,  308,361, 362,363 
Astronautics  Engineer Award,  103 
Astronomical  clock,  169 
Astronomisches  Rechen  Institut,  (Heidel- 
berg,  W.  Germany),  220 
Astronomy  (see  also  Radioastronomy; 
Star),  39,  40,  63,  65,  95,  121,  125, 
339, 384 
gamma-ray,  151, 263 
optical, 95,  219 
solar, 11, 79,87,  137, 156, 174,187, 274, 
278,  337,  341,  346,  347 
s tar  catalog,  107 
ultraviolet,  18,  79,  138,  145,  182,  190, 
241,  242,  295,  352 
x-ray, 79 ,89 ,96 ,219 ,  229, 319,328,347, 
373 
Astrophysical Journal, 141, 229 
See Air  Transport Association  of 
ATA. 
America. 
AT&T.  See American  Telephone  & Tele- 
graph Co. 
Atacama Desert, Chile,  202 
Atda.  See Augmented  Target  Docking 
AdaDter. 
Athen;  (missile),  342, 367 
Athens,  Greece, 206 
Atlantic City, N.  I.,  52,  136, 233 
Atlantic Ocean, 235, 247, 269, 290,  308 
Atlantic Research Co 
117 
A t l a s   (booster), 92, 9 z ' i 2 1 ,   180, 182, 193, 
202,  213,  243,  290,  378 
D, 320 
Atlas  (missile),  54 
D,  108 
F,  261 
Atlas-Agena (booster), 92,  380 
Gatv 9,  180-181 
launch,  180 
Agena B  (OGO  111), 209 
Agena D 
ATS  I,  367 
Ers satellites, 212, 272 
Lunar Orbiters, 257,  263,  340 
OVl-IV, v,  121 
Secor sateliites, 212, 272, 312 
unidentified,  20,  54,  106,  121,  132, 
143, 178,208,238,268,293,319, 
337,  367 
high-reliability  Agena, 213 

Atlas-Centaur  (booster)  (see also  Centaur), 
58 ,238 ,380 ,385  
AC-7,  296 
AC-8,  120,  131,  164 
AC-9,  329 
AC-10,  164, 196 
Atm. 
See A  0110  Telescope  Mount. 
Atmos  here  t e e  also  Ionos  here) 
artilcial,  12, 13, 285, 3 3 9  
meteorological  experiments,  3,  221,  260, 
265.  276.  342.  360.  364 
grenade, 23,39,51,161,164,216,226, 
260,  307, 310 
upper,  study  of,  59,  79,  237,  267,  276, 
3.77 
Atomicbomb,  232,  246 
Atomic  clock,  353 
Atomic  Energy Commission  (AEC)  (see also 
NASA-AEC  Space Nuclear  Propulsion 
Office,  Snap,  Nerva,  Rover,  and Vela 
programs),  19, 41,  128, 147, 165 
accelerator,  10, 376 
annual re  or t   35 
Argonne ka t iona l  Laboratory,  142, 240 
award.  259 
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,  10, 
225, 257 
budget,  24,  171 
coniiract,  112 
cooperation, 42,  82, 240,  336,  360 
National Reactor Testing Station, 13, 276 
nuclear  reactor,  13,  56-57 
nuclear  rocket  engine,  42,  52,  82,  103, 
115, 14.5,  211,  336, 385 
nuclear  test, 49,  342,  366 
Oak Ridge National  Institute,  243 
radioisoto  e generator, 83,  112, 227 
space nucrear  ower,  27,  56,  273 
Atomic Industria!  Forum,  336 
Ats.  See Applications  Technology 
Satellite. 
ATS  I  (Ats-B)  (Applications  Technology 
Satellite),  367,  369,  372, 385 
Auburn,  Mass.,  103, 263,  350 
Auburn Univ.,  365,  379 
Augmented  Target Docking Adapter  (Atda), 
8, 181, 202 ,206  
AURORA  7  (spacecraft), 107 
Aurora borealis,  95,  137, 299,  352 
Austin,  Tex.,  287 
Australia, 288, 315 
good-will tour,  54,  95 
INTELSAT  11-A transmissions, 360,  365 
international  cooperation,  123,  191, 
267,  329 
tracking stations,  64,  162, 234 
Automatic Mechanical Translator 
(AMTRAN),  81 
Automatic Picture Transmission  (Apt),  70, 
178, 284,  368 
Avco Corp.,  230,264,327,  359 
* 
AVCS.  See Advanced  Vidicon  Camera 
System. 
Aven.  Alex P..  173 
AviaGon /Spa&Writers'  Assn.,  166, 
191-192,  223,  275,  378 

436 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Av ia twn   Week and Space Technology 
aviation,  143, 197, 308 
defense, 49,72,  213,243 
Government,  19 ,128 ,317  
international,  220,285, 334,  356 
space, 2 ,11 ,96 ,149 ,150 ,   171,232-233, 
250,  261,  273,  295 
Av ia ts iya   i  Kosmonavtika, 55 
AVLABS.  See Army Aviation Materiel 
Laboratories. 
Awards 
civic,  331 
Government,  43,  50,  57,  77,  117,  218, 
223,  259,  304,  314,  380 
institutions,  22,  140, 324, 377 
societv 
aerAnautics,  20,  166,  188,  208,  235, 
298,  301,  308,  323,  374 
astronautics,  103, 225,  235, 321 
engineering,  145, 213,  230, 296 
medical.  215 
military,  168, 294 
science, 376, 380 
Awls.  See All-weather landing system. 
Ax-4  (balloon),  319 
Aykovlev,  Col. Gen. Alexander  (U.S.S.R.), 
118 

B 
B-52  (Stratofortress),  168, 377 
M2-F2 flights,  114,  237,  244,  264,  274, 
284,293, 297,298,306,312, 319, 330, 
348 
Bacchus,  Utah,  226 
Backus, George E.,  52 
Bahrein  Island, 219 
Baikonur,  U.S.S.R.,  121,  223,  324,  372 
Bailey,  F.  John,  149 
Baja  California, 297 
Bak-11  (barrier  arresting  component 
device),  180 
Baldwin,  Robert  H.  B.,  13 
Ball,  Robert  S.,  Memorial Award,  166 
Balloon, 185,251 
accident,  161 
award. 225 
high-h&de, 
152,  153,  242,  263,  275 
record,  40, 237,  319 
weather,  3, 89,  141, 168,  195, 287, 333 
Baltimore, Md.,  134, 167, 325 
Baltimore Sun,  5, 210, 381 
Bangkok, Thailand, 72 
Barabashov, Nikolay, 47 
Barber,  Richard  J.,  165 
Barbon,  Dr.  Roberto,  287 
Barium,  299,  301 
Barnes, Tracy,  289 
Barron,  Paul A.,  139,396 
Barstow, Calif.,  211,  263 
Bartholemew,  C.  S.,  134 
Bascom, Willard N.,  154 
Bassett, Capt. Charles A.,  I1  (USAF),  14, 72, 
76,  85,  110 
Bastin, J.  A.,  316 
Battelle Memorial Institute,  379 

Baum, Dr. Werner A.,  293 
Bazykin, Prof.  Victor,  12 
BBC.  See British  Broadcasting Corp. 
Beachey, Lincoln, 383 
Beale AFB,  Calif.,  9 
Beaudry,  Col. Emil G .  (USAF),  78 
Becker, H.  S.,  284 
Becklin, Eric E.,  277 
Beecher, William, 200 
Belai.  U.  E..  318 
Belew, Leland F . ,  235, 315 
Belgium,  125, 191 ,210 ,220  
Belka  (dog), 154 
Bell AerosDace  CorD.,  78,  106. 225 
. 
Bell AeroGstems Ck.;  168 
Bell, Rep. Alphonzo,  128 
Bell  Telephone  Laboratories,  31,  51,  329, 
m n  
Bei&  William  S.,  232 
Belossov,  Dr. Vladimir V.,  251 
Belton, M.  J .   S.,  9 
Belyayev,  Col.  Pave1 (U.S.S.R.),  92,  107 
Bendix Corp.,  104, 210, 244, 261, 288 
Bendix Field Engineering  Co.,  315 
Bennett,  Dr.  Ivan  L.,  Jr.,  111, 328 
Bennett, Robert A.,  251 
Benton,  Dr.  George S.,  111 
Bergeron, Prof.  Tor,  210 
Berkeley,  Calif.,  221,  283 
Berkner,  Dr. Lloyd V.,  146, 251,  315 
Berlin, Germany,  324 
Berman,  Col.  Robert  A .   (USAF)  294, 
Blue Book, Project,  326 
Berry, Dr. Charles A.,  8,134,166,208,225, 
294,  318,  323 
Berry, William  R.,  237 
Beverly Hills,  Calif.,  299 
Bhabha,  Dr. Homi J.,  46,85 
Bhagavantam,  Dr.  S.,  106 
Binder,  Alan  B.,  187 
Bioastronautics.  See Space biolog  . 
Biology and the Exploration of Mars  Jeport), 
199 
Biosatellite  (program), 84,  187 
BIOSATELLITE  I  (Biosatellite  A),  374 
Bioscience.  See Space biology. 
Birmin  ham, Ala.,  312 
!ee  British  Interplanetary  Society 
BIS. 
Bisplinghoff, Dr.  Raymond L.,  26,  74,  128, 
159, 223,  280,  307,  362 
B'urstedt,  H.  B.,  318 
Bl ack  and Decker Tool Co.,  78 
Blackman, A .  W.,  27 
Blagonravov,  Dr.  Anatoli  A.,  28,  46,  173, 
175.  287 
Blanchard,  Gen. William  H.  (USAF),  199 
Blessley, L /C  R.  C. W .  (USAF),  116 
Bleymaier, B /G  Joseph  S.  (USAF),  113 
.
.
 
Blobm, Harold L.,  192 
Blossom Point, Md.,  307 
Blue Book,  Project,  112,118,130, 325,326 
Blue  Streak  (British  rocket),  190 
BMWF.  See German  Ministry  of  Scientific 
Research. 
BNS.  See  Broadcasters Nonprofit  Satellite 
Service. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

437 

BOAC.  See British Overseas Airways Corp. 
BOB.  See Budget, Bureau of. 
Bochum  Observatory  (W.  Germany),  45, 
104, 109, 126 
Boeing Co.,  134 
anniversary,  241 
booster,  223 
contract,  3,  85,  115,  194, 244,  249,  332 
‘et engine inlet,  199 
kunar Orbiter,  49 
supersonic transport,  85,  215,  225,  264, 
286,  296,  299,  307,  323,  334,  341, 
383 
Vertol Div.,  17  
Boeing 707  (jet aircraft),  143, 145 
Boeing 720  (jet aircraft),  143 
Boeing 727  (jet aircraft), 64  
Boeing 747  (jet aircraft),  137, 143, 250 
Boeing, William F.,  383 
Bogard, Dr. Howard M.,  88 
Boggs,  Rep. Hale,  224 
Bogotl, Colombia, 316 
Bolivia, 297 
Bollerud, Col.  Jsck  (USAF),  54 
Bolling AFB  (D. C.),  123 
Bomarc  (missile), 275 
Bomber  aircraft, 61,  72,  153, 168 
Bonn, W.  Germany, 303 
Bonney,  Walter  T.,  36 
Bono,  Phil,  318 
Boone, Adm.  William F.,  1, 198 
Boosted  Arcas  (sounding  rocket),  15,  87, 
178, 185,  187, 249,  253,  277, 
Boosted Dart  (sounding rocket), 14,15,253 
Booz-Allen Applied Research,  Inc.,  376 
Borman,  L / C  Frank  (USAF ) ,   87,  144, 203 
306,  379 
award, 208,  226,  259,  374 
good-will tour,  54, 61,  66, 69, 72, 95 
interview,  12, 16,  170 
Boron  fiber, 77 
Boston  Globe,  21 
Boston, Mass.,  235,  330,  332 
Boulder, Colo.,  133 
Boushey,  Homer A.,  259 
Bow,  Re  . Frank  T.,  84 
Bowers, fack A.,  354 
Boy  Scouts  of  America,  169 
Boyd, Alan  S.,  362 
Boynton, Melbourne W.,  Award,  225 
Bozajian,  John,  250 
Bradner,  Hugh,  52 
Bradt, Hale,  229 
Branch, M /G  Irving  H.  (USAF),  3 
Brand,  Vance D.,  127 
Bratchell,  G.  E.,  354 
Brazil, 14 ,22 ,154 ,  161,252,260,265,297, 
310,320,  347,  373 
Brazilian  Space  Commission  (CNAE),  14, 
161,252,310,  320,  347,  373 
Brenner,  Edward J.,  319 
Bretign  Tracking Center  (France),  56 
B r e v a r l  (County)  Building  and  Construc- 
tion  Trades  Council,  240 
Brewer, Frank  G.,  Trophy,  210 
Brewer,  Jack D.,  330 

Brewer, L /C  Martin H.  (USAF),  294 
Brewster, Sen. Daniel B.,  20 
Brewster Flat,  Wash.,  179 
Brezhnev,  Leonid  I., 94,  356 
Brighton, U .  K.,  189 
Bristol  Siddeley Engines,  Ltd.,  235 
British  Aircraft  Corp.,  356 
British  Assn.  for  th e   Advancement  of 
Science, 285 
British Broadcasting Corp.  (BBC),  287 
British  Interplanetary  Society  (BIS),  45 
British Meteorological Office,  199 
British  National  Space  Research  Commit- 
tee,  114, 118 
British  Overseas  Airways  Corp.  (BOAC), 
143, 145 
British  Research  Council,  329 
Brizendine,  John  C.,  330 
Broadcasters  Nonprofit  Satellite  Service 
(BNS),  256 
Bromberg, Jack  L.,  317 
Brookhaven National  Laboratory,  10, 116, 
225,  257 
Brooks AFB,  Tex.,  203 
Brooks,  Col. Allison  (WAF ) ,   164 
Brooks, Melvin,  115 
Brown, Ed,  111, 183 
Brown, Gov.  Edmund,  275 
Brown  Engineering Co.,  130 
Brown, Rep. George E.,  246 
Brown,  Dr.  Harold,  113,  122,  130,  138, 
150,  199, 219,  232, 264,  335,  366 
Brownell,  Charles, 78  
Brush  Instruments  Co.,  216 
Buchwald, Dr.  Julius,  88 
Buckley,  Edmond C.,  1, 83,  157 
Budget,  Bureau  of  (BOB ) ,   112,  128, 258, 
278,  364 
Buenos Aires, Argentina,  60  
Buffalo, N .   Y..  330 
Bulgaria,  214 .  
Bull,  Lt.  John S.  (USN ) ,   127 
Bundy, McGeorge,  270,  370 
Bunker, George M.,  354 
Burcham, Dr.  Donald P.,  198 
Bureau  of  Ships  (USN),  1 3  
Burke, Walter F.,  354 
Burma.  60 
Burroughs,  Richard  Hansford,  Test  Pilot 
Award,  20 
Bush, Edgar G.,  208 
Bush,  Dr. Vannevar,  155 
Butler,  Herbert  I.,  43 
Butler,  Stuart Thomas, 251 
Bykovsk  Valery F.,  55 
Byram,  I? T.,  80  
Byrd,  Sen. Harry F.,  Jr., 12 

C 
C-5A  (cargo transport),  35,  58,  37? 
C-124 (cargo aircraft),  7 
C-133 (Cargomaster), 333 
C-141 Starlifter  (cargo iet), 66  
CAAGS.  See  Civil  -A&ation  Assistance 
Groups. 

$38 

ASTRONAUTICS AND 

California  Ins t i tu te   of  Technology  (Cal 
Tech), 2 ,29 ,90 ,96 ,124 ,128 ,152 ,230 ,  

Los Angeles (UCLA) ,  32,128,142,320,837 
San Diego,  7,  27 
Callaghan, Richard L.,  2 
Cal.  Tech.  See  California  Ins t i tu te   of 
Technology. 
Calvin, Melvin,  90 
Cambridge Astro  hysical Observatory. See 
Observator  . 
Smithsonian  eambridge  Astrophysical 
Cambridge 
la ta log   of  Radio  Objects, 
Third,  253 
Cambridge, Mass.,  37, 342 
Cambridge Research Laboratories. See Air 
Force Cambridge Research Laboratories. 
Cambridge Univ.,  57 
Camera 
(see  also  Advanced  Vidicon 
Camera  System;  Automatic  Picture 
Transmission  System;  SURVEYOR  I; 
LUNAR  ORBITERS  I and 11) 
COSMOS  CXXII,  308 
GEMINI VIII, 107 
K-24 ballistic,  114, 118 
reconnaissance, 289 
lunar, 11 ,12 ,252  
miniature,  234 
Cameron, Roy E.,  202 
Camm.  S ir  Svdnev.  94 
-, 
- 
Camp Roberts,  Calif.,  361 
-,> 
~ 
Canada, 43,  63,  94,  252,  353,  357 
Canadian  Aeronautics  and  Soace  Insti- 
tu te ,   94 
Canadian  Defence  Research  Board  Tele- 
communications  Establishment,  313 
Canadian National Research Council, 252, 
348 
Canadian  Overseas  Telecommunication 
Corp.,  126 
Canberra, Australia, 64  
Cannon, Dr .   Robert H.,  Jr.,  298,  362 
Canopus  (star),  203,  262,  340 
Cape  Canaveral  National  Seashore,  15 
Ca  e Kenned  , Fla.  (see also Eastern  Test 
i a n g e  and kennedy  Space Center), 244, 
303 

Catholic Univ.,  365 
Causse, Jean-Pierre,  188 
Cavanagh, Mayor Jerome  P.,  366 
CBS.  See Columbia Broadcasting  System. 
Cedar Crest College,  325 
Celestial mechanics,  83 
Centaur (booster) (see also Atlas-Centaur), 
298 
Centaure  (French  sounding  rocket),  87, 
124, 253,  299,  327,  352 
Center for  Nuclear  Studies, 370 
Centre National #Etudes  Spatiales (CNES), 
188 ,195 ,323  
Centre  National  #Etudes  des  T61Bcom- 
munications, 20 
Centre  National  de  la  Recherche  Scienti- 
fique,  264 
CEBN.  See  European  Center  for  Nuclear 
Research. 
Cernan, LCdr.  Eugene A.  (USN), 379 
award, 251  
GEMINI  IX-A (Gemini  IX),  110, 180, 
206, 
209, 213,  219,236, 
training,  14,  178, 198 
Cesium en  ine,  336 
Cessna 2Of   (li  h t  aircraft),  134 
Cetus  (constelfation), 287 
Chaffee, Dr.  R.  R.,  136 
Chaffee,  LCdr.  Roger  B.  (USN), 
110, 
00" 
3 3 1  
Chamberlin, James A.,  354 
Chamical Rocket  Range,  Argentina,  154, 
253 
Cham  ine, Robert,  253 
ChanJasekhar ,   Subrahmanyan, 380 
Chaparral  (missile), 267 
Chapman,  Dr.  J.  H.,  353 
Charyk,  Dr.  Joseph  V.,  131,  172,  221  
Chavanac, Mayor Albert,  191  
Chemistry,  1 
Cheng,  Dr.  Chu-yuan, 30 
Cheng, Richard,  250 
Chevalier, Roger,  188 
Chew,  Peter,  13 
Cheyenne Mountain,  Colo.,  32 
Chicago American, 294 

144, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

439 

Chile, 94,  162,202, 297 
Chimpanzee,  336 
China,  381 
China,  Communist, 325 
engineers,  30 
missile,  331,  355 
nuclear  test,  172, 331,  382 
scientist exchange, 77 
scientists,  30 
Christchurch, New  Zealand,  89,  168 
Christian Science Monitor, 28,  122 
Chrysler Corp.,  5,  22,  122, 178, 250,  255, 
263,267,353,378 
Chubb, T.  A.,  80 
Churchill  Research  Range,  Canada,  252 
laiinrh 
__ - -_ -  
Aerobee,  60,  150 
Nike-Apache,  50,  55,  95,  237,  245, 
260 ,274 ,284 ,292  
Nike-Cajun,  23,  39,51,  161,164,216, 
221.226.  260.  265 
Nike-Tomahawk;  137, 283, 293 
Churchman’s  Club,  Baltimore,  167 
6‘ ivi .r Aeronautics  Board  (CAB ) ,   159,  180, 
Cincinnati,  Univ.  of,  252 
“Cit  of  San Francisco”  (balloon),  237 
227 
Civil Aviation  Assistance Groups  (CAAGS), 
34 
Claggett,  C.  Thomas,  Jr.,  314 
Claremont, Calif.,  232 
Clark,  Evert,  57,  95,  294,  333,  348,  368, 
376 
Clark, Dr .   John F.,  44,  166, 264,315 
Clark,  Sen.  Joseph,  190 
Clark Univ.,  208,  314 
881 
Clear air  turbulence  (Cat),  23,  3 
Clear Lake  (Tex.)  Chamber of  Commerce, 
325 
Clearinghouse  for  Federal  Scientific  and 
Technical Information,  235 
Cleaver, Arthur V.,  189 
Clemence,  Dr.  Gerald M.,  252 
Clock, atomic,  353 
Cloud, 267 
noctilucent, 252,  260,  266 
photographs,  7,  310,365,  369 
Cloud,  James D.,  250 
Cm.  See Command module. 
CNAE  (Comissao  Nacional  de   Atividades 
Espaciais) . See  Brazilian  Space  Com- 
mission. 
CNES.  See  Centre  National  #Etudes 
Spatiales. 
CNIE  (Comisi6n  Nacional  de  Investiga- 
ci6nes .Espaciales).  See Argentine  Space 
Commission. 
Cobb,  Dr.  James C.,  116 
Cobb,  Roland W.,  151 
Cocoa Beach,  Fla.,  89  
COESA.  See Committee on Extension to  the 
Standard  Atmosphere. 
Coggan,  B.  F.,  34 
Colbert,  Ralph,  250 
Coleman  Bros.  Co 
332 
Coleman,  Paul J.,%:  151 

Col  ate Univ.,  117 
Colfege of  William and Mary,  365 
College Park,  Md.,  273 
Collier, Robert J.,  Trophy,  324 
Collins, Maj.  Michael  (USAF),  27,  240,  246, 
248 ,249 ,255 ,306 ,379  
Collins,  Wayne,  367 
Collision,  263-264,  284,  317-318,  320 
Colloquium of Law  of  Outer Space, 317 
Colombia,  297,  316 
Colorado, 341 
Colorado  S  rings,  Colo.,  139, 215 
Colorado,  8n iv .   of,  315 
Colorado  Women’s  College,  107, 138 
Columbia,  Mo., 350 
Columbia Broadcasting System  (CBS ) ,   256, 
287,327 
Columbia  Univ.,  10,  57,  150,  163,  258, 
279,  286,  302,  3%,  343,  377,  378 
Nevis  Laboratory,  225 
Columbus,  Christopher,  298 
Columbus Da  , 298 
Columbus, O l io ,   134 
Colwell, Arch T.,  Merit  Award,  213 
Comet,  235,  260,277,  287 
Comisi6n  Nacional  de   Investigaci6n  del 
Espacio  (CONIE)  (Spain),  15  
Comisi6n  Nacional  de   Investigacibnes 
Espaciales  (CNIE).  See Argentine  Space 
Commission. 
Comissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais 
(CNAE).  See Brazilian Space Commission. 
Command  module  (Cm),  21,  25,  40,  67, 
93,  156, 272,  274,  313 
Commerce,  Dept.  of,  80,  103,  111,  323, 
354,  381 
Committee  on  Extension  to   the   Standard 
Atmosphere  (COESA),  121 
Committee  on  Space  Research  (COSPAR), 
173 
Communications. 
dee  space,  3,  9,  84,  157, 263 
glolal,  67,  73,  83, 96,  172 
international,  118,  120,  139,  152,  162, 
198, 210,  221,  235,  281,  386 
laser  use  in,  51,  126, 209 
military  use,  35,  200,  220,  323,  362 
Communications satellite  (see  also  indivi- 
dual satellites:  EARLY  BIRD  I,  MOLMYA 
I,  INTELSAT 11-A,  etc.),  180, 223 
aeronautical,  91,  120 
agreement, 40,  65,  235 
contract.  20.  142 
cooperaiion,’65,  331 
international, 40,  155, 237,  354 
military, 40,52,200,216,220,321,  323, 
362,  376 
system, 20 ,83  
domestic,  special  purpose,  81,  131, 
146, 256,  270,  278,  288,  375 
foreign,  149; 271,  325,  353 
global, 67,  172, 287,  331,  376 
transmission via,  46,  152, 154, 162-163, 
182 ,287 ,360  
launch 
INTELSAT  11-A,  331 

MO 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Initial  Defense  Communications Sat- 
ellite Program,  216 
MOLNIYA  I  (3),  149 
MOLNNA  I  (4), 325 
use of,  98,  118, 162-163,  278,  338 
Communications  Satellite  Corp.  (ComSat- 
Corp), 83,118,  125, 165, 199 
contract, 20,  142, 179, 232 
EARLY  BIRD  I,  65,  67,  83,  122,  252,  331 
revenue,  125 ,252  
transmission,  237,  278,  350 
Gemini recovery, 86,179,207,290, 
332 
ground i ta t ion ,   122, 131, 152, 199, 314, 
331,350,368 
(((‘LANI  B IRD” ) ,   331,  341, 
INTELSAT  11-A 
360,  365,  385 
rates,  311,  327 
Research and Development Center,  221, 
337 
sat-eiiite program,  46, 67,  73,  114,  136, 
146 ,197 ,256 ,278 ,287 ,288 ,375  
services,  237,  311,  365 
test,  237,  360 
Communications blackout,  88, 330,  367 
Communist  Party Con  ress,  125 
Compania Telefhnica 8acionale de  Espana 
(CTNE),  97 
Compagnie  Francaise  Thomson-Houston, 
239 
Comprehensive Designers,  Inc.,  288 
Computer  Sciences Corp.,  169, 223 
Computers,  348 
foreign use,  372 
NASA,  9,  81,  104,  165,  169,  233,  262, 
265,  267,  273,  275,  291-292,  298 
universities,  220 
-  France) 
Concorde 
(U.K. 
supersonic 
transport,  19,  21,  43,  123,  143,  189 
194 ,226 ,233 ,289 ,354  
Condon,  Dr.  Edward  U.,  315 
Condor  (missile),  227 
Conference  on  Biomedical  Knowledge, 
328 
Congress,  80, 83,  119,  131, 138 
AEC  report  to,  35 
budget  request,  President’s  23-24 
NASA  budget,  23-24 
State of  Union  message to,  14  
Congress,  House  of  Re  resentatives,  12, 
19, 49,  119,  171, 2f1,  215,  224,  227, 
244,  274,  359 
bills introduced,  84,  288 
bills  assed,  163,  171,  172,  228,  244, 
24$  247,  279 
Committee  on  Ap  ropriations,  54-55, 
166, 171,  182, 2f1,  213, 
Committee on Armed  Services,  87,  116, 
130 
Committee  on   Civil  Service,  Subcom- 
mittee on Manpower,  258-259 
Committee  on Government  Operations, 
Subcommittee  on  Military  Opera- 
tions, 111, 323 
Committee on Science and Astronautics, 
10, 28-29,  59,  76, 90,  91,  92,  116, 

127,  143,  232-233,  281,  291,  325, 
357-358.  359 
Subcommittee on Advanced Research 
and  Technology,  62,  66,  81, 83-84 
88-89 
Subcommittee  on  Manned  Space 
Flight,  59 ,6 4A5 ,2 73  
Subcommittee  on  NASA  Oversight, 
180. 272.280 
Subcommikee  on  S  ace  Science  and 
Applications,  56,  82-64, 65-66,  71, 
75-76,  113, 200,  244,  275,  308 
Congress, Senate,  20, 32,  34,  89,  187, 212, 
227 ,247 ,261 ,266 ,273  
bills  introduced, 21,  167 
bills passed,  190, 227,  247,  263 
Committee  on   Aeronautical  and  Space 
Sciences,  12,  70-71,  80-81,  91,  176, 
208,  373 
Committee on Appropriations,  122, 257, 
263 
Committee on  Armed  Services, 72,  122, 
145 
Commitee  on Commerce, Subcommittee 
on Communications,  270 
Committee  on Foreign  Relations,  271 
Committee on   Finance,  21 
Committee on Government  Operations, 
Subcommittee  on  Government  Re- 
search,  179 
Committee on  Judiciary, 268 
Congressional Record,  12, 119 
CONIE.  See Comisi6n  Nacional  de  Investi- 
gaci6n del Espacio. 
Connes, Dr . Pierre, 264, 322 
Connes,  Dr.  Janine,  264,  322 
Connor,  John T.,  77,  111 
Conrad, LCdr.  Charles, Jr.  (USN), 7 ,54 ,  60, 
110 ,290 ,293 ,294 ,304 ,379  
Construction  Industry  Joint  Conference, 
364 
Contamination,  75  
Contract  (see also under agencies,  such a s  
NASA,  USAF,  etc.) 
cost-plus-award-fee,  223,  235,  257,  315, 
330 
cost-plus-fixed-fee, 224, 257,262, 383 
cost-plus-incentive-fee,  130,  257,  165- 
166,  169, 224,  255,  352,  353 
fixed-price, 85,  142, 145, 176, 195, 215, 
220 ,223 ,298 ,338 ,375  
fixed-price-incentive-fee,  334,  368,  375 
fixed-price letter,  375 
incentive-fee,  85, 90,  244, 353 
sole source,  321 
university,  247,  251,  315,  328 
Control  Data  Corp.,  157,  165, 215,  258 
Convair  990  (jet aircraft),  153, 154 
Cooke, Richard,  382 
Cooper,  George, 352 
Cooper,  L /C  L.  Gordon  (USAF),  7,  54,  60, 
105,219 
Cooper,. B /G  Pau l  T.  (USAF),  268,354 
Copernicus  (moon  crater),  344 
Coralie  (rocket engine),  356-357 
Cornell Univ.,  10  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

4 1  

Corona, 241,  272 
Co  s pf  Engineers.  See Army  Corps  of 
Zggmeers. 
Cortright, Edgar  M.,  56,  75-76,  120, 315, 
325-326,359 
Cosmic dust,  9,  328 
Cosmic  rays,  85,  86,  133, 151,  264,  279, 
336 
“Cosmic  rubble,”  279 
Cosmology,  47 
Cosmonaut, 20,  5 5 , 6 0 4 1 ,   70,  92, 
169-170,  193,306,  323 
anniversary, 135-136 
extravehicular activity, 20,  107, 318 
interview, 135-136,  214, 237,  330 
scientists  as,  327 
space coo  eration, 10,109-110,248-249 
space fliglt,  effects of, 60, 285 
VOSKHOD  I1 ilight,  12-13,  107 
CosMpOs  Lxxx  (u. 2 S. R.  satellite), 2 
Cosmonautics Da  135-136 
COSMOS  LXXXI,  2 
COSMOS  LXXXII,  2 
COSMOS LXXXIII,  2 
COSMOS  LXXXIV,  2 
COSMOS  C,  2 
COSMOS  CIV,  8 
COSMOS  CP ,   22 
COSMOS  CVI,  27 
COSMOS  CVII,  51  
COSMOS  CVIII,  51  
COSMOS  CIX,  59 
COSMOS  cx, 60-61,  69,  84, 91,  102,  138 
COSMOS  CXI,  75 
COSMOS  CXII,  104 
COSMOS  CXIII,  110, 121 
COSMOS  CXIV,  130 
COSMOS  CXV,  144 
COSMOS  CXVI,  152 
COSMOS  CXVII,  168  
COSMOS  CXVIII,  175 
COSMOS  CXIX,  190 
COSMOS CXX,  211 
COSMOS  c m ,  218 
COSMOS  CXXII,  223,  269, 271,  308 
COSMOS  CXXIII,  235 
COSMOS  CXXIV,  240 
COSMOS  CXXV ,  246 
COSMOS CXXVI,  252 
COSMOS  CXXVII, 261 
COSMOS  CXXVIII,  277 
COSMOS  CXXIX,  321 
COSMOS  cxxx, 325 
COSMOS  CXXXI,  347 
COSMOS  CXXXII,  352 
COSMOS  CXXXIII,  356 
COSMOS  c x m v ,  366 
COSMOS  cxxxv, 372 
COSMOS CXXXVI,  378 
COSMOS  CXXXVII,  378 
COSPAR.  See Committee on  Space 
Research. 
Cotton,  Col.  Joseph  F.  (USAF),  136,  158, 
264,  338,  354,  378 
Coughlin,  William  J.,  25,  112,  162,  214, 
272,348,  352 

Council of  Economic Advisers,  350-355 
Council on Higher Education  (D.  C.),  55 
Courant, Dr. Richard, 52 
Courter, Robert F.,  78 
Cousins, Frank, 51 
Covington, Osro H.,  354 
Crab Nebula, 263 
Craig,  E.  B.,  361 
Crater Lake,  Ore.,  299 
Crawler-transporter.  See Kennedy  Space 
Center  (NASA). 
Cronkite, Walter,  1 7  
Crowell, Gen.  Benedict, Gold  Medal,  341  
Cryogenics,  55,  77,  114 
Crystal fibers,  250 
CTNE.  See Compania Telefdnica 
Nacional de Espana. 
Cuba,  193, 334 ,376  
Cuddeback Dry Lake,  Calif., 313 
Culver  City, Calif.,  132 
Cunningham, R.  Walter,  144 ,306 ,351  
Curtis, Sen. Carl T.,  227-228 
Curtiss-Wright Corp..  72.  353 
Cygnus  (co&teUatibi),  radiation sources, 
79-80.  151 
Czechosiovak Academy of  Sciences, 231 
Czechoslovakia,  92 

D 
D - 1  (French satellite),  361 
D-2   (French satellite),  361 
Daddario, Rep.  Emilio Q.,  64,  214,  359 
Dade County, Fla.,  62, 63,  110 
Dallas,  Tex.,  14, 113,  297 
Dana, William H.,  47,  242,  258,  271,  292, 
336 
Daniel, L /C  Walter  F.  (USAF), 251 
Daniel Guggenheim School of Aeronautics, 
319 
Das.  See Data  automatic subsystem. 
Data, 229,  281 
Data  automatic subsystem  (Das),  337 
Davies,  M.  Helen, 315 
Davies, Merton E.,  73 
Davies, Richard W.,  162, 202 
Davis,  Richard, 250 
Day,  LeRoy E.,  232 ,354  
Day,  Melvin  S., 209,  243 
Dayglow, 277 
Dayton, Ohio, 383 
Deep  Space  Facilities,  Goldstone,  Calif., 
226 
Debus, Dr.  Kur t  H.,  198, 215,  283 
Deep Space Network (DSN) (NASA), 3 4 4 8 4 ,  
157 ,261 ,  263 ,315  
Defense Atomic Support Agency,  311 
Defense Communications Agency  (DCA), 
222 ,232  
Defense,  Dept.  of  (DOD), 22,  57,  90-91, 
110,  134,  147-148,  178,  236,  251, 
291-292,  332,  382 
Advanced  Research Projects  Agency, 
322,  376 
aircraft,  131, 253,  288,  323 
budget, 23-24,  145, 246 

4 2  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

communications satellite system, 40, 
200,306,323,361, 
contract,  54 
cooperation, 40,  295,  354 
NASA,  7,  29,  43, 110-111,  150,  198, 
303,  334 
missile program,  170 
nuclear  detection  satellite,  322 
R&D,  154,  165,  220,323 
s  ace  rogram,  153,  384 
Degn se  Electronics,  Inc.,  128 
DeFlorez Training Award,  359 
DeGaulle, President Charles (France), 221, 
223,  334,  370 
Delamar Dry Lake,  Nev.,  168 
Delorme, Jean,  307 
Delta  (booster)  (see  also  Thor-Delta  and 
Thrust-Augmented  Improved  Delta), 
192,374 
Delta Scor  i i   (star),  241 
Dembling, S a u l  G.,  282,378 
Denmark,  125 
Denver, Colo.,  107,  177,  315 
Denver Moonwatch, 284-285 
Denver Post, 11 8 
Detroit, Mich.,  177,  296 
Deutsche  Lufthansa Airlines,  358 
Devons,  S.,  10 
Diamant  (French booster), 52,  55-56,  261 
DIAPASON  I  (D-IA)  (French satellite),  55-56 
Dick,  John M.,  78 
Dineen,  Col.  Richard E.  (USAF),  218 
Disarmament, 84-85,  97,  302,  304 
DISCOVERER  XVII  (satellite), 332 
Distance Measuring Equi  ment-Instru- 
ment  Landing System  fDme-Ils),  131 
District of Columbia Teachers College, 225 
Djerfisherite (mineral), 287 
DMS,  InC.,  172 
Dmu.  See  Dual-purpose Maneuvering 
Unit. 
Docking,  17,  99-102,  104,  105-106,  108, 
202,  212,  243,  290,  291,  294,  314,  344 
Documentation, Inc.,  273-274 
DOD.  See Defense,  Dept.  of. 
Dog experiment, 60-61,84,102,  179,  237, 
318 
Dol  'nov,  A.  I.,  358 
D $  
01  Ronald,  164 
Doolittle, Gen.  James  H.  (USAFR),  27 
Doppler effect, 254 
Dorman,  B.  L.,  380 
Doty,  L. L.,  285 
Douglas Aircraft  Co.,  34,  384 
contract,  2,  5,  145,  167,  224,  263,  306, 
316,368,  375,  383 
Delta launch vehicle,  375 
Missile and Space Systems Div.,  318, 
353 
s  ace equipment, 78,  383 
&cramento  Test  Center,  107,  202 
Saturn  V,  107,  202,  224,  252,  261,  306 
Douglass, Howard W.,  258 
Dounreay, Scotland, 51  
Dow  Chemical Co.,  262 
Downey,  Calif.,  167,  215,  257,  328 

Dragon  (French sounding rocket),  322 
Dra  er,  Dr.  Charles S.,  26,  317 
Drefl, Dr.  Sidne  D.,  111 
Drinkwater, F r e g  J.,  III,  20 
Drummond.  Roscoe.  160 
Dr  den, Dr:  Hugh, L.,  20,27,50,148,193, 
l19,225,  305,  315,369 
Dryden, Mrs.  Hugh L.,  305 
Dryden,  Dr. H u h  L., Memorial Fund.  305 
DSG.  See Dee  S p a c e  Network. 
Dual-  urpose  ganeuver ing  Unit  (Dmu) , 
22Q 
Duart,  Calif.,  221 
DuBridge, Dr.  Lee A.,  29,  329 
Dubrovin, Leonid I.,  157 
Dudley, Dr.  Seibert, 7 
Observatory (Albany, N.  Y . ) ,  267, 
D:+y 
Duke,  Capt.  Charles M.,  Ir.  (USAF),  127 
Duke Univ.,  25 
Dulles International Airport.  217 
. 
Dunning, Dr.  John R.,  $7 
Dupree,  Prof.  A.  Hunter,  359 
Durant,  Okla.,  89 
Duthie,  J.  G.  M.,  151 
Dynatronics, Inc.,  176 

E 
Eaker, L /G  I ra  C.  (USAF,  Ret.),  328 
Early, Benjamin N.,  103 
EARLY  BIRD  I  (INTELSAT  I)  (communications 
satellite),  65,  67,  83,  122,  252,  331 
revenue,  125-126,  252 
transmission,  237,  278,  350 
Gemini  recovery,  86,  179,  207,  290, 
332 
Earth,  150,  302,  305 
infrared  data,  176,  178,  251,  257, 
283-284 
magnetic field, 86,  146 
magnetic tail,  86,  301,  358 
photographs  of,  7,  265,  294,  297,  355, 
369 
East  Central Florida Planning Council,  15 
East Grand Forks, Minn.,  228 
Eastern Air  Lines,  144,  194 
Eastern  Test  Range  (ETR)  (see  also  Cape 
Kennedy and Kennedy Space Center), 
334 
launch 
Apollo /Saturn 
AS-201,  6749 ,   93 
AS-202,274 
AS-203,  233 
Atlas-Centaur 
AC-7.  296 
AC-8;  131-132 
AC-9.  329 
- - -   - >   --- 
AC-10,  196 
Augmented  Target  Docking  Adapter 
(Atda), 202 
GEMINI  VIII. 99-102 
GEMINI IX, 206 
GEMIEPI x, 243,  248 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

4 3  

114, 
274, 
330, 

GEMINl  XI,  248,290 
GEBSINI  XII,  340,  344 
Minuteman, 255 
PIONEER VI,  214 ,301  
satellite,  69-70,  132,  213,  249,  262, 
265,  269,  296,  313,  331,  342,  344, 
365,367 
Titan 111-C, 216,  276 
Eastman Kodak,  284 
Easton, Pa.,  140 
Eckert,  Dr.  Wallace J.,  150 
Ecli  se,  solar, 87,  178,  187, 311,  320, 
3fl-332,  344,  346 
Ecole Normale Supkrieure, 339 
“Ecological  Technology-Space,  Earth, 
Sea”  (symposium),  54 
Economic Club of  Detroit,  296 
Ecs.  See Environmental control  system. 
Ecuador, 297 
Eddington Gold Medal,  82 
Education,  28-29,  32,  35,  53,  238-239 
Edwards  AFB,  Calif.  (see  also Air  Force 
Flight Test Center) 
flight 
C-130B,  119 
F-104, 111 
F-111A, 116 
M-2-F2  (lifting  body  vehicle), 
152-153,  237-238,  244,  264, 
284,  293,  298,  306,  312,  319, 
348,  352,  383 
SR-71, 28 
XB-70,5, 16, 136, 158, 184, 211, 
342,  354 ,372 ,376 ,378  
strike,  35 
Edwards.  John A..  354.  383 
 
,
-
Eglin AFB,-FI~., 131 
See United Arab Republic. 
Egy  t. 
E i s Je ,  Donn F.,  351 
ELDO.  See  European  Launcher  Develop- 
ment  Organization. 
Electric  rgpulsion.  See Engine, electric. 
Electro-8ptical  S stems,  Inc.,  62,  336 
Electron, 237,277,287,292,293,313,328 
auroral producing, 55,  95 
measurement,  237,  277,  283,  287,  292, 
293,  313,328,  346-347 
ELECTRON  I  (U.S.S.R.  satellite),  2 
ELECTRON  111,  2 
Electronics Research Center  (EBC)  (NASA), 
37,  288,  332,  342 
Electrostatic gyroscope  (Esg),  353 
Elliott-Automation, 239 
Elms,  James C.,  288 
Emerson Electric Go., 247 
-_  
ENEA.  See European  Nuclear  Energy 
Agen 
Engine T e e  also  individual engines,  such 
as F-1, M-1, etc.) 
aircraft,  27,  77,  137, 143 
gas  turbine,  143, 326,  362 
jet,  77,  137,  143,  199-200,  249,  273, 
1113 
su  ersonic transport, 85-86,109,123, 
599-200,  226,  250,  273,  286,  296, 
383 

338, 

336, 

343 
1, 

145, 
241, 

cesium, 336 
chemical, 258 
electric, 27-28,  82,  119-120, 
ion,  89-90.  312,  339 
89-90,  194,  355 
hydromagnetic, 151-152 
nuclear  (see  also  Nerva),  62,  92, 
251,  336,385 
rocket,  27,  34,  39,  110,  114,  168, 
383 
turbo-rocket, 285 
vernier,  296 
Engle,  Capt.  Joe  H.  (USAF),  47,  127,  246, 
2SQ --. 
Environmental  control  system  (Ecs),  332 
Environmental  Science  Services  Admini- 
stration  (ESSA),  43,  199,  240,  293, 
361,  368 
budget, 24 
cooperation, 103, 127, 168, 267,  321 
Institute  for Telecommunications 
Sciences  and Aeronomy,  328 
Institutes  for  Environmental  Research, 
111 
Na&al  Disaster Warning  System, 77 
Office  of  Hydrology, 379 
Project  Stormfur  267 
satellite, 41,  69-&  103, 310,  321,  365, 
385 
solar eclipse expedition, 311 
sounding rocket,  127, 328 
Eole  (meteorological forecasting project), 
195 
Epsilon Canis Majoris  (star),  295 
Epstein, L.  M.,  289 
EBC.  See Electronics  Research  Center 

Eremea,  George,  302 
E r k d ,  Chancellor Ludwig (W. Ger.),  303, 
311 
Eros  (Earth  Resources Observation 
Satellite) project,  297 
ERS-xv (research satellite),  272 
ERS  XVI, 212 
Es  See Electrostatic gyroscope. 
E t
 
s  leman, Dr.  von  R.,  199 
ESRO.  See  European  Space  Research 
Organization. 
ESSA.  See Environmental  Science 
Services Administration. 
ESSA  I  (meteorological satellite), 41,43,82, 
308 
ESSA  II, 70,  79,  103, 365 
ESSA  III,  310, 321,  365 
ETR.  See Eastern Test  Range. 
Euboea  (Greek island), 87  
Euratom.  See European Atomic Energy 
Community. 
Europa  (booster), 348,  357 
Europa  I  (ELDO  booster),  190,  214,  236, 
348,357 
Europe  (see  also  European  Launcher 
Development Organization; European 

444 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Space  Research  Organization;  Euro- 
space),  15 ,41 ,   239,  257,  275,  307 
cooperation, 73 
European Atomic Energy Community 
(Euratom), 133,189,285-286,303,307, 
311 
European  Broadcasting Union,  287 
European  Center  for  Nuclear  Research 
(CERN),  286 
European Launcher  Development  Organi- 
zation  (ELDO),  41,  189, 285,  361 
launch,  190,348,356-357 
policy,  156,  211,  214,  220,  236 
European Satellite Team,  239 
European  Space  Research  Organization 
(ESRO),  11, 87,  124, 133, 208,  299,  307, 
352,  354,356,  383 
European Space Symposium,  le3 
Eurospace, 96,  307 
Eva.  See Extravehicular activity. 
Evans,  LCdr.  Ronald E.  (USN), 127 
EXAMETNET.  See  Inter-American  Experi- 
mental Meteoroloeical Rocket  Network. 
Exce  tional  Service"Medal  (NASA),  218, 
223,  255 
Exhibit, 312 
Exobiology, 198-199 
Experimental Aircraft Assn.,  308 
EXPLORER  XXVIII  (Imp-C)  (satellite), 
150-151 
EXPLORER xxx  (IQSY  Solar Explorer) 
(satellite),  174 
EXPLORER  XXXII  (AE-B)  (aeronomy 
satellite).  192. 276.  385 
EXPLORER  'XXXIII  (Imp-D)  (satellite),  231, 
358,  385 
Explorer's  Club,  383 
Extraterrestrial  life,  40,  74,  141,  171,  174, 
189 ,241 ,264 ,322 ,366  
Extra-terrestrial Research Agency,  154 
Extravehicular  activity  (Eva),  104,  316, 
374 
e q i rm e n t ,  12 ,17 ,78-79 ,225 ,251 ,301 ,  
3&-305, 
317,  353-354 
GEMINI  VIII,  92,  100 
GEMINI  IX-A,  202,  207, 218 
GEMINI  x,  243-244,  248, 255 
GEMINI  XI,  290,293,  294,301 
GEMINI  XII,  344, 353-354 
hydrogen 'tank.  conversion  experiment, 
167, 272 
U.S.S.R.,  20,  107, 318 

F 
F-1 (rocket engine), 115, 352 
F-4B  (Phantom  11)  (fighter  aircraft),  211 
F-4E,  323 
F-4J.  195 
F-104  (Starfighter)  (aircraft),  111,  211, 
263 
F-l04G,  183,  256,  367,  378 
F-106  (Delta Dart),  198 
F-111  (supersonic fighter),  61,  288 
F-111A,  77,  116, 288 

F-111B, 21, 
FAA.  See Federal Aviation Agency. 
Faget, Dr.  Maxime g., 166 
Fabbrica  Italiana  A  arecchi  Radio,  239 
Fairbanks, Alaska,  257,  356 
Fairchild Hiller Corp.,  77,  264 
FAITH 7  (spacecraft), 105 
Fairchild,  Sherman,  Technology  Center, 
322 
Falcon  (fan-jet aircraft),  302 
Falmouth, Mass.,  5 
Farnsworth, Clyde H.,  136 
Fast  Deployment Logistic  Fleet  (Fdl)  pro- 
gram, 371 
F a d ,  Dr. Henry,  139, 208 
FB-111 (su  ersonic bomber), 72 
FCC.  See  iedera l   Communications Com- 
mission. 
Fdl.  See Fast Development Logistic Fleet 
" 
Fe!z%Ed  Airport  Program,  377 
Federal Aviation Agency  (FAA),  22,  24,  80, 
143, 227,  261,  340,  343 
air  traffic  control,  13,  18, 91,  233 
airports,  243,  364,  377 
annual report,  131 
contract,  233,  341 
cooperation, 284, 381 
criticism, 64  
landing system, 66 
noise,  aircraft,  133 
statistics,  11, 91,  155, 209, 250 
transport,  supersonic  (see  a lso   Super- 
sonic Transport), 24,84,112,  122- 
123,  128,  131,  143,  200-201,  296 
design  and  development, 85-86,  286, 
299,  307,  323,  332,  334,  343,  383 
Federal  Communications Commission 
(FCC ) ,   81,  179 
approvals, 126, 332,  365 
briefs filed with, 256,  288,  360,  371, 375 
ComSatCorp,  142,  146,  152,  176,  197, 
199,  233,  235,  311,  314,  327,  331, 
350,  365,  368,  375 
mound  stations.  278.  314 
yequests  to,  46; 67,' 73,  90,  122,  152, 
176,270,321,331,  341,365 
Federal Council for  Science and Technol- 
ogy,  31,  34  
Federal Electric Corp., 261 
Federal Executive Board.  238 
Federal Woman's  Award;  77 
FkdCration  ACronautique  Internationale 
(FAI),  187, 253 
F&iorenko,  Ambassador Nikolay T.,  198 
Fels Planetarium,  366 
Feoktisov,  Konstantin Petrovich,  136 
Ferguson, Gen. James  (USAF),  283 
Fermi, E r i c o ,  Award,  259 
Fermi, Enrico, Institute,  141 
Field Enterprises Educational Corp.,  161 
Finger, Harold B.,  82,  83, 315 
Fink, Daniel J.,  111, 153, 220 
Finland,  174 
Fire 
aircraft,  159 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

445 

electrical,  177 
escape system,  250 
Firebee  (tar  et missile),  267 
“First  Soft 8tep”  (TV  rogram),  198 
Fisher, Adrian  S.,  85, 87 
Fitch, John,  198 
Flax, Alexander  H.,  225 
Fleming,  William  A.,  327 
Flemming,  Arthur S.,  Award,  57 
Flight Dynamics  Laboratory  (AFSC),  87-88 
Flight International, 372 
Flight  Research  Center  (FRC) 
(NASA)  (see 
also Lifting body vehicle;  X-15; XB-70) 
14.47.  200 
Flight  Safety Foundation,  20 
Flight  Safety  Review  Board,  180-181 
Flight  Test  Center.  See Air  Force  Flight 
Test Center. 
v 
Florida,  62, 63 
Florida,  Univ.  of,  29-30 
Flying  saucers.  See  Unidentified  flying 
objects  (Ufo). 
Forster,  Wilhelm,  Observatory,  121, 324 
Fokker,  239 
Ford Foundation,  229,  256,  270,  288,  327, 
370 
Ford,  Rep.  Gerald  R.,  116 
Ford,  Henr  , 11,  247 
Foreign O d c e  (U.K.), 211 
Forman,  Edward  S., ’124 
Ft.  Campbell, Ky.,  131 
Ft. Eustis,  Va.,  253 
Ft.  Greely, Alaska,  119 
Ft. Monmouth,  N .   J.,  254 
Foster,  Dr.  John  S.,  Jr.,  29,  43,  90-91, 
200 
Foster,  Leslie D.,  288 
Foster,  Willis B.,  61 
Fourier  spectroscopy, 264 
France,  20,  43,  264 
atomic bomb,  232,  246,  312 
Concorde  (France-U.K.  supersonic 
transport)  43,  233 
cooperation,  63,  73,  125, 133, 190,  195, 
210,  214,  220,  221, 239,  261, 299, 
348,  370 
U.S.S.R.,  227,  261,  281,  334,  348, 
370, 385 
launch,  11, 52 
missile,  82,  201 
satellite,  52,  55-56,  94,  384,  385 
sounding rocket,  322,  327,  352 
satellite,  233 
space program,  334,  361 
Franklin  Institute, 82 
Franzini,  Dr.  Juliet  Lee-,  225,  286 
Franzini,  Dr.  Paolo,  225,  286 
Frascati,  Italy,  37 
See Flight  Research  Center  (NASA). 
FRC. 
Fredericka,  Queen Mother  (Greece),  317 
Freeman,  Orville,  117 
Freeport,  Tex.,  196 
Freitag,  Capt.  Robert  F.  (USN,  Ret.),  143, 
177 
French  Guiana,  82,  261 
Frese,  Col.  Gregory C.,  Jr.  (WAF), 294 

Friedman,  Dr. Herbert,  79-80,  109, 174 
Friendly,  Fred W.,  270,  327 
FRIENDSHIP  7  (  acecraft),  105 
Frutkin, A m 0 8  W.,  2,  32,  74,  141 
FS-3  (nuclear  reactor  power  system), 
27-28 
Fuchs,  Dr.  Louis  H.,  287 
Fuel,  55 
aircraft,  liquid  methane,  293,  362 
carbon  dioxide-water,  120 
cesium,  336 
hydrogen-peroxide,  78 
liquid,  57-58 
liquid  hydrogen,  55,  222,  385 
liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen,  114,120, 
168, 252 
liquid oxygen-kerosene,  285 
alutonium.  83.  112 
h u s h  hydrogen,  9-10 
solid,  42,  57-58,  62,  90,  92,  110,  176, 
190,  219,  226,  241,  297,  385 
tank,  328 
liquid hydrogen,  167,  168,  195,  198, 
210,  272,  283 
liquid  oxygen,  272,  277 
Fulbright,  Sen.  J.  William,  32,  190 
Fuller,  Prof.  Buckminster,  311 
Fulton  County  (Georgia)  Airport,  251 
Fulton,  Fitzhugh,  338,  372 
Fulton, Rep.  James  G.,  163, 214 
Fulton  Recovery  System,  164 
Funk,  M IG  Ben  I.  (USAF),  268 

G 
Gabriel,  David S.,  315 
Gagarin,  Col.  Yuri  A.  (U.S.S.R.),  20, 
60-61,  135, 193, 214 
Galaxy, 79-80 
Galiko  (jet aircraft), 347 
Galveston Island,  36 
Galipeau, George,  308 
Gamma ray,  1 3 6 1 3 7 , 2 6 3  
GAO.  See General  Accounting 05ce. 
Garbarini,  Robert  F.,  44,  149,  204,  250, 
367 
Gardner, Richard  N.,  163 
Garmire,  Gordon,  229 
Garrard, Dr. W.  C.  J.,  296,  314 
Garrett Corp.,  238 
Gary,  Ind.,  16  
Gas turbine.  See Engine. 
See Gemini Agena Target Vehicle. 
Gatv. 
Gaudry,  Roger,  229 
Gautschi, Theodore F.,  250 
Gay,  Clarence  C.,  Jr.,  340 
Gazenko,  Dr.  Ofeg G.,  321 
GCA  Corp.,  19,  214,  239,  274, 292 
GE.  See General Electric  Co. 
Gell-Mann, br. Murray,  152, 329 
GE 4  (turbo’et engine), 273,  332, 3?3 
Gemini  (program),  16, 64,  218,  314,  318, 
338, 352,372 
award, 27,  218,  324 
completion,  344,  349,  384-85 
management,  43 

446 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
Gemini  (spacecraft),  7-8,  121,  164,  177, 
338 
(&pt 7,  105 
exhibit,  60,312,  340 
GEMINI  WI,  7,  90,  94 
GEMINX IV  (fli  h t) ,   105 
GEM IN I  V 
GEMINI  VI-A  fli  t),  8,  126 
G E W M  W  (flig  t) ,   203 
(fli  h t) ,  8 ,53 ,86 ,104 ,118 ,145 ,  
GEMIMVIII 
162,  2 2  
launch,  99 
preparations,  7,  90,  94,  96 
GEMINI  1x4  (Gemini I x )   (flight), 210,215, 
236 
crew,  72,  85,  110, 
208 ,219  
Gatv,  180 
launch,  206 
preparations,  105, 
172, 178,  195 
G E W M  x (flight), 27, 
248 
226,  240, 247, 
launch.  243 
GEMINI  xi (flight),  248,  294,  297 
crew,  110, 293,  301,  304 
launch,  290 
GEMINI  HII  (flight), 327,  355,  361 
crew, 219,  340,  347,  349 
launch.  344 
Gemini  Agena  Target  Vehicle  (Gatv),  8, 
53,  86,  126 
GATV  VIII,  99-100,  104,  115,  118,  243, 
248 ,255  
GATV  9 ,  180 
GATV  X,  243-244,  248,255 
GATV  XI, 290,  297 
GATV XII,  344 
Gemini Mid-Program Conference, 64 
General Accountin  Office  (GAO), 202 
General Aviation  f i t   Training  Standards 
Board,  131 
General Dynamics Corp.,  11 
award, 354 
contract, 30,  268,  284, 315,  371 
Convair Div.,  54 
F-111A,  116 
missile system,  119 
trackin  communications vessel, 47,  214 
General  Aec tr ic   Co.  (GE),  111, 317,  321 
award,  103, 353 
contract,  72,  77,  90,  222,  343,  380 
Industrial Electronics Div.,  157 
Missile and  Space Div.,  239 
Re-Entry Systems Div..  192 
research,  126, 174, 190 
supersonic  transport  engine,  86,  249, 
273,  286,  296,  299,  332,  383 
XB-70  accident, 211 
General Electric Co.,  Ltd.,  136 
General Electric Forum ,   30% 
General  Precision  Equipment  Corp.,  337, 
361 
General  Telephone & Electronics  Corp., 
361 _ _ -  
Geneva,  Switzerland,  135,  199,  221,  237, 
248,  250,  258,  286,  287 
Gentry, Capt. Jerauld  R.,  319,  318, 352 
Geodetic satellite,  162, 212,272,  312 
Geological Society of  America, 349 

George Washington Univ.,  287 
Georgetown Univ.,  18 
Gerdes, Ron, 253 
Germantown, Md.,  322 
Germany, East,  174, 355 
Germany, West,  25,  210,  307 
aircraft,  53,  183,  256,  367,  378 
Bochum Observatory, 45,104,  109, 126, 
24.R 
cooperation, 73,  125, 190, 191,220, 240, 
299,  303,  304,  311 
Ministry  of  Scientific Research 
(BMWF), 299, 301 
satellite,  176, 342 
sounding rocket, 240,  299,  342 
Wilhelm  Forster  Observator  121, 324 
Ghost.  See  Global  HorizontaT) Sounding 
Techni  ue. 
Giacconi,(kiccardo,  229 
Giannini Corp.,  221 
Giberson, W. Eu  ene,  250 
Gill, Dr.  Jocelyn%.,  77,  215 
Gillespie, Rollin W.,  26 
Gilmore Creek, Alaska,  41,  310 
Gilruth,  Dr.  Robert  R.,  93-94,  104,  117, 
321 
Ginter,  Roll D.,  315,  327 
Giordmaine, Dr.  Joseph A.,  51 
Givens,  Maj.  Edward  G.,  Jr.  (USAF), 127 
See Goddard  Institute  for  Space 
GISS. 
Studies. 
Glenn,  Col.  John  H.,  Jr.  (USMC, Ret.),  54, 
60,  105,  169,  191, 241,  314,  328 
Glennan, Dr .   T. Keith, 257,315 
Glider, 124 
Global  Horizontal  Sounding  Technique 
(Ghost),  2,  89,  168 
Glod,  G.  D.,  318 
Goddard Institute  for Space Studies  (GISS), 
159, 235,  365,  378 
Goddard,  Dr.  Robert Hutchings,  103,  209, 
263,  350,  383 
Goddard,  Robert  H..  Award.  27 
Goddard;  Robert  .H.,  Historical  Essay 
Award,  103 
Goddard,  Dr.  Robert  H.,  Lecture,  97 
Goddard,  Robert  Hutchings,  Library,  314 
Goddard,  Robert  H.,  Memorial  Trophy 
Award,  102 
Goddard  Space  Center  (GSFC), 151,  187, 
231,  260,  288,  355,  358,  375 
aeronomy satellite,  192 
award,  57,  315,  354 
contract,  216,  353 
Humphrey,  Vice  President  Hubert  H., 
visit,  79 
management, 264,289 
personnel,  9,  86,  166, 208,  232 
satellite monitoring 
ATS  I,  367,  372 
ESSAS  I,  II, 111,  41,  69-70,  310 
NIMBUS  11,  178, 185 ,349  
Observatory class,  63-64,  181, 209, 
218,  264,  367 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

447 

Satellite Situation Report,  294,  307, 
337.  384 
Tiros,.145 
sounding  rocket  experiments,  80-81 
astronomical,  18, 80-81,  185,  190, 
295 
atmosphericdata, 50,  55,95,111,  245, 
260,276,  277,  284,313,  341 
meteorological, 19, 69,  161, 221, 241, 
265,  276 
grenade, 23,  164 ,216 ,252  
micrometeorite  collection,  328,  351 
radar,  171 
Goethert,  Dr.  Bernhard H.,  316 
Gold,  Dr.  Thomas,  128 
Goldberg,  Arthur  J.,  237,  246,  258,  271, 
291,  298 
Goldstein, Dr.  Richard,  175 
Goldstone Tracking Station, 3, 7,  157, 194, 
226.  372 
Golomb,  Solomon W.,  363 
Golovin, Dr. Nicholas E.,  57,  358 
Goodrich, B.  F.,  Co.,  87-88 
Goodwin’s  Sandbank, U.  K.,  354 
Gordon, LCdr.  &chard  8: Jr.  (USN), 1 
Goodyear Aeros  ace  Cor 
78,  159 
10, 
297,  379 
award, 304 
GEMINI XI, 285, 290,  293 
Eva,  294 ,301  
Gordon, T.  J.,  317 
Gorenstein, Paul,  229 
Gorkin, Jess,  10, 248 
Gorman, Harry  H.,  315 
Goudas, Dr .   C.  L.,  355 
Gould,  R.  Gordon, 258 
Government Printin  Office  (GPO), 107 
Graduate Research  Eenter  of  the   South- 
west,  127, 139 
Grand Canary  Island,  97 
Grand Forks AFB, N.  Dak.,  165 
Grants 
research,  28,  55 
facilities,  128,  147, 287 
Great Silver Medal  of  Paris,  191  
Greece, 87,  178, 187 
Greek National Committee for  Space 
Research, 87,  185 
Green, Re  . William,  90 
Green, Wiyliam L., Jr.,  202 
Green River,  Utah,  342 
Greenstein, Dr.  Jesse L.,  329 
Gregory, Prof.  Richard L.,  57 
Grigorov, Prof.  Naum,  140 
Grissom,  L /C   Virgil  I.  (USAF),  105,  110, 
144, 332 
press conference, 94, 257,  376 
Gromyko,  Andrey A.,  227 
Gross, Courtland S.,  170 
Gross, F.  R.,  159 
Gross, Re  . H.  R.,  172 
Grubbs, Jaydon  Y., Jr.,  6 0 , 9 1  
Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.,  145, 
167 
GSFC.  See Goddard Space Flight Center. 
Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, 235 

Guggenheim, Daniel, Medal,  94 ,321  
Guiana Range,  Guiana, 361 
Gulf  of  Mexico,  36,  287 
Gunter, Richard, 250 
Gurjian, A.  A.,  318 
Gursky, Herbert,  229 
Guthrie, Sir Giles,  143 

H 
H-1  (rocket engine),  130, 169, 227 
Haas,  Conrad,  231 
Haeussermann, Dr.  Walter,  361 
Hagge, Dr.  Donald E.,  151 
James J.,  Jr.,  87,  134, 219 
Haggert 
H a g l u n z  Howard H.,  372 
The Ha  ue,  Netherlands,  354 
Hahn,  fir. Otto,  259 
Haise,  Fred W.,  Jr.,  127 
Halaby,  Najeeb  E.,  343 
Haley, Andrew  G.,  281, 289 
Hall, Eldon W.,  354 
Hall,  Floyd  D.,  194 
Hall of  Aeronautical Propulsion, 236 
Hallett, Robert L.,  383 
Halpern, Dr.  Irwin  P.,  195 
Hamma  uir  Range,  Algeria,  52,  55,  94, 
327,  $44,  356,  361 
Hammarsk’old, Knut,  156 
Ham  ton,  ba . ,   121-122 
H a n i e r ,   Prof.  Philip,  25 
Haney, Paul P.,  76 
Hanscom Field, Mass.,  294 
Hansen,  Grant L.,  315 
Harmon,  Col.  Clifford B.,  259 
Harmon  International  Aviator’s  Trophy, 
259,  374 
Harper,  Charles W.,  37,  66 
Harr,  Dr.  Karl G.,  Jr.,  97,  160, 367,  378 
Harris, Sen. Fred R.,  89  
Harris poll,  249 
Harris,  S  dne  242 
Harteck, $r.  &uI,  377 
Hartfard  Times, 248 
Harvard  Univ.,  22,  131,  260,  382 
Harvard Univ.  Graduate School of 
Business Administration, 369 
Hasp  (meteorological rocket),  173 
Haughton,  Daniel J.,  350, 354 
Hausman, William,  322 
Haut-Provence Observatory, 322 
Hawaii,  83,  222, 311, 360 
Hawaii Institute  of  Geophysics, 38 
Hawaii,  Univ.  of,  39,  144 
Hawker Siddeley Aviation Co.,  356 
Hawker  Siddeley Dynamics, Ltd.,  191  
Haworth, Dr.  Leland J.,  34 
Haworth, Michael, 33 
HG130H  (cargo  aircrafte;’36,  164   . 
Hayes  International Cor 
130 
Heale  Denis,  40,  6 1  
Healtz,  Education,  and Welfare  (HEW), 
De  t.  of,  177, 284 
Hechfer, Rep.  Ken,  214 
Hedges,  Fielding, 250 
Heidelberg,  W.  Germany, 220 

448 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

and 

Helicopter,  132, 228,  290,  344 
commercial use,  340 
military  use,  60,  187, 326 
record,  187, 291 
Heliport,  155 
Helium,  12, 237,  242,  245,  263 
Hello,  Bastian,  354 
Henry,  William,  118 
Henty,  Denham,  64,  123,  162 
Heos (Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite), 
208 
Heos  A  (interplanetary physics  satellite), 
383 
Hercules  (constellation),  260 
Hercules,  Inc.,  226 
Herget,  Dr.  Paul,  252 
Hess,  Dr.  Harry  H.,  280,  349,  384 
Hess,  Dr.  Wilmot N.,  57  
HEW.  See  Health,  Education, 
Welfare,  Dept.  of. 
Hewlett,  William R.,  111 
Heydon,  Rev.  Francis  J.,  160, 341 
Hiatt, William  E.,  379 
Hibex  (High-E  Boost  Experiment),  15  
High  Altitude  Background  and  Signal  to 
Noise  (Hitab)  program,  108, 115-116 
High  Resolution  Infrared  Radiometer 
(Hrir),  178, 284 
Highly  Eccentric  Orbiting  Satellite.  See 
Heos. 
Hiibuin, Earl D.,  1, 202,  270 
Hill,  Gladwin,  93 
Hill,  Louis W.,  Award,  359 
Hill.  William.  131 
Hillsdale.  Mich..  116 
Himme1,’Dr.  Seymour  C.,  16 
Hines,  William,  7,  154-155,  166,  185 
boosters,  57-58,  241 
manned  space flight,  145-146,  193, 295, 
305 
NASA,  37,  123, 220,  375 
U.S.S.R.,  106,  125,  138, 338-339 
Hitab.  See High  Altitude  Background  and 
H’ornevik,  Wesle  E., 166 
rogram. 
Signal  to  Noise 
Hk-10  (lifting-bo$  vehicle),  19, 135,379, 
383,  385 
Hodge, John  D.,  100,  115, 354 
Hohmann, Bernhard  A.,  354 
Holifield, Rep.  Chet,  227 
Holland,  Sen.  Spessard L.,  190 
Holloman  AFB,  N. Mex.,  40,  175,  185, 283, 
342,  336 
Holmes,  D.  Brainerd,  53 
Honest  John-Nike  (rocket),  275, 340,352, 
- . -  
37n 
Honeywell,  Inc.,  60, 92,  264,  298 
Hong Kong,  219 
Honolulu.  Hawaii.  77.  106,  134, 366 
,
.
 
Hooker,  Ray W.,  315‘ 
Hootman, Dr.  James A.,  317 
Hope,  Bob,  129 
Horn,  Helmut  J.,  315 
Horne,  Walter  B.,  213 
Homer,  H.  M.,  308 

Ho;  S  ring;,  Aik,.  330 
Hotz, go b e r t ,   19, 180, 220,  273,  317,  334 
Hough,  Richard,  270 
House of  Commons,  U.  K.,  289 
Housing  and  Urban  Development,  Dept. 
of, 80 
Houston,  Tex.,  165, 213,  216,  332 
Houston  Post,  76,  220, 269 
Houston,  Univ.  of,  365,  379 
Houston,  M /G  Vincent  G.  (USAF ) ,   354 
Hovercraft,  168 
Howick, George J.,  12 
Hrir.  See  High  Resolution  Infrared  Radi- 
ometer. 
ometer. 
HS-303A 
HS-303A 
(communications  satellite),  6 5  
(communications  satellite),  6 5  
Hubbard.  Samuel 8.. 377 
Hubbard.  Samuel 8.. 377 
Hsinhua  (Chinese  ress  agency),  172 
Hsinhua  (Chinese  ress  agency),  172 
Huff,  Vearl N.,  354  ’ 
Hugh,  W.  F.,  241 
Hughes  Aircraft  Co.,  39,  132,  176,  227, 
260,297,  320 ,353  
Humphrey,  Vice  President Hubert  H.,  28, 
139 
Assistant  for  Aeronautics  and  Space 
Matters,  54  
award  by,  215,  324,  374 
NASA  visit,  43,  79,  125 
science.  239 
space  program,  44,  103,  119,  125,  302, 
307,  374 
Humphrey, Mrs.  Hubert  H.,  247 
Hunn,  Col.  Spencer S.  (USAF),  294 
Hunter,  Willson  H.,  315 
Huntington  Beach,  Calif.,  202 
Huntsville,  Ala.,  373 
Hurricane  Beulah,  267 
Hurricane  control,  267 
Hurricane  Esther, 267 
Hutchingson,  Henry P.,  254 
Hydrogen  (see also  Fuel), 335 
Hyman,  William  A.,  237 
Hynek,  Dr.  J .   Allen,  112-113,  116,  122, 
255,326,351,  376 
Hypersonic flight,  66  
Hypersonic transport  (Hst),  382 

I 
IAF.  See  International  Astronautical  Fed- 
eration. 
IAM.  See  International  Association  of 
Machinists. 
IATA.  See  International  Air  Transport 
Association. 
IAU.  See International Astronomical Union. 
IBM.  See  International  Business Machines 
Corp. 
ICAO.  See  International  Civil  Aviation 
Organization. 
Icarus  (asteroid),  251 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

449 

Unions. 
IDA.  See  Institute  for  Defense  Anal  ses. 
IDB.  See Inter-American Develo  ment i a n k  
Idcsp.  See  Initial  Defense  8ommunica- 
tions  Satellite  Project. 
IEEE.  See  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Elec- 
tronics  Engineers. 
IGY.  See  International  Geophysical Year. 
Ike  a-Seki  (comet), 277 
I1-[8  (U.S.S.R.  airliner),  256 
Illinois, Univ.  of,  111, 214 
Im  roved  capability missile  (Icm.),  219 
IC! n  la,  106, 163 
Indian  Atomic  Energ  Commission,  46 
Indian  Institute  of  Tecgnology, 253 
Indian  National  Commission  for   Space 
Research  (INCOSPAR),  234 
Indian  Radioastronomy Group, 46 
Indiana,  16 
Information  technology, 31,  370 
Infrared.  See Earth,  infrared  data;  Ins tru-  
ment,  radiometer. 
Initial  Defense  Communications  Satellite 
Project  (Idcsp),  40,  200,  216,  276,  361 
Institute  for  Defense Analyses  ( IDA ) ,   214, 
357 
Institute  for  the   Study  of  Science  in  
Human  Affairs,  343 
Ins t i tu te   of  Electrical  and  Electronics 
Engineers  (IEEE),  112,  238,  327 
Institute  of  Geophysics  and  Planetary 
Physics  (UCLA), 17 
Institute  of  Navigation, 321 
Instituto  de Investigacihnes de  Geolhgicas 
de  Chile,  94 
Instituto  Nacional de TCcnica Aeroespacial 
(INTA)  (Spain),  15, 137 
Instrument 
_
 
_
Langmuir probe, 234, 292 
magnetometer, 29 ,56 ,83 ,   129, 221, 234 
microscope, 260 
photometer,  83 
Pitot-static probe,  260,  263,  276 
radiation  detector,  83,  129 
radiometer,  2,  176,  178, 238,  257,  268, 
260 
se i& ,   21,  61,  175, 289 
spectrometer,  2,  18, 111, 129, 238,  274, 
277.  347 
INTA.  See  Instituto  Nacional  de  TCcnica 
Aeroespacial. 
Intelsat.  See  International  Telecommuni- 
cations  Satellite  Consortium. 
INTELSAT  I.  See EARLY  BIRD  I. 
(communica- 
BIRD”) 
41,350,360,365,385 
launch,  331 
Inter-Agency Bird Hazard Committee, 284 
Inter-American Experimental Meteorolog- 
ical Rocket  Network  (EXAMETNET),  154, 
253 
Znterauia, 335 

International  Airline  Pilots  Association, 
165 
International  Assn.  of  Machinists  (IAM), 
144, 236,  242,  254,  257,  259,  272 
International  Astronautical  Federation 
(m), 289 
Congress,  188, 317,  319,  320,  321 
International  Astronomical  Union  (IAU)  , 
171,  324 
International  Business  Machines  Corp. 
(ISM),  61-62,  103,  165,  233,  257 
Federal Systems Div.,  321, 348 
International  Civil  Aviation  Organization 
(ICAO),  43 
International  Conference of  Social Work, 
288 
International  Conference  on Selenodesy, 
196 
International  conference  on outer  space 
(proposed),  20,  28,  32,  287 
International Congress on Air Technology, 
x i n  
International  Congress  on Oceanography, 
I-- 
Second,  189 
International  Council of  Scientific Unions 
(ICSU),  46 
International  coo  eration,  84-85,  291 
aircraft,  188, 255 
astronomy, 40,  125,  171, 251,  329,  346 
communications, 40,  162-163,  376,  381 
meteorolog  , 8,  14, 15, 21,  89,  96,  133, 
154,  18z  195,  210,  298,  308,  326, 
346-347 
militarv, 40, 306 
oceanography, 240 
science and technology, 15, 49,  77,  133, 
221,  231,  251,  303,  346-347 
International  cooperation,  space  (see  also 
European Launcher Development Or- 
anization; European  Space Research 
Lgan iza t ion ;   space  law  treaty),  10, 
96.  111-112.  119 
confirence  (pro  osed),  20,  28,  32 
satellite,  11, 388  
Europe, 237,  239 
NASA-‘ESRO, 383 
-France, 195 
-West Germany,  176,342 
U.S.-Canada,  63 
U.S.-U.K.,  40 
U.S.-U.S.S.R.,  308 
U.S.S.R.-France,  221,  226,  227,  261, 
281.  334.  348.  370.  386 
,
,
 
soundiqg rocket 
ESRO,  124,235,  299 
NASA-Ar  entina,  154,342,  346-347 
-Brazf, 14, 161, 252, 310,320, 347, 
373 
-Canada, 313 
-France, 327 

450 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

220, 

-Greece, 178, 185, 187 
-India, 234 
J a  an, 381 
-P&  stan,  69,  114-115 
-S  ain,  15,  138 
-$est  Germany,  191, 299 
space research,  141, 155-156,  152 
Euro  e,  37,  73,  189,  210,  214, 
28! 
NlrsA-Sweden, 5 1  
-West  Germany, 303 
US.-Australia,  123 
-New Zealand, 89  
-U.K., 123 
-U.S.S.R.,  74,  90 
tracking, 81 
U.S.  -1 ustralia,  64 
NASA-S ain,  137 
-ESRO,  356 
-U.S.S.R.,  90,  293,  298,  299 
International Council of  Scientific Unions 
(ICSU) 46, 310,  316 
International  Council of  the  Aeronautical 
Sciences (ICAS), 291, 293 
International Flat Earth  Society, 282 
International Galabert Astronautical Prize, 
188 
International Geophysical Year  (IGY), 251, 
260 
International  Institute  of  Space Law,  289, 
317 
International  Scientific Radio  Union,  199 
International  Telecommunications  Sat- 
ellite  Consortium  (Intelsat),  120,  126, 
139,  159,  165,  197,  386 
International  Telecommunications Union 
(mu),  181) 
International  Telecommunications Union 
Conference, 135 
International  Telephone  and  Telegraph 
Corp.  (ITT), 126,  145,  179,  210,  236 
International Union of  Electrical Workers 
(IUEW), 142, 144, 150 
the   Quiet  Sun 
International  Year  of 
(IQSY), 64,  80, 251, 260 
“Internationale”  (U.S.S.R.  anthem),  157, 
171 
Inventions,  16,  156,  199,  285,  288,  335 
Ion  propulsion.  See  Engine,  electric,  ion. 
Ionosphere 
composition, 111, 274,  277 
properties  of,  79,  127,  234,  301,  328, 
341,347 
seasonal changes, 10  
Iowa, 341 
See International Year of  the  Quiet 
IQSY. 
Sun. 
Iranian  Poets  Association,  49 
Irwin, Maj.  James B.  (USAF), 127 
Isaacs, John,  52 
Ise,  Reine,  361 
Italy,  239 
cooperation, 191, 210,  220 
ground  station,  306 
satellite,  133, 174 

ITT.  See International Telephone and Tele- 
gra  h  Corp. 
ITT  $odd  Communications, Inc.,  86,  222, 
332 
ITU.  See  International  Telecommunica- 
tions Union. 
IUEW.  See International Union of Electrical 
Workers. 
Iverson, Richard,  250 
Zzvestia,  44,  59 ,82 ,   115, 157 

J 
J-2  (rocket en  ine),  2,  85,  168,  195,  233, 
252,  257,  3 t 4  
Jackass Flats,  Nev.,  52 ,82 ,   104,  115, 211, 
222 
Jackson, Mich.,  298 
Jackson, Nelson P.,  Aerospace Award,  103  
Jacksonville,  Fla.,  311 
Jaffe,  Leonard, 203,  228,  295 
James, Jack N.,  149 
Japan, 45,222,224,237,311,347,360,365 
astronaut visit to,  54 ,6 1 ,66  
booster, 333, 339 
probe,  3 
satellite,  3,  74,  123, 301, 333,  378 
Satellite Navigation Research Office, 123  
sounding rocket,  109, 149, 257 
Japan-U.S.S.R.  ou th  festival, 237 
Jastrow, Dr.  Rofjcrt, 235 
Javelin  (sounding rocket)  (Argo  D-4), 79, 
161 ,185 ,237 ,267 ,299 ,313  
Jeffries, John, Award,  323 
Jet-assisted takeoff  (Jato), 259 
Jet  engine.  See Engine, jet. 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory ( J P L )   (Cal Tech), 
2 ,45 ,   177, 261,378 
anniversarv.  124 
award,  14f,’166 
contract,  227,  239,  261,  327,  337 
Dee  Space Network, 261,  263,  340 
Goljstone Tracking Station, 3,138,  157, 
194. 203.  226.  372 
Lunar‘Orbiter  (see also LUNAR  ORBITERS 
I, 11), 265,340 
Mariner project  (see also MARINER  11, IV), 
9 ,175 ,238  
radar,  154, 171 
research,  89,  162,  175,  189,  202,  253- 
254,  322 ,348 ,355  
Surveyor project  (see  also  SURVEYORS  I, 
11), 39,  340,  372 
Voya  e r  project,  9,  198, 243,  279,  352, 
37 8  
“Jet  shoes,”  78 
Jodrell Bank  Experimental Station,  160, 
209 
Lunaspacecraft,  41,  47,  115,  126, 278, 
328,  330 
-U.S.S.R.  Venus exDeriment.  9,  47 
. .  
VENUS  111,  75 
Johannesburg, S. Africa, 316,325 
Johns  Hopkins  Univ.,  60,  111,  181,  145, 
162 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

451 

Johnson,  Arthur  W.,  286 
Johnson,  Clarence L.,  27,  135 
Johnson,  David  S.,  43 
Johnson,  Dr.  Gerald W.,  49  
Johnson,  President  Lyndon  B.,  131,  159, 
214,  298 
air pollution,  194 
appointment,  111, 293, 340 
astronaut,  54,  66,  117, 293,  345,  354 
awards by,  50,  251,  380 
budget,  23-24,  259,  286,  357, 364 
communications satellite system, 83 ,361  
defense,  343 
disarmament, 97,  304 
GEMINI  V I I I ,   101  
GEMINI  XII,  344 
international  cooperation,  10,  73,  258, 
303, 311,  354 
LUNA  ix, 42 
meteorolog  59,  113  
oceanograpty,  219,  240 
science and  technolog 
33,  303,  354 
space program,  35,  1&, 169,  259,  297, 
303,  375 
space  treaty,  169-170,  276,  277,  368, 
386 
State of  the  Union Message,  19  
supersonic  transport,  112, 281,  334 
SURVEYOR  I,  205 ,212  
Transportation,  Dept.  of,  80,  321,  340 
Johnson,  Marshall, 250 
Johnson,  Vernon  A.,  371  
Johnson,  Dr.  William G.,  235,  315 
Johnston,  Richard,  226,  317 
Joint  Chiefs of  Staff, 72 
Jonash,  Edmund R.,  315 
Jones, M /G  David M.  (USAP), 229,  360 
Jones, Robert F.,  199 
Jones,  WilIiam J.,  309 
Journal  of  A i r  Law   and   Commerce, 282 
Journal  of  Geophysical  Research, 377 
Journal  of  Spacecraft  and  Rockets,  159 
Journal  of  the Armed  Forces, 87,  1343,  219 
Joyner,  Upshur  T.,  213 
JPL.  See Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory. 
JT9D  (turbofan engine),  137,  143 
JTF-17A  (turbofan engine),  109 
Junior  Academy  of  Sciences, 382 
Junkers  Flugzeug-und  Motorenwerke  A. 
G.,  208 
Jupiter  (planet), 29 ,74 ,1S0 ,210 ,281 ,311 ,  
355 

K 
Kai-shek, President  Chiang, 72 
Kakol,  Stanley J.,  106 
Kaminski, Heinz, 45,  104 
Kano,  Nigeria, 351 
Kansas City, Mo.,  327 
Kansas  City S tar ,  303 
Kansas,  Univ.  of,  200 
Kantrowitz, Arthur,  359 
Kapitsa, Dr.  Pyotr  L.,  21,  30,  165 
Kaplan,  Dr.  Lewis D.,  264,  322 
Kapustin  Yar,  U.S.S.R.,  294 ,372  

Karo, VIAdm. H.  Arnold  (USN), 293 
Karolinska Institute,  318 
Karth,  Re  . Joseph  E.,  19,  98,  113,  200, 
214 ,258 ,275 ,308  
Kastler.  Dr.  Alfred.  339 
Kazakhkan,  U.S.S.k., 121, 223 
KC-135  (Stratolifter),  106 
Keathley, William,  361 
Keldysh, Mstislav V.,  20,  50, 82,  140, 224 
Keller, K. T.,  22 
Kelley,  Dr.  Albert J.,  149 
Kemmerer, Dr.  Walter,  6 4  
Kennedy, Harvey M.,  Jr., 139 
Kennedy International Air  ort, N.  Y.,  365 
Kennedy, President  John  l!, 
193, 365 
Kennedy,  John  F.,  Center  for  Special 
Warfare.  156 
Kennedy,  ‘John   F.,  Memorial  Library, 
314-315 
152 lh, 215 ,258 ,283  
Kenned  S  ace  Center  (KSC) (NASA), 125, 
Apollo /Saturn,  69,  134, 193, 383 
astronauts  at,  112,  213,  247,  249,  293, 
349 
award, 314-315 
contract,  223,  262,  321,  337 
crawler-transporter, 33,  86,  248 
facilities, 86, 220,  364 
personnel,  258 
spacecraft delivery, 49 
strike,  142, 144, 150, 242, 268,  271,  272 
KergnBlen, 227 
Kerr,  Breene M.,  2,  88,  195, 209 
Kerster,  Geor  e,  250 
Keyhoe, Maj.%onald  E.  (USMC, Ret.),  119  
Kilston  (comet),  260 
Kilston,  S te   hen,  260 
Kincheloe, K e n  C., Award,  301 
King, Jose  h  C.,  120 
King, Ludgw,  249 
King, Robert E.,  6 
King’s  Medal  (U.K.),  2 
Kin  s  Point,  N.  Y., 321 
irt and APB,  N.  Mex.,  119 
K ? ?  
Kitt  Peak National Observatory, 9 
Kitty Hawk,  N.  C.,  377 
mass,  Phillip  J.,  272 
Klein, Milton,  336 
Klein,  Murray,  9 
Kleinman,  Dr.  David A.,  51 
Kliore, Dr.  Arvydas J.,  175 
Klump,  H.  F.,  358 
Knight,  Maj.  William  J .   (USAF), 237,  247, 
257 ,263 ,278 ,351 ,385  
Knowles, Gov.  Warren  P.,  69 
Kock,  Dr. Winston  E.,  288 
Koesterer, M.  G.,  174 
Kok,  Dr.  Bessel,  174  
Kolman, Prof.  E.,  201  
Kolomiyets, Nikola  333 
Komarov, L /C V lazm ir   (U.S.S.R.],  237 
Kommunist,  40  
Komsomolskaya  Pravda ,   21  
Konecci,  Dr.  Eugene B.,  54,  79,  221,  252 
Konstantinov,  Boris, 236 
Korad Gorp . ,   135 

452 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Korea,  54  
Korea, North,  355 
Korean War,  311 
Korff,  Dr.  Serge A.,  333 
Kormanyos, Steven W.,  142 
Korolev, Sergey Pavlovich, 16 
Koroni, Greece, 87,  178.  187 
Kosygh,  Premier  h lexey   N.  (U.S.S.R.), 
94.  356.  370 
Koteiniko;,  Vladimir, 9 
Koval,  Ivan,  46 
Kraft,  Christopher C.,  Jr.,  166, 235 
Krakatau,  Indonesia, 299 
Kratochvil. L IC  C.H.  (USAP).  336 

isGh,  Dr.  Alan  D.,  142 
KSC.  See Kennedy Space Center. 
Kuiper, Dr.  Gerard P.,  44,  96  
Kuo.  T.  K..  152 
Ku  permadn,l)r.  Aron,  128 
Kugrt,  Wesley A.,  98 
Dr.  Hermann H.,  81 
E r F n i v . ,  45 
Kyushu  Island,  Japan,  149,  301,  333,  378 

L 

183 

259, 

Labor, Dept. of, 6 
Labor  relations  (see  also  strike),  6, 
271,  364 
Lafayette College,  140 
Lagerfeld  Base,  Munich,  Germany, 
Lagos,  Nigeria,  134 
La  Jolla, Calif.,  159 
Lakehurst, N.  J.,  134 
Lam,  S. H.,  151 
Lambda  (Japanese booster),  74 
4s-1,  301 
4s-2,  378 
Lambda Scorpii  (star),  241 
LAMBDA  (U.S.S.R.  satellite),  374 
Lamont Geological  Observatory, 94 
Lancaster, Calif., 214 
Lancaster, Dr.  Otis E.,  298 
Les  Landes 
(missile  launching  site), 
France,  8 2  
Landing gear,  aircraft,  158, 296,  314 
“Landing on  the  Moon”  (TV program), 198  
Lange, Dr.  Oswald H.,  192 
Langley  Research  Center  ( L ~ R C )   (NASA), 
309 
award, 213,315 
computer,  165, 215 
contract,  19,  90, 92,  135, 177, 284,  316 
lifting  body  research  (see  also  HL-lo), 
19 ,135  
Lunar  Orbiter  program,  262,  265,  281, 
313 ,340 ,344  
PAGEOS I,  222 
arawing, 156 
{lanetar y  Reentry  Parachute  Program, 
153,  242-243,  279,  284,  340,  352, 
370 

49.  90 

contract,  275 
Project  Scanner,  92,  268, 369 
Scout  Reentry  Heating Project, 
Langmuir p:obe, 
234, 292 
See INTELSAT  11-A. 
“LANI  BIRD. 
Larraga, Gen.  Jose Lacalle,  317 
Las  Cruces, N.  Mex.,  235, 351 
Las Vegas,  Nev.,  145 ,366  
Laser, 135 
chemical, 221,  289 
patent,  126, 258 
use of, 51, 97,  126, 209,310,  380 
Lasilla, Chile,  125 
Lasswell,  Harold D.,  190 
Launch  Complex  14, 243 
Launch Complex  17A, 269 
Launch Complex 37,  233 
Launch Complex 39,  15,268,  315 
Launch Complex 41,  276 
Launch Escape S  stem  (Les),  19, 21,  42 
Launch UmbilicdTower,  86 
Launch vehicle  (see also individual launch 
vehicles such as Atlas-Centaur, Saturn, 
etc.) 
reusable, 99,  221,  358 
Lausche, Sen.  Frank J.,  137 
Lawrence Radiation Laboratories, 49 
Learned, Dr.  Edmund P.,  131 
Lebedinsky, Dr. Alexander I.,  50 ,174 ,377  
Lederberg, Joshua, 260 
Lederman, Leon,  286 
Lee,  Ca  t  Chester M.  (USN,  Ret.),  267 
Leiden,%niv.  of,  Observatory, 324,  377 
Leighton, Dr.  Robert B.,  90, 236 
Lem  (Lunar excursion module). See Lunar 
 module. 
Lemke,  George A.,  268 
Leningrad Institute  of  Cytology,  337 
Leningrad Jet  Study Group,  10 
Leningradshya Prauda, 10  
Leonid meteor shower, 220, 267,  350, 351 
Leonov,  L/C  Aleksey  (U.S.S.R.),  92,  107, 
330,  356 
Le  Poole,  Rudol  h  S.,  116 
Les.  See Launc i  Escape System, 
Lesher,  Dr.  Richard L.,  12 
Levitt, Dr.  I. M.,  366 
Levy,  Lawrence, 275 
Lewis,  David  S.,  354 
Lewis, Dr.  George W.,  23 
Lewis  Research Center  (LRC)  (NASA),  258, 
281 
anniversary, 23 ,312  
Atlas-Centaur, 197,296,329-330 
award, 315 
contract,  251,  283, 298 
research,  120, 194, 293 
rocket  engine 
hydro  en-fueled, 125 
se r t ,   $12 
turbo  ump,  114 
Lewis,  &chard,  261 
Lewis,  Roger, 354 
Li-2  (U.S.S.R.  aircraft),  256 
Libby, Dr. Willard F.,  128 
Library of  Congress,  243 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

453 

LIBERTY  BELL  7  (spacecraft),  105 
Liccardi, Anthony L.,  354 
Lick  Observatory,  260 
Life,  artificial,  18-19 
L i je   magazine,  125 
Life science.  See Space biology. 
Life su  port  system,  11, 94,  120, 273 
L if t ing tody  vehicle,  99,  383 
HL-10,  19,  135, 379 
M2-F2,  114,  237,  244,  264,  274,  284, 
293,  297,  298,  306,  312,  319,  330, 
352 
SV-5D,  378 
SVdP ,   152 
Lin,  Prof.  Shao-Chi, 27 
Lind,  Dr.  Don L.,  127 
Ling-Temco-Vought (LTV) Aerospace Corp., 
194,  264,  267,  309 
Lipski, Prof.  Yuri,  305 
Lisbon,  Portugal,  302 
Little Joe  I1  (booster),  19, 21 
Little  Luke  (NASA barge),  74 
Litton Industries, Inc.,  337, 361,  371 
Livermore,  Calif.,  237 
Lm.  See Lunar Module. 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corn..  284 
award,  27,  135, 354'  ' 
C-5A  (cargo  transport),  35,  58, 377 
C-141 (,,;go 
jet),-66 
contract,  5,  66,  77,  208,  361 
F-104G (Starfighter),  53,  256,  367 
500  (car  o  aircraft),  358 
HC-l30€f, 164 
Launch Escape System rocket motor,  42 
supersonic  transport, 85,  170, 224,  286, 
296,  299,  323,  341,  343,  383 
Lockheed-California Go.,  111, 335,  356 
Lockheed-Georgia Co.,  58,  314,  365 
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.,  179, 195, 
213,  319,  353,  356,  375 
Lockheed  Propulsion  Co.,  16, 90 
Loewy, Dr.  Robert G.,  298,  362 
Loginov,  Yevgeni F.,  339 
Logistics  Management  Symposium,  First, 
291 
London  Times, 251,  260 
London,  U.K.,  41,  77,  170, 262,  293,  354 
Long Tank Thor,  6 
Look,  323 
Loosbrock,  John,  36 
Lop Nor,  Communist China,  382 
LORHO   (test  facility), 221 
Lorsch, H.  G.,  174 
Los Angeles, Calif.,  188, 221,  238, 330 
meeting in, 166, 241, 271, 273, 275,314, 
366 
Los  Angeles  Times, 82,  142, 248 
Louisiana,  341 
Lousma,  Capt.  Jack  R.  (USMC), 127 
Lovelace, Dr. W.  Randolph,  11, 36,  54, 359 
Lovelace, Dr. W.  Randolph, 11, Award, 225 
Lovell,  Sir  Bernard,  16,  44,  75,  115,  126, 
160, 209,  330 
Lovell, Capt. James  A.,  Jr.  (USN), 110 

award,  69,  226,  259,  354,  374 
GEMINI  XII  (fight),  219,  327,  340,  345, 
349 
Low,  George M.,  235 
Lowenfeld,  Andreas F.,  43 
Lowman,  Paul D.,  Jr.,  7,  355 
LRC.  See Lewis  Research  Center. 
LTV.  See  Ling-Temco-Vought  Aerospace 
Corp. 
Luee,  Adm.  Sir David,  61 
Luckey,  Dr.  T.  D.,  166 
Ludlow Kin  Associates,  249 
Luedecke,  d / G  Alvin  R.  (USAF-Ret.),  9 
Luftwaffe, 111 
LUNA  111  (U.S.S.R.  lunar probe),  333 
LUNA  IX,  41-42,  130, 203 
launch, 35 
photographs, 44 ,47 ,   48,49,  50 ,59 ,   115, 
116.  213.  228 
soft-kinding, 42,  45,  50 ,1 46 ,38 5  
LUNA  x, 125, 146, 171, 279,  385 
launch,  122 
lunar  orbit,  126-127 
results,  129,  133, 136,  159, 181, 356, 
358 
LUNA  XI,  279,  330 
launch,  273 
lunar  orbit, 278 
results,  292,  303,  312 
LUNA  XI1 
launch,  326 
lunar orbit,  328,  330,  331 
results,  333,  355 
LUNA  XIII,  380 
launch, 378 
Lunar  Excursion  Module  (Lem).  See 
Lunar  Module. 
Lunar  Module  (Lm),  6,  11,  96,  104,  167, 
198,203, 206,  221,  298,375 
contract,  40 
test,  54,  189 
Lunar  Orbiter  f  (Lunar  Orbiter  A),  279, 
Lunar  Orbiter  (  rogram),  47,  49,  176, 246 
282,  332,  384-385 
launch,  262 
lunar  orbit,  265 
results,  275,  313,  355,  382 
Lunar  Orbiter  I1  (Lunar  Orbiter B),  333, 
347,  373,  384 
launch,  340 
lunar orbit,  344,  364,  369 
Lunar  roving vehicle,  6 
simulated  cabin,  60,  91,  138 
Lunar  Sample Receiving  Laboratory  (MSC), 
163, 171,172,176,255 
Lund,  Thomas, 250 
Lurain.  See  Moon,  photographs  and 
surface. 
Luster,  Project, 326 
Luxembourg,  210 
Lyman-alpha  radiation  experiment,  267, 
274,  347 
Lyons,  Dick, 289 
Lytton  Systems, 287 
LyVere,  Capt. Gerald T.  (USAF), 164 

454 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

M 
M-1  (rocket engine),  114 
M2-F2  (lifting-body vehicle), 384,  385 
flights, 114,237,244,264,274,284,293, 
297,298,301,306,312,319,330,352 
M-87  (celestial bod  radiation  source),  79 
MA-25s   (silicon abyator), 15 
MacDonald, Dr.  Gordon J. F.,  32,128,142, 
214,357 
McCall.  G .  T.  H..  299 
.___  
I  _ _ _ . _ _  
.___  
I  _ _ _ . _ _  
McCall,  Dr.  Jerry  C.,  1 
McCall,  Dr.  Jerry  C.,  1 
I _ .  
I _ .  
McCandless, Lt.  Bruce,  I1  (USN),  127, 382 
McCandless, Lt.  Bruce,  I1  (USN),  127, 382 
McCarthy, Sen.  Eugene J.,  288 
McCarthy, Sen.  Eugene J.,  288' 
McCarthy, Dr.  John,  314 
McCarthy, Dr.  John,  314 
McCollom,  John  S.,  264 
McCollom,  John  S.,  264 
McConnell, Gen. JohnP .  (USAF),72,113,282 
McConnell, Gen. JohnP .  (USAF),72,113,282 
McCormack, James,  146,  199, 270 
McCormack, James,  146,  199, 270 
McCulloch, Re  . William M.,  137 
McCulloch, Re  . William M.,  137 
McCormack, Rep.  John W.,  112 
McCormack, Rep.  John W.,  112 
McDivitt, L /C fames A.(usAF), 54,93,105, 
McDivitt, L /C fames A.(usAF), 54,93,105, 
110.  144. 216.  332.  379 
110.  144. 216.  332.  379 
, 
McDi&ttl Mrs. James' A.,  216 
> 
~~ 
McDonald, Adm.  David L.  (USN), 251 
McDonald, Dr.  James C., 325 
McDonneli  Aircraft  Cor  .,  7,  103,  145, 
157, 167,177,272,3351  354,  364 
McDonnell, James S.,  354 
McGregor-Werner Co.,  272 
McKay, John g., 47,168,252,263,275,288 
McInturff,  Ra  mond M.,  199 
.  , 
McKee.  Gen. William F.  (USAF.  Ret.).  128. 
,, 
, 
131 ,296 ,334  
McKenzie,  R.  I., 354 
McKnew,  Dr.  Thomas W.,  232 
McNamara,  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert 
S.,  40,  43,  57,  72,  170,  264,  303,  341, 
343 
McWilliams, William J.,  73 
Madison, Wis.  69  
Madras,  India,  253 
Madrid,  Spain,  317,  319,  320,  321,  352 
Magellanic Gold Medal,  147 
Magnesium, 221 
Magnetic field  (see a lso   Earth;  Moon) 
earth,  86,  161, 320,  380 
interplanetary,  86 
Magnetic hammer,  288 
Magnetohydrodynamics, 222 
Magnetometer, 29,  56,  83,  129, 221,  234 
Magnuson,  Sen. Warren  G.,  219,  286 
Mahon,  Rep.  George H.,  213 
Maiman, Dr.  Theodore,  135 
Makai, Pro-ect, 366 
Malaysia, 24,  165 
Mali,  139,  174 
Malina, Frank  J.,  124 
Rodion  Y.,  125 
"Man  an   Materials"  (symposium),  147 
Management,  77,  172, 291,  294,  331,  350, 
369.  372 
Management Club, 372 
Management Services, Inc.,  130 
Manchester,  U.  K.,  196 
Manley,  Oscar h., 229 
Manhattan  Pro'ect,  363 

Manned  Orbital  0 erations  Safety  Equip- 
ment  (Moose),  f92  
Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (Mol),  87, 
121, 150, 153,167, a%,  323,348,369 
appropriations, 23-24,  87,  227 
contract,  157,  177 
cooperation,  111, 138, 307 
launch  plans,  11, 243,  381 
test,  87,  111, 167, 338,  381 
Manned space  flight  (see  also  Apollo  ro-  
gram,  Gemini  program  and  fligits; 
Astronaut;  Cosmonaut; Manned  Or- 
biting Laboratory; and Space Biology), 
382 
achievements,  23,  99-100,  100-102, 
105-106,  212,  248,  291,  324,  384 
award,  103 ,259 ,324  
cooperation,  10, 73,  111, 319-320 
criticism,  109 
Eva.  See Extravehicular activity. 
hazards,  105,107,111-12,120,145,182- 
183 ,255  
long-duration,  120, 351 
lunar  landing, manned.  See Moon  land- 
ing, manned. 
manpower required,  56,  149 
military potential,  352,  373,  381-382 
policy and plans  for 
U.S.,  49,  93,229,  238,262,307-308, 
323,  334,  338 
schedule, 93,257,269,332,351,375 
U.S.S.R.  135-136,  303,  316,  319, 
321,  338,  348,  356,  368,  373,  379- 
380 
space simulation  testing,  130,  203,  273 
lunar-roving vehicle cabin, 60, 91-92, 
138 
Manned S  ace Flight Policy Committee, 43 
Manned  {pacecraft  Center  (MSC) (NASA), 
146, 293,  334,  349 
Apollo Spacecraft Office,  167, 375 
astronauts at, 22,27,104,117,218,246, 
249,255 
award,  103, 255,  323,  354 
contract,  40,  104, 270 
Crew Systems Div.,  317 
Gemini Mid-Program Conference,  64  
Lunar  Sam  le  Receiving  Laboratory, 
163, 171, $72,  176,255 
management,  166,235 
manned spacecraft missions. See Gemini 
flights. 
Mission Control Center, 244,  247,  327 
ersonnel,  64 
bh i l i   Prince,  visit,  93 
Real %me  Computer Complex,  258 
spacecraft test.  See Apollo  (spacecraft). 
Marbarger, Dr.  John  P.,  90 
Marble,  Prof.  Frank  E.,  235 
March Field,  Calif.,  259 
* 
Marcos,  President  Ferdinand  E.  (Philip- 
pines),  292,  311 
Marine Resources and  Engineering Devel- 
opment Act,  219 
Marine  Science,  Engineering  and  Re- 
sources Commission, 219 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

455 

Mariner  (program), 32,  73,  281,  337 
Mariner  (spacecraft), 83,  238,  239,  264 
MARINER  11  (Venus probe),  65,  75,  86,  151  
MARINER  IV  (Mars probe), 33,  166 
photogra  hs,  240,  241,  262,  299,  356 
results, 35-32,86,151,175,199,236,241 
signal, 3,  84,  194 
Mariner E  (Venus probe),  7 
Marion Power Shovel Co.,  33 
Mark  12  (reentry vehicle),  255 
Mark,  Dr.  Herman F.,  52 
Mars  (planet)  (see  also  MARINER  IV;  Voy- 
ager  rogram), 86,  157, 173, 212,  239 
atmospgere, 80,  199, 236,  264,  314,322 
craters,  187, 299 
exploration,  23,  73,  290,  334,  348,  368, 
380 
manned,  69,  146-147,  229,  268,  327 
plans  for,  26,  65,  281 
solar-electric  ropulsion,  89,  355 
spacecraft,  25%-254,  268,  279 
unmanned,  recommendation, 17, 198, 
281 
life  on, 53,  65,  189, 241,  366 
surface,  162,  175,  187, 202 
water  on, 236 
Marshall, Gen.  George  C.,  22 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center 
(MSFC) 
(NASA), 119,  168,  194, 241 
Apollo  Telescope Mount,  239,  289,  325, 
360 
Automatic Mathematical Translator,  81 
award, 315 
Computation Laboratory 169, 223 
contract, 5,129, 165, 244,247,249, 268, 
306,  328,  343 ,383  
Sa turn ,   129,  165-166,  255,  378 
launch  vehicle.  See Saturn. 
management, 1, 125, 235,  360 
marine  transportation,  74 
ersonnel,  1 ,  235,  284,  360 
ga t  urn Manufacturing  Review  meeting, 
191 
space science exhibit,  312 
test  (see also Saturn),  55,  60,  91,  138 
Marshall, Mrs.  Jane,  210 
Martin Co.,  14 ,40 ,  78,  103, 112, 135, 152, 
177,  195,  210,  264,  270,  275,  325,  354 
Martin,  Glenn L.,  383 
Martin,  Dr.  James S.,  Jr.,  262 
Martin,  Joseph W.,  214 
Martin  Marietta  Corp.,  5,  177,  220,  251, 
354 
Maryland,  Univ.  of,  241,  252,  293,  365 
Massachusetts  Ins t i tu te   of  Technology 
(MIT), 26,  31,  47,  214,  223, 258,  280 
experiment,  89,  229 
research,  323,  384 
Masursky, Dr.  Harold,  313 
Materials, aerospace, research, 77,250,382 
Mathews, Charles W.,  17 ,64 ,86 ,103 ,   162, 
342,  354,  360 
Mattingly, Lt.  Thomas K.  (USN), 127 
Maxwell,  BIG  Jewel1  C.  (USAF, Ret.),  85, 
122,200-201 
May,  T. R.,  58  

May Day  (U.S.S.R.),  154,  161 
Medium  Resolution  Infrared  Radiometer 
(Mrir), 178,257 
Mayhew,  Christopher,  61 
Mbelouson, Yuri,  46 
Mdta.  See  Modulation,  demodulation, 
terminal  and  associated  equipment. 
Meitner, Dr.  Lise,  259 
Memorandum of understanding, 15,40,43, 
51,138,195 
Menzel,  Dr.  Donald H.,  382 
Mercury  (  lanet),  17  
j ro jec t ,   7,  103, 321 
J.,  190 
k::ygnest 
Metal fatigue, 377 
“Metalaw,”  289 
Meteor,  149, 351 
Meteorite 
crater,  94  
origin.  116. 144 
, -  , -  
lu& 
im  act,  299,  316,  382 
Meteoroid je tec t ion  satellite, 205,247,337 
Meteorology, 3,  23 
award, 210 
balloon use  in,  3,  89,  168, 287,  326 
cooperation, 8,  43,  89,  210 
ESSA-USN,  267 
NASA-Argentina,  154 
-Brazil, 154, 161  
-France,  195 
-Spain,  15  
U.S.-U.S.S.R.,  96,  156, 269,  271,  308 
forecasting, 3,  79,  195 
National  Natural  Disaster  Warning 
S  stem, 77 
sa tek te .  See Meteorological satellite. 
sounding rocket  experiments  (see  also 
individual  sounding  rockets),  154, 
173.265.360 
chaff. ’14- fS 
, -  , - -  
grenade,  23,  39,  51,  114,  117, 
152, 
161,  164,  216,  226,  260,  307 
’,  310 
Japan,  109,  149 
m$lar- sDhere,  25.  42 
$ot-st&ic  probe;  69,  260,  276 
S.S.R.,  174 
vapor  cloud,  19,  69,  152,  239, 
292,  299,  301,  347 
Stormfury, Project, 267 
weather modification. See Weather 
ification. 
World Meteorolo  ical Day,  113 
World  Weather  b a t c h ,   114,  133,  326 
Meteorological  satellite,  43,  70,  79,  173, 
298,  385 
cooperation 
NASA-France,  195 
U.S.-U.S.S.R.,  96,  156, 269,  271,  308 
Nimbus program, 367 
NIMBUS  I,  3 ,  264 
NIMBUS  I1,178,185,240,257,28S,  347, 
349,365 
Tiros program, 24,41,69,145,220,310, 
321, 365 
contract,  176 
U.S.S.R.,  269,271,  385 

mod- 

242, 

456 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Methane 
Martian atmosphere,  322 
liquid,  293,  362 
“Metro  Air  Support  ’66”  (air  transport 
exercise),  340 
Meudon Observatory,  323 
MI-1   (U.S.S.R.  helicopter), 291 
Miami,  Univ.  of,  378 
Michael,  William,  313 
Michigan,  110,  113,  116, 122 
Michigan Assn.  of  the  Professions,  177 
Michigan Technological Univ.,  22 
Michigan,  Univ.  of,  25,  30,  42,  69,  142, 
2 37 , 25 1 ,2 6 0 , 27 6 ,2 77  
Michoud Assembly Facility  (MSFC),  15, 22, 
34,  191, 298 
Microelectronics,  77,  177 
“Microeye”  (camera),  234 
Microflora,  162 
Micrometeorite,  86,  267,  328,  350,  351 
Micrometeoroid,  288,  327,  336 
collection  experiment,  252,  263,  275, 
292 
Micrometeoroid  detection experiment 
GEMINI  x,  243,  248 
LUNAR  ORBITER  I,  313 
Microscope,  260 
Midas  (satellite),  172 
Midway Island,  149, 233 
Midwest Research Institute,  12 ,2 00  
Midwest  Slavic Congress,  117 
Midwest  S  ace Exposition,  298 
MiG-21  ($S.S.R. 
fighter  aircraft),  323 
Mikhailov,  Prof.  Alexandr  I.,  140 
Mikoyan,  Anastas I.,  94 
Miles,  Marvin,  82 
Miles,  Rufus E.,  Jr.,  310 
Milky  Way  (constellation),  292 
Miller,  Rep.  George P.,  64,  157,  171, 291, 
297.325.357 

Mills Coilege, 332 
Milwaukee,  Wis.,  69,  327,  337 
Milwitzky, Benjamin,  250 
Minderman, Peter A.,  315 
Minneapolis,  Minn.,  138, 287 
Minneapolis  Tribune,  34 
Minnesota,  Univ.  of,  169, 360 
Minuteman  (ICBM),  22,  66 
Minuteman 11,  165, 255 
Mirny Antarctic station,  157 
Mirovaya  Ekonomika  i  Mezhdunarodnyye 
Otnosheniye,  201 
Missile,  97,  113, 153, 219 
air-to-surface,  334,  341,  361 
antiaircraft, 119, 267 
antimissile,  170, 355, 373 
ballistic,  intercontinental  (ICBM),  115, 
165,  261,  369 
foreign 
Communist  China,  331 
France,  8 2 , 20 1  
India,  106 

U.K.,  31 
U.S.S.R.,  181, 261 
medium-range,  227 
nuclear, 355 
passenger,  34 
short range attack  (Sram), 334, 341, 361 
launch,  22,  66,  255,  275,  342,  367 
submarine,  missile  car  ing,  247,  302 
Missiles and Rockets.  See yechno togy  Week .  
Mississippi Test Facility  (MTF)  (MSFC),  114, 
147, 181 ,283 ,364 ,380  
Missouri,  Univ.  of,  55,  136, 166, 350 
MIT.  See Massachusetts  Institute  of  Tech- 
nolo 
Mitcher’LCdr. Edgar  D.  (USN ) ,   127 
Mitchell.  Gen.  William  E..  383 
Mitchell;  Gen.  William’  E.,  Memorial 
Award,  137 
Miyamoto,  Dr .   Shotaro,  45 
Mock, Mrs.  Geraldine,  134 
Mohole,  Project,  150, 155, 182, 247,  359 
Mol.  See Manned  Orbiting Laboratory. 
I 
(U.S.S.R. 
communications 
Molniya 
satellite program),  376,  385 
MOLNIYA  I  (3)  (U.S.S.R.  communications 
satellite),  149, 152, 154, 182. 224 
MOLNIYA  I  (4) ,  325 
Mombasa,  E.  Africa,  174 
Monkey  ex  eriment,  187, 322 
Montreal,  6n iv .   of,  229 
Moon 
atlas,  305 
crater, 187, 299, 305,313, 333, 344,  382 
exploration  of,  1,  29,  56-57,  95,  180, 
198, 255, 307,  369 
equipment, 40,  244-245,  252 
ravitational  field, 265 
fanding 
manned 
US., 95,  96,  134, 219, 352 
plans  for, 23,  229,  327, 334,  350, 
375-376 
U.S.S.R.,  50,  125,  157,  285,  319- 
320 

203, 

380-381,385’ 
magnetic field,  133, 173 
photographs 
LUNA  rx, 44,  46,  47,  48,  59,  174, 
213.  228 
LUNA  XI,  278,279 
LUNA  XII,  333 
LUNA  XIII,  380-381 
LUNAR  ORBITER  I,  262-263,  265,  279, 
281-282,313,382,384 
LUNAR  ORBITER  11,  344,*364, 374 
SURVEYOR  I,  203-204,  208,  226,  228, 
234,  341 
ZOND  111,  305 
probe.  See  individual  probes:  LUNAS  111, 
IX,  X,  XI,  XII,  XIII,  LUNAR  ORBITERS  I,  11, 
RANGER  M, SURVEYORS  I,  11,  ZOND  111. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

457 

radiation, 51,133, 173 
sha   e,  275,  313,  355-356 
surface 
composition,  136, 173,  228,  355 
texture,  49,  50,  96,  174, 203,  228 
topography,  47,  313, 316,  374 
temperature,  50,  203 
volcanism,  299,  313, 316,  374 
Moorefield, W.  Ya.,  122,  176, 314 
Moorestown,  N.  J.,  194 
Moose.  See  Manned  Orbital  Operations 
Safety Equipment. 
Moraes,  Carlos de,  189 
Morehead  Planetarium  (Univ.  of  North 
Carolina),  14  
Morozov,  Platon  D.  218,  237,  248,  258, 
291,  293 
Morrison,  Dr.  Philip,  28,  47 
Moscow  (U.S.S.R.),  95,  161, 254,  379 
airline service, 339 
airport,  58  
comsat  transmission  to,  152, 154 
meeting in,  125,  189, 227 
press conference,  50,  82,  140 
television,  47,  48, 135, 147, 333 
weather  data exchange,  156 
Moscow State Univ.,  U.S.S.R.,  221 
Mosher,  Rep.  Charles A.,  214 
Moskva,  384 
Motor,  rocket  (solid-propellant),  16,  62, 
i i o , i 7 7 , z a 3 , 2 9 7 , 3 8 5  
Motorola,  Inc..  239 
Mt.  Palomar  Observatory, 28,  93,  219 287 
Mt. Wilson  Observatory,  219,  287 
Moyers,  Bill,  212 
Mrir.  See  Medium  Resolution  Infrared 
Radiometer. 
MSC,  See Manned  Spacecraft Center. 
MSFC,  See  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center. 
MT-135 
(Japanese 
sounding 
rocket), 
381 
MTF.  See Mississippi Test Facility. 
Mu-1  Uaoanese  booster).  333.  339 
Muellei,  b r .  George E . , ’ i ,   31 i  
Apollo, 69,  275,  291 
Aiollo. A  plications,  52 
award.  3 f 4  
Gemini,  108, 207,  318 
manned  spaceflight, 30,  56,  64,  93,  110, 
269 
space  program,  56,  93,  162,  191,  196, 
329.  337.  366 
technology ’utilization,  357,  366 
Mulholland,  Donald R.,  188 
Mullin,  Jerome P.,  339 
Mullins,  George C.,  128 
“Multiple  Sclerosis Woman  o f   the   Year,” 
215 
Mundt,  Sen. Karl,  179 
Murphy,  Charles,  180 
Murphy, Franklin D.,  128 
Murphy, Dr.  Thomas P.,  55 
Murray,  Dr.  Bruce C.,  73,  236 
Mururoa Atoll,  232,246,  312 

N 
N*3245  (nuclear particle),  142 
NAC.  See National  Aviation  Club. 
NACA.  See  National  Advisory  Committee 
for Aeronautics. 
Nadge.  See  NATO  Air  Defense  Ground 
Environment  Project. 
NAE.  See  National  Academy  of  Engi- 

Naples,  Italy, 306 
Naples, Univ.  of,  319 
Napolitano, Dr.  Luigi, 319 
Narodna  A rm i ya ,  214 
NAS.  See  National  Academy  of   Sciences. 
NASA.  See National Aeronautics  and  Space 
Administration. 
NASA  Headquarters 
Inventions  and Contributions Board,  16 
Natural  Resources  Program  Office,  33 
Office  of  Advanced  Research  and Tech- 
nology  (OART),  60,  66,  99,  232,  234, 
238 ,258 ,327 ,334  
Office  of  Manned  Space  Flight  (OMSF), 
18, 26,  53,  125,  143, 232,  233 
Office of  Space Science and Applications 
(OSSA),  3,  18, 32-33,  43-44,  75,  113, 
125,  178,  215,  222,  231,  261,  263, 
269,  281,  296,  325,  340,  367,  374 
Office of  Technology  Utilization,  3 
Planetary  Quarantine  Committee,  308 
Scientific  and  Technical  Information 
Facility,  273 
NASA-AEC  Space Nuclear  Propulsion  Office 
(SNPO),  42,  83, 336 
NASA   Contributions to  Cardiovascular Mon- 
itoring,  309 
NASA  Pasadena Office  (NaPO),  261 
NASAS ace Radiation Effects Laboratory, 19 
NASC.  gee National  Aeronautics  and  Space 
Council. 
Nasher,  Raymond  D.,  258 
Natal,  Brazil,  14,  161,  164, 252,  260,  265, 
307,310,  373 
Nathan,  Dr.  Robert, 262 
National  Academy  of  Engineering  (NAE), 
145,  155 
National  Academy  of  Sciences  (NAS),  39, 
53,  85,  123, 133, 150 ,173 ,231 ,302 ,  
305, 310, 320,361,  376,  384 
Physics Survey Committee,  95 
Space  Science  Board  (see  also  National 
Research  Council),  17,  53,  95,  198, 
251,  280 ,314 ,349  
National  Advisory  Committee  for  Aero- 
nautics  (NACA),  36,  270 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Adminis- 
tration  (NASA)  (see  also NASA  centers, 
programs, satellites,  and related head- 
ings,  such  as Ames  Research  Center, 
Apollo  rogram,  LUNAR ORBITER  I,  etc.) 
accompliskments, 23-24,  35,  47,  62-63, 
65,  83-84,  88-89,  92,  99-100,  155- 
265,294, 
156,203,205,207,246,24%, 
349,  384-385 

458 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

agreement. See Agreement. 
anniversary, 23,  35,  310 
astronaut.  See Astronaut. 
awards and  honors,  20,  22,  30,  43,  50, 
57,  77,  103,  117,  140,  145,  188,  191, 
208,  213,  215,  218,  223,  225,  232, 
235,236,255,259,301,304,314-315, 
321 ,323 ,324 ,331 ,352 ,354 ,359 ,374  
ap  ro  riations,  127, 143,  163, 166,  172, 
!7< 
190,214,244,247,257,259,261, 
263,271,273,286,328 
budget,  23,  26-27,  28,  59,  64,  70-71, 
75-76,80,91,  93,  113, 138, 143, 149, 
171,  187, 262,  278,  317,  357,  364 
conference, 5, 64,  191, 291 
contract 
administration,  239 
engine, 2,  5, 16, 85, 90,  115, 145,224, 
238,255,  257-258,  330,  332,  356, 
575 
fa%ies,  255,  257,  258,  273 
space  e  uipment,  54,  92,  104,  117, 
175,1?6,177,179,194,221,234,264, 
271,  325,  337,  348, 353,  356 
spacecraft,  5,  77,  90,  176,  227,  275 
space medicine, 64 
study,  2,  5,  176, 179, 195, 356 
support  services,  9,  165-166,  195, 
223,  235,  244,  262,  298,  315,  321, 
380,  383 
tracking, 261,  315, 361 
cooperation, 284 
AEC,  42,82-83,  211,  336,  360 
American  Society  for  Engineering 
Education, 364-365 
ComSatCorp, 235 
DOD,  7,  29,  43,  110,  150,  198,  225, 
304-305,334 
ESSA,  43,  103 
FAA,  128 
NAS-NRC,  302 
Naval Oceanographic Office,  19  
Small Business Administration, 89  
USAF,  90-91,  111, 114,  128-129,  150, 
203 
USDA,  3 ,117  
USN,  8 
cooperation,  international.  See  In ter-  
national cooperation, space and Sound- 
ing  rocket,  international  programs. 
criticism of,  7,  37,  108,  109,  123,  165, 
202,  220,  232-233,  258,  260,  264, 
266,  273,  280-281,  319,  365,  366 
exhibit, 60,  253,  312 
facilities, 19, 23,  83,  220,  247,  257,258, 
273-274 
construction,  97,  255,  364 
history,  231 
Humphrey,  Vice  President  Hubert  H., 

Inventions and Contributions Board, 317 
labor  relations,  6,  258,  271,  364 
launch,  120, 131 

failure,  162,  164,  180,  182,  193 
manned 
GEMINI  VIII,  99 
GEMINI  IX-A,  206 
GEMINI X,  243 
GEMINI  XI,  290 
GEMINI XII,  344 
postponed,  61,  67,  96,  121,  180,  202 
probe 
PIONEER  VII,  269 
SURVEYOR  r,  196, 232 
SURVEYOR 11  296 
satellite 
ATS  I,  367-8,  371 
BIOSATELLITE  I,  374 
ESSAS  I,  11,  and  111,  41,  69, 310 
EXPLORERS  XXXII and XXXIII,  192 ,231  
INTELSAT 11-A,  331 
LUNAR  ORBITERS  I  and  11,  262,  340 
NIMBUS  Ir,  178 
OAO  I .   132 
OGO   I ~ I ,  209 
PAGEOS  I,  222 
Scanner,  Proiect,  268 
test 
Apollo-Saturn, 67,  88, 233,  274 
Augmented  Target  Docking  Adap- 
ter, 202 
Launch Escape S  stem, 21 
Scout  Reentry  d a t i n g  Project,  50 
sounding rocket 
Aerobee 150 ,60 ,89 ,   138,156,277, 
364,  373 
Aerobee 150A, 18 ,7 9 ,84 ,   182 ,276  
Aerobee 350,  269 
JH””? ave in, 173 79,  161, 237, 267,  299 
Arcas,  173 
Boosted Arcas,  185, 277 
Nike-Apache, 10, 19, 42,  55, 56,  95, 
111,117,127,132,214,234,237, 
239,240,242,245,276,292,307, 
351 
Nike-Cajun,  39,  42,  51,  161,  307, 
3 10 
Nike-Tomahawk, 276,  301,  360 
Orion 11, 342 
Pacemaker, 333 
Wasp,  210 
management, 9,125,258,268,289-290, 
291,  331,  350,  360 
manpower,  93 
organization,  1,  16,  43-44,  139, 
235,261,327 
atents,  16, 335 
:view 
gbservatory  Class  Spacecraft  Rt 
Board, 149 
127, 
personnel,  9,  32,  34,  36,  105,  106, 
232, 
128,132,202,203,208,209,214, 
283, 
235,249,258,264,267,268,270, 
328, 
288,289-290,305,316,317,327, 
336 ,340 ,360 ,377 ,383  
166, 
ap  ointments,  6,  12, 54,  55,  73, 
279, 
!73,  195,  243,  246,  249,  275, 
319, 
283,  284,  298,  310,  311,  315, 
380 

188, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

459 

programs  (see  also  s  ecific  programs, 
such  as Apollo,  (emini,  etc.  and 
Space program,  national) 
aeronautics,  62,  66,  208 
astronom  39,  62-63,  65,  150-151, 
278,  2&  
international,  62-64,  80-81,  90,  133, 
141, 155, 386 
manned  space  flight,  52,  64-65,  71, 
93,  167,  238,  261,  269,  318,  324, 
327,332,349,351,375-376 
meteorology,  3,  381,  384-385 
nuclear propulsion, 42 ,62 ,   82-83 
285 --- 
sounding rocket, 65,80-81,310,384.- 
space  medicine,  187,  317-318,  361, 
374 
space science, 59,  62-64, 71,  83,  133, 
229,  238,  264,  359,  384-385 
technology  utilization,  88-89,  281, 
328,  334 
tracking  and  data  a 
isition,  81,  83 
Sa turn  ManufacturingTeview  meeting, 
191  
Science Advisory Committee, 95 
Space Science Steering Committee, 83 
supersonic transport,  92,  128, 224 
test 
Agena  target  vehicle, 67,  86 
booster, 1 4 , 2 2 ,6 4 ,  84,  107, 114, 122, 
147,  181,  185,  195, 210,  227,  233, 
252,  350,  357,  364,  382,  383 
motor,  solid  propellant,  62,  110 
nuclear,  42,  52,  82,  103-104,  115, 
211.222 
parachute,  279,  284,  340,  352,  370 
spacecraft,  19,  35-36,  39,  42,  175, 
185,  328 
universities,  53,  71,  238-239,  298,  364, 
378,  379 
grants;  55,  97,  287 
X-15.  See X-15. 
National  Aeronautic  and  Space Engineer- 
ing Meeting, 314 
National Aeronautic  Assn.,  210,  237,  324 
National Aeronautics and  Space Act,  288, 
310 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Council 
(NASC), 35,  44,  46,  53,  79,  99,  102, 167, 
180,  212,  252,  319,  324,  357,  372,  373 
Nat&al 
Aerospace  Education  Council, 
L I W  
National Air  and  Space Museum, 49,  169, 
227,  324 
National Air Museum, 227 
National Assn.  of  Broadcasters,  118 
National  Assn.  of  Educational  Broad- 
casters,  327 
National Assn.  of Manufacturers, 256, 319 
National Assn.  of  Science Writers,  Inc.,  47 
National  Aviation  Club  (NAC),  208,  268, 
308 
National Aviation Hall of  Fame,  383 
National Broadcasting Co.  (NBC), 136,256. 
287 
National Bureau of  Standards, 9 

National Center for Atmospheric*Researcb 
and Information, 89,  133,  168, 263 
ee  for  Clear  Air  Tur- 
National  Conference  of  Lieutenant  Gov- 
ernors,  223-224 
National Council of  Marine Resources and 
Engineerin  Development,  219 
National Cowghoy Hall  of  Fame,  236 
National  Cybernetics Foundation,  54 
National Dair  Council,  25 
National  DeLnse  Transportation  Assn. 
Award,  297 
National  Environmental  Satellite  Center, 
96  
National  Foundation  on  the   Arts  and 
Humanities,  147, 360 
National  Geographic  Society,  132,  155, 
232 
National  Investigations  Committee  on 
Aerial  Phenomena  (NICAP), 119 
National  Labor  Relations  Board,  271 
National  Lea  e  of  Cities,  366 
National M e d r o f   Science,  50,  380 
National  Natural  Disaster  Warning  Sys- 
tem,  77 
National  Observer, 13  
National Oceanography Assn.  (NOA), 224 
National Park  Service, 15  
National Pilots  Assn.  308 
National  Radio  Astronomy  Observatory, 
257 
National Reactor Testing Station,  Ida.,  13, 
276 
National Research Council (NRC), 302,336 
Space Science Board,  336,  384 
National Referral Center,  243 
National Satellite Center, 286 
National Science Board,  10, 243 
National Science Foundation  (NSF), 10 ,24 ,  
30,  38,  54-55,  59,  96-97,  104,  223, 
243,247,  257,  360 
Special  Commission  on  Weather  Mod- 
“The  National  Science  Foundation  -  I ts  
ification, 21  
Present  and  Future”  (report),  223 
National security,  83,  130, 135,  196, 366 
National  sonic  boom  program  (see  also 
Supersonic  transport;  X-15),  338,  342, 
354,372,  376,378 
National  Space  Club  (NSC),  19,  53,  102, 
153, 221 ,269 ,297 ,323  
National  Suace  Club  Press  Award.  103 
National  &ace  program.  See  Space  pro- 
gram, national. 
National  Survey  of  Historic  Sites,  263 
National  Youth  Science  Camp  program, 
239 
NATO. See North Atlantic Treaty Organiza- 
tion. 
NATO. Air  Defense  Ground  Environment 
(Nadge) Project,  227 
NATO’s   15 Nations,  199,282 
Nature, 289 
Naugle, Dr.  John E.,  44,  326 

460 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Naval Electronics Laboratory,  13 
Naval Laboratories, 49 
Naval Missile Center,  327 
Naval  Research  Laboratory,  79,  109,  156, 
174,242,317 
Naval  Reserve  Officers Assn.,  316 
L a  Nazione,  45 
NBC.  See National Broadcasting  Co . 
Neher,  H.  Victor,  152 
Nelson,  Clifford H.,  313 
Nero 
(Near  Earth  Rescue  Operation) 
spacecraft, 384 
Nema.  See  Nuclear  Engine  for  Rocket 
Vehicle  Application. 
Ness, Dr.  Norman  F.,  86, 315,  358 
Netherlands,  125, 190-191,  210,  220, 239, 
306,  324,  347,  377 
Nettles,  J. Cary,  315 
Nevada,  215,  339 
New  Delhi,  India,  34 
New Hampshire,  Univ.  of,  274,  360 
New Mexico,  367 
New Mexico, Univ.  of, 89, 381 
New  Rochelle, N.  Y.,  353 
New  York Board of Trade,  331 
New  York,  N.  Y.,  18,  97,  191,  246,  258, 
316 ,319 ,330 ,340 ,367  
New  York  Times, 57,  355, 376 
science  and  technology,  30,  260,  367, 
377 
space  law treaty,  250,  277,  299 
space program 
U.S.,  44, 47,  52,  105,  182,  279,  347- 
348 
U.S.S.R.,  20,  82,  95,  130,  157,  279, 
294,339 
space  technology,  33,  69,  96,  109,  136, 
339 ,352 ,384  
supersonic  transport,  281,  289,  333 
New  York  Univ.,  52,  97,  293,  319,  333 
New  York,  Univ.  of  (Stony  Brook),  225 
New York World Telegram, 110 
New York Zoological Society,  96 
New Zealand,  54,  89, 347 
New  Zealand Weather Service.  168 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne,  Univ.  of, U. K.,  150 
Newell,  Dr.  Homer  E.,  1, 26,  44,  95,  110, 
149 ,235 ,251 ,325 ,367  
space astronomy,  121, 384 
space programs,  scientific, 59 ,62 ,65 ,   71, 
121, 324 
Newport  News, Va.,  87 
News  conference.  See  Press  conference. 
Ney,  Edward  P.,  241 
Nhatrang,  Sou th  Vietnam,  361 
NICAP.  See National Investigations Commit- 
tee on Aerial Phenomena. 
N'  eria,  351 
Nxe-Apache  (sounding  rocket),  65,  342 
electron measurement,  50,  55,  95,  127, 
214.240.292.293.347 
,
.
.
,
 
ionosphere  experiments,  10,  56,  111, 
127,  234,274 
micrometeoroid  sampling,  267,  351 
Polar cap absorption data, 245, 284 
upper atmosphere data, 19,69, 117, 152, 

237,  260,  276,  307 
Nike-Cajun  (sounding  rocket),  6 5 6 6  
radar  test,  25,  42 
up   e r  atmosphere data,  23,  114, 328 
fall, 307 
summer, 161,164,216,221,226,260, 
265 
winter,  39,  51 
Nike-Hydac  (sounding rocket),  347 
Nike-Javelin  (sounding rocket),  108, 115 
Nike-Tomahawk  (sounding  rocket),  137, 
276 ,277 ,283 ,287 ,293 ,341  
Nike-X  (antimissile  missile  system),  191, 
343 
Nikoiayev,  L /C Andrian G.  (U.S.S.R.),  60 
Nikolayeva-Tereshkova,  Maj.  Valentina 
(U.S.S.R.),  90 
Nilsson,  Carl,  288-289 
NIMBUS  I  (meteorological  satellite),  2,  264 
NIMBUS  II(Nimbus  6) 2,  178, 185 ,240 ,257 ,  
283,  347, 349,  365,  385, 
launch,  178 
Nimbus  B,  2,  322 
Nininger,  Dr.  Harvey H.,  232 
Nippon  Electric Co.,  179 
Nitrogen,  335 
NOA.  See National  Oceanography Assn. 
Nobel  Prize,  339 
Noervich,  W.  Germany,  256 
Noise,  aircraft,  164,  274,  279,  284,  288, 
332 
No&k,  Va.,  332 
Normyle,  William,  149 
North  American  Air  Defense  Command 
(NORAD), 32 ,43 ,   194 
North  American  Aviation,  Inc.  136,  158, 
215,  268,  283-284,  302 
Apollo  spacecraft,  93,  313-314,  328 
Atomics  International  Div.,  320 
contract, 2,  5,  115,  130, 264,  268,  284, 
306,  330 ,335 ,341 ,356 ,   361 
labor,  35 
rocket  engine 
F-1,  115, 352 
H-1,  130 
J -2 ,2 ,  85, 168,233, 252,257 
Rocketdyne Div.,  35,111,  168 ,233 ,252  
Saturn, 5,  14, 306, 330, 364 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 
199,  227,  275,  306, 
North Carolina.  Univ.  of.  14  
, -  
North,  Warren'J.,  359 
Northrop  Corp.,  19,  130,  227,  264,  306 
Northrop Space Laboratories, 270 
Northwestern  Univ.,  255,  326,  351,  376 
Norway,  227,  322 
Norwegian  Defense  Research  Establish- 
ment.  11  1 
NoshirS,japan,  339 
Nottingham,  U.K.,  285 
Novae,-339 
Novosibirsk,  U.S.S.R.,  117 
Novosti Press Agency  (U.S.S.R.),  224 
Noyes,  Mrs.  Blanche W.,  22 
Noyes,  Crosby  S.,  373 
NRC.  See National  Research Council. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

461 

NRDS.  See  Nuclear  Rocket  Development 
Station. 
NRL.  See Naval Research Laboratory. 
N R X - A ~   (nuclear reactor),  211,  222 
NSC.  See National Space Club. 
NSF.  See National  Science Foundation. 
Nuclear  detection satellite (see also  Vela), 
24,  35,  322 
Nuclear  Engine  for  Rocket  Vehicle  Appli- 
cation  (Nerva),  145, 385, 
test,  42,  52,  82-83,  103-104,  115,  145, 
211,  222 
Nuclear  fission,  259 
Nuclear power,  177 
Nuclear  propulsion,  83 
Nuclear  reactor,  35,  51,  57,  211,  222 
Nuclear  Rocket  Development  Station 
(NRDS),  42,  52, 82,  104, 115 
Nuclear  submarine,  87,  125 
Nuclear  test,  31,  35,  172,  312,  331,  342, 
382 
Nuclear test ban treaty,  58,  109, 259,  304, 
342,369 

0 

Oahu, Hawaii,  179 
Oakland, Calif.,  332 
Oak Ridge  National  Institute,  243 
Oao.  See  Orbiting  Astronomical  Obser- 
vatory. 
OAR .   See Office of  Aerospace  Research. 
OART.  See  NASA  Headquarters  Office  of 
Advanced  Research  and  Technology. 
O’Brien, Edward W.,  269 
Observatoire  de Meudon,  264 
Observatory  class  satellite.  See  Orbiting 
Astronomical  Observator  ;  Orbiting 
Geophysical Observatory; &biting  Solar 
Observatory. 
Ocean  of  Storms  (Oceanus  Procellarum) 
(moon), 48 ,203 ,313 ,316 ,325 ,341 ,380  
Ocean Science  and Engineering,  Inc.,  154 
Oceanic Institute,  367 
Oceanographer 
(oceanographic  research 
ship), 240,  311 
Oceanography, 13,  19, 154, 182, 219,  224, 
240,247,271,302,366-367 
Oceanus  Procellarum  (moon).  See  Ocean 
of  Storms. 
Ochao,  Dr.  Severo,  52 
O’Connell,  James D.,  163 
O’Connor,  B /G  Edmund F.  (WAF),  315 
Odishaw,  Dr.  Hugh,  337 
OECD.  See Organisation  for Economic  Co- 
o  eration  and  Development. 
O’d l lon ,   John R.,  142 
Office  of  Aerospace  Research  (OAR),  326 
Office National  #Etudes  et  de Recherches 
Akros  atiales  (ONEBA),  201 
Office o?Aircraft  Noise Control and Abate- 
ment  (  roposed),  274,  279 
Office of  Emergency Planning,  340 
Office of  Naval Research  (ONR),  13,  166 
Office  of  Science  and  Technology  (Pres- 
ident’s),  28,  33,  57,  106, 328,  358,  370 

Offik,  Wolfgang G.,  250 
O’Gallagher, J .   J.,  151 
Oglesby  Ca  t.  Charles,  194 
Ogo.  $e  &biting  Geophysical  Observa- 
tory. 
OGO  11  (Ogo-C, Orbiting Geophysical  Obser- 
vatory),  289 
(Ogo-B,  Orbiting  Geophysical 
OGO  111 
Observatory),  209,213, 218, 248 
elicopter),  132,  187 
Ohio,  142, 367 
Okinawa,  106 
Oklahoma City,  Okla.,  236,  328 
Old Moore’s Almanack,  281 
Oliver,  Dr.  Bernard M.,  112 
OMSF.  See NASA  Headquarters.  Office of 
Manned  Sqace  Flight. 
“On  Rockets ’ (manuscript),  321 
ONERA.  See  Office  National  d’Etudes 
Recherches  ACros  atiales. 
ONR.  See Office of  &aval  Research. 
Oort, Dr.  Jan  H.,  324,  377 
Opik,  Dr.  Ernst  J.,  241 
Oppenheim, Dr. A.  K.,  359 
Optical  Society of  America,  97 
Orbiting  Astronomical  Observatory  (Oao) 
5,  39,  47,  121,  132, 181, 264,  380 
Orbiting  Data Relay  System  (Ords),  179 
Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory  ( O g o )  
(see also  OGO S   11,  111),  5,  25,  63-64, 150- 
151, 248,  264 
Orbiting  Primate  Spacecraft,  322 
Orbiting Solar Observatory  (O s o )  (see also 
os0 11),  5,  39,  367 
Ords.  See Orbiting Data Relay  System. 
Oregon,  341 
Orenburg region,  Ural Mts.,  U.S.S.R.,  291 
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation 
and Develo  ment  (OECD ) ,   15, 49 
Orion  (conste5ation),  11 
Orion (NASA  bar  e),  74 
Orion  I1  (soungng  rocket),  342 
Orionid meteor  shower, 327 
Orlando, Fla.,  78 
Orlov, Vladimir,  279 
Ormand  Beach,  Fla.,  132 
Oso.  See Orbitin  Solar Observatory. 
oso  11  (Orbiting  jo l a r   Observatory),  212 
OSSA.  See NASA  Headquarters.  Office of 
0 us sf ey, Gilbert W.,  232 
ace  Science  and  Applications. 
OV-1 Mohawk  (surveillance  aircraft),  253 
OV1-IV  (reseach  satellite),  121 
ov1-v, 121 
OV1-VI,  338 
ov1 -V I I IT ,   240 
OV1-IX, 370 
OV1-X,  370 
OV3-I,  146 
OV3-11, 331 
OV3-111, 258 
OV3-IV, 213 
OV4-IR  (communications satellite), 338 
OV4-IT9 338 
OV4-111, 338 

462 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Owens-Cornin  Fiberglas Corp.,  249 
Oxygen  (see  $so  Fuel),  11,  12   174,  285, 
306,  335 
Ozonide,  11 

P 
P-1127  (U.K.  Vtol aircraft),  94,  131 
Pacemaker  (booster), 333 
Pacific Ocean,  232,  247,  261,  311,  373 
communications satenite, 235, 287,  311, 
321 
U.Sr5.R. 
rocket  test,  149,  193,  233, 
275,  287,  302,  352,  373 
Pacific Science Center.  312 
Paffell, Col.  Donald W.  (USAF),  54  
Pacific  Area  Travel  Association  Confer- 
Test  Ranee).  176.  22 r, 
ence,  53 
Pacific  Missile  Range  see  also  Western 
Page Comm%cations, 
Inc.,  139 
(Pageos  A  Passive  Geodetic 
I 
PAGEOS 
Earth-Orbiting  Satellite),  222,  385 
Paige, Dr.  Hilliard W.,  317 
Pakachoag Hill, Mass.,  263,  350 
Pakistan, 69,  114, 117-118,  174, 271 
Pakistan  Space  and  Upper  Atmosphere 
Research Committee (SUPARCO),  69,114, 
152 
Paksuniemi, Sweden, 352 
Palaemon  (NASA  barge),  74 
Palestine,  Tex.,  263 
Pan  American  World  Airways,  Inc.  (Pan 
Am),  137,  143,  297,  302,  339,  343 
Parachute,  275,  278 
fatality, 278 
test,  40-41,  161 
Voyager,  153,  242-243,  340,  352,  370 
Parade,  10, 109-110,  248-249 
Paraguay, 297 
Parawin  156 
Parin,  $assily  V.,  232,  318 
Paris,  France,  11,  15,  188,  220,  287,  339 
Parks,  Robert J.,  197, 250,  372 
Parry,  Albert,  117 
Parsons, John W.,  124 
Particles,  char  ed, 225 
Pastore,  Sen. fohn  O.,  270 
Patent  Law  Assn.  of  Chicago,  154 
Patents,  126, 254,  268, 319,  335 
Patrick AFB,  Fla.,  113, 372 
Patuxent Naval Air Station, Md.,  106,131 
Paul,  Norman  S.,  213 ,323  
PCS. See Pointing-control system. 
Peach Tree Valley,  Calif.,  331 
Pearl River  (NASA  barge),  74 
Pearson, Drew, 314 
Pecora, Dr. William T.,  297 
Peebles, P.  J.  E.,  31 
PEGASUS  I  (meteoroid  detection  satellite), 
205-206,  337 
PEGASUS 11,205-206,  337 
PEGASUS  ~ n ,  205-206,  247,337 
Pelly, Rep.  Thomas M.,  76 
Pendray,  G.  Edward,  Award,  359 

Pennsylvania, 141  
Pennsylvania State Univ.,  298 
Penrose Medal,  349 
Pensacola, Fla.,  234 
Pensacola (Ha.)  Junior  College, 317 
Pentagon, 251 
Phpin, Dr.  Eugene, 317 
Perkin-Elmer Corp.,  175, 353 
Perm, U.S.S.R.,  107 
Peroxide, 11 
Perreault,  W.  D.,  358 
Pert.  See  Program  Evaluation  Review 
Technique. 
Peru,  297, 347 
Peterson,  Bruce  A.,  293,  298,  379 
Peterson,  L /C  Harry W.  (USAF,  Ret.),  283 
Petit Jean  Air  Service, 302 
Petranek,  Jan,  254 
Petrocelli, Dr.  A.  W.,  11 
Petroleum Today ,  281  
Peyrefitte, Alain,  348, 361 
Pezdirtz, George F.,  315 
Pfund,  Edward,  250 
Philadelphia, Pa.,  82,  147 
Philadelphia Evening  Bulletin,  18, 282 
Philadelphia  Inquirer, 366 
Philco Corp.,  221, 233,244,  247,261  320, 
382 
Philip, Prince  (U.K.),  93-94,  291 
Philippines, 54,  222, 292-293,  311 
Phillips, Col. Donald Boyer  (USA,  Ret.),  124 
Phillips, M/G Samuel C.  (USAF)  229,  350 
Phipps, Clifford,  327 
Phoenix,  Ariz.,  17, 242 
Phoenix  (missile), 176 
Phoenix Gazette, 96 
Photography. See Advanced Vidicon  Cam- 
era  System;  ATS  I;  Automatic  Picture 
Transmission  System;  Cloud,  photo- 
graphs;  Earth,  photographs;  LUNAR 
ORBITERS  I ,   11;  MARINER  IV; Moon,  photo- 
graphs;  SURVEYOR  I. 
Photometer,  83  
“Photostate  I”  (radiation  measurement 
device),  337 
Physical  Research  Laboratory  (Ahmed- 
abad,  India),  234 
Physical  Review  Letters,  143, 225 
Physics, 85, 95-96,  229 
Piantanida, Nick,  40-41,  161, 278 
Piccard, Don,  237 
Piccard, Dr.  Jeanette Ridlon, 225 
Pickering,  Dr.  William H.,  147,  157,  166, 
208-209,317 
Pierce, John  R.,  329 
Piloted  Low  Speed  Tests  (Pilot)  project, 
153 
Pioneer  (program), 269 
PIONEER  VI  (interplanetary probe), 32,  269 
results, 32,79,  144,183,214-215,301 
PIONEER  vn   (Pioneer B) ,   269 ,301 ,385  
Pitot-static probe, 260,  263 
Pittendri  , Colin  S.,  361-362 
P i t t s b u r g t  Pa.,  336 
Pittsburgh,  Univ.  of,  237 
Planetarium,  12,  14  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

463 

Planetary  Reentry  Parachute  Progam, 

Pluto  (planet),  17 
PUR.  See Pacific Missile Range. 
Po,  Shu-jen, 339-340 
Pogue, Maj, William 2 (USAF),  127 
Pogo  Stick, rocket  pro  elled, 78-79 
Point Barrow, Alaska, 38-40, 51,161,164, 
216 ,226 ,252 ,260 ,265 ,321  
Point Mugu,  Calif.,  327 
Pointing-control system  (PCS), 356 
Poland, 231 
Polar Cap Absorption, 245,  277, 284 
Polaris  (ICBM),  31,  247, 343 
“Policy  Planning  for  Aeronautical  Re- 
Polytechnic f nstitute  of  Brooklyn, 52 
search  and  Development”  (report),  208 
The Politics o  Research,  165 
Pomona College, 232 
Pope, David  P.,  260 
Popovich, Pave1 R.,  60 
Porter,  D.  C.,  134, 173 
Porter,  Dr.  Richard W.,  173 
Poseidon (ICBM),  343 
Poseidon  (NASA  barge),  15, 74,  298 
Potrero,  Calif.,  16 
Prather, Victor A.,  Award,  226 
Pra t t   &  Whitney  Div. 
See  United  Air- 
craft  Corp.,  Pra t t   & Whitney Div. 
Pravda ,   135-136,  279 ,353  
Presidential Medal  of Merit, 2 
President’s  Science  Advisory  Committee 
(PSAC),  25,  34,  111, 248 
Press  conference,  80,  106,  131,  194,  319 
Gemini ilights, 16  
GEMINI  VIII,  17,  92,  104, 117 
GEMINI  IX-A,  207,  208,218 
GEMINI x, 255 
GEMINI  XI,  301 
GEMINI XII,  353-354 
L U N A I X , ~ O - ~ ~  
LUNA  X,  126-127,  140-141 
LUNAR  ORBITER  I,  313 
NIMBUS 11,  185 
U.S.  space program,  14,  162,  196,  258, 
3.14 
U.SIS.R.  space  activities,  14,  50-51, 
82,  139, 140-141,  162, 232-233,  285, 
316,  322 
SURVEYOR  I,  203 
Press, Har 
2-3,  315,  349 
Price, Don%.,  22 
Princeton  Univ.,  11, 40,  295,  349 
Prishchep, A.  G ,  173-174 

Propulsion’  Joint  Specialist  Conference, 
Second,  215 
Propulsion  Module.  See  Service Module. 
Propulsive wing  aircraft  (V/Stol),  309 
Proton,  287 
PROTON III  (U.S.S.R.  space  station),  233, 
236,  285,  385 
Protostar,  229 
Proxmire, Sen. William F., 261 
Pryor,  Harold E.,  139 
PSAC.  See  President’s  Science  Advisory 
Committee.  25,  34,  111, 
Puerto Rico, 90,152, 267,350 
Pulkovo  Observatory  (U.S.S.R.), 
224,292 
Punch, 32 
Pushkov, N.  V.,  251 
Q 
Quark  (matter theory),  236 
Quasar  (quasi-stellar  object),  31,  92-93, 
171,230,253 

199, 

R 
Radar, 18 ,42-43 ,51 ,57 ,95 ,199 ,203 ,210 ,  
337 
planetary  soundin  technique,  153,  171 
Radar  signature  auafysis  (Rsa),  326 
Radcliffe, Capt. Chester R.,  Jr.  (USAF),  291 
Radistion, 61 
cosmic,  85,  99,  133-134,  136-137,  151, 
190, 295,  306,  374 
effects, 121 ,243 ,337 ,374  
gamma,  129,  136-137,  151 
measurement, 51,146,  199,370 
resistant  cell,  259-260 
shielding from,  306-307 
s an Allen  belts,  102, 168,213,260,  332 
solar, 7,  79,  173,  199, 289,  337 
s  ace,  12-13,  121, 213 
Radio  Cor  oration  of  America  (RCA),  9, 
126,  176:  177,  222,  255,  259,  338,  353 
Radio  Liberty, 226 
Radio Moscow,  107 
Radio  Prague,  379 
Radio  signal, 9,  118 
Radioactive fallout, 342 

x,  XI,  XII,  XIII; 

Mars,  173,380 

See Royal Aeronautical Society. 15, 

u e s .  
94 

464 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

RAF.  See Ro  al A i r  Force.  6 1  
Raman,  Dr.  C!  V.,  253 
Ramo,  Dr.  Simon, 329 
Ramse  Dr.  Norman  F.,  132 
Rand &p.,  73,  273 
Randolph,  Sen.  Jennings, 227 
Ranger  (pro  ram),  262 ,373  
RANGER  VI1  (funar probe),  333 
RANGER  VIII,  333 
RANGER  IX, 333 
Rangoon, Burma,  60  
Ratner,  Lazarus G.,  142 
Ray,  Dr.  Carleton, 96-97 
Raytheon  Cor 
53 
Razumov,  Vla%nir  Vasilyevich, 10 
RCA.  See Radio Corporation of America. 9, 
126 
RCA  Service Co.,  130 
Rcs.  See Reentry  Control System.  100 
Reaction Motors,  Inc.,  377 
Reader's  Di est,  37 
Real Time [omputer  Complex  (RTCC),  258 
Reconnaissance  satellite,  22,  61-62,  369, 
372 
Record 
aircraft,  134, 250,  253,  302,  351 
balloon.  319 
helicopter,  187, 291  
spacecraft, 207,  251,  294,  349 
speed, 201,  302,  351, 385 
women's,  134 
Redeye  (missile), 119 
Reflector satellite,  249,  384 
Redlands,  Calif.,  42 
Redstone  (rocket),  123, 267 
Redstone Arsenal, Ala.,  192 
Reentry 
control,  105, 180,207, 290-291 
Gemini, 99-100,207,244,290-291,344 
heating,  88, 258 
Scout  Reentry  Heating  Project,  49-50 
test,  238,  367 
vehicle, 267,  271,  330,  378 
Reentr  Control System  (Rcs),  100 
Rees,  Jberhard   F.  M.,  315 
Reeves, Dr.  Robert R.,  Jr.,  377 
Reid,  Re  . Ogden,  288 
Reid,  S  h a n u s  Albert, Award,  27 
Reiff,  d e n n ,  32-33 
Reinartz,  Stanley R.,  1 
Reistrup,  J.  V.,  294 
Remote Maneuvering Unit  (Rmu), 225 
Rendezvous, 34 ,212 ,314  
GEMINI  VI-A  (Gemini VI),  226,  259,  374 
GEMINI  VIII,  17, 99-102,  107-108 
GEMINI  IX-A  (Gemini I x ) ,   202,  206-207 
GEMINI  X, 243-244,255 
GEMINI XI,  290,291,  294 
GEMXNI  XII,  344 
Rendezvous  Docking  Simulator,  130-131 
Rensselaer Pol  echnic Institute,  147, 377 
Republic S u p p c  Co.,  73 
Research,  Inc.,  Barrier  Arresting  Compo- 
nent,  180  
Research and  development 
aeronautics,  291  

benefits, 97,  119, 154 
Federal support, 22 ,30 ,34 ,55 ,104 ,165  
funds for,  33,  179, 257,  323 
geographic distribution,  104 
information,  distribution  of,  370 
management,  154 
Research  Institute  for  Advanced  Studies, 
174 
Research Review, 229 
Research satellite, DOD, 212,213,  331-332, 
370 
Research Societ  of America, 123-124 
Restrepo, PresiKent Carlos LIeras  (Colom- 
bia).  316 
Review  of  Popular Astronomy, 224 
Reynolds, Dr.  Orr  E.,  90 
Rice Univ.,  56,  139 
Rickover, VIA  Hyman G.  (USN),  206 
Rieke,  William B.,  188, 364,  380 
Rigel  (star),  18 
R io  Grande.  Brazil.  347 
Rio  Grande; N.  J.,'289 
Risso, William  P.,  139 
Ritchie,  Donald W.,  89  
RL.10  (rocket engine),  125, 132, 169 
Rmu.  See Remote Maneuvering Unit. 
Roberts, W.  Cameron, Jr.,  117 
Roberts,  Dr.  Leonard, 258 
Roberts, Walter  Orr,  133 
Robillard, Geoffrey,  9 
Robledo de  Chavela  (Spain)  Space Track- 
ing Station,  265,320 
Rochester Conference, 286 
Rochester, Univ.  of,  151  
Rock,  Dr.  Vincent P.,  163 
Rocketdyne Division. See North  American 
Aviation, Inc. 
Rocket  engine.  See  Engine,  chemical, 
electric,  nuclear,  rocket,  etc.,  and  indi- 
vidual  rocket  engines such  as  F-1, M-1, 
J-2, etc. 
Rodana Research Corp.,  40 
Roderick, R.  L.,  250 
Rogallo,  Francis M.,  156, 235 
Rogallo, Gertrude  S.,  156 
Rogers Dry Lake,  Calif.,  135 
Ro  ers,  Dr.  Thomas F..  219 
Roman,  6 
R f  
o  1s-Ro  ce,  Ltd.  189, 285 
r.  James A.,  200 
Roman, Dr.  Nancy  G.,  107, 121  
Romania,  165,  174, 231 
Roney, Robert,  250 
Roosa, Ca  t.  S tuar t  A.  (USAF),  127 
Root,  L.  gugene,  354 
Rose,  V/Adm.  Rufus  E.  (USN,  Ret.),  214 
Rosenthal,  Re  . Ben'amin  J.,  274,  279 
Rosholt, Dr.  feobert i., 331 
Rosman, N.  C.  257,  361,  372 
. 
Ross,  Stanle  , 26 
Rostow, Wai: W., 258 
Rota,  Spain,  135 
Rotary  Club,  77 
Roth, Herbert  E.,  285 
Roth,  J. Reece,  120 
Rover  (program), 24,  211 
Row,  Dr.  Ronald, 88 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAU'FICS,  1966 

Satellite  unidentified 
1 

465 

143, 
293, 

Royal National Foundation,  206 
Royal  Society of  Great Britain, 77 
Rsa.  See Radar signature analysis. 
RU  Camelo  ardalis  (star),  230 
Ruby, Charyes H.,  165 
Ruddick, Keith,  142 
Ruderman, M.  A.,  152 
Ruina, Dr. J. P.,  214 
Rumsfeld, Re  Donald,  12 
Runcorn,  S.  I!:, 
150 
Runyan,  Thorne L.,  78 
Rushworth,  L/Col.  Robert  A.  (USAF), 47, 
182,223, 231,  315 
Rusk,  Secretary  of  State  Dean,  137-138 
Russell, Sen. Richard B.,  145 
Rust Engineering Co.,  130 

S 
Sabha, Ebrahim, 49 
Sabreliner  (twin-jet), 302 
Sacramento,  Calif.,  252 
SADL.  See  Sterilization  Assembly  Devel- 
opment Laboratory. 
sAE .   See Society of Automotive Engineers. 
Sagan, Dr.  Carl,  98 
Saigon, Vietnam, 302 
St. Albans School, 313 
St.  Croix, V.  I.,  152 
St.  John's  Newfoundland, 302 
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  95 
St. Thomas, V.  I.,  152 
Salinas, Dr.  Luis Tapis, 317 
Salto  di  Quirra  Test  Range,  Sardinia, 235 
Samos (satellite), 289 
Sun Antonio Express, 328 
San Diego,  Calif.,  7 ,61 ,   160, 289 
San Fernando  State College,  302 
San Francisco,  Calif.,  150,  322,  330,  349 
San Francisco Examiner und  Chronicle, 242 
San Jose,  Calif.,  260 
San Marco  (Italian  satellite),  174 
Sanchez, Joa 
in,  94 
Sandri, G.,  1% 
Santa Susana, Calif.,  85  
Santiago, Chile, 125, 334 
Saros  (French  communications  satellite), 
233 
Satellite.  See  individual  satellites,  sat- 

Satellite  Educational  and  Informational 

132, 

Thor-Agena D,  40,  50,  91,  121, 
188,  221,  262,  297,  341,  382 
Thor-Altair. 9 
Thrust-Augmented  Thor-Agena  B, 
178, 222 
Titan  111-B-Agena  D,  252,  305,  373 
Satellite,  weather.  See  Meteorological 
satellite. 
Sato, Premier Eisaku, 66  
Satterthwaite, Jose  h  C.,  53 
Saturday Evening &st,  376,  377 
Saturday Review,  1 
Saturn  I,  U  rated  (Saturn  IB)  (booster), 
144,  158,  177, 178,  194, 261,  328 
capability, 25 ,5 8 ,241  
contract,  2,  19,  255,  378 
enh?{  130, 169 
J-2,  2,  85,  168,  195,  233,  252,  257, 
364 
launch,  51,  60-61,  67,  88,  385 
AS-201,67 
AS-202, 274 
AS-203,  233 
program,  72, 92 
88, 255,  263,  378 
St?!-:B, 
test,  227 
S-IVB, 88, 224,  263, 272 
test,  233 
test,  122, 350, 357 
Saturn  V  (booster), 72,  86,  125, 
193, 261, 
'."* 
L I L  
capability, 18,25,58,119-120,241,317 
contract,  8,  9,  85,  115,  145,  224,  330, 
333 --- 
crawler-transporter, 33,  86, 248 
en  ine, 2 
f-1, 115, 210,  352 
J-2,2,85,  168, 192,233,252,257,364 
equipment, 9 
facilities, 272,  277 
.
.
 
stage 
1st  (S-IC),  85,  115,  213,  292,  332 
test.  210 
2nd-(S-I1), 2,  213,  292,  306,  330 
explosion,  195, 198, 283 
test,  85,  147,  181,  185,  364,  383 
3rd  (S-IVB),  2,  8, 145, 178, 202,  213, 
224,  292,  306 
test, 107, 252 
transport,  marine,  74 
Saturn  Manufacturing  Review  meeting, 
191 
Scanner, Project,  92, 
Schawlow, Dr.  Arthu 
Scheer, Julian  W.,  1, 213 
Scherer, Lee  R.,  176 
Schirra,  Capt. Walter M.,  Jr.  (USN),  8, 95, 
140 

466 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Apollo,  144 ,306 ,381  
award, 30,225-226,374 
ood-will tour,  54,  61,  66, 69  
Scb ich ter ,  Dr.  Louis B.,  128 
Schmeck, Harold M.,  Jr.,  33,  52 
Schneider, William C.,  195 
Schneiderman, Dan, 9 
Schreiber. Dr.  Carl.  270 
Schriever;  Gen.  Bernard  A.  (USAF,  R 
et.), 
111, 148, 211,  215,  295,  355 
award, 129, 137, 168, 315 
military technology, 77,  191, 357 
retirement,  146, 153 ,283 ,285  
Schurmeier, Harris M.,  9 
Schwartz, Murray L.,  163 
Schweickart, Russell L., 110, 144 ,332 ,379  
Schwinghamer, Robert J.,  288 
Science, 98, 312,  343 
benefits, 167-168,206,  308 
human  needs,  74,  113,  147,  159,  223, 
329 
287, 328 
Science,  1,33-34,51,85,133,370 
astronomy, 46, 92-93,  339-340 
geology,  150, 208 
interplanetary  physics,  86,  1 
33-134, 
241,  288 
Mars,  187, 241-242,  264 
moon,  115, 187 
Ufo’s,  255,  326 
Science Advisory Committee (President’s). 
See  President’s  Science Advisory  Com- 
mittee. 
“Science Frontiers”  (seminar), 221 
“Science ReDorter”  (Tv  series).  198 
“Scientific  and  E n b e e r i n g  Manpower  in 
Communist  China,  1949-1963,”  31-32 
“Scientific  Progress  and  Human  Values” 
(Cal Tech convocation), 329 
Scientist-astronaut,  302  ’ 
Scientist-astronaut,  302  ’ 
Scientist-cosmonaut, 327 
Scientist-cosmonaut, 327 
Scientists, 21,  34, 50-51,  327 
Scientists, 21,  34, 50-51,  327 
Scorpius, 89,  188, 241 
Scorpius, 89,  188, 241 
Scott,  L/Col.  David R.  (USAF),  8,  144 
Scott,  L/Col.  David R.  (USAF),  8,  144 
Apollo  (mission),  110, 332,  379 
Apollo  (mission),  110, 332,  379 
award.  117 
award.  117 
GEMINI  vIII  (flight),  99-102,  104-106, 
107-108,  112,  117,  130-131 
plans  for,  17,  78-79,  92,  94 
t r a h i n   90,  130-131 
Scott, Cof:  James G.  (USAF),  264 
Sco X-1  (x-ray source),  219, 229 
Scout  (booster),  174,  176,  195, 223,  261 
launch 
._ _ _  ._ 
Reentry E,  49-50 
USAF satellite, 183,213,258,271,331- 
JJd 
*.-I” 
Reentry  Heating Project,  50, 90 
S c r i   ps Institute of Oceanography, 52 ,247  
SCUH ,   Wilf red E.,  315 
SDS  Data Systems, 175 
Seaborg, Dr.  Glenn T.,  18-19,  56-57,  147, 
273.  365 
Seal, 96-97 
Seal Beach, Calif.,  86 
Sealab Project,  316 

Sealab 11,  13 
Sealab 111.  13 
Seamans, ’Dr.  Ro 
157, 331,  354, SOY 
Apollo Applications, 59,  171, 229,  278 
appointment,  1, 3 2 , 4 3  
award given b  , 117, 218,  255 
budget,  24,  2 4  71  
space  program,  significance,  238-239, 
241,335 
U.S.S.R.,  44-45 
“Search” 
(deep-sea  retrieval  system), 
154-155 
“The  Search  for  Extraterrestrial  Life” 
(sym  osium),  189-190 
Sears, €!.  E.  250 
Seattle Times, 176 
Seattle, Wash.,  238 
SECOR  VI  (geodetic satellite), 212 
SECOR  VII,  378 
SECOR  VII,  378 
SECOR  VIIJ,  312 
Sedov, Prof.  Leonid  I.,  319-320 
See,  Elliot M..  Jr.  Kdr..  USNRL 14.72.76 
Segr;,  Emilio, 85 
Sehlstedt, Albert, Jr., 
SEIT.  See  Satellite  Educational  and  Infor- 
mational Television. 
Seitz,  Dr.  Frederick,  8 ,   85,  123-124,  305 
Sekkujokki, Sweden, 299 
Sell, Ted, 311 
Sellman, Mrs. John,  57 
Sells, Dr.  S. B.,  120 
Senghor,  President  Leopold  Sedar  (Scne- 
gal),  131 
Sensor, 3,  21, 61,  153, 175,200 
SEREB.  See  Soci6tk  pour  1’Etude  e t   la 
Rkalisation  d’Engins  Balistiques. 
Service Module  (Sm), 25, 272,  274, 328 
SETP.  See  Society  of  Experimental  Test 
Pilots. 
Shanghai, China, 339 
Shapiro, Prof.  Aschcr H.,  235 
Shapiro, Irving  I.,  376 
Shapley, Willis H.,  1 
Sharp, Dr.  Robert P.,  329 
Shastak, Dr.  Arnold,  166 
Shea, Dr.  Joseph F.,  17, 72,  93, 375 
Sheely, Horace, 263 
Sheldon, Dr.  Charles S., 11, 99 
Shelton, Dr. Russel D.,  120 
Shen,  C.  S.,  152 
Shenton,  Sam, 282 
Shepanek, Capt. Raymond A.  (IJSNR),  133 
Shepard, Capt. Alan B.,  Jr.  (USN), 76,  248- 
249 
Shepard, Van  H.,  354,376,  378 
Shepherd, Dr.  L.  E.,  45 
Sherwin, Dr.  Chalmers W.,.  154 
Shoemaker, Dr.  Eugene M.,  228,  305,  382 
Short  Range  Attack  Missile  (Sram),  334, 
341 
Shultze, Charles,  258 
Sikorsky, Igor  I., 60  
Silverstein, Dr.  Abe,  293-294,  362 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

467 

n,  230 
348 
Simpson, J. Wesley, 279 
Simpson, Dr.  John A.,  151 
Simpson, Wyatt C.,  309 
Sinkiang Province, Communist China, 382 
Sioux Falls,  S. Dak.,  40 
Sirius  (star),  18, 203 
Er kyhook,”  52 
Sisakian, Dr.  Norair M.,  94 
and  Telescope,  230 
Skylark  (U.K.  sounding rocket),  235,  299 
SL-1 (solid  rocket motor),  62 
SL-2 (solid rocket motor),  62,  110 
Sla. See S  acecraft Lem  Adapter. 
Slattery,  -tp art J.,  Jr.,  322 
&, 116, 376 
Sla  ton,  Maj.  Donald  K.  (USAF, Ret.),  22, 
Sloan,  Alfred  P.,  ,punda t ion ,   343 
“Slush  h  drogen,  9-10 
Sm.  See gervice module. 25  
Small Business Administration, 89  
Smart, Gen.  Jacob E.  (USAF, Ret),  336,  380 
Smirnov, Leonid,  20 
Smith, Dr. Alexander G.,  29-30 
Smith, Francis B.,  149 
Smith,  Lawrence A.,  354 
Smith,  Sen. Margaret Chase,  187 
Smith, Walter  D.,  354 
Smith’s  Ranch, Nev.,  288 
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory 
(Cambridge, Mass.),  251,  260,  287 
catalog,  107 
research,  22,  144, 284-285 
Smithsonian  Institution,  49,  104,  169, 
236, 253,  284,  324 
Smull, Dr. Thomas L.  K.,  128 ,264  
Snap  (Systems  for  Nuclear  Auxiliary 
Power)  program,  83,  273 
Snap-8 (nuclear reactor),  24,  244 
Snap-1OA  (nuclear  reactor),  13, 28  
Snap27  (thermoelectric generator),  83  
Snap-29 (radioisotope generator),  112, 325 
SNAF’TRAN-2  (AEC test),  13  
Snow, Lord Charles  (C.  P.),  28-29 
SNPO.  See NASA-AEC  Space Nuclear Propul- 
sion  Office. 
Sociktk  pour  1’Etude  e t   la  Rkalisation 
d’Engins  Balistiques (SEREB), 188 
Society of  American Scientists, 170 
Society  of  Automotive  Engineers  (SAE), 
213,  296,314, 
Society  of  Experimental  Test  Pilots 
(SETP), 299 

Solar T 

XB-70, 338,  342,  354,  372,  376,  378 
Sonmiani, Pakistan, 69,  114, 117,  152 
Sonnichsen, Dede,  319 
Sophia, Princess  (Spain),  317 
Sorlie,  L /C  Donald  (USAF), 297,  306, 312 
Sounding  rocket 
(see  a lso  
individual 
sounding rockets:  Aerobee  150, Aer- 
obee  150A,  Aerobee  350,  Arcas, 
Boosted  Arcas,  Hasp,  Javelin,  Nike- 
A  ache, Nike-Cajun, Nike-Tomahawk, 
dke-Hydac ,  Orion 11, Wasp),  39-40, 
65-66 
foreign 
Fr&ce,  322,  327 
Japan,  109, 123, 149 ,257  
Spain, 322,  325 
international  programs,  155-156 
ESRO. 124.  235.  299 
NASAIAr  entina,  154, 342,  347 
-B r a d ,  14, 161, 252,310,320,347, 
373 
-Fiance, 327 
-Greece, 178, 185, 187 
-India, 235 
-Ja  an,  381 
-Pa%istan, 69,  114-115,  152 
-S  ain,  15-16,  138 
-$est  Germany,  191, 299 
South Africa,  7 
South America, 7,  139, 152 
Southeastern  State  College,  Okla.,  89 
“Southern  Cross”  (USN program), 13  
Southern  Illinois Univ.,  311 
SOVCOMSAT,  149 
Soviet  Civil  Aircraft  Research  Institute, 
255 
Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  21,  50,  82, 
140, 174,201,  224 ,236  
cooperation, 90,  171,  231 
new members, 52-53 
Soviet  Commission  for  Exploration  and 
Use of  Outer Space, 46 
Space biology 
animal experiments, 232,  374 
dog,  60-61,  84,  102,  179,  237,  318 
mouse,  71 
primate,  187, 322,  336 
atmospheres, artificial, 11 ,273 ,285 ,335  
helium in.  12.  13 
award, 226,323. 
biotelemetry, 91,  102, 254 
drugs, use of,  318 
environment,  effects  of,  60,  179,  187, 
318, 

hibernation  state,  96-97,  136 

468 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1 9 6 6  

life support s  stem,  11, 94,  120, 285 
nutrition,  20$,  335 
physiological monitoring, 60,  254,  433- 
434 

weightlessness 
effects  of,  102,  179,  226,  294-295, 
318,  322,  361,  374 
work  during,  61,  170,  294-295,  317- 
318 
S  ace Business Da i ly ,   278 
$ace  debris,  194, 225 
S  ace  Digest,  280 
$ace  Electric Rocket Test  (Sert),  312 
Space General Cor 
177 
Space law,  289,  3 8 '  
S ace Law  and  Government, 289 
$ace 
law treaty,  330 
U.N.  consideration, 246,  248,  250,  276, 
291,  368-369,  370,  377, 386 
U.S.  draft  proposal,  169, 171, 205,  216, 
218 
U.S.S.R.  draft,  312 
Space medicine.  See S  ace biology. 
Space, military  use  of, H35-136,  147-148, 
221,  248 
communications, 306 
manned space flight, 357,  381-382 
nuclear  detection,  24,  35,  322 
potential  uses,  200,  216,  220,  335,  370 
reconnaissance, 289 
space station,  368 
Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Office.  See 
NASA-AEC  S  ace  Pro   ulsion  Office. 
Space,  eace&l  use  oE  23,  60-61,  291- 
292, %7-358. 
rogram,  national  (see  also  indi- 
Space 
v i lua l   programs,  such  as  Apollo 
program,  etc.) 
accomplishments, 35,  53,  70,  125,  319, 
324 
international,  141, 304 
management, 249 
manned s  ace flight, 95,246,314,344, 
357.3ip2 
budget, 23-24,26-27,41,  70,  224 
cost Of,  338-339,  362 
criticism, 7,  32,  109-110,  131, 210-211, 
220 ,232-234 ,266267 ,366  
education,  benefits  to,  20,  35,  53,  54, 
education,  benefits  to,  20,  35,  53,  54, 
238-239 
238-239 
employment, 1 3 , 5 6 ,9 3 , 29 5  
international  cooperation.  See  In ter-  
national  coo  eiation. 
Johnson,  P r e s i g n t  Lyndon B.,  35,  162, 
169,  258,  297.  303,  375 
lunar  landing.  See Moon, landing. 
manned space flight.  See Manned space 
f igh t .  
military,  35,  111,  135,  153,  196,  200 

objectives, 26-27,  70-71,  167,  196, 372 
scientific  and  technological,  39,  53, 
187-188.  359 
social,  12 ,25 ,   160,280,362-363 
policy,  25,  95,  143,  179, 193, 199,  220 
PO~ t -A~o l lo ,  54,  74,  248.  261,  269.  350 
-  bu&et  decision,  70,  '108,.  2101211, 
267,  272-273,  317,  364 
suggested  rograms,  17,  92,  99,  103, 
281,  3 3 f  
significance, 32,  160, 167-168,  177-178, 
187-188,  238-239,  297,  335,  343, 
367 
international,  141, 148-149,162,  241, 
332 
U.S.  vs.  U.S.S.R. 
See Space race. 
Vietnam  war,  effect  of,  24,  138,  275, 
317,  323,  325 
Space  race,  109-110,  209,  212,  279,  286, 
303,  373 
booster,  380 
criticism, 301,  328,  365 
manned  space flight, 79,  316,  334,  356, 
373 
moon, 44,  314 
post-Apollo, 70,  138, 162, 307 
Space rescue, 262,269 
need for,  111-112,  145-146,  273 
proposal, 78, 297 
test,  164-165,  192, 336 
Space results  (see also Earth; Moon; Mars; 
Venus;  individual  probes  satellites, 
sounding  rockets,  and  Apollo  and 
Gemini flights) 
astronomy, 92,  151-152,  174,  188, 219, 
229,  230,  348 
communications, 20,  88, 163, 372-373 
earth  science,  144, 228, 236,  313 
medicine, 177, 309 
meteoroid detection, 205-206 
meteorolog  185, 257, 271 
oceanograpty, 33 
radiation,  51,  136-137,  173 
ph  sics, 133-134,  140-141,  144, 
social science, 297,  329, 343,  366 
technology,  25,  88-89,  92,  209,  238- 
239,329,  351-360 
Space  Research:  Directions f o r   the  Future, 
17,  39,  53 
Space  station  (see  also  Manned  Orbiting 
Laboratory),  180,352,357,368,373-374 
Space suit,  203,  226,  301,  317-318,  336 
Space tools,  17-18,  40,  78-79,  270 
Space  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition 
Network  (STADAN),  70,  257,  307 
Spacecraft  (see also  individual  spacecraft, 
such  as  Apollo,  Gemini,  Lunar  Or- 
biter, Luna, Mariner, Surveyor, etc.), 
78,  170, 
braking, 279,  339 
design, 46, 127, 132, 167, 176, 192, 197, 
204,  368 
development  testing,  30,  39,  42,  132, 
175, 185, 328 
electrical systems, 27,  82,  119-120,  134 
emergency equipment, 40, 78 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

469 

equipment,  6,  11,  12,  57, 
149,  178, 234, 
extravehicular equipment,  29,  78,  246 
heatina.  112. 307 
instruGentation,  117, 213, 236 
landing system,  35-36,  39,  86,  88,  279, 
284.  380 
- - -  
life support  system,  11, 120 
- - - >  
propulsion.  See  Engine;  Motor,  rock- 
et;  and  individual  launch  vehicles, 
such as Saturn, etc. 
reentry  control  system  (see  also  reen- 
try),  100,  105, 207,  290 
reusable, 5,  313-314,  374 
space tool,  17-18,  40,  78-79 
window,  236 
Spacecraft Lem  Adapter  (Sla),  177 
Spacetrack, 225 
Spaco, Inc.,  41,  130 
Spain,  15-16,  58-59,  137-138,  265,  322, 
325 
Spanish Astronautical Assn.,  317 
Spanish S  ace Commission. See Comisi6n 
N a c i o n i   de  Investigaci6n  del  Espacio 
(CONIE)  . 
Sparkman, Sen. John  J.,  212 
Sparta  (reentry  measurement  program), 
267 
Spectrometer, 18,  111,  129, 274,  277,  347 
Sperry, Lawrence, Award,  359 
Sperry Rand  Corp.,  130 
Univac Div.,  157, 223 
Spica  (star).  See Alpha Virginis. 
Spilhaus, Dr. Athelstan F.,  169 
Spirit of  St.  Louis Medal,  166 
Spohn, Dr .   Clifford A.,  286 
SPUTNIK  i  (U.S.S.R.  satellite),  17, 312 
SPUTNIK  v,  154 
SR-71  (long-range  reconnaissance  air- 
craft),  129 
SR-71B (training aircraft),  9 
Sram.  See Short Range Attack  Missile. 
Sreekantan, B.  V.,  229 
SSRC.  See Swedish Space Research Com- 
mittee. 
Sst.  See Supersonic transport. 
STADAN.  See  S  ace  Tracking  and  Data 
Acquisition d t w o r k .  70 
Stafford, Ma’  Thomas P.  (USAF),  72 
Gemini  I k A ,   206-207,  209,  213,  218, 
236 
preparation  for,  178,  180-181,  198, 
757 
honors,. 225-226,  236,  374-375 

Development  Lab- 

170 --- 
“Stepping Stones  to  Mars”  meeting,  119- 
Sterilizatio 
oratory 
Sternberg, 
D.  (USAF,  Ret.)  311 
Stevenson, 
Stewart, D 
e,  355 
Stewart, Joseph,  151 
Stoddard, Dr.  David H.,  254 
Stoltenberg,  Minister  of  Science  (W. 
Gennany),  303 
Stoner, George H.,  338 
Stoolman, Leo,  250 
Stormfur  , Project,  267 
Strang, f. J.,  189 
Strap.  See Star Tracking Rocket Attitude 
Positioning. 
Strassman, Dr.  Fritz,  259 
Strategic Air  Command  (SAC),  9,  165 
Strelka  (dog),  154 
Strike 236,  257,  259 
Edwards AFB,  35 
Kennedy  Space Center,  142,  144, 150, 
239-240,  242,  268,  271 
United Technology Center, 145, 150 
Strom,  Robert G.,  116 
Strong,  Dr.  John,  141  
S tru   hold,  Dr. Hubertus,  295 
Stuhfinger,  Dr.  Ernst,  73,  120, 361 
Submarine,  missile-carr  ing,  247,  302 
Sub-Aviation (France), i 8 9  
Sudden Ranch,  Calif.,  11 
Suitland, Md.,  268 
Sullivan,  Walter,  82,  109,  168,  355-356, 
377 
Sumi, Ukraine, U.S.S.R.,  291 
Summer Conference on Lunar Exploration 
and  Science,  5-6 
Summerfelt, William A.,  354 
Sun  (see  also  Ecli  se,  solar;  Solar  cell; 
Solar wind),  2f6 ,   239,  287 
IQSY, 251 
radiation, 79,  173, 199, 289,  337 
research,  109, 278,  336,  355 
satellite data, 79,  269 
Sun, K.  H.,  289 
Sunspots, 129,174,  199 ,347  
Suomi, Prof.  Verner, 361 

contract,  249,  286, 296,  383 
cost,  122-123,  289 

470 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

criticism, 142, 185, 267,  281 
desi 
and development,  14 ,1 6 ,80 ,85 -  
8 9 7 ,  122-123,  184,  215,  224-225, 
226,273,297-298,299,307,332,334, 
343,  350,  385 
foreign,  19,  20-21,  43,  118,  143,  189, 
194,  196 ,226 ,233 ,289 ,370  
funds,  for,  19, 24,  80 ,84 ,   112, 167, 348 
reservations,  118, 144 ,272  
son ic   boom,  57,  203,  333,  341,  350. 
Supersonic  Transport  Authority 
(pro- 
osed),  84,  167 
“&re-Fire,”  Project,  126 
Surveyor  (program),  5,  39,  75-76,  196- 
197, 202,  232-233,  340,  372,  373 
Surveyor (spacecraft), 39,4445,131-132, 
175,185,330 
SURVEYOR I  (lunar  probe),  209,  212,  215, 
246,262,313,333,  373 
instrumentation,  202,  296 
launch,  197-198 
lunar  landing, 203-204,  38&385 
photograph enhancement,  263 
reactivation,  226,  316,  325,  341 
results,  228,  235,249 
“Surveyor  I-A 
Preliminary Report,”  235 
SURVEYOR II  (Surveyor B),  2% 
SV-SD  (lifting-body vehicle),  378 
SV-SP (manned lifting-body vehicle),  152- 
1 C n  133 
Sweden, 125,  174, 210,  239,  299,  318 
Swedish Space Research Committee (SSRC), 
5 1  
Swetnick, Dr. Martin J.,  344 
Swigert, John L.,  Jr.,  127 
Sydney, Australia,  96 
Sydney  (Australia) Univ.,  251 
Sylvania Electronic Systems, 254 
Symington, Sen.  Stuart,  288 
SYNCOM I1  (communications satellite),  133- 
134 ,362  
SYNCOM 111,  362 
Syracuse Univ.,  237 
System Development Corp.,  370 
Systems  engineering, approach  to   social 
problems,  252 
Syvertson, Clarence A.,  258 

T 
T-38 (jet  trainer),  211 
- 
Tabanera, T e 6 l o  M.,  253 
Tad.  See Thrust-Augmented Delta. 
Taipei,  72 
Taiwan,  54 
Talyzin, Nikolay, 376 
Tass 
cosmonaut, 307-308,  330 
Cosmos launchings, 60-61,75,110,152, 
223 
LUNAS  IX, X, XI, ~ n ,  and  XIII,  41-42,  47, 
48-49,  122,  127,  129,  312,  326-327, 
355,  381 
U S .  s  ace program,  104 
u.S.S!k. 
space  program,  16-17,  139, 

214,  272- 

233,236,287,302,306-307,352,373, 
376 
U.S.S.R.  wea  ons,  270 
VENUS  n,  8&7 
ZOND III.  81 
Tata  Institute,  Bombay,  46,  85  
Taub,  William P.,  103 
Taylor, Hal,  225 
Taylor, Gen.  Maxwell D.  (USAF),  214 
TD-1 (research satellite),  11, 239 
TD-2 (research satellite),  11, 239 
Teague,  Rep.  Olin E.,  180, 211,  214,  273, 
364 
Technology, 28,  98,  187, 233,  329 
benefits, 66,  74,  113-114,  159, 191, 215, 
253,334 
g a p  15  
mi  itary,  77 
misuse of,  206 
sharing of,  355 
Technoltgy  utilization,  space,  61-62,  88- 
89,  167,  238-239,  281,  286,  287,  308, 
328.  329 
Technolog-  Week  (formerly  Missiles  and 
Rocketsf 
Mol,  348 
Pert,  268 
space medicine, 335 
France, 361 
Japan,  3 
US . ,   11, 24,  72,  76,  112, 
273.  307-308.  334.  352 
U.S.S:R.,  232,  285 
‘ 
Webb, James  E.,  249 
Tektite,  139, 208,  324 
Teledyne Systems Co.,  234 
Telescope,  28,  39,  46,  47,  239, 
268,  289-290,  303,  329 
Television 
educational, 256,  270, 370-371 
laser beam  use  in,  310 
space probe,  use  of,  11, 59-60,  86-87 
via  satellite,  12,  69,  86,  96,  162-163, 
179,  287 
Teller, Dr.  Edward,  334 
Tempel-Tuttle Comet,  220 
Temperature, 61-62,  141 
I I   Tempo,  205 
Tennessee,  Univ.  of,  Space Institute,  316 
Teplinskiy, M / G  B.  (U.S.S.R.),  147 
Tepper, Dr. Morris,  43 
Tereshkova,  Valentina.  See  Nikolayeva- 
Tereshkova, Valentina. 
Test  ban  treaty.  See  Nuclear  test  ban 
treaty. 
Texas, 297 
Texas A&M  Univ.,  365 
Texas Atomic Energy Commission, 196 
Texas Christian  Univ.,  120 
Texas Instruments.  Inc..  239. 
Texas Technical College; 334 
Texas, Univ.  of,  56 
Teweles, Sidney,  199 
Thailand, 54,  72,  165,222 
Thiokol Chemical CorD..  112. 177,265.328 
Reaction Motors Dh:,  377 
 
I
,

241,  263, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

471 

Thomas, Rep.  Albert D.,  54-55 
Thomas,  David  F.,  78 
Thome,  P.  G.,  190 
Thompson,  Dr.  Barbara A.,  377 
Thompson,  Col.  John M.  (USAF),  333 
Thompson, Llewellyn E.,  339 
Thompson,  Milton  O.,  47,  237-238,  244, 
264,274,284,  301 
Thompson,  R.  P.,  253 
Thom  son, Robert F.,  354 
T h t )  
17s " .-  
or   booster)  (see also Long Tank Thor), 
Thor-Agena (booster), 61  
B.  178 
D;  50,  91,  121,  132, 188, 221,262,  297, 
341,  382 
Thor-Altair  (booster), 9 
Thor-Burner I1  (booster), 292 
Thor-Delta (booster),  11, 41,  70,  310 
Thrust-Augmented Improved  Delta  (Tad), 
269,  331 
Tiros  (meteorological satellite), 24 
TIROS VII  (meteorological satellite), 220 
Tiros  Operational  Satellite  (Tos),  41,  70, 
176, 310 
Titan  I1  (booster), 99,  164, 202,  206,  248, 
318.  353 
T i t a n - h   (booster), 24,  220,  305,  368 
Titan  111-B-Agena, 252,  373 
Titan  111-C  (booster),  113,  216,  219,  276, 
338.  359,  385 
Titanium,  224,  308 
Titov,  L/C Gherman  S.  (U.S.S.R.),135 
Tokyo,  Japan,  179, 340 
Tokyo Observatory, 219 
Tokyo Univ.,  109, 149, 257,  301,  339 
Tonkin, Leo  S.,  55 
Toowoomba, Australia, 361 
Toronto,  Canada,  194 
Toronto,  Univ.  of,  229 
Torrance,  Calif.,  156 
Tos.  See Tiros Operational Satellite. 
Toth, Robert,  343 
Towers, Adm.  John H.  (USN),  383 
Townes,  Dr.  Charles H.,  31,  97 
Townes-Schawlow patent, 258 
Trac  Calif.,  319 
T
ra  c control,  247 
Z
 
Trailblazer  (booster), 330,  369 
Trans World Airlines (TWA),  159,223,236, 
242 
Thumba  Equatorial  Rocket  Launching 
Station  (India), 234 
Thursday Island,  162 
Tidbinbilla, Australia,  234 
Time measurement, 166 

stations 

2$1$::299, 
307,361 
U.S.S.R.,  299,  334 
Transit (nav'  ational satellite), 302 
TRANSIT IV-A ?navigation  satellite), 227 
Transportation,  Dept.  of,  80,  227,  274, 
279,321,  340,348,  362 
Trendex  oll, 265,362 
Trimethy!-alurninum  (m), 117, 152, 292, 
347 
Trip  e, Juan T,,  137, 297 
T r u j  196 ,285 ,294 ,374  
ski, Gerald M.,  81 
Ti:rc., 
235, 375 
TRW Systems,  Inc.,  24-25,  142,  267,  306 
Tsara  kin, Sem  on K.,  85 ,97  
Tu-&  (U.S.S.6.  airliner), 256 
Tu-114  (U.S.S.R.  transport aircraft),  58 
Tu-144  (U.S.S.R.  supersonic  transport), 
196,  226 
Tu-154  (U.S.S.R.  airliner), 256 
Tulsa,  Okla.,  177 
Tupolev, Andrei N.,  196 
Turkey,  227 
Twiss, Robert  L.,  176 
Tydings, Sen.  Joseph  D.,  12  
Tyler, Gordon H.,  283 
Tyura Tam,  U.S.S.R.,  294 
U 
U-2  (reconnaissance aircraft), 27 
Uchinoura  Range,  Kyushu,  Japan,  109, 
149, 301,  333,  378 
UCLA.  See  California,  Univ.  of,  at  Los 
Angeles. 
Udall,  Secretary of  the Interior Stewart L., 
297,  350 
Ufo.  See Unidentified f l   . g objects. 
Ugolyek  (dog), 6061, g 8 4 , 9 1 ,  102,141, 
147,  179, 318 
U.K.  See United Kingdom. 
U.N.  See United  Nations. 
Unidentified flying objects (Ufo), 160,176- 
177, 299,  333,  341,  377 
Georgia, 251 
Michigan,  112-113,  116, 122 
Ohio,  142 
Pennsylvania, 200 
USAF,  130,255, 272,  325,326, 
contract, 172, 315 

, 16,  27,  286,  296, 

ort engine, 109,123, 
273,  286,  296,  299, 

United  Aircraft  Research  Laboratories, 98 
United Arab Republic  (U.A.R.),  139 
United Auto  Workers (UAW),  35  

472 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966 

United  Kingdom  (U.K.),  42,  43,  44,  46, 
115, 136, 330,  347 
aircraft,  61,  356 
Concorde,  20-21,  43,  285,  289 
cooperation,  defense,  40 
cooperation,  space,  73,  133,  155-156, 
239,  267,  287,  299,  322,  329,  377 
ELDO,  156,  189,  190,  211,  214,  220, 
236,  285 
House of  Commons,  31  
Ministry of Aviation,  356 
Ministry  of Technology,  28,  356 
nuclear  reactor,  5 1  
nuclear  test,  31  
science  and  technology, 25-26,  28-29 
United Nations  (U.N.),  135, 169, 171, 216, 
218,221,  277,  299,  312 
Commission  to   Study th e   Organization 
of  Peace,  181 
Committee  o n   the   Peaceful  Uses  of 
Outer Space, 20,28,  32, 94,  258, 282, 
287,  291,  386 
Legal  Subcommittee,  237,  246,  248, 
250 
General  Assembly,  298,  355,  369,  377 
World Meteorological  Organization,  89, 
113-114 
United  Press  International  (UP I ) ,   76,  134, 
233 
United States (see also appropriate Govern- 
ment  agencies). 
Asian  summit  conference,  311 
budget,  19,23-24,  33 
communications,  83 
contract policy,  128 
criticism,  85-86,  131, 288 
defense, 40,170,191-192,341,342,343, 
355 
disarmament,  304 
international  cooperation,  15-16,  113- 
114,  133, 226,  231,  240,  303 
nuclear weapons,  58,84-85,  342 
research  and  development,  15,  55,  119, 
154,  179 
science and technology,  1,13,22,28-29, 
33-34,70-71,97-98,99,133,150, 
182,  219,  240,  348-349,  370 
* 
space  law  treaty.  See  Space law  treaty. 
space  program.  See  Space  program, 
national. 
transportation 
(see  also  Supersonic 
transport),  80,  340,  348 
United Technology Center,  150 
Univac  Div.  See  Sperry  Rand  Corp., 
Univac Div.,  223 
Universal Match Corp.,  361 
Universe,  origin,  31,  4 6 4 7  
UPI.  See United Press International. 
Uprated  Sa turn  I.  See  Saturn  I,  Uprated. 
Ural Mountains,  U.S.S.R.,  107 
Urban Renewal Administration,  37 

e  (USAF)  (see also  individual 

bases,  centers,  and  commands,  such  
as Air Force Systems Command, Arnold 
Engineering  Development  Center, 
Edwards  AFB,  etc.) 
aircraft  (see  also  individual  aircraft, 
such   as  C-5A,  F-111A,  X-15,  XB- 
70,  etc.),  9,  113, 166169 ,253 ,282 ,  
309,  323,  341,  365 
accident, 28,  211,  214 
anniversary, 302 
award,  113, 129,  137, 168, 232 ,251  
booster,  6, 94,  216,  218,  385 
contract,  88,  122,  138-139,  195,  255, 
268,  315,  328,  334,  335,  377 
V/Stol  and Vtol aircraft,  194, 365 
coo  eration,  128-129,  203,  281,  385 
F l ig i t  Safety Review Board,  180,  193 
. 
launch 
booster,  213,  276,  329-330,  338 
Hitab  test.  108.  115 
missile,  255,  241,  342-343,  367 
lifting-body  vehicle,  152-153,  378 
missile program, 22,  108, 113, 165, 261, 
275,  355 
Mol.  See Manned  Orbiting Laboratory. 
177 
motor.  solid urouellant.  90.  177 
Office'of A e r bG c e  Research,  326 
personnel,  54,  57,  127,  146,  199,  259, 
283,  298,  311,  336,  345 
research,  113, 209,  263 
satellite  (see  also  Satellite,  unidentified), 
121, 146, 216,  331-332,  338,  370 
sounding rocket,  342 
Scientific Advisory  Board,  172 
spac;lFgram,  90-91,  283,  320-321,  335, 
s  acecraft  recovery,  100 
J f o ,   116,  119,  130,  142, 172, 255,  272, 
315,  325,  376-377 
Vietnam war,  311 
USAF.  See U.S.  Air  Force. 
USAF  Aero  Propulsion  Laboratory,  78 
USAF Aerospace  Medical  Div.,  295 
USAF Air  Rescue Service,  78 
USAF  School  of  Aerospace  Medicine,  12, 
273,  335 
U.S.  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament 
Agency,  339 
U.S.  Army  (USA),  156, 284 
aircraft,  106,  131, 187, 253,  281,  309 
missile,  119, 267 
satellite,  212,  272,  312 
training,  150 
U.S.  Coast  Guard,  114, 278 
U.S.  Comptroller General, 236 
U.S.  Congress.  See Congress. 
U S .  Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, 
258 
U.S.  Geological Survey,  297;  313,  382 
U.S.  Information  Agency  (USIA),  304 
U.S.  Junior Chamber of  Commerce,  9 
U.S.  Marine Corps  (USMC),  150,  195 
U.S.  Merchant Marine Academy,  321 
U S .  Military Academy,  203 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

473 

U.S.  Naval  Aerospace  Medical  Institute, 
234 
U.S:  Naval  Oceanographic Office,  14  
U.S.  Navy  (USN), 206,  207,  228 
agreement, 8, 179 
aircraft,  106, 131, 195 
contract.  30.  77.  338 

macecraft recoven ,  207, 244, 
291,  332, 344 
U.S.  News  & World Report,  372 
USNS Croatan, 80-81 
USNS Kingsport,  134-135 
USNS Point  Barrow,  74,  86 
U.S.  P ub f IC  Health  Service, 64 
USNS Ran  e Recoverer, 87,  178, 185,  187 
U.S.S.  Benjamin Franklin, 87  
U.S.S.  Bennington,  185 
U.S.S.  Boxer,  86 
U.S.S.  Guadalcanal,  244,  247 
U.S.S.  Guam, 290,  293 
U.S.S.  La   Solle,  338 
U.S.S.  Leonard  F. Mason,  100, 106 
U.S.S.R.  (Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Re- 
publics)  (see  also  Soviet  Academy 
of  Sciences, etc.)  219-220,  289,  294 
aircraft,  50,  58,  226,  251, 255-256,291, 
323,  333 
antiaircraft  defense.  125.  161 
171,  17&175,  305,  377 
171,  17&175,  305,  377 
i%;tZ;Ji, 
i%;tZ;Ji, 
i 3 a , 2 1 2 , 2 9 o ,   316 
i 3 a , 2 1 2 , 2 9 o ,   316 
communications satellite,  149, 152,154, 
communications satellite,  149, 152,154, 
324,  353,  376 
324,  353,  376 
coo  eration,  10, 251,  269,  330, 376 
coo  eration,  10, 251,  269,  330, 376 
g a n c e ,  221,  226,  227,  261,  334,  348, 
g a n c e ,  221,  226,  227,  261,  334,  348, 
370.  386 
370.  386 
U.S.,-bO,  96,  109-110,  155-156,  271, 
303,  308,  339 
cosmonaut.  See Cosmonaut. 
Cosmonaut’s Day,  135-136 
disarmament,  58-59,  84-85,  97 
launch 
aerostat,  336 
Luna  spacecraft,  35,  122,  273,  326- 
327, 378-379 
satellite 
Cosmos,  8 ,   22,  27,  51,  59,  60-61, 
75,  104, 110, 130, 144, 152, 175, 
190,218,223,235,240,246,252, 
261,277,294,321,325,337,347, 
352, 356,  366,  372,  378-379 
Molniya,  149, 325 
Proton,  233 
Yantar I (ion propulsion system test), 
3.19 
launchs i te ,   372 
life science, 11,12-13,60-61,69,84,90, 
91,  94,  102,  136-137,  154,  179,  232, 
285,  306-307,  318,  374 
lunar  exploration (see also LUNA IX, etc.), 
manned, 55,  125, 130,  131,  162, 214, 
285,  286,  319-320 
unmanned,  41-42, 44-45,  46,  47,  48, 
157, 204-205,380-381 

meteorolo  y,  96,  174, 269,  271,  385 
missile a n i  rocket program, 10,181,270, 
302,  341,355 
exploration  2,  40,  75,  81-82, 
planet 
86-% 
126,  173,  i 3 6  
rocket test,  147-148,193,233,275,287, 
302,  352,  373 
science, 21,  25-26,  117,  146, 337,  377 
space law treaty.  See Space law treaty. 
and  satellite  pro  rams,  SUCK as 
space program. (see also individual  robe 
Cosmos,  Luna,  do ln iya ,   Proton, 
Venus,  Voskhod,  etc.),  16-17,  20, 
70,  130,  173,  201,  212,  237,  303, 
312,  318,  320-321,  368,  373,  385 
manned s  ace flight, 79, 92,  135-136, 
138,  1&, 303,  314,  338-339,  356, 
379-380 
spacecraft,  17, 254,  285,  306,  321 
submarines,  125 
supersonic transport,  118,196,  226 
tracking station,  9,  16, 48,  139, 334 
weapons, 84-85,97,  161, 181, 191-192, 
198, 270,  341,  355 ,373  
U.S.S.  Redstone,  214 
U.S.S.  Silas Bent,  189 
U.S.S.  Wa sp ,   179,  207,  209,  332,  334 
U S .  Weather  Bureau,  5,  41 
U Thant,  U.N.  Secretary Gen.,  198 

V 
Vaccaro, Michael J.,  60,  91  
Vacuum Technology and   Space  Simulation, 
334 
Van  Allen,  Dr.  James A.,  134 
Van  Allen  radiation  belts,  102,  120,  213, 
260 
Van  Dusen Aircraft  Sup  lies, 308 
Vandenberg AFB, Calif.  t e e  also Western 
Test Range),  11, 195, 294 
launch,  108, 115 
missile,  275 
rocket, Arcas,  342 
satellite launch  vehicle 
Atlas-Agena, 213 
Atlas-Agena  D,  54,  92,  121,  272, 
Q - V  53 I 
Atlas D,  240,  370 
Scout,  146, 183 
Thor-A ena D,  40,  341 
Thor-Atair,  9 
Titan  111-B-Agena D,  252, 
Missile,  22,  66,  115-116 
VANGUARD I  (satellite),  106 
Varo,  Inc.,  61  
Vashkov,  V.  I.,  173 

306 

Veis,  Dr.  George,  22 
I  35,  322 
Vela  (nuclear detection  satellite), 
V e m  (research ship),  302 
Venezuela,  297 

474 

351 
350, 
315, 

380 
383 

95, 

Venus  (planet), 142,145,157 
atmosphere, 251, 377 
ex  loration,  17,  26,  73,  75,  82, 
!47,  159, 268,281,  351,  368 
life on,  26,  141 
rotation,  175 
surface,  1 6 , 17 5  
temperature,  26,  159 
VENUS  11  (U.S.S.R. 
interplanetary  probe), 
51,  75,  86-87,  95 
VENUS  111,  51,  75,  82,  86-87,  95, 
Vershinin,  A ir   Marshal  Konstantin 
(U.S.S.R.),  136-137 
Vertical and shor t  takeoff and landing air- 
craft.  See V/Stol  and Vtol aircraft. 
Veterok  (dog),  60, 69,  84,  91,  102,  141, 
147,  179, 318 
Vetlesen Award,  324,  377 
Vetlesen,  G.  Unger, Foundation,  324 
Vienna, Austria,  171, 287 
Vietnam,  216 
Vietnam, North,  355 
Vietnam,  South,  361 
Vietnam war,  228,  311,  325 
aircraft,  326 
effects  on  space  budget,  24,  138,  275, 
317,  323,  325, 328 
effects on space law treaty,  237,  277 
opposition  to,  246,  366 
Vine, Allyn C.,  52 
Vinogradov, Aleksandr, 50,  140 
Virgin Islands,  152 
Virginia  Associated  Research  Center,  19, 
365 
Virginia Polytechnic  Institute,  365 
Virus control,  64  
Vitro Gorp.  of  America,  130 
Vivian,  Rep.  Weston  E.,  110 
Vladivostok, U.S.S.R.,  154 
Vocational  Rehabilitation  Administration, 
222 ,328  
Vogel,  Col.  Lawrence W.  (USA),  1 
Vogeley,  Arthur  W.,  354 
Volcano,  299,  313,  316, 374 
Volunteer Flight  Officers Network,  284 
Von Braun, Dr. Wernher,  1,241,298,322, 
372 
Von Eckardt, Wolf,  311 
Von K h m h ,  Dr.  Theodore, 124 ,259  
Von Markatz,  Dr.  Hans-Joachim, 210 
Von  Ohain, Hans J.  P.,  27 
VOSKHOD  I  (U.S.S.R.  spacecraft), 285,  356 
VOSKHOD  11,  92,  107, 321,339,  356 
VOSTOK  VI, 90 
Voyager  (program),  113,  171,  198,  244, 
279,281,  308,  352,  362 
Planetary  Reentry  Parachute  Program, 
, 242-243,  279,  340,  352 
contract,  275 
Voyager  (spacecraft), 327 
Vreeland,  Thad, Jr.,  260 
V/Stol  aircraft,  106,  131,  185,  194,  253, 
364 
Vtol aircraft,  94,  284,  309,  323,  365 

ASTRONAUTICS  ANI D  AERONAUTICS,  1966 
w 
WA-50  (light aircraft),  118 
Walker AFB, N.  Mex.,  279,  284 
Walker,  Cliff W.,  58  
Walker, Dr.  Eric A.,  155 
Walker,  Jose  h  A.,  47,  211,  214, 
W a l l  Street $urnal,  28,  219, 250, 
Wallops Station  (NASA),  41,  312, 
launch 
Pacemaker, 333 
satellite 
OV3-IV, 213 
Scanner,  Project,  268,  369 
Scout  (Reentry E),  49 
sounding rocket, 252 
Aerobee 150A,  79,  84, 182, 276 
Aerobee 350,269 
Boosted-Dart. 14 
Javelin, 79,  185, 237,267,299,  313 
Nike-Apache, 10,  19,56,  127, 132- 
133,214,239,240,274,276,293, 
207 
Nse-Cajun,  25,  39-40,  42-43,  51, 
161 ,260 ,265 ,307 ,310  
Nike-Tomahawk,  276,  277,  301, 
341. 360 
Orjon'I1,- 342 
Wasp,  210 
Trailblazer, 330 
personnel, 382 
Wang,  Dr.  Chiao Jen,  376 
Wapakoneta, 137 
Warrior  Constructors,  Inc.,  255 
Warsaw Convention, 43,  157 
Washington Board  of  Trade,  319 
Washington, D.C.,  140,172,271,289,293, 
311,  313,  330,  334 
awards presented at,  208, 215,232, 294, 
314-315 
meetings,  19,  56,  136,  140,  143,  144, 
150,162-163,172,199,212,214-215, 
221,  269,  271,  288,  297,  338,  382 
museum, 49 ,236  
news  conference, 80,  119 
Washington, D.C.  Business Council, 56 
Washington Daily News ,  370 
Washin  ton  Evening  Star  (see  also Hines, 
Wiiiam),  373 
editorial,76,106,109,170,183,210-211 
Washington  (D.C.)  National  Airport,  13, 
149, 217 
Washington  Post,  82,  143,  225,  260-261, 
289.  343 ~ _ .  
. _ _  
e d i t o r k ,   105,  183,  246,  320-321,  351, 
365,  370 
interview, 294-295,  311, 341 
Washington  Society  of  Investment  Ana- 
lysts,  199 
Washington Sunah  Star, 26";  294,  301 
Washington  (state{  83 
wasp.  i? ee  Weightless Analysis Sounding 
Washin  on, Univ.  of, 287 
Probe. 
Wassmer Aviation,  118 
Water,  105, 274 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

475 

Westinghouse  Electric  Corp.,  103,  222, 
249,  361,  376 
Westinghouse Research Laborafories, 289, 
309 
Weston,  Ill.,  376 
Westphal, James A.,  277 
Whitaker, Ewen A.,  116 
White,  Alvin  S.,  36,  158, 211 
White, L /C  Edward H.,  I1  (USAF),  92,  144 
Apollo  flight, 110,332 
European visit,  54 
GEMINI IV flight, 17, 104,216-217 
honors,  9,  208,  232 
White,  George C.,  Jr.,  336 
White  House,  50,  77,  101-102,  146,  212, 
293,  301,  303,  328,  354,  356 
White House Committee on  Meteorology, 3 
White  House Conference on  International 
Cooperation, 258 
White,  John Michael,  128 
White,  L /C  Robert M.  (USAF),  47 
White Sands Missile Range (WSMR), N. Mex. 
launch 
Aerobee 150 
atmospheric data,  360,  364 
booster test,  297 
dayglow measurement,  138 
micrometeoroid sampling, 326-327, 
350 
radar  test,  171 
solar astronomy,  187, 331 
ultraviolet astronomy, 40,145,  190, 
241,  242,  295,  352 
x-ray astronomy, 89,  188, 219,  319 
Air-Launched, Air-Recoverable Rocket 
(Alarr), 118-119 
Boosted Arcas,  249,  277 
Nike-Apache,  267,  351 
test 
Athena, 342-343,  367 
Chaparral, 267 
Voyager  parachute,  279,  284,  340, 
352,  370 
White,  Gen.  Thomas  D., Space  Trophy, 
_ _ _  
2.12 
Whitten,  James R.,  126 
Wildt, Ru  ert, 82  
Wilford, 6 h n  Noble,  4-5 
W i l l   Rogers  (missile-carrymng submarine), 
247 
Williams, Clifton C.,  Jr.,  379 
Williams, G.  P.,  348 
Williams, George K.,  296,  314 
Williams, John J.,  354 
Williams, B /G  Robert R.  (USA),  281 
.
.
 
Williams. William W..  296.314 
Wilson,  Andrew,  143 

Waters,  John  R.,  229 
Watertown (N.Y.) Dail  T imes ,  248 
Watson, James Craig,  Gedal,  150 
Watson  Laboratory,  150 
Weapon  systems,  72,  125,  147-148,  161 
Wa5he r   modification, 8,  59,  62,  99,  261, 
J1sU Webb, Alvin  B.,  178 
Webb,  James  E.,  1, 60,  73,  79,  132,  140, 
147,381-382 
Ap:!? 
applications, 70,  138,  196, 210- 
A L L  
appointments by,  166-167,173,275,319, 
336 
award by,  304,  315 
award  to,  314,  341 
labor a  reement, 33 
manne t  space flight, 43 
nuclear  propulsion,  145 
space  cooperation,  133,  138,  289,  303, 
304 
spac;iFgram,  95,  108,  147, 297,  332, 
U.S.S.R.,  70,  301,  316,  323 
tribute  to,  102,249 
Weaner .   Herman K..  315 
Wei  h t l e k   -Ana l   si; 
Sounding  Probe 
(#as  ),  210,  2T4 
We'  htgssness 
ezects  of,  102, 179, 210,  226,  295,  318, 
322.  361.  374 

West Ford,  Project,  35,  376 
West  Palm Beach  Facility, Fla.,  123, 226 
West Virginia, 341 
Westbury, N.Y.,  108 
Western Air  Lines,  159 
Western  Operations  Office  (WOO) 
(NASA), 
215 
Western  Support Office  (WSO) (NASA),  215 
Western  Test  Range 
(see  also 
(WTR) 
Vandenberg AFB,  Calif.) 
launch 
lifting body,  SV-5D, 378 
missile,  66 
satellite, 153, 178,222, 284, 310,  321, 
349 
launch  vehicle 
Atlas-Agena  D, 20,  54,  106, 143, 
178,  208,  212,  238,  268,  293, 
312,319, 367 
Scout,  33,  116, 258,  271 

132, 
382 
gena 

Titan  111-B-Agena D, 373 
Western  Union  International,  Inc.,  176, 
321 
Western Union Telegraph Co.,  341 

476 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1966 

Wing,  aircraft 
delta, 225 
flexible, 156 
, 307,  383 
variable-swe  116, 215 
Wingert,  L o w ~ ~ T . ,  114 
Wings Club,  137 
Winston,  Donald C., 356 
Winter,  Frank  H.,  103 
Wisconsin,  69  
Wisconsin  State  Chamber 
of  Commerce, 
227 
W&yonsin, Univ.  of,  132 ,182 ,328 ,361  
WMO.  See World Meteorological Organiza- 
tion. 
Wolff,  Rep.  Lester L., 165 
Women  as astronauts,  7,  107, 324-325 
WOO.  See NASA  Western Operations Office. 
Wood, Clotaire, 232,  322 
Wood, David  S.,  260 
Woodcock, Gordon R.,  22 
Woodland, Ga.,  176 
Woods Hole, Mass.,  39,  53 
Woods  Hole  Oceanographic  Institute,  52 
Woodward and Lothrop, Inc.,  77 
Wooldridge, Dean  E.,  235 
Woollard, Dr.  George P.,  38, 39 
Woomera  Rocket  Range,  Australia,  123, 
190, 348 
Worden,  Capt. Alfred M.  (USAF),  127 
World Affairs Council, 241 
World  Federation  of  Democratic  Youth 
congress,  214 
World Journal  Tribune, 311 
World Magnetic Surve  6 4  
World Meteorological Zay, 89,  113, 133 
World Meteorological Organization (WMO), 
113-114,  210,  326 
World War  11, 311 
World  Weather  Watch,  114, 133, 326 
Worthin  ton, Minn.,  161 
Wright  Ifrothers Lecture, 26 
Wright  Brothers Medal,  296,  314 
Wright,  Orville, 377 
Wright-Patterson AFB,  Ohio, 27,  203, 284, 
294,  309,  326,  353 
Wright,  Robert, 371 
Wright,  Wilbur,  377 
WSMR.  See White  Sands Missile Range. 
wso.  See NASA Western  Support Office. 
Wyatt,  DeMarquis D.,  1, 351 
Wydler,  Rep.  John W.,  108, 164, 279 
Wyld,  James H.,  377 
Wyndham, Dr.  John  D.,  230 ,253  
x 
XV-4A   hummingbird")  (Vtol  aircraft), 
365 
XV-SA  (V/Stol aircraft),  253 
XV-6A  (V/Stol  aircraft),  131  
X-15  (rocket research aircraft),  15, 129 
fiight, 47,  62 ,282 ,385  
No.  1, 168, 238,  252,  263,  275,  288, 
313 

No.  2,  182, 231,  247,  257,  263,  278, 
351 
No.  3,  242,  258,  271,  292,  351,  357 
pilots,  47,  211,  246,  359 
record, 62,  211,  351 ,385  
test,  182 
accelerometer, 279,  336 
base dra  ,247 ,   278-279 
electricaf loads,  237,  275 
lass,  nonglare, 237,  252 
f e a t ,  278 
horizon  scanner,  252,  263,  275 
micrometeoroid, 252,  263,  275,  292 
pilot  checkout, 258,  313,  357 
radiometer, 292, 336 
stability,  182, 279,  357 
s tar  tracker,  247,  263 
X-22A  (V/Stol  aircraft),  106 
XB-70  (supersonic aircraft),  114, 385 
accident,  211,  263-264 
flight, 5,16,136,158-159,183-184,338, 
342, 354,  372, 376,  378 
XB-7OA,  183 
XC-142A  (V/Stol  aircraft),  182 
XE  (nuclear rocket  engine), 336 
Xi,  Ze-zong, 339 
X-ray (see also Astronomy, x-ray), 79, 174, 
187, 219,  373,  385 
flux, 8 7  
sources, 89,  188, 229 

Y 
Yak-40 (U.S.S.R.  airliner), 256 
Yale  Club,  314 
Yale  Univ..  190.  252 
Yale Univ.'Observatory,  220 
Yangel,  Mikhail K.,  a 4  
Yantar  I  (U.S.S.R.  automatic ionospheric 
laboratory),  339,  385 
Yardley, John  F.,  354 
Yarymovich, D r .   Michael,  150 
Yegorov,  Dr.  Boris  B.,  84,  147,  249,  285 
Yegorov,  Pyotr,  327 
Yegorychev, Nikola  20 
Yeremin,  A.  V.,  3 1 g  
Yeshiva Univ.,  365 
YF-12A  (reconnaissance aircraft),  28,  251 
Yomiuri Shimbun.  45 
Young,  Dr.  C.  Gilbert, 209 
Young, Cdr.  John W.  (USN),  240, 246, 249, 
255,  299,  379 
Young, John D.,  27,  188 
Young  Men's  Business  Club  of  Greater 
New  Orleans.  247 
Young, Sen. Milton R.,  167 
Young, Robert B.,  235 
9no -". 
Y t tr ium-a lum inum-gae t   crystal  (Yag), 
Yugoslavia, 165, 231 
Yurovsky, Vladimir, 46 

Z 

Zabelin, Igor,  384 
Zahner,  Donald, 224 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1966  

477 

Zemlya i Vseknmya, 377 
Zenith Radio Corp., 310  
Zero  Defects Achievement Award,  131 
Zero  Defects Program,  353  
Zero  (zero  gravity)  (see  also  Weightless- 
ness),  121,  179,  210 ,   299  
Zero  Length  Launch  (Zell) platform, 111  
Zeta  Ophiuchi  (star), 190, 241  

Zia Corp.,  235 
Zimmerman,  Fred  L.,  350  
Zimmet, Donald, 250  
Zond  (U.S.S.R. spacecraft), 73  
ZOND 111  (U.S.S.R. space probe), 8 1 4 2 , 3 0 5 ,  
333  
Zuckert,  Eugene M.,  Trophy,  129  
Zwayer,  James T., 28  

NASA  HISTORICAL  PUBLICATIONS 

HISTORIES: 
Robert  L.  Rosholt,  An  Administrative  History  o f   N A S A ,   1958-1963, with 
Foreword  by  James E.  Webb,  NASA  SP-4101, 1966; for   sale  by  Supt. 
of  Documents  ($4.00). 
Loyd  S.  Swenson, James M.  Grimwood, and Charles C.  Alexander, This New 
Ocean:  A  History  o f   Project  Mercury,  NASA  SP.4201,  1966;  for   sale 
by  Supt.  of  Documents  ($5.50). 
CKRONOLOGIES AND  SPECIAL  STUDIES : 
Aeronautics  and  Astronautics:  An  American  Chronology  of  Science  and 
Technology in the Exploration of  Space,  1915-1960, compiled by  Eugene 
M. Emme with Foreword by Hugh L. Dryden, Washington: NASA,  1961 
(out  of  print). 
Aeronautical  and  Astronautical  Events  of  1961, with  Foreword by  James E. 
Webb, published by  the  House Committee on Science and Astronautics, 
1962  (out  of  print). 
Astronautical  and  Aeronautical  Events  o f   1962, w i th   Foreword by  George  L. 
Simpson, Jr.,  published by  the  House Committee on Science and Astro- 
nautics,  1963; for  sale by Supt. of  Documents  ($1.00). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics,  1963, with Foreword by Hugh L. Dryden, NASA 
SP-4004 ,1964 ;  for sale by Supt. of  Documents  ($1.75). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics,  1964, with Foreword by Robert C.  Seamans, Jr., 
SP-4005, 1965; for  sale by Supt. of  Documents  ($1.75). 
Astronautics  and Aeronautics,  1965, with Foreword by James  E. Webb,  NASA 
SP-4006, 1966; for sale by  Supt.  of Documents  ($2.25). 
Project Mercury: A Chronology, by James M. Grimwood with Foreword by Hugh 
L.  Dryden,  NASA  SP-4001,  1963;  for   sale  by  Supt.  of  Documents 
($1.50). 
Mae  Mills  Link,  Space  Medicine  in  Project  Mercury,  with  Foreword  by 
Hugh  L.  Dryden and  Introduction by W.  Randolph Lovelace  11,  NASA 
SP-4003, 1965; for sa le  by  Supt. of  Documents  ($1.00). 
Historical  Sketch  of  N A S A ,  NASA  EP-29,  1965; for   sale by  Supt.  of  Docu- 
ments  ($.25). 

*US.  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING OFFICE:  l967--0  261-497 

479 

"The  aeronautical  and  space  activities  of  the  United  States  shall  be 
conducted  so  a t o   contribute  . . . to   the  expansion  of  human  Knowl- 
edge  of  phenomena in the atmosphere and  spare.  The Administration 
shall  provide  f o r  the  widest  practicable and  appropriate dissemination 
of  information  concerning  its  actiuifies and  the  results  thereof!' 
-NATIONAL  AERONAUTUS AND  SPACE ACT  OF  1958 

TECHNICAL  REPORTS:  Scientific  and  technical  information  considered 
important, complete,  and  a  lasting contribution to  existing knowledge. 

TECHNICAL NOTES:  Information less  broad  in  scope  but  nevertheless  of 
importance as a contribution to existing knowledge. 
TECHNICAL  MEMORANDUMS:  Information  receiving  limited  distribu- 
tion because of  preliminary data, security classification, or other reasons. 
CONTRACTOR  REPORTS:  Scientific  and  technical  information generated 
under  a NASA  contract or  grant and  considered an important contribution to 
existing knowledge. 
TECHNICAL  TRANSLATIONS: 
Information  published  in  a  foreign 
language considered to  merit NASA distribution in English. 
SPECIAL  PUBLICATIONS:  Information derived from or of  value to NASA 
activities.  Publications  include  conference  proceedings,  monographs,  data 
compilations, handbooks, sourcebooks, and special bibliographies. 
TECHNOLOGY UTILIZATION  PUBLICATIONS:  Information  on  tech- 
nology used by NASA that may be of  particular interest in commercial and other 
non-aerospace  applications.  Publications  include  Tech  Briefs,  Technology 
Utilization Reports  and Notes,  and  Technology Surveys. 

De ta i ls  on  the  a v a i l ab i l i t y   of  these publications  may   be  ob ta ined   from: 

SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL  INF 
ONAUTICS  AND  
Washinsion,  D.C.  20546 

I N I STR AT! 0 N 

