N A S A   $P -4010  

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D  
A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 8  

Chronology  on  Sc ience ,   Techno logy ,   and  Po l icy  

Text  by  
S c i e n c e   and   T e c h n o l o g y   D i v i s i o n  
L ibrary   of   Con g r e s s  

Sponsored  by 
NA SA   Historical  D iv is ion  
Office  o f   Policy 

Scientific and Techn ica l  I n fo rma t i on  D i v i s ion  
1969' 
NATIONAL  AERONAUTICS  AND   SPACE  ADMINISTRATION 
W a s h ing to n ,  D.C. 

For  sale by  the  Superintendent  of  Documents 
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.  20402 
Price $2  (paper  cover) 
Libraru of Congress  Catalog Card  Number  66-60096 

Foreword 

How  the voyage of  Apollo  11  came to  pass  after  seven years of  concerted 
national  effort will  occupy  the  serious  attention  of  competent  historians  fo r  
years  to  come.  The moon  walk  of  Astronauts Armstrong and  Aldrin was  an  
important  achievement  in   the  progress  of  man.  This  dramatic  event  was 
shared  on  live  television  by  half  a  billion  people  around  our  small  planet, 
involving  the  entire globe  in   a  unique  common  historical  event  of  all  man- 
kind.  New  questions  concerning the  place  of  man  in   the  universe have been 
raised,  which  should  stimulate  inqu iry   into  the  philosophical  aspects  of 
space travel  as  well  a s  the scientific, engineering, and  organizational  aspects. 
For  such  studies  it  is hoped  that  this  chronology of  the  space events  of  the 
notable year of  1968 will be of  high reference value. 
The year  preceding man’s  first  landing  and  initial  exploration  of  an   ex- 
traterrestrial  body  was  also  the  11th  year  since  Sputnik  became  the  first 
manmade  object  lofted  into  earth  orbit  and  the   10th  anniversary  of  the 
creation ,of  the  U S .   National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration.  For 
NASA  it  witnessed  the  conclusion of  the  great  leadership  of  its  second  Ad- 
ministrator,  James  E.  Webb,  who  organized and   carried  forward  so  vigor- 
ously America’s effort to  undertake a  manned lunar landing  in  the  decade of 
the  1960’s.  Two   historic  space  flights  in   the  final  months  of  1968 put  the 
work  fo r  which he had  been  responsible to  the  final test:  Apo l lo   7,  the  first 
manned  Apollo  flight,  and  ApoUo  8, man’s  first  t r ip   from  earth  into  orbit 
around  another  celestial  body.  After  an   18-month hiatus  in   manned  space 
flight,  both  flights  were  carried  out  flawlessly.  Apo l lo   8’s  10-orbit  voyage 
around  the moon  a t   Christmastime by   Astronauts Borman, Lovell,  and  An- 
ders  and  their  safe  return  to  “the  good  earth”  was  hailed  as   being  in   the 
historical  and  scientific tradition  of  Galileo  and Kepler,  Columbus  and  Ma- 
gellan,  Herschel  and  Newton,  Verne  and  Tsiolkovsky,  the  Wright  Brothers 
and  Lindbergh,  Goddard,  and  Gagarin.  W i th   this  flight,  extraterrestrial 
space was opened to man’s  exploration. 
Other notable techno-scientific space triumphs were made in   1968, includ- 
ing  the launching of  the  Orbiting  Astronomical  Ob se rva to ry  I I ,   the  success- 
ful conclusion of  the X-15  rocket  research airplane program, and the Soviet 
missions  of  the rendezvousing Soyuz   I11 and  unmanned  circumlunar flights 
of  Zond  V  and  Zond   VI.  This  chronicle  for  1968 helps  maintain  histosical 
perspective  by  including such  events  in   their  juxtaposition  to   other  threads 
of  history  such  as  the budgetary and   policy  problems  besetting NASA  and  its 
White  House  and  Congressional  overseers.  The  1968  space  program  ?as 
carried out in  a  year of  national  unrest  and turbulence in   the United States. 
Major  news  events  included  tragic  assassinations  and  urban  r io ts   in   the 
United  States,  widespread  campus  disorders,  the   capture  of  the  U.S.S. 
Pueblo  by  North  Korea,  continued  combat  in   South  Vietnam,  war  in   the 
Middle  East,  the  starving  of  thousands  in   Biafra,  and  a  turbulent  presiden- 
tial  campaign. To  many  Americans U S .  successes  in   space provided much- 

111 

IV 

FOREWORD 

needed  reassurance  that  this  mighty  nation  could  still  accomplish  great 
things. 
If  the engine of  modern  social change is technology, perhaps  this  first col- 
lation  of  spacs  accomplishments in  1968 w i l l   promote  greater  in-depth  un- 
derstanding  of  our  complex times. This,  in  turn,  may  help  generate  new  SO- 
lutions  for  current  and  future  problems  in  those  complex  human  areas 
which so  badly need to progress as rapidly a s  our science and technology. 

Thomas 0. Paine 
Administrator 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration 

August 20,1969 

Contents 

PAGE 
III 

Foreword  ................................................. 
Administrator  Thomas  O . Paine 
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
January  .................................................. 
February  ................................................. 
March  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
April  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
May  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
June 
July  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
August  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
September  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
October  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
November  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
December  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix  A:  Satellites.  Space  Probes.  and  Manned  Space  Flights. 
1968  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
339 
Appendix B :   Major NASA Launches. 1968  ..................... 
367 
Appendix  C :   Chronology  of  Manned  Space Flight.  1967-1968  . . . .   371 
Appendix D : Abbreviations of  References  ...................... 
375 
Index and List  of  Abbreviations and Acronyms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
379 

w 
1 
29 
53 
75 
101 
126 
149 
175 
205 
235 
269 
298 

V 

Preface 

This  chronicle covering aeronautical  and  space  events  in   1968  is,  like  its 
predecessor  volumes,  a  tentative  step  in   the  process  of  documentation and 
writing  of  history.  Admittedly  a  first  skimming,  it  attempts  to  sort  out  the 
rising  crescendo  of  events,  decisions,  and personalities  into  the  sequence  of 
their  happening. I t  is  largely a  collection process  on available sources rather 
than  a  product  of  research. Because  of  the  virtual  real-time basis  on  which 
i t   is  compiled  and  written,  it must  rely  heavily  on  the  most  immediate and 
available  sources-newspapers,  magazines,  press  releases,  etc.-rather 
than 
on  the  in-depth  documentation  that  full  history  requires,  I t   is,  in  another 
sense,  a  holding  action  until  the  full  history  can  be  written,  while  a t   the 
same time providing early reference utility. 
Within  these  limitations,  we  make  a  considerable  effort  to   ensure  accu- 
racy  and  comprehensiveness. Ou r   NASA  Archives  collects  the  current  docu- 
mentation. Under  an   exchange  of  funds  agreement,  the  Science  and  Tech- 
nology  Division  of  the  Library  of  Congress  drafts  the  monthly  segments  in  
comment edition form. These are  edited  and augmented by  the NASA Histori- 
cal  Division,  published,  and  circulated  €or comment  and  use.  At  the  end  of 
the  year the entire manuscript is  reworked  and  augmented by  the  comments 
that have come in  and by  documentation that  has become available since the 
comment  edition  was  prepared.  The  Library  also  prepares  the  extensive 
index. 
This  annual  volume  is  the  result  of  a  number  of  hands.  The  entire  NASA 
Historical  Division  participated  in   source  collection,  review,  and  publica- 
tion. At  the Library Mr.  Charles Thibault  (through April 1968) ,  Mrs.  Pa tr i-  
cia  Davis  (from   May  o n ) ,   Mrs.  Carmen  Brock-Smith,  and  Miss  Shirley 
Medley  prepared  the  monthly  texts  which  were  circulated  throughout  NASA 
for comments  as   to  completeness and   accuracy on  NASA  items.  Mrs.  Davis, 
Mrs. Brock-Smith, and Mrs.  Gay Arnelle then  revised  the monthly draf ts  fo r  
annual  publication.  Mr.  Arthur  Renstrom  prepared  the  index.  I n   the  NASA 
Historical Division  the general editor  was Dr.  Frank W. Anderson,  Jr.,  D e p  
uty  NASA  Historian.  Technical editor  was  Mrs.  Carrie Karegeannes.  Appen- 
d ix   A,  “Satellites,  Space  Probes,  and  Manned  Space  Flights,  1968,”  was 
prepared by  Leonard C.  Bruno  of  the, Library.  Appendix B,  “Major  NASA 
Launches,  1968,” was  prepared by  Dr. Anderson.  Appendix  C,  “Chronology 
of  Manned  Space  Flight,  1967-1968,”  was  prepared  by  William  D. 
Putnam,  Assistant  NASA  Historian  for   Manned  Space  Flight.  Appendix  D, 

VI1 

VIJI 

PREFACE 

“Abbreviations of  References,”  was  prepared  by  Mrs.  Brock-Smith. Creston 
Whiting  of  NASA’s Information  Services  Branch,  Scientific  and  Technical 
Information  Division,  kept  the  process  abreast  of  Russian  releases.  At  the 
NASA  centers  the  historians  and  historical  monitors  submitted  local  material 
fo r  the  chronology. Validation was  the work  of  many  busy  people  through- 
out  NASA  and  in  other  relevant branches  of  the  Federal  structure. 
A  chronology  is but  the  first  step toward  history  a s   an   intellectual  disci- 
pline  and  even it  is  never  really  completed. Comments, additions,  and  criti- 
cisms are always welcomed. 

Eugene M.  Emme 
NASA  Historian 

January  1968 

January  1 : NASA  announced  it  would  conduct  29  major  launches  from  ETR 
and  WTR   durinq  1968.  Surveyor-G launch, last  in   Surveyor series,  was 
scheduled  for  Jan.  7.  Launch  of  OGO-E  would  include  last  scheduled 
flight  of  Atlas-Agena  launch  vehicle from  E T R ;   future  unmanned  inter- 
planetary  probes  and high-altitude  earth-orbital launches would  use  hy- 
drogen-fueled  Centaur.  Two  unmanned  tests  of  Apollo  lunar  module 
and   first  manned  test  of  Apollo  spacecraft would  use  new  Saturn  IB 
vehicle.  Three  Apollo  tests  employing  Saturn  V  would  be  launched 
from new  spaceport complex  a t  KSC .   In   addition  to  OGO  and  Surveyor, 
11  scientific  satellites  would  be  launched  from  ETR-four 
Intelsats, 
ATS-D,  OAO ,   OSO,  Biosatellite-D, HEOS  (launched  for  ESRO)  , Pioneer-D 
and Skynet comsat  (launched f o r  U.K.) . Another  10 scientific satellites 
would be launched from WTR-fOUr 
TOS spacecraft  (launched for ESSA) 
OGO-F,  GEOS-B,  Nimbus-B,  IMP-G,  Radio  Astronomy  Explorer-A,  and 
International  Satellite  for  Ionospheric  Studies  (joint  American  and 
Canadian  program). 
About  250  sounding  rockets  and  scientific  probes  of  upper  atmos- 
phere  would  be  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station.  (NASA   Release 
67-315;  KSC  Release 451-67) 
President  Johnson  announced  stringent  Government  controls  over  pri- 
vate  investments  abroad  and  measures  to  reduce  U S .   balance-of-pay- 
ments  deficit by  $3 billion  in  1968. At  Johnson  City, Tex.,  news confer- 
ence,  he  said  actions  would  reduce  intolerable  deficit  that  could  “en- 
danger  the  strength  of  the  entire  free  world  economy,  and  thereby 
threaten  our  unprecedented  prosperity  a t   home.”  (Harwood,  W Post, 
1 /2 /68 ,1 )  
Membership  of  NASA  Historical  Advisory  Committee  was  designated  for 
1968-1969:  Dr.  Melvin  Kranzberg,  Case  Western  Reserve  Univ.,  a s  
Chairman;  Dr .   Eugene  M.  Emme,  NASA  Historian,  as  Executive  Secre- 
tary;  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff, M I T ;   Dr.  James  L.  Cate,  Univ.  of 
Chicago;  Dr.  Earl H.  DeLong,  American  Univ.;  Dr.  A.  Hunter Dupree, 
Univ.  o f  California  a t  Berkeley;  Dr.  Joe B.  Frantz, Univ.  of  Texas;  Dr. 
Louis  Morton,  Dartmouth  College;  and  Robert  L.  Perry,  RAND  Corp. 
(NASA   NM I   1156.3A; NASA   Special Release, 1/5/68) 
January  2 :   FAA  proposed  rule  requiring  all  jet  aircraft to  operate under  in- 
strument  flight rules  ( I FR )   when  in  controlled  airspace  within  the  con- 
tiguous  48  U S .   states.  Aircraft  would  come  under  control  of  FAA  a i r  
traffic control  ( A T C )   facilities;  pilots  would  file  flight  plan  and  observe 
ATC  instructions  which  provided  for  separation  between  IFR  aircraft. 
Under  visual  flight  rules  (V FR )   pilots maintained  separation on a “see 
and avoid”  basis.  FAA  noted  that  rapid  growth of  total  flight operations 
was  “creating  demands  for  substantial expansion  and  improvement  in  
the  nation’s  a i r   traffic  control  system  . .  [so  that]  proposed  action 
1 

January  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

should  be  taken  to  maintain  the  desired  level  of  safety  pending  long 
range solutions.”  (FAA Release 68-1) 
0  F-111A  aircraft  crashed  near  Edwards  AFB, Calif.,  on  test  flight.  Crew- 
men,  Col.  Henry W.  Brown  (USAF)   and  L/Col.  Joe  B.  Jordon  (USAF) ,  
parachuted  to  safety  in  escape  compartment.  Crash  was  fourth  f o r  
F-111;  one  F-111B  and  two  F-111As  had  crashed  previously.  (AP, 
N Y T ,  1 /4 /68 , 74 )  
AFSC   awarded  United  Aircraft  Corp.  $3,300,000  initial  increment  to  
$33,476,000 contract  for  advance development program  to  demonstrate 
high-performance  reusable  oxygen-hydrogen  rocket  engine.  (DOD R e  
lease 4-68) 
e  Commercial  irradiation  of  foods  by  gamma  rays  for  protection  against 
spoilage  had  begun. a t   Nuclear  Materials  Equipment  Corp.  (NUMEC )  , 
Apollo,  Pa.  Bacon  would  be  proceBsed  initially,  although  FDA had  also 
approved irradiation  for potatoes, wheat,  and wheat  flour. Bacon would 
be treated  by  exposure to  4.5  million rads  of  gamma rays to  destroy all 
bacteria;  product  could  be  stored  indefinitely  without  refrigeration. 
Neither  texture  nor  wholesomeness would  be  affected, according  to  AEC 
and Army tests conducted over past 15 yr.  ( N Y T ,  1 /2 /67 ,58 )  
January 3:  Development  of  blood-pressure  sensors  small  enough  to  pass 
of  ARC’S  Grant  W.  Coon- 
through  dog’s  artery  into  heart-invention 
was  announced  by  NASA.  Sensors  showed  promise  a s   diagnostic  and 
monitoring  instrument  for  human  beings,  particularly  infants.  (NASA 
Special Release; NASA  Tech Brief  67-10669;  AP, N Y T ,   1/4/68;  UPI,  P 
EB,  1/4/68) 
NASA  announced presentation  of  awards  of  $25  each  to  68 NASA  and  con- 
tractor  employees for  technical innovations that might be useful to non- 
aerospace  industry.  Awards  were  expected  to   stimulate  reporting  of 
useful  new  materials,  processes,  products,  tools,  computer  programs, 
66  
and  other  space  technology  developed  in  the  course  of  NASA  work.” 
(NASA  Release 68-3) 
Cosmos  CLXXXZV ,   launched  Oct.  24,  1967, was  identified  by   U.S.S.R. 
a s  operational meteorological satellite which  also  surveyed Arctic  ship- 
ping  conditions.  Satellite had  completed its  first  1,000 orbits.  Informa- 
tion  obtained  from  mission  would  be  shared  with  US. Cosmos 
CLXXXZV  was  fourth  known  Soviet meteorological satellite.  (UPI,  W 
Post, 1/4/68,  A14;.SBD,  1 /4 /68 ,13 )  
January  4:   NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  announced  personnel 
changes  for  new  Apollo  Lunar  Exploration  Office  [establishment  an- 
nounced  Dec.  19,  19671:  Capt.  Lee  R.  Scherer  (USN,  Ret.),  Assistant 
Director  for  Lunar  Programs  and  Lunar  Orbiter  Program  Manager, 
OSSA,  would  transfer  to  OMSF  to  direct  new  office:  Capt.  William  T. 
O’Bryant  (USN,  Ret.),  Program Manager  for Apollo Lunar  Surface Ex- 
periment Package, OSSA, would  head  Flight  Systems Development Div. ; 
and Dr.  Richard  J. Allenby, Jr.,  Deputy Director of  Manned Flight  Ex- 
periments,  OSSA, would  head  Lunar  Science Div.  (NASA  Release  68-5) 
e  Robert  F.  Packard,  Director  of  State  Dept.’s  Office  of  Space  and  Envi- 
ronmental Science Affairs,  described prospects for  international cooper- 
ative programs  in  space before  meeting  of  National  Capital  Section  of 
AIAA:  “.  . . our  foreign  policy  objectives clearly  call  f o r . an   ongoing 
and  successful space program  [and]  to  a  surprising degree  the  Ameri- 
can  position  in  the  world  today  may  be  affected  by  the  manner  in 

2 

Jan- 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
4 
which w e  conduct our  space program.  . . . There may be opportunities 
to  use  space technology  for   arms verification  and  arms  control,  and  to 
create  special  opportunities  for   cooperation  between  d e  major  space 
powers.  There will  clearly be  opportunities to   extend the  economic and 
social  benefits  which  this  technology  offers  and   to   use  these  applica- 
tions,  as  well  as   scientific  research  projects,  as  a  means  for  increased 
international  cooperation.”  (Text) 
January  5 :  Resignation of  Dr.  Robert C. Seamans,  Jr., as  Deputy  Adminis- 
tra tor  of  NASA,  announced Oct.  2,  1967, became  effective. (NASA  Release 
67-257) 
USAF  announced  launch  of  200th  Minuteman  ICBM  from   Vandenberg 
AFB.  Since September  1962, Vandenberg  had  been  launch  site for  mis- 
siles fired over  Pacific Ocean fo r  crew  training,  reliability  tests,  and de- 
velopmental work.  (Boeing Release) 
e Computer  services for   1968 would  be  provided  to  major  contractors  op- 
erating  a t   Michoud  Assembly  Facility  by  Ling-Temco-Vought’s Range 
Systems Div.  under  $2 .7 -d l l ion   MSFC  contract,  MSFC  announced. Sec- 
ond  of  three  one-year renewed  options, contract  ~ O W  had  total  value of 
$7.6  million.  Services  would  include  operation  and  maintenance of  a 
large  complex  of  digital  and  analog computers,  data  transmission sys- 
tems,  data  reduction systems,  and  related  electronic  equipment.  ( MSFC 
Release 68-1) 
January 7:  NASA’s Surveyor  V I I   (Surveyor G )  , last  spacecraft in NASA’s Sur-  
veyor  Program  to  analyze  lunar  surface,  was  successfully  launched 
from  ETR  by  Atlas-Centaur  (AC-15)  booster  on  67-hr  lunar  intercept 
trajectory.  Primary mission  for  2,29341  (a t  launch)  spacecraft was  to  
softland on  the moon  and  obtain postlanding TV  pictures  of  lunar   sur-  
face.  As  secondary mission  spacecraft  would  determine  relative  abun- 
dance  of  chemical elements  in   lunar  soil  with  alpha-scattering  instru- 
ment;  manipulate lunar  material  with  surface  sampler  in   view  of  TV 
camera ; and  obtain  touchdown  dynamics,  de rma l ,   and  radar   reflectiv- 
ity  data  [see  Jan.  9-22].  Surveyor  VII-which 
also  carried  magnets 
attached  to  landing  pads,  mirrors  for  viewing  beneath  spacecraft  and 
for   stereo  photography, and  seven  special  dust-detection mirrors-was 
first  in   Surveyor  series  to  carry   both  alpha-scattering  instrument  and  
surface sampler. 
Launch  sequence  for  Surveyor  V U  was  flawless,  and   spacecraft  per- 
formed nominally.  First  of  two  scheduled midcourse maneuvers was  so 
precise  that  second  correction  was  not  necessary;  maneuver  directed 
spacecraft toward a point 1.6 mi from center of  target area. 
Surveyor  V I I   was  seventh  in   series  of  seven  spacecraft  designed  to  
prove out  design, develop technology  of  lunar  softlanding,  obtain  post- 
landing  TV pictures  of  lunar  surface,  and  provide basic  scientific and  
engineering data  in   support  of  Project  Apollo.  Surveyor program  wa s  
directed  by  OSSA  Lunar and   Planetary Programs  Div.;  project  manage- 
ment  was  assigned  to  JPL;  Atlas-Centaur launch  vehicle  was  managed 
by  LeRC;  and  prime  contractor  fo r   spacecraft  development  and   design 
was  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; NASA  Release 67-316K;  AP, 
NYT,  1 /8 /68 ,14 ;   UPI, W S tar ,   1/8/68,1;  AP, B Sun, 1/8/68,  A3) 
USAF   and  United  Technology  Center  announced  that  hybrid  rocket  en- 
gine  using  solid  propellant  and  liquid  oxidizer  had  successfully  fired 
Sandpiper  missile  from  F 4  aircraft  in   secret  test  Dec.  12,  1967.  Ac- 

3 

January  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS.  1968 

January  7:  Surveyor  VII,  launched  Jan .   7  f o r   sof t land ing   on   moon  Jan.  9 ,   photo- 
graphed  crescent  earth from   lunar  surface  Jan.  20  and  recorded  two   laser  beams  ( a r row )  
aimed  toward  landing  site  from  earth.  Spacecraft  was  last  i n   NASA’s Surveyor  program. 

cording to  UTC manager Douglas D.  Qrdahl,  engine had performed well 
during  five-minute  flight  over  Eglin  AFB,  Fla.,  aerial  test  range  and 
“proved  fo r  the  first  time  that  hybrids  a re  practical  and  can  fly.”  (W 
Post,  1/7/68,  A7; Wilford, N Y T ,  1 /8 /68 ,3 )  
January  8 :  Two-volume Review  Board  report,  Status  of  Actions  Taken  on 
the Apo l lo  204, was submitted to  Senate Committee on Aeronautical and 
Space  Sciences  and   House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’ 
NASA  Oversight  Subcommittee  by  NASA  Associate  Administrator  fo r  
Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller.  According  to  report, 
major  changes  made  in   Apollo  project  included:  installing  quick- 

4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

January  8 

opening hatch;  eliminating most combustible materials in cabin;  remak- 
ing  spacesuit, primarily  of  glass  fiber  instead  of  nylon;  equipping  and 
training  launch  pad  workers  for  fire  fighting;  placing metal  shielding 
over  exposed  electrical  wiring ; and  replacing  aluminum oxygen  pipes 
with  more-fire-resistant stainless  steel  pipes.  NASA  reported  spacecraft 
had  been  modified  by  North  American  Rockwell Corp.  so  that  it  could 
use  ordinary  a i r  or oxygen-enriched air,  a s  well  as  100% oxygen, while 
on launch pad.  (Text; Wilford, NYT,  1 /20 /68 ,1)  
Spain  had  submitted  “declaration  of  intent”  to   withdraw  from  ESRO, 
Space  Business  Da i ly   reported.  Under  March  20,  1 9 a ,  eight-year  or- 
ganization plan, Spain would have contributed 2.66%, $7.98 million, of 
ESRO’S  total  budget  of  $300  million.  Nine  countries  would  remain  in  
ESRO:  Belgium,  Denmark,  West  Germany,  France,  Italy,  The  Nether- 
lands, Sweden, Switzerland, and U.B.  ( S B D ,  1 /8 /68 ,27)  
Five  o r   six  meteorites  landed  on  earth  every  day,  usually  undetected, 
National  Geographic Society reported.  Some 8 billion  meteors  actually 
entered earth’s  atmosphere daily,  but  intense heat  from  a i r   friction  va- 
porized all but largest.  ( N Y T ,  1 /8 /68 ,47)  
January  9:  NASA  announced creation  of  Research  and  Technology Advisory 
Council to assist in planning  and evaluation of  research and  technology 
fo r  aeronautics  and  space.  Council would  assess relative  importance  of 
ongoing  research,  suggest additional work,  and  advise  on  methods  fo r  
developing national resources. 
Headed  by  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff, Head  of  MIT  Department 
of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics,  and  supported  by  committees  repre- 
senting seven major  technology areas, Council included:  Dr.  David Alt- 
man,  United  Technology  Center;  Dr.  Allen  V.  Astin,  Director  of  Na- 
tional  Bureau  of  Standards;  Dr.  Loren  D.  Carlson, Univ.  of  California 
School  of  Medicine;  Dr.  Howard  W.  Emmons,  Harvard  Univ.;  Gen. 
James  Ferguson,  Commander  of  AFSC;  Dr.  Nicholas J. Hoff,  Head  of 
Stanford Univ.  Dept.  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics;  Dr.  Hans  W. 
Liepmann,  Cal  Tech;  Dr.  John  G.  Linvill,  Head  of  Stanford  Univ. 
Electrical  Engineering  Dept. ; Matthias  E.  Lukens,  Deputy  Executive 
Director of  Port  of  New  York  Authority;  Dr.  Ronald Smelt, Vice Pres- 
ident  and Chief  Scientist of  Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.;  Dr.  Chauncey V. 
Starr, Dean  of  Univ.  of  California Engineering School;  and Edward  C. 
Wells, Vice  President,  Product  and  Development, Boeing Co.  Dr.  Allan 
E.  Puckett of  Hughes Aircraft  Corp.  accepted  appointment later.  (NASA 
Release 68 -4 ;  NASA  OART) 
NASA  said  one  mile  of  coaxial  cable  had  been  laid  in  two-foot-deep 
trench  across Ascension Island  in  South Atlantic Ocean  to  link  two  an- 
tennas-30-ft-dia  parabolic  reflector  for  contact with  Apollo  spacecraft 
and  42-ft-dia  dish  to  link  with  Intelsat  II-C-as 
part  of  chain  of 
Manned  Space  Flight  Network  ( MSFN)   tracking,  telemetry,  and  voice 
communications facilities. Also  integrated  in  NASA  communications cir- 
cuits  were  Satellite Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition Network  (STADAN) 
facilities  fo r  scientific satellites and  Deep  Space Network  (DSN)   facili- 
ties  to  support .lunar  and  planetary  probes.  Ascension  Island  cable was 
“final  link”  in  two  million  miles  of  NASA  Communications  (NASCOM ) .  
(NASA  Release 68-1) 
Dr.  Robert  6.  Seamans,  Jr.,  former  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  was 
sworn  in   a s  consultant  by  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb.  Webb 
5 

January  9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%8 

said  Dr.  Seamans would  “lend  his  talents  and  experience to   the  com- 
plex problems we  face  a s  the  space program moves  into  its second dec- 
ade.”  (NASA Release 68-7) 
AEC  scientists had  produced  man-made  atoms  of  transuranium  elements 
-artificial 
elements  of  californium,  einsteinium,  and  fermium  tha t  
were  heavier  than  uranium,  heaviest  of  the  92  elements  that  occurred 
naturally.  Man-made atoms  had  numerous  potential  uses  in  medicine 
and  space,  such  as  providing  power  for  satellites  and  for  electrical 
heart stimulator.  (Spivak, W S J ,  1 /9 /6 8 ,1 )  
Aerospace industry sales in  1967 totaled  $27.3  billion,  13% increase  over 
1966  sales,  Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  reported.  (W News,  1/9/68, 
38) 
January  9-22:  NASA’s Surveyor  V I I ,   launched  Jan.  7,  became  fifth  US. 
spacecraft  to  softland  on  moon  when  it  touched  down  in  Tycho  crater 
ejecta  after  66-hr 35-min flight  and  began  transmitting  first  of  21,274 
detailed  television  pictures  to  JPL Deep  Space  Facilities,  Goldstone, 
Calif. 
Landing sequence began when  Surveyor  VZZ  shifted  its normal  cruis- 
ing  attitude to position main  retrorocket. Triggered  by  radar,  main  ret- 
romotor  slowed  spacecraft  to  3%  mph;  retromotor  then  ejected.  Ver- 
nier  engines cut  off  a t   13 f t  above lunar  surface and  spacecraft landed. 
First  photos  transmitted  showed  Surveyor  VU   was  resting  in   rock- 
strewn  area.  Later  photos consisted of  wide  and  narrow  angle  surveys, 
panoramas,  and  special area  surveys of  spacecraft and landing  area,  in- 
cluding  closeups  of  rocky  debris  on  rim  of  Tycho  crater  and  rugged 
landscape with  prominences and  boulders  estimated  to  be  three  stories 
high.  Stereo  pictures  were  obtained  with  special  mirrors;  polarization 
pictures  were  taken  of  lunar  surface, geologically interesting  rocks,  and 
ea r th ;   and  photos  of  Jupiter  and  earth  were  obtained.  Camera  also 
photographed  laser  beams directed  a t  spacecraft  from  Table Mountain, 
Calif.,  and  Kitt  Peak,  Ariz.,  observatories,  two  of  six  US. stations 
which directed laser  beams.  Test,  first use  of  light  to  communicate over 
such great  distance, was  considered highly  significant for  future use  of 
lasers  in  communications and measurements in  space and  on  earth  and 
was  expected  to  permit  distance  between  points  on  moqn  and  on  earth 
to  be  measured  with  accuracy  of  six  inches.  Special  surveys  of  dust- 
detection mirrors showed no accumulation of  dust. Footpad magnets did 
not  show  a  significant adherence to  particles, but  material  did  accumu- 
late on surface sampler scoop magnet. 
Only  flaw  in  mission  occurred  Jan.  10 when  alpha-scattering  instru- 
ment  failed to  contact lunar  surface  after  command to  deploy had  been 
issued.  Photos  revealed  that  although  release  squib  had  fired,  instru- 
ment had  remained  in background  count position.  Efforts to  dislodge it 
by  rocking  solar  panel  were  unsuccessful.  After  satisfactory  bearing- 
strength  data  had  been  obtained,  engineers  positioned  surface ’sampler 
on  top of  alpha-scattering instrument, applied downward force, and suc- 
cessfully released  instrument  without  damage.  Alpha-scattering instru- 
ment,  moved  by  surface  sampler  to  its  initial  position  over  soil,  to  
second position’ over  rock, and to  third  position  over  one-half-inch-deep 
trench,  obtained  data  for  63 h r   2  min.  Surface  sampler  conducted  six 
bearing-strength  tests;  excavated several  trenches,  including  one  16 in  
long  and over 6 in deep; turned  over large rock  for  examination by TV 

6 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Jan- 

9-22 

e 

camera;  and  attracted  gravel-size rock  with  i ts   magnet.  On  Jan.  22, 
communications w i th   spacecraft were  halted  to  preserve  battery  power 
during cold of  lunar night. 
Performance of  Surveyor   VZZ,  final mission  in  NASA’s Surveyor pro- 
gram to analyze lunar surface, was  excellent. Surveyor  Z (launched May 
, Surveyor   V 
30,  1966),  Surveyor   ZZZ  (launched  April  1% 
(launched Sept.  8,  1967) ,   and  Surveyor   VZ (la 
Nov.  7,  1967) 
had  all  softlanded  successfully  and  transmitted. 
to  earth.  Sur- 
veyo r  ZZ (launched Sept.  20,  1966) had  failed to  softland because  of  an 
ignition  failure.  Communications with  Surveyor   ZV  (launched July  14, 
1967)  were  lost  seconds  before  spacecraft  was  scheduled  to  softland, 
and  its  condition  could  not  be  determined.  (NASA P ro j   Off;  NASA  Re- 
lease 67-316K;  AP,  W  Po s t ,   1/10/68,  A1;  urn, W S ta r ,   1/10/68,  A3 ;  
AP,  B Sun,  1/11/68,  A l ;   SBD,  1/11/68,  56 ;   Hill,  NYT,  1 /12 /68 ,4 ;  
W Po s t ,   1/13/68,  A5;  Clark,  NYT,  1/22/68,  1 7 ) .  
January  10: Vice  President Hubert H.  Humphrey,  as Chairman of  National 
Aeronautics and  Space Council,  had  asked  BOB to  place  $20 million  in  
FY 1969 NASA  authorization  for  Earth  Resources Observation Satellite 
(EROS) .  White  House  budget-cutters  had  eliminated  EROS  from  new 
budget, George C.  Wilson  said in  Washington Po s t .  Secretary of  the  In- 
terior  Stewart L.  Udal1  and  NAS  scientists  also  were  expected  to  press 
for restoration  of  funds. NAS  report  to  NASA  would  urge EROS funding a s  
‘‘one  of  the  potentially  big  payoffs  for  the  national  space  program.’’ 
(Wilson, W Po s t ,  1/10/68,  B7) 
Dr.  Frederick  Seitz,  National  Academy  of  Sciences  President,  was 
awarded  DOD’S  Distinguished  Civilian  Service  Medal  fo r   outstanding 
contribution  to  DOD as  Chairman  of  Defense  Science  Board  for  past 
News Repor t ,   3/68,  6:  NAS  Info  Off) 
four  years.  (NAS-NRC-NAE 
January  li : NASA  successfully  launched Explorer  XXXVZ-also 
called  Geos 
ZZ  (GEOS-B)  Geodetic  Earth  Orbiting  Satellite-€rom  WTR by  Thrust- 
Augmented Delta booster  into orbit with 978.4-mi  (1,574.5-km) apogee; 
670.8-mi  (1,079.5-km)  perigee;  112.18-min  period;  and  105.8’ 
in- 
clination. 
The  460-lb,  gravity-gradient  satellite,  launched  to  contribute  to 
completion  of  NASA-managed  U.S.  National  Geodetic  Satellite  Pro- 
(NGSP ) ,   carried  six  geodetic  systems  for  development  of  a 
gram 
more  precise  model  of  earth’s  gravitational  field  and  improvement  of 
knowledge  of  earth’s  size  and  shape:  ( 1 )   flashing-light beacons  with 
6,620-candle-sec-per-flash combined candle emittance to be photographed 
against  background  of  stars;  ( 2 )   corner  cube quartz  reflectors  to  pin- 
point  satellite’s  position  by  reflecting  a  laser  beam;  ( 3 )   three  radio 
transmitters  to  help  determine  satellite’s  line-of-sight  velocity  using 
Doppler  shift  principle  and  USN  TRANET  equipment;  (4) radio  trans- 
ponder  to  provide  distance  between  satellite  and  interrogating  USA 
SECOR  network  ground  station;  (5 )   range  and   range-rate  transponders 
fo r  simultaneous determination of  satellite-to-ground-station range  and 
line-of-sight  velocity,  using  NASA’s STADAN  system;  and  (6)   C-band 
transponder  systems  a t   STADAN  stations  for  calibration  and   experimen- 
tation  to determine applicability of  C-band radar  tracking  system t o  sat- 
ellite  geodesy.  Primary  mission  objectives  were  to  obtain  90 days  of 
precision  spacecraft  position  data,  support  geodetic  positioning  of  40 
reference control points  and 64 densification observation sites, and eval- 
uate accuracy of  ground-based C-band radars. 

7 

January  11 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
Explorer  XXXVZ was  fifth  satellite launched  in   NGSP  series  and  sec- 
ond  in  GEOS  series.  Mission  of  first  GEOS  satellite,  Explorer  Xx1.X 
(launched Nov.  6, 1 96 5 ) ,  had  ended  in  December  1966,  but  satellite 
was  still  transmitting  weak  signals on  Doppler  shift.  Geos  ZZ was  de- 
signed,  fabricated,  and  tested  by  Johns  Hopkins Univ.’s  Applied  Phys- 
ics  Laboratory.  Overall  mission  responsibility  was  assigned  to  OSSA. 
(NASA  Release 68-2K;  NASA  P ro j  Off; UPI,  N Y T ,  1/11/68,30) 
SR-71,  USAF’S  fastest  and  highest  flying  aircraft,  crashed  in  northern 
California. L/C  Robert G.  Sowers  (USAF)  , instructor, and Capt. David E. 
Fruehaf  (USAF ) ,  trainee,  ejected  safely.  (UPI,  W  Po s t ,   1/13/68,  4 )  
Malfunction in  test  equipment apparently  caused  failure  of  two  modified 
Apollo drogue  parachutes during  flight  test  a t  USN’S  aerospace research 
facility,  El  Centro,  Calif.  Test  objective  to  demonstrate  structural  in- 
tegrity  of  parachutes to  slow  and  stabilize spacecraft before main  para- 
chute deployment was  not  realized;  MSC  announced repeat  of  flight test 
would be made Feb. 5.  ( A e r o  Tech, 1 /29 /68 ,10 )  
NASA  announced  award  of  $4,521,671 contract  to  Honeywell,  Inc.,  fo r  
management  and  engineering  services during  1968 for  Centaur  launch 
vehicle  guidance  system.  Atlas-Centaur  booster  had  successfully 
launched  seven  Surveyor  spacecraft  toward  the  moon  and  was  sched- 
uled  to  launch  OAO,  ATS, and  two  Mariners.  (LeRC  Release 68-3) 
January  12 :  XB-70  research  aircraft, flown  by  Fitzhugh L.  Fulton,  Jr.,  and 
Donald  L.  Mallick,  reached  mach  2.55  and  67,000-ft altitude  and  ac- 
complished  70%  of  primary  test  objectives  during  1 -h r  54-min  flight 
from  Edwards AFB.  Purpose  of  flight was  to  take  wing  tuft  photos  and 
check  stability,  control,  and  handling  qualities;  inlet  performance; 
boundary  layer  noise;  friction;  fuselage  bending.  (XB-70  P ro j   O f f )  
Most  realistic  way  to  reduce  sonic boom  from  supersonic aircraft  was  to 
make  successive small  rr-luctions,  according  to  Generation  and  Propa-  
ga t ion   of  Sonic  Boom,  report  of  Subcommittee on  Research, NAS  Com- 
mittee  on  SST-Sonic Boom.  Reductions  could  be  achieved  by  “refine- 
ments in  conventional aircraft  design, a  better  understanding  of  theory, 
and  improvements in  propulsive efficiency  and  operating  procedures.” 
Future  aircraft  designs  might  yield  significant ‘  reductions.  Studies 
should  be  undertaken  by  both  Government  and  industry  on  “less  con- 
ventional  configurations.”  ( NASA  Release ; NAS-NRC-NAE 
News   Repor t ,  
1/68,1-2) 
NASA  awarded  $7,178,937  contract  to   General  Dynamics  Corp.  Convair 
Div.  to  continue  for  15 mo  contract  now  in  force  f o r   launch  support 
services  fo r   Atlas-Centaur  launch  vehicle.  LeRC  had  management  re- 
sponsibility  for  Centaur.  ( NASA  Release  68-8) 
DOD announced  termination  of  $175-million Mark  1 7  reentry  vehicle  pro- 
gram-for  which  $45 million had  already  been  expended-“before 
ad- 
ditional  R&D  or  heavy  production  costs  are  incurred.”  Funds  originally 
designated for Mark  1 7  would be  used  f o r  design changes on Mark  11. 
(DOD Release 43-68;  AP,  N Y T ,   1/14/68,  50) 
a  Postdoctoral  research  opportunities  under  one-year  research  associate- 
ships  to  work  in  AFSC’S  laboratories  and  research  centers  would  be  of- 
fered by AFSC  in  1968 and  1969. Awards would be made by  NRC’S  selec- 
tion board around April  1, 1968.  (AFSC  Release 4.68) 
January  15: NASA  announced personnel changes:  Samuel H.  Hubbard,  OMSF 
Special Assistant,  Gemini  Program, moved  to  Apollo Applications Pro- 

8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

January  15 

gram  Office  as  Special Assistant  for  Programs,  responsible  for  ensur- 
ing  adequate  communications  and  documentation  were  provided  by 
UP in  support  of  organizations  with  program  interfaces. 
Col.  Maynard  E.  White  (USAF,  Ret.) , Director,  MSF  Program  Con- 
trol,  was  named  Director  of  MSF  Management  Operations.  Jerald  K. 
Kubat  of  Apollo  Program  Control would  succeed  him.  (NASA  Ann) 
USAF  Air  Defense  Command  was  redesignated  Aerospace  Defense  Com- 
mand.  ( S B D ,  1/3/68,  1; A FH F  News le t ter ,   2/68) 
Terms  for  development, production,  and  launch  of  two  comsats for U.K. 
under  DOD  contract  announced  March  8,  1967,  were  made  final  in 
$7,535,000  fixed-price-incentive-fee USAF  contract  with  Philco-Ford 
Corp.’s  Space  and  Re-entry  Systems  Div.  First  satellite  would  be 
launched  into  synchronous,  equatorial  orbit  with  Thor-Delta  booster 
from ETR  in  1968; second satellite would  be backup. Philco-Ford would 
design  satellites  Lrto satisfy  certain  defense  communications  require- 
ments of  the United Kingdom.”  Satellites would have station-keeping ca- 
pability to maintain  specific positions over earth.  Space and Missile Sys- 
tems Organization would  be contracting  agency.  ( AFSC  Release  195.67) 
January 16:  U.S.S.R.  successfully launched Cosmos CXCZX .  Orbital parame- 
ters:  apogee,  221  km  (137  mi) ; perigee,  159  km  (99  mi) : period, 
88.2  min;  inclination,  65.5’.  Satellite  reentered  Feb.  1.  (Krasnaya  
Zoez,  1/18/68;  GSFC SSR ,  1/31/68;  2/15/68) 
Two  NASA  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  launched  from  NASA  Wallops 
Station  carried  payloads  to  85-mi  (137-km)  and  88-mi  (141-km)  alti- 
tudes  to  investigate D  region  electron density  during  solar  x-ray  flare. 
Rocket  and  instrument  performance was  satisfactory.  Preliminary  data 
indicated  launches  were  accomplished  during  period  of  decreasing 
solar activity.  (NASA  Rpt SRL )  
France  had  successfully  test-fired LEX,  improved,  single-stage experimen- 
tal  hybrid  sounding  rocket  which  used  liquid  oxidizer  and  inert  solid 
propellant.  Developed  by  Office  National  d’Etudes  et  de  Recherches 
ACrospatiales  ( ONERA )  , French  space  agency,  LEX  could  carry  14-lb 
payload  with  meteorological  experiment  to  115-km  (71-mi)  altitude. 
( S B D ,  1 /1 6 /68 ,7 4 )  
NASA  awarded  NAR  Rocketdyne  Div.  $14,796,400  cost-plus-incentive-fee 
contract  for engineering support  services for H-1  engines to power  Sat- 
urn  IB   1st stage.  Contract  covered  period  of  July  1967  through  June 
1971.  ( MSFC  Release 68-9) 
British  Prime  Minister  Harold  Wilson,  speaking  to  House  of  Commons 
on  long-range spending cuts  to  restore  financial confidence,  announced 
withdrawal  of  U.K.’s  military  forces  east  of  Suez  by  end  of  1971 and 
cancellation of  agreement to  purchase  50 F-111  aircraft  from  U S .   for 
$875  million.  F-111  aircraft  order  cancellation  was  expected  to  have 
adverse effect on  cooperation between  U.K.  and U S .   in defense produc- 
tion.  To obtain  U.K.  purchase  agreement  of  $2.9  billion  for  F-111, 
F-4,  and  C-130  aircraft  plus  Polaris  spare  parts,  U.S.  had  agreed  to 
purchase  $425  million  worth  of  defense  items  from  U.K.  by  Ey  1977 
and  to  help  U.K.  obtain  additional  $400  million  in  cooperative  arms 
sales  to  third  countries.  (Lewis,  NYT ,   1/17/68,  1;  Sheehan,  NYT ,  
1/17/68,15) 
January  17:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Thrust-Augmented  Thor-Agena  D  booster  into  orbit  with  335-mi 

9 

January  17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

(539.1-km)  apogee,  285-mi  (458.6-km)  perigee,  94.5-min  period,  and 
75.1”  inclination.  (A e r o  Tech,  1/29/68,  11; Pres  Rp t   68) 
e  Primary  objectives  of  Mariner  V  mission  (launched June  14,  1967)  had 
been  fulfilled and mission had  been  adjudged  a  success by  NASA.  Com- 
munications with  spacecraft  had  been  terminated  Dec.  1, 1967, when 
signal level had been  lowered because of  antenna pointing angle;  space- 
craft  systems  had  operated  normally  during  telemetry  reception,  Nov. 
21,  1967.  Spacecraft  was  expected  to  survive  solar  heat  and  return 
within range  of  DSN  antennas  in   August  or   September  1968. Total  life- 
time would be three to  six years.  (NASA  Pro j  Off) 
A  21.5-ftt-dia, 40-ft-long mockup  of  Saturn  V  3rd  (S-IVB) 
stage  was 
flown  to  MSFC for   crew  station  design review;  it would  be  launched as  
2nd  stage  of  Saturn IB  and  as  flight  orbital workshop,  with  aluminum- 
grid  partitions  rearranged  to  create  separate  rooms.  Modification  pro- 
vided  two-story  arrangement  with  separate  rooms  for   sleeping,  food 
preparation,  and  control  center  and  large  open  laboratory  area  for  ex- 
periments.  ( MSFC  Release 68-11  1 
e  In   Moscow,  U.S.S.R.  and  France  agreed  to  place  French  instruments on 
board  Soviet  lunar  orbiter  satellite  a t   undetermined  future  date,  in  
th ird   joint  Soviet-French space  project,  Evert  Clark  reported  in   New 
Yorle  T ime s .  Projects,  most  significant cooperative effort  U.S.S.R.  had 
undertaken with  any  country,  included launch of  French satellite on  in- 
terplanetary  physics mission in   1972 and use  of  Soviet Molniya comsats 
to  exchange  experimental color  TV  broadcasts.  ( N Y T ,  1/18,/68, 52 )  
AFCRL  geodesists  hit  Explorer  XXII satellite  with  multipulse  ruby  laser 
beam  in   daylight  for   second  time.  First  success  in  using  satellite 
as  target  f o r   reflection  in   daylight  was  on  Dec.  19,  1967, by  AFCRL. 
Explorer  XXII, launched  by  NASA  Oct.  9,  1964,  carried  special 
reflectors for  laser  beams.  Experiment  was  designed  to  improve meas- 
urements  of  distance  between  widely  separated  points  on  earth’s 
surface  and  improve  knowledge  of  earth‘s  size  and  shape.  (OAR  Re -  
search  Review,  5 / 6 8 ,  13;  Instruments  and  Spacecraft,  NASA  SP-3028) 
January  17-19:  Rep.  Emilio Q.  Daddario  (D-Conn.),  Chairman  of  House 
Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Science, Research,  and  Devel- 
opment  Subcommittee, a t  hearings  on  environmental pollution,  stressed 
crucial  role  for  science  and  technology  in   pollution  abatement.  He 
said  hearings  would  focus  on  research  programs  of  Federal  agencies 
which  “must  produce an   expanded  basis  of  facts  and  technical  options 
to  make  our  pollution  laws  work.”  Testimony  would  show  “that  it  is  
shortsighted indeed to  consider goals  for   restoring  and maintaining the 
quality  of  the  environment apar t   from  the  supporting research  and  de- 
velopment.”  (Transcript) 
January  18:  USAF launched unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg AFB  by 
Titan  111-B-Agena  D  booster.  Satellite  entered  orbit  with  254-mi 
(408.8-km)  apogee,  77-mi  (132.9-km)  perigee,  89.8-min  period,  and 
111.4”  inclination  and  reentered  Feb.  4.  ( S BD ,   1/19/68,  98;  GSFC 
SSR ,   1/31/68;  Pres  Rp t   68) 
Study  of  Northern  Lights,  auroras,  and  polar  cap  airglow  by  coordi- 
nated  use  of  aircraft  flights  from  Churchill  Research  Range,  sounding 
rocket  launches,  satellite  overpasses,  and  ground  observations  was 
begun, by. NASA.  During two  extended periods  (Jan.  18-Feb.  8 and Feb. 

10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

January  18 

21-March  12 )   NASA  airborne  laboratory,  Convair  990  jet  aircraft, 
would  fly  over  Churchill  area  and  beyond,  from  Alaska  to  Greenland. 
Three flights would  be coordinated with  sounding rocket launches from 
Churchill;  many  flights would  be  coordinated  with  passes  of  Ogo  ZV, 
containing  12  experiments fo r   studying  auroral  and  polar  cap   phe- 
nomena.  Aircraft  would  carry  spectrometers,  photometers, wide-angle 
cameras,  radio  frequency receivers,  and  magnetometer  to   study  mag- 
netic  field  activity  and  time  and  space variations  of  auroras  and   polar 
gap  airglow.  NASA’s 1968 Airborne  Auroral  Ewed i t ion   would  be   di- 
rected by  ARC’S  Airborne Science Office and managed  by  ARC’S  Louis C. 
Haughney ; 14  universities  and  research  organizations  in   Canada  and 
U S .  would participate.  (NASA  Release 68-9) 
0  Complete  draf t   of  treaty  to  ban  spread  of  nuclear  weapons  was  submit- 
ted  by  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  to  17-nation U.N.  Disarmament  Conference, 
which  would  report  to  U.N.  General  Assembly  by  March  15.  Agree- 
ment  had  been  reached  on  international  inspection  and   controls  to   de- 
tect  any violations  of  treaty’s  provisions.  West  Germany and  other  na- 
tions  contended proposed  controls would  interfere  with peaceful  atomic 
development.  European  Atomic  Energy  Community  (EURATOM) had 
refused  to  take  par t   in  negotiations  and  said  it would  not  sign  treaty. 
( N Y T ,  1/19/68,1;  1 /20 /68 ,8 )  
Proposal  for  four  additional  basic  Block  I1  Apollo  spacecraft  command 
and  service modules  would  be  made  by  NAR  Space Div.  in   accordance 
with  NASA  request. Action would  bring total purchase to  19 for flights on 
Saturn IB  and  Saturn V  launch vehicles.  Delivery would  s tar t  in   1970. 
(NASA  Release  68-12) 
0  Northrop Gorp.  scientists 6. M.  Andrew  and  M.  S.  Cahn  told  n e w   con- 
ference  discharge  of  electricity  into  air  ahead  of  supersonic  a ircraf t  
might not only lessen  sonic boom  intensity but  also reduce aerodynamic 
drag,  saving  fuel.  Scientists said  NASA  and  Boeing  Co.  were  interested 
in  new  line  of  SST research.  Electrical discharge-up 
to  30,000  volts  in  
repel molecules of  air  and  remove  them  from  a ir-  
tests  to  date--would 
craft’s  path;  molecules  would  then  flow  smoothly  around  aircraft  in- 
stead  of  bunching  ahead  to  cause  sonic  boom.  Scientists  admitted 
electrical  discharge could  interfere with radio  and  TV  broadcasts  and 
with  communications  between  aircraft  and  ground.  (AP,  W Post, 
1/19/68,  AS) 
Lockheed  Missiles  &  Space  Co.  received  $5,700,000  USAF  contract  for  
Agena  launch  services  at  Vandenberg AFB  from  Oct 1, 1967, through 
Sept. 30,1968.  (DOD  Release 64-68) 
January 19:  U.S.S.R.  successfully launched Cosmos CC. Orbital  parameters : 
apogee,  538  km  (334  mi) ; perigee,  518  km  (322  mi) ; period,  95.1 
m in ;   inclination,  74”.  (Pravda, 1/21/68;  GSFC SSR,  1/31/68) 
Fiftieth  anniversary  of  USAF  School  of  Aerospace  Medicine,  dedicated 
to  ensuring  that  man  could  perform  efficiently  and  safely  in   a ir   and 
in   space.  Established  in  1918  a t   Hazelhurst  Field  near  Mineola, 
N.Y.,  school  wa s   currently  headquartered  a t   Brooks  AFB, Tex.,  under 
command  of  Col.  George  E.  Schafer.  (AFHF  Newsletter,  2/68) 
Holder of world  manned  aircra€t speed  record,  X-15  pilot  Maj.  William 
J.  Knight  (USAF) , received  senior  astronaut  wings  and  Distinguished 
Flying Cross  from  M/G  Hugh  B.  Manson,  Commander  of  AFFTC.  Maj. 

11 

January  19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Knight  set  4,534-mph  speed  record  Oct.  3,  1967,  in  special  ablative- 
coated X-15; 
two   weeks  later  he  reached  277,000-ft  altitude  to  qualify 
as  an   astronaut.  On  June  29,  1967, after  experiencing complete engine 
and  power  failure,  he  had  piloted  X-15 
to  safe  landing  to   earn  DFC. 
(AFFTC  Release  68-1-9) 
0  President  Johnson  named  Clark M.  Clifford, lawyer  and  intimate  adviser 
to   three  Democratic  Presidents,  to  succeed  Robert  S.  McNamara  a s  
Secretary  of  Defense.  President  praised  Clifford  as  “a  counselor  on 
most  of  the  important  decisions  made  in  many  of  the  international 
fields from  defense  to  strength  to  weapons  to  actions.”  (Frankel, NYT ,  
1/20/68,  1 ; PD, 1 /22 /68 ,8&5 )  
NASA  announced  award  of  $8.5-million  contract  to  Bendix  Field  Engi- 
neering  Corp.  to  provide  logistics  support  services  for  NASA’s consoli- 
dated worldwide spacecraft tracking networks, which included 50 world- 
wide  sites,  ships,  instrumental  aircraft,  communications  switching 
centers, spacecraft  control  centers, mobile  units,  and  a  training  center. 
Bendix  would  establish  consolidated  logistics  support  system  by  com- 
bining  certain  functions previously  performed  separately  for  each  net- 
work.  Both  networks  were  operational  responsibility  of  GSFC,  under 
NASA’s Office  of  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition.  (NASA   Release 68-10) 
January 20:  NASA  General Counsel Paul G.  Dembling told Rutgers Univ.  au- 
dience:  “.  . . we   are moving toward  the end that the rule of  law will pre- 
vail  in  space.”  He  explained space law  treaty,  which  entered  into  force 
Oct.  10, 1967, and praised  effectiveness of  U.N.  “as  a vehicle for  the de- 
velopment  of  international  law.”  Significance of  space  law  and  space 
rescue treaties was  that they “indicate that  international law can develop 
. . . even  among  nations  having  widely  divergent  ideologies  and  na- 
tional  interests  . . .  [and]  can  evolve  by  gradually  codifying  the 
ground  rules which  a re  considered by  States to  be  in  their  common  in- 
terests.”  (Text) 
January  21:  FRC  announced  cuts  in  N  1969  budget  dictated  closing  out 
X-15  aircraft  program  in  fall  1968. Major  setback was  Nov.  15,  1967, 
crash  which  resulted  in  death  of  pilot  Maj.  Michael  J.  Adams  (U SA F ) .  
Main task  in  191 flights to  date had  been  study  of  problems of  manned 
controls  in  high-speed,  high-altitude  aircraft.  Remaining  tasks  con- 
cerned  testing of  atmospheric reentry  conditions. As  successor to  X-15 
-holder  of speed record  of  4,534 mph  and altitude record  of  354,200 f t  
-officials  would  consider  aircraft  capable  of  taking  off  from  ground 
under  own power,  achieving earth  orbit,  reentering,  and  landing  a t  vir- 
tually  any  point  on  earth.  (AP, C T r i b ,  1/22/68) 
Telescope  a t   Univ.  of  Arizona’s  Planetary  Laboratory  photographed 
Lunar Orb i ter  V  as  i t  appeared  beyond left  limb  of  moon’s  face. Scien- 
tists  believed  experiment to  be  first  success in  sending  observable light 
signals  from  moon’s  vicinity  to  earth.  Some  80  photos  were  made 
through  61-in  telescope  by  team  of  three  astronomers  under  Labora- 
tory’s  Director,  Dr.  Gerard  Kuiper,  in  experiment  conducted  for  NASA 
and  spacecraft’s designer  and  builder,  Boeing  Co.  Satellite was  visible 
on  52  photos.  Boeing  engineers  oriented  Lunar  Orb i ter   V  so  its  shiny 
panels reflected sunlight  toward  earth.  Astronomers reduced stray  light 
near  very  bright  moon  to  prevent  multiple  reflections within  telescope 
from  reaching  photographic  plates.  Dr.  Kuiper  explained  that  space- 
craft resembled  12th-magnitude star  in brilliance.  These  reference data, 

12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

January  21 

used  with  radar  tracking  data,  would  enable  scientists  to  locate  more 
precisely center  of mass  of moon with  respect to  its visible limb. Lunar 
Orb i ter   V  was  crashed  on  the  moon  Jan.  31.  (NASA  Release  68-34; 
N Y T ,  2/20/68,19) 
January  22 :   NASA’s Apo l lo   5  (AS-204)  unmanned  earth  orbital  mission, 
delayed  for  nearly  four  hours  because  of  ground  equipment malfunc- 
tions, was  successfully launched  from  KSC   Complex 37  at  5:M pm  EST 
in  fourth  flight  of  Saturn  IB  and  first  flight  of  31,700-lb lunar  module 
(LM-l),  designed  to  land  two  astronauts  on  the  moon.  Primary  d s -  
sion objectives were to verify operation  of  LM  ascent propulsion  system 
( APS) , descent propulsion  system  ( DPS)  -including 
restart-and 
space- 
craft  structures;  evaluate LM  staging;  and  evaluate 2nd-stage  (S-IVB)  
and instrument-unit  ( IU) orbital performance. 
Launch phase occurred a s  planned;  S-IVB  ignited to insert spacecraft 
into  orbit  with  138-mi  (222-km)  apogee,  101-mi  (163-km)  perigee, 
88.3-min period,  and  31.63’  inclination ; nose  cone  jettisoned;  space- 
craft  coasted  fo r  43  min  52  sec;  and  LM  separated  from  spacecraft  LM 
adapter.  LM  entered  orbit  with  138-mi (222-km)  apogee,  104-mi  (167- 
km)  perigee, 88.4-min period,  and 31.63O  inclination.  Initial  39-sec DPS 
burn,  designed  to  simulate  deceleration  for  descent  to  lunar  surface, 
was  automatically  shut  down  after  only  4  sec  because  of  overly  con- 
servative computer programming.  Ground controllers switched to  mini- 
mum  requirement  sequence,  an   alternate  flight  plan  with  shorter  total 
DPS  firing  time  and  no  provision  for  lunar  landing  simulation.  Second 
DPS  engine firing occurred successfully, with 26-sec burn  a t   10% thrust 
level and  7  sec a t  maximum thrust.  Third  DPS  engine firing  32  sec later 
consisted  of  26-sec burn  a t   10% thrust,  2  sec  a t  maximum  thrust,  and 
ascent  stage  fire-in-the-hole ( FITH)   burn  during  which  the  two  stages 
separated  and  APS  engine  was  ignited  simultaneously  while  DPS  was 
being  shut  down,  simulating  abort  during  landing  phase.  Duration  of 
initial  APS  burn  during  abort  staging  was  60  sec.  APS  engine  fired  sec- 
ond  time  for  6 min  2 3  sec  until  fuel wa s   depleted.  At  end  of  11-hr 10- 
min  test  period,  both  stages  of  the  LM  were  left  in  orbit  eventually  to 
reenter and disintegrate. 
Apo l lo   5 mission, adjudged  successful by  NASA  in  spite  of  premature 
DPS  engine  shutdown,  proved  out  structural  integrity  of  LM;   verified 
in-space operation  of  DPS  and  APS;  and  proved  value  of  contingency 
planning.  LM  was  last  major  piece  of  Apollo  hardware  to  have  its  first 
test  in  space.  Command module  ( C M )   had  been  tested  during  AS-203 
mission  (Ju ly   5,  1966)  and  with  service  module  (SM )   on  A S 2 0 2  
(Aug.  25,  1966)  and  Apo l lo   4  (AS-501)  (Nov.  9,  1967 ) .  Final  deci- 
sion  on  whether  Apo l lo   5  results  justified  omitting  second  unmanned 
test  and  scheduling next  mission  to  be  manned would  be deferred  until 
March,  pending  final  mission  review.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; NASA  Releases 
68-6K,  68-19;  MSC   Release 68-4;  AP,  Strothman,  W Pos t ,   1/23/68, 
1; Fahnestock,  W  S tar ,   1/23/68,  1 ;  Wilford,  N Y T ,   1/24/68,  20) 
NASA  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Sta- 
tion  carried  GSFC  payload  to  184-mi  (296-km)  altitude  to   measure  in- 
tensity  and  polarization  distribution  of  hydrogen  Lyman  alpha  a t  
night.  Although rocket performance was  satisfactory, instruments  failed 
to function.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
Flammability characteristics  of  mixed  gas  atmosphere  (60%  oxygen  and 

13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
January 22 
40% nitrogen a t  16 ps i)   in  Apollo command module had  been evaluated 
by  MSC  in   24  “enriched  air”  tests,  with  “all  but  two  ignition  points” 
showing self-extinguishing  characteristics.  Two  ignition  points  on  cir- 
cuit breaker panels  exhibited what  MSC termed “moderate fire propaga- 
tion”  because  fire  spread  “beyond  the  point  of  self  extinguishment.” 
Dr.  Robert R.  Gilruth,  MSC Director,  retained  three  major  options  fo r  
mixed  gas”  for  Apollo  launch  phase:  regular  air,  enriched  a ir   using 
< I  
oxygen  and  nitrogen,  o r   pure  oxygen.  (Aero  Tech,  1/29/68,  1 0 )  
e  MSC  had  awarded  $2-million  contract  extension  to  MIT’S  Div.  of  Spon- 
sored  Research  for  design  and  developmental  support  of  Apollo  guid- 
ance and  navigation systems, including flight  test  and  operational  sup- 
port  fo r   Apollo  command  and  service  modules.  Contract  extension 
brought  total  estimated value of  MIT contract  since April  1965 to  $48.7 
million.  (NASA Release 68-15) 
In  statement to  press,  Secretary  of  the  Navy  Pau l   R.  Ignatius  and  Chief 
of  Naval  Operations Thomas H.  Moorer refuted  rumors  USN  wanted  to 
drop  controversial  F-111B  aircraft in   favor  of  another  type:  “In   early 
October  1967,  representatives  of  the   Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering 
Company  submitted to  the Navy  a  design layout  of  a  new  fighter  type 
aircraft.  The  design  proposal  sought  to  meet  future  fleet  a ir   defense 
and  fighter interceptor  requirements  [and]   would  build  on  the F-111B 
technology  and  incorporate most  of  its basic  components,  including the 
engines,  and  the  PHOENIX  missile  [and]   variable  sweep  wing.”  They 
try but  added  that  “evaluation . . . of  proposals from  industry  . . . is 
stated  that three  other  proposals had been  received  from aircraft indus- 
a continuing process.  . . . The Navy  continues to  support the  on-going 
aircraft programs  and  the  funds in   the N 69  budget  request  for  pro- 
duction of  both  F - 4  and  F-111B  aircraft, as  well  as the VFAX concept.” 
(DOD Release 70-68) 
Junuary 23:  NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket  launched from Churchill 
Research  Range  carried  Univ.  of  Alaska  payload  to  examine  spatial 
distribution  of  ionospheric  currents  near  visual  auroral  forms  with 
flashing light  on  rocket  used  to  locate position  of  rocket  on  TV film  of 
aurora.  Rocket  and  instrument  performance  was  satisfactory.  Radar 
did  not  track  vehicle  to   sufficient altitude  to  obtain  peak  altitude  data. 
(NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
At  AIAA’S  6th Aerospace  Sciences Meeting  in   New  York  City,  NASA  Asso- 
ciate  Administrator, Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  compared current  space ac- 
tivities  with  those  of  past:  “Today,  as   we  note  the  anniversaries  of 
Sputnik, Explorer,  and Vanguard, we   do well to  take stock of  where we 
a re  and where we  a re  going in  Space, for after  a decade of  unparalleled 
success we  find  ourselves having to  resell  our  fellow citizens  this  great- 
est adventure of  mankind.” 
Ten  years  ago “we  could  only assert  from intuition  and  prophecy  the  
value of  space techniques to  science. Today, we  can point  to  a  profound 
influence  that  space has  had  on  the  geosciences,  is  having  on  astron- 
omy,  and  is  beginning  to   have  i n   life  sciences.”  Ten  years  ago,  plan- 
ning  for  future  required  organizational  and  management,  a s   well  as  
disciplinary  and  technical,  capability  to  achieve  objectives.  Now  i t  
could  be  based  on  established  capability  in   science,  engineering,  and 
administration;  proved  reliability  of  wide  variety  of  launch  vehicles; 
demonstrated ability  to  use  automatic techniques in   space and   to  con- 

1 4  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

January  23 

struct  and  fly  new  large  s y s t em   successfully;  and   demonstrated capa- 
bility  of  man  to  operate  in   space.  Major  problem  of  mastering  space 
technology was  solved,  failures were  few,  and  success,  once  “rare and  
precious commodity,”  became routine. 
Budget  reductions  and   postponement  of  new  space missions would 
continue  until  resolution  of  Vietnam  war,  but  long-term  outlook  fo r  
trinsic  worth  of  the  program merits  the  interest and  support of  the  . . * 
space explorations,  research,  and   applications wa s   good:  (1 )   “the  in- 
people”;  ( 2 )  post  World War   I1  babies  raised  in   midst  of  space  age 
“w i l l   in  the  70’s become a powerful force of  intelligent, highly educated 
people  . . . [who  w i l l]   want  to   continue”  space  exploration;  ( 3 )  
U.S.S.R.  would  continue vigorous,  expanding program, presenting chal- 
lenge U.S.  would have to meet;  ( 4 )  as  U.S.  economic growth  continued 
and military  expenditures decreased,  resources  would  be   available  and 
need  fo r   vigorous  U.S.  space  program  recognized;  and   ( 5 )   gap  be- 
tween  professionals  and  laymen  would  be  bridged  by  space-oriented 
younger  generation. 
NASA’s key  policies were  directed  toward preserving U.S.  space  capa- 
bility  and  laying  groundwork  f o r   vigorous  program  in   19709.  NASA 
would  seek  approval  from  Congress  and  Executive  Branch  to  initiate 
programs, increase emphasis on aeronautics  and  space applications and  
practical  applications on  earth,  and  continue to  support development  of 
key  advanced  technologies.  (Text) 
e  AIM’S  highest  award,  Goddard  Award,  was  presented  jointly  to  General 
Electric  Co.  project  managers  Donald  C.  Berkey  and   James  E.  War- 
sham  and  Ernest  C.  Simpson,  Chief  of  Turbine Engine  Div.  a t   USAF’S 
Aero  Propulsion  Laboratory,  for   “an  outstanding  contribution  to  a ir-  
craf t   propulsion  in   relation  to  development  of  the  high  bypass  ratio 
turbofan  engine”  [TF39  engine  which  would  power  USAF’S  C-SA 
jet 
transport  aircraft]. Other awards:  Sylvanus Albert  Reed  Award  to Wil- 
liam  H.  Cook, Boeing  Co.,  for  his  influence  on  development  of  Boeing 
727 and SST; Space Science Award  to  Prof.  Kinsey  A.  Anderson, Univ. 
of  California  a t   Berkeley,  for   “a  consistent  series  of  major  contribu- 
tions  to  the  development  of  space science and  the   improvement  of  our 
understanding of  solar  cosmic  radiation,  the  aurora  and  the  magneto- 
sphere”;  and  1968 Dryden Research Lecture Award  to   Hans W.  Liep- 
mann for research on laminar instability  and transition. 
LaRc  Director  Dr.  Floyd  L.  Thompson  was  elected  AIM President, 
succeeding Harold T.  Luskin.  (AIAA News,  1/5/68,  1/15/68,1/23/68; 
AIAA Fac ts)  
Honored  a t   Chicago’s  National  Conference  on  Industrial  Research  as  
Man  of  the  Year  in  research  by  Industrial  Research  magazine,  JPL 
Director,  Dr.  William H.  Pickering,  told  press  a t   Illinois  Institute  of 
Technology,  “The  United  States  has  superiority  in   space  exploration 
but  the  Congressional  cutbacks  may  enable  the  Russians  to   get  well 
ahead of  us.”  (Kotulak, C T r i b ,  1/24/68) 
Rep.  George P. Miller  (D-Calif.),  Chairman of  House  Committee on  Sci- 
ence and Astronautics, said  on floor  of  the House,  “. . . these a re  times 
of  stringent  budgetary  considerations  [and]  times  when  fiscal  alloca- 
tions  fo r   our  space program must  be  evaluated.”  He  referred  to  Jan.  2 
Oakland  Tribune  editorial  which  stated:  “After  the  frustrations  and  
fears brought  on  by  the  Soviet  Union’s  early  space successes,  this  na- 

15 

January  23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

tion  resolved  to  bear  the  burdens  and  financial  strain  of  winning  the 
space race. We  were not  going  to   continue  to  be  second  in  space. That 
commitment is a s  worthy  today  as it was  in  the early years  of  this dec- 
ade. A t   stake is  not  only  national prestige  but  critical  scientific knowl- 
edge  and  military  advantages.  Fickle  second  thoughts  a t   this  late  date 
a re  inexcusable.”  ( C R ,  1/23/68,  E139) 
January  23-24:  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  opened 
Ninth  Annual  Seminar with  Panel  discussion  of  applied science and  its 
relationship to world  economy. President  of  International Bank  for  Re- 
construction  and  Development  George  D.  Woods  said  that  “technol- 
ogies  do  . . . provide  the  developing  countries  of  the  world  with  the 
basis  for  a  satisfactory  rate  of  economic  growth.”  We  should  concen- 
trate  efforts on  education,  agriculture,  population  control,  development 
efforts on  VTOL  and  STOL  aircraft,  communications and  geodetic  satel- 
lites, and sea water desalination. 
House Speaker John W.  McCormack said,  “If  scientific knowledge is 
appIied  indiscriminately without  regard  to   social  and  worId  costs,  the 
results  over  a  period  of  time  can  be  disastrous  [and]  Congress  must 
have a means for  judging the consequences of  science.” 
Dr.  Anthonie T.  Knoppers,  Senior Vice  President  of  Merck  &  Com- 
pany,  Inc.,  speaking of  transfer  of  marketable technology, said that  “ev- 
erybody  recognizes  . . . problems  of  the  future  the  large  corporation 
cannot  solve”  and  called  for  “new  firms  in  which  the  corporation,  the 
university,  and  the  government have  to  work  to  better  solve  some  of 
our sociological problems.”  (Transcript) 
January 2 4 :   USAF launched  two  unidentified  satellites  from  Vandenberg 
AFB  by  LongTank  Thrust-Augmented Thor  ( LTTAT) -Agena D  booster. 
One  satellite  entered  orbit  with  269-mi  (432.9-km)  apogee,  112-mi 
(180.2-km)  perigee,  90.6-min  period,  and  81.5’  inclination  and  reen- 
tered  Feb 27.  Other  satellite entered  orbit with  338-mi  (543.9-km)  apo- 
gee,  294-mi  (473.1-km)  perigee,  94.9-min  period,  and  81.7’ 
inclina- 
tion.  Flights were  fifth  and  sixth  since LTTAT  vehicle was  activated  on 
May 9,1967.  (SBD, 1/26/68,137;  Pres Rpt 68) 
NASA’s  Exp lo re r   X X X V Z   (Geos  11)  satellite, launched  Jan.  11, had  com- 
pleted  initial checkout tests and was ready  for  operational  use.  Support- 
ing  ground  systems were  expected  to  be  ready  to  operate  with  satellite 
in  late  February.  All  six  geodetic  systems  had  responded  to  ground 
commands.  Satellite had  been  stabilized  by  gravity  gradient  boom  so 
that  it faced earth constantly with  2 5 ’ stability.  (NASA  Release 68-16) 
ARC  scientists  Dr.  Cyril  A.  Ponnamperuma  and  Fritz  H.  Woeller  said 
gigantic  red  spot  on  Jupiter’s  atmosphere might  be  millions  of  square 
miles  of  red  organic  dye.  Scientists had  made  large  number  of  electri- 
cal  energy  discharges  (lightning)  in   simulated  Jupiter  atmosphere  of 
ammonia  and  methane,  atmosphere mix  agreed  t o   by  most  scientists, 
and  had  produced  quantities  of  amino  acids  and  other  organic  mate- 
rials.  Most  common  product  had  been  organic  dyestuff  with  ruby  red 
translucency. From  experiments and  spectroscopic and  theoretical  stud- 
ies,  scientists concluded red  spot might  result  from giant meteor  craters 
in  solid hydrogen  surface  of  Jupiter  creating  vortex  in  Jupiter’s  atmos- 
phere.  Since  atmosphere  might  be  largely  red  dye,  upwelling  caused 
by   vortex  would  create  red  spot  in   top  of  dense  surrounding  white 
clouds. J~upiter was  like huge dynamo, rotating  once  every  10 h r ;   rapid 

16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

January  24 

alternation  of  day  and  night,  hence  warm  and  cold,  was  believed  to 
produce  great  atmospheric  turbulence  and  electrical  energy  transfer. 
{ARC  Release  68-3) 
.a  Pravda  released  description  of  preparations  for  launching  of  Maj.  Yuri 
A.  Gagarin  in  history’s  first manned space flight April  12, 1961. Songs 
by  110-member folk  music  choir-instead 
of  one  man’s  voice-had 
been  selected  for  radio  tests  to  avoid  arousing  rumors  that  U.S.S.R. 
had  put  a man  into  orbit.  Pravda  reports  were  excerpts from  The  First 
Four  Stages,  book  recognizing  leading  role  in  Soviet  manned  space 
flight of  Sergei P.  Korolev. U.S.S.R.  acknowledged malfunction had  oc- 
curred  during  first  unmanned  test  of  Vostok  spacecraft  launched  May 
15, 1960, as Spu tn ik  ZV.  Because of  improper alignment, spacecraft was 
hurled  deeper into  space when  retrorockets  fired  instead  of  braking  fo r  
reentry.  (Anderson,  N Y T ,   1/25/68;  A& A ,   15-60,  123,  147) 
.a  J P L   announced  appointment  of  R/A  John  E.  Clark  (USN ,   Ret.)  as  JPL  
Deputy Director, effective Feb.  19. Adm.  Clark had  retired  as Comman- 
dant, Twelfth Naval District, in  September 1967.  ( JPL  Release) 
January  26:  NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR   car- 
ried  GSFC  payload  to  99-mi  (160-km) aItitude to check instrumentation. 
Random  failure  occurred  in  control  system,  but  pointing  system  ac- 
quired  two  of  three  target  stars.  Rocket  performance  was  satisfactory. 
(NASA   Rpt  SRL )  
.a  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  announced  resignation  of  Edmond 
C.  Buckley  a s  Associate Administrator  for  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisi- 
tion,  and  Buckley’s  appointment  as  his  Special  Assistant  and  Vice 
Chairman of  NASA  Post Apollo Advisory Group  (headed by  LaRC  Direc- 
tor  Dr.  Floyd L.  Thompson).  Gerald M.  Truszynski, Deputy to  Buckley 
fo r   seven  years,  would  succeed  him.  Webb  said  Buckley  had  been 
one of  the  architects of  this  nation’s  great  competence in  tracking  and 
6C 
data acquisition.”  (NASA   Release 68-17) 
.a  UCLA  physicist Dr. Willard  F.  Libby  believed  icecaps,  similar  to  those  on 
earth,  covered Venus’ poles  and  might  extend  over  as  much  as  half  of 
planet. U.S.S.R.’s  Venu s  4  probe had  found  surface temperatures  reach- 
ing  540’  F  during  landing  of  instrument  package,  Oct.  18,  1967. Dr. 
Libby, Nobel  Laureate,  explained  that  temperatures  between  hot  equa- 
torial  belt  and  icy  polar  regions  must  grade  off  into  area  of  moderate 
warmth where plant  life might  exist;  gaseous carbon dioxide cloud cov- 
ering Venus did not  permit  animal  life  as known  on  earth.  (UPI,  N Y T ,  
1/26/68) 
January  27:  First  flight  test  of  Apollo  lunar  module  (Apo l lo   5)  Jan. 
22-23  was  adjudged  success.  NASA  officials  were  gratified  with  matu- 
rity  of  spacecraft’s hardware;  studies indicated LM  showed more matu- 
rity  in  its  first flight than  many previous spacecraft, including some de- 
signed  to  be  manned.  Although  overly  conservative  programming  of 
guidance  computer  caused  early  shutdown  of  first  descent  propulsion 
system burn,  data  indicated no  problems with  computer o r   system’s  en- 
gine.  (NASA  Release 68-19) 
January  28:  Airborne  laboratory,  Convair  990  jet  aircraft  Galileo,  had 
completed more  than  one week  of  flights above Alaskan-Canadian area 
in   NASA’s  1968  Airborne  Auroral  Expedition,  based  a t   Churchill  Re- 
search  Range,  NASA  reported  [see  Jan.  183.  Scientists  had  obtained 
hundreds  of  unique  color  photos  of  auroras  and  had  reported  unu- 

1 7  

January  28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1968 

sually clear  night  views  of  towering auroral displays. Aircraft  had  pro- 
vided  superior  data  at  altitudes  previously  reached  only  by   balloons. 
Expedition scientists intended  to  establish more  precisely width  and ex- 
usually located  below  80“ north  lati- 
tent  of  Auroral  Oval region-belt 
tude  and  often  extending a s  far  south a s  55” north  latitude.  (NASA  Re- 
lease 68-18) 
0  Pakistan  Space and Upper  Atmosphere Research  Committee had   success- 
fully  installed  and  tested  Pakistan’s  first  satellite  tracking  station  a t  
Dacca,  East  Pakistan.  Automatic  Picture  Transmission  (APT)  station 
capable of  receiving cloud-cover photographs via US. Nimbus and ESSA 
satellites  would  enable  meteorologists  to  forecast  cyclones,  which  fre- 
quently struck Pakistan.  (AP, NYT,  1/29/68;  AP, NYT,  2/20/68,  61) 
January  29:  President  Johnson  sent  message  to  Congress  on  FY  1969 
budget. 
Praising  effectiveness of  NASA’s cost  reduction  efforts,  he  noted  that 
NASA  by  utilizing  idle,  excess,  and  surplus  Government  property  had 
avoided expenditures of  over $22 million for  new  equipment  and  facili- 
ties  and  had  saved  over  $16 million  by  improving  procurement  prac- 
tices.  However,  to  meet  urgent  national  needs  in  other  areas,  further 
reductions  still had  to  be made.  “New  obligational  authority  requested 
fo r   [NASA]  . . . is  about  $220  million  below  the  1968  amount.  Ex- 
penditures  will  be  $230 million  below  1968, $850  million  below  1967, 
and  over  $1.3  billion  less  than  in  1966.  This  reduction  reflects  our 
progress  beyond  the  costly  research  and  development  phases  of  the 
manned  lunar  mission,  as  well  as  the  immediate  need  to  postpone 
spending fo r  new  projects wherever possible. 
“Based  on  a  careful  examination  of  priorities,  the  1969 budget  pro- 
vides  increases in  some  areas to  prepare  for  important  advances  in  fu- 
ture years, while deferring  other less urgent,  new  projects. The produc- 
tion  of  our  large  Saturn-class space boosters  is  continued  but  a t   a  re- 
duced  rate.  The  development of  a  nuclear  rocket engine to  increase the 
capability  of  our  Saturn  V  launch  vehicle  is  also  continued,  but  a t   a 
smaller  size  and  thrust  than  originally  planned,  to  reduce  development 
cost.” 
Planetary  exploration  would  be  continued  with  development  of  “a 
new  spacecraft  fo r   launch  in  1973  to  orbit  and  land  on  Mars.  This 
new  Mars  mission  will  cost  much  less  than  half  the  Voyager  program 
included  in   last  year’s  budget.  Although  the  scientific  result  of  this 
new  mission will  be  less  than  that  of  the  Voyager,  it  will  still  provide 
extremely valuable data  and  serve as a  building block  for  planetary  ex- 
ploration  systems of  the future.” 
Request  for  DOD, increased  “to  assure  that  our  defense  capabilities 
remain  equal to  any  challenge or  threat,”  included  funds  to:  ( 1 )   main- 
tain  strategic  deterrent  by  converting  from  Minuteman  I1  to  Poseidon 
missiles with multiple warheads and modernizing manned  bomber  force 
with  additional  F-111B  aircraft  and  improved  short-range attack  mis- 
siles;  ( 2 )   proceed  with  procurement of  Sentinel missile  defense system 
for  defense against  possible Communist Chinese  threat  and  revamp  a i r  
defense;  (3)  augment  firepower,  mobility,  and  readiness  of  general- 
purpose  forces by  improving  a i r  defenses with  new  fixed-wing aircraft, 
helicopters, and  weapon  systems ; (4) improve  airlift-sealift  capability 
by  purchasing  additional  C-5A  aircraft  and  procuring  fast  deploy- 

18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
January  29 
ment logistics ship;  and  (5) continue vigorous R&D effort.  (The B zdge t  
of  the  United  States  Government, FY  1969, 26-9) 
0  President  Johnson  submitted  $186.1-billion  FY  1969  budget  request  to  
Congress,  including $6.76-billion  total  space budget. Of  this sum,  NASA 
would  receive $4.37  billion,  smallest  amount since  1963; DOD  space ef- 
forts,  $2.216  billion;  mc  space  applications,  $143  million;  and  ESSA 
satellite system, $30.6 million. 
NASA  FY 1969 budget,  $218 million less than  fo r  FY  1968, provided 
for  $3.677  billion  to  be  spent  fo r   R&D  (down  $233  million  from  FY 
1968 and $557 million  from FY  1967) ; $4!5  million for  construction of 
facilities ; and  $648  million  for   administrative  operations.  Project 
Apollo  would  be  kept  on  schedule,  development  of  NERVA  I  would 
be  continued,  and  launch plans would  be  made  for   two  pioneer  flights 
toward Jupiter  and  one  Sunblazer probe.  Research  on  Earth  Resources 
Observation  Satellite  would  continue,  but  development  would  be 
postponed.  OGO  program  would  be  phased  out  after  OGO-F.  NASA’s 
$2.5-billion  Voyager  program  would  be  replaced  with  a  $500-million, 
four-mission  Mars  orbiter  project.  Although  NASA’s $2.039-billion 
Apollo budget request accounted for  47%  of  total  NASA  budget, amount 
for Apollo  was  $517 million  less than  for  FY  1968, reflecting  declining 
expenditures  as  program  neared  its  completion.  Requested  $439.6 
million  for  Apollo  Applications  (u) program  was  less  than  half  of 
amount  originally  sought  and  necessitated  cancellation  of  planned 
14-day  AAP-1A 
flight.  Some  $76.9  million-a 
$10.1-million  in- 
crease  over  FY  1968-was   allotted  for  NASA’s aeronautics  program, 
with  most  of  increase  attributed  to   additional  supporting  research 
and  X-15 
in  subsonic  aircraft  technology.  XB-70 
research  pro- 
grams  would  be  phased  out  by  December  1968.  Space  science  and 
applications were  allotted  $538.2  million,  with  18 major  NASA  launches 
and 13 non-NAsA launches scheduled for  1968. 
Major  portions  of  DOD  space budget  would  be  spent  on  MOI.-$~OO 
million,  compared  with  $431  million  requested  for   FY  1968..  Some 
$60.4  million  was  allocated  for   defense  and  tactical  satellite communi- 
cations programs, and  $10.5  million for Vela  nuclear test  detection  sat- 
ellite program. 
AEC  space budget-$11  million  higher  than  for   FY  1968-included 
$72 million €or Project  Rover, with  $39 million  for  NERVA  system. Most 
of  ESSA’S  funds would  be  used  for  development of  sensors and   satellite 
system  in   support  of  World  Weather Watch  and  improved  techniques 
fo r  warning  services. FAA’s request  included  $351 million  for SST devel- 
opment,  $251  million  increase  over  FY  1968  and  one  of  largest  in- 
creases  given  to  any  domestic  program.  It was  principal  item  i n  DOT’S 
g449-million  request  for  R&D.  (Text;  DOD  Budget  Summary;  W  Po s t ,  
1/16/68,  A5;  AP,  B  Sun,  1/16/68,  A3;  McNamara  Statement;  DOD 
Background  Briefing;  NASA  Release,  1/29/68;  W  S tar ,   1/29/68,  A7 ;  
Clark,  N Y T ,   1/30/68,  16 ;   A e ro   Tech,  2/12/68,  17-35) 
NASA  released  transcript  of  Jan.  27   background  briefing  on  NASA  FY 
‘ 
1969 budget,  in   which  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  explained  how 
Apollo  program  had  been  kept  close  to  schedule  in   spite  of  severe 
budget  cuts.  Although  budget had  been  reduced  $600-mi&on  in   1964, 
NASA  had been given  great  deal of  flexibility to  reprogram  funds.  “This 
in   effect permitted  the  driving  forward  of  the  program  even  though 

19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
January  29 
there were  substantial  reductions  in  the plan.  I  think  if  you  examine all 
of  the  very large systems development in  the  country,  you will  not  find 
a  one  that  has  kept  more  on  schedule, given  more  for  the  money,  and 
more  nearly  realized  its  goals  on  time  than  the  Apollo,  in   spite  of  the 
fire, in  spite of  the reductions. The kind  of  rolling  readjustment  that  we 
have  had  to  make  . . . has  involved  very  large  problems.  And  the 
projections we  made  a s  to  our  capability  to meet  problems of  that  kind 
have  pretty  well  been  borne  out.  . . . The  fact is within  this  short  pe- 
riod  of  time the  Saturn V  has  flown.  The heat  shield  on  the  Apollo has 
been  improved.  Service  module  has  been  tested.  LM  has  been  tested. 
And  we  have  I  think  moved  about  as  rapidly  as  any  p ro g r am - c e r -  
tainly more rapidly  than any program  of  a comparable complexity.” 
Webb  said  NASA  and  DOD were  studying  closer  cooperation  “in  the 
area  of  orbiting  laboratories,”  such  as  MOL   and  Saturn  V Workshop. 
He  envisioned production  of  “a  basic  capability  of  a  rather  primitive 
sort,  something  like  an  Antarctic  base  flown  on  the  Saturn  V  which 
could be used fo r  any national purpose.”  (Transcript) 
In   statement on  DOD FY  1969 budget  released  by  Senate Armed  Services 
Committee, Secretary of  Defense Robert S. McNamara said DOD was  re- 
questing  $79  million  more  for  R&D  in  FY  1969  than  in  FY  1968  to 
support  more  vigorously many  scientific  fields  that  show  great  prom- 
C L  
ise  and  clear  relevance  to  our  future  security.”  DOD would  continue 
working  closely  with  NASA  to   ensure  maximum  interchange  of  person- 
nel,  ideas, technology,  and  hardware  and  to  avoid wasteful  duplication 
of  effort  in  national  space  program.  Under  new  budget  work  on  MOL 
development would be  increased substantially. “FY  1969 is expected  to 
be  a  peak  year  of  activity  in  the  MOL   program,  including  the  comple- 
tion  of  a  major  portion  of  the  structural  test  programs  on  flight  hard- 
ware,  continued  fabrication  of  hardware  for  the  first  three  flights,  de- 
velopmental test  firings of  the  seven-segment solid motors  for  the  Titan 
111-M,  and  installation  of  the  ground  equipment  in  the  launch  com- 
plex.”  (Text) 
Lee  B.  James,  Deputy  Director  of  Apollo  Program  in  OMSF ,   returned 
to  MSFC’s  Industrial  Operations  a s   Deputy  Director  for  Special 
Activities,  MSFC  Director  of  Industrial  Operations  B/G  Edmund  F. 
O’Connor  ( USAF)  announced.  Before  assignment  with  OMSF,  James 
had  been  manager  of  Saturn  I  and  Saturn  IB  programs  a t   MSFC. 
(MSFC   Release  68-16;  Marshall  S tar ,   2/7/68,  4)  
January  30:  President  Johnson  transmitted 
to  Congress  his  annual 
report,  United  States  Aeronautics  and  Space  Activities,  1967. 
“The  fruits  of  . . . technology  have  not  been  limited  to  space 
exploration  alone.  The  knowledge  built  through  our  space  program 
has  benefited  our  earthbound  lives.  I t   has : revolutionized  communica- 
tions  throughout  the  world;  given  us  better  weather  information  and 
more  accurate  navigational  and  geographic  data;  brought  improved 
medical  instruments  and  techniques,  advanced  education,  and  added 
to  our  store  of  scientific knowledge;  spurred  the  development  of  more 
sophisticated  aircraft  and  improved  flight  safety ; [and]  strengthened 
both  the  security  of  this  nation  and  our  leadership  in  the  search  for  a 
peaceful  and  secure  world.” 
The  President  was  heartened  to  see  that  the  space  program  had 
moved  forward  in  a  spirit  of  international  cooperation,  giving  new 
6 6  

20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

January 30 

January  3 0 :   Engineering  mockup  o f   Saturn  I  orbital  workshop  readied  for  crew   station 
review  a t   Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen ter .  Space-suited  astronaut  leaves  fu l l - s i z e  model  of 
Saturn  S - IVB   rocket  stage  which  will  contain  individual  sleeping  rooms,  kitchen-din- 
ing  area,  laboratory  work  spaces,  and  waste-management area. 

hope  that  the  conquest  of  space  can  contribute  to  the  establishment 
of  peace.” 
(Text) 
MSFC  reported  “all  mission  objectives  were  met”  by  Saturn  IB   launch 
vehicle used  in   first  unmanned  flight test  of  Apollo  lunar  module,  Jan. 
22.  Flight  was  fourth  consecutive  success  for  Saturn  IB   and  15th out 
of  15  fo r   MsFc-developed  Saturn  launch  vehicles.  Flight  events  had 
21 

January  30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

been  “exactly  on  time  o r   within  a  few  hundredths  of  a  second  until 
second  stage  but  still  within  tolerance  limits.’)  Trajectories  of  both 
stages  had  been  within  expected  tolerances,  and  orbit  insertion  condi- 
tions  had  been  met  satisfactorily.  (MSFC  Release  68-17) 
ARC  scientists Dr.  Gordon W. Hodgson and  Dr.  Cyril  A.  Ponnamperuma 
had  demonstrated  by  synthesizing  molecules  in  porphyrin  group,  of 
which  chlorophyll  was  a  member,  means  by  which  chlorophyll  might 
have  first  appeared  on  earth.  By  subjecting  ammonia,  methane,  and 
water  in   a  simulated  primitive  atmosphere  to  continuous  lightning 
charges,  scientists  created  new  molecular  combinations,  including 
some  tentatively  identified  as  porphyrins.  Such  a  process  of  chemical 
evolution  to  form  of  self-sustaining life  probably  occurred  during  bil- 
lion  years  of  earth’s  4.5  billion  years.  Scientists  confirmed  synthesis 
with  tests,  but  warned  that  materials  might  not  be  true  porphyrins 
but  structurally  related  compounds.  (ARC  Release  6 8 4 )  
Shipment of  LM-2,  second  Apollo  lunar  module,  and  associated  Saturn 
IB   launch  vehicle  to  KSC  had  been  postponed  pending  further  eval- 
uation  of  Apo l lo   5 mission  results  [see  Jan.  27  and  301.  Initial  eval- 
uations  of  first  LM  flight,  Jan.  22-23,  had   indicated  that  second 
unmanned  flight  might  not  be  required  to  qualify  spacecraft  fo r  
manned  flight. NASA  announced that  further  “detailed  review  of  Apo l lo  
5 flight  data  and  deliberations  by  a  [NASA]  design certification review 
board  in   March  will  determine  the  final  decision.” 
(NASA  Release 
68-21). 
Orbital  workshop  engineering  mockup  was  readied  f o r   five-day  crew 
station  review  Feb.  12-16  a t   MSFC.  It  was  second  of  three  design 
reviews.  First  had   been  conducted  Dee.  11-14,  1967.  In   mockup, 
recently  returned  to  MSFC  from   McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.,  astronauts 
would  carry  out  tasks  on  ground  that  would  later  be   done  in   orbit 
under  zero  gravity  conditions,  including  experiment  installation  and 
operation.  MSFC  announced  that  th ird   and  final  critical  review  in 
July  would  precede  production  of  flight  model  of  orbital  workshop. 
(MSFC   Release  68-18) 
NASA  announced  award  of  gB7.Pmillion  contract  to  Link  Group,  General 
Precision  Systems,  Inc.,  for  maintenance  and  modification  support  of 
MSC’S  simulator complex,  continuing services provided  by  Link  Group 
since March  1964.  Apollo  mission  simulators,  a t   MSC  and  a t   KSC,  had  
provided  flight  training  for  astronaut  crews  in   which  nearly  every 
detail  of  flight  except  weightlessness  could  be  simulated.  (NASA Re- 
lease  68-20). 
January  31 : Tenth  anniversary  of  first  U S .   satellite,  Explorer  I ,   launched 
team  with  Jupiter  C booster.  In   defiance  of  original 
by  ABMA-JPL 
prediction  of  three-year  lifespan,  30.8-lb  stovepipe-shaped  spacecraft 
had   traveled  1% billion  miles  and  was  expected  to  continue  orbiting 
through  1968, though  silent.  Explorer  I,  currently  in   orbit  with  771- 
mi  (1,241-km) apogee,  215-mi  (346-km)  perigee,  and  100-min period, 
had  stopped  transmitting  data  May  23,  1958,  after  supplying da ta   on 
cosmic  rays,  micrometeoroids,  and  temperature  and  discovering  one 
of  earth’s  radiation  belts  later  named  after  Dr.  James  A.  Van  Allen, 
designer  of  satellite’s  radiation-detection  experiment. 
At National Press Club Ceremony in  Washington, D.C.,  commemorat- 
ing  annbersary ,   Dr.  William  H.  Pickering,  JPL   Director,  reviewed 

22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

January  31 

January  31:  Ten th   anniversary  o f   f irs t   U.S.  sa te l l i te ,   Explorer  I,  shown  in   1958  photo 
w i t h   JPL  scientists  before  ABMA-JPL 
launch.  S t i l l   i n   orb i t ,   30.8-lb  80-inch  assembly  o f  
instrumented  upp e r   section  and  final-stage  solid-propellant  rocket  had  traveled  1 f / z   bil- 
lion  miles.  L e f t   to  right  are  John  Small;  the   late  D r .   J .   E .   Froelich,  J P L   pro jec t  
d irec tor;   D r .   A lber t   R .  H i b b s ;   Kar l   W .  L inne s ;   and  Rober t   V ic to r .   (U.S. Army   pho to )  

American  and  Soviet  space statistics:  “The  U S .  has   placed  about  500 
vehicles  in  Earth  orbit  to  250  fo r   the  USSR.  We  have had  13 success- 
fu l  missions  to  the  Moon,  the  USSR  8.  Our reconnaissance spacecraft 
have obtained about  100,000 high-resolution photographs of  the Moon; 
USSR  craft have returned  about  100. The US .   has had  three  successful 

23 

January   31 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

missions  to  the  near  planets  in   five  attempts.  Russia  has  successfully 
landed  an  instrumented  package  on  Venus  after  an   estimated  19 
planetary  attempts. We have  accumulated nearly  2,000 hours of  manned 
space  flight  time,  compared  with  about  530  for  the  USSR.  Our 
astronauts  have  performed  multiple  rendezvous  and  docking  opera- 
tions;  the  Soviets have  demonstrated  one  automatic  docking.  We  have 
logged  over  12  hours  of  extravehicular  activity;  the  USSR  shows  20 
minutes.” 
Dr.  wernher   yon  Braun,  MSFC   Director,  critical  of  cuts  i n   NASA 
budget,  noted:  “NASA  has  not  been  able to  plan  for  post-Apollo projects 
with  any  degree  of  certainty.  NASA  has  attempted  production  of  the 
Saturn  I B   and  Saturn  V  a t   the  rate  of  two  each  per  year.  Frankly, 
this  rate  i s  too  low  to  maintain  the  progress  and  momentum  s o   pains- 
takingly  acquired  in  the  space  program  over  the  past  decade. 
“The  dismantling  of  the  high  competence  built  up  over  the  years 
a t   J PL  and  [M S F C ]   has  already  begun.  Both  organizations  a re   already 
losing  valuable,  highly  trained  people  because  of  the  insecurity  and 
reality  of  even  further  reductions  and  cutbacks.  . . . The   exploration 
the  lack  of  challenging  work  for  them  to  do.  And  we  face  the  grim 
of  space  has  proven  its  worth,  and  has  become  deeply  ingrained  into 
the  everyday  fabric  of  our   society.  . . .”  Space  program  would  be 
examined  closely by  Congress, Dr.  von  Braun  said, but  “NASA’s record 
of  accomplishments  and  the  ability  of  its  management  will  bear  up 
well  under  the  scrutiny.  In   determining  what  our  space  program 
should  be  during  the  coming  years  . .  . members  of  Congress  . .  . 
[should]  give  careful  consideration  to  where  we  a re   today  in   space, 
at  the  end  of  our  first  decade,  and  where  we  could  be  ten  years  from 
now,  by  building  on  the  accomplishments  of  the  past.”  ( E H ;   Texts; 
MSFC  Release  68-14;  Clark, N Y T ,  2/1/68,  15) 
NASA  announced  end  of  Lunar  Orbiter  project.  Lunar  Orbiter  V ,  launched 
Aug.  1,  1967, had  obeyed  spacecraft  controllers  and  crashed  on  lunar 
surface  after  1,200  orbits.  Final  operation  of  spacecraft  had   consisted 
of  18.9-sec burn  of  velocity  control engine  a t   apolune  to   decrease  speed 
by  64  mph  for  orbit  decay.  Impact  occurred  a t   2:58.5  am,  EST, near 
equator  on  moon’s  western  limb.  Destruction  of  Lunar  Orbiter  V  had 
become  necessary because  its  supply  of  attitude  control  gas  was  nearly 
depleted.  In   concentrating  on  36  areas  of  moon’s  face,  spacecraft  had  
completed  coverage  necessary  for  full  photographic  survey  of  moon’s 
hidden  side,  photographing  and  transmitting  212  telephoto  and  212 
wide-angle pictures  of  lunar  surface.  Spacecraft had  also  been  used  to 
provide  tracking  target  to  MSFN  stations  and  for  crew  training  and 
computer  program  verification. 
Lunar  Orbiters  I ,   11,  and  I J I   had  been  crashed  on  Oct.  29,  1966, 
Oct.  11,  1967, and  Oct.  9,  1967,  a s  their  control gas became exhausted. 
Communications were lost with Lunar Orbiter I V ,  and  i t  had  apparently 
crashed  on  lunar  surface.  During  Lunar  Orbiter  project,  since  first 
launch  Aug.  10,  1966,  6,034  orbits  of  moon  had  been  completed  and 
more  than  99%  of  lunar  surface  had  been  photographed  by  orbiting 
cameras  to  provide  data  for  selection  of  eight  candidate  landing  sites 
for   Apollo  project.  Lunar  Orbiter  program  was  directed  by  OSSA  and 
managed  by  LaRC.  Boeing  Co.  was  prime  spacecraft  contractor.  (NASA  
Pro j   Off;  NASA  Release  68-23) 

24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

January  31 

Apollo  204  accident  was  reviewed  in  Senate  Report  No.  956,  issued 
by  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space  Sciences:  “The 
thorough  investigation by  the Apollo 204 Review Board  . . . determined 
that  the  test  conditions  at  the  time  of  the  accident  were  extremely 
hazardous.  However,  the  test  was  not  recognized  as  being  hazardous 
by  either  NASA  o r   the  contractor prior  to  the  accident.  The  committee 
can  only  conclude  that  NASA’s long  history  of  successes  i n   testing  and  
launching space vehicles . . . led  to  overconfidence  and  complacency.” 
Committee  recommended  that  “safety  . . . be  considered  of  paramount 
importance  in   the  manned  space  flight  program  even  at  the  expense 
of  target  dates”  and  urged  NASA  to  keep  “appropriate  Congressional 
committees  informed  on  significant  problems  arising  i n   its  programs.” 
Individually,  three  Committee  members-Sen.  Walter  F.  Mondale 
(D-Minn.), Sen.  Edward  W.  Brooke  (R-Mass,), and   Sen.  Charles  H. 
Percy  (R-Ill.) -filed  more  critical  separate  reports.  Sen.  Brooke  and 
Sen.  Percy  stated:  “,  . . NASA’s curious  reticence  to   supply  these 
facts  and  figures  [Phillips  Report]  relevant  to  a  thorough  evaluation 
of  Apollo  program  management  brought  the  credibility  of  NASA  and  
its top management  into sharp question  [and]  this  initial  lack of  candor 
as to  the  existence and  then  the status of  the  Phillips  report  threatened 
one  of  the  essential  assets  of  the  space  program-the 
confidence  of 
the  American  public  and  their  elected  representatives.”  Sen.  Mondale 
said  NASA  “has  an  unfortunate  habit  of  swamping  Congress  with  en- 
gineering  details  and  starving  it  for  policy  and  management  informa- 
tion.  .  .  . Congress  should  be   able  to  count  on  frank  answers  to 
pertinent,  responsible,  and  legitimate  inquiries.” 
Criticizing  Committee’s  report,  Rep.  William  F.  Ryan  (D-N.Y.) 
said  in  news  release later,  “Although  the  Senate Committee  does charge 
NASA  with  such  misdemeanors  as  overconfidence  and  complacency, 
the  report  remains  a  whitewash  and  an  evasion  of  the  real  issues 
involved.”  (Texts) 
Senate Report  No.  957,  Aeronautical  Research  and  Development  Policy, 
sponsored  by  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences, 
conciuded  NASA  should  increase  its  aeronautical  effort,  particularly  in 
the development phase,  and carry  it on  to  “proof-of-concept  testing as a 
means  of  providing  a  larger  variety  of  options  to  aircraft  designers 
and   systems  engineers.”  Report  called  for  NASC  to  act  as  focal  point 
fo r   development  of  more  comprehensive  and  better  coordinated  aero- 
nautical  R&D  policy  and  recommended  that  NASA’s aeronautical  activity 
be  upgraded  to  major  office  level  and  directed  by  an   Associate  Ad- 
ministrator. 
(Text) 
I n   Annual  Report  to   Congress  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  fo r  
1967,  AEC  announced  fifth  launch  of 
twin  Vela  nuclear  detection 
satellites  was  planned,  with  increased  detection  capabilities.  Earth- 
oriented  spacecraft  would  be  launched  by  Titan  111-C  booster. 
Among  other programs,  large heat  source  for power  system for space 
applications  in  mid-1970s  was  being  studied  at  NASA’s request,  with 
scheduled  July  1971 delivery  of  25-kw  heat-source  subsystem  consist- 
ing  of  high-temperature  fuel  capsules integrated  into  safe  flight  pack- 
age.  Second  Phoebus  test  reactor,  Phoebus-2A,  was  being  assembled  a t  
Nuclear  Rocket  Development Station  in  Nevada;  testing was  scheduled 

25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

January  31 
to  begin  in  second  quarter  of  year.  Work  on XE  cold-flow engine  and 
testing  of  first  “hot”  (uranium-fueled)  ground  experimental  engine 
were  scheduled  for  second  quarter.  Power  testing  of  second-generation 
S N A P 4  reactor  was  planned  and  more  advanced  reactor  systems  for 
space  use  were  being  examined,  including  thermionic  fuel  elements. 
For  treatment  of  “heart  block,”  AEC  was  developing  plutonium- 
fueled cardiac  pacemaker. Studies were  also  under  contract  on  isotopic 
“engine”  for  pumps  to  assist  or  replace  functions  of  damaged  heart. 
(Text;  InteraviaAirLetter,  2/1/68,  11) 
0  Fifth anniversary of  ComSatCorp was  noted by  Sen. Warren G .  Magnuson 
(D-Wash.), Chairman  of  Senate Committee on  Commerce,  on  floor  of 
Senate:  “Intelsat  has  grown  from  its  original  membership  of  11 na- 
tions  to  a  total  of  61,  including  40  which  qualify  as  among  the  less 
developed countries.  . . . The commercial utilization of  space for  com- 
munications  purposes-a 
dream  for  the  future  when  the  Congress 
today  a  reality.”  (NASA  LAR   V I I /7 ;   CR ,  
passed  the  Satellite  Act-is 
1/31/68,  S6.76) 
President  Johnson  announced  his  intention  to  nominate  Dr.  Thomas  0. 
Paine,  manager  of  General  Electric  CO.% Technical Military  Planning 
Operation  (TEMPO )  , a s   NASA  Deputy  Administrator  to  succeed  Dr. 
Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  who  resigned  Jan.  5.  ( P D ,  2/5/68,  176) 
0  NASA  announced  award  of  $1,769,200  contract  to  Lockheed  Missiles  8i 
Space Co.  for  “adapting  the  Agena  second  stage  rocket  for  use  on  the 
SERT  11  mission  to  test  ion  engines  in  earth  orbit.”  SERT  11  (Space 
Electric  Rocket  Test)  for  at  least  six  months  of  flight  would  evaluate 
in-flight performance  of  electron  bombardment  ion  engines  . . . and 
( 6  
analyze the possible  effects of  the  electric thrustors and  their  associated 
eIectric fields on  other  spacecraft components.” Entire Agena  2nd  stage 
would  be  used  in  1969  launch  as  bed  of  spacecraft  SERT 1 1 ;   Agena 
would  be  equipped  with  11/2-kw solar  cell  array  to  provide  power  f o r  
ion  engines and  other  systems. LeRC  had  management responsibility fo r  
launch  vehicle and  spacecraft  in  SERT  11  mission.  (LeRC  Release 68-8) 
NASA  personnel  changes:  Thomas B.  Shillito  of  LeRC’s  Office  of  Develop- 
ment  Evaluation  and  Management  Review  was  appointed  Supersonic 
Transport  Program  Coordinator  for  NASA  in  Washington,  D.C.  He 
would have  offices  a t  FAA  and would  “stay  abreast  of  technical progress 
in  the  SST  program  [and ]   inform  NASA  . . . of  any  impending  require- 
ments.,,  Shillito would  report  to   NASA  Deputy  Associate Administrator 
for  Advanced  Research  and  Technology  (Aeronautics)  Charles  W. 
Harper. 
Harvey  Sherman  and  James  M.  Beggs  were  named  consultants  to 
NASA  Administrator  James  E. Webb.  Sherman,  Port  of  New  York  Au- 
thority’s  Director  of  Organizations  and  Procedures  Dept.,  would  be 
member  of  senior  group  of  advisors  on  management  matters.  Beggs, 
Westinghouse Electric C o r p . ’ ~  Assistant Director of  Purchases and Traf- 
fic, would  advise on  management  concepts and  policies.  (LeRC  Release 
68-7;  NASA  Release 68-22) 
During  January:  New  knowledge  of  movement  and  state  of  electrons  in 
Van  Allen  radiation  belts  that  explained  movement  of  electrons  into 
and  out  of  belts  and  trapped  electron activity  wa s   reported  from  three 
new  di3coveries.  Bell  Telephone  Laboratories  used  energetic  particle 

26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
During  January 
collectors aboard NASA’s A t s  I ,  launched Dec. 6 ,1966 ,  to show that high- 
energy  outer  Van  Allen  belt  electrons exhibited  bunching  phenomenon 
as  they  drifted  around  earth  in   its magnetic  field.  Bell  scientist Charles 
S.  Roberts  presented  theory  that  “radio  noise  in  the  charged  particle 
gas”  surrounding  earth was  “responsible for  the  loss  of  electrons from 
the  Van  Allen  belts,  rather  than  the  mere  presence  of  lightning-bolt- 
initiated  whistlers  alone,  a s   previously  believed.”  At  Nov.  16,  1967, 
meeting,  Dr.  James  A.  Van  Allen  had  presented  satellite-collected data 
suggesting that  “both  electrons  and  protons  enter  the  outer  Van  Allen 
radiation belt”  drawn by  high voltage generated across earth’s  magnetic 
field, caused  by  earth‘s  spin  between  dawn  and  evening  sides  of  earth- 
surrounding  magnetic  envelope. 
(Strasser,  Aero   Tech ,   1/29/68, 
18-20) 
U S .   Arms  Control  and  Disarmament Agency  released  Technological  In- 
novation  in  C iv i l ian   Public  Areas ,   study  by  Analytic  Services  Inc. 
which  urged  Government  to  continue  support  of  advanced  R&D  on  do- 
mestic  problem-solving  to  prevent  economic  decline  i f   disarmament 
agreement  were  reached.  Unless  such  R&D  was  funded,  study  said,  i t  
was  questionable  whether  large  demonstration  projects  to  alleviate do- 
mestic  problems could be  undertaken  quickly  enough to   offset  substan- 
tial  reductions  in  defense  spending.  Defense  industry  could  help  solve 
civilian  programs,  study  concluded, but  i t   questioned whether  industry 
noted  fo r  technological  innovation  would  not  encounter  serious  obsta- 
cles  in  orienting  its  activities to  areas  which  often had  resisted  innova- 
tion  in  any form.  (Text; Aero   Tech ,  1 /15 /68 ,43 )  
India  could  be  first  developing  country  to  orbit  her  own  artificial  satel- 
lite, according  to  recommendations of  five-man mission  of  UNESCO.  Sat- 
ellite  would  be  first  of  “distribution”  communications  design,  more 
powerful  than  current  point-to-point satellites such as Early  Bird  I  and 
requiring  less  complex  ground  facilities.  Operating  under  long-term 
plan  to   end  in  1951, India  would build  56 ground  stations which would 
bring  TV  to  25%  of  population.  Network  of  160  stations  could  reach 
80%  of  India’s population. Mission recommended India  produce 50,000 
home  TV  receivers  by  1970-1971  and  enter  into  bilateral  agreement 
with  major  space  power  to  purchase  satellite  and  launching  services. 
( N Y T ,  1 /28 /68 )  
0  Payoff  from  space  investment  ( in   satellite  applications  in  extended 
weather  forecasting, reduced cost, and  extended  range  for  telecommuni- 
cations)  was discussed  in Space /Aeronau t ics .   Government policy  on  fu- 
ture  satellite  applications  would  depend  on  four  “key  study  efforts”: 
(1) study  by  Presidential  Task  Force  on  Communications Policy  on 
status  of  INTELSAT  and  its  role  in   global  and  foreign  domestic comsat 
systems;  ( 2 )   study  by  NAS  on  potential  of  applications  satellites  and 
“an  effective  cost/benefit  strategy”;  ( 3 )   recommendation  by  Presi- 
dent’s  Commission  and  Council  on  Marine  Sciences  for  consolidation 
of  Federal  efforts  in  marine  engineering  and  oceanography,  and  crea- 
tion  of  policy  framework  hospitable  to  applications  satellites;  and  (4) 
European  organization  of  firms’  formulation  of  arguments  advocating 
fou r  regional  systems rather  than  one global network.  ( S / A ,  1/68, 80) 
History  of  lunar  nomenclature  and  tradition  in  naming  lunar  features 
was  reviewed  by  Director  of  Fels  Planetarium,  Dr.  I .  M.  Levitt,  in  A i r  
Force  and  Spa c e .  D iges t .   Knowledge  from  space  research  had  created 

2 7  

During  January 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

complications fo r   specialists who  had  to  name  lunar  features.  I n   past, 
craters,  mountains,  rills,  and  seas  on  moon  had  been  named  for  scien- 
tists,  mathematicians,  and  philosophers.  In   1647,  Johannes  Hevelius 
had  published  Selenogruphicu  in   Danzig,  setting  stage  for  naming 
lunar  features.  Ground  rules  were  set  down  in  1932  by  International 
Astronomical Union  ( IAU )  , which  formed committee of  astronomers to  
select names. 
U.S.S.R.  had  asked  1967  General  Assembly  of  IAU  to  pass  on  153 
more  names  fo r   features  on  moon’s  hidden  side.  Levitt  recommended 
that  names  of  dead  astronauts-both  American  and  Russian-be 
ac- 
cepted  for  lunar  nomenclature;  later,  living  astronauts  could  be  simi- 
larly honored.  Also  pioneers in  space research-“such 
as  Goddard, von 
Braun, Gilruth, Newell, Ley, Lovelace, Flickinger, Stehling, and  so  on” 
-and 
astronomers  and; benefactors  of  mankind  could  be  considered. 
( A F / S D ,  1/68,66-9) 
*  William Leavitt  in  A i r   Force  and  Space  Digest  asked:  “Are  antiballistic 
missile  systems  necessarily provocative and  ‘destabilizing’ in   the  sense 
that  they  will  inevitably set  off  a  new  spiral  in  the  arms  race?  Many- 
but  by  no  means  all-scientists 
answer  ‘yes’  to  these questions,  despite 
impressions  to  the  contrary”  Director  of  Oak  Ridge National  Labora- 
to  ABM  question, 
tory  Dr.  Alvin  Weinberg,  who  would  answer  c c n ~ y 7  
was  quoted:  “The  deployment of  ABMS  on both  sides has been  deplored 
as  the  first  step  in  the  unending  arms  spiral  that  eventually  will  con- 
sume everything, including  our  vision  of  abundance. But  suppose ABMS 
and  other  defensive measures  turn  out  to  be  effective,  and  a t   the  same 
time  there  is no  escalation of  offense in unending spiral. The knife-edge 
of  delicately balanced  terror  would then  be  blunted.”  (Leavitt, A F / SD ,  
1/68,  72-4) 

28 

February  1968 

February  1 : NASA  Nike-Cajun sounding  rocket launched from NASA Wallops 
Station  carried  payload  to  65-mi  (104.4-km)  altitude  to  obtain  vertical 
profile o i   atmosphere  parameters  between  22-  and  59-mi  (35-  and  95- 
km)  altitudes  with  exploding-grenade  and  falling-sphere  techniques. 
Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily  except  fo r   one  of 
the  two  spheres;  other  sphere was  tracked  for  23  min.  Globe  Explora- 
tion  Corp.  and  Superior  Engineering  Co.  experiments were  correlated 
with  firings  from  Kiruna,  Sweden;  Fort  Churchill, Canada;  and  Point 
Barrow, Alaska.  (NASA   Rpt SRL )  
e  A t s   I I I ,   launched  by  NASA  Nov.  5,  1967, was  again  returning  color  and 
black-and-white pictures  to  ground  stations;  color  camera  had  been 
turned  off  Nov.  29,  and  black-and-white camera,  Dec.  9.  Latter  had 
been  returned  t o   active photographing  of  cloud  cover  Dec.  30.  Color 
camera  had  operated  since  first  week  of  January,  but  ground  equip- 
ment  had  lacked  precise  adjustment.  GSFC  believed  camera  problems, 
possibly  caused  by  gas  seepage,  had  been  corrected.  (NASA  Release 
68-24) 
Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  S.  McNamara,  in   annual  report  to  Con- 
gress,  stated  before  joint  session of  Senate Armed  Services Committee 
and  Defense  Appropriations  Subcommittee  that  U.S.S.R.  had  nearly 
closed nuclear missile gap in  1967 by  more than  doubling  its  IBM   force. 
According to  intelligence estimates, Soviet buildup  could  give  U.S.S.R. 
capability  of  delivering about  1,000 nuclear  warheads and bombs;  U S .  
could  deliver up  to  4%  times  that  number.  Both U.S.  and U.S.S.R.  pos- 
sessed  strategic  forces  capable  of  withstanding  surprise  attack  and  re- 
taliating  overwhelmingly against  the  other.  “It  is  precisely  this  mutual 
capability  to  destroy one another,  and  conversely, our  respective  inabil- 
ity  to prevent such destruction, that  provides us  both with  the  strongest 
possible  motive  to  avoid  a  strategic  nuclear  war.”  Communist  China’s 
medium-range missiles,  and  ICBMS  could  be  operational  as  a  “modest” 
force  in  mid-1970s.  (Beecher,  N Y T ,   2/2/68,  2 ;   Marder,  W Po s t ,  
2/2/68,  A l ;  N Y T ,  2 /6 /68 ,42 )  
V /A   Charles  E.  Weakley  (USN ,   Re t . ) ,   former  Commander  of  US .   Atlan- 
tic  Fleet  Anti-Submarine Warfare  Force  and  recipient  of  Navy  Distin- 
guished  Service  Medal,  became  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  fo r  
Management Development and took over staff  of  Organization  and Man- 
agement  Planning  Div.,  formerly  under  Associate  Administrator  fo r  
Organization  and  Management.  (NASA  Release  68-11) 
February  1-2:  Tenth  anniversary of  Explorer  I  [see  Jan.  311  was  commem- 
orated  by  JPL   and  Cal  Tech  with  two-day  program  including  sympo- 
sium  on  First  and  Second  Decades  of  Space  Research  and  JPL   open 
house.  JPL   Director,  Dr. William H.  Pickering,  leader  of  first  Explorer 
scientific  task  force,  was  chairman.  Speakers  included  Dr.  James  A. 

2 9  

February  1-2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Van  Allen  of  State  Univ.  of  Iowa,  who  had  verified  radiation  belts 
bearing  his name;  L/G  Austin W.  Betts  (USA)  , Army Chief  of  Research 
and  Development;  Dr.  John  W.  Findlay,  NASA  Lunar  and  Planetary 
Missions  Advisory  Board  Chairman;  and  Dr.  Joseph  Kaplan  of  UCLA, 
US. Chairman of  IGY when Explorer Z was launched Jan.  31,1958. 
In   next  10  yr,  “as  an   increasingly  important  area  of  scientific  and 
technical research  a  balanced  program  in  space must  certainly be  part 
useful  service can  be  conceived  than  one which  gives  strength  t o   . . . 
of  the  activities of  our  Nation,”  Dr.  Kaplan  said.  “No  more  noble  and 
cooperation  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Space  certainly  qualifies 
for such a role.” 
Dr.  Findlay  outlined  possible missions  “of  strong  scientific interest” 
to Mercury, Venus, Mars, and Jupiter  in next decade. Gen.  Betts voiced 
concern  about  attitudes  toward  exploratory  efforts;  he  was  “not  con- 
vinced  that  w e   remember, the  lesson”  of  Sputnik  I.  “Only  some  two 
weeks”  after  its  launch,  numerous  programs  were  proposed  for  U.S. 
satellite-possible  only  because  “far-sighted  technical  people had  been 
planning  for  various  applications  of  space  for  some  time,  and  even 
though  firm military  requirements  were  not  available.”  ( JPL  Releases, 
1/22/68,  1/31/68;  Texts;  Wilford,  NYT,  2/2/68,  4 ;   SBD ,   1/26/68, 
38) 
February  2 :   NASA  launched  two  Aerobee  150 sounding  rockets from  WSMR. 
First  carried  American  Science  and  Engineering,  Inc.,  experiment  to 
86.5-mi  (139-km)  altitude  to  collect data  on  location  and  flux  levels  of 
celestial  x-ray  sources  in  1- to  20-kev range  using  collimator,  propor- 
tional  counters,  aspect  camera,  and  attitude  control  system  (AcS)   . ACS 
performance  was  poor  because  of  timer  malfunction;  performance  of 
rocket and instrumentation was satisfactory. 
Second  rocket  carried  GSFC  payload  to  92.8-mi  (149.3-km)  altitude 
to  measure  spectral  irradiance  of  four  early-type  stars  in   1,100-  to 
4,000-i% interval, using uv  stellar spectrometer and  STRAP  system for  at- 
titude  control.  Rocket,  instrumentation,  and  STRAP  performed  satisfac- 
torily. Good data were obtained.  (NASA  Rpt SRL)  
*  Sen.  Clinton  P.  Anderson  (D-N.Mex.) , Chairman  of  Senate  Committee 
on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences,  on  behalf  of  himself  and  Sen. 
Margaret  C.  Smith  (R-Me.),  ranking  member,  introduced  S.  2918,  FY 
1969 NASA  authorization bill.  Measure was  referred  to  Committee. Total 
authorization  of  $4.37  billion  would  provide  R&D, $3.677  billion;  can- 
struction  of  facilities,  $45  million ; and  administrative  operations, 
$648.2 million.  (NASA LAR  V I I /8 )  
S-I1  2nd  stage  for  fifth  Apollo  Saturn  V  mission  left  Seal Beach,  Calif., 
onboard USNS Point Barrow  en route to Mississippi Test Facility  ( MTF)  , 
where stage would  undergo  static  testing  before  shipment to  KSC. Also 
onboard  ship, to  save $6,000  in  transportation  charges, was  F-1  rocket 
engine.  Engine would be  unloaded  for  inspection a t  Michoud  Assembly 
Facility  in  New  Orleans,  then  transferred  to  barge  fo r   remainder 
of  trip  to  MTF.  (MSFC   Release  68-23) 
*  India’s  Thumba  Equatorial  Rocket Launching  Station  (TERM)   was  dedi- 
cated  as  international  facility  by  Prime  Minister,  Mrs.  Ind i ra   Gandhi. 
NASA  w a s   represented by  Assistant Administrator  for  International  Af- 
fairs  Arnold  W.  Frutkin,  Director  of  Space  Applications  Programs 
Leonard Jaffe, and  NASA  Wallops Station Assistant Chief  of  Flight  Test 

30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
February  2 
Div.  Robert T.  Duffy.  D u f i   had  served  as   advisor,  and  Wallops  had  
assisted  by  helping  to  develop  range,  training  scientists and  engineers, 
and lending launching and tracking equipment. 
TERLS had  been  established Nov.  21,  1963, by  Indian National  Com- 
mission  for  Space Research  (INCOSPAR)  and  to  date  had   launched  52 
rockets:  17  American  Nike-Apaches,  29  American  Judi-Darts,  and  6 
French Centaures.  Rockets launched as par t   of  dedication included two 
Nike-Apaches, one Judi-Dart, and one Centaure. Payloads contained  ex- 
periments  involving  French,  Soviet,  and  American  collaboration  with 
India.  India’s  Dept.  of  Atomic Energy planned Centaure manufacturing 
unit  a t  TERLS,  and  INCOSPAR  would  build  space science  and  technology 
center  a t  Veli  (near  TERLS)  to  design  and  develop  space research  sys- 
tems,  including vehicle, payload, instrumentation,  and  ground  support. 
Mrs.  Gandhi said:  “This  center  represents  only  one  facet  of  the  tre- 
mendous  industrial  and  technological  revolution  in   which  we  a re  
involved.  . . . Technology is  a  key.  It is  a  key  to knowledge  that  opens 
the  door  t o   plenty  as  well  as  power.  I n  a  sense it  is  a  key  to   independ- 
ence,  for  i t   was  the  failure  to  advance  technologically  which  made 
(NASA  Release 
Asia  and  Africa  dependent  and  poverty-stricken.” 
68-14;  WS  Release 68-1;  Zndiu News,  2/2/68,4;  LA   T ime s ,  2/3/68; 
B  Sun,  6/30/68) 
Cornell  Univ.’s  association  with  Cornell  Aeronautical  Laboratory  had 
been  ended by Univ.’s  Board  of  Trustees on  recommendation  of  special 
committee headed by  Univ.’s  law  professor  W.  David  Curtiss.  Reasons 
cited  included  overlap and  potential  conflict between Laboratory’s  over- 
seas  research  projects  and Univ.’s  expanding program  of  international 
studies.  (Science, 2/2/68,  515) 
February 3:  Clifford C.  Furnas, President of  Western New  York Nuclear Re- 
search Center  and member  of  NAE,  was  appointed to  newly  created  po- 
sition  of  Vice  Chairman of  National Research Council  (NRC )  , in  which 
he  would  “assist  the  Chairman,  NAS  President  Frederick  Seitz,  in   the 
general  administration  of  the   NRC   and  help  coordinate  activities”  be- 
News Repo r t ,  3/68,5: NAS PIO) 
tween NAE,  NAS,  and NRC.  (NAS-NRC-NAE 
February  5:  NASA  Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched from  NASA  Wallops 
Station carried GSFC  payload  to   73.3-mi  (118.5-km) altitude  to  evaluate 
vehicle  performance and  measure  payload  environmental instrumenta- 
tion, including three-axis acceleration, lateral  and longitudinal vibration, 
three-axis  gyro,  10  temperatures,  and  motor  pressure.  Rocket  per- 
formed as  predicted  and was  recommended for  acceptance by  NASA.  All 
instruments operated to impact.  (NASA Rpt SRL) 
Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range  carried  Univ.  of  New  Hampshire-Univ.  of  California  a t  
San  Diego  payload.  Objectives  were  to  detect  and  identify  energetic 
charged  particles  that  caused  aurora,  measure  local  electron  density 
and correlate  it  w i th   ground  measurements  of  ionization,  study  aurora 
light  emissions a t   several wavelengths and  detect  related  electric  fields, 
and  investigate  auroral  ionospheric currents  and  magnetic  fields  driv- 
ing   them  in  ranges  1-15  kev  and  2 3 0  kev  and  protons  from  1 0 4 0  
kev  with  electrostatic  curved  plate  analyzers  and  channel  multipliers. 
Launch  was  first  in   series of  five to  be  launched from  Churchill.  Exact 
performance was  not calculated because  of  early  radar  loss;  time corre- 
lated  performance indicated  rocket  functioned  as  predicted.  Telemetry 

31 

February  5 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

signals were  strong  throughout  flight.  All  experimental objectives were 
achieved.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
’ Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  NASC  Executive  Secretary,  testified  before  House 
Committee  on  Appropriations’  Subcommittee  on  Independent  Offices 
and  HUD  that  there  would  be  no  duplication  of  experiments  on  DOD’S 
Manned  Orbital  Laboratory  (M O L )   and  NASA’s Orbiting  Workshop. 
They would  operate  in  different orbits.  NASC,  Welsh  said,  was  stressing 
those types of  space activities from  which  w e  can  see  relatively direct 
( 6  
benefits  to  the  general  public.”  (Transcript ; Aero   Da i ly ,   4/23/68, 
11-F) 
Rep.  George  P.  Miller  (D-Calif.),  Chairman  of  House  Committee  on 
Science  and  Astronautics,  introduced  H.R.  15086,  FY  1969  NASA  au -  
(NASA  L A R  
thorization  bill.  Measure  was  referred  to  Committee. 
V I I /9 )  
February  6 :  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos CCZ  into orbit with 327-km (203-mi) 
apogee,  202-km  (126-mi) perigee,  89.7-min period,  and  64.9’  inclina- 
tion.  Satellite  performed  satisfactorily  and  reentered  Feb.  14.  ( S B D ,  
2 /7 /68 ,210 ;   GSFC S SR ,  2/15/68) 
’ Senate  confirmed  nomination  of  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine  as  NASA  Deputy 
Administrator  [see  Jan.  311.  (Transcript;  NASA  L A R   VII/lO;  UPI, 
N Y T ,  2 /8 /68 , 4 )  
NASA  announced  appointment  of  five  members  to  its  Aerospace  Safety 
Advisory  Panel:  M /G   Carroll H.  Dunn,  Director  of  Military  Construc- 
tion  in  Office  of  Chief  of  Army  Engineers;  Dr.  J .  A.  Hornbeck,  Presi- 
dent  of  Sandia  Corp.;  Dr.  Henry Reining,  Jr.,  Dean  of  von  KleinSmid 
Center  of  International  Affairs,  USC;  Dr.  Eberhard  F.  M.  Rees,  Special 
Assistant  to  Apollo  Spacecraft  Manager  (detached  from  position  as 
Deputy  Director,  MSFC)   ; and  Bruce T.  Lundin,  Associate  Director  for 
Development,  LeRC.  Appointments  implemented  Sec.  6,  P.L.  90-67, 
NASA  Authorization Act  for  FY  1968.  (NASA  Release  68-26) 
’ Dramatic  reversal  in  balance  of  U.K.  aerospace trade  with  U.S.  had  oc- 
curred  in  1967, ZnteraviaAirLetter  reported. Whereas in   1966, U.K.  ex- 
ports  to  U S .   of  $187 million  (predevaluation)  exceeded  imports  by  a 
favorable  $137.2  million  ( predevaluation) , U.K.  aerospace  industry’s 
1967 dollar  earnings  of  $118.3 million  (new  rate)  were  swamped  by 
imports  from  U S .  totaling  $149.3  million  (new ra te ) .  This  was  highest 
figure ever recorded  and  included $127.2  million  for  aircraft  and  $22.1 
million fo r  engines.  (ZnteraviuAirLetter, 2 /6 /68 ,1 )  
February  6-8:  Five  nations-Brazil, 
India,  Italy,  Romania,  and  Sweden- 
had  misgivings about  draft treaty  to   prohibit  further  spread  of  nuclear 
weapons,  submitted  jointly  at  Geneva  disarmament  conference by  US .  
and U.S.S.R.  Jan.  18. 
On Feb. 8, India,  through  authoritative  source, announced she feared 
neither  U S .   nor  U.S.S.R.  would  supply  “an  airtight  guarantee  of  its 
territorial  integrity  and  inviolability  once Communist China  achieves  a 
second-strike intercontinental nuclear capability,”  according to  Los  An-  
geles  T imes .   Sweden  appealed to  U.S.S.R.  to  match  offers by  US .   and 
U.K.  to  permit  international inspection of  their  peaceful  nuclear  activi- 
ties.  (Hamilton, N Y T ,  2/7/68,  8; LA   T imes  in  W Po s t ,  2/9/68;  N Y T ,  
2 /9 /68 ,16 )  
February  7:  NASA  Nike-Cajun sounding rocket  launched  from WSMR  carried 
special  parachute  and  payload  to  41.7-mi  (67-km)  altitude  to  test 

32 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1968 

February  7 

parachute deployment at high  altitude and  to  determine ozone distribu- 
tion  in  12-  to  40-mi  (20-  to  65-km)  region.  Rocket  and  instruments 
performed  satisfactorily ; parachute  deployed  a t  approximately 216,000 
ft. Recovery  attempts, initially  unsuccessful because  of  65-mi off -range 
drift, would  be continued in  attempt to  recover  onboard  camera.  (NASA 
Rpt  SRL) 
*  President’s authorization request for NASA’s FY  1969 budget was presented 
by  NASA Administrator  James E.  Webb  to  House Committee on  Science 
and  Astronautics.  At  $4.37  billion,  authorization  request  was  $700 
million below  FY  1968 request,  almost $500 million less  than  FY  1968 
authorization,  and  $200  million  below  FY  1968  appropriation.  Webb 
stated:  “NASA’S  expenditures  for  FY  1969  will  be  down  $230  million 
from this  year,  $850 million below  last  year,  and  $1.3  billion  less  than 
in  FY  1966. The  NASA  program  has  been  cut.  I  hope  you  will  decide 
i t  has  been  cut  enough  and  will  approve the  full  amount  recommended 
by  the  President. 
“The  FY  1969  request  does  not  meet  a t   all  our  Nation’s  needs  in 
aeronautics  and space.  It is a  compromise-one  which  I fully support- 
between  needed  work  toward  advances  in  aeronautics  and  space which 
we  can  and  should  make,  and  other  overriding  requirements.  . . . 
During  this  period  when  we  a re   reducing  our  effort  by  one-third  the 
U.S.S.R.  is still increasing  its  effort.  . . . I n   terms  of  scientific advance 
and  in  applications  of  immediate economic use,  such  as meteorological 
and  communications systems,  our  program  has  contributed  more  than 
theirs.  But  in  terms  of  the  use of  large  launch vehicles  and  in  the  rate 
of  which  fu tu re  greater  capabilities  a re   being  developed  they  a re   and 
will  remain  ahead, a t  our  1969 budget level. The hard  fact w e  now  face 
is that  just  as we  have  begun  to  catch  up  in  large-scale booster  opera- 
tions  . . . we  a re   cutting  back  our  program  while  they  continue  to 
advance.” 
He  listed  guidelines  within  “necessary  fiscal  constraints,”  which 
determined decisions on  FY  1969 program  and  budget  estimates.  NASA 
would continue 1968 operating plan for Apollo program while using  all- 
up test concept f o r  Saturn V and Apollo.  Complete success in  all remain- 
ing  eight  Saturn  V  flights would  be  needed  for  manned  lunar  landing 
by  “end  of  1969.”  NASA  would  reduce numbers of  Saturn  IB and V  and 
work  out with  DOD  future requirements for  large launch  vehicles under 
“sharply  limited”  launch  program.  Launch  of  Saturn  I  Workshop  in 
1970 would  be  interim  step  toward  Saturn  V  Workshop  and  would  be 
coordinated  with  later  launch  of  Apollo Telescope Mount.  “Practically 
all”  programs  had  been  stretched out,  and  a  number  of  projects would 
be phased out. 
Scope of  new  starts would  be  reduced,  with  NERVA  I  replacing  larger 
NERVA  11  and  “less  costly Mariner  class  spacecraft”  replacing  Voyager 
mission.  Urgent  activities  would  be  expanded  in  aeronautics  and  in 
space  applications;  for  example,  noise  reduction,  VTOL  and  sTOL,  air- 
craft  for  remote  measurement  of  earth  resources,  and  Nimbus  D  for 
charting atmosphere parameters. 
NASA  Centers  would  be  reorganized  “to  retain  . . . after  reductions 
[in  work  force]  are made,  a limited but  strong  and  well-balanced team 
of  scientists, engineers, program and project managers.” 

33 

February  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Webb  responded  to  questions:  “There  are  no  signs  that  the  Soviets 
a re   cutting  back  as  we  are.  New  test  and  launch  facilities  a re   steadily 
added  . . . and a number  of  spaceflight systems more advanced than  any 
heretofore used  are  nearing  completion.” Webb  forecast Soviet booster 
with  thrust  greater  than  that  of  Saturn V,  resumption of  manned  space 
flights, and landing  of  Soviet instrument packages on Mars in  1969  and 
1971.  Budget  reductions  in  FY  1968  had  compelled  revisions,  reduc- 
tions,  delays  and  cancellations  in  NASA  programs.  “We  can  conduct 
a viable and useful program a t  these lower levels, but i t  will  be a  sharply 
reduced one.” 
Despite  reductions  allowing  almost  no  flexibility  to  work  around 
problems,  “we  still  have  the  possibility  of  making  the  lunar  landing 
before  1970.”  ( C R ,  2/7/68,  H926-7;  2/12/68,  E708-9) 
Testimony  on  NASA’s FY  1969  Budget  request  was  presented  to  House 
Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  by  three  NASA  Associate  Ad- 
ministrators. 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications, 
Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  presented  OSSA’S  budget  for  “an  austere  program 
for  the  immediate  future,”  yet  one  that  would  make  “effective  use  in 
the  years  ahead  of  the  capabilities  we  have  developed  in  the  past 
decade”  and  that  would  advance scientific knowledge and  useful  appli- 
cations.  “New  starts  are  at  a  minimum,”  he  said,  “but  if  this  budget 
request  is  approved, we  can  continue  the  most  useful  of  our  on-going 
programs, we  can  avoid  abandoning  the  field  of  planetary  exploration, 
and we  can hold  together teams and capabilities to meet  future national 
needs.  . . . ” Authorization  request  for  OSSA  for  1969  was  for  $538.2 
million,  $14.7  million  below  FY  1968  operating  plan,  with  “the  de- 
crease  . . . primarily  in  the  Lunar  and  Planetary  Programs  budget, 
reflecting  the  completion  of  the  initial  aubma ted   phase  of  lunar  ex- 
ploration  and  cancellation  of  Voyager.”  Space  applications  budget 
request  had  increased  for  FY  1969  ( to   $112.2  million)  because  of 
demonstrated  value  of  communications  and  meteorological  programs 
L C  
and the potential value of  applying space technology on  a global basis.” 
NASA  Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, 
Dr. Mac  C.  Adams,  described OART  program  as “the  key  to  tomorrow’s 
leadership  in  aeronautics  and  space.”  He  explained:  “. . . our  FY  69 
budget  request  for  the  R&D  line items  . . . is  $336,800,000, up  5.7  per- 
cent over FY 68. The increase is primarily due to   increases in  effort on 
aircraft  technology  [up   to  $10.1  million]  and  nuclear  rockets  [up  $6 
million].  . . . Major  changes also included more V/STOL  research, noise 
research  for  subsonic jets,  and  development  of  NERVA  I  nuclear  rocket 
engine a t  thrust level of  75,000 lb. 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  f o r   Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition 
Gerald  M.  Truszynski  presented  FY  1969  budget  request  of  $304.8 
million  for  R&D  and  $21.8  million  for  construction  of  facilities  and 
reported  that  “50  satellites  by  the  end  of  1968”  would  be  supported 
by  network  while  “some  16  new  missions”  would  be  launched  in   FY 
1969.  For  FY  1969,  “the  great  majority  of  funds  requested  will  be 
directed  toward  operating  and  maintaining  present  network  capability. 
Much  of  the  existing  equipment has  been  operated  almost continuously 
for  a t  least  eight years  and  must  be  refurbished  or  replaced.” 
Construction of  facilities budget would  fund : two  210-ft-dia antennas 

34 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1968 

February  7 

fo r  Spain and Australia;  power generating plant for Fairbanks,  Alaska, 
tracking station;  and Sunblazer antenna.  (Testimony) 
NASA  awarded  Boeing Co.  $3,226,374  supplement to  its  Saturn V  systems 
engineering  and  integration  effort,  bringing  this  portion  of  Boeing’s 
three-part  Saturn  V  contract  to  $194.8-million  total.  Boeing  would  be 
responsible for  propulsion systems’ preflight and postflight performance 
analysis for first  10 launch vehicles.  ( MSFC  Release 68-28) 
February  8:  NASA  management  officials  continued  to  testify  on  their  pro- 
grams, within NASA’s FY  1969 budget  request,  to  House  Committee on 
Science and Astronautics. 
NASA Associate Administrator  for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. 
Mueller, said  OMSF’S  $2.815-billion FY  1969 request was lowest request 
since FY 1963, $332.8 million below  FY 1968, and  “almost $700 million 
below  the  peak  Manned  Space Flight  budget  year,  Fiscal  Year  1966.” 
Dr. Mueller included $2.483 billion  for  R P ~ D ,  $18.7  million  for construc- 
tion  of  facilities,  and  $313  million  for  administrative  operations.  Over 
80%  of  total  R&D  report  was  committed  to  Apollo.  “The  program  of 
Apollo  and  Apollo  Applications  Flights,  with  the  development  of  the 
Saturn  V  Workshop  and  the  Advanced  Missions  studies  leading  to  a 
space  station  of  longer  duration  and  greater  earth  orbital  capabilities, 
constitute  a  minimum  effort  to  continue  manned  space  flight  into  the 
early  1970s.”  Dr.  Mueller  warned  against  failing  “to  capitalize  on  the 
investment  in   the  Apollo  Program”  and  said  i t   was  “economically 
prudent  to  proceed  now  with  the  Apollo  Program  and  the  definition 
study  of  the  . . . long  duration  space  station  . . . keystone  in  the  fu- 
ture  of  manned  space  flight.” 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Organization  and  Management 
Harold  B.  Finger,  citing  27%  decrease  in  procurement  for  first  three 
months  of  FY  1968  below  same  period  in  1967,  predicted  94%  of 
procurement  dollars  going  to  industry  would  decrease  to  less  than 
90%  by  end  of  FY  1969 a s  industry-developed systems came into  NASA 
for  testing  and  launch.  Presenting  $10-million  Sustaining  University 
program  budg e t - eq u a l   to  1968 budget  but  one-third  1967’s  $30  mil- 
lion-Finger 
stressed need  for  university  contributions  and  combining 
universities’ “demonstrated  competence  in  physical  sciences with  their 
social  science  strengths  to  deal  with  the  total  impact  of  the  nation’s 
aerospace effort.”  Finger  submitted statement of  Dr.  Richard  L.  Lesher, 
Assistant  Administrator  for  Technology  Utilization,  describing  pro- 
grams  “to  experimentally test  and  develop methods  for  bringing  about 
the  multiple  use  of  the  new  knowledge  gained  as  a  result  of  NASA 
activities.” 
NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Administration  William  E.  Lilly 
charged  $7.8-million  increase  in  FY  1969  administrative  operations 
budget  request  (from  $ 6 4 0 . 4 n d i o n   budget  f o r   FY  1968)  to  cost  of 
1967  Pay  Act  and  conversion t o   civil  service  of  certain  GSFC  support 
services.  He  cited  personnel  reduction  of  1,704  positions  since  freeze 
on  hiring  new  employees on  Aug.  24,  1967.  (Testimony) 
Five  ellipse-shaped, three- by   five-mile lunar  landing  areas  were  selected 
for  astronaut  safety  considerations  by  NASA  Apollo  Site  Selection 
Board.  First  two  sites were  in  Sea  of  Tranquility,  third  was  in  Central 
Bay,  and fourth and  fifth were  in Ocean of  Storms. Sites contained  fea-  
tures  of  scientific, interest,  including  small craters,  raw  material  ejected 

35 

February  8 

ASTRONAGTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

from  craters,  ridges,  and  faults.  Criteria  for  selection  were  area 
smoothness,  approach  path,  propellant  conservation,  countdown  recy- 
cling  time,  free-return  trajectory,  optimum  lighting,  and  slope.  Board 
had  studied  Lunar  Orbiter  high-resolution photos  and  Surveyor  close- 
up  photos and  surface  data.  (NASA  Release 68-25;  AP,  N Y T ,  2/5/68, 
13) 
Interim 
released  Space  Applications  Summer  S tudy ,   1967 
NAS 
Report,  Volume  I,  Central  Review  Committee Conclusions and  Recom- 
mendations and  Summaries of  Panel  Reports. Chaired by  Dr.  W.  Dem- 
ing Lewis,  study  treated  aspects of  space  technology “likely  to  produce 
practical  benefits  to  large  segments of  the  American  and  world  econo- 
mies.”  Report  urged  extensive  and  coherent  program  and  said  NASA 
should double $100 million  i t   currently  spent  to  develop  technology  of 
space applications. (Text; Clark, N Y T ,  2 /9 /68 ,6)  
NSF   announced  scientists  and  engineers  from  USA’s  Cold  Regions  Re- 
search  and  Engineering  Laboratory  in   Hanover,  N.H.,  had  lo r   first 
time  successfully  drilled  through  Antarctic  icecap,  obtaining  contin- 
uous  cores  to  depth  of  7,100  f t   a t  Byrd  Station.  Later  studies  of  cores 
and  samples  of  underlying  rock  were  expected  to  provide  insight  into 
climatic and  atmospheric history.  Engineers had  reached  their  immedi- 
ate goal  Jan.  29;  drilling would  be  resumed  in  October.  (NSF  Release 
68-108;  Reinhold, N Y T ,  2/8/68,  C3) 
0  Soviet  Prof.  Georgy  Petrovich,  writing  in  T rud ,   praised  US. space 
achievements but  pointed  to  20  Soviet  “firsts”  since  Sputnik  I .   Past 
neutral  appraisals  had  generally agreed  with  Petrovich  that  U.S.S.R.’s 
payloads  had  been  heavier  and  US. hardware more  sophisticated. Re- 
cent  contradiction  had  been  intricate  softlanding  for  Soviet  Y e n ,   I v, 
Oct.  18,  1967,  and  successful  U S .   test  of  Saturn  V,  world’s  largest 
booster,  Nov.  9,  1967.  Petrovich  praised  NASA’s broad  application  of 
space equipment in  practical  commercial use  of  satellite technology  fo r  
communication, meteorology, and navigation.  (Winters, B Sun, 2/9/68, 
A3 1 
February  9 :  Aerobee 150 sounding  rocket launched by  NASA  from  Churchill 
Research Range carried  Univ.  of  Pittsburgh-Johns  Hopkins Univ.  pay- 
load  to  %.3-mi  (155-km)  altitude  to  perform  coordinated  auroral  ex- 
periments with  spectrometers and  photometers.  Rocket and  instruments 
performed satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
February  10: Second-stage ( M I )  engine  for  fourth  Apollo/Saturn  V  mis- 
sion was  successfully static-fired for  its  full  duration  of  six minutes  a t  
MTF,  with  engine  developing  equivalent  thrust  of  over  1  million  Ib. 
(Marshall Star,  2/14/68,  1 )  
Sixteen  scientist-astronauts, from  two  groups  selected  in   June  1965  and 
August  1967, had  complained of  dimming prospects for  scientific space 
work because  of  slowdown in  spaceflight schedule.  UPI  said  astronauts 
also  feared  falling  behind  their  colleagues  outside  space  program  be- 
cause  flight  training  left  little  time  for  scientific research.  MSC  Public 
Affairs Officer  Paul Haney had  announced designation of  MSC’s  Science 
Director  Dr.  Wilmot  N.  Hess  to  find  means  for  relieving  complaints. 
(UPI,  N Y T ,  2/11/68,55) 
February  1 1 :   Electric  signals  out  of  phase  with  jet  engine  noise  could  be 
introduced  into exhaust  flame and converted into sound waves to  cancel 
out  engine noise,  according  to  United  Technology  Center  scientist, Dr. 

36 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
February  11 
A.  G .  Cattaneo.  Idea,  in  principle,  had  been  demonstrated  by  recent 
laboratory  experiments  in  which  acetylene torch  flame converted  elec- 
tric  signals  into  sound with  high  fidelity.  Evaluation  of  combustion ef- 
ficiency  during  rocket  engine  tests  could  b e   additional  application. 
(Wilford, N Y T ,  2/11/68,30) 
Febrtutry  12 :   GSFC  technicians  had  moved  NASA’s  A t s   111  satellite  to  new 
position  over  Pacific off  Ecuador’s  coast to  aid  in  U S .   Coast  and  Geo- 
detic  Survey  ( CS ,GS )   mapping  project.  After  movement  from  position 
on  Equator a t  95”  west  longitude to  location  at  85” west  longitude, sat- 
ellite  could  provide  precise  timing  signals  to  C B ~ G S  team  on  South  At- 
lantic  islands  of  South  Georgia  and  Tristan  de  Cunha.  A t s   ZII, carry- 
ing  communications, meteorological, and  navigational  experiments, had 
been launched Nov  5, 1967,  into synchronous equatorial  orbit a t  22,300- 
mi altitude.  ( NMA  Release 68-30) 
“Space Activities  and  the  National Well-Being” were  discussed in  speech 
before  Detroit’s  Economic Club  by  Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  NASA  Asso- 
ciate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space Flight.  “It is  a  measure of  how 
fa r  we  have come in  space in  10 years,”  he  said,  “to consider  that,  with 
the  flight  of  the  Apollo-Saturn V  last  November,  and  the  flight  of  the 
lunar  module  on  January  22,  we  have  now  successfully  flight-tested 
and  proven  every  piece  of  the  Apollo-Saturn space vehicle,  the  vehicle 
the  United  States  will  use  . , . for  the  exploration  of  space  for  years 
to come.” 
He  warned  that  while  U S .   was  decreasing  its  rate  of  investment  in 
space activities, “Soviets are spending 50 per  cent more in  terms of  real 
purchasing power  than we  are.  I n  percentage of  gross national  product, 
they are spending 2  or 3 times as much as we  are.” 
He  noted  that  “when  we  launched  our  first  satellite, Explorer  I ,   the 
cost was  several millions of  dollars per  pound  of  payload  to get  it up  in 
orbit.  With  the  Saturn  V,  w e   are  now  able  to  put  payloads  into  orbit 
for  only  about  $500 per  pound.  Considering  that  reduction  from  mil- 
lions  of  dollars  per  pound  to  hundreds  of  dollars  per  pound  in  orbit 
over a period  of  only 10 years, one can foresee reducing the cost to $50 
per pound or even $5 per pound for getting into and out of  orbit.” 
Saturn V development should move U S .  ahead  during next year,  but 
U.S.S.R.  would  soon  surpass  U.S.  “as  the  full  impact  of  the  resources 
they  are putting  into  their  space program  a t  this  time  becomes evident. 
And  I  would  expect  that  by  1971 o r   1972  we  will  be  significantly be- 
hind  them in  terms of  all of  the  aspects that  we  now  know  will be  char- 
acteristic of  space flight.”  (Text) 
Radar  map  of  planet  Venus  had  been  produced  by  Cornel1 Univ.  scien- 
tists  f rom   computer-assembled data.  Radar-astronomy  data  had  been 
gathered  by  world’s  largest  radiotelescope at  Arecibo  Ionospheric  Ob- 
servatory  in   Puerto  Rico.  Principal  scientist Raymond  F.  Jurgens  said 
map was  equivalent to  what  largest  optical telescope on  earth could  ob- 
tain were it not  for  thick cloud cover obscuring Venusian surface. Meas- 
urements  had  been  made  in  1 9 M  and  1967  when  Venus  wa s   nearest 
earth,  26  million  miles  away.  Cornell’s  Center  for  Radiophysics  and 
Space  Research  Director  Thomas  Gold  concluded  from  measurements 
that  Venus’  surface  material  was  denser  than  moon’s.  Scientists  con- 
firmed  that  Venus  rotated  with  same  face  toward  earth  each  time  it 
passed nearest earth.  Radar observations revealed rough  areas near plan- 

37 

February  12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

et’s  equator  and  probable  steep  mountain  range  in  southern  hemis- 
phere.  One-third  of  Venus  had  already  been  mapped;  data  needed  fo r  
map  of  almost  entire  planet  were  available.  (AP,  N Y T ,  2/13/68,  30) 
*  RFPS  for  two  series  of  advanced comsats,  Intelsats  111% and  IVY and  for 
design and  feasibility study  of  rotary  joint  for  use  in   Intelsat 111% sat- 
ellites had  been  issued by  ComSatCorp. Two   725-1b Intelsat  I I I y 2  satel- 
lites  planned  for  mid-1969 launch  would  use  directive  antenna  system 
to  increase  radiated  power  directed  toward  eastern  North  America  and 
Western  Europe  and  would  have  1,900 two-way voice  circuits.  Rotary 
joint  would  transmit  four  RF  signal  channels  across  interface  between 
spinning  spacecraft  and  mechanically  despun  antenna.  Four  2,430-lb 
Intelsat  IV  satellites  planned  for  launch  beginning  in  mid-1970  would 
be  larger,  more  sophisticated  comsats with  more  than  5,000  voice  cir- 
cuits  and  greater  operational  flexibility  and  versatility.  Both  satellite 
models  would  have  onboard  apogee  motors  and  both  would  b e  
launched  into  synchronous circular  equatorial orbits.  (ComSatCorp Re- 
lease 68 -4 )  
*  XB-70  research  aircraft  flown  by  NASA  test  pilot  Fitzhugh  L.  Fulton,  Jr., 
and  L/C  Emil  Sturmthal  (USAF )   reached  41,000-ft  altitude  and  rnach 
1.18 during  2-hr  43-min  flight  from  Edwards AFB .   About  80%  of  pri- 
mary  objectives were  accomplished, testing  stability,  control,  handling, 
canard  loads, engine performance, airspeed system calibration,  fuselage 
bending photos, and  runway noise.  (XB-70  P ro j  Off) 
February  13:  President  Johnson,  presenting  National  Medal  of  Science  to 
12 scientists, said:  “In  a  democratic society, the  public  attitude  toward 
science must  always  be  a  real  concern  of  the  scientific community.  If 
that  attitude  is  to  be  favorable,  science  must  be  prepared  to  play  its 
part  in correcting the flaws in our  environment.” 
Award winners were:  Jesse W.  Beams, professor  of  physics,  Univ.  of 
Virginia;  Francis  Birch,  professor  of  geological  sciences,  Harvard 
Univ.;  Gregory Breit,  professor  of  physics, Yale Univ.;  Paul  J.  Cohen, 
professor  of  mathematics,  Stanford  Univ.;  Kenneth  S.  Cole,  senior  re- 
search biophysicist, National  Institutes of  Health, and visiting professor 
of  biophysics, Univ.  of  California  a t  Berkeley;  Harry  F.  Harlow,  pro- 
fessor  of  psychology,  Univ.  of  Wisconsin;  Louis  P.  Hammett,  retired 
professor  of  chemistry, Columbia  Univ. ; Michael Heidelberger, profes- 
sor  of  immunochemistry, New  York  Univ.;  George  B.  Kistiakowsky, 
professor  of  chemistry, Harvard  Univ.;  Edwin  H.  Land,  president,  Po- 
laroid  Corp. ; Igor  I.  Sikorsky,  retired  engineering  manager,  Sikorsky 
Aircraft  Div.  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.;  and Alfred  H.  Sturtevant,  pro- 
fessor  of  biology,  emeritus,  Cal  Tech.  National  Medal  of  Science  was 
Government’s highest  award  for  distinguished  achievement  in  science, 
mathematics, and engineering.  ( P D ,  2 /19 /68 ,285 -6 )  
NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator  for  Aeronautics,  OART,  Charles W. 
Harper  presented  31st  Wright  Brothers  Lecture,  “Prospects  in  Aero- 
nautics  Research  and  Development,”  a t   AIAA  meeting  in  Washington, 
D.C.  He  said  potential  of  a i r   transportation  had  not  been  realized, 
partly  because  aeronautics  R&D  had  not  fully  met  its  challenges,  and 
suggested :  ( 1) aeronautics  researchers  and  socioeconomists coopera- 
tively  analyze  possible  a i r   transportation  approaches  to  provide  basis 
for  most  effective  R&D  program;  ( 2 )   emphasis  on  theoretical  analy- 
sis  in  all  sciences of  concern  to  aeronautics  be  greatly  increased;  and 

38 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

February  13 

(3 )   increased  experimental effort  be  directed  toward  solving problem 
NASA  LAR  
of  system  integration.  (P rog ram ;   AIAA  Paper  68-217; 
VII/14) 
' Air  Force Chief  of  Stag Gen.  John  P.  McConnell announced renaming  of 
Bunker  Hill AFB,  Ind.,  to  Grissom AFB  in  honor  of  Astronaut  Virgil  I. 
Grissom  (L /c ,   USAF)  who  was  born  in  Mitchell, Ind.,  graduated  from 
Purdue Univ.,  w a s   first astronaut o r  cosmonaut to make  a  second space 
flight, and  died  in  Apollo  fire  Jan.  27,  1967.  (DOD   Release  151-68) 
' NASA  issued 20 RFPS for  final design of  two ATS  satellites. Of  two  contract- 
tors  selected  to  develop  final  design, one  would  be  designated  to  build 
spacecraft. Planned  for  launch  in  early  19709,  two  satellites  carrying 
communications,  navigational,  and  meteorological  experiments  would 
be  placed  in  synchronous  equatorial  orbit  a t   22,300-mi  altitude  by 
Atlas-Centaur booster.  Current  program  of  five  ATS  launches  had  two 
successes  in  three  launches;  remaining  two  (ATS-D  and  -E)  would  be 
launched in  June 1968 and in mid-1969.  (NASA  Release 68-31) 
' NASA  awarded  Boeing  Co.  Space  Div.  $3,064,946  cost-plus-incentive-fee 
contract,  effective through  September, f o r   continued prelaunch  systems 
analysis  and  integration  for  first  manned  Apollo/Saturn  V  launch 
vehicle. Contract brought  total for Saturn V  systems integration  contract 
to $200 million.  ( MSFC  Release 68-29) 
' ERC  scientists Dr.  Lothar  Frenkel  and  Thomas E.  Sullivan  and  Bell  Tele- 
phone  Laboratories  scientists  M.  A.  Pollack  and  T.  J.  Bridges  had 
measured  frequency  of  laser  light  with  error  margin  of  about  20  parts 
in  1 billion.  They  viewed  experiments  as  important  step  toward  new 
measurement  of  speed of  light,  a  fundamental physical  constant, and  of 
distances of  space.  ( ERC  Release 68-3) 
February  15:  Some  25  Mexican  and  Brazilian  scientists  began  four-month 
study  course  a t   MSC  to  learn  how  aircraft-borne sensors  could  enable 
them to map natural resources. Program,  initial step toward development 
of  earth  resources satellites which would carry  sensors for  international 
exchange of  data,  included  12-wk technical  course  taught  by  Univ.  of 
Michigan instructors under $92,000 contract;  6 -w k  field  trip  to  Govern- 
ment  and  university  sensor  development  centers;  and  additional  2-wk 
study  a t   MSC.  After  completing program,  scientists  would  initiate  test 
programs  for  remote  sensing  techniques  in  their  countries,  first  with 
NASA  aircraft and then with native-owned aircraft.  ( H .  Chron, 2/15/68; 
AP, N Y T ,  2/16/68,1) 
' John D.  Hodge,  MSC,  and  Dr.  George  F.  Pezdirtz,  LARC,  received  Arthur 
S. Flemming Award, presented annually to  10 outstanding young men  in 
the  Federal  Government.  Pezdirtz  had  developed  pyrones,  new  family 
of  polymer  plastics,  and  Hodge  had  been  flight  director  of  manned 
flight  missions  beginning  with  Project  Mercury.  (NN ;   PD ,   2/19/68, 
289-90) 
' INTELSAT  comsats  had  carried  heaviest  load  of  traffic  across  Atlantic  in 
their  history  during  interruption  of  service on  two  transatlantic  cables, 
ComSatCorp  announced. With  cooperation  of  earth  stations  overseas, 
ComSatCorp used  177 additional  circuits  on  Zntelsat  I  and  114. Satel- 
lites and  stations  functioned precisely.  (ComSatCorp Release 68-6) 
' Current  U S .   aerospace 
test 
facilities  were  becoming  outdated, 
AFSC  Commander,  Gen.  James  Ferguson,  told  Los  Angeles  Chapter  of 

39 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
February  15 
American  Ordnance  Assn.  Warning  that  U.S.  was  “stretching  present- 
day facilities to a thin point  and reaching  a limit in   . . . ability to  ‘make 
do’  on a year  to  year basis,”  Gen. Ferguson urged  that  an  “imaginative, 
comprehensive, long-range  plan”  be  instituted  for  design, development, 
and acquisition of  new facilities. Major  facility needs,  he said, included: 
wind  tunnel  for  testing  VTOL  aircraft  over  entire  performance  range, 
‘ 200-ft vacuum chamber  capable of  simulating space  environment,  shock 
interaction facility to simulate aerodynamic flow and strong shock gener- 
ated  over  warhead  models  and  true-temperature  wind  tunnel  (TRIPL- 
TEE )   to   duplicate  flight  conditions  a t   hypersonic  speeds  and  tempera- 
tures.  (Text) 
’ Dr.  Stephen  J.  Lukasik,  Director  of  Nuclear  Test  Detection  in  DOD’S  Ad- 
vanced  Research  Projects  Agency  (ARPA)  and  Acting  ARPA  Deputy 
Director,  was  appointed  &PA  Deputy  Director.  ( DOD  Release  157-68) 
’ USAF  Space  and  Missile  Sybtems  Organization  awarded  General  Electric 
Co.  $2,600,000  increment  to  a  previously  awarded  contract f o r   reentry 
vehicle flight testing.  ( DOD  Release 162-68) 
February  16:  President  Johnson  at  news  conference  announced  that  resig- 
nations  of  A.  B.  Trowbridge  as  Secretary  of  Commerce  and  Charles 
Murphy  as  member  of  Civil  Aeronautics  Board  had  been  accepted. 
With  Senate approval,  Trowbridge would be  succeeded by  C.  R.  Smith, 
Chairman  of  Board  of  American  Airlines, and Murphy,  who would  be- 
come  consultant  to  President,  by  John  H.  Crooker  of  law  firm  Full- 
bright, Crooker, Freeman & Bates.  ( P D ,  2/19/68,295-300) 
’ National  Sporting  Aviation  Council,  representing  over  80,000  sporting 
aviation  enthusiasts,  was  formed  within  NAA to  promote  progress  and 
development of  sport  aviation in  U.S.  and  to  encourage worldwide  par- 
ticipation  through  FA I .   (NAA  N ew s )  
’ Flight  of  Soviet heavy  turboprop  Bear  aircraft  had  made  most  southern 
penetration  over  North  American  waters,  coming  close  to  Newfound- 
land  coast  in   early  February,  Charles  W.  Corddry  reported  in   Balti- 
more  Sun.  According  to  DOD  officials,  flight was  closest  to  date  but  was 
not  first;  several  Soviet  aircraft  had  been  detected  75-100  mi  from  
Newfoundland coast since January.  (Corddry, B Sun, 2 /17 /68 ,1)  
February  17: President  Johnson  announced  appointment  of  Dr.  Philip Han- 
dler, Chairman  of  Dept.  of  Biochemistry a t  Duke Univ.  Medical  Center, 
and  Dr.  Herbert  F.  York,  Jr.,  professor  of  physics  a t  Univ.  of  Califor- 
nia  (San  Diego),  to  four-year  terms  on  President’s  Science  Advisory 
Committee.  ( P D ,  2/26/68,312-3) 
February  18 :  U.S.S.R.  would  increase pace  of  its space program in   prepara- 
tion  for  manned  circumlunar  flight,  John  N.  Wilford  reported  in   New 
Y o rk   T ime s .  Although  no  official  Soviet  flight  schedules  had  been  an- 
nounced,  informed  sources  speculated  that  U.S.S.R.  would  conduct 
manned  earth-orbital flight, possibly within  three months,  during which 
cosmonauts  in   redesigned  Soyuz  spacecraft  would  practice  rendezvous 
with  another  vehicle;  unmanned  circumlunar  flight  during  summer 
1968; and  manned  flight  in   fall  1968, in  which  cosmonauts o r   animals 
would  circle  moon  in  Soyuz  spacecraft  and  return  to  earth.  (Wilford, 
N Y T ,   2/18/68,  18) 
February  19:  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  fired  i ts   1,OOOth  sounding 
rocket. Aerobee  150 launched  from WSMR  carried  Lockheed  Missiles  & 
Space CO, payload  to 97.9-mi  (160.5-km)  altitude to  obtain quantitative 

40 

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1968 

February  19 

measurements of  spectrum and  intensity  of  solar  x-ray flux  in 2- to  30- 
kev  interval with  eight  proportional  counter  x-ray sensors,  solar  aspect 
sensors, and  yo-yo despin  unit.  Rocket  and   instrumentation  performed 
satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt SRL;  GSFC  Historian) 
“The  successful completion of  the  current  phase  of  the  automated  explo- 
ration  of  the Moon  and  our  planetary  successes to  date provide  the  ca- 
pability,  experience,  and  framework  for  the  next  step  forward  in  the 
exploration  of  the  planets,”  NASA  Associate  Administrator  f o r   Space 
Science  and  Applications, Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  told  House  Committee 
on  Science and  Astronautics’  Space Science and  Applications Subcom- 
mittee.  Advanced  Planetary  Mission  Technology  ( APMT)   effort,  begun 
in  Fiscal Year  1968 at the conclusion of  the Mariner  V,  Lunar  Orbiter, 
and  Surveyor  Programs,  and  deferral  of  Voyager  was  “directed  a t  
planning  and  technology  for  potential  planetary  missions  in  the  early 
1970’s.”  Emphasis  had  shifted  from  automated  to  manned  exploration 
and  return  of  lunar  samples.  “Regardless  of  missions  planned  by  the 
U.S.S.R.  during  the  opportunities  in  1969, 1971, and  1973,”  Dr.  Nau- 
gle said, NASA’s  “systematic approach  . . . will be meaningful and more 
likely  to  be  complemented by  the  U.S.S.R.  missions  than  duplicative.” 
(Testimony) 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  in  statement  before  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astro- 
nautics’ Manned Space Flight  Subcommittee, stressed urgency  of  fund- 
ing  Apollo Applications and  advanced missions programs  in  continuing 
“this  country’s  position  as  a  space pioneer.”  These  programs,  he  said, 
are  a n   investment in  our  national  posture  and  the  future  of  manned 
space  flight  . . .  [and  provide]  the  opportunity  to  stabilize  the 
( 6  
manned  space flight program  so  that  i t  can  effectively and efficiently re- 
spond  to  the  challenges  of  the  next  decade.  We  have  the  resources, the 
facilities,  the  people,  and  the  knowledge  of  Apollo  upon  which  to 
build,  and  the  crucial  question  posed  by  this  minimum  request  for 
Apollo  Applications is  whether  we  are  going  to  pursue  the  manned  ex- 
ploration  of  space.  . . . Man  will  prevail  in  space. On  that  there  can  be 
no  serious  question.  The  only  question  is  whether  they  will  be  Ameri- 
cans.’,  (Testimony) 
Dr.  Abe  Silverstein,  LeRC  Director,  described  progressive  decline  of 
LeRC  funding  from  peak  $389.2  million  in   FY  1965 to   $242.4  million 
in  FY  1967,  to  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Ad- 
vanced  Research  and  Technology  Subcommittee.  Dollar  value  of  pro- 
curement  had  decreased,  from  $324.5  million  in  FY  1964  to  $211.6 
million  in  FY  1967, while  workload was  maintained  and  lead  time  re- 
duced.  Power  usage  had  increased  “but  costs  had  declined  signifi- 
cantly.”  However  in   last  several  years,  “funds  available  for  mainte- 
nance  had  been  less  than  those  believed  necessary  for  proper  upkeep 
and  repair.”  In   long  run,  Dr.  Silverstein said,  delays “may  prove more 
costly to the Government.”  (Testimony) 
USN  Aquanauts  Fernando  Lug0  and  Don  C.  Risk, wearing  standard  neo- 
prene  wet  suits  and  Mark  VI11  breathing  apparatus,  dived  to  record 
1,025-it simulated  ocean  depth  and,  with  three  other  aquanauts,  accu- 
mulated  record  48  hr  each  at  825-ft depth  during  tests  a t  Washington, 
D.C.,  Navy Yard.  Experiment was  in  preparation  for  USN’S  60-day Sea- 

4 1  

February  19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

lab I11  experiment in underwater living scheduled to begin  in  fall  1968. 
(DOD Release 180-68) 
' R/A  John  E.  Clark  (USN,  Ret.),  former  Commandant  of  Twelfth  Naval 
District  in  San  Francisco,  became  JPL  Deputy  Director.  He  had  been 
Commander  of  Naval  A i r   Missile  Test  Center  (2954),  ARPA  Deputy 
Director  (195&61),  and  Commander  of  PMR  (1961-65).  ( J P L  Lab- 
O ra to ry ,  2/68,  3) 
' Jodrell  Bank  Observatory  Director,  Sir  Bernard  Lovell,  claimed  explo- 
sion  of  Soviet spacecraft  in  orbit  during  1962 Cuban missile  crisis  led 
U.S.  to believe U.S.S.R.  was  launching massive ICBM  attack  and warned 
that  World  War  I11 could  be  triggered  by  misidentified  space  debris 
falling to earth.  (W News ,  2/20/68,  3 ;  S BD ,  2/20/68,281) 
' U.S.S.R.  was  closing  its  missile  gap  and  could  equal  U.S.  1,054-ICBM 
force by mid-1969, according to DOD   sources. Between October  1966 and 
October 1967 Soviet ICBM  force had  increased from 340 to 720 missiles; 
currently, U.S.S.R.  had more than 720 ICBM  sites in operation and about 
280 under  construction. In  addition,  U.S.S.R  was  reportedly  developing 
new  16-tube  nuclear  submarines,  missiles  that  could  travel  long  dis- 
tances underwater, mach  3 interceptor  aircraft,  and mobile, solid-fueled 
ICBMS.  (Beecher,  N Y T ,   2/19/68,  1 ;   2/20/68,  18; Wilson,  W Po s t ,  
2 /2 0 /68 ,1 )  
' Preliminary  to  joint  NASA-WAF 
flight  testing,  X-24  manned  lifting-body 
vehicle built  by  Martin  Marietta  Co.  had  been  sent to  ARC  for  full-scale 
wind-tunnel tests,  to begin  Feb.  26,  FRC  announced. Prime  purpose was 
to  verify  aerodynamic  predictions  obtained  from  small-scale  model 
tests.  (FRC   Release, 5-68) 
February  20:  U.S.S.R.  launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCZZ  entered 
orbit with 456-km (283.3-mi)  apogee, 211-km (131.1-mi)  perigee, 91.2- 
min  period,  and  48.4"  inclination  and  reentered  March  24.  Cosmos 
CCZZZ  entered  orbit  with  1,203-km  (747.5-mi)  apogee,  1,186-km 
(736.9-mi)  perigee,  109.2-min period,  and  74"  inclination.  Both  satel- 
lites  performed  satisfactorily.  (UPI ,   P  Znq,  2/21/68;  SBD ,   2/21/68, 
294;  2/23/68,300;  GSFC  S SR ,  2/29/68;  3/31/68) 
' NASA  announced  Apollo  6  would  be  launched  no  earlier  than  March  21  
in second unmanned test flight of  command and  service modules on  Sat- 
urn  V.  First  Saturn V  had  been  launched successfully Nov.  9,  1967. 
Ten-hour,  earth-orbital  mission  would  include  ( 1 )   5X -m i n   second 
burn  of  3rd-stage engine to  provide  279,000-mi flight into  space on  16- 
day  elliptical  earth  o rb i t ;   (2 )   separation  and  flight  of  Apollo  space- 
craft  to  13,824-mi altitude,  using  4-min retro-burn of  spacecraft's  main 
propulsion  system;  and  (3)  high-speed  spacecraft  reentry  into  earth's 
atmosphere simulating lunar mission return.  (NASA Release 68-37) 
' Surveyor   VZZ,  on  the  moon,  stopped operating  22  h r   before  nominal  sun- 
set  time.  Spacecraft,  launched  Jan.  7,  had  responded  to  turn-on  com- 
mands  Feb.  12, transmitted  45  200-line TV  pictures,  and  obtained  22 
h r  of  useful data  from  alpha-scattering instrument, but  performance be- 
fore  signal  loss  indicated  that  appreciable  functional  degradation  had 
occurred  during  preceding  lunar  night.  (NASA  P ro j   Off;  AP,  B  Sun, 
2/22/68,  A5) 
' Explorer  X X X V Z   (Geos   ZZ), launched  Jan.  11, became  fully  operational, 
having  achieved  orbit  well  within  specifications.  With  launch  of  this 
spacecraft, Thrust-Augmented Delta had  accomplished record 23rd  con- 

42 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

February  20 

secutive, successful launch.  Spacecraft  would  support  128  global  obser- 
vation  stations  which  used  both  electronic  and  optical  geodetic  instru- 
mentation.  (NASA P ro j  Off) 
Dr.  Bruce  C.  Murray,  Cal  Tech  associate prefessor  of  planetary  science, 
told  Space  Science  and  Applications Subcommittee of  House  Commit- 
tee  on  Science and Astronautics  i t  would  be  tragic  i f   U S .   were  to  “ig- 
nore  the  challenge and  the  opportunity”  of  planetary  exploration.  He 
urged  sustained  eTploration  program  competitive  with  U.S.S.R.  “We 
need  not  always  be  first,  but  we  must  not  always be  second.”  He  saw 
“real  possibility  of  Soviet Mars  lander  attempts  as  early  as  1969” and 
other  attempts  a t   planetary  firsts.  (NASA  Auth  Hearings;  Randal,  W 
star, 3/7/68,  A12) 
a Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  engineer  John  W.  Jones  was  granted  patents 
3,369,455  and  3,369,485  for  new  rocket-launching technique  with  po- 
tential  military  and  space applications. Rockets  encased  in  liquid-filled 
plastic  sheaths  were  fired  from  a  gun,  after  which  sheath  fell  away, 
solid  propellant  ignited,  and  rocket  continued  on  its  own  power.  Jones 
said  high-altitude  research  probes  could  be  conducted  using  seven-  or 
eight-inch gun  at  one-half  to  one-fourth cost  of  present  methods.  Pro- 
tective sheath and liquid permitted use of  new  thin-walled military  rock- 
ets  which  had  better  flight  performance  and  traveled  twice  as  fast  a s  
standard artillery shell.  (Jones, N Y T ,  2 /24 /68 ,37 ;   Patent Off  PIO) 
National  Academy  of  Engineering  announced  award  of  its  third  Found- 
ers  Medal  to  Dr.  Vladimir  K.  Zworykin,  Honorary  Vice  President  of 
Radio Corporation  of  America  and  technical consultant  to  RCA  Labora- 
tories,  in  recognition  of  his  many  contributions  to  engineering  and  to 
betterment  of  human  society.  Dr.  Zworykin, known  a s   “Father  of  Tele- 
vision”  for  invention of  iconoscope, first  practical  picture  transmission 
tube,  was  cited  also  for  “his  role  in   developing  the  first  commercial 
electron  microscope  in  the  western  hemisphere  . . . promoting  the 
cause of  traffic  safety through  the  imaginative concept of  an  automated 
‘electronic highway,’ a n d .  . . working  . . . to bring about a union of  elec- 
tronics  and medicine.”  Medal would  be presented April 24  during  NAE’S 
4th Annual Meeting.  (NAE  Release, 2/20/68) 
USA  announced  plans  to   establish  Advanced  Ballistic  Missile  Defense 
Agency  which  would  combine  some  elements  of  DOD’S  Advanced  Re- 
search  Projects  Agency  (ARPA )   Office  of  Ballistic  Missile  Defense  and 
Nike-X  advanced  development.  Dr.  Patrick  J .   Friel,  Director  of  ARPA 
office, would be  appointed USA  Deputy Assistant Secretary and Director 
of  new  agency. He  would be  replaced  by  Dr.  David  E.  Mann.  (DOD  Re- 
lease 176-68) 
a Administration  would  soon  announce plans  to  slow  pace  of  SST  develop 
ment, Evert Clark reported  in  New  York  T imes .  He said industry sources 
believed  that  technical  reasons  would  be  cited  as  cause,  but  “the  real 
reason was  chiefly political-an 
attempt to  reduce  the request  for  funds 
. . . for  [FYI  1969 to  a  level  acceptable to  Congressional critics  of  the 
program.”  (Clark, N Y T ,  2/21/68) 
February  21 : NASA  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  was  launched  from 
Churchill  Research  Range  carrying  GSFC  experiment  to  study  auroral 
activity  as  i t   developed and  dissipated  for  comparison with  data  from 
similar  Nike-Apache launch.  Flight  was  unsuccesshl  because  of  unde- 

43  

February  21 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

termined failure related to  pitch/roll  couple. Radar and loss of  telemetry 
indicated payload breakup.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
Sixty-day  simulated  earth-orbited  mission,  using  Douglas  Missile  & 
Space Systems Div.’s  lz-ft-dia, 40-ft-long space cabin simulator, had  be- 
gun  fo r  four California college students-Jack  G.  Angaran,  Dennis Gi- 
roux,  Guy  H.  King,  and Robert  B.  Zeuschner.  NASA  OART  had  awarded 
$200,000 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. to  conduct what was  be- 
lieved  first  test  in  which  crew  would  subsist  in  space cabin  on  %lased 
water  and  oxygen  loop”  for  lengthy  period.  Students  would  use  re- 
claimed  water  and  oxygen  from  human  waste.  Additional  missions  to 
evaluation  of  integrated  li€e support  system  were  evaluation  of  waste 
management;  crew’s  ability  to maintain,  service and  repair  life support 
system;  and crew’s  physiological and  psychological reactions. Life sup- 
port  system  resembled  that  needed  f o r   three-year  spacecraft  mission. 
Crew’s  contact  with  outside  world  would  be  by  radio.  (DAC  Release 
67-172  ; S t .  Louis  G-D ,   2/21/68) 
Explaining  decision  to  develop  flight-rated  NERVA  engine  a t   75,000-lb 
rather  than  200,000-lb  thrust  level,  NASA  Manager  of  Space  Nuclear 
Propulsion  Milton Klein  told  House  Committee  on  Science and  Astro- 
nautics’  Advanced  Research  and  Technology Subcommittee that  lower 
level  would  be  suitable  for  most  missions in  which  nuclear  rocket  was 
significantly  advantageous.  It  was  “substantially  off -optimum  f o r  
manned  planetary  landing  missions,”  but  with  manned  exploration  de- 
layed,  “less  emphasis  is  now  properly  placed  upon  that  mission,  and 
is  appropriate.  .  . . The 
the  75,000-pound-thrust  NERVA  class 
75,000-pound-thrust NERVA  gives  somewhat better  payload  performance 
for  orbital  operations  missions which  start  from  low  Earth  orbit  and 
involve  a  single  Saturn  V  launch,”  but  its  use  for  manned  planetary 
missions  ‘Lentails a  significant  performance  penalty.”  Further  develop- 
ment might be required  “to extend operating  time  and  to  accommodate 
more  extensive clustering  and  staging  if  such  a  mission were  to  be  un- 
dertaken.”  (Testimony) 
Within  limited  budget,  NASA  was  “attempting  increased  emphasis  on  As- 
tronomy”  using manned spaceflight capabilities, NASA Associate Admin- 
istrator  for  Space  Science and  Applications, Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  told 
House Committee on  Science and  Astronautics’ Space Science and  Ap- 
plications  Subcommittee.  Advanced  studies  and  supporting  R&T  pro- 
grams would  be expanded in  FY  1969 to lay “ground  work  for  a  major 
program  in  space  astronomy.”  Flight  program  in  space  physics  was 
being  “supported  a t   reduced  levels,”  primarily  because  of  OGO  phase- 
out,  but  resources would  be  needed  “to  capitalize  on  analysis  of  data 
obtained.”  Decline  in  data  and  experiments,  despite  output  from  EX- 
plorer  and  Pioneer  programs,  might  be stemmed, but  NASA  %onsidered 
it  much  more  important  to   use  our  requested  resources  to  develop  a 
program  which will  enable us  to  fly  new  experiments, to  make  new  in- 
vestigations,  and  to  explore  new  regions  of  interplanetary  space.”  De- 
velopment  of  two   new  Pioneer  spacecraft  would  be  initiated  in   FY 
1969,  to  reach  past  Mars  and  toward  Jupiter,  with  first  launch  pro- 
posed for 1973.  (Testimony) 
NSF  announced award  of  first  nine  grants  under  National  Sea  Grant  Col- 
lege  Program  Act  of  1966 to  encourage  development  of  national  ma- 
rine  resources.  Grants,  which  totaled  nearly  $2  million,  included  three 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

February  21 

to  help higher  education  institutions  develop broadly  based  major  pro- 
grams fo r  increasing  utilization of  marine  resources and  six  to  support 
individual sea grant projects.  (NSF  Release 68-112) 
USAF  awarded  Big  Three  Industrial  Gas  and  Equipment  Co.  $1,156,845 
fixed-price contract  for  production  of  propellant  nitrogen  to   support 
Project Apollo a t  KSC.  (DOD  Release 183-68) 
February  21-22:  NASA  successfully  launched  six  Nike-Apache  sounding 
rockets  carrying  chemical  cloud  experiments  from  NASA  Wallops 
Station  between  6:17  pm  and  6:02  am  EST.  Seven  launches had  been 
scheduled, but  second launch  was  postponed  because  of  payload  prob- 
lems  [see Feb. 261. Rockets ejected vapor  trails during descent between 
50-  and  90-mi  (81- and  l g - k m )   altitudes  to  measure  wind  veloc- 
ities  and  directions  a t   various  altitudes  in  upper  atmosphere.  Nike- 
Apache launched a t  dawn carried  sodium experiment which created  red- 
dish-orange trail.  Other  five  payloads  consisted  of  one  triethylborane 
( TEB)   and  four  trimethyl-aluminum  ( TMA )   experiments which  formed 
pale  blue  and  green  clouds.  Rocket  carrying  TEB  was  equipped  with 
photometer to  observe airglow in  sunlight  for  vertical  profile  of  atomic 
oxygen.  Other  five  payloads  carried  Langmuir  probes  for  measuring 
electron  energy  distribution.  Data  were  obtained  by  photographing 
continuously  motions  of  trails  from  five  ground-based  camera  sites. 
Launches were  conducted for  GCA  Corp.  under  GSFC  contract.  (WS Re- 
lease 68-3;  NASA Release 68-32;  NASA  Rpt SRL) 
February 22:  SST  prototype construction would be delayed  one year  because 
of  design  changes  “which  would  result  in  significant  improvements in 
the  production  airplane,”  Boeing  Co.  President  William  M.  Allen  an- 
nounced.  Detailed  plans  of  recommended changes were being  prepared 
for  FAA  approval.  Although  present  design  could  result  in   airworthy 
flight-test aircraft,  FAA and  airline  reviewers had  concluded  that  proto- 
type  should have more  substantial  range  and  payload  “to  assure  i t   is  a 
sound  foundation  for  an  economically successful commercial aircraft.” 
First  flights now would  be in  1972.  (Boeing Release;  W P o s t ,  2/23/68, 
A3;  WSJ ,  2/23/68,  4 )  
February  23 : NASA  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  from 
Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of  Alaska experiment to  obtain 
data  on  horizontal  and  vertical  spatial  variation  of  auroral  light  emis- 
sions  and  relationship  between  their  intensities  and  volume  emission 
rates. Rocket and  instrumentation performance was  satisfactory and  ex- 
periment was successful. Peak altitude was not determined because radar 
lost track.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
0  President  Johnson  announced  appointment  of  Gen.  Maxwell  D.  Taylor 
(USA,  Ret.)  a s   Chairman  of  President’s  Foreign  Intelligence Advisory 
Board  to  succeed  Clark  M.  Clifford,  who  would  become  Secretary  of 
Defense.  (PD, 2 /26 /68 ,345 -6 )  
President  Johnson  nominated  B/G  Edmund  F.  O’Connor  (USAF ) ,   MSFC  
Director of  Industrial Operations, for promotion  to  Major  General. AS- 
signed  to  YASA  through  special  NASA-DOD  personnel  exchange  agree- 
ment  in  1964, Gen.  O’Connor  had  been  responsible  for  technical  and 
administrative management of  Saturn  IB  and  Saturn V  launch vehicles 
and Apollo Applications program.  ( MSFC Release 68-33) 
Soviet Defense Minister,  Marshal  Andrey  A.  Grechko,  speaking  a t   Mos- 
cow  ceremony ,marking 50th  anniversary  of  Soviet  armed  forces,  con- 

February 23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

firmed  reports  that  U.S.S.R.  had  greatly  expanded  its  ICBM  force  [see 
Feb.  191  and  emphasized  that  Soviet  armed  forces  had  been  modern- 
ized  to  emerge  victorious  in  nuclear  or  non-nuclear  war.  (Anderson, 
N Y T ,  2/24/68,  C8) 
February  23-24:  Results of  13 experiments carried  on board  Biosatellite  I I  
(launched  Sept.  7  and  recovered  Sept.  9,  1967)  were  discussed by  sci- 
entists at  NASA-NAS  symposium in Washington,  D.C.  Experimenters  re- 
ported  that  radiation  in  weightless state caused greater  damage  to  plant 
and  animal  organisms  than  radiation  on  earth.  Affected  most  severely 
by  weightlessness and  radiation  were  young  and  actively growing  cells 
and  tissues  and  cells  with  high  metabolic  activity.  Animal  cells  were 
least  affected by  weightlessness. Generally,  plants  had  difficulty main- 
taining  proper  orientation ; some  plant  structures,  mechanisms,  and 
biochemical  activities  were  affected. 
Analyses  of  effects  of  45-hr  flight  on  individual  experiments,  com- 
pared  with  control  group  on  earth,  revealed  that  pepper  plant  leaves 
twisted  and  curled  downward  and  wheat  seedling  roots  grew  upward 
and  sideways.  Radiation  experiments  showed:  wasp  nurse  cells  and 
primitive  egg  cells  slowed  activities,  allowing time  for  repair  of  radia- 
tion  damage;  two strains of bacteria  grew substantially  faster  and toler- 
ated  radiation  better,  and  viruses hosted  by  these bacteria  appeared  to  
be  less effective in  harming  bacteria  than  on  earth;  twice  as many  flour 
beetle  offspring died,  and  beetles  suffered  50%  more  of  characteristic 
wing  defect;  tradescantia  plant  had  greater  cell  death  and  pollen  abor- 
tion;  and both  adult  and  larval  stages of  vinegar  gnats  suffered greater 
chromosome damage.  (NASA   Release 68-35) 
February  24 :   House Government Operations  Committee said  in  report  that 
despite acute need to eliminate U S .  balance of  payments deficit, Govern- 
ment  continued  to  make  grants  for  foreign  research  projects  of  about 
$20  million  yearly-more 
than  $15  million  being  spent  in  developed 
countries.  Committee recommended  rigorous  scrutiny  of  dollar-financed 
projects  in  Japan,  Canada,  U.K.,  Sweden, Italy,  Australia,  France,  and 
West Germany.  (W  S ta r ,  2/24/68,  B9) 
*  U.S.S.R.  inaugurated  fifth permanent  Antarctic  research  station,  Bellings- 
hausen  station  on  King  George  Island,  according  to  Moscow  newspa- 
pers.  U.S.S.R.  thus  joined  U.K., Argentina,  and  Chile  in  operating  sci- 
entific bases  in  northernmost  and  warmest  part  of  Antarctica.  ( N Y T ,  
3 /6 /68 , 49 )  
February  25:  U.S.S.R.  would  probably  launch  several  spacecraft,  possibly 
containing  dogs, on  circumlunar  missions and  return  them  to  earth  be- 
fore  launching  manned  lunar  spacecraft,  Cosmonaut  Valery  Bykovsky 
said  in  Hungarian  Army  newspaper  interview. Quoted  in  Nephadsreg, 
he  said  that  first Soviet passengers around  moon might  be  offspring of 
space dog Laika. Manned spacecraft would  not  be  launched  until  neces- 
sary  experience had  been  gained.  (AP,  B Sun,  2/26/68,  A3) 
February  26:  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wal- 
lops  Station  ejected  triethylborane  ( TEB) vapor  trails  during  descent 
from 95.2-mi  (153.5-km)  altitude to  study nighttime airglow and varia- 
tions  in  wind  structure,  determine  vertical  profile  of  atomic  oxygen 
with  photometer,  and  measure  electron  energy  distribution  in   normal 
nighttime  ionosphere  with  Langmuir  probe.  Rocket  and  instrumenta- 
tion  performance was  satisfactory. Launch, postponed  Feb.  2 1  to   check 

46 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

February  26 

instrumentation  fo r  high voltage breakdown, was  one of  seven launches 
in  series  conducted  for  GCA  Corp.  under  GSFC  contract  [see  Feb. 
(NASA  Rpt SRL) 
21-22]. 
e  NASA  Deputy  Associate Administrator  for  Aeronautics,  OART,  Charles W. 
Harper,  in  statement  before  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astro- 
nautics,  Subcommittee  on  Advanced  Research  and  Technology,  ex- 
plained  NASA’s increased  emphasis  on  aeronautics.  Air  transportation 
“has  grown  to  dominate  the  long  range  transportation  systems”  and 
“has  created  a n   industry  of  great  importance  to  the  economic  strength 
of  the  nation,”  showing $850  million  in  export  value  in  first  10 mo  of 
1967, more  than  any  other  product,  according  to   Dept.  of  Commerce. 
NASA  planned  to  direct major  effort  at  providing  noise  suppression, in- 
creasing  aerodynamic and  propulsion efficiency  and  advanced avionics, 
while  avoiding  “major  new  airport  complexes”  by   increasing  develop- 
ment efforts for V/STOL  aircraft. 
Harper  presented FY  1969 aircraft  technology budget:  $91.3 million 
for  R&D,  $20.6  million  for  “other  NASA  support  applicable  to   aeronau- 
tics,’,  and  $54.5  million  for  administrative  operations  (AO)  (for  both 
OART  and  nOn-OART).  He  said,  “A  large  part  of  the  most  fundamental 
aeronautics  research  is  carried  out  by  NASA  scientists  using  NASA 
facilities.  . . . Without  this  continued  support  the  foundation  of  the 
whole  program  is  in  jeopardy  and  the  research  supported  by  R&D 
funds is much less effective.”  (Testimony) 
e Research  on  concepts for  high  lift  capability  for  STOL  aircraft  and  spe- 
cial  hover  and  speed  requirements for  VTOL  aircraft  would  continue  in 
M 1969,  NASA  Director  of  Aeronautical  Vehicles,  OART,  Albert  J. 
Evans  reported  to  House  Committee on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Ad- 
vanced  Research  and  Technology  Subcommittee.  Aircraft  noise  pro- 
gram  would  pursue  efforts  to   suppress  noise  by  acoustic  treatment  of 
engine nacelles  (with  results  expected  from  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp. 
and  Boeing  Aircraft  Co.  investigations by  October  1969  and  January 
1970) , by  engine redesign  (with construction of  engine  components  in 
Quiet  Research  Engine  Program  initiated  in  FY  1969 ) ,  and  by  opera- 
tional  techniques.  Major  NASA  program  in  flight  dynamics  and  propul- 
sion  in  support  of  SST  program  would  be  continued.  Phase  I11  of  Hy- 
personic Research Engine  ( HRE )   program, test  of  HRE  on X-15  in  flight 
a s   well  as  on  ground,  would  not  be  conducted  because  of  X-15  pro- 
gram  termination.  Major  emphasis  in  general-aviation  technology 
would  be  on  flight  safety,  with  flight tests of  “typical  twin-engine vehi- 
cle,,  a t   FRC  in  FY  1%9.  (Testimony) 
9  NASA  Associate  Administrator  fo r   Space  Science  and  Applications,  Dr. 
John  E.  Naugle,  presented  NASA’s bioscience  programs  to  House  Com- 
mittee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Space  Science  and  Applications 
Subcommittee.  Biosatellite  flights  Il  and  F,  30-day earth-orbiting  mis- 
sions  to  study  effects  of  space  environment  on  living  organisms,  were 
scheduled for  second and  fourth  quarters  of  1969 and  21-day flights C 
and  E  for  1970 and  1971.  Flights  would  test  reactions  of  central  ner- 
vous  system,  cardiovascular  system, metabolism,  performance,  and  be- 
havior  of  pigtailed monkey.  Gas  management system for  two-gas atmo- 
sphere would b e  flown for  first time in US. satellite.  (Testimony) 
Discovery by  MSFC  officials  of  tiny  welding  flaws  in  Saturn  V  2nd  stage 
had  prompted  scheduling  of  new  test  series  before  f igh t   could  be 

47 

February 26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

manned,  AP  reported.  Although  none  of  flaws  was  considered  serious 
enough  to  cause  failure,  cryogenic  prooftesting  would  be  conducted 
March  18-25  with  Saturn  V  fourth  flight  version.  (AP,  B  Sun, 
2/27/68,  A3;  AP,  W  Star,  2/27/68,  A5) 
*  Harold  T.  Luskin,  chief  advanced  design  engineer  a t   Lockheed-Califor- 
nia  Co.  and  former  AIAA  President,  w a s   named  NASA  Deputy  Associate 
Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  (Technical) , effective March 
18. Luskin  would  be  responsible for  ensuring  technical  excellence and 
would  share  responsibility  for  overall  planning  and  direction  of 
Manned  Space  Flight  Program  with  Associate  Administrator  for 
Manned Space Flight and his other deputies.  (NASA  Release 68-39) 
February 27:  NASA  Administrator  James E.  Webb  began  testimony on  Pres- 
ident’s  authorization  request  for  NASA’s FY  1969 budget  before  Senate 
Committee on  Aeronautical and  Space Sciences. He  outlined significant 
NASA  achievements and  said  “remarkable  series of  successes shows how 
f a r   we  have  come  since  the  beginning  of  the  Space  Age  ten  years 
ago.  . . . Today  . . . success  is  treated  almost  routinely,  no  matter 
how  difficult the task or how significant the achievement.” 
Describing budget as “a compromise,’, he  said President  “was forced, 
in spite of  his conviction as to  the  importance of  a larger  effort in  aero- 
nautics  and  space, to  accept reductions.  . . . This means  that  for  NASA 
1968  and  1969  are  . . . years  in  which  we  will  be  completing  pro- 
grams  started  in  previous  years  and  endeavoring  to  make  limited  fur- 
ther  advances. Under  these conditions  we  w i l l   devote a  major  effort  to 
stabilizing  our  organization  and  the  resource  base  we  have  built.” 
(Testimony) 
NASA’s university  program,  operating  a t   lower  level  because  of  reduced 
funding,  was  also changing  to  meet  changing  requirements,  NASA  ASSO- 
ciate  Administrator  for  Organization  and  Management  Harold  B.  Fin- 
ger  told  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences.  Em- 
phasis  in  predoctoral  trainee  grants  had  shifted  from  earlier  need  to 
replenish  “national  reservoir  of  engineers  and  scientists who  had  ad- 
vanced 
training 
in 
space  sciences” 
to  “current  and 
future 
needs  . . . for  engineers  trained  in  design  and  development  of  com- 
systems  . . . and 
plex 
engineering 
for 
people 
trained 
in 
management  . . . of  large-scale research  and  development programs.” 
Finger  declared  “importance  of  the  university participation  in  the  na- 
tion’s  space  program  is  equal  to  or   possibly  greater  now  than  in   the 
early  1960’s,” but  cited decreases in predoctoral  trainee grants  to  75 in  
FY 1968  from  about  800  in  1967  and  over  1,300  in  1966.  No  new 
funding  awards  for  new  university  facilities  were  anticipated  fo r   FY 
1968  or  FY  1969.  Multidisciplinary  research  had  been  reduced  to 
about one-half 1967 level. 
In  Technology Utilization program,  Finger  believed some of  greatest 
benefits  would  come  from  “the  storehouse  of  information  that  we  are 
building  that permits easy public access to  the large masses of  data  and 
information”  in  many disciplines.  (Testimony) 
NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Administration  William  E.  Lilly  pre- 
sented NASA’s FY  1969 administrative  operations  (AO)  budget  to  Sen- 
ate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He  said $648.2  mil- 
lion  was  requested  and  “the  same  stringent  measures  that  were  re- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
February  27 
quired  in N 1968 to  operate a t   a level  of  $628 million have been  con- 
tinued into FY 1969.” (Testimony) 
0  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Space  Science  and   Applications,  Dr. 
John  E.  Naugle,  testifying before House Committee on  Science and As- 
tronautics,  Space Science and Applications Subcommittee, said Nimbus 
B would  be  launched  in  meteorological flight  program  in  spring  1968. 
Nimbus  D  continued  on  schedule  fo r   1970  launch  a s   major  step  in  
charting  earth  atmosphere with  new  techniques.  Nimbus  E  and  F were 
planned for  1971 and  1973. First  of  next-generation meteorological sat- 
ellites  (Tiros M)  would b e  available for  launch  for  ESSA  in  1969, pro- 
viding  in  single spacecraft both  stored  picture  data  for  global  use  and 
local  readout  of  cloud  photos,  day  and  night.  Dr.  Naugle  foresaw  “in 
more distant future  the possibility that  several economic applications  of 
satellite technology  can  be  combined  on  single, multiple purpose  satel- 
lites,  thus  achieving eEonomy  through  the  sharing of  many  basic  space- 
craft systems.”  (Testimony) 
British  Minister  of  Technology  Anthony  W.  Benn  announced  in  House 
of  Commons  that  U.K.  would  underwrite  production  of  Anglo-French 
Concorde supersonic aircraft  with  $180- to  $240-million loan  for  work- 
ing  capital,  bringing  total  U.K.  commitment  to  more  than  $1 billion. 
He  later  revealed  first  test  flight  would  b e   delayed  until  summer  1968. 
First  flight  of  U.S.  SST had  been  postponed  until  1972  [see  Feb.  221. 
(Lee, NYT,  2/28/68,  5 )  
MIT physicist Dr.  Irwin  I.  Shapiro,  speaking a t   American Physical  Soci- 
ety  meeting  in  Boston,  said  he  and  associates had  successfully  tested 
refined  radar  technique  that  might  prove  validity  of  Einstein’s  general 
theory  of  relativity.  Using  20-ft-dia Haystack, Mass.,  dish  antenna,  sci- 
entists  observed  impulses  which  they  bounced  off  of  Venus  and  Mer- 
cury  as  planets  passed  behind  sun.  Results,  which  confirmed  theory’s 
prediction  that  signals would  be  slowed  down  slightly by   gravitational 
pull,  were  more  precise  than  those  from  previous  tests  but  were  not 
clear  enough  to  resolve  completely  debate  on  theory’s  validity.  Dr. 
Shapiro believed  greater  precision  could  be  achieved.  (Sullivan, NYT, 
2/28/68,  2 2 ;   O’Toole,  W Post, 2/28/68,  1 )  
NAA  Executive  Director,  M /G   B.  E.  Allen  (USAF, Ret.),  in   Washington, 
D.C.,  ceremony presented awards to  Allen Bourdon, William Diehl,  and 
Ernest  Hall, last  three  living  civilian  flight  instructors  of  World War  I 
air  service,  for  ‘‘their  patriotism,  devotion  to  duty,  and  capability  as 
pilots  [who performed]  an  outstanding  service toward  our  achievement 
of  victory in World War  I.”  (NAA   News) 
February 28:  NASA  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket 
launched  from 
Churchill  Research Range carried  Univ.  of  Alaska  experiment  to  183- 
mi  (295-km)  altitude  to  obtain  data  on  horizontal  and  vertical  spatial 
variation  of  auroral  light  emission  and  relationship  between  their  in- 
tensities  and  volume  emission  rates. Rocket  and  instruments  performed 
satisfactorily. Experiment was successful.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
0  NASA  Aerobee 150 MI  sounding  rocket launched  from .WSMR  carried  Cor- 
ne11  Univ.  experiment  to  106-mi  (170.6-km)  altitude  to  study  fa r   in- 
h a r ed   in   spectral  range  from  five  to   several  hundred  microns,  using 
mercury-, copper- and gallium-doped germanium and  antimonide  detec- 

49 

February 28 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1968 
tors.  Nikon  F  camera  monitored  instantaneous  rocket  aspect.  Rocket 
and instrumentation  performance was satisfactory.  (NASA Rpt SRL) 
XB-70  research  aircraft  flown  by  NASA  test  pilot  Fitzhugh L.  Fulton,  Jr., 
and  L/C  Emil Sturmthal  (USAF)  , reached mach  0.50  and  18,500-ft alti- 
tude.  Primary  objectives were  not  accomplished because main  landing 
gear  valve  malfunctioned;  low  speed  stability  da ta  were  obtained  dur- 
ing  1 -h r  51-min  flight.  (NASA  Proj  Off) 
Second  anniversary  of  Essa  11,  first  spacecraft  in  Tiros  Operational  Sat- 
ellite  (TOS )   system  and  first  to  carry  Automatic  Picture  Transmission 
(APT )   equipment  for  cloud-cover photos.  Satellite  was  still  operating 
satisfactorily.  ( GSFC Historian) 
Press  conference  on  preliminary  scientific  results  from  NASA’s Surveyor 
V I I ,  which  landed  on  moon Jan.  9,  revealed spacecraft could make safe 
landing  in   highland  area  with  “major  ejecta  blanket”  ( r im   of  debris 
ejected  from  center  of  c ra te r ) .  Data  indicated Tycho  region  of  moon’s 
surface contained  larger  rocks,  fewer  craters,  and  thinner  debris  layer 
than  did  maria.  Fine particles  and  rocks near  Tycho crater  had  higher 
albedo,  o r   lighter  color.  Iron  content  was  lower,  accounting  for  lower 
density.  In   Tycho  region,  where  iron  group  of  elements was  less  con- 
centrated,  reflection  of  light  from  moon’s  surface  was  greater  than 
from  area  where  iron  group  elements existed  in   greater  concentration. 
Low  iron  content  was  “probably  strongest  direct  evidence”  that  moon 
had  undergone chemical fractionation,  suggesting i t   “has  been  hot,  has 
been  melted  at  least  partially,  and  has been  differentiated into  different 
types  of  rock.”  (Transcript;  Sehlstedt, B  Sun, 2/29/68,  AS;  W  News ,  
3/21/68) 
February  29:  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Space Science and Applica- 
tions,  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  described  OSSA  programs  before  Senate 
Committee on  Aeronautical and  Space Sciences. Three-year budget  his- 
tory  of  Space  Applications  program  was  one  of  very  few  in  OSSA 
“showing a  steady rise”  and increase for  FY  1969 was  primarily  due to 
increase  in  Earth  Resources  Survey  Program. 
“Together with  user  agencies-the  Departments of  Agriculture, Com- 
merce,  Interior,  and  Navy-we 
are  studying  the  feasibility  of  applying 
space technology  and  techniques to  such Earth  resources disciplines a s  
agriculture and  forestry  resources ; hydrology  and  water  resources ; ge- 
ography,  cartography,  and  cultural  resources ; and  oceanography  and 
tronic  and  electro-optical sensors  over  geographical  areas  . . . to   per- 
marine  resources.  Data  a re   now  being  obtained  by  flying  with  elec- 
mit  correlation  of  remote  sensor  data  w i t h   actual  conditions.  . . . To 
complement the  acquisition  of  sample data  in  preparing  for  future  sys- 
tems,  we  intend  to  initiate  a  definition  and  economic benefit  study  in  
Fiscal  Year  1969  of  an   automated  spacecraft  system  called  Earth  Re- 
sources Technology Satellite.”  (Testimony) 
NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition  Gerald 
M.  Truszynski, testifying  on  FY 1969  budget  before  House  Committee 
on  Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and  Technology Sub- 
committee, cautioned:  “The  many  actions we  have  taken  to  reduce  op- 
erating  costs have,  however, lowered the  level of  support we  provide  to  
the flight projects.  I n  our  judgment,  further  reductions  are not  possible 
without  reducing  network  reliability  to  the  point  of  jeopardizing  the 
success of  flight missions.”  (Testimony) 

50 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
February  29 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  in  statement  before  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and 
Space  Sciences,  pointed  to  “establishment  of  a  Manned  Space  Flight 
Safety Office  . . . to  focus all  our  safety activity a t  the highest level of 
management.”  NASA,  he  said,  was  ensuring  “that  quality  assurance  and 
reliability  officials  have  direct  access  to  contractor  management  and 
NASA  management.”  (Testimony) 
Apo l lo   and  ApoZZo  App l ica t ions ,   staff  study  released  by  House  Commit- 
tee on  Science and  Astronautics’ Subcommittee on  NASA  Oversight,  in- 
cluded  statement  by  Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex.),  Subcommittee 
Chairman:  “. . . the general posture of  the  programs  is  good  [but]  the 
Apollo  program,  with  its  inherent  complexity, has  had   and  can  be  ex- 
pected  to  have  a  variety  of  problems.  Yet  this  study  identifies  the  fact 
that  confidence in  the  governmental-industrial team  accomplishing this 
work is well placed.” 
Report  found  “that  the  NASA  industry  team  is  continuing  to  effec- 
tively employ its  resources in  the  solution of  those problems which cur- 
rently  face  the  program.  NASA  has  indicated  that,  given  the  stretchout 
in  the  Apollo  program  caused  by  the  Apollo  204  accident,  NASA  is  not 
constrained  by  total  funding  f o r   the  Apollo  program  during  [FYI 
1968. The continued  reduction  in   total  effort in   the  Apollo program  a s  
the  program  passed  its  peak  effort in  fiscal  year  1967  is  beginning  to 
cause dislocation  in   the contractor  and  NASA  center  effort  to  the  extent 
that  personnel that  will  be  needed  during  the  flight  portion  of  the  pro- 
gram  may  not  be  available in  the  event  a  major  flight  problem  occurs. 
Timely  support  f o r   the  Apollo  Applications  program  and  other  post- 
Apollo  effort  could  have  a  major  effect  on  minimizing  this  problem.” 
(Text) 
0  President  Johnson  presented  Presidential  Medal  of  Freedom,  highest  ci- 
vilian  award,  to  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  S.  McNamara  at  White 
House ceremony.  McNamara, who  would  head  World  Bank, was  cited 
for  administering  DOD  for  seven  years  and  “unifying  our  strength  so 
that  w e   might  respond  effectively  wherever  the  security  of  our  free 
world w a s  challenged.”  (AP, NYT ,  2 /29 /68 ,3 ;   PD ,  3 /4 /68 ,387-8)  
0  Iowa  State Univ.  scientist Dr.  James  A.  Van  Allen  said  that  although  he 
was  not  outright  opponent of  manned  space flight, so  fa r  man  had  done 
“that  is  not  unimportant.”  He 
nothing  in  space but  survive-although 
advocated  Jupiter  exploration  using  unmanned  flyby,  which  he  said 
could  be  accomplished  in  1972.  He  felt  there  was  little chance  Jupiter 
could  have  life  forms  of  any  sort,  but  he  wanted  this  large  planet  (10  
times  diameter  of  earth)  “put  on  an   equal  footing  with  Mars  and 
Venus in  U S .   exploration.”  His  opposition to man  in  space was  based 
on  dominance of  manned  flight in  national  funding to   detriment  of  un- 
manned  missions  that  could  have  returned  major  scientific  benefits. 
(Miles, L A  T imes ,  2/29/68) 
LaRC  Director  Dr.  Floyd  L.  Thompson  was  appointed  Special  Assistant 
to  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  and  head  of  NASA  Hq.  Interim 
Working  Group  to  evaluate  future  manned  spaceflight projects.  LaRC 
Deputy Director Charles J. Donlan would serve as Acting Director in Dr. 
Thompson’s  absence.  (NASA  Release 68-41;  W  Po s t ,   3/1/68,  A7) 
During  February:  NASA  published  1967  Summer  Study  of  Lunar  Science 

51 

During  February 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

and  Exploration  (NASA  SP-157),  results of  July 31-Aug.  13,1%7,  con- 
ference a t  Univ.  of  California  in  Santa  Cruz. Conference recommended 
NASA:  ( 1 )   develop lunar  flying unit  ( LFU)  , Saturn  V  dual-launch capa- 
bility,  and  dual-mode local  scientific survey  module  (LSSM) for  lunar 
suri‘ace mobility;  ( 2 )  make  available in  1970-75  Block  I1  Surveyor o r  
another  system  capable  of  deploying  numerous  experiments;  ( 3 )   in- 
crease total  returned  payload  to  400  lb  so  that  a t  least  250  lb  of  lunar 
samples could  be  returned  on  Apollo  Applications  (a) missions;  (4) 
increase flexibility of  ALSEP  stations’ design, possibly by  adopting mod- 
ular  concept;  ( 5 )   provide for continuous telemetry coverage of  all pay- 
load  elements  and  operations;  (6)   develop  subsatellite system  for  de- 
ploying  instruments  in  close lunar  orbit;  ( 7 )   implement any  extension 
of  Apollo  science  program  by  open  solicitation  of  experiments  from 
scientific community;  (8)  undertake  strong  programs  in   scientific in- 
strument  definition  and  development  and  in  lunar  supporting  research 
and  technology;  (9)   establish  position  of  Project  Scientist  within 
manned  spaceflight program;  (10) include  ability  in  field  geology a s  a 
major  requirement  for  astronauts  who  would  land  on moon;  (11) con- 
duct  immediate and  intensive program  of  detailed mission  analyses f o r  
prime  lunar  landing  sites  and  traverses  suggested  by  the  conference ; 
and  (12 )   include in  lunar  surface  studies  observations of  micrometeor- 
oid  environment,  radio-frequency  noise  levels,  suri‘ace impedance  and 
conductivity, lunar  ionosphere, gamma  rays  and  x-rays, soil mechanics, 
thermal  effects, and  contaminants.  (NASA   SP-157;  AP, NYT ,   2/19/68, 
17 )  
Discovery  of  gamma  radiation  from  celestial  sources by  AFOSR-supported 
group a t  Rice Univ.,  using  “gamma-ray telescope,”  was  reported  by  Dr. 
R.  C .   Haymes  in  OAR  Research  Rev iew .   Telescope  tracked  celestial 
sources in  diurnal  motions  across  sky with  pointing  system  also  devel- 
oped  by  Rice  group.  The  two   gamma-ray  sources,  discovered  in  1967 
flight  from  Scientific Balloon  Flight  Station  of  National  Center  for  At- 
mospheric  Research,  Texas,  were  found  in  Crab  Nebula  and  Cygnus. 
(OAR  Research Rev iew ,  2/68,1-2) 
U.K.  was  urged  to   join  “the  mainstream  of  space  development”  by 
Council  of  the  British  Interplanetary  Society.  Council specifically criti- 
cized  13th report  from Parliamentary Estimates Committee, “Space  Re- 
search  and  Development,”  fo r  its  statement that  U.K.  “should not  take 
part  in  the  CETS  [Confkrence  Europkene  sur  les  T616communications 
par Satellites] programme for a television distribution  satellite.” 
Council said  U.K.  should assess fully  future opportunities  for  collab- 
oration  with  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  and  recommended  multiaction  course 
for  U.K.  to  conduct  international  and  national  space  activities.  Con- 
cluding  that  “lack  of  purpose  a t   the  political  level,  and  a  stubborn  re- 
fusal to establish a viable European space programme” had  caused pres- 
ent  confused, unplanned,  and  ineffectual  situation,  Council  urged  that 
U.K.  seize  opportunity  to  create  family  of  satellite launchers  of  maxi- 
mum  utility  to  extend “many  branches  of  space competence with  other 
types of  applications satellites.”  ( S / F ,  2/68,  56-7) 

52 

March  1968 

March  1 : WAF 
launched  navigational  satellite  irom  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Scout  booster  into  orbit  with  711-mi  (lY4d4?.2-km) apogee,  640-mi 
( 1 , 0 3 0 . 0 - h )   perigee,  106.9-min period,  and  89.9”  inclination.  (GSFC 
SSR ,  3/15/68;  Pres Rpt 6 8 )  
NASA  test  pilot  William  H.  Dana  flew  X-15  No.  1  rocket  research  air- 
craft  to  104,500-ft altitude and  2,898 mph  (mach 4.36)  from Edwards 
AFB  to  check  out  aircraft’s  electrical systems  and  test  newly  developed 
spray  foam insulation planned  for  use  on  2nd  stages  of  Saturn V  rock- 
ets  beginning  with  vehicle  eight.  Foam  was  much  lighter  than  insula- 
tion  previously  used  to  maintain  low  temperatures  required  for  cry- 
ogenic  propellants  used  in  Saturn  V.  (X-15  P ro j   Off; MSFC   Release 
68-69) 
House  Committee  on  Science and  Astronautics  decided  on  $153-million 
cut  in  NASA’s authorization  request  of  $4.37  billion  for  N  1969. Re- 
ductions  included  cut  from  $48.3  million  to  $11.7  million  for  nuclear 
rocket  program  [Advanced  Research  and  Technology  Subcommittee 
had  recommended  cut  of  entire  $48.3 million],  $36.5  million  from  un- 
manned  space program,  and  $60.3 million  from request  of  $2.8 billion 
for  manned  space  flight  program.  (AP, W S tar ,   3/2/68,  A3;  W  Po s t ,  
3L2/68,  A10;  HR 1181,3/19/68) 
President  Johnson,  accompanied  by  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb, 
visited MSC  and  announced plans  for  new  Lunar  Science Institute  to  be 
constructed under  $580,000 grant  to  NAS  and  operated by  NAS  and  Rice 
Univ.  in Houston. “We have  invested billions  of  dollars  during  the  past 
10  years  in  our  efforts  in  space  .  . .  [and]  I  am  certain  that  as  future 
generations look back  on  our  incredible decade, they w i l l  be unanimous 
in  their  belief  that  the  treasure  that  we  have  dedicated  . . . was  the 
most  significant  and  important  investment  ever  made  by   any  people. 
We  are truly  reaching for  the  stars.”  ( P D ,  3/11/68,  410-2;  Kilpatrick, 
W  Pos t ,   3 /2 /68 , 1 ;   AP, N Y T ,  3 /2 /6 8 ,2 1 ;   MSC  Roundup, 3/15/68,  1) 
Former  NASA  Deputy Administrator  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  became 
visiting  professor  in  MIT’S  Dept.  of  Aeronautics and  Astronautics  and 
a t   Sloan  School  of  Management.  He  would  continue  as  part-time  con- 
sultant to NASA.  (Bo s ton  G lobe ,  3/6/68;  SBD ,  3 /11 /68 ,51 )  
Clark  M.  Clifford was  sworn  in  by  U S .   Chief  Justice  Earl  Warren  as 
Secretary  of  Defense,  replacing  Robert  S .   McNamara,  new  head  of 
World  Bank.  (Sheehan,  Finney,  N Y T ,   3/3/68,  E3;  PD ,   3/4/68, 
395-6) 
.March  2:  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Church- 
ill  Research  Range  carried  Univ.  of  California  payload  to  161.9-mi 
(260.6-km)  altitude  to  study  flux-energy-spectrum pitch-angle distribu- 
tion  and  time  and  space  variation  of  mirroring  and  precipitating 
charged  particles  in  auroral  zone.  Launch  was  one  of  series  of  four. 
Apogee was  11%. below  predicted;  telemetry  was  satisfactory.  Electro- 

53  

March  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

static  analyzers  performed  satisfactorily  and  good  data  were  obtained. 
Plasma  experiment on boom was  100%  successful. Boom deployed late, 
providing  satisfactory  data  from  last  30%  of  flight.  Electric  field  did 
not produce necessary data.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
*  NASA  Javelin  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill  Research  Range 
carried  Rice  Univ.  payload  to  500-mi  (805-km)  altitude  to  investigate 
auroral  fluxes and  backscattered  particles.  Rocket and  instruments  per- 
formed satisfactorily.  ( NASA  Rpt SRL) 
*  U.S.S.R.  successfully launched  Zond  ZV  automatic  research  station, Tass 
announced. Station was  placed  in  planned  flight from  parking  orbit  of 
artificial  satellite and was  flying on  trajectory  close to  calculated one  to 
study  “outlying  regions  of  near-earth space.’’  Heinz Kaminski, Director 
of  Institute  for  Satellite  and  Space  Research  a t   Bochum,  West  Ger- 
many,  said  mission  “must  be  regarded  as  a  preliminary  phase  for  a 
planned  flight  to  the  moon.”  Sir  Bernard  Lovell,  Director  of  Jodrell 
Bank Experimental  Station,  said  he  had  “hunch”  Zond   ZV  was  not  in- 
tended  to  fly  around  moon.  Apparently  station  made  no  attempt  to 
orbit  moon.  One  source said  that  after  journey  of  about  3%  days,  sta- 
tion  reached “apogee . . . comparable to lunar  altitude.” 
Zond   I ,   launched  April  2,  1964,  failed  in  attempt  to  reach  Venus, 
and  Zond  ZZ, launched  Nov.  30,  1964, suffered  communications  failure 
on  route  to  Mars.  Zond  ZZZ, launched  July  18,  1965,  obtained  photos 
of  far  side  of  moon.  (W Po s t ,   3/3/68,  A17;  3/4/68,  A14;  3/8/68, 
A12;  AP, W S ta r ,  3/4/68,  A3) 
*  President  Johnson-watching  world’s  largest  aircraft,  USAF  C-5A  Gal- 
laxy  jet,  roll  off  production  l in e - c a l l ed   event  “a  long  leap  forward  in  
the  effective military  might  of  America.”  President  praised  USAF,  Lock- 
heed-Georgia Co.,  and  General  Electric  Co.  for  carrying  out  “a  great 
new  adventure”  in  aviation  and  completing  the  job  “on  time.”  (AP, 
N Y T ,  3/3/68,  1 ;  AFSC  Nezusreview, 3/68,  1 )  
March   3-9:  Radio  signals  which  scientists  speculated  possibly  could  have 
been  from  extraterrestrial  civilization  had  been  received  by  Cornel1 
Univ.’s  antenna  at  Arecibo  Ionospheric  Observatory  in  Puerto  Rico. 
U.K.  astronomers  during  February  had  proposed  such  signals  might 
originate  with  pulsating  neutron  stars.  Arecibo’s  Director,  Dr.  Frank 
D.  Drake,  would  investigate  all  possibilities  of  natural  origin.  He  be- 
lieved  four-  to  five-month study  might  determine  whether  signals  came 
from  planet  in  orbit  around  another  star.  Dr.  Drake  said  Arecibo  ob- 
servations had  confirmed all  signal properties  reported  by  U.K.,  includ- 
ing  regularity  and  variable  intensity  of  signals.  (Sullivan,  N Y T ,  
3 /10 /68 ,1 )  
March 4-16:  NASA’s 1,347-lb Ogo  V  (OGO-E)  Orbiting  Geophysical Observ- 
atory,  carrying  24   experiments  in  most  comprehensive study  of  parti- 
cle-wave processes  in  space  during  period  of  maximum  solar  activity, 
was  successfully  launched  a t   8 :06   am   EST  from  ETR  by  Atlas 
(SLV-SA)  -Agena  D  booster,  being  used  for  first  time.  Spacecraft  en- 
tered  highly  elliptical earth  orbit  with 92,078-mi  (148,186-km)  apogee, 
168-mi  (271-km)  perigee,  63.3-hr  period,  and  31.3’  inclination.  P r i -  
mary  mission  objective  was  to  acquire  correlative  scientific  data  at 
high  information  rates  in  magnetic  fields,  energetic  particles,  and 
plasma  disciplines  through  leading  quadrant  of  magnetosphere  into 
geomagnetic tail,  both  in  interplanetary  medium and  within  large  sec- 

54  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  4-16 

tions of  magnetosphere.  Secondary objectives were to  demonstrate tech- 
nological capability  of  OGO’S  three-axis stabilization system in  highly  el{ 
liptical orbit  for  extended operations  of  135 days or  more  and  to  con- 
duct electric-field, gamma-ray, and radioastronomy observations. 
On March  16, second  of  two  30-ft-long extendable  antennas  was  de- 
ployed  to  complete post-launch checkout  and  NASA  reported  Ogo  Y  was 
operating  satisfactorily.  All  experiments  except  one,  low-energy  elec- 
trons  and  protons  experiment, which  had  stopped  operating  March  11 
when  input  power  apparently  failed,  were  acquiring  data  effectively. 
Data  provided  first  observations  of  hydrogen  cloud  surrounding  earth 
(geocorona) , first detailed measurements of  electric fields a t  shock  and 
magnetospheric  boundaries,  and  first  spark  chamber  observations  of 
gamma rays. 
Ogo  V  was  filth  spacecraft in  NASA’s six-mission OGO  series, last  OGO 
planned  for  highly  eccentric  orbit,  last  spacecraft  to  be  launched  by 
Agena  launch vehicle, and last  to be  launched from Complex 13. Agena 
would  be  replaced  by  Atlas-Centaur, and  Complex  13 would  revert  to 
USAF.  Scientific instrumentation  for  Ogo  V‘s  24   experiments had  been 
provided  by  six U S .   universities;  four  groups  from U.K.,  France,  and 
the Netherlands;  four  Government centers;  and  two  private  companies. 
Ogo  V  joined  three  other  operational  O G O s - - - o g o   I  (launched  Sept.  4, 
1964 ) ,  Ogo ZZZ (launched  June  6,  1966), and  Ogo  ZY  (launched  July 
28,  1967) -in 
providing  data  for  studies  of  earth’s  environment  and 
solar-terrestrial interactions  during  period  of  maximum  solar  activity. 
Ogo  ZZ, launched  Oct.  14,  1965,  had  been  turned  off  in  November 
1967. Of  8 5  experiments  assigned  to  four  missions  still  operating,  68 
were still obtaining  useful data,  including  12 for which  instrumentation 
wa s  working after 42 mo  in  space. 
OGO  program  was  managed  by  GSFC  under  OSSA  direction.  LeRc  was 
responsible for  Atlas-Agena launch  vehicle, and  KSC  for  launch  opera- 
tions.  (NASA   P ro j   OB; NASA  Releases  68-38,  68-53; 
LeRC   Release 
68-14;  UPI,  M Her ,  2/25/68;  W Star, 2/27/68,  A9; NYT,  3/5/68,  17 ;  
W Post, 3/6/68,  A7) 
March 4:  NASA Assistant Administrator  for  Policy, Dr.  Alfred  J.  Eggers,  Jr., 
told  New  Orleans  AIAA  conference on  technology  for  manned planetary 
missions, “the manned  planetary  mission  of  first priority  is  the mission 
of  man  on  planet  Earth.”  He  explained  that  only  “minute”  part  of 
NASA’s funding  went  toward  research  on  manned  planetary  flight  and 
described overall NASA  program  a s  “lean, but  . . . by  no means lifeless. 
It  is  planned  to  emphasize  the  space  applications  and  the  supporting 
research  and  technology  programs.”  He  called  for  best  in  talent  f o r  
achieving manned  planetary  flight  “in  the  course  of  man’s  exploration 
of space.”  (Text; AP, NYT,  3/30/68,31M) 
Gen.  Bernard  A.  Schriever  (USAF,  Ret.),  former  AFSC  Commander,  deliv- 
ered  Dr.  Robert  H.  Goddard  Lecture to  National  Space Club  in  Wash- 
ington,  D.C.  He  warned  the  U.S.S.R.  had  moved  forward  steadily w i t h  
new  and  more  diversified  strategic  threat  highlighted  by  development 
of  orbital  missile  and  sophisticated  space  systems.  U.S.  comparative 
missile strength, h e  noted, was declining steadily, with  emphasis still on 
updating  existing  force.  ‘‘What  is  missing  so  fa r   in  our  military  space 
program  is the  necessary high priority  research and development aimed 
at protecting us  in  the high ground  of  space.  In  space, as elsewhere, the 

55 

March  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Soviets  say  one  t h in g - e v e n   sign  agreements-but 
consistently  do 
whatever  is  in  their  own  self-interest. The  orbital  missile  is  merely  the 
latest  example  of  their  policy.  In   light  of  their  development of  an   or- 
bital missile, it would be totally irresponsible . . . to  assume that we  do 
not  need  to  initiate  any  R&D  to  prepare  us  to  meet  a  Soviet  space 
threat.” 
Attributing  loss of  endorsement of  national  space program  to  change 
in  national  value  scale  because  of  Vietnam  and  domestic  problems, 
Gen.  Schriever  said:  “The  old  criteria,  national  security  and  national 
prestige,  are  no  longer  the  only  justifications for  our  space  efforts, im- 
portant  though  they  are.”  If  public  understood  “the  practical,  dollars 
and  cents worth of  the  program  to  this  country and  to  the  world,”  they 
would  support  it.  U S .   was  on  verge  of  receiving  annual  return  larger 
than  its  annual  investment in   space,  and  within  one  decade,  “those  re- 
turns  should  be  several  times  our  annual  investment.”  (Text;  A e ro  
Tech, 3/11/68,16) 
*  Current  knowledge  of  effe&s  of  sonic  boom  on  building  materials  and 
structures  was  insufficient  to  assess  accurately  kinds  of  damage  SST 
might  produce,  NAS  Physical  Effects  Subcommittee of  NAS  Committee 
on  the  SST-sonic Boom  report  concluded. Assuming SSTS  would  fly  over 
land  and sonic booms  along flight paths would  be low  enough in  intens- 
ity  to  be  publicly  acceptable,  probability  of  structural  damage  under 
normal  operating  conditions  would  be  “very  small.”  Subcommittee 
stressed,  however,  that  more  meaningful  physical  response  was  neces- 
sary,  including  simulator  studies, laboratory  tests  of  glass, and  acceler- 
ation  and  expansion  studies  of  atmosphere’s  bending  and  magniiying 
effects on  sonic boom  shock waves.  ( N Y T ,  3 /5 /6 8 ,3 ;   Science,  3/8/68, 
1081 ) 
Sen.  Claiborne  Pel1  (D -R . I . ) ,   member  of  Senate  Committee  on  Foreign 
Relations, released  proposed  draft  of  international  treaty  to  govern  ex- 
ploration  and exploitation  of  “ocean space.”  He  said  there was  “proba- 
ble danger  of  anarchy”  beneath  seas because “man’s  sea  technology has 
brought  him  to  the  verge  of  total  undersea  capability.”  Treaty  would 
apply  to   undersea  areas  same  freedom-of-the-seas principles  now  gov- 
erning  ocean  surfaces,  create  licensing  body  and  sea  guard,  seek  to  
prevent  development of  weaponry on  ocean  floor,  and  provide  for  dis- 
posal  of  radioactivity  in  seas.  (Clark,  N Y T ,   3/5/68,  1 9 ;   SR  263, 
3/5/68) 
March 5:  NASA  launched  198-lb Explorer  XXXVIZ  (Solar  Explorer  B )  , sec- 
ond  joint  project  of  NRL  and  NASA  to  measure  solar  emissions,  from 
NASA  Wallops  Station  by  four-stage Scout booster.  Orbital  parameters: 
apogee,  545  mi  (877  km) ; perigee,  324  m i   (521  km) ; period,  98.8 
min  and  inclination  59.4’.  Primary  NASA  objective w a s   to  place  satel- 
lite  in  planned  orbit  and  provide  tracking  and  telemetry  support.  NRL 
objectives were  to  continue  and  augment overall solar  x-ray monitoring 
program  into  ascending portion  of  11-yr solar  cycle;  perform  temporal 
measurements of  x-ray  emission  intensity  and  spectral  quality  of  solar 
flare  emission;  correlate  measurements with  optical  and  radio  ground- 
based  observatories ; and  provide  real-time  solar  monitoring  informa- 
tion.  International  scientific  community  had  been  invited  to  acquire 
solar radiation data from satellite. 
Although  Explorer  XXXVIZ   did  not  enter  planned  circular  orbit, 

56 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  5 

orbit  achieved would  satisfy scientific objectives. Expected  lifetime was 
solar  monitoring  project,  Explorer  X X X  
one  year.  First  NRL-NASA 
(IQSY  Solar  Explorer),  had  been  launched  Nov.  18,  1965,  and  had 
ceased  operating  Nov.  20,  1967.  Explorer  program  was  directed  by 
OSSA.  Wallops  Station  was  responsible  for  vehicle  integration  and 
launch  operations.  NRL   was  responsible  for  satellite  development,  con- 
struction,  and  testing.  (NASA  Proj  Off; NASA  Release  68-43;  WS  Re- 
lease 68-5;  AP, N Y T ,  3 /7 /68 ,10 ;   W Po s t ,  3/7/68,  D21) 
e  U.S.S.R.  successfully launched  two  Cosmos  satellites.  Cosmos  CCIV  en- 
tered  orbit  with  843-km  (524-mi)  apogee,  271-km  (168-mi)  perigee, 
95.7-min period,  and 70.9’  inclination. Cosmos  CCV  entered  orbit with 
292-km  ( 181-mi)  apogee,  197-lan  (122-mi)  perigee,  89.3-min  period, 
and  65.6”  inclination.  Cosmos CCV  reentered March  23.  Cosmos  CCIV 
reentered March 2,  1969.  (AP, NYT ,  3/7/68,  1 0 ;  GSFC  S SR ,  3/15/68; 
3/15/69;  SBD ,  4 /1 /68 ,174 )  
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and  Technology, 
Dr.  Mac  C.  Adams,  told  Senate Committee on  Aeronautical  and  Space 
Sciences  that  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  cut  of 
$48.3  million  €rom request  for  FY  1969 NERVA  program  “would  essen- 
tially  wipe  out  the  entire  program.  With  the  $11.7  million  authorized 
by  the  House  Committee  [see  March  11-it 
is  not  clear  that  would 
even  cover  termination  of  the  contracts.  . . . We  would  immediately 
have  to  start  termination  of  not  only  the  engine  development, but  also 
termination  of  the  technology work.  I  feel  that  we  would  waste  a  very 
valuable investment.” 
Dr.  Adams  described  “substantial  progress”  in  OART  programs  in  
1967:  initial  acoustic  absorber  tests  showed  reduction  in  jet  transport 
noise ; parawing  (steerable  parachute)  showed  promise  for  spacecraft 
and  precise  military  landings;  static  firing  of  260-in-dia  solid  rocket 
motor  had  reached  5.9-million-lb thrust  in  80-sec test;  NERVA  had  been 
successfully  tested  at  full  power  60  min;  all  major  components  of 
SNAP-8  nuclear  turbo-generator  system had  completed  1,800 h r   of  en- 
durance  tests,  one  exceeding  13,000 h r ;   and  new  Beta  cloth  for  astro- 
naut  clothing  had  passed  wear  and  flammability  tests.  I n   “beneficial 
crossflow  between  engineering  and  life  sciences,”  he  named  develop- 
ment  of garment  to give physicians three-dimensional data  on  heart  ac- 
tivity,  new  blood  velocity meter,  and  sensor to  measure blood  pressure 
in  heart-small 
enough to  be  threaded  through  hypodermic needle  and 
derived  from  instruments  developed  for  small  flight  models  for  wind- 
tunnel tests.  (Transcript) 
President  Johnson  presented  Goddard  Memorial Trophy  for  1968 to  Dr. 
Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  former  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  and  now 
NASA  consultant  and  MIT   visiting  professor,  in  White  House  ceremony. 
National  Space Club  award  named  fo r  the  late  Dr.  Robert H.  Goddard, 
“father  of  American rocketry,”  was given Dr.  Seamans for  helping “de- 
velop the  policies, plans  and  programs  that  have  led  to  the  outstanding 
achievements and  United  States leadership  in  the  field  of  rocketry  and 
astronautics.”  President  Johnson  had  received  trophy  in   1966.  ( P D ,  
3/1/68,  475;  Program,  Goddard  Memorial Dinner,  3/5/68;  W Po s t ,  
3/6/68) 
MSFC   Director,  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  discussed  “The  Outlook  for 
Space Exploration”  addressing  National  Space Club’s  Goddard  Memo- 

57 

March  5 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  5 :   R e p .   George  P .   Miller  (D-Ca l i f .) ,   Chairman  of  House   Comm i t tee   on  Science 
and  Astronautics,  reads  citation  on   Goddard  Trophy   wh ich   President  Johnson   ( r i g h t )  
presented  to   Dr.  Rober t   C .   Seamans,  J r .   ( c e n t e r ) ,  former  NASA   Depu ty   Administrator. 

rial  Dinner  in  Washington,  D.C.  “The  public’s  knowledge  and  under- 
standing  of  space  exploration  have  been  broadened  by  the  remarkable 
achievements of  the  first decade of  the space age, but  a  great  many  peo- 
ple  in  the  space  program  are  deeply  concerned  about  an  apparent  de- 
cline  in  popular  support  of  space  activities.’’  Space  achievements had 
been  well  publicized  but  “the  capability  that made  these  feats  possible, 
the  underlying  science  and  technology,  the  inherent  value  of  delving 
deeper  into  the mysteries of  the  atmosphere and  space,  and  the  mecha- 
nism  by  which  increased  scientific  knowledge  enhances  economic  and 
social  progress  are  apparently  little  understood  or  appreciated  on  a 
wide basis. 
“Up  to  now  we  have  had  to  devote  our  full  energies  to  working  on 
the  means  by  which  we  reach  into  space.  Now  that  the  pipelines  are 
filling  with  space  hardware,  more  and  more  of  our  preoccupation  is 
turning toward  the question of  what can be done to  assure that  the  peo- 
ple who have supported our  program  . . . receive the  full  range  of  ben- 
efits  which  can  be  derived  from  space  exploitation.”  (Text;  C R ,  
3/12/68,  E1769) 
0  Rep.  Joseph E.  Karth  (D-R’linn.) , Chairman  of  House Committee on  Sci- 
ence  and  Astronautics’  Manned  Space Flight  Subcommittee, told  Sixth 
Goddard  Memorial  Symposium  in   Washington,  D.C.,  he  saw  “grave 

58 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  5 

danger  to  our  economic and  social progress,  a s  well  a s  to  our  position 
in  the  world,  if  ‘let  technology  wait’  attitude  becomes  too  prevalent.” 
He  advocated building  sound  foundation  for  economic growth by  l o n g  
term  investment in  science, technology, and  education and  by maintain- 
ing  technological leadership  “as  a  necessary  basis  for  our  national  se- 
curity  and  economic  strength.”  He  called  for  “a  space  program  better 
balanced  between  scientific,  exploratory  and  economic  payoff  m i s -  
sions.,,  (Text;  Clark, N Y T ,  3/6/68,  C33;  S BD ,  3 /6 /68 ,25 )  
NASA  awarded $26,116,200 fixed-price-incentive-fee contract  to McDonnell 
Douglas  Corp.  to  provide  launching  and  launch  support  services,  in- 
cluding  inspection and  checkout, for  improved  Delta  boosters.  Contract 
would  cover  20  launches from  ETR  and  WTR  over  21-mo period.  (NASA  
Release 68 -42 ;   WSJ ,  3 /6 /68 ,20 )  
March  6 :  NASA  awarded  $30.1-million  contract  extension  to  Bendix  Corp. 
fo r   operation  and  maintenance  services  for  launch  facilities  a t   KSC, 
bringing  total  contract  value  to  $76.3  million.  NASA  also  awarded 
$ll.6-million  extension to  Aerojet-General for  work  on  nuclear  power 
plant,  making  total  of  $76.1  million  awarded  Aerojet-General through 
Aug. 30,1969.  ( W S J ,  3 /6 /68 ,20 )  
LeRC  awarded  $11,600,440  cost-plus-award-fee  contract 
to  Aerojet- 
General  Corp.  to  continue  through  Aug.  31,  1969,  development  of 
SNAP-8  nuclear  space power  system.  (LeRC   Release 68-16) 
USAF  Space  and  Missile  Systems Organization  awarded  North  American 
Rockwell  Corp.  $1-million  initial  increment  to   $4-million  fixed-price 
contract  for  production  of  Thor  propulsion  systems.  (DOD Release 
215-68) 
March  7:  In   draft  U.N.  Security  Council  resolution  a t   Geneva  Disarma- 
ment  Conference  U.S.,  U.S.S.R.,  and  U.K.  formally  committed  them- 
selves to  take  “immediate  action”  against  nuclear  attack  or  threatened 
attack  on  any  country  that  renounced  nuclear  weapons.  Object  of  big- 
power  cooperation was  to  reassure  governments asked  to  ban  spread  of 
nuclear weapons by  treaty  signature.  (Hamilton, N Y T ,  3/8/68,  1 ;  Mid- 
dleton, N Y T ,   3 /10 /68 ,8 ;   N Y T ,   3 /8 /6 8 ,4 0 ;   3/11/68,  1 4 )  
Astronauts  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  Charles  M.  Duke,  Jr.,  and  Stuart  A. 
Roosa  were  chosen  prime  crew  for  48-hr  at-sea  checkout  of  Apollo 
spacecraft,  scheduled  to  begin  March  18  in  Gulf  of  Mexico.  Apollo’s 
at-sea post-landing systems for  first  manned  mission would  be  checked 
from  deck  of  NASA’s  motor  vessel  Re t r ieve r .   ( H  Chron,  3/7/68) 
MSFC  awarded  $11,096,282  contract  extension  to  Feb.  1969  to  Sperry 
Rand  Corp.  for  engineering  support  in  applied  research,  testing,  and 
design a t  MSFC’S  Astrionics Laboratory.  ( MSFC  Release 68-37) 
New  salt  fog  chamber  at  Naval  Missile  Center’s  environmental  labora- 
tory  in  Point  Mugu, Calif., had  improved and  speeded tests  of  missiles 
and  rockets.  Chamber  provided  70-120’  F  environment  for  weapons 
up  to  1 4  f t   long  and  operated  automatically  for  round-the-clock tests. 
( PMR  Release 280-68) 
U.K.  Defence  Equipment  Minister  Roy  Mason  advised  Commons  that 
military  aircraft  programs  in  1968-69  would  be  worth  more  than 
El00  million  ($240 million)  for  R&D  alone.  Employment  in  the  indus- 
try  had  fallen  from  268,000  in  December  1%3  t o  264,000  in  Decem- 
ber  1967, but  output  was  up  by  E133  million  ($349 million)  and  ex- 
ports  by  $90  million  ($216  million),  and  Government  assistance  for 

59 

March  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

civil  transport  aircraft  had  quadrupled.  Mason  added  that  current 
offset  agreements with  U S .  would  not  now  be  changed  to  affect exist- 
ing  contracts  which  had  provided  high-level sales  for  aircraft  and  en- 
gine industries.  (In terav iaA irLe t ter ,  3/8/68,  3) 
March  8 :   NASA  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wal- 
lops  Station  carried  GSFC  experiment  to  180-mi  (290-km)  altitude  to 
verify  performance  of  quadrupole  ion-mass spectrometer  and  measure 
electron density  by  CU  propagation technique. Rocket  and  instruments 
performed satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt SRL )  
NASA  launched  first  two  boosted  Arcas  1 sounding  rockets  from  TERLS 
carrying GSFC  experiments to  obtain data  on  equatorial electron density 
in  ionosphere  D  region  by  means  of  radio  propagation  experiments. 
Rockets  reached  52.6-mi  (84.5-km)  and  57.6-mi  (93.7-km)  altitudes 
and  performed  satisfactorily.  Good  data  were  obtained.  (NASA  Rpts 
SRL)  
0  ELDO  announced  unanimous  election  of  Gen.  R.  Aubiniere  of  France  as 
new  president to  succeed A.  Paternotte  de la  Vailee  of  Belgium, named 
Belgium’s  ambassador to  Lebanon.  ( S B D ,  3 /8 /6 8 ,4 3 )  
0  U.K.  estimated  space  expenditures  for  N 1967-68,  ending  March  31, 
1968, would  total  $73.2  million.  Detailed  amounts:  ESRO,  $9.9 million; 
ELDO,  $23.3 million;  and  INTELSAT,  $1.4 million. Largest  other  amount 
was  $17.9  million  for  U.K.’s  Skynet  military  comsat  system.  ( S B D ,  
3/8/68,  A3) 
March  10:  NASA’s Echo   I  (launched  Aug.  12,  1 96 0 ) ,  world’s  first  passive 
reflector  comsat,  was  being  driven  closer  to  denser  regions  of  earth‘s 
atmosphere  and  would  reenter  before  summer  1968. The  100-ft  globe 
of  aluminum-coated mylar  plastic had  been  battered  by  space dust  and 
meteoroids, its  skin  wrinkled,  and  its  benzoic  acid  and  anthraquinone 
inflating gas lost. Echo  I’s  nearly circular  orbit 800 mi  above earth  had 
become  egg-shaped in  more  than  7%   yr  of  operation.  I t  had  probably 
been  seen  by  more  people  than  any  other  man-made  object  in  space. 
(NASA   Release 68 -44 ;  P EB ,  2/13/68;  UPI, N Y T ,  2 /14 /6 8 , 8 )  
March  11 : Th e   International Biological  Program-Its  Meaning  and  Needs, 
released by House Committee on  Science and Astronautics’ Science, Re- 
search,  and  Development  Subcommittee,  considered  “one  of  the  most 
crucial  situations  to  face  this  or  any  other  civilization-the 
immediate 
or  near  potential of  man  to  damage, perhaps beyond  repair,  the  ecolog- 
ical  system of  the  planet  on  which  all  life  depends.”  International  Bio- 
logical Program  asked  for  $200 million  over  five  years  to  attack  prob- 
lem;  Subcommittee recommended $3-5  million  for  FY  1969.  (Text;  W 
Pos t ,  4/5/68,  A24) 
President  Johnson  sent  to   Congress Marine  Science  Afiairs-A 
Yea r   of 
Plans  and  Progress;  T h e  Second  Repor t   of  the   President  to   the   Con-  
gress  o n  Marine  Resources  and  Engineering  Development  and  reported 
on  N  1969  budget,  which  included  $516  million  for  marine  science 
and  techndogy  programs.  Increased  funding  wa s   requested  for  pro- 
gram  on  application  of  spacecraft technology  in  oceanography  and  im- 
proved  observation  and  prediction  of  ocean  environment.  ( P D ,  
3/ 18/68,489-90) 
March   12:  NASA  awarded  $13,748,200  contract  to  General  Electric  Co.‘s 
Missile  and  Space Div.  for  integration  and  test  of  1,400-lb Nimbus  D 
meteorological satellite. Nimbus  D,  fourth  in  series, would  be  launched 

60 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  12 

in  1970 carrying  10 experiments to  improve  long-range weather  fore- 
casting  and  further  study of  earth's  atmosphere.  (NASA  Release 68-46) 
MSFC  awarded  $5,779,884  cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  to  Chrysler  Corp., 
bringing  total  to  $14.7  million,  for  ground  support  and  engineering 
equipment for Saturn IB program.  (MSFC   Release 68-41) 
0  DOD  awarded  $456-million  cost-plus-incentive-fee contract  to  Lockheed 
Missiles  &  Space  Co.  for  development  and  production  of  Poseidon 
(C-3)  missile  system, making  definite March  1966 letter  contract  f o r  
$26.6  million.  Addition  of  $25  million  had  been  awarded  in  October 
1967 modification and  total  funding  allocated  to  date  was  $507.7  mil- 
lion.  About  $1.2  billion  would  be  spent  through  1971.  (DOD  Release 
230-68;  AP, N Y T ,  3 /13 /6 8 , 8 )  
AFSC  Aeronautical  Systems  Div.  awarded  Bendix  Corp.  $677,500  initial 
increment  to  $1.4-million contract  for  reentry  vehicle  systems  reliabil- 
ity testing.  (DOD Release 231-68) 
Analysis  of  Luna  ZX (launched Jan.  31,  1966)  TV  photos  showed  lunar 
mass  was   decreasing because  of  micrometeoroid bombardment,  Soviet 
scientist A.  A.  Gurshteyn reported.  He  explained that  speed  of  particles 
dislodged by  falling micrometeoroids often  exceeded second  escape ve- 
locity for moon of  only 2.4  km per sec.  ( S B D ,  3 /12 /68 ,61 )  
March  13 :   USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  with 
Titan  111-B-Agena  D  booster.  Satellite  entered  orbit  with  260-mi 
(418.5-km)  apogee,  82-mi  (132-km)  perigee,  89.9-min  period,  and 
( P r e s   Rp t   6 8 ;   S B D ,  
99.9" 
inclination  and  reentered  March  24. 
3/14/68,  75) 
GSFC  selected Philco  Ford  Corp.  for  negotiations on  one-year, $1,200,000 
contract  with  two  one-year options  for  engineering  and  related  duties 
(NASCOM)  . 
for  NASA's 2-million-circuit-mi  communications  network 
( GSFC Release G8-68) 
March  14:  USAF  launched  two  unidentified  satellites from  Vandenberg  AFB 
using  Long-Tank Thrust-Augmented Thor  ( LTTAT)  -Agena  D  booster. 
First  entered orbit with  242-mi  (481.0-km)  apogee,  114-mi (183.5-km) 
perigee, 90.2-min period,  and  83.1 " inclination  and  reentered  April  10. 
Second entered  orbit  with  326-mi  ( 5 2 4 . 6 4 4   apogee,  299-mi  (448.2- 
km)  perigee,  94.6-min  period,  and  31.6"  inclination.  (P r e s   R p t   68; 
SBD ,  3/18/68,91) 
0  U.S.S.R.  successhlly  launched  Cosmos  CCVZ, carrying  television  and  in- 
frared  cameras  for  meteorological  observations.  Orbital  parameters: 
apogee,  640  km  (398  m i )  ; perigee,  598  km  (372  mi) ; period,  97.1 
min;  and  inclination, 81.2".  (GSFC  SSR ,  3/15/68;  AP,  N Y T ,  3/20/68, 
10) 
0  Spacecraft  for  first  manned  Apollo  mission  would  use  60%  oxygen  and 
40%  nitrogen  cabin  atmosphere while  on  launch  pad  and  pure  oxygen 
in  orbit,  NASA  announced.  Astronauts  would  continue  to  breathe  pure 
oxygen  in  their  spacesuits before  and  during  launch  phase,  a t   higher 
pressure than  that  of  cabin  to  avoid  leakage into suits.  Spacecraft envi- 
ronmental control  system in  orbit would  gradually  replace mixed  cabin 
atmosphere with pure oxygen. 
Since  October  1967, more  than  140  flammability tests  on  full-scale 
simulated  spacecraft  a t   MSC  had  shown  that  spacecraft  modifications 
and  installation  of  fire  extinguisher  and  new  quick-opening hatch  fo r  
crew egress had drastically reduced fire hazards. 

61 

March  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Detailed  physiological review  of  new  mixed  gas  atmosphere had  in- 
cluded  considerations  of  operational  characteristics  of  spacecraft  and 
life support  equipment. Astronauts would be adequately protected phys- 
iologically  during  all  phases  of  atmosphere  change.  Crew  procedures 
during period  when diluted  oxygen atmosphere would  be  in  cabin  were 
only  slightly affected.  (NASA  Release 68-47;  O’Toole,  W Po s t ,   3/6/68, 
1; UPI,  N Y T ,  3/15/68,41) 
*  NASA’s A t s   111  (launched  Nov.  5,  1967 ) ,   i n   synchronous  orbit  above 
equator over mouth of  Amazon River, was photographing cloud patterns 
with  multicolor  spin-scan camera  to  identify  possible tornado-breeding 
storm  clouds.  Scientists would  prepare  movies  from  photos  in  effort  to 
determine whether  tornado  breeding  situations could be  identified from 
characteristic cloud motions before tornadoes developed. A t s   I11 was  ca- 
pable  of  photographing  cloud  patterns  over  northern  hemisphere every 
15  min.  (ESSA  Release 68-20;  N Y T ,  3/14/68,  88) 
Sen.  Frank  Carlson  (R-Kan.),  ranking  member  of  Senate Committee on 
Post  Office  and  Civil  Service,  addressed  Space Age  Law  Conference in 
Cape Kennedy,  Fla.  “The  continuing  progress  of  our  nation  in  trying 
to  solve the  age old  problems  of  poverty, ignorance  and  disease  simply 
cannot  be  achieved  if  we  neglect  the  basic  strength  of  our  national 
advancing  frontier  of  technology. The basic  point  to   re- 
economy-the 
member  is  not  whether  this  nation  can  have  its  space  program-meet 
the  crisis  in  the  cities  and  fight  a  controversial  war  in  Vietnam-but 
rather  how  we  can  possibly  solve these problems unless we  push  ahead 
into the  frontiers  of  technology.”  Sen.  Carlson praised  Earth  Resources 
Observation Satellite program which would  provide “new  ability to   im- 
prove  harvests-prevent 
a i r   and  water  pollution 
crop  diseases-attack 
-inventory 
our  agricultural  resources-and 
perhaps  even  control 
floods.  Frankly,  I  think  this  program  alone  would  justify  all  that  the 
space effort is costing!”  ( C R ,  3/21/68,  S3130-1) 
MSFC   awarded  $49,985  nine-month  study  contract  to  Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corp.  to  assess  possible  radiation  damage  to  film  used  on  ATM  to  re- 
cord  solar  activity  and  to  consider  radiation  hazards  to  astronauts  in  
Saturn I orbital workshop.  ( MSFC Release 68-43) 
Geneva  disarmament  conference completed  draft  of  nuclear  nonprolifer- 
ation  treaty  and  referred  it  to  U.N.  General Assembly  special  session. 
(Hamiltox, N Y T ,  3/15/68,  18; Egli, W Po s t ,  3/15/68,  A19) 
March  15: NASA  launched  two  Aerobee  sounding  rockets  from  WSMR.  One 
carried  American  Science  &  Engineering,  Inc.,  payload  to  96.2-mi 
(154.8-km)  altitude  to  obtain  high-resolution  x-ray  pictures  of  active 
regions on  sun  and  general x-ray emission  of  solar  corona. Ten  percent 
loss  in   rocket  performance  suggested  sustainer  ruptured ; instruments 
performed  satisfactorily.  Data  would  be  degraded  by  pointing  control 
failure. 
Second rocket  carried  GSFC  payload  to  95-mi  (152.8-km)  altitude  to 
collect  data  on  x-rays  from  Crab  Nebula  and  its  proximity,  using  six 
collimated  x-ray  detectors.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performance 
was  satisfactory.  Entire  payload  was  recovered  in  excellent  condition. 
(NASA  Rpt SRL) 
NASA  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Sta- 
tion  carried  GSFC payload  to  180-mi  (290-km)  altitude  to  verify  per- 
formance o€  quadrupole  ion  mass  spectrometer in  D  and  E  regions  of 

62 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  15 

ionosphere  and  measure  electron  density  using  CW  propagation  tech- 
nique.  Rocket  and  telemetry  performed  satisfactorily  and  good  results 
were  obtained  from spectrometer, but  propagation  experiment was  lost 
a t  43.4-mi  (70-km) altitude.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
NASA’s  H G l O   lifting-body  vehicle,  flown  for  first  time  Dec.  22,  1966, 
made its second  flight, following vertical tail  fin  modifications to  direct 
more  airflow over  its control  surfaces. Piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld  R.  Gen- 
(U SA F ) ,   H G l O   was  air-launched  from  mother  ship  flying  a t  
try 
45,000-ft altitude  and  400  mph.  Rocket  engine  for  craft  was  not  used 
during  41/-min  flight  and  6,000-lb H G l O  was  piloted  through  “U” 
pattern  to  make  a  220-mph  glide  landing.  Built  by  Northrop  Corp.’s 
Norair  Div.,  H G l O  was  flight-tested  in  joint  NASA-USAF  study  of  po- 
tential  as  spacecraft  capable  of  maneuvering  in  flight  to  a  ground 
landing under pilot control.  (FRC   Release 8-68) 
0  At  background  briefing  on  Apollo  6 mission, NASA  Apollo  Program  Mis- 
sion Director, William C.  Schneider, described flight planning  activities 
for  Apollo missions up  to landing  on  the moon.  Apollo 6 mission,  orig- 
inally  scheduled  for  launch  March  21,  would  be  postponed  until  April 
because of  “erratic  behavior”  in  service module’s  helium  check  valves. 
Since  Apollo  5 had  been  so   successful,  Apollo  6  objectives  had  been 
“downgraded  to  secondary”  and  primary  objective would  be  to   evalu- 
ate  launch  vehicle.  New  optimum  injection  method  in  which  S-IVB 
would  be  launched  toward  moon  would  be  used  but  rest  of  mission 
would be basically same a s  Apo l lo   5, he  said.  NASA  would continue mis- 
sion  planning,  “so  that  we  have  the  option  to  select  a  lunar  orbit  mis- 
sion  i f   as  a  result  of  previous  flights we  felt  i t  was  technically the  best 
thing to do.”  (Transcript;  Sehlstedt, B Sun,  3/16/68,1) 
0  Univ.  of  Illinois  sociologist  Alexander  Vucinich  in  Science  described 
problem  of  relationship  of  science to  morality which  prompted  leading 
Soviet  scientists  to  search  for  broader  cultural  autonomy  of  science. 
“Moral law has become a  by-product of  science;  science, in  o5c ia l  So- 
viet  ideology,  is  a  structural  component  of  Soviet  society,  while  the 
moral  code  is  only  a  superstructural  derivation.”  He  traced  growth  of 
critical  reassessment  made  by  individual  members  of  Soviet  Academy 
of  Sciences who  looked  to  “the  broader  cultural  effects  of  modern  sci- 
ence  and  the  ongoing  technological  revolution”  under  stimulation  of 
considerable  relaxation  of  political  and  ideological controls  which  re- 
sulted  from  Stalinist  policies.  (Vucinich, Science,  3/15/68,  1208-12) 
March  16:  U.S.S.R.  successfully  launched  Cosmos  CCVZZ  into  orbit  with 
342-km  (213-mi)  apogee,  210-km  (130-mi)  perigee,  89.8-min  period, 
and 65.6’  inclination.  Satellite reentered March 24.  (Krasnaya  Zuezdu, 
3 /19 /68 ,1 ;   SBD ,  3/19/68,100;  GSFC  SSR ,  3/31/68) 
0  Demonstrated  success  of  lunar  module’s 
initial  unmanned  test 
( LM )  
flight in  earth  orbit  Jan.  22  and  of  subsequent ground  test  analysis by 
NASA Manned  Space Flight Safety O5ce  had  eliminated need  for  second 
unmanned  LM  flight,  NASA  announced.  First  manned  LM  flight  using 
Saturn  V  launch  vehicle  was  planned  for  late  1968.  (NASA  Release 
68-50;  UPI,  W  S tar ,   3/17/68,  A4) 
March  17:  Tenth  anniversary  of  second  U S .   satellite,  Vunguard  I ,   3$$,-lb, 
6Y2-in-dia spacecraft  that  had  proved  earth  was  slightly  pear  shaped 
and  examined  composition of  upper  atmosphere.  Satellite had  stopped 

63 

March  17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  17:  T e n   years  ago  Vanguard  I,  second  US. satellite,  was  launched  f r o m   Cape 
Canaveral  ( n ow  Cape  K e n n e d y )   in to   o rb i t   expec ted   to   last  another  200  years.  Satellite, 
6%  inches   in  d iame ter ,   proved  ear th   was  pear  shaped  and  continued  transm i t t ing   until 
Ma y   1964.  (O f f i c i a l  U.S.  Navy   ph o to )  

transmitting  in May  1964, but  was  expected to  remain  in   orbit  a t  least 
200 yr  longer.  (KSC Release 63-68;  AP, M H e r ,  3/17/68) 
March  17-18: NASA  Wallops  Station  engineers  launched  three  Nike-Apache 
and  three  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rockets  from  Vega  Baja  launch 
site  in  Puerto  Rico  to  detect  diurnal  changes  in  atmosphere and  iono- 
sphere.  Seventh  planned  firing  was  postponed  because  of  rocket  and 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  17-18 

radar  tracking  difficulties. Measurements taken  by  rocket-borne experi- 
ments,  furnished  by  GSFC  and  Univ.  of  Michigan, would  be  compared 
with  those  taken  by  radiotelescope a t  Arecibo  Ionospheric  Observatory 
in  Puerto  Rico,  and  by  Canadian  Alouette  ZZ satellite during  overpass 
fo r   three-way  comparison  of  rocket,  satellite,  and  observatory  data. 
(WS  Release 68-7) 
March  18:  NASA  launched  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  from  Churchill 
Research Range carrying Univ.  of  California experiments to  study Aux- 
energy-spectrum, pitch-angle distribution  and  time  and  space variation 
of  mirroring  and  precipitated  charged  particles  in   auroral  zone  with 
variety  of  detectors. Good  data  were  received  from  all  experiments ex- 
cept  electric  field  measurement  experiment  which  had  two  damaged 
booms.  (NASA  Rpt SRL)  
NASA  announced  personnel  changes  effective  May  1: Deputy  Associate 
Administrator  for  Manned  Space Flight Edgar  M.  Cortright  would  be- 
come  LaRc  Director,  replacing  Dr.  Floyd  L.  Thompson,  who  would 
serve  as  Special  Assistant  to   the  Administrator  until  his  retirement 
Nov.  25  at  age  70 and  would  then  serve a s   part-time  consultant.  Cort- 
right  would  be  replaced  by  Charles  W.  Mathews,  Director  of  Apollo 
Applications  Program.  Harold  T.  Luskin,  who  would  serve  as  Deputy 
Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  (Technical)  until 
May  1, when  he  would  succeed Mathews,  would  be  replaced  by  LaRc 
Deputy Director Charles J. Donlan.  (NASA  Release 68-51) 
March  19 :   NASA  Aerobee 150 sounding  rocket  launched from WSMR  carried 
ARC   payload  t o   98.7-mi  (159-km)  altitude  to  check  Solar  Pointing 
Aerobee Rocket Control System  (SPARCS)  and map  flight-path magnetic 
field.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt 
SRL )  
FRC  engineers had  used  small,  inexpensive,  radio-controlled model  space- 
craft  to  evaluate  concepts  for  possible  advanced  spacecraft  recovery 
systems in   over  100 successful  flights,  FRC’S  planning  engineer  Robert 
D.  Reed  revealed.  In  status report  to AIAA’S  2nd  Flight  Test, Simulation 
and  Support  Conference in  Los  Ange l s ,   Reed  said  flight  tests  of  mod- 
els,  including heavy  volume and  slender lifting-body vehicles, with vari- 
ous   advanced  flexible-wing  and  gliding-parachute  recovery  systems, 
were  being  tested  to  determine  their  suitability  for  ground  landings. 
( FRC  Release 9-68) 
NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition  Gerald 
M.  Truszynski,  in  statement before  Senate  Committee on  Aeronautical 
and  Space Sciences, summarized 1967 activities and  technical problems 
and  presented  FY  1969 funding  requirements for  tracking  and  data  ac- 
quisition  program.  He  explained that N 1968 funding  limitations  had 
made  it  necessary  to  defer  important  equipment  procurement  affecting 
network  reliability  and  recounted  efforts  to  realize  savings  and  reduce 
operating costs.  (Testimony) 
0  NASA  Manager  for  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Milton  Klein  explained  to 
Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  that  AEC’S  nu- 
clear  space power  work would  “establish technology in  advance of  mis- 
sions, with  specific system development undertaken  a s  mission  require- 
ments dictate.” He presented  a  sampling of  AEC’s  activities a s  it worked 
closely with  NASA  and DOD  “to  keep  in  focus the types and likely timing 
of  future mission needs.”  (Testimony) 

65 

March  19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

ESSA  had  received  its  first  meteorological photos  from U.S.S.R.’s  Cosmos 
CCVZ,  launched  March  14,  Space  Business  Da i ly   reported.  All  seven 
pictures were “good quality.”  ( SBD ,  3/20/68,  109) 
D.  P.  Nerry  warned  in Data  that  space research, candidate  to  help  allevi- 
ate  many  national  problems,  was  “placed  on  a  back  burner  of  the  na- 
tion’s  stove of  priorities.  . . . For  the sad fact is that after  landing men 
on  the  moon  this  nation  will  only  have  a  cursory  space  program.” 
Nerry  called for  assessment of  new  outlook on  space for  1970s. “If, fo r  
example,  Congress  should  decide  that  there  should  be  a  permanent 
large-scale  reduction  in  the  resources  allocated  to  space,  NASA  then 
should be  firmly  advised to  plan  accordingly.” But  if  slowdown would 
be  temporary,  NASA  should  plan  to  pursue  space  exploration  “vigor- 
ously”  a t  end  of  present  delays. Nerry  urged  that  press  employ “strong 
debate  and  factual  reporting”  to  provide  “a  reappraisal  of  U.S.  empti- 
ness  in  space  in  this  Guns-Butter Society.”  (Nerry,  Data,  3/19/68,  7 )  
March  19-20:  More  than  100  scientists  and  engineers  attended  Saturn  I 
Workshop  design  review  board  meeting  at  MSFC  to  discuss  results  of 
previous reviews. Workshop, scheduled for  launch  in  1970, would  cons- 
ist  of  Saturn  IV-B  stage modified  for  living  and  working  in  space  for 
better  understanding  of  permanent,  man-made, island-in-space require- 
ments.  ( MSFC  Release 68-45)  
March  20:  MSFC  Director  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  addressing  National 
Capital  Area  Chapter  of  American  Society for  Public  Administration, 
praised  U S .   space program  for  “unequaled  competence and  unlimited 
opportunity.”  After  10  yr  in  space,  he  noted,  U S .   had  launched  514 
spacecraft  into  earth  orbit  and  28  to  moon  and  other  planets.  “The 
soil  analyzed, and  sites  . . . selected  for  manned  lunar  landings.  Ou r  
moon  has  been  completely mapped,  the  composition  and  texture  of  its 
scientific  knowledge  of  Mars  and  Venus  . . . has  been  advanced  tre- 
mendously by  . . . unmanned,  instrumented probes.  . . . American  as- 
tronauts,  who  have  a  total  of  almost 2,000 hours in  space to  their  credit 
in  the  Mercury  and  Gemini  Projects,  will  begin  the  third  phase  of 
manned  space flight this  year with the  first manned  launches in  Project 
Apollo. These achievements in  space, fruits of  the  advanced science and 
technology  of  our  times, mark  the  first decade of  the  Space Age  a s  one 
of  the  finest periods  in  American history.  And  they  are  forerunners  of 
even  greatei  discoveries  and  widespread  applications  to  come  during 
our second decade in space.” 
Dr.  von  Braun  credited  NASA  Administrator  James Webb’s  direction 
with  adaptation  of  systems  approach  to  space  research  without  which 
“we  would  never  be  able to  go  to  the moon.”  Approach, Dr.  von  Braun 
believed,  could  also be  tested  on  river  pollution  and  satellite communi- 
cations.  (Text; W Post,  3/21/68,  H14) 
AIAA  named  Maj.  William  J.  Knight  (WAF )   winner  of  Octave  Chanute 
Award  for  notable  contribution  to  hypersonic  and  reentry  flight.  Maj. 
Knight  flew  X-15  research  aircraft  a t  mach  6.72  (4,534 mph)  Oct.  3, 
1967. Annual award  of  $500 and travel stipend  of  $1,000 would be pre- 
sented  a t  AIAA  Second  Flight  Test,  Simulation and  Support  Conference 
in  Los  Angeles  March  26.  (AFNS  Release  3-8-68-165;  AIAA  Release, 
3/20/68;  AFSC Newsreview, 5 /68 ,9 )  
M /G   J.  C.  Maxwell,  director  of  SST development  for  FAA,  told  Wings 
Club  in  New  York  SST  would  have  “tremendous  significance”  on  U.S. 

66 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  20 

balance  of  payments  in  international  trade.  One  SST  would  “pay  for 
20,000 Volkswagens.” He explained Boeing Co.’s  Feb. 22 announcement 
of  one-year  delay  in  prototype  construction:  “Our  prototype  design 
simply  wasn’t  good  enough,  not  yet.  . . . We  are  convinced  that  we 
can  get what  we   need  but we  want  to  stop now  to make certain that we 
do get it.” 
Very  reason  fo r   existence  of  SST  program  was  belief  “that  this  is 
next logical step in development of  civil aeronautics.”  Supersonic travel 
was  first step  toward hypersonic flight, he  said.  “Unless we  take  it now 
it’s  going  to  he many  years before civil  aviation  advances beyond  sub- 
sonic  flight-if 
ever.”  Biggest  problem  facing  SST  program  was 
sonic boom.  “We  have made all our program  decisions . . . on  assump- 
sonably certain  . . . we  can  operate  over  the  oceans on  an   inter-conti- 
tion  that  supersonic flights over  land may not  be permitted. We a re  rea- 
nental basis,”  and have sufficient market  to  assure  profitable program.” 
(Text; Seattle  Times, 3/21/68;  Hudson, N Y T ,  3/21/68,  3 /24 /68 ,23 )  
a  PMR  Aero-mechanical Branch  announced  development  of  new  cold-gas 
rocket-launching system consistently more  reliable,  less  expensive,  and 
more  efficient  than  old  cartridge  system.  New  system,  being  used  for 
launches of  Arcas meteorological rockets, consisted of  modified launcher 
door  incorporating  550-cu-in tank  of  compressed  air.  Ignition  forces 
opened  valve which  released  air  into  launch  chamber,  increasing  liftoff 
power and peak altitude.  ( PMR  Release 350-68) 
March  21 : U.S.S.R.  successfully launched Cosmos  CCVZZZ.  Orbital  parame- 
ters:  apogee,  278  km  (173 m i )  ; perigee,  202  km  (126  mi) ; period, 
89.2  min;  and  inclination,  64.9’.  Satellite  reentered  April  2 .   (UPI, 
N Y T ,  3/22/68,  5 ;  SBD ,  3/22/68,  125; GSFC  SSR ,  3/31/68;  4/15/68) 
a  NASA  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range  carried  Univ.  of  Maryland  experiment  to   150-mi  (241- 
km)  altitude  to   study  dissipation  processes  and  electron  acceleration 
mechanisms  in  aurora.  Four  experiments measured  energy spectrum of 
electrons from 1 ev  to 200 kev.  Photometers, UV  emissions, and  plasma 
probes were  included. Three  of  four  electron experiments returned  data 
on  energy spectra;  no  data  were  acquired  from  optical  and  plasma  ex- 
periments because clamshell nose cone failed to  deploy.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
XB-70  research  aircraft  was  flown  to   15,500-mi altitude  by  Col.  Joseph 
F.  Cotton  (USAF)   and  NASA  test  pilot  Fitzhugh  L.  Fulton,  Jr.  Primary 
goals  were  not  achieved  because  main  landing  gear  valve  malfunc- 
tioned.  Low-speed,  gear-down  handling  qualities,  propulsion  system, 
and  performance  tests  were  accomplished  during  2-hr  30-min  flight 
from Edwards AFB.  (XB-70  P ro j  Off) 
March  22:  Cosmos  CCZX  w a s   successfully launched  by  U.S.S.R.  into  orbit 
with 945-km  (587-mi) apogee, 871-km (541-mi)  perigee, 103.1-min pe- 
riod,  and 65.3O  inclination.  ( S B D ,  3/25/68,  136; GSFC  SSR ,  3/31/68) 
a  NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  carried  GSFC 
payload  to  129.4-mi  (208.2-km)  altitude  to measure spectral  irradiance 
of  Gamma  star  in  constellation Vela  and  of  Zeta  star  in  constellation 
Puppis  using  W  stellar  spectrograph.  Rocket  performance  was  satis- 
factory.  Instrumentation  performance was marred  by loss  of  fine point- 
ing  17 sec before end of  second exposure.  (NASA  Rpt SRL)  
a  NASA  authorized  partial  restoration  of  primary  structure  of  M2-F2  lift- 
ing-body vehicle so  it could be  removed from  inspection jig  used  to  de- 

6 7  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
March  22 
termine  damage sustained  in  landing  accident May  10,  1967.  It  would 
be  returned  by  builder,  Northrop  Co rp . ’~  Norair  Div.,  to  FRC  by  late 
summer. OART  would  determine  iuture  research  work  on  M2-F2  from 
“flight  results and  other  experience obtained  from both  the M2  and  the 
HG10 . ”   ( F R C   Release 10-68;  ARC  Astrogram,  3 /28 /68 ,2 )  
0  Sen.  Gaylord  Nelson  (D-Wis.),  member  of  Senate  Committee  on  Inte- 
rior  and  Insular  Affairs,  on  Senate  floor  praised  construction  of  Wis- 
consin  Regional  Space  Center  as  “a  place  where  the  layman  can  ac- 
quire  information about  the  developments and  our  accomplishments in 
the  space age.”  He  inserted  in  Congressional Record  article by  Barbara 
E.  Kocjan,  stenographic coordinator  of  projects  for  Center,  describing 
Center  as  “a  highly  effective teaching  laboratory  that  can  readily  be 
tied  into  the  on going  programs  of  tens  of  thousands of  elementary and 
secondary  schools  and  hundreds  of  colleges  and  universities.”  ( C R ,  
3/22/68,  E2151) 
March  24-25:  NASA  launched  series  of  three  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets 
from  Natal,  Brazil,  carrying  GSFC  payloads  to  obtain  data  on  diurnal 
temperature  variations  as  a  function  of  latitude  using  grenade  tech- 
nique.  Rockets  performed  satisfactorily  and  grenades  exploded  a t  
planned intervals.  (NASA   Rpt SRL)  
March 25:  Solar Wind  Composition Experiment, developed  by  Swiss scien- 
tific team headed by Univ.  of  Berne’s  Dr.  Johannes Geiss, was  first for- 
eign  experiment accepted  for  NASA’s Apollo Lunar  Suriace  Experiments 
Package  (ALSEP)  . Sw i s s   experiment would  require  astronaut  to  deploy 
on  lunar  surface  aluminum  foil  sheet  oriented  toward  sun  to  entrap 
solar  wind  ions;  foil  sheet  would  be  packaged  for  return  to  earth  by 
astronauts,  providing  in  this  one-pound experiment first  opportunity  to 
capture ions for earth analysis. 
Swiss National  Committee for  Space Research had  already  built  pro- 
totype.  NASA  would  provide  qualification  tests  for  prototype  and  con- 
struction  and  acceptance  tests  for  flight  hardware. 
(NASA  Release 
68-55;  Marshall  S tar ,  3 /27 /68 ,10 )  
Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine  was  sworn  in  as  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  in 
NASA  Hq. ceremony. Nomination had  been  confirmed by  Senate  Feb.  7. 
(NASA   Ann) 
MSFC   awarded Univ.  of  California  $929,000 contract  to  develop  and  test 
prototype balloon  flight system for  NASA’s High Altitude Particle Exper- 
iment  (HAPPE)   program.  Primary  objective of  HAPPE  was  to  use  natu- 
rally  occurring  radiation  in  investigating  interactions  of  elementary 
particles  at  90,000-ft  altitude.  Balloon  payload  for  prototype  flight, 
scheduled  for  late  summer,  would  be  50  f t   tall  and  8  f t   in  dia  and 
would weigh  10,000 lb.  (MSC  Release 68-26;  Aero   Tech, 4/8/68,  3 )  
Use of 260-in solid rocket motor as  1st stage for  advanced manned launch 
vehicle  was  advocated  by  MSFC  Director,  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun, 
Aerospace  Technology  reported.  Dr.  von  Braun,  whose  support  fo r  
motor  was  revealed  in  Oct.  11,  1967,  testimony  released  by  House 
committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  NASA  ove r -  
sight,  said  concept  was  advantageous  for  resupply  of  flights  to  space 
stations  and  for  space  rescue  systems  where  80%  of  emergencies  i n  
manned spacecraft in earth  orbit were  “time critical.”  NASA  and DOD,  in  
joint  study,  were  considering  use  of  260-in motor  and  its  development 

6 8  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  25 

March  25 :   NASA  Administrator  James  E .   W e b b   shakes  hands  w i t h   Dr.  Thomas 
0 .  Paine  ( l e f t )  a f t e r   swearing  him in as Depu ty   Administrator  of  NASA .  

@ 

but  questioned whether  there  would  be  enough missions for  booster  to 
justify  high  development  costs.  (Text;  Aero  Tech ,  3/25/68,  12) 
Four  F-111A  jet  aircraft  flew  first  mission  from  Ta  Khli  AFB  in  Thai- 
land  under  radar  control  to  target  areas  northwest of  Dong  Hoi, North 
Vietnam,  according  to  unofficial  sources,  AP  reported.  Aircraft  con- 
ducted  successful  nighttime  strike  and  encountered  no  enemy  aircraft 
or surface-to-air missiles.  (AP, B Sun, 3/26/68,  A2) 
March  26:  ComSatCorp  in  fourth  annual  report  announced  1967  net  in- 
come of  $4.6  million. Highlights  in  1967  included  successful launch  of 
three  satellites  ( in   four  attempts)  into  synchronouq  orbit  to  extend 
full-time service to  Pacific and  expand capability  in  Atlantic, beginning 
of  construction  on  three  U S .   ground  stations,  completion  of  new 
ground  stations  by  Italy  and  Spain,  and  increase  in  INTELSAT  member- 
ship  to  61  with  addition  of  Uganda  in  January.  (Text;  ComSatCorp 
Release 68-11) 
Director  of  Defense  Research  and  Engineering,  Dr.  John  S.  Foster,  Jr., 
in  statement  before  Senate  Committee on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sci- 
ences,  described  DOD  activities  in  space  and  aeronautics.  “Military 
launches,”  he  stated,  “were  intended to  implement in  part  the  functions 
of  navigation,  communication,  nuclear  detection,  space  defense,  and 

69 

March  26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

@ 

meteorology,  or  to  furnish  scientific  and/or  development  support.” 
NASA’s work, he  said, had  contributed  “heavily”  to  science and  technol- 
ogy  base  for  DOD  effort.  In   MOL  activities “considerable  progress”  had 
been  made;  feasibility  of  the  MOL  system was  affirmed,  technical  risks 
were assessed in  some detail,  and  full  scale development was  initiated.” 
He  described  coordinated  DOD-NASA 
range  and  network  efforts  and 
other  cooperative programs  in  which  DOD  made  its  resources  available 
to  NASA  on  reimbursable  basis.  (Testimony;  Ae ro   Tech ,   4/8/68, 
10-11) 
March  27:  Cosmonaut  Yuri  A.  Gagarin-who 
became  first  man  in  space 
when  he  orbited  earth  once in U.S.S.R.’s  Vo s tok  I April  12, 1961-and 
engineer Col.  Vladimir  S.  Seryogin were  killed  when  their  M i G 1 5  jet 
aircraft  crashed  northwest  of  Moscow  during  training  flight.  Gagarin, 
who  had  been  commander of  Soviet Corps of  Cosmonauts and officer  in  
charge  of  cosmonaut training,  wa s   second cosmonaut to  die  in  an  acci- 
dent.  Cosmonaut Vladimir  M.  Komarov had  died  when  Soyuz I crash- 
landed  after  reentry  April 24,  1967. Bodies of  Cosmonaut Gagarin  and 
Col.  Seryogin  would  be  cremated  and  buried  in  Kremlin  wall.  (UPI, 
W  S tar ,   3/28/68,  1; Reston,  W P o s t ,   3/29/68,  1) 
e  First  launch  of  British  Aircraft  Corp.-built  Skylark  sounding  rocket 
from  ESRANGE  near  Kiruna,  Sweden, carried  London  Imperial  College 
experiment to   105-mi  ( 170-km)  altitude  to  investigate  relationship  be- 
tween  auroral  events  and  polar  “electrojet.”  Rocket  and  instrumenta- 
tion performance was satisfactory.  ( S B D ,  4/4/68,199) 
USAF  w a s   testing  thermal  preconditioner  with  promethium-147 radioiso- 
tope  heat  source  to  reduce  aircraft  guidance-system errors  caused  by 
temperature  changes, AFSC  announced. Unit,  which  eliminated warmup 
time  required  by  orthodox  heaters,  had  been  developed  by  AEC  and 
USAF.  (AFSC  Release 7.68) 
Rep.  Henry  S.  Reuss  (D-Wis.) , Chairman  of  House  Committee  on  Gov- 
ernment  Operations’  Research  and  Technical  Programs  Subcommittee, 
released  Scientific  Bra in   Dra in   from  the   Developing  Countries  (dated 
March  2 8 ) .  Immigration  to  US .   of  scientific manpower  from  develop- 
ing countries had more than quadrupled  in  past  12 yr. Report, based  on 
Subcommittee hearings  held  Jan.  23, said,  “the  long-sustained U.S.  for- 
eign  aid  program  has  devoted  substantial  sums  and  given  high  prior- 
ity”  to  educating  and  training  professional  manpower.  When  these 
countries “suffer an  emigration drain  of  the  very  skills and  talents they 
are  attempting  to  increase,  an  important  part  of  the  foreign  aid  pro- 
gram  is  undermined.”  (Text;  N Y T ,   3/28/68,  33) 
March  28:  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  wallops 
Station carried  GSFC  experiment to  100.2-mi (161.2-km)  altitude  to  test 
flight  models  of  impedance  measuring  instruments  to  be  flown  on 
RAE-A  satellite.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performance  was  satisfac- 
tory.  (NASA  Rpt SRL)  
*  Apollo  6 mission,  second  flight  of  Apollo/Saturn  V  space vehicle, would 
be  launched  from  ETR  on  or  after  April  3,  NASA  announced.  Primary 
mission  objective  would  be  qualification  of  launch  vehicle  for  future 
manned  flights;  spacecraft objectives, including recovery, would  be  sec- 
ondary.  (NASA   Release  68-54) 
ARC  Director  H.  Julian  Allen  had  been  elected  Fellow  of  U.K.’s  Royal 

70 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  28 

Aeronautical Society for   outstanding contributions  to  aeronautics,  ARC 
As trogram   announced.  Allen,  who  had  served  NACA  and  its  successor 
NASA  since  1936,  had   received  NACA  Distinguished Service Medal  fo r  
originating  concept of  bluntness as  aerodynamic technique for  avoiding 
severe  reentry  heating,  AIAA  Sylvanus  A.  Reed  Award,  Air  Force 
Assn.’s  Air  Power  Trophy,  and  NASA  Exceptional  Scientific  Achieve- 
ment Medal.  (ARC   Astrogram, 3 /28 /68 ,1 )  
e  DOD announced  loss  of  F-111A  aircraft  with  two  crew  members,  pre- 
sumably on mission to North  Vietnam. According to  Hanoi radio  broad- 
cast,  F-111A,  one of  six based  a t  Thailand, had  been  shot  down  near 
Laotian  border.  (AP,  B  Sun, 3/29/68,  1; AP,  W  Star,  3/29/68,  A4; 
Kumpa, B Sun, 3/30/68,  A 2 ;  Wilson, W Post, 3/30/68,  A14) 
0  USN  announced compromise plan  to  purchase 8  F-111B  aircraft  instead 
of  original  30 planned and  to  consider building  alternate  aircraft light- 
er  and more maneuverable than F-111B.  However, Senate Armed  Serv- 
ices  Committee  voted  11  to  2  against  additional  funds  for  F-111B, 
(Finney,  NYT, 
dimming  chances  of  continuing  program  a t   all. 
3 /29 /68 ,1 ;   Maffre, W Pos t ,  3 /29 /68 ,1 ;   WS J ,  3 /29 /68 ,6)  
March  27-28:  GSFC  team headed by  Dr.  Henry H.  Plotkin  h i t   orbiting  sat- 
ellite  Explorer  X X X V I   (Geos  I I )   with  laser  beam  but  failed  for  two 
successive  nights  to  relay  Morse  code  on  laser  beam  to  satellite  for  
replay  to  earth.  First  test  to  carry  modulated  13-kc signal  into  space 
for  detection  by  spacecraft  was  unsuccessful  because  satellite  was  SO 
low  on  horizon  i t   passed  out  of  range  before  scientists  had   time  to 
cause  of  overcast.  (NASA   Release 68-56;  W  Star,  3/28/68,  l ;  w Pos t ,  
send  coded  message.  Second  attempt  a t   message  delivery  failed  be- 
3/29/68,  A18) 
March  29:  FAA  released  12-yr forecast  of  aviation  activity.  Number  of  a ir-  
line passengers was  expected to   triple,  from  126  million  in   FY 1967 to 
444  million  in   FY 1979;  revenue  passenger  miles  would  quadruple, 
from  86  billion  to  342  billion;  and  airline  fleet  would  increase  from 
2,272  aircraft  to  3,860.  General  aviation  fleet  would  double,  from 
104,706 aircraft  on  Jan.  1,  1967, to  203,000  by  1979,  and  its  flying 
hours would  increase from 21.9  million to 40.5  million hr.  Total  flights 
under  instrumented flight  rules  (IFR)  would  increase  from  5.8  million 
in   1967 to  18.7  million  in   1979.  (FAA Release  68-21) 
NAA  announced  award  of  1967  Frank  G.  Brewer  Trophy  to  New  York 
Univ.  Professor  Emeritus  Dr.  Roland  H.  Spaulding  for  “continuous, 
youth  of  the nation.  . . .” (NAA   News, 3/29/68) 
outstanding,  and pioneering contributions  in  aerospace education to  the 
Sen.  Karl  E.  Mundt  (R-S.D.),  ranking  member  of  Senate Committee  on 
Government Operations, praised  March  28  decision  of  Senate Commit- 
tee  on  Armed  Services to   disapprove additional  funds  for  F-111B  a ir-  
craf t  and  urged  that  F-111As  in   combat zone  “be  brought back  imme- 
diately  . . . and  not  returned  to  combat until  they  a re  fully  tested  and 
ready.”  He  said  i t  was  “imperative tha t   the production line be held  up  
until  the design  of  the  airplane  number  160 configuration  is completed 
and  tested  and  can  be  incorporated  into  the  very  next  plane  the  A i r  
Force buys.  If this drastic  step  is  not  taken,  then  we  will  truly  be  com- 
mitting  another  billion  dollar  blunder  in  this  TFX  program  which  al- 
ready has cost the American  taxpayers many, many fruitless billions  of 
dollars.”  (CR, 3/29/68,  S3657-60) 

71 

March  29 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

USA  and  Western  Electric  Co.,  prime  contractor,  signed  six-month, 
$85,480,628 initial  production  contract  for  Sentinel ABM  system. West- 
ern  Electric  would  receive  $28  million  of  total;  balance  would  be 
shared  by  eight  subcontractors.  Contract  would  be  managed  by  Senti- 
nel System Command, Redstone Arsenal, Ala.  (DOD Release 284-68) 
Lockheed Aircraft Corp.  announced orders for  144 triple-jet  G l O l l  air. 
buses  totaling  $2.16  billion.  Eastern  Airlines,  Trans  World  Airlines, 
and  U.K.’s  Air  Holdings, Ltd.,  ordered  50,  44,  and  50  aircraft.  Order, 
largest  in  history  for  aircraft, was  dramatic  reentry  for  Lockheed  into 
commercial aircraft  industry,  which  i t  left  in  1962 a t  conclusion  of  tur- 
boprop  Electra  production.  U.K.’s  Rolls-Royce, Ltd.,  was  selected  to 
build  engines for  250- to  275-passenger aircraft,  which  would  be  deliv- 
ered starting in fall 1971.  (Hudson, N Y T ,  3/30/68,  1) 
U.N.  Secretary General U  Thant  presented  to  U.N.  Economic  and  Social 
Council  Resources  of  the  Sea ,   urging  world  action  to  regulate  use  of 
sea’s  largely  unexplored  riches.  (Brewer, N Y T ,  3/30/68,  16) 
*  Nearly  200,000 mourners  filed  past  biers  of  Cosmonaut Yuri  A.  Gagarin 
and  Col.  Vladimir  Seryogin in Soviet Army House in Moscow.  Premier 
Alexey Kosygin, President Nikolay V.  Podgorny, and Communist Party 
leader  Leonid  I.  Brezhnev  briefly  joined  honor  guard  of  soldiers  near 
biers.  (Winters, B Sun ,  3/30/68;  N Y T ,  3/31/68,21) 
March  30:  USA  successfully conducted first  test-firing of  Spartan  long-range 
interceptor  missile a t  Kwajalein Test Site in Marshall Islands.  (DOD Re- 
lease 289-68;  UPI,  W Po s t ,  3/2/68,  A7) 
Second  combat  loss  of  F-111A  aircraft  in  Vietnam  conflict  occurred 
when  aircraft  crashed  in  Thailand  after  an  “in-flight emergency.”  Tw o  
crewmen were  rescued.  First  F-111A  wa s   reported  missing  March  28. 
( N Y T ,  3/31/68,  1 ;  4/1/68,  1 ;   W  Po s t ,   3/31/68,  1;  AP,  W  Star, 
3/31/68,  1 ;  Wilson,  W  Pos t ,   4/1/68) 
March  31 : NASA’s six-week  1968  Airborne  Aurora  Expedition  had  accom- 
plished  most  intensive  studies  ever  made  of  northern  lights  and  had 
proved  dramatically  value  of  high-altitude  observatory  jet  transport 
aircraft  to  “stop  time”  near  poles  [see  Jan.  181. Expedition,  based  a t  
Fort  Churchill, Canada, with  cooperation of  National Research  Council 
of  Canada and managed and directed by  ARC’S  Louis C.  Haughney, had 
ended  in  mid-March.  Convair  990  jet  transport,  carrying  13  experi- 
ments, followed underneath  auroras  a t  550 mph,  making frequent  trips 
to  north  magnetic pole,  north  of  Greenland;  took  40,000  auroral  pho- 
tos;  and  recorded  instrument  readings  on  180,000 f t   of  magnetic tape. 
Jet  aircraft  canceled  out  speed  of  earth‘s  rotation  by  flying  against  it 
and  holding  constant  position  on  night  side  of  earth  opposite  sun  at 
latitudes above 60” north. 
Aircraft  on  three  occasions  crossed  same  spot  on  arctic  north  pole 
end  of  earth‘s  magnetic  field  as  did  NASA’s Ogo   ZV satellite  a t   south 
pole  end,  in  400-mi-altitude orbit  over  Antarctica.  Measuring  instru- 
ments  on  both  satellite  and  aircraft  were  nearly  identical.  In   another 
aircraft-satellite combination,  on  six passes  aircraft  measured group  of 
auroras  from  below  a t  40,000-ft altitude  while  Ogo  IV   measured  same 
group from above.  (NASA  Release 68-45 ; ARC Release 68-8) 
0  Cost  of  spaceflight  was  discussed  by  space  writer  Arthur  C.  Clarke.  As 
with  aviation,  cost  would  decrease  as  techniques  improved.  Reusable 
spacecraft, orbital  refueling, and nuclear  propulsion would  make  travel 

72 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

March  31 

to   moon,  a t   least,  “comparable  i n   cost  to  that  of  global  jet  transport 
today.” 
If  conquest of  space served no  other  purpose,  i t  would provide  “new 
mental  and  emotional horizons  which  our  age  needs  more  desperately 
than  most  people  yet  realize.”  Yet  there  were  signs  US. space  effort 
was  “grinding  to  a  halt,  a s   its  initial  crisis-induced momentum  is  ex- 
hausted.’,  U.S.  might  well  be  “Sputniked”  again  in  early  1970s. 
(Clarke, H  Chron,  3/31/68;  LA   Times,  3/31/68) 
During March:  Special ESSA  task  force  recommended environmental science 
and  service  agencies  take  early,  joint  steps  toward  national  effort  for 
development and  use  of  earth-oriented  space technology.  I n  Man’s  Geo- 
physical  Environment:  I t s   S tudy   from   Space,  task  force  predicted  fu -  
ture  space platforms  would  be  able  to  acquire  global  geophysical  data 
on  unprecedented  scale  for  environmental  disciplines. I t   recommended 
combination  of  manned  and  unmanned  space vehicles-rather 
than  ei- 
ther  alone-and  warned  that  orbiting  environmental  observatories 
might  provide  data  too  rapidly  for  effective  use  unless  data  handling 
and  display  improvements  were  begun  in  immediate  future.  It  rated 
highly  spacecraft capability  to  service and  repair  manned  spacecraft in 
orbit,  to  provide  semiautomatic  mode  to  operate  manned  spacecraft 
after flight crew left,  and  to  launch  subsatellites, special probes,  and  re- 
coverable capsules from orbit. 
Among  proposals  for  missions were  continuous monitoring  of  space 
disturbances  to  predict  spaceflight  hazards,  global  ionospheric  m a p  
ping,  global noise  and  interference survey,  global measurements of  ab- 
solute ground  and sea  surface temperatures  and  surface  roughness, and 
surveys  of  snow  areas,  river  and  lake  ice  distribution,  rain  and  river 
gauging, shoals, and sea states.  (Text) 
NRC   Committee  on  Polar  Research,  established  in  1958  to   continue  re- 
search begun  by  NAS  during  International Geophysical Year,  began  re- 
view  of  significant results of  past  research efforts,  to  pinpoint  scientific 
questions that  should be  studied  in  either  of  polar  regions  during  next 
few  years,  and  to  make  recommendations on  national  research  goals. 
(NAS-NRC-NAE  News  Report,  3/68,  2 )  
0  Strong  arguments  in  favor  of  Europe’s making  comsats  “focal  point”  of 
space  activity  were  presented  in  Spaceflight  by  spacewriter  Arthur  C. 
Clarke,  former  chairman  of  British  Interplanetary  Society.  “Reliable 
domestic radio  services are not  available  over  most  of  the world.  Long 
distance services are  of  poor  quality  . . . [and]  by  1970, there  w i l l   be 
130 million VHF  sets in  the world, many  of  which  could  pick  up  direct 
radio  broadcasts  from  satellites.”  U.K.,  he  said,  “certainly  cannot  do 
everything  in  space. But  what  we  should  not  tolerate  is  the  apparently 
invincible ignorance  of  those who  think  that  nothing  in   space is  worth 
doing.  . . . Our  space  achievements w i l l   be  our  greatest  legacy  to  the 
future.  Indeed they w i l l  create that  future. They will make i t  possible to 
have  a  future.’’  (Clarke, SF ,   3/68,  78-84) 
Effects  of  manned  space  flight  program  on  communities  surrounding 
NASA  space  flight  centers  were  discussed  in  Monthly  Labor  Rev iew .  
South had  gained most  from  1967 decision to proceed with  Apollo Pro- 
gram.  Total  civil service and contractor  employment increase of  66,000 
in  five  states  bordering  Gulf  of  Mexico  was  about  5%   of  area’s  in- 
crease in  total  nonagricultural  employment. However,  economic signifi- 

73 

During  March 

of  employment  in program  in  1966  had 
nd  if  funding  continued  to  decline  after 
1968 communities would have  to  adjust  to  sharply contracting  employ- 
ment.  (Holman, Konkel, Mon th ly  Labor  Rev iew ,  3/68,30-6) 

74 

April  1968 

April I: Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth, Director of  NASA’s Manned  Spacecraft  Cen- 
ter,  was  elected member  of  National  Academy  of  Engineering  “in  rec- 
ognition  and  in  honor  of  his  important  contributions  to  engineering 
and  of  his  leadership  in  the  field.”  He  w a s   cited  for  development and 
operation  of  manned spacecraft.  (NAE  P IO ;   MSC  Roundup,  4/12/68,  1) 
USAF  F-111A  aircraft  had  been  grounded by  USAF  pending  results  of  in- 
vestigation of  March 28  and  30 crashes, Associated Press  reported.  (W 
S tar ,  4/1/68,  A3) 
9  New  York  Times editorial  on  F-111A  aircraft:  “The  difficulties  that 
have  beset  the  cont;roversial F-111  swing-wing plane  recently  provide 
new  evidence of  the  folly  of  allowing political  factors  to  veto  o r   dilute 
technical judgment. 
“These  additional  blows  to  a  plane  that  still  has  great  potential 
promise emphasize what most  experts have been  saying for  seven years 
-the  F-111  has  been  built  the  wrong  way  from  the  beginning.  It  re- 
flected  former  Secretary  of  Defense  McNamara’s  insistence,  in   the 
name  of  ‘commonality’  and  savings,  that  the  Navy  and  the  Air  Force 
buy  one plane for two entirely different missions. 
“But,  though  the  Navy’s  version may  never-as  Congress believes- 
ities as a  supersonic high- and  low-level all-weather fighter-bomber . . . 
meet  the Navy’s  needs,  the Air  Force model ha s  great potential  capabil- 
[and]  must  be  developed, tested  and  utilized  to  its  fullest  capability.” 
(NYT,  4/1/68) 
0  AEC-NASA  Space Nuclear  Propulsion Office awarded Aerojet-General Corp. 
extension  of  cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  for  nuclear  propulsion  work. 
funding 
Extension  covered  period  through  Sept.  30,  but  NASA 
would be restricted  to  effort through  July  31 pending  Congressional ac- 
tion  on  NASA’s  FY  1969 budget  request.  Extension  brought  total  esti- 
mated  cost to  $59,413,790 for Oct.  1, 1967, through  Sept.  30,  1968, in- 
cluding  $25,845,000  NASA  share.  ( NASA  Release  68-57;  V S J ,  4/2/68, 
12 ; SBD, 4 /2 /68 ,179 )  
MSFC  contract  awards:  $2,056,360 contract  modification  to  RCA  for  con- 
tinued  support  of  RCA   l lOA  computers for  use  in   checkout and  launch 
of  Saturn  IB  and  Saturn  V  launch  vehicles,  bringing  total  contract 
value  to  $12.7  million;  and  $11,750,000  follow-on contract  to  Sanders 
Associates, Inc.,  to  provide logistics and engineering  support  t o  Saturn 
V  operational display systems a t  MSFC,  bringing  total value of  contracts 
to $3,899,548.  ( MSFC  Releases 68-57,68-58) 
9  USAF  awarded  RCA  $100,000  initial  increment  to  $1.5-miUion  fixed-price 
contract  for  study,  evaluation,  and  testing  of  advanced  electro-optical 
techniques for  surveillance of  high-altitude space vehicles.  ( DOD Release 
288-68) 
A p r i l   2:  NASA  and  German  Federal  Ministry  fo r   Scientific  Research 
(BMWF )   were  conducting series of  four  sounding  rocket launches  from 

75 

April  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Thumba  Equatorial  Rocket Launching  Station  ( TERLS)  to   study  upper 
atmosphere  near  Equator.  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rockets  ejected 
barium  clouds  between  90-  and  120-mi altitudes  to  investigate  electric 
fields  in  upper  atmosphere  region  of  intense  electric  current.  Results 
would  be  available  to  world  scientific community.  BMWF  was  responsi- 
ble  fo r  chemical payloads, phptographic equipment, and cloud  observa- 
tion;  Indian  National  Committee for  Space Research  provided  launch 
services ; and  NASA  supplied  sounding  rockets  and  rocket  launcher. 
(NASA  Release 68-58) 
President  Johnson,  in  letter  transmitting  to  Congress  Fijth  Annual  Re- 
por t   on  Communications  Satellite  Act  of  1962, said:  “[Report]  reflects 
. . . steady  progress  toward  the  ultimate  goal  of  providing  mankind 
with  new  capabilities  for  worldwide communication.  I n   the  brief  span 
of  five years,  satellite technology has grown dynamically. The  possibili- 
ties envisioned in  1962 have been  greatly  exceeded.”  Communications, 
he  said, must provide  “ ‘network for  knowledge’ so  that  all  peoples  can 
share  the  scientific,  educational,  and  cultural  advances  of 
this 
planet.  . . . 
“Failure  to  reach  these  goals  can  only  contribute  to  apathy,  igno- 
rance,  poverty and despair  in  a very  large part  of  the world.  Success in  
our  telecommunications policies can  be  a  critical  link  in  our  search  for 
the  understanding  and  tolerance  from  which  peace  springs.  Communi- 
cation by  satellite is  a  tool-one 
of  the most  promising which mankind 
attain  this end.”  (Text; AP, W  S tar ,  4/3/68,  A7; 
has had  thus  far-to 
P D ,  4 /8 /68 ,637 )  
Senate Armed  Services Committee, after  hearing  DOD witnesses  in  closed 
session, voted  to  appropriate $297 million-including  $170  million  for 
contract  definition of  Navy VFX-1  as possible replacement for F-111B 
-for 
continuation  of  USN’S  fighter-bomber program  and  procurement 
of  F -4 J   Phantom  jet  aircraft.  Committee had  voted  March  28  to  deny 
the  funds. Contract definition phase was  expected  to  take  8-12  mo.  (W  
S tar ,  4/3/68,  A8) 
Dr.  John  C.  Houbolt, Executive Vice  President  of  Aeronautical Research 
Associates  of  Princeton,  Inc.,  received  AIAA  Structures  and  Materials 
Award  for  his  “original,  definitive,  and  continuous  research  leading  to 
the  use  of  random  processes  in  aircraft  gust  loads  design.”  ( SBD ,  
4 /4 /68 ,193 )  
April  3 :  U.S.S.R.  successfully  launched  Cosmos  CCX   into  orbit  with  374- 
km  (232.4-mi)  apogee, 198-km (123-mi) perigee, 90.2-min period,  and 
81.3”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  April  11.  ( SBD ,   4/4/68,  197; 
G SFC  SSR ,  4/15/68) 
0  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill Research 
Range carried  GSFC  payload  to  81-mi  (129-km)  altitude  to  gather  data 
on  charged  particle  flux  associated  with  aurora  and  to  investigate dis- 
tribution  of  electric fields in  ionosphere, occurrence of  radio  noise,  and 
ionospheric electron densities during  auroral  displays. Experimental re- 
sults were 70%  successful. (NASA  Rpt SRL)  
National  Academy  of  Sciences  president,  Dr.  Frederick  Seitz,  was 
elected president  of  Rockefeller Univ.  to  succeed Dr.  Detlev W.  Bronk, 
who  would  retire  July  1.  Dr.  Seitz  would  divide  his  time  between 
NAS  and  University  until  early  1969, when  he  would  assume  his  full- 
time  educational duties. Member  of  President’s  Science Advisory  Com- 

76 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

A p d  3 

mittee  and  of  DOD’S  Defense  Science  Board,  which  he  chaired  fou r  
years ending in  March,  Dr.  Seitz had  succeeded Dr.  Bronk  as NAS  pres- 
ident  i n   1962.  (Farber,  NYT,  4/4/68;  NAS-NRC-NAE 
News  Report, 
4/68) 
Dr.  Harold  A.  Rosen,  Assistant  Manager  of  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.  Space 
Systems  Div.  and  Manager  of  Hughes  Satellite  Systems  Laboratories, 
was  named  recipient  of  U’S 
first  Aerospace Communications Award 
fo r  his  “leadership  in  making  synchronous  satellite communications  a 
global  reality,  thereby  opening  a  new  challenge  for  the  progress  of 
mankind.” Award  also honored late Don  Williams, former  Chief  Scien- 
tist  for  Communications  Satellite  Systems  a t   Hughes,  for  “his  early 
recognition,  technical  judgment,  inventiveness,  and  singular  dedica- 
tion  in  pioneering  the  development  and  design  of  synchronous  com- 
munications satellites.”  (MU   News; AIAA  P IO )  
USAF  was  flight-testing tactical  photographic  image  transmission  (TAPIT) 
subsystem  which  would  enable  tactical  fighter  aircraft  to  perform  a s  
reconnaissance  vehicles.  TAPIT,  self-contained  in  pod  mounted  under 
aircraft  wing  with  small  control  box  in  cockpit,  took  panoramic  pic- 
tures  from  low  altitudes;  developed  film  in  seven  seconds;  electroni- 
cally scanned photos ; and  transmitted  signals to ground  stations within 
100-mi radius.  ( AFSC  Release 24.68) 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  awarded  IBM’S  Space  Guidance  Center 
$1,303,758  contract  for  spare parts  and  logistics support  of  instrument 
units  that  guided  Saturn  IB   and  Saturn  V  launch  vehicles.  (MSFC   Re- 
lease 68-63) 
April  4:  NASA’s ApoZZo  6  (AS-502)  was  successfully  launched  from  KSC 
Complex 39A  a t   7 : O O   am  EST  on  mission  to  qualify  Saturn  V  launch 
vehicle  for  future  manned  space  flights.  Primary  objectives  were  to 
demonstrate  structural  and  thermal  integrity  and  compatibility  of 
launch vehicle and  spacecraft; confirm launch loads and  dynamic char- 
acteristics ; demonstrate s-II/S-IC 
and S-IVB/S-I1 
stage separations ; 
verify  operation  of  propulsion  (including  S-IVB  restart) , guidance 
and  control  (optimum  injection) , and  electrical  systems;  evaluate 
performance  of  emergency  detection  system  ( EDS)  in  closed-loop 
configuration;  and  demonstrate  mission  support  facilities  and  oper- 
ations  required  for  launch,  mission  conduct,  and  command  module 
( C M )   recovery. 
Launch  vehicle  1st-stage performance  was  near  nominal,  but  two  of 
five  2nd-stage  52  engines  shut  down  prematurely,  causing  remaining 
2nd-stage engines and 3rd-stage engine to burn  longer than  planned. As 
result,  spacecraft  and  3rd  stage  entered  elliptical  parking  orbit  with 
223.1-mi  (395.1-km)  apogee,  107-mi (172.1-km) perigee,  and  89.8-min 
period  instead  of  planned  circular  orbit  of  115-mi  (175-km)  altitude. 
When  3rd  stage  failed  to  reignite  on  command  after  two  orbits  as 
planned,  NASA  switched  to  alternate  mission,  firing  service  propulsion 
system  ( SPS) 
to  place  spacecraft  into  trajectory  with  13,823-mi 
(22,225.4-km)  apogee.  Since  insufficient  propellant  remained  after  ex- 
tended  burn,  second  SPS burn  was  not  attempted  and  CM  reentered  at 
22,376  mph,  just  under  planned  25,000-mph rate.  Spacecraft  splashed 
down  50 mi  off  target  in   Pacific 9 h r   50 min  after  launch  and  was  re- 
covered  in  good  condition  by  U.S.S.  Okinawa.  Preliminary  assessment 
indicated  four  of  five  primary  objectives  were  attained,  even  though 

77 

Apr i l   4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

launch  vehicle  performance  and  S-IVB  restart  and  guidance  control 
(optimum  injection)  were  not  fully  successful  [see  April  11 and  241. 
Apollo 6 was second flight for Saturn V launch vehicle and boilerplate 
lunar  module  ( LM )   and  fourth  for  operational  Block  I  command/serv- 
ice  module  ( C SM )  . Spacecraft  had  been  modified  to  include  Block  I1 
heatshield  and  instrumentation  for  unmanned  configuration,  delete 
crew  provisions,  incorporate  new  unified  quick-operating  hatch  and 
movie camera to record  launch escape system  ( LES)  jettison  and  reentry 
conditions,  and  relocate sequence camera  for  earth  landmark photogra- 
phy.  Apollo  4  (launched  Nov.  9,  1967)  and  Apollo  5  (launched  Jan. 
22,  1968)  had  both  been  highly  successful, completing inflight  tests  of 
all  major  pieces  of  Apollo hardware.  Apollo  program  was  directed  by 
NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space  Flight;  MSC   was  responsible  for  Apollo 
spacecraft  development,  MSFC  for  Saturn  launch  vehicle  development, 
and KSC  for  launch  operations. Tracking  and data  acquisition was  man- 
aged  by  GSFC  under  overall  direction  of  NASA  Office  of  Tracking  and 
Data  Acquisition.  (NASA   P ro j   Off;  NASA  Release  68-54K;  W  Post, 
4/5/68,  A18;  UPI,  W Star, 4/5/68,  A3) 
NASA  test  pilot  William  H.  Dana  flew  X-15  No.  1 to  187,500-ft altitude 
and  3,546  mph  (mach  5.27)  to   test  spray-on  foam  insulation,  much 
lighter  than  previously  used  insulation, for  use  on  Saturn  V  2nd  stage. 
Test,  from  lidwards  AFB,  was  satisfactory,  with  X-15  performing  in  
maximum-heating design  trajectory  close  to  that  of  Saturn  V  and  sus- 
taining  temperatures  of  up   to  1,500"F.  (X-15  P ro j   Off; MSFC  Release 
68-69;  AP, P Inq,  4/5/68) 
Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill 
Research Range carrying GSFC  payload  to  gather data  on charged  parti- 
cle fluxes associated with  aurora  and  to  investigate distribution  of  elec- 
tric  fields  in  ionosphere,  occurrence  of  radio  noise,  and  ionospheric 
electron densities during  auroral  displays. Rocket and  instruments per- 
formed satisfactorily;  good data were acquired.  (NASA Rpt SRL) 
0  ARC  scientists Dr.  William L.  Quaide and Verne R.  Oberbeck had developed 
method  of  calculating  lunar  soil  depths  using  measurements based  on 
Lunar  Orbiter  photos  and  Surveyor  photos  and  surface  analyses,  NASA 
announced. Studies  indicated  that  many  of  moon's  smaller  craters  and 
much  of  soil  and  fragmental  material  on  lunar  surface  were  result  of 
meteoroid impacts.  By  simulating impacts in  laboratory and comparing 
results  with  photos  of  lunar  craters  scientists  identified  four  crater 
types:  (1 )   craters with  up to  12-ft dia,  round  bottoms, and depths 25% 
of  their  diameter;  ( 2 )   craters  with  12- to  22-ft  dia,  flat  bottoms,  and 
central  mound;  (3)   craters with  22-  to  30-ft dia,  flat  bottoms,  and  no 
mound;  and  (4 )  craters  with  diameter  greater  than  30  ft  with  second 
crater  gouged  in  flat  bottom.  Thick  layer  of  fragmented  material, 
calculated  by  new  method  to  be  up  to  20  yd  deep,  coincided  with 
densely cratered  areas  to  support  impact theory.  (NASA  Release 68-59; 
SBD,  4/5/68,  202) 
0  Model  of  wheel-shaped  planetary  landing  craft,  sterilized  by  heat  and 
dropped  from  250-ft  altitude  by  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory,  operated 
successfully after  impacting dry  lake in Mojave Desert a t  80 mph-ma- 
jor  step  in  demonstrating  feasibility  of  sending  lightweight  scientific 
landing  capsule  to  Mars.  Craft's  radio  transmitter  turned  on  30  sec 
after  craft  struck  surface  and  operated  20  min.  Anemometer  deployed 

78 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

April  4 

automatically  3 min  after  impact,  to  measure wind  velocity.  Following 
mission  profile  identical  to  projected  Mars  surface  operations,  radio 
turned  on  again  22  h r   a{ter  initial  transmission  (when  earth  would 
again be  in view).  Signals from three-watt transmitter  were  received fo r  
another  40  min  to  conclude  test.  Craft  was  powered  by  12-cell, silver- 
zinc battery,  first known  to  survive both  heat  sterilization  and  high-ve- 
locity impact.  (NASA  Release 68-69;  JPL Release 473;  JPL   PIO) 
*  USAF’S  Lincoln  Experimental  Satellite  (Le s   V )  (launched  July  1, 1967 ) ,  
first  all  solid-state UHF   band  comsat,  had  been  used  in  first  network  of 
tactical  terminals  to  include  a  comsat, first  air-to-air  link  via  satellite 
relay,  and  first communications link  from high  latitudes  via  satellite  as 
part  of  USAF  program  to  improve communications between  aircraft. Les 
V  w a s  testing UHF   teletype system which  relayed  60-wpm messages over 
ground  distances  of  up  to  8,000 mi.  Satellite’s  20,000-mi-altitude orbit 
allowed  line  of  sight  stretching nearly  halfway around  the  world.  USAF 
proposed using  system for  communications between  low-altitude attack 
aircraft  and  rear  area  controllers,  for  USAF  worldwide  logistic  control 
and  status  reporting  system,  and  for  strike  and  reconnaissance  report- 
ing.  (AFSC  Release 23.68) 
Dr.  William H .   Pickering,  Director  of  Cal Tech’s  Jet  Propulsion  Labora- 
tory,  spoke  at  Space Forum  sponsored by  American  Institute  of  Aero- 
nautics  and Astronautics, American Astronautical Society, and  Institute 
of  Environmental Sciences in Washington, D.C.  Describing first  decade 
in space as “most productive . . . in history  of  technology,”  he  forecast 
manned  lunar  operations  including  lunar  laboratories  before  end  of 
second decade;  tour  of  Jupiter,  Saturn, Uranus,  and  Neptune by  single 
spacecraft  in  1977;  and  dramatic  yield  from  growing  applications  of 
near-earth satellites. 
He  urged  initiation  of  “orderly  planning  cycle”  to  replace  major 
programs  being  phased  out.  Emphasis  of  next  phase  was  likely  to  be 
“gleaning  more  benefits’’  from  space  dollar  expenditure.  National 
Space  Council  estimated  annual  return  from  space  would  markedly 
exceed expenditures in 10 yr .   (Text) 
0  NASA  would  negotiate  $3.5-million, one-year,  cost-plus-fixed-fee contract 
with  General  Electric  Co.% Apollo  Systems  Div.  for  Apollo  Applica- 
tions engineering  support.  GE, under  direction  of  NASA  Hq.  Apollo  Ap- 
plications Program  Office,  would  provide  engineering  support  in  areas 
of  quality and  reliability, configuration and data management, test,  and 
checkout.  (NASA  Release 68-61) 
0  MSFC  contract  activity:  RCA   was  awarded  $1,293,aO  contract  to  modify 
RCA   110 computer  module  boards,  by  systematically incorporating  im- 
proved solder design. 
IBM   was  issued  $1,523,282  supplemental  agreement  for  adjustment 
and  implementation  of  configuration  management  for  fabrication,  as- 
sembly,  checkout,  and  delivery  of  2 7   Apollo/Saturn  instrument  unit 
stages and other support equipment. 
Air  Products  and  Chemicals,  Inc.,  received  $2,249,364 contract  ex- 
tension to  supply  12 million  lb  liquid  hydrogen by March  31,  1969, to 
MSFC,  purchasing  agent  for  Government agencies  and  their  supporting 
contractors in eastern US. 
Three  one-year contract  renewals,  effective through  March  31,  1969, 
were  awarded  for  MSFC  support  services: $10.5 million  to  Brown Engi- 

79 

April  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

neering  Co.  for  services  in  Propulsion  and  Vehicle  Engineering  Labo- 
ratory,  $4,504,000 to  SPACO  Inc.  for  services in  Quality  and  Reliability 
Assurance  Laboratory,  and  $2,273,000  to  Hayes  International  for 
services  in  Manufacturing  Engineering  Laboratory.  ( MSFC  Releases 
68-64,68-65,68-66,68-67) 
April  5:  ComSatCorp,  on  behalf  of  International  Telecommunications Sat- 
ellite  Consortium  ( INTELSAT) , leased  antenna  and  related  facilities  a t  
Fucino,  Italy,  earth  station  from  Telespazio,  Italian  space  communica- 
tions  company.  Fucino  facilities, approved by  INTELSAT’s  Interim  com -  
munications Satellite Committee  ( IC SC )  , would be  used  for  tracking,  te- 
lemetry,  and  command duties  for  INTELSAT  comsats.  (ComSatCorp Re- 
lease 68-15) 
MSFC  announced  award  to  Harvard  univ.  of  $1,942,300  supplementary 
contract  for  development  of  UV  scanning  spectrometer to  be  flown  as 
solar  experiment on  first  launch  of  Apollo Telescope Mount.  Award  in- 
creased  total  value  to  $6,458,544  for  experiments for  use  with  manned 
solar  observatories.  ( MSFC   Release  68-68;  S BD ,  4/8/68,  210) 
0  Crash  of  F-111A  in  Thailand  March  30  had  been  caused  by  failure  in 
terrain  radar  guidance  system,  newspapers  said  reliable  sources  re- 
ported.  Aircraft  had  reportedly  bucked  and  gyrated  severely,  forcing 
two crew members to eject. USAF  team was  conducting on-site investiga- 
tion  and  was  expected  to  report  findings  in   two  weeks.  (Horton,  AP, 
W  S tar ,   4/5/68,  A6;  Beecher, N Y T ,   4/6/68,  1 0 )  
Apr i l   6:  USAF  launched  two  Orbiting  Vehicle  research  satellites  pickaback 
from Vandenberg  AFB  by  Atlas-F booster.  OV  I-13  entered  orbit  with 
5,789-mi  (9,316.2-km)  apogee,  346-mi  ( 5 5 6 . 7 - h )   perigee,  199.5-min 
period,  and  100.5”  inclination  to  determine  flexibility  of  cadmium  sul- 
fide solar  cells in  space  and  to   measure proton/electron  energy  spectra 
and  angular  distribution  of  electrons.  OV  I-14,  launched  to  obtain 
high-resolution  measurements  of  proton/electron  flux,  spectra,  decay, 
and  time  variations,  entered  orbit  with  6,173-mi  (9,934.2-km)  apogee, 
348-mi  (560.0-km)  perigee,  207.8-min  period,  and  100.0” inclination. 
(UPI ,   C  T r i b ,  4 /8 /68 ;   S B D ,   4/9/68,  220;  GSFC  SSR ,   4/15/69;  Pres 
Rp t  68) 
Third  anniversary  of  launch  of  85-lb  ( E a r l y   B i r d ) ,  world’s  first  com- 
mercial  comsat,  owned  by  INTELSAT  and  managed  by  ComSatCorp. 
Originally designed as experimental-operational satellite with  l8-mo life 
expectancy, comsat  launched  by  NASA  into  22,300-mi-altitude synchro- 
nous  orbit  over  Atlantic,  wa s   still  providing  service  between  North 
America  and  Europe with  100%  reliability.  Intelsat  I   had  received  and 
transmitted  more  than  200  h r   of  TV  and  thousands  of  telephone calls, 
data  and  record  messages,  and  other  general  communications without 
satellite  service  outage.  TV  use  of  Intelsat  I   increased  from  31  pro- 
grams  consuming 31 h r   leased  time  in  1965 to   160 programs  and  125 
h r   in  1967. Highlights  of  TV  broadcasts  included  live  coverage  of  At- 
lantic  splashdowns  of  Gemini  spacecraft,  sports  events,  public  affairs, 
and news programs.  (ComSatCorp Release 68-16) 
. . . was  the  extraordinary  difficulty  of  assuring  that  every  one  of  the 
New  Y o r k   T imes   editorial  on  Apollo  6  mission:  “What  was  illustrated 
literally  millions  of  components in  such  an  extremely  complicated sys- 
tem  a s   the  Saturn  5  works  perfectly.  But  the  complexity  of  the  total 
Apollo mechanism for  the  planned manned voyage to  the  moon  . . . is 
80 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
April  6 
even greater.  . . . This  fact  argues for  a  slow but  sure  approach  to  fu- 
ture Apollo tests,  rather  than  an  adventuresome policy  aimed  primarily 
a t  completing the job by the end of  1969. 
“Regrettable  as  were  Saturn  5’s  deficiencies  as  demonstrated  in 
this  week’s  test,  they  provide  a  useful  warning  against  renewed  over- 
confidence and  the  costs  it  could again  impose.”  ( N Y T ,  4/6/68,  36) 
In   New   Republic,  Louis  J.  Halle  wrote  “Why  I’m  for  Space  Explora- 
tion.”  I t  was  less than  12 yr  since life on  earth had  emerged  “from  our 
planet’s  atmospheric envelope into  outer space.”  He was  puzzled  to  find 
“marked  lack  of  enthusiasm  . . . at  the  prospect  of  man’s  liberation 
from  this  earthly  prison.”  Many,  he  felt, were  moved by  “spiritual  hor- 
ror”  at  notion  of  looking  beyond  earth.  “Now  . . . that  we  are  at  last 
beginning  to  escape  €rom our  native  confines,  there  is  no  telling  what 
light  we  may  find  in  the  larger  universe  to  dissipate  the  darkness  of 
our minds.”  There was  also  possibility “that  we  may  begin  to  populate 
new  planets  as, after  1492, we  began  to  populate a  new  continent.  Sud- 
denly man’s  fate  seems boundless.”  ( A F / S D ,  7/68,  51-4.) 
April  7 :   U.S.S.R.  successfully  launched  Luna  XZV  unmanned  spacecraft 
toward moon  “to conduct further  studies of  near-lunar space,”  Tass  an- 
nounced.  All  systems  were  functioning  normally  and  spacecraft  was 
traveling  close  to  planned  trajectory.  [See  April  10  and  11.1  (Ander- 
son, N Y T ,  4 /8 /68 , 1 ;   AP, W Star, 4/8/68,  A3;  GSFC  S S R ,  4/15/68) 
Long-nosed  USAF  C-131  research  aircraft  was  being  developed  for  Air 
Force  Systems Command by  Cornel1 Aeronautical Laboratory,  Inc.,  as 
unique  flying  simulator  to  test  controls,  instruments,  and  aircraft  con- 
figurations  of  advanced  aircraft  such  as  Advanced  Manned  Strategic 
Aircraft  (AM SA )  , military  C-5A  cargo  and  passenger  aircraft,  and  SST. 
Total  In-Flight  Simulator  ( TIFS)   configuration-with  nose  length vary- 
ing  to  simulate  advanced  aircraft  and  with  second  cockpit  below  and 
ahead  of  main  cockpit  and  six  independent  controls-would 
realisti- 
cally  reproduce  handling  conditions  of  modeled  aircraft  and  enable 
USAF  to  determine  inexpensively  in  advance correct  design  and  instru- 
mentation for  advanced aircraft.  ( AFSC  Release 45.68) 
0  In  Perception  of  Space  and  T im e   i n   the  Cosmos ,  published  in  U.S.S.R., 
Cosmonaut  Aleksey  A .   Leonov,  who  made  first  space walk  from  Vo s -  
khod  ZZ spacecraft March  18, 1965, and  Soviet space medicine special- 
ist  Vladimir  Lebedev  claimed  pilots’  distorted  perceptions  of  dimen- 
sions  and  time  were  frequent  factors  in  aircraft  accidents.  In   space 
flights  such  miscalculation could  cause  incineration  during  reentry  or, 
conversely,  divert  spacecraft  into  an   orbit  of  no  return.  Authors  di- 
vided  people  into  three  categories:  those  who  suffered  no  ill  effects 
from weightlessness, those who  required  time for  adjustment,  and  those 
who  were  unable  to  adjust  and  should  be  permanently grounded.  They 
suggested  spacecraft  of  future  protect  against  monotony  of  unbroken 
routine  by  carrying  well-stocked  libraries,  cinema,  and  discotheque. 
(Stevens, W S tar ,  4/7/68,  F6) 
Washington  Sunday  S tar   editorial  on  Apollo  6  mission:  “.  . . Saturn 
5’s  latest  performance  . . . suggests  that  our  astronauts  may  not  be 
able to  carry  out  their  lunar  mission until  considerably later  than  opti- 
mists  have  suggested-possibly  not  until  1971,  i f   then.  . . . However 
. . . it  is  better  to  be  sa€e than  sorry.  Saturn  5’s  deficiencies must  be 
eliminated, no matter  how  long the  job  takes,  before  it is used  to  lift  a 

81 

April  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

manned  Apollo  spacecraft  to  the  moon.  Despite  loose  talk  about  a  So- 
viet-American ‘space race,’  there  should  be  no  all-out  drive,  no  sense- 
less rush, to score a first in this field.”  (W  S tar ,  4/7/68,  F1) 
- 4 p r i l 8 :  NASA  announced publication of  Teleoperators  and Human Augmentu- 
t ion   (NASA  SP-5047)  , NASA-AEC 
technology  survey  issued  by  NASA 
Office  of  Technology Utilization and  written  by  Edwin  G.  Johnsen  and 
William R.  Corliss.  It covered work  of  both  agencies  in  development of 
teleoperators,  including  history  of  the  robot-like machines,  assessment 
of  their  impact  on  technology, and  explanation  of  principal  subsystems 
of  those  in   use.  Since  1948 “some  3,000 manipulator  arms”  had  been 
built  in U.S.- 
“the  advance guard  of  an  army of  man-machine systems 
now  assembling  to  serve  man  in  a  variety  of  ways.” 
(NASA  Release 
68-62) 
0  NASA  selected  Teledyne  Systems  Co.  for  negotiation  of  $950,000  15-mo 
contract  to  design  and  construct  prototype  airborne  digital  computer 
unit  for  Centaur  launch  vehicle’s  guidance  and  control  system.  Con- 
tract,  which  would  include  option  for  five  additional  units  with  re- 
quired  ground  support  equipment  and  spare  parts,  would  be  managed 
by L eRC .   (NASA   Release 68-64) 
Harold  D.  Babcock, 40-yr  member  of  Mt.  Wilson  and  Mt.  Palomar  Ob- 
servatory  staffs, died.  He  was  specialist in  study  of  spectra  of  sunspots 
and discoverer of  fact  that  magnetic field  of  sun  reversed  polarity  peri- 
odically.  ( NAS-NRC-NAE  News  Repor t ,  5 /68 ,1 0 )  
Apr i l   9 :  U.S.S.R.  successfully  launched  Cosmos  C C X I .   Orbital  parame- 
ters:  apogee, 1,545 km  (960 mi) ; perigee, 199 km  (123.6 mi) ; period, 
102.1  min;  and  inclination,  81’.  Satellite  reentered  Nov.  10.  ( S B D ,  
4 /10 /68 ,266 ;   GSFC  SSR, 4/15/68;  11/15/68) 
NASA  launched  two   Javelin  sounding  rockets  from  NASA  Wallops  Station. 
One  carried  GSFC  payload  to  497-mi  (800-km)  altitude  to  observe he- 
lium  ionization  levels  in  exosphere  with  vacuum-ion  chamber  and  to 
observe  helium  and  oxygen-ion resonance  dayglow  with  filtered  pho- 
tometer.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performance was  satisfactory.  Te- 
lemetry  signal  was  received  for  16 min  40  sec.  Second  rocket  carried 
Syracuse  University  Research  Corp.  vacuum-ion  chamber  to  observe 
helium  ionization  levels  in  exosphere and  Univ.  of  Southern  California 
filtered  photometer  to  observe helium-  and  oxygen-ion  resonance  day- 
glow  to  4?7-mi  (800-km)  altitude.  Rocket  and  instruments  performed 
satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
FAA  awarded  $3.8-million  contract  to  IBM’S  Federal  Systems  Div.  to  
modernize a i r  traffic  control  a t   100 U.S.  facilities by  installing  printers 
and  keyboards  for  faster  coordination  and  reduction  of  controllers’ 
oral  and  manual  workload.  Delivery  of  equipment,  to  begin  April  15, 
would  be  coordinated  with  delivery  of  other  automation  components 
fo r  National Airspace System.  (FAA   Release 68-24) 
.4pril  9-10:  Electronic  signals  on  medical condition  of  USMC volunteer  pa; 
tient  in  Tokyo  were  transmitted  between  Tokyo,  Houston,  and  Wash- 
ington,  D.C.,  via  satellite  and  ground  equipment  to  show  how  world- 
wide  diagnosis  of  complex medical  problems could be  achieved  by  ad- 
vanced  communications.  Intelsat-IZ  F-2  (Pacific I )   comsat  and  AT&T 
landline  facilities we re  used  in demonstration  for  1968 National Telem- 
etry  Conference  of  IEEE  in  Houston.  Signals were  relayed  from  Brew- 
ster Flat, Wash.,  earth station to  Conference and  to  computer centers a t  

82 

April  9-10 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
US .   Public  Health  Service  in  Washington, D.C.,  and  Univ.  of  Texas. 
Demonstration was  directed  by  ITT  World  Communications,  Inc.,  with 
cooperation  of  ComSatCorp  and  Kokusai  Denshin  Denwa  Co.,  Ltd., 
Japan.  (ComSatCorp Release 68-17;  AP,  W  S ta r ,   4/10/68,  A18;  UPI, 
W Pos t ,  4/12/68,  A15 )  
Ap r i l   10:  U.K.’s  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental  Station  reported  U.S.S.R.’s 
Luna  X I V   spacecraft had  apparently entered lunar  orbit  and was  trans- 
mitting  telemetry  but  no  photographic  signals.  U.S.S.R.  had  made  no 
official statement  since  April  7  launch.  (UPI,  N Y T ,   4/11/68,  4 ;   Cohn, 
W Po s t ,  4/11/68,  A27) 
Ernest  W.  Brackett,  Special  Assistant  to  NASA  Assistant  Administrator 
fo r   Industry  Affairs,  was  appointed  Chairman  of  NASA  Board  of  Con- 
tract Appeals, succeeding E.  M.  Shafer, who  became  Chairman  of  NASA 
Contract Adjustment Board. GSFC’s  Matthew J. McCartin was  appointed 
Vice Chairman.  (NASA  Release 68-65) 
Apr i l   1 1 :   U.S.S.R.’s  Luna X I V   had  entered orbit around moon  “close to  the 
calculated  one”  t o   study  correlation  between  earth  and  moon  and  col- 
lect  data  necessary  for  landing  cosmonauts on  moon,  Tass  announced 
in   first  official statement  since  April  7  launch.  Satellite  had  entered 
lunar  orbit  April  10  with  870-km  (540.6-mi)  apolune,  160-km  (99.4- 
mi)  perilune, and 2-hr 40-min period.  (UPI ,   W S tar ,  4/11/68,  A3;  SBD ,  
4/12/68,239-40;  Reuters, N Y T ,  4 /14 /68 ,8 )  
MSFC   issued  report  on  preliminary  results  of  April  4  Apo l lo   6  flight.  Al- 
though  “basic  source  of  the  difficulties”  had  not  yet  been  determined, 
scientists and engineers speculated that wires carrying cutoff  commands 
to  the  malfunctioning  engines  were  interchanged.  First  stage  had  per- 
formed as planned and  stage thrust was  near  predicted during  first por- 
tion  of  flight.  Second  stage  had  performed  satisfactorily  through  1st- 
stage boost, 2nd-stage ignition,  and  early  portion  of  2nd-stage powered 
flight.  First  indications  of  anomaly  were  decreasing  temperatures  on 
main  oxidizer valve  and  its  control  line  on  fifth  engine  and  steady  de- 
crease in  second engine’s yaw  actuator  pressure.  Third  stage performed 
satisfactorily through  first burn  and  orbital  coast. Although engine and 
stage prestart  conditions appeared  normal,  engine received  start  signal, 
and  valves  opened  properly,  engine  did  not  restart.  Initial  data  sug- 
gested  that  leak  in  one  of  two  propellant  lines  to  engine’s  augmented 
spark igniter  might have caused  insufficient or  inadequately mixed  pro- 
pellant  for  proper  start  condition.  Investigations  were  continuing  on 
longitudinal  oscillation of  vehicle.  Guidance and  other  instrumentation 
functions,  telemetry  performance,  and  onboard  TV  camera  operation 
were satisfactory.  (MSFC  Release 68-74?;  AP, N Y T ,  4/12/68,20) 
USAF  and  NASA  had  agreed  to  consolidate  their  photographic  operations 
a t   ETR  under  one  contractor  to  save  estimated  $1 million  first  year. 
Single contractor, selected by  competitive bid, would  report  to  ETR  con- 
tract  manager.  USAF  and  NASA  each  would  provide  one  technical  man- 
ager  to monitor  performance. New  operation would  be  effective Jan.  1, 
1969.  ( KSC  Release 68-151) 
V/A  Hyman  G.  Rickover  ( U S N ) ,   testifying  before  House  Committee  on 
Banking  and  Currency hearings  on  H.R.  15683 to  renew  Defense Pro- 
duction Act  of  1950 a s  amended, warned  against emergence of  “fourth 
branch  of  government,”  partnership  of  Federal  bureaucrats  and  giant 
corporations  “with  men  exerting  power  without  political  responsibil- 

83 

April  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

ity.”  DOD’S  industry-oriented  philosophy,  lack  of  inhouse  capability, 
and  absence  of  standardized  accounting procedures  permitted  Govern- 
ment  subsidization  of  civilian  business  of  defense contractors  and  cost 
U S .  taxpayers billions of  dollars, he said.  (Transcript:  Porter,  W Po s t ,  
5/2/68,  G2) 
Apr i l   1 2 :   NASA  would  negotiate  $900,000, one-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee con- 
tract with  Chrysler Corp.’s  Space Div.  to  study needs  and configuration 
alternatives  for  an   intermediate  payload  launch  vehicle  in   post-1973 
space operations.  Payloads  under  consideration  included  long-duration 
manned  operations  in  low  earth  orbit,  unmanned  satellites in  synchro- 
nous  orbit,  logistic  support  for  manned  lunar  exploration,  and  un- 
manned  planetary  and  deep  space probes.  Contract would  be  managed 
by OMSF.  (NASA   Release 68-67;  Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/13/68) 
Apr i l   14: Cosmos  CCXII   wa s   successfully launched  by  U.S.S.R.  into  orbit 
with  200-km  (124.3-mi)  apogee,  180-km  (111.8-mi)  perigee,  88.3-min 
period,  and  51.6’  inclination.  Satellite  docked  w i t h   Cosmos  CCXIZI 
April  15  and  reentered  April  19.  (AP,  B  Sun, 4/15/68;  UPI,  N Y T ,  
4 /15 /68 ,86 ;   GSFC  S SR ,  4/15/68;  4/30/68) 
Apr i l   15:  U.S.S.R.  successfully  launched  Cosmos  CCXIIZ  into  orbit  with 
254-km  (157.8-mi)  apogee,  186-km  (115.6-mi)  perigee,  89.1-min  pe- 
riod,  and  51.6”  inclination.  At  1 :21  pm  Moscow  time  (3:21  Baikonur 
time)  satellite was automatically docked with Cosmos CCXZI  (launched 
April  1 4 ) .  Tass  later  announced that  satellites used  “special  closing-in 
systems, radio,  technical  and  computing  devices, to  carry  out  an  auto- 
matic  mutual  search,  closing-in, docking,  and  rigid  coupling  to  each 
other.”  Maneuver w a s  second automatic docking in space and was  filmed 
by  TV  cameras  on  board  both  satellites.  U.S.S.R.  had  successfully ac- 
complished  first  automatic  docking  Oct.  30,  1967.  First  successful 
manned  docking had  been  conducted by  U S .   March  16,  1966. Cosmos 
CCXII  and Cosmos CCXIII  remained docked in near-circular orbit 3 h r  
50 min  and were then  separated  automatically by  ground command  and 
placed  into  different orbits. Cosmos  CCXII  reentered April  19 and Cos-  
mos  CCX I I I ,   April  20.  ( W   Pos t ,   4/16/68;  N Y T ,   4/16/68;  B  Sun, 
4/16/68;  SED ,  4/16/68,  255-6;  GSFC  SSR ,  4/15/68;  4 /30 /68 )  
Flight  reenactment had  revealed  that  USAF  F-111A  aircraft  crash March 
30 had  been  caused by  malfunction of  flight  control  system, press  said 
informed  sources  reported.  Second  F-111A,  which  North  Vietnam 
claimed  to  have  shot  down,  was  still  missing;  U S .   officials speculated 
that  aircraft had  crashed in  Thailand  jungle  area.  (UPI ,   N Y T ,  4/16/68, 
22 ;  W N ew s ,  4 /16 /6 8 , 7 )  
Defense  Projects  Support  Office  (DPSO )   wa s   established  in  Special  Pro- 
grams  Office  at  NASA  Hq.  to  manage  specialized  tasks  where  NASA’s 
unique  capabilities  could  provide  needed  support  to   a  limited  number 
of  DOD   projects.  M.  J.  Raffensperger,  Director  of  Advanced  Manned 
Missions Planning  and Operations, Office  of  Manned  Space Flight, was 
appointed  Deputy  Director  of  Special  Programs  Office  and  Acting 
Director of  DPSO.  (NASA  Release 68-66;  NASA Ann, 4/17/68) 
0  Lawrence  A.  Hyland,  Vice  President  and  General  Manager  of  H u g h a  
Aircraft  Co.,  was  selected  by  NAA to  receive  Robert  J.  Collier  Trophy 
for  significant  achievement in  aeronautics  and  astronautics  in  1967 a s  
Hughes Surveyor program  director. Trophy would  be  presented May  7. 
(NAA   Release; AP,  W Po s t ,  4/16/68,  A3) 

8 4  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

April  15 
e  Tass  announced  issuance  of  three  stamps  commemorating  Soviet  space 
achievements: March  18, 1965, space walk by  Aleksey A.  Leonov;  Oct. 
30,  1967,  automatic  docking  of 
two  Cosmos  satellites;  and  Oct. 
18,1967, softlanding of  Venus 4 on Venus.  ( W Post,  4/15/68,  B O )  
April 16: NASA  Associate Administrator, Dr.  Homer E.  Newell,  summarized 
Earth Resoiirces Survey program  at  Fifth  Symposium on Remote Sens- 
ing  of  Environment  at  Univ.  of  Michigan’s  Institute  of  Science  and 
Technology in  Ann  Arbor.  Prospects in  field  were  promising.  Greatest 
use  of  satellites  for  earth  survey  to  date  was  for  meteorological data, 
including  global  cloud-cover photos,  cloud motion,  and  ocean  tempera- 
tures,  but  U S .   still  lacked  “much  of  the  data  essential  for  worldwide 
long-range  weather  €orecasting,”  such  a s   data  on  three-dimensional 
fields  of  density,  wind  velocity,  temperature,  and  water  vapor  within 
the atmosphere. 
Major  contributions  expected  from research  in  other  fields  included: 
completion  of  geodetic programs  which would  permit  determination  of 
relative positions  of  any  tw o   points  on  earth  w i th   improved accuracy; 
monitoring  of  sea  surface  state,  evaluation  of  marine  biological  re- 
sources,  and  surface  observations  of  conditions  of  interest  to  oceanog- 
raphers;  and  improved  identification  of  spectral  signature  of  various 
species  for  agriculture,  forestry,  and  geology.  (Text;  SBD,  4/19/68, 
280) 
e  John  N.  Wilford described in  New York  Times front  page  article  decline 
in  U S .   space expenditures  since  1966:  “Under  pressure  from  the  war 
in  Vietnam,  civilian  space  spending  has  dropped  from  $5.9-billion  in 
the  peak  year  of  1966 to  $4.8-billion  this  year,  and  it  is  expected  to 
drop  much  lower  in  the  fiscal  year  starting  in  July.  Employment  in  
space  work  a t   private  companies, universities  and  Government centers 
has declined from  420,000 in  1966 to  fewer than  300,000 today,  and  i t  
is  still  dropping  a t   the  rate  of  4,000  a  month.”  Signs  of  decline were 
clearly  visible,  in  “ghost  towns’’  that  were  once  test  sites,  and  in  re- 
moval  of  numerous projects from NASA’s  post-Apollo plans.  Fortunately, 
impact  of  cutback  was  softened  because  NASA  had  not  replaced  many 
personnel who  ordinarily  left  agency each  year  and  because  personnel 
dismissed  were  absorbed  by  growing  aircraft  industry  and  expanding 
military  space program.  But  there  was  a  growing feeling “that  once  as- 
tronauts  have landed  on  the moon,  they will have  no  other place of  sig- 
nificance  to  go   fo r   several  years  because  of  sharp  budget  cuts.  These 
cuts have trimmed t o  the bone  all preparations  for  future missions. It is 
as  if  the  astronauts  are  heading  for  a  dead-end on  the  moon.”  (NYT, 
4 /16 /68 ,1 )  
U.K.  Minister  of  Technology  Anthony  W.  Benn  announced  that  U.K. 
would  withdraw  €rom European  Conference  on  Satellite  Communica- 
tions  and  would  make  no  new  commitments to  ELDO,  though  it  would 
increase its  contribution  to  ESRO  by  up  to  6%. U.K.  officials reportedly 
said  decision  not  to  participate  in   proposed  project  for  experimental 
European TV relay satellite was made in effort to avoid unrealistic proj- 
ects  and  concentrate  on  nonspace  aircraft  and  computer  industries. 
(Shuster, NYT,  4/17/68,  79;  Mott,  W  Post,  4/17/68,  A l l )  
MSFC  awarded  Ball  Brothers  Research  COT.  $134,500  contract  for  six 
solar  sensor  systems, including  one  prototype  and  five  flight  units,  for 

85 

April  16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

ApoUo  Telescope  Mount  pointing  control  system.  ( MSFC  Release 
68-76) 
Ap r i t   17: USAF launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg AFB  using 
111-B-Agena  D  booster.  Satellite entered  orbit w i th   262-mi  (4221.6-km) 
apogee,  79-mi  (127.1-km) perigee,  89.9-min  period,  and  111.4” incli- 
nation  and  reentered  April  29.  (Pres Rpt  68;  UPI  W  Post,  4/18/68; 
SBD ,  4/18/68,275;  GSFC  SSR ,  4/30/68) 
NASA  Marc 42A2 Arcas  booster launched from NASA  Wallops  Station  car- 
ried  GSFC  payload  to  4.8-mi  (7.8-km)  altitude  in   ballistic performance 
evaluation  test.  Booster  and  instruments performed  satisiactorily ; bal- 
listic parameters agreed  closely with  predictions.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
Charles W.  Mathews,  Director of  NASA  Apollo Applications  Program,  told 
National  Space  Club  in  Washington,  D.C.,  NASA’s manned  space plan, 
beyond  first Apollo  landing,  “contemplates  a  balanced activity of  lunar 
exploration  and  extension  of  man’s  capabilities  in   ear th   orbit.”  Pro- 
gram had  been  designed  for  flexibility  so  activities could  be  conducted 
in   harmony  with  available  resources.  “We  a re   also  prepared  to  move 
forward  a t   an   increased  pace  when  it  is  desirable  and  possible  to  do 
SO.”  Both  civil  benefits and national  security implications of  space pro- 
gram warranted continued strong  support.  Contingency planning would 
leave more room for budgetary or goal changes, thus placating critics  in  
Congress who claimed NASA  had  not  provided  them with  sufficient flexi- 
bility.  (Text:  Lannan,  W  Star,  4/18/68,  A5;  AP,  B  Sun,  4/18/68, 
A l l )  
Sen.  Margaret  C.  Smith  (R-Me.),  ranking  member  of  Senate Committee 
on Aeronautical and  Space Sciences,  on Senate floor  presented  General 
Accounting  Office  review  of  source  selection  and   award  of  major 
subcontract by  NASA  and  its  prime contractor,  Grumman  Aircraft  Engi- 
neering Corp.,  for  development  of  landing and  rendezvous radar   equip- 
ment  fo r  Apollo  lunar module,  compiled  a t  her  request.  Sen.  Smith ex- 
plained that  although another electronics  firm had  expressed  interest  in  
performing  under  fixed-price contract,  RCA  had  received  contract  be- 
cause  of  agreement  between  Grumman  and  RCA  “before  the  require- 
ments  and  specifications  for  the  radar  components had   been  defined.” 
Noting  that  RCA  estimated cost  of  $23.4  million  had  now  increased  to  
about  $112  million,  she  suggested  that  i f   Grumman  radar   subcontract 
was  illustrative  of  how  NASA  “maintains  surveillance  over  its  appro- 
priated  funds,  it  would  appear  that  substantial  savings  could  be  real- 
ized merely  by  strengthening the agency’s  contracting  practices.’’  ( NASA 
LAR VII /36 ;   CR,  4/17/68,  S4138-46;  AP, B Sun, 4/23/68,  A5) 
NASA  had  awarded  Aerojet-General Corp.’s  Space Div.  $316,776 contract 
to  perform  preliminary  design  of  spacecraft  for   basic  research  on 
frog’s  balance mechanism  (otolith)  under  weightlessness  and  repeated 
acceleration. Project,  initial step  in NASA’s Human Factor  Systems pro- 
gram  to   investigate  primary  balance  mechanism  within  inner  ear, 
would be managed  by NASA Wallops Station under  direction  of Office of 
Advanced  Research  and Technology.  ARC  would  be  responsible fo r   oto- 
lith  experiment package  designed  by  Johns  Hopkins  Applied  Physics 
Laboratory.  (WS Release 68-8;  NASA Release 68-71) 
MSFC   awarded nine-month, $99,000  contract  to  Raymond  Loewy/VCTilliam 
Snaith,  Inc.,  to  conduct  habitability  studies  of  planned  ear th   orbital 
space stations.  Basic goal would  be  to  ensure that  workshop  configura- 

86 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1968 

April  17 

tions  were  comfortable  and  functional  structures  in   which  to  live  and 
work.  ( MSFC  Release 68-79) 
Naval  Research Laboratory  scientist,  Dr.  Richard  C.  Henry,  speaking  a t  
dedication  of  NRL’s  new  E.  0. Hulburt  Center  for  Space  Research  in 
Washington,  D.C.,  presented  data  strongly  supporting  closed  universe 
concept.  Aerobee  sounding  rocket  launched  from  ‘white  Sands  Missile 
Range  Sept.  7,  1967, carrying  soft  x-ray  detector,  had  detected  radia- 
tion  from  large,  unexpected  amount  of  thinly  spread  intergalactic  hy- 
drogen  gas,  evidence  of  existence  of  intergalactic.  matter  previously 
supposed  but  undetected.  Amount  detected  indicated  presence  of  100 
times  as  much  matter  between  galaxies  a s   in  all  stars  in  u n i v e r s e  
enough to  fill up  all space and satisfy  all theoretical  requirements  for  a 
closed universe.  (Text;  Cohn, W Post, 4/18/68,  1) 
Editorial  comment  on  Soviet  space  achievements,  including  successful 
orbiting  of  Luna  XZV  and  docking  of  Cosmos   CCXZZ  and  CCXIZZ, 
urged US .  to acknowledge challenge: 
“The  Soviet  Union’s  sense  of  purpose  in  space  is  apparently  a s  
steady  and  unwavering  as  i t   ever  was.  The  US .   . . . after  coming  up 
fast  from  behind  in  a  wave  of  feverish  anxiety  and  enthusiasm,  now 
seems  to  have  lost  interest.  That  could  be  a  dange rou s -even   fatal- 
tendency  in  an  age where space is  of  key  importance to  the  security of 
the  Nation.  I t   should be  reversed,  before great  harm  is  done.”  (P Znq, 
4/ 17/68 ) 
“If  we   muff  what  now  looks  like  a  good  chance  to  beat  the Russians 
to  the  moon  with  manned  space  ships,  the  prestige  loss  to  this  nation 
will  probably  be  immeasurable. And  i f   our  space people  aren’t  paying 
a t  least as much attention  as the  Russians to the military  possibilities of 
space, then  we  are  in  grave  danger  and  growing more  so.  All  of  which 
adds  up  . . . to  a  whole string  of  dire  warnings  to  Congress not  to  be 
stingy  about  space projects  of  any  description.”  (NY News, 4/17/68) 
USAF  F-111A  aircraft  crash  March  30  in  Thailand  had  been  caused  by 
“a  mechanic’s  mistake,  not  by  a  flaw  in  design,”  U.S.  military  com- 
mand  announced. Recovered aircraft  revealed that  pilots lost control  of 
aircraft  because  tube  of  sealant  normally  used  to  seal  fuel  tanks  w a s  
left  loose  in   aircraft,  hardened  during  low-temperature  flight,  and 
jammed  flight-control system.  Loss  of  another  F-11lA  March  2 8   re- 
mained  mystery  and  search  i n   Thailand  area  where  it  presumably 
crashed had  ended unsuccessfully.  (UPI ,   W Post, 4/16/68,  A8;  Carroll, 
B Sun, 4/18/68,  A5) 
Apr i l   18 :  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos  CCXIV  into orbit with 370-km  (229.9- 
mi)  apogee,  199-km  (123.6-mi)  perigee,  90.1-min  period,  and  81.3” 
inclination.  Satellite reentered  April  26.  ( GSFC  SSR,  4/30/68) 
LaRC  selected  Northrop  Corp.’~ Norair  Div.  for  negotiations  on  $ 2 - d -  
lion  contract  to  design  and  construct  differential  maneuvering  simula- 
tor.  System, two  identical piloted  flight  simulators  linked  electronically 
through  central  computing  equipment,  would  be  used  to  study  future 
aerospace vehicle concepts.  (NASA  Release 68-74) 
NASA  announced  appointment  of  two  new  members  to   Aerospace  Safety 
Advisory  Panel:  Dr.  C.  D.  Harrington,  President  of  Douglas  United 
Nuclear,  Inc.,  for  six-year term;  and S.  T.  Harris,  0 5 c e r  of  the  Board, 
Texas Instruments, Inc.,  for fou r  years.  (NASA  Release 68-72) 
Apr i l   19:  U.S.S.R.  launched €osmos  CCXV  into  orbit  with  403-km  (250.4- 

8 7  

April  19 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

m i )   apogee,  255-km  (158.4-mi)  perigee,  91.1-min  period,  and  48.4’ 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  June  30.  ( S B D ,   4/22/68,  292 ; GSFC  
SSR ,  4/30/68;  7/15/68) 
*  Sixty-day  simulated  earth-orbital  mission  for  four  UCLA  students 
ended  when  they  left  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.  Missile  &  Space  Sys- 
tems  Div.  space cabin  simulator  [see  Feb.  21).  Although  students had 
tired  of  food  and  missed  female  companionship,  attending  doctor 
said  they  remained  in  good  health.  Leaving simulator  they  first  noticed 
extreme  humidity  and  “myriad  smells  and  odors  in  normal  air.”  EX- 
periment  had  included  cycles  of  rest  and  work,  testing  air-water 
samples, and  manning scientific equipment.  (AP, B  Sun,  4/20/68,  A3) 
*  Page  Communications  Engineers,  Inc.,  and  government  of  South  Viet- 
nam  were  negotiating  agreement  to  permit  Page  to  finance  and  con- 
struct  $7-million earth  station  in  Vungtau.  Station,  which  would  be 
used  with  ComSatCorp  satellite  to  be  launched  in  November,  would 
have  60-channel capacity  initially  and would  be  able  to  expand  to  120. 
South Vietnamese government would  receive  20%  of  gross  revenues- 
expected to  total  $4-5  million  annually-for 
first  five  years  and  50% 
for  second  five  years,  after  which  operation  would  be  turned  over  to  a 
South  Vietnamese corporation.  (Page  PIO;   Wilson,  W Pos t ,   4/19/68) 
*  NATO’s Nuclear  Planning  Group  had  concluded  that  construction  of  Eu- 
ropean  ABM  defense  system  was  not  justified  under  present  circum- 
stances,  Robert  C.  Doty  reported  in  New  Yo rk   T ime s .   Recommenda- 
tion, he said,  “which appears certain  to be endorsed by  the  alliance as a 
whole,  ends  for  the  foreseeable future  European  interest  in  any  multi- 
billion-dollar  project  to  match  the  antimissile  screen  now  under  con- 
struction by  the  Soviet Union.”  U S .   decision in  1967 to  build  Sentinel 
ABM  system to  protect  against  possible  Chinese Communist  attack  had 
promoted NATO  review of  Europe’s nuclear defense.  ( N Y T ,  4/20/68,  2 )  
Apr i l   20:  U.S.S.R.  successfully launched  Cosmos  C C X V I .  Orbital  parame- 
ters:  apogee, 265 km  (164.7 mi) ; perigee, 195 km  (121.2 mi) ; period, 
89.1 min;  and  inclination,  51.8’.  Satellite reentered  April  28.  (Ander- 
son, N Y T ,  4 /21 /68 ,28 ;   W S ta r ,  4/21/68,  A5;  GSFC  SSR ,  4/30/68) 
*  NASA  Astrobee  1500  sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Sta- 
tion  carried  Univ.  of  Minnesota  experiment to  776-mi  (1,250-km)  alti- 
tude  to   study  levels  of  electric and  magnetic  field  variations  in  magne- 
tosphere,  check  operation  of  antenna  systems  for  use  on  satellite,  and 
verify  vehicle  design  changes.  Rocket  performed  satisfactorily.  Instru- 
mentation  suffered  partial  failure,  but  cause had  not  been  determined. 
(NASA   Rpt SRL) 
Apr i l   20-22:  Technical review  of  Saturn launch vehicles, attended by  about 
140 scientists, engineers, and  administrators,  and held  a t  MSFC.  Partici- 
pants  investigated status  and  flight  schedule of  Saturn  launch  vehicles. 
(MSFC   Release 68-77;  UPI,  W S ta r ,  4/21/68,  A5) 
Apr i l   21 : U.S.S.R.  successfully launched eighth  Molniya  I  comsat, Mo ln iyu  
1-8.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  39,719  km  (24,680.2  m i )  ; perigee, 
414  km  (257.2  mi) ; period,  11 h r   53  min;  and  inclination  6 5 ” .   (UPI ,  
N Y T ,  4 /23 /68 ,34 ;   GSFC  S SR ,  4/30/68) 
*  Soviet  scientists reported  that  automatic  docking  of  C o sm o s   C C X I l   and 
C C X l l l   April  15  had  occurred  only  47  min  after  pursuit  vessel  was 
launched.  Cosmos  C C X l l   (launched  April  1 4 )   was   orbiting  earth  a t  
225.3-km, (140-mi)  altitude  and  17,500 mph  when  Cosmos  C C X I I I   en- 

88 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

April  21 

tered  orbit  three  miles  from  it. According to  Tass,  satellites repeatedly 
changed  their  orbits,  reoriented,  maneuvered  in  space,  and  conducted 
various  scientific experiments  during  four  days  in   orbit.  Soviet  scien- 
tists  had  reportedly  developed  three  launch  systems  fo r   spacecraft  in- 
tended  fo r   automatic  docking  in   orbit:  ( 1 )   simultaneous  side-by-side 
launch  with  docking maneuvers beginning  immediately after  spacecraft 
separated  f rom  launch  vehicles;  ( 2 )   separate  launches  from  same  o r  
different  sites  with  second  spacecraft  launched  a s   close  a s   possible  to 
first  spacecraft in   orbit  as  i t  passed  over  launch  site  [method used  for 
April  15 docking] ; and  ( 3 )   separate  launches  of  spacecraft  into  same 
plane,  but  with  distances between  them great  enough to  require  several 
orbital  corrections  and  maneuvers  to  close  gap.  (Anderson,  NYT, 
4 /22 /68 ,9   ; SBD ,  4/23/68,296-7) 
NASA  announced  appointment  of  Dr.  Henry  J.  Smith, Deputy Director  of 
Physics  and Astronomy Programs,  OSSA,  as Deputy Associate Adminis- 
trator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications  (Science),  replacing  Dr. 
John  E.  Naugle  who  was  named  Associate  Administrator  for  Space 
Science  and  Applications  Oct.  1,  1967.  Dr.  Smith  would  be  Chief 
Scientist  fo r   OSSA,  responsible  for  obtaining  and  implementing  scien- 
tific  advice for  the  national  space program.  (NASA   Release 69-70) 
JPL   soil  sciences  group,  headed  by  Dr.  Roy  E.  Cameron,  reported  tests 
and  cultures  of  Antarctic  soil  samples in  JPL’S  walk-in freezer  labora- 
tory  to   determine  what  micro-organisms lived  in   extreme cold  and  to 
help  determine  whether  life  existed  on  Mars.  Samples  had  come  from 
high,  dry  valleys  in  Victorialand  near  U S .   base  at  McMurdo,  Antarc- 
tica.  Scientists  discovered  bacteria,  yeasts,  molds,  and  algae,  which 
began  to  grow  within  two  weeks  when  Antarctic  soil  kept  laboratory- 
frozen fo r  over one  year  was  subjected  to  temperature  68”  F  or  above. 
Studies were sponsored by NASA  and NSF.  (NASA  Release 68-73) 
Dept.  of  Commerce  announced  that  “the  exploration  of  Antarctica  has 
now  been  virtually  completed,”  with  conclusion  of  two-month, 815-mi 
scientific  journey  led  by  C&GS   geophysicist  Norman  W.  Peddie. 
There  a re   now  no  major  areas  [of  Antarctica]  which  have  not  been 
C L  
explored,”  Peddie said. 
Expedition,  which  started  Dec.  5  and  ended  Jan.  30,  was  made  by  
nine-man  party  of  Belgian,  Norwegian,  and  American  scientists.  Trip 
covered  region  in  Queen Maud  Land  between  South  Pole  and  Princess 
Ragnhild  Coast  in  direction  of  Africa  (W Post, 4/21/68,  A12) 
Dr.  Kurt  H.  Debus,  KSC  Director,  and  J P L   Director  William  H .   Picker- 
ing  had  been  named  cowinners  of  American  Astronautical  Society’s 
1967  Space Flight  Award  for  outstanding  achievement  in  advancement 
of  space flight and space science.  (AP, W Star, 4/21/68,  AS) 
A p r i l   22 :   Representatives of  43  nations  signed  space  rescue  treaty  a t   sepa- 
rate  ceremonies  in  Washington,  D.C.,  London,  and  Moscow.  A t   State 
Dept.  ceremony in Washington,  D.C.,  President  Johnson  said  he hoped 
treaty  would  end  wasteful  competitive spacemanship between U S .   and 
U.S.S.R.  and  that  next  decade  in  space  would  increasingly  become  a 
partnership.  Treaty,  which  provided  for  assistance  to  astronauts  in  
emergency and  safe return  of  astronauts  and  space hardware,  had  been 
unanimously approved by U.N.  General Assembly Dec.  19,1967. Secre- 
tary  of  State  Dean  Rusk  signed  for  U S .   I t   would  become  effective 

89 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
April  22 
when  ratified  by  US.,  U.S.S.R.,  U.K., and  two  other  countries.  (Ward, 
B Sun, 4/23/68,1;  PD ,  4/29/68,1108) 
a  New  Yorlc T imes   editorial  on  cuts  in   NASA  FY 1969 budget:  “NOW that 
the  desired  space  research  capability  has  been  created,  it  is  merely 
good  sense  to  shift  some  of  the  resources  thus  employed  to  other  and 
more  urgent  national  needs  . . . [such  as]  cleaning  up  the  nation’s 
polluted  a i r   and  water,  providing  high-speed  land  transportation,  o r  
the noxious and overcrowded slums.  . . . 
working  out  faster  and  cheaper  ways  to  build  new  housing  to  replace 
“None  of  this  means  . . . that  the  United  States  will  or  should 
abandon  the  effort  to  explore space and  exploit  space technology.  . . . 
But  fo r   the  moment  the  new  relatively  svelte-though 
still  very  ade- 
quate--space  program  meets  the  nation’s  needs  quite  generously.” 
( N Y T ,  4/22/68;  C R ,  5/1/68,  E3M6) 
Ap r i l   23:  NASA  launched  two  sounding  rockets  from  Churchill  Research 
Range. Nike-Tomahawk carried Univ.  of  New  Hampshire-Univ. of  Cali- 
fornia a t  San Diego payload  to  166.5-mi (268-km)  altitude.  Objectives 
were  to  measure  electric  field,  ionospheric  currents,  auroral  light  in- 
tensity  and  location,  and  proton  and  electron fluxes  in   1- to  10-kev re- 
gion  while payload was  passing  through  or  close to  visible auroral  dis- 
play.  Rocket and  instruments performed  satisfactorily;  all  scientific ob- 
jectives were  achieved.  Launch  was  second  in  series  of  four  [see  Feb. 
51. 
Nike-Apache carried Univ.  of  Michigan payload  to  6-mi  (9.6-km)  al- 
titude  to  study  atmospheric  parameters  of  temperature,  pressure,  and 
density  using  Pitot-static-probe  technique  and  measure  extreme  UV 
emission  to  determine  energy  disposition  with  altitude  of  incoming 
particles.  No  scientific data  were  obtained  because  of  vehicle  malfunc- 
tion.  (NASA Rpt SRL )  
*  Aerobee  150  MI  sounding  rocket  launched  from  White  Sands  Missile 
Range  carried  Univ.  of  Colorado  experiment  to  111.9-mi  (185.4-km) 
altitude  to  measure  intensity  of  spectral  lines  in  3,400-1,lOOA  band. 
Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  heard  testimony 
in  support  of  NASA  FY  1969 budget  from  U S .   scientists. Dr.  Harry  H. 
Hess  of  Princeton  Univ.  presented  statement  for  record  by  National 
Academy  of  Sciences  President  Dr.  Frederick  Seitz.  Space  program, 
Dr.  Seitz  said,  was  “the  latest  and  one  of  the  greatest  human  explora- 
tory  adventures in  a  long  sequence that  has  enriched mankind.  It offers 
us the promise of  extending the  range  of  our  domain  . . . to  the entire 
solar system. We  can  expect many  benefits along the way,  some of  con- 
ceptual  and  some  of  direct  material  value  . . . but  those  which  w i l l  
prove  to  be  the  most  rewarding  are  probably,  in   the  main,  still hidden 
from us over the horizon.” 
Dr.  John  A.  Simpson of Enrico  Fermi  Institute and Univ.  of  Chicago 
noted:  “Researches  in  space  have  made,  through  the  bold  programs 
which NASA  established with  universities in  the  early  1960s, major  con- 
tributions  to  the  critical  problems  of  generating,  developing  and  re- 
taining  first-class  scientific  manpower.  .  .  .  The  great  fear  a t  
present  . . . is  that  the  momentum  established  will  be  dissipated  by 
the  preferentially  deep  budgetary  cuts  made  by  NASA  in  those  areas 
which most  affect the  universities.’’  He  stressed “deeply  felt conviction” 

90  

April  23 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
that  U S .   was  “in  danger  of  unwittingly  destroying  what  we  wish  to  
save  and  need  . . . pre-eminence  in  science  and  technology  which  is 
crucial  fo r   each  major  problem  of  the  nation,  from  poverty  to  war.” 
Actions  taken  in  Congress  in  1968 might  “largely  determine  whether 
the U S .  will  retain its leadership in the space sciences.” 
Dr.  Simpson urged  early start  of  Pioneer concept since it was  “abso- 
lutely  clear  that  discoveries important  fo r   the  progress  of  science  and 
technology  may  be  made  by  . . . experiments  and  observations  on 
spacecraft moving  outward  from  the  orbit  of  the  Earth  . . . the  pro- 
gram  is  not  a  gamble  and  a  hope,  but  a n  objective  of  high  importance 
and  certain  to  produce  fruitful  results.”  (Testimony;  NYT,  4/24/68, 
24;  W S ta r ,   4/24/68,  A21) 
e  Eleventh  Saturn  IB  booster  was  successfully  static  fired  a t   Marshall 
Space  Flight  Center  at  1.6-million-lb thrust  for  145  sec  by  Chrysler 
Corp.  personnel.  I t   would  be  returned  to  Michoud  Assembly  Facility 
for post-static checkout.  ( MSFC  Release 68-85) 
*  At  American  Physical  Society  Meeting  in  Washington,  D.C.,  Stanford 
Univ.  physicist, Dr. William M.  Fairbank,  described experiments on  su-  
perconducting  accelerators  that  would  enable  scientists  to  accelerate 
electrons  faster  and  fok   longer  periods  and,  possibly,  to  produce  10 
times  as much  energy  as world’s  most  powerful  existing  accelerator, 2- 
mi-long, 20-bev Staniord  Linear  Accelerator  (SLAG ) .   By  immersing  ac- 
celerator  in  liquid  helium  cooled  to  absolute  zero,  energy  loss  could 
be  reduced  so  much  that  electrons could  be  fired  continuously and  ac- 
celerator  kept  a t   constant  temperature.  SLAG  currently  could  be  fired 
for  only  0.001  sec  because  of  excess  heat  generated  by  pulse.  Experi- 
ments,  preliminary  to  construction  of  $5-million, 500-ft-long prototype 
accelerator,  had  been  conducted  on  5-ft  model.  (Sullivan,  NYT, 
4 /24 /68 ,26 ;   O’Toole, W  Post, 4/24/68,  A17) 
R.  F.  Taschek of  AEC’S  Los  Alamos  (N. Mex.)  Scientific Laboratory 
presented  “SpaceLBased  Detection  of  Radiations  from Nuclear  Detona- 
tions  and  Other  Sources.”  Eight  test-detection satellites-launched 
two 
at a  time  in  joint  DOD-AEC  Vela  Hotel program, Oct.  17, 1963;  July  17, 
1964;  July  20,  1965;  and  April  28,  1967-were 
still  orbiting  earth  a t  
69,000-mi  altitude.  They  had  not  spotted  any  detonations  to  date  but 
provided  “undoubtedly  the  best  information”  about  solar  winds,  Tas- 
chek  said.  Information  would  “eventually  allow  us   to  understand  and 
perhaps  control  our  environment  more  readily.”  (Test;  EH ;   P  Znq, 
6 /5 /68 ,5 )  
Capt.  J.  Laurence  Pritchard  (RAF) , pioneer  in  British  aircraft  industry, 
died  in  U.K.  a t   age  83.  First  textbook  on  airplane  structural  analysis, 
Aeroplane  Structures,  which  he  wrote  jointly  with  A.  J.  Sutton  Pip- 
pard,  was  used  all  over  the  world  and  served a s  model  for  many  later 
books  on  subject.  He  was  editor  of  Journal  of  the  Royal  Aeronautical 
Society 26 yr.  (A&A, 7 /68 ,69 )  
e  MSFC  announced  award  of  $1,400  to  MSFC  Test  Laboratory  Engineer 
John  A.  Hauser  for  invention  of  five-module system for  purifying  and 
filtering  gas  to  purity  necessary  in  development  of  Saturn  rockets. 
(MSFC  Release 68-82) 
NASA  announced  swearing  in  of  Dr.  Wain0  W.  Suojanen,  Chairman  of 
Univ.  of  Miami’s Dept.  of  Management, as  a  consultant  to  Administra- 
tor  James E.  Webb.  Dr.  Suojanen would  serve a s  member  of  NASA Man- 

@ 

91 

April  23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1968 

agement Advisory  Panel  which  reviewed NASA’s pattern  of  administra- 
tion  and  advised  on  specific aspects of  organization  and  management. 
(NASA  Release 68-78) 
MSFC   announced  appointment  of  M.  Keith  Wible,  chief  of  MSFC’S  Man- 
power Utilization  and Administration Office,  as head  of  new  manpower 
utilization  system  for  NASA  Hq.  Operations Management  Office,  OMSF. 
He  would  be  succeeded by  Paul  L.  Styles, head  of  MSFC’S  Labor  Rela- 
tions Office. (MSFC   Release 68-83;  Marshall  S tar ,  4 /24 /68 ,1 )  
NASA  announced  that  Astronaut  Brian  T.  O’Leary  had  withdrawn  from 
astronaut  training  program  because  he  disliked  piloting  aircraft.  Dr. 
O’Leary,  who  had  completed  15 h r   flying  time  i n   training  program  a t  
Williams AFB,  Ariz.,  hoped  to  remain  w i t h  space program  a s  researcher 
in  planetary  astronomy.  Astronaut  F.  Curtis  Michel  had  received  spe- 
cial  permission to  spend 80% of  his  time teaching and studying  a t  Rice 
Univ.  and 20%  in  astronaut training for  one year.  (M SC  Release 68-32; 
AP, W  S tar ,   4/24/68,  A2; W  Pos t ,   4/24/68,  4 )  
U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  had  included  “little-publicized sanctions”  in  proposed 
nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty,  John W.  Finney  reported  in  New  Yorlc 
Times. “Unless they  sign the  treaty  o r  accept its  requirements  for  inter- 
national  inspection  over  all  their  atomic  activities,  nations  may  find 
themselves  cut  off  from  assistance  in  developing  the  peaceful  uses  of 
atomic  energy.”  Such  nations  would  not  be  able  to  purchase  atomic 
power  plants  or  to  obtain  nuclear  fuel  from U S .   o r  U.S.S.R.  Further, 
European  Atomic  Energy  Community  would  not  receive  fuel  unless  it 
entered  into  inspection  agreement within  two  years  with  International 
Atomic Energy Agency.  (NYT, 4 /24 /68 ,1 )  
Apr i l   2 4 :   U.S.S.R.  successfully  launched  Cosmos  CCXV I I   into  orbit  with 
182-km  (113.1-mi)  apogee,  150-km  (93.2-mi)  perigee,  87.6-min  pe- 
riod,  and  62.2’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  April  26.  (GSFC  SSR, 
4/30/68) 
NASA  Apollo  Program  Director  M /G   Samuel 6. Phillips  (USAF )   told  press 
a t  NASA  Hq.  briefing  that  Apollo  6 mission,  in  spite  of  anomalies, was 
“a  safe  mission  from  a  crew  safety  standpoint”  as  demonstrated  by 
spacecraft’s  recovery  in  excellent condition  after  performing  an   alter- 
nate  mission.  He  cited  three  substantial  technical  problems-J-2 
en- 
gine  failure because  of  fuel  leak,  amplitude  of  oscillations during  1st- 
stage  burn  (pogo  effect),  and  apparent  separation  of  large  piece  of 
paint  or  skin  from lunar  module  adapter  during  ascent-and 
one  pro- 
cedural  problem-premature 
shutdown of  second  of  two  2nd-stage en- 
gines because of  wiring  error made by  North American Rockwell Corp. 
which was  not  discovered by  NASA  in  prelaunch  tests.  He  said  all  could 
b e  corrected. 
From  demonstrations  of  ApoZZo  4  (launched  Nov.  9,  1967)  and  in- 
formation  gained  from  ApoZZo  6 Gen.  Phillips  said  he  had  determined 
“the  course  of  actioh  . . . necessary  to  correct  and  demonstrate  the 
correction  of  the  prablems  and  . . . recommended  to   the   Administra- 
tor  of  NASA  that  we  proceed  with  preparations  for  the manned  flight  of 
205  with  the  101  spacecraft  which  is  planned  to  be  the  first  manned 
flight  in   Apollo,  and  . . . a  Saturn  IB.”  He  also  recommended  that 
NASA  prepare  third  Saturn V  (No.  503)  for  manned  flight  in  late  1968 
with  option  to  revert  to  unmanned mission  if  necessary corrections  did 
not meet  requirements  to  ensure crew  safety  on  manned  mission.  NASA 

92 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

April  24 

Administrator  James  E.  Webb’s  decision  on  Gen.  Phillips’  recommen- 
dation w a s  expected shortly.  (Transcript ; W Pos t ,  4/25/68,  A9) 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  urged  Senate  Committee  on  Aero- 
nautical  and Space Sciences to  restore  $48.3 million cut by  House from 
NASA  FY  1969 budget  request  for  nuclear  rocket  program  [see March 
11. Webb  stressed  importance  of  proceeding with  U S .   development  of 
nuclear  rocket  propulsion  as part  of  total  capability  in  aeronautics  and 
space to  (1) meet  potential  civil or  military  requirements for  space ve- 
hicles  and  missions,  ( 2 )   avoid  short-sighted  cutoffs  or  constraint  on 
promising new  technological developments because they  had  no  specific 
justification  in  advance,  (3) prove  that  US .   “does  not  intend  to   limit 
its  development  of  large  launch  vehicles  and  payload  capabilities”  to 
Saturn  V  class, and  ( 4 )   serve as  “central  focus for  continuing  advance 
in nuclear and other technologies involved.” 
Responding  to  questions, Webb  cited  recent  Soviet  development  of 
fractional  orbital  bombardment  system,  automatic  docking  flights,  and 
maneuvering  of  heavy  payloads  in  orbit  as  evidence U.S.S.R.  was  “not 
neglecting any  important capabilities.  . . . Everything I  know  . . , in- 
dicates  they  are  still probing  f o r   those  areas  that  will  put  them  ahead 
the  fastest and  give  them  the  lead  over  us  that  we  cannot  overcome in  
a short  time.”  (Testimony;  SBD ,   4/25/68,  309;  NYT   4/25/68,  16) 
Univ.  of  Wisconsin professor  Dr.  William  Kraushaar,  speaking  a t   dedi- 
cation  of  new  $4.3-million Center  for  Space Research  a t   MIT,  reported 
discovery by  NASA’s Os0  I I I   of  high  intensity  of  gamma  rays  flowing 
from center  of  Milky Way.  Dr.  Kraushaar  said  finding was  first  obser- 
vation  to  support  theory  that  galaxy  centers  were  rich  reservoirs  of 
cosmic rays.  (Wilford, N Y T ,  4 /27 /68 ,40 )  
U S .   leadership  in  physics  “very  likely”  would  be  overtaken  soon  by 
U.S.S.R.  and Western  Europe,  Dr.  Marvin  L.  Goldberger,  professor  of 
physics  at  Princeton  Univ.,  said  a t   105th Annual  Meeting  of  National 
Academy of  Sciences in Washington, D.C.  Dr.  Goldberger,  chairman  of 
symposium on current advances in high-energy physics, and other physi- 
cists  attributed  threatened  loss  of  leadership  to  budget  cutbacks  and 
US .   failure  to  develop  apparatus  for  producing  colliding  beams  of 
high-energy  particles  which  would  permit  exploration  of  realms  of 
physics  inaccessible  by  other  experiments.  Plans  for  accelerators  a t  
Stanford  Univ.  and  at Weston,  Ill.,  provided  for  storage  rings  for  ex- 
periments, but  there  seemed to  be  no  early  prospect  for  their  construc- 
tion.  (Text; Sullivan, N Y T ,  4/25/68,17) 
ComSatCorp  reported  $1.8-million  net  income  (18 cents  per  share)  fo r  
first  quarter  of  1968-$569,000 
( 6  cents per  share)  more than  fQ r  first 
quarter  of  1967-and  operating  revenues  of  record  $6.9  million.  AS  of 
March  31,  ComSatCorp  was  leasing,  full-time,  equivalent  of  754  half 
circuits, 453 more  than  on  March  31,  1967. Of  number  leased  in  1968, 
421 were  through  two Atlantic satellites and 333 were  through  two  Pa- 
cific  satellites.  One  year  ago  only  two  satellites  were  in  service,  one 
over Atlantic and one over Pacific.  (ComSatCorp Release 68-19) 
launched  Cosmos  CCXYIZI   into  orbit  with  209.2-km 
A p r i l   25:  U.S.S.R. 
(130-mi)  apogee,  143.2-km  (89-mi)  perigee,  and  50”  inclination. 
Period was  not  disclosed. Satellite reentered  same day.  Simultaneously, 
U.S.S.R.  disclosed April  24  launch  of  Cosmos  C C X V I I .  
There  was  widespread  speculation  that  U.S.S.R.  would  soon  attempt 

93 

April  25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

new  space spectacular. Evert  Clark  had  suggested in   New  Yo rk   T imes  
that  U.S.S.R.  was  secretly  testing  “a  maneuverable  rocket  stage  that 
could be  used  to  guide  bombs  down  from  orbit  o r   to  send  instruments 
to  the  moon.”  AP  said  Soviet  failure  to  reveal  period  of  Cosmos 
CCXV I I I   suggested spacecraft might  have  reentered  before  completing 
one  orbit  to  test  fractional  orbital  bomb  system  (FOBS )   described  by 
Secretary of  Defense Robert S.  McNamara Nov.  3,  1967.  (Clark, WYT ,  
4/3/68,  1 ;  AP,  B  Sun, 4/26/68,  2 ;  GSFC SSR ,  4/30/68) 
NASA  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range  carried  TRW,  Inc.,  experiment  to   measure:  total  flux  en- 
ergy,  including  spectrum  of  precipitated  energetic  H  atoms ; spectrum 
of  precipitated  energetic  protons  and  electrons ; fluctuating  and  DC 
electron  fields;  H  light-intensity  altitude  profile;  and  location  and  in- 
tensity  of  ionospheric current  systems. Rocket and  instrumentation  per- 
formance was  satisfactory.  (NASA  Rpt SRL)  
In   statement  to  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences, 
Milton  Klein,  Manager  of  NASA-AEC  Space NucIear  Propulsion  O5ce ,  
summarized  progress  of  nuclear  rocket  program.  Major  milestone  has 
been  achieved  with  “operation  in  late  1967  of  a  single  reactor  for  60 
minutes  at  its  design  power  of  1,100 megawatts,  a  duration  capability 
adequate  fo r  most  missions.”  Technology phase  of  NERVA  program  w a s  
nearing  completion  and  next  step wa s   to  develop engine  t o   flight capa- 
bility,  funds  for  which  were  included  in  Ey  1969  budget  request,  he 
said.  No  action  deferring  this  step  could  be  taken  without  losing  a 
major  portion  of  capability  in  this  field.  Nuclear  rocket  was  “a  focal 
point  for  pushing  forward  frontiers  of  technology  . . . [and]  only 
major  advanced propulsion program in  the Nation.” 
High  performance  of  nuclear  rockets had  been  demonstrated in  nine 
consecutive power  reactor  tests. Solid base  of  data  and  underrating had 
been  built  for  development  of  flight-rated NERVA  engine.  “Development 
of  the  NERVA  engine  at  this  time,”  Klein  stressed, “would  capitalize on 
this  investment  and  provide  a  major  fundamental  advance  in   propul- 
sion  capability.  Its  high  specific  impulse w i l l   provide  a  broad  mission 
versatility  for  the  high-payload,  high-energy  missions  . . . inevitably 
included in a viable space program.”  (Testimony) 
0  Dr.  Norris  E.  Bradbury,  Director  of  Los  Alamos  Scientific Laboratory, 
testified a t  Rover Program  Hearing  of  Senate Committee on Aeronauti- 
cal  and  Space Sciences that,  since  project’s  basic  reactor  performance 
goals  had  been  demonstrated  along  with  basic  elements  of  complete 
engine system, major  emphasis of  Rover Program  should shift  to  devel- 
opment of  overall flight engine.  LASL  would  continue  to   support  NERVA 
program  chiefly  in  development  and  evaluation  of  improved  fuel  ele- 
ments  and  other  reactor  core  components.  “Deep  space  has  always 
been  known  to  be  the  true  domain  of  nuclear  energy  fo r   both  power 
and  propulsion;  it  is  my  belief  that  the  atom  will  be  the  work  horse 
of  near  space a s  well.”  (Text) 
0  Addressing  Women’s  National  Democratic  Club  in  Washington,  D.C., 
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  Director  of  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center, 
said:  “.  . . w e  must  not  seriously  impair  or  hamper  our  progress  in 
space because w e   cannot  foresee  immediate payoffs to  offset  the  invest- 
ment w e  are making.”  He  urged  that  U S .  “come  to  grasp  the unlimited 
opportunities  and  the  promise  of  space  exploration.”  (Text;  SBD ,  

94 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

April  25 

4/26/68,321;  W Post, 4/26/68,  C3) 
ESRO  announced  cancellation of  TD-1  and  TD-2  solar  astronomy  satel- 
lites,  which  were  to  have  been  built  under  $20-million contract  by  an  
international  consortium  and  launched  from  US. by  Thor-Delta  rock- 
ets.  Italy  had  refused to  pay  its share  of  costs,  feeling its  share  of  work 
too  slight  to  justify  contribution,  John  L.  Hess  later  reported  in  New 
York  Times. Earlier  U.K.  bad  refused to  contribute  to  proposed budget 
expansion  of  ELDO,  partner  with  ESRO  in  plans  for  European  satellite 
communications system  [see  April  161.  (Reuters,  NYT ,   4/26/68,  16; 
Hess, NYT,  4/28/68,24) 
e  FAA  announced  allocations  of  $74.7  million  for  construction  and  im- 
provement  o€ 397 public  civil  airports  under  Federal-Aid  Airport  Pro- 
gram  (FAAP)   for  FY  1969.  Program,  developed  from  record  773  re- 
quests  for  aid  by  public  agencies, provided  $67.7  million  to  improve 
356  existing  airports  and  $7  million  to  construct  41  new  public  air- 
ports.  ( FAA Release 68-28) 
FAA awarded  $57,345  to  McDonnell  Douglas  Gorp.,  $52,663  to  Western 
Co . ,  and  $28,000 to  Bureau  of  Mines for  additional  research  on  use  of 
thickened safety fuels to  reduce chances and  severity of  post-crash fires 
in survivable aircrait  accidents.  (FAA Release T 68-15) 
A p r i l   26 :  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos CCXZX-10th  Cosmos in April  and 9th 
orbit  with  1,747-km  (1,085.5-mi)  apogee, 
spacecraft  in  12  days-into 
225-km  ( 139.8-mi)  perigee,  104.7-min  period,  and  48.4’ 
inclination. 
Soviet scientist Prof.  Georgi Pokrovsky in Nedelyu,  Sunday  supplement 
to Zzvestiu,  predicted that  interlinked satellites might  some day  form  a r -  
tificial Saturn rings around earth. 
NASA  Executive  Secretary  Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh  said  U.S.S.R.’s 
launch  activity April  14-26  made  most  active 12 days  in  space history 
of  any  nation  and  “a  great  acceleration”  of  Soviet  space  effort. “For 
some  time  we’ve  had  indications  that  they’re  putting  in  an  increasing 
rate of men and resources.” 
James  J.  Haggerty,  Jr.,  wrote  in  Journal  of  the  Armed  Forces  that 
U.S.S.R.  satellite launches  in  1968 might  for  the  first  time  since  1957 
exceed  U S .   spacecraft  orbited.  Launches  in   Cosmos  series,  which  in- 
cluded  a  variety  of  spacecraft,  had  continued  to  accelerate, he  noted, 
with 34 Cosmos launches in 1966 and 59 in 1967. 
Satellite  reentered  March  2,  1969.  (Cohn,  W  Po s t ,   4/27/68,  A15; 
UPI,  NYT,  4/27/68,  1 5 ;   J / A F ,   4/27/68,  9 ;   GSFC S SR ,   4/30/68; 
3/15/69) 
0  Maj.  William  J .   Knight  (USAF)   flew  X-15  No.  1 to  209,600-ft  altitude 
and  3,545 mph  (mach 5.05)  from Edwards AFB.  Purposes  of  test  flight 
were  to  check  Saturn  insulation  horizon  scanner  and  fixed  ball  nose. 
(NASA  P ro j  Off) 
A  15-lb pig-tailed  monkey,  like  one  scheduled to  orbit  earth  for  30  days 
on  board  Biosatellite D  in  1969,  had  successfully completed  simulated 
space flight  fully instrumented with  some two  dozen separate  biological 
sensors.  Test,  first  joining  of  instrumented  primate  and  its  complete 
array  of  biological  instrumentation  with  flight-type  spacecraft,  met 
all  objectives,  including  15-day medical  countdown,  3-day  simulated 
flight, and  5-day monitoring.  (NASA  Release  68-76;  W  Post,  4/26/68, 
A19) 
NASA  established Aerospace Safety Research and Data  Institute  a t  LeRC  to 
95 

April  26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

April  2 6 :   P ig ta i l ed   mon k e y   was  in  good  health  a f ter   3-day  simulated  t e s t   f l igh t ,   w i t h  
15-day  medical  coun tdown   and  5-day  postflight  monitoring.  M on k e y ,   identical  to   one 
scheduled  for   30-day  orbit  of  earth  on  NASA’s Biosatellite  D  in  1969,  had  b e e n   ins tru-  
mented  w i th   two   dozen  sensors.  I n   photo,  primate  i s   seated  in  tes t   f ix ture .  

maintain  highest  safety  standards  possible  in  national  aerospace  pro- 
gram  by  solving technical  safety  problems  and  providing  NASA  and  its 
contractors  with current  information  on  safety data  and  procedures.  In- 
stitute  would  be  directed  by  I.  Irving  Pinkel,  consultant  on  aircraft 
safety  to  USAF  and  FAA  and  former  Apollo  204  accident  investigator 
and consultant.  (NASA   Release 68-79;  LeRC  Release 68-32) 

96 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

April  26 

NASA  published  Constructing  Inexpensive  Automatic  Picture-Transmis- 
(NASA  SP-5079),  providing  instructions  f o r  
sion  Ground  Stations 
building  from  surplus  parts  $500  ground  station  that  could  receive 
local cloud-cover pictures anywhere in  the world  from U S .  meteorolog- 
ical  satellites.  Booklet  wa s   available  from  Clearinghouse  for  Federal 
Scientific and Technical Information.  (NASA Release 58-77) 
April  27: NASA  Administrator  James E. Webb  approved April  24  recommen- 
dation  of  Apollo  Program  Director M /G   Samuel C.  Phillips  (USA,  Ret.) 
that  NASA  proceed  with  preparation  of  third  Saturn  V  Launch  Vehicle 
fo r   manned  mission  in  late  1968  and  retain  option  for  another  un- 
manned  mission  “if further  analysis  and  ground  testing  indicate  that 
i t  is the best course.” 
Astronauts  James  A.  McDivitt,  David  R.  Scott,  and  Russell  L. 
Schweickart  were  scheduled  to  be  launched  on  Saturn  V  in  second 
manned  Apollo  space  flight.  First  manned  Apollo  mission,  Apollo  7 
with  Saturn IB booster, would  carry Astronauts Walter M.  Schirra,  Jr., 
Donn  F.  Eisele,  and  R.  Walter  Cunningham  into  earth  orbit  in   third 
quarter  of  1968.  (NASA  Release  68-81;  W  Star,  4/28/68) 
NASA  successfully  launched  600-lb  Reentry  F  payload  by  Scout  booster 
from NASA Wallops Station to  obtain  inflight hndamental  research  data 
on  aerodynamic  heating  and  transition  from  laminar  to  turbulent  flow 
in boundary  layer.  Payload,  graphite-tipped beryllium  cone  13 f t  long, 
tapering  from  0.01  in  a t  nose  to  27.3  in  a t  base,  was  designed  to meas- 
ure  heat  transfer  in  slender  cone  a t  hypersonic  speeds for  comparison 
with ground  studies. Three of  Scout’s  four stages were used:  1st and 2nd 
stages  fired  during  ascent,  boosting  3rd  stage  and  payload  to   115-mi 
(175-km)  altitude;  and  3rd  stage  drove  payload  a t   up  to  13,500 mph 
through  earth’s  atmosphere.  Impact  occurred 800 mi  downrange, north- 
east of  Bermuda. 
Reentry  F experiment, sixth  mission  in  NASA’s Reentry  Heating  Pro- 
ject,  was   designed  and  directed  by  LaRC  under  sponsorship  of  NASA 
Office  of  Advanced Research  and Technology.  Payload  was  constructed 
by  General Electric Co.’s  Re-Entry Systems Div.  (WS Release 68-9) 
Aerobee  150  MOD  I  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  carried 
Naval  Research  Laboratory  experiment  to   103.2-mi  (166.1-km)  alti- 
tude to  photograph  solar  corona  for  streamers and  to  photograph  inter- 
planetary  dust  shadows  using  two  externally  occulated  coronagraphs 
and one solar pointing control. Rocket and  instruments performed  satis- 
factorily.  (NASA   Rpt SRL) 
Crash  of  US-4F  F-111A  aircraft  near  Bowie,  Tex.,  Oct.  19,  1967,  had 
been  caused  by  failure  of  experimental speed break-only  one  ever  in- 
stalled on F - ~ ~ ~ u s A F  
reported.  Investigation had  indicated  hydraulic 
system  tubing  ruptured  and  flight  control  system  was  disrupted  when 
bracket  assembly failed a t  1,000 mph.  (AP, W Po s t ,  4/27/68) 
Tass  reported  Moscow  scientist  had  compared  “spectrometric  analysis” 
of  cactus growing  in  cold  areas  with  spectrographs  of  “dark  areas’’  of 
Mars  and concluded areas  on Mars  were  covered  with  cactus-like vege- 
tation.  Other  tests  on  cactus,  scientists said,  proved  i t   could  stand  ex- 
tremes  of  temperature  and  other  conditions  similar  to  those  on  Mars. 
(UPI ,   W S ta r ,  4/28/68,  A3) 
April  29:  NASA  awarded $25,841,000 one-year, cost-plus-fee contract  to  Ben- 
dix  Field  Engineering  Corp.  for  continued maintenance  and  operation 

9 7  

April  29 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

of  major  portion  of  NASA’s Manned  Space  Flight  Network,  including 
11  facilities  of  14-station unified  8-band  network  for  Apollo.  Contract 
extended  original  two-year  agreement containing  three  options.  (NASA 
Release 68-82) 
A p r i l  30:  NASA  launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Churchill Re- 
search Range carrying  Univ.  of  New  Hampshire-Univ. of  California  at 
San  Diego  payload  to  66.4-mi  (109.7-km)  altitude  to  measure  electric 
field,  ionospheric  currents,  auroral  light  intensity  and  location,  and 
proton  and electron fluxes  (1-10  kev)  while passing through  or close to 
auroral  display.  Rocket  did  not  perform  as  expected;  spin  rate  was 
below  that  anticipated.  Payload  broke  away  from  rocket  and  no  u se€d  
data  were  received  from  experiment.  Launch  was  third  in  series  of 
four  [see April 231.  (NASA  Rpt SRL )  
0  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  Director  of  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center,  told 
Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences he  was  greatly 
concerned about  future  of  entire  space program without propulsion  ca- 
pability  of  nuclear  rocket  program.  Nuclear  propulsion  was  “a  must 
for  our  future space needs.”  Failure  to  proceed  into  development phase 
fects on  the  total  program.  . . . A  one-year delay  in  funding  could  re- 
would  result  in  “losses  of  experienced personnel  and  cost-increase ef- 
sult  in  a s   much  as  two  years  delay  in  having  a n   operational  nuclear 
engine.” 
Nuclear vehicle as 3rd  stage on  Saturn V  could significantly improve 
payload  and  mission  versatility,  and  improved capability  could  be  uti- 
lized  “to  improve  mission  effectiveness,  to  increase  the  mission  and 
the  late  1970’s and  the  1980’s. Equally  important  . . . for  high  energy 
payload  reliability,  and  to  extend the  spectrum of  potential missions in 
missions  requiring  the  launch  of  two  or  more  Saturn  V’s,  with  subse- 
quent  rendezvous in earth orbit, we  will be able to  reduce the number  of 
Saturn V’s  needed  through  the  utilization  of  a  nuclear vehicle,”  a t  sub- 
stantial cost savings. 
In   response  to  questions by  Sen.  Howard  W.  Cannon  (D-Nev.),  Dr. 
von  Braun  said  space program  was  “cutting  edge of  our  technology  ad- 
vancements  and  of  many  advances  in  the  applied  sciences  . . . [be- 
cause]  no  other  program  . . . involves  so  many  branches  of  tech- 
nology  and  science.”  Reduction  in  NASA’s  $@-million  NERVA  request 
to  $11 million  recommended  by  House  would  be  disastrous  because 
to  make  manned  space  operations  useful,  “plenty  of  payload”  was 
required.  AEC   funding  for  NERVA  had  been  approved,  but  i f   cuts 
were  made  in  NASA  funding,  program  would  be  nonexistent.  (Testi- 
mony;  Transcript;  O’Toole, W Po s t ,  5/1/68,  A3) 
Secretary  of  Defense  Clark  M.  Clifford  asked  House  Committee  on 
Armed  Services to  restore  funds cut by  Senate for  compromise develop- 
ment  program  for  Navy  F-111B  aircraft.  According  to   compromise 
plan,  USN  would  continue  tests  on  F-111B  experimental  models  and 
exploratory  work  on  alternate  aircraft,  VFX-1,  until  March  1969 and 
then  decide  whether  to  proceed  with  F - l l l B   or  to  cancel  program 
after  first  eight  models  and  develop  alternate.  If  VFX-1  were  chosen, 
F-111Bs  already  produced  would  provide  sophisticated  a i r   de€ense 
until  alternate  aircraft  became  operational  in  1973. DOD  had  requested 
$425 million  for  8  F-111Bs  and  60  Phoenix  missiles  and  $30  million 
for  R&D. on  VFX-1.  Senate  instead  had  approved  $170  million  for 

98 

April  30 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
VFX-31.  (Testimony;  Sheehan, NYT ,  5 /1 /68 ,4;   UPI,  W S tar ,  5/1/68, 
A12) 
’ 
e  Univ.  of  Colorado  physicist  Dr.  Edward  U.  Condon  announced  tha t  
Univ.  $500,000  UFO  study  for  USAF  had  been  completed  on  schedule. 
Dr.  Condon declined to  discuss conclusions and  said  final report  would 
be submitted to NAS  in September. He  protested May  14 Look  magazine 
article, which called project  fiasco, but  said  completion of  field  investi- 
gations were not  related to controversy. 
Rep.  J .   Edward  Roush  (D-Ind.) , citing  article  on  House  floor,  ques- 
tioned  scientific profundity  and  objectivity  of  project  and  urged  Con- 
gress to  take  over UFO  investigation from USAF.  ( C R ,  4/30/68,  H3087; 
Clark, NYT ,  5 /1 /68 ,5 )  
Republican  Coordinating  Committee 
on 
statement 
released 
US.-U.S.S.R. 
relations,  including  policy  on  space:  “Outer  space 
should b e  seen a s  the  focus for  ever  increasing United  States-Soviet col- 
laboration  rather  than  as the  site of  an  endless series of  increasingly ex- 
pensive  prestige  races.  Because  our  society  is  open,  so   much  is  known 
about  our  space program  that  inviting  Soviet participation  in  the  non- 
military  projects  would  be  unlikely  to  endanger  national  security.  By 
insisting  upon  reciprocal  privileges we  would  acquire  much  additional 
knowledge  about  their  space  efforts,  thus  achieving  a  net  gain  for 
United  States security. At  the  same time, we  must  not  intimate  that  the 
Soviets  and  ourselves  have  an   exclusive  role  to  play  in   this  area.  We 
must  constantly  reiterate  our  willingness  to  collaborate  with  NATO  and 
other  Allies  in  space  technology.”  (Text;  UPI,  N Y T ,   4/30/68,  95;  
Unna, W Po s t ,  4/30/68,  AS;  S B D ,  5 /1 /68 ,2)  
NASA  awarded  General  Dynamics  Corp.  Convair  Div.  $4,771,390  supple- 
mental agreement for  construction  of  two   additional Centaur launch ve- 
hicles to be  used  with Atlas boosters to launch  two Orbiting Astronomi- 
cal Observatories  ( OAO )   in  1960 and  1970.  (NASA  Release 68-83) 
During  Ap r i l :   In  MIT  Technology  Rev iew ,   Gen.  Bernard  A.  Schriever 
(USAF,  Ret.) , President  of  B.  A.  Schriever Associates, and  Dr.  William 
W.  Seifert,  Assistant  Dean  of  MIT  School  of  Engineering,  wrote  “Air 
Travel  Threatens  to  Become  Hard-to-Get.” Unless  we  “begin  now  to  
take steps to meet the demands of  the  future,  sheer growth in  population 
and  the  accompanying economic  demands could  so  saturate  our   trans- 
portation  system, especially the  air  system, that  mobility  could  become 
a  premium  service instead  of  a  routine  accommodation.”  Median  fore- 
casts were  that  by  1980 number  of  domestic revenue passengers carried 
by  airlines  would  quadruple,  with  a i r   cargo  growing  10 times.  (MIT  
Tech  R e v ,  Vol.  70, No.  6 ;  W  Po s t ,   10/15/68,  B4) 
House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  published  Survey   o f  
V iews   of  Leading  Industrial  Executives  on  the  National  Space  P ro -  
gram .   Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex.),  Chairman  of  Subcommittee on 
NASA  Oversight,  had  queried  750  U.S.  senior  executives;  449  had  re- 
plied.  Majority  considered  $5  billion  annually  for  NASA  funding  to  be 
“about  right”;  54% favored maintaining  goal of  manned  lunar  landing 
in  this  decade ; 96% ranked  national  defense high-priority  assignment; 
69% felt NASA  had made “much”  scientific and utilitarian  contribution. 
In   context  of  Vietnam  War,  47%  favored  same  level  of  funding  f o r  
space program on basis of  contribution to national security.  (Text) 
e  National  Science  Foundation’s  Rev iews   of  Da ta   on   Science  Resource9 

99 

During  April 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

presented  information  on  scientific  and  technical  personnel  in   Govern- 
ment  in   1966. Federal Government  had   employed  149,300 civilian  sci- 
entists  and  engineers in   October  1966, increase  of  4%   over  December 
below  5%  annual 
1- 
figure  and  annual  gain  of  2%-substantially 
gain in  1962-64  and in entire  1959-64  period. There were 72,500 scien- 
tists on rolls  in  October 1966, increase of  6% over total 68,300 reported 
two  years  earlier, and  average  gain  of  3%  per  year,  only  half  the  6% 
average increase  in   1959-64. Approximately  13% of  natural  scientists 
and  8%   of  engineers in  U S .  were  employed  in  Federal Government in  
1%6,  accounting for 9% of total U S .  employment in  those occupations. 
DOD continued  as  largest  employer  of  scientists  and  engineers,  with 
total  of  66,000. 
Women  professional  scientific  and  technical  personnel  increased 
more than  3% between  1964 and  1966, to  32,300,  17%  of  total  profes- 
sional  scientific  and  technical  personnel  in   both  years.  (NSF   Release 
68-16) 

100 

May  1968 

.May  1 : USAF  launched  unidentified satellite from  Vandenberg  AFB  by  Tho r -  
Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 176-mi (273.2-km)  apogee, 
115-mi (185.1-km)  perigee,  88.6-min period,  and 83.1” inclination  and 
reentered May  15.  (P r e s  Rp t  68) 
House  Republican  Policy  Committee  recommended  $353-million  cut  in  
Administration’s  requested  $4.37-million  NASA  FY 1969  authorization 
and  said  unless  Government  spending  was  dramatically  reduced,  “the 
cost  of  living  may  reach  the  moon  before  our  astronauts.’’  Committee 
urged  reductions  in  Apollo  Applications program,  administrative  oper- 
ations,  and  public  relations  and  suggested that  NASA  place  greater  em- 
phasis  on  R&D  programs  leading  to  future  space advances.  “Stockpiling 
of  expensive  hardware  that  may  be  obsolete  by  the  time  i t   is  finally 
needed”  could  not  be  justified.  (Text:  Sehlstedt,  B  Sun,  5/2/68,  A6 ;  
SBD ,  5 /7 /68 , 31 )  
NASA,  USN,  Dept.  of  the  Interior,  and  General  Electric  Co.  announced 
plans  for  Operation  Tektite,  60-day  study  of  ocean  floor  by  four  U S .  
scientists  isolated  at  50-ft  depth  in  Greater  Lameshur  Bay,  Virgin  Is- 
lands,  in  February  1969. Project,  first  such program undertaken  jointly 
by  Government agencies and private  industry,  would be  longest contin- 
uous  undersea study by a diving team. Previous record was 45 days. 
NASA  would  acquire  data  on  human  endurance;  USN ,   on  engineering, 
marine  science, and human  behavior;  and  Interior,  on  marine geology, 
underwater  mapping,  and  fish  life.  GE  would  build  laboratory.  (Abra- 
ham,  P  EB,  5 /1 /68 ;   Wilford,  NYT,  5/2/68,  1 8 ;   ARC  Astrogram, 
5 /23 /68 ,3 )  
Second  stage  of  vehicle  expected  to  be  first  manned  Apollo/Saturn  V 
space  vehicle  was  shipped  from  Kennedy  Space  Center  launch  site  to  
Mississippi  Test  Facility  for  cryogenic  proof  pressure  test  by  North 
American  Rockwdl  Corp.  personnel.  Test,  scheduled  for  June,  would 
further  certify  integrity  of  stage’s  liquid-hydrogen  tank  and  would  be 
conducted on  all  2nd  stages fo r  manned  Apollo  Saturn  missions. Stage 
would be reshipped  to KSC  about  July 1. (MSFC   Release 68-93) 
0  Edgar  M.  Cortright,  former  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  f o r  
Manned  Space Flight,  assumed  duties  as  Director  of  NASA  Langley Re- 
search  Center.  He  succeeded Dr.  Floyd  L.  Thompson, who was  serving 
as  Special Assistant  to  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb.  Codright 
had  served  a t  Lewis  Research  Center  from  1948 to  1958 and  a t   NASA 
Hq. since 1958.  (Lang ley  Researcher, 5 /17 /68 ,1 )  
President’s  Office  of  Science  and  Technology  released  Nutionul  Atmos- 
pheric  Sciences  Program-Fiscal  Y ea r   1969,  report  describing  total 
$200-million  Federal  investment  in  atmospheric  science  in  terms  of 
priority  areas  and  programs  of  10  participating  Federal  agencies.  Re- 
port  was  prepared  by  Interdepartmental  Committee  fo r   Atmospheric 

101 

May  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Sciences of  Federal Council for  Science and Technology. Planned  NASA 
share of funding for  FY  1969 was  $84,573,  dropping  from $123,406  in 
FY  1968.  Allocation  included  $50,594  for  meteorological  studies; 
$4,313  fo r  aeronomy, including  ionospheric physics atmospheric chem- 
istry, rocket and satellite instrumentation;  and $29,666 for study of  plan- 
etary  atmospheres. 
During  past  year  efforts had  increased  on  weather  modification and 
space  environmental  forecasting.  Special  effort  had  been  made  to  in- 
crease  support  of  university  research  groups  in   connection  with  U.S. 
participation  in  Global Atmospherics Research Program.  ESSA  and  K S F  
had  increased meteorology program  slightly. ESSA, DOD,  and NSF  had  in- 
creased  solar-terrestrial  research.  (Text : OST Release, 5/1/68) 
NASA  personnel  changes:  M /G   Robert  H.  Curtin  (USA,  Ret.)  was  ap- 
pointed  Director  of  Facilities,  reporting  to  Assistant Administrator  fo r  
Administration.  He  had  been  Director  of  Civil  Engineering,  Office of 
Deputy Chief  of  Staff, Programs and Resources, USAF  Hq. 
Ralph  E.  Cushman,  who  joined  National  Advisory  Committee  fo r  
Aeronautics in  1939, was  appointed  Special Assistant to  NASA  Assistant 
Administrator  for Administration.  (NASA Ann) 
Oakland  Tribune  editorial,  “Space  Race  Has  Big  Stakes”:  “The  orbital 
bomb  is  one  chilling  example of  the  potential military  threat  posed  by 
the Soviet space program.  Yet, so  far,  the  only officially announced U.S. 
reaction  . . . has been  reports  of  plans  for an  over-the-horizon radar  to 
lengthen the warning time against orbital devices and missiles. 
“It  would  be  more  reassuring  to  the  nation  i f   the  Pentagon  were 
given  the  authority  to  devote whatever  resources  i t   requires  to  counter 
the  orbital bomb threat,  not simply with defensive measures but  with  an 
offensive military  capability  of  our  own.  . . . The ultimate  prize  in  the  
space race may be national survival.”  (Oak land  T r i b ,  5/1/68) 
USAF  announced  modification of  F-111A  flight control  system  to  correct 
“binding  action  in  the  actuator  mechanism.”  F-111As 
in  U S .   and 
Thailand  had  been  grounded  briefly  until  bcpreCautionary measures” 
had  been  taken.  DOD could not  ascertain  if  problem  had  contributed  to 
Ioss  of  two  of  three  F-111As  in  Southeast Asia  during  past  10 wk  be- 
cause  wreckage  had  not  been  found.  USAF  said,  however,  F-11lA’s 
safety  record  was  superior  to  that  of  other  supersonic  fighters  during 
early  flights.  (Corddry, B Sun,  5/2/68,  A3;  N Y T ,  5/2/68,  15) 
Twenty  nations,  including  U.S.,  U.S.S.R.,  and  U.K.,  presented  d ra f t  
resolution  in   U.N.  General  Assembly  urging  “widest  possible  ad- 
herence”  to  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty  and  to  pur- 
sue urgent  negotiations  on  further  measures  to  halt  nuclear-arms race. 
(deOnis, N Y T ,  5 /2 /68 ,12 )  
May  2 :   House passed,  by  262-to-105 vote,  NASA  FY  1969 authorization  bill 
(H.R.  15856)  of  $4.031  billion,  including  $3.383  billion  for  R&D, $45 
million  for  construction  of  facilities,  and  $602  million  for  administra- 
tive  operatipns.  NASA  had  requested  $4.37  billion.  House  cut  $142.4 
million  from  Apollo  Applications  program-leaving 
$252.2  million, 
$186.4  million  less than NASA  had  requested  for  orbiting workshop  and 
lunar  exploration.  Administrative  operations  allocation  was  cut  by 
$43.5 million, making  total  of  almost $186-million reduction  in  $4.217- 
billion  authorization  recommended  by  House  Committee  on  Science 
and Astronautics. 

192 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

May  2 

During  floor  debate  Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex.),  Chairman  of 
House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on 
Manned  Space  Flight,  answered  Apollo  Applications  program  critics’ 
charge  that  NASA’s  Orbiting Workshop  would  duplicate  USAF’S  Manned 
Orbiting  Laboratory,  explaining  that  projects  differed  in  nature  and 
purpose.  MOL   objectives were  to  develop, operate  and  evaluate special- 
ized experiments and military  equipment requiring manned space opera- 
tions,  and  DOD would  draw  on  NASA  experience in   systems  involved  in 
Mercury, Gemini,  and  Apollo.  MOL   was  “example  of  utilization  by  an- 
other  department  .  .  . of  NASA-developed  space  technology.” 
( C R ,  
5/2/68,  H3229-661;  Sehlstedt, B  Sun,  5/3/68,  1; Lannan,  W  Star, 
5 /3 /68 ;   Griffin,  H  Chron,  5 /3 /68 ;   SBD ,   5/3/68,  1 5 ;   Aero   Da i ly ,  
5/7/68) 
*  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range  carried  Univ.  of  New  Hampshire-Univ.  of  California  at 
San  Diego  payload  to  161-mi  (258-km)  altitude.  Objectives  were  to 
measure electric  field,  ionospheric  currents,  auroral  light  intensity  and 
location, and proton  and electron fluxes in 1- to  10-kev  region while pay- 
load  was  passing  through  or  close  to  visible  auroral  display.  Rocket 
and  instruments  performed  satisfactorily;  useful  data  were  obtained 
from  all  experiments. Launch  was  last  in  series of  four  [see  April  301. 
(NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
*  New  Tanay  earth  station  near  Manila  participated  in  US.-Philippines 
commercial  satellite  television  inaugural  with  telecast  between  Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  and Manila via  landline  to  satellite earth  station  at  Brews- 
ter  Flat,  Wash.  Facility  functioned  through  Intelsat-II  F-2  a t   22,300- 
mi altitude over Pacific.  (ComSatCorp Release 68-22) 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  a t   dedication  of  Grissom  and  Chaffee  Halls  a t   Purdue  Univ. 
said,  “The  pressing  sociological problems besetting  this  nation  will  re- 
quire  a  high  order  of  technological skill  to  solve.”  Space program  was 
contributing  to  “fundamental  solution”  of  problems  of  poverty  and 
human  welfare  by  bringing  “advancement in  economic  and  technologi- 
cal growth.”  Space flight would help public understand  ability  of  indus- 
try,  science,  and  government  to ”  work  together  to  mobilize ,resources. 
Honoring  late  astronauts  Virgil  I .   Grissom  and  Roger  B.  Chaffee, Dr. 
Mueller  predicted  space program  would  “help  to  shape  our  future”  and 
U S .   would  continue  “to  rely  upon  the  vision  and  dedication”  of  such 
men.  Conquest  of  space  would  be  “our  most  enduring  memorial  to 
these men.”  (Text) 
*  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  delivered  first  of  three  McKinsey 
Foundation  lectures,  “Reflections on  Government  Service,”  before  Co- 
lumbia Univ.  Graduate  School of  Business:  “Our  society has  reached  a 
point  where  its  progress  and  even  survival  increasingly  depend  upon 
our  ability  to  organize the  complex and  do  the  unusual. We  cannot  do 
the  things  we  have  to  do  except  by  employment  of  large  aggregations 
of power in highly specialized forms.” 
Present  technological revolution was  “the most  decisive  event  of  our 
times.”  Great  issue  of  the  age  was  whether  U S .   could,  within  frame- 
work  of  acceptable  institutions,  “organize  the  use  and  development  of 
advanced  technology  as  effectively  as  the  USSR  with  its  totalitarian 
system of  allocating and utilizing human  and material  resources.”  Webb 

103 

May  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

believed  capabilities  of  US .   system  had  “immense  advantage  over  all 
other systems.”  (Text) 
U S .  military  sources in  Saigon  said  US@  F-111A  aircraft  had  been  re- 
stricted to  training  flights  in  Thailand. Three  aircraft  had  been  lost  on 
war  zone flights since being sent to  Southeast Asia  in  mid-March.  (UPI, 
W S ta r ,  5 /2 /68 , 1 )  
8  Arthur  E.  Raymond  of  RAND  Corp.  presented  Lester  D.  Gardner  lecture 
a t   MIT,  reviewing  “Air  Transport  History  and  a  Glimpse  into  the  FU- 
ture”:  “Looking back,  one sees, ever since the  1920s, nothing but  rapid 
progress  in  speed, range,  reliability, operating  altitude,  carrying  capac- 
ity,  and volume of  operations  . . . but  seldom if  ever  in human  affairs 
does  this  kind  of  growth  continue  without  a  slowing  a t   some 
point.  . . . The  days  are  gone  iorever  when  airplanes  could  be  de- 
signed  and  purchased  without  simultaneously  making  provision  for 
soiving the problems introducing  them will create.”  For  “practical,  util- 
itarian  air-transport systems,”  he  saw  little  advantage  in  speeds  above 
those  currently  associated  with  SSTS  or  ranges  above  those  associated 
with  subsonic jets.  He  foresaw coupling of  these  speeds and  ranges.  He 
saw little advantage in  larger  payloads than would be carried  in Boeing 
747  or  C-5  aircraft  because  of  terminal  congestion  and  high  aircraft 
cost.  ( A & A ,   7/68,  60-9) 
Donald  A.  Hall,  designer  of  Lindbergh  aircraft,  Sp i r i t   of  S t .   Louis,  died 
in San Diego, Cali€., a t  age 69.  ( N Y T ,  7 /3 /68 ,33 )  
May  3:  NASA  launched two  Aerobee 150 sounding  rockets  from  WSMR .   First 
carried  Princeton  Univ.  Observatory  payload  to  106.4-mi  (171.2-km) 
altitude  t o   point  two  spectrographs  toward  hot  stars  i n   Scorpius  to 
study  their  EUV  radiation  with  1  A  resolution  and  0.3  A  resolution. 
Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily.  Second  Aerobee 
150, launched 30 min  later,  carried  Columbia Univ.  experiment to  2.1- 
mi  (3.3-km)  altitude  to  search  for  x-ray emission  rrom  known  extraga- 
lactic  objects  in  radio  galaxy  M-87  and  in  quasi-stellar object  3C273. 
Rocket  performance  was  unsatisfactory  because  sustainer  did  not  ig- 
nite.  Instrumentation performance was satisfactory.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
NASA  Lewis  Research  Center  announced  organizational  changes : Dr. 
Seymour  C.  Himmel,  Assistant  Director  for  Launch  Vehicles,  was 
named  Chief  of  new  Special Projects Div.  for  jet  noise  and  V/STOL  air- 
craft  study and to new  post  of  Assistant Director  for Aeronautics. New- 
ell  D.  Sanders, Chief  of  Chemistry and Energy  Conversion Div.,  would 
assume additional duties as Assistant Chief  of  Special Projects Div. 
Milton  A.  Beheim,  Chief  of  Aerodynamics  Branch,  Advanced  Sys- 
tems Div.,  was appointed Chief  of  new Wind Tunnel and Flight Div. 
Edmund R.  Jonash, Chief  of  Centaur Project Office, was named Chief 
of  new  Launch  Vehicles Div.,  which  would  include previously  separate 
Centaur,  Agena,  and  Atlas  Project  0 5 c e s .   William  R.  Dunbar  would 
become  Project  Manager  for  Centaur.  H.  Warren  Plohr  and  Edward 
F.  Baehr  continued  as  Agena  and  Atlas  Project  Managers.  (LeRC 
Release 68-29) 
8  NASA  awarded  $73-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  to  Boeing  Co.  for 
technical  integration  and  evaluation  in   support  of  Apollo  program. 
Agreement was  an   addition  to  Boeing’s  previously  contracted  Saturn  V 
work and could be extended a s  necessary.  (NASA Release 68-85) 
8  Air  Force,Academy  announced  selection  of  Gen.  Carl  A.  Spaatz  (USAF, 

104 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

May  3 

Ret.)  to  receive its Thomas D.  m i t e  Award,  given  annually  for  contri- 
bution  to  national defense and security. Gen.  Spaatz was  fighter pilot  in 
World War  I.  During  World  War  I1 he  helped  plan  strategic  bombing 
of  Germany and  commanded  a i r  forces in North  Africa, U S .   Strategic 
Air  Forces  in  Europe,  and  final  bombing  operations  against  Japan. 
( R o c k y  Mountain News ,  5 /4 /68 ,13 )  
M a y  4 :  Preliminary  “pathfinder”  flights could delay U.S.S.R.’s  first manned 
lunar  and  planetary  flights, according to  Soviet scientist Vasili Pa r in   in 
Sovetskaya Rossiya.  “Experiments with  animals,”  preceding interplane- 
tary  flight, he  said,  “w i l l   take  many months and  perhaps  many  years.” 
(UPI ,   N Y T ,  5 /4 /68 ,66 )  
Sen.  Claiborne  Pel1  (D-R.I.)  told  33rd  American  Assembly  in  Harri- 
man,  N.Y.,  “The  proportion  of  government expenditures in  oceanology 
must  be  brought  much  closer  to  our  outer  space  program.”  Increased 
Federal  investment in oceanology w a s   justified by  promise  of  economic 
returns,  he  said.  Material  benefits  from  space program  were  more  re- 
mote.  (Text; W Po s t ,  5/5/68,  A25) 
M a y   5:  U.K.’s  Ariel  ZZZ, launched  by  NASA  from  ETR  May  5,  1967,  com- 
pleted  successful year  in  orbit.  It has traveled  around  earth 5,500  times 
and  transmitted  more  than  400  million  bits  of  usable  data  on  upper  at- 
mosphere.  All  five  experiments  were  still  working  well.  (Znteravia- 
AirLetter,  6/11/68,  9 )  
0  Two   prototypes  of  20-ton  DO  31  VTOL  transport  aircraft,  capable  of 
carrying  40  fully  equipped servicemen  o r   80 civilian  passengers, made 
first  public  appearance  at  Hanover  Air  Show,  West  Germany.  Using 
combination  of  vectored-thrust turbofans  and  pods  of  lift  engines,  jet 
transport  rose  vertically and  changed  in  air  to  horizontal  flight  in  first 
public demonstrations. Built by  Dornier Works, Munich,  a t  $50-million 
cost,  prototypes  were  financed  by  West  German  Defense  Ministry, 
which now  saw no  requirement  for  transport.  Financing would  be with- 
drawn  at  close  of  1968,  with  five  years  required  for  completion  of 
production  design. Thus fa r  no  civilian interest  in  production  had  been 
shown.  ( N Y T ,  5 /7 /68 ,95 )  
M a y   6 :   Republican  Coordinating  Committee  report  charged  “technology 
gap”  existed between US. and  U.S.S.R.  Military  space  systems empha- 
sis  had  been  on  passive  satellites  until  approval  of  Manned  Orbiting 
Laboratory  program-delayed  for  years.  Administration,  “fearful  lest 
new  developments  might  provoke  undesirable  Soviet  reactions,”  had 
failed  to  exploit  boldly  new  concepts  in  science  and  technology.  US. 
R&D  had  not been  aggressively pursued, with consequential slowdown i n  
new  weapons  development.  (Text;  AP,  N Y T ,   5/27/68,  8 ;  Golden,  P 
I n g ,  5/27/68) 
Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  ejected  and  parachuted  to   safety  from 
NASA’s  $2.5-million  Lunar  Landing  Research  Vehicle  ( LLRV)  while 
flying  simulated  lunar  landing  at  Ellington  AFB,  Tex.  Vehicle,  which 
had  reached  500-ft  altitude,  crashed  and  burned  on  impact.  Cause  of 
accident was  unknown.  ( C  T r ib ,  5/7/68;  B Sun, 5/7/68;  MSC  Round- 
up, 5 /10 /68 ,1 )  
0  Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  NASC  Executive Secretary, defended  space  activity 
before  St.  Louis, Mo.,  section  of  AIAA:  “There  are  . . . those  who  a re  
trapped  by  the  illogical proposition  that  i f   the money  involved were not 
spent on  space,  it would  automatically flow  into projects  in  which  they 

105 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
M a y  6 
a re  more  interested.  . . . I  do  not  agree.  It  is  not  an  ‘eitherlor’  situa- 
I h o w  it is-it  has 
tion.  In  my  judgment,  i f   this country  is great-and 
the  will,  the  ability,  and  the  responsibility to  handle  both  a  vigorous 
space program  and  the  social  and  economic  problems  which  confront 
it.  In  fact,  our  competence to  solve the  issues  of  the  city  is  greater  be- 
cause  of  the  space program.”  ( C R ,  6/17/69,  S7314) 
May   7:  U.S.S.R.  successfully launched  Cosmos  C C X X   into  orbit  with  755- 
km  (469.1-mi)  apogee, 677-km  (420.7-mi)  perigee,  99-min period,  and 
inclination.  All  equipment  was  functioning  normally.  ( S BD ,  
74 
5 /8 /68 ,39 ;   AP, N Y T ,  5 /8 /68 ,93 ;   GSFC  S SR ,  5/15/68) 
NASA  successfully launched  Canadian  Black  Brandt  IV  sounding  rocket 
from  NASA  Wallops  Station  to  510-mi  (820-km)  altitude.  Primary  ob- 
jective was  to  check  out  instrumentation  to  be  carried  later  in  1968 on 
International Satellite  for  Ionospheric Studies  ( ISIS  A ) ,   Canada’s  third 
ionosphere-probing  satellite,  and  to  confirm  results  of  similar  1967 
launch.  Secondary objectives were  to  explore  spectrum of  VLF electro- 
magnetic waves,  measure  electron density  and  temperature,  and  meas- 
ure  thermal  gradients  in  vicinity  of  a  skin  depression.  Launch  was 
conducted  when  Canada’s  A loue t te   I I   was  passing  overhead,  to  permit 
comparison  of  data  telemetered  to  earth  by  both  vehicles.  Good  data 
were obtained.  (NASA   Rpt SRL ;   WS Release 68-10) 
*  Lawrence  A.  Hyland,  Vice  President  and  General  Manager  of  Hughes 
Aircraft  Go.,  received NAA’s  Robert J. Collier Trophy  for  1967 on behalf 
of  Hughes  Surveyor  Program  Team,  JPL ,   and  other  companies  and 
organizations involved in project  which citation  said,  had  “put  the  eyes 
and hands  of  the United  States on  the  Moon.’’  Award  was  presented by 
Vice  President  Hubert  H.  Humphrey  fo r   greatest  annual  achievement 
in  aeronautics  o r   astronautics  in  US. 
In  ceremonies a t   Smithsonian  Institution’s  Air  and  Space  Museum, 
Humphrey  called  U S .   space  program  “a  splendid  challenge  and  a 
noble mission  . . . one whose practical  benefits for  today  are  exceeded 
only  by  its  promise  for  tomorrow.  “I  urge  every  American  to  support 
the  future  development  of  our  space  program,  and  I  . . . shall  do  so 
with pride and vigor.’’ 
Humphrey  said  Nation  had  decided  to  commit  resources  “to  venture 
in  space  for  one  primary  reason:  We  believe  that  this  mission  to  the 
far-out  will  produce  many  down-to-earth  benefits  for  men.  . . . I n  
fact  . . . the nation  that  is first  in  science and technology ha s   a  chance 
to  be  the  first  to  overcome some  of  the  perplexing  problems  that  have 
beset  mankind  since  the  beginning  of  civilization.’’  Space  research 
has  vastly  expanded  our  capabilities  in  navigation,  communication 
( 6  
and  meteorology.  I t   has  given  us  new  products  and  processes  in  such 
fields  as  agriculture,  photography,  metallurgy,  and  oceanography.” 
Techniques “that  are going to put  a man  on  the moon  a re   . . . exactly 
the  techniques  that  we  are  going  to  need  to  clean  up  our  cities  . . .; 
the  systems  analysis  approach  . . . is  the  approach  that  the  modern 
city  of  America  is going to  need  if  it’s  going  to become a  livable social 
institution. 
‘50 maybe we’ve  been  pioneering in  space only  to  save  ourselves on 
earth  . . . maybe the nation  that  puts a man  on  the moon  is the nation 
that w i l l  put man on his feet first right here on earth.  . . . 
‘? think  a  certain  extravagance  of  objectives-a  will  to   push  back 

106 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1968 

May 7 

M a y  7 :  Lawrence  A .  Hyland  ( r i g h t ) ,  V i c e   President  and  General  Manager  of  Hughes  
Aircraft  Co.,  looks a t   Surveyor  model  w i t h   V i c e   President  Huber t   H .   Humphrey   a t  
Sm i thson ian   Ins t i tu t ion .   V i c e  President  presented  Hyland  1967  Rober t   J .   Collier  Trophy  
{ba c kg round )   in  Sm i thson ian   ceremonies  honoring  Hughes   Surveyor  team ,   J e t   Propul- 
s ion   Laboratory,  and  General  Dynamics  Corp.  for program  wh ich   ‘$u t   th e   eyes  and 
hands  of th e   Un i ted  S ta tes   o n  t h e  moon.” 

the  test  of  a  vital  society,  a  nation 
the  frontiers  of  the  unknown-is 
(Text;  AP, W  Star, 
that  intends  t o   meet  the  challenge  of  tomorrow.’, 
5/8/68,  ALE;  Aero Tech, 5 /20 /68 ,19)  
U S .   patent  No.  3,381,917  was  awarded  to  Wendell  F.  Moore,  assistant 
chief  engineer  a t   bell  Aerosystems  Go.,  and  Edward  G.  Ganczak,  re- 
search  associate,  €or Bell  Pogo  and  Flying  Chair,  flying  platforms  on 
which pilot  could  stand  or  sit  on  fuel  tank.  Engine was  kerosene turbo- 
jet.  Both  had  arm  pieces  with  which  pilot  directed  thrust.  Pilot  could 
disembark  without  encumbrance,  advantage  useful  t o   soldiers,  police- 
men, o r  firemen.  (Jones, NYT, 5 /11 /68 ,45)  
*  Juan  T.  Trippe,  founder,  Chairman,  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Pan 
American  World  Airways,  Inc.,  announced  his  retirement  a t   annual 
meeting in  New  York.  Board  of  Directors selected President  Harold  E. 
Gray,  Chairman and Chief  Executive Officer,  and Senior Vice President 
Najeeb E. Halaby, President. 
Citing Trippe’s 41-yr service with  PAA, New  York  Times termed him 
last  of  the  aviation  pioneers” to   retire.  One of  four  who  forged  major 
6 6  
US. trunk  airlines  in  industry’s  infancy, Trippe had  led  PAA to  be  first 
airline  to  fly  across  Pacific,  first  to  fly  across  Atlantic,  first  to  order 

107 

May  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

and  fly  American-made  jets,  first  to  order  Boeing  747,  and  first  to 
order  SSTS.  New  Chairman Gray,  hired by  PAA  in  1929 as its  10th pilot, 
had  made  first scheduled transatlantic  flight, in  1938. He had  served a s  
President  since  1964. Halaby,  pilot  since  age  1 7  and  former  FAA  Ad- 
ministrator, had  joined  airline  as  senior  vice president  in  1965.  (Ham- 
mer, NYT ,  5 /8 /68 , 6 3 ;   5 /12 /68 ,16 )  
AEC  refused  comment  on  Science  and  C i t izen   report  U S .   had  set  off  3 
and U.S.S.R.  22  undisclosed  underground  atomic tests in  1 9M  through 
1967,  bringing  total  underground  tests  to  168  for  past  three  years. 
Magazine,  published  by  Committee  for  Environmental  Information  in 
St.  Louis, Mo.,  said  source  of  information  was  publication  of  Research 
Institute  of  Swedish National  Defense  and  that  three  undisclosed  U S .  
tests had  occurred in  1964. All  subsequent U S .  tests had  been  reported. 
( W  Po s t ,  5 /7 /68 ,7 )  
M a y  8 :  House passed  by  record  353-to-37 vote  H.R.  17023,  FY  1969 Inde- 
pendent  Offices and  HUD  appropriations  bill.  Before  floor  debate,  H.R. 
1164, with  points  of  order  against  NASA  provisions waived,  was  passed 
by  voice vote.  As  passed, H.R.  17023 provided  $4.008 billion  for  NAS-4 
-$959.777  million  below  FY  1967  level  and  $580.677  million  below 
FY 1968 ( C R ,  H3458-502) 
ESRO  successfully  launched  first  two-stage  Centaure  rocket  fired  from 
Italy  at  Perdasdefogu,  Sardinia,  carrying  Max  Planck  Institute  (Lan- 
dau,  Germany)  payload  to   88.5-km  (55-mi)  altitude  in  118 sec.  (AP, 
W Pos t ,  5/9/68) 
Arrival  of  Prime  Minister  Thanom  Kittikachorn  of  Thailand  a t   White 
House marked  first  transpacific satellite telecast of  visiting head-of-state 
to   his  home  country.  Telecast  also  inaugurated  television  from  U S .   to 
S r i   Racha  earth  station  in  Southeast  Asia.  (ComSatCorp  Release 
68-24) 
USAF  F-111A  aircraft  crashed  on  training  flight  60  mi  north  of  Las 
Vegas,  Nev.  Instructor  and  student  pilot  escaped  injury.  USAF  said 
cause of  crash  was  not  known.  F-111As  had  been  criticized  after  three 
of  six  sent  to  Thailand  were  lost within  weeks.  (UPI ,   W Pos t ,   5/9/68, 
A8; AP, W S tar ,  5/9/68,  D7;  UPI,  W New s ,  5 /9 /6 8 ,2 )  
Director  of  Defense  Research  and  Engineering,  Dr.  John  S.  Foster,  Jr., 
testified  before  House  Committee  on  Armed  Services  on  F’Y  1969  de- 
fense research, development, test,  and  evaluation program.  “We have  a 
strong  technical-military position  today  only because we  built  a  strong 
research and technology base  in  the  past.  . . . Yet  there  are some indi- 
cations  that  the  program  is eroding.”  The  “net  effect of  continuing  this 
trend  will  be  a  serious  weakening  of  our  long-term  national  security 
position.”  Research  and  technology  funding  in  F’Y  1968 was  “about 
70%  of  the  FY  1964  level,  a  critical  30%  reduction.”  (Text;  P  S B ,  
6/9/68  ) 
Charles W,  Mathews,  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned 
Space  Flight,  addressed  Society  of  Automotive  Engineers  Space Tech- 
nology  Conference in  Washington, D.C.:  “A  major  goal  of  the  Apollo 
Applications  Program  is  to  accelerate  the  evolution  of  the  utility  of 
space flight using  the  very major  capability  that  has  been  developed in  
the  Apollo  Program.  . . . First,  our  experience  to  date  leads  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  utility  of  space  flight  w i l l   be  greatly  enhanced  by 
the  participation  of  men  onboard  the  spacecraft.  Second,  in  manned 

108 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

May  8 

space flight  our  ability  to  maintain  operations  for  durations  considera- 
bly  in  excess  of  those  now  obtained  is  necessary  for  efficient 
operations.  . . . The  initial  step  in  this  approach  is  the  establishment 
of  a workshop in earth orbit.” 
Saturn  IB   orbiting  workshop,  manned  after  launch  by  three-man 
crew,  would  be  followed  by  manned  Apollo  Telescope  Mount,  which 
would  dock  with  workshop  for  56-day mission  to  study  solar  phenom- 
ena-“first 
application  of  man  in  space  to  conduct  advanced  scien- 
tific  experiments.”  Features  and  operating  modes  of  Saturn  V  work- 
shop,  to  follow, would  be  based  on  information  gained  from  Saturn  IB  
workshop.  (Text) 
M a y   9 :   U.S.  reconnaissance  satellite,  orbiting  a t   altitudes  of  several 
hundred  miles,  had  discovered  that  U.S.S.  Pueblo  was  no  longer 
moored  in  North  Korean  port  of  Wonsan.  Vessel  had  occupied  that 
berth  since  her  capture  by  North  Koreans  Jan.  23.  State  Dept.  con- 
firmed  absence  of  vessel  but  would  not  discuss source  of  information. 
(Goulden, P  Inq, 5 /10 /68 ,2 )  
0  In   second  McKinsey  Foundation  lecture  at  Columbia  Univ.,  NASA  Ad- 
ministrator  James  E.  Webb  discussed  “Goal  Setting  and  Feedback  in 
Large  Scale Endeavors.”  NASA  had  created  “in-house technical  and  ad- 
ministrative  competence”  making  possible  “correct  judgments”  and 
thus  could move  “to  the  voter- judgment  arena  w i th   confidence.” NASA’s 
“integrated  system” approach  had  proved more  effective than  “indepen- 
dent components”  approach  of  past  in  solving problems of  space  devel- 
opment.  Successful working  partnership  of  universities,  industry,  and 
government had  yielded product,  in  usable resources, “greater  than  the 
sum of  its  parts.”  Scientific R&D  expenditures in  large  endeavors could 
contribute more to  economic growth in next  decade than  any  other  sin- 
gle  factor. Maximum  transfer  of  technology to  nonspace use  should  be 
“purposefully  and  systematically  sought.”  Costs  of  space  accomplish- 
ments  had  been  “less  than  three  percent  of  the  total  of  our  federal  ex- 
penditures,,  for  first  10  yr  and  “less  than  five  one  thousandths  pf  our 
gross national product.” More than 90% went to  laboratories  and  facto- 
ries, outside NASA.  (Text) 
Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry.  Director  of  Medical  Research  and  Operations, 
MSC,  was  elected  1969  President  of  Aerospace  Medical  Assn.  at  39th 
Annual  Meeting  in  Bal  Harbour,  Fla.  Astronaut  Edwin  E.  Aldrin  was 
named honorary member.  ( MSC  Roundup ,  5 /24 /68 ,1 )  
USAF  restricted  all  F-111A  flights  in  U.S.  and  in  Southeast Asia  pending 
investigation  of  crash  in  Nevada  May  8.  Five  F-111As 
in  Thailand 
would  conduct  no  air  strikes.  (AP,  W  Po s t ,   5/10/68,  1; AP, W  S tar ,  
5/10/68,  A7;  N Y T ,  5 /11 /6 8 , 2 )  
M a y  9-10:  NASA  held  Second Conference on  Sonic Boom  Research  at  Head- 
quarters  to  review  status  of  NASA  university  program  on  sonic  boom 
research,  survey  research  program  at  NASA  centers,  determine  most 
pressing  areas  of  research  for  SST,  and  determine most  promising  ave- 
nues  of  research  on  sonic  boom  overpressure  reduction.  Appraising 
proceedings, I .   R.  Schwartz,  NASA  OART  Research  Div.,  said  that  “sig- 
nificant  progress  has  been  made  during  the  past  year  in  our  under- 
standing  and  analysis  of  the  generation  and  propagation  of  sonic 
boom.  Further,  i t   has  been  analyticallyl  demonstrated  in  the  NASA 
program  . . . that  the  utilization  of  a  particular  aerodynamic  tech- 

109 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
M a y   9-10 
nique  can  result  in  large  reductions  in   sonic  boom  overpressures.  . . . 
[This]  allows  us  to  expect  vast  improvements in  future  SST  conceptual 
designs.”  (NASA  SP-180) 
Muy  10:  MSFC  contract  activity:  Brown  Engineering  Co. 
received 
$1,007,000  one-year  contract  renewal  for  support  services  a t   MSFC  
Space Sciences Laboratory.  A.  L.  Mechling Inc.  was  awarded  $556,416 
one-year  contract  for  barge  towing  service  on  the  Tennessee,  Missis- 
sippi, and Ohio rivers, Gulf  of  Mexico,  and Atlantic  intercoastal water- 
ways.  ( MSFC  Releases 68-100,6&101) 
Special  Assistant  to  President  for  Science  and  Technology,  Dr.  Donald 
F.  Hornig,  on  receipt  of  first Mellon  Institute  Award  a t   Carnegie-Mel- 
lon  Univ.  for  “the  application  of  science  to  the  betterment  of  man- 
kind,”  discussed  “A  Crisis for  Science.”  After  two decades of  progress, 
“Congress  and  the  public  ask  whether  we  can  afford  it  after  all.  We 
now  find  ourselves pulling back  €rom the  exploration of  space,  slowing 
down  on  the  development  of  universities,  and  even  holding  back  on 
health  research.”  Scientific community,  however,  had  “done  much  to  
alienate  itself  from  the  society  which  supports  it.” 
(Text;  Science, 
7/19/68,248) 
Muy   11 : NASA’s Goddard  Satellite Tracking  Center  reported  upper  stage  of 
Molniyu  1-8  booster,  launched  April  2 1   by  U.S.S.R.,  had  reentered 
(AP,  N Y T ,  
earth‘s  atmosphere  and  disintegrated  over  Florida. 
5/12/68,87) 
May  1 2 :   At  dedication  ceremony  attended  by  19,000,  USAF  officially  re- 
named  Bunker  Hill  AFB,  Indiana,  Grissom  AFB  in  honor  of  Astronaut 
Virgil  I.  Grissom  who  died  Jan.  27,  1967,  in   Apollo  fire.  ( N Y T ,  
5/13/68) 
Nearly  fallout-free  nuclear  explosive  appeared  within  U S .   grasp  as  re- 
sult  of  two  AEC  Plowshare nuclear  excavation  tests  Jan.  26  and  March 
12 a t  Nevada  test  site.  Small size  of  explosives used  had  confined  fall- 
out  within  few  hundred  yards  of  craters,  with  radiation  a t   source  un- 
detectable after three days.  (O’Toole, W Post, 5/12/68) 
Muy  13:  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  approved 
$4.151 billion  NASA  FY  1969 authorization,  adding  $119.137 million  to 
H.R.  15856, which  had  authorized  $4.031  billion.  Figure  still  was  ap- 
proximately  5%   below  $4.37  billion  requested  by  President  Johnson. 
Senate voted  $350  million  for  Apollo  Applications, against  $253.2  mil- 
lion  by  House,  and  $55 million  for  NERVA  program,  a s  against  $11.7- 
increasing  R&D  funds  to  $3.475  billion.  Both  houses  agreed  on  alloca- 
tion  of  $2.025  billion  for  Apollo  program.  Senate  committee cut  con- 
struction  of  facilities  funds  by  $5.4  million  to  $39.6  million,  but  in- 
creased  administrative  operations  by  $32.4  million  to  $635.6  million. 
(NASA  LAR VII/48;  AP, N Y T ,  5/14/68;  Sehlstedt, B Sun ,  5/14/68) 
9  ESSA  was  studying  solar  flare  prediction  technique  and  ground  observa- 
tory  support  for  NASA’s Apollo  Telescope  Mount  flight  scheduled  for 
1971. NASA  had  transferred  $30,000  to   ESSA  for  six-month investigation 
to  enable  astronauts  to  know  when  and  where  solar  flare  would  occur 
within  accuracy  of  1,000 mi  out  of  860,000-mi-wide face  of  sun.  ESSA 
also would  study da ta  required  for  maximum results  from ATM  mission 
and  examine  existing  data  collection  networks  and  observing  proce- 
dures. Effort would be monitored by  ATM  Project Office  and  Space Sci- 
ences Laboratory  at  MSFC.  (MSFC  Release 68-103;  SBD,  5/15/68,  73) 

110 

May 13 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
*  Free world’s largest  experimental  comsat was  being  built  by  Hughes  Air- 
craft Co.  under  USAF  Space and Missile Systems Organization  manage- 
ment.  The  1,600-lb s a t e l l i t d e s i g n e d  to  provide  testing  for  tactical 
communications between  military  units  i n   the  field,  ships  a t   sea,  and 
scheduled for  late  1968 delivery.  I t  would  be  launched by 
aircraft-was 
Titan  111-C  booster  into  22,300-mi-altitude  orbit  and  would  be 
equipped  with  three  antenna  systems.  During  orbital  tests,  standard 
military  UHF  band  would  be  used  for  air-ground  communications and 
super-high-frequency portion  of  X  band  for military  satellite communi- 
cations.  (AFSC Release 64.68) 
National  Sporting  Aviation  Council,  formed  Feb.  16,  adopted  official 
charter  at  first  meeting held  in  Washington, D.C.,  affirming its  original 
mission to  promote progress and  development of  all  forms  of  sport  avi- 
ation  in  US. through  National  Aeronautic  h s n .   and  worldwide 
through  FCdBration  ABronautique  Internationale.  ( NAA  News) 
Dr. Walter  Haeussermann was  selected to  Fellowship in  American Astro- 
nautical  Society for  “direct  and  significant contribution  to  the  field  of 
(MSFC   Re- 
astronautics,”  a s   Director  of  Astrionics  Laboratory,  MSFC. 
lease 68-102) 
John  B.  Tuke  had  assembled  operable  weather-picture  receiving  station 
at  his  home  in  Stranraer,  Scotland,  out  of  spare  electronic  parts,  old 
antenna,  electric  motor,  and  tuning  fork  f o r   about  $480.  One  of  first 
amateurs  to  construct  homemade  receiving  set,  Tuke  was  able  to  re- 
ceive  pictures  from  ESSA  and  Nimbus  satellites for  1 5  min,  from  lower 
Spain to Arctic, on  each pass.  Interest  in  amateur stations  had  grown  to 
point  that  NASA  had  published  booklet  of  instructions  for  building 
ground  stations  [see  April  261  and  Electro-Mechanical Research  Co .  
h College Park, Md.,  had  begun selling packaged sets for  $5,000.  (Wil- 
ford, NYT, 5/13/68) 
May  14:  ComSatCorp Chairman  James  McCormack  submitted  Annual  Re- 
port  to  shareholders’ meeting at Washington, D.C.  Intelsat  I ,  ZZ F-2,  I1 
F-3,  and  I I   F-4  were  reasonably  loaded with  commercial communica- 
tions  traffic.  Intelsat  I11  series wa s   scheduled for  late  summer  delivery 
and  launching  during  fall  1968  and  spring  1969.  Intelsat  IV   series 
would  be  presented for  Government approval  shortly.  It was  hoped  de- 
velopment could be  under  way  before  end  of  1968. More than  half  the 
40 earth  stations  anticipated  to  be  in  operation  by  1969 were  expected 
to  be operating by end  of  1968. Despite technical problems,  satellite op- 
erating  circuits  maintained  10070  reliability.  Total  of  48  nations  were 
represented  by  Interim  Communications Satellite Committee,  to   which 
ComSatCorp had  submitted several US. proposals : relating  investments 
of  global members  directly  to  amount  of  their  use  of  system;  limiting 
voting power  to 50% maximum with  substantive issues decided by  two- 
thirds  majority ; ComSatCorp’s  continuing  as  Consortium  manager 
with contractual  obligations made more specific. 
ComSatCorp  opposed  authorization  by  Federal  Communications 
Commission  of  separate  satellite  system  for  broadcast  distribution  as 
had been proposed. 
With  first  quarter  operating  income  of  $372,000  and  investment in- 
come of  $1.426 million, ComSatCorp realized net  income of  $1.798  mil- 
lion.  At  close  of  first  quarter  1968,  investments  in  communications fa- 

111 

May  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

cilities  amounted  to  $73  million.  ComSatCorp expected  this  to  exceed 
$100 million a t  end of  1968. (Text) 
NASA’s Test  and  Training  Satellite T t s   I ,   carried  pickaback  a s   secondary 
payload  on  P ioneer   VZII  and  ejected  into  orbit  Dec.  13,  1967,  reen- 
tered  atmosphere  and  was  believed  to  have  burned  up   over  Easter  IS- 
land  in  Pacific.  Spacecraft supplied  14-station worldwide  tracking  net- 
work  training  fo r   Apollo  flights.  (NASA  Release  68-86;  AP, P  EB ,  
5/15/68;  S BD ,  5/15/68,75) 
e  Dr.  Harold  Brown,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  told  Los  Angeles  Junior 
Chamber  of  Commerce that  if  U.S.S.R.’s  long-range bomber  force  im- 
proved,  U S .   might  need  new  2,000-mph  F-12 
interceptor  rejected  by 
Secretary  of  Defense Robert S.  McNamara  in  1967. Although U.S.S.R. 
had  about  155  long-range  bombers  and  U.S.  had  680,  USAF  officials 
feared  U.S.S.R.  might  build  advanced  manned  aircraft  to  overpower 
what  McNamara  had  acknowledged  to  be  an  obsolete conventional  a i r  
shield. DOD  had  announced major  cutbacks  in  existing  a i r  defense units 
May 13. (Text; Omaha W -H ,   5/15/68,21) 
Parafoil,  steerable parachute  being  developed  and  tested  by  Notre  Dame 
Univ.  under  contract  with  USAF’S  Flight  Dynamics Laboratory,  brought 
Sgt.  Robert  McDermott  (USA )   down  from  35,000-ft altitude  in  demon- 
stration at Wright-Patterson AFB.  Parafoil had  glide of  nearly  three  feet 
for  each  ioot  of  vertical  drop,  enabling  jumper  to  steer  toward  target. 
Steerable parachutes  normally used  for  spot landings  glided  only  about 
% f t  for each foot of  fall.  (AP, N Y T ,  5 /15 /68 ,24 )  
e  Dr.  Walton  L.  Jones,  Chief  of  NASA’s Biotqchnology  and  Human  Re- 
search  Div.,  Office  of  Advanced Research and  Technology,  in  an  inter- 
view  reported  study  of  3,500  residents of  Chicago, Denver, Dallas,  and 
Los  Angeles  had  indicated  some were  more  annoyed  by  aircraft  noise 
than  others.  Noise  w a s   more  objectionable  inside  the  house  than  out. 
The  deeper  people  slept,  the  more  boom  i t   took  to  wake  them.  People 
could adapt  to  sonic boom, but  data  compiled thus  far  did  not  indicate 
to  what  extent.  Dr.  Jones’  work  on  improving  safety  of  aircraft  seats 
showed “many  injuries  could be  avoided if   seats were  designed to  dissi- 
pate  more  energy.”  Good  forward-facing  seat,  possibly  with  shoulder 
harness,  would  be  better  than  rear-facing  seats.  ( C S M ,  5/14/68;  C R ,  
5/28/68,  E4743) 
e  Dr.  Arthur  Rudolph, Saturn V  Manager  a t  MSFC   for  past  4%  yr,  was  re- 
tiring  after  38  yr  in  rocketry,  MSFC  Director,  Dr. Wernher  von  Braun, 
announced. He  would  be  succeeded by  Lee  B.  James,  Deputy  Director 
of  Apollo  program  in  NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space Flight.  (M S FC   Re- 
lease 60-106;  AP, N Y T ,  5 /15 /68 ,5 ;   AP, W S tar ,  5/15/68,  A2) 
M a y   15 :   Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  NASC  Executive  Secretary,  told  National 
Space Club in Washington, D.C.,  U.S.S.R.  in  1968 had  been  surpassing 
its  1967 payload  successes numerically  and,  “what  is  more  significant 
. . .  surpassing  substantially  the  number  of  successful  payloads 
launched  this  year  by  the  United  States.  While  our  activity  curve  is 
moving  down  . . . theirs  is headed  up.”  U.S.S.R.  had  “orderly,  persist- 
ent,  and  well  planned  space program,  including  a  vigorous  project  for 
a  manned  landing  on  the  lunar  surface.”  U S .   had  operational  lead  in  
communications,  navigation,  and  meteorology  but  U.S.S.R.  showed 
“considerable  activity”  in  those  fields.  U S .   had  been  generally  more 

112 

May  15 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
successful in unmanned  lunar  and  planetary  performance, but  U.S.S.R. 
was more active.  (Text) 
Fiftieth  anniversary  of  U S .   Airmail  Service was  celebrated  in  Washing- 
ton,  D.C.,  with gathering  a t  National Air  and Space Museum of  pioneer 
airmail pilots  and  presentation by  Postmaster General W.  Marvin Wat- 
son  of  commemorative 10-cent postage  stamp.  Watson  observed  that, 
f rom  small beginning,  “virtually  all  first  class mail which  can  be  effec- 
tively  airlifted  is  now  so  moved  and  almost  80  per  cent  of  all  letter 
mail  now  travels  by  air.”  (Text;  Lidman,  N Y T ,  5/16/68,  3 0 ;   Ae ro -  
space, Spring 68) 
NASA  Javelin  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill  Research  Range 
carried  Univ.  of  Iowa  experiment  to  500-mi  (805-km)  altitude  to  ob- 
serve frequency-time spectra  and  measure  relative phase  and  amplitude 
of  magnetic  and  electric  fields  of  VLF  radio  noise  in  30  hz-10  khz  
range;  measure  electric  field  amplitude  of  naturally  occurring  radio 
noise  from  7-70  khz;  measure  differential energy  spectra  for  protons 
and  electrons over 5  ev-50  kev  energy range;  and measure DC  electric 
field  perpendicular  to  payload  spin  axis.  Rocket  and  instrument  per- 
formance was  satisfactory  and  all  scientific objectives were  met.  (NASA  
Rpt SRL )  
NASA  announced  that  sinus  condition  that  was  aggravated  by  pressure 
changes and  had  not  responded to  treatment led  to  grounding-perhaps 
permanently-of  Astronaut  John  S.  Bull.  Astronaut  Robert  A.  R.  Pa r -  
ker  had  suffered  spine  fracture  during  parachute  training  at Williams 
AFB,  Ariz.,  but  injuries  were  not  thought  to  be  serious.  (AP,  B  Sun, 
5/16/68,  A3 ;  W S tar ,  5/16/68;  H  Po s t ,  5 /16 /68 ,8 )  
NASA  awarded  North  American  Rockwell  Gorp.  $2.575-million  contract 
modification to  continue  Saturn  V  (S-11)  “battleship”  or  ground  test 
program  at  Santa  Susana, Calif.,  test  center through  July.  Modification 
increased total  contract  for  S-I1  stage  development testing  and  facility 
maintenance planning to  $1.281 billion.  ( MSFC Release 68-109) 
M a y   16 :  Ir is   I  (E s ro  11-B) International  Radiation  Investigation Satellite, 
designed, developed, and  constructed  by  European  Space Research  Or- 
ganization  under  July  8,  1964+, NASA-ESRO  agreement, w a s   successfully 
launched  by  NASA  from  WTR  by  four-stage Scout  booster.  Orbital  par- 
ameters:  apogee,  673.7  mi  (1,084.2  km) ; perigee,  204.1  mi  (328.5 
km) ; period,  98.9  min  and  inclination,  97.2”.  Primary  NASA  mission 
objectives  were  t o   piace  Ir is   I  into  planned  polar  orbit  and  provide 
tracking  and  telemetry  support.  The  164Jb,  35Y2-in high,  30-in-dia 
cylindrical  satellite carried  seven  experiments for  solar-astronomy and 
cosmic-ray studies  representing  six  different  organizations  from  U.K., 
France, and the Netherlands. Six experiments were operating as planned 
and  their  scientific  objectives  were  being  achieved. 
Ir is   I  w a s   backup  spacecraft to  ESRO 11-A,  which had  been  launched 
May  29,  1967, but  had  failed  to  achieve  orbit  because  of  Scout  3rd 
stage  malfunction.  ESRO  was  responsible  for  experiment  instrumenta- 
tion,  delivery  of  spacecraft  to  launch  site,  equipment  and  personnel 
necessary  to  mate  spacecraft  to  launch  vehicle,  and  spacecraft  testing. 
NASA  provided  Scout  launch  vehicle, conducted  launch  operations,  and 
supplied  data  and  tracking  acquisition  support.  (NASA  P ro j   Off;  NASA 
Release 68-75;  UPI,  W Po s t ,  5/17/68,  D13;  W News ,  5 /17 /68 ,5 ;   GSFC 
SSR, 5/31/68) 

113 

May  16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS.  1968 

May  16:  I n   cooperative  program,  NASA   launched  Iris  I  (Esro  11-B)  International  Ra- 
d ia t ion   Investigation  Sa te l l i te ,   f o r   European  Space   Research  Organization  f rom   WTR  b y  
four-stage  Scout  booster.  I n   Apr i l   pho to ,   Iris  I  is  prepared  f o r   mission  t o   orbit  seven 
solar-astronomy  and  cosmic-ray  exper imen ts   f r om   s ix   organizations. 

0  First  recording  of  pulsar  signals  a t   short  wavelengths,  2293  mc,  was 
made by  Drs.  Alan Moffet, Ronald D.  Ekers,  and Richard M.  Goldstein 
of  Cal Tech, using 210-ft Mars dish  antenna  a t  Goldstone Tracking Sta- 
tion  operated  by  JPL   for  NASA.  Signals’  energy  indicated  origin  from 
natural  source  such  as  white  dwarf  stars  o r   neutron  stars.  CP-1919, 
one  of  three  pulsars  observed, was  weakest  source  ever  recorded.  At 

114 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1968 

May  16 

2293 mc,  signal was  one-hundredth that  of  other  two,  though  a t  longer 
wavelengths  signal  was  one  of  two  strongest  of  four  known  pulsars. 
(“CP”  referred  to  Cambridge pulsar  list; number  indicated  location.) 
Dr.  Moffet  placed  pulsars  100  to  10,000  light  years  from  earth,  in  
Milky Way Galaxy. Although signal  strengths varied,  periods  remained 
constant.  (Cal Tech Release; Pasadena Independent,  5/15/68) 
*  President  Johnson  announced  intention  to  nominate  following  for  ap- 
pointment  to  six-year  terms  on  National  Science  Board:  R.  H.  Bing, 
Chairman,  Dept.  of  Mathematics, Univ.  of  Wisconsin;  Harvey  Brooks, 
Dean of  Engineering  and  Applied Physics, Harvard  Univ.;  William A. 
Fowler, professor  of‘physics, Cal Tech;  Norman Hackerman, President, 
Univ.  of  Texas a t  Austin;  Philip Handler,  Chairman,  Dept.  of  Chemis- 
try,  Duke Univ.  Medical Center;  James  G.  March,  Dean  of  Social Sci- 
ences,  Univ.  of  California  at  Irvine;  Grover  Murray,  President,  Texas 
Tech;  and  Frederick  E.  Smith,  professor  of  zoology,  Univ.  of  Michi- 
gan.  (PD, 5/20/68,802) 
*  In  last  of 
three  McKinsey  Foundation  lectures  NASA  Administrator 
James  E.  Webb  discussed  “Executive  Performance  and  Evaluation.” 
NASA  program  a t   peak  level had  employed more  than  400,000  full-time 
workers  and  20,000  contractors,  subcontractors,  and  suppliers  and 
drawn  on  more  than  150  universities,  in  addition  to  8,000  NASA-SUP- 
ported  professors, scientists, and technicians. I t  had  worked  with  urban 
communities  on  problems,  reclaimed  wasteland,  constructed  massive 
buildings,  and  developed new  transportation  means.  NASA  would  not  be 
viewed in history a s  unique but was likely “to prove a prototype.” 
As  Administrator,  Webb  said, his purpose was  to  work  toward  envi- 
ronment  within  which  NASA  could  be  a s  innovative  in  the  management 
of  all  its  activities  as  it was  in   its  scientific and  technical work.  Large- 
scale  endeavor  required  executives  of  unusual  type  and  had  to  be  de- 
signed  to  enable  executives  to  perform  in  an   unusual  way.  (Text) 
New  Yo r k   Times editorial  urged  congressional passage  of  legislation  to 
ban  sonic  booms:  “While  technical  and  budgetary  di5culties  have 
slowed development of  an  American supersonic aircraft,  the British  and 
French  are  progressing  with  their  joint-venture model.  I t   is  important 
to  have  some  protection  on  the  law  books  beiore  the  booms  come 
crashing  down  on  the  nation’s  ears.  . . . Developers . . . say  they  ‘as- 
sume,  it  will  fly  a t   supersonic speed only  over  water  but  this  is  too  im- 
portant  an  issue  to  b e   left  to  anyone’s  assumption.”  ( N Y T ,  5/16/68, 
46 ;  5 /25 /68 ,32 )  
May   17:  NASA  Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  launched by   NASA  from  WSMR 
carried  GSFC experiment to  102.5-mi  (165-km)  altitude  to  measure UV 
radiation  from  several  early-type  stars.  Rocket  and  instruments  per- 
formed satisfactorily.  ( NASA Rpt SRL) 
*  NASA  announced  it  had  notified  agency  elements  to  hold  permanent  em- 
ployment  to  onboard  strength  a t   close  of  May  13, to  minimize  impact 
of  potential  manpower  adjustments  necessitated  by  cuts  in  N  1969 
budget.  Field centers had been  advised of  possible further  reduction  by  
75%  of  attrition  May  14-June  30  (one  replacement  for  every  four 
losses).  FY  1969 budget  included  positions for  32,727 permanent  civil 
service employees.  NASA  installations had  been  requested  to  assess pro- 
gram  impact  of  continued  reduction,  which  could  exceed  1,000 if  cur- 
rent  limitations continued. Actual supportable employment level for IT 

115 

May  17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1%8 

1969 depended  on  final  appropriation  approved.  (NASA  Release 68-91 ; 
AP,  N Y T ,  5/19/68,  S O ;   SBD ,  5 /23 /68 ,114 ;   Kluttz,  W Po s t ,  5/27/68, 
*  House  Committee on  Interstate  and  Foreign  Commerce  approved bill  to 
control aircraft noise  levels  and  sonic boom.  Committee,  by  voice vote, 
agreed on provisions empowering FAA to  set standards for measurement 
and  regulations  for  control.  (H.R.  1463;  F Pos t ,   5/17/68,  5 )  
NASA  named  five-man  board  with  counsel  to  investigate  crash  of  Lunar 
Landing Research  Vehicle  piloted  by  Astronaut Neil  Armstrong a t   El- 
lington AFB,  Tex.,  May  6.  Board would  determine probable cause of  ac- 
cident,  identify  and  evaluate  corrective  actions,  and  evaluate  implica- 
tion  fo r  LLRV  and  lunar  module  design  and  operations.  (NASA  Release 
68-90) 
LaRc  Associate  Chief  of  Flight  Mechanics  and  Technology  Div.,  John  P. 
Campbell,  had  been  selected by  American  Helicopter  Society to  receive 
i ts   Paul  E.  Haueter  Award  for  1968,  Langley  Researcher  announced. 
Award  was  given  annually for  significant contributions  to  development 
of  vertical  lift  aircraft  other  than  helicopters.  Campbell  was   cited  “for 
his  personal contributions  to  and  direction  of  NASA  research  programs 
which  have  provided  a  sound  technology  base  for  a  large  number  of 
VTOL designs.’’  (Lang ley  Researcher, 5 /17 /68 ,1 )  
*  NASA  announced  organizational  change  effective  May  19.  Functions  and 
personnel  of  Procurement  Management  Div.  of  Management  Opera- 
tions  Directorate,  Office  of  Manned  Space  Flight,  was  transferred  to 
Office  of  Industry  Affairs.  Procurement Office  would  become  Program 
Support  Div.  ( OM S F ) ,   reporting  to  Director  of  Procurement.  (NASA 
Ann) 
May  18:  Nimbus  B  spacecraft  launched  by  NASA  from WTR  failed  to  enter 
orbit because  of  malfunction in   booster.  Thorad-Agena D  booster  and 
spacecraft  were  destroyed  by  Range  Safety  Officer.  Satellite,  third  in  
Nimbus  meteorological  series,  contained two  25-L  SNAP-19  radioiso- 
tope  electric power  generators  fueled w i th   plutonium 238 to  supplement 
solar  panels  and enclosed  in   capsules designed  to  withstand impact and 
corrosion.  Debris  fell  into  Pacific  between  Vandenberg AFB  and  San 
Miguel  Island.  (WTR   Release;  AP,  W  S tar ,   5/18/68;  P E B ,   5 /18 /68 ;  
AP,  W P o s t ,  5/19/68,  A3; AP, N Y T ,  5/18/68;  5/25/68) 
NASA  successfully  launched  Stratoscope  11,  Princeton  Univ.’s  balloon- 
borne telescope,  from  Scientific Balloon  Flight  Station,  Palestine,  Tex., 
to  altitude  of  80,000 ft.  Purpose was  to  photograph  sky  from  altitude 
above 95%  of  earth‘s  atmosphere.  (NASA Release 68-93) 
*  U.S.S.R.  would  conduct  ‘Yurther  tests  of  the  landing  system  of  space ap- 
paratuses”  from  May  20  to   June  30  in  two  Pacific  areas,  Tass  an- 
nounced.  Aircraft  and  ships  were  warned  not  to  enter  80-mi-dia circu- 
lar   area  1,200 mi  south  of  Hawaii  near  Christmas Island  and  90- by 
180-mi rectangular  area   1,600 mi  south  of  Hawaii  between  noon  and 
midnight  local  time  each  day.  (AP,  New  Orleans  Times-Picayune, 
5/19/69;  SBD ,  5/21/68,99-100) 
*  Entire  thrust  of  Soviet  space  program  pointed  to  circumlunar  flight  by 
cosmonauts  before  US., according  to  former  astronaut  Cdr.  M.  Scott 
Carpenter  (USN )  . Speaking a t  Beloit College symposium  on oceanogra- 
phy,  he predicted NASA  might try to  send crew  around moon  in   autumn 

116 

May 18 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
a s   counter  to  Soviet  manned  space  spectacular.  (Lewis,  B  News, 
5/19/68) 
NASA,  NAS,  and  NRC  would  be  “taking  a  long  close  look”  a t   applied  satel- 
lites capable  of  producing concrete benefits to  mankind,  James  J.  Hag- 
gerty,  Jr.,  wrote  in  Journal  of  the  Armed  Forces.  Study,  recommended 
in NAS  repart  released Feb.  8 ,  would  focus on  economic aspects. Among 
new  areas  of  application proposed were:  forestry-agriculture  satellite to  
survey and  identify vegetation resources through  standard and  infrared 
photography;  oceanographic  satellite  to  predict  fish  locations,  isolate 
plankton  areas,  and  improve  ship  routing  and  weather  detection 
through  use  of  sensors;  hydrological satellite  to  aid  i n  management  of 
water  resources  and  to  facilitate  weather  forecasting ; and  geological 
satellite to  extend  process  of  using  airborne  sensors to   detect minerals, 
oil,  and  gas.  Group also would  study  economic benefits of  advances in  
existing  applied  spacecraft,  such  as  “advanced  weathersat”  to  interro- 
gate  high-altitude  weather  balloons  and  broadcast  satellite  to  promote 
“extremely broad program of  education and culture.” 
NAS  report  had  set dollar values on benefits:  savings of  $8 billion  an- 
nually  in  agriculture  and  construction  alone  from  two-week  weather 
forecasting;  $5  million  in  management  of  municipal  water  supplies; 
and  “hundreds  of millions”  in  potential saving to  shipping,  fishing, and 
coas+al engineering industries, but  satellites would have t o  be  developed 
at  “considerable  investment.”  (Haggerty,  J / A F ,   5/18/68,  9,  1 9 )  
*  AEC  Chairman,  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  presented  first  Swords  Into  Plow- 
shares  Award  for  major  contributions  in  nuclear  science to  Columbia 
Univ.  in  New  York.  Occasion marked  opening of  Nuclear Week,  spon- 
sored  by  private  foundations,  industry,  and  government,  to  attract 
young  people  to  careers  in  nuclear  science.  ( N Y T ,  5/19/68,  81) 
Fifth  International  Congress  for  Noise  Abatement,  meeting  in  London, 
adopted  resolution  urging  governments  to  prohibit  supersonic  flights 
over  their  territories.  Dr.  Charles Wakstein,  Dartmouth  College  scien- 
tist,  said  if  overland SST  flights were  permitted, about  50  million  Amer- 
icans  could  b e   exposed  to  average  of  15  sonic  booms  daily.  Flights 
could  cost  $100  million  annually  in  damage  to  homes.  However,  evi- 
dence  thus  fa r   indicated  little  psychological harm  to  those  surrounded 
by constant noise.  (Shuster, N Y T ,  5 /19 /68 ,3 )  
NASA  had  named  Wade  St.  Clair,  former  consultant  and  director  on 
radio  and  television  programs,  Director  of  Special  Events,  Office  of 
Public Affairs, succeeding Brian M. Duff,  who  had  joined  Urban  Coali- 
tion  staff.  St.  Clair  most  recently  had  served  as  Du f f s   deputy.  (NASA 
Release 68-88) 
F-111A  supersonic  aircraft  participating  in  a i r   show  at  Holloman  AFB, 
N.  Mex.,  crashlanded,  without  injuring  crew  or  spectators.  USAF  said 
ban  on  F-111  flights was  still  in  effect  but  did  not  apply  in  this  case 
since  aircraft  was  still  owned  by  manufacturer,  General  Dynamics 
Corp.  (W Po s t ,  5 /19 /68 ,1 ;   W Star, 5/19/68,  A12) 
Man’s  “most  rewarding  new  frontier  for  the  next  generation”  might  lie 
in  ocean  space,  according  to  New  York   T imes   editorial.  “Imminent 
opening of  the  deep-sea bed  for  commercial exploitation  offers exciting 
possibilities  for  the  enrichment  of  mankind  . . . but  unregulated 
rush  to  cash  in  on  the  wealth  of  the  ocean  floor could  provoke  serious 
international  conflicts.”  U S .  caution,  however,  in  approaching  U.N.  es- 

117 

May  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

tablishment  of  international  control  had   merit  because  “knowledge  of 
the  potential  of  ocean  space  is  still  fragmentary  and  vital  national  in- 
terests a re  a t  stake.“  ( N Y T ,  5/18/68,30) 
0  President  Habib  Bourguiba  of  Tunisia  visited  MSC  f o r   general  orienta- 
tion  and  tour  during two-day visit  to Houston.  (AP, New  Haven  Regis- 
ter, 5/17/68) 
May  20:  NASA  Aerobee  150 MI  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  car- 
ried  GSFC  experiment  to   102.6-mi  (165.1-km)  altitude  to   obtain  mon- 
ochromatic picture  of  sun using spectroheliograph and  to measure solar 
spectral  irradiance  using  photoelectric radiometers. Rocket  and  instru- 
mentation performance was satisfactory.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
ESRO  successfully  launched  Centaure  rocket  from  Kiruna  Range  in  
Sweden to collect micrometeoroid data.  (SBD, 5/23/68,118) 
In   “remote  sensing”  experiment  by  NASA  and  U S .   Geological  Survey, 
pilots and scientists began  two-week air-ground sweep of  Southern  Cali- 
fornia  in search  of  solutions to  environmental problems.  Area had  been 
selected because  of  variety  of  geographic  features.  Aircraft  would  test 
sensors for  later  use  in  satellite surveys of  land, water, mineral,  human, 
and  energy  resources.  (Copley  News  Service,  San  Diego  Union, 
5/20/68) 
*  Australian  Air  Force  was  sending  technical  team  to  US. to  investigate 
airworthiness  of  F-111  aircraft. Australian  government had  ordered  24  
F-111s  in  1963 for  estimated $112  million.  Cost had  already  increased 
to  $266  million,  and  additional  increases  were  expected.  Delivery 
would  be  refused  until  Australia  was  satisfied  mechanical  faults  had 
been eliminated. ( N Y  Post, 5/20/68,21) 
NASA  and  British  Ministry  df  Technology  began  month-long tests  of  de- 
vices  for  predicting  performance  of  aircraft  brakes  a t   NASA  Wallops 
Station  on  runway  modified  to  include  varied  surface  conditions. 
Under  direction  of  Walter  B.  Horne,  LaRC,  tests in which FAA and USAF 
also  were  participating,  would  enable engineers  to  establish system  for 
runway  length  requirements  to  bring  landing  aircraft  to  safe  stop. 
(NASA  Release 68-89) 
May  21 : NASA  announced i t  would  launch  two Mariner  spacecraft, F and 6, 
on  flyby missions to  Mars  in  1969.  Project  responsibility was  assigned 
to  JPL ;   LeRc  would  be  responsible  for  launch  vehicle. 
Deep SFace Network stations would provide tracking  and communica- 
tions  during  launch  period  scheduled  between  mid-February  and  mid- 
April.  Spacecraft would  reach  Mars  between  end  of  July  and  mid-Au- 
gust.  Arrival  dates  of  two  spacecraft would  not  be  less  than  five  days 
apart.  Atlas-Centaur combination would for  first time b e  used  as launch 
vehicle  for  planetary  exploration.  Spacecraft  would  weigh  approxi- 
mately 900 lb.  Mariner 111  (Nov. 5,  1964)  weighed 575 lb.  (NASA  Spe- 
cial Release) 
9  NASA  announced  that  Dr.  Mac  C.  A d am ,   Associate  Administrator  fo r  
Advanced  Research  and  Technology, would  resign  July  1 to  return  to  
private  industry.  He  would  be  succeeded by  James M.  Beggs,  Director 
of  Purchases  and  Traffic, Westinghouse Electric  Corp.,  who  would  join 
NASA  June  1. Bruce  T.  Lundin,  Associate  Director  for  Development, 
LeRC,  was  named  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced 
Research and Technology. Commenting on Dr.  Adams’  departure,  NASA 
Administrator  James  E.  Webb  said,  “He  brought  to  NASA  strong  man- 

118 

May 21 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
agement  and  engineering  competence  . . . [and]  gave  us  brilliant 
leadership in critical times.”  (NASA  Release 68-92) 
USAF  grounded  42  F-111As  to   repair  defective hydraulic  valve.  Aircraft 
had been  under  restrictions  since May 8 accident a t  Nellis AFB,  Nev.,  of 
which  defective  valve  was  “the  most  probable  cause.”  Twelve  earlier 
model  F-lI1As not  containing  defective part  were  not  grounded.  AC- 
tuator valve problem  was  suspected in  third  F-111A  crash  in Thailand, 
attributed  to  capsule of  sealant  lodged  in  flight control  system.  Modifi- 
cations  should be  completed  in  June.  (DOD  Release 472-68;  AP,  NYT ,  
5/22/68,5;  AP, W Star, 5/22/68,  A20) 
Scientists from  Stanford  Univ.  and  Univ.  of  California,  using  telescope 
a t  Lick  Observatory  atop Mt.  Hamilton, Calif.,  and  telescopes  on  Kitt 
Peak,  Ariz.,  had  found  one  of  four  recently  discovered  pulsars  flashed 
visible wavelengths of  light  a t  half  the rate of  its  radio pulse.  Discovery 
was disclosed by Univ.  of  California  at Berkeley astronomer, Dr.  David 
Cudaback, at  pulsar  meeting  in  New  York  sponsored  jointly  by  NASA 
Institute  for  Space  Studies  and  Belfer  Graduate  School  of  Science, 
Yeshiva Univ.  (Sullivan,  N Y T ,   5/21/68,  14;  5/22/68,  24;  5/26/68, 
12 ) 
Sen. Mark  0. Hatfield  (R-Ore.),  addressing  IEEE  Region  Six Conference 
in  Portland,  criticized  order  of  priorities  by  which  “survival”  was  su- 
perseded  by  “our  desire  to  explore  new  technological  frontiers.  . . . 
We  must  rationally  decide  if  our  goal  of  promoting  the  well-being of 
man  is better  served through  huge  expenditures to beat  the  Russians to  
the moon  or  through developing methods to  feed  a  hungry  world.  It  is 
a very  black mark  on  our  sense of  values  and  a  contradiction  of  man’s 
quest  for  progress  when  one  part  of  the  world  competes  for  the  moon 
while the other part  competes for a loaf  of  bread.”  (Text) 
Arthur  C.  Clarke,  co-author  of  2002:  A  Space  Odyssey ,   told  Los  Altos 
Morning  Forum  proposed  Federal  cuts  in  NASA  budget  would  curtail 
progress  in  “medicine, agriculture,  weather  forecasting, communication 
and  other  endeavors.”  NASP  budget  now  was  “smaller  than  the  amount 
American  women  spend  ori  cosmetics in  a  year.”  (Anderson, San   Jose 
Mercury, 5/23/68) 
Soviet  space  experts  Dr.  Georgii  Pokrovskii  and  Aleksandr  Yavnel  be- 
lieved  automatic  docking  of  Cosmos  C C X l l   and  C C X I I I   April  15  had 
brought  U.S.S.R.  closer to  day when  it could  establish large permanent 
earth-orbiting  stations  and  planetary  laboratories.  I n   Moscow  inter- 
views, they claimed docking had  cleared way  for  launching  segments of 
large  spacecraft by  individual  rockets,  then  assembling them  in  com- 
mon  orbit.  (Macomber, S t .  Louis G-D,  5/21/68) 
May   22 :   First  public  demonstration  of  satellite  communications  between 
merchant  ship  and  shore  was  given  before  Propeller  Club  of  Po r t   of 
Baltimore, Md.  Civic  officials conversed via  NASA’s A t s   I I   with  captain 
of  vessel  off  Valparaiso,  Chile,  coast.  Conversation  was  transmitted 
over  telephone lines  to  GSFC and  relayed  to  Rosman,  N.C.,  t o   satellite, 
and to ship.  ( N Y T ,  6/26/68,86) 
Post-launch  investigations  a t   MSFC  and  a t   Rocketdyne  Div.  of  North 
American Rockwell  Corp.,  J-2  manufacturer,  had  revealed  J-2  rocket 
engine malfunctions  on  April 4 Apo l lo   6 mission  had  been  caused  by 
ruptures  of  small-diameter fuel  lines  feeding  engine  igniters.  Improved 
designs  for  lines  had  been  completed  and  new  lines  were  being  man- 

119 

May 22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

ufactured fo r  extensive testing before use  in next  Saturn  IB  and  Saturn 
V launch vehicles.  (Marshall Star, 5/22/68,1) 
Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  released  its  1967  Annual  Report,  reviewing 
“industry’s  continuing  pattern  of  growth”:  11% increase  in   sales over 
1966, t o   $27.2 billion;  maintenance  of  1,4007000-man work force, mak- 
ing  aerospace  industry  largest  U.S.  manufacturing  employer ; and 
$575-million  increase  in  exports,  to  $2.2  billion,  including  42.9%  in- 
crease in civilian aircraft, to  $789 million.  (Text) 
NASA  selected  Fairchild-Hiller  Corp.,  General Electric  Co . ,   and  Lockheed 
Missiles &  Space Co.  for  competitive negotiations  for  $5-million fixed- 
price  contract  to  develop  designs for  basic  spacecraft  configuration  of 
F  and  G  models  of  Applications  Technology  Satellite.  Firms  would 
provide  complete  specifications and  versions  of  critical  spacecraft  sys- 
tem .   (NASA  Release 68-95) 
MSFC  awarded  third  one-year  contract  extension,  a t   $6.448  million,  to 
(MSFC  Re- 
RCA  Services Co.  fo r   institutional  support  services  a t   MSFC. 
lease 68-112) 
NASA  established Office of  Facilities, merging facility  functions  and  appli- 
cable  staff elements  of  Office  of  Manned  Space  Flight,  Ofice  of  Space 
Science  and  Applications, Office  of  Advanced  Research  and  Technol- 
ogy,  Office of  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition,  and  Facilities  Manage- 
ment  Office. New  office,  under  direction  of  M /G   Robert  H.  Curtin 
(USAF ,   Ret. ) , would  encompass planning,  design,  acquisition, construc- 
tion,  repair,  alteration,  maintenance,  operations,  utilization,  and  dis- 
posal  of  facilities including land  and collateral  equipment.  I t  would  re- 
port to the Assistant Administrator for Administration.  ( NASA  Ann) 
May   23 :   World’s  first  passive  satellite, Echo  I,  launched  by  NASA  Aug.  12, 
1960, reentered  earth‘s  atmosphere and  disintegrated  over  southeastern 
Pacific.  Launched  as  passive  communications and  air-density  research 
satellite, Echo  I  also  served  geodesists determining accurate continental 
and  intercontinental  distances.  ( UPI,  W  Pos t ,   5/24/68;  W  News ,  
5 /24 /68 ,3 ;   Newsweek, 5/27/68;  SBD ,  5 /28 /68 ,138 )  
USAF  launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB  by  Thor-Burner 
I1 booster  into  orbit  with  561-mi  (902.8-km)  apogee, 509-mi  (819-km) 
perigee,  102.1-min period,  and  98.9”  inclination.  (P r e s  Rp t   68) 
Smithsonian  Institution  scientists  positively  identified  as  a  meteorite, 
fist-size black  stone  which  damaged  Denver,  Colo.,  warehouse  roof  in 
July  1967.  I t   was  “first  recovered  fresh-fall”  meteorite  in  U.S.  since 
Bells,  Tex., meteorite Sept. 9 ,  1961.  (Cleveland Plain Dealer,  5/24/68) 
May  24 :   U.S.S.R.  successfully  launched  Cosmos  C C X X I   into  orbit  with 
2,082-km  (1,293.7-mi)  apogee,  214-km  (133-mi)  perigee,  108.3-min 
period,  and  48.4”  inclination.  ( SBD ,   5/27/68,  132;  GSFC   SSR ,  
5/31/68) 
0  First  satellite  telephone  link  between  U.S.  and  Australia  began  with 
opening  of  earth  station  at Moree, Australia.  (W   Star,  5/26/68) 
0  Mathematical tools  used  to  predict  lunar  motions were  so   imprecise that 
they  hampered  evaluation  of  lunar  flights  and  use  of  moon  as  time- 
piece,  according  to  two  articles  in  Science  by  group  of  JPL  scientists. 
Amplifying  report,  Dr.  J.  Derral  Mulholland,  JPL  scientist in  charge  of 
revision  of  methods of  prediction,  said  errors  seemed  to  derive  largely 
from  inadequate  emphasis on  gravital  influence of  other  planets, partic- 
ularly  Jupiter  and Venus.  JPL   was  preparing  computer program to  pre- 

120 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

May  24 

dict  lunar  position  for  future  space flights.  (Science,  5/24/68,  874-8; 
Sullivan, N Y T ,  5/24/68,47) 
0  James T.  Murphy,  Deputy Manager  in  NASA  Saturn  V  Program  Office  a t  
MSFC,  w a s  named Director of  MSFC’S  Safety Office.  He would  also  serve 
as  member  of  MSFC  Flight  Readiness  Review  Board.  E.  W.  Neubert 
would  continue  as  Chairman  of  MSFC  Safety  Board.  (MSFC   Release 
68-114;  Marshall S tar ,  5 /29 /68 ,1 )  
0  Before Los  Angeles  Junior  Chamber of  Commerce,  Sen.  Thomas H.  Ku- 
chel  (R-Calif.)  said,  “What  we  need  and  what  we  lack  is  an   adminis- 
tration  which  will  allocate  space  dollars  according  to  the  skills  and 
manpower and brain power  available, rather  than  on the basis  of  politi- 
cal  preference.”  No  Federal  program  was  more  in   need  of  public  un- 
derstanding  than  space  and  its  relationship  to  balanced  economy,  he 
said.  When  looking  a t   future  space  investment  we  needed  to  count 
“payofe”  already  gained.  Spinoff  from  space technology  was  providing 
“enormous  boon  to  both  soldier  and  civilian.”  We  needed  space goals 
which  clearly  stated  potential  benefits  of  program  to  people,  he  said, 
“or  the  public  will  justifiably  fight  a  single  penny  being  thrown  into 
space.”  (UPI ,  Sun Diego Un ion ,  5/25/68;  CR, 6/10/68) 
Six-month  slippage  in  launch  date  of  U.K.’s  Skynet  comsat  to  spring 
1969 was  due to  “normal  R&D  problems,”  according  to  USAF  Space and 
Missile  Systems Organization.  Philco-Ford  Corp.‘s  Space  and  Re-entry 
Systems Div. was  building  two  Skynets compatible with U S .  Initial  De- 
fense  Communications Satellite  Program  for  delivery  to  U.K.  While 
Skynet  program  w a s   linked  with  U.K.’s  latest  defense  review,  Defense 
and Technology Ministry sources said its cancellation was  not  expected, 
though U.K.’s  military  withdrawal  from Asia  would  substantially affect 
its use and scope.  ( A e r o  Daily, 5/24/68) 
Ma y   25:  Aerobee  150 MI  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR 
carried  GSFC  photometers  and  objective-grating  wide-angle  camera  to 
105-mi  ( 168.9-km)  altitude  to  measure  radiation  from  celestial  bodies 
in  X2800-Xl300 
spectral  range.  Payload  instrumentation  performed 
satisfactorily;  Aerobee  pointing  control  system  (ACS )   malfunctioned. 
(NASA  Rpt  SRL)  
Unexpected solar  flares could  cause  serious  radiation  damage  to  SST pas- 
sengers and  lead  to  aircraft  navigation errors,  according to  Dr.  Adolph 
Razdow,  President  of  Yardney  Electric  Corp.,  Razdow  Laboratories 
Div.  Global  solar  watch,  he  said,  could  provide  10-min  warning  of 
strong  solar  flares,  enabling  pilot  to  descend  to  safer  altitude.  NASA’s 
Solar  Particle  Alert  Network  (SPAN )   could  give  20-min  flare  warning 
to unprotected astronauts  on moon, who  could  then  take  shelter or  take 
antiradiation  drugs.  Peak year  in solar  flare cycle would be  1969.  (UPI, 
N Y T ,  5 /25 /68 ,59 )  
May   26:  NASA  appointed  H.  Kurt  Strass,  Chief  of  Earth  Orbital  Mission 
Office, Advanced Spacecraft Technology Div.,  to head  newly  established 
Office of  Aerospace Safety Research Programs.  New  office,  which would 
operate within Office  of  Advanced  Research  and  Technology, would  re- 
port  to  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and  Technol- 
ogy through Director, Space Vehicles Div., OART.  (NASA  Ann) 
M a y  27:  U.S.S.R.  announced successful completion of  rocket tests in  two Pa -  
cific  areas  to  test  equipment  for  spacecraft  landings  a t   sea.  Series, 

12 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

M a y  27 
which  began  May  20,  had  been  scheduled  to  last  until  June  30.  ( S BD ,  
5/29/68,144) 
FAA  announced Washington National Airport  was  first  in   US. to  equip 
main  instrument  runway  with  color-coded centerline  lights  cautioning 
pilots  entering  last  3,000  f t   of  runway  during  takeoffs  and  landings. 
(FAA  Release T 68-18) 
*  Aerospace  Daily  survey  showed  most  experts  considered  military  R&D 
funds  prime  candidate  for  budget  cuts.  Services  had  been  told  to 
slash $900 million  from  FY  1969 requests  as  their  part  in  $6-billion re- 
duction  demanded  by  Congress,  which  exhibited  little  support  for  ei- 
ther Manned Orbiting Laboratory program or  Sentinel ABM  system. 
Federal  Contract  Research  Center  also  was  likely  to  be  cut,  though 
Pentagon sought $48 million, $3 million less than  FY  1968. Government 
wa s   spending estimated  $17 billion  annually on  research and  there  was 
rising  general  Congressional  reluctance  to  approve  more  funds  or 
6 6  
even  to  provide  additional money merely  to  keep pace with  the  inflation 
of the economy.”  (A e r o  Daily, 5 /27 /68 ,26)  
*  Charles  J.  Donlan  was  named  Acting  Director,  Advanced  Manned  Mis- 
sions Program, NASA  Office  of  Manned Space Flight, replacing Edgar M. 
Cortright.  He would  serve in  addition  to  his  duties as Deputy Associate 
Administrator for Manned Space Night  (Technical). (NASA Ann) 
m  May  28:  In  second Mars  lander experiment [see April 231  NASA  concluded 
JPL R&D  program  demonstrating  feasibility  of  sending  lightweight 
scientific  capsules  to  Mars  by  successful 250-ft  free-fall drop   of  63-lb 
heat-sterilized  planetary  landing  craft  from  hovering  helicopter  onto 
asphalt  pavement at  Goldstone Tracking Station. Capsule,  which  struck 
a t  80 mph,  or  impact of  2,500 g,  was  powered  by  12-cell silver-zinc bat- 
tery  which  produced  sufficient  electricity  after  impact  to  extend  wind 
gauge  and  to  operate  radio  transmitter  and  timer  aboard  Mars  lander. 
Battery was  believed  to  be  toughest  yet  developed.  (NASA   Release  68- 
152 ; W S tar ,  9/8/68,  A17;  Pasadena Independent  Star-News, 9 /8 /68 ;  
N Y T ,   10/15/68,  34 ;   JPL Lab-Oratory  7/68,  8 )  
*  Gen.  John  P.  McConnell, USAF  Chief  of  Staff, was  awarded National  Ge -  
ographic  Society’s Gen.  Thomas D.  White  Space Trophy  for  1967 fo r  
“effective  leadership  and  direction  of  U.S.  Air  Force  in  development 
and utilization of  aerospace vehicles.”  Award  was presented  annually to 
military  or  civilian  member  of  WAF  who  made  most  outstanding con- 
tribution  to  U S .   progress  in  aerospace.  (NGS   Release;  AP,  N Y   News ,  
5/29/68,  22 )  
a  MSFC  announced  it  had  extended  for  one  year  $3,6d7,603  c o s t - p l ~ s  
award-fee contract held by Management Services, Inc.,  for technical serv- 
ices a t  MSFC.  ( MSFC Release 68-116) 
M u y   29:  Command  module  for  Apollo  7,  first  manned  Apollo  flight,  left 
North  American  Rockwell  Corp.’s  Downey,  Calif.,  plant  enroute  to 
Kennedy  Space  Center.  Service  module  had  arrived  a t   RSC  May  17. 
(NASA  Release 68-100) 
Saturn  V  2nd  stage  planned  fo r   first  manned  Apollo/Saturn  V  mission 
passed  cryogenic proof  pressure  test  at  NASA  Mississippi  Test  Facility. 
( MSFC  Release 68-119) 
*  NASA  announced  changes  in   Aerospace  Safety  Panel  personnel:  Dr. 
Charles D.  Harrington,  President  of  Douglas United Nuclear,  Inc.,  was 
elected  Chairman. Dr.  Eberhard  F.  M.  Rees,  Deputy  Director  (Techni- 

122 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

May  29 

call  a t   MSFC  and  Special Assistant  to  Apollo  Spacecraft  Manager,  re- 
signed  from  panel  to  devote  full  time  to   these  assignments.  Newly 
named  to  panel  were:  Frank  C.  Di  Luzio,  President  of  Raynolds  Elec- 
trical  and Engineering Co.,  Inc.,  and Vice President  of  E-G, 
Inc.;  Gen. 
Orval  Cook  (USAF,  Ret.) ; and  Dr.  Harold  Agnew,  Weapons  Div. 
Leader, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory.  Dr.  William A.  Mrazek, As- 
sistant  Director  for  Engineering  and  Chief  Engineer  for  Industrial  Qp- 
erations a t  MSFC,  was named consultant.  (NASA Release 68-98) 
NASA  selected  Computer  Sciences  Corp.,  Lockheed  Electronics Co.,  Com- 
puter Applications, Inc.,  and Service Technology Corp.  (LW )   , for com- 
petitive  negotiations  n  $1-million one-year  renewable  contract  to  pro- 
vide  computer  s u p p J t  services a t   Electronics  Research  Center.  ( NASA 
Release 68-99) 
May  31:  U.S.S.R.  successfully  launched  Cosmos  C C X X I l   into  orbit  with 
520-km  (323.1-mi)  apogee,  281-km  (174.6-mi)  perigee,  91.3-min  pe- 
riod,  and  70.9”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Qct.  11.  (AP, NYT, 
6/2/68;  GSFC SSR ,  5/31/68;  10/15/68) 
U.K.  successfully  launched  Skylark  sounding  rocket  from  Adelaide, 
Australia,  to  altitude  of  149 mi  (239.8 km)  after  initial  delays caused 
by  weather.  (Reuters, NYT,  6/2/68,  55 )  
’ Roderick  W.  Spence, Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  outlined  advan- 
tages of  nuclear  rockets and  offered chronological resum6 of  Rover pro- 
gram in Science. Thirteen years had produced  reliable reactor  ready  for 
development into  flyable engine. Development of  complete nuclear-elec- 
tric  propulsion  system  would  be  difficult  and  expensive,  “but  if  man 
wants  to  continue  to  explore space to  the  best  of  his  ability,  such  a  de- 
velopment seems inevitable.”  (Science, 5/31/68,953-9) 
NASA  announced  LaRC  and  LTV Aerospace  Corp.  would  negotiate  unified 
contract  valued  in  excess  of  $14  million  to  provide  complete  system 
management for  Scout launch  vehicle  for  24-mo period  beginning Nov. 
1. (NASA Release 68-101) 
NASA  announced  extension  until  Feb.  13, 1969, of  contract  with  Sperry- 
Rand  Corp. for mission support services to   Systems Reliability Director- 
ate a t  GSFC.  Value  of  extended  cost-plus-award-fee agreement with  two 
one-year  options was  approximately $3.5 million.  Included  in  services 
were  operation  and  maintenance  of  test  facilities  such  as  large  space 
chambers,  laboratory  equipment,  and  instrumentation.  ( GSFC Release 
G 3 5 - 6 8 )  
0  USN  told  P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.,  United  Aircraft  Corp.,  it  would  pay 
approximately  $180  million  less  than  $1.2-billion  contract  price  for 
1,640 F-111  engines ordered  in  February  1967. Adjustment of  approx- 
imately  $19 million  in  price  of  engines  already  delivered brought  dif- 
ference between USN  and  Pratt & Whitney prices to  almost  $200 million. 
USN  believed  more  efficient operation  could  produce  engines  a t   lower 
cost.  (Kelley, W Star, 6 /4 /68 ,5 )  
USAF  awarded  Lockheed  Missiles  &  Space  Co.  $1.174-million  initial  in- 
crement  to  $2.959-million  cost-plus-incentive-fee contract  for  launch 
services a t  ETR.  (DOD Release 511-68) 
In   response to  pressure  from smaller countries, U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  agreed 
to  make  changes in  proposed nonproliferation  treaty:  stronger  guaran- 
tees to small countries which would benefit from peaceful use of  nuclear 
power, more urgent  efforts to  end world  arms race,  and  enforcement of 

123  

May  31 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

During  May:  Pro jec t   engineer  W. B .  Horne,  w i t h   T .  J .   Yage r ,   examines  e f f e c t s  of  Con- 
vair  990  landing  on  grooved  runway  a t   Wa l lops   S ta t ion .   G r o o v e s - o n e   inch  apar t ,   one- 
fourth  inch w ide ,  and  one-fourth  inch  deep-increased 
f r ic t ion  on  wet  runways. 

U.N.  charter  authority  against  use  of  force  generally.  (Brewer, NYT, 
6 /1 /68 , 1 )  
During  Ma y :   Karl  G .  Harr,  Jr.,  President  of  MA,  commented in  spring issue 
of  Aerospace  on  preliminary  report  of  space  applications  study  being 
conducted by  NASA  and  NAS.  “Concept of  funding  space  research  as  an  
investment has not  yet found wide acceptance.”  Intangibility  of  benefits 
-renewed 
national  prestige,  expanding  technological  capability,  and 
enormous  scientific  gain-was 
to  blame.  Report  indicated,  however, 
that  “investment will  pay  far  greater  bonus  . . . monetary  value  alone 
124 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1968 

During  May 

may  run  into billions.”  Advantages of  applications program  superseded 
dollar value. Potential  contributions  to  “welfare  of  the planet”  included 
possibilities  of  greater  food  availability,  enhancement  of  a i r   safety, 
more  effective management  of  natural  resources,  higher  general  educa- 
tion  level, closer  relations among nations  with  cooperative management 
ent  but  “we  must  pursue  . . . program  aggressively”  by  increasing 
of  earth‘s  total  resources.  Opportunity  to  harvest  these gains  was  pres- 
our  investment.  (Aerospace, Spring  68,  3 )  
e LaRC  was  conducting  operational  research  program  a t   NASA  Wallops  %a- 
tion  to evaluate  runway  grooving  a s   a  means  of  reducing  aircraft  hy- 
droplaning,  loss  of  friction  during  high-speed landing  because of  water 
or  slush  film.  Aircraft  landed  on  specially  prepared  runways  with 
grooves % in wide, 
in deep, and  1  in  apart and braking effectiveness 
w a s   recorded by  instruments  on  aircraft  and  on  ground.  Research  indi- 
cated grooving helped  to  alleviate all  known  phenomena  which  resulted 
in   low  tire-ground  friction,  but  scientists were  concerned that  undesira- 
ble  vibrations  might  be  introduced  into  aircraft.  (Lang ley  Researcher, 
5 /17 /68 ,4)  
*  Lt. Gen.  Ira  C .  Eaker  (USAF,  Ret.)  wrote  in  Data  he  believed  sonic  boom 
problem  would  be  eliminated,  permitting  transcontinental  flight  and 
realization of  estimated 1,200 SSTS  in  service by  1990. ‘ L N ~  
federal  pro- 
gram  since World War  I1  had  ever  had  the  thorough  analysis,  careful 
examination  and  close  scrutiny  accorded  the  present  SST plan.”  (Da ta ,  
5 /68 ,8 )  

125 

June  1968 

June  1 : U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  CCXXIII   from  Plesetsk  Cosmodrome 
into orbit with  979-km  (608.3-mi)  apogee, 221-km  ( 1 3 7 . 3 4 )   perigee, 
89.9-min period, and  72.9” inclination. Satellite performed satisfactorily 
and  reentered  June  9.  (UPI ,   P  E B ,   6/3/68;  SBD ,   6/4/68,  168;  GSFC 
SSR ,  6/15/68,7/15/68) 
June  2:  New  Y o rk  T imes  editorial criticized Administration’s  failure  to sup- 
port  International  Biological  Program’s  proposal  to  conduct  five-year 
worldwide  study  of  spoilage  and  near  exhaustion  of  earth’s  resources 
by  chemical  pollution.  “One  would  think  that  the  urgency  and  im- 
portance  of  these  matters  would  quickly  rally  general  support  to  these 
and  related  efforts  to  meet  the  worldwide  challenge  . . . [but]  Ivan 
L. Bennett, Jr.,  Deputy Director of  the Office of  Science and Technology, 
opposed  congressional appropriation  of  $5  million  . . . for  American 
participation  .  . , during  fiscal  1969.  The  parochial  priorities  im- 
plied  . . . must  deepen  concern  as  to  whether  Spaceship  Earth  can 
be  saved  for  its  proliferating  cargo  of  fragile  organisms  whose  in- 
creasingly ravenous demands steadily deplete and damage the ecological 
basis  of  life  on  this  planet.”  ( N Y T ,  6 /2 /68 )  
June 3 :  U.S.S.R.  planned  to   test-fly Tu-144 supersonic aircraft  during  1968, 
possibly  within  few  months,  Soviet Vice  Minister  for  Air  Industry  4- 
exander  Kobzarez  told  press  a t   Third  International  Air  and  Space 
Salon  in  Turin,  Italy.  Tu-144 would  carry  120 passengers up  to  1,500 
mph  over  4,000-mi range.  Soviet  aircraft  on  display  included  $6.4-mil- 
lion,  long-range,  186-passenger 11-62 jet  aircra€t and  $2-million Mi-6 
and M i-]  0 heavy-duty helicopters.  ( N Y T ,  6/4/68,  93) 
*  NASA  and  DOD  would  spend  estimated  $1.406  billion  during  next  decade 
fo r  parachutes, aerodynamic decelerators, aerial  recovery systems, plan- 
etary  landing  devices,  and  spacecraft  escape  systems,  according  to  
Frank  A.  Burnham  in  Aerospace  Techno logy .  Technology  was  marked 
by  rapid  growth  and  widespread applications,  including  drogue  chutes 
for  supersonic aircraft;  personnel  parachutes  capable  of  being  “flown” 
to  spot landings;  recovery  systems for Apollo, MOL,  military  spacecraft, 
drones,  and  test  missiles;  systems to  d rop  cargo  from  altitude  and  de- 
posit  i t   on  ground  from  aircraft  in  flight;  and  a i r   “snatch”  rescue  sys- 
tems.  ( A e r o  Tech ,  6 /3 /68 ,26 )  
June  4 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCXXIV   from  Baikonur  Cosmodrome 
into orbit  w i t h   311-km  (193.2-mi)  apogee, 167-km (103.8-mi)  perigee, 
89. I-min  period,  and  51.8 O  inclination.  Satellite  functioned  normally 
and  reentered June  12.  (AP ,  N Y T ,  6/5/68,  7 ;  S B D ,  6 /5 /68 ,172 ;   GSFC 
SSR ,  6/15/68) 
Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carried 
145-lb GSFC  payload to  80.8-mi  (130-km)  altitude to  evaluate parachute 
recovery  system  for  Nike-Apache  and  Nike-Cajun  launch  vehicies. 

126 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

June 4 

Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily ; excellent  data 
were obtained from all telemetry channels.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
MSFC   awarded  Boeing  Co.  $1,123,591  contract  modification  to  perform 
failure  effects analysis, components criticality  determination,  and. relia- 
bility  report  on  Saturn  V  launch  vehicles through  SA-510,  10th  flight 
vehicle.  (MSFC   Release 68-121) 
At  Glassboro  (N.J.)  State College commencement, President  Johnson  dis- 
cussed  developments in  US.-Soviet  relations  during  past  year : comple- 
tion  of  space law  and  space rescue  treaties,  new  consular  treaty,  bilat- 
eral  air  agreement, and  negotiations on  agreement to  avoid  costly  ABM  
race.  He proposed  International  Council on  Human  Environment, accel- 
erated  efforts  to  develop  global  satellite  communications system,  con- 
ducting  of  Arctic  and  Antarctic  exploration,  and  study  of  possible 
productive  uses  of  rain-rich tropical  forest.  ( P D ,  6/10/68,  903;  N Y T ,  
6 /5 /68 ,1F )  
e  Rep.  Silvio 0. Conte  (R-Mass.)  inserted  in  Congressional  Record  results 
of  questionnaire  mailed  to  his  constituents which  showed  3,857  out  of 
8,145  would  reduce  Government  spending  on  space  program.  Second 
and third  most  popular  candidates  for  cuts  were  public  works  (2,298) 
and poverty program  (2,070).  (NASA  L A R  VII/55) 
NASA  announced  that  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  Rocketdyne  Div. 
injector  would  be  used  in  Bell Aerosystems Go.  engine  of  first  manned 
lunar module. Decision on  whether to use Bell  or NAR  injector  for  lunar 
mission had not yet been made.  (MSC  Release 68-41) 
June  4-28:  Seventh  session  of  Legal  Subcommittee  of  U.N.  Committee  on 
Outer  Space met  in  Geneva, Switzerland. U.S.  delegation  included  two 
NASA  officials, Paul G.  Dembling, General Counsel,  NASA,  Alternate Rep- 
resentative;  and  Daniel  M.  Arons,  Attorney-Adviser,  NASA,  as  adviser. 
(NASA   Hq,  10/14/68) 
June  5:  USAF  launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB  by  Titan 
111-B  booster.  Satellite entered  orbit  with  262-mi  (421.6-km)  apogee, 
85-mi  (126.8-km) perigee, 89.9-min period, and  110.5’  inclination  and 
reentered June 17.  (P r e s  Rp t  68; S BD ,  6/25/68,272) 
e  Rep.  Emilio  Q.  Daddario  (D-Conn.)  inserted  in  Congressional  Record 
address he  had  planned  t o   deliver to House,  deploring  1969 budgetary 
cuts  in  research  field, particularly  20%  reduction  in  National  Science 
Foundation  funds. Tendency in  times  of  stress to  “jump  on  research  as 
the  vulnerable part  of  the  Federal  budget”  came  from  thoughtlessness, 
but  slashing research funds was  particularly  serious “in  view  of  the  ad- 
ministrative  cutbacks  in  basic  research  funds  being  made  by  the  SO- 
called  mission-oriented  agencies.”  America’s  “tortuous  new  physical, 
social and  security problems”  could  not be  resolved without “new  tools, 
new  methods, new  approaches”  and  only  way  to  develop  them  was  by 
research.  ( C R ,  6/5/68,  H4572) 
President  Johnson,  in  accordance with  Senate Concurrent  Resolution  67 
approved May  29,  bade Secretary  of  Commerce C.  R.  Smith to  continue 
coordination  of  national  efforts  in  World  Weather Watch  program  by 
providing  forum  for  consultation  among  interested  Federal  agencies 
and  departments,  requiring  submission  of  plans  for  following  fiscal 
year  to  Congress annually  on March  1, and developing arrangements to 
further  international  participation  and  cooperation  in  weather  pro- 
gram.  (PD, 7/8/68,1057-8) 

127 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
June  5 
*  NASA  announced appointment of  R.  Emerson Harris,  Supervisor of  System 
Safety, Boeing Co.,  as Assistant Director  of  Safety  (System) , reporting 
to   Bob  P.  Helgeson,  Director  of  Safety.  Harris  also  would  serve  a s  
Deputy  Executive  Secretary  to  the  Aerospace  Safety  Advisory  Panel. 
(NASA Ann) 
June  6:  NASA  investigation  board  reported  that  primary  cause  of  Oct.  5 ,  
1967, crash of  T-38  jet trainer  near Tallahassee, Fla.,  was “a  jam in  the 
lateral  control  system  (ailerons)  from unknown  source.”  Accident had 
claimed  life  of  pilot,  Astronaut  Clifton  C.  Williams.  Board  recom- 
mended  improvement  in  T-38 
inspection  procedures.  (NASA  Release 
68-102  ; UPI,  W Post, 6/7/68,  A2 ; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 6/7/68,  A3) 
NASA  appointed  Jerome  Freibaum,  Assistant  Executive  Secretary,  Office 
of  the  Administrator,  to  succeed  L/C  Wayne Mathews  (USAF,  Ret.)  as 
Program  Manager  of  ComSatCorp-related activities  in  Space  Applica- 
tions  Programs  Office.  Col.  Mathews  had  joined  Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corp.  (NASA  Ann) 
*  New   Yo r k   Times  editorial  praised  US.-U.S.S.R. 
cooperation  on  revi- 
sion  of  nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty.  Textual  changes  “are  substan- 
tively  important,  but  their  psychological  impact  is  even  greater.”  The 
way  Soviet-American agreement was  reached  “was  itself  extraordinary. 
The  two  co-chairmen of  the’Geneva conference came  to  New  York  de- 
termined  to  accept  no  amendments,  but  midway  through  the  debate 
. .  . they realized concessions might be essential. They prepared  a  joint 
contingency plan  which  contained  the  treaty  changes  they  both  would 
accept if necessary.”  When changes had  to be made,  “they were  able to 
negotiate details in  a  few  hours. The  flexibility of  United States and  the 
Soviet  Union  . .  . should  make  [U.N.  majority  for  treaty]  a  virtual 
certainty.”  ( N Y T ,  6/6/68,  46 )  
June  8:  NASA  successfully launched two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets from 
WSMR.  First  rocket  carried  Naval  Research  Laboratory  and  Univ.  of 
Maryland payload to   111.3-mi  (179-km) altitude  to  flight-test flight de- 
sign  verification  unit 
( FDVU)   of  high-resolution  spectroheliograph 
planned  fo r   use  on  Apollo  Telescope Mount-A.  Second  rocket  carried 
American Science and  Engineering,  Inc.,  payload  to  93.7-mi  (151-km) 
altitude  to  obtain high-resolution x-ray pictures  of  active  region of  sun 
during  solar  flare  and  general  x-ray  emission  of  solar  corona.  Rocket 
and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily,  but  payload  of  first 
rocket  failed  to  separate,  preventing  functioning  of  parachute  recovery 
system.  (NASA  Rpts SRL )  
*  Univ.  of  California  scientist  Dr.  David  Cudaback,  in  telephone  inter- 
view,  said  rhythmic  light  flashes coming from  one  of  newly  discovered 
pulsars,  which  he  described  a t   NASA  pulsar  meeting  May  2 1   in   New 
York,  had  turned  out  to  be  rhythmic  effect  from  his  tape  recorder. 
However,  Kitt  Peak  National  Observatory,  which  reported  flashes  a t  
same meeting,  still  argued  they  seemed  real.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,   6/8/68, 
32 1 
June  9 :  Cosmos  C C X V ,   launched  by  U.S.S.R.  April  18,  had  carried  tele- 
scopes  to  observe  stars  without  interference  from  earth’s  atmosphere, 
Pravda  announced.  Orbiting  astronomical  observatory  had  trained  its 
eight mirror  telescopes and one x-ray telescope on specific hot  stars long 
enough  for  adequate  study,  partially  by  slowing  satellite’s  rotation  to  
0.01 usual  rate  with  magnetic  anchor  that  fixed  itself  on  earth’s  mag- 

128 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

June  9 

netic  field. Data  received in  150 radio  sessions was  being  processed by  
computer. Satellite reentered June  30.  (Anderson, N Y T ,  6/10/68,  C14; 
Reuters,  W Po s t ,   6/10/68,  A3;  SBD ,   6/11/68,  199;  GSFC  SSR ,  
7/15/68) 
e Nike- Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Churchill  Research  Range 
carried  GSFC  payload  to  92.7-mi  (149.5-km)  altitude  to  measure  inten- 
sity and energy spectra of  low  energy protons helium nuclei and heavier 
nuclei  present  during  Polar  Cap  Absorption  (PCA )   event.  Launch  was 
first  o€ six scheduled during solar  event. Parachute  failed  to  deploy  ap- 
parently  because  of  technician’s  failure  to  connect  flight  system  pyro- 
techniques.  Extendable nose  cone malfunctioned  for  undetermined  rea- 
son. Telemetry functioned for  full  flight  duration.  (NASA   Rpt SRL) 
JPL   Historian  R.  Cargill  Hall  had  been  selected  f o r   inclusion  in  1968 
edition  of  Outstanding  Young  Men  of  Amer ica ,   compiled  annually  by 
14-man national  board  of  editors.  ( L A  T ime s ,  6/9/68) 
*  Univ.  of  Colorado  electrical  engineer,  Dr.  Warren  L.  Flock, was  using 
radar  to  monitor  migration  of  birds  in  study  to  help  Government air- 
craft  controllers  predict  bird  migrations  or  establish  aircraft  guidance 
system  eliminating  hazards  of  collisions  between  aircraft  and birds. 
( N Y T ,  6/9/68) 
“The  seven  fa t   years  of  the  space  effort  are  ended,  and  the  seven  lean 
years  have  begun,”  William  Hines  wrote  in  Washington  Sunday  S tar .  
During  N s  1962-1968  Congress had  granted  NASA  more  than  $30 bil- 
lion.  In   FY  1969 agency would  be  limited  to  slightly  under  $4 billion. 
Transition  from fat  to lean  wa s   “completely understandable.”  NASA  had 
received  favored  treatment  because  it  had  high-priority  goal,  but  with 
attainment  now  in  sight,  NASA  was  no  longer  in  priority  position.  “Be- 
ginning  of  the  end”  came  in  FY  1967 when  funding  fell  nearly  $250 
million  from  1966 level.  Budget  for  FY  1968 was  down  $400 million 
from FY  1967, and  cut  from  FY  1968 to   1969 probably  would  be  close 
to  half  billion  dollars.  With  current  inflation  added,  NASA  “will  be 
lucky to  have  $4  billion,”  he  said. Agency would  be  operating  in   1969 
“at  an  economic level  lower  than  that  of  six years  ago when  the  moon 
just  getting  started.”  (W   S ta r ,  
program-and 
the  fat  years-were 
6/9/68,  E7) 
June  10:  Senate  passed  by  vote  of  66  to  4  H.R.  15856, NASA  FY  1969 au- 
thorization  bill  of  $4.013  billion-$357  million  less  than  Administra- 
tion’s  requested  $4.37  billion,  $18  million  less  than  sum  voted  by 
House, and  $136.4  million less than  sum recommended by  Senate Com- 
mittee on  Aeronautical and  Space Sciences. Bill  provided  $3.37 million 
f o r   R&D,  $39.6 million  for  construction  of  facilities,  and  $603.17  mil- 
lion  for  administrative  operations.  During  debate  Sen.  Carl  T.  Curtis 
(R.-Neb.)  successfully proposed amendment to bar  NASA  space research 
grants  to  colleges and universities that  refused  to  allow armed  forces re- 
cruiters  on  their  campuses.  ( C R ,   6/10/68,  S6943-77;  W  Po s t ,  
6/11/68,  A3;   B  Sun,  6/11/68,  1; SED ,   6/11/68,  198 ;   AP,  NYT ,  
6/12/68,  11) 
e Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA 
from  WSMR  carried 
115-lb Dudley  Observatory  payload  to   95-mi  (152.4-km)  altitude  to 
collect  micrometeoroid  particles  during  meteor  shower  and  recover 
payload  fo r   analysis  and  flux  determination.  Rocket  and  instruments 
performed satisfactorily;  good data were obtained  from telemetry.  Pay. 

129  

June  10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

load parachuted  successfully but  early efforts a t   recovery were not  suc- 
cessful.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
e  House passed  H.R.  3400  giving  FAA authority  to  set  standards  and  make 
regulations for  control  and abatement of  aircraft noise  and  sonic boom. 
Bill  amended  Title  VI  of  Federal  Aviation  Act  of  1958.  (NASA  LAR 
VII/59;  Science, 6/21/68,1321) 
NASA  awarded  $200,000  fixed-priced  contract  to  Lockheed  Missiles  & 
Space  Co.  Space  System  Div.  fo r   eight-month  study  of  earth  orbital 
flight emergency escape device. Contract called for  development of  con- 
ceptual design of  three-man entry vehicle for emergency escape from ve- 
hicle  in  earth  orbit  up  to  300  mi.  Device  could  be  launched  into  orbit 
with  future space vehicles and  remain  in  orbit  until  needed.  (NASA  Re- 
lease 68-103) 
e  Press  reported  recently  released  testimony a t  February hearings  of  House 
Committee  on  Appropriations’  Subcommittee  on  Department  of  De- 
fense.  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff  Gen.  John  P.  McConnell had  described 
Foxbat  as  only  Soviet  fighter  aircraft  “that  we  cannot  match.”  Un- 
dergoing late stages of  testing, i t  had estimated mach 3 maximum speed, 
70,000- to   75,000-ft maximum  altitude,  1,600-mi combat  range  w i t h -  
out  external  fuel  tanks,  and  1,400-mph cruise  speed  a t   50,000-ft  alti- 
tude.  U S .   observers  believed  fighter-bomber version  could  be  opera- 
tional  in  1969  or  1970;  advanced  radar-equipped  interceptor  version 
with  internally  carried  missiles  could  be  in  squadron  service by  1970 
or  1971.  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  Dr.  Harold  Brown,  had  testified 
that  U.S.  was  not  behind  U.S.S.R.  in  aircraft  development, while  Gen. 
(fighter  experimental) , U S .   fighter  in 
McConnell had  said  that  F-X 
Foxbat  class,  was  still  being  designed  and  was  “a  little  late.”  (Tran- 
script;  Corddry, B S u n ,  6/11/68,1) 
U.N.  General  Assembly’s  Political  Committee  by  vote  of  92-4,  with  22 
abstentions,  endorsed  draft  treaty  to  halt  spread  of  nuclear  weapons. 
Chief  U.S.  delegate Arthur  Goldberg  called  vote  “a  milestone  on  the 
road  to  a  more  peaceful  and  secure  international  order.”  (de  Onis, 
NYT, 6 /11 /68 ,1 )  
Pratt  81  Whitney Div.  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.  announced it had  reached 
agreement with  USN  on  prices covering all military  aircraft  engine  pro- 
grams during  1968-1970.  Week  before,  USN  had  informed  the company 
that  top  p r k e  it was prepared  to  pay  for  1,640 jet  engines built  for  the 
F-111  was  $180 million  less than  asked by  the company.  (Text:  V S J ,  
6/11/68,34;  Kelly, W Star, 6/11/68,  B5) 
J u n e  11 : Cosmos CCXXV  w a s  launched from Kapustin Yar  by U.S.S.R.  into 
orbit  with  519-km  (322.3-mi)  apogee,  248-km (154.1-mi)  perigee, 
92.1-min  period,  and  48.4”  inclination.  Instruments  functioned  nor- 
mally  and  satellite  reentered  Nov.  2.  ( S B D ,  6/13/68,  215;  GSFC SSR ,  
6/15/68;  11/15/68) 
NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  from  Kiruna,  Sweden,  car- 
ried  Max  Planck  Institute  (Germany)  experiment  to  114.2-mi  (183.5- 
km)  altitude  to  measure  micrometeoroids by  sensitive microphone  de- 
tectors  and  electron  emission  and  to  measure  electrical  fields  in  iono- 
sphere by  static vlrltmeter. Good  data were received. Rocket and  instru- 
mentation performanc 
a s  satisfactory.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from 
Canadian  Black  Brandt 
Barreria. do  Inferno  Range  near  Natal,  Brazil.  It  carried  MSC  Space 

130 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

June  11 

Physics  Div.  80-lb  South  Atlantic  Anomaly  Probe  (SAAP) experiment 
package  containing  spect-ometer,  magnetometers,  ion  chambers,  and 
heavy  ion  detector  to  502-mi  (806-km)  altitude  to  provide  fast  re- 
sponse capability  for  measuring  radiation  dose  and  dose  rate  a t   orbital 
altitude  over  South  Atlantic.  Project,  cooperative  effort  of  NASA  and 
Brazilian  Comissao  Nacional  de  Atividades  Espaciais  ( CNAE )   in  sup- 
port  of  Apollo  program,  would  use  data  to  study  dynamics  of  inner 
Van  Allen  belt  and  possible  radiation  hazard  to  astronauts  on  low-alti- 
tude  missions.  (NASA   Releases  68-94,  68-97K;  NASA  Rpt  SRL; SBD ,  
6/13/68,213) 
0  XB-70  No.  1, flown  by  NASA  test  pilots  Donald  L.  Mallick  and  Fitzhugh 
L.  Fulton,  Jr.,  reached  9,500-ft  altitude  and  316.5  mph  to  obtain  in- 
flight data  for  SST program.  Flight  ended prematurely  after  71 min  be- 
cause of  hydraulic  system malfunction.  (XB-70  P ro j  Off;  NASA  Release 
68-105;  SBD ,  6/17/68,229) 
NASA’s HL-10 
lifting-body  vehicle,  flown  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  A. 
Manke,  successfully acconiplished eighth  flight after  being  air-launched 
from  B-52  aircraft.  During  four-minute  pilot-checkout  flight  Manke 
tested  limit  cycle  characteristics  and  performed  stability  and  control 
maneuvers.  (NASA   P ro j   Off;  NASA  Release  68-105;  SBD ,   6/17/68, 
229) 
NASA  and  AEC  successfully completed  intermediate  power  run  of  Phoebus 
2A nuclear  reactor  at  Jackass  Flats, Nev.  Level of  approximately 2,000 
mw,  highest achieved in  program  to   date, was  held  about  30  sec to  ver- 
ify  satisfactory  operation  of  all  equipment.  I n   future  test,  reactor  was 
expected to  be  operated  a t  power  level  of  4,000-5,000  mw.  (AEC/NASA 
Release L-131) 
0  U S .   patent  No.  3,380,687 was  granted  to  Edwin  H.  Wrench,  staff  scien- 
tist  at  Convair  Div.,  General  Dynamics  Corp.,  and  five  associates  for 
satellite  dispenser  designed  to  release  cluster  of  satellites  into  orbit. 
Launched  by  rocket-powered booster  and  propelled  by  its  own  engine 
after  separation,  dispenser  would  release  satellites one  a t   a  time  upon 
radio  commands from  ground.  (Patent Off PIO ;   Jones,  NYT,  5/4/68, 
53) 
0  President  Johnson  submitted  to  Senate  nomination  of  GSFC  Deputy 
Director,  Dr.  John  W.  Townsend,  Jr.,  as  Deputy  Administrator  of 
Environmental Scimce  Services Administration. He  would  succeed  Dr. 
Werner  A.  Baum,  who  had  accepted  presidency  of  Univ.  of 
Rhode  Island.  Dr.  Townsend,  scientific  administrator  and 
ion- 
ospheric  physicist,  had  been  head  of  Naval  Research  Labora- 
tory’s  Rocketsonde Branch  and  Deputy Science Coordinator  of  Project 
Vanguard  before  he  joined  NASA  in  1958  a s   Chief  of  Space  Sciences 
Div.  ( P D ,  6 /17 /68 ,960 ;   ESSA  Release ES 68-38;  W Star, 6/11/68;  W 
Pos t ,  6/11/68) 
0  Joseph  E.  Karth  (D-Minn.)  criticized  general  public’s  “let  it  wait”  atti- 
tude  toward  science  and  technology  in  Dandridge  M.  Cole  Memorial 
Lecture  before  AIAA  Greater  Philadelphia  Section:  Poll  after  poll 
showed  “strong  inclination  to  slow  down or  cut back  mw--particularly 
the  space  program.  . . . Indeed,  sentiment has  grown  that  drastic  cuts 
should  be  made  in   R&D  to  iinance a  variety  of  requirements-Vietnam 
to   urban  renewal.  . . . In   April  Senate  turned  down  “by  only  two 
votes’’  move  to  .reduce DOD R&D  budget  half  million  dollars  on  top  of 

131 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
June  11 
committee cut  of  $240  million.  In  House,  space budget  was  cut  to  $4- 
billion level, $1.25 billion less than 16 mo before. 
Technology  seemed  major  factor  in   economic  and  social  progress 
and was  essential to maintaining international position, but  it needed  to  
be  more  responsive  to  urgent  social problems.  “A  strong  case  can  be 
made  to  continue  supporting vigorous R B ~ D  efforts in  the  US.,  although 
directions  and   priorities  must  change  to  suit  our  needs  from  time  to 
time.”  ( A & A ,   7/68,  6 5 )  
June  12:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCXXVZ   from  Plesetsk.  Orbital  par- 
ameters:  apogee, 519 km  (398.9 mi) ; perigee, 597 km  (370.9 mi) ; pe- 
riod,  96.8 min;  and  inclination, 81.1’.  Equipment was  functioning nor- 
mally.  ( S BD ,  6/13/68,  217;  GSFC  S SR ,   6/15/68) 
X-15  No.  1,  flown  by  NASA  test  pilot  William  H.  Dana,  reached  3,545 
mph  (mach 4.96)  and  214,000-ft altitude  to measure earth‘s  horizon  a t  
40-mi altitude. Data  obtained would be used to  redefine horizon  a s  nav- 
igational  reference  for  Apollo  spacecraft  on  return  flight  from  moon. 
(X-15  P ro j  Off; NASA Release 68-105  ; SBD ,  6/17/68,229) 
e  In  what  President  Johnson  described  a s   “the  most  important  interna- 
tional  agreement  in  the  field  of  disarmament  since  the  nuclear  age 
began,”  U.N.  General  Assembly  endorsed  nuclear  nonproliferation 
treaty  by  vote  of  95  to  4  with  21  abstentions.  Making  surprise  ap- 
pearance,  President  told  Assembly  Geneva  Disarmament  Conference 
should begin  early  discussions on  “limitation  of  strategic  offensive and 
defensive nuclear weapons  systems.”  He  promised  quick U.S.  action  in  
ratifying  and  carrying  out  treaty,  which  provided : nuclear  nations 
would  not  transfer  arms  or  explosive devices to any nonnuclear  nations 
or  assist  them  in  obtaining  or  manufacturing  such  items;  nonnuclear 
nations  would  not  receive  such weapons  or  accept  assistance in  manu- 
facturing  them;  nonnuclear  nations  would  accept  inspection  system 
under  International  Atomic  Energy Agency;  research,  production,  and 
use  of  nuclear  energy  for  peaceful  purposes, except  for  development of 
nuclear  explosives,  would  be  made  available  through  international 
body;  nuclear  nations  would  pursue  negotiations  for  early  end  to  nu- 
clear arms race and for complete disarmament treaty. 
Twenty-five-year treaty  would  be  in   force  when  ratified  by  US., 
U.S.S.R.,  U.K.,  and 4LI  nonnuclear countries.  (de  Onis, N Y T ,  6/13/68, 
1 ;  Kilpatrick,  W Po s t ,  6/13/68,  1;  PD ,   6/17/68,  9 5 4 4 )  
e June  13 :   USAF  Titan  111-C  booster  launched  from  ETR  inserted  eight 
Initial  Defense  Communications Satellite  Program  ( IDCSP) 
jam-resis- 
tant  repeater  satellites into separate,  random,  near-synchronous, 21,000- 
mi-altitude  equatorial  orbits.  Addition  of  8  comsats  to  18  IDCSP 
comsats launched  since  June  16,  1966, was  expected  to  boost  average 
satellite-availability  time  between  Vietnam  and  Hawaii  from  92%  to  
98% for top-priority messages and  from 60% to  85% for lower priority 
and  to  considerably  extend  expected  lifetime  of  communications  sys- 
tem.  (W Po s t ,  6/14/68;  AP,  P  Znq, 6 /14 /68 ,2 ;   Pres  Rp t   6 8 )  
*  Ogo   V  mission, launched  from  ETR March 4, was  adjudged  successful by 
NASA.  Initial  results  provided  first  evidence  of  electric  fields  in  bow 
shock. Other  data  indicated  presence  of  electric  field  discontinuities  in  
solar  wind  and  observations of  new  particle  and  field  phenomena.  Per- 
formance of  three-axis stabilization system had  been  excellent  and,  ex- 
cept  for  several  unexplained  transmitter  anomalies,  performance  of 

132 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

June  13 

other  subsystems was  satisfactory.  During  first  three  months  in  orbit 
Ogo   V  had  accumulated over  47,000  hr  of  experiment  operations  and 
was  continuing  to  provide  high-quality  data  for  2 1  of  24  onboard  ex- 
periments.  ( NASA  Proj Off) 
NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  from  Kiruna,  Sweden,  car- 
ried  Max  Planck  Institute  (Germany)  experiment  to  114.2-mi  (183.5- 
km)  altitude  to  measure micrometeorites  and  electrical fields  in  ionos- 
phere.  Preliminary  analyses  indicated  good  data were  received.  Rocket 
and  instrumentation  performance  was  satisfactory.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Organization  and  Management  Harold 
B.  Finger  received AIAA’S  James H.  Wyld  Propulsion  Award-including 
certificate and  $500  honorarium-for 
“outstanding  achievement in  the 
development of  the  technology  required  for  a  nuclear  flight  propulsion 
system.”  Award  was   presented a t  Honors  Luncheon during  4th  Propul- 
sion Joint Specialist Conference in  Cleveland, Ohio.  (AIAA  Release) 
*  Chicago  Tr ibune   criticized  “ridiculously  small”  congressional  cuts  in  
NASA  FY  1969 authorization  bill:  “Of  all  the ways  in which  the govern- 
ment  has  found  to  spend  taxpayers’  money,  the  space  program  is  the 
most  expendable. . . . I t   is  irrelevant  to   the  w a r   in Vietnam  . . . irrele- 
vant  to  the  problems of  poverty, crime,  violence,  and  urban  decay.”  It 
could be “scrapped  in  its entirety  without seriously affecting any  of  the 
critical  problems w e  face today.”  However, “today’s  space research does 
have a bearing  on  tomorrow’s defense. It is better to keep the machinery 
running  in  low  gear  than  to   shut  it  down  and  then  try  to  start  i t   up 
again.”  ( C  T r i b ,   6/13/68) 
*  U.N.  endorsement  of  nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty  had  “turned  back 
the  doomsday  clock,)’ said  New  Y o r k   T imes   editorial.  Broad  support 
for  it  would  impose political  restraints  on  all  nations  and  reinforce  na- 
tional  leaders  in  resisting  demands  for  nuclear  arms  development. 
Treaty  put  “a particular  duty”  on  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  to  “move  rapidly 
to  check  their  own  dangerous  nuclear  arms  race  and  to  find  new  ways 
to prevent international conflicts.”  ( N Y T ,  6 /13 /68 ,46 )  
Sen.  John  S.  Cooper  (R-Ky.)  led  bipartisan  drive  in   Senate to  deny DOD 
FY  1969 funds  to begin  deployment of  Sentinel ABM  system. There  was 
“no  present  threat  to  American  security  from  a  Chinese  interconti- 
nental  ballistic  missile  attack,”  he  said,  and  it  w a s   “difficult  to   believe 
they  would  invite  the  certain  destruction  of  their  country  by  a  nuclear 
attack  upon  the  US .”   when  they  attained  the  capability.  Coalition 
hoped  to  postpone Sentinel deployment for  a t  least one year  by  striking 
approximately  $600  million  for  further  R&D.  (Finney,  N Y T ,   6/14/68, 
1 8 ;  AP, W Pos t ,  6/14/68,  A28)  
June  13-1  5:  NASA  successfully accomplished first radar  tracking  of  asteroid 
Icarus,  which  passed  close  to  earth  once  every  19  yr.  Using  85-ft-dia 
and  210-ft-dia  antennas  at  Goldstone  Tracking  Station,  scientists  fol- 
lowed  Icarus’ approach  and  June  14  flyby of  earth a t  3,945,000 mi  and 
66,215 mph,  logging  15y2 h r   of  radar  contact  to  obtain  data  on  aster- 
oid’s  size,  velocity,  rotation,  and  composition.  Preliminary  results  of 
observations  by  Harvard  Univ.  and  Univ.  of  Arizona  suggested aster- 
oid  might  be  composed of  iron  and  have  two-  to  four-hour rotation  pe- 
riod.  (NASA  Release 68-106;  L A   T ime s ,  6/16/68;  Pasadena  Independ- 
ent  Star-News,  6/16/68;  Glendale  News-Press,  6/18/68;  Sullivan, 
N Y T ,  6/27/68,41) 

133 

June  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

June  14 :  NAS  announced establishment of  12-member Computer  Science and 
Engineering  Board  chaired  by  Dr.  Anthony  G.  Oettinger  of  Harvard 
Univ.  to  assess implications  of  rapid  evolution of  computers  and  their 
increasingly pervasive  influence on  individual  lives and  on  the  national 
welfare.  (NAS  Release; UPI,  NYT,  6/15/68,20) 
AIA  President  Karl  G.  Harr,  Jr.,  spoke  before  House  Ways  and  Means 
Committee in  support  of  H.R.  17551, Administration’s  proposed  1968 
Trade  Expansion  Act.  “ I t   is  no  accident  that  the  US. supplies  more 
than  72  percent  of  the  transport  aircraft  in  airline  use  throughout  the 
free world.  . . . World markets have been won by  designing and  build- 
ing  products  that  are  safe,  reliable,  economical,  easy  to  maintain  and 
backed  by  a  vast  network of  manufacturers’ service  organizations.”  In -  
dustry’s  1967 gross sales had been $27.2  billion, of  which a  record  $2.2 
billion  or 8.3% of  total were  exported. In   1967, industry had  accounted 
for more than  40%  of  U.S.  merchandise trade  surplus. Annual  interna- 
tional  sales revenue had  exceeded $ 1  billion  in  1 0  of  past  12 yr.  Recent 
Dillon,  Read  &  Go.  forecast,  Harr  said,  showed  US .   commercial  jet 
transport  export  sales would  exceed $13 billion  over next  decade,  antic- 
ipated gain  of  300% over $3.2 billion in past decade.  (Text) 
USAF  announced  it  had  authorized  resumption  of  flights  by  some  of 
42  F-111A  aircraft grounded  since May  8, after  series of  crashes. Tail 
control  assembly rod,  suspected cause  of  last  crash,  had  been  modified 
and  installed in  aircraft  released.  (AP, W Post,  6/15/68,  A15;  AP,  W 
Star, 6/15/68,  A10) 
June  15:  Rare  photographic  zenith  tube,  P Z T ,   which  provided  almost  exact 
measurement of  astronomical time, had  been  installed a t  Dominion Ob- 
servatory,  Priddis,  Alberta,  Canada.  I t   would  be  used  in   conjunction 
with  another  PZT a t  Royal  Greenwich Observatory near  Herstmonceux, 
U.K.,  to  study  continental  drift by  establishing exact measurements be- 
tween  two  points  on  same  latitude  and  observing  whether  distance 
changed with time.  (Can Press, NYT, 6/15/68,20) 
June  16:  Astronauts  Joseph  P.  Kerwin,  Vance D.  Brand,  and  Joe  H.  Engle 
began  177-hr simulated space journey  with Apollo  2TV-1  model space- 
craft  inside  giant  vacuum  chamber  at  MSC, to  prove  spacecraft  struc- 
ture  and  inner  pressure  vessel  and  verify  Apollo’s  environmental  con- 
trol  system  in  temperature  and  vacuum  extremes.  (West,  H  C h o n ,  
6/17/68;  E Post, 6 /18 /68 ,2 ;   NAR Skywriter, 6 /21 /68 ,1 )  
NASA  and  France’s  Office  National  $Etudes  et  de  Recherches  Abrospa- 
tiaIes  ( ONERA )   had  agreed  on  cooperative  research  project  on  tilt-ro- 
tors  fo r   vertical-flying aircraft.  Data  were  expected  to  assist  in  design 
of  rotors and propellers fo r  V/STOL  aircraft.  NASA  would  provide rotors, 
hardware,  and  instrumentation  for  tests,  minimum  engineering support, 
and  basic  computations  of  structural  strength;  ONERA  would  conduct 
tests in Modane, France, wind  tunnel  at  no  cost to  NASA. 
(NASA  Release 
68-104) 
Pearl  I.  Young,  first  woman  technical  employee  of  National  Advisory 
Committee for  Aeronautics, died  at  age  72  in  Hampton, Va.  Author  of 
technical  editing manual  used  throughout  NASA,  head  of  NASA  technical 
editing  staffs  a t   LaRC  and  LeRC  for  28  yr,  and  engineering  teacher  for 
12 yr, Miss  Young  had  retired  from  NASA  in  1961 and  a t   time  of  her 
death  was  completing a  biography  of  Octave Chanute.  (Newport News 

134 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

June  16 

Da i ly   Press,  6/17/68;  W  S ta r ,   6/18/68,  B4;  Denver  Po s t ,   6/23/68, 
33 1 
June  17: Tests to   evaluate propellant lines  for  J-2  engine had  been  success- 
fully conducted  in  vacuum  chamber  a t   Arnold  Engineering  and  Devel- 
opment  Center,  B.  J.  Richey  reported  in  Huntsville  T ime s .   Engineers 
had  discovered that  frosting which  enveloped  lines  and  provided  extra 
protection when  engine was  fired a t  ground  temperatures  failed to  form 
in vacuum or  simulated vacuum, so  lines burned  through.  Lines leading 
to  engine’s  augmented  spark  indicator,  believed  to   have  caused  engine 
shutdowns and  restart  failure  during  Apo l lo   6  flight April  4,  had  been 
redesigned  and  strengthened  without  affecting  engine  performance. 
(Richey, Huntsville  T ime s ,  6/17/68) 
Tests  a t  ARC  VTOL  Static Test  Facility had  shown that  inverted  “v” fence 
of  porous  metal  could  prevent  soil  erosion  around  landing  pads  fo r  
VTOL  aircraft.  Fence, developed  fo r   USAF  Aero  Propulsion  Laboratory 
by  Northrop  Corp.  Norair  Div.,  was  less  than  16  in  high;  placed  be- 
tween  aircraft  and  edge  of  pad,  it  permitted  some  of  blast  to  flow 
through  and  deflected  some upward  at  45”,  diffusing downblast.  (AFSC 
Release 83.68) 
a  Subcommittee  on  Science,  Research,  and  Development  submitted  to 
House Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics its  report  Managing  the  
Env ironmen t .   Subcommittee  recommended  development  of  national 
policy for  environment, including:  use  of  environment for  benefit  of  all 
mankind ; maximized  productivity  consistent with  continued  usage  into 
very  long-term  future ; systematic management  of  applied  science  and 
technology ; incentives  to  industry,  land  developers,  and  local  govern- 
ments;  international  agreement  on  projects  with  widespread  or  l o n g  
term  effects;  assessment  of  new  and  extended  applications  of  science; 
avoidance  of  speculative  statements  and  emotional  appeals;  and  in- 
creased  education  and  information  program  in  ecological  principles. 
(Text) 
Wa sh ing ton   Post  editorial  suggested  House-approved  bill  H.R.  3400 
granting  FAA  authorization  to  control  aircraft  noise  might  cause  con- 
flict  of  interests  by  instructing  FAA  to  consider  safety,  “technical  prac- 
ticability,,’  and  “economic  reasonableness”  as well  as  noise.  Many  citi- 
zens  would  feel  FAA  already  considered  these  criteria  “too  much.”  Nor 
could  it  be  ignored  that  FAA  also  was  charged  with  building  U.S.  SST 
potential  “boom  maker.”  House  bill  merited  Senate  support,  however, 
as  a  first  step.  Its  significance was   “that  finally  the  demands  of  the 
public  are  being  heard  in  Congress  over  the  roar  of  aircraft,  airline, 
airport,  air-traveler  and  air-bureaucrat  interests  too  little  concerned 
with noise.’’  (W  Pos t ,  6/17/68,  A18 )  
June  18 :  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos  C C X X V I I   from  Baikonur  into  near-cir- 
cular  orbit  with  271-km  (168.4-mi)  apogee,  202-km  (125.5-mi)  peri- 
gee,  89.2-min period,  and  51.8”  inclination.  Satellite  performed  satis- 
factorily  and  reentered  June  26.  ( S B D ,   6/19/68,  2 4 ;   GSFC  S S R ,  
6/30/68) 
House  unanimously  accepted  $4.013-billion  Senate  version  of  NASA 
FY  1969 authorization  bill  (H.R.  15856)  [see  June  101  without  con- 
ference  and  sent  to  President  Johnson  for  signature.  Final  bill, 
$357.027  million  less  than  NASA  request,  reduced  funds  asked  for 
Apollo program  by  $13.8 million,  to   $2.025  billion;  cut  Apollo  Appli- 

135 

June  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

cations  from  requested  $439.6  million  to  $253.2  million;  and  halved 
advanced missions  funds,  to  $2.5  million.  It  increased  House  figure  of 
$11.7 million for  NERV.4  program  to  $55  million, still  $5  million  under 
request.  Lunar  and  planetary  exploration  funds  were  cut  from  re- 
quested  $107.3  million  to  $92.3  million,  and  space  applications  from 
$112.2  to  $98.7  million.  Final  authorization  figures  were  $3.37  billion 
for  total  R&D,  $603.173 million  for  administrative  operations  ($45.027- 
million  reduction) , and  $39.6  million  for  construction  of  facilities.  All 
items  were  subject  to  appropriations  bills,  not  yet  passed.  ( C R ,  
6/18/68,  H5052-3;  Lannan,  W  S ta r ,   6/19/68,  D9;  SBD ,   6 /19 /68 ,  
239; Science, 6/28/68,1432) 
Apollo  7  spacecraft,  which  would  carry  three  astronauts  on  11-day 
earth-orbital mission  in  late  1968,  was  undergoing  combined  systems 
tests a t  KSC .   Unmanned  and  manned  altitude  runs  would  follow, before 
spacecraft  would  be  sent  to  Cape  Kennedy  to   be  placed  on  Saturn  IB  
launch  vehicle.  Saturn  had  undergone  tests  and  checkout  on  Launch 
Complex 34 for several months. 
NASA  announced  Apollo mission-which  would  demonstrate perform- 
ance  of  spacecraft’s  command  module  ( C M )  , service  module  ( SM )  , 
crew,  and  support  facilities-would 
begin  with  mid-morning  launch, 
carrying  commander Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  CM   pilot  Donn  F.  Eisele, 
and  LM  pilot Walter Cunningham into  earth  orbit.  During  second  revo- 
lution,  crew  would  separate  Apollo  from  rocket’s  upper  stage  and  per- 
form  transposition  and  simulated  docking  maneuver  similar  to  one  to 
be  performed  on  lunar  mission.  Reentry  under  manual  control  of  crew 
would  culminate in  splashdown  in  Atlantic a t   approximately  7  am  EDT 
on 11th day.  (NASA  Release 68-108;  KSC   Release 285-68) 
ARC  reported  that  90  U S .   scientists  at  ARC  working  group  sessions  had 
agreed  electromagnetic systems would  provide  best  data  on  moon’s  in- 
terior  and  recommended  three  techniques,  magnetometer  systems,  ra- 
dio-frequency systems,  and  radar.  Magnetometer  systems  could  meas- 
ure  blocking  of  fluctuating  solar  magnetic  field  borne  by  solar  wind 
by  using  network  of  emplacements on  moon’s  surface.  Highly  conduc- 
tive  hot  lunar  core  would  cut  off  field  completely,  while  cold  core 
would  let  most  of  field  pass  through.  Magnetometer  on  lunar  crawler 
could  make  similar  measurements  to  find  highly  conductive masses  of 
water,  lava,  or  ore.  Radio-frequency  probes  could  make  inexpensive 
subsurface surveys through  spacecraft radio  signals which  would  pene- 
trate moon’s  surface  and  bounce back  to   be  measured as  to  wave  char- 
acteristics.  Wave-change data  could  help  define  ore,  ice  deposits,  or 
permafrost.  High-frequency  radar  systems  could  study  lunar  surface 
through  radar  bounced  off  moon  from earth with  return  signal  received 
by  earth  antennas,  o r   beamed  from  spacecraft  in  lunar  orbit  o r   from 
lunar  crawler  a t   lunar  surface,  w i th   return  signals  received  by  space- 
craft or crawler.  ( ARC Release 68-9) 
*  Opening session  of  3rd  Eurospace  U.S.-European  Conference  at  Munich 
discussed  disparity  between  U.S.  and  European  space  funding.  Total 
spent  on  Western  European  space  research  in  1967 was  $300  million, 
0.005%  of  gross  national  product  of  cooperating  countries;  NASA 
budget  was  1 4  times  that  amount. West  German Minister  for  Scientific 
Research, Dr. Gerhard  Stoltenberg, proposed merger of  ELDO  and ESRO, 
10%  increase  in  total  funding,  and  possible  cooperation  with  U S .   i n  

136 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

June  18 

developing launch  vehicle  for  use  after  1975.  International  Space  Re- 
search Committee Vice  President  Richard W.  Porter urged  increased co- 
operation  with  NASA,  which  already had  concluded bilateral  agreements 
with  several countries  for  scientific  satellite launch ing ,   eight  of  which 
had  proved  successful  thus  far.  Some  42  countries  were  working  with 
U S .   on  meteorological  satellite  programs;  11  were  cooperating  o~ 
communications projects.  There  were  20  tracking  stations  in   11  coun- 
tries  cooperating  in  U S .   launching  projects  and  395  foreign  techni- 
cisns,  engineers, and  scientists had  worked in U S .   space centers.  Euro- 
pean  industrial  sources  expressed  hope  system  could  be  evolved  for 
joint US.-European  work on  projects.  (In terav iaA irLe t ter ,  6/19/68,  1 )  
Dr.  Gardiner  L.  Tucker,  Deputy  Director  of  Defense Research  and  E@- 
neering  (Electronics &  Information  Systems) , told  Military  Operations 
Subcommittee  of  House  Committee  on  Government  Operations  DOD 
would  proceed  w i t h   new  phase  of  Defense  Satellite  Communicatiops 
System  (DSCS)  , procuring more  than  three  advanced  synchronous sagel- 
lites  and  developing  over  six  new  ground  terminals.  Funding  of  satel- 
lites,  which  would  use  very  narrow-beam  steerable  antennas  illuminat- 
ing  1,000- to  2,000-mi-dia area  of  earth,  would  start  in  FY  1969. DSCS 
satellites would  be  comparable to  Intelsat  IV  series under  consideration 
for commercial service. 
New  DOD   phase  represented  technological  advance  over  advanced 
DSCS  considered  in   1967  but  was  Less  ambitious  in  cost  and  size, with 
cost  range  of  $100-200  million,  contrasted  with  earlier  $500  million. 
Current  system  had  25  satellites  in  orbit  and  operational,  each 
equipped w i t h   switch to   turn  it  off  after  six years  in   orbit.  Number  of 
terminals had  grown from  original  two  in  field  and  seven  transportable 
to  worldwide operational  system with  terminals near  Washington, D.C., 
and  in   New  Jersey,  Colorado,  California,  Hawaii,  Guam,  Australia, 
Korea,  Okinawa,  Philippines,  South  Vietnam,  Thailand,  Ethiopia,  and 
Western Germany, plus six shipboard terminals. 
Cooperative  programs  with  Allies  in  satellite  communications  in- 
cluded  procurement  of  two  synchronous  Skynet  satellites  for  U.K.  as 
part  of  lnitial Defense Communications Satellite Program  ( IDCSP)  with 
first  launch  scheduled  for  mid-1969. Joint  efforts  were  under  way  to 
ensure  operability  of  U S .   and  U.K.  satellites and  terminals,  and  work 
was  under  way  to  procure  two  Skynet  satellites  for  NATO  under  pro- 
gram  similar  to  that  of  U.K.  First  launch  was  planned  for  late  1969, 
with U S .   controlling  satellite.  U.S.  had  signed Memorandum of  Under- 
standing with six NATO  countries  establishing joint  testing program  uti- 
lizing Les  Y  experimental satellite, launched July  1, 1967.  (Transcript: 
DOD  Release 603-68;  Johnson, A v  Wk, 6/24/68) 
0  Secretary  of  Transportation  Alan  S.  Boyd  testified  before  Senate  Com- 
merce  Committee’s Aviation Subcommittee in  support  of  S.  3645,  pro- 
posing  airport  development  and  airways  systems  improvement.  By 
1974,  revenue  passenger-miles flown  by  U S .   airlines  were  expected  to 
rise  to  200  billion,  more  than  double  1967  level;  hours  flown  by  car- 
riers,  from  5.2  million  in  1967  to  8.6  million,  increasing  65%;   and 
general  aviation  hours  flown,  SO%,  from  21.9  million  to  31.8 million. 
Air  carrier  fleet would  increase  from  2,272  aircraft  to  3,320  and  gen- 
eral  aviation  fleet  would  increase  from  104,706  to  160,000.  Aircraft 
handled  by  FAA  towers  would  more  than  double,  a s   would  those  han- 

137 

June  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

dled by  FAA  route control  centers.  Increase  in  speed  and  quality  of  air- 
c ra f t  also would increase demand for use of  FAA facilities. 
5.3645  would  authorize  direct  loans  for  potentially  viable  airports 
when  reasonable  private  financing  was  unobtainable  and  grant  up  to  
50%  of  cost  for  projects  attributable  to  service by  subsidized carriers. 
Federal  assistance would  be  available only for  development projects  re- 
lated  to  landing  areas  and  safety  facilities.  DOT  would  be  required  to 
submit National Airport System Plan within two years.  (Testimony) 
Response  from U.S.S.R.  and  other  nations  to  proposal  for  international 
decade of  ocean exploration  in  1970s had  been  “quite  favorable,”  Vice 
President  Hubert  H.  Humphrey, Chairman  of  National  Council on Ma- 
rine  Resources  and  Engineering  Development, said  in  report  released 
by  council.  “ I  welcome the  enthusiasm with  which  the  Decade  is being 
received.  . . . We  look  forward  to  a  continuation  of  this  spirit  of  close 
collaboration,  for  the  seas  can,  and  must  serve  the  interest  of  man- 
kind.”  (Text; NCMRED  Rpt, 5/68;  Madden, N Y T ,  6 /18 /68 ,16 )  
June  19: U.N.  Security  Council  approved  security  guarantee  by  US . ,   U.K., 
and  U.S.S.R. 
to  provide  immediate  assistance  to   nonnuclear  nations 
facing  nuclear  attack,  completing  U.N.  action  on  nonproliferation 
treaty  endorsed by  U.N.  General Assembly June  12. Ten voted  in  favor 
of  guarantee;  France,  India,  Brazil,  Pakistan,  and  Algeria  abstained. 
(de Onis, N Y T ,  6/20/68,10C) 
0  I n  letter  to  Sen.  Richard  B.  Russell  (D-Ga.) , Chairman  of  Senate Armed 
Services  Committee,  Secretary  of  Defense  Clark  M.  Clifford  said  that 
“it  would  be  a  serious  mistake  to  eliminate  construction  and  procure- 
ment  funds  in  fiscal year  1969 for  the  deployment  of  the  Sentinel Sys- 
tem.”  Program  represented  12 yr  of  R&D  at  cost  of  $3 billion,  he  said, 
and  time had  come  “when  we  can  no  longer  rely  merely  on  continued 
research  and  development  but  should  proceed  with  actual  deployment 
of  an   operating  system.”  Congressional decision  to  eliminate  deploy- 
ment  funds would  disrupt  work  under  way  and  lose  two  years  in  avail- 
ability  of  operating  system  which  was  important  to  U S .   security. 
Senate coalition  responded with  letter  from  Assistant Defense Secre- 
tary  Paul  C.  Warnke  acknowledging one-year  delay  in  Chinese  ICBM 
program  and  that  Sentinel  ballistic  missile  defense  system  had  “also 
slipped  a  little.”  (Text;  Finney,  N Y T ,   6/20/68,  24;  Corddry,  B  Sun, 
6/20/68,  A3 )  
June 20 :  USAF  launched two unidentified  satellites from Vandenberg AFB by 
Thor-Agena D  booster.  One  entered  orbit  with  251-mi  (403.9-km)  f p -  
ogee,  113-mi (181.8-km)  perigee,  90.3-min period,  and  85”   inclination 
and  reentered  July  16.  Second  entered  orbit  with  322-mi  (518.2-km) 
apogee, 273-mi  (439.3-km)  perigee,  94.1-min period,  and  85.1”  incli- 
nation.  (SBD,  6/25/68,  272;  Pres  Rp t   6 8 )  
Analysis of  data  returned  by  Pioneer  VI11  had  led  ARC  scientists to  spec- 
ulate  that  earth’s  magnetic  tail,  extension  of  its  magnetic  envelope 
(magnetosphere)  blown  out  by  solar  wind  to  resemble  comet’s  tail, 
might be  shorter  than  the  200 million mi  suggested by  certain  theoreti- 
cal  calculations. When  Pioneer  V l I   flew  through  tail  region  a t   3.5-mil- 
lion-mi distance  from  earth  after  Aug.  17,  1966, launch,  it  found  long 
period  when  solar  wind  was  completely  or  partially  blocked  out,  sug- 
gesting  spacecraft  had  observed  end  of  organized  tail  region.  Condi- 
tions  encountered in  tail  area  by  Pioneer  V I I l  a t   1.75 million m i   from 

138 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

June  20 

earth  after  Dec.  13,  1967,  launch,  were  similar.  However,  instead  of 
smooth cylindrical  structure expected at  smaller distance,  Pioneer 
found  conditions  resembling turbulent  wake,  leading  some  scientists to 
conclude  tail  was  shorter.  Others,  including  Pioneer  Project  Scientist, 
Dr.  John  Wolfe, believed  tail  might  include  successively turbulent  and 
smooth  areas.  (ARC   As trogram ,   6/20/68;  AP,  N Y T ,   6/22/68,  53) 
Eastern  Air  Lines  and  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.  announced  joint  pro- 
gram  to  evaluate propeller-driven STOL aircraft  for  use  on  300- to  500- 
mi  intercity  flights  by  trial  of  64-passenger  French  Breguet  941 
(McDonnell Douglas  188)  aircraft.  Beginning  in  September, perform- 
ance  of  STOL aircraft,  which  could  take  off  from  1,000-ft  runway  and 
cruise  at  250  mph,  would  be  compared  with  that  of  conventional  jet 
aircraft  on  regular  commercial a i r   shuttle  routes  on  same  schedule  to 
determine time  saved by  using  separate  runways and  terminal  airspace. 
(Hudson, N Y T ,  6/21/68;  W  Po s t ,  6/21/68,  A20; W S J ,  6 /21 /6 8 , 28 )  
U.K.  withdrew  from  $42O-million  European  Nuclear  Research  Center 
project  because  of  financial  difficulties  resulting  from  devaluation  of 
pound Nov.  18, 1967. Officials said  U.K.  could  not  afford  to  contribute 
its  $93.6-million share  in  proposed  300-bev European  nuclear  accelera- 
tor.  U.K.  withdrawal from  European  Conference on  Satellite Communi- 
cations had been announced April 16.  (W Post, 6/21/68,  A16) 
NATO  planned  establishment  by  early  1970  of  comsat  network  of  ad- 
vanced  relay  spacecraft  in  synchronous  orbit  21,000  mi  over  Atlantic 
for  communications between  its  military  units  in  Europe  and  U S .   Re- 
portedly  $7.9-million  contract  calling  for  delivery  in  autumn  1969  of 
two  spacecraft had already been signed.  (AP, W Post, 6/21/68,  A7) 
0  Commenting  on  reductions  in  NASA  authorization  bill,  Kansas  C i t y  
T imes   editorial  said:  “We  have  supported  the  space  program  in  the 
past,  not  as  a  window  dressing but  as  an  expression-and 
a  catalyst- 
of  the  inventiveness and  technical energies of  the  American people.  We 
still support it, and believe it is beneficial. 
“We  recognize,  nonetheless,  that  i t   is  but  one  of  many  costly  and 
sometimes competing activities. Congress has  decided  that  in  a  time  of 
burdensome  military  expenditure,  and  of  pressing  domestic needs,  the 
space  budget  is  one  logical  place  to  apply  the  knife  of  economy.  NASA 
planners  w i l l   simply have  to  find  creative ways  to  live  with  that  deci- 
sion.”  ( K C  T ime s ,  6/20/68) 
June 21 : U.S.S.R.  successfully  launched  Cosmos  CCXXVZZZ.  Orbital  par- 
ameters:  apogee, 241 km  (149.8 m i )  ; perigee, 203  km  (126 mi) ; pe- 
riod,  88.9  min;  and  inclination,  51.6’.  Satellite  reentered  July  3. 
( S BD ,  6 /24 /68 ,260 ;   GSFC  S SR ,  6/30/68,7/15/68) 
0  NASA’s H G l O   lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld  R.  Gentry, 
successfully  completed  ninth  flight.  Purposes  were  to  obtain  stability 
and  control data  through  pitch  and rudder  pulse maneuvers, verify yaw 
rate  measurements,  investigate  pilot  limit  cycle,  and  verify  predicted 
optimum use  of  landing  rockets  during  landing  flare.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
0  Nearly  1,000 scientists and  educators  attended  “crisis”  meeting called  by 
New  York  Academy  of  Sciences to   demand  science be  declared  “disas- 
ter  area”  because  of  threatened  $6-billion Federal  budget  cut.  Federal 
R&D funding,  after decade of  average 22%  annual  expansion, had  risen 
only  2.5%  annually  since  1 9 a ,  while  number  of  scientists  had  risen 
20%.  It was feared resulting crush would damage US. leadership  in  sci- 

139 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
June  21 
ence and  technology.  MIT   Provost  Dr.  Jerome  B.  Wiesner  said,  “If  the 
Congress  continues to  do  what  i t   is  now  doing  we’ll  wake  up   with  an- 
other  sputnik  in  a  decade.”  Federal  R&D  funding  had   risen  from  $74 
million  in  1940  to  $16.9  billion  in   1968 with  October  1957  “shock  of 
Sputnik”  giving greatest  impetus.  Cut  of  $6  billion  would  mean  “we’re 
going  to  cut  not  only  into  the  fat,  but  into  the  flesh  of  lots  of  areas,’’ 
Dr.  Donald  F.  Hornig,  President’s  Science  Adviser,  said.  NASA’s sus- 
taining  university  program  had  been  one  of  chief  casualties  of  recent 
cutbacks  with  budget  slashed  from  $45  to   $10  million  yearly,  forcing 
drop  from  1,300 to  50  training  grants  which  had  produced  more  than 
1,000  Ph.D.s  since  1961.  Government  officials  had  chided  scientists 
f o r  being  ill-prepared fo r   leveling  of  Federal  support  and  for  alleged 
detachment from  political  realities.  (Reinhold, NYT,  6/21/68,  1 )  
Jzme  22:  Alexandru  Birladeanu,  Deputy  Prime  Minister  of  Romania  and 
president  of  Romanian  National  Council  of  Scientific Research,  visited 
KSC for general orientation and tour.  (K SC  Release 290-68) 
June  24:  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  testified  before  Senate  Com- 
mittee  on   Appropriations’  Subcommittee  on  Independent  Offices  that 
NASA  was  still  uncertain  as  to  exact  levels  a t   which  a  number  of  pro- 
jects  could  be  included  in  N  1969  operating  plan  and  that  at  House- 
passed  $4.008-billion  appropriations  level  NASA’s  aeronautical  and 
space  activities would  have  to  be  sharply  curtailed.  “We  will  have  to 
reduce  and  stretch  out  ongoing  programs  and  eliminate  o r   defer  the 
work  that  would  have  enabled  us   to  continue  the  research  and 
development  . . . looking toward  a  future resumption of  tests  and mis- 
sions  which  will  soon  grind  to  a  halt.”  Because  of  reduced  budget, 
Webb  said,  NASA  would  have  to  accept  one-year  gap  in  Saturn V  pro- 
duction, discontinue production of  Saturn IBs,  delay  initiation  of  NERVA 
development,  either  severely  limit  all  proposed  planetary  orbiter  mis- 
sions  or  eliminate  1971  or  1973  missions,  and  curtail  work  toward 
using space systems for direct economic benefits. 
If  NASA  budget  were  further  reduced  under Revenue  and Expenditure 
Control Act  of  1968, requiring  $6-billion reduction  in   Federal  expendi- 
tures  in  FY  1969, result  could  be  disastrous  to  goals  of  national  space 
program.  Although  NASA  would  do  everything  possible  to  fulfill  com- 
mitment  to  Apollo  program  and  would  continue  on  smaller  scale  pro- 
grams  of  greatest  and   most  immediate  national  importance,  further 
budget  cuts  would  require  complete  termination  of  Saturn  production 
and  cancellation  of  production  of  associated  manned  spacecraft ; elimi- 
nation  of  Titan-Mars  1973  missions  and  possible  elimination  of  Mari- 
ner-Mars 1971 missions ; and further  delays, curtailments,  and cancella- 
tions  which  might  require  more  harsh  steps  such  as  canceling  orders 
for  hardware  already  under  contract  and  mothballing  entire  installa- 
tions.  (Testimony; NASA LAR  VII/65) 
*  House  Committee  on  Government  Operations  issued  report  urging  imme- 
diate  curtailment  of  Federal  grants  to  foreign  scientists,  especially  in  
developed  countries,  to  conduct  nonessential  research.  Committee  said, 
despite  balance  of  payments  deficit,  Government  grants  for  foreign  re- 
search  projects  amounted  to  $20 million  yearly,  more  than  $15 million 
in  developed countries. Committee recommended  limiting funds to proj - 
140 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
June 24 
ects urgently  needed  by  U S .  until  end  of  emergency.  (H.R.  1578; AP, 
W S tar ,  6/24/68) 
e  NASA  Aerobee  150  A  sounding  rocket  successfully launched  from  NASA 
Wallops  Station  carried  300-lb  payload  containing  two  white  rats  to  
89-mi  (143.2-km)  altitude  in  second  of  four  experiments  to  study  rats’ 
behavior  in   artificial  gravity  field  and  determine  minimum  level  of 
gravity needed  by  biological  organisms during space  flight. During  five 
minutes  of  free fall, rats  selected artificial gravity levels created through 
centrifugal action by walking  along  tunnel runway  i n  extended arms  of 
payload.  Data  on  their  movement  and  position  were  telemetered  to 
ground  stations.  Payload  impacted  53 mi  downrange  in   the  Atlantic; 
no recovery  was  attempted.  (WS  Release 68-11;  NASA  Release 68-112; 
NASA  Rpt  SRL)  
House  passed  by   269-to-42  vote  H.R.  3136  authorizing  study  of  in- 
creased  use  of  metric  system  in U S .   ( C R ,  6/24/68,  H5341-6;  AP,  W 
Post, 6/25/68) 
*  Denver  Post  editorial:  “With  the  goal  of  the project-landing 
of  men  on 
close  a t   hand,  it  would  be  sad  indeed  i f   NASA 
lost  some key  people now  because  of  budget and morale problems.  . . . 
the  moon  by  1970-so 
There are future manned  flights and  space  experiments  to  consider, and  
these will  surely be crippled  at  infancy  i f   NASA’s budget  is  cut  back  too 
severely.”  (Denve r  Post, 6/24/68) 
June  24-27:  Fourth International Symposium on Bioastronautics and the Ex- 
ploration  of  Space was held  in  San Antonio,  Tex.,  under  sponsorship of 
AFSC’S  Aerospace Medical Div. 
I n   keynote  address  Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  Executive  Secretary  of 
NASC,  noted  no  other  program  had  given  such  impetus  to  technological 
and  economic  growth  as  national  space  program.  “Those  who  oppose 
adequate  spending  on  space  technology  are  deliberately  o r   inadver- 
tently  campaizninq  for  a  lower  standard  of  living  for  ou r   people, a  de- 
clining  Gross  National  Product  for  our  Nation,  and  a  secondary posi- 
tion  in  strength  to  that  of  the  Soviet Union.”  U S .   investment  in   space 
to  date.  he  said,  “has  mostly  been  an  investment  in  the  future,  the  re- 
turns  of  which  can  be  lost  i n   large  measure  if  we  lack  the  vision  and 
the  vigor  and  the  desire  to  keep  this  country  great  by  maintaining  a 
vigorous space effort. 
“Every  major  power  and  every  nation  eager  to  raise  its  standard  of 
living  and  world  influence  strives  to  participate  in   space  technology 
and space exploration. I t  certainly would  be  ironic i f   the United  States, 
as  the  world’s  leader  in  international  cooperation  and  the  world’s 
leader  in  standard  of  livinc,  were  to  abandon  or   even  neglect  the  
source of  such strength.  I  believe i t  miKht  be labeled  the  worst  mistake 
in history.”  (Text;  C R ,  6/24/68,  E5775-6;  S B D ,  6/25/68,  267;  A e r o  
Daily,  6/25/68) 
Gen.  James  Ferguson,  AFSC  Commander,  said  bioastronautics  prob- 
lems  and provisions could  have  serious impact  on mission  performance, 
space station design.  cost,  and  operations.  Principal  problems  included 
those  of  crew  rotation,  crew  size,  compartment  volume  per  crew  mem- 
ber,  radiation  exposure,  versatility  of  astronauts,  station  atmosphere, 
and  prolonged  weightlessness.  I n   one  study,  savings  from  doubling 
crew rotation  intervals from 30  to  60 days  ranged  from $220 million  to  
$470 million  per, year,  depending  on  altitude.  Savings  from  increasing 

141 

June 24-27 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

from  60 to  90  days were  another  $100  million  a  year.  For  same cost, 
slightly  longer  interval  could  support  two  more  astronauts.  Crew  rota- 
tion  intervals  of  two  or   more months should be   goal.  “If  a  future  sta- 
tion  can be  expected  to  be  useful  over  a  period  of  many  years  and  its 
cost can be  amortized accordingly . . . efforts  to  achieve  long crew  ro- 
tation  intervals have a  very  large  potential  payoff .” (Text ; A e ro  Da i ly ,  
6/28/68) 
Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  MSC  Director,  described  100-man  orbital 
workshop  that  could  be  operational  by  late  1970s.  Proposed  6154% 
long,  1-million-lb vehicle,  carrying  10,000  lb   of  experiments,  would  be 
launched in  three  separate parts by  three  Saturn V  boosters  and assem- 
bled  in  space.  Baton-shaped station would  revolve  around  hub  in  center 
which  would  serve  as   spaceport  and  zero-gravity  laboratory.  Crew 
would  live  and  perform  some work  in   240-ft  arm  on  one  side  of  hub. 
On  other  side,  375-ft arm  would  house  engine which  would  spin  entire 
station  a t  3.5  r p q  creating  centrifugal  force  to  serve  as  artificial  grav- 
(Maloney,  H  Post,  6/26/68;  AP,  W  S tar ,   6 /26 /68 ;   CSM, 
ity. 
6/28/68) 
Arthur  C.  Clark,  co-author  of  2001:  A  Space  Ody s sey ,   suggested 
that  most  earth  inhabitants  could  not  be  very  objective  about  possi- 
bility  of  extraterrestrial  life  because  they  were  too  “geocentrically 
minded,”  still  considering earth  the  center  of  the  universe.  “The whole 
history  of  astronomy teaches us   to be  cautious of  any theory purporting 
to  show that  there is something special about the  earth.  In  their  various 
ways, the other planets may  have  orders of  complexity as  great  as  ours. 
looked  a  promising  candidate  for  geophysical 
Even  the moon-which 
simplicity  less  than  a  decade  ago-has 
already  begun  to  unleash  ar. 
avalanche of  surprises. 
“The discovery  that Jupiter  is  quite  warm  and has  precisely  the  type 
of  atmosphere in  which  life is  believed  to  have arisen  on  earth may  be 
the  prelude to  the most  significant biological  findings  of  this  century.‘’ 
If  we  discover  no  trace  of  extraterrestrial  life,  he  said,  “even  such  a 
negative finding would  give us  much  sounder understanding of  the con- 
ditions  in  which  living  creatures  a re  likely  to  evolve-and 
this  in   turn  
would  clarify  our  views  on  the  distribution  of  life  in   the  universe as   a 
whole.”  (Leavitt, A F / S D ,  8/68,  59-62) 
lune 25:  NAS  Committee on  SST-Sonic Boom’s  Subcommittee  on  Human  Re- 
sponse  reported  that  although studies  indicated  little cause  for  physio- 
logical  concern,  psychological  impact  of  sonic  boom  would  be  
discouraging  for  supersonic flight  over  land  by  present  SST  configura- 
tions.  Report stressed,  however,  that  although no  damage to  hearing  or 
other  direct  physical  damage was  expected,  indirect  physiological  re- 
sponses could  be caused by  startle  produced  by  even  moderate  booms. 
Committee’s  recommendations  to  develop  “commercial  SST  which  will 
be  able  to   fly supersonically  over  populated  areas  a t   frequent  intervals 
without  undue  annoyance to  the   residents”  included : further  develop- 
ment  of  concept  of  “utility”  in  comparing monetary  and  nonmonetary 
costs  and  benefits  of  flights;  continuation  of  laboratory  studies  of 
booms ; construction  of  additional  boom-simulation  facilities  and  im- 
provement  of  existing  ones;  continuation  of  studies  of  human  reaction 
to  varied  boom  levels;  and  studies  of  human  response  during  sleep 

142 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

June  25 

and  effects  of  repeated  awakenings.  (NAS  Release;  Schmeck,  N Y T ,  
News   Repor t ,   6-7/68,  1 )  
6/26/68,  41;  NAS-NRC-NAE 
*  NASA  awarded  $36,271,376  threeyear  cost-plus-award-fee contract  to  RCA 
Service  Co.  for  maintenance  and  operation  of  Satellite  Tracking  and 
Data  Acquisition Network  (STADAN)  facilities a t   GSFC;  Rosman,  N.C.; 
and  Fairbanks,  Alaska.  Contract  carried  two  one-year  extension  op- 
tions.  (NASA Release 68-110) 
*  MSFC  had  brought  22 Super  Loki  Dart  rockets  from  Space Data  Corp.  to 
replace larger,  costlier  Cajun-Dart  sounding  rockets in  high-altitude at- 
mospheric  research  at  KSC.  Super  Loki,  costing  $800,  i n   contrast  to  
$2,800  for  Cajun, would  deliver similar  performance in  taking  high-al- 
titude  wind  measurements  before  and  after  Saturn  launch  vehicle 
flights. ( MSFC Release 68-139) 
a  USN  announced  selection  of  5 4   men  to  serve  as  aquanauts  in  60-day 
Sealab I11 experiment in underwater living, scheduled to begin  in  Octo- 
ber.  Former Astronaut M.  Scott Carpenter  (Cdr.,  USN)  , team leader  fo r  
Sealab I1  ( Aug.  28-Sept.  26,  1965) , would  serve  a s  Senior  Aquanaut. 
Ocean  floor  experiments  would  be  conducted  a t   620-ft  depth  off  San 
Clemente  Island  by  40 aquanauts  in  5  teams  serving  1 2  days each. Re- 
maining  14  men  would  serve as  alternates  and  backup  surface  support 
divers.  (DOD  Release 579-68;  Aero  Daily, 6/26/68) 
e  President  Johnson  announced  he  would  nominate  AEC  Chairman,  Dr. 
Glenn T.  Seaborg, to  fill unexpired  term  of  Dr.  Samuel M.  Nabrit,  who 
had  resigned  from  AEC  Aug.  1 ,  1967. Term  would  end  June  30,  1970. 
Dr.  Seaborg’s current  term would  expire June  30,  1968. President  also 
would nominate  James T.  Ramey, AEC  member  since  1962, to  new  five- 
year term expiring June 30,1969.  (PD, 7/1/68,1012-3) 
*  U S  patent  No.  3,390,336  was  issued  to  Dr.  Michael  J.  DiToro,  Vice 
President  for  Science  of  Cardion  Electronics,  for  Adapticom,  instru- 
ment  that  corrected  multipath  reception  o r   time-spread responsible  for 
fuzziness and consequent errors in high-speed radio  and telephone com- 
munications and eliminated ghosts from facsimile transmission.  (Jones, 
N Y T ,  6/15/68,49) 
*  Senate by  vote of  78  to  3 passed  H.R.  16703, authorizing  construction  a t  
military  installations,  including  funds  for  ABM  land  acquisition  and 
construction. Approximately $1.2  billion  for  Sentinel program  was  in- 
cluded  in  various budget  requests of  DOD  and AEC  for  FY  1969. During 
final  day  of  debate  Sentinel  system  advocates  had  warned  more  of 
U.S.S.R.  missile  threat  and  less  of  Red  Chinese  missile  threat  which 
Sentinel had been  designed to  counter.  ( C R ,  6/25/68,  S7721;  W New s ,  
6 /25 /68 ,4 )  
June  26:  Cosmos  C C X X l X   was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  from  Plesetsk  into 
orbit  with  328-km  (203.8-mi)  apogee,  222-km  (137.9-mi)  perigee, 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  July  4. 
89.8-min  period,  and  72.9 
( S BD ,  6 /27 /68 ,286 ;   GSFC SSR ,  6/30/68,7/15/68) 
Phoebus  2A  nuclear  rocket  reactor  was  successfully tested  by  NASA  and 
AEC  a t   Jackass Flats,  Nev.  During  32-min ground  test,  reactor  reached 
peak  power  level  of  approximately  4,200  mw,  operating  for  about  12 
min  a t  above 4,000 mw.  Power  density  exceeded that  required  for  75,- 
000-lb-thrust NERVA  (Nuclear  Engine  for  Rocket Vehicle  Application) . 
Test was  part  of  NASA/AEC  nuclear  rocket program.  (AEC/NASA  Release 
W News ,  6/27/68,3) 
J-148; 

143 

June  26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

NASA  issued  Apollo  Status  Summary.  I n   preparation  for  first  manned 
Apollo  flight,  Apollo  7  spacecraft  command  module  ( C M )   and  service 
module  ( SM )   had  been  mated  in  KSC  altitude chamber  to  confirm com- 
patible  operation  systems.  Saturn  IB  launch  vehicle  2nd-stage  engine 
was  being  modified  to  strengthen  propellant  feed  lines  to  augmented 
spark  igniter.  Apollo/Saturn  503 mission might  be  first manned Saturn 
V  flight. 
Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D.  Brand,  and Joe H.  Engle had 
successfully completed eight-day vacuum chamber test  of  Apollo  2TV-1 
CM  and  SM  a t  MSC  June 24. All  tests necessary  to  help  verify Apollo for 
first  manned  flight  had  been  completed, with  review  of  test  data  in 
progress. 
Last  of  seven  scheduled  verification  tests  of  modified  Apollo  earth 
landing  system had  been  postponed  to  complete analysis  of  all  possible 
test  conditions  before  drop  of  13,000-lb  full-scale  Apollo  CM   from 
aircraft  at  Naval  Air  Facility,  El  Centro,  Calif.  Test  would 
simulate severe landing  condition  using  one  of  two  drogue  parachutes 
and  two  of  three  main  parachutes.  Ultimate  load  test  of  two  modified 
Apollo  drogue parachutes  in  reefed  condition  was  scheduled no  earlier 
than  June  27.  Repeat  of  unsuccessful test,  i t   would  be  conducted  from 
13,OO-lb parachute  test  vehicle  a t   aircraft  altitude  of  46,000  ft.  (Text; 
UPI,  W  Po s t ,   6/22/68,  A8;  SBD ,   6/25/68,  270;  6/27/68,  285) 
I n   GSFC tests  using  Omega  Position  Location  Equipment  ( O P L E ) ,   track 
of  specially  equipped  automobile  had  been  located  repeatedly  within 
1,000  f t   of  its  actual  route  on  Baltimore-Washington  Parkway  by 
A t s   111,  in  22,300-mi-altitude orbit.  Satellite  had  also  tracked  and 
located  boat  in  Chesapeake  Bay,  NASA  calibration  aircraft,  and  Coast 
and  Geodetic  Survey  ship,  D iscoverer ,   in  Caribbean.  Meteorologists 
believed OPLE  system, designed  primarily  as meteorological  experiment 
for  tracking  balloons  and  floating buoys,  might  produce  new  data  on 
wind  circulation  in  atmosphere and  its  effect on  weather.  (NASA   Release 
68-111;  AP,  B Sun, 6/27/68) 
NASA  awarded  Teledyne  Systems  Co.  $1,358,728  incentive  contract  to 
design  and  construct  prototype  airborne  computer  unit  for  Centaur 
launch  vehicle.  NASA  would  have  option  to  purchase  five  additional 
units, support equipment, and  spare parts  for  $759,872. Contract would 
be managed  by  L ~ R C .  (LeRC   Release 68-44) 
June  27:  NASA  successfully launched  four-stage  Pacemaker  rocket  carrying 
52-lb  spacecraft  from  NASA  Wallops  Station  to  test  performance  of 
phenolic  nylon  charring  ablation  material,  foamed  quartz  material, 
MOD   v  ablation  material,  and  foamed  Teflon  material.  Spacecraft 
reached  7,200  mph  and  was  lowered  into  Atlantic  by  parachute  after 
four-minute flight. Recovery helicopter retrieved  payload,  which  would 
be  evaluated  at  LaRC.  (WS   Release  68-12) 
House  Appropriations  Committee  struck  all  funds  for  SST  development 
from Administration’s FY  1969 budget and  asked  return  of  $30-million 
carryover  to  Treasury.  President  Johnson  had  requested  authori- 
zation  of  $223  million.  Cut  w a s   unlikely  to  postpone  development  of 
project,  which  would  be  continued  during  FY  1969  entirely  with 
carryover  funds.  First  flight had  been  scheduled  for  first quarter,  1972. 
( C R ,  6/27/68,  H5766-7;  Hoffman, W  P o s t ,  6/28/68,  A3) 

144 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

June  27 
0  NASA  awarded  one-year  $1,250,000  cost-plus-award-fee contract  with  two 
one-year renewal  options to  LTV  Service Technology Corp.  for  computer 
support services a t  ERC.  ( ERC  Release 68-9) 
MSC  engineers  Edwin  Samfield  and  William  C.  Huber  were  granted 
patent  No.  3,389,877  for  inflatable  tether  to  connect  orbiting  spacecraft 
o r  to connect  astronauts and spacecraft.  Tether, which became semirigid 
when  inflated  to  avoid  problems  of  flexible tether,  consisted of  nylon 
tube  with  aluminum  end  pieces  and  shock-absorbing  struts  for  attach- 
ment  to  spacecraft.  I t   could  be  folded  and  stowed  in  end  piece  and 
expanded  with  compressed  gas  when  needed.  Prototypes  were  being 
constructed at MSC.  (Patent Off  P IO ;   Jones, N Y T ,  6/29/68,  37) 
0  Jet  flying belt  designed  to  propel wearer  for minutes  over multimile range 
a t   speeds  from  hovering  to  70  mph  and  at  varying  altitudes  was  de- 
scribed  by  manufacturer,  Bell  Aerosystems  Co.,  at  Washington,  D.C., 
press  briefing.  Miniature  turbojet  engine  using  kerosene  fuel  was 
designed  by  Williams  Research  Corp.  for  DOD  Advanced  Research 
Projects Agency.  (Schmeck,  N Y T ,  6/28/68,  1 8 )  
0  Westinghouse  Defense  and  Space  Center  engineer  Paul  J.  IGefer  had 
received  A IM   annual  award  for  “outstanding  contribution  to  aerospace 
sciences or  technology”  for  overall  mechanical  design  and  development 
of  Gemini  rendezvous  radar   system  and   for  development  of  lunar  TV 
camera  for  use  in  Apollo  series.  (Westinghouse Release;  AP,  W  S t a r ,  
7/5/68,  A3) 
Soviet  Foreign  Minister  Andrey  A.  Gromyko  announced  at  Supreme 
Soviet  meeting  in Moscow  that  U.S.S.R.  was  ready  to  open  discussions 
with  U.S.  on  mutual  limitation  of  antiballistic  missile  defense  systems. 
U.S.S.R.,  he  said,  was  anxious to  sign  immediately  international  docu- 
ment  prohibiting  use  of  nuclear  weapons  and  to  reach  agreement  on 
mutual restriction  and subsequent reduction of  strategic nuclear vehicles. 
(UP I ,   W  News ,   6/27/68,  3 ;  Anderson,  N Y T ,   6/28/68,  1) 
June  28:  NASA   test  pilots  L /C   Emil  Sturmthal  and  Col.  Joseph  F.  Cotton 
flew  XB-70A 
to  39,400-ft  altitude  and  mach  1.23  in  flight  from  Ed- 
wards  AFB.  Purpose was  to  check  exciter  vane  function,  aeroelasticity, 
stability,  control,  and  gust  and  canard  loads  and  determine ground  ef- 
fects during load  approaches.  (XB-70  Pro j  Off) 
NASA  announced  probable  spring  1969  launch  of  Nimbus  B2  to  replace 
Nimbus  B  experimpntal  weather  satellite  intentionally  destroyed  after 
launch  May  18. Primary  meteorological  objective  would  be  to  obtain 
data  from  advanced  sensors  to  demonstrate  infrared  sounding  tech- 
niques  fo r  determination  of  temperature profiles. Replacement mission 
would  cost  1/3 of  $61.9-million  cost  of  Nimbus  B  and would  eliminate 
critical  21-mo  gap  in  U S .   meteorology  satellite  program.  Nimbus  I, 
launched  Aug.  28,  1964+, operated  26   days.  Nimbus  11,  launched  May 
15,  1966,  was  still  transmitting,  but  with  inoperable  tape  recorders. 
(NASA   Release  68-114) 
*  Third  anniversary  of  beginning  of  commercial  service  by  ComSatCorp’s 
Intelsat  I  (Ea r l y   Bird), launched  April  6,  1965.  Service  had  been 
inaugurated  by  President  Johnson  in  25-min,  six-nation  conference 
call  with  European  officials.  (ComSatCorp Release  68-31;  A&A  65)  
0  Presidential  memorandum  advised  agency  and  department  heads  to 
achieve  provisions  of  P.L.  90-364,  Revenue  and  Expenditure  Control 

145 

June  28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Act  of  1968, calling  for  reduction  in  Federal  spending  and  lending  of 
a t   least  $6  billion  below  original  1969  fiscal estimates  and  restriction 
of  hiring  until  Federal  civilian  employment was reduced  to  June  1966 
level.  (PD,  7/8/68,  1041) 
NASA  awarded  three-year,  $20,126,224  cost-plus-award-fee contract  to 
Bendix  Field  Engineering  Corp.  f o r   maintenance  and  operation  of 
Satellite Tracking  and Data  Acquisition Network  ( STADAN)  facilities a t  
GSFC; Fort  Myers,  Fla. ; Lima,  Peru;  Tananarive, Malagasy  Republic; 
Mojave, Calif.;  Quito,  Ecuador;  and  Santiago,  Chile. 
NASA  also  awarded  $27.6  million  cost-plus-incentive-award-fee con- 
tract  to   TRW  systems group for  work  on  mission trajectory  control pro- 
gram  and  Apollo  spacecraft  systems  analysis  program  for  MSC.  (NASA  
Releases 68-113,68-115) 
Wull  Street  Journal  reported  interview  with  Prof.  Edwin  L.  Resler,  Jr., 
Director  of  Cornel1 Univ.  Graduate  School  of  Aerospace  Engineering, 
on  possibility  of  reducing  sonic boom  created  by  supersonic transports 
to  tolerable level by  changing design of  engines for  big  aircraft  to  slow 
down  expansion  of  exhaust  stream.  “We  can  . . . reduce  the  shock 
wave  effect  and  its  consequent boom  to  a  tolerable  level  so  that  over- 
land  flights  of  supersonic  transports  would  be  feasible,”  Prof.  Resler 
said.  ( WSJ,  6/28/68) 
House  Appropriations  Committee  released  hearings  on  DOD  appropria- 
tions  for  FY 1969 which helped explain why  Vietnam war had  produced 
strain on  President  Johnson’s budget. USAF  was  nyw  paying $2.4  million 
for  single  rescue  helicopter;  during  World  War  11,  each  B-17  aircraft 
that  had  bombed  Germany  had  cost  $190,000  and  each  B-29  used 
over Japan  had  cost $635,000. Government had  bought 200 World War 
I1  fighters  for  the  $1.1 million  i t   cost  USAF  for  technical  manuals  for 
single  type  of  aircraft  in  1968.  USN  was  spending  $30,000  for  single 
torpedo  and  $20.3  million  for  ammunition  for  battleship  U.S.S.  New 
Jersey  to  fire  a t  Vietnam  shore  targets.  I t  was  requesting  $51.8  million 
for  one-year supply of  aerial targets.  Super  Jolly helicopter which  USAF 
was  introducing  in  Vietnam  wa s   twice  as  expensive  a s   predecessor, 
Jolly  Green  Giant, and  could carry  60 passengers o r   18,500-lb cargo  at 
195  knots.  F-111  was  being  produced  a t   $8  million  each;  C-5AY 
world’s  largest  aircraft,  had  a  unit  cost  of  $25  million,  with  USAF  re- 
questing  120 aircraft.  (Transcript;  AP,  B Sun,  6/30/68,  2 )  
June 30:  Lockheed-Georgia  Co.  test  pilot  Leo  J.  Sullivan  successfully  flew 
C-5  Galaxy,  world’s  largest  aircraft,  on  94-min  first  test  flight  from 
Dobbins AFB  over Georgia countryside a t  speeds ranging  from  143-mph 
takeoff  to  230  mph  and  reaching  10,000-ft altitude.  No  attempt  was 
made  to  reach  maximum  speed  of  550  mph.  C-5,  powered  by  fou r  
TF-39  turbofan  jet  engines, each  delivering 41,000  lb  of  thrust,  could 
carry  265,000-1b  payload  over  2,875-mi  range  or  100,000-lb payload 
over  6,325-mi  range  at  cruising  speed  of  506  mph.  Military  version 
would  carry  350 fully equipped troops.  USAF  had  ordered  58.  “We  like 
to   talk  about a  commercial plane similar  to  the  C-5  which  could  carry 
nearly  1,000 passengers,”  said  Lockheed-Georgia President  T.  R .   May, 
but  he  found  idea  of  carrying  both  passengers  and  freight  attractive. 
“We  have  preliminary  plans  for  airplanes  weighing  over  a  million 
pounds.  But  it  is  fairly  clear  that  the  world  is  not  quite  ready  for  a 

146 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1968 

June  30 

Jun e   30:  UsAF-Lockheed  C-5  Galaxy,  world‘s  Largest  aircraft,  takes  o f f  f r om   Dobbins 
AFB  on  first  tes t   flight.  C-5  reached  230  m p h   and  10,000-foot  altitude  on  %-m inu te  
f l igh t ,   not  a t temp t ing   ma x imum   speed  of  550  rnph.  ( A F S C   PHOTO) 

commercial  plane  of  this  size.’’  ( A F S C   Newsreview,  6 / 6 8 ,   1 ; Witkin, 
N Y T ,  7/1/68,  1 ;  AP, W  Star, 7/1/68,  1; AFHF  Newsletter,  8 /68 ,   1 )  
’ Dr.  Robert Jastrow,  Director  of  GSFC  Institute for  Space Studies, reviewed 
Arthur  C.  Clarke’s  T h e   Promise  of  Space.  Clarke  had  described 
chronology  of  Apollo  decision as  “politics and  astronautics combined” 
and  had  written:  “The  verdict  of  history  may  well  be  that  the  United 
States  made  the  correct  decision  even  if  from  dubious  motives.”  Dr. 
Jastrow  said  Clarke  “seems  to  betray  a  point  of  view  that  the  primary 
purpose  of  the  space  program  is,  or  should  be,  the  exploitation  of  its 
scientif;c potential  and  the  search  fo r  knowledge  in  the  space  around 
the  earth  and  on  the  other  bodies  of  the  solar  system. 
“My  own  view  is  that  he  is  mistaken.  Spacecraft  have  yielded 
important  scientific discoveries . . . but  it  seems clear  to  me  that  pres- 
ervation  of  national  security,  and  not  scientific  research  per  se,  was 
the motivation  for  the Kennedy  proposal.  Kennedy  acted  out  of  a  deep 
gut  instinct,  shared  by  the  Congress  and  the  American  people,  that 
the  United  States had  been  presented  with  a  major  challenge  to  which 
it must respond  effectively or  pay  a  heavy  penalty. The  decision on  the 

147 

June  30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

expanded  space program  may  have  been  accelerated  by  the  events  of 
the  spring of  1961, but  the Soviet challenge . . . was  permanent.” 
Dr.  Jastrow  saw  promise  of  space  as  “dollars-and-cents  return  in 
increased productivity  in  the  U.S.”  To  Clarke  i t  was  “the  universe-or 
nothing.”  ( W  Post,  Book  Wo r ld ,  6/30/68,  1 ;  CR ,  7/9/68,  E6290) 
During  Jun e :   Last  of  11  JC-130  Hercules  turboprop  aircraft  left  Patrick 
AFB,  Fla.,  to  be  replaced  by  larger,  high-speed  jet  EC-135N  Apollo 
Range  Instrumentation  aircraft.  With  complex  electronic  instrumenta- 
tion, Air  Force Eastern Test Range Hercules had  supported hundreds  of 
Cape Kennedy  space  and  missile  launches,  including  Atlas,  Titan,  Po- 
laris,  Minuteman,  Saturn,  Mercury,  Gemini,  and  Apollo.  When  fully 
operational  in  1961,  they  had  replaced  earlier  C-54s.  (AFSC Newsre- 
view,  6/68,  4) 
Scientists were  pressing NASA  to  prepare  “Grand  Tour”  mission  of  succes- 
sive unpowered  flybys  of  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Uranus,  and  Neptune  to  take 
advantage  of  configuration  which  occurred  once  in  179 yr.  Alignment 
of  planets would  permit  trip  time  as  low  as  8 yr  rather  than  30.  Next 
opportunity  would  occur  during  1975-1981  period,  with  1978  and 
1979 regarded  as  best  launch  years.  Tour  was   described  by  Lockheed 
Missiles &  Space Go.  engineer Brent W.  Silver  in Journal  of  Spacecraft 
and Rockets  as “feasible and worthwhile.”  It would be  “waste of  natural 
resources  to  pass  up  this  opportunity,”  he  said.  Studies  indicated 
mission  could  be  mounted  with  existing  technology,  but  NASA,  because 
of  budgetary  cuts,  had  yet  to  authorize  it.  JPL   study  had  postulated 
nine-year tour  including  use  of  electric propulsion  for  sustained power 
between planets. M IT   project, beginning with  exploratory  Jupiter  probes 
in  1972, would  cost  $80  million  annually  over  17  yr  and  would  use 
1,000-lb spacecraft  launched  by  Titan  111-C  with  Centaur  upper  stage. 
( J /Spa c e c ra f t  and  Rockets, 6/68,633-7;  Wilford, N Y T ,  6/20/68,  1 6 )  
0  Evert Clark  in Astronautics  & Aeronautics  praised Report  to  the  Congress 
f r om  the  President  of  the   United States:  United States  Aeronautics and 
Space  Activities,  1967  [see  Jan.  301.  I t   was  “small  encyclopedia, re- 
vealing information  that  appears  nowhere else  in  the  public  record  . . . 
a  valuable  addition  to  the  shelf  of  the  careful  collector.”  Presidential 
reports,  he  said,  served  “as  signposts  for  the  road  ahead  as  well  as 
irreplaceable records  of  the  recent  past”  and  provided  “only  complete, 
official  accounting  of  American  appropriations  and  expenditures  for 
military  and  civilian  space  since  1955.”  ( A & A ,  6/68,  6 )  
Cosmonaut Valentina Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, who  became first woman  to 
fly  in  space  when  she  orbited  earth  June  16-19,  1963,  on  board 
U.S.S.R.’s  Vos tok   VZ,  was  elected  President  of  the  Presidium  of  the 
Soviet Women’s  Committee.  (Moscow  News,  6/22-29/68,  1) 

148 

July  1948 

July  1 :   Eighth  anniversary  of  NASA’s largest  Center, Marshall  Space Flight 
Center.  I t   became  operational  July  1, 1960, with  4,400  employees  and 
facilities  valued  a t   estimated  $100  million.  On  eighth  anniversary 
MSFC  had  6,500  employees. Plant  value  was  estimated a t  $400  million, 
with  real property values accounting for $140 million and capital equip- 
ment  for  remaining $260 million.  Achievements during  first  eight years 
included development and  successful  flight  of  Saturn  I, Saturn  IB,  and 
Saturn V  launch vehicles.  (MSFC   Release 68-143) 
McDonnell Douglas Corp. received $9,666,800  NASA  contract  for  10  addi- 
tional  Improved  (Long-Tank)  Delta  launch  vehicles  for  use  in  variety 
of  launches,  including  TOS-E  for  ESSA  in  August,  Intelsat  I11  for  Com- 
SatCorp  in  September,  IDSCP/A  for  DOD   in  May  1969,  HEOS  (Highly 
Eccentric  Orbiting  Satellite)  for  ESRO  in  late  1968,  and  ISIS-A 
(Inter- 
national Satellite for  Ionospheric Studies)  in late 1968. North American 
Rockwell Corp. was  awarded $6,968,038 contract extension for material, 
facilities,  manpower  and  equipment  for  XB-70  flight  operations,  and 
General Electric C o .  was awarded $1,957,323 extension for  maintenance 
of  XB-70  engines. Both  extensions covered  July  1, 1968, through  June 
30,1969.  (NASA   Release 68-116;  FRC  Release  19-68) 
At  signing  in Washington, D.C.,  of  nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty,  Presi- 
dent  Johnson said:  “The  conclusion  of  this  treaty  encourages  the  hope 
that  other  steps may  be taken  toward  a  peaceful world. And  . . . I  have 
described  this  treaty  as  the  most  important  international  agreement 
since the beginning of  the nuclear age. . . . After  long seasons of  patient 
and painstaking negotiation, w e  have concluded just within the past  five 
years,  the  limited  test  ban  treaty,  the  outer  space  treaty,  the  treaty 
creating  a  nuclear-free zone  in  Latin  America. And  the march  of  man- 
kind  is  toward  the  summit  and  not  the  chasm.” 
Agreement had  also been  reached between US. and U.S.S.R.,  Presi- 
dent Johnson announced, “to enter  in the nearest future into discussions 
on  the  limitation  and  the  reduction  of  both  offensive  strategic  nuclear 
weapons  delivery  systems  and  systems  of  defense  against  ballistic 
missiles.” 
At  Moscow  signing  of  treaty,  Soviet  Premier  Alexey  N.  Kosygin 
called agreement a  “major  success for  the cause of  peace.”  He  disclosed 
contents  of  U.S.S.R.  memorandum  to  all  nations  proposing  nine-point 
disarmament and arms control program and called on  18-nation Geneva 
disarmament  conference  to  take  up  proposal.  ( P D ,  6 /8 /68 ;   Sherman, 
W  S tar ,   7/1/68,  A l ;   UPI,  7/1/68;  Grose, NYT ,   7/2/68,  1, 2 )  
e Sudden affirmative response by U.S.S.R.  to President  Johnson’s  longstand- 
ing  offer  for  discussion  of  limiting  missiles  may  have  substantial 
meaning,  said  William  S.  White  in  Washington Po s t .   “If  this  should 
turn  out  to  be  the  case  i t   would  be  ironic,  indeed.  I t   would  mean  that 
only after  renouncing his  office had  the President been  able  to  convince 

149 

July  1 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
the  Russians  . . . that  this  country  was  honestly  prepared  to  make  ac- 
commodations with MOSCOW, SO long  as they were realistic  and enforcea- 
ble  accommodations  to  reduce  a  possibility  of  nuclear  holocaust  that 
still  hangs  over  the  world  and  will  so  hang whatever  may  o r   may  not 
happen  in  the Vietnams.”  (W P o s t ,   7/1/68,  M I )  
Boeing  Co.  submitted  SST  progress  report  to  FAA which  indicated  Gov- 
ernment  might  have  to  guarantee  $2  billion  in   production  costs,  de- 
pending  on  ultimate  number  of  aircraft  sold.  Manufacturer  estimated 
production  and  certification could  cost  $2.96  billion,  assuming produc- 
tion  of  500  aircraft.  Airline  advance  payments  could  account  for  $905 
million;  suppliers,  including  Boeing  and  General  Electric  Co . ,   could 
raise  $595 million,  leaving  $1.5  billion  in  capital  to  be  acquired  from 
other  sources. Boeing  said  this capital  probably would  not  be  available 
unless  Government  guaranteed  repayment.  Total  cost  of  each  aircraft 
was  estimated  at  $41.2  million,  with  probable  50%  advance  payment 
by  airlines  required. Since first  flight  tests  were  planned  for  September 
1972,  further  studies  would  be  conducted,  Boeing  said,  before  final 
recommendations  on  SST  financing  were  made.  (Taylor,  Am   Av ,  
9 / 1 6 / 6 8 , 2 2 4 ;   AP, B Sun, 9/17/68,  A9 )  
*  Resignation  of  Dr.  Mac  C.  Adams,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for 
Advanced  Research  and Technology,  announced  May  21,  became  effec- 
tive. He rejoined Avco Corp., where  he had  worked  from  1955 to  1965, 
as  Corporate  Vice  President  and   Deputy  Group  Executive  of  Govern- 
ment  Products and  Services  Group.  ( N Y T ,  7/2/68,  63)  
NASA  appointed  M /G   Daniel  F.  Callahan  (USAF,  Ret.), Manager  of  Florida 
Missile Operations  for  Chrysler  Corp.,  to  position  of  Deputy  Director 
of  Administration, Kennedy  Space  Center, vacated  in  October  1967 by 
Frederic  Miller,  who  became  Director  of  Installation  Support.  ( KSC 
Release KSC-331-68) 
White  House  announced  that  Gen.  William  F.  McKee  (USAF,  Ret.)  had 
submitted his  resignation  as  head  of  FAA,  effective July  31. There  was 
no  indication  of  successor.  ( W  News,  7/2/68,  12 ;   WS!,  7/2/68) 
New  subdivision  of  A i r   Force  Systems Command,  Air  Force Human  Re- 
sources Laboratory  (AFHRL )  , became  operational  a t  Brooks  AFB,  Tex., 
as focal point  fo r  USAF  R&D  effort to  satisfy  technology  needs  in human 
resources  education,  training,  and  management.  I t   would  also  provide 
technical  and  management  assistance  in  support  of  studies,  analyses, 
development  planning  activities,  acquisition,  test  evaluation,  modifica- 
tion,  o r   operation  of  aerospace  systems  and  related  equipment.  (AFSC  
Release 93.68) 
0  Commenting  on  G 5  maiden  flight,  New  Yo rk   Times editorial  noted: 
“Of  the  many  technological  advances  required  fo r   yesterday’s  aviation 
breakthrough,  the most  important was  the  quantum  leap  in   jet  propul- 
sion capabilities represented  by  the C-5’s  motors.  The enormous size  of 
the  new  plane  forced  extraordinary  use  of  light  metals  . . . to  keep 
down  weight,  I t   also  posed  unprecedented  manufacturing  problems 
whose  brilliantly  successful  solution  was  proved  by  yesterday’s  path- 
breaking flight. 
the world,  for that matter 
“But  will  the airports of  this country-and 
capable  of  meeting  the  challenges  . . . ?   By  1978,  “it  may  be 
-be 
commonplace  for  a  few  enormous  planes  landing  minutes  apart  to  de- 

150 

J.1,: 1 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
posit  5,000  o r   10,000  passengers  on  the  ground  almost  simultane- 
ously.  . . . Now  is  none  too  soon  to  begin  planning  for  handling 
such  masses  of  people.  . . . The  vast  size  of  the  giant  new  planes 
ahead  is  dwarfed  only  by  the  enormity  of  the  unprecedented  problems 
they pose.”  ( N Y T ,  7 /1 /68 ,30)  
Surveyor  Project  Office  at  JPL  officially  closed  after  directing  one  of 
U S ’ S  most  successful  space  exploration  programs.  Program  director, 
Howard  H.  Haglund,  recipient  of  1968  Astronautics  Engineer  Award, 
had  been  accepted  as  Alfred  P.  Sloan  Fellow  and  would  attend  Stan- 
ford  Univ.  (JPL   PIO;  SBD,  7/8/68,  10) 
July 2:  USAF  had  attributed March  3  UFO  reports over  eastern  US., includ- 
ing  70  eyewitness  accounts,  to  reentry  of  booster  rocket  or  other 
launching  components  of  Zond  ZV  spacecraft  launched  by  U.S.S.R. 
March 2 on apparently unsuccessful mission. Despite March flurry, there 
had  been  sharp  decline  in  UFO  reports;  they  were  reaching  USAF  a t  
one-fourth the  monthly rate  of  1967. As  of  previous weekend, 156 UFO 
reports had  been  received  since Jan.  1, 1968; 21 were attributed  to  as- 
tronomical  objects, 19  to  aircraft,  10 to  balloons,  8 to  satellites, and  22 
to  other known  causes. There were 35  cases pending  and 41  as yet  uni- 
dentified.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,  7 /2 /68 ,1 )  
West  Germany’s  major  aerospace  companies-Messerschmitt-Bolkow, 
Vereinigte Flugtechnische Werke  of  Bremen, Hamburger  Flugzeugbau, 
and  Dornier-formed 
subsidiary  to  coordinate  all  long-range  aircraft 
and  space projects.  They  met  under  auspices  of  West  German  govern- 
ment which had  been  urging  greater  concentration of  the  nation’s  aero- 
space  capacity.  Experts  termed  new  organization  nucleus  of  eventual 
merger  of  the  four  companies to  increase West  German competition in 
world markets.  (Shabecoff, N Y T ,  7 /3 /68 ,12)  
NASA  awarded  contracts  valued  a t   $579,000  to  Lockheed  Missiles  & 
Space Co.  and $568,313 to Northrop  Systems Laboratories  to build  and 
test  nonflight demonstration  models  for  Orbiting  Primate  Experiment, 
as  continuation  of  preliminary  conceptual design  studies  made  during 
1967. Research had  been  begun to  gain  better  understanding  of  physio- 
logical changes anticipated  in  long manned  flights.  To  assess  effects  of 
weightlessness on  relatively high  order  mammal,  NASA  was  studying  ex- 
periment  which  might  place  two  unrestrained  rhesus  monkeys  in  orbit 
and  return  them  for  detailed  examination  after  extended period  to  iso- 
late  weightlessness  as  a  variable  while  maintaining  all  other  factors 
near  normality.  Postflight  examinations  could  reveal  changes  resulting 
from  absence  of  gravity.  Orbiting  Primate  Experiment  was  part  of 
NASA’s Human  Factors  Systems  program  to  provide  technology  re- 
quired  to  support man  in  space during  extended periods.  (NASA  Release 
68-119) 
0  Univ.  of  Virginia  announced  it  would  use  $100,000  NASA  grant  to  
finance  construction  of  40-in  astrometric  telescope  at  its  observatory 
south  of  Charlottesville, Va.  Additional  funding  would  come  from  es- 
tate  of  L a n d e r  McCormick, who provided  funds  for  its 26-in telescope 
built in  1882. ( AP, W Star, 7/3/68,  A20) 
US. patent  No.  3,390,853 was  issued to  North  American Rockwell Corp. 
mechanical  engineer  Raymond  P.  Wykes  for  inflatable  drag  balloon 
(ballute)  to  be  released  behind  reentry  vehicle  or  Mting-body  vehicle 
a t  end  of  a  cable which pulled  spacecraft’s wings  out  from  its  body  on 

151 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

July  2 
reentry  and  slowed  i t   down  for  landing.  Patent  No.  3,390,492  was  is- 
sued  to  General  Electric  Co.  engineer  Edwin  T.  Myskowski  for  glass 
deep-submergence module in  titanium  alloy  frame usable  as  laboratory 
or  living quarters  on  ocean  floor  in  anchored  or  mobile  form.  (Patent 
Off  P I O ;  Jones, N Y T ,  7 /6 /68 ,25)  
0  N. Whitney Matthews,  Chief  of  GSFC’S  Spacecraft  Technology Div.,  died 
in  Alexandria, Va.,  at  age  52.  Pioneer  in  space  research,  he  had  been 
with  NASA  10  yr  and  had  helped  see Goddard  through  planning  stages 
He  had  worked  with  Projects  Vanguard,  Ariel,  and  Echo  and  with 
number  of  Explorer  programs.  He  had  specialized  in  electronic  and 
solid-state instrumentation  and  control circuitry.  ( W Post,  7/5/68,  B8) 
0  In   editorial  critical  of  June  25  NAS  report  on  sonic  boom,  Washington 
Evening  S tar   said:  “There  comes  a  time  when  the  convenience  of  the 
few  and  the  profit of  the  even  fewer  simply have to  be made  secondary 
to  the  sanity of  the  many. That time is arriving  in  the  sonic boom  busi- 
ness.  There  is  no  imaginable  excuse  for  unleashing  the  boom  against 
defenseless citizens.”  (W  S ta r ,  7/2/68,  3)  
Ju l y  3 :  President  Johnson  signed H.R.  15856, NASA  FY  1969 Authorization 
[see  June  181.  ( P D ,  
Act,  which  had  been  designated  P.L.  90-373 
7/15/68,  1099;  NASA  L A R   VII/71) 
0  Wash ing ton  Post  editorial  commented  on  complaints  of  scientists  about 
deceleration of Federal funding for  R&D. Since Federal expenditures had 
risen  every  year,  there  would  not  be  “much  lay  sympathy  for  scientists 
who  complain  they  are  not  getting  their  annual  increase  of  15  per 
cent.  . . . Rather  than  crying  ‘crisis’ . . . scientists ought  to  accept  an 
ongoing  obligation  to  help  public  officials devise better  ways  of  decid- 
ing  how  to  support  the  level  of  science  that  the  national  welfare  re- 
quires.”  ( W  Post, 7/3/68) 
Did  it  matter  in  1968,  asked  New  Y o r k   Times editorial,  that  Italian  as- 
tronomer  Galileo  after  three  centuries  might  be  cleared  of  heresy  by 
commission  authorized  by  the  Pope?  “His  astronomical  theories  and 
discoveries  have  long  since  been  accepted;  in  a  real  sense,  i t   is  the 
spirit  of  scientific inquiry  that  w i l l   be  ‘retried’  by  the  Vatican  Tribu- 
nal. “.  . . it  still matters  in  1968  that  the  intellectuals, the  scientists and 
the  students  be  granted  full  freedom  of  inquiry  and  participation  in 
modern  life and  government. That  is  the  meaning  of  Galileo,  the  indi- 
vidual and heretic, for today.”  ( N Y T ,  6 /3 /68)  
Senate approved  reappointment of  Gen.  John  P.  McConnell  as  Air  Force 
Chief  of  Staff  effective  Aug.  1,  1968.  ( C R ,  7/3/68;  58200;  W  Po s t ,  
7 /4 /68 ,4)  
Aluminum Co.  of  America and Ocean  Science and  Engineering,  Inc.,  an- 
nounced  they  would  invest  more  than  $5  million  in  Alcoa  Seaprobe 
project  calling  for  construction  of  ship  permitting  search,  science,  and 
salvage work  at  depths  to  6,000  f t  and  able  to  hoist  to  surface  loads 
weighing  up  to  200  tons.  Planned  for  launch  by  May  1970,  vessel 
would  search  Ocean  floor  by  lowering  streamlined  sensor,  carrying 
side-looking sonar,  at  end  of  long  semirigid  pipe.  (W   Star,  7/3/68, 
A2 ) 
’ Jet  ProPulSion  Laboratory  announced  appointment  of  Dr.  Robert  V. 
Meghreblian, Manager of  JPL   Space Sciences Div.,  to  newly  established 
Post  of  Deputy  Assistant  Laboratory  Director  for  Technical Divisions. 

152 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
July  3 
Dr.  Donald  P.  Burcham,  Deputy  Manager  of  Space  Sciences  Div., 
would succeed him.  ( JPL Release) 
*  French  government  announced  imminent  start  of  new  atomic  test  series 
in Pacific  amid  indications  France would  attempt  her  first explosion of 
hydrogen  bomb  in  late  summer o r  early  autumn. Bulletin warned  ships 
to  avoid danger zone around Mururoa  Atoll,  about 750 m i   southeast of 
Tahiti.  ( N Y T ,  7 /4 /68 ,1 )  
*  French  Armed  Forces Ministry  announced  successful testing  of  two   new 
long-range ballistic  missiles during preparation  for  Pacific  nuclear  test 
series.  First  missile,  sea-to-ground, two-stage,  remote-controlled rocket, 
would  be  used  on  France's  first  nuclear  submarine,  to   enter  service in 
early 1970.  (Reuters, N Y T ,  7/5/68,  13; W  Po s t ,   7/5/68,  A27) 
July  4-8:  NASA  launched  417-lb Explorer  X X X V I I I ,  Radio  Astronomy  Ex- 
(RAE-A)  , from  WTR  by  three-stage  Thrust-Augmented  Delta 
plorer 
booster  in   first  of  two  missions  to  measure  frequency,  intensity,  and 
source direction  of  radio  signals  from solar,  galactic,  and  extragalactic 
sources. 
Spacecraft  entered  elliptical  transfer  orbit,  where  it  was  spin-stabi- 
lized  with  3,656.1-mi  (5,884-km)  apogee,  397.7-mi  (640-km )perigee, 
157-min period,  and  59.4' 
inclination.  Apogee motor  was  fired  July  7, 
placing  Explorer  XXXV I I I   into  planned  near-circular  orbit  v i t h  
3,654.3-mi  (5,881-km)  apogee,  3,641.2-mi  (5,860-km)  perigee,  224.4- 
min  period,  and  59.2'  inclination.  On  July  8, yq-yo despin  mechanism 
reduced spin rate  €rom 9 3  rpm to 2.8  rpm. As  primary  objective, space- 
craft  would  measure  intensity  and  direction  of  radio  signals  from 
cosmic  sources  in  0.5- to  10-mhz  range,  not  normally  observable from 
earth.  Secondary  objectives were  to  place  spacecraft  into  circular  orbit 
of  about 3,728-mi  (6,000-km)  altitude  and to  obtain useful data  during 
first 30  days  in  orbit,  for  detailed  study  of  dynamic  spectra  and  decay 
rates  of  sporadic radio  bursts.  Spacecraft was  expected  to  provide  first 
low-frequency radio  map  of  Milky Way  and  additional  data  on  low-fre- 
quency signals from Jupiter and sun. 
Explorer  XXXV I I I   was  equipped  with  unique  antenna  system  con- 
sisting  of  two  antennas  made  of  four  s - i n - d i a  booms  which  could  be 
deployed up  to  750 f t  each, to  form X-shaped array.  Configuration was 
to  be  gravity-gradient  stabilized  [see  July  221.  Spacecraft  was  also 
equipped with dar,per  boom,  dipole antenna,  and TV  cameras  to moni- 
tor spacecraft performance and determine source of  radio  signals moni- 
tored  with  upper  array.  Radio  Astronomy  Explorer  project  was 
managed by  GSFC  under  OSSA  direction. GSFC  constructed, designed, and 
tested  spacecraft  and  provided  scientific  instrumentation.  (NASA  P r o j  
Off; NASA  Release 68-109K;  Schmeck, N Y T ,  6/29/68;  8; AP,  W  S tar ,  
7/5/68;  AP, N Y T ,   7/5/68,  2 6 ;   W  Po s t ,   7/8/68,  A6;  7/9/68,  A7) 
*  Ju ly   4 :   Exp lorer   XXV I I I ,   Interplanetary Monitoring  Platform  launched 
by  NASA  May  29,  1965, to  investigate earth's  magnetosphere and  study 
earth-sun  relationships,  reentered  atmosphere a s  had  been  predicted  a t  
GSFC  August  1967. Mrs.  Barbara  Lowrey of  GSFC  Laboratory  for  Theo- 
retical  Studies  had  found  in  analysis  of  satellite's  orbit  t h a t - d u r i n g  
perigee pass on July 4 (actually early  next day in  Indian  Ocean reentry 
effect of  sun  and  moon  would  alter  orbit  and  cause  EX- 
area)-joint 
p lorer   XXV I I I   to  make  high-angle  reentry  and  burn  up  in  earth's  at- 

153 

July  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

mosphere.  Computer  tests  had  verified  analysis.  ( GSFC S SR ,   7/15/68; 
NASA  Release  68-117;  Marshall  S ta r ,   3/6/68) 
July  5:  U.S.S.R.  successhlly launched Cosmos  C C X X X   from Kapustin Yar. 
Orbital parameters:  apogee, 544 km  (338 mi) ; perigee,  283 km (175.8 
mi) : period.  92.8 min:  and  inclination.  48.4O Satellite reentered  Nov. 
NYT ,   7/6/68;  SBD ,   7/10/68,  26;  GSFC  S SR ,   7/15/68; 
2 .   (;PI, 
11 /1s /68) 
I  --, - - ,  
-~ 
AEC’S  High  Energy  Physics  Advisory  Panel  report  in  Science  decried 
cutbacks  in  funds  for  high-energy  physics  “one  of  main  fronts  of 
science”  and  recommended  budget  increase  to  avert  decline  in  U S .  
effort  and  construction  of  giant  bubble  chamber  a t   Brookhaven  Lab- 
oratory  and electron-positron storage ring at Stanford Linear Accelerator 
( S LAC )   , Work  on  200-bev  accelerator  a t  Weston,  Ill.,  should  continue 
“at  highest  priority,”  report  stressed,  and  provision  should  be  made 
to  finance  joint  research  with  U.S.S.R.  using  present  most  powerful 
accelerator in world  at Serpukhov, near Moscow. 
Lack  of  approval  of  bubble  chamber  and  SLAC  storage  ring  in  1968 
and  1969 budgets meant  “for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  this  field, 
U.S.  physicists will  be  unable  to make  use  of  some of  the  most  modern 
means of  research.”  Further,  there  was  “clear  and present  danger”  that 
U.S.  would  lose  its  leadership  in   this  fundamental  field,  “an  ominous 
step”  toward  situation  of  1930s,  “when  most  of  the  major  discoveries 
in fundamental science were made in Europe.”  (Sc ience ,  7/5/68,11-9  ; 
Sullivan, NYT ,   7/7/68,  17) 
JPL   scientist Dr.  Robert  Nathan,  who  had  devised method  using  comput- 
ers  to  improve  spacecraft  photos  of  moon  and  Mars,  planned  to  link 
computers  with  electron  microscopes  to  photograph  single  atom. 
Within  six  months  much  of  connection work  should  be  done,  he  said, 
and  “with luck, we  could  be  taking  pictures  of  atoms in  a  year  o r   so.” 
(Dighton, Glendale Kews-Press ,   7/5/68,  1 )  
NASA  awarded  16-1110, $178,844  cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  to  Lockheed 
Missiles &  Space Go.  f o r  computer  software to  operate  NASA/RECON  re- 
mote-console information  retrieval  system.  Consoles would  be  installed 
a t   field  centers  and  NASA  Hq.  and  linked  to  central  computer  a t   NASA 
Scientific and Technical Information Facility  in  College Park, Md.  They 
would  provide  real-time access  to  NASA’s worldwide collection  of  scien- 
tific and  tcchnical documents on  aerospace. Users would need  no special 
skill.  (NASA   Release 68-118) 
FcC  ruled  that  rates  charged  TV  networks for  overseas service via  satel- 
lite  were  not  excessive  and  that  companies  providing  service-AT&T, 
RCA   Communications, Inc.,  ITT  World Communications, Inc.,  and West- 
ern  Union  International-were 
no  longer  required  to  place  payments 
fo r  services  in  deferred  credit  fund.  (AP, NYT ,   7/7/68,  10) 
Danish  government  announced  i t   had  banned  U S .   rocket  flights  to 
probe  sunspot effects  a t  high  altitudes over Greenland during  1968 be- 
cause  of  popular  apprehension  which  followed  January  crash  of  nu- 
clear-armed USAF  B-52  aircraft  near  Thule AFB.  Disappointed scientists 
noted  1968 was  peak  in  11 -y r  sunspot  cycle;  1969  would  offer  hardly 
enough sunspots for study.  (C  T r ib ,  7 /6 /68 ,5)  
Sonic  booms  from  USAF  test  flights  were  threatening  prehistoric  Indian 
cliff  dwellings  and  natural  rock  formations  in  Arizona.  Log  kept  a t  
Canyon ,de Chelly National  Monument had  recorded  16 booms in  April 

154 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

July  5 
1967,  19  i n   April  1968,  20  i n   May  1968,  and   9  in   June  1968.  Nat- 
ural  Environment  Panel,  participating  in  Interagency  Aircraft  Noise 
Abatement  Program under  DOT,  planned  to place data  recorders  at Yel- 
lowstone,  Yosemite,  Bryce,  and  Mesa  Verde  national  parks  to  extract 
information  on  which  to  base  plea  for  “adjustment”  from  USAF.  (Blu- 
menthal,  N Y T ,  7/5/68,11) 
July  5-12;  High-quality weather  data  were  moved  from Suitland,  Md.,  by 
wire  to NASA’s Mojave,  Calif.,  relay  station  and  beamed,  for  first  time, 
to  stations  in  the  Netherlands  and  West  Germany  via  NASA’s A ts   ZZZ 
Applications  Technology  Satellite.  Transmissions, 
including  cloud 
maps,  charts,  and  photo-mosaics,  were  received  “in  good  form,”  ac- 
cording  to  ESSA.  WEFAX  (Weather  Facsimile  Experiment)  project  was 
part  of  World  Weather  Watch  program  to  develop  economical  world- 
wide  weather  da ta   distribution  system.  Further  experiments  scheduled 
fo r  September included  relay  via  A t s   ZZZ of  weather  da ta   to  more than 
150 Automatic  Picture  Transmission  (A P T )   stations  i n   30   countries. 
(ESSA  ReIease  ES-68-43,  UPI ,   N Y T ,   7/19/68,  35:  W  S tar ,   7/24/68, 
A14) 
July  6 :  Ninth Molniya  I  comsat,  Molniyu  1-9,  was  launched by  U.S.S.R.  to 
“ensure the  operation  of  the long-range system o f .   . . communication” 
and TV  transmission  to  far  northern  and  far  eastern  U.S.S.R.,  accord- 
ing  to  Tass.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  39,806  km  (24,  734.2  mi) ; 
perigee, 396 km  (246.1 m i)  ; period,  11 h r  9 min;  and inclination, 65”. 
Equipment, including  instruments  for  transmission,  command,  and  sat- 
ellite operation, was  functioning normally.  (AP, NYT ,  7/9/68,  6 ;  SBD ,  
7/10/68,  26 ;   GSFC SSR ,  7/15/68) 
Japanese  astronomer  Minori Honda  of  Kurashiki  Astronomical  Observa- 
tory,  Okayama,  discovered  new  comet  south  of  Capella  in  Auriga  con- 
stellation.  Tokyo  Astronomical  Observatory said  July  14  discovery  had 
been  confirmed  by  three  American  observatories.  Comet  was  named 
Honda Comet No. 6.  (AP, C T r ib ,  7/15/68) 
DOD released  April  23-24  testimony  before  Senate  Committee on  Armed 
Services’ Preparedness  Investigating Subcommittee.  Dr.  John S.  Foster, 
Jr.,  Director  of  Defense  Research  and  Engineering,  had  said  F-111A 
wings  had  broken  off during  Jan.  23  ground  test-under 
load  greater 
than  expected  in  flight  but  less  than  stipulated  50%-overload  safety 
margin-before 
introduction  into  Vietnam  combat,  where  aircraft had 
operated under protective restrictions. 
General  Dynamics  Corp.  President  Frank  W.  Davis  later  termed 
ground  testing  which  broke  wings  off  USAF  F-111A  “normal.”  Tests, 
he  indicated, were made  to  determine stress limitations.  “We’ve  had  no 
failures  . . . a t   stress  simulation  to  be  expected  in  combat.”  (Tran- 
script;  Kelly,  W  S tar ,   7/7/68,  A3 ;   AP,  W Po s t ,   7/7/68,  m2; 
7/8/68,  A15 ;   Corddry, B Sun, 7/7/68,1) 
*  Washington  Evening  S tar   editorial praised  WAF  C-5  Galaxy  jet  aircraft 
and  its  “impressive”  civilian  potential;  “According  to   Tom  LT.R.1 
May,  Lockheed’s  president,  all  the  experimental  evidence  indicates 
there  a re   virtually  no  engineering  limitations  to  building  strikingly 
larger  G 5 s  than  those scheduled,”  but  its commercial  use  would  cause 
passenger  and baggage congestion.  “If the  Galaxy  is  to  become  a  corn- 
mercial plane,  then,  at  the most,  only  a  third  of  its  space  should  be  fo r  
passengers;  the rest  should  be   for cargo.  . . . Although  [May  is1  con- 
155 

July  6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%8 

fident  that  bigger  and  bigger  G 5 s  can  be  made,  he  doubts  that  the 
world is ready for them. We doubt it, too.”  (W  S tar ,  7/6/68) 
Ju ly  7:  Melbourne,  Fla.,  engineer Duane  Brown  had  applied fo r   patent  on 
Survey  Satellite  ( SURSAT),  system  of  four  low-cost  satellites  which 
would  enable  surveyors  to  plot  boundaries,  route  highways,  make 
maps,  and  monitor  earth’s  crust  to  accuracies  of  a  few  inches.  System 
included  regional center  for processing survey  data  and portable  receiv- 
ing and  recording units  for  field  use  and  could be  operational  by  mid- 
1970’s, Brown said.  (UPI ,  W S tar ,  7/7/68,  A7) 
Successful  test-firing  of  Phoebus  2A,  world’s  most  powerful  reactor, 
June 26 might  have been  catalyst needed  to  bring DOD into partnership 
with  NASA  and  AEC  in   development of  nuclear  energy for   space propid- 
sion,  Frank Macomber  wrote  in   San  Diego  Un ion .  Not  only  was  UMF 
becoming  interested in  military  applications for nuclear engine, so were 
scientists and engineers representing aerospace industry.  Phoebus firing 
would  be  followed  in   fall  by  first  test  of  smaller  NERVA  XE-1  nuclear 
engine.  Both  were  vital  phases  of  NASA-AEC  Rover  program.  (SD 
Un ion ,  7 /7 /68 ,12)  
Sun  Shipbuilding  and  Dry  Dock  Co.  announced plans  for   new  Guppy, 
4,000-lbY low-cost, undersea  research  vehicle  to  be   tethered  to  surface 
ship  by  electric  cable  and  capable  of  carrying  two  men  to  2,0(30-ft 
depth for up to 48 hr.  First  vehicle would  be  completed in  March 1‘369. 
( N Y T ,  7 /8 /68 ,66 )  
France  began  1968  nuclear  test  series  with  detonation  of  conventional 
atomic warhead  over  Mururoa Atoll  in  Pacific.  Device was  fired  to  test 
complex  measuring  instruments  installed  for   tests  scheduled  to   culmi- 
nate in  explosion  of  France’s  first hydrogen bomb.  (UPI,  N Y T ,   7/7/68, 
7; W Post, 7/8/68,  A12) 
July  8 :  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  Special  Consultant  to  NASA  Administra- 
tor and former NASA  Deputy Administrator, had been elected to  board  of 
trustees of  Aerospace  Corp.  (Aerospace Release;  SBD, 7/8/68,  10) 
0  Approximately  36  Soviet  Air  Force  flights  with  more  than  85   bombers 
had  been  identified  off  northern  coasts  of  North  America  during  first 
half  of  1968, six  times  scale of  operations  reported  during  last  half  of 
1967,  according  to  Charles W.  Corddry  in   Baltimore Sun.  Soviet  a ir-  
craf t  had  cruised  over  international  waters.  DOD reportedly  considered 
flights rou the .   ( B  Sun, 6/9/68,  1) 
In   joint  communique,  Dr.  Donald  F.  Hornig,  Special  Assistant  to  the  
President  for   Science  and  Technology,  and  Alexandru  Birlandeanu, 
member  of  Romanian Politburo  touring  US. scientific  institutions,  an- 
nounced agreement to broaden scientific and technological ties, including 
exchange of  scientists and possible collaboration  in   atomic energy field. 
Romania had asked US. for technical and financial aid  toward construc- 
tion  of  its  first nuclear power  plant  by  1973.  (Grose, N Y T ,  7/9/68,  1 )  
New  York  T ime s  editorial  on  June 21  emergency meeting  of  scientists to 
protest cuts in  Federal support for basic research:  “. . . deep slashes in  
basic  research  funds  a re   likely  to  be  extremely  costly  i n   the  years 
ahead.  The  fundamental lesson  of  the  history  of  science  is   that  basic 
research is  the indispensable seed  bed  for  all  future technology,  the  ul- 
timate  source of  the  new  wealth  and  of  the  improved capacity  to   save 
lives  that  future  technology  could  bring.  . . . Those  in   Congress  and 
the  Executive  Branch  who  a re   now  applying  the  axe  to  Government 

156 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

J U ~ Y  a 

spending  would  be  wise  to  proceed  a s  gently  a s  possible  in  this  small 
area that is so essential for the nation’s future.”  ( N Y T ,  7/8/68,36) 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  fo r   Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  addressed  joint  meeting of  American  Institute  of  Aeronautics 
and Astronautics  ( AIAA)  and Canadian  Aeronautics and  Space Institute 
(CASI) in  Montreal:  Systems  engineering  concept  applied  to  manage- 
ment  “was  pioneered  and  developed  in  aerospace  programs  and  is 
being  increasingly  applied  a s   a  powerful  tool  in   the  management  of 
other  major  enterprises.”  I n   NASA  most  extensive  application  was  in  
Apollo  program.  Factors  unique  to  manned  space  flight  had  contrib- 
uted  to  management  approach,  including  “sheer  size  of  Apollo  pro- 
gram,  larger  in   . . . lead  time,  money,  organization  and  technological 
development than  any  previous program.”  Special feature was  high  re- 
liability  and  safety  required.  And  space  program  had  been  executed 
under scrutiny of  press, public, Congress, and scientific community. 
Weight  and  volume  budgeting  were  critical.  High  cost  of  flight-test- 
ing  space vehicles made maximum ground  testing  necessary, a s  well  as 
all-up  (concurrent rather  than  sequential)  flight testing. Vehicle was  a s  
complete as practicable for  each  flight, to  obtain maximum information 
from minimum  number  of  flights  and  provide  earliest  possible  system 
readiness. Open-ended mission concept was used  to  accomplish a s  many 
flight  objectives per  vehicle  as  consistent with  safety  and  mission  suc- 
cess.  Review  of  status  throughout  mission  determined  length  of  mis- 
sion.  Redundant,  o r   alternate,  means  of  operation  reduced  ability  of 
single €ailure to  endanger  crew  or  mission.  Prime  design consideration 
in  all  manned space flights was  safety.  (Text;  UPI, H C h o n ,  7/10/68) 
NASA  board  investigating  fatal  accident  a t   North  American  Rockwell 
Corp.’s  Downey, Calif., plant Oct. 5,  1967, announced  it had  found  that 
laboratory  employees had  ignored  important  safety  procedures.  “Most 
probable  cause”  of  explosion  which  had  killed  two  workmen  and  in- 
jured  11 was  “frictional  o r   impact  force  created  while  ba r iumF reon  
TF slurry  was  being  transferred  from  a  laboratory  container  to  a  ship- 
ping  container.”  Although  NAR  had  issued  safety  instruction  requiring 
barium-used 
in  NASA  sounding  rocket  experiments-be  handled  only 
under  dry  argon  atmosphere, i t   had  been  washed  and  sieved  in  open 
air.  Board  recommended  full  recognition  of  chemical hazards  of  com- 
bining  metals  and  chemicals  such  as  Freon  TF  and  upgrading  of  pre- 
cautions.  manuals.  and  vrocedures.  NAR  had  altered  vrocedures.  would 
process barium o k y  under  remote control.  (NASA  Recease  68-122;  AP, 
N Y T ,  7/9/68,27) 
Inauguration  of  direct  air  service  between  New  York  and  Moscow  had 
been  set  for  “on  or  after  July  15”  by  letters between US. Moscow  Em- 
bassy and U.S.S.R.  Foreign Ministry. Soviet airline Aeroflot announced 
11-62  jet  aircraft  service would  start  from  Moscow  July  15.  U S .   car- 
rier  Pan  American World Airways expected to  start Boeing  707  service 
from  New  York  same  date.  Bilateral  a i r   agreement  of  Nov.  4,  1966, 
had  stipulated  once-weekly return  flights over  4,700-mi  route.  May  6, 
1968,  agreement  added  intermediate  stop  a t   Montreal,  Copenhagen, 
Stockholm, or  London.  (CAB Docket 6489;  State Dept  Release 94;  AP, 
N Y T ,  7/9/68,65;  Ward, B Sun, 7/9/68,1;  AP, W Post, 7/9/68,  A15) 
July  8-9:  Two  major  solar  flares  were  detected  within  25-hr  interval  by 
US. Space  Disturbance  Forecast  Center  scientists  in  Boulder,  Colo. 

157 

July  8-9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

First  had  interfered  with  short-wave transmissions  worldwide,  accord- 
ing  to  ESSA  Chief  of  Forecast  Services,  Robert  Doeker;  second  had 
seemed weaker. Scientists were  watching for  effect of  cloud  of  electrons 
spawned by  first solar  flare, biggest  and brightest  since 1966.  (AP, LA 
Her-Exam ,  7/10/68;  AP, N Y T ,  7 /10 /68 ,17 )  
*  Nine  astronauts  participated  in  life  support  training  for  aircraft  pilots  a t  
Perrin  AFB,  Tex.  They  were  second  astronaut  group  to  attend  USAF 
course.  (NASA  Apollo Status Summary, 7/10/68) 
J u l y   9 :   British  physicist  Samuel  Tolansky,  appointed  special  investi- 
gator  for  Apollo  program,  had  predicted  discovery  of  industrial  dia- 
monds among 40 Ib  of  matter  Apollo spacecraft would  bring  back  from 
moon.  Theory  was  based  on  supposition  that  lunar  craters  had  been 
caused  by  meteor  impact  or  volcanic  eruptions  producing  shock waves. 
“You  can  create  diamonds  by  passing  a  shock wave  through  carbon,” 
he  said.  ‘‘And  there  has  to  be  carbon  on  the  moon.”  (NANA ,   Pasadena 
Independent,  7/9/68) 
0  Lockheed  Missiles  &  Space  Co.  scientists  we re   studying  use  of  small 
charcoal  beds  to  remove  contaminants  in  space  capsules  where  pollu- 
tion  hazards  had  been  found  to   be  “more  serious  than  those  for  the 
man  on  the  street.”  Studies  had  isolated  150  contaminants,  most  of 
which could be extremely toxic.  ( W S J ,  7 /9 /68 ,23 )  
0  President  Johnson  transmitted  Treaty  on  the  Non-Proliferation  of  Nu- 
clear  Weapons  to  Senate  for  ratification  and  urgently  recommended 
that  Senate  “move  swiftly”  to  enhance  U S .   and  world  security.  “The 
treaty,”  he  said,  ‘‘does  more  than  just  prohibit  the  spread  of  nuclear 
weapons.  I t  would  also promote  the  further  development of  nuclear  en- 
ergy  fo r  peaceful  purposes under  safeguards.”  Treaty  had  been  passed 
by  U.N.  General  Assembly  June  12  and  opened  for  signature  July  1. 
(PD, 7/15/68,1090-2) 
Fixed-wing  SST  design  aerodynamically  similar  to  one  unsuccessfully 
submitted t o   USAF  by  Boeing  in   1957 XB-70  competition but  featuring 
more  titanium,  new  flight  control  system, and  more  powerful  turbojets 
was  presented  to  customer  airlines  at  FAA SST program  briefing.  Model 
was  undergoing  wind-tunnel  tests  to  determine  its  ability  to  exceed 
mach 1 without perceptible sonic boom.  (Hoffman, W Po s t ,   7/9/68,  1) 
Ju ly  10 :  NASA  issued Apollo Status Summary:  Apollo 7 spacecraft was  being 
prepared  fo r  unmanned  altitude chamber  tests  a t  210,000  ft  for  1 5  hr. 
I f   successfd,  manned  tests  might  be  scheduled  to  begin  July  15 with 
Astronauts Walter M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  Donn  F.  Eisele,  and  R.  Walter  Cun- 
ningham in command module. In Apollo/Saturn  503 program, combined 
systems tests would  continue through mid-July on Lunar  Module 3. 
I n  Apollo  spacecraft loading  tests, drogue parachutes would  be  tested 
within  several  days  at  Naval  Air  Facility,  with  13,000-lb  test  vehicle 
dropped  from  aircraft  at  46,000-ft  altitude,  subjecting  parachutes  to 
“ultimate loads”  in  reefed  condition before they  opened fully. Drop,  re- 
peat  of  previous test  which  failed,  w a s   to  tomplete  verification test  se- 
ries which had begun in 1967.  (Text) 
launched  from  Baikonur  Cosmodrome  by 
Cosmos  CCXXX I   wa s  
U.S.S.R.  into  orbit  with  391-km  (243-mi)  apogee,  206-km  (128-mi) 
perigee,  89.6-min period,  and  64.9’  inclination.  Equipment  functioned 
normally and  spacecraft reentered  July  18.  (UPI ,   W S tar ,  7/11/68,  A5; 

158 

July  10 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
UPI,  N Y T ,   7/12/68,  7 ;   S BD ,   7/12/68,  41;  GSFC  SSR ,   7/15/68, 
7/31/68) 
Soviet  Stalin  Prize  physicist,  Prof.  Andrey  D.  Sakharov,  contributor  to  
development  of  U.S.S.R.  hydrogen bomb,  had  issued  plea  fo r   full  intel- 
lectual freedom, US.-U.S.S.R.  cooperation,  and worldwide  rejection of 
“demagogic  myths,”  in  unpublished  essay  entitled  “Thoughts  About 
Progress,  Peaceful  Coexistence  and  Intellectual  Freedom,”  which  was 
circulating  in Moscow.  Expressing fear that world  was  on  brink  of  dis- 
aster,  he  urged  worldwide  implementation  of  scientific  method  and 
freedom  of  thought  in  politics,  economic  planning  and  management, 
education,  arts,  and  military  affairs  and  denounced  Soviet  censorship. 
(Anderson, N Y T ,  7/11/68,1) 
DOD  formally  ordered  work  stoppage  on  USN  E-111B  development  work 
being conducted by  General  Dynamics  Corp.  Action  followed  Congres- 
sional cuts  of  $460 million  in  program.  (General Dynamics  PIO;  S BD ,  
7 /11 /68 ,30)  
Sen.  Eugene  J.  McCarthy  (D-Minn.) , candidate  for  Democratic  nomina- 
tion  for  President,  in  position  paper  urged  that  U S .   delay  deployment 
of  Sentinel ABM   system  and  Poseidon  and  Minuteman  I11  missiles,  to 
facilitate  agreement  with  U.S.S.R.  on  defensive  and  offensive  armament 
limitation.  Delay  would  not  jeopardize  U S .   security,  he  said,  since 
neither  Chinese  nuclear  threat  nor  Soviet  ABM   development  is  “mov- 
ing ahead perceptibly.”  Paper was prepared by Harvard Univ.  chemistry 
professor  Dr.  George  B.  Kistiakowsky  and  MIT   Provost,  Dr.  Jerome 
B.  Wiesner.  (Text;  Kenworthy,  N Y T ,   7/11/68,  2 5 ;   C R ,   7/11/68, 
5 8 4 3 9 4 2 )  
Ju ly  10-1 2 : Hearings were held  by Senate Foreign Relations Committee and 
Senate members  of  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  on  U.S.  ratifi- 
cation  of  nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty.  Secretary of  State Dean  Rusk 
affirmed  treaty  would  bind  U.S.  to  no  more  atomic  defense  action  than 
already  set  forth  in  existing  treaties  and by  membership  in  U.N.  Secu- 
rity  Council. 
Gen.  Earle  G .  Wheeler,  Chairman  of  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff, and  Dep- 
uty  Secretary  of  Defense  Paul  H.  Nitze  in   joint  testimony  said  US. 
would  give  up   nothing  under  terms  of  treaty  but  would  benefit  from 
major  step  to  reduce  tensions.  (AP,  N Y T ,   7/11/68,  16;  Roberts,  W 
Pos t ,   7/11/68,  A l l ;   UPI ,   N Y T ,   7/12/68,  4 ;   Sherman,  W  S ta r ,  
7/12/68,  A5) 
Ju l y  11 : USAF  successfully launched OV  1-15  and OV  1-16  research  satellites 
pickaback  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by  Atlas-F booster.  OV  1-15  entered 
orbit  with  1,032-mi  (1,660.8-km)  apogee,  94-mi  (151.3-km)  perigee, 
103.0-min period, and 89.8’  inclination and reentered Nov.  6. OV  1-16, 
nicknamed  “Cannonball,”  was  600-lb,  23-in-dia  Low  Altitude  Density 
Satellite  (LOADS) launched  to  measure  atmospheric  density  between 
90- and  110-mi altitudes fo r  25-30  days.  Densest  satellite U S .   had  or- 
bited,  OV  1-16  had  162-lb-per-cu-ft density,  which  enabled  it  to  orbit 
closer  to  earth  than  any  previous  spacecraft.  Orbital  parameters: 
apogee,  286 mi  (460.3  km)  ; perigee,  82 mi  (132.0  km)  ; period,  90.4 
min;  and  inclination,  89.8’.  OV  1-16  reentered  Aug.  19.  (O’Toole, 
W  Pos t ,   7/12/68,  A21;  S BD ,   7/15/68,  44;  GSFC  S SR ,   7/15/68; 
8/31/68;  Pres  Rp t  6 8 )  

159 

July  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

0  DOD  directive  that  General  Dynamics  Corp.  halt  development  of  USN 
F-111B  aircraft  because  of  weight  problem  would  not  affect  USAF’S 
F-111A  program  o r  Hughes Aircraft  Co.  development of  Phoenix  air- 
to-air missile, which  presumably would  be  installed  in  replacement air- 
craft,  Wa l l  Street  Journal  reported.  Of  1 7  F-111B  prototypes planned, 
8 had been produced  and 6 delivered  (one of  which had  crashed).  Gen- 
eral  Dynamics  was  uncertain  how  many  of  remaining  nine  would  be 
completed.  USN  had  originally  requested  30  aircraft.  ( W S J ,  7/11/68, 
29 )  
Secretary  of  Defense  Clark  M.  Clifford  announced  USN  would  proceed 
with  construction  of  one  of  two  advanced  nuclear  submarines  advo- 
cated  by  V/A  Hyman  G.  Rickover  to  combat  Soviet  submarine  threat. 
Authorization  was  for  “super  high-speed”  version ; “quietyy electric- 
powered  craft  wa s   still  under  consideration  although  its  development 
had  been  stopped  in  May.  Congressional  committees  had  supported 
Adm.  Rickover  and  urged  development  of  both  types.  (Dale,  NYT, 
7/12/68,1;  Kelly, W S tar ,  7/12/68,  A5) 
July  12:  Last  USN  flying  boat,  SP-5B  Martin  Marlin,  was  formally  retired 
from  active service and  turned  over  to  Smithsonian  Institution  a t   cere- 
mony a t  US. Naval Air Station, Patuxent, Md.  Aircraft would be placed 
in  proposed  National  Armed  Forces Museum.  ( C R ,  7/18/68,  E6671) 
0  Dr.  Stephen B.  Sweeney, governmental administration  professor  a t  Univ. 
of  Pennsylvania’s Wharton  School and  Executive Director  Emeritus  of 
Univ.’s  Fels  Institute  of  Local  and  State  Government,  and  Dr.  Harold 
Asher,  manager  of  General  Electric  Co.’s  TEMPO  section  and  former 
Deputy Assistant Secretary  of  Defense, had  been  sworn  in  as  consult- 
ants to  NASA  Administrator  James E. Webb.  Dr  Sweeney would  special- 
ize in university affairs, public administration, and application of  science 
and  technology  to  urban  problems.  Dr.  Asher  would  review  and 
analyze  NASA’s systems  for  resource  management. 
(NASA  Release 
68-124) 
July  13:  USAF  C-5  Galaxy  jet  aircraft,  flown  by  Lockheed-Georgia Co.  test 
pilot  Walter  E.  Hensleigh,  completed  successful  2-hr  U m i n   second 
to be  10 tons heavier 
flight with takeoff  weight of  520,000 lb-believed 
than  any  previous  aircraft  takeoff  weight.  During  ascent  to  1,000  ft, 
crew cut each of  four GE TF39 engines individually and  restarted  them 
in  air.  Auxiliary units  also  underwent cut-restart checks.  (AP, W  S tar ,  
7/14/68,14) 
0  FB-IllA,  bomber  version  of  F-111, 
successfully  completed  30-min 
maiden  flight  from  Carswell AFB,  Tex.,  reaching  20,000-ft altitude  and 
up  to  660  mph.  Equipped  with  advanced  avionics,  including  onboard 
computers  enabling  pilots  to  alter  missions  in   flight  automatically, 
FB-lllA’s  design  incorporated  basic  fuselage of  USAF  F-111A  tactical 
fighter  recently  grounded  after  three  crashes  in  Southeast  Asia.  (DOD 
Release 652-68;  AP, W S tar ,   7/14/68,  A2; AP, W  Po s t ,  7/14/68,  A5) 
Team  of  NASA  and Max  Planck  Institute  scientists completed 28-day  tour 
of  Argentina,  Chile,  Netherlands  Antilles,  Peru,  and  Venezuela. 
They  had  explored potential  sites  for  optical  observation  of  high-alti- 
tude  ionized  cloud  experiment proposed  a s  cooperative project  of  Ger- 
man  Ministry  for  Scientific  Research  and  NASA.  Release  of  barium 
vapor  at  12,000- to  20,000-ft  altitudes  by  Scout  rocket  launched  from 
NASA  Wallops  Station  was  being  considered.  Barium  cloud  would  be 

160 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1968 

July  13 

visible f rom  large  area  of  Western Hemisphere.  (NASA  Release 68-121) 
July  14 :   U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  had  exchanged  private  messages  which  raised 
hope  initial  talks  on  limiting  nuclear  missiles  would  begin  in  few 
weeks,  according  to  Geneva  sources quoted by  Wash ing ton  Post’s  Mur- 
rey  Marder.  Possible  obstacle  was  Warsaw  meeting  of  U.S.S.R.  and 
Eastern  European  officials  over  Czechoslovakian advance toward  liber- 
alization. US.-U.S.S.R. 
accord  on  nuclear missile production presuma- 
bly  would  interact  on  Soviet  strength  in  Eastern  Europe, weakening  it 
a s  East-West tension subsided.  ( W  Po s t ,  7/15/68,  A l )  
*  George Alexander  reviewed  in  Wash ing ton  Pos t   Erik  Bergaust’s  Murder 
on Pad   34 ,  story of  Jan.  27,  1967, Apollo  fire.  Book  was  “characterized 
by  sloppy errors  of  omission and  commission, innuendo  and  pointless- 
ness,”  Alexander  said.  “It  was  good  fortune, nothing  else,  that  the var- 
ious mechanical flaws and  human  faults  that  occurred  in  the  . . . Mer- 
cury  and  Gemini  programs  did  not  coincide  . . . as  they  did  inside 
Apollo-one. Foresight  tries  to  prevent  such coincidence, but  . . . not  all 
possible coincidence can  be  foreseen.  . . . Accidents 
. . will  happen. 
And  the  searching  investigation conducted by  the National  Aeronautics 
and  Space Administration  into  Apollo-one could  find  no  evidence  that 
the  fatal  fire  was  anything  but  an   accident.”  (Book  W o r l d ,  W   Po s t ,  
7/14/68,4-5) 
July  15:  President  Johnson  formally  asked  Senate  to  ratify  space  rescue 
treaty  endorsed  by  U.N.  General Assembly Dec.  19,  1967,  and  signed 
by  43 nations  April 22, terming  i t  “another  step toward  stable peace  on 
this  threatened  earth.”  Astronaut  assistance  and  return  agreement 
looked  “beyond  the  old  divisions  of  history  and  ideology  to  recognize 
the  challenge of  common  peril  and  the  benefits of  common action.  . . . 
Our  laws  and  treaties  must  always keep  pace  with  our  science. But  the 
value  of  this  Agreement  goes  beyond  the  protection  i t   offers  to  those 
who  venture  into  space.”  It also  “helps  protect the  peace of  this  planet. 
Surely two  nations  who  aspire to  the  stars can  realize the  common dan- 
ger  and  act  in  the  common  interest  here  on  earth.”  (Text;  W   Po s t ,  
7/16/68,  A9;  AP, W S tar ,  7/16/68,  A8;  Nordlinger, B Sun, 7/16/68, 
1) 
*  Harvard  College Observatory scientists Dr.  George R.  Huguenin  and Dr. 
J.  H.  Taylor  became  first U S .  scientists to  identify  a  new  pulsar  when 
they  discovered  HP  1506  in   northern  sky  near  Little  Dipper.  Pulsar, 
similar  to  four  pulsars  discovered in  1967 by  U.K.  scientists, had  pulse 
rate  of  one every 0.7397  sec,  each lasting 0.020  sec. Pulse rate  of  other 
four  pulsars  ranged  from 0.25  to  1.4 sec, with  each pulse lasting  0.020 
see.  Harvard  scientists used  National Radio Astronomy Observatory an- 
tenna  a t   Green  Bank,  W.  Va.  (Sullivan, NYT,  7/19/68,  20) 
*  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb,  discussing implications  of  FY  1969 
budget  reductions a t  AAS Symposium in  Denver, Colo.,  said  he  did  not 
find  public support for space program  declining. Rather,  “many  people 
who  in  the  years  following 1961 ascribed  to  the  space program  a  sepa- 
rate,  special,  top  priority  status  are  now  realizing,  a s   the  national 
leadership  in   the  space  program  has  understood  all  along,  that  the 
space program  must  be  regarded  as  only  one  of  a  number  of  essential 
activities of  high  priority  to  which  the  country must  devote  substantial 
resources.  . . . The  investments made  in  NASA  may  well  add greatly  to 
the value of  investments we will have to make in these other fields.” 

161 

July  15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

NASA  was  “very  much  in  business,  and  it  w i l l   stay  in   business.  We 
are accepting the challenge of  the time  and  w i l l   continue a hard-hitting, 
technically  sound  program  aimed  a t   the  most  important  objectives  of 
the  future.”  But  he  described  cutbacks  a s  well  as  elements  of  strength. 
We  are doing  all we  can  to  avoid  terminating  completely such  impor- 
C G  
tant  activities as  the unmanned planetary  exploratory program,  but  i t  is 
not  likely  that  we  will  be  able  to  proceed  with  the  Titan/Mars  1973 
missions.”  Saturn I  Workshop would be  delayed  and,  “for  a  number  of 
years  to  come,  missions  to  use  the  manned  space  flight capabilities  de- 
veloped  in  the  Apollo  program  will  be  very  limited.”  Reductions  to  a 
budget  already  “sharply  reduced will have many very  serious effects on 
the  US. position  in  aeronautics  and  space. They  are  only  the  most  re- 
cent  in  a  series  of  cutbacks  and,  in   effect,  constitute  something  like 
final  ratification  of  a  decision  . . . that  the  United  States  w i l l   not,  at 
this  time,  take  the  steps  necessary  to  continue  the  advances of  the  re- 
cent years.” 
Outlining NASA’s program, Webb  said  two  flyby missions to  Mars  in 
1969 were  largely  paid  for.  “Even  at  our  reduced  levels,  I  believe  we 
can  follow  the  1969  missions  with  two  orbiter  missions  in  1971,  but 
will  probably  have  to  postpone  for  another  year  the  start  of  work  on 
the  two  Titan-launched  orbiter  and  lander  missions  which  we  had 
hoped  to  fly  in  1973.” The  1969 missions “were  initiated  three  or  more 
years  ago.  We  are  approaching  the  end  of  our  approved  flight  pro- 
grams. The number  of  new  projects  started  each year has  sharply  dwin- 
dled  since  1966  and  we  w i l l   soon  see  years  go  by  when  we  will  have 
very  few  flights.  We  may  see  a  gap  of  2  years  in  our  manned  flight 
program  after  the  landing  on  the  moon,  and  a  second  gap,  equally 
long, after the Saturn I Workshop. 
“Perhaps  the  most  fundamental  decisions  ahead  lie  in  the  field  of 
large  launch  vehicles. Can  we  gap  the  production  of  Saturn  V  or  will 
we  have  to  terminate  i t ? ”   Question  required  reexamination  of  uses  of 
Titan  I11  and  of  possible  development  of  new,  less  costly  launch  vehi- 
cles. 
‘‘Especially important”  in  this period  was  continuation  of  broad  pro- 
gram  of  advanced  research  for  future  national  needs,  including  broad 
university program.  (Text) 
Sen.  Gsrdon  Allott  (R-Colo.)  told  AAS  Symposium:  “.  . . in  the 
thirty  minutes  I  spend  talking  about  the  space  program  this  morning 
four  Tiros  satellites . . . w i l l   have monitored  10 cloud  covers above 40 
million  square  miles  of  the  earth’s  surface.  . . . During  this  same 
period,  the  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  . . . will  have  received  340 
minutes of  data from 37  active satellites ; and  the  NASA  communications 
network around the globe w i l l  have sent and received  over  750 messages 
dealing  with  information  obtained  from  these  satellites.  .  . . 
“Already  the  beneficial changes  wrought  by  man’s  incredible  inven- 
tive genius  have made  their  mark.  When  NASA  launched  Early  Bird  for 
Comsat  three  years  ago,  for  example,  i t   boosted  the  capacity  of  the 
transatlantic  telephone system by  50%. The A IM   has  already  estimated 
that this new  industry will be grossing $200 million by  1975.  .  . . 
“Obviously, this is not  all. Too often, it seems, those interested in  giv- 
ing an  accounting of  the  $30 billion  invested  in  the  space program  stop 
once  they  have  demonstrated  technological spin-off  or  . . . unmanned 
162 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

July  15 

communication  and  weather  satellites.  The  crowning  achievement  of 
the  space  program  has  really  been  what man  himself,  in  space, has  ac- 
complished during  this past  decade. For man ha s  ventured  into  the hos- 
tile, mysterious world of  space.”  ( C R ,  7/18/68,58901-3) 
Martin  Marietta  Corp.  planetary  scientist Allan  R.  Barger,  who  was 
doing  theoretical  work  on  balloon-borne  Venus  probe,  told  AAS  that 
U.S.S.R.  data  released  a€ter Oct.  18, 1967, Venus probe  was  incorrect. 
Soviet report  had  set planet’s  surface  temperature  at  about 520”  F and 
surface  pressure  at  about  18 times  that  on  earth.  Barger  said  his  con- 
clusions,  based  on  analysis  of  Soviet  report  and  on  data  gathered  by 
NASAS’S  Mariner  V  space probe  as  it  flew  by Venus’  upper  atmosphere, 
set planet’s  surface temperature  at  about 890’  F and pressure  at  100 o r  
more times that on earth.  (Denve r  P o s t ,  7/15/68) 
USAF’s  Arnold  Engineering  Development  Center  was  conducting  research 
with 5-million-w arc heater  to determine temperature  and  pressure limi- 
tations  of  ablative  materials  used  to  prevent  military  reentry  vehicles 
from burning  up  on  encountering  earth’s  atmosphere.  Military  reentry 
vehicles  had  to  withstand  conditions  similar  to  high-speed  reentry  of 
interplanetary  vehicles on  return  to  earth, fa r  more  severe than  those to 
be  met  by  lunar  astronauts.  Data  had  been  produced  for  civilian  and 
military  agencies.  (AFSC Release 117.68) 
House  Committee  on  Government  Operations’  Special  Studies  Subcom- 
mittee,  chaired  by  Rep.  Porter  Hardy,  J r .   (D-Va.),  ordered  NASA  to 
make  every  effort  to  cut  escalating costs  of  its  June  16,  1967, contract 
with Boeing  Co.  fo r  technical integration  and  evaluation in  assembly of 
Apollo  spacecraft’s three  modules  with  Saturn  V  launch  vehicle.  Con- 
tract,  negotiated by  NASA  in  drive to  improve safety after  Jan.  27,  1967, 
Apollo  fire, had  been  listed  tentatively a s  costing $20 million;  NASA  of- 
ficials now  placed cost of  carrying work  through  1968 a t  $73.4  million. 
(Transcript; UPI,  W Po s t ,  7/16/68,  A6) 
Food,  land,  and  raw  material  shortages  might  compel  man  to  establish 
mining operations  on  other  planets and  to  grow  food  in  space stations, 
according  to  Dr.  K.  A.  Ehricke,  North  American  Rockwell  Corp. 
scientist. He said  farms  growing food  in  chemicals could be  established 
in  earth-orbiting  stations  fertilized  by  chemicals  produced  on  Mars 
and  other  planets.  (AP ,   N Y T ,  7/15/68,  6 )  
Boyd  C.  Myers  11,  NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator  for  Operations, 
Office of  Advanced Research  and Technology, became NASA  Deputy  As- 
sistant  Administrator  for  Administration.  (NASA   Release  68-125;  AP, 
N Y T ,  7 /16 /68 ,7 )  
July  15-16:  Commercial air  service between U.S.  and U.S.S.R.  was  inaugu- 
rated  with  Moscow  departure  July  15 of  Ilyushin-62  aircraft  belong- 
ing  to  Soviet flag  carrier  Aeroflot. Aircraft,  carrying  97  Soviet  officials 
and  commercial  passengers,  landed  a t   Kennedy  International  Airport 
in New  York  July  16, after  13-hr 17-min flight via  Montreal  (including 
1 hr  35 min  circling  New  York  area  because  of  air  traffic).  U.S.  flag 
carrier,  Pan  American  World  Airways,  flew  two  Boeing  707  aircraft 
from  New  York  to  Moscow’s  Sheremetyevo Airport  via  Copenhagen 
July  16.  First  carried  U.S.  officials  and  press;  second  carried  revenue 
passengers.  (W   S ta r ,   7/15/68,  A l l ;   7/16/68,  A7;  Witkin,  N Y T ,  
7/17/68,28) 
July  16:  U.S.S.R.  successfully launched  Cosmos  C C X X X I I   into  orbit  with 

163 

July  16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

355-km  (220.6-mi)  apogee,  200-km  ( 124.3-mi)  perigee,  89.4-min  pe- 
riod,  and  65.3”  inclination.  Spacecraft  reentered  July  24.  (UPI,  N Y T ,  
7/17/68,30;  GSFC SSR, 7/31/68) 
Maj. William J. Knight  (USAF)  piloted X-15  No.  1 to  218,500-ft altitude 
and  3,409 mph  (mach  4.74)  in  flight  from  Edwards  AFB.  Objective of 
flight, exposure and  satisfactory  retraction  of  WTR  experiment, was  not 
accomplished because  abnormally low  hydraulic  pressure and  severe vi- 
brations  prevented  aircraft’s  reaching  required  altitude.  (X-15  Proj 
Off 1 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and  Technology 
James  M.  Beggs  dedicated  new  $3.5-million  Flight  Control  Research 
Facility  a t   LaRC.  Facility,  connected  to  LaRC’S  data  analysis  and  com- 
putation  center,  would  be  used  for  guidance  and  control  research  in 
support of  manned flight. 
During  ceremony,  Center’s  Digital  Computer  Complex  Group  re- 
ceived  Lam  Group  Achievement Award  for  “outstanding  performance 
and  dedicated  efforts  in  combining  unique  concepts  in  computer  orga- 
nization  and  operating  systems”  contributing  to  “one  of  the  most  out- 
standing  research  computer  installations  in  the  United  States.”  (Lang- 
ley Researcher,  7/26/68,  1 ,  4) 
MSC  officials  announced  resignation  of  Astronaut  John  S.  Bull  (L/Cdr., 
USN)  , third  astronaut to  leave space program because  of  medical prob- 
lem.  Dr.  Charles A.  Berry,  MSC  Chief  of  Medical  Programs,  told  news 
conference Astronaut  Bull  had  rare  respiratory  disease for  which  there 
was  no  known  cure  and  no  medical  name.  I t   was  characterized  by 
chronic  sinus  difficulties,  lung  obstruction,  and  sensitivity  to   aspirin. 
(UPI,  W Post, 7/17/68,  A l l )  
Global  warning  system  operational  since  January  was  providing  airline 
pilots with  as  much  as  two  months,  notice  of.reentry  of  spacecraft  de- 
bris,  which had  been  averaging  one  reentry  a  day.  Chances  of  damage 
by  fragment  to  aircraft,  while  small,  would  increase with  operation  of 
SSTS  a t  70,000- and  80,000-ft altitudes.  System, outgrowth of  Volunteer 
Flight  Officer  Network  formed  in  1963,  included  more  than  38,000 
flight crews  attached  to  117 airlines,  which  received  reentry  data  f rom  
NORAD  computers  via  United  Air  Lines  communications  facilities  a t  
Denver, Colo.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,  7 /17 /68 ,27 )  
0  President  Johnson  informed  Geneva  disarmament  conference that  agree- 
ment  was  expected “shortly”  on  time  and  place  of  US.-U.S.S.R. 
talks 
to  limit nuclear missile production.  I n  message read  to  opening  of  new 
session of  conference, President  said  i f   progress  could be  made  on  lim- 
iting  strategic  delivery  systems,  U S .   “would  be  prepared  to  consider 
reduction  of  existing  systems.”  (Text;  W Post,  7/17/68,  A15;  N Y T ,  
7/17/68,1) 
July  17:  Investigation  of  Nov.  15, 1967, X-15  accident by  NASA board  indi- 
cated  that  pilot, Maj. Michael  J. A d a m   (USAF)   who  died  in  crash, had 
suffered  disorientation  and  operated  controls  improperly.  Mistaking 
roll  indicator  for  heading  indicator,  he  had  increased  heading  error, 
causing  aircraft  to  spin  uncontrollably  at  mach  5  and  230,000-ft  alti- 
tude and then to  go into  severe pitch  oscillation and disintegrate  a t  alti- 
tude  above  60,000  f t .   Board  requested  that  Government  report  on 
MH-96  control  system  experience and  recommended  use  of  telemetry 
fo r   directional  readings  by  NASA  X-15  ground  control  center,  careful 

164  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
July  17 
checkout of  experiments and  equipment for  next X-15  flight,  inclusion 
in  pilot’s  physical examination of  special tests for tendency toward  ver- 
tigo,  and  development  of  additional  methods to  maintain  proper  head- 
ing under  ballistic  flight conditions.  (FRC Release 20-68;  NASA  Release 
68-126) 
0  James  C.  Elms,  Director  of  ERC, discussed  “the  NASA  Biomedical  Pro- 
gram  in   Perspective”  before  Third  Annual  Meeting  of  Assn.  for  the 
Advancement  of  Medical  Instrumentation  in   Houston.  “Despite  the 
rapid  advance  of  biomedical techniques since World War  11,  the main 
thrust  of  the  activities was  directed toward  studying  sick individuals  i n  
a  normal  environment.  The  manned  space  program  has  provided  the 
opportunity  for  intensive controlled study  of  a  select  group  of  normal 
and  healthy  individuals  in  an  abnormal  and  stressful environment. By 
so doing, we  have achieved a better  definition of  the  range of  normality 
of  the  healthy  organism  which,  in  turn,  is  useful  in   the  study  and  un- 
derstanding  of  disease.” 
Interaction  of  space  and  medicine had  led  to  many  medica1 appli- 
cations  of  aerospace  hardware.  Application  of  electron  probe  micro- 
analyzer-used 
for  chemical  analyses  of  microelectronic  circuits-to 
study  of  red  blood  cells had  led  to  unexpected clues  in  study  of  blood 
cancer.  System  to  monitor  heart  rate,  respiration,  and  galvanic  skin 
response was  being considered  for  use  in measuring  efficiency  of  dental 
anesthetics on  children  and  in  training  teachers  for  retarded  children. 
Accomplishments  of  bioelectronics  research  in  interdisciplinary  dec- 
tronics  environment  included  remote  measuring  technique  for  eye- 
pointing  direction,  meaningful  measurement  of  aerosol  concentration 
and  s ize  distribution,  and  automatic tracking  system to   identify thresh- 
olds of  mental  alertness.  (Text) 
0  Univ.  of  California  physicist  Dr.  Edward  Teller,  a t   hearing  on  nuclear 
nonproliferation  treaty  before  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee, 
urged  Congress  to  preserve  option  of  giving  nonnuclear  allies  control 
over  “purely  defensive”  nuclear weapons systems.  He  was  referring,  he 
said,  to  system that  could  be  exploded  only  over  a  nation’s  territory, 
one  involving “time-lock”  of  monthly  inspection by  donor  nation,  and 
one  which  would  be  proof  against  tampering  or  analysis  designed  to 
develop it  into  offensive system.  (Maffre, W Post,  7/18/68,  A4;  Sher- 
man, W Star, 7/18/68,  A12) 
U.K.,  West  Germany,  Italy,  and  the  Netherlands  signed  agreement  to 
cooperate  in  $4.b-million  project  to  develop  and  produce  advanced 
combat aircraft  for  their  a i r  forces. Aircraft,  scheduled to   enter  service 
in  1975,  would  replace  US. Lockheed  F-104  Starfighter  currently 
being  used.  Orders  for  new  aircraft  were  expected  to   reach  1,000. 
(Reuters, B Sun, 7/18/68,2) 
July  18: Cosmos  C C X X X I I I   was  launched  from  Plesetsk  Cosmodrome  by 
U.S.S.R.  into  orbit  with  1,505-km  (935.2-mi)  apogee,  199-km  (123.6- 
mi)  perigee,  101.9-min  period,  and  81.9”  inclination.  Satellite  reen- 
tered  Feb.  7,1969.  (SBD, 7/22/68,32;  GSFC SSR, 7/31/68;  2/15/69) 
Senate  passed  unanimously  H.R.  17023,  FY  1969  Independent  Offices 
and  HUD  appropriations  bill,  including  $4.008  billion  for  NASA.  Total 
for NASA  agreed with House-passed total, but  Senate adopted  committee 
amendments  increasing  funds  fo r   construction  of  facilities  by   $12.95 
million  and  decreasing R&D  funds  by  same amount.  As  passed  by  Sen- 

165 

July  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

ate, bill  provided $3.37  billion  for  R&D,  $34.75  million  for  construction 
of  facilities,  and  $603.17  million  for  administrative  operations.  Senate 
requested  conference  with House  on  amendments.  (NASA L A R   VII/76; 
C R ,  523910-38;  S BD ,  7 /19 /68 ,71)  
House  Appropriations  Committee  cut  $550.5  million  from  DOD  FY  1969 
appropriations,  including $85 million  from USAF  Manned  Orbiting Lab- 
oratory  (M O L )   program.  ( C R ,  7/18/68;  SBD ,  7 /19 /68 ,71)  
0  Defense  Communications Agency had  declared  operational eight  satellites 
added  to  Defense  Satellite Communications  System  ( DSCS) by  success- 
ful  June  13 launch  from ETR,  final launch  of  Initial  Defense  Communi- 
cations Satellite  (IDSCP)  Project.  Total  of  24   satellites  were  in   normal 
use,  orbiting  eastward  in  21,000-mi-altitude  synchronous  orbit.  They 
would remain in  use until  1971.  (DOD Release 668-68) 
0  NASA  had  completed  tests  to  find  solution  to  “longitudinal  oscillations” 
of  Saturn V  booster  which  had  occurred  during April  4 Apo l lo   6  mis- 
sion.  Tests  revealed  that  natural  frequency  of  vehicle  structure  and 
propulsion  system  frequently  had  coincided,  multiplying  amplitude  of 
oscillations.  Problem  would  be  corrected  by  using  accumulators,  small 
gas reservoirs, in 1st-stage liquid-oxygen prevalves  to  change propulsion 
system  frequency.  Minor  modifications  necessary  to  allow  helium  in- 
jection  into prevalves  were  being made  on  1st stages of  third  and  sixth 
Saturn Vs.  (NASA  Release 68-128  ; MSFC  Release 68-158) 
Ryan Vertifan,  jet  V/STOL  aircraft  designated  XV-5B  by  NASA,  was  un- 
dergoing  flight  tests  a t   Ryan  Aeronautical  Co.  in  San  Diego  before 
delivery to ARC  for use in  aeronautical  research. Aircraft’s counter-rotat- 
ing  fans  submerged  in   wings  and  driven  by  jet  exhaust  provided  l if t  
for  vertical  takeoff , hovering,  and  vertical  landing.  XV-5B  was  im- 
proved  version  of  Ryan  Aeronautical  Co.  research  aircraft  built  for 
USA ;   modifications  and  renovations,  after  damage  from  October  1966 
emergency  landing  at  Edwards  AFB,  were  made  under  $1-million  NASA 
contract.  (A R C   Astrogram, 7/18/68,1) 
With  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  ready  to  discuss  possible  mutual  restriction  on 
production  of  strategic missiles, research  and   testing  of  advanced spec- 
trometer  designed  to  police  agreement  had  been  delayed  because  of 
congressional  cuts  in   DOD  funds  for  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament 
Agency  program.  Device,  which  analyzed  missile  characteristics  from 
their  exhaust  trails  a t   launch  sites,  had  been  developed  at  cost  of 
$574,000  after  1964  proposal  by  U S .   for  missile  agreement  with 
U.S.S.R.  Device  could  be  manned  by   international  inspectors  posi- 
tioned  one  mile  irom  launch  site  or  read  by  remote  control  through 
transmission  cable  already  developed  fo r   additional  $200,000.  Field 
testing  under  simulated  U.S.S.R.  conditions  had  been  postponed  one 
year until summer 1969. (Oberdorfer, W Pos t ,  7/18/68,  G4) 
0  The  Security  of  Japan  and  Prospects  for  1970, study produced  for  Japa- 
nese  Defense  Agency  by  Security  Research  Council,  said  Japan  had 
technical  and  economic  resources  to  produce  uranium  and  plutonium 
bombs  and  ICBM-producing capability  similar  to  that  of  France.  Japa- 
nese policy  to  date had  banned  construction and  importation of  nuclear 
weapons.  (W  Pos t ,  7/18/68,  A3 )  
0  Dr.  Ernest  Harry Vestine,  expert  on  geomagnetism  who  had  joined  RAND 
Corp.  in  1957 after 20 yr with  Carnegie Institution,  died  in  Santa Mon- 
ica,  Calif.,  of  heart  attack  a t   age  62.  He  had  been  an  originator  of 

166 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

July  18 

1957-58  International  Geophysical  Year  and had   served  a s  consultant 
to  DOD,  NASA,  and  Dept.  of  Commerce.  He  had  been  one  of  leaders  of 
1933  International  Polar  Year  expedition,  which  established  observa- 
tory to  measure earth’s magnetic field.  ( W Pos t ,  7/19/68,  B6) 
Ju ly   19 :   NASA  test  pilots  Donald  L.  Mallick  and  Fitzhugh  L.  Fulton,  Jr., 
flew  XB-70A 
to  42,000-ft  altitude  and  mach  1.62  in   flight  from  Ed- 
wards AFB.  Purpose of  flight was  to  evaluate performance  at  variety  of 
speeds,  check  exciter  vane  function,  determine  ground  effects  during 
low  approach,  and  evaluate  pilot  proficiency  during  touch-and-go land- 
ing.  (XB-70  Pro j  Off) 
Astronauts  James  A.  McDivitt,  David  R.  Scott,  and Russell L.  Schweick- 
a r t   successiully  completed  checkout  of  Apollo  spacecraft  cabin  flight 
equipment  provisions  under  simulated  mission  conditions  a t   North 
American  Rockwell  Corp.’s  Downey,  Calif.,  facility.  (NAR   Skywr i ter ,  
7 /26 /68 ,1)  
USN  awarded  five  $1-million  contracts  for  preliminary  design  and  engi- 
neering  work  on  FB-111B 
replacement  to  Grumman  Aircraft  Engi- 
neering  Corp.,  LTV  Aerospace  Corp.,  General  Dynamics  Corp.,  North 
American  Rockwell Corp.,  and McDonnell Douglas  Aircraft  Corp.  Sub- 
stitute  for  F-111B,  designated  VFX-1,  would  have  vertical  sweep 
wings and same jet engine.  (AP, N Y T ,  7/20/68,27;  V Pos t ,  7/21/68) 
Ju ly   20:  Senate  by  vote  of  6 7   to  3  passed  H.R.  17903,  Ey  1969  public 
works  and  atomic  energy  appropriations bill,  which  included  $36  mil- 
lion  fo r   NERVA   and  total  of  $68  million  for  space propulsion  systems. 
Senate  also  passed  H.R.  13781,  authorizing  $15  million  for  sea-grant 
colleges  and  ocean  exploration  in   FY  1969  and  $15  million  i n   FY 
1970.  (NASA  L A R  V11/77;  CR ,  S9047, S9069-87) 
July  21:  USN   had  awarded  $143.5-million  contract  to  Newport  News  (Va.) 
Ship  Building  Co.  for  two  nuclear-powered  guided-missile  frigates, 
which would bring  to  five USX’S  total  atomic-powered escort vessels.  ( W 
Pos t ,  7/21/68,  H1) 
July  22:  Partial  extension  of  Explorer  X X X V f f l ’ s   antennas,  delayed  be- 
cause  of  unexpected  spacecraft  oscillations  and  ground  computer  fail- 
ure,  was  successfully  conducted  by  NASA  after  series  of  complex 
maneuvers  which  permitted  successful  gravity-gradient  capture  and 
three-axis  stabilization.  Antenna  array’s  four  booms  would  be  held  at 
planned  455-ft length  for at least two weeks while data was collected and  
then,  if  spacecraft performed  satisfactorily,  antennas  would be  extended 
to  full  750-ft  length.  Damper  boom  was  deployed,  experiments  were 
turned  on,  and  all  spacecraft  support  systems  were  functioning  nor- 
mally.  Dipole  antenna  was  deployed  July  23  and  satellite was  declared 
fully  operational.  Spacecraft  had  been  launched  July  4.  (NASA   Pro j  
Off;  RASA   Releases 68-123,68-132  ; W Pos t ,  7/18/68,  D21) 
Explorer  X X X V   (IMP-E)   , sixth  spacecraft  in  Interplanetary  Explorer 
series,  completed  one  year  of  operation  in   lunar  orbit.  Seven  of  eight 
onboard  experiments  and  all  spacecraft  systems  were  100%  opera- 
tional.  Eighth  experiment had  5 %  degradation  in   performance.  Since 
July  19,  1967 launch,  satellite had  shown  that  positive  ions  from solar 
wind  crashed  directly  into  lunar  surface  and  had  verified  existence  of 
solar wind  void  directly behind  moon,  enabling scientists to  deduce in- 
formation  on  moon’s  electrical  conductivity  and  internal  temperature. 
(NASA  P ro j  Off) 

167 

July  22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Despite  sharp  budget  cuts  NASA  was  not  contemplating  layoff  of  Civil 
Service  Commission  personnel,  columnist  Jerry  Kluttz  reported  in 
Wa sh ing ton  Post.  As  Government agencies  searched  for  ways  to  meet 
cuts ordered by  Congress, NASA  appeared  to  be  only major  agency w i t h  
no problem of  excess employees. But because of  “big money  problems,” 
NASA  hoped  to  save  dollars  by  abolishing  half  of  its  currently  vacant 
positions,  possibly  making  some  “selective”  layoffs  a t   MSFC  and  GSFC, 
and continuing major  cutbacks in  contractor  personnel. NASA  would  re- 
program  its  activities  and  transfer  funds  to  finance csc  positions.  ( W  
Pos t ,  7/22/68,  A20) 
I n   Project  Cold  Flare,  joint  NASA-FAA-USAF  program  to  assess radiologi- 
cal  effects  of  solar  activity  on  future  SST passengers  and  crews,  radia- 
tion-measuring flights were  being flown  from Eielson AFB,  Alaska, near 
North  Pole,  where  solar  and  galactic  charged  particles  were  normally 
concentrated,  to  gather  data  on  radiological  phenomena  during  solar 
flares.  ( N Y T ,  7/22/68,61) 
Ju ly   22-23:  Arthritic  growth  on  spine  of  Astronaut  Michael  Collins 
(Maj.,  USAF ) ,   scheduled  to  pilot  command  module  on  third  manned 
Apollo mission early  in  1969, had  led  to his being  grounded.  USAF  sur- 
geons  successfully removed  bone  spur  from  near  base  of  his  neck  but 
speculated convalescence might take up  to four months. MSC   officials  de- 
clined  conjecture  on  his  future  flight  status.  Collins  had  piloted  two- 
man Gemini mission July  18-21,  1966, during which he  had  performed 
two  space walks.  (AP, W  S tar ,   7/23/68,  A4 ;   W  Pos t ,   7/23/68,  A5; 
7/24/68) 
Ju ly   23 :   Senate passed  H.R.  18188, Dept.  of  Transportation  appropriations 
bill,  by  vote  of  82  to  2  after  approving  addition  of  $153  million  for 
FAA to  hire  3,627  air  traffic  controllers to  relieve congestion  at  nation’s 
busiest airports.  ( C R ,  S9226-47;  AP, W S tar ,  7/24/68,  A21) 
0  Guidance  and  control  equipment  used  during  Gemini  X I   reentry  Sept. 
15, 1966, was  being  flight-tested at  NASA  Wallops Station  to  set  up  sys- 
tem  performance  requirements  for  automated  landing  for  V/STOL  air- 
craft.  Tests were  part  of  long-range NASA  research  program  to  develop 
all-weather aviation  electronics  systems  for  V/STOL aircraft.  (ERG   Re- 
lease 68-12;  WS Release 68-14;  Marshall S tar ,  8 /14 /68 ,2 )  
Ju ly   23-24:  NASA  launched  series  of  11  sounding  rockets  from  NASA  Wal- 
lops  Station  between  8:19  pm  July  23   and  5:55  pm  July  24  to  gather 
upper-atmosphere  data  f o r   weather  research.  Carried  on  six  Nike- 
Apache  and  five  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets,  experiments included: 
two Univ. of  Colorado experiments to obtain vertical profile of  nitric acid 
density,  with  two   spheres  to  measure  daily  density  change;  four  pay- 
loads  instrumented by  GCA  Gorp.  and  Univ.  of  Illinois  to  measure  elec- 
tron  and  ion  density  and  solar  radiation  in  ionosphere;  three  joint 
GSFC-Univ. of  Michigan grenade  launches  to  obtain  temperature,  pres- 
sure,  and  wind  data;  and  two  Univ.  of  Michigan  payloads  to  measure 
ambient a i r  density by  tracking  two small spheres a s  they  fell  from  dif- 
ferent  altitudes.  Experiments were  expected  to  yield  new  information 
about  interrelationship  of  ionosphere  and  neutral  atmosphere  between 
30- and 70-mi altitudes.  (NASA  Release 68-134;  WS Release 68-15) 
. M y   24 :   Zris  I  (E s ro   IZ-B)  satellite  launched  May  16 by  NASA  for  ESRO 
completed its  1,OOOth  revolution of  earth.  Two  of  seven scientific exper- 
iments  malfunctioned  in  first  days  after  launch  but  were  turned  off 

168 

July  24 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
ow   satisfactory. Three 
. ComSatCorp reported  $3.3  million  net  income  (33  cents  per  share)  fo r  
y  after  anomalies were 
een  executed  by  space- 
first  half  of  1968, of  which  $1.5  million  (15  cents  per  share)  was  in  
second  quarter.  Earnings  for  first  half  of  1967  were  $2  million  ( 2 1  
cents per  share)  and  for  second quarter  of  1967, $859,000  (9 cents per 
share) . (ComSatCorp Release 68-35) 
IBM  physicists Dr.  Peter  P.  Sorokin  and  J.  P.  Lankard  had  designed and 
built  pulsed  laser  which produced  100,000-w bursts  of  light  lasting  2.5 
millionths of  a  second and varying  in color according to commercial liq- 
uid  dye used.  It  could be built  in home workshop with materials  worth 
$25  to   $50.  By  changing  dye  used,  thereby  selecting  new  molecule, 
light  of  new  frequency was  produced,  enabling  scientists to  investigate 
energetic properties  of  molecules and  atoms.  (Stevens, N Y T ,   7/26/68, 
55) 
Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  said  no  valid  reason  had  been  of- 
fered  for  DOD’S  May  28  halt  in  spending  for  quiet  electric  drive  sub- 
marine  and  urged  that  all  restraints  on  its  design  and  construction  be 
removed.  Recommendation  accompanied  release  of  June  2 1   testimony 
in  which  V/A  Hyman  G.  Rickover  strongly  supported  submarine  and 
criticized  DOD  for  delaying  its  development  [see  July  111.  (Transcript; 
AP, NYT ,  7 /28 /68 ,54 )  
July  25 .- NASA  was  entering  competitive negotiations  with  Informatics  Inc. 
and  Leasco  Systems  and  Research  Corp.  for  one-year,  $4-million con- 
tract with  two  one-year options for  operation of  its  Scientific and  Tech- 
nical  Information  Facility  at College Park,  Md.  (NASA  Release 68-133) 
President  Johnson  appointed  15-member Federal  Air  Quality  Advisory 
Bo a r d - c h a i r ed  by  Secretary of  Health, Education, and Welfare Wilbur 
J.  Cohen-to 
advise  Government  of  effective  state  and  community 
a i r   quality  control  programs.  ( P D ,  7/29/68,  1153;  Science,  8/2/68, 

July  26 :   NASA  Aerobee  150 M I   sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR,  car- 
ried  Columbia  Radiation  Laboratory  experiment  to  88.3-mi  (142-km) 
altitude  to   examine  x-ray  polarization  of  Sco  XR-1 
in  10- to  25-kev 
region  with  x-ray polarimeter. Rocket  and  instruments  performed  satis- 
factorily. Experiment worked as expected, but some counter or electronic 
failure,  o r  both,  occurred during  early part  of  flight.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL )  
USAF-sponsored  unidentified  flying  object  (UFO)  investigation  by  Univ. 
of  Colorado  concluded  April  30  had  become  “mired  in  controversy,’’ 
said  Science.  Its Director,  Dr.  Edward  U.  Condon, had  refused  to  dis- 
cuss situation  and critics we re   saying project  was  “biased  and  less than 
diligent investigation.” Chief  targets  for  criticism were  Dr.  Condon  and 
project  coordinator  Robert  J.  Low,  while  “most  substantial”  critics 
were  James  E. 
d ,   Univ.  of  Arizona  senior  physicist,  and 
Northwestern U 
omer  Dr.  J.  Allen  Hynek,  WAF’S  chief  UFO  
consultant,  who  feared  Dr.  Condon  would  recommend  against  further 
serious  UFO  study.  Dr.  Condon’s  supporters  had  noted  criticism  was 
based  on  newspaper quotes,  on  his  delight  in  humorous  UFO  anecdotes, 
statements from project  members who  had  been  fired,  and  memo  writ- 

169 

July  26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

ten  by  a  subordinate  before  project  began.  They  did  not  find  evidence 
convincing, Science said.  (Boffey, Science, 7 / 2 6 / 6 8 , 3 3 9 4 2 )  
Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Laboratories  scientists  John  W. Salis- 
bury  and Graham R.  Hunt  reported  in Science they had  found  hypothe- 
sis  of  particle-size control  of  albedo  incompatible  with  hypothesis  of 
abmd an t  limonite on  Mars.  Their  observations indicated  that  proposal 
that  polarimetric,  spectrometric,  color,  and  albedo  measurements  of 
light  and  dark  areas  on Mars  proved  limonite was  major  soil  constitu- 
ent  was  irreconcilable with  proposal  that  variations  in  size  of  particle 
could  be  responsible  for  albedo  difference  between  light  and  da rk  
areas.  They  showed  relative  albedo was  reversed  from  blue  to  red  for 
limonite  samples with  different-sized particles. Observations of  Mars  re- 
vcaled  no   blue-red  albedo  reversal  between  areas.  Although  evidence 
was  insufficient for  choice between  hypotheses, they  believed Mars  soil 
was  most  likely,  for  geological  reasons,  to  be  composed  of  silicates 
stained or coated with ferric oxides.  (Science, 7 /26 /68 ,365 -6 )  
July  27:  Aerobee  150  MI  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR 
carried  MIT  payload  to  84.1-mi  (135.3-km)  altitude  to  obtain  data  on 
celestial  locations  and  energy  spectra  of  discrete  x-ray  sources  in  three 
regions  and  to  search  for  weak,  undiscovered x-ray  sources using  pro- 
portional  counters.  Rocket  and  instruments  performed  satisfactorily. 
(NASA  Rpt SRL )  
*  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson  (D-N. Mex.) , Chairman  of  Senate Committee on 
Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences,  inserted  into  Congressional  Record 
his  report  “Legislative History  of  Space Nuclear  Propulsion  for  Fiscal 
Year  1969,”  which  confirmed  “the  continued  vigorous  support  of  the 
Congress  for  this  space  research  and  development  activity”  and  that 
“appropriate  agencies  should  proceed  with  the  development  of  the 
NERVA-1  nuclear  rocket  engine.”  Final  Congressional action  on  AEC 
and  NASA  FY  1969  authorizations  strongly  supported  nuclear  propul- 
sion development, he said. 
NASA  authorization  had  been  $55  million  fo r   Nuclear  Rockets  Pro- 
gram.  Joint  Committee on   Atomic  Energy  had  recommended  $69 mil- 
lion  for  AEC  Nuclear  Space  Propulsion  Systems  and  strongly  recom- 
mended  program  proceed.  AEC  had  requested  $72  million  for  Project 
Rover,  including $49 million  for  development of  NERVA  I  rocket engine. 
Final  action  of  both  Senate  and  House  Appropriations  Committees on 
Independent Ofices bill  and  AEC  appropriations bill had  restored  funds 
cut  by  House earlier.  It  was  clear,  said  Sen.  Anderson, “that  the  view 
of  the  Congress  is  that  the  Nuclear  Rockets  Program  for  fiscal  year 
1969  is  one  of  the  most  important  and  highest  priority  programs  in 
NASA  and  should  move  forward  as  planned.  . . .’, Amount  finally  ap- 
propriated  for  NASA  R&D  for  FY  1%9  would  not  b e   less  than  $3.3703 
billion,  including  $55  million  for  the  Nuclear  Rockets  Program.  “The 
conference  committee  on  the  AEC  appropriations  . . . agreed  to  $53 
million  on  the  AEC’S  program  in  Reactor  Development-Space  Propul- 
sion  Systems,  a  figure  more  than  halfway  between  the  House  lower 
figure  [$31  million]  and  the  Senate  higher  figure  [$68  million].” 
(CR, 7/27/68,  S 9 5 8 2 4 ;  NASA LAR VII/81) 
*  Army  Electronics  Command  had  produced  new  battery-operated  nuclear 
clock  which  would  gain  or  lose  only  one  second  every  3,000  yr.  It 
would  be  used  by  USA,  NASA, USAF,  and  USN primarily  in   aviation-elec- 

170 

July  27 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
tronic systems and had  potential use  in U.S.,  U.K.,  Canadian,  and  Aus- 
tralian digital communications systems.  ( AP, N Y T ,  7/28/68,30) 
July  28:  JPL   astronomers Dr.  Richard  M.  Goldstein and  Dr.  Shalhav Zohar 
had  located  and  mapped  three  rugged  sectors  on  northwest  face  of 
Venus  using  Goldstone  Tracking  Station’s  210-ft  antenna.  Beta,  most 
clearly defined, appeared  roughly  circular  w i th   150-mi dia  and  17,000- 
s q - m i   area.  Two  other  irregular  features  almost  as  large  had  appeared 
on  radar  map  which  covered  triangular  area  of  estimated  160,000 sq 
mi,  equal  to  area  of  northeastern  U.S.  Dr.  Goldstein  inclined  to  theory 
that prominences were mountains, but he had not yet been able to  meas- 
ure  their  heights.  “We  know  these  features  are  permanent,”  he  said 
“because  they  have  appeared  on  all  our  tests”  for  past  six  years.  (JPL 
Release BB-483) 
German  scientist  Dr.  Otto  Hahn,  who  had  won  1944  Nobel  Prize  for 
chemistry for  his  1938 discovery of  nuclear  fission, died  a t  Goettingen, 
Germany, of  heart  failure  a t   age  89.  He  had  been  consistent opponent 
of  use  of  atomic  weapons,  uiging  scientists to  concentrate  on  peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy.  (UPI, W  Po s t ,  7/29/68,  B4) 
July  28-August  3 :  Australian  astronomers using  Mills  Cross  antenna  array 
a t  Univ. of  Sydney had detected first two  pulsars to be  found in  southern 
sky.  They  brought  to  nine  total  pulsars  discovered  to  date.  Pulse  rates 
of  once  every  0.56  and  1.96  sec  were  similar  to  all  others,  which 
ranged  between  0.25  and  2  sec.  Cornel1 Univ.  astronomer,  Dr.  Yervent 
Terzian,  had  observed  that  two-second pulse  rate  made  it  appear  un- 
likely  that  pulsating  neutron  stars  could  account  for  the  signals.  Calcu- 
lations  indicated  that,  if  they  were  quivering,  or  “ringing”  like  bell,  it 
should  be  a t   much  shorter  intervals  than  those  observed.  Pulse  rates 
were  more  compatible, he  said,  with  proposal  that  they  emanated  from 
white  dwarfs,  “cinders”  of  stars  that  had  consumed  their  nuclear  fuel 
but  were  larger  and  less  dense  than  neutron  stars.  (Sullivan,  N Y T ,  
8 /8 /68 ,30 )  
.Iuly  29 :   Av ia t ion   Week   reported  anticipated  $100-million  cut  in  FY  1969 
funding could halt  contractors’ work on USAF  Manned Orbiting Labora- 
tory  (MOL) in  September,  with  slippage  of  flight  schedule  into  1972. 
Boeing Co.  wa s   working on  new  launch vehicle  a t  NASA’s Michoud  As- 
sembly  Facility  under  Project  Scrimp.  Booster  would  be  vehicle  75  f t  
in  dia  and 80 f t  high  and  use  TRW engine based  on  Boeing  lunar  mod- 
ule  ascent  engine  experience,  with  2-million-lb operational  thrust-al- 
though  USAF  had  not  decided  to  abandon  Titan  111-M  a s  launch  vehi- 
cle.  ( A v  W k ,  7/29/68) 
House  passed  H.R.  18785, military  construction  appropriations  bill  f o r  
FY  1969, which  included $263.3  million  for  Sentinel ABM facilities.  It 
had  rejected  by  vote  of  106 to  37 motion  to  delete missile  funds.  (CR ,  
H7710-35;  Crowther, B Sun, 7/20/68,  AS; AP, N Y T ,  7/30/68,62) 
Av ia t ion   W e e k   reported  DOD  concern  over  advanced  U.S.S.R. 
tactical 
new  Soviet  mach  2.8  M i G 2 3  
fighters  [see  June  101-particularly 
result  in  approval of  longdelayed  USAF  and USN  proj- 
(Foxbat) -might 
ects  including  USN  VFX-1  and  follow-on VFX-2 
interceptors  for  fleet 
defense, USAF  FX  a i r  superiority  fighter, and  usAF/Lockheed  F-12  inter- 
ceptor.  USAF originally  had  wanted  next-generation continental  defense 
interceptor  force composed  entirely  of  F-12s  but  would  accept mixed 

171  

Ju ly   29 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

force  of  F-12s  and  modified  Convair  F-106 
interceptors  designated 
F-106X.  ( A v  Wk, 7/29/68) 
Panel  of  scientists testified  before  House  Committee  on  Science  and  As- 
tronautics  symposium  on  unidentified  flying  objects  ( UFOS )   in  unani- 
mous  support  of  further,  more  detailed  UFO  research.  Northwestern 
Univ.  astronomer  Dr.  J.  Allen  Hynek  said U S .   should  seek U.N.  coop- 
eration in  setting up  “international  clearing house”  for  scientifically re- 
spectable  UFO  reports  because  there  was  almost  a  total  lack  of 
quantitative  data  about  the  phenomenon. Cornel1 Univ. exobiologist Dr. 
Carl Sagan told Committee i t  was not inconceivable that  there were  other 
planets with  civilizations and  technologies more  advanced than  earth’s, 
but  he  cautioned  against  a  widespread  UFO  investigation  program 
which would  require  “some harder  evidence than  is  now  present,”  thus 
being expensive. 
Computer  Science Corp.  mathematician  and  celestial mechanics spe- 
cialist, Dr.  Robert L.  Baker,  Jr.,  revealed space-based sensor  system op- 
erated  from Colorado Springs Air  Defense Command Hq.  had  received 
several  anomalous UFO  alarms  that  had  not  been  explained.  Dr.  James 
A.  Harder,  Univ.  of  California  at  Berkeley  engineer,  suggested  that 
power  which  permitted  UFOS  to  undertake  their  reportedly  incredible 
maneuvering  might depend  on  a  theoretically possible “second gravita. 
tional  field”  interacting  with  electrical field  in  a  manner  corresponding 
to  reaction  between  conventional  electrical  motors  and  generators. 
(Transcript; Lyons, N Y T ,  7 /30 /68 ,10 ;   Lannan, W S ta r ,  7/30/68,  A3 )  
NASA  had  extended,  for  $29,130,524,  one-year contract with  Trans World 
Airlines,  Inc.,  for  installation support  services  a t  KSC,  bringing  total  of 
cost-plus-award-fee contract  to  $101,017,194.  ( KSC  Release  KSC-364- 
6 8  
Ju l y   30 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCXXXZV   from  Baikonur  Cosmo- 
drome  into  orbit  with  295-km  (183.3-mi)  apogee,  208-km  ( 1 2 9 . 2 4  
perigee,  89.5-min period,  and  51.8” inclination.  Equipment  functioned 
normally.  Satellite  reportedly  softlanded  in  its  home  territory  Aug.  5. 
(GSFC  SSR ,   7/31/68;  8 /15 /68 ;   SBD ,   7/31/68,  129 ;   AP,  N Y T ,  
7 /31 /68 ,3 ;   8 /7 /68 )  
@  NASA  announced  addition  of  $35,048,000  to  contract  with  General  Elec- 
tric  C o .  for  continuation  of  design,  fabrication,  and  testing  for  four  re- 
maining  Eiosatellite  spacecraft,  associated  experiment  hardware,  and 
aerospace  ground  equipment-bringing 
total  value  of  contract  to  
$136,662,157.  (NASA  Release 68-136) 
Cone-shaped  instrumented  payload  of  French  Veronique  rocket  released 
a t   114-mi altitude  fell  into Atlantic 164 mi  off  French  Guiana  and  was 
swept  away  by  currents,  French  National  Space  Center  announced. 
(Reuters, W Pos t ,  7/31/68,  A14) 
Bernhardt  L.  Dorman  had  resigned  as  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  fo r  
Industry  Affairs  to  return  to  Aerojet-General Corp.,  NASA  announced. 
He  would be  succeeded Aug.  5 by  Philip  N.  Whittaker,  Vice  President 
of  IBM   Federal Systems D iv .   (NASA   Release 68-137) 
U S .   patent  No.  3,395,565 was  issued  to   Norton  Research  Corp.  for  cali- 
brator  developed  for  NASA  to  enable  crew  of  space  vehicle,  o r   ground 
control  personnel  in   unmanned  flight,  to  check  accuracy  of  pressure 
gauges.  Prototype  instrument,  containing  quantity  of  helium,  had  been 
delivered to NASA.  (Patent Off  PIO;  N Y T ,  8/10/68,33) 

172 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
July  30 
*  USAF  Space  and  Missile Systems  Organization  issued  Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corp.  $2-million  initial  increment to  $4,131,785  cost-plus-fixed-fee con- 
tract  fo r  reentry vehicle technology  and  observables program.  (DOD Re- 
lease 706-68) 
IuZy  31 : NASA  issued  Apollo  Status Summary:  Apollo  7  prime  crew,  h r o -  
nauts  Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  Donn  F.  Eisele,  and  R.  Walter  Cun- 
ningham, successfully completed nine-hour test in  s p a c s r a f t  in  KSC  alti- 
tude  chamber  July  26   a t   226,000-ft  simulated  altitude,  with  cabin 
pressurized  first  with  60%  oxygen  and  40%  nitrogen,  then  with  100% 
oxygen at 5 psi,  normal orbital atmosphere. Astronauts  Thomas P .  Staf. 
ford,  John W.  Young,  and Eugene  A.  Cernan  had  completed  successful 
manned  altitude  test  in  KSC   chamber  July  29  with  cabin  pressurized 
with  60/40  mixture at start  and oxygen to  replenish atmosphere during 
test.  Saturn  IB   launch  vehicle  stages  were  mated  a t   Complex  34  with 
sequence  malfunction  tests  scheduled  fo r  Aug.  1. Propellant utilization 
system modifications  had been completed on 2nd stage. 
In  Apollo/Saturn  503  program,  Lunar  Module  3  ascent and  descent 
stages were  being modified  to  correct  radar  lock-on problem  in  rendez- 
vous  radar  subsystem.  Saturn V  launch vehicle  1st and  2nd  stages were 
mated, with pogo suppressor  modification kits on 1st stage being verified. 
Third-stage propulsion  subsystem  checks were  in  progress. 
I n  South  Atlantic  Anomaly  Probe,  computer  analysis had  confirmed 
radiation  levels presented  no  hazard  to  low-altitude manned  Apollo  or- 
bital flights.  (Text) 
Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  from   NASA  Wallops  Station 
carried  Univ.  of  Maryland  and  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  experiments  to 
186-mi  (300-km)  altitude  to  investigate  role  of  electrons in  producing 
day  airglow.  Rocket  and  instrumentation-which 
included  five-wave- 
length  filter-wheel photometer  with  special  sunshade,  3-  to  800-ev elec- 
tron  spectrometer,  and  electron  retarding-potential  analyzer-per- 
formed  satisfactorily.  Data  correlating  ionospheric  electron  density 
distribution  with  day  airglow  emissions  in  ionosphere  were  obtained. 
(NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
*  NASA  announced  award  of  $31,270,300  contract  to  General  Electric  Co. 
fo r  continuance of  general  support  services at Mississippi  Test  Facility 
through  September  1969,  bringing  total  value  of  basic  contract  to 
$190,810,713.  (MSFC  Release 68-170) 
Dr.  Henry  J.  Reid,  former  Director  and  Senior  Staff  Associate  at  NASA 
Langley  Research  Center, died  in  Gloucester,  Va.,  after  heart  attack  at 
age  72.  He  had  become  LaRC  Director  i n   1926  and  retired  in  June 
1961, after  34 yr  continuous service.  (AP, W Po s t ,   8/1/68,  B10) 
During  J u l y :   Ralph  Kinney  Bennett  in  Data  scored  U.S.  complacency  in 
year which might  “see  some of  the  greatest Soviet  space  spectaculars of 
the  decade.”  I n  U.S.,  he  said,  early  glamour  of  space  race  had  faded 
and NASA  projects were  neither  as ambitious nor  as well-funded as they 
once were.  I n  contrast, he  noted, U.S.S.R.  showed signs of  “a  new  spurt 
of  activity,  new  technical  accomplishments  above  our  planet,  an  accel- 
erated  assault  on  the  moon  and  dark  rumblings  of  advanced  military 
uses  of  the  threshold  of  space. The  time  for  a  Soviet  resurgence  could 
hardly be  better. 
“.  . . Soviets are badly  in need  of  a  great  techno-propaganda feat to 
reassert  their  influence  on  world  public  opinion.  . . .”  Soviet  hold  on 
173 

During  July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

European  satellite  nations  had  shown  evidence  of  advanced  erosion. 
“Their  position  in  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  communist world  is  no 
longer  clearly  defined.”  U.S.S.R.  was  spending  estimated  $9  billion  a 
year  on  space  and  half  that  sum  went  toward  military  applications  of 
space technology.  “There  is an  American attitude  .  . of  waiting  until 
you  get  burnt  before  you  shed complacency. When  Sputnik I  burnt  us, 
we  came  back  with  a  vengeance.  Now  complacency  has  set  in   again. 
Perhaps we  will  feel the  fire  from  the  Soviets in  space before  this  year 
is out  and  react  accordingly. But  in  space technology  . . . it’s  a  tough 
way  to  play the ball game.”  (Da tu ,  7/68) 
Paul G .  Thomas discussed “Earth-Resource Survey from Space,”  in Spuce/ 
Aeronautics.  Program  called  for:  first  mapping  of  earth  to  ultimate 
scale  level  of  1:25,000;  first  mapping  of  global  sea  state  and  surface 
temperature  to  help  shipping,  fishing,  and  weather  forecasters;  moni- 
toring  hydrological  cycle  to  assist  watershed  planning  and  prediction 
of  botanical  responses;  measuring  plant  vigor  and  impact  on  supply 
and  price  of  earth‘s  food ; measuring geographical  surface  phenomena 
to  permit  geologists to  home  in  on  mineral  deposits  and  further  argu- 
ments  in  morphology of  planet earth.  Signatures  and  their  rapid  analy- 
sis  were  major  stumbling  blocks  in  program.  “Although  there  are 
about  50 geological signatures on  record  and  about  100 for  agriculture 
and  forestry,  each  represents  a  one-of-a-kind situation  . . . and,  oddly 
enough,  there  is  often more  variance within  a  species than  there  is  be- 
tween species.” 
As  remote  sensing concepts emerged, i t  was  “apparent  that  successful 
earth-resource  surveillance will  not  be  simply  a  matter  of  lashing  to- 
gether  existing technology  into pseudo-systems and  hoping  for  benefits. 
The  human  effort  and  development funding  needed  to  fully  implement 
a system for  earth  observation from  space will  make  the  lunar  landings 
look  like  a  walk  to  the  corner  candy  store. Thus  the  shift  in  emphasis 
to  cost/benefit  studies,  new  to  the  space  age,  is  certainly  not  without 
foundation.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  an  optimized  system  cannot-or 
should  not-be 
realized, we   should be  willing  to  stumble  a  bit  to   find 
out.”  ( S / A ,  7/68,46-54) 

174 

August  1968 

August  1 : Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill 
Research Range  carried  ARC  luster  sampling instrument  with  collection 
modules,  camera,  and  electronics  package  to  71.3-mi  (114.7-km)  alti- 
tude  to  sample  material  from  noctilucent  clouds  as  luster  instrument 
passed  through  them.  Sampling  instrument  was  successfully  flown  and 
recovered. Instrument  malfunction caused  loss  of  four  modules, but  re- 
maining  eight  were  recovered  in   excellent  condition.  Experiment  was 
considered highly successful.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
Senate  passed  by  voice  vote  H.R.  18785, N 1969 military  construction 
appropriation  bill  which  contained  $36  million  for  Sentinel  planning, 
after  defeating  46  to  27  amendment  to  cut  $227.3  million  in  Sentinel 
deployment  funds  from  its  $1.7  billion  Ey  1969  appropriation.  (CR, 
8/1/68,59965;  Wilson, W Post, 8/2/68,  A10; SBD, 8 /2 /68 ,137 )  
Groundbreaking  ceremony  marked  start  of  construction  on  Hall  of  the 
National Academy of  Sciences, symposia  facility  to  be  shared  with  Na- 
tional  Academy of  Engineering  and National Research Council. An  ad- 
dition  t o   present  NAS  structure,  new  building  would  contain  700-seat 
auditorium,  lounge  area,  40  research  and  administration  offices,  and 
research  archive  file.  Design  and  construction  funds  had  come  from 
contributions  to  Hugh  L.  Dryden  Memorial  Fund  and  from  other  pri- 
vate  and  Government  sources,  including  large  gift  on  behalf  of  NAE. 
Total  cost  of  structure  was  estimated at  $3.8  million.  Dr.  Dryden,  who 
died  in  December  1965, had  served  10 yr  as Home  Secretary with  NAS, 
12 y r   as  a  NAS  Council member,  and  2 1  yr  as  member.  He  had  joined 
NACA,  NASA  predecessor,  in  1947 and had  been  named  Director  of  NACA 
in  1949.  (NAS   Release) 
0  President  Johnson  announced  appointed  of  David  D.  Thomas,  Deputy 
Administrator  of  FAA,  as Acting Administrator,  (PD, 8/5/68,  1190) 
British Railways inaugurated  commercial service across  English  Channel 
with  165-ton SRN4 Hovercraft,  cutting  time  of  30-mi crossing between 
Dover  and  Boulogne  from  1y2 hr  by  fastest  ferry  to  35  min.  (Lee, 
NYT, 8 /2 /68 ,54 ;   Wentworth, W Post, 8/5/68,  A3) 
August  2:  NASA  launched  two  boosted  Arcas  I  sounding  rockets  from 
Resolute Bay, Canada, carrying GSFC  payloads to measure D-region elec- 
tron  density  profiles  in  Polar  Cap  ionosphere  and  measure  simulta- 
neously  solar  proton  spectra.  Rockets  and  instruments  performed  satis- 
factorily. Minimum altitude required  (52.8  mi)  (85 km)  was  obtained, 
allowing  excellent  data  recovery.  Peak  altitudes  were  not  determined 
because of  lack of  radar  support.  (NASA  Rpts SRL) 
NASA  was  stopping  work  on  Saturn  I33 vehicles 215  and  216  “to  the  ex- 
tent possible without involving uneconomical terminations.”  Contractors 
had  been  instructed  to  terminate  work  on  long-lead-time items  being 
procured  for  Saturn  V  vehicles  516  and  517;  halt  would  cause  time 
gap  should  decision  be  reached  later  to  resume  production.  Boosters 

175 

August  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Augus t   2 :   NA SA   introduced  new  fireproof  Apollo  spacesuits  at  press  shou ing   i n   Dover, 
D e l .   I n   earlier  photo,  t e s t   sub j e c t   Ronald  C. Woods   wears  integrated  thermal  microme- 
teorite  garment  (TMG)  to   b e   worn  by   astronauts  during  extravehicular  activities.  I LC  
Industries  su i t   has  back-puck  life-support  sys tem   deueloped  by  United  A ircra f t   C o w .  

had been  requested  in  NASA  FY  1969 budget  fo r  follow-on utilization  of 
Apollo  capacity  beyond  manned  lunar  landing.  Steps  were  taken  after 
Congressional  cuts  in  budget,  in  anticipation  of  final  decisions  on  fu- 
ture production.  (NASA  Release 68-139  ; W Post, 8/3/68,  A2) 
*  At press  showing  in  Dover,  Del.,  NASA  introduced  fireproof Apollo  space- 
176 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

August  2 

suits  developed  after  Jan.  27,  1967,  Apollo  fire  to  protect  astronauts 
against  extreme heat,  cold,  and  flash  fires.  Beta  cloth  of  glass  fiber was 
nonflammable,  with  1,200”  F  melting  point.  Former  spacesuit  fabric 
would  melt  a t   700”  F and  would  burn  if  ignited.  New  541b  suits  were 
22  lb heavier but more  flexible,  consisting of  inner  layer  of  cotton  un- 
derwear and  cover  layer  of  Beta  cloth,  nylon,  and  aluminized  Kapton 
to  protect  against  micrometeoroids  and  temperatures  between  310’  F 
and  - 250”  F.  Intermediate garment  contained  ventilation  unit  which, 
for  astronauts  participating  in   extravehicular  activity,  would  be  cooled 
with  continuous  flow  of  water  while  wearer  was  outside  capsule  and 
with pure oxygen  inside capsule. Suits and cloth helmet to  be worn  after 
removal of  plastic headwear  were manufactured by  ICL  Industries,  Inc., 
and  cost  $175,000-$200,000  each.  NASA  had  ordered  100.  (Lyons, 
NYT, 8 /3 /68 , 3 ;   Lannan, W S ta r ,  8/3/68,  A2) 
*  Ryan XV-5B  Vertifan aircraft made  first  vertical  and hovering flights  a t  
ARC, piloted  by  Ryan  chief  test  pilot William Anderson  in   airworthiness 
tests.  These were  first vertical  flights  since  extensive modifications  con- 
verted  aircraft f rom   original  XV-SA 
to   new  version for  NASA  research 
[see  July  181. Aircraft  made  three  vertical  lift-offs, reaching 20-ft  alti- 
tude  and  remaining  stationarv  in   a i r   UD to  one  minute.  (ARC   As tro-  
gram, a / i 5 / 6 8 , 3 ) u  
*  Data  collected  for  17  mo  by  five  Lunar  Orbiters  indicated  rate  of  pene- 
tration  of  0.025-mm  beryllium  copper  surface  of  pressurized  celis  by 
meteoroids  in  near-lunar  environment was  approximately half  the  rate 
in  near-earth  environment  a s   measured  by  similar  detectors  aboard 
Explorer  XVZ  and  Explorer  X X I I I .  Each  experiment used 20  pressur- 
ized-cell detectors with  total exposed area of  0.186 sq m,  carried aboard 
spacecraft in  both  equatorial  and  polar  orbits  at  altitudes between  18.6 
and 3,852.5 mi  (30 and 6,200 km). Estimates  of  hazard  near moon  had 
ranged from  less to much  greater  than hazard  near  earth. Major  uncer- 
tainty  had  been  contribution  by  secondary meteoroids  created  by  im- 
pacts  of  primary  meteoroids  on  moon,  according  to  report  by  NASA 
LaRC  scientists C.  A.  Gurtler  and  Gary W.  Grew.  Data  showed no  evi- 
dence  of  increase  in   hazard from such “backsplash.”  (Sc ience ,  8/2/68, 
4 6 2 4 )  
0  Univ.  of  Minnesota  scientists  J.  G.  Sparrow  and  E.  P.  Ney  reported  i n  
Science  results  of  experiment on NASA’s Os0  IZ Orbiting  Solar Observa- 
tory  designed primarily  to   measure  zodiacal  light  and  continuum  a ir-  
glow.  From  February to  November  1965, Os0  ZZ had  been  able  to  pick 
up  and  distinguish  between  such  earth  light  sources  as   lightning,  gas 
flares i n  Middle  East  oil  fields,  and  nighttime lights  of  major  US. cit- 
ies.  Most  significant was  recognition  of  10 other  satellites in   low  earth 
orbit. “In  principle, each satellite could have been  identified.”  (Sc ience ,  
8/2/68,.259-60;  W Po s t ,  8 /2 /68 ,   A10; SBD, 8 /5 /68 ,145)  
*  NAS  and  NAE  would  collaborate  on  initial  study  of  scientific  and  engi- 
neering aspects  of  U S .   participation  in   International  Decade  of  Ocean 
Exploration planned  for  1970s,  Science  reported.  (Sc ience ,   8/2/68, 
447) 
August 4 :   NASA  had   concluded  agreements for  cooperative scientific  experi- 
ments  with  space and  upper  atmosphere research  authorities  of  Brazil, 
Norway,  Spain,  and  Sweden.  Brazilian  Comissao  Nacional  de   Ativi- 
dades Espaciais  (CNAE )  and  NASA  project  would  include four  sounding 

177 

August  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

rocket  launches into  upper  atmosphere to  measure micrometeoroid flux 
and  its  variations  with  latitude  in  early  autumn.  Royal  Norwegian 
Council for  Scientific and  Industrial  Research  and  NASA  project  would 
observe earth‘s  magnetic and  electrical fields and charged  particle  envi- 
ronment  during  stages of  auroral  activity  by  launch  in  September and 
October  of  three  barium-release  ion-cloud payloads  followed by  instru- 
mented payloads. 
Spanish  Comisi6n  Nacional  de  Investigaci6n  del  Espacio  ( CONIE) 
and NASA  project would  require launch  of  24 Boosted-Dart meteordogi- 
cal sounding rockets to  30- to 60-km (18.6- to 37.3-mi)  altitudes  a t  two- 
week  intervals  throughout  1969 to  obtain  synoptic wind  and  tempera- 
ture  data  on  structure  and  circulation  of  upper  atmosphere  and  wind 
oscillations.  Swedish  Space  Research  Committee  and  NASA  project 
would  study D and E ionospheric layers with  instrumented payloads  on 
four Boosted-Arcas I1 sounding rockets in autumn 1968. 
I n   all  projects,  principal  experimenters  would  have  first  rights  to 
data  which  subsequently would  be  made  available  to  world  scientific 
community. Each agency would bear  full  cost of  its agreed  responsibili- 
ties  without  exchange  of  funds.  (NASA  Release  68-138;  SBD,  8/5/68!, 
148) 
August  5:  U.S.S.R.  w a s   expected  to  make  more  successful  launches  than 
U S .  during  1968 for  first time  since  1957, with  both  nations  emphasia- 
ing  military  goals,  Howard  Benedict  of  Associated  Press  wrote.  I n  
1957, U.S.S.R.  had  launched two   Sputniks, U S .   had  launched none.  I n  
1958, U S .   had  launched  five  to   U.S.S.R.’s  one;  thereafter,  U.S.  had 
maintained  substantial  edge,  building  to  73-46  margin  in   1966.  In  
1967, U S .  had  led by  only one launch,  67-66.  Through  1967, U S .  had 
had  400  successful launches,  with  532  payloads  orbited.  U.S.S.R.  had 
had  240 launches with 289 payloads.  In   1968 t o  date, U.S.S.R.  had  suc- 
cessfully launched  40  rockets with  40  payloads;  U S .   had  launched  22 
rockets  with  31  payloads,  23   fewer  than  in  1967,  while  U.S.S.R. 
launches had  increased by five. 
Reasons  for  decline  in  U S .   launch  rate  were  NASA  budget  cuts  and 
improved  instrumentation  and  data  recovery  in  military  launches 
(60%  of  U S .   firings). U S .  military  payloads in   1968 numbered  22  to  
U.S.S.R.’s  24  out  of  total  40.  Tracking  experts had  reported  16 of  1968 
U.S.S.R.  satellites  on  reconnaissance  assignments,  with  13  reentering 
after  8-day  orbit,  two  after  12  days  and  one  still  aloft.  Sole U.S.S.R. 
Fractional  Orbital  Bombardment  System 
test,  Cosmos 
(FOBS) 
C C X V I I I ,   had  been  launched  and  returned  to  earth  in   less  than  one 
orbit  April  25.  Drop  from  nine  FOBS  tests  in  1967  indicated  U.S.S.R. 
might have perfected a t  least first stage in FOBS  development. 
Neither  U S .   nor  U.S.S.R.  had  launched  men  into  space in  1968 but 
experts  listed  Cosmos  CCX I I   and  CCX I I l   launchings  April  1 5   as 
forerunners  of  manned  lunar  mission.  I n   1968, U.S.S.R.  had  launched 
nine  scientific  satellites,  three  for  navigation,  and  two  each  for  com- 
munications,  weather,  and  deep  space  probes.  US. had  made  two  un- 
manned Apollo  rocket  and spacecraft  tests,  five  scientific payloads,  and 
one moon shot.  (Huntsville T ime s ,  8/5/68) 
0  Committee  on  Resolutions  of  1968  Republican  National  Convention 
meeting in Miami Beach, Ha.,  proposed platform plank  on  science:  “In 
science and  technology  the  nation  must  maintain  leadership  against  in- 

178 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
August  5 
creasingly  challenging  competition  from  abroad.  . . . We  regret  that 
the  Administration’s  budgetary  mismanagement  has  forced  sharp  re- 
ductions  in  the  space program.  The Republican  party  shares  the  sense 
of  urgency  manifested by  the  scientific community concerning  the  ex- 
ploration  of  outer  space. We  recognize  that  the peaceful applications of 
space probes  in communications, health, weather, and  technological ad- 
vances  have  been  beneficial  to  every  citizen. We  regard  the  ability  to  
launch and  deploy  advanced spacecraft  as  a  military  necessity. We  de- 
plore  the  failure  of  the  Johnson-Humphrey Administration  to   empha- 
size  the  military  uses of  space for  America’s  defense.”  (NYT,  8/5/68, 
25 1 
*  First  short-takeoff -and-landing  strip  fo r   commercial  aircraft  in   US. 
opened  a t   La  Guardia  Airport  in  New  York.  Called  S T O L ~ O ~ ~ ,  
i t   was 
1,095 f t  long.  Shortest regular  runway  a t  La  Guardia  was 4,000  ft.  FAA 
said STOLport would be used  for visual  flying only.  STOL  aircraft landed 
and  took  off  a t   60 mph,  rather  than  regular  commercial aircraft’s  105 
mph.  Three more  stolports were  to  open  Sept. 1 to  provide  taxi  service 
between National  and  Dulles Airports  in Washington, D.C.,  and  Friend- 
ship  Airport  in  Baltimore.  (Shipler.  NYT,  8/6/68,  1 ;  AP,  W  S ta r ,  
8/6/68,  AS;  W Pos t ,  8 /14 /68 ,1 )  
0  NASA  planned  flight  test  of  relatively  inexpensive  general-aviation  colli- 
sion-avoidance system,  flight  test  of  six  or  more  general-aviation  air- 
craft,  and  series  of  wind-tunnel tests  of  Learjet  at  ARC  under  five-year 
program  to   improve light  aircraft  technology with FY 1969 funding  of 
$500,000.  General-aviation research  program’s  main  current  emphasis 
was  on  flight-testing  Piper  Twin  Comanche  on  twin-engine  aircraft 
characteristics for comparison with measurements obtained during wind 
tunnel  tests.  ERC  and  LaRC  work  on  collision-avoidance system  was 
aimed  a t   cooperative  system  costing  below  $1,000  commercially,  in 
which  pilot  would  be  warned  of  impending  collision  if   other  aircraft 
was  similarly equipped. LaRC  was  using  randomly coded Doppler radar 
system, to be  flight tested  late  in  autumn, while  ERC  was  developing op- 
tical  system using  xenon  strobe light  to  illuminate aircraft. Light would 
be  picked  up  by  silicon  detectors.  ERC  had  not  yet  developed  fully 
integrated system.  (Am  Av,  8 /5 /68 ,6 )  
ciugust  6 :  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite with  Atlas-Agena D  booster 
from  ETR  into  o r b2   with  24,769-mi  (39,866.8-km)  apogee,  19,685-mi 
(31,556-km)  perigee  1,436.0-min period,  and  9.9 O  inclination.  USAF’S 
first  unannounced  ETR  launching  in  five  years  (USAF  usually  launched 
from WTR)   ; satellite carried payload described by  USAF  a s  “experimen- 
tal.”  AP  story  in  Wash ing ton  Pos t   said  payload’s  primary  purpose  re- 
portedly was  to  test  improved sensing devices and  other  equipment de- 
signed  to  locate  missile  and  other  military  installations  and  provide 
warning  of  rocket  attacks  from unfriendly  nations.  AP  sources had  in- 
dicated  launch  was  from  ETR  so  satellite  could  achieve  high-altitude 
orbit where  i t   could  “dwell  for  a  longer  period  over  a  desired  area  of 
(AP,  W Po s t ,   8/7/68,  A14;  SBD ,   8/7/68,  156;  GSFC 
the  globe.’’ 
SSR, 8/15/68;  Pres   Rp t   6 8 )  
launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by  Titan 
USAF 
111-B-Agena  D booster.  Satellite entered orbit  with 266-mi  ( 4 2 8 . 1 - b )  
apogee,  88-mi  ( 1 4 1 . 6 4 4   perigee,  90.5-min  period,  and  109.5’  incli- 

179 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%8 
August  6 
nation  and  reentered  Aug.  16.  ( S BD ,   8/12/68,  177;  GSFC  SSR, 
8/15/68;  8/31/68;  Pres Rp t  68) 
Wash ing ton  Post  article  by  George C.  Wilson  logged  significant changes 
in  U.S.S.R.  space  program:  Cosmos  CCVIII   and  Cosmos  CCXXVZIZ, 
launched March  21   and  June  21,  had  been  first  Soviet “spyyy satellites 
to   stay  up  for  12 days  instead  of  usual  7  or  8.  U S .   space  experts had 
said  they  would  have  to  watch  pattern  of  future  satellites before  con- 
cluding  whether  purpose  of 
longer-lived  satellites  was  peaceful. 
Launches had  been  logged without comment  in  GSFC Satellite  Situation 
Repor t   but West had  evidence that  U.S.S.R.  had  recovered  photographs 
taken  by  them.  U.S.  analysts also had  noted  overlapping by  U.S.S.R.  of 
reconnaissance flights,  possibly  to  ensure  backup  if  one  failed.  Cosmos 
C C X X X I V   marked  100th  Soviet  reconnaissance  launch  July  30.  Cos- 
mos  CCXXXI   had  been  launched July  10 a t  time  appropriate  for  pho- 
tographing  French  nuclear  tests  in  Pacific  near  Tahiti.  (W   Po s t ,  
8 /6 /68 ,2   1 
Republican  presidential  contender  Richard  M.  Nixon  told  group  of 
Southern  delegates to  nominating  convention U.S.  must  restore  balance 
of  power  in  missile  and  space  programs.  “This  Administration  has  al- 
lowed  i t  to  deteriorate.  That  is  why  I  am  opposed to  any  kind  of  pro- 
gram-such 
as  defensive  missiles-which 
allows  the  United  States  to  
take  second  place  to  the  Soviet  Union.  We  are  going  to  restore  our 
strength in the missile program.” 
I n   the  space program,  he  said,  “We  have  sort  of  a  budget  problem 
. . . and  we  may  have  to  trim  it  in  some  places.  But  as  f a r   as  these 
great  and  important  objectives  that  involve  national  defense  . . . 
[and ]   prestige,  we  have  got  to  be  sure  that  the  United  States  is  first 
and never  second  in  space  . . . [for]  any  great  nation,  to  remain  great, 
must  explore the  unknown.  . . . As  f a r   as  I  am  concerned  . . . there  is 
a  research  gap  at  the  present  time.  We  aren’t  putting  enough  money 
into basic research  to  keep  ahead  of  the  Soviet Union. We  a re  going  to  
close  that  gap-and 
then  create  one  where  they  a re   behind  us  all 
around the world.”  (M  Her, 8 /7 /68 ,   A22;  Cocoa, Ha.,  Toda y ,  8/7/68; 
SBD ,  8 /8 /68 ,162 )  
0  I n   policy  statement  on  science  New  York  Governor  Nelson  B.  Rocke- 
feller, campaigning for Republican presidential  nomination, had  recom- 
mended  that  U S .   postpone  manned  space  program  after  Apollo.  He 
warned  against  treating  space  program  a s   contest  between  U.S.  and 
U.S.S.R.  and  advocated  use  of  unmanned  satellites for  direct  benefits 
on  earth,  to  explore planets, and  to  study  sun.  Gov.  Rockefeller  said  if  
he  were  President  he  would  appoint  commission  “to  review  the  whole 
field  of  government science.”  He  recommended  President  make  annual 
report to Congress on science and technology.  ( S BD ,  8/6/68,149) 
0  House Committee on  Government Operations  report,  Government  Use   of 
Satellite  Communications-1  968,  endorsed  DOD  decision  to  proceed 
with  Phase  I1  of  Defense  Communications Satellite System  [see  June 
181  and  urged  immediate  action  in  reprogramming  and  procurement. 
“The  initial  system,  established  partly  on  an   experimental  basis  and 
without  the  benefit  of  more  recent  technological advances,  needs  to  be 
supplemented  and  ultimately  replaced.”  It  recommended  DOD planning 
to   develop  facilities  and  methods  for  emergency  communications  by  
satellite,  to  provide  satellite  services  when  possible  instead  of  expand- 

180 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

August  6 

ing  conventional  systems,  and  to   improve  ground  terminals  and  de- 
velop new  ones.  (Text; Aero Daily, 8/6/68) 
*  NASA  successfully  completed  month-long  laboratory  test  of  Biosatellite 
capsule  which  would  maintain  primate  in  space  for  30  days  in  1969. 
Fully  instrumented,  IS&,  pigtailed  monkey  which  made  simulated 
space  flight was  alert  and  responsive when  removed  and  was  undergo- 
ing  postflight examination  and  physiological measurements identical  to 
those planned  to  follow actual  flight. Test had  been  terminated  after 28 
days  when  biomedical  instrumentation  measured  less  urine  than  mon- 
key would normally secrete. 
Biosatellite  D  primate  flight  would  duplicate  most  routines  of 
manned  flight  to  provide  data  on  effects  of  prolonged  weightlessness. 
During  simulated  flight,  monkey  ate  penets,  drank  water,  and  per- 
formed  two  30-min tasks  each  day.  Test  was  conducted by   Biosatellite 
experimenters a t  UCLA with  support  from NASA  and General Electric Go. 
(NASA  Release  68-142;  AP,  B  Sun, 
ARC  was  managing  project. 
8/29/68,  A4) 
USAF  experiments  in  human  reactions  to  extreme  heat  had  indicated  as- 
tronauts  could  survive  reentry  through  earth’s  atmosphere  if  their 
cabin  cooling system  failed.  I n  tests at Wright-Patterson AFB,  Ohio, air- 
men  were  being  subjected  to  300°F and  400°F heat  in  four-foot-high 
oven  three  times  daily.  Some could  stand up  to  1 5  min  a t  300°F; limit 
a t  400°F had been two o r  three minutes.  (AP, LA  Times, 8/6/68) 
Apollo 7  prime  crew successfully completed water  egress training  in  Gulf 
of  Mexico.  (NASA  Apollo  Status  Summary,  8/7/68) 
August  7:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Thor-Agena booster into  orbit with  161-mi (257.2-km)  apogee, .lOO-mi 
(160.9-km)  perigee, 88.7-min period, and 82.1  inclination. Satellite re- 
entered  Aug.  27  (GSFC  SSR,  8/15/68;  8/31/68;  Pres  R p t   68) 
*  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops Station 
carried  Rice Univ.  payload  to  121.6-mi  (195 .644   altitude to  measure 
vector  magnetic field  in  region between 90  and  130 km  during  electron 
current  flow with  sufficient continuity  and  signal  strength  to   deduce al- 
titude  profile and absolute strength  of  current layer.  Rocket  and  instru- 
mentation  performed  satisfactorily.  Clear  magnetometer data  were  re- 
ceived during payload ascent and descent. ( NASA Rpt SRL) 
*  NASA  issued  Apollo  Status  Summary:  Apollo  7  spacecraft  had  been 
moved  from altitude  chamber  at  KSC. During  week  it  would  be  mated 
with lunar module adapter  and  prepared  f o r  mechanical mate with  Sat- 
urn  IB   launch  vehicle.  I n   Apollo  Saturn  503  project,  radar  lock-on 
problem in Lunar Module 3 ascent and  descent stages’ rendezvous radar 
subsystem  was  being  isolated.  Saturn  V  launch  vehicle  1st  and  2nd 
stages had been mated. 
Last  in  series of  seven water  impact tests in   support  of  first manned 
Apollo mission was scheduled for Aug.  13.  (Text) 
AEC  and  US .   Geological  Survey  experiments  had  shown  that  neutrons 
from man-made californium-252 hitting  gold  and  silver  atoms  excited 
atoms  to  radioactive  state ; atoms  then  emitted  characteristic  gamma 
rays  by  which  they  were  identified.  With  californium,  irradiation 
equipment  fo r   technique  already  known  could  be  reduced  about 
~
0
times, making  it  ideal for sea bottom probes and  for devices to 
0
~
~
~
~
 
analyze  materials  on  moon’s  surface  as  well  as  fo r   mining  and  in- 

181 

August  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

dustrial purposes.  Geological  Survey was  working  with  GSFC  on  use  for 
study of  moon.  (NEA ,   W New s ,  8/8/68) 
0  S t .  Louis Globe-Democrat editorial  said : “The  principal  criticism  of  the 
proposed cuts in  the space budget  is that they  aren’t  deep enough.  NASA 
will be left with  an expenditure of  nearly  $4 billion  in  the current  fiscal 
year.  With  the  nation  in   a  financial  bind  and   the  Administration 
pledged  to  prune  $6  billion  from  the  federal  budget,  i t   seems  that  a 
good  deal more  than now  suggested  should  be  lopped  off  the  space pro- 
gram.”  (S t .  Lou i s   G-D,  8/7/68) 
August  8 :   Explorer  X X X Z X   (Air  Density  balloon)  and  Explorer  X L  
(Znjun V )  were  successfully  launched  by  NASA  from  WTR  by  single 
four-stage Scout booster.  Primary mission  objective was  to  place  space- 
craft  in near  polar  orbits to  extend  studies of  atmospheric density, geo- 
magnetically  trapped  particles,  and  down-flux of  these  particles  into  a t-  
mosphere.  Expected lifetimes were one year each. 
Explorer  X X X l X   entered  orbit  with  1,548-mi  (2,492.3-km)  apogee, 
425-mi  (683-km)  perinee,  117.9-min  period,  and  80.6”  inclination. 
The 20.5-lb, 12-ft-dia inflatable  sphere was  covered  with  aluminum  foiI 
to reflect sunlight and radio beacons  and was  coated  with  painted  white 
spots  for  temperature  control.  I t  would  extend  measurements  of  latitu- 
dinal,  seasonal,  and   solar  cycle  variations  in  upper  a i r   density  and 
compare  previous  satellite  measurements  for  further  insight  into 
sources of  atmospheric heating. 
Explorer  X L ,   29-in-high, 30-in-dia,  153.1-lb  hexagon,  entered  orbit 
with  1,573-mi 
(2,530-km)  apogee,  424-mi 
(677-km)  perigee, 
118.3-min  period,  and  80.6’ 
inclination.  Satellite’s  primary  purpose 
was  to  measure  directly  down-flux  of  charged  particles  into  atmos- 
phere;  study  geomagnetically  trapped  charged  particles,  emphasizing 
spectra,  spatial  distribution,  and  time  variations;  and  correlate  VLF 
radio  emissions  and  measurements  of  low-energy  positive  electrons 
with more energetic particle measurements. 
Mission  was  second  NASA  launch  of  two  spacecraft  by  one  Scout 
booster.  First  dual  launch  successfully  injected  Explorer  XXZV   (Air 
Density  balloon)  and  Explorer  X X V   ( l n j un  ZV)  into  orbit  Nov. 
21,  1964.  LaRC  desiqned,  developed,  and  constructed  A i r   Density  Ex- 
plorer  and Univ.  of  Iowa  designed,  developed  and constructed In jun   V 
and provided  all but  one  of  its  experiments.  Proqram  was  managed  by 
LaRC  under  OSSA  direction.  (NASA  Proj  Off;  S BD ,   8/12/68,  177;  GSFC 
SSR ,  8/15/68) 
NASA  announced  “interim  operating  plan”  for  FY  1969  designed  to 
achieve  $3.85-billion budget.  Agency  would  reduce  staff  by   1,600  and 
contract  employees by  2,000.  Purchase  or  construction  of  four  Saturn 
boosters  had  been  canceled  [see  Aug.  21,  plans  for  1973  instrument 
payloads  on  Mars  had  been  substantially  reduced,  lunar  exploration 
programs  had  been  halted,  and  development  of  NERVA  nuclear 
rocket  engine would  be  put  back  until  next  fiscal year,  at  least.  Apol10 
Applications  program would  be  reduced  $300 million  from  budget  re- 
I 
quest of  $440 million  and would  include only two  spacecraft-Saturn 
Workshop  and  Apollo  Telescope  Mount-with 
boosters  and  backup 
equipment.  “Work  toward  post-Apollo  lunar  exploration  and  toward 
Saturn V Workshop will  be limited to  studies.”  (NASA  Release 68-141) 
NASA  Nike- Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station 

182 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

August  8 

carried  Univ.  of  Michigan  payload  to  94.7-mi  (152.4-km)  altitude  to 
measure neutral  atmosphere density and  temperature  profile  in  17.4- to 
63.4-mi  (28-  to  120-km) -altitude  range,  compare  day   measurements 
with  night  measurements  by  rocket  to  be  launched  Aug.  9,  and  flight- 
test  and evaluate  new  second-generation  Pitot  probe  system  flown  with- 
out  ejectable  nose  tip.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfac- 
torily.  Pitot  tube  performed  well  and  seemed  capable  of  reaching 
higher  apogees,  even without nose-cone tip,  than  old  system.  (NASA   Rpt 
SRL)  
NASA  announced  Astronaut  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  had  replaced  Astronaut 
Michael  Collins  as  prime  command  module  pilot  for  third  manned 
Apollo  mission.  Lovell  had  held  same  position  on  mission’s  backup 
crew.  Collins  had  undergone  successful  spinal  surgery  July  2 3   and 
would  require  three  to  six  months  recuperation.  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr., 
backup  lunar  module  pilot,  had  been  moved  to  command  module  pilot 
position  on  backup  crew.  Astronaut  Fred  W.  Haise,  Jr.,  had  been  as- 
signed  to  backup crew  as  lunar  module  pilot.  Lovell  joined  Astronauts 
Frank  Borman  and  William  A.  Anders  on  prime  crew  for  mission 
scheduled  for  first  quarter  1969. 
(M SC   Release;  KSC   Release 
KSC-374-68;  AP,  N Y T ,  8/9/68,  14 ;   UPI,  W  S tar ,   8/9/68;  W  P o s t ,  
8/9/68,  A7; S BD ,  8 /9 /68 ,169 ;   MSC Roundup ,  8 /16 /68 ,1)  
GSFC  team  headed  by  Peter  Minott  was  studying  amount  of  energy  ab- 
sorbed by  atmosphere through  experiments  with  laser  beam  directed  a t  
Exp lo re r   X X X V I .   Reflectors  on   satellite  returned  beam  to  its  starting 
point on earth while laser  detector on  satellite radioed  back  data  on  the 
strength  of  its  light  as  it  passed  through  atmospheric conditions.  NASA 
laser  expert  Dr.  Henry  Plotkin  said,  “Some  day  we  figure  that  with  a 
laser we  can build  a  space-to-earth communications  link  that  won’t  fade 
the way  radio  waves do.”  Laser  experiments also were  being conducted 
with  Explorer  X X I I ,   X X V I I ,   and  X X I X ,   and  two  French  satellites. 
(Kehoe, W Po s t ,  8/8/68,  F l )  
ComSatCorp,  on  behalf  of  INTELSAT,  issued  RFP  for  aeronautical  com- 
munications  satellites  for  two-way  simplex  voice  communication  be- 
tween  transoceanic  aircraft  and  fixed  earth  stations.  Spacecraft were  to 
be  active  repeater  VHF   comsats  with  minimum  five-year  life  for  em- 
placement  in  synchronous  equatorial  orbit.  (ComSatCorp  Release 
68-38) 
.4ugust  8-9:  Two  NASA  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rockets  launched  from 
NASA  Wallops  Station  reached  178-mi  (286.5-km)  and  199-mi  (320- 
km )   altitudes  in  Univ.  of  Michigan  experiments  to  obtain  thermo- 
sphere structure measurements  of  N,  density  and  temperature. Rockets 
and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily.  All  scientific  objectives 
appeared  to  have  been  met.  (NASA  Rpts  SRL) 
August  9 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  C C X X X V   from  Baikonur  Cosmo- 
drome  into  orbit with  283-km  (175.8-mi)  apogee,  203-km  (126.2-mi) 
perigee, 89.3-min period,  and 51.8’  inclination.  Satellite performed  sat- 
isfactorily and  reentered Aug.  17.  (W S ta r ,   8/9/68,  1; S B D ,  8/12/68, 
177; GSFC  S S R ,  8/15/68;  8/31/68) 
*  NASA  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station 
carried  Univ.  of  Michigan  payload  to  90.9-mi  (146.3-km)  altitude  to 
measure  neutral  atmospheric  density  and  temperature  profile  a t   alti- 
tudes of  12.4-74.6  mi  (20-120  km) , compare  night measurements  with 

183 

August  9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

day  measurements by  rocket  launched  Aug.  8,  evaluate  lunar  position 
sensing  device for  use  in  resolving payload  altitude,  and  measure wind 
velocities.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed  satisfactorily ; data 
were  obtained  as  planned.  Launch  was  to  be  last  of  this  Pitot  static 
payload  configuration.  New  Pitot  probe  system  would  be  used  in  fu- 
ture.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
0  NASA  selected  Nortronics  Div.  of  Northrop  Corp.  and  Fecker  Div.  of 
Owens-Illinois Go.  for  competitive negotiations  fo r   $2.5  million  cost- 
plus-incentive-fee contract to  design, build,  and install 3 6 i n  aperture in- 
frared  telescope  in   N.4SA’S  high-altitude  observatory  aircraft.  Aircraft, 
modified  Convair  990  jet  transport,  was  operated  by  ARC  a s   national 
facility  for  astronomers  and  other  scientists. Telescope  would  provide 
information on  planets,  comets,  asteroids,  solar  surface,  stars,  nebulae, 
and  galactic phenomena.  Above  interference  of  most  of  earth’s  atmos- 
phere,  it would  gather  information  in  infrared  portion  of  spectrum not 
available from ground observatories. (NASA  Release 68-144) 
*  Naval  Research Laboratory  scientists Dror  Sadeh,  Stephen Knowles,  and 
Benjamin  Au  reported  in  Science  observations  made  in   two  experi- 
ments  in  which  an  apparent  decrease  in   frequency  of  radio  or  light 
waves was  detected when  optical path  was  in  vicinity  of  a  mass.  Radio 
waves  skirting  earth  and  sun  appeared  to  increase  in  wavelength, lead- 
ing  scientists  to   reason  that  all  lights  crossing  portions  of  universe 
would  be  similarly  affected  by  mass  of  objects  along  the  way.  Effect 
could  account  for  part  of  “red  shift”  (shift  in  spectra  of  distant  gal- 
axies  a s  they  receded  €rom e a r th ) ,  chief  tool  for  measuring  expansion 
rate  of  universe which,  in  turn,  was  used  to  measure  age  of  universe. 
Thus,  if  observations by  NRL   scientists were  confirmed,  they  could  ne- 
cessitate revision  of  long-standing estimates of  age  and  expansion  rate 
of  universe. Experimenters, however,  indicated  their  findings appeared 
inconsistent with  results  from  “round-trip”  experiments, such  as  those 
obtained  during  past  year  when  radar  impulses  were  bounced  off 
(Science,  8/9/68,  567-9;  Sullivan,  NYT, 
Venus  and  Mercury. 
8/10/68,27) 
ComSatCorp,  on  behalf  of  INTELSAT,  announced  i t   had  requested  pro- 
posals  for  design  of  120-in  parabolic  spacecraft  antenna  for  experi- 
ments  to  evaluate feasibility  of  deployable,  narrow-beam, parabolic  an- 
tenna  for use  on  spacecraft in  synchronous, equatorial orbit  in  research 
on  communications at  15 ghz.  Antenna  would  be  designed  to  provide 
0.5” width beam.  (ComSatCorp Release 68-40) 
-4ugust  10 :   NASA’s 860-lb A t s   ZV  (ATS-D) 
(Applications Technology Satel- 
lite)  w a s   launched  from  ETR  by  Atlas-Centaur booster  on  mission  to  
evaluate  gravity-gradient  system  for  spacecraft  stabilization  in   syn- 
chronous  orbit  and  to  obtain  data  on  experiments during  first  30  days 
in orbit. 
Centaur  ignited,  successfully injecting  spacecraft into  elliptical park- 
ing  orbit with  475.8-mi  (765.7-km)  apogee,  115.4-mi  (175.7-km)  peri- 
gee,  and  29.1”  inclination.  Centaur  engines,  which  were  to  have  reig- 
nited  to  inject  spacecraft  into  22,300-mi-altitude  synchronous  equa- 
torial  orbit west  of  South  America, failed  to  ignite.  Since programmer 
did  not  receive  accelerometer  burn  indication,  it  did  not  issue  com- 
mand  to  separate  and  spacecraft  and  Centaur  stage  remained  joined, 
tumbling  uncontrollably,  in  parking  orbit.  Three  attempts  to  fire  apo- 

184 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

August  10 

gee kick motor  were unsuccessful because firing was  inhibited  by  sepa- 
ration  switches. Efforts would be made to  operate all experiments possi- 
ble,  but  information  beyond  proof  of  operation  was  not  expected.  Al- 
though  exact  rate  and  direction  of  tumble  had  not  been  determined, 
preliminary  assessment indicated  rate  was  too high  for  successful boom 
deployment. 
A t s   ZV was  fourth  in  series  of  seven  satellites designed  to  improve 
spacecraft technology,  develop long-life control  systems, advance space- 
c ra f t   communications,  and  improve  long-range  weather  predictions. 
First  spacecraft  to  be  placed  in  earth  orbit  by  Centaur booster,  A t s   ZV 
was  56  in  in  dia,  72  in  long,  and  would  have  been  251  f t   across with 
gravity-gradient  rods  fully  deployed.  Spacecraft  carried  four  appli- 
cations  technology  experiments-gravity-gradient 
stabilization  system, 
day-night  Image  Orthicon  Camera  (roc) , microwave  communications 
no  science  experiments.  Ats  I 
experiment,  and  ion  engine-and 
(launched  Dec.  6,  1966)  had  exceeded  its  test  objectives  and  was 
still  operating  satisfactorily.  A t s   ZZ  (launched  April  5,  1967 ) ,  though 
judged  a  failure because of  eccentric orbit,  had  transmitted some useful 
data.  A t s   ZZZ (launched Nov.  5,  1967) , last  ATS  spacecraft scheduled  to 
be  launched  by   Atlas-Agena  D  booster,  had  operated  successfully and 
transmitted  color  photos  of  earth.  ATS  program  was  managed  by  GSFC 
under  OSSA  direction.  (NASA   P ro j  Off;  NASA  Release 68-127;  UPI,  ,YYT, 
8 /12 /68 ,34 ;   AP, P  Inq, 8/12/68;  Lewis News ,  8/16/68,1) 
*  Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight,  told  British  Interplanetary  Society  in  London :  “I  believe 
that  the  exploitation  of  space  is  limited  in   concept  and  extent  by 
the  very  high  cost  of  putting  payload  into  orbit,  and  the  inaccessibility 
of  objects  after  they  have  been  launched.  Therefore  I  would  forecast 
that  the  next major  thrust  in  space will  be  the  development  of  an  eco- 
nomical launch vehicle for  shuttling between earth and  the installations, 
such  as  the  orbiting  space  stations  which  will  be  operating  in  space.” 
Dr.  Mueller  said  efficient earth-to-orbit transportation  system would  be 
needed  to  shuttle  thousands  of  tons  of  material  in  and  out  of  space, 
operating  in  mode  similar  to  that  of  large  commercial  air  transports 
and  compatible with  airports.  Same technology could be  applied  to  ter- 
restrial point-to-point transport.  (Text) 
New  York  News  editorial  criticized  severe  cut-backs  in  space  funding: 
“Most  ominous, we  think,  are  the  delays and  curtailments  likely  to  be 
economy-compelled in  the  Apollo  moon  program  . . . too-drastic  cut- 
backs  in  funds  for  space programs  and  researches would  be  foolish  a t  
best,  and  suicidal  a t   worst,  considering  Russia’s  known  efforts  to  de- 
velop  space  weapons  for  world  blackmail.  What  if  Queen  Isabella  had 
limited  Christopher  Columbus to  one  little ship  and  a  skeleton  crew?” 
(NY  News ,  8/10/68) 
-4ugust  1 1  : Photographic  evidence  from  U S .   satellites  had  indicated 
U.S.S.R.  construction  of  Moscow  antimissile  defense had  been  slowed 
down,  if  not  halted.  U S .   intelligence officials  had  been  satisfied  from 
photographs  that  Tallinn  defense  across  northeast  approaches  to 
U.S.S.R.  was  against U S .   bombers, not missiles.  (W  Po s t ,  8/11/68,  1) 
August  12 :  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding rocket  launched from  WSMR  carried 
Dudley  Observatory,  Albany,  N.Y.,  payload  to  96.5-mi  (155.2-km) 

185 

August  12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

altitude  to  collect,  recover,  and  evaluate  micrometeoroid  particles  dur- 
ing  approximate  maximum  of  Perseid  meteor  shower.  Rocket  and 
instruments  performed  satisfactorily  and  telemetry  data  were  obtained 
during  entire  flight  time.  Preliminary  data  indicated  excellent  experi- 
mental  results.  Payload  was  not  damaged  and  was   recovered  within 
one hour.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
*  Simplified  instrumentation  technique  using  miniaturization,  developed 
by  NASA’s FRC  for  monitoring  pilots  of  XB-70  aircraft  and  wingless 
lifting-body vehicles, had  been  adapted  to  make possible  almost  instan- 
taneous  transmission  of  electrocardiograms  taken  of  ambulance  pa- 
tients  enroute  to  hospital  doctors  awaiting  their  arrival.  In  procedure 
taking  total  tw o   minutes,  data  obtained  from  patient  were  flashed  over 
ambulance radio  to  control  center,  relayed by  telephone to  cooperating 
hospital,  and  fed  to  ECG  recorder.  System had  been  successfully tested 
by  a  Los Angeles  ambulance service for  several months.  (NASA   Release 
68-145;  W Po s t ,  8/15/68) 
*  N e w   Yo rk   T imes   reported  interview  i n   which  General  Electric  C o .   engi- 
neers  described ARMS  (Application of  Remote Manipulators  in  Space), 
concept  being pursued  under  $68,000 NASA  contract  to   study  feasibility 
of  orbiting robots  to  refuel,  resupply, and  repair  crippled  spacecraft on 
signals  from  earth.  They  could  be  in  operation  by  mid-1970s and,  i f  
successful,  could  extend  useful  lifetimes  of  communications  and 
weather  satellites and,  possibly,  could  inspect  or  disable  hostile  space- 
craft.  One plan  was  to  launch  600-lb robot  attached  to  1,000-lb tender 
or  “home  base”  satellite. ,With  repair  kit  orbited  on  distress  signal 
from  regular  satellite, robot  would  rendezvous  and  repair  disabled  sat- 
ellite  directed  by  a  ground  controller  by  radio  signals  transmitted  via 
the  tender.  After  each  repair  robot  would  return  to  tender.  Engineers 
estimated  robot  could  remain  in  orbit  four  to  five  years  and  would 
have paid for  itself after  12 repairs.  (Wilford, N Y T ,  8 /13 /6 8 , 4 )  
‘4ugust 13 :  Apollo  7  spacecraft  had  been  mechanically mated  to  Saturn  IB 
launch  vehicle  at  Complex  34,  NASA  announced.  Apollo  7  prime  or 
backup  crew, or  both, would  participate  in  10-hr network  simulation of 
first  six  revolutions  of  mission  and  8 -h r   launch  simulations  during 
week. 
Spacecraft  2TV-1  command  and  service modules  successfully  com- 
pleted  menned  checkout  Aug.  9  and  10   in  preparation  for  five-day 
manned  thermal-vacuum test  at  MSC   in  September to  help  verify  space- 
craft  in  simulated space  environment for  Apollo  earth-orbital and  lunar 
missions.  Two-minute captive  firing  of  6th  Saturn  V  booster  stage  a t  
MTF   Aug.  13 would  try  out  “fix”  for  Saturn V  longitudinal  oscillations 
--conversion  of  liquid  oxygen prevalves into gas-filled shock absorbers. 
(Text; C T r i b ,  8/13/68) 
NASA  issued  request  for  quotations  for  design,  development,  fabrication, 
test,  qualification, and  delivery of  actuator  system for  Apollo Telescope 
Mount  (A TM )  , calling  for  completion within  nine  months.  System, ex- 
pected  to  weigh 20 lb, would be contained  in  cylinder  18 in  long  and  1 
f t  in  dia.  I t  would  be used  to  deploy solar  panels  of  ATM  which  would 
be  placed  in  orbit  and  docked  with  Saturn  I  workshop.  (MSFC   Release 
68-178) 
NASA  Associate Administrator  for Manned  Flight,  Dr.  George E.  Mueller, 
had  told  Apollo  project  contractors  that  U.S.S.R.  was  developing  a 

186 

P, STRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

August  13 
“large  booster,  larger  by  a  factor  of  two,  than  o u r   Saturn  V,”  New 
Y o r k   Times’  John  N.  Wilford  reported. Wilford  said  estimate was  part 
of  warning  to  Apollo  team  that  unless  they  speeded  their  efforts, 
U.S.S.R.  might  beat U.S.  to manned  lunar landing. With Dr. Mueller  in  
Europe,  NASA  spokesman  had  said  he  did  not  know  basis  of  informa- 
tion.  Previously,  there  had  been  no   public  statement  indicating 
U.S.S.R.  might  be  working  on   rocket  with  greater  than  10-million-lb 
thrust. Saturn V had  7.5-million-lb thrust.  ( N Y T ,  8 /14 /68 ,11)  
NAE’S  Aeronautics and   Space  Engineering Board  called  for  review  of  a i r  
transport’s  part  in  U S .   transportation  network,  urging  that  DOT  and 
FAA take  systems  approach  to  study  of  R&D  goals  while  leaving  R&D  i t-  
self  to  enlarged  NASA  role.  Board  report,  Civil  Av ia t ion   and  Develop- 
men t :   A n   Assessment  of  Federal  Government  Involvement,  recom- 
mended,  “NASA7s  role  should  be  expanded  to  involve  not  only  flight 
vehicles  and  their  propulsion  systems,  which  have  traditionally  oc- 
cupied  its principal  attention  . . . but  all  aspects of  research  and  devel- 
opment of  importance to civil aeronautics.” 
First  project  of  Board  organized  in  1967,  study  said  NASA  work 
should  include  “development  of  new  technologies  relating  to  a i r   traffic 
control  as well  as  to  airports  and  their  support  facilities.”  In   addition 
to NASA’s background  in vehicle  technology  and  growing avionics  capa- 
bility,  “developments  in  space technology,  including the use  of  satellites 
fo r   communications  and  navigation,  offer  new  opportunities  for  im- 
(Text;  NAE   Release;  Lannan,  W  Star, 
proving  a i r   navigation.” 
8 /13 /68 ,   A8 ;   Sehlstedt,  B  Sun ,   8/14/68;  A & A ,   8 / 6 8 )  
U.S.  patent  No.  3,396,921  was  issued  to  Francis  M.  Rogallo,  head  of 
low-speed vehicle branch  at  LBRC ,   for  control  devices  to  regulate  pitch 
and  roll  of  paraglider  planned  for  Apollo  Applications  flights.  Rogallo 
and  his  wife  Gertrude  had  developed  paraglider-called  Rogallo  wing 
NASA  contract.  I t   was  free-flight  vehicle  with  flexible  wings 
-under 
which  could  be   extended  upon  reentry  to   carry astronauts to  a  landing. 
(P a t  Off  PIO;   N Y T ,  8 /17 /68 ,37)  
0  DOD   announced  second  $1-million  installment  on  contracts  for  design  of 
Navy  VFX,  substitute  aircraft  for  F-111B,  held  by  Grumman  Aircraft 
Engineering  Corp.,  General  Dynamics  Corp.,  LTV  Aerospace  Corp., 
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.,  and  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  [see 
July  191. Five  contractors would  eventually  get  $3 million  each  under 
contract  definition  phase  to  end  Oct.  1.  (DOD  Press  Off;  W  Po s t ,  
8/14/68,  D9) 
0  USN  had  announced  selection  of  General  Dynamics  Corp.  and  Lockheed 
Aircraft  Gorp.-LTV  Aerospace  Corp.  team  to  make  contract  definition 
studies of  VSX,  carrier-based antisubmarine  aircraft to  replace  15-yr-old 
52,  Wall  Street  Journal  reported.  vsx,  powered  by  turbofan-jets, 
would  have twice  S2’s  speed,  10 times  its  efficiency  because  of  its  digi- 
ta l  computers which  could  analyze underwater  sound  and present  da ta  
on   TV-like displays.  Contract  could  eventually  reach  $1 billion.  (VSJ, 
8 /13 /68 ,2)  
In   closed  meeting a t  Civil Aeronautics  Board, Washington, D.C.,  75  a ir-  
line  and  U S .   Government  officials  discussed  possible  solutions to  avia- 
tion  congestion  crisis,  including:  elimination  of  peak-hour  charter 
flights;  adoption of  minimum  flight distance  rule  for  scheduled  services 
from  New  York‘s  Kennedy  International  Airport;  rollback  to  1967 

187 

August  13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

level  of  Kennedy  schedules;  limitation  of  aircraft  movements  in   peak 
hours,  including  general  aviation;  diversion  of  flights  to  other  air- 
ports;  and  blackout  of  discount  fares  at  peak  periods.  Trans  World 
Airlines  President  Charles  C.  Tillinghast,  Jr.,  disagreed  with  Port  of 
New  York Authority view  that  basic solution to  a i r  congestion was con- 
struction  of  fourth  New  York  airport.  Solution, he  said, was  expanding 
Kennedy’s capabilities to meet traffic demand.  (Tolchin, N Y T ,  8/14/68, 
30; W Star, 8/14/68,  A18) 
New  Yo r k   Times  editorial  advocated  priority  for  passenger  transports 
over  private  aircraft  during  peak  hours  a t  major  airports-New  York, 
Washington,  Chicago,  Los  Angeles-until 
longer-range measures  could 
be  provided  to  alleviate congestion.  “Such  a  solution  will  be  strongly 
opposed  by  . . . general  aviation  which  now  numbers  112,000  private 
planes  [including]  4,000 business  jets,  . . . The  contention  will  be  ad- 
vanced  that  it  is  unfair  to  bar  them  from  airports  built  with  public 
funds  through  a  system  of  preference for  the  2,200  commercial airlin- 
ers now  in  service. Yet  no  one can  argue that  i t  i s  in  the  public interest 
to  keep  a  commercial  airliner  with  120 passengers aboard  circling  for 
. . . hours  . . . while  airport  tower  time  and  runway  space are  occupied 
by  planes which  may  carry  only  two  or  three  persons.  . . . Where  lim- 
ited  airport  facilities necessitate a  choice, common carriers  should have 
preference over  private  planes.  Delay  in  making  that  choice is  an  invi- 
tation to disaster.”  ( N Y T ,  8/13/68,34) 
Washington  Evening  Star  editorial  praised  U S .   decision  to  test  Multiple 
Independently  Targetable  Reentry %Vehicle (M IRV )   despite  suggestions 
that  experimentation be  suspended as token of  U.S.  readiness to  negoti- 
ate  with  U.S.S.R.  on   international  control  of  missile  production:  “.  . . 
negotiations  . .  . are  still  in  the  future  and  will  be  drawn  out.  . . . 
Meanwhile, since  neither  party  is  subjecting  itself  to  any  kind  of  con- 
trol  . . . and  since  the  technology  of  missiles  continues  a  sort  of  ex- 
plosive advance, nothing could  be  more  foolish o r  more dangerous than 
a  unilateral  suspension  . . . of  the  testing  that  is  clearly  necessary  to 
the defense of  the nation.”  (W  Star, 8/13/68,  A6) 
0  Prof.  J.  Hoover Mackin,  one  of  four  experts  chosen  by  NASA  to  examine 
first  rock  samples to  be  returned  from moon,  died  in  Houston,  Tex.,  at 
age  62.  He  had  held  William  Stamps  Farish  Chair  in  Geology  at 
Univ. of  Texas.  ( AP, F Post, 8/14/68,  B6) 
0  Ralph  Hazlett  Upson,  aeronautical  engineer  who  won  James  Gordon 
Trophy  in  1923 International Balloon Race  from  Paris  to  England  and 
American  National  Balloon  Races  in  1913,  1919,  and  1921,  died  in  
Burien, Wash., at age 80.  ( N Y T ,  8/15/68,35) 
August  14:  NAS-NRC  Space  Science  Board  urged  NASA  to  use  developing 
technology  of  fully  automated  systems  in  planetary  exploration  rather 
than  manned  flights, which  i t  felt were not  “essential for  scientific plan- 
etary  investigation a t   this  stage.”  Recommendations on  priorities  were 
made  in  Planetary  Exploration,  1968-1 975,  prepared  by  panel  of  23 
scientists who  met  during  week  of  June  9  to  reappraise  1965  study  in  
light of  rapid  development in science and severe cuts in NASA budget. 
Report  called  2%  for  planetary  exploration  out  of  NASA  Ey 1969 
budget  “totally  inadequate.”  I t   recommended  diversion  of  funds  f rom  
manned  missions  to  instrument  exploration,  including  biennial  flights 
to  orbit Venus and Mars until  1975; dropping capsule on Mars  in  1973 

188 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

August  14 

to  detect  life signs  and  a  major  lander  later,  perhaps  in  1975;  multi- 
ple-drop probe  of  Venus’  surface  in  1975; Mercury  flight in   1973;  and 
priority  Jupiter  flybys  in  1972  and  1973.  Panel  advocated  pursuit  of 
planets in  economical way:  use  of  existing Pioneer  spacecra€t in Venus 
unless “clear gain  . . . will  result  from such double launches,”  and use 
and  Jupiter  missions,  elimination  of  second  spacecraft  in   all  missions 
of  single  launch  for  both  Venus  and  Mercury  missions by  scheduling 
them  when  planets  were  in  alignment  (same  technique  could  be  used 
fo r   “Grand  Tour”  of  major  planets  in   1977,  when  they  would  be 
aligned  in  space).  Referring  to  U.S.S.R.  exploration,  report  said,  “We 
certainly  believe we  cannot  abandon  this  broad  area  of  space activities 
to our competitors.” 
Report  also  recommended  strong  support  for  radioastronomy,  in- 
cluding development of  major  new  observatory primarily  for  planetary 
study,  and continued  support  of  ground-based optical planetary  astron- 
omy.  I t   proposed  coordinated,  informal  contact  with  Soviet  scientists 
on  possibility  of  joint  planning  of  planetary  exploration.  (Text;  NRC 
Release;  Lyons,  NYT,  8/15/68,  17;  O’Toole,  W Post,  8/15/68,  A l ;  
Lannan, W S tar ,  8/15/68,  C 8 ;  Carter, Science, 8/16/68,671-3) 
Secretary  of  Transportation  Alan  S.  Boyd  said  Government  would  limit 
both  commercial and  general  aviation  traffic  at  New  York’s  major  air- 
ports  unless  aviation  industry  imposed  its  own  limitations.  Banishment 
of  general aviation  from Kennedy  International  or  La  Guardia  Airport 
was  “an  extreme  possibility”;  problem  of  “spiderweb”  of  connecting 
flights would  be  tackled  by  diverting  some  international  flights  to  air- 
ports  at  Boston,  Philadelphia,  and  Washington.  (Tolchin,  NYT, 
8 /15 /68 ,1)  
Taccomsat  1,  world’s  largest  synchronous  orbit  satellite,  was  scheduled 
for  launch  by  USAF  Titan  111-C  booster  in  February  1969,  Aerospace 
Da i ly   reported.  Spacecraft would  be six times a s  powerful  as  any  other 
comsat.  Initial  command  and  control  of  satellite,  to  be  positioned  near 
Galapagos Islands  for  undetermined  checkout period,  would  be  accom- 
plished  by  Air  Force  Satellite  Control  Facility  (AFSCF)  . Taccomsat  1 
would  have  6  kw  of  effective radiated  power.  Intelsat  I1  satellites had 
50  w.  I t s   1  kw  of  raw  dc  solar  power  was  10  times  that  available  i n  
Intelsat  11. While  Intelsat  I1 communications bandwidth  was  125  mhz, 
Taccomsat 1 would have down-link bandwidth of  10 mhz  at X-band and 
500  khz  at  UHF   frcquencies.  ( A e r o  Da i ly ,   8/14/68) 
e Recorded  aircraft highjackings  had  totaled  14  in  past  year,  w i th   13 US. 
airliners over  southern U.S.  forced  to land  in  Cuba, Andrew Wilson  of 
London Observer reported.  ( W  Pos t ,  8/14/68,  A3) 
.4ugust  14-27;  At  U.N.  Conference  on  Exploration  and  Peaceful  Uses  of 
Outer  Space  held  in  Vienna  and  attended  by  500  delegates  from  74 
nations,  Soviet  Premier  Alexey  N.  Kosygin  announced  U.S.S.R.  and 
other  Socialist  countries”  would  establish  comsat  network  “Inter- 
< <  
sputnik”  to  compete with  INTELSAT.  Draft  agreement had  been  submit- 
ted  in  New  York  to  U.N.  Secretary-General U  Thant by  U.S.S.R.,  Bul- 
garia,  Czechoslovakia,  Hungary,  Poland,  Romania,  Mongolia,  and 
Cuba.  Vladimir  Minashin,  head  of  comsat  div.  of  Soviet Ministry  of 
Communications,  said  Intersputnik  satellite would  have  same  synchro- 
nous orbit used by the four US.-provided  INTELSAT satellites. U.S.  Dept. 
spokesman said  US. had  no  need  to  join  U.S.S.R.-sponsored  system; 

189 

August  14-27 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

INTELSAT,  with  62 member  nations,  was  already  operating  successfully, 
handling  95%  of  total  international  telecommunications  traffic.  U S .  
was not  opposed to Soviet proposal  for  political reasons, but  on grounds 
there would  be economic problems in  creation  of  two worldwide comsat 
systems.  ( W Pos t ,  8/14/68,  12 ; O’Toole, W  P o s t ,  8/15/68,  A21 ; Hamil- 
ton,  NYT ,   8/15/68,  18; 8/20/68,  18; W S J ,  8/15/68,  1 ;  Sehlstedt, B 
Sun,  8/15/68,  1 )  
Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned 
Space  Flight,  a t   Vienna  conference  discussed  three  results  of  U S .  
manned  space  flight program  to  illustrate  contributions  to  space explo- 
ration.  Program had  proved man  could  live in  space and man  could  do 
useful work  in  space and  i t  had  created  technology  to  make these possi- 
ble.  In  first  category,  NASA,  NAS-NRC  Space  Science  Board,  NSF,  ARPA, 
DOD  groups, universities, and others had  conquered problems of  weight- 
lessness in  space, heavy  acceleration and  deceleration forces, a i r   supply 
and  pressure  required  for  breathing  in  space,  psychological  problems 
presented by  isolation, and problem of  radiation. 
Successful termination  of  Mercury and  Gemini programs  had  proved 
man  capable  of  exizting  in  space.  His  capability  to  do  useiul  work  in 
space had  been  proved by  successful rendezvous and  docking  of  space- 
craft,  by  space photography,  and  by  extravehicular  activity.  Pervasive- 
ness  of  space technology  had  been  demonstrated by  range  and  variety 
of  thousands  of  products,  including  Saturn  V  launch  vehicle,  world’s 
largest  flight  vehicle,  and  integrated  circuit,  one  of  world’s  smallest 
manufactured  items. 
Dr.  Mueller  said:  “Our  civilization has  been  built  upon  our  accumu- 
lated  knowledge of  the  natural  laws  of  our  environment. All  of  our  in- 
ventions  have  been  the  result  of  the  application  of  these  natural  laws. 
some  one  of  the  missing  links  in  our  chain  of  knowledge.  . . . We 
Advances  in  our  civilization  have  always  followed  after  discovery  of 
know  that  many  of  the  missing  links  . . . will  be  supplied  . . . as  we 
move  man  with  his  accumulation  of  experience  and  his  sophisticated 
equipment  for  exploration,  into  a  new  laboratory  . . .  the  laboratory 
of  the  moon  and  outward  to  our  solar  system.  . . . If  all  of  us,  from 
all  nations,  are  sufficiently  creative,  abundantly  inventive,  and  freely 
adaptive,  we  have  i t   within  our  power  to  improve  the  lives  of  every 
man, womm,  and child.”  (Text) 
U.S.S.R.  Cosmonaut  Aleksey  A.  Leonov  a t   Vienna  conference  pro- 
posed  Aug.  15 that  Ocean  of  Storms, prominent  feature  of  lunar  land- 
scape,  be  renamed  Ocean  of  Gagarin  in  honor  of  Soviet  Cosmonaut 
Yuri  A.  Gargarin,  who  made  first  manned  earth  orbit  April  12,  1961. 
Leonov,  who  took  man’s  first  walk  in  space  in  1965,  read  Gagarin 
paper  which  emphasized  similarity  between  experience of  Soviet  astro- 
nauts and that of  crews of  deep-sea exploratory craft. He  said all actions 
taken in Soviet space vehicles were tried  first in underwater craft. 
Large Soviet exhibit a t  conference showed full-scale model of  original 
Soviet  spacecraft  and  listed  Soviet  space  firsts.  U S .   exhibit,  small 
because  of  cut  in NASA  funds, depicted benefits space exploration would 
produce  fo r  developing  countries.  (Hamilton,  NYT ,   8/16/68) 
J .  L.  Blondstein  of  British  National  Industrial  Space Committee told 
group  meeting  a t   conference Aug.  20  that  production  of  U S .   military 

190 

BSTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

August  14-27 
satellites  capable  of  direct  TV  broadcasts  to  military  units  was  “immi- 
nent.”  He  said  U S .   had  spent  between  $80 million  and  $100  million 
on  development  but  denied  information was  being withheld  for military 
security  reasons.  DOD spokesman  in  Washington  had  said  h e   knew  of 
no plans for direct TV broadcasts by military satellites.  (Hamilton, N Y T ,  
8 /21 /68 ,3)  
W.  T.  Pecora,  Director,  U S .   Geological  Survey,  said  Aug.  23  that 
worldwide  volcano  and  earthquake monitoring  network  might  be  p ro -  
vided  within  a  few  years  by  space  satellites  carrying  cameras  and 
sensing  devices  to  give  up  to  one  hour  advance  notice  of  strong  earth 
shocks.  (AP, C  T r i b ,  8/23/68) 
August  15:  At  closed  meeting  a t   Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering  Corp.  in  
July, NASA  Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George 
E.  Mueller,  had  said  contractors’  disregard  of  planned  delivery  dates 
fo r   Apollo  equipment  amounted  to  a  “disease”  in  the  project,  New 
Yo rk  T imes   reported. Apollo Program Director L/G Samuel  C.  Phillips 
was quoted as saying, “The  lunar  landing next  year  is within  our grasp, 
but we don’t  have a hold  of  it because  of  the disease Dr.  Mueller  cited.” 
Project  was  running  two  years  behind  schedule,  with  first  manned 
Apollo  flight  expected  no  earlier  than  mid-October  and  earliest  lunar 
landing in a  year.  Dozens  of  contractors  in  $24-million  program,  urged 
to meet tough specifications for mission  safety and success a t  same time, 
were  obsessed  with  checking  and  double  checking  all  systems  as  result 
o f   Jan.  24,  1967,  Apollo  fire.  Lunar  module  ( LM )   regarded  as  pacing 
item  of  project,  had undergone only  one flight test.  First  LM  for manned 
flight  had  developed  problems  in  rendezvous  equipment.  Dr.  Mueller 
had said rate of  changes  in  LM  was  three  times that  of  Apollo  command 
module, whose  rate of  changes,  in turn, was four  times  that  of  Saturn V 
rocket. He said changes placed  added burden  on technicians who  should 
be concentrating on launching  operations, not  on  vehicle modifications. 
(Wilford, N Y T ,  8/15/68,16) 
Washington  Po s t   editorial  saw  scheduled  M IRV   test  as  threat  to  success 
o f   missile-limitation  talks  between  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  “Perhaps  it  will 
prove  possible  to  level  off  the  arms  race  despite  MIRV,  although  i t   is 
generally  acknowledged  that  this  weapon  raises  special  inspection  and 
stability issues of  its own. If  talks do stick, however,  the Administration 
must  be  prepared  to  bend  on  M IRV .   . . . No  one  seriously  claims  that 
there  is  any  immediate military  justification  for  i t ;   deterrence  works 
without  it  and  the  antimissile system  it  was  designed  to  penetrate  evi- 
dently  is  in low gear.  I t  may be acceptable  for MIRV  to be tested  in order 
to  ease  the  Administration’s  internal  tensions  and  electoral  exigencies. 
. . . But  it would  be intolerable to  let  M IRV   spoil  the  missile talks.  They 
only  genuine  kind  there 
hold  more  promise  of  mutual  security-the 
any  new  weapon  can  provide.”  ( W  Po s t ,  8/15/68,  A20) 
is-than 
(TOS-E)  , seventh  mete- 
August  16:  NASA  successfully  launched  Essa  VZZ 
orological  satellite  in   ESSA’S  Tiros  Operational  Satellite  (TOS) System, 
from  WTR  by  two-stage  Thrust-Augmented  Long-Tank  Thor-Delta 
booster.  This  was  first  use  of  long-tank Thor  for  a  NASA  Delta  mission, 
first  use  of  two-stage  vehicle  for  TOS  spacecraft,  and   first  operational 
two-burn mission  for 2nd stage. 
Primary  NASA  mission  objective was  to  place  and   operate  spacecraft 

191 

A u g u s t   16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

A u g u s t   16:  NASA   launched  meteorological  satellite  Essa  VI1  for Environmental  Science 
Services  Administration.  Sa te l l i te   relayed  photo  o f   tropical  storm  Shirley  Aug .   19. 

in  sun-synchronous orbit with  local equator  crossing time between 2:35 
pm  and  2:55  pm  so   that  daily  Advanced  Vidicon  Camera  System 
(AVCS)  pictures  of  entire  globe  could  be  obtained  regularly  and  de. 
pendably.  Satellite  achieved  nearly  polar,  sun-synchronous,  circular 
orbit  with  918-mi  (1,477.9-km)  apogee,  895-mi  (1,440-km)  perigee, 
114.9-min period,  and  101.7"  inclination.  Drift  of  only 0.002O per  day 
out  of  sun-synchronous  orbit  meant  it  would  take  perhaps  15  y r   to 
change  equator  crossing  time  by  1 h r   and  added  considerably  to  ex- 
pected useful lifetime. 
An  advanced  version  of  cartwheel  configuration,  325-1b  cylindrical 
Essa  VZZ  carried  two AVCS  cameras for  global weather coverage. Photos 
would  be  stored  onboard  satellite  on  magnetic  tape  until  readout  by 
ESSA'S  Command  and  Data  Acquisition  ( CDA)  stations  a t   Fairbanks, 
Alaska, and Wallops Island, Va. 
During  first 42  orbits,  spacecraft  underwent  orientation  maneuver  to 
place  it  in  wheel  mode  and  spin  rate  was  adjusted.  By  Aug.  2 3   all 
spacecraft systems had  been  successfully programmed  and excellent pic- 

192 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

August  16 

tures had  been  read  out directly, as well  as sequences stored  for  remote 
readout. 
ESSA  financed and managed TOS  system and would  operate  spacecraft 
after  NASA  completed checkout later  in  month.  GSFC  was  responsible for 
procurement, launch,  and  initial  checkout of  spacecraft in   orbit.  Essa  Z 
was  launched  Feb.  3,  1966;  Essa  ZZ,  Feb.  28,  1966;  Essa  ZZZ,  Oct.  2, 
1966;  Essa  ZV,  Jan.  26,  1967;  Essa  V,  April  20,  1967;  and  Essa  VZ, 
Nov.  10, 1967. E s sa   VZZ  was  17th Tiros  satellite launched  successfully 
since  T iros   Z,  first  weather  satellite, April  1, 1960. All  from  T i ro s   ZZZ 
on  had  equaled  or  exceeded  designed  operation  lifetimes.  Millionth 
weather  satellite  photo  had  been  received  May  27,  1968.  (NASA  P r o j  
Off; ESSA  Release ES 68-48) 
USAF  attempt  to   launch  record  12  satellites  from  Vandenberg  AFB  w i th  
single  Atlas-Burner  I1  booster  failed  when  heat  shield  apparently  did 
not  separate  as  planned.  Telemetry during  launch  indicated  Atlas  and 
Burner  II  stages  performed  as  scheduled,  but  confirmation  of  heat 
shield  separation  wa s   not  received.  USAF  was  still  investigating  launch 
attempt. Upper  stage had  been  designed to eject small satellites to meas- 
ure  size and  shape  of  earth,  provide  targets  for  radar  experiments, and 
test  atmospheric drag  in near  space.  ( W Pos t ,  8/18/68;  Boeing Release 
5-9805) 
0  NASA’s Reentry  VI  mission-launched  April  27  to  obtain  fundamental 
inflight research  data  on aerodynamic heating  and  transition  from  lam- 
inar  t o   turbulent  flow  in  boundary  layer-was 
adjudged  successful by 
NASA.  Boosted  flight  trajectory  was  nominal  and  spacecraft  was  placed 
on  desired  trajectory  with  three  sigma  dispersion  limits.  Separation  of 
spacecraft from  Scout launch  vehicle  occurred  as  planned, with  all  sys- 
tems fully operational.  Maximum  spacecraft velocity  (19,820 fps) , alti- 
tude,  and  reentry  angle were  near  nominal. Telemetry records  indicated 
flight  instrumentation  performance  was  satisfactory  throughout  flight. 
Large  unexpected  amount  of  signal  attenuation  occurred  a t   altitudes 
below 90,000  ft,  but  because  of  high  design margins,  no  data  were lost. 
Transitional  and  h l l y   developed  heating  data  were  obtained  during 
reentry.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
DOD  successfully  launched  first  Poseidon  and  Minuteman  I11  long-range 
missiles  from  ETR.  USN’S  two-stage,  solid-fuel  Poseidon,  designed  as 
submarine-launched missile,  weighed  65,000  lb-twice 
as  much  a s   Po- 
could  carry  up  to  10 nuclear  warheads  in 
laris  it would  replace-and 
one Multiple Independently Targetable  Reentry Vehicle  (MIRV)  cluster. 
Missile traveled 1,000 m i  downrange over Atlantic. 
USAF’s  76,000-lb Minuteman  111,  more  powerful  version  of  Minute- 
man  I  and  I1  missiles and  capable  of  carrying  three  warheads, traveled 
5,000 mi downrange.  (DOD   Release 753-68;  W S tar ,   8/16/68,  A9; Wil- 
ford,  N Y T ,  8/17/68,  l ;  AP,  B  Sun,  8/17/68,  l ;  W  Po s t ,   8/17/68,  l )  
JPL   scientists  Paul  M.  Muller  and  William  L.  Sjogren,  using  tracking 
data  from  Lunar  Orb i ter   V,  had  discovered  mass  concentrations  of 
dense material  beneath  moon’s  surface,  centered below  all  five  circular 
seas  on  moon’s  near  face.  They  had  caused  acceleration  in  speed  of 
Lunar  Orb i ter   V  spacecraft, while  irregular  seas had  only  small effects 
on  satellite’s orbital velocity. Source and  nature  of  concentrations were 
not known, but  their  presence under  circular  seas indicated  relationship 
to  these  seas.  Further  analysis was  expected  to  yield  more  positive  in- 

193 

August  16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

formation on  size and depth of  masses, which might  a id  Apollo naviga- 
tion  and  shed  light  on  moon’s  origin  and  evolution.  (NASA  Release 
68-143;  JPL Release 486; Sullivan, N Y T ,  8/16/68,  42;  C o b ,  W Post, 
8/16/68,  A3)  
U.S.S.R.’s  Tu-144  supersonic aircraft had  been  completed  and  was  being 
prepared  for  maiden  flight,  Associated  Press  reported.  According  to 
Moscow radio,  aircraft  was  a t  an  airfield,  would  soon  start  flight  tests, 
and  would  become  operational  “in  the  nearest  future.’’  (AP,  N Y T ,  
8 /17 /68 ,44)  
Washington Post  editorial on  NAS-NRC  Space Science Board’s  recommen- 
dation that NASA  follow manned  lunar exploration with  unmanned  plan- 
etary  exploration:  “The  program  they  project  would  require  more 
funds than  so   far  given  NASA  but  certainly  would  be  more  economical 
than  preparation  for  manned  flights  to  other  planets.  Without  settling 
the  basic  issues  dividing  the  exponents of  manned  flights  and  those  in  
favor of  unmanned  flights, this program would  be a logical preliminary 
to  either  alternative  . . .  [and]  seems  consistent  with  both  scientific 
objectives  and  financial  realities.  And  i f   success in  this  program  justi- 
fies  going  on  to  manned  flights,  that  can  be  decided  later.”  ( W  Pos t ,  
8 /16 /68 ,20)  
At  DOT   press  conference Secretary  of  Transportation  Alan  S.  Boyd  and 
Acting  FAA  Administrator  David  D.  Thomas  outlined  proposed  restric- 
tions on  a i r  traffic at major U S .  airports to  ease increasing congestion: 
limit  aircraft movements  in   peak  periods  to  65  per  h r   at  Kennedy  In -  
ternational,  60  per  h r   at  Newark  and  La  Guardia,  130  per  h r   a t   Chi- 
cago’s  O’Hare,  and  70  per  h r   at Washington  National;  require  all  a ir-  
craft  operating  to  and  from  those  airports  to  file advance  flight plans; 
and  restrict  use  of  those  airports  to  aircraft  meeting  performance  and 
equipment  requirements  which  would  eliminate  many  general-aviation 
planes.  DOT  said  it  planned  to  implement  its  proposals  only  if  aviation 
community  could  not  agree  on  alternative  plans.  ( W S J ,  8/19/68,  3; 
Lyons, N Y T ,  8 /20 /68 ,1 )  
Goodyear  Tire  Sr  Rubber  C o .   and  medical  researchers  were  developing 
artificial  heart  of  natural  rubber  and  semirigid  polyurethane  with 
pumps  and  monitoring  systems  developed  by  NASA.  Although  rubber 
heart  had  been  tried  in  animals,  artificial  heart  was  still  experimental 
and  was  no t   expected  to  be  available for  use  in man  until  1975.  (w s j ,  
8 /16 /68 ,4)  
USAF  Space  and  Missile  Systems  Organization  awarded  Philco-Ford 
Corp.  $2-million,  cost-plus-incentive-fee contract  for  work  on  ejection 
equipment for reentry vehicles.  (DOD   Release 772-68) 
Howard  H.  Haglund,  JPL   Surveyor  Project  Manager,  had  been  named 
Stanford-Sloan Fellow  for  1968-69. Recipient  of  National  Space  Club 
Astronautics  Engineer  Award  and  NASA  Exceptional  Service  Medal, 
Haglund  would  attend  special  nine-month  Stanford  Univ.  graduate 
course in  advanced  management.  (Pasadena Star-News, 8/16/68;  Glen- 
dale News-Press, 8/19/68) 
August  17:  I n   letter  to  President  Johnson,  Rep.  Emilio  Q .   Daddario  (D- 
Conn.) , Chairman  of  House  Subcommittee  on  Science,  Research  and 
Development,  urged  reorganization  of  environmental  science  activities 
of  Federal  Government  and  asked  that  responsibility  for  development 
of  weather  modification  programs  be  given  to  Environmental  Science 

194 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
August  17 
Services  Administration  ( ESSA)  .  His  committee,  originator  of  NSF  
Amendments  Act  of  1968  which  became  effective July  18, was  inter- 
ested in  implementing section  which  relieved  NSF  of  that  responsibility 
as of  Sept. 1. 
Rep. Daddario stated three beliefs:  “1. The weather modification pro- 
gram  involves  the  development  of  environmental  understanding  which 
is crucial  to the  protection of  our  planetary  resources;  it  should be  sup- 
ported  and  pursued  without  significant hiatus.  2.  I n  light  of  the nature 
of  the program  and the present  administrative  organization  of  the  exec- 
utive  branch,  it  seems  clear  that  weather  modification  should  become 
part  of  the portfolio  of  the  Environmental Science Services Administra- 
tion.  3.  At  the  same time, there  is considerable doubt  whether  the Envi- 
ronmental  Science Services  Administration  should  remain  part  of  the 
Department  of  Commerce ; therefore  consideration  should  be  given  to 
executive  reorganization  which  might  either  relocate  the  Administra- 
tion or give it independent status.”  (Text; W Star, 8/23/68,  A4) 
New  Yo rk   T imes   editorial  said  first  flight  tests  of  Multiple  Independ- 
ently  Targetable  Reentry  Vehicle  (M IRV )   and  prototype  missile  car- 
riers  Poseidon  and Minuteman 111  had  taken  U.S.  “into  a  new  nuclear 
itself.  The  critical  question now  is  whether  the  Soviet 
arms  race-with 
Union  will  feel  sufficiently challenged to  run  along.  Future  generations 
undoubtedly will  look  back  with  disbelief  at  the  way  the  United  States 
again  has  invented, publicized  and  tested  a  deadly  new  weapon  which, 
instead  of  improving  American  security,  creates  an  added  threat  to  it 
by  putting  the  Soviet  Union  under  pressure  to  produce  the  same 
weapon  and  aim  it  at  the  United  States.”  ( N Y T ,  8/17/68,  26) 
dugu s t   18 :   U.S.S.R.  had  begun  using  new  supersonic jet  fighter, described 
by  l ’ rud ,   Soviet  trade  union  paper,  a s   “similar  to  a  triangle,  split  in 
two  by  the  fuselage.”  Aircraft,  thought  by  U S .   sources  to  be  M i G 2 3  
(Foxba t ) ,  had  reportedly  undergone more  than  1,000 h r  of  flight  test- 
ing.  (Reuters, N Y T ,  8 /18 /68 ,50 )  
U.S.S.R.  celebrated  Aviation  Day  by  extolling  its  supersonic  bombers, 
but  no new  aircraft had been unveiled-in 
contrast  to   1967 celebration, 
which  featured  several new  jets  and missiles.  (W Pos t ,   8/19/68,  A13) 
DOD  attributed  May  8  crash  in  Nevada  of  USAF  F-111A  and  “possibly” 
three  other  F-111A  accidents in  Southeast Asia  between March 28  and 
April 22  to  break  in weld  holding  together two pieces  of  metal, totaling 
six  inches,  in  hydraulic  fluid  control  valve  in  aircraft’s  tail.  In   early 
F-111s  part  was   forged  from  single  piece  of  high-grade  steel  but  in 
subsequent  models  it  was  made  from  two  pieces  welded  together. 
F - l l l s ,   grounded  after  May  8  crash,  had  resumed  flying  in  mid-June 
after  replacement  of  two-piece  rod  end  assemblies  with  original  one- 
(DOD   Press  Off;  Welles,  NYT ,   8 /18 /68 ; -W   Po s t ,  
piece  firging. 
8/19/68. B71 
, - ,   , -   , 
0  Soviet  economist  Dr.  Viktor  A.  Cheprakov  had  published  in  Izvestia 
what  appeared  to  be  rebuttal  to  prognosis  by  Soviet  nuclear  physicist 
Prof.  Andrey  D.  Sakharov  of  convergence of  communism and  capital- 
ism by year  2000  [see July  221.  In   “Problems  of  the  Last Third  of  the 
Century,”  translated  by  New  Yo rk   T ime s ,   Dr.  Cheprakov  foresaw 
sharpening  of  struggle between the  two  ideologies and  discussed role  of 
science.  “Science  and  technology  are  endowed  with  tremendous  possi- 
bilities.  . . . a  new  achievement  . . . is  being  recorded  every  25  see- 
195 

August  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

onds.  We  have  figures on  what  and  how  much  can  be  extracted  from 
the  earth,  on  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  new  methods  of  food 
production  . . . and  on  the  undoubtedly vast  prospects of  using  the  re- 
sources of  seas and  oceans.  But  the  realization  of  all  these potentialities 
will  require  the  victory  of  socialism  . . . for  only  socialism makes  it 
pclssible  to funnel vast funds  into scientific research and into  the practi- 
cal  use  of  its  results  in  the  interest  of  the  peoples.”  (Anderson,  NYT, 
8 /19 /68 ,1 )  
Washington Post  editorial  called  DOT and  FAA decision  to   deal  with  a i r  
traffic congestion “long overdue.”  Public  had  become  aware  that  “satu- 
ration point  had  been  passed  early  in  July  and those who  use  the  air- 
passengers and pilots alike-have  been  suffering ever  since. This  suffer- 
ing  is going  to  go  on  for  some time unless  the  FAA and  the  Department 
of  Transportation move  much  faster  in  the  future than  they  have  in  the 
last  six weeks.  The  hope  . . . that  the  aviation  industry  can  solve  this 
congestion problem within  itself  seems to  be  just  wishful  thinking.  The 
airlines  and  the  general-aviation  people  have  not  shown  the  slightest 
sign  of  producing  constructive proposals  either  jointly  o r   separately.” 
( W  Pos t ,  8/18/68,  B6) 
Augus t   19:  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  announced 
elimination of  lunar module  ( LM )   operations from first manned Apollo/ 
Saturn  V  flight,  Apollo  8.  MSF  would  begin  planning  and  training  for 
alternate,  low-earth-orbit, manned  command  and  service module  ( CSM ) 
mission  for  December  launch  but  no  final  decision  on  precise  mission 
plan would  be made until  after Oct. 11 Apollo 7 flight results were evalu- 
ated. LM  3,  delayed in  checkout, would be  flown  in  1969 on  fourth  Sat- 
urn  V  with  CSM  104  since  preliminary  studies  had  indicated  many 
Apollo  objectives scheduled  for  later  flights could be  obtained  by  using 
Apollo  8 CSM mission.  Two  problems  in  Saturn  Apollo  systems-verti- 
cal  oscillation, o r  pogo  effect,  in  1st stage  of  Saturn  V  and  rupture  of 
small  propellant  lines  in  upper  stages-had 
been  corrected  and  solu- 
tions verified in extensive ground tests. 
Plans  and  changes were  discussed  in  detail  a t  NASA  Hq.  news  confer- 
ence  by  Apollo  Program  Director  L/G  Samuel C.  Phillips  (USAF ) ,   who 
blamed  checkout problems  for  six-week delay  in  Apollo  schedule.  “It  is 
our  view,” he  said,  “.  . . that  the  probable  flight  readiness  of  LM 3 is 
perhaps  in  February,  but  i t   is  in  the  February-March  time  period.”  He 
said  important  advantage  of  flying  Apollo  8 in  1968  was   opportunity 
for  earlier  experience  in  operation  of  Saturn  V  and  CSM  than  could 
otherwise be  obtained.  In  response to  questions Gen.  Phillips  said lunar 
landing  next  year  was  “clearly  possible.”  He  also  announced  reassign- 
ment  of  crews:  redefined Apollo  8  mission  would  have  crew  of  Frank 
Borman, James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and William A.  Anders;  crew  originally 
assigned to  this  mission-James  A.  McDivitt, David  R.  Scott, and  Rus- 
sell L.  Schweickart-would 
fly  on  Apollo 9 with LM.  New  backup  crew 
fo r  Apollo  8 was  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  and  Fred 
W.  Haise,  J r .   (Text;  NASA  Release  68-148;  AP,  C Trib, 8/20/68; 
O’Toole,  W P o s t ,  8/20/68,  A3 ;  Wilford, NYT,  8/20/68,  19;  Sehlstedt, 
B Sun, 8 /20 /68 ,1;   MSC Roundup, 8 /30 /68 ,1)  
*  U S .   was  negotiating  with  India  on  use  of  one  visual  and  two  voice 
channels  on  NASA  ATS  satellite to  be  launched  by  1971  into  fixed  posi- 
tion  22,400 mi  above  Indian  Ocean.  I n  her  pilot  comsat project,  India 

196 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
August  19 
would broadcast  several hours  of  educational TV weekly to  seven  areas 
with  total  50 million population. Remaining channels would  be  used  to 
broadcast  NASA  scientific data.  India  hoped  eventually  to  transmit  edu- 
cational  TV  from  comsat  to  community  receivers  in  her  560,000  vil- 
lages.  (NASA P ro j  Off; NYTNS,  LA  Her-Exam, 8/19/68) 
NASA  would  ask  industry  to  submit  proposals  on  $50-million “quiet  jet 
engine’’  development program,  said  Hal  Taylor  in  American  Aviation. 
Contractor would  be  selected early  in  1969 with  fabrication  of  compo- 
nents to begin  shortly after.  Development would take three years. While 
engine would have  takeoff  thrust  rating  of  about 23,000  lb,  larger  than 
JT3D  engine  in   Boeing  707  and  McDonnell  Douglas  DC-8,  NASA 
officials  had  emphasized  technology  used  would  be  applicable  to   all 
sizes  of  jet  engines.  Allison  and  Pratt  81  Whitney  had  performed  pre- 
liminary design contracts  and  NASA  felt General Electric Co.  had  facili- 
ties  and personnel to  undertake  the  advanced technology.  Initial  objec- 
tive  wa s   minimum  noise  reduction  below  existing  turbofan  engines  of 
a t   least  15 pndb  on  takeoff  and  20  pndb  a t   landing.  Once  engine  was 
developed and  run  successfully, technology would  be  turned  over  to  in- 
dustry  to  be  incorporated  into  future  jet  engines.  ( A m  A v ,   8/19/68, 
23 1 
President  Johnson  signed H.R.  3136, bill  authorizing  three-year  study  of 
proposed  increased use  of  metric  system in  U S .   by National  Bureau  of 
Standards  on  year-to-year basis  out  of  already  appropriated  funds  a t  
cost up  to  $500,000 for  current  fiscal year.  (wh i t e  House  P IO ;   Science, 
8/23/68,772  ; PD ,  8/26/68) 
Univ.  of  Colorado professor Dr.  George Gamow,  leading  theoretical  phy- 
sicist,  astronomer,  and  author,  died  a t   age  64   of  circulatory  illness. 
Winner  of  1956 UNESCO  Kalinga  Award  for  his  nontechnical books  on 
atomic energy and  other  scientific  subjects, Dr.  Gamow  had  published 
quantum  theory  of  atomic  nucleus  in  1928,  formulated  Gamow-Teller 
selection rule  for  beta  emissions,  and  been  one  of  chief  proponents  of 
“big  bang”  theory  of  universe.  (NYT ,   8/22/68,  35;  AP,  W Post, 
8/23/68,  B10) 
h g u s t   20:  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR 
carried  Dudley Observatory experiment to  95.8-mi  ( 154.3-km)  altitude 
to  determine  micrometeoroid  flux  in  absence  of  an   active  meteoroid 
shower from comparison with data from Aug.  12  launch during meteor- 
oid  shower.  Rocket  and  instruments  performed  satisfactorily.  Payload 
was recovered undamaged. (NASA Rpt SRL) 
NASA  issued  Apollo  Status  Summary:  Apollo  7  spacecraft  would  b e  
electrically mated  to  Saturn  IB  launch  vehicle a t   KSC Complex 34 next 
week.  In  Apollo  503 program,  command  module  was  scheduled  to   be 
mated to  service module after Aug.  20.  The  three  stages and  instrument 
unit  of  Apollo 8 launch  vehicle  were  mated  a t   Complex 34  and  under- 
going  tests.  Modification  and  retests  continued  on  Lunar  Module  3 
ascent and  descent  stages and  modification and  checkout on  Saturn  V 
2nd stage for 504 mission.  (Text) 
Los  Angeles  International  Airport  officials  had  initiated  $300,000  test 
program  to  insulate  25  nearby  houses  against  noise  from  jet  aircraft 
taking  off  and  landing  1,700 times per  day.  In  effort to meet  increasing 
resentment which had  resulted in  lawsuits against  airport totaling more 
than  $300  million  in  past  six  years,  airport  officials would  soundproof 

197 

August  20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

roo-fs, walls,  doors,  windows,  and  floors.  Airport  would  also  construct 
$170,000 “hush house”  with  four-inch-thick fiber glass panels where  jet 
engines could  be  run  a t   full power  without  disturbing nearby  residents. 
(AP, W  S ta r ,   8/20/68,  A l l )  
Three  scientists were  named  winners  of  1967  Atoms  for  Peace  Award: 
Sigvard  Eklund  of  Sweden,  Director-General of  International  Atomic 
Energy  Agency  (IAEA) ; Abdus  Salam  of  Pakistan,  Director  of  IAEA’S 
International  Center for  Theoretical Physics in  Trieste;  and  Henry  De- 
Wolf  Smyth,  US. Representative  to  IAEA  and  former  AEC  Commis- 
sioner.  Presentation  of  gold  medal  and  $30,000  honorarium  to  each 
would be made in New York Oct.  14.  (AP, N Y T ,  8 /22 /68 ,61 )  
French  test  pilot  Andre  Turcat  successfully piloted  Anglo-French super- 
sonic  transport  Concorde  in  1.2-mi  first  formal  runway  test  a t   Tou- 
louse-Blagnac. Aircraft,  equipped  with  Sud-Aviation fuselage  and  four 
Bristol-Siddely engines, was   scheduled  for  fall maiden  flight  and  1971 
production delivery.  (W Pos t ,  8/21/68,  A16; Aw  Wk, 8/26/68) 
August  21 : NASA  successfully launched three  Nike-Apache sounding  rockets 
from  NASA  Wallops  Station  carrying  GSFC  experiments to  determine D- 
region  electron  density  profile  during  solar  flare.  Rockets-launched 
into  active electron  density  profile  after  flare was  reported  and,  subse- 
quently,  into  declining  activity-reached  117.6-mi  (189-km) , 119.8-mi 
(192.7-km), and  119.6-mi  (192-km)  altitudes.  All  rockets  and  instru- 
mentation  performed  satisfactorily.  Good  data  were  obtained.  Radar 
data  showed  remarkable continuity  for  all  three  trajectories,  indicating 
that  rockets  carried  payloads  to   same  ionospheric  region.  (NASA  Rpts 
SRL) 
0  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  by  SASA  from  NASA  Wallops 
Station carried Univ.  of  Maryland-Geophysics Corp. of  America  experi- 
ment  to  163-mi (262-km) altitude.  Primary  objectives were  to   evaluate 
capabilities  and  accuracies  of  pulse  and  thermal  equalization  probes, 
investigate  electron  energy  distribution  in  normal  daytime  ionosphere, 
and  evaluate  use  of  wing-slope  techniques  with  Langmuir  probes. 
Rocket  trajectory  was   nominal,  but  despin  wa s   higher  than  predicted. 
Problems were  encountered in  telemetry.  GCA   antennas  broke  off  a t  de- 
ployment  and  no  data  were  received.  Clamshell  deployed  properly  and 
exposed  pulse  probe  as  planned, but  motor  for  boom  deployment  mal- 
functioned. No  useful data were obtained.  (NASA  Rpt SRL)  
0  NASA  test  pilot  William H.  Dana  flew  X-15  No.  1 to  264,000-ft  altitude 
and  3,443 mph  (mach  4.71)  during  flight  from  Edwards  AFJ3  to  con- 
duct WTR  experiment and check horizon  scanner, sky  brightness, fluidic 
probe, and fixed alpha ball.  (X-15  Proj Off)  
August  22:  Cone-shaped  RAM  c-11  spacecraft  was  successfully  launched 
from  NASA  Wallops  Station  by  four-stage  Scout  booster  at  11:16  am 
EDT. After  reentering  earth’s  atmosphere  at  17,000 mph,  264-lb space- 
craft  completed  its  eight-minute  ballistic  flight  by  impacting  725  mi 
downrange  150 mi  northeast  of  Bermuda.  No  recovery was  attempted. 
Primary  mission  objective  of  RAM  c-11-15-in-long, 
26-in-dia space- 
craft  with  12-in-dia hemisphere nose-was 
to  measure electron concen- 
trations  in  flow  field  at  discrete locations  along  spacecraft during  reen- 
t ry   a t   medium  velocity.  Secondary  objectives  were  to  measure  ion 
concentrations  in  flow  field  as  function  of  distance  from  spacecraft, 
measure  antenna  performance  and  signal  attenuation  during  reentry 

198 

ASTRONAUTXS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

August  22 

under  specified  conditions,  and  measure  spacecraft  environmental 
parameters,  including  accelerations 
ressures  and  temperatures. 
’. p 
Launch was second  in NASA’s Project  RAM   (Radio Attenuation Meas- 
urement)  to  study  methods  for  preventing  loss  of  radio  signals  from 
reentering  spacecraft.  RAM  C-I,  launched  Oct.  19,  1967,  had  success- 
fully demonstrated  effectiveness of  water  addition  to  flow  field and  use 
of  X-band  telemetry  signals  in  maintaining  communications  through 
ionized plasma  sheath. RAM  program was managed by LaRC  under  OART 
direction. RAM  C-IL  spacecraft  was  designed,  fabricated,  and  tested  by 
(NASA  P ro j   Off;  LaRC  P ro j   o f f ;   NASA  Release  68-146;  WS 
LaRC. 
Release 68-17) 
JPL   researchers  Dr.  Arvydas  J .   Kliore  and  Dan  L.  Cain  in  Journal  of 
Atmospheric  Sciences  reported  findings similar  to  July  1 5  findings  of 
Martin  Marietta’s  Allan  R.  Barger  that  surface  a i r   pressure  on  Venus 
might  b e   75  or  100  times  greater  than  that  on  earth,  or  four  to  five 
times  greater  than  that  reported  by  U.S.S.R.  scientists  from  data 
supplied  by  Venus  I V   spacecraft.  Kliore  and  Cain  concluded  that 
Venus   IV  either  had  landed  on  15-mi-high Venusian  peak  undetected 
by  earth  radar  o r   had  stopped  transmitting  before  i t   reached  danet’s 
solid surface. 
Precise  radio  tracking  of  Mariner  V-US. 
spacecraft  which  had 
completed flyby mission by  crossing  Venus  orbit  Oct.  19,  1967, 24  h r  
after  U.S.S.R.  had  reported  parachute  landing  on  Venus-had 
enabled 
Kliore  and  Cain  to  calculate  position  of  spacecraft’s  rad;o  beam, 
relative  to  Venus’  center.  Resulting  profiles  indicated  Soviet  probe 
had penetrated  to radial distance of  3,774 mi from Venus’  center, which 
point  Soviets  had  taken  to  be  Venus’  surface.  U S .   radar  studies  had 
shown  Venus  radius  of  only  3,759  mi.  If  radar  data  were  accurate, 
Yenus  IV   measurements  were  made  at  15-mi  altitude  and  reported 
conditions fa r  less extreme than  on  surface. U S .  measurement  of  Venus 
F  was  consistent  with 
surface  temperature  greater  than  890’-900’ 
estimates from  passive  radio  astronomy  and  with  results  of  radiometer 
experiment conducted by Mariner  I I   in  1962, when  surface temperature 
was found to be 800” F.  (NASA   Release 68-147;  Pasadena  Independent, 
8/22/68;  Parker, Denver  Po s t ,  8/22/68) 
NASA  Administrator  for  Manned  Space Flight,  Dr.  George E. Mueller,  ac- 
cepting 1968 Veterans of  Foreign Wars Space Award  in Detroit, Mich., 
said:  “The  long-term  outlook  for  space  is  good.  I  have  just  returned 
from the  first UN  Conference on  the Peaceful Uses  of  Space. There has 
been  a  world-wide increase  in  awareness of  the  values  and  practicality 
of  space flight.  The  nations  of  the  world  have  become  more  conscious 
of  the  economic benefits of  the space program,  and  the public is becom- 
ing  increasingly  aware  of  the  values  derived  from  space  technology. 
With  the  increase  in public  awareness of  the  importance  of  space tech- 
nology  to  the  future  well-being of  the  Nation,  I  believe  that  the  new 
dynamic US. Space Program.  . . . Man  w i l l   prevail  in  space. On that 
Congress  and  the  new  President  will  and  must  reaffirm  support  fo r   a 
there can be no serious question. The  only question i s  whether  this Na- 
tion w i l l  prevail in  space.”  (Text) 
Wa l l  Street  Journal commented on  DOT  plan  for  easing  a i r   traffic conges- 
tion:  “Many  people  are  flying  100 or  200  miles,  o r   even  shorter  dis- 
tances, only because reasonably rapid  and reliable rail  service simply  is 

199 

August  22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

no  longer  available.  Before  building  airports  still  farther  from  where 
people want  to go-and 
further  jamming the highways leading  to  them 
-someone 
should start  looking  a t   the  broader  picture.  m i l e  the  Gov- 
ernment’s  new  a i r   traffic plan  may  represent necessary movement  on  a 
problem  that  demands  action,  i t   scarcely  qualifies  a s   transportation 
progress.))  ( WSJ ,   8/22/68,  1 4 )  
August  23:  After  meeting privately  with  more  than  100 representatives  of 
aviation  industry,  Secretary  of  Transportation  Alan  S.  Boyd  said  Gov- 
ernment  would  propose  regulations in  September to   unsnarl  tr&c  j am  
over Washington, New York, and Chicago.  (Lardner, W  Po s t ,  8/24/68, 
A3) 
e  NASA  announced  Astronaut  John  A.  Lewellyn  had  withdrawn  from  as- 
tronaut  training  program  because  of  inability  to  progress  sufficiently 
with  jet  flight  training  a t   Reese AFB,  Tex.  After  discussions with  NASA 
and  USAF  officials, he  had  withdrawn  to  consider  several  opportunities 
within NASA  and  elsewhere. His departure reduced  total number  of  NASA 
astronauts  to  52.  Nine  of  eleven  scientist-astronauts selected  in  1967 
were  in  flight  training.  Dr.  Brian  T.  O’Leary  had  withdrawn  April  2 3  
because  he  disliked  flying.  (MSC Release  68-63;  AP,  N Y T ,   8/24/68, 
12 1 
Dr.  Alan  H.  Barrett  and  Dr.  William  J.  Wilson  of  MIT  reported  in  Sci- 
ence discovery of  hydroxyl  radio  emissions from  four  infrared  stars  in 
Cygnus constellation, observed from National Radio Astronomy Observ- 
atory  in  West  Virginia.  They  speculated  that  emissions  indicated  defi- 
nite  stage  in  stars’  evolution.  (The  older  a  star  gets  the  hotter  i t   be- 
comes,  until  i t  has  almost  no  oxygen  and  hydrogen.)  Further  studies, 
supported partially  by  NASA,  would be conducted during  next  few  years 
in  attempt  to  determine how  fa r  young  stars  had  progressed  in  process 
of  evolution  by  observing  hydroxyl  emissions.  (Science,  8/23/68, 
778-9;  Wilford, N Y T ,  8 /25 /68 ,19 )  
August  24:  France  became fifth nation  to  explode hydrogen bomb-joining 
U.S.,  U.S.S.R.,  U.K.,  and  Communist China-when 
she  detonated  two- 
megaton  balloon-borne device  1,800  f t   above  Fangataufa  Atoll  in  Pa- 
cific. French  Defense Minister  Pierre  Messmer  later  told  press  confer- 
ence device weighed  154-2  tons  and  compared  favorably with  devices 
detonated  by  U.S.  in  1956. He  stressed  that  fallout  would  be  minimal 
because  of  explosion’s altitude  and  “particularly  satisfactory” weather 
conditions.  He  also  revealed  that  France’s  new  submarine  missile  had 
become  operational  with  final  explosion  July  16  and  predicted .that 
French  armed  forces  could  be  equipped  with  nuclear  weapons  withm 
several  years.  (AP,  W  Po s t ,   8/25/68,  A l ;   Hess,  NYT ,   8/28/68,  4 ;  
Fenton, B Sun ,  8/28/68,  A2) 
August  25:  U.S.S.R.’s  leading  geneticist, Prof. Nikolay P.  Dubinin, told  In- 
ternational  Symposium  on  Genetic  Effects  of  Space  Environment  in 
Tokyo  biological  experiments  on  various  Soviet  satellites  beginning 
with Sputnik  I had  disclosed that  space  flight  caused  higher  frequency 
of  mutation,  chromosome damage,  and  disruptions in  normal cell  divi- 
sion  mechanisms.  “Dynamic  flight  factors,”  he  said,  were  responsible; 
doses  of  cosmic radiation  registered  were  too  small  to  account  fo r   a11 
genetic  changes  observed.  Symposium  was  held  in  conjunction  with 
12th International  Congress  of  Genetics.  American  scientists  also  S U g  
gested  “dynamic  flight factors”  of  vibrations, acceleration, and  weight- 

200 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

August  25 

lessness might be  factors  in  genetic damage observed  aboard  American 
spacecraft.  (Reinhold, NYT, 8/26/68) 
0  St.  Louis Post-Dispatch editorial  on  NAS-NRC 
Space  Science Board  rec- 
ommendation  that  NASA  “embark  on  an   ambitious  program”  of  inter- 
planetary  flights  and  expand  other  areas:  “The  program  would  be 
costly, of  course, but  nowhere near  as costly a s  war,  and the benefits,  if 
the  goals  were  reached,  would  be  incalculable.  Expenditures  for  pur- 
poses such  as this must be fitted into the schedule of  national priorities. 
Certainly  outlays  to  relieve  the  plight  of  our  cities  and  to   end  poverty 
come  first.  But  the  United  States  is  uniquely qualified  to  take  the  lead 
in  the  sort  of  peaceful  scientific endeavor  that  requires  both  technical 
skills and  money,  and  i t   should  not  lose  sight  of  its  obligation  to  ex- 
pand the area of  human knowledge.”  ( S t .  Louis P-D,  8/25/68) 
August  26:  New  comet  of  undetermined  size  had  been  discovered by  ama- 
teur  astronomers  John  Bally-Urban and  Pa t  Clayton, who  were  attend- 
ing  Southwest  Astronomical  Conference  a t   New  Mexico  State  Univ. 
Using  10-in  telescope,  they  made  discovery  while  observing  comet 
Honda.  Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had  confirmed sighting 
of  comet, which  had  been  given  official  name  of  Bally  Clayton  comet. 
(AP, W Star, 8/26/68,  A2) 
August 27:  U.S.S.R.  launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos  CCXXXV I   en- 
tered orbit with 627-km (389.6-mi)  apogee, 590-km  (366.6-mi)  perigee, 
96.8-min period,  and 56”  inclination. Cosmos  CCXXXV I I   entered orbit 
with  323-km  (200.7-mi)  apogee,  199-km (123.6-mi)  perigee,  89.7-min 
period,  and  65.4”  inclination  and  reentered  Sept.  4.  (GSFC  SSR ,  
8/31/68;  9/15/68) 
NASA  issued  Apollo  Status  Summary:  Integrated  Systems Test  had  been 
completed  on  Apollo  7  command  and  service module  (C SM )  , Apollo  8 
CSM  would  undergo  combined  systems tests  a t  KSC early  in  week.  Sat- 
urn  503  had  been  erected  on  mobile  launcher.  (Text) 
USAF  announced  actions  to  reduce  FY  1969 expenditures  by  $219  mil- 
lion  in  accordance  with  Revenue  and  Expenditures  Control  Act  of 
1968. Savings  of  $18  million  would  be  achieved by   deactivating  seven 
F-101  squadrons  earlier  than  planned  and  closing Paine  Field,  Wash. 
Early  phase-out  would  reduce  military  space  authorizations  by  2,661 
and civilian  authorizations by  372  and  would remove  126 aircraft  from 
active  inventory.  Revised  production  schedules  and  stretch-out  of 
F-111A  and  FB-111  programs  would  save  $201  million.  Production 
would  be  leveled  cff a t  combined production  rate,  below  previously  ap- 
proved  rates  for  each  aircraft,  causing  extended  force buildup,  but  not 
delaying  initial  deliveries.  (DOD Release  800-68;  Sehlstedt,  B  Sun, 
8/28/68,  A2 ; AP, P Inq, 8/28/68,10) 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  conferred  with  West  German  Sci- 
ence Minister Gerhard  Stoltenberg in  Bonn  on US.-German  space proj- 
ects.  (AP, Min Trib, 8/28/68) 
0  USAF  awarded  United  Aircraft  Corp.’s  P ra t t   & Whitney  Div.  and  General 
Electric Co.  separate letter  contracts  and  $11-million initial  obligations 
to  develop  and  test  prototype  of  high-performance afterburning  turbo- 
fan  engine fo r  USAF  FX a i r   superiority  fighter  and  USN  VFX  advanced 
fighter.  Funded  jointly  by  USAF  and  USN,  18-mo competitive contracts 
were valued a t  $100 million.  (DOD Release 799-68) 
.4ugust  28:  Cosmos CCXXXV I I I   was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  into  orbit  with 

201 

August  28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

210-km  (130.5-mi)  apogee,  203-km  (126.1-mi)  perigee,  88.6-min  pe- 
riod,  and  51.7”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Sept.  l.  (GSFC  SSR ,  
8/31/68;  9/15/68) 
NASA  announced  award  to  Bendix  Corp.  of  $1,567,550  cost-plus-incen- 
tive-fee  contract  for  development,  test,  and  delivery  of  one  prototype 
and  five  flight-model ATM  star  trackers  in  15-mo period.  ATM,  part  of 
Apollo  Applications program,  would  be  launched  into  earth  orbit  and 
docked  with  Saturn  I  Workshop  being  developed  by  MSFC  for  28-  to 
56-day astronaut  stays in space. Astronauts would  use ATM  to  study sun 
from above earth‘s  atmosphere. ( MSFC Release 68-196) 
August 28-30:  AIAA  and American Bar Assn. held  joint  Impact of  Aerospace 
Science and  Technology on  Law  and  Government Conference in Wash- 
ington, D.C. 
Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh,  NASC  Executive Secretary,  asserted U S .   could 
afford  multibillion  dollar  space  program;  “at  least  as  much  as  Presi- 
dent  Johnson  proposed  this  year-nearly  $7,000,000,000-and  perhaps 
an  appreciable amount  more.”  (Figure  included all  Government spend- 
ing,  not  just  NASA  funds.)  Persons  advocating  big  cuts  in  space  pro- 
gram  were  “doing  this  country  a  disservice.”  Much  of  high  U.S.  gross 
national  product  was  result  of  prior  investment  in  R&D.  “This  Nation 
invests more  per  capita  in  research  than  any  other  nation  in   the  world 
and  that  is  a  major  reason  why  we   have  a  higher  standard  of  living. 
The space program  is  the most  active, economical, and  productive stim- 
ulus  to  research  and  development in  history.  We  cannot  afford  to  slow 
i t  down  . . . unless we  think we  can  afford less  investment in  the  elimi- 
nation  of  poverty,  less expenditure for  health  improvement, less  income 
for  an  expanding  population,  and  less  readiness  in  the  realm  of  na- 
tional  security.”  Space program  cost,  though  large,  was  “not  really  so 
expensive  when  we  figure  that  we  are  spending  less  than  1% of  our 
Gross National Product  for  a  technological capability  that  increases the 
rate  a t   which  this  Nation  becomes  wealthier  and  more  powerful  by 
many  times  l%.” 
(Text;  B  Sun,  8/29/68,  A5;  AP,  L A   T ime s ,  
8/29/68) 
Dr.  Charles  S.  Sheldon  11, Library  of  Congress  Research  Specialist, 
said U.S.S.R.  was  launching more military  espionage satellites than  any 
other  spacecraft  and  therefore  had  softened  complaints  about  U.S.  es- 
pionage  satellite  activity.  Tracing  political  and  social  implications  of 
Soviet space  program,  Dr.  Sheldon said  U.S.S.R.  accepted  “importance 
of  basic  research  on  the  cosmic  scale”  and  vigorous  exploitation  of 
space  applications  for  c iv i l   purposes  w a s   definite  goal.  I n   long-term 
outlook,  U.S.S.R.  talked  of  “future  automated,  cybernetics-aided  in- 
dustrial  state  . . . in which  space applications, space travel,  and  use  of 
extraterrestrial resources play  a  vital  part.”  We  also  credited  NASA  pro- 
gram of  international cooperation with  some influence  on  recent  Soviet 
shift  toward  increased  cooperation  within  and  without  Soviet  bloc, 
though  joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  program  for  space exploration would  prob- 
ably  prove  inoperable  even  if  i t   could  be  established.  (U M Paper 
68-900;  AP, NYT ,  8 /30 /6 8 , 7 )  
M /G   Jewel1  C.  Maxwell  (USAF ) ,   director  of  FAA  SST  development, 
said  cost  of  designing  and  developing  two  prototype  commercial  SSTS 
would  amount  to  $1.587  billion.  Government  share  in  total  spending 
from  1963 through  1972 would be  $1.239 billion,  or  78%.  Contractors, 

202 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

August  28-30 

Boeing Co .  and General Electric C o . ,  would pay $287.8 million, or 18% ,  
and customer airlines would  contribute $59.5  million,  o r  4%. Principal 
problem  in  financing, he  said,  was  protection of  manufacturers  against 
catastrophic  failure. This would  require  “some limitation  of  recourse of 
creditors . . . in  event of  program failure.” 
In  addition,  Gen.  Maxwell  forecast  $2.5-billion to  $5-billion market 
risk  for  period  starting  in  1972  and  $15  billion  commercial  risk  for 
period  between start  of  sales and  end  of  century.  (AIM Paper  68-916; 
AP, NYT ,  9 /1 /68 ,22 )  
August  29:  NASA’s Pegasus  I ,   I I ,   and  I I I   meteoroid  technology  satellites 
launched  Feb.  16,  May  25,  and  July  30,  1965,  were  turned  off  by 
ground  command after  more  than  three  years  successful operation.  De- 
signed  for  18-mo lifetime,  Pegasus  satellites, by  detecting  meteoroids, 
had  confirmed  protective  adequacy  of  Apollo  spacecraft  for  manned 
lunar  missions but  indicated  that  spacecraft for  longer  missions might 
encounter protection design  problems.  Spacecraft also provided data  on 
Van  Allen  belts,  earth  reflectivity,  solar  constant,  orbital  and  gyro- 
scopic motions of  rigid bodies, degradation of  surface coatings in  space, 
thermal  control  systems, and lifetime of  electronic components in  space 
operations.  Pegasus  program  had  been  managed  by  MSFC  under  OART 
direction.  (NASA   Releases  68-149,  68-149A,  68-149B;  Marshall  Star, 
8 /21 /68 ,1 )  
NASA  scientists working with  Deep  Space Network  (DSN)   had  quadrupled 
distances over which signals from  three  Pioneer  spacecraft currently  in 
interplanetary  space  could  be  heard.  Pioneers  could  view  sun  from 
every side.  Improvements in  DSN  receivers so  fa r  had  allowed  return  of 
50%  more  of  their  data  than  had  been  planned.  All  three  Pioneers- 
now  29,  116, and  182 million  mi  from  e a r t h - c o u l d  be  heard  through 
DSN  antennas,  ensuring  return  of  data  until  they  wore  out.  Together 
they  had,  to  date,  amassed  55  mo  in  orbit,  measuring  particles  and 
fields  of  sun’s  atmosphere  and  returning  seven  billion  bits  of  data. 
Change of  polarization  of  tracking  antennas from  circular to  linear had 
doubled  received  signal  power.  (ARC   Release  68-13;  ARC  As trogram ,  
8 /29 /68 ,1 )  
President  Johnson  signed  Executive  Order  11424 ensuring  “flight  pay” 
to  military  personnel  flying  spacecraft and  incentive pay  for  hazardous 
duty  on  same  basis  as  for  those  flying  in  conventional aircraft.  Order 
further  ensured  incentive pay  for  personnel injured  in  an  “aviation  ac- 
cident”  for  three  months without their  completing performance require- 
ments.  Order  included  word  “spacecraft”  in   previous  Executive Order 
related  to  hazardous  duty  pay  for  “aerial  flight”  and  “aviation  acci- 
dent.”  ( P D ,  9/2/68,1285) 
*  National  Pilots  Assn.  issued  statement  defending  C‘first-come, first- 
served”  principle  of  a i r   traffic  control  and  opposed  priorities  for  a i r  
carriers  as  solution  to  mounting congestion  a t  major  airports.  Instead, 
NPA  recommended upgrading  pilot  and  aircraft  requirements  for  using 
New  York,  Chicago,  and  Washington  terminals.  It  specifically  advo- 
cated  requiring  IFR  equipment  including  transponder  for  aircraft,  in- 
strument rating  for  pilots,  and  aircraft capable of  maintaining  specified 
approach speeds.  ( NPA  Release) 
*  Library  of  Congress had  acquired  from  former  astronaut  John  H.  Glenn, 
Jr.,  The John  Glenn Papers,  90,000 items representing  national  and  in- 

203 

August  29 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%8 

ternational  response to  his  first manned space flight, Feb.  20,  1962. Ma- 
jority  of  letters  covering 1962-64  were  from  ordinary  citizens,  largely 
elementary school  children.  Other  items  included  subject  files,  space 
manuals,  news  clippings,  scrapbooks,  invitations,  certificates,  awards, 
maps,  and charts which Library’s  Information  Bulletin said  “reflect  the 
contemporary need  for  a popular  hero-one  who  can be held  up  to   the 
young  and  who  at  the  same time  must  undergo  the  rigorous  pressures 
brought  about  by  ‘instant’  fame  and  worldwide  recognition.”  Papers 
provided  “many  insights  into  contemporary social history.”  Glenn  had  
been  asked  for his opinion on every conceivable topic.  (Sifton, LC  Znfo 
Bull, 8/29/68) 
August  30:  Apollo 7 spacecraft and launch vehicle were  electrically mated  a t  
KSC Launch Complex 34.  (NASA Apollo Status Summary, 9 /4 /68)  
0  ComSatCorp  had  notified  FCC of  its  intention  to   award  $270,000 fixed- 
price  contract  to   Hughes  Aircraft  Co.  fo r   installation,  operation,  and 
maintenance of  transportable  earth  station  in   California  to   transmit, 
via  Zntelsat  ZZ satellite,  TV  coverage  of  Mexican  Olympics  to   Pacific 
area in  October.  (ComSatCorp Release 6 8 4 5 )  
During  Augus t:   In   A s t ronm t ic s   &  Aeronautics  editorial  AIAA  President 
Floyd  L.  Thompson  heralded  U.N.  Conference  on  Exploration  and 
Peaceful Uses  of  Outer Space in  Vienna,  August  14-27.  Against  back- 
ground  of  new  developments in   arms control,  i t  would  emphasize prac- 
tical  benefits  of  space exploration,  especially  as   to  how  they  could  aid 
developing  nations.  “This  action  by  the  UN  points  up   the  continuing 
concern of  many  about  the  need  for   cooperation among nations  in   the 
exploration of  space.  It  recognizes  that  space  represents  an  important 
element of  national  power, a  force  for growth, particularly  in  advanced 
technology and education.”  ( A & A ,  8 /6% ,17)  

September  1968 

September  I :   I n   Baltimore  Sun William  J.  Perkinson  warned  against  “A 
Czechoslovakia  I n   Space.”  He  said  experts  explained  U.S.  and  other 
free-world nations  “must  insure  that  future  Russian  leaders  will  never 
be able to blackmail nations  or whole continents of  nations  into submit- 
ting  to  the will  of  such Soviet leaders  the way  the leaders  of  the Krem- 
lin  forced Czechoslovakia to  yield  through  the  invasion  of  that  country 
on the night of  August 21.” 
By  marrying  technology  of  “spook,”  or  hovering,  satellite with  that 
used  to  produce  MIRV  and  by  use  of  more  powerful  rockets,  “it would 
be  possible to  launch  truly  ‘orbiting men-of-war’ that  could  be  used  fa r  
more effectively to  cow  any  nation  than  the  most  powerful of  gunboats 
were  able to  do  in  the  days  of  ‘gunboat diplomacy.’ ” Blackmail might 
not  occur,  if arms limitation  treaties granted  each nation  right  to  board 
and  inspect  all  heavy  satellites  in  orbit.  “But  even  that  right  would 
have to  be  backed up  by  means  of  spacecraft and  spacemen capable  of 
exercising that  right.  That  . . . is  why  the  invasion  of  Czechoslovakia 
(B   Sun, 
is  certain  to  spark  new  interest  in  manned  space  flight.” 
9/1/68,3) 
September  2 :  John  Lannan  in  Washington  Evening  Star  called  GSFC “home 
base”  fo r   Apollo  7  astronauts.  All  their  communications  would  pass 
through  Center.  Communicating  with  some  or  all  lunar  spacecraft 
would  be  14  land  stations,  4  ships,  and  8  aircraft  around  the  world, 
manned by  4,000 persons.  All  circuits used  would  be  put  together  from 
GSFC switching  centers.  Except  for  astronaut’s  electrocardiagram  and 
his  voice,  all  mission  data  would  be  channeled  in  digital  form,  which 
meant vast  bulk  of  detail  controlling  system  itself,  in   addition  t o  mis- 
sion  data  from  Houston  or  spacecraft,  could  b e   handled  rapidly  by 
computers. (W  S tar ,  9 /2 /68 ,1 )  
*  AEC  was  developing  plans  for  “nuplexes,”  giant  agro-industrial  com- 
plexes  built  around  nuclear  reactors  and  using  advanced  agricultural 
and  industrial  technologies, said  AEC Chairman, Dr.  Glenn T. Seaborg, 
in  U.S. News &  Wo r ld   Repo r t .   While  “modest  type”  could  be  built 
using  reactors  of  type  under  construction, eventually feasible $1-billion 
nuplex could  sustain  100,000  farmers,  laborers,  and  their  families and 
feed  5  million  others,  while  exporting  fertilizer  to   grow  food  fo r  addi- 
tional  50  million  people.  Nuplexes  would  generate  own  electricity  and 
pump  oceans  for  unlimited  quantities  of  water  for  irrigation  and  in- 
dustrial  uses.  Seaborg saw  India  and  Middle East  a s   specific areas  f o r  
nuplexes.  ( W  Po s t ,  8/26/68,  A12;  U S  News, 9/2/68,62) 
September  3:  Lunar  Test  Article  (LTA  2R)--carried  onboard  A p o h   6 
flight April  4  to  measure vibration,  acoustics,  and  structural  integrity 
fo r  lunar  module-reentered 
earth’s  atmosphere and  splashed  into  Pa- 
cific. Tracking  station  lost contact with  debris  in   orbit  a t   about  10 am  

205 

September  3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

EDT  but  calculated  its  trajectory  to  landing  area. 
(NASA  Release 
68-155;  AP, B Sun, 9/11/68,  A3) 
September  4 :   NASA  Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  car- 
ried  National  Center  for  Atmospheric  Research  experiment  to   77-mi 
(124-km)  altitude  to  retrieve  high-intensity  a i r   sample  from  26.7-  to  
40.4-mi  (43- to  65-km)  altitude,  using  low-temperature condenser.  All 
cryogenic  heat  exchange  and  sampler  functions  performed  satisfac- 
torily;  recovery parachute  deployed and  payload  survived impact.  Sam- 
ple  of  eight moles of  a i r  was  recovered between  26.8-mi  (43.2-km)  and 
38.9-mi (62.8-km) altitudes.  (NASA  Rpt SRL)  
NASA  issued Apollo  Status Summary:  Apollo  7  crew  was  participating  in 
verification test  of  electrically mated  spacecraft and  launch  vehicle.  For 
Apollo  8  mission,  combined  systems  test  on  Command  and  Service 
Module  103 and  checkout  of  Apollo  Saturn  503  launch  vehicle would 
continue through week a t  KSC. (Text) 
0  FAA  issued  notice  of  proposed  rule  to  restrict  number,  type,  and  equip- 
ment  of  aircraft  using  “high  density”  airports.  New  York‘s  Kennedy 
International  and  La  Guardia,  Newark,  Chicago’s  O’Hare,  and  Wash- 
ington  National  would  be  allocated 80,  60,  60,  135, and  60 operations 
per  h r  from 6 :OO   am to midnight. Rule would  set minimum airspeed  of 
150 knots  while  under  a i r   traffic  approach  control  and  require  all  air- 
craft  to  be  equipped with  radar  beacon  transponder  w i t h   64-code capa- 
bility  and  two  pilots  while  under  reservations  plan.  Prior  approved 
departure or arrival reservations would be required  for  each flight oper- 
ated  under  IFR  or  from  designated  high-traffic  airport.  Public  hearing 
on  proposed  rule  would  be  held  a t   FAA  Hq.  Sept.  25.  (FAA   Release 
68-53  1 
0  At  Fort  Worth,  Tex.,  ceremonies,  Australian  Minister  for  Defence  Allen 
Fairhall  accepted first  of  Australia’s 24  F-111C  aircraft  on  order  from 
General  Dynamics  Corp.  U.S.  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  Dr.  Harold 
Brown,  told  assembled  dignitaries  F-111  “institutes  a  new  generation 
of  aircraft.  . . . We have discovered . . . that  when  compared to  fixed- 
wing  aircraft,  the  variable  geometry  wing  requires  fa r   fewer  compro- 
mises  to  obtain  the  desired  performance.”  ( DOD  Releases  779-68, 
812-68;  AFSC  Newsreview, 9 /68 ,1 )  
0  Dr.  George Kozmetsky,  dean  of  Univ.  of  Texas  College  of  Business  and 
of  Graduate  School  of  Business,  had  been  sworn  in   as  consultant  to 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb, NASA  announced.  Specialist in  sys- 
tem  analysis,  organization  theory,  quantative  methods,  and  system 
management, Dr.  Kozmetsky would serve on NASA’s Management Advis- 
ory Panel.  (NASA  Release 68-153) 
September  5:  Cosmos   C C X X X I X   was  launched by  U.S.S.R.  into  orbit  with 
262-km  (162.8-mi)  apogee,  198-km (123-mi)  perigee,  89.1-min period, 
(GSFC  S SR ,  
and  51.8’ 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Sept.  13. 
9/15/68) 
0  Washington  Daily News  story  by  London Express  Service said  scientists 
“have  told  the  military  that  a  new  infra-red  sensing device  tested  in  a 
secret  American  reconnaissance satellite  may  be  able,  from  space,  to 
detect the  elusive  submarines as  they  lurk  under  water.  And  the  inven- 
tion  is  said  to  work  whether  the  quarry  is  moving,  hovering  in  mid- 
water,  or  even  lying  silently on  the  bottom.  . . . More  tests  are  to  be 

206 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
September  5 
made.  But  i t   . . . seems  fairly  certain  that  the  system w i l l   be  put  into 
full operation soon.”  ( W  News, 9 /5 /68 ,6 )  
0  USAF  announced Aug.  25 discovery of  new  F-111A  problem  during  fa -  
tigue  test  at  General Dynamics-Convair plant,  San  Diego,  Calif.,  would 
extend  restrictions  on  aircraft.  Problem  was  failure  of  steel  fitting  on 
which  swing-wings pivoted.  Technical  officers  believed  crack  in  metal 
plate  wa s   caused  by  iaulty  bolt  hole  rather  than  serious  design  defi- 
ciency.  DOD  said  it  would  take  10  to  1 4   days  to  complete  analysis. 
( A e r o  Daily,  9/6/68;  W  Post,  9/6/68,  1 ; AP.  W  S tar ,   9/6/68,  C5; 
Sehlstedt, B Sun, 9/7/68,  A7) 
President  Johnson  issued  Executive Order  11428 terminating  President’s 
Advisory  Committee  on  Supersonic Transport,  which  had  been  estab- 
lished April  1,196LE.  ( P D ,  9/9/68,1309) 
September  6 :  NASA  announced  i t  had  terminated  production  of  60  H-1  en- 
gines  for  post-Apollo  Saturn  IB  missions  under  contract  with  North 
American Rockwell Corp.’s  Rocketdyne Div.  Delivery  of  32  engines to 
MSFC   had  already  been  completed.  Of  remaining  2 8   engines,  1 would 
be  complete;  1, complete without  firing;  6,  assembled;  and  hardware 
for  20,  delivered  in  present  production  state.  (NASA  Release  68-154; 
MSC  Roundup ,  9 /1 3 /68 ,1 )  
*  Charles G.  Haynes, Director  of  NASA  Inspections Div.,  had  been  assigned 
additional  duties  as  Acting  Director  of  Headquarters  Administration, 
NASA  announced. He  would  replace Alfred S.  Hodgson, who  was  on   ex- 
tended leave.  ( NASA  Ann, 9/6/68) 
Col.  Robert  L.  Stevens  ( USAF)  , holder  of  four  of  nine  new  world  speed 
and  altitude  records  set  in  Lockheed  YF-12A 
jet  interceptor,  was 
named  technical  adviser  to  FAA SST Program  Director,  M/G  Jewel1  C. 
Maxwell  ( USAF)   . (FAA   Release 68-32) 
September 7 :  During visit  to  MSFC,  Republican presidential  candidate  Rich- 
a rd   M.  Nixon  said  of  space  program,  “ I   would  have  this  clearly  un- 
derstood:  that  I  consider  this  program  as  one  of  our  national  impera- 
tives,  that  it  must  be  supported  at  a  level  assuring  efficient  and  steady 
progress,  that  the  ups  and  downs  . . . in  planning,  programming  and 
financing must  be  brought  to  a  halt,  and  that  as  President  I  will  make 
certain  our country retains  leadership  in  this  great  endeavor.  . . . It  is 
an  inescapable fact  of  our  national  life  today  that  we  cannot  afford  to  
do  all we  wish.  But  we   must  do  all we  can.  . . . I  assert my  conviction 
that  among  the  claimants for  Federal  support  I consider  the  space pro- 
gram both  indispensable and of  major  importance to  our  country.  . . . 
In   every  area  of  science-in 
every  area  of  k n ow l e d g e t h e   United 
States must  continue  to   probe  the  unknown.  In  terms of  our  long-range 
security  and  growth, the  most  critical  gap which we  could  allow  to  de- 
velop would  be  a  research gap.”  (Text; N Y T ,  9/7/68,  l ;  UPI,  W  Post, 
9/7/68  [photo] ; B Sun, 9/7/68) 
*  Max  Conrad,  holder  of  world  record  for  straight-line  distance  (7,688.5 
mi)  in  light  aircraft,  set  June  2 4 ,  1959, claimed  new  world  distance 
record  of  4,968  mi in   closed-circuit route.  He  landed  his  twin-engine 
Piper  Aztec  at  Lambert  Field  in  St.  Louis, Mo.,  after  flying 621-mi tri- 
angular  route  between  St.  Louis,  Des  Moines,  Iowa,  and  Kansas  City, 
Mo.,  eight  times  in  37  h r   50 min.  (Wo r ld  Almanac,  68,  752;  UPI,  W 
Post, 9/9/68,  C5) 
September  8 :   France  exploded  second  hydrogen  bomb-believed 

to  be  less 

207 

September 8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

than  two  megatons-susDended 
above  Mururoa  Atoll  i n   the  Pacific. 
First  test had-been  cond&ted  Aug.  24.  (AP, B Sun ,  9 /2 /68 ,2 ;   W Pos t ,  
9/9/68.  A22) 
Sep tember   9:  Apollo  7  prime  and  backup  crews  successfully  completed 
egress test  a t  KSC.  Astronauts performed  both  aided  and unaided  egress 
from  spacecraft  under  simulated  emergency  conditions.  At  MSC  three 
astronauts completed five-da y vacuum chamber  tests  in  spacecraft simi- 
la r   to  command  and  service  modules  to  be  flown  on  second  manned 
Apollo  mission  and  lunar  flights. 
(NASA  Apollo  Status  Summary, 
9/10/69) 
U.S.  News   &  Wo r ld   Report  said  story  of  how  U S .   had  been  steadily 
stripping  away  “some  of  the  most  valuable  military  secrets  of  Soviet 
Russia for the past  five  years” was being  revealed in bits  and  pieces. At 
heart  of  story  were  spy  satellites orbiting  earth.  Powerful  spaceborne 
cameras could  photograph  in detail objects less than  one foot in  diame- 
ter  from  150-mi altitude.  “Ultramodern”  radar  circling  in  outer  space 
now  penetrated cloud covers and  forest vegetation  to  reveal hidden  m i s -  
sile  sites, tanks,  and  even  troops.  Infrared  sensors could  detect  subma- 
rines  and missile launching. Electronic sensors could monitor atomic ex- 
plosions and  pick  up  telephone messages  from  deep within  U.S.S.R.  or 
Communist  China.  President  Johnson  had  said  spy  satellites  alone 
made U.S.  space investment worthwhile. 
USAF  had,  to  date,  launched  more  than  200  classified  payloads.  At 
least  one  intelligence  satellite was  always  ready  for  orbit.  Most  stayed 
operational  for  1 to  25 days.  Even  more  useful, Manned  Orbiting  Lab- 
oratory  (MO L )   was  yet  to  come.  U.S.S.R.  was  particularly  concerned 
about  its  intelligence  implications.  “The  Russians  a re   starting  now  to 
understand  that  one  of  their  centuries-old weapons  against  the  rest  of 
( U S   News, 
the  world-their 
secrecy-is 
rapidly  being  removed.” 
9 /9 /68 , 2 )  
September  10: uSAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenber, cr  AFB 
by  Titan  111-B  booster  into  orbit  with  ZOO-mi  (321.9-km)  apogee,  89- 
mi  (143.2-km) perigee, 89.1-min period, and  106’  inclination. Satellite 
reentered  Sept.  25.  (P re s  Rp t   6 8 ;  GSFC  S S R ,  9/15/68,  9/30,/68) 
XB-70A,  flown by NASA test pilots Donald L.  Mallick and  Fitzhugh L.  Ful- 
ton,  Jr.,  reached  63,000-ft altitude  and  mach  2.54  in  flight  from  Ed- 
wards  AFT(.  Accomplished  successfully were ILAF  systems check;  exciter 
vane  tests;  evaluation of  stability,  control,  and  handling qualities:  and 
observation of  duct turbulence.  (NASA  Proj Off) 
USAF  announced  successful completion  on  Aug.  6  of  initial  Aight  phase 
of  C-5A 
jet  transport,  after which  aircraft  had  been  put  into  six week 
planned  layup  for  “configuration update  and  instrumentation for flutter 
testing.”  I t   had  accumulated 23  h r   48 min  in  flights on  June  30;  July 
13, 20,  25,  and  31;  and  Aug.  1 and  6.  During  evaluation,  C-SA  had 
flown  a t  maximum gross  weight  of  557,000 lb,  logged  gross maximum 
taxi  weight of  732,000 Ib,  and  reached  250-knot top speed  and  11,000- 
f t   maximum  altitude.  6 5 A  Galaxy  was  designed  to  operate  at  long- 
range  cruise  speed  of  MO  knots  with  basic  mission  weight  of  712,000 
lb.  ( A e r o  Da i ly ,  9/11/68) 
Astronomer  Dr.  &mitt  L.  Verschuur,  with  aid  of  National  Radio  As- 
tronomy  Observatory,  had  measured  for  first  time  strength  of  Milky 
Way’s  magnetic  field  as  it  existed  in  far  reaches  of  the  galaxy,  to   help 

208 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

September  10 

explain theories of  star  formation,  radio wave  propagation,  and cosmic 
ray acceleration unprovable previously.  ( W Po s t ,  9/10/68,  A10) 
Col.  Albert  J.  Wetzel  (USAF,  Ret.),  Director  of  Sponsored  Programs  a t  
Tulane  Univ.,  was  sworn in  as consultant to  NASA  Administrator  James 
E.  Webb.  Former  technical  assistant  to  Director  of  Defense  Research 
and  Engineering  and  former  Titan  ICBM  program  director,  Col.  Wetzel 
would  advise  Webb  on  NASA  Project  Management  System  and  other 
technical and personnel management activities.  (NASA Release 68-156) 
*  NASA  Deep  Space Network  celebrated  1,OOOth  tracking  and  data  acquisi- 
tion  support  pass  of  Pioneer  VZ  spacecraft, launched  Dec.  16, 1965, as 
first of  successful series. Pass was monitored by 210-ft antenna  a t  Gold- 
stone, Calif., where  Pioneer  Tracking  and  Data  Systems Manager,  Dr. 
N.  A.  Renzetti,  congratulated  members  of  JPL  Pioneer  Operations 
Team.  ( JPL   Lab-Ora tory ,  10 /21 /68 ,2 )  
NAA  selected  Sen.  Warren  G.  Magnuson  (D-Wash.)  to  receive  its  1968 
Wright  Brothers Memorial Trophy  for  “more  than  two  decades  of  dy- 
namic  leadership  in  developing  national  and  international  policy  that 
has  assured  United  States  preeminence  in  aeronautics  throughout  the 
world  and  has  contributed  immeasurably  to  the  health  and  vitality  of 
America’s  economic  structure.”  Trophy  would  be  presented  Dec.  17 a t  
Annual  Wright  Brothers  Memorial  Dinner  in  Washington,  D.C.  (NAA  
Release) 
0  George  C.  Wilson  in  Washington  Post  wrote:  “No  one  is  willing  to 
predict  what  form  a  new  Soviet  psychological  sputnik  would 
take  . . . [but]  it  w a s   a  gut  feeling  among  space  leaders  that  the 
United States w i l l   pay  the price  eventually for cutting back  on  its  space 
program  while  the  Soviets move  right  ahead  on  all  fronts with  theirs.” 
Even  Saturn  V  rocket  “does  not  look  big  enough  to  close  the  thrust 
gap.  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb-one 
of  the  most  underrated 
administrators  in  Washington-warns 
that  the  Soviets a r e  about  to   fly 
a rocke t  much bigger.  . . .” 
By-product of  big  boosters was  luxury  of  weight  they  allowed  com- 
sats.  US.  was  using  satellites weighing 357  lb  a t   launch  and  192 lb   in 
orbit.  U.S.S.R.  was  talking  about  1,000-lb comsats for  competing inter- 
national  communications system.  “The  Soviet Union’s  bigness in  boost- 
ers  and  payloads will  be  an   advantage  in  this  contest between  the  two 
AT&Ts  of  space.”  ( w  Post,  9/10,/68,  14) 
September  II:  NASA  selected  Fairchild  Hiller  Corp.  and  General  Electric 
Co.  to  develop spacecraft designs for Applications Technology Satellites 
(ATS) F and  G  under  $4.6-million  fixed-price contracts.  Configuration 
would consist of  30-ft-dia deployable antenna and precision control  sys- 
tem.  Both  spacecraft  would  carry  advanced  communications,  naviga- 
tion,  weather,  technical,  and  scientific  experiments. They  were  sched- 
uled  for  1972 and  1973 synchronous orbits  a t  22,300-mi altitude.  Each 
company would  design  and  develop basic configuration  for  both  space- 
craft  and  provide  specifications,  drawings,  and  test  procedures.  ( NASA 
Release 68-157) 
Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Laboratories  launched  largest  research 
balloon-28.7-million-cu-ft polyethylene sphere-to 
record  158,000-ft al- 
titude  from WSMR.  Flight  carried  instruments  for  atmospheric measure- 
ments near  stratopause and  terminated near  Needles, Calif.,  after  18 hr. 
Previous  record  size  for  polyethylene  balloon  was  13.5  million  cu  ft. 

209 

September  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Previous  balloon  record,  26  million  cu  f t ,   was  held  by  five  fiber-rein- 
forced Mylar balloons flown by  AFCRL for NASA  in  1966 and  1967.  (OAR 
Research Review, 1-2/69,8-9) 
0  Republican  Presidential  candidate  Richard  M.  Nixon  announced  deci- 
sion  to  request  Senate postponement  of  approval  of  nuclear  nonprolif- 
eration  treaty.  “Despite my  concern over  some of  its provisions, I  have 
endorsed  [the  treaty].  . . . I  hope  tha t   it  can  be  universally  adopted. 
But  the  Soviet  invasion  of  Czechoslovakia has  seriously  damaged  the 
prospects for early ratification of  the treaty.” 
Nixon  statement  came  as  Republicans  blocked  meeting  of  Senate 
Foreign  Relations  Committee  for  second  day,  preventing  voting  on 
treaty  approval.  (Semple,  Finney,  NYT ,   9/12/68,  1 ; Oberdorfer,  W 
Post, 9 /12 /68 ,1 )  
September 12:  Institute  for  Strategic  Studies in  London issued  report,  “The 
Military  Balance,”  which  said  U.S.S.R.  had  rushed  construction  of 
land-based ICBMS   and  now  had  almost  as many a s  U S .   By  end  of  1968 
Soviet total  w a s   expected  to  reach  U S .   total  of  1,054.  (Shuster,  N Y T ,  
9 /13 /68 ,9 )  
Slide-wire escape  way,  1,200-ftt-long, from  215-ft  level  to  ground  a t   KSC 
Complex  34  was   declared  man-rated  following  tests  by  five  dummies 
and  five men.  Slide wire was  designed as last means  of  escape from  tot, 
of  Saturn  IB  gantry  for  astronauts  and  close-out  crews  if   emergency 
should shut off  other routes.  (Spaceport News,  9 /12 /68 ,1 )  
0  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  told  World  Affairs  Council  in  Pittsburgh,  Pa.:  “The  U.S. 
space program  was  undertaken  in  1958, and  accelerated by  three  Presi- 
dents  and  six  Congresses  who  considered  it  basic  to   our  national 
strength  and  essential to  our continued leadership of  the  Free World.  I t  
is  . . . significant  to  note  that  this  has  been  a  bipartisan  effort,  with 
Republican  as  well  as  Democratic  support.  . . . Space  expenditures 
contribute  significantly to  the  national  power  of  the  United  States  in  a 
world  where  military  and  economic  security  increasingly  rest  upon 
technology.”  US .   space  program  “has  been  deliberately  oriented  to- 
ward cooperation with  other countries.  I t   is providing  opportunities for 
foreign  scientists  to  contribute  and  develop  their  talents  and,  a t   the 
same time,  gives  other  nations  a  chance  to  share  not  only  in  the  pub- 
achievements a s  well.  . . .”  (Text) 
lished  results  of  space  research,  but  in  the  accomplishment  of  these 
*  Senate  adopted  S.R.  391,  changing  assignments of  minority  Senators  to 
standing  committees.  Measure  excused  Senators  Edward  W.  Brooke 
(R-Mass.)  and  Charles  H.  Percy  (R-Ill.)  from  Senate  Committee  on 
Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences and  assigned  Senators Mark  0. Hat- 
field  (R-Ore.)  and-Charles  E.  Goodell  (RyN.Y.)  to  Committee.  (NASA 
LAR   VTT/9C)\ 
-, 
. . - _  
September 13 :  Explorer X X X V I I I   (RAE-A)  , launched from WTR  July 4, was 
I  ~ 
adjudged  successful by  NASA.  Satellite had  completed  30  days  of  suc- 
cessful  three-axis  gravity-gradient-stabilized  operation  in   orbit  a s   of 
Aug.  22.  Experiment  instrumentation  and  all  spacecraft  support  sys- 
tems were operational and  functioning satisfactorily. Recording of  vari- 
ations  in  galactic  emission, low-frequency solar  bursts,  and  radio  sig- 
nals  from  earth  had  been  acquired.  Some  evidence had  been  found  of 
enhanced  noise  bands  a t   medium  frequencies  within  magnetosphere, 

210 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

September  13 

and  strong  noise  enhancement had  been  observed  in  vicinity  of  South 
Atlantic anomaly.  (NASA   P ro j  Off) 
0  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  portable  launcher 
at W S M R  carried  GSFC  payload  to  3.1-mi  (5.05-km)  altitude.  Objectives 
were  to  flight-qualify production  lot  of  VAM-20  variboosters,  demon- 
strate  Aerobee  rail  launch  feasibility,  determine  exiting  loads  on  rail 
launcher,  establish  procedures  for  rail  launching,  and  verify  boost- 
phase  dispersion  calculations. Booster  web  burning  time,  booster  pres- 
sure,  acceleration, velocity,  and  system impact were  a s  predicted.  (NASA 
Rpt  SRL) 
X-15  No.  1 was successfully flown by Maj. William J.  Knight  (USAF)  
to 254,100-ft altitude and 3,716 mph  (mach 5.26)  in  test from Edwards 
AFB.  Primary  objectives were  to  conduct WTR  experiment and  check  out 
horizon scanner,  fixed alpha  cone,  and  fluidic probe.  (X-15  P ro j   Off) 
0  President  Johnson  selected  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  AEC  Chairman,  to  
head  U S .   delegation  to  12th  conference  of  International  Atomic  En- 
(UPI,  NYT, 
ergy  Agency,  which  would  open  in  Vienna  Sept.  24. 
9/15/68,34) 
September  14:   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCXL  into  orbit  with  283-km 
(175.8-mi)  apogee, 203-km  (126.1-mi)  perigee,  89.3-min  period,  and 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Sept.  21.  (GSFC  SSR,  9/15/68, 
51.8’ 
9/30/68) 
While  Soviet  scientists believed  in  use  of  some drugs  to  help  man  adapt 
to  long  space flights, U S .  medical experts wanted  to  avoid use  of  medi- 
cation  in   orbit  because  of  unpredictable  side  effects  they  sometimes 
produced,  Associated  Press  reported.  U S .   astronauts  had  carried  only 
nonbromide,  antimotion  sickness  pills  and  these  had  been  used  only 
once,  by  Gemini  VZZZ  pilots  Neil  A.  Armstrong  and  David  R.  Scott 
when  stuck  thruster  caused  spacecraft  to  roll  and  forced  emergency 
landing.  Soviet  representatives at  Vienna  U.N.  Conference  on  Peaceful 
Uses  of  Outer  Space had  indicated most  U.S.S.R.  cosmonauts had  used 
depressants  for  sleeping  in  orbit  and  stimulants  to  counteract  fatigue. 
To  avoid  need  for  drugs,  NASA  selected  only  highly  qualified  astronaut 
candidates  and  trained  them  to   cope with  situations  they  might  find  in 
space.  ( B  Sun ,  9 /16 /68 ,8 )  
Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  called  for  prompt  DOD  action  to  re- 
vive work  on  quiet  electric-drive nuclear  submarine  halted  in  May  by 
DOD  order when  it decided  to  proceed with  new  high-speed nuclear  sub- 
marine  [see  July  241.  (Transcript;  Greene, N Y   News,  9/20/68,  8 )  
September  15-22:  Zond  V  automatic  space  station  was  launched  by 
U.S.S.R.  and  placed  on  lunar  trajectory  from  parking  orbit  of  another 
satellite  to  explore  outer  space  and  test  spacecraft  systems,  Tass  an- 
nounced.  All  systems were  functioning  normally.  Speculation  in  Mos- 
cow, later confirmed, was  that  spacecraft would  attempt  to  circle moon. 
On  Sept. 18 Sir  Bernard Lovell, Director of  U.K.’s  Jodrell Bank  Experi- 
mental  Station,  said  spacecraft  had  passed  within  1,000 mi  of  moon 
and was  returning  to  earth  and  predicted U.S.S.R.  would  attempt to  re- 
cover it. West Germany’s Bochum Observatory agreed  that  Zond  F’  was 
returning  but  insisted  spacecraft  had  circled  moon.  U.S.S.R. 
initially 
denied both  reports, but  two days  later, confirmed that  Zond  V  had  cir- 
cled  moon  Sept.  18 and  was  continuing  its  flight.  Tass  said  spacecraft 
had  flown  within  1,200  mi  of  moon  and  obtained  data  on  physical 

211 

September  15-22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

characteristics  of  outer  space  near  moon.  Research  mission  had  been 
completed and  spacecraft was  continuing  to  relay  information  to  space 
stations. 
Zond  V’s  reentry  and  splashdown  in  Indian  Ocean  Sept.  2 1  was  re- 
corded  by  US . ,   U.K.,  and  West  German  space  scientists,  but  U.S.S.R. 
made  no  official  announcement until  Sept  22.  Tass  then  said  Zond  V 
had circled moon,  explored space near moon, reentered  a t  11,000 mi per 
sec,  softlanded by  parachute  in  predetermined  area,  and was  recovered 
by  Soviet recovery  ship-becoming 
first  circumlunar  spacecraft  recov- 
ered  on  earth.  “During  the  flight  the  station’s  systems  and  aggregates 
for  maneuvering on  the  trajectory  and  for  returning  to  the Earth  were 
tested.  Flight  control  systems  of  the  station  and  the  radio-engineering 
means  for  measuring  the  parameters  of  its  trajectory  ensured  the  suc- 
cessful execution of  the programme. 
“The  successful  flight  of  the  ‘Zond-5’  automatic  station  over  the 
Earth-Moon-Earth route,  and  its  return  to  the  predetermined  area  are 
an  outstanding achievement of  Soviet science and engineering. Another 
scientific-engineering problem  has  been  solved,  and  broad  prospects 
have  been  opened  up  for  further  research  of  outer  space  and  planets 
of  the  solar  system  by  automatic  space  stations  which  bring  back  re- 
search data to the Earth.” 
Tass  announcement that  atmosphere  and  pressure  “remained  within 
the  limits  of  their  present  range”  supported  earlier  speculation  that 
Zond  V  carried  prototype passenger  cabin with  atmosphere of  artificial 
helium  mixture which  would  be  used  by  cosmonauts on  future  flights. 
Later  Tass report  quoted  Soviet Prof.  Leonid  I. Sedov a s  saying  space- 
craft  had  special  heat  shield  and  was  slowed  down  during  reentry  by 
a i r   resistance”  and,  “at  a  comparatively small  height,”  by  parachute. 
6 6  
Zond  V  was  fifth spacecraft in  Zond  series and  first Soviet spacecraft 
to  land  in  water.  Zond  Z (launched  April  2,  1964)  had  failed  in   at- 
tempt  t o   reach  Venus  and  Zond  ZZ (launched  Nov.  30,  196p)  had  suf- 
fered communications failure enroute to Mars.  Zond ZZZ (launched July 
18 ,1965 )  had  obtained photos of  fa r  side of  moon;  Zond  I V  (launched 
March  2,  1968)  apparently  had  reached  apogee  comparable  to   lunar 
altitude  and  had  burned  in  earth’s  atmosphere on  reentry.  (GSFC SSR, 
9/15/68;  9/30/68;  W Post,  9/16/68,  A17;  9/19/68’  A25;  9/23/68, 
A l ;   N Y T ,   9/16/68,  29;  9/21-23/68,  1; Moscow  News ,   10/5-12/68, 
3 )  
September  16 :  At  White House press conference NASA  Administrator  James 
E. Webb announced his  resignation, effective Oct.  7,  his 62nd birthday. 
He wished  to  retire  to  devote his time  to  interests in  education and  for- 
eign  and  urban  affairs  after  25  yr  in  Government  and  nearly  8 yr  as 
NASA  chief. President  Johnson would  name  Dr.  Thomas 0. Paine,  NASA 
Deputy  Administrator,  to   succeed him  as  Acting  Administrator.  Webb 
would remain as consultant to Dr. Paine until  Jan. 20,1969. 
Webb  told  press:  ‘‘I  leave NASA  well  prepared  and  with  a  conserva- 
tive  financial  structure  to  carry  out  the  missions  that  have  been  ap- 
proved. They will  go forward. What we  have not been  able to  do under 
the  pressures  on  the  budget  has  been  to  fund  new  missions  for  the 
1970’s.  So,  there  is  going  to  be  a  period  when  there  will  be  fewer 
flights  than  would,  in  my  view,  have  been  important  to  do.  . . . We 
planned, with  the  President’s  leadership  in  1961 and  his  recommenda- 

2 12 

September  16 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
tions  to  President  Kennedy  to  develop an  ability  to  fly  six  Saturn  V’s 
per  year  and  six Saturn  1’s  per  year.  . . . Under  the  reductions  in   the 
budget  beginning  in  1964  . . . we  have  reduced  that  anticipated  flight 
schedule,  or  production  schedule,  [until]  we  have  now  cancelled  the 
production  lines  on  both  these boosters.  . . . what  we  will  have  to  do 
is develop a  new  base  of  technology for the  next  generation  of  boosters 
[and]  . . . the  country  will  have to  look with  great  care  into what  i t  is 
it wants to do with those boosters that w i l l  be in storage.” 
Answering query, Webb said,  ‘‘I am not satisfied with the program.  I 
am  not  satisfied that  we   as  a  nation  have  not  been  able  to  go  forward 
to  achieve  a  first  position  in  space. What  this  really  means  is  that  we 
are  going to be  in  a  second  position  for  some time  to  come.  . . . I am 
satisfied with what  we  have  developed  in  every  field  and  that  we  have 
been  flying three  successful generations  of  spacecraft.  . . . I  think  now 
the question is what will  the  fourth  . . . be. We  have  a vast  amount of 
capability.  As  the  U.S.S.R.  proceeds  to  fly  and  remains  in  the  number 
one position,  we  will  have  the  capability  to  start  new  programs  a s  the 
need  is clearly  indicated.  . . . We  have  worked  up  to  a  work  force  of 
420,000  people.  At  the  end  of  this  fiscal year,  we  will  be  down  to  just 
over  200,000. So  we  have  shown the  administrative capability  to  build 
up  and  then  to  reduce without  losing pace  in  the  program.”  Webb  said 
NASA  had  decided  to  man  third  Saturn  V  flight  in  December.  “We  did 
calculate  that  we  needed  15  Saturn  V’s  in  program  to  make  sure  we 
would  do  the  Lunar  landing. We  have  funded  eight.  . . . Now  we  can 
only fly  seven.  So  the  real question is can we  make the landing  by  num- 
ber seven?” 
A  good many  people, Webb  said,  have  tended  to  use  space  program 
“as  a  sort  of  whipping  boy.  . . . But  in  essence, if  i t  were  not  for  the 
fiscal problems  faced by  the  President  and the  Director of  the Budget  I 
would  believe  that  the program  would  have been  supported  in  the  Con- 
gress  and  in  the  country  at  a  higher  level  than  it  has  been.”  Webb 
thought  U S .  had  reached  parity  with  U.S.S.R.  21/,  yr  earlier  except  in 
large boosters and spacecraft. If  U.S.  could have had  12  Saturns  a  year 
in  late  1967  or  1968, “I  think  w e   would  have  forged  ahead.”  Instead, 
“while we  are reducing down to  half  to  two-thirds of  our  program,  they 
are still increasing.” Webb  said  current U S  space program had  created 
capability  that  could  be  used  for  major  efforts  in  exploration  if  ade- 
quately  funded.  “Any  danger  to  the  United  States  that  would  come 
from the  Russian program would be  visible in  time  to  use  this  capabil- 
ity  to  start  out. But they  are going to  have the  reality  and  the  image of 
being  out  in   front  for  a  number  of  years  to  come.  How  dangerous that 
is,  you  will  have  to  judge  yourself.”  (Transcript;  Sheehan,  NYT, 
9/17/68,  1 ;  Kilpatrick, O’Toole,  W Post,  9/17/68,  A l ;  Dobbin, B  Sun, 
9/17/68,  A9) 
U.S.S.R.  successfully  launched  Cosmos  CCXLI   into  orbit  with  326-km 
(202.6-mi)  apogee,  198-km  ( 1 2 3 4   perigee,  89.7-min  period,  and 
65.4” inclination.  Satellite reentered  Sept.  24.  (C  Trib,  9/17/68;  GSFC 
SSR ,  9/30/68) 
NASA  launched  series  of  three  sounding  rockets  from  NASA  Wallops  Sta- 
tion.  First  Nike-Cajun carried  GSFC  experiment  to  42.6-mi  (68.6-km) 
altitude  to  determine ozone concentration  and water  vapor  distribution 
as  a  function  of  altitude  and  obtain  finite  data  during  parachute  de- 

@ 

@ 

213 

September  16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

scent  from  43.4-mi  (70-km)  altitude.  Basic  payload  design  proved  op- 
erational.  Rocket  performance wa s   good;  peak  altitude  was  6%  below 
predicted.  Instrumentation’s tone  ranging  was  lost  after  payload despin 
and  new  AB  signal  replacing  FM  signal  slowly  deteriorated  after  lift- 
off.  Radar  tracked  all  systems  from  liftoff  to  impact.  Although  para- 
chute  was  not  fully  deployed  during  descent  and  aluminum  oxide 
hydrometer  failed to  project  because  of  spring malfunction, key  events 
occurred  within  two  seconds  of  predicted  times  and  significant  data 
were obtained. Midair-retrieval attempt was  not  successful, but  payload 
and  parachute  were  recovered. 
Second Nike-Cajun carried  GSFC  payload  to   73.1-mi  (117.6-km)  alti- 
tude  to   obtain  vertical  profile  of  temperature,  pressure  density,  and 
wind  data  between  21.8- and  59-mi  (35- and  95-km)  altitudes by  deto- 
nating  19  grenades  and  recording  their  sound  arrivals  a t   ground. 
Rocket  performed  satisfactorily.  Grenade  timer  malfunctioned  and  in- 
stead  of  ejecting  19  grenades  during  ascent,  vehicle  ejected  1  grenade 
after  apogee  during  descent  and  12-14  grenades  which  detonated  a t  
sporadic  intervals  during  descent.  Final  destruct  grenade  destroyed 
payload  before  impact.  Some significant data  could  be  correlated  from 
ground  arrivals. 
Arcas  sounding  rocket  carried  U.S.  Naval  Ordnance  Test  Station 
payload  to  34.5-mi  (55.5-km)  altitude  to  measure  ozone  concentration 
at  18.6-  to   37.5-mi  (30-  to  60-km)  altitudes  by  observing  solar  UV 
light  attenuation  by  ozone during parachute  descent. Rocket performed 
nominally;  altitude  achieved was  within  10,000 f t  of  predicted.  Instru- 
ments performed satisfactorily and  good  data  were  obtained. Parachute 
deployed  properly  and  payload  was  tracked  by  radar  and  retrieved  in 
midair.  (NASA   Rpts SRL )  
0  Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  portable  launcher 
at  WSMR  carried  GSFC  experiment  to  3.14-mi  (5.05-km)  altitude  to: 
(1) flight-qualify production  lot  of  VAM-20  variboosters,  ( 2 )   demon- 
strate  feasibility  of  Aerobee rail  launch,  ( 3 )   determine  exit  loads,  (4 )  
establish  rail-launching procedures,  and  ( 5 )   verify  boost-phase  disper- 
sion calculations. System was  ballasted  with  water  and  lead  to  produce 
mass  and  mass  distribution  of  fully loaded  rocket with  200-lb  net  pay- 
load.  Rocket  and  instruments  performed  satisfactorily.  Booster  web 
burning  time,  booster  pressure,  acceleration, velocity,  and  system  im- 
pact occurred as predicted.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
German scientists a t  Max Planck  Institute-using  U.S.,  U.K.,  and  French 
rockets-had 
shown  that  borders  of  magnetic  energy  extending  from 
earth  could  be  made  visible  directly  to  persons  on  earth,  New  Yo rk  
T imes   reported.  Release  of  barium  clouds  in  space  produced  glowing, 
colored  filaments outlining  magnetic  field.  Technique showed  influence 
of  electric fields in  space.  Preparations were  being made  to  release bar- 
ium  cloud  in  heart  of  inner  radiation  belt  around  earth  before  year’s 
end.  Cloud would  inscribe  in  space magnetic  lines of  force  which  held 
radiation  belt  in  place.  ESRO  had  prepared  Highly  Eccentric  Orbiting 
Satellite  (IIEOS)  for  launch by  U S .  booster  in  experiment which would 
be  too high  for  naked  eye to  observe. Telescopic Schmidt cameras were 
to be used.  ( N Y T ,  9 /17 /68 ,1 )  
0  NASA  awarded  $3,290,500  contract  to  Pittsburgh  Des  Moines  Steel  Co .  
for  fabrication  and  installation of  heavy  steel test  chambers and  related 

214 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

September  16 

systems  as  part  of  second  phase  in  expansion  of  Propulsion  Systems 
Laboratory  a t   LeRC.  (LeRC  Release  68-56) 
September  17:  Presidium  of  Supreme  Soviet  ratified  space  rescue  treaty 
signed by U.S.  and U.S.S.R.  April 22, according to Tass report.  Presid- 
ium  took  care  of  legislative  matters  when  Supreme  Soviet  was  not  in 
session.  (AP, W  S tar ,   9/19/68,  A10) 
0  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  whom  retiring  Ad- 
ministrator  James E.  Webb had  said  would  be named  Acting  NASA  Ad- 
ministrator  by  President  Johnson,  represented “new  breed  of  scientist- 
administrators  making  their  way  into  government,”  said  John  Lannan 
in Washington Evening  S tar .  Unlike Webb, he was  new  to Government, 
having  come up  through  “the  scientific ranks  of  the  sprawling General 
Electric Co.  over  a  period  of  19  years.”  As  Webb’s  chief  deputy  since 
March,  Dr.  Paine  had  been  authorizing  and  signing  major  announce- 
ments but  had  yet  to  confront  Congress. He  and Webb  saw  eye-to-eye, 
he  had  said,  on  agency’s  current  program  emphasis,  which  had  been 
criticized as too  heavily oriented  to  manned  flight.  “I  am  a  very  strong 
supporter  of  doing  as  much  a s  we  can  in  planetary  areas.”  Dr.  Paine 
said,  “but  it’s  one  of  those  cases  where  you’ve  got  limited  resources 
and  you’re  trying  to  do  all  the  things  you  can.  You’ve  got  to  do  things 
in  aeronautics;  we’ve  got  to  finish  up  the  Apollo  program;  and  we’ve 
got to do more in earth resources  (surveying them from space)  here  on 
this  planet.”  A  lot  of  NASA’s future  “is  in  the  questions  that  we’ll 
be raising as we  continue to probe the planets.” 
On  balancing  space needs  against  problems  of  cities,  Dr.  Paine  felt 
U.S.  suffered  from  “what  I  would  call  almost  a  national  hypo- 
chondria  . . . in  many  ways  crippling  some  of  the  forward-looking 
things  we’re  able  to  do.  . . . I  feel  that  one  of  the  very  highest  prior- 
ity  matters  is the war  on poverty  and  the problems  of  the  cities. But  in 
the  meantime, we’re  making  . . . a  lot  of  progress  in  the  civil  rights 
area  and  really, this nation  is a good deal healthier  than  we’re  giving i t  
credit  for  today.”  He  was  confident  of  a  resurgence  of  public  interest 
in  space  once  the  Apollo  program  got  underway.  (W   S tar ,   9/17/68, 
A41 
0  Under  Administrator  James  E.  Webb’s  leadership,  Don  Kirkman  com- 
mented  in  Wa sh ing ton  Daily  N ew s ,  NASA  had  “put  John  Glenn  in  orbit 
in  the Mercury capsule, brought  back  all  the Gemini  spacemen without 
mishap,  and  intended  to  put  U.S.  astronauts  on  the  moon  before  the 
1960s ended.”  Unmanned spaceships had  photographed moon  and Mars 
and  probed  Venus  host  of  weather,  communications,  and  navigation 
satellites had  been  launched.  But  since  Jan.  27,  1967,  Apollo  fire  and 
with needs of  Vietnam war, “every new  budget brought new  blows.”  ( W 
News ,   9/17/68,  9 )  
U.S.  patent No.  3,4.02,295 was  issued to  Robert W.  Astheimer,  Vice Pres- 
ident  of  Barnes  Engineering  Co.,  for  process  by  which  aircraft  pilot 
could spot clear a i r  turbulence  (CAT) far  enough ahead to avoid danger. 
To  discover  rise  in  temperature  which  marked  CAT,  pilot  would  scan 
ahead  with  radiometer  to  detect  significant heat  radiation  from  carbon 
dioxide  uniformly  distributed  through  air.  (Pa t  Off  PIO;   Jones,  NYT ,  
9/21/68,45) 
Sep tember   17-18:  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  approved  nuclear 

215 

September  17-18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
nonproliferation  treaty  by  vote  of  13 to  3 after three  previous meetings 
failed  to  attract  majority  of  members.  Senate  Democratic  leaders  ex- 
pressed  hope  treaty  could  be  brought  to  vote  on  Senate  floor  before 
mid-October  Congressional  adjournment.  I n   formal  statement  after 
Committee approval,  Vice President Humphrey,  Democratic Presidential 
candidate,  called  upon  Republican  Presidential  candidate  Richard  M. 
Nixon  to  support ratification.  U.S.S.R.’s  occupation  of  Czechoslovakia, 
Humphrey  said, should not deter Senate approval of  “cmcial”  treaty.  I t  
was  not  agreement between  Washington  and  Moscow,  but  a  treaty  al- 
ready signed by 81 nations  and developed  among  many  signers as we11 
as the United  Nations.  (Sherman, W.  Star, 9/17/68,  A5 ; Unna,  V. Pos t ,  
9/18/68,1;  Finney,  N Y T ,  9/18/68,1;  Furgurson, B Sun, 9/19/68,1) 
September  18:  NASA  launch from ETR  of  Intelsat-I11 F-1,  first  of  four  Intel- 
sat  111  comsats  scheduled  for  1968-69,  failed  to  reach  orbit  when 
three-stage  Long-Tank  Delta  booster,  on  maiden  flight,  pitched  back- 
ward  and  was  exploded  several  thousand  feet  above  Atlantic.  NASA 
Launch  Director Robert Gray  said booster encountered  trouble  in gyro- 
scope system controlling pitch  rate 2 0  see  after blastoff.  Launch  vehicle 
became  erratic and  uncontrollable,  pitching  backward  1 min  2  sec  into 
flight,  and  6  sec  later  ETR  safety  officer  sent  signal  to  destroy  vehicle. 
Delta  fuel  tanks  had  already  begun  to   tear  apart  and  burst  into  flame. 
Pieces  of  booster and  satellite fell into  ocean  12 mi off  Florida.  Experts 
were  studying radio  data  to  determine cause  of  failure,  which  ComSat- 
Corp  said  would  not  have  significant  effect  on  1968 revenue.  Delay  in  
completing  cycle  of  four  Intelsat  111s  would  be  felt  in  1969;  ComSat- 
Corp  officials  termed  it  “major  blow”  to  plans  for  early  full-scale 
global system. 
TO be  owned  by  63-nation  INTELSAT  consortium,  each  of  satellites 
was  designed  to  have  1,200-voice capacity  o r   four TV channels;  com- 
pleted  series  of  four  was  to make  coverage  available around  the  world. 
First  had  been  planned  for  synchronous  equatorial  orbit  above  Atlan- 
tic.  (ComSatCorp  PIO;  ComSatCorp  Release  68-46;  AP,  W Pos t ,  
9/19/68,  A3;  Dimond, W  Star, 9/19/68,  A21;  C SM ,  9/20/68) 
USAF   launched  two  unidentified  satellites  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Thor-Agena D  booster.  One  entered  orbit  with  243-mi  (391.1-km)  ap- 
ogee,  111-mi (178.6-km)  perigee,  90.1-min  period,  and 83’  inclination 
and  reentered  Oct.  8.  Second  satellite  entered  orbit  with  318-mi 
(511.8-km)  apogee,  312-mi  (502.1-km)  perigee,  94.7-min  period,  and 
83.2’  inclination.  (P re s  R p t  6 8 )  
e  Nike-Cajun sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill Research 
Range carried GSFC  payload  to  12-mi (19-km) altitude  to  obtain  varia- 
tions  in  temperature profile  and atmosphere  structure.  Launch  wa s   one 
of  series  scheduled  for  winter  1968-69  at  Churchill,  Point  Barrow, 
Alaska,  and NASA  Wallops Station.  Nineteen  grenades  deployed  and  e*- 
ploded  a s  planned.  Second  stage  failed  to  ignite  causing  low  apogee, 
which prevented acquisition of  useful data.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
At  international  symposium  in Washington,  D.C.,  sponsored  by  NAS  and 
GSFC,  Univ.  of  California  scientist  Dr.  W.  Ian  Axford  explained  new 
phenomenon,  “polar  wind,”  which  was  constantly  blowing  away  small 
portions  of  earth’s  atmosphere  and  losing  them  in  space.  In   polar  re- 
gions,  ea&s  magnetic  lines  of  force  plunged  almost  straight  down, 
leaving  considerable  area  “accessible  to  space.”  Charged  particles mov- 

2 16 

September  18 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
ing  rapidly  could  escape  local  entrapment by  planet’s  field.  U S  satel- 
lites  had  observed  such  particles  rising  toward  space  a t   supersonic 
speeds.  They  climbed  vertical  magnetic  force  lines  and  wound  up   in 
long  tail  which  protruded  from  earth  on  side  away  from  sun  (distor- 
tion  of  earth’s  magnetic  field  by  solar wind  of  charged particles  flowing 
continuously from  sun) .   Univ.  of  California  scientist  Peter  M.  Banks 
was  credited  with  deducing  existence  of  polar  wind.  (W News, 
9 /18 /68 ,18)  
Four  NAVSATS  (satellites  resembling  comsats)  in   synchronous equatorial 
orbit could  control  entire  a i r   traffic  of  US. and  18 could handle  entire 
world’s  air  traffic,  according to  TRW  Systems Div.,  which  demonstrated 
system  during Air  Force  Assn.  meeting  in  Washington,  D.C.  Satellites 
would  serve  as  reference  points  for  aircraft  in  flight,  ships  a t   sea,  or 
mechanized  ground  equipment  and  could  locate  user’s  longitude  and 
latitude  to  accuracy within  60 f t  and his  altitude  to  within  120  ft.  They 
would  operate  like  comsats  but,  instead  of  relaying  messages  from 
point  to  point,  would  beam  signals  to  aircraft.  By  taking  bearings  on 
any  two  satellites,  computerized  unit  in   aircraft  could  pinpoint  air- 
craft’s  location  by  radio.  Militarily,  system  could  lead  to  accurate  all- 
weather  bombing  capability  and  armored  column  movements  in   poor 
terrain  or   weather,  or  help  infantrymen  in   the  field.  For  civilian  air 
traffic  control,  i t   could  overlap  existing  equipment  and  eventually 
phase  it  out.  (Lannan, W  Star, 9/18/68) 
Boeing  Co.  confirmed  it  was  most  likely  to  submit  conventional 
fixed-wing design  resembling  large F 4  Phantom  fighter  as   design  for  
U.S.  SST  when  firm’s  final  proposal became  due  a t   FAA,  no  later  than 
Jan.  15. If  approved, aircraft‘ would start moving from paper to  titanium, 
Boeing President T.  A.  Wilson told  Air  Force Assn.  seminar. M /G   Jew- 
ell  C.  Maxwell,  FAA’S  SST Program  Director,  said  aircraft  could  f ly   in 
first  half  of  1972 and  be  ready  for  passenger  service  as   early  as   1974 
(1976 if  Government  decided  to  test  prototype before  starting  produc- 
tion  l ine ) .  A.  H.  C.  Greenwood,  Assistant Managing Director  for  Brit- 
ish  Aircraft  Corp.,  said Anglo-French  Concorde would  fly  in   1968 and 
be  in  commercial  operation  by  summer  1972.  (Wilson,  J7‘  Po s t ,  
9/19/68,  D1) 
0  Prototype  four-engine turboprop  STOL  aircraft  built  in   France  as  Bre- 
guet  I11  and  in   U S.  as McDonnell  Douglas  188 was  demonstrated fo r  
press  in   flight  over Washington, D.C.,  metropolitan area.  Eastern  Air- 
lines,  McDonnell  Douglas,  and  FAA were  testing  aircraft  as  possible  re- 
placement  for   jet  aircraft on Eastern’s  crowded  shuttle  service between 
Washington,  New  York,  and   Boston.  When  fully  developed,  a ircraf t  
would  carry   100 passengers  a t   4+00 mph  with  all-weather  capability.  It 
would  take  off  and  land  on  less  than  800-ft  runway  and  operate  on 
more  direct  routes  closed  to  conventional aircraft  under  noise-abate- 
ment  rules. Airline  spokesman had  said  aircraft could be  operational  in  
“early  1970.”  (Yarborough, W Star, 9/18/68,  A l ;   Valent-ine,  W Pos t ,  
9/19/68,  B1) 
AEC  Chairman, Dr.  Glenn T.  Seaborg, was  named  1968 winner  of  Arches 
of  Science Award  presented  annually by  Pacific  Science Center of  Seat- 
tle,  Wash.,  to  American  who  had  contributed  to  public  understanding 
of  science.  Award  of  $25,000  would  be  presented  Oct.  16 to  Dr.  Sea- 

217 

September  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

borg,  who won  Nobel  Prize  in  chemistry  in   1951 and was  codiscoverer 
of  plutonium.  ( W  Po s t ,  9/18/68,  B5;  AP,  NYT,  9/18/68,  12 )  
Wash ing ton  Post  commented  on  resignation  of  James  E.  Webb  a s   NASA 
Administrator:  “Virtually  from  scratch,  with  the  country  in   a  swivet 
over  Soviet  prowess,  James  E.  Webb  took  over  the  Nation’s  feeble 
space  program  and  drove  the  United  States  firmly  into  the  space 
age.  .  .  . he  created-in 
the  civilian  space  agency-the 
largest 
and  most 
labryrinthine  engineering  organization 
in  American 
history.  . . . I n   his  eight-year  stewardship,  NASA  proceeded  under 
presidential  and  Congressional flogging  toward  the  goal  of  a  manned 
lunar  landing  ‘in  this  decade.’  I t  achieved  repeated  successes and but  a 
single  important  failure-the 
fire  that  claimed  the  lives  of  three  astro- 
nauts last year. 
“It  is  characteristic  of  this  self-effacing,  organization-minded  man 
that  he  should choose to  retire  now  a t  his  62nd birthday,  qractically on 
career-capping  event  i f   ever  there 
the  eve  of  the  Apollo  launching-a 
was  one. His  purpose  is  to hand  NASA  over to  his  lieutenants before  the 
change  of  administration,  on  the  theory  that  the  agency  will  thereby 
have  a  better  chance  of  riding  out  next  year’s  power  transfer.  The 
country  is fortunate that Mr. Webb  is in  good health and determined  to 
apply  himself  vigorously  to  further  the  Nation’s  understanding  of  the 
space  age.  For  him  this  is  far  more  than  a  matter  of  projectiles  and 
orbits;  i t   goes  to  the  heart  of  the  necessities  and  the  aspirations  of  a 
great modern society. 
“Whereas Mr. Webb  leaves NASA  with  its  current  mission adequately 
funded  and  its  capabilities  well  formed,  he  does  not  leave  it  with  a  set 
mission beyond  landing  on  the moon. This is hardly  his  fault.  The  fad- 
ing  American taste  for  competition with  the  Russians  in  space  and  the 
rising  competition  of  other  claimants  for  Federal  funds  explain  NASA’s 
uncertain  estate;  its  budget  has  been  cut  $1.4  billion  in   four 
years.  . . . it  will  be  up  to  the  next  Administration  and  the  next 
Congress to chart  America’s  future in  space. That  they have  a  choice is 
the singular achievement of  Jim Webb.”  ( W Po s t ,  9/18/68,  A22) 
September  19:  House  adopted  conference report  on  H.R.  17023, N  1969 
Independent  Offices  and  HUD   Appropriations,  which  allocated  $3.995 
billion to NASA.  [See Sept. 251.  ( C R ,  H8970-1;  NASA  LAR V I I /95 )  
In   12-yr NASA-sponsored experiments with  roosters  spinning  a t   130  rpm 
up  to  15  mo  on  double-deck centrifuge,  Univ.  of  California’s  Davis 
Chronic Acceleration Laboratory  gravity  experts had  noted possible ad- 
verse effects of  long-term weightlessness on  astronauts. Without  steps  to 
counter  effects, “man  in  space for  long periods will  find his body  decal- 
cified,”  said  Dr.  Arthur  H.  Smith.  “He  will  not  be  able  to  stand  up 
without  fracturing  bones.  All  his  muscles  will  shrivel  up   including 
those  around his blood vessels. He will be  overloaded with  fat which he 
may not  be  able to use.”  Among methods being  developed to  offset dis- 
turbances  to  human  body  in  space were  drugs which  stabilized proper 
balance  of  red  cells and  steroids which helped maintain  calcium metab- 
olism. Roosters were  used  in  tests  since their  upright  posture,  heart-to- 
head  distance,  and  circulatory  systems were  similar  to  man’s.  (Hillin- 
ger, W Po s t ,  9/19/68,  G11) 
NASA  said  i t   had  reassigned  management  responsibility  for  Saturn  I 
Workshop  airlock  module  and  modified  lunar  module  ascent  stage  for 

2 18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

September 19 

Apollo  Telescope  Mount  from  MSC   to   MSFC,  to  establish  satisfactory 
balance  between  Apollo  Applications  and  Apollo  programs.  Move 
placed  AA  program  design  and  integration  responsibilities  under  single 
NASA  center.  Management  responsibilities  encompassed  systems  engi- 
neering,  including  development test  and  integration,  to  ensure  compati- 
bility  of  flight  hardware  and  ground  support  equipment.  Airlock mod- 
ule,  mounted  on  Saturn  IB  vehicle,  would  provide  65-in-dia  airlock 
tunnel  for  Apollo  astronauts  between  spacecraft  and  living  area  of 
workshop  inside  hydrogen  tank  of  rocket’s  2nd  stage.  Lunar  module 
ascent stage wa s  being modified as control  station  for ATM.  A A  program 
would  further  develop  space  capability  in  series  of  earth-orbital  long- 
duration  flights using  Apollo  hardware  and  other  facilities.  (NASA  Re- 
lease 68-159) 
*  NAS  published  report  of  NASA-sponsored  two-year  study  of  planetary  as- 
tronomy  by  NAS-NRC  Space  Science  Board’s  16-scientist panel  headed 
by  Dr.  John  S.  Hall,  Director  of  Lowell  Observatory,  Ariz.  Planetary 
recom- 
As tronomy:   A n   Appraisal  of  Ground-Based  Opportunities 
mended  assignment  of  high  priority  to  erection  of  60-in  optical  tele- 
scope  in  mountains  of  northern  Chile,  where  atmospheric  conditions 
permitted  favorable  view  of  Mays,  in  time  to  observe  planet’s  closest 
approach  to   earth  in  almost  50   yr,  August  1971.  Also  recommended 
were  construction  of  large  dish  antenna  in  U S .   for  planetary  rada r   as- 
tronomy;  two  large  radiotelescope arrays  in  California  and  West  Vir- 
ginia,  plus  third  planetary  radio  facility  to  pick  up   signals  at  short 
wavelengths ; and  120-in  infrared  telescope  in  desert  region  where 
vapor  would  be  less  likely  to  interfere  with  infrared  radiation.  (Text; 
Wilford, N Y T ,  9/20/68,  29) 
0  Boeing  Co.  dedicated  $8-million low-speed wind-tunnel complex  for  de- 
velopment  of  helicopters  and  STOL  and  V/STOL  aircraft  a t   its  Vertol 
Div., Eddystone, Pa.  ( P  EB, 9/19/68) 
September  20 :   Cosmos  CCXLZZ  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  Orbital  parame- 
ters:  apogee, 404  km  (251  mil  ; perigee,  269  km  (167.2  mi) ; period, 
91.2  min;  and  inclination,  70.9’.  Satellite  reentered  Nov.  13.  (UPI, 
N Y T ,  9 /21 /68 ,14 ;   GSFC  SSR ,  9 /30 /68 ;   11/15/68) 
*  NASA  Aerobee  150  MI  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  carried 
NAs-Univ.  of  Wisconsin  experiment  to  107.7-mi  (173-km)  altitude  to 
measure  radiation  from  celestial  objects  in  spectral  regions  2,800- 
1,200 hi, 6WOh i ,  and  15-2hi  using  photometers  and  gas-filled propor- 
tional  counters  a s   x-ray  detectors.  Both  x-ray  and  UV  payloads  func- 
tioned well and acquired data.  (NASA  Rpt SRL)  
NASA  Boosted  Arcas  I1 sounding  rocket  launched from  NASA  Wallops  Sta- 
tion  carried  GSFC  experiment  to  26.5-mi  (42.7-km)  altitude  to  deter- 
launching  Boosted  Arcas  I1  f rom   Arcas  tube 
mine  feasibility  of 
launcher  and to  obtain  data  on  complete system flight. Booster pressure 
and  acceleration  were  nominal  throughout  flight.  Pressure  transducer 
produced  data  until  2nd  stage  ignition.  However,  there  was  no  drag 
separation  after  booster  burnout.  Separation  occurred  at  2nd  stage  ig- 
nition.  Radical  coning  occurred  during  burn  and  predicted  altitude  of 
71.5-mi  (115-km) was not attained.  (NASA  Rpt SRL)  
NASA  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  launched  from  Andoya,  Norway, 
carried  GSFC  experiment  to  analyze  electric  fields  from  observed  mo- 
tions  of  neutral  and  ionized  barium  clouds  during  auroral  condition. 

219 

September  20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%8 

Preliminary  results indicated good  photographic coverage was  obtained 
from all sites.  (NASA Rpt SRL) 
*  Apollo 7 prime  crew-Astronauts  Walter M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  Donn  F.  Eisele, 
and  R.  Walter  Cunningham-held  news  conference a t   MSC. Crew  saw 
no  reason  to delay Apollo  7 launch beyond  scheduled lift-off on Oct.  11 
but  results  of  flight readiness test  following week  would  determine defi- 
nite plans. 
Questioned about safety, mission commander Schirra  said,  “when we 
go over the  sill for launch  day, we  will consider that  all  those risks  that 
are  appropriate for  this  type of  mission  are either  understood  by  us  or 
that 
they  are 
low  enough  that  we  have  a  very,  very  high 
probability.  . . . We  would  like  10.8  days  and  we  will  d o   our  best  to  
do  it.  . . . We’ve  had  a  goal  that  is  rather  a  hard  one  to  achieve, par- 
ticularly  one that  we  have  to  follow  on when  we  lost  three  of  our  com- 
patriots,  and  we  don’t  want  any  mistakes  . . . to  happen  again.  We 
have  not  been  the  ‘kid-around’ types  that  we  might  have  been  in   the 
past,  we’re  much  more  serious  about  it,  because  this  is  a  much  more 
complicated machine  and  there  are  many,  many  more  people  involved 
in  it.  . . . I  think  you  will  find  that  you  will  see  a  good  performance 
out of  this total  crew and w e  have tried  very hard  to make this machine 
plant  [and ]   at the  Cape  . . . and  if  somebody even  takes  a  small com- 
work  just  the  way  i t   should.  We  have  basically  lived  with  it  a t   the 
We  expect answers immediately  . . . that  is the  way  we  a re  working.” 
ponent  off  it,  we  become  furious  and  say,  ‘Why  did  you  remove  it?’ 
In   answer  to  question,  Schirra  said  i t  had  taken  1 min  5  sec  for  all 
three  to  exit  from  spacecraft  to  white  room  in  simulated  emergency, 
while  still  being  careful  not  to  damage  equipment.  In   real  emergency, 
crew could probably exit in 45 sec.  (Transcript) 
Astronaut Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  announced he  would  retire  as  NASA  as- 
tronaut  after  commanding Apollo  7  mission.  At  45,  Schirra  would  be 
world’s  most  experienced  astronaut,  having  flown  six  orbits  Oct.  3, 
1962, on  Sigma  7  in Mercury mission and having commanded two-man 
Dec.  15-16,  1965,  Gemini  V I   mission,  which  had  participated  with 
Gem in i  V I1  in  first rendezvous of  spacecraft in space. He would  remain 
in  space program,  he  said,  “until  we  effect the  job  we  set out  to  do”- 
to land men  on moon  and  return  them.  (W Post, 9/21/68,  A7 ;  W  S tar ,  
9/21/68,  A2 )  
*  Saturn  V  launch  vehicle  has  passed  Design  Certification  Review  con- 
ducted  over  communication facilities  linking  NASA  and  contractor  per- 
sonnel  a t   Washington,  D.C.,  Houston,  Tex.,  Cocoa  Beach,  Ma.,  and 
Huntsville, Ala.,  into  one conference. Purpose was  to certify  overall  de- 
sign  of  rocket,  including  engineering  modifications after  two  previous 
Saturn  flights. Certification for  manned  mission was  issued,  subject  to  
verification of  data in  minor  areas in later,  limited review. Under  parti- 
cular consideration were engineering changes to  correct  pogo,  or  exces- 
sive  oscillations, during  second  Saturn  V  flight  and  anomalies  experi- 
enced by  J-2  engines on  upper  stages.  Solutions had  been  tested t o  sat- 
isfaction.  Major  efforts  on  both  items  would  continue.  (MSFC Release 
68-216) 
Commenting  on  expected  Boeing  Co.  decision  on  fixed-wing  design  for 
SST,  Washington Evening  S tar   editorial  said:  “America’s  first  fumbling 
rush  into  the  field of  supersonic transportation now  appears destined to  

220 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
September  20 
end  not  with  a  boom,  but  w i t h   a  whimper  . . . from  the  company 
which,  after  years  of  effort  and  a  few  hundred  million  dollars  expendi- 
ture,  has  apparently  decided  to  scrap  the  swing-wing concept  and  re- 
treat  to  the  drawing  board.  . . . It was  the  boldness  and  originality  of 
the  variable  wing  that  won  the  contract  for  Boeing,  so  there  would 
seem to be  room  for  complaint i f   i t  now  develops that  the  system is  too 
heavy to be practical.”  (W S tar ,  9/20/68,  A10) 
AEc  announced  selection  of  Dr.  John  Archibald  Wheeler  of  Princeton 
Univ.  to  receive its $25,000 Enrico  Fermi  Award for  1968 for  “his  pio- 
neering  contributions  to  understanding  nuclear  fission, and  to  develop- 
ing  the  technology  of  plutonium  production  reactors,  and  his  continu- 
ing  broad  contributions  t o   nuclear  science.”  Award would  be  presented 
in  ceremony Dec.  2,  26th  anniversary  of  first  sustained  controlled  nu- 
clear reaction.  (AEC   Release 1,224) 
Dr.  Dinsmore Alter,  astronomer,  first  to  provide  evidence that  moon  was 
not  as  inactive as had  been  thought,  died  in  Oakland, Calif.,  a t   age 80. 
He had  been  director  of  Griffith Planetarium  in  Los Angeles  from  1935 
until his  retirement  in  1958. On Oct.  26,  1956, from Mt.  Wilson,  Calif., 
he  had  seen  apparent  mistiness  at  bottom  of  crater  which  later  led  to 
re-evaluation of  concepts of  moon.  ( N Y T ,  9 /24 /68 ,47 )  
September  21 : Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from 
Andoya, Norway,  carried  GSFC  payload  to  analyze  electric  fields  from 
observed motions  of  neutral  and  ionized  barium  clouds  during  an  au- 
roral  condition.  All  four barium  clouds were  released  in  visible aurora 
as  planned.  Good  photographic  coverage  was  obtained  from  all  sites. 
Peak  altitude  would  be  determined from  triangulation  of  photos.  (NASA 
Rpt SRL )  
September 22:  NASA  Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  launched  from WSMR car- 
ried  NRL   experiment  to  117.4-mi  (188.9-km)  altitude  to  obtain  UV 
photographs  of  sun’s  disk  and  white  light  photographs  of  outer  solar 
corona  in  conjunction  with  measurements made  by  others  during  total 
solar  eclipse. Payload  contained  two  externally occulting coronagraphs, 
with  Univ.  of  Colorado  solar  pointing  control.  Solar  pointing  control 
operated  properly,  with  exceptionally steady  pointing;  white  light  co- 
rona  and  streamers were  recorded  in  both  coronagraphs  with  excellent 
resolution.  xuv heliograph  and  spectroheliograph  were  recorded  with 
excellent resolution.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
Washington Sunday  Star  commented on  resignation  of  NASA  Administra- 
tor  James  E.  Webb:  “The  abrupt  announcement, which  was  notably 
lacking in  the customary ceremonial niceties, was  the  final confirmation 
that  NASA’s honeymoon  is  definitely over. The  relationship  between  the 
space  agency  and  Congress must  rank  as  perhaps  the  longest,  and  in 
many  ways  the  happiest,  official  honeymoon  on  record.  For  six  years, 
hardly  a  frown  or  a  cross  word  came  between  the  blossoming  agency 
and the  guardians  of  the  nation’s  treasure.  The amiable  and  loquacious 
Webb  proved  himself  an  able  administrator  who  knew  his  way  around 
in  the  bureaucratic  jungle.  Through  Mercury  and  Gemini  programs, 
NASA  virtually  had  only  to  ask,  and  Congress was  ready  to  give.  Then 
came  the  Apollo  tragedy.”  But  Jan.  27,  1967,  fire  did  not  cause  the 
change of  heart.  “It was  . . . a catalyst that  speeded the process. But a 
growing  coolness  was  bound  to  develop  . . . for  the  basic  economic 

22 1 

September  22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

fact  is  that  America  simply  cannot  continue  to  meet  NASA’s ever-ex- 
panding  economic  demands-not, 
a t   least, without  a  critical  weighing 
of  those demands against  the nation’s  existing domestic, diplomatic  and 
military  obligations.  . . . 
“Long  before  the  tragedy  that  threw  the  timetable  into  a  shambles, 
the  conflict between America’s technical ability  to  move men  into  space 
and  America’s  ability  to  pay  the  freight  could  be  seen  by  those  who 
cared  to  look  ahead.  . . . Congressional  reluctance  to  commit  the  na- 
tion  to  further,  open-ended  expenditures  in  manned  space  flight  is 
therefore  inevitable. But  equally inevitable is  the  dismay-and 
in  some 
cases  the  bitterness-of 
NASA  officials.  Webb  and  his  lieutenants  can 
take  justifiable  pride  in  what  has  been  accomplished  in  the  brief  span 
of  the  space  age.  . . . They  have  solved  problems  quickly  and  accu- 
rately  that men  have  never  faced  before.  In  the  process,  they  pulled  to- 
gether  a  scientific  and  technical  team  unequalled  in  the  peacetime  his- 
tory  of 
this  country.  Now  they  are  watching  that  massive  army 
disband.  . . . 
“Man  will  someday go  to  the  planets  and  beyond.  But  that  day must 
wait  until  the  breakdown  of  nationalistic  barriers  makes  possible  a 
truly  united  world  space program.  Meanwhile,  the United  States should 
concentrate  on  the  development  of  more  sophisticated  machines,  less 
costly  rocket  systems  and  closer cooperation  between  the  military  and 
civilian  space programs  to  avoid wasteful  duplication.  America’s  space 
effort  must  not  end  with  the  Apollo  program.  I t   must  be  diverted  into 
equally exciting and  frequently  more  rewarding  channels  of  unmanned 
space exploration.”  (W  S t a r ,   9/22/68,  C l )  
*  Associated Press  roundup  of  comment by  space authorities  on  U.S.S.R.‘s 
Zond  V mission: 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb : “The  most  important  demon- 
stration of  total space capability up to now by any nation.” 
Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D -Tex . ) ,  Chairman  of  House  Committee  on 
Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Manned  Space  Flight : 
Hoped U.S.S.R.  achievement would  “cause  some stir  in  Congress.  . . . 
The Russians again did  something we  have not  done. We  slept until  the 
Sputnik. That may be what we’re  doing now.” 
Sir  Bernard  Lovell,  Director  of  U.K.’s  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental 
Station:  “ I   think  i t   is  a  very  considerable  achievement  and  I  expect 
that  a  human  being will  be placed in  a  similar  spacecraft in  a matter  of 
months.” 
Heinz  Kaminski,  Chief  of  West  Germany’s  Bochum  Observatory: 
‘‘Still  in   this  year  or  at  latest  in  first  quarter  of  1969  a  three-man 
spacecraft of  the  Soyuz type will  circle the moon.  After  that  [in  a  later 
flight] they will land on the moon.” 
In  Moscow, unidentified Western  expert on U.S.S.R.’s  space program 
said  that,  because  of  seasonal  factors,  best  time  for  Soviet  manned 
lunar  circumnavigation  would  be  no  later  than  early  November-or 
spring  1969. “They  are  now  in  a  position  to  send  a  man  around  the 
moon  and back to  earth, without landing  him  on  the moon.  They might 
try  one more unmanned  shot,  just  to be  sure,  and  then  they  could  send 
up a man.”  (AP ,  N Y T ,  9/23/68,  E8) 
*  In   This  W e e k ,  Erik  Bergaust discussed  improvements in  safety  made  by 
NASA  since Jan.  27,  1967, Apollo fire.  Though  NASA  leaders  in Wa sh ing  

222 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

September  22 

ton and a t  MSC  believed this was “doing the job,  other experts in and ou t  
of  NASA  privately are expressing their  doubts,” he  said. They felt  “NASA 
had  been  slow  to  correct  [and]  . . . its  solutions have  been  more  po- 
litical  than  practical.”  Experts  insisted,  “that  while  progress  has  been 
made, there  have been  very  few  significant improvements in NASA’s own 
management.  . . . reports  circulating  in  Washington  [since]  the  acci- 
dent  indicated  the  conditions  that  led  to  the  Apollo  fire  may  not  have 
been corrected.”  (Th i s  W e ek ,  W Star, 9 /22 /6 8 , 7 )  
September  23 :  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  C C X L l I l   into  orbit  with  297-km 
(184.6-mi)  apogee,  206-km  (128-mi)  perigee,  89.5-min  period,  and 
(GSFC  S SR ,   9/30/68; 
71.3”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Oct.  4. 
10/15/68) 
NASA  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  launched  from  Andoya,  Norway, 
carried  GSFC  experiment  to  analyze  electric  fields  from  observed  mo- 
tions  of  neutral  and  ionized  barium  clouds  during  auroral  condition. 
All  four  barium  clouds were  released  in visible aurora  as planned,  and 
good  photographic  coverage  was  obtained  from  all  sites.  (NASA  Rpt 
SRL) 
NASA  Apollo  Program  Mission  Director  William  C. Schneider  told  news 
conference astronaut  training  for  possible  manned  moon-orbiting  mis- 
sion  later  in  1968 was  under  way.  “We  w i l l   do  the  maximum the  sys- 
tems will  allow,”  he  said,  “and  the  maximum  you  could  foresee  would 
be  lunar  orbit.”  Decision  in   November,  after  evaluation  of  Apollo  7 
data,  would  determine  if  Apollo  8 crew-Astronauts  Frank  Borman, 
William  A.  Anders,  and  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.-were 
to  attempt  lunar 
orbit  in  December. NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas 0. Paine, 
pointed  out  that  plans  for  possible  manned  lunar  mission  had  been 
made long before U.S.S.R.’s  Zond   Y  circumlunar flight. 
In  Oct.  11 Apollo  7  launch,  Schneider  said,  earth  orbital  flight  was 
set to  run up  to  10 days 19 h r  at  altitudes from  120 to  150 mi.  Primary 
objectives were  tests  of  command  and  service modules with  crew,  tests 
of  ground  control  facilities, demonstration of  capability  for  rendezvous 
with  spent  rocket  section,  and  eight  firings  of  service  propulsion  sys- 
tem.  Schneider said he would  rate Apollo 7  a  success i f   “w e   get  rendez- 
vous and stay up three days to accomplish our main objectives.” 
Discussing  plans  to  follow  Apollo  program  with  lunar  exploration 
program  Dr.  Paine  said,  if  forced  to  choose  between  Apollo  Applica- 
tions program  in  eaith  orbit  or  lunar  exploration, NASA  “would be most 
reluctant  to  give  ~p  manned  lunar  exploration,”  as  an  area  “man  is 
uniquely qualified to  contribute to”  and  one “of  enormous scientific in- 
terest  and  importance.”  (Transcript;  Wilford,  N Y T ,   9/24/68,  26; 
Cohn, W Po s t ,  9/24/68,  A l )  
New   Yo rk   T imes   editorial  on  U.S.S.R.’s  Zond  V  mission:  “Until  the  na- 
tion  [U.S.]  has  a  better  idea  of  the  progress achieved  during  this  long 
interval  between American  manned  flights,  i t   is  premature  to  conclude 
that  the  Russians  have  a  significant  over-all  lead  in  space  capability 
and  that  Soviet citizens w i l l   certainly  paint  their  flag  on  the  lunar  sur- 
face before American astronauts. 
“In  any  event,  a s  the  Soviet  rape  of  Czechoslovakia has  recently  re- 
minded  the world so dismayingly, a nation’s  image and  prestige depend 
primarily  upon  what  i t   does here  on  earth,  not  on   its  feats  in  space.” 
( N Y T ,  9 /23 /68 ,32 )  

223 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
September  23 
*  Senate Preparedness  Investigating  Subcommittee of  Senate  Armed  Serv- 
ices  Committee  recommended  continuing  expansion  and  improvement 
of  US .   nuclear  submarine  fleet  to  meet  “serious  challenge”  from 
U.S.S.R.,  which  was  “giving  major  emphasis  to   qualitative  improve- 
ment  of  its  submarine  fleet.”  Committee  recommended  U S .   continue 
building  nuclear  submarines  after  1970  and  proceed  with  high-speed, 
electric-drive, and  advanced-design submarines.  (Text ; Finney,  NYT, 
9 /24 /68 ,1 )  
*  William  E.  Stoney,  Jr.,  former  Chief  of  MSC’S  Advanced  Spacecraft 
Technology  Div.,  became  NASA  Deputy  Director  (Engineering)  of 
Apollo program.  (NASA Release 68-151) 
September  23-24:  USAF  halted  all  F-111A  flights  for  second  time  in  1968 
day  after Sept. 23  crash a t  Nellis AFB,  Nev.,  in which  two pilots,  includ- 
ing Australian  trainee,  escaped serious injury by  triggering  escape c a p  
sule.  I t   was  11th F-111A  accident  since  aircraft’s  inception.  USAF  was 
investigating crash  in  which  aircraft  had  plummeted  300  f t   to  runway 
after  “SIOW  pull-up maneuver’’  during  which  pilots,  on  routine  training 
(UPI,  W  Post, 
mission,  were  unable  to  maintain  aircraft  control. 
9/24/68,  A18;  Witkin,  NYT,  9/25/68,  1; AP,  W  Po s t ,  9/25/68,  AS; 
WSJ ,  9 /25 /68 ,1 ;   Sehlstedt, B Sun, 9 /25 /68 ,1 )  
September  23-25:  Washington Airlines  inaugurated  nation’s  first  regularly 
scheduled  short-takeoff -and-landing  STOL  service  linking  Friendship, 
National,  and  Dulles  Airports  in  Washington,  D.C.,  area,  1 6  twin-en- 
gine  Dornier  flights  daily.  In   other  STOL  developments,  McDonnell 
Douglas  Corp.  and  Eastern  Airlines  had  started  evaluation  of  Model 
188 STOL  over  Eastern’s  shuttle  routes  [see  Sept.  181 ; MIT  scientists 
Rene H.  Miller  and  Robert W.  Simpson in  Astronautics  & Aeronautics 
said  series of  studies of  VTOL  and  STOL  transportation  systems for U S .  
Northeast Corridor  started  in  1964 showed need  for  cooperation among 
states  and  Federal  Government  to  pave  way  for  V/STOL  as  essential 
mode  of  transportation ; production  arrangements  had  been  announced 
for  32-  to  36-passenger,  short-field,  turboprop  transport  by  General 
Aircraft  Corp.;  Rutgers  Univ.  was  getting  Federal  grant  to  continue 
studies  of  feasibility  of  low-altitude a i r   shuttle  service  in  New  York- 
New  Jersey-Connecticut area ; and  Boeing  Co.  had  dedicated advanced 
R&D  facilities  for  testing  V/STOL  aircraft  a t   its  Vertol  Div.  near  Phila- 
delphia.  (Stout, W  Po s t ,  9/23/68,  B2;  Yarborough,  W  S tar ,   9/23/68, 
B1;  9/25/68,  A53;  A&A ,   9/68,  28-34) 
September  24:  NASA  doubled  resolution capability  of  Explorer  X X X V I I I   to  
map  radio  sources in  space by  extending each  of  satellite’s four  anten- 
nas  to  600  ft  by  ground  command. Antennas, which  could be  extended 
to  750-ft maximum, had  been  initially  deployed  to  455  f t  each July  22. 
Satellite, launched  July  41,  had  monitored solar  radio  emissions, variety 
of  emissions across Milky  Way,  radio  emissions  apparently  related  to 
earth’s  magnetosphere,  and  possible  emission  from  earth’s  radiation 
belt.  (NASA  Release 68-162  ; AP, W S tar ,  9/25/68,  A5) 
*  NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  carried  Har- 
vard  College Observatory experiment  to  111.9-mi  (180-km)  altitude  to 
scan sun  in  1,400-1,875  A  spectral region  using  photo-electronic detec- 
tor  and  BB  solar  pointing  control.  Solar  pointing  control  malfunc- 
tioned, changing signal on experiment detector.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
NASA’s H G l O   lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld  R.  Gentry 

224 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
September  24 
(USAF)  , successfully completed  10th flight  from Edwards  AFB.  Primary 
objectives  were  to  check  out  vehicle  systems,  evaluate  new  nonlinear 
longitudinal  gearing  to  control  stick,  obtain  stability  and  control  data, 
and evaluate modified cab’  pressure system.  (NASA P ro j  Off) 
NASA  was  conducting three  $,ate 
studies  to  determine  reasons  for  fail- 
ures  of  May  18 launch  of  Nimbus  B,  Aug.  10 launch  of  A t s   I V Y  and 
Sept.  18  launch  of  Intelsat  111-which 
had  brought  its  launch  record 
down  to  0.500  average.  Before May  failure,  agency  had  compiled  “al- 
most  incredible”  launch  record,  said  Thomas  O’Toole  in  Wash ing ton  
Post.  Sources close to  NASA  had  said  agency was  conducting  fourth  in- 
vestigation  to  determine  whether  there  was  “something  systemic  a t  
the  root  of  the  trouble.”  One  theory  was  that  decline  i n   NASA  launch 
activity in  1968, with 42  attempted launches thus  fa r  compared  to  69  a t  
same  time  in  1967, had  caused  similar  drop  in  attention  to  detail.  Sec- 
ond  theory  was  that  layoffs  and  turnover  in  launch  crews  had  cut 
down  efficiency  and  introduced  element  of  inexperience.  Third  theory 
was  that  NASA  was  suffering  from  “a  sudden  case  of  overconfidence 
brought  on by its long string of  launch s u c c e ~ s e s . ~ ~  
Seven-man board  to  investigate  failure  of  first  Intelsat  I11  mission 
met  for  organization  session.  Board,  convened by  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle, 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications, 
would  have  five  observers  in  addition  to  seven  voting  members  and 
would  be  chaired  by  Daniel  G.  Mazur,  Assistant  Director  for  Technol- 
ogy  a t   GSFC.  (NASA   Release  68-160;  NYT ,   9/21/68,  1 4 ;   W   Po s t ,  
9/24/68,  A10) 
9  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  approved  space  rescue  treaty  pro- 
viding  for  rescue  and  recovery  of  astronauts  down  in  foreign  lands. 
U.S.S.R.  had  given  final  approval  along  with  73  other  nations.  (AP, 
NYT,  9/25/68,  1 7 ;  WSJ,  9 /25 /68 ,1 ;   UPJ, W Post, 9/25/68,  A6) 
*  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  told  House  Commit- 
and  Technology  that,  while  NASA  was  “maximizing  . . . technical  sup- 
tee  on   Science and  Astronautics’ Subcommittee on  Advanced  Research 
port  of  the  DOD  within  the  framework of  their  systems approach  to  new 
military  aircraft,”  major  changes  in  civil  aeronautics  made  that  situa- 
tion  “more  complicated for  NASA  and  the  nation.”  Growth of  air  trans- 
portation,  decline in  development of  military  aircraft whose  technology 
was  directly  applicable to   civilian  use,  and  ground  transportation’s  sat- 
uration  had  created  era  in  which  “it  is not  simply enough  to build  air- 
craft which a re  bigger  or  fly  €aster; rather,  future  advances in  aeronau- 
tics  must  also  take  the  form  of  aircraft  which  complement  the  nation’s 
overall  transportation  systems  while  operating  harmoniously  with  the 
constraints imposed by urban environments.” 
Basic  issue facing NASA  and  US. in  civil aeronautics  R&D  was  proper 
role of  Government in  fostering  its  advances. “In  my  view,  government 
actions  to  stimulate  the  development  of  advanced  aircraft  transporta- 
tion  system should be such a s  to  leave the maximum initiative  and  busi- 
ness  risk  in  the  hands  of  industry.  The  government  [might]  carry 
promising  new  technological  principles  . . . into  experimental  hard- 
ware, but  only to  the  point  of  demonstrating the  soundness of  the  prin- 
ciple involved, and  only when  this  demonstration is essential and would 
not be otherwise undertaken. 
NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  fo r   Aeronautics  Charles  W. 

225 

September  24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Harper  told  Committee  accelerated  research  was  needed  not  only 
on supersonic and  hypersonic aircraft,  but  in  development of  quiet  sub- 
sonic jets with  steeper landing  patterns,  helicopters with  greater  safety 
and  less  noise,  and  STOL aircraft  for  interurban  transport.  He  said  a i r  
traffic  control  systems bogging  down  a t  major  airports  were  based  on 
technology  developed  in  1940.  He  doubted  “continued  evolutionary 
modernization” of  this  system would suffice  in  future.  (Transcript;  AP, 
W S tar ,  9 /25 /68 ,1 ;   Cohn, W  Post,  9/25/68,  D8 ;   UPI,  NYT,  9/25/68, 
93 1 
*  General  Accounting  Office  revealed  in  report  to  Congress  that  Bendix 
Corp.  had  agreed  to  lower  by  $520,000  fees  it  would  have  collected 
under  $465-million  NASA  contract  for  construction  of  Saturn  V  plat- 
form.  GAO had  found  that  target  cost  included  overstated  amounts  for 
certain  materials  in  relation  to  pricing  data  available to   contractor  be- 
fore start of  negotiations.  (Text) 
United  Press  International  quoted  Soviet  scientists  interviewed  by 
would R’$ 
U.S.S.  Army  newspaper Krusnaya  Zvezda  (Red  S ta r )   as  saying  they 
a i   more  space  vehicles  for  sea  landings  because  of  successful 
recovery  of  Zond  V  from  Indian  Ocean.  Before  Zond  V,  all  Soviet 
probes  had  been  brought  down  in  Siberia.  Sea  landing  in   warm  cli- 
mates  would  allow  year-round  launchings.  Although  Soviet  ships  did 
not  recover  spacecraft till  day  after  landing,  scientist N.  Melnikov told 
newspaper,  “The  time  and  place  of  Zond‘s  landing  were  calculated be- 
forehand  with  precision.  Everyone  . . . knew  the  exact  hour,  minute, 
and  even second of  Zond’s  landing.”  Krasnaya  Zvezda  said  even  slight- 
est  deviation  ccwould have  resulted  in  tremendous  overloads  [on  Zond 
VI  which could  have  gone again  into  outer  space.”  ( W  Pos t ,  9/25/68, 
A l l )  
Wash ing ton   Pos t   editorial  praised  “magnificent  achievement”  of 
U.S.S.R.’s  Zond  V :  “In  its  own  way,  Zond-5 should  serve  to  shake  this 
Nation’s  complacency once  again.  Our  national  goals  in  space explora- 
tion  are  fuzzy,  our  hopes have  been  out  of  line  with  our  commitments. 
From  President  Kennedy’s  glowing  picture  of  Americans  in  space  we 
have  slipped  into  a  program  put  together  in   fits  and  starts-fits 
brought  about by  a  realization  of  how  much  i t  would  cost to  do  it right 
and  starts caused by  a  basic  desire  never  to  be  second  to  anybody.  Be- 
cause of  this,  there  is  no  use  in  seizing upon  Zond-5 as  a  reason  to  go 
all-out  to  beat  the  Russians  in  a  race  for  men  on   the  moon.  Our 
program  . . . ought to  move a t  its  own  pace.  If  that  pace  is sufficiently 
rapid  to  bring  American astronauts  to  the  moon  first,  fine.  If  it  is  not, 
so be  it.  The  Russians will  deserve  the  honor  and  praise  they  will  win 
if  their  men  make  the  first  landing.  In   space exploration,  it  is  more im- 
portant  to  do  things  right  than  to  do  them  first.”  ( W   Post,  9/24/68, 
A16) 
*  Washington  Evening  Star  editorial  commented  on  “Soviet  Spectacular.” 
U.S.S.R.  had  scored  impressive advance with  ccboomerang-styleyy Zond 
V.  “Congratulations are  in  order.  But  handwringing  assertions  that  the 
Russians will  be  indisputable masters of  the  universe are  decidedly pre- 
mature.  The  shot  demonstrated  two  major  steps  forward  in  the  space 
sciences: A  degree of  accuracy in the guidance and navigational systems 
that  is  new  for  Russian  spacecraft,  and  a  re-entry  system  capable  of 
withstanding  the  searing  heat  of  a  25,000-mile-an-hour plunge  into  the 

226 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
September  24 
atmosphere.  . . . But  the  essential  fact  is  that  neither  Russia  nor  the 
United  States  has  yet  successfully  flown  its  third  generation  spacecraft 
-the 
ships that will  eventually carry  men  to  the moon.  The  outcome of 
the  ‘space  race’  . .  . will  depend  on  what  happens  in  the  Apollo  mis- 
sions  immediately ahead  and  the  Soviet manned  flights  still  to  come.” 
(W  S tar ,  9/24/68,  A12) 
Television  sequences showing Apollo  7  astronauts  working  in  spacecraft 
as  it  passed  Corpus Christi,  Tex.,  and  Cape Kennedy,  Fla.-as  well  as 
shots  of  terrain  more  than  130 mi  below  and  views  of  anything  inter- 
esting  in  space would  be  telecast  by  three  major  U S .  networks  “live” 
Oct.  12 through Oct.  19, NASA  said. Pictures would  be  transmitted  from 
camera  in  space capsule to  MSC  for  instant  showing  over  TV  networks. 
Neither  launch day nor  splashdown day would be  included  in  11 am to 
12 pm  series.  (Kirkman, W  News ,   9/24/68,  7 )  
USN  had  selected  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  design  for  its  first  Deep  Sub- 
mergence  Search Vehicle.  Craft would  be  able  to  descend  to  20,000 f t  
to  locate  objects and  recover  small  ones with  claw-like projecting  arm. 
I t   would  be  able  to  submerge  for  40  h r   and  would  have  maximum 
speed  of  five  knots.  ( N Y T ,  9/24/68) 
Press  said  WSMR  Public  Information  Office  had  denied  reports  by  Ohio 
newspaperman that  disc-shaped practice parachute platform  used  in  five 
Voyager  space vehicle  tests  at  WSMR  had  inspired  reports  of  unidenti- 
fied  flying  objects  over  southwestern U S .   in  1966  and  1967.  Vehicle 
had  been  tested  only five  times, Acting Chief  of  Information  Gabe Bril- 
lante had  sa id ;  there  had  been many more UFO  sightings during period. 
He  said  WSMR  would  have  acknowledged  tests  if  it  had  had  inquiries 
about  sightings.  (UP I ,  W S ta r ,  9 /24 /6 8 , 4 ;   Auerbach, W Po s t ,  9/24/68, 
A5 ) 
Sep tember   25:  Senate  adopted  Senate-House  Conference  report  on  H.R. 
17023, FY  1969 Independent Offices and  HUD   appropriations  bill,  clear- 
ing  i t   for White  House  action.  In   addition  to  $500,000  for  NASC  and 
$400 million  for  NSF,  bill  agreed  to by  Conference included $3.995  bil- 
lion  for  NASA-$12.95  million  below  amount  passed  earlier  by  House 
and  Senate and  $375.12 million below  original  budget  request.  NASA  al- 
locations  were  $3.37  billion  for  R&D,  $21.8 million  for  construction  of 
facilities,  and  $603.17  million  for  administrative  operations.  (CRY  
9/25/68,  S11393-402;  NASA  LAR   VII/98) 
Rep.  Seymour Halpern  (D-N.Y.)  on  behalf  of  himself  and  14  sponsors 
introduced  H.R.  19990, Sonic Boom  Damage Recovery Act  of  1968, to 
protect  public  against  anticipated  damage from  sonic boom  from  mili- 
tary  and  civilian  aircraft.  ( C R ,  9/25/68,  H9149;  NASA  LAR   VII/98) 
NASA  issued  Apollo  Status  Summary:  Apollo  7  space  vehicle  Flight 
Readiness  Test  was  under  way  a t   KSC,  with  prime  crew-Astronauts 
Walter M.  Schirra, Jr.,  Donn  F.  Eisele,  and R.  Walter Cuhningham-to 
participate  without  spacesuits  and  with  hatch  open.  Apollo  8 manned 
altitude  runs  had  been  successfully completed, with  prime  crew  spend- 
ing 13% h r  in its spacecraft Sept. 20 and backup crew spending 10% h r  
Sept.  22.  (Text) 
0  NASA  announced  it  had  selected  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  Rocket- 
dyne  Div.  to  provide  injector  fo r   Apollo  lunar  module  ascent  engine 
under  $10-million  subcontract  with  Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering 
Corp. Bell  Aerosystems Co.,  also under  subcontract to  Grumman, would 

227 

September  25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

continue  to  provide  engine  hardware  for  assembly  with  the  injector. 
(NASA Release 68-164;  MSC Release  68-71;  W S J ,  9/26/68,  3 )  
AEC Chairman  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg  told  12th  General  Conference  of 
International Atomic Energy Agency  in  Vienna  that  US. planned  reali- 
zation  of  terms  OI nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty.  “We  shall  continue 
to  conduct, within  the limitations  of  available funds, a n  active research 
and  development  program  both  on  nuclear  explosive  devices  . . . 
particularly  suited  f o r   peaceful  uses  and  on  various  peace  appli- 
cations for which  nuclear explosions can be  used.  Concurrently, we  w i l l  
provide  available information  and  data  and  technical advice and assist- 
ance to   those  nonnuclear weapon parties  to  the  Treaty  seeking such  as- 
sistance.”  (AEC Release S-34-68) 
Sen.  Henry  M.  Jackson  (D-Wash.),  Chairman  of  Senate  Nuclear  Safe- 
guards  Committee,  in  Senate  review  of  implementation  of  limited  nu- 
clear  test-ban  treaty  safeguards  reported  possibility  of  black-out  of 
communications,  radar,  and  missile  systems  by  electromagnetic  pulse 
(emp)  emitted  by  nuclear  explosion.  If  absorbed  in  electronic  equip- 
ment,  this  surge  of  electricity  could  blow  fuses  or  disrupt  electronic 
components.  Scientists had  warned  of  insufficient data  on  emp  and  its 
possible effects on  intercontinental and other missile systems. U.S.  would 
spend third  more on underground  nuclear testing in  1968 than  in   1967. 
Five-year-old treaty,  Sen.  Jackson said, was  being  observed. U S .  sat- 
ellites kept  watch  from  space  “to  the  earth’s  surface”  to  guard  against 
violation.  (Text; AP, W Star, 9/25/68,  A6;  Finney, NYT, 9/26/68) 
0  EDP Technology,  Inc.,  of  Washington, D.C.,  independent concern  provid- 
ing  technical support  in  computer  use  and  technology,  had  announced 
i t  would purchase Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory,  Buffalo, N.Y.,  from 
Cornell Univ.  for $25 million.  (NYT, 9/26/68) 
September 26: USAF Titan  111-C  booster  launched  from  ETR successfully in- 
serted  four  satellites into  separate  earth  orbits.  Satellites were  one Lin- 
coln  Experimental  Satellite  ( L e s   VZ) , two  Environmental  Research 
Satellites  (Ers X X I ,  also  called OV  V - 4 ;  and  E r s   XXVIZI,  also  called 
OV  V -2 ) ,   and one Orbiting Vehicle research  satellite  (OV  ZZ-5). 
Powered flight  of  Titan  111-C  was  very  close to  planned  parameters, 
according  to  preliminary  figures.  First  transtage burn  placed  transtage 
and  payload  into  parking  orbit  with  107.5-mi  (173-km)  apogee  90.8- 
mi  (146.2-km) perigee, 87.7-min period,  and 28.6”  inclination.  Second 
transtage  burn  moved  stage  and  payload  into  elliptical  transfer  orbit 
with  22,241-mi  (35,792.4-km)  apogee,  112.7-mi  (181.4-km)  perigee, 
631-min period,  and 26.2 ” inclination. 
Booster  ejected  E r s   XXVZII  (OV   V-2)  into  orbit  with  22,236-mi 
(35,777.7-km)  apogee,  115-mi  (185-km)  perigee,  630.8-min  period, 
and  26.4”  inclination,  where  satellite  would  investigate  radiation  in  
Van  Allen belts.  Third  transtage  burn  put  satellite dispenser frame  and 
remaining  three  satellites  into  final  orbit  with  22,201.9-mi  (35,729.5- 
km)  apogee, 22,037.4-mi  (35 ,W .9 -km )   perigee,  1,428-min period,  and 
3” inclination. 
Ers  X X I   (OV  V - 4 ) .  which  would  conduct  research  on  heat  transfer 
in  liquids  a t  zero  gravity,  was  ejected  into  circular  orbit  with  22,225- 
mi  (35,760-km)  apogee,  22,220-mi  (35,771.9-km)  perigee,  1,435.8-min 
period, and 3 ” inclination. 
OV  II-5,  synchronous-altitude  research  satellite  equipped  with  10  

228 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

September  26 

sensors  to   investigate  radiation,  entered  separate  orbit  with  22,232-mi 
35,771.2-km)  apogee, 21,827-mi  (35,771.2-km)  perigee,  and  1,418-min 
period. 
Les   V I ,  major  payload,  entered  synchronous  orbit  with  22,236-mi 
(35,777.7-km)  apogee,  22,233-mi  (35,772.9-km)  perigee,  1,435.9-min 
period,  and  2.9’ 
inclination.  Second  all  solid-state UHF-band  comsat, 
Les  V I  would  transmit  radio  signals to  test  communications to  aircraft, 
ships,  and  ground  troops.  First  Lincoln  Experimental  Satellite, Les  V ,  
had  been  launched  July  1 ,   1967.  USAF  officials  reported  all  satellites 
were  functioning  properly.  (DOD  Proj.  Off; UPI,  N Y T ,   9/26/68,  8 ;  
AP, W Star, 9/26/68,  A l ;  B  Sun ,  9/27/68,  A3;  GSFC  SSR ,  9/30/68; 
Pres  Rp t   68) 
Univ.  of  Wisconsin  meteorologist Verner  E.  Suom i   said  weather  satellite 
research  could  reduce critical  hours  needed  to  identify  tornado-produc- 
ing  cloud  systems and warn  public  of  threat.  Photos  from A t s   ZZZ  had 
shown  it  was  possible  to  observe  rapid  expansion  a t   top  of  tornado- 
producing  clouds,  while  radar  and  ground  observation tended  to  show 
only  their  “stems.”  With  adequate  facilities,  Suomi  saw  possibility  of 
satellite tornado  forecasts presented directly to  the public via  television. 
(UPI, W Pos t ,  9/26/68,  K3 )  
e  In   Wash ing ton  Pos t   Rudy Abramson of  Los  Angeles  T imes   described re- 
tiring  NASA  Administrator  James E. Webb  as “a  huckster.  A  good  one. 
Maybe  the  best  Washington has  ever  seen.”  Even  when  he  could  talk 
politicians  into  putting  up  $5   billion  in  a  year  for  civilian  space pro- 
gram, “he left many  of  them  feeling a  little guilty because  they  had  not 
done  enough.”  Congressional  opponents had  charged  he  was  overzeal- 
ous  to  point  of  dishonesty  in  protecting  his  empire  a t   NASA.  “Space 
buffs  were  piqued  because  Webb  continued  calling  the  Apollo  space- 
craft a ‘capsoole’ and publicly  seemed to view  the  astronauts w i t h  child- 
like  adoration.  But  Webb  had  it  where  it  counted.  President  Johnson 
ranked  him  with  Robert  S.  McNamara  as  an   administrator.  Influential 
Congressmen  sided  with  him  against  their  colleagues  who  challenged 
the  wisdom  of  the  space  program  and  the  quality  of  the  Webb 
management.  . . . 
“If  Richard  Nixon  is  elected President, it  is  a  dead  certainty  that  he 
would  not  want  to keep Webb  on  as NASA  Administrator.  Hubert  Hum- 
phrey  might  also  want  his  own  man.  But  even  i f   Webb  could  stay  in 
the  job,  it’s  probably  all  for  the better  that  he  quit  now.  The  investiga- 
tion  following  the  Apollo  accident  permanently  soured  his  relations 
with  some members of  Congress.  One has  to  suspect that Webb  is  leav- 
ing  the  space  program  because  the  country  seemed  less  and  less  inter- 
ested  in  listening  to  its  evangelist.”  ( W  Pos t ,   9/26/68,  K4)  
Commenting  on  retirement  of  James  E.  Webb  as  NASA  Administrator, 
Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex.)  on  House  floor  said:  “I share with  Mr. 
Webb  his  continuing  concern  that  the  Soviets are  determined to  be  the 
No.  1 power  in  space. Jim Webb  has  counseled us  often  and with  great 
clarity  on  the  seriousness  of  such  a  situation.  We  must  heed  Jim 
Webb’s  warning  that  the  United  States  should  be  first  in   space. 
. . . [He]  is  to be  congratulated  for  his unselfish  dedication and  great 
skill  in  leadership.  . . . It  will  be  difficult  for  any  man  to  fill  those 
large and capable shoes.”  ( C R ,  9/20/68,  E8135) 
September  27:  I n   Christian Science  Monitor,  Robert  C.  Cowen  asked,  “Is 

229 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
September  27 
US. space ability  eroding?”  and  warned,  “Even  if  it  beats  the  Soviet 
Union  to  the  moon,  the  American  space  capability  relative  to  that  of 
the  Soviet Union may have atrophied.”  At  Boeing  Co.  Space Div.  some 
valuable  space  teams  were  splitting  up.  “It  w i l l   take  time  as  well  as 
money  to  buy  this  kind  of  asset  back,  if  and  when  it  is  wanted.”  At 
JPL ,   officials  had  said  personnel  cutbacks  now  were  “reaching  the 
bone.”  More  than  any  other  facility,  JPL   “embodies  American  compe- 
tence  in  this  challenging field.”  Plight  of  Boeing,  as  an   industrial  con- 
tractor,  and  JPL ,   “as  an   outstanding  government  space  laboratory, 
typify 
the  peril 
the  American  space  program 
faces.  Loss  of 
funds  . . . means more  than  postponement of  certain  projects.  . . . I t  
threatens  also  a t   least  partial  loss  of  the  competence to  carry  out  such 
projects in the future.”  ( C S M ,  9/27/68) 
Dedication  ceremonies  were  held  for  ComSatCorp’s  new  high-capacity 
earth  station  for  satellite  communications  at  Etam,  W.  Va.  Station 
would  serve as major U S .  East Coast facility  for  sending  and  receiving 
all  forms  of  communications  via  satellite  between  U S .   mainland, 
Puerto  Rico  and  Caribbean, Europe, Latin  America,  and  other  Atlantic 
points.  I t   was  designed  to  work  with  INTELSAT  satellites  stationed  in 
synchronous  orbits  22,300  mi  over  Atlantic.  (ComSatCorp  Release; 
AP,  B Sun ,  9 / 2 8 / 6 8 ,  A 3 )  
Senate  Committee  on  Foreign  Relations  urged  President  Johnson  to 
delay  formal  ratification  of  nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty  until  ma- 
jority  of  nations  “nearest  to  a  nuclear  weapons  capability”  had  prom- 
ised  to  join  it,  although  i t  urged  immediate  Senate  approval  of  treaty. 
(Unna, W Post, 9 /28 /68 ,1;   N Y T ,  9 /28 /68 ,1)  
NASA  appointed  Ronald  J.  Philips  Director  of  Technology  Utilization 
Div.,  succeeding George  J.  Howick,  who  had  resigned  to  join  Inter- 
national  Research  and  Marketing  Corp.  Philips,  who  had  joined  NASA 
in  1964 as management intern  a t  MSC,  had  been  principal  staff  assistant 
to  NASA  Administrator  and  Executive Assistant to  Associate Administra- 
tor  for  Organization  and  Management.  (NASA   Release  68-166) 
Sep tember  28:  U.S.S.R.’s  Zond  V  automatic research  station had  apparently 
suffered  series  of  errors  during  reentry  that  could  have  been  fatal  if 
men  had  been  on  board,  John  Lannan  reported  in Washington Even ing  
S tar .   According  to  one  unidentified  U S .   source,  Zond  V  had  entered 
atmospheie and  “skipped”  back  out a s  planned,  but  then  skipped along 
top  of  atmosphere  and  reentered  “at  a  peculiar  angle.”  Reentry  caused 
g  forces  and  heat  loads  that  would  have  been  fatal  to  crews  if  aboard, 
and  spacecraft landed  thousands  of  miles  short  of  its  intended  landing 
area, which was  probably  on  land  in  Soviet territory. 
Chicago  Tr ibune   later  supported  theory  that  Zond  V’s  reentry  was  a 
disaster  and  reported  that  U S .   sources  said  evidence  indicated  space- 
craft  had:  ( 1 )   failed  to  circle  a s   close to  moon  as  intended,  and  was 
thus  unable to  obtain  useful  photos  of  possible landing  sites;  ( 2 )   reen- 
tered  earth’s  atmosphere  at  angle much  steeper  than  planned,  causing 
friction  temperatures  that  would  have  killed  cosmonauts;  and  ( 3 )  
landed  in  water  accidentally instead  of  in  Soviet  territory  as  planned. 
(W S tar ,   9/28/68,  A l ;  C  T r ib ,  10/1/68) 
Civilian  pilot  Bernie  J.  Dvorscak  flew  USAF’S  X V 4 B   Hummingbird  I1  
VTOL  research  aircraft  on  maiden  flight  from  Dobbins AFB, Ga.,  for  28 

230 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

September  28 

min  a t   7,600-ft  altitude  and  240  mph  w i th   conventional  takeoff  and 
landing.  First  Hummingbird  I1  vertical  flight  was  scheduled  for  early 
November. Aircra€t had  four  J8S-19  lift  engines mounted vertically  in  
center  fuselage  and  two  J85-19  cruise  engines  mounted  in  nacelles, 
providing total thrust of  18,000 lb.  (AFSC  Newsrev iew ,  10/68,3) 
Senate  Committee  on  Armed  Services’  Preparedness  Investigating  Sub- 
committee  called  for  rapid  development  of  new  strategic  bomber  to 
supplement  “obvious  and  admitted  shortcomings”  of  F-111  aircraft. 
Report,  US. Tactical  Air Power   Program ,   said:  “During  the  past  dec- 
ade  the  Soviet Union  has  introduced  a t   least  one  new  type  operational 
total  of  six,  with  11  models.  . . . United 
fighter  every  2  years-a 
States does not  have  a  single STOL  airplane  even  in  contract  definition, 
[while]  the  Soviets  are  now  flying  three  supersonic  STOL  models  and 
also  one VTOL.”  New  U.S.  fighter  “designed  to  achieve  a i r   superiority 
is  a  vital  and  urgent  requirement,  should  b e   optimized  for  its  prime 
mission,  not  compromised  by  assigning  i t   multipurpose  roles,”  and 
should receive “highest priority.”  (Text; UPI, W S ta r ,  9/29/68,  A2) 
DOD  had  approved  purchase by  Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.  of  $113,886,000 
Government  plant  at  Marietta,  Ga.,  world’s  largest  aircraft  assembly 
area  under  one  roof.  USAF  had  declared it  in  c4excess” of  its  needs  and 
would  sell it only to  Lockheed, which had  been  using facility  to  produce 
C-5A  cargo  transports  under  $l.Cbillion  USAF  contract.  Lockheed 
would  continue  work  on  the  huge  aircraft  and  could  be  required  t o  
produce  an  additional  172  on  priority  basis  under  USAF  agreement. 
(Wilson, W Po s t ,  9/28/68,  1) 
September  29 : Highly  sophisticated “multispectral  analysis” under  develop- 
ment  at  Space and  Re-entry Systems Div.  of  Philco-Ford  Corp.  was  en- 
abling scientists to  extract  additional  information  from photos  taken  by 
satellites. Assigning color  ratings  to  gradations  of  gray  in  pictures  and 
filtering out  color  levels  as  many  as  18 times,  to  create  series  of  trans- 
parencies in  vivid  hues,  allowed  details  previously undetectable in  gray 
to  be  distinguished.  Technique could  be  applied  to  all  black  and  white 
photos,  enabling  scientists to  map  ocean  bottom,  prospect  for  precious 
metal,  and  explore  composition of  sun without  leaving darkroom.  (UPI, 
NYT ,  9 /29 /68 ,28 )  
0  In   New  Y o rk   T imes   Magazine  article.  “The  Universe  Is  Not  Ours 
Alone,”  Walter  Sullivan  recounted  discovery  of  pulsars,  “strange 
. . . radio  pulsations  coming  from  certain  spots  in  the  sky.”  Ten  had 
been  discovered  io   date.  Radioastronomers  leaned  toward  natural  ex- 
planation,  yet  there  were  “tantalizing  questions  that  remain  unan- 
swered.”  I t   was  possible  “that  evidence  for  the  existence  of  superior 
civilizations lies  hidden  in  the  archives  of  magnetic  tape  a t   our  radio 
astronomy observatories.”  ( N Y T  Magazine, 9/29/68,  40-1  f f )  
FAA  released  Kling  Report  outlining  four  plans  for  possible  moderniza- 
tion  of  Washington  National  Airport.  Four  options,  offered  to  extend 
National’s  short-haul role  through  1970s,  envisioned no  major  expan- 
sion  except fo r  22-acre river  fill.  All  proposed designs  emphasized peo- 
ple-handling or  terminal  side  of  airport.  Report  was  prepared  by  Vin- 
cent  Kling  and  Associates,  Philadelphia,  with  James  Buckley,  New 
York,  and Jackson and Moreland, Boston, under  $297,000 FAA contract 
awarded  in  May  1966.  (FAA   Re!ease  T  68-38;  W  S ta r ,   9/29/68,  A l ;  
Eisen, W Po s t ,  9/29/68,  A l )  

231 

September 30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%8 

Sep tember  30:  NASA  Aerobee  150 M I   sounding  rocket launched  from  WSMR 
carried  GSFC  experiment  to  126.5-mi  (203-km)  altitude  to   obtain  solar 
extreme  UV  spectra  from  40 to  390  A  and  from  10 to  390  A  using 
BBRC-SPC  300D  solar  pointing  control  and  recovery  system.  Despite 
better  than  expected  performance,  no  solar  spectrum  was  detected. 
(NASA  Rpt SRL) 
*  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  delivered  John  Diebold  Lecture  on 
Technological  Change  and  Management  a t   Harvard  Univ.  Graduate 
School of  Business Administration.  Speaking on  “NASA  a s   an   Adaptive 
Organization,” he  emphasized “how   as well  as what”  in  NASA’s buildup 
of  capabilities  and  learning  to   “apply  new  ways  of  organizing  and  ad- 
ministering human and material resources.” 
*  Capabilities demonstrated  during  one week-second  week  of  Novem- 
launching  A t s   111,  Surveyor   V I ,  Saturn  V ,  and  Essa  IV 
ber  1967-in 
represented “better  than  90%  of  everything we would need  to carry  out 
almost any mission that  even  the most  daring  have placed  on  our  space 
agenda  for  the  next  decade.”  Measurements  made  by  experimental 
spacecraft  plus  ESSA’s  24-hr-per-day  operations  were  providing  hand- 
some  returns  in  understanding  and  predicting  weather.  “This  is  one 
way  our  country  says  to  every  other  country,  every  day,  that  we  a s   a 
people want  to  use  our  new  power  over  the  forces  of  nature  in  a  joint 
effort with  them, with  benefits  to  both  of  us,  and  not  to  threaten  or  to 
coerce  them  to  fo l low   some  pattern  laid  down  by  us.” 
Magnification capability  of  Ranger  and  Surveyor  opened  way  “for 
lunar  and  planetary  investigations  of  a  type  and  scope  undreamed  of 
before  we  learned  to  use  the  rocket  technology.”  Saturn  V  launch 
“demonstrated  that  we  can  have  . . . the  big-booster  capability  and 
the  launch  rate  capability  in  which  we  have  been  behind  the  U.S.S.R.” 
Utility  of  Essa  ZV  was  “far  beyond  any  we  can  achieve  in   any  other 
way.  I t   works  .  . . all  around  the  world,  and  feeds  information  into 
something  like  296  stations  in  the  United  States  and  about  86   in  45 
other  countries.  I t   is  truly  a  working  bird.  . . . 
“I  do  not  believe  our  Nation  could  have  long  continued  as  a  great 
power  if  we  had  not  built  up  the  means  to  conduct  operations  in 
space.  . . . I  believe  we  would  have  sacrificed  our chances  to  keep 
pace  in  the  technological  competition  that  is  the  crucial  test  of  our 
times.  . . . We  would  have  denied  to  ourselves  the  tools  and  the 
knowledge  necessary  . . . [for]  problems  that  beset  us  and  the  rest 
of  mankind  the  benefits  that  surely  will  follow  from  the  full  develop 
ment  of  space  applications.”  (Text;  IT‘ Po s t ,   20/13/68,  B5) 
to  490-passenger  Boeing  747  with 
World‘s  largest  commercial  jet-360- 
mach  0.84 to  0.90  cruising  speed-was 
rolled  from  factory  for  first 
time  in  ceremony a t  Everett, Wash. The 962O-million aircraft  was  sched- 
uled  for  first  flight  in  December  1968 and  first  passenger  service, with 
Pan   American World  Airways,  Inc.,  one  year  later.  (Boeing PIO; AP, 
W  Po s t ,  9/30/68,  A22;  10/1/68,  A9;  Witkin,  NYT,  10/1/68,  UPI, W 
S ta r ,   10/1/68,  A6) 
USAF announced  it  had  called  for  proposals  from  eight  aircraft  compa- 
nies  for  contract  definition  of  advanced  tactical  fighter  aircraft  des- 
ignated  FX,  highly maneuverable, single-place, twin-engine jet with  ini- 
tial  operational  capability  in  mid-1970s. Engine  development contracts 

232 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
September  30 
had  been  announced Aug.  27.  Maiden flight was  expected in  1972. FX 
would  have  significantly better  air-to-air performance  than  any  known 
fighter aircraft.  (DOD Release 891-68) 
Newsweek  commented  on  break-up  of  European  Launcher  Development 
Organization:  “The  seven-nation . . . [ELDO]  which  never  really  got 
off  the  pad,  will  be  buried  early  in  October.  Efforts  to  get  Britain  to 
remain  only made  clear  the  reason  for  her  withdrawal:  France  refused 
to  accept Britain  a s  a  member  of  Euromart  and the  British  pulled  out. 
The  Netherlands backs  Britain’s  move  in  the  face  of  De  Gaulle’s  stub- 
bornness, and Italy has already expressed reservations about the project. 
If  Western  Europe  wants  launchers  for  scientific  space  exploration  in 
future,  i t  will  have  to  buy  them  from  the  US . ”   (Newsweek ,  9/30/68, 
20) 
Gen.  William  F.  McKee  (USAF, Ret.),  President  of  Schriever and  McKee 
Associates,  had  been  sworn  in   a s   consultant  t o   NASA  Administrator 
James  E.  Webb,  NASA  announced.  Former  FAA Administrator  and 
former  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Management  Development, 
Gen.  McKee would  advise NASA  on  management, aeronautics,  and  coor- 
dination with other Government agencies.  (NASA  Release 68-169) 
*  Dr.  Hubertus  Strughold  retired  as  Chief  Scientist  of  Aerospace  Medical 
Div.,  at  Brooks  AFB, Tex.  He  had  been  associated  with  USAF  aerospace 
medical  program  since  1947 and  was  known  as  father  of  space medi- 
cine.  (Brooks AFB PIO;   AFSC  Newsreview,  10/68,  3) 
House,  by  voice  vote,  passed  H.R.  12012  to  encourage  worldwide  inter- 
est  in  U S .   developments and  accomplishments in   military  and  related 
aviation  and  equipment  by  authorizing  Federal  sponsorship  of  an   In -  
ternational Aeronautical Exposition in U.S.  ( C R ,  9/30/68,  H9254;  NASA 
LAR  VTl/101) 
LeRC  began  l8-mo  program  to  flight-test  advanced  inlets  and  exhaust 
nozzles  for  supersonic  transport  engines.  Tests,  conducted  in  modified 
USAF F-106B  jet  aircraft,  would  study  performance  of  nozzles  and  in- 
lets in transonic speed range.  ( NASA  Release 68-163) 
During  Septem,ber:  Bureau  of  the  Budget  released  Summer  Review  of  the 
Budget.  From  action taken  on  five regular  appropriations  bills  to   date, 
Congress was  expected to  reduce  remaining  appropriations by  approxi- 
mately  $9.3  billion. On  completion, further  reductions required  to  com- 
ply with Revenue and Expenditure Control Act  of  1968 would  be  deter- 
mined  by  Presideni.  For  portion  of  budget  covered  by  required  reduc- 
tion  under  P.L.  90-364,  total  outlays  were  estimated  at  $6  billion 
below  January  budget  estimate.  Overall  $6-billion reduction  would  be 
made approximately 50% in DOD and 50% in civilian agencies. NASA  out- 
lays beyond those  for manned  lunar  landing would be held  to $100-mil- 
lion level below  that resulting from Congressional action.  (Text) 
Astronautics  &  Aeronautics  noted  that  NASA-sponsored  translations  of 
Russian  historical  works  compiled  1963-68  were  available  from  Clear- 
inghouse for  Federal  Scientific and Technical Information,  Springfield, 
Va.  22151.  I t  was  a  credit  to NASA’s historians  “that  they  have  not  ne- 
glected  bringing  to  our  attention  the  products  of  their  opposing  num- 
bers.”  (Stehling, A&A ,   9/68,  76) 
*  Astronautics  &  Aeronautics  published  letter  from  J.  Gordon  Vaeth  of 
ESSA’S  National Environmental Satellite Center: With  emphasis of  space 
technology  on  applications  and  practical  benefits,  it  was  ‘%urious that 

233 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
During  September 
. . . little is  apparently being  said or  done about  using communications 
satellites to  ‘carry’  the  mail  over  intercontinental  distances.”  Facsimile 
techniques  were  available  for  scanning  and  electronic  transmission  of 
letter mail by  geostationary  spacecraft. “In-depth  professional consider- 
ation  of  this satellite application is overdue”  ( A & A ,  9/68,  17-20) 
*  P.  J.  Parker  listed  in  Spaceflight  “typical  examples  of  space-inspired 
technology”  which  had  either  appeared  or  were  expected  to  emerge 
from  future  space activity : low-weight, high-calorie “spacefoods”  devel- 
oped  for mass-feeding undernourished  peoples ; adaptation  of  Saturn V 
air-bearing t o   other  large  items  such a s  refrigerators;  use  of  spacecraft 
automatic  monitoring  unit  in  hospitals  for  relaying  data  on  patient’s 
heart  condition  to  central  point;  use  of  high-pressure oxygen  in   astro- 
nauts’  suits  to  reduce  lung  collapse  and  to  save lives  of  premature  ba- 
bies;  potential cure for  stuttering  from  examination  of  voice communi- 
cation  problems;  electric  switch  adapted  for  use  by  paralyzed  patients 
to  operate hospital  call  boards  and  wheelchairs;  and  lunar  exploration 
vehicle redesigned into walking-chair with reciprocating legs. 
Industrial  applications  included  solar  cells  used  to  drive  small  out- 
board  motorboats  and  “outback”  telephone  booster  units;  heat-resist- 
ant  coatings  for  spacecraft  used  in  furnaces,  aircraft,  and  domestic 
cookers;  and  new  precision tooling methods that  worked to  nearest mil- 
lionth of  an inch,  (Space f l igh t ,  9/68,306-7) 
National  Science Foundation  issued  Emp loymen t   of  Scientists  and  Eng i -  
neers  in   the   United  S ta tes ,   1950-1966.  Such  employment  had  risen 
from 550,800 in   1950 to  1,412,500 in   1 9 6 6 1 5 6 % .  Scientific  occupa- 
tions had  increased by  185%, from 146,300 to  416,800, engineering had 
increased 146%, from 404,600 to 996,000. Chemists accounted for more 
than  25%  of  scientists in  1966, while medical scientists more  than  dou- 
bled rate for all scientific occupations. 
Between  1950 and  1966, number  of  R&D  scientists and  engineers rose 
242%.  Proportion of  R&D  personnel grew  from 28%  of  all scientists and 
engineers in  1950 to  37%  in  1966. Private  industry employed  71%  of 
total  scientists and  engineers ; government,  16% ; universities  and  col- 
leges, 13% ; and nonprofit institutions about 1%. Employment increased 
more rapidly  in  nonprofit sector  (359%  between  1950 and  1966 ) .  Gov- 
ernment  employment 
(excluding  public  educational 
institutions) 
(Text) 
showed lowest growth-106%. 

234 

October  1968 

October  1 : NASA  10th Anniversary:  National  Space  Club  presented  special 
award  to  President  Johnson  a t  White  House  citing  his  legislative  and 
executive leadership  of  national  space program.  A t   Space Club  dinner 
in Washington, D.C.,  Sen.  Clinton P.  Anderson  (D-N. Mex.)  and Rep. 
George  P.  Miller  (D-Calif.)  presented  retiring  NASA  Administrator 
James  E.  Webb  award  for  his  outstanding  contributions  to  national 
space effort. In   telegram tribute  to Webb, President  Johnson  said,  “The 
Nation  is  in  his  debt.  He  will  be  deeply  missed  but  gratefully  remem- 
bered as his dreams continue to become reality in the years ahead.” 
Telegram from Vice  President  Hubert  Humphrey said,  “The  span  of 
achievement  which  measures  a  decade  of  space progress  is  one  which 
should  be  a  source  of  pride  to  all  of  us.  Now  a  new  decade beckons, 
with  new  challenges, and  new  opportunities. And,  such  is  the  nature  of 
the  space  age  that  we  da re   not  become  complacent  about  our  rate  of 
progress  or  the  scope  of  our  past  accomplishments.  I t   is  unthinkable 
that  we  would  allow  ourselves  to  be  surpassed  in  technology  by  any 
other  nation.  I  have  never  questioned  that  space  endeavors have  con- 
tributed  significantly to  the  strengthening and  enrichment  of  our whole 
society,  through  a  teamwork  approach  by  private  industry,  our  univer- 
sities, and  the  Federal Government. By  means of  this  program we  have 
vitalized  our  economy,  developed  improved  methods  of  management, 
stimulated  our  educational  system,  produced  new  goods  and  services, 
added to  our  store  of  scientific knowledge,  and  buttressed  our  national 
security.”  Telegram  from  Republican  Presidential  candidate  Richard 
M.  Nixon  said,  “The  space  program  must  continue  to  be  one  of  our 
national  imperatives,  and  i t   must  be  supported  a t   a  level  assuring 
efficient and steady progress.” 
Anniversary ceremonies also  included open house  and  annual  awards 
presentation  a t   MSFC   Sept.  28-29. 
(NSC   Newsletter;  Texts;  Marshall 
Star, 9/25/68,4) 
In   anniversary  statement issued  by  White  House  President  Johnson 
said:  “.  . . not  all  of  NASA’s accomplishments have  been  out  of  this 
world.  Satellites have  given  us  a  new  look a t  the  world’s  weather.  . . . 
They  have  given  us   intercontinental  television  broadcasts,  and  broken 
down  the  technical  barriers  to  worldwide  communications.  NASA  has 
brought  us  advances  in  medical  science,  education,  mapmaking,  geol- 
ogy,  transportation,  and  a  host  of  other  areas  that  promise a  better  life 
for  us   here  on  Earth.  Its  intensive  research  and  development  efforts 
have given us  new  materials, products  and  processes;  raised  our  stand- 
ards  of  reliability  and  advanced  managerial  techniques.  These  ad- 
vances,  together with  the useful facilities it has  built,  will  be  lasting na- 
tional assets long after the Moon landing is ancient history.  . . . 
“In  the years ahead-as 
in the past decade-our 
foremost motive is to 
make men  wiser  and  life  on  earth  more  meaningful.  And  on  the  mile- 

235 

October  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  1:  T e n   years  ago  NASA  o f f i c i a l l y  came  into  being.  In  photo,  President  Dwight 
D .  Eisenhower  hands  commissions  t o   heads  o f   new  agency  a f t e r  S ep t .   8 ,   1958,  swearing 
in   ceremonies.  A t   President’s  lef t   is   D r .   T .  K e i th   Glennan,  f irs t   NASA  Administrator. 
Accepting  commission  is  f irs t  Depu ty   Administrator,  the  l a t e   Hugh  L .  Dryden .  

stone  of  this  rewarding  effort,  we  renew  our  dedication  to  the  guiding 
principle  we   expressed  10 years  ago  at  NASA’s  launching:  that  our  fur- 
ther  mastery  of  space  may  continue  to  be  ‘for  the  benefit  of  all 
mankind.’ ” ( P D ,  10/7/68,1435-1436) 
During  its  first  10  yr  NASA  had  completed 234 major  US. and  inter- 
national  launches  plus  thousands  of  sounding  rocket  launches.  Of  234 
major  launches,  189 were  launch-vehicle successes and  174  were  space- 
craft  o r  mission successes, with  two missions still under  evaluation. For 
these  launches  NASA  had  developed  rockets  ranging  from  88,000-lb 
thrust  to  Saturn V  with  7.5-million-lb thrust  capable  of  sending  nearly 
100,000-lb payload to moon. 
First  phase  of  manned  flight  program,  Project  Mercury,  had  begun 
seven days  after  NASA  was  established. Six manned Mercury flights had 
proved man  could  go  into  space  and  function  as  pilot-engineer-experi- 
menter for  up  to  34 h r  weightless flight before  returning  t o  earth.  Gem- 
ini  program  announced  in  1961 had  demonstrated  work  could  be  per- 
formed  in  orbit  outside  spacecraft  in  more  than  12 h r   extravehicular 
activity. Gemini included 52 experiments, among them  17  scientific-in 
astronomy,  biology,  geology,  meteorology,  and  physics.  Seven  rendez- 
vous techniques and nine dockings had  been  accomplished during  Gem- 
ini.  More than  2,000 h r   manned  spaceflight experience gained  through 

236 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  1 

Mercury  and  Gemini  had  contributed  heavily  to  Apollo,  including  16 
flights of  unmanned Saturn  launch vehicle which had  confirmed Apollo 
engineering  concepts  and  qualified  all  systems  for  manned  missions. 
Although Apollo  fire  on  Jan.  27,  1967, had  delayed manned  missions, 
i t  had resulted in safer spacecraft and improved suits for astronauts. 
Ahead  were  two  manned  missions  for  1968  and  possibly  five  for 
1969, culminating  in  landing  of  U.S.  astronauts  on  moon.  Facilities  a t  
NASA  installations  in  U S .   were  worth more  than  $2.5  billion  and  peak 
35,000  staff  included  some  of  Nation’s  top  scientists.  Industrial  work 
force  had  peaked  a t   4.00,OOO  and  was  dropping  to  200,000.  NASA  had 
established global tracking  network capable of  communicating with  ve- 
hicles  as  fa r   away  as  f a r   side  of  sun.  I t s   aeronautics  program  con- 
ducted R&D  on noise abatement, flight safety, supersonic and hypersonic 
aircraft,  lifting-body vehicles,  and  V/STOL  aircraft.  NASA’s technologi- 
cal  advances included  development  of  new  electronic parts,  alloys,  ad- 
hesives, lubricants,  valves, and  pumps,  as well  as progress  in  miniaturi- 
zation.  More  than  2,500  technical  innovations  applicable  in  industry, 
medicine,  and  other  nonaerospace activities had  resulted  from  10 yr  of 
NASA  progress. In   Christian  Science Monitor,  Neal  Stanford  said,  “It  is 
. . . science  satellites  and  the  new  technology  developed  that  are 
counted  on  to   return  to  the  tax-paying public  the  dividends  that  some 
say  w i l l   make  space  the  best  investment  man  ever  made.”  (Marshall 
Star, 9 /25 /68 ,5 ;   Wilford, N Y T ,  10/1/68;  CSM ,  10/5/68) 
In   Washington  Sunday  Star  special  report,  “A  Decade  in  Space,” 
John  Lannan  commented  on  NASA’s 10th  anniversary:  “. . . the  space 
agency’s real  promise for  improving the  general welfare of  mankind  as 
set  forth  in  the  Space Act  which  brought  it  into  being  has  apparently 
been  too  slow  in  being  fulfilled.  Th e   fact  that  the  space  investment  is 
only  now  starting  to  pay  off,  and  a t   an   increasingly  rapid  pace,  is 
going  unnoticed in  the  glare  of  present  problems, past  mishaps and  the 
imminence of  the Apollo venture.  Where NASA’s real  goals lie a re  in  the 
future-the  near  future  and  the  near  earth.  Spin-off, the  serendipity  of 
technology,  has  long  been  used  a s   a  justification  for  the  vast  sums 
poured  into  space, but  little beyond Teflon-coated frying  pans  have  im- 
pinged on the tax-payer’s mind.”  (W  S tar ,  9/29/68,  A l )  
NASA  Assistant Administrator  for  DOD and  Interagency  Affairs  Jacob 
E.  Smart  wrote  in  Space  D iges t:   “The  tenth  anniversary  . . . marks 
the  end  of  a  decade of  concerted effort  across a  broad  front to  advance 
the  nation’s  capabiiities  in  aeronautics  and  space.  I t   has  been  a  decade 
of  accomplishment that has  few  peers in  this country’s  history.  . . . the 
good  working  relationships  . . . between  NASA  and  DOD  have  been  of 
immeasurable benefit  to  them  both,  and  the  nation’s  space effort  is  the 
stronger  for  it.  . . . with  the  prospect  of  tighter  budgets  likely,  the 
maintenance  of  such  relationships-and 
their  improvement-assumes 
an  increasing  importance.  The  need  to   stretch  the  appropriations  dol- 
lars  to  the  maximum may  be  partly  met  by  fresh  efforts  to  find  com- 
mon  ground  where  cooperation will  produce  economies a s  well  as  mu- 
tual benefits.”  (Space  D iges t ,  10/68,68-70) 
I n   Space  Digest  Gen.  James  Ferguson,  Commander  of  AFSC,  de- 
scribed  “A  Decade  of  cooperation-The  Military-NASA  Interface.” 
AFSC’S  FY  1969 NASA  support  expenditures  “amounted  to  millions  of 
dollars  and  thousands  of  man-years in  effort. The  sums of  money,  and, 

237 

October  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

more  important,  the  human  technological  resources  we  a re   currently 
expending  on  the  nation’s  space  programs  a re   of  great  consequence 
since  they  are  the  foundations  of  our  future  benefits.  . . . we  a re  
acutely aware  that  the  fate of  future generations lies in space.  . . . I t  is 
a  sad  commentary  to   state  that  technology  has  provided  us   with  the 
means  t o   conduct  wars.  But  it  is  heartening  to  realize  that  one  day 
technology will  provide  us  with  the  means  to  prevent wars.  ( S p a c z  Di- 
gest,  10/68,  71-3) 
Aerobee  150 MI  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  W SM R carried 
Univ.  of  Colorado  experiment  to  108-mi  (173.8-km)  altitude  to  meas- 
ure  height  profile  of  nitric  oxide  and  nitrogen  and  test  Marine..  Mars 
UV  spectrometer. UV  spectrometer measured earth’s  dayglow  and  day- 
light  between  1,100  A  and  4,300  A.  Inertial  ACS  successfully  maneu- 
vered  payload until  scat  eye took control  and caused  instrument  to  scan 
through  10”. Experiment’s  measurements  and  tests  were  successful. 
(NASA  Rpt SRL) 
*  Dr.  Finn  J.  Larsen,  DOD  Deputy  Director  of  Defense Research  and  Engi- 
neering,  testified  before House Committee on  Science and Astrnnautics’ 
Subcommittee on  Advanced  Research  and  Technology : “If  our  civil 
aviation  is  to  continue  its  dramatic  progress,  the  greatest  slngle  re- 
quirement  is  to   accomplish . . . complete  system engineering.  The  . . . 
planning  must  consider  not  only the  aircraft  in  flight  as  a  system,  but 
also  the  entire  problem  of  moving  people  from  destination  tD  destina- 
tion,”  requiring  “planning  and  resources on  a  considerably larger  scale 
than are now available.’’ 
NASA’s responsibility  for  U.S.  aeronautical  research  “should  con- 
tinue.”  DOD  had  used  NASA  research, augmenting i t  for  defense as  neces- 
sary,  with  “excellent  coordination  for  many  years.”  Military  R&D  was 
specialized,  but  much  was  transferable  to  civil  aviation.  Long-term 
goals  of  smokeless combustors  and  silent  aircraft  would  be  of  mutual 
benefit. SAGE air  defense computer system had  contributed  to FAA radar 
beacon  system  and  new  national  standards.  Much  improved  altimetry 
reporting  came  from  DOD  development  for  high-performance  jet  air- 
craft.  Common  digitizer  was   joint  DOD-FAA  project,  as  was  TPX-42 
airport  traffic  control  facility.  Eleven  aircraft  carriers  had  pilot 
“hands-off  capability  for  blind  landing.  Microwave  scanning-beam 
landing  systems  were  in  testing.  Collision  avoidance,  V/STOL,  and 
cargo-handling  R&D  had  civil  application.  (Text) 
*  Dr.  Frank  D.  Drake,  Director  of  Cornel1  Univ.’s  Arecibo  Ionospheric 
Observatory  in  Puerto  Rico,  said  he  had  detected  first  distinct  pattern 
to  radio  signals  from  two  pulsars.  He  told  radioastronomy  seminar  a t  
National  Radio  Astronomy Observatory  at  Green  Bank,  W.  Va.,  pulse 
rate  could  be  explained  only  i f   source were  star  of  extraordinary  den- 
a s  neutron  star.  If  correct,  find- 
sity spinning  a t   incredible  speed-such 
ings  would  be  first  scientific proof  that  hypothetical  neutron  stars  ac- 
tually  existed.  (Wilford,  NYT,  10/2/68;  Lannan,  W  S ta r ,   10/2/68, 

MIT physicist  and  radioastronomer,  Dr.  Bernard  Burke,  and  teams  of 
scientists using  140-ft  “Big  Dish”  antenna  a t   National  Radio  Astron- 
omy  Observatory began  first  radioastronomy  test  of  Einstein’s  general 
theory  of  relativity  in  attempt  to  discover  gravity’s  effect  on  universe. 
Among  three  basic  tests  proposed  by  Einstein  to  test  his  theory 

238 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  1 

to  account  for  action  of  all  bodies  under  gravitational  force  was 
one  to  measure  bending  of  light  from  distant  source  a s   it  passed  an  
energetic body  like  the  sun.  Dr.  Burke’s  experiment  measured  signals 
from  newly  discovered  quasars  to  determine  amount  of  bending  they 
underwent  in  passing  the  sun.  If  light,  in  form  of  quasar  radiowaves, 
was  bent,  Einstein  theory  would  receive  added  support;  if  it  was  not 
bent  as much  as  he  predicted,  or  if  astronomers were  unable  to   detect 
significant bending, theory  would  remain  intact  until  further  proof  was 
provided.  (NRAO   Proj Off; Lannan, W Star, 10/1/68,  A9) 
0  MSFC  announced  it had  selected RCA  for  negotiation  of  $5.1-million  cost- 
plus-fixed-fee contract  for  logistics  and  engineering  support  for  Saturn 
ground  computer  systems  and  associated  equipment.  Contract  would 
cover Oct.  1,1968, through June 30,1970.  (MSFC  Release 68-231) 
President  Johnson announced resignation of  Leonard  H.  Marks  as Direc- 
tor  of  U.S.  Information  Agency  in  time  to  head  U S .   delegation  to  ne- 
gotiate permanent  arrangements for  INTELSAT  at  February  1969 confer- 
ence  in  Washington,  D.C.  (PD,  10/7/68,  1433;  Halloran,  W Post, 
10/2/68,  A8; AP, N Y T ,  10/2/68,23) 
0  Arnold W.  Frutkin,  since  Feb.  1 Special Assistant  to  NASA  Associate Ad- 
ministrator,  resumed  his  duties  as Assistant Administrator  for  Interna- 
tional  Affairs.  (NASA   PAO;  NASA  Ann,  10/2/68) 
October  2:  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  CCXLIV   into  orbit  with  158-km 
(98.2-mi)  apogee,  140-km (87-mi) perigee, 87.4-min period,  and  49.6” 
inclination.  Satellite reentered  same day. U.S.  press  later  reported  U.S. 
observers  said  launch  appeared  to  have  been  13th  test  of  Soviet  frac- 
tional  orbital  bombardment  system  (FOBS). Orbit  followed  pattern  of 
previous  tests  identified  as  FOBS  by  US.-very 
low  earth  orbit  with 
satellite  reentering  before  completing  first  revolution  of  earth.  ( GSFC 
SSR,  10/15/68;  UPI,  N Y T ,   10/9/68,  1 2 ;  W  Post,  10/8/68,  A10) 
Sen.  Clinton  P.  Anderson  (D-N.  Mex.) , Chairman  of  House  Committee 
on  Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told  Senate:  “Ten  years  from  now 
NASA  will  be  celebrating  its  20th  anniversary.  I  hope  that  the chairman 
of  the  Committee . . . a t  that  time w i l l   be  able to   stand  here  and  con- 
gratulate the agency and  its  people  for  20 years  of  accomplishment and 
say  that  the  United  States  is  still  first  in  space  and  in  aeronautics.  But 
unless we  a re  vigilant and  supply the  agency with  the needed authoriza- 
tions  and  appropriations,  that  statement  will  not  be  made.”  (CR, 
10/2/68,  S11844) 
NASA  awarded  Chrysler  Corp.’s  Space  Div.  $10,545,753  cost-plus-award- 
fee extension  to  $77,877,486  contract  fo r   KSC  support  services.  Exten- 
sion,  fo r   July  1 through  Dec.  31,  covered  manpower  and  material  to 
design and  sustain  engineering, modification,  testing,  refurbishing,  and 
launch  support  of  Ksc-designed equipment and  Saturn  IB  launch  oper- 
ations.  ( KSC  Release KSC-418-68) 
Sen.  Stuart  Symington  (D-Mo.)  said  on  Senate  floor:  “In  the  past  ten 
years, money  expended by  the  Defense Department for  R&D  has  almost 
doubled, from $4 billion to  about $8 billion. Yet  since 1955, the United 
States  has  not  produced  a  single  modern  fighter;  in  fact,  i t   has  pro- 
duced no  combat plane except the  TFX series. The Navy version  of  that 
plane has  already  been  abandoned;  and  the  Air  Force  has  once  again 
found  i t   necessary  to  ground  their  version  because  of  technical  diffi- 
culties.”  Despite  “all  those billions we  have  developed no  a i r   superior- 

239 

October  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

ity  fighter  capable  of  competing against  a  first-class a i r   force  such  a s  
the  Soviets possess  today.”  He  said U.S.  was  losing  its  lead  on  seas  as 
well  because  “our  various  Government  branches  produce  arguments, 
(Text;  NY   News, 
whereas  the  Soviets  produce  the  submarine.’’ 
10/3/68,18) 
0  MSFC  announced  it  had  awarded  American  Science  and  Engineering, 
Inc.,  $5,413,000  addition  to  contract  for  final  design,  fabrication,  as- 
sembly,  integration,  test  qualification, and  acceptance of  prototype  and 
flight  unit  x-ray  spectrographic  telescope for  Apollo  Telescope Mount. 
Award  brought  total  value  of  contract  to  $11,617,471.  (NASA  Release 
68-170;  MSFC Release 68-234) 
0  National  Center  for  Atmospheric  Research  and  Information  announced 
10-ft-dia Global  Horizontal  Sounding  Technique  (GHO S T )   plastic  bal- 
loon  launched  from  Christchurch,  New  Zealand,  Sept.  29,  1967,  had 
broken  a11  balloon  flight-duration  records  by  remaining  aloft  for  one 
year.  (AP, St. Lou is  G-D,  10/3/68) 
October 3:  Aurorae  ( E s r o  I )  satellite, designed, developed, and  constructed 
by  European  Space  Research  Organization under  July  8,  1964,  NASA- 
ESRO  agreement,  was  successfully  launched  by  NASA  from  WTR  by 
four-stage Scout booster. Orbital parameters:  apogee, 952.1 mi  (1,532.2 
km) ; perigee,  158.9 mi  (255.8 km)  ; period,  102.8 min;  and  inclina- 
tion, 93.8’.  Primary NASA  mission objectives were to place Aurorae  into 
planned  orbit  and  provide  tracking  and  telemetry  support.  The  185-lb 
cylindrical  satellite  carried  eight  experiments to  study  aurora  borealis 
(Northern  Lights)  and  other  related  phenomena  of  polar  ionosphere, 
representing  six  different  organizations  from  U.K.,  Denmark,  Sweden, 
and Norway.  All  experiments were  operating  a s  planned,  and  their  sci- 
entific objectives were being achieved. 
Aurorae  was  second  successful ESRO satellite launched  by  NASA.  Iris 
I ,   launched  May  16 to  replace  ESRO  11-A  which  had  failed  to  achieve 
orbit  May  29,  1967,  had  entered  planned  orbit  and  conducted  solar- 
astronomy  and  cosmic-ray  studies.  ESRO  was  responsible  for  experi- 
ment  instrumentation,  delivery  of  spacecraft  to  launch  site,  equip- 
ment  and  personnel  necessary  to  mate  spacecraft  to  launch  vehicle, 
and  spacecraft  testing.  NASA  provided  Scout  launch  vehicle,  con- 
ducted  launch  operations,  and  supplied  data  and  tracking  acquisition 
support.  (NASA   P ro j  Off;  NASA  Release 68-158;  AP, W  S ta r ,   10/4/68; 
GSFC SSR ,  10/15/68) 
Cosmos  CCXLV  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R. 
into  orbit  with  481-km 
(298.9-mi)  apogee,  272-km  ( 1 6 9 - 4   perigee,  92-min  period,  and 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Jan.  15,  1969.  (GSFC  SSR, 
70.9’ 
10/15/68;  1/31/69) 
lifting-body  vehicle,  flown  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  A. 
NASA’s HL-10 
Manke,  successfully completed eleventh flight  from  Edwards AFB.  Vehi- 
cle with  full  load  of  fuel  was  carried  to  altitude, where  successful jetti- 
son  test  was  performed  before  launch  from  B-52  aircraft.  (NASA  P r o j  
O f f )  
NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  presented  NASA  FY  
1969 interim  operating  plan  to  Senate Committee on  Aeronautical  and 
Space Sciences. Although President  Johnson  had  not  yet  signed  appro- 
priations  bill,  Bureau  of  the  Budget  had  indicated  NASA’s share  of  $6 
billion  ,expenditure  reduction  might  amount  to  $350  million.  This 

240 

ASTRONAUTTCS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
October  3 
meant  limitation  of  use of  N 1969 appropriations  to   $3.85  billion, Dr. 
Paine  said.  “Our  actions  also  have had  to  be  constrained  by  our  cur- 
rent  instructions within the Executive Branch to hold  expenditures to  a 
minimum  in  1970 as well  as  in  1969,  and  to  be  prepared  fo r  the  even- 
tuality  of  budgetary  limitations  in  FY 1970 even  more  restrictive  than 
those  in  N  1969.  I  am  personally  convinced  that  the  nation’s  space 
program  requires  an  increase  in  funding  in  FY  1970  and  I  am 
hopeful  . . . w e   w i l l   succeed  in  establishing the  need  f o r  a  significant 
increase. Until this decision is made  . . . we  have  no  alternative but  to 
proceed  with  an  interim  operating  plan  . . .  which,  where  possible, 
holds open  options we  can  exercise in  FY  1970 if  the  budget  is  higher 
but which does not overcommit us  i f  the FY  1970 budget is lower.” 
Plan  retained  $2.025  billion  authorized  for  Apollo  program-$14 
million  below  budget  request.  It  reduced  authorized  $253.2  million  for 
Apollo  Applications to  $150 million, amount  “required  to   work  toward 
the  important  but  sharply  limited  and  deferred  Apollo  Applications 
program  we   now  propose.”  This  would  include cessation  of  Saturn  IB  
launch  vehicle  production  after  completion  of  14th  (Saturn  214)  and 
discontinuation  of  Saturn  V  at  completion  of  first  1 5  vehicles.  Single 
Saturn  I  workshop  and  single  Apollo  Telescope Mount  (ATM) would 
be  launched  in   early  1970s. Authorized  $5  million  for  advanced  mis- 
sions  would  be  cut  to  $2.5  million,  for  continued  studies  related  to 
manned  earth-orbital  and  lunar  missions.  Authorized  $136.9  million 
would  be  reduced  to   $132.1  million  for  physics  and  astronomy,  with 
level  of  effort  in  supporting  research  and  technology  and  data  analysis 
approximately  10%  lower than  in  FY  1968. 
The  $92.3  million  authorized  for  lunar  and  planetary  exploration 
would be cut  to   $75.8 million, with  $6.8 million  for  lunar  and  $69 mil- 
lion  for  planetary-to 
support  Mariner-Mars  1969  mission,  reacquisi- 
tion  of  telemetry  from  Mariner  V,  and  Mariner-Mars  1971  mission. 
Plan  also supported  in  FY  1969, a t  reduced  funding  level, capability to 
conduct  Mars  mission  during  1973  opportunity  in  keeping  with  NAS 
recommendation  [see  Sept.  191. Overall  scope of  mission would  be  re- 
duced  and  schedule compressed. Operating plan  provided  for  construc- 
tion  of  two 210-ft antennas  for  Mars and  other missions  during  1970s. 
Launch  vehicle  procurement  authorization  of  $115.7  million  would  be 
cut to  $100.2  million  and  bioscience from $33 million  to  $32.7  million, 
which was  $15  mi2ion below  budget  request  and  required  slip  of  6-12 
mo  in 21-day Biosatellite missions. 
Space applications authorization  of  $98.7 million  would be  retained ; 
program  change  necessitated  by  May  18  destruction  of  Nimbus  B 
would  result  in  launch  of  replacement,  Nimbus  B2,  in  spring  1969. 
Aeronautics  R&D  budget  would  remain  at  authorized  $74.9  million, 
while  IT 1969  effort  in  nuclear  rockets  would  be  limited  and  NERVA 
development  deferred  until  1970,  when  $7.5  million  withheld  in  Ey 
1969 could be added to allow total  of  $39.5  million.  Interim plan-would 
provide  $178.4  million  for  basic  research,  space vehicle  systems,  elec- 
tronics systems, human  factor  systems, space power  and electric propul- 
sion  systems,  and  chemical  propulsion-at 
reduction  of  $21.5  million 
from NASA’s budget  request. Work  in  long-endurance life-support-equip 
ment  technologies  would  proceed  as  planned  but  i n   other  areas  re- 
search  and  technical  development would  be  reduced,  especially  efforts 

241 

October  3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

in  support  of  advanced  space missions.  Tracking  and  data  acquisition 
budget  would  be  reduced  from  $289.8  million  authorized  to  $280  mil- 
lion,  providing  full  Apollo  schedule  support  but  limiting  support  for 
spacecraft a lof t  and on future missions. 
Construction of  facilities funds had  been  reduced  from  $39.6  million 
authorized  to   $21.8  million  appropriated.  Operating  plan  would  in- 
crease figure t o  $35.7 million by  transferring  funds  from  R&D  appropri- 
ation.  Facility planning  and design funds were reduced from $3 million 
requested  to  $1 million.  Interim  operating  plan  anticipated  transfer  of 
$20.1  million  from  R&D  to  administrative  operations,  bringing  total  to 
$623.3 million  instead  of  $603.2  million  in  authorization  and  appropri- 
ations  acts  and  $648.2  million  requested by  NASA  in  budget.  Dr.  Paine 
emphasized that  administrative  operations  appropriation  did  not  cover 
only  “administrative”  expenses ; it  covered  direct  costs  of  operating 
NASA  laboratories,  research  centers,  development  centers,  and  launch 
centers. 
NASA  Administrator  James E.  Webb  told  Committee:  “.  . . when  you 
use  words such as ‘Congress consistently has  supported  the  Apollo pro- 
gram,,  you must  add  ‘at  a minimum level.’  We have clearly indicated  in  
every budget  that  the  basis  on  which  we  were  going  forward  with  this 
support  by  Congress  was  one  that  did  not  take  into  account  unusual 
risks  and  happenings  and  was,  in  effect,  based  on  success  in  all  these 
efforts.” Webb said NASA  Apollo  funding was  related  to  success on vari- 
ous operations and did not  include “a  return  to  test flight on  the  Saturn 
IB   should we  not  be  able  to  make  the  shift  to  the  big  rocket  after  this 
next  flight.”  From  1961  to  1969, Webb  said,  “we  have  not  had  the 
funds  to  proceed  except  in  a  manner  that  would  permit  us,  within  the 
total budget, to do this lunar landing within this decade and on  an all-up 
systems test  basis.  So  the  excruciatingly painful  period  of  all-up testing 
on the Saturn V is yet ahead of  us.”  (Testimony; Transcript) 
Senate by  vote  of  55  to  2  passed  H.R.  18707, defense  appropriations bill 
containing  initial  funds  for  deployment  of  ‘‘thin”  missile  system,  al- 
ready under construction.  (CR, 10/3/68,  S11951-79) 
0  Senate, after  secret  session, defeated by  vote  of  45  to  25  amendment by 
Sen.  John  S.  Cooper  (R-Ky.)  to  eliminate  from  $71.8-billion  defense 
appropriations  bill  the  $387.4  million  requested  by  Administration  to 
start  deployment  of  Sentinel  antiballistic  missile  system.  Final  action 
on   largest  defense  appropriations  bill  in  US. history  was  deferred. 
(CR,  10/2/68,  S11872-85;  AP, W  Star,  10/2/68,  A4;  Finney,  NYT, 
10 /3 /68 ,1 ;   Lardner, W Post, 10/5/68,1) 
0  NASA  said  spacecraft  and  parts  of  Agena  2nd  stage  of  Nimbus B  weather 
satellite  launched  unsuccessfully May  18, including  two  SNAP-19  nu- 
clear  power  generators,  had  been  found  Sept.  30  by  crew  of  research 
submarine  four  miles  south  of  San  Miguel  Island  off  California  coast. 
Pictures  taken  by  submarine  indicated  three- by  six-inch graphic  cores 
of  generators  were  intact;  surrounding  magnesium-thorium  alloy  cas- 
ings  were  almost completely decayed  since  they  dissolved  in   sea  water 
almost  immediately.  Each  core  contained  three  pounds  of  plutonium. 
AEC had  spent $200,000 searching  for missing nuclear  sources. Nimbus 
B  had  been  destroyed  shortly  after  launch  when  i t   veered  off  course. 
(NASA  Release  68-171;  Lannan,  W  Star,  10/4/68,  A16) 
Boeing Co.  said  i t   would  build  one-fifth size  thermal  models  of  manned 

242 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  3 

space stations  under  $156,500 NASA  contract to  determine  their  feasibil- 
ity  fo r   predicting  temperatures  in  full-size  earth-orbiting  station. 
(Boeing Release 5-9840) 
review  board  report  said  failure  of  Nimbus  B  mis- 
Oc tober   4:  NASA-USAF 
sion May  18 had  been  caused by  improper  installation  of  yaw-rate gyro 
90”  from  design  position  in  Thorad-Agena launch  vehicle.  Board  rec- 
ommended revision  of  test  procedures which  failed  to  discern error  and 
redesign  of  gyro  mounting  brackets  to  make  improper  installation  im- 
possible.  Repeat  mission,  Nimbus  B2,  would  be  launched  in  spring 
1969  because  of  flight’s importance  to  meteorological  research.  (NASA 
Release 68-171  ; UPI, H Chron ,  10/5/68) 
President  Johnson  signed  H.R.  17023  as  P.L.  90-550, 
Independent 
Offices  and  Dept.  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development Appropriations 
Act,  1969, which  included  NASA  appropriations  of  $3.995 billion.  Con- 
ference  report  on  bill  had  been  adopted  by  Senate  Sept.  25  and  by 
House Sept. 19.  ( P D ,  10/14/68,1484) 
A t   NASA  Pasadena  (Calif.)  Office  third  annual  awards  ceremony,  Dr. 
John  E.  Naugle,  NASA’s Associate Administrator  for  Space Science and 
Applications, said:  “During  the  next  few  years  . . . our  efforts  in  as- 
tronomical  observations, in   space  applications  and  in  planetary  explo- 
ration,  should  receive  priority.  . . . In  astronomy, perhaps  more  than 
in  any  other  scientific  discipline,  major  progress  has  been  achieved 
when  a  new  observing technique  is  used.  I n   the  next  several years  we 
will  provide  our  astronomers  with  such  new  observational  tools-tele- 
scopes and  detectors in  space  above the  absorbing  and  obscuring  effect 
of  the  earth‘s  atmosphere.  . . . we  envision  a  complementary program 
using  both  manned  and  automated  observational  platforms  leading  to 
permanent  observatories  in  space  in  the  next  10  to  15  years.  On  the 
other  hand,  OAO ,   OSO,  and  the  small  astronomy  satellite  will  carry  the 
burden  of  automated  observation,  while  the  Apollo  Telescope Mount 
provides  us with  early  experience in  the  contribution  man  can  make  in 
astronomy.  Before  very  many  years,  i t   should  be  possible  for  us   to 
move  into  astra-type  systems  in  which  we  combine  the  best  of  both 
techniques, i.e.,  long-term automated  instruments in  orbit  of  a  cost  and 
complexity  which  justify  their  being  serviced  and  maintained  by 
man.  . . . 
“Although  .  . . post  Apollo  plans  are much  more  modest  than  pre- 
viously announced, even at  these reduced levels,  it should be  possible  to 
carry  out  some  important  near-earth  and  extended  lunar  missions  fol- 
lowing the  Apollo  landings. However, there  remains no  clear  picture  a s  
to  the  future of  manned  space flight beyond  the use  of  the  launch vehi- 
goals of  manned  space flight must  await the  . . . next  administration.” 
cles  and  rockets  left  over  from  Apollo.  The  resolution  of  the  future 
(Text) 
NASA’s Os0  ZV spacecraft  (launched  Oct.  18,  1967)  had  obtained  valu- 
able  new  data  on  three-dimensional structure  of  sun’s  atmosphere, Leo 
Goldberg,  Robert  W.  No  yes,  William  H.  Parkinson,  Edmond  M. 
Reeves,  and  George  L.  Withbroe  of  Harvard  College  Observatory’s 
Solar  Satellite Project  reported  in Science. During  five weeks  of  experi- 
ment  operation-before 
electronic  failure  of  instrument  detection  sys- 
than  100  solar  flares were  recorded.  More  than  4,000  UV 
tem-more 
images  in  52  different  wavelengths  over  wide  range  of  temperatures 

243 

October  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

and  heights  in  solar  atmosphere were  obtained. Most  of  emission  lines 
represented  had  not  been  observed  before  with  spatial  resolution  on 
solar disk. 
New  instrument  was  being  prepared  for  flight  on  OS- 
in  1969, to 
have  twice  spatial  resolution  and  10  times  time  resolution  of  in- 
strument on Os0 I V .   (Science, 10/4/68,95-9) 
0  ComSatCorp,  on  behalf  of  INTELSAT,  awarded  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.  $72- 
million  contract  for  Intelsat  IV  advanced  comsats.  Hughes  would  de- 
liver  within  22  mo  four  flight  spacecraft,  one  prototype,  associated 
spacecraft  test  equipment,  and  necessary ground  equipment.  (ComSat- 
Corp Release 68-52;  W S J ,  1 0 /7 /6 8 , 3 )  
0  AFSC’S  Space  and  Missile  Systems  Organization  awarded  Philco-Ford 
Corp.’s  Space and  Re-Entry  Systems Div.  $7,805,000  fixed-price-incen- 
tive-fee contract  for  development, production,  and  launch  of  two  com- 
sats  for  NATO.  First  satellite would  be  launched  from  ETR  in  late  1969 
by  Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta  booster  into  20,000-mi-altitude syn- 
chronous  orbit.  Second  would  be  backup.  (AFSC  Release  145.68) 
Oc tober   5:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Thor-Agena D  booster  into  orbit  with  316-mi  (508.5-km)  apogee, 300- 
mi  (482.8-km)  perigee,  94.5-min  period,  and  74.9”  inclination.  (Pres 
Rpt  68) 
U.S.S.R.  successfully launched Molniya  1-10  to   relay  telephone  and  tele- 
graph  communications and  TV  programs  to  fa r  northern  and  fa r   east- 
ern  U.S.S.R.  and  to  central  Asia.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  39,639 
km  (24,630.5 mi) ; perigee;  429  km  (266.6  m i )  ; period,  711.9  min; 
and inclination, 64.8”.  (UP I ,   W S tar ,   10/7/68,  A9;  AP, NYT,  10/8/68, 
2 ;  GSFC  SSR ,  10/15/68) 
*  Republican  Presidential  candidate  Richard  M.  Nixon  issued  policy  state- 
ment,  “The  Research  Gap:  Crisis  in  American  Science  and  Technol- 
ogy’’:  U S .  was  “shortchanging”  its  scientific community  and  risking 
research  gap  between U S .   effort and  that  of  U.S.S.R.  “Faced  with  dy- 
namic  possibilities  for  science,  the  current  Administration  is  hobbled 
by 
technological  potentialities  are 
that 
the  static  philosophy 
limited.  . . . This  attitude  is  particularly  perilous  in  the  realm  of 
defense.  . . . In   few  areas  of  development  is  activity  so  intense  and 
productive  as  in  Soviet  military  research  and  development.”  While 
U.S.S.R.  graduated  twice as many scientists annually as US.,  American 
scientific community was  “demoralized”  by  wavering  attitudes  toward 
R&D.  “Scientific  activity  cannot  be  turned  on  and  off  like  a  faucet. The 
withdrawal  of  support  disperses  highly  trained  research  teams,  closes 
vital  facilities,  loses  spinoff  benefits,  and  disrupts  development 
momentum.  . . . The  United  States  must  end  this  depreciation  of  re- 
search  and  development  in  its  order  of  national  priorities.  . . . I t  
would be  an urgent  goal  of  my  administration  to devise effective means 
by which i t  could cooperate with industry  and the academic community 
in  an   effort to  make maximum  use  of  scientific advances to  help  solve 
major  national  problems.  . . . Our  goal  is  to  make  the  United  States 
first  again  in  the  crucial  area  of  research  and  development.”  (Text; 
Walsh, Science, 10/18/68,335-7) 
Oc tober   6 :   In   Washington  Sunday   S ta r   William  Hines  commented  on 
James  E.  Webb‘s  resignation  as  NASA  Administrator:  “Yes  . . . there 
was a  James Webb.  He had  his  faults,  God  knows,  and  a  peculiar  style. 

2444 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  6 

Most  people  would have  done  the  job  differently.  But,  on balance,  it  is 
difficult  to  see how  anyone could  have  done  it much  better.”  (W Star, 
10/6/68,  C4) 
Oc tober   7:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCXLV I   into  orb i t   with  3 1 7 - h  
(197-mi)  apogee,  145-km  (90.1-mi)  perigee,  89.1-min  period,  and 
65.3 O 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Oct.  12.  (InteraviaAirLetter, 
10 /8 /68 ,11 ;   GSFC SSR, 10/15/68) 
NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  issued  order  dissolving  Apollo  2 M  
Review  Board  established  Jan.  27,  1967,  to  investigate  accidental 
Apollo fire of  that date.  (Text) 
*  Resignation of  James  E.  Webb  as   NASA  Administrator,  announced  Sept. 
16, became  effective.  Deputy  Administrator, Dr.  Thomas 0. Paine,  as- 
sumed duties as  Acting Administrator.  (NASA  Off  of  Administrator;  Off 
of  Acting Administrator) 
I n  National  Ob se rve r ,  Peter  T.  Chew  criticized  Americans  as  “uncertain, 
timid  farers  in  space.”  During  “19-month  interregnum  in   manned 
space flight”  occasioned by  Jan.  27,  1967, Apollo  fire,  “Americans  have 
become  obsessed with  the  race  question a t   home  and  the  Vietnam Wai 
abroad.  . . . If  some  doomsayers  are  to  be  believed,  the  vast  U.S. 
space science and technology  establishment put  together  during the  la$% 
decade will  be systematically  dismantled once  the  manned Apollo  lanil- 
ing  has  been  accomplished because  NASA  has  ‘no  clear  mandate’  to   go 
sites  . . .; the  solar  system  will  become  the  exclusive  playground #of 
on;  cornfields  will  reclaim  the  great  rocket  and  spacecraft-testing 
Soviet cosmonauts.” Yet  NASA% mandate to  explore space “for the bene- 
fit  of  all  mankind”  had  been  set  down  in  legislation  establishing  the 
agency  and  did  not  end  with  the  moon.  If  anything,  “the  moon  is   the  
first  stepping  stone.”  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  “stands  almost  alone 
among the country’s  leaders  in   his  ability  to   express in  understandable 
terms just  why  we   are  going to  the moon-and  beyond.  . . . To critics 
of  the space program he  replies,  ‘Man was  born with  an   insatiable nosi- 
ness  about  his  natural  environment.  . . . i t   seems  to   pay  off  hand- 
somely,  but  often  in  the  most  unexpected  way,  to   keep  satisfying  h is  
curiosity about the world around him.”  (Na t l  Obs, 10/7/68) 
NASA  announced  i t   had  awarded  Technical  Information  Services  co .  
$4.3-million  cost-plus-award-fee contract  for  continued  operation  of 
NASA’s  Scientific  and  Technical  Information  Facility  a t   College  Park, 
Md.  Contract  would  extend  through  November  1969  with  two  one- 
year  options.  Current  contractor  was  Leasco  Systems  and  Research 
Corp.  (NASA  Release 68-173) 
Newsweek  said  NERVA  project  had  “become  one  more  casualty  of  cut- 
backs  in   the  space program.”  Workers a t   Nevada  test  site  “say  only  a 
skeleton  staff  will  be  left  on  the  project  by  spring.” 
(New sweek ,  
10/7/68) 
0  Sen.  Stuart  Symington  (D-Mo.)  said  on  Senate  floor:  “I  am  now 
confident  . . . serious  consideration  should be  given  to   canceling  the 
entire  A ir   Force  F-111  series.  . . . If  the  plane  is  fundamentally un- 
sound-and 
that  would  now  appear  to   be  the  case-its 
termination 
would  prevent  the  loss  of  additional  billions  of  dollars-and  what  is  
more  important,  save the  lives  of  many  pilots.”  He  said October  report 
o i  Preparedness  Investigating  Subcommittee  of  Senate  Committee  on 
Armed  Services “points  up  the  grave security deficiencies  that  have  re- 

245 

October  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

sulted from the Department of  Defense forcing  the Air  Force  and Navy 
to  put  all  the  eggs  of  their  aircraft  development  into  one  unfortunate 
basket.”  (Text; CR ,  10/7/68,  S12148-51;  Witkin, NYT ,   10/8/68,  18; 
W P o s t ,  10/8/68,  A l l )  
October  8:  Antennas  on  NASA’s  Exp lo re r   XxxvIII  (launched  July  4) 
were each  successfully extended to  750-ft maximum length  and  damper 
boom  to maximum 630 ft by  ground  command. Satellite’s antennas had 
been  initially  deployed  to  455  f t  each  July  22  and  extended  to  600-ft 
each  Sept. 24.  Maximum extension completed  planned  antenna  deploy- 
ment sequence.  (NASA  Release 68-174;  NASA  P ro j  Off)  
Senate  unanimously  approved  space  rescue  treaty,  providing  for  rescue 
and  return  of  astronauts downed on  foreign  soil.  It had  been  signed by 
’75 nations.  (CR ,  10/8/68,  S12215-6;  AP, B Sun, 10/9/68, A10) 
0  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  addressed Ninth  National  Conference of  United  Press  Interna- 
tional Editors  and  Publishers in Washington, D.C.:  “For  the  conception 
and  construction  of  the  equipment  necessary  to  the  safe  transport  of 
men  into  space  and  for  their  accomplishment of  productive  tasks  in 
that  new  atmosphere,  a  new  mix  of  professional  and  scientific  disci- 
plines  has  been  created  which  has  forced  cooperation  between  engi- 
neers  and  medical  doctors.  Many  of  the  technologies  which  are  essen- 
tial  to  our  sending three  men  to  the moon  and  back  did  not  exist  a  few 
years ago. They had  to be invented, adapted or developed.  . . . 
“We  now  have  the  giant  boosters  which  have  released man  from  his 
atmosphere,  and  . . . life  support  systems  that  can  maintain  him  in 
space. As  a  result  of  the  cleanliness requirements  of  the  space program 
we  have  the  largest  ‘clean  rooms’  in  the  world-rooms  which  hospitals 
are  now  emulating.  . . . Over  600 computers now  comprise the  largest 
and  most  advanced communications system in  the  world.  The fuel  cell, 
which had  lain  dormant  for  many  years, was  activated  to  power  space- 
craft  in  orbit.  Thirty  public  utility  companies now  have  a  $27,000,000 
program  for  the  adaptation  of  the  fuel  cell  for  home  power  units.  We 
had  to  know  on  a  real-time basis  how  fast  the  hearts  of  the  astronauts 
were  beating  while  they  were  in  space  . . . how  much  oxygen  they 
were  using,  and  how  their  muscles  were  responding  . . . so  we  in- 
vented  another  new  system,  biosensor  to  computer  to  data  gathering 
equipment,  and  through  communications  network  to  the  Manned 
Spacecraft Center  at  Houston-from  100  . . . or  800  . . . or  from 
of  a  million miles  out  in  space. And  a  half  a  dozen  newly  formed  com- 
panies  are  now  manufacturing  these  adapted  space-created instruments 
for  the use of  doctors and hospitals here on earth.” 
I n  conclusion Dr.  Mueller quoted  the  late  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  first 
Deputy  Administrator:  “None  of  us  knows  what  the  final  destiny  of 
i f   there  is  any  end  to  his  capacity  for  growth  and 
man  may  be-or 
adaptation. Wherever  this  venture  leads us,  we  in  the United  States a re  
travel where w e  will  in 
convinced  that  the power  to  leave the Earth-to 
space-and 
to  return  at  will-marks 
the  opening  of  a  brilliant  new 
state in man’s  evolution.”  (Text) 
0  Commenting  on  James  E.  Webb’s  retirement,  Sen.  John  Stennis  (D- 
Miss.)  said  on  Senate  floor,  “I  have been  a  member  of  the  Committee 
on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  since  about  the  time  Mr.  Webb 
was  appointed  to head  NASA.  I  am  not  given  unduly  to  praise  a  man.  I 

246 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
October  8 
am  not  impressed  by  a  title.  I  am   impressed  by  a  record.  But  I  am 
certainly  impressed with the  fact  that Mr.  Webb  carried  out his  respon- 
sibilities for  NASA  with  an  expenditure of  $34 billion,  in what  might  be 
called  a  crash program;  and  I  have not  seen any evidence of  any  activ- 
ity  of  his  except  that  clothed  in  the  highest  degree with  integrity,  hon- 
esty,  frankness  and  openness  in  his  dealings with  the  committee,  with 
Congress, a s  well  as with the public.”  ( C R ,  10/8/68,  9 2 2 2 7 - 8 )  
Dept.  of  State  said  it  would  issue  visas  t o   35  Soviet  space  scientists  to  
attend  19th  Congress  of  International  Astronautical  Federation  (IAF)  
in New  York Oct.  13-19.  However, it might recommend cancellation of 
sightseeing tour  of  KSC   arranged with  NASA  by  AIAA  for  scientists from 
34  countries  attending  both  IAF  Congress  and  AIAA  annual  meeting  in 
Philadelphia  Oct.  21-25.  No  Soviet  scientist  had  yet  visited  KSC,  “ap- 
parently  out  of  concern that  the  United  States would  ask  for  reciprocal 
rights  in  Russia  for  American scientists,”  said  N e w   Yo rk   T imes .   Rep. 
Paul G.  Rogers  (D -Ha . )  , in  letter to  Secretary of  State Dean Rusk, had 
said  visit  was  inappropriate  in  light  of  U.S.S.R.’s 
invasion  of  Czecho- 
slovakia, imprisonment  of  Pueblo  crew  by. North  Korea,  Soviet  aid  to 
North  Vietnam,  and  existence  of  Communist  regime  in  Cuba.  ( N Y T ,  
10/9/68) 
October  8-10:  NASA  held  conference a t   L ~ R C  on  progress  of  NASA  research 
on  noise  alleviation of  large  subsonic  jet  aircraft.  It  dealt  with  nacelle 
acoustic treatment  technology and  application, noise  generation  and  re- 
duction  at  source,  operational  considerations,  and  subjective  reaction. 
I n   introductory  remarks,  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for 
Aeronautics  Charles  W.  Harper  said  NASA  support  for  research  pro- 
grams  on  noise  had  risen  from  less  than  $1   million  per  year  to 
nearly $18 million  in  1968, most  of  which  was  used  to  obtain  industry 
support for program.  (NASA   SP-189) 
October  9:  Univ.  of  California  at  Los  Angeles  astronomer  Dr.  Kurt  Riegel 
and  graduate  student Mark  Jennings  reported  discovery of  cloud  of  in- 
tensely cold  interstellar  hydrogen  gas near  region  of  galaxy  where  star 
formation wa s   known  to  be  taking  place,  about  3,000 light  years  from 
earth  in  direction  of  Milky  Way.  Dr.  Riegel  said,  “The  implication  is 
that  the process of  star  formation may in  some way  depend  on  the cool- 
ing  of  the  gas  floating  around  between  the  stars.”  (Getze,  LA  T imes ,  
10/9/68) 
NASA  wa s   completing tests  for  USAF  Cambridge Research  Laboratories  in 
which  individual plastic hailstone models were  dropped  from 20,000- to 
25,000-ft altitudes  near  NASA  Wallops  Station  to  study  speed  a t   which 
hailstones fell  to  earth  and  its  effect  on  their  size  and  growth  rate  in 
atmosphere. Wind-tunnel tests  had  confirmed  that  size  and  weight  to 
which  naturally  formed  hailstones  would  grow  was  related  to  speed 
they  fell  and  thus  to  length  of  time  spent  in  storm  clouds.  Shape  and 
surface  roughness  affected  fall  speed by  changing  d rag   characteristics. 
Wallops  test  data  would  check  tunnel  results  and  would  be  applied  in 
predicting  growth of  real  hailstones.  (NASA   Release 68-172) 
October  10: Aerobee 150 MI  sounding  rocket  launched by  NASA  from  WSMR 
carried Naval  Research Laboratory  experiment to  109.2-mi (174.7-km) 
altitude  to  obtain  stellar  spectra  in  Scorpius in  1,000-1,600  A  fa r   UV 
range  and  photometric  data  on  stellar  fluxes.  Rocket  performed  satis- 
factorily.  Scientific objectives  were  not  achieved  because  attitude  con- 

247 

October  10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

trol  system  (ACS)   malfunctioned and vehicle failed to capture and point 
a t   desired  targets.  Experiment  performed  as  expected,  but  because  of 
ACS  malfunction no  film was  advanced by  spectrograph  or  aspect  cam- 
era.  Some photometric data  were  obtained by  Geiger  tube  photometers. 
(NASA  Rpt SRL) 
*  Australian  House  of  Representatives, by  60-30  vote,  defeated  opposition 
Labor  Pa r ty  motion  to  condemn  government  for  ordering  24   F-111C 
fighter-bombers from  U S .   Crashes, delays,  and  cost  increases had  led 
to major criticism  of  government. Deliveries of  aircraft were  18 mo  be- 
hind  schedule.  Latest  U S .   estimate  of  cost,  including  spares  and 
ground  equipment,  was  $294.63  million,  about  one-fourth  Australian 
defense budget for  1968-69.  There was no  ceiling price  on aircraft and 
no  way  Australia  could  cancel  contract  without  $200-million penalty. 
(AP, W Po s t ,   10/11/68,  A l l ;   N Y T ,   10/9/6&,  12 )  
*  NASA  announced  i t   had  requested  proposals  by  Nov.  18  for  two  experi- 
mental  turbofan  jet  engines  for  extensive test  program  [see  Aug.  181. 
Objective was  to  reduce  two major  sources of  noise-interaction 
of  jet 
exhaust with  outside a i r  and noise created by  fan-to  produce  turbofan 
demonstrator  engine  operational  at  noise level a t  least  15-20  d b  below 
those  powering  DC-8  and  Boeing  707  aircraft.  Specifications were de- 
veloped  a t   LeRC  with  assistance  on  contract  from  Allison  Div.  of  Gen- 
eral Motors Corp.  and  Pratt  & Whitney  Div.  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.; 
McDonnell Douglas Corp.  studied feasibility of  integrating  quiet  engine 
with DC-8. 
( ~ A S A  Release 68-175) 
*  Sen.  John  J.  Sparkman  (D-Ala.)  on  Senate  floor  said:  “President  John- 
son  is  properly  called  the  principal  architect  of  America’s  space  pro- 
gram.  As  Senator  and  Vice  President  he  worked  unceasingly to  assure 
this  country  a  role  of  leadership  in  the  exploration  of  space.  . . . 
Under  President  Johnson’s  leadership  in  the  Senate the  Space Act  was 
passed 
in  1958,  creating 
the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space 
Administration  . . . setting up  a  charter  to  win  for  this  country  a  pre- 
eminence  in  the  peaceful  exploration  of  space.  NASA  pulled  to- 
gether  widely  scattered  efforts  in  space  and  built  an  organization 
unique  in  this country’s  history.  It  has  contributed  to  the  technological 
competence so vital to modern industrial  society.”  (NASA  LAR   VII /108;  
C R ,   10/10/68,  S12423) 
FAA  published  report,  SRDS   Program  Goals,  Achievements  and  T rend s ,  
on  50 Systems Research  and  Development Service projects  undertaken 
in  FY  1968. Beacon  tracking  level  of  terminal  automation  would  pro- 
vide aircraft  identity,  altitude, and computed ground  speed on  a i r  traffic 
control radarscopes. Over  three  years,  automated radar  tracking  system 
ARTS  111  would  be  installed  a t   62  busiest  airports.  Computer-aided ap- 
proach  spacing  (CAAS)  system  would  give  more  consistent  spacing  of 
landing  aircraft.  R&D  eventually would  lead  to  Category I11  all-weather 
landing  systems  (AWLS )   a t   major  airports,  permitting  aircraft  to  land 
with zero ceiling and runway visual range.  (FAA  Release T-68-39) 
Oc tober   11:  Cosmos  C C X L V l l   was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  into  orbit  with 
343-km  (213.1-mi)  apogee,  215-km  (133.6-mi)  perigee,  89.9-min 
period,  and  65.4”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Oct.  19.  (GSFC  SSR, 
10/15/68;  10/31/68) 
U.S.S.R.’s  Zond  V  could  be  precursor  to  next  step  in  flying  complex  un- 
manned missions to Venus or  Mars a s  well  as to  carrying men  to moon, 

248 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
October  11 
RAND  Corp.  Scientist Merton  E.  Davies and  Cal Tech  scientist Bruce 6. 
Murray  wrote  in  Science.  Soviet  descriptions  of  Zond  V  suggested 
U.S.S.R.  might plan to  send pair  of  spacecraft to Mars  in  late February 
or  early  March.  One  might  land  on  Mars  and  cast  off  satellite to  orbit 
it  and  relay  signals  to  earth;  other  might  fly  by  Mars  and  return  to 
earth  with  film  of  Mars  surface.  Speculations were  based  on  Pravda 
and K ra snaya   Zvezda  (R ed  S t a r )   articles by  Soviet Prof.  A.  Dmitriyev, 
which said “information  from  space”  must be delivered  “directly to  the 
scientists’  laboratory”  free  of  “encumbrances  and  distortions  of  ra- 
dioed  signals.”  He  said  Zond   Y  had  successfully completed  assignment 
of  developing  means  and  methods  for  returning  space  devices.  Also, 
U.S.S.R.  had  previously  sent  pair  of  spacecraft  on  planetary  mission 
and  might  repeat  mission  to  take  advantage  of  favorable  Mars  or 
Venus  positions  for  flyby  or  landing  attempts.  (Sc ience ,   10/11/68, 
245-6;  Cohn, W Post, 10/11/68,  A9) 
President  Johnson  transmitted  NASA’s 15th,  16th,  and  17th  Semiannual 
Reports to  Congress covering July  1, 1966, to  Dec.  31,  1967. President 
wrote,  “I  commend these  reports  to  your  attention. They contain,  I be- 
lieve, concrete evidence that  NASA  is moving  forward,  and  that  America 
is  contributing  mightily  in  the  worldwide  effort  to  conquer  space  for 
the benefit of  all mankind.” 
I n   letter  accompanying  17th  report,  NASA  Administrator  James  E. 
Webb wrote,  “This  period  was  overshadowed by  the  Apollo  fire which 
took  the lives of  three  of  our  astronauts. The thorough  investigation of 
the  accident  and  the  steps  that  were  initiated  to  improve  safety  by 
changes in design and procedures have previously  been made matters of 
public  record.  This  report  shows that  the  same period  was  also  one  of 
progress  in  aeronautics  and  space  as  evidenced,  for  example,  by  the 
successful  flights  of  Surveyor,  Lunar  Orbiter,  and  many  other  space- 
craft.  I t   was  a  difficult  time  for  NASA,  but  one  in  which  the  agency 
showed,  I believe, that  it could  react maturely to  failure  a s  well  a s  suc- 
cess, and continue to  deserve the confidence and support of  the nation.” 
(Text; NASA  L A R  VII/III) 
Republican  Presidential  candidate  Richard  M.  Nixon  said  in  TV  pro- 
gram  to  viewers  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  Arkansas,  and  Oklahoma, Re- 
publican  administration  would  strive  to  make  U S .   “first  in  space.”  “I 
don’t  want  the  Soviet  Union  or  any  other  nation  to  be  ahead  of  the 
United  States.  . . . Let’s  emphasize the moon  shot and  others where we 
can make a direct break-through.”  (W S ta r ,  10/12/68,  A l )  
0  President  Johnson  vainly  urged  Senate ratification  of  nuclear  nonprolif- 
eration  treaty:  “If  the treaty  does not  go  into effect soon, an  increasing 
number of countries will  see  i t  in  their  national  interest  to  go  nuclear.” 
He  said  i f   Senate  found  i t   impossible to  remain  in  session  to  act  on 
ratification, he  might  call  special  session  after  election.  However,  after 
consulting with  President Johnson,  Senate Majority  Leader Mike Mans- 
field  (D-Mont.)  announced  he  was  laying  treaty  aside  for  this  session 
of  Congress because to call i t  up  during closing days would  result in “a 
devisive political  dispute” that  could  convert  i t   into  partisan  issue  and 
imperil  its  eventual  approval.  ( P D ,  10/14/68,  148181;  C R ,   10/11/68, 
S12685-90;  Finney,  N Y T ,   10/11/68,  1 2 ;   Kilpatrick,  W  Po s t ,  
10/12/68,  A14) 
NASA  task  force  appointed  by  Assistant  Administrator  for  University Af- 

249 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%8 
October  11 
fairs Francis B.  Smith announced publication of  A  S tudy   of  N A S A   Un i-  
ve r s i ty   Programs ,   containing  assessment of  programs  and  their  benefit 
to  NASA  and  academic  community.  NASA  university  programs  had 
“made  major  contributions  to  aeronautics  and  space  program.  Re- 
search  sponsored  . . . has  generated new  concepts, has  developed new 
technology, and  has created  unique  facilities for  further  education  and 
research.  Over  50  percent  of  all  experiments  flown  on  NASA  satellites 
have  been  generated  by  university  programs.  Universities  have 
awarded  a t   least 500  graduate degrees  and provided  continuing  educa- 
tion  opportunities to  thousands  . . . [and]  university consultants have 
given  policy,  scientific,  and  engineering  advice  to  NASA  a t   all  levels.” 
(Text;  NASA Release 68-177) 
NASA  had  asked its contractors  to cut  KSC   personnel 10% in  effort to  save 
$40 million by  July  1. Boeing Go.  had  already  announced plans  to  re- 
duce 4,400-man force  to  4,000.  Chrysler Corp.  would  keep  1,000 of  its 
1,200. Cutbacks were  due to   NASA  budget  cuts  and  affected  only  2%   of 
work force.  (NASA  PAO;   W S tar ,  10/11/68,  A3) 
Comparison  of  infrared  images  of  lunar  eclipses  of  Dec.  19, 1964,  and 
April  13,  1968, showed  thermal  anomalies  of  lunar  maria  unchanged 
after  3y2 yr,  Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Laboratories  researchers 
reported  in  Science.  Graham  R.  Hunt,  John  W.  Salisbury,  and  Robert 
K.  Vincent  wrote  that  hundreds  of  hot  spots  that  cooled  more  slowly 
than  surroundings were strikingly  similar  in  images from both  eclipses. 
One  new,  linear  thermal  anomaly had  been  discovered, whose  close  re- 
lation  to  lunar  crustal  fracture  line  suggested  i t   might  be  of  internal 
origin.  Origin  could  give  clue  to  formation  of  craters.  (Sc ience ,  
1 0 / 1 1 / 6 8 , 2 5 2 4 )  
Oc tober  11-22:  NASA’s A p o l b   7  (A!3-205),  first  manned mission  in  Apollo 
lunar  landing  program,  wa s   successfully  launched  from  KSC  Launch 
Complex 34 a t   11:02  am EDT by  Saturn  IB booster.  Primary  objectives 
were  to  demonstrate  command  and  service  module  (C SM )   and  crew 
performance;  demonstrate crew, space vehicle, and mission  support  fa- 
cilities ; and  demonstrate  CSM  rendezvous  capability.  All  launch  events 
occurred  a s   planned  and  spacecraft,  carrying  Astronauts  Walter  M. 
Schirra,  Jr.  (commander),  Donn  F.  Eisele  ( CM   pilot),  and  R.  Walter 
Cunningham  (LM   pilot) , entered initial orbit with  177.8-mi  (286.1-km) 
apogee,  138.2-mi  (222.4km)  perigee,  89.9-min period,  and  31.6’  incli- 
nation.  Saturn  IB   2nd  stage  (S-IVB)  manned  control  test  was  com- 
pleted  with  excellent results,  and  S-IVB  separated  from  CSM  on  sched- 
ule.  Crew  successfully  transposed  CSM  and  simulated  docking  by 
maneuvering  CSM  to  within  four  o r   five  feet  of  S-IVB. 
President  Johnson  sent  message  to  Apollo  7  crew:  “Everything  in 
the  Presidential  office  came  to  a  halt  a s   Foreign  Minister  Debr6  of 
France  and  I  watched  with  mounting  excitement  the  magnificent 
launch  of  the  Saturn.  . . .” Message was  relayed  from  Air Force  I as 
President  flew  from  Washington  to  visit  former  President  Harry  S. 
Truman. 
On  second day  Schirra told  ground  controllers crew was  too  busy  to 
set  up  portable  camera  for  live  TV  coverage  because  of  minor  but 
time-consuming difficulties. Astronauts had  to pump waste water manu- 
ally from spacecraft, Schirra and Eisele had  trouble with  their  biomedi- 
cal  harnesses,  Schirra  had  head  cold  symptoms,  spacecraft  evaporator 

250 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  11-22 

system  required  maintenance,  and  hatch  windows  blurred  and  were 
bordered  by  mysterious “small  hairs  like  fuzz.)’  Crew  fired  SPS  engine 
for  10  sec  and  8  sec  to  set  up   rendezvous  and  maneuvered  CSM  to  
within  70  f t   of  tumbling  spent  2nd  stage,  simulating  techniques  to  be 
used  on  future  flights  if  LM  were  to  become  disabled  in  lunar  orbit. 
Crew took close-up photos of  LM  adapter attached to  2nd  stage.  S-IVB 
reentered  earth’s  atmosphere  Oct.  18  and  splashed  into  Indian  Ocean. 
On  third  day  crew,  which  had  already  accomplished  half  its  objec- 
tives, photographed  clouds and  earth  and  continued  checking out space- 
craft  systems.  Power  failure  in  spacecraft’s  AC  electrical  system  was 
quickly restored,  but  overloading prompted  officials to  reschedule third 
SPS burn  20  h r  sooner than  planned.  Burn  positioned  and  sized  ellipse 
for  C M  reaction  control system deorbit  in  case  of  emergency and  set up 
auxiliary gaging  system test.  Astronauts,  all  with  head  colds,  appeared 
on national TV for 7 min  for  first  time live from space.  Crew  displayed 
hand-printed  signs  bearing  greetings  from  “the  lovely  Apollo  room 
high atop everything.” 
Second live telecast for  11 min  Oct.  15  showed closeups of  spacecraft 
interior  and  astronauts  so  clear  that  observers  could  read  astronauts’ 
lips. Third  TV  appearance Oct.  16, which  included nine-minute tour  of 
spacecraft, won  astronauts  honorary  membership  in  American  Federa- 
tion  of  Television  and  Radio  Artists.  Later,  crew  successfully fired  SPS 
engine  for  fourth  burn,  demonstrating  20,500-lb-thrust engine’s  mini- 
mum  impulse  capability.  As  spacecraft  passed  over  Hurricane  Gladys 
in  Gulf  Qf Mexico, astronauts  photographed  storm and  relayed  data  to 
Weather  Bureau  hurricane  center.  They  also  took  pictures  of  “long 
plume”  of  a i r  pollution.  Crew  continued  spacecraft checkout,  guidance 
and  navigation  procedures,  and  TV operations  on  seventh  day,  but 
fourth telecast was  smudgy.  Successful 67-sec fifth SPS  burn-longest 
to 
date-was 
performed  out  of  plane  to  test  auxiliary  gaging  system  and 
readjust ellipse for lifetime and CM  reaction control system deorbit. 
On  ninth day astronauts  showed  viewers exceptionally sharp pictures 
of  main  control  panels in  fifth TV broadcast  and  performed close-order 
drill  to  demonstrate  movement  in  weightless  environment.  Sixth  SPS 
burn,  essentially duplicate  of  fourth  minimum  impulse  test  burn,  was 
successfully conducted. Seventh burn,  on  following  day,  adjusted  time 
phasing  for  backup  SM 
reaction-control-system  deorbit  burns.  At 
259:39  GET  astronauts  fired  SPS engine for  eighth time,  to   deorbit  CSM 
for  reentry.  CM /SM   separation,  parachute  deployment,  and  other  reen- 
t ry   events  were  nominal,  and  spacecraft  splashed  down  in  Atlantic 
eight miles north  of  recovery ship U.S.S.  E s sex   at  7:11 am EDT  Oct.  22 
after  completing  163  revolutions.  Crew  was  picked  up  by  helicopter 
and  flown  to  recovery ship within  one hour  after  splashdown. 
All  primary  Apo l lo   7  mission  objectives were  achieved,  as  well  a s  
every detailed test objective and three  not originally planned.  Crew com- 
fort and  safety were  enhanced by  change in  cabin  atmosphere to  100% 
oxygen in  flight, hot meals, and relatively complete freedom of  motion in 
spacecraft.  Engineering  accomplishments included  live  TV  from  space 
and  drinking water  produced a s  by-product  of  fuel  cells. NASA’s A t s   I11 
applications technology satellite relayed TV pictures  to  Europe.  Service 
module  SPS  main  engine,  largest  thrust  engine  to  be  manually  thrust- 
vector  controlled,  proved  itself  by  accomplishing  longest  and  shortest 

251 

October  11-22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  11-22:  Bearded  Apollo  7  astronauts  emerge  f r om   recovery  helicopter  which 
carried  them  from  landing  point  to  deck  o f   U.S.S.  Essex  a f t e r  11  day s   in   o rb i t   on  first 
manned  mission  i n   Apollo  Program.  L e f t   to   right  are  Wa l te r   M .   Schirra,  J r .   (com- 
mand e r ) ,   Donn  F .   Eisele  (CM p i l o t ) ,   and  R .   Walter  Cunningham,  (LM  p i l o t )   4 .5  
million miles and  163  revolutions  a f t e r  launch. 

manned  SPS  burns,  and  largest  number  of  inflight  restarts.  Manual 
tracking,  navigation,  and  control  achievements  included  full  optical 
rendezvous, daylight platform  realignment, optical platform  alignments, 
pilot  control  of  launch  vehicle  attitude,  and  orbital  determination  by 
sextant  tracking  of  another  vehicle.  Mission  also  accomplished  first 
digital-sutopilot-controlled engine  burn  and  first  manned  S-band  com- 
munications. 
All  launch  vehicle  systems  performed  satisfactorily ; spacecraft  sys- 
tems  functioned with  some minor  anomalies, countered by  backup  sub- 
system,  change  in  procedures,  isolation,  or  careful  monitoring  so  that 
no  loss of  systems support resulted. 
Apo l lo   7  spacecraft  had  been  redesigned  for  safety.  Original  two- 
piece side hatch had been  replaced by  a  quick-opening, one-piece hatch. 
Flammability  within  C M  had  been  reduced  by  extensive materials  sub- 
stitution,  and  systems redundancy  had  been  expanded  to  reduce  single 
failure  points.  Saturn  IB  launch  vehicle  carried  less  telemetry  and  in- 
strumentation  equipment,  to  lower  weight  and  increase  payload  capa- 
bility.  New  propellant  lines  to  augmented  spark  igniter  had  been  in- 
stalled  in  J-2  engine  to  prevent  failure which  had  occurred  on  Apo l lo  
6. 

I 

252 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  11-22 

Earlier  unmanned  Apollo  flights  had  yielded  all  spacecraft  informa- 
tion  possible  without  crew  on  board.  Apollo  4  (launched  Nov.  9, 
1967)  and  Apollo  5  (launched Jan.  22,  1968)  had  both  been  highly 
successful, completing  inflight  tests  of  all  major  pieces  of  Apollo  hard- 
ware.  Apollo  6  (launched  April  e ) ,  despite  launch  vehicle  problems, 
had  attained  four  of  five primary  objectives and had  been  recovered  in  
excellent  condition.  Apollo  program  was  directed  by  NASA  Office  of 
Manned Space Flight;  MSC  was  responsible for Apollo  spacecraft devel- 
opment,  and  KSC   for   launch  operations.  Tracking  and  data  acquisition 
was  managed  by  GSFC  under  overall  direction  of  NASA  Office  of  Track- 
ing  and  Data  Acquisition.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; NASA  Releases  68-,168K, 
68-179;  MSC  Historical Off; W  Post,  10/12-23/68;  B Sun ,   10/12/68; 
10/23/68;  W S tar ,  10/13-19/68;  PI), 10/21/68,1492) 
Oc tober   12 :   Wash ing ton  Po s t   editorial  noted total  cost  of  space  program  to  
date  was  upwards  of  $20 billion:  “The  expenditure of  sums  of  money 
like  these  cannot  be  justified  in   terms  of  the  military  or   civilian  spin- 
off,  although both  have  been  substantial,  o r   of  the  knowledge we  have 
gained  about  the  atmosphere  surrounding  our  planet.  But  they  can  be 
justified  in   terms  of  the  national  prestige  that  is  to  be  won  or  lost  in  
space and of  the  inevitable fate of  man  to  pursue knowledge towards its 
ultimate  end  in  hope  of  some  day  achieving  a  better  understanding  of 
what  the  earth  and  universe  a re  all  about.  I t   is   in   this  latter  hope  that 
we  cheer  the  astronauts  on, wish  them  well  in  their  planned  163  orbits 
of  the  earth,  pray  for  their  safe  return,  and  urge  those  who  make  the 
crucial  decisions  about  the  future  space program  to  proceed  with  all 
deliberate  speed  to  reach  the  goal  President  Kennedy  put  before  us.” 
( W  P o s t ,  10/12/68,  A12) 
“NASA’s 10th  anniversary  was  celebrated  with  appropriate  fanfare,  but 
the  11th  anniversary  of  the  Space Age,  which  came  during  the  same 
week,  slipped  by  with  barely  a  nod  of  recognition,”  James J.  Haggerty, 
Jr . ,  charged in  Armed  Forces  Journal.  “I t   should have been  given  more 
attention.  The  U.S.  needs  a  continual  reminder  that  we  were  dragged 
kicking  and  screaming into space exploration,  that  the  U.S.  space  pro- 
gram was  born  only  out  of  reaction  to  the  accomplishments of  another 
nation.  . . . 
“The summary for  11 years  of  space launchings shows a  total  of  881 
launches  through  the  Oct.  4  anniversary  date.  About  400  of  all  the 
spacecraft launched still are  in  orbit. 
“The US .   enjoj-ed a  considerable quantitative  lead  a t   the  end  of  the 
11-year period.  It  sent  into  orbit  564  spacecraft,  or  64%  of  the  total, 
compared with 298 spacecraft, or 3376,  for the USSR.  . . . 
“Manned  flights, of  course, were  confined  to  the  U S .   and  the  USSR. 
Through the   anniversary date  the  U.S.  had  launched  1 4  flights  involv- 
ing  24  astronauts  and  1,993  man-hours;  the  USSR  had  made  nine 
flights with  12 cosmonauts piling up  532 man-hours.”  ( A F J ,  10/12/68, 
13) 
Oc tober   13 :  New  observations from  U.K.‘s  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental Sta- 
tion  indicated  distance  estimates  to  pulsars  had  been  30  times  too 
short.  Observations from  Australia’s  Molonglo  Radio  Observatory had 
identified pulsar  PSR  1749-28,  believed  to  be  three  times  more distant 
than  10  others  observed  to   date.  Despite great  distance,  i ts  pulses  were 
more  powerful  than  those  of  all  but  one  other.  From  these  observa- 

253 

October  13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

tions,  Jodrell’s  Dr.  Graham  Smith  believed  pulsars  lay  in  distant  halo, 
not in Milky Way.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,  10/13/68,74) 
October  13-19:  At  19th  Congress  of  IAF  in  New  York,  Dr.  Edward  C. 
Welsh,  NASC  Executive  Secretary,  read  message  from  Vice  President 
Hubert  H.  Humphrey, Chairman  of  NASC:  “We  take considerable  pride 
in  the  United  States with  the  generally  open  nature  of  our  space  pro- 
gram  and  in  the  manner  in which we  have  attempted  to  cooperate with 
other  nations  in  space participation  as  well  a s   in  the  dissemination  of 
facts  and  theories  gleaned  from  our  space  experience.  . . . man  has 
now  begun  to  make  the  space fa r  beyond  the  Earth’s  surface  a  part  of 
his  library  of  education  and  his  scope of  achievement. Now  more  than 
ever before  the  way  of  the  future  must  be  the  way  of  nations  working 
together  to  harness  the  forces of  nature  so  that  the  peaceful pursuits  of 
mankind may flourish.” 
Dr.  Welsh  said:  “I  would  place  high  on  the  list  of  benefits  those 
which  flow  from  increased  international  cooperation  in  the  field  of 
space.  . .  . stimulated  by  the  universal  desire  for  knowledge  [it]  has 
brought  somewhat closer together  the  peoples of  the world.  . . . a s  the 
practical  applications  of  space  become  more  evident  in  the  form  of 
weather  predictions,  communications, and  increased  knowledge  of  the 
world’s  limited  natural  resources,  additional  strength  is  added  to  the 
foundation  for peace.”  (Text) 
Daniel  and  Florence  Guggenheim  International  Astronautics  Award 
of  $1,000, made  annually  by  International  Academy  of  Astronautics  in 
recognition  of  outstanding  contribution  to  progress  of  space  research 
and  exploration  over  five-year  period,  was  presented  Oct.  18  a t   IAF 
Congress banquet  to  Dr.  Zdenek  Svestaka  of  Astronomical  Institute  of 
Czechoslovak Academy  of  Sciences. He  was  Chairman  of  Commission 
on Solar Activity  of  the  International  Astronomical Union.  (IAF   IAA  Re- 
lease 34;  AIAA  Release 10/13/68) 
Soviet  scientist  Prof.  Leonid  I.  Sedov  in  news  conference  said 
U.S.S.R.  was  not  in  race  to  moon  with  U S .   “The  question  of  sending 
astronauts  t o   the  moon  at  this  time  is  not  an   item  on  our  agenda.  The 
exploration  of  the  moon  is  possible,  but  it  is  not  a  priority.”  Prof. 
Sedov  said  Soviet  timetable  fo r   manned  expeditions would  depend  on 
next  series of  flight  tests using  Zond  rocket. Zond  Y  was  successful, he 
said,  “because  the  capsule  returned  safely,  which  was  the  purpose  of 
the  flight.”  Regarding  US-U.S.S.R. 
scientific  cooperation,  “its  suc- 
cessful  implementation i s   very  much  dependent  on  international  rela- 
tions.”  At  present,  he  said,  close  relations  did  not  exist.  ( N Y T ,  
10/15/68,48) 
Informal  meeting  of 
international  space  scientists,  organized  by 
Northwestern  Univ.  UFO  expert,  Dr.  J.  Allen  Hynek,  in   conjunction 
with  IAF  Congress, discussed advisability of  world cooperation  on  UFOs. 
Several  speakers urged  international  cooperation  such  a s  uniform  UFO 
report  forms,  but  it  was  agreed  that  no  action  should  be  taken  until 
after  appearance  of  Univ.  of  Colorado  report  expected  later  in  year. 
(Sullivan, N Y T ,  10/16/68,12) 
Dr.  Harold  Masursky,  US. Geological  Survey  astrogeologist,  re- 
ported  to  IAF  analysis  of  data  from  spacecraft  that  had  orbited  and 
crashed into  or landed  intact  on moon had  shown side facing  earth was 
largely  a  basin  similar  to  that  of  Pacific  Ocean.  I t   seemed  more  like 

254 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  13-19 

earth  than  had  been  previously  believed.  Lunar  interior  had  been  mol- 
ten.  Deep cracks in  its crust were lined with  craters where molten mate- 
rial  had  erupted  from  below.  Study of  remains  of  giant  crater  in  west- 
ern Texas had  shown features analogous to  lunar  craters  with  mountain 
in center.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,  10/19/68,19) 
October  14 :   NASA  successfully  launched  two  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets 
two  hours  apart  from  Point  Barrow, Alaska,  to  80-mi  (128.8-km)  alti- 
tudes.  Purpose  of  launches was  to  obtain  data  on  variation  of  tempera- 
ture,  pressure,  and  wind  profile  by  detonating  1 9  grenades  per  rocket 
a t   prescribed  times  and  recording  sound  arrivals  on  ground.  Data 
would be  compared with data  from  two  launches to  be  conducted  from 
Churchill Research Range Oct.  15. Rockets  and  instruments performed 
satisfactorily ; sound  arrivals  were  recorded  for  all  grenade  ejections. 
Good data were anticipated.  (NASA Rpts SRL) 
e  NASA  FY  1970 budget  request,  totaling  $4.698  billion,  was  submitted  to 
Bureau  of  the  Budget.  Subsequently, Acting  Administrator  Thomas  0. 
Paine  met  with  BOB  Director  Charles  J .   Zwick,  and  BOB   staff  members 
held budget hearings with NASA  officials. (NASA   Off  of  Admin) 
*  Special  committee  of  National  Academy  of  Sciences  had  nominated 
Duke  Univ.  biochemist  Dr.  Philip  Handler,  Chairman  of  National  Sci- 
ence  Foundation’s  National  Science  Board,  to  succeed  Dr.  Frederick 
Seitz as NAS  president. Election by mail ballot would be held  in  Decem- 
ber.  ( N Y T ,  10 /14 /68 ,33 )  
Barron’s  editorial  criticized  concentration  of  space  funding  on  manned 
lunar  program  rather  than  on  military:  “Congress  in  its  wisdom  al- 
ready  has  curtailed  funds  for  manned  flights after  the  lunar  landing- 
the  so-called Apollo Applications Program-and 
it  could  usefully wield 
an  even  sharper  axe.  The  money  might  fa r  better  go  toward  the  mili- 
tary  exploitation of  space, which, for  the past  seven  years, has  suffered 
from  dangerous  neglect.  Thus,  out  of  the  vast  sums  spent  on  space,  at 
possible  exception  of  the  Manndd  Orbital  Laboratory  . . . nearly 
most  one  dollar  in  six  has  had  a  ,military bearing.  I n   turn,  with  the 
every cent  of  the  so-called military  budget  has  gone  for  hardware with 
a  passive  or  defensive  aim,  notably  satellites for  reconnaissance, com- 
the  Soviet Union has  developed and  tested  . . . a  weapon  aptly known 
munications, navigation  and  weather  forecasting.  In  striking  contrast, 
as  Scrag,  which  can  hurl  a  guided  missile  carrying  a  nuclear  payload 
of  15 megatons or  =ore  into  a  partial  orbit  (hence, fractional)  round 
the  earth.  To  anyone  in  his  right  mind,  FOBS  constitutes a  gross  viola- 
tion  of  the  outer  space  treaty,  which  prohibits  the  placing  of  nuclear 
warheads  in  orbit.  However,  according  to  the  confused legal  eagles  in 
the  State Department and  Pentagon  (if  not  to  some future hapless pop- 
ulace  which  finds  itself  on  ground  ze ro ) ,   anything  less  than  a  full 
orbit goes.  . . . In   the  interest  of  survival, here  is  one balance the U S  
must  move  swiftly to  redress.  . . . The  first  duty  of  government  is  to 
protect  its people. Neither the Kennedy nor  the  Johnson  Administration 
has honored that trust.”  (Basron’s, 10/14/68,  15) 
Christian  Science Monitor  editorial  listed  purchases bought  by  $32.4 bil- 
lion  spent  on  national  space program  in  past  10 years:  manned-space- 
craft  program  that  should  put  men  on  the  moon  within  a  year;  un- 
manned-satellite program  of  234 major  launches;  stable  of  space rock- 
ets ranging  from workhorse Scout w i th   thrust  of  88,000 lb, to  Saturn V 

255 

October  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

with  7,500,000  lb   of  thrust;  facilities  a t   NASA’s 1 5   installations  worth 
over $2.5  billion;  staff  of  35,000 NASA  employees, including some of  the 
nation’s  top  scientists, physicists,  and  engineers;  industrial  work  force 
that  peaked  a t   more  than  400,000  (now  down  to  about  200,000); 
global tracking  network stretching around  the world  that  can  track,  re- 
ceive telemetry,  control,  and  communicate with vehicles as  f a r   away  as 
other  side  of  sun ;   aeronautics  program  largely  unpublicized but  con- 
stantly  growing;  advances in  technology  that  have  developed new  elec- 
tronic parts,  power  sources, alloys, adhesives, lubricants,  and  highly  re- 
liable hardware components. 
“This  is  just  a  bare-bones  receipt  for  the  American  tax  payers’  $32 
billion.  But  i t   represents an   investment that  is  already  producing  a  ci- 
vilian  ‘spinoff‘ of  incalculable value.’’  ( C R ,  10/14/68,  E9524) 
October  15:  NASA  launched  two  Nike-Cajun sounding  rockets  from  Church- 
ill  Research  Range  to  obtain  data  on  variation  of  temperature,  pres- 
sure,  and  wind  profile  by  detonating  19  grenades  per  rocket  at  pre- 
scribed times  and  recording  sound arrivals on  ground.  Rockets reached 
78.8-mi  (126.8-km)  and  77.8-mi  (123.5-km)  altitudes  and  performed 
nominally. Sound arrivals were recorded from  all grenades.  Data  would 
be  compared  with  data  from  Oct.  1 4  Point  Barrow,  Alaska,  launches. 
(NASA   Rpts  SRL) 
NASA  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Sta- 
tion  carried Univ.  of  Michigan payload  to  211-mi  (340-km)  altitude to  
investigate  role  of  quenching,  dissociative  recombination,  ionospheric 
decay, and nonthe‘rmal electrons on  airglow during decay period  imme- 
diately  following  sunset.  Rocket  and  instruments  performed  satisfac- 
torily;  peak  altitude  was  as  predicted,  and  570  sec  of  telemetry  was 
received. All  measuring  systems  functioned  properly  and  scientific  ob- 
jectives  were  met.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL )  
Dr.  Kurt  Debus,  Director  of  KSC ,   said  Saturn  IB  Launch  Complexes  34 
and  37 would be put  on  standby basis  until beginning  of  Apollo  Appli- 
cations  program  in  late  1970, with  reduction  of  1,315 personnel.  Shut- 
down,  forced by  space budget cuts, would  save NASA  $20 million.  Some 
10% of  2,400  contract  work  force would  be  affected, with  1,000 engi- 
neers  and  technicians  continuing  to  work  in  other  areas.  Complexes 
were t o  have been  maintained  in  event Saturn V  launch vehicle encoun- 
tered  serious development problems,  but  Dr.  Debus  said  this  insurance 
was  no  longer  needed.  ( K S C   Release  463-68;  AP,  B  Sun,  10/16/68, 
A7) 
0  U.K.  Minister  of  State  in  Ministry  of  Technology,  J.  P.  W.  Mallalieu, 
told  House of  Commons U.K.  would have  to  pay US. equivalent of  $60 
million  in  cancellation fees and  other  expenses connected with  termina- 
tion  of  its order  for  50 F-111  aircra€t Jan.  16, 1968. Order was  valued 
at  $650 million  but  this  would  have  risen  to  $1 billion  with  computa- 
tion of  spares and  10-yr interest.  ( V S J ,  10/15/68,  17) 
October  16:  Aerobee  150  MI  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from 
WSMR   carried  Lockheed  Missiles  &  Space  Co .   experiment  to  96.6-mi 
( 155-km)  altitude  to  obtain  quantitative  measurements  of  spectrum 
and  intensity  of  solar  x-ray flux  in 2- to  30-kev range,  determine distri- 
bution  on  sun,  and  observe galactic  x-ray  sources.  Rocket  and  instru- 
ments  performed  satisfactorily.  All  detection  systems  on  payload 
acquired  useful data. Communications, maintained with both  satellite x- 

256 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  16 

ray  monitor  and  ground-based  optical  observer,  indicated  sun  was  in 
nonflaring  state with  increasing  activity  on  west  limb.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
Ray  Cromley  commented  in   Wash ing ton  Da i ly   News: “It  is  one  of  the 
tragedies  of  the  moon  race  that  earth  satellite  programs  which  could 
revolutionize  certain  aspects  of  agriculture,  mineral  exploration,  TV 
broadcasting,  navigation,  weather  forecasting  and  flood  control  are 
being  squeezed unmercifully by   Apollo.  It  is  now  clear  that  these  un- 
publicized,  unromantic  programs  promise  unbelievably  large  payoffs. 
The US. return  . . . has been  conservatively estimated at $400 million 
to  $1  billion  for every $100 million invested after  feasibility  research  is 
completed.  The  investments could  be  private,  public  or  a  mixture  of 
both.”  (W  News, 10/16/68,31) 
U S .   and  Australia  signed  five-year  agreement  in  Canberra  to  expand 
scientific  cooperation  through  exchanges  of  scientists and  information, 
to  participate  in   joint  research  projects,  and  to  include  scientists  and 
institutions  from  other  countries  in  some  projects.  (Reuters,  NYT, 
10/17/68,14) 
0  MSFC issued  to   WAR’S  Rocketdyne Div.  two  contract  modifications to  ex- 
tend  engine  production  and  delivery. An  $8.4-million  supplement was 
awarded  for  extension  of  J-2  engine  production  through  April  30, 
1970,  because  of  overall  stretch-out  of  launch  vehicle  production. 
Under  extension,  J-2  engine  production  would  be  cut  from  three  en- 
gines  per  month  to  one.  Contract  for  F-1  engine  deliveries  was  ex- 
tended  through  June  1970  under  $4-million  modification  which  de- 
creased  F-l  production  rate  from  two  engines  per  month  to  one. 
( MSFC  Releases 68-246,68-247) 
October  17:  NASA’s A t s   ZV  applications  technology  satellite  reentered 
earth‘s  atmosphere  over  South  Atlantic  southwest  of  St.  Helena  island. 
Spacecraft, launched  Aug.  10, had  remained in  parking  orbit, tumbling 
uncontrollably,  when  Centaur  engines  failed  to  reignite  for  second 
burn.  (NASA  Release 68-188) 
NASA  issued  summary  of  combined  findings  of  Accident  Board  and  Re- 
view  Board  appointed  to  investigate May  6  accident  which  destroyed 
Lunar  Landing Research Vehicle  (LLRV )   a t  Ellington AFB.  Pilot,  Astro- 
naut  Neil A.  Armstrong,  had  to  eject  few  seconds  after  loss  of  helium 
pressure  in  propellant  tanks  caused  premature  shutdown  of  attitude 
control  rocket  system.  Helium  had  been  inadvertently  depleted  earlier 
than  usual  in  flight. Armstrong  incurred minor  injuries.  Review  Board, 
appointed by  theR  NASA  Deputy Administrator  Dr. Thomas 0. Paine  to 
study  accident’s possible  impact  on Apollo  program,  discovered no  un- 
favorable effects on  lunar  landing project,  particularly  lunar  module.  I t  
agreed  with  Accident  Investigation  Board  in  calling  for  improvements 
i n   design  and  operating  practices  in  LLRV  and  urged  more  stringent 
control  over  such  flying  programs  and  greater  attention  to  all  NASA 
lunar landing simulators.  (NASA  Release 68-182) 
0  Atmospheric scientists a t   JPL   and Ohio State Univ.  announced  successful 
high-altitude test  of  balloon-borne spectrometer to measure atmospheric 
radiation  emitted  in  four-micron  region.  Data,  obtained  on  flight  from 
National  Center  for  Atmospheric Research  and  Information  station  a t  
Palestine,  Tex.,  indicated  sunlight  reflected  from  earth  would  pose  no 
significant  obstacle  to  continuous  effective  operation  of  radiation  sen- 
sors  on  spacecra€t in  earth  orbit.  Researchers concluded satellite-borne 

257 

October  17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

instrument  could  probe  earth’s  lower  atmosphere  for  global  weather 
prediction. Test marked step  in NASA  program to  define experiments for 
manned  earth-orbiting missions in Apollo Applications program.  (NASA 
Release 68-176;  Pasadena Star-News, 10/17/68) 
October  17-18:  IAF  International  Institute  of  Space Law  held  XIth  Collo- 
quium  on  the  Law  of  Outer  Space  in  New  York.  Lawyers  and  jurists 
from  1 7  countries  presented  papers  on  Treaty  on  Outer  Space,  Treaty 
on  Rescue  and  Return  of  Astronauts  and  Space Objects,  telecommuni- 
cations by  satellites, and next  steps in  space law.  NASA  General Counsel, 
Dr. Paul G.  Dembling, presided.  (NASA  Hq Memo) 
October  1 8 :   RAM  C-11  radio  attenuation  measurement  mission  launched 
Aug.  22  was  adjudged  successful by  NASA.  Good-quality measurements 
of  electron  and  ion  concentrations  i n   flow  field  were  obtained  at  dis- 
crete locations along the spacecraft during  reentry.  (NASA  Proj Off) 
XB-70A,  flown  by  NASA  test  pilot  Fitzhugh  L.  Fulton,  Jr.,  successfully 
reached 52,000-ft altitude  and mach 2.18  in  flight from Edwards AFB  to 
evaluate  ILAF-exiter  vane  systems,  a i r   vehicle  performance,  and  han- 
dling qualities.  (XB-70 P ro j  Off)  
USAF  announced  lifting  of  three-week  ban  on  F-111A  flights  but  reim- 
posed  severe limits  on  speeds  and  maneuvers  in  force  before  halt.  Re- 
strictions would  be  lifted  following reinforcement  of  high-stress area  of 
wing  box  to  distribute  load  more  evenly.  Investigation  of  Aug.  27 
ground  fatigue  testing  failure  had  shown  i t   was  “due  to  an  isolated 
small  crack  induced  during  manufacturing  process  in  the  metal  sur- 
rounding  a  bolt  hole.”  No  other  such  imperfections had  been  found. 
USAF  said  Sept.  23   F-111A  accident  at  Nellis  AFB  had  occurred  when 
pilot lost control because  of  excessive rearward  shift  of  aircraft’s  center 
of  gravity  following  fuel  transfer  to  which  crew  had  given  inadequate 
attention.  (DOD   Release  947-68;  Witkin,  N Y T ,   10/19/68,  1 ;  B  Su n ,  
10 /19 /68 ,4 ;   AP, W   Post, 10/19/68,  A l l ;  W Star, 10/22/68,  A9) 
ComSatCorp reported  net  income  of  $5,054,000  (50 cents per  share)  for 
first  nine  months  of  1968.  Income  included  $1,750,000  (17  cents  per 
share)  for third quarter.  (ComSatCorp Release 68-56) 
0  NASA  announced  it  had  released  tracking  ship  USNS  Wa ter town   from 
priority  role  of  reentry  support  for  Apollo  missions,  thus  effecting  re- 
duction  in  operational  costs  required  by  budgetary  curtailments. 
Manned  Space Flight Network  land  stations  in   Pacific,  Apollo tracking 
ship Huntsville, and  Apollo  range  instrumentation  aircraft  would  serve 
returning  Apollo  spacecraft  landing  in  preselected  Pacific  area.  (NASA 
Release 68-181) 
0  Sen.  Gordon L.  Allott  (R-Colo.)  in  letter  to  Science  scored “Understand- 
ing  Gap”  between  scientific community and Congress and  taxpayers  on 
Federal  R&D  funding:  “We  are  limited  to  a  great  degree  by  revenue 
taken  in  by  the  Treasury  if   we   are  to  make  the  financing  of  our  na- 
tional  debt manageable. Within  our  admitted lack  of  expertise, coupled 
with  an  appalling  lack  of  national  goals  or  a  system  of  priorities,  I 
think we  do a  fair  job  of  spreading out  the  federal  dollar. We could do 
better,  though,  with  some  constructive help  from  the  scientific  commu- 
nity  from  an  objective and  realistic  appraisal  of  the  circumstances and 
of  existing  realities,  and  w e   could  benefit  from  the  establishment  of 
some  system,  either  a  Joint  Committee  o r   something  similar,  which 
would  view  research  on  an  overall basis,  which  would  review  national 

258 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
October  18 
goals and  aspirations and which might  . . . make  a  stab  a t  setting  up  
some  type  of  priority  list.”  U S .   “might  well  benefit  if   . . . the  scien- 
tific community would  become ‘involved,’  would d rop  the cloak of  mys- 
tery,  and take  the time to  explain, not  just  to  us in  Congress, but  to  Mr. 
Taxpayer  as  well,  just  what  it’s  all  about.” 
(Sc ience ,   10/18/68, 
2 1 4 4 )  
Oc tober   1 9 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCXLV I I I   into  orbit  with  543-km 
(337.4-mi)  apogee,  473-km  (293.9-mi)  perigee,  94.7-min  period,  and 
62.2 O  inclination.  (InteraviaAirLetter,  10/21/68,  6;  UPI,  W Po s t ,  
10/21/68,  A l l ;  GSFC  SSR, 10/31/68) 
USAF  test  pilot  Maj.  William  J.  Knight  was  named  1968 winner  of  Har- 
mon  International  Aviator’s  Trophy  as  “world’s  outstanding  pilot  fo r  
exceptional individual  piloting  performance.” He had  piloted X-15  No. 
2  to 4,520 mph Oct. 3, 1967. Maj. Knight held  both  command pilot  and 
USAF  astronaut’s  command  wings,  having  piloted  research  aircraft  to 
280,000-ft altitude.  ( N Y T ,  10/20/68,84;  CSM ,  10/21/68) 
Oc tober   2 0 :   Cosmos  CCXL IX   was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  into  orbit  with 
2,158-km  (1,340.9-mi)  apogee,  491-km  (305.1-mi)  perigee,  112.1-min 
period,  and  62.3”  inclination.  (AP, B  Sun, 10/21/68,  A4;  GSFC  S S R ,  
10/31/68) 
Oc tober   2 1 :  GSFC  used  ruby  laser  to  track  Explorer  X X X V I   (Geo s  11 )   sat- 
ellite  during  daylight,  a  significant  milestone in   development  of  laser 
satellite-tracking system.  (Cambridge Research Lab  PAO ; NASA  Release 
68-2  19 )  
ComSatCorp, on  behalf  of  INTELSAT  consortium,  signed  $72-million con- 
tract w i t h   Hughes Aircraft  Co.  fo r  construction  of  Intelsat  IV  series  of 
advanced  comsats-four  spacecraft  and  one  prototype,  with  test  and 
ground equipment.  (ComSatCorp Release 68-57) 
0  Richard  Witkin  in  New  Yo rk   T imes   quoted  “reliable  sources”  a s   saying 
Assistant Secretary  of  Defense  f o r  Systems Analysis, Dr.  Alain  C.  Ent- 
hoven,  had  forwarded  paper  to  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  Paul  H. 
Nitze  proposing  further  cuts  in  F-111  production,  including  cancella- 
tion  of  interim  bomber  version,  Dr.  Enthoven,  specialist  in   calculating 
cost  effectiveness of  competing  weapons  systems,  claimed  many  pro- 
jected  F-111  missions  could  be  performed  by   much  cheaper  aircraft 
( N Y T ,   10/21/68,  25;  Business 
such  a s   Ling-Temco-Vought A-7. 
Week ,  10/26/68) 
October  21 -23 :   Tenth  Rational  Trendex  Poll  sponsored by  Thiokol  Chemi- 
cal  Corp.  reported  public  support  for  space  program  was  17%  higher 
than in 1967. Taken after  successful ApoElo  7 mission, it showed 68% of 
US. public  favored  Apollo  program  to  land  man  on  moon  by  1970, 
21%  did  not,  and  11% was  undecided  (in  September 1967 poll, Apollo 
had  51% support, with  35%  opposed  and  14%  undecided).  Public de- 
sire fo r  increased Government spending on space was a t  its highest point 
in  five years,  with  18% in  favor,  a s  against  7%  in  1967. Support  for 
program was highest among college-educated, those under 35, and men; 
49%  favored manned  space  exploration,  versus  25%  for  instrumented 
program;  60%  backed  planetary  exploration,  with  30%  opposed.  Fa- 
vored  programs  after  Apollo  were:  ( 1 )   reusable  space  system,  ( 2 )  
lunar  exploration,  (3) manned  space stations,  ( 4 )   manned Mars explo- 
ration.  (CR,  1/6/69,  E 6 M ;   SBD ,   12/16/68,  197-8) 
Oc tober  21 -25 :   At  Fifth Annual Meeting  and Technical Display of  AIM in 

259 

October  21-25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  19:  T e s t   p i lo t   Ma j .   W i l l iam  .I. Kncght  (USAF) was  named  wznner  of  Harmon 
International  Aviator’s  t rophy .   I n   photo,  he  inspects  connection  between  external  tank 
and  rocket-powered  X-15  N o .   2 ,   which  he  f lew   to  record  4,520  mph  O c t .   3,  1967.  Two 
tanks  supplied  additional  engine  propellant  f o r  increased  speed .   O n   Oc t .   24,  1968,  NASA 
te s t   pilot  William H .  Dana  took  X-15  N o .   1  on   last  f l igh t   of  research  program. 

Philadelphia,  Boeing  Co.  Vice  President  John  M.  Swihart  announced 
abandonment of  swing-wing design fo r   SST  in  favor  of  fixed-delta-wing 
aircraft with  four  independently mounted  engines under  triangular  tail. 
Final  detailed design would  be  given to  FAA by  Jan.  15,  1969, deadline. 
New  design  differed  from  delta-winged  Anglo-French  Concorde  and 
Soviet Tu-144 in wider wing span and horizontal tail which, according to 
Boeing Vice  President  in  charge  of  SST  H.  W.  Withington,  made  pos- 
sible superior  control a t  low  speeds  and  compensated for  more  drag  en- 
countered with sweep-back angle  of  wing.  Aircraft  cost  would  be  same 
as swing-wing, $40 million.  I t  would  carry  same number  of  passengers, 
280  o r   more,  at  same  maximum  speed,  1,800  mph.  (Witkin,  N Y T ,  
10 /22 /68 ,   77;  UPI,  W Po s t ,   10 /22 /68 ,   A l l ;   AP,  W  S ta r ,   10/22/68, 
A3 1 
Dr.  William H.  Pickering,  JPL  Director,  received  $5,000  AIAA Louis 
W.  Hill  Space Transportation Award  “for  devising, developing  and  su- 
pervising significant space and satellite programs  fo r  military  and civil- 
ian  agencies of  the  United  States Government.”  ARC Director  H.  Julian 
Allen  was named  Honorary  Fellow  of AIM, highest membership award 
given by  Institute.  I t  was  presented annually  to  two  Americans and  one 
foreign  national.  Other  1968  recipients  were  James  S.  McDonnell , 

260 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  21-25 

Chairman  of  Board,  McDonnell  Douglas  Gorp.,  and  England’s  S i r  
Frank  Whittle,  often  called  father  of  jet  engine.  (AIAA  Releases;  ARC 
Release 68-15  ; ARC  A s t rog ram )  
Oc tober  22 :   DOD Systems Analysis Office  cost-effectiveness proposal  submit- 
ted  to  Secretary  of  Defense  Clark  M.  Clifford  called  for  elimina- 
tion  from  budget  of  new  nuclear  submarines  requested  by  Adm. 
Hyman Rickover, reduction  in  funds  already  approved  for  purchase  of 
antisubmarine  weapons, and  retirement  of  more than  20  diesel-powered 
submarines,  said  George C.  Wilson  in  Wash ing ton  Po s t .   Proposal,  ac- 
cording  to  sources, was  to  postpone  high-speed  submarine  and  cancel 
development  of  “quiet”  one.  Its  severity  “illustrates  the  money  pinch 
the  Pentagon  finds itself  in a s  i t  tries to cut billions from its  fiscal 1969 
budget as well  as the  new  budget.”  ( W  Pos t ,   10/22/68,  A10) 
October  23 :   USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Thor-Burner  I1  booster  into  orbit  with  529-mi  (838.3-km)  apogee, 
497-mi  (799.8-km)  perigee,  101.3-min period,  and  99.0”  inclination. 
(P r e s  Rp t  68) 
NASA  successfully  deployed  40-ft-dia parachute  with  predicted  10-lb-per- 
cubic-ft dynamic pressure at mach  3.5.  Parachute was  ejected from five- 
foot-long  canister  which  had  been  propelled  to   33-mi  altitude  by 
three-stage rocket  launched from  WSMR.  Test was  to  determine  possible 
use  of  parachute  for  aerodynamic  deceleration  in  planetary  entry  mis- 
sions.  Another  test  in   Project  SHAPE  (Supersonic High  Altitude  Para- 
chute  Experiments)  wa s   scheduled  for  November.  ( NASA  Release 
68-185;  AP, NYT,  10/27/68,66) 
A t s   ZV  mission  (launched  Aug.  10  and  reentered  Oct.  17 )   was  ad- 
judged  a  failure  by  NASA.  Satellite  had  remained  in  elliptical  parking 
orbit  instead  of  entering  planned  synchronous orbit  when  Centaur  en- 
gines failed t o   reignite for second burn. Resulting highly  elliptical orbit 
precluded meaningful return  of  gravity gradient data.  Day-night camera 
operated, but  attitude dynamics precluded reception other than  smeared 
unintelligible  pictures.  Electrical  operation  of  ion  engines,  microwave 
multiple access,  and  microwave  wide  band  was  verified.  Boom  camera 
returned good photos, including some of  earth.  (NASA   P ro j  Off) 
*  NASA’s H G l O   lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld  R.  Gentry 
(USAF)  , failed  to  climb  to  desired  45,000-ft  altitude  after  air-launch 
from  B-52  aircraft,  apparently  because  of  rocket  engine  malfunction. 
Vehicle  glided  to  smooth  225-mph  emergency  landing  on  Rosamond 
Dry  Lake.  Fliglit  from  Edwards  AFB  was  to  have  been  HL-lo’s 
first 
powered flight.  (NASA  P ro j  Off; L A  T ime s ,  10/24/68) 
Apollo  7 editorial comment: 
Washington  P o s t :   “. . . a s   the  men  i n   the  space  program  go  over 
the  data  on  Apollo  7  and  consider  the  alternatives  of  manned  or  un- 
manned  flight  on  Apollo 8, they  must  not  allow anyone’s desire  to beat 
the Russians, or  to  get  around  the  moon  by  the  end  of  1968, or  to  f an  
public interest  in  the  future of  space exploration to  enter  into  their  cal- 
culations.  Only  if  they  are  convinced  that  ou r   knowledge  is  sufficient, 
our  spacecraft  is  totally  adequate,  and  our  men  a re   ready  should  they 
give  the  go  to  Astronauts Borman,  Love11  and  Anders  for  a  Christmas 
t r ip  into space.” ( W  Po s t ,  10/23/68,  A24) 
Washington Evening  S tar:   “To  those  who  have  made  a  close  study 
of  the  space  program,  [Walter  M.]  Schirra  is  the  astronaut’s  astro- 

261 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
October  23 
naut;  the  man  whose  ability  stands  out  in that  company  of  the  super- 
able. To those in  the know, Schirra  is the mischievous perfectionist, the 
naval officer who  lives by  the  book when  he  isn’t  too  busy  carrying  out 
an   elaborate  practical  joke.  But  Schirra  w i l l   surely  be  remembered by  
the  public  as  the  astronaut  who  caught  cold,  who  growled  when  the 
alarm clock rang,  and who  blew  up when  he was  pushed too  far.  And  it 
may be that  Schirra’s  greatest contribution  to  the  space program  is that 
he, the most superlative of  the  supermen, forcefully demonstrated to  the 
(W   Star, 
world  that  his  is  completely  and  refreshingly  human.” 
10/23/68,  A20) 
Baltimore  Sun:  “The  toting  up  and  analysis  of  all  the  information 
brought  home  this  time  must  be  left  to  the  teams  of  experts.  So  must 
the  decisions  as  to  what  comes next,  and  the  planning  such  decisions 
call  for.  The  public  is  content  to  know  that  three  men  in  a  spaceship 
have  added  another  brave  and  brilliant  chapter  to  a  history  of  which 
all of  u s  are unreservedly proud.”  ( B  Sun, 10/23/68,  A6) 
MSFC   issued  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.  $2,395,955-supplemental-contract 
agreement  for  qualification  test  program  to  verify  capability  of  main- 
taining  S-IVB  stage  auxiliary-propulsion-system modules  for  up   to  90  
days with  propellants  loaded. Award  brought  total  value of  contract  to 
$965,568,493.  ( MSFC  Release 68-252) 
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory  dedicated  multipurpose  astro- 
nomical  station  a t   Mount  Hopkins,  Ariz.  Station,  supported  by  NASA 
Office  of  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition  and  Office  of  Advanced  Re- 
search  and  Technology, would  b e   site  of  experimental series  on   laser 
communications t o  be  conducted by  NASA  and  Smithsonian.  (Smithson- 
ian  PAO) 
October  24 :   X-15  No.  1, flown  from  Edwards  AFB  by  NASA  test  pilot Wil- 
liam  H.  Dana,  successfully reached  255,000-ft altitude  and  3,682  mph 
(mach 5.04)  in  199th and  last  flight  of  program.  Purpose  was  to  con- 
duct  WTR   experiment and  check out  fixed  alpha  cone  and  fluidic  probe. 
Flight  scheduled  for  Dec.  20  was  later  canceled  because  of  adverse 
weather.  I t  was  not  rescheduled because  NASA  announced completion of 
program  [see  Jan.  2 1   and  Dec.  201.  (X-15  P ro j   Off; NASA  Release 
68-221;  AP,  W Po s t ,   10/25/68;  SBD ,   10/29/68,  289) 
Boosted  Arcas  I1  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Kiruna, 
Sweden, oarried Uppsala  (Sweden)  Ionospheric Observatory payload to 
65.2-mi  (104.3-km)  altitude.  Objectives were  to  measure  electron  den- 
sity  profile,  distribution  of  positive  and  negative  ions  and  secondary  x- 
rays  in D region and lower E  region  of  ionosphere during  auroral  glow, 
quiet  arc,  and violent  and  pulsating  auroral conditions and  to  study  its 
effects on  radio  wave propagation.  Rocket was  launched  in  conjunction 
with three  others. Rocket performance was  12% below  predicted.  Exper- 
imental results were successful.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
0  NASA  was  negotiating with  General  Electric Co.  for  data management  sys- 
tem costing in  excess of  $750,000 for  15 mo.  It would be used  to  moni- 
tor  data  from  Barbados  Oceanographic  Meteorological  Experiment 
(BOMEX )  , in  which  NASA  would  assist ESSA  during  1969. Data  from sat- 
ellites, five to  seven ships, many buoys, and  from high  in atmosphere to 
bottom of  ocean would  be processed by  system.  (NASA  Release 68-251) 
Rep.  Alphonzo  Bell  ( R-Calif. )  told  American  Astronautical  Society 
meeting  in  Los  Angeles:  “In  evaluating  space  spending  as  a  budget 

262 

@ 

October  24 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
priority,  it  is  vital  to  consider  the  relationship  of  space  to  defense. 
. . . Both  Russia  and  the  United  States have  advance  surveillance ca- 
pacity.  . . . As  long a s  the  threat  of  nuclear war  from  any  source con- 
tinues, Russia and the United States will  be producing ever more sophis- 
ticated  orbital  ‘spies in  the  skies’.  . . . That  is why  the  space  program 
of  the  United  States never  is going  to  be  abandoned.  It  will  always  be 
high  on  the  list  of  spending priorities.  The  reason  is  not  charming,  but 
basic.  We  need  to  be  in  space  to  protect  ourselves.  . . . In   the  some- 
what  more  distant  future the  harvest  of  human  rewards  . . . now  only 
beginning  . . . w i l l   prove  that  space  research  and  space  applications 
justify a continuing high priority.”  (Text;  Aero  Da i ly ,  10/29/68) 
Oc tober  25:  Soyuz   I1 was  successfully launched by  U.S.S.R.  into  orbit  with 
229-km  (142.3  mi)  apogee,  191-km  (118.7-mi)  perigee,  88.6-min  pe- 
riod,  and  51.7’  inclination.  Satellite later  was  used  in  rendezvous ma- 
neuvers with manned Soyuz 111  [See Oct. 26-30]  and reentered Oct.  28. 
(Lannan,  W  S ta r ,   1G/27/68,  A l ;   SBD ,   10/28/68,  279;  GSFC SSR ,  
10/31/68) 
Secretary  of  Defense  Clark  M.  Clifford  announced  decision  to  proceed 
with  program  for  turbine  electrical  drive  (quiet)  submarine.  He  had 
ordered  construction  of  high-speed nuclear-propelled attack  submarine 
July  1.  “The  close  re-examination  , . . just  completed  has  convinced 
me  that costly as i t  is  [$150 to  $200 million compared with $78 million 
for  new  Sturgeon class nuclear  attack  submarine],  there  is  no  cheaper 
and  effective  way  to  achieve  in  equal  time  desired  progress  in  noise 
s ~ p p r e ~ s i o n . ”  (DOD  Release  971-68) 
NASA  announced  that  H.  Julian  Allen,  who  joined  NACA  in  1936, would 
retire  as  Director  of  Ames  Research  Center  Nov.  15.  ARC  Associate 
Director  John  F.  Parsons  would  serve  as  Acting  Director.  Leading  au- 
thority  on  supersonic  and  hypersonic  wind-tunnel  design,  Allen  had 
originated  concept  of  bluntness  for  reentry  shapes-as 
used  in  Apollo 
spacecraft-and 
had  received  NACA’S  Distinguished  Service  Medal, 
NASA  medal  for  Exceptional  Scientific Achievement, AIAA  Sylvanus  A. 
Reed Award, and Air  Force Assn.’s  Air Power Trophy. After his  retire- 
ment  Allen  would  be  available  to  NASA  as  a  consultant.  (NASA  Release 
68-183;  S BD ,  10 /28 /68 ,272 ;   NASA  Ann) 
New  Yo rk   T imes   editorial  commented  on  failure  of  swing-wing design 
for SST: “More than ever now  the burden  of  proof  is  on those who  urge 
that billions of  taxpayers’ dollars be  spent on  an American SST.  The fal- 
libility  of  their  judgment  has  been  demonstrated  in  the  loss  of  the 
swing-wing  gamble.  I s   there  reason  to   suppose  that  their  optimistic 
forecasts  about  the  profits  to  be  made  from  such  an   airplane  are  any 
sounder?  The  aerodynamics of  different wing  configurations  is  not  the 
only  thing  that  needs  to  be  assessed  in  the  current  re-examination  of 
the SST.”  ( N Y T ,  10/25/68,46) 
In  Washington  Evening  Star  Carl T.  Rowan wrote:  “Some  disenchanted 
Americans shake  their  heads  a s  they  note  the  poverty,  the  hunger,  the 
sickness, the  ignorance  that  plague the  earthlings  about  them,  and  they 
ask what  logic  provokes  our  government to  ignore  critical  problems  a t  
hand  while  investing  vast  sums  in  space  ventures  of  doubtful  value. 
. . . we  have  become  an  ‘either/or’  society.  . . . Even  though  our  gross 
national  product  is  now  running  at  a  fantastic  level  of  $871  billion  a 
year,  it is  absolutely inconceivable to  most  taxpayers  that  we  can  have 

@ 

263 

@ 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
October  25 
guns  and butter,  space spectaculars and  dramatic  domestic change. . . . 
we  are  wrong  to  search  the  darkest  reaches  of  outer  space.  . . . Who 
Well,  no  man  of  vision,  imagination,  or  hope  can  possibly  believe  that 
can  say that  contributions  to medicine, to weather control,  to  science in 
general,  to  the  problems  of  feeding  man,  to  national  defense, and  ulti- 
mately  to  peace  may  flow  from  the  space  program?”  Space  program 
was  “inherently  and  intrinsically,  justification  enough  for  spending 
$340 fo r  every man, woman,  and child  in America. But  are we  not wise 
to  ask:  what  is  man  profited  if  he  harness  the  universe  and  yet  fail  to 
conquer  the  meanness  . . . the  hatreds,  that  dog  those who  inhabit  the 
earth?  . . . Much  of  the  public  is  not  in   a  mood  to   finance  anything 
else.  So  we  shall  be  stuck  with  the  ordeal  of  setting  priorities  where 
there  is  scant  room  for  making  choices.”  (W   S ta r ,   10/25/68,  A15)  
MSFC   announced  Boeing  Co.  contract  modifications  totaling  $4,652,364 
for  Saturn  V  R&D,  to:  install  over  4,000  instrumentation  and  data 
acquisition  systems in  special 2nd  stage structural  test  verification  pro- 
gram  to  confirm  design  of  lighter  weight,  more  powerful  2nd  stage 
for  fourth Apollo/Saturn  V  and  subsequent vehicles; perform  an  abort 
and  alternate mission  analysis  for  Apollo/Saturn  vehicles  503  through 
510;  and  perform  reliability,  quality,  and  component qualification pro- 
gram,  special  prelaunch  analysis,  telemetry  systems,  and  Saturn  V/ 
Apollo  operations system safety program.  Total value  of  Boeing Saturn 
V  systems engineering  and  integration  contract  was  now  $213,443,238. 
( MSFC  Release 68-253) 
@  USAF’S  Space and  Missile  Systems Organization  announced  award  of  ini- 
tial  increments to  cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts  with  McDonnell Douglas 
Corp. : $5-million increment  was  awarded  to  $9,829,177  contract  for 
reentry  vehicle  developmental  flight  tests ; $756,285  increment  was 
awarded to  $1,739,105 contract  for  reentry  vehicle environmental com- 
ponents tests.  ( DOD Release 974-68) 
Edward  J.  Schmidt,  Special  Assistant  to  General  Electric  Co.’s  Vice 
President  for  R&D,  was  sworn  in  by  NASA  Acting  Administrator,  Dr. 
Thomas  0. Paine,  as  consultant  to  the  Administrator  in  management 
operations  as  affected  by  scientific  and  technical  information.  (NASA 
Release 68-189) 
October 26 :   Business  Week  editorial:  “.  . . since the  tragedy  on   the  launch 
pad  . . . [Tan.  27,  19671 NASA  and  its  thousands  of  supporting  compa- 
nies  have  done  a  tremendous  job  in  rebuilding  the  spacecraft  and  in 
perfecting  the  safety  and  reliability  of  the  entire  Apollo  system.  The 
clear  message  of  Apollo  7  is  that  NASA  now  has  a  spacecraft  that  can 
take men  to  the moon  and  back  safely. This  is  a  triumph  for  NASA  and 
for U S .  science, engineering, and management.  ( B u s  Wk, 10/26/68) 
October  26-30:  U.S.S.R.  successfully launched Soyuz  ZZZ, carrying  Cosmo- 
naut  Georgy T.  Beregovoy,  from  Baikonur  Cosmodrome with  “a  pow- 
erful  rocket-booster,”  Tass  announced.  Spacecraft  entered  orbit  “close 
to  the preset  one,”  with  205-km  ( 1 2 7 . 4 4   apogee, 183-km (113.7-mi) 
perigee,  88.3-min  period,  and  51.7O  inclination;  all  equipment  was 
functioning  normally.  Launch  was  first  manned  Soviet  mission  since 
Soyuz Z (April 23-24,  1967) , in which Cosmonaut Vladimir M.  Koma- 
rov was killed when  spacecraft crashlanded following reentry. 
Tass  later  announced  that  during  first  revolution  Soyuz  ZZZ  “ap- 
proached’’  to  within  200 m  (656 f t )   of  unmanned  Soyuz  ZZ (launched 

@ 

264 

October  26-30 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
Oct.  25) , initially  by  “an  automatic  system”;  subsequent  operations 
were performed manually by Beregovoy. On Oct. 27,  Tass said,  Berego- 
voy  ‘‘independently  oriented  the  ship  in  space  and  switched  on  the 
motor,”  to  alter  spacecraft‘s  orbit;  continued  conducting  scientific, 
technical,  medical,  and  biological  experiments and  research;  transmit- 
ted TV  pictures  of  cabin  interior;  and  approached Soyuz  I I   for  second 
time before  it reentered  Oct.  28.  Soyuz  I I I   remained  in  orbit  until  Oct. 
30,  completing 94  hrs  5 1  min  and  64 orbits, before  i t  softlanded  “with 
the use of  aerodynamics,”  in  a  preset  area  in Soviet territory.  (Lannan, 
W Star,  10/27/68,  A1 ; O’Toole,  l?’ 
Po s t ,   10/27/68,  A1 ; Kamm, N Y T ,  
10/27/68;  SBD,  10/28/68,  279;  10/31/68,  297;  AP,  W  Po s t ,  
10/28/68,  A I ;   GSFC SSR ,  10/31/68) 
Oc tober   27:  Lightweight plastic  foam  invented  by  ARC  scientists Dr.  John 
A.  Parker  and  Salvatore  Riccitiello showed  promise  for  industrial  fire 
protection, particularly  fuel fires. Extremely light polyurethane with  ad- 
ditives  formed  tough,  protective  char  layer  when  exposed  to  flame, 
while  simultaneously releasing  fire-extinguishing gases which  helped  to 
quench flame.  Used  to  fill  airspaces within  structures,  foam  would  pre- 
vent  oxygen  from  reaching  and  feeding  a  fire.  Demonstrations  had 
shown it  suitable for  fire protection  in  aircraft,  spacecraft, homes,  and 
other structures. Other possible uses included  automobiles, boats,  trains, 
oil refineries, paint and chemical processing, and laboratories.  Foam was 
resistant  to  heat  flow,  making  it  an   excellent  insulator.  (NASA  Release 
68-187) 
9  I n  New  Y o rk   T imes   John  N.  Wilford  said  some NASA  Hq.  officials were 
“hesitant  to  approve  a  lunar  orbit  mission  out  of  fear  of  being  criti- 
cized  for  taking  undue  risks  by  skipping preliminary  test  flights.  They 
are  worried  about  the  spacecraft’s  electrical  system,  which  developed 
some  minor  ‘bugs’  during  Apollo  7,  and  the  propulsion  system,  even 
though  the  on-board rocket  apparently  performed  well  in   eight  firings 
during  Apollo  7.”  If  lunar  mission was  decided  on,  it  would  probably 
be launched  Dec.  21  when  moon’s  position to  earth would  require mini- 
mum  midcourse  rocket  firing  maneuvers  for  landing  and  light  condi- 
tions  would  give  good  view  of  potential  lunar  landing  site.  First  astro- 
nauts  on  moon were  expected to  stay less than  24  hr,  to demonstrate  it 
could  be  done.  I n   time  astronauts  would  make  many  return  trips  and 
would  roam  moon’s  surface  in  “moon  buggies.”  Day might  come when 
people would  estabiish lunar  colonies.  ( N Y T ,  10/28/68,  12E) 
0  Dr.  Lise Meitner,  nuclear  physicist  who  was  for  30  y r   scientific  partner 
of  Dr.  Otto  Hahn, Nobel  Prize  winning  discoverer  of  nuclear  fission, 
died  in  Cambridge, England,  at  age  89.  She  had  been  forced  to  leave 
her  work  with  Dr.  Hahn  and  flee  Nazi  Germany’s  antisemitism  in 
March  1938, nine  months  before  he  announced  results  of  experiments 
which  indicated  atom  could  be  split.  Dr.  Meitner  was  credited  with 
having laid  much  of  theoretical groundwork for  atomic  bomb.  Though 
i t   was  she  who  named  the  phenomenon  “nuclear  fission,”  she  took 
pains  to  disassociate her  work  from  the  bomb  itself.  ( N Y T ,  10/28/68, 
1) 
Oc tober  28:  NASA  outlined  six steps which would  lead  to  final decision dur- 
ing  week  of  Nov.  11 on  next  Apollo manned  mission.  Apollo  8,  sched- 
uled  for  December,  was  planned  as  manned  earth-orbital  mission  on 
Saturn  V  vehicle.  Because  of  Apollo  7  success,  NASA  was  considering 

265 

October  28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

alternative  mission  possibilities:  earth-orbital  mission  deeper  into 
space, circumlunar  flyby, and lunar orbit. 
Steps-laid 
out  by  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight, Dr. George E.  Mueller, and Apollo  Program  Director,  L/G  Sam- 
uel  C .   Phillips-were:  detailed  analysis  and  review  of  ApoZZo  7  results 
to  determine any necessary spacecraft changes;  final certification of  so- 
lutions  to  Apollo  6  problems;  certification  of  strengthened  Saturn  V 
2nd  and 3rd  stage fuel lines  and elimination  of  pogo  in  1st stage;  com- 
pletion  of  ground  tests  before  Apollo  8  command  and  service  module 
(C SM )   certification  for  lunar  flight;  completion of  flight  computer  pro- 
grams  for  deep  space and  lunar  missions;  rehearsal  of  CSM  operations 
tests with  mathematical models  and  delivery  of  Apollo  8  CM   computer 
program;  and  completion  of  design  certification  reviews  of  launch  ve- 
hicle and spacecraft subsystems. 
Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Acting  Administrator,  said,  “The  final 
decision  on  whether  to   send  Apollo  8  around  the  Moon  w i l l   be  made 
after  a  thorough  assessment  of  the  total  risks  involved  and  the  total 
gains  to  be  realized  in  this  next  step  toward  a  manned  lunar  landing. 
We  will  fly  the most  advanced mission  for  which we  are fully  prepared 
that  does  not  unduly  risk  the  safety  of  the  crew.” 
(NASA  Release 
68-190;  UPI ,  N Y T ,  10 /29 /68 ,14 )  
Washington  Evening  S tar   editorial:  “The  Russians  a re   going  to  the 
moon  just  as  fast  a s   their  technology  will  carry  them.  . . . I t   is,  of 
course,  impossible to  judge  what  lies  ahead  or  guess what  problems ei- 
ther  nation  may  encounter  before  the  lunar  landings  a re   carried  out. 
But  if  all  goes  well  i t   looks  as  though  both  nations  might  be  ready  to 
go   in  about  a  year. We  would  have  no  objection  at  all  i f   a  way  could 
be  found  to  ‘fix’  the  race,  and  an  agreement reached  to  make  the  land- 
ings  literally  simultaneous.  It  would  be  one  way  of  assuring  that  nei- 
ther  nation  would  pursue  the  goal  of  national  prestige  to  the  point  of 
tragedy.”  (W  S tar ,   10/25/68,  A10) 
October 29: ESSA  said  “very  minor”  solar  flare reported  a t  7:18  am EST  was 
accompanied by  large  radio  burst  that  could  interfere with  radio  com- 
munication.  I t   was  too  small  to  affect  U.S.S.R.  Cosmonaut  Georgy  T. 
Beregovoy in  orbit.  (UPI ,   W  Pos t ,   10/30/68,  A23) 
Army  Map  Service  technicians  were  building  22-  by  14-ft hand-carved 
model  of  landing  site  astronauts would  see  on  approaching  lunar  “tar- 
get  area,”  to   assist  NASA  in  simulating  manned  landings  on  moon. 
Model,  part  of  lunar  module  simulator  ( LM S ) ,   would  be  constructed 
from  high-fidelity lunar  relief  map  made  from  Orb i ter   ZV and  Y  pho- 
tography.  (DOD   Release 966-68) 
NASA  announced  retirement,  effective Nov.  1, of  Werner  R.  Kuers,  Direc- 
tor  of  Marshall  Space Flight  Center’s Manufacturing  Engineering  Lab- 
oratory  since  1961.  ( MSFC  Release  68-257  ; Marshall  S tar ,   10/30/68, 
1) 
*  MSFC  awarded  Boeing  C o .   $1,404,548  contract  modification  to  predict 
and  evaluate orbital  heating  effects of  liquid-hydrogen  boil-off , supply 
thermal  criteria  and  profiles  related  to   Saturn V  2nd  stage,  assist with 
Saturn  V  preflight  reviews,  and  provide  configuration  accounting. 
Award  brought  total  contract  to  $212,128,585.  (MSFC  Release 68-256) 
October  30:  Award  of  $70,000 Nobel  Prize  in  physics  to  Univ.  of  Califor- 
nia  at  Berkeley Prof.  Luis W.  Alvarez  and  in  chemistry to  Yale  Univ. 

266 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

October  30 

Prof.  Lars Onsager meant  U S .  had  won  all  three Nobel  science catego- 
ries  for  1968,  as  i t   had  in  1946.  Awards  in   medicine  and  physiology 
[see Oct.  161  went  to U S .   geneticists.  Dr.  Alvarez  was  cited  for  “deci- 
sive contributions” in  early  1960s to physics  of  subatomic particles  and  
techniques  for  their  detection.  Dr.  Onsager  was  honored  for  findings 
published  in  1931 and  sometimes  regarded  as  fourth  law  of  thermody- 
namics,  “the  reciprocity  relations  of  Onsager,”  which  could  determine 
interrelation between voltage and  temperature as electric current  flowed 
through  metal  wire.  Awards  would  be  presented  in   Stockholm  Dec.  10. 
(Lannan, W  S t a r ,   10/30/68,  A l ;  Lee, N Y T ,   10/31/68,  1; O’Toole,  W 
Po s t ,  10/31/68,  A 2 5 )  
Oc tober   31 : U.S.S.R.  launched  two  Cosmos  satellites.  Cosmos  CCL   entered 
orbit  with  845-km  (525.1-mi)  apogee,  735-km  (467.8-mi)  perigee, 
100.6-min period,  and 74”  inclination.  Cosmos  CCLI  entered orbit with 
226-km  (140.4-mi)  apogee,  170 km  (105.6-mi)  perigee,  88.3-min  pe- 
riod,  and  64.7”  inclination  and   reentered  Nov.  18. Both  satellites  func- 
tioned normally.  ( GSFC  S SR ,  10/31/68;  11/30/68;  S B D ,   11 /4 /68 ,12)  
*  Dr.  William  H.  Pickering,  J P L   Director,  and  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge,  Cal 
Tech  President,  presided  a t  unveiling  of  historical  marker  at  JPL   com- 
memorating  test-firing  of  rocket  engine  Oct.  31,  1936,  by  students  of 
Cal  Tech‘s  Guggenheim  Aeronautical  Laboratory  under  the  late  Dr. 
Theodore von  Karmhn.  With  firing,  Cal  Tech  had  become  first  univer- 
sity  actively  to  sponsor  rocket  research.  I ts   work  had  gained  Govern- 
ment  sponsorship and  later  had  led  to  establishment  of  J P L .   ( J P L   Re- 
lease 492;  Diebold,  L A  T ime s ,  11/1/68) 
NAS  President  Dr.  Frederick  Seitz  announced  William W.  Rubey,  profes- 
sor  of  geology  and  geophysics  a t  Univ.  of  California  a t  Los  Angles had 
been named  Director  of  Lunar  Science  Institute,  Houston, Tex.  NAS  had 
accepted  interim  responsibility  for  operation  of  Institute  until  consor- 
tium of  universities could  be  formed  to  assume  its  direction.  Formation 
of  Institute had  been  announced  by  President  Johnson  March  1, 1968, 
to  provide  base  for  academic  scientists  participating  in   lunar  explora- 
tion  program,  working  in  Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory,  o r   using  other 
facilities  of  Manned  Spacecraft Center  devoted  to  study of  the moon.  I t  
was  to  serve  also  as  center  for  analysis  and  study  of  lunar  data  ob- 
tained  from  NASA  unmanned  missions.  (NASA Release  68-191;  NAS  Re- 
lease) 
October  31-November  1 : Soviet  academician  and  aerospace  scientist,  Prof. 
Leonid  I.  Sedov,  visited  Univ.  of  Tennessee  Space  Institute  during 
AIAA-sponsored tour  of  U.S.  A t   press  conference he said U.S.S.R.  would 
reach  moon  from  orbital  station but  this  was  not  crux   of  Soviet  effort 
in   space.  “Other  planets  a re   just  as  important.”  Zond-type  satellites 
would  circumnavigate other  planets and  return.  I n  question  and  answer 
period  following  lecture  he  said  U.S.S.R.  would  not  conduct  manned 
lunar space operation within  following six months. 
In   lecture,  Prof.  Sedov  said  i t   was  “obvious  that  space  technology 
and  the  associated research have  a  pronounced  stimulating  effect  on  the 
development  of  the  technological  fields  . . . essential  fo r   large-scale 
progress-particularly 
in   the  development  of  automatic  control  sys- 
tems;  in  radio engineering, television,  and  telemetry;  i n  computer tech- 
nology;  in  the preparation of  new materials  and new  devices;  in  minia- 

267 

October  31-November  1 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
turization  and  minimum-weight  design ; in  problems  associated  with 
accuracy  and  reliability  of  automatic  systems.  . . .” It  was  clear  that 
“space  technology has become pivotal in modern  industry  in  the broad- 
est sense of  the word.” 
Dr. G.  G.  Chernyi, Moscow Univ. professor, also participated  in semi- 
nar.  (Transcripts; Aero  Da i ly ,   11 /7 /68 ,29 )  
During  Oc tober:   Sov ie t   Science  i n  the  News,  Electro-Optical Systems,  Inc., 
publication,  said  review  of  Soviet  technical  press  indicated  U.S.S.R. 
would  attempt to  orbit manned space station within  the year  and that  i t  
possessed  “well-devised  and  thoroughly  realizable  designs.”  First 
“rooms”  of  station  would  comprise  Cosmos  or  Proton  booster  joined 
with  Soyuz  spacecraft.  Additional  rooms  would  combine  solid  and  in- 
flatable  elements like  polyethylene.  Tests  of  water  recovery  systems  in 
Pacific indicated broadening  of  Soviet techniques. Six vessels had  been 
completed for  ocean  recoveries of  spacecraft. Conclusion  of  Soviet sci- 
entists  that  weightlessness had  adverse effect on  human  skeletal compo- 
sition  seemed  to  indicate  space  station  would  use  artificial  gravity. 
‘Rotation  of  space  station  of  from  40  to  60 meters  in  diameter  would 
generate  sufficient  artificial  gravity  to  allow  large  number  of  scientists 
to  work  in  space.”  ( S SN ,  10/68,  1 ;  Aero   Da i ly ,   10/16/68) 
Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  former  NASA  Associate  Administrator 
(1960-67)  and now  MIT  professor and consultant to  the  NASA  Adminis- 
trator,  was  nominated as AIAA  President  for  1969.  ( A & A ,   10/68,  106 )  

268 

November  1968 

November  1 : U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos C C L l l  from Baikonur  Cosmodrone 
into  orbit  with  2,148-km  (1,334.7-mi)  apogee,  531-km  (330-mi)  peri- 
gee,  112.4-min  period,  and  62.3”  inclination.  (W  S ta r ,   11/1/68; 
S E D ,   11/4/68,  12 ;   GSFC S SR ,   11/15/68) 
NASA  XB-70,  flown  by  NASA  test  pilots  Fitzhugh L.  Fulton,  Jr.,  and  Emil 
Sturmthal,  reached 41,000-ft altitude  and  mach  1.62  in  flight  from  Ed- 
wards AFB  to  obtain  stability  and control data and  to test  ILAF.  (XB-70 
P ro j  Off)  
November   2:  President  Johnson  presented  NASA  Distinguished  Service 
Medal,  NASA’s highest  award,  to   recently  retired  NASA  Administrator 
James  E.  Webb  at  ceremony  in  Johnson  City,  Tex.  He  also  awarded 
cluster  to  NASA  Exceptional Service Medal held by  Apollo  7 commander 
Walter M.  Schirra, Jr.,  and Exceptional Service Medals to  Apollo  7 As- 
tronauts R. Walter Cunningham and Donn F. Eisele. 
President  said  U S .   w a s   “ready  to  take  that  first  great  step  out  into 
the  solar  system and  on  to  the  surface  of  the  nearest  of  the  many mys- 
terious  worlds  that  surround  us  in  space.”  Noting  that  Apollo  7  had 
logged more than  780 man-hours in  space-more 
than had  been  logged 
“in  all  Soviet manned  flights to  date”-and 
had  accomplished 56 mis- 
sion  objectives, as many “in  this  one  flight as were accomplished in  the 
first  five  manned  flights  o i  the  Gemini  spacecraft,”  he  said:  “This  is 
not  important  as either  a game or  a contest. But  it  is  important  because 
the United  States of  America must be  first  in  technology if   it  is  to  con- 
tinue  its  position  in  the  world.  I  believe  today,  as  I  did  when  we  had 
our  original  hearings  that  created  the  Space  Administration,  that  the 
United States must be first.” 
President  read  citation,  presenting Medal  to Webb  for  “outstanding 
leadership  of  America’s  space program  from  1961 to  1968.  . . . More 
than  any  other  individual  he  deserves the  credit  for  the  great  achieve- 
ments of  the  United  States in  the  first decade of  space, and  for  helping 
man to  reach outward toward the stars.” 
Webb  responded:  “The  citation  and medal  . . . should, in  my  view, 
be  converted  into  some  kind  of  holographic  substance so  it  could  be 
divided  into  thousands of  parts  . . . and  each  part  should  really  go  to 
an  outstanding  person  in  NASA,  in  our  scientific group,  working  in   our 
universities,  and  in  the  great  industrial  organizations  of  this  country 
that  have  really  done the  work.”  (Transcript;  Citation;  P D ,   11/8/68, 
1568-71) 
0  In   Prague  newspaper  Mlaba  Fronta,  Czechoslovak Academy  of  Sciences’ 
astronomer  Dr.  L. Krivsky  said  “very dangerous”  radiation  f rom  solar 
radio  storm  might  have  forced  premature  ending  of  U.S.S.R.’s  Soyuz 
ZZZ mission  Oct.  30.  He  implied,  said  New  York   T ime s ,   that  U.S.S.R. 
had  either  been unaware  or had  failed to   consider radio  storm  forecast 
fo r  late October.  ( N Y T ,  11 /3 /68 ,35 )  

269 

Nov emb e r   2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

N o v em b e r   2 :   President  Johnson   reads  c i ta t ion   before  presenting  NASA’s Distinguished 
Service  Medal  to  James  E.  W e b b ,  who  retired  as  NASA  Administrator  Oc t .   7.  Medal  was 
given  for outstanding  leadership of  America’s  space  program. 

*  Bus iness   W e e k   commented  on  results  of  “two  bad  decisions  by  agencies 
of the  federal government.”  Boeing  Co.  was  scrapping swing-wing con- 
cept  on  SST in   favor  of  fixed-wing  and  “word  seeped  out  of  the  Penta- 
gon  that  a  real  fight has developed  over  whether  to  cut back  production 
of  . . . F- l l l .”   How  were  such  mistakes  to  be  prevented  in   future? 
“One  lesson  that  emerges  .  . . is  that  the  government  must  learn  to 
avoid  premature  commitment  to  any  huge-scale  project.  . . . Another 
lesson  is  that  in  such  major  decisions,  an  independent,  technologically 
competent  judgment  should  be  brought  to  bear  on  the   issue.  On  the 
F-111,  the  President’s  Science  Advisory  Council  did  not  even  look  at 
the  design  features  of  the  aircraft.  On  the  SST, a  Special  Presidential 
Advisory  Committee  was  set  up,  but  it  was  chaired  by  [then  Secretary 
of  Defense  Robert  S.]  McNamara  and was  dominated  by  top  Adminis- 
tration  officials. Such  changes  in  procedures may  not  wipe  out  all  mis- 
takes,  but  they  could  greatly  reduce  the  chances  of  astronomically 
costly blunders.”  ( B u s  W k ,  11/2/68) 

270 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

November  3 

November   3 :   USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Thor-Agena D  booster  into  orbit  w i th   177-mi  ( 2 8 4 3 - h )  apogee,  108- 
mi  (173.8-km)  perigee,  88.8-min  period,  and  82.1”  inclination.  Satel- 
lite reentered Nov.  23.  (P r e s  Rp t  68) 
November   4 :   President  Johnson  released  N o i s e - S o u n d   W i thou t   Va lue ,  re- 
port  of  Federal  Council  for  Science  and  Technology  task  force,  and 
challenged  industry,  universities, and  public  authorities  to  attack  noise 
in  environment  from  many  sources.  He  directed  Federal  departments 
and  agencies  to  undertake  or  expand  noise  abatement  programs. 
Among  recommendations  endorsed  by  President,  report  said : NASA 
should complete studies of  community response to  airport  noise,  in  ad- 
dition  to  HEW,  DOT,  and  HUD   studies  of  effects;  NASA  and  DOT  should 
continue  a i r   transport  noise  abatement  research;  DOD  and  NASA  should 
continue  to  study  and  set  standards  for  noise  in  special situations:  and 
(Text ;  P D ,  
DOT  should  dkvelop  sonic-boom-control  stanhards. 
11/11/68,1575-6) 
0  New  Y o rk   T imes  editorial  commented on  award  of  all  1968  Nobel  Prizes 
in  science and  medicine  to  U S .   citizens:  “.  . . there  are  real  and  im- 
portant  roots  of  American  scientific  prowess  which  need  to  be  under- 
stood  and  fostered  so  that  future  achievement may  match  or  excel  that 
of  the past.  This country’s hospitality to  refugees from political tyranny 
and  to  those  seeking  to  better  themselves  economically  has  brought 
rich  rewards  particularly  in  science and  technology. The  nation’s  huge 
investment  in  education  has  permitted  able  young  people  to  develop 
their  talents. Generous Government support  of  basic  research has  given 
the nation’s  scientists the  tools  and  the material  security needed  for  the 
realization  of  their  potential  excellence.  The  abundant  returns  from 
these policies provide good  reason  for maintaining  them so   that  Ameri- 
can science can continue to flower.”  ( N Y T ,  11/4/68,46) 
I n  Av ia t ion   Week  & Space  Technology  editorial,  Robert Hotz  said:  “The 
element  of  sharp  competition  between  the  US. and  the  USSR  in  
more  rapid  pace  than  if  either  nation  were  going  i t   alone.  . . . Much 
manned  space  flight  has  unquestionably  forced  progress  at  a  much 
has  already  been  learned  by  these  competitors from  each  other.  I t   is  a 
pity  that  the  Soviets’  obsession  with  secrecy  bars  them  from  a  more 
fruitful international  exchange of  technology. . . . 
“Events  of  the  past  month  have  put  the  space  race  into  high  gear 
again. With  a  lunar  window  opening in  December,  it  is  a  strong  possi- 
bility  that both  the U S .   and  the USSR  can launch  a  manned  circumlu- 
nar  mission  as  another  step  towards the  ultimate lunar  landing. With  a 
Soyuz  and  an  Apollo  carrying  the  Hammer  and  Sickle  and  the  Stars 
and  Stripes,  respectively, around  the  moon  a t   about  the  same  time,  it 
would  require  a  phlegmatic world  indeed not  to get excited at  these ex- 
traterrestrial Olympics.”  ( A v  W k ,  11/4/68,  11) 
November   5:  Republican  candidate  Richard  M.  Nixon  was  elected  Presi- 
dent of  United States, with  302  electoral votes  from  32  states  and p o p -  
lar  vote  of  30,041,582,  or  43.42%.  Democratic  candidate  Hubert  H. 
Humphrey polled  191 electoral votes from  14 states and 29,817,385 pop- 
ular  votes,  or  43.10%. American  Independent Party  candidate  George 
C.  Wallace  won  45  electoral  votes  and  9,242,950  popular  votes,  o r  
13.36%. While  space had  not  been  major  issue  in  election,  candidates 

271 

November  5 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%0 

had  made  statements  in  support  of  space  program  in  campaign 
speeches.  (NASA EH ;   CQ   W e ek l y  R p t ,   11/8/68,  3071) 
*  Soviet Academy  of  Sciences  President  Mstislav V.  Keldysh  told  Moscow 
news  conference Soyuz  111  spacecraft  flown  by  Cosmonaut  Georgy  T. 
Beregovoy Oct.  30  was  intended  only  for  earth  orbit.  He  said  U.S.S.R. 
might  send animal  on  lunar  mission before sending human  to  ascertain 
that  cosmic  radiation  was  not  too  dangerous.  (AP,  B  Sun,  11/6/68, 
fw 
USAF  awarded  separate  $3,941,500  contracts  to   Westinghouse  Electric 
Corp.  and  Hughes Aircraft  Co.  for  20-mo  competition  to   develop  new 
attack  radar  system for ZF-15A  (formerly FX) advanced a i r  superior- 
ity  fighter  aircraft.  Awards  were  initial  obligations  of  contracts  which 
would  total  $22  million  during  FY  1969 and  FY  1970. Winner  would 
be  selected  after  flight  tests  and  evaluation  of  both  rada r   prototypes. 
(DOD Release 1006-68;  WSJ,  11 /6 /68 ,13 )  
November   6:  USAF  launched  unidentified satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Titan  111-B  booster  into  orbit  with  249-mi  (400.7-km)  apogee,  90-mi 
(1U.8-km)  perigee,  89.8-min  period,  and  106”  inclination.  Satellite 
reentered Nov.  20.  (P r e s  Rp t  68) 
*  National  Radio  Astronomy  Observatory  astronomers  a t   Green  Bank,  W. 
Va., disclosed discovery of  first pair  of  pulsars, near  Crab Nebula, 6,000 
light  yr  from  earth.  Through  association  with  the  decayed  star,  they 
might  provide  clue  as  to  pulsars’  identity.  (Cohn,  W Post,  11/7/68, 
A41 
With  task  of  designing  equipment  for  U.S.  space  program  largely  over 
and  because of  cuts  in   ~ ~ s ~ . s p e n d i n g ,  
hundreds  of  scientists and  engi- 
neers were  losing  their  jobs  or  getting  out  “while the  getting  is  good,” 
said  Peter  H.  Prugh  in  Wa l l   Street  Journal.  Boeing  Co .  was  laying  off 
several  hundred  a t   New  Orleans  and  Cape  Kennedy;  its  Huntsville 
work force was  down from 4,600 in  1966 to  3,000,  with more cuts com- 
ing.  Chrysler Corp. had  cut  employment at  New  Orleans  from 3,300  to 
1,500  and  most  of  its  900  Cape  Kennedy  employees  faced  layoffs  or 
shifts  to  other  cities.  Huntsville  office  of  Alabama  State  Employment 
Service said  area  employment had  declined 3,500  in past  year  with big- 
gest drop in aerospace field. 
Space scientists and  engineers were  finding  even mundane  jobs  difti- 
cult to  land because of  their  specialized skills and  relatively high  salary 
demands.  Exodus  was  worrying  space  experts,  “who  fret  that  a  new 
emphasis on  US. space efforts o r  new  military  needs would  leave com- 
panies  hard  pressed  to  fill  the  rows  of  desks  being  vacated  now.” 
( P S I ,  11 /6 /68 ,1 )  
AFSC  Commander,  Gen.  James  Ferguson,  addressing  Fourth  Biennial 
Guidance  Test  Symposium  a t   Holloman  AFB,  N.  Mex.,  cited  missile 
guidance needs  and said U.S.S.R.  was  “working night  and day  to  upset 
the status quo. There are  a  number  of  possible advances o r  even break- 
throughs  that  would  give  them  decided advantages  over  us.  We  would 
be most  unwise to  let  them  take  a  lead  in   technology  through  our  lack 
of  decisive  effort. We  must,  a t   all  times,  maintain  a  technical  momen- 
tum  in  order  for  our  nation  to  maintain  adequate  strength  across  the 
entire spectrum of  deterrence.”  (Text) 
*  NASA  announced  appointment  of  Dr.  Mathias  P.  Siebel  a s   Director  of 
MSFC’S  ,Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory,  replacing W.  R.  Kuers, 

272 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

November 6 

who  retired  Nov.  1. Dr.  Siebel had been  Deputy Director  of  Laboratory 
since going to MSFC   in 1965. (M S FC  Release 68-262) 
0  Ham,  first  chimpanzee  successfully  launched  on  space  flight  [Jan.  31, 
19611, and  now  11 yr  old,  was  among  five  great  apes  a t  National  Zoo 
who  reacted  positively  to  tuberculosis  tests,  according  to  zoo  veteri- 
narian,  Dr.  Clinton  W.  Gray.  Animals  were  under  treatment  and  ex- 
pected  to be  fit  for  exhibiting  again  within 60 to 90  days.  (Schaden, W 
S ta r ,  11/6/68,  B2;  Elsberg, W News ,  2/L4/69,5) 
November  7 :  NASA  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wal- 
lops Station carried GSFC  payload  to  64.4-mi  (103.6-km)  altitude  to  de- 
termine absolute value of  positive ion concentration  in  D  and  E regions 
of  ionosphere.  Quadrupole  mass  spectrometer  for  measuring  relative 
abundance  of  positive  ions malfunctioned and,  consequently, launch  of 
two   supporting  rockets was  postponed. Vehicle performance and  trajec- 
tory  were  good  and  experimental related  events functioned well  and  on 
time.  (NASA  Rpt SRL )  
0  NASA  Nike- Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  from  Thumba  Equatorial 
Rocket  Launching  Station carried  Physical  Research Laboratory  exper- 
iment  to  93.2-mi  (150-km)  altitude  to  measure  absolute  flux  and  en- 
ergy  spectrum  of  x-rays  from  sources  in  constellations  Scorpius, Tau- 
rus,  and  Centaurus  and  time  variation  of  x-ray  fluxes  from  Scorpius 
and Centaurus sources. Experiment  also would  survey southern  sky  for 
undiscovered  x-ray  sources.  Rocket  and  instrumentation  performed 
satisfactorily. Good  x-ray data  were  reported.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL)  
0  ARC   Astrogram  reported  successful completion  of  first  in  series of  studies 
by  Ames Biomedical  Research  Branch  in  which  primates  had  been  re- 
strained  in  chairs for  98  days to provide information  on  calcium metab- 
olism and  bone  mineralization when  normal  weight  load  on  bones was 
altered  as  in  weightlessness in  space.  Results  showed  that  with  applica- 
tion  of  weight  loads  on  certain  bones  loss  of  calcium  in  urine  was 
within  normal  limits;  without  load,  control  animal’s  calcium  loss  was 
elevated and  lasted throughout  experiment. X-rays showed normal bone 
mineralization  in  vertebrae  and  bones  of  loaded  pig-tailed  monkey, 
while unloaded  animal  sustained mineral  loss.  Studies would  determine 
methods  for  prevention  of  bone  changes  and  improve  safety  and 
efficiency of  manned space flights.  (ARC  Astrograrn,  11 /7 /68 ,2 )  
0  NASA  released  Delta  launch  vehicle  for  Nov.  8  launch  of  Pioneer  D 
after  completion  of  “corrective  actions”  to  prevent  repetition  of  vehi- 
cle’s  first  flight  failure Sept.  18. Delta  No.  59,  carrying  Intelsat  111-A 
(Intelsat III/F-1)  , had been  destroyed shortly after  liftoff when  vehicle 
began  breaking  up.  (NASA   Release  68-195) 
U.S.S.R.  celebrated  51st anniversary  of  Bolshevist Revolution in  Moscow 
with  missile  display  which  included  no  new  weapons.  (AP,  W  S tar ,  
11/7/68,  A3) 
November   8 :   NASA’s Pioneer  I X   (Pioneer D )  , fourth  in  series of  five space- 
c ra f t  designed to  provide  continuing  measurements over  solar  cycle  at 
widely  separated  points  in  interplanetary  space,  was  successfully 
launched  from  ETR  by  Thrust-Augmented  Improved  Thor-Delta 
(DSV-3E)  booster  into  orbit  around  sun.  Orbital  parameters:  aphe- 
lion,  0.99  astronomical unit  ( a u )  , or  92.04  million  mi  (148.10 million 
km) ; perihelion,  0.75  au,  or  69.71  million  mi  (112.19  million  km) ; 
period, 297.55 days;  and inclination 0.09’. 

273 

November  8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Test  and  Training  Satellite  Te t r   I I   (TETR-B)  carried  pickaback  on 
2nd  stage, was  successfully ejected after  3rd-stage burnout  and  entered 
orbit  around earth with 582.3-mi  (937-km)  apogee, 231.3-mi  (373-km) 
perigee,  97.9-min  period,  and  32.8’ 
inclination.  S-band  transponder 
was  operating  properly.  Te t r   I 1   was  follow-on Te t r   I  (formerly  desig- 
nated  T t s   I;  launched  pickaback  on  Pioneer  VIIZ  Dec.  13,  1967), 
which was highly  successful in  testing Apollo communications network. 
Primary mission objective of  147-1b, drum-shaped Pioneer  ZX  was to  
collect  scientific  data  on  electromagnetic and  plasma  properties  of  in- 
terplanetary  medium  for  period  covering six  or more passages of  solar 
activity  centers.  As  secondary mission, Pioneer  ZX  would:  (1 )   acquire 
data  when  highly  significant solar  event  occurred;  ( 2 )   refine  primary 
.determinations  of  earth  and  moon  masses,  the  astronomical  unit,  and 
osculating elements of  earth’s  orbit;  ( 3 )   provide  synoptic  study of  so- 
lar-interplanetary  relations;  and  ( 4 )   provide  target  for  checkout  of 
Manned  Space  Flight  Network  equipment  and  training  of  operations 
personnel  by  launching  Test  and  Training  Satellite  a s   secondary  pay- 
load.  Pioneer  I X  separation,  boom  deployment, and  first  solar  orienta- 
tion  occurred as planned and  all eight experiments were operating prop- 
erly and returning  good data. 
Pioneer  V I   (launched  Dec.  16,  1965 ) ,  Pioneer  VZZ  (launched  Aug. 
17,  1966), and  Pioneer  VIIZ  (launched  Dec.  16,  1967)  were  all  suc- 
cessful  and  were  continuing  to  transmit  excellent  data.  Pioneer  pro- 
gram was managed by  ARC  under  OSSA  direction.  (NASA  P ro j  Off;  NASA 
Release 68-192;  UPI,  W  News ,   11/8/68;  W  Po s t ,   11/9/68,  A10;  AP, 
LA  T ime s ,  11/9/68;  Lannan, W S tar ,  11/11/68,  A17;  S BD ,   11/12/68, 
46; GSFC,  S SR ,  11/15/68) 
0  Bureau  of  the  Budget  issued  tentative  allowance  of  $3.623  billion  for 
NASA’s FY  1970 budget  request.  (NASA   Off  of  Admin) 
0  American  Nuclear  Society  held  panel  session  in  Washington,  D.C.,  on 
“The US. Space Program:  Achievements and Objectives.” 
Dr. Edward  C.  Welsh, NASC  Executive Secretary, declared:  “We must 
step up  the  rate  a t  which we  tap  the vast potential of  nuclear  energy for 
the  space activities of  tomorrow.  . . . if  we  do  not  make greater  use  of 
nuclear  energy,  w e   will  neglect  our  mission  of  learning  rapidly  more 
and more  about  the  solar  system in  which we  live  and  about  the  planet 
where we  reside.  In   the  field  of  propulsion,  chemical  rockets,  both  liq- 
uid  and  solid,  can  be  vastly  improved  when  combined  with  the  prod- 
ucts  of  nuclear  technology.”  Combining  nuclear  stage  with  Saturn  V 
“will greatly increase that  rocket’s power  of  achievement. . . . Not  only 
will we  have  the vast power  of  the  atom at our  command, but  it will  be 
compact, self-contained, long  lived,  highly  maneuverable, and  virtually 
independent  of  its  surrounding  environment.  . . . Atomic  energy  w i l l  
enable the space effort to reach for the infinite.”  (Text) 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and  Technol- 
ogy  James M.  Beggs discussed  “Research  and  Technology  for  the  Fu- 
ture,’:  “The  difference between  success and  failure  of  [NASA]  missions 
. . . lies in our knowledge of  the  flight sciences and  our  skill for  apply- 
ing  this knowledge to  the  development and  operation  of  space vehicles. 
. . . A  natural  characteristic  of  technology  is  its multiapplicability;  an 
improvement  in  guidance  o r   communication  equipment,  for  example, 
may  find many uses  in  space missions a s  well  as non-aerospace applica- 

274 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
November 8 
tions.  A  key  to  making  this  process  productive  . . . is  a  continuing 
research  program  . . . that  has  a  good  balance  between  the  effort  in  
the scientific and engineering disciplines and  in the technologies needed 
to explore the unknown.”  (Text) 
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  WSFC  Director,  said:  “The  first  practical 
application  of  space electric power  systems, which have  been  under  de- 
velopment over the past  10 years, may well  be  found  in  our  second gen- 
eration  orbital  space station  program.  Consistent with  our  present  esti- 
mates  of  station  initial power  requirements, and  allowing for  growth,  a 
zirconium  hydride  reactor  coupled  with  a  thermoelectric  conversion 
system is being  studied for  application  on  such  a  space station.”  (Text; 
Reuters, B Sun ,  11/14/68,  A10) 
*  MSFC  announced  Boeing  Co.  had  been  issued  $239,000 contract  for  10- 
mo  study  defining  two-stage  derivative  of  Saturn  V  launch  vehicle. 
With  1st  (S - IC )   and  3rd  (S-IVB)  stages and  instrument  unit  of  Sat- 
urn  V,  vehicle could place up  to  158,000 lb  in low  earth  orbit.  Varying 
the  number  of  F-1  engines in  S-IC  could  tailor  vehicle to  specific mis- 
sions.  Five-engine configuration  could  put  into  orbit  Saturn  I  Work- 
shop  with  airlock  and  multiple docking  adapter,  plus Apollo Telescope 
Mount  and  Apollo  CSM  and  three-man  crew.  Three  Saturn  IB  vehicles 
would  be  required  to   do  same  job.  Vehicle  could  resupply  space  sta- 
tions  and  could  be  used  for  synchronous  orbits  and  unmanned  lunar 
and  planetary  flights at major  savings  over  three-stage Saturn V.  Two- 
stage version was  called “Intermediate 20.” With Centaur  3rd  stage, ve- 
hicle could send about 15,000 lb to Jupiter  or Saturn. 
MSFC  also  had  signed  $22,826,736 contract  modification with  North 
American  Rockwell  Corp.’s  Rocketdyne Div.  for  continued  production 
support  of  J-2  engines  used  on  Saturn  IB   and  Saturn  V  boosters. 
Modifications  would  improve  engines’  versatility.  ( MSFC  Releases 
68-264,68-266) 
*  NAS-NRC  Space  Science Board  issued  Physics  of  the  Earth  in   Space-A 
Program   of  Research:  1968-1975,  report  of  NASA-supported  study  by 
31 scientists a t  Woods Hole, Mass.,  Aug.  11-24.  Report,  dated  October 
and  fourth by  Board  to  provide  guidance for  NASA’s  programs  in  space 
physics,  said  results  of  decade  of  research  by  artificial  satellites were 
“revolutionary;  few  of  the  concepts of  the  early  1950’s  have  survived 
without  major  revision  and  totally  unexpected  discoveries  have  pro- 
vided  fundamentally  new  theoretical  challenges.”  And  “results  of  to- 
day’s  space  research  on  the  physics  of  the  Earth  in   space  become  the 
engineering design data  of  tomorrow’s  civilian and  defense applications 
programs.” 
Report  defined  program  of  satellite,  space-probe,  and  sounding 
rocket missions for  concerted attack  on  questions of  fundamental physi- 
cal mechanisms of  sun-earth system, in  contrast  to  past  decade’s explor- 
atory  surveys.  It  emphasized  coordinated  investigations,  new  experi- 
mental  techniques, and major  observation effort during  1974-1975  low 
solar  activity.  Recommendations  included  continued  NASA  support  for 
balloon,  aircraft,  and  ground-based  observations  and  of  advanced  de- 
velopment  of  spacecraft  instruments;  better  means  of  data  handling 
and  adequate  support  for  data  analysis;  and  restoration  of  NASA  pro- 
*  Astronomers  reported  in  Science  conclusion  neither  NASA7s  Mariner  v 
gram of predoctoral traineeship grants to 1966 level.  (Text) 
275 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
November  8 
(launched  June  14,  1967,  for  flyby  of  planet  Venus)  nor  U.S.S.R.’s 
Venus  ZV  (launched  June  12,  1967)  had  reported  atmospheric  condi- 
tions near  level of  mean  surface of  planet. Von  R.  Eshleman  and Gun- 
nar  Fjeldbo  of  Stanford  Univ.,  John  D.  Anderson  and  Arvydas  J. 
Kliore  of  JPL,  and  Rolf  B.  Dyce  of  Arecibo  Ionospheric  Observatory 
(Puerto  Rico)  had  made  new  determination  of  radius  of  planet,  based 
on  concurrent  ranging  from  earth  to  Mariner  V  near  encounter  and  to 
surface  of  Venus.  Extrapolations  of  measurements  had  given  surface 
values  for  mid-latitudes  of  close  to   100  atmospheres  pressure  and 
700°K  temperature  (within  1 0 0 ” )  , rather  than  Soviet values  of  1 9 2 2  
atmospheres  and  544” &10”K .   Soviet  probe  apparently  was  not  de- 
signed  to   work  through  such  thick  atmosphere.  Simple  ambiguity 
(times  two )   in  Venus  ZV  altimeter  reading  could  explain  supposition 
that  probe  reached  Venus  surface,  “since  this  would  bring  all  other 
data into excellent agreement.”  (Sc ience ,  11/8/68,661-5) 
*  At  press  conference,  inventor-scientist  Stanford  R.  Ovshinsky  described 
production  of  electronic  devices-including 
desktop  computers;  flat, 
tubeless  TV  sets  that  could  be  hung  on  walls;  amd  missile  guidance 
systems  impervious  to  destruction  by  man-made  radiation.  Devices 
were made  of  amorphous  materials  whose  electrical properties  differed 
from  transistor  materials.  Balance  of  energy  forces  within  amorphous 
glasses was  such  that  application  of  voltage of  right  minimum  strenzth 
made  material  switch  from  insulator  to  conductor.  (Stevens,  N Y T ,  
11/11/68,  1) 
American Telephone &  Telegraph  Co.  said  i t  had  asked  FCC to  authorize 
its  acquisition  of  70   additional  satellite  communications circuits  from 
ComSatCorp.  Purchase  would  boost  AT&T  circuits  to  396.  ( W S J ,  
11 /8 /68 ,5 )  
November  9:  ApolZo  7  commander  Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  received  from 
Italian  Ambassador  to  U.S.  Egidio  Ortona  gold  medallion  awarded  by 
Assn.  of  Man  in  Space, group of  Italian  scientists and  jurists,  a t  Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  party in his honor.  (Billington, W S tar ,  11/11/68,  B7) 
November  10:  On  nationwide  “Meet  the  Press”  TV  interview,  Astronaut 
Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  commented  on  NASA  budget  cuts:  “We’ve  built 
up  a  fantastic  technology  [but]  talented  people  are  starting  to  leave. 
. . . We  should  let  it  b e  known  that  we  a re  in  this  for  the  future,  not 
just  one  flight.”  Cost  of  manned  missions  was  justified  in  quest  for 
knowledge  not  only  outward,  but  earthward,  too.  Astronauts  were 
“looking  at  portions  of  the  earth  that  had  never  been  documented be- 
fore.  A  crew  can  see  something  and  respond  to  it,  on  earth  o r   the 
moon.”  Fellow  ApoZZo  7  crewman  R.  Walter  Cunningham  said  never 
had  Soviet crewmen  “functioned  in   the  same  operational  conditions  a s  
we.”  U.S.S.R.  was putting  fewer higher  trained  persons in orbit,  “main- 
ly  a s  biological specimens.”  (AP,  W Post,  11/11/68,  A2; AP,  B  Sun, 
11/11/68,  A5) 
*  NASA  announced  it  soon  would  begin  series  of  test  flights  a t   LaRc  of 
tilt-wing VTOL aircraft  on  loan  from  USAF,  to  determine opera- 
XC-142 
tional  problems  in   airport  terminal  areas  during  poor  visibility. 
XC-142, 
for  which  Ling-Temco-Vought,  Inc.,  was  prime  contractor, 
was propeller-driven and  powered  by  four  GE  turboshaft  engines.  NASA 
also was testing Ryan Aeronautical Co.’s  XB-5A,  which  it had  modified 

276 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

November  10 

as  XV-5B,  and  Hawker  Siddeley  P-1127  vectored  jet  VTOL aircraft. 
(NASA  Release 68-194) 
I n  New   Y o rk   T imes  Walter  Sullivan described “The  Sun-Spot Menace  to  
Astronauts.”  Apo l lo   7  and  U.S.S.R.’s  Soyuz  ZZZ served  a s   reminders 
that  sunspots were  reaching  their  11-yr peak.  If  eruptions  were particu- 
larly  severe,  protons  were  hurled  out  a t   almost  speed  of  light.  These 
could  penetrate  spacecraft.  While  Apollo  7  astronauts  were  never  in 
danger,  Soviet  spacecraft  placed  in  orbits  reaching  north  beyond  lati- 
tude  51”  might  “nudge  zone”  within  which  protons  ejected  by  sun 
“rain  fiercely  on  the  atmosphere.”  Major  flare  had  occurred  Oct.  30 
just  after  Soyuz  IZI returned  to  earth.  If  astronauts  had  been  in  orbit 
if  they  had  been  outside  spacecraft-they 
-particularly 
could  have 
been  subjected  to  hazardous  radiation.  Many  warnings  preceded  this 
event.  For  moon  journey  it  should be possible to  postpone  or  cut  short 
flight  if  sun  looked  ominous.  In   any  miscalculation,  radiation  exposure 
to  astronauts  inside  spacecraft  would  be  severe  only  during  most  in- 
tense  outbursts. However, on  prolonged  journeys  to  other  planets  there 
would be no  escape. “It may  therefore be necessary to design the  space- 
craft  so  that  a  portion  of  its  interior  will  be  shielded  from  such  radia- 
tion.”  ( N Y T ,  11/10/68,  7E) 
November  10-1  7:  Zond  V I   automatic  space  station  was  successfully 
launched  by  U.S.S.R.  and  placed  on  lunar  trajectory  from  parking 
orbit  of  another  satellite to  explore outer  space  and  test  spacecraft sys- 
tems, Tass announced. All  equipment was  functioning normally. Specu- 
lation,  later  confirmed,  was  that  spacecraft  would  attempt  to  circle 
moon  on  same  route  taken  by  Zond  V  Sept.  15-21.  On  Nov.  14 Tass 
announced  that  Zond  V I   had  circled  moon  at  minimum  distance  of 
2,420 km  (1,503.8 mi)  and  had  conducted  studies of  physical  charac- 
teristics  of  near  lunar  space  before  continuing  its  journey  back  to 
earth. 
Zond  VZ  reentered and  softlanded in  a  predetermined area  in  Central 
Asia  Nov.  17.  Unlike  Zond  V ,  which  had  plunged  directly  through 
upper  atmosphere, Zond  V I   skipped  across  outer  layers  of  atmosphere 
to  reduce  its  reentry  speed  and  then  resumed  its  descent  with  aerody- 
namic forces. Announcing recovery, Tass said Zond   V I  had  for  first time 
tested  a  “more  complex  and  promising  method  of  the  return  of  space- 
craft  from interplanetary  trajectories-the  method  of  controlled descent 
with  the use  of  aerodynamical lifting  force  (aerodynamical quality)  of 
the descending craft.  . . . 
“The  braking  of  the  descending  apparatus  in  the  atmosphere  . . . 
was  effected along a  trajectory with  two  immersions in  the  atmosphere. 
During  the  first  immersion  . . . the  second  cosmic speed  . . . [ l l  km 
per  sec, 24,607  mph]  was  reduced  to  7.6 kilometers  a  second  (17,000 
mph)  through  aerodynamical braking.  In  doing  so,  the  descending ap- 
paratus  . . . was  oriented through  the onboard  control system in  such  a 
way  that  it,  passing  through  the  dense  layers  of  the  atmosphere,  left 
them  and  next  continued  along  the  ballistic  trajectory  until  the  second 
immersion  . . . [ in   which]  the  further  lowering  of  the  descending  ap- 
paratus was  also effected along the  trajectory  of  controlled descent w ith  
the  use  of  aerodynamical  qualities  which  ensured  its  return  to  the 
Earth in the pre-set district.” 
Zond  VZ  was  sixth spacecraft in  Zond  series  [see Sept.  15-21].  (AP, 

277 

November  10-17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

W  Star,  11/11/68,  1;   N Y T ,   11/15/68,  8 ;   GSFC  SSR ,   11/15/68, 
11/30/68;  Winters,  B Sun, 11/19/68,  1;  Kamm,  N Y T ,   11/19/68,  1 ;  
SBD ,  11/19/68,71-2) 
November  12 :   NASA  Acting  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas  0.  Paine,  an- 
nounced  a t   NASA  Hq.  news  briefing  that  Apollo  %-carrying  com- 
mander  Frank  Borman,  CM   pilot  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  LM  pilot 
William  A.  Anders-would 
be  launched  from  ETR  Dec.  21  on  open- 
ended  lunar  orbital  mission  of  at  least  six  days.  Spacecraft would  cir- 
cle  moon  10  times  at  70-mi  altitude  before  returning  to  earth.  Dr. 
Paine  explained:  “After  a  careful  and  thorough  examination  of  all  of 
the  systems  and  risks  involved,  we  have  concluded  that  we  a r e   now 
ready  to  fly  the  most  advanced mission  for  our  Apollo  8 launch  in  De- 
cember, the orbit around the moon.  . . . 
“We  have reached  this  conclusion after  a  long  series  of  intensive in- 
vestigations of  the  status  of  our  program,  the  flight  hardware,  ground 
support equipment, status of  our training.” 
L/G  Samuel  C.  Phillips,  Apollo  Program  Director,  cited  two  catego- 
ries  of  new  risks  with  a  lunar  orbital  mission:  “ In   the  one  . . . the 
spacecraft propulsion  system  must  operate  properly  in  order  to  propel 
the  spacecraft  back  out  of  lunar  orbit  and  on  its  way  back  to  earth. 
And  the  other  category  of  risks  are  those  that  a re   inherent  in  being 
some three  days  away from the earth  as opposed to  . . . between a  half 
an   hour  and  three  hours  which  the  crew  is  away  from  the  earth  in  a 
low  earth  orbital  mission.”  Although  increased  reliance  would  have  to  
be  placed  on  dependability  of  life  support  and  electric power  systems 
and  mission would  have  to  take  on  additional  risks,  Gen.  Phillips  said, 
“The  progression  of  risk  between  the  Apollo  7 mission  which  we  have 
flown  and  the  Apollo  8 mission  which  we  have  designed  is  a  normal 
progression  of  risks  in  a  logically stepped  development,  flight  test  pro- 
gram.”  (Transcript;  NASA  Release  68-199;  Schmeck,  NYT,  11/13/68, 
1 ;  O’Toole,  W  Post,  11/13/68,  1;  Sehlstedt, B  Sun, 11/13/68,  1 )  
Engineer  Michael  O’Hagan,  manager  of  space  and  military  systems 
in  government contracts  dept.  of  U.K.’s  Standard  Telephone  &  Cables 
Co.,  told  Conservative  Party  seminar  in  London  U.S.  was  “actually 
buying  land  with  mineral  rights”  in  other  countries  after  using  satel- 
lites  to  discover  its  location.  Hawker  Siddeley  Group  Ltd.  scientist 
K.  C.  C  Pardoe  said  countries  could  use  satellites to  spy  on  rival  na- 
tions,  crops  and  decide  best  time  for  marketing.  (Reuters,  W Post, 
11/13/68,  A25) 
0  FAA  issued  1968 edition  of  National  Airport  Plan,  annual  assessment  of 
civil  airport  needs  for  commercial  and  private  flying.  U.S.  would  re- 
quire 808 new  a i r p o r t s i n c l u d i n g  22 for  airline traffic and 748  fo r  gen- 
eral  av i a t io n -d u r in g  next  five years,  to  relieve congestion and  accom- 
modate  growth.  Plan  included  recommendation  for  25  STOLports  in 
heavily  congested  areas.  (FAA  Release  68-74) 
Office  of  Secretary  of  Defense issued  list  of  100  companies  and  subsidi- 
aries  awarded  largest  dollar  volume  of  military  prime  contracts  of 
$10,000  or  more  in   F Y   1968.  Total  of  these  was  $26.2  billion,  1.9% 
above FY  1967. U.S.  companies received $38.8 billion,  1% less than  in 
FY   1967.  No.  1  on  list  was  General Dynamics Corp.,  F-111  manufac- 
turer,  with  $2.24 billion  in  contracts;  No.  2, Lockheed Aircraft  Corp., 
$1.87.  billion;  No.  3,  General  Electric  Co.,  $1.49  billion.  McDonnell 

278 

November  12 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
Douglas  Corp.  fell  from  first  place  in   1967 to  fifth with  $1.1 billion. 
(Text; Wilson,  W  Po s t ,   11/19/68,  D7;  WSJ ,  11/19/68,  27) 
New  York  State  Supreme  Court  Justice  Abraham  N.  Geller  issued  tem- 
porary  order  blocking  sale  of  Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory  to  EDP 
Technology,  Inc.,  Washington,  D.C.,  for  $25  million.  Order  had  been 
requested  by  State  Attorney  General  Louis  J.  Lefkowitz, who  alleged 
alteration  of  Laboratory from public purposes  to  profit-making organi- 
zation  would  be  a  “major  change  detrimental  to   the  national  interest, 
to  the  quality  and  effectiveness  of  the  laboratory  and  to   the  . . . 
public.”  New  York  State  had  sought  to  purchase  facility  but  was  re- 
portedly  unable  to  match  EDP  Technology,  Inc.,  offer.  (@,  NYT, 
11/13/68,11) 
November  12-14:  Twelve  nations  attending  Third  European  Space Confer- 
ence  in   Bonn  decided  to  work  toward  creation  of  single  European 
Space  Authority,  in   effort  to  end  dependence  on  U.S.  space  research. 
Committee w a s   appointed to  draf t  convention  for new  body encompass- 
ing 6-nation ELDO,  10-nation ESRO,  and  12-nation CETS and   functioning 
somewhat like NASA.  Member  nations would be  free  to  choose programs 
they  would  support-which 
could  mean  small  group  would  work  on 
launchers  as  well  a s   working  with  number  of  other  nations  on  space 
applications and research. 
Day  preceding conference,  ELDO  meeting  had  resolved,  with  U.K.  ab- 
staining,  to  proceed  with  launcher  development  on  scale  designed  to 
hold  down  costs.  U.K.  had  proposed  European  nations  abandon  proj- 
ect,  rely  on  US .   boosters, .and  concentrate  on  space applications, par- 
ticularly  communications.  U.K.  agreed, however,  to  fulfill  commitment 
to  support  launcher  program  until  1971.  (W   Po s t ,   11/15/68,  A20; 
Greenberg, Science,  12/6/68,1108-9) 
November  13 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCLZZZ  from  Plesetsk  Cosmo- 
drome  into  orbit  with  337-km  (209.4-mi)  apogee,  216-km  (134.2-mi) 
perigee,  90-min  period,  and  65.4”  inclination.  Equipment  functioned 
normally  and  satellite  reentered  Nov.  18.  ( S BD ,  11/14/68,  53;  GSFC 
SSR ,  11/15/68;  11/30/68) 
lifting-body  vehicle,  flown  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  A. 
NASA’s HL-10 
Manke,  completed  first  powered  flight  after  a ir   launch  from  B-52  air- 
craft  near  Lancaster,  Calif.,  to  demonstrate  successful  operation  of 
XLR-11  rocket engine and to  investigate effects of  engine operation on 
basic  stability  and   control  of  wingless  vehicle.  Manke  said  craft 
climbed  and  maneuvered  in   “marvelous  fashion.”  Increased  perform- 
ance  expected  in   successive  flights  would  simulate  lifting-body  space- 
craft during terminal portion of  flight. 
Manke  ignited  two  of  four  chambers  in   HL-lo’s  rocket  engine  and 
climbed from 35,000 to 43,250 f t ,   reaching top speed of  610 mph  (mach 
0.8) during 184-sec engine  burn.  Eventually  speeds  of  1,000 mph  and 
altitudes  to  80,000 f t  were  expected.  Oct.  2 3  HL-10 
flight  had  ended 
with  early  shutdown  of  rocket  engine.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; NASA  Release 
68-198;  FRC Release  26-68;  A€’, B  sun,  11/14/68,  A10;  LATNS,  W 
Po s t ,  11/14/68,  A22) 
NASA  announced  it  had  assigned  Astronauts  Thomas  P.  Stafford,  John 
W.  Young,  and  Eugene  A.  Cernan  as   prime  crew  for  Apollo  10  mis- 
sion,  scheduled  for  second  quarter  of  1969 as  second  manned  flight  of 
lunar  module.  Backup  crew  would  be  Astronauts  L.  Gordon  Cooper, 

279 

November  13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19G8 

November  13:  John  A .   Manke,  NASA  research  p i lo t   a t   F R C ,   stands  before  wingless 
H G l O   l i f t ing -body  vehicle  which  he  f lew   in   f irs t   powered  f l igh t ,   a f t e r  air  launch  from 
B-52   a i rc ra f t .   Manke  reached  610  m ph   i n   NASA-WAF 
program  to   evaluate  possible 
forerunners  o f   reusable  spacecraf t .  Eventual  1,000-mph  speed  was  expected. 

Donn  F.  Eisele,  and  Edgar  D.  Mitchell.  Flight  crew  support  team  was 
Astronauts Joseph  H.  Engle, James  B.  Irwin,  and  Charles M.  Duke,  Jr. 
Mission probabilities  ranged  from  earth  orbital  operations  to  lunar  or- 
bital  flight, with  separation  and  docking of  command  and  service mod- 
ule  and  lunar  module.  (NASA  Release 68-201;  AP,  W  S ta r ,   11/14/68, 
A7;  W  Post,  11/14/68,  A12;  AP,  NYT,  11/14/68,  21;  Sehlstedt,  B 
Sun, 11/14/68,  1 )  
Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Space Science and 
Applications, addressed International Meeting of  American Nuclear  SO- 
ciety  in Washington, D.C.  In   past  decade NASA  had  developed “impres- 
sive capability”  in  “competent  and  creative  people  who  make  up  our 
government-university-industry team.”  It  was  “prepared  to  accomplish 
any goal  in  space exploration which the new  administration  may  estab- 
lish.”  NASA  fu tu re  included “broad,  balanced,  Planetary  Program”  em- 
phasizing Mars  but  examining  other  planets like Mercury  and  Jupiter; 
major  lunar  exploration program  in  1970’s; astronomy program  cover- 
ing  optical  astronomy, x-ray and  gamma  ray  fields,  and  low-frequency 

280 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

November  13 

radio  astronomy;  and  increased  emphasis  on  space  applications  pro- 
grams, with major  efforts toward surveying earth’s resources from space 
and  continuing  developments  in  meteorology  and  communications. 
(Text) 
Dr.  Abe  Silverstein, Director  of  Lewis Research  Center,  was  announced 
winner  of  Rockefeller  Public  Service  Award  in  science  category.  He 
had  supervised plans  for  rocket  installation on  Lunar  Orbiter  and  Sur- 
veyor spacecraft. 
Dr.  Silverstein had  been  first  Director  of  Space  Flight  Programs  in  
NASA  Hq.  in  1958. Under  his  leadership  first  U S .   man-in-space pro- 
gram,  Project  Mercury,  had  been  planned  and  groundwork  laid  for 
Gemini and Apollo programs. He  had  joined  NACA  at  Langley Aeronau- 
tical Laboratory  in  1929  and  helped  design  and  later  was  in  charge  of 
Full-Scale Wind  Tunnel.  He  was  transferred  to  Lewis  Laboratory  in  
1943,  where  he  was  responsible  for  conception, design,  and  construc- 
tion  of  first U S .   supersonic propulsion  wind  tunnels.  Alter  serving  in 
Washington, D.C.,  three  years  he  returned  to  LeRC  as Director  in  1961. 
Leonard  C.  Meeker,  State Dept.  legal  adviser, won  award  in  foreign 
affairs and  international  administration  for  his work on  1967 mace  law 
treaty.  (W Post,  11/14/68,  B7 ;   LERC  Biog,  4/67;  Lew$  New s ,  
11/22/68,1) 
New  Yo rk  T imes  editiorial,  “After  the Lunar  Landing,”  said  first  priority 
would  probably  go  to  study  of  moon’s  surface  and  resources.  “Beyond 
this  exploration,  the  moon-once 
accessible to  men-will 
immediately 
become  a  laboratory  world  for  expanding  knowledge  in  astronomy, 
physics, chemistry, geology and  a  host  of  other  sciences. For  both  pur- 
poses  . . . i t  will  be  desirable  to  create  one or  more  permanent manned 
communities on  the  moon  a s  soon  as  possible.  . . . As  the  pioneers  in 
space, the  United  States  and  the  Soviet Union  have  the  responsibility 
now  to begin  organization of  the  vast  international effort that must  fol- 
low  the  coming triumph  of  human  courage  and  human  ingenuity.  And 
the  United  Nations,  of  course,  is  the  body whose  flag must  fly  over  fu- 
ture  lunar  settlements.”  ( N Y T ,  11/13/68,  4x)) 
e Purdue  Univ.  Prof.  James  E.  Etzel  said  in   Evanston,  Ill.,  interview  that 
technique  for processing sewage sludge by bombarding  it with  ionizing 
radiation  from chemical emitter  of  gamma rays  could  save $1  billion  a 
year  if  used  by  all U S .  cities.  Process was  pioneered by   Etzel  and  Gor- 
don  S.  Born  of  Purdue  in  cooperation  with  Jerome  Stein,  director  of 
R&D  for  Chicago Sanitary  District.  Plan  would  cut  solid-waste-process- 
ing  costs by  more  than half.  Treated  sludge would  be  completely disin- 
fected,  odorless,  and  compressed  to  y3  its  volume.  (Randal,  W  S ta r ,  
11/14/68,  A5) 
USAF  awarded $8.5  million  addition  to  contract  with  Northrop  Corp.  for 
F-5  aircraft.  ( W S J ,  11 /13 /68 ,7)  
November   14:  NASA  announced  it  had  authorized  JPL  to  proceed  with con- 
struction  of  two  Mariner  spacecraft  for  1971 Mars  orbit  with  funds  al- 
located under  approved FY  1969 NASA  appropriations bill.  I n  combined 
mission  to  assist  in  establishing touchdown  sites  for  1973  Mars  lander 
mission,  spacecraft  would  be  launched  by  Atlas-Centaur boosters  into 
orbit  around  Mars  to  examine Mars  polar  cap,  provide  high-resolution 
coverage of  selected areas,  and  permit  oblique views of  broad  areas  of 
Mars’  surface  and,  possibly,  its  moons,  Phobos  and  Deimos.  Each 

281 

November  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

spacecraft would  complete t r ip   from earth  to Mars  in  six  months, with 
May  1971 launch  and  November  1971 arrival,  and  would  orbit  Mars 
for  three  months  or  more.  (NASA Release  68-196;  B  Sun, 11/14/68, 
A10;  W Po s t ,  11/14/68,  D16) 
Washington  Evening  Star  editorial  commented  on  scheduled  December 
launch  of  Apollo  8:  “. . . this  promises  to  be  one  Christmas when  the 
thoughts  of  all  . . . will  contain  more  than  visions  of  sugarplums,  of 
laden  stockings,  of  gifts  about  to  be  received  and  bills  about  to  come 
due.  I t   is,  in  fact,  just  possible  that  NASA  will  succeed  in   putting  that 
missing  ingredient  back  into  the  yule  season,  and  that  more  prayers 
will be  offered this Christmas than  at any time  in  the past 2,000 years.” 
(W  S tar ,  11/14/68,  A14) 
At hearing of  Congressional Joint Economic Committee’s  Subcommittee on  
Economy in Government, A.  E.  Fitzgerald, Deputy for Management Sys- 
tems  in  USAF  financial  office,  said  ultimate  cost  to  DOD of  58  G 5 A  
cargo  aircrait  might  be  “100%  above the  original  estimate”  of  $1.279 
billion for Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.  airframes. General Electric Co.  esti- 
mate  of  $459 million  for  engines was  not  expected  to  double.  Increase 
resulted  from  rise in  manufacturing costs, higher  subcontracting prices, 
and  rising  administrative  costs,  rather  than  gross  original  underesti- 
mate,  although  there  was  probably  some  original  underestimate  by 
Lockheed.  DOD  was   weighing  all  factors  before  deciding  action  on  op- 
(Crowther, B Sun, 11/14/68,  A12;  AP, NYT,  11/14/68,10;  Porter,  w 
tion  for  62  additional  M A S  which  would  expire  Jan.  31,  1969. 
Po s t ,  11/14/68,  A l )  
0  Soviet  aviation  experts  told  Pravda   they  had  successfully  tested  “orni- 
thopter,”  aircraft which  flew  by waving  its wings like  a  bird.  Craft  wa s  
said to have  “withstood  all  aerodynamic tests”  and  to have  greater  lift- 
ing  power  than  ordinary  aircraft.  P ravda   said  test  “opens  unheard  of 
prospects.yy (UPI ,   P  Znq,  11/15/68) 
November  15:  NASA  Aerobee 150 MI  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR 
carried  Princeton  Univ.  Observatory  experiment  to  108-mi  (174-km) 
altitude  to  obtain  UV  radiation  of  bright  star  in  constellation Cassio- 
peia,  using  gyro-stabilized  spectrograph,  ACS,  and  recovery  system. 
Rocket  and  instruments  performed  satisfactorily.  ACS stabilized  rocket 
on  target  at  star.  Spectra  were  obtained  on  three  exposures  and  pay- 
load wa s  recovered in excellent condition.  (NASA Rpt SRL) 
NASA  released  plans  for  lunar  landing  experiments.  First  U.S.  astronauts 
to  land  on  moon  in  1969 would  place  three  scientific  experiments  on 
lunar  surface  instead  of  more  complex Apollo  Lunar  Surface  Experi- 
ments Package  ( ALSEP)  originally planned.  Change was  necessitated by 
uncertainties  in  workload  required  to  deploy  ALSEP  by  astronauts  in  
pressurized suits on  moon’s  surface. Mission’s  primary  objective would 
be  to   prove  Apollo  system  by  achieving  successful moon  landing  and 
safe  return  to  earth.  During  first  landing,  two  astronauts  would  leave 
spacecraft  for  up  to  three  hours  on  moon’s  surface,  making  observa- 
tions  and  photographing  area  in  vicinity  of  landed  spacecraft, collect- 
ing soil and rock samples, and deploying experiments. 
Scientific and  medical data  would  be  obtained  on  expenditure  of  as- 
tronauts,  energy,  monitoring  ability  to  perform  in  vacuum,  extreme 
temperature,  and  I/s gravity fo r  planning  of  longer, more complex m i s -  
sions. Experiments were  (1) passive seismometer  (self-contained 1OO-lb 

282 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

November  15 

seismic station  with  earth-moon communications link,  designed  to  last 
up   to  one  year),  ( 2 )   70-lb laser  ranging  retro-reflector, and  (3 )   1-lb 
solar-wind-composition experiment. They  would  provide  data  on  inter- 
nal  activity  of  moon;  would  provide  data  to  improve  measurement  of 
earth-moon distance,  fluctuation of  earth’s  rotation  rate,  and variations 
in  gravitational  constant  6 ,  as well  as  to  test  theory  of  intercontinental 
drift by  direct  measurements from  different continents;  and  would  en- 
t rap  nobly  gases  (helium,  neon,  krypton,  xenon)  from  solar  wind  for 
analysis. 
I n   second  lunar  landing  mission,  astronauts  would  deploy  full  geo- 
physical  station  o r  ALSEP  and  conduct  detailed  field  geology  investiga- 
tion.  (NASA  Release 68-200) 
U.S.S.R.’s  Zond  Y  automatic  space  station  [see  Sept.  15-21]  had  car- 
ried  first living organisms-wine 
flies, turtles,  meal worms, plants,  bac- 
teria,  and  seeds-around  moon  and  returned  them  safely  to  earth, 
P ravda  announced. Turtles had  lost about  10% of  their body weight but 
remained very active and showed no  loss of  appetite. Preliminary  blood 
tests  indicated  no  substantial  deviation  from  laboratory  control  ani- 
mals, but  analysis of  test turtles 2 1  days after  flight revealed  excess gly. 
cogen  and  iron  in  their  livers.  (AP,  W  S tar ,   11/15/68,  A4;  B  Sun, 
11/16/68,  M )  
*  NASA  Honor  Awards  ceremony was  held  a t   Washington,  D.C.,  wiih  Dr. 
Thomas 0. Paine,  Acting Administrator, making  presentations. Alexan- 
der  H.  Flax, Assistant Secretary of  the Air  Force  (Research and  Devel- 
opment), was main  speaker.  . 
Distinguished Service Medal,  NASA’S  highest honor,  was   presented  to 
Secretary Flax;  Edmond C.  Buckley, former NASA  Associate Administra- 
tor for Tracking and Data Acquisition;  Paul G.  Dembling, NASA  General 
Counsel; and Abe Silverstein, Director of  Lewis Research Center. 
NASA  Exceptional  Scientific  Achievement  Medal  went  to  LeRc’s  G. 
Mervin  Ault,  Edmond  E.  Bisson,  and  John  C.  Evvard;  JPL’S  Richard 
M.  Goldstein, Alan  Rembaum, Lewis  D.  Kaplan,  and  Conway W.  Sny- 
de r ;   MSFC’S  Otto  A.  Hoberg  and  Hans  H.  Hosenthien;  LaRC’s  Mark  R. 
Nichols;  and  ARC’S  William A.  Page  and  John  A.  Parker. 
Exceptional  Service Medal  recipients  were:  Mac  C.  Adams,  Walter 
Boone, Richard  I,.  Callaghan,  Arnold W.  Frutkin,  Alfred  S.  Hodgson, 
Mildred  V.  Morris,  and  Boyd  C.  Myers,  NASA  Hq.;  Robert  M.  Crane 
(posthumous),  William  R.  Schindlar,  and  Michael  J.  Vaccaro,  ARC ; 
Robert  J.  Darcey, Herman  E.  LaGow,  and  Robert  J.  McCaffery, GSFC; 
Philip  Donely,  Paul  F.  Fuhrmeister,  and  Harry  H.  Hamilton,  LaRC; 
Robert  C.  Duncan,  ERC ;   Fred  H.  Felberg  and  Alvin  R.  Luedecke,  JPL; 
Arthur Rudolph, MSFC ; and Hubert Ray Stanley, Wallops Station. 
Group  Achievement  Award  went  to  Apo l lo   7  Flight  Operations 
Team,  Instrumentation  Ships  Team,  Mariner  Occultation  Experiment 
Team,  OGO  Project  Team,  Sonic  Boom  Investigating  Team,  and  Sur- 
veyor  Team. 
(Program;  MSFC  Release  68-267;  Marshall  S tar ,  
11/13/68,  1 ; Pasadena  Independent,  11/15/68;  ARC  As trogram ,  
11/21/68,1) 
0  Dr.  R.  G.  McIver,  head  of  aeromedical  research  a t   Holloman  AFB,  N. 
Mex.,  said  tests on chimpanzees had  shown astronaut  experiencing sud- 
den  decompression outside  spacecraft might  live  a t   least  three  minutes 
in  total  vacuum, giving  his  companions time  to  get him inside  pressur- 

283 

November  15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

ized  cabin.  Survival  of  astronauts  in  ruptured  space  cabin  would  de- 
pend  on presence of  one man  wearing  space suit  and  thus  able  to  place 
other  crewmen  in  suits  after  they  lost  consciousness. Earlier,  scientists 
had  predicted  sudden  death  for  astronauts  experiencing space vacuum 
decompression. Revised  estimates of  life expectancy were based  on  sim- 
ulated  space capsule  experiments with  150 chimpanzees.  (AP,  B  Sun, 
11/16/68,  A4) 
*  Science  editorial  on  NASA  administration:  “In  terms  of  numbers  of  dol- 
lars or  of  men,  NASA  has not been  our  largest  national  undertaking,  but 
in  terms  of  complexity, rate  of  growth, and  technological sophistication 
it has been  unique.  . . . Keeping all  of  [its]  parts-often  working  right 
a t  the  edge  of  technological  knowledge  and  capacity-finely 
tuned  and 
in  close harmony  has  been  an  organization  achievement of  high  order. 
. . . Ever  since the  space program  began  to  take  shape  there  has  been 
talk  of  technological spin-offs. I t   may  turn  out  that  the  most  valuable 
spin-off  of  all  will  be  human  rather  than  technological:  better  knowl- 
edge  of  how  to  plan,  coordinate,  and  monitor  the  multitudinous  and 
varied  activities  of  the  organizations  required  to  accomplish  great  so- 
cial undertakings.”  (Wolfle, Science, 11/15/68,753) 
*  I n  Wushington Post  George C.  Wilson  said Secretary of  Defense Clark M. 
Clifford’s  office  had  recommended cutback in  USAF’S  order  for  FB-111, 
bomber version of  TFX,  from 253 to  90,  a  saving of  $1.5  billion. While 
DOD  was  under  pressure  to  reduce  spending by  $3 billion,  said Wilson, 
argument  “goes to the heart  of  the  strategic question of  unmanned mis- 
siles vs.  manned bombers.”  ( W  Po s t ,   11/15/68,  1) 
Formal  establishment  of  Science  and  Public  Policy  Studies  Group  tem- 
porarily  housed  at  MIT   became  effective.  Group was   designed  as  focus 
of  interest  and  information  for  scholars,  universities,  and  government 
officials engaged  in  teaching and  research  in  science and  public  policy. 
Any  university  with  active  teaching  and  research  program  in  science 
and  public  policy  could  become  affiliate.  Some  50  had  indicated  inter- 
est.  Funding for  two-year period was  from university contributions  and 
matching  Sloan  Foundation  grant.  Prof.  Eugene  B.  Skolnikoff  of  MIT 
would  serve as chairman.  (Group Ann) 
0  Dr.  Frank  D.  Drake,  Director  of  Cornel1 Univ.‘s  Arecibo  Ionospheric 
Observatory  (Puerto Rico) , told  meeting  of  Council  for  the  Advance- 
ment  of  Science Writing  a t   Evanston,  Ill.,  that  pulsar  discovered  Nov. 
14  near  Crab Nebula was almost certainly a  neutron  star.  I t  was  second 
discovery during week  [see  Nov.  61  and  was  located  by  Arecibo  radio 
dish  telescope.  (Randal,  W  Pos t ,   11/16/68,  A5;  Sullivan,  N Y T ,  
11 /20 /68 ,31 )  
*  Edward Wenk, Jr.,  Executive Secretary  of  Marine Resources Council, told 
new  American  Oceanic  Organization  in  Washington,  D.C.,  “We  are 
ready  for  the  next  step  in  Federal  management  of  marine  a f f a i r s - c r e -  
ation  of  an  independent  civilian  operating  agency.”  Chairman  of  new 
group,  Rep.  George E.  Shipley  (D-Ill.) , member  of  House  Appropria- 
tions Committee, said,  “I think  that  we  w i l l   see the time  that  this  coun- 
try  w i l l   spend  a s   much  in  oceanography  as  we   are  spending  in  the 
space program.”  (Corrigan, W Pos t ,  11/17/68,  K 1 )  
November  16: U.S.S.R.’s  P ro ton   ZV, largest  unmanned  scientific satellite  to 
date, was  launched  into  orbit  with  472-km  (293.3-mi)  apogee,  248-km 
(154.1-mi)  perigee,  91.7-min  period,  and  51.5”  inclination.  Satellite 

284 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

November  16 

weighed  17   metric  tons  (37,478  l b ) ,   including  12.5-metric  ton 
(27,557.5-1b)  scientific  payload  to  continue  studies  of  cosmic  rays. 
Equipment was  functioning  normally.  (AP,  W  S tar ,   11/17/68,  A18; 
Kamm,  N Y T ,   11/17/68,  1 ;   SBD ,   11/19/68,  72-3;  GSFC  SSR, 
11/30/68) 
Apollo  8 prime  crew-Astronauts  Frank  Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr., 
and  William  A.  Anders-held 
press  conference  a t   MSC  on  Apollo  8 
flight plan.  Commander Borman explained that  an  important  feature  of 
mission’s  flight  plan  was  establishment in  advance  of  decision  points 
when  crew could decide whether  to  continue mission  a s  planned  or  re- 
to  earth:  “.  . . the 
[decision  point]  w i l l   be 
first  one 
turn 
whether  w e   commit 
to 
translunar 
injection 
[from  parking 
orbit]  or  not.  . . . But  even 
i f   we  do  commit  . . . we  have 
regular  abort  times  along the  course  to  the moon,  so   that  we  could-in 
case  of  a  system  problem  . . . stop  a t   any  time  and  come  back.  Then 
we  finally reach  a  point where i t  would  be  swifter to  just  go  on  around 
the  moon  than  i t  would  be  to  try  to  abort.  The next  great  point  is  be- 
fore  we  burn  lunar  orbit  injection.”  Once  in  lunar  orbit  crew  would 
receive  abort  data  regularly  and  have  option  to  return  to  earth  every 
two  hours.  “The  mission,  i f   all  works  well,  will  be  a  relatively  simple 
one,”  Borman  said.  “.  . . we  designed  Apollo,  we  said  we  were  going 
to  the  moon,  and  . . . finally when  we  get  down  to  examining  the  de- 
tails  and  saying we  are really going, people  start  getting  a  little  queasy 
about  it.  But  I  have  no  hesitancy  about  the  hardware.”  (Transcript; 
O’Toole,  W Po s t ,  11/17/68,  A8 )  
November  17 :   Boeing  Co.  in  Washington,  D.C.,  displayed  scale  model  of 
new  fixed-wing design  for  SST with  downward-bent wings  inboard  to- 
ward  fuselage  and  vertical  tail  placed  well  forward  of  horizontal  tail. 
SST Program  Director  M /G   Jewel1  C.  Maxwell  said  i n   interview,  “I 
think  we  have  a  much  greater  feeling  of  confidence  than  we  have  had 
in  some time. We  now  have  a  design  in hand  that  seems able to  do  the 
job.”  Boeing would  submit  new  design  to  Government in  mid-January 
but,  said New  Y o rk   T ime s ,  “there  is some nervousness about the  recep- 
tivity  of  the new  Congress for  a budget request that  w i l l   probably  come 
close  to  $300  million  for  the  fiscal  year  ending  June  lWO.”  Current 
estimates  of  overall  SST cost  were  $1.5  billion.  ( N Y T ,  11/18/68,  93) 
e  In   New  Yo rk   T imes  Walter  Sullivan  said  nuclear  specialists who  met  in 
Stockholm  during  April  and  June  a t   invitation  of  International  Insti- 
tute  for  Peace  and  Conflict  Research  had  confirmed  effectiveness  of 
new  method  of  distinguishing man-made explosion  from  natural  earth- 
quake  at  thousands  of  miles  by  comparing magnitude  of  seismic  event 
in  waves  crossing  earth‘s  surface  with  magnitude  of  “body  waves” 
f rom  same  event  that  had  passed  through  earth‘s  depths.  Analysis  by 
scientists from  U.K.,  Canada,  and  U.S.S.R.  had  shown  strength  of  sur- 
face waves  related  to  body  waves  was  consistently less  in  bomb  explo- 
sions than in  earthquakes.  ( N Y T ,  11/17/68,1) 
November  18:  Bullet  fragment  in  brain  of  holdup  victim  Joseph  Barrios 
was  successfully repositioned  into  brain  membrane by  whirling  patient 
in  ARC  centrifuge, subjecting him  to  force of  6 g.  Fragment  had  moved 
from  critical  central  ventricle  to  lateral  ventricle  when  doctors  a t  
O’Connor  Hospital  in  San  Jose,  Calif.,  somersaulted Barrios  on  rotat- 
ing  chair,  but  fragment  could  move  again.  Force  of  c e n t r i f u g e n o r -  

285 

November  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

mally  used  by  NASA  for  space  research-imbedded 
fragment  in   m em  
brane of  left  ventricle, where i t  was expected to  remain  safely encapsu- 
lated  by  scar  tissue.  Dec.  16  x-rays  showed  fragment  had  not  moved 
since  centrifuge  treatment.  Barrios  was  sent  home  from  hospital  Dec. 
17.  (Brody, N Y T ,  11/21/68,  37 ;  AP,  V Po s t ,   11/21/68,  A3;  ARC  A s -  
t rog ram ,  12 /8 /68 ,1 ;   ARC  Medical Services Branch) 
Astronaut  Walter  M.  Schirra  was  announced winner  of  Kitty Hawk  Me- 
morial  Trophy  for  distinguished  achievement in  aeronautics.  Trophy 
would  be  presented  a t   annual  Wright  Brothers  memorial  banquet  in  
Beverly Hills, Calif., Dec.  6.  (UPI,  W S tar ,  11/19/68,  A2) 
0  NASA  submitted  reclama  to  Bureau  of  the  Budget’s  tentative  FY  1970 
budget allowance, for total  $4.074 billion. Subsequently, Acting Admin- 
istrator  Thomas  0.  Paine  met  with  BOB  Director  Charles  J.  Zwick. 
(NASA   Off  of  Admin) 
USAF  denied  decision  had  been  made  to  cut  back  or  cancel  FB-Il? 
production  [see  Nov.  151,  Wa l l   Street  Journal  said,  but  reports  per- 
sisted  that  fewer  than  253  would  be  purchased  because  of  their  high 
cost  and  indifferent performance.  Aerospace  Daily  said  its  sources  re- 
ported  recommended cutback of  more  than  50%  was  “essentially accii- 
rate”  and  put  figure at  “about  100” to  give USAF  Unit  Equipment  force 
of  90 aircraft.  (W S J ,  11 /18 /68 ,12 ;   Aero Da i ly ,  11/18/68) 
November   18-19:  Conference on  Pavement Grooving  and  Traction  Studies 
was  held  at  LaRC  on  results  of  NASA  research  program  into  hydroplm- 
ing  and  effectiveness  of  runway  and  highway  grooving  in  minimizing 
accidents on wet  pavement.  Among papers  presented, joint  NASA-Br3:ish 
Ministry  of  Technology  study of  tests  a t  Wallops Station  showed  1- by 
%- by  %-inch  grooving  “at  least  doubled  the  friction  coefficient”  of 
aircraft  runway  surfaces.  Studies  by  L aRC ,   California  Div.  of  High- 
ways,  and  other  state  highway  departments  showed  grooving  of  high- 
way  pavement  was  effective in  preventing wet-weather accidents.  (NASA 
SP-5073) 
Air  Transport  Assn.  of  America  reported  that  15- to  19-mo use  a t  
three  major  airports had  convinced airlines  that  runway  surface  groov- 
ing  was  “an  effective  aid  in  overcoming  hydroplaning”  during  wet 
landings.  Airline  operation  evaluation had  “dispelled  earlier  fears  that 
grooving might  damage  runways  or  aircraft.”  (Text;  N Y T ,   11/24/68, 
84 )  
November   18-21:  During  Geneva conference of  IAF  on  Basic  Environmen- 
tal  Problems of  Man  in  Space, Dr.  Boris B.  Yegorov,  only physician  to 
travel  in  space  (launched  in U.S.S.R.’s  Voskhod  I  Oct.  12,  1964) , told 
press  conierence  he  believed  planetary  flights  would  be  achieved  by 
1987. 1J.S.S.R.  was  experimenting  with  8- to  10-volt electrical  shocks 
administered  to  improve  circulation  and  stimulate  muscles  of  cosmo- 
nauts  to  enable  them  to  endure  strain  of  returning  to   earth  after  pro- 
longed  period  in  confined  space  capsule.  He  claimed  problem  of 
weightIessness wa s   same  for  short or  long  flights  and  urged  immediate 
planning for flights to galaxies outside solar system. 
Dr.  Walton  W.  Jones,  NASA  Director  of  Biotechnology  and  Human 
Research,  told  conference US .   could  keep  astronauts  in  earth  orbit  a 
year  within  10 yr i f   U S .   would  allocate sufficient  resources to  project. 
ARC  experiments  had  shown  rats  subjected  to  gravitational  pull  4.7 
times  above normal  had  increased  life  expectancy.  He  said  after  meet- 

286 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

November  18-21 

ing  that  NASA  planned  experiments with  rats  a t  zero  gravitation  to  de- 
termine if  aging process was suspended while man  was free from gravi- 
tational pull. 
Dr.  J.  F.  Kubis  of  Fordham  Univ.  emphasized  importance  of  psy- 
chological factors  in  selecting space crews. On  long  flight,  “lack  of  pri- 
vacy,  crowding,  and  continuous  exposure  to  interaction  w i l l   become 
sources  of  aggravating  stress.’’  He  recommended no  more  than  one  in 
crew with dominant personality. 
Soviet scientist  Dr.  N.  N.  Gurovsky said  condition of  two  dogs after 
22-day  orbital  flight  (in  Cosmos  CX  Feb.  22-March  16,  1966)  had 
aroused forebodings on effect of  year-long flights on  astronauts. Loss of 
calcium  in  bones would  make  them  prone  to  breaking.  Both  dogs  had 
.developed  liver  and  intestinal  ailments  including  edemas.  Human 
beings  could  expect  same  effects.  Earlier  reports  had  noted  dogs  suf- 
fered  muscular  reduction,  dehydration,  and  confusion  in  adjusting  to 
walking. 
Cal  Tech  Prof.  Fritz  Zwicky  said  some  apparently  unexplained 
deaths on  earth each year  could be due to blows from meteors or heavy 
nucleons  in  cosmic  rays.  (Hamilton,  N Y T ,   11/20/68,  31 ;   11/21/68, 
18; AP, B Sun, 11/22/68,1) 
November  19:  NASA  launched  series  of  three  sounding  rockets  from  NASA 
Wallops  Station  to  conduct  acoustic  grenade  experiments.  Nike-Cajun 
carried GSFC  experiment to  72.6-mi  (122.7-km)  altitude to  obtain  verti- 
cal profile of  temperature, pressure, density, and wind data between 21.8- 
and  59-mi  (35- and  95-km)  altitudes.  Sound  arrivals  of  18  exploding 
grenades,  ejected  at  programmed  altitudes,  were  recorded  and  shock 
waves  were measured by  two  rocketborne pressure  transducers.  Launch 
was  correlated  with  similar  grenade  experiments  launched  from 
Churchill Research Range and Point Barrow, Alaska. 
Nike-Apache carried  GSFC  payload  to  124.3-mi  (200-km)  altitude  to 
define  D-region  electron-density profile  in  conjunction  with  measure- 
ments  by  Nike-Apache launched  later.  Good  data  were  obtained,  but 
radar failed to track vehicle. 
Second  Nike-Apache,  carrying  Univ.  of  Michigan  experiment, 
reached 80-mi  (148-km)  altitude. Objective was to  obtain neutral  parti- 
cle parameters  of  pressure,  temperature,  and  density between  24.8-  and 
62.1-mi  (40- and  100-km)  altitude  w i th   Pitot  static  tube  and  falling 
sphere.  All  key  experimental  events  occurred  as  planned.  (NASA  Rpts 
SRL)  
Vice  President Hubert H.  Humphrey spent  five  hours  in  briefings a t   KSC, 
ascending to  spacecraft level  of  Apollo  8 moon  rocket, performing sim- 
ulated  rendezvous  and  formation  flying  inside  mock  spacecraft,  and 
lunching  with  NASA  officials  and  Apollo  8 Astronauts  Frank  Borman, 
James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  William  A.  Anders.  During  visit,  he  said: 
“The space program  has contributed  greatly  to  the  structure  of  our  na- 
tion.  . . . I have  felt i t  has  been  underfunded  a t  times  and we  will  pay 
the price. I feel  i t  is a  wise investment  on  the  part  of  Congress and  the 
public.  I’ll do what I can  a s  a  private citizen and  a former chairman  of 
the  space council  to  see  i t   is  funded.”  (KSC   Release  K S C - 4 9 6 - 6 8 ;   AP, 
W S tar ,   11/20/68,  AS;  AI’,  W  Pos t ,   11/20/68,  C1 ;   Toda y ,   11/20/68, 
1 )  
*  Soviet  Prof.  Georgy  I.  Petrov  in   Izvestzh  said  successful  recovery  of 

287 

November  19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Zond  V I   opened  way  (‘for  creation  of  spacecraft  able  to  get  to  the 
moon,  Mars,  Venus,  and  other  planets  and  return  to  earth.”  Such  ex- 
periments, he  said, “w i l l   allow us  in  the  near  future  to  create long-last- 
ing  orbital  stations, moon  laboratories  manned  by  scientific  personnel. 
. . . The  passenger  ships  will  differ  from  the  present  spacecraft,  bu t  
now  we  are  witnessing  their  birth.”  I n   another  dispatch  Tass  said 
basic problem of  reentry  by  spacecraft a t  “second  cosmic speed,”  about 
25,000  mph,  had  been  solved  by  Zond   V I .   (UPI,  W  Star,  11/20/68, 
B11) 
In  answer  to  queries  [see  Nov.  161  DOD issued  statement  on   increased 
cost  of  C-SA,  world’s  largest  aircraft.  “At  the  beginning  of  this  pro- 
gram  over  three  years  ago,  the  Air  Force  estimated  that  the  cost  of 
development  and  production  of  the  first  58  airplanes  would  b e   $2.3 
billion.  The  corresponding  estimate  for  the  120   airplanes  ultimately 
contemplated  was  $3.1  billion.  Current  estimates,  including  economic 
escalation  and  all  other  factors,  are  $3.25  billion  and  $4.3  billion, 
indicating  increases  of  41 %  and  39%  respectively.”  Additional  costs 
had  resulted  from  increased  labor  and  materials  costs  due  to   Vietnam 
war  and  “unprecedented demand  for  civilian  aircraft,”  introduction  of 
new  technology,  and  modifications  to  overcome  technical  difficulties. 
(Text;  WSJ,  11/20/18,  2 ;  AP,  W  Post,  11/20/68,  A3;  Kelly, W  Star, 
11/20/68,  A l l )  
November  20:  NASA  successfully launched two Nike-Cajun sounding  rockets 
to  74.6-mi  (120-km)  and  70.6-mi  (113.6-km)  altitudes  to  obtain  data 
on  variation  of  temperature,  pressure,  and  wind  profile  by  detonating 
grenades  at  prescribed  times  and  recording  sound  arrivals  on  ground. 
Rockets  and  instruments  performed  satisfactorily;  sound  arrivals  were 
recorded  from  19 grenades  on  each  rocket.  Data  would  be  compared 
with  data  from launches from  NASA  Wallops  Station  and  Point  Barrow, 
Alaska.  (NASA  Rpts SRL )  
NASA  Acting  Administrator  Dr.  Thomas  0.  Paine  in  speech  before  AIA 
Fall  Conference in  Phoenix, Ariz., said, “Today  the United  States stand 
a t  the crossroads.”  In  FY  1969 NASA  wa s  operating close to  “breakpointyy 
level.  Below  $4-billion  budget  level,  NASA  could  no  longer  “hold 
together  our  hard-won  capabilities  and  utilize  them  effectively  in 
critical  programs;  some  of  them  would  have  to  be  dropped  entirely.” 
Budget  aEw e   $4  billion  would  “not  only  allow  us   to  . . . carry  fo r -  
ward  major  programs,  but  might  permit  . . .  modest  investments 
aimed at reducing costs of  future space activities.” 
Pointing  to  “long-term results  of  the  tremendous technological effort 
. . . mounted  during World War  11”  and  “still  being  exploited today,” 
Dr.  Paine  urged  that  a s   “we  tackle  grave  social  ills,  we’ve  got  to  con- 
tinue  to  forge  ahead  in  other  areas.’We  must  worry  about  how  we 
create  new  wealth  a s   much  as  we  do  about  how  we  better  distribute 
today’s  wealth.  It would be  an  international tragedy  if  America  were  to 
turn  back  now  from  its  forward  thrust  in  space at  the  end  of  an   aston- 
ishingly productive first decade.” 
James  M.  Beggs,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Re- 
search  and  Technology,  discussed  three  major  aerospace  needs:  in- 
creased  aeronautical  research,  low-cost boosters,  and  use  of  nuclear  en- 
ergy  i n   space.  In  aircraft  technology,  NASA  was  “increasing  . . . effort 
by  increases in  old  and  new  aeronautical  disciplines in  V/STOL technol- 

288 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

November  20 

@ 

ogy,  and  in  noise  reduction.”  Pressing  need  for  boosters as  reliable  a s  
existing boosters but  fa r  more  economical, “means  a  fresh  approach  to  
the  entire  concept  of  boosters  and  a  critical  examination  of  each  step 
. . . from  the  drawing  board  to  the  end  of  the  boost  operation.”  NASA 
was  recommending that  NERVA  engine  development be  continued  with 
engine and stage ready  for  a mission a s  early  as  1977.  (Texts) 
I n  BBC TV  interview Jodrell  Bank Experimental Station Director,  Sir  Ber- 
nard  Lovell,  said  U S .   Apollo  8 plan  f o r  manned  lunar  orbit  was,  “On 
a  scientific basis  . . . wasteful  and  silly.  . . . We’ve  reached  the  stage 
with  automatic  landings  when  it’s  not  necessary  to  risk  human  life  to 
get  information  about  the  moon.  Within  a  few  years  this  information 
could  be  obtained  by  automatic,  unmanned  instruments.’’  Sir  Bernard 
said he was  full  of  admiration  for  project  but  added,  there was  “a  dan- 
gerous element of  deadline beating i n  it.” 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space Flight,  Dr.  George 
E.  Mueller, commented, “The purpose is not scientific but to  take an  im- 
portant  step in  developing the  capability  of  landing  men  on  the moon.” 
In   telephone  interview  from  Huntsville,  Ala.,  he  said,  “We  are  taking 
no undue risks.” 
Apollo  8 crewman William  A.  Anders  told  news  conference  a t   KSC, 
“We  are  flying  primarily  an   operational  mission  and  we  strongly  feel 
that  a  manned  platform  in  lunar  orbit  with  the  operational  equipment 
we  have  can  add  significant  bits  and  pieces  to  scientific  knowledge. 
. . . We  think  it  will  be  a  real  boon  for  future  Apollo  flights  to  have 
the  photographic,  navigation,  tracking,  mapping,  and  other  knowledge 
we’ll  bring  back.”  (AP ,   B  Sun, 11/21/68,  1; NYT,  11/21/68,  1 9 ;  
O’Toole,  W Post,  11/21/68,  A3 )  
Survey by  AIA  predicted  decline in  aerospace  industry  employment  from 
1,431 million  in  March  to  1,400 million  by  December because  of  con- 
tinuing  decline  in  space  program  and  leveling  off  of  employment  re- 
quirements  in  aircraft  production  and  R&D  programs.  Employment was 
expected  to  remain  at  December  level  through  March  1969.  Aircraft 
production  and  R&D  employees were  expected  to  decline  from  854,000 
to  833,000,  o r   by  2.5%.  Missiles and  space employment was  expected 
to  drop  from  517,000  to  507,000,  or  1.9%.  Scientists  and  engineers 
would  continue  to  form  16%  of  aerospace  employment,  with  techni- 
cians  making  up  6%   of  aerospace  industry  employment.  (MA   Release 
68-56) 
Soviet trade  union  newspaper  T rud   said  mass production  of  powerful  in- 
tercontinental  rockets  had  started  at  U.S.S.R.’s  “Rocket  City”  because 
the  conquest  of  space is  expanding.”  Device made  a t   the  unidentified 
( 6  
city  “will help  ou r   scientists discover new  mysteries of  the  universe  for 
the good of  man.”  (UPI,  NYT,  11 /22 /68 ,22 )  
@  GSFC  awarded  $3,127,001  one-year  extension  of  cost-plus-award-fee con- 
tract  t o   Fairchild-Hiller  Corp.  for  scientific  and  engineering  support 
services a t  GSFC.  ( GSFC  Release G-53-68) 
November  21 : Cosmos CCLIV  was  successfully launched  by  U.S.S.R.  from 
Plesetsk  Cosmodrome.  Satellite  entered  orbit  with  332-km  ( 2 0 6 . 3 - 4  
apogee, 210-km  (130.5-mi)  perigee,  89.8-min period,  and  65.4”  incli- 
nation  and  reentered  Nov.  29.  (UPI,  NYT,  11/22/68,  22;  GSFC  S S R ,  
11/30/68;  SBD, 12 /2 /68 ,129 )  
@  NASA  Aerobee  150  A  sounding  rocket  successfully  launched  from  NASA 

@ 

289 

November  21 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%8 

Wallops  Station  carried  300-lb  payload  containing  two  white  rats  to 
101-mi  (162.5-km)  altitude  in   third  of  four  experiments to  study  rats’ 
behavior  in  artificial  gravity  field  and  determine  minimum  level  of 
gravity  needed by biological organisms during  space flight.  During  five 
minutes of  free fall, rats  selected artificial gravity levels created through 
centrifugal action by  walking  along tunnel  runway in  extended arms  of 
payload.  Data  on  their  position  and  movement  were  telemetered  t o  
ground  stations.  Payload  impacted  69  mi  downrange  in  the  Atlantic. 
( ws  Release 68-21 
NASA  Aerobee  150  M I   sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  carried 
Univ.  of  Colorado  experiment  to   121-mi  (193-km)  altitude  to  take 
high-resolution  spectra  of  carbon-2  resonance  doublet  a t   wavelength 
1,334 and  1,336 A ;   to  retake,  for  comparison,  high-resolution  spectra 
of  oxygen-1 resonance  triplet  at  1,302,  1,304,  and  1,306  A ;   and  to  
measure total  intensities of  these lines. Rocket and  instrumentation  per- 
formed  satisfactorily.  Analysis  of  experiment  results  awaited  recovery 
and processing of  flight film.  (NASA Rpt SRL) 
e National  Science  Foundation  released  Research  and  Development  in   In- 
du s t ry ,  1966. Total  1966 industrial  R&D  expenditure was  $15.5  billion, 
with  industry  accounting  for  70%  of  nation’s  R&D  performance.  Fed- 
eral  Government R&D  performed  in  industry  reached  $8.3  billion,  53% 
of  industrial  total.  In   January  1%7,  163,900-30%  of  total-industrial 
scientists  and  engineers  were  engaged  in  R&D  directly  supported  by 
Federal  Government.  I n   1966,  NASA  and  DOD  financed  work  of  89% 
of  R&D  scientists and  engineers employed  by  industry  on  Federal  proj- 
ects,  with  54,000 working  on  NASA  projects,  an  increase  of  50%  over 
1963.  DOD-financed  scientists  and  engineers  decreased  23%  in  same 
period.  (Text) 
At  awards  dinner  of  National  Institute  of  Social Sciences in   New  York, 
Charles A.  Lindbergh  said,  “My  hope  that  aviation  would  cause better 
relationships  between  our  earth‘s  peoples  gave  way  to  realization  that 
the  airplane’s primary  significance lay  in  its  power  of  destruction.  . . . 
My  fascination  with  the  rocket  as  a  space-exploring vehicle  has  been 
replaced  by  my  alarm  at  its  ability  to  wipe  out  our  civilization  over- 
night.,,  Lindbergh  and  his  wife,  Anne  Morrow,  received  gold  medals 
for  “distinguished service to humanity”  for  their  work  in  conservation. 
(UPI, W  S tar ,   11/22/68,  A2) 
Washington  Evening  Star  said  U.K.  and  Australian  governments  had 
drawn  up  joint  plans  for  largest  telescope  in  Southern  Hemisphere, 
150-in optical telescope at Siding Spring Mountain Observatory of  Aus- 
tralian  National Univ.  I t  would  cost $10.5 million.  (W  S tar ,   11/21/68, 
A6) 
ComSatCorp  announced  it  had  requested  proposals  for  construction  of 
two  new  earth  stations  near  Talkeetna,  Alaska,  and  Apra  Heights, 
Guam.  (ComSatCorp Release 68-63) 
e Dept.  of  Interior  released Noise  and  the Sonic  Boom  in  Relation  to   Man, 
report  of  12-scientist study group  appointed by  Interior  Secretary Stew- 
a r t  L.  Udall.  Study found  boom effects not  harmful  to  hearing but  esti- 
mated  regular  commercial overland SST flight  would  produce  possible 
$80  million  worth  of  damage  claims  annually  from  owners  of  build- 
ings.  Although  value  of  time  saved by  SST passengers might  be  $3 bil- 
lion  annually,  number  of  persons  “gravely  annoyed”  probably  would 

290 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

November  21 

be  larger  than  that  of  SST passengers.  Widespread  use  of  SSTS  would 
introduce  large  quantities  of  water vapor  into atmosphere, which might 
affect weather. 
Group  found  urgent  necessity  for  prompt  decision  on  SST program 
and  recommended : permitting  only  controlled  experimental  SST flights 
over populated areas while full determination of  effects was being made; 
making  immediate large-scale experiments with  existing supersonic air- 
craft  simulating  intercity  SST operations ; and  establishing  Presidential 
committee  to  hold  public  hearings  in  all  regions  of  U S .   likely  to   be 
affected by  sonic  boom.  (Text;  Hornig,  W  S tar ,   11/22/68,  A4;  Rich, 
W  Po s t ,   11/22/68,  A2; Sehlstedt, B  Sun,  11/22/68,  AS) 
November   21-22:   NASA  launched  two  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  from 
Point  Barrow,  Alaska,  carrying  GSFC  experiments  to  obtain  vertical 
profile  of  temperature,  pressure,  density,  and  wind  data  between  21.8- 
and  59-mi  (35-  and  95-km)  altitudes  by  detonating  grenades  a t   pre- 
scribed times  and  recording  sound  arrivals  on  ground.  Rockets and  in- 
struments  performed  satisfactorily;  1 9   grenades  on  each  rocket  ex- 
ploded  as planned.  (NASA  Rpts SRL) 
November   2 2 :   NASA  Aerobee  150  A  sounding  rocket  launched  from  NASA 
Wallops  Station  carried  Univ.  of  Kentucky  experiment  to  101.7-mi 
(163.6-km)  altitude  to   determine  gravity  preference  of  small white  ra t  
when  subjected to  artificial  gravity  field  [see Nov.  211.  Rocket and  in- 
strumentation  performed  satisfactorily.  Good  data  were  obtained. 
(NASA  Rpt SRL) 
0  JPL announced i t s  astronomers had  determined  asteroid  Icarus was  about 
half  mile  in  diameter  and  rotated  every 2%  hr,  from  data  received dur- 
ing  three-day  series  of  seven  microwave  probes.  Icarus  was  clocked  a t  
speeds from 36,000 mph  to   1,450 mph  at  4-million-mi distanc-losest 
approach  it  had  made  to  earth  in  19 yr.  A  450,000-w  transmitter  on 
85-ft antenna  at  Goldstone Tracking  Station  in  Mohave  desert  beamed 
radar  waves  a t  2,388-mc frequency.  Reflected echoes were  received  by 
210-ft antenna  14  mi  away. Average  radar  round  t r ip  to  Icarus was  43 
sec.  JPL radar  astronomer,  Dr.  Richard  M.  Goldstein,  said  indications 
were  that  Icarus  was  “rough,  even  jagged,  and  perhaps  shaped  like  a 
peach  stone.”  Radar  reflections were unable to   indicate  whether  its  sur- 
face  was  stony  o r   metallic.  If  metallic,  Dr.  Goldstein  said,  its  radius 
might be  as small as 300 m;  if  stony,  600 my which  fixed Icarus’ diam- 
eter  at  600  to  1,200  m,  with  900  m  a  probable  figure.  (NASA  Release 
68-197;  AP,  W  S tar ,   11/20/68,  A8;  Goldstein,  Science,  11/22/68, 
903 -4 )  
0  Electronic  device  used  to  monitor  heart  pumping  performance  of  astro- 
nauts  was   being  tested  as  a  “potentially  sensitive  indicator  of  early 
transplant  rejections,”  MSC’S  Dr.  Charles A.  Berry  and Dr. Lawrence F. 
Dietlein  told  symposium  of  medical space scientists from  1 5  nations  at 
World  Health  Organization  in  Geneva.  “The  device,  i f   successful, 
would be  ideally suited for  this use.”  Dr.  Dietlein pointed  out  that  since 
no  needles were used  there would b e  no  risk  of  infection and no  risk  of 
upsetting  the  delicate  immunological balance  of  patients.  (AP,  Toda y ,  
11/24/68,12A) 
NAS  in  The   Mathematical  Sc iences:   A  Repor t   said  that  before  World 
War  I1  US. w a s   consumer  of  mathematical  talent  but  now  was  “uni- 
versally  recognized  a s   the  leading  producer.”  Graduate  education  i n  

291  

November  22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

mathematical sciences  a t   major  US .   centers  was  ‘‘far  superior  to  that 
in  all but  tw o  or  three  centers in  the  rest  of  the world,”  but  shortage of 
college  teachers  was  likely  to  worsen.  Report  recommended  increased 
Federal  support  for  basic  research,  including NASA  programs,  computer 
science, applied mathematics, graduate apprenticeships, and  faculty  im- 
provement.  (Text;  Schwartz, N Y T ,  11/24/68,74) 
*  Dr.  Donald  F.  Hornig,  President  Johnson’s  Special Assistant  for  Science 
and  Technology,  would  join  Eastman  Kodak  Co.  in  “executive  capac- 
ity”  in  early  January,  Science  reported.  He  would  also become  profes- 
sor of  chemistry a t  Univ. of  Rochester.  (Sc ience ,  11/22/68,881) 
*  U S .   and  Romania  signed  agreements to  exchange information  on  peace- 
ful uses  of  atomic energy,  scientific delegations, and unclassified techni- 
cal literature  and  films.  Romanian graduate students would be  assigned 
t o  U S .   laboratories  and  universities.  (Cohn,  W  Po s t ,   11/21/68;  E l ;  
AP, N Y T ,  11 /24 /68 ,43 )  
November   23:  First  Lady,  Mrs.  Lyndon  B.  Johnson,  and  daughter  Mrs. 
Lynda  Robb  paid  their  first  visit  to  KSC  and  participated  in  simulated 
moon  landing  in  lunar  landing  module  replica.  Dr.  Thomas 0. Paine, 
NASA  Acting  Administrator,  presented  model  of  Apollo  lunar  landing 
module for  display in  Lyndon B.  Johnson Presidential  Library.  He said 
model  would  bear  plaque  listing  “a  few  of  the  many  contributions  to 
ou r   space program  of  Lyndon B.  Johnson-as  Senate Majority  Leader, 
as  Chairman  of  the  Senate Aeronautics and  Space Sciences Committee, 
as  Chairman  of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Council  when  he 
was  Vice  President,  and  then  as  President  of  the  United  States.”  Dr. 
Paine told Mrs.  Johnson,  “We trust  that  this model of  the lunar landing 
module  w i l l   signify  to  the  many  visitors  . . . the  President’s  vision 
and  leadership  that  has carried  this  nation  outward  into  the  new  ocean 
of  space.”  (KSC Release KSC-500-68;  Shelton, W  S tar ,   11/25/68,  E3; 
Blair, N Y T ,  11 /24 /68 ,41 )  
November   2 4 :   Cornel1  Univ.  scientists  reported  pulsar  lying  in   or  near 
Crab  Nebula with  €astest pulse  rate  of  pulsars  discovered  thus  fa r   was 
slowing pulse  tempo  a t  rate  of  one part  in  2,000  a  year.  Discovery was 
made  with  1,000-ft-dia  antenna  a t   Arecibo  (Puerto  Rico)  Observa- 
tory.  Walter  Sullivan  in  New  Yo rk   T imes   said  discovery  encouraged 
view  that  astronomers  “are  penetrating  an   entire  new  realm  of  physics 
. . . physics  of  superdense  matter  (in  the  form  of  so-called  neutron 
s ta r s ) ,   magnetic  fields  fa r   beyond  anything  observable  in  the  labora- 
tory and superpowerful gravity.”  ( N Y T ,  11 /25 /68 ,53 )  
0  New  Y o rk   T imes   article  said  at  least  eight  nations,  including  U S .   and 
U.S.S.R.,  were  building  astronomical  observatories in  Chile, which  had 
been  termed  ideal  site because  of  its  latitude,  near  30’  South.  Associa- 
tion  of  Universities  for  Research  in   Astronomy,  Inc.  ( A U R A ) ,  depend- 
ency of  NSF,  had  invested  $19  million  thus  far  in  observatory of  Cerro 
Tololo.  Other  groups  were  European  Southern  Observatory  ( ESO,  con- 
sortium  of  West  Germany,  France,  Holland,  Belgium,  Sweden,  and 
Denmark)  and  Soviet Astronomical Mission.  A  36-in-telescope a t   U S .  
observatory  already  had  photographed  powerful  ray-emitting  star 
whose existence previously had  been  only  suspected.  ( N Y T ,  11/24/68, 
27 )  
0  USAF  launched  experimental Advanced Ballistic Reentry  System  ( ABRES) 
vehicle from Vandenberg AFB.  (AP, W Po s t ,  11 /25 /68 ,9 )  

292 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

November  25 

November  25:  Four  foreign  firms who  handled  all Argentine  overseas  tele- 
phone  calls  and  telecommunications,  with  multimillion-dollar  invest- 
ment,  had  been  notified  by  lower  echelons  of  Argentine  government 
that  its  national  carrier  ENTEL  would  be  exclusive international  carrier 
and  would  reserve  all  communications  satellite  channels  for  itself, 
Washington  Evening  S tar   reported.  Argentina  was  to  link  up  with 
ComSatCorp and  INTELSAT  on  completion  of  earth  station  a t   Balcarce 
in  June  1969.  Firms-U.S.-based 
ITT  World  Communications,  Inc. ; 
Transradio,  which  had  RCA   hookup;  Western  Telegraph  of  U.K.;  and 
Italcable  of  Italy-would 
propose  mixed  government-carrier  company 
to  own  and  operate  Argentine  earth  station.  (O’Leary,  W  S tar ,  
11/25/68,  A15) 
G130   troop  and  supply  carrier,  used  as  pick-up  aircraft  for  satellites 
dropping  special reconnaissance photos  into  sea, had  developed serious 
wing  cracks which  would  cost  USAF  $11 million  to  repair,  Bob  Horton 
reported  in Washington Evening  Star.  USAF  had  been  reinforcing  wings 
but  would  have  to  build  entire  new  wing  on  400  C-130  models  B 
through  E to   ensure long  service. Model  C-130A  was  not  affected.  (W  
Star,  11/25/68,  A3) 
New  Y o rk   T imes   editorial commented on  NAS  report  on  status and  needs 
of  American  mathematics  [see  Nov.  221 : “.  . . this  era-often 
called 
really the  time  of  the  most widespread  and 
the  age of  the computer-is 
fruitful  application  of  mathematics  ever  known.  . . . The  cost  of  sup- 
porting  American mathematics is so  slight in  relation  to  the  vast poten- 
tial  benefits  that  even  the  most  economy-minded Congressman  should 
be chary of  using his ax”  on Federal support.  ( N Y T ,  11/25/68,46) 
Harold  T.  Luskin,  Director  of  Apollo  Applications  in  NASA  O5ce   of 
Manned  Space Flight,  died  in  Bethesda, Md.,  of  respiratory  illness.  He 
had  joined  NASA  in  March  1968 and  had  become  Apollo  Applications 
Director  in  May.  He  was  past  president  of  AIAA  and  had  been  asso- 
ciated  with  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.  for  20   yr  and  Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corp.  fo r  9 yr.  He  had  held  engineering  and  management  positions  in 
connection  with  Agena  space  vehicle,  USAF  Manned  Orbiting  Labora- 
supersonic  research  aircraft,  and  DC-8. 
tory,  X-3 
(NASA  Ann, 
11/26/68;  W P o s t ,  11/27/68,  C3; Marshall  S tar ,  1 1 /2 7 /68 ,1 ;   W S ta r ,  
11/27/68,  B4) 
In  Aviation  W e e k  & Space  Technology  editorial  Robert  Hotz  said,  “The 
national  space program  is approaching a critical watershed  a t  about the 
same time  the Nixon Administration will  assume stewardship. . . . It  is 
obvious now  that  space technology has  demonstrated  its  ability  to  pro- 
vide  a  wide  range  of  benefits  for  better  living  on  earth.  I t  would  be  a 
national  tragedy,  i f   this  country  failed  to  capitalize  on  the  substantial 
investment i t  has  already made  in  developing  space technology.  It  will 
fall to  the  Nixon  Administration  to  make  the  critical  decisions during 
the  next  few  years that  will  determine the  future course  of  the  national 
space program.”  ( A v  W k ,  11/25/68,11) 
Dr.  Paul  Allman  Siple, polar  explorer  and  geographer  who  had  accom- 
panied Adm.  Richard  E.  Byrd  to Antarctica and science adviser  to U.S. 
Army  1946-1963  and  since  1967, died  at  Arlington,  Va.,  a t   age  59. 
( N Y T ,  11/27/68,47) 
November  26 :   Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for 
Manned  Space  Flight,  told  National  Space  Club  in  Washington,  D.C., 

293 

November  26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

unique  conditions  in  space  suggested use  of  orbiting  space stations  for 
certain  manufacturing  processes.  “For  instance,  liquid  floating  in   a 
weightless environment  takes  the  shape  of  a perfect  sphere.  Thus,  it  is 
e that  metal ball  bearings  could be manufactured  in  space to  
impossible on  earth,  yet  a t   a  cost,  including  transportation, 
less  than  we  can  now  achieve.  Perfect  bearings  would  reduce  friction 
and  noise  levels  to  the  vanishing  point.  Free-fall  casting  techniques 
could  be  utilized  to cast  large  flawless optical blanks  for  telescopes and 
by  proper  combinations  of  spinning  and  electrostatic forces we  should 
be able to shape the surface as well.” 
Stable foams for mixtures of  liquefied materials and gases, impossible 
to  produce  satisfactorily  on  earth, could  be produced  in  weightlessness, 
resulting  in  “a  steel  foam  almost  as  light  as  balsa  wood  with  many  of 
the  properties  of  solid steel.”  Composite materials like steel of  different 
densities  and  properties  and  glass  also  could  be  produced.  (Text; 
Schmeck, NYT,  11 /27 /68 ,48 ;   Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/27/68,  A6) 
0  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  NASA  Associate  Administrator,  said  in  speech  be- 
fore  annual  convention of  National  Council for  Social Studies  a t  GSFC: 
. . . because of  the  length  of  time  between  investment  in   basic  scien- 
66 
tific research  and  important  use of  the  results  thereof,  support  by  Con- 
blic  of  basic  research  is  hesitating  and  often  outright 
elopment  and  application  of  technology  to  the  quick 
solution  of  current  problems  is  better  understood  and  more  readily 
supported. Yet  the  fact  is  that  technology  to  be  used  in  the  solution  of 
a  practical  problem  rests  ultimately  upon  the  results  of  basic  research 
performed  years,  and  often  many  years,  ago.”  Experience  proved,  he 
said,  “that  the  effort  to  select  the  basic  research  to  support  in  terms 
of  predicted  usefulness  would  over  and  over  again  preclude  support 
of  the research that  in time would  prove to be the most valuable.”  (Text) 
0  NASA  and  Univ.  of  Texas  dedicated  world’s  third  largest  telescope,  107- 
in,  15O-ton  instrument  at  McDonald  Observatory,  Mount  Locke,  Tex. 
Observatory Director,  Dr.  Harlan  J.  Smith,  said  i t  had  been  booked  a 
year  in   advance.  The  $5-million observatory  would  emphasize  studies 
of  moon  and  other  planets.  Government  scientists hoped  for  informa- 
tion  to  help  them  design  planetary  spacecraft.  (UPI,  NYT ,   11/27/68, 
26) 
French  Prime  Minister  Maurice  Couve  de  Murville  announced  France’s 
1969 atomic  test  program  would  be  canceled  and  credits  would  be  re- 
duced  for  Concorde supersonic aircraft  as part  of  austerity  program  to 
save  French  franc  from  devaluation.  French  contribution  to  Concorde 
development would  be  cut  by  $12 million. It was  not  known how  much 
move  might  delay program,  with  first prototype scheduled to  fly  in  late 
December.  (AP, W Star,  11/26/68,  1 ; Louchheim,  W Post,  11/27/68, 
A l ;  Tanner, NYT,  11 /27 /68 ,1 )  
November  27:  NASA  FY  1970 budget  request  of  $3.878  billion  was  agreed 
on  in  meeting between  President  Johnson  and NASA  Acting Administra- 
tor Thomas 0. Paine.  (NASA   Off  of Admin) 
NASA  awarded  Allis-Chalmers  $3,500,000 contract  to  flight-qualify Mul- 
timission  Fuel  Cell  Assembly,  an  improved  fuel  cell  electrical  power 
system for  Apollo  Applications  ( A A )   program.  System had  been  devel- 
oped  under  three  previous  NASA  contracts  since  1962.  Allis-Chalmers 
would produce two assemblies for use  in qualification program  and two 

294 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%8 

November  27 

for  delivery  to  MSC.  (NASA  Procurement  Off;  MCS  Roundup,  12/6/68, 
1 )  
U.K.  became  first  nuclear  power  to  ratify  nuclear  nonproliferation 
treaty.  At  Washington, D.C.,  ceremony,  British  Charg6  d’tlffaires  Ed- 
ward  E.  Tompkins handed  instruments  of  ratification  to   Director  Wil- 
liam  C.  Foster  of  U.S.  Arms  Control and Disarmament Agency.  ( N Y T ,  
11/28/68,9) 
0  Soviet  journal  Aviatsiya  i  Kosmonavtika  (A v ia t ion   and  Cosmonau t ics)  
said  Soviet scientists had  concluded “basis  of  a  linked  system  for  pro- 
viding man with vital necessities on board  spaceship will be the cultiva- 
tion  of  higher  plants.  . . . Scientists believe that  artificial  soil  could  be 
used  for  space  plant  growing.”  Once  spacecraft  left  earth  gravitation 
field,  “plants  will  be  fixed  in  special holders  and  sprayed  with  concen- 
( UPI,  N Y T ,  
trated  solutions  containing  all  necessary  substances.’’ 
11 /29 /68 ,22 )  
USN’s  Sealab  I11  was  carried  by  barge  to  §an  Clemente  Island,  Calif.  It 
would  be  lowered  600  f t   to  Pacific Ocean  bottom  to  serve  a s  working 
and living quarters for  five teams of  8 to  10 men  setting up  underwater 
trolley  line,  building  dry  and  lighted hut  on  sea  floor,  starting  lobster 
farm,  and  training  porpoises and  sea  lions  to  fetch  and  carry.  Sealab 
111,  submerged  to  three  times  depths  of  Sealab  I  ahd  Sealab  11,  was 
final experiment in  Sealab program.  (AP, W  S ta t ,   11/28/68,  A36) 
November  28:  NASA  announced  Mexican  cities  Gomez  Palacios  and  Tor- 
reon  had  been  saved  from  flooding in wake  of  Hurricane  Naomi  when 
Automatic  Picture  Transmission  (APT )   station  a t   Mexico  City  relayed 
data  from  Essa  VZ satellite  indicating  weather  was  clearing.  Mexican 
authorities  thus were  saved from opening dangerously filled  dam  which 
would  have  inundated  the  cities.  (NASA  Release  68-203;  UPI,  NYT, 
12/1/68,77) 
Canadian  scientist  I.  A.  Stewart,  Operations  Manager  of  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range,  said  at  first  International  Aerospace Exposition  in  Mon- 
treal  he  believed range,  operated  jointly  by U.S.  and  Canada, could  be 
converted for  $1 million  to  accommodate satellite launching  pad.  Can- 
ada could  thus  rise  to  ranks  of  space-age power, he  said.  Of  more  than 
200 on staff, only one was from U.S.  (Can Press, N Y T ,  12/1/68,13) 
launched  Cosmos  CCLV  from  Plesetsk  Cosmo- 
November  29 :   U.S.S.R. 
drome  into  orbit  with  317-km  (197-mi)  apogee,  211-km  (131.1-mi) 
perigee,  89.6-min  period,  and  65.4’  inclination.  Spacecraft  reentered 
Dec.  7.  (GSFC  SSR,  11/30/68;  12/15/68;  SBD, 12/2/68,129) 
MSFC   announced  it  had  requested  proposals  from  11  aerospace  compa- 
nies fo r  six-month design and definition study for  dual mode lunar  rov- 
ing  vehicle  ( LRV )   capable  of  transporting  astronauts  on  lunar  surface 
and  of  performing  automated,  long-range  scientific  traverses  across 
moon under  remote control from earth. 
Vehicle  was  to  permit  manned  sorties  of  up  to  6  mi  from  landed 
spacecraft, with  total  round  t r ip   of  more  than  18 mi.  After  astronauts 
left  moon,  LRV  would  be  placed  in   remote control mode  for  automated 
long-range  (600 or  more m i )   geological  and  geophysical trips  for  one 
year.  I t   would  collect  up  to  200  lb   of  lunar  samples and  measure  ter- 
rain,  then  rendezvous with  manned  spacecraft for  return  of  samples to  
earth.  (MSFC Release  68-274;  SBD, 12/3/68,  134;  Marshall  S ta r ,  
12/4/68,1) 

295 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
November  29 
*  FAA announced  i t  had  issued  RFP  for  collection  and  analysis  of  informa- 
tion  on  engineering,  economic,  and  operational  aspects  of  proposed 
construction  of  airports  on  offshore water  sites, including  floating  air- 
ports  and those to be built  on   fill  or piles or in  areas protected by  dikes. 
(FAA Release 68-75;  N Y T ,  12 /2 /68 ,94 )  
*  World’s  largest  vacuum  telescope, scheduled  for  spring  1969 completion 
a t   Sunspot,  N.  Mex.,  could  provide  method  of  predicting  solar  flares, 
Associated Press  reported.  Housed  in  135-ft concrete needle atop moun- 
tain  ridge  4,000  f t   above WSMR,  at  Sacramento Peak  Observatory, tele- 
scope was  brainchild  of  USAF  astronomer  Dr.  Richard  Dunn,  who  told 
AP,  “Prediction  of  solar  flares would  give  us  time  to  warn  astronauts 
working  outside  the  radiation  shielding  of  a  spacecraft  to  take  cover 
and  allow  us  to   predict  periods  of  radio  communication interference.’’ 
Project cost $3.5  million.  (AP, NYT ,   12/1/68,65) 
November   30:  U.S.S.R  launched  Cosmos  CCLVI  into  orbit  with  1,223-km 
(759.9-mi)  apogee,  1,195-km  (742.6-mi)  perigee,  109.4-min  period, 
and 74” inclination.  ( GSFC SSR, 11/30/68) 
*  European  Launcher  Development Organization  ( ELDO)  attempt  to  place 
550-lb  Italian  ELDO  F-7 
into  polar  orbit  failed  when  technicians  lost 
contact  with  payload  shortly  after  launch.  Satellite  launched  from 
Woomera  Rocket  Range  by  booster  with  U.K.  Blue  Streak  1st  stage, 
French  Coralie 2nd  stage,  and  West  German  Astris  3rd  stage  stopped 
transmitting  after  abbreviated  seven-second 3rd-stage burn  and  could 
not be tracked.  (Reuters, N Y T ,  12/1/68,  11) 
During  November:   Milton  Alberstadt  reviewed  25-yr  history  of  MSFC’S 
Michoud  Assembly  Facility.  U.S.  Government  built  plant  (dedicated 
Oct.  24,  1943)  on Michoud  sugar  mill site during World War  I1 to  as- 
semble Curtiss C-46  Caravan  transports.  After  C -4 6  contract  was  can- 
celed,  “Flying  Dutchman,”  air-sea  rescue  boat  carried  under  belly  of 
Boeing  B-17  bomber,  was  developed.  Michoud  plant  was  reactivated 
during  Korean  War  by  Chrysler  Corp.  to  produce  810-hp engines  for 
Patton  tanks.  I t   was  selected  by  NASA  in  1961 as  site  to  build  Saturn 
rocket to  put  man  on  moon.  (Boeing Magazine,  11/68,  8-9) 
In   A i r   Force  and  Space  Digest  interview  General  Electric  Co.  Vice 
President  Gerhard  Neumann, head  of  GE  Aircraft  Engine  Group,  said 
postponement  of  essential  R&D  during  past  several  years  had  “mort- 
gaged”  nation’s  techological  future.  He  saw  hazards  in  current  DOD 
contracting  policies which kept  industry  from taking  “reasonable  risks” 
because  they  imposed  implacable performance  guarantees.  He  blamed 
parsimonious  funding  on  Vietnam  War  requirements  and  urged  lost 
ground  be  regained  as  soon  as priorities  permitted. In   era  of  R&D  aus- 
terity,  Neumann  advocated  “lot  more”  work  in  advanced-engine  re- 
search by NASA.  ( A F / S D ,  11 /68 ,58 )  
*  Secretary  of  Defense  Clark  M.  Clifford  wrote  in   Air  Force  and  Space 
Digest:  “Not  too  many  years  ago,  the  War  and  Navy  Departments 
were  concerned  almost  exclusively with  men  and  simple machines.  De- 
fense industries were  regarded  as mere munitions-makers. . . . We now 
have a military-industrial team with  unique  resources of  experience, en- 
gineering  talent,  management and  problem-solving capacities,  [ and  it] 
must  be  used  to  help  find  the  answers  to  complex  domestic  problems 
as  it  has  found  the  answers  to   complex  weapon  systems.  Those  an- 
swers  can  be  put  to  good  use  by  our  cities  and  our  states,  by  our 

296 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

During  November 

schools, by  large  and  small  businesses  alike.  The  nation  w i l l   b e   the 
better  and  the  stronger.”  ( A F / S D ,  11/68,  76-7) 
In   A i r   Force  and  Space  Digest  Capt.  Gerald T.  Rudolph  (USAF)  of  AFSC 
Space  and  Missiles  Systems  Organization  scored  lack  of  progress  in  
adopting  systems  technology  to  solve  “nation’s  mounting  social  prob- 
lems.”  He  found  two  major  reasons  for  lag:  “the  public  does  not  en- 
tirely  understand  [it] , largely  because  the  aerospace industry  has  been 
unable  to  define  i t   adequately  and  explain  how  i t   is  used.  And  . . . 
American  society has  always been  reluctant  to  accept  the  kind  of  cen- 
tralized  authority required  to  implement systems solutions, especially a t  
the community and regional levels.” 
Every  effort  should be made,  he  said,  to  surmount  obstacles because 
“it is the  judgment  of  many  experts  that  systems technology will  prove 
t o  be  the most valuable parcel  of  knowledge to  come out  of  present day 
space technology.”  ( A F / S D ,  11/68,79-81) 
*  J.  S.  Butz,  Jr.,  in  A i r   Force  and  Space  Digest  article  “The  Men  Behind 
Soviet  Aircraft  Design”  wrote : “Top  Russian  designers  are  exuberant 
realists;  and  they  operate  under  a  ‘prototype’  system  of  development 
that  is probably  the most  competitive and  technically  stimulating in  the 
world.  This  system  is  similar  to  the  one employed  in  the  United  States 
until  the  mid-1950s and  the  odds  appear  strong  that  the  U S .   will  re- 
turn  to  such  an  approach  in  the  1970s’ rejecting  the  strong dependence 
on  ‘systems  analysis’ and  ‘cost-effectiveness’ studies  that  characterized 
the  1960s.’’  ( A F I S D ,  11/68,62-7) 

297 

December  1968 

December  1 : Tenth  anniversary  of  Antarctic  Treaty  signed  by  12  nations 
to   promote scientific  research  and  to  bar   military  activity  in   the  area. 
(A&A,  1915-1960) 
December  2:  Retirement  of  H.  Julian  Allen  as  Director  of  Ames  Research 
Center,  announced Oct.  25,  would  be  deferred,  NASA  announced. Allen 
would  be  Special  Assistant  to  Associate  Director,  Office  of  Advanced 
Research  and  Technology,  and  would  serve  as  Acting  Director  of  ARC 
for  indefinite period.  ARC  Associate Director  James  F.  Parsons,  named 
to  be Acting Director  after  Allen’s  retirement, had  become  seriously ill. 
Parsons  died  March  2,  1969.  (NASA  Ann,  12/2/68;  ARC   Memo  from 
Director  to  Staff,  3 /3 /69)  
U.S.S.R.  published  Zond   VZ  photo  of  70-mi-wide lunar  crater  carrying 
name honoring geneticist  Nikolay  I.  Vavilov,  who  had  been  sent to   Si- 
beria  in  1939 for opposing ideas of  Trofim D.  Lysenko,  and his brother 
Sergei  I.  Vavilov,  who  had   later  become  president  of  Soviet  Academy 
of  Sciences. Nikolay  Vavilov died  in   Siberia  in   1943; his brother  died 
in   1951. Soviet name  for crater,  Brothers Vavilov,  had  not  yet  been  ac- 
credited by International  Astronomical Union.  (NYT,  12 /3 /68 ,36)  
President  Johnson presented  1968 Enrico  Fermi  Award  in  White  House 
ceremony  to  Dr.  John  Archibald Wheeler,  Princeton  Univ.  physicist, 
for  “pioneering  contributions  to   understanding  nuclear  fission  and  to 
developing  the  technology  of  plutonium  production  reactors  and  his 
continuing broad  contributions  to nuclear science.”  Award  carried  gold 
medal,  citation,  and  $25,000.  ( P D ,  12/9/68,  1956;  W  Po s t ,   12/3/68, 
A2;  W  S ta r ,   12/3/68,  A6) 
DOD announced issuance  of  $4,400,000  initial  increment  to  $31,132,689 
cost-plus-incentive-fee USAF  contract  with  Lockheed  Missiles  and  Space 
Co.  for launch support services a t  WTR.  (DOD  Release 1060-68) 
U.K.,  West  Germany,  and  the  Netherlands had  decided  to  pool  secrets 
and  build  centrifuge  separation  plant  to  produce  cheap  enriched-ura- 
nium  reactor  fuel,  Don  Cook  reported  in   Wash ing ton  Po s t .   I n   1962 
agreement with  U.S.,  the countries had   contracted to  keep  experimenta- 
tion  in   centrifuge secret from  each  other.  I n  addition  to  U.S.,  U.S.S.R. 
and Communist China produced  enriched uranium by  gaseous-diff usion 
process.  ( W Po s t ,  12/2/68,  A3) 
launched  Cosmos  CCLVZZ into  orbit  with  438-km 
December  3 :   U.S.S.R. 
(272.2-mi)  apogee,  269-km  (167.2-mi)  perigee,  91.6-min  period,  and 
70.9O  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  March  5,  1969.  (AP,  B  Sun ,  
12/4/68;  Reuters,  C  T r i b ,   12/4/68;  GSFC  SSR ,   12/15/68;  3/15/69) 
S 7 0 A  experimental  supersonic  bomber,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilots 
Fitzhugh L.  Fulton,  Jr.,  and Donald  L.  Mallick,  reached  mach  1.64, and 
39,400-ft  altitude  during  1-hr  58-min  flight  from  Edwards  AFB to   test 
exiter  v w e   integrated  loads  and  frequency and  handling  qualities.  All 

298 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December 3 

primary  objectives  were  accomplished,  although  cabin  pressure  prob- 
lem necessitated manual operation of  system.  (XB-70  P ro j  Off) 
*  President  Johnson  proclaimed  Agreement  on  the  Rescue  of  Astronauts, 
the  Return  of  Astronauts,  and  the  Return  of  Space  Objects  in   effect 
with  deposit  in  three  capitals  of  instruments  of  ratification  by  U.S., 
U.S.S.R.,  and  U.K.  Ireland  and  Nepal  had  previously  ratified  treaty, 
which had  been  signed by  75  countries. Proclamation  noted  new  agree- 
ment  was  essentially humanitarian.  I t s   provisions  “carry  forward  the 
goals  Qf  international  cooperation  to  which  the  United  States ha s  been 
dedicated  since  enactment of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space Act 
of  1958  and  to  which the United  States renewed  its commitment in  the 
outer  space  treaty  of  1967.”  ( P D ,   12/9/68,  1658;  AP,  NYT, 
12/5/68,  13;  NASA  Off  of  General  Council) 
0  President-elect Richard  M.  Nixon  named  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge,  retiring 
President of  Cal Tech, as his Science Adviser  and  announced formation 
of  task  force  under  Dr.  H.  Guyford  Stever,  President  of  Carnegie-Mel- 
lon  Univ.,  to   make  recommendations  in  general  science  field.  Task 
force headed  by  Dr.  Charles Townes, Nobel  Prize  winning physics pro- 
fessor  at  Univ.  of  California  at  Berkeley,  would  recommend  in  space 
field. 
Dr.  DuBridge  described  as  a  ‘‘very  critical  matter”  loss  of  momen- 
tum  in  U S .   space program  because  of  appropriations  cuts  and  said  re- 
ducing activities in basic and  applied research damaged nation’s  future. 
Later,  National  Science  Board  Chairman,  Dr.  Philip  Handler  of 
Duke Univ.,  said of  Dr. DuBridge,  “He has one rare  attribute  . . . w is-  
dom,  a n   unusual  commodity.  He  is  knowledgeable  about  the  role  of 
technology  in  our  society  and  has  a  deep  belief  in   the  importance  of 
fundamental  research  to  the  health  and welfare  of  the country.  And  he 
is  usually  understanding  of  the  problems  of  the  private  universities.” 
Horner, W Star, 12/3/68;  Cohn, W Pos t ,   12/3/68,  A7;  S%D,  12/4/68, 
141 ; W  Star,  12/4/68,  A13) 
President  Johnson  presented  Harmon  International  Aviator’s  Trophy  to 
Maj.  William  J.  Knight  (USAF )   for  piloting  X-15  rocket  research  air- 
craft to unofficial record  speed of  4,520 mph  (mach 6.70) Oct.  3,  1967. 
During White  House ceremony President  said,  “What  we   learned  from 
the X-15  program will enable us to  improve on  all our  aircraft. The in- 
airplanes of  the  future safer,  faster,  and more  efficient.”  (NASA  PAO;   w 
formation  gained from Major  Knight’s  ‘flying iaboratory’ will make  the 
Pos t ,   12/4/68,  A3; S%D, 12/5/68,151;  PD ,  12/9/68,1660) 
Gen.  Jacob  E.  Smart  (USAF,  Ret.),  NASA  Assistant Administrator  for  DOD 
and  Interagency  Affairs,  addressed  Armed  Forces  Management  Assn. 
on  NASA  Interagency  Coordination:  “. . . I believe  it  would  be  appro- 
priate  for  the  President  or  the Congress to charge NASA with  exercising 
the lead in  a national R&D  program that  is designed to  learn  how  and t o  
what  degree  science,  engineering,  and  technology  can  be  applied  to  
help  the  Departments  of  Interior,  Agriculture,  Commerce,  Navy,  and 
others  to  fulfill their  responsibilities  for  development  and  management 
of  natural  resources.  . . . National  decision  on  whether  we  undertake 
development  of  operational  space  systems  must  await  outcome  of 
R&D.  Issues  will  be  more  clearly  identified  and  understood  i f   the 
President  and  the  Congress lend  their  interest  and  public  support  to  a 
first class R&D  program.’’  (Text) 

299 

December  3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

e  FAA  adopted  rule  proposed  Sept.  4  to  limit  number  and  type  of  aircraft 
operations  a t   five  “high-density”  airports  in  New  York,  Washington, 
and  Chicago  and  included  supplemental  carriers  in  same  category  a s  
scheduled  carriers.  Final  rule,  effective April  27,  1969,  dropped  pro- 
posed  requirement  that  all  aircraft  operating  instrument  flight  rule 
(IFR)   a t   high-density  airports  have  minimum  two-pilot  crew  and  be 
able  to  maintain  150-knot minimum  airspeed.  (FAA  Release  68-76;  W 
S tar ,   12/3/68,  A l ;   Eisen,  W  Po s t ,   12/3/68,  A l ;   Witkin,  N Y T ,  
12 /4 /68 ,1 )  
Cal  Tech  said  Mt.  Wilson  and  Mt.  Palomar  observatories  were  keeping 
close watch  for  developing sunspots that  might  threaten  Apollo 8 astro- 
nauts with  dangerous  x-ray radiation.  (Reuters, W  Po s t ,   12/5/68,  H9) 
December  4 :   USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Titan  111-B  booster  into  orbit  with  454-mi  (730.6-km)  apogee, 94-mi 
( 151.3-km)  perigee,  89.3-min  period,  and  106.2 
inclination.  Satellite 
reentered Dec.  12.  (P r e s  Rpt  6 8 )  
0  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carried 
Dudley  Observatory  payload  to  95.8-mi  ( 1 5 3 . 2 - h )   altitude  to  deter- 
mine  particle  flux  during  quiet  period  preceding  Geminid  meteor 
shower  (Dec.  13-14).  Launch  was  first  in  series of  two;  second would 
be  launched  Dec.  14. Rocket  and  instruments  performed  satisfactorily. 
All  collection  t rap   functions  occurred  as  programmed.  Payload  was 
tracked  visually  during  descent  and  sucessfully  recovered.  (NASA  Rpt 
SRL) 
Eugen  Sanger  Medal  of  German  Society  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronau- 
tics  was  awarded  to  US. X-15  research  aircraft  team  in  Bonn,  West 
Germany,  for  X-15  program’s  contribution  to  advancement  of  space 
flight. Medal honored  German rocketry  leader,  Dr.  Eugen  Sanger,  first 
t o   define  potential  of  hypersonic  rocket  aircraft,  who  died  in   1964. 
John  v.  Becker  of  LaRC  accepted  award  on  behalf  of  NASA-USN-USAF 
team.  (NASA   Release  68-206) 
0  Dr.  Abe  Silverstein, Lewis Research  Center  Director,  received  one  of  six 
$10,000,  1968  Rockefeller  Public  Service  Awards-highest 
privately 
sustained honor  fo r  Federal  career  s e r v i c e i n  Washington, D.C.,  cere- 
monies.  (Causey, W Po s t ,  12/5/68,  A22) 
0  In  letter  to  National  Council  on  Marine  Resources  and  Development, 
President-elect Richard  M.  Nixon  said his  administration  would  “consi- 
der  an   integrated  program  in   oceanology  a  first  priority.” 
(AP, 
NYT ,   12/8/68,  74) 
December  5-30:  NASA  successfullv  launched  ESRO’S  24041  Heos-A  Highly 
Eccentric Orbiting  Satellite from  ETR  by  Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta 
(DSV-3E)  booster. Drum-shaped satellite entered orbit with  138,831.2- 
mi  (223,579.4-km)  apogee,  263-mi  (423-km)  perigee,  112-hr  29-min 
period,  and  28.3”  inclination. 
Primary  NASA  objective was  to  place Heos-A  into  earth  orbit  which 
would  permit  successful  achievement of  ESRO  scientific  objectives  and 
to  provide  spacecraft  tracking  and  telemetry  support.  Eight  onboard 
experiments  designed  by  nine  scientific  groups  in  Belgium,  France, 
West  Germany,  Italy,  and  U.K.  would  investigate  interplanetary  mag- 
netic  fields  and  study  solar  and  cosmic-ray particles  outside  magneto- 
sphere during  period  of  maximum solar  activity. By  Dec.  30 seven ex- 
perimene  had  been  turned  on  and  operated  satisfactorily.  Eighth  ex- 

300 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  5-30 

periment would be  activated two months after  liftoff. Spacecraft control 
had  shifted to ESRO Operations Center, Darmstadt, Germany. 
Heos-A  was  third  ESRO  mission  orbited  by  NASA,  first  ESRO  mission 
on  Delta  launch  vehicle,  and  first  NASA-ESRO 
reimbursable  mission,  in 
which  ESRO  would  pay  U.S.  for  launch  vehicle  hardware  and  certain 
launch  costs.  (NASA  P ro j   Off;  NASA  Release  68-204;  Wilford,  NYT, 
12/6/68;  GSFC  SSR ,  12/15/68) 
December 5:  Interview with Dr.  Donald F. Hornig, Science Adviser to  Presi- 
dent  Johnson,  appeared  in  New  Yorlc  T ime s .   Dr.  Hornig  said 
problem  facing  his  successor, Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge, was  finding  funds 
for  science and  technology,  to  preserve “the  vitality,  the  creativity  and 
the  entrepreneurial  surge  of  the  establishment.”  Next  science  adviser 
would  have  to  orient  new  administration  to  give  science proper  place 
in   overall  scheme.  One  of  America’s  great  strengths  was  recognition 
tha t   science, like  economics, was  part  of  everything. 
New  administration  would have to set course for  space program  after 
manned lunar  landing.  I t  would have to decide how  to  improve nation’s 
health  care,  deal  with  environmental  pollution,  and  face  technological 
problems of  keeping world  free  of  nuclear  war.  Particularly  important 
task  would  be  advancing vitality  of  basic  science  enterprise-research 
devoted  to  quest  for  knowledge  with  no  immediate  applications  in 
mind.  (Schmeck, N Y T ,  12/5/68,28) 
WuZZ  Street  Journal  editorial  said  major  task  of  new  Presidential  Science 
Adviser,  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge,  would  be  “to  try  to  help  instill  some 
semblance  of  order  in  the  Government’s  massive  involvement  in  sci- 
ence.”  While  DOD  and  NASA  had  been  biggest  science  spenders,  other 
agencies  were  extensively  involved.  “Because  there  was  such  a  limited 
effort  to  set  priorities  in  the  first  place,  it’s  hard  for  anyone  to  know 
fo r  sure which  programs  the  nation  now  can  best  afford  to  slow  down 
or  abandon.  . . . [Dr.]  DuBridge  now  must  t ry   to  plan  the  future 
course  of  Federal  science, somehow  reconciling all  the  competing pres- 
sures  from  scientists, universities,  industry,  Congress, maybe  even  tax- 
payers.”  ( WSJ,  12/5/68) 
NASA  Deputy  Administrator  for  Space  Sciences  and  Applications  Oran 
W.  Nicks  described  applications  of  Surveyor  and  Lunar  Orbiter  tech- 
niques  to   Mars  exploration  before  AIAA  meeting  in  Washington,  D.C. 
Two  1971  Marinez Orbiter  missions  would  provide  new  tools  fo r   sur- 
vey  of  dynamic  Mars,  arriving  when  most  striking  seasonal  changes 
were  evident  in  Southern  Hemisphere.  Their  combined  orbits  and  life 
expectancies  would  allow  observations  of  dynamic  changes  in  clouds 
and surface features  over  several months. In   1973, two  additional  orbit- 
ers  would  survey  Mars  from  different  orbits  during  different  seasons, 
with  support  of  landing  mission  as  prime  requirement.  Also  planned 
for  1973 was  survivable landing  spacecraft to  make local measurements 
of  environment, photograph  surface  and  topography,  and  analyze  soil. 
Burning  question  of  immediate concern  to  you  and  me  will  be  ad- 
$6 
dressed  by  use of  our  new  tools,”  Nicks said:  “Is there  life elsewhere? 
Has  life existed  on  nearby  planets  and  disappeared  for  any  reason? 
Can  nearby  planets  be  made  suitable  for  life?’  Together,  orbiters  and 
landers  form  a  powerful  team  for  the  study  of  Mars  and  for  seeking 
answers to  these  questions.  Together,  they  w i l l   continue  to  extend  our 

301 

December  5 

\ 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

capabilities  in  what  is probably the most  challenging, open-ended arena 
fo r   expansion of  science and  technology  in   the  decade ahead.”  (Text) 
*  NASA  announced plans  to   use  Titan  111-D/Centaur 
in   dual  launches  of 
6,000-lb  spacecraft  consisting  of  Surveyor-type soft  landers  mated  to  
Mariner  1971 class  Mars  orbiters  in   mid-1973, in   Project  Viking,  to  
obtain  scientific information on  life  on  Mars.  Launched  1 0  days  apart, 
spacecraft  would  arrive  about  seven months later,  when  orbiter  propul- 
sion  systems would  place  orbiters  and  landers  in  Mars  orbit.  After  re- 
connaissance, landers  would  be  detached  and  softland  on  Mars.  (NASA 
Release 68-207  ; Pasadena  Independent,  12/6/68) 
*  LeRc  announced NASA-developed  artificial-heart  control  system  delivered 
to   Cleveland  Clinic,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  would  aid  research  into  ways 
man-made ventricle  could  assist  damaged  natural  heart.  Later,  system 
could be modified  to  control  artificial  replacement  heart.  Electronic  R- 
wave  detector  sorted  heartbeat  from  background  noise  in   electrocar- 
diogram  to  synchronize beat  in   artificial  heart  with  natural  heart  and 
gave synchronization signal  to   programmer, which  could  adjust  pump- 
ing  of  artificial  ventricle  to  needs  of  body.  (LeRC  Release  68-80) 
*  ComSatCorp  announced i t   had  placed  in   full-time  commercial operation 
two   new  earth station  facilities  a t  Jamesburg, Calif.,  and  Paumalu, Ha- 
waii,  t o   handle  U.S.-Pacific  area  communications via  Zntelsat-ZZ  F-d 
(Intelsat 11-D)  satellite.  (ComSatCorp Release  68-66) 
*  Scientists  at  Univ.  of  California  a t   Los  Angeles,  testing  to  determine  i f  
life  could  exist  in  hostile  environment of  Venus,  said  they  had   grown 
algae  in   atmosphere  of  100%  carbon  dioxide.  They  said  Venus  had  
more  than  90% .   More  complex  plants  had  not  survived,  reported  Dr. 
Willard  F.  Libby,  Nobel  Prize  winner  in   chemistry,  Dr.  Joseph  Seck- 
bach  of  Israel,  and  Dr.  Irene  Aegerter  of  Switzerland.  (AP,  NYT, 
12 /8 /68 ,35)  
*  DOD  announced  USAF  scientists,  in   study  conducted by  Air  Force  Cam- 
bridge  Research  Laboratories,  would  fly  KC-135 
flying  ionospheric 
laboratory  around  auroral  oval  in   Arctic  during  seven-day  series  of 
first  flights  attempted along  this  route.  Purpose  was  to  obtain  da ta   on 
spatial  extent  and  intensity  of  optical  and  radio  auroras  in   midwinter 
and  define relationships between  them.  USAF  was  interested in   influence 
of  auroras  on  radio  communication and  navigation  and  on  radar   sur-  
veillance.  AFCRL  scientists hoped,  eventually,  to  predict  occurrence and 
severity of  auroral activity.  (DOD  Release 1065-68) 
*  Washington  Post  editorial  commented  on  FAA’s limitation  of  operations 
a t   five major  airports  [see  Dec.  31:  “It  is  unfortunate,  of  course,  tha t  
the   capacity  of  airports  at  New  York,  Chicago  and  Washington  have 
not  kept  up   with  the  growth  of  the Nation’s  a i r   fleet.  But  airports  do  
have  limits,  and  i t   is   growing increasingly  clear  that  the  only  solution 
to  congestion problems i s   to   separate  commercial and  noncommercial 
traffic.  I t  would  make  f a r  more sense for   those who  feel they  have been 
unfairly  treated  by  the FAA’s action  to   campaign fo r  more  reliever  air- 
ports  around  large  cities  (and   the   taxes  on  airport  users  to  pay  fo r  
them)  than  to  attempt  . . . to   overturn  the  FAA  decision.”  (W Po s t ,  
12/5/68,  A20) 
*  USN  announced  authorization  of  $22  million  to  Electric  Boat  Div.  of 
General  Dynamics  Corp.  fo r   planning  and  procurement  of  materials 
and equipment for   “quiet”  nuclear-powered submarine. Award  brought 

302 

@ 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
December  5 
total  allocation  thus  fa r   to   $30.5 d i o n .  Initial  $8.5  million  was  for  
design.  (UPI,  W Po s t ,  12/5/68,  H7) 
December  6 :   Aerobee  150  M I   sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from 
WSMR  carried  American  Science  and  Engineering,  Inc.,  payload  to 
92.6-mi  (149-km)  altitude  to  collect data  on  celestial  x-ray  sources in  
1- to   20-kev  range.  Rocket  and  instruments  performed  satisfactorily. 
(NASA  Rpt SRL) 
NASA  announced first  successful orbital  operation of  two  low-thrust space 
engines  during  five  separate  tests  in  two-month  lifetime  of  A t s   ZV 
spacecraft.  Ion,  or   electrical  engines,  producing  thrust  of  less  than  20 
micropounds,  had   been  fired  for  total  23 h r   and  perfprmed  perfectly- 
Ion  engines  for  future  spacecraft  were  ideal  systems  for  countering 
gravitational  attraction  between  spacecraft, moon  and  sun,  and  ellipti- 
cal  equatorial  section-to  keep  satellite stationary  for   conducting com- 
munications, meteorological,  and  navigational  experiments.  They  haid 
controllable thrust level and direction, higher  fuel efficiency, and longer 
fuel  life  than Chemically propelled  engines.  Reservoir  of  1/10 lb  ce s iua  
could  keep  synchronous satellite  stationary  for   more  than  three  years. 
Before test,  propulsion experts  had  expected  ion  engine  firings  might 
create  radio  frequency interference.  Test  showed  no  interference.  Two 
more ion  engines were  planned  for   testing aboard ATS-E, 
scheduled  for  
August 1969 launch.  (NASA  Release 68-205) 
9  In   major  organizational  changes  a t   Marshall  Space  Flight  Center,  Dr. 
W.  R.  Lucas,  Director  of  Propulsion and  Vehicle  Engineering Labora- 
tory,  was  named  Director for  Program  Development, effective Dec.  16; 
Dave Newby  was  named  Director of  Center Operations;  and  Dr.  Ernst 
Stuhlinger,  Director  of  Space  Sciences  Laboratory,  was  named  Asso- 
ciate  Director for   Science.  All  were  new  positions.  MSFC  Research  and 
Development  Operations would  become  Science and  Engineering, with 
Hermann K.  Weidner remaining Director ; Industrial  Operations would 
become Program Management under  same director,  E.  F.  O’Connor. 
Dr.  Wernher von  Braun, MSFC  Director,  said  major  function  of  new 
Program  Development  organization  would  be  to  “harden”  complete 
package  plans  for  new  programs,  such  as   space  station.  Director  for 
Program  Development  would  “help  chart  the  course fo r   this  Center  in  
the  post-Apollo period,  keeping  i n  mind  our  Apollo  program  require- 
ments  and  AAP obligations.”  ( MSFC  Release  68-276;  Marshall  Star, 
12 /11 /68 ,1)  
Apollo  7  Astronaut Walter M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  received  Kitty  Hawk  Memo- 
rial  Trophy  for  distinguished  achievement  in   aeronautics  a t   annual 
Wright  Brothers  memorial  banquet  i n   Beverly  Hills,  Calif.  Banquet 
commemorated 65th anniversary of  flight of  K i t t y   Hawk.  (UPI,  W S ta r ,  
12/7/68,  A2) 
ComSatCorp  filed  application  for  authority  to  construct  earth  station  for  
satellite  communications in   Alaska,  90  mi  north  of  Anchorage  near 
Talkeetna Village.  (ComSatCorp Release 68-68) 
0  I n  Wash ing ton  Post, Thomas O’Toole  said  Howard R.  Hughes organiza- 
tion’s  holding  company,  Hughes  Nevada  Operations,  had  requested 
public  disclosure of  alleged  DOD study by  Harvard  Univ.’s  Dr.  George 
Kistiakowsky  and  MIT’S  Dr.  Jerome Wiesner  and   James  Killian.  Com- 
pany  claimed  Special  Repor t   on  Underground  Testing  concluded  there 
was  no  reason  fo r  continued underground  atomic tests.  DOD spokesman 

@ 

303 

December  6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

denied  existence of  study, while  Science Adviser  to  President  Johnson, 
Dr.  Donald F.  Hornig,  said  only  that  he had  met  with  top  physicists in  
November  to  discuss  safety  of  underground  testing.  “We  may  make  a 
public  report  on  it.  The  subject  seems  to  b e   of  enough  importance  to 
warrant a public airing.”  ( W Pos t ,  12/6/68,87) 
December  7-10:  NASA’s  Oao  11  ( oA o -A ~ )   Orbiting  Astronomical Observa- 
tory  was  successfully  launched  from  ETR  by  two-stage  Atlas-Centaur 
booster.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  485.7  mi  (781.6  km) ; perigee, 
479.2  mi  (771.2  km) ; period,  100.4 min;  and  inclination,  35”.  Heavi- 
est  and  most  complex  automated  spacecraft  ever  developed  by  U.S., 
Oao  IZ wa s   7  f t  wide  and  10  f t  high, weighed 4,400  lb,  carried  11 tele- 
scopes, and contained 238,000 separate parts. 
Primary  mission  objective  was  to  demonstrate  flight  operation  to  
support  two  experiments  provided  by  Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Ob- 
servatory  and  Univ.  of  Wisconsin  for  at  least  30  days.  Secondary  ob- 
jective  was  to  obtain  scientific data  over  a  range  of  s ta r   magnitudes 
and  wavelengths  for  a t   least  50  hr.  Experiments would  observe  inter- 
stellar  dust  and  extremely  young  hot  stars  in  UV  portion  of  spectrum 
not  visible  to  human  eye  or  earth-based  observatories.  Satellite would 
he  able to  collect six hours  of  UV  data  per  day-twice 
as much  as had 
been  obtained  in  15 yr  from  40  sounding  rocket  launches.  Through  its 
complex  ground-command spacecraft-attitude system  Oao   IZ would  be 
aimed  a t   individual  objects  in  space  with  precision  never  before  at- 
tained  by  an  orbiting  satellite. Information  from  experiments would  be 
radioed  to   earth  as  digital  data  for  analysis by  experimenters. 
By  Dec.  10 all  spacecraft  equipment  had  been  turned  on  and  oper- 
ated  satisfactorily:  satellite  had  been  placed  in  its  sunbathing  mode 
with  its  solar  panels  oriented  toward  sun ;   its  six  star  trackers  had 
been  activated;  three  of  the  trackers  had  been  locked  on   to  preplanned 
guide  stars ; and  satellite had  established three-axis stabilization. Smith- 
sonian experiment initial power  had  been  turned  on. Wisconsin Experi- 
ment Package would be turned on Dec.  11. 
Oao  11  was  second  in  series  of  four  spacecraft  in  NASA’s  OAO  pro- 
gram  to  obtain  precise  astronomical  observations  of  celestial  objects 
above earth’s  atmosphere. Oao  I  had  been  launched  into  almost  perfect 
orbit  April  8,  1966,  but  had  failed  because  of  power  supply  system 
malfunction and  probable  high  voltage  arcing  in  star  tracker.  OAO  pro- 
gram  was  managed  by  GSFC  under  OSSA  direction,  (NASA  P ro j   Off; 
NASA  Release 68-186K;  KSC Release  KSC-68;  UPI,  W  S tar ,   12/8/68, 
A5;  O’Toole,  W  Pos t ,   12/8/68;  AP,  W  S tar ,   12/9/68,  A6;  S B D ,  
12 /10 /68 ,172 ;   Sehlstedt, B Sun,  12/12/68,  A5) 
December  7:  ApoZZo  8  Astronauts  James A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  William A.  Anders, 
and Frank Borman-scheduled 
to begin lunar  orbital mission Dec.  21- 
held  preflight press  conference at  MSC.  Borman,  comparing mission  to  
“a  combat  tour  in  Vietnam,”  said:  “The  risks  we  take  are  acceptable 
ones.  . . . V7e  have  to  accept  them  if  we   believe  it’s  worthwhile.  If 
I ever feel it’s  not worthwhile, I’ll  quit.” 
Describing  the  magnificence  of  space  flight,  Borman  said,  “When 
you’re  finally  up   at  the  moon  and  looking  back  a t   the  world,  the  na- 
tionalities blend.  . . . You  get  the concept that  this  really  is  one world 
and wonder why  . . . we  can’t  live together like decent people.”  Anders 
said  c r ew   “might  use  the  opportunity  [of  being  in   lunar  orbit  Christ- 

304 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Dedember  7 

December  7-10  : NASA’s’ Oao-I1  21 -foo t-w ide ,  4,400-pound  Orb i t ing   Astronomical  Obser- 
vatory  carried  11   telescopes  into  orb i t   to  seek  answers  to   questions  on  origin,  evolu- 
t ion ,  and  future  of  universe. Photo  was  made  i n  final  f l igh t   qualification tes t ing .  

mas  Day]  t o   express  to  all  peoples  of  the  world  our  purposes  and  the 
benefits  w e   can  expect  from  space  exploration.”  (Lannan,  W  S ta r ,  
12/8/68,  A4;  AP,  ICC  S tar ,   12/8/68;  AP,  M  He r ,   12/8/68) 
December  8:  Chief  Test  Pilot  Joseph  S.  Algranti  successfully ejected  from 
lunar  landing  training  vehicle about  four minutes into planned  six-min- 
Ute  flight,  when  large  lateral-control  oscillation  developed  as  he  de- 
scended  from  maximum  altitude  of  550  ft.  He  ejected  a t   200  ft  and 
landed by  parachute  while  $1.8-million vehicle crashed  and burned  sev- 
eral hundred  feet  away.  Flight  was  14th for  this  LLTV.  Astronaut  Wal- 
ter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  was  named  chairman  of  board  to   investigate acci- 
dent.  (M SC   Special  Releases;  W  Pos t ,   12/9/68,  1; SBD ,   12/10/68, 
172) 
e In   New   Yo rk   T imes ,   Walter  Sullivan  said  President-elect  Richard  M. 
Nixon’s  entourawe had  discussed  creation  of  Cabinet  post  for  science 
and  technology.”The  science adviser,  in  the  view  of  the  Nixon  entou- 
rage,  has  been  unable  to  streamline  the  machinery  for  making  science 
policy.  Science,  and  the  problems  relating  to  it,  has  outgrown  its  old 
boundaries.  The  big  problems  a re   interdisciplinary.  Their  solution 
requires  expertise in  many  fields, and  the cooperation  of  many  depart- 
ments  of  government.  This  has  led  to  a  proliferation  of  interdepart- 
mental  committees.”  However, “because the  creation  of  a  Cabinet  post 
would  have major  repercussions within the  scientific establishment, it is 
unlikely that  such a  step w i l l   be  taken until  there  has  been  an  extensive 
study,  lasting  perhaps  a  year  o r   more.”  ( N Y T ,  12/8/68,  3E) 

305 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
December  9 
December  9 :  NASA’s H G l O  lifting body  vehicle,  piloted by  Maj.  Jerauld  R. 
Gentry  ( USAF)  , successfully  completed  second  rocket-powered  flight 
from Edwards AFB  reaching mach 0.8  (550 mph)  a t  altitude  approach- 
ing 50,000  ft.  (NASA  Proj  Off;  AP,  B  Sun,  12/10/68,  5) 
At  White  House  Dinner  honoring  members  of  space program,  President 
Johnson  presented  Presidential Medal  of  Freedom,  Nation’s  highest  ci- 
vilian  award,  to  retired  NASA  Administrator,  James  E.  Webb,  “a  most 
distinguished  public  administrator,  . . . a  farsighted  and  forceful 
leader  of  this Nation  in  the pioneer exploration of  outer  space, opening 
new  frontiers  of  discovery and progress for  the  American  people.” 
President  told  23   Apollo  astronauts,  NASA  officials,  Government 
leaders  in  space program,  and  heads  of  rocket-building firms, “I  asked 
you  to  come  here  tonight  in  the  twilight  of  this  administration,  so  I 
could  pay the  respect  and  the honor  and the affection that  I  felt for  the 
man  who  has  directed  your  efforts  and  directed  them  so  well,  and  so 
that  I could express my personal admiration and respect for you.” 
In   response, Webb  said,  “The  challenge  of  space  is  large  and  so  is 
NASA.  I n   all  such  human  endeavors, organized  institutional  efforts  a re  
essential,  and  we   know,  in  the  words  of  Emerson,  that  they  are  ‘the 
lengthened shadow of  one man.‘  We  in  NASA  know, Mr.  President,  that 
you  are  the  man  of  which  our  civilian  space  effort,  conducted  for  the 
benefit of  mankind, is the lengthened shadow.” 
A t   predinner  ceremony,  document  for  White  House  Treaty  Room 
was  signed  by  ApoZZo  7  astronauts  Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  R.  Walter 
Cunningham, and Donn F.  Eisele; Apollo 8 Astronauts William A.  An- 
ders,  Frank  Borman,  and  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.;  and  pioneer  aviator 
Charles A.  Lindbergh.  Also  in  Treaty  Room  were  commemorations of 
May  21,  1963, visit  to  White  House  by  Astronaut  L.  Gordon  Cooper 
following  22-orbit  mission  in  Faith  V I 1  May  15-16  and  of  June  17, 
1965, award  of  Exceptional Service Medal to  late Astronaut Edward H. 
White  11,  and  Astronaut  James  A.  McDivitt  following  first  U.S.  space 
walk during June 3-7  Gemini IV   mission. 
During exchange of  dinner  toasts President Johnson said that  “in  the 
hundreds  of  laws  on which I have answered the  rollcall,  the bills  that  I 
have  sponsored or  cosponsored  or  amended  or  defeated, there  is  not  a 
single  one  that  gives  more  pride  than  the  Space  Act.”  Responding, 
Webb citsd  three generations of  spacecraft in  10  yr,  “put  to  use  . . . in 
every  major  field,”  and  said  he  had  “strongly  held  view  that  in  the 
kind  of  world  we  live  in,  our  Nation  needs  this  kind  of  success in  this 
kind  of  endeavor.”  (PD, 12/16/68,  1689-91;  McCardle,  V’ Po s t ,  
12/10/68,  D1;  Shelton, W S ta r ,  12/10/68,  B6;  NYT ,  12/10/68,86) 
0  World  Meteorological  Organization,  U.N.  agency  managing  World 
Weather Watch project,  said work was well  advanced, according to  UPI. 
System would  be  fully operational  in  1971 and  save world  economy es- 
timated  $17  billion  annually  in  losses  caused  by  unexpected  weather 
changes. System  called  for  29,000  observations daily,  of  which  24,OW 
were already  being made.  Additional 2,500 by  1971 would  bring  imple- 
mentation  level  to  91%.  World  centers  a t   Melbourne,  Moscow,  and 
Washington would be computerized by  1969, increasing daily  output of 
134 charts  to  223  by  1971.  Additionally,  2 1   regional  centers  issuing 
1,191 charts  daily  would  increase  output  to  1,830 charts  by  1971 and, 
eventually, would  be  linked to  global communications system. Observa- 

306 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  9 

December  9 :   Apo l lo   7  and  8  f l igh t   crews  s ign   memorial  document  f o r   Wh i te   House 
T rea ty   Room.  Signers  are  ( l e f t  to   r igh t )  : Astronauts  R.  Walter  Cunn ingham ,  D o n n  F .  
Eisele,  Wa l te r  M .  Schirra,  J r .   (A p o l l o   7 )  ; WiUiam A .  Anders,  James  A .   Lovell,  J r . ,   and 
Frank  Borman  (A p o l l o   8 ) .  Standing  are  Charles  A .  Lindbergh  (w ho   also  s i g n e d ) ,  Mrs. 
Johnson,  President  L yndon   B .   Johnson,  retired  NASA  Administrator  James  E .   W ebb ,  
and  V i c e  President  Hubert H .  Humph rey .  

tions  would  be  made by  land  surface  stations  300 mi  apart  throughout 
world  with  exception of  desert  areas.  Further  data  would  be  passed  on 
by  weather  ships,  upper-air  sea  stations,  aircraft,  and  meteorological 
satellites.  (W  S ta r ,  12/9/68,  AFI) 
December   9-12:  New   Yorlc Times  and Washington Evening  S tar   published 
contents of  unreleased draft report  by  Presidential  task  force appointed 
in  1967  to  formulate  national  communications  policy  dealing  with 
rapid  technological  changes  and  providing  for  adequate  Government 
supervision.  Report  would  recommend  reorganization  of  U S .   commu- 
nications  industry  to  include Government-sponsored monopoly to  trans- 
mit  all  international  communications-including  ComSatCorp  satellites 
and  ground  stations;  AT&T  underseas cables;  and  terminals  and  switch- 
ing  stations  of   record'^  carriers  ITT  World  Communications, Inc.,  RCA 
Communications, Inc.,  and Western  Union  International,  Inc.  If  Com- 
SatCorp  became  single  international  “entity,”  committee’s  recommen- 
dations  would  preclude  it  from  becoming  owner  and  manager  of  do- 
mestic  satellite  communications  system  for  which  the  report  would 
propose  pilot  program. 
Committee  claimed  single  entity  could  make  more  balanced  invest- 
ment  choice  on  whether  to  lay  more  cables  or  launch  satellites  and 
would  eliminate  need  for  duplicate  transmission  facilities.  Conclusions 
were  challenged  in  dissenting  footnote  to  report  by  Dr.  Edward  C. 
Welsh,  Executive Secretary of  NASC,  who  said merger would  inhibit  de- 

307 

December  9-12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

velopment  of  satellite  technology  and  reduce  technological competition 
between cables and satellites that could result in lower rates. 
Report  also  would  recommend  informal  merger  of  postal  and  tele- 
graph  services, with Western Union  Telegraph Co.  permitted  to  operate 
in   post  offices;  relaxation  of  FCC  restrictions  on  cable  TV  to   protect 
broadcasters ; and Government sponsorship of  experimental program  to 
test  TV’s  usefulness  in  assisting  minority  groups.  (Finney,  NYT, 
12/9/68,  1 ; 12/10/68,  1 ; Aug.,  W  Star,  12/12/68,  A13) 
December  10:  Cosmos  CCLV I I I  was  successfully launched by  U.S.S.R.  into 
orbit with  302-km  (187.6-mi)  apogee, 206-km  (128-mi)  perigee,  89.5- 
min  period,  and  64.9’  inclination.  Satellite reentered  Dec.  18.  (UPI,  W 
S tar ,   12/10/68,  A6;  AP,  NYT,  12/11/68,  6 ;   GSFC  SSR ,   12/15/68; 
12/31/68) 
Javelin  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill  Research 
Range carried  Syracuse Univ.  Research Corp.  payload  to  520-mi  (837- 
km)  altitude  to  observe  ionization  levels  of  helium  in  exposure.  Data 
would  be  related to  aspects of  sun  and earth  relative to  payload. Rocket 
and instruments performed satisfactorily.  (NASA Rpt SRL) 
NASA  announced  award  of  $1,046,123  contract  to  Thiokol  Chemical 
Corp.’s  Elkton,  Md.,  Div.  for  development  of  more  powerful  solid-fuel 
rocket  for  automated  missions,  including  possible  use  a s   3rd  stage  for 
Centaur  and  Delta.  New  3rd  stage  was  expected  to  be  ready  for  use  in 
1971.  (NASA Release 68-210) 
*  NASA  announced  joint  1969  project  with  German  Federal  Ministry  for 
Scientific Research  (BMWF )   to  photograph  earth’s  magnetic  lines  of 
force  high  in  space  would  involve  release  of  barium  vapor  by  NASA 
Scout  rocket  at  20,000-mi altitude.  Scientists would  use  special  optical 
equipment to view  resultant  glowing  ionized cloud  along magnetic field 
lines  and  visually  map  electromagnetic forces  acting  in  barium  area. 
Agreement  on   project  called  for  BMWF  to  provide  payload,  tw o   ground 
observer  stations,  and  data  analysis.  NASA  would  furnish  rocket,  con- 
duct  launch  from  NASA  Wallops Station,  and provide  tracking  and  com- 
munications services.  (NASA  Release 68-211) 
MSC  had  awarded  $16.4  million,  one-year  extension  to  cost-plus-award- 
fee  contract  with  Lockheed  Electronics  Co.  Div.  of  Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corp.,  NASA  announced. Award  was  €or general electronic, instrumenta- 
tion,  and  engineering  support  services, bringing  total  contract  value  to 
$46.4 million.  (NASA  Release 68-209) 
0  Wash ing ton  Da i ly   News  editorial  commented  on  statement  by  physicist 
Dr.  Ralph  E.  Lapp  warning  of  possible  dangers  in  Apollo  8 mission 
[see  Dec.  l a ] :   “There  are  perhaps  sound  reasons  involving  national 
prestige fo r  trying  to be  the  first nation  to  send men  into  a  moon  orbit. 
But  surely  no  such  reasons  are  compelling  enough  to  cut  corners  on 
safety. The technical arguments advanced by  Dr.  Lapp  a re  f a r  too  com- 
plex  to  be  resolved  by  laymen.  But  after  the  tragic  fire  that  took  the 
lives  of  three  of  our  Apollo  spacemen  two  years  ago  i t   should  not  be 
necessary to  urge  that  the National  Aeronautics and  Space Administra- 
tion  exercise  all  due  prudence-even  a t   the  risk  of  losing  the  race 
around the moon.”  ( W  News ,  12 /10 /68 ,24 )  
Secretary  of  Defense  Clark  M.  Clifford  announced  DOD  had  completed 
Project  693  ( a  $3-billion cutback in  FY  1969 expenditures  required  by 
Revenue  and  Expenditure  Control  Act  of  1968)  including  $85-million 

308 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  10 

reduction  in  MOL  program.  (DOD   Release  1083-68;  SBD ,   12/11/68, 
176) 
0  Soviet  Finance  Minister  Vasily  Garbuzov  told  semiannual  budget  meet- 
ing  of  Supreme Soviet in Moscow  that  nominal U.S.S.R.  defense spend- 
ing  in  1969 would  increase  6% ,   from  16.7  billion  to  17.7  billion  ru- 
bles.  Institute  of  Strategic  Studies  in  London  had  estimated  before 
Aug.  20   invasion  of  Czechoslovakia that  real  Soviet military  spending 
for  1968 would  be  approximately  equivalent  to  $50  billion.  Thus,  an- 
nounced  increases would  bring  total  1969 budget  to  some  $53  billion, 
as  against  $80  billion  for  US . ,   which  had  allocated  $30  billion  fo r  
costs  of  Vietnam War.  However,  Soviet  figure did  not  include  military 
R&D  and  investment  in  defense  industries. 
Budget  also  disclosed  continued  expansion  of  government  support 
for  scientific  research.  (Shabad,  N Y T ,   12/11/68,  1 ;   Shub,  W P o s t ,  
12/11/68,  A l )  
December  11 : President-elect Richard  M.  Nixon  introduced  his  Cabinet on 
nationwide TV  from  Washington,  D.C.  Among  appointments, William 
P.  Rogers, Washington  attorney  and  Eisenhower Administration  Attor- 
ney  General, would  serve  as  Secretary  of  State;  Rep.  Melvin  R.  Laird 
(R-Wis.), as  Secretary  of  Defense;  and  Massachusetts  Gov.  John  A. 
Volpe, as Secretary of  Transportation.  (Herbers, NYT,  12/12/68) 
0  Apollo 8 crew, wearing their  spacesuits, participated  in  final 2  hr  45 min 
of  countdown  rehearsal  for  Dec.  2 1   launch.  Spacecraft had  completed 
four-day  rehearsal  fully  fueled  Dec.  10.  (AP,  B  Sun ,   12/11/68,  A9; 
UPI, W S tar ,  12/11/68,  C4) 
NASA  was  unsuccessful  in  second  Project  SHAPE  (Supersonic  High  Alti- 
tude  Parachute  Experiments)  attempt  at  WSMR  when  parachute  was 
ejected  prematurely  from  five-foot-long canister  after  three-stage rocket 
had  successfully propelled  payload  to  33-mi altitude.  First  test  Oct.  23 
had been  successful. (NASA  Release 68-216) 
Fhdkration  Akronautique  Internationale  ( FAI)   had  established Yuri  Ga- 
garin  gold  medal  honoring  cosmonaut who  became  first  man  in  space 
April  12,  1961, during  Soviet  Vo s tok  I  mission,  Space  Business  Daily 
reported.  Medal  would  be  awarded  annually  to  pilot  contributing  best 
( S B D ,  
performance  of  year 
in  peaceful  exploration  of 
space. 
12/11/68,178) 
Cal  Tech‘s  Dr.  Maarten  Schmidt  received  Rumford  Premium,  nation’s 
oldest  science  award  for  “the  most  important  discovery  or  useful  im- 
provement  . . . on  heat  and  on light”  at  AAAS dinner  in  Boston, Mass. 
Award,  established  in  1796 by  Benjamin  Thompson,  Count  Rumford, 
consisted  of  medal  and  $5,000.  Dr.  Schmidt  had  determined  intense 
radio  emission of  quasars  indicated  they were moving  away  from  earth 
at  speeds  up  to  149,000 mps,  or  about  80%  of  speed  of  light.  (AP, 
W  S ta r ,   12/12/68,  A2) 
December  12:  USAF  launched  two  unidentified  satellites  from  Vandenberg 
AFB   by  Thor-Agena D  booster.  One  entered  orbit  with  148-mi  (238.3- 
km)  apogee,  109-mi  (175.4-km)  perigee,  88.6-min  period,  and  81.0” 
inclination  and  reentered  Dec.  28.  Second  satellite  entered  orbit  with 
916-mi  (1,474.1-km)  apogee,  862-mi  (1,387.2-km)  perigee,  114.4-min 
period, and 80.3”  inclination.  (P re s  Rpt 68) 
Two  Nike-Cajun sounding  rockets  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range  carried  GSFC  experiments to  75-mi  (120-km)  and  78-mi 

309 

December  12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

( 124d -km )  altitudes to  obtain  temperature, pressure, density, and wind 
variation  data  in  atmosphere between  21.8-  and  59-mi  (35- and 95-km) 
altitudes  by  detonating  grenades  a t   various  altitudes  and  recording 
their  sound arrival  on  ground. Grenades exploded a s  planned. Launches 
were coordinated with  series at  Point  Barrow, Alaska.  (NASA  Rpts  SRL) 
December  13:  Explorer  X X X I X   (Air  Density  Explorer  C)  and  Explorer 
X L   (Irzjun Y ) ,  launched  as  dual  payload  Aug.  8,  were  adjudged  suc- 
cessful  by  NASA .   Explorer  X X X I X   balloon  had  been  ejected  and  fully 
inflated.  Explorer  X L  had  despun,  extended booms,  and  turned  on  ex- 
periments  satisfactorily.  Malfunction  in  spacecraft's  power  subsystem 
had  caused  loss of  one-third of  power  generated by  solar  panels,  reduc- 
ing  quantity  but  not  affecting quality  of  data.  Satellite would  enter  full 
sunlight  Sept.  18, 1969, permitting  originally  planned  data-acquisition 
rate.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
*  NASA  announced  agency  and  DOD   had  agreed  jointly  to  make  computer 
programs  available  to  industry,  educational  institutions,  scientific  and 
technical  organizations,  and  others  through  Computer  Softwear  Man- 
agement  and  Information  Center  ( C O SM I C ) .   Established  in  1966 under 
NASA  contract  at  Univ.  of  Georgia,  COSMIC  listed  some  350  computer 
programs  for  sale  at  fraction  of  cost.  More  than  100  DOD   programs, 
with additional NASA programs, would be added during  1969. 
Pa r t  of  NASA  Office of  Technology Utilization effort  to  encourage sec- 
ondary  use of  aerospace R&D results, COSM IC  offered  design  information 
for  electronic printed-circuit  boards  and  programs  for  such  jobs  as  in- 
ventory  control,  accounting,  data  control,  stress  analysis,  equipment 
checkout, and structural testing.  (NASA  Release 68-212) 
' Cal  Tech  trustees  announced  choice  of  Dr.  Harold  Brown,  Air'  Force 
Secretary,  to  replace  Dr.  Lee A.  DuBridge, who  resigned effective Jan. 
20  to   become  Science  Adviser  to  President-elect  Richard  M.  Nixon. 
(UP I ,   VET  S ta r ,   12/14/68,  A3;  W Pos t ,   12/15/68,  A6 )  
Naval  Ship  Systems  Command  had  awarded  $13.5-million  contract  to 
Todd Shipyards Corp.  for  first  of  nine  oceanographic ships of  radically 
new  design.  Prototype  would  provide  USN  with  its  first  catamaran-style 
hull.  Diesel-propelled,  246-ft-long ship  would  be  designated  GOR-16 
( fo r  general ocean research).  ( N Y T ,  12/13/68,86) 
December  14 :   NASA's Oao  11,  launched  Dec.  7,  photographed  three  un- 
named  stars  in  Draco  Constellation  2,000  light  years  from  earth,  near 
Vega between Big and Little Dippers-to  make first UV  photos of  stars. 
Photos were taken by  telescopes of  Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa- 
tory  experiments aboard  satellite and used  UV  radiation  which  did  not 
penetrate  earth's  atmosphere. They  gave  GSFC  astronomers  enough  in- 
formation  to  reconstruct  fairly  detailed  images  of  stars,  GSFC  spokes- 
man  said.  (OSSA ;   UPI,  NYT ,   12/15/68,  SBD ,   12/17/68,  208) 
U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  C C L I X   from  Kapustin  Yar  into  orbit  with 
1,331-km (827-mi)  apogee, 213-km  (132.4-mi)  perigee,  100.3-min pe- 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  May  5,  1969.  (GSFC 
riod,  and  48.4" 
SSR ,  12 /15 /68 ,210 ;   SBD ,  12/17/68,210;  3/15/69) 
*  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carried 
Dudley  Observatory  payload  to  98.9-mi  (159.2-km)  altitude  to  601- 
lect  micrometeoroids  during  peak  of  annual  meteor  shower.  Parti- 
cles would  be  studied  to  determine chemical composition, size  distribu- 
tion,  numerical  density  in  upper  atmosphere,  and  crystal  structure. 

310 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  14 

@ 

Control  experiment had  been  launched  successfully  Dec.  5 .   Although 
two  doors  failed  to  operate  properly,  scientific  objectives were  accom- 
plished and payload was recovered.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
New  Republic  reported  interview with  Dr.  Ralph  E.  Lapp,  physicist  and 
assistant laboratory  director  of  World War  I1  Manhattan  Project.  Dr. 
Lapp  said:  “We  are  pushing  our  luck,  gambling  that  everything  will 
work  perfectly”  on  Apollo  8 mission.  He  advised  delay  in  program  so 
that  Apollo  9,  configured  to  have  relief-capability,  would  be  on  pad 
ready  for  launch  should  Apollo  8  ‘<run into  trouble.”  Asked  if  U.S. 
could  afford to  delay Apollo 8, Dr.  Lapp  said,  “The  basic  factor  is not 
really technical. We  are racing  the  Russians to  the  moon.  A  lot  of  peo- 
ple  in NASA  and  in  industry  are hoping  that  a  successful Apollo-8 orbit- 
ing  of  the moon-or 
even circumnavigation-will  build  up  public  sup- 
port  for  a n   invigorated  manned  space  program.  It’s  just  one  of  the 
weighty techno-decisions facing Mr.  Nixon. He  is committed to  funding 
out the Apollo program-but  post-Apollo programs  await his  decision.” 
(AP, W Star, 12/9/68;  W Post, 12 /9 /68 ,3 ;   New  Republic,  12/14/68, 
16-9) 
Deep  sea  drilling between  U.S.  and  Africa by  scientists of  Joint  Oceano- 
graphic  Institutions  for  Deep  Earth  Sampling  ( JOIDES)  had  confirmed 
that  sea  floor  was  spreading  and  pushing  Europe  and  America  farther 
apart,  John  Lannan  said  in  Washington  Evening  S tar .   Evidence, 
brought  to  surface  in  samples, or  cores,  extracted from  earth’s  bottom, 
showed fluid internal mass  of  moIten  rock  under  ocean was  stilf  welling 
up  along mid-Atlantic Ridge.  Cores   indicated  “this  newly  formed  crust 
must  spread  slowly aside, like  a  giant  conveyor belt,  continuously accu- 
mulating  sediment . . . throughout  millions  of  years  as  i t  moves,”  sci- 
entists said.  (W  S tar ,  12/14/68,  A l )  
December  15-19:  NASA  successfully  launched  Essa  VZZZ  (TOS-F)  , eighth 
meteorological  satellite in  ESSA’S  Tiros  Operational  Satellite  ( TOS)  sys- 
tem, from W TR  by  two-stage, Thrust-Augmented, Long-Tank Thor-Delta 
booster.  Primary  NASA  mission  objective  was  to  provide  global  cloud 
coverage  on  regular,  daily  basis  with  six-month  nominal  and  three- 
month  minimum  lifetime.  Satellite achieved  nearly  polar,  sun-synchro- 
nous  circular  orbit  with  903.4-mi  (1,453.6-km)  apogee,  874.6-mi 
(1,407.2-km)  perigee,  114.6-min period,  and  101.9’  inclination. 
An  advanced  version  of  cartwheel  configuration,  300-lb  Essa  VZZl 
carried  two  Automatic  Picture  Transmission  (APT )   cameras  which 
would photograph earth‘s cloud cover and immediately transmit pictures 
to local APT  stations  in 52 nations.  During  first 22  orbits  spacecraft un- 
derwent  orientation  maneuver  to  place  it  in  wheel  mode  and  spin  rate 
was  adjusted  by  0.2  rpm.  By  Dec.  19 all  spacecraft  systems had  been 
successfully programmed and excellent pictures had been read  out. 
ESSA  financed and managed  TOS system and  would  operate spacecraft 
after  NASA  completed checkout later  in  month.  GSFC was  responsible for 
procurement,  launch,  and  initial  checkout  of  spacecraft  in  orbit.  Essa 
YZZZ  was  18th Tiros  satellite launched  successfully since  Tiros Z,  first 
weather  satellite, April  1, 1960. All  from  Tiros ZZZ  on  had  equaled  or 
exceeded  designed  operation  lifetimes.  Most  recent 
satellite 
launched  was  Essa  VZZ,  launched  Nov.  10.  (NASA  Proj  Off: ESSA  Re- 
lease ES 68-67;  SBD, 12/17/68,210) 
December  15:  Apollo  8  launch  crew  began  lengthy  countdown  on  time  a t  

311 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
December  15 
KSC  a t  7:OO  pm  EST,  for  launch scheduled for 7:51  am EST  Dec.  21.  (W 
Pos t ,  12/16/68,  A12; W S ta r ,  12/16/68,  A5;  W News,  12/16/68,3) 
0  NASA  announced millions of  home TV viewers in  U.S.,  Europe,  and  Japan 
would  see live pictures taken by Apo l lo   8 crew with  cigar-box-size cam- 
era  similar  to  that  carried  on Apo l lo   7 mission.  They would  be  beamed 
to  earth  from  spacecraft  six  times  during  Apo l lo   8 mission,  including 
twice  while  spacecraft  was  in  moon  orbit.  Manned  Space  Flight  Net- 
work  stations near  Madrid,  Spain, and Goldstone, Calif.,  would  convert 
slow-scan signal  into  TV  picture.  Still  photos  would  be  taken  of  TV 
monitor  during  live transmission  and  pictures  released  in  Los  h g e l e s ,  
Madrid, and Canberra.  (NASA Release 68-214) 
Scientific team  headed  by  Nobel  Prize  winning  physicist,  Dr.  Charles H. 
Townes,  announced  discovery  of  ammonia  molecules  in  direction  of 
Sagittarius  toward  Milky  Way  center,  30,000  light  years  away  from 
earth.  Finding  wa s   made  through  spectrographs  a t   radioastronomy  ob- 
servatory of  Univ. of  California a t  Berkeley during  studies supported by 
NASA,  Office  of  Naval  Research,  and  NSF.  Ammonia  was  consid- 
ered  chemical  ancestor  of  organic  compounds  and  necessary  step  to- 
ward  origin  of  life.  Team  said  discovery  “marks  the  first  time  that  a 
relatively complex molecular compound has been  definitely identified in 
the  vast  regions between the  stars.”  I t  would  spur  intensified search  for 
additional combinations of  life-essential elements detected in space. 
Former MIT   provost and inventor of  maser, which  led to  development 
of  laser,  Dr.  Townes  had  been  named  Dec.  3  to  head  President-elect 
Richard  M.  Nixon’s  task  force to make  recommendations on  space pro- 
gram.  Report would  be  published in  Physical  Rev iew   Letters  of  Ameri- 
can  Institute  of  Physics.  (UPI ,   N Y T ,   12/16/68,  93;  AP,  W  Po s t ,  
12/16/68,  A l )  
I n   Washington  Sunday   S tar   William  Hines  said  NASA  announcement  of 
plans  for  1974 Mars landing  marked  revival  “of  a  project  that  was  sac- 
rificed  last  year  on  the  altar  of  the  great  God  Apollo  whose  manned 
moon  program  w a s  gobbling up   all  the  funds  at NASA’s disposal. I t  also 
marked  the  first  positive  action  by  NASA  in  two  years  directed  to  start- 
ing  rather  than  terminating  activities.”  Its  timing,  one  month  after 
presidential  election, seemed  “to  provide  a  tantalizing  clue  to  the  Nix- 
onian  philosophy  about  space.”  Hines  said  it  wa s   likely  new  adminis- 
tration  would  heed  post-Apollo views  of  NAS  which  had  recommended 
more  attention  to  scientific exploration  of  space with  instruments.  (W 
S tar ,  12/15/68,  F4) 
In   Wa sh ing ton  Post  Thomas  O’Toole  said  poisoning  from  overexposure 
to  beryllium  powder  had  resulted  in  800 known  deaths  in  U.S.  during 
past  15 yr.  Beryllium  disease  expert,  Dr.  Harriet  L.  Hardy  of  Massa- 
chusetts  General  Hospital,  estimated  total  beryllium  cases  a t   2,500, 
“about  three  times as many  as we’ve  heard  about.”  New  uses  for  light- 
weight,  heat-resistant  metal  had  pushed  production  to  150,000 lb   per 
year.  Battelle Memorial Institute  estimated  output  would  grow  a t   20% 
rate  per  year  for  next  five  years;  NAS  estimated 1979 production  at  six 
times  1969’s. Beryllium was  being  used  by Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.  for 
wheel  brakes  in  C-5A  transport  and  heat  shields for  Poseidon  missile. 
Boeing  Co.  used  it  for  new  Minuteman  missile  shield.  I n   past  three 
years  estimated  $25  million  had  been  spent  on  beryllium  rocket 
research:  O’Toole  said  one  scientist  claimed  test  firing  in  California 

312 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December 15 

had  so  contaminated  site  that  electrician working  there  developed  be- 
ryllium  poisoning.  Neither  NASA  nor  USAF  planned  to  abandon  testing 
beryllium  rockets, however,  and  beryllium  use  had  “kicked  off  a  lively 
debate  inside the Federal Government.”  (W Po s t ,  12/15/68,  A l )  
December  16:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCLX  into  orbit  with  39,576-km 
(24,591.3-mi)  apogee,  511-km  (317.5-mi)  perigee,  712.3-min  period, 
and  64.9”  inclination.  (AP,  B  Sun,  12/18/68,  10;  SBD ,   12/18/68, 
211;  GSFC  S S R ,   12/31/68) 
NASA  announced  decision 
two  Biosatellites 
to  terminate  work  on 
scheduled  for  21-day  missions  beginning  in   1971.  Contract  with 
General  Electric  Co.  Reentry  Systems  Div.  would  be   revised  to  retain 
only work  on  two  30-day primate-experiment  Biosatellites scheduled  to  
begin  in  1969.  Funding  for  later  missions  had  been  reduced  and 
efficient planning  made more  difficult. Possibilities for experiments with 
greater  flexibility  in  early  1970s  had  been  indicated  by  success  of 
smaller satellites and by studies.  (NASA  Release 68-215) 
e FRC  said  two   reports-one 
by  Dr.  Eldon  E.  Kordes,  NASA  Senior  Staff 
Scientist,  to   American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers  and  one  by 
Chief  XB-70  Pilot  for  FRC,  Fitzhugh  L.  Fulton,  Jr.,  to  Flight  Safety 
Foundation-indicated 
NASA-USAF  XB-70  test  program  wa s   providing 
valuable  information for  operation  of  large supersonic  commercial and 
military  aircraft.  Results  from  XB-70’s  participation  in   national  sonic 
boom  research  program  had  shown  methods  used  to  predict  overpres- 
sure  and  extent  of  boom  were  generally  adequate  for  aircraft  of  this 
size and  speed  under  “standard  day”  conditions  but  indicated  unusual 
weather  conditions  and  other  factors  could  affect  these  predictions. 
XB-70  program  wa s   attempting  to  define  intensity  of  turbulence  a t  
higher  altitudes.  System  to   improve  stability,  lessen  turbulence-induced 
accelerations, and  improve  passenger  riding qualities while lengthening 
aircraft’s fatigue life was being tested. 
New  methods of  presenting  flight  and  engine  information to pilot had 
evolved  from XB-70  program,  including  digital  form  for  more  precise 
readout.  Special warning  systems prevented  exceeding  operating limits 
and  attitude  indicator  with  changeable  sensitivity  for  smoother  flight 
control  had  been  evaluated. XB-70  flight  had  demonstrated  need  for 
further  research  in  basic stability and  control characteristics  of its class 
of  aircraft. Actual cross-country  flight  experience had  been  gained  with 
tr ip   from Edwards  AFB,  Calif.,  to  Carswell AFB,  Tex.,  and  return.  Both 
reports  emphasized that,  although  XB-70  was  not  passenger  aircraft,  it 
was  similar  in  size  and  performance  characteristics  to  proposed  SSTS 
and wa s   only  operational aircraft  approaching  SST size and  speed.  (FRC  
Release 28-68) 
*  Apollo  8 astronauts were  pronounced  in   perfect health  by  NASA  Director 
of  Medical  Operations,  Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  after  three-hour  physical 
examination  as countdown proceeded  toward  Dec.  2 1  launch  for  moon 
flight.  “The  crew  i s   i n   real  fine  spirits,”  he   added.  (AP,  B  Sun, 
12/17/68;  AP, W S ta r ,   12/17/68) 
President  Johnson  proclaimed  Dec.  1 7   Wright  Brothers  Day,  com- 
memorating  aircraft  flights  made  by  Orville  and  Wilbur  Wright  65 
E earlier:  “Their  first  journey  wa s   shorter  than  the  floor  of  the  giant 
C-5  cargo  ship  that  w a s   test  flown  earlier  this  year.  But  those  brief 

313 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  IERONAUTICS,  1968 
December  16 
flights . . . on  December  17, 1903, launched  the  air  age.  They  changed 
mankind‘s  way  of  life.”  ( P D ,  12/23/68,1718-9;  N Y T ,   12/17/68,  16) 
December  1 7 :   In   interview  published  in  New  Yo rk   T imes ,   Dr.  Lee  A.  Du- 
Bridge,  science adviser-designate to  President-elect Richard  M.  Nixon, 
said  problem  facing  Government  was  not  “Shall  Government  support 
and  use  science and  technology,  but  how  shall  it  do  it.  What  are  the 
priorities.  . . .” Fundamental  to  use  of  science was  knowledge;  there- 
fore,  “one  must  have  in  any  modern  society  a  very  important.  and 
extensive  free  basic  research  enterprise  establishment,  largely  in  uni- 
versities,  so  that  new  areas  of  knowledge  w i l l   be  explored.”  Basic  re- 
search budget of  country should increase a t  least 10% annually for next 
few   years. When it came to using this knowledge, “the  Government can, 
and  somebody  must,  direct,  set  up  the  goals.” 
On  space  program,  Dr.  DuBridge  said  that  “the  astonishing  dis- 
coveries”  made  by  launching  instruments  into  space  justified  further 
exploration  from  scientific  point  of  view.  When  man  entered  picture 
a s  “another  piece of  the  instrumentation  that  is needed  for  the explora- 
tion,’’  first  effect  “is  that  the  costs  get  large.  . . . Apollo  landing  of  a 
man  on  the  moon  is  vastly  more  expensive  . . . than  the  Surveyor 
landing.  . . . By  the  same  token,  the  information  returned  will  be 
much  greater,  too.  However,  as  the  technology  of  the  spacecraft  im- 
proves,  and  our  instruments  need  to  get  more  complex,  heavier,  or 
longer  lasting,  there  may  very  well  be  a  time  when  putting  a  man  up  
will  actually  be  cheaper  than  trying  to  use  automated  instruments.” 
(Sullivan, N Y T ,   12/17/68,  1 ) .  
At  Wright  Brothers  Memorial  Dinner,  Washington,  D.C.,  sponsored  by 
NAA,  Sen. Warren  G.  Magnuson  (D-Wash.)  received  Wright  Brothers 
Memorial  Trophy  for  “assuring  United  States  preeminence  in   aero- 
nautics throughout the world.”  (NAA  PAO) 
0  At  Washington,  D.C.,  ceremony,  Adm.  Thomas  H.  Moorer,  Chief  of 
Naval  Operations,  USN,  presented  Distinguished  Service  Medal  to  
Astronaut  Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr.  (Capt.  U SN ) ,   for  space  deeds  “ex- 
ceeded  by  no  one  afloat  or  airborne.”  (AP,  W  Star,  12/18/68,  B2; 
W Post, 12/18/68,  A3) 
0  Dr.  Philip  Handler,  National  Science Board  Chairman  and  only nominee 
to   succeed  Dr.  Frederick  Seitz  as  NAS  president  in  July  1969,  said  in  
interview  he  would  urge  Federal  program  of  “bloc  grants”  to  U.S. 
universities  in  1969  to  support  science.  Legislation  would  be  intro- 
duced  in  new  Congress,  with  “something  like”  $500-million  price  tag 
in  first  year,  “just  for  starters.”  Universities,  “completely  dependent 
upon  science  project  grants,”  had  had  funds  for  individual  projects 
cut  off  leaving  “numerous  employees for  whom  they  have  no  salaries.” 
(Cohn, W Post, 12/18/68,  A32) 
0  DOD  announced  USN  had  selected  Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering  Corp. 
and  McDonnell Douglas  Corp.  to  continue  to  contract  definition  phase 
for  F-14A  aircraft,  formerly called VFX-1.  Selection of  contractor  was 
scheduled  for  January  1969.  (DOD Release  1 1 0 9 4 8 ;  WS J ,   12/18/68; 
upr, W Star, 12/18/68,  A6) 
December  18 -20 :   Intelsat-III  F-2  was  successfully  launched  by  NASA  f o r  
ComSatCorp on  behalf  of  International Communications Satellite Con- 
sortium.  Launch  was  from  ETR  by  three-stage,  Thrust-Augmented, 
Long-Tank  Delta  booster.  The  632-1b7 cylindrical  satellite  entered 

314 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  18-20 

elliptical transfer  orbit with  22,590-mi  (36,355.1-km)  apogee,  161.9-mi 
(260.5-km)  perigee,  642.9-min  period,  and  28.8’  inclination.  All  sys- 
tems  were  functioning  normally.  On  Dec.  20   apogee  motor  was  fired 
to  kick  satellite  into  planned  near-synchronous  orbit  over  Atlantic 
a t  51” west  longitude with 22,328.2-mi  (35,933.8-km)  apogee, 21,833.4- 
mi  (33,137.5-km)  perigee,  0.79’ 
inclination,  and  3.25O  per  day  east- 
ward orbital drift. 
I n t e l s a t l l l   F -2 ,   first  successful  launch  in   Intelsat  I11  series,  was 
backup  to  Intelsat-I11  F-1  (Intelsat  111-A)  which  had  been  destroyed 
minutes  after  launch  Sept.  18 when  launch  vehicle  began  to  break  up. 
Satellite wa s   scheduled  to  begin  commercial service  Jan.  2,  1969  [see 
Dec.  281, handling  up  to  1,200 voice  circuits  or  four W channels.  By 
Jan. 29,  1969, all Atlantic area  service except NASA  Apollo  traffic would 
be  transferred  to In te lsa t-I l l   F-2   from  other  Atlantic comsats. Intelsat 
I  (Ea r l y   Bird)  and  Zntelsat-11  F - 3   (A t lan t ic   11 ) .   Etam,  W.  Va., 
earth  station  would  become  prime  East  Coast  terminal  and  Andover, 
Me.,  station  would  be  removed  from  service  preparatory  to  its  use 
as  prime  terminal  for  Intelsat-I11  F-d.  NASA  Apollo  communications 
would  be  maintained  through  Intelsat-11  F-3  with  42-ft  terminal 
antenna  at  Andover.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; ComSatCorp  Release  68-69; 
Stevens, N Y T ,   12/19/68,  1 ;  AP, W  Po s t ,   12/19/68,  A3) 
December  18: NASA  announced appointment of  William C. Schneider, Apollo 
Mission  Director,  as  Director  of  Apollo  Applications,  succeeding  latc 
Harold  T.  Luskin, who  died Nov.  25.  George H.  Hage, Deputy Director 
of  Apollo  Program,  would  be  Acting  Apollo  Mission  Director  in  add,- 
tion  to  his  present  duties.  (NASA  Release 68-217) 
0  Apollo  8 astronauts  heading  for  moon  would  be  “in  far  less  hazardous 
position”  than  they  would  have  been  as  crew  for  Columbus,  NASA 
Director  of  Manned  Space  Flight  Safety  Jerome  F.  Lederer  said  in 
speech  before  Wings  Club  in  New  York.  “Columbus  did  not  know 
where  he  was  going,  how  far  it  was,  nor  where  he  had  been  after  his 
return. With Apollo, there is no such lack of  information.”  Nevertheless, 
mission  would  “involve  risks  of  great  magnitude  and  probably  risks 
that have not been  foreseen. 
“Apollo  8 has  5,600,000  parts  and  one  and  a  half  million  systems, 
subsystems  and  assemblies.  Even  i f   all  functioned  with  99.9  per  cent 
reliability,  we  could  expect  5,600  defects.  Hence,  the  striving  for  per- 
fection  and  the  use  of  redundancy.”  (Text;  N Y T ,   12/19/68,  56) 
9  Aerospace sales reached  record high  of  $30.1 billion  in  1968, an  increase 
of  almost  $3  billion  over  1967,  Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  President 
Karl  G.  Harr,  Jr.,  told  Washington,  D.C.,  meeting  of  Aviation/Space 
Writers Assn.  Commercial aerospace sales increased 39%,  to  record $6.4 
billion;  aerospace  exports  rose  32%,  to  $3  billion. 
Military  space  programs  in  1968  rose  3%, from  $1.088  billion  in 
1967 to $1.121 billion,  reported  AIA’S  “1968 Aerospace Industry Review 
and  Forecast,”  which  Ha r r   released.  Nonmilitary  space  sales  declined 
3.7%,  from  $4.202  billion  in  1967  to  $4.047  billion  in   1968.  Sales 
of  products  and  services for  use  of  aerospace  technology  in   nonaero- 
space a r e a s - s u ch   as marine science, water  desalination, crime  control, 
and  rapid  transit-increased 
irom  $2.579  billion  to  $2.726  billion. 
Ha r r   predicted  slight decline in   total  aerospace sales  to  about  $29.6 
billion  during  1969 because  of  25%  drop  in  jet  transport  sales before 

315 

December  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

deliveries  of  new  high-capacity  aircraft ; continuing  increase  in   heli- 
copter,  executive, and  utility  aircraft  sales;  modest  increase  in  defense 
and  nonaerospace sales;  and  decline  in  civil space sales.  He  noted  that 
in  third  quarter  of  1968 backlog of  Government  aerospace  orders  was 
less than  that  of  other  customers for  first time  since before World War 
11.  (Text:  AIA  Release 68 -60 ;   W  S ta r ,   12/19/68,  A19) 
USAF  flew  11  newspapermen  on  simulated  combat  missions  in  F-111A 
from Nellis AFB,  Nev.,  to  demonstrate aircraft’s systems. I n  Washington 
Post,  George C.  Wilson  said  decision  to  allow  newsmen  in  cockpits  of 
controversial  plane  for  first  time  evidenced  USAF’S  conviction  “that 
the  F-11  program  is  at  a  crucial  juncture  a s  the Nixon  Administration 
gets  ready  to  take  office.”  (W  Post,  12/19/68,  A8) 
Df.  Anatoli  A.  Logunov,  Director  of  Institute  of  High  Energy  Physics 
near  Serpukhov, 60 mi  south of  Moscow,  said  in Zzvestiu that  Institute’s 
l,OW-yd-dia, 7O-bev, proton  accelerator had  joined  scientists elsewhere 
in  search  for  quark.  Quark  was  hypothetical  particle  thought  to  be 
elementary building  block  of  all  matter  and  to  carry  electrical  charge 
one-third  to   two-thirds  that  of  electron  charge.  ( N Y T ,   12/20/68,  3) 
AIAA  announced  Dr.  Charles  P.  Sonnett,  Chief  of  ARC’S  Space  Science 
Div.,  would  receive  Space Science Award,  including  $500  honorarium, 
“for  his personal contribution as planner,  leader and  individual experi- 
menter  in major space science vehicle programs which have  contributed 
to  the  field  of  space  physics.”  He  had  worked  in  magnetospheric 
physics  and  nuclear  physics  and  was  currently  concentrating  on  inter- 
planetary  physics.  He  had  been  principal  investigator  on  several  NASA 
experiments and  ALSEP.  Award  would  be  presented  a t   AIAA  7th  Aero- 
space  Science  Meeting  in  New  York  Jan.  20-22,  1969. 
Dr.  Stanley  G.  Hooker,  Technical  Director  of  Bristol  Engine  Div., 
Rolls-Royce Ltd.,  and  Perry  W.  Pratt,  Vice  President  and  Chief  Scien- 
tist  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.,  had  been  selected  to  share  $10,000 
Goddard  Award  for  their  separate  work  in  developing  gas  turbine 
engines.  Goddard  Award,  named  for  late  rocket  pioneer  Robert  H. 
Goddard, was  awarded  annually  to  “a  person  who  has made  a  brilliant 
discovery or a series of  outstanding contributions over a  period  of  time, 
in  the  engineering  science of  propulsion  o r   energy  conversion.” 
Prof.  Rene  H.  Miller, head  of  MIT  Dept.  of  Aeronautics  and  Astro- 
nautics,  would  receive  Sylvanus  Albert  Reed  Award  for  “outstanding 
contributions”  to  rotary-wing  aircraft.  Dr.  Robert  D.  Fletcher,  USAF 
Air  Weather  Service’s  Deputy  Chief  of  Staff  for  Aerospace  Sciences, 
would  receive Robert  M.  Losey  Award  for  “outstanding  and  dedicated 
leadership  and  service”  for  30  yr  to  aeronautical  meteorology.  (AIAA 
Release;  NASA  Biog,  11/29/68;  N Y T ,   12/31/68,  5 2 )  
December  19:  NASA  Aerobee  150 MI  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR 
carried  Cornel1  Univ.  experiment  to  100.3-mi  (161.3-km)  altitude  to 
examine sky in f a r  infrared  ( 5  micron to  1,600 microns)  using copper- 
doped-germanium,  two   gallium-doped-germanium,  and  indium-anti- 
monide detectors  in  conjunction  with  telescope.  Rocket  and  instrumen- 
tation  performed  satisfactorily.  Preliminary  results  indicated  detectors 
functioned properly.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
0  NASA  issued  Management  Instruction  establishing  Committee  on  Extra- 
Vehicular  Activities  ( EVA ) ,   activities  performed  in  space by  astronaut 
outside  space  vehicle.  Seven-member committee,  serving  for  two-year 

316 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  19 

period,  would  provide  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned 
Space Flight  with  recommendations on  overall NASA  EVA  planning  and 
development  by : identifying  EVA  capabilities  which  must  be  defined 
and  developed  to  support  manned  space  flight  activities ; identifying 
ground-based,  orbital,  and  lunar  surface  experiments  to  establish  re- 
quired  EVA  capabilities;  providing  recommendations  on  short-  and 
long-term  EVA  program  plans ; reviewing  proposed  EVA  flight  experi- 
ments  and  making  recommendations ; and  maintaining  awareness  of 
EVA-related activities  of  organizations  other  than  NASA.  (NM I   1152.36) 
NASA  announced  renewal  through  August  1970  of  10-yr  contract  with 
NAS  which  provided  one-year appointments for  post-doctoral and senior 
post-doctoral scientists and  engineers specializing in  space-related work 
to   conduct research  a t  NASA  field  centers. NASA  would  pay  NAS  $2,390,- 
500 to  carry  out  program.  (NASA  Release 68-218) 
0  AEC  announced it  had  conducted underground  nuclear  test  of  about  one- 
megaton  yield  at  Nevada  Test  Site.  It  was  similar  to  April  2 6   test. 
Tests  had  been  described in  press  as  largest  continental  explosions an- 
nounced by  AEC.  Newsmen  were  permitted  to  witness test  for  first  time 
in  10  yr.  (AEC   PIO;  AEC  Release  L-288;  Wilson,  W Post,  12/20/68, 
A3;  Hill,  N Y T ,   12/20/68,  1; 12/25/68;  AP,  N Y T ,   12/18/68,  35) 
*  U.N.  General  Assembly, by  vote  of  96-0,  approved  plans  for  permanent 
body  of  42  members  to  study  means  of  reserving  seabed  for  peaceful 
purposes  and  of  exploring  resources  beyond  national  jurisdiction. 
(Estabrook,  W Post,  12/20/68,  A12) 
December  20:  Cosmos  CCLX I   wa s   launched  by  U.S.S.R. 
into  orbit  with 
initial  apogee  of  670  km  (416  mi) , perigee  of  207  km  (128.5  m i ) ,  
93-min period,  and  71 O  inclination.  Satellite  carried  scientific  equip- 
ment  for  studies  of  upper  layers  of  earth’s  atmosphere  and  nature  of 
Northern  Lights,  with  participation  of  research  institutions  and  ob- 
servatories  of  Bulgaria,  Hungary,  East  Germany,  Poland,  Romania, 
U.S.S.R.,  and  Czechoslovakia.  Satellite  reentered  Feb.  12,  1969.  (SF, 
5/69,  165;  GSFC  SSR,  12/31/68;  2/15/69) 
a  NASA  announced  completion  of  X-15 
flight  research  program  [see 
Jan.  211.  On  final  flight Oct.  2 6 1 9 9 t h  in  series which  began  June  8, 
1969-NAS~  test  pilot  William  H.  Dana  flew  rocket-powered  aircraft 
to  255,000-ft altitude.  Attempt  a t   200th  flight  Dec.  20  was  canceled 
because  of  adverse  weather  conditions. 
program  initiated  in   1954, flights by  three  X-15 
In   NASA-USAF-USN 
aircraft manufactured by  North  American Rockwell Corp. had  included 
more than  82 min  of  flight at  speeds exceeding mach  5  and  total  flight 
time  of  more  than  30  hr.  Peak  altitude  reached  was  354,200  f t   (67.04 
m i )   and  top  speed  was  4,520  mph  (mach  6.7)-speeds 
and  altitudes 
never  before  attained  by  any  vehicle  fully  controlled  by  pilot  from 
launch  to  landing.  I t   had  set  two  official  world  altitude  records  of 
246,740  ft  and  314,750  f t   previously.  X-15 
flight  program  provided 
knowledge  applicable  to  design  and  development  of  future  spacecraft 
and  commercial  supersonic aircraft  and  data  on  aerodynamic  heating 
in  high-speed  flight,  which  could  cause  deterioration  of  aircraft 
structural  integrity.  X-15  remained  only  aircraft  capable  of  studying 
phenomena  at  hypersonic  speeds,  space-equivalent flight,  and  reentry 
flight. 
It  also  had  served  as  test  bed  for  new  components  and  subsystems, 
0 

317 

December  20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
subjecting  them  to  hypersonic  flight  environment.  In   1962  four  X-15 
pilots  received  Robert  J.  Collier  Trophy  from  President  Kennedy  for 
“the  greatest  achievement  of  aeronautics  o r   astronautics  in   America, 
with  respect  to  improving  the  performance,  safety,  or  efficiency  of  a i r  
and   space vehicles.”  (NASA   Release  68-221;  NASA  SP-60;  NASA  EP-9; 
AP, N Y T ,  12/21/68,73;  SBD ,  12/23/68,236) 
Workmen  loading  super-cold  oxygen  into  Apollo  8  service  module  dis- 
covered  gas  had  been  contaminated,  apparently  by  nitrogen  used  to 
flush tanks.  Oxygen  would  be  changed  and  tanks  reflushed  and  launch 
was expected to take place on schedule  (Lannan, W S tar ,  12/20/68,  AS) 
Dr.  Robert  H.  Guest,  professor  of  organizational behavior  in  Amos  Tuck 
School of Business Administration, Dartmouth  College, was  sworn  in  as 
consultant  by  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  Acting  NASA  Administrator.  Dr. 
Guest  would  serve  on  Management  Advisory  Panel.  (NASA  Release 
68-220) 
December   21-27:  NASA’s Apo l lo   8  (AS-503),  second  manned  mission  in 
Apollo  lunar landing program and  first  manned  mission  to  orbit moon, 
was  successfully launched  from  KSC   Launch  Complex  39  a t   7:51  am 
EST by  Saturn V  booster.  Primary  objectives were  to  demonstrate  crew, 
space  vehicle,  and  mission  support  performance  during  manned  Saturn 
V mission  with command and service module  (C SM )   and to demonstrate 
performance  of  nominal  and  selected  backup  lunar  orbit  rendezvous 
( LOR )   mission  activities-including 
translunar  injection ; CSM   naviga- 
tion, communications,  and midcourse corrections ; and CSM  consumables 
assessment  and  passive  thermal  control.  All  launch  events  occurred  as 
planned  and  spacecraft-carrying  Astronauts  Frank  Borman  (com- 
mander),  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.  ( CM   pilot),  and Willam  A.  Anders  (LM  
pilot)--entered  initial  orbit w i t h   118.4-mi  ( 1 9 0 . 6 - h )   apogee,  113.8-mi 
(183.2-km)  perigee, 32.51 O  inclination,  and  88.2-min period. 
At  10:42  am  EST  3rd  stage burned  for  second  time,  injecting  space- 
craft  into  lunar  trajectory,  and  astronauts  began  journey  to  become 
first  men  to  leave  earth‘s  gravitational  field.  Stage  and  instrument unit 
separated  as  planned  and  service  module  propulsion  system  was  fired 
to  increase  separation  distance  from  3rd  stage,  which  was  trailing 
500-1,000  ft behind  spacecraft,  spewing  unused  propellants.  Crew  fired 
service  propulsion  system  (SPS)   engine  for  2.4  sec,  correcting  trajec- 
tory and increasing velocity by 25 fps. 
Second  midcourse  maneuver,  scheduled  for  second  day,  was  can- 
celed because  trajectory  was  already  so  accurate  that  burn  would  have 
required  velocity  change  of  only  0.7  fps.  Borman  reported  illness,  ap- 
parently  from  2 4 h r   intestinal  virus  o r   from  reaction  to  sleeping  pills 
being  used  during  space  flight  for  first  time,  and  Lovell  and  Anders 
reported  nausea.  Crew  took  navigation  sightings  and  conducted  first 
TV transmission, showing spacecraft interior  and earth from 138,690-mi 
altitude and demonstrating food  preparation and movements in weight- 
lessness.  Signals  were  received  a t   ground  stations  and  transmitted  to 
NASA  Mission  Control  Center  in  Houston  before  release  live  to  com- 
mercial  networks. 
Second  TV  transmission,  on  third  day,  showed  excellent  pictures 
of  earth  from  201,365-mi  altitude,  including  view  of  Western  Hemis- 
phere  in  sunlight.  Crew  pointed  out  North  Pole,  South  America,  Cape 

318 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  21-27 

Horn,  and  Baja  California  and  noted  that  U.S.  East  Coast  was  very 
cloudy.  Earth,  they  said,  was  beautiful;  water  looked  royal  blue,  land 
areas  brown,  and  clouds  bright  white.  Reflection  off  earth  was  much 
greater  than  off  moon.  SM  reaction  control  system’s  four  rockets  were 
fired  fo r   12 sec  to  reduce  velocity  by  2  fps  and  to  make  approach  to  
moon  closer  to  60 mi  a t   nearest  point. 
On  fourth  day,  Christmas Eve,  communications were  interrupted  as 
Apollo  8 passed  behind  moon  and  astronauts  became  first  men  to  see 
moon’s  fa r   side.  SPS  engine was  fired  for  4  min  2  see,  reducing  speed 
by  2,994  ip s   and  placing  spacecraft  in  lunar  orbit  with  193.6-mi 
(310.6-km)  apolune  and  69.1-mi  (111.2-km)  perilune.  In  third 
telecast  Anders  described  lunar  surface  as  “whitish  gray,  like  dirty 
beach  sand  with  lots  of  footprints  on  it.  Some  of  these  craters  look 
like  pick-axes  striking  concrete,  creating  a  lot  of  fine  dust.”  After 
spacecraft passed  behind  moon  at  end  of  second  revolution,  SPS  engine 
burned for 10 sec  to reduce speed by  135 fps and to circularize orbit with 
70.0-mi  (112.6-km)  apolune  and  69.6-mi  (112.0-km)  perilune.  Love11 
said  astronauts  had  “a  grand  view”  of  the  lunar  surface  and  confirmed 
that  prospective  landing  sites  were  satisfactory.  He  reported  that  at 
about two minutes before sunrise a  fan-shaped white haze appeared  just 
behind  moon’s  Iimb.  Crew  continued  landmark  sightings  and  named 
numerous unnamed  lunar  features  after  other  astronauts,  NASA  officials, 
and  friends. They conducted communications experiment which showed 
that  radio  signal  from  earth  to  ApoZZo  8  and  back  to  earth  took  three 
seconds to make 460,000-mi round trip. 
Third  TV  transmission  during  ninth  revolution  showed  heavily  im- 
pacted mountains described by Anders a s  “a vastness of  black and white, 
absolutely no   color. The sky up here  is  also rather  forbidding,  forebod- 
ing extents of  blackness with  no  stars visible when  we5-e flying over the 
moon  in  daylight. You  can  see by  the numerous craters  that  this  planet 
has  been  bombarded  through  the  eons  with  numerous  small  asteroids 
and meteoroids, pock-marking the  surface of  every square inch. And  one 
of  the  amazing  features  of  the  surface  is  . . . that  most  of  the  craters 
. . . have  a  round  mound  type  of  appearance  instead  of  sharp  jagged 
rocks.  All,  only  the  newest  of  features  have  any  sharp  definitions  to 
them, and eventually they get eroded down by the constant bombardment 
of  sm a l l   meteoroids.”  The  moon  is  “a  very  dark  and  unappetizing 
place.  . . .” 
Crew  read  verses  from  first  chapter  of  Genesis  and  wished  viewers 
“good  night,  good  luck,  a  Merry  Christmas  and  God  bless  all  of 
you-all  of  you  on the good earth.” 
On  fifth  day,  Christmas  Day,  while  spacecraft  was  behind  moon 
completing its  10th revolution,  SPS engine  was  fired  for  3 min  23   sec, 
increasing  spacecraft  velocity  by  3,523  fps  and  propelling  ApolZo  8 
back  toward  earth.  Spacecraft  left  lunar  gravity  a t   201,807  mi  above 
earth.  At  104 hours mission elapsed  time  14-sec reaction-control-system 
burn  increased  velocity  by  5 fps.  Fifth  TV  transmission  showed  space- 
craft  interior,  controls,  and  food  preparation.  Data  analysis  revealed 
sixth midcourse correction would  not  be  necessary  because  of  accuracy 
of  course.  Astronauts  reported  they  had  slept  well  and  were  in  “very 
good  shape.”  Sixth  TV  transmission  showed  earth  from  112,125-mi 
altitude. 

3 19 

December  21-27 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  21-27:  NASA’s Apollo  8  carried  Astronauts  James  A .   Lovell,  Jr . ,   Y i l l i a m   A .  
Anders ,   and  Frank   Borman   ( l e f t  to   right  above)   out  of  earth’s  field  of grav i ty   and  i n t o  
p lex   39  to   pu t   command  and  service  module  in to   initial  orbit. f 
man’s  first  orbit  of  moon.  I n   photo  at  right,  Sa turn   V  l i f t s   o f f   rom   KSC   launch   com-  

On  sixth  day  crew  prepared  for  reentry  and  SM  separated  from  CM  
on  schedule.  Parachute  deployment  and  other  reentry  events  were 
nominal  and  A p o l l o   8 splashed,  apex  down,  in  Pacific  about  5,100  yd 
from  recovery  ship U.S.S.  Yorktown  a t   10:51 am  EST  Dec.  27,  147 h r  
after  launch  and  precisely  on  time.  According  to  prior  planning,  heli- 
copters and aircraft hovered  over  spacecraft  and  pararescue personnnel 
were  not  deployed  until  local  sunrise,  50  min  after  splashdown.  Crew 
was  then  picked up and reached  recovery  ship at  12:20 pm  EST. 
All  primary  Apo l lo   8 mission  objectives  and  detailed  test  objectives 
were  achieved  and,  in  addition,  five  not  originally  planned.  All  launch 
vehicle and spacecraft systems performed  according to plan. Engineering 
accomplishments  included  use  of  ground  network  with  onboard  navi- 
gational ,techniques to  sharpen  accuracy  of  lunar  orbit  determination 

320 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  21-27 

and  successful  use  o i   Apollo  high-gain  antenna,  four-dish  unified 
S-band antenna the+, deployed  from SM  after  separation from  3rd  stage. 
Mission  proved  wpability  of  Apollo  CSM  and  crew,  as well  as  ground 
support  and  control  systems,  to  operate  out  to  lunar  distances  and 
return  through  the  earth's  atmosphere at  lunar  velocity. 
Apo l lo   8  was  fifth  Apollo  mission  to  date,  second  manned  Apollo 
mission,  first  manned  mission  on  Saturn  V  launch  vehicle,  and  first 
manned  operation  of  Apollo  system  under  conditions  fo r   which  i t   was 
designed.  Earlier  unmanned  Apollo  flights  had  yielded  all  spacecraft 
information  possible  without  crew  on  board.  Apo l lo   4  (launched  Nov. 
9,  1967)  and Apo l lo   5  (launched  Jan.  22,  1968) had  both  been  highly 
successful, completing  inflight  tests  of  all  major  pieces  of  Apollo  hard-  
ware.  Apo l lo   6  (launched  April  4 ) ,   despite  launch  vehicle  problems, 
had  attained  four  of  five  primary  objectives  with  the  spacecraft  re- 
covered  in  excellent condition.  First  manned  Apollo mission,  Apo l lo   7 
Oct.  11-22,  had achieved  all primary  objectives and had  verified  opera- 

321 

December  21-27 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  21-27:  Rising  earth,  240,000  miles  away,  greets  Apollo  8  astronauts  as  they 
come  from  behind  moon  a f t e r   lunar  orbit  insertion  burn. 

tion  of  spacecraft  for  lunar-mission  duration.  Apollo  program  w a s  
directed  by  NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space  Flight;  MSC  w a s   responsible 
for  Apollo  spacecraft  development, MSFC  for  Saturn  V  launch  vehicle, 
and  KSC   for  launch  operations.  Tracking  and  data  acquisition  was 
managed by GSFC  under  overall direction  of  NASA  Office of  Tracking  and 
Data  Acquisition.  (NASA  P ro j  Off;  NASA  Release  68-208;  NASA  Special 
Releases;  W  S tar ,   12/21/68,  A l ;   W  Pos t ,   12/21-28/68,  A1;  N Y T ,  
12/21-28/68,1;  B S u n ,  12/21-28/68,  A1 ; MSC  Roundup ,   1 /10 /69 ,3 )  
December  21 : President  Johnson  sent  congratulatory  message  to  Apo l lo   8 
astronauts:  “I  am confident that  the world’s  finest equipment w i l l   strive 
to  match  the  courage  of  ou r   astronauts.  If  i t   does  that,  a  successful 
mission is assured.”  ( P D ,  12/30/68,  1738) 
Apollo  Program  Director,  B/G  Samuel  C.  Phillips,  told  post-launch press 
conference at  KSC   early  portion  of  Apo l lo   8 mission  had  been  perfect: 
b b .   . . Apollo  8 is  now  on  its  way  to  the  Moon.  And  . . . I  certainly 
envy  the  crew  the  magnificent views  that  they  might  have  at  this  point 
as they  were describing  it  to  us.  . . . To  be  able to  see  the  entire earth. 
I think by  this time in  their  flight, they  are something over  10,000 miles 

322 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
December  21 
high  and  moving  a t   about  25,000  miles  an  hour.  . . . The  countdown 
. . . w a s 4 u r i n g  most  of  the night  actually a  hit,  and  even  into the  late 
minutes  of  this  morning,  the  count  was  proceeding  with  comfortable 
margins  of  time.  The  flight  of  the  Saturn  V was  flawless  in   all  of  the 
maneuvers  it  was  expected  to  make.  The  performance  of  the  space- 
craft  . . . has similarly  been  flawless.”  (Transcript) 
December  22 :  New  Y o rk  T imes  commented  on Apo l lo   8 flight:  “Space con- 
tains more than  enough opportunity  for  fruitful application  of  the ener- 
gies  that  all  mankind  can  devote  to  its  exploration,  development  and 
eventual settlement. There  is  no  need  here  for  wasteful  rivalry  deriving 
from  earthbound  nationalistic  and  political  ambitions.  I n   the  face  of 
the  most  breathtaking  challenge humanity  has  ever  faced,  the  only  ra- 
tional  response is cooperation to  make  space  an   arena  of  unity  and  in- 
ternational  brotherhood.  Man’s  hopes  and  prayers  ride  with  the  pre- 
Christmas  voyagers.  After  them  must  come  ships  bearing  the  United 
Nations flag, each carrying men  of  different citizenship, language, polit- 
ical and religious convictions and color.”  ( N Y T ,  12/22/68,  E10) 
*  New  York  Academy  of  Sciences  investigative committee of  22  members 
directed  “preliminary  report”  to   President  Johnson,  President-elect 
Richard  M.  Nixon,  and  Congress on  intensifying  crisis  in US. science 
and  education  which  they  said  stemmed  from  cuts  in   Federal  Govern- 
ment  support.  Investigation covering 84 academic institutions  and work 
of  193  research  scientists had  shown  “potential  solutions  of  such prob- 
lems  a s   poverty,  racial  discrimination,  population  control,  air  and 
water  pollution, cancer  and  cardiovascular  disease, mental illness, mass 
transportation, housing and education are not being  pursued because  of 
lack  of  continuing  support.”  Committee  recommended  diverting  Fed- 
eral science funds  earmarked  for buildings  and  other  capital  equipment 
to  use  on  research  programs  and  in  training  scientific  manpower  to 
“preclude  a  serious  shortage  in  the  near  future,  a  crippling  one within 
five years.’’  (UPI ,   W Post, 12/23/68,  ,420) 
December  24 :   Intelsat-Ill  F-2  began  carrying  segment  of  coverage  of 
Apollo  8 to  Europe.  I t   transmitted  moon  pictures  from  capsule and  re- 
layed  TV  coverage  of  Pacific  splashdown to  Europe  and  Puerto  Rico. 
Intelsat  I1  satellites over  Atlantic  and  Pacific  each  reserved  about  100 
voice  circuits  for  NASA  support  communications with  Apollo  8.  A ts   I I  
and  I l l  augmented commercial communications coverage and  transmit- 
ted  limited number  of  weather  photos.  (OSSA;  NASA  Release 69-6)  
one  billion  people  in  64 
One  out  of  every  four  persons  on  earth-nearly 
countries-heard  Christmas Eve  reading  of  Genesis by  moon  orbiting 
Apollo  8 crew  either  on  radio  o r  TV, according to  TV   Guide.  Delayed 
broadcasts  same  day  reached  30  additional  countries.  “The  fantastic 
success  of  TV  on  that  flight  echoed  around  the  world.”  ( T V   Guide, 
5/10-16/69,9) 
New  Yo rk   T imes   said  of  Apollo  8 telecast  of  earth:  “. . . the  drama 
and  interest  of  yesterday’s  view  of  earth  from  space  transcended  any 
prosaic  considerations  of  practical  utility.  Rather  the  excitement  these 
pictures  aroused  among millions  of  stay-at-homes flowed  from  the  vis- 
ual  evidence  they  provided  of  man’s  successful  entrance  into  a  com- 
pletely  new  realm,  one  which  poses  challenges,  opportunities  and  dan- 
gers  such a s  the human  species has never before  faced. And  yesterday’s 
pictures  provided  a  sobering  perspective  on  man’s  puny  earthly  works 

323 

December  24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

@ 

@ 

and  rivalries,  reminding  all  humanity  that  nature  is  the  basic  antago- 
nist, not other men.”  ( N Y T ,  12/24/68,22) 
FAA  announced  report  Friction  Elgects  of  Runway   Grooves ,   Runway  
18-36  Washington  National  A irpor t   [AD   678  645  (DS  68-21)], 
result  OF  nine-month test  series  a t  Washington  National  Airport,  indi- 
cated  runway  grooving,  designed  to  prevent  hydroplaning  by  increas- 
ing  drainage  of  water, might  also  enhance braking  effectiveness of  air- 
craft on wet  runways  [see Nov.  171.  (FAA  Release T 68-48) 
U.S.S.R.  announced through  Tass  successful completion of  experiment  in 
which  three  researchers  spent  from  Nov.  5,  1967,  to  Nov.  5,  1968,  in  
isolated  chamber  consisting  of  living  compartment  and  greenhouse 
linked  to  outside world  by  videotelephone.  Purpose  of  experiment was 
to   test  man’s  ability  to  live  in  isolation  for  year,  using  water  and  oxy- 
gen  regenerated  from  waste  products  and  dehydrated  food  supple- 
mented  by  greenhouse-grown vegetables;  study  effects  of  various  fac- 
tors  on  human  organism  and  establish  optimum  conditions  for  long  
isolation ; and  evaluate  effectiveness  of  self-contained life-support  sys- 
tems  based  on  regeneration  of  waste  products.  Daily  requirements  of 
astronauts  on  long  voyage  included  700  g  of  food,  2.4  kg  of  drinking 
water  plus  5.5  kg  of  water  for  other  purposes,  and  800  g  of  oxygen, 
amounting to  11 tons of  supplies for one-year space voyage. Report  said 
there were no  significant changes in body weight and temperature  of  ex- 
perimenters except one lost eight to nine pounds before his weight stabi- 
lized in  f ive  to  six months.  Electrocardiogram remained unchanged  and 
no  dehydration  was  observed.  Pulse  and  respiration  rates  had  fluc- 
tuated  before  assuming  lower  level  than  a t   start  of  experiment.  Re- 
searchers  Gherman  A.  Manovtsev,  Andrey  N.  Bozhko,  and  Boris  N. 
Ulybshev  were  reported  in  good  health  a t   conclusion  of  experiment. 
(Shabad, N Y T ,   12/25/68,  38) 
December  2 5 :   The  space  age,  no  doubt,  w i l l   produce  many  future  heroes 
and  many  other  historic  accomplishments, New  Yo rk   T imes   said,  “but 
even  now  i t   is  plain  that  yesterday Astronauts  Borman, Lovell  and  An- 
ders  assured  themselves  of  immortality  as  the  first  men  literally  to 
break  the  shackles  of  earth  and  travel  successfully to  another  destina- 
tion  in this suddenly shrunken solar system.”  (N Y T ,  12/25/68,30) 
December  2 6 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  C C L X l l   from  Kapustin  Yar  into 
orbit  with  791-km  (491.5-mi)  apogee,  2 6 4 - b  (164-mi)  perigee,  95.2- 
min  period,  and  48.4”  inclination.  Equipment  was  functioning  nor- 
mally.  ( S B D ,  12/30/68,257;  GSFC  S S R ,  12/31/68) 
ApoZZo  8 lunar  flight was  voted  top  news  story  of  1968 in  Dec.  24 repoll- 
ing  of  editors  of  Associated  Press  member  newspapers,  radio,  and  TV 
stations.  Previous  poll,  completed  before  Dec.  21-27  mission,  had  se- 
lected  assassinations  of  Sen.  Robert  F.  Kennedy  and  Rev.  Martin  Lu- 
ther  King  as No.  1 and No.  2  stories  of  year.  (W S tar ,   12/26/68,  A8)  
Wash ing ton  Post  said  of  Apo l lo   8:  “Above  all,  perhaps,  this  Christmas 
Eve  a t   the  moon  and  Christmas  Day  on  the  way  home  have  told  us 
more  about  our  earth  than  about  the  moon.  One  of  the  astronauts  had 
wondered  on  his way  to  the moon  whether,  if  he  were  a  traveller  from 
another  planet,  he  would  think  that  intelligent  life  existed  on  Earth. 
The  answer, from Captain  Lovell a t  least, is that  our  planet  is  ‘a  grand 
oasis  in  the  great  vastness  of  space.’  That  i s   an   awing  insight  and  it 
reminds us  that  man  has  fa r  to  go here  a t  home to  fulfill  the  Christmas 

324 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
December  26 
promise  of  Peace  on  Earth,  Good  Will  toward  Men.”  (W Po s t ,  
12/26/68,  A20) 
T imes   of  Ind ia   termed  A p o l l o   8 ,   “the  most  magnificent  achievement  i n  
space to date.”  I t  was  “by  any  reckoning  a  tremendous  achievement  of 
science and technology”  and  “decidedly the most  daring adventure  man 
has  ever  undertaken.’  (T im e s  of  India,  12/26/68,  8)  
*  In  Washington  Pos t ,   columnist  Joseph  Kraf t   said  post-Apollo  programs 
had  been  sharply  cut  in  Congress  and  space  spending had  been  com- 
pared  unfavorably  with  money  for  pressing  internal  needs.  “In  this  sit- 
uation,  i t   makes  sense  for  this  country  to  disengage  while  i t   is  ahead. 
There  is  no  need  for  the  United  States  to  race  Russia  to  every  new 
milestone  in  space.  On  the  contrary, what  the  United  States wants  is   a 
program  closely  connected  to  explicit  American  requirements-a 
pro- 
gram  of  exploration  for  its  own  sake,  not  for  the  sake  of  beating  the 
Russians.  In  that way,  this country can continue  to  develop a  capability 
in  space,  without  having  to  respond  in  a  panic  to  the  ups  and  downs 
that are  necessary part of  the space business.”  ( W Po s t ,  12/26/68) 
December  26-31:  During  135th  meeting  of  AAAS  in  Dallas,  Tex.,  Catholic 
Univ.  of  America  assistant professor of  international relations  John M. 
Logsdon  gave paper  on  lunar  landing  decision a t  session of  Society  for 
the  History  of  Technology.  Prof.  Logsdon  said  President  Eisenhower 
had  planned  to  end manned  space  flights after  Project  Mercury  but  his 
successor, President  Kennedy,  had  “calculated  the  costs,  weighed  the 
needs,  and  finally decided that  ‘whatever mankind  must  undertake,  free 
men must fully share.’ ” 
Outgoing  Presidential  Science  Adviser,  Dr.  Donald  F.  Hornig,  rec- 
ommended  reexamination  of  concept  of  Federal  Dept.  of  Science since 
science  “has  now  assumed  such  importance  to  the  nation  that  its  posi- 
tion  would  be  stronger  i f   i t  had  a  voice  in  the  Cabinet.”  He  advocated 
annual report  on  state of  science similar to  annual economic report  and 
said  Office  o i   Science  and  Technology  “could  eventually evolve  in   an  
office  of  planning  and  analysis,  looking  broadly  at  national  problems 
with  some scientific or  technological component, but  extending  well  be- 
yond  the  purely  technical areas.”  Under  questioning,  Dr.  Hornig  said 
he  agreed  with  Dr.  J.  Herbert  Hollomon,  President  of  Univ.  of  Okla- 
homa  and  former  Assistant Secretary  of  Commerce,  that  Federal  Dept. 
of  Science,  with  NSF  as  its core, might  encompass oceanographic  agen- 
cies,  high-energy-physics  research  currently  funded  by  AEC,  ESSA, Bu- 
reaus of  Census and Labor  Statistics, geophysics branches  of  Geological 
Survey,  and  some N IH   programs.  Dr.  Hollomon  also suggested  NASA  be  
added  when  i t   could  be  included  “without  having  it  become  the  tail 
that  wags  the  dog.”  Dr.  Hornig  insisted  no  massive  “science  agency” 
should be created  to usurp supervision of  Nation’s  science effort. 
Bacteria  might  have  caused  gastrointestinal  upset  suffered  by  astro- 
naut  Frank  Borman  on  Apo l lo   8 mission,  Dr.  Rudolf  H.  T.  Mattoni, 
head  of  Biological  Systems  Div.  of  Nuclear  Utility  Services,  Haw- 
thorne,  Calif.,  told  meeting.  Effects  of  weightlessness  on  bacteria  on 
Biosatellite  I1 flight  (Sept.  7-9,  1967)  suggested  that  lack  of  gravity 
might  have  allowed  common,  normally  benign,  intestinal  bacteria  to 
cause illness like Borman’s. 
Drs.  Bouilin  Browning  of  St.  Thomas  Univ.  and  Irwin  Oster  of 
Bowling  Green  State  Univ.  reported  first  experimental  evidence  that 

325 

December  26-31 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

weightlessness can  cause chromosomal damage  of  genetic  significance, 
based  on  sperm  cells flown  45 h r  aboard  Biosatellite. 
Cornel1 Univ.  map expert, Prof.  Arthur  J .   McNair,  said  sophisticated 
photographic  mapping  by  satellites  a t   140-mi altitude  would  provide 
faster, cheaper, broader,  and more  detailed coverage than  now  possible 
by  airplane mapping. Single map-making satellite photo,  he  said,  would 
be  equivalent  to  1,000  photos  taken  by  aircraft.  U S .   could  be  fully 
mapped  in  one  year  from  photos  from  satellite in  near-polar  orbit  for 
fou r  weeks.  Another 11 mo would be needed for data processing. 
Dr.  Robert  H.  Hardie  of  Vanderbilt  Univ.  said  planet  Pluto  had  ap- 
peared  to  be  dimming  for  past  10 yr.  It  was  moving  in  248-yr  orbital 
period  to  point  where i t  reflected  little  sunlight and its  surface  tempera- 
ture  had  dropped  two   degrees.  He  speculated  that  planet  froze  into 
mass  of  stone  and  solid  nitrogen  as  temperatures  reached  -250’  C 
when  facing  away  from  the  sun.  When  bathed  in  sunlight,  planet 
warmed  to  -200”  C  and  formed  reflecting puddles which  astronomers 
s aw   as variations  in  liqht  intensity.  (Text; UPI,  W Po s t ,  12/28/68,  A9; 
Lannan,  W  S ta r ,   12/30/68,  A3;  AP,  W Po s t ,   12/30/68,  A6) 
December  27:  At  White  House  press  conference  President  Johnson  dis- 
cussed  Apo l lo   8’s  effect  on  U S .   position  in   space  race:  “We  are  very 
pleased  with  the  progress  we   have  made.  . . . Each  side  has  different 
examples  of  its  achievements. But  in  the  10  to  11 years  since  Sputnik 
I  . . . when  we  didn’t  even  have  a  space  committee  in   the  Congress, 
when  we   were  talking  about  the basketball up  there  in  the  air, when  we 
have  weathered  the  storms that .have brewed-everyone  who  wanted  to 
cut  anything,  the  first thing  they  wanted  to  cut  was  the  space program 
-when  we  have  seen  the  editorial  professors  inform  us  that  there  was 
really  no  value  in  doing  all  of  this  anyway,  it  gives  me  great  pleasure 
now  to see the thrill that even they are getting out of  it.” 
President  described  anxiety  about  complex mission  and  said  he  had 
repeatedly asked himself  whether U.S.  was  ready,  whether  date  selected 
was  best  one,  whether  every  possible  precaution  had  been  taken,  and 
whether  every  man  had  performed  his  requirements.  “About  all  you 
can  do  . . . is  to  pick men  that  you  have confidence in, that  you  trust, 
give  them  the  support  they  need,  and  then  hold  on.”  Remembering he 
had  “recommended  this  goal for  this decade”  to  President  Kennedy, he 
said:  ‘‘Therq  have  been  many  pitfalls  every  step  of  the  way.  I  don’t 
know  how  many  folks  have  just  wanted  to  abandon  it,  clip  it,  cut  it, 
take  the  money  for  the  cities  or  the  war  or  just  anything  else.  Space 
has been  a whipping boy. 
“So  when  you  see  the  day  approaching  when  visions,  and  dreams, 
and what we  said  to  the  Congress when  we   created  the  Space Adminis- 
tration  back  in  1958 a re  becoming  reality,  you  naturally  are  hopeful.” 
Later,  in  telephone message  to   Apo l lo   8  astronauts,  President  con- 
gratulated  crew and  said:  “You  have made us very proud  to  be  alive at 
this particular  moment in history.  You  have  made  us  feel  akin  to  those 
Europeans nearly five centuries ago who heard  stories of  the New World 
for the  first time.  . . . My  thoughts this morning went back to more than 
10  years  ago  . . . when  we  saw  Sputnik  racing  through  the  skies,  and 
we  realized that America had a big  job ahead of  it. 
“ I t   gave  me  so  much  pleasure  to  know  that  you  men  have  done  a 
large  part  of  that  job.”  ( P D ,  12/30/68,  1744-50) 

326 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  27 

International  comment on Apo l lo  8 mission: 
In   statement  distributed  by  Soviet  Embassy  in   Washington,  D.C., 
Boris Petrov, Chairman of  Council for  International  Cooperation in  In -  
vestigation  and  Utilization  of  Outer  Space,  U.S.S.R.  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences,  hailed  “hardware”  and  “courage”  of  Apo l lo   8  astronauts  but 
called  attention  to  “considerable accent”  placed  on  “automatic  devices” 
in  Soviet  space program.  He  said,  “The  Soviet Union  i s   engaged  in   a 
large-scale program  of  planned  studies and  exploration  of  outer  space, 
which  provides  for  the  investigation  of  the  earth’s  upper  atmosphere 
and  of  near-earth  outer space and studies of  sun-earth relationships  and 
of  our  closest  space  neighbors-the  moon,  Venus  and  mars,  and  later, 
on  more  remote  planets.” 
Cuban National Radio called mission “a total success.” 
Tass:  “Due  tribute  should  be  paid  to  the  courage  and  mastery  of 
Frank  Borman,  William  Anders  and  James  Lovell  who  have  accom- 
plished  this  outstanding  scientific  and  technical  experiment.  The  suc- 
cessful flight  of  Apollo 8  ushers  in  a  new  stage  in  the  history  of  space 
exploration.” Ten Soviet cosmonauts telegraphed Apollo crew congratu- 
lations fo r  “another milestone in scientific and technical progress.” 
Pope  Paul  VI,  in  message  to  President  Johnson:  “Giving  thanks  to 
God  for  the  successful completion  of  the  magnificent  enterprise  of  the 
Apollo  8  mission,  we  congratulate  you  and  the  people  of  the  United 
States of  America  and  particularly  the  intrepid  space travelers,  and  in- 
voke  divine  blessing  upon  all  contributing  to  this  noble  achievement.” 
U.N.  Secretary  General  U  Thant:  “The  powerful  thrust  of 
the 
rocket  engines,  the  awesome  speeds  attained  in  flight,  the  vast 
distances  traveled,  the  precision  of  navigation  and  the  fidelity  of 
communications, aural  and  visual,  all stagger  the  imagination  and  defy 
the comprehension of  man.” 
Emperor I-Iaile Selassie of  Ethiopia:  “a  great milestone in man’s  con- 
tinued search of  the unknown.” 
Gov.  Gen.  Roland  Michener  of  Canada,  in  message  to  President 
Johnson : Canadians  had  followed  astronauts’  flight  with  “admiration 
for  their  courage  and  the  technical skill  of  all  who  have  a  part  in  the 
enterprise.” 
Prime  Minister  Eisaku  Sat0  of  Japan  to  President  Johnson:  feat 
showed America’s “courage and  the high  level of  scientific technology.” 
I n  Kaduna, Nigeria, New  Nigerian  said Apo l lo   8 ,  “Apart  from  being 
the  supreme technological  achievement  . . . of  all  time,”  was  “another 
exciting chapter  in  man’s  eternal  quest  to  triumph  over  his  own  natu- 
ral  environment.” Same skills and  resources which were helping to  con- 
quer  space  ”could  easily  be  diverted  to  giving  man  a  better  life  on 
only  all  of  us  would  allow  the  good  that  is  inherent  in 
earth  itself-if 
all mankind to  assert itself.”  (AP, B Sun ,   12/28/68,  1 ;  N e w   Nigerian, 
12 /27 /68 ,1)  
*  San  Francisco Chronicle  said:  “In  their  meteoric  flitting  about  the  skies 
the  crew  of  the  Apollo  8  did  more  than  thrill  their  fellow Americans 
and  pump  up  the  national  ego.  They  drew  commendations  from  di- 
rectors of  the Soviet space project whose  considerable achievement they 
had  outstripped.”  They  made  believers  of  “informed  skeptics  such  as 
Sir Bernard  Lovell, director  of  Britain’s  Jodrell Bank Observatory, who 
had  more  than  ever  scoffed  a t   the  value  of  the  moon  venture.  (They 

327 

December  27 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

also  drove  the  stubborn  adherents  of  the  flat-earth theory  into  confu- 
sion.)  All  this  they  accomplished  in  faultless  style.”  (SF  Chornicle, 
12/27/68,  30) 
Associated  Press  quoted  Mrs.  Madalyn  Murray  O’Hair,  who  was  instru- 
mental  in  having  prayer  removed  from  U S .   public  schools,  a s   saying 
she  would  register  complaints with  NASA  against  reading  by  Apo l lo   8 
astronauts  of  portions  of  Genesis  during  lunar  orbit  and  would  orga- 
nize mail campaign to  bar  prayer  from  space.  (AP,  W Po s t ,   12/28/68, 
A91 
Washington  Pos t   said  Harvard  Univ.  scientist  Dr.  George  B.  Kistia- 
kowsky,  who  in  1959  was  chief  science  adviser  to  President  Eisen- 
hower, had  said  in  taped  interview for  broadcast  on  CBS  radio  network 
Dec.  29  that  putting  man  on  moon  would  not  compare  to  great  scien- 
tific  achievements  such  as  breaking  genetic  code.  “This  [moon  flight] 
is  an  adventure.  . . . it’s  different from  Darwin’s  travels,”’ which  led  to 
his discovery of  genetic evolution.  ( AaFons, W Po s t ,  12/28/68,  AS) 
Apo l lo   7  mission  (Oct.  11-22)  was  adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  All 
launch vehicle systems had  performed-satisfactorily throughout  expected 
lifetime  and  spacecraft  systems  functioned  with  few  minor  anomalies, 
which were  countered,  preventing  loss  of  systems  support.  Splashdown 
occurred within  one mile  of  guidance system target  point  and  recovery 
of  flight crew  and  C M   was  successful. All  test  objectives had  been  suc- 
cessfully accomplished.  (NASA   Proj Off) 
e  Apo l lo   6  (launched April 4 )  was adjudged unsuccessful by NASA.  Although 
three  of  five  primary  mission  objectives  had  been  fully  accomplished 
and  two  partially  accomplished,  overall  mission  was  not  a  success. 
Apo l lo   6  had  entered  elliptical  parking  orbit  instead  of  planned  cir- 
cular  orbit  when  2nd  stage  engines  shut  down  prematurely  and  3rd 
stage failed to reignite on command.  (NASA   Proj  Off) 
NASA  announced  i t   would  convert  to  civil  service  operation  during  next 
18  mo  work  performed  in  810  contractor  positions  at  GSFC,  to  bring 
Center’s  operations  into  accord  with  Civil  Service  Commission  guide- 
lines prohibiting  Government supervision of  contractor employees. Many 
incumbent contractor  employees would be offered Government positions 
and  only  small  portion  of  contractors’  activities  would  be  affected  in 
many  cases.  Conversion  would  be  completed  by  June  1970  and  NASA 
would  coptinue  to  rely  on  industry  to  considerable extent  for  support 
services.  (NASA   Release 68-223) 
MSFC  announced it had  issued Boeing Co.  $8,429,047 supplemental agree- 
ment  extending  from  October  1968  to  March  1970  maintenance  and 
operation  of  Saturn  V  development facility  a t   MSFC  and  providing  for 
mechanical ground  support  equipment  and  logistics  work.  ( MSFC  Re- 
lease 68-283) 
0  NASA  announced award by LeRC  of  $3,448,762 cost-plus-award-fee contract 
to Honeywell, Inc.,  for  Centaur  launch  vehicle guidance system  includ- 
ing  management, engineering, repair,  and  modification  support  during 
1969.  (NASA   Release 68-222) 
0  In   Science  Dr.  J.  C.  G.  Walker,  Yale  Univ.  geologist  and  geophysicist, 
and  N.  W.  Spencer,  Chief  of  GSFC’S  Laboratory  for  Atmospheric  and 
Biological Sciences, said  thermosphere probe  experiments had  provided 
largest body  of  rocket mass-spectrometer data  obtained. Tests had  been 
conducted jointly by  scientists a t  GSFC  and  Space Physics Research Lab. 

328 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  27 

a t   Univ.  of  Michigan  to  determine  temperatures  of  earth’s  upper 
atmosphere.  Since  1962,  concentration  and  temperature  of  molecular 
nitrogen  in upper  atmosphere had been measured in 22 successful flights 
under  varying  conditions  of  solar  activity,  from  launch  sites  a t   Fort 
Churchill, Manitoba, Wallops Island,  Va.,  and Vega Baja,  Puerto  Rico. 
Scientists had  concluded that  upper  atmosphere consisted of  mixture of 
gases-electrons, 
ions, and neutral pa r t ic le s -each  o i  which had  distinct 
temperature.  Multiplicity  of  temperatures  could  be  expected  in  upper 
atmosphere of  planets, though differences between planetary atmospheres 
must  be  more  striking  than  similarities  because  of  differences  in  at- 
mospheric  composition  and  in  distance  from  sun.  I t   was  likely  that 
absence  of  permanent  magnetic  field  on  either  Mars  o r   Venus  caused 
further  substantial  differences  between  upper  atmospheres  of  these 
planets and  upper  atmosphere of  earth.  (Sc ience ,  12/27/68,  1 4 3 7 4 1 )  
e National  Science  Foundation  announced  median  annual  salary  of  U S .  
scientists  in  1968  was  $13,000,  up  $1,200  (10% )   from  1966.  Self- 
employed  scientists  earned  highest  median,  $18,000,  in  1968,  with 
those  employed  by  industry,  business,  and  nonprofit  organizations 
second a t  $14,700. Federal Government scientists reported  same median 
salary-$13,50O-as 
those  employed  on  yearly  basis  by  educationa! 
institutions.  Single  largest  users  of  scientific  talent  were  educational 
institutions  ( 40% ) .   Industry  and  business  employed  32%,  and  1077 
were  civilians  in  Federal  Government.  Information  was  based  on  rc- 
sponses  by  298,000  U S .   scientists  to  NSF’S  biennial  National  Register 
survey.  ( NSF  Release 68-181) 
New  Y o rk   T ime s   said  article  in  December  issue  of  Australian  Quarterly 
by  Australian  National  Univ.  lecturer  Robert  Cooksey  had  suggested 
U S .   “space  research  facility”  a t   Pine  Gap near  geographical center  of 
Australia might be  station  designed to  guide  orbital  missiles  fired  from 
U S .   to  targets  in  Communist  China.  Article  had  caused  flurry  of 
questions about base  in  Australian  press.  Later  New  Yo rk   T imes   story 
said  U S .   officials in Washington  had  denied  suggestion  and  said  Pine 
Gap  installation  was  joint  US.-Australian  space  research  facility 
established by  agreement  in  1966.  (Trumbull,  N Y T ,   12/29/68,  30) 
e DOD  announced  appointment  to  Defense  Science Board  of  Dr.  Arthur  T. 
Biehl,  Associate  Director  for  Advanced  Study,  Lawrence  Radiation 
Laboratory;  Dr.  Lewis M.  Branscomb, Chairman  of  Joint  Institute  for 
Laboratory  Astrophysics,  Univ.  of  Colorado ; Daniel  J.  Fink,  General 
Manager  for  Space  Systems,  General  Electric  Corp.;  and  Dr.  Charles 
M.  Herzfeld,  Technical  Director  of  Defense  Space  Group  (R&D), 
International  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Corp.  (DOD  Release  1139-68) 
December  28: Intelsat-III  1;-2  (launched  Dec.  19)  was  used  between Etam, 
W.  Va.,  and  Raisting,  Germany,  under  emergency  authorization  to 
back up interruption of  service on T A T 4  cable.  (NASA  P ro j  O f f )  
Finnish  professor  Arrno  Niini  said  photos  of  earth  brought  back  by 
Apo l lo   8 astronauts  might  show  tiny  ring  of  small  dust  particles  200 
to  350  mi  above  earth.  I t   would  be  discernible  only  in  pictures  taken 
with  sun behind  camera  and with  sufficiently sensitive film.  (UPI,  N Y T ,  
12 /30 /68 ,2)  
e  In  Moscow  interview  with  Turin,  Italy,  newspaper  La  S tampa ,   Soviet 
space  scientist  Prof.  Leonid  I.  Sedov  said  U.S.S.R.  was  concentrating 

329 

December 28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%8 

on  perfecting  unmanned  spaceships for  exploration  of  celestial bodies 
deeper  in  space  than  moon.  “There  does  not  exist  a t   present  a  similar 
project  [to  Apollo  81  in  our  program.  In   the  near  future  we  will  not 
send a  man  around  the  moon. We  start  from  the  principle  that  certain 
problems can  be  resolved with  the  use  of  automatic  soundings.”  Sedov 
hailed Apo l lo  8 mission as “a  great  scientific conquest.”  (UPI, W  Po s t ,  
12/29/68,  A4,) 
*  President  Johnson  announced  promotion  of  Apollo 8 Astronaut  William 
A.  Anders  (Maj.,  USAF) to  lieutenant  colonel  under  his  policy  of 
granting  one-grade  promotion  to  military  astronaut  after  his  first 
successful  space  mission.  (Maynard,  W  Po s t ,   12/29/68,  A4;  PD ,  
$ /6 /69 ,5 )  
Polish  noncommunist  party  newspaper  Zycie  W r s zawy   said  of  Apo l lo   8 
crew:  “We were all with  them during  those five days.  . . . We  congratu- 
late  them  heartily.  At  such  a  time  we  do  not  think  about  politics  and 
we   forget  about  the  country‘from  which  they  come.”  Paper  also  said, 
“Only  a  few  changes  would  be  enough  for  the  monstrous  rocket  to 
carry  a nuclear warhead into  orbit  instead  of  astronauts.”  ( UPI, C T r i b ,  
12/29/68) 
In   Paris  Match,  Raymond  Cartier  said,  “With  Apollo  8  the  summit  is 
human  daring  is  attained.”  (Pa r i s  Match,  12/28/68,  3 7 )  
Chicago  Tribune  said,  “NOW that  Apollo  8 and  its  three  astronauts  are 
home  from  their  historic  t r ip   around  the  moon,  we  can  safely call  i t  
one  of  the most memorable Christmas gifts  ever given to  the  American 
people and mankind.”  (C  T r i b ,  12 /28 /68 ,12)  
The  Econom is t:  “What  did  they  think,  those  three  men  of  Apollo  8 who 
risked  their  lives  and  their  sanity  to   fly  to  the  moon  only  to  report 
that  i t   Iooked  like  grey  plaster  of  paris?  What  should  we  earthbound 
ones  think?  In   New  York  City,  there  a r e   a t   least  2,000  people  who 
would  rather  have  watched  a  football  game  and  were  sufficiently  in- 
censed to  telephone the  television  networks and  tell  them  so.  The blame 
is not  the  astronauts’.  A whole  series of  photographs,  some  taken  from 
instruments  actually  on  the  moon’s  surface,  some  in  black-and-white, 
some in colour, had  already warned  them what  to  expect. The buck lies 
on  the  desks  of  the  men  who  for  the  past  13  years  have  directed  the 
United  States’  $32  billion  space  programme,  and  spent  70%  of  i t   on 
getting men  into  space without planning  anything  constructive for  them 
to do when  they  got  there.  . . . The cost  of  a  manned moonshot  is  put 
a t  around $1 billion, and for that  sum you  could get a whole programme 
of  unmanned  moon  launches.  . . , 
“But  man  does  not  live  by  science  alone.  . . . the  greatest  achieve- 
ments  of  men  in  space  have  so  fa r   been  in   the  realm  of  the  human 
spirit.  . . . Apollo  8  is part  of  the  unceasing  restlessness, invention  and 
ambition  of  our  kind.  Have we  really  any  reason  to  believe  that  man’s 
evolution has  come to  a  stop  after  a  bare  half  million  years  on  ea r th?  
It  requires  arrogance,  a  closed  mind  and  absolutely  no  sense  of 
history  . . . to  say  that  sending  men  into  space  is  an   utter  waste  of 
time.”  (Th e  Economist,  12/28/68,112) 
Neither  Peking  Radio  nor  New  China  News  Agency  covered  ApoZZo  8 
Mission.  ( N  V u  Sun, 12/28/68,  1 )  
December  29:  Yomiuri of  Tokyo said  of  Apo l lo  8:  “This splendid voyage is 

330 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  29 

hailed  around  the world  a s   ‘mankind’s  greatest  feat’  and  ‘a  symbol  of 
hope  fo r   the  future’.  . . . For  the  U S .   and  the  Soviet Union,  i t   may 
first. . . . This  aspect is not  important  for  mankind  in  general. The two  
be  a  matter  of  serious  concern  a s   to  which  puts  men  on  the  moon 
superpowers should regard  space exploration  as a  project  of  the human 
race  and not  a  narrow  issue of  national prestige.’’  ( Y om i u r i ,  12/29/68, 
2 )  
International  Flat  Earth  Society said  in  London that  earth  was  definitely 
flat despite  pictures  from  ApoZZo  8.  Society  Secretary  Samuel  Shenton 
said moon was circular  but  there was  no  proof  i t  was a  globe.  (Reuters, 
B Sun, 12/30/68) 
I n   Washington  Sunday   Star,  William  Hines  reported  results  of  query 
of  eight  eminent  scientists  on  most  important  single  decision  related 
to  science  and  technology  which  faced  President-elect  Richard  M. 
Nixon  early in his  administration.  Consensus was:  shaping  of  long-term 
science policy. Also  cited we re  need  for  reexamination of  priorities and 
goals,  with  firm  decision  on  extent  to   which  science  and  higher  edu- 
cation should receive Government support;  creation  of  Dept.  of  Science 
in  cabinet  or  stronger  science-Government  communication  lines ; re- 
assessment of  space funding  and  other  “big  science” projects,  including 
proton  accelerators ; greater  emphasis  on  social  goals ; vigorous  anti- 
pollution efforts;  and  more  imaginative  use  of  science and  technology 
as  instruments  of  national  policy.  None  of  eight  scientists  advocated 
abandonment  of  space  program  after  culmination  of  Apollo  project. 
Alvin M. Weinberg, Director  of  Oak Ridge National Lab.,  said  of  space 
program,  “This  thing  takes  so  very  much  money  that  it’s  hard  to  get 
excited  about  any  other  decision  in  science  until  this  one  has  been 
made. What  should  be  its  level  in  the  1970s? We  have  become  accus- 
tomed  to  something like  four  or  five  billion  dollars  a  year,  but  I  doubt 
very much  that  this  is  a  level the  new  President  is  likely to  concur  in.” 
(W Star, 12/29/68,  C3) 
0  Noting  what  he  called  “curious  conspiracy  of  silence  on  Russia’s  capa- 
bilities  and  intention”  for  almost  eight  years,  William Hines  in  Wash- 
ington  Sunday   Star  said:  “One  of  the  many  small  acts  of  positive 
statesmanship which  Richard  M.  Nixon  could  profitably  perform  early 
in  his  administration  would  be  to  tell  the  American  people  fully  and 
frankly just what  the  United  States government knows about  the  Soviet 
space  program.  . . . It  would  lend  credence  to  Mr.  Nixon’s  professed 
policy  of  openness.  I t  would  compromise no  significant  secrets.  And  i t  
would  enable the  American public  to  make  judgments  about  the  future 
of  the U S .   space program  a t  a time when  vital decisions along this  line 
would be coming due.”  (W Star, 12/29/68,  C4) 
December  30:  Defense Secretary  designate, Rep.  Melvin R.  Laird  (R-Wis.) , 
named  David  Packard,  chairman  of  Hewlett-Packard  Co.,  California 
electronics  firm,  to  be  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  in  Nixon  Admin- 
istration.  (Beecher, NYT,  12/31/68,  1;   W S J ,  12/31/68;  Ae ro   Da i ly ,  
12/31/68) 
0  Cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  fo r   Cal  Tech’s  operation  of  Jet  Propulsion 
Laboratory  a s  a  major  NASA installation  was  renewed  by  NASA  and  Cal 
Tech  through  Dec.  31,  1971. Cal  Tech  staffed  and  operated  JPL;  prop- 

331 

December  30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

erty,  facilities,  and  equipment  were  owned  by  Government. 
(NASA 
Procurement Off; NASA Release 69-2) 
In   Pravda,  Prof.  Boris  Petrov,  Soviet  guidance  mechanisms  specialist, 
said  U.S.S.R.  preferred  not  to  send  men  to  moon  a t   this  point,  though 
unmanned Zond  V and Zond  V I  “were adapted for piloted flight.”  (Reu- 
ters,  W  Post,  12/31/68,  A3) 
Cleveland  Plain  Dealer  editorial:  “Those  who  argue  that  the  country 
should  be  spending  more  money  on  important  domestic programs  are 
correct.  But  these increases should  not  have  to  come  a t   the  expense  of 
American space exploration and newly-won world prestige. NASA’s needs 
deserve high  priority.  There  should  be  no   lost  opportunities. When  the 
first  American  sets  foo t   on  the  moon  next  year,  his  accomplishment 
(C  Plain  Dealer, 
should  symbolize  a  beginning,  not  an  ending.” 
12/30/68) 
e In  Washington  Evening  Star,  David  Lawrence  asked,  “What  was  really 
the  big  ‘miracle’  in  the  voyage  of  the  American  astronauts  to  the 
moon  and  back?”  I t  could  have  happened,  “and  the  rest  of  the  world 
would not have witnessed  the  dramatic  arrival  of  the  astronauts  aboard 
an  aircraft  carrier  in  the  middle  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  or  the  pictures 
sent  from  outer  space  for  several  days  i f   i t   had  not  been  for  another 
great  feat  of  science-transmission 
television  and  radio  from 
of 
artificial  satellites  direct  to  every  continent  of  the  world.”  (W   Star, 
12/30/68,  A9) 
December  31 : White  House announced from  Johnson City, Tex.,  that  Presi- 
dent  Johnson  would  present  NASA  Distinguished  Service  Medals  to 
Apo l lo  8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A.  Lovell, Jr.,  and William A. 
Anders during  “Astronaut  Day”  ceremonies in  Washington,  D.C.,  Jan. 
9,  1969.  (AP, W S tar ,   12/31/68,  A5;  UPI,  N Y T ,  1/1/69,  1 0 ;  W  Post, 
1 / 1 / 6 9 , 2 )  
Soviet test  pilot  Eudard  V.  Yelyan  test-flew Tu-144, U.S.S.R.’s  delta-wing 
supersonic transport,  on  successful  38-min maiden  flight  from  airport 
near  Moscow.  Tass  reported  “the  equipment  on  board  the  airliner 
operated normally.”  Aircraft was  designed to  carry  120-135  passengers 
at  speeds to  1,600 mph  over 4,000-mi range.  I t  was  equipped  w i t h   four 
Kuznetsov N.K.-144 
turbofan  engines. Tass said  sonic boom  “is  almost 
not  felt”  on  earth  because  Tu-144  reached  maximum  speed  at  high 
altitudes. 
Later, New   Y o r k  T im e s  editorial commented : “The lung international 
debate  about  supersonic airliners  is  sure  to  be  stepped  up  in  the  wake 
of  the  news  that  the  Soviet entry,  the  TU-144,  has  made  its  first  flight. 
Since  it  has  not  been  claimed  that  this  initial  trial  reached  supersonic 
speeds, the likelihood is  that  the  TU-144  was  kept  subsonic on  its  first 
outing.  But  Soviet  airplane  designers  and  builders  have  manufactured 
enough supersonic military planes to  suggest that  on a subsequent flight 
the  TU-144  will  fly  faster  than  the  speed  of  sound.  .  . . I n   this 
country,  the  Soviet  first  will  undoubtedly  spur  those  who  want  to 
pour  still  more  Government funds  into  the  Boeing project  to  build  an 
advanced  supersonic plane  that  is  faster  and  larger  than  the  TU-144. 
Fortunately,  this  country’s  technological  prestige  is  now  higher  than 
ever  in  the  wake  of  the  Apollo  8 moon  journey.  That  fact  should  help 
the  incoming Nixon  Administration to  see that  there  are  better  uses  for 

332 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

December  31 

the  nation’s  scarce resources than  to  engage  in  a  supersonic  plane  race 
whose  economics  are  dubious  and  whose  product’s  contribution  to 
noise pollution is all too loud.”  (Shabad, N Y T ,  1/1/69,  1 ;  UPI,  W S tar ,  
1/1/69,  A7;  Winters,  B  Sun ,   1/1/69,  A l ;   N Y T ,   1/2/69,  30) 
0  Earth  Resources  Satellite  Sy s tem ,   report  by  Subcommittee  on  Space 
Science  and  Applications for  Subcommittee on  NASA  Oversight,  House 
Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics,  was  transmitted  to   committee 
and  subcommittee.  ERS  system  “unquestionably  presents  NASA  with 
. . . perhaps  the  best  possible  opportunity  to  achieve  tangible  eco- 
nomic  returns  from  the  substantial  investment  already  made  by  the 
American  taxpayer  in  the  U S .   space  program.”  Pace  of  program 
to  date  had  been  “much  too  leisurely”  and  financial  support,  “in- 
adequate.”  Report  recommended  “NASA  concentrate  a  much  larger 
portion  of  its efforts  and  resources on  this  project”  and  “give  the  most 
serious consideration  to  the  recommendation of  the  National  Academy 
of  Sciences’ summer study to  the  effect that  funding  for the  applications 
satellite program  should  be  a t   least  doubled,  perhaps  tripled.”  (Text) 
0  National  Science  Foundation  released  Federal  Funds  fo r   Research, 
Development,  and  Other  Scientific  Activities : Fiscal  Years  1967,  1968, 
and  1969. Federal  obligations for  basic  research,  applied  research,  and 
development  (plant  excluded)  totaled  $16.5  billion  in  FY  1967  and 
were  expected  to  total  $16.2  billion  in  FY  1968, first  drop  since  1955. 
Obligations had  been  expected t o   total  $17.3  billion  in   FY  1969, but, 
because  of  appropriations  and  apportionment  actions,  probably  would 
be even less than  in 1968. 
Basic  research  obligations totaled  $2.0  billion  in  FY  1967 and were 
expected to be $2.1 billion  in  1968. Applied research  obligations totaled 
$3.3 billion in FY  1967, with  $3.3 billion  estimated for  1968. Originally 
expected  increases  in  FY  1969  obligations,  to  $2.4  billion  for  basic 
research  and  $3.6  billion  for  applied  research,  probably  would  not  oe- 
cur  because  of  cutbacks  in  FY 1969  budget.  Development  obligations 
were $11.3 billion  in  1967, highest  ever  reported,  but  were  expected to 
drop  to  $10.8 billion  in  1968. Originally  expected  rise  to  $11.3  billion 
in  1969 probably  would  not  be  achieved.  I n  FY  1967,  obligations  for 
R&D  plant  totaled  $620  million,  with  estimated  $517  million  for  1968 
and  $777  million  for  1969. DOD,  NASA,  and  AEC  provided  bulk  of  R&D 
funds,  with  90%  average  share  during  1960-66  and  85%  during 
1967-69.  DOD,  NASA,  and  AEC  together  supported  60%  of  Federal 
research  total  and  more  than  95%  of  development  total  in  1968. 
During  1967-69,  80%  of  Federal  R&D  funds  were  scheduled  fo r  
extramural  performers,  chiefly  U S .   industrial  firms.  I n   1968  they 
received 60%.  (Text) 
0  New  York  Gov.  Nelson  B.  Rockefeller  announced  Apollo  8  astronauts 
had  accepted  invitation  to  come  to  New  York  for  special  day  of 
observance Jan.  10.  (Fox, N Y T ,  1 / 1 / 6 9 , 1 )  
Senator-elect  Barry  Goldwater  (R-Ariz.)  test-rode  F-111A  and  took 
controls during part  of  90-min flight to and  from Nellis AFB, Nev.  Later 
he  said  aircraft  had  been victim  of  politics, not  by  party,  but  by  “bun- 
gling  in  the  Defense Department.”  Goldwater  said  he  had  not  opposed 
aircraft  but  objected  to  way  DOD  had  awarded  contract  to  General 
Dynamics Corp.  He  said  USAF  had  done  good  job   in  “taking  the  bugs 
out of  this airplane.”  (AP, W Post, 1/1/69, A9) 

333 

December  31 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

USAF  awarded  contracts  totaling  $28.8  million  to  Fairchild  Hiller  Corp., 
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.,  and  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  fo r  
contract  definition  for  ZF-15A  advanced  a i r   superiority  fighter  air- 
craft.  (DOD Release 1147-68) 
During  December:   NASA  issued  Objectives  and  Goals  in   Space  Science  a d  
Applications-1968.  NASA  Office  of  Space Science and  Applications had 
participated  in  1968 agency-wide planning  to  detail program  objectives 
and  options  from  which  program  could  be  built.  Many  tools  required 
for  future space program  had  already  been  developed and  many  future 
ventures would  require  onIy  modest improvements.  Spacecraft pointing 
accuracies  and  stability  would  improve,  and  their  lifetimes  would 
increase.  More  powerful  transmitters  would  communicate  data  across 
ever-widening  expanses.  Spacecraft  weight  would  increase  and  man 
would  have  increasing  capability  to  work  and  navigate  in  space. 
Advances  in  chemical propulsion,  introduction  of  nuclear  and  electric 
propulsion,  and  new  combinations  of  existing  stages,  would  permit 
growth  of  launch vehicle capability  to meet mission demands. 
FY  1969 support  of  program  recognized need  for  austerity  and  pro- 
vided  for  continuance  of  existing  programs  at  economical  level  and 
initiation  of  only  “projects  of  great  merit,  including  those  where  a 
unique  opportunity  might  be  lost.”  Future  emphasis  would  be  on 
applications  of  space  and  space  technology  for  benefit  of  man:  sur- 
veying  earth‘s  resources, TV  broadcast  from  space,  and  weather  fore- 
casting. Knowledge of  Mars,  Venus,  Mercury, Jupiter,  and  other  outer 
planets  would  be  expanded.  Introduction  of  larger,  more  accurate 
telescopes  would  provide  man  perhaps  with  “his  greatest  step  in 
understanding  the nature of  his universe.”  (Text) 
Senate  Committee on  Aeronautical  and  Space Sciences  issued  Ten th   An-  
niuersary,  1958-1968  to  meet  requests  for  information  concerning  its 
historical  background,  activities,  jurisdiction  and  procedures,  legis- 
lative  record,  membership,  and  staff  assistance.  Report  contained 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Act  of  1958,  as  amended,  related 
legislation-including  NASA’s funding  history-and  Communications 
Satellite Act  of  1962.  (Text) 
Global  military  expenditures  ranked  first  in  world  public  expenditures. 
They had  risen  irom $132  billion  to 1964 to  $138 billion  in   1965, $159 
billion  in  1966, and  estimated  $182 billion  in  1967-record  high  level. 
Preliminary  data,  said  U.S.  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament  Agency 
Report,  Wo r ld   Military  Expenditures  1 9 6 6 4 7 ,   said  current  military 
spending  exceeded  by  40%  world‘s  expenditures  on  education  by  all 
levels of  government and  was  more  than  three  times  worldwide public 
health  expenditure.  (Text;  Shackford,  W  Po s t ,   1/24/69,  A21) 
During  1968 :   In   1968  U S .   orbited  64 spacecraft  and  U.S.S.R.,  74.  U.S. 
total  included 43  launched  by  DOD.  NASA’s 2 1  included  satellite orbited 
as secondary payload. 
Highlight  of  NASA’s 10th  anniversary  year  w a s   success  in  carefully 
planned  series  of  Apollo  mission-including 
first  two  manned  flights 
in  Apollo  lunar  landing  program.  Unmanned  Apo l lo   5  and  Apollo  6 
completed  inflight  tests  of  all  major  pieces  of  Apollo  hardware.  First 
manned  mission,  ApoUo  7 ,  carried  three  astronauts  around  earth  f o r  
11 days, veriiying  spacecraft operation before  splashing down precisely 
on  target.. Mission  included  live  TV  transmission  from  space,  largest 

334 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

During  1968 

number  of  inflight restarts  of  SPS  to date,  and  new  record  of  781  man- 
hours  in  space.  Apollo  program  climaxed Dec.  21-27  with  highly  suc- 
cessful  six-day  Apo l lo   8  mission  on  which  three-man  crew  demon- 
strated  operation  of  spacecraft  systems  in  lunar  environment  while 
world  watched  live TV  coverage via  satellite.  Spacecraft  orbited  moon 
10  times, providing  man  with  his  first  trip  out  of  earth’s  gravitational 
field  and  first  look  at  moon’s  far  side and  proving  capability  of  crew, 
spacecraft,  and  support  and  control  systems  to  operate  out  to  lunar 
distances  and  return  through  earth‘s  atmosphere  a t   lunar-return 
velocity. 
Unmanned  Surveyor   VIZ,  NASA’s first  launch  in  1968  and  last 
spacecraft  in  Surveyor  series,  softlanded  on  moon,  conducted  on-site 
analyses of  lunar  soil,  and  took  part  in  laser-detection communications 
experiment. 
Applications  satellites  launched  included  Intelsat-ZII  F-2  comsat 
for  ComSatCorp  and  Essa  V I 1  and  VIIZ  meteorological  satellites  for 
ESSA.  Scientific achievements included orbiting  of  NASA’s Ogo V ,  Aao   11, 
Explorer  X X X V I ,   XXXVZ I I ,   X X X I X ,   and  X L   satellites  and  Naval 
Research  Laboratory’s  Explorer  X X X V I I .   Oao  11-heaviest 
and  most 
complicated  U S .   automated  spacecraft  ever  launched-took 
first 
UV  photos  of  stars,  returning  previously  unobtainable  data.  Explorer 
X X X V I   was  successfully used  by  GSFC  as target  in  first  daylight  opera- 
tional  laser  tracking.  Pioneer  I X ,   launched  into  solar  orbit,  carried 
Te t r   I1 pickaback  and  ejected  i t   into  earth  orbit  where  i t   served  as 
tracking  target  for NASA’s Manned  Space Flight Network. 
Some  157 meteorological  sounding  rockets  and  100 scientific  sound- 
ing  rockets  were  launched,  and  RAM  C-11 
spacecraft  was  launched 
on  suborbital  mission  to  obtain  data  on  radio  attenuation  during 
reentry. 
X-15  rocket  research  aircraft  made  13  flights,  ending  its  flight  pro- 
gram with  199 missions, including 154 a t  mach 4 o r  greater, 109 a t  mach 
5  o r   above,  and  4  a t   greater  than  mach  6.  NASA-USAF 
flight  research 
continued  with  13  flights  of  XB-70  supersonic  aircraft.  USAF’S  C-5A, 
world’s  largest  military  cargo  aircraft,  made  its  maiden  flight  and 
three  of  the  aircraft  completed  31  flights  for  88-hr  total  flying  time. 
Design  of  SST was  reevaluated  and  program  was  delayed  until  new 
fixed-wing  design  was  selected,  with  prototype  construction  expected 
to  begin  in  1969.  NASA’s H G l O   lifting-body  vehicle  completed  12 
successful glide  flights and  first  powered  flight. 
DOD   space program  included  orbiting  of  8  IDCSP  comsats,  1  Lincoln 
Experimental  Satellite,  5  Orbiting  Vehicle  research  satellites,  and  2 
environmental research  satellites;  static  test-firings of  Titan  111-M  1st 
stage;  and  near  completion  of  M O L  launch  complex  a t   Vandenberg 
AFB. 
I n   joint  NASA-AEC 
effort,  propulsion  technology  highlights  included 
power  tests  of  Phoebus  2A  nuclear  reactor,  first  tests  of  cold-flow test 
engine  in   flight  configuration  in  new  test  stand,  and  first  test-firings 
of Pewee 1 fuel element test-bed reactor. 
U.S.S.R. 
launched  74  payloads,  including  64   Cosmos  satellites,  1 
Luna,  1  Proton,  3  Zond,  and  2  Soyuz  spacecraft,  and  3  Molniya  I 
comsats.  Manned  Soyu z   111  rendezvoused  but  did  not  dock  with  un- 

335 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
During  1968 
manned  Soyuz   Z Z   launched  one day  earlier.  Unmanned Zond  V  and  V I  
completed  circumlunar  flights  and  were  recovered.  Zond  ZV  circled 
moon  and  apparently  crashlanded.  U.S.S.R.’s  Tu-144 delta-wing super- 
sonic transport  successfully made  38-min maiden  flight.  (P r e s  Rp t   68; 
NASA  Release  68-219;  B Sun,  1 /18 /6 9 , 28 ;   Shabad,  N Y T ,   1/1/69,  1; 
UPI,  W  S tar ,   1/1/69  A7) 
Major  administrative  events  affecting  NASA  and  its  role  in  space  were 
resignation  of  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  in  October,  after  71/2  yr 
a s  NASA’s head,  and  budget  cuts  necessitating  program  and  personnel 
reductions. 
Press  marked  Webb  retirement  with  praise  for  many  accomplish- 
ments  of  U S .   space  program  during  his  leadership.  Webb,  planning 
to  devote  time  to  interests  in  education  and  urban  and  foreign  affairs, 
continued  to  serve  as  consultant  to  Acting  Administrator  Dr.  Thomas 
0. Paine. 
NASA  FY  1969 budget  request  of  $4.37 billion, already  smallest  since 
1963  and  $700  million  below  FY  1968  request,  was  further  trimmed 
by  Congress  because  of  urgent  national  needs  in  other  areas,  particu- 
larly Vietnam war  and urban  problems.  Authorization  of  $4.013 billion 
was  lowered to  appropriation  of  $3.995  billion-$375.12  million  below 
original  request.  Revenue  and  Expenditure  Control  Act  of  1968 again 
reduced NASA  funds,  as well  as  funds  for  D m  and  other  agencies. 
Dr.  Paine  in  October  announced NASA  interim  operating  plan  limited 
to  $3.85  billion  for  FY  1969. Cutbacks  included  “sharply  limited  and 
deferred”  Apollo Applications program, end to  Saturn IB  and V booster 
production,  50%  cut  in  advanced  mission  studies,  reduced  lunar  and 
planetary  exploration  program,  one-year  delay  in  NERVA  development, 
slips  in  Biosatellite  program,  and  reductions  in  astronomy,  physics, 
and  basic  research.  I n   November  Dr.  Paine  said  that  below  $4-billion 
level  NASA  could  no  longer  “hold  together  our  hard-won  capabilities 
and  utilize  them  effectively in  critical  programs;  some  of  them  would 
have to be dropped entirely.”  (EH )  
0  I n   its  international  cooperation  program,  NASA  successfully  launched 
three  satellites  for  European  Space  Research  Organization :  In -  
(E s ro   ZZ-B)  , 
ternational  Radiation  Investigation  Satellite  Ir is   Z 
Aurorae  ( E s r o  Z )   to study aurora borealis  and  related  polar  ionosphere 
phenomeni,  and  Highly  Eccentric  Orbiting  Satellite Heos  A  for  inter- 
planetary  physics  research.  From  eight  nations,  35  investigators  were 
selected  to  carry  out  experiments with  first  lunar  surface  material  to  
be  retrieved  by  NASA.  Four  nations  contributed  experiments  flown  on 
NASA  spacecraft  and  122  sounding  rockets  were  launched  in   scientific 
programs  with  eight  countries.  Geodetic  satellite  observations  were 
carried  out  with  34  countries;  aeronautical  research  was  conducted 
with  4  countries;  and  52  countries  had  APT  facilities  to   receive  cloud 
cover  pictures  from  U S .   satellites.  (NASA  Releases  68-219,  68-204; 
Pres  Rp t  68) 
0  Uspekhi  SSSR  v  Zssledovanii  Kosmicheskogo  Prostranstva.  Pe rvoye  
Kosmicheskoye  Desya t i le t iye   1957-1967 
[U.S.S.R.  Achievements  in 
Space Research  (First  Decade  in  Space,  1957-1967)  ]  wa s   published 
as  Sputnik  anniversary  edition  by  Nauka  Publishing  House,  Moscow. 
Dr.  Anatoly  A.  Blagonravov,  Academician  and  chief  editor,  wrote 

336 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

During  1968 

introduction.  Text  included  results  of  scientific  studies,  experiments, 
and  exploration.  Appendix  listed  satellites,  spacecra€t,  and  their 
characteristics.  Joint  Publications  Research  Service  of  U.S.  Dept.  of 
Commerce published  translation, JPRS   47,311, on  Jan.  24, 1969.  (Texts) 

337 

Appendix A 

SATELLITES,  SPACE  PROBES,  AND  MANNED 
SPACE FLIGHTS 
A  CHRQNZCLE   FOR  1968 

The  following  tabulation  was  compiled  from  open  sources  by  Leonard 
C.  Bruno  of  the  Science  and  Technology  Division  of  the  Library  of  Con- 
gress.  Sources  included  the  United  Nations  Public  Registry;  the  Satellite 
Situation  Report  issued by  the Operations Control Center  at  Goddard  Space 
Flight  Center ; public  information  releases  of  the  Department  of  Defense, 
NASA,  ESSA,  and  other  agencies, as well  a s  those of  the  Communications s a t -  
ellite  Corporation.  Russian  data  a re   from  the  U.N.  Public  Registry,  the 
Satellite  Situation  Report,  translations  from  Tass  News  Agency,  statements 
in  the  Soviet press,  and  international  news  services’ reports.  Data  on  satel- 
lites  of  other  foreign  nations  are  from  the  U.N.  Public  Registry,  the  SateE 
lite  S i tua t ion   Report,  government  announcements,  and  international  news 
services’ reports. 
I t  might  be  well  to  call  attention  to  the  terms  of  reference  stated  or  im- 
plied  in  the  title  of  this  tabulation.  This  is  a  listing  of  payloads  that  have 
( a )  orbited;  ( b )   as probes,  ascended  to  a t  least  the 4,000-mile altitude that 
traditionally  has  distinguished  probes  irom  sounding  rockets,  etc. ; o r   ( c )  
conveyed one o r  more humans  into space, whether  orbit was attained  or not. 
Furthermore,  only  flights that  have  su c c e ed ed - o r  at  least  can  be shown by 
tracking  data  to  have  fulfilled our  definition of  satellite or  probe  or  manned 
flight-are 
listed.  Date  of  launch  is  referenced  to  local  time  a t   the  launch 
site.  An  asterisk  by  the  date marks  those  dates  that  are  one  day  earlier  in 
this tabulation  than  in  listings which  reference to  Greenwich Mean Time.  A 
double  asterisk  by  the  date marks  those  dates  of  Soviet launches which  a re  
a  day  later  in  this  compilation  than  in  listings  which  reference  to  Green- 
wich Mean Time. 
World  space  activity  in  1968 continued  a t   about  the  same  pace  a s   1967. 
There  was  a  slight  decline in   total  successful launches-119  against  127 in 
against  159 in  1967, a 
1967-and 
a  decline in  total  payloads  orbited-138 
good  deal  under  the  record  160  of  1965.  The  difference between  launches 
and  payloads  is  of  coprse  accounted  for  by  the  multiple-payload launches 

339 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

(DOD is  the  principal  user  of  this  system,  with  9 multiple-payload launches 
orbiting  a  total  of  26  payloads  and  with  as  many  as  8  payloads  on  one 
Titan  111-C  vehicle; NASA  had  2 multiple launches of  4 payloads against  one 
multiple launch  and  2  payloads  in  1967;  the  U.S.S.R.  again  had  none). 
Of  the  1968 world  total,  the  United  States launched 45  boosters  carrying 
64 payloads  (compared with  55  and  87 in  1 96 7 ) ,  the  U.S.S.R.  launched  74 
(compared with  67  in   1967) ; 6  of  NASA’s  total  were  n o n - N A S A   missions- 
Esro  I I ,  Aurorae, Heos-A,  In te lsa t-I l l   F-2,  Essa  V I I I .  
If  1967  was  characterized  by  the  large  number  of  U.S.  lunar  flights 
(seven  compared  with  none  for  the  U.S.S.R.),  1968 wa s   distinguished  by  
the reappearance  of  manned  flight. The US .   moved closer to  its  lunar  land- 
ing  goal  with  two  manned  Apollo  successes,  and  the  Soviet Union  demon- 
strated  its  manned  capability  in  the  Soyuz  111  flight.  I n   1968  both  the 
United  States  and  the  Soviet  Union  successfully  circled  the  moon.  The 
Soviet’s  Zond  V  first  accomplished  the  feat  w i th   an  unmanned  craft,  while 
the  United  States was  first  in  putting  men  around  the  moon  in  ApoZZo  8. 
As  we  have  cautioned  in  previous  years,  the  “Remarks”  column  of  these 
appendixes  is  never  complete  because  of  the  inescapable  lag  behind  each 
flight of  the  analysis  and  interpretation  of  results. 

340 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

341 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

2 
I  t- 
c? 

s 
m 

2 m 

cn m 

t- 
m 
rl 

s 
rl v.l 

2 
W 

z 
m 

3 
W 

dl t- 

1 
m 

In 
W N 

L- t- 

la 
m m 

d In N 

d 
m m 

m 
W 
4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

N 
d 

d 
m 
N 

1 
W 

x 
v=i 

I? Lo 
t- 

0 d W 

d e0 d 

343 

2 
m 

m 
c 
9 
N 
m 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

2 
c- 

5 
m 

m 
W 3 

f W 

eo 
m m 

% 
,+ 

e 
N IC 

3 
m 
3 

d: 
2 

2 
m 

N m 

* 
9 In 

le 

le 

le 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

z 
B 
9: 

o! m m 

2 
m 

a m 

1 
m 

f 
en 

0 
(0 N 

m m 
a 

N 
-3 N 

(0 N a 

a 
r( N 

345 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

t- 0 4 

n 
N N 

346 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

2 
I 

m 
w m 

n c- a 

I m m 
- 
(0 
rl 

m 
v3 r( 

N 
(0 N 

0 
n 
N 

4 

$ 

9 r; 

347 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

x 
(D 

4 
m -3 

1 
m 

' L- 

348 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

J 2 
d ." 
0 

m 
0 I C  

r( W Lh 

P 
* 
t l  e, 
d 

f

* m 
2- 

4
W t- 

 
t- 
a H 

s 
.J 

W W 

a 
N a 

W 
0 W 

a 
m 
4 

N 
v1 N 

x 
m 

a c (0 

349 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

z 
Lo 

2 
00 

Lo 00 

2 
m 

9 
L- 

oo. m m 

4 m 

9 
m 

350 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

4 
m c* 

10 W 

Q! 
6 8  W 

o! 8 

- 
c* c 

W M M 

5 
w M 
N 

W 
b 
h 

10 

A 
4 

351 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

2 

v! m 
0 .PI 

2 
m 

2 
m 

3 
W 

4 m m 

W x) 

,-I N N 

8 

P 

* 
3 
4 

(0 r( 
B 
ra 

352 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

2 
m 

n c- 
'0. 
4 

a * 

353 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

: E 

- 
0 
c 

W h m 

m 
...I Q, 

354 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

355 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

m 

Q! 
N 

9 
4 
co 

x 
0 N 
N 

x 
v) N 
N 

3 
4 Po 

H 
N' N 

: 
N- 
N 

0 N 
4 
0 
m 

m 
N 
4 
0 
m 

356 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

4 
m 
L- 

t- 00 

m m 

N 
m 

m 
(D r( 

m m 
N 

f 
0 r( 

!4 

E: 
0) 

f 
r( L- 

t- 
(D N 

2 m 

2 m 

0 m : 

r( co 
(D 

2 
t- 

N 

3 
8 

co 

3 
8 

Io 

4 
8 

to 

3 
8 

ID 

3 
8 

L- 

0 

357 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

m 2 

m 
P- 
d 

t- co co 

d * c? 
d 

2-l l-4 2 ,   d 
l-4 
l-4 

358 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

s 
W 

iz 

co 
0 

I 
N 
m 

z 
d 

* In 

2 
m 

f 
Io 

co 
m m 

N d * 

t- 
N .-I 

I 

In 01 
2 
0 

359 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

N B 

a 8 

360 

9 
9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

2 
W 

i 
Lo 

1 
m 

0 2 

0, 0 N 

m 
W 
N 

(9 0 N 

t- 
o) 
,-I 

3 
t- 

N t- N 

d LD 7" 

361 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

I 
N 

m 
-3 2 

m 
(D N 

.-( co 
w. 
W m .-( 

Lo 
1 n 

d: 
0 
0 r( 

W 
m 
9 

362 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

j .  
8 
f 

d t- 

W m 

m 
N ,+ 

2 
W 

Y 
N n 

E 
N 

c: 
0 )  

ab- .$'a 
8 %  
Pi- 

@ 
3s 

4 
V - 8 
n 
P 
Pi 

a 

i 
i 

m 
9 
r( 
2 
n 

364 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

365 

Appendix  B 

CHRONOLOGY OF MAJOR  NASA  LAUNCHES 

JANUARY  1 , 1 9 6 8 ,  THROUGH  DECEMBER   3 1 , 1 9 6 8  

This  chronology of  major  NASA  launchings in  1968 is  intended to  provide 
an  accurate  and  ready  historical  reference, one compiling  and  verifying  in- 
formation previously  scattered  over  several  sources.  It  includes  launchings 
of  all  rocket vehicles  larger  than  sounding  rockets  launched  either  by  NASA 
or  under  “NASA  direction  (e.g.,  NASA  provided vehicles,  launch facilities, and 
performed  the  launches  for  ComSatCorp’s  In te lsa t-I l l   F-2,  for  ESSA’S  Essa 
V I 1   and  V I I I ,   and  for  ESRO’S  I r i s   I ,   and  Aurorae  and  Heos-A 
in  1968) .  
NASA  sounding rocket launches are published  annually by  the Goddard Space 
Flight  Center  Historian  in  Goddard  Projects  Summa ry :   Satellites  and 
Sounding  Rockets. 
An  attempt has  been  made  to  classify the performance of  both  the  launch 
vehicle  and  the  payload  and  to  summarize total  results  in  terms  of  primary 
mission.  Three  categories  have  been  used  for  evaluating  vehicle  perform- 
(S )  , partially  successful  (P )  , and  un- 
ance  and  mission  results-successful 
successful  (U )  . A  fourth  category,  unknown  (Unk) , has  been  provided  for 
payloads where vehicle malfunctions did not give the payload a chance to  ex- 
ercise  its main  experiments. These  divisions a re  necessarily arbitrary,  since 
many  of  the  results  cannot  be  neatly  categorized. Also  they  ignore  the  fact 
that  a  great  deal  is  learned  from missions that  may  have  been  classified  a s  
unsuccessful. 
Date of  launch  is  referenced to  local time  a t  the  launch  site. Sources used 
were all  open  ones, verified  where in  doubt  from  the  project  offices  in  NASA 
Headquarters and  from  NASA  Centers. For  further  information  on each item, 
see  Appendix  A  of  this  volume  and  the  entries  in  the  main  chronology  as 
referenced  in  the  index. Prepared  May  1969 by  Dr.  Frank W.  Anderson, Jr. 
Deputy  NASA  Historian  (EH )  . 

367 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

3 n 

368 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

5 

m 

m 

m 

- 
-* 
x 
1: 

m 
3 
4 

Y 3 

5 

- 
k!? 
3-5 
4 

0 
3 
d 
4 

369 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%8 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

370 

Appendix C 

CHRONOLOGY OF MANNED SPACE FLIGHT,  1967-1968 

This  chronology  contains  basic  information  on  all  manned  space  flights 
during  1967 and  1968 and,  taken  with  Appendix  C  to  the  1965  and  1966 
editions  of  this  publication, provides  a  summary  record  of  manned  explora- 
tion  of  the  space environment through  1968. The  information  was  compiled 
by William D.  Putnam,  Assistant  NASA  Historian  for Manned  Space Flight. 
The year  1967 s aw   only  one flight by man  into  space and  that  mission of 
lhe Soviet spaceship Soyuz 1 ended  in  the  tragic  death  of  Cosmonaut Vladi- 
mir  M.  Komarov. Although  there were no  U S .   flights  in  1967, tragedy  also 
struck the American program  with  the death of  astronauts Virgil  I. Grissom, 
Edward  H.  White  11,  and  Roger  B.  Chaffee  inside  their  spacecraft  on  the 
launch  pad  a t   Cape  Kennedy  while  they  were  conducting  tests  preparatory 
to  the  first  manned  flight  in   the  Apollo  program. 
It  was  October  of  1968  before  each  nation  resumed  manned  space 
flight, with  ApoZZo  7 the  initial manned  test  of  America’s  spacecraft  for  the 
lunar  landing  program  and  the  Soyuz  111  the  first  Soviet  manned  flight 
since the  crash  of  Soyuz  I  18 months earlier.  The  epochal flight of  ApolZo  8 
was  man’s  first  t r ip   outside  the  earth’s  environs  to  lunar  orbit.  This  land- 
mark  in  human  exploration  demonstrated  the  ability  of  the  Apollo-Saturn 
V  system  to   perform  the  mission  for  which  it  was  designed  and  built- 
man’s  landing  on  the  lunar  surface  and  safe  return  to  earth. 
By  the end  of  1968, the United States had  conducted a  total  of  18 manned 
space  flights,  15 in  earth  orbit  and  one  circumlunar  voyage, with  a  total  of 
22  different  crewmen.  Six  of  the  22  American  astronauts  had  participated 
in  two   flights each,  and  two  had  flown  three  times.  The  Soviet Union  had 
conducted  a  total  of  10 manned  flights,  all  in  earth  orbit,  with  12 different 
crewmen. Cosmonaut Romarov’s  fatal  flight  in  1967 was  his  second.  Cumu- 
lative totals  for manned  spacecraft hours  on  flight had  reached  1,430 hours 
53  minutes  for  the  United  States  and  554  hours  4  minutes  fo r   the  Soviet 
Union.  Cumulative  total  man-hours  in  space  were  3,215  hours  and  628 
hours  4 0  minutes,  respectively. 
Data  on U S .   flights a re  the  latest  available to  date within  NASA.  Although 
minor  details  a r e  subject  to  modification as  data  are  refined,  major  aspects 
of  all U S .  manned  flights remain  subject  to  direct  observation by  interested 
citizens of  the  world,  with  a  significant portion  of  recent  missions  seen  live 
on  worldwide  television. 

371 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

.P E: 

0 'cc 
m 2 
W N 

m 
W 3 
W 

372 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

0 m 3 
W N 

J B 

373 

Appendix  D 

ABBREVIATIONS  OF  REFERENCES 

AF J  
AFFTC  Release 
AFHF   Newsletter 
AFNS  Release 
AFOSR  Release 
ABPL  Release 
AFSC  Newsreview 
AFSC   Release 
A F / S D  
AFSSD  Release 
A IA   Release 
A IAA   Facts 
A IAA   News  
AIAA  Release 
Amer   A v  

Listed  are   abbreviations  for  sources cited  in  the  text.  This  list  does  not 
include  all  sources provided  in  the  chronology, for   some  of  the  references 
cited are  not  abbreviated. Only those  references which  appear in  abbreviated 
form  are   listed  below.  Abbreviations used  in  the  chronology  entries  them- 
selves a r e  cross-referenced  in  the  Index. 
AIAA’S  magazine,  Astronautics  &  Aeronautics 
A & A  
NASA,:  As tronau t ics   and  Aeronautics  1968  Cthiti  pub- 
A&A  68  
licationl 
American  Broadcasting  Company 
Atomic  Energy  Commission  News  Release 
Aerospace  Daily  newsletter 
Aerospace  Techno logy  magazine  (now Am e r i c z n  Avia- 
t i o n )  
Armed  Forces  Journal  magazine 
A ir   Force  Flight  Test  Center  News  Release 
A ir   Force  Historical  Foundation  Newsletter 
Air  Force  News  Service  Release 
Air  Force  O 5 c e   of  Scientific  Research  News  Release 
Air  Force  Rocket Propulsion  Laboratory  News  Release 
Air  Force Systems Command’s  Newsreview 
Air  Force  Systems Command  News  Release 
A i r   Force  and  Space  Digest  magazine 
Air  Force  Space  Systems  Division  News  Release 
Aerospace  Industries  Association  News  Release 
American  Institute  o f   Aeronautics  and   Astronautics’ 
Facts 
American  Institute  o f   Aeronautics  and  Astronautics‘ 
News  
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics 
News  Release 
Amer ican   Av ia t ion   magazine 
(formerly  Aerospace 
T e chno log y )  
Associated  Press   news  service 
NASA  Ames  Research  Center’s  As trogram  
NASA  Ames  Research  Center  News  Release 
Av ia t ion   Daily  newsletter 
Av ia t ion   W e e k   and  Space  Techno logy   magazine 
B irm ingham   N ew s   newspaper 
Baltimore  S u n   newspaper 
Business  W e e k  magazine 
Canadian  Press  news  service 
Columbia  Broadcasting  System 
Chicago  Da i ly   News   newspaper 
Communications  Satellite  Corporation  News  Release 
Congressional  Quarterly 
Congressional  Record 

ABC 
AEC  Release 
Aero  Daily 
Aero   T e c h  

A P  
ARC   As trogram  
ARC   Release 
A v  Da i ly  
A v   W k  
B  News  
B  S u n  
Bus  W k  
Can  Press 
CBS 
C  Daily  News  
OmSa tCo rp   Release 
CQ  
C R  

375 

CSM  
CTNS  
C  T r i b  
DJ 
DOD  Release 
DOT  Release 
EH  
ERC  Release 
ESSA  Release 

FAA   Release 
FonF 
FRC  Release 
FRC   X-Press  
G E  Forum  
Goddard  N ew s  
GSFC  Release 
GSFC  S S R  

H  Chron  
H  Pos t  
JPL  Lab-Oratory 
JPL Release 
KC   S tar  
KC  T im e s  
KSC  Release 
LA  H e r -E xam  
Langley  Researcher 
LaRC  Release 
L A   T imes  
LATNS  
LC  In fo   Bu l l  
LeRC  Release 
Lew is   News  
Marshall  S tar  

M  Her  
MJ 
M  News  
MSC Release 
MSC Roundup  

MSFC  Release 
M  T r ib  
N A A   News  
NAc  Release 
N A E   Release 
NANA  
NAR  Release 
NAR   Skywr i ter  
NAS   Release 
NASA  Ann 
NASA  Auth  Hearings 
NASA  Hq   P B  
NASA  H q   W B  
NASA   In t   Aff 
NA SA   L A R  mI/8 
NASA  P ro j   Off 
NASA   Release 
NASA   Ru t   S R L  
NASA   SP-4006 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Christian  Sc ience   Mon i tor   newspaper 
Chicago  Tribune  News  Service 
Chicago  T r ibun e  newspaper 
Dow  Jones  news  service 
Department  of  Defense  News  Release 
Department  of  Transportation  News  Release 
NASA  Historical  Staff  (Code  EH )  
NASA   Electronics Research  Center  News  Release 
Environmental  Science  Services  Administration  News 
Release 
Federal  Aviation  Administration  News  Release 
Facts  o n  F i le  
NASA   Flight  Research  Center  News  Release 
NASA   Flight  Research  Center’s  FRC   X-Press  
General  E lec tr ic   Forum   magazine 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s  Goddard  N ew s  
NASA   Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  News  Release 
NA SA   Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s  Sa te l l i te   S i tua-  
t ion   R epo r t  
Hous ton   Chronicle  newspaper 
Hous ton   Pos t   newspaper 
Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory’s  Lab-Oratory 
J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  News  Release 
Kansas  C i t y   S t a r   newspaper 
Kansas  C i t y   T imes   newspaper 
John  F.  Kennedy  Space  Center,  NASA ,   News  Release 
Los  Angeles  Herald-Examiner  newspaper 
NASA   Langley  Research  Center’s  Lang ley   Researcher 
NASA  Langley  Research  Center  News  Release 
Los   Ange les   T im e s   newspaper 
Los  Angeles  Times  News  Service 
Library  of  Congress  In forma t ion   Bu l le t in  
N A S A   Lewis  Research  Center  News  Release 
NASA  Lewis  Research  Center’s  Lew is   N ew s  
NA SA   George  C.  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center’s 
Marshall  Star 
Miami  Herald  newspaper 
Milwaukee  Journal  newspaper 
M iam i   News   newspaper 
N A S A   Manned  Spacecraft  Center  News  Release 
NA SA   Manned  Spacecraft  Center’s  Space   News  
R oun dup  
NA SA   George  C.  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  News 
Release 
Minneapolis  T r i bun e   newspaper 
National  Aeronautic  Association  N ew s  
National  Aviation  Club  News  Release 
National  Academy  of  Engineering  News  Release 
North  American  Newspaper  Alliance 
North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  News  Release 
North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  S k yw r i t e r  
National  Academy  of  Sciences  News  Release 
NA SA   Announcement 
NA SA   Authorization  C19691  Hearings 
N A S A   Headquarters  Personnel  Bulletin 
NASA   Headquarters  W e e k l y   Bu l l e t i n  
NASA   Office  of  International  Affairs 
NASA   Lezislative  Activities  Report,  Vol.  VII,  No.  8 
N A S A   Project  Office 
NASA   Headquarters  News  Release 
NASA  Report  of  Sounding  Rocket  Launching 
NASA   Special  Publication  # 4 0 6  

376 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

NASC  Release 
NAS-NRC  Release 
News 

NAS-NRC-NAE 

R p t  

Na t l   Obs 
NBC 
NGS  Release 
NMI- 
NN 
N   New s  
NSC  Release 
NSF   Release 
N   V u  S u n  
N Y   New s  
N Y T  
NYTN S  
Oakland  T r ib  
Omaha  W-H 
0 S e n  
P A 0  
PD 
P  E 3  
P  I n q  
P I 0  
PMR   Release 
Pres  R p t   68 

P  S B  
S A  
S BD  
Sci  Ame r  
SciServ 
SD  
SD   Union 
SF 
S F   Chron 
SP 
S R  
S SN  
S t .  Louis  G-D 
S t   Louis  P-D 
Testimony 
Text 
Transcript 

IJPI 
USGS Release 
U S   News 
WH  Release 
I J T  
W News 
w Post 
WSJ  
WS  Release 
W  Star 

National Aeronautics  and Space Council News Release 
National  Academy  of  Sciences-National  Research 
Council  News  Release 
National  Academy  o f   Sciences-National  Research 
Council-National  Academy  of  Engineering  New s  
Report 
National  Observer  magazine 
National  Broadcasting  Company 
National  Geographic  Society  News  Release 
NASA  Management  Instruction- 
NASA  Notice 
Newark  New s   newspaper 
National  Space  Club  News  Release 
National  Science  Foundation  News  Release 
No r the rn   Virginia  S u n   newspaper 
N ew   Yo r k   New s   newspaper 
N ew   Y o r k   T ime s   newspaper 
New  York  Times  News  Service 
Oakland  T r ibune   newspaper 
Omaha  World-Herald  newspaper 
Orlando  Sen t ine l  newspaper 
Public  Affairs  Office 
National  Archives  and  Records  Service’s  W e e k l y  
Compilation  of  Presidential  Documents 
Philadelphia  Evening  Bu l le t in   newspaper 
Philadelphia  Inquirer  newspaper 
Public  Information  Office 
USN Pacific  Missile  Range News  Release 
United  States  Aeronautics  &  Space  Activities  1968, 
Report  to  the  Congress  from  the  President  of  the 
United  States 
Philadelphia  Sunday   Bu l le t in   newspaper 
Space  Aeronautics  magazine 
Space  Business  Daily  newsletter 
Scientific  American  magazine 
Science  Service  news  service 
Space  Digest  magazine 
Su n   Diego  Un ion   newspaper 
Space  Flight  magazine 
Sun   Francisco  Chronicle  newspaper 
Space  Propulsion  newsletter 
Saturday  Review  magazine 
Soviet  Sciences  i n   the   New s ,   published  by  Electro- 
Optical  Systems,  Inc. 
S t .   Louis  Globe-Democrat  newspaper 
S t .   Louis  Post-Dispatch  newspaper 
Congressional  testimony,  prepared  statement 
Prepared  report  o r   speech  text 
OEc ia l   transcript  of  news  conference  or  Congression- 
a l   hearing 
United  Press  International  news  service 
U.S.  Geoloeical  Survev  News  Release 
U.S.  News-and  World  Report  magazine 
White  House  News Release 
World  Journal  T r ibune   newspaper 
Washington  Daily  New s   newspaper 
Wmh ing to n   Post  newspaper 
W a l l   Street  Journal  newspaper 
NASA   Wallops  Station  News  Release 
Washington  Evening  S t a r /S unda y   Star  newspaper 

377 

INDEX  AND  LIST  OF  ABBREVIATIONS 
AND  ACRONYMS 

A 
AA.  See Apollo  Applications program. 
AAs.  s e e  American  Astronautical  society. 
AAAS.  See  American  Assn.  for  the  Ad- 
vancement  of  Science. 
ABM.  See Antiballistic missile  system. 
See  Army  Ballistic  Missile 
ABMA. 
Agency. 
Abramson,  Rudy,  229 
ABRES.  See  Advanced  Ballistic  Reentry 
System. 
Acceleration,  effects  of,  86,  190,  200-201 
Accelerator,  91, 93,  154, 316 
Accident,  95,  96,  157 
aircraft 
F - I l lA ,   2,  72,  75,  80,  84,  87,  97, 
102,  108,  109,  117,  119,  134,  160, 
195 ,207 ,224 ,258  
F-1llB.  2 
Mig-15;  70 
SR-71,  8 
T-38. 128 
X-15,  12,  164-165 
Lunar  Landing  Research  Vehicle,  257 
Lunar  Landing  Training  Vehicle,  305 
spacecraft 
Apollo  AS-204,  25,  51,  161,  191, 215, 
221-222,  222-223,  229,  237,  245, 
249 ,264 ,308  
Soyuz I,  70,  264 
Sputnik I V ,   16 
ACS. See  Attitude  Control  System. 
Adams,  Dr.  Mac  C.,  57,  118-119,  150, 
283 
Adams,  Maj.  Michael  J.  (U SAF ) ,   164-165 
Adapticom,  143 
Adelaide,  Australia,  123 
Advanced  Ballistic  Missile  Defense 
Agency,  43 
Advanced  Ballistic  Reentry  System 
(ABRE S ) ,   292 
Advanced  Manned  Strategic  Aircraft 
( A M S A ) ,   81  
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
(AR PA )   40,  42,  43,  145,  190 
Advanced  Videcon  Camera 
(AVCS )   , 192-193 
AEC. See Atomic  Energy  Commission. 
Aegerter,  Dr.  Irene,  302 
Aerobee 
(sounding 
rocke t ) ,   62,  87, 
150 auroral experiment,  36 

System 

instrumentation test,  17 ,65 ,   175 
launch  test,  211,  214 
solar astronomy,  221, 224 
stellar  data,  67 
ultraviolet  astronomy,  115 
upper  atmosuhere data.  206 
x&y  astronomy,  30,  46-41,  128 
150 A,  141,289-290,291 
150 M I  
in f ra red  astronomy,  49-50,  316 
solar 
astronomy,  97, 
118,  232, 
256-257 
stellar  data,  247-248,  282 
upper  atmosphere  data,  90,  12’,  238, 
289-290 
x-ray  astronomy,  169,256-257,  303 
Aeroflot,  163 
Aerojet-General Corp.,  59, 75,  172 
Space Div.,  86 
Aeronautics,  172, 249,  249-250.  291 
anniversary,  11, 303,  313-314 
award,  15,  70-71,  84,  209,  259,  263, 
286 ,299 ,300 ,303 ,316  
cooperation,  118, 238,  336 
employment,  289 
exposition,  233 
funds  for,  18-19,  33-34, 
161-162,  237-238,  239 
general  aviation.  71,  137-138. 
-  i87-188,189,  i94.  i96;278 
’ 
military,  239-240,313,  317-318 
NASA   program,  19,  25,  33-34,  47,  48, 
118,  125,  161-162,  166,  179,  187, 
225-226,  236-237,  238,  248,  255-256, 
288-289,313,317-318 
noise  abatement.  See  Noise,  aircraft. 
research  (see  also  X-15  and  XB-701, 
19,  25,  38-39,  56,  69-70, 
118, 
124-125,  166, 168.  197 ,237 ,  247,  296 
Aeroplane  Structures,  9 1  
Aerospace  Communications  Award,  77 
Aerospace  Corp.,  156 
Aerospace Defense  Command, 9 
( A I A )  ,  6, 
Aerospace 
Industries  Assn. 
124-125,  134,  288-289,  3 1 5 4 1 6  
Aerospace  industry,  6 ,   134,  272,  278-279, 
289,297,315-316 
Aerospace Medical  Assn.,  109 
Aerospace  Safety  Panel,  ( N A S A ) .   122-123 
AFCRL.  See  Air  Force  Cambridge  Re- 
search Laboratories. 

71,  126, 

179. 

379 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

AFETR.  See  Air  Force  Eastern  Test 
Range. 
AFHRL.  See  Air  Force  Human  Resources 
Laboratory. 
Africa, 31,  311 
AFSC.  See  Air  Force  Systems  Command. 
AFSCF.  See  Air  Force  Satellite  Control 
Facility. 
(see  also  Atlas-Agena 
Agena  (booster) 
and  Thor-Agena) , 1 1 , 2 6 , 2 4 2 , 2 9 3  
Agnew, Dr.  Harold,  122-123 
Agreement, 
astronaut,  rescue, 161, 299 
international,  27,  165,298 
'NASA-Brazil,  177-178 
-ESRO,  113,  240 
Norway,  177-178 
-Spain, 177-178 
-Sweden, 177-178 
-USAF,  83  
U.K.-US.,  59-60 
US.-Australia,  257,  329 
-Romania, 292 
-South Vietnam, 88 
- U S S R . ,   127,  149-150,  157,  159, 
164,  166 
Agriculture, 16, 62,  85,  106, 205, 257 
Agriculture, Dept.  of  299 
AIA.  See Aerospace Industries Assn. 
AIAA.  See  American  Institute  of  Aeronau- 
tics  and  Astronautics. 
Air  Defense  Command, 9 
Air Force Academy,  104-105 
Air  Force, Assn.,  217 
Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Labora- 
tories  ( A F C R L ) ,   10,  170,  209-210,  247, 
250,302 
Air  Force  Eastern  Test  Range  (AFETR ) ,  
148 
Air  Force  Human  Resources  Laboratory 
(AFHRL) , 150 
Air  Force  Satellite  Control  Facility 
(AF SCF ) ,   189 
Air  Force  Systems  Command  ( A F S C ) ,   5, 
39-40,  54,  81,  237-238,  272 
Aeronautical Systems Div.,  61 
Aerospace  Medical  Div.,  141  
Air  Force  Human  Resources  Labora- 
tory,  150 
associateships, 8 
contract, 2 
rocket engine, reusable, 2 
Space  and  Missiles  Systems  Organiza- 
tion, 244,  297 
test,  70 
Air  Holdings, Ltd.,  72 
Air  pollution, 169, 251,  323 
Air  Products and  Chemicals,  Inc.,  79 
Air  traffic control, 104 ,203 ,238  
contract, 82 
FAA   regulation,  1-2,  194,  196,  199-200, 
206,24% 
NASA   role h, 187,225-226 

(19681, 

press comment, 188, 196 
satellite use in,  217 
Air  Transport  Assn.  of America,  286 
Air  transportation,  99,  104,  187-188,  194, 
206,217,  232 
NAE   reuort.  187 
R&D,  4 f ,  224,225-226 
Airborne  Auroral  Expedition 
10-11. 17-18.  72 
Aircraft'  (see  ' also 
individual  aircraft, 
F-111,  X-15, 
such 
as  C-5A, 
XB-70),  288-289,  291 
accident,  2,  8,  12,  72,  75,  80,  97,  102, 
108,  109,  117,  119,  128, 134,  157,  160, 
164-165,  195 ,207 ,224 ,258  
a ir  show,  105,  117 
antisubmarine,  187 
award, 76 
bomber,  76,  112 ,240 ,280  
cargo,  16,  19,  54,  81,  146-147,  150, 
155-156,  208,  231,  282,  288,  312,  335 
collision  study,  179 
communications test,  111,  205,  229 
Cost,  146, 202-203,  282,  288 
delta-wing, 332-333 
fighter, 76,  130, 165,  187,  195,  201,  217, 
232-233,272,281,  314 
flying boat,  160 
foreign,  40,  49,  52,  105,  112,  115,  126, 
130,  139,  151, 156,  165,  194, 195, 198, 
217 ,233 ,259 ,294 ,   332-333 
general-aviation, 71,  137-138 
helicopter, 18. 219.  226.  251 
Hovercraft, 175 
hypersonic,  226,  237,  300,  317 
interceptor, 112,  156, 171-172 
navigation, 187, 217 
noise.  See Noise,  aircraft. 
personal, 207 
reconnaissance, 8 ,  40 
record, 11-12,207,299.  317-318 
regulations,  1-2,  116,.  130,  194,  196, 
206,300 
research  (see  also  X-15  and  XB-70), 
8,  18,  34,  39,  72,  81,  184,  276-277, 
286,313,324,  335 
safety, 187 
sonic boom.  See Sonic boom. 
statistics,  71,  120, 137-138 
STOL,  16 ,139 ,217 ,219 ,224 ,226 ,231  
tracking,  12  
transport 
(see  also  Supersonic  trans- 
port) 
air-bus, 72 
jet,  134, 157, 197 
military,  293 
STOL,  16,  139,  179,  217,  219,  224,  226, 
231 
variiblesweep-wing, 206,220-221 
Vietnam War use.  195 
V/STOL,  33,  34,  4f  104,  134,  166,  168, 
177 ,219 ,224 ,238 ,288  
VTOL,  16, 33,  40,  47,  105,  135,  219,  224, 
230-231,276 

380 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

wind-tunnel  testing, 40,  59,  219 
Aircraft carrier,  238 
Airglow,  177, 256 
Airlines  (see  also  A ir   traffic  control  and 
Supersonic  transpor t) ,   107-108,  135, 
196, 203,206,286 
aircraft,  45,  71-72.  139.  217.  224-225. 
232-233  ‘ 
.
,
I
 
forecast,  137-138,  278 
highjacking,  189 
Airlock  module,  218-219 
Airmail,  113 
Airports  (see  also  A ir   traffic  control; 
Noise,  aircraft ; and  individual  air- 
ports,  such  as  Washington  National 
A irpor t) ,   150-151,179,199-200 
FAA  plans,  82,  137-138,  248,  278,  296 
facilities, 122, 187, 286 
funds  for,  95 ,168  
meeting,  187-188 
NASA   role,  187, 225-226 
regulation,  189,  194,  203,  206,  300,  302 
runway  research,  215,  286,  324 
statistics,  137-138 
Alabama,  73-74,  272 
Alabama  S ta te   Employment  Service,  272 
Alaska,  10-11, 303 
Alaska,  Univ.  of,  14, 49 
Alberstadt,  Milton,  296 
Aldrin,  L/C  Edwin  E.,  Jr.  ( U S A F ) ,   109, 
183, 196 
Alexander,  George,  161  
Alexandria,  Va.,  152 
Algeria,  138 
Algranti,  Joseph  S.,  305 
All-weather  landing  system  ( AW L S ) ,   248 
Allen,  M / G   Brooke  E.  (USAF,  re t .) ,   49-50 
Allen,  H.  Julian, 70,260-261,263,298 
Allen, William M.,  1E5 
Allenby,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  Jr.,  2 
Allis-Chalmers,  294 
Allison  Div.,  General  Motors  Corp.,  247 
Allott,  Sen.  Gordon  L.,  162, 258 
Alouette  I1  (Canadian  satellite),  65,  106 
Alpha-scattering  instrument,  3, 6 
ALSEP.  See  Apollo  Lunar  Surface  Experi- 
ment  Package. 
Alter,  Dr.  Dinsmore,  221 
Altman,  Dr.  David,  5 
Aluminum  Co.  of  America,  152 
Alvarez,  Prof.  Luis  W.,  266-267 
Amazon  River,  62 
American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences, 
309 . ._ 
American  Airlines,  40 
American  Assembly,  105 
American  Assn.  fo r   th e   Advancement  of 
Science  (AAA S ) ,   325 
(AAS)  , 
American  Astronautical  Society 
79,  111,  161-163,  262-263 
Space  Flight  Award,  89  
American  Bar  Assn.,  202 
American  Federation  of  Television  and 

Radio  Artists,  251 
American  Helicopter  Society,  116 
American  Independent  Party,  271 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics  ( A I A A ) ,   48,  268,  293 
award,  15,  66,  71,  133,  145,  260-261, 
316 
meetings,  38-39,  55,  65,  105,  131,  157, 
202,  247,  259-261,  301-302,  316 
National  Capital  Section,  2 
American  Institute  of  Physics,  312 
American  National  Balloon  Race,  188 
American  Nuclear  Society,  274 
International  Meeting,  280-281 
American  Oceanic  Organization,  284 
American  Ordnance  Assn.,  39-40 
American  Physical  Society,  49,  91 
American  Science  and  Engineering,  Inc., 
30,  62,  128,  240  303 
American  Society  for   Public  Adminis- 
tration,  66 
American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engi- 
neers.  313 
American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Co. 
(A T& T ) ,   82,  154,276,  307 
American  Univ.,  1 
Ames Research  Center  ( A R C ) ,   42,  138, 181, 
2 74 
award,  70-71,  260-261,  263,  283 
Biomedical  Research  Branch,  273 
experiment,  65,  175 
meeting,  135-136 
uersonnel.  263.  298 
research,  2,  16-17,  21-22,  78,  166, 285- 
286,  286-287 
aircraft,  179,  184 
Space  Science  Div.,  316 
VTOL Facility,  135 
Ammonia,  312 
AMSA .   See  Advanced  Manned  Strategic 
Aircraft. 
Analytical  Services  Inc.,  26-27 
Anchorage,  Alaska,  303 
Anders,  L/C  William  A. 
(USAF )  
Apollo  8  flight,  318-323,  327 
preparations  for,  59,  183,  196,  222- 
223,  261-262,  278 
award,  332 
Humphrey,  Vice  President  Hubert  H., 
visit  with,  287 
press  conference,  285,  289,  304.305 
promotion,  330 
White House visit,  306 
Anderson,  Sen.  Clinton  P.,  30,  170,  235 
Anderson,  John  D.,  275-276 
Anderson,  Prof.  Kinsey  A.,  15 
Anderson,  William,  177 
Andover,  Me..  315 
Andoya,’Norway, 219-220,  223 
Andrew, 6. M.,  11 
Angaran,  Jack  G..  44 
Anrmal  experiments,  space,  46, 47,86,  95, 
105,  151,  181,  218,  283-284 
Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  85 

381 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Anniversary,  221,  298,  313-314 
Government,  12,  113 
industry,  26 
MSFC,  149 
NASA.  64-65,  135.  235,  239.253.  334-335 
satellite,  15;  22124,  30,  49-50,  63-65, 
80,  145 
U S S R . ,   4 5 4 6 ,   273,  336-337 
Antarctic  Treaty,  298 
Antarctica,  46,  72,  89,  127,  293 
Antenna,  5,  49,  133,  167,  171,  219,  238- 
239,241-242,290,  293 
spacecraft,  34-35,  153,  184,  224,  246 
Antiballistic  missile  ( A BM )   system,  28 
agreement,  127, 159 
contract,  72 
Europe  (NATO), 88 
funds for,  122,  133, 138, 171, 242 
limitation  of,  145 
U.S.S.R.,  145, 159 
APL.  See Applied  Physics Laboratory. 
Apollo  (program)  (see also  Apollo  Appli- 
cations  program) ,   41,  45,  102-103, 
108-109,  131, 145,  148, 215,  218,  237, 
281,  311 
astronaut.  See  Astronaut. 
communications,  205,  289,  312,  315 
criticism,  25,  191,  289,  308 
facilities,  34-35, 
256 
fire.  See  Accident,  spacecraft,  Apollo 
A.WM. 
_ _   ~. 
funds  for,  19,  35,  104,  110,  135-136, 
175,  185,  241-242,  311 
House  staff  study,  51  
landing  site,  35-36,  66,  265,  266,  319 
launch 
Ap0110  5  (AS-204),  13, 334 
APOUO 6  (AS-502),  77-78,334 
Ap01l0  7  (AS-205),  150-253,334-335 
Ap0110  8  (AS-503),  318-322,  335 
management,  2,  8-9,  20,  25,  157,  218- 
219,  224,  303,  315 
plans  for,  33,  35,  63,  66,  92-93,  97,  158, 
196,  223,  227,  257,  278,  279-280 
press  comment,  80-81,  81-82,  161, 222- 
223,  253,  261-262,  265,  271,  323-324, 
324-325.  327-328 
progress,  92-93,  122, 136,  141,  144,  158, 
173,  181,  186,  191,  197,  201,  209 
test.  63.  78.  158,  173, 181, 197.  201,  209 
tracking,  205,  289 
training,  2,  158, 181, 223,  227,266 
Apollo  (spacecraf t) ,   13,  77-78, 
92-93, 
251-253,  319-322 
ascent  propulsion  system,  13  
command  and  service  module,  11,  201, 
206,  208,250,  251,  318,  320 
command  module.  13.  42.  77.  122.  144. 
181,  186,  197,  251-253’ 
I
,
,
control.  77-78,  136,  251-252,  319-322 
descent  propulsion  system,  13 
emergency  detection  system,  77 
environmental  control  system,  61-62, 
134, 186, 251-252 

escape  device,  77-78,  210 
equipment,  167,  282-283,  295 
fire  prevention,  4-5, 
13-14,  61,  163, 
237,  252 
heat  shield,  77 
landing  system,  59,  144,  158 
launch.  See  Apollo  (program) .  
launch  vehicle. See Saturn. 
life support system,  61-62,  144, 251-253 
lunar  module,  1, 13,  17, 37,  63,  92,  144, 
173,  181,  191,  197,  205-206,  227 
materials,  4-5 
recovery,  70,  77,  320 
service  module,  13,  42,  63,  122,  144, 
181,  186,  197,  251-252,  318,  321 
test,  1,  17,  25,  33,  37,  42,  63,  77,  81, 
136, 143,  158, 181,  186, 201,  206,  209, 
227 
(spacecraf t) ,   13,  78, 
ApoUo  4  (AS-501) 
92.  253.  321-322 
Apollo  5 (AS-204),  17,  78,  253,  321-322, 
334-335 
launch,  13 
Apollo  6  (AS-502),  42,  63,  70,  83,  92-93, 
135,  166, 205-206,  253,  266,  321-322, 
328,  334-335 
launch,  77-78 
press  comment,  80-81,  81-82 
Apollo  7  (f l igh t) ,   259,  265-266,  278,  312, 
321-322 
launch.  250-253 
preparations  for,  136,  144, 158, 180, 181, 
197,  206,  209,  222-223,  227 
Dress  comment, 208.  222-223.  253.  261- 
262,  264-265, 
265,  266 
press  conference,  219 
results,  251-253,  334-335 
Apollo  7  (AS-205) 
(spacecraft),  204,  261 
command  and  service module,  201,  206, 
223,  250-251 
command  module,  122,  136,  144,  181, 
251 
lunar  module,  144,  181,  205 
service  module.  122.  136.  144.  181.  251 
test,  136,  144,’158,  181,  186,  197,  201, 
205,  208 
Apollo  8  (f l igh t) ,  261,  266,  315,  330,  330- 
331 
criticism,  308,  311 
Johnson,  President  Lyndon  B.,  mes- 
sage,  322 
launch, 318,320 
preparations  for,  196,  197,  201,  208, 
227,265-266,  278,311-312,313 
press  comment,  323,  323-324,  324-325, 
327-328,  329-330,  330331 
press  conference,  223,  278,  285,  289, 
304-305,  322-323 
results,  321-322,  326, 330, 334-335 
Apollo  8  (AS-503) 
(spacecraft),  315 
command  and  service  module,  196, 201, 
266,  318 
command  module,  266 
lunar  module,  196 

 

382 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

(AT S )  , 

service module.  319.  320.321 
test,  197,  201,265-266,  318 
Apollo 9  (f l igh t) ,  311 
Auollo  10   (flight).  279-280 
Apollo  AppliGtions  ( A A )   program, 
51-52,108-109 
contract,  79,  202, 2 9 6 2 9 5  
funds  for,  19,  35,  41,  101,  102-103, 
110,  135-136,  182, 240-241,  255,  256, 
311,  325,336 
House staff  study,  51  
management,  218-219,  293,  303,  315 
plans  for,  86 ,223 ,243 ,336  
Apollo  Lunar  Surface  Experiment  Pack- 
age  ( A L S E P ) ,   51-52,  68,  282-283,  316 
Apollo,  Pa.,  2 
Auollo 204  Review  Board.  P-5.  25.  245 
Ai0110  Telescope  Mount’  ( A T M )  ,‘33,  109, 
110,  128, 275 
contract,  62, 80, 85-86,  186, 202,240 
experiment,  80 
funds for,  182 ,241  
management,  218-219 
use  of,  202,243 
Applications  Technology  Satellite 
8 
Applied  Physics  Laboratory 
( A P L )  
(Johns Hopkins Univ.),  8, 86 
Apra  Heights,  Guam,  290 
APS.  See Ascent  propulsion  system. 
APT.  See  Automatic  Picture  Transmis- 
sion. 
Aquanaut,  41-42 
ARC .   See Ames  Research  Center. 
Arcas  (sounding  rocke t) ,   67,  86,  214 
Arcas I, 60, 175 
Arches of  Science Award,  217-218 
Arctic,  127, 302 
Arecibo  (Puer to   Rico)  Ionospheric  Ob- 
servatory,  37-38, 
54,  64-65, 
238, 
275-276,284 
Argentina,  46,  160-161,293 
Ariel  (program) ,   152 
Ariel  I I I   (U.K.  sa te l l i te) ,   105 
Arizona,  154-155 
Arizona, Univ. of,  133 
Planetary Laboratory,  12-i3 
Arkansas, 249 
Arlington,  Va.,  293 
Armed  Forces Management  Assn.,  299 
ABMS  (Application  of  Remote  Manipula- 
tors  in   Space) ,   186 
Armstrong,  Neil A.,  105, 116, 196, 211,  257 
Army  Ballistic  Missile  Agency  ( A BM A )  , 
“ 0  & Army  Electronics  Command,  170-171 
Army Map Service, 266 
Arnold  Engineering  Development  Center, 
135, 163 
Arons,  Daniel  M.,  127 
ARPA.  See  Advanced  Research  Projects 
Agency. 
ARTS.  See  Automated  radar  tracking  sys- 
tem. 
Ascension  Island,  5 

(AP S )  

system 

Ascent 
propulsion 
(Apollo), 13  
Asher,  Dr.  Harold,  160 
Asia,  31 
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Med- 
ical  Instrumentation,  165 
Association of  Man  i n  Space,  276 
Association  of  Universities  for   Research 
in  Astronomy, Inc.  ( A U R A ) ,   292 
Asteroid,  133, 291 
Astheimer, Robert  W.,  215 
Astin,  Dr. Allen V.,  5 
Astris  (West German  rocket),  296 
Astrobee  1500  (sounding  rocke t) ,  88 
Astronaut  (see  also  Cosmonaut ; Extra- 
vehicular  activity),  187,  218,  223, 
261-262,295,  296,  305 
accident,  105, 128, 218,  308 
achievements,  22-24,  66,  236-237,  253, 
326,  334-335 
Auollo  mission.  66.  81-82.  85.  97, 
-116-117,  136,  183,  196,  ,223:’ 
227, 
250-253,  278,  282-283,  311-312, 
313, 
318-322 
crew  assignment,  59,  92,  97,  183,  196, 
279-280 
former, 203-204,  286 
hazards,  61-62,  131,  176-177,  220,  278, 
283-284,  296,300 
honors.  11-12.  28.  103.  109.  110.  259. 
269,’286,  303,  306,  314,  330,  332  333 
physiology  61-62,  113,  168,  181,  205, 
211,218, 283-284,  286-287,291 
press  conference,  220,  276 
scientist-astronaut,  36, 51-52,  200 
space  rescue.  See  Space  rescue  treaty. 
spacesuit, 
57, 
176-177, 
236-237, 
283-284 
training,  22,  52,  59,  92,  105,  134,  14-4, 
158, 173,  181,  186, 200,  208,  211,  223, 
227,266,  309 
Astronaut  Day,  332 
Astronautics Engineer  Award,  151 
Astronomy  (see  also  individual  observa- 
tories,  planets,  and   satellites  such  as 
Om  I ,   Oao  I I ;   Pu lsar ;   Radioastron- 
omy;  S t a r ) ,   142,  151,  155,  221,  290, 
292,294,  312 
NASA  program,  44,  241,  243,  280-281, 
336 
solar,  56-57,  153,  219,  224,  266,  269, 
277,296,300-301 
stellar,  128-129,  208-209,  231,  238, 
247,272,  284,292,  304,310 
ultraviolet,  310 
x-ray, 30,  62,  104, 256-257,  303 
AT&T.  See  American  Telephone  &  Tele- 
graph Co. 
A t lan t ic   I I  
(communications  satellite). 
See  Intelsat-I1  F-3. 
Atlantic Ocean,  130-131,  193, 216 
Apollo  7  splashdown,  251 
satellite  communications  over,  5,  39, 
80,  139, 314-315,  323 
sounding  rocket,  141,  144, 172 

383 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

A t l a s   (booster),  80,  148, 159 
Atlas-Agena  D  (booster),  1,  54-55,  179, 
185 
Atlas-Burner I1  (booster),  193 
Atlas-Centaur  (booster),  3,  8,  39,  55,  118, 
184-185,281-282,304 
ATM. See Apollo  Telescope Mount. 
Atmosphere,  29,  56,  62,  63-64,  105,  168, 
177-178,182-183,217,328-329 
National  Atmospheric  Sciences  Pro- 
gram,  101-102 
Atom,  man-made, 6 
Atomic  bomb,  265 
(see 
Atomic  Energy  Commission  (AEC )  
also  NASA-AEC  Space  Nuclear  Propul- 
sion  Office;  NERVA,  Rover,  SNAP,  and 
Vela  programs),  82,  117,  181,  242, 
Annual  Report  to  Congress  . .  . for 
325 
1967, 25-26 
artificial  elements,  production  of,  6 
award.  198.217-218.221 
Brookhaven National Laboratory,  154 
budget,  19,  170 
contract,  75 
cooperation,  65,  70,  91,  131,  156,  170, 
335 
food  irradiation  test, 2 
High  Energy  Physics  Advisory  Panel, 
154 
nuclear  power,  peacefuI  use  of,  205, 
228 
nuclear  reactor,  131,  143,  156,  205,  335 
nuclear 
rocket 
engine, 
65, 
170, 
288-289,  335 
nuclear test,  108, 335 
nuclear  test  detection,  91  
personnel,  143 
Plowshare,  Project,  110 
Atoms  for Peace Award,  198 
ATS.  See  Applications  Technology  Satel- 
lite. 
A L - - I   (Applications  Technology  Satel- 
l i t e ) ,  2 6 2 7 , 1 8 5  
Ats 11.  119.  185.  323 
Ats  I I I ,   3?,  62;  14.2,  155,  185,  229,  232, 
251-252,323 
Ats I V ,  184-185,  225 ,257 ,261 ,303  
ATS-D,  1 
ATS-E,  303 
ATS-F,  120,  209 
ATS-G,  120,209 
Attitude  control  system 
247-248.282 
Au,  Benjamin,  184 
Aubiniere,  Gen. R.  (F rance ) ,  60  
Auk,  G. Mervin,  283 
AURA. See  Assn.  of  Universities  for  Re- 
search in  Astronomy,  Inc. 
Auriga  (constellation) , 155 
Aurora borealis,  240,302,  336 
Aurorae  (Esro I )   (satellite),  240.  336 
Auroras,  10-11,  17-18,  31-32,  49,  53-54, 
219-220,223 
Australia,  35,  46, 118,  120,  137,  170-171, 

( A C S ) ,   30,  121, 

( A P T ) ,  

206,224,248,253-254,257,290,329 
Australian Air  Force,  118 
Australian  National Univ.,  290,  329 
Automated  radar  tracking  system  (ART S ) ,  
248 
Automatic  Picture  Transmission 
50,97,  155 ,295 ,311 ,336  
Avco  Corp.,  150 
AVCS.  See  Advanced  Vidicon  Camera  Sys- 
tem. 
Aviation  Day  ( U S S R . ) ,  195 
Av ia t iodSpace  Writers Assn.,  315-316 
Awards 
civic, 281, 290,  300 
Government,  2,  7,  11-12,  29,  38,  39,  51, 
91,  117,  164,  194, 221,  263,  269,  283, 
298 ,306 ,314 ,332  
institutions,  110, 194,217-218 
military,  11-12,  104-105,  314 
society 
aeronautics,  15,  66,  70-71,  84,  116, 
209,259,263,  286,303,314,316 
astronautics,  15,  57,  89,  106,  133, 
145,  151,  194,  235,  260-261,  276, 
300,  316 
military,  199, 263 
science,  122,198, 309 
AWLS.  See  All-weather  landing system. 
Axford,  Dr. W.  Ian,  216-217 
B 
(Flying Fortress),  146, 296 
B-17 
I1-29  (Superfortress),  1% 
B-52  (Stratofortress) 
accident.  154 
H G l O  flights,  63,  131,  139,  224-225, 
240,261,  279,  306,335 
Babcock  Harold  D..  82 
Baehr,  Edward  F.,  104 
Baikonur  Cosmodrome,  126,  135,  158-159, 
172,  183,  264,  269 
Baja California,  318-319 
Baker,  Dr.  Robert, L.,  Jr.,  172 
BaI  Harbour,  Ha.,  109 
Balcarce,  Argentina,  293 
Ball Brothers Research  Corp.,  85-86 
Balloon,  151-200 
drag,  151-152 
Explorer  X X I V ,  182 
Explorer  X X X I X ,   182,  310 
race,  188 
record,  209-210,  240 
research,  use,  68,  209-210,  275 
Stratoscope 11,116 
tracking,  144 
Venus probe,  163 
Bally  Clayton  comet, 201 
Bally-Urban,  John,  201 
Baltimore,  Md.,  119, 179 
Banks,  Pe te r  M.,  216-217 
Barbados  Oceanographic  Meteorological 
(BOMEX )   ,  262 
Experiment 
Barger,  Allan  R.,  163,  199 
Barium,  157,  160,  161,  223,  308 
Earnes  Engineering Co.,  215 

384 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 
Scientific Research  (BMWF)  . 
Bochum  Observatory  (W.  G em a n y ) ,   54, 
211-212,222 
Boeing Co.,  5 
award.  15 
boost&,  171 
Saturn  V,  35,  39,  104,  127,  266,  275 
contract,  35,  39,  104,  127,  242-243, 
266.275.328 
employment,  229-230,  250,  272 
Lunar Orbiter,  12-13,24 
Minuteman,  312-313 
noise  suppression,  47 
Space Div.,  229-230 
space station,  242-243 
supersonic transport,  11, 45,  66-67,  150, 
202-203,  217,  220-221,  259-260,  270, 
285,332-333 
Vertol  Div.,  219,  224 
Boeing  707  ( j e t  transpor t) ,   163,248 
Boeing 727  ( j e t  transpor t) ,   15 
Boeing 747  ( j e t  transpor t) ,   104,232 
- _  
BOMEX  See  Barbados  Oceanoerauhic  Me- 
teorological  Experiment. 
Bonn, W.  Germany,  201,  279,300 
Boone.  Adm.  Walter  F.  (USN, Ret.),  283 
Boosted-Arcas  I1  (sounding  rocket),  178, 
219,  262 
Boosted-Dart  (sounding  rocket),  178 
Borman. Col.  Frank  (U SAF )  ,332  
Apollo  8 flight,  325,327 
Apollo  8 flight,  325,327 
flight,  318, 324 
flight,  318, 324 
plans  for,  183, 196, 223,  261,  278 
plans  for,  183, 196, 223,  261,  278 
award  332 
award  332 
Humphrey,  Vice  President  Hubert  H., 
visit  with,  287 
Press  conference,  285,  3@4-305 
White  House visit.  306 
Born,  Gordon S.,  281 
Boston,  Mass.,  49,  217,  231,  309 
Boulogne, France,  175 
Bourdon, Allen, 49 
Bourguiba,  President  Habib  (Tun i s i a ) ,  
118 
Bowie,  Tex.,  97 
Boyd,  Secretary  of  Transportation  Alan 
S.,  137-138,189,200 
Bozhko, Andrey  N.,  324 
Brackett,  Ernest W.,  83 
Bradbury, Dr.  Norris E.,  94 
Brand,  V a n e  D.,  134,144 
Branscomb,  Dr.  Lewis M.,  329 
Brazil,  32,39,130-131,  138, 177-178 
Breguet  HI  (STOL a ircraf t) ,   217 
Breguet 941  (French a ircraf t) ,   139 
Breit,  Prof.  Gregory,  38 
Brewer,  Frank G.,  Trophy,  71 
Brewster  Flat,  Wash.,  82-83,  103 
Brezhnev, Leonid,  I., 72 
Bridges,  Thomas  J.,  39 
Brillante,  Gabe,  227 
Bristol  Siddely Engines,  Ltd.,  198 
British  Aircraft  Corp.,  70, 217 
British  Broadcasting  Go.  (BBC) , 2 8 9  

Barreria  do Inferno Range,  Brazil,  130-131 
Barrett,  Dr.  Alan  H.,  200 
Barrios,  Joseph,  285-286 
Battelle Memorial  Institute,  312-313 
Battery,  78-79 
Baum,  Dr. Werner  A.,  131 
BBC.  See British  Broadcasting  Co. 
Beams, Jesse W.,  38 
Bear  (U.S.S.R.  turboprop  a ircraf t) ,   40 
Becker, John  V.,  300 
164,  274- 
Beggs,  James  M.,  26,  118-119, 
275,  288-289 
Beheim, Milton  A.,  104 
Belgium, 5, 60, 89,  292,  300-301 
Bell Aerosystems  Co.,  107,  127,  145,  227- 
228 
Bell, Rep. Alphonzo, 262-263 
Bell Telephone Laboratories,  26-27 
Bellingshausen  station,  Antarctica,  46 
Bells.  Tex..  120 
Beloit  College, 116-117 
Bendix  Corp.,  59, 61,202,  226 
Bendix,  Field  Engineering  Corp.,  12,  97- 
98.  146 
- - I   - - -  
Benedict,  Howard,  178 
Benn,  Minister  of  Technology  Anthony 
W.  (U.K.),  49,85 
Bennett,  Dr.  Ivan  L.,  Jr.,  126 
Bennett,  Ralph Kinney,  173-174 
Beregovoy,  Georgy  T.,  264-265,  266,  272 
Bergaust,  Erik,  161,222-223 
Berkey,  Donald C.,  15 
Bermuda, 97  
Berne,  Univ.  of,  68 
Berry,  Dr.  Charles  A.,  109,  164,  291,  313 
Beryllium,  312-313 
Betts.  L/G  Austin  W.  (USA), 29-30 
Beverly Hills,  Calif.,  303 
Biehl,  Dr.  Arthur T.,  329 
Biennial  Guidance  Test  Symposium, 
. -  
Fourth, 272 
Big Dipper  (constellation), 310 
Big  Three   Industrial  Gas  and  Equipment 
co.,  45 
Bine.  R.H..  115 
Bio&ronautics.  See  Space biology. 
Biology,  60,  126 
Biosatellite  (program),  161, 241,  313,  336 
BLosatellite  11. 46. 325-326 
Biosatellite C,’  47‘ 
Biosatellite  D,  1, 47,  95 
Biosatellite E.  47 
Biosatellite  F: 47 
Biosensor, 2% 
Birch,  Prof.  A.  Francis,  38 
Birlandeanu.  A lexandra   140.  156 
Bisplinghoff,’ Dr.  Raymond  L.,  1, 5 
Bisson,  Edmond  E.,  283 
Black  Brandt  IV  
(Canadian  sounding 
rocket),  106, 130-131 
Blagonravov, Dr. Anatoly  A.,  336-337 
Blondstein,  J.L.,  190-191 
Blue Streak  ( U X .  rocke t) ,   296 
BMWF.  See  Germany,  West  Ministry  of 

385 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

British  Interplanetary  Society,  52,  73,  185 
British  Railways,  175 
Bronk,  Dr.  Detlev W.,  76-77 
Brooke, Sen. Edward  W.,  25,  210 
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,  154 
Brooks AFB,  Tex.,  11, 150,233 
Brooks, Harvey,  115 
Brown,  Duane,  156 
Brown  Engineering  Co.,  79-80,  110 
Brown,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  Dr. 
Harold,  112, 130,206,  310 
Brown, Col. Henry W.  (W A F ) ,   2 
Browning, Dr.  Bouilin,  325-326 
Bryce National  Park,  154-155 
Bubble  chamber,  154 
Buckley,  Edmond  C.,  17,  283 
Buckley,  James,  231 
Budget,  Bureau  of, 286 
Buffalo, N.Y.,  228 
Bulgaria,  189-190,  317 
Bull,  L /   Cdr.  John  S.  (USN), 113,  I64 
Bunker  Hill AFB,  Ind.,  39,  110 
Burcham,  Dr.  Donald  P.,  152-153 
Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  325 
Bureau  of  the  Census,  325 
Burke,  Dr.  Bernard,  238-239 
Burnham,  Frank  A.,  126 
Butz, J.S.,  Jr.,  297 
Bykovsky,  Valery  F.,  46 
Byrd,  Adm.  Richard  E.  (USN) , 293 
Byrd  Station,  Antarctica,  36 
C 
C-5A 
(military  cargo  trans- 
(Galaxy) 
po r t ) ,   15,  18-19, 
81,  104,  231, 
312-313 
cost,  146,282,  288 
Johnson,  President  Lyndon  B.,  state- 
ment,  54  
press comment,  150-151, 155-156 
test  flights.  146147 .   150-151.  208,  335 
C-54  ( tGboprop  a ircraf t) ,   148 
I
.
 
C-130 
(transport a ircraf t) ,   9,  293 
C-131  (research  a ircraf t) ,  81 
6 - 4 6   (Caravan), 296 
CAAS.  See  Computer-aided  approach  spac- 
ing system. 
CAB.  See Civil Aeronautics Board. 
Cable,  underwater,  5 
Cactus test,  97 
Cahn, M.S.,  11 
Cain,  Dan L.,  199 
Caiun-Dart  (sounding  rocke t) ,   143 
Caiifornia,  8,  137, 2 0 4  219 
California  Div.  of  Highways,  286 
California  Institute  of  Technology  (Cal 
T e ch ) ,  5 , 4 3 , 7 9 ,   248-249,287  299 
award, 38 ,309  
contract,  331-332 
Guggenheim  Aeronautical  Laboratory, 
267 
pulsar signal  research,  114-115 
symposium  on space research,  2 9 3 0  
California,  Univ.  of,  1,  5,  38,  51-52,  65, 
68,128,  216-217 

Berkeley,  172,  266-267,  299.  312 
Davis Chronic Acceleration  Lab.,  218 
Imine,  115 
Los  Angeles,  17,  29-30,  88,  181,  247, 
267,  302 
San Diego, 31-32,  90 ,98 ,103  
School of  Medicine.  5 
Californium,  6,  181-182 
Callaghan,  Richard L.,  283 
Callahan,  M/G  Daniel  F.  (USAF,  Ret.),  150 
Cal  Tech.  See  California  Institute  of 
Technology. 
Cambridge, U.K.,  265 
Camera,  49-50,  145 
Apollo  6 ,  78 
Apollo  7,227,250-252 
Apollo  8 ,  312 
A t s  Ill.  29 
A t s  I V ;   185 
Essa  V I I .  192 
Essa  V I I I ,  311 
reconnaissance,  200 
Cameron,  Dr.  Roy  E.,  8 9  
Campbell,  John P.,  116 
Canada, 46,54,  65,113,  170-171,  285 
cooperation,  1, 10-11, 64-65 
satellite,  1, 64-65 
sounding  rocket,  106, 130-131 
Canadian  Aeronautics  and  Space  Insti- 
tute  (CA S I )   , 157 
Canberra,  Australia,  312 
Cannon,  Sen.  Howard  W.,  98 
Canyon  d e   Chelly  National  Monument, 
154-155 
Cape  Horn,  318-319 
(see  also  Eastern 
Cape  Kennedy,  FIa. 
Test  Range  and  Kennedy  Space  Cen- 
t e r ) ,  62,  136, 148,227,  272 
Carbon  dioxide,  302 
Cardion Electronics,  143 
Carlson,  Sen. Frank, 62 
Carlson, Dr.  Loren D.,  5 
Carnegie  Institute  of  Washington,  166 
Carnegie-Mellon  Univ.,  110, 299 
Carpenter,  Cdr.  M. 
Scott 
116-117,  143 
Carswell  AFB,  Tex.,  160,  313 
Cartier,  Raymond, 330 
Case Western  Reserve  Univ.,  1 
CASI.  See  Canadian  Aeronautics  and 
Space Institute. 
CAT.  See  Clear air turbulence. 
Cate,  Dr.  James L.,  1 
Catholic  Univ.  of  America,  325 
Cattaneo,  Dr.  Alfred  G.,  36-37 
Centaur  (booster) 
(see  also  Atlas-Cen- 
t a u r ) ,   1, 82,  144,148,261, 275,329 
Centaure  (French  sounding  rocke t) ,   31, 
108, 118 
Centaurus  (constellation),  273 
Central  Bay  (moon) ,  35 
Central Intelligence  Agency  ( C I A ) ,   208 
Cernan,  L/Cdr.  Eugene  A. 
( U S N ) ,   173, 
279 

(USN), 

386 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Cerro Tololo,  Chile,  292 
CETS.  See  Conference  Europeenne  sur   les 
TBl6communications par   Satellites. 
Chaffee, L/Cdr.  Roger  B.  ( U S N ) ,   103 
Chanute,  Octave,  134 
Chanute, Octave, Award,  66 
Charlottesville,  Va.,  151 
Cheprakov,  Dr.  Viktor  A.,  195 
Chernyi,  Dr.  Gorimir  G.,  268 
Chew, Pe ter  T.,  245 
Chicago,  Ill.,  15,  112,  188,  200,  203,  300, 
302 
Chicago  Sanitary District,  281 
Chicago, Univ.  of,  1, 90 
Chile,  46,  160, 219,  292 
Chimpanzee experiment,  283 
China,  Communist,  208 ,298 ,329  
missile  threat,  18-19,  32,  88,  138,  143 
nuclear  test, 200,  330 
weapons,  159 
Christchurch,  New  Zealand,  240 
Christmas  Island,  116 
Chrysler  Corp.,  61,  91,  150,  250,  272,  296 
Space Div.,  84,  239 
Churchill  Research  Range,  Canada  (see 
also  Ft.  Churchill,  Canada) ,   287,  295 
Airborne  Auroral  Expedition,  10-11, 
17-18 
launch 
Aerobee  150, 36,  175 
Javelin,  54,  113, 308 
Nike-Apache,  90,  129 
Nike-Cajun,  216,256,  309-310 
Nike-Tomahawk,  14,  31-32,  43-44, 
45,  49,  65,  67,  90, 94,  98,  103 
CIA.  See Central  Intelligence  Agency. 
Civil  Aeronautics  Board 
( C A B ) ,  
187-188 
Civil Service Commission, 168, 328 
Clark,  Evert,  10,  43,  93-94,  148 
Clark,  R /A   John  E. 
(USN ,   Ret.),  17,  42 
Clarke,  Arthur  C.,  72,  119, 142,  147 
Clayton,  Pa t ,  201 
Clear  air  turbulence  ( C A T ) ,   215 
Clearinghouse  for  Federal  Scientific  and 
Technical  Information,  97.  233 
Cleveland  Clinic.  302 
Clifford,  Secretary  of  Defense  Clark  M., 
98,  138,  160,  261,  263,  284,  296,  308 
appointment,  12, 45 
Cloud, 29,  50, 62, 85,  251,  311, 336 
CM .   See Command  module. 
CNAE .   See  ComissZo  Nacional  de   Ativi- 
dades Espaciais. 
Cocoa Beach, Fla.,  220 
Cohen, Prof.  Pau l  J., 38 
Cohen,  Secretary  of  Health,  Education, 
and  Welfare  W i lhur  J.,  169 
Cold  Flare,  Project,  168 
Cold  Regions  Research  and  Engineering 
Laboratory,  36 
Cole,  Dandridge  M.,  Memorial  Lecture, 
131 
Cole, Kenneth  S.,  38 

40, 

College Park,  Md.,  111, 154, 245 
Collier,  Robert  J.,  Trophy,  84,  106, 
3 1 7 3 1 8  
Collins,  L/C Michael  (U SAP ) ,   168,  183 
(CAS),  129, 
Collision-avoidance  system 
177, 238 
Colloquium  on  the   law  of  Outer  Space, 
XIth,  258 
Colorado.  137 
Colorado;  Univ.  of,  90,  129,  168,  169,  197, 
238,254,  290,329 
Joint  Institute  for   Laboratow  Astro- 
physics,  329 
Columbia  Radiation  Laboratory,  169 
Columbia Univ.,  38,  117 
Graduate School of  Business,  103 
Comet, 155 ,201  
Comisi6n  Nacional  de  Investigacibn  del 
Espacio  (CONIE)  , 178 
ComissZo  Nacional  d e   Atividades  Espa- 
ciais  ( C N A E ) ,   131, 178 
Command module  ( c M ) ,   11, 14, 183 
Apollol Saturn 
AS-202,  13 
AS-203,13 
AS-501,13 
AS-502  ( A p o l l o  6 ) ,  77 
A p o l l o   7,144,  186,  197, 201, 251 
A p o l l o  8,  265 
Command  and  service  module  ( C S M ) ,   11, 
15, 181 ,208 ,277  
An0110  6 .  77 
Ai0110  7,‘ 197, 201,  223,  250,  251 
A p o l l o  8, 206,  265,  321 
A D O ~ ~ O  
10. 281 
Commerce, ‘Dept.  of,  89,  195,  299,  325, 
336-337 
Committee  for  Environmental  Informa- 
tion,  108 
Communications, 307-308 
deep  space,  5,  6,  10,  16,  61,  118, 203, 
237,  246 
global,  76,  111, 127,237 
international,  10,  69,  73,  80, 82-83,  95, 
137, 1 9 6 1 9 7 , 2 3 0 , 2 9 3  
laser use  in,  6,  183 
military  use,  60,  79,  111,  132,  134,  137, 
139, 166, 180 ,217 ,228  
Communications  satellite 
(see  also 
dividual satellites : Zntekut-111 F-2, 
Mo ln iyu   1-9,  etc.) 
anniversary,  80 
award, 77 
contract,  9,  38,  149, 183,  184, 204,  209, 
244,259 
coooeration.  128 
Lnternational,  10,  17,  52,  82-83,  85, 
95,111,136-137,  139, 279,292 
mound  station,  39,  69,  80,  88,  103,  108, 
I 111.  137.  230.  290.  302.  303.  306-307 
launch,  1, 178,213-214,  335 
’ 
failure,  216,  273 
( IDC SP ) ,   121,  132, 
Initial  Defense 
137 ,166 ,335  

in-  

387 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

(Com- 

In te lsa t-I l l   F-2,  314-315,  335 
Les   V I ,  228 
Molniya  1-8,88 
Molniya  1-9,  155 
Mo ln iya  I-10,244 
plans  for,  1, 38, 39,88,  137,  189 
military,  9,  59,  79,  111,  121,  132,  137, 
139,166,  180, 229 
use  of,  1,  39,  60,  80,  82-83,  93,  109, 
209 
Communications  Satellite Act,  334 
Communications  Satellite  Corp. 
SatCorp),  128 
A t lan t ic   I I .  See Intelsat-I1 F-13 
contract,  38,  149,  183,  184,  204,  244, 
259 
Early  B ird .   See Intelsat  I .  
FCC  regulation,  111,204 
ground  station,  39,  69,  80,  88,  103,  108, 
111, 204,230,290,  302,  303,  307 
Intelsat  I  (Ea r l y  B i r d ) ,  27,  39,  80, 111, 
145,315 
Intelsat  11, 189,204, 323 
(In te lsa t   11-B; Pacific 
Intelsat-I1  F-2 
I ) ,  82-83,  103, 111 
Intelsat-I1  F-3 
(In te lsa t   1 1 4 :   A t lan-  
t ic   I I )  , 5,  39,  111, 315 
Intelsat-11  F-P  (In te lsa t   11-D;  Pacific 
I I ) ,  111,302 
Intelsat  111.  111.  149.  216.  225.  314-315 
Intelsat-I11 F-1,  216,'225,'273,  '315 
In te lsa t-I l l   F-2,  314-315,  323,  329,  335 
Intelsat-111 F-4, 315 
Intelsat  I11  !h, 38 
Intelsat  IV,  38,  111, 137, 244,  259 
Pac if ic  I. See In tdsa t-I1  F-2. 
Pacific 11. See Intelsat-11 F 4 .  
revenues,  69,  93,  111-112,169,  258 
satellite  program,  69,  88,  93,  111,  183, 
184,  216,  243,259,307-308 
services,  111,  145,  196-197,  230,  276, 
293,  302,307-308 
Computer-aided  approach  spacing  system 
(CAAS )   , 2 4 8  
Computer Applications,  Inc.,  123 
Computer  Sciences  Corp.,  123,  172 
Computer  S o f tm a r   Management  and  In- 
formation Center  (CO SM IC ) ,   310 
Computers,  172,  228,  238,  267-268,  276, 
293 
NASA ,   120-121,164,205,  246,  310 
contract, 3,  75,  79,  154,  239 
Concorde 
(U.K.-France) 
supersonic 
transport,  49,  115,  198,  217,  259-260, 
294 
Condon, Dr.  Edward  U.,  99,  169 
sur  les  T&- 
Conf6rence  Europdene 
communications  par  Satellites  (ems), 
52,  85,  139,  279 
on  Basic  Environmental 
Conference 
Problems of  Man  in  Space,  286-287 
Conference  on  Exploration  and  Peaceful 
Uses  of  Outer  Space,  189-191,  204,  211 
Conference  on  Pavement  Grooving  and 

108, 

130, 

Independent 

Traction  Studies,  286 
Congress,  43,  60,  75,  101,  115,  131-132, 
159,  160,  168,  175-176,  180,  225-226, 
235 ,301 ,323  
McNamara,  Secretary  of  Defense  Rob- 
ert  s., report  to,  29 
President's  budget  message,  18-20 
President's  report  to  Congress,  Un i ted  
States  Aeronautics  and  Space  Ac t iv i-  
t ies ,  1967,  20-21,  148 
R&D,  122, 156-157,258-259,299 
space  program,  24,  65,  87,  110,  139, 
147,  199, 210,  213,  218,  221-222,  233, 
242,287,  325,326, 336 
Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy, 
159,  169, 170,211 
Joint  Economic  Committee,  Subcom- 
mittee  on  Economy  in  Government. 
282 
Congress,  House 
of  Representatives, 
15-16,  93,  127,  135,  140,  197,  218, 
229 
bills  introduced,  32 ,227  
bills 
passed, 
102-103, 
135-136,  171,218,233 
Committee  on  Appropriations,  144, 146, 
166, 170,284 
Subcommittee  on  Department  of  De- 
fense,  130 
Subcommittee 
on 
Offices  and HUD,  32 
Committee  on  Government  Operations, 
1 "" 
13 I 
Subcommittee  on  Military  Opera- 
tions,  137 
Subcommittee  on  Special  Studies, 
163 
Committee  on  Interstate  and  Foreign 
Commerce, 116 
Committee  on  Science  and  Astronau- 
tics,  16,  33-35,  47,  53,  57,  58,  99, 
102-103,  172,239 
Subcommittee 
on  Advanced  Re- 
search  and  Technology,  41,  44,  47, 
50,  53,225-226,238 
Subcommittee  on  Manned  Space 
Flight,  41,58,  103, 222 
Subcommittee  on  NASA  Oversight, 
4-5,  51, 68,  99,  333 
on  Research 
and 
Subcommittee 
Technical Programs,  70 
Subcommittee  on  Science,  Research, 
and  Development,  10,  60,  135, 
194-195 
Subcommittee  on   Space  Science  and 
Applications,  41,  43, 44,  49, 333 
Committee  on Ways  and Means,  134 
Congress,  Senate,  131,  135,  152,  239-240, 
348,292 
bills  introduced.  30 
bills  passed,  129, 165-166,  167,  168, 175, 
210,227,  242 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
249 

treaty,  158, 

388 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

resolution,  127 
space rescue treaty,  161 
Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space 
Sciences, 210,246-247 
Apollo AS-204  accident,  4-5,25 
DOD, 69-70 
NASA  budget,  30,  48-49,  50,  57,  65, 
90-91,93,94,  98,  110 240-242 
NASA  contracts,  86 
NERVA  program,  57,  93, 94,  98,170 
Tenth  Anniversary,  1958-1968,  report, 
334 
Committee  on  Appropriations,  170 
Subcommittee  on  Dept.  of  Defense, 
29 
Subcommittee  on  Independent  Offices, 
140 
Committee  on  Armed  Services,  20,  29, 
71,  76,  138 
Preparedness  Investigating  Subcom- 
mittee,  155,224, 231;  2 4 g 2 4 6  
Committee on  Commerce, 26 
Subcommittee  on  Aviation,  137-138 
Committee  on  Foreign  Relations,  56, 
159,  165,  210,  215-216,  225,  230 
Committee  on  Government  Operations, 
71 
Committee  on  Interior  and  Insular  Af- 
fairs, 68 
Committee  on  Nuclear  Safeguards,  228 
Committee  on  Post  Office  and  Civil 
Service, 62 
CONI.  See  Comisi6n  Nacional  de  Inves- 
tigaci6n  del Espacio. 
Connecticut,  224 
Conrad,  Max, 207 
Conte,  Rep.  Silvio  O.,  127 
Contract  (see  also  under  agencies,  such 
as  NASA,  USAF) 
cost-plus-award-fee,  59,  122,  143,  145, 
146, 239,  245,  289,308,328 
cost-plus-fixed-fee, 79,  84,  104,  173,  239, 
264,331-332 
cost-plus-incentive-award-fee,  146 
cost-plus-incentive-fee,  9,  39,  123,  184, 
194 ,202 ,298  
fixed price,  59, 86,  120, 130, 209 
fixed-price-incentive-fee, 59 
incentive-fee.  144 
study, 62,  187, 275 
(Galileo ) 
Convair  990 
10-11  17.72.  184 
Cook, Don,'298 
Cook, Gen.  Orval  (USAF, Re t . ) ,   123 
Cook, William  H.,  15 
Cooksey,  Robert,  329 
Coon,  Grant W.,  2 
Cooper,  L /C   L.  Gordon  (WA F ) ,  279,  280, 
306 
Cooper,  Sen.  John  S., 242 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  163 
Coralie  (French rocke t ) ,  296 
Corddry,  Charles  W.,  40,  156 
Corliss,  William  R.,  82 

( je t   a i rc ra f t ) ,  

Cornell  Aeronautical  Laboratory,  Inc.,  31, 
81 ,228 ,279  
Cornell,  Univ.,  31,  49,-50,  54,  171,  172, 
228.  238.284.292.  316.  326 
Cente;  for' Radiophysics ' and  Space  Re- 
search, 37-38 
Graduate  School  of  Aerospace  Engi- 
neering,  146 
Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  227 
Cortright,  Edgar  M.,  65,  101,  122 
COSMIC.  See  Computer  Softwear  Manage- 
ment  and Information Center. 
Cosmic 
ray, 
93. 
208-209 
284-2285. 
300-301 
Cosmonaut,  28,  83,  116--117,190,  212,  230, 
253,  254 
accident, 264 
commemorative stamp,  85 
death,  70,  72,  264 
interview,  46 
medal,  gold,  309 
Soyuz  3  flight,  264-265,  266,  272,  277 
space flight, effects of,  211 
space  rescue  treaty,  299 
V o s t o k  I flight, 17, 309 
woman,  148 
Cosmodrome, 
135, 
132, 
130, 
126, 
158-159,  165,  172,  183,  264-265,  269, 
279,  289,  295 
Comos  C X   (U.S.S.R.  satellite),  287 
Cosmos C L X X X I V ,  2 
co sm o s  C X C I X ,  9 
Cosmos  C C ,  11 
Cosmos C C I ,  32 
Cnsmos CC I I ,  42 
Cosmos  CC I I I ,  42 
Cosmos C C I V ,  57 
Cosmos C C V ,   57 
Cosmos C C V I ,  61  
Cosmos CCV I I ,   66 
Cosmo s C C V I I I ,  63,  180 
Cosmos C C I X .  67 
Cosmos C C X ,  76  
Cmmos C C X I ,  82 
_- 
Cosmos  C C X I I ,  84, b . ,  
R 7   R8-89, 119,  178 
Cosmos  CCX I I I .   84.  87.  88-89.  119.  178 
,
.
 
Cosmos  CCX IV , ' 8 7  
,
,
 
Cosmos C C X V ,  87,  128, 130 
Cosmos C C X V I ,  88 
Cosmo s CCXV I I ,  92 
Cosmos  C C X V I I I ,  93,  178,180 
Cosmos C C X I X ,  95 
Cosmos C C X X ,  106 
Cosmos C C X X I ,  120 
Cosmos C C X X I I ,  123 
C o s m o s  C C X X I I I ,  126 
Cosmos  C C X X I V ,  126 
Cosmos C C X X V ,  130 
Cosmos C C X X V I ,  132 
Cosmos C C X X V l l ,  135 
Cosmos C C X X V I I I ,   139 
Cosmos C C X X I X ,  143 
Cosmos C C X X X ,   154 
Cosmos  C C X X X I ,  158,  180 

389 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Cosmos C C X X X I I ,  163-164 
Cosmos C C X X X I I I ,  165 
co smo s  C C X X X I V ,  172,180 
Cosmos C C X X X V ,  183 
Cosmos  C C X X X V I ,   201 
Cosmos  C C X X X V I I ,  201 
Cosmos C C X X X V I I I ,  201 
Cosmos  C C X X X I X ,  206 
Cosmos  C C X L   211 
co smo s   CCXLI ,  213 
Cosmos C C X L I I ,  219 
cosmos  C C X L I I I ,  223 
co smo s  C C X L I V ,  239 
co smo s   C C X L V ,  240 
Cqsmos C C X L V I ,  245 
Cosmos C C X L V I I ,   24% 
Cosmos  C C X L V I I I ,  259 
Cosmos C C X L I X ,  259 
co smo s   CCL ,  267 
Cosmos  C C L I ,  267 
Cosmos C C L I I ,  269 
cosmos   CCL I I I ,  279 
c o s m s  C C L I V ,  289 
Ccsmos CCLV ,  295 
Cosmos  C C L V I ,  296 
Cmmo s   C C L V I I ,  298 
Cosmos  C C L V I I I ,  308 
Cosmos C C L I X ,  310 
Cosmos  C C L X ,  313 
co smo s   C C L X I >  317 
Cosmos  C C L X I I ,  324 
Cotton, Col.  Joseph F.  (USAF )   ,67 ,   145 
Council  for  the  Advancement  of  Science 
w r i t ing ,   284 
Couve  de  Murville,  Prime  Minister  Maur- 
ice  (F rance ) ,  294 
Cowen, Robert  C.,  229-230 
CP-1919  (pu lsar) ,   114-115 
Crab Nebula, 52,62,  272,  284,  292 
Crane,  Robert M.,  283 
Cromley,  Ray,  257 
Crooker, John  H., 40 
Cryogenics,  101,122 
CSM.  See  Command  and  service  module. 
Cuba, 42,  1 8 9 , 2 8 /  
Cudaback, Dr.  David,  119,  128 
Cunningham, R.  Walter, 276 
ApoUo 7 flight,  250,252,276 
preparations  for,  97,  158,  173,  220, 
227 
award, 269 
press  conference, 220,  276 
White House visit,  306 
Curtin,  M /G   Robert  H.  (USA ,   Ret.),  102, 
120 
Curtis,  Sen. Carl T.,  129 
Curtiss, Prof.  W.  David,  31 
Cushman, Ralph E.,  102 
Cygnus  (constellation), 52,  200 
Czechoslovak  Academy  of  Sciences,  269 
Astronomical Institute,  254 
Czechoslovakia, 
189-190, 
161, 
215-216,223,247,309,317 

205, 

D 
Dacca,  East  Pakistan,  18 
Daddario,  Rep.  Emilio  Q.,  10,  127, 
194-195 
Dallas, Tex.,  112, 325 
Dana,  William  H., 53,  78,  132,  198,  262, 
317 
Darcey, Robert  J., 283 
Darmstadt, W.  Germany,  300-301 
Dartmouth  College,  117 
Amos  Tuck  School  of  Business  Admin- 
istration,  318 
Davies, Merton  E.,  2 4 8 4 4 9  
Davis, Frank  W.,  155 
DC -8   ( j e t  a ir l iner) ,  293 
Deb&  Foreign Minister  Michel  (F r an c e ) ,  
250 
Debus, Dr. Ku r t   H.,  89,  256 
( D S N ) ,   5,  6,  IO, 
Deep  Space  Network 
118, 203,209 
Deep  Submergence Search Vehicle,  227 
Defense Communications Agency,  166 
(see  also U S .  Air 
Defense, Dept.  of  (DOD) 
Force,  U S .   Army,  and  U S .   Navy), 
40, 42,  156,  301 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency, 
40,  42,  145 
aircraft,  71,  75,  146,  155, 160,  245-246, 
282,284,  288,  333 
annual report  to Congress,  29 
award, 7 , 5 1  
budget,  18-20,  143,  146,  166,  233,  242, 
243,261.  336 
communications satellite  system,  9,  137, 
166,  180-181 
contract,  9,  61,  278-279,  298,  334 

NASA ,   20,  33 
31 0 
criticism, 83-84,  333 
Defense  Science Board,  7,  76-77,  329 
facilities,  231 
missile  program, 61,  133,  137,  143,  155, 
193, 242 
nuclear submarine,  169, 211,  261 
personnel,  12,  40, 51,  331 
R&D,  69-70, 
101-102, 
136-137,  186, 
239-240,290,302 
reentry  vehicle program, 8 
space program, 32,  69-70,126,  137,  149, 
180-181,  190,  208,  255,  335 
underground  atomic  tests  study,  303- 
304 
Defense Production Act,  83  
Defense  Projects  Support  Office  (DPSO) . 
84  
Defense  Satellite  Communications System 
(DSCS) , 137 
De  Gaulle,  President  Charles  (F r an c e ) ,  
233 
Deimos  (Mars moon), 281 
DeLong, Dr.  Ea r l  H., 
390 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

(DPS) 

system 

Delta  (booster) 
(see  also  Thor-Delta), 
59,273,300 
Demblinp,  Dr.  Pau l   G.,  12,  127,  258,  283 
DenmarK  5.154.  24 
LO.  292 
Denver,  dolo.,  112, 161 
Des Moines, Iowa,  207 
Descent 
propulsion 
(Apollo) ,13  
Detroit, Mich.,  199 
DFC.  See Distinguished Flying Cross. 
Diamonds,  industrial,  158 
Diebold, John,  Lecture, 232 
Diehl, William, 49 
Dietlein,  Dr.  Lawrence F., 291 
Di Luzio,  Frank  C.,  123 
Disarmament, 11, 27,  32,  59,  63,  149,  160, 
164 
Distinguished  Civilian  Service  Medal 
(DOD)  , 7  
Distinguished  Flying  Cross  (DFC )   , 11-12 
Distiueuished Service Medal.  314 
Distiniuished  Service  M<dA 
(NA SA ) ,  
263,  269,283,332 
Distinguished Service Medal  (U SN )   , 2 9  
Ditoro, Dr.  Michael J.,  143 
Dmitriyev,  Prof. A.,  249 
DO  31  (VTOL transport  a ircraf t) ,   105 
Dobbins AFB,  Ga.,  1%, 230-231 
Docking, 236 
automatic, 24,  84, 85, 87, 88,  93,  119 
manned,  24 ,84 ,250 ,280  
DOD.  See Defense, Dept.  of. 
Doeker.  Robert. 158 
Dominion  Observatory  (Canada ) ,  134 
Donely, Philip, 283 
Dong Hoi,  North Vietnam, 69 
Donran, Charles J.,  51, 65,  122 
Dorman,  Bernhardt L.,  172 
Dornier-Werke,  GmbH, 105, 151 
DOT.  See  Transportation,  Dept.  of. 
Doty,  Robert  C.,  88 
Douglas  Aircraft  Co.,  Inc.  See  McDon- 
ne11 Douglas Corp. 
Douglas  United  Nuclear,  Inc.,  87-88,  122 
Dover,  Del.,  176-177 
Dover,  U.K.,  175 
Downey,  Calif.,  122, 167 
DPS. See Descent propulsion system. 
DPSO.  See Defense  Projects  Support  Office. 
Draco  (constellation),  310 
Drake, Dr.  Frank  D.,  54 ,238 ,284  
Dryden,  Dr.  Hugh L.,  175 
Dryden,  Hugh L.,  Memorial Fund,  175 
Dryden  Research Lecture Award,  15 
DSCS.  See  Defense  Satellite  Communica- 
tions System. 
DSN.  See Deep  Space Network. 
Dubinin, Prof.  Nikolay  P.,  200 
DuBridge,  Dr.  Lee  A.,  267,  299,  301,  310, 
314 
Dudley  Observatory  (Albany,  N.Y.)  , 129, 
185,197,300,  310 
Duff, Brian M..  117 
DuBy,  Robert T., 30-31 

Duke,  Capt.  Charles  M.,  Jr.  (U SAF ) ,   59, 
280 
Ouke Univ.,  255,299 
Medical Center, 40, 115 
Dulles International  Airport,  179,224 
Dunbar,  William  R.,  104 
Duncan,  Robert  C.,  283 
Dunn,  M/G Carroll  H.  ( U S A ) ,   32 
Dunn, Dr.  Richard,  296 
Dupree, Dr.  A.  Hunter,  1 
Dvorscak, Bernie J.,  230-231 
E 
Eaker,  L/G  Ira   C.  (WAF ,   Ret.),  125 
Early  Bird 
(communications  satellite). 
See Intelsat  I. 
Earth. 
gravitational field, 318,335 
horizon,  132 
light  sources,  177 
magnetic field, 72,  308 
magnetic tail,  138 
mapping, 325 
photographs  of,  251,  318,  323,  324,  329 
resources measurement, 33-34,  174 
shape, 1 6 1 1 , 3 3 1  
size,  10-11 
Earth  Resources  Observation  Satellite 
(EROS) program, 7-8,  19 ,39 ,62 ,333  
Ea r th   Resources  Satellite  System  (Con- 
gressional repor t) ,   333 
Earth  Resources  Snrvey  Program,  39,  51, 
85,  173 ,215 ,279  
Earthquake,  191 
Easter Island,  112 
Eastern  Airlines,  72,  139,  217 
Eastern  Test  Range 
(see  also 
(ETR )  
Cape  Kennedy  and  Kennedy  Space 
Center) 
contract, 83,  123 
launch, 1, 9,  59,  105, 244,  278 
Apollo/Saturn,  AS-204,  13 
Atlas-Agena D, 5 6 5 5 , 1 7 9  
Atlas-Centaur, 184, 304 
AC-15,3 
failure, 216,  225 
Long-Tank Delta, 216 
Minuteman III, 193 
Poseidon, 193 
satellite,  3,  54-55,  111, 132,  179,  184, 
216,228,273,300,  314-315 
Thrust-Augmented  Improved  Thor- 
Delta, 273 
Thrust-Augmented  LongTank   Delta, 
314-315 
Thrust-Augmented  Thor-Delta,  244, 
300 
Titan  111-C,  132,228 
Eastman Kodak Co.,  292 
EC-135N 
( Apollo  Range  Instrumenta- 
tion  a ircraf t) ,   148 
Echo  program, 152 
Echo  I  (communications  satellite),  60, 
120 
Eclipse,  lunar, 250 

391 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Ecology,  126,  135 
Economic  Club of  Detroit, 37 
Ecuador, 37 
Eddystone, Pa., 219 
Editorial  comment.  See  Press  comment. 
EDP Technology,  Inc.,  228 ,279  
EDS. See Emergency  detection system. 
Education,  235,  249-250,  271,  314,  323, 
331,334 
Edwards  AFB,  Calif.  (see  also  Air  Force 
Flight  Test Center) 
flight 
accident, 2 
F - l l lA ,   2 
H L l O   (lifting  body  vehicle),  63, 
131, 139,224-225.240 
X-15,53,  78,164,  198,211,  262 
XB-70,  8,  38,  67,  269,  313 
XB-70A,  145 ,167 ,208 ,258 ,298  
EG&C,  InC.,  123 
Eggers,  Dr.  Alfred  J., Jr.,  55  
Eglin AFB,  Fla.,  4 
Ehricke, Dr.  Kraft  A.,  163 
Eielson AFB,  Alaska,  168 
Eisele,  Maj.  Donn  F.  (U SAF )  
Apo l lo   7 flight, 250, 251 
preparations  for,  97,  158,  173,  220, 
227 
Apollo  10 flight, 279-280 
award, 269 
press  conference, 220 
White House visit,  306 
Eisenhower,  President  Dwight  D.,  325, 
328 
Ekers,  Dr.  Ronald  D.,  114 
Eklund, Sigvard, 198 
El  Centro, Calif., 8 
ELDO.  See  European  Launcher  Develop 
ment Organization. 
ELDO  F-7 
(ELDO  sa te l l i te) ,   296 
Electric power, 275 
Electromagnetic  pulse  (emp) , 2 2 8  
Electro-Mechanical Research Co.,  111 
Electron, 31,  60,  62-63,  67,  173,  175,  198, 
256,329 
Electronics  Research  Center 
( ERC )  
( N A S A ) ,   39,123,  145,164,179,  283 
Electro-Optical Systems,  Inc.,  268 
Ellington  AFB,  Tex.,  105,  116, 257 
Elms, James C.,  165 
Emergency 
system 
detection 
(Apollo),  77 
Emme,  Dr.  Eugene M.,  1 
Emmons,  Dr.  Howard  W.,  5 
Employment  o f   Scientists  and  Engineers 
in   the  United  States,  1950-1966 
(N SF   repor t) ,   234 
Engine  (see  also  individual  engines, such 
a s  F-1,  H-1) 
aircraft, 313 
aircraft, 313 
gas turbine,  316 
gas turbine,  316 
jet,  130,  197,  198, 226,  232 
jet,  130,  197,  198, 226,  232 
Quiet  Research  Engine  Program,  47, 
Quiet  Research  Engine  Program,  47, 
197,2” 
197,2” 

(EDS )  

supersonic transport,  146,233,  332 
tubofan,  145,158 
turboprop,  148 ,217  
electric, 25-26,  303 
flying platform,  107 
hypersonic, 47,  299 
lunar module,  127,227-228 
nuclear  (see  also  NERYA ) ,   44,  53,  57, 
93,94,156,241-242,302 
reusable, 2 
rocket,  2,  62-63,  68-69,  261,  275,  279, 
308.317 
hybrid, 3 - 4 , 9  
test,  13,  17,  36,  42,  77-78,  92,  143, 
184 
space station,  141-142 
vernier, 6 
Engineers, 234,  289 
Engle,  Capt.  Joseph  H.  ( U S A F ) ,   134,  144, 
280 
English  Channel, 175 
ENTEL,  293 
Enthoven, Dr.  Alain C.,  259 
Environment, 135 
Environmental  Science  Services  Adminis- 
tration  (ESSA )  
budget,  19  
cooperation 66,  262,  335 
Man’s  Geoaranhvsical  Environment : Its 
S tudy   f r o m  S i a c e ,   73 
personnel,  131 
research.  101-102.  110.  266.  325 
satellite,‘ 1 ,49 ,  111, 149; 232,’ 311 
launch,  193, 335 
weather modification.  194-195 
ERC.  See  Electronics’  Research  Center 
( N A S A ) .  
EROS.  See  Earth  Resources Operation  Sat- 
ellite. 
Ers  XXI   (OV V-d) 
(Environmental  Re- 
search Satellite),  228,  335 
Ers  X X V I I   (OV V - 2 ) .   228,335 
Escape system,  78 ,210  
‘ 
ESO.  See  European  Southern  Observatory. 
EERO.  See  European  Space  Research  Or- 
ganization. 
Esro  I 
(ESRO  sa te l l i te) .   See  Aurorae 
( E S T 0  I) .  
(International  Radiation  Inves- 
ESRO  11-A 
tigation  Satellite),  113 
Esro  11-B.  See  Iris I  (E s ro  11-B) . 
ESSA.  See  Environmental  Science  Services 
Administration. 
Essa  I  (meteorological satellite),  193 
Essa  I t ,  50,  193 
Essa  I l l .  193 
Essa I V ;  193,232 
Essa  V,  193 
Essa  VI,  193.295 
Essa  V i 1   (TOS-E) 
,193 ,   311,335 
Essa V I I I   (TOS-F), 
311,  335 
Etam, W. Va.,  230,315,329 
Ethiopia,  137,. 327 
ETR.  See Eastern Test Range. 

392 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Etzel, Prof.  James E.,  281 
Community . 
EURATOM.  See  European  Atomic  Energy 
Euromart, 233 
Europe  (see  also  European  Launcher  De- 
velopment  Organization;  European 
Space Research Organization),  160 
communications,  38,  73,  139,  230,  312, 
323 
cooperation, 136-137,  139 
space funding,  136 
tracking  station,  137 
European  Atomic  Energy  Community 
(EURATOM ) ,   11 ,92  
European  Conference  on  Satellite  Com- 
muyications. 
See  Conference  Eu- 
ropeene  sur 
les  Tdldcommunications 
par  Satellites. 
European  Launcher  Development  Organi- 
zation  (ELDO )  
launch 
ELDO F-7,2% 
merger proposal,  136-137 
policy, 279 
president elected, 60 
U.K.  membership,  85 ,95 ,233  
European  Nuclear  Research  Center,  139 
European  Southern  Observatory  (E SO )   , 
292 
European  Space  Conference,  Third,  279 
European  Space  Authority  (proposed), 
279 
European  Space  Research  Organization 
(ESRO ) , 6 0  
launch 
satellite,  1 
Aurorae  (E s ro  I ) ,  241) 
Heos-A,  301,  336 
Ir is   I (E s ro  11 -B ) ,   113, 336 
sounding rocket, 108, 118 
membership, 5,  85 
merger proposed,  136 
satellite,  95,  149,  168-169,  214,  240, 
336 
Eurospace  Conference,  Third  U.S.-Euro- 
pean,  1 3 6 1 3 7  
EUV:  extreme ultraviolet. 
EVA.  See Extravehicular activity. 
Evans, Albert  J.,  47 
Evanston,  Ill.,  284 
Everett, Wash.,  232 
Evvard,  John  C.,  283 
Exceptional 
Scientific 
Medal  ( N A S A ) ,   263,283 
Exceptional  Service  Medal  ( N A S A ) ,   194, 
269,  283 
Exhibit,  190 
Exosphere, 82 
Explorer  (program),  44 
Exp lorer  I  (sa te l l i te) ,  22,2!9-30, 
Explorer  X V l ,  177 
Explorer  X X I I ,  10, 183 
Explorer  X X I I I ,   177 
Enplorer  X X I V ,  182 
Exp lorer  X X V   ( In jun  I V ) ,  182 

Achievement 

37 

Explorer X X V l l ,  183 
Explorer X X V I I I ,   153-154 
Explorer X X I X ,  8,  183 
Explorer  X X X  
(IQSY  Solar  Explorer), 
56-57 
Enplorer  X X X V   (IMP-E)  , 1 6 7  
Explorer  X X X V I  
(Geos  11;  GEOS-B),  1, 
7,  8,  16, 42-43,  71,  183, 259,  335 
Explorer  X X X V l l   (Solar  Explorer  B ) ,  
5 6 5 7 , 3 3 5  
Explorer  X X X V l l l  
(Radio  Astronomy 
Explorer  R A E - A ) ,   153,  167,  210,  224, 
246.  33s 
Ezp lorer  - X X X I X   (Air  Density  Explorer 
C ) ,  182, 310,  335 
Explorer  X L   ( In jun  V ) ,  182,310,  335 
Extraterrestrial life,  54,  142, 301, 302 
( E V A ) ,   24,  168, 
Extravehicular  activity 
177, 190, 236,  316-317 
F 
F-1  (rocket engine),  30,  257,  275 
F - 4   (Phantom)  (fighter  a ircraf t) ,   3,  14, 
217 
F-4J,  76 
F-5 
(supersonic  fighter  a ircraf t) ,   281 
(interceptor  a ircraf t) ,   112,  171-172 
F-12 
interceptor  a ircraf t) ,   76, 
F-14A 
(USN  
98-99,  167, 171,230-231,314 
F-15A  (a ircraf t) .   See ZF-15A. 
F-104 
(Starfighter)  (a ircraf t) ,   165 
F-106  (interceptor  a ircraf t) ,   171-172 
F-106B,  233 
F-l06X,  171-172 
F-111 
(supersonic  fighter),  130,  206, 
231,245-246,  259,270 
accident, 2,  195 
cost,  130, 146 
F - I l lA ,   117, 160 ,201 ,316 ,333  
accident, 2,  72,  80, 84, 87,  97,  102,  108, 
109, 119,  134, 160,195,224,258 
defense of,  75,333 
test  155, 207,  258 
Vietnam  War  use,  69,  71,  72,  84,  104, 
109,155 
F - I l lB ,   76,130,167 
accident, 2 
fund s  for, 14,19, 71,98,  159 
weight,  160 
F - l l lC ,   206,  248 
FAA .   See  Federal  Aviation  Administra- 
tion. 
FAI.  See  FedBration  Aironautique  Inter- 
nationale. 
Fairbank.  Dr.  William M..  91 
Fairbanks,  Alaska, 35,143,  192 
Fairchild-Hiller  Corp.,  120,  209,  289,  334 
Fairhall.  Defence  Minister  Allen  (Aus- 
t r a l i a ) ,  206 
Fangataufa Atoll, 200 
FB-111 
(supersonic  bomber),  201,  259, 
284,286 
FB - l l lA ,   160 
FCC..  SFe  Federal  Communications  Com- 
mission. 

393 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

FDA.  See  Food  and   Drug  Administration. 
FDVU.  See  Flight  Design  Verification 
Tlnit 
F e i i i i - A i d  Airport  Program  (FAAP )  , 95 
Federal  A ir   Quality  Advisory  Board,  169 
Federal Aviation  Act  of  1958, 130 
Federal  Aviation  Administration 
( F A A ) ,  
26 ,96 ,108 ,   150, 175, 207 
air  traffic  control,  1-2,  82,  137-138, 
168,  187,  196,  206,  238,  248,  300,  302 
airports,  95,  137-138,  231,  278,  296, 
302,  324 
appropriations,  19, 168 
contract, 82, 231 
cooperation,  168, 238 
forecast,  71,  137-138 
landing system,  248 
noise,  aircraft,  116,  130,  135 
regulations,  1-2,  116,  130,  194,  206, 
300 
transport,  supersonic  (see  also  Super- 
sonic  transpor t) ,   19, 66-67,  135,  150, 
158 
design  and  development,  45,  202-203, 
260 
Federa l   Communications  Commission 
( F C C ) ,   111, 154, 204,276,  308 
Federal Contract  Research  Center,  122 
Federal Council  for   Science  and  Technol- 
ogy,  271 
Interdepartmental  Committee  for   At- 
mospheric  Sciences,  101-102 
Federal  Department  of  Science 
Dosed).  325 
Fld6ration  A6ronautique 
( F A I ) ,   111 ,309  
Felberg,  Fred  H.,  283 
Fels  Planetarium,  27 
( U S A F ) ,   5,  141, 
Ferguson,  Gen.  James 
237,272 
Fermi,  Enrico,  Award,  221,  298 
Fermi,  Enrico,  Institute, 90 
Findlay,  Dr.  John W.,  30 
Finger,  Harold  B.,  35,48,  133 
Fink,  Daniel J., 329 
Finney,  John W.,  92 
The  First F o u r  Stages,  17  
Fitzgerald,  A.  E.,  282 
Fjeldbo,  Gunnar,  276 
Flammability  tests,  13-1% 57,  61,  265 
Flax,  Dr.  Alexander  H.,  283 
Flemming,  Ar thur   S., Award,  39 
Fletcher,  Dr.  Robert D.,  316 
Flickinger,  B / G   Don,  Jr.  ( U S A F ) ,   28 
(FDVU )  , 
Flight  design  verification  unit 
128 
Flight  Research  Center 
(FRC )  
12, 42 ,48 ,   68 ,186 ,313  
Flight  Safety Foundation,  313 
Flight  Test,  Simulation  and   Support 
Conference,  65,  66 
Flock,  Dr. Warren  L.,  129 
Flood  control,  62 
Florida,  109 
, 

Internationale 

( N A S A ) ,  

(pro- 

156, 

200, 

153, 

( F D A ) ,  

FOBS.  See  Fractional  orbital  bombard- 
ment  system. 
Food  and  Drug  Administration 
2 
~ Food  irradiation,  2 
Fordham  Univ.,  287 
Ft.  Churchill,  Canada 
also 
(see 
Churchill  Research  Range,  Canada) ,  
29,  72,  329 
For t  Myers, Fla.,  146 
For t  Worth,  Tex.,  206 
Foster, Dr.  John  S.,  Jr., 69-70,  155 
Foster,  William  C.,  295 
Founders Medal  ( N A E )  , 4 3  
Fowler,  Prof.  William  A.,  115 
Foxbat  (U.S.S.R. 
fighter  a ircraf t) ,   130 
Fractional  orbital  bombardment  system 
( F O B S ) ,   55-56,  93,  94,  102,  178,  239, 
355  
France,  46 ,60  
aircraft,  217 
balloon,  166 
Concorde 
supersonic 
(FrancaU .K .  
transpor t) ,   115, 198, 260,  294 
cooperation,  5,  31, 55,  113, 134, 214,233, 
292,  300-301 
U.S.S.R.,  10 
hydrogen 
bomb, 
207-208 
missile program,  153, 200 
nuclear  attack,  138 
nuclear  test,  156,  180, 294 
sounding  rocket,  31,  296 
Frantz,  Dr.  Joe B.,  1 
FKC. See Flight  Research  Center. 
Freibaum,  Jerome,  128 
French Guiana,  172 
Frenkel.  Dr.  Lothar.  39 
Freon TF,  157 
Friction  E f e c t s   of  R u n w q   Grooves ,  
Runway   18-36,  Washington  National 
Airport,  324 
Friel, Dr.  Patrick  J.,  43 
Friendship  Airport,  179,224 
Fruehaf, Capt.  David E.  ( W A F ) ,   8 
Frutkin, Arnold  W.,  30,239,  283 
Fucino,  Italy,  80 
Fuel,  94,  303 
hydrogen,  1 
leak,  92 
liquid,  3 - 4 , 9 ,   274 
liquid hydrogen,  79,  101, 266 
nitrogen,  45 
oxygen-hydrogen, 2 
plutonium  238,  116 
safety,  95 
solid,  3 - 4 , 4 2 ,  68,  193,  274 
Fuel cell,  246,251-252,  294-295 
Fuhrmeister,  Pau l  F.,  283 
Fullbright,  Crooker,  Freeman  &  Bates, 
an 
&., Fulton,  Fitzhugh  L.,  Jr.,  8,  38,  50,  67, 
131,  167, 208,  269,298 
FX  ( a i r c r a f t ) .  See ZF-15A. 

394 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

(U.S.S.R.),  17, 

(GAO )   , 86, 

G 
Gagarin,  Col.  Yuri  A. 
70,72,  190, 309 
Galapagos  Islands,  189 
Gamma  ( s t a r ) ,  67 
Gamma  ray,  5 2 , 5 6 5 5 ,   181 ,281  
Gamow,  Dr.  George,  197 
Ganczak,  Edward  G.,  107 
Gandhi,  Prime  Minister,  Mrs. 
Indira, 
30-31 
GAO .   See General  Accounting  Office. 
Garbuzov,  Finance  MiGster  Vasily 
(U.S.S.R.),  309 
Gardner, Lester  D.,  Lecture,  104 
Gas  turbine, 316 
GCA  Corp.,  45,  46-47,  168 
Geiss, Dr.  Johannes,  68 
Geller,  Justice Abraham  N.,  279 
Gemini 
(program) ,   66,  80,  103,  161 
211,  215,  221-222,  236-237,  269,  281 
Gemini  (spacecraft),  148 
Gemini X  (f l igh t) ,   168 
Gemini XI   (f l igh t) ,   168 
General  Accounting  O 5 c e  
226 
General Aircraft  Corp.,  224 
General  aviation.  47 
a ir   traffic, 1871188,  189,  194, 196 
aircraft,  71,  137 
airports,  278 
collision  avoidance  system,  179 
flying hours,  71,  137 
General Dynamics  Corp. 
contract,  167,  187, 278,  333 
Convair Div.,  8,  131, 207 
Electric  Boat  Div.,  302-303 
F - l l lA ,   117,  155 ,224 ,333  
F - l l lB ,   159, 167 
F-IllC,  206 
VFX  aircraft,  187 
General  Electric Co.,  215,  329 
Aircraft  Engine  Group,  296 
Apollo  Systems Div.,  79 
ARMS  (Application  of  Remote  Manip- 
ulators  in  Space) ,   186 
award,  15 
contract,  40, 54,  12n,  149,  172,  173, 
186, 201,  202-203,  209,  262,  278 
laboratory,  undersea,  101 
Mississippi  Test  Facility,  173 
“Quiet  je t   engine,”  197 
Re-Entry  Systems Div.,  97 
reentry vehicle,  40 
spacecraft,  120.172.  181. 209 
,
,
.
,
 
supersonic 
transport 
engine, 
202-203 
Technical  Military  Planning  Opera- 
tion  ( T EM P O ) .   26 
turbofan engine,’54z 201 ,276 ,282  
XB-70  engine,  149 
General  Motors  Corp.,  Allison  Div.,  248 
General  Precision  Systems,  Inc.,  22 
Geneva  Disarmament  Conference,  59, 
62,  132 

(WAF ) ,   63, 

Geneva,  Switzerland,  32,  59,  127,  149, 
164 
Gentry,  Maj.  Jerauld  R. 
139.226225.  306 
Geocorona, 55 
’ 
Geodetic  satellite,  1,  7-8,  16,  42-43, 
71,  183 ,335  
Geoloev. 51-52 
Geophisics Corp.  of  America,  198 
Georgia,  Univ. of,  310 
Geos  I1  (GEOS -B ;   Explorer  X X X V I )  
(geodetic 
sa te l l i te) ,   1,  7-8, 
16, 
42-43,  71,183,259,  335 
Germany,  East, 317 
Germany, West,  46 
aircraft,  105, 151, 165 
Bochum  Observatory,  54,  211-212, 
222 
cooperation,  5,  137,  160,  165,  201, 
292,298,  300-301 
Ministry 
of 
Scientific  Research 
(BMW F ) ,   75-76,  160-161, 308 
nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty,  11 
space  program,  137,  151,  160-161, 
201,300 
GFT:  ground  elapsed  time. 
GHOST.  See  Global  Horizontal  Sounding 
Technique. 
Gilruth,  Dr.  Robert  R.,  14,  28,  75,  142 
Giroux,  Dennis,  44  
Glassboro  (N.J.)  S ta te  College,  127 
Glenn,  Col.  John   H.,  Jr.  (USMC, Re t .) ,  
203-204,  215 
Global  Atmospherics  Research  Program 
( G A R P ) ,   101-102 
Global  Horizontal  Sounding  Technique 
( G H O S T ) ,   240 
Globe  Exploration  Corp.,  29 
Goddard,  Dr.  Robert  H.,  28,  57, 316 
Goddard, Robert  H.,  Award,  15 ,316  
Goddard,  Dr.  Robert  H.,  Lecture,  55-56 
Goddard,  Dr.  Robert  H.,  Memorial  Tro- 
phy,  57 
Goddard Memorial Dinner,  57-58 
Gcddard  Memorial  Symposium,  58-59. 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center 
(G S FC ) ,  
216 ,225 ,294  
Apo l lo   6 ,  78 
Apo l lo   7 ,  253 
Apollo  8 ,322  
award.  283 
contract,  45,  47,  61,  123, 289 
facilities, 123 
Laboratory  for  Atmospheric  and  Bio- 
logical  Sciences,  328-329 
Laboratory  f o r   Theoretical  Studies, 
153-154 
laser  experiment,  71,  183 ,335  
personnel,  35,  131,  152,  168,  328 
Radio Astronomy  Explorer,  153 
satellite  monitoring 
A t s  I l ,  119 
A t s   I l l ,  29,  37,  144 
A t s   I V ,  185 
Essa  V U ,  191-193 

150, 

395 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

test, 

Essa  V I U ,  311 
Explorer  X X X V l ,   71,  183,  259,  335 
Explorer  X X X V I I I ,   153 
Molniya 1-8,110 
OgO  v  (OGO-E) ,   55 
Oao  I I   (OAO -A ) ,   304,  310 
Satellite  Tracking  Center,  12,  143,  146, 
205 
sounding rocket  experiments, 4 3 4  
astronomical,  62-63,  67,  115,  118, 
121,  129,  175,  198,  232 
atmospheric  data,  13,  60,  62,  6 M 5 ,  
76,  82,  130-131,  168,  175,  213-214, 
216,  219-220, 
223,  273,  287,  291, 
309-310 
instrumentation  test,  17,  31,  70 
launch test,  211,  214 
parachute 
system 
recovery 
126-127 
vehicle  performance test,  3 1  
Gold, Thomas, 37-38 
Goldberg, Ambassador  Arthur  J.,  130 
Goldberg, Leo,  243-244 
Goldberger, Dr.  Marvin  L.,  93 
Goldstein,  Dr.  Richard  M.,  114-115, 
171,283,291 
Goldstone  Tracking  Station,  114-115, 
122,  171,209,  291,312 
Goldwater, Barry M.,  333 
Gomez  Palacios, Mex.,  295 
Goodell, Sen. Charles E.,  210 
Goodyear  T i re   and  Rubber  Co.,  194 
GOR-16  (general 
research 
ocean 
s h i p ) ,  310 
Gordon,  James, Trophy,  188 
Grants, 44-45,46,  140-141,  151,  314 
Gravity,  141,  238-239 
artificial,  268,  291 
Gray, Dr.  Clinton W.,  273 
Gray, Harold  E.,  107-108 
Gray, Robert  H.,  216 
Greater  Lameshur  Bay,  Virgin  Islands, 
101 
Grechko,  Defense  Minister  Marshal  An- 
drey A.  (U.S.S.R.),  4 5 4 6  
Green Bank,  W.  Va.  161,238,  272 
Green State Univ.,  325-326 
Greenbelt, Md.,  205 
Greenland, 11 
Greenwood, A.  H.  C.,  217 
Grew, Gary W.,  177 
G r i 5 t h   Planetarium,  221 
Grissom  AFB,  Ind., 39,  110 
Grissom,  L/C Virgil  I.  ( U S A F ) ,   103,  110 
Gromyko,  Foreign  Minister  Andrey  A. 
(U.S.S.R.),  145 
Gross  National  Product,  141 
Group  Achievement  Award 
164.  283 
Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering  Corp., 
14,86,  167,  187,191,227-228,  314 
- 
GSFC.  See  Goddard  Suace  Flight  Center. 
Guam,  137 
Guest, Dr.  Robert  H.,  318 

( N A S A ) ,  

Guggenheim  Aeronautical  Laboratory 
(Cal  Tech ) ,  267 
Gulf  of  Mexico, 59,73-74,  181,  251 
Guppy 
(undersea 
research  vehicle), 
lS6 
Gurovsky, Dr.  N.  N.,  287 
Gurshteyn,  A.  A.,  6 1  
Gurtler, C.  A.,  177 

H 
H-1  (rocket  engine),  9,  207 
Hackerman, Norman,  115 
Haeussermann. Dr.  Walter.  111 
7  - - -  
_..._ 
Hage,  George H.,  315 
Haggerty, James  J.,  Jr.,  95,  117,  253 
Haslund.  Howard H..  151.  194 
Ha sn ,  Dr.  Otto, 171,'265 
' 
Haile  Selassie,  Emperor  of  Ethiopia, 
327 
Hailstone model  test,  247 
Hake ,  Fred  W.,  Jr.,  183,  196 
Halaby,  Najeeb  E.,  107-108 
Hall,  Donald A.,  104 
Hall,  Ernest, 49 
Hall, R.  Cargill, 129 
Halle, Louis J.,  8 1  
Halpern, Rep.  Seymour, 227 
Ham  (chimpanzee),  273 
Hamburger Flugzeugbau, 151 
Hamilton, Harry  H.,  283 
Hammett, Prof .  Louis P.,  38 
Handler,  Dr.  Philip,  40,  115,  255,  299, 
314 
Haney,  Paul,  36 
Hanover Air Show,  105 
Hanover, N.  H.,  36 
HAPPE.  See  High  Altitude  Particle  Ex- 
periment program. 
Harder, Dr.  James A.,  172 
Hardie, Dr.  Robert  H.,  326 
Hardy, Dr.  Harriet  L.,  312-313 
Hardy, Rep.  Porter,  Jr.,  163 
Harlow,  Prof.  Harry F.,  38 
Harmon  International  Aviator's  Trophy, 
259,  299 
Harper,  Charles  W.,  26,  38-39, 
225-226.  247 
Harr,  Dr.'  Karl  G., 
315-316 
Harriman, N.  Y.,  105 
Harrington,  Dr.  Charles  D..  87,  122-123 
Harris,  R.  Emerson,  128 
Harris,  S. T.,  88 
Harvard  College  Observatory,  161,  224 
Solar Satellite Project,  243 
Harvard  Univ.,  5,  38,  115,  133,  134,  159, 
303-304,328 
Graduate  School  of  Business  Admin- 
istration,  232 
Hatfield, Sen.  Mark  O.,  119,  210 
Haueter,  Paul  E.,  Award,  116 
Haughney,  Louis  C.,  11,  72  
Hauser,  John  A.,  91  
Hawaii,  116,  132,  137 

Jr.,  124-125,  134, 

47, 

396 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Hawker Siddeley Aviation  Co.,  277 
Hawker Siddeley Group,  Ltd.,  278 
Hawthorne, Calif.,  325 
Hayes International Corp.,  80 
Haymes,  Dr.  R.  C.,  52 
Haynes, Charles G.,  207 
Haystack, Mass.,  49 
Hazelhurst Field,  N.Y.,  11 
Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  Dept. 
of,  169, 271 
Heart,  291 
artificial,  194,  302 
Heat  shield, 212 
Helgeson,  Bob P.,  128 
Helicopter, 219 
astronaut  pickup, use for, 251 
commercial use,  225-226 
military,  18-19,  146 
Helium, 82, 257,  308 
Henry, Dr.  Richard  C ,  87 
Hensleigh, Walter  E.,  160 
HEOS   (Highly  Eccentric  Orbiting  Satel- 
l i t e ) ,   1, 149, 214 
Hem-A ,   300-301,  336 
Herzfeld, Dr.  Charles M.,  329 
Hess,  Dr.  Harry  H.,  90 
Hess,  John  L.,  95 
Hess, Dr. Wilmot  N.,  36 
Hevelius,  Johnannes,  28 
Hewlett-Packard  Co.,  331 
High  Altitude 
Particle  Experiment 
(HAPPE )   program,  68 
Hill,  Louis  W.,  Space  Transportation 
Award, 260-261 
Himmel,  Dr.  Seymour  C.,  104 
Hines  William,  129,  244-245,  312,  331 
HL-IO 
( l i f t ingbody  vehicle) 
test  flight,  63,  131,  139,  224-225,  240, 
335 
powered, 279,  306 
unsuccessful, 261 
test  results, 67-68 
Hoberg, Otto  A.,  283 
Hodge,  John  D.,  39 
Hodgson, Alfred  S.,  207,  283 
Hodgson, Dr.  Gordon W.,  22 
Hoff,  Dr.  Nicholas J.,  5 
Holloman  AFB,  N.  Mex., 
283-284 
Hollomon, Dr.  J. Herbert,  325 
Honda  (comet) , 2 0 1  
No.  6,  155 
Honda, Minori, 155 
Honeywell,  Inc.,  8, 328 
Hooker,  Dr.  Stanley G.,  316 
Hornbeck, Dr.  J. A.,  32 
Horne,  Walter  B.,  118 
Hornig,  Dr.  Donald  F.,  13%14~0, 156,  292, 
301,  304,  325 
Horton, Bob,  293 
Hosenthien, Hans H.,  283 
Hotz,  Robert, 271,  293 
Housing  and  Urban  Development,  Dept. 
218,  227, 
( l l U D ) ,   108,  165-166, 
of 

117,  272, 

243,271 
243,271 
Houston,  Tex.,  53,  82-83,  118,  188,  220, 
Houston.  Tex..  53.  82-83.  118.  188.  220. 
246,267 
246,267 
I
I
.
 
,
,
 
Hovercraft, 175 
Hovercraft, 175 
Howick, George J.,  230 
Howick, George J.,  230 
HP  1506  (pu lsar) ,   It1 
HP  1506  (pu lsar) ,   161 
HRE.  See  Hypersonic  Research  Engine 
HRE.  See  Hypersonic  Research  Engine 
program 
Bubbard, Samuel H.,  8-9 
Huber,  William C.,  145 
HUD.  See  Housing  and  Urban  Develop 
ment, Dept.  of. 
Hughes  Aircraft  Co.,  3,  5,  84,  106,  111, 
160.  204.244.259.  272 
Satellite Systems Laboratories, 76 
Space Systems Div.,  77 
Hughes,  Howard  R.,  303-304 
Hughes  Nevada  Operations, 303-304 
Huguenin, Dr.  George R.,  161 
Hulburt,  E.  O.,  Center  for  Space  Re- 
search, 87  
Humphrey,  Vice  President  Hubert  H., 
229 
astronauts,  visit  with, 287 
Earth  Resources  Observation  Satel- 
lite,  7 
election results, 271-272 
NASA  visit, 287 
nuclear 
nonproliferation 
215-216,  230 
ocean exploration, 138 
space  program,  106-107, 
235-236,254 
Hungary,  189-190,  317 
Hunt,  Graham R.,  170,250 
Huntsville, Ala.,  220, 272 
Hurricane  Gladys,  251 
Hurricane  Naomi,  295 
Hydrogen  bomb,  152,  156,  200,  207-208 
Hyland, Lawrence A.,  84,  106-107 
Hynek,  Dr.  J.  Allen,  169-170,  172,  254 
Hypersonic  aircraft,  226,  237,  300, 
317-318 
Hypersonic  Research  Engine 
program, 47 

178-179, 

treaty, 

( HRE )  

I 
IAEA .   See  International  Atomic  Energy 
Agency. 
International  Astronautical 
See 
IAF. 
Federation. 
International  Astronomical 
See 
IAU. 
Uniorr 
IBM .   See  International  Business  Mach- 
ines Corp. 
Icarus  (as tero id) ,   133 ,291  
ICBM.  See  Intercontinental  ballistic  mis- 
sile. 
ICL  Industry,  Inc., 176-177 
Iconoscope, 43 
IDSCP.  See  Initial  Defense  Communica- 
tions  Satellite Program. 
IEEE.  See  Institute  of  Electrical  and 
Electronics Engineers. 

397 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

27, 

30-31, 

75-76, 

treaty,  32, 

IES.  See  Institute  of  Environmental  Sci- 
ences. 
the   Navy  P au l  
Ignatius,  Secretary  of 
. -  
R..  14  
See  International  Geophysical 
IGY. 
Year. 
Illinois  Institute of  Technology,  15  
Illinois,  Univ.  of, 63,  168 
Ilyushin-62 
a ir l iner) ,   126, 
(U.S.S.R. 
163 
Image Orthicon  Camera  ( IOC )   , 185 
(IMP-E)  . 
(Interplanetary  Monitoring  P la t-  
IMP-E 
form).  See  Explorer  X X X Y  
IM P - G ,   1 
India 
cooperation, 
196-197,273 
Dept.  of  Atomic  Energy,  31 
ground  station,  27 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
138 
nuclear  power, 205 
satellite,  27 
Thumba  Equatorial  Rocket  Launching 
Station,  30-31,  60, 75-76,  273 
weapons,  130-131 
Indian  National  Commission  for  Space 
(INCOSPAR)  ,  30-31,  75-76 
Research 
Indian  Ocean,  196-197,212,  250-251 
Industrial  Research,  Man  of 
the   Year 
award, 15 
Informatics,  Inc.,  169 
Information  retrieval,  48,  154 
Infrared  sensor,  206-207,  208 
Initial  Defense  Communications  Satel- 
( IDC SP ) ,   121,  132,  137, 
lite  Program 
166 ,335  
Injun  IV .  See Explorer  X X V .  
ln jun   V .  See Explorer XL .  
Institute 
for 
Strategic 
210 
Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics 
Engineers  ( I E E E ) ,   82,  119 
Institute  of  Environmental  Sciences 
( I E S ) ,   79 
Institute  of  High  Energy  Physics,  316 
Institute  of  Strstegic  Studies,  309 
International  Telecom- 
INTELSAT.  See 
munications  Satellite Consortium. 
Intelsat 
(communications  sa te l l i te) ,   1, 
39 
Intelsat  I  (Ea r l y   B i r d ) ,   27,  39-44  80, 
111  14s  314-315 
I  - - - I   - - -   - - -  
Inteisat 11,  189,204,323 
(In te lsa t   11-B : Pac if ic  
Intelsat-11  F-2 
I), 82-83,  103, 111 
h t e l s a t - I 1   F-3 
(In te lsa t   1 1 4 ;   A t lan t ic  
11) , 5,  39,  111, 315 
(In te lsa t   D - I I ;   Pac if ic  
lntelsat-I1  F - 4  
111, 111, 302 
Intelsat 111, 111, 149, 216,  225,  315 
Intelsat-I11 F-I,  216,225,  273,  315 
In te lsa t-I l l   F-2,  314-315,  323,  329,  335 
Intelsat-III FA ,  315 

Studies, 

Union 

Intelsat I11 %,  38 
Intelsat  IV,  38,111,  137, 244,259 
Interaeencv  Aircraft  Noise  Abatement 
Pro&& 
154-155 
Intercontinental 
missile 
ballistic 
(ICBM),  3,  18-19,  29,  42,  138,  191, 
195, 210,  312 
“Intermediate  20”  (boos ter) ,  275 
Interior,  Dept.  of,  101,290-291,299 
International  Academy  of  Astronautics, 
254 
International  Aeronautical  Exposition 
(proposed), 233 
International  Aerospace  Exposition,  295 
International  Air 
and  Space  Salon, 
Third,  126 
International  Astronautical  Federation 
( IAF )  , 258,286-287 
Congress, 246-247 
Astronomical 
International 
( IAU )  ,27-28,298 
Commission on Solar Activity,  254 
International  Atomic  Energy  Agency 
( IAEA ) ,   92,  132, 198 ,211 ,228  
International  Center 
for   Theoretical 
Physics,  198 
International Balloon Race,  188 
International  Bank 
for  Reconstruction 
and Development,  16 
The  
International  Biological  Prob lem  
-Its  Meaning  and  Needs  House 
s tudy ) ,  60 
International  Biological  Program,  60, 
126 
International  Business  Machines  Corp. 
( I B M ) ,   79,  169 
Federal Systems Div.,  82, 173 
Space Guidance  Center,  77 
International  Congress  for   Noise  Abate- 
ment,  117 
of  Genetics, 
International  Congress 
200-201 
International  cooperation  (see  also  Nu- 
clear  nonproliferation 
trea ty) ,   127 
aircraft,  9,  49,  105-106,  117,  118,  126, 
134,157-158,  163,165,  198 
astronomy,  72 
law,  12 ,127  
meteorology,  127 
military,  9,  127,  145,  146,  149-150, 
160, 164, 166, 170-171,  191 
nuclear  power, 11, 154 
oceanography,  56, 72,  138 
science  and  technology,  39,  60,  126, 
140,  141,  156,  158,  159,  247,  255, 
257 
International  cooperation, 
(see 
space 
also  European  Launcher  Develop 
ment 
Organization; 
European 
Space  Research  Organization ;  In -  
ternational  Telecommunications  Satel- 
lite Consortium ; Space rescue  treaty) , 
2 , 2 6 2 1 ,   30 
law, 12,  127 ,258 ,281  

398 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

satellite,  19,  52,  134,  137,  189,  233, 
236 
Europe,  10 ,85  
NASA-ESRO,  113,  214,  240 
-Canada, 1,11, 72 
-India, 196-197 
-U.K.,  1 
- U S S R . ,   2 
u s .  
-Japan, 82 
-South Vietnam,  88 
-U.K.,  9 
- U S S R . ,   66,99,  281 
USSR . -F r an c e ,   10 
sounding rocket, 29,  154 
India-France, 31  
- U S S R . ,   31 
NASA-Brazil,  131, 177 
-Canada, 64-65,106 
-Germany, West,  75-76,  160 
-India, 30-31,  75-76,  273 
-Spain, 177-178 
Sweden ,  177-178 
space research, 141 ,204 ,210 ,254  
Europe,  136-137,279 
U.K.-U.S.S.R.,  52 
US.-Australia,  329 
-Germany, West,  201 
-Switzerland, 68 
- U S S R . ,   202 
tracking,  137 
US.-Australia,  34-35 
-Spain, 34-35 
International  Council  on  Human  Envi- 
ronment, 127 
International  Decade  of  O c ,  in   Explora- 
tion,  177 
International  Flat  Earth  Society, 331 
( IGY )   , 
International  Geophysical  Year 
2 W 0 ,  73,  166-167 
International 
Institute  f o r   Peace  and 
Conflict Research,  285 
International  Institute  of  Space  Law, 
258 
International  Po la r  Year,  166-167 
International  Radiation 
Investigation 
Satellite  ( IR IS ) ,   113 
International  Research  and  Marketing 
Corp.,  230 
International  Satellite  for  Tonospheric 
Studies  (ISIS) ,  1, 106, 149 
International  Space  Research  Commit- 
tee,  136-137 
International  Symposium  on  Bioastron- 
autics  and  the   Exploration  of  Space, 
Fourth,  141-142 
International  Symposium  on  Genetic 
of 
Space 
Environment, 
Effects 
200-201 
International  Telecommunications  Sat- 
ellite  Consortium  (INTELSAT) , 27, 
60 ,80 ,239 ,293  
communications  satellite,  39,  80,  183, 
lm,  189-190,  216,  243-24, 
259 
Satellite 
Interim 
Communications 

committee, 35,  80 
membership,  26,  46 
International  Telephone  and  Telegraph 
Corp.  (IT&T), 329 
Platform 
Interplanetary  Monitoring 
(IMP). See  Explorer  XXXV  (IMP-E) 
and  IMP-G. 
Intersputnik,  18%190 
Invention, 91 
IOC.  See Image Orthicon Camera. 
Ion propulsion, 25-26,  303 
Ionosphere, 63,  73 
composition,  46-47,  60,  130,  132,  168, 
175, 198,273 
diurnal  changes,  64-65 
probe,  106,149,336 
properties  of,  31,  168,24U, 262 
Iowa, univ.  of,  29-30,  113, 182 
Ireland, 299 
Iris  I  (Esro   ZZ-B) 
(International  Ra- 
diation  Investigation  Satellite),  113, 
168-169,  240,336 
Irwin,  Maj.  James  B. 
(W A F ) ,   279-280 
(International  Satellite  f o r   Io- 
ISIS-A 
nospheric S tud ie s ) ,  1, 106, 149 
Isolation experiment, 324 
Italcable, 293 
Italy 
cooperation,  5,  46,  95,  108,  165,  233, 
293,  300-301 
ground station, 69 
nuclear nonproliferation treaty, 32 
satellite,  296 
ITT  World  Communications,  Inc.,  82-83, 
154,293,307-308 

77-78, 

92-93, 

J 
J-2  (rocket  engine) 
Apo l lo   6  and  7, 
251-252 
contract, 257,  275 
failure, 92,  119-120,  135, 252-253 
test,  220 
585-19 
(VTOL  eng ine ) ,  230-231 
Jackass Flats,  Nev.,  131, 143 
Jackson, Sen.  Henry M.,  228 
Jackson and Moreland,  231 
Jaffe, Leonard,  30-31 
James, Lee B.,  20,112 
Jamesburg, Calif.,  302 
Japan,  46,82433,146,155,166,  312 
Japanese Defense  Agency,  166 
Jastrow, Dr. Robert,  147-148 
Javelin  (sounding  rocke t) ,   54,  82,  113, 
308 
JC-130 
(Hercules) 
c r a f t ) ,  148 
Jennings, Mark, 247 
J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  (JPL)  (Cal 
Tech ) ,  22-23,79,148,331-332 
award,  15,  89,  106,  151,  194,  260-261, 
283 
Deep  Space Network, 6, 209 
Goldstone  Tracking  Station,  114-115, 
122, 171,209,291,312 

(turboprop 

air- 

399 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Mariner  Project,  118, 122,  199 
personnel,  15,  17,  42,  129,  152-153, 
171,22%230,  267,  275-276 
Pioneer  V I ,  209 
Surveyor Project,  3,  106, 151 
symposium  on  space  research,  29-30 
Jodrell  Bank  Experimental  Station,  42, 
54,83,211-212,222,253-254,  289 
Johns Hopkins  Univ.,  8 ,36 ,  86,  173 
Johnsen,  Edwin G.,  82 
Johnson  City, Tex.,  1, 269,  332 
Johnson,  President  Lyndon  B.,  301,  304, 
323,327 
aircraft, 54  
Apo l lo   8 flight, 322,  326 
appointments  and  nominations  by,  12, 
45,  115,131,  143, 169,175,211 
astronauts, 322,  326,  330, 332 
flight pay,  203 
awards by,  38,  51,  57,  269,  298,  332 
awards 
to 
(National  Space  C lub ) ,  
2.15 --- 
balance  of  payments deficit, 1 
bills  signed, 135-136,  152, 197 ,243  
budget,  18-19,60,233 
NASA, 135-136,  152,294 
communications satellite system,  76 
disarmament, 164 
international  cooperation,  20-21,  127 
meteorology,  127 
metric  system,  197 
noise abatement, 271 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
149, 158, 230,249 
oceanography, 60 
press conference,  1 
resignations acceuted bv.  40 
space  program,  is-19,'  20-21,  53,  179, 
202,  208,235,248,  267,  292 
space  rescue  treaty,  89,  127,  161,  299 
supersonic transport,  144, 207  
Webb, James  E.,  235,269 
Wright  Brothers Day,  313-314 
Johnson, Mrs.  Lyndon  B.,  292 
Johnson,  Lyndon  B.,  Presidential  Li- 
brary,  292 
for 
rnstitutions 
Joint  Oceanographic 
Deep  Earth  Sampling 
( J O I D E S ) ,   311 
Joint  Publications  Research  Service, 
336-337 
Jolly  Green Giant  (helicopter),  146 
Jonash,  Edmund  R.,  104 
Jones, John W.,  43 
Jones, Dr.  Walton W.,  286-287 
Jordon,  L / C   Jo e  B.  (USAF ) ,   2 
Journa l   o f   the   Royal  Aeronautical  Soci- 
e t y ,  91 
JPL.  Pee J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory. 
Judi-Dart  (sounding rocket),  31 
Jup i te r   (p lane t) ,   120-121 
atmosphere, 16-17,  142 
exploration  of,  19,  30,  44,  51,  79,  148, 
153-154, 
275,  280-281, 
188-189, 
334 

treaty,  132, 

144, 

life on, 51,  142 
photographs of, 6 
Jup i te r  C  (booster), 22 
Jurgens,  Raymond F.,  3 7 3 8  
K 
Kaminski, Heinz,  54,222 
Kansas City, Mo.,  207 
Kaplan, Dr.  Joseph, 29-30 
Kaplan, Dr.  Lewis D.,  283 
Kapustin Yar,  U.S.S.R.,  130,  154, 310 
131-132 
Karth,  Rep.  Joseph  E.,  58-59, 
KC-135 
(flying 
ionospheric 
labora- 
tory) ,   302 
Keldysh,  Mstislav V.,  272 
Kennedy,  President  John  F.,  147- 
-148, 
212-213,317-318,325,326 
Kennedy,  John  F., 
International 
Air- 
port,  163, 187-188,  189,194,206 
Kennedy, Sen.  Robert  F.,  326 
Kennedy  Space  Center  (KSC )  
78,  136, 
Apollo/Saturn, 
77, 
186-187 ,250 ,252 ,318 .321322  
astronauts  at,  172, 208 
award, 89 
contract, 45,  172,239 
facilities,  210,  256 
high-altitude research,  143 
personnel, 150 
spacecraft  delivery  and  shipments  to. 
22,  30,  101, 122, 181, 186 
spaceport, 1 
visits  to 
Humphrey,  Vice  President  Hubert 
H.,  287 
Johnson, Mr.  Lyndon  B.,  292 
Robb,  Mrs.  Lynda, 292 
U.S.S.R.  scientists, 247 
Kentucky, Univ.  of,  291 
Kerwin, Joseph P.,  134,  144 
Kiefer,  P au l  J.,  145 
Killian, Dr.  James R.,  303-304 
King George Island, % 
King, Guy  H.,  44 
King, Rev.  Martin Luther,  324 
Kirkman, Don,  215 
Kiruna  Range,  Sweden,  29,  70,  118, 
130. 133.262 
Kistiakowsky,  Dr.  George  B.. 
303-304,328 
Kitt  Peak  National  Observatory,  6,  119, 
12% 
Kittikachorn,  P r ime   Minister  Thanom 
(Tha i land ) ,  108 
Kitty  Hawk  Memorial  Trophy,  286,  303 
Klein, Milton, 44,  65,  94 
Kling  Report, 231 
Kling, Vincent, and  Associates,  231 
Kliore, Dr.  Arvydas J.,  199,275-276 
Kluttz.  .Term.  168 
Knighi,- Maj.  William  J.  (USAF )  , 11-12, 
66, 95,  164 ,211 ,259 ,299  
Knouuers, Dr.  Anthonie T., 16 
Knowles,  Stephen, 185 
Kobzarez,  Alexander, 126 

38. 

400 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Kocjan, Barbara  E.,  68 
Kokusai Denshin Denwa  Co.,  Ltd.,  82-83 
Komarov,  Col.  Vladimir  M. 
(U.S.S.R.), 
70.264 
Kometsky, Dr.  George,  206 
Kordes, Dr.  Eldon E.,  313 
Korea, 109.  137 
Korolev.  Sereei P..  17  
Kosygin,  PGmier’ Alexey  N.  (U.S.S.R.), 
72,  149,  189-190 
Kraft,  Joseph, 325 
Kranzbere. Dr.  Melvin.  1 
Krausha;;  Dr. William, 93 
Krivsky,  Dr.  L.,  269 
KSC. See Kennedy Space Center. 
Kubat.  .Terald K..  9 
Kubis,’ Dr.  Joseph F.,  287 
Kuchel, Sen. Thomas H.,  121 
Kuers, Werner  R.,  266,272-273 
Kuiper, Dr.  Gerard P.,  12-13 
Kurashiki  Astronomical Observatory,  155 
Kuznetsov  N.K.-144 
(U.S.S.R.  turbofan 
engine),  332 
Kwajalein Test  Site, 72 
L 
L- lo l l   ( j e t  a i rbu s ) ,  72,  72 
Laboratory,  12-13,  17-18,  59,  91,  101, 
151, 266 
LaGow, Herman E.,  283 
La  Guardia  Airport,  179,  189,  194,  206 
Laika  (dog, U.S.S.R.),  46 
Laird.  Rem Melvin R..  309.  331 
Lambert  Field, Mo.,  207 
‘ 
Lzncaster, Calif., 279 
Land, Dr.  Edwin H.,  38 
281 
Langley Aeronautical Laboratory, 
Langley  Research  Center  (LaRc) 
( N A S A ) ,  
144,  177,300 
award, 116,283 
collision-avoidance system,  179 
contract, 87,  123 
--  - 
Digital  Computer  Complex  Group, 
lfih 
Explorer program, 182 
Flight  Control  Research  Facility,  164 
Lunar Orbiter program, ?4 
noise  alleviation conference, 247 
paraglider,  1 8 7 .  
personnel, 15, 65,  101, 134-135,  173 
runway grooving research, 125, 286 
RAM   program, 198-199 
VTOL  aircraft.  276-277 
Langmuir probe, 45 ,46 -47  
Lankard, J. P.,  169 
Lannan,  John,  205 ,215 ,230 ,237 ,311  
Lapp, Dr.  Ralph  E.,  308, 311 
Larsen, Dr.  Finn J., 238 
Las Vegas,  Nev.,  108 
Laser, 312 
exDeriments.  6.  10.  71.  183,  262. 
. 
,
.
  , 
i82-283 
measurement of, 39 
production of,  169 
use of, 6,  183, 259 

(Univ. 

Latin  America,  230 
Launch Complex 13 ,55  
Launch  Complex  34 
Saturn  IB  test,  136, 144, 173, 186 
Saturn/ Apollo 
launch, 250 
mating, 186, 197, 204,  206 
side-wire escape way  test,  210 
Launch Complex  37,  256 
Launch Complex  39,  318 
Launch  Escape  System  (LES )   (Apollo), 
711 .., 
Launch vehicle  (see  also individual 
launch vehicles such a s  Atlas-Cen- 
taur,  Saturn, e tc .) ,   36,  37,  185 
US.,  235-236,  246 
U.S.S.R.,  33-34,36,  93,  186-187 
Lawrence, David,  332 
Lawrence  Radiation  Laboratory 
of  Calif.),  329 
Learjet,  179 
Leasco  Systems  and  Research  Corp., 
169,245 
Leavitt, William, 28 
Lebedev, Vladimir, 81 
Lederer, Jerome F., 315 
Lefkowitz, Louis J.,  279 
Leonov,  L/C  Aleksey  A.  (U.S.S.R.),  81, 
85,  190 
LES.  See Launch Escape System. 
Les  Y  (Lincoln  Laboratory  Experimen- 
ta l   Satellite),  79,  137,  228 
Les  VI,  228,335 
Lesher, Dr.  Richard  L.,  35 
Levitt,  Dr.  I.  M.,  27-28 
Lewellyn, John  A.,  200 
Lewis  Research  Center  (LeRC) 
( N A S A )  
Aerospace  Safety  Research  and  Data 
Institute,  95-96 
Atlas-Agena, 54-55 
Atlas-Centaur, 3, 8 
award, 281,283,  300 
budget, 41  
contract. 59,  82.  144.329 
noise abatement, 248 
organization, 104 
personnel, 26,  32,  101,104, 118, 134-135 
Propulsion Systems Laboratory, 214-215 
research, 302 
SERT 11,26 
supersonic transport  engine, 233 
Lewis.  Dr. W.  Demine.  36 
LEX  (French  sounding  rocke t) ,   9 
Ley,  Willy, 28 
LFU.  See Lunar  flying unit. 
Libbv.  Dr.  Willard  F..  17. 302 
Libra&  of  Congress,’  202,  203-204 
Lick Observatory,  119 
Liepmann, Dr.  Hans W.,  5 , 1 5  
Lifting  body  vehicle,  65  
HL-10,  63,  131,  139,  224-225, 
261,  279,306,335 
M2-F2,67-68 
X-24,42 

240, 

401 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Lilly, William E.,  3 5 , 4 3 4 9  
Lima,  Peru,  1% 
Lindbergh, Anne Morrow,  290 
Lindbergh, Charles A.,  104,290,306 
Ling-Temco-Vought  A-7 
(fighter  air- 
c r a f t ) ,  259 
Ling-Temco-Vought,  Inc.,  276-277 
Ling-Temco-Vought 
Aerospace 
(LTV) 
Corp.,  123,167,  187 
Range Systems Div.,  3 
Linville, Dr.  John  R, 5 
Liquid hydrogen, 79-80 
Little Dipper  (constellation), 161, 310 
LM. See Lunar module. 
LLRV.  See Lunar Research Vehicle. 
LLTV.  See  Lunar  Landing  Training 
Vehicle. 
LMS. See Lunar module simulator. 
(LSSM )  , 
Local  scientific  survey  module 
51-52 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  5,  43,  128,  293 
C 5 A   (cargo  transport),  146-147,  285, 
312-313 
contract, 62,  173, 187, 225,  278 
Deep  Submergence Search  Vehicle,  227 
F-104  (Starfighter),  165 
GlOll airbus,  72 
Marietta,  Ga.,  plant  purchase, 231 
Lockheed-California Co.,  48 
Lockheed  Electronics Co.,  123, 308 
Lockheed-Georgia Co.,  54,1%-147 
Lockheed  Missiles and  Space Co.,  148 
contract,  11, 26,  61,  120,  123,  151,  298 
missile, 61  
pollution study, 158 
sounding 
rocket  experiment,  40-41, 
256-257 
Space  Systems  Div.,  130 
Logsdon,  Prof.  John  M.,  325 
Logunov, Dr.  Anatoli A.,  316 
London  Imperial College, 70 
London,  U.K.,  89-90,  117,  185,  210,  278 
Long-Tank  Delta  (boos ter) ,   216 
Long-Tank Thrust-Augmented Thor 
(LTTAT)-Agena D  (boos ter) ,   16 ,61  
Look ,  99 
LOR.  See Lunar orbit  rendezvous. 
Los  Alamos  (N.  Mex.)  Scientific Labora- 
tory, 91 ,94 ,123  
Los Altos Morning Forum,  119 
Los  Angeles,  Calif.,  112,  186,  188,  221, 
265,312 
meeting in,  65,66,  262-263 
Los  Angeles  International  Airport,  197- 
198 
Los  Angeles  Junior  Chamber  of  Com- 
merce,  121 
Losey,  Robert  M.,  Award,  316 
Louisiana,  73-74 
Lovelace,  Dr. W.  Randolph, II, 28 
Lovell,  Sir Bernard,  42,  54,  211-212,  222, 
289.327-328 
Lovell;  Capt. James A,,  Jr.  (USN) 
Apollo  8  flight,  318,  322-323,327 

preparations  for,  59,  183,  196,  223, 
261-262,  278 
award,  332 
Humphrey,  Vice  President  Hubert  H., 
visit with.  287 
press  confdrence,  285,  304-305 
White House visit,  306 
Low,  Robert J.,  169-170 
Lowell Observatory, 219 
Lowery, Mrs. Barbara,  153-154 
LRV.  See Lunar roving vehicle. 
LSSM. See  Local  scientific survey module. 
L1A .   See Lunar  Test Article. 
LTV.  See Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc. 
LTV Service Technology  Corp.,  145 
Lucas,  Dr.  W.  R.,  303 
Luedecke,  M /G   Alvin  R (USAF,  Ret.), 
283 
Lugo,  Fernando, 41-42 
Lukasik, Dr.  Stephen J.,  40 
Lukens, Matthias  E.,  5 
Luna  IX (U.S.S.R.  lunar  p robe ) ,  61 
Luna XIV, 81,83,  87.  335-336 
Lunar flying unit. (LFU )  ,51-52 
Lunar  Landing  Research  Vehicle  ( L LRV )  , 
105,116,257 
Lunar  Landing  Training  Vehicle,  (LLTV )  
305 
Lunar  module 
{ L M ) ,   19-20,  116,  183, 
218-219 
contract, 86 
flight test,  1, 191 
No.  1, 13, 17, 37,  63 
No.  2,  78,  92 
ground test,  143,173,181 
Lunar Module  3,  158, 173,181,  196 
manned,  127,  191,279-280 
Lunar  module  simulator  (LMS )   , 227-228, 
266 
Lunar  orbit rendezvous  (LOR ) ,   318 
Lunar  Orbiter 
(program),  41,  281, 
301-302 
Lunar  Orb i ter  I ,  24 
Lunar  Orbiter  I I , 2 4  
Lunar  Orb i ter  111, 24 
Lunar  Orb i ter  I V ,  24,266 
Lunar  Orb i ter   V,  12-13,  24,  193-194,  266 
Lunar  roving  vehicle  (LRV )   , 295 
Lunar  Science Institute,  53,267 
Lunar Test Article  (LTA ) ,   205-206 
Lundin,  Bruce T.,  32,  118-119 
Luskin, Harold T., 15, 48,65,  293,  315 
Lysenko, Trofun D.,  298 
M 
M2-F2  ( l i f t ingbody  vehicle), 67-68 
McCaEery, Robert  J.,  283 
McCarthy, Sen.  Eugene J.,  159 
McCartin, Matthew J.,  83  
Macomber,  Frank,  156 
McConnell,  Gen.  John  P.  (USAF),  39, 
122, 130, 152 
McCormack,  James, 111 
McCormack, Rep.  John W., 16 
McCormick, Leander, 151 
402 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

McDermott,  Sgt.  Robert  ( U S A ) ,   112 
McDivitt,  L / C   James  A. 
( U S A F ) ,   97,  167, 
196 ,306  
MacDonald,  Dr.  James E.,  169 
McDonald  Observatory,  294 
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.,  22,  44,  47, 
260-261 
McDonnell,  James  S.,  260-261 
McIver, Dr.  R.  G.,  283-284 
McKee,  Gen.  William  F.  (USAF,  Ret.), 
150,233 
Mackin,  Prof.  J. Hoover,  188 
McKinsey  Foundation  lecture,  103,  109, 
115 
McNair,  Prof.  Arthur  J., 326 
McNamara,  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert 
S.,  12,  20,  29,  51;  53,  75,  93-94,  112, 
229,270 
Madrid,  Spain,  312 
Magnetometer.  130-136 
Magnetosphere,  88,  138-139,  153-154, 
210-211 
Magnuson,  Sen.  Warren  G.,  26,  209,  314 
Mallick,  Donald  L.,  8,  131,  167,  208, 
298-299 
Management  Services, Inc.,  122 
Managing  the  Environment 
(House  re- 
po r t ) ,  135 
Manhattan Project, 311 
Manila,  Philippines,  103 
Manke,  John  A.,  131 ,240 ,279  
Mann,  Dr.  David  E.,  43 
Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  ( M O L ) ,   32, 
105.  126. 208.255.293 
appropriations,’ 19, ‘ 20,  122,  166,  171, 
308-309 
cooperation,  20,  70,  102 
launch  complex,  335 
test, 20 
(see  also  Apollo 
Manned  space  flight 
program, 
program,  Gemini 
and 
flights ;  Astronaut ;  Cosmonaut ; 
Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory;  Soyuz 
3  flight;  Space  biology;  and  Space 
s ta t ion ) ,   73-74,  80-81,  281,  304-305 
achievements,  24,  66,  165,  190,  215, 
236-237, 
253,  269,  324-325,  326, 
327-328,  334-335 
criticism,  25,  51,  257 
EVA.  See Extravehicular activity. 
funding,  19-20,  33-34, 
35,-  53,  98, 
102-103,  140 ,218 ,311 ,336  
hazards,  25,200-201,  230 ,278 ,311  
longd&ation,  35,  219 
lunar 
landing,  manned.  See  Moon 
landing,  manned. 
military  potential,  205 
policy  and plans 
US.,  33-34,  35,  41,  47,  51-52,  55, 
61-62,  63,  86,  92-93,  94-95,  97, 
108-109,  112-113,  141,  173,  180, 
188-189,  191,  194,  196,  215,  223, 
243,  245,  265-266,  276,  282-283, 
311,312,314,  328 

(space. 

Its 

test.  See  Apollo 

U.S.S.R.,  34,  40,  116-117,  178,  222, 
223, 
254, 
266265 ,  
267-268, 
277-278 
safety,  4-5,  25,  51,  92-93,  246,  264, 
265-266,273 
(M SFN )  , 
Manned  Space  Flight  Network 
5.  12.97-98.258.273-274.312.335 
hIa&e;l 
Spacecraft  Ce‘nter ’  (M SC )  
( N A S A ) ,   39,  222-223,  224,  227,  246, 
291 
Apollo  spacecraft, 78,253,  322 
astronauts  at,  164,  168,  208,  220,  285, 
304-305 
award,  75 
contract,  14, 22,  146 
Lunar  Landing  Test  Vehicle  (LLTV ) ,  
305 
Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory, 267 
management,  218-219 
patent,  145 
Space Physics  Div.,  130-131 
Space  Environment  Simulation  Labora- 
tory,  144 
spacecraft 
c ra f t ) .  
visits  to  
Bourguiba,  President  Habib  (Tuni- 
s i a ) ,   118 
Johnson,  President  Lyndon  B.,  53 
Nixon,  President-elect  Richard  &I., 
207 
Webb,  James  E., 53  
Manovtsev, Gherman A,,  324 
Alan’s  Geophysical  Environment: 
Study from  Space  (ESSA  s tudy ) ,  73 
Mansfield,  Sen. Mike,  249 
Manson, MIG  Hugh B.  (U SAF )  , 11-12 
March,  James G.,  115 
Narder,  Murrey,  161 
Marietta, Ga.,  231 
Marine Resources  Council,  284 
Marine  Science  Affairs-A  Year  of  P lan s  
and   Progress  (President’s  repo r t ) ,   60 
Mariner  (program),  8,  33-34,  240-241, 
281-282 
Mariner F,  118 
Mariner  G,  118 
Mariner  I I   (Venus probe),  199 
Mariner  I l l   (Mars p robe ) ,  118 
Mariner  V  (Venus  p robe ) ,   10,  162,  199, 
241,275-276 
Mark  11  (reentry vehicle),  8 
Mark  1 7 , 8  
Marks,  Leonard  H.,  239 
Mars  (planet)  (see  also  Mariner  IZI and 
Voyager program),  162 
atmosphere,  328-329 
exploration  of,  219,  280-281,  327,  334 
funding,  18,  162,  188-189, 
241, 
281-282 
manned,  259 
plans  for,  118,  162,  182,  18G-189, 
248-249,281-282,301-302 
spacecraft,  18,  43,  44, 78-79,  118, 

403 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

212,248-249,281-282,287-288 
unmanned,  51,  66,  78-79,  212,  215, 
248-249 
life on,  97,  188-189 
magnetic  field, 329 
photographs,  215,249,301-302 
surface,  170, 249,  301-302 
Marshall  Islands,  72 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center 
(M S F C )  
( N A S A ) ,   57-58,  66,  68,  91,  98,  143, 
275 
anniversary,  149,235 
Apollo  Telescope  Mount,  62,  85-86, 
218-219,  240 
Astrionics  Laboratory,  59 
award,  235,  283 
contract,  62,  79,  85-86,  110,  120,  122, 
240 ,257 ,266 ,295  
Saturn,  75,  77,  79,  127,  207,  239,  257, 
262 ,275 ,328  
employment,  149, 168 
launch vehicle.  See Saturn. 
Lunar  roving  vehicle  (LRV) , 295 
management, 219 
Manufacturing  Engineering  Labora- 
tory,  272-273 
meeting,  88 
marine  transportation,  110 
organization, 303 
Pegasus program,  203 
personnel,  20,  45,  47-48 
Safety  Office,  121 
I  Workshop, 
Sa turn  
218-219 
Space Sciences Laboratory,  110 
Test Laboratory,  144 
Martin Marietta  Corp.,  42,  163, 199 
Maryland,  Univ.  of,  67,  128, 173, 198 
Maser,  312 
Mason,  Roy,  59-60 
Massachusetts  General  Hospital,  312-313 
Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology 
(M I T ) ,   1,  5,  57,  139-140,  148,  224, 
268,  303-304,  312 
Department  of  Aeronautics  and  Astro- 
nautics,  53,  316 
Div.  of  Sponsored Research,  14  
experiment,  170 
research,  49,200,  238-239 
School of  Engineering,  99 
Masursky,  Dr.  Harold,  254-255 
Materials 
144, 
53, 
technology, 
39, 
150-151,  157,  162-163,  177,  234,  251, 
253.  265.267-268 
The  Atathematical  Sciences:  A  Report, 
291-292 
Mathematics.  291-292.  293 
Mathews,  Charles W.,  65,  86,  108 
Mathews,  L / C   Wayne  (USAF,  Re t .) ,   128 
Matthews, N. Whitney,  152 
Mattoni,  Dr.  Rudolph  H.  T.,  325 
Max  Planck  Institute,  130,  133,  160,  214 
Maxwell,  M / G   Jewel1  C. 
( U S A F ) ,   66-67, 
202-203,  207,217 

21-22, 

202, 

161, 

P ierre  

May,  Tom  R.,  146-147, 155-156 
.. 
Mazur,  Daniel G.,  225 
Mechling,  A.  L.,  Inc.,  110 
Meeker,  Leonard  C.,  281 
"Meet  th e  Press"  (TV  program),  276 
Meghreblian,  Dr.  Robert V.,  152-153 
Meitner,  Dr.  Lise,  265 
Melbourne,  Australia,  306-307 
Melbourne, Fla.,  156 
Mellon  Institute Award,  110 
Melnikov, N.,  226 
Memorandum  of  Understanding,  137 
Merck  &  Company, Inc.,  16  
(p l an e t ) ,   30,  184,  188  
Mercury 
-189, 
280-281,334 
Mercury  (program) ,   66,  102-103, 
220,221-222,236-237,  281,325 
Mercury  (spacecraft),  148 
Mesa  Verde National  Park ,   155 
Messerschmitt-Bijlkow. 151 
Messmer,  Defense  Minister 
(France) ,   200 
Meteor,  5,  185-186.287 
Meteorite,  5,  120 
Meteoroid,  177 
Meteorological  satellite  (see  also  individ- 
ual  satellites,  such  as  Ats  I l l ,   Ats 
IV ,   Essa  V I ,   Essa  V I I ,   Essa  V I I I ) ,  
185,229, 232,237,306-307 
cooperation, 
U.S.-U.S.S.R., 
2 
ground  station,  97 
Nimbus  program,  1,  33-34, 
116, 145,241-242,243 
photographs  by,  97 ,229 ,311  
Tiros  program,  49,  191, 311 
U.S.S.R.,  2 
Meteorology,  101-102, 
235, 
251 
award,  316 
cooperation,  306-307 
NASA-ESSA,  111, 262,  335 
U.S.-U.S.S.R., 
65-66 
forecasting,  85,  102,  257-258, 
334-335 
hailstone  research,  247 
satellite.  See Meteorological  satellite. 
sounding  rocket  experiments,  10, 168 
U.S.S.R.,  2, 61  
World  Weather  Watch,  19,  127,  155, 
306-307 
Metric system,  197 
Mexico. 39.  59.  29.5 
I  -  7 -
Mexico7 City, Mexico, 295 
-
-
 
Mi-6  (U.S.S.R.  helicopter),  126 
Mi-10,  126 
Miami  Beach,  Fla.,  178-179 
Miami,  Univ.  of,  91-92 
Michel, F.  Curtis,  92 
Michener, Gov. Gen.  Roland,  327 
Michigan,  Univ.  of,  39,  64-65,  85,  115, 
168,  182-183,  183-184,  256,  287 
Space  Physics  Research  Laboratory, 
328-329 
(MSFC )   , 3, 
Michoud  Assembly  Facility 

49,  60-61, 

236-237, 

295, 

404. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

15, 

91,171,  173 ,227 ,296  
Micrometeoroid,  61,  118,  129-130,  130, 
177,  177-178,185-186,  197,310-311, 
Middle  East,  205 
M i G 1 5   (U.S.S.R.  fighter  a ircraf t) .  70 
M i G 2 3   (Foxba t)   TU.S.S.R. 
fighter  air- 
c r a f t ) ,   171-172,  195 
“The  Military  Balance”  (repor t) ,   210 
“. , 
Militarv  technolom.  29.  43.  102. 334 
Milky  .  Way  
(ga laxy) ,   ’  114-1 
208-209,  224,  247 
Miller,  Frederic H.,  150 
Miller,  Rep.  George P.,  15-16,  32,  235 
Miller, Dr.  Rene H.,  224,  316 
Minashin, Vladimir,  189-190 
Mineola, N.  Y.,  11 
Miniaturization.  186.  237.  267-268 
Minnesota,  Uni;.  of, 88, 177 
Minott,  Pe ter   O.,  183 
Minuteman  ( I C BM ) ,   3,  148,  237,  312-313 
Minuteman  I,  193 
Minuteman 11, 18-19,  193 
Minuteman  111, 159,  193,  195 
MJRV.  See  Multiple  Independently  Target- 
able Reentry  Vehicle. 
Missile,  126, 130, 272, 276,  284 
air-to-air.  98.  160 
antimissile,  72,  88,  133,  138,  143,  159, 
180, 242 
ballistic  intercontinental 
( I C BM ) .   3.  18, 
29, 42,  138, 191, 195,210, 289,312 
contract,  61 
detection,  208 
foreien 
Communist  China,  29 
France,  153 
U.S.S.R.,  29,  42,  55,  159,  210,  272, 
289 
medium-range,  29 
nuclear,  29,  228 
orbital.  55.  93.  94.  178. 255.  329 
underwater-to-surface, ‘ 19,  61,  153,  159, 
 
,
,
I
193, 195 
limitation  of,  149-150,  159,  166,  188, 
191.  195.209 
Mississippi,  73-74 
(M T F )  , 73-74 
Mississippi  Test  Facility 
contr&,  173 
test, 30,  36,  73-74,  122,  186 
M IT .   See  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Tech- 
noloev. 

Mojave  Desert ’ Ground  Station,  Calif., 
78-79,  146, 155 ,291  
MOL. See Manned  Orbiting Laboratorv. 
Molniya  (U.S.S.R.  communications  satel- 
l i te) ,  10 
Molniya  1-8,  88,  110,  335-336 
Mo ln i ra   I-9.  155.  335-336 
MolnGa  I-IO,  244,335-336 
&Iondale, Sex. Walter F., 25 

298, 

Mondane,  France,  134 
Moneolia.  189-190 
MonYkey  experiment,  47,  95,  151,  181, 273, 
283-284 
Montreal,  Canada,  157, 163 ,295  
Moon,  120-121,  136,  142,  153-154,  158, 
167,  177,190, 221,294,  330-331 
crater,  50,  78,  250,  254-255, 
319 
eclipse, 250 
exploration  of,  22-24,  34,  41,  5 1 5 2 ,  54, 
66,  68,  72-73,  79,  211-212,  222, 
232,  242,  245,  248-249,  259,  267, 
277,  278,  281,  285,  287-288,  289, 
308,  311,327, 329-330,336 
equipment,  51-52,  105,  106 
laboratorv.  79 
landing,  ’33-34,  35-36,  213,  215,  218, 
220,222,233 
manned.  19.  33.  46.  63.  79.  80-81. 
81-82;  87,‘  97,’  105,  112,  f41,  178; 
186,  191,  194,  215,  222,  237,  242, 
245.  246. 
248-249. 
250. 
254. 
255-256, 
i59 ,   265,  267,  27’7,  282; 
287-288,  289,  295,  312,  314,  325, 
328,332 
simulated,  105, 292 
soft,  3,  6, 35-36,335 
unmanned,  112-113,289 
landine simulator.  257 
site,  35-36,  51-52,  66,  265, 
landin; 
266,  319 
Lunar  Science Institute.  53.  267 
nomenclature,  28 
 
I
,
photographs,  6,  23,  35-36,  54,  61,  78, 
215 ,266 ,298 ,326  
probe,  3,  6-7,  42,  81,  83,  278,  282-283 
surface,  3,  6-7,  37,  50,  52,  61,  68,  78, 
181-182,  188,  193-194,  250,  254-255, 
316-317.  319.  330.  33&335..336 
Moore,  Wendell  F.,  107 
Moorer,  Adm.  Thomas  H.  (USN), 14,  314 
Moree. Australia.  120 
Morris,  Mildred  V., 283 
Morton, Dr.  Louis,  1 
MOSCOW ( U S S R . ) ,   10,  211-212,  222, 
316 
accident,  70 
airline service,  163, 194 
airport,  332 
anniversary ceremony, 45-46 
nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty  signing, 
149 
mess  conference.  119. 272 
hea ther   data exchange, 306-307 
Moscow Univ.,  268 
Mt.  Hamilton,  Calif.,  119 
Mount  Hopkins,  Ariz.,  262 
Mount  Locke, Tex.,  294 
Mt.  Palomar Observatory,  82, 300 
Mt.  Wilson  Observatory, 82, 300 
Mrazek, Dr.  William  A.,  122-123 
RISC.  See Manned  Spacecraft  Center. 
MSFC .   See  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center. 
405 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

MSFN.  See  Manned  Space  Flight  Network 
MTF.  See Mississippi  Test Facility. 
Mueller,  Dr.  George  E.,  4-5 
Apollo,  157,  191, 265-266,289 
Apollo  Applications, 41  
award,  199 
launch vehicle,  185 
space program,  37,  51,103,  157,210 
systems engineering,  157, 2% 
technology  utilization,  246,  293-294 
U.S.S.R.  space  program,  186-187 
Mulholland,  Dr.  J. Derral,  120-121 
Muller,  Pau l  M.,  193-194 
Multiple  Independently  Targetable  Reen- 
try  Vehicle  (MIRV) ,  188,  191,  193,  195, 
205 
Mundt,  Sen. Kar l   E.,  71 
Murder  on  Pad 34 ,161  
Murphy,  Charles,  41) 
Murphy,  James  T.,  121  
Murray,  Dr.  Bruce C.,  43,248-249 
Murray, Grover,  115 
Mururoa  Atoll.  153.  156.207-208 
Myers,  Boyd  C.,  II,’163,’283 
hlyskowski,  Edwin  T.,  152 
N 
NAA .   See National Aeronautics Assn. 
Nabrit,  Dr.  Samuel M.,  143 
NACA .   See  National  Advisory  Committee 
fo r  Aeronautics. 
NAE .   See  National  Academy  of  Engineer- 
ing. 
NAR .   See  North  American  Rockwell  Corp. 
NAS .   See  National  Academy  of  Sciences. 
Space  Nuclear  Propulsion 
NASA-AEC 
Office, 65,  75,  94 
Program 
NASA   Apollo  Applications 
O5 c e ,  79 
NA SA   Apollo  S i te   Selection  Board,  35-36 
NASA   Board  of  Contract  Appeals,  83 
PASA   Contract  Adjustment  Board,  83 
NASA   Committee  on  Extra-Vehicular  Ac- 
tivities, 316-317 
NASA  Communications  Network 
(NA S -  
C O M ) ,   5 ,61 ,246  
NA SA   Historical  Advisory Committee,  1 
NA SA   Lunar  and   Planetary  Missions  Ad- 
visory  Board,  2P.30 
NASA  Management  Advisory  Panel,  91-92 
NASA   Manned  Space  Flight  Safety  Office, 
51 ,63 ,  315 
NASA  Office  of  Advanced  Research  and 
Technology  ( O A R T ) ,   34,  44,  57,  67-68, 
97,  121, 163,203, 262 
NASA   Office  of  Aerospace  Safety  Research 
Programs,  121 
NA SA   Office of  Facilities,  120 
NA SA   Office  of  Manned  Space  Flight 
(OMSF) ,  2,  32,  35,  78,  84,  112,  122, 
253,  293,  322 
NASA   Office  of  Space  Science  and  Appli- 
cations 
(O S SA )   2,  24,  34,  50,  55, 
56-57,  152-153,182,185,304,  334 
NASA   Office  of  .Technology  Utilization,  82, 

( N A S )   , 

310 
NASA   Office  of  Tracking  and  Data  Acqui- 
17,  78,  253,  262, 
sition 
(OTDA ) ,  
321-322 
NASA   Pasadena  (Calif.)  Office. 243 
NASA  Post  Apollo Advisory Group,  17 
NASA   Scientific  and  Technical  Informa- 
tion  Facility,  154, 169 
NASC.  See  National  Aeronautics  and  
Space Council. 
R‘ASCOM.  See  NASA   Communications  Net- 
work. 
Natal,  Brazil, 68,  130-131 
Nathan,  Dr.  Robert,  154 
National  Academy  of  Engineering  ( N A E )  , 
31.  75,175.  177 
Aeronautics  ‘ and  Space  Engineering 
Board,  187 
Founders  Medal.  43 
National  Academy  of  Sciences 
255,  312 
annual meeting,  93 
applications  satellite  study,  27,  36,  73, 
76-77,  117,  124-125,219,241-242 
Committee  on  SST-SOniC Boom,  56 
Subcommittee  on  Human  Response, 
134 
Subcommittee on Research, 8 
Computer  Science  and  Engineering 
Board,  134 
contract,  317 
cooperation,  31,  177,  216-217 
Lunar Science Institute,  53, 267 
reuort.  7.36.  152.  291-292.293 
’ 
spHce program,  3k ,90  
Space  Science  Board,  188,  219,  275, 
276 
symposia, 46,  216,  217 
UFO  study  review, 99 
National  Advisory  Committee  for  Aero- 
nautics  ( N A C A ) ,   102,  134-135,  175,  281 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Act,  237, 
248 ,306 ,334  
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Admin- 
istration  ( N A S A )   (see  also  NASA   cen- 
ters, programs,  satellites,  and  related 
headings,  such  a s   Ames  Research 
Center,  Apollo  program,  Essa  V I [ ) ,  
12,  38,  103,  109,  115,  127,  128,  133, 
134.  143. 144,  145,  146, 198, 218,  225, 
247;  275,  280,  287,  291,  294,  295,  301, 
325 
accomplishments,  10-11,  22-24,  36,  48, 
66,  162-163,  215,  232,  235-238,  239, 
248,  249,  253 
Aerospace  Safety  Advisory  Panel,  32, 
87,  122 
agreement.  See Agreement. 
Airborne  Auroral  Expedition,  10-11, 
17, 72 
anniversary,  63,  80,  149,  235,  237,  239, 
253,  334 
Apollo  204  Review  Board.  See  Apollo 
204  Review Board. 

406 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

astronaut.  See  Astronaut. 
awards  and  honors,  2,  39,  70-71,  89, 
91,  194,  199,  235,  260,  276,  281, 
286,300,303,306,  316 
Distinguished  Service  MedaI,  263, 
269 ,283 ,332  
Exceptional  Scientific  Achievement 
Medal, 263,283 
Exceptional  Service  Medal,  194,  269, 
283 
Group  Achievement  Award,  164,  283 
budget,  FY   1969,  7,  18-20,  24,  56,  59, 
75,  99,  119,  126,  129,  135-136, 
139-140,  168,  170,  175-176,  182, 
188,  190,  213,  233,  250,  262,  272, 
276 ,287 ,288 ,334 ,336  
bills signed, 152, 243 
House consideration 
appropriations,  32,  108,  140,  218, 
243 
authorization,  15-16,  32,  33-35, 
41,  43,  44,  47,  48,  50,  53,  99, 
101,  102,  127,  135-136,  152,  170 
interim  operating  plan,  182,  24Q-242 
press  comment,  85,  90,  129,  133,  139, 
141,  182,  194,  215,  229,  255-256, 
324 
Senate consideration 
appropriations,  140,  165-166,  227, 
240-242.243 
authorization, 
30, 
48-50, 
57, 
90-91,  93,  94,  98,  110,  129,  170 
Vietnam  war,  effect  of,  15,  56,  99, 
131, 146, 215 ,245 ,336  
budget, FY  1970,255, 274,294 
conference,  109, 247,  286 
contract, 86,  187, 317,  331 
aircraft,  149 
balloon. 68 
computer  services,  3,  75,  79,  82,  123, 
144,  145,239 
da ta  management, 262 
engine,  9,  26,  35,  113,  149,  207,  227, 
248 ,257 ,262 ,264 ,   275 
facilities,  59,  78-80,  97-98,  122,  146, 
169, 214 ,226 ,245 ,326 ,331  
fuel,  79,  266 
fuel cell, 294 
guidance  and  navigation,  8,  14,  77. 
82,  328 
instrumentation, 80  
launch services,  8 , 3 9 , 5 9 , 7 5  
launch  vehicle, 8,  35,  39,  84,  99,  104, 
123,  127, 144 ,149 ,226 ,275  
nuclear propulsion, 59 ,75  
sounding rocket,  143 
space  equipment,  22,  85-86,  87,  130, 
202,295 
space 
station,  62, 
242-243 
spacecraft,  6 0 4 1 ,   86-87,  120,  146, 
151,163,172,209,281-282 
study, 61,  87, 275 

86-87, 

202, 

support  services,  9,  12,  59,  61,  75, 
79-80,  104,  110,  120,  123,  172,  173, 
239.289.308 
telescope, 184, 202,241) 
tracking,  12,97-98,  143, 146 
cooperation, 235-236 
AEC,  65,82,  156, 170, 335 
Agriculture, Dept.  of,  299 
Commerce, Dept.  of,  299 
ComSatCorp, 335 
DOD,  20,  33,  69-70,  84,  156,  238,  310 
ESSA,  110,262, 335 
FAA,  168 
Geological Survey,  118 
Interior, Dept.  of,  101, 299 
Naval Research Laboratory, 56-57 
USAF, 38,  42,  63,  83,  156,  168,  261, 
335 
USN, 101,299 
cooperation,  international.  See  Interna- 
tional 
cooperation, 
space ;  and 
Sounding  rocket,  international  pro- 
grams. 
criticism, 86,  133 
Aw l lo  AS-204  accident. 25.  223 
' 
Apollo 8 flight, 289,328  ' 
employment, 24,  35,  73-74,  85,  115-116, 
141.  149.  168.  182.  213,  237,  250. 
256,  272,  276,  328,  336 
facilities, 33-35,  164,242,256,  296 
Historical Advisorv  Committee.  1 
launch,  1 
Apollo  5 (AS-204) ,13 ,334  
ApoZZo  6 (AS-502),77,334 
Apollo  7  (AS-205),250-253,334-335 
Apollo  8  (AS-503),  318-322,335 
balloon  (Esp lorer  X X X I X ) ,  182 
cost,  37 
failure,  116,  184-185,  216,  225,  243, 
261 
postponed,  13 
probe,  1 
Pioneer  I X   (Pioneer  D ) ,   273-274 
South  Atlantic  Anomaly  Probe, 
130-131 
Surveyor  V I 1   (Surveyor  G I ,   1,  3, 
335 
reentry  test 
R A M  C-II,198-199,258,  335 
reentry  F experiment, 97,  193 
satellite, 335-336 
A t s  I V   (ATS-D), 184-185 
Aurorae  (Esro I ) ,  240 
Esro II-B,  113 
Essa  V U .  (TOS-E),  V l l l   (TOS-F), 
191-193,311 
Explorer  X X X V I ,   X X X V I I ,  
X X X V I I I ,   X X X I X ,   X L ,  7-8, 
56-57,153-154,182 
Heos-A,  300-301 
Intelsat-Ill  F-2.  314-315 
OW I I   (OAO-A$ 
, 3 0 4  
Ogo  V  (060-E) ,54155  
sounding rocket, 1,62-63 

407 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Aerobee  150,  17,  30,  36,  40,  65,  67, 
104,  115,  128,  175,  206,  211,  214, 
221,  224 
Aerobee  150A.  141.289-290.291 

Arcas.  86.214 
Arcas’I,  60,  175 
Astrobee  1500, 88 
Black  Brandt  IV,  106, 130-131 
Boosted Arcas  11.219.  262 
Javelin,  54,82,  113, 308 
Nike-Apache,  45,  46-47,  64-65,  70, 
76,  90,  126-127,  129-130,  133, 
168.  181.  182-183.  185-186.  197. 
198; 273,’287,  300,’310-311 
I
,
Nike-Cajun,  9,  29,  32-33,  68,  168, 
213-214,  216,  255,  256,  287,  288, 
291,  309-310 
Nike-Tomahawk,  13,  14,  31-32, 
43-44,  45,  49,  53-54,  60,  62-63, 
64-65,  67,  90,  94,  98,  173,  183, 
198, 219-220,  221,223,  256 
Pacemaker,  144 
management.  24.  115.  157.  218-219. 
22$223,284 
’ 
Management  Advisory  Panel,  91-92, 
206 
mamower.  See Emdovment. 
organization,  33,  29,’  84,  95-96,  104, 
116,  120,  121, 303, 316-317 
patents,  145,  187 
personnel,  2,  8-9,  15, 26,  29,  32,  45,  51, 
53,  65,  68,  75,  83, 87,  89,  91-92,  101, 
104,  109,  121,  128,  152-153,  156,  160, 
163.  207.  212-213.  215.  218.  221-222. 
224,  225,  230,  233,239;  245;  246-247; 
268,272-273,  298,  315,  328 
amointment.  5-6.  17.  26.  29.  32.  48. 
51,  87-88;  92,’117,  118,  122-1231 
150,  160, 206,  209,233,264,  318 
death.  152.  173.  293.  298.  315. 
resignation,  13, ‘17,  117, 118, 122-123, 
128,  150, 172, 230,  244,336 
retirement,  112,  243,  266,  272-273, 
298 
~. 
procurement,  3 5 , 4 1  
programs,  1,  14,  22-24,  162,  182,  215, 
241-242 
aeronautics,  19,  25,  33,  34,  47,  48,  57, 
104,  109-110,  118,  125,  162,  166, 
179.  187.  197.  225,  237.  238.  247. 
248;  256,‘270,  288,  313,  317 
astronomy,  18,  19,  24,  30,  33,  34,  41, 
43,  44,  51,  56,  148,  162,  188,  194, 
201,  243,280,  281,  301,  312 
ear th   resources,  7,  19,  50,  73,  85, 
125,257, 334 
international,  2,  20-21,  177, 202,  210, 
254,  336 
manned  space  flight,  4,  19,  25,  34, 
35,  51,  53,  55,  63,  73,  86,  92,  97, 

 

103,  108-109,  112-113,  140,  141, 
180,  188-189,  191,  194,  196,  223, 
243,  245,  265,  276,  278,  282,  311, 
314,. 327-328 
meteoralom.  11. 34.  49.  102.  137.  145 
nuclear  propulsion, ’18, ’19,  33,  34,  44, 
53,  57,  65,  93,  94,  98,  170, 288-289 
sounding  rocket.  1.  10.336 
space  medicine;  151,’ 165,  181,  211, 
218,273,  313 
mace  science,  19, 47,  52,  165,334 
technology  utilization,  20,  36,  41,  48 
tracking  and  data  acquisition,  34-35, 
50 ,65 ,  137 
Research  and  Technology  Advisory 
council,  5 
Semiannual  Report,  249 
supersonic  transport,  26,  47,  131,  233, 
237 
test, 37,  135, 210, 247 
aircraft,  166,  168, 276 
collision-avoidance system,  179 
ion  engine.  303 
IaunchY  vehicle,  21-22,  36,  91,  101, 
166, 206 
l if t ingbody   vehicle,  42,  63,  65,  67-68, 
131,  139,  224-225,  237,  240,  261, 
279,  306, 335 
materials,  144 
nuclear,  131, 143, 156 
parachute,  8,  158,261, 309 
spacecraft,  13,  17,  42-43,  61-62, 
63-64,  78-79,  136,  144,  158,  172, 
173,  181,  193,  197,  201,  206,  208, 
227 
tracking,  144 
VTOL aircraft,  276 
translations,  233 
universities,  35,  39,  48,  90-91,  109-110, 
115,  139-140,  151,  161, 249-250,  275, 
280-281 
grants,  129 ,151  
X-15.  See X-15. 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Council 
(NASC), 7,  31,  79,  105-106,  112,  141, 
202,  274-275,  292,  308 
National  Aeronautics  Assn.  ( N U ) ,   40, 
84,209,  314 
National  Air  and  Space  Museum,  106, 
113 
National Airport  Plan,  278 
National  Airport  System  Plan,  137-138, 
278 
National  Airspace  System, 82 
National  Armed  Forces  Museum 
posed) ,  160 
National  Atmospheric  Sciences Program- 
Fiscal  Year  1969  (Office  of  Science 
and  Technology repor t) ,   101-102 
National  Bureau  of  Standards,  5, 197 
National  Center  for   Atmospheric  Re- 
search  and  Information,  52,  206,  240, 
257-258 
National  Conference  of  United  Press  In -  

(pro-  

408 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

ternational  Editors  and  Publishers,  246 
National  Conference  on  Industrial  Re- 
search,  15 
National  Council  fo r   Social  Studies,  294 
National  Council  on  Marine  Resources 
and Development,  138, 300 
National  Environmental  Satellite  Center, 
233-234 
National  Geodetic  Satellite  Program 
(NGSP )  . 7-8 
National  Geographic  Society,  5, 122 
National  Institute  of  Social  Sciences,  290 
National  Institutes  of  Health  ( N I H ) ,   38, 
325 
National Medal  of  Science,  38 
National P a rk   Service, 156155 
National Pilots Awn.,  203 
National  Press  Club, 22-23 
National  Radio  Astronomy  Observatory, 
161.200. 208-209. 238. 272 
National  Research  Council  ( N R C ) ,   8,  31, 
117, 175, 190, 275 
Committee on  Polar  Research,  73 
Space  Science  Board,  188, 190, 194, 
201. 275 
Na t ion2  Research  Council of  Canada,  72 
Naval Research Laboratory  (NRL )   , 184 
National  Science  Board,  115, 255 
(NSF )  , 36, 
National  Science  Foundation 
89, 190, 196195,255, 312, 325 
Employment  of  Scientists  and  Engi- 
neers  i n  th e  Un i ted  S ta tes ,   1950-1966, 
234 
Federal  Funds  f o r   Research,  Emp loy-  
men t ,   and  O ther   Scientific  A c t i v i -  
t i e s :   Fiscal  Y ea r s   1967, 1968, and 
1969, 333 
funds for,  101-102, 127,227 
grants,  44-45 
National Register  survey, 329 
Research  and  Development  in   Industry, 
1966,290 
Reviews  of  Data  on  Science  Resources, 
99-100 
National  Sea  Grant  College  Program  Act, 
44-45 
National  security,  55-56, 57-58, 99, 162, 
147-148, 194-195,207,210, 235-236 
National  Space  Club,  55-56,  86, 112-113, 
235,293-294 
Astronautics Engineer Award,  194 
Goddard  Memorial  Trophy,  57 
National  Sporting  Aviation  Council,  111 
National Zoo,  273 
NATO.  See  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Or- 
ganization. 
Natural  Environment  Panel,  154-155 
Kaugle,  Dr.  John  E.,  34, 41, 44, 49, 50, 
89,225,243,280 
Naval  Air Facility,  Calif.,  144, 158 
Naval Air  Missile Test  Center,  42 
Naval Missile  Center,  59 
Naval  Ordnance  Test  Station,  China 
Lake, Calif.,  214 

(NR L ) ,   56, 
Naval  Research  Laboratory 
87, 99, 128,247-248,335 
Rocketsonde  Branch,  131 
Naval  Ship  Systems Command, 310 
Navigation  satellite,  53, 187, 215, 217, 
255 
Navy Yard,  Washington,  D.C.,  41-42 
Needles, Calif.,  209-210 
Nellis  AFB,  Nev.,  224,258,316,336 
Nelson,  Sen.  Gaylord,  68 
Nepal,  299 
Neptune  (p lane t ) ,  79, 148 
Nerry,  D.  P.,  66 
NERVA .   See  Nuclear  Engine  for  Rocket 
Vehicle Application. 
NET.  See Nuclear Emereencv  Team. 
Netherlands,  5, 55,  li3, i55,  165, 233, 
292,298 
Neubert,  E.W..  121 
Neumann.  Gerhard.  296 
Nevada, 25-26, 196 
Nevada  Test  Site,  317 
New  Hampshire,  Univ.  of,  31-32, 90, 98, 
103 
New  Jersey,  137,224 
New  Mexico, 249 
New  Mexico  State Univ.,  201 
New Orleans,  La.,  31, 55, 272 
New  Tanay,  Philippines,  103 
New  York  Academy 
Sciences, 
of 
139-140,325 
New  York,  N.Y.,  88, 107, 117, 163, 179, 
187-188, 200, 203, 217, 224, 300, 302 
meetings,  14, 66-67, 128, 247, 258, 290, 
315 
New York  Univ.,  38, 71 
Newark  Airport, 206 
Newark,  N.J.,  194 
Newby,  Dave,  303 
Newell, Dr.  Homer  E.,  14, 28,85, 294 
Newfoundland,  40 
Newport  News  (Va.)  Sh ip   Building  Co., 
167 
News  conference.  See Press  conference. 
Ney,  E.  P.,  177 
NGSP.  See  National  Geodetic  Satellite 
Program. 
Nichols, Mark R.,  283 
Nicks,  Oran W.,  301-302 
NIH.  See  National  Institutes  of  Health. 
Niini,  Prof.  Arrno,  329 
rocket),  30, 
Nike-Apache 
(sounding 
4.3-44 
electron  measurement,  45, 46-47, 181, 
198,287 
instrumentation test,  70 
ionosphere  experiments,  64-65, 130, 198, 
273 
magnetic  field measurement,  181 
micrometeoroid  sampling,  129-130, 130, 
133, 185-186, 197,198, 310-311 
parachute  test,  126-127 
upper  atmosphere  data, 45,46-47,63-64, 
76,  89,  128-129,  168,  182-183, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

183-184,287,300 
Nike-Cajun  (sounding  rocket) 
electron  measurement,  9 
parachute  test, 32-33,213-214 
upper  atmosphere  data,  29,  32-33,  68, 
168, 214,  216,  255,  256,  287,  288,  291, 
309-310 
Nike-Tomahawk  (sounding  rocke t) ,   43-44 
60, 
electron  measurement, 
31-32, 
62-63,  67,  90,  94,  98,  103,  173,  198, 
256 ~. 
instrumentation  test,  31-32 
ionosphere 
experiments,  14,  31-32, 
62-63,  64-65,  90,  94,98,  102 
upper  atmosphere  data,  13,  45,  49, 
53-54,  64-65,  183,  219-220,  221,  223 
(antiballistic  missile  sys tem) ,   43 
Nike-X 
Nikolayeva-Tereshkova,  Maj.  Valentina 
(U.S.S.R.)  , 148 
Nimbus  I  (meteorological  sa te l l i te) ,   145 
Nimbus  II, 145 
Nimbus  B,  1,  49,  116,  145,  225,  241-242 
Nimbus,  B2,  145, 241-242 
Nimbus  D,  3 3 , 4 9 , 6 0 6 1  
Nimbus  E,  49 
Nimbus  F,  49 
Nitric  acid.  168 
Nitrogen, 45,  61 
Nitze,  P au l  H.,  159, 259 
Nixon,  President-elect  Richard  M.,  309, 
332-333 
election,  271-272 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
2 16 
oceanography,  300 
research  and  development,  244,  314, 
324 
science  and  technology,  244,  299,  305, 
310,  314,  323,331 
space  program,  207,  235,  249,  311,  312, 
331 
Nobel  Prize,  267 ,271  
Noise,  aircraft  (see  also  Sonic  boom) ,  
36-37,  38,  104,  142,  197-198,  271, 
290-291 
International  Conference 
Abatement,  117 
NASA   program, 
34,  47,  57,  104, 
109-110,  197,  225-226,  236-237,  238, 
247,248 
regulation,  116, 135 
Noise  and  the  Sonic Boom  in Relation  to 
Man  (repor t) ,   290-291 
Without  Va lue   (repor t) ,  
Noise-Sound 
271 
North  American  Rockwell  Corp. 
151-152.163 
accident,  157 
aircraft,  149,  167, 187, 317,  333 
Apollo spacecraft, 4-5,  167 
contract;  59,  149,  167, 187, 188, 333 
rocket  engine  test,  101 
Rocketdyne  Div.,  10,  126, 207,  227-228, 
257.275 

treaty,  210, 

fo r   Noise 

( N A R ) ,  

Space Div.,  11 
North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization 
( N A T O ) ,   99 ,137 ,139 ,243  
Nuclear  Planning  Group,  88 
North  Korea,  247 
North  Pole,  72,  168,  318-319 
Northrop  Corp.,  11 ,281  
Norair  Div.,  63,  67-68,  87,  135,  1% 
Northrop Systems  Laboratories,  151 
Northwestern  Univ.,  172,  254 
Norton  Research  Corp.,  172 
Norway,  89,  177-178,240 
Notre Dame  Univ.,  112 
Noyes,  Robert  W.,  243-244 
NRC.  See National  Research  Council. 
NRL.  See Naval Research Laboratory. 
NSF .   See National  Science Foundation. 
Nuclear  accelerator,  139 
Nuclear  clock,  170-171 
Nuclear  Engine  for   Rocket  Vehicle  Ap- 
plication  ( N E R V A ) ,   44,  94,  143, 289 
funds   for,  18,  57,  98,  110,  135-136, 
140,  167,  170,  182, 241-242,  289,  336 
NERVA  I ,   33 
NERVA  11,  33 
NERVA   XE-l,156 
Nuclear  fallout,  110 
Nuclear  fission,  220,  265,  298 
Nuclear  Materials  Equipment  Corp. 
( N U M E C ) ,   2 
Nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty,  228 
Geneva  Disarmament  Conference  con- 
sideration,  11, 32,  59,  62 
ratification,  295 
Senate  hearings,  158,  159,  165,  210, 
215-216,236,249 
signing,  149 
U.N.  consideration,  11, 59,  62,  130,  132, 
133, 138, 158 
U.S.  draft  proposal  and  consideration, 
11, 32,  92 
U.S.S.R.  draf t   proposal  and   considera- 
tion,  11 ,32 ,92 ,   145 
Nuclear  aower,  92,  171, 205 
Nuclear  propulsion,  72-73,  75,  93,  94,  97, 
98,  132, 274 
Nuclear  reactor,  131,  143,  156,  221,  298, 
335 
Nuclear  Rocket  Development  Station, 
25-26 
Nuclear  submarine,  42,  153,  160,  169, 
211,  224,261,302-303 
Nuclear  test,  108,  110,  180,  200,  208,  228, 
317 

tems  Div.,  3 2 5 3  
Nuclear  weapons  (see  also  Disarmament 
and   Nuclear  nonproliferation  trea ty) ,  
285,  330 
Communist  China, 200 
France,  153, 156, 180, 200, 266,294 
Japan,  166 

~ 

410 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

NATO  consideration,  88 
US., 160,  191,  211,  224 
U S S R . ,  29 ,42 ,45 -4 ,210 ,255  
Nuclear  Week.  117 
NC’MEC.  See  ‘Nuclear  Materials  E q u i p  
ment  Corp. 

0 
Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory,  28, 
331 
Oakland,  Calif.,  221 
OAO .   See  Orbiting  Astronomical  Observa- 
tory. 
Oao  I  (Orbiting  Astronomical  Observa- 
tory) ,   304 
oao  11  ( o A o - A ~ ) ,  3@4,  310,  335 
OART .   See  NASA  Office  of  Advanaed  Re- 
search and Technology. 
Oberbeck, Verne  R.,  78 
Objectives  and  Goals  i n   Space  Science 
and  Applications,  1968  (NASA   Repor t) ,  
334 
O’Bryant,  Capt.  William  T.  (USN ,   Re t .) ,  
2 
Observatory  satellite.  See  Orbiting  Astro- 
nomical  Observatory;  Orbiting  Geo- 
physical  Observatory ;  Orbiting  Solar 
Observatory. 
Ocean  of  Gagarin  (proposed  name  for 
Ocean  of  S torms) ,  190 
Ocean  of  Storms  (moon) ,  35-36,  190 
Ocean  Science  and  Engineering,  Inc.,  152 
Oceanography 
grants,  44-45 
international  aspects,  56,  117-118,  138, 
177, 317 
research,  101,  152,  227,  262,  295,  310, 
311 
satellite  use  in,  73, 85,  117, 262 
U S .   program,  27,  105,  167,  284,  300, 
325 
O’Connor,  B/G  Edmund  F. 
( U S A F ) ,   20, 
4s.  30.1 
- 7   - - -  
Oettinger,  Dr. Anthony G.,  134 
Office  National  $Etudes  et  de   Recherches 
A6rospatiales  ( O N E R A ) ,   9,  134 
Office of  Naval Research  ( O N R )  , 312 
Office  of  Science  and  Technology  (Presi- 
dent’s),  101-102,  325 
OGO.  See  Orbiting  Geophysical  Observa- 
tory. 
Ogo   I 
(Orbiting  Geophysical  Observa- 
to ry ) ,  55 
O m  11. 54 
0:;  I l l ,  55 
Ogo  v  (OGO-E),  1,  54-55,  132-133,  335 
Ogo I V ,  55,  72 
OGO-F,  1, 19 
O’Hagan, Michael,  278 
O’Hair,  Mrs.  Madalyn  Murray,  328 
O’Hare  International Airport, 206 
Ohio,  227 
Ohio State Univ.,  257-258 
Okinawa,  137 
Oklahoma,  249 

Oklahoma, Univ.  of, 325 
O’Leary,  Dr.  Brian T., 92,  200 
Omega  Position  Location  Equipment 
(OPLE ) ,   144 
OMSF .   see  NASA   office  of  Manned  Space 
Flight. 
ONERA.  See  Office  National  d’Etudes  e t  
d e  R e ch e r ch e  A6rospatiales. 
ONR .   See Office of  Naval Research. 
Onsager,  Prof.  Lars, 266 
Operation  Tektite,  101 
OPLE.  See  Omega  Position  Location 
Equipment. 
Orbiting Astronomical Observatory  (OAO )   , 
1, 8,  99,  243 
Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory  (OGO )   , 
19, 44 
01 biting  Primate  Experiment,  151 
Orbiting  Solar  Observatory  ( o s o ) ,  1, 243 
Orbiting  Vehicle  (research  satellite) .I  335 
Ordahl,-Douglas  D.,  3-4 
Ornithopter,  282 
Ortona,  Ambassador  Egidio  ( I t a ly ) ,   276 
oso.  See Orbiting Solar Observatory. 
Os0  I1  (Orbiting  Solar  Observatory),  177 
Os0  I l l   (Orbiting  Solar  Observatory),  93  
OSO I V ,  243-244 
oso-e,  244 
OSSA.  See  NASA  Office  of  Space  Sci- 
ence and Applications. 
Oster,  Dr.  Irwin,  325-326 
OTDA.  See  NASA  Office  of  Tracking  and 
Data Acquisition. 
Otolith  experiment, 86 
O’Toole,  Thomas, 225,303,  312-313 
- 
Outstanding  Young Men   o f   America,  129 
OV  1-15  (orbiting  vehicle  research  satel- 
l i t e ) ,  159 
OV  1-16,159 
ov  1 1 4 , 2 2 8  
OV   V-2.  See Ers  X X V I I I .  
O l r  V - 4 .  See Ers  X X I .  
Ovshinsky, Stanford R.,  276 
Owens-Illinois  Co.,  184 
Fecker  Div..  184 
Oxygen,  61-62,  318 
P 
(U.K.  VTOL  aircraft), 276-277 
P-1127 
Pacemaker  (boos ter) ,  144 
Pacemaker,  cardiac,  26  
Pacific  I  (communications  sa te l l i te) .   See 
Intelsat-I1 F-2. 
Pacific  I1  (communications  sa te l l i te) .  
See Intelsat-11  F A .  
Pacific Missile Range  (PMR )   , 42 
Aero-Mechanical  Branch,  67 
Pacific Ocean,  254,  258,268 
Apollo  6 ,  77-78 
Apollo  8,  320,  323 
A t s   111, 37 
communications  satellite,  69,  103 
French  nuclear  test,  153, 156, 180 
missile  launch,  3,  121-122 
Sealab  I11 experiment,  295 

411 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

U.S.S.R.  rocket  test,  116,  121-122 
Pacific Science Center.  217-218 
Packard,  David,  331 
Packard,  Robert  F.,  2-3 
P u e  Communications  Eneineers.  Inc..  88 
- 
,
,
Pa ie ,  William A.,  283 
Paine Field, Wash.,  201 
Paine.  Dr.  Thomas 0.. 257.318.366 
.
,
.
 
aeronautics, 225 
Apollo 8 Bight, 266,278 
awards by,  283 
budget, 24&242,255,286,  288,294 
nomination  a s   Deputy  Administrator, 
26, 32 ,68 ,212  
space program,  223,288 
Pakistan,  138, 198 
Pakistan  Space  and  Upper  Atmosphere 
Research Committee,  18 
Palestine, Tex.,  116, 257 
Pan   American  World  Airways,  107-108, 
163,232 
Parachute 
Apollo,  8,  la, 158 
funds for,  126 
steerable, 57,  112 
test,  8,  32-33,  57,  126,  la, 158.  213, 
227.261.  309 
Voyager,  227 
Parafoil  (steerable  parachute),  112 
Paraglider,  187 
Parawing  (steerable  parachute),  57 
Pardoe, K. C.  C.,  278 
Parin,  Vasili,  105 
Parker,  Dr.  John  A.,  265,283 
Parker,  P. J.,  234 
Parker,  Robert  A.  R.,  113 
Parkinson, William H.,  243 
Parsons, John  F.,  263,298 
Particles,  charged,  31,  53,  65,  68,  182, 
216-217 
Patent,  43,  107,  131,  143,  145.  151-152, 
156, 172, 187 
Paternotte de  l a  Va 

PCA. See Po la r  Cap Absorption. 
Pecora, W. T.,  i 9 1  
Peddie, Norman  W.,  89 
Pegasus  I  (meteoroid detection  satellite), 
20.3 
Pegasus  11,203 
Pegasus 111,203 
Pell, Sen.  Claiborne, 56,  105 
Pennsylvania, Univ.  of, 160 
Perception  of  Space  and  T ime   in   the 
Cosmos,  81  
Percy,  Sen.  Charles  H., 25,  210 
Perdasdefogu, Sardinia, 108 
Perkinson, William J., 205 
Perrin  AFB, Tex.,  158 
Perry,  Robert  L.,  1 
Perseid meteor shower, 185-186 
Peru,  160 
Petrov, Prof.  Boris,  327-332 

 

Petrov,  Prof.  Georgy  I.,  287-288 
Petrovich,  Prof.  Georgy V.,  36 
Pewee  1 (nuclear  reactor),  335 
Pezdirtz, Dr.  George F., 39 
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  189, 231,247 
Philco-Ford Corp.,  61,  194 
Space  and  Re-Entry  Systems  Div.,  9, 
231,244 
Philiooines.  137 
Phil&  Ronald J.,  230 
“Phillips Report,”  25 
Phillips,  L/C  Samuel  C. 
(WA F ) .   92-93, 
97, i g i ,  196,266,278,322-323 
‘ 
Phobos  (Mars moon),  281-282 
Phoebus  2A 
(nuclear  reac tor) ,   25-26, 
131,  143, 156,  335 
Phoenix,  Ariz.,  288 
Phoenix  (missile),  14,  98-99,  160 
Photography  zenith  tube  (PZT) , 134 
Photography.  See  Advanced  Vidicon 
Camera  System;  Automatic  Picture 
Transmission; 
Earth, 
photographs ; 
Moon,  photographs. 
Photometer. 67.  82.  121 
Physical  Research  Laboratory,  Ahmeda- 
bad,  India,  273 
Physics,  93,  102,  154,  275,  325 
Physics  o f   the  Earth  in   Soace-A  P ro -  
gram  o f ’ l ie sea rch :  1968-1’975,275 
Piekering,  Dr.  William  H.,  15, 22-23,  29, 
79.89.260 
P in eG ap ,  Australia, 329 
Pinkel,  I. Irving, 96 
Pioneer  (urogram).  26.  44.273-274 
Pioneer  V I   -(interplaneta&  p robe ) ,   209, 
274 
Pioneer  V I I ,  138,274 
Pioneer  V I I I ,  112, 138-139,274 
Pioneer  IX  (Pioneer D) , 1,273,  335 
P ipe r  Aztec  (light a ircraf t) ,   207 
Piper  Twin  Comanche  (light  a i r c r a f t ) ,  
179 
Pippard,  Alfred J.  S., 91 
Pittsburgh  Des  Moines  Steel  Co., 
214-215 
~-  ~ _ _  
Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  210 
Pittsburgh,  Univ.  of,  36 
Phn e t a r y   Exploration.  196&75 
port) ,- i8ti.489 
Planets,  life  on.  See  Extraterrestrial  life. 
P lan t  experiments, space,  43 
Plastics, 39,  265 
Plesetsk  Cosmodrome,  U.S.S.R.,  126,  132, 
165,279,289,295 
Plohr,  H.  Warren, 104 
Plotkin,  Dr.  Henry H., 71,  183 
Plowshare, Project,  110 
Pluto  (p lane t) ,   326 
PMR. See Pacific Missile Range. 
Podgorny,  President  Nikolay  V. 
(U.S.S.R.),  72 
Point  Barrow,  Alaska,  29,  216,  255,  256, 
287,  288,291,310 
Pokrovsky,  Prof.  Georgi, 95,  119 
412 

(re. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Poland,  189 
Polar  Cap Absorption  (PCA) , 129 
Po la r  wind, 216 
Polaris  (missile),  9,148,  193 
Polaroid  Corp.,  38 
Pollack,  Martin A.,  39 
Pollution  control,  10,  66 ,323  
Pcnnamperuma, Dr.  Cyril A.,  16 ,22  
Po r t  of  New York Authority,  5,  26,  188 
Porter,  Dr.  Richard W.,  136-137 
Portland,  Ore.,  119 
Poseidon  (missile),  18-19,  61,  159,  193, 
195.312 

Presidential  Task  Force  on  Communica- 
tions Policy,  27 
President’s  Advisory  Committee  on  Su -  
personic  T ran spoa ,  207,270 
i 
President’s  Commission  and  Council  on 
Marine Sciences, 27 
President’s  Foreign  Intelligence  Advisory 
Board,  45 
President’s  Science  Advisory  Committee, 
40,  76-77,270 
Press  comment 
air  tr&c  congestion,  188, 196,  199-200 
airports,  302 
antiballistic  missile  ( A B M )   system,  143 
Apollo  AS-204,  accident,  161,  222-223, 
3fid 
-I * 
Apollo  6  flight, 80-81, 81-82 
Apollo  7  flight,  253,  261-262,  264,  265 
Apollo  8  flight,  323-32,  324-325,  327- 
328,  329-331 
C-5A  cargo  aircraft,  150,  155 
disarmament,  149-150,  161 
European  Launcher  Development  Or- 
ganization  ( E L D O ) ,   233 
F-111,270 
F - I l lA ,   75 
fractional  orbital  bombardment  system, 
102,255 
International  Biological  Program,  126 
lunar  landing,  261,  271 
mathematics,  293 
moon,  exploration  of, 255,  281 
Multiple  Independently  Targetable  Re- 
entry  Vehicle,  188,  191,  195, 205 
National Academy of  Sciences,  152 
NASA ,   223,  284 
NRC  Space Science  Board,  194, 201 
nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty,  128,  133 
oceanography,  117 
Paine, Dr.  Thomas O.,  215 
research and  development, 152 
science  and  technology,  271,  301 
sonic  boom,  115, 135,152 
space  program,  national,  15,  90,  101, 
185,  194, 229,  234,  253,  255,  256,  271, 
284,  293,332 
budget,  85,  90,  129,  133,  139,  141, 
182, 194,  215,  229,255,256,325 

space race,  102 ,266 ,271 ,325  
supersonic  transport,  220,  263,  270,  332 
U.S.S.R.  space  program,  87,  255,  267, 
271 
Webb,  James  E.,  215,  218,221,229 
Zond  V mission,  222, 223,  226 
Press  conference, 40 
airports,  194 
Apollo 5 flight, 63  
Apollo  6 flight, 63,92 
Apo l lo   7  flight,  220,277 
ApoUo  8  flight,  196,  278,  285,  304, 
322,326,330 
ARMS  (Application  of  Remote  Manipu- 
lators in  Space ) ,  186 
astronaut,  164 
balance  of  payments  deficit, 1 
electronics,  276 
hydrogen  bomb, 200 
manned  space flight, 63,  286 
science  and technology,  314 
sonic  boom,  11, 1% 
Soyuz  I l l ,   272 
space  program,  national,  15,  212-213, 
254,314,  328 
space suit,  1 7 6 1 7 7  
Surveyor  V U ,  50 
U.S.S.R. 
space  program,  15,  226,  254, 
267-268,286287,329-330 
Webb,  James E.,  212-213 
Zond  V ,  222,  226-227,,  267 
Princess  Ragnhild  Coast,  89 
Princeton Univ.,  90,  93,  116, 221,  298 
Princeton Univ.  Observatory,  104,282 
Pritchard,  Capt.  J. Laurence  (RAF )  , 91 
Probe  (see  also  individual  probes,  such 
a s   Mariner  V ,  Pioneer  V l l l ,  Pioneer 
IX ,  Venus I V )  
interplanetary,  1,  18,  19,  41,  44, 84, 
140,  148,  178,  188-189,  201,  241, 
273-274,280-281, 
336 
lunar. See Luna X IV ,  Lunar Orb i ter   V ,  
Zond  V ,   Zond  V I .  
Mars,  118,  188-189,  248-249,  301-302 
Venus,  17,  163,  188-189, 
248-249, 
275-276 
The Promise  of  Space, 147 
Propeller Club,  119 
“Prospects  in   Aeronautics  Research  and 
Development”  (Wright  Brothers  Lec- 
t u r e ) ,  38-39 
Pro ton   IV 
(U.S.S.R. 
space  s ta t ion ) ,  
28P-285,  335 
Proton  accelerator,  316 
Prugh,  Peter  H.,  272 
Puckett,  Dr.  Allan  E., 5 
,  323 
Puerto  Rico,  37,  54,  64-65,  230,  238, 
238, 
Pulsar,  114,  119,  128,  161,  171,  231, 
253,  272,284,292 
Puppis  (constellation),  67 
Purdue Univ.,  103,281 
PZT. See  Photographic  zenith  tube. 
Q 
Quaide,  Dr.  William  L.,  78 

413 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Quark  (theoretical  elementary  particle  of 
ma t ter) ,   316 
Quasar  (quasi-stellar  ob jec t) ,   239,309 
Oueen  Maud  Land.  89 
Quiet  Research  Engine  Program,  47,  197, 
248 
Quito,  Ecuador,  I46 
R 
Radar,  7-8,  49,  80,  129,  136,  145,  179, 
181, 238,  248 ,272 ,291  
Radiation, 277 
cosmic, 46. 87.115,200.228.  272 
,
,
 
effects,  46; 62;  168 
gamma,  52,  55, 181-182,281, 
measurement,  115,  131, 168 ,257 ,282  
nuclear,  110 
sensor,  257 
solar, 56,  121, 168,269, 296,300 
Radio  Astronomy  Explorer-A,  1 
Radio  Corporation  of  America  (RCA )   , 43, 
75.86.  239.  293 
Radio  signal;  54,  136,  153,  184,  199,  210, 
229 ,238 ,249 ,   262,  319 
Radioactivity.  56 
Radioastronomy,  54,  189,  200,  231,  238, 
272,  312 
Radiotelescope,  65, 219, 238 
Raffensperger,  M.  J., 84 
Raisting,  W.  Germany,  329 
R A M   (Radio  Attenuation  Measurement) 
Project,  198 
(spacecraft),  199 
RAM   C-I 
RAM   C-11,  198-199,  258,  335 
Ramey, James E.,  143 
RAND  Corp.,  1 ,104 ,  166, 248-249 
Ra t   experiment, 286-287,  289-290.  291 
Raymond  Loewy/William  Snaith, 
Inc, 
86-87 
Razdow,  Dr.  Adolph,  121 
KCA .   See  Radio  Corporation  of  America. 
RCA   Communications,  Inc.,  154,307 
RCA   Laboratories,  43 
RCA   Services Co.,  120, 143 
Reconnaissance satellite 
US . ,   22-24, 
109,  185-186,  206-207, 
208,228,  255,  262-263,278 
U.S.S.R.,  22-24,  178,  180,  202,  262-263 
Record 
aircraft,  11-12,  207,  299,  317-318 
balloon.  209-210.  240 
spacecraft,  334-335 
Redstone  Arsenal,  Ala.,  72 
Reed,  Robert  D.,  65  
Reed,  Sylvanus  Albert,  Award,  15,  263, 
316 
Reentry,  17  
Apollo  7,  251 
control,  277-278 
heating,  97,  163,  181,  193, 226-227,  230 
radio  attenuation,  193,  198-199,  258, 
3.15 
spacecraft  debris,  164 
test,  193,  198-199 
vehicle  163, 194, 292 

Reentry  Heating  Project,  97,  193 
Rees,  Dr.  Eberhard  F.  M.,  32,  122-123 
Reese AFB,  Tex.,  200 
Reeves, Edmond  M.,  243-244 
Reid,  Dr.  Henry J.,  173 
Reining,  Dr.  Henry,  Jr.,  32 
Relativity  theory,  49,  238-239 
Rembaum,  Dr.  Alan,  283 
Rendezvous, 145, 186,  191,295 
U.S., 
22-24, 
136,  190,  220,  223, 
236-237,  250 
U.S.S.R.,  40,  263,264-265,  335-336 
Renzetti,  Dr.  N.  A.,  209 
Report  to  Congress  from  President  of 
United  States,  Un i ted   States  Aeronau- 
t ics   and  Space  Activities, 1967,  20-21, 
148 
Republican  Coordinating  Committee,  99, 
- - -  
1 os 
Republican  National  Convention,  178-179 
Research  and  development  (R&D ) ,   46,  105, 
150 
aeronautics,  38-39,  187,  225-226,  248, 
296 
benefits,  127, 244,  271,275,  294 
emdovment.  234.  289.  290 
127, 
suppo&  27,  101-102, 
Federal 
131-132, 
152, 
139-140, 
14C-141, 
156-157.  180,  208,  244,  258,  271, 
291-292,  294,  301,  323 
funds   for,  27,  101-102,  127,  131-132, 
136-137,  139-140,  141,  258-259 
296,  333 
DOD.  20.  131-132.  239-240,  290.  299 
NASA,  19,  165-166,  290,299 
U.S.S.R.,  309 
Research  and  Development  in   Industry, 
I966  ( N S F   repor t) ,   290 
Research  and  Technology  Advisory  Coun- 
cil  ( N A S A ) ,   5 
Resler,  Prof.  Edwin  L.,  146 
Resolute Bav. Canada.  175 
Retriever  (NA SA   motor  vessel),  59 
Retromotor,  6, 17  
Reuss,  Rep.  Henry S.,  70 
Revenue  and  Expenditure  Control  Act  of 
1968, 140, 145-146,336 
Reynolds  Electrical  and   Engineering  Co., 
122-123 
Rhode  Island,  Univ.  of,  131 
Riccitiello.  Salvatore. 265 
Rice  Un iv ,   52, 53,  92,  181 
Richey, B.  J.,  135 
Rickover.  V / A   H ~ m a n  G.  (uSN),  83-84. 
160.  169. 261 
. 
Riegel,  Dr:  Kurt, 247 
Risk,  Don  C.,  41-42 
Robb,  Mrs.  Lvnda,  292 
Roberts,  Chades  S., 26-27 
Rochester, Univ.  of, 292 
Rockefeller,  Gov.  Nelson  B.,  180, 333 
Rockefeller  Public  Service  Award,  281, 
300 
Rockefeller  Univ.,  76-77 
Rogallo,  Francis M.,  187 

414 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Rogallo,  Gertrude,  187 
Rogallo  wing  (parag l ider) ,   187 
Rogers, Rep.  P au l  G.,  247 
Rogers,  William P.,  309 
Rolls-Royce, Ltd.,  72 
Bristol  Engine Div.,  316 
Romania,  32,  156,  189-190,292,  317 
Romanian  National  Council  of  Scientific 
Research,  140 
Roosa,  Capt.  S tuar t  A.  ( U S A F ) ,   59 
Rooster  experiment, 218 
Rosamond  Dry  Lake,  261 
Rosen,  Dr. Harold  A.,  77 
Rosman,  N.C.,  119, 143 
Roush,  Rep.  J. Edward,  99 
Rover  (program),  19 ,94 ,  123, 156, 170 
Rowan,  Carl T.,  263-264 
Royal Aeronautical  Society, 70-71 
(U.K.) , 
Royal  Greenwich  Observatory 
134 
Royal  Norwegian  Council  for   Scientific 
and  Industrial Research,  177-178 
Rubey,  Prof.  William W.,  267 
Rudolph,  Dr.  Arthur,  112, 283 
Rudolph,  Capt. Gerald  T.  (W A F ) ,   297 
Rumford,  S i r  Benjamin  Thompson,  Count, 
309 
Rumford  Premium,  309 
Rusk,  Secretary  of  State  Dean,  159,  247 
Russell,  Sen. Richard  B.,  138 
Rutgers  Univ.,  12,  224  ' 
Ryan  Aeronautical  Co.,  166,  177,  276-277 
Ryan,  Rep.  William F.,  25 
S 
SAAP.  See  South Atlantic  Anomaly  Probe. 
Sacramento Peak Observatory,  296 
Sadeh, Dror,  184 
Sanger, Dr.  Eugen,  300 
Safety,  32,  95-96, 
122-123,  157,  163, 
220,  237,  251-253,  264,  273 
Sagan, Dr.  Carl,  172 
Sage  (Semi-Automatic  Ground  Environ- 
men t)   svstem. 238 
Saigon,  S.-Vietnam,  104 
St. Clair, Wade,  117 
St. Helena  island,  257 
St.  Louis, Mo.,  108, 207 
5%.  Thomas Univ.,  Tex.,  325-326 
Sakharov,  Prof.  Andrey  D.,  159,  195-196 
Salam,  Abdus,  198 
Salisbury,  Dr.  John W.,  170,250 
Samfield. Edwin.  145 
San Antonio,  Tex,  141 
Sar. Clemente Island,  Calif.,  143, 295 
San Dieso,  Calif..  104,  207 
San Francisco,  Calif.,  42 
Sail  Jose,  Calif.,  285-286 
San Miguel Island,  116, 242 
Sanders Associates,  Inc.,  75 
Sanders, Newel1 D.,  104 
Sandia  Corp.,  32 
Sandpiper  (missile), 3-4 
Sen ta  Cruz,  Calif.,  5 1 5 2  
San ta  Monica,  Calif.,  166-167 

San ta   Susana,  Calif.,  113 
Santiago, Chile,  146 
Satellite  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition 
Network  ( STADAN ) ,   5,  12,  104,109 
Sato,  Prime  Minister  Eisaku,  327 
Sa turn   (planet),  79,  148, 275 
Saturn I  (booster), 21-22,  149 
Saturn  I  Workshop 
(spacecraft),  162, 
218-219 
contract,  62  
design  review meeting,  22,  66 
funds  for,  102-103,  182 
plans  for,  33,  108-109,  186,  202,  241, 
275 
Sa tum- lJ3   (boos ter) ,   140,  148,  149,  210, 
218-219,275 
contract,  9,  61,  75,  77,  175-176,  207, 
239 
engine 
H-1 ,9 ,207  
J-2.119-120 
launch 
AS-204.  13 
AS-2051  173,250-253 
program,  11 ,20 ,   24,33,  92-93,  175-176, 
212-213.  241.  336 
stage,  S-IVB  test,  10,  13 
test,  13,  21-22,  91,  136,  144,  173,  186, 
242 
Saturn  V  (booster),  44,  78,  93,  148,  149, 
190, 191, 274 
capability,  52,  80-81,  81-82,  98,  186, 
236,255-256 
contract,  35,  75,  77,  104,  127,  163, 
175-176,226,  264,  275 
engine 
F-1,  30,257,  275 
5-2,  77,  92,119-120,  135,220,  252 
launch 
AS-502,  63,77-78,  166, 328 
AS-503,  144, 173, 318-322 
AS-504  (preparations f o r ) ,  197 
program,  11,  18,  24,  33-34, 
42,  63, 
97,  98,  140,  144,  162, 
92-93, 
175-176,  181,  212-213,  232,  242, 
321-322,  336 
stage 
1st  ( S I C ) ,  166, 173 
test, 77 
2nd  (S-111,  30,  36,  4 7 4 8 ,   53,  173, 
197 
tesi;  77,  122 
3rd  (S-IVB),  10,63,  173, 186 
test.  77 
Saturn  V'  Workshop 
(spacecraft),  10, 
20,  33,  35,  109,  142,  182 
Schafer,  Col.  George E.  (U SAF )  , 11 
Scherer,  Capt.  Lee  R.  (USN ,   Ret.),  2 
Srhindlar, William  R.,  283 
S ch in a ,   Capt.  Walter  M.,  Jr.,  (usN), 
261-262,  305 
Apollo  7  flight,  250-251,  252 
preparations  for,  97,  158,  173,  220, 
227 
honors,  269,286,303,  314 
415 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

press  conference,  220,276 
White House visit,  306 
Schmidt,  Edward  J., 264 
Schmidt,  Dr.  Maarten,  309 
Schneider, William  C.,  223,  315 
Schriever and McKee Associates,  233 
(USAF,  Ret.), 
Schriever,  Gen.  Bernard  A. 
55-56,  99 
Schwartz,  I.  R.,  109-110 
Schweickart, Russell  L.,  97,  167,  196 
Science  (see  also  National  Academy  of 
Sciences),  188-189 
award,  38 ,217-218 ,266267 ,271  
benefits,  110,  195-196,301 
Government  support  of,  90-91,  93,  110, 
131-132,  139-140,  270,  271,  301,  314, 
323 
human  needs,  16,  110,301 
national  policy  and  goals,  10,  38-39, 
98.  135.  178-179.  180-181. 
90-91. 
207,  $a, 299,  301-302,  305,  314,  33 i  
President’s  Science Advisory  Committee, 
40,  76-77,270 
U.S.S.R.,  63.  93.  195-196.  244 
Science,  Dept.  of  (proposed), 325,331 
Science  Advisory  Committee 
(Presi- 
dent’s).  See  President’s  Science  Advis- 
ory  Committee. 
Science 
and  Public  Policy  Studies 
Group,  284 
Scientific Balloon  Flight  Station,  116 
Scientist-astronaut,  36,  51-52,  200 
Scientists,  99-100, 
152,  156-157,  234, 
247,  254-255,  257,  289,290,  301,  323, 
329 
women,  99-100 
Scorpius  (constellation), 247-248,  273 
Scott,  L/C  David  R.  ( U S A F ) ,   97,  167,  211 
Scout  (boos ter) ,  53,  56, 97,  113,  123, 182, 
193, 198, 240,  255-256 
Scout  (sounding  rocke t) ,   160-161,  308 
Scrag  (U.S.S.R.  weapon), 255 
Scrimp,  Project,  171 
Sea  of  Tranquility  (moon) ,  35-36 
Seaborg,  Dr.  Glenn  T.,  117,  143,  205,  211, 
217-218,  228 
Seal Beach,  Calif.,  30 
Sealab I  (underwater labora tory) ,  295 
Sealab 11,  143, 295 
Sealab III, 41-42,  143, 295 
Seamans,  Dr.  Robert  C.,  Jr.,  3,  5-6,  26, 
53 ,57 ,156 ,268  
Seattle,  Wash.,  217-218 
Seckbach, Dr.  Joseph,  302 
SECOR  (geodetic  satellite),  7 -8  
The  Security  of  Japan  and  Prospects  for 
1970.  (s tudy) ,   166  
Security  Research  Council,  166 
Sedov,  Prof.  Leonid  I.,  212,  254,  267-268, 
329-330 
Seifert,  Dr.  William W.,  99 
Seismometer, 282-283 
Seitz,  Dr.  Frederick,  7,  76-77,  90,  255, 
267 
Selenographica, 27-28 

Sensor,  2,  39,  50,  11 
Sentinel  (antiballistic  missile  system), 
18-19,  72,  88,  122,  133,  138,  159,  171, 
175,242 
Sentinel  System Command,  72 
Serpukhov,  U.S.S.R.,  154,316 
SCRT 11  (Space  Electric  Rocket  T e s t ) ,   26 
Service  module  (SM), 13,  14,  63,  136, 
144, 186, 197 ,201  
Service  propulsion  system  (SPS) , 77-78, 
136 
Service Technology  Corp.  (LTV )  , 123 
Seryogin,  Col.  Vladimir  S. 
(U.S.S.R.), 
70,  72 
Sewage  sludge,  281 
Shafer,  Edward  M.,  83 
SHAPE  (Supersonic  High  Altitude  Para- 
chute Experiment)  Project,  261,  309 
Shapiro,  Dr.  Irwin  I., 49 
Sheldon,  Dr.  Charles  S.,  11,  202 
Shenton,  Samuel,  331 
Sherman,  Harvey,  26 
Shillito,  Thomas B.,  26 
Shipley, Rep.  George E.,  284 
Siding  Spring  Mountain  Observatory,  290 
Siebel,  Dr.  Mathias  P.,  272-273 
Sikorsky  Aircraft  Div.,  United  Aircraft 
COrD..  38 
Sikorsiy,  Igor  I.,  38 
Silver, Brent W.,  148 
Silverstein,  Dr.  Abe,  41,281,  283.  300 
Simpson,  Ernest  C.,  15. 
Simpson, Dr.  John A.,  90-91 
Simpson, Robert  W.,  224 
Siple, Dr.  P au l  Allman,  293 
Sjogren, William  L.,  193-194 
Skolnikoff, Prof.  Eugene B.,  284 
Skylark  (U.K.  sounding  rocke t) ,   70,  123 
Skynet  (U.K.  communications  satellite), 
1,60,  121, 137 
SLAC.  See  Standford  Linear  Accelerator. 
Sloan  Foundation,  284 
Sloan  School of  Management,  53 
SIW See Service module. 
Smart,  Gen.  Jacob  E.  (USAF ,   Ret.),  237, 
299 
Smelt, Dr.  Ronald, 5 
Smith, Dr.  Ar thur  H.,  218 
Smith,  Secretary  of  Commerce  C.  R.,  40, 
127 
Smith,  Francis B.,  249-250 
Smith, Prof.  Frederick  E.,  115 
Smith,  Dr.  Graham, 253-254 
Smith,  Dr.  Harlan J., 294 
Smith,  Dr.  Henry J.,  89 
Smith,  Sen. Margaret C.,  30,  86 
Sniithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory 
(Cambridge, Mass.),  201,262,  304 
Smithsonian  Institution,  106,  120, 160 
Smyth,  Henry  DeWolf,  198 
SNAP-8  (nuclear  reac tor) ,   25-26,  57,  59 
SNAP-19 
(radioisotope  genera tor) ,   242 
Snyder,  Conway W.,  283 
Society  for  the  History  of  Technology, 

416 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

325 
Society  of  Automotive  Engineers  Space 
Technology  Conference,  108-109 
Solar  corona, 97 
Solar 
flare,  56-57, 
110,  121,  128, 
157-158,  168,  198,  210-211,  243-244, 
266,296 
Solar  Particle  Alert  Network  ( SPAN ) ,   121 
Solar  Pointing  Aerobee  Rocket  Control 
System  (SPARCS ) ,   65 
Solar  wind,  68,  91,  282-283 
Solar  Wind  Composition  Experiment,  68 
Solid propellant,  3-4,  43,  68-69 ,274  
Sonic boom 
damage,  56,  117,  142-143,  154-155, 
227,  290-291 
regulation  of,  115,  116, 130, 271 
research  8,  11,  109-110,  142-143,  146, 
158, 313 
National  Academy  of  Sciences  report, 
8,56,142-143,  152 
supersonic  transport,  8,  11, 56,  66-67, 
109-110,  115,  117,  125,  135,  142-143, 
146,290-291,332-333 
Sonnett, Dr.  Charles  P.,  316 
Sorokin,  Dr.  Pe ter   P.,  169 
Sounding  rocket 
(see  also 
individual 
sounding 
rockets:  Aerobee  150A, 
Aerobee  150  MI,  Arcas,  Astrobee 
1500,  Boosted  Arcas,  Boosted  Dart, 
Javelin,  Nike-Apache,  Nike-Cajun, 
Nike-Tomahawk,  Skylark) 
foreign 
U k ,  123 
international  programs,  29,  30,  69, 75, 
123,336 
ESRO. i08 .   118 
NASA-Brazil,  68,  130, 177 
-Canada,  11,  14, 29,  36,  43,  49,  53, 
54.  67.  90.  94.  98,  103.  106.  113. 
. 
,
.
  , 
12& 175.  329 
, 
-Germany,’West, 75,  130, 133 
-India, 30,  60,  75,  273 
-Norwav. 177-178 
h e r t i  Rico,  64-65 
-Spain,  177-178 
-Sweden, 29,130,  177-178 
South America.  184-185.  318-319 
South  Atlantic  Anomaiy  Probe   ( SAAP )   , 
130-131,173 
South Georgia,  37 
South Pole,  89  
Southeast  Asia,  195 
Southern  California,  Univ.  of, 82 
Southwest  Astronomical  Conference,  201 
Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  63,  272,  298 
Council  for   International  Cooperation 
i n   Investigation  and  Utilization  of 
Outer Space,  327 
Soviet c o r p s  of  Cosmonauts,  70 
Soviet Women’s  Committee,  148 
Sowers,  L/C  Robert  G.  (U SAF ) ,   8 
soyuz  (U.S.S.R.  spacecraft),  40,  222,  268 
Soyuz I ,  70 

Soyuz 11,263,264-265,335-336 
I l l ,   266265 ,   269,  272,  277, 
Soyuz 
335-336 
SP-5B 
(flying  bo a t ) ,  
(Mar t in   Marlin) 
160 
(USAF,  Ret.), 
Spaatz,  Gen.  Car l   A. 
104-105  . 
Space Age Law Conference,  62 
Space  App l ica t ions   Summer  Study,  1967, 
Interim  Report,  36 
Space biology, 232,241-242 
animal experiments,  46,  47,  86,  95,  105, 
151, 181, 218,  272 ,273  
atmosphere,  artificial, 61,  173,  251,  283, 
287,289-290,291 
contract, 86, 151  
drugs,  use  of  211 
environment,  effects,  44,  47,  88,  101, 
143, 158,  165, 324 
life  support  system,  44,  86,  14, 
176-177,236,283 
medical  benefits,  2,  57,  165,  186,  2&. 
302 
psychology, 287 
radiation,  effects,  46,  62,  121,  168,  “00, 
257.  272.  277 
symposium;  141-142,  200,  291 
weightlessness,  86,  190, 286 
effects  81 ,46 ,  200-201,268,273 
prolonged,  151, 181 ,218  
Space  Disturbance  Forecast  Center, 
- _   _ _ _  
157-1  SR 
Space  law treaty,  12,  127, 258,  281 
Space,  military  use  of  (see  also  Manned 
Orbiting Laboratory),  329 
communications,  190-191,217,228 
reconnaissance,  178,  179,  202,  206-207, 
208,  262-263 
space station,  69-70,208 
US.,  69-70,  105,  178,  190-191,  206- 
207,208,  262-263 
U.S.S.R.,  93,  102,  178,  202,  205,  229, 
255,262-263 
Space,  peaceful  use  of,  178-179,  245,  249, 
257,263-264,  309,334-335 
Space  program,  national  (see  also  indi- 
vidual  programs,  such  as Apollo  pro- 
g r am ) ,  94,  112-113,178 
achievements,  33,  37,  48,  53,  66,  79, 
212-213,  215,  218,  221-222,  232, 
235-238, 
248,  249,  253,  306, 
324-328,334-335 
international,  336 
management,  66,  109,157,296-297 
manned  space  flight,  22-24,  66,  165, 
190,  215,  236-237, 
253,  269, 
334-335 
benefits.  See Space results. 
budget,  33,  34-35,  36,  44,  48,  50,  51,  57, 
65,  66,  85,  90,  94,  98,  99,  102,  129, 
131-132,  138, 140,  161-162,  165-166, 
173,  178,  182,  202,  209,  212-213,  218, 
229,  239,  240-242,  255,  276,  287,  288, 
299,  332 
cost,  37,  62,  72-73,  85,  109,  237,  253, 
417 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

255-256,  276 
criticism,  25,  51,  86,  101,  103,  133, 257, 
265 ,289 ,325  
education,. benefits  to,  20,  124-125,  235, 
249-250 
employment,  73-74,  85,  115,  168,  182, 
213,  229-230,  256,  272,  289 
House  staff  study,  51  
Humphrey,  Vice  President  Hubert  H., 
106-107,  235,  254 
international  aspects  (see  also  Interna- 
tional  cooperation),  2-3,  20-21,  99, 
126125 ,127 ,   141,204, 232,254 
Johnson,  President  Lyndon  B.,  18-19, 
20-21,  53,  178-179,  202,  208,  212 
235-236,248,267,292 
lunar  landing.  See Moon,  landing. 
manned 
space 
flight.  See  Manned 
space flight. 
military,  55-56, 
85,  102,  105,  122, 
147-148,  179,  190-191,  205,  208,  255, 
262-263 
Nixon,  President-elect  Richard  M.,  207, 
235,  249 ,293 ,311 ,331  
objectives,  86,  106,  140,  147-148, 
235-237 
policy,  41,  44,  48,  55,  57-58,  62,  92,  97, 
98,  99,  105,  112-113, 
124-125, 
188-189,  212-213, 
215,  245,  253, 
263-264,  293,  299,  308,  314,  325,  331 
post-Apollo,  29-30,  41,  44,  47,  51,  66, 
79,  85,  124-125,  162,  180,  182,  218, 
222,  243,  257,  259,  274-275, 
301-302,303,  311 
budget,  101,  182,  188-189,  212-213, 
233,281-282,325 
suggested  programs,  51-52,  94,  148, 
188-189,  194,  201,  275,  280-281, 
334 
significance, 
43,  90-91, 
103, 
98, 
106-107,  115,  141,  161-162,  199, 
235-237,249,275 
international, 20-21,  199, 210 
U.S.  vs.  U.S.S.R.  See Space race. 
Vietnam  War,  effect  of,  15,  56,  99, 
131-132,146,  215,245,336 
Space  race,  15-16,  41,  90-91,  147-148, 
180,  212-213,  249,  253,  326 
booster,  33,  34,  186-187,209,  213 
criticism,  257,  325 
funds,  37,  174,213,229-230 
manned  space  flight,  22-24,  34,  40, 41, 
51,  180,  222,  226-227,  253,  269,  326 
military,  42,  87,  93-94,  102,  174,  180, 
188.223.  255 
moon;  22 i24 ,   41,  87,  112-113,  119, 
173-174,  186-187,  222,  229-230,  249, 
261,266,  308 ,311  
payload,  36,93,  112,209 
planetary  fiights,  23-24,  34,  36,  41,  43, 
112-113,188-189,  222 
press  comment,  102, 266,  324-325 
Space  rescue  treaty,  89-90,  127,  161, 215, 
225 ,246 ,258 ,299  
Space  results  (see  also  Ea r th :   Moon; 

Mars ;   Venus;  individual  probes,  sat- 
ellites,  and  rockets),  2,  24,  31-32, 
34, 53,  56,  66,  72-73,  79,  90,  94, 
106-107,  119,  124-125,  141, 190,  232, 
255-256,333,334 
agriculture,  62,  106, 117,  125,257 
aircraft,  20,  57 
astronomy,  180, 231,  276 
communications,  20,  27,  33,  34,  36, 
82-83,  106,  233-234,  235,  246,  254, 
257.267.334 
earth’sciences,  20,  180,  191,  215,  254, 
earth’sciences,  20,  180,  191,  215,  254, 
257,  275,276,  334 
257,  275,276,  334 
economic  benefits,  33,  36,  49,  58, 
economic  benefits,  33,  36,  49,  58, 
73-74,  103,  109,  117,  202,  234,  235, 
73-74,  103,  109,  117,  202,  234,  235, 
257 
257 
education,  20,235,  249-250 
engineering,  66,  106,  234,  246,  294,  310 
geology,  117,231,235,  257 
medicine,  20,  57,  82-83,  165,  234,  235, 
246,285-286,  302 
meteorology,  20,  27,  32-33,  36,  49,  106, 
117,  232,  236-237,  254,  257-258,  334 
military,  2-3,  20,  22-23,  57,  185,  208, 
217,237-238,  275 
navigation,  20,  37,  106, 217,  257 
oceanography,  27,60,  106,231 
photography,  106,  185 ,231  
political,  2-3,  202,  204,  232,  254 
social  science, 58, 202 
technology,  20,  91,  103,  124-125,  190, 
204,  234,  235-238,  249-250,  267-268, 
2 7 6 2 7 5 , 2 9 7  
Suace  station  (see  also  Manned  Orbiting 
Laboratory:  Saturn  I Workshop;  Sa- 
tu rn   V  Workshop),  73,  141-142,  163, 
185, 259,  275,  293-294,  303 
contract,  62,86-87,202,  242-243 
U.S.S.R.,  54,  119,  211-212,  222,  226, 
230,68,  277-278,  283 
Spacecraft 
(see  also  individual  space- 
craft,  such  as  Apollo,  Lunar  Orbiter, 
Luna, Mariner,  Surveyor) 
braking,  17, 277 
communications,  319 
control,  24,  185,  218-219,  226-227, 
264-265 
design,  10,  48,  66,  86,  111,  202-203, 
2 i a 2 1 9 , 2 5 2 , 3 i i  
development  testing,  3 
electrical  systems, 4-5,  251 
environment  control  system,  47,  61-62, 
134,  173,  186 
equipment,  8,  153,  167,  179,  191-192, 
218-219,282-283,303 
escape  system,  4-5,  78,  210,  252 
exhibit,  190 
extravehicular equipment,  316-317 
heating,  193,  212 
instn&entation, 
210-211 
landing  system,  3,  59,  78-79,  116,  144, 
158 
launch  system, 88, 251-252 

55,  78,  83,  172, 

418 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

life  support  system,  4-5,  13-14,  61-62, 
144,  173,  176-177,  212,  236-237, 
242-243,  273 
propulsion.  See  Engine  and  individual 
launch vehicles, such a s  Saturn. 
recovery,  65, 268 
reentry  control  system  (see  also  reen- 
t ry ) ,   198-199,230,277 
reusable,  72-73,  259 
Spacecraft  debris,  42,  164, 205-206 
Spacecraft,  model,  65 
Spacesuit,  176-177,  283-284 
SPACO,  InC.,  79-80 
Spain,  5, 35 ,69 ,   111, 177-178 
SPAN .   See  so l a r   Particule  Alert  Network. 
SPARCS.  See  Solar  Pointing  Aerobee 
Rocket  Control System. 
Sparkman,  Sen. John  J., 248 
Sparrow,  J.  G.,  177 
Spartan  (missile),  72 
Spaulding, Dr.  Roland H.,  71 
Special  Repo r t   on   Underground  Te s t ing ,  
303-304 
Spectrograph,  67 
Spectroheliograph,  118, 128, 240 
Suectrometer,  60,  62-63.  80.  130-131. 
257-258,  273,  328-329 
,
,
 
Spence, Roderick  W.,  123 
Spencer, N.  W.,  328-329 
Sperry Rand  Corp.,  59 ,123  
Spirit  of  S t .  Louis  (a i rc ra f t ) ,  104 
Sport aviation,  40 
Springfield, Va.,  233 
SPS.  See Service  propulsion  system. 
Spu tn ik   I  (U.S.S.R.  sa te l l i te ) ,  139-140 
Spu tn ik   I V ,   17 
SR-71  (reconnaissance  a i rc ra f t ) ,  8 
S r i  Racha,  Southeast  Asia,  108 
SRN4  (hovercraft),  175 
SST. See Suuersonic transoort. 
STADAN .   See  Satellite  Tracking  and  Data 
Acquisition  Network. 
Stafford,  Mai.  Thomas  P.  (W A F ) ,   73, 
279-280 
Standard  Telephone  &  Cables,  Ltd.,  278 
(SLAC)  , 93, 
Stanford  Linear  Accelerator 
154 
S t i i io rd ,   Neal,  237 
Stanford  Univ.,  5,  38,  91,  93,  154, 
275-276 
Sloan  Fellow,  151,  194 
Stanley,  Hubert  Ray,  283 
Star, 272 
formation,  247 
neutron, 238,  284 
photographs,  310,335 
radiation,  30 
radio  signals  from,  54,  208-209,  231, 
238 

of,  128-129,  208-209,  231,  238, 
247,272,284,  304, 310 
Star  Tracking  Rocket  Attitude  Position- 
ing  S STRAP^  system, 30 
S tan ;   Dr.  Chauncey  V.,  5 
State,  Dept.  of,  2-3,  89-90,  109,  18!9-190, 

247,  255,  281 
S t a tu s   of  Actions  Taken on  the  A p o l l o  
(NASA  report)  4-5 
204 
Stein, Jerome,  281 
Stennis,  Sen.  John  C.,  246-247 
Stevens, Col.  Robert  L.  (USAF )  , 2 0 7  
Stever,  Dr.  H.  Guyford,  299 
Stewart,  I. A.,  295 
Stockholm, Sweden, 266-267,  285 
STOL  (short  takeoff  and  landing)  aircraft, 
139,179, 217,219,224,  225-226,231 
STOLpOrt,  179 ,278  
Stoltenberg  Science  Minister,  Dr.  Ger- 
hard  (W. Germany),  136-137,  201 
Stoney, William  E.,  Jr.,  224 
Stranraer,  Scotland,  111 
STRAP.  .%e  S ta r   Tracking  Rocket  Atti- 
tude  Positioning. 
Strass,  H. Kur t ,  121  
Stratoscope  I1  (balloon-borne  telescope), 
116 
Strughold, Dr.  Hubertus,  233 
Strughold, Dr.  Hubertus,  233 
A   Study of  N A S A   University  Programs, 
A   Study of  N A S A   University  Programs, 
24%250 
7 4 k 3 5 0  
Stuhlinger,  Dr.  Ernst,  303 
Stu 
Sturmthal,  L/C  Emil  (U SAF ) ,   38,  50, 145, 
269 
Sturtevant, Prof.  Alfred  H.,  38 
Styles,  Pau l  L.,  92 
Submarine,  nuclear,  42,  152,  160,  169, 
211,224,261,  302-303 
Sud-Aviation  (F rance ) ,  198 
Suitland, Md.,  155 
Sullivan,  Leo  J.,  146-147 
Sullivan,  Thomas  E.,  39 
Sullivan, Walter,  231,  277,292 
Sun  (see  also  Solar  corona;  Solar  flare, 
Radiation,  solar;  etc.),  56-57,  65,  68, 
102,  109,  118,  128,  153-154,  180,  203, 
243-244 
Sun  Shipbuilding  and  Dry  Dock  Co.,  156 
Sunblazer  (p robe ) ,  1 9 , 3 5  
Sunspot,  N.  Mex.,  296 
Sunspots,  154,277 
Suojanen, Dr. Waino  W.,  91-92 
Sttomi, Verner  E.,  229 
Super Jolly  (helicopter),  146 
Super  Loki  Dart  (sounding  rocke t ) ,   143 
Superior Engineering Co.,  29 
Supersonic  High  Altitude  Parachute  Ex- 
periment.  See SHAPE  Project. 
Supersonic  transport 
(SST )  
Concorde  and Tu-144),104 
benefits,  66-67 
cost,  150, 202-203 
criticism,  115,  135, 263, 270,  332-333 
design  and  development,  45,  67,  158, 
217,  220-221,  226,  259,  263,  285,  335 
flight  plans,  45,  198, 217 
foreign,  49,115,  126,  194,  198, 217,  25% 
260,  294,  332,  336 
funds for,  19 ,43 ,   115,  144,285 
hazards,  121,  164-165 
NASA   participation  in   research,  26,  47, 

(see  also 

419 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

131 ,233 ,237  
President’s  Advisory  Committee  on  Su- 
personic  Transport, 207,270 
press  comment,  115,  220-221,  263,  270, 
332-333 
reservations,  285 
sonic  boom,  8, 11, 56,  67,  1 0 9 4 1 0 ,  112, 
115,  117,  125,  135,  142-143,  146, 271, 
290-291,332433 
Srarvey  of  Yiews  of Leading  Industrial 
Executives  on  the  National  Space  Pro- 
gram  (House  repo r t ) ,   99 
Survey Satellite  (SURSAT)  , 156 
Surveyor  (program),  1,  3,  41,  51-52,  85, 
106,  151 ,281 ,301 ,314 ,335  
Surveyor  I  (lunar probe),  7 
Surveyor  I I ,   7 
Swveyor I I I ,   7 
Surveyor  IV ,   7 
Surveyor  V,  7 
Surveror  VI.  7.232 
Surveyor  V I 1  ’ (Surveyor  G ) ,   1,  3,  6-7, 
42,  50,  335 
Svestaka,  Dr.  Zdanek,  254 
Sweden,  5,  32,  46, 118,  177-178,  198,  240, 
262.292 
Swedish  Space   Research  Committee,  178 
Sweeney, Dr.  Stephen B.,  160 
Swihart,  John M.,  259-260 
Swiss  National  Committee  fo r   Space  Re- 
search,  68 
Switzerland,  5 
Swords  Into Plowshares  Award,  117 
Sydney, Univ.  of,  171 
Symington,  Sen.  Stuart,  239-240,  245-246 
Symposium  on  Remote  Sensing  of  Envi- 
ronment,  85 
Syracuse  University  Research  Corp.,  82, 
308 
Systems  engineering,  66,157,238,  297 
T 
T-38  ( je t   a i rc ra f t ) ,   128 
Ta Khli  AFB,  Thailand, 69,  80 
Table Mountain, Calif.,  6 
Taccomsat  1  (communications  satellite), 
189 
Tactical  photographic  image  transmission 
(TAPIT)  system,  77 
Tahiti,  180 
Tallahassee,  Fla.,  128 
Talkeetna,  Alaska, 290 
Tananarive, Malagasy  Republic,  146 
TAPIT.  See  Tactical  photographic  image 
transmission  system. 
Taschek,  R.  F.,  9 1  
Taurus  (constellation),  273 
Taylor,  Hal,  197 
Taylor,  Dr.  J .  H.,  161 
Taylor,  Gen.  Maxwell  D.  (USA, Ret.)  45 
(ESRO  solar  astronomy  satellite), 
TD-1 
9s 
TDL2 ,95  
Teague,  Rep.  Olin E.,  51,  99,103,222 
Technical  Information  Services  Co.,  245 

in   Civilian 

lnnovatwn 
Technological 
Pub l ic  Areas  ( s tudy ) ,  27 
Technology,  16,  63,  90-91, 
103-104, 
139-140,  178-179,  210,  235-236,  237, 
246,249-250,271,273,299 
benefits,  27,  98,  195-196,  27k275 ,   301 
Federal  support,  58-59, 
126,  139, 
237-238,294,314 
gap,  105,244 
misuse  of,  16,  119 
U S .  policy,  135,330-331 
Technology  utilization,  space 
(see  also 
Space results),  36,  48,89,  91 ,94  
benefits,  2-3,  20-21,  62,  103-104,  141, 
178-179,  232,  237-238,  246,  249, 
274-275,297 
Teledyne  Systems Co.,  82,  144 
Telemetry,  51-52,83,164-165 
Teleoperators  and   Human  Augmentation 
(NA SA   SP-5047),  82 
Telescope 
(see  also  Apollo  Telescope 
Mount),  12-13,  119,  128-129,  219, 
284,  290,294,  334 
astrometric,  151 
balloon-borne,  116 
gamma-ray, 52 
infrared,  184, 219 
spectrographic, 241) 
vacuum,  296 
Telespazio  (Italian  space  communications 
company),  80 
Television, 249,  276,  308 
Apollo  7,  250-252,  312,334-335 
Apollo 8,318-319,323-324,336335 
educational,  196-197 
Soyuz 3,264-265 
space  probe,  use  of,  3,  6,  24,  29,  84, 
153 
via  satellite,  10,  80,  103,  111-112,  154, 
155,  196-197,  204,  216,  227,  244, 
251-252,257,315,323 
military use,  190-191 
Teller, Dr.  Edward,  165 
Temperature,  17,230,  243-244 
Tennessee,  Univ.  of,  Space  Institute,  267 
TERLS.  See  Thumba  Equatorial  Rocket 
Launching Station. 
Terzian,  Dr. Yervent,  171 
Tether.  inflatable.  145 
Tetr  I ‘  (T t s   I )   (Test  and  Training  Satel- 
l i t e ) ,  112 ,274  
Tetr I I   (TETR  B )  , 2 7 4 , 3 3 5  
Texas.  249.  255 
Texas Instruments,  Inc.,  87 
Texas Tech,  115 
Texas,  Univ.  of,  1,  82-83,  115,  188,  206, 
294 
TF -39   ( je t  engine),  15, 146 
TFX.  See F-111. 
Thailand,  69,  72,  80, 84,  87,  102,  108, 
109, 119, 137 
Thant,  U,  U.N.  Secretary  General,  72, 
189-190.  327 
Thiokol  Chemical  Corp.,  259 
Elkton,  Md.  Div.,  308 

420 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

(booster),  7, 

Thomas,  David D.,  175, 194 
Thomas, Pau l  G.,  174 
Thompson,  Dr.  Floyd  L.,  15,  17,  51,  65, 
101,204 
Thor  (booster). 59 
Thor-Agena  (booster),  101,  138,  181,216, 
244,271,  309 
Thor-Burner I1  (boos ter) ,  120, 261 
Thor-Delta  (booster),  9 ,95  
Thorad-Agena  D 
(booster),  116,  138, 
216.243 
Thrug-Augmented  Delta 
42-43.153 
Thrust-Augmented  Improved  Thor-Delta 
(DSV-3E)  (booster),  273 
Thrust-Augmented  Long-Tank  Delta 
(booster), 3 1 6 3 1 5  
- 
Thrust-Augmented  LongTank   Thor-Delta 
(booster),  191, 311 
Thrust-Augmented  Thor-Agena  D,  9-10 
Thrust-Augmented  Thor-Delta  (booster) , 
244,300 
Thule AFB,  Greenland, 154 
Thumba  Equatorial  Rocket  Launching 
Station 
(TERLS ) ,  India,  30-31, 
60, 
75-76,273 
TIFS.  See Total  In-Flight  Simulator. 
Tillinghast, Charles C.,  Jr.,  187-188 
Tiros  Operational  Satellite  (TO S )   system, 
1,50,149,  191-193,311 
Tiros I, 193, 311 
Tiros Ill. 193.  311 
Tiros,  M, 49’  - -  
Titan  (booster),  148 
Titan  I n ,  162 
Titan 111-B,  127,208, 272,300 
Titan  111-B-Agena  D,  10,  61,  86,  127, 
179-180,  272 
Titan  III-C,  25,  132,  148,189, 228 
Titan  111-D/Centaur.  302 
Titan  111-M,  20,  335 ’ 
Todd Shipyards Corp.,  310 
Tokyo Astronomical Observatory,  155 
Tokyo, Japan, 82-83,200-201, 
Tolansky, Samuel,  158 
Tomahawk  (sounding rocket),  31  
Tompkins,  ChargB  d’Affaire-s  Edward  K. 
(U.K.),  295 
Tornado observation, 62,  229 
Torreon, Mexico,  295 
TOS.  See Tiros Ouerational Satellite. 
(Tiros  Operational  Satellite).  See 
TOS-E 
Essa  V U .  
Total In-Flight Simulator  (T IFS ) ,   81 
Tculouse-Blagnac, France,  198 
Townes.  Dr.  Charles H.. 299.312 
Townsend, Dr.  John W.;  Jr.,’131 
Tracking,  17,  30,  34-35,  50,  65,  112,  113, 
144.178.256 
aircrait,  l i  
deep  space,  5,  6,  10,  12-13,  118,  203, 
209.237 
laser, 6,259,  335 
MSFN,  5,  12,  97-98,  258,  274,  312,  335 

radar,  7,lZ-13,  14,64-65,133,199,214, 
248,  291 
ship, 12 ,258  
STADAN,  5,7,  12,143,146 
station, 205-206 
Alaska,  35 
Europe,  137 
Pakistan,  18 
Spain, 312 
US.,  114, 133,  171, 291,  312 
Trade  Expansion Act  of  1968,134 
Trans World Airlines, 72,172,  187-188 
Transportation,  185, 187,235,323 
TraFsportation, Dept.  of  (DOT) 
a ir  
traffic  control,  189,  194,  196, 
199-200,  206 
airports,  137-138 
budget, 19 ,168  
noise abatement, 156155 ,271  
R&D,  187 
Transradio, 293 
Treasury, Dept.,  144 
Treatv 
nud e a r   nonproliferation,  11,  32,  62,  92, 
128, 130, 132, 138,  149,  158,  159,  165, 
210,215-216,228,230,249,295 
nuclear  test-ban. 228 
“ocean  space”  (proposed), 56 
space law,  12 ,127 ,258 ,281  
space  rescue, 84h90,  127,  161, 215,  225, 
246,258,299 
Triethylhorane  (TEB), 45 
Trimethylaluminum (TIA)  , 45 
TRIPLTEE.  See True temperature  tunnel. 
Trippe, Juan  T.,  107-108 
Tristan  de Cunh a  37 
Trowbridge, A.  B:,  40 
(TRIPLTEE)  , 
True 
temperature 
tunnel 
39-40 
Truman, President Harry S.,  250 
Truszynski, Gerald M.,  17, 34,  50,65 
THW ,  Inc., 94 
Systems Group,  146,217 
T t s  I. See T e t r  I. 
Tu-144 
(u.s.s.R.  supersonic  a i r c r a f t ) ,  
126,194,259-260,332-333,335-336 
Tucker, Dr.  Gardiner L.,  137 
Tuke, John  B.,  111 
Tulane Univ.,  209 
Tun i s ia   118 
Turcat,’AndrB,  198 
Turin,  Italy,  126 
Turtle experiment, 283 
Tycho  (lunar cra ter) ,   6 ,50  
U 
UCLA.  See  California,  Univ.  of,  at  Lob 
Angeles. 
Udall,  Secretary  of  the  Interior  Stewart 
L.,  7,290-291 
UFO. See  Unidentified  flying object. 
Uganda,  69 
U.K.  See United Kingdom. 
Ulybshev, Boris N.,  324 
P.N.  See United Nations. 

421 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Underground  nuclear  test,  303-304,  317 
Unidentified  flying  object  ( U F O ) ,   99,  151, 
169-170,  172,  227,  254 
Unidentified  satellite,  9-10,  16,  61,  101, 
120,  127,  138,  179-180,  181,  208,  244, 
261,  271,  272,  309 
United  A ir  Lines,  164 
United  Aircraft Corp.,  2, 38,  316 
Pra t t   &  Whitney  Div.,  123,  130,  197, 
201.248 
United  k ingdom   (U .K .)  , 46 ,91  
aircraft,  9,  32,  165,256 
Concorde,  49,  115,  198,  217,  260,  294 
cooueration.  defense,  9.  165 
cooperation- space,  5 ,   95,  113,  137,  214, 
240,  279 
House of  Commons, 9 
launch 
missile,  55 
sounding  rocket,  70,  123 
Ministry  of  Technology,  49,  118,  121, 
256,286 
treaty,  102, 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
132,  138,295 
satellite, 1, 9,  60,  105, 121,  137 
science  and  technology,  46, 54,  83,  134, 
139,  170-171,  200,  211-212,  253,  285, 
290,298 
space program, 60,  73 
space rescue  treaty,  89,  299 
United  Nations  (U.N.),  12,  117-118,  133, 
172,  189, 199,  204 ,281 ,306 ,323  
Committee  on  the  Peaceful  Uses  of 
Outer  Space,  Legal  Subcommittee, 
127 
Conference  on  Exploration  and   Peace- 
f u l   Uses  of  Outer  Space,  189,  204, 
211 
Disarmament  Conference,  11, 32,  59,  62 
Economic and  Social Council,  72 
General  Assemblv.  11.  62.  89.  102.  132. 
138,  158, 161;’317 
I
,
 
Political Committee, 130 
Secretary  General,  72,  189, 327 
Securitv  Council.  59.138.  159 
United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific 
and  Cultural  Organization  (UNESCO), 
27 
United  States  ( U S . )   (see  also  appro- 
priate agencies) 
award,  38,  49,  198,  217,  221,  266,  271, 
281,290,298,  309 
budget,  15-16,  18-19,233 
communications,  27,  76,  307 
defense,  9,  18-19,  20,  29,  137,  242,  278, 
308 
disarmament,  11, 59,  132,  149,  164,  166, 
171 ,188 ,191 ,210 ,301  
education,  16, 331 
election results,  271-272 
health,  2, 301,  312-313 
9,  59, 
international  cooperation,  2-3, 
70,  73,  99,  117-118,  127,  128,  138, 
141,  156,  157,  159, 177,  189,  196-197, 
247,257,306-307 

medical research,  2,165,  186,325 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
treaty.  See 
Nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty. 
nuclear  tests,  108,  110,  303-304,  317 
oceanography,  27,  56,  105,  117,  177, 
284,300,  325 
uollution  abatement.  10.  62.  301.  331 
research  and   development;  10,’  16,  20, 
101-102,  127,  131-132,  139-140,  141, 
152.  156-157.  202.  208.  244,  271,  290, 
2911292.  3 1 4   333 

space  rescue  treaty.  See  Space  rescue 
treaty. 
space  program.  See  Space  program,  na- 
tional 
transportation 
(see  also  Supersonic 
transpor t) ,   168,  187,  207,  235,  323 
Vietnam War. See Vietnam War. 
United  Technolorn Center.  2-4. 36-37 
,
,
 
Universe,  87,  184‘197 
Universities  (see  also  individual  universi- 
t ies) ,   11,  102,  271,  301,  329 
and  space  effort,  55,  68,  85,  235,  267, 
269 
Federal  support,  110, 291-292,  301,  314 
grants to, 4 4 4 5 ,  129, 151 
N A S A   program,  35,  39,  48,  115, 
275, 
139-140,  151,  162,  249-250, 
2 8 6 2 8 1  
Uppsala  (Sweden)  Ionospheric  Observa- 
tory,  262 
Upson,  Ralph Hazlett,  188 
Uranium,  166,  298 
Uranus  (p lane t) ,   79,148 
Urban  Coalition,  117 
USAF School of  Aerospace Medicine,  11 
USAF Space  and  Missile  Systems  Organi- 
zation  ( SAM SO ) ,   111, 121,  173,  194,  264 
U.S.  Air  Force,@SAF) 
(see  also  individ- 
ual  bases,  centers,  and  commands, 
such  as  Air  Force  Systems  Com- 
mand,  Arnold  Engineering  Develop- 
ment  Center,  Edwards  A F B ) ,   39,  40, 
55-56, 
110,  112,  135,  146,  164, 
170-171,  207,  209,  211,232-233,  283, 
298-299 
Aero  Propulsion  Laboratory,  15, 135 
aircraft 
(see  also  individual  aircraft, 
such  as  C 5 A ,   C-130,  F - l l lA ,  
X-15,  XB-70),  75,  112,  130,  146 
171-172,  239-240, 
245-246, 
259, 
286,  313 
accident,  2,  8,  72,  80,  84,  87,  97,  102, 
108, 109, 117,  119,134,195,224 
sonic boom,  154-155,227,  313 
anniversary,  11 
astronaut,  11-12 
award,  15,  104-105,259,  299,300 
booster,  9-10,  20,  61,  86,  111, 127,  132 
148,162,  189,  228,302,335 

422 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

budget,  201 
communications  satellite,  79, 111, 229 
contract,  2, 9, 11, 45, 59, 61, 123, 173, 
194, 201, 231, 232-233, 264, 272, 298, 
334 
cooperation,  42, 63, 70, 83, 118, 233, 
237-238, 247, 276-277, 299, 317-318, 
335 
launch,  189,208 
failure,  193 
missile.  3. 193 
r e e n t i  vkhicle, 292 
satellite,  9-10, 16, 53, 61, 80, 86, 
101,  120.  127.  132.  138.  159. 
179-180, '181, 208, 216, 228-229; 
244, 261, 271, 272, 300, 309 
missile  program,  3 4 ,  18, 61, 148, 159, 
193.195.209.262-263. 312413 
MOL,  20  69-70,' 103, 122; 126, 166, 171, 
208,255, 293,308-309, 335 
Nimbus  B Review  Board  report,  243 
nuclear  propulsion.  156 
organizaiion,  9, 150 
parachute  test,  112 
personnel,  102, 152, 172, 207,233 
research,  70, 150, 163, 170, 181, 302, 
312-313 
test, 34, 77, 156, 181 
training,  158 
UFO,  99. 151. 169-170. 172 
Vietnam  War,  71, 72,'84, 104, 109, 155, 
195,224 
US.  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament 
Agency,  27,166,295,334 
U S .   Armv  ( U S A ) .   293 
Advanckd  Ballktic  Defense  Agency,  43 
Cold  Regions  Research  and  Engineer- 
ing  Laboratory,  36 
missile,  43, 72 
nuclear clock,  170-171 
Sentinel System Command,  72 
U.S.  Atlantic  Fleet  Anti-Submarine War- 
fare Force,  29 
US. Bureau  of  Mines,  95 
U.S.  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey  ( c a s ) ,  
37, 89 
US .   Geological  Survey,  118, 181-182, 
191,254-255, 325 
US. Information  Agency  (USIA) ,239 
U.S.  Navy  (USN),  8, 29, 30, 41-42, 
83-84, 146,170-171 
aircraft,  187,201, 245-246, 314 
F-lllB, 14, 71, 75, 98-99, 123, 130, 
167 
contract,  167, 187, 201, 227, 302-303, 
310,314 
cooperation,  50, 101, 300 
Deep  Submergence  Search  Vehicle,  227 
missile,  191 
submarine,  160,  169,  261, 
nuclear 
302-303 
oceanographic  ship, 310 
Operation Tektite,  101 
Sealab  I11  experiment,  41-42, 143, 295 
spacecraft recovery,  77-78,251, 320 

USNS Huntsville,  258 
USNS Po in t   Barrow, 30 
USNS Wa ter town ,  258 
U.S.  Public  Health  Service, 82-83 
U.S.S.  Discoverer 
(Coast  and  Geodetic 
Survey sh ip ) ,   144 
U.S.S.  Essex,  251 
U.S.S.  N ew   Jersey,  146 
U.S.S.  Okinawa, 77-78 
U.S.S.  Pueblo.  109 
U.S.S.  York town ,  320 
U.S.S.R. 
Soviet  Socialist 
(Union  of 
Reoublics)  (see also  Soviet Academv 
of  -Sciences,  etc.) , 15-16, 42, 89-90, 
92, 141, 145, 148, 210, 215-216, 233 
agreement,  127, 149-150, 157, 159, 161, 
164, 166 
aircraft,  40, 70, 112, 126, 130, 156, 157, 
163,  171-172,  194,  195,  231, 
239-240,  259-260,  282,  297, 
332-333 
accident,  70 
airlines,  127, 157,163 
anniversary,  14, 4546,273, 336-337 
antimissile  defense, 88, 185 
Aviation  Day,  195 
booster,  34,  36,186487,209,289 
budget,  309 
communication  satellite,  10, 88, 110, 
155, 189-190, 244 
cooperation,  127, 128, 138, 154, 159, 
202,254,281 
cooperation,  space,  2, 10, 31, 52, 66, 99, 
127, 202 
Cosmonaut.  See  Cosmonaut. 
disarmament,  32, 59, 127, 145, 149, 159, 
161, 164, 166, 188, 191, 195, 210 
exhibit,  190 
launch,  23-24,334,335-336 
probe 
Luna  X I V ,  81 
Zond  I V ,  54 
Zond V ,  211-212,230 
Zond V I ,  277-278 
satellite 
Cosmos,  9, 11, 32, 42, 57, 61, 63, 
67, 76, 82, 84,  87, 88, 92, 93-94, 
95.  106. 120. 123. 126. 128-129. 
130,- 132, 135, i39, '143, 154 
158-159, 163-164, 165, 172, 178, 
180, 183, 201, 206, 211, 213, 219, 
223. 239. 240. 245. 248. 259.267. 
2691 279; 289; 295; 296; 298; 308; 
310,313,317,335-336 
Mo ln ira  1-8, 88 
Mo ln i ia   I-9;  155 
Molniya I-10,244 
Proton IV, 284-285 
Soyuz  I I ,  263 
Soruz  I I I .   264-265 
luna r   expliration,  46, 54,  112-113, 
116-117, 178, 186-187, 222, 223, 
226-227. 254,329-330 
meteorological  satellite,  2 
missile  and  rocket  program,  29, 42, 
423 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

211,  283, 

45-46,  55-56,  93-94,  102,  178,  188, 
191, 210,  272,273,  289 
nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty,  11,  32, 
59,  92,  102,  123-124,  128,  132,  133, 
138,  149,210,  215-216 
science  and  technology,  46, 63,  93,  97, 
103-104,  159,  163, 195-196,  244,  247, 
254,  272,  275-276,285,292,  295,  298, 
309,  316,317,324 
space,  biology,  200-201, 
286-287,295,324 
space  rescue  treaty,  89-90,  127,  215, 
225,299 
space  program,  15,  17,  22-24,  34,  36, 
37,  40, 42,  46,  83,  85,  87,  93-94,  95, 
102,  105,  112-113,  116-117, 
119, 
173-174,  178,  180,  190,  200-201,  202, 
209,  211,  218,  222,  223,  226,  229-230, 
248-249.  254.  262-263.  264-265.  266. 
267-268;  269;  272,  275-276,  27i-278; 
283,  286-287,  289,  295,  298,  310,  327, 
329-330.  332.  336-337 
space  station,  54,  119,  211-212, 
226,230,  277-278,283 
satellite;  and 
spacecraft.  See  U.S.S.R., 
individual  spacecraft,  such  a s   Luna 
I V ,   Molniya  1-10,  Soyuz  I l l .  
submarine,  160,224,239-240 
supersonic transport,  332-333 
test,  116,  121-122 
nuclear,  108 
weapons,  29,  42,  45-46, 
55-56,  59, 
93-94,  102,  128,  178,  180,  185,  200, 
205,  208,  210,  239-240,  255,  273.  309 
U.S.  Tactical  Air  Power  Program  (re- 
po r t ) ,   305 
UV:  ultraviolet. 

222, 

V 
Vaccaro,  Michael  J.,  283 
Vaeth,  J.  Gordon,  233-234 
Valparaiso,  Chile,  119 
Van Allen,  Dr.  James A.,  22,  26-27,  51  
Van  Allen  radiation  belt,  26-27,  29-30, 
131, 203,228 
Vandenberg  AFB.  Calif.  (see  also  Western 
Test  Range ) ,   116 
contract,  11 
launch 
Advanced  Ballistic  Reentry  System, 
292 
fai%e,  193 
missile,  3 
satellite  launch vehicle 
Atlas-Agena  D,  179 
Atlas-Burner 11,  193 
Atlas-F, 80 ,159  
LongTank   Thrust-Augmented Thor 
D,  16,  61 
( L T T A T I - A ~ ~ ~ ~  
scout, 53 
Thor-Agena,  181 
Thor-Agena  D,  101,  138,  216,  244, 
271,309 
Thor-Burner 11, 120 ,261  

199, 

Thrust-Augmented  Thor-Agena  D, 
9-10 
Titan  111-B,  127,208,272,300 
Titan  111-B-Agena  D,  10,  61,  86, 
127,179-180 
MOL   launch  complex, 335 
Vanderbilt  Univ.,  326 
Vanguard  (program),  152 
Vanguard I  (satellite), 63-64 
Vavilov,  Nikolay  I., 298 
Vavilov, Sergei I., 298 
Vega  ( s t a r ) ,  310 
Vega  Baja, Puerto  Rico,  64455,329 
Vela  (constellation),  67 
(nuclear  test  detection  satellite), 
VELA 
1 9 , 2 5  
Veli,  India,  31 
Venezuela,  160 
Venus  (p lane t ) ,  49,  184 
atmosphere,  17,199,302,  329 
exploration  of,  24,  30,  66,  188-189, 
215,248-249,  287-288,327,  334 
gravity,  120-121 
landing,  soft, 85 
life  on,  17, 302 
magnetic  field,  328-329 
map,  37 ,171  
probe,  163, 188-189,212 
rotation.  37 
surface,  17,  37,  171,  188-189, 
275-276 
temperature,  17,  163 
Penus  IV   (U.S.S.R.  p robe ) ,   17,  36,  85, 
199.275-276 
Vereinigte  Flugtechnische  Werke,  151 
Veronique  (sounding rocket),  172 
Verschuur,  Dr.  G em t t  L.,  208-209 
Vestine,  Dr.  Ernest Harry,  166-167 
Veterans  of  Foreign  Wars  Space  Award, 
199 
VFX  (USN supersonic  fighter),  187,  201 
VFX-1.  See F-14A. 
VFX-2,  171-172 
Victorialand,  89 
Vienna,  Austria,  190-191,  204,  211,  228 
Vietnam,  North,  71,  84,  146 
Vietnam,  South,  88,  132,137, 146 
Vietnam  War,  62,  133,149-150,245 
aircraft,  69,  71 
budget  for,  309 
effects  on  R&D,  296 
effects  on  space  budget,  14-15,  56,  99, 
146,215,245,  336 
Viking,  Project,  302 
Vincent,  Robert  K.,  250 
Virgin  Islands,  101 
Virginia,  Univ.  of,  38,  151 
Volcano,  191 
Volpe, Gov.  John  A.,  309 
von  Braun, Dr. Wernher,  28,  112,303 
electric  power  system,  space  use,  275 
space  program,  24,  57-58,  66,  94-95, 
9a 
von Eshleman, R.,  275-276 
von  Kdrmdn, Dr.  Theodore,  267 

424 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Voskhod  I  (U.S.S.R.  spacecraft),  286 
Voskhod I I .  81 
Vostok  (U.S.S.R.  spacecraft),  17 
Vos tok  I, 70,  309 
Vos tok   V I ,  148 
Voyager  (program),  18 -19 ,34 ,41  
V/STOL aircraft,  33,  166,  177 
landing  tests  for,  168 
research,  for,  34,  47,  134,  238,  288-289 
wind  tunnel  for  testing,  219,  224 
vsx  (antisubmarine  a i rc ra f t ) ,   187 
VTOL  aircraft,  16,  33,  47,  116,  224,  231, 
276-277 
foreign,  105,  231 
landing  pads  for,  test, 135 
wind  tunnel  for testing,  39-40 ,219  
Vucinich,  Alexander,  63  
Vungtau,  South Vietnam,  88 
W 
Wakstein, Dr.  Charles,  117 
T a l k e r ,  Dr,  J.  C.  G.,  328 
Wallace,  Gov.  George C., 271-272 
Wallops  Station  (NASA), 30-31,  192 
award, 283 
hailstone model tests,  247 
launch 
Exp lorer   X X X V I I ,   56-57 
R A M  C-11,  198-199 
Reentry F experiment,  97 
sounding  rocket,  1,  64-65,  160,  216, 
288,  308, 328-329 
Aerobee  150  A,  141,  289-290,  291 
Arcas,  86 ,214  
Astrobee  1500,88 
Black  Brandt  IV,  106 
Javelin.  82 
Nike-Apache,  45,  64-65,  70,  168, 
181,  182-183,  273,  287 
Nike-Cajun,  9,  29,  168,  213-214, 
287 
Nike-Tomahawk,  13,  31,  60,  62-63, 
64-65,  183 ,198 ,256  
Pacemaker,  144 
runway  test,  118, 125, 286 
Warnke, Pau l  C.,  138 
Warsaw,  Poland,  161 
Warsham,  James  E.,  15  
Washington  Airlines,  224 
Washington,  D.C.,  26,  82-83,  103,  122, 
137, 145 ,200 ,217 ,279 ,   306, 327 
awards  presented  a t ,   49,  235-236,  300 
meetings,  22-23,  38-39,  46,  55-56,  79, 
108-109, 
86,  91,  94-95, 
111-112, 
112-113, 
187-188, 
216-217, 
239 
274-275, 
280-281, 
284,  293-294, 
301-302,315-316 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
at,  149, 295 
space rescue  treaty signed  at, 89-90 
Washington  National  Airport,  179,  189, 
203,224 
a i r  traffic,  194,  199-200,  206,300 
lights,  122 

treaty  signed 

218,  221-222, 

modernization,  231 
runway  test,  324 
Watson,  Postmaster  General  W.  Marvin,  ' 
113 
Weakley,  V /A   Charles  E.  (USN, R e t ) ,   29 
Weapon  systems,  55,  59,  191,  195,  239, 
2.55 
Weather modification,  101-102,  195 
K'ebb,  James  E.,  26,  101,  118- '?9 ,   215. 
244-245, 
appointments  by,  5-6,  17,  91-92,  160, 
206,209,233 
award to,  306 
budget,  19-20,  33-34,  48,  93,  140, 
161-162 
lectures  by 
Diebold,  John, 232 
McKinsey  Foundation,  103-104,  109, 
115 
resignation,  212-213, 
229,  244-245,  336 
space  cooperation,  201 
space  program,  97,  209,212-213 
tribute  to,  66,  215,  218,  221-222,  229, 
2%-247,306 
U.S.S.R.  space program,  222 
visit  to  MSC, 53 
WEFAX  (Weather  Facsimile  Experiment), 
155 
Weidner,  Hermann  K.,  303 
Weightlessness,  effects of,  200-201 
animals,  46,86,151,  218,286-287 
bacteria  and viruses,  46,  325-326 
chromosomes, 46,325-326 
human  beings,  81,  190,  218,  268, 
286-287 
olants.  46 
Weinberg,  Dr,  Alvin  M.,  28,  331 
Wells,  Edward  C.,  5 
Welsh,  Dr.  Edward  C.,  32.  105-106. 
112-113,  141,  202,  254,  274,  307-308' 
Wenk,  Edward,  Jr.,  284 
Rrest Virginia,  219,  230 
Western Co.,  95 
Western  Electric Co.,  72 
Western  New  York  Nuclear  Research 
Center, 31  
Western  Telegraph  (U.K.),  293 
Western  Test  Range 
(WTR )  
Vandenberg AFB,  Calif.) 
launch,  1, 179 
contract,  59 ,289  
failure,  116, 224,  242 
satellite 
launch vehicle 
Scout,  113,  182, 240 
Thorad-Agena  D,  116,  244 
Thrust-Augmented  Delta,  7,  42- 
43,  153,  210-211 
Thrust-Augmented 
LongTank  
Thor-Delta, 191-192,  311 
X-15 
experiment,  164,  198,  211, 
262 
Western  Union  International,  Inc.,  l%, 
307-308 

(see  also 

425 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

Westinghouse  Defense  and  Space  Center, 
145 
Westinghouse Electric Corp.,  26,  272 
Weston,  Ill.,  93,  154 
Wetzel,  Col.  Albert  J.  (USAF,  Ret.),  209 
Wheeler,  Gen.  Earle  G.  ( U S A ) ,   159 
Wheeler, Dr.  John  Archibald, 221,298 
White,  L/C Edward  H.,  I1  (USAF ) ,   306 
White House,  7,  51,  57,  150,  212,  235-236, 
298,  299,  306,  326,  332 
White,  Col.  Maynard  E.  (USAF,  Ret.),  9 
White  Sands  Missile  Range  (W SMR ) ,   N. 
Mex.  296 
launch 
Aerobee  150 
radiation,  121 
solar  astronomy,  40-41,  62,  128, 
224 
stellar  data,  30,67,104,  115 
ultraviolet astronomy, 115 
x-ray 
astronomy,  30,  40-41,  62, 
87,  104 
Aerobee 150 M I  
atmospheric data, 238 
infrared  data,  49-50,  316 
solar  astronomy,  97,  118,  232,  290 
stellar  data,  90,  282 
x-ray  astronomy,  169,  170,  303 
balloon, 209-210 
Nike-Apache,  126-127,300 
micrometeoroid 
sampling, 
185-186,  197,310 
Nike-Cajun, 32-33 
test 
instrumentation,  17, 128, 238 
parachute,  32-33,  126-127,  227,  261, 
309 
rail  launch, 211, 214 
Solar  Pointing  Aerobee  Rocket  Con- 
trol  System, 65 
varibooster, 211,214 
White,  Gen.  Thomas  D.,  Award,  10k-105 
White,  Gen.  Thomas  D.,  Space  Trophy, 
122 
White, William S.,  149-150 
Whittaker,  Philip N.,  172 
Whittle,  Sir F rm k ,  260-261 
W I IO .   See World  Health Organization. 
Wible, M.  Keith,  92 
Wiesner,  Dr.  Jerome  B.,  139-140,  159, 
303-304 
Wilford, John  N.,  85, 186-187,  265 
Williams AFB,  Ariz.,  92 
Williams,  Maj.  Clifton  C.,  Jr.  ( U S M C ) ,  
128 
Williams,  Don,  77 
Wilson,  Andrew,  189 
Wilson,  George  C.,  7,  180,  261,  284,  316 
Wilson,  Prime  Minister  Harold  (U.K.),  9 
Wilson, T. A.,  217 
Wilson,  Dr. William  J.,  200 
Wind  tunnel, 39 -40 ,42 ,219 ,281  
Wing,  aircraft 
delta, 332-333 

129, 

fixed,  19,  158,  206,  217,  220-221,  270, 
285,335 
fixed  delta. 259.270.  285 
swept, 14,167,259-260 
swing,  75,  207,  220-221,  259-260,  263, 
270 
test,  75,  155 
tilt,  276 
variable, 206,220-221 
Wings Club, 66-67,  315 
Wisconsin  Regional Space Center, 68 
Wisconsin,  Univ.  of,  38,  93,  115, 219,  229, 
304 
Withbroe, George L.,  243-244 
Withington, H.  W.,  259-260 
Witkin,  Richard, 259 
Woeller,  Fritz H.,  16-17 
Wolfe, Dr.  John  H.,  138-139 
Women’s  National  Democratic  Club, 
94-95 
Wonsan, North Korea, 109 
Woods,  George D.,  16 
Woods  Hole,  Maw.,  275 
Woomera Rocket  Range, Australia, 296 
World  Affairs  Council,  210 
World Bank,  51,  53 
World  Health  Organization  (W H O ) ,   291 
World  Meteorological Organization,  306- 
9n7 

306-307 
Wrench, Edwin H.,  131 
Wright  Brothers Day,  313-314 
Wrights Brothers Lecture, 38-39 
Wright  Brothers  Memorial  Dinner,  209, 
286,314 
Wright  Brothers  Memorial  Trophy,  209, 
314 
F r i g h t ,   Orville, 313-314 
Wright,  Wilbur,  313-314 
Wright-Patterson  AFB,  Ohio,  112, 181 
WSMR.  See White Sands Missile Range. 
WTR.  See Western Test Range. 
Wykes,  Raymond  P.,  151-152 
Wyld,  James  H.,  Propulsion  Award,  133 
X 
X-3  (supersonic a ircraf t) ,   293 
X-15 
(rocket 
research  a i r c r a f t ) ,   299, 
300,  317-318,  335 
accident, 12,  164-165 
flight 
No.  1, 53,  78,  95,  132,  164,  198,  211, 
212,262 
No.  2,  259 
funding, 19 
Hypersonic Research Engine,  47 
pilots,  11-12,  12,299,300 
record, 11-12,317-318 
altitude, 317-318 
speed, 317-318 

426 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1968 

test 
alpha cone,  198,211 
electrical system,  53 
fluidic probe,  198,211 
horizon measurement,  132 
horizon scanner,  198 ,211  
insulation,  78 ,95  
Saturn components,  95 
X-24  (lifting-body vehicle), 42 
(V/STOL  a ircraf t) ,   276-277 
XB-5A 
XB-70 
(supersonic  a ircraf t) ,   19,  158, 
313 
contract, 149 
flight,  8, 38,  50, 67,131,269,  335 
instrumentation, pilot,  186 
flight,  145,  167,  208,  258, 
XB-70A, 
298-299 
XC-142  (VTOL a i rc ra f t ) ,  276-277 
XE  (nuclear  rocket  engine),  25-26 
XLR-11  (rocket eng ine) ,  279 
X-ray,  62,  104,  256-257,  280-281 
source, 30 ,273 ,303  
XV-5A   (V/STOL  aircraft), 177 
(V/STOL  a ircraf t) ,   166,  177,  276- 
XV-5A 
277 
X V 4 B   (Hummingbird  11) 
search a i rc ra f t ) ,  230-231 
Y 
Yale  Univ.,  38,  328-329 
Yardney Electric Corp.,  121 

(VTOL 

re- 

173, 

Yavne:,  Aleksandr,  119 
Yegorov, Dr,  Boris B.,  286 
Yellowstone National Park,  154-155 
Yelyan,  Eudard V.,  332-333 
Yeshiva  Univ.,  Graduate  School  of  Sci- 
ence.  119 
YF-lZA-jjet  interceptor),  207 
York, Dr.  Herbert F.,  Jr.,  40 
Young,  Cdr.  John   w. (USN), 
Yusemite National Park,  154-L5 
279-280 
Young,  Pear l  L, 134-135 
Z 
Zeta  ( s ta r ) ,   67 
Zeuschner,  Robert B.,  44 
ZF-15A 
(fighter  a ircraf t) ,   130, 
272,334 
Zohar,  Dr.  Shalhav,  171 
Zond   I  (U.S.S.R.  space  probe), 
Zond  I I ,   54,  212 
Zond  Ill, 54,  212 
Zond  IV, 54,  151,  212 
Zond  v. 
~. Iaunc&,  211-212 
press  comment, 222-224,226,230 
reentrv.  230.277 
re su l& , ’24&249 ,~3  
Zond  VI, 277-278,  287-288,  298,  332 
Zwick,  Charles J.,  255,  286 
Zwicky,  Prof.  Fritz, 287 
Zworykin, Dr.  Vladimir K.,  43 

232-233, 

212 

- 
1 

NASA  HISTORICAL  PUBLICATIONS 

HISTORIES 
* Robert  L.  Rosholt,  A n  Adm in is tra t ive   History  of  N A S A ,  1958-1963,  NASA  SP- 
4101,  1966,  $4.00.' 
Loyd  S.  Swenson,  James  M.  Grimwood,  and  Charles  C.  Alexander,  Th i s   N ew  
Ocean:  A  H is tory   of  Pro jec t   Mercury,  NASA  SP-4201,  1966,  $5.50. 
* Constance  McL.  Green  and  Milton  Lomask,  Vanguard:   A  History,  NASA  SP- 
4202  (1970). 
Alfred  Rosenthal,  V e n tu r e   In to   Space:   EarZy  Years   o f   Goddard  Space   F l igh t  
Cen ter ,  NASA  SP-4301,  1968, $2.50. 
*  Edwin  P.  Hartman,  Adven tures   in  Research:  A  H is tory   of th e   Am e s   Research 
Center,  1940-1965,  NASA  SP-4302  (1970). 
HISTORICAL STUDIES 
Eugene  M.  Emme  (ed.),  H is tory   of  R o c k e t   Technology  (Detroit:  Wayne  State 
Universitv.  1964) .  
Mae Mills  Link,  Space Med ic ine   in Pro jec t   Mercury,  NASA  SP-4003,  1965, &QO. 
* Historical  S k e t c h   of  N A S A ,   NASA  EP-29,  1965  and  1966. 
Katherine  M.  Dickson  (Library  of  Congress),  History  of  Aeronautics  and  Astro- 
nautics:  A  Preliminary  Bibliography,  NASA  HHR-29, 
for  sale  by  Clearing- 
house  f o r   Federal  Scientific  and  Technical  Information,  Springfield,  Va.  22150, 
$3.00. 
CHRONOLOGIES 
Aeronautics  and  As tronau t ics:   A n   American  Chronology  of Sc ience   and  T e ch -  
nology  in  th e   Exploration  of  Space,  1915-1960,  compiled  by  E.  M.  Emme, 
Washington:  NASA,  1961. 
* Aeronautical  and  Astronautical  Even ts   of  1961,  published  by  th e   House  Com- 
mittee  on  Science  and  Astronautics,  1962. 
Aeronautical  and  Astronautical  Even ts   o f  1962, published  by  the   House  Commit- 
tee on  Science and  Astronautics,  1963. 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1963,  NASA  SP-4004,  1964,  $1.75. 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1964,  NASA  SP-4005,  1965,  $1.75. 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1965 ,  NASA  SP-4006,  1966. 
* Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1966,  NASA  SP-4007,  1967,  $1.50. 
* Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1967,  NASA  SP-4008,  1969,  $2.25. 
* Project  Mercury:   A  Chronology, by  James M.  Grimwood, NASA  SP-4001,  1963. 
*  Project  G em in i   Technology  and  Operations:  A  Chronology,  by  James  M.  Grim- 
wood  and  Barton  C.  Hacker,  with  Pe ter   J.  Vorzimmer, NASA  SP-4002,  1969, 
$2.75. 
* T h e   Apo l lo   Spacecra f t:   A  Chronology,  Vol.  I ,   Th rough   November  7 ,  1962,  by 
Ivan  D.  Ertel  and  Mary  Lou  Morse,  NASA  SP-4009 ,   1969,  $2.50. 

*All  titles with  prices  can  be   ordered  from  the  Superintendent  of  Documents,  Govern- 
ment  Printing  Office,  Washington,  D.C.  20402. 

* U.S.  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE:  1970  0 3 6 2 - 2 7 5  
429 

N A I I O N A L  A ~ R O N A U ~ I C S  A N D  SPACE  A DM I N I S I R A T I O N  
WASiiINGTON,  D. C.  2 0 5 4 6  
o r r i c i  A I .   D L I S I N ~ S S  

F IRST   CLASS  MAIL 

POSTAGE  AND   FEES  PAID 
NATIONAL  AERONAUTICS AND 
SPACE ADMINISTRATION 

POSTMASTER: 

If Undeliverable (Section  158 
Postal Manual)  D o  Not Return 

“The  aeronautical  and  space  activities  o f  the  United States  shall 
be  conducted so  as to   contribute  . . . t o   the expansion  o f  human 
knowledge  o f  phenomena i n  the atmosphere and  space.  T h e  
Administration  shall  provide  f o r  the widest  practicable  and 
appropriate dissemination  o f  information concerning  i t s  activities 
and  the  results  thereof.” 
-NATIONAL  AERONAUTICS AND   SPACE  ACT  OF   1958 

N A S A   SCIENTIFIC  A N D   TECHNICAL  PU 
TECHNICAL REPORTS : Scientific and 
TECHNICAL  TRANSLATIONS: 
technical  information  considered 
Information  published  in a  foreign 
language considered  to merit NASA 
important, complete,  and  a  lasting 
contribution  to  existing knowledge. 
distribution  in  English. 

TECHNICAL NOTES:  Information  less 
broad  in scope but  nevertheless  of 
importance  as a contribution  to  existing 
knowledge. 

TECHNICAL  MEMORANDUMS : 
Information  receiving  limited  distribu- 
tion  because of  preliminary  data, 
security classification, or other  reasons. 

CONTRACTOR REPORTS:  Scientific 
and  technical  information  generated 
under  a NASA contract o r  grant and 
considered  an  important  contribution  to 
existing  knowledge. 

SPECIAL  PUBLICATIONS : 
Information  derived  from o r  of  value 
to  NASA  activities.  Publications include 
conference  proceedings,  monographs, 
data compilations,  handbooks, source- 
books, and  special bibliographies. 

TECHNOLOGY  UTILIZATION 
PUBLICATIONS:  Information  on  tech- 
nology  used  by  NASA  that may  be 
of  particular  interest  in  commercial  and 
other  non-aerospace  applications. 
Publications  include Tech Briefs, 
Tcchnology  Utilization Reports  and 
Notes,  and  Technology  Surveys. 

Details  on  the   availability  of  these  publications  may  be   obtained  from: 
SCIENTIFIC  AND  T E C H N I C A L   I N F O R M A T I O N  D I V I S I O N  
NATlO NAL  AERONAUTICS  AND  SPACE  AD MI N ISTRATI 0 N 
Washington, D.C.  PO546 

