NASA  SP-4014 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D  
A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 6 9  

Chronology  on  Sc ience ,   Technology,  and  Po l icy  

T e x t   b y  
S c i e n c e   a n d   T e c h n o l o g y   D iv is ion  
L i b r a r y   of  C o n g r e s s  

Sponsored  by 
NASA  H i s tor ica l   D iv i s ion  
Office  of  P o l i c y  

Scientific and Techn ica l  In fo rma t ion  D iv i s ion  
1970 
OFFICE   OF   TECHNOLOGY  UT IL IZAT ION  
NATIONAL   AERONAUTICS  A N D   SPACE  ADMINISTRATION 
Wash ing ton ,  D . C .  

For  sale  by  the  Superintendent  of  Documents, 
U.S.  Government  Printing  Office,  Washington,  D .C .   20402 
Price  $2 .25   (paper  cover) 
Library  o f   Congress  Catalog  Card  Num b e r   66-60096 

Foreword 

History  is   a  word with varied  meanings. They  range  from  one  conveying 
idealistic  images,  to  fat  books  of  ultimate  truth,  to  the  professional’s 
prejudices  concerning  history  a s   a n   intellectual  discipline.  To  those  of  US 
who  have  been  privileged  to  be wholly  immersed  in   science  and   technology 
of  aeronautics  and   space  over  a  number  of  years,  history  perhaps  is  the 
sense of  accomplishment. 
While  this chronology volume  is not  a  history,  i t  does  attempt  to  prdvide 
a  first-cut reference  to  events and   commentary dur ing   a  most  crowded year 
and   the  year  that man  first  set  foot  upon  an  extraterrestrial body.  When  the 
ApoZZo  11 astronauts Neil Armstrong and  Buzz  Aldrin made  their  lunay  walk 
on  July  20,  1969,  i t   became  one  of  the  most  vicarious  events  to  date  in  
world  history.  Over  a  half  billion  people  around  the  world  witnessed  this 
momentous occasion live by  television  relayed via  communications satellites. 
Many  who  did  not  witness  i t   appear  reluctant  to  admit  i t   today.  The  full 
consequences of  the  seven-year Apollo  endeavor are   as yet  in  the  domain  of 
prophets  and  posterity  despite  the  worldwide  enthusiasm.  But  we  have 
already  seen  evidence of  the  second thoughts provided  by  man’s  perspective 
from  the  moon  of  his  own  planet-a 
heightened  awareness  that  spaceship 
Ear th   is   perhaps  unique  and  certainly  is   precious,  even  with  the  manifold 
problems  of  mankind.  And  w e   have  learned  about  ourselves  as  a  people. 
We  have  learned  that  the  United  States  can  set  itself  a  large,  difficult,  long- 
term  objective  and  mobilize  itself  and   sustain  its  effort  to  the  successful 
conclusion. 
Aside  from  being  the  year  that  man  landed  on  the  moon,  1969 had  many 
other  significances  to  students  and   participants  in   aeronautics  and   astro- 
nautics.  I t  was  NASA’s first  year  under  the  Nixon  Administration  and   a  new 
Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine.  I t   was  the  year  in   which  the  Space 
Task  Group’s  report  to  the  President reaffirmed  the  Nation’s  continued com- 
mitment to  space exploration and  painted  in   the broad   outline  of  post-Apollo 
goals  in   space.  I t  was  the  year  the  concept of  the  space  shuttle  emerged  in 
detail,  exciting  in  i ts   potential  as  a  practical,  reusable,  economical space 
transportation system. In  space science i t  was  the  year when  Mariner  V I   and 
V I I  flew  within  2,600 miles  of  Mars  and sent  back  photographs  of  the  Mar- 
tian surface and  200  times more data  on Mars than had  Mariner  IV   in  1964. 
In   addition  to  these  more  spectacular  events,  there  was  solid  progress  in 
space  science,  exploration,  and   applications.  All  of  these  events  &d  many 
more  find  their  milestones recorded  in   this  chronology. 
There a re  both value  in  and  special  reservations  about  this  chronology of 
science,  technology,  and  public  policy  a s   related  to  aeronautics  a’hd  space. 
I t   provides  the  historian  or  any  analyst  with  time-oriented  steppingstones 
toward  the  human  and  institutional  stories.  General  items  are   included  to 
help  create  the  social  environment  in   which  the  selected  items  took  place. 
There  seems  some  merit,  despite  inevitable  bias  in  viewpoints,  in   validating 

FOREWORD 

entries  to  sources  generally  available.  This  facilitates  additional  research. 
With  i t s   detailed  index,  the  chronology  i s   cross-referenced  to  dimensions 
other  than  time  and  becomes  a  useful  reference  available  to  lay  and  pro- 
fessional  inquiry. 
But  beyond  this,  history-maker,  historian,  observer,  and  student  alike 
may  become  more  aware  of  the  documentation  and  reflection  yet  to  be 
performed  in  comprehending  more  fully  what  has  transpired. 
George  M.  Low 
Acting  Administrator 
National Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration 

September  15, 1970 

IV 

Contents 

Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
NASA  Acting  Administrator  George M . Low 
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
January  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
February  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
March  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
April  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
May  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
June  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
July  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
August  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
September  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
October  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
November  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
December  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix  A :   Satellites,  Space  Probes,  and  Manned  Space  Flights, 
a  Chronicle  for   1969  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix  3 :  Chronology  of  Major  NASA  Launches,  1969  . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix  C :   Chronology  of  Manned  Space  Flight,  1969  . . . . . . . .  
Appendix  D : Abbreviations  of  References  ..................... 
Index  and  List  of  Abbreviations  and  Acronyms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

PAGE 
III 

i. 

VII 
1 
37 
61  
99 
127 
167 
195 
259 
297 
323 
359 
399 

427 
459 
465 
471 
475 

V 

Preface 

The brief,  chronological  record  of  1969 events  in   aerospace  science,  tech- 
nology,  and  policy  has  been  prepared  a s  events  occurred  and  were  reported 
i n   the  immediately  available,  open  sources-the  news  media,  press  releases, 
speech  texts,  transcripts,  testimony  before  Congress,  and   test  and   study 
reports.  A  first collection  of  clues  to  significant  occurrences  and  background 
climate  for   fu ture   historians,  the  volume  is  also  intended  to  serve  fo r  
immediate  reference  uses.  I t   does  not  attempt  to  analyze  but  to  cite  the 
who, what,  when,  and  where  in   sequence  and   as  near  rea l   time  as   possible. 
Within  these  limitations,  we make a considerable  effort  to ensure  accuracy 
and  comprehensiveness.  Our  NASA  Archives,  under  Lee D.  Saegesser,  collects 
the  curren t   documentation.  Under  an   exchange  of  funds  agreement,  the 
Science  and   Technology  Division  of  the  L ibrary   of  Congress  draf ts   the 
monthly  segments  i n   comment  edition  form.  These  a re   edited  and  aug- 
mented  by  the  NASA  Historical  Division,  published,  and  circulated  for   com- 
ment  and  use.  At  the  end  of  the  year  the  entire manuscript  is  reworked  and 
augmented  by  the  comments  tha t   have  come  in   and   by  documentation  that 
has   become  available  since  the  comment  edition  was   prepared.  The  Library 
also  prepares  the  extensive  index. 
The  1969 annual  volume  is  the  work  of  a  number  of  hands.  The  entire 
NASA  Historical  Division  participated  in   source  collection,  review,  and  
publication.  The  general  editor  was  Dr.  Frank  W.  Anderson,  Jr.,  Deputy 
NASA   Historian.  Technical  editor  was  Mrs.  Carrie  Karegeannes.  At  the  Li- 
brary   Mrs.  Pa tr ic ia   Davis,  Mrs.  Carmen  Brock-Smith,  and   Mrs.  Shirley 
Singleton  prepared  the  monthly  texts,  which  were  circulated  throughout 
NASA  for  comments  a s  to  completeness  and  accuracy  of  NASA  items  and   then 
revised  for  annual  publication.  Arthur  G.  Renstrom  prepared  the  index. 
Appendix  A,  “Satellites,  Space  Probes,  and   Manned  Space  Flights,  a 
Chronicle for  1969,” and Appendix  C,  “Chronology  of  Manned  Space Flight, 
1969,” were  prepared  by  Leonard  C.  Bruno  of  the  Library.  Appendix  B, 
“Chronology  of  Ma jor   NASA  Launches,  1969,” was  prepared  by  William  A. 
Lockyer,  Jr.,  of  the  Historical  and  L ibrary   Services  Branch,  Kennedy  Space 
Center.  Appendix  D,  “Abbreviations  of  References,”  was  prepared  by  Mrs. 
Brock-Smith.  Creston  Whiting  of  NASA’s Information  Services  Branch, 
Scientific  and   Technical  Information  Division,  kept  the  process  abreast  of 
Russian  releases.  At  the  NA SA   Centers  the historians  and  historical  monitors 
submitted  local  material  for   the  chronology.  Validation  was  the  work  of 
many busy  persons  throughout  NASA  and   in   other  relevant  branches  of  the 
Federal  structure. 
A  chronology  is  but  the  first  step  toward  history  and   even  i t   is  never 
completed.  Comments,  additions,  and  criticisms  a re  always  welcomed. 
Eugene  M.  Emme 
NASA  H is tor ian  

January  1969 

January 1 :  Washington Evening  S tar  editorial said of  success  of  Dee.  21-27, 
1968, Apollo  8 mission : “Modern  science  undercut  man’s  bland  belief 
that  he  was  the  center  of  the   universe,  and  modern  philosophy reduced 
him  to  a  trivial  atom  of  matter  in   the  larger  cosmos,  To  be   able  to 
sail around  a t  w i l l   i n   that vast  cosmos may  give man  back  some  of  the 
confidence he  once  had,  not  the  arrogance  of  thinking  tha t   he  under- 
stands  the  whole  pattern,  but  the  quiet  sense  that  he  will  not  flinch 
from  what he  may  yet  learn.”  (W  S tar ,   1 /1 /69 ,   A15) 
*  U.S.S.R.  disclosed  that  converted  MiG  fighter  was  prototype  used  for 
testing  design  features  and  performance  of  TU-144, Soviet  supersonic 
aircraft.  Soviet  aviation  writer  for  Pravda   K.  Raspevin  said  four-man 
crew  aboard   Tu-144  maiden  flight  Dec.  31,  1968,  was  one  of  most 
experienced  in   U.S.S.R.  Pilot  was  Eduard  V.  Yelyan.  Copilot  Mikhail 
V .   Kozlov  had   won  title  Hero  of  the  Soviet  Union  for  testing  Tu-22 
supersonic  strategic  bomber.  Tu-144  was  constructed  of  light  alloys 
with  titanium  on  leading  edges  and   other  areas  subjected  to  high 
temperatures.  At  cruising  speed,  outside  skin  temperature  was  150” C. 
A i r   conditioning  system  cooled  cabin.  Tail  unit  was  minus  horizontal 
guiding  surface.  Crew  members had  catapult  seats  as  safety  precaution 
dur ing   test  flights.  ( N Y T ,  1 /2 /69 ,   7 )  
World  Data  Center  A  for  Rockets  and  Satellites,  established  a t   National 
Academy  of  Sciences  in   June   1958,  moved  to  location  adjacent  to 
News  R p t ,  
National  Space Science  Data  Center  at  GSFC.  (NAS-NRC-NAE 
2 /69 ,   11) 
January  2:  In   Washington  Evening  S tar ,   Judith  Randal  said  world’s  first 
successful  hear t   transplant  and   Apo l lo   8 mission  made  1968 year  “of 
spectacular  scientific  achievement”  but  that  critics  of  both  events  had 
charged  that  technology  “was  being  exploited  at  the  expense  of  basic 
research  and   social  worth.”  I t   did  no  harm,  she  said,  to  celebrate 
heart  transplants and  voyages  to  moon,  “but,  with  the  advent  of  a  new 
administration,  i t   also  is  worth  reflecting  what  the  price  may  be- 
when  so  much  else  needs  doing-of 
deciding  to  climb  Mount  Everest 
just  because Mount  Everest  is   there  and we  have  learned  how  to  climb 
it.”  ( W S t a r ,  1 /2 /69 ,   A14) 
NASA  awarded  Boeing  Co.  $32,815,000  cost-plus-fixed-fee supplemental 
agreement  extending  fo r   additional  12 mos  Apollo  program  technical 
integration  and   evaluation  support  initiated  by  Boeing  June  15 ,   1967. 
(NASA   Release  69-1) 
President  Johnson  announced  12   recipients  of  1968  National  Medal  of 
Science,  Government’s  highest  award  for  distinguished  achievement  in  
science,  mathematics,  and   engineering.  Detlev  W.  Bronk,  President 
Emeritus  of  Rockefeller  Univ.,  past  president  of  NAS  (1950-1962) 
and   Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  (19&1953) ,  
received  award  for  “highly 
original  research  in   the  field  of  physiology  and  for  his  manifold  con- 

1 

January  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

tributions  to  the  advance  of  science  and   its  institution  in   the  service 
of  society.”  Herbert  Friedman,  Superintendent, Atmosphere and  Astro- 
physics  Div.,  Naval  Research  Laboratory,  won  award  “for  pioneering 
work  in   rocket  and   satellite  astronomy  and   in   particular  for  his  con- 
tributions  to  the  field  of  gamma  ray   astronomy.’’  ( P D ,  1/6/69,  11; 
NASA  biog,  9 /8 /68)  
Ja i iuary  3: H.R.  16, 17,  and   204, bills  to  authorize  award  of  Congressional 
Medal  of  Honor  to  Apollo  8  Astronauts  Frank   Borman,  James  A. 
Lovell,  Jr.,  and  William  A.  Anders,  were  introduced  dur ing   first  ses- 
sion  of  9 l s t   Congress.  (CR,  1/3/69,  H33-42)  
*  T ime   named  Apo l lo   8  astronauts  its Men  of  the  Year  for   1968. “For  all 
its  upheavals  and   frustrations,  the  year  would  be   remembered  to  the 
end  of  time  for  the  dazzling  skills  and  Promethean  dar ing   that  sent 
mortals  around  the  moon.  I t  would  be  celebrated  as  the  year  in  which 
men  saw  a t   first  hand  their  little  ear th   entire,  a  remote,  blue-brown 
sphere  hovering  like  a  migrant  b ird   in   the  hostile  night  of  space.” 
(T im e ,  1/3/69,  9 )  
New  York  State  Supreme  Court  Justice  Frederick  M.  Marshall  issued 
temporary  injunction  to  block  sale  of  Cornel1 Aeronautical Laboratory 
by  Cornell  Univ.  to  EDP Technology,  Inc.,  of  Washington,  D.C.,  for 
$25  million.  He  directed  case  be  given  preference  on  tr ia l   calendar. 
( N Y T ,  1 /4 /69 ,   23) 
January 4:  At  Explorers Club symposium  in  New York  scientists, educators, 
community  leaders,  and   students  discussed  significance  of  Apollo  8 
mission. William  Booth,  Chairman  of  Commission  on  Human  Rights 
in   New  York,  said,  “I  still  am  quite  disturbed  by  the  fact  that  we’re 
dying  a t  home,  people  are   about  to  starve.  There’s  overpopulation and 
underproduction  of  food  in  the  world.  We  haven’t  been  able  to  solve 
these  problems  and   here  we  a re   going  of€ to  the  moon.”  Dr.  Robert 
Jastrow,  Director  of  NASA’s Goddard  Institute  for  Space  Studies,  said 
flights  were  “a  means  of  concentrating  our   energies  toward  building 
a  technological  capability.”  Moon  flight  had   played  “same  role  a s  
Lindbergh‘s  flight  to  Paris”  in   that  i t   demonstrated  new  capability. 
Space  program  was  paying  economic  dividends  in   communications, 
mineral  exploration,  and  new  materials.  Dr.  Maynard M.  Miller,  Chair- 
man of  Explorer Club’s World Center for Exploration  Foundation,  said, 
“The word  ‘impossible’ has  a  different meaning  after Apollo.8.  Perhaps 
its  real  contribution  will  be  as  a  symbol  of  man’s  willingness  to   da re  
to  do  something  great.”  (Wilford,  NYT ,   1/5/69,  26) 
January  5:  Venus V  unmanned  probe  was  successfully  launched by  U.S.S.R. 
on  four-month journey  to  Venus.  Tass  announced  that  2,491433  space- 
craft  had  been  launched  into  parking  orbit  and  then  injected  on 
trajectory  toward  Venus  to  softland,  conduct  extensive  scientific  re- 
search,  and  continue  studies  begun  by  Venus  ZV,  which  landed  on 
Venusian  surface  Oct.  18,  1967.  All  equipment  was  functioning  nor-  
mally.  Spacecraft  carried  pennants  with  bas-relief  of  Lenin  and   Soviet 
coat of  arms and  “greater range  of  scientific and  measuring equipment, 
making  i t   possible  to  improve  the  accuracy  of  measurements  and   to  
obtain  additional  da ta   on  planet’s  atmosphere,”  Moscow  News  said. 
(Winters,  B  Sun, 1/6/69,  1;  AP,  W  Star,  1/6/69,  A3 ;   Reuters, 
W  Po s t ,   1/6/69,  A3;  Moscow  News,  1/1&25/69,  3 )  
Washington  Sunday  S tar   editorial  commented  on  proposals  made  at 

2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January  5 

AAAS  meeting  in   Dallas,  Tex.,  Dec.  26-31,  1968, for  agency  to  estab- 
lish  priorities  for  Federal  spending  in  research,  education,  technology, 
weapon  development,  and   science.  Dr.  James  V.  Shannon,  former  NIH  
director,  had   proposed  creation  of  top-level  council  equal  in   stature 
to  National  Security  Council  and   Council  of  Economic  Advisers.  Dr. 
Donald  F.  Hornig,  President  Johnson’s  Science  Adviser,  had  recom- 
mended  adding  Secretary  of  Science  to  Presidential  Cabinet.  Star 
said,  “There  will  be  strong  opposition  to  both  of  these  proposals.  The 
cry   of  centralization  will  be  raised.”  However:  “What  is  proposed  . . . 
is   a  body  o f   informed  advisers,  whose  duty  it  is   to  suggest  . . . to  in- 
struct  the  President,  the  Congress  and  public  on  the  potentialities  for  
good and evil that  could result  if a  given path were  followed.  The Pres- 
ident  would  still  have  to make  the  executive  decisions.  Congress would 
still  control  the  purse.  The  public  would  still  have  the  final  verdict  of 
the  ballot.  But  all of  them could  use  some  responsible,  expert guidance 
through  the  awesome  and  fantastic  new  world  that  lies  just  ahead.” 
(W  S tar ,   1 /5 /69 ,   G1) 
January  6 :  Oao  ZZ  (launched  Dec.  7,  1968)  completed  30  days  of  flight 
operation  and   was  adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  Experiments  had  ob- 
tained  65   hrs   of  scientific  data  over  range  of  eight  magnitudes  and 
4,200 A-1,100  A  wavelengths.  Smithsonian  Astrophysical Observatory 
celescope experiment made 18 mappings and Univ.  of  Wisconsin  experi- 
ment  made  detailed  observations  of  100  stars.  Some  40,000  separate 
commands had  been  sent  to   Oao  ZZ and  more  than  4 million  pieces  of 
information  had  been  collected,  with  20  times  more  uv  information 
from  stars  in   30  days  than  in   1 5  yrs  of  sounding  rocket  launchings. 
Satellite’s  11  telescopes  were  studying  extremely  young,  hot  stars 
which  emitted  most  of  their  energy  in   uv  portion  of  spectrum,  not 
visible  to  ground  observatories  because  of  earth‘s  atmosphere.  (NASA  
P ro j  Off;  NASA  Release  69-7) 
*  Budget  squeeze  had  forced  NASA  to  drop  16 institutions  from  its  sustain- 
ing  university  program,  Scientific  Research  said.  Four  others  were 
dropped  in  1968;  30  remained.  Contracts  of  the  16   would  no t   be  re- 
newed  as  they  expired  unless  institutions  devised  exceptional research 
proposals.  Then  money  would  probably  have  to  be  taken  from  other 
universities.  Grants  had  ranged  from  $75,000  to  $300,000,  with  total 
saving of  $4 million  over  FYs  1969, 1970, and   1971  expected  from  can- 
cellation.  Program  funding  had   declined  from  $45  million  in   FYs 
1965  and  1966 to  $30  million  in  FY  1967,  $10  million  in  FY  1968, 
and  $9  million  in  1969. FY  1970 budget  level  was  expected  to  be  $9 
million.  (Scientific  Research,  1 /6 /69 ,   15-17;  NASA  FY  1970 Budget 
Briefing) 
*  FAA  announced  i t   had  moved  to  reverse  “escalation  of  aircraft  noise” 
around  a irpor ts  by  proposing maximum  noise  standards  and   noise  ob- 
jectives  for   new  subsonic  transport  aircraft,  including  those  under  de- 
velopment.  Proposal  was  first  regulatory  action  taken  under  P.L. 
90-411,  which  granted  FAA  broad  authority  in   noise  control.  Noise 
limits  on  approach would  be  102  to  108 effective perceived  noise  deci- 
bels  (epndb)  , depending  on  a ircraf t   weight;  sideline  noise  limits 
would  be  same;  and   takeoff  limits  would  be  in   93-  to   108-epndb 
range.  (FAA   Release  6P-1;  Bisen,  W  Pos t ,   1/7/69,  A3 ;   W S J ,  1 /9 /69 ,  
4)  

3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
January  6 
0  Defense  Secretary-designate Melvin  R.  Laird  announced  a t   press  confer- 
ence  that  Stanley  R.  Resor  would  remain  a s   Secretary  of  the  Army, 
Rhode  Island  Gov.  John  H.  Chafee  would  be   nominated  Secretary  of 
the  Navy,  and   former  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Sea- 
mans,  Jr.,  would  be  nominated  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  in  Nixon 
Administration.  (Wilson,  W  Po s t ,   1 /7 /69 ,   1 )  
January  6-8:  Three-article  series  on  “The  Cost  of  Preparedness”  by  Orr  
Kelly  i n   Washington  Evening  S tar   quoted  interviews  with  outgoing 
Johnson  Administration  defense  experts  who  agreed  U S ,   might  be 
entering  peaceful  era   in   international  relations  though  defense  cost 
least  $50  billion  annually-in 
foreseeable  fu-  
would  remain  high-at 
ture.  Secretary  of  Defense  Clark  M.  Clifford  thought,  “cautious  and 
forceful steps”  could  be  taken  “to  improve  the  lo t   of  the  people  of  the 
world.” 
USN  saw  post-Vietnam war  need  for   modernization,  with  emphasis 
on  nuclear-powered  escort  sh ips ;   USAF  wanted  new  fighter,  manned 
bomber,  deployment  of  interim  bomber,  and  revamping  of  U S .   air 
defense force. 
Dr.  John  S.  Foster,  Director  of  Defense  Research  and  Engineering, 
said:  “The  Soviets  have  four  characteristics  of  special  concern  to  the 
R&D  community.  They  are   technically  advanced,  they  are  strong  eco- 
nomically,  they  have  an  aggressive  military  posture-and 
they  work 
behind  a  veil  of  secrecy.  The  one  that  makes  competition  difficult  is 
secrecy.  To  counter  it,  the  United  States  must  have  technological  su-  
periority.  We  must  have  been  there,  technically,  before  them.”  (W  
S tar ,   1 / 6 4 / 6 9 )  
January  7:  U S .  patent  No.  3,420,471  was  granted  to  John  D.  Bird,  Howell 
D.  Garner,  Ernest  D.  Lounsberry,  and  David  E.  Thomas,  Jr.,  LaRC 
engineers who  assigned rights to NASA  for  jet  shoes to  enable astronauts 
to  move  in   space.  Wearer  could  rotate  body  by  natural  ankle  and  leg 
motions  and  control  direction  by  turning  body  and   aiming  head  in 
swimming motion.  Previous  devices for  similar  purpose  required  use  of 
one o r  both  hands  or  operation  of  complex  arrangement  of  control  jets 
and   gyroscope sensors.  Toe pressure  in  new  shoes would  release  nitro- 
gen  through  thruster  in   sole  of  each  shoe.  With  electrical  control,  pres- 
sure   would  be  applied  to  switch.  Alternate  method  would  be  fluidic 
control,  with  toes  pressing  syringe.  ( P a t  Off  PIO; NYT,  1/11/69,  39 )  
0  Once  Vietnam  war  was  over,  Michael  Harrington  said  in  Washington 
Evening  S tar ,   there  would  be  “money  enough for  both  slums and  space 
if   the  nation  has   the  political  wilI  to  appropriate  it.”  Space exploration 
could  provide  “economic  alternative  to  war.”  I t   was  “simply  not  true 
that  the  United  States  must  choose between  the  heavens  and   earth.  By 
the  mid-Seventies,  this  country  will  have  achieved  a  $1 trillion  gross 
national  product  and  because  of  this  . . . there  will  be  almost  $30 
billion  in   ‘extra’  federal  funds  by  1972.  Tha t   projection  does  not  re- 
qu ire   any  increase  in  taxes  and  i t   assumes  that  there  will  be  a  fairly 
high  level  of  military  spending.”  (W  S ta r ,   1/7/69,  A7 )  
Christian Science  Monitor  editorial  asked,  “Would  i t   not  be  possible,  as 
America’s  eventual  space  aim,  to  see  the  moon  treated  much  as  Ant- 
arctica  today  is   treated?”  That  is   “as  a  ‘continent’  where  nationality 
does  not  play  a  significant  role.  There  could  be  a  research  station  on 
the  moon,  manned  the  year  around-not  merely  by  Americans  but  by 

LE 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January  7 

invitation  to   the  scientists  and   technicians  of  other  interested  nations.” 
( C S M ,  1 /7 /69 )  
January 8 :  Apollo  9,  carry ing  Astronauts  James M.  McDivitt  (commander) ,  
David  R.  Scott  ( CM   pilot) , and   Russell  L.  Schweickart  (LM   p i lo t ) ,  
would  be  launched  from   KSC  Launch  Complex  39A  a t   1 1 :OO   am  EST 
Feb.  28,  NASA  announced.  The  10-day  ear th   orbital  mission  would 
include  simulated  translunar  insertion;  CSM  separation,  transposition, 
and   docking  with  LM;  onboard   LM  systems  evaluation;  extravehicular 
maneuvers  between  LM  and   C M ;   manned  LM  active  rendezvous;  and  
six  SPS  burns.  (NASA   Release  69-3) 
0  U.S.S.R.’s  supersonic  transport,  Tu-144,  made  second  test  flight.  Of 
50-min  duration,  flight  did  not  achieve  supersonic  speed,  according  to 
Pravda .   (Reuters,  N Y T ,   1/11/69,  65 )  
NASA  Acting  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  asked  review  board 
created May  17, 1968,  to   restudy  its  findings  in  May  6,  1968, crash   of 
Lunar  Landing  Tra in ing  Vehicle  because  of  second  LLTV  crash,  Dec.  8, 
1968.  Both  craf t   were  destroyed  in   accidents  a t   Ellington  AFB,  Tex.; 
pilots  escaped  uninjured.  Accident  board  a t   MSC   was  investigating 
latest  crash.  (NASA   Release  69-5) 
January  9: USAF  released  three-volume Scientific  S tudy   of  Unidentified F ly-  
ing  Ob jec ts ,   report  of  Univ.  of  Colorado  scientists  directed  by  Dr.  Ed- 
ward  U.  Condon.  It  concluded  tha t   “nothing  has  come  from  the  study 
of  UFOS  i n  the past  21  years  tha t  has  added  to  scientific  knowledge.  . . . 
Further  extensive  study  of  UFOS  probably  cannot  be  justified  in   the 
expectation  that  science  will  be  advanced  thereby.”  Scientists  felt  “the 
reason  that  there  ha s   been  very  little  scientific  study  of  the  subject  is 
that  those  scientists  who  a r e  most  directly  concerned,  astronomers,  a t-  
mospheric  physicists,  chemists,  and   psychologists,  having  had  ample 
opportunity  to  look  into  the matter,  have  individually  decided  that  UFO 
phenomena  do  not  offer  a  fruitful  field  in   which  to  look  for   ma jor  
scientific  discoveries.” 
In   review  of  study,  NAS  special  review  panel  had  concluded,  “On  the 
basis  of  present  knowledge  the  least  likely  explanation  of  UFOS   is  the 
hypothesis  of  extraterrestrial  visitations  by  intelligent  beings.” 
Condon  report  recommended  DOD  handle  UFO   sighting  reports  in  
normal  surveillance  operations  and   found  no  basis  for  contention  that 
UFO  da ta  were  “shrouded  in   official  secrecy.”  Report  stated,  “The  his- 
tory  of  the  past  21   years  ha s   repeatedly  led  Air  Force  officers  to   the 
conclusion  tha t   none  of  the  things  seen,  or  thought  to  have  been  seen 
. . . constituted  any  hazard  o r   threat  to  national  security.”  Report  of 
t u  o-year study, commissioned  by  USAF  for $500,000, had  been  approved 
by  NAS  panel.  (Tex t ;   Sullivan,  NYT ,   1/8/69,  1; 1/10/69,  32 ;   Boffer, 
Science,  1/17/69,  260-2) 
0  NASA  named Astronauts  Neil A.  Armstrong  (Commander ) , Michael Collins 
( C M   p i lo t) ,   and   Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr .   ( L M   p i lo t ) ,   as  prime  crew  of 
Apollo  11 lunar   landing  mission  scheduled  for  summer  1969. Backup 
crew  would  be  Astronauts  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.  (commander) , William 
A.  Anders  ( C M   p i lo t ) ,   and   Fred  W.  Haise,  Jr.  ( LM   p i lo t) .   (NASA  
Release  69-9) 
NASA  submitted  to   BOB  proposed  FY  1970  NASA  authorization  bill  in  
which  FY  1969  “Administrative  Operations”  category  had  been  re-  
designated  “Research  and   Program   Management.”  Bill  requested 

5 

January 9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

$3.051  billion  for   R&D,  $58.2  million  for   construction  of  facilities,  and  
$650.9  million  for  research  and   program  management-for 
total 
budget  of  $3.761  billion.  (Tex t ;   NASA  LAR ,   V I I I /8 )  
In  farewell  speech  to JPL as President of  Cal Tech, Dr.  Lee A.  DuBridge, 
Science Adviser-designate to  President-elect  Richard  M.  Nixon,  said: 
“I  am  sure  that  under  the  new  administration  a  change  in   the  general 
structure  of  the  space  program  may  occur  principally  because  the 
Apollo  landings  for  1969 will  be  carried  out.  . . [And]  that  ends  an 
era,  so to  speak, in  the  space program  which  President Kennedy  started 
when  he   proposed  attainment  of  a  landing  on  the  moon  by  the  end  of 
this  decade.”  Question  would  be   raised  “in  Congress  and   in  the  ad-  
ministration  and   by  the ‘people of  the  country,  ‘OK  we’re  all  through 
now,  let’s  save tha t   four  billion  o r   five billion  dollars  a  year  and  settle 
back  and   do  something  less  expensive.’  I  don’t  believe  tha t   this  is   a 
very  widespread  view  in   the  top   levels  of  the  new  administration.  I 
think  the  Apollo  8  program  came  a t   a  very  critical moment”  to  make 
everyone  see  that  “by  lifting  the  eyes  of  the  people  to   something  be- 
yond  this  little  planet  on which we  live  tha t   the  spiritual effect  . . . the 
elevation  of  morale  which  has  occurred,  the  pr ide   which  the  country 
has  taken  in   this  sort  of  achievement,  following  on  the  many  other 
achievements,  is  going  to  be  a  stimulus to  redirecting  the  program, yes, 
but  certainly  not  abandoning it,  and   deciding what  a re  the  great  things 
that  can  be  done i n   the  fu ture  of  the  space program.”  (Transcr ip t)  
NASA  Aerobee  150 MI  sounding  rocket  with  VAM-20  booster,  success- 
fully  launched  from  WSMR,  carried  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  payload  to 
103.2-mi  (166-km)  altitude.  Pr imary   objective  was 
to  measure 
vacuum  uv spectral  emission  lines  from  Venusian  atmosphere. Rocket 
and   instruments  worked  satisfactorily,  but  experiment failed  to  receive 
STRAP  acquisition  and  ACS  failed  to  receive  tracker  lock-on. Except for 
terrestrial  airglow,  no   useful  spectral  information  on  Venus  or  Pro-  
cyon  was  received.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
*  Apollo  8 astronauts  were  honored  in   Nation’s  Capital. 
Astronauts  Frank  Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  and William A.  Anders 
received  NASA  Distinguished  Service Medal  from  President  Johnson  a t  
White  House.  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Acting  Administrator,  read 
citatiosl,  identical  for  each  astronaut  except  for   designation  as  com- 
mander,  command  module  pilot,  o r   lunar   module  pilot.  Borman 
received  award  “for  outstanding  contributions  to  space  flight,  engi- 
neering,  technology  and   exploration  as Commander  of  Apollo  8, man- 
kind’s  first  venture  beyond  Ea r th   into  orb i t   around  the  Moon.  During 
this  flawless  mission  from  December  21   to  December  27,  1968,  he 
made  critical  decisions  and   carried  out  complex  maneuvers  to  fly  into 
precise  translunar  injection,  lunar   orbit,  and   transearth  injection  flight 
paths  to  a  successful  reentry  and   splashdown  within  5,000  yards  of 
the  recovery  vessel.  His  scientific  observations  during  the  journey  to 
and   from  the  Moon  and  dur ing   10  orbits  of  the  Moon  have  added 
significantly  to  man’s  knowledge.  He  displayed  outstanding  leadership, 
courage,  professional  skill  and   devotion  to  duty  in   accomplishing  all 
planned  mission  objectives,  significantly  advancing  the  nation’s  capa- 
bilities  in   space.  As   one  of  history’s  boldest  explorers,  he  has  blazed  a 
new  tra i l   for  mankind  out  into  the  vastness  of  extraterrestrial  space.’’ 
President  Johnson  said:  “Our  space  program,  and   this,  i ts   most 

6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January 9 

spectacular  achievement, have  taught  us  some  very  invaluable  lessons. 
We  have  learned  how  men  and   nations  may  make  common  cause  in 
the  most  magnificent  and   hopeful  enterprises  of  mankind.  We  in   the 
United  States  a re   already  engaged  in   cooperative  space  activities  with 
more  than  70 nations  of  the  world.  We  have  proposed  a  variety  of  ad-  
ventures  to  expand  international partnership  in   space exploration.  This 
morning  I  renew  America’s  commitment  to  tha t   principle  and  to  its 
enormous  promise.  The  flight  of  Apollo  8 gives  all  nations  a  new  and  
a  most  exciting  reason  to  jo in   in   man’s  greatest  adventure.”  President 
Johnson  presented  retired  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  a s   “the 
single  man  most  responsible  for   successfully  administering  this  pro- 
gram  and,  I  think,  the  best  Administrator  in   the  Federal Government.” 
Astronauts  gave President  Johnson  miniature  copies  of  recent  inter- 
national  space treaties  which  they  had  carried  aboard  Apollo  8 space- 
craf t   and   “picture  of  the  ranch”  (pho to   of  earth  taken  from  space) .  
(PD,  1 /13 /69 ,   3 5 - 6 )  
After  awards  ceremony  astronauts  were  driven  in   motorcade  to  ad-  
dress  joint  assembly  of  Congress  attended  by  nine  Supreme  Court 
Justices.  Borman  told  Congress : “The  one  overwhelming  emotion  tha t  
we   carried  with  us  is   the  fact  that  we  really  do  all  exist  on  the  small 
globe.  And  when  you  get  to  240,000  miles,  i t   really  isn’t  a  very  large 
earth.”  He  sa id   voyage  was  not  just  an   American  achievement;  “we 
stood on  the  shoulders  of  giants,”  from Newton  and  Galileo  to  present 
day  scientists  and   space explorers.  “If  Apollo  8 was  a  triumph  a t   all,” 
Borman  said, “it  was  a  triumph  of  all  mankind.” 
At  State  Dept.  Auditorium  press  conference, NASA  Assistant  Admin- 
istrator  for   Public  Affairs  Julian  Scheer  announced  Astronaut  Frank 
Borman  had   been  appointed  Deputy  Director  of  Flight  Crew  Opera- 
tions  a t  MSC. 
During  conference  astronauts  disclosed  they  had  not  seen  moon 
during  approach  to  lunar  orb i t ;   presented  slides  indicating  presence 
of  volcanics  on  back  of  moon;  and   announced  their  conclusion  tha t  
conditions  on  pseudolanding  site,  B-1, 
indicated  “lighting  conditions 
a re   . . . adequate  for  a  lunar   landing,  which  was  one  of  our  objectives 
of  the  flight.”  Borman  said,  “ I   came  away  with  the  idea  that  the  moon 
may  be  more  homogeneous than  I  had  realized  . . . that  you  could  get 
a spoon  one place  and   find  it jus t   abou t  the  same  as  the  samples some- 
where  else.”  In   answer to  question,  he  said,  “I   don’t  believe  we  found 
anything that would  be  of  concern  to  fu ture  flights. We  flight-tested the 
ground  system.  We  flight-tested  the  airborne  system.  The  command 
module  and  service  module  have  effectively  performed  their  designed 
task,  their  designed mission,  with  the  exception of  docking.  We  have 
got  magnificent machinery.  We  have  superb  ground support.” 
Following press  conference, astronauts and  their  families  were  guests 
at  Smithsonian  Institution  dinner  in  Washington,  D.C.  (Transcr ip t ;  
NASA  Release  69 -8 ;   Wilford,  N Y T ,   1 /10 /69 ,   1 ;   Maynard,  W Post, 
1 /10 /69 ,   1; Sehlstedt,  B  Sun, 1 /10 /69 ,   1) 
January 10: U.S.S.R.  launched  unmanned  Venus  VZ probe-second 
in   five 
days  [see  Jan.  51-into 
parking  orbit  and  then  on  trajectory  toward 
Venus.  Tass  said  2,4991-lb  spacecraft  would  attempt  slow  descent 
through  Venusian  atmosphere  and  softlanding  on  part  of  surface  not 
illuminated  by  sun.  Probe   was  expected  to  reach  Venus  in   mid-May. 

7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Januaq   10 
Tass  said  Yenus  Y  had  completed  863,700  m i   of  155-million-mile 
journey.  Venus  VZ was  last  reported  40,762  mi  above  earth.  Informa- 
tion  radioed  from  both  spacecraft  indicated  equipment  was  working 
normally.  (UP I ,   W  Star,  1/10/69,  A8;  AP,  B  Sun,  1/11/69,  1; MOS- 
COW   News,  2 / 1 4 / 6 9 ,   11) 
*  New  York  City  held  ticker-tape  parade   for   ApoZZo  8  Astronauts  Frank 
Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and   William  A.  Anders,  followed  by 
presentation  a t   City  Hall  Plaza  of  Medals  of  City  of  New  York, 
luncheon  a t   Lincoln  Center,  appearance  a t   U.N.,  and   Waldorf-Astoria 
dinner  attended  by  2,500 political  leaders  and   guests.  ( N Y T ,  1 /10 /69 ,  
30 ;   Aarons,  W Post,  1/11/69,  A l ;   AP,  B  Sun ,   1/11/69,  A4) 
*  Special  six-cent  postal  stamp  honoring  Dec.  21-27,  1968, ApoZZo  8  mis- 
sion  had  been  approved  by  Post  Office Dept.,  Postmaster  General  W. 
Marvin  Watson  announced.  Stamp  would  be  issued  May  5,  seventh 
anniversary  of  Freedom  7,  first  U S .   manned  suborbital  space  flight, 
by  Alan  B.  Shepard,  J r .   (PO Dept Release  14) 
NASA  released  ‘‘Debrief:  Apollo  8,”  28-min,  16-mm color  film  showing 
first  manned  lunar  orbit.  (NASA  PAo;  Nelson,  Science,  1 /24 /69 ,   371)  
National  Investigations  Committee  on  Aerial  Phenomena  challenged 
USAF’S  Condon  Report  on  UFOS  [Jan.  81.  At  Washington,  D.C.,  press 
conference Maj.  Donald E.  Keyhoe  (USMC ,   Ret.),  head  of  private com- 
mittee,  said  investigation  examined  only  “about  1 o/o”  of  “reliable,  un- 
explained”  UFO  sightings  supplied  to  it.  He   said  his  files  contained 
11,000  reports  of  sightings,  of  which  3,000  were  unexplained.  ( U P I ,  
W  S ta r ,   1/11/69,  1) 
*  Dr.  Frederick  Seitz,  NAS  President,  appointed  12-member  Universities 
Organizing  Committee  for  Space  Sciences,  chaired  by  Frederick  T. 
Wall,  Vice  Chancellor  of  Graduate  Studies  and  Research  at  Univ.  of 
California  a t  San  Diego.  I t  would  serve  NAS  a s   national  Board  of  Gov- 
ernors   of  Lunar  Science  Institute,  Houston,  Tex.,  establishing  policy, 
reviewing  operations  and   budgets,  and   advising  Institute’s  director  on 
program  development.  Committee  also  would  draf t   objectives  and 
procedures  for  consortium  of  universities  operating  the  facilities  for 
research,  development,  and   education  associated  with  space  science 
and  technology.  (NAS-NRC-NAE  News  Rpt,  2/1969,  2 )  
New  York  Times  ed i tor ia l   commented  on  USAF  UFO  report:  “Evidently 
many  committed  to  the  belief  that  reported  UFO  sightings  prove  this 
planet  is   being  reconnoitered  and   even  visited  by  beings  from  else- 
where  in   space  will  remain  unpersuaded  that  earth  has   a  current 
monopoly  on  space  voyagers.  . . . But  outside  the  ranks  of  true   be- 
lievers,  we  suspect  this  document  and   its  conclusions  will  find  wide 
acceptance.  Professor  Condon  and   his  colleagues did  make  a  careful 
and   extensive  investigation.  They  enlisted  specialists  in   the  relevant 
branches  of  science,  interviewed  alleged  witnesses,  examined  photo- 
graphs  purporting  to  show UFO  sightings  and   studied  cases  of  claimed 
radar   detection.  . . . Those  believers  will  keep  on  trying,  bu t   the  rest 
of  society  can   dedicate  themselves  to   worrying  about  more  serious 
matters-unless  and   until  there  is   new  and   more  persuasive  evidence 
than  any  now  available.”  ( N Y T ,  1/10/69,  4 6 )  
9  Washington  Evening  Star  commented  on  USAF  UFO  report:  “Man  needs 
his  myths  and   his  irra t iona l  beliefs-his 
goblins and  witches  and  mon- 
sters.  Be  needs  to  be   reminded  that  the  universe  is   still  a  wondrous, 

8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January  10 

awesome  and  unknown  place.  H e  needs  to   cling  to   the   hope  tha t   there 
is, somewhere,  some product  of  creation more  frightening,  more power- 
fu l   and  more  wise  than   he.  The   UFO  was  the  space-age thing  tha t   goes 
bump  in  the   night.  It should  have  been  left  alone.”  (W  S tar ,   1/10/69, 
A10) 
0  FAA  announced  proposed  ru le   which  would  requ ire   issuance  to   a ir l ine  
passengers  and   crew  of  fireproof,  lightweight,  plastic  smoke  hoods  to 
protect  against  fire  and  smoke  dur ing   evacuation  following  crash  land- 
ing.  (FAA   Release  69 -4 )  
0  Japanese  Cabinet  approved  National  Defense  Council’s  decision  to  pro- 
duce  104 Phantom  F -4E   je t   fighter  a ircraf t  by  FY  1977  under  licens- 
ing   agreement  with  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp. ’ ( N Y T ,  1/11/69,  15 )  
January 11:  In  Philadelphia  Evening  Bulletin,  J.  F.  Te r   Horst  commented 
on  designation  of  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  former  NASA  Deputy  Ad- 
ministrator,  as   Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  in   Nixon  Administration 
Cabinet:  “It’s  highly  unlikely  that  the  Nixon  Administration  will 
merge  civilian  and   military  space  programs-they  were  back  in   1958 
when  he   was  Vice  President.  But  if  i t   becomes  easier  to  sell  Congress 
a  space  budget  with  a  military  label  than  with  a  civilian  one,  M r .  
Nixon  undoubtedly  will move  in   tha t   direction.  If  he   does,  he   has  an  
uncommonly  qualified  administrator  in  Seamans.”  ( P  Bull,  1 /11 /69 ,  
14 )  
0  NASA  successfully  launched  two  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  from  Po in t  
Barrow,  Alaska,  carrying  GSFC  payloads.  First  launch  was  to  develop 
experimental  techniques  for   determining  atmospheric  composition  pro- 
files  in   mesospheric  region  and   to  measure  distribution  of  ozone  by 
chemiluminescent  technique  and   of  water  vapors  by  aluminum-oxide 
hygrometer  in   40.4-  to  12.4-mi  (65-  to  20-km)  region.  Rocket  and  
instruments  performed  satisfactorily. 
Second  rocket  was  launched  to  obtain  data  on  wind,  temperature, 
pressure,  and   density  in   support  of  first  launch  by  detonating  gre- 
nades  and   recording  sound  arrivals. Rocket  and   instruments  performed 
satisfactorily.  (NASA   Rpts  SRL) 
Commission  on  Marine  Science,  Engineering  and   Resources  recom- 
mended  in   report  Ou r   Nation  and  the  Sea  creation  of  new  agency, 
National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Agency  ( NOAA )  , to   coordinate  and  
accelerate  oceanology  research  and   development.  It  proposed  agency 
be  composed  initially  of  U.S.  Coast  Guard  and   Bureau  of  Fisheries, 
plus  some  functions  of  Bureau  of  Spor t   Fisheries  and   Wildlife,  Na- 
tional  Sea  Gran t   Program,  U S .   Lake  Survey,  National  Oceanographic 
Data  Center,  and   ESSA.  (Pasadena   Star-News,  1 /12 /69 ;   Nelson,  Sci- 
ence,  1/17/69,  263-5) 
January  11-12:  After  being  feted  a t  Newark,  N.J.,  a irpor t  by  1,500 persons 
i n   15”  temperature,  Apollo  8  Astronauts  Frank   Borman,  James  A .  
Lovell,  Jr.,  and   William  A.  Anders  flew  to  Miami,  Fla.,  for   Jan .   12  
Super  Bowl  game.  Dade  County,  Fla.,  Mayor  Chuck  Hall  presented 
astronauts  and   their  families keys  to   county  and  tickets  to  game.  (UP I ,  
N Y T ,   1/12/69,  35)  
launched  Cosmos  CCLXZII  into  orb i t   with  362-km 
January  12:  U.S.S.R. 
(224.9-mi)  apogee,  207-km 
(128.6-mi)  perigee,  89.6-min  period, 
(UP I ,   W  Star, 
and   65.4’ 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Jan.  20. 
1/13/69,  A I ;   GSFC  SSR ,   1/15/69;  1 /31 /69)  

9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January 12 
*  USAF  launched  an  Advanced  Ballistic  Reentry  System  (ABRES)   vehicle 
from  Vandenberg  AFB  by  Atlas-F  Booster.  (AP,  C Trib 1 /17 /69 )  
I n  Washington  Evening S ta r ,  O r r  Kelly  said  U.S.S.R.  appeared  to  be  de- 
veloping  new  multiple  warhead  missile  to  deliver  “string”  of  as  many 
a s   10   one-megaton  nuclear  bombs.  Missile  was  similar  to,  bu t   less 
sophisticated  than,  U S .   MIRV  system.  Both  countries  were  reportedly 
a t  same  development stage,  with  deployment  scheduled  for  early  1970s. 
(W  S tar ,   1/12/69,  13) 
January  13: Apo l lo   8  Astronauts  Frank  Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and 
William  A.  Anders  returned  to  Houston,  Tex.,  fo r   biggest  parade  in  
city’s  history,  with  quarter  million  spectators  filling  sky  with  ticker 
tape  and  balloons.  Astronauts  received  city’s  highest  honors,  bronze 
medals  fo r   heroism  with  motto  “per  aspera  a d   astra.”  (AP,  B  Sun, 
1/14/69,  A8;  UPI,  W  Pos t ,   1/14/69,  ALE) 
0  I n   ceremony  at  MSC,  NASA  presented  awards  including  12   Distinguished 
Service  Medals,  recognizing  contributions  to  Apollo  8  space  mission 
by  groups  and   individuals  in   NASA,  DOD,  and  industry. 
DSM,  NASA’s highest  award,  was  presented  to  Dr.  Ku r t   H.  Debus, 
Director,  K S C ;   Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  Director,  MSC ;   Christopher  C. 
Kraft,  Jr.,  Director  of  Flight  Operations,  MSC ;   George M.  Low,  Man- 
ager, Apollo  Program  Office,  MSC ;   Dr.  George E. Mueller, NASA  Associ- 
ate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight;  Rocco  A.  Petrone, 
Director  of  Launch  Operations,  KSC ;   L/G  Samuel  C.  Phillips,  NASA 
Apollo  Program  Director;  Dr.  Eberhard  F.  M.  Rees,  Deputy  Director 
(Technical),  MSFC;  Arthur  Rudolph,  Manager,  Saturn  V  Program 
Office,  MSFC ; William  C.  Schneider, Manager,  Apollo Applications  Pro- 
gram ; Gerald  M.  Truszynski,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Track- 
ing  and   Data  Acquisition;  and  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  Director, 
MSFC. 
Exceptional  Service  Medals  were  awarded  to  62  persons  and  Public 
Service  Awards  to  22.  Group  Achievement  Awards  went  to  U.S.S. 
Yo rk town   (CVS-10)  and  Embarked  Air  Group,  Manned  Space  Flight 
Network,  and  NASX  Office  of  Public  Affairs.  Public  Service  Group 
Achievement  Award  was  presented  to  Apollo  8  Communication  Net- 
work  and  Certificate  of  Appreciation  was  awarded  to  University-NASA 
Scientific  and  Technology  Advisory  Committee  ( STAC)  . (NA SA   Special 
Release  1/13/69;  NASA  PAO) 
At  nonpartisan  farewell  dinner  given  to  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  in 
New  York,  former  NASA  Administrator  James  E.  Webb  read  statement 
on  accomplishments  in  space  effort  under  Johnson  Presidency : “Lyn- 
don  Baines Johnson  has done more  than  lead  the United  States forward 
in  space. He has  stamped  on  our  program  its significant  characteristics: 
that  i t   be  conducted  in  the  open  for  all  the  world  to  see;  that  i t   be 
carried  out  so  as  to  strengthen  and  not  to  undermine  the  basic  institu- 
tions  and  values  of  our  society;  that  i t   be  dedicated  to  the  cause  of 
peace  and   the  benefit  of  all  mankind. 
“Of  all  the  debts  the  American  people  owe  President  Johnson,  none 
is  likely  to  loom  larger  over  time  than  that  he  started  them  on  the  road 
to  mastery  of  this  new,  unlimited  environment  by  means  of  the  new 
rocket  technology.  . . . I t  is  the  lasting  tribute  to  Lyndon  Baines  John- 
son  that  he  has  seen  from  the  beginning  that  accomplishments in   space 
and   the  capability  which  can  sustain  and  increase  these  accomplish- 

10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January 13 

* N  

flight  NASA  planned  to  obtain  data  on  its  handling  qualities  and   struc- 
tura l   response  to  a ir   turbulence. 
First  flight  of  XB-70  was  made  Sept.  21,  1964. Top   speed  of  mach 
3  (2,000 mph)   and  peak  altithde of  74,000  had  been  attained  in  four- 
year  flight  program.  (NASA   Release  69-10) 
*  NSF  released  Technology  in   Retrospect  and  Critical  Events  in   Science 
(TRACES)  , report  by  Illinois  Institute  of  Technology  Research  Institute 
which  traced  key  scientific  events  leading  to  five  ma jor   technological 
innovations : magnetic  ferrites,  video  tape  recorder,  ora l   contraceptive 
pill,  electron  microscope,  and   matrix  isolation.  In   all  five,  nonmission, 
o r   basic,  research  “provided  the  origins  from  which  science  and   tech- 
nology  could  advance  toward  the  innovation  which  lay  ahead.”  Ap- 
proximately 70%  of  key  events documented were  nonmission  research, 
20%  mission-oriented,  and   10%  development  and   application.  Ten 
years  before  innovation-i.e., 
shortly  before  conception  of  that  inno- 
vation-90% 
of  nonmission  research  had  been  accomplished.  (Text) 
*  Defense  Secretary- designate Melvin  R.  Laird  announced  retention  of  Dr. 
John  S.  Foster,  Jr.,  as  Director  of  Defense  Research  and   Engineering. 
(Kelly, W Star,  1/13/69,  A5;  UPI,  W Star,  1/14/69,  A6) 
MSFC  announced  award  of  $1,311,702  contract  to  LTV Aerospace  Corp. 
for  construction  of  temperature  control  devices  for   Apollo  Telescope 
Mount,  or  manned  solar  observatory. 
MSFC   also  had  issued  bid  requests  on  5  control  relay  packages,  4 
horizon  sensor  scanner  systems,  11 solar  sensors  ( 4  for  attitude  con- 
trol  system  and   7  for  solar  panel  control  system),  and  5  computer 
component  control  packages  for   guidance,  control,  and   power  systems 
for  Sa turn   I  Workshop,  scheduled  to  be  flown  in   1971-72  in   Apollo 
Applications  Program.  ( MSFC  Releases  69-6,  69-8)  
January  14-18:  U.S.S.R.’s  Soyuz  ZV, carrying  Cosmonaut Vladimir  Shata- 
lov,  was  successfully launched  from  Baikonur  Cosmodrome  in to   orb i t  
11 ith  224-km  (139.2-mi)  apogee,  213-km  (132.4-mi)  perigee,  88.8- 
min  period,  and   51.7’ 
inclination.  Soviet news  media  reported  launch 
quickly  and   in   detail  and   within  one  hour  video  recording  of  launch 
was  shown  on  Moscow  TV. Soon  afterward  viewers  received  live  TV 
coverage from  spacecraft  and   description  of  flight by  Cosmonaut Shat- 
alov.  Western  speculation,  later  confirmed,  was  that  Soyuz  ZV  would 
rendezvous with  another  spacecraft. 
Soyuz  V ,  carrying  Cosmonauts Yevegeny  Khrunov,  Boris  Volynov, 
and  Aleksey  Yeliseyev,  was  launched  Jan.  15 into  orb i t   with  212-km 
( 131.7-mi)  apogee,  196-km  ( 121.8-mi)  perigee,  88.6-min  period, 
and   51.7’  inclination.  Tass  said  spececraft  would  conduct  joint  experi- 
ments w i t h  Soyuz   ZV.  Spacecraft  established  radio  contact,  coordinated 

11 

January 14-18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January  14-18:  First  manned  transfer   i n  space .   Launched  on  successive  da y s ,  Soyuz  IV 
(carry ing   one  cosmonau t)   and  Soyuz  V (carry ing   t h r e e )   rendezvoused  and  docked   i n  
space .   Y e v eg en y   Khrunou  and  A l ex e y   Y e l i s e y e v   p e r f o rm e d   experiments  ou ts ide   their 
Soyuz  V and  then   jo ined   V k d i m i r   Shatalov  in  Soyuz  I V   for   return  t o   earth,  leaving 
Boris  Volynou to   re turn   alone  i n   Soyuz V.  Full-scale  configuration  of 
the  docked   space- 
c ra f t   was  photographed  at  E x p o   ’70  i n   Japan  in  Ma y   1970.  (Aviation  W e e k   P h o t o )  

scientific  programs,  transmitted  TV  pictures  to  earth,  photographed 
earth‘s  surface,  and  conducted  midcourse  maneuvers. 
On  Jan.  16  the  two  spacecraft  automatically  approached  to   within 
110 yds  of  each  other  and Soyuz ZV  was  then  steered manually  until  i t  
docked  with  Soyuz  V .  Tass  announcement  said:  “After  the  docking 
there  was  a mutual  mechanical  coupling  of  the  ships,  they  were  rigidly 
tightened  up  and  their  electrical  circuits  were  connected.  Thus,  the 
world’s  first  experimental  cosmic  station  with  four  compartments  for 
the  crew  w a s   assembled  and  began  functioning  as  an  artificial  earth 
satellite.” 
Moscow  TV  viewers  watched  as  Soyuz  V  crew  members  Khrunov 
and  Yeliseyev  put  on  special  spacesuits  with  new  regenerative  life- 
support  systems  and  went  out  into  space  through  service  compartment 
hatch.  Cosmonauts  remained  in   space  for  one  hour,  conducting  obser- 
vations  and  experiments,  and  then  entered  service  compartment  of 
other  spacecraft,  Soyuz ZV,  to  join  Shatalov.  After  4  h r s   35  min  of 
docked  flight  in   low,  nearly  circular  orbit,  spacecraft  were  uncoupled 
and  continued  their  flights  separately.  Soyuz ZV, with  three-man  crew, 
landed  Jan.  17  and   Soyuz  V,  Jan.  18.  (UP I ,   W  Star,  1/14-19/69; 
Shub,  W Post,  1/15-19/69;  Winters,  B  Sun, 1/15-18/69;  Moscow 
News, 1/25-2/1/69,  3;   2 / 1 3 / 6 9 ,   Supplement;  GSFC  SSR,  1/15/69; 
1/31/69) 

12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January  14 

January  14:  I n   his  last  State of   the   Union  message,  President  Johnson  told 
Jo in t   Session  of  Congress:  “. . . if  the  Nation’s  problems  a r e  continu- 
ing,  so   a re   this  Nation’s  assets.  Our  economy,  the   democratic  system, 
our   sense  of  exploration,  symbolized  most  recently  by  the  wonderful 
flight  of  the  Apollo  8,  in   which  all  Americans  took  great  pride,  the 
good  common  sense  and   sound  judgment  of  the  American  people,  and  
their  essential  love  of  justice.”  Quest  for   durable  peace  “has  absorbed 
every  Administration  since  the   end  of  World  War  11.  I t   has  required 
us  to   seek  a limitation  of  arms   races  not  only  among  the  superpowers, 
but  among  the  smaller  nations  as  well.  We  have  joined  in   the  test  ban  
treaty  of  1963, the  outer  space  treaty  of  1967,  and   the  treaty  against 
the  spread  of  nuclear  weapons  in   1968.”  (PD, 1/20/69,  60-8) 
*  I n   four th  big  city  welcome within  one  week,  Apo l lo   8 Astronauts  Frank  
Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  William  A.  Anders  received  tribute 
from  estimated  1.5 million  persons  i n  Chicago  reception  a t  which  they 
were  made  honorary  citizens  of  city.  (U P I ,   N Y T ,   1/15/69,  1 )  
*  MSFC  announced  Dr.  Arthur  Rudolph,  special  assistant  to  MSFC  Director, 
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  and   formerly  manager  of  Sa turn   V  rocket 
program,  would  retire  Jan .   31.  Dr.  Rudolph  had  been  awarded  NASA 
Distinguished  Service  Medal  Jan.  13  and   on  Nov.  15,  1968,  had  re-  
ceived NASA  Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal  “for  distinguish- 
ing   himself  by  meritorious  achievement”  as  manager  of  Sa turn   V 
program  f rom   August  1963 to   May  1968. S tar t ing   career  i n   rocketry 
in   Germany  in   1930,  he   later  received  patents  fo r   liquid-fuel  rocket 
engines  and   demonstrated  operation  of  liquid-fuel rocket.  He   came  to 
U S .   with  more  than  100 other  rocket  experts  in   “Operation  Paperclip” 
i n  December  1945.  (M S FC  Release  69-10) 
Secretary  of 
the   Air  Force-designate,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr., 
thought  space  activity  should  be  ma jor   par t   of  USAF,  Christian Science 
Monitor  said.  He  had  said,  “My  prime  objective  will  be  to  develop 
equipment  for   national  defense,  and  my  emphasis  w i l l   be  on  whatever 
kind  of  equipment  will  be  most  suitable  for  the  mission  a t   hand.” 
( C SM ,  1/14/69,  5 )  
*  Senate  adopted  S.R.  13  establishing  numerical  size  of  Senate  standing 
committees  fo r   9 l s t   Congress  and   adopted  S.R.  14 and   S.R.  15 elect- 
ing  majority  and   minority  standing  committee  membership.  Senate 
Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space  Sciences  was  reduced  from  16 
to  15 members,  with  Republican  Sens.  Len  B.  Jordan   (R-Idaho)   and  
Charles  E.  Goodell  (R-N.Y.)  dropping  off.  Senate  also  approved  ap- 
pointment  of  Sens.  Barry  Goldwater  (R-Ariz.) , Charles  McC.  Mathias, 
Jr.  (R-Md .) ,   and   William  B.  Saxbe  (R-Oh io)   to  committee.  Demo- 
cratic  assignments  on   committee  remained  unchanged.  ( CRY  1/14/69, 
S152-87) 
USN  announced  i t   had   selected  Grumman  A ircraf t  Engineering  Corp.  as  
prime  contractor  for   new  F-14A 
supersonic  carrier-based  fighter. 
F-14A  was  expected  to  make  maiden  flight  i n   early  1971  a n d   to  be 
operational  with  fleet  in   1973.  (DOD   Release  33-69) 
Anglo-French  Concorde  supersonic  airliner  was  undergoing  final  ground 
trials  a t   Toulouse-Blagnac  airfield  in   southwest  France  in   preparation 
fo r  inaugural  flight  expected  toward  end  of  January   o r   early February, 
Reuters  reported.  Aircraft  was  expected  to  enter  commercial  service 

13 

January 14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

in   1972  and   to  halve  London-New York  flight  time,  to  3 h r s   32  min. 
I t  had   five-year  lead  over  U S .   SST,  which  was  still  in  blueprint  stage. 
( N Y T ,  1/15/69,  77) 
*  NASA  announced  it  had  signed  $2,919,000  supplemental  agreement 
with  Div.  of  Sponsored  Research  of  MIT   fo r   fabrication and   delivery 
of  40  inertial  reference  integrating  gyros  ( IRIGS)  for  Apollo  guidance 
and   navigation  system,  bringing  total  contract  to  $81,000,000. 
(NASA  
Release  69-1  1 ) 
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.  received  $1,000,000  initial  increment  to 
$3,900,000  fixed-price USAF  contract  for  development,  fabrication,  and 
testing  of Titan  I I IC  payload  fa ir ing  subsystem. Contract was  managed 
by  USAF  Space and  Missile  Systems Organization.  (DOD   Release  34-69) 
Janua r y  15: President  Johnson  in  message  transmitting  FY  1970 budget  to 
Congress said  ma jor   recommended  decreases in  budget  authority  from 
1969 to   1970 included  $235  million  for  the  National  Aeronautics  and 
Space  Administration,  which  “will  provide  for   a  program  level  equal 
to  1969  when  combined  with  prior  year  funds.”  Major  increases 
included  “522  million  for  airway  modernization,  highways,  and  other 
activities”  in   DOT.  Of  estimated  $11.6  billion  increase  in   total  budget 
outlays,  $0.5  billion  wa s   for  national  defense,  “largely  for  improve- 
ments  in  our  strategic  forces,  modernization  of  our  tactical  a i r   forces, 
and   other  increased  research  and   development  efforts  needed  to  assure 
sufficient  deterrent  power  in   the  future.  These  increases  will  be  sub- 
stantially  offset  by  reduced  outlays  for   Vietnam  resulting  from  chang- 
ing   combat  patterns  and   revised  supply  requirements.  . . . In   keeping 
with  national  priorities,  ma jor   social  programs  account  fo r   largest 
portion”  of  increase. 
President  said:  “The  record  of  achievements  of  the  past  5  years  is 
an   impressive one.  We  have  witnessed  a  period  of  unprecedented  eco- 
nomic  growth,  with  expanded  production,  rising  standards ,of 
living, 
and  the  lowest  rates  of  unemployment  in   a  decade  and   a  half.  Our 
military  forces  today  are  the  strongest  in   the  world.  . . . Last  month 
saw man’s  first  successful  flight  to  the  moon.  In   domestic  matters,  the 
legislative  and  executive  branches,  cooperatively,  have  forged  new 
tools  to  open  wider  the  doors  of  opportunity  for  a  better  life  for  all 
Americans. 
“This  Nation  remains  firmly  committed  to  a  world  of  peace  and  
human  dignity.  I n   seeking these  goals,  we   have  achieved  great military 
strength  with  the  sole  aim  of  deterring  and  resisting  aggression.  We 
have  continued  to  assist  other  nations  struggling  to  provide  a  better 
life  for  their  people. We  are  successfully  pushing  forward  the  frontiers 
of  knowledge  to  outer  space  and  promoting  scientific and   technological 
( P D ,  
advances  of  enormous  potential  for  benefit 
to  mankind.” 
1/20/69,  70-90;  CR ,  1/15/69,  S195-208) 
0  President  Johnson  sent  $195.3-billion  FY  1970  budget  request  to  Con- 
gress,  including  total  space budget  of  $5.946 billion.  Of  this  sum,  NASA 
would  receive  $3.599  billion  (p lus   $7.89  million  for  a ircraf t   tech- 
nology  and   $117 million  in   unobligated  funds  from  pr ior   years  to  be 
applied  to  1970  program)  ; DOD  would  receive  $2.219  billion;  AEC, 
$105 million;  ESSA,  $10 million;  NSF ,   $4  million;  Dept.  of  Interior,  $6  
million;  and   Dept.  of  Agriculture,  $4 million. 
Total  NASA  FY  1970  budget  request  of  $3.878  billion  was  below  $4 

1 4  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January  15 
billion  for  first  time  since  FY  1963 request.  Expenditures  were  budg- 
eted  to  decline  nearly  $300  million  froin  N  1969  level  of  $4.250 
billion,  to  $3.950  billion.  Of  budget  request,  $3.168  billion  would  go 
for  R&D,  $58.2  million  for  construction  of  facilities,  and   $650.9  million 
for   program  management.  Slightly  more  than  50%  of  total  FY  1970 
authority-$2.008 
billion-would 
be  in  manned  space flight,  including 
Sa turn   IB  Workshop  and  Apollo  Telescope  Mount.  Space  science  and  
applications  were  allotted  $558.8  million ; advanced  research  and   tech- 
nology¶ $290.4  million. 
Larger  proportion  of  NASA  funds   would  go  to  research  than  to  de- 
velopment  in   FY  1970 as Apollo  costs  declined.  Increases  would  go  to 
Apollo  Applications  ( to ta l  $308.8  million  in  FY  1970) , 1971  Mariner- 
Mars  flight  ($45.4  million) , Viking  project 
($40  million) , 1973 
Mariner-Mercury  ($3 million) , Planetary  Explorers  ( $ 8  m i l l ion) ,   Ap- 
plications  Technology  Satellites  ($44.2  million) , and   Earth  Resources 
Survey  program  ($25.1 million).  Aeronautical  vehicle  technology  pro- 
gram,  up  from  $74.9  million  to  $78.9  million,  included  $21.78  million 
for  advanced  research,  $500,000  for  general  aviation,  $11.25  million 
for  V/STOL,  $16.19  million  for  subsonic  aircraft,  $20.9  million  for 
supersonic  aircraft,  and   $8.28  million  for  hypersonic  aircraft. 
DOD   space  funding  would  include  satellite  development,  certain  por- 
tions  of  missile  development  and  operating  costs,  MOL  (increased  to 
$576 million) , Titan  I11  booster,  and  supporting  R&D.  In   addition,  a i r -  
craft  R&D  funds  of  $1.4  billion  would  include  $500  million  for  new 
USN   F-14A  fighter  to  replace  F-111B,  $1 billion  for  series  of  advanced 
jet  aircraft,  $75  million  for  long-range  bomber  to  succeed  B-52,  and 
funds  for  USAF  F-15  fighter  and   USN  vsx antisubmarine  aircraft. 
AEC  space  funding  included  amounts  for  nuclear  rocket  propulsion 
technology  and  nuclear  power  sources  for  space applications,  including 
production  of  isotopic  fuels  and   aerospace  safety.  ESSA  funds  would 
support  Ear th   Resources  Technology  Satellite  ( ERTS)   program  re- 
search.  NSF’S  total  request  was  up  from  $400  million  in  FY  1969  to 
$497  million.  Of  this  amount,  its  $4-million  space  funds  were  for 
research  in  astronomy  using  rockets  and  satellite-borne  observation 
instruments.  Dept.  of  Interior  would  conduct  experiments  with  data 
from  ERTS  spacecraft. 
FAA’S  R&D  budget  would  increase  from   $49   million  in  FY  1969  to 
$59  million  in  FY  1970. Principal  increases  were  for  research  on  a ir  
traffic  control  and  noise  abatement.  President  Johnson  requested  no 
additional funds for  SST  program.  (NASA   Release,  1 /15 /69 ;   BOB   Special 
Analysis  Q;  Dale,  N Y T ,   1/16/69,  1 ;   Schmeck,  N Y T ,   1/16/69,  24 ;  
Lindsey,  N Y T ,   1/16/69,  8 1 ;   W  Post,  1/16/69,  A12) 
NASA   released  transcript  of  Jan.  1 4  briefing  on  NASA  FY  1970 budget  at 
which  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Acting  Adminisirator,  said  $3.SiS- 
billion  budget  approved  by  President  Johnson  had  been  developed  “to 
maintain  an   austere  but  balanced  NASA  aeronautics  and   space  prograln 
aimed  a t  major  program  goals of  high  national  priority.” 
Goals  were  continuing  advances  in  space  applications,  including  in- 
itiation  of  experimental  ear th   resources  technology  satellites  and  
slightly  decelerated  research  on  space environment;  achieving manned 
lunar  landing  and   additional Apollo  moon  missions,  with  limited  pro- 
equipment  to  achieve 
for  development-of 
vision  fo r   studies-not 

1 5  

January 15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

longer  lunar  stay-times and  mobility  for   fu ture  exploration;  proceeding 
with  Sa turn   I  Workshop  and   Apollo  Telescope  Mount;  proceeding 
with  Viking  Project  to   land  instruments  on Mars  in   1973;  initiating  in  
FY  1970  Mariner  flyby  in   1973  of  Venus  and   Mercury;  producing 
family  of  small  planetary  Explorers  for   orb i t ing   Mars  and   Venus; 
making  preliminary  observations  of  Jupiter  with  previously  approved 
Pioneer  spacecraft;  continuing  work  on  unmanned  orbiting  astro- 
nomical  observatories;  continuing  advanced  aerospace  technology  work 
a t   about  current  levels;  emphasizing  noise  reduction,  with  construction 
of  special  noise  research  laboratory ; developing  full  potential  of  civil 
and   military  aeronautics;  and   undertaking  NEKVA   project  for  develop- 
ment  of  flight-weight  nuclear  engine. 
Dr.  Pa ine  noted  FY  1970 budgct,  as  approved  by  President  Johnson, 
“would  halt  a  four-year  downward  trend  in   NASA  budget.”  I t   was 
“au6tere  and   does  not  make  full  use  of  the  aerospace  capabilities  that 
the  nation  has  developed.  . . .,, But  i t   permitted  “a  balanced  program 
of  useful  work  in   critical  areas.’,  Budget  left  “the  ma jor   new  program 
decisions,  especially  in   the manned  flight  area,  for   the next  Administra- 
tion,”  and  was  ‘L  ‘holding budget’  tha t   provides  for   progress,  but  defers 
critical  program  and   funding  decisions  to  the  new  Administration.” 
(Transcr ip t)  
Apollo  Program  Director,  L/G  Samuel  C .   Phillips  ( USAF )  , addressed 
National  Space  Club  luncheon  in  Washington,  D .C . ,   on   impact  of 
ApoZZo  8:  “Many,  i f   not  most,  of  the  world’s  newspapers  heralded  the 
flight  a s   evidence  of  the  greatness  of  the  United  States.  I’m  told  jou r -  
nalists  in  Germany,  England  and   France  speculated  on  the  improved 
position  that  the  U.S.  would  enjoy  in   the  diplomatic  arenas  in   which 
i t   is  engaged  i n   very  important  discussions.  I’m  told  tha t   a  French 
paper  went  so  fa r   a s   to   say  that  the  lunar   flight  had  vindicated  Capi- 
talism  as  the  best  system  of  government,  and   vindicated  our   free enter- 
prise  system  a s   the  most  effective  way  to  make  progress.  I’m  aware 
from  personal  correspondence  and   discussions  as  well  as   reports  in   the 
press  that  scientists  throughout  the  world  have  been  equally  impressed 
and   tha t   they’ve  applauded  the  progress  tha t   this  flight  indicates  for  
us.,, 
Gen.  Phillips  described  Apollo  9  mission  as  “far  less  spectacular 
than  Apollo  8,  bu t   . . . more  complex.”  I t   would  be  “certainly  one  of 
the  most  vital  missions  tha t   we’ve  had   in   our   mission  sequence  over 
the  years  tha t   leads  u s   to  a  lunar   landing.”  Risks  would  be  different 
but  “ I   personally  think  they’re  a  little  greater  than  the  risks  which  we 
knowingly  accepted  in   committing  the  Apollo  8 mission.” 
Apollo  10  would  be  fifth  Sa turn   V--505-with 
106  command  and 
service  module  and   L M 4 .   Crew  would  bt.  Astronauts  Thomas  P. 
Stafford,  John  W.  Young,  and  Eugene  A.  Cernan.  Scheduled  for  May, 
its  objectives  were  “to  demonstrate  the  performance  of  the  crew,  the 
space  vehicle,  and   the  mission  support  facilities  dur ing   a  manned 
lunar   mission  with  the  Command  and   Service  Module  and   Lunar  
Module,  and   to  evaluate  the  performance  of  the  Lunar  Module  in   a 
cislunar  and   lunar   environment.”  (Tex t)  
*  Astronomers  a t   Univ.  of  Arizona  detected  fo r   first  time  existence  of 
rapidly  flashing  s tar   in   Crab  Nebula  with  rhythm  coinciding  with  that 
of   pulsar  observed  by  rad io   telescope  a t   same  position.  Flashing  was 

16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January 15 

confirmed  dur ing   week  by  McDonald  Observatory  of  Univ.  of  Texas 
and   by   K i t t   Peak  National  Observatory  in   Arizona.  Presumably  s tar  
and   pulsar  were  identical.  Discovery  was  first  unequivocal  observation 
of  pulsar  i n   visible  light.  (Sullivan, N Y T ,   1/21/69,  29 )  
*  Boeing  Co.  announced  i t  had  made  Jan.  15 deadline  in   submitting  to  FAA 
specifications  for   fixed-wing,  280-ft, titanium  SST, weighing  635,000 
lbs  and   having  141  %-ft  wingspan.  General  Electric  Co.  engines 
would  propel  a ircraf t   t o   1,800  mph.  Boeing  said  299-passenger  a ir-  
craft’s  first  flight  was  scheduled  for  1972,  with  commercial  operation 
possible  in   1976.  ( W S J ,  1/15/69,  7 ;   FAA  Release  69 -6 )  
e  Underwater  test  program  begun  a t   MSFC’S  Neutral  Buoyancy  Simulator 
several  years  earlier  was  providing  information  essential  for   design  of 
first  U S .   space  station,  NASA  reported.  Technicians,  design  engineers. 
and   professional  divers  in   spacesuits  and   scuba  gear   were  conducting 
tasks  similar t o   those  necessary  to  activate  space  orbiting  workshop,  in  
1.4-million-gal water  tank  containing  mockups  of  AAP  cluster  elements 
(Sa tu rn   I  Workshop,  lunar   module  ascent  stage,  Apollo  Telescope 
Mount  solar  observatory,  and   airlock  and   multiple  docking  adap te r ) ,  
simulating  weightlessness  of  space.  Weightlessness  was  impossible  to 
duplicate  on  ear th  fo r   longer  than  fraction of  minute.  Conclusions  from  
tests  would  be  reflected  in   workshop’s  final  design,  with  decision  ex- 
pected  i n  May  1969.  (NASA   Release  6 9 4 )  
e  Penn  Central  Railroad  began  electric-powered  Metroliner  service  that 
would  cu t   traveling  time  of  226-mi  New  York-Washington  t r ip   to  2 
hrs  59 min-36  min  faster  than  swiftest  previous  tra ins  and,  according 
to  Penn  Central  Chairman  S tua r t  T.  Saunders,  comparable  to  airplane 
journey  which  took  45  min  in   sky  but  added  airport-access  and   airway 
delays.  (Aug ,  W  Star,  1/15/69,  A l ;   Eisen,  W  Post,  1/16/69,  B1) 
January  15-1 7:  Space Science  Education  Conference,  to  inform  educational 
TV  directors and  teachers  of  ways  NASA  could  assist  in  explaining  space 
program  to  students  and  educational  TV  audiences,  was  held  a t   MSFC 
and   attended  by  educators  and   TV  representatives  from  six  states. 
(M S FC   Release  69-11) 
January  16:  Secretary  of  Defense  would  exercise  option  to  buy  57   add i-  
tional  C-SA  a ircraf t  from  Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.  and  General Electric 
Co.,  DOD  announced.  Expenditures  and   commitments  would  be  limited 
to  first  23   a ircraf t ;   decision  on  whether  to  authorize  expenditures  for  
remaining  a ircraf t   would  be  made  later.  Predicted  cost  for  total  120 
C-5As  (s ix   squadrons)  was  $4.343 billion.  (DOD   Release  43-69)  
January  17:  President  Johnson  submitted  to  Congress report  on  U S .  Aero- 
nautics  and  Space  Activities  for  1968. I n  transmittal message  he  wrote: 
O u r   astronauts  have  now  flown  18  manned  space  missions,  dur ing  
L L  
which  they  experienced  3,215  man  hours  in   space  flight.  Together 
with  the  activities  of  the  Soviet Union,  this  makes  a  total  to  date  of  28  
manned  flights  and  3,846  man  hours  in   space. Through  this  investment 
we  have  obtained  new  products,  services,  and   knowledge;  we  have 
enhanced  our  national  security ; we  have  improved  our  international 
relations;  and   we  have  stimulated  ou r   educational  system.  Ou r   Nation 
is  richer  and   stronger  because  of  ou r   space  effort.  1 recomnwnd  tha t  
America  continue  to  pursue  the  challenge  of  space  exploration.” 
(Pres R p t   68 ;  C R ,  1/17/69,  H405, S524) 
Christian Science  Monitor  reported  interview  with  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge, 

17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 
January 17 
President-elect  Richard  M.  Nixon’s  Science  Adviser-designate : “The 
balance  between  manned  and   unmanned  [space]  exploration  ha s   to  
be  studied.  But  there  comes  a  time,  place,  and   activity  where  the  judg- 
mea t   and   quick  reaction  of  men  a r e   needed  to  do   the  job   o r   make 
emergency  repairs.  There  may  even  be  situations in  which  i t  is cheaper 
to  have  men  d o   this  than  to  have  automated  instruments.  Tha t   time 
h a s  not  yet  arrived.  Manned  flight  is  still very  expensive.  But  I  foresee 
the  time  when  you  will  run   beyond  the  ability  of  automatic  instru- 
ments  to  do   a  job   either  adequately  o r   economically  in   space  explora- 
tion.”  (Cowen,  CSM,  1/17/69) 
*  NASA  terminated  Nimbus I1 flight  operations.  Spacecraft,  launched  May 
15,  1966, to  flight-test  instrumentation  and   observe  region  of  electro- 
magnetic  spectrum  not  previously  studied,  had  accomplished  all  pr i-  
mary  and   secondary  objectives  and   had  operated  on   three-axis 
stabilization  32  mos,  greatly  exceeding  design  lifetime.  Automatic  pic- 
ture   transmission  had  operated  7,900  hrs   over  nearly  23   mos.  (NASA  
P ro j   Off) 
*  NASA  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  was  successfully  launched  from Kiruna, 
Sweden,  to  study  sudden  upper-atmosphere  warming  conditions  by 
detonating  grenades  between  24.9-  and   55.9-mi  (4)O-  and   90-km)  alti- 
tudes.  Launch  was  first  in   series  of  four  scheduled  under  agreement 
between  Swedish  Space  Research  Committee  ( SSRC) , British  Science 
Research  Council  ( SRC )  , and   NASA.  SSRC  provided  ground  equipment, 
instrumentation,  and  grenade  payloads  and   was  responsible  fo r   launch 
operations.  NASA   supplied  Nike-Cajun  rockets  and   DOVAP  transponders. 
Second  launch  would  be  conducted  Jan.  19.  (NASA   ReIease  (39-16; 
NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops  Station 
carried  GSFC  payload  to  69.6-mi  (112-km)  altitude  to  collect  da ta   on 
wind,  temperature,  pressure,  and   density  in   21.7-  to   59.0-mi  (35-  to  
95-km)  range  dur ing   atmospheric  warming  by  exploding  grenades. 
All  19  grenades  exploded  as  programmed  and   sound  arrivals  were 
recorded.  Launch  was  first  i n   series of  four   to   obtain  upper-atmosphere 
data.  ( N A S A   Rpt  SRL )  
*  Rep.  George  P.  Miller  (D-Calif.),  Chairman  of  House  Committee  011  
Science and  Astronautics,  introduced H.R.  4046,  FY  1970 NASA   authori- 
zation  bill,  totaling  $3.760  billion,  in   House.  (CR ,   1/17/69,  H403) 
Arcas  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Andoya,  Norway, 
carry ing   Swedish  payload  to  study  ionosphere.  Rocket  and   instru- 
ments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
ComSatCorp  announced  TV  coverage  of  Presidential  inauguration  of 
Richard  M.  Nixon  would  be  transmitted  via  comsats  across  Atlantic 
and   Pacific  to  viewers  in   Europe,  Latin  America,  Caribbean,  and  
Pacific  areas  dur ing   more  than  13  h r s   of  overseas  transmissions. 
(ComSatCorp Release  69-4) 
NAS-NRC  Space  Science  Board  released  Physiology  in  thc!  Space   E i t -  
vironment,  Vol.  1, CircuEation,  prepared  a t  NASA  request.  Report  found 
systematic  program  of  ground-based  and   inflight  biomedical  experi- 
mentation  w a s   essential  fo r   planning  of  long-duration  manned  space 
missions,  such  as  to Mars.  Knowledge  of  circulatory  system  and  effects 
of  space  flight must  be greatly  expanded.  It  recommended  experimenta- 
tion  with  animals,  man ,   simulations,  laboratory  investigations,  com- 

18 

-\STRO?iAUTICS  -4XD  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January 17 

prehensive  literature  studies,  and   physiological  measurement  before, 
after,  and   dur ing   flight  to   obtain  all  possible  data  from  ground-based 
work.  Flight  experiments  should  be  limited  to  those  requiring  weight- 
lessness  and   other  conditions  not  reproducible  on  ground.  (Tex t ;  
NAS  Release) 
A’ezc  Y o rk  T imes  commented  on  Soviet  linking  of  Soyuz spacecraft:  “ I t   is 
probably  not  too  soon  to   begin  planning  For.standardization  of  space 
vehicles-a  move  that  would  permit  joining  these  vehicles  regardless 
of  their  national  origin.  I t   would  be  tragic,  for   example,  if  a  group  
of  Sosiet  spacemen  needed  rescue  and   could  not  be  saved  because  the 
only  available  vehicle  was  an  American  space  ship  impossible  to  link 
with  the  Soviet ship. Here  is an   area  in  which  international cooperation 
could  not  only  save lives  bu t   help  pave  the  way  fo r   the  joint  operation 
of  stations  in   space  fo r   the  benefit  of  all  mankind.”  ( N Y T ,  1/17/69, 
46)  
Kational  Transportation  Safety  Board  recommended  to  FAA  new  flight 
regulations  to   reduce  aircraft  landing  and   approach  accidents  respon- 
sible  fo r   56%  of  fatal  crashes  since  jet-age  inception  in   1957. During 
the  60  days  before  release,  10  airliners  had  crashed  in  US . ,   Latin 
America,  and   Europe  on  landing  or  approach.  Board  called  f o r   review 
of  policies,  practices,  and   tra in ing   to  increase  crew  efficiency.  I t  urged 
development  of  audible  and  visual  warning  devices  to  alert  pilot  when 
flj ing  below  safe altitude.  (N T S B   Release SB69-5) 
FAA  announced  i t   was  considering  amendment  of  flight  recorder  rules 
to  require  increase  in   instrument’s  capability  so  as   to  provide  1 4  addi- 
tional  kinds  of  information  in   accident  investigation,  including  data 
on  altitude,  response  to   aerodynamic  forces,  flight-control  surface  posi- 
tions,  and   engine  performance.  Underwater  locator  device  also  was 
proposed,  to  go  into  operation  upon  submersion.  Proposal  would  re- 
qu ire   installation  of  new  equipment  on  newly  manufactured  aircraft 
within  three  years  of  effective  date  of  final  rule  and   within  five  years  
on   a ircraf t   already  i n   service.  ( FAA   Release  69-9) 
*  KASA   announced  appointment  of  Charles  G .  Haynes,  Director  of  Inspec- 
tions  since  1961,  as   Director  of  Hq.  Administration  effective  J an   19. 
He  would  succeed  Alfred  S .   Hodgson,  who  retired  after  35  yrs  of 
Government  service.  Ralph  F.  V i n t e   would  serve  as   Acting  Director 
of  Inspections  until  permanent  appointment  was  made.  (NASA   Ann) 
0  Xational  Academy  of  Sciences  announced  Dr.  Philip  Handler,  Chairman 
of  Dept.  of  Biochemistry  at  Duke  Univ.,  had  been  declared  President- 
elect  of  NAS  after  tally  of  mail  ballots.  There  had  been  no  other  nomi- 
nee.  Dr.  Handler  would  begin  six-year  term  July  1,  succeeding  Dr. 
Frederick  Seitz,  President  of  Rockefeller  Univ.  Dr.  Handler,  with 
career  in  enzyme  research,  had   been  Xational  Science  Board  member 
since  1962  and   its  Chairman  since  1966.  From  1964  to  1967 he  had 
been  member  of  President’s  Science  Advisory  Committee.  NAS  Re- 
lease;  W  P o s t ,   1/19/69,  A 5 )  
January  18: Kike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Po in t  
Barroiv,  Alaska,  carrying  GSFC  payload  to  obtain  da ta   on  wind,  tem- 
perature,  p!essure, 
and   density  during  period  of  atmospheric  warming 
by  detonating  grenades  and   recording  sound  arr iva ls   on  ground.  All 
grenades  were  ejected  and   exploded  as   programmed.  Launch  was  first 
i n  series of  four   to  be  launched  from  Po in t  Barrow.  ( K A S A   Rpt  SRL) 

19 

J a n u a r y  18 

ASTROXAUTICS  AXD   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

0  Arcas  sounding  rocket  $vas  launched  by  NASA  from  Andoya,  Norway, 
carry ing   Swedish  payload  to  study  ionosphere.  Rocket  and   instru- 
ments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA   P ro j   O f f )  
0  Wa sh ing ton  Daily N e w s   editorial commented  on Condon Report  on  WOS :  
“Dedicated  disciples  of  the  little  green  nien  from  Mars  school  no 
doubt  will  find  the  Condon  report  represents  another  diabolical  plot 
to  suppress  truth.  But  most  Americans  \+-ill find  the  report  something 
less  than  a  surprise.  Apart  f rom  xas t ing   time,  continuing  study  would 
waste  taxpayer  money.”  ( W  News, 1 /18 /69 )  
Janua ry   19:  NASA  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket,  second  in  series  of  four 
[see  Jan.  171  in   NISA-SSRC-SRC 
cooperative  program,  was  successfully 
launched  from  Kiruna,  Sweden,  to  study  sudden  upper-atmosphere 
warming  conditions  by  detonating  grenades  between  24.9-  and   55.9-mi 
(40 -   and   90-km)   altitudes.  Vehicle  underperformed  but  satisfactory 
scientific  da ta  were  expected.  (NASA   Release,  69-16;  NAS-4  Rpt  SR L l  
N . ~ S .A  announced  appointment  of  Robert  W.  Kamm,  Assistant  to   Director 
of  Space  Institute  of  Univ.  of  Tennessee,  as   consultant  to  Harold  B. 
Finger,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Organization  and  Manage- 
ment.  Kamm  had  been  director of  NASA’s Western  Support Office, Santa 
Monica,  Calif.,  for  nearly  nine  years.  (NASA   Special  Release) 
January  20:  Administration  of  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  ended  as 
President  Richard  M.  Xixon  was  sworn  in  as  President  of  U S .   John- 
son  had  served  U S .   space  program  continuously  since  Spu tn ik   I  in  
October  195‘7, first  on  Capitol  Hill  as  Chairman  of  Select  and  then 
permanent  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space  Sciences.  As 
Vice  President  under  late  President  Kennedy,  he  had  served  as  Chair- 
man  of  National  Aeronautics  and   Space  Council,  post  held  by  Vice 
President  Hubert  H.  Humphrey  dur ing   Johnson  Administration.  I  EH 1 
0  I n   inaugural  address  following  his  taking  oath  of  office  as   President  of 
US . ,   Richard  M.  Nixon  said:  “Those  who  would  be  our  adversaries, 
we  invite  to  a  peaceful  competition-not 
in   conquering  territory  o r  
extending  dominion,  but  in   enriching  the  life  of  man.  As  we  explore 
the  reaches  of  space,  let  us   go   to  the  new  worlds  together-not 
as  new 
worlds  to  be  conquered  but  as   a  new  adventure  to  be  shared.  . . . Only 
a  few  short  weeks  ago,  we  shared  the  glory  of  man’s  first  sight  of 
the  Ttorld  as  God  sees  it,  as   a  single  sphere  reflecting  light  in   the  dark-  
ness.  A s   the  Apollo  astronauts  flew  over  the  moon’s  gray  surface  on 
Christmas  Ere ,   they  spoke  to  us  of  the  beauty  of  Earth-and 
in   that 
voice  so   clear  across  the  lunar   distance,  we  heard  them  invoke  God’s 
blessing  on  its  goodness.  In   tha t   moment,  their  view  from  the  moon 
moved  poet  Archibald  MacLeish  to  write: 
‘‘ ‘To see the  Ear th   as  i t  truly  is, small and  blue  and  beautiful  in  that 
eternal  silence  where  i t   floats,  is  to  see  ourselves  as   riders  on  the 
Ear th   together,  brothers  on   tha t   bright  loveliness  in   the  eternal  cold- 
brothers  who  know  now   they  a re   truly  brothers.’ 
I n   that  moment  of  surpassing  technological  triumph,  men  turned 
L L  
their  thoughts  toward  home  and   humanity-seeing 
in   tha t   far   per- 
spective  that  man’s  destiny  on  ear th   is  not  divisible;  telling  us   that 
however  far  n e   reach  into  the  cosmos,  our  destiny  lies  not  in  the 
( P D ,  
s tars   bu t   on  Ear th   itseIf,  i n   our   hands,  in  our   own  hearts.” 
1 /21 /69 ,   150-154;  C R ,   1 /20 /69 ,   5561)  
Inaugura l   parade  following  President  Nixon’s  address  included  NASA  

20  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January 20 

float  carrying  mockup  of  lunar   module  to  be  used  for  moon  landing 
and  Apollo  7  capsule.  Apo l lo   7  Astronauts  Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr., 
Donn  F.  Eisele,  and  R.  Walter  Cunningham  rode  in   convertible  auto- 
mobile  in  fron t   of  NASA  float.  (NASA PIO) 
0  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range  carrying  GSFC grenade  payload  to  obtain  data  on  atmos- 
pheric  parameters.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily. 
(NASA  P ro j   Off) 
“The  ability  to  rescue  a  stranded  astronaut  is  something  the  U S .   does 
.no t   have,”  John  Lannan  sa id   in   Washington  Evening  Star.  “And- 
despite  claims by  both  the  Soviet Union  and  the  foreign  press-neither 
does  the  Soviet Union.”  NASA  Deputy  Director  of  Manned  Space Flight 
Safety  Ph i l ip   H.  Bolger  had   said  NASA  was  not  likely  to  have  real 
space  rescue  capability  before  “second  generation”  of  manned  space 
stations.  Agency  was  now  funding  rescue  studies  a t   cost  of  $600,000 
yearly.  Amount  would  probably  rise  to  $1 million  within  two  years. 
Immediate  goal  was  to  examine  method  that  would  fit  into  existing 
systems  and   br ing   it  to  hardware  stage.  Bolger  had   said  ‘Lbail-outyy 
mechanism  seemed  likelier  than  earth-based  rescue  system.  ( W   S tar ,  
1/20/69,  A8)  
*  At  Moscow  news  conference,  U.S.S.R.  Foreign  Ministry  spokesmen 
Leonid  Zamayatin  and  Kirill  Novikov  released  statement  rea5 rm ing  
U.S.S.R.’s  readiness  to  discuss  missile  control  DroDosals  contained  in  
July  memorandum  to  other  governments.  (ShGb, ‘W Post,  1 /21 /69 ;  
NYT,  1 /21 /69)  
January  21:  At  annual  AIAA  dinner,  in  New  York,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, 
Jr.,  Secretary-designate  of  the  Air  Force  and  former  NASA  Deputy 
Administrator,  was  installed  as  President  of  AIAA  for  1969, succeeding 
Dr.  Floyd  L.  Thompson,  who  continued  as  a  director.  I n   interview 
following  dinner,  Dr.  Seamans  said  NASA  should  maintain  its  open 
space program  and   its  freedom  for  international exchange  of  informa- 
tion.  USAF,  with  current  M O L  program,  “has  special  problems  which 
can  be  resolved  by  the  Department  of  Defense.”  Value  of  dual  space 
program,  he  said,  was  that  one  element  could  learn  from  another. 
Of  U.S.S.R.  space program,  Dr.  Seamans  said,  “They’re  awfully  good 
at  doubling  in  brass  . . . getting  the  most  ou t   of  their  program,”  but 
“our  program  has  more  breadth  and  depth  and  if  we’re  imaginative 
about  what  we’re  doing,  we’re  not  going  to  take  second  place.” 
AIAA  presented  its Goddard  Award  to  Dr.  Stanley  Hooker, Technical 
Director  of  Bristol-Siddeley  Engine  Div.  of  Rolls-Royce,  Ltd.,  and  
Perry   W.  Pra t t ,   Vice  President  and  Chief  Scientist  of  United  Aircraft 
Corp.,  for  work  on  turbine  engines. 
Dr.  Charles P.  Sonnett,  Chief  of  Space Sciences Div.  a t  ARC,  received 
annual  Space  Science Award  of  $500  for  “his  personal  contribution 
a s   a  planner,  leader,  and   individual  experimenter  in  major  space 
science vehicle  programs  which  have  contributed  to  the  field  of  space 
physics.” 
LaRC  Director  Edgar  M.  Cortright  and  Charles  W.  Harper,  NASA 
Deputy  Associate Administrator,  Aeronautics,  OART,  were  elected  AIAA 
directors.  (Lannan,  W  Star,  1/22/69,  A13 ;   NYT,  1/22/69,  33;  AIA 
Releases) 
Look  published  interview  in   which  former  astronaut  M.  Scott  Carpenter 

21 

January 2 1  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

announced  that  infarcts  in   lower  thigh  bones,  indicating  calcification, 
would  terminate  his  career  a s  active  deep-sea  diver.  He  would  remain 
senior  aquanaut  on   Sealab  I11  project  a s   deputy  on-scene  commander 
of  Sealab  111 command  ship  Elk R iver .   (Look,  1/21/69,  68-74) 
Sen.  Claiborne  Pel1  (D-R.I.)  introduced  on  Senate  floor  S.R.  33  calling 
on  U S .   representatives  to  U.N.  to  place  before  U.N.  Committee  on 
the  Peaceful  Uses  of  the  Seabed  and   Ocean  Floor  set  of  detailed  pr in-  
ciples  to  govern  activities  in   ocean  space of  all nations of  world.  Reso- 
lution was  referred  to  Committee  on  Foreign  Relations.  ( C R ,  1/21/69, 
S597) 
January 21-28:  Harr is   survey  of  1,544 U S .  households showed  widespread 
disenchantment  w i t h   Federal  commitments  on  space  and  Vietnam. 
Greatest number,  3976, selected space as program  they  would  cut  first, 
while  2%  voted  to  keep  or  increase  space  program.  Second  favorite 
for  funding  cut  was  Vietnam  war  financing,  with  18% of  votes.  Anti- 
crime  and  law  enforcement  programs  received  greatest  number  of 
January  22-29:  NASA’s  os0  v  (OSO-F)  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory  was  
6 6  keep  o r   increase”  votes-2276. 
(Harr is ,   Federal  T imes ,   3/5/69,  9) 
successfully  launched  from  ETR  by  three-stage  Thor-Delta  ( DSV-3C) 
booster  to  study  the  sun   and   its  influence  on  earth’s  atmosphere.  Or-  
bital  parameters:  apogee,  353.1  mi  (568.2  k m ) ;   perigee,  337.8  mi 
(543.6  km)  ; period,  95.8  m in ;   and   inclination,  32.96”.  Pr imary   mis- 
sion  objective was  to  obtain  high-resolution  spectral  da ta   from  pointed 
experiments i n   1 A-1,250  A  range  during  one  solar  rotation  and   con- 
duct  raster  scans  of  solar  disc  in   selected  wavelengths.  Secondary  ob- 
jective  was  t o   obtain  useful  data  from  nonpointed  and  pointed  experi- 
ments  for  more  than  one  solar  rotation  with  extended  observations  of 
single  lines  and   solar  flares. 
direct  observation  of  sun   during  most  of  11-yr  solar  cycle,  Os0  v 
Fifth  of  eight  spacecraft  launched  in   NASA’s oso  program  to  provide 
weighed  636  lbs,  carried  eight  experiments,  was  designed  with  six- 
month  lifetime,  and   had  two  main  sections-wheel 
(lower)  section, 
which  provided  stability  by  gyroscope  spinning  and   housed  telemetry- 
command  equipment,  batteries,  gas-spin  control  arms,  and  five  experi- 
ment  packages;  and   sail  (upper)   section,  which  contained  solar  cells 
and  solar  pointing  experiments  and  was  oriented  toward  sun.  Experi- 
ments,  designed  to  continue  and   extend  work  of  preceding  oso  space- 
craft,  were  provided  by  University  College  (London)  and   Univ.  of 
Leicester,  Univ.  of  Paris,  Univ.  of  Colorado,  Univ.  of  Minnesota, 
Naval Research Laboratory,  and   GSFC. 
Both  tape  recorders  were  turned  on  and  were  operating  satisfactorily 
and  all  spacecraft  subsystems  were  operating  nominally.  NRL   wheel 
x-ray  experiment was  turned  on  during  11th  orbit  and   was  obtaining 
good  data.  By  Jan.  29   Os0  V  had  received  707  commands  and  had 
completed  102   orbits.  All  eight  experiments  had  been  turned  on  and 
obtained  good  scientific  data.  All  spacecraft  s y s t em s i n c l u d i n g  raster 
scan  and   both  tape  recorders-had 
operated  satisfactorily.  Data  from 
GSFC  x-ray  experiment  were  being  used  to  plot  spectrum  of  sun.  Data 
from  NRL  uv  pointed  experiment had  been  used  to  obtain  Os0  V’s  first 
Lyman-alpha  spectroheliograph. 
Os0  I  (launched  March  7,  1962)  and   Os0  ZZ  (launched  Feb.  3, 
1965)   had  surpassed  their  six-month  design  lifetimes  and,  together, 

22 

January 22-29 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
provided 6,000 hrs of  scientific  information.  Os0  ZZI (launched March 
8,  1967)  and   Os0  ZV  (launched  Oct.  18,  1967)  continued  operating 
satisfactorily,  each  providing  7%  hrs  of  real-time  data  daily.  oso pro- 
gram  was  managed  by  GSFC  under  OSSA  direction.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; 
NASA  Release  69-13) 
January  22:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  on  Titan  IIIB-Agena  D 
booster  from  Vandenberg  AFB  into  orbit  with  672.5-mi  (1,082-km) 
apogee,  92.0-mi  (148-km) perigee,  96.9-min  period,  and  106.1’ 
in- 
clination.  Satellite  reentered  Feb.  3.  (GSFC   SSR,  1/31/69;  2/15/69; 
Pres  Rpt  70  [69]) 
*  NASA  announced  i t  would  conduct  26  major  launches  from  ETR and   WTR 
during  1969.  First  launch  was  Os0  V  Jan.  22.  Launches  from  ETR 
would  include  five manned  missions:  Apollo  9,  scheduled for  Feb.  28, 
would  place  three-man  crew  in   ear th   orb i t   for  11  days  to  flight-test 
lunar  module;  Apollo  10 would  place  three  astronauts  in   lunar  orbit 
and  two  would  fly  LM  to  within  50,000  ft  of  lunar  surface;  and 
Apollo  11 would  land  two  members  of  three-man  crew  on  lunar  sur-  
face. Two  additional lunar  landings would  be conducted i f   first  landing 
was  successful.  Unmanned  launches  from  ETR  would  include  two 
Intelsat  I11  comsats,  two  Mariner-Mars  missions,  T iros   weather  satel- 
lite,  Biosatellite  carrying  monkey,  Pioneer  E  interplanetary  spacecraft, 
Applications  Technology  Satellite  ( ATS) , Orbiting  Solar  Observatory 
( OSO) , Orbiting Astronomical Observatory  ( OAO )  , and   two  U.K.  com- 
sats.  WTR launches  would  include  three  Tiros  weather  satellites,  Ex- 
( IMP-G)  ,  Canadian  International  Satellite  for  Ionospheric 
plorer 
Studies  ( ISIS) , Nimbus  weather  satellite,  and  Thor-Agena  ( OGO-F) 
mission  to  test  experimental  ion-thruster.  ( KSC  Release  19-69;  NASA 
OSSA )  
Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range  carrying  GSFC  grenade  experiment  to  obtain  data  on 
atmospheric  parameters.  Rocket  and  instruments  functioned  satisfac- 
torily.  (NASA   P ro j  Off) 
Communist  Par ty   General  Secretary  Leonid  I.  Brezhnev  told  Soviet 
gathering in  honor  of  four  Soyu z  ZV  and Soyuz  V  cosmonauts U.S.S.R. 
was  “fully  justified  in   saying  that  the  successful  flight  . . . [see  Jan. 
14-18]  is   a  grea t   achievement of  Soviet science  and   engineering,  and 
a  new  triumph  of  the  courage,  boldness,  intellect  and   labour  of  the 
Soviet  people.  The  recent  outstanding  flight  made  by  the  American 
astronauts  round  the  Moon,  the  confident  s tar t   made  by  the  Soviet 
automatic  interplanetary  stations  ‘Venus-5’  and   ‘Venus-6’  towards 
their  distant  target,  and  the  successful flight  made  by  the  . . . [Soyuz] 
spaceships-all 
this  constitutes  man’s  new,  major  steps  along  the  road 
to  conquering  the  mysterious  world  of  outer  space.  . . .”  (Moscow 
News,  2/&15/69,  Supplement, 3-5) 
*  During  day  climaxed  by  shots  from  what  U.S.S.R.  Foreign  Ministry 
called  “schizophrenic” gunman,  Soyu z  ZV and  V  Cosmonauts Vladimir 
Shatalov, Boris Volynov, Yevgeny Khrunov, and Aleksey Yeliseyev  flew 
from   Baikonur  Space  Center,  Kazakhstan,  to  Moscow  for  Kremlin 
ceremony  honoring  success  of  Soyuz  missions.  Attack  occurred  as 
motorcade  escorting  cosmonauts  approached  Kremlin’s  Borovitsky 
Gate.  Reports  said driver  of  cosmonauts’  limousine  and  security  guard 
had  been  in jured   by  bullets  and   that  Cosmonaut Beregovoy  had  been 

23 

January 22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

slightly  in jured   by  flying  glass.  Communist  Pa r ty   General  Secretary 
Leonid  I.  Brezhnev  and   Soviet  President  Nikolai  V.  Podgorny,  riding 
several  cars   behind  cosmonauts,  were  not  injured.  Western  newsmen 
had   already  been  admitted  to  Congress  Hall  fo r   ceremony  a t   which 
cosmonauts  received  Medal  of  the  Order  of  Lenin.  Reports  sai’d  gun- 
man  had  been  apprehended.  (U P I ,   W  Star,  1 /22 /69 ,   A13;  AP,  W  S ta r ,  
1/23/69,  A l ;   N Y T ,   1/23/69,  10;  Shabad,  NYT ,   1/24/69,  1; Shub, 
W  Po s t ,   1/24/69,  A l )  
State  Dept.  announced  U.S.S.R.  had   accepted  U.S.  invitation  to   partici- 
pate  in   international conference  on  communications  satellites  scheduled 
Feb.  24   i n   Washington,  D.C.  U.S.  had   notified  all  U.N.  members  i t  
would  extend  “observer”  invitations  to  any  nation  having  “serious 
interest”  in   possibility  of  becoming  INTELSAT  member.  Bulgaria  and 
Yugoslavia  also  would  attend.  At  least  80  nations  were  expected  to 
participate.  (Finney,  N Y T ,   1/23/69,  1; AP,  W Post,  1/24/69,  A5)  
Sen.  Clinton P. Anderson  (D-N. Mex.) , Chairman  of  Senate  Aeronautical 
and   Space  Sciences  Committee,  introduced  s.  539,  FY 1970  NASA 
authorization  bill  totaling  $3.760  billion.  ( C R ,  1/22/69,  S659-60)  
Sa turn   V  2nd   stage  (S-11-7)  was  successfully  captive  fired  fo r   full 
flight  duration,  369 sees, by  North  American  Rockwell Corp.  personnel 
a t   Mississippi  Test  Facility.  Stage  developed  thrust  equivalent  to  1 
million  lbs at  operating  altitude.  (MSFC  Release  69-25) 
A E C   announced  i t   had  completed  and   successfully  tested  world’s  largest 
superconducting  magnet  at  Argonne  National  Laboratory  near  Chi- 
cago.  Consisting  of  110-ton  circular-coil  assembly  in   1,600-ton  steel 
yoke,  magnet  formed  par t   of  world’s  largest  bubble  chamber  facility 
for   high-energy  physics  research.  Chamber,  holding  6,400  gals  of 
liquid  hydrogen,  would  be  placed  inside  magnet,  which  was  expected 
to  operate  a t   approximately  1/10  cost  of  equivalent  conventional 
magnet.  (A EC  Release  M-19) 
Wa sh ing ton  Pos t   editorial  sa id :   “The  fact tha t   the  Russians  may  be  able 
to  complete  a  floating  [space]  station  substantially  before  the  United 
States  is  ready  to  attempt  it  should  be  of  no  great  concern.  Although 
the  psychological  impact  of  knowing  tha t   men  a re   up   there  looking 
down  on  us  constantly  is  bound  to  be  great,  this  should  be  more  than 
offset by  the  successes of  the Apollo program.  The  important  things  a r e  
fo r   the  American  space  effort  to  proceed  in   a  logical  fashion  designed 
to  reap  the  largest  possible  scientific  benefits  and   to  remain  largely 
under  civilian  control.”  ( W  P o s t ,   1 /22 /69 ,   A26) 
launched  Cosmos  CCLX lY   into  orb i t   with  295-km 
January  23:  U.S.S.R. 
( 183.3-mi)  apogee,  208-km  ( 129.3-mi)  perigee,  89.5-min  period, 
and  69.9’  inclination.  Satellite reentered  Feb.  5.  (GSFC   S S R ,   1/31/69; 
2/ 15 /69 ) 
*  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  launched  by  RASA  from  Kiruna,  Sweden, 
carried  Swedish  Space Research  Committee  ( SSRC )   and  British  Science 
Research  Council 
( SRC )   payload 
to   72.1-mi 
(116-km)  altitude. 
Launch,  th ird   in   series  of  four  [see  Jan.  191, was made  to   obtain  data 
on  atmospheric  parameters  of  wind,  temperature,  pressure,  and   density 
dur ing   atmospheric  warming  by  detonating  grenades  and   recording 
their  sound  arrivals  on  ground.  Rocket  and   instruments  performed 
satisfactorily;  17  of  25   grenades  detonated  and   were  recorded.  (NASA 
Rp t   SRL)  

24  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January 23 

*  MSFC  announced  i t   had   signed  $2,022,500  supplemental  agreement  to 
basic contract with In terna t iona l  Business Machines Corp.  for  assurance 
and   reliability  testing  on  Sa turn   IB  and   Sa turn   V  instrument  units. 
MSFC   also  announced  modifications  totaling  $2,093,760  to  contract 
with  Bendix  Corp.  for   26  ST-124  “stable  platforms,”  related  equip- 
ment,  and   support  in   Sa turn  programs.  ( MSFC  Releases  69-23,  69-24) 
*  FAA   announced  i t   had  awarded  $665,241  contract  to  P r a t t   &  Whitney 
Div.  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.  for   two-year  study  to  develop  compres- 
sor /fan   noise-prediction  methods  for   design  of  quieter  jet  aircraft 
engines.  Contract  represented  Government’s  55%  share   of 
total 
$1,209,530  cost-sharing  contract.  P ra t t  &  Whitney  would  fund  remain- 
ing  45%.  (FAA   Release  69-11) 
Australia  announced  i t   had  asked  U S .   to  use  nuclear  explosives  to  blast 
out  harbor   on  Australia’s  northwest  coast  a t   Cape  Keraudren,  on  In -  
d ian   Ocean.  U S .   State  Department  officials  confirmed  AEC   had   been 
authorized  to begin  talks with  Australian  officials on  feasibility  of  using 
nuclear  explosion  to  develop  port.  (Unna ,   W  Pos t ,   1/24/69,  A l ;  
Reuters,  NYT,  1/24/69,  10) 
January  24:  NASA  released  Annual  Procurement  Report  FY  1968. NASA  pro- 
curements  dur ing   FY  1968  totaled  $4,133  million-11% 
less  than  in 
FY  1967.  Approximately  83% of  net  dollar  value  was  placed  directly 
with  business  firms,  4% with  educational  and   other  nonprofit  institu- 
tions,  570  w i t h   Cal  Tech  for   JPL   operation,  and   770 with  or  through 
other  Government  agencies.  Of  latter,  90%  resulted  in  contracts  with 
industry.  About  72%  of  NASA  funds  placed  under  J PL   contracts  re- 
sulted  in  subcontracts  o r   purchases  with  business  firms.  Thus  about 
9376  of  NASA   procurement  dollars  went  to  private  industry. During  FY 
1968, 49  states  and   D.C.  participated  in   NASA  prime  contract  awards 
of  $25,000  and   over.  They  went  to  1,299  business  firms,  165  univer- 
sities,  and  68 other  nonprofit  organizations.  (Tex t)  
*  NASA   launched  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  from  Wallops  Station  carry- 
ing  GSFC   grenade  experiment  to  collect  data  on   atmospheric  parani- 
( N A S A   P ro j  
eters.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily. 
O f f )  
*  Mstislav  V.  Keldysh,  President  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  said  dur-  
ing  Moscow  interview  with  Soyuz  cosmonauts  there  were  “some  ad-  
vantages”  to   joint  space experiments  with  U S .   “We  have  no  objection 
in   principle,”  he  said,  “and  the  setting  of  this  type  of  goal  has  some 
merit.  Even  now  the  two  countries  participate  in  a  number  of  inter- 
national  programs.”  He  added,  “One  would  have  to  think,  and   choose 
this  kind  of  jo in t   program  carefully.  Maybe  one  of  the  flights  to  a 
planet  in   the  future,  o r  maybe  around   the  ear th   also  could  be  interest- 
ing.  I t  is difficult to  say exactly  what  I  would  like  to  see.”  Keldysh  said 
Soviet  scientists  had  not  received  special  technical  da ta   on   ApoZIo  8 
flight  from  U S .   However,  “Certainly  the  success  of  such  an   outstand- 
ing  flight, even  if   i t   does  not  produce  any  concrete  new  data,  still gives 
something  to   all  mankind.”  (Winters,  B  Sun ,   1/25/69,  A2;  Shabad, 
NYT,  1/25/69,  6)  
0  MSFC   announced  it  had   awarded  $173,000,  11-in0 contract  to  Boeing  Co. 
for   study  of  cost-reduction  methods  in  fu ture   space  vehicle  logistics 
systems,  including  expendable  and   reusable  systems.  Major  emphasis 
of  study  would  be  on  space  station logistics  missions  in   100- to  300-mi 

25 

January 24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

orbits,  with  5,000-  to  50,000-lb  payloads,  and   capable  of  holding  12  
passengers and   3,000- to  12,500-lb cargo.  ( MSFC  Release  69-26) 
Sen. James B.  Pearson  (R-Kan.)  introduced S. 608, bill to create National 
Aviation  Planning  Commission  responsible  for  planning  development 
of  national  a ir   travel  system  and  establishment  of  a ir   transportation 
policy.  Commission would  consist  of  Assistant  Secretary of  Transporta- 
tion  for  Policy  Development,  FAA  Administrator,  CAB  Chairman,  NASA 
Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Aeronautics,  Assistant  Secretary 
of  Housing  and   Urban  Development  for  Metropolitan  Development, 
and   not  more  than  10 others  to  be  appointed  by  Secretary  of  Trans- 
portation.  (CR,  1/24/69,  S869-70) 
*  In  Science, Kar l  D.  Kryter, Director  of  Sensory Sciences Research Center 
of  Stanford Research Institute,  Calif.,  concluded tha t   sonic booms  from 
SST  and  Anglo-French Concorde-operating 
dur ing   daytime  af ter  1975  
a t   frequencies  projected  for  long-distance  supersonic  transport  of  pas- 
sengers over US.-would 
result  in   extensive social,  political,  and  legal 
reactions  against  such  flights  at  start,  during,  and  after  years  of  ex- 
posure  to  sonic  boom  from  flights.  (Sc ience ,   1/24/69,  359-67) 
New  Y o r k   Times  commented  on  Soviet decision  to  participate  in   Febru- 
ary   INTELSAT  conference  [see  Jan.  221  and   on  Soviet  coverage  of 
Apollo  8  which  was  “treated  more  generously in   the  Soviet press  than 
any  earlier  American  space  accomplishment.”  Editorial  said:  “These 
indications  of  a  positive  shift  in   Kremlin  thinking  seem  to  enhance 
hopes  that  President  Nixon  w i l l   have  an   opportunity  for   creative  diplo- 
macy  and   action  of  the  kind  he  envisaged  in  his  Inaugural  Address. 
Thought might  be  given,  for   example,  to  inviting Moscow  to  designate 
a  Soviet  astronaut  to  participate  in   an   Apollo  flight  late  this  year  o r  
early  next  year.  Or  Washington  might  suggest  tha t   the  United  States 
and   the  Soviet Union  coordinate  their  programs  of  planetary  explora- 
tion  with  one  nation,  say,  having  primary  responsibility  for  studying 
Venus  and   the  other  Mars. With  the  landing  of  men  on  the  moon  now 
probably  only  months  away  i t   is   certainly  not  too  early  for  the  two 
nations  that  have  pioneered  most  actively  in   space  to  discuss  concrete 
means  for  involving the  United  Nations  directly  in   the  fu ture   explora- 
tion  and   exploitation  of  the  moon,  as well  a s   of  the  planets  when  men 
reach  them.”  ( N Y T ,  1/24/69,  46) 
January  25:  Apollo  9  prime  crew-Astronauts 
James  A.  McDivitt  (com- 
mande r ) ,   David  R.  Scott  ( CM  p i lo t) ,   and   Russell  L.  Schweickart  ( LM 
pilot) -held 
press  briefing  a t   Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering  Corp.’s 
Bethpage,  N.Y.,  plant.  Describing  10-day mission  scheduled  to  begin 
Feb.  28   as primarily  engineering  evaluation  of  lunar  module, McDivitt 
said:  “. . . we  w i l l  be giving the  . . . LM  hardware  a very  close  scrutiny. 
We  don’t  expect  to  find  anything,  but  our  job   is  to  go  up  there  and  
look  for  it.  Now  after  we  have discovered that  the  LM  is  a good vehicle, 
we  have  . . . to  prove  the  jo in t   operations  techniques tha t   we’ve  tried 
to  develop on  the  ground over  the  last 3 years.  It’s  one thing  to  fly  one 
spacecraft  in  orbit,  and  have  i t   controlled  by  the  ground,  but  when 
you  get  2  of  them  up  there,  they  are  trying  to  look  a t  2  vehicles  simul- 
taneously  so  that  . . . you  find  the  ground  talking  to  2  spacecraft  and  
2  spacecraft  talking  back  to  each  other  and   also  to  the  ground,  and   i t  
becomes  a  rather  unwieldly  communications  effort.”  He  added  re- 

26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January 25 

minder  that  “only  one  of  these  vehicles  has   the  capability  to  land- 
safely,  I  guess I  should add.  They  both  have  the  capability  of  landing. 
We  only  have  one set  of  parachutes  and   one heat  shield.”  He described 
LM  a s  “a  tissue  paper  spacecraft,”  explaining i t   did  not  have  to  reenter 
earth’s  atmosphere  and   there  was  no  atmosphere on  moon. 
Scott  said  they  now  had   “a  new  vehicle  . . . a  command module  LM 
combination  . . . a  particularly  unique  situation,  in   that  . . . we  have 
to  do  the  lunar   orbit  insertion  [ in   lunar mission]  with  the  two  vehicles 
joined  together  with  a  very  large  mass  on  the  end   of  the  command 
module,  so  it’s  a  completely  new  guidance  task”  to   be  checked  out. 
McDivitt  explained  separation  of  LM  from  CM   on  rendezvous  day, 
with  two  vehicles  pulling  away  from  each  other  and  performing  ma- 
neuvers, moving up to  100 m i   apar t :   “The  object  . . . is   to  evaluate our 
systems  from  a  propulsion  standpoint,  electrical  standpoint,  the  staging 
sequence,  all of  the  components that we  can  and   still  get  back  safely  to 
the  command  module.” 
In   response  to  question  on  relation  of  Apollo  program  to  life  on  
earth,  McDivitt  replied:  “. . . if  you’re  not  moving  forward  . . . the 
rest  of  the  world  is  and   they’re  going  to  pass  you  by.  We’re  gaining 
something and  we’re  gaining  knowledge.  . . . We’re  going  to  move  for-  
ward  on   all  fronts,  we’re  not  moving  forward  on  just  the  space  front. 
. . . Any  organized  system  of  intelligence  moves  forward  in   all  direc- 
tions,  and  . . . that  is   what  we  are   doing.”  (Transcr ip t)  
0  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Kiruna,  Sweden, 
carried  Swedish Space Research Committee  ( SSRC )   and   British  Science 
Research  Council  payload  to  73.3-mi  (118-km)  altitude  to  obtain  a t -  
mospheric  data  by  detonating  grenades  and   recording  their  sound  a r -  
rivals  on  ground.  Flight,  last  in  series  of  four  [see  Jan.  231,  was 
successful;  24  of  25  grenades  detonated  and  were  recorded.  (NASA   Rpt 
SRL)  
0  Dedication ceremonies were  held  a t   site  of  new  earth  station  for  comsats 
near  Cayey,  Puerto  Rico.  (ComSatCorp  Release  69-5;  ComSatCorp 
PRO )  
*  NR-1,  world’s  first  nuclear-powered  deep  submergence  research  and 
ocean  engineering  vehicle,  was  launched  at  Groton,  Conn.  Developed 
jointly  by  USN  and   AEC,  140-ft-long submarine  would  carry   five  crew 
members and   two  scientists  over  ocean  bottom  to  study  and map  ocean 
floor,  temperature,  currents,  and  other  oceanographic  parameters  for 
military,  commercial,  and   scientific  uses.  ( DOD Release  64-69 ;   UPI, 
P Inq,  1 /26 /69)  
January  26:  NASA  launched  two  sounding  rockets  from  Wallops  Station. 
Aerobee  350  carried  MSC   experiment  to  168.4-mi  (271-km)  altitude 
to  produce  artificial  aurora   with  electron  accelerator.  An  85-ft-dia 
aluminum  mylar  foil,  deployed  a s   planned  a t   60-mi  (96.5-km)  alti- 
tude,  acted a s  current  selector  for  ionospheric electrons  and   electrically 
neutralized  experiment.  Series  of  LOO beam  pulses  aimed  downward 
toward  Wallops  ground  station  by  accelerator  were  recorded  on  film 
by  very  sensitive TV  camera  and   observations of  artificial  aurora   were 
observed visually  by  scientists  on  ground.  Analyses  were  under  way  to 
determine  i f   aurora l   intensity,  location,  and   shapes  were  as  predicted. 
Nike-Tomahawk, launched  148  secs  later  to  study  acceleration  beam 

27  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January 26 
from  Aerobee 350, carried  DeHavilland antenna  and   Langmuir  probe 
to  11.8-mi  (19-km)  altitude.  Second  stage  failed  to  ignite;  no  useful 
da ta   were  obtained.  (WS Release  69-2;  NASA  Rpts  SRL) 
*  NASA  launched  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  from  Point  Barrow,  Alaska, 
carrying GSFC grenade experiment to collect da ta  on atmospheric param- 
(NASA   P ro j  
eters.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily. 
O f f )  
I n   New  York  T imes ,  Walter  Sullivan  said  da ta   returned  by  Os0  V  and  
other  oso satellites had   begun  to  deepen  understanding  of  sun.  “ I t   has 
become  sufficient  so  that,  from  information  gathered  in   space,  as  well 
a s   by  a  globe-encircling  network  of  stations,  those  in   charge  of  the 
Apollo  8 flight  to  the  moon  and   back  last  month  were  able  to  ignore 
a  variety  of  ominous manifestations  on  the  sun   during  the  flight.”  He 
said  enough  radiation  measurements had   been  made  during  previous 
space  storms”  to  indicate  Apollo  astronauts  were  reasonably  safe  as 
C L  
long  as they  remained  inside  their  spacecraft.  ( N Y T ,  1/26/69,  E6) 
Observers  i n   Wisconsin,  Iowa,  Michigan,  and   Illinois  reported  sighting 
large  meteorite  or  space  debris  flashing  across  sky  and  burning  itself 
out  a s   i t   entered  earth’s  atmosphere.  Several  airline  pilots  had  seen  i t  
a t   O’Hare  International  Airport,  Chicago.  Northwestern  Univ.  astron- 
omer  James  Wray  said  i t   probably  was  large  meteor  breaking  up   in 
atmosphere.  UFO  expert  Dr.  J.  Allen  Hynek,  Chairman  of  North- 
western’s  Astronomy  Dept.,  said  flash  could  also  have  been  reentering 
debris of  U S .   or  Soviet space rocket.  (UPI,  W  News,  1 /27 /69 ,   30 ;   AP, 
W  Star, 1/27/69,  B4) 
*  In  Washington Evening  Star, William  Hines said, “If  a  successful farmer 
suddenly started economizing on  seed,  his  neighbors  and  family  would 
begin  to  doubt  his  judgment,  i f   not  his  sanity.  Yet  this  is  precisely 
what  Uncle  Sam  is  doing  in   cutting  back  the  financing  of  scientific 
research.  Despite  denials  from  budget  officials  in  the  past  weeks, 
federal  support  of  science  in   fiscal  1970  continues  on  an   alarming 
down-trend  that  has  been  apparent  for  several  years.  I t   has  been  said 
that  i n  an  advanced economy  like  ours,  research  expenditures are   ‘seed 
money’  and  the  analogy  is   apt.  Like  individual  seeds  in  a  field,  not 
every  research  dollar  germinates,  and  not  all those  that  do  mature.  But 
total  return  is  vastly  greater  than  outlay-and 
that  is  the  story  of 
science  as well  a s  of  agriculture.”  (W  Star,  1/26/69,  C4) 
January  27:  Boosted  Arcas  I1 sounding  rocket  launched by  NASA  from Wal- 
lops  Station  carried  GSFC  experiment  to  63.5-mi  (102-km)  altitude  to 
evaluate  rocket  performance  fo r  possible  use  a t   Resolute  Bay,  Canada. 
Vehicle  underperformed  according  to  predicted  trajectory ; peak  alti- 
tude  was  below  predicted  and   tone  ranging  appeared  too  weak  for 
Resolute Bay.  (NASA   Rp t   SRL) 
*  AEC  announced  that  S8DR  nuclear  reactor  system  developed  in   its  SNAP  
(Systems  for  Nuclear  Auxiliary  Power)  Program  was  producing  600 
thermal  kw  a t   1,300’F  during  tests  in  underground  vacuum  chamber 
a t   Santa  Susana,  Calif.  Electrical  power  ranging  from  20  to  75  kw 
could  be  generated  by  such  a  reactor  to  provide  power  for  manned 
orbiting  laboratories  and   bases  on  moon’s  surface.  I t   was  being  con- 
sidered  fo r   these  uses  because  of  its  potentially  high  reliability,  small 
size,  and long life  (two to  f ive  years)  without refueling  or maintenance. 
(A EC   Release M-22) 

28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January 28 

Janua ry   28:  I n   New  York  news  conference,  NASA  Associate  Administrator 
for   Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  sa id   U.S.  was  [ in  
danger  of  going  “out  of  the  manned  spaceflight  business”  unless  more 
funds were  provided  i n  Federal  budget  for   projects  beyond  Apollo.  He  
said  U.S.S.R.  probably  would  surpass  U.S.  i n   space  exploration  in  
1970s. Current  Soviet  space  expenditure  was  “about  50 percent  greater 
than  ours.”  (Wilford,  N Y T ,   1/29/69,  11; NY   News ,   1 /30 /69)  
I n  speech  before  New  York  Society  of  Security  Analysts,  NASA  Associate 
Administrator  fo r  Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  sa id :  
“I  believe  tha t   if  we  wanted  to  we  could have  our   space shuttle  in  oper- 
ation by  1976. . . . To achieve  the  desired  economy,  i t  will be  necessary 
to  operate  this  transportation  system  in   the  successful  je t   transport 
mode.  Our  space  shuttle  will  probably  take  off  from   ma jor   a irpor ts  
with  little  or  no   noise.  I t  will  not  create  a  sonic  boom  along  the   route. 
It  will  go  into  orbit,  deposit  and   take  on  crew  and   cargo,  and   re turn  
for  a  horizontal  a irpor t   landing.”  He  foresaw  an  international  demand 
for  reusable  space vehicles.  (Tex t)  
0  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched by  NASA  from Wallops  Station 
carried  Univ.  of  Wisconsin  experiment  to  139.2-mi  (224-km)  altitude 
to  examine  isotropic  component  of  cosmic  x-rays in  wavelength  region 
of  A >   5 A,  using  collimated,  thin-window  gas   proportional  counters. 
Peak  altitude  was  3.5%  over  predicted  but  x-ray  counters  failed  to 
reach  design pressure.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
lifting-body  vehicle  damaged  in   accident  May  10,  1967,  would 
M2-F2 
be  repaired,  modified,  and   returned  t o   service  as   M2-F3,  NASA  an- 
nounced.  Modifications  would  include  center-stabilizing  fin,  special 
equipment  for  use  as   test  bed  fo r   lateral  control  systems  research,  jet 
reaction  roll  control  system,  and   improved  internal  components  for 
precise  maneuvering  by  pilot.  M2-F3  would  rejoin  HL-10  and   X-24 
in  NASA-USAF  flight  research  program  to  evaluate  wingless vehicles  for 
manned  horizontal  landings  a t   airfields  after  re turn   from  space.  (NASA  
Release  69-15) 
*  Eastern  Airlines,  Inc.,  Vice  President  A.  Scott  Crossfield  told  Aero  Club 
in   Washington,  D.C.,  that  seven-week  experiment  with  STOL  a ircraf t  
at  Boston,  Washington,  and   New  York  a irpor ts  begun  Sept.  1968 had 
been  “unqualified  success.”  Airline’s  engineers  were  drafting  specifica- 
tions for   STOL  a ircraf t   to  ca r ry   125 passengers  a t   250  mph,  capable  of 
maneuvering  a t   speeds  of  70  mph.  I t  could  double  landing  capacity  of 
airports  by  using  taxiways  and   ends  of  unused  runways.  McDonnell 
Douglas  version  of  French-designed  Breguet  941   aircraft  used  by 
Eastern  in   experiments  had   used  onboard  computer-controlled  system, 
“heart”  of  which  was  manufactured  by  Decca  in   England.  I t   used 
existing  navaids  and   was  accurate  within  25-ft  altitude  and   100-ft 
latitude.  (Koprowski,  W Po s t ,   1/29/69,  A8) 
0  S.  705  was  introduced  in   Senate  by  Smithsonian  Institution  regent  Sen. 
Clinton  P.  Anderson  (D-N.  Mex.),  for  himself  and   regents  Sens.  J. 
William  Fulbright  (D-Ark.)  and   Hugh  D.  Scott  (R-Pa .)   to   authorize 
$2  million  for  planning  and   land   acquisition  for   world’s  largest radio- 
radar   astronomical  telescope.  Proposed  440-ft  “big  dish”  antenna 
would  be  enclosed  in   550-ft geodesic dome  and  cost  about  $37  million. 
I t  would  be  made  available  to   appropriate  scientists  everywhere.  ( C R ,  
1/28/69,  S967-8 ;   W S tar ,   4/1/69,  B1)  

29  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
January 28 
*  Following  conference  with  President  Nixon,  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  AEC 
Chairman  since  1961, announced  he  would  continue  in   tha t   position  in 
Nixon  Administration.  Curren t   term   would  expire  June  30,  1970.  (W  
S tar ,   1/29/69,  A2)  
Jariuary  29:  ComSatCorp  announced  i t   had   applied  to   FCC  for  permission 
to   reduce  rates  fo r   TV  transmissions  through   Atlantic  satellites  by 
abou t   40%  and   to   eliminate  extra  charge  for   color  TV through  these 
satellites.  Reductions  were  possible  because  of  availability  of  Intelsal 
111  F-2 
(ComSatCorp 
(launched  Dec.  19,  1968)   over  Atlantic. 
Release) 
*  NASA  selected  Electro  Mechanical  Research  Aerospace  Sciences  Div. 
of  Weston  Instruments,  Inc.  for   contract  negotiations  on  $1.37-million 
cost-plus-award-fee  contract  for  spacecraft  integration  and   ground 
support  services  for   Interplanetary  Monitoring  Platform  ( I M P )   mis- 
sions H,  I, and  J.  (NASA  Release  69-19) 
President  Nixon  announced  selection  of  Gerard  C.  Smith,  former  Assist- 
an t   Secretary  of  State  for  Policy  Planning,  as   Director  of  Arms  Con- 
tro l   and   Disarmament  Agency.  Adrian  S.  Fisher  had  been  acting 
director  since  resignation  of  William  C.  Foster.  ( P D ,  2/3/69,  188) 
January 30: Canadian  lsis 1  ( ISIS-A) 
International  Satellite  for  Ionospheric 
Studies  was  successfully  launched  by  NASA  from  WTR  by  three-stage 
Thrust-Augmented  Improved  Thor-Delta  ( DSV-3E)  booster.  Satellite 
entered  orb i t   with  2,188.5-mi 
apogee,  356.7-mi 
(3,522-km) 
(574-km)  perigee,  128.3-min  period,  and   88.4"  inclination.  Pr imary  
NASA  objectives  were  to  place  lsis  I  into  elliptical  ear th   orb i t   that 
would  permit  study  of  topside  of  ionosphere  above  electron  peak  of  F 
region  and   to  extend  cooperative  Canad ian-US .   program  of  iono- 
spheric  studies  initiated  by  Alouette  I  (launched  Sept.  28,  1962)   by 
combining  sounder  data  with  correlative  direct measurements  for  time 
sufficient to  cover  latitudinal  and   d iurna l   variations  dur ing   high  solar 
activity. 
Th i rd   i n   series  of  five  satellites  to   improve  understanding  of  iono- 
spheric  physics,  lsis I weighed  520  lbs  and   carried  six  Canadian  and  
four  American  experiments.  First  launch  in   series  ( IS IS   x  project,  Nov. 
28,  1965)  orbited  Canada's  Alouette  I1 and   U S .   Explorer  XXXI.  ISIS 
program  was  joint  undertaking  of  NASA  and   Canadian  Defence  Re- 
search  Board  ( D R B )   under  December  1963  Memorandum  of  Under- 
standing.  DRB  was  responsible  for   spacecraft  design,  fabrication, 
electrical  testing,  experiment  integration,  and   satellite  control.  NASA 
provided  launch  vehicles,  launch  facilities.  (NA SA   P ro j   Off; NASA  Re- 
leases  69-14,  69-22) 
*  NA SA   launched  two  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  from  Po in t   Barrow, 
Alaska,  carry ing  CSFC  experiments.  First  rocket  was  launched  to   obtain 
data  on  variation  of  temperature,  pressure,  and   wind  profile  by  deto- 
nating  grenades  a t   prescribed  times  and  recording  sound  arrivals  on 
ground.  All  19 grenades ejected  and  detonated  and   sound arrivals were 
recorded.  Launch  was  th ird   in  series  of  four   launches  from  Po in t  Bar- 
row  dur ing   stratospheric warming  [see  Jan .   261. 
Second  rocket  was  launched  in   conjunction  with  Jan.  11 launch  to 
develop  experimental  techniques  for  determining  atmospheric  compo- 
sition  profiles  in   mesosphere  and   to  measure  ozone  and   water  xapor 
distribution  in   12.4- to   40.4-mi  (20-  to  65-km)  region  by  separating 

30  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January 30 

January  30:  Canadian  Isis  I  International  Satellite  for  Ionospheric  S tud ies ,   launched 
b y   NASA  f r om   WTR, carried  six C a n a d k n  and  four   U.S.  experiments  in to   orbit  to   s tudy  
th e   ionosphere  during  a period  of  h igh   solar  activity.  Isis  I ,   photo- 
t h e   topside  of 
graphed  before  mating  to   i t s   Thor-Delta  launch   vehicle,  combined  the   capability  f o r  
direct  and  indirect  ionospheric  measurements  in   one  spacecraft  for  the  first  t ime .  

payload  from  2nd  stage  and   deploying  parachute  near  apogee.  Ozone 
was  measured  by  chemiluminescent  technique  and   water  vapor  by 
aluminum-oxide hydrometer.  All  major  events  occurred  as planned  and 
good  data  were  obtained.  (NASA   Rpts  SRL) 
Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill  Research 
Range  carried  GSFC payload  to  77.1-mi  (124-km)  altitude  to  obtain 
data  on  variation  of  temperature,  pressure,  and  wind  profile  by  deto- 
nating  grenades  at  prescribed  times  and   recording  sound  arrivals  on 
ground.  All  19 grenades  were  detonated  and   sound  arrivals  were  re- 
corded. Launch  was  third  in   series  of  four  rockets  to  be  launched  from 
Churchill  dur ing   stratospheric  warming  period  [see  Jan.  221.  (NASA  
Rpt  SRL) 
Aerobee  150  MI  sounding  rocket was  launched by  NASA  from  WSMR  with 
VAN-20  booster  to  111.2-mi  (179-km)  altitude.  Objectives  were  to 

31 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
January 30 
obtain  stellar  spectra  with  1 A  resolution  in  1,000-1,600  A  fa r   uv 
wavelength  range  and   to  obtain  photometric  da ta   on  stellar  fluxes  in  
1,050-1,180  A ,   1,230-1,350  A,  and   1,350-1,470  A  wavelength  ranges. 
All  experimental  objectives  were  achieved  and  payload  was  recovered 
promptly.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
FAA  Government-industry conference in  Washington,  D.C.,  discussed FAA 
role  i n   STQL  development,  STOL noise  sources,  STOL operational  con- 
siderations  related  to  noise  abatement,  noise  source  reduction  tech- 
niques,  and   review  of  existing  a ircraf t   certification  concepts  and 
considerations  for  STOL noise  certification.  (FAA   Release  69-5) 
At  White  House  press  briefing  President  Nixon  introduced  ApoZZo  8 
astronauts  and   announced  that  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  would  make 
eight-nation  goodwill  t r ip   to  Western  Europe.  Tour  would  point  out 
“what  i s   the  fact:  that  we  in   America  do  not  consider  tha t   th is   is  a 
monopoly,  these  grea t   new  discoveries  tha t   we  are   mak ing ;   tha t   we 
recognize the  great  contributions that  others  have made  and   will  make 
in   the  fu ture ;   and  that  we  do  want  to  work  together  with  all  peoples 
on  this  ear th   in   the  high  adventure  of  exploring  the  new  areas  of 
space.”  Later,  Press  Secretary  Ronald  Ziegler  announced  Borman 
family  would  visit  England,  France,  Belgium,  the  Netherlands,  West 
Germany,  Italy,  Spain,  and   Portugal.  (PO ,  2/3/69,  189-90;  AP,  W 
Post,  1/31/69,  A2 )  
President  and  Mrs.  Nixon  watched  Apollo  8 films  at White  House  show- 
ing  attended  by  Astronauts  Frank  Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  
William A.  Anders.  Borman  narrated.  (Shelton,  W Star, 1/31/69,  B1 ;  
PD,  2/3/69,  194)  
0  Dr. Thomas 0. Paine,  NASA  Acting  Administrator,  presented Public  Serv- 
ice  Group  Achievement  Award  Certificates  to  12   representatives  of 
communications  organizations  which  had  supported  Apollo  8 mission. 
Award  to   Apollo  8 Communications Network  cited  “the  dedication  and 
skill  of  the  leaders  and   all  personnel  in   these  organizations  in  main- 
taining  reliable  communications which  insured  the  success  of  the  first 
manned  lunar  orb i t   mission.”  British  External  Telecommunication 
Executive  and  Hawaiian  Telephone  Co.  had  received  same  award. 
(NASA   Release  69-20) 
0  President  Nixon  issued  directives  to  cabinet  officers  and  agency  heads. 
He  directed  DOT   to  establish  committee  to  investigate  all  aspects  of  SST 
program  and   some  aspects  of  a irpor t   development,  a ir   traffic  control, 
and  FAA  regulations. 
Bureau  of  Budget was  informed  that  President  was  disturbed  by  re- 
ports  that  Government  was  not  fulfilling  obligations  to  colleges  and 
universities  whose  gran ts   had  been  abrogated  by  NSF  because  of  FY 
1969 expenditure ceiling.  BOB  was  directed  to  check  facts,  estimate  cost 
required  to  eliminate inequities,  and   advise President  on  need  for   con- 
tingency  reserve  for   FY  1969  and   desirability  of  thorough  budget 
revision  for  FY 1970.  (PD ,  2/3/69,  192-3) 
0  NASA  awarded United  Aircraft Corp.’s  P ra t t   & Whitney  Div.  and  General 
Electric  Co.  separate  fixed-price contracts  to  design,  fabricate, and  test 
experimental  quiet  je t   engines.  Each  contract  would  have  two  phases. 
Six-month  first  phase  would  include  detailed  engine  design  and   pro-  
curement  of  selected  engine  components.  NASA  would  have  option  of 
authorizing  construction  of  two  engines  and   test  program  of  at  least 

32 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

January  30 

250 hrs   of  engine operation.  I n  second  phase,  expected to  take  30  mos, 
each  contractor  would  refurbish  and   deliver  one  engine  to  LeRC  for  
additional  testing.  Program   was  expected  to  cost  $50  million  over 
three-year  period.  (NASA   Release  69-21) 
Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for Manned  Space 
Flight,  told meeting of  National Security Industrial  Assn.  a t  KSC, “ I t   i s  
very  clear  that  jus t   as we  have  had  substantial  payoffs from  communi- 
cations,  navigation,  geodetic,  and   weather  satellites  in  the  first  decade 
of  the  space  age,  ear th   resources  satellites  will  represent  extremely 
promising  investment opportunities  in   the  second  decade.”  They  would 
require  “close  cooperation  among  many  agencies  in   Washington,  and 
in  the long run   with  new  commercial and  international institutions  that 
_ _ _ _   ,- 
can  bring  the  benefits  of  the  space  age  to  many  people  around  the 
world.”  (‘l‘ext) 
*  At  his  first  news  conference, Secretarv  of  Defense  Melvin  R.  La ird   said 
he  would  prefer  to  deal  from  strength-including  Sentinel  ABM   system 
fu ture  missile  talks  with U.S.S.R.  “I think  it’s  most  important,  as 
-in 
we  go  into  these  talks,  to   have  defensive  as  well  as  offensive  missile 
systems  up   for  discussion  and   debate  and   negotiation.”  (Maffre ,   W 
Pos t ,   1/31/69,  A l )  
0  Moscow  sources  reported  “Lt.  Ilyin”  of  U.S.S.R.  Army  Engineers  had 
been  identified  as  attempted  assassin  who  fired  on  Moscow  motorcade 
carrying  cosmonauts  and   h igh   Soviet  officials  in to   Kremlin  Jan.  22, 
Anatole Shub  said  in   Washington Pos t .   He  reportedly  had  died  almost 
immediately after  taking  poison  and being  slugged by  Kremlin  guards 
at  scene  [see  Feb.  4.1.  (W Pos t ,   1/31/69,  A l )  
January  31:  Eleventh  anniversary  of  Explorer  I ,   first  U S .   satellite.  Since 
i ts   launch  Jan.  31,  1958,  the  30.8-lb  stovepipe-shaped  satellite  had 
completed  nearly  60,000  revolutions  around  ear th   and  on  Dec.  31, 
1968,  was  in   orb i t   with  632-mi  (10,170.8-km)  apogee,  199.9-mi 
(321.7-km)  perigee,  and  98.1-min  period.  (MSFC  Release  69-26) 
9  Apollo  9  press  briefing  was  held  at  NASA  Hq.  Countdown  would  begin 
Feb.  22,  for   launch  from  ETR  a t   11 am  EST  Feb.  28.  Ten-day  ear th-  
orbital  mission  would  demonstrate  LM  manned  crew  performance  for 
first  time  and   carry  out  intervehicular  activities  between  spacecraft, 
through-docking-tunnel activities,  and EVA.  Number  of  small aluminum- 
alloy  brackets  and   fittings  had   been  replaced  or  reinforced  in   LM-3 
and   L M 4  because  they  were  sensitive  to  stress  or  corrosion.  Both 
vehicles  were  ready  for  flight. 
Apollo  Program  Director  George  H.  Hage  said  number  of  activities 
would  be  performed  on  Apollo  9  that  had  not  been  done  before  “in 
the  sense  of  wringing  out  the  spacecraft.”  NASA  was  “working  the 
hardware  launch  readiness  of  Apollo  10  to  a  late  April  date”  so  that 
“if  we  have  difficulty  on  Apollo  9 and   need  to  repeat  some  element  o r  
all of  the  D mission, we  can  get  that  mission  off  as  early  a s  possible.” 
If  Apollo  9  was  successful  Apollo  10  could  be  launched  as  early  a s  
May  17  on  lunar   landing mission.  (Transcr ip t)  
NASA  successfully  launched  two  Nike-Cajun,  one  Arcas,  and   three  Nike- 
Apache  sounding  rockets  from  Wallops Station,  carrying  experiments 
to measure meteorological, ionospheric,  and  composition characteristics 
of  upper  atmosphere dur ing   “winter  anomaly”-unusual 
absorption  of 
rad io   waves-which 
occurred  during  January  o r   early  February. 

33 

January 31 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Launches  would  contribute  to   specimen  day  program,  coordinated  in- 
vestigation  of  winter  variability  of  D  region  of  ionosphere  above 
Wallops. 
Nike-Cajuns  carried  GSFC  payloads  to  75.2-mi 
(121-km)  and  
12.4-mi  (20-km)  altitudes.  All  19 grenades  on  each  rocket  detonated 
a s   planned  and   sound  arrivals  were  recorded,  but  poor  vehicle  per- 
formance  of  second  rocket  prevented  acquisition  of  useful  data. 
Arcas  carried  Naval Weapons  Center  payload  to   33.2-mi  (53.4-km) 
altitude  to  measure  ozone  concentration  in   18.6-  to  37.3-mi  (30-  to 
60-km)  region  dur ing  parachute descent,  bu t   parachute  did  not  deploy 
satisfactorily  and   payload  descended  too  rapidly  for  recovery. 
First  Nike-Apache  carried  Univ.  of  Illinois-GCA  Corp.  payload  to 
141.1-mi  (227-km)  altitude  to  investigate  winter  variability  of  D 
region  of  ionosphere  and   measure  differential  absorption,  Faraday 
rotation,  and   probe  current  to  determine  electron  density,  collision 
frequency,  and   temperature.  Second  Nike-Apache  carried  Univ.  of 
Colorado  payload  to  71.5-mi  (115-km)  altitude  to  obtain  vertical 
profile  of  nitric  oxide  density,  using  scanning  monochromoter.  Third 
Nike-Apache  carr ied   GSFC  payload  to  72.1-mi  (116-km)  altitude  to 
measure  degree  of  polarization  and   intensity  of  nitric  oxide  emission 
at  2,147  A  to  determine  whether  resonance  scattering  of  sunlight  was 
responsible  for   emission in   D  and   E  regions.  Secondary  objective  was 
to  determine  altitude  profile  in   46.6-  to  65.2-mi  (75-  to  105-km) 
region.  Desired  spectrum  was  not  observed,  apparently  because  of 
mechanical failure  in   payload.  (NASA   Rpts  SRL; WS  Release  69-3) 
0  President  Nixon,  accompanied by  Secretary  of  Defense Melvin  R.  Laird, 
visited  DOD employees  a t   Pentagon.  President  recalled  reference  made 
by  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  a t  White House Apollo  8 briefing  Jan.  30 
to  “400,000 men  and  women  in   the Nation  who  a t  one  time  o r   another 
had  played  a  par t   in  making  this  great,  spectacular  feat  possible.” 
President  said,  “I  was  glad  to  see  Colonel  Borman  bring  i t   home  that 
way.  Four  hundred  thousand  made  i t   possible  for  this  magnificent 
achievement to  occur.  I  trust  that  all  of  you  can  convey  that  kind  of 
sp ir i t   to  those  who  work  in  the   Defense  Department.”  ( P D ,  2 /3 /69 ,  
194)  
0  Sen.  Kenneth  McC.  Anderson,  Australian  Minister  for  Supply,  accepted 
NASA  Group  Achievement  Award  for  Dept.  of  Supply  a t   NASA  Hq. 
luncheon for  “outstanding  contributions  in   the  establishment and   oper- 
ation  of  the  stations  and  associated  facilities  in   Australia  which  as- 
sured  the  success  of  the  Apollo  8 mission.  . . .” Sen.  Anderson  also 
received  awards  for  Apollo  8  support  by  MSFC  stations  at  Canberra 
and   Carnarvon  and   DSN  station  a t   Canberra.  (NASA Release  69-23) 
0  FAA  said preliminary  figures  showed  its 27 a i r   route  traffic  control  centers 
handled  19.5  million  a ircraf t   in   1968, an  increase  of  17%   over  1967. 
Chicago, New  York,  and   Cleveland  each  logged  1.5 million  operations 
-first 
time  any  center  had  reached  this  mark.  (FAA   Release  69-15) 
During  January:  JPL Senior  Staff  Scientist  Albert  R.  Hibbs  summarized 
results  of  NASA’s Surveyor  program  in   Astronautics  and  Aeronautics. 
Experiments  on  five  Surveyor  spacecraft  which  successfully  landed  on 
moon  between  May  30,  1966,  and   Jan.  7,  1968,  indicated  surface 
material  was  granu lar   and   very  fine  with  103  dynes/cm2  cohesion. 
Slightly  deeper  material  had  lower  normal  albedo  than  undisturbed 

34 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

During  January 

surface.  Chemical  composition  of  surface  material  was  similar  to  ba- 
saltic  rocks  on  ear th ;   mare   material  contained  more  i ron   elements 
than  highland  material;  and  highland  material  had   higher  albedo  than 
mare   material.  Chemical  analyses  indicated  material  d id   not  resemble 
chondritic  meteorites.  F rom   observed  da ta   scientists  concluded  tha t  
moon  had   undergone  significant  chemical  differentiation  dur ing   its 
history and  had  been  subjected  to  basaltic  lava  flows;  surface was  con- 
tinually  being  “churned  a n d   pulverized”  by  meteoroid  impacts;  some 
undefined  process  lightened  optical  surface  and   darkened  buried 
material;  and  mare   areas  were  “surprisingly  similar  and   offer  numer- 
ous safe-landing  zones for  fu ture  lunar  missions.”  ( A M ,  1/69,  50-63) 
U.S.S.R.  was  testing  150-ton,  250-passenger  “compound”  helicopter, 
American  Broadcasting  Co.  reported.  Largest  helicopter  in   Western 
world  was  19-ton  Sikorsky  CH-54H  Flying  Crane.  Soviet  47-ton 
Mi-10  was  world’s  largest.  New  compound  helicopter  had   wings  tha t  
assumed  lifting  function  from   rotors  a t   cruising  speed;  i t   obtained 
most  of  its thrus t  from conventional  propulsion  when  i t  converted  from 
vertical  to  cruising  flight.  Sikorsky  had  proposed  32.5-ton  compound 
helicopter  to  DOD  and   U S .   civilian  transportation  authorities.  ( N Y T ,  
1 /12 /69 ,   S23 )  
0  M IT   scientist  Dr.  Jerome  B.  Wiesner  in   Technology  Review  said  reorgan- 
ization  and   strengthening  of  Federal  mechanisms  for  planning  and  
supporting  R&D  was  only  solution  to  “present  antagonisms  and   . . . 
skepticism”  about  the  value  of  a  continued  high  level  of  R&D  support. 
He  proposed  new  agency  w i th   NSF  a t   core  for   planning  R&D  and   to 
“indicate  resource  allocation  for  all public  endeavors,  including  foreign 
aid  and   national  security.”  (Techno logy  Rev iew ,   1/69,  15-17) 
0  Systems  approach  was  needed  in   applying  “human  and   technological 
resources  to  domestic  problems,”  Space /Aeronau t ics   said.  Growth 
areas   for  aerospace  industry  spinoff  included  urban ,   environmental, 
surface-transportation,  medical,  and  ocean  systems.  Lessons  to  be 
learned  in  dealing  with  these  systems  were:  (1) massive  problems 
required  efforts  on  massive  scale;  ( 2 )   R&D  cycle  for   civil  system  was 
always  longer  than  political  cycle  being  counted  on  to  support  i t ;   and  
( 3 )  even when  system was built  jurisdictional prerogatives  could  “make 
a  mess  of  the  implementation.”  Aerospace  companies  should  ernploy 
their  capabilities  “ to   assess  their  experience  in   high  technology  and  
their  managerial  skills”  and   apply  experience  “to  new  systems  chal- 
lenges.”  ( S / A ,  1/69,  106-7) 

35 

February  1969 

February  2:  Development  of  laser  tracking  techniques  permitting  accurate 
24-hour  tracking  of  orbiting  spacecraft  was  announced  by  NASA.  New 
technique-particularly 
‘important in   geodetic  studies,  which  required 
precise  angle  and  distance  measurements between  satellite  and  ground  
greater  measuring  accuracy  than  RF   methods,  re- 
stations-offered 
quired  only  lightweight reflectors  on  satellite,  and   was  less  affected by 
transmission-impeding  environmental  disturbances.  First  operational 
daylight  tracking  with  laser  had  been  accomplished  by  GSFC team  Oct. 
21,  1968.  (NASA   Release  69-18;  A&A   68) 
Apo l lo   8 Astronaut  Frank  Borman  and  family  departed  on  USAF  jet  for 
18-day  Presidential  goodwill  mission  to  Europe.  I t inerary  : London, 
Feb.  2-5;  Paris,  Feb.  5-7;  Brussels,  Feb.  7-10;  The  Hague,  Feb. 
10-11;  Bonn,  Feb.  11-12;  West  Berlin,  Feb.  12-13;  Rome,  Feb. 
(NASA   In t   Aff; 
13-17;  Madrid,  Feb.  17-19;  and   Lisbon,  Feb.  19-21. 
W  S tar ,   2/2/69,  A3) 
NASA’s Apollo 8 mission and  USN  navigation  satellite  system  developed  by 
Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  Applied  Physics  Laboratory  had   been  named 
two   of  top  four  engineering  achievements of  1968 by  National  Society 
of  Professional Engineers.  ( W  Star, 2 /2 /69 ,   B2) 
*  I n   New  York  T imes   Magazine,  Dr.  Ralph  E.  Lapp,  physicist,  wrote: 
“.  . . I  would  urge  that  we  alter  the  U S .   space  program  as  follows: 
First,  make  a  firm  decision  to  terminate  the  manned  space  program 
soon  after  the  initial  lunar   landing.  . . . I would  reserve  the  remaining 
Apollo  craft  for  future  unmanned  missions to  the  planets  and  I  would 
mothball  the  single-purpose manned  space flight  facilities.  At  the  same 
time,  I  would  continue  a  N.A.S.A.  program  of  long-range  space develop- 
ment  aimed  a t   advanced modes  of  propulsion,  compact  energy  sources 
and   improved  long-distance  communication.  High  priority  would  be 
assigned to  the  development  of  nuclear  energy both  for  propulsion  and  
for  on-board power. 
“Second,  greatly  expand  N.A.S.A.’S  present  program  for  exploiting 
applications  of  space science and   technology.  The  potential  of  satellites 
fo r   communications  . . . needs  to  be  enhanced  by  the  development of 
new  techniques.  I t  should not  be  too  difficult  to  develop  orbital  systems 
fo r   the  control  of  intercontinental  a i r   traffic.  Perhaps  the  greatest  bene- 
fits  from   satellites  are   to  be  expected  in  the  survey  and  evaluation  of 
ear th   resources,  such  a s   underground  water,  mineral  deposits  a n d  
plant-forest  cover.  . . . 
“Third,  establish  a  high  priority  within  N.A.S.A.  €or fundamental  re- 
search  using  unmanned  space  vehicles  . . . 10 to  20  years  in   duration 
and   . . . aimed  a t   finding  out more  about  our  planet,  the  sun  and   the 
rest  of  the  solar  system.  The  most  expensive-and 
probably  the  most 
dramatic-of 
these  projects  would  be  the  planetary  probes  designed to 
fly  by,  orb i t   or  land  on  the  nearby  planets.”  ( N Y T ,  2/2/69,  32 -40 )  

37 

February 3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

February  3:  NASA  announced  i t   had  extended  $69,692,000  contract  with 
Bellcomm,  Inc.,  to  provide  systems  analysis,  study,  planning,  and  tech- 
nical  support  of  manned  space flight.  Value  of  one-year cost-plus-fixed- 
fee  contract extension was  $11,483,000.  (NASA   Release  69-25) 
February  3-5:  London  accorded  Apo l lo   8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  and 
family  full  celebrity  status,  ,including  frontpage  newspaper  coverage, 
taped  TV  interviews,  and   cheers  from  schoolchildren.  Borman  lectured 
before  Royal  Society of  Scientists  Feb.  3 and   on  Feb.  4  was  presented 
to  Queen  Elizabeth  I1  a t   Buckingham  Palace  and   visited  Prime  Min- 
ister  Harold Wilson  and  House of  Commons.  Borman  a t  U S .   Embassy 
presented  NASA’s  Manned  Spaceflight  Group  Achievement  Award  to 
Station Manager  James  McDowell  of  NASA  Communications Switching 
Station  in  London  and   Public  Service  Group  Achievement  Award  to 
C.  James  Gill,  director  of  U.K.’s  postoffice  telecommunications system. 
(Lee,  N Y T ,  2/4/69,  4 ;   W  Post,  2/5/69,  A18;  C  T r i b ,  2 /5 /69 ;   NASA 
In t   Aff) 
Februarv  4:  President  Nixon  sent  directive  to  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge, Science 
AdGiser  to  the  President,  asking  assessment  of  proposal  to  appoint  in-  
teragency committee to  advise President  on  post-Apollo  space program. 
Directive  also  asked  report  on  “possibility  of  significant  cost  reduc- 
tions  in   the  launching  and  boosting  operations  of  the  space program,” 
with  judgment  on  “how  best  to  assess  fu ture   developments  in   this 
area.”  White  House  announcement  from  Key  Biscayne,  Fla.,  Feb.  8 
said  directive  had  asked  assessment  of  recommendations that  DOD  and 
NASA   be  directed  to  coordinate  activities  in  this  area.  (PD,  2/17/69, 
249 ;   3/10/69,  349-51) 
Aerobee  150 MI  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range  carried  Univ.  of  Minnesota  Institute  of  Technology 
payload  to  115.6-mi  (186-km)  altitude  to  study  neutral  composition 
of  polar  atmosphere with  neutral  mass  spectrometers.  Rocket  and   in- 
struments  performed  satisfactorily  and   experimental  data  showed 
some  extremely interesting  results.”  (NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
‘C 
Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Point  Bar- 
row,  Alaska,  carry ing   GSFC experiment  to  obtain  data  on  variation  of 
temperature,  pressure,  and  wind  profile  by  detonating  grenades  at 
prescribed  times  and   recording  sound  arrivals  on  ground.  Rocket,  last 
in   series  of  four  launched  dur ing  period  of  atmospheric warming  [see 
Jan.  301,  performed  satisfactorily.  All  19 grenades  ejected  and  deto- 
nated  a s   planned  and   sound  arrivals  were  recorded.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
President Nixon  accepted  pro  forma  resignation  of  Dr.  Edward  C.  Welsh, 
Executive  Secretary  of  National  Aeronautics  and   Space  Council.  Ap- 
pointed  by  President  Kennedv  lin  1961.  Dr.  Welsh  had  been  Council’s 
first  and  dnly  appointed execitive secretary.  ( W  Post, 2/5/69,  A7;  AP, 
W  S tar ,   2/5/69,  1) 
XB-70  supersonic research  a ircraf t  was  flown  from  Edwards  AFB,  Calif., 
to  Wright-Patterson  AFB,  Ohio,  to   be  placed  on  exhibit  a t   Air  Force 
Museum.  Flight  had   been  delayed  until  turbulent  a ir   conditions  pre- 
vailed  so  testing  could  continue  until  end  of  aircraft’s  service.  During 
final  flight,  crew  collected  data  on  a ircraf t   handling  and   structural 
response to  a i r   turbulence  a t   subsonic  flight.  NASA  had  announced  end 
of  XB-70  flight research  program  Jan.  13.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; UPI,  N Y T ,  
2/5/69,  73;  AP,  W  S tar ,   2/5/69,  A19) 

38 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

February 4 

0  I n   Look,  science  writer  Arthur  C.  Clarke,  Nobel  Prize  nuclear  physicist 
Dr.  Isidor  I.  Rabi,  novelist  C.  P.  Snow,  and  Catholic  theologian  Prof .  
Leslie  Dewart  wrote  personal  reactions  to  ApoZZo  8  mission.  Clarke 
said:  “The  Apollo  8 mission marks  one  of  those  rare   turning  points  in  
human  history  after  which  nothing  will  ever  be  the  same  again.  The 
immense  technical  achievement  is  already  obvious  to  every  one  and 
has  been  universally  praised;  yet  the  psychological  impact  may  be 
even  more  important  and  will  take  some  time  to  make  itself  fully  felt. 
We  no  longer  live  in  the  world  which  existed  before  Christmas  1968. 
I t   has  passed  away  as  irrevocably  a s  the  earth-centered  universe of  the  
Middle Ages.” 
Dr.  Rabi  sa id :   “ I t   would  be  misleading to  talk  of  the  events  that  led 
to  the  journey  of  Apollo  8 in   terms of  the  vast  sums of  money  that  a re  
involved,  even  though  it  cost  several  times  as much  as  the  development 
of  the  first  atomic bomb.  What  is  more  important  and  more  impressive 
is  that  Apollo  8 represents  the  cooperation  of  hundreds  of  thousands 
of  people  over  a  period  of  years  in  a  gigantic  effort with  no  clearly  set 
practical  goals,  except  perhaps  the  profound  desire  of  mankind  to 
prove  to  itself  that  i t   had  the  knowledge  and   the  ability  to  overcome 
its  earthbound  limitations.” 
Prof.  Dewart  sa id :   “Man  has  taken  his  first,  halting  steps  into  the 
cosmos  beyond  that  earthly  world  in   which  he  was  born  and  within 
which  he  had  always  lived.  The  impact  of  Apollo  8  in  other  areas  of 
human  experience is  obvious;  in   religion,  i t   is  much  less  immediately 
evident.  And  yet,  in  the  end,  i t   may  be  more  significant  for  the  de- 
velopment  of  man’s  religious  consciousness.”  (Look,  2 /4 /69 ,   72-8) 
In  letter  to  Astronaut  Frank  Borman,  Board  of  Education  of  Glendale 
Union  H igh   School  District  No.  205,  Glendale,  Ariz.,  said  i t   had 
named  planned high  school “Apollo”  in  “honor  and appreciation  of  the 
accomplishments of  the  participating  astronauts.”  I t   invited  ApoZZo  8 
crew  to  participate  in   1970  dedication  ceremony.  (CR,  2/21/69, 
E1216) 
0  USN  announced  award  of  $40,000,000  contract  to  Grumman  Aircraft  En- 
gineering  Corp.  for  engineering  development  phase  of  F-14A  super- 
sonic  fighter  (formerly VFX) , replacement for  F-111B.  Funding  during 
four-year  development  was  expected  to   total  $388,000,000.  ( DOD Re- 
lease  92-69)  
In   letter  from  Chairman  L.  Mendel  Rivers  (D-S.C.)  to  Secretary  of  De- 
fense  Melvin  R.  Laird,  House  Armed  Services  Committee  informed 
DOD that,  because  of  uncertainty  over  ABM,  Committee would  take  no 
action  to  approve  Sentinel  antiballistic  missile  sites  until  Nixon  Ad- 
ministration  positively  expressed  interest  in   project.  (Sell,  W  Pos t ,  
2/6/69,  A l )  
In   New  York  T imes ,   Theodere  Shabad  said  Moscow  sources  indicated 
Soviet investigators  had  ruled  out  possibility  of  political  conspiracy  in 
Jan.  22  shooting  during  Kremlin  ceremonies  for  Soyuz  cosmonauts 
because  of  amateurish  behavior  of  gunman  identified  as  “Lt.  Ilyin”  of 
Soviet  Army.  Sources  denied  earlier  reports  that  gunman  had  taken 
poison  af ter   shooting  and   was  dead.  They  said  he  w a s   undergoing 
medical and   psychological testing  to  determine  his  sanity  and  motives. 
( N Y T ,  2 / 5 / 6 9 , 2 )  
February  5-16:  Intelsat-III  F-3  was  successfully  launched  by  NASA  for 

39 

February 5-16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

ComSatCorp  on  behalf  of  International  Telecommunications  Satellite 
Consortium.  The  632-1b  cylindrical  satellite,  launched  from  ETR  by 
( DSV-3M) 
Long-Tank  Thrust-Augmented  Thor 
( LTTAT) -Delta 
booster,  entered  elliptical 
transfer  orb i t   with  23,496.9-mi 
(37,- 
814.6-km)  apogee,  157.3-mi  (253.1-km)  perigee,  671.9-min  period, 
and 29.8”  inclination. All  systems were  functioning  normally.  On  Feb. 
7  apogee motor  was  fired  to  kick  satellite  into  planned  near-synchro- 
nous  orb i t   over  Pacific  a t   173.8”  east  longitude  with  22,000-mi 
(35,719.8-km)  apogee,  22,190-mi  (35,703.7-km)  perigee,  23-hr  56- 
min  period,  and  1.3’  inclination. 
Zntelsat-ZZZ  F-3  wa s   second  successful  launch  in  Intelsat  111  series. 
Zntelsat-Zll F-2  had been launched Dec.  18 ,  1968, as backup  to  Intelsat- 
I11 F-1,  which  had  been  destroyed minutes  after launch  Sept.  18, 1968. 
Satellite  began  commercial service  Feb.  16, handling  up  to  1,200 voice 
circuits o r  4 TV  channels.  (NASA   P ro j  Off;  ComSatCorp  Releases  69-7, 
69-27;  AP,  B Sun,  2/6/69,  A3;  Pres  Rpt.  70  [69] ; ComSatCorp P IO )  
February  5 :   D O D   launched  two  unidentified  satellites  from  Vandenberg 
AFB  by  Thor-Agena  booster.  One  entered  orbit  with  171.0-mi 
(275-km)  apogee,  91.7-mi  (147.6-km)  perigee,  88.7-min  period, 
and  81.6”  inclination  and   reentered  Feb.  24.  Second  satellite  entered 
orbit  with  894.9-mi  ( 1,439.9-km)  apogee,  866.4-mi  ( 1,394.0-km) 
perigee,  114.1-min  period,  and   80.4”  inclination.  (P r e s  R p t   70  [69 ] )  
President  Nixon  authorized  immediate  $10-million increase  in   expendi- 
ture   ceiling  placed  on  National  Science  Foundation  by  Johnson  Ad- 
ministration  in   1968. He  sa id :   “The  colleges  and  universities  of  this 
Nation  provide  a  critical  resource  which  needs  to  be  fostered  and  
strengthened.  Our  higher  educational  system  provides  the  advanced 
training  needed  for  tomorrow’s  leaders  in   science  and  technology,  in- 
dustry  and  government,  and   also  conducts  the  basic  research  which 
uncovers  the  new  knowledge  so  essential  to  the   future  welfare  of  the 
country.  I t   is  essential  that  these  programs  of  education  and   research 
be  sustained  at  a level  of  high  excellence.”  ( P D ,  2/10/69,  224-5) 
*  New  tempest  was  brewing  in   national  scientific  community over  whether 
defense  establishment  absorbed  exorbitant  portion  of  U.S.  scientific 
and   technological energies,  John  Lannan  said  in   Washington  Evening 
S tar .   In   New  York,  younger  physicists  had  called  for  political  activism 
a t   annual  meeting  of  American  Physical  Society  Feb.  3.  MIT  group, 
Union  of  Concerned  Scientists,  had  scheduled day-long “research  stop- 
page”  March  4  and   initiated  letter  campaign  to  spread  i ts   views  to 
other  institutions.  Union’s  proposals  included  ‘‘a  critical  and  continu- 
ing  examination  of  government  policy  in   areas  where  science  and 
technology  are  of  actual  or  potential  significance”;  redirection  of  re-  
search  from   defense-oriented to  environment-oriented  projects;  oppo- 
sition  to   antiballistic  missile  system;  and   organization  of  scientists  into 
effective  and   vocal  political  action  group.  (W   S tar ,   2/5/69,  A7; 
Sullivan,  N Y T ,  2/9/69,  E7 )  
Report  on  aviation  safety for  1968 was  submitted  to  House  Committee  on 
Interstate  and  Foreign  Commerce  by  Joseph  J.  O’Connell,  Jr.,  Chair- 
man  of  National  Transportation  Safety  Board.  For  all  scheduled  a i r  
carr ier   services  there  had   been  one  fatal  accident  for  about  every 
500,000  hrs,  or  fo r   every  100,000  transcontinental  flights.  One  pas- 

40  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

February 5 

senger  had   been  lost  fo r   every  370  million  passenger  miles  flown. 
Number  of  fatalities  in   scheduled  domestic  and   international passenger 
service had   been  second  worst  of  decade;  but  accident  rates,  fatal  and  
nonfatal,  continued  downward  for  total  scheduled  a i r   carriers.  I n  
general  aviation,  ra te   for   fa ta l  accidents per  hours  flown had  increased 
bu t   remained  below  rates  of  1965 and   before  and   was  th ird   best  in  
decade.  To ta l   number  of  fa ta l   accidents-692,  killing  1,374  persons- 
was  highest  i n  history.  (Tex t ;  NYT,  2/9/69,  94)  
In   message  to   Senate,  President  Nixon  urged  prompt  ratification  of 
treaty:  “I  believe  tha t   ratification  of 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
the 
Treaty  a t   this  time  would  advance  this  Administration’s  policy  of 
negotiation  ra ther   than  confrontation  with  the  USSR.  I  believe  the 
Treaty  can  be  an   important  step  in  our   endeavor  to  curb   the  spread  of 
nuclear  weapons  and   tha t   it  advances  the  purposes  of  our   Atoms  for 
Peace  program.”  (PD, 2/10/69,  219) 
February  5-7:  Dur ing   two-day  Pa r i s   visit  Apo l lo   8 Astronaut  Frank   Bor- 
man met  with  President  Charles  de  Gaulle.  At  dinner  given  by  Ambas- 
sador   R.  Sargent  Shriver,  Jr.,  on   Eiffel  Tower,  Borman  received  offer 
of  racing  car   from  French  manufacturer  who  had  presented  similar 
gift  to   Cosmonaut  Yur i   Gagarin  in  1965.  During  Par is   news  confer- 
ences  and   on  TV  interview,  Borman  stressed  international  character  of 
space  exploration.  He  said,  “I  don’t  know  why  we  aren’t  going  to 
Russia.  I  would  like  to  visit  Russia.  . . . I  think  we  have  some  fa ir  
means  of  cooperation  in   space  and  I  would  hope  to  see more.”  (Garr i-  
son,  NYT,  2 /6 /69 ,   2;  2/7/69,  3 )  
Fe6ruary  6:  NASA  launched  four  sounding  rockets  from  Wallops  Station  to 
obtain  upper-atmosphere  da ta   on  normal  winter  day.  Arcas  carr ied  
Naval  Weapons  Center  payload  to  34.9-mi  (56.1-km)  altitude  to  
measure  ozone  concentration  a t   altitudes  between  18.6  and   37.3  m i  
(30  and   60  km) , using  photometer  and   optical  filter  wheel.  Failure  of 
recovery  parachute  to  open  satisfactorily  caused  fast  descent  and   pre- 
vented  payload  recovery.  Obtaining  useful  information  was  expected 
to  be  difficult,  but  good  data  were  expected. 
Nike-Cajun  carried  GSFC  payload  to  79.4-mi  ( 127.7-kn1)  altitude 
to   obtain  temperature,  pressure,  density,  and   wind  da ta   in   upper  a t-  
mosphere  by  detonating  grenades  and   recording  sound  arrivals  on 
ground.  All  19  grenades  were  ejected  and   detonated  as  planned  and  
sound  arrivals were  recorded. 
Nike-Apache  carry ing   Univ.  of  Colorado  payload  reached  72.7-mi 
(117-km)  altitude  on  flight  to  obtain  vertical  profile  of  nitric  oxide 
density  in   15.5-  to  65.3-mi  (25-   to  105-km)  region.  Rocket  and   in-  
struments  functioned  satisfactorily. 
Second Nike-Apache  carr ied  Univ.  of  Illinois  payload  to  collect  da ta  
on   ionosphere.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA  
Rpts  SRL ;   NASA  P r o j   Off) 
*  Nike-Caj un  sounding  rocket  launched  by   NASA  from  Churchill  Research 
Range  carr ied   GSFC payload  to   80.2-mi  (129-km)  altitude  to  obtain 
data  on  variation  of  temperature,  pressure,  and   wind  profile  by  deto- 
nating  grenades  a t  prescribed  times  and  recording  their  sound  arrivals 
on  ground.  Rocket,  last  in   series of  four  launched  from  Churchill  dur-  
ing   stratospheric warming  [see  Jan.  301,  performed  satisfactorily.  All 

41 

February  6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

19  grenades  ejected  and   detonated  as  planned.  Sound  arrivals  were 
recorded  for  14-15  grenades  because  of  power  failure  at  receiving 
station.  (NASA  Rp t   SFW) 
Aerobee  150 M I   sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range  carried  Univ.  of  Minnesota  Institute  of  Technology pay- 
load  to  83.2-mi  (133.8-km)  altitude  to  study  neutral  composition  of 
polar  atmosphere  with  neutral  mass  spectrometers.  Rocket  underper- 
formed;  burnout  occurred  a t  42  secs.  All  instruments worked  perfectly. 
Useful  data  were  obtained  in  68.4-  to  07.0-mi  (110-  to  140-km) 
region.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
At  confirmation  hearing  on   h is   appointment  as  Director  of  Office  of 
Science and  Technology before  Senate Labor  and  Public Welfare Com- 
mittee,  Dr. Lee A.  DuBridge said he would  place  h is  energies on  analy- 
sis  of  weapon  systems,  environment  and  effect  of 
technology  and 
pollution  on  environment,  and   utilization  of  science  and  technology  by 
Government  departments.  He  planned  to  concern  himself  with  social 
problems and hoped  to  increase  social  scientists  on  President’s  Science 
Advisory  Committee  from   one  to  two.  He  hoped  for  increased  funding 
for  HUD   and  DOT,  and   regretted  allocations  for  basic  research  were 
declining  in   DOD,  NASA,  and   AEC  because  such  agencies “will  profit  by 
good  relations  with  universities.”  (Nelson, Science,  2/14/69,  657)  
0  U.S.S.R.’s  Venus  V  (launched Jan.  5 )   and   Venus VZ  (launched Jan.  10 )  
were  on   course  and   functioning  normally,  Tass  announced.  Spacecraft 
were  expected  to  reach  Venus  in   late May.  Venus  V  was  4,785,000  mi 
from  ea r th ;   Venus  V I ,  4,050,000  mi.  (Reuters,  N Y T ,   2/7/69,  1 4 )  
NASA  sponsored  one-day meeting  to  review  progress  in  its  five-year  re- 
search  program  on  fog-shrouded  airports.  In  one  test  during  NASA- 
sponsored  work  by  Cornel1  Aeronautical  Laboratory  in   Project  Fog 
Drops, small  aircraft  carrying  700  lbs  of  salt had  opened wide  path  in  
dense warm  fog  in   five minutes.  (NASA   Release  69-17;  Transcript) 
Sperry  Rand  Corp.  announced  election  of  former  NASA   Administrator 
James  E.  Webb  to  Board  of  Directors.  He  had  been  vice  president  of 
company’s  Sperry  Gyroscope  Div.  in   1943.  (Sperry  Rand  Release 
2 /6 /69 ;   SBD,  2 /11 /69 ,   140)  
0  Univ.  of  California  astronomers  Dr.  E.  Joseph Wampler  and   Dr.  Joseph 
S.  Miller  repor ted- they  had  photographed  winking  of  pulsar  in   Crab 
Nebula-first 
of  pulsars  to  be  unequivocally associated  with  observable 
star-by 
spinning  disc  before  star’s  image  projected  by  120-in  tele- 
scope a t   Lick  Observatory,  Calif.  Hole  in   disc,  spun  slower  than  flash 
ra te   of  pulsar,  permitted  light  from  s tar   to  penetrate  once  each  revo- 
lution.  For  first  time  star  was  shown  photographically  to  be  flashing 
on  and  off.  Rate  of  light  pulses  was  identical  to  tha t   of  previously 
observed  radio  pulses.  ( N Y T ,  2/7/69,  22 ;   UPI,  W Pos t ,   2/7/69,  A 6 )  
*  Cambridge  Univ.  announced  radioastronomy  team  under  S ir   Martin 
Ryle,  professor  and   astronomer,  would  build  world’s  largest,  most 
sensitive  radiotelescope,  to  cost  $4.8  million.  I t   would  be  operational 
in   two  years  and   capable  of  picking  up  signals  which  started  to  ear th  
8,000 million  yrs  ago.  Cambridge  team  had   discovered  pulsars.  (UPI ,  
W Po s t ,   2/7/69,  A20) 
0  NASA  awarded  Grumann  Aircraft  Engineering  Corp.  $3,438,400  supple- 
mental  agreement  for   changes  in   Apollo  lunar  module  contract.  Modi- 
documentation  and   reporting  procedures  for  LM  test  and 
fications-to 

4 2 .  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

February 6 

checkout, to flight and  ground   test  hardware,  to  test  and  effect  analyses, 
and   to  Crew  safety  hardware-brought 
total  value  of  contract  to  $1.6 
billion  since  January   1963.  (MSC Release  69-14) 
Washington Evening  Star  sa id :   ‘‘As  man’s  horizon  of  space expands,  the 
costs  of  maintaining  an   effective program  expand  in   direct  proportion. 
Already,  the  first  limited  steps  have  resulted  in   an  economic  burden 
that  the  richest  nation  in   the  world  finds  almost  intolerable.  If  the  ad-  
venture  is  to   continue  much  longer,  i t   will  have  to  be  a s   an  inter- 
national  effort.  Nixon’s  inaugural  statement  raises  the  possibility  that 
some  international  body,  a  sort  of  United  Nations  for  space  explora- 
tion,  could  be  established  to  pool  the  talents  and   the  resources  of  all 
nations.  It is an  idea well worth  pursuing.  (W  S tar ,  2/6/69,  A10)  
DOD announced month  delay in   site  acquisition  and   construction work  on 
Sentinel  ABM  system.  Action  had   been  taken  previous  week  to  permit 
review  of  program.  At White  House news  conference President  Nixon 
said,  “I  do  not  buy  the  assumption that  the  ABM  system,  the  thin  Senti- 
nel  system,  as  i t   has  been  described,  was  simply  for   the  purpose  of 
protecting  ourselves  against  attack  from  Communist  China.”  System, 
like  those  U.S.S.R.  already  deployed,  “adds  to  our  overall  defense 
capability.”  (PD, 2/10/69,  228 ;   W S J ,  2/7/69,  6) 
State Dept.  announced  AEC  would  join  Australia  in   exploring  economic, 
technical,  and   safety  aspects  of  producing  deep-water harbor   a t   Cape 
Keraudren  i n  northwestern Australia  using  atomic explosives.  ( W Post, 
2/7/69,  AS) 
launched  Cosmos  CCLXV  into  orb i t   with  457-km 
February  7:  U.S.S.R. 
(284-mi)  apogee,  272-km  (169-mi)  perigee,  91.8-min  period,  and 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  May  1.  (GSFC SSR,  2/15/69; 
71’ 
5/15/69) 
Aerobee  150 MI  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carried  Johns  Hopkins 
Univ.  payload  to  101.7-mi  (163.6-km)  altitude  to  measure  vacuum 
uv  spectral  emission  lines  from  Venusian  atmosphere.  Experiment 
worked  satisfactorily  except  for   one  second  near  end.  No  fine-mode 
acquisition  was  received  and  Vernier  star-tracker could  not  track.  No 
data  on  Venus were  obtained.  Terrestrial  airglow  data  were  obtained. 
(NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill Research 
Range  carr ied   Southwest  Center  for  Advanced  Studies  payload  to 
826-mi  ( 133-km)  altitude  to   investigate  aurora l   disturbances.  Rocket 
and   instruments  performed  satisfactorily  and   payload  was  recovered 
successfully.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
0  Senate  confirmed  appointment  of  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge  as  Director  of 
Office of  Science and  Technology.  (CR,  S1536-7) 
0  Secretary  of  Transportation  John   A.  Volpe  sa id   in   Washington,  D.C., 
that  committee of  academicians, committee within  DOT, and   committee 
representing  other  agency  executives  had  begun  extensive  review  for 
Nixon  Administration  to   determine  whether  Government  should  con- 
tinue  subsidizing SST development.  (Herbers, NYT,  2 /8 /69 ,1 ;   Reuters, 
W Post,  2/8/69,  A2) 
Royal  Crown  Cola  International  announced  former  Astronaut  John  H. 
Glenn,  Jr.,  had  become  i ts   president.  He  had   been  chairman  since 
January   1967.  (NYT ,   2 /8 /69)  
Committee  of  a i r   traffic  controllers  said  i t   had  evolved  program  which 
43 

February 7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

would  enable  FAA to  postpone  restrictions  scheduled  to  go  into  effect 
April  27  at  five  ma jor   airports.  Professional  Air  Traffic  Controllers 
Organization  would  petition  Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A. 
Volpe  to  substitute  “revamped  procedures  which  would  make  opera- 
tions safer and  more  efficient,”  said F.  Lee Bailey,  counsel.  Restrictions 
would  curtail  services  into New  York,  Chicago, and  Washington,  D.C. 
( N Y T ,  2 /8 /69)  
0  I n   Science,  Walter  O r r   Roberts,  President  of  University  Corp.  for  At- 
mospheric  Research,  wrote : “Manned  exploration  of  the  moon  will 
provide  answers to  age-long speculation  about  its  nature.  Perhaps  even 
more  important  than   what  we  find  will  be  the  fact  tha t   we  have  done 
it.  The  event  will  mark  the  successful  attainment  of  a  goal  that  de- 
manded  technological  attainments  of  unprecedented  complexity  and 
difficulty.  Our  sights  were  set  upon  this  goal  nearly  a  decade  ago  by 
President Kennedy.  I was,  I confess,  one  who  feared  he  had  asked  the 
impossible.” 
Weather  forecasting-one 
example  of  earth-oriented  use  of  space 
science-would 
require  space  satellites  of  new  and  sophisticated 
character.  “We  will  not  solve  this  problem  unless  we   can  somehow 
inspire  atmospheric scientists  of  all  the  world  to  commit  themselves  to 
the  goal.  . . . Space  technology  is  perhaps  the  most  important  single 
component  of  the  technology  development  needed  for  success.  What 
better  use  could be  found  for  ou r   incredible  talents  in  space?  After  the 
moon,  the  earth!”  (Sc ience ,  2 /7 /69)  
February  9: DOD’S  Tucsut  I  Tactical  Communications Satellite  was  success- 
fully  launched  from  ETR a t   4:09  pm  EST by  Titan  I I IC   booster  into 
synchronous equatorial  orbit  over  Pacific.  Orbital parameters : apogee, 
22,387  mi  (36,020.7  km)  ; perigee,  22,332  mi  (35,932.2  km )  ; period, 
1,446.6  min ; and   inclination,  0.6”.  The   $30-million,  1,600-lb,  cylin- 
drical  satellite  would  test  feasibility  of  using  satellite  system  to  com- 
municate over  great  distances with  small military  units  such a s  aircraft, 
ships,  and   small  ground  stations.  Tm s a t   I  was  powerful  enough  for 
ground  forces  to  use  portable  receiving  antennas  a s   small  as  one  foot 
Star, 2/9-10/70;  AP,  w Post, 2/10/69,  A I ;   GSFC S S R ,  2/15/69;  DOD 
in   diameter.  I t   also  would  test  new  gyrostat  stabilization  system.  (W  
Release  64-68;  Pres  Rpt  70  [69]) 
Supercritical wing  would  be  flight-tested on  USN  F-8  fighter  a t   FRC,  NASA 
announced. Airfoil  shape  had  been  developed  in   four-year  wind-tunnel 
studies  a t  Lam   by  Dr.  Richafd  T.  Whitcomb.  If  wind-tunnel perform- 
ance  was  achieved  in   flight,  wing  could  improve  performance  and 
efficiency  of  future  aircraft,  particularly  je t   transports.  I t  would  allow 
efficient  cruise  flight  near  speed  of  sound  a t   45,000-ft  altitude  and  
reduce  operational  cost  of  subsonic  flights  by  increasing  operational 
range  o r   permitting  less  fuel  and  more  payload  on  faster  schedules. 
Supercritical  wing  shape  was  developed  to  delay  rise  of  d rag   force 
and   onset  of  buffeting  a t   high  speeds.  Flattened  top  was  designed  to 
reduce  intensity  of  airflow  disturbances;  downward  curve  a t   rear   of 
wing  supplied  lift  lost  by  flattening.  Flight  program  would  evaluate 
behavior  of  wing  in   actual  flight  with  both  high-lift  maneuvering  and 
off -design performance,  and   determine  sensitivity  of  supercritical  wing 
to  wing-contour  variations  associated  with  manufacturing  processes 
and  deformations due  to  flight  loads.  (NASA  Release 69-27) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

February 9 

February  9 :   NASA   announced  t h e   supercritical  wing,  a  new  ajrfoil  shape  developed  i n  
fou r   years  of  wind-tunnel  studies  ut  Langley  Research  Center,  would  be  flight-tested 
on a  USN  F-8  fighter  at  the  Flight  Research  Center. Dr .   Richard  T .  Wh i tcomb ,  inventor 
o f   th e   design  expected  t o   improve  performance  of  subsonic  j e t   transports,  stood  w i th  
his  model  i n   t h e   test  section  of  th e   wind  tunnel  at  L a m .  

9  Meteorite broke  into  fragments  in   air  and  fell  near  Pueblito  de  Allende, 
Chihuahua, Mexico.  Scientists  a t  MSC Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory  and 
Oak  Ridge National  Laboratory  later  reported  from  tests  of  fragments 
that  meteorite  was  chondrite  (C3  and   C4)  with  opaque  and   micro- 
crystalline  matrices.  Gamma  rays   from  short-lived  isotopes  were  ob- 
served  in   specimens  brought  to  low-background  gamma  counter  less 
than  4%  days  after  fall.  (Science,  2/28/69,  928-9) 
9  Boeing  Co.  test  pilot  Jack  Waddell  flew  3554011, $20-million  prototype 
of  490-passenger  Boeing  747  je t   transport  from  Pa ine   Field,  near 
Seattle,  Wash.,  for   1 h r   15 m in   of  scheduled  21/2-hr  maiden  flight. 
Waddell  returned  a ircraf t   to  field  after  encountering  “minor  malfunc- 
tion”  of  wing  surface control  while  lowering  wing  flaps  to  30”  angle. 
Later  he  said  a ircraf t   was  “a  pilot’s  dream”  which  could  be  “flown 
with  two  fingers”  and   indicated  flap  misalignment  would  not  delay 
45 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
February 9 
further  testing.  The  210-ft-long  747 used  only  4,500  ft  of  runway  to 
become  airborne  a t   170 mph.  Spectators were  impressed with  quietness 
of  i ts   engines.  ( W Pos t ,   2/10/69,  1 ; AP,  W  Star,  2/10/69,  AS) 
*  Lunar  module  was  “first  manned  spacecraft  ever  built  that’s  not  tough 
enough  to  survive  a  return  to   earth,”  said  Thomas  O’Toole  in   Wash- 
ington  Pos t .   Vehicle  from   which  two  astronauts  would  descend  to 
moon’s  surface  in   summer  1969 was  23  f t  high,  weighed  8,000 Ibs,  and  
carried  12  tons  of  propellant.  I t   contained  25   mi  of  electrical  wiring 
and  more than a million parts,  most  of  which  had  been  designed “from 
scratch,”  held  together  by  216,000  “pins.”  P in   bent  more  than  five 
degrees  out  of  shape  would  have  to  be  replaced.  NASA  had  contracted 
f o r   15 LMS  a t   total  cost  of  $1.9  billion  from  Grumman  Aircraft  En- 
gineering  Corp.,  which  had   taken  s ix   years  to  get  i t   from  drawing 
board  to  launch  pad.  (W Post,  2/9/69,  B2)  
*  I n  Brussels,  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  and   family  attended  dinner  given 
in  his  honor  a t  palace  by  King Baudouin  and  Queen  Fabiola.  Borman 
showed ApoZZo  8 film.  (NASA   In t  Aff;  AP,  B Sun,  2 /10 /69)  
*  Hungary  and   Romania  had  issued  souvenir  stamps  commemorating 
ApoZZo  8 mission  and   astronauts,  U.S.  newspaper  philatelic  columns 
announced.  Photograph  taken  from  Gemini  ZV  of  Arabian  coast  pro- 
vided  design  for  new  stamp  in   sultanate  of  Muscat  and  Oman.  (Faries, 
W  S tar ,   2/9/69,  D10;  AP,  W Post,  2/9/69,  K8) 
Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  associate  professor  of  mechanics,  Dr.  Robert  L. 
Green,  had  designed  and  perfected  “visualization  apparatus  for  X-ray 
crystallography,”  device  which  permitted  continuous  observations  of 
changes  in   structure  of  atoms  in  metal  under  stress.  Device  could  lead 
to  discovery  of  hitherto  unknown  properties  of  metals,  nonmetallic 
crystals,  and  living  molecules;  enable  scientists  to  study  changes  in  
internal  structure  of  metals  during  deformation  caused  by  a ir   and 
water  pressure;  enable  scientists  to  project  image  of  atomic  structure 
on  closed-circuit  TV  screen;  and  result  in   development  of  stronger 
(Reuters,  N Y T ,  
submarine  hulls,  a ircraf t   wings,  and   spacecraft. 
2/9/69,  92)  
FAA  had  awarded  United  Aircraft  Corp.  Pra t t   Sr  Whitney  Div.  $665,241 
contract  for  two-year  study  to  develop  design  for  quieter  jet  aircraft 
engines.  ( N Y T ,  2/9/69,  94 )  
*  Astronaut  Walter M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  and his  first-grade  school teacher,  Mrs. 
Peggy  Crowley,  would  receive  1969  Golden  Key  Awards  from  six 
national  school organizations  a t   annual  convention  of  American Assn. 
of  School  Administrators,  Atlantic  City,  N.J.,  Feb.  15,  Parade  re- 
ported.  Awards  had  been  founded  to  dramatize  teacher’s  role  in  U S .  
life.  (Pa rad e ,  2/9/69,  4) 
*  In   Washington Pos t ,   Thomas  O’Toole  said  NASA  Administrator  was  “the 
last  big  Federal  post  President  Nixon  has  left  unfilled.”  He  asked,  “Is 
i t  because he can’t  find the man he  wants?  I s  i t  because no man he wants 
wants the  job ?   O r  is Mr.  Nixon  playing with  the  possibility  of  appoint- 
ing  [Acting Administrator  Thomas  0.1  Paine  to  the  post  of  Adminis- 
t ra to r?”   Washington  “space  watchers”  felt  job   could  not  be  kept 
vacant  much  longer,  “if  only  because  the  program  to  land  American 
astronauts  on  the  moon  is  rapidly  nearing  its  goal.”  ( W Post,  2/9/69, 
A l l )  
New  Yo rk  Times editorial:  “The  Congressional pressure that  spurred  the 

46 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

February 9 

Nixon  Administration  to  halt  deployment  of  the  Sentinel  antiballistic 
missile  system  signals  a  healthy  new  disposition  on  Capitol  Hill  to 
challenge  the  military-industrial  complex,  against  which  President 
Eisenhower warned  eight  years  ago.”  (N Y T ,  2/9/69,  1 2 )  
February  10: NAS  published  NRC Div.  of  Engineering’s  Useful  Applications 
of  Earth-Oriented  Satellites,  Report  of  the  Central  Review  Committee 
of  NRC  Summer Study  on Space Applications, prepared for  NASA.  Study 
concluded  that  space applications  program  was  “too  small  by  a  factor 
of  two  or  three.”  Benefits  from  program  were  expected  to  be  large, 
“certainly  larger  than  the  costs  of  achieving  them.”  However,  “an  ex- 
tensive,  coherent,  and  selective  program”  would  be  required  to  achieve 
benefits. 
Committee  recommended  tha t   NASA  give  greater  emphasis  to  ear th-  
satellite  programs  with  promise  of  beneficial  applications,  commit  ad -  
ditional  funds  to  expanded  R&D  and   prototype  operations  for  certain 
applications,  and   commit $200  million  to  $300  million  yearly  to  space 
applications  program.  Manned  space  programs  should  be  justified  in  
their  own  right,  not  in  terms  of  space  applications;  near-term  benefits 
for  mankind  would  be  achieved  “more  effectively  and   economically 
with  automated  devices  and   vehicles.” 
Noting  that  in   meteorology  and   communications “satellites  have  al- 
ready  entered  solidly  into  the  area  of  economic  usefulness,”  report 
recommended  that  NASA  gran t   high  priority  to  development  of  multi- 
channel distribution  system  for   public  and   private  network  TV;  multi- 
channel  system  for   educational  broadcasts  in  developing countries  and  
for  special  interest  groups  such  a s   physicians,  lawyers,  and   educators; 
and   North  Atlantic  satellite  navigation  system  for  traffic  control  of 
transoceanic  a ircraf t   and   ships.  Satellite  earth-sensing  was  dependent 
on  R&D  in   sensor  signatures-form 
of  information  provided  by  ins tru-  
ments.  Report  recommended  immediate  pilot  program  for  providing 
information  in  familiar  and   immediately usable  form,  exploration  into 
use  of  side-looking  radar,  and   s ta r t   of  10- to  12-yr development  plan 
for  more  sophisticated  sensors.  (Text;  NRC   Release) 
ApoZZo  8 mission  (Dec. 21-27,  1968)   was  adjudged  successful  by  NASA. 
All  objectives  of  manned  circumlunar  mission  were  attained,  as  well 
as  four  detailed  test  objectives  not  originally  planned.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
*  MSFC  announced  i t   would  manage  two  recently  awarded  $300,000  six- 
month  contracts,  one  to  Lockheed  Missiles  &  Space  Co.  and  one  to 
General  Dynamics  Corp.,  for  conceptual  study  of  low-cost,  manned 
logistics  (space  shuttle)  system.  Similar  study  contracts  awarded  to 
North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  and  to  McDonnell  Douglas  Astro- 
nautics  c o .  would  be  managed  by  MSC  and  LaRC.  Integral  Launch  and  
Reentry  Vehicle  ( ILRV)  studies  would  investigate  aspects  of  reusable 
transportation  system  for  post-1974 use  in  support  of  proposed  space 
stations. 
MSFC also  announced  $3,288,914  modification  to  contract  with  Boe- 
ing  Co.  fo r  continued  configuration  management  support  on  Sa turn   V 
launch  vehicle  program,  including  processing  of  vehicle  and  ground 
support  equipment  configuration  changes,  configuration  accounting, 
and  change  integration  and  tracking.  ( MSFC Releases  69-34,  69-35) 
*  General  Accounting  Office  released  report  to  Congress,  Need  for  Im -  
proved  Guidelines  in  Contracting  for  Research  w i th  Government-Spon- 
47 

February  10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

sored  Nonprofit  Contractors.  I t   called  fo r  Government-wide guidelines 
on  amounts  and   use  of  fees  or  management  allowances given  by  DOD, 
NASA,  and  AEC  Federal contract  research  centers.  GAO  found  allowances 
paid  to  nonprofit  organizations  varied  significantly,  were  not  much 
used  for  research,  and   had  been  spent  by  some  centers  to  acquire  ex- 
tensive  capital  facilities.  (Text) 
USAF  contract  awards : $4,305,295  fixed-price  contract  to  Computer 
Sciences  Corp.  fo r   services  and   supplies  to  develop,  install,  operate, 
test,  and  maintain  hardware  to  improve  capabilities  of  space  tracking 
equipment;  and   $1,600,000 initial  increment  to  $4,200,000 fixed-price 
contract to United Technology Center for  KSC  launch  and  support  serv- 
ices.  (DOD   Release  102-69;  WSJ,  2/11/69,  17) 
Febrllary  11: Initial  thermal  and  vacuum  testing  of  flight  model  of  SERT  I1 
(Space Electric  Rocket  Test)  in  preparation  for  fall  1969  launch  had 
been  completed,  LeRC  announced.  SERT  11,  second flight  test  in  deve lop  
ment  of  ion  propulsion  for  space use  and  first  LeRC  orbital  spacecraft, 
would  be  launched  from  WTR  by  Thorad-Agena  booster  into  621-mi 
(999.4-km) circular  orb i t   to  evaluate  inflight  performance  of  electron- 
bombardment  engines for  six months  o r  more.  SERT  I  had  carried  first 
ion  thruster  to  operate  in   space  on  suborbital  mission  July  20,  1964. 
(L eRC   Release  69-2) 
*  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill Research 
Range  carried  Southwest  Center  for  Advanced  Studies  payload  to 
85.1-mi  (137-km)  altitude  for  comprehensive investigation  of  aurora l  
disturbances  during  active  aurora l  event.  Rocket  and  instruments  func- 
tioned  satisfactorily  and   payload  was  recovered  as  planned.  (NASA Rpt 
SRL) 
I n   Bonn  during  European  tour,  ApoZZo  8 Astronaut  Frank  Borman  ad- 
dressed  enthusiastic  crowd  of  1,500  students  and   government  officials 
after film  showing on  lunar  mission  in  Beethoven  Hall:  “ I   believe  this 
research  will  teach  us  that  we  are   first  and  foremost  not  Germans  or 
Russians  or  Americans  but  earthmen.”  Borman  met  West  German 
Chancellor  Kurt  Georg  Kiesinger  a t   lunch  and  later  discussed  space 
research  with  Scientific  Affairs  Minister  Gerhard  Stoltenberg.  He  at- 
tended  evening  reception  given  by  West  German  Air  and   Space  Re- 
search  Institute.  (Falbe,  B  Sun, 2/12/69) 
U.S.S.R.  had  ordered  100  space pens  developed  for  US. astronauts  and 
1,000 special  pressurized  ink  cartridges which  enabled  pen  to  write  in  
weightlessness  according  to  pen’s  inventor,  Pau l   C.  Fisher.  When  he 
presented  models  of  pen  to  Soviet  Cosmonaut Alexey  Leonov  a t   Ger- 
man  trade  fa ir   in   1968,  Leonov  said  Soviet  cosmonauts were  writing 
with  grease  pencils  dur ing   space  flights  and   incurring  difficulty  with 
their  flaking.  (UP I ,   W  Pos t ,   2/13/69,  D24) 
February  12: Pentagon  sources estimated U.S.S.R.  was  spending  equivalent 
of  $60 billion  in   1969 on national  defense  and  space efforts,  while  US. 
was  spending $85.2 billion,  of  which $29 billion  was  for  Vietnam  war. 
Figures  left  U.S.S.R.  $4 billion  ahead  of  U S .   in  spending  on  weapon 
and   space  technology.  Between  1965  and  1969,  Soviet  spending  on 
offensive and   defensive strategic  forces increased  by  40% bu t   amount 
spent  on  intercontinental  missiles  and  surface-to-air  missile  defense 
systems  rose  by  75%.  (Kelly, W  Star,  2/12/69,  D4) 
Aerobee 150 sounding  rocket launched by  NASA  from WSMR  carried Naval 

Q 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

February  12 

Research  Lab.  payload  to  116.8-mi  (187.9-km)  altitude  to  record 
photographically  18  EUV  spectra  of  solar  photosphere,  chromosphere, 
and   corona,  using  SPARCS  and   flight-design  verification  unit  of  high- 
resolution  spectrograph  planned  for  ATM-A  and   ATM-B.  Rocket  and  
instruments  performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA   Rpt  SW )  
0  NASA  launched  Aerobee  150   sounding  rocket  from  Churchill  Research 
Range  carrying  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  payload  to  collect  data  on  a ir-  
glow.  Mission  did  not  meet  minimum  scientific  requirements.  ( NASA 
P ro j   Off) 
During  visit  to  West  Berlin,  ApoUo  8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  drove 
past  U.S.S.R.’s  war  memorial  near  Berlin  wall  and   looked  across  wall 
into  East Berlin.  At  Tempelhof  airport  Borman  told  press,  “ I   was  here 
before  [dur ing   1949  Berlin  a ir l if t]   amid  many  bags  of  coal.  There 
have  been  many  space  advances  in   the  last  two  decades, yet  we  have 
so   many  troubles  here  on  earth.”  ( C  T r ib ,  2 /13 /69)  
MSFC  announced  i t  had  issued  $1,182,155  contract  modification  to   Chrys- 
ler  Corp.  Space Div.  for  continued  systems engineering  and  integration 
on  Saturn  IB   launch  vehicles.  (M S FC   Release  69-37) 
USAF  F - l l l A   piloted  by  Capt.  Robert  Earl  Jobe  (U SA F )   and  instructor 
pilot  Capt.  William  D.  Fuchlow  (USAF)   failed  to  return  to   Neliis  AFB, 
Nev.,  after  750-mi  training  mission.  USAF  and   Civil  Air  Patrol  were 
searching  area  between  Las  Vegas,  Nev.,  and   Great  Salt  Lake.  (U P I ,  
W  Star,  2/13/69,  1 ;  AP ,   W Po s t ,   2/14/69,  A4) 
February  13-14:  NASA  successfully  launched  one  Nike-Tomahawk  and   six 
Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  carrying  chemical  cloud  experiments 
from  NASA  Wallops Station  between  6:11  pm  and  6:13  am  EST.  Rockets 
ejected  vapor  trails  between  50-  and  186-mi  (80.5-  and   299.3-km) 
altitudes  to  measure  wind  velocities  and  directions.  Nike-Tomahawk 
launched  a t   dusk  and  Nike-Apache launched  at  dawn  carried  sodium 
experiments  which  created  reddish-orange  trails.  Other  five  payloads 
consisted  of  trimethylaluminum  ( TMA )   experiments which  formed  pale 
white  clouds.  Data  were  obtained  by  photographing  continuously mo- 
tions  of  trails  from  five  ground-based  camera  sites.  Launches  were 
conducted  for  GCA  Corp.  under  GSFC  contract. 
In   conjunction  with  vapor  series  USA  Ballistics  Laboratory  a t   Aber- 
deen,  Md.,  fired  six  projectiles  containing  cesium  experiments  to 
330,000-ft  altitude between  8:07 pm  and   6:23  a m  EST  for  comparative 
study  of  winds.  Three  experiments  failed  to  eject  chemical;  dispersion 
of  cesium  from  remaining  Ihree  projectiles  was  recorded  by  ground- 
based  radar   and   ionospheric  sounding  stations.  (WS   Release  69-5; 
NASA  Release  69-28;  N Y T ,  2/14/69,  41)  
February  13: President Nixon’s  Science Adviser,  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge, an-  
nounced  at  his  first  Washington  press  conference that  overall  plan  for 
next  decade  of  U S .   space  program  would  be  drafted  at  President’s 
request  by  his  office,  NASA,  NASC,  and   DOD for  submission to  President 
about  Sept.  1. Charting  “new  directions,  new  goals  and  new  programs 
fo r   the  entire United  States Space program”  was  necessary.  “Bringing 
to  the  benefit  of  people  the  marvelous  space  technologies  that  have 
been  developed  in   the  last  decade  and  certainly  orbiting  satellites  for 
the  purpose  of  learning  more  about  the  ear th   must  be  an   important 
element  in   our  future  space  program,”  Dr.  DuBridge  said.  “Whole 
problem” was  balance  between  that  enterprise  and  planetary  and  lunar 

49 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
February 13 
exploration  and  “this  is  the  problem  which  our  group  will  seek  . . . to  
b r ing   into  perspective  a s   we  project  ahead  and  consider  the  budget 
problems  that  also  lie  ahead.” 
In   answer  to  question  on  White  House  appointments,  Dr.  DuBridge 
said,  “We  have  not  yet  located  the  right  man”  for  either  Administrator 
of  NASA  or  Executive  Secretary  fo r   Space  Council.  (Transcript;  White 
House  Memo) 
*  Arthur  S.  Flemming  Awards  fo r   1969 were  presented  to  10 outstanding 
young  men  in   Federal  Government  in   Mayflower  Hotel  ceremony  in  
Washington,  D.C.  Winners  included  James  J.  Kramer,  Chief  of  LeRC 
Propulsions  Systems Acoustics Branch,  who  kept  solid  rocket  program 
“on  schedule  and  within  budgeted  costs,”  and  Dr.  Norman  F.  Ness, 
head  of  Extraterrestrial  Physics  Branch,  GSFC,  who  made  “significant 
contributions”  to  understanding  space  through  Explorer  satellite  pro- 
gram.  Dr.  Richard  E.  Hallgren,  Director  of  Commerce  Dept.’s  world 
weather  systems,  was  named  for  “imaginative  leadership”  i n   recogniz- 
ing  and  integrating  requirements  of  oceanographers  and meteorologists. 
(W  S tar ,   2/13/69,  B6;  LeRC  Release  69-3) 
*  Washington  Pos t   reported  Washington  Airlines  President  Robert  Rich- 
ardson  had  said  first  scheduled  STOL  a i r   shuttle  i n  US. had  lost  more 
than  $100,000,  cut  back  operations  44%,  and  operated  a t   less  than 
half  break-even  load  factor  during  first  four  months  of  service.  He 
attributed  most  difficulties to  start-up problems,  including  minor  equip- 
ment  shortcomings  which  had  been  corrected.  Airline  wa s   lowering 
fares  and  could,  said  Richardson,  break  even  in   12-18  mos.  (Koprow- 
ski,  W   Pos t ,   2/13/69,  C9) 
*  At  GSFC,  satellite mapping  authority  Dr.  John  A.  O’Keefe  was  preparing 
first  precise  maps  of  Tibet  using  photographs  taken  from  100-mi  alti- 
tude  by  U S .   astronauts  and  data  obtained  between  1890s and  1935 by 
Swedish  explorer  Sven  Hedin  during  only  extensive survey  of  area  by 
outsider.  Expedition’s  survey  sightings  on  mountain  peaks  were  being 
applied  to  numerous  photographs  from  space.  Revised  maps  wouId  be 
published  in   Sweden.  (Sullivan,  NYT ,   2/13/69,  14) 
*  Intelligence  briefings  to  high  DOD  officials had  indicated  U.S.S.R.  missile 
defense  was  three-quarters  complete  and  had  been  slowed  in   recent 
months  to  improve  its radar  system, said William Beecher  in New  Yo rk  
T imes .  Briefings also  indicated  that  antimissile  system  around  Moscow, 
even when  finished, would  not  alter  balance  of  power  between  U.S.S.R. 
and  U S .   or  undermine  U S .   retaliatory  power.  ( N Y T ,  2/13/69,  1)  
February  14:   ComSatCorp  announced  broadcasters  had  booked  40  h r s   of 
satellite  time  fo r  TV  coverage  of  President  Nixon’s  European  trip  Feb. 
23-March  3.  More  than  1 7  h r s   had  been  requested  from  abroad  to 
date  fo r   coverage  of  Apollo  9  Feb.  28-March  3.  (ComSatCorp  Release 
69-8;  W  S t a r ,  2/16/69,  C6) 
*  In   Science  Hudson  Hoagland,  President  Emeritus  of  Worcester  Founda- 
tion  for  Experimental  Biology,  commented  on  Condon  Report  on  UFOS 
released  Jan.  9,  1968:  “The  basic  difficulty  inherent  in   any  investiga- 
tion  of  phenomena  such  as those  of  psychic  research  or  of  UFO’s i s  that 
i t   i s   impossible  fo r   science  ever  to  prove  a  universal  negative.  There 
will  be  cases  which  remain  unexplained  because  of  lack  of  data,  lack 
of  repeatability,  false  reporting,  wishful  thinking,  deluded  observers, 
rumors,  lies,  and  fraud.  A  residue  of  unexplained  cases  is  not  a  justifi- 

50 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

February 14 

cation  for  continuing  an   investigation  after  overwhelming  evidence 
has   disposed  of  hypotheses  of  supernormality,  such  a s   beings  from 
outer  space  o r   communications from  the  dead.  . . . Science deals  with 
probabilities,  and   the  Condon  investigation  adds  massive  additional 
weight  to  the  already  overwhelming  improbability  of  visits  by  UFO’s 
guided  by  intelligent  beings.”  (Science,  2/14/69,  625)  
*  Leonard  Mandelbaum  in   Science  briefly  examined  history  of  U S .   de- 
cision  to  adopt Apollo  program.  “Cautious approach”  to  manned  space 
flight  gave way  after  impact  of  April  12,  1961, “Russian  spectacular” 
-flight 
of  Cosmonaut  Yuri  A.  Gagarin-and  U S .   Cuban  foreign 
policy  fiasco,  Bay  of  Pigs.  “Congress  acted  without hearing  testimony 
of  compelling  military  need.  The  Apollo  decision  was  made  without 
reference  to  any comprehensive and  integrated  national policy  designed 
to maximize the  use  of  scientific  and  technological  resources  for  social 
objectives.  .  . . I t   was  a  typical  Cold  War   reaction.” 
(Science, 
2/14/69,  649)  
February  15:  Project  Tektite,  multiagency-industry  program  to  determine 
ability  of  men  to  perform  scientific  research  mission  while  living  iso- 
lated  on  ocean  floor  under  saturated diving  conditions  for  long  period, 
began  a t   St.  John,  Virgin  Islands.  Four  U S .   aquanauts,  Richard  A. 
Waller, H. Edward  Clifton,  John   G.  Van  Derwalker,  and  Conrad V.  W. 
Mahnken  jumped  into  sea  at  Beehive  Cove  and   swam  to  “habitat,” 
underwater  capsule  moored  42  ft  below  sea  level  for   60-day  experi- 
ments.  Tektite  program  was  jointly  sponsored by  USN,  NASA,  and  Dept. 
of  the  In ter ior ,   with  participation  by  US. Coast  Guard.  Prime  con- 
tractor,  General  Electric  Co.,  furnished  undersea  habitat.  NASA  and 
USN  behavioral  and   biomedical  teams  would  observe  aquanauts  con- 
tinuously  to  identify  psychological  and   physiological  reactions  to 
long-term  mission  performed  in   hostile  and   isolated  environment 
common  to  undersea  and  space  missions.  (NASA   OMSF   PAO ;   Lannan, 
W  S tar ,   2/16/69,  A3;  2/17/69,  A6) 
*  Pope Pau l  VI  received  A p o l b  8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  and  family for 
17-min audience  in   Papal  library.  Pope  said  in  English,  “Man’s  reach- 
ing  out  to  unravel  the mysteries  of  the  universe reveals more  and more 
the  wonders  of  God’s  work  and  shows  forth  His  glory.”  Pope  Pau l  
sent  personal  greetings  to  Astronaut  James W.  McDivitt who  had  audi- 
ence in  1967.  (UP I ,   W Star, 2/16/69,  C5) 
February  16:  USN’S  Sealab  I11  project,  in  which  five  aquanau t   teams  were 
to  spend  12  days  each  in   60-day  test  of  man’s  ability  to  work  under 
water  for  long  periods,  started  early  when  four  of  first  team  of  nine 
men  were  dispatched  to  repair  helium  leak  in   57  X  12-ft habitat,  600 
f t   beneath  Pacific  Ocean  off  San  Clemente  Island,  Calif.  Remaining 
five  aquanauts  were  scheduled  to  descend  in   pressurized  personnel- 
transfer  capsules  12  hrs  later  to  join  colleagues  in   performing  experi- 
ments  in  marine  biology,  geology,  acoustics,  and   ecology.  (B   SUR, 
2/17/69,  A7) 
February  17:  Tenth  anniversary  of  Vanguard  I I ,   fifth  US.-IGY  satellite, 
launched by  NASA  to  produce  cloud-cover images  using  two  photocells. 
Wobbling  had  prevented  interpretation  of  data.  Satellite  was  still  in 
orbit.  ( A & A   1915-60; GSFC SSR, 2/28/69) 
*  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill  Re- 
search Range  carrying  Southwest Center for  Advanced  Studies payload 

51 

February 17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

to  investigate  auroral  disturbances.  Rocket  and  instruments  functioned 
satisfactorily.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
USN  suspended  Sealab  I11  project  when  veteran  Aquanaut  Berry  L.  Can- 
non   was  stricken  while  he  and  Aquanaut  Robert  A.  Barth,  Jr.,  were 
attempting  to  open  habitat’s  hatch  after  Cannon’s  second  dive  to  check 
gas  leaks.  He  was  pronounced  dead  of  “cardiac  arrest”  in  decompres- 
sion  chamber  of  mother  ship U.S.S.  Elk  River  and  body  was  flown  to 
San  Diego  for  autopsy.  First  finding  of  autopsy  was  that  Cannon  d id  
not  die  of  heart  attack.  USN  on  Feb.  18  canceled  project.  (Stevens, 
NYT,  2/18/69,  1; 2/20/69,  93;  O’Toole,  W  Po s t ,   2/1&20/69;  AP, 
W  Star,  2/18/69,  A l )  
President  Nixon  submitted  to  Senate  nomination  of  former  NASA  Associ- 
ate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and  Technology  James  M. 
Beggs  as Under  Secretary  of  Transportation.  ( P D ,  2/24/69,  293) 
I n   Madrid  during  European  goodwill  tour,  Apollo  8   Astronaut  Frank 
Borman  placed  wreath  at  statue  of  Columbus  and  met  Cristobal  Colon 
de  Carvajal  y  Maroto,  17th  duke  of  Veragua  and  hereditary  “admiral 
of  the  ocean  sea,”  title  created  in   1537  for  explorer’s  son,  Diego 
Columbus.  (AP,  C T r ib ,  2/18/69) 
USAF said  ground  test  of  F-111A  had  revealed  large  crack  in   test version 
of  aircraft  belly  section  to  which  movable  wings  were  attached.  NO 
F-111As  would  be  grounded,  as  test  did  not  indicate  safety  hazard  to 
aircraft  in  service. Crack was not  related  to  one detected Aug.  25,  1968. 
(UP I ,   W   Po s t ,  2/18/69,  ALE;  AP,  W  Star,  2/18/69,  A6) 
February  18 :   Secretary  of  State  William  P.  Rogers  told  Senate  Foreign 
Relations  Committee  during  hearings  on  nonproliferation  treaty  that 
he  hoped  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  missile  talks  would  be  under  way  before  i t  
became  necessary  for  U.S.  to  start  deployment  of  proposed  Sentinel 
ABM   system.  He  said  U S .   would  have  obligation  under  treaty  to  enter 
into  strategic  arms  talks  with  U.S.S.R.  and  expressed  hope  such  talks 
could  begin  within  six  months.  (Transcript,  377-8) 
Rep.  Charles  H.  Wilson  (D-Calif.)  introduced  H.R.  7030,  bill  to  en- 
courage  worldwide  interest  i n   U S .   developments and  accomplishments 
in  military  and  related  aviation  and  equipment  by  authorizing  Federal 
sponsorship  of  International  Aeronautical  Exposition  in  U.S.,  to  be 
held  not  later  than  1970.  (Text) 
e  I n   Washington  Post  review  of  Contact!  The  S to ry   of  the  Early  Birds  by 
Henry  Serrano  Villard,  John  Osgood  said:  “Despite  the  technical  com- 
plexities  of  the  recent  translunar  injection,  the  mystique  of  flight  re- 
mains  undiminished  6 5   years  after  Orville  Wright  managed  his  mere 
120  feet  of  powered  flight. Mystique  o r   no,  it  is  still  difficult  to  com- 
prehend  what  drove  the  early  aeronauts  to  attempt  feats  which  most 
often  won  them  the  contempt  and   ridicule  of 
their  countrymen.” 
( W  Po s t ,  2/18/69,  B4) 
February  19 :   Dr.  Lee A.  DuBridge,  Presidential  Science Adviser,  told  Sub- 
committee on  Science, Research,  and  Development  of  House  committee 
on  Science and  Astronautics,  “Our  intellectual  resources-not  our  ma- 
the  limits  to  what  we  can  now   achieve.”  During 
terial  resources-are 
hearings  on  H.R.  35,  bill  to  promote  advancement  of  science and  edu- 
cation  of  scientists  through  institutional  grants  to  U S .   colleges  and 
universities,  he  said:  “We  hear  i t   said  that  if  we  only  spent  as  much 

52 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

February 19 

money  on  urban  programs  as we  did,  say,  on  the  atomic bomb  project 
or  on  our   space  program,  we  could  quickly  solve  the  crisis  in  our  
cities.  But let u s  not  forget  that we  launched the Manhattan  project and  
the  space program  only  after,  and   not  before  . . . efforts  in  basic  re-  
search  over  the  previous 30  o r   40 years  had  uncovered  the  knowledge 
which  showed  us how  we  could build  atomic bombs or launch  payloads 
into  space. Neither  the Manhattan  project  nor  the  space program  could 
have  been  dreamed  of  10 years  before they  started,  because w e   did  not 
even  know  enough  to  even  formulate  a  development  program.  Now,  in  
many  . . . of  our   present  crises  we  a re   in   the  same  position  as  far  as 
technology  is  concerned.  We  do   not  know  enough  about  certain  tech- 
nologies  and   . . . many  social  phenomena  to  justify  mounting  a  con- 
centrated,  technically  based  attack  on  these  problems  now.  We  must 
. . . greatly  enhance  . . . measures  to  relieve  immediate  suffering  and  
injustice.  But  a t   the  same  time  we  must  encourage  and  support  new 
efforts  to  learn  more,  to  extend  our   base  of  fundamental  knowledge  in  
science,  technology,  social  science,  so  that  we  can  move  sure  footedly 
toward  long-range  solutions.”  (Transcript) 
Rep.  Louis  Frey,  Jr.  (R-Fla.) , introduced  H.R.  465  “providing  for  the 
establishment  of  the  Astronauts  Memorial  Commission  to  construct 
and  erect  with funds  a memorial  in   the  John F.  Kennedy Space Center, 
Florida,  o r   the  immediate  vicinity,  to  honor  and   commemorate  the 
men  who  serve  as  astronauts  in   the  U S .   space  program.”  (CR, 
2/19/69,  H1087) 
House  passed  and  returned  to  Senate  S.  17,  bill  to  amend  Communica- 
tions  Satellite Act  of  1962 to  provide for  apportionment of  ComSatCorp 
directors  according  to  percentages  of  stock  held  by  public  and  com- 
munications  corporations.  (CR,  2/19/69,  H1037-40) 
February  20: NASA  announced appointment of  Dr.  Hans M.  Mark,  Chairman 
of  Dept.  of  Nuclear  Engineering,  Univ.  of  California  a t   Berkeley,  a s  
Director  of  Ames  Research Center.  He  would  succeed  H.  Julian  Allen, 
who  had  announced  retirement  Oct.  25,  1968,  but  had  remained  a s  
Acting  Director.  Dr.  Mark,  expert  in  nuclear  and  atomic  physics,  was 
also  Reactor  Administrator  of  Univ.’s  Berkeley  Research  Reactor,  re- 
search  physicist  a t   Univ.’s  Lawrence  Radiation  Laboratory,  and   con- 
sultant to  USA  and  NSF. Clarence A.  Syvertson, Director  of  Astronautics 
at ARC,  was appointed to newly  created  position  of  ARC   Deputy Director. 
Both  appointments  were  effective  Feb.  28.  Because  of  prior  commit- 
ments,  Dr.  Mark  would  spend  one-fifth  of  his  time  a t   ARC   until  July 
1969.  (NASA  Release  69-32;  ARC  Astrograrn,  2/24/69,  1 )  
*  Secretary of  Defense Melvin R. La ird   told  Senate Foreign  Relations Com- 
mittee  dur ing   hearings  on  nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty  that  U S .  
should  go  forward  with  Sentinel  system  i f   DOD review  found  it  “prac- 
tical”  and   “effective,”  since  U.S.S.R.  was  working  on  “sophisticated 
new  ABM  system.”  Curtailment  in  Soviet  missile  construction  during 
past  few months,  Laird  said,  was  due  to  R&D  testing  on  more  sophisti- 
cated  system.  U.S.S.R.  had  been  outspending  U S .   three  to  one  i n  
missile  defense and  “substantial”  network  around  Moscow  was  halfway 
complete.  (Transcript,  419-20) 
*  Apo l lo   8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  and  family  ended  official  goodwill 
tour  of  Western  Europe  with  lecture  and   luncheon  in   Lisbon.  During 

53 

February  20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

final  European  news  conference  previous  day,  he  had  predicted  U S .  
would  put  man  on  moon  in   summer  1969  “if  everything  goes  well.” 
(UP I ,   W  S tar ,   2/20/69,  A8) 
*  NASA  launched  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  from  Churchill  Research 
Range  carrying  Southwest  Center  for  Advanced  Studies  payload  to 
investigate  aurora l   disturbances.  Mission  was  unsuccessful. 
(NASA  
P ro j   Off) 
At  annual  dinner  of  Washington  Academy  of  Sciences,  GSFC  engineer 
Charles R.  Gunn  received  Academy’s  award  for  “noteworthy  discovery, 
accomplishment, o r   publication”  in   engineering  field  for  his  work  a s  
technical  director of Thor-Delta launch  vehicle.  (GSFC  Delta  Proj Mgr ;  
AP,  W  Star,  2/21/69,  C10)  
*  First  International  Aviation  Service  Award,  financed  by  contributions 
from FAA  employees and   established  in  June   1968 by  retiring FAA  exee- 
utive Alfred Hand,  was  presented in  Washington  to  Theodore C.  Uebel, 
International  Liaison  Officer  for  FAA,  for  “outstanding  aecomplish- 
ments  in   furthering  the  interests  of  the  United  States  in  international 
aviation.”  (FAA   Release  69-17) 
*  Eugene  Luther Vidal,  who  a s  Director  of  Air Commerce of  Dept.  of  Com- 
merce  (1933-1937)  promoted  growth  of  U S .   civil  aviation,  died  a t  
age  73  in  Palos  Verdes,  Calif.  He  had  furthered  construction  of  a ir-  
ports  and  beacons,  encouraged private  flying  and  manufacture  of  small 
aircraft,  advanced  commercial  aviation,  and  reorganized  Government 
control  of  commercial  flights.  After  leaving  Commerce  Dept.  he  had 
established  research  laboratory  near  Camden,  N.J.,  where  he  developed 
process  for  making  airframe  parts  from  molded  plywood.  (NYT, 
2/21/69,  43 )  
February  21: Apo l lo   8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  and  family  returned  from 
European  goodwill  tour  made  on  behalf  of  President  Nixon.  At  An- 
drews  AFB,  Md.,  Borman  told  press  on  arrival  that  Europeans  found 
it  ha rd   to  believe  US. “could  spend  all  that  money  on  its  space  pro- 
gram  and  still  make  public  everything  we  learned.”  He  said  reception 
had  been  uniformly  friendly,  “but  they  would  hesitate  to  ask  us   ques- 
tions,  because  they  assumed  . . . information  about  the  Apollo  8 flight 
must  be  classified.”  Borman  and   family  reported  a t   Capitol  to  Vice 
President  Spiro  T.  Agnew,  Chairman  of  NASC.  Borman  told  press  con- 
ference he  had  found  “extreme  identification  of  people  in   all  walks  of 
l ife   in   Europe  with  our  flight.  They  were  very  well  informed  about  i t  
and   looked  on  us  as  representatives  of  Earth.  I  hope  that  feeling  of 
comradeship  can  continue.”  (AP,  W Post,  2/22/69,  A2 )  
ComSatCorp  reported  $6.841  million  1968  net  income  (68   cents  per 
sh a r e ) ,   up  from   1967  net  income  of  $4.638  million  ( 4 6   cents  per 
sh a r e ) .   Improvement  had  resulted  primarily  from  net  operating  in- 
come  of  $988,000,  which  contrasted  with  1967  net  operating  loss  of 
$642,000.  ( ComSatCorp Release  69-10) 
President  Nixon  approved  “Policy  on  Expanded Use  of  Federal  Research 
Facilities  by  University  Investigators”  which  directed  Federal  agencies 
to  make  equipment  in   Federal  laboratories  more  readily  available  to 
qualified  university  scientists.  He   directed  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge  to 
monitor  execution of  policy  with  help  of  Federal  Council  for  Science 
and   Technology,  which  had   recommended  adoption.  ( P D ,   3/3/69, 
304)  

54 

F eb r u a ry  21 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
*  FAA  announced  award  of  $35,426,283  contract  to  UNIVAC  Federal  Systems 
Div.  of  Sperry  Rand  Corp.  for  automated  rada r   tracking  systems  (ARTS 
111)  to   be  installed  a t  more  than  60  ma jor   U.S.  airports.  (FAA   Release 
69-22) 
February  23:  President  Nixon  arr ived   in   Belgium  a t   s tar t   of  eight-day 
goodwill  visit  to   heads  of  s ta te   in   Brussels,  London,  Bonn,  West  Ber- 
lin,  Rome,  Paris,  and   the  Vatican.  I n   welcoming  speech  a t   Brussels 
National  Airport,  King  Baudouin  said:  “During  this  year,  which  will 
perhaps  be  tha t   of  man’s  first  landing  on  the  moon,  we  a re  more  than 
ever  conscious  of  the  gulf  between  the  wonderful  possibilities  open  to 
us  and   the   obligations  which  burden  the  world  because  of  war,  want, 
injustice,  and   inequality.  May  your  journey  and   your  interviews  pro- 
vide  an   opportunity  fo r  friendly  nations  better  to  combine  their  efforts 
to  solve  their problems  on  which  the  very  fu ture  of  mankind  depends.” 
(PD, 3/3/69,  310)  
February 24-28:  NASA’s Mariner  V I   (Mariner  F )  spacecraft  was  successfully 
launched  from  ETR by  Atlas-Centaur  (SLV-3C)  booster  on   five-month, 
first  of 
226-million-mi,  direct-ascent  trajectory  toward  Mars-NASA’s 
tw o   attempts  to  conduct  Mars  flyby  missions  dur ing   1969 launch  win- 
dow.  Launch  vehicle  performance  and  spacecraft  injection  were  nom- 
inal.  Spacecraft separated  from  Centaur,  deployed  its four  solar  panels, 
locked  its  sensors  on  sun  and   s tar   Canopus,  and   entered  cruise  mode, 
where  i t   remained  with  all  subsystems  performing  satisfactorily  while 
trajectory was  refined.  Midcourse maneuver  was  successfully  conducted 
Feb.  2 8   to   ensure  tha t   spacecraft  would  fly  within  2,200  m i   (3,540.5 
km )   of  Mars  July  31. 
Pr imary  mission  objective  was  equatorial  flyby mission  for  explora- 
tory  investigations  of  Mars  to  set basis  for  future experiments,  particu- 
larly  those  relevant  to  search  for  extraterrestrial  life.  As   secondary 
objective  spacecraft  would  develop  technology  needed  for  succeeding 
Mars  missions.  The  840-lb  spacecraft  carr ied   six  complementary  ex- 
periments  to   provide  information  about  Martian  surface  and  atmos- 
phere.  Mission  offered  first  opportunity  to make scientific  measurements 
on  night  side  of  Mars.  Two  onboard  TV  cameras  would  take  pictures 
of  Mars  disc  dur ing   approach  with  15-mi optimum  resolution  and   of 
surface  dur ing   flyby  with  900-ft  optimum  resolution.  Infrared   spec- 
trometer  and   uv   spectrometer  would  probe  Mars  atmosphere,  and  oc- 
cultation  experiment  would  obtain  da ta   on  atmospheric  pressures  and 
densities.  Infrared   radiometer  would  measure  surface  temperatures  on 
both  light  and   dark   sides  of  Mars;  celestial  mechanics  experiment 
would  use  tracking  informa t ion   to  refine  astronomical  data.  Sharp  
increase  in  da ta  returns would  be  achieved over  1964 Mariner missions. 
Mariner  V I  TV  pictures  would  contain  3.9-million  bits  of  information; 
Mariner  IV   contained  240,000  bits  in   1965. Mariner  V I   would  trans- 
mit  science  data  a t  basic  ra te   of  270  bps  and   high  ra te   of  16,200  bps 
before  flyby;  Mariner  I V   transmitted  a t   8  1/3  bps. 
Mariner  V I  was  follow-on  to  1964 Mariner/Mars  missions  and   pre- 
cursor  to  1971  orbital  and   1973 landing  missions.  First  Mars  probe, 
Mariner  111  (launched  Nov.  4,  1964) , had  failed  to  achieve  desired 
orb i t   when  shroud  remained  attached  to   spacecraft.  Mariner  IV 
(launched  Nov.  28,  1964)   had  transmitted  first  close-up  photos  of 
Mars  in   July  1965.  Mariner  VI1  (Mar iner   G )   would  be  launched 

55 

February  24-28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  24.  Mariner  program  was  directed  by  OSSA  Lunar   and  Planetary 
Programs   Div.  Pro jec t   management  and   responsibility  for   spacecraft, 
mission  operations,  and   tracking  and   da ta   acquisition  were  assigned 
to   JPL. Atlas-Centaur  launch  vehicle  was  managed  by  LeRC.  (NASA 
P ro j   Off;  NASA  Release  69-26) 
February  24:   At  State  Dept.  meeting  of  more  than  6 0   INTELSAT  member 
nations,  U.S.  delegation  chairman  Leonard  H.  Marks  said,  “I  can 
think  of  no  more  important  step we  can  take  towards  reducing  world 
tensions  than  that  of  broadening  communications  links between  power 
nations  representing  different  political  systems”-as  U.S.S.R.  and   1 3  
other  observer  nations  listened.  I n   written  memorandum,  France  had  
questioned  whether  strong  centralized  system  desired  by  U.S.  could  o r  
should  be  established  and   urged  tha t   any  new  agreement  leave  partici- 
pating  countries  free  to   join  other  satellite  systems.  (Samuelson,  W 
Po s t ,  2/5/69,  D5)  
*  Federal  Council  for  Science  and   Technology  transmitted  to   NASA  “Policy 
on  Expanded  Use  of  Federal  Research  Facilities  by  University  Investi- 
gators”  approved  by  President  Nixon  Feb.  21.  (NA SA   Off  of  Policy 
Memo,  3 /14 /69)  
Vice  President  Sp iro   T.  Agnew  told  American  Management  Assn. 
briefing  on  oceanography  in   Washington,  D.C.,  that  Nixon  Adminis- 
tration was  not  yet  ready  to   endorse  concept  of  “a  wet  NASA”-marine- 
oriented  Government  agency.  As  Chairman  of  National  Council  on 
Marine  Resources  and   Engineering  Development  he   was  studying 
opinions  of  advocates  of  such  an   agency,  as   well  as  [Jan.  111  report 
by  Commission  on   Marine  Science,  Engineering  and   Resources. 
(Smith,  N Y T ,   2/25/69,  53 )  
February  24-March  3: F irs t   documented  pulsar  acceleration was  discovered 
in  Pulsar  PSR  0833-45  in   Vela  constellation  in   southern  sky  by  JPL 
radio-astronomers  Pau l   Reichley  and  Dr.  George  S.  Downs,  using  85- 
foot  dish  antenna  a t   Goldstone,  Calif.  While  pulsars  normally  showed 
moderate  but  steady  slowing  in  pulse  rate,  Vela’s  rate  accelerated,  then 
slowed  a t   slightly  faster  rate  than  before,  dur ing   week‘s  observation. 
Findings  in   NASA-sponsored  research  were  confirmed  by  Parkes   Ob- 
servatory  astronomers  in   Australia.  ( JPL Release  BB-513,  4 /16 /69)  
February  25:   Cosmos  CCLXVI  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  in to   orb i t   with 
336-km  (208.8-mi)  apogee,  202-km  ( 125.5-mi)  perigee,  89.8-min 
period,  and   72”   inclination.  Satellite  reentered  March  5.  (GSFC   S S R ,  
2 /28 /69 ;   3 /15 /69 ;   AP,  W Po s t ,   2 /26 /69)  
NASA’s Os0  V  (launched  Jan.  22)  had   successfully  completed  more  than 
496  ear th   orbits  and   had  satisfactorily  operated  all  spacecraft  systems, 
including  raster  scan  and   both  tape  records.  Torque  coil  had  been 
turned  on  Jan .   25   to  help  minimize  spacecraft  pitch  motions  and   re- 
duce  ga s   consumption.  Pr imary   objectives  had  been  achieved  and  
Os0  V  had  acquired  scientific  da ta   from  eight  onboard  experiments. 
(NASA   P ro j   Off)  
*  President  Nixon  addressed  U S .   Embassy  staff  in  London  dur ing   eight- 
day  goodwill  visit  to  European  heads  of  state:  “You  have  had  a  very 
distinguished  visitor  to  this country, Frank  Borman,  a  f ew  days ago.  . . . 
I  recall  when  I  was  a t   the  White  House I  was  congratulating  him  in   a 
toast  for  what  he   and  his  fellow astronauts  had   done.  . . . He  said,  ‘We 
appreciate  the  remarks  you  have  made  about  us.’  But,  he  said,  ‘I 

56 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

February 25 

want  to  point  out  tha t   there  are   400,000  Americans who,  in   one  way 
o r   another,  contributed  to   the  building  of  the  Apollo  spacecraft  and 
to  this  program.’  He  said,  ‘I  want  to  point  out  that  there  are  2 million 
parts  in   a n   Apollo  spacecraft.  So,  i f   something  went  wrong  with 
one  of  those  parts,  which  had   been  created  by  these  400,000  Ameri- 
cans,  that  tremendous,  exciting  journey  around  the  moon  could  not 
have  been  possible.’  That,  of  course,  is  what  government  is  about.” 
( P D ,  3/10/69,  341-2) 
*  NASA  announced  selection  of  38  scientists  organized  into  eight  teams 
to  assist  in   design  and  development  of  Martian  softlander  for  1973 
Viking  missions.  Teams  would  participate  in  early  instrument  de- 
velopment,  designing  softlander,  and   planning  missions.  Final  selec- 
tion  of  investigations  and   participating  scientists  for  both  landers  and 
orbiters  making  up  1973 Viking  missions  would  be  made  December 
1969, when  in i t ia l   results  of  Mariner  flybys  of  Mars  in   summer  1969 
would  be  available.  Planetary  Programs  Directorate  would  have  man- 
agement  responsibility  for  Viking  Mars  1973 mission;  L a R C   had  been 
assigned  overall  project  management  and   direct  responsibility  for  
managing  planetary  lander  portion;  JPL   had  management  responsi- 
bility  for  orbiter  spacecraft.  (NASA   Release  69-31) 
*  County  Coroner  Robert  L.  Creason  in   San  Diego,  Calif.,  gave  official 
cause  of  Feb.  17   death  of  Aquanaut  Berry  L.  Cannon  in   Sealab  I11 
as  “acute  hemorrhagic  pulmonary  edema  and  congestion  due  to  acute 
cardiorespiratory  failure  due  to  carbon  dioxide  poisoning.”  Earlier 
USN  spokesman  had  acknowledged  that  one  of  rigs  used  by  Cannon 
and   colleagues  on  fatal  dive  contained  canister  empty  of  chemical 
used  to  absorb  carbon  dioxide  from  aquanauts’  air  supply.  USN  opened 
(UP I ,   N Y T ,   2/25/69,  28 ;   AP,  W  S tar ,  
formal  inquiry  Feb.  26. 
2/25/69,  A7) 
USAF  and  Lockheed  Georgia  Co.  jointly  announced  six-month  delay  in 
C-5A  production  schedule  attributed  to  labor  strikes  and  material 
shortages  caused  by  Vietnam  war.  First  a ircraf t   would  be  delivered 
to  USAF  in   December  rather  than  June.  Announcement  followed  suc- 
cessful  test  flight  during  which  250-ton  a ircraf t   reached  complete 
stop  on  1,500  f t   of  runway--1/4 
distance  required  by  conventional 
85-ton  airliners.  (Lindsay,  N Y T ,   2/26/69;  AP,  J7  Pos t ,   2/27/69, 
A18) 
FAA  announced  i t   had  amended  i ts   Dec.  3  rule  intended  to  ease  conges- 
tion  a t   five  of  Nation’s  busiest  airports.  Amendments  provided  for 
extra  sections  of  scheduled  a i r   carr ier   flights  without  regard  to  estab- 
lished  quotas  a t   all  airports  except  John  F.  Kennedy,  increase  in  
flight  quotas  a t   Kennedy  between  5 :OO   pm  and  8 :OO   pm,  effective 
date  June  1 instead  of  April  27,  and   termination  date  of  Dec.  31. 
(FAA  Release  69-23) 
*  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  recommended  U.S.  ratification  of 
nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty  and   said  it would  send  treaty  to   Senate 
floor  for  action  by  March  6.  ( W  Pos t ,   2/26/69,  A5) 
February  26:  NASA  successfully  launched  Essa  IX  (TOS-G) ninth  meteoro- 
logical  satellite  in   ESSA’S  Tiros Operational  Satellite  ( TOS) system  from 
ETR by  three-stage  Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta  (DSV-3E)  booster. 
Primary  NASA  mission objective  was  to  place  and  operate  spacecraft  in 
sun-synchronous orbit  with  local  equator  crossing  time  between  2 :15 

57  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

February 26 
pm  and   2 :35 pm  so  that  daily  advanced-vidicon-camera-system ( AVCS) 
pictures  of  entire  globe  could  be  obtained  regularly  and   dependably. 
Satellite  achieved  nearly  polar,  sun-synchronous,  circular  orbit  with 
934.6-mi  ( 1,503.8-km)  apogee,  8M.4-mi  ( 1,423.9-km)  perigee,  115.2- 
min period,  and   101.8'  inclination. 
An  advanced  version  of  cartwheel  configuration,  320-lb  cylindrical 
Essa I X   carried  flat  plate  radiometer  to  measure  atmosphere's  heat 
balance  and   two  AVCS  cameras  for  daily  global  weather  coverage. 
Photos  would  be  stored  on  board  satellite  on  magnetic  tape  until 
readout  by  ESSA'S  Command  and   Data  Acquisition  ( C D A )   stations  a t  
Fairbanks,  Alaska,  and   Wallops  Island,  Va.  Satellite  was  backup  to 
ensure  full  coverage  after  failure  of  one  AVCS  camera  on  Essa  V I I  
(launched Aug.  16,  1968)  and   would  be  primary  stored-data  satellite 
i n   TOS system. 
Spacecraft  was  placed  in   wheel  mode  and   spin  rate  was  adjusted. 
Only  anomaly  was  20  rpm  spin  rate  ( ra the r   than  expected  10  rpm)  
after  spacecraft  spin-down. 
ESSA  financed and  managed  TOS  system  and  would  operate  spacecraft 
after  NASA  completed  checkout  in   month.  GSFC  was  responsible  for 
procurement,  launch,  and   initial  checkout  of  spacecraft  in   orbit. 
(NASA  P ro j   Off; ESSA Release  ES-69-9) 
launched  Cosmos CCLXVIZ  from  Baikonur  Cosmodrome.  Or- 
*  U.S.S.R. 
bital  parameters : apogee,  331  km  (205.7  m i )  ; perigee,  202  km  ( 125.5 
m i)  ; period,  89.8  m in ;   and  inclination,  65'.  Satellite  reentered March 
6.  (GSFC  SSR,  2 /28 /69 ;   3/15/69;  SBD,  2/27/69,  212;  C  T r i b ,  
2/27/69) 
*  LeRC  announced i t  had   completed  assembly  of  Brayton Cycle  space power 
generating  system,  which  appeared  promising  as  source  of  electrical 
power  for  space  flights  up  to  five  years  long.  Self-supporting,  closed- 
loop  system  operated  when  mixture  of  helium  and  xenon  was  heated 
to  1,600"F  and  circulated  to  drive  turbine.  Turbine  operated  alternator 
providing  electric  power  and  also  compressor  that  helped  circulate 
gas  through  system.  Cycle  would  undergo  tests  in  simulated  space  en- 
vironment  in  summer.  (LeRC  Release  68-9) 
*  Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe  announced  President  Nixon 
had  nominated John  H.  Shaffer, Vice  President  of  TRW Inc.,  as  Federal 
Aviation Administrator.  Shaffer would  replace  Acting  FAA  Administra- 
tor,  David  D.  Thomas,  who  would  remain  as  Deputy  Administrator. 
(DOT   Release  2469) 
*  MSFC  announced i t  had  extended contract  with Mason-Rust for  continued 
support  services  a t   Michoud  Assembly  Facility  for  six  months.  Con- 
tract  modification  amounted  to  $3,786,203.  ( MSFC  Release  6 9 4 6 )  
February  27:  NASA  postponed Apollo  9  earth-orbital mission,  scheduled for 
launch  Feb.  28,  after  intensive  medical  examinations  of  prime  crew 
revealed  viral  infections.  (W  S tar ,   2/27/69,  A l )  
*  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill 
Research  Range  carrying  Rice  Univ.  payload  to  conduct  aurora l  
studies.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA   P ro j  
O f f )  
*  White  House  announced  President  Nixon  had  established  interdepart- 
mental  ad   hoc  committee to  review  SST  program's  technology,  commer- 
cial  potential,  schedule and   costs,  and  environmental  side-effects,  par- 

58  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

February 27 

ticularly  sonic  boom  phenomenon. 
Secretary  of  Transportation 
James  M.  Beggs  was  designated  c 
n  of  11-member committee, 
which  also  included  Presidential  Science  Adviser,  Dr.  Lee  A.  DU- 
Bridge;  Secretary  of  the  A i r   Force,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.;  and  
NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  Charles  W.  Harper. 
( P I ) ,  
3/3/69,  329-30) 
Commemorative  stamp to  be  issued May  5 in   honor  of  Dec.  21-27,  1968, 
ApoZZo  8 mission  would  include  phrase  “In   the  beginning  God  . . .” 
on  photo  of  ear th   a s   seen  from  moon,  taken  by  Apollo  8  crew.  Post-  ‘ 
master  General  Winton  M. Blount  said  phrase,  read   from  Genesis  by 
Astronaut  William A.  Anders  during  lunar  orb i t   Christmas Eve  1968, 
would  be  included  in  response  to  many  requests.  Stamp would  be  first 
U S .   stamp with  religious  wording since  1961.  (UPI ,   W Post,  2/28/69) 
0  FHC  announced  award  to  Serv-Air  Inc.  of  one-year,  cost-plus-award-fee 
contract  for  administrative  technical  support  services.  Contract,  esti- 
mated  a t   $750,000  per  year,  included  provision  for   two  one-year  ex- 
tensions.  ( FRC  Release  7-69)  
February  28:  NASA  and   British  Science Research Council  (SRC) had  agreed 
to  conduct  cooperative  project  to  launch  fourth  Ariel  satellite,  NASA 
announced.  Ariel  IV would  be   launched  by  Scout  booster  from  WTR 
in  late  1971  or  early  1972 carrying one U.S.  and four U.K.  experiments 
to  explore  interactions  among  plasma-charged  particle  streams  and 
electromagnetic waves  in   upper  atmosphere. SRC would  be  responsible 
for  spacecraft  design,  fabrication,  and  testing;  NASA  would  provide 
Scout launch  vehicle.  Both  agencies  would  participate  in   tracking,  data 
acquisition,  and   data  reduction.  (NASA   Release  69-35) 
0  Tenth  anniversary  of  DOD’S  1,450-lb  Discoverer  I  satellite  successfully 
launched  into polar  orbit  by  Thor-Agena booster.  Tracking  acquisition 
was hampered by  stabilization  difficulties  and satellite  reentered  in   early 
March  1959. 
Agena  launch  vehicle-most  widely  used  booster  in   U.S.-had 
com- 
pleted more than 250 successful  flights in  DOD and  NASA  operations since 
its first mission Feb.  28,1958,  and  had carried first  spacecraft to achieve 
circular  orbit,  first  t o   be  controlled  in   orb i t  by  ground  command,  and  
first  propelled  from  one  orb i t   to  another.  I t   had  been  continually  up- 
dated  and   used  a s   versatile,  multipurpose  vehicle.  (A&A   1915-60; 
Space  Propulsion,  2/28/69,  199 )  
Canadian  Black  Brant  I I IB   sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from 
Wallops  Station  reached  134-mi  (215.6-km)  altitude  on  first  of  two  
flights  to  evaluate  improved  Black  Brant  I I IB   single-stage  rocket  and 
to  provide  data  for  payload  environmental  test  specification  [see 
May  11.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
Lam   issued  RFPS  for  design  and   financial  proposals  f o r   planetary  lander 
and project integration  portions  of  NASA’s Viking project.  Viking  space- 
c ra f t -con s i s t ing   of  lander  and   orbiter-were 
to  be  procured  for  two 
planned  flights  to  Mars  to  search  for   scientific  data  in   1973.  (NASA  
Release  69-36) 
*  NASA  announced  i t  would  negotiate  w i t h  North  American Rockwell  Corp. 
f o r   modifications  to  fou r   Apollo  spacecraft  for  Apollo  Applications 
program.  Combined  value  of  spacecraft  and  modifications  was  esti- 
mated  a t   $340  million.  (NASA   Release  69-34) 
In   Science,  Bryce  Nelson  reviewed  Science  Po l icy   i n   the  USSR, study 

59 

February  28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

relative  unavailability  of  testing  facilities.  Central  planning  system  in  
reinforced  separation  between  R&D  establishments  and   in- 
U.S.S.R. 
dustry  and  contributed  to  reluctance  of  factories  to  innovate.  Increas. 
ing  use  of  contract  system,  with  industries  placing  growing  number 
of  R&D contracts  with  institutions  of  higher  learning,  was helping bridge 
gap  between  research  centers  and   industry.  (Science, 2/28/69,  917-8) 
During  February:  In   Astronautics  &  Aeronautics  editorial  written  just 
before  his  appointment as Secretary of  Air  Force,  incoming AIAA  Presi- 
dent,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  said:  “ I   believe  that  to  understand 
adequately  the  challenges that  confront  those  of  us  in   aeronautical  and 
aerospace  activities,  we  must  take  as  our  perspective  the  commitments 
that  challenge  the  nation  as  a  whole.  President  Eisenhower, President 
Kennedy,  and  President  Johnson,  each  in  his  own  way,  had  a  ma jor  
impact  on  aeronautics  and  astronautics.  And  for  each,  his  support  of 
aerospace  was  a  function  of  his  belief  that  such  efforts  were  instru- 
mental  in  the  accomplishment of  national  goals.  In   the  future,  as  in 
the  past,  governmental  support  of  aerospace will  be  based  largely  on 
i ts   demonstrated  relevance  to  the  needs  of  the  nation.”  ( A& A ,   2/69, 
26-7) 

60 

March  1969 

March  1 :   Terminal  countdown  for   Apollo  9 mission,  scheduled  for  launch 
1O :OO   pm  EST.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
d  Report  to  the  President  and  the  Congress  for   the 
Calendar  Yea r   1968.  Highlights  included  completion  of  three  new 
ground  stations  in   U S .   and  seven  in  foreign  countries,  successful 
launch  and   operation  of  Zntelsat-ZZZ  F-2 
(Dec.  18,  1968 ) ,   increase 
in  INTELSAT  membership  to  63   nations,  award  of  $72-million contract 
to  Hughes Aircraft  Co.  for  four  Intelsat  IV   satellites,  and  phasing  out 
of  regular  service  of  Intelsat  Z  (Early  B ird)   after  42  mos  of  com- 
mercial  service  with  100%  reliability. 
In   1968  ComSatCorp  realized  net  income  of  $6,841,000  (68 cents 
per  sh a r e ) ,  47%  increase  over  $4,638,000  (46 cents  per  share)   earned 
in   1967. Revenues for  1968 totaled  $30,495,000;  they  were  $18,464,000 
in   1967.  Utilization  of  comsat  system  continued  to  increase,  with 
ComSatCorp  leasing  941   full-time  circuits  a t   end  of  1968,  up  from 
717 a t   end  of  1967  and   73   at  end  of  1966.  Demand  for  TV  coverage 
of  world  news  events  increased,  with  666  hrs   of  TV  transmitted  via 
satellite  dur ing   1968-nearly 
three  times  as  many  hours  a s   in   1967. 
(Tex t ;   Annual  Rpt  to  Shareholders) 
March  2 :   Sud-Aviation  chief  test  pilot  Andre  Turcat  flew  Anglo-French 
supersonic  Concorde  001  prototype  airliner  in  successful  27-min 
maiden  flight  from  Toulouse-Blagnac  Airport,  France.  Inclement 
weather,  which  had  delayed  event  originally  scheduled  fo r .  Feb.  28, 
forced  holding  193-ft-long, 200,000-lb aircraft  to  altitudes  below  3,000 
f t   and   maximum  speed  of  350  mph.  Concorde was  designed  to  fly  a t  
1,400 mph  at  12,000-ft  altitude.  Turcat  pronounced  flight  “very  satis- 
factory”  and  said  a ircraf t   “behaved  perfectly”  in  90”  sweep  around 
area.  U.K.  prototype  would  fly  in  s ix   weeks  and   a i r   worthiness  cer- 
tificates  were  hoped  for  by  manufacturers  Sud-Aviation  and  British 
Aircraft  Corp. by  end  of  1972, so  aircraft  could enter  service  in  1973. 
( BAC   P IO ;   AP,  W  Star,  3/3/69,  A7 ;   Wentworth,  W  Pos t ,   3/3/69,  A3) 
Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  Director  of  Medical  Research  and   Operations  a t  
MSC,  told  preflight  press  conference  Apollo  9  astronauts  were  “in  a 
real  fine  state  of  health”  for  March  3 launch.  Although  two  astronauts 
still  had  some  minor  throat  infection,  i t   would  not  interfere  with 
planned  launch  time.  Three-day  postponement  of  launch  from  original 
Feb.  28  date  had  made  possibility  of  inflight  illness  “exceedingly 
slim.”  Only  addition  to  spacecraft’s  standard  medical  kit-which 
al- 
ready  included nasal  emolient-might 
be  throat  lozenges.  (Transcr ip t)  
9  President  Nixon  addressed U.S.  Embassy  staff  in  Par is   before  departure 
fo r  visit  with  Pope  Pau l  VI   a t  Vatican  and   return  to  U.S.  after  good- 
will  tour:  U.  . . the  success  of  a  policy  depends  upon  thousands  of 
people  around,  in  an  embassy  like  this  and  an  establishment like  this, 
and  millions  around  this  world,”  in   same way  that  success  of  Apollo  8 

61 

March  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  2 :   Concorde   001,  Ang lo-French   supersonic  p ro to t yp e   airliner,  l i f t e d   ofl  on  i t s  
ma iden   flight,  from  Toulouse-Blagnac A i rpo r t ,   France.  (B r i t i s h  A i r c ra f t   Co rp .   p h o t o )  

( P D ,  
had  depended  on  400,000  Americans  working  on  project. 
3/10/69,  355) 
US. authorities  reported  U.S.S.R.  had  conducted  mid-February  test- 
firing  of  defense  rocket  that  could  intercept  attacking  missiles  at  100 
to  450  mi  from   its  launch  site.  Rocket  appeared  comparable  to  U.S. 
Spar tan   interceptor  planned  for  U.S.  ABM  system.  U.S.S.R.  also  was 
reported  making  progress  on  phased-array  radar   judged  essential  for 
swifi  detection  and   handling  of  several  attacking  missiles  a t   once. 
(Corddry, B  Sun, 3/3/69,  A l )  
0  Thomas  O’Toole  i n   Washington Post  observed  similarities  among  astro- 
nauts.  Of  23 who  already  had  flown  in   space, 21  were  either  only  sons 
or  eldest  sons.  Pattern  tied  in,  he  said,  with  psychologists’  beliefs  that 
only  and   eldest  children  tended  to  achieve  more  in  life  because  they 
were  disciplined more  and  trained  and   treated  better  by  parents.  Astro- 
nauts  also  were  athletic,  showed  academic  excellence,  and   had  intense 
love  of  flying,  O’Toole  said.  ( W  Post,  3/2/69) 
March  3-13:  NASA’s Apollo 9  (AS-504),  first manned  flight  of  Apollo  lunar  
module,  was  successfully  launched  from  KSC   Launch  Complex  39, 
Pad   A,  a t   11:OO  am  EST  by  Sa turn  V  booster-for 
extensive  LM  tests, 
extravehicular  activity,  and   CSM-LM   separation,  rendezvous,  and  dock- 
ing  to  simulate  activities  after  lunar  landing.  Flight  carried  LM-3 
and   CSM-104.  Launch  had  been  postponed  three  days  because  crew 
had  virus  respiratory  infections. 
Pr imary   objectives  were  to  demonstrate  crew,  space  vehicle,  and 
mission  support  facilities  performance  during  manned  Sa turn   V  mis- 
sion  with  CSM  and   LM ;   demonstrate  LM  and   crew  performance,  dem- 
onstrate  performance  of  nominal  and   selected  backup  lunar  orbit 
rendezvous  ( LOR )   mission  activities;  and   assess  CSM /LM   consum- 
ables.  Multispectral  photography  experiment was  carried  for  first  time 

62 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  3-13 

March  3-13:  Apollo  9,  first  manned  flight  of 
th e   Apo l lo   lunar  modu le ,   successfully 
tested  in  space  CSM-LM  separation,  rendezvous  and  dock ing ,   and  extravehicular  ac- 
tivities  to  simulate  actions  a f t e r   a  manned  lunar  landing.  David  R.  Sco t t ,   pilot  o f  
t h e   CM, stood  in  the   open   ha tch   o f   t h e   docked  CM   with  th e   earth  as  a  backdrop, 
photographed  b y  LM   pilot  Russell  L.  Schweickart  f r om   t h e   porch  of  the   LM. 

to  provide  photos  of  ear th   resources  using  several  different  film-filter 
combinations. 
Launch  events  occurred  as  planned  and   spacecraft,  carrying  Astro- 
nauts  James  A.  McDivitt  (commander) ,   David  R.  Scott  (CM p i lo t) ,  
and   Russell  L.  Schweickart  (LM p i lo t) ,   entered  initial  orb i t   with 
119.5-mi  (192.3-km)  apogee  and   117.6-mi  (189.3-km)  perigee.  After 

63 

March  3-13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

post-insertion  checkout  CSM,  code-named  “Gumdrop,”  separated  from 
Saturn  V  3 rd   stage  (S-IVB)  and   LM,  code-named  “Spider.”  Crew 
successfully  transposed  CSM  and   docked  with  LM,  and  docked  space- 
c r a f t  was  separated  from  3 rd   stage  with  RCS  burn.  Two  s-IVB  bu rn s  
placed  stage  on  earth-escape  trajectory.  Crew  conducted  first  docked 
SPS  burn. 
On  second  day  crew  tracked  landmarks,  conducted  pitch  and  yaw 
roll  maneuvers,  and  increased  apogee by  firing  SPS  engine  three  times. 
On  third  day,  McDivitt  and  Schweickart  entered  LM  through  docking 
tunnel,  evaluated  LM  systems,  transmitted  first  telecast,  and  conducted 
first  manned  firing  of  LM  descent  propulsion  system  (DPS) . They  then 
returned  to  CSM  and  conducted  fifth  SPS  burn  to  circularize  orbit. 
McDivitt  and  Schweickart  reentered  LM  on  fourth  day  and  trans- 
mitted  second  telecast.  Schweickart,  recovered  from  earlier  nausea, 
spent  37  min  outside  spacecraft,  walking between  LM  and  CSM   hatches, 
maneuvering  on  handrails,  and  standing  in  “golden  slipper”  foot 
restraints.  He  commented  on  sun’s  brightness,  photographed  spacecraft 
and  earth,  and  described  rain  squalls  over  KSC  before  he  and  McDivitt 
returned  to  CSM.  Scott  opened  CM   hatch  and  retrieved  thermal  samples 
from  CSM  exterior. 
McDivitt  and  Schweickart  reentered  LM  on  fifth  day  to  perform 
rendezvous.  Scott  separated  CSM  from  LM  and  fired  CSM  
CSM-LM 
reaction  control  system  thrusters  to  place  spacecraft  about  3.4  mi 
(5.5 km)  apart.  LM  DPS  was  ignited  twice  to  set  up  rendezvous.  LM 
descent  stage  was  jettisoned  and  LM  ascent  propulsion  system  (APS )  
was  fired  to  set  up  conditions  for  circularization.  Although  problems 
were  encountered  with  crewman  optical  alignment  sight  ( COAS )   be- 
cause  of  extremely  bright  reflections,  rada r   and  optical  sightings 
backed  up  by  earth  tracking  enabled  spacecraft  to  dock  successfully 
after  being  up  to  114 mi  (183.5  km )   apa r t   during  61/2-hr separation. 
After  McDivitt  and  Schweickart  returned  to  CSM ,   crew  jettisoned  LM 
ascent  stage  and  maneuvered  to  safe  distance  while  stage  burned  to 
propellant  depletion  and  entered  orbit  with  4,309-mi  (6,934.5-km) 
apogee  and  142.2-mi  (228.8-km)  perigee.  By   end  of  fifth  day  97% 
of  Apollo  9  objectives  had  been  successfully accomplished. 
On  sixth  through  ninth  days  crew  conducted  sixth  and  seventh  SPS 
burns  to  alter  apogee,  tracked  NASA’s Pegasus  I 1 1   meteoroid  detection 
satellite  (launched  July  30,  1965 ) ,  took  multispectral  photos  of  earth, 
tracked  landmarks,  exerciskd  spacecraft  systems,  and  prepared  for 
reentry. 
Final  SPS  burn  for  deorbit  on   10th  day  was  delayed  one  revolution 
because  of  unfavorable  weather  in   planned  landing  area.  CM-SM  sepa- 
ration,  parachute  deployment,  and  other  reentry  events were  nominal; 
spacecraft  reentered  during  152nd  revolution  and  splashed  down  in  
Atlantic  180 mi  east  of  Bahamas  a t   12:53  pm  EST  March  13,  241  h r s  
53  secs  after  launch,  within  sight  of  recovery  ship  U.S.S.  Guadalcanal. 
Crew  was  picked  up  by  helicopter  and  flown  to  recovery  ship  within 
one  hour  after  splashdown. 
Astronauts  were  welcomed  by  Guadalcanal  crew  and  received  con- 
gratulatory  telegram  message  from  President  Nixon  which  said : “The 
epic  flight  of  Apollo  Nine  will  be  recorded  in  history  a s   ten  days  that 
thrilled  the  world.  You  have  by  your  courage  and  your  skill  helped  to 

64 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  3-13 

shape  the  fu ture  of  man  in   space. The  three  of  you  and   the  great  team 
which  enabled you  to  complete your  successful mission have  shown  the 
world  that  the  spirit  of  man  and   his  technological  genius  are   eager  to 
begin  an  age  of  adventure,  an  age which  will  benefit  all  the  people  on 
this  good  earth.” 
All  primary  Apollo  9  objectives  were  achieved  and  anomalies  were 
not  serious  enough  to  alter  mission  operations  or  flight  plan  signifi- 
cantly.  First  manned  flight  of  LM  qualified  last  major  component  fo r  
lunar   landing  mission. 
Apollo  9  was  sixth  Apollo  mission  to  date  and   th ird   manned  Apollo 
mission.  Earlier  unmanned  Apollo  flights  had   yielded  all  spacecraft 
information  possible  without  crew  on  board.  Apollo  4  (launched NOV. 
9,  1967)  and  Apollo  5 (launched Jan.  22,  1968) had  both  been  highly 
successful,  completing inflight  tests  of  all major  pieces  of  Apollo  hard-  
ware.  Apo l lo   6  (launched April  4,  1968 ) ,  despite  launch  vehicle  prob- 
lems,  had   attained  four  of  five  primary  objectives  with  spacecraft 
recovered in  excellent condition.  First  manned Apollo mission,  Apollo  7 
(Oct.  11-22,  1968 ) ,  had   achieved  all  primary  objectives  and   verified 
operation  of  spacecraft  for  lunar-mission  duration.  Second  manned 
mission,  Apollo  8  (Dec.  21-27,  1968 ) ,   proved  capability  of  Apollo 
hardware  and  systems  to  operate  out  to  lunar  distances  and  return 
through  earth’s  atmosphere. 
Apollo  program  was  directed  by  NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space 
Flight;  MSC  was  responsible  for  Apollo  spacecraft  development,  MsFC 
for  Saturn  V  launch  vehicle,  and   KSC  for  launch  operations.  Tracking 
and  data  acquisition  was  managed  by  GSFC  under  overall  direction  of 
NASA Office  of  Tracking  and   Data  Acquisition.  (NA SA   P ro j   Off;  NASA 
Releases  69-29,  69-33  ; PD,  3/17/69,  400) 
March  3:  Following  successful  Apollo  9  launching,  President  Nixon  issued 
statement:  “The  successful  launching  of  the  Apollo  9 spacecraft  marks 
another  milestone  in  the  journey  of  man  into  space.  The  hopes  and  
prayers  of  mankind  go  with  Col.  James  A.  McDivitt, Col.  David  R. 
Scott,  and   Mr.  Russell  Schweickart on  their  courageous  mission.  The 
genius  of  the  American  scientist  and  technological  community,  which 
created  and   designed  the  Sa turn   V,  the  command  ship,  and   the  lunar 
module,  once  again  stirs  the  imagination  and   gratitude  of  the  world. 
We  are   proud  of  this  American  adventure;  but  this  is  more  than  an 
American  adventure.  I t   is   a n   adventure  of  man,  bringing  the  accumu- 
lated  wisdom  of  his  past  to  the  task  of  shaping  his  future.  The  10-day 
flight  of  Apollo  9  will,  we  hope,  do  something  more  than  bring 
America  close  to  the  moon;  i t   can  serve  to  bring  humanity  closer  by 
dramatically  showing  what  men  can  do  when  they  bring  to  any  task 
the  best  of  man’s  mind  and   heart.”  (PD,  3/10/69,  356) 
*  After  watching  Apollo  9  launch  a t   KSC,  Vice  President  Sp iro  T.  Agnew 
-NASC  Chairman-told 
press  he  would  be  special  advocate  for  space 
program.  “I  will  lend  whatever  thrust  I  can  to  nudge  the  President 
into  an   awareness  of  what  I  consider  of  overriding  importance.”  His 
interest  in  space  was  heightened  by  “the  wonderful  experience  of 
visiting  with  astronauts,  preparing  for  fu ture   missions,”  and  seeing 
dedication  of  workers  in  all  jobs  connected  with  program.  ( B   Sun, 
3/4/69,  A6) 
Aerobee  150   M I   sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR with 

65 

March  3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

VAM-20  booster  carr ied   GSFC  experiment  to  101.5-mi  (163-km)  alti- 
tude  to  search  for  cosmic  x-ray  radiation  near  Scorpius  and  north pole 
of  galaxy.  Rocket  and   experiments performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA   Rpt 
SRL) 
*  USAF  announced  it  had  selected  TRW  Inc.  fo r   initial  increment  of  $14 
million  to  estimated  $37,653,090  contract  to  design  new,  synchronous 
comsats  for  Phase  I1  of  Defense  Satellite  Communications  System 
(DSCS )   . New  satellites  would  be  used  with  small  surface  terminals. 
Steerable,  narrow-beam  antennas  would  focus  portion  of  satellite 
energy  to  areas  of  1,000- o r   2,000-mi  d ia   and   could  be  steered  to 
different  locations  on  earth’s  surface  in   minutes.  Satellites  could  be 
moved  to  new  position  in   days  a s  needed.  (DOD   Release  148-69) 
March  4:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  A F B   by 
Titan  IIIB-Agena booster  into  orbit  with  279.6-mi  (449.9-km)  apogee, 
96.3-mi  (155.0-km)  perigee,  90.2-min  period,  and  92.0”  inclination. 
Satellite  reentered  March  18.  (GSFC   SSR,  3 /15 /69 ;   3 /31 /69 ;   S BD ,  
3/7/69,  30; Pres Rpt  70  [69]) 
NASA  Acting Administrator,  Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, testifying  before House 
Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  on  NASA  FY  1970  authoriza- 
tion  request,  outlined  goals  in  space  and  aeronautics  toward  which 
U.S.  should  move  in   next  decade: 
“First-We 
should  do  all  we  can  to  understand  and  put  into  early 
use  the  promise  of  space for  people  here  on  earth.  We  should  increase 
ou r   scientific  knowledge  of  the  vital  earth-sun  relationship  and  study 
the  earth  itself  from  space.  We  should  develop  and  experiment  with 
new  and   improved  practical  applications  of  satellites,  particularly  in 
ear th   resources. We  should continue  to  foster  prompt  introduction  into 
the  economy  of  space applications  and  technology. 
“Second-We 
should  follow  up  the  first Apollo  landing  with  a  sound 
program  of  manned  lunar  exploration. 
“Third-We 
should  proceed  with  the  development  and  experimental 
operation  of  a  permanent  U.S.  space station  in  ear th   orbit. 
“Fourth-We 
should move  out  steadily  in  the  exploration  of  deeper 
space,  exploring  the  planets  with  unmanned  probes  and  the  sun,  stars, 
and   galaxies  from   orbital  observatories  outside  the  atmosphere. 
“Fifth-We 
should  provide  the  technology  for  developing  the  full 
potential  of  U S .   civil  and   military  aeronautics. 
should  maintain  a  strong  momentum  of  broad  techno- 
“Sixth-We 
logical  advance in   all  aerospace disciplines.” 
Although  NASA’s 1970  budget  was  “ ‘holding’  budget,”  Dr.  Paine 
said  request  did  include  funds  for  starting  three  principal  new  pro- 
grams:  Ear th   Resources  Technology  Satellite  Program,  with  s tar t   of 
ERTS  A  and   B  development;  NERVA  flight-weight  engine  development, 
postponed  from  1969;  and   series  of  planetary  explorers  for  future 
flights  to  Venus  and   Mars. 
I n   period  of  “retrenchment  and  declining  resources,”  FY  1969 
operating  budget  was  $762  million  below  FY  1968  budget  and   over 
$1 billion  below  FY  1967. Nationwide employment  on  NASA  work  had 
decreased from  earlier  peak  of  420,000  to  2’70,000 a t  end  of  FY  1968, 
to  about  215,000  a t   end  of  FY  1969,  and  under  FY 1970 budget  to 
about  190,000.  (Testimony) 
*  Apollo  program  after  lunar  landing  was  discussed  by  NASA  Associate 

66 

March  4 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
d Space Fight,  Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  before 
Administrator  for Ma 
ence  and   Astronautics  hearing  on  NASA N 
House  Committee  on 
1970 appropriations : “A  thorough  exploration  plan  has  been  evolved 
by  the  scientific community which  will  be  initiated with  the  remainder 
of  the  fifteen  Sa turn  V  launch  vehicles  and  Apollo  spacecraft  available 
under  the  Apollo  program.  Three  initial  phases  of  lunar  exploration 
have  been  defined.  The  first  phase  will  consist  of  landings tha t   sample 
and   observe  the  ma jor   classes  of  regions  on  the  moon.  To   establish 
these  norms,  i t   will  be  necessary  to  land,  carry  ou t   geological  pros- 
pecting,  and   obtain  rock  and   soil  samples  for  return  to  ear th   from 
four  separate  sites.  . . . 
“The  second  phase  would  include  the  investigation  of 
the  ma jor  
classes of lunar   anomalies.  . . volcanic types,  sinuous riverlike  channel- 
ways,  frac ture  zones  and   impact  craters.  Six additional sites  have  been 
identified  a s   the  minimum  . . . to  provide  answers  to  basic  questions 
about  the  moon  and  to  evaluate locations  of  potential  iesources,  build- 
ing  materials  or  underground  shelter  openings. The  third  phase would 
be  to  tie  together  this  information  from  10 o r  more  sites  by  making  a 
remote  sensing  survey  of  the  moon  from  lunar  orbit.” 
Apollo  Applications N 1970 budget  provided  for  “continuation  of 
flight  hardware  development  and  for  integration  of  modified  subsys- 
tems  into  hardware  for  a  set  of  five  earth-orbital  flights.”  Their  com- 
pletion  in   1972  “terminates  the  manned  flight  activity  until  other 
manned  flight  programs  a re   established.”  (Testimony) 
Philadelphia  Evening  Bulletin  editorial  on  Apollo  9  mission:  “In   the 
first  Apollo  launchings,  i t   was  the  taming  of  sheer,  brute  power  that 
awed  the  on-looker. 
“At  the  moment  of  ignition,  i t   was  not  what  lay  beyond  the  astro- 
nauts  that  gripped  the  millions  watching  TV.  I t   was  the  question 
whether  the  huge  Sa turn   V  booster  would  respond  to  command, 
whether  i t   would  hur l   the  astronauts  into  orb i t   o r   collapse,  toppling 
slowly  into  a  furnace of  its  own  making. 
“But  with  yesterday’s  flawless Apollo 9 launch,  the  Saturn V  booster 
seemed  to  emerge a s   a  proven  piece  of  space  hardware.  The  preoccu- 
pation  now  is   with  the  complexity,  sophistication,  the  intricate  work- 
ings  of  the  most  complicated of  the  several machines  the  United  States 
has put  together  for  the conquest of  the moon.  . . . In   its sophistication 
and  vulnerability,  [the  LM]   i s   . . . an  extension  of  man  himself.”  ( P  
Bull,  3 /4 /69)  
0  A  number  of  MIT  scientists,  in   day-long  work  stoppage,  gathered  to  
discuss  uses  and  misuses  of  scientific  knowledge,  including  military 
research,  university-Government relations,  disarmament,  and  responsi- 
bilities  of  intellectuals.  Similar  programs  were  held  on  30  campuses 
across country,  and  Univ.  of  Pennsylvania  in   Philadelphia  canceled  all 
undergraduate  classes  for  day.  (Reinhold,  NYT,  3/5/69,  1) 
March  5:  U.S.S.R.  successfully  launched  two  Cosmos  satellites.  Cosmos 
CCLXV I I I ,  launched  from  Kapustin  Yar,  entered  orb i t   with  2,161-km 
(1,342.8-mi)  apogee, 211-krn  ( 131.1-mi) perigee,  109.1-min period,  and  
inclination  and  reentered  May  9,  1970.  Cosmos  CCLXZX, 
48.4” 
launched  from  Plesetsk,  entered  orb i t  with  542-km  (336.8-mi)  apogee, 
inclination. 
525-km  (326.2-mi)  perigee,  95.2-min  period,  and   74’ 
(GSFC  SSR,  3/15/69;  5/31/70;  SBD,  3/7/69,  30) 

67  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  5 
*  President  Nixon,  a t   White  House  ceremony,  presented  National  Space 
Club’s  Robert  H.  Goddard  Memorial  Trophy   to   ApoZZo  8  astronauts 
and   announced  nomination  of  Acting  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas  0. 
Paine,  to   be  NASA  Administrator. 
Astronaut  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  accepted  award  for   himself  and  
Astronauts  Frank   Borman  and   William  A.  Anders.  Citation:  “ In   an 
epic  journey  man  f o r   the  first  time  in   December  1968 soared  out  of 
the  ear th   gravitational  field,  flew  unerringly  into  a  close  orbit  of  the 
moon,  then  back  to  a  precise  and   safe  landing.  This  historic  voyage 
performed  a t   times  before  the  largest  television  audience  in   history, 
and   open  for   coverage  by  the  world’s  press,  reflects  the  utmost  credit 
on  the   United  States  Space  Program,  Congress,  NASA ,   and   thousands 
of  companies  and   employees  in   industry  representing  all  these,  the 
courageous,  competent  crew  of  Apollo  8.” 
Following  award  presentation,  President  announced  Dr.  Paine’s 
appointment:  “There  has  been  a  great  deal  of  interest  as  to  who  would 
. . . we  have  searched  the  country  to  find  a 
be  the  new  head  of  NASA. 
man  who  could  take  this  program  and   give  it  the  leadership  tha t   i t  
needs,  as   we  move  from  one  phase  to   another,  This  is  an   exciting 
period,  and  it  requires  the  new  leadership  that  a  new  man  can  pro- 
vide.  But  after  searching  the  whole  country  for  somebody,  perhaps 
outside  of  the  program,  we  found  . . .  that  the  best  man  in   the 
country  was  in   the  program.”  Dr.  Paine  in   his  response  sa id :   “ I  
believe  i n   the  space  program.  I  believe  in   this  country,  and   I  think 
that  this  country  should  indeed  be  the  preeminent  nation  in   space- 
faring,  and   . . . I  am  sure  tha t   we  can  go   ahead  to   . . . see  that  the 
NASA  program  in   the  second  decade  of  space  will  even  out-perform 
the  accomplishments  in   the  first.”  ( P D ,  3/10/69,  369-71) 
At  12th  annual  Goddard  Memorial  Dinner  in  Washington,  D.C.,  spon- 
sored by  National Space Club,  Presidential Science Adviser,  Dr.  Lee A. 
DuBridge,  sa id :   “. . . we  a r e   witnessing  another  spectacular  example 
of  the utilization  of  scientific  knowledge,  accumulated  by  many  genera- 
tions  of  scientists,  some  famous  and   some  obscure,  who  worked  aw a y  
in   their  laboratories  trying  to  probe  the  secrets  of  nature.  We  have 
seen  how  once  these  secrets  . . . have  been  revealed,  engineering  skills 
could  be  put  to   work.  We  see  in   ou r   space  program  also  an   example 
of  the  reverse  process.  . . . New  technological  developments  lead  to 
new  techniques  and   new  instruments  which  . . . speed  up  our  basic 
work  i n   science  and   lead  to   new  ways  of  uncovering  new  secrets  of 
nature.  Thus,  dur ing   these  past  ten  years  the  advance  of  science  ha s  
been  enormously  aided  by  the  advance  of  space  technology.”  (CR ,  
3/12/69,  S2755) 
Astronautics  Engineer  Award  was  presented  to  NASA%  L/G  Samuel 
C.  Phillips  (USAF )   in   absentia  since  Apollo  9 mission  was  still  under 
way.  Citation  read:  “For   his  personal  direction of  the  Apollo  program 
throughout  development  and   into the  final  phases  of  flight  to  the Moon 
dramatically  illustrated  by  the  two  successful  all-up  flights  of  the 
Sa turn  V  and   the  error-free  flights  of  Apollo  7  and   the  extraordinary 
flight  of  Apollo  8  to  the  Moon  and   back.  His  engineering  skill  and  
leadership  throughout  the  development  and   execution  of  this  complex 
program  have  made  possible  an   outstanding  American  success.” 
Richard  J.  Allen  of  NASA  Apollo  Program   Office  Test  Div.  wa s  

68 

March  5 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
awarded  Hugh  L.  Dryden  Memorial  Fellowship  presented  to  NASA  em- 
ployee  adjudged  “a  deserving  individual  in   disciplines  applicable  to 
science,  astronautics  and   space  administration.” 
Mitchell  R.  Sharpe  of  Systems Safety  and  Manned  Flight  Awareness 
0 5 c e ,   MSFC, received  certificate,  trophy,  and   $500  award  for   winning 
entry  i n   1969 Robert  H.  Goddard  Historical  Essay  competition.  (H i s  
Development  of  the  Lifesaving  Rocket:  A  S tudy   in 19th  Century  Tech-  
nological  Fallout  was  released  by  NASA  June   1 0   as   MSFC  Historical 
Note  4.) 
National  Space  Club  Press  Award  “for  penetrating,  consistently  in- 
formed  and   lucid writing  on  all  phases  of  the  national  space  program” 
was  awarded  Evert  Clark,  Washington  science  correspondent,  News- 
week .   North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  received  Nelson  P.  Jackson 
Award  “for  its  ma jor   contribution  to  the  success  of  Apollo  dur ing  
1968.”  (P rog r am ;  MSFC  Historical  Note  4 )  
9  Dr.  John   E.  Naugle,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for   Space  Science  and  
Applications,  told  House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics  in  
testimony  on  NASA  FY  1970  budget  request:  ‘LWe a re   moving  toward 
a  number  of  important  milestones  in   the  Space  Applications  Program, 
the  most  important  of  which  is  the  Ear th   resources  survey  area ,  where 
we  a re   requesting  funds  fo r  the  design  and   construction  of  a  research 
satellite,  Ear th   Resources  Technology  Satellite  ( ERTS )  . We  think  the 
ERTS  Program   will  be  a  very  valuable  addition  to  mankind’s  tools 
for  handling  the  natural  and   cultural  resources  of  the  world.” 
FY  1970  OSSA  program  required  $559  million  in  new  obligational 
authority.  Although  increased  over  FY  1969, program  was  well  below 
FY  1963 through  1967.  Increases  were  in   planetary  and   space  appli- 
cations  program,  with  planetary  increases  primarily  due  to  costs  in  
FY  1970  of  program  authorized  in  FY  1969.  In   addition,  NASA  was 
proposing  Planetary  Explorer  program  and   dual  planet  mission  to  
Venus  and  Mercury  for   1973.  Space  applications  increase  was  for  ex- 
perimental  ERTS  satellite  and   prototype  of  operational  Synchronous 
Meteorological  Satellite  ( SMS)  . (Testimony) 
Harold  B.  Finger,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Organization  and  
Management,  testifying  on  budget  request  before  House  Committee 
on  Science  and   Astronautics,  described  employment  restrictions  under 
FY  1970   operating  plan:  I n   May  1968,  NASA  had   restricted  employ- 
ment  to  avoid  ‘Llarge and   disruptive”  personnel  reduction  in   FY  1969. 
“As  a  result  . . . the  on-board manpower  complement  is  being  reduced 
by  1,285 in   Fiscal  Year  1969 and   559  new  positions  a re   being  estab- 
lished  . . . [a t   GSFC]  for   support  service  operations.  From  ou r   highest 
civil  service  employment  level  of  34,126  in   July  1967,  the  number  of 
NASA’s permanent  employees  will  have  decreased  by  2,526  to  31,600 
a t  the end  of  Fiscal  Year  1970. During  this  same period,  965 positions 
will  have  been  established  specifically  to  convert  certain  suppor t   serv- 
ice  functions  carr ied   out  under  contract  with  industry  to  civil  service 
operations.  Th is  results  in   an  effective decrease  in  manpower  of  3,491, 
with  a  reduction  f rom   our   planned  manpower  of  4,374.  We  a r e   plan- 
ning  all  of   these  reductions  in   personnel  by  attrition.  . . . Th is   is 
becoming  increasingly  difficult  since  the  rate  of  separation  has   slowed 
appreciably.  . . . The  overall  separation  ra te   dur ing   the  curren t   year 
is only  about  two-thirds of  the ra te  for  Fiscal Year  1968.”  (Testimony) 

69 

March  5 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and   Tech- 
nology  Bruce  T.  Lundin,  testifying  on   FY  1970  budget  request,  told 
House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics  there  was  “a  large   op- 
portunity  to  transfer  the  electronics  technology  developed  for  the  space 
program  to  the  problems  of  aeronautics,  such  as  for  collision  avoidance 
and   the  development  of  all-weather  capabilities.”  ERC   was  studying 
use  of  proximity-warning  devices  to  avoid  midair  collisions  and   “pos- 
sibilities  of  an   aircraft-satellite  link  as   a  means  of  communication  and  
precise  navigation  over  water  areas  where  present  capabilities  are  
limited.  I n   the  future,  this  method  of  navigation  could  provide  precise 
position  fixing  i n   crowded  domestic operations.” 
Increased  FY  1970  request  for  aeronautics  research,  $187  million, 
would  fund  program  strengthening  base  of  aeronautical  advanced  re- 
search,  increasing  technology  base  of  short-haul  transports,  and   in-  
creasing  research  and   technology  for   a ircraf t   noise  abatement  and 
safety.  (Testimony) 
FAA  released  forecast of  aviation  growth  through   1980. Airline  passenger 
traffic M-ould  more  than  triple  by  1980,  with  470  million  passengers 
compared  with  152.6 million  in   1968. Average  annual  growth  would  be 
l o% ,   less  than  in   recent  years.  Revenue  passenger-miles  flown  would 
reach  379  billion,  from  106.5  billion  in   1968.  More  than  90%  of 
3,600  airline  a ircraf t   in   use  would  be  jets;  in   1968,  507,  of  2,452 
airline  aircraft  were  jets. 
General-aviation  fleet  would  total  214,000  by  1980,  up  from  114,186 
in   FY  1968.  Civil  aircraft  production  would  more  than  double  FY 
1968  total  of  15,044,  reaching  33,950.  Air  carr ier   transport  aircraft 
production  it-ould  decrease  gradually  from  FY  1968  record  of  625  
to  250.  (FAA  Release  69-29) 
Dr.  James  G .  Harlow,  President  of  West  Virginia  Univ.,  was  sworn  in  
a s   consultant  to  NASA  Administrator-designate,  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine. 
He  would  serve  on  Management  Advisory  Council  and  had   held  simi- 
la r   position  in   1961 and   1962.  (NASA   Release  69-39) 
RISFC  announced  i t  had   signed  agreement  with  North  American  Rockwell 
Corp.’s  Rocketdyne  Div.  for   extension  of  J-2 
engine  production 
through  April  30,  1970,  a t   reduced  rate  of  one  engine  per  month 
instead  of  three.  Engines  would  not  be  used  as   rapidly  as   originally 
planned  because  of  overall  extension  of  launch  vehicle  production 
( MSFC   Release 
to  $8,423,454. 
schedule.  Modifications  amounted 
69-70) 
0  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.’s  Space  Div.  had   earned  incentive 
award  fees  of  $1,100,000  and   $270,000  under  NASA  contracts  for  
Apollo  command  and  service modules  and  2nd  stage  (S-11)  for Sa turn  
V  launch  vehicle,  NASA   announced.  Awards  were  determined  by  Per-  
formance  Evaluation  Board  on  basis  of  NAR’S  achievement  of  manage- 
ment  objectives  specified  in  contracts from  Sept.  1, 1967,  through  Dec. 
31,  1968,  n-hich  encompassed  S-I1  contract  activities  from  Aug.  4, 
1968, through  Dec.  28,  1968-first 
of  three  time  increments  extending 
through  completion  of  Apollo  program.  I NASA  Release  69-38) 
March  6 :  Cosmos  CCLXX   was  launched  from  Plesetsk  by  U.S.S.R.  in to  
orb i t   with  330-km  (205.01-mi)  apogee,  200-km  (124.3-mi)  perigee, 
89.8-min  period,  and   65.4”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  March  14. 
(GSFC  S S R ,  3/15/69;  SBD ,   3/7/69,  30;  UPI,  W S ta r ,   3 /6 /69)  

70 

March  6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
Aerobee  150 M I   sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carried 
Columbia  Univ.  payload  to   99.6-mi  (160-km)  altitude to   study  polari- 
zation  of  x-rays  from  Crab   Nebula  in   10-  to  25-kev  energy  region, 
using  x-ray  polarimeter  with  lithium  scattering  blocks  and   gas  pro- 
portional  counters.  All  systems were  perfect;  good  da ta  were  obtained. 
(NASA   Rp t   SRL) 
*  Members  of  Subcommittee  on  Manned  Space  Flight  of  House  Committee 
on  Science  and   Astronautics  visited  MSFC  fo r   inspection  tour  and 
hearings.  Chairman  Olin  E. Teague  D-Tex.)  was  ranking  Representa- 
tive.  ( MSFC  Release  69-72) 
MSFC  announced  i t   had  awarded  $1,954,999  cost-plus-incentive-fee  con- 
tract  to  IBM  Federal  Systems  Div:  for   designing,  developing,  and  
building  five  general-purpose  digital  computers  for  Apollo  Telescope 
Mount  project.  ( MSFC  Release  69-71) 
March  7:  Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from   WSMR 
carry ing   Columbia  Radiation  Laboratories  payload  to  conduct  stellar 
spectra  studies.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily. 
(NASA   P ro j   Off) 
T ime   magazine  said  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  had  amused  audiences 
dur ing   February   1969 European  tour  by  claiming  ApoZZo  8 astronauts 
deserved  overtime  pay  because  they  had  aged  about  300 microseconds 
more  than   people  on  ear th   during  moon  mission.  At  NASA’s request, 
Univ.  of  Maryland  physicist  Carroll  Alley  had  calculated  effects  on 
astronauts  of  phenomena  described  in   Einstein’s  relativity  equations- 
time  ran   slower  for  object  as   its  speed  increased,  and   time  accelerated 
for  object  as   it  moved  away  from  body  exerting  gravitational  force. 
Alley  found  Apollo  8  spacecraft  speed  was  predominant  factor  when 
i t   was  within  4,000  mi  of  ea r th ;   time  slowed  and   astronauts  actually 
aged  more  slowly.  Beyond  4,000 mi,  effects  of  earth’s  gravity  lessened 
as   Apollo’s  time  passed  300  microseconds  faster  than  earth‘s. 
Despite  Alley’s  calculations,  said  T ime ,   Borman’s  claim  was  valid 
only  for  Astronaut William  A.  Anders,  who  made  his  first  space  flight 
on  Apo l lo   8.  Astronauts  Borman  and  James  A.  Lovell  had  been  crew- 
mates  on   Dec.  4-18,  1965,  Gemini  VZZ,  when  time  dilation  effect  was 
dominant  for  entire  two  weeks.  They  had  aged  less  than  those  on 
ea r th  by  400  microseconds.  Lovell’s  time  also  had   been  slowed  during 
four-day  Gemini  XZZ  mission  Nov.  11-15,  1966, by  about  100  micro- 
seconds.  “Thus,”  said  T ime ,   “during  all  their  missions  in  space,  Lovell 
and   Borman  respectively  spent  200  and   100  microseconds  less  time 
than  was  recorded  on  earth-which  means  they  were  paid  for  more 
time  than  they  actually  worked.”  (T im e ,  3/7/69,  42)  
March  7-8:  NASA  launched  series  of  three  Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rockets 
from  Dew  Line  station  P in   Main,  Cape  Parry ,   Canada,  carrying  GSFC 
payloads  to  analyze  electric  fields  from  observed  motions  of  neutral 
and  ionized  barium  clouds  dur ing  disturbed  magnetic  conditions.  Four  
barium  clouds  on   each  rocket  were  released  dur ing  disturbed  magnetic 
conditions  as  planned.  Good  photographic  coverage  was  obtained  f rom  
all  sites.  (NASA   Rpts  SRL)  
March  8:   Anglo-French  Concorde  supersonic  airliner  made  successful  sec- 
ond  flight  a t   altitudes  to   15,840  ft  and   speeds  to  345 mph  with  d roop  
nose  lifted  in   flight.  Sud-Aviation  test  pilot  Andrk  Turcat  termed  flight 
very  satisfactory.”  ( UPI,  N Y T ,   3/10/69,  91 )  
L C  

71  

March  8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

*  Christian  Science  Monitor  congratulated  “Gumdrop,  Spider,  and   their 
gallant  crew”  for  successful  Apollo  9  mission  to  date:  “In   a  series 
of  smoothly  executed  maneuvers,  they  have  opened  the   way  for   land- 
ing   on   the  moon.  They  have  removed  any  doubt  tha t   the  machinery 
and   tactics  designed  to   set  men  down  and   recover  them  safely  can 
indeed  do   the  job.”  Spectacular  view  from  space  symbolized  “men’s 
ability  to  surmount  human  and   na tura l   obstacles  to  reach  the  most 
difficult  goals  when  they  want  to.  It  bespeaks  a  sp ir i t   running  counter 
to   the  rivalries,  hatreds,  and   selfishness  tha t   often  seem  to  prevent  a 
similar  attack  on   tough  human  problems  on   earth.  The  spirit  now 
has   brought  the  moon  within  mankind’s  grasp.  I t   could  br ing   a  better 
l ife  on  ear th  within  their  grasp,  too.”  ( cSM,  3/8-10/69) 
March  9:  While  spaceborne,  Apollo  9  Astronaut  James  A.  McDivitt  was 
selected  to  receive  Ancient  Order  of  Hibernians’  John   F.  Kennedy 
Medal  for   National  Civic  Service.  Award  would  be  presented  by  Ir ish-  
descent  society  i n   Newark,  N.J.,  May  10.  (Sehlstedt,  B  Sun,  3/10/69, 
A l ;   W  Post,  3/10/69,  AS) 
March  10:  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA   from 
Churchill  Research  Range  carried  Univ.  of  Colorado  payload  to 
measure  Vegard-Kaplan  (1,500-1,700  A  and   2,300-3,000  A )   and  
Lyman-Birge-Hopfield  ( 1,300-1,500  A )   bands  of  nitrogen 
in   UV  
aurora l   emissions.  Rocket  and   instruments  performed  satisfactorily. 
Payload  penetrated  aurora ,   and   data  were  excellent.  (NA SA   Rpt  SRL) 
*  “Man  ha s   three  sets  of  capabilities  tha t   make  him  extremely  ha rd   to 
replace  by  any  machine,”  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned 
Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  said  in  address  before  N R C  En-  
gineering  Div.’s  annual  meeting  in   Washington,  D.C.:  “1 )   he  has   a 
very  wide-band  set  of  sensors  for  acquiring  information;  2 )   he   has 
in  h i s  head  a built-in memory  and  computer  that cannot  yet  be matched 
by  ou r   largest  and   fastest  machines;  and   finally  he   has   a  remarkably 
versatile  capability  for  action,  and   physical  operations  with  his  body, 
hands,  and   tools.  These  three  capabilities  make  man  such  a  valuable 
element  in   space  science  and   applications  tha t   we  need  to  take  ad-  
vantage  of  h im   a t   the  site  of  operations  whenever  this  is  feasible.  . . . 
With  the  prominence  tha t  manned  flight  has   gained,  i t   is  surprising  to  . 
realize  tha t   while  589  unmanned  satellites  have  been  launched,  there 
have  been  only  29  manned  flights,  eleven  by  the  USSR  and   eighteen 
by  the  USA.  These  few  experiments  have  shown  tha t   we  have  the 
capability  to  extend  man’s  genius  into  the  new  dimrnsion  of  space, 
as  fa r   out  as  the  moon.  I n   the  years  ahead  I  expect  that  man  will 
exploit  his  bridgehead  into  space  and   use  this  new  trrr i tory   for  his 
own  good  on  earth.”  (Tex t)  
*  NASA  released  Space  Resources  f o r   Teachers: Biology,  Including  Sugges- 
tions  for  Classroom Activities  and  Laboratory  Experiments.  Curriculum 
project  was  prepared  by  Univ.  of  California  a t   Berkeley  to   introduce 
h igh   school  teachers  and   students  to  scientific  advances  in   space  bi- 
ology.  (Tex t)  
March  10-12:  During  AIAA  3 rd   Flight  Test,  Simulation  and   Support  Con- 
ference  in   Houston,  Tex.,  Apollo  7 Astronauts  Walter  M.  Schirra,  Jr., 
Donn  F.  Eisele,  and   R.  Walter  Cunningham  received  Haley  Astro- 
nautics  Award  for   “exceptionally  meritorious  service  and   outstanding 
contributions  to  the  advancement  of  manned  space  flight  dur ing   the 

72 

March  10-32 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
11-day flight  of  Apollo  7.” Award-$500 
honorarium,  medal,  and  cer- 
presented  annually  for  ‘Lan outstanding  contribution  by 
tificate-was 
test  personnel who  undergo  personal  risk  in   the  advancement of  space 
flight.” 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  test  pilot  William C.  Pa rk   received  Octave 
Chanute  Award  for  “flight  test  development  of  Mach  3 f   aircraft.” 
He was  first  test  pilot  t o  fly  SR-71  and YF-12A  a t  design speed.  ( A I A A  
Release  3 /5 /69)  
Murch  11: Apollo  10 spacecraft,  atop  Sa turn   V  launch  vehicle,  rolled  out 
of  Vehicle  Assembly  Building  a t   KSC  to  Launch  Complex  39,  P a d   B, 
for May  liftoff  to  lunar  orbit.  (AP, NYT,  3/12/69,  14; UPI, Huntsville 
News,  3 /12 /69)  
0  Dr.  George E.  Mueller, NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight,  testified  on  Apollo  program,  space  flight  operations,  and  ad-  
vanced  manned  missions  before  House  Committee  on  Science  and 
Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Manned  Space  Flight.  He  explained 
importance  of 
lunar  exploration  and   outlined  plans  for  new  space 
station. 
President’s  Science Advisory  Committee  had  said  answers  to  ques- 
tions  about  moon  “may  profoundly  affect  o u r   views  of  the  evolution 
of  the  solar  system  and  its  place,  as  well  as man’s  in  the  larger  scheme 
of  things.”  Fact  that  earth‘s  moon  was  largest  in  relation  to  its  planet, 
Dr. Mueller  said,  “implies that  the  two  bodies  may  have  been  formed  in 
the  same manner  at  the  same  time.  If  true,  the  moon  may  be  a  book 
containing  the  secret of  the  earth’s  first billion  years of  life.  This  record 
is  lost  on  the  earth  which  is  subjected  to   . . . erosion  by  atmosphere 
and   water.  . . . By  comparing  similarities  and  contrasting  differences, 
man  may  be  able  to  arr ive   a t   a  greater  understanding  of  the  funda- 
mental  processes  that  affect  the  ear th ;   for  example,  the  mechanisms 
that  cause  earthquakes  and   volcanic  eruptions,  and   the  processes  re- 
sponsible  for  concentrating  ore  deposits.  The  orbits  of  Apollo  8  and 
the  Lunar  Orbiters were  disturbed  by  mass  concentrations  beneath  the 
circular  lunar   seas.  These  may  be  huge  meteors  that  struck  the  moon 
with  such  force  that  they  melted  and   sank  into  the  interior,  or  they 
may  be  iron   deposits. 
“Another  objective  of  lunar  exploration  is  to  learn  about  man  as  a 
capabilities  and  limitations.  Some  day  man  w i l l  
space  explorer-his 
move  on  to  other  planets;  the moon  is  a  training ground.  . . . We  don’t 
have  the  basic  information  which  early  lunar  landings  will  furnish 
and  we   can  only  speculate  today  about  the  feasibility  of  the  moon  a s   a 
base for  a n  observatory or  a  permanent  science station-about 
exploit- 
ing  i ts  environment  of  low  gravity  and  high  vacuum-about 
its  poten- 
tial  fo r   natural  resources.  . . . A  long-range  goal  like  the  lunar   base 
would  direct  technological  advances,  stimulate  public  interest,  and 
attain  subsidiary  objectives  with  ear th   application  such  as   food  syn- 
thesis,  environmental  control,  and  recovery  of  useful  elements  from 
rock.” 
Within  new  program  category,  Space  Flight  Operations,  NASA  was 
bypassing intermediate  space station,  launch  vehicles,  and  logistic  craft 
and   proposing  to  move  directly  to  new,  semipermanent  space  station 
and low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system.  Space station  “should 
be  in   being  by  the  mid-1970s.”  With  FY 1969 funds,  contractor  defi- 

73 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
March  11 
nition  efforts  were  being  initiated.  FY 1970  funds  would  continue 
definition,  preliminary  design,  and  supporting  work. 
Dr.  Mueller  described  space  complex  200  to  300  mi  above  ear th  
planned  for  10 yrs’  continuous  operation  and   adaptable  for  crew  size, 
additional  laboratory  facilities,  or  other  special-purpose  equipment 
through  selection,  design,  and   arrangement  of  component  modules. 
Crew  would  rotate  a t   three-  to  six-month intervals,  ferried  between  sta- 
tion  and  ear th  by  reusable shuttles. Station’s electric  power  would  come 
from  solar  panels  o r   small  nuclear  generator.  (Testimony;  NASA  Re- 
lease 69-49)  
*  Lee  R.  Scherer,  Director  of  NASA’s Apollo Lunar  Exploration  Office,  testi- 
fying  on  FY  1970  budget  request  before  Subcommittee  on  Space 
Science and   Applications  of  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astro- 
nautics,  described extravehicular  activity  ( EVA )   planned  for  first  lunar 
landing. 
Emerging  on  lunar   surface,  astronaut  would  acquire  and   seal  bag- 
ful  of  surface  material  and  place  i t   in  spacesuit  pocket,  inspect  LM, 
and  with  geological  tools,  fill  large  sample container.  Location  would 
be  photographed  before and   after  sampling. Passive seismometer  would 
be  emplaced  to measure  “moonquakes”  and   permit  estimates  of  moon’s 
internal  structure  for  comparison  with  that  of  earth.  Instrument, 
operated  on  solar  power,  would  record  and  transmit  lunar  data  to 
ear th   for  about  one  year.  Laser  retroreflector  would  be  emplaced  to 
permit  measurement  of  earth-to-moon  distance  and  monitoring  of 
distance  variation.  Measurements would  be  repeated several  times  daily 
for  year  or  more  and  precise  times determined  by  atomic clock.  From 
data  on  relative  motion  of  moon  and   ear th   and  of  each  about  own 
center  of  gravity,  scientists  could  refine  “knowledge  of  size  and  shape 
of  the  Moon,  detect  small  movements  that  may  occur  between  the 
Earth’s  continents,  and  perhaps  even  test  gravitational  theories.”  If 
time  permitted,  second  sample  return  container  would  be  filled  more 
selectively,  with  greater  effort  to  document  and  to   pack  samples  indi- 
vidually.  (Testimony) 
*  Dr.  Thomas 0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator-designate, discussed  possibility 
of  integrated  European  space  program  alongside  that  of  U.S.  and  
U.S.S.R.  in  Thomas  A.  Edison  Memorial  Lecture  at  Naval  Research 
Laboratory,  Washington,  D.C.  “The  space-age challenge  to  Europe  in 
my  view  is  to  find  new  ways  of  organizing  and   managing  the  great 
wealth  of  that  continent  t o   overtake,  if  you  like,  ma jor   American  and  
Soviet  space  and  other  programs.  This  is  the  space-age challenge  to 
Europe:  not  the  ‘technology  gap’  but  the  ‘management gap.’  ” 
Dr.  Paine also  said, if  1969, 1971, and   1973 space probes should find 
“very exciting  things  about Mars,  i t  is  possible  that  we  o r   the  Russians 
might  want  to  move  a  manned  interplanetary  expedition  to  a  higher 
order  of  national  priority.  At  the  present  time,  the  best  guess  is  that 
this  would  not  take  place until  the mid  1980’s but  new  priorities might 
lengthen  or  shorten  this  period.” 
In  reply  to  question  on   man-in-space  justification,  he  sa id :   “For 
almost  any  simple  specific  experiment  . . . an  automated  probe  can 
be  developed  to  do   it  a t   lower  cost.  The  basic  question  here  is  the 
difference  between  short-range  research  projects  to  achieve  simple 
specific  objectives,  and   complex  research  aimed  at  developing  general 

74 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  1 1  

exploratory  capability and  broad   technological  positions  which  will  le t  
you  do   things  in   the  fu ture   which  you  can’t  yet  fully  foresee.  For   the 
latter you  will need  men.” 
Dr.  Pa ine   expected  U.S.S.R.  “very  likely”  would  put  space  station 
into  orb i t   before  U S .   I n   lunar   exploration,  he  expected  U S .   to   stay 
ahead  a  while.  I n  planetary  probes,  he  expected  U.S.S.R. 
to   stay  ahead. 
I n  ear th   applications,  he  expected  U S .   to  stay  ahead.  (Tex t)  
*  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  and   former  NASA 
Associate  and   Deputy  Administrator,  delivered  1969  Minta  Martin 
Lecture  a t   M IT   as   1968-69  Jerome  Hunsaker  Professor  of  Aeronau- 
. tical  Engineering.  Describing  origins  and   development  of  U S .   space 
program  as   well  as   decision-making  and   implementation  in   commit- 
ment  to  manned  lunar   landing,  paper  would  be  presented  also  a t  Univ. 
of  Maryland  March  20  and   a t   LeRC  April  24. 
Citing  need  for   set  of  national  goals,  Dr.  Seamans  defined  national 
agenda  for  allocation  of  R&D  that might  be  acceptable  to  man  in   street: 
understanding,  forecasting,  and   controlling  environment;  supplying 
basic  resources  of  food,  fuel,  minerals,  and   water;  improving  quality 
of  life ; improving  transportation ; improving  communications;  encour- 
aging  economic  growth;  and   assisting  international  development  and  
providing  national  security. 
Space  program  contributed  to  all  categories.  Studies  of  sun’s  trans- 
missions,  of  Mars  and   Venus  atmospheres,  of  moon’s  origin,  and   of 
ear th   itself  contributed  to  understanding  of  environment  for   practical 
use  of  man.  Space R&D might  aid search  for  alternative basic  resources; 
it  could  establish  facilities  for   detecting  available  resources  and   speed 
communications  to  meet  problems.  Biological  and   medical  investiga- 
tions  in   space  program  held  greatest  promise  in   study  of  reactions  of 
biological  specimens,  animals,  and  man.  Impact  on   education  had   been 
cited  by  some  as  greatest  value  of  space  exploration.  Program   had  re- 
quired  in-depth  investigation  of  waste  management,  fire  prevention, 
materials  development,  and   microminiaturization.  Space  technology 
influenced  new  vehicles  being  tested  for  transportation-hydrofoil 
ships,  surface-eff ect  and   air-cushion  vehicles, high-speed  trains,  electric 
cars,  VTOL  and   V/STOL  aircraft,  jumbo  subsonic  aircraft,  and   super- 
sonic  aircraft. 
Communications  satellites,  already  in   commercial  use,  ultimately 
.. 
could  broadcast  directly  to   home  receivers.  I n   international  coopera- 
tion,  NASA  was working  with  64 nations  in   space  activity.  Returns  from 
NASA’s scientific  satellites  and   communications  satellites,  development 
of  manned  space  flight  capability,  and   tracking  facilities  contributed 
to  national  defense.  (Tex t )  
*  I n  Houston, Tex.,  press  interview Astronaut Walter M.  Schirra, Jr.  (Capt., 
U SN ) ,   sa id  h e  had   turned  down  offers for  Naval  promotion  to  admiral 
and  NASA  Hq.  executive position,  to  become president  of  Regency  Gorp. 
in  Denver,  Colo.,  financial  complex  leasing  industrial equipment  world- 
wide.  One  of  original astronauts  and  only  veteran  of  Mercury,  Gemini, 
and  Apollo  missions,  Sch irra   sa id  he   did  not  want  to  “stick  around   as  
a  half  astronaut.”  He  had   rejected  aerospace  offers  because  “I  might 
be  limiting the contribution  of  which  I  feel  I’m  capable.”  (AP,  W Post, 
3/12/69,  A8) 
March  12: Lunar   Science  Institute  and   MSC’S  Lunar   Receiving  Laboratory 

75 

March  12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

were  preparing  for  “lunar  knowledge  explosion”  expected  to  follow 
first  manned  lunar   landing,  Washington  Even ing   S tar   reported.  Lab- 
oratory  would  quaran t ine   astronauts  and  lunar   samples  brought  back 
from  landing,  storing  samples  for  study  and   distribution  to  scientists. 
Institute,  funded  by  NASA  and  administered  through  NAS  by  Rice  Univ., 
would  facilitate  lunar   research  by  nonspace  scientific  community, 
Administrator  Robert  C.  Wimberley  said  in   interview.  Directed  by 
William  C.  Rubey,  Institute was  soon  to  be  turned  over  to  consortium 
of  universities. 
U.S.  Public  Health  Service,  NAS,  Dept.  of  Interior,  Dept.  of  Agri- 
culture,  and   NASA  had  planned  30-day  quarantine  and   study  of  moon 
material  and  21-day quaran t ine  of  astronauts.  Samples  would  be  sealed 
on   lunar   surface  and  would  be  flown  from  recovery  carr ier   to  Labora- 
tory  after  spacecraft  return.  Astronauts  were  to  be  transferred  from 
spacecraft  in to   sealed  van  through  plastic  tunnel  aboard  carr ier   [see 
May  161. Van  would  be  delivered  to  nearest  port  and   then  flown  t o  
Houston  to  sealed-off  laboratory.  Objective  was  to  prevent  importing 
viruses,  some  of  which  had   been  known  to   survive  thousands  of  years 
under  unlikely  conditions. 
During  three-week  debriefing,  crew  would  live  in   glassed-in  quarters 
including  medical  area.  Samples  would  be  maintained  under  vacuum 
seals  until  opened  in   high-vacuum  chambers  containing  remotely  con- 
trolled  equipment.  Once  photographed,  catalogued,  and   processed, 
content  and   structure  would  be  studied  to  determine  composition  and 
origins.  (W  S tar ,   3/12/69,  A13) 
NASA  advocated  “balanced,  broad-based  Planetary  Exploration  Program” 
as  “feasible  and   practical”  part  of  U S .   space  program,  Donald  P. 
Hearth,  Director  of  Planetary  Programs,  OSSA,  testified  before  House 
Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Space 
Science  and   Applications.  Basic  goals  were  to  increase  understanding 
of  origin  and   evolution  of  solar  system  and   life  in   solar  system  and  
understanding  of  dynamic  processes  shaping  man’s  terrestrial  en\ w o n -  
* 
ment-“increasing 
our  understanding  of  the  planet  Earth,  how  i t   has  
evolved,  and   how  i t   may  evolve  in   the  future  through  a  comparative 
study  of  the  other  planets  in   the  solar  system.” 
Approach  would  be  broad-based  exploration  of  several  planets- 
period  of  time,  combined  with  direct 
Jupiter,  Mercury,  Venus-over 
measurements  of  Mars  surface  in   orbital  and   lander  missions.  Pioneer 
F  and   G  spacecraft  (planned  for  launch  in   1972  and  1973)   and   new 
cooperative  project with West  Germany,  Helios,  would  open  “new  era” 
in   solar  system  exploration,  studying  effects of  radial  distance  on  inter- 
planetary  medium  close  to  sun.  (Testimony) 
*  Milton  Klein,  Manager,  NASA  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Office,  testified 
on  nuclear  rocket  capabilities  before  Subcommittee  on  Advanced 
Research  and   Technology  of  House  Committee  on   Science  and   Astro- 
nautics : Benefits  to   be  realized  included  “significantly  extended  per- 
formance  of  launch  vehicles  which  now  exist  o r   may  be  operational 
by  the  late  1970’s,  feasibility  of  certain  near-Earth  missions  otherwise 
impractical,”  and  “increased  potential  for  mission  success.’’  One  basic 
propulsion  system  could  be  developed  to  yield  all  these  benefits. 
(Testimony) 
*  NASA  announced  appointment  of  Gerhard  B .   Heller  as  Director  of  MSFC 

76 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  12 

Space  Sciences Laboratory,  replacing  Dr.  Erns t   Stuhlinger,  who  had  
been  promoted  to  new  position  of  MSFC  Associate  Director  for  Science. 
Heller  had  worked  in  rocket  R&D  since  1940, when  he   joined  Wernher 
von  Braun  group   in  Germany.  For  more  than  10 yrs   he   had  directed 
fluid  and  thermodynamics research  a t  Laboratory  and   its predecessors. 
He   was  responsible  for   thermal  design  aspects  of  several  satellites, 
including  Explorer  I ,   first  U S .   satellite.  ( MSFC  Release  69-75) 
MSFC  announced $48,142,823  modification to  contract  with  North Ameri- 
can  Rockwell  Corp.  Space  Div.  to  provide  for   14-mo  extension  of 
S-I1  program  a s   part  of  overall  Apollo  program  stretchout.  S-I1  was 
2nd  stage  for   three-stage  Sa turn   V  launch  vehicle. 
MSFC  also  announced $1,896,916 modification to Apollo Applications 
program  contract  for  further  Ba rva rd   College  R&D  of  modified  uv 
scanning  spectrometer  to  fly  in   space  on  Apollo  Telescope  Mount 
(A TM )  . ( MSFC  Releases  69-76,  69-77) 
*  U S .  Equal  Employment  Opportunity  Commission  opened  three-day hear- 
ings  in  Los  Angeles  on  extent  of  racial  discrimination  in   aerospace 
industry.  Commission’s  figures  showed  only  177,  o r   0.9%,  of  20,000 
officials and  managers  in  Los Angeles  aerospace industry  in   1968 were 
black.  (Pasadena  Star-News,  3 /13 /69)  
*  USN  ended  17-day  investigation  into  Feb.  17   death  of  Sealab  I11  aqua- 
naut  Berry  L.  Cannon.  USN  had   disclosed  tha t   one  of  rigs  worn  by 
four  divers  did  not  contain  chemical  to  filter  carbon  dioxide  from 
recycled  helium-oxygen  breathing  mixture,  but  photographic  experts 
had  been  unable  to determine which  rig  was worn by  Cannon. Findings 
(UP I ,   W  Star, 
were  not  expected  to  be  released  for  some  time. 
3/13/69,  A3) 
March  13:  Shortly  after  ApoZZo  9  splashdown  [see  March  3-13]  Dr. 
George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight,  told  press  a t   MSC,  mission  was  “as  successful  a  flight  as  . . . 
any  of  us  have  ever  seen.”  I t   had   “fully  achieved  all  of  its  primary 
objectives  and   in   numerical  count,  we  accomplished  more  than  the 
planned  number  of  detailed  test  objectives.”  Apollo  program  would 
move  toward  greater  scientific  content each mission  as  NASA  developed 
its  capabilities.  “.  . . we  have  been  remarkably  successful  thus  f a r   in  
the  Apollo  program.  The   hardware  has  worked  better  than  anyone 
should  have  expected,  and  better  than  any  of  us  did  expect.”  Mission 
profile  for  Apollo  10 ,  scheduled  for  launch  May  17 ,  would  be  released 
March  24   after  careful  evaluation  of  ApoZZo  9 results. 
“We  a re   doing  the  planning  for   . . . 10  vehicles  beyond Apollo  11.” 
After  first  landing  NASA  would  stretch  ou t   flight  schedule  to  allow 
time  to  make  modifications and   to  understand  results,  with  about  two 
or  three  landings  per  year.  NASA  had  equipment  for  scientific payloads 
for  first  four  Apollo  vehicles-of  which  two  would  land  in   lunar   maria 
and   two  in   highland  areas--which  would  provide  capability  for  later 
pinpoint  landings  a t  points  of  unique  scientific  interest  outside  Apollo 
landing  zone.  NASA  would  emplace  on  lunar   surface  network  of  10 
seismographs,  series  of  heat-measuring  probes,  cameras,  and   other 
geophysical  instruments  to  determine  environment  of  lunar  surface. 
Astronauts  would  wear  new,  “constant  volume”  spacesuits  which 
would  enable  them  to  move  around  lunar   surface  very  freely  to  con- 
duct  experiments.  (Transcr ip t)  

77 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  13 
*  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge,  President’s  Science  Adviser,  told  AIM  board 
luncheon  in  Washington, D.C.,  tha t   President’s  Space Task  Group  had  
forged  ahead  with  plans  for   new  space  program  by  Apollo  program’s 
end bu t   he did  not  see specific mechanism  in  Nixon  Administration  for 
handling  “tremendous”  aviation  problems.  He  had  raised  question  at 
first  Task  Group meeting,  but  budget  squeeze  had  cu t   DOT request  for 
civil  aviation  research  by  two-thirds.  Noise  would  be  dealt  with  by 
Cabinet-level  committee  on  environmental  quality.  President  Nixon 
was  “anxious  to  extend  our  technical  and   scientific  collaboration  with 
other  nations.”  Recent  visit  to  U.S.S.R.  by  U.S.  scientists  had   led  to 
plans  for  more  extensive  collaboration  in   high-energy physics.  ( M A ,  
4/69,  5;  AIAA  P IO )  
*  NASA  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR  with  Naval. 
Research  Laboratory  experiment  collected  data  that  led  to  discovery 
of  x-ray  pulsar  in   Crab  Nebula.  Sounding  rocket  carried  several  uv 
detectors  and   gas  proportional  counters  to   103-mi  (153.5-km)  alti- 
tude  to  obtain  x-ray  spectra  in   Crab  Nebula,  region  in   galactic  plane, 
region  near  cluster  of  galaxies,  and   region  toward  earth.  All  detectors 
gave  good  data  and   NRL  scientists  later  reported  pulsations  were 
observed  at  frequency  closely  matching  radio  and  optical  pulsations 
with  5%  of  total  x-ray  power  of  nebula  appearing  in   pulsed  com- 
ponent.  Pulsations  included  main  pulse  and  interpulse  separated  by 
about  12 milliseconds.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL; Fritz,  Henry,  Meekins,  Chubb, 
Friedman,  Science,  5/9/69,  709-12) 
O r r   E.  Reynolds,  NASA  Director  of  Bioscience  Programs,  OSSA,  testified 
before  Subcommittee  on  Space  Science  and  Applications  of  House 
Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics  that  species  used  in  NASA 
Biosatellite  I1 radiation  experiments-drosophila, 
lysogenic  bacteria, 
flour  beetles,  neurospora,  and   spiderwort-had 
been  used  as  biological 
experiments  on  Zond  V.  “The  fact  tha t   both  nations  are   using  many 
of  the  same species  of  organisms  for  space  radiation  studies,”  he  said, 
“offers  a  considerable  advantage  to  both  for  comparison  and  con- 
firmation  of  experimental  results.” 
Reynolds also  said  that  space  flight  offered  bioscientists  only  known 
keys  to  number  of  life  phenomena,  “some  fundamentals  of  life  that 
must  be  sought  here  in  . . . the  space  program,  because  scientists 
know  of  no  other  experimental  environment  that  w i l l   serve.”  Role  of 
gravity  in   l ife   processes,  cyclical  behavior  of  living  organisms,  and  
origin  and   character  of  Iife  in   universe  were  areas  for   which  NASA 
had  unique  research  capabilities.  (Testimony) 
*  Senate  approved  nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty  without  change  by  vote 
of  83  to  15,  in   what  Joseph  Sterne  in   Baltimore  Sun   called  most 
“lopsided”  margin  accorded  to  ma jor   pact  involving  U.S.S.R.  “since 
the  cold  war  began.”  I t   gave  President  Nixon  “clear  signal  to  pursue 
his policy  of  ‘negotiation  ra ther   than  confrontation’  with  the  Kremlin.” 
Pac t   had   been  signed  by  87  nations  and   ratified  by  9.  I t   would  go 
into  effect  when  ratified  by  US.,  U.S.S.R.,  U.K.,  and   40  other  nations. 
( C R ,  3/13/69,  D180;  B  Sun, 3/14/69,  A l )  
President  Nixon  transmitted  to  Congress  first  annual  plan  for   U.S. 
participation 
in   World  Weather  Program:  “This  project,  and  our 
role  in   i t   . . . have  great  political  significance.”  Program  had  “devel- 
oped  in to   a  most  impressive example of  international  cooperation.  On 

78 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  13 

a  scale  never  attempted  until  this  decade,  scientists  and  governments 
in   many  countries  a re   joining  hands  across  national  boundaries  to 
serve  the  entire  human  community.  Their  example  should  be  instruc- 
tive  for  all of  us  a s  w e   pursue  lasting  peace  and   order  for  our   world.” 
(PO ,  3/17/69,  3 9 9 4 0 0 )  
*  MSFC  announced  i t   had   completed  negotiations  with  North  American 
Rockwell  Corp.  Rocketdyne Div.  on  $4,075,490  contract  modification 
extending  F-1  engine  deliveries  through  June   1970  to  align  engine 
effort to stretchout  in  production  rate of  Sa turn  V  boosters.  F-1  engines 
for  initial order  of  15  Sa turn  V  boosters had been  slated  for April  1969 
delivery. 
MSFC  also  announced  award  of  $1,239,045  contract  modification  to 
IBM   for  work  in  connection  with  31  launch-vehicle data  adapters  and 
31   launch-vehicle  digital  computers.  Adjustments,  necessitated  by 
changes  in   Apollo  launch  schedule,  provided  fo r   streamlining  con- 
tractor’s  plan  for  product  identification  control  and   accounting system. 
( MSFC  Releases  69-78,  69-81) 
*  Senate  confirmed  nomination  of  former  NASA  Associate  Administrator 
for  Advanced  Research  and   Technology  James  M.  Beggs  as  Under 
Secretary  of  Transportation.  ( C R ,  3/13/69,  52833)  
*  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  resigned  as 
president  of  AIAA.  Letter  of  resignation  said,  “It  is  not  in   the  best 
interest  of  either  the  Air  Force  or  the  AIAA  for   me  to  continue  with 
A IAA   responsibility.”  AIAA  board   of  directors  elected  Dr.  Ronald Smelt, 
Vice  President  and  Chief  Scientist,  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  to  replace 
Dr.  Seamans.  ( A IAA   Release) 
Krusnaya   Zvezdu  ( R e d  S ta r )   claimed  world  heavy-lift  helicopter  record 
for  U.S.S.R.,  citing  68,266-1b  payload  carried  to  9,675-ft  altitude  by 
V-12  helicopter  a t   595-ft-per-min ra te   of  climb.  Four  world  records 
in  15-,  20-,  25-,  and   30-ton-weight  categories  at  2,950-m  altitude 
also  were  claimed.  ( A F J ,  3/22/69,  6 )  
March  14: NASA  Wallops Station  recovered parachute  and   payload  launched 
on  two-stage  Sidewinder-Arcas meteorological sounding  rocket.  Recov- 
ery-by 
fixed-wing  Cessna  206  aircraft-was 
th ird   success  to  date. 
Flight  investigated  performance  of  Sidewinder-Arcas rocket system  and 
demonstrated  deployment of  lQft-dia,  disc-gap-band parachute  a t  high 
altitude.  Wallops scored  first  aerial  recovery Nov.  9,  1966, when  pay- 
load  launched  on  Argentina  Orion  I1  sounding  rocket  was  snatched 
by  helicopter.  (WS   Release  69-7) 
Aerobee  150   sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carried 
GSFC-Univ.  of  Wisconsin-Smithsonian Astrophysical  Observatory  pay- 
load  to   109.8-mi  (176.7-km)  altitude.  Objective  was  to  provide  pre- 
cisely  calibrated  stellar  observations of  s tars  Regulus, Spica,  Denebola, 
and  Benetnasch,  which  had  been  viewed  by  NASA’s Oao  11-using 
12.9-in-dia  Dall-Kirham  telescope,  plane-grating  spectrograph,  and 
STRAP  111  stellar  pointing  attitude  control  system.  Rocket  and  instru- 
ments  performed  satisfactorily,  but  attitude  control  system  malfunc- 
tioned.  First  target  was  acquired  and  data  were  obtained;  second  and  
th ird   targets  were  not  acquired;  and  fourth  target  was  acquired  but 
not  identified.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
*  Senate Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space Sciences ordered  favorably 
reported  the  nomination  of  Dr.  Thomas  0.  Pa ine   as  NASA  Admin- 

79 

March  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

(NASA  LAR ,  

istrator.  Nomination  awaited  approval  by  Senate. 
VI11/42) 
President  Nixon  proposed  deployment  of  $6-  to   $7-billion  modified, 
‘‘Safeguard”  ABM  system  using  components  developed  for  Sentinel, 
but  altering deployment  to   provide  local  defense  of  selected Minuteman 
sites,  area  defense  to  protect  bomber  bases  and   command  and   control 
authorities,  defense  of  continental  U S .   against  accidental  attack,  and  
“substantial  protection  against  the  kind  of  attack  which  the  Chinese 
Communists  may  be  capable  of  launching  throughout  the  1970’s.’’ 
Deployment  would  not  place  missile  and   rada r   sites  near  ma jor   cities 
(except Washington,  D.C.)  . President  said  safety  of  country  “requires 
that  we   should  proceed  now  with  the  development  and   construction 
of  the  new  system  in   a  carefully  phased  program.  . . . The  program  is 
not  provocative.  The  Soviet  retaliatory capability is not  affected by  ou r  
decision.”  ( P D ,  3/17/69,  400-9) 
FAA  announced  signing  of  two-year  agreement  with  Air  Transport  Assn. 
of  America  to  participate  in   ATA’S  airborne  collision  avoidance  pro-  
gram.  FAA  would  take  par t   in   testing  and   evaluation  of  airborne  CAS 
systems  supplied  by  industry  in   ATA-funded  program.  ( FAA   Release 
69-34;  ATA  Release  22) 
*  Soviet  youth  newspaper  Komsornobkaya   Pravda   praised  NASA’s Apollo  9 
mission:  “A  thorough  check  of  the  entire  equipment  necessary  for   a 
lunar  landing  has   been  attained,  thanks  to   the  courage  and   gallantry 
of  the  three  American  astronauts.  At  the  same  time  the  Apollo  9 flight 
showed  that  i t   is  impossible  in   terrestrial  conditions  to  envisage  all 
difficulties  astronauts  are  encountering  in   real  flight.” 
Soviet Academician  Prof.  Anatoly  Blagonravov  complimented  NASA’s 
planning  for  lunar   land ing :   “The  fact  that  the  Americans  earlier made 
a  flight  around  the  moon  and   now  conducted  the  Apollo  9 experiment, 
in   my  opinion,  is  evidence  of  a  ra ther   complete  solution  of  the  prob-  
lem  of  dependability,” 
though  some  risk  always  remained. 
( UPI, 
W  Star,  3/14/69,  A6) 
*  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.’s  Hummingbird  experimental  VTOL  aircraft, 
officially  designated  XV-4B,  crashed  22  m i   from   Dobbins  AFB,  Ga., 
dur ing   research  flight.  Civilian  test  pilot  Ha l   J .   Quamme  parachuted 
to  safety.  Aircraft  was  being  tested  and   developed  for   USAF. 
(U P I ,  
P  Inq ,   3/15/69,  1; AP,  W  Star,  3/16/69,  A8)  
Los  Angeles  T imes   editorial  observed  space  industry  employment  d rop  
f rom   400,000  i n   mid-1960s  to  curren t   200,000-at 
which  ra te   i t  
would  sink  to  50,000  by  1972.  “. . . the  pool  of  scientific  and   techni- 
cal  expertise  which  has   been  brought  together  in   the  manned  space 
program  is disintegrating.  If  the President  wants  to  save what  is really 
an   invaluable  national  resource,  he  and  Congress  cannot  wait  much 
longer  to   assign  new  projects to   the  space  agency.  . . . 
“A  sound  space  program  deserves  a  high  place  on  the  scale  of 
priorities.  And,  both  economic  and  military  considerations  dictate 
that  the  emphasis  should  be   heavily  on  activities  in   the  space  near  
ear th   rather  than  on   esoteric  exploration  of  such  deep  planets  as  Mars 
and   Venus.  The  proposal  fo r   construction  in   ear th   orb i t   of  a  large, 
permanent  scientific  laboratory  . . . seems  to  deserve  serious  consid- 
eration as the ma jor   space project  of  the  1970s.”  ( L A  T imes ,  3 /14 /69)  
March  15:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCLXXZ  from  Plesetsk.  Orbital 

80 

March  15 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
parameters:  apogee,  310 km (192.6  m i )  ; perigee,  187 km  (116.2  m i)  ; 
period,  89.7  m in ;   and   inclination,  65.4’.  Satellite  reentered  March  23. 
(GSFC S SR ,   3/15/69;  3/31/69;  S RD ,   3/18/69,  78 )  
*  I n   press  interview  Transportation  Secretary  John   A.  Volpe  said  he 
favored  building  SST.  Y  certainly  don’t  want  to   see  our  country  play 
second  fiddle  . , . and   if  this  is  feasible  and  economical  to  build  and  
operate  and   the   economy  of  the   nation  budget-wise  will  permit  it,  I 
probably  would  like  to  see  i t  g o   ahead.”  (UP I ,   W  S tar ,   3/16/69,  A l l )  
0  I n   letter  to  Ambassador  Gerard  C.  Smith,  Head  of  U S .   Delegation  to 
Geneva  Disarmament  Committee  Meeting  and   Director  o i   Arms  Con- 
trol  and  Disarmament  Agency,  President  Nixon  issued  instructions : 
Delegation  was  to  seek  discussion  of  international  agreement  pro- 
hibiting  placement  of  weapons  of  mass  destruction  on  seabed,  support 
conclusion  of  comprehensive  test  ban  adequately  verified,  press  for 
agreement  to  end  production  of  fissionable  materials  for   weapons  and 
transfer  materials  to  peaceful  uses,  explore  proposals  for  control  of 
chemical  and   biological  weapons,  understand  tha t   actual  reduction  of 
armaments remained  U S .  goal,  and  remember  U S .   hoped  international 
situation would  permit  US.-U.S.S.R. 
talks  on  strategic  arms  limitation 
soon.  ( P D ,  3/24/69,  4 3 6 5 )  
*  First  Soviet  press  and   radio  reports  of  President’s  ABM   announcement 
comment-statement 
spotlighted-without 
that  proposed  program 
should  not  complicate  US.-U.S.S.R. 
nuclear  arms  control  talks. 
Moscow Radio  described  decision  as  “compromise”  after  “exceptionally 
fierce”  congressional  struggle  over  any  “antimissile  defense  system” 
with  “monopolistic  corporations  and  Congressmen  faithful  to   them” 
favoring powerful  system.  (Marder,  W  Po s t ,  3/16/69,  A l )  
March  15-1 7:  NASA  released  ApoZZo  9  pictures-including 
detailed  shots 
of  CM ,   LM,  S-IVB,  and   Astronaut  Schweikart  during  E V A ;   70-mm 
color  still pictures;  and  16-mm color  movies.  Pictures  of  ear th   showed 
clear  views  of  ma jor   cities  across  southern  U S .   and   U.S.  East  Coast 
from  North  Carolina  to  Long  Island.  (UP I ,   C  T r i b ,  3 /18 /69 ;   W  S tar ,  
3/16/69,  A l ;   W   Po s t ,   3/18/69,  A l )  
March  16: Apo l lo   9  mission  had  gathered  new  evidence  of  clearer  visibility 
in   space  and   “marvelous”  acuity  of  human  eye,  Associated  Press 
reported.  Astronauts  had  told  officials  onboard  recovery  ship  after 
splashdown  they  could  see  much  far ther   in   space  than  in   earth’s 
atmosphere-both  with  telescopes  and  with  naked  eye.  They  had 
tracked  several  orbiting  space  objects  up  to  1,600  m i   away  with  tele- 
scope  and   had   tracked  jettisoned  21/-ft-long,  14-ft-dia  LM  ascent 
stage  to  1,000  mi.  ( W  S tar ,   3/17/69,  A4;  W  Post,  3/17/69,  A4)  
e  More  than  2,000  Americans  had   made  reservations  with  Pan   American 
World  Airways  and   Trans  World  Airlines  on  first  commercial  trips  to 
moon,  said  Joe   McCarthy  i n   Th is   Week .   Downpayments  were  no t  
being  accepted,  but  lunar   reservations  were  being  confirmed,  acknowl- 
edged  by  letter,  and   placed  in   order  on  waiting  list.  PAA  spokesiiiaii 
had  said,  “ I t   will  undoubtedly  be  an  expensive  trip.  When  we  finally 
s tar t   asking  the  passengers  for   money,  a  lot  of  them  will  probably 
drop   off  the  list.”  (Th i s   Week ,   3/16/69,  9-10) 
e  I n   Wash ing ton  Pos t ,  Victor  Cohn  said  fight  for  ideas  “which  once would 
have  been  labeled  ‘wild’ ” had  begun  when  NASA   began  congressional 
committee  hearings  on   its  $3.7-billion  FY  1970  budget  [see  March 

81 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  16 
41.  It  had   continued  with  announcement  of  “dramatic  plan  for   ten 
more  manned  expeditions  to  the  moon  after  the  first  men  land   there 
i n   July.”  Americans  had  responded  to  “exciting”  Apollo  program 
“with  heightened  fervor  for  a  man  in   space.”  But  new  fight  for  
toughest.”  Americans  were  asking, 
fund ing  would  probably  be  “NASA’s 
“How  about  our   needs  here  on  ea r th?”   Many  scientists  felt  unmanned 
instruments  could  do  cheaper  and   nearly  as   effective  job   of  space 
exploration.  Congress  had  been  calling  NASA’s present  spending  level 
“enough.”  Still,  NASA  had   succeeded  in  marshaling  “powerful  scientific 
support.” 
As  yet  unreleased  report  of  Dr.  Charles  H.  Townes’ space  task  force 
appointed  by  President  Nixon  urged  both  vigorous  manned  space 
reusable  space  shuttle.  Presidential 
program  and   development  of 
Science  Adviser,  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge,  had  declared  himself  f o r   bba  
really  solid,  many-faceted  program.”  NASA  officials  were  optimistic 
b u t   funds   actually  appropriated  for   FY  1970  budget  would  finance 
only  f ive   more  Apollo  flights  plus  first  hardware  for   Apollo  Applica- 
tions  program.  Public  thinking  was  “just  about  50-50 
today,  and  
new  U S .  consensus  has  not  yet  crystallized.”  ( W  Post,  3/1G/G9,  A l )  
0  First  royalty-bearing  license  under  NASA’s  foreign  patent  program  had 
been  granted  to  Nippon  Electric  Co.,  Ltd.  in   Tokyo,  NASA   announced. 
Invention  bearing  NASA-owned  patent  No.  484,436  and   made  by 
GSFC’S  Joseph  G.  Haynos,  was  concerned  with  connections  between 
solar  cells  tha t   permitted  flexibility  and   low  weight.  Company  had 
made  initial  payment  to  NASA  for   exclusive  manufacturing  rights  in  
Japan  and   agreed  to  continue  royalty  payments  for   duration  of  license. 
(NASA   Release  69 -40 )  
0  Bitter  battle  was  raging  in   Nixon  Administration  over  construction  of 
SST, said  Robert  H.  Phelps  in   New  York  T imes .  Opposition  to   1,800- 
mph  a ircraf t   had  been  rising  since  Feb.  7  appointment  by  President 
Nixon  of  11-member  interdepartmental  study  committee.  Indications 
were  that  ma jor i ty   would  recommend  shelving y ro j rc t   until  technical, 
economical,  and   environmental  problems,  particularly  aircraft  noise, 
were  closer  t o   solution.  President  Nixon  had  inherited  controversy 
from  Johnson  Administration,  which  had   not  earmarked  funds  for 
SST.  He  would  have  to  decide  whether  to  ask  Congress  to  appropriate 
$212  million  to  $247  million  to  keep  project  on  schedule.  (NYT, 
3/16/69,  1 )  
launched  Cosmos  C C L X X I I   from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t  
March  17:  U.S.S.R. 
with  1,210-km  (751.8-mi)  apogee,  1,180-km  (733.1-mi)  perigee, 
inclination.  ( GSFC SSR,  3/31/69;  SBD, 
109.3-min  period,  and   73.9’ 
3/19/69,  86;  AP,  W  Star,  3 /18 /69)  
*  Canister  containing  S-16  bar ium   cloud  experiment  was  successfully 
ejected  from   ESRO’S  Heos   I  satellite  (launched  by  NASA  Dec.  5,  1968)  
a t   43,495.9-mi  (70,000-km)  altitude.  Cloud,  1,864.1  m i   (3,000  km) 
long  and   visible  to  the  naked  eye,  had  lasted  20  min  and   yielded 
information  on  magnetic  fields  in   space.  (NASA  P r o j   Off) 
0  Apollo  10  mission  would  be   launched  May  18,  one  day  later  than 
originally  planned,  NASA  announced.  Change  from  first  to   second  day 
of  launch  window  would  permit  observation  and   collection  of  da ta  
on  Apollo  landing  site  2,  a s   area  of  primary  interest,  and   observation 
of  site  3  after  sunrise  on  moon.  Final  decision  on  specific  nature  of 

8 2  

March  17 

(NASA  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
mission  would  be  made  after  review  of  Apo l lo   9  mission. 
Release  6 M 1 )  
*  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Fairbanks, 
Alaska,  carried  Univ.  of  Alaska  payload  to  134.2-mi  (216-km)  alti- 
tude.  Objectives  were  to  examine  spatial  distribution  of  atmospheric 
currents  near  visual,  stable,  homogeneous and  pulsating  aurora l   forms 
and   to  examine  relationship  between  electron  and   proton  precipitation 
and  visual  aurora l   distribution  produced.  Forward  experiment  portion 
of  payload  functioned  satisfactorily,  but  data  reduction  was  difficult. 
Some  da ta   loss  occurred  on   rear   portion  of  payload  and  additional 
data  reduction  was  required.  One  flashing  light  failed  a t  apogee.  (NASA  
Rpt  SRL) 
Eleventh  anniversary  of  launch  of  Vanguard  I ,   3y4-lb, 6X - in -d ia   US. 
IGY  satellite  which  proved ear th  was  slightly  pear-shaped  and  examined 
composition  of  upper  atmosphere.  Satellite  had  stopped  transmitting 
in   May  1964,  bu t   was  expected  to  remain  in  orbit  a t   least  200  yrs 
longer.  ( E H ;  KSC  Release  63-68)  
*  Vice  President  Sp iro   T.  Agnew  announced  Astronaut  James  A.  Lovell, 
Jr.,  would  head  $4.5-million  summer  day  camp  program  for  youth 
to  be  administered  by  National  Collegiate  Athletic  Assn.  under  H EW  
contract.  (Tex t)  
0  Dr.  Leo  S.  Packer,  former  Assistant  Postmaster  for  Bureau  of  Research 
and   Engineering,  became  Special  Assistant  to  NASA  Associate  Admin- 
istrator  for Advanced  Research  and  Technology.  (NASA   Ann,  3 /21 /69)  
*  White  House  released  letter  to  President  Nixon  from  Dr.  Lee  A. 
DuBridge,  Presidential  Science  Adviser,  on   proposed  Safeguard  ABM 
system:  I t   “eliminates  the  serious  defects  of  the  old  Sentinel  plan, 
focuses  on  the  reasonable,  feasible  and  necessary  defense  of  our  deter- 
rent  force,  provides  time  for  more  thorough  testing  of  an   operating 
system  and   phases  future  deployment  to  progress  of  arms  control 
negotiations  and  the  changing  information  on  the  nature  and  immi- 
nence  of  potential  threats  to  our  security.  I  shall  endeavor  to  make 
clear  to  my  scientific  colleagues  tha t   the  Safeguard  plan  represents 
a  sound  and  a  reasonable  approach  to  our  strategic  defense  problem.” 
(PD, 3/24/69,  430) 
March  17-19:  At  Sixth  Space Congress sponsored by  Canaveral  Council  of 
Technical  Societies,  James  R .   Williams  of  MSFC  Engineering  Labora- 
tory  presented  “Space  Manufacturing  Modules,”  paper  describing 
NASA’s work  on   manueacturing-in-space experiments.  Paper  outlined 
future  possibilities,  including  development  of  manufacturing  module 
to  be  attached  to  fu ture   space  station.  Phase  3 module  would  contain 
work  space  for  a t   least  two  astronauts,  equipment,  raw  materials,  and  
manufacturing  process  chambers.  I t   would  be  designed  to  dock  with 
earth-orbiting  space  station  proposed  for  mid-1970s  launch,  weigh 
about  23,000  lbs,  and   provide  for  continuous  investigation  of  manu- 
facturing  processes  and   for   production  of  small  quantities  of  special 
items best produced in  zero-gravity environment.  ( MSFC Release 69 -80 )  
March 18 :   OV  1-17,  OV  I - l 7A ,   OV  1-18,  and  OV  1-19  research  satellites, 
carrying  41   experiments,  were  successfully  launched  by  USAF  picka- 
back  on  Atlas-F booster  from  Vandenberg  AFB.  OV  I-17  weighed  312 
Ibs  and  carr ied  experiments to  measure  incoming solar electromagnetic 
radiation  and  its  reaction  with  earth‘s  upper  atmosphere, make  electric- 

83 

March  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

field  and   VLF  energy  propagation  studies,  evaluate  ionized  meteor 
trails  i n   calibration  of  ground-based  radars,  and   make  engineering 
tests  on  spacecraft  materials  and   solar-cell  power  system.  Orbital 
parameters:  apogee,  287.7  m i   (462.9  km) ; perigee,  246.7  mi  (396.9 
kn i)  ; period,  93.1  m in ;   and   inclination,  99.1”.  OV-17 
reentered 
March  5,  1970. 
OV  Z-17A,  487-lb  payload  consisting  of  OV-17  propulsion  module 
and   Naval  Research  Laboratory  two-beacon  ORBIS-CAL  II  experiment 
to   study  unusual  transmission  of  rad io   waves  through  ionosphere, 
entered  orb i t   with  233.0-mi  (347.9-km)  apogee,  106.9-mi  (172.0- 
km )   perigee,  89.8-min  period,  and   99.0”  inclination  and   reentered 
March  24. 
OV  1-18  weighed  275  lbs  and   carried  experiments  to  study  iono- 
sphere  and  measure  radio-wave  interference,  electric-field  intensity, 
and  hazardous  radiation.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  362.3  mi  (582.9 
km )  ; perigee,  288.3  mi  (463.9 km) ; period,  95.0  m in ;   and   inclina- 
tion,  98.8”. 
OV  1-19  weighed  273  lbs  and   entered  orb i t   with  3,592.9-mi 
(5,780.9-km)  apogee,  288.0-mi  (463.4-km)  perigee,  153.5-min  period, 
inclination,  where  it  would  study  events  resulting  in  
and   104.7’ 
and   sustaining  trapped  radiation  in   Van  Allen  belts  and  hazards  to 
man.  ( GSFC  S S R ,   3/31/69;  3 /31 /70 ;   OAR  Research  Rev iew ,   6-7/69, 
23 -4 ;   Pres  Rpt  70  [69] ; W Post,  3 /19 /69)  
Though  “highly  successful  subsonic  je t   transports  designed  and   manu- 
factured  i n   the  United  States  a r e   symbols  of  United  States  leadership 
on  the  airlines  around   the  world,”  Albert  J .   Evans,  Director  of 
Aeronautical  Vehicles,  NASA  OART,  told  House  Committee  on  Science 
and   Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Advanced  Research  and   Technol- 
ogy,  “both  the  British/French  SST  and   the  Russian  SST  a r e   in   flight 
test.  Many  short-haul  a ircraf t   used  by  United  States  commuter  and  
feeder  airlines  are   foreign  a ircraf t   and   in   the  VTOL  and   STOL  area  the 
United  States  severely  lags  its foreign  competition.”  STOL  aircraft  were 
“within  our   grasp.”  Two  concepts  showed  promise,  one  for   propeller- 
driven  aircraft  and   one  for  jet-powered.  Move  to   flight  test  in   FY 
1970  was  planned.  F irs t   was  rotating-cylinder-flap  STOL  research  a ir-  
craft.  Second,  jet-augmented  wing,  would  be  applicable  to  jet-powered 
STOL  aircraft.  (Testimony) 
*  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  NASA   Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science  and 
Applications,  testified  before  House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astro- 
nautics’  Subcommittee  on ‘Space  Science  and   Applications : “We  have 
been  able  to   maintain  this  country  in   the  forefront  of  planetary 
exploration  by  the  quality  of  both  our   engineering  talent  and   o u r  
Nation’s  scientists,  and   by  the  way  in   which  they  a re   involved  in  
plarlning  and   executing  ou r   program.  By  making  the  most  effective 
use  of  our   best  people  we   have  been  able  to  make  better  use  of  the 
limited  resources  we  have  had   available  for   planetary  exploration 
than  the  Russians.  If  the  Russians  continue  to  commit  a  major  share  
of  their  space  effor t   to   planetary  exploration-and 
the  two  recent 
if  they  begin  to   involve 
launches  to   Venus  indicate  they  are-and 
their very best  scientists  in   the planning  and  execution  of  their mission 
there  is  evidence 
so  tha t   they  fly  first  ra te   reliable  experiments-and 

84 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  18 

from  our  scientific  colleagues  that  they  are-then 
i t   i s   clear  that  this 
Nation  cannot  continue  in   the  forefront  of  space  exploration  in   the 
next  decade.”  (Tex t )  
NASA  announced  MSFC  award  of  $98,200,000  definitive  contract  for  pay- 
load  integration  in  support  of  Apollo  Applications  program  to  Martin 
started  under  Jan.  16,  1968,  letter  con- 
Marietta  Corp.  Work-which 
extend  through  Nov.  30,  1972,  and  cover  flights  1, 2,  3, 
tract-would 
3A,  and  4. 
MSFC  also  awarded  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.’s  Rocketdyne 
Div.  $1,142,294,  26-mo  contract  fo r   additional  work  on  aerospike 
( plug-nozzle)  engine  evaluated  by  Rocketdyne  under  previous  MSFC 
contract.  Ring-like  engine  had  tiny  throats  along  circumference  that 
discharged  engine  exhaust  down  sides  of  plug,  making  aerodynamic 
extension  for  plug,  providing  nozzle  during  launch  ascent,  and  simu- 
lating  performance  characteristics  of  full-length  nozzle  without  in -  
creased  weight  and  length.  (MSFC   Releases  69-43,  69-87) 
If  JPL were  taxed  a s  business  it would  bring  i n  estimated  $840,000  and 
reduce  property  tax  rate  in   La  Canada-Flintridge,  Calif.,  district  from 
$4.20  to  $2.56,  according  to  La  Canada  School  Superintendent,  Dr. 
Donald  Ziehl.  Instead,  he  told  School  Board,  district  would  receive 
$85,000  from  Government  under  fixed-amount  system  used  in   lieu  of 
property  tax  on  Federal  facilities.  (Michals,  Glendale  News-Press, 
3/ 19 /69 )  
USAF  announced  award  to  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  of  $700,000 
initial  increment  to  $2,473,000  cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  for  research 
on  feasibility  of  using  advanced  composite  materials  for  production 
of  aircraft  wings.  (DOD   Release 200-69) 
March  18-19:  In   testimony  before  House  Committee  on  Science and  Astro- 
nautics’  Subcommittee  on  Space  Science  and  Applications,  Leonard 
Jaffe,  NASA  Director  of  Space Applications Programs,  urged  commence- 
ment  of  Ea r th   Resources  Technology  Satellite  program:  “We  have 
reached  a  stage  in  our  supporting  investigations  of  Earth  resources 
phenomenology  that  can  be  measured  from  space,  where  we  have  con- 
fidence  that  an   experimental  Earth  Resources  Technology  Satellite 
can  show  us  the  way  to  the  future  operational  satellite  sj-stem  that 
will  make  major  contributions  to  the  management  of  our  resources. 
The   state  of  technology  in  sensors  and  spacecraft  sjstenis  has  also 
reached  a  sufficiently  advanced  stage,  so   that  we  can  with  confidence 
embark  this  year  on  the  development  of  ou r   first  experimental  Earth 
‘  resources  satellite  system.” 
Proposed  design  and  selection  of  candidate  sensors  for  ERTS  had 
been  closely  coordinated  with  other  Government  agencies.  . . . NASA 
was  requesting  N  1970  funds  to  initiate  development  of  flight  ha rd -  
and  B,  with  ERTS-A 
ware  for  two  experimental  satellites,  ERTS-A 
scheduled  for  launch  in   late  1971  or  early  1972. 
NASA  also  would  proceed  with  techniques  for  infrared  sounding  of 
atmosphere  with  Nimbus  B-2  and  D  launches  in  1969  and  1970  and 
had  begun  construction  of  Nimbus  E  and  F  for  development of  micro- 
wave  sounding  techniques.  Prototype  second-generation  operational 
meteorological  satellite  Tiros-M  was  being  prepared  for  launch  i n  
few  months.  Study  to  define  third-generation  Tiros-N  would  s ta r t   in 

85 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  18-19 
FY  1970.  NASA  planned  to  accelerate  basic  studies  of  remote  sensor 
signature  relationships,  instrument  development,  da ta   processing,  user 
decision  models,  and   a ircraf t   use. 
Synchronous satellite  ATS-E  would  be  launched  in   1969 with  gravity 
and   G  would  no t   be   ready  for   first  launch 
gradient  experiment.  ATS-F 
before  late  1971  o r   early  1972.  Synchronous  Meteorological  Satellite 
( S M S ) ,   new  N  1970  effort  for  1971   and   1972  launches,  would  use 
existing  technology  and  be  prototypes  fo r  National  Operational Meteor- 
ological  Satellite  System  ( NOMSS)  . 
National  Geodetic  Satellite  program  would  complete  objectives  with 
launch  in   1970.  Cooperative  Applications  Satellite 
GEOS-c 
( C A S ) ,  
French  satellite,  would  be  launched  on  NASA  Scout  booster  in   1970 
to   track  some 500 meteorological  balloons  to  determine wind  direction 
and   speed.  (Testimony) 
March  19:   USAF  launched  two  unidentified  satellites  from  Vandenberg  AFB 
by  Thor-Agena  booster.  One   entered  orb i t   with  156.6-mi  (252.0-km) 
apogee,  102.5-mi  ( 164.9-km)  perigee,  86.6-min  period,  and   82.9’ 
inclination  and   reentered  March  24.  Second  entered  orb i t   with  318.8- 
m i  
(513.0-km)  apogee,  312.8-mi 
(503.3-km)  perigee,  94.7-min 
period, and  83.0’  inclination.  (GSFC  SSR ,  3/31/69;  P r e s   Rpt  70  [69]) 
*  Secretary  of  Defense Melvin R.  La ird  presented  to Senate  Armed  Services 
Committee  FY  1970 defense  budget  reduced  from  Johnson  Administra- 
tion  proposal  of  $80.6  billion  to   $78.5  billion.  He  sa id  FB-111 bomber 
program  would  be  cu t   off  with  aircraft  already  on  order  and   work 
would  be  speeded  up  on  advanced  manned  strategic  a ircraf t   expected 
to  replace  B-52s. 
(Testimony) 
*  Pro jec t   Tektite  civilian  aquanauts  Richard  A .   Waller,  Conrad  V.  M. 
Mahnken,  John  G.  Van  Derwalker,  and  Dr.  H.  Edward  Clifton  set 
32-day  record  for   remaining  under  water  in   “habitat”  off  St.  John 
Island  in   Caribbean.  Previous  record  wa s   held  by  former  Astronaut 
M.  Scott  Carpenter,  who  had  remained  submerged  30  days  in  1965. 
I n   Project  Tektite,  aquanau ts   were  trying  for   60-day  submersion. 
(DOD   Release  204-69;  UPI,  W  Po s t ,   3/20/69,  A2) 
*  At  Geneva  luncheon  dur ing   meetings  of  Disarmament  Conference,  U.S. 
and  U.S.S.R.  opened  exploratory  talks  on  proposed  treaty  banning  use 
of  seabed  for   stationing nuclear  weapons.  (U P I ,   W  N ew s ,   3/20/69,  2 )  
March  19-21:  Air  Force  Assn.  held  23rd  Annual  Convention  in   Houston, 
Tex.  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator-designate,  said  national 
defense  aspects  of  permanent  space  station  in   ear th   orbit  was  “a  
question  which  should  not  be  considered  only  from  the  narrow  stand- 
point  of  special  operational  systems  requirements  tha t   can  be  clearly 
established  as   necessary 
today.  The 
lead 
times  are   too  great. 
The  uncertainties  a s   to  the  future  world  situation  and   the  precise 
na ture   of  f u t u r e   defense  needs  a re   also  too  great.  I  believe  that  the 
approach  should  be  to  consider  carefully  what  our   long-term  national 
security  posture  would  be  ten  to  fifteen  years  from  now  if  by  then 
the   United  States  has   developed  a  space  station  capability  and   the 
logistics  or  ‘space  shuttIe’  system  necessary  to  utilize  it,  and   compare 
this  posture  to  what  i t  might  be  if   we  do   not  then  have  the  capability, 
and   the   Soviet  Union  has   developed  and   a r e   fully  utilizing  such 
capability.”  NASA  planned  to  work  closely  with  Defense  establishment 

86 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  19-21 

for  “national  program  for   the  development  of  a  permanent  space 
station  and   a  logistic  support  system  i n   a  way  tha t   will  not  only 
serve  the  needs  and   goals  of  the  civilian  space  program,  but  will  also 
be  capable  of  supporting  fu ture   defense  research  and   developments 
as  needs  become  clearly  defined.”  (Text) 
Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr., Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  and   former 
NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  said:  “Although  similar  space  technology 
is  used  in   Apollo  Applications  and  the  Manned  Orb i t ing   Laboratory, 
there  is  no  unnecessary duplication  in   the  experiments planned.  These 
activities  require  different  equipment,  different  orbits  and   different 
timing.  I  believe  that  any  attempt  to  combine the  two  programs  would 
jeopardize  the  returns  to  each  agency  and   would  ultimately  increase 
the  cost.  There  is   a  distinct  need  to  continue  with  manned  space 
operations  under  both  military  and  nonmilitary  auspices.  Cooperation 
between  NASA  and   DOD  has   been  close,  and   will  continue.”  (Tex t)  
AFA’S  highest  award,  Henry  H.  Arnold  Trophy,  was  presented  to 
ApoZZo  8 Astronauts  Frank  Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  William 
A.  Anders.  NASC  Executive  Secretary,  Dr.  Edward  C. Welsh,  received 
Gill  Robb  Wilson  Trophy  for  Arts  and  Letters  for  his  par t   in   in ter-  
preting  aerospace  role  in   modern  society.  AFA’s  Citation  of  Honor 
went  to  L/G  Samuel  c. Phillips  (USAF)  
for  his  management  of  NASA 
for  “out- 
Apollo  program,  and   to  Maj.  William  J.  Knight  (USAF)  
standing  contributions  to  the  Air  Force  and  the  nation  for  being  the 
first  to  achieve hypersonic  winged  flight  while  piloting  the  X-15  a ir-  
craft  to  a  speed of  4,534 miles per  hour.”  (AFSC  Newsrev iew ,   3/69,  1 ;  
AF J ,   3/8/69,  30) 
March  20:  Senate  confirmed nomination  of  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine  as  NASA 
Administrator.  (CR, 3/20/69,  S2949) 
In  first  test  of  NERVA  in f igh t   configuration  a t  Jackass  Flats,  Nev.,  engine 
was  held  to  1/10  maximum  power  development  of  1,100 mw  o r   55,000 
lbs thrust,  dur ing   three  25-sec warmups.  Full  power  tests would  be held 
in April  by  Aerojet-General Corp.  and Westinghouse Astronuclear Lab- 
oratory,  when  NERVA was expected to produce  electrical  energy equal  to 
110 mw  and   5,500 
one fourth  that  developed by  Hoover Dam.  Test-to 
lbs  thrus t   to  duplicate  engine  startup  procedures  in   space  and  verify 
system  performance  with  liquid  hydrogen  fuel-marked 
first  test  of 
rocket with  nozzle down  and  thrust  blasting  in to  water-cooled firing  pit. 
Engine  had  produced  sufficient  energy  to  boil  ton  of  water  every  two 
seconds.  ( AEC/NASA  Release  M-54;  LA  Times, 3/23/69) 
Appointment of  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for Organization and  Man- 
agement  Harold  B.  Finger  as  first  Assistant  Secretary  for  Urban  
Research  and   Technology  was  announced  by  Housing  and   Urban 
Development  Secretary  George  W.  Romney.  From  1960  until  1967, 
Finger  had  been  manager  for   AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion 
Office  and,  since  1961, director of  nuclear system  for  OART.  (UPI ,   NYT ,  
3/16/68,  39;  AP,  W Post,  3/21/69,  A17) 
MSFC  announced  i t  had   signed  $4,095,000 contract  with  Radio  Corp.  of 
America  for  engineering  and   logistics  support  for   ground  computer 
systems  and   other  equipment  in   Sa turn   V  program.  (MSFC Release 
69-84)  
NASA  announced completion of  negotiations  for one-year $513,293,000 ex- 

87 

March  20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

tension,  through  1969,  of  cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  with  Philco-Ford 
Corp.  Education  and   Technical  Services  Div.  fo r   engineering  support 
and  related  services a t  Wallops Station.  (NASA   Release 69 -8 )  
March 21:  Dept.  of  Commerce,  DOD, Dept.  of  Interior,  DOT, AEC,  WASA,  and 
NSF released  News   from  BOM E X ,   report  of  Barbados  Oceanographic 
and  Meteorological  Experiment  to  be  conducted  in  May,  June,  and 
July  in   cooperation  w i t h   government  of  Barbados.  Scientific  study  of 
joint  behavior  and  interactions  of  atmosphere-ocean  system  in   sub- 
tropical  and  tropical  waters  was  pa r t   of  Federal  Air-Sea  Interaction 
Research  Program  and ma jo r  U S .   contribution  to Global Atmospheric 
Research  Program  ( GARP )   . BOMEX  would  study  continuous  exchange 
of  energy, momentum,  gases,  particulates,  and  electrical  charges  a t  a i r -  
sea  interface and  study ways  in  which  energy  and  other  properties  were 
transported  from  area  by  atmosphere  and  ocean. 
NASA  would  test  concepts  of  satellite  sensors  for  weather  and   oceano- 
graphic  observatidns.  I t s   experimental  weather  and  communications 
satellites  ( A t s  ZZZ, Nimbus  ZZZ, and  ESSA  satellites)  and  devices  being 
developed  under  Ea r th   Resources  Survey  Satellite  program  would  be 
directly  engaged  in   BOMEX .   Photos  taken  by  Apo l lo   9  astronauts  with 
hand-held Hasselblad  camera  of  900  sq mi  of  equatorial Atlantic Ocean 
off  Barbados  would  be  used  in  project.  (Tex t ;   NASA  News;  Sc ience ,  
3 /28 /69 ,1435-6)  
First  decade  in  space corresponded  with  early  years  of  aviation  following 
Wright  brothers  flight  a t  Kitty Hawk,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for 
Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  told  Annual  Kiwanis 
Dinner  in   Milledgeville,  Ga.  “I  recently  calculated  the  costs  per  seat 
mile  of  their  first  flight  for  comparison  with  our  Apollo  flight  to  the 
moon.  They  probably  had  ten  thousand  dollars  invested  in   first  Kitty 
Hawk  flight  that  went  one  fifth  of  a  mile,  giving  a  cost  per  seat  mile 
fo r   Orville  of  fifty  thousand  dollars.  We  will  have  about  twenty-four 
billion  dollars  invested  in  our  first  five-hundred-thousand-mile t r ip   for 
three  astronauts  to  the  moon,  giving  a  cost  of  only  about  sixteen 
thousand  dollars  per  seat mile.  We  a r e  ahead  of  the Wright  Brothers- 
but  we  have  a  long  way  to  go  to  catch  up   with  the  DC -8   or  707.  If 
subsequent  flights  to  the  moon  cost  two  hundred  million  dollars  each, 
that’s  less  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  a  seat  mile,  so  we  a re  
going  in   the  right  direction.”  (Text) 
INTELSAT  conference of  67  countries  and  observers  from  Communist bloc 
and underdeveloped  nations  ended  at State  Dept.  without  agreement  on 
method  of  sharing  control  over  international  satellite  communications. 
Committee  of  INTELSAT members  was  appointed  to  work  through  sum- 
mer  on alternate drafts  of  final  agreement  to be  presented  to  conference 
i n   November.  Leonard  H.  Marks,  American  chairman  of  conference, 
had  announced  his  resignation  and  would  return  to  private  law  prac- 
tice  in  Washington,  D.C.  (Lydon,  N Y T ,  3/23/69,  31;  Rpt  of  US  Del) 
0  Aviation  Progress  Committee  announced  appointment  of  former  Sen. 
A.  S.  Mike  Monroney  as  consultant  and  adviser  to  committee  and 
stated  i t s  purpose  was  “to  work  with  interested  individuals  and  organi- 
zations  to  . . . seek  and  support  ways  to  improve  and  expand  the 
National  Aviation  System  of  airports  and  airways.”  As  Chairman  of 
Aviation  Subcommittee of  Senate Commerce Committee, Monroney  had 

88 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  21 

been  largely  responsible  for   legislation  which  created  FAA  in   1958. 
(Committee Release; W  S ta r ,  3/23/69,  C5) 
*  Secretary  of  Transportation John  A.  Volpe  announced  award  of  $544,302 
FAA contract  to  Laboratory  for   Electronics,  Inc.,  to  develop  two  low- 
cost,  solid-state,  microwave-instrument landing  systems  ( ILS)  for  STOL 
a ircraf t   operations  a t   FAA’s  National  Aviation  Facilities  Experimental 
Center in  Atlantic  City,  N.J.,  and   at  suitable  operational  STOLport  such 
a s   Dulles  International  Airport  near  Washington,  D.C.  (FAA   Release 
69-38) 
Harvard  Univ.  biologist  Dr.  George Wald  and  MIT  physicist  Dr.  Bruno 
Rossi  disclosed  that  some  251   NAS  members  out  of  806  had   signed 
letter  to  President  Nixon  expressing  continued  opposition  to  deploy- 
ment  by  U S .   of  ABM  system.  Letter  said,  “Russia  is  a s   well  prepared 
to  build  such  devices  a s   we  are.  This  can  only  introduce  a  new  and  
perhaps  disastrous  spiral in  the  arms race.  Our  science and  technology, 
rather  than  being used to  add   further  to  the  present  ‘balance of  terror,’ 
needs  to  be  redirected  to  solving  pressing  problems  of  poverty,  mal- 
nutrition,  control  of  population,  and  improvement  of  the  human  en- 
vironment  for  our  own  people  and   people  everywhere.”  (AP ,   W Po s t ,  
3/22/69,  A5) 
March  22:  Cosmos  C C L X X I I I   was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  into  orb i t   with 
335-km  (208.2-mi)  apogee,  199-km  ( 123.6-mi)  perigee,  89.8-min 
period,  and  65.4”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered March  30.  ( GSFC  S SR ,  
3/31/69) 
Five  segments  of  ApoZZo  9’s  6,500,000-lb  “stackyy remained  in   space, 
making  total  1,613 objects  floating  in   ear th   orb i t   after  ApoZZo  9 ,   said 
James J. Haggerty,  Jr.,  in  Armed  Forces  Journal. Descent  stage  of  LM, 
in  eccentric  low  orbit,  would  soon  be  captured  by  ear th   gravity  and  
burn  on  reentry;  ascent  stage might  remain  in  high  orbit  20  yrs,  along 
with  LM  adapter  [GSFC  reported  later  tha t   LM  descent  stage  had   re- 
entered  March  22 ;   ascent  stage  was  still  in  orbit].  S-IVB  3rd   stage 
mated  to  instrument  unit  was  directed  into  solar  orbit.  Of  1,613 orbit- 
ing  objects  listed  by  NORAD,  356  were  payloads,  both  active  and 
expired.  Remaining  1,257 pieces were  debris. 
Items  in   solar  orbit  included  3rd-stage  and  instrument-unit combina- 
tions  from  ApoZZo  8 and   9 ,   four  U S .   Pioneers  and   Mariner  V I   still 
sending  useful  data,  and   U S .   and  U.S.S.R. 
planetary  explorers 
launched before  1969. About 20 solar  orbiting objects  would  remain  in  
space a  long time,  along with 28 spacecraft  which  had  crashed  on  other 
celestial  bodies,  inc1uding‘U.S.S.R.’~  Venus  111  and   IV  on  Venus,  9 
Soviet  Lunas,  5  U S .   Rangers,  7  Surveyors,  and   5  Lunar  Orbiters. 
(AFJ ,  3/22/69,  15 ;   GSFC  SSR ,   3/31/69) 
*  DOD announced  name  of  planned  U S .   antiballistic  missile  defense  had 
officially  been  changed  from  Sentinel  to  Safeguard.  (AP ,   W  S ta r ,  
3/23/69,  A4) 
March 23: NASA  announced release  of  The Book  of  Mars,  one-volume digest 
of  facts  and   theories  about  Mars  by  Dr.  Samuel  Glasstone,  illustrated 
with  photos  taken  during  Mariner  1V  mission  1964-65,  when  space- 
craf t   flew  within  6,000  mi  of  Mars  surface.  Book  traced  history  of 
man’s  acquisition  of  Mars  data  and  compared Mars with  other  planets. 
(NASA   Special Release) 

89  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  23 
*  William  Hines  in   Washington  Sunday  Star  commented  on  “deadly  dull- 
ness”  of  last  five  days  of  Apollo  9 mission:  “The  flight  plan  of  Apollo 
%which  most  people  do   not  see  and   therefore  do  not  understand- 
was  carefully  divided  into  six  ‘activity  periods,’  of  which  five  were 
“I t   i s   no  criticism  of  the  . . . crew  that  after  five  days  of  brilliant 
each  about  24 hours  long  and   the  sixth  five  days  in   duration. 
spacemanship  they  took  it  easy  for  the  rest  of  the  flight.  Nor  is  i t  
criticism  of  the  space  program  to  say  that  the  last  half  of  Apollo  9 
was  dull.  I t  was  d a n n e d   that  way.  and  if   i t   had   turned  ou t   otherwise 
the  United  S t a t e iv e r y   likely  w o d d   not  be  attempting  a  moon  landing 
in   July.”  (W  S tar ,   3/23/69,  C4) 
launched  Cosmos  CCLXXZV into  orb i t   with  300-km 
March  24:  U.S.S.R. 
(186.4-mi)  apogee,  208-km  ( 129.3-mi)  perigee,  89.5-min period,  and 
64.9”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  April  1.  ( GSFC  SSR,  3 /31 /69 ;  
4 /15 /69)  
*  JPL   astronomer  Dr.  Ronald  Schorn  announced  “definite  and   conclusive” 
evidence  of  water  on  Mars  had  been  found  in   five-year  study  with 
Stephen Little  of  Univ.  of  Texas  and   JPL   scientist  Dr.  C.  B.  Farmer  a t  
McDonald  Observatory in  Ft.  Davis, Tex. Noting Mars  generally  should 
be  compared  with  driest  deserts  of  earth,  he  said:  “If  you  took  all  the 
water we  found  and  la id   it  out  over  the  whole  planet,  i t  would  be  only 
1,OOOth  of  an  inch  thick.  Mars  may  still  not  be  a  great  place  to  live, 
bu t   there’s  a  chance  of  life  there.”  Photos  to  be  taken  by  Mariner  VZ 
and  Mariner  VI1 spacecraft,  Dr.  Schorn said,  would  help solve question 
of  whether  enough water existed  to  sustain  life  on Mars. 
New  spectra,  superior  to  any  previously  available,  were  made  pos- 
sible  by  NASA-supported  improvements  in   McDonald  82-in  Struve  re- 
flecting  telescope and  i ts  large  spectrograph. Observations of  Mars were 
beginning with  more powerful, 107-in reflecting  telescope a t  McDonald, 
constructed  with  funds  from  NASA,  NSF,  and  Univ.  of  Texas.  (NASA  
Release  69-48;  AP,  W Post,  3/25/69,  A5 )  
Apollo  10 mission would  be  launched  from  ETR May  18 carrying  Astro- 
nauts  Thomas  P.  Stafford  (commander) , John  W.  Young  ( CM   pilot) , 
and   Eugene A.  Cernan  ( LM   pilot)  on  eight-day  lunar  orbital  mission. 
Final  decision  to  fly  mission  as  previously  planned  followed  review  of 
technical  and   operational  data  from  ApoZZo  9  (March  3-13).  Mission 
would  provide additional experience in  combined system  operation and, 
with  exception  of  actual  landing  on  lunar   surface,  was  same  as  for  
lunar  landing mission. While  spacecraft  circled  moon  a t   69-mi  (111.0- 
km)   altitude,  Stafford  and  Cernan  would  separate LM  from  CSM ,   pilot 
LM  twice  to  within  10  mi  (16.1 km)   of  preselected  landing  site,  and 
re turn   to  CSM.  Crew  would  then make  landmark  sightings,  take  photos, 
and   transmit  live  TV  views  of  moon,  earth,  and   spacecraft  interior 
before returning  to  earth.  (NASA  Release  69 -46 )  
*  Gas  from   solar  flare  wiped  out  much  of  earth’s  outer  radiation  belt  and 
caused  aurora l   displays-normally 
seen  only  over  subpolar  regions- 
to  move  to  lower  latitudes.  Residents  of  metropolitan  New  York  area 
flooded weather  bureau  and  newspapers with  inquiries.  Radiation belts’ 
discoverer,  Dr.  James  A.  Van  Allen,  said  display  might  have  been 
flare  on  sun.  ESSA’S  space  disturbance  warning 
caused  by  class  2-B 
center,  Boulder,  Colo.,  said  several  smaller  flares  had  occurred  March 
21   and   22.  Auroras  were  to  be  expected,  Walter  Sullivan  said  in  New 

90 

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  24 

York: T ime s ,  because sun was  near  maximum  of  its  11-yr cycle  of  sun- 
spot  and   eruptive  activity.  ( N Y T ,  3/25/69,  30)  
a  MSFC  contract  awards:  $1,521,500  supplemental agreement  w i th   IBM  for  
design  improvement  of  control  signal  processors  for   Apollo/Saturn  V 
guidance  instrument  units;  and   $1,334,931  contract  modification  t o  
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.  t o   develop,  design,  manufacture,  and   test 
restarting  oxygen/hydrogen  burner.  ( MSFC  Releases  69-88,  69-89)  
USN  announced  award  of  $28,161,681  modification  to  contract  with  LTV 
Aerospace Corp.  for  improvement changes on  F-8B  and  F-8C  aircraft. 
(DOD Release  212-69) 
March  25:  Apo l lo   9  commander  James  A.  McDivitt told  press  at  Washing- 
ton,  D.C.,  news  conference  tha t   Apollo  9  spacecraft  performance  had  
been  outstanding  and procedures had  been  “as  near  perfect  as anything 
rendezvous  . . . and   I  don’t  recall  a  single  procedure  that  we  recom- 
I  could  possibly  imagine,”  without  deviating  “from  a  single  step  in  
mended be   changed.’’ 
Astronaut  Russell  L.  Schweickart  said  new  spacesuit  had   increased 
mobility  significantly.  Activities  like manipulating  camera  were  “prob- 
ably  the  most  challenging  . . . and  I  found  that  after  taking  a  whole 
series  of  pictures  and   all  the  various  motions  you  go  through  . . . my 
hands  were  fa r   less  tired  than  I would  have  anticipated.”  (Transcr ip t)  
*  House Committee on  Science and Astronautics’  Subcommittee on Manned 
Space Flight  voted to  add  $230.5  million  to  t2.212-billion  authorization 
requested  by  NASA  for manned  space  flight  in   J?Y  1970. Of  raise,  $168 
million  was  earmarked  for  development  of  scientific  payloads  for  six 
manned  lunar  landings  between  1970  and  1973  and   $66  million  for 
space  flight  operations  to  cover  flying  men  in   ear th   orb i t   for  month  at 
a  time,  in   1970  onward.  Flights  were  to  be  forerunners  of  orbiting 
space stations.  (CR, 3/26/69,  D233;  Committee  member) 
0  White  House  submitted  to  Senate  nomination  of  former  NASA  Associate 
Administrator  for  Organization  and  Management Harold  B.  Finger  to 
be  Assistant  Secretary  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development.  (PD, 
3/31/69,  489)  
a  MSFC   announced  award  of  $3,657,000  contract  to  Sanders  Associates, 
Inc.,  for  continuation  of  engineering  and  logistics  support  for  opera- 
tional  display  systems  for  Sa turn   V  program.  Contract  covered Oct.  1, 
1968, through  June  1970.  (MSFC  Release  69-91) 
March 26:  U.S.S.R.  launched Meteor  Z satellite  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t  with 
686-km  (426.3-mi)  apogee,  632-km  (392.7-mi)  perigee,  97.9-min 
period,  and   81.1” inclination.  Tass  said  satellite  carried  solar  batteries 
and   would  obtain  information  about  weather  prospects.  ( GSFC  SSR, 
3/31/69;  AP,  N Y T ,   3/28/69,  5; Znteravia,  11/69,  1751) 
*  In   NASA  Hq.  Apollo  9  awards  ceremony Vice  President  Spiro  T.  Agnew, 
a s   NASC  Chairman,  presented  NASA  Distinguished  Service  Medals  to 
Astronauts  James  A.  McDivitt,  David’ R.  Scott,  and  Russell  L. 
Schweickart for  individual contributions to  “the Nation’s  manned  space 
flight  program  and   the  advancement  of  space  technology”  as  partici- 
pants  in   “this  historic  mission,  the  first  manned  flight  involving  the 
Command  Module,  Lunar  Module,  and   extravehicular  mobility  unit.” 
NASA  Exceptional Service Medal went  to  Carroll H.  Bolender,  Manager 
for   Lunar   Module,  Apollo  Spacecraft  Program   Office,  MSC,  and  
Eugene  F.  Kranz,  ApoUo  9  Flight  Director,  Flight  Control  Div.,  MSC. 

91 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  26 
NASA  Public  Service Award  was  presented  to  Llewellyn  J .   Evans,  Pres i-  
dent  of  Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering  Corp.,  LM  manufacturer.  (NASA 
Awards  summary) 
*  House  Committee  on   Science  and   Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on   Ad- 
vanced  Research  and   Technology  voted  increase  of  $11.8 million  over 
$818.8-million  NASA  request  for   research.  ( C R ,  3/26/69,  D233) 
*  NASA  reported  experiments  with  yaw-damper  system  developed  a t   FRC ,  
consisting  of  small  gyroscope,  magnetic-clutch actuator,  and   electronics 
control  assembly  in   package  occupying  1 /10   cu   ft  and   weighing  less 
than   two  pounds.  I t   could  cost  as   little  as  $200  and   be  installed  on 
light  general-aviation  aircraft  to  control  “dutch  roll”  or  yawing.  Com- 
mercial  je t   a ircraf t   were  equipped  with  advanced  systems  to  eliminate 
yawing.  (NASA   Release  6 9 4 )  
*  Boeing  CO.’S Vertol  Div.  was  conducting  wind-tunnel  tests  of  $250,000 
model  of  V/STOL  a ircraf t   with  tilting  wing  and   large  cyclic-pitch 
propellers,  New  Y o r k   Times  said.  Tests  would  provide  da ta   fo r   ad-  
vanced  aircraft, including  Light  Intratheater  Transpor t   ( L IT )   fo r  which 
USAF  was  funding  studies.  Tilt  wing  rotated  from  horizontal  to   vertical 
flight  in   takeoff  o r   descent.  Cyclic  pitch  would  control  pitch  (nose-up- 
or-down movement)  by  acting on  all  four  of  aircraft’s  propellers  simul- 
taneously.  According  to   Boeing  engineers,  cyclic  pitch  would  eliminate 
need  for   horizontal  ta i l   ro tor   for   pitch  control  in   hovering  and   slow 
flight.  Large  propellers-26 
f t   in   d ia   on  full-sized  aircraft-would 
reduce  engine  horsepower  requirements.  ( N Y T ,  3/2/69,  93) 
*  I n  Washington Post  Thomas O’Toole sa id :   “. . . man’s  flight  to  the  moon 
and   beyond  could  be  the  only  means  he  has  left  of  renewing  his 
dwindling  spirits.  . . . The  voyage  of  Apollo  8  around   the  moon  last 
Christmas  did  more  than  any  other  single  event  last  year  to  restore 
man’s  faith  in   himself-and 
tha t   flight  will  pale  beside  an  actual moon 
landing  when  i t   comes.  . . . I t  could  just  be  that  when  man  walks  the 
moon  fo r  the first  time  i t  will  be  felt  round  the world  as such  a  triumph 
of  the  human  heart  tha t   its  beat  shall  go  on  for   a  million  years.”  ( W  
Pos t ,   3/26/69,  A27) 
March  27-April  8:  NASA’s Mariner  V I 1   (Mar iner  G )  spacecraft  was  success- 
fully  launched  from  ETR by   Atlas-Centaur  (AC-19)  booster  on   four-  
month,  193-mi1lion-miy direct-ascent  trajectory  toward  Mars-NASA’s 
second  mission  to  fly  past  Mars  dur ing   1969  launch  window.  Launch 
vehicle  performance  was  nominal.  Spacecraft  separated  from  Centaur, 
deployed  its  four   solar  panels,  and   locked  its  sensors  on   sun  and   s tar  
Vega.  Because  of  several  minor  spacecraft  anomalies  dur ing   launch, 
spacecraft  was  kept  in   sun-Vega  cruise  while  performance  was  eval- 
uated.  Star-lock  override  command  was  transmitted  to   spacecraft  April 
1; Canopus was  acquired  as  planned  initially  and  Mariner  V I 1  entered 
stable  cruise  mode.  Midcourse  maneuver  was  conducted  April  8  to 
ensure  tha t  spacecraft would  fly within  1,900 mi  (3,057.7  km )   of  Mars 
Aug.  5. 
Pr imary   mission  objective  was  to  fly  by  southern  hemisphere  and  
polar  regions  of  Mars  to  set  basis  for  fu ture   experiments,  particularly 
those  relevant  to  search  for   extraterrestrial  life.  As  secondary  mission 
spacecraft  would  develop  technology  needed  for  succeeding  Mars  mis- 
sions.  The  900-lb  spacecraft  carried  six  complementary  experiments  to 
provide  information  about  Martian  surface  and   atmosphere.  Mariner 

92 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS.  1%9 

March  27-April  8 

March  27-April  8 :   NASA  faunched   Mariner  V I 1   on  an   A t lus-Cen taur   boos ter   (u  the  
second  of two   spacecraf t   in   the   Mariner  Mars  1969  m iss ion   to  take   pho tographs   and 
collect  da ta   abou t   the   su r face   and  a tmosphere   of  Mars .   Manner  IV  was  launched 
Feb .   24.  An   Ap r i l   8  maneuver  ensured  tha t   Mariner  VI1   wou ld   pass   Mars  A u g .   5 .  

VIZ  mission,  except  for  flyby  area,  was almost  identical  to  mission  of 
Mariner  V t  Iaunched  Feb. 24 for investigation of  equatorial region  and 
scheduled  to  amv e   at  Mars July  31.  (NASA  Proj  Off; NASA Releases 
69-26,6942) 

93 

March  27-29 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  27-29:  NASA  launched  fou r   Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  carrying 
GSFC  payloads  to  obtain  data  on  atmospheric parameters.  Two  rockets 
launched  from  Arenosillo,  Spain,  March  27-28 
reached  75.2-  and  
75.8-mi  (121- and   122-km)  altitudes,  each  exploding  19 grenades  with 
sound  arrivals  recorded  on  ground.‘  Rockets  launched  from  Wallops 
Station March 28-29  reached  75.4-  and  69.1-mi  (121.3- and   111.2-km) 
altitudes  and   exploded  19 grenades  each,  with  sound  arrivals  recorded 
on  ground.  Data  would  be  analyzed  and   compared.  (NASA  Rpts  SRL) 
March 27:  LaRC  had  awarded  10-mo, $155,000  feasibility  study  contract  to  
North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  to  design  two-man, lunar   emergency, 
escape-to-orbit  vehicle  which  could  be  carried  aboard  LM  on  Apollo 
missions.  (SBD,  3/27/69,  125 ;  NAR  Skywr i ter ,   4/4/69,  1) 
AEC-NASA  Space Nuclear Propulsion Office awarded Aerojet-General Corp. 
$47,447,601  contract  extension  for  completion  of  preliminary  engine 
, and component design fo r  NERVA  I and initiation of  procurement or‘fabri- 
cation  of  component  development  hardware.  Extension,  from  Oct.  1, 
1968, through  Sept.  30,  1969, brought  total  value  of  cost-plus-fixed-fee 
contract  to  $500,015,527.  (NASA  Release  69 -47 )  
*  MSFC  announced $7,384,543  modification to  contract with  Chrysler Corp. 
Space Div.  for  assembly  of  two  boosters for  Saturn  IB  rockets  213  and  
214  for  use  in  Apollo Applications program.  (MSFC   Release  69-93) 
launched  Cosmos  CCLXXV  into  orb i t   with  761-km 
March  28:  U.S.S.R. 
(472.9-mi)  apogee,  275-km  ( 170.9-mi)  perigee,  95.1-min  period,  and  
(GSFC  SSR, 
70.9” 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Feb.  7,  1970. 
3/31/69;  2 /7 /70)  
NASA  Science  and   Technology  Advisory  Committee  for  Manned  Space 
Flight,  chaired  by  Dr.  Charles H.  Townes, published Proceedings  of the 
W in te r  S tudy   on  Uses  of  Manned  Space  Flight,  1975-1985,  Vol.  I- 
Proceedimgs:  NASA  program  for  next  two  decades must  project  state  of 
technology  for  that  period.  Program  must  be  balanced  in   use  of 
manned  and  automated  operations.  “The  benefits  to  the  nation,  both 
internal  and   international, dictate  that  the  United  States  remain  in   the 
forefront  of  all  ma jor   categories  of  space  activities,”  space  sciences, 
cxploration  of  solar  system,  manned  space  flight  capability,  and  eco- 
nomic  applications  of  space  flight. 
Study  said  i t   was  reasonable  to  use  yz% to  1% of  GNP   to  support 
civilian  space  flight  program  of  which  major  elements  were:  (1) ag- 
gressive automated  planetary  exploration  program  as  recommended by 
NAS-NRC  Space Science Board, with  options for  manned phase  to  follow 
early  automated  phase;  ( 2 )   economic  applications  program  a s   recom- 
mended  by  1968  Summer  Study  on  Space  Applications  by  NAS;  ( 3 )  
continuation  of  lunar  exploration after  Apollo  landing as recommended 
by  Lunar  and  Planetary  Missions  Board  of  NASA;  ( 4 )   vigorous  pro-  
gram  of  astronomical  observations  in  ear th   orb i t   a s   recommended  by 
NASA  Astronomy Missions  Board;  and   ( 5 )   extension  of  manned  space 
flight  capability  in   ear th   orb i t   to  longer  duration  for  scientific  and  
technological  purposes.  Achievement  of  manned  low-cost  transporta- 
tion  system  deserved  high  priority.  Study  recommended  use  of  long- 
duration  manned  space  station  designed  to  support  men  in   weightless 
condition  “unless  unexpected  biomedical  problems  are  encountered  o r  
overwhelming  engineering  advantages  for  artificial  gravity  a re   dis- 
covered.”  I t   agreed on  advisability  of  placing observatories  and  labora- 

ASTROXAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

March  28 

tories  i n   ear th   orb i t  but  noted,  “Relative emphasis  among  these  activi- 
ties  and   the  extent  of  manned  attendance  desirable  in   each,  must  be 
decided  by  appropriate  studies  and   experiments.” 
“To  provide  a  focal  point  for  structuring  a  manned  planetary  pro- 
gram a target  date  of  1982 and  the Mars landing mode  . . . are  assumed 
here  for   discussion.  Achievement of  the  operational  capability  in   that 
year  would  require  initiation  of  system  design  in   about  1975.”  (Tex t )  
*  President  Nixon  received  report  of  10-member  ad   hoc  committee  ap- 
pointed Feb.  7 to  review  all  aspects of  SST  program.  Under  Secretary of 
Transportation  James  M.  Beggs,  chairman,  said  no  votes  were  taken 
by  committee on  recommendations to  President;  each member  had  sub- 
mitted  his  suggestions to  Transportation  Secretary  John  A.  Volpe  and  
they  were  included  in   report.  (UP I ,   W  Post,  3/29/69,  A2) 
March  29:  While  Nixon  Administration  warned  of  $2-  to  $3-billion  cut  in  
FY  1970  budget,  NASA  was  asking  $100-million  increase  with  good 
chance  of  approval,  James  J.  Haggerty,  Jr.,  said  in   Armed  Forces 
Journal.  “NASA  officials report  a  generally warmer  reception  on  Capitol 
Hill  as  a  result  of  near-flawless  performance  on  all  of  the  manned 
Apollo missions.”  Apollo  1970  funding  represented  penultimate  install- 
ment  on  basic  program  and   “Congress can  a t  last  see  light  at  the  end 
of  the  tunnel.”  Most  important,  “extra  $100-million is  a  real  bargain 
price  for  the potential  benefit  . . . one of  those deals tha t   the  buyer  can’t 
afford  to  turn  down.  If  you  invest  a hundred  thousand  in  a magnificent 
home  and  the  contractor  demands another  thousand  to  put  a  roof  on  it, 
you  have  little  option.”  Since  U S .   had  committed  $25  billion  to  pro- 
gram,  “it  would  be  questionable economy  to  settle  for  less  than  maxi- 
mum  benefit  by  withholding what  amounts to  two-fifths of  one  percent 
of  the  total.”  (AFJ ,  3/29/69,  21)  
March  30:  Thomas  O’Toole  in   Vush ing ton   Post  said  plans  for   handling 
lunar  samples  [see March  121 had  stirred  bitter  scientific  controversy. 
Tests  scheduled  a t   NASA’s Lunar   Receiving  Laboratory  would  last  a t  
least  two  months  while  scientists  waited  for   “the  chance  to  study  what 
amounts  to  a  Rosetta stone tha t  could hold  the  clue  to   the  origin  of  life 
itself.”  At  close  of  examination  period,  NASA  would  parcel  out  moon 
rocks  to  110 scientists  from  group  of  600  and   even  “chosen  few”  had 
no  guarantee  of  receilring  piece  of  moon.  LRL official  had  explained 
that  if  NASA  found,  for   example,  that  there  was  absolutely  no  evidence 
of  radioactive  argon,  “ I t   would  be  quite  foolish  to  waste  a  sample  on 
a  man  . . . whose  primary  goal  was  to  look  for   radioactive  argon.” 
Scientists  also  were  disturbed  over  involvement  of  other  Federal 
agencies in   lunar  sample handling.  ( W   Pos t ,   3/30/69,  A l )  
March  31:  Library  of  Congress  Legislative  Reference  Service  published 
United  S ta tes   and  Soviet  R iva lry   in   Space:  W h o  I s   Ahead,  and  How 
D o   the  Contenders  Compare?  by  Dr.  Charles  S .   Sheldon  11,  Senior 
Specialist  in   Space  Transportation  and  Technology,  Science  Policy 
Research  Div.  By  June  30,  1969,  U.S.  expected  to  have  spent  $50.6 
billion  on  space.  Because  of  greater  weight  of  Soviet  hardware,  “one 
could  assume that  their  program  is  a t   least  of  the  same magnitude  . . . 
and  may  be  larger.”  While  “there  is   no  reason  to  believe  their  total 
aerospace  industry  is   as  fully  equipped  a s   our   own,”  missiles  in   Mos- 
cow  parades  indicated  existence  of  multiple  design  and   development 
team  fo r   space  work.  Each  country  seemed  adequately  equipped  with 

95 

March  31 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

launch  pads  and   ground   support.  While  U S .   had   worldwide  tracking 
system  supplemented  by  ships  and   electronics-carrying  a ircraf t ,  
U.S.S.R.  accepted  “certain  constraints,”  relying  on  ships to   fill gaps  in  
tracking  system.  U.S.  launch  vehicles  ranged  from  those  lifting  20  lbs 
to  Sa tu rn  V  capable  of  285,000-1b lift  to  low  ear th   orbit.  U.S.S.R.  still 
used  basic  ICBM  vehicle  introduced  in   1957,  with  upper  stages  added 
to   improve  performance. 
While  NASA  program  was  run   on  open  basis,  there  was  less  “open- 
ness”  in   DOD.  U.S.S.R.  “holds  to  a  minimum  advance  notice  of  flights, 
limits  information  . . . bu t   a t  least  makes  a  prompt  announcement,  as- 
signs  a  name,  and   gives  orbital  parameters”  of  successful  launches. 
There  seemed  little  difference between  space  programs  “as  to  general 
purpose  and   direction.”  Both  placed  emphasis  on  military,  though 
little was  known  of  Soviet  organization  pattern.  All  “reasonable  analy- 
ses  a re   fairly  convincing  that  up  to  this  time  the  Soviet  Union  has  not 
placed  nuclear  bombs  in   orbit.” 
I n   space  applications  U S .   “has   held  a  clear  lead  from   the   earlier 
difys.”  U.S.S.R.  “has  made  a  greater  relative  effort  in   . . . flights  com- 
mitted  to  lunar  and   planetary  work  than  the  United  States”  but  “has 
not  gained  as  good  results.’’ 
I n   future  programs,  both  nations  “undoubtedly  have  to  face  hard  
budget  choices  before  actual  hardware  can  begin.’’  Soviet  goal  was 
“comprehensive  exploitation  of  space  technology  including  the  explo- 
ra t ion   and   settlement  (where  practical)  of  the  planets,  along  the   way 
exploring  the Moon  in   great  detail,  and  using  Ear th  orbital  stations  for 
a  host  of  practical  purposes.”  While  large  orbital  station  would  be 
within  NASA’s technical  capabilities  in   late  1970s,  beginning  of  such 
capability  probably  already  existed  in   U.S.S.R.,  but  “it  would  be  risky 
to  predict  whether  such  a  station  will  appear  soon  or  only  after  some 
years.” 
Cooperation  of  U S .   and   U.S.S.R.  in   space  already  existed  in   ex- 
change  of 
information, 
treaties,  plans  for   trading  space-collected 
weather  pictures,  plans  for  joint  textbook  on  space  biology,  and   jo in t  
efforts  in   geomagnetism,  but  no  assessment  could  be  made  of  fu ture  
prospects.  (Tex t)  
9  At  American  Cancer  Society  Seminar  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  Clarence  D. 
Cone,  Jr.,  head  of  LaRC’s  Molecular  Biophysics  Laboratory,  discussed 
his  discovery  of  intercellular  linkages  and   its  application  to   under- 
standing  behavior  of  certain  cancer  types.  His  basic  research  into 
effects  of  space  radiation  on  body  cells  had  enabled  him  to  observe 
phenomenon  in   which  dividing  cancer  cell  appeared  able  to   induce 
connected  cells  to  divide  by  transmitting  chain-reaction  stimulation 
through  thin  linkage  of  cytoplasm.  Networks  of  these  stimulus-trans- 
mission  bridges  permitted  continued  division  of  cells  and,  in  human 
body,  might  constitute  basic  mechanism  for  cancer  spread. 
( N A S A  
Release  69-45) 
During  March:  NSF  published  Scientific  Activities  of  Nonprofit  Institutions, 
1966  (NSF   69-16).  Full-time  equivalent  number  of  R&D  scientists  and  
engineers  employed  by  independent  nonprofit  institutions  in   January  
1967  totaled  24,300, annual  increase  of  12.4% from  1954 to  1967.  I n  
1966  expenditure  for   R&D  in   independent  nonprofit  institutions  was 
seven  times  the  $100  million  in   1953.  Federal 
$800  million-about 

96 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Dur ing   March 

R&D  expenditures  contracted  to  nonprofit  institutions  reached  $540 
million  in   1966, nine  times 1953’s $60 million.  (Text) 
*  NSF published  R&D  Ac t iv i t ies   of  Local  Governments, Fiscal  Years   1966  
and  1967  (NSF 69-14).  Local governments spent $20.3 million  in   1966 
and   $28.8 million  in   1967  for   R&D  and   $1  million  in   1966  and   nearly 
$3  million  in   1967  on  R&D  plant.  Federal  Government provided  56% 
of  funds  in   1967  and   local  governments,  3576.  Health  and   hospitals 
accounted  for   approximately  50%  of  total  local  R&D  expenditures  in 
both  years,  with  education  second a t   10%. (Tex t)  
0  Engineer,  journal  of  Engineers  Joint  Council,  published  “The  Engineer- 
ing  Profession:  A  New   Profile.”  Management, not  design  or  develop- 
ment,  was  most  common  job   function  of  engineers.  Only  about  10% 
of  engineers worked  directly  for  Federal Government and  12% in  total 
aircraft, missile,  and  rocket  area. Median  age  of  engineers was  43  and 
profession was  more  than  99% male.  (Text) 

97 

April  1969 

April  1:   Reporting  findings  from   four  months  of  Oao  I I   data  to  129th 
meeting of  American Astronomical Society in   Honolulu, Univ.  of  Wis- 
consin  astronomer  Dr.  Arthur  D.  Code  said:  “It puzzles  me  to   see  so 
much  ultraviolet  light  from   the  Andromeda galaxy  (M31)  and   so  little 
from  M81   because  they  are   rather  old  ‘garden  variety’  galaxies.  . . . 
There  is  a  possibility  that  we  might  have  discovered  an  old  quasar  a 
few  million  light  years  away.” 
Full  impact  of  Oao  ZZ da ta   would  not  be  felt  for  couple  of  years. 
“Some  theories  on  cosmology  will  have  to  be  modified  and  others  dis- 
carded.  Practically  all  phases  of  optical  astronomy  w i l l   be  affected.” 
Temperature  figures  assigned  to  young,  hot  stars  with  masses  more 
than  15  times  sun’s  would  require  alteration.  “These  s tars   are   con- 
siderably  hotter  than  20,000  degrees  absolute.  They  are   aging  about 
twice  a s   fast  as we  thought  and   are   burning  hydrogen  a t   a  very  rapid 
rate.”  OAO  da ta   thus f a r  provided  argument  against  steady-state  theory 
of  universe  which  maintained  universe  always  looked  same,  from  any 
point  a t   any  time,  Dr.  Code  said. 
At  same meeting, Joseph  Purcell,  OAO  Project Manager  a t   GSFC, said 
Oao ZI’s  observatory control system  had  exceeded  its pointing  accuracy 
requirement  of  one minute  of  a rc  by  factor  of  two.  “A   subsequent OAO 
will be   100 times more  stable.”  (NASA  Release  69-51  ; Lannan, W  Star, 
4/4/69,  AS) 
*  NASA’s Mariner  VZZ  Mars  probe  (launched March  27)   obeyed  rad io   com- 
mand  to  lock  i ts   sensors  on  s tar   Canopus.  Spacecraft  would  fly  past 
Mars  night  of  Aug.  4.  Command  was  radioed  from  NASA  tracking  sta- 
tion  in   Woomera,  Australia.  (AP,  W  Pos t ,   4 /2 /69 ;   UPI, C T r i b ,  
4 /3  /69 1 
Pakistan  had   successfully  launched  her  first  rocket,  a  two-stage  vehicle 
to investigate  upper atmosphere, Pakistan  Space and Upper  Atmosphere 
Research  Committee  announced.  (AP ,   W  Pos t ,   4/2/69,  A7) 
*  Secretary  of  Defense Melvin  R.  Laird  told  House  Armed  Services  Com- 
mittee  he  planned  to  cut  FY  1970  defense  budget  by  a t   least  $1.1 
billion  because of  Nation’s  “extremely  difficult  and  dangerous  economic 
and  fiscal  situation.”  At  press  interview  following  testimony,  he  said 
DOD budget  submitted to  Congress included  cutback  in  B-52 ra ids   over 
South Vietnam  from  1,800 to  1,600.  (Transcript  of  Press  Conference; 
Corddry,  B  Sun, 4/2/69,  A l )  
April  2:  National  Academy  of  Engineering  announced  election  of  44  U.S. 
engineers  to  membership.  Included  were  Dr.  John  S.  Foster,  Jr.,  Di- 
rector  of  Defense  Research  and   Engineering,  honored  for  “techno- 
logical  leadership  in   defense  research  and  engineering,”  and  Edward 
Wenk,  Jr.,  Executive  Secretary  of  National  Council  on  Marine  Re- 
sources and   Engineering  Development,  for  “major  contributions  to  the 

99 

April  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

design  of  military  submarines  and   other  underwater  equipment.” 
( NAE  Release) 
April  3:  Dr.  Thomas  0. Pa ine   was  sworn  in   by  Vice  President  Sp iro   T .  
Agnew ,as  NASA  Administrator  in   ceremony  in   Vice  President’s  office. 
Dr.  Pa ine   said:  “I  am   particularly  anxious  to  see  that  in  the  second 

Apr i l   3 :  D r .   Thomas  0 .  I‘aine  ( r i g h t )  was  sworn  i n   a s   Administrator  of 
the  National 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  b y   V i c e   President  Spiro  T .   Agnew .  

decade  of  space  we  br ing   down  to  the  people  on  ear th   more  of  the 
benefits  that  can  be  obtained  from  this  wonderful  new  technology.  . . . 
Such  areas  as   navigation,  communications  and   particularly  ear th   re- 
sources  a r e   things  tha t   a r e  very  much  on  our   minds  as  we  look  out  to 
the moon  and  beyond.”  (NASA   Hq  WB;  Sehlstedt,  B  Sun ,  4/4/69;  AP, 
W Post,  4 /4 /69)  
*  National  Geographic  Society’s Hubbard  Medal  for  research,  exploration, 
and   discovery  was  presented  by  Vice  President  Spiro  T.  Agnew  to 
ApoZZo  8 Astronauts  Frank  Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  William 
A.  Anders  in  Constitution  Hall,  Washington,  D.C.  Vice  President 
Agnew  said:  “The  possibilities  of  space  exploration  a r e  so  infinite  they 
overwhelm  the mind.  The  speed  with  which  we  have  reached  this  new 
threshold  of  hope  itself  is  awesome.  Less  than  half  a  century  ha s  
passed  since  the  Hubbard  Award  was  presented  to  Colonel  Charles  A. 
Lindbergh  for  his  solo  flight  from  New  York  to  Paris.  Less  than  a 
decade  has   passed  since  Colonel  John  Glenn  was  awarded  the  first 
Hubbard  Medal  for   exploration  in   space.” 

100 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

April  3 

Award,  one  of  Nation’s  highest  honors,  had   been  given  only  24  
times  in   63  years,  for   outstanding  achievement  in   geography  and   ex- 
ploration.  F irs t  medal  had   gone  to  Robert  E.  Peary   in   1906 for  Arctic 
explorations. 
Earlier  i n   day  a t   National  Geographic  headquarters,  Apollo  8 astro- 
nauts  had   received  General  Thomas  D.  White  Space Trophy  for  1968, 
awarded  to  military  o r   civilian  USAF  member  making  most  outstanding 
contribution  to  US. progress  i n   aerospace.  (NGS   Release \ 
*  MSFC  announced  two  contract  awards.  Definitive  $38,340,000  contract  to 
North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  Rocketdyne  Div.  for  5-2  engine  oper- 
ational  and   flight  support  Jan.  1,  1969,  to  June  30,  1970,  replaced 
letter  contract  which  earlier  authorized  $9 million.  Contract  modifica- 
tion  of  $15,253,945  was  given  to  Chrysler  Corp.  Space  Dir.  for  ex- 
tending  delivery  schedule  of  Sa turn   IB  boosters  and   stage  storage. 
MSFC  Releases  69-97,  69-96  ) 
April  4:   U.S.S.R. 
launched  two  Cosmos  satellites  from  Plesetsk.  Cosmos 
CCLXXV I   entered  orb i t   with  371-km  230.5-nii)  apogee,  200-km 
I  124.3-nii  perigee,  90.1-min  period,  and   81.3’ 
inclination  and   re- 
entered  April  11.  Cosmos  CCLXXVII  entered  orb i t   with  466-km 
( 289.6-mi)  apogee,  267-km 
( 165.9-mi)  perigee,  91.8-min  period, 
and  70.9”  inclination  and   reentered  July  6.  (GSFC   SSR,  4 /15 /69 ;  
7 /15 /69 ;   AP,  C  Trib, 4 /5 /69 ;   SBD Space  Log  Supplement, 4 /15 /69 )  
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld  R .   Gentry 
USAF  X-24A 
(U SA F )  , was  carried  to  45,000-ft  altitude  by  B-52  aircraft  dur ing   first 
captive  flight.  All  systems  functioned  satisfactorily  and   vehicle  was 
NA SA   P ro j   Off  1 
deemed  flight  worthy  in   NASA-USAF  program. 
*  N A A   announced  Apollo  8  Astronauts  Frank  Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr., 
and   William  A.  Anders  would  receive  1968 Robert  J.  Collier  Trophy 
for  significant  achievement  in   aeronautics  and   astronautics,  as   repre- 
sentatives  of  “entire  United  States space  flight  team  for  the  successful 
and  flawless  execution  of  the  first  manned  lunar   orbit  mission  in   his- 
tory.”  Trophy  would  be  presented  by  President  Nixon  a t   Washington, 
D.C.,  luncheon  May  7.  ( N A A   Release) 
*  Astronaut  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  received  Distinguished  Service  Medal  a t  
DOD ceremony  for   service  as Apollo  8 command  module  pilot.  ( W Post, 
4/5/69,  A7)  
Apollo  8 Astronauts  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and   William  A.  Anders,  both 
U S .  Naval Academy graduates,  presented  Academy  flag carried  aboard  
Apollo  8  spacecraft  to   br igade   representing  4,000  midshipmen  a t  
Annapolis.  (AP ,  B Sun,  4/3/69,  A l l )  
INTELSAT  conference  ended March  2 1  had   made  i t  clear  “that  Intelsat,  in  
its  brief  5-year  history,  has   been  an   extraordinary  success,)y wrote 
Robert  J. Samuelson  in  Science. Its transoceanic  satellites,  transmitting 
telephone  signals  primarily,  had   tended  to  depress  cost  of  communica- 
tions  by  multiplying  available  channels  and   pressuring  carr iers   to 
lower  rates.  Satellites  had   given  “third  world”  nations  in   Asia,  Africa, 
and   Latin  America,  previously  dependent  upon  “confused  mixture  of 
rad io   and   cable  channels,”  chance  to   jo in   advanced  world’s  communi- 
cations  system.  Attendance  of  U.S.S.R.  as   conference  observer  was 
sure   sign”  of  INTELSAT  success. 
L C  
Soviet  decision  to  jo in   INTELSAT  might  hinge  on   organization’s  de- 
cision  abou t   its  future.  Issue  was  INTELSAT’S  formal  structure  and  

101 

April  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

problem  was  “determining  how  large  a  role  the  United  States  should 
play.”  U S .   domination  stemmed  from  its  economic  and   technological 
power.  U S .   firm,  ComSatCorp,  was  made  manager  of  INTELSAT  under 
1964  agreement,  to   oversee  satellite  design,  contract  with  NASA  for  
launchings,  and   supervise  operation  i n   space. 
Month-long  meeting  h ad   not  resulted  in   accord  on  even  draf t   agree- 
ment.  Europeans  wanted  to  replace  ComSatCorp  management  with 
international  secretariat  to   subcontract  technical  tasks  to  ComSatCorp 
and   other  organizations  as   they  demonstrated  genuine  competence. 
U S .   approach  was,  Why  “tamper  with  a  successful  formu la?”   Funda-  
mental  issue  lay  deeper.  “Technological  superiority  . . . creates  its own 
foreign  policy  problems.  America’s  Intelsat  partners  a re  pushing  for  a 
Space  Age  which-if 
not  truly  international-is 
a t   least  more  multi- 
national.”  (Sc ience ,  4/4/69,  56-7) 
FAA   released  A ir   T ra f i c   Ac t iv i ty   Repor t   for   1968:  Los  Angeles  In ter-  
national Airport  had  climbed to  position  of  second  busiest U S .   airport, 
from  sixth  place  in   1967. Los Angeles  had  logged  594,486 takeoffs  and  
landings.  O’Hare  International  in   Chicago,  which  had   ranked  first 
every  year  since  1962,  still  led  with  690,810.  Van  Nuys,  Calif.,  re- 
tained  third  position  with  567,973  total  and   led  in   general  aviation 
with  317,816  operations.  Instrument-flight-rule  aircraft  handled  by  FAA 
a i r   route  traffic  control  centers  had  more  than  doubled  in   decade,  to  
19.4 million  in   1968.  (FAA   Release  69 -43 )  
Apr i l   5:  NASA  adoption  of  field  sequential  color  TV  system  to  relay  pictures 
from  moon  on  future  Apollo  flights  was  “solace”  to  inventor  Dr.  Peter 
C.  Goldmark,  president  of  CBS Laboratories,  New  Yo rk   T imes   said. 
System,  employing  small  revolving  filter  disc  to  inject  primary  colors 
in   fron t  of  camera,  had  been  rejected  by  industry  and  FCC  some  15  yrs 
earlier  in   favor  of  all-electronic  compatible  system  now  in   worldwide 
use.  Advantage  of  Goldmark  system  on  moon  flights  was  ability  to 
pick  up  usable  color  images  under  exceptionally  low  levels  of  light 
intensity-important  where  s tars   might  be  ma jor   illumination  source. 
Images  received  from  space  would  then  be  converted  through  com- 
patible  system  for   home  reception.  Dr.  Goldmark  said  system  might 
be   “first  technological  breakthrough  tha t   is  28  years  old.” 
( N Y T ,  
4/5/69,  30) 
Apr i l   6 :  I n   interview  published  by  Th is   W e ek ,  Apollo  8  Astronaut  Frank  
Borman  said  many  things  could  be  learned  from  moon:  “One  . . . I 
hope will be international cooperation,  such as  now  exists  in  Antarctica. 
Even  though  the  moon  struck  me  a s   a  very  desolate,  forbidding  ex- 
panse,  i t  will  be  very  beneficial  fo r  men  to  work  together  to  unlock  its 
many  mysteries  and   secrets.  I  hope  tha t   both  the  moon  and   the  large 
permanent  space  stations  from   ear th   will  be  citadels  for  international 
cooperation  and   tha t   the  people  who  visit  them  will  really  be  inter- 
nationalists  in   the  truest  sense.”  (Th i s  Week ,  4/6/69) 
Baltimore  Sun  said  Ind iana   Univ.  had   announced  plans  for  experiments 
with  NASA  to  determine  problems  in  making  fu ture  lunar   colonies  self- 
supporting.  Studies  to  s tar t   in  August  would  probe  feasibility  of  grow- 
ing  ear th  plants  in  lunar   soil to  provide  food  fo r  manned  space  stations 
and  possibly  fodder  for   animals  transported  to  moon  colonies  in   20  to  
30  yrs.  “Moon  grow”  experiment  would  use  lunar  soil  retrieved  by 
lunar   missions  and   would  expand  as   more  material  became  available. 

102 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AEKONAUTICS,  1%9 

April  6 

Experiments  would  be  conducted  by  astrobotanist  Dr.  Pau l   Mahlberg 
and  team a t  MSC  laboratory  and  later  a t  university.  (Perkinson, B Sun, 
4/6/69) 
Apr i l   7 :  NASA’s Lunar  Landing  Training  Vehicle  ( WTV) , piloted  by  NASA 
test  pilot  Harold  E.  Ream,  successfully  completed  six-minute  flight  a t  
Ellington  AFB.  LLTV  flights  had  been  suspended  since  Dec.  8,  1968, 
crash.  (AP,  B  Sun,  4/8/69,  A3;  4/7/69,  A9) 
MSFC  announced engineer  Chester B.  May  would  be  member of  oceanolo- 
gist  Dr.  Jacques  Piccard’s six-man crew  on  Gulf  Stream Drift Mission, 
scientific  undersea  journey  aboard  submersible  vessel  Ben  FrankEin 
(PX-15).  Vessel  would  dr if t   with  Gulf  Stream  current  from  Miami, 
Fla.,  to  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  from  four   to  six  weeks  beginning  in  
June.  May  would  study  vessel’s  operation  and   evaluate  analogies  be- 
‘tween  i t   and   future  NASA  space  station.  Mission,  covering  1,450  nm, 
would  be   conducted  a t   1,000-ft average  depth,  w i t h   periodic  excur- 
sions  to  300  f t   and   2,000  ft.  PX-15,  designed  by  Dr.  Piccard,  would 
remain  submerged  throughout  journey.  Crew  would  experience  space 
station  characteristics:  isolation,  confinement,  and  stressful  environ- 
ment.  ( MSFC  Release  69-100;  Marshall  S tar ,  4/9/69,  1) 
belt 
“World’s  only  jet-powered  personal  jet  propulsion  system”-jet 
developed  by  Bell  Aerosystems  Co.  under  DOD  sponsorship-made 
its 
first  free  flight  near  Niagara  Falls  International  Airport.  Device  would 
provide  quick-response, individual  aerial  mobility.  ( DOD Newsfilm  Re- 
lease  185-69;  AFJ,  6/14/69,  20) 
In  U.S.’s  Annual  Review  of  National  a d  Co-Operative  Iitternational 
Space  Activities,  Soviet  Government  report  said  Soviet  scientists  had 
paid  “great  attention”  to  developing methods  of  detecting  signs  of  life 
on  other  planets.  “With  the  development  of  space  research,  the  prob- 
lem  of  detecting  life  on  the  celestial  bodies  closest  to  the  ear th   by 
means  of  space  craft  is   becoming  a  priority  matter.  The   considerable 
difference  between  conditions  on  the  surface  of  the  moon,  Venus  and 
Mars  and  those  in  which  terrestrial  life  exists  makes  it  necessary  for  
us  to  extend  our  knowledge  of  the  limits  within  which  terrestrial  life 
and   life  in   general  can  exist.  In   this  connexion  Soviet  scientists  are  
investigating  the  possible  limits of  the  existence of  life.  The  absence of 
systematic processes  for  the movement  of  matter  on  the moon  obviously 
makes  active  life  on  its  surface  impossible.  On  Mars,  where  free  liquid 
water i s  probably  absent,  life  is possible  using matter  transfer  by  frost, 
ice  in  the  soil,  water  vapour  and   the  wind.  Examination  of  the  temper- 
ature  limits  for  the  existence of  l ife  gives  rise  to  a  number  of  consider- 
ations which  allow  us  not  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of 
life,  in   fo r  example,  the  polar  regions  of  Venus.”  (Tex t)  
*  Space  Publications,  Inc.,  reported  i ts   poll  of  Senate  showed  48   Senators 
opposed  to  o r   “leaning  against”  deployment  of  proposed  Safeguard 
ABM   system;  46  for  or  leaning  toward  deployment;  and   6  uncom- 
mitted,  of  which 4  had   record of  voting  for  former Sentinel  system  and  
2  against.  (SBD,  4/7/69,  167)  
Apr i l   8:  NASA’s Mariner  V I I ,  launched  from  ETR March 27,  successfully  exe- 
cuted  midcourse  maneuver  in   response to  rad io   commands  from Woo- 
mera,  Australia,  tracking  station.  Spacecraft,  more  than  2.5-million  m i  
from  earth,  would  fly,within  2,000  mi  of  Mars  Aug.  5.  (Sehlstedt, 
B Sun,  4/9/69,  A5;  Reuters,  W  Pos t ,  4/9/69,  A7) 

103 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
April  8 
Sa turn  V 2nd  stage  (S-11-8)  was  successfully captive-fired a t  Mississippi 
Test  Facility  fo r  385 secs,  with  only  four  outboard  engines functioning 
for  final 86 secs.  Center engine was  intentionally  cut  off  early  to  evalu- 
a te  early  cutoff as  suppressor of  longitudinal  oscillations  (pogo  effect) 
which  had   occurred  on  Apollo  8  and  9 flights.  If  test  da ta   were  satis- 
factory,  center  engine might  be  cut  off  early  during  Apollo  10 mission 
in  May.  (MSFC   Release  69-107) 
Aerobee  150  MI  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carried 
American  Science  &  Engineering,  Inc.,  payload  to  109.4-mi  (176-km) 
altitude.  Objective  was  to  obtain  high-resolution  pictures  of  general 
x-ray  emission  from  solar  corona  in  quiescent  state,  using  9-in-dia 
x-ray  m irror   and   12-frame  rotating  camera  with  variety  of  filters. 
Rocket  and  instruments  performed  satisfactorily ; x-ray  exposures  of 
considerable  scientific  value  were  anticipated.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL)  
*  President  Nixon  announced  nomination  of  NASA  Assistant  Administrator 
for  Industry  Affairs  Philip  N.  Whittaker  to  be  Assistant  Secretary  of 
the  A ir   Force  for  Installations  and  Logistics.  He  also  announced  ap-  
pointment  of  former  Gov.  William  W.  Scranton  of  Pennsylvania  as 
U S .   Representative to   INTELSAT  Conference with  rank  of  Ambassador, 
replacing  Ambassador  Leonard  H.  Marks,  who  resigned  March  21. 
(PD,  4/14/69,  533-4 ;   W  Star,  4/9/69,  A8) 
MSFC  announced  $8,391,052  modification to   contract  with  North  Ameri- 
can Rockwell Corp.  Rocketdyne Div.  for   support  services  to  J-2  rocket- 
engine  program  from   June  1, 1969,  through  April  30,  1970.  (MSFC  
Release  69-104) 
Merger  of  military  and  civilian  man-in-space programs  was  ma jor   de- 
cision  facing  Nixon  Administration,  said  Howard  Benedict  of  Associ- 
ated  Press.  Many  observers  felt  i t   necessary  because,  under  separate 
courses  being  taken  by  NASA  and   DOD,  costs  of  competing  hardware 
systems  “might  explode out  of  proportion.”  Congressmen  had  charged 
there  was  costly  duplication  in   NASA’s orbiting  workshop  and   DOD’S 
MOL,  both  planned  for  1971   launch,  bu t   with  work  on  both  so  fa r  
advanced  there  was  no  turning  back.  Air  Force  Secretary,  Dr.  Robert 
Seamans, Jr.,  former NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  had  said  any  attempt 
to  combine two programs  “would  jeopardize  the  returns  to  each agency 
and  would  ultimately  increase  the  cost.  . . . These  activities  require 
different  equipment,  different  orbits  and   different  timing.”  NASA  As- 
sociate Administrator  for Manned Space Flight,  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller, 
had  said  classified  study  to  determine MOL’S  capabilities  to  accomplish 
NASA’s long-duration  ear th   orbit  objectives  had  shown  extended  MOL 
“too  limited  to  provide  a  significant,  cost-effective step  toward  achiev- 
ing  NASA’s long  duration  objective.” 
Many  observers  believed  technology  and   information  for  building 
national  space  station  housing  military  and   civilian  personnel  might 
emerge  from  the  two  programs.  Another  possibility  was  use  by  both 
agencies  of  similar  rocket  and  spacecraft  on  separate  scientific  and 
military  missions with  equipment  standardization  providing  “consider- 
able  saving.”  (Huntsville  Times,  4/8/69) 
“Where  the  Legend  Starts,”  film  depicting  life  of  late  Cosmonaut Yuri 
Gagarin,  was  being  prepared  in  U.S.S.R.,  Tass  announced.  Gagarin, 
first man  in   space  on  Vostok  Z April  12,  1961, died  in   a ircraf t   crash 
March  27 ,1968 .   (AP,  C T r i b ,  4/9/69) 

1044 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

April  8 

*  Federally sponsored TurboTrain passenger demonstration began with  one 
re turn   t r ip   daily  from   Boston  to  New  York  on  Penn  Central’s  New 
Haven  Region.  Within  year  service  would  permit  elimination  of  45   to 
50  min  from  schedules.  Developed  by  Unite& Aircraft  Corp.,  Turbo- 
Tra ins  were  leased  by  DOT fo r   two-year Government experiment.  (DOT 
Release  4769) 
April  9:  Cosmos CCLXXVIII  was  launched  from Baikonur  by  U.S.S.R.  into 
orbit  with  318-km  (197.6-mi)  apogee,  203-km  (126.1-mi)  perigee, 
89.6-min  period,  and   65.9”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  April  17. 
(GSFC SSR, 4/15/69;  4/30/69;  SBD,  4/10/69,  190) 
British  Aircraft  Corp.  chief  test  pilot  Brian  Trubshaw  flew  Anglo-French 
Concorde  002 supersonic  airliner  on   successful  24-min maiden  flight 
from  Filton  Airfield,  near  Bristol.  Aircraft,  built  to  reach  1,400-mph 
speed,  flew  a t   300  mph  dur ing   flight,  which  copilot  John  Cochran 
termed  “marvelous.”  French  version Concorde 001 made  maiden  flight 
March 2.  (W  Star, 4/10/69,  A13;  AP,  W Post, 4/10/69,  A12) 
‘ 
0  MSFC  announced  issuance  of  RFP’S  for  10-mo  study  to  establish  design 
concepts  and  development  requirements  for   nuclear  rocket  stage  to 
replace  Sa turn   V  3 rd   stage  for  advanced missions  in   late  1970s  and 
1980s and   payload  design  concepts and   development  requirements  for 
flight  test  and   early  operational  applications  of  stage  using  NASA-AEC 
NERVA.  Study,  for  which  proposals  were  due  April  17,  also  would  in- 
vestigate  payloads for  nuclear-stage  test  flights  including  interplanetary 
meteoroid  experiment  ( IME )   and  barium  cloud experiment  ( BCE) . IME 
would  gather  information  on  meteoroid  environment  in  interplanetary 
space,  particularly  in   asteroid  belt  between  Mars  and  Jupiter.  BCE 
would  create  artificial  plasma  cloud  in   space  to  simulate  comet’s  tail 
and   to  study  motions  of  ionized  particles  in  earth‘s  magnetosphere. 
Work  would  be  done  at  MSFC.  (MSFC Release  69-105) 
*  Astronaut  R.  Walter  Cunningham  was  named  a  director  of  American 
Systems  Inc.,  Los  Angeles  electronics  firm.  Cunningham,  LM pilot  on 
Qct.  11-22  Apollo  7  mission,  would  continue  duties  as  astronaut. 
(Reuters, W Post,  4/10/69) 
shipped  20,000-lb,  20-ft-tall  F-1 
*  MSFC 
and   225,000-lb-thrust  J-2 
Sa turn   V  rocket  engines from  New  Orleans  to  France  as  par t   of  NASA 
exhibit  a t   Pa r i s   Air  Show,  May  29-June  8.  Other  items  in   display 
would  include Apollo  8  spacecraft  and   an Apollo  lunar  module.  (MSFC  
Release  69-106;  MSFC  PIO) 
Apr i l   9-11:  NASA  and   National  Science  Teachers  Assn.  sponsored  Youth 
Science Congress  a t   LaRC  to  encourage  original  scientific  research  by 
outstanding  high  school  students.  (Lang ley   Researcher,  4/18/69,  1) 
April  10: Pr ime  crew for Apollo  12  mission was  announced by  NASA:  Astro- 
nauts  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.  (commander) ,   Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.  ( CM 
p i lo t) ,   and  Alan  L.  Bean  ( L M pilot).  Backup  crew  would  be Astronauts 
David  R.  Scott,  Alfred  M.  Worden,  and   James  B.  Irwin.  Apollo  12 
would  land  on   moon  four  to  s ix   months  after  July  1969  Apollo  11 
mission.  (NASA  Release  69-53) 
NASA  reported  research  project  to   develop TV  tube with  completely  black 
face  to  give  pilots  sha rpcon t ra s t   picture  of  a ircraf t   instrument  read- 
ings,  providing  accurate  information  on  rapid  scanning  of  instrument 
panel.  Filters  would  absorb  prevailing  cockpit  light  and   prevent  back 
reflection.  NASA  believed  high-contrast  cathode-ray  tube  could  be  used 

105 

April  10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

i n   commercial  TV  receivers  a s   well  if   production  cost  could  be  re- 
duced.  (NASA  Release  69-52) 
NSF  released  Federal  Support  to   Universities  and  Colleges,  Fiscal  Yea r  
1967,  prepared  for   Office  of  Science  and   Technology.  Federal  support 
to  universities  and   colleges  totaled  $3.3  billion  in   1967,  up  9%  over 
1966  bu t   below  increases  of  32%  and   42%  in   previous  two  years. 
Federal  support  of  academic  science activities  reached  $2.3  billion,  up 
6%, with two-thirds for  science education and  institutional  development 
and   one-third  for  operating  and   plant  costs  for  R&D  projects.  Nonsci- 
ence  activities  reached  $987  million,  o r   30%   of  total.  While  HEW, 
Dept.  of  Agriculture,  AEC,  and   NSF  increased  aid  to  higher  education, 
NASA  decreased spending by  $11 million  ( 8% )   and  DOD by  $37 million 
( 1 2% ) .   (Text) 
0  USA  issued  “cure  notice”  giving  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  15  days  to 
prove  i t  could  solve  technical  problems  of  new  high-speed AH56  Chey- 
enne  helicopter  production  o r   face  cancellation  of  375  on  order.  Cost 
estimate had  soared  from  $1.5  million  each  to  $2.25  million  with  final 
contract  terms  not  yet  negotiated.  (W S J ,  4/14/69,  1 5 )  
April  II: U.S.S.R.  launched  Molniya  I - 1 1   comsat  to  relay  telephone  and 
telegraph  communications  and   TV  broadcasts  to  “the  far   north,” 
Siberia,  Central  Asia,  and   Fa r   East.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee, 
39,595 km  (24,603.2  m i)  ; perigee,  483  km  (300.1 m i)  ; period,  712.1 
min;  and   inclination,  64.9”.  Equipment  was  functioning  normally. 
(GSFC SSR ,  4/15/69;  SBD,  1 /14 /69 ,204 ;   AP,  W  S tar ,   4/11/69,  A l )  
Terms  of  Reference  for  jo in t   NASA/DOD  study  of  space  transportation 
systems  were  approved  by  NASA  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas 0. Paine, 
and   Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  J r .   Two-part 
study  to  assess practicality  of  common  system  would  correlate  needs  of 
both  agencies,  assess  technical  feasibility  of  various  systems,  compare 
costs,  assess  economic  sensibility  of  systems,  and  recommend  concepts 
of  space  transportation  system  with  rationale  for  each  concept.  Group 
would  report  to  President’s  Space Task  Committee  June  15.  (Terms of 
Reference) 
0  U.K.’s  Institute  for   Strategic  Studies  predicted  U.S.S.R.  would  overtake 
U S .   in   ICBM  production  by  mid-1969  but  US. would  retain  overall 
lead  in   nuclear  weapons  because  of  greater  submarine  and   a i r   forces. 
U S .  international role  in   1970s could become  smallest  since  pre-World 
War   11.  (UPI,  W  S tar ,   4/11/69,  A12) 
April  12:  NASA’s Oao  I I   orbiting  astronomical  observatory  (launched Dec. 
7,  1968)  refused  to   accept  commands  from  NASA’s Santiago,  Chile, 
tracking  station.  Satellite  began  tumbling  out  of  control  and   its  solar 
cells  were  unable  to  receive  energy  from   sun  to  charge  its  batteries. 
While project  officials  tried to determine exact nature  of  anomaly, satel- 
lite  recovered, accepting  command  from  Australian  station  within  few 
hours  of  battery  depletion.  Oao  I I   was  placed  in   sunbathing  mode 
while  batteries  recharged.  (Memo,  NASA  Asst  Director  for   Projects; 
NASA  Release  69-55) 
0  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  ETR  by  Atlas-Agena  booster 
into  near  polar  orb i t   with  24,391-mi 
apogee, 
(39,245.1-km) 
20,302-mi  (32,665.9-km)  perigee,  1,436.0-min  period,  and   10.2’ 
in-  
clination.  (GSFC,  SSR,  4/15/69;  Pres  Rpt  70  [69] ; W  Pos t ,   1/13/69, 
A14) 

106 

April  12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
*  President  Nixon  announced  he   would  submit  to  Congress April  15 pro- 
posed  anti-inflation  revisions  in   N  1970  budget  including  $4-billion 
reduction  in   Federal  spending, to  $192.9  billion;  $5.5-billion  reduction 
i n   appropriations  requests  and   other  budget  authority;  and   $5.8- 
since  1951.  (PD,  4/21/69,  553-4) 
billion  budget  surplus-largest 
Unpublished  DOD estimate  put  Federal  funding  for  C-5A 
transport  at 
$5,202,400,000,  Bernard  D.  Nossiter wrote in   Washington Pos t .   Figure 
was  $77.2-million  increase  over  quotation  by  USAF  in   January  and 
total  $2.1  billion  (66%)  increase  since  original  1964  estimate. 
( W  Post,  4/12/69,  A2) 
April  12-14:  NASA  successfully  launched  series  of  three  Nike-Apache 
sounding  rockets  from  Churchill  Research  Range  carrying  GSFC pay. 
loads  to  study  energy  spectra  and  relative  abundances  of  various 
charge  species  of  solar  cosmic  radiation  dur ing   period  of  solar  maxi. 
mum.  Each  rocket carried  three  nuclear  emulsion stocks  and  solid-state 
detector  sensitive  to  protons  above  30  mev.  Rockets  reached  98.4-mi 
( 1 5 8 . 4 - h ) ,   96.4-mi 
(155.2-km),  and   100.0-mi  (161.0-km)  alti- 
tudes  and   instruments  performed  satisfactorily.  Payloads  were  re-  
covered  in   good  condition.  (NASA   Rpts  SRL) 
April  14: NASA's Nimbus  I I I   (Nimbus-B2)  meteorological satellite  was  suc- 
cessfully  launched  from  WTR by  Long-Tank, Thrust-Augmented  Thor 
("ho rad )  -Agena  D  booster  after  three-day  postponement  because  of 
fuel  leak.  Satellite  entered  orb i t   with  703-mi  (1,131.1-km)  apogee, 
662.2-mi  (1,065.5-km)  perigee,  107.3-min  period,  and   80.1' 
in- 
clination. 
Nimbus  I I I   carried  USA'S  Eg i s   X l l I   (also  called  Secor  X I I I )   Se- 
quential  Collation  of  Range  satellite  as  secondary  payload  on  Agena 
2nd   stage and   injected  it  in to   orb i t  with  704-mi  (1,132.7-km)  apogee, 
667-mi  (1,073.2-km)  perigee,  107.3-min  period,  and   99.9"  inclination. 
Pr imary   objectives were  to  inject Nimbus  I I I   into  orbit  and  demon- 
strate  satisfactory  operation  of  active,  three-axis,  earth-oriented  space- 
craft  for  a t   least  three  months  and   to  acquire  representative  global 
samples of  infrared  spectra  for  vertical  temperature  profiles  of  atmos- 
phere.  As  secondary  objectives  spacecraft  would  make  global  maps  of 
radiative  energy  balance  of  ear th   atmosphere  and  cloud  cover  over  a t  
least  one  seasonal  cycle;  demonstrate  feasibility  of  surface  pressure 
and   tropospheric  wind  measurements  by  infrared   interferometer  spec- 
trometer  system  and  temperature  profile  determination  by  infrared 
spectrometry;  make  global  maps  of  ear th   and  day-and-night  cloud 
cover  fo r   three  months  from   image-dissector camera  system  and   high- 
resolution  infrared  radiometer;  and   demonstrate  SNAP-19  system  a s  
auxiliary  power  system  for   three  months.  Spacecraft  carried  seven 
ever  carried  on  U.S.  meteorological 
meteorological experiments-most 
satellite-and  was  first  capable  of  measuring  emitted  infrared  energy 
that  would  permit  inference  of  atmospheric  profile  on  global  basis. 
Interrogation,  recording,  and   location  system  ( IRLS)  would  pinpoint 
position  of  special  electronic  platforms  on fixed  land  sites  and  moving 
objects  such  as  buoys,  balloons,  aircraft,  and   elk  in  Yellowstone 
National  Park. 
Butterfly-shaped  1,269-1b Nimbus  I11 was  fourth  in   series  of  seven 
spacecraft  designed  to  develop  significantly  improved  meteorological 
satellite,  prove  applicability  of  instrumentation,  and   fulfill  special  data 

107 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

April  14 
requirements  of  atmospheric  sciences  research  community.  It  was  re- 
placement  for  Nimbus  B,  which  failed  to  enter  orb i t   May  18,  1968, 
when  launch  vehicle  malfunctioned.  Nimbus  I  (launched  Aug.  28, 
19M)  had  operated  for   one  month  before  solar-array  drive  system 
malfunctioned. Nimbus  I I   (launched May  15, 1966)  had  exceeded  six- 
month  lifetime,  operating  successfully  until  Jan.  18,  1969.  Nimbus 
program  was  managed  by  GSFC  under  OSSA  direction.  (NASA   P ro j   Off; 
NASA  Release  69-50) 
*  NASA’s Apollo  10 lunar  orbital mission was  proceeding well  toward  launch 
readiness  for  11:49  am  EST  May  18, Deputy  Apollo  Program  Director 
George H.  Hage  told  NASA  Hq.  briefing.  Flight  readiness  test  had  been 
successfully  completed  April  9.  Countdown demonstration  test  ( CDDT) 
would  begin  April  27,  completing  cryogenic  propellant  flow  May  2 ;  
crew  participation  in   CDDT  would  begin  May  3.  Astronauts  Thomas  P. 
Stafford  (commander) ,   John  W.  Young  ( C M   p i lo t) ,   and  Eugene  A. 
Cernan  (LM   pilot)  would  be  launched  from   KSC  Launch  Complex  39, 
Pad   B-being 
used  for   first  time-on 
eight-day mission  in   which  crew 
would  enter  lunar  orbit,  separate  LM  from  CSM,  and  pilot  LM  to  within 
50,000  f t  of  lunar  surface. 
Mission  would  include  11  different  crew  operations  on  TV  and 
Westinghouse Electric  Corp.-developed  “experiment involving color TV 
if  we  can  develop i t   and   get  i t   prepared  to  fly  in  time  to  support  this 
mission.  If  we  a re   able  to  . . . we  would  do  most  of  the  pictures  with 
color  TV  rather  than  black  and  white.  . . .” (Transcr ip t)  
a  Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  would  be  first  man  to  step  on  moon,  ac- 
cording  to  NASA  plans  for  July  16 Apollo  11 mission, Apollo  Program 
Manager  George  M.  Low  told  MSC  press  conference. Armstrong,  mis- 
sion  commander,  followed  by  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  LM  pilot,  would 
leave  LM  and  spend  2  hrs   40 min  walking  on  lunar  surface,  gathering 
rock  samples,  setting  up  experiments,  and  taking  pictures  within  100 
f t   of  LM .   Astronauts  would  not  go  farther,  Low  said,  because  “all  that 
we  need  to  carry   ou t   in  deploying  the  experiment  in   doing  all  of  the 
activities  that  we  have  to  do   on  the  surface  the  first  time  . . . can  be 
done within  the  first  50  or  100 f t  from  the  LM  and   we  see no  reason  to 
go  any  further  and  use  up  a lot  of  energy walking  a s  opposed  to  doing 
those  things  tha t   we  would  like  to  do.  . . .” (Transcript) 
*  Apollo  11  CSM  and   LM  were  mated  with  Sa turn   V  (SA-506) 
launch 
vehicle  a t  KSC  in   preparation  for  July  16 lunar  landing mission.  ( S B D ,  
4/15/69,  209) 
*  Aerobee  150   MI  sounding  rocket  with  VAM-20  booster  launched  by 
NASA  from  WSMR   carried  GSFC  payload  to  116.5-mi  (187.5-km)  alti- 
tude.  Pr imary   objective  was  to   obtain  solar  x-ray  spectra  from  2  to 
400  A.  Secondary  objective  was  to  obtain  integrated  solar  flux  from  8 
to  20   A.  Data  would  be   used  to  check  calibration  of  spectrometer  on 
board   Os0  V  (launched  Jan.  22 ) .   Rocket  and   instruments  functioned 
satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
*  Nixon  Administration  was  responding  to  NASA  requests  for   $ZOO  million 
supplemental R&D  funds  by  “emphatically  ordering  future  reductions” 
in   FY 1970  budget,  said  William  J.  Normyle  in   Av ia t ion   Week  & 
Space Technology.  BOB  had   told  NASA  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas  0. 
Paine,  to  plan  on  $140-million loss  despite  conclusions of  House  sub- 
committees  that  NASA’s R&D  should  be  increased  $234.4  million.  Until 

108 

April  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
Nixon  decisions  on  U S .   space  future,  cut  would  “wipe  out”  work  on 
space stations,  shuttle/logistics  vehicles,  and  manned  lunar   exploration. 
Feasible  fu ture   programs  were  being  studied  by  President’s  ad  hoc 
committee which  would  report  in  September.  ( A v  W k ,  4/14/69,  27 -8 )  
e  General aviation’s  impact on U S .   economy in   1980 would  be  $7.1  billion, 
222.7%  above  $2.2-billion  industry  contribution  to  GNP  in   1967,  ac- 
cording  to  The  Magnitude  and  Economic Impact  of  General Av ia t ion ,  
study  by  R.  Dixon  Speas Associates  for  AIA.  Study  said  1980 airports 
and   airways  system  must  be  prepared  to  accept  260,000  general-avia- 
tion  a ircraf t   making  241  million  takeoffs  and   landings  and   carrying 
317 million  passengers.  (MA   Fact  Book;  Bramley, Amer  A v ,   4/14/69, 
17-9) 
In   Duke  Univ.  lecture, 
r.  Peter  van  de   Kamp,  Director  of  Sproul  Qb- 
servatory  a t   Swarthmore  College,  Pa.,  described  discovery  of  fourth 
planet-like  body  found  outside  solar  system.  Existence  had  been  de- 
duced  from  30  yrs  telescopic  observation  of  irregularities  in   Barnard’s 
S tar ,   six  light  years  from  earth.  ( N Y T ,  4/15/69,  16;  AP,  W Po s t ,  
4/17/69,  F13) 
April  15:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Titan  IIIB-Agena  D booster.  Satellite  entered  orb i t   with  292.7-mi 
(471-km)  apogee,  78.9-mi  (127-km)  perigee,  89.9-min  period,  and  
108.7”  inclination  and   reentered  April  30.  (GSFC SSR,  4 /15 /69 ;  
4 /30 /69 ;   SBD,  4/25/69,  264) 
0  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos CCLXX IX   into  orbit  with  350-km  (217.5-mi) 
apogee,  205-km  ( 127.4-mi)  perigee,  89.8-min  period,  and   51.8” 
inclination.  West  German  Institute  for  Space  Research  later  reported 
spacecraft  was  a  Soyuz  space  capsule  and   tha t   i t   reentered  and   soft- 
landed  in  U.S.S.R.  April  24.  (GSFC SSR,  4/15/69;  AP,  c“  T r i b ,  
4/25/69) 
0  President  Nixon  submitted  to  Congress  FY  1970  budget  amendments 
[see  April  121.  White  House,  DOD,  and  NASA  released  details.  NASA 
funds  were  reduced  $45  million  from  $3.878-billion  Johnson  proposal 
to  $3.833  billion  (recommended  $3.716  in   new  obligational  authority 
plus  $117  million  carr ied   over  from  prior  years) .  
Apollo  Applications  program  would  be  cut  by  $57  million  but  new 
obligational  authority  of  $46 million  for  resumption  of  Sa turn   V 
rocket  production  and   $40  million  for  lunar  exploration  would  be  
added,  for   net  increase  of  $29  million  in   manned  space  flight  funds. 
Space  science  and   applications  would  be   cut  by  $41  million,  to 
$517.8-million  new  total.  Advanced  research  and   technology  would 
be  cu t   $13 million,  to   total  $277.4  million;  and  tracking  and  data  ac- 
quisition,  $20  million,  to  total  $278 million.  University  affairs  funding 
would  remain  a t   $9  million,  technology  utilization  a t  $5 million,  and 
NERVA  funding  under  nuclear  rocket  program  a t   $36.5  million. 
Funds  proposed  fo r   construction  of  facilities  and   for  research  and  
program  management  remained  unchanged. 
At  NASA  budget  briefing,  NASA  Administrator  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine 
said:  “The  reductions we  have been  required  to make will  make neces- 
sary  difficult  program  adjustments  and   will  result  in   reduced  accom- 
plishments in  many  areas.  However  . . . in   a  context  clearly  requiring 
that  Government spending  be  held  to  a  minimum,  the  Administration 
has recognized the  importance to  the  United States  of  a  strong and  con- 

109 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
April  15 
tinuing  program  in   space  and   aeronautics.  . . . Last  January,  I  char- 
acterized  President  Johnson’s  N 1970 Budget  a s   a  ‘holding’  Budget 
. . . deferring  to  President  Nixon’s  Administration  the  decisions  the 
nation  faces  on  the  fu ture   of  manned  flight  programs.”  President 
Nixon’s  recommendations,  “if  approved  by  the  Congress,  w i l l   ensure 
tha t   the  nation  can  continue  a  scientifically  effective  program  of 
manned  lunar  exploration  and avoid foreclosing  our  ability to continue 
produce  Sa turn  V  launch  vehicles  . . . to   lapse  beyond  the  point where 
large-scale  space operations  in   the  future  by  allowing  the  capability  to 
i t  can  economically be  resumed.” 
DOD spending  was  reduced  $1.1 billion  and   requested  new  obliga- 
tional  authority,  $3.1  billion,  including  $51 million  from  MOL.  Other 
funding,  $78.6  million;  agricultural  and  
science  budget  cuts:  AEC 
na tura l  resources conservation, $345 million;  HEW   university  facilities, 
$107  million;  and   NIH ,   $47.4  million.  NSF  budget  remained  a t   $495 
million.  Nixon  budget  made  available  $92.7-million  carry-over  for  SST 
R&D bu t  no  funds fo r  prototype construction.  Overall reduction  in   space 
and  atomic  energy  funding  was  $140 million.  ( P D ,  3/21/69,  561-3; 
NASA  Budget  Briefing  Transcript;  DOD   Transr ip t ;   W  Po s t ,   4/15- 
16 /69 ;   NYT ,   4/16/69;  Science,  4 /25 /69)  
*  Project  Tektite  Aquanauts  Richard  A.  Waller,  Conrad  V.  W.  Mahnken, 
John  6. Van  Derwalker,  and   H.  Edward  Clifton  were  brought  to  sur-  
face  and   placed  in   decompression  chamber  for  19  hrs,  after  record- 
breaking  59  days  on  ocean  floor  off  St.  John,  Virgin  Islands.  They  had 
submerged  Feb.  15  in   successful  experiment  to  determine  how  men 
functioned  for  extended periods  underwater.  At  news  conference later, 
aquanauts  revealed  they  had  spent 25-40   hrs   outside  underwater  habi- 
ta t   dur ing   first  two  weeks,  moving  no  farther  than  300  f t ;   later  they 
averaged  70  hrs   per  week,  swimming  up  to  3,000  f t   from  hab i ta t   to 
study marine life,  ocean currents, and geology.  (Lyons, NYT,  4/14/69, 
17 ;   AP,  W  S tar ,   4/15/69,  B11;  W  Pos t ,   4/16/69,  A9;  4/17/69; 
4/19/69,  A6) 
At  American  Chemical  Society  meeting  in  Minneapolis,  Univ.  of  Cali- 
forn ia   a t   Berkeley  nuclear  scientist  Albert  Ghiorso  reported  discovery 
of  element  104  isotopes  104-257  and   104-259  and   possibly  104-258. 
Discoveries, made by  bombarding target  in  heavy  ion  linear  accelerator 
( H ILAC ) ,   were  announced by Lawrence Radiation Laboratory,  operated 
a t  Univ.  of  California for   AEC.  (AEC  Release M -87 )  
Apr i l   15-1  7 :  Conference on  technology of  food  management  for  aerospace 
vehicles  was  sponsored  by  NASA,  NAS,  and   Univ.  of  South  Florida  a t  
Tampa, Fla.  Discussions included Mercury, Gemini,  and  Apollo mission 
experience by  Dr.  Charles A.  Berry,  MSC  Director  of  Medical Research 
and  Operations,  and   feeding system  requirements  for  Manned Orbiting 
Laboratory  and   Apollo  Applications  program.  Food  specialists  had 
found  they  needed to  improve methods on  all types of  aerospace flights 
with  emphasis  on  more  palatable  food  and   less  food  preparation  time 
in   flight.  (NASA  Special Release) 
Apr i l   16:  NASA  would  require  $5-  to  $5.6-billion  annual  budget  “within 
three  years”  fo r   simultaneous  development  of  orbiting  space  station 
and   lunar   exploration  in   1970  and   onward,  NASA  Associate  Adminis- 
tra tor   fo r   Space Science and   Applications,  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  said 
in  Wash ing ton  Pos t   interview.  (Cohn,  W  Po s t ,  4/17/69,  A3) 

110 

April  16 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 
*  Aerobee  150  M I   sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  with 
VAM-20  booster  carried  Naval  Research  Laboratory  payload  to  
117.0-mi  (188.3-km)  altitude  to   record  white-light  corona  of  sun 
from  three  to   nine  solar  rad i i   with  package  containing  two  externally 
occulted  coronagraphs  and  three  related  experiments.  Rocket  and  in- 
struments  functioned  satisfactorily.  ( NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
NASA  noted  new  level  of  maturity  in  conduct  of  Apollo  8 mission,  NASA 
Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications,  Dr. 
.Homer E.  Newell,  told  National  Space Club  in  Washington,  D.C.  “We 
got  the  feeling  that  the  people  . . . handling  the  operations had   now  a 
new  tool that  fit the hand.”  Maturing  of  total  space capability was  seen 
in   use  of  Pioneers  and   ear th   orbiting  satellites  during  Apollo  8  “to 
keep  track  of  what  the sun was doing  so that  the directors  of  the Apollo 
operation  could know  what  radiation  conditions  in   space were  relative 
to  . . . crew  safety.”  Mission  also used  weather  satellites and  communi- 
cation  satellites,  “not  only  to   transmit  pictures  . . . but  also  as   an  
integral  par t   of  the  operation,  to  transmit  data.  . . .” 
Asked  NASA’s priority  on  space  station  versus  lunar  exploration  in  
view  of  increase  in  funding  request  for   lunar  landing  program,  Dr. 
Newell  said:  “Now  you  have  touched  uppn  what  I  think  is  going  to  be 
the  most  m c u l t   question  for   the  country  to   resolve  in   the  months 
ahead.”  There  was  general  agreement  that  manned  space  flight  should 
continue. Debate would  be  over whether  i t  would  be  done by  continued 
lunar  exploration,  ear th   orbital  operations,  or  both.  “Our  own  feeling 
is  that  the  country  ought  to  do  both.  Certainly  after  having  put  all  the 
investment  into  landing  a  man  on  the  moon  and   developing  the  capa- 
bility  to  do  so  we  must  continue  to  explore  the  moon.  And  we   cannot 
foresee  any  reasonable  or  rational  national  program  in   which  we  do 
not  continue  that  exploration.  At  the  same  time  . . . we  haven’t 
finished  developing the manned  space flight  capability. We  have  got  to 
. . . get  that  permanent  foothold  in   space  and  that  i s  where  the  space 
station  comes  in.”  (Transcript) 
0  LaRC  and  JPL   announced  formation  of  management  teams  to  direct  vi- 
king  Mars  1973 program  to  send  two  instrumented  lander-and-orbiter 
spacecraft  to  Mars  i n  1973. LaRC  h ad   responsibility  fo r   overall project 
management  and   for  lander  portion  of  spacecraft.  JPL would  manage 
orbiter  portion  and  tracking  and  data  acquisition. James S.  Martin,  Jr., 
was  LaRc  project manager, with Henry W.  Norris  named Viking  orbiter 
manager  a t   JPL.  (NASA  Release 69-54;  JPL  Release 512) 
*  MSFC  announced  award  of  eight-month  identical  $400,000  contracts  to 
Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.  and Bendix Corp. for  preliminary 
design  and   definition studies  of  dual-mode lunar   roving  vehicles.  DLRV 
would  provide  mobility  for  one  astronaut  on  lunar  surface  and  could 
be  operated  by   remote  control  from  earth  while  making  automated, 
long-range  traverses  of  large  lunar  areas.  DRLV  would  be  delivered  to  
moon  aboard  Apollo  LM.  After  astronauts  left,  i t   would  be  placed  in  
remote control  for   geological and  geophysical tr ips   of  600 mi  or  more 
for  one  year,  during  which  it  would  collect  up  to  200  lbs  of  lunar 
samples  and  measure  lunar   terrain.  I t   would  then  rendezvous  with 
and  transfer  samples  for   return  to   ear th   for   analy- 
sis.  (MSFC Release 69-110) 
At  closed  session  of  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  Dr.  Robert  C. 

111 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  I369 

April  16 
Seamans, Jr.,  Secretary  of  the Air  Force,  and  Gen.  John  P. McConnell, 
Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff,  said  development  of  new  intercontinental 
supersonic  bomber  was  “perhaps  our  most  urgent  requirement.”  Air- 
craft,  with  proposed  ABM system,  would  “provide  insurance  against 
unexpected Soviet developments.”  (Homan,  W Post,  4/17/69,  A9) 
*  U.S.S.R.  announced  it  would  conduct  series  of  rocket  tests  in   Pacific 
from  April  17   to  June   15.  Aircraft  and  ships  were  asked  to  avoid 
55-nm-dia circular  area  north  of  Midway  Island  w i t h   center  a t   35’23’ 
north  latitude and   172’24‘  west  longitude.  (UP I ,   W  News ,   4/17/69,  9 ;  
SBD   Space Log  supplement, 4 /18 /69)  
0  A t   Vienna  peace  conference,  following  three-day  secret  talks,  AEC 
member  Gerald  F.  Tape  and   Dr.  Yevgeny  K.  Fedorov,  head  of  Soviet 
Weather  Bureau,  issued  joint  communique  expressing  concern  about 
amount  of  harmful  radioactivity  that  would  be  released  by  nuclear 
explosions  when  used  for  such  projects  as  canal  digging.  Tape  pre- 
dicted  widespread  use  of  nuclear  explosion  for  benefit  of  nonnuclear 
countries  was  still  five  years  away;  Fedorov  said  Soviet  technology 
would  permit  general  use  of  some  types  before  1974, but  applications 
would  come  later.  (Hamilton, N Y T ,  4/17/69,  8 )  
*  MIT and   USN  unveiled  in   Boston  computerized guidance  and   control  sys- 
tem  to  enable pilot  of  deep-diving rescue vessel  to  rendezvous  and  dock 
with  disabled  submarines  a t   depths  to  5,000  ft.  I t   would  be  used  in  
class  of  USN  submarines 
Deep  Submergence  Rescue  Vehicles-new 
scheduled  fo r   first  test  dive  in   June  1969.  (Wilford,  N Y T ,   4/17/69, 
94;  W  Post, 4/17/69,  A4) 

April  17:   Ma j .   Jerauld  R .   Gen try  
l i f t i n g b o d y   vehicle 
( U S A F )   p i lo ted   USAF   X-24A 
on  i t s   first  g l ide   f l i gh t .   T h e   wingless  c r a f t ,   wh ich   depends   on  shape  and  speed  for 
aerodynam ic   l i f t ,   was   air-launched  f r o m   a   B-52  a i r c ra f t   at  45,000-foot  a l t i tude   and 
mach   0.66. Designed  f a r  max imum   speed   o f   mach  2   and  a l t i tudes   t o   100,000  f e e t ,   the 
X-24A  w a s   one  o f   three  wingless  experimental  vehicles  i n   the  jo in t   USAF-NASA 
re-  
search  program  s tudy ing   concepts  f o r   reusable  and  maneuverable  reen try   spa c e c ra f t .  

112  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

April  17 
d  by  Maj.  Jerauld  R. 
April  17:  X-24A 
lifting-body  research  vehicle, 
Gentry  ( USAF) , successf 
flight  from  Rogers 
Dry  Lake,  Calif.  Vehicle 
ir-launched  from  B-52  a ircraf t   a t  
45,000-ft altitude  and mach  0.66  for  pilot  checkout and   data  on  longi- 
tudinal  trim,  lift,  and  drag.  [NASA  P r o j  OB) 
NASA’s H G l O   l if t ingbody   vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  A. 
Manke,  successfully  completed  15 th  flight.  Pr imary   objectives  were  to 
expand  flight  envelope  to  mach 0.9  and  to  determine control character- 
istics  a t   mach  0.9.  Vehicle  was  air-launched  from  B-52  a ircraf t   north 
of  Four   Corners,  Calif.,  a t   45,000-ft  altitude  and   mach  0.7.  Manke 
ignited  three  chambers  of  XLR-11  engine,  rotated  vehicle,  climbed  to  
55,000-ft  altitude,  and   sustained  flight  a t  mach  0.9  fo r   100 secs.  (NASA 
P ro j  Off) 
Rep.  George  P.  Miller  (D-Calif.)  introduced  in   House  H.R.  10251, new 
NASA  FY  1970  authorization  bill  totaling  $3.716  billion  in   line  with 
President  Nixon’s  April  1 5  amended  budget  request.  Bill  was  referred 
to House Committee on  Science and  Astronautics.  (Text;  CR ,  4/17/69, 
H2806) 
*  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill  Re- 
search  Range  carried  TRW  Systems  Inc.  payload 
to  161.6-mi 
(260-km)  altitude.  Objectives were  to  measure  total  flux  and  energy, 
including  spectrum  of  precipitated  energetic  (1-20  kev)  H  atoms  and 
precipitated  energetic  protons  and   electrons;  fluctuating  DC  electron 
fields;  HB light  intensity  altitude profile;  and   location  and  intensity  of 
ionosphere curren t   systems.  Rockets  and   instruments  functioned  satis- 
factorily;  good  da ta   were  obtained.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
*  Aerobee  150   M I   sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from   WSMR  with 
VAM-20  booster  carried  Naval  Research  Laboratory  payload  to 
113.7-mi  (182-km)  altitude  to  record  white-light  corona  of  sun  from 
three  to  nine  solar  rad i i   with  package  containing  two  externally  oc- 
culted  coronagraphs  and   three  related  experiments. Rocket  and  instru- 
ments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL)  
*  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  NASA  Wallops  Sta- 
tion  carr ied   Univ.  of  Illinois  and   GCA  Corp.  payload  to  130.5-mi 
(210-km)  altitude  to  measure  electron  density,  collision  frequency, 
and  temperature  in  lower  ionosphere  a t  vernal  equinox  during  sunspot 
maximum.  Rocket  and   dual-frequency propagation  experiment  for   a ir-  
glow  photometer  performed  satisfactorily.  Langmuir-Smith  probe  and  
uv  experiment  produced  no  data  and  payload  did  not  come  out  of 
calibration  until  near  impact.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
0  MSFC  announced  modification  of  $3,057,503  to  contract  with  Chrysler 
Corp.  Space  Div.  for  work  on  mechanical  ground  support  equipment 
for Sa turn  IB  and Sa turn  V  launch vehicles  from  Dec.  1 ,1968 ,  through 
March  31,  1970.  MSFC  also  announced  one-year  $5,704,116  extension 
to  contract with  RCA  Service  Co.  Div.  of  Radio  Corp.  of  America  for  
technical  services  in   support  of  MSFC  Management  Services.  ( MSFC 
Releases  69-115,  69-114) 
DOT  released S t d y  of  A i r  Cargo  and A i r  Passenger  Terminal Facilitation 
by  Simat,  Helliesen, & Eichner,  Inc.,  and   TransPIan,  1nc.-source  doc- 
ument  for  Transportation  Facilities  Committee’s  industry-Government 
task  forces.  It  forecast  worldwide passenger  traffic  increase  of  nearly 
10%   annually  and   a i r   cargo  increase  of  nearly  20%  annually  dur ing  

113 

April  17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

next  decade.  Documentation,  processing,  and   handling  delays  were 
contributing  to  nearly  six-day  delivery  time  of  a i r   cargo  despite  six- 
hour   Atlantic  crossings,  and   Government  clearance  procedures  were 
critical  problem  for   international  cargo  operations.  Report  recom- 
mended:  further  consideration  of  high-speed  rail,  STOL,  and   VTOL 
services;  computerized  processing  of  cargo  documentation  and  high- 
speed  communication  to  facilitate  advanced  clearance ; off -a irpor t  
cargo  terminals ; automated passenger ticketing  and  baggage  handling ; 
and  streamlined,  mechanized  border  formalities.  (DOT   Release  5869) 
*  Rep.  Emilio  Q.  Daddario  (D-Conn.)  told  House  Dr.  Franklin  A.  Long 
of  Cornel1 Univ.  had  been  asked  to  withdraw  from  nomination  as  N S F  
Director  after  refusing  to  support  Administration’s  ABM  system.  “ I t   is  
unfortunate  that  the  Nixon  administration  is  sacrificing  the  National 
Science Foundation on  the  altar  of  the ABM,  and, by  so  doing, seriously 
affecting  i ts   unique  capability  to  be   of  service  to  our  country.”  (CR, 
4/17/69,  H2759) 
April  18: Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A.  Armstrong  and Edwin E. Aldrin,  Jr., 
dressed  in   full  landing  attire,  rehearsed  simulated  lunar  landing  a t  
MSC  for  the  2  hrs  40  min  they  would  spend  walking  and   working  on 
lunar  surface  in   July.  Astronauts  practiced  scooping  rock  and   soil 
samples,  unfurled  umbrella-like  antenna,  and   deployed  seismometer  to 
detect  quakes  and   a r ray   of  m irrors   to  serve  as  laser  target  for  astron- 
omers  on  earth.  (Wilford,  NYT,  4 /19 /69 ;   UPI,  P Bull,  4/19/69) 
MSFC announced  i t  had   issued RFPS  for  assistance  in   producing  320 com- 
pleted  solar  “arrays”  to  convert  solar  energy  into  electrical  power 
to  operate  Sa turn   I  Workshop.  Two  wings  covered  with  120  modules 
each,  for  total  1,200-sq-ft area, would  produce  12,000 w  for Workshop. 
Pre-proposal  conference was  scheduled a t   MSFC  May  1.  (MSFC   Release 
69-1  16) 
INTELSAT  Consortium had  selected  Atlas-Centaur launch  vehicle  for  Intel- 
sa t  IV  program,  ComSatCorp announced.  First  Intelsat  IV-18-ft-high7 
8-ft-dia  comsat  with  5,000  two-way  voice  grade  circuits-would 
be 
launched  in   early  1971.  ComSatCorp  would  negotiate  with  NASA  for 
purchase  and   launch  of  two  Atlas-Centaur  boosters  with  option  for 
two more. Atlas-Centaur was manufactured  by  General Dynamics Corp. 
Convair  Div.  and   managed  by  L ~ R c .   (ComSatCorp  Release  69-19; 
Lew is  News ,   4/25/69,  1) 
ComSatCorp announced earnings of  $1,525,000,  or  15 cents per  share,  for 
first  quar ter   of  1969.  I t   had  earned  $1,798,000  (18 cents  per  share)  
for  similar  period  in   1968.  Expected  decline  followed increased  operat- 
ing  expenses  from   expansion  of  satellite  and   ear th   station  system. 
(ComSatCorp Release  69-18) 
Having  started  from  “near  zero”  in   1961, West  Germany  was  spending 
about  $90 million  annually  on  space activities, said  D.  S.  Greenberg in  
Science,  with  rise  to  $150  million  expected  within  few  years.  About 
40%  was  in   international  programs  like  E ~ O  
and  ESRO but  emphasis 
was  on  building  domestic  facilities.  All-German  satellite  was  being 
built  fo r   launch  by  NASA  and   Germans  were  working with  French  on 
comsat  for  1972 Munich  Olympic  Games  coverage.  “With  no  manned 
space  effort  or  aspirations  to  divert  their  resources,  and   with  the 
military  barred  from  space,  whatever  the  Germans  muster  in   space 

114 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

April  18 

activity  goes  directly  into  scientific  research  o r   commercial  applica- 
tions,”  Greenberg said.  (Science, 4/18/69,281-3) 
April  20:   AH-56A  Cheyenne  helicopter-integrated, 
aerial,  vehicle-arma- 
ment-avionics-fire  control  gunship  capable  of  firing  machine  guns, 
grenades,  rockets,  and   missiles-could 
become  latest  DoD-purchased 
a ircraf t  to  incur  Congressional and  public criticism  because  of  massive 
cost  overruns,  major  technical  difficulties,  and   hints  of  improper  pro- 
curement  practices,  Robert  Walters  said  in   Washington  Sunday  S tar .  
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.’s  California  Co.  was  prime  contractor  on 
Cheyenne  project which “has  been  i n  trouble  almost since i ts  inception 
in   August  1964.”  Total  cost  for   Cheyenne  program,  including  $195.3 
million  estimated  for  R&I),  was  set  as  $1.06  billion  and   Lockheed 
contract allowed  further  increases.  (W  Star, 4/20/69,  A8) 
April  21:  NASA’s Explorer  XXXVlll (launched  July  4, 1968 ) ,   orbiting  a t  
3,640-mi  altitude,  had  discovered  earth,  like  Jupiter,  sporadically 
emitted low-frequency radio  signals, Radio Astronomy Explorer  project 
scientist  Dr.  Robert  G.  Stone  told  1969  spring  meeting  of  U S .   Na- 
tional  Committee  of  International  Union  of  Radio  Science  in   Wash- 
ington,  D.C.  “In  the  radio  frequency  range  below  10 megahertz,  the 
Ear th   looks  very  much  like  Jupiter.  This  suggests  tha t   the   same 
processes  tha t   account  for  the  Jovian  radio  noise  may  also  be  active 
in   the  Earth‘s  magnetosphere.”  Signals  from  both  planets  appeared 
sharply  beamed  o r   directed  in   narrow  cone,  were  quite  intense  and  
increased  in   intensity  rapidly  when  observed toward lower  frequencies, 
and  were  impulsive,  occurring  i n  rap id  but  sporadic bursts. 
Explorer  XXXVlll also  had  revealed sun  was  more  active source  of 
radio  outbursts  in  lower  frequencies  than  expected,  providing  unique 
means  of  studying  sun’s  outer  atmosphere  to  36-million-mi distance of 
Mercury  orbit.  “Such  information,”  Stone  said,  “could  shed  further 
light  on  mystery  of  Sun’s  part  in   cause  of  low  frequency  radio  storms 
on  the  Earth.”  Explorer  XXXVlIl’s four  750-ft-long  antennas  had 
provided  most  comprehensive  and  detailed  measurements  of  cosmic 
radio  noise a t  low  frequencies yet  available.  Information was  providing 
first  low-frequency  maps  of  rad io   emissions  in  Milky  Way  galaxy, 
showing  tha t  most  radio  emissions originated  in   plane  o r   disc  of  Milky 
Way.  Satellite  had   remained  stable  since  orb i t   despite  repeated  move- 
ment  and  had  continued  to  operate  successfully.  (NASA  Release  69-57; 
AP,  B Sun,  4/22/69,  A6;  O’Tode,  W  Post, 4/22/69,  A l )  
9  President  Nixon’s  amendments to   proposed  FY  1970 space budget  would 
support  post-Apollo manned  flight  a t   expense  of  unmanned  planetary 
space  flight,  William  J.  Normyle  wrote  in  Aviation  Week   &  Space 
Technology.  I n   effect,  NASA  had  received  “almost  all  i t   wanted  for 
planning  post-Apollo manned  lunar   exploration.”  Argument  was  ex- 
pected  i n   House  Committee on  Science  and   Astronautics  over  relative 
apportionment.  ( A v  Wk, 4/21/69,16-7) 
9  Senate  Committee  on  Banking  and   Currency  approved  nomination  of 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for   Organization  and   Management 
Harold  B.  Finger  a s   Assistant  Secretary  of  Housing  and   Urban  De- 
velopment.  (CR,  4/21/69,  D289;  W  S tar ,   4/22/69,  A3)  
April  22:  NASA  named Brian M.  Duff, Vice President for  Communications of 
National  Urban  Coalition,  a s  Public  Affairs  Officer  for  MSC.  He  would 

115 

April  22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

succeed  Pau l  Haney who  was  named  Special Assistant  to   Julian  Scheer, 
Assistant  Administrator  for   Public  Affairs,  NASA  Hq.  Duff  had  been 
Director  of  Special Events  in  NASA  Office  of  Public Affairs  before  going 
to  National  Urban   Coalition.  I n  new  position,  Haney  would  coordinate 
development  of  news  media  materials,  with  concentration  on  Apollo 
manned  lunar   landing.  Haney  later  told  press  he  had  been  ordered  to  
new  position  because  of  personal  differences  with  Scheer.  “I’m  defi- 
nitely  uncertain  whether  to  go   and   have  consulted  a  lawyer,”  he   said. 
Scheer  said  on  April  2 3  transfer  was  not personal  matter  bu t   “case  of 
using  two  very  good  people  where  they  can   best  serve  our  needs.” 
(NASA   Release  69-59;  H  Chron,  4/22-23/69;  H  P o s t ,   4/23/69,  1; 
W  Po s t ,   4/23/69,  A3)  
Rep.  Charles W.  Whalen,  Jr.  (R-Oh io)  , inserted  in  Congressional Record 
results  of  annual  opinion  poll  of  his  constituents  which  showed  51% 
preferred  continuation  of  space  funding  a t   present  level,  21%  pre- 
ferred  cutback  with  reallocation  of  space  funds   to  social  welfare  pro- 
grams,  16% wanted  acceleration  of  space program  with  increased  fund-  
ing  i f   necessary,  and  12%  wanted  none  of  these.  ( C R ,  4/22/69,  E3230) 
*  DOD  reported  Soviet  SS-9  missile  had   been  test-fired  with  multiple  re- 
entry  vehicles  for  first  time  over  U.S.S.R.’s  Pacific  testing  area  a t  
5,000-mi  range.  Missile,  of  which  U.S.S.R.  had   deployed  200,  was 
capable  of  carry ing  warhead  of  up to  25  mt  o r   three warheads  of  5 mt 
and   was  only  Soviet  missile  credited  with  hard-site  destruction  capa- 
bility.  Portions  of  its  booster  had   been  used  in   testing  FOBS.  (DOD  
Release  310-69 ;   Homan,  W  P o s t ,   4/23/69,  A26) 
April  22-25:  Discovery  of  six new  mascons  (mass  concentrations  of  dense 
material)  beneath  moon’s  surface  was  reported  by  J P L   scientists  a t  
50th  Annual  Meeting  of  American  Geophysical  Union  in  Washington, 
D.C.  William  L.  Sjogren,  Pau l   M.  Muller,  and   Dr.  Peter  Gottlieb  re. 
ported  discovery  tha t   brought  to  12  total  mascons  mapped  on  moon’s 
near  face  and   leading  and   trailing  edges  and  tha t   were  expected  to 
refine  gravity  model  used  in  Apollo  navigation. 
Dr.  Gottlieb  said  latest  gravity  model produced  significant  agreement 
with  analysis  of  tracking  information  from  ApoZZo  8 mission  Dec.  21- 
27,  1968. JPL   researchers  were working with MSFC  to  predict  accurately 
landing  sites  several  orbits  before  spacecraft  landing.  Most  da ta   avail- 
able  had   been  taken  from  spacecraft  in   lunar   orb i t   of  about  60   mi. 
JPL   team  expected new  and  possibly  higher  resolution  da ta  from  Apollo 
10 when  lunar  module  orbited  a t   lower  altitude.  ( J P L   Release  514; 
NASA  Release  69-61) 
April  23 :   Cosmos  C C L X X X   was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  into  orbit with  251- 
km  (156-mi)  apogee,  198-km  (123-mi)  perigee,  88.1-min  period,  and  
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  May  6.  ( GSFC  S SR ,   4 /30 /69 ;  
51.0’ 
5/15/69;  SBD ,  4 /25 /69 ,261 )  
e  Briefing  on  ApolZo  9’s  ear th   resources  survey  experiment  [see  March  3- 
131  was  held  a t  NASA  Hq.  Dr.  Leonard  Jaffe,  Director  of  Space  Appli- 
cations  Programs,  stressed  importance  of  satellite photos  for  ear th   re- 
sources  program:  “.  . . we  have  taken  advantage  of  the  Apollo  and  
Gemini,  as  we  d id   with  Mercury,  opportunities  to  get  pictures  of  the 
ear th   and   its  environment  with  cameras,  largely  held  by  hand,  by  the 
astronauts.  These  pictures  have  been  a  very  large  source  of  experi- 
mental  da ta   for   our  Ear th   Resources  Survey  Program.” 

116 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

April  23 

Advantage  of  using  space  for   ear th   resources  survey  was  twofold. 
One  was  “large  view  tha t   it  gives  you  of  the  earth.”  Second  was 
“ability  to   see  the  same phenomenon,  o r   the  same  area  of  the  ear th  
time  and   time  again,  to   be  able  to   arrive  over  th is   particular  spot  on 
the  ear th  periodically  and   observe  temporal  changes.”  Apollo  9  experi- 
ment had  obtained some 120  or  130 useful  frames  of  multispectral  data, 
all of  which  had  been  distributed to principal investigators  for   analysis. 
(Transcr ip t)  
*  House Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  accepted  subcommittee  re- 
ports  on  H.R.  10251,  FY  1970  NASA  authorization  [see  April  171   and  
added  $258  million  to   amounts  requested  by  President  Nixon.  Com- 
mittee  would  meet  again  April  29.  (CR ,   4/23/69,  D302;  Lannan,  W 
S tar ,   4/24/69) 
National  Telemetry  Conference  of  Institute  of  Electrical  and   Electronic 
Engineers,  Inc.,  presented  award  for  telemetry  achievements  to  NASA 
team  responsible  for   directing,  planning,  engineering,  implementing, 
and   operating  Manned  Space  Flight  Network  in   support  of  Apollo 
program.  At  Washington,  D.C.,  luncheon,  award  was  accepted  by  GSFC  
Assistant  Director  for   Manned  Flight  Support,  Ozro  M.  Covington. 
( GSFC  Release  G-1-69) 
Australian  Pr ime   Minister  John  G.  Gorton  announced  in   Canberra  that 
Australian  government had   accepted U S .   proposals  for  “a  joint  United 
States-Australian  defense  space  communications  facility”  a t   Woomera, 
Sou th   Australia,  site  of  Australian  Weapons  Research  Establishment. 
(Sehlstedt,  B  Sun,  4/24/69,  A l )  
Apr i l   24:  NASA’s  Mariner  V I  and  Mariner  V I 1  spacecraft  were  1 0  million  mi 
and   6.47  million  mi  from  ear th   en  route  to  Mars.  Mariner  V I  Canopus 
tracker had   failed  to  change  position  properly  April  20  and search  was 
underway  to  find  substitute  for   Canopus.  ( JPL   Status Bull) 
President  Nixon  announced  appointment  of  five  new  members  to  19- 
member  President’s  Science  Advisory  Committee:  Dr.  John  D.  Balde- 
schwieler,  professor  of  chemistry  at  Stanford  Univ.;  Dr.  Richard  L. 
Garwin,  Director  of  IBM  Watson  Laboratory  a t   Columbia  Univ.;  Dr. 
Murray  Gell-Mann,  professor  of  theoretical  physics  a t   Cal  Tech;  Dr. 
Patrick  E.  Haggerty,  President  of  Texas  Instruments,  Inc.;  and   Dr .  
Gerald  F.  Tape,  President  of  Associated  Universities,  Inc. 
( P D ,  
4 /28 /69 ,602)  
0  Signing  of  $8,802,472  supplemental  agreement  with  McDonnell  Douglas 
Corp.  defining  18 change  orders   affecting  S-IVB  quality  maintenance 
program  was  announced  by  MSFC.  Agreement  included  reliability  and  
quality  reviews,  documentation,  and   expanded  production  acceptance 
tests.  ( MSFC  Release  69-122) 
*  FAA   announced  initiation  of  Airport  Data  System  (ADS)  to   collect  and  
validate  da ta   on  facilities  and   service  available  a t   nation’s  a irpor ts   in  
centralized  section  of  FAA-National  Flight  Data  Center  ( NFDC) . Data 
would  be  made  available  to U S .   Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey  and   com- 
mercial  char t   producers.  (FAA Release  T  69-20) 
Apr i l   25:  NASA’s H G l O   lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot 
William  H.  Dana,  was  air-launched  from  B-52  a ircraf t   a t   45,000-ft 
altitude  and   glided  to   successful  landing.  Purpose  of  flight,  16th  in  
series  a t   FRC, w a s  pilot  checkout.  (NASA P r o j  Off) 
Electrostatic  zero-gravity  workbench  experiment  by  Chrysler  Corp.  a t  

117 

April  25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Michoud  Assembly  Facility  might  provide  substitute  for   gravity  in  
small  space-station  area,  NASA  reported.  If  successful,  experimental 
equipment-three-foot-square  workbench  with  coated  metal  top,  high 
voltage and  variable  power  supply,  and   ion  source with  interconnected 
cabling-would 
enable  astronaut  to  manipulate  loose  objects  like  tools 
in   weightlessness  of  orbiting  space station.  Ion source  and   high-voltage 
power  supply,  directed  downward,  would  create  force  field  to   hold 
tools  to  bench  top.  Ground  experiments  would  be  completed  in  six 
months.  (NASA  Release  69-58) 
0  Sen. Clinton P.  Anderson  (D-N. Mex.) , for himself  and Sen. Margaret  C. 
Smith(R-Me.) , introduced  S.  1941, NASA  authorization  bill,  similar  to 
H.R.  10251  [see  April  171.  Bill  was  referred  to  Senate  Committee  on 
Aeronautical  and   Space Sciences.  (Tex t ;   CR,  4/25/69,  S4118) 
Senate  confirmed  nomination  of  Harold  B.  Finger,  NASA  Associate Ad- 
ministrator  for  Organization  and   Management,  as  Assistant  Secretary 
of  Housing  and   Urban  Development.  ( C R  4/25/69, 
,54189) 
0  Pau l   Haney,  described  by  press  as  “Voice  of  Apollo,”  announced  resig- 
nation  after  10  yrs  with  NASA  following  NASA  Hq.  discussion  of  his 
April 22 appointment as assistant  to Associate Administrator  for   Public 
Affairs  Julian  Scheer.  Haney  said  decision  to  resign  resulted  from 
personal  differences  with  Scheer,  who  told  press  he  had   tried  to  per- 
suade Haney  to  remain  with  agency.  (AP,  NYT,  4/26/69,  2 ;   O’Toole, 
W Post,  4/29/69,  A3) 
Apr i l   26:  Aerobee  150 MI  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR 
carr ied   MIT  payload  to  97.7-mi  (157.9-km)  altitude  to  study  x-ray 
spectrum  of  Crab  Nebula  a t  long  wavelengths  and   to  search  for  weak 
x-ray  sources  associated  with  supernova  remnants  or  with  galaxies 
outside  Milky  Way.  Rocket  and   instruments  performed  satisfactorily. 
(NASA  Rpt SRL)  
0  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Thumba 
Equatorial  Rocket  Launching  Station  (TERM )   carrying  Indian-Japa- 
nese  payload  for  x-ray  astronomy  studies.  Rocket  and   instruments 
functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
*  Testifying  before  Subcommittee  on  Space  Science  and  Applications  of 
House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics,  Joseph  B.  Mahon, 
NASA’s Director  of  Launch Vehicle  and  Propulsion  Programs,  OSSA,  said 
NASA  planned  to  use  Titan  IIIC   and  Titan  Centaur  to  carry   out  high- 
velocity Viking mission in   FY  1970. They would  provide capability  for  
both  orbital  and   lander  scientific  experimentation  and   would  expand 
launch  window.  After  proof  test  flight  in   1972  of  integrated  Improved 
Centaur  and   Titan  111,  configuration  would  be  flown  in   support  of 
1973 Viking  mission  and   other  planetary  missions,  a s   well  a s   ear th  
synchronous missions  using  4,000-  to  8,000-lb  spacecraft.  Titan  I I IC  
also  would  be  used  on  two  synchronous-altitude missions,  ATS-F  and  
A T S -G .   (Transcr ip t)  
Apr i l   27:  Several thousand  gallons  of  fuel  escaped from  prevalves in   Sa turn  
V  1st stage  (S-IC)  while  i t   was  being  prepared  for  Apollo  10 count- 
down  demonstration  test  (CDDT )   a t   KSC.  Prevalves  opened  while  leak 
was  being  repaired  in   nitrogen  pressurization  system  on  mobile 
launcher.  CDDT,  scheduled to  begin  April  28,  was  delayed  24  hrs   while 
vehicle  was  examined  for  damage.  (O’Toole,  W Post,  4/29/69,  A3 ;  
Marshall, Star, 4/30/69,  1) 

118 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
April  27 
FRC  announced  retirement  of  NASA’s two  X-15  rocket  research  aircraft, 
designed  for  manned  hypersonic  flight  research  a t   speeds  u p   to  4,000 
mph  and  altitudes  of  50 mi.  X-15  No.  1, which  had   made  first  flight 
June  8,1959,  would b e  displayed a t  Smithsonian Institution in  Washing- 
ton,  D.C.  No.  2  would  be  displayed  a t  Air  Force  Museum  a t   Wright- 
Patterson  AFB,  Ohio.  No.  3 had   been  destroyed  in   accident  Nov.  15, 
1967. During  $300-million NASA-USAF-USN 
program  X-15  had   set  two 
unofficial  world  records,  reaching  354,200-ft  altitude  and  4,520  mph 
(mach  6.7).  Aircraft  served  as   reusable  manned  platforms  for   wide 
range  of  experiments  tha t   helped  advance  development  of  vital  space- 
flight  systems.  Final  flight,  199th,  had   been  Oct.  24,  1968,  and  NASA 
had  announced  completion  of  program  Dec.  20.  (FRC  Release  9-69) 
William Hines  said  i n  Washington  Evening Star:  “ I t   now  seems  entirely 
possible  that  NASA  may  sneak  into  a  Mars  program  without  a  specific 
. 
go-ahead of  the  type given  for  the moon  adventure  in  1961. A  case can 
be  made  that  exploration  of  the  planets  i s   but  a  logical  extension  of 
exploration of  the moon;  that  once the  space frontier  is crossed  in   1969 
everything  else  is evolutionary, not  revolutionary. This sort  of  gradual- 
ism,  which  is  analogous  to   a  girl’s  becoming  a  little  b i t   pregnant,  is  
just  as effective  in   the  long  run  as  the  flamboyant setting  of  spectacular 
goals,  and  probably  a  good  b i t   more  feasible  in   a  time  when  there  is 
already  much  grumbling  about  pre-occupation with  other  worlds  when 
our  own  is  in   such  a  sorry  state.”  (W  S ta r ,   4/27/69,  G4) 
*  Dr.  Nicholas E.  Golovin, technical  adviser  for   aviation  and space  science 
and  technology  in   Office  of  Science  and  Technology,  died  of  heart 
attack  in   Washington,  D.C.,  a t   age  57.  He  had   been  deputy  Associate 
Administrator  of  NASA  in   1960. After returning  to private  industry  for  a 
year,  he  had   rejoined  NASA  as   director  of  Large  Launch  Vehicle  Plan- 
ning  Group.  Before  coming  to  NASA  he  had  been  Chief  Scientist  a t  
White  Sands  Missile  Range  for  DOD and  then  Director  of  Technical 
Operations  Div.  of  ARPA.  ( W  Post,  4/30/69,  B14;  W  Star,  4/30/69, 
B6) 
April 28:  Dr.  Thomas  0.  Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  testified  in   FY  1970 
authorization  hearings  before  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and 
Space Sciences that  he  believed “the  greatest  significance” of  President 
Nixon’s  decision  to  include  in   budget  amendment  amounts  for  con- 
tinued  lunar  exploration  after  first  Apollo  landings  and  for  continued 
Saturn  V  production  was  “that  i t   recognizes  the  fundamental  fact  that 
the  United  States  should  not  and  does  not  plan  to   stop  its  further 
development  and  use  of  manned  space flight.” 
Early  manned  lunar  landing  would  allow  additional  savings  of  per- 
haps  a s   much  as   $39  million  in   amended  Apollo  budget.  Budget  in-  
cluded  funds  for  improved  scientific  equipment  fo r   more  advanced 
missions  to  moon  and  for   limited  Apollo  Applications  program.  Fund 
cuts would mean  some program  reorientation  as well  as  delay  in  Work- 
shop,  previously  scheduled  for  mid-1971. 
Amended  budget  supported  continuation  of  plans  for  1971 and  1973 
Mars  missions  and  first  mission  to  Mercury  in   1973,  with  Venus 
swing-by.  I n   space  applications,  ‘bwhere we  are   placing  special  em- 
phasis,’’  Ea r th   Resources  Technology  Satellite  program  would  enable 
NASA,  with  other  agencies,  t o   test  practical  use  of  space  to  gather  in-  
formation  on  water  levels,  crops,  forests, and  other  resources.  “Despite 

119 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
April  28 
the  sizable  overall  reduction  . . . we  have  not  reduced  the  ear th   re- 
sources project.” 
Budget  included  funds  to  proceed  with  NERVA  development  and   con- 
tinued  to  give  “high  priority  to  our  work  in  aeronautics.”  New  con- 
struction would  include  Aircraft  Noise  Reduction  Laboratory  a t   URC, 
“unique national  facility  for  studying the  fundamentals of  noise genera- 
tion  and   reduction.” 
U.S.S.R.  was  continuing  vigorous  program  in   both  aeronautics  and 
space.  “The  Soviet  commitment  represents  . . . the  application  of 
resources  a t   about  the  same  rate  a s   that  we  have  averaged  in   recent 
years,”  with  “significantly  higher  percentage  of  the  gross  national 
product.”  Soviets  were  “proceeding  in   manned  space  flight  programs 
directed  both a t  sending men  to  the moon  and   at  substantially  enlarged 
and   extended  manned  operations  in   ear th   orbit.  . . . Automatic  ren- 
dezvous  and   docking  flights  with  Cosmos  186-188  and  212-213  and 
the  manned  Soyuz &5  mission  in   January,  with  manned  docking  and 
crew  transfer,  demonstrated  the  increasing  Soviet capability.  . . . They 
appear  to  be  pointed  to  a  fu ture   capability  for  assembly  i n  ear th  orb i t  
of  large  space  stations  and  of  manned  spacecraft  to  send  to  the  moon 
and   beyond.”  U.S.S.R.  had  “made  attempts  to   launch  one  or  more 
spacecraft  to  the  planets  a t   almost  every  opportunity-three  or  four 
times the number  of  attempts we  have been  able  to  make.”  (Testimony) 
*  Mascons  might  be  excess  mass  deposited  by  water  and   supported  by 
internal  strength  of  rigid  moon,  JPL   scientist  Pau l   M.  Muller  said  in 
address  before  American Physical  Society  in  Washington,  D.C.  Muller 
was  codiscoverer  of  mascons  [see  April  251.  Mascons  probably  were 
not  floating  on  liquid  lunar  interior  as  were  earth‘s  continents  and 
mountains,  but  were  held  there  by  moon  with  structural  strength.  He 
illustrated  with  photos  taken  by  Lunar  Orbiters  and  ApoZZo  8  theory 
that  lunar  features  might  have  been  cut  by  primordial  lunar   water. 
(NASA  Release  69-62;  JPL  Release 515) 
*  NASA  issued RFPS  for  design  and planning  studies  of  12-manY earth-orbital 
space  station  for  1975 with  10-yr operational  life,  subject  to  resupply 
of  expendables  and   crew  rotation  with  logistics  vehicles.  Work  also 
would  include  conceptual  design  of  50-man space  base  of  specialized 
modules assembled  in  low  ear th  orbit  in  late 1970s and early  1980s and 
comparable  to   scientific  and   technical  research,  development,  and 
operations  center  on  earth.  Modified  Apollo  and  Gemini  spacecraft 
would  be   considered a s  initial  logistics  systems  if  space shuttle  did  not 
become  available  in   early phase  of  space  station  operations.  Data  from 
studies  would  be  available  for  final  design  of  future  space  station  i f  
program  were  approved  for  development.  Proposals  were  due  June  9. 
(NASA   Release  69 -65 )  
*  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Thumba 
Equatorial  Rocket  Launching  Station  ( TERLS)  carrying  Indian-Japa- 
nese  payload  for  x-ray  astronomy  studies.  Rocket  and  instruments 
functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA  P r o j  Off 1 
LeRC  said  its  engineers  had  built  and  were  operating  world’s  largest 
acoustical  testing  facility  for  fan  portion  of  compressors  on  turbofan 
engines-key 
element in   a ircraf t  noise.  I t   could  test  fans  up  to  six  feet 
in   diameter  to  collect  basic  noise  information  and  help  determine  fan 
configuration  for  NASA’s quiet  engine  program.  Facility  was  powered 

120 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

April  28 

by  supersonic  wind  tunnel’s  drive  motor,  whose  23,000  hp   spun  fan   to 
3,500  rpm.  Noise  created  was  recorded  by  strategically  placed  micro- 
phones  to  determine  differences  in   level  producing  by  fan  blade  con- 
figurations  and   effects  of  noise-deadening  inlet  lining  materials.  (LeRC 
Release 69-19) 
*  At  international  airline  conference  in   Dublin,  U.S.S.R.’s  First  Deputy 
Minister  of  Civil  Aviation,  Gen.  Leonid  V.  Zholudev,  denied  Tu-144 
supersonic  transport  had   been  in   accident,  American  Av ia t ion   said.  I t  
was  “undergoing  tests  according  to   our  program,”  Gen.  Zholudev  said. 
He  declined  to  speculate  when  Soviet  aircraft  would  go  into  service 
and  said  “many  complex  problems  must  be  solved.”  Tu-154,  170- 
passenger  trijet,  would  enter  service  “in  near  future”;  An-22  turbo- 
prop,  with  reported  maximum  takeoff  weight of  551,160 lbs,  was  being 
used  exclusively a s  cargo  carrier.  (Am e r  Av ,   4/28/69,  17 )  
President  Nixon  met  with  National  Science  Board  members  and  NAS 
council  and  promised  t o   nominate  NSF  director  without  regard  to  his 
ABM   position.  He  asked  for  names  for  possible  nominee  and  promised 
to  consider  only  scientific  qualifications.  President  disclosed  h e   had 
asked  Cornell  Univ.’s  Dr.  Franklin  A.  Long  to  consider  having  his 
name  resubmitted  to  Senate  after  original  decision  not  to  nominate  Dr. 
Long  [see April  171  but  Dr.  Long  had  declined.  (Kilpatrick,  W Po s t ,  
4/29/69,  A l )  
A p r i l   28-30:  At  106th  annual  meeting  of  National  Academy  of  Sciences in 
Washington,  D.C.,  Dr.  Eugene  N.  Parker  of  Univ.  of  Chicago  and  Dr. 
J .  P. Wild  of  Commonwealth Scientific and  Industrial Research Organi- 
zation  in  Sydney,  Australia,  received  Henry  Arctowski  Medal  for 
studies  of  solar  activity  changes  and  their  effects upon  ionosphere  and 
terrestrial  atmosphere.  Dr.  Parker  was  honored  fo r   “contributions  to 
theoretical  understanding  of  interaction  between  magnetic  fields  of 
sun  and  earth  and  surrounding  ion  plasmas”;  Dr.  Wild,  for  contribu- 
tions  to  solar  radio  astronomy,  including  development of  technique  of 
studying  solar  disturbances  through  moving  pictures  of  sun  “photo- 
graphed”  in   radio  spectrum.  Dr.  Jurgen  K.  Moser  of  New  York  Univ. 
received  James  Craig  Watson  Medal  for  mathematical  contributions 
to  dynamical  astronomy.  ( NAS   Release  4/23/69) 
Cal  Tech  scientist  Kip  S.  Thoren  suggested  pulsars  were  subject  to 
quakes  which  accelerated  their  pulsation.  At  press  interview  during 
annual  meeting,  he   said  pulsars’  insides  were  probably  superfluids- 
more  liquid  than  liquid-and  were gradually  cooling,  w i t h   crust  crys- 
tallization  requiring  adjustments.  ,4djustments,  he  said,  would  cause 
“pulsequakes”  and  could 
result 
in   sudden  speedups  i n   pulsar 
periodicity. 
Cornell  Univ.  astronomer  Dr.  Thomas  Gold  said  observations  of 
pulsars  indicated  they  slowed  down  a s   they  aged,  with  oldest  finally 
slowing billionths  of  seconds per  year  until  they  reached  periods  up  to 
almost  four  seconds. He  suggested  pulsar  radiation  might  account  for 
luminosity  of  whole  galaxies  and  even produce  all  cosmic rays  detected 
throughout  universe,  including  earth. 
Cornell  Univ.  astronomer  Dr.  Frank  D.  Drake,  former  director  of 
Cornell’s Arecibo  Ionospheric  Observatory  i n   Puerto  Rico,  said  space 
clocks  were  emerging  as  practical  scientific  tools,  especially  in   testing 
Einstein’s  theories.  Dr.  F.  Graham  Smith  of  Nuffield  Radio  Astronomy 

121 

April  28-30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Laboratories,  Manchester,  England,  said  space  clocks  were  being  used 
to  investigate  interstellar  medium-gas 
clouds  between  earth  and  other 
parts  of  solar  system.  (Lannan,  W Stur,  5/1/69,  A6 ;   O’Toole,  a7 Post, 
5/1/69,  A l )  
Apr i l   29:  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge,  Presidential  Science  Adviser,  said  a t   NAS 
dinner  in  Washington,  D.C. : “The relations  between  science,  tech- 
nology,  government  and  the  various  elements  of  our  society  a re   enor- 
mously  complex.  Science  and  technology  a re  no  longer  separable  from 
political  and  social  problems.  . . . Whether  we  like  i t   or  not,  science  is 
in   politics  and  politics  is  i n   science.  . . The  fact  is  that  today  science 
i s  too  important  to  our  nation  to  stay  out  of  politics.  Clearly  we   all- 
politicians  and  scientists-must 
find  ways  of  adapting  ourselves  to  a 
e ra   which  began  . . . really  on  Hiroshima  day  in   1945.” 
new  era-an 
(Text) 
Apr i l   29-May  1: MSFC  held  workshop  on  optical  telescope  technology  to  ex- 
change  technical  information  on  design  of  future  space  telescopes  and 
identify  research  and   technology  efforts  needed  to  support  future  mis- 
sions.  ( MSFC  Release 69-117) 
Apr i l   30:  At  KSC  briefing  on  NASA  FY  1970  budget  for  community  leaders, 
KSC  Director,  Dr.  Ku r t   H.  Debus,  said:  “It  is  clear  that  we   will  con- 
tinue the present  pace  of  launch  operations  in   the  Apollo program  until 
the  first  lunar  landing  has  been  accomplished. . . . The  continuation  of 
space  effort,  however,  must  somehow  take  into  account  the  same  con- 
straints  on  Government  spending  which  now  affect  the  entire  federal 
budget.  . . . The  total  KSC  budget  is  being  revised  from  $455  million 
for  all  purposes  to  $410 million.  I  am  taking  action  to  accomplish  this 
reduction  without  crippling  the  essential  launch  team  capability  or 
drastically  impacting  the  local  economy.”  Savings  would  be  effected 
by:  gradual  cutback  in   efforts  of  contractors  supporting  design  engi- 
neering;  phasing  down  of  Boeing technical  integration  effort ; decelera- 
tion  of  Apollo/Saturn  V launch  rate  to  three manned  vehicles annually, 
reducing  employment;  and  greater  use  of  five-day week  and  two-shift 
schedule,  permitting  stabilization  of  employment  level  a t   18,500  by 
June   30,  1970,  instead  of  current  23,500. 
KSC  strength  would  remain  a t   80%  of  current  level,  with  reduction 
in   support  and  stage  contractors.  Civil  service  cadre  would  drop  from 
2,920  to  2,880 by  June  30,  1970. Employment  already  had  been  frozen 
a t   current  level. 
Saturn  IB Apollo Applications missions  would  require  increased  em- 
ployment  at  Launch  Complexes  34  and  37  in  1971,  with  estimated 
increase  in   contract  jobs  of  2,600  to  handle  nearly  simultaneous  or 
dual  launches.  KSC  also would  participate  in   earth  orbital  space  station 
studies.  (Transcript) 
*  KSC  announced  selection  of  Dr.  Ku r t   H.  Debus,  KSC  Director,  to  receive 
1969 Career  Service Award  of  National  Civil  Service League  at  Wash- 
ington,  D.C.,  banquet  June  13.  Citation  said:  “The  development  of 
Complex  39,  the  installation  from  which  the  Apollo  program  launches 
take  place,  is  the  crowning  achievement  of  Dr.  Kurt  H.  Debus’  career. 
His  leadership  was  pivotal  in   both  the  design  and  construction  of  the 
famed  Apollo  launch  complex.  Further,  he  has  been  responsible  for 
many  of  the  technical  advances  in   launch  technology,  and  for  the  for- 
mation  of  the  government-industry  launch  team  which  has  carried  out 

122 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

April  30 

’ 

more  than  150  successful  launches,  including  several  notable  firsts.” 
Awa rd -con s i s t ing   of  $1,000,  inscribed  gold  watch,  and   citation-was 
one  of  most  prestigious  for   which  civil  service  career  employees  were 
eligible. 
Also  among  10 selected  was  George  S.  Moore,  Associate  Adminis- 
tra tor   for  Operations,  FAA, for  “an  extraordinary  record  in   the  de- 
velopment  of  up  to  date methods  of  evaluation  of  a ircraf t  worthiness.” 
(KSC   Release  154-69;  W  Star,  4/30/69,  A2) 
NASA  was  engaged  in   “comprehensive  continuing  program”  to  gain 
“better  understanding  of  the  structural  loads  due  to  buffeting  and  the 
buildup  of  buffeting  intensity  for   flight  conditions  above buffet  bound- 
ary,”  Acting  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and  
Technology  Bruce  T.  Lundin  testified  before  Senate  Committee  on 
Aeronautical  and   Space Sciences.  FRC program,  in  which  F-111A  was 
being  used,  also  included  verification  in   flight  of  favorable  effects  of 
flaps  i n   alleviating  buffeting.  Program  was  supported  and  comple- 
mented  by  wind-tunnel studies  a t   LaRC  and   ARC.  (Testimony) 
Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight,  spoke before  student  seminar  a t   California  Museum  of  Science 
and  Technology in  Los Angeles:  “Besides  serving as  a  subject  of  scien- 
tific  exploration  for  its  own  secrets,  the  moon  may  be  an  important 
base  for  outward  looking  space  science  programs  of  the  future.”  I t  
might  eventually  support  large   optical  telescopes.  There  was  strong 
evidence  “that  the  most  ideal  location  for  large  rad io   telescopes  will 
eventually  be  the  fa r   side  of  the  moon.  Th is   may  be  the  only  place 
within  our  convenient  reach  where  the  earth,  which  will  become  in-  
creasingly noisy  a s  a  rad io   source, may  be  completely  screened out.  In  
addition,  the  lunar   surface  presents  us  with  a  very  large  stable  base, 
with  only  1/6 gravity,  no  wind  disturbance  and  no  atmosphere absorp- 
tion  a t   any  wave  length.  . . . Another  attractive  possibility  is  to  use 
stations  on  both  the  moon  and   earth  a s  a  radio  interferometer  baseline 
for  highly  precise  directional  rad io   astronomy.”  (Tex t)  
NASA  announced  it would  sponsor,  in   1970, 90-day test  of  four-man life- 
support  system  with  continuous  regeneration  of  water  and  oxygen 
without  resupply,  under  $586,885  contract  with  McDonnell  Douglas 
Corp.  Advanced  waste  management  subsystem  would  be  used.  Experi- 
ment,  scheduled  to  begin  in   March  1970, would  demonstrate  crew’s 
ability  to  function  during  long  period  of  uninterrupted  confinement. 
(NASA  Release  69-60)  
Univ.  of  Miami  and   Chrysler  Corp.  Space  Div.  had   conceived  $100- 
million  undersea  laboratory  “Atlantis”  to  be   constructed  on  ocean 
floor  near  Miami,  AP   said.  Laboratory  would  be  testing  ground  for 
future  USN  centers  directing  submarine  warfare  and   test  bed  for   in- 
dustrial  equipment  to  mine  ores  and   dr i l l   fo r   undersea  oil.  I t   would 
consist  of  80-ft-long  cylinder-shaped  habitat  housing  10  to  12   scien- 
tists  a t   in i t ia l   depth  of  1,000  ft.  Later  it  could  be  moved  to  6,000-  o r  
12,00010-ft depths.  (B  Sun, 4/30/69,  A3) 
President  Nixon  had   apparently  yielded  to  “top  level  economizers”  and  
returned  SST and  airways  and   airports  programs  to  DOT for   further 
study,  said  Associated  Press.  (AI’, W  Star, 4/30/69,  A l l )  
Secretary  of  Defense  Melvin  R.  Laird  issued  statement  expressing  con- 
cern  over C-SA  contract  and  procurement  actions  and   announcing  that 

123  

April  30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

new  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  (Installations and   Logistics) 
had   been  nominated  [Philip  N.  Whittaker  had  been  nominated  to  re- 
place Robert H.  Charles]  and  new  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force 
(Financial  Management)  would  be   nominated  [to  replace  Thomas  H. 
Neilson].  “1  am  determined  to  insure  tha t   full  and   accurate  informa- 
tion  on  C-5A  procurement,  and   on  all  other  procurement  matters,  is  
given  to  the  Congress  and   to  the  public  promptly.  I  am  also  deter- 
mined  to  insure  that  past  mistakes in   the  procurement  of  this  transport 
aircraft  will  not  be  repeated.”  (DOD Release  340-69;  AP,  W  S tar ,  
5/1/69,  A l ;   Nossiter,  W Pos t ,   5/1/69,  A l )  
9  Rep.  William  F.  Ryan  (D.N.Y.)  presented  to   House  petition  by  729  sci- 
entists,  engineers,  and   students  in  these  fields,  submitted  by  Scientists 
for  Social  and  Political  Action, care   of  Dr.  Martin  L.  Per1 of  Stanford 
Univ.  I t   called  fo r   open  Congressional  hearings  to  review  substance 
and   direction  of  en t ire   military  R&D  program  including  ABM  system. 
( C R ,  4/30/69,  H3220) 
During  Apr i l:   NAS-NRC  Space  Science  Board  published  Sounding  Rockets: 
Their Role  in Space Research, report by  Committee on Rocket Research 
recommending  tha t   NASA  increase  annual  expenditures  on  rocket  re- 
search  to  $27  million  by  1971 and   thereafter  restore  its  earlier  policy 
of  increasing  support  12%   per  year;  that  NSF,  Naval Research Labora- 
tory,  and   USAF  immediately  increase  their  support  by  36%,  and  then 
maintain  an  annual  1 2%   increase  until  1975;  and,  additionally,  that 
support  for  rocket  research  be  increased  by  appropriate  ratio  to   com- 
pensate  for  any  reduction  in   satellite  support. 
Report  noted  sounding  rockets were  responsible  for  dozens  of  major 
scientific  discoveries,  including  discovery  of  solar  x-rays  emanating 
from   millionth-degree  corona  of  sun;  for   mapping  of  solar  spectrum 
and   structure  of  earth’s  atmosphere;  and  for  existence  of  three  new 
branches  of  astronomy-uv, 
x-ray,  and   gamma-ray.  Greatest  single 
advantage  of  sounding  rockets  for  studying  upper  atmosphere  was 
unique  ability  to  obtain  direct,  vertical  profiles  at  altitudes  of  24.8  to 
124.3 mi  (40 to  200 km )  . (NAS-NRC-NAE 
News  Rp t ,  4/69,  2 ;   NAS  PIO) 
Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  released  Annual  Report  1968:  Aerospace  in- 
dustry  had   gained  3 n  virtually  every ma jor   category”:  sales  reached 
record  $30.1 billion,  up  10.5%  over  1967, with  turbine-powered com- 
mercial  a ircraf t  sales accounting for  $3.73  billion,  up  211%  over  1965. 
General-aviation  a ircraf t   sales  reached  13,698  units  valued  a t   $426 
million.  Civil  helicopter  production  increased  to  528  units  valued  at 
$59 million.  DOD sales  reached  $16.9  billion,  up  nearly  7%   over  1967; 
nonmilitary  sales  decreased 3.776,  to  $4.047  billion.  Backlog  a t   end  of 
th ird   quarter  was  due  primarily  to  commercial  transport  orders. 
(Tex t)  
NASA  issued  Relay  Program  Final  Repor t   (NASA  SP-151),  prepared  by 
GSFC.  It  was  sequel  to  Relay  I Final  Report  (NASA  SP-76)  and   sum- 
marized  operations  of  Relay  I Z  satellite  (launched Jan.  21,  1964 ) ,  in- 
cluding  communications  and   other  experiments.  I t   compared  Relay  I 
(launched Dec.  13 ,1962 )   and  ZZ  performances and documented aspects 
of  Relay  I  operations  and   experiment  results  not  covered  in   Relay  I 
report.  Relay  I  transmitted  last  useful  data  Feb.  10,  1965 ;   Relay  II 
operated  normally  f o r  last  time Nov.  20,  1966.  (Tex t)  

124  

During  April 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
NAS  announced  appointment of  Dr.  T. Keith  Glennan,  first  NASA  Admin- 
istrator  (1958-1961)  and  Assistant  to  Chairman  of  the  Urban  Coa- 
lition,  as  Chairman  of  NRC’S Committee  on  Radio  Frequency 
Requirements for  Scientific  Research.  Dr.  Glennan had  been  President 
of  Case  Institute  of  Technology,  AEC  Commissioner,  and  President  of 
News   R p t ,  
Associated  Universities,  Inc.  ( NAS  PIO;  NAS-NRC-NAE 
4/69,  10) 

125 

May  1969 

May 1: Canadian  Black  Brant  I I IB   sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA 
from  NASA Wallops  Station  to  133.6-mi  (215-km)  altitude.  Pr imary  
objective  was  to  evaluate  improved  Black  Brant  I I IB   single-stage 
rocket,  using  flight-performance instrumentation.  Flight,  second of  two 
(first  was  Feb.  2 8 ) ,   was  successful  and  sounding  rocket  was  recom- 
mended  for  consideration  a s   operational  vehicle  in   NASA  sounding 
rocket  program.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL; NASA  Release  6%9) 
*  NASA  was  developing  novel  technique  for  photographing  fa in t   x-ray 
sources,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space Science and   Applica- 
tions,  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  told  Senate Committee  on  Aeronautical  and 
Space Sciences. Testifying  on  supporting  research  and   technology  pro- 
gram,  he  said  technique would  reduce  required  exposure time  1/10  to 
1/1000  and   was  “likely  to   revolutionize  x-ray  observations where  tele- 
scopes  a re   not  usable.’’  Based  on  Princeton  Univ.  development  and 
laser  image-enhancement  technique,  i t   was  “major  technological  ad-  
vance  as  an  outgrowth  of  the  space  program  and   should  find  applica- 
tions  in  all  fields  of  x-ray  science.”  GSFC  was  developing  advanced 
gamma-ray  telescope  to  observe  center  of  galaxy  and  other  celestial 
objects.  Univ.  of  Colorado  was  developing  advanced  coronagraph  to 
observe  solar  corona  from  ear th   orb i t   six  months  instead  of  the  few 
minutes  per  year  possible  during  solar  total  eclipse  by  ground-based 
observation.  (Testimony) 
*  National  Aviation  Club’s  highest  honor,  Award  for  Achievement,  was 
presented  a t   Washington,  D.C.,  ceremony  to   M / G   Jewel1  C.  Maxwell 
( USAF)  , Director  of  Supersonic  Transport  Development  for  FAA,  for 
“laboring  so  magnificently  and   conscientiously  in   the  public  and 
national  service.”  (FAA   Release  T  69-25) 
U.S.S.R.  celebrated  May  Day  without  military  participation.  In   tra-  
ditional  address  from  atop  Lenin’s  tomb  in  Moscow,  Communist Par ty  
General  Secretary  Leonid  I.  Brezhnev  said:  “The  Soviet  Union  will 
further  consistently  uphold  the  cause  of  peace  and  security  of  people, 
the  Leninistic  principles  of  peaceful coexistence of  states  with  different 
social  systems.  I t   will  come  out  for  the  solution  of  unsettled  inter- 
national  problems by  way  of  talks.”  (Kamm, NYT,  5/2/69,  1) 
May 2:  USAF  launched  two  unidentified  satellites  from  Vandenberg  AFB by 
Thor-Agena  booster.  One  entered  orb i t   with  202.1-mi  (325.2-km) 
apogee,  104.6-mi  ( 168.3-km)  perigee,  89.5-min  period,  and   64.9’ 
inclination  and   reentered  May  23. 
Second  satellite  entered  orb i t   with  283.2-mi  (455.7-km)  apogee, 
255.9-mi  (411.7-km)  perigee,  93.2-min  period,  and  65.7’  inclination. 
Satellites  reentered  Feb.  16,  1970.  (GSFC  SSR ,   5/15/69;  5/31/69; 
2/28/70;  Pres Rpt  70  [69])  
*  Data  from  Mariner Y  flyby  Oct.  19,  1967,  indicated  Venus  was  layered 
with  deadly  compounds  of  mercury,  GSFC  scientist  Dr.  S.  Ichtiaque 

127  

May  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Rasool  said  in   interview.  Although  bulk  of  its  atmosphere  was  pri- 
marily  carbon  dioxide,  mercury  and   halides-reactive 
chemicals  in- 
cluding  iodine,  bromine,  and  chlorine-had 
boiled  off  planet’s  surface 
and   combined to  form  clouds of  poisonous gas  and  dust,  often  covered 
by  water  vapor.  Findings,  Dr.  Rasool  said,  upset  scientific  notions  of 
origin  of  Venus’  heat  as  “greenhouse”  effect-which  might  be  occur- 
r ing   on  ear th   with  addition  of  carbon  dioxide  to  atmosphere  through 
burning  of  coal  and   oil.  Clouds  of  carbon  dioxide  were  assumed  to 
retain  heat,  bu t   planet  covered with  four  layers  of  heavily  colored  a t-  
mosphere  would  never  feel  sun’s  heat.  (Lannan, W  Star,  5 /3 /69)  
e  Basic  research  program  conducted  by  Dr.  Wilhelm  Rindner  had  led  to 
development  of  cardiovascular  pressure  transducer,  ERC  reported.  Tiny 
device had  been  placed  in   arteries  and  hearts  of  laboratory  animals  to 
measure  blood  pressure  while  using  100  times  less  power  than  con- 
ventional  devices.  Medical team  headed  by  Harvard  Univ.  cardiologist 
Dr.  Bernard  Lown,  in   collaboration with NASA,  said  device was  signifi- 
cant  advance  in   monitoring  important  blood  flow  changes.  Eventually 
i t   should  be  possible  to  implant  device  in   human  beings  to  observe 
blood  flow  and   pressure  in   persons  suffering  from  hypertension  and 
other  blood  pressure  disorders,  including  hear t   attacks. 
Discovery  of  properties  of  device  was  made  during  ERC  study  of 
effects  of  pressure  on  semiconductors. Properties  would  also  be  impor- 
tant  in   space  applications;  sensing  of  acceleration  already  had  been 
demonstrated.  ( ERC  Release  69-9) 
e  NASA  unloaded  eight-ton  airlock  at  MSFC   for  ground  testing  to  qualify  it 
as pa r t   of  orbiting  space station.  P a r t   of  Apollo  Applications program 
cluster  to  be  launched  in   mid-l970s,  65-in-dia,  17-ft cylindrical  unit 
was  flown  from McDonnell Douglas  Corp.’s  St.  Louis plant  to  be  joined 
to  multiple-docking adapter.  I t  would  provide  interconnecting  passage- 
way  between  S-IVB 
rocket  stage  and  multiple-docking  adapter  in 
flight,  condition  environmental  gases,  and   provide  instrumentation, 
da ta   management,  intercommunication,  and  other  services.  ( MSFC  Re- 
lease  69-124) 
MSFC  announced  i t   had  issued  RFPS  for   experiment modules  to  be  used 
with  proposed  manned  space  station  to  orb i t   earth  in  1970s.  Study, 
under  eight-month  contract,  would  analyze  scientific  and  engineering 
need  fo r   experiment  modules  and  develop  concepts  for  least  number 
of  modules needed.  Study  tasks  included further  defining  candidate ex- 
periment  groupings,  developing  preliminary  module  concepts,  defining 
minimum  number  of  concepts,  developing preliminary  design  and  cost 
analysis  for  each module concept,  and  making  proposed plan  schedule. 
Proposals were  due May- 22.  (MSFC   Release  69-125) 
a  At  DOD news  conference, Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Sea- 
mans,  Jr.,  said  current estimate of  cost  to Government of  C-5A  a ircraf t  
was  $4.348  billion,  increase  of  $882  million  ( 2 5% )   over  original  esti- 
mate  of  $3.466  billion  on  which  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  contract  was 
based. 
Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  Robert  H.  Charles  said  USAF 
had   not  disclosed  Feb.  1, 1967, “cure  order”  to  Lockheed  on  a ircraf t  
procurement  contract  because  of  concern  over  its  effects  on   financial 
community. He  maintained  data  on  cost  overruns  had  been  developed 
too  early  in  program  to  be  solid  enough  for  publication  and   that  sub- 

128  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

May  2 

sequent  firmer  cost  estimates  had  been  made  public.  (Transcript; 
Corddry,  B Sun, 5/3/69,  A4) 
*  I n   editorial  directed  to  “Americans  who  think  Soviet Russia  is  ‘mellow. 
ing”’  and   who  opposed  President  Nixon’s  Safeguard  ABM  plan,  New  
Y o r k   News noted  U.S.S.R.  had  paraded  no  military  gear  in   Moscow 
May Day  parade  and  limited  ora tory  “to a  peace-it’s-wonderful  speech” 
by  Brezhnev.  Paper  then  quoted  April  30  issue  of  Pa r t inaya   Zhizn  in  
which  Marshal Matvey  V.  Zakharov, U.S.S.R.  Chief  of  Staff,  described 
Soviet  stockpile  of  nuclear  missiles:  ‘“These  rockets  are   always  pre- 
pared  for   immediate  firing.  Global  rockets  have  unlimited  range,  and 
a re   able  not  only  to  carry   colossal  payloads  but  to  overcome  the  an t i-  
missile  defense  of  the  adversary.’  ” (NY  News,  5/2/69) 
M a y  3 :  Press  conference on  results  of  NASA’s Oao  I 1   orbiting  astronomical 
observatory  (launched Dec.  7,  1968) was  held  a t  NASA  Hq.  OAO  Project 
Manager  Joseph  Purcell  of  GSFC  said  spacecraft’s  five  months  of 
orbital  operations  had  been  “a  fabulous  success”  and  all  spacecraft 
systems  were  operating  normally.  As  of  last  week,  he  said,  “we  had 
137 mission days.  [Univ.  of]  Wisconsin [experiment]  has been pointed 
to   846  different  locations  in   the  sky  [and]  344  of  those  were  unique 
objects  that  they  were  studying.  SAO,  the  Smithsonian  package,  has 
. .  a t  483  separate locations  and  taken  some  1,172 pictures.” 
,-  pointed 
been 
(Transcr ip t)  
1 
NASA’s Explorer  XXXIV  (IMP-F) 
Interplanetary  Monitoring  Platform 
(launchkd May  24,  1967)  reentered  eaith’s  atmosphere. MG e  complex 
than  previous  IM P   spacecraft,  Exploker  XXXIV had   carried  11 experi- 
ments  and   obtained  more  than   170,000  hrs   of  data  on  solar  activity, 
near-earth  environment,  and  magnetosphere.  ( GSFC  SSR,  5/15/69  ; 
NASA  Release  69-63)  
M a y   4-11;  London  Daily M a i l   sponsored  eight-day  “Great  Transatlantic 
Air  Race  of  1969”  between  top  of  New  York’s  Empire  State  Building 
and   top  of  London’s  General  Post  O 5 c e   to  commemorate  50th  anni- 
versary  of  first  nonstop  transatlantic  flight  by  John  W.  Alcock  and  
Arthur  W.  Brown  in   1919. Nearly  4 0  entrants  devised  combinations 
of  land,  sea,  and  a ir   transportation to compete  for  21  prizes worth  total 
$150,000  i n   separate  categories.  Fastest  west-to-east  time--5 
hrs   11 
min  22  secs-was  made by  L/C  P.  M.  Goddard  ( R N )   in   US.-built  F-4, 
Phantom  jet,  motorcycle,  and   helicopter.  Air  time  was  4  hrs   46  min. 
Royal  Navy  later  claimed  this  was  new  world  record  for  New  York- 
London  flight.  Previous  unofficial  record  had  been  set  during  race  by 
Phantom  which  made  flight  in  4 hrs   53  min.  Best  east-to-west time  in  
race  was  made  by  S/L  Tom  Lecky-Thompson  (RAF)  in   RAF  Ba r r ie r  
VTOL  jet,  which  flew  from  London  to  New  York  in   6  hrs   11  min  57 
secs.  ( N Y T ,  5/6/69,  93;  5/12/69,  93) 
M a y  5:  At  dedication  ceremony in  Houston  for  ApoZZo  8  stamp,  Postmaster 
General Winton  M.  Blount  sa id :   “The  fact  tha t   this  i s   the  fifth  stamp 
the  Post Office Department ha s  issued commemorating accomplishments 
of  the  space  program  signifies  the  extent  to  which  space  exploration 
has  captured  the  imagination  of  the  American  people.  . . . The  nation’s 
concerted  effor t   to   reach  the  moon  and  outer  space  reflects  two  tra-  
ditional  aspects  of  our  national  character.  One  is  scientific:  the  search 
for   truth,  knowledge,  discovery.  The  other  is   psychological:  the  strong 
urge  kindled  by  the  unknown.  We  are   all  ex- 
urge  fo r   adventure-an 
129 

May  5 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

plorers  a t   heart.  The   space  program  has   made  an  en t ire   nation  ex- 
plorers  in   fact.  The  flight  of  ApoZZo  8  around  the  moon  and   back  was 
perhaps  the  greatest  technological  achievement  of  man  to  date.  Cer- 
tainly  i t   was  the  most  dramatic.”  (Text) 
*  NASA  announced  Bernard  Moritz,  Assistant  Administrator  for  Special 
Contracts  Negotiations  and   Review,  would  serve  a s   Acting  Associate 
Administrator  for  Organization  and   Management  since  Harold  B. 
Finger  had  assumed new  duties with  HUD.  (NASA   Ann)  
*  Senate confirmed nomination  of  Ph i l ip  N.  Whittaker,  former  NASA  Assist- 
an t   Administrator  fo r   Industry  Affairs,  to  be  an  Assistant  Secretary 
of  the  Air  Force.  (CR,  5/5/69,  54668) 
U.S.  returned  14-in  metal  sphere  from  Soviet  spacecraft  to  U.S.S.R. 
under  terms  of  space  rescue  treaty.  Later,  State  Dept.  spokesman said 
object-gas 
storage  tank-was  washed  up  on  Alaskan  coast  in   late 
1968.  Delay  i n   return  was  due  partly  to  efforts  in   identifying  it. 
(Reuters,  W  Post,  5/8/69,  A25) 
In   letter  to  Attorney General, Sen. William  F.  Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  asked 
that  Justice  Dept.  investigate  possible  violations  of  Federal  law  in  
handling  of  Government’s  contract  with  Lockheed  Aircraft  Gorp.  for 
production  of  C-5A  a ircraf t   and   urged  tha t   DOD immediately  freeze 
(Proxm ire  Off;  Nossiter,  W  Post,  5/6/69,  A3) 
funding  for  C-5A. 
Jerald  R.  Kubat,  former Director  of  NASA  Manned  Space Flight  Program 
Control  Office,  died  in   Seattle,  Washington.  He  had  joined  Apollo 
Program   Office  in  1964.  (NASA  Hq  WB,  5/12/69,  5) 
May  6:  Milton  Klein,  Manager  of  AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion 
Office  and   Director  of  Space  Nuclear  Systems,  AEC,  testified  in   NASA 
authorization  hearings  before  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and 
Space Sciences that  for   second  decade  “what  is clear  is  that  regardless 
of  the  specific  directions  the  space  program  may  take,  i f   i t   is  to  be  a 
progressive  one,  nuclear  energy  will  play  an  increasingly  important 
role.  As  payloads  become  larger   and  energy  requirements  become 
greater  to  move  these  payloads  farther  from  the  earth,  the  nuclear 
rocket will  become  a workhorse propulsion  system.  As  we  move  far ther  
from  the  sun  or  a s   the  power  requirements  increase  for  the  more  so -  
phisticated  payloads,  electric  power  generated  from  radioisotopes  or 
nuclear  reactors  will  similarly  become  more  and   more  important. 
(Transcr ip t)  
ApoZlo  9 mission  to  prove  capability  of  LM  to  operate  in   space  (March 
3-13)  was  adjudged  successful by  NASA.  Overall performance of  launch 
vehicle,  spacecraft,  flight  crew,  ground  support  and  control  facilities, 
and  personnel was  satisfactory  and   all  primary  mission objectives were 
accomplished.  (NASA  P ro j   Q f f )  
At  annual meeting  of  Aerospace Medical Assn.  and   interview which  fol- 
lowed  in   San  Francisco, MSC  Director  of  Medical Research and  Opera- 
tions,  Dr.  Charles A.  Berry,  said  it was  almost certain  that  a t  least  one 
Apollo  11  astronaut  would  develop  illness  during  21-day  quarantine 
period  following  re turn   from  moon.  “We  have  to  face  the  fact  that 
we’ve  had   post-flight  illness  on  every  Apollo  mission  so  far.  Our  prob- 
lem  will  be  to  determine  whether  any  illnesses  that  show  u p   . . . a re  
due  to  the stresses  of  space flight  o r   to  some micro-organism picked  up  
on  the  moon.’’  Among  difficulties  noted  dur ing   Apollo  program  were 
loss  of  exercise  capacity  for  period  after  return  to  earth,  motion  sick- 

130 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  6 

ness  in   flight,  and  damage to  red  blood cells from  atmosphere of  100% 
oxygen.  Blood  cell damage had   been  alleviated  by  addition of  nitrogen 
to   spacecraft  atmosphere.  (Huntsville  T imes ,   5 /7 /69)  
Dr.  John  S.  Foster,  Jr.,  Director  of  Defense  Research  and  Engineering, 
discussed aeronautical portion  of  DOD N 1970 program  before  Senate 
Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space  Sciences  hearing  on  NASA  ap- 
propriations.  Upsurge in   DOD aircraft weapon  systems development  was 
“reflected  in   the  DOD fiscal  year  1970 budget  of  $1,372  million  for   a ir-  
craft  and   related  equipment  R.D.T.  &  E.,  an   increase  of  about  $387 
million”  over  FY  1969.  High-priority programs  were  USN’s  F-14A  a i r  
defense  fighter  and  S-3A  carrier-based antisubmarine warfare a ircraf t ;  
USAF’S  F-15A  a i r   superiority  fighter,  advanced manned  strategic  a ir-  
craf t   (AMSA )  , and AX  close-support a ircraf t ;   and  USA%  heavy helicopter 
( HLH) . Comsat  program  included  Defense  Satellite  Communications 
System,  Tactical  Satellite  Communications  Program,  and   Very  Low 
Frequency  Propagation  Satellite.  (Transcript) 
American  Security  Council published  The   ABM  and  the  Changed  Stra- 
tegic  M i l i tary   Balance,  U.S.A.  vs .   U.S.S.R. Although  U.S.  GNP  ran  
almost  tw i c e   tha t   of  U.S.S.R., 
latter  was  investing  two  to  three  times 
more  i n   strategic  military  forces  annually.  Report  concluded:  “Anti- 
ballistic  missile  defense  is  not  a  cure-all  for  the  security  of  the  United 
States.  I t   is  not  the  ultimate  defense  system,  for  technology  knows  no  
limits  and   each  decade  produces  fresh  challenges  and  fresh  need  for 
response on  the  part  of  free  nations.  But  anti-missile  defense  is   an  es- 
sential  component  in  the  network  of  military  systems  designed  to  give 
the American  people  a  seamless garment  of  security  in  an   age  of  acute 
danger.  . . . We  firmly  believe  that  an   American  ABM  system  is   the 
soundest  insurance  for   peace  and  against  war  tha t   the  United  States 
can  buy  in   1969, for  the  1970s.  . . . It may  well  be  . . . the  single most 
important  step  the  United  States  can  take  toward  a  real  and   lasting 
peace  a t   this moment in   history.”  (Tex t)  
Sen.  Edward  M.  Kennedy  (D-Mass.)  released  report  on  Safeguard  ABM 
system  prepared  a t   his  request  by  Harvard  law  professor  Abram 
Chayes and   MIT  provost  Dr.  Jerome  B.  Wiesner  and   scientists  George 
W. Rathjens and  Steven Weinberg. It said that  “the Sentinel/Safeguard 
anti-ballistic  missile  system  should  not  be  deployed  a t   this  time.”  Rec- 
ommendation was based  on conclusions system ,was unlikely  to perform 
according  to  specifications  under  nuclear  attack,  was  susceptible  to 
penetration,  and  was  not  well  adapted  to  perform  missions assigned  to 
it.  Deployment  would probably  start  “new  round  in  the  arms race”  and  
seriously  impede  the  conclusion  of  an  arms  control  agreement.” 
t.< 
(Kelly, W  S tar ,   5/7/69,  A8;  Chapman,  W Pos t ,   5/7/69,  A l )  
May   7:  NASA  announced  establishment of  task  group  on  manned  space  sta- 
tion  under  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  
Manned Space Flight,  and  of  task group  on  space shuttle  under  Charles 
W.  Mathews,  Deputy Associate Administrator  for Manned Space Flight. 
Reporting  to   Dr.  Mueller  would  be  LeRoy  E.  Day,  former  Director  of 
Apollo  Test.  H i s   group  would  develop  NASA  material  for  report  on 
space shuttles  to  President’s  Space Task  Group by  June  15. Frank  Bor- 
man,  former  Deputy  Director  of  Flight  Crew  Operations  a t   MSC  and 
ApoUo  8  commander,  would  report  to   Mathews  a s   Field  Director  for 
Space  Station  effort.  (NASA  Release  69-70) 

131 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  7 
*  Robert  J.  Collier Trophy  for   1968 was  presented  to  Apollo  8  Astronauts 
Frank   Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and   William  A.  Anders  by  Dr. 
Thomas  0.  Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  a t   Statler  Hilton  Hotel  cere- 
mony  i n   Washington,  D.C.  National  Aeronautic  Assn.  award  was 
made  annually  for  greatest  achievement in   aeronautics  o r   astronautics 
in  U.S.  toward  improving performance,  efficiency,  and  safety  of  a i r   o r  
space vehicles.  (NAA   News;  W  S tar ,   5/8/69,  A 3 )  
Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops  Station 
carried  GSFC  payload  to   80.4-mi  (129.4-km)  altitude  to  provide  data 
on  wind,  temperature,  pressure,  and   density  in   21.8-  to  59.0-mi  (35-  
to  95-km)  range dur ing   atmospheric warming.  All  1 9  grenades  ejected 
and   exploded  as  programmed  and   sound  arrivals  were  recorded  on 
ground.  Mission  was  launched  in   conjunction  with  Nike-Cajun  launch 
from  Arenosillo,  Spain.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
0  MSC   announced  Astronaut Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  had  been  cleared  medi- 
cally  for  return  to  space  flight  status  following correction  of  inner  ear 
disorder  which  had   grounded him  in  1963.  (NYT,  5/8/69,  2 ;   W Post, 
5/8/69,  A7) 
George  J.  Vecchietti,  NASA  Director  of  Procurement,  would  serve  as Act- 
ing  Assistant  Administrator  for   Industry  Affairs,  replacing  Philip  N. 
Whittaker,  who  had   assumed  new  duties  as  Assistant  Secretary  of  the 
Air  Force,  NASA  announced.  (NASA  Ann)  
*  Associated  Press  said  NATO  nations  U.K.,  West  Germany,  Canada,  Italy, 
Belgium,  Holland,  and   Norway  had  agreed  to  participate  in  tactical 
satellite  communications  experiments with  U.S.  France  was  interested 
but  would  not  participate;  system  was  for  use  of  closely  integrated 
forces  and  she  had  withdrawn  her  troops  from  integrated  NATO   com- 
mands.  Satellite  for  exclusive  use  of  alliance  was  scheduled  for  launch 
by  end  of  year.  (W  Star,  5/7/69,  A9) 
Four  contract  modifications  totaling  nearly  $10  million,  fo r .   change 
orders issued  in  connection with  Sa turn  V 2nd  stage, had  been  awarded 
to  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.,  MSFC  announced.  ( MSFC  Release 
69-127) 
V /A   Hyman  G.  Rickover  (U SN )  , addressing Convocation  on  Ecology  and  
the  Human  Environment  a t   St.  Alban’s  School  in  Washington,  D.C., 
said  that  “keeping  our  small  crowded  planet  inhabitable”  was  “of  ut- 
most  importance  and  great  urgency.  . . . We  have  been  brought  to  this 
critical  situation  by  the  scientific-technological revolution,  and  can  ex- 
tricate  ourselves  only  by  a  change  of  direction  in   thought  and  action 
so drastic  it would  rate  the  term  counterrevolutionary.”  Science,  “pure 
thought,”  harmed  no  one.  “But  technology  is  action  . . . often  poten- 
tially  dangerous  action.  Unless  i t   is   made  to  adapt  itself  to  human 
interests,  needs,  values,  and   principles,  more  harm  will  be  done  than 
good.  Never  before  . . . ha s   man  possessed  such  enormous  power  to 
in jure   himself,  his  human  fellows,  and   his  society.  . . . Tha t   is  why  i t  
is  important  to  . . . recognize clearly  tha t   . . . technology  can  have  no 
legitimate  purpose but  to  serve man-man 
in   general,  not  merely  some 
men.  . . .” (Tex t ;   W Star,  5/11/69,  E2)  
*  Securities  and   Exchange  Commission  said  i t  had  begun  inquiry  into  all 
phases  of  Government’s  contractual  dealing  with  Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corp.  on  C-5A  procurement.  (Nossiter,  W  Po s t ,   5/8/69,  A l ;   AP, 
W  Star, 5/8/69,  A3) 

132 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
May  8 
lifting-body  research  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld  R. 
May  8:  X-24A 
Gentry  ( USAF)  , successfully  completed  second  glide  flight  over  South 
Rogers  Lake  Bed,  Calif.,  to  obtain  additional  data  on  handling  quali- 
ties.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
*  New  direct  value  for   sun’s  thermal  radiation  of  125.7  w  per  sq  ft,  ob- 
tained  from Mariner  V I  and   V I I   en  route  to  Mars, was  nearly  twice  as 
accurate  a s   old  value  of  129.5  w  per  sq   ft,  NASA  announced.  J P L  
Mariner  project  engineer  Joseph  A.  Plamondon  said  change  in   prob- 
able  e r ro r   in   new  measurement was  one-half  tha t   of  old  figure.  Results 
of  inflight  measurements obtained  with  temperature-control  flux  moni- 
tors  ( TCFM)   monitoring  solar  radiation  since  Mariners’  launch  Feb. 
24  and March 27 would  be  compared with  preflight predictions  of  solar 
radiation  and   spacecraft  temperature  variations  in   flight,  to   establish 
new  standard  for   temperature-control  design  and   testing.  Data  from 
TCFM  agreed  with  data  obtained  by  NASA  from  high-altitude  experi- 
ments  on  Convair  990.  research  aircraft  and  X-15. 
(NASA   Release 
69 -69 ;   J P L   Release  518) 
Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Arenosillo, 
Spain,  carrying  grenade  payload  for  Spain  to  conduct  meteorological 
studies.  Rocket  and  instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA   P ro j  
O f f )  
Smithsonian  Institution  celebrated  50th  anniversary  of  May  8,  1919, 
takeoff  of  first  aircraft  to   cross  Atlantic  Ocean with  display  on  Wash- 
ington,  D.C.,  mall  of  original  NC-4   (restored  by  Smithsonian  Air 
Museum  Curator  Pau l   Garber)   and  w i t h   presentation  to  Institution  of 
Plaque  and  aircraft’s  log.  Glenn  Curtiss-built,  long-range  seaplane 
ordered  by  USN  as bomber  dur ing  World War  I  but  completed  too  late 
to  see  service  had  been  flown  by  USN  crew  from  Rockaway  Beach, 
N.Y.,  to  Plymouth,  England,  with  two  sister  a ircraf t   which  crashed  in  
Azores.  NC-4 ,   known  as  “Nancy,”  made  journey  in   53  h r s   58  min 
flying  time  and  23  days elapsed time.  (Lydon, NYT,  5/1/69,  22 ;   Dur- 
bin,  W Post,  5/8/69,  C1) 
Sen.  Warren  G.  Magnuson  (D-Wash.)  submitted  to  Senate  S.C.R.  23, 
expressing sense  of  Congress that  US. participate  in   international dec- 
ade  of  ocean  exploration.  Measure  was  referred  to  Senate  Commerce 
Committee.  (CR,  5/8/69,  S4688) 
May  9 :  NASA’s HL-10 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  
A.  Manke,  reached  54,000-ft  altitude  and  724  mph  (mach  1.1)-first 
supersonic  flight  by  HG10-after 
45,000-ft-altitude  air-launch  from 
EL52  a ircraf t .   Primary  purpose  of  17th  flight,  made  north  of  Four 
Corners,  Calif.,  was  to  obtain  stability  and  control  data.  (NASA   P ro j  
O f f )  
Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops  Station 
carried  GSFC  payload  to  79.4-mi  (127.7-km)  altitude  to  obtain  data 
on  wind,  temperature? pressure,  and  density  in   21.8-  to  59.0-mi  (35- 
to  95-km)  range  during  atmospheric  warming.  Seventeen  of  19  gre- 
nades  ejected  and   exploded  as  programmed  and  sound  arrivals  were 
recorded.  Mission  was  launched  in   conjunction  with  Nike-Cajun 
launch  from  Arenosillo,  Spain.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
Astronomers  a t   60-in  optical  telescope  a t   Cerro  Tololo,  Chile,  began 
two-week  alert  in   attempt  to  photograph  Scorpio  X-1,  brightest  x-ray 
star,  best  seen  in   southern  skies.  When  flare-up  occurred,  they  would 

133 

May  9 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

rad io   message  t o   astronomical  teams  in  Hawaii,  which  would  launch 
two  Nike-Tomahawk  rockets  above  atmosphere  to  photograph  x-rays 
from  g ian t   star.  At  200-in  Palomar,  Calif.,  telescope,  astronomers 
would  try   to  photograph  star’s  visible  and   infrared  light  dur ing   flare 
period,  while  astronomical  team  in   Wisconsin would  order  Oao  ZZ to  
observe uv  light  from   star.  Astronomers hoped  to match  all  photos  of 
flare-up  to  determine  element  in   s ta r   which  excited  x-rays.  (W Post, 
5/4/69,  A3;  Hines,  C  Sun-Times,  5 /5 /69)  
Dr.  Lee A.  DuBridge, Presidential  Science Adviser,  testified  before  Sen- 
ate  Committee  on   Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  during  NASA  FY 
1970  authorization  hearings:  “Nothing  can  do   more  harm   to  suppbrt 
for   the  space program  than  to have  a  series  of  missions for  which  there 
a re   no  clear  objectives-such 
a s   a  series  of  manned  revisits  to  the 
moon  without  providing  the  capability  to  perform  new  scientific  ex- 
periments  and   to  explore  interesting  new  lunar   features.”  When  Space 
Task  Group  considered  urgent  items  in   manned  space  flight  area  for  
N 1970,  i t   “gave  high  priority  to  the  provision  of  additional  science 
payloads  for  lunar   flights  and  increased  capability  for  man  on  the 
lunar   surface,  to  support  Apollo  missions af ter   the  first  four  landings. 
Funding  for  this  purpose  is included  a s  pa r t   of  the  budget  amendment 
to  the  NASA  request  for   fiscal  year  1970. 
“An  additional  item  . . . is   funding  for  maintaining  the  production 
of  the  Sa turn   V  launch  vehicle.  Although  specific  commitment  to  a 
particular  mission  or  missions  has   not  been  made  for  the  initial  ve- 
hicles  to  be  produced  under  this  budget  amendment,  i t   was  the  judg- 
ment  of  the  Space  Task  Group  tha t   this  vehicle  represented  a  unique 
and   valuable  resource  that  we  would  undoubtedly  wish  to  continue  to 
use,  a t   least  through  the  mid-1970s.  Because  of  the  long  lead  times  in- 
volved  in   a  vehicle  of  this  size,  action  is   necessary  now  i f   we  a re   to 
have  follow-on  vehicles  produced  and   available  by  1973  and   after.” 
(Transcr ip t)  
*  Harold  R.  Kaufman,  Assistant  Chief  of  Electromagnetic Propulsion  Div., 
LeRC ,   would  receive  James  H.  Wyld  Propulsion  Award  for  “outstand- 
ing  leadership  in  the  field  of  electric propulsion,  including  the  concep- 
tion design,  and  development of  the world’s  most  successful  ion  rocket” 
a t   AIAA  5 th   Propulsion  Joint  Specialist  Conference  in   Colorado 
Springs,  Colo.,  June  9-13,  AIAA  announced.  (A IAA  N ew s ;   Lewis  News ,  
5/9/69,  1) 
*  Associated  Press  said  Astronaut-Aquanaut  M.  Scott  Carpenter  (Cdr., 
USN)   would  retire  from   USN  July  1 to   enter  private  business  in   ocean- 
ography  field.  He   was  second  US. astronaut  to  orb i t   earth,  dur ing  
May  24,  1962, Mercury  mission in   Aurora  7.  ( W  Pos t ,   5/10/69,  A3) 
Tom  Barker,  owner  of  bingo  hall  in   Cardiff,  Wales,  had   written  to 
American  and  Soviet embassies  in  London  for   permission to  open  first 
amusement  and  bingo  hall  on  moon,  Reuters  said.  U S .   Embassy 
spokesman had  replied:  “There  are   no   proposals  to  colonize  the  moon 
and  many  factors  inhibit  large-scale development.”  (NYT,  5/9/69,  16) 
New  Yorlc  Times  editorial:  “Now  it  appears  tha t   the  solution  to  the 
cosmic  ray  mystery  may  be   intimately  related  to  the  explanation  for 
the  strangest  astronomical  phenomena  discovered  in   recent  years,  if 
not  all  history,  the  pulsars.”  Present  favored  explanation  “views  pul- 
sa r s  a s  neutron  s tars  composed  of  matter  packed  so tightly  tha t   a  mass 

134 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  9 

the  weight  of  the  ear th   would  be  a  sphere  with  a  diameter  of  a  few 
hundred  feet. The  extremely swift  rotation  of  a  neutron  star,  it  is now 
theorized,  produces  both  the  periodic  radio  emissions  of  the  pulsars 
and  the  super-energetic  cosmic  rays.”  (NYT,  5/9/69,  46) 
May  10: Loose  wire  in   1s t  stage  of  Delta  launch  vehicle’s  guidance  system 
had  been  identified  by  final  failure  review  committee a s  most  probable 
cause  of  Intelsat-111  F-1  mission  failure  Sept.  18,  1968,  NASA  an -  
nounced.  Report  did  not  eliminate  possibility  that  electrical  failure  in  
unrecovered  pitch  gyro  o r   interconnecting  wiring  had  caused  failure. 
(NASA  Release  69-71) 
a  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Arenosillo, 
Spain,  carrying  grenade  payload  for  Spain  to  conduct  meteorological 
studies.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA   P ro j  
O f f )  
*  Comsat  station  for  communications  with  Europe  was  opened  a t   Yama- 
guchi,  Japan,  to  replace  telephone  and   telegraph  relay  through  U S .  
(Reuters,  W  Post,  5/11/69,  A3) 
M u y   11; Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory  announced  appointment  of  Dr.  Robert 
J.  Mackin,  Jr.,  as  Manager  of  Space  Sciences  Div.,  succeeding  Dr. 
Donald  P.  Burcham.  Dr.  Burcham  had   been  named  Research  and   Ad- 
vanced  Development  Manager  for  Space  Science,  JPL  O 5 c e   of  Re- 
search  and   Advanced  Development.  ( JPL Release  517) 
Vice  President  Sp iro  T.  Agnew  announced President’s  Council on  Youth 
Opportunity  and   NASA  would  explain  mechanics  of  scheduled  July 
6  Apollo  11 lunar   landing  to  high  school  and   jun ior   high  school pupils 
in   50   cities  under  summer  program  to  be  held  in  city  streets,  play- 
grounds,  and   classrooms.  (W   S t a r ,   5/12/69,  A3) 
Rise  of  costs  of  Mark  I1 electronic  equipment for   F-111  a ircraf t  of  more 
than  100%  above  original  contract  with  Autonetics  Div.  of  North 
American  Rockwell  Corp.  were  described  by  Bernard  D.  Nossiter  in  
Washington  Post  article  based  largely  on  memo  from  DOD  o5c ia l .  
Memo  had  warned,  “If  i t   fails  to  enforce  the  contract,  the  Air  Force 
and   the  entire  Department  of  Defense  can  count  on  many  more  years 
of  misleading  promises  from  contractors  and   failures  to  meet  contrac- 
tual  requirements.”  ( W  Pos t ,   5/11/69,  A l )  
*  F ire   a t  AEC  plutonium-handling  facility  a t   Rocky  Flats,  Colo.,  might  halt 
U S .   nuclear  missile  production  for  remainder  of  1969,  Associated 
Press  reported  testimony  released  by  Senate  Appropriations  subcom- 
mittee  had  disclosed.  Most  nuclear  weapons  needed  plutonium  to 
trigger  atomic  warheads.  ( W  Pos t ,   6/24/69,  A3) 
M a y   12:  NASA  launched  two  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  from  Wallops 
Station:  first  carried  GSFC  payload  to  study  ionospheres;  second 
carried  Univ.  of  Michigan  payload  to  conduct  studies  on  atmospheric 
structure.  Rockets  and  instruments  functioned  satisfactorily. 
(NASA  
P ro j   Off) 
Melvin  S.  Day  became  NASA  Acting  Assistant  Administrator  for  Tech- 
nology  Utilization,  succeeding  Dr.  Richard  L.  Lesher,  who  had  re- 
signed  to  accept position  in   industry.  (NASA  Ann)  
Author  Norman  Mailer’s  total  publishing  rights  on  book  on  lunar  land- 
ing  would  exceed  $1 million  when  book  was  published  by  Little, 
Brown  &  Co.  in   January   o r   February  1970,  according  to  his  agent, 
Scott  Meredith.  If film rights  were  sold,  total  could  approach  the  $1.5 

135 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  12 
million  paid  for  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  memoirs.  Mailer  planned  to  visit 
KSC  dur ing   Apollo  11  launch  to  interview  astronauts  and   describe 
space center  operations.  He  also  planned  chapter  on  philosophical  and 
technological  implications  of  lunar  landing.  Meredith  said  he  was  sur-  
prised  a t   “phenomenal competition  among  foreign  publishers  for  book 
and  magazine  rights.”  (Raymont, NYT,  5/13/69,  44) 
0  Science  students,  younger  scientists,  and   many  older  professors  of 
physics and  physiology were  engaging  in  what  Harvard  Univ.  political 
scientist  Prof .   Don  K.  Price  called  “a  new  kind  of  rebellion,”  linked 
only  in   part  with  radical  activists  on  campuses,  said  Victor  Cohn  in 
F’ashington  Post.  I t  was  rebellion  against ABM   “and  other  costly  mili- 
tary-technological  systems,  against  ‘weaponeering’  a t   secret  labora- 
tories  on  o r   near  campuses  and,  in   many  cases,  against  doing  any 
research,  secret  or  non-secret,  to  help  the  military.”  It  had  helped 
cause  Stanford Univ.  to  decide  to  phase  out  50%  of  secret  projects  at 
Applied  Electronics  Laboratory,  made  Stanford’s  trustees  place  mora- 
torium  on   new  chemical  and  biological  warfare  contracts  a t   Stanford 
Research  Institute,  caused  MIT  moratorium  on  new  secret  contracts, 
and   forced  American  Univ.  to  cancel  partly  secret  USA  research  con- 
tract.  Movement  and   student  protests  had,  in  past  year,  forced  DOD to 
cut  from  400  to  200  its  classified  R&D  contracts  on  U S .   campuses. 
( W  Pos t ,   5/12/69,  A l )  
*  I n   American  Aviation,  Eric  Bramley  called  1969 year  of  “cautious  op- 
timism”  for  a ir   transport  industry.  Deliveries  of  new  a ircraf t   to  US. 
carr iers   would  drop   from  478  in   1968  to  309.  Trunk  traffic  was  ex- 
pected  to  grow  a t   same  14%   rate  as  1968,  with  available  seat-mile 
increase  of  17% .   CAB-approved fare   increases  would  add  $194  million 
to  revenues  with  profit  level  and   ra te   of  return  expected  to  improve. 
( Am e r  A v ,   5/12/69,  40-1) 
May   12-24:  At  10th  annua l   meeting  of  Committee  on  Space  Research 
(COSPAR) in  Prague,  Apollo  8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  received 
medal  from  Czechoslovak Academy  of  Sciences. 
submitted  United  States  Space  Science  Program,  compre- 
NAS-NRC 
hensive summary  of  scientific  research  in   space science  in  U.S.  during 
1968.  “Although  the  principal  concern  of  the  space  science  program 
in   the  United  States  continues  to  be   with  the  Earth,  its  environment, 
the  Sun,  interactions  of  solar and   terrestrial phenomena, the Moon  and 
planets,  and   the  biological  effects  of  weightlessness  and  radiation, 
there  is  a  trend  toward  increasing  emphasis  on  the  use  of  space  ve- 
hicles  for   stellar  and   galactic  astronomy,  especially  in  areas  of  the 
electromagnetic  spectrum  for   which  the  atmosphere  is  essentially 
opaque.  The  successful  operation  of  the  Orbiting  Astronomical  Ob- 
servatory  satellite  and   the  rapid  development  of  improved  instruments 
and   techniques  for  ultraviolet  and  x-ray  astronomy  . . . are   examples 
of  this trend.” 
I n   interview with  press,  NAS-NRC  Space  Science Board  member  Dr. 
Richard W.  Por ter   sa id  U.S.  would  probably  have  to  review  i ts   expen- 
sive  prophylactic  measures  in   planned  Mars  landings  if  U.S.S.R. 
landed  there  first  with  same techniques and   precautions  used  in   Venus 
shots.  Outgoing  contamination  of  planets  might  well  be  bigger  prob- 
lem  than  contamination  of  incoming  spacecraft.  There  was  little  likeli- 
hood  of  spacecraft  landing  on  Mars  and   Venus  and  returning  for  a t  

136 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  12-24 

least  10 yrs,  Dr.  Porter  said,  and   risk  from  lunar   bacteriological  con- 
tamination  was  infinitesimal.  But  contamination  of  planets was  serious 
problem  because  it  could  spoil man’s  first  chances  to  make  a  pure  in- 
vestigation of  biological evolution elsewhere i n  the  solar  system.  (Text; 
W  Pos t ,   5/23/69,  A15) 
May  13:  Cosmos  C C L X X X I   was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  from  Plesetsk  into 
orbit  with  301-km  (187.0-mi)  apogee,  188-km  (116.8-mi)  perigee, 
89.3-min  period,  and   65.4’ 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  May  21. 
(GSFC S S R ,   5/15/69;  5/31/69;  SBD,  5/14/69,  61) 
Countdown  for  NASA’s  Apollo  10 mission,  scheduled  for  launch  May  18, 
began  a t   KSC.  Astronauts  completed  three-hour  physical  examinations 
and  were  reported  to  be  in   good  health  and  good  spirits.  ( W   Pos t ,  
5/13/69,  A7;  Sehlstedt,  B  Sun,  5/14/69,  A3) 
NASA  and Australian  Dept.  of  Supply and  Dept.  of  Education a n d  Science 
announced  that  210-ft-dia  radiotelescope  a t   National  Radio  As- 
tronomy  Observatory  in   Parkes,  Australia,  might  be  used  to  relay  TV 
signals  from  moon  during  Apollo  11 lunar  landing  mission  in   Ju ly .  
Signals  from  Apollo  11  antennas  were  scheduled  to  be  received  by 
Goldstone  Tracking  Station.  If  mission  were  delayed  and  moon  were 
not  visible  from  Goldstone  while  TV  was  scheduled,  signals  would  be 
received  a t   Parkes,  transmitted  to  Sydney,  and  transmitted  to  NASA’s 
Mission  Control  Center  a t   Houston  via  Zntelsat-IIZ  F-3  over  Pacific. 
(NASA   Release  69-72) 
ComSatCorp  President  Joseph  V.  Charyk  told  Annual  Meeting  of  Share- 
holders  i n   Washington,  D.C.,  key  goal  of  establishing  global  comsat 
system  was  “within  immediate  view.”  When  Early  Bird  [Intelsat  Z ]  
“wa s   launched  just  four  years  ago,  there  were  only  a  handful  of  ex- 
perimental  stations  in   Europe  and  the  United  States.  Today,  there  a r e  
25  earth  stations  operating  in  15 different countries  of  the  world,  with 
many  more  nearing  completion.  It  is   expected  that  a  total  of  43 sta- 
tions  will  be  in   service  by  the  end  of  this  year  and  that  26  different 
countries will  have  direct  access  to  all  forms  of  high  quality  communi- 
cations that  the global  system of  satellites makes economically available 
to   them.”  By  1972  “there  w i l l   be  more  than  70  stations  operating  in 
nearly  40 countries  of  the  world,  thereby  making  this  high  quality 
means  of  communications  available  directly  to  practically  every  na-  
tion  on  earth.” 
At  end  of  first  quarter  of  1969 1,209  full-time  circuits  were  being 
leased,  up  from  777  a t   end  of  1967.  Leased  voice  and  record  tariffs 
published  by  international  carriers  represented  40%  reduction  in  
Atlantic  and  Pacific  areas  since  advent  of  comsats.  Transmission  of 
TV  via  satellite  increased  from  225  h r s   in   1967  to  666  hrs   in   1968, 
with  40%  reduction  i n   TV  rates.  (Text) 
*  New  Y o r k   Times  editorial  urged  President  Nixon  to  “undo  a  mistake 
and  strike  a  blow  for  the  more  rational  ordering  of  Federal  spending 
priorities”  by  supplanting  Government  subsidy  of  SST program  with 
SST Authority.  “The  Government’s  S.S.T.  contribution  should  be  con- 
verted  to  a  preferred  equity  interest  in   a  new  public  corporation  with 
variable  proportions  of  the  total  common  stock  being  reserved  for  the 
airlines  and  the  investing  public.  To   the  extent  necessary,  the  S.S.T. 
authority  would  be  authorized  to  raise  development  funds  by  selling 
bonds  . . . guaranteed  by  the  Federal  Government.”  ( N Y T ,  5/13/69) 
137 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
May  14 
May 14: Rep.  George P. Miller  (D-Calif.)  introduced  in  House H.R.  11271, 
substitute NASA  FY  1970 authorization bill increasing  total from  $3.716 
billion  of  April  15 amended budget  request  (a s  reflected  in  H.R.  10251 
introduced April  1 7 )   to  $3.966 billion. 
Bill added $258 million  to  R&D  funds  for  new  total  of  $3.264  billion, 
including  increase  of  $75.7  million fo r  Apollo  program,  to  total  $1.767 
billion.  Of  this  increase,  $32.1  million was  for  Saturn V  improvements 
and   $4.6  million  for  lunar  exploration.  Within  new  total  of  $354.8- 
million  NOA  for   manned  space  flight  operations,  bill  restored  $57 
million  cut from Apollo  Applications by  budget  amendment and   added 
$66 million for   space station  and  shuttle  and  $6.2  million  for   Saturn V 
production. 
I n   space science  and   applications,  bill  reduced  funds  for  supporting 
research  and   technology by  $12  million  and   deferred  funding  for   four 
proposed  Explorer  satellites  and   for  Mariner-Mercury  1973  mission, 
but  restored  biosatellite  program  to  originally  requested  $18  million 
plus  $1.6  million  restored  for  Delta  launch  vehicle  for  Biosatellite-F. 
Ear th   Resources  Technology  Satellite  funds  were  increased  by  $10 
million,  with  transfer  of  funds  to  other  projects  prohibited. 
Advanced  research  and   technology  funds  were  increased  by  $31.5 
million,  including  $13.5-million  increase  for  nuclear  rocket  program, 
$5.25 million  for  chemical propulsion,  and  restoration  of  $1.20  million 
for  aeronautics. 
Research  and   program  management  total  was  cut  by  $7.15  million, 
to  $643.75  million.  Construction of  facilities  total  remained  unchanged. 
(Tex t ;   CR,  5 /15 /69 ;   House Rpt  91-255) 
I n   press  statement,  Secretary  of  Defense  Melvin  R.  Laird  said  G A O  team 
investigating  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  books  had  estimated  cost  of 
120-aircraft  C-SA  program  exceeded  advance  estimates  by  about 
$550  million.  DOD  analysts  had  computed  $450-million  overrun  and  
USAF  had  used  $35O-million  figure.  Laird  denied  there  was  $%billion 
overrun.  Figures  had  been  turned  over  to  Congressional  committee. 
(AP,  B  Sun, 5/15/69,  A4) 
USAF’S  Arnold  Engineering  Development  Center  a t   Tullahoma,  Tenn., 
had  “brought  much  of  the  universe down  to  pocket-size’’  for  scientists 
working  on  Apollo  10,  Henry  J.  Taylor  wrote  in   Wash ing ton   Daily 
News.  Tests  to  establish  spacecraft’s ability  to  withstand  lunar   environ- 
ment  were  under  way  in   Center’s  216,000-hp  wind  tunnel,  which  pro-  
duced  8,000-mph winds  and   was  “largest  hypersonic  wind  tunnel  in 
the  free world.”  ( W  News ,   5/14/69,  31) 
Eugene S.  Burcher, NASA  Tektite  Program Manager,  OMSF,  received  Navy 
Distinguished  Public  Service Award  for  “distinguished  and  outstand- 
ing  service  to  the  United  States  and  to  the  Department  of  the  Navy  as 
a  participant  in   Project  TEKTITE I  mission,  as well  a s   its  planning  and 
implementation.”  (NASA  Hq   Y B ,  6/2/69,  6 )  
0  Charles  L.  Lawrence  Award  of  Aviation/Space  Writers  Assn.  was  pre- 
sented  to  Volta  Torrey,  Publications  Officer,  NASA  Scientific  and  Tech- 
nical  Information  Div.,  for   “efforts  to  inform  the  public  of  NASA’s 
activities.”  Citation  and   silver  tray   were  presented  a t   Dayton,  Ohio, 
banquet.  (ASWA   letter  of  notification,  4/15/69;  NASA  Sci  and   Tech 
Info   Div) 
*  U.S.  District  Court  Judge  Gerhard  A.  Gesell  had  turned  down  appeal  of 

138 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  14 

Aircraft  Owners and   Pilots Assn.  to  prevent  enforcement of  FAA  regu- 
lation  limiting nonscheduled &ghts  a t   five ma jor   airports, Washington 
Evening  S ta t   said.  AOPA  had   asked  for   preliminary  injunction  to  stop 
regulations  from  becoming  effective  June   1.  (W   Star,  5/14/69,  G8) 
May  15: Aerobee  150 A  sounding rocket launched  by  NASA  from  NASA  Wal- 
lops  Station  carried  payload  containing  two  white  ra ts   to  97.9-mi 
157.6-km)  altitude  in   four th   of  four  experiments  to  study  rats’  be- 
havior  in   artificial  gravity  field  and   determine  minimum  level  of 
gravity  needed  by  biological  organisms  during  space  flight.  During 
free  fall  ra t s   selected  artificial  gravity  levels  created  through  centrif- 
ugal  action  by  walking  along  tunnel  runway  in   extended  arms  of 
payload.  Data  on  their  position  and   movement  were  telemetered  to 
ground  stations.  Last  flight  in   series  had  been  Nov.  21,  1968.  (NASA  
Rp t   SRL;  WS  Release  69-10) 
Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Space Science and  
Applications,  announced  reorganization  of  Hq.  Space  Applications 
Programs  Office in   recognition  of  increasing  importance  of  applica- 
tions  satellite  programs.  Leonard  Jaffe,  former  Director  of  Space  Ap- 
plications  Programs,  had  been  named  Deputy  Associate  Administrator 
for   Applications,  responsible  for  near-term  and   long-range  planning 
and   interagency  policy  coordination.  As  Acting  Director  of  Ear th   Ob- 
servations  Programs  Office-one 
of  two  new  program  offices  into 
which  Space  Applications  Programs  Office  was  being  divided-he 
would  supervise R&D  efforts  in   meteorology and   ear th   resources survey 
including  TIROS,  Nimbus,  Synchronous  Meteorological Satellite,  EIZTS, 
and   sounding  rocket  programs  in   support  of  meteorology. Dr.  Morris 
Tepper  would  continue  to   direct  scientific  activities. 
Communications  Programs  Office-concerned  with  R&D  for  com- 
munications,  navigation,  traffic  control,  and   geodetic  satellites ; ATS 
program;  and   COMSAT  support-would 
have  as  its  Director  Dr. 
Richard  Marsten,  Manager  of  Advanced  Programs  Technology,  RCA 
Astro-Electronics Div.  Dr.  Marsten’s  NASA  appointment  would  become 
effective  June   23.  (NASA  Release  69-76) 
ERC  Director  James  C.  Elms  discussed  NASA’s role  in   computer  R&D  a t  
Spr ing   Joint  Computer  Conference  in   Boston.  While  Apollo  guidance 
computer was  best known  among major  computer  activities  undertaken 
by  NASA  i n   i ts   first  decade,  other  onboard  computer  developments  ‘‘of 
considerable  technical  challenge”  had  been  pursued.  Versatile  test-bed 
multiprocessor  EXAM was  oriented  toward  use  of  “hierarchy  of  mem- 
ories”  to  increase  capability  to   evaluate  advanced  technology  for  very 
large  bulk-storage  systems,  particularly  for  spaceborne  computers. 
TRIM-for  Transformation  of  Imagery-was 
experimental  tool  for  ad- 
vancing state of  a r t  in   imagery  processing;  computer-driven flying-spot 
scanner with color  capability  had   auxiliary  display  terminal  permitting 
man-machine-interactive operation.  SOFIX-for 
Software  Fix-was 
co- 
ordinated  university  research  program  on  problems  in   developing 
computer  software  a t   same pace  a s  hardware.  (Tex t)  
Soviet  astronomer  Dr.  Nikolay  A.  Kozyrev  had   revealed  detection  by 
Pulkovo  Observatory  of  volcanic  activity  on  moon,  Space  Business 
Da i ly   reported.  Two  spectrograms  of  Aristarchus  crater’s  western  side 
taken  April  1 had  shown  “an  unusual  red  spot  of  approximately  102 
kilometers  C63.4  mi]”  which  was  “result  of  the  emission  of  gases- 

139 

May  15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

molecular  nitrogen  and   cyanogen.”  Emissions,  which  had  occurred 
one  day  after  earthquakes  in   U.A.R.  and   Japan,  affirmed  link  between 
tectonic  phenomena  on  ear th   and   moon  and   showed  “that  the  moon 
had   ‘responded’  to   this  terrestrial  phenomenon.”  (SBD,  5/15/69,  67 )  
AFSC  announced  new  UHF  communications  terminal  developed  by  Elec- 
tronic  Systems  Div.  might  solve  problems  in   relaying  messages  be- 
tween  spacecraft  and   ground  stations.  Designed  for  uSAF  a ircraf t   a s  
part  of  joint-service  Tactical  Satellite  Communications  Program,  ter- 
minals would  be  installed  and   tested  on  USAF  jet  tracking  a ircraf t  used 
fo r   communications  support  in   Apollo  program.  They  would  allow 
a ircraf t   to  relay  spacecraft  information  and   recovery  operations  reli- 
ably  from  par ts   of  globe  where  communications  had  posed  problem. 
( USAF  Release  51.69) 
*  Strategic threat  to U.S.  security  was  rapidly  increasing,  Secretary  of  the 
Air  Force,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  told  Chamber  of  Commerce 
Armed  Forces Day  luncheon  in  New  Orleans. U.S.S.R.  had  built  inter- 
continental  missile  force  from   250  in   1966  to  1,150  operational  or 
under  construction.  “With  their  large  SS-9  missiles,  the  Soviets  will 
soon  have  about  twice  a s   much  missile  payload  . . . as  our  missile 
force,  even  including  our  advantage  in   submarine  launched  missiles. 
In   addition,  the  Soviets  have  already  deployed  an   antiballistic  missile 
system  that  includes  some  60  long-range  ABM  missiles.”  (Tex t)  
Muy   16:  U.S.S.R.’s  Venus  V  planetary  probe  (also  designated  Yeneru  Y )  
entered  atmosphere of  planet Venus  a t  2:Ol  am  EDT and   ejected  instru- 
mented  capsule  [see  June  41.  Probe   decelerated  from  6.9  mps  to 
688.8  fps,  deployed  parachute,  and  transmitted  data  during  53-min 
descent  through  dense  clouds  to  night  side  of  Venusian  surface. 
Launched  Jan.  5,  Venus  V  had   traveled  217-million-mi trajectory.  Tass 
said:  “The  instrument  capsule  was  automatically  jettisoned  from  the 
station  before  entry  into  Venusian  atmosphere.  The  aerodynamic 
deceleration  of  the  apparatus  in   the  atmosphere  began  . . . and  was 
accompanied  by  a  sharp   decrease  in   overloads  and  a  growth  of  tem- 
perature  on  the  craft’s  outer  surface.  . . . During  the  53-min parachute 
descent,  measurements of  the  temperature,  pressure  and   chemical com- 
position  of  Venusian  atmosphere  were  made.  This  information  was 
uninterruptedly  transmitted  to  earth.”  Venus  IV  (launched  June   12, 
1967)   had   reached  Venus  Oct.  18,  1967;  Venus  V I   (launched  Jan. 
10) was  scheduled to  reach  planet May  17.  (Winters,  B Sun,  5/17/69, 
A l ;   Bausman,  W Post,  5/17/69,  A3;  SBD,  5/19/69,  77 ;   Gwertzman, 
NYT,  5/17/69) 
*  In te l su t - I l l   F-3  comsat,  launched  Feb.  5  and   in   orb i t   over  Pacific,  had  
lost  some  of  potential  capacity  and   would  be  moved  to  62.5”  east 
longitude  over  Ind ian   Ocean,  ComSatCorp announced.  In   new  position 
satellite  would  link  directly  all  countries  with  appropriate  ear th   sta- 
tions  in  Western  Europe, Near  East,  Africa,  Asia,  and Australia.  Move 
would  be  made  soon  after  launch  of  Intelsat-I11 F 4  May  21.  Fu ture  
satellites  would  be  modified  for  additional  redundancy.  ( ComSatCorp 
Release  69-27) 
Aerobee  150 MI  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carried 
GSFC  payload  to  125.5-mi (202-km) altitude to  obtain  solar  EUV spectra 
from  4.0  to  390 A  and   from  10 to  390 A  using  BBRC-SPC  330D  solar- 

140 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  16 

pointing  control  and  recovery  system.  Rocket  and   instruments  per- 
formed  satisfactorily.  ( NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
*  President  Nixon  submitted  to   Senate  nomination  of  ApoZZo  8  Astronaut 
William  A.  Anders  a s   Executive  Secretary  of  NASC  to  succeed  Dr. 
Edward  C.  Welsh.  I t   was  highest  Government post  ever  offered  to  an  
astronaut.  (PD, 5/19/69,  705;  Kirkman,  W Post,  5/15/69,  A25) 
*  MSC  announced  revised  quarantine  procedures  for  Apollo  11 af ter   land- 
ing.  To  prevent  back  contamination  from  moon,  astronauts  would 
dispose  on  moon  under  containment  conditions  equipment  exposed 
there;  brush,  vacuum-clean, and   bag  other  equipment  and  clothing  for 
re turn ;   prevent  dust  from  being  transferred  from  LM  to  CM ;   and  
continuously  filter  CM   atmosphere  during  re turn   t r ip   to  remove  dust 
particles. 
Under  original  plans  Apollo  11 crew  would  have  remained  in   CM 
after  splashdown while  i t  was  hoisted  onto  recovery ship.  After  review- 
ing  loads  to  be  lifted  in   transferring  CM  to   deck,  reliability  of  ship- 
board  cranes,  and  capacity  of  available  load-limiting  elastic  tackle, 
NASA  decided to  retain  helicopter  lift used  on  previous Apollo  missions. 
Crew  would  emerge  from  CM  to   raft,  where  they  would  put  on  bio- 
logical  isolation  garments  tha t   would  cover  them  completely  and  pro- 
vide  high-efficiency  a ir   outlet  filter.  Interagency  Committee  on  Back 
Contamination-NASA,  Dept.  of  Agriculture,  HEW ,   Dept.  of  Interior, 
and  NAs-had  agreed  that  helicopter  lift,  combined  with  other  pre- 
landing  procedures,  would  provide  maximum  achievable  precautions 
against  back  contamination,  ( MSC  Release  6 9 4 7 )  
I n   Science,  Leonard  D.  Jaffe,  Surveyor  data  analysis  manager  a t   JPL, 
cited  important  findings  of  five  Surveyor  spacecraft  which  softlanded 
on  lunar   surface:  surface  of  both  maria  and  highlands  was  covered 
with  layer  of  particulate  material  of  10-micrometer particles  scattered 
with  rocks  and   clods;  layer  was  few  meters  deep  in   maria  and   varied 
from  few  centimeters  to  tens  of  meters  in   highlands,  with  density  and  
other properties  varying with depth;  p.articulate material had  cohesion; 
fine material  moved  gradually  downhill;  freshly  exposed  fine  material 
from  below  surface was  darker   than  previously  exposed  surface  mate- 
r ia l ;   density  of  surface  rock  was  2.8  & 0.4  g r   per  cc ;   composition of 
surface  material  was  approximately  that  of  basalt  (mare   material  had 
elemental  composition  like  high-iron  basalt;  highland  material,  like 
low-iron basalt;  not  more  than  one-quarter  volume  percent  of  metallic 
iron   was  present) ; lunar  surface  material  had   experienced  extensive 
melting  and   chemical  differentiation.  (Science,  5/16/69,  775-8) 
e  FAA  and  USAF  announced  that  M /G   Jewel1 C.  Maxwell  (U SA F ) ,   Director 
of  Supersonic  Transport  Development  for  FAA,  would  become  Com- 
mander  of  Armament  Development  and  Test  Center  a t   Eglin  AFB,  Fla. 
His  successor a t   FAA  had  not  yet  been  selected.  (FAA   Release  69-56) 
Muy   17: U.S.S.R.’s  Venus  V I  planetary  probe  (also  designated  Veneru  VZ) 
launched Jan.  1 0  landed  on  night  side  of  planet Venus  a t  2:03  am EDT, 
186.4 m i   (300 km)   from  Venus  V  after  51-min descent  [see  June  41. 
Tass  said  landing  of  both  probes  “was  accomplished with  tremen- 
dous  precision.”  Throughout  flight  “the  necessary  temperature  in   the 
compartments  and   the  permanent  orientation  of  solar  batteries  on  the 
Sun  were  ensured.  During  rad io   communication  sessions  the  direc- 

141 

May  17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

tional  parabolic  antennae  were  oriented  on  Earth.  As  envisaged  by 
plan,  the  detachable  capsules  of  both  stations  descended  through  the 
planet’s  atmosphere on  its night  side.  In the course of  descent,  scientific 
equipment  measured  the   chemical  composition,  pressure,  density  and  
temperature  of  the  planet’s  atmosphere. Experts  analysed  the  graph  of 
temperature  and pressure  changes while  the  apparatus was  approaching 
. . . and   found  in   i t   a  resemblance with  the  . . . picture  of  the  landing 
of  Venera  5.  The  apparatus  performed  with  the  same  precision  all 
ma jor   operations  of  the  landing.’’  ( S BD ,  5/20/69,  84 ;   AP,  W Post, 
5/18/69;  UPI,  W Star,  5/18/69,  A9) 
Apollo  10  astronauts  would  each  carry   out  about  two  hours  of  head 
exercises early  i n   mission  in   attempt  to  prevent motion  sickness which 
plagued  previous  Apollo  astronauts,  MSC  Deputy  Director  of  Medical 
Operations,  Dr.  A.  Duane  Catterson,  said.  Exercises-which 
included 
nodding,  rocking,  and   twisting  head-would 
be  done  to  point  just 
below  threshold  of  illness  until  normal  adaptation  occurred.  Since 
pilots  who  regularly  performed  drastic  maneuvers  in   a ircraf t   seldom 
suffered  motion  sickness,  astronauts  had  flown  aerobatic  jet  flights  in  
barrel  rolls  and   high-gravity  maneuvers  during  week  before  launch. 
(Cohn,  W Post,  5/18/69,  A8) 
May  18-26:  NASA’s ApoZZo  10  (AS-505),  first  lunar  orbital  mission  with 
complete Apollo  spacecraft, was  successfully launched from KSC  Launch 
Complex  39,  Pad   B,  at  12:49  pm  EDT by  Sa turn   V  booster.  Flight 
carried  three-man  crew  and  CSM-106  and   LM-4.  Pr imary   objectives 
were  to  demonstrate  crew,  space vehicle,  and  mission support  facilities 
during  manned  lunar  mission  with  CSM  and  LM  and  to  evaluate  LM  
performance  in  cislunar  and   lunar  environment. 
Launch  events occurred  as  planned  and   spacec ra f t -ca r ry ing   Astro- 
nauts  Thomas  P.  Stafford  (commander) ,   John  W.  Young  ( C M   p i lo t) ,  
and   Eugene  A.  Cernan  ( LM  pilot) -entered 
initial  parking  orbit  with 
118.1-mi (189.9-km)  apogee and  114.6-mi  (184 .4km)   perigee.  Check- 
out  followed  lunar  trajectory  insertion;  then  CSM,  code-named Charlie 
Brown,  separated  from  Sa turn   V  3rd   stage  (S-IVB)  and   LM ,   code- 
named  Snoopy.  Crew  successfully  transposed  CSM  and  docked  with  LM .  
Excellent  quality  color  TV  coverage  of  docking  sequences  was  trans- 
mitted  to Goldstone  tracking  station  and seen on  worldwide  commercial 
TV.  Crew  extracted  LM  from  S-IVB  and   conducted  1s t   SPS  burn.  All 
launch  vehicle  safing  activities  were  performed  as  scheduled  and   suc- 
cessful  propellant  dump  provided  impulse  to  S-IVB 
for   slingshot 
maneuver  to  earth-escape  velocity. 
On  second  day,  first  midcourse  maneuver  was  not  required.  Crew 
conducted  midcourse  maneuver  number  two,  which  was  so  accurate 
that  th ird   and  four th   maneuvers  were  canceled.  Five  color  TV  trans- 
missions totaling  72 min  and  showing excellent  views  of  receding  earth 
and   spacecraft  were  made  dur ing   translunar  coast.  Spacecraft  entered 
moon’s  sphere  of  influence  on  four th   day,  May  21,  a t   61:50  GET. 
Crew  conducted  first  lunar  orbit  insertion  maneuver  with  356-sec 
SPS  burn   to  reduce  speed  to  5,474  fps  and   place  spacecraft  in   initial 
lunar  orbit with  196.1-mi  (315.5-km)  apolune  and  68.6-mi  (110.4-km) 
perilune.  Second  LOI  maneuver,  13.9-sec  SPS  burn,  circularized  orbit 
with  70.8-mi  (113.9-km)  apolune  and   67.8-mi  (109.1-km)  perilune. 
Crew tracked lunar landmarks and transmitted 29-min color TV of  lunar 
142 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  18-26 

surface.  Cernan  transferred  to LM  at 81:55 GET  for  two hours  of  house- 
keeping activities  and  communications test. 
On  fifth  day  Stafford  and  Cernan  entered  LM  and   checked  ou t   all 
systems  before  firing  SM  reaction  control  system  thrusters  to  separate 
CSM  and   LM  about  30  f t   and   again  for   2.3-mi  separation.  LM   descent 
propulsion  system burn   propelled LM  to  within  9.6 mi  of  lunar  surface 
over  landing  site No.  2.  Crew  had   no  difficulty  identifying  landmarks 
and  Stafford  said,  “It  looks  like  all  you  have  to  do   is   put  your  ta i l  
wheel  down  and   we’re  there.  . . . The  craters  [around  No.  2  landing 
site]  look  flat  and   smooth  a t   the  bottom.  I t   should  be  real  easy”  for 
Apollo  11 landing.  LM  crew  took  numerous photos of  lunar  surface  and 
provided  continuous  commentary  on  their  observations  after  cameras 
malfunctioned. Astronauts described volcanoes  and  light-colored craters 
that  glowed  a s   i f   l i t   by  radioactive  substance. 
Crew  conducted  LM  rada r   test  during  low-altitude  pass  which  indi- 
cated  47,000-ft pericynthian  (lowest point  in   o rb i t ) .   DPS  phasing  burn 
raised  apocynthian  (orb i ta l   high  point)  to  218.6  mi  (351.7  km ) .   LM  
descent  stage  was  jettisoned  and   RCS  separation  maneuver  and   staging 
were  accomplished.  Anomaly  i n   automatic  abor t   guidance  system 
caused  LM  ascent  stage  to  undergo  extreme  gyrations.  By  taking  over 
manual  control,  Stafford  reestablished  proper  attitude.  APS  insertion 
maneuver  burn   a t   pericynthian  established  equivalent  of  standard  LM 
insertion  orb i t   of  lunar  landing  mission  (51.8 by  12.9 m i ) ,  where  LM 
coasted  for  one  hour.  Concentric  sequence  initiation  a t   apocynthian, 
constant-delta-height  maneuver,  and  terminal  maneuver  were  con- 
ducted.  LM  successfully  docked  with  CSM  a t   106:33 GET,  after  eight- 
hour  separation;  and  LM  crew  returned  to   CSM. 
On  sixth  day   LM  ascent  stage  was  jettisoned;  its  batteries  burned  to 
depletion  and   it  entered  solar  orbit.  Crew  made  18  landmark  sightings 
and  took  extensive  stereo  and   oblique  photos  of  moon.  Two  scheduled 
TV  periods  were  deleted  because  of  crew  fatigue  and  crew  rested  and 
prepared  for  return  to  earth.  SPS  burn  at  137:36 GET  injected  CSM  into 
transearth  trajectory  after  61.5  h r s   (31   orbits)  in  lunar  orbit.  Ma-  
neuver  was  so   accurate  that  two  other  scheduled midcourse maneuvers 
were  not  necessary.  During  re turn   to  earth  astronauts made  star-lunar 
landmark  sightings,  live  color  TV  transmissions,  star-earth  horizon 
navigation  sightings,  and  CSM  S-band  high-gain  antenna  reflectivity 
test.  Pictures  of  moon  from  receding  spacecraft  were  spectacular. 
Scheduled  10-  and   29-min  color  TV  broadcasts  of  earth,  moon,  and 
spacecraft  interior  were  later  followed  by  unscheduled  TV  transmis- 
sion, which  provided beautiful  pictures  of  earth  and brought  total  color 
TV  broadcasts  to  19 transmissions totaling  almost six hours. 
On  eighth  day  crew  prepared  for  reentry  and  SM   separated  from  CM  
on  schedule.  Parachute  deployment  and  other  reentry  events  occurred 
as planned.  Apollo  10 splashed down  in  Pacific  a t   12:52 pm  EDT  May 
26,  3.4  mi  from   recovery  ship  U.S.S.  Princeton  192  hrs   3  min  after 
launch  and   precisely  on  time.  Crew  was  picked  up  and  reached  re- 
covery  ship a t   1 :31 pm  EDT. 
All  primary  Apollo 10 mission objectives and  detailed  test  objectives 
were  achieved.  All  launch  vehicle  and   spacecraft  systems  performed 
according to  plan,  with  only minor  discrepancies, which  were  corrected. 
Flight  crew  performance  was  outstanding;  all  three  crew  members 

143 

May  18-26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  18-26:  Apollo  10,  f i r s t   lunar  orb i ta l   mission  w i t h   comp le te   Apo l lo   spa c e c ra f t ,  
carried  Astronauts  Eugene   A .   Cernan,  John   W .  Y oun g ,  and  Thomas  P .   S t a j o r d   ( l e f t  
t o   r igh t   abo v e )   around  the   moon  for the  first  demons tra t ion   of  lunar  orb i t   rendezvous. 
Apollo  10  CM   ( a t   r i g h t ) ,   carrying  Young ,   wa s   pho tographed   b y   th e   LM w i t h   S t a f f o r d  
and  Cernan  aboard ,   60  m i les   above   the  moon’s far  s i d e .   Craters  below  w e r e   unnamed .  

remained  in   excellent  health  and  their  prevailing  good  spirits  were 
continually  evident.  Accomplishments  included  evaluation  of  LM  steer- 
able  antenna  a t   lunar   distances;  demonstration  of  lunar  landing  mis- 
sion  profile;  low-level  evaluation  of  lunar   visibility;  inflight  demon- 
stration  of  Westinghouse  color  TV  camera;  testing  of  landing  radar  
i n  near-lunar environment;  and  manned navigational,  visual, and  photo- 
graphic  evaluation  of  lunar  landing  sites  2  and  3,  and  in   addition 
other  possible  landing  sites in   highland  areas. 
ApoZZo  10 was  seventh Apollo mission to  date,  four th  manned  Apollo 
mission,  largest  payload  ever  placed  in  earth  and   lunar  orbits,  and 
first  demonstration  of  lunar  orbit  rendezvous.  Mission  acquired  ma jor  
quantities  of  photographic  training  materials  for  Apollo  11 and   sub- 
sequent  missions  and   numerous  visual  observations  and  photos  of 
scientific  significance.  First  manned  Apollo  mission,  ApoZZo  7  (Oct. 
11-22,  1968 ) ,   had  achieved  all  primary  objectives  and   had  verified 
operation  of  spacecraft  for  lunar-mission duration.  First manned  lunar 
orbital mission,  ApoZZo  8  (Dec. 21-27,  1968 ) ,  had  proved  capability  of 
ApoIlo  spacecraft  and   hardware  to  operate  out  to  lunar   distances  and  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  18-26 

return  through  earth’s  atmosphere  a t   lunar  velocity.  Apollo  9  (March 
3-13,  1969)  had  proved  capability  of  manned  LM  to  operate  in   space. 
Apollo  program  was  directed  by  NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space  Flight; 
MSC  was  responsible for  Apollo  spacecraft  development, MSFC  for   Sat- 
urn  V  launch  vehicle,  and  KSC fo r   launch  operations.  Tracking  and  
data  acquisition  was  managed  by  GSFC under  overall  direction  of  NASA 
Office of  Tracking  and  Data Acquisition.  (NASA   Proj Off;  NASA  Release 
69 -68 ;   W Post,  5/19-27/69,  A l ;   Sehlstedt, B  Sun,  5/19-27/69,  A l ;  
W Star, 5/19-27/69) 
May 18:  On  NBC  TV  program  “Meet  the   Press”  NASA  Administrator,  Dr. 
Thomas  0. Paine,  said  there  was  possibility  U.S.S.R.  would  land  men 
and  instruments  on  all planets before  U S .   “The  Russians have  publicly 

145 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
May  18 
taken  the  position  that  they  are   extremely interested  in   landing  on  the 
planets,  and  . . one  of  the  popular  songs  in   the  Soviet  Union  right 
now  is a  song abou t  little  apple trees  growing  on Mars.”  NASA  felt  with 
Apollo  lunar  landing  “we  are   really  taking  a  lead  in   the  ability  to 
operate  on all other bodies.  . . . the technology  we  a re  developing . . . 
is a kind  . . . tha t  would  be  required.”  If  July  lunar  landing  succeeded, 
“we   will  have  enough  hardware  for   nine  additional flights  to  begin  the 
exploration  of  the  lunar  surface.  In   parallel  with  that,  we  see  activities 
in  ear th  orb i t  which  w i l l   be  the  precursors  to  the  eventual emplacement 
of  a  large permanent  space station,  a  laboratory  in   the  sky.” 
NASA  expected  to  find  “surprising  amount”  to  study  on  moon.  “In 
fact,  we   have  already  radically  changed  our  views  of  the  moon  just 
with  the  activities  w e   have  carried  out  in   preparation  for  the  Apollo 
landing.  For  example  . . . men  are   beginning  to  seriously  question 
whether  there  may  have  been  water  a t   one  time  on  the  surface  of  the 
moon.  Indeed, whether the  large mare  areas,  the  smooth areas  . . . may 
even  have  been  the  beds  of  ancient  seas.  As   we  get  more  and  more 
familiar  with  the  moon  we  realize  how  little  we  know  about  it.  I t   will 
take  those  ten  flights  and   many  other  trips  to  the  moon  before  man 
really  begins  to  understand  his  twin  planet.” 
Dr.  Paine  said  USAF’S  MOL  and  NASA  orbiting  workshop  were  “two 
very  different  projects.”  NASA’s was  “longer  range  program  aimed  a t   a 
very  substantial  facility  which  would  be  really  a  university  campus 
type  of  research  station  in   orbit.”  MOL   was  “program  that  is  well  ad-  
vanced,  and   is  designed to  find  out  the  military  applications  of  space.” 
(Transcr ip t)  
*  On  ABC  radio-TV  program  “Issues  and  Answers,”  Secretary  of  Defense 
Melvin  R.  Laird  said  he  did  not  favor  increased military  participation 
in  U.S.  space program.  “We’ve  had  very  good  cooperation between  the 
military  and  our  civilian  programs  and   I  think  that’s  the  way  i t  should 
continue.”  ( B  Sun, 5/19/69,  A l )  
m  Norwegian  explorer  Thor  Heyerdahl  had   rejected  NASA  request  to  install 
communications  equipment  aboard  his  papyrus  boat  for  July  hookup 
between  Apollo  11 and  Heyerdahl’s  voyage into  the  past,  his navigator, 
Norman  Baker,  said.  Also  rejected,  Baker  said,  was  request  to  install 
satellite-controlled  navigation  system  on  replica  of  4,700-yr-old  vessel 
in   which  Heyerdahl  hoped  to  reach  Mexico  from  Morocco  in  four 
months,  to  reinforce  theory  that  Egyptian  adventurers  reached  Amer- 
icas  more  than  2,500  yrs  before  Christ.  Heyerdahl  felt  craft  could  not 
safely  carry  400-lb  communications  equipment  load.  He  had  refused 
satellite  navigation  system  because  Egyptians  had  managed  without 
navigational  aids.  (AP,  W Post,  5/19/69,  A15)  
*  Tass  quoted  unidentified  Soviet  space  scientist,  described  as  chief  de- 
signer  of  automatic  interplanetary  stations,  as  saying  U.S.S.R.  favored 
manned  space flight, but  only in  ear th  orbit  “so  far.”  I t  would  continue 
probing  planets  with  automatic  apparatus.  (Reuters,  B  Sun, 5/19/69, 
A1 1 
Soviet  Embassy  Second  Secretary  Oleg  M.  Sokolov  said  in   Washington, 
D.C.,  that  U.S.S.R.  definitely  would  display  supersonic Tu-144  airliner 
a t   28th  Par is   Air  Show,  May  29-June  8 .  He  said  a ircraf t   would  beat 
Anglo-French  Concorde  into  operation  and  plans  were  under  way  to 
set  up  worldwide  logistics  support  for   Tu-144.  DOT officials  said  West 

146 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
May  18 
would  be  watching closely  to   see whether  U.S.S.R.  could  fulfill pledge 
and,  if  so,  would  take  good  look  at  T u - l a ,   which  could  hu r t   com- 
mercial market  for  SST if  it  had   worldwide  logistics backup.  (Bentley, 
B Sun, 5/19/69,  A5) 
Muy   19: At  dedication  of  Robert  Hutchings  Goddard  Library  of  Clark 
Univ.,  Worcester,  Mass.,  Sen.  Edward  M.  Kennedy  (D-Mass.)  said:  “I 
am  for  the  space  program.  But  I  want  to  see  i t   in  i ts   right  priority: 
One  which  w i l l   let  it  continue  into  the  future  and  not  have  to  be  cut 
back  or  abandoned  because  the  nation  that  supports  i t   is   hobbled  by 
internal  disorder.  And  so,  once  the   lunar  landing  and  exploration  a r e  
completed, a  substantial  portion  of  the  space budget  can be  diverted to 
the  pressing  problems here  a t   home.  We  should  develop  a  plan  for   an  
orderly programmed  exploration  of  outer space. But  we  no  longer  need 
an   accelerated  program.  . . . We  should  continue  an   orderly  and  ra -  
tional  space  program  for  the  advancement  of  man’s  knowledge  of  the 
universe  and  for   the  considerable  benefits  i t   will  bring  us  here  a t  
home.”  NASA  program  “has  been  the  first  time,  outside  wartime,  in  
which  the  nation  has  organized  i t s   scientific  and  industrial  disciplines 
and  techniques. 
“Our  challenge  today  is  to  use  the  same  techniques  and   the  same 
discipline:  To  lower  the  cost  of  production  of  home  building  . . . ; to 
develop  command  and  control  systems  in   the  fight  against  crime;  to 
apply the versatility of  computers to  education and worker  training  and 
the vital work  of  neighborhood  health  centers;  to  organize government 
and  scientific resources  to  find  new  and  cheaper  ways  to  end  the  de- 
struction  of  our  environment.  The  American  team  of  government,  in- 
dustry  and  labor  has  been  able  to  achieve  Dr.  Goddard’s  impossible 
dream:  Certainly  the  same  industries,  the  same  employees,  the  same 
techniques  and  support  can  be  applied  to  the  urgent  business  here  a t  
home.”  (Kennedy  Off Release) 
Honorary  Doctor  of  Laws  degrees were  awarded  to  Sen.  Edward M. 
Kennedy  (D-Mass.) ; J.  Leland  Atwood,  President  of  North  American 
Rockwell  Corp.  and  general  chairman  of  Goddard  Library  program; 
and  Jack  S.  Parker,  General  Electric  Co.  Vice  Chairman;  and  Doctor 
of  Science  degree  to  Apollo  11 Astronaut  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.  Mrs. 
Robert  H.  Goddard,  widow  of  U.S.  rocket  pioneer,  spoke  during  r ib-  
bon-cutting ceremony  a t   which  Dr.  Charles G.  Abbot,  97-yr-old Smith- 
sonian  Institution  Secretary  Emeritus  and  Dr.  Goddard’s  close  friend, 
received  ovation  from  audience  of  4,000.  MSFC Director,  Dr.  Wernher 
von  Braun,  and  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  Vice  President 
Francis  D.  Tappaan  received Clark  Univ.  chairs du r ing  luncheon  after 
ceremonies.  (P rog ram )  
House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics  favorably  reported, 
without  amendment, H.R.  11271,  NASA  FY  1970  authorization  bill  in-  
troducdd May  14.  (House Rpt  91-255) 
William  R.  Frye  described magnificence  of  ApoZZo  10 liftoff  in   Philadel- 
phia  Evening  Bulletin: ‘‘W cameras  do  not  do  i t   justice.  I t  is like  100 
claps  of  thunder,  each  following  the  other  with  machine-gun speed. 
“The  flame  that  leaps  f rom   behind  the  rocket  could  have  come 
straight  from  Dante’s  inferno.  It is  too  bright  to   be  seen  with  comfort 
by  the  naked  eye.  The  ear th   trembles beneath  the  feet,  two miles  away. 
Then  the  towering  rocket,  nearly  twice  as high  a s  Niagara  Falls,  two- 

147  

May  19 

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

thirds  the  height  of  the  Washington  Monument,  creeps with  agonizing 
slowness  the  first  few  feet  off  the  ground,  enveloped  by  a  white  cloud. 
“Then  it  is  gone-and  man  is   left  to  wonder  and   to  pray.”  ( P  Bull, 
5/19/69) 
NASA  announced  i t   would  close  transportable  tracking  station  near  Too- 
woomba,  Queensland, Australia,  following August launch  of  ATS-E  and 
relocate  i t  later  for   use  in   advance versions  of  ATS  series  scheduled for 
late  1972  launch.  Emplaced  in   1966,  $6-million  station  included  40-f t  
parabolic  antenna  and   trailers  containing  electronic  gear  to  maintain 
communications  and   receive  telemetry  from  ATS  satellites.  (NASA   Re- 
lease  69-77) 
Secretary  of  the  Army  Stanley  R.  Resor  announced  termination  of  pro- 
duction  phase  of  AH-56A  Cheyenne  armed  helicopter  program  for 
default  of  contractor,  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  and  said  USA  might 
issue  “cure  notice”  on  R&D  contract  with  Lockheed  for  same  aircraft. 
USA  had  concluded that  any  aircraft  delivered  in   accordance with  con- 
tractual  schedule  would  fail  to  meet  performance  specifications,  par-  
ticularly  those for  safe  speed  and  maneuverability.  ( DOD  Releases  416- 
69,  417-69) 
M a y   19-20:  Officials  of  Eurocontrol,  seven-nation organization  established 
under  Convention  of  Cooperation  for  the  Security  of  Air  Navigation, 
met  with  DOT  and   FAA  in   Washington,  D.C.,  to  exchange  information 
on  a i r   traffic  control  and   other  aviation  developments.  ( FAA   Release  T 
69-30;  FAA  P I O )  
Muy   20:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCLXXXZZ  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit 
with  321-km  (199.5-mi)  apogee, 201-km  (124.9-mi)  perigee,  89.7-min 
period,  and  65.4”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  May  28.  ( GSFC  S SR ,  
5 /31 /69 ;   SBD,  5/22/69,  98) 
NASA’s HG-10  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  William  H. 
Dana,  reached  50,000-ft  altitude  and  mach  0.9  after  air-launch  from 
B-52  aircraft  a t  45,000-ft  altitude  north  of  Four  Corners, Calif.  Flight 
objectives  were  to  complete pilot  checkout  and  to  obtain  stability  and 
control  data.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  said  to  press  representatives 
in  Houston  he  wa s   “surprised  and  disappointed”  by  May  19  speech  of 
Sen.  Edward  M.  Kennedy  (D-Mass.)  suggesting  slowdown  in   U.S. 
space program  after  lunar  landing  and  exploration.  “He  is  wrong,”  Dr. 
Pa ine   said.  “The  United  States  should  not  weakly  yield  technological 
supremacy  in   space  to  the  Soviets.  We  should  not  ground  our  astro- 
nauts after Apollo.”  He  told  press  he  did not  want  ApoZZo  10  astronauts 
in   flight  to  moon  to  hear  news  of  speech and  would  not  include item  in 
news  reports  sent up  to  spacecraft.  ( R  Post,  5/21/69,  A12) 
Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  presented  paper  “Space-Age 
Management and City  Administration”  a t   1969 National Conference on 
Public  Administration  in   Miami:  “Mobilizing  modern  science,  tech- 
nology  and  management to  accomplish bold ventures  in  space is clearly 
far   simpler  than  better  organizing  the  extraordinarily  complex  human 
interactions  that  comprise  a  modern  metropolis.  NASA’s spectacular 
advances in  space are  undoubtedly exacerbating  public  frustration  with 
urban  failures,  but  . . . they  a re   encouraging  the  nation  to  tackle  its 
more  complex  human  problems  with  greater  confidence  on  a  bolder 

14% 

M a y  20 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
scale.  If  America  can  go  to  the  moon,  it  can  indeed  do   much  better 
here  on   spaceship earth. 
NASA’s range  of  management  approaches  i s   nearly  as  broad  a s   the 
(6 
range  within  an   urban  complex.”  Urban  manager,  like  NASA  manager, 
“can  and   should  directly  manage  only  a  limited  par t   of  the  complex 
interacting  human  enterprise  for  which  he  has  responsibility.  For   the 
important  remainder he must  structure a  ‘Darwinian Discipline’  system 
to  encourage  essential  contributions  from  industry,  from   universities, 
and   from  the  entrepreneur,  the  free  wheeler,  the  scientist,  the  brilliant 
innovator,  the  g if ted   teacher,  and   other  committed  individuals.  . . . 
The  greatest  single  achievement  of  the  space  age  may  have  been  the 
formation  of  NASA;  the  rest  followed  a s   the  energies  and   talents  of 
America  were  released  and   given  direction.”  (Text) 
Stacked spacecraft  and  Sa tu rn  V  launch vehicle for   Apollo  11, first  lunar  
landing mission,  rolled  out to  Launch Complex 39,  Pad  A,  a t  KSC.  (KSC 
Hist Off; McGehan,  B  Sun,  5/21/69) 
Philadelphia  Evening  Bulletin  editorial  on  ApoUo  10 color  TV  pictures: 
“Of  all  the  visions man  sees  from  his  new  and  precarious  vantages  in 
space,  the  most  compelling is   still  the  planet  from  which  he  comes.  In  
the  eye  of  Apollo  10’s  color  TV  camera,  Ear th   is  indeed  the  fairest 
object,  the  ‘oasis’  the  Apollo  8  astronauts  saw  last  Christmas  on 
Earth’s  first manned  mission  to  the  moon. 
“For   a  stranger  entering  the  solar  system from   the  outer  reaches  of 
the  Universe,  surely  Earth’s  mist-shrouded  blues,  browns  and  reds 
would  be  a  goal  to  satisfy  the  utmost  yearning.  Set  against  the  cold 
blackness  of  space,  i t   would  be  a  prize  to  draw  bold  and   venturesome 
inhabitants  of  other  planets  across  incredible  distances.  It  would  be  a 
goal  courageous  strangers  would  endure  incredible  hardships  to 
win.  . . . 
“The  awe  expressed  by  the  intrepid  Apollo  10  astronauts  . . . is 
further  reminder  tha t   the  greatest  space  prize  presently  within  man’s 
comprehension  is   already  in   his  keeping.  And  i t   is  one  to  leave  man 
wondering  whether  beings  on  other  planets  strive  and   dream  a s   he 
does.  For  the moment certainly,  i t  would  not  seem  so. For   what  people 
on  another  planet  could  resist  the  vision  in   the  eye  of  Apollo  10’s TV 
camera? ” ( P  Bull,  5/20/69) 
Baltimore  Sun   noted  Apollo  10’s first  day  in   space  enabled  men  to  be  
as near  a s  they  will  ever  come  to being  in   two  places  simultaneously- 
(<  
there  in   their  own  living  rooms  with  their  television  sets  before  them 
and,  a t   the  same moment more  than  22,000  miles  away,  observing  the 
planet  on  which  they  live. 
“What  we  saw  with  such  marvelous  cold  clarity  was,  of  course,  a 
round  and  mottled swirl  of  blue,  brown  and  white,  a  small fragment  of 
the  cosmos which  until  less  than  a  decade ago had  fixed  absolute  limits 
upon  all  of  mankind’s  history.  Now  suddenly  we  saw  i t   a s   a  unity,  a 
whole,  a s   the  habitation  common  to   all  of  us,  just  as  i t   would  be   seen 
by  a  non-human visitor  approaching  it  as  the  astronauts a re   approach- 
ing  the  moon,  silent, mysterious  and   seemingly  lifeless and   motionless. 
The  observer  had   to   remind  himself  tha t   this  was  indeed  the  ear th  he  
knew.  . . .” ( B  Sun, 5/20/69) 
*  Phikzdelphiu  Inquirer  cited  possible  danger  to  Apollo  spacecraft  from 

149 

May  20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

“drifting  junk”  in  space.  “One notable  sidelight  to  the  Apollo 10 flight 
came  in   a  report  that  the  spaceship brings  the  number  of  man-made 
objects  in   space  to  1691.  Although  the  chance  of  Apollo  10 colliding 
with  any  of  the  objects  is  infinitesimal,  it  is   significant  that  there  is  so 
much  hardware  floating  around   in  space 12  years  after  Sputnik  I.  . . . 
“U S .   and   Soviet  scientists  should  find  ways  of  bringing  back  o r  
destroying  rockets  and   satellites  and   their  separate  components  after 
they  have  become  inoperable.  If  some  sor t   of  solution  isn’t  found,  it 
may not be  long before  a  tragic collision w i l l   occur.)y ( P  Inq ,  5/20/69) 
NASA  announced  i t   had   invited  commercial  and   educational  broadcast 
organizations  interested  in   experimental  use  of  Applications  Tech- 
nology  Satellites  (ATS) to  send  representatives  to   June  13 briefing  a t  
NASA  Hq.  to  learn  possibilities  for  working with  ATS.  A T S   I  (launched 
Dec.  6 ,   1966) and ATS IZZ (launched Nov.  5,  1967)  were  in   orb i t   but 
had   largely  filled  basic  technical  assignments. Their  facilities  could  be 
made  available  for  additional  experiments.  Th ird   ATS,  scheduled  for 
August  launch,  might  be  available  for  additional  experimental  use  on 
completion of  technical  missions assigned.  (NASA   Release  69-74) 
AIA  released  results  of  survey which  showed  expected  decline  of  4.5%  in  
aerospace  industry  employment between  September  1968  and  Septem- 
ber  1969, from  1,416,000  to  1,353,000, because  of  continuing  decline 
in   civilian  space  program  and  decreasing  sales  of  civilian  aircraft. 
Employment  in   a ircraf t   production  and   R&D  plants  was  expected  to 
decline 4.6%,  transport  aircraft  employment,  7%  ; general-aviation  a i r -  
craft  employment,  0.3% ; and  missile  and   space  employment,  5.7%. 
Helicopter  and  nonaerospace  employment,  including  oceanographic 
research,  was  expected  to  increase  slightly.  Scientists  and   engineers 
would  continue  to  account  for  16%   of  total  aerospace  employment. 
(Tex t)  
0  USAF  announced  issue  of  $1,616,000  initial  increment  to  $5,370,750  cost- 
plus-incentive-fee contract  with  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  for  prototype 
development  and  testing  of  system  to  improve navigation  and   guidance 
of  space  vehicles.  (DOD   Release  415-69)  
Lockheed Aircraft Corp.  laid off  700 workers and   reassigned 1,800 others 
as result  of  May  19 USA  cancellation  of  contract  for  AH-56A  Cheyenne 
helicopter.  Company’s  stock  fe l l   $2.50  per  share  to  $32.37  on  New 
York  Exchange.  (AP ,  B Sun, 5/21/69,  A6) 
A t   Wings  Club  luncheon  in  New  York  world  aviation  leaders  honored 
80 th   birthday  of  aeronautical  pioneer  Igor   I.  Sikorsky  and   presented 
him  with  silver  goblets  and   tray.  (AU ,   7/69,  110) 
0  Sen.  George  Murphy  (R-Calif.)  introduced  S.  2204,  bill  to  establish 
National  Oceanic  Agency.  I t   was  referred  to  Senate  Commerce  Com- 
mittee.  ( C R ,  5/20/69,  55403) 
May   21-23:  In te l sa t - I l l   F-4  was  successfully  launched  by  NASA  for  Com- 
SatCorp  on  behalf  of  International  Telecommunications Satellite  Con- 
sortium.  The  632-1b  cylindrical  satellite,  launched  from  ETR  by 
Long-Tank, Thrust-Augmented Thor  ( LTTAT) -Delta  ( DSV-3E)  booster, 
entered elliptical transfer  orb i t  with  22,802.7-mi  (36,689.5-km)  apogee, 
183-mi  ( 2 9 4 . 4 - h )   perigee,  and   29.1”  inclination.  All  systems  were 
functioning  normally.  On  May  23  apogee  motor  was  fired  to  kick 
satellite into planned near-synchronous orb i t  over Pacific with 22,164.3- 

150 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

M a y  21-23 

mi  (35,644.2-km)  apogee,  21,887.2-mi  (35,216.5-km)  perigee,  and   5’ 
inclination. 
Zntelsat-ZZZ  F - 4   was  th ird   successful  launch  in   Intelsat  I11  series. 
I d s a t - Z I Z   F-3   had  been  launched  Feb.  5 ,   and   Intelsat-ZZZ  F-2,  Dec. 
18,  1968.  Intelsat-I11  F-1  had  been  destroyed  minutes  after  launch 
Sept.  18, 1968. New  satellite was  scheduled to  begin commercial service 
June  1, handling  up  to  1,200 voice  circuits or  four  TV  channels.  (NASA 
P ro j  Off;  ComSatCorp Release 69-27) 
Ma y   21:  USAF’S  C-5A  Galaxy  jet  became  heaviest  a ircraf t   flown,  in   test 
flight  from  Dobbins  AFB, Ga.,  with  728,100-1b  takeoff  weight.  Manu- 
facturer,  Lockheed-Georgia  Co.,  said  weight  exceeded  design  gross 
takeoff  load  by  100  lbs.  I t s   previous  record  was  703,826  lbs.  (AP, 
W Star, 5/22/69,  A5) 
NASA  announced  i t  had  issued  12  RFPS  for   definition  and  design  of  Ear th  
Resources Technology Satellite  system  including  study  of  ground  data- 
processing  system.  Responses  were  due  June  18.  First  of  two  planned 
spacecraft,  ERTS-A  was  scheduled  for  late  1971   or  early  1972 launch 
as  R&D  satellite  to  test  new  technology  to  verify  effectiveness  of  ear th  
sensors would  obtain  image  data 
resources  survey  from  space.  ERTS-A 
in   regions  of  near  and   infrared   spectrum. Satellite,  weighing 1,000 lbs, 
would  also  carry  experimental data-collection  system  for measurements 
of  remote,  unattended  sites.  I t   would  be  placed  in   sun-synchronous7 
near-polar  orb i t   at  500-mi altitude  to   view  entire  ear th   in   100-mi-wide 
increments in   less  than  three  weeks  for   a t  least  one year.  (NASA   Release> 
69-73) 
a  AIAA  submitted  to  President  Nixon’s  Science  Advisory  Committee  The  
PostApoElo  Space  Program:  A n  A I A A   V i ew .  While  “remarkable  prog- 
ress  of  the  Apollo-Saturn lunar   program  has   erased  almost  all  doubt 
about  man’s  ability  to  travel  in   space  and  return  safely,”  program’s 
magnitude  had   overshadowed  “very  solid  accomplishments”  of  un- 
manned  satellites.  I t  was  based  largely  on  technology  available  a t   its 
inception ; neglected  “growing  accumulation  of  feasible,  bu t   unde- 
veloped  technology”  in   space  vehicle  design  that  could  affect  space 
transportation  costs;  and  failed  to  specify  goals  beyond  manned  lunar  
landing. 
Report  rejected  single  national  space  objective  for  next  decade.  I t  
recommended  programs  to  determine  man’s  usefulness  in   space  over 
prolonged  periods  and  to   reduce  cost  of  manned  operations  and   urged 
Government to  give  high  priority  to  multifaceted  applications  satellite 
program.  I t   urged  planning  and   funding  for  communications  da ta  
relay,  meteorology  data,  ear th   resources  data,  and   navigational  aids 
satellite  programs  and   “well-integrated  inter-agency  plan  to  develop 
data-management subsystems.” 
AIAA  considered  Apollo  Applications  program  and   M O L   of  “sub- 
stantially  greater  importance”  than  last  four  or  five  lunar  landing 
missions  and   encouraged  “their  timely  continuance.”  I t   urged  designs 
proceed  for  extensions of  capability  in   AA  and   MOL  orbital  hardware 
to  permit  continuation  of  manned  orbital  program  after  1973,  sup- 
ported  retention  of  a t   least  one  crew-carrying  vehicle  with  increased 
capability  for  1973-1975;  encouraged  early  steps  to  commit  to   flight 
demonstration  partially  reusable  low-cost  space  transportation  system 

151 

May  21  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

for   1 9 7 6 1 9 7 6 ;   encouraged  accelerated  study  of  space  station  hard-  
ware  to  succeed  AA  program  and   MOL;   and   encouraged  early  steps 
toward  commonality of  NASA  and   DOD subsystems.  I t  considered  “com- 
mitment  to  an   entirely  new  station”  was  ‘‘less urgent  than  commitment 
to  a  new  logistics  system.” 
AIAA  recommended  continued Apollo  lunar   program  through  a t  least 
two  or  three  missions and   then  evaluation,  as well  a s   immediate begin- 
ning  of  ‘‘vigorous  study  and   controlled  funding”  of  advanced  sub- 
systems  for  1973-1975  to  permit  continuation  i f   early  success  provided 
support  for  extension.  It  recommended  manned  planetary  exploration 
commitments await  evaluation  of  current  programs. 
Search  for  extraterrestrial  life  was  “perhaps  the  most  exciting  and 
spectacular  of  all  space-science  program  objectives”  and   might  well 
serve  a s  one  of  “central  themes  for  set  of  balanced  space goals  for  the 
1970s.”  ( A&A,  6/69,  39-46)  
U.S.S.R.  publicly  demonstrated Tu-144 supersonic  airliner  in   90-min test 
flight  from  Moscow’s  Sheremetyevo  Airport.  Test  pilot  Eduard  V. 
Yelyan  said  a ircraf t  had   not  yet  exceeded  speed  of  sound  although  i t  
was  designed  for  speeds  to  1,600  mph  (mach  2 ) .   At  a irpor t   press 
conference Boris  Savchenko, head  of  U.S.S.R.  a ircraf t   export  agency, 
said production  had  started  on  120-seat, 130-ton airliner.  In   New  Y o r k  
T imes ,  Bernard  Gwertzman  said  observers believed  purpose  of  demon- 
stration  was  to  dispel  Western  reports  of  accident  to  aircraft.  ( N Y T ,  
5/22/69,  94 ;   UPI,  W  Po s t ,   5/21/69,  C11) 
0  Vice  President  Sp iro   T.  Agnew,  Chairman  of  NASC,  issued  statement  on 
Administration’s attitude  toward  space program:  ‘‘In  response to  those 
who  would  denigrate  our  space effort,  I  think  i t   is   clear  tha t   this  Ad- 
ministration  has  already  demonstrated  its  belief  in   the  strength  and 
potential  of  America’s  space  program.”  Administration  was  taking 
steps to  “evaluate the  costs  and  alternatives  available  to  us  in   extending 
the  program  once man  has been  placed  on  the moon  and  returns.”  ( AP, 
W Pos t ,  5/22/69,  A5) 
Pope  Pau l  VI  hailed  Apo l lo   10  flight  and   said man’s  presence  in   cosmos 
was  sign  of  God‘s  presence  “in  our  world  and   our  life.”  Pope  told 
30,000  persons  at  St.  Peter’s  Basilica  in  Rome,  “Even  more  than  the 
face  of  the  moon,  the  face  of  man  shines  before  u s ;   no  other  being 
known  to  us.  no  animal.  even  the  strongest  and   most  Derfect  in  its 
” 
vital  instincts,  can  be  compared  to  the  prodigious  beings we  men  are.” 
( N Y T ,  5 /22 /69)  
0  Press  commented  on  Apollo  10 mission: 
Washington Pos t   editorial:  “The mission  of  Messrs.  Cernan, Staff ord 
and  Young,  a s   dramatic  and   dar ing   as  i t   is,  is  only  an   interim  step 
between  the  first  tr ip   to  the  moon  and  the  first  landing  on  the  moon. 
I t   is,  however,  a  crucial  step  since  any  major  problems  in   this  mission 
or  any major  unanticipated  discoveries  about  the  moon’s  gravity  might 
well  delay  the  ultimate  landing.  Because  it  is  both  so  crucial  and  so 
risky,  the  Nation  will  wait  with  special  concern  when  they  disappear 
behind  the  moon  for   the  first  time  this  afternoon  and  when  the  lur(ar 
landing  craft  breaks  away  from  the  mother  ship  tomorrow  afternoon 
for   its descent toward  the moon’s  surface.  The hope hardly  needs  to  be 
expressed  that  these  maneuvers,  like  those  in   the  other  Apollo  flights, 

152 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  21 

May  2 1 :   Th e   supersonic  Soviet  airliner  Tu-144  following  i ts   land ing   a t   Sheremetyevo 
A irpor t ,   Moscow,  af ter   a  pub l ic-demons tra t ion   t e s t   f l igh t .   ( A P  w i r eph o t o )  

will  be  executed  with  the  same  precision  that  marked  the  early  stages 
of  this  trip.”  ( W  Post,  5/22/69,  A24) 
John  Lannan  i n   Washington  Evening  Star:  “Where  manned  space 
flight  once  was  fraught  with  fright  and  peril,  i t   seems  to  have  moved 
into  an  era   of  fun  and  games.  . . . The  astronauts  have  learned  to  fly 
their  spacecraft,  the  ground  crews  to  launch  them  and  the  Defense 
Department  to  recover  them.  What  remains  is  to  use  this  accumulated 
knowledge,  and   that’s  what  NASA is   attempting  to  do.”  I t  all  pointed  to 
fact  that  “space  flight  has  come  of  age.”  (W  Star,  5/21/69,  A4)  

153 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
May  21 
Marquis  Childs  in   Wushington Post:  “When  the  moon  landing  . . . 
is completed  the  cost  to  the   government will  be  just  under  $24 billion. 
The  achievement  represents  an   unprecedented  orchestration  of 
the 
resources of  science and  technology.  The contrast with  the  failures here 
on  ear th   to  begin  to  try   to   cure  rudimentary  ills  could  hardly  a t   this 
moment  of  grave  uncertainty  be  sharper.”  ( W  Post,  5/21/69,  A25) 
Christian Science Monitor  editorial:  Apo l lo   10 mission  “has  again 
posed  the  old,  old  question:  If  mankind  can   achieve  so  spectacularly 
in   space,  why  cannot  we  improve  matters  faster  here  on  ear th?   The 
answer,  surely,  is  tha t   i t   is  simpler  to  mobilize the  complex  electronics 
and   space-science  gadgetry  to  rocket  a  spacecraft  to  the  moon  than  i t  
is   to  coordinate  the  manifold  and  conflicting  human  emotions,  am- 
bitions,  and  processes  necessary  for  cleaning up  the  cities,  thrusting  the 
black  revolution  forward  with  a  minimum  of  friction,  and   banishing 
earth’s  pollutants.  The   ear th  problem  is more  complex  than   the  moon 
problem.  Yet  success  in   thg moon  venture  will  offer  assurance  that  the 
ear th   challenge can  be  met. 
So  let  no  one  call  the  moon  venture  a  waste  of  ambition,  treasure, 
6 6  
achievement.  The  whole  brilliant  enterprise  is  immensely  horizon- 
widening,  thought-expanding.’’  ( CSM,  5/21/69) 
May  22:  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  presented  NASA  Distin- 
guished  Service Medal  to  Jesse  L.  Mitchell,  Director  of  Physics  and 
Astronomy  in   OSSA,  and   Joseph Purcell,  OAO  Pro jec t  Manager  a t   GSFC, 
for  their  contributions  to  Oao  ZZ, a t   GSFC  ceremonies.  Dr.  Frederick 
Seitz, NAS  president,  received Distinguished Public  Service Medal,  spe- 
cial  award,  for   leadership  in   solid-state  physics.  Without  solid-state 
circuitry, Oao ZI would  not  have been  possible.  Additional  awards were 
presented  to  13  persons  from  Government,  industry,  and   universities 
for   Oao  ZI  efforts.  CSFC  OAO  project  team,  Atlas/Centaur  personnel 
from   LeRC,  and   launch  operations  personnel  from  KSC  received  Group 
Achievement  awards.  (NASA  Release  69-78) 
*  MSFC  announced  award  of  $4,620,310  contract modification  to   Chrysler 
Corp.  Space  Div.  for  vehicle  systems  engineering  and   integration  on 
Sa turn   IB vehicles  scheduled for  NASA  AA  program  flights. Work  begun 
Jan.  1,  1969,  would  extend  through  March  31,  1970.  (MSFC  Release 
69-133) 
0  NASA  Wallops  Station  announced  selection  of  Aerojet-General  Corp.  to 
fabricate  and   support  launch  of  two  Orbiting  Frog  Otolith  spacecraft 
for  basic  research  on  frog’s  balance mechanism  under  $1,616,000 cost- 
plus-fixed-fee  contract.  Project  was  par t   of  NASA’s human  factor  sys- 
tems  program  to  investigate  functioning of  primary  balance mechanism 
within  inner  ear   under  zero  g conditions.  (WS Release  69-11) 
*  I n   Washington  Evening  S ta r ,   Crosby  S.  Noyes  sa id :   “. . . i t   would  be 
a  mistake  to  consider  the  space  program  itself  as  nothing  more  than 
a  kind  of  inspirational  s tun t   to  show  us  what  we  can  do  if  we  really 
pu t   our  minds  to  it. The   idea  tha t   once the   demonstration  is   over,  we 
should  divert  all  of  its  resources  to  domestic  problems  is  excessively 
simple-minded.  Of  all  the  resources  that  have  gone  into  the  space 
the least  critical.  The ma jor   resources . . . are   people  and   organization 
program,  the money  tha t  is so much  on  everyone’s mind  is  undoubtedly 
and   a  continuing  process  of  research  and   application.  These  resources 
cannot  be  ‘diverted’  into  new  areas ;   nor  can  a  program  such  as  this 

154 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  22 

be  turned off  and  on  again like a  spigot.  Once the process  is  interrupted 
and   the  concentration  of  talent  is  broken  up,  it  will  b e   virtually  im- 
possible to  reassemble it.”  (W  Star, 5/22/69,  A9) 
*  LeRc  announced  it  had  acquired  F-8  single-seater  supersonic  jet  from  
USN  for  use  a s  chase a ircraf t  dur ing  flights by  i t s  F-106  research  jet  in  
program to evaluate advanced inlets and  exhaust nozzles.  Although F-8 
could  achieve mach  1.5 plus  speeds,  it  would  be   flown  a t   mach  1.2- 
top speed  in  F-106  flight plan.  (LeRc Release 69-24) 
*  U S .   submitted  d ra f t   treaty  to  Geneva  Disarmament  Conference  to   pro- 
hibit  emplacement of  nuclear  weapons,  other  weapons of  mass destruc- 
tion,  and  fixed  launching  platforms  “on,  within  o r   beneath  the  seabed 
and   ocean  floor.”  Proposal  completed  US. rejection  of  Soviet  draf t  
treaty  tha t   would  prohibit  not  only  such weapons  bu t   also  “all  objects 
of  a  military  nature.”  U S . ,   Canada,  Italy,  and   other  coastal  states 
opposed ban  on  submarine detection  devices  included  in   Soviet treaty. 
(Hamilton, N Y T ,   5/23/69,  12 )  
F-111A  fighter-bomber crashed  in   northern  Arizona  on  training mission 
from  Nellis  AFB,  Nev.  USAF  sa id   both  pilots  had  ejected  safely.  (AP, 
B Sun,  5/23/69,  A6 ;   W News ,  5 /23 /69 ,3)  
Muy  23:  USAF  Titan  I I IC   booster  launched  from  ETR  successfully  orbited 
five  unmanned  satellites-two  Vela  nuclear  detection  satellites  and  
three  orbiting  vehicle  research  satellites.  Launch  was  17th  for  Titan 
I I IC   and   last  in   development  program. 
Ve la   IX  entered  orb i t   with  69,387-mi  (111,643.7-km)  apogee, 
68.653-mi  (110,462.7-km)  perigee,  6,718.5-min  period,  and   32.7”  in- 
clination.  Ve la  X  entered  orb i t  with  69,614-mi  (112,008.9-km)  apogee, 
68.774-mi  ( 110,657.4-km)  perigee,  6,707.6-min  period,  and   32.8”  in- 
clination.  Velas would monitor  nuclear weapon  detonations  and  natural 
radiation  sources. 
OV  V-5  (ERS-29),  OV  V-6,  and   OV  V-9  entered  orbits  with 
69,427-mi  ( 111,708.0-km)  apogee,  10,480-mi  ( 16,862.3-km)  perigee, 
3,119-min  period,  and  32.9”  inclination  to  study  particles  and   fields 
and  solar  processes.  (Pres  Rp t   70  [69];  GSFC  SSR ,   5/31/69;  UPI, 
N Y T ,   5/24/69,  6 )  
Apollo 8 Astronaut  Frank  Borman  ended four-day visit  t o  Czechoslovakia 
-first  visit  by  US. astronaut to  any Communist country.  (UPI ,   W Post, 
5/24/69,  A3 ) 
Press  commented  on   personal  qualities  of  Apollo  10  astronauts  dur ing  
crises  and   technological marvels. 
New  Yo rk   T imes:   “Their  courage  and   high  technical  skill  were  evi- 
dent.  There  was  total  absence of  posturing  o r   pomposity.  Notable,  too, 
wa s   the  absence  of  false  patriotism  or  of  any  attempt  to  use  the  space 
feat  a s   the  basis  for   claims  of  national  or  ideological  superiority.  The 
astronauts’  personal  behavior  added  a  warm  human  luster  to  the 
superb  scientific  and   technological  feats  they  were  and   are   perform- 
ing.”  ( N Y T ,  5/23/69) 
Washington  Evening  Star:  b b .   . . the  flight  of  Apollo  10 has  shown 
something  . . . about  the  durability  of  human  nature.  . . . However 
rigorous  the  training, however  unworldly  and  unreal  the  surroundings, 
man  is  still capable  of  awe,  error ,   fright,  outrage  and-when 
the  occa- 
It’s  good  to  know.”  (W  Star,  5/23/69, 
sion  calls  for   it-profanity. 
A16) 

155 

May 23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

0  Project  research  method  of  supporting  principal  investigators’  research 
within  universities  accounted  for  about  70%  of  NASA  funds  obligated 
to  universities  and   was  serving  NASA  and   schools  well,  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  said 
in   speech a t  Ohio State Univ.  Maze  than  10% of  project  research  sup- 
port  funds  had  been  invested  in   equipment  in   university  laboratories 
for  continuing  education  and  research.  “More  than  90%   of  balloon 
borne  experiments,  more  than  40%  of  sounding  rocket  experiments, 
and  more  than  50%  of  satellite experiments flown  on NASA  vehicles had 
principal  investigators  or  co-investigators  in   our  universities.  A  large 
share  of  the  significant  discoveries  in   space science were  made  in  uni- 
versity  originated  experiments.’’  NASA  “supports  about  13,000 project 
oriented  research  grants  and   contracts  in   universities  . . . [and]   32 
universities  in  21  states  are   now  working with  NASA  on  various  aspects 
of  the  ear th   resources  satellite  program.”  (Text) 
At  Second Advanced Marine  Vehicles  Meeting  in   Seattle,  Wash.,  Frank 
E.  Rom,  Chief  of  LeRC  Advanced  Nuclear  Concepts  Branch,  discussed 
technical  developments  in  reactor  design  which  could  make  nuclear 
propulsion  feasible  for  use  on  hovercraft.  Water-moderated  nuclear 
reactor  would  heat  helium,  which  then  would  pass  through  heat  ex- 
changer  where  water  would  be  boiled.  Resultant  steam  would  drive 
6,500-hp steam  turbines  to  power  lift  and  thrust  fans.  Nuclear  propul- 
sion  would  increase  hovercraft  range,  reduce  cargo  hauling  costs,  and  
make  vehicle  competitive with  freighters.  (LeRC  Release  69-26) 
0  FAA  Administrator  John  H.  Shaffer announced  allocations  of  $34,144,479 
to  construct  and  improve  177  U S .  airports  under  FY  1970 Federal-aid 
Airport  Program.  Appropriations,  based  on   $30 million  authorized  by 
Congress  and  carryover  funds  from  previous  years,  represented  last 
year  of  funding  authorized  under  curren t   Federal  Airport  Act.  Pro-  
gram  stressed  preservation  and  expansion  of  facilities  a t   existing  a ir-  
ports  to  accommodate  high-performance,  sophisticated  a ircraf t ;   in- 
creasing  a irpor t   capacity ; relieving  congestion;  and  continuing  con- 
struction  of  airports  initiated  under  earlier  programs.  ( FAA   Release 
69-59) 
0  Use  of  new  “alphanumeric”  system-computer-originated 
display  of 
letters  and   numbers  on  radarscopes  indicating  aircraft  identification, 
direction,  altitude,  spqed,  and  flight  attitude  a t   FAA’s Atlanta,  Ga.,  con- 
described  by  Robert  Lindsey  in  New  York  T imes .  
trol  center-was 
System,  in  which  each  airliner constantly radioed  flight  data  to  ground 
where  i t  was  processed through  computer  and   then  displayed on  radar  
screen,  would  eventually be  used  by  FAA  throughout  its  traffic  control 
network.  ( N Y T ,  5/23/69,  92)  
*  U.S.S.R.  announced  completion of  rocket tests  begun  in  Pacific  April  17. 
Tests  had  been  scheduled  to  end  June   15.  (SBD,  5/26/69,  109 ;   W 
Post,  5/24/69,  A12) 
M a y  23-24:  NASA  Astronomy Missions  Board, chaired by  Dr.  Leo  Goldberg 
of  Harvard  Univ.,  met  a t   MSFC  to  evaluate  potential  astronomy  mis- 
sions  for  NASA.  Board  would  submit formal  recommendations for  space 
astronomy  to  NASA  later  in   year.  (MSFC  Release  69-135) 
Muy  24:  Apollo  11  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Michael  Collins,  and 
Edwin E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  practiced  splashdown and   anticontamination  pro-  
cedures  they  would  use  after  return  from  moon  in  July.  Astronauts 

156 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  24 

donned  plastic-coated  biological  isolation  garments  and   sprayed  each 
other  with  Betadine  disinfectant before  leaving  dummy  spacecraft  in  
Gulf  of  Mexico.  (UPI,  W  Star, 5/25/69,  A6) 
Muy  25:  Excited  US. residents  called  a i r   control  towers,  police  depart- 
ments,  and   newspapers  to  report  citing  NASA’S  Apollo  10  spacecraft 
circling  moon.  Weather  Bureau  explained  bright  object  actually  was 
planet  Jupiter,  which  was  approaching  i ts   nearest  distance  to  earth. 
(W  Star, 5/26/69,  A7) 
*  New  York  Times-while 
urging  precautions  against  contamination  on 
Apollo  11  lunar  landing  mission-praised  ApoZZo  10 mission  as  “ tr i-  
umphant  scientific  climax”  of  Apollo  effort:  “The  breathtaking  virtu- 
osity  of  Apollo  10’s equipment and  crew  leaves  little  doubt  that  similar 
apparatus  can  deposit  properly  trained  men  on  the  moon  and   bring 
them  back  safely  to  earth-always 
barr ing   the  possibility  of  unex- 
pected mechanical  or  other  malfunction. At  the  cost  of  more  than  $20 
billion  the  United  States  has   acquired  the  capability  of  manned  travel 
to  the moon. Whatever the  wisdom  of  concentrating  such vast  resources 
on  the  space  race,  the  accomplishment  is  brilliant  and  merits  awed 
congratulations  for  all  those whose  work  and   talent  made  i t   possible.” 
(NYT,  5/25/69,  E16) 
May  26:  President  Nixon  telephoned congratulations  to  Apollo  10 crew  fol- 
lowing  successful  splashdown after  lunar   mission  for   its  “magnificent 
achievement” and   invited  astronauts  and  their  wives  to  dinner  at White 
House.  “This  is  a  proud  moment  for  the  country,”  President  said. 
(NYT,  5/27/69,  29 ;   PD, 6/2/69,  775) 
Soviet Embassy  praised  Apollo  10  mission  as  event  that  “inspires  into  us 
pride  fo r   man.”  Message,  written  by  academician  Boniface  Kedrov, 
called  astronauts  “20th  Century  Columbuses”  and  said  mission was  an 
“immeasurably more  complex,  dangerous  and  almost  unrealizable  aim 
compared  with  that  Columbus  set  before  himself  at  the  dawn  of  the 
new  era.”  Moscow  ‘I”V  showed  splashdown.  ( W  Post,  5/27/69,  A9) 
*  Scientific  and   Technical  Subcommittee of  U.N.  Committee  on  the  Peace- 
ful  Uses  of  Outer  Space  had  recommended  new  Y.N.  initiatives  to 
promote  access  to  applications  of  space  technology  by  small  and   non- 
space  powers,  Richard  S.  Kahn  said  in  Newsweek.  Recommendations 
included  appointment  of  U.N.  official  to  serve  as  contact  point  for 
member  states;  panel  meetings  for  promoting  collaboration;  U.N. 
assistance  for  survey missions,  panel meetings,  and   fellowships;  inves- 
tigation  of  use  of  ear th   resource  satellites;  and   dissemination  of  in- 
formation  on  opportunities  for  education  and  tra in ing   in   space-related 
fields. 
Points  of  debate  between  large  and   small  powers  were  on  whether 
new  technical  assistance  was  required  or  whether  existing  machinery 
was  sufficient.  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  International  Affairs 
Arnold  W.  Frutkin,  as  US. Representative on  subcommittee, had  ob- 
served that  the  “only  two  applications  of  space technology  substantially 
available  today  are   in  . . . meteorology and   communications,  in   both 
of  which  U.N.  agencies a re  active.”  (Newsweek,  5/26/69,  57-61)  
*  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  founder  Allan  H.  Lockheed  died  in  Tucson, 
Ariz.,  a t   age  80.  He  had  begun  career  a t   16 as  auto  mechanic, taught 
himself to  fly,  and  in  1915 established  a ircraf t  manufacturing  firm with 
brother  Malcolm.  In   1926 he  formed  partnership  with  John  K.  North- 

157  

26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

rop   which  developed  into  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  They  pooled  re- 
sources to  produce  Lockheed Vega  aircraft,  which  set  27  records  from 
1928   to  1932.  Lockheed  resigned  in   1929  but  served  a s   adviser  to 
(UPI,  W  Star,  5/28/69,  B7;  W  Post, 
several  aviation  companies. 
5/28/69,  C10) 
May  27:  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  C C L X X X I I I   into  orb i t   with  1,501-km 
(932.7.mil  apogee,  196-km  ( 121.8-mi)  perigee,  102.0-min  period,  and 
81.9’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Dee.  10.  ( GSFC SSR,  5/31/69; 
12/15/69;  NYT,  5 /28 /69 ,16 )  
0  Special message  to  ApoZZo  10 crew  from  five  Soviet cosmonauts was  re- 
leased  by  Soviet Embassy:  “We  Soviet cosmonauts followed  your  d iff i-  
cult  work  very  closely.  We  sincerely  admire  the  high  accuracy  with 
which  you  carried  out  all  the  maneuvers  planned,  your  excellent  pre- 
paredness  and  courage.”  Message  was  signed by  Cosmonauts  Gherman 
S.  Titov,  Andrian  G.  Nikolayev,  Aleksey  Leonov,  Georgy  Beregovoy, 
and  Vladimir  Shatalov.  (UPI, W  Pos t ,   5/28/69,  A13) 
0  International  comment  on  NASA’s ApoZZo  10 mission: 
U.N.  Secretary  General  U  Thant  sa id   flight  was  “a  thrilling  com- 
pound  of  great  skill,  boundless  courage  and  fabulous  technology,  as 
impressive  for  its  perfection  as  for  its  informality  and  its  great 
humor.  . . . I t   is  refreshing  to  have  been  able  to  turn  for  a  moment 
from  all  our  troubles  on  earth  to  this  magnificent  spectacle  of  man’s 
extraordinary  capacity  for  achievement  and   peaceful  quest.” 
S ir   Bernard  Lovell,  Director  of  U.K.’s  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental 
Station,  said  mission  represented  almost  miraculous  achievement  a t -  
tainable  only  by  finest  technology  and   engineering  in  world:  “Every 
pa r t   of  the  Apollo  10  concept  now  appears  to  have  been  performed 
perfectly.  . . . We  a re   nearly  about  to  enter  an  epoch  when  men  and 
materials  can  be  transferred  to  other  planets  in   the  solar  system.” 
U.K.  Prime  Minister  Harold  Wilson  termed  flight  ‘‘a  great  triumph 
i n   both  human  and  technical  terms.” 
Soviet  space  scientist,  Dr.  Vassily  V.  Par in ,   called  mission  “big 
event i n  the  history  of  cosmonautics,”  impressive because of  “ the   accu- 
racy  of  all  its  maneuvers.” 
Mrs.  Ind ira   Gandhi,  Prime  Minister  of  India,  said  of  ApoZZo  10 
crew,  “These men  who  could have come  back  with  moon  dust  on  their 
feet  a re  leaving that  for  others  in   the  true  spirit  of  detachment of  great 
pioneers.” 
Heinrich  Luebke,  President  of  West  Germany,  said  mission  “brings 
the  United  States  to  the  brink  of  an  historical  high  point-the 
landing 
of  the  first  man  on  the  moon.”  (NYT,  5/27/69,  29 ;   AP,  €3  Sur!, 
5/27/69,  A l )  
0  ApoZZo  8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman,  as  Field  Director  of  Space  Station 
Studies  for  NASA,  told  Pasadena,  Calif.,  press  conference  before  ad- 
dressing  annual  meeting  of  Chamber  of  Commerce  there  were  f ive  
valid  reasons for continuing space program  despite  high  cost:  (1) need 
for  program  that  challenged U S .   in  only way  i t  could in  time  of  peace, 
( 2 )   educational  impact  of  space technology  in  lower  grades  as  well  as 
among  graduates,  (3 )  scientific findings  in  space,  ( 4 )  sheer  quest  and 
exploration,  and   (5 )   tendency  of  all  countries  to  cooperate  and  per- 
haps  realize  earth’s  fragility.  Borman  said,  “I  hope  we  can  isolate 
successes  and  failures  from  funding  because  I  think  space  exploration 

158 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 
May  27 
is   an   important  phase  of  American  life.”  (LA  T imes ,   5/28/69;  Pasa- 
dena  Star-News,  5 /28 /69)  
NASA’s Pioneer  IX,  launched  in to   heliocentric  orb i t  Nov.  8,  1968, to  col- 
lect  data  on  electromagnetic  and   plasma  properties  of  interplanetary 
medium, was  adjudged  successful by  NASA.  Spacecraft  had  transmitted 
more.than  6 billion  bits  of  da ta   and  was  continuing  to  transmit  useful 
data  from  all  scientific  experiments.  Pioneer  IX had  passed  through 
inferior  conjunction  Jan.  30  and   had   reached  perihelion  of  0.75  au  
April 7. It would  pass through  superior  conjunction  in  November  1970, 
when  special  experiments  utilizing  spacecraft-earth  rad io   communica- 
tion  frequencies would  be  conducted.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
*  Discovery  of  microscopic evidence  in  lava  on  Deception  Island,  Antarc- 
tica,  indicated  algae,  fungi,  and   minute  bacteria  had   begun  to  thrive 
in   previously  sterile  lava  within  13  mos  after  volcanic  blasts,  NASA 
reported.  JPL scientist  Dr.  Roy  E.  Cameron  and   Virginia  Polytechnic 
Institute biologist  Dr.  Robert Benoit brought back  samples in  February 
of  lava  rubble  from  Dec.  4,  1967, volcano-earthquake. Discovery  indi- 
cated  sterile  material  could  withstand  invasion  of  growing  things  for 
only  limited  time.  (NASA  Release  69-80) 
US .   patent No.  3,446,999  was  granted  to  Dr.  Athelstan F.  Spilhaus,  AAAS 
tha t   could  move  around   circu- 
President-elect,  for   rolling  device-toy 
lar   track.  Same  propulsion  method-attraction 
of  electromagnets  in  
ca r   to  circuitry  in   rails,  providing  continuous  revolving  movement- 
could  be  adapted  to   larger  equipment.  Patent  had   been  assigned  to  
Experimentoy  Corp.  (P a t   Off  PIO;  Jones,  NYT,  5/31/69,  29)  
May  28:  NASA’s H L l O  lifting-body  vehicle,  flown  by  NASA  test  pilot  John 
A.  Manke,  successfully  completed  19 th   flight  after  air-launch  from 
B-52  a ircraf t   a t  45,000-ft  altitude north  of  Four  Corners, Calif. Manke 
fired  engine  a t   full  power  for  66   secs  and  a t   half  power  for  40  secs, 
reaching  64,500-ft  altitude.  Objectives-expansion 
of  flight  envelope 
to  mach  1.2  and   collection  of  stability,  control,  and  performance  data 
(NASA  P r o j   Off;  UPI, W  Star,  5/29/69,  A16;  SBD, 
-were  met. 
6/4/69,  152)  
*  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops  S ta-  
tion  carrying  Dudley  Observatory  payload  to  collect  micrometeoroids. 
Rocket  and  instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
*  NASA  released  first  of  hundreds  of  photos  and  moving  pictures  taken  by 
Apo l lo   10 crew.  Pictures  showed  moon  from  variety  of  positions  and 
CSM  as  seen  from  LM.  Photo  of  Triesneck  Crater  showed  network  of 
broad  rilles  which  resembled  tracks  left  by  large  snowballs rolled  over 
snow-covered plain.  Photo  of  Sea  of  Tranquility,  prime  landing  site, 
had  only  few  rugged  features,  including  medium-sized  Moltke  Crater 
and  Hypatia  Rille.  Pictures  showed  striking  resemblance  to  aerial 
photos  of  Antarctica.  Films  included  scenes  of  moon  taken  from  LM 
a t   pericynthian  and   of  Astronaut  John  W.  Young  shaving  in   CSM. 
(AP,  B  Sun, 5/29/69,  A l ;   W  Pos t ,   5/29/69,  A4) 
Soviet Deputy  Minister  of  Aviation  Vasily  Kazakov  told  press  in   Par is  
on  eve  of  28th  Pa r i s  Air  Show  that  U.S.S.R.  would  not  br ing   Tu-144 
supersonic  airliner  to  show.  U.S.S.R.  would  exhibit  its  An-22  700- 
passenger  turboprop  and  would  make  major  effort  to  promote  sales  of 
10 competitive Soviet  aircraft.  Cosmonauts  Vladimir  A.  Shatalov  and  
Aleksey  S.  Yeliseyev  said  two  Zond  moon-orbiting  capsules  launched 

159 

May  28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Sept.  15, 1968, and   Nov.  10,  1968, were  large  enough  to  have  carried 
men.  Shatalov  said  h e   hoped  in   future  U.S.  and   Soviet  space  crews 
would  be  able  to  work  together.  (NYT,  5/29/69,  78) 
*  In   letter  to  stockholders,  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  said  i t   had  initiated 
appeal  to  Armed  Services  Board  of  Contract  Appeals  against  cancel- 
lation  of  its  Government contract  to  produce  AH-56A  Cheyenne  heli- 
copter  for  USA  and  asked  USA  to  defer  demand  for  $50  million  in   re- 
payment  of  progress  payments  until  appeals  board  ruling.  (UP I ,   W 
Post,  5/29/69,  A7;  WSJ,  5/29/69,  7 )  
May   29:  Cosmos  CCLXXX IV   was  launched  by  U.S.S.R. 
into  orb i t   with 
297-km  (184.6-mi)  apogee,  204-km  (126.8-mi)  perigee,  89.5-min 
period,  and  51.7”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  June   6.  (GSFC S SR ,  
5/31/69;  6 /15 /69)  
*  Specific  objectives  of  lunar  exploration  were  discussed  in  testimony  by 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for Manned  Space Flight,  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  before  Senate Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space Sciences. 
Evaluation  of  na tura l   resources  on  14.6-million-sq-mi  lunar  surface 
would  include  minerals  of  yet  undetermined  nature  and   unique  com- 
bination  of  high  vacuum  and  gravitational  field  one-sixth  a s   strong  as 
earth‘s.  “On  the  results  of  our  evaluation  will  depend  ou r   decision 
some  years  from  now  as  to  whether  there  is  sufficient  potential  to  jus- 
tify  establishing  a  lunar  base.”  NASA  also  would  investigate  use  of 
moon  as  “island  near  our  shores  to  which  we  can  voyage  . . . to  de- 
velop  man’s  potential  to  function  as  an  explorer  throughout  the  solar 
system.”  (Testimony) 
NASA  selected Martin  Marietta  Corp.  for  $280,000,000 cost-plus-incentive- 
fee/award-fee  contract  for  Viking  lander  system  and  technical  inte- 
gration  of  project  to  send  two  instrumented  spacecraft  to  Mars  during 
summer  of  1973.  (NASA   Release  69-82)  
A t   USN  Symposium  on  Military  Oceanography  in   Seattle,  Wash.,  Naval 
Oceanographic Office  scientists Pau l  E.  La  Violette  and  Sandra  E.  Seim 
said  pictures  taken  by  astronauts  during  Mercury,  Gemini,  and  Apollo 
missions had  been  of  greater value  than  expected.  “The  high  resolution 
of  these  color  photographs  has  shown  a  wealth  of  detail  impossible to 
duplicate  by  television  pictures.”  Surface  and  near-surface  conditions 
“appear  as  sea  scars,  rips,  sea  state,  bathymetric  features.  . . .” Many 
of  these  features had   been  shown  to  exist  over  large  areas  on  a  scale 
previously  unimagined.  ( AP,  NYT,  6/1/69,  8 2 )  
NASA  published  Significant  Achievements 
i n   Space  Science  1967 
(SP-167).  Among  achievements  described  were  discovery  of  strong 
x-ray-emitting  objects  in   stellar  astronomy;  controlled,  quantitative 
testing  of  biological  hypotheses  provided  by  Biosatellite  I I   d a t a ;   in- 
creased use  of  remote-sensing radio  techniques in   ionosphere and  radio 
physics ; acquisition  of  data  on  surface  temperature,  total  pressure,  at- 
mospheric  composition,  exospheric  temperature  and   composition,  and 
strength  of  magnetic  field  of  Venusian atmosphere by  Soviet  Venus  I V  
and   simultaneous  flybys  of  U S .   Mariner  V   in   planetology.  Develop- 
ments  in  solar  physics  had   led  to  revision  of  existing  set  of  numbers 
and   had  repercussions  on  interpretation  of  measurements  from  sun. 
(Tex t)  
If  NASA’s Apollo  11 successfully landed  on  moon  July  20,  “it  will  be   a 
proud moment  for Americans and  a  costly  one f o r  British  bookmakers, 

160 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

May  29 

who  will  pay  out  a t   least  $172,000  in   bets  they  wish  they  had  never 
made,”  Kar l  E.  Meyer  reported  in   Vu sh ing ton  Po s t .  Big  winner  would 
be  David  Threlfall  of  Preston,  Lancashire, who  in   April  19648 bet  $10 
($24)   tha t   man  would  land   on  moon  before  January   1971.  Since odds 
were  1,000  to  1 ,   Threlfall  would  collect  $24,000  from  William  Hill 
Organization  betting  firm.  As  one broker  explained:  “When  you  think 
about  it,  it’s  a  bit  ridiculous.  This  is  one  of  the  few  times we’ve  made 
a mistake-the  man  in   the  street knew more  about  space than  we  did.” 
( W   Pos t ,   5/29/69,  A4 )  
Terre   Haute  [Ind.]  S tar   sa id :   “In  backing  Columbus,  according  to 
Samuel Eliot  Morison,  historian,  Queen  Isabella  had  two  motives:  To 
make  a  buck  in   the  spice  trade,  and  to  open  new  territories  for  her 
Catholic  missionaries.  I t   did  not  occur  to  her  that  she  was  about  to 
change  the  history  of mankind.  That  is  the  way  of  most  turning  points 
in  human  history.  The Manhattan  Project which  resulted  in   the  atomic 
bomb  was  basically  a  defensive move  against  the  danger  of  Germany’s 
doing  i t   first.  I t   launched  the  atomic  age.  Johann  Gutenberg  found  a 
way  to  print  with  movable  type  for  the  simple reason  that  he  wanted 
more  people  to  read  the  Bible.  He  had  no  idea  tha t   he was  introducing 
mass  literacy.  These  great  human  adventures  had  two  things  in  com- 
mon:  They  were  done  for  practical  reasons,  and   most  contemporaries 
said,  ‘who  needs  i t?’   The  space program  began  for  practical,  everyday 
reasons.  Russia’s  Sputnik  scared  the  pants  off  most  Americans.  The 
initial  goal  of  catching  up  with  the  Russians  has   been  achieved,  and 
this is par t   of  the reason  why  there  is now  a  slowing interest.  However 
. . . this  country  now  has  the  potential  of  changing  the  world.  . . . The 
U S .  should continue  in   the  forefront  of  space exploration,  with  a  well- 
funded  and  stable  program.  Space  should  continue  to  have  a  perma- 
nent,  though  not  extravagant,  position  in  the  priority  of  national 
goals.”  (Terre  Haute S ta r ,   5/29/69) 
9  Subcommittee  on  Science,  Research,  and   Development  transmitted  to 
House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics  Centralization  01  Fed- 
eral  Science  Ac t iv i t ies .   Report,  prepared  by  Library  of  Congress  Sci- 
ence  Policy  Research  Div.,  described  centralization  and   potential 
organization  of  Federal  science  activities,  summarized  arguments  for 
and  against  centralization,  examined  major  functions  of  Federal  Gov- 
ernment  in   dealing  with  science  and  technology  and   present  organiza- 
tion,  and   presented  historical  summary  of  evolution  of  Federal 
organization  for  science  and  of  proposals  for  reorganization  and  con- 
solidation.  (Tex t)  
Wendell  F.  Moore,  assistant  chief  engineer  a t   Bell  Aeroaystems  Co.  and  
developer of  rocket  belt  which  could  lift man  and  carry   him  length  of 
football  field,  died  in  Niagara  Falls, N.Y.,  a t  age 51. He  had  won  John 
Price Wetherill Medal  of  Franklin  Institute  of  Philadelphia  in  1964 for 
h is   invention,  first  flight-tested in   1961.  (UPI ,   NYT,  5 /30 /69)  
May  29-June  8: 28th  Salon  Internationale de  l’A6ronautique  et  de  1‘Espace 
-Paris  Air  Show-featured 
nearly  550  exhibitors  representing  1 4  
nations.  US.,  with  largest  pavilion,  emphasized  space  achievements, 
taking  “Countdown  Apollo”  a s   theme.  On  opening  day  biggest  display 
attraction,  said  United  Press  International,  was  Apo l lo   8  spacecraft, 
which  ApoZZo  9  Astronauts  James  A.  McDivitt,  David  R.  Scott,  and  
Russell  L.  Schweickart unveiled  in   ceremony attended  by  U S .   Ambas- 

161 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
May  29-June  8 
sador  to  France,  R.  Sargent  Shriver.  U S .   exhibit  also  included  F-1 
and  5-2  engines of  1s t  and  2nd  stages  of  Sa turn  V  rocket and   full-scale 
model  of  Apollo  11 LM. 
French  prototype  of  Concorde  001  supersonic  transport  was  flown 
over Par is   for  first time and la ter  took  i ts  place on  apron  a t  Le Bourget 
Airport  among  150 aircraft,  helicopters,  and   gliders. 
Opening  day  also  marked  signing  of  agreement  for  joint  develop- 
ment  of  short-haul a irbus  by  French  Transport  Minister  Jean  Chamant 
and  West  German  Economics Minister  Kar l   Schiller.  Spokesman  fo r  
U.K.  manufacturer  Hawker  Siddeley said  firm was  still  negotiating  on 
building  wings  for  250-seat  airbus.  U.S.  exhibited  490-passenger 
Boeing  747  but  d id   not  show  Lockheed  C-5AY world’s  largest  aircraft. 
U.K.  exhibits  a t   Air  Show  included  Concorde  002,  British  prototype; 
Hawker  Siddeley Harr ier   VTOL jet  fighter;  and   Hawker  Siddeley Nim- 
rod,  maritime  reconnaissance  version  of  Comet.  French  exhibits  in- 
cluded  Dassault  Mirage  fighters  and  Dassault  Hirondelle  turboprop. 
U.S.S.R.’s  chief  entry  was  500-passenger  An-22  turboprop  airliner. 
( Am e r  Av ,   5 /26 /69 ,33 -6 ;   UPI,  W  Star, 5/29/69,  A10;  Reuters,  NYT, 
5/30/69,  40) 
May   30: NASA’s Biosatellite  111,  scheduled to  carry  monkey  on  30-day ear th  
orbital mission June   18 ,  was  damaged when  unexplained pressure  blew 
top  off  spacecraft  a t  KSC.  Accident, which  severed  electrical  wire  har- 
nesses  and  caused  minor  structural  damage, might  delay  launch.  (AP, 
W  S tar ,   5/31/69,  A l ;   6/1/69,  A8) 
Science  magazine published  letter  from  Rep.  Joseph E.  Kar th   (D-Minn.) , 
Chairman  of  Subcommittee  on  Space  Science  and  Applications  of 
House Committee  on  Science and  Astronautics,  clarifying  his  views  on 
cost  effectiveness  evaluation  of  Earth  Resources  Satellite  system.  He 
reiterated  opinion  he  stated  in   Dec.  1968  Earth  Resources  Satellite 
System  report:  “Precise  determination  of  cost  effectiveness a t  this early 
stage  . . . is  not  possible.  . . . The magnitude  of  the  economic  benefits 
simply  cannot  be  calculated  in  the  absence  of  the  type  of  data  which 
the  system  is  designed  to  produce.”  Conclusions  of  studies  already 
completed  had  constituted  “strong  evidence  that  precision  was  not  pos- 
sible.  Yet,  I  am  reassured  by  the  fact  that  all  such  studies  . . . have 
concluded that  the  potential  economic  benefits  w i l l   exceed  the  costs  of 
such  a  system  by  a  substantial margin  and   some  predict  that  benefits 
will  someday  be  measured  in  billions  of  dollars  annually.  I t   is  my  per- 
sonal  conviction  tha t   an   operational  ERS system  will  ultimately  prove 
highly  cost-effective.” 
Karth  said he  considered i t  “NASA%  responsibility  to  experiment with 
new  space  systems  that  appear  to  have  potential,  and   to  conduct  the 
necessary  research  and   development  which  will  lead  to  a  firm  founda- 
tion  for  a  subsequent  determination  as  to  whether  operational  systems 
should  be  built.  I n   this  context,  I  believe  cost  effectiveness  is   not  an  
appropriate s tandard   to  apply  in   advance  to  NASA’s experimental work, 
though  i t  is certainly  applicable when  the  time comes to  decide whether 
to   go  forward  wi+  an   operational  system.”  (Sc ience ,  5/30/69,  1009) 
In   Science  editorial,  Kenneth  V.  Thimann  said:  “. . . there  is  no  doubt 
that  some of  our most thoughtful young people see science a s  a  destruc- 
tive  force.  Some  of  this  disillusionment  stems  from  a  preoccupation 

162  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

May  30 

with  the  failings of  science,  and   especially  the  failings  of  technology.” 
But  people  complaining  had  forgotten  past  history  of  fa r   worse  a i r  
and  water  pollution  and  malnutrition.  “On  the  contrary,  the  record  of 
steady progress  can  give  us  confidence tha t   the  residual  blemishes  and  
pockets  will  indeed  be   wiped  out  as  the  power  of  science  and   tech- 
nology is   increasingly  brought  to  bear  on  them.”  I n  some fields “scien- 
tist  wields  almost  unlimited  power  for  good.”  International  Rice 
Research  Institute,  w i t h   staff  of  16  Ph.D.s,  had   apparently  changed 
“whole  nutritional  future  of  Asia  in   a  scant  5 years”  by  doubling  or 
even  tripling  rice  yields.  Discovery  of  penicillin  and   streptomycin had 
saved countless  lives.  (Science, 5/30/69,  1013) 
9 There  was  “growing  conviction  that  Soviet  authorities  have  taken  ad- 
ministrative  measures  to  punish  the  noted  physicist  Andrey  R.  Sak- 
harov,”  said  Bryce Nelson  in   Science.  Washington,  D.C.,  sources had 
said  Sakharov was  summoned fo r   verbal  criticism  after  July  11, 1968, 
publication  in   New  Yo rk   T imes   of  his  essay  “Progress,  Coexistence, 
and   Intellectual  Freedom.”  Discipline  was  thought  to  have  been  per- 
formed  in   early  1969.  Fragmentary  accounts  in   Western  publications 
indicated  he  had  been  deprived  of  work  as  consultant  to  ministry,  re- 
moved  from position  as chief  consultant  a t  State Committee f o r  Atomic 
Energy  and   from work  in   restricted  physics  institute a t  Chernogolovka, 
barred   from  research  institute  a t   Dubna,  and   possibly  expelled  from 
Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences.  (Science,  5/30/69,  1 0 4 3 4 )  
May 31:  New  Yo r k  Times  said  DOT  had  received  detailed  proposals  for  con- 
struction  of  150- to  300-mph,  air-cushioned  vehicle  guided  by  track 
or  guideway.  Agency  hoped  to  design  vehicle  tha t   could  avoid  prob- 
lems  of  steel  tra in   wheels  and  rails,  which  lost  traction  and   spun  a t  
speeds  of  150-200  mph.  DOT   expected  to   award  contract  for  Tracked 
Air  Cushion Vehicle  ( TACV )   within  three  months,  with  completion  of 
prototype and  several miles  of  test  track  by mid-1971.  ( N Y T ,  5/31/69, 
46)  
During  May: Space/Aeronautics  said:  “Reshaping  of  the  budget,  in   com- 
bination  with  a  flurry  of  new  activity  among  NASA,  the  Air  Force  and  
the  President’s  in-house  and   specially  commissioned  science  advisors, 
has  left  no  doubt  that  the  Administration  favors  continuation  of  a 
strong  manned  space  flight  program  and   a  total  space  effort  much 
more  national  in   character  than  the  current  one.  The  latter  point  in- 
volves greater  pressure  on  the  Air  Force  and  NASA  to  bring  their  future 
programs  together,  particularly  in   the  space station  and   support  areas. 
“Although  manned  space  flight  was  the  clear  victor  in   the  Repub- 
lican  amendments  to  the  NASA  budget,  the  surgery  on  the  unmanned 
sectors  was  artfully  performed.”  Although  $41  million  was  cut  from 
OSSA,  none  of  i t   came  from  Ear th   Resources Survey  satellite  program. 
Although  $14  million  was  cut  from  OART,  none  came  a t   expense  of 
NERVA  program.  Only  notable  individual  reductions  in  areas  other 
than  manned  space  flight  came  in   deferral  of  Sunblazer  program,  can- 
cellation  of  Biosatellite-F,  and   deferral  for  one  year  of  new  Planetary 
Explorer  project.  I n   net  increase  in   OMSF,  NASA  essentially  traded  off 
slippage  in  A A  program  fo r   resumption  of  Sa turn   V  production  and  
insurance  that  lunar  exploration  would  continue  into  early  1970s. 
( S / A ,  5/69,  31 -6 )  

163 

Dur ing   May 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

NAS-NRC  Space  Science Board  had  formed  13-member  standing  Commit- 
tee  on  Space  Medicine  to  respond  to  requests  from  NASA   on   problems 
in  manned  aspects  of  national  space  effort, NAS-NRC-NAE  News  Report 
said.  Chairman  was  Dr.  Shields  Warren  of  Cancer  Research  Institute 
of  New  England  Deaconess  Hospital,  Boston,  who  was  noted  for   his 
work  on   effects of  radiation.  (NAS-NRC-NAE  News  Rp t ,   5/69,  1 )  
OAR  Research  Review  summarized  1968  research  activities  of  Air  Force 
Cambridge  Research  Laboratories : During  1968 AFCRL  scientists  had 
“placed  more  instruments  on  board   more  research  vehicles  than  any 
other  research  group”  in   U S .   Experiments  included  46  research 
rockets,  75  small  meteorological  rockets,  110  research  balloons,  and  
374   research  flights  by  6  flying  laboratories.  Eight  of  nine  satellite 
experiments  were  successfully  orbited;  most  significant  was  600-lb 
OV  1-16 
(“Cannonball”)  low-altitude-density  satellite  launched  July 
11 to  measure  atmospheric  density.  (OAR   Research Rev iew ,   5 4 / 6 9 ,   9 )  
NSF  published  R&D   i n   the  Aircraft  and  Missiles  Indus try ,   1957-68  (NSF  
69-15).  I n  1967 a ircraf t  and  missiles  industry  spent  record  $5.6 billion 
of  all  industrial R&D  spending  and   116% increase  from 
for  R&D-34c/c 
1957  level  of  $2.6  billion.  Federal  Government  had  continued  to  f i -  
nance  more  than  80%   of  industry  R&D.  I n   1967 this  was  $4.5  billion, 
of  which  estimated  $2.7  billion  was  supplied  by  DOD, $1.6  billion  by 
NASA,  and   $0.2  billion  by  all  other  Federal  agencies  combined.  How- 
ever,  Federal  spending  in   1967  was  $100  million  less  than  in  1964. 
Companies’  own  R&D  funds  rose  from  $445  million  in  1964  to  $1.1 
billion  in   1967,  with  growing  emphasis  on  nonmilitary  and   nonspace 
areas,  particularly  commercial  a ircraf t   and   general-aviation  fields. 
(Tex t )  
Flying  magazine  issued  special  report  on  F-111, 
including  “The  People 
vs.  the  F-111”  by  John   Fricker  and   “The  F-111-a 
Pilot’s  Verdict” 
by  Richard  B.  Weeghman.  Fricker  called  F-111  “not  guilty”  of 
charges  that  concept  of  commonality  was  invalid,  that  selection  of 
General  Dynamics  Corp.  instead  of  Boeing  Co.  as   prime  contractor 
was  result  of  “political  consideration,”  that  F-111  suffered  from  ex- 
cessive  flight  restrictions,  that  i t   was  unsafe,  aiid  that  i t   was  “opera- 
tional flop.”  To  charge  that cost  escalation  of  F-111  program  had  been 
excessive,  Fricker  delivered  verdict  “Guilty,  with  mitigating  circum- 
stances”-factory, 
engineering,  and   research  costs  had  risen  twice  as  
much  a s   originally  estimated.  (F ly ing ,  5/69) 
Copy  of  original  tape  recording  of  excited  voices  of  astronomers  as   they 
discovered  first  optical  pulsar  on  night  of  Jan.  15-16  had   been  de- 
posited  in   Niels  Bohr  Library,  American  Institute  of  Physics  News-  
letter  noted.  Tape,  made  accidentally  dur ing   moment  when  optical 
pulses  from  Crab  Nebula  were  discovered,  had  been  preserved  by  dis- 
covery  team,  W.  J.  Cooke, M.  J.  Disney,  and   D.  J.  Taylor  a t   Steward 
Observatory,  Univ.  of  Arizona.  ( A IP   Newsletter,  5 /69)  
*  I n   Communist  Pa r ty   cultural  weekly  Kultura,  Warsaw,  Janusz  Wilhelm 
said:  “Once  more  the  world  is  experiencing  a  sense  of  exultation  over 
the  universe.  Man’s  latest  cosmic  achievements  have  caused  talk,  writ- 
ing   and   speculation  everywhere.  Moreover  they  a re   almost  personally 
experienced  by  all.”  Exultation  over  man’s  ability  to   cope  with  un i -  
verse  “surpasses  all national  and  political  boundaries.”  I t  was  rare   for  

164 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

During  May 

people  to  react  “just  as  human  beings  without  any  special  differences 
or  distinctions.”  Moon  flight  was  not  going  to  solve  “dramatic  prob- 
lems  and  conflicts  besetting  earth,”  but  exultation  represented  “the 
essence  of  rationalism  and  pragmatism  to  a  much  greater  extent  than 
most  of  our  emotions.”  What  we  felt  was  “the  unity  ( o r   oneness)  of 
humanity.  . . . So  it  carried  with  i t   a  hope.”  (A t l a s ,   5/69,  23) 

165 

June  1969 

June  1: Special Task  Force  report  submitted  to  President  Nixon  Jan.  8  but 
not  released  by  White  House  called  for  NASA  revamping  and .sh if t   in 
space  priorities,  John  Lannan  said  in  Washington Sunday   Star.  Panel, 
chaired  by  Univ.  of  California  at  Berkeley  physicist  Dr.  Charles  H. 
Townes,  included  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air 
Force,  then  NASA  Deputy  Administrator;  Dr.  James  A.  Van  Allen  of 
Univ.  of  Iowa ;   Dr. Harry  H.  Hess,  chairman  of  NAS-NRC 
Space Science 
Board;  and   Dr.  Walter  O r r   Roberts  of  National  Center  for  Atmos- 
pheric  Research. 
Report  recommended  continuation  of  $6-billion  space  effort,  with 
$2 billion  fo r   DOD  and   rest  for   NASA;  disapproved  of  any  commitment 
to  large  orbiting  space  s ta t ion ;   and   urged  commitment  to  unmanned 
planetary  probes.  I t   considered  NASA’s present  structure  inappropriate 
for  post-Apollo program  and   urged  bringing  “an  outstanding  scientist 
into  its  top  administrative  ranks.”  It  was  desirable  to  avoid  manned 
versus unmanned  operations  argument  and  to  focus on  search  for  most 
appropriate  role  for  human  being  in   entire  system.  NASA  organization 
was  not  “adapted  to  this  approach.” 
NASC  should  be  chaired  by  President  rather  than  Vice  President. 
Pane l   advocated  lunar  exploration  and   gave  high  priority  to  use  of 
space  for  commercial  and  civil  benefits.  I t   urged  space  spending  at 
?/”% to  1%  of  GNP  and  proposed  U S .   intensify  efforts  toward  inter- 
national cooperation  in   space, Lannan  reported.  (W  Star, 6/1/69,  A l )  
NASA’s Mariner  VZ  spacecraft  (launched  Feb.  24)  was  21,731,091  mi 
from  ear th   and  would  fly  past  Mars  July  30.  Mariner  VZZ  (launched 
March  27)   was  19,526,893  mi  from  ear th   and  would  fly  past  Mars 
Aug.  4.  Both  spacecraft  were  operating  normally.  ( JPL   Release  521) 
Atomic  scientist  Dr.  Edward  Teller  thought  nuclear  explosion  on  moon 
would  be  scientifically  useful,  Associated  Press  reported  after  New 
York  interview. Vibrations  would  be  source of  seismographic measure- 
ment  for  study  of  moon’s  interior.  “The  best  information  on  earth” 
came  from  nuclear  explosions,  “because  the  energy-generating event  is  
confined  very  sharply  both  in   space  and  in  time.”  Factors  making 
of  a i r   and   water-were 
moon  extremely  inhospitable  to  life-absence 
highly  desirable  to  researchers,  since  “change  tha t   has   taken  place 
billions  and   billions  of  years  ago  is  still  visible  today.”  Dr.  Teller  also 
favored  development  on  moon  of  research  station  powered  by  nuclear 
reactor  that  heated  lunar  rocks  to  high  temperature  and   liberated 
oxygen  for  breathing  purposes.  There  was  probability  rocks  also  con- 
tained  water,  which  reactor  could  reduce  to  hydrogen  and  oxygen  for 
making  rocket fuel  to  power  short-range rocket trips  on moon and   soft- 
landing  interplanetary  spacecraft.  Moon’s  environment  might  lead  to 
advances  in   low-temperature  physics  and  surface  chemistry  in   elec- 
tronics,  which  could  result  in   development  on  earth  of  smaller,  more 

167 

June  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

efficient,  and  more  sophisticated  electronic  equipment,  particularly  for 
information-storing  and   information-reordering. 
(Nicholson,  AP,  W 
Star,  6/1/69,  A l )  
Retiring  Chief  Justice  of  Supreme  Court  Ear l   Warren  sa id   a t   Lincoln 
Univ.  commencement  in  Oxford,  Pa.,  “We’re  going  to  be  on  the  moon 
-perhaps  by  July,  they  tell  us.  But i t  would be  better  if  our  universities 
taught  u s   how  to  live  in   our   grea t   cities.”  (AP ,   W  Post,  6 /3 /69 ,   A 9 )  
June 2:  NASA  announced  preliminary  flight  plan  for  Apollo 11 lunar   landing 
mission.  Spacecraft,  carry ing   Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong  (coni- 
mande r ) ,   Michael  Collins  ( C M  p i lo t) ,   and   Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr .   ( LM  
p i lo t ) ,   would  be  launched  from  KSC  Launch  Complex  39,  Pad   A ,   by 
Sa turn  V  booster  a t  9:32  am  EDT July  16, with  touchdown  on  moon’s 
Sea  of  Tranquility  a t   2:22  pm  EDT July  20.  At  12:12  am  EDT July  21  
Armstrong  would  step  onto  lunar  surface,  followed  hour  later  by  Al- 
drin.  Astronauts  would  collect  up  to   50  lbs  of  lunar   surface  samples 
fo r  re turn   to  earth, take photos,  and  deploy  experiments  package  before 
leaving  moon  a t   12:OO  pm  EDT July  21   and   returning  to   CSRZ  piloted 
by  Collins.  They  would  complete  eight-day  mission  with  splashdown 
in   Pacific  at  12:52  pm  EDT July  24,  195 h r s   20   min  4.2.2  secs  after 
launch.  (NASA   Release  69-83) 
0  ApoZZo  8 Astronaut  Frank   Borman  acknowledged  tha t   he  had  discussed 
possibility  of  runn ing   for  Governor  of  Arizona  or  U S .   Senate  with 
Rep.  Morr is   K.  Udal1  (D-Ariz.)  bu t   said  he   did  not  “foresee  right 
( W   Post, 
now”  that  he  would  do  so,  Associated  Press  reported. 
6 /4 /69)  
*  Prearranged  meeting  a t   Pa r i s   Air  Show  between  Apollo  9  Astroriauts 
James  A.  McDivitt,  David  R.  Scott,  and   Russell  L.  Schweickart  and  
Cosmonauts  Aleksey  S.  Yeliseyev  and   Vladimir  Shatalov  and   wives 
developed  from  brief  technical  exchange  into  what  U S .   officials  called 
an   epic  of  all  space  meetings.  After  inspecting  interior  of  ApoZZo  8 
spacecraft  and   joining  astronauts  for  dr inks   in   V IP   lounge  a t   U S .  pa- 
vilion,  cosmonauts  escorted  astronauts  through  U.S.S.R.  pavilion,  pro- 
vided  technical  explanation  of  1968  Soyuz  missions,  and   entertained 
with  vodka  and   caviar  in   Soviet  tr i je t   Yak-40  on  display  field  and  
la ter   in   500-passenger  An-22.  ( N Y T ,   6/3/69,  78 ;   AP,  B  Sun, 
6/3/69,  A l )  
Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  received  honorary  Doctor  of 
( N A S A   Off  of 
Science  degree  from  Brown  Univ.,  his  alma  mater. 
Administrator) 
X-ray,  one  of  science’s  foremost  photographic  tools,  was  being  supple- 
mented  by  revolutionary  process  of  neutron  radiography  called  “neu- 
trography,”  said New   York  T imes .   I t  had  been  used  to  check  safety  of 
components  in   ApoZZo  10 spacecraft  and   was  subject  of  Government- 
supported  research  in   U.K.,  France,  West  Germany,  and   Japan.  I n  
US . ,   commercially  oriented  studies  were  being  pursued  by  General 
Electric  Go.,  Aerojet-General  Corp.,  and   North  American  Rockwell 
Corp.  Process-in  Which  object  to   be  radiographed  was  placed  in  
large,  high-density  beam  of  neutrons  that  passed  through  object  and  
registered  da ta   concerning  its  internal  structure  on  film-had 
applica- 
tions  i n   inspection  of  pyrotechnic  devices  and  nuclear  reactor  fuel  and  
detection  of  excessive moisture  o r   minute  cracks.  Critical  welds,  guid- 
ance  components,  and   “honeycomb”  bonding  used  in   N A S A   program 

168 

June 2 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
could  also  be  inspected-as  well  as   home  TV sets,  telephones,  radios, 
missiles,  and   SST. ( N Y T ,  6/2/69,  39)  
0  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  announced  it  had   reduced  its  activity 
on  USAF’S  Advanced  Manned  Strategic Aircraft  ( AMSA )   bu t   was  main- 
taining  team  effort  i n  connection  with  program.  Reduction  was  made 
to   permit  maximum  attention  to   F-15  fighter  weapon  system  compe- 
tition.  (NAR   Release  NN-28;  Wilson,  W Pos t ,   5/31/69,  A l )  
June 3:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by  T i tan  
IIIB-Agena  D  booster.  Satellite  entered  orb i t   with  265.3-mi 
(426.9-km)  apogee,  86.4-mi  (139.0-km)  perigee,  89.8-min  period, 
and   110.0’  inclination  and   reentered  June  14.  (GSFC   SSR,  6/15/69; 
UPI,  W  Pos t ,   6/4/69,  A18;  Pres  Rp t   70  [69])  
launched  Cosmos  CCLXXXV  into  orb i t   with  493-km 
0  U.S.S.R. 
(306.3-mi)  apogee,  266-km  (165.3-mi)  perigee,  92.1-min  period, 
and  71.0’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Oct.  7.  (GSFC   SSR,  6/15/69; 
10/15/69;  AP,  NYT ,   6/4/69,  5 )  
International  team  of  scientists  might  man  first  U S .   permanent  space 
laboratory,  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  said  a t   London 
news  conference.  Work  on   project  would  begin  about  1975  and   ad-  
ditional sections  would  be  added  each  year  for   decade,  eventually  pro- 
ducing  laboratory  for  abou t   50  scientists.  Dr.  Paine,  on  his  way  to  
Pa r i s  A ir   Show,  said  i t   was  too  early  to  say  if  there  would  be  perma- 
nent  U S .   lunar   space station  o r   to  predict  if  man  would  land  on  Mars. 
He  had   no   information  to   support  rumors  of  imminent  Soviet  moon 
landing.  (Reuters, W  Pos t ,   6/5/69,  E5 )  
Boeing  Co.  pilot  Don  Knutson  flew  362-passenger  version  of  Boeing 
747-world’s 
9-hr  8-min  maiden  At- 
largest  passenger  aircraft-on 
lantic  crossing  from  Seattle-Tacoma  Airport,  Wash.,  to  Le  Bourget 
Airport,  Par is ,   fo r   28th  Pa r i s   Air  Show.  Aircraft  was  four th   747  off 
assembly  line  and   acquired  one-third  of  its  27   hrs   flying  time  dur ing  
transatlantic  flight  a t   average  570-mph  and   maximum  656-mph 
speeds.  ( N Y T ,  6/4/69,  74;  Ame r   Av ,   6/9/69,  16-7) 
0  House  adopted  resolution  electing  Rep.  Barry  M.  Goldwater,  Jr. 
(R-Calif.) , to  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics.  ( C R ,  6/3/69, 
H4401) 
London  T imes  published  four-page  space  supplement  On   the  Edge  of  the 
Moon .   Man  had   been  traveling  to  moon  for  centuries  in  transport 
which  was  “romantic,  ingenious,  foolish  and   brilliant:  chariots  of 
swans,  g ian t   guns,  artificial  clouds  and  enormous  metal  springs;  even 
rockets.”  Journeys,  “dreams  tha t   ranged  between  ludicrous  fantasy 
and   prophetic  imagination,”  had  not  been  recorded  much  before  sec- 
ond  century  A B .   “But  later,  as  writers  discovered  science  fiction  and  
the  appetite  men  had   for   it,  the  stories  proliferated.”  At  times,  either 
by  luck,  reasoning,  knowledge  of  science,  or  uncanny  inspiration,  they 
foresaw  details  of  voyages  like  Apollo  10’s  and   that  planned  for  next 
month.”  Article  traced  1,800  yrs  of  space  travel  “from  dream   to 
reality.”  Supplement  also  described  stage sequences  planned  for  NASA’s 
lunar   landing,  specifications  of  lunar  module  and   its  achievements, 
data  which  scientists  hoped  to   extract  from  lunar   explorations,  and  
possible  construction  of  lunar   observatory.  Costs  of  observatory  would 
be  justified  “only  a s   pa r t   of  a  space  programme  much  larger   than 
what  is  envisaged  for  the  immediate  future,  and   too  large,  perhaps, 

169 

June 3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

for   the  resources  of  any   one  nation.”  (London  T ime s ,  6/3/69,  I-IV) 
June  3 5 :  NASA held  Spacemobile  Conference  in  Washington,  D.C.,  to  fa-  
miliarize  all  personnel  with  Vice  President’s  Summer  Space  Education 
Program   for  the  Cities  conducted  by  NASA  in   cooperation  with  Presi- 
dent’s  Council  on  Youth  Opportunity.  (P rog ram )  
June  4 :   President  Nixon  addressed  A ir   Force  Academy  commencement  in  
Colorado  Springs,  Colo.:  “A  nation  needs  many  qualities,  but  i t  needs 
fa i th   and   confidence  above  all.  Skeptics  do   not  build  societies;  the 
idealists  are   the  builders.  Only  societies  tha t   believe  in   themselves  can 
rise  to  their  challenges.  Let  u s   not,  then,  pose  a  false  choice  between 
meeting  our   responsibilities  abroad   and   meeting  the  needs  of  our  
people  a t   home.  We  shall meet  both  o r   we  shall  meet  neither. 
“This  is why  my  disagreement  with  the  skeptics  and   the  isolationists 
is  fundamental.  They  have  lost  the vision  indispensable  to  grea t   leader- 
ship.  They  observe  the  problems  tha t   confront  u s ;   they  measure  our  
resources  and   then  they  despair.  When  the  first  vessels  set  out  from 
Europe  for  the  New  World  these  men  would  have  weighed  the  risks 
and   they  would  have  stayed  behind.  . . . 
Ou r   current  exploration  of  space  makes  the  point  vividly,  here  is 
bL 
testimony  to  man’s  vision  and  man’s  courage.  The  journey  of  the  as- 
tronauts  is more  than  a  technical  achievement:  i t   is  a  reaching-out  of 
the  human  spirit.  I t   lifts  ou r   sights;  i t   demonstrates  that  magnificent 
conceptions  can  be  real. 
“They  inspire  us   and   a t   the  same  time  they  teach  us  true   humility. 
What  could  br ing   home  to  us  more  the  limitation  of  the  human  scale 
than  the  hauntingly  beautiful  picture  of  our   ear th  seen from  the moon? 
“When  the  first  man  stands  on  the  moon  next  month  every  Ameri- 
can  will  stand  taller  because  of  what  he   has   done,  and  we  should  be 
proud  of  this  magnificent  achievement. 
“We  will  know  then  tha t   every  man  achieves  his  own  greatness  by 
reaching  out  beyond  himself,  and   so  i t  is with  nations.  When  a  nation 
believes  i n   itself-as  Athenians  did  in   their  Golden  Age,  as   Italians 
did  in   the  Renaissance-that 
nation  can  perform  miracles.  Only  when 
a  nation  means  something  to  itself  can  it  mean  something  to  others. 
“That  is why  I  believe  a  resurgence  of  American  idealism  can  br ing  
tha t   modern  miracle  is  a  world  order  
about  a  modern  miracle-and 
of  peace  and   justice.”  ( P D ,  6/9/69,  797-802) 
*  I n   Huntsville  interview,  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  MSFC  Director,  said 
accomplishment  of  first lunar   landing  would  not  necessarily  mean  U.S. 
was  first  in   space  race.  “. . . whether  the  Russians  have  this  particular 
objective  in   their  program,  I  just  don’t  know.”  I t   was  no  longer  pos- 
sible  to  decide  i n   simple  terms  who  was  ahead.  “.  . . today  the  space 
program   has  so many  facets  that  i t  may  be  impossible  for  all  raternity 
from  now  on  to  be  ahead  of  them  in   all  fields. And  . . . impossible  for  
them  to  be  ahead  of  us  in   all  fields.”  I t  was  still  possible  for  U.S.S.R. 
to  reach  moon  first  i f   July  launching  da te   for   Apollo  11  was  delayed. 
Russians  now  had   rocket  more  powerful  than  Sa turn  V,  which  would 
allow  direct  lunar  flight.  “If  this  rocket  is  flown  in   the  very  near 
i t   might-they  may  still  have  a  chance  of  landing  a 
future-which 
man  on   the moon  in   the  latter  p-art of  1969.”  A s   for  Soviet  unmanned 
lunar   landing,  Dr.  von  Braun  said,  “I  think  the  Russians  very  defi- 
nitely  have  the  capability  as  fa r   a s   their  equipment  is  concerned  to 

170 

ASTRONAUTIGS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

June 4 

soft  land  enough  payload  on  the  moon  to   take  a  sample  of  lunar   soil 
and   fly  i t   back  to  earth.”  (UPI, N Y T ,   6/6/69,  18 )  
*  Tass  released  reports  which  revealed  that  neither  Venus  V  (launched 
Jan.  5 )   nor   Venus  VI  (launched  Jan.  10 )   had  reached  Venusian  sur- 
face  intact  in  May.  Data  radioed  from  two  spacecraft  suggested terrain 
was  very  uneven,  with  height  differences  of  more  than  50,000  f t .   Re- 
ports  also  conceded  that  Venus  I V ,   which  purportedly  had  landed  on 
Venus Oct.  18, 1967,  had  not  relayed  data  from  Venusian  surface,  but 
had  apparently  been  crushed  dur ing   descent  by  extreme  atmospheric 
pressure.  “The  pressure  might  have  pushed  in  the  upper  lid  of  the  in- 
strument  department  and  affected  the  instruments  of  the  rad io   com- 
plex,”  Tass said.  Data  suggested that  Veiius V  had  descended  over  deep 
basin  where  temperature  was  almost  1 ,000”F   and  pressure  was  140 
times  that  on  earth.  VeiLus  V I  had  descended over  plateau  where  tem- 
perature  was  750°F  and  pressure  was  60  times  that  on  earth.  Since 
spacecraft  had  not  been  designed  to  withstand  pressures  greater  than 
25-27 
times  that  on  earth,  they  had  not  sent  da ta   from  below  12  mi. 
(Sullivan,  N Y T ,   6 /5 /69 ;   W Po s t ,   6/5/69,  A25) 
ComSatCorp announced  selection  of  General Telephone &  Electronics  In -  
ternational  as  contractor  for   construction  of  ear th   station  for  satellite 
communications near Talkeetna, Alaska.  Contract price  was  $3,558,000. 
(ComSatCorp Release  69-32) 
l u n e  5-8:  NASA’s  1,393-1b o g o   V I   ( 060-F)  Orbiting Geophysical Observa- 
tory,  carry ing   25   experiments  to  study  sun’s  influence  on  earth‘s  near- 
space  environment  during  period  of  maximum  solar  activity,  was  suc- 
cessfully  launched  from  WTR  a t   7:42  am  PDT  by  Thorad-Agena  D 
(SLV-2G) 
booster.  Spacecraft  entered  orb i t   with  682.4-mi 
(1,098.2-km)  apogee,  246.4-mi  (396.6-km)  perigee,  99.8-min  period, 
and   82.0’  inclination. 
Pr imary   mission  objective  was  to  conduct  correlative  studies  of 
latitude-dependent atmospheric phenomena dur ing  period  of  maximum 
solar  activity.  Secondary  objectives  were  to  search  for  celestial  hydro- 
gen  Lyman-alpha  radiation,  conduct  neutron  and  cosmic-ray  observa- 
tions, measure solar  uv  and  x-ray  radiation, make detailed  observations 
of  VLF  rad io   emissions,  and   exceed  one  year  of  active,  three-axis  sta- 
bilization.  By  June  8 ,   all  experiments  except  one-Naval  Research 
Laboratory’s x-ray  spectrometer, which  was  expected  to  have  humidity 
problems-had 
been  turned  on  and   were  operating  satisfactorily.  Two 
30-ft  antennas  had   been  deployed. 
Ogo   VI   was  sixth  and   last  spacecraft  in  NASA’s OGO  series.  Scientific 
instrumentation  for  Ogo  VI’S 25   experiments  had  been  provided  by 
10  U S .   universities,  1 foreign  university,  4  Government  centers,  and 
5  private  companies.  Ogo  VI   joined  four  other  operational  OGO’S- 
Ogo  I  (launched  Sept.  4,  1964 ) ,   Ogo  111  (launched  June  6,  1966 ) ,  
(launched  July  28,  1967 ) ,   and  Ogo  V  (launched  March  4, 
Ogo  ZV 
1968)  -which 
had  provided  more  than  1.2-million  h r s   of  scientific 
data  on  earth-sun  relationships  and   on  near-earth  environment. Ogo  11 
(launched Oct.  14, 1965)   had   been  turned  off  in  November  1967.  Re- 
sults  from  OGO  program  included:  first  observation  of  protons  re- 
sponsible  for  ring  of  current  surrounding  earth  a t   distance  of  several 
ear th   rad i i   dur ing   magnetic  storms;  first  satellite  global  survey  of 
earth’s  magnetic  field,  resulting  in   proposed  new  magnetic  field  model 

1 7 1  

June  5-8 

A S TRONAU T IC S   A N D   AERONAU T IC S ,   1969 

June 5-8: Ogo  VI-sixth  and  last  of  NASA’s Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory  series- 
carried  25 experiments  in to   orbit  t o   s tud y   the   sun’s influence  on   the  earth‘s  near-space 
environment  during  a  period  of  max imum   solar  activity.  T h e   satellite  was  launched 
f r o m  WTR  b y   B  Thorad-Agena D  booster  in to   near-polar  orbit.  B y   June   8,  all  bu t   one 
experiment  had  been   turned  on   and   were  operating  satisfactorily. 

172 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

June  5-8 

for  International  Geomagnetic  Reference Field;  clear  identification  of 
controlling  influence  of  earth‘s  magnetic  field  on  ion  population;  veri- 
fication  of  existence  of  inward  boundary  (plasma-pause)  surrounding 
region  of  stable  trapped  rad ia t ion ;   first  evidence tha t   region  of  low- 
energy  electrons  completely  enveloped  trapped  radiation  regions ; first 
observation  of  daylight  auroras ;   and  first  worldwide map  of  airglow 
distribution. 
OGO   program  was  managed  by  GSFC  under  OSSA  direction.  LeRC  was 
responsible  for  Thorad-Agena  D  launch  vehicle,  and  KSC  for  launch 
operations.  (NASA   P ro j   Off;  NASA  Releases  69-81,  69-92) 
June  5 :  Electronic  disorder  in   NASA’s Oao  ZZ  orbiting  astronomical  observa- 
tory  (launched Dec.  7,  1968 ) ,  first  noted  June  2,  had  been  successfully 
adjusted  from  ground,  NASA  announced.  Spacecraft’s  inability  to  re- 
ceive  ground  commands or maintain  correct  orientation  was  similar  to 
malfunction April  12 which  had  almost  caused spacecraft’s  death.  GSFC 
controllers  corrected  problem  by  adjusting  ground  command  trans- 
mitters  and  computer  programs  and  switching  attitude  control  system 
from  gas-operated to   gyro  stabilization.  (NASA   Release  69-88) 
*  Investigating  board  headed by  Astronaut Walter M.  Schirra,  Jr.,  reported 
primary  cause  of  Dec.  8,  1968, crash  of  NASA’s lunar  landing  training 
vehicle  (LLTV )   No.  1 was  “that  the  vehicle  entered  a  region  of  flight 
where  aerodynamic moments  overpowered the  control  system  . . . such 
that  attitude  control  was  lost.  The  source  of  the  control  problem  was 
not  identified  . . . in  time  to  add  (use)   a  second  control  system  which 
could have  restored  control  capability.”  Crash did  not  involve  any mal- 
functions  of  systems.  Adverse  region  of  flight  was  entered  because  the 
aerodynamic  limitations  of  LLTV were  not  completely  understood, wind 
conditions  were  insufficiently  accounted for,  and   displays  in  LLTV  and 
support  van  were  inadequate  for  conditions.  Board  made  11  recom- 
mendations-including  wind-tunnel  tests  to  assess  LLTV  aerodynamic 
improved  safety.  (NASA   Release  69-87 ;   AP,  H 
characteristics-for 
Chron,  6 /6 /69 )  
*  U.S.S.R.’s  Tu-144  supersonic  a ircraf t   exceeded  mach  1 for  first  time 
during  flight  test,  according  to  Tass.  No   further  details  were  released. 
(In terav iaA irLe t ter ,  6/9/69,  5 )  
*  At  Pa r i s   Air  Show  Sud  Aviation  test  pilot  Andre  Turca t   demonstrated 
Concorde 001.  During  engine  checks  before  takeoff,  noise  level  at  300 
m to  side and  behind was  not  excessive even  with  afterburners switched 
in.  Fly-pasts  a t   various  speeds  and  configurations  showed  good  han- 
dling  characteristics  and  low  noise levels.  Aircraft  landed  smoothly and  
stopped  in   relatively  short  distance  on  wet  runway  with  brake  chute. 
(In terav iaA irLe t ter ,  6/6/69,  4) 
*  Dr.  Eugene G.  Fubini,  former  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense,  was  sworn 
i n   a s   consultant  to  NASA  Administrator.  He  would  advise  NASA  senior 
officials  on  scientific  and  engineering  aspects  of  agency  programs  and  
review  and  advise on  work  of  President’s  Space Task Group  and  NASA- 
DOD  cooperation  on  space  shuttle.  Before  joining  NASA  Dr.  Fubini  had 
(NA SA   Release 
been  Vice  President  and   Group  Executive  a t   IBM. 
69-85) 
NASA  announced  selection  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.  for  $4-million,  three- 
year  contract  to  design  and   develop  life  support  and   environmental 

173  

June  5 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

control  systems  to   sustain  astronauts  for   long-duration  ear th   orb i ta l  
space  flights.  ( W S J ,  6 /5 /69 )  
Secretary  of  State William  P.  Rogers  told  Washington,  D.C., news  con- 
ference  Nixon  Administration  was  resolved  to  continue  test  firings  of 
advanced  strategic missiles.  He  said  tests  would  not  affect  chances  for  
U S .  success in  disarmament  talks  with U.S.S.R.,  scheduled for   summer, 
and   tha t   they  should  be  continued  even  after  negotiations  had  begun, 
(Grose,  NYT ,  6/6/69,  1 )  
June  6:  NASA’s H G l O   lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Ma j .   Peter  Hoag 
( USAF)  , successfully  completed  20th  flight  over  Buckhorn,  Calif.  Ve- 
hicle  was  air-launched  from  B-52  a ircraf t   a t   45,000-ft  altitude  and  
glided  to  landing.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
*  At  New  York  meeting  sponsored  by  Goddard  Institute for   Space  Studies, 
MSC,  and   Columbia  Univ.’s  Lamont-Doherty  Geological  Observatory, 
MSC  scientist Wilbur  R.  Wollenhaupt  said ApoZZo  8 computer  had  erred 
i n   prediction  of  spacecraft’s  position  by  15,000  f t   in   range  and   1,500 
f t   in   elevation.  Apollo  10 computer  erred   only  2,000  f t   in   range  and  
500  f t   in   elevation  with  programming  of  more  accurate  model  of 
moon’s  asymmetrical  gravity  field.  ApoZZo  10  results  made  i t   likely 
Apollo  11 could  be  guided  to  extremely  accurate  landing  in   July. 
Dr.  Richard  Lingenfelter  of  UCLA  described  study  of  meandering 
tracks  across  moon’s  surface  which  showed  evidence  tha t   a t   least  130  
river-like  rilles  around   large  circular  lunar   mare   had   been  formed  by 
flowing  water.  Evidence  was  presented  from  gravity  studies  and   m a g  
netic  observations  in   nearby  space  that  moon’s  interior  was  homoge- 
neous  rather  than  subdivided  into  heavy  core  surrounded  by  lighter 
mantle.  (Sullivan,  NYT ,   6/7/69,  16 )  
*  I n  Life,  Hugh  Sidey  sa id :   “I t   was  jus t   exactly  eight  years  ago  that  John 
Kennedy  set the  moon  goal  and  called  the  nation  into  ‘the  exciting  ad-  
venture  of  space.’  There  have  been  grea t  space moments  in   these  years, 
but  they  have  faded  rather  rapidly  as  the  ear th   problems  pressed  in. 
Now  there  is  a  lasting  excitement  which  will  build  to  the  big  launch 
[Apollo  111 this  summer  and  probably  will  linger  for months  o r  years. 
. . . History  suggests  tha t   man,  despite  his  obvious  and   obsessive 
miseries,  craves  something  to   lift  him  beyond  himself.  War  too  often 
has  been  one  outlet.  Americans  in   particular  have  needed  a  quest, 
across  the  mountains  o r   the  continent,  into  the  sky  and   the  sea,  to  the 
poles  or  inside  the  atom.”  This  pointed  up  “classic  dilemma  in   presi- 
dential  leadership.”  Did  national  pride  in   space  achievement  and   its 
technological  and   military  benefits  mean  more  to  nation  than  plans 
for   a id   to  education,  welfare  programs,  o r   feeding  the  hungry?   “ I t  
could  be  that  the  world’s  ills  a re   not  too  great  to  allow  such  dreams. 
It  could  also  be  that  Americans  cannot  live  without  them.”  (L i f e ,  
6/6/69,  4 )  
*  President  Nixon  announced  intention  to  appoint  Stanford  Univ.  physicist 
Huber t   B.  Heffner  a s   Deputy  Director  of  Office  of  Science  and   Tech- 
nology,  succeeding  Ivan  L.  Bennett,  Jr.,  who  had   resigned.  Nomination 
was submitted  to   Senate June  9.  ( P D ,  6/9/69,806;  6 /16 /69 ,845 )  
0  NAS  and   NAE  issued  Scientific  and  Technical  Communication: A  Pressing 
National  Problem  and  Recommendations  for   I t s   Solution.  Committee 
on  Scientific  and   Technical  Communication  ( SATCOM)   emphasized 
need  for  maintaining  pluralistic,  diverse  communication  activities  in  

174 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

June 6 

science  and   engineering  a s   opposed  to  monolithic,  centralized  system 
and   recommended  55  methods  for   meeting  accelerating  growth  of 
of  $2?-billion  R&D  enterprise  in   US. Recom- 
technical  data-product 
mendations  included  creation  of  Jo in t   Commission  on  Scientific  and  
councils  to  stimu- 
Technical  Communications  responsible  to  NAS-NAE 
late  greater  coordination  among  private  organizations  and  facilitate 
interaction  with  government.  (Tex t ;   NAS  Release;  NAS-NRC-NAE 
News 
Rpt,  5-7/69,  1) 
*  Florida  Legislature  passed  concurrent  resolution  asking  President  Nixon 
and   Congress  to  restore  name  “Cape  Canaveral”  to  Cape  Kennedy, 
subject  to  agreement by  Sen.  Edward  M.  Kennedy  (D-Mass.),  brother 
of  la te   President  John  F.  Kennedy.  Original  Spanish  name  meant 
“plantation  of  cane.”  (AP, W  S tar ,   6/7/69,  A l )  
June  7:  World’s  largest  passenger  airliner,  629,000-1b  Boeing  747,  landed 
a t   Dulles  Airport,  Washington,  D.C.,  en  route  from  Par is   Air  Show. 
Pan   American  World  Airways  would  take  delivery  of  i ts   first  747  in 
September and   inaugurate  passenger  service  shortly  after  first  of  year. 
(W S tar ,   6/8/69,  A23) 
*  Since  “any  contamination  of  the  ear th   from  the  moon  would  affect  all 
men  and   all  nations,”  said  New  Yo rk   T imes ,   protective  arrangements 
“should  be  approved by  an  international group, preferably  by  a  formal 
United Nations committee.  I n  the  future men  will  go  to Mars  and  other 
par ts   of  the  solar  system  where  the  prospects  of  finding  living  or- 
ganisms  are   much  greater  than  they  are   on  the  moon.  If  Americans 
now  monopolize  the  key  decisions  regarding  protection  of  the  earth‘s 
environment,  they  will  have  no  grounds  for  objecting  later  on   i f  
Russians, Chinese, Germans,  Japanese,  Brazilians  o r   others monopolize 
similar  decisions  affecting  human  beings  returning  from  more  distant 
celestial  bodies.”  ( N Y T ,  6/7/69,  32 )  
In  Nature,  Stanford  Univ.  astronomer  Dr.  Edward  K.  Conklin  reported 
recording  earth’s  motion  using  background  radiation  believed  to  have 
been  produced  at  early  stage  in   universe’s  expansion.  If  theory  was 
correct,  radiation  defined  extremely  distant  reference  frame  for  meas- 
urement  of  earth’s  motion.  Recording  showed  100-mi-per-sec move- 
ment  i n   direction  midway  between  direction  of  Big  Dipper  and   s tar  
Arcturus.  (Na ture ,   6/7/69,  971-2) 
June  8:  NASA’s Echo  I1 comsat,  launched  Jan.  25, 1964,  reentered  atmos- 
phere  a t   60.3”  north  latitude  and   148.1”  east  longitude,  nor th   of 
Siberian  Sea  of  Okhotsk  after  orbiting  earth  more  than  28,000  times. 
Launched  a s   passive  comsat  and   air-density  research  satellite,  532-1b, 
135-ft-dia,  laminated  mylar  plastic  and   aluminum  balloon  had   been 
used  as  reflector  fo r   bouncing  rad io   transmissions  between  ground 
points  and   for   geodetic studies.  (NASA  Release  69-90) 
New  Y o r k   Times Magazine  profile  quoted  NASA  Administrator,  Dr. 
Thomas  0.  Pa ine :   Late  President  John  F.  Kennedy’s  decision  to  try  
to  put man  on moon by  end  of  1960s was  “bold  act  that  is  standing the 
test  of  time  damned well,”  Dr.  Pa ine  had  said.  “Our  ability  to  function 
now  in   a  new  environment a  decade  af ter  Jack  Kennedy  is  going  to  be 
a  very  challenging  test  for  us.  Do  we  understand  tha t   environment? 
Can  we  achieve a  new  consensus without  the  ‘Pearl Harbor’  of  a  Rus- 
sian  lead  in   space?  We’re  not  really  talking  about  the  space  program 
anymore.  The  space  program  is  finished.  You  wouldn’t  speak  about 

175  

June  8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Columbus’s  voyage  a s   the  sail-powered  water  craft  program.  What 
Columbus’s  journey  was  all  about  had  nothing  to  do   with  water.  I t  
was  the  extension  of  man’s  dominion,  new  life  styles,  new  forms  of 
government, new  societies.”  Dr.  Paine  believed  U S .   had  no  choice but 
to  push  ahead.  “A  nation  tha t   turns   down  a  challenge  like  this  is  a 
(Buckley,  N Y T   Magazine,  6/8/69, 
nation  that’s  on  i ts   way  out.” 
34-63)  
0  William  Hines  in   Washington  Sunday  Star  criticized  NASA’s Lunar  Re- 
ceiving  Laboratory  and   plans  to  protect  U S .   from  lunar   contamina- 
tion:  “.  . . there  is   ample  doubt  tha t   ( 1 )   the  quarantine  will  really  be 
air-tight  and   ( 2 )   i t   will  make  very  much  difference  i f   the  contamina- 
tion  shield  leaks  a  little.”  He  also  commented  that,  earlier,  “great  lip 
service  was  paid  to  the  necessity  for  avoiding  contamination  of  the 
moon  and  other  celestial bodies by  lifeforms  from  Earth.  The  rationale 
was  pragmatic,  not  moral,  and   purely  anthropocentric:  If  we  contam- 
inate  the  surface  we  won’t  be  able  to  say  with  certainty  whether  the 
lifeforms  we  eventually  find  are   native  or  imported.  This  line  is   still 
being  hewed  to-after 
the  case  of  Mars,  but  for  the 
a  fashion-in 
moon  the  game  has proved  too  costly  to  be  played  with  strict  attention 
to  rules.”  (W  Star,  6/8/69,  C4 )  
June 9:  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from Wallops 
Station  carrying  Dudley  Observatory  payload  to  collect  micrometeor- 
oids.  Rocket  and  instruments  functioned satisfactorily.  (NA SA   P ro j  Off) 
FAA  announced  there  were  10,470  airports,  heliports,  and   seaplane  bases 
on  its  records  on  Dec.  31,  1968: net  increase  of  344  over  1967.  They 
included  555  heliports,  411  seaplane  bases,  and   28  landing  facilities 
outside  U S .   Of  total,  3,986 were  publicly  owned  and  6,8423,  privately. 
Airlines  served 183 airports with  turbojets  and were  expected  to  extend 
this  service  to   additional  215  airports  by  1973.  ( FAA   Release  69-68) 
June  10: House  passed  by  vote  of  328  to  52  H.R.  11271,  FY  1970  NASA  
authorization  of  $3.966 billion,  allocating  $3.26  billion  for  R&D,  $58.2 
million  for  construction  of  facilities,  and  $643.8  million  for  research 
and  program  management.  House  had  adopted  amendment  canceling 
$327  million  authorized  for  FYs  1967,  1968,  and  1969  for  which  ap- 
propriations  had  not  been  made.  I t   also  adopted  amendment requiring 
emplacement  of  U.S.  flag,  exclusively,  on  moon  or  any  other  planet by 
U S .   astronauts  dur ing   visits  financed  entirely  by  Government  funds. 
Act  would  be  symbolic  gesture  of  national  pride  in   achievement, not 
declaration  of  national  appropriation  by  claim  of  sovereignty.  (Tex t ;  
CR,  6/10/69,  H4615-56) 
0  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  David  Packard  announced  cancellation  by 
DOD   of  Manned Orbiting Laboratory  (M O L )   program  because  of  “con- 
tinuing  urgency  of  reducing  Federal  defense spending”  and  “advances 
in   automated  techniques  for   unmanned  satellite  systems.”  Cancellation 
would  save  “several  hundred  million”  of  $525  million  proposed  for 
MOL  in   FY  1970  budget  authorization.  Remainder  would  be  needed 
for  termination  costs and  USAF  unmanned  space programs.  Cancellation 
also would  save $1.5 billion  in  FY  1970 through  1974. 
Since  1965  initiation  of  MOL  program,  DOD  had  accumulated much 
experience  in   unmanned  satellite  systems  and  “profited  from  both 
manned  and   unmanned  space exploration  of  NASA”  for  “the  many,  ad -  
vanced  technologies  in   the  MOL   effort.”  Some  MOL   technology  and 

176 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

June  10 

hardware  would  be  used  in   other  DOD  unmanned  space  programs  and 
DOD was  exploring  with  NASA  “the  usefulness  of  some  MOL  develop- 
(DOD  Release  491-69) 
ments  to  NASA  programs.” 
*  In   Bonn  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  and   West  German 
Science Minister  Gerhard  Stoltenberg  signed Memorandum  of  Under- 
standing  calling  fo r   NASA  and   West  German  Ministry  for  Scientific 
Research cooperation  on  Helios.  Most  advanced  international  scientific 
space  program,  Helios would  consist  of  two  solar  probes  carrying  10 
scientific experiments  28  million m i - c l o s e r   to  sun   than  any  other  yet 
1974-75  to  provide  new  understanding  of  fundamental 
scheduled-in 
solar  processes  and   sun-earth  relations  by  studying  solar  wind,  mag- 
netic  and   electric  fields,  cosmic  rays  and  cosmic  dust.  NASA  would 
launch  two  German-built spacecraft  on  Atlas-Centaur vehicles  one  year 
apart.  Seven  experiments would  be   provided  by  German  scientists  and 
three  by  GSFC  in   cooperation with  U.S.,  Australian,  and   Italian  experi- 
menters.  (NASA   Releases  69-86,  69-91) 
*  A t   Smithsonian  Institution  ceremony,  X-15  No.  566670,  one  of  three 
rocket-engine a ircraf t   built  to  test  flight  environment  in   upper  atmos- 
phere,  took  its  place  near  Wright  brothers’  K i t t y   Hawk Flyer  and  
Charles A.  Lindbergh’s Sp ir i t   of  S t .   Louis. Aircraft  had  been  officially 
retired  with  completion  of  jo in t   NASA-USAF  X-15  program  in   De- 
cember and flown  from Edwards  AFB,  Calif.,  as cargo  to  be  refurbished 
by  Smithsonian. First X-15  built,  it made  first captive  flight March  10, 
1959, and   flew  first  glide  and  power  flights  June  8, 1959, and  Jan.  23, 
1960. I t  completed  last  flight  in   test  program  Oct.  24,  1968, to  total  81 
free  flights  and  142 flights  with  B-52  mothership. 
Of  three  X-15s  built  by  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  and   Thio- 
ko l   Chemical  Corp.,  No.  3  had  been  destroyed  in  Nov.  15, 1967, crash 
which  killed  pilot,  Maj.  Michael  J.  Adams  (USAF )   ; No.  2  was  being 
displayed  at  Air  Force  Museum,  Wright-Patterson  AFB,  Qhio.  X-15 
program  had  cost  $300 million  and  established  records  for  354,200-ft 
altitude  and   for  4,520  mph  (mach  6.7)  speed. 
A t  ceremony Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force, 
said  i t   was  difficult  to  believe  designer’s  dream  of  15 y r s   ago   had  al- 
ready  found  i ts   way  into  museum.  (Program ;   NASA  Release  69-56; 
DOD  Release  327-69;  NYT,  6/15/69,  70) 
*  MSFG  announced  award  of  $1,712,000  contract  change  to  Bendix  Corp. 
for  construction  of  three  additional  control  computers  for  Apollo  Tele- 
scope  Mount  project,  to  be  delivered  from  April  1970  through  July 
1970.  ( MSFC  Release  69-141) 
*  Space  Business  Da i ly   said  poll  of  1,400  U.S.  adults  conducted  after 
Apollo  10   splashdown  by  A.  Singlinger  Co.  had   found  51.3%  in  
favor  of  lunar   exploration program.  Of  those polled,  39%  disapproved 
of  program  and  9.7%  had  no   opinion.  ( S B D ,  6/10/69,  174) 
0  Rep.  Lester L.  Wolff  (D-N.Y.)  proposed  in   House  that  Apollo  11 space- 
craft be commissioned  “The John F.  Kennedy.”  (CR, 6/10/69,  H4639) 
*  I n  Washington  Evening  Star  Crosby  S.  Noyes  noted:  “There  are   . . . a 
number  of  questions  about  interplanetary  travel  that  remain  to  be 
answered, the most  obvious being why  take  the  trouble.  I t  is,  n o   doubt, 
a  magnificent conception. But  whether  i t   can  or  should  be  made  real 
is  still  open  to  some  doubt.”  (W  S tar ,   6/10/69,  A l l )  
f u n e  11: NERVA  nuclear  experimental engine  (XE )   was  successfully  ground- 

177 

June  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

tested  by  NASA  and   AEC  in   Jackass  Flats,  Nev.,  reaching  full  power  for  
first  time  under  simulated  altitude  conditions.  Reactor  operated  a t  
50,000  lbs   thrust  for  31/2  min  during  13-min  test.  (AEC/NASA  Release 
M-144) 
NASA  Associate Administrator,  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  and  Assistant  Asso- 
ciate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and   Technology  John  L. 
Sloop presented  paper  “Planning  Space Technology for  the  1970’s”  to 
National  Security  Indus tr ia l   Assn.  in   Washington,  D.C.  Technology 
readiness  for  manned  missions  beyond  the  moon  depended  “very 
heavily  upon  (1) carrying  the  technology  through  proof-of-concept 
o r   prototype  phase  in   order  to  assure  long l ife ,   reliable  flight  equip- 
ment  and   operations,  and   ( 2 )   precursor  missions,  particularly  an 
Ear th   orbiting  laboratory  and  lunar  exploration  that  provide  an   op- 
portunity  to  obtain  the  needed  technology.”  Technology  needed  for 
manned  Mars  exploration  “represents  capabilities  that  are   very  useful 
in   many  space  missions  and   for  some  non-space applications  as  well, 
particularly  with  regard  to  long-life  equipment  and  man’s  performance 
under  stress.”  (Tex t)  
*  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff,  MIT  Dean  of  Engineering,  received  FAA’s 
highest  honor-Extraordinary 
Service  Award-in  Washington,  D.C., 
ceremony for  service  as  technical  adviser  on  SST program.  Gold  medal, 
lapel  ribbon,  and   citation  for  exceptional  contribution  were  presented 
by  Under  Secretary  of  Transportation  James  M.  Beggs.  He  noted  Dr. 
BisplinghofYs extraordinary  competence  and   knowledge  of  aeronautics 
had  played  significant  role  in   analyzing  complex  technical  aspects  of 
SST  development  program.  Dr.  Bisplinghoff  had  served  as  technical 
adviser  to  FAA  Administrator  on  SST  program  since  April  1966,  had 
held  key  scientific  posts  with  NASA  since  1962,  and   was  member  of 
NASA  Historical  Advisory Committee.  (FAA   Release  69-69) 
Congressional  sources  quoted  by  John  Finney  in  New  York  Times  said 
White  House  had  ordered  cancellation  of  DOD’s  MOL   program  [see 
June  l o ]   over  DOD and   USAF  objections  and  in  response  to  mounting 
congressional  pressure 
to  hold  down  military  spending. 
( N Y T ,  
6/12/69,  1) 
*  Washington  Post  Federal  Diary  column  noted  Astronaut  Neil  A.  Arm- 
strong  would  receive  $2-per-day  travel  allowance  as  civil  servant 
dur ing   Apollo  11  mission.  As  GS-16  a t   NASA,  Armstrong  collected 
maximum  per  diem  of  $16  when  traveling  on  duty.  But  for  Apollo  11 
mission,  i t   had  been  ruled  that  he  would  be  enjoying  Government 
billeting  and  subsistence.  (Clopton,  Causey,  W Post,  6/11/69,  B11 ) 
June  12:  L/G  Samuel  C.  Phillips  (U SA F ) ,   Apollo  Program  Director,  an -  
nounced  NASA  would  proceed with  plans  for  July  16  Apollo  11 launch. 
(He stressed,  however,  that  NASA  would  not  hesitate  to  postpone  launch 
if  officials  did  not  feel  “ready  in  every  way.  Nor,  once  the  voyage 
has   begun,  would  we  hesitate  to  bring  the  crew  home  immediately  if 
(NASA   Special Release) 
we  encounter  problems.” 
*  Bullpup Cajun  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops Station 
carried  GSFC  payload  to   45.1-mi  (72.5-km)  altitude  to  study  capability 
of  Bullpup Cajun as sounding rocket system  and  to  test  prototype  ozone 
payload.  Rocket  performed  satisfactorily  but  loss  of  signal  a t   payload 
separation  prevented  analysis  of  payload  performance.  Parachute  de- 
ployed  a s  planned  but payload  was  not  recovered.  (NASA   Rpt  s a )  
NSF  released  Scientists,  Engineers,  and  Physicians  from  Abroad ,   Fiscal 

178  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

June 12 

Years   1966  and  1967  (NSF 69-10).  More  than  12,500  scientists  and  
engineers  had  been  granted  immigrant  status  in   U S .   in   FY 1967, 
increase  of  74%  from  1966 and   134%  from  1956.  Immigrant  physi- 
cians  and   surgeons  increased  30% from  1966 and   6.5%  from  1965, to 
3,300.  Number  of  immigrant  scientists  and  engineers  was  estimated 
roughly  at  one-tenth  of  gross  addition  to  domestic  science  and   engi- 
neering  manpower.  (Text) 
*  New York Da i ly  News  editorial sa id :   “For  some years,  the U S .  Air Force 
has   had   an   entirely  feasible  project  fo r   orbiting  by  1972  a  30,000-lb. 
space laboratory carrying two men,  a t  a cost of  around $3  billion.  About 
$1.3  billion  having  been  spent  on  the  program,  Deputy  Defense  Secre- 
tary  David  M.  Packard  announced  Tuesday  that  i t   has   been  junked, 
scrapped,  scrubbed,  in  order  to  save  the  taxpayers  some money.  We’re 
hot  for  government economy.  But  this  looks to   us  like  a  most  dubious 
move  in   that  direction.  You can  bet tha t  Soviet Russia, poverty-stricken 
though  i t   is,  is   not  skimping  in   its  drive  to   make  space  serve  the 
Kremlin  militarily.”  (NY  News ,   6 /12 /69)  
June  13:  In   letter  to  NASA  Associate Administrator  for   Space  Science  and  
Applications,  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  ComSatCorp  President  Joseph  V. 
Charyk  offered  plan  for  NASA-ComSatCorp  cooperation  in   demonstra- 
tions  of  TV  and   other  satellite  services  between  U S .   areas,  including 
Alaska,  using  existing  ear th   stations  a t  Brewster,  Wash.,  and  Paumalu, 
Hawaii,  plus  two  new  small stations,  and  NASA  ATS  satellite  or  possibly 
in-orbit  commercial  satellite.  ( ComSatCorp Release  69-33) 
Aerobee  150   sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Natal,  Brazil, 
carried  Brazil-Univ.  of  California  payload  to  conduct  stellar  x-ray 
studies.  Rocket  and  instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA   P ro j  
O f f )  
Aerobee 150 M I   sounding  rocket was  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  with 
VAM-20  booster  to  106.6-mi  (171.5-km)  altitude  carrying  Univ.  of 
Colorado  payload  to  measure  height  profile  of  nitric  oxide,  nitrogen, 
and ionized nitrogen  and to  test Mariner-Mars UV  spectrometer. Rocket 
and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
NASA  announced  addition  of  two  lunar  orbits  to   Apollo  11  flight  plan, 
which  would  increase  revolutions  to  30  and   total  time  in   lunar   orbit 
to  59   hrs  30  min.  Addition  of  orb i t   before  LM/CSM  undocking  would 
improve  communications  during  critical  maneuver  by  bringing  LM 
within rad io   sight  of  210-ft dish  antenna  a t  Goldstone Tracking Station 
dur ing   i ts   descent  to  lunar  surface.  Addition  of  orb i t   after  redocking 
and  before  LM jettison  would  allow  astronauts  two  more  hours  for 
decontamination  of  equipment  exposed  to  lunar  environment.  (NASA  
Release  69-83A) 
Catastrophic  contamination  of  ear th   by  returning  Apollo  11  astronauts 
and  lunar   samples  was  “extremely  unlikely,”  Philip  H.  Abelson  ex- 
plained  i n   Science.  “One  argument  is  that  a  form  of  life  adapted  to 
the  absence  of  H20,  0 2 ,   and   organic  compounds  could  scarcely  be  
expected  to   survive  on  earth,  much  less  infect  earth’s  creatures.  The 
most  compelling  argument,  however,  is  that  the  lunar-return  experi- 
ment has been  conducted many  times  in   the past.  I t  has  been  estimated 
that  millions  of  tons  of  unsterilized  lunar   material  have  reached  the 
ear th   a s   a  consequence of  meteor  impact.  . . . Sterile  containment  of 
lunar  specimens during the  journey  to Houston is  assured.  . . . 
“Procedures  involving the  astronauts are  more  controversial.  Careful 

179 

June  13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

effort  to   keep  to   a  minimum  the  amount  of  adventitious  material  re- 
turned  to  ear th   is  a  substantial factor  in   the  procedures  tha t   have  been 
adopted.  The  astronauts  face  a  difficult  and   dangerous  mission.  Were 
their  procedures  to   be  made  even  more  complex  because  of  panicky, 
last-minute  objections,  their  chances  of  a  safe  return  could  be  need- 
lessly  jeopardized.”  (Science,  6/13/69,  1227)  
Discovery  of  approximately  621.4-mi-dia  ( 1,000-km-dia)  mascon-mass 
concentration  of  gravitational  pull-on  moon’s  fa r   side  and   of  fact 
tha t   Mare  Marginis  a t   eastern  edge  was  flooded  fraction  of  mascon 
basin  was  reported  in   Science  by  Cornell  Univ.  radiophysicists  Dr. 
Malcolm  J.  Campbell,  Dr.  Brian  T.  O’Leary,  and   Dr.  Carl  Sagan.  Dis- 
coveries  were  made  from  study  of  Lunar   Orbiter  and   ApoZZo  8 photos 
and   gravitational  data.  New  mascon  was  2.8  times  heavier  than   mas- 
cons  associated  with  Mares  Imbrium  and   Serenitatis  on  moon’s  near  
side.  If  mare  material  was  confirmed  in   basin,  discoverers  proposed 
calling  it  Mare  Occulum  (H idden   S e a ) .   Dr.  Campbell  said  they  be- 
lieved  mascons  explained  moon’s  entire  “out-of-balance”  appearance 
as  seen  from  spacecraft.  While  some  Apollo  mission  planners  believed 
moon  to   be  pear-shaped  because  of  its  effects  on   spacecraft,  Cornell 
team  believed  moon  was  nearly  perfect  sphere.  Mascons  explained  un- 
expected  variations  in   lunar   gravity  which,  according  to  MSC  officials, 
had  dragged  ApoZZo  10 off  course.  With  mascons,  scientists  were  close 
to  answering  question  of  origin  of  lunar   seas,  Dr.  Campbell  said,  “But 
we   haven’t  quite  gotten  the  whole  story.”  (Science,  6/13/69,  1273-5; 
Cohn,  W  Post, 6/14/69,  A l )  
President  Nixon  submitted  following  nominations  to  Senate : Gen.  John 
D.  Ryan  (U SA F )   to  be  USAF  Chief  of  Staff,  Adm.  Thomas  H.  Moorer 
( U S N )   to  be  Chief  of  Naval  Operations  for   additional  two-year  period, 
and   Gen.  Earle  G.  Wheeler  (U SA )   for   reappointment  as   Chairman, 
Jo in t  Chiefs  of  Staff, for  additional one-year term.  ( P D ,  6/16/69,  845 )  
*  Disruption  of  circadian  rhy thm s -cyc le s   in   life  processes  dependent  on  
biological  mechanism  operating  like  internal  clock-placed 
stress  on 
long-distance  air  traveler,  said  FAA  medical  officials  Dr.  Peter  V. 
Siegel,  Dr.  Siegfried  5 .   Gerathewohl,  and   Dr.  Stanley  R.  Mohler  in  
Scimce.  I n   modern  aviation  environment  man  was  exposed  abruptly 
to  disruptions,  particularly  dur ing   long  east-to-west  and  west-to-east 
flights.  (Science, 6/13/69,  1249-55) 
June  14: Madrid  ceremony  marked  takeover  by  Spanish  crew  of  operations 
at  U.S.  Deep  Space  Network  tracking  facility.  Attending  were  NASA 
Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas 0. Pa ine ;   Spanish Space  Research  Council 
President,  Gen.  Luis Azcarrago;  U S .  Ambassador  Robert  C.  Hill;  and 
Gen.  Antonio  Perez-Marin,  President  of  Spanish  Instituto Nacional  de  
Thcnica  Aeroespacial.  Dr.  Pa ine   sent  final  U S .  signal  to  Pioneer  V I I l  
(launched Dec.  13, 1967)  orbiting sun. Shor t  time  later  Gen.  Azcarrago 
sent  first  signal  under  Spanish  control.  Dr.  Paine  said,  “Spanish  de- 
termination  to   participate  in   this  exciting  20th  Century  form  of  ex- 
ploration  reminds  us  that  five  centuries  ago  Columbus’  great  voyage 
of  exploration  was  carr ied   out  under  the  flag  of  Spain.”  (NASA   Release 
69-93  ) 
0  Washington  Post  published  letter  from  John  M.  Raymond,  Jr.,  of  Wash- 
ington,  D.C.,  which  praised  decision  of  Florida  Legislature  to  ask  for  
re turn   of  original  name  “Canavera17’ to   Cape  Kennedy  [see  June  61. 

180 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

June   14 

“I t   is   for  u s   today  a  thrilling  thought  that  men  w i l l   leap  to  the  moon 
from  a  cape  discovered  by  Spanish  adventurers  early  in   the  16th 
cape  with  one  of  the   very  earliest  American  place  names 
century-a 
t o  be  retained  to  the present  day.  Or   almost  to  the  present  day.  Let  the 
NASA  center  bear  the  name Kennedy. It is  an  appropriate  tribute  to  the 
man  who  set  us   on  the  course  to  the  moon.  But  let  us   restore  to  the 
cape the proud  name it carried for  400 years.”  ( W  Post, 6/14/69,  A24) 
0  Pash ing ton   Post  commented  on  DOD’S  cancellation  of  MOL  program: 
“While  few   tears  . . . will  be  shed  for  MOL,  the  process  by  which  i t  
fell  from  grace  deserves  scrutiny.  Many  of  the  suggestions for  taming 
the  defense  budget  have  posited  some  kind  of  non-Pentagon  review 
mechanism, either  inside  o r   outside government. Yet  MOL   lost  its  place 
not  through  such  a  review  but  through  intense  general  pressure,  which 
became  focused  inside  the  Pentagon  upon  this  particular  item.  The 
choice  o f   which  project  to  save,  which  to  sacrifice,  was  made  by  the 
military  on  the   basis  of  an  obscure  bureaucratic  struggle  with  high 
Darwinian  overtones.  Like  the  brontosaurus,  MOL   came  upon  the 
tougher  conditions  of  a  new  environment  and   was  found  unfit  to  sur-  
vive.  This may  be  an  effective way  t o   exercise  a  measure  of  occasional 
control  over  a  swollen  defense  budget,  but  i t   is   a  crude  way  and  one 
no t   a t   all  guaranteed  to  leave  the  r igh t  elements  intact.  Both  the  spend- 
e r s   and   the  critics  ought  to  keep  looking  for   a more  refined  and  selec- 
tive  approach.”  ( W  Po s t ,   6/14/69,  A24) 
June  15:  Cosmos  CCLXXXVI   was  successfully  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  from 
Plesetsk.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  322  km  (200.1  m i)  ; perigee, 
197  km  (122.4 m i )  ; period,  89.7 min;  and  inclination,  65.4’.  Satellite 
reentered  June  23.  (GSFC SSR,  6/15/69;  6 /30 /69 ;   SBD,  6/17/69, 
205;  Reuters,  W  Pos t ,  6/16/69,  A16) 
*  U.S.S.R.  was  watching  U.S.  missile  debate  “with  keen  interest  but  with- 
out  any  sign  of  serious  concern,”  said  Bernard  Gwertzman  in  New 
Yo r k  T ime s .  Moscow diplomats were pessimistic about chances of  US.- 
U.S.S.R.  disarmament  agreement  being  reached  within  three  years, 
which  meant  U.S.S.R.  “must  go  ahead  with  new  systems.”  Even  pos- 
sibility  of  eventual  agreement  on  slowdown  in   arms  spending  was 
clouded  by  emergence  of  Communist  China  a s   possible  missile  threat 
( N Y T ,  6/15/69,  E3 )  
to  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R. 
*  London  Sunday  Times  article  by  Francis  James  said  Communist  China 
would  soon  test  nuclear  missile  with  6,000-mi range  that  could  afford 
second-strike  nuclear  capability  in   1970s.  ( W   Po s t ,   6/16/69,  A14) 
Current  Book-of-the-Month  Club  selection,  The  Andromeda  Strain  by 
Michael Crichton, would  “hardly  gladden  the  hearts”  of  those  at  NASA, 
said  Walter  Sullivan  in  New   Y o r k   T imes .   I t   dramatized  dangers  of 
back  contamination  that  had  “suddenly  become  a  subject  of  sharp  
debate  on  the  eve  of  the  Apollo  11  mission  to  the  moon.”  ( N Y T ,  
6/15/69,  E8) 
*  New  Y o r k  T imes  said Dr.  Carlos Varsavsky, Director  of  Argentine Radio 
Astronomy  Institute  a t   La  Plata,  and   23  team  members  engaged  in 
international  research  in  radioastronomy  faced  dismissal  for  joining 
general  strike May  10 in   defiance of  Argentine  government.  They  had 
received  notifications  of  termination  of  appointment.  ( N Y T ,  6/15/69, 
243) 
June  15-16:  Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  successfully completed  four  simu- 

181 

Juno  15-16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

lated  lunar  landings  in   th ird   lunar  landing  training  vehicle  (LLTV )   a t  
Ellington  AFB,  Tex.  Armstrong  piloted  LLTV  to  100- and  300-ft  alti- 
tude  and   practiced  touchdown  maneuvers  in   preparation  for   lunar 
landing  during  Apollo 11 mission,  to  be  launched  July  16. Armstrong 
told  newsmen  LLTV  did  “excellent  job   in  simulating  the  landing  charac- 
teristics  of  the  lunar   module.”  Flights  were  first  for  Armstrong  since 
crash   of  second  LLTV  Dec.  8,  1968.  First  LLTV,  piloted  by  Armstrong, 
had  crashed May  6,  1968. (UPI, NYT,  6/16/69,  1 ;  MSC  Release 6 9 4 9 ;  
W  S tar ,   6/17/69,  A5) 
June 16: Apollo 11 preparations were proceeding well  toward launch to moon 
a t   9:32  am  EDT  July  16, Apollo  Mission Director George H.  Hage  told 
Washington,  D.C.,  press  conference.  Hypergolic  propellant  loading 
would  begin  June  18,  wet  phase  of  countdown  demonstration  test 
(CDDT)   would  begin  July  1, and   crew  participation  in  CDDT  without 
propellants  would  begin  July  2. 
After  landing  on  moon  astronauts  would  descend  ladder  to  lunar 
surface.  When  Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  reached  second  rung   of 
ladder,  he  would  pull  D-ring  to  activate  camera  for  TV  coverage  of 
descent to  lunar  surface.  Astronaut Edwin E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  would  descend 
about  15   min  after  Armstrong.  Entire  21/2-hr  period  during  which 
astronauts  explored  lunar   surface,  set  up  experiments,  and  collected 
lunar   samples within  100  f t   of  landing  site  would  be  telecast  live  to 
TV  viewers on  earth.  (Transcr ip t)  
*  President  Nixon  sent  message  to  Congress urging  approval  of  5-million, 
10-yr  program  for   expanding  planning  effort  and  construction  and 
improvement of  airports.  He  called  for  increased taxes  on  users  to  fund 
major  part.  Levies  would  include  increase  from  5’31  to  876  in   tax  on 
domestic  flight  tickets;  new  $3  tax  on  tickets  for  international  flights 
originating  in  US . ;   new  5% tax  on  a i r   freight waybills;  and   increase 
from  two  to  nine  cents  per  gallon  on  fuels  used  by  general  aviation. 
( P D ,  6/23/69,  861-5) 
*  First  stage  of  Sa turn   V  (SA-508) 
launch  vehicle,  to  be  used  on  Apollo 
13, reached  KSC.  Second stage,  scheduled to  leave  MTF  June   25,  would 
reach  KSC  June  30. Th ird   stage  had  arrived  at  KSC  June  13.  Instrument 
unit  would  be  flown  from  MTF  to  KSC  July  7.  (MSFC   Release  69-148) 
In   Physical  Review  Letters,  Univ.  of  Maryland  physicist  Dr.  Joseph 
Weber  described  detection-of  gravity  waves  from  unknown  source  but 
i n   two  places  simultaneously. Coincidences were  observed  on  gravita- 
tional-radiation detectors  over  1,000-km base  line  a t  Argonne National 
Laboratory  and   at  Univ.  of  Maryland.  Probability  that  coincidences 
were  accidental  was  “incredibly  small.’’  NSF-supported  study  provided 
first  real  evidence  of  existence  of  gravity  waves  postulated  by  Prof. 
Albert  Einstein  more  than  50   yrs  ago.  (Phys ica l   Rev iew   Letters, 
6/16/69,  1320-24;  Lannan,  W  Star,  6/15/69,  A25) 
June  17: Apollo  Program  Director,  L/C  Samuel  C.  Phillips  ( U S A F ) ,   gave 
go-ahead to  Apollo  11 lunar   landing mission for  launch  July  16. Nine- 
hour  flight  readiness  review  had  revealed  only  one  ma jor   problem- 
in  guidance  system.  “Although  this  problem  is  not  completely  resolved 
a t   this  time,”  Gen.  Phillips  said,  “I  am  confident this  will  not  become 
a  constraint  to  the  July  launch.”  (AP, W  Star, 6/18/69,  A l )  
*  Dr.  Arthur  Rudolph,  former  Sa turn   V  Program  Manager  a t   MSFC,  w a s  
honored by W.  Randolph Lovelace  I1  Award  a t  American Astronautical 

182  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

June 17 

Society  banquet  in   Denver,  Colo.  Award  was  presented  for  his  sus- 
tained  contribution  to  space  travel  in   directing  Sa turn   V  launch 
vehicle  program  1963 through  1968.  I t   was  accepted  for  Dr.  Rudolph 
by  Dr.  Helmut G.  Krause  of  MSFC .   (Release 69-144) 
Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  discussed  need 
for  improved  manned  bomber  a t   joint  national  meeting  of  American 
Astronautical  Society  and  Operations  Research  Society of  America,  in  
. Denver,  Colo.:  “Those  who  criticize  the  bomber  a s   an   obsolete  system 
in  the  missile  age  are   often  the  same  people  who  refer  to  our   alleged 
440-1  superiority  over  the  Soviets  in   individually  targeted  warheads.” 
Ratio  would  be  “nearly  1-to-1,  with  total  payload  running  heavily 
against  us,  if  i t   were  not  for  our  bomber  force  with  its  multiple 
weapons  on  each  aircraft.  If  our  bombers  are   to  continue  to  provide 
deterrence,  they  must  be  able  to  survive  an  attack  and   then  penetrate 
the  ever-improving Soviet  defenses.  The  B-52 
is   still  a  good  aircraft, 
but  the  prototype  was  flying  in   1952  and   the  latest  models  were  pro- 
duced  in  1962. An  advanced  bomber  will  take  advantage  of  the  many 
improvements that  have  been  made  in  airframe  and  engine  design.  I t  
would  have  shor t   take-off  and   landing  capability  needed  for  dispersal 
and  payload,  structure,  and  speed  necessary  for  penetration.” 
I n   security  terms,  space  age  presented  dangers,  but  also  afforded 
opportunities  for  increasing  strategic  stability.  “Each  generation  of 
space  vehicles  will  provide  additional  improvements in   our  ability  to 
monitor  enemy  activities.  We  are   now  working  on  a  satellite  early 
warning  system  that  would  detect  missiles  as  they  are   launched  from 
land  or  sea. With  the  a id   of  such  a  warning  system  a  dispersed bomber 
force  would  be  able  to   take  off  from  its  bases  before  the  impact  of 
enemy  weapons,  even  i f   the  time  of  flight  of  the  latter  were  greatly 
reduced.”  (Tex t )  
*  Australian  marathon  runner  Bill  Emmerton  left  Houston,  Tex.,  on 
1,034-mi jog  to  Cape  Kennedy,  Fla.,  where  he  would  watch  Apollo  11 
launch. He  would  travel  on  foot  approximately 40 mi  per  day,  arriving 
morning  of  July  16. Purpose  of  run  was  to  publicize  benefits  of  physi- 
cal conditioning, pay  tribute  to  fitness of  lunar  crew, and  commemorate 
Apollo  11  flight.  (Space land  News,  6/69,  1 1 ;   PMR  Release  916-69) 
Sen.  Edward  W.  Brooke  (R-Mass.),  for  37  cosponsors,  introduced  on 
Senate floor  S.R.  211, “sense  of  the  Senate” resolution  urging  President 
immediate  suspension  by  U S .   and 
Nixon  to  propose  to  U.S.S.R. 
U.S.S.R.  of  flight  test  of  multiple  missile  warheads  and  strongly  sup- 
porting  prompt  negotiations  with  U.S.S.R.  on   weapon  issues.  (CR, 
6/17/69,  S6538) 
June   18:  NASA  successfully  deployed  and  recovered  40-ft-dia  parachute  in 
final  Project  SHAPE  (Supersonic  High  Altitude  Parachute  Experiment) 
test  to  evaluate possible  use  of  parachute  for  aerodynamic  deceleration 
for  soft  landings  on  planets  with  thin  atmospheres.  Parachute  was 
ejected  from  five-foot-long canister  carried  to  33-mi altitude  and   1,800 
mph  (mach  2.7)  by  three-stage  rocket.  Previous  tests  had  been  con- 
ducted Oct. 23  and  Dec.  11,1968. (NASA  Release  69-95) 
USAF announced  that  data  from  preliminary  investigation  of  effect  of  SST 
wing  shape  in   creating  sonic  boom  indicated  that  varying  shape  to 
reduce  pressure  field  beneath  wing  might  decrease  wing’s  flight  effi- 
ciency.  Tests  had  been  completed  a t   Arnold  Engineering  Development 

183 

June 18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Center  in   Tullahoma,  Tenn,  Tests  also  had   been  made  to  determine 
lift-to-drag characteristics  of  wing  shapes  upon  which  a ircraf t   range  
and  efficiency were  dependent.  ( AFSC  Release  100.69) 
June  19: NASA’s HL-10 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  John 
A.  Manke,  successfully completed  21st flight  after air-launch from  B-52 
a ircraf t   a t   45,000-ft  altitude west  of  Rosamond,  Calif.  Objectives  were 
to  obtain  stability,  control,  and   performance  da ta   a t   speeds  up  to 
mach  1.35.  (NASA   P ro j   O f f )  
House  Committee  on  Appropriations  favorably  reported  H.R.  12307, 
Independent  Offices  and   HUD   appropriations  bill,  which  provided 
$3.696  billion  for   NASA-$63.544 
million  below  original  budget, 
$18.544  million  below  revised  budget,  $298.290  million  below  1969 
appropriation,  and   $269.394  million  below  total  authorizations  ap- 
proved  by  House.  Bill  provided  $3  billion  for  NASA  R&D,  $53.233  mil- 
lion  for   construction  of  facilities,  and   $643.750  million  for  research 
and   program  management.  With  unobligated  carryover  from  1969  of 
$117.473  million,  total  $3.117  billion  would  be  available  for  obligation 
i n   1970. 
H.R.  12307  also  provided  $418  million  for   NSF-$79  million  below 
amount  originally  budgeted  bu t   $18  million  above  FY  1969  appro- 
priation. It provided  $500,000  for NASC,  $24,000 below budget  estimate. 
(Tex t ;   Committee  Rpt  91-316) 
Senate  confirmed  nomination  of  Apo l lo   8 Astronaut  William  A.  Anders 
as  Executive  Secretary  of  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Council. 
( C R ,  6/19/69,  S6736) 
*  President  Nixon  announced  intention  to  nominate  Dr.  William  D.  Mc- 
Elroy,  Chairman  of  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  Dept.  of  Biology,  as   Director 
of  National  Science  Foundation.  Dr.  McElroy  would  replace  Leland  J. 
Haworth,  whose  six-year  term  had   expired.  He  was  director  of  Mc- 
Collum-Pratt Institute  a t  Johns  Hopkins,  former member  of  President’s 
Science  Advisory  committee,  and  member  of  NAS,  AAAs,  American 
Chemical  Society,  and   American  Society  of  Biological  Chemists.  ( P D ,  
6 /23 /69 ,877 )  
*  Library  of  Congress  announced  acquisition  of  more  than   500  kinescope 
films  of  “Meet  the  Press”  TV   series  covering  1949-65,  presented  by 
producer  and   panel  moderator  Lawrence  E.  Spivak  on   behalf  of  N BC  
News.  Collection  included  interviews  with  aviation  expert  Maj.  Alex- 
ander  de   Seversky;  MSFC  Director,  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun ;   atomic 
energy  expert  Dr.  Vannevar  Bush;  NASA  pioneers  Dr.  T.  Keith Glennan 
and  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden;  former  NASA   Administrator  James  E. Webb; 
AEC  Chairman,  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg;  Sen.  Thomas  J.  Dodd  (D -  
Conn.)  ; and  members  of  Senate Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space 
Sciences.  ILC  Info  Bull,  6/19/69,  1; LC  Motion  Picture  Dept) 
June  20:  Aerobee  150 MI  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR 
with  VAM-20  booster  carried  Princeton  Univ.  observatory  payload  to 
112.5-mi  (181-km)  altitude  to  study  uv  radiation  of  hot  s tars   in   con- 
stellation  Scorpius  with  1 A  and   0.3  A  resolution.  Rocket  and   instru- 
ments  functioned  satisfactorily,  bu t   camera  and   stabilization  were 
completely  demolished  because  of  fall  after  parachute  failed. 
(NA SA  
Rpt  SRL) 
“There  is a good chance there  is  some form  of  life  on Mars,”  Los Angeles 
Herald-Examiner  quoted  Dr.  William  H.  Pickerink,  JPL   Director,  as  

184 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

June   20 

saying  in   interview.  “The  planet  has   a  thin  atmosphere, the  climate  is 
tough  bu t   not  completely  unreasonable.”  Changes  of  colors  on  Mars 
could  be  vegetation.  Mars’  seasons were  like  earth’s  bu t   twice  a s  long. 
I t s  days were  same length  a s  earth’s.  (Smith, LA  Her-Exam, 6 /19 /69)  
S-I1  stage  for  ninth  Sa turn   V  launch  vehicle  was  successfully  test-fired 
at  MTF  for   almost s ix  minutes.  All  test  objectives  were  met.  (Marshall 
Star, 6 /25 / 69 ,2 )  
*  MSFC  announced  appointment  of  Saverio  F.  Morea,  former  manager  of 
F-1  and   J-2  engine  projects,  a s  manager  of  new  lunar  roving  vehicle 
project.  Small  manned  vehicle  would  weigh  400  lbs  and  would  be 
carried  on  board   LM  i n   1971  to  provide  lunar   surface  transportation 
for  two  astronauts,  hand  tools,  lunar  samples,  and  other  equipment. 
( MSFC  Release  69-150) 
June  21-26:  NASA  successfully  launched  174-lb  Explorer  XLI  ( IM P - G )  
Interplanetary  Monitoring  Platform  from  WTR  by  Thrust-Augmented 
Improved Thor-Delta  (DSV-3E)  booster  a t   1:48  am  PDT  during ma jor  
electric  power  failure.  Spacecraft  entered  nearly  polar  orbit  with 
110,722.5-mi  (178,191-km)  apogee,  213.1-mi  (343-km)  perigee,  4,906- 
min  period,  and   87’ 
inclination.  Primary  objectives  were  to  place 
spacecraft  into  orbit  with  apogee  of  a t   least  92,000  mi  (148,028  km )  
and  to  obtain  for  90  days  adequate  measurements  from  plasma  and 
energetic  particle  experiments for  continuation  and  extension of  studies 
of  environment  within  and   beyond  earth’s  magnetosphere  dur ing  
period  of  high  solar  activity.  Solar  proton  data  would  be  transmitted 
to MSC  as needed  to  support Apollo missions.  Explorer  XLI   carried  12  
number  ever  carried  by  IMP   spacecraft-pro- 
experiments-greatest 
vided  by  universities,  NASA  centers,  and   industry  to  measure  cosmic 
rays,  solar  plasmas,  and magnetic  fields in  interplanetary  space. 
Explorer  XL I   was  seventh in   series  of  10 IMP   spacecraft  planned  by 
X X X I I I  
NASA.  Two  of  six  previously  orbited  satellites-Explorer 
launched  July  1,  1966,  and   Explorer  X X X V  
(IMP-D) ,  
( IMP -E ) ,  
launched  July  19,  1967-were 
still  providing  scientific  data.  IMP   pro- 
gram  was  managed  by  GSFC  under  OSSA  direction.  (NASA   P ro j   Off; 
NASA  Release  69-89)  
June   21 :   Cancellation  of  MOL  program  had  left  USAF  with  $1  billion  in  
space  hardware  and  14 highly  trained  astronauts,  Ralph  Dighton  of 
Associated  Press  wrote.  Most  of  $1 billion  already  spent  on  program 
had  been  for  undisclosed  number  of  Titan  IIIM   boosters  and  satellites 
built  o r   on  order.  USAF  had   said  launch  facilities  would  be  finished  on 
schedule in   September because they would  have  to  be  paid  for  anyway. 
They  could  be  used  for   unmanned  spacecraft.  The  $1.3-million  MOL 
administration  building  a t   Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif.,  and   $1.6-million 
medical  and   training  structure  could  be  adapted  for  office  space.  MOL 
astronauts  had  been  offered  to  NASA  but  no  decision  had  yet  been 
reached.  Aerospace workers  in   seven  firms  had   been  h i t   by  MOL   can- 
cellation,  with  McDonnell  Douglas Corp.  most  affected.  I t   had  7,200 
employees  on  project.  (AP, W  S tar ,  6/21/69,  A5) 
0  Soviet  academician  Anatoly  A.  Blagonravov said  in   Moscow  interview: 
“Exploration  of  moon  and   planets  is   a  most  noble  task  and  our   gen- 
eration  can  rightly  be  proud  it  ha s   opened  the  space  era.  Any  scien- 
tific  achievement accomplished  in  any  country  in   the  long  run  becomes 
an   achievement of  world  science.  Space efforts  of  the  United  States  and 

185 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 
June  21 
the  USSR  sometimes complement one  another.”  ( UPI,  P Bu l l ,   6 /22 /69)  
NASA  was combining Apollo  11 spectacular with “bit  of  spectacular  lobby- 
ing,”  Washington  Evening  Star  said.  I t   had   invited  all  533  members 
of  House  and   Senate  to  fly  a t   NASA’s expense  to  witness  Apollo  11 
launch  from  Cape  Kennedy.  Total  bill  could  come  to  nearly  $28,000. 
(W  Stur,  6/21/69,  A3) 
June  22: NASA  had   raised  limit  on  amount  of  samples Apollo  11 crew  could 
br ing   back  from  moon,  Washington  Post  writer  Thomas  O’Toole  re- 
ported in  Los Angeles  T imes .  Instead  of  50  lbs of  samples originally  set 
as maximum,  astronauts would  be  permitted  to  collect  as much  a s  they 
up  to  about  100 lbs.  (LA  T imes ,  6/22/69) 
could  carry-probably 
0  Aerobee  150 M I   sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Natal,  Brazil, 
with VAM-20  booster  carr ied  Univ.  of  California  at  Berkeley  payload 
to  102.3-mi  (164.6-km)  altitude.  Objective  was  to  search  sky  for 
diffuse  and  point  x-ray  sources in  %- to  10-kev range  and   for  possible 
existence  of  soft  x-ray  galactic  corona  and  x-ray  emission from  Magel- 
lenic  clouds.  Rocket-first 
live  Aerobee  150   launched  from  ra i l  
launcher-functioned 
satisfactorily.  One  source  counter  failed  after 
one-third of  flight;  other  counter  operated  perfectly,  but  door  failed  to 
open.  Objective was  not  achieved,  but  some  data  on  x-ray sources were 
obtained.  (NASA   Rp t   SRL) 
William  Hines  in  Washington  Sunday  Star  said  June  10 cancellation  of 
USAF  MOL  program  would  eliminate  “wasteful,  ill-conceived  and   costly 
project  set  in   motion  four  years  ago  principally  to  still  the  clamoring 
of  aerospace  lobbyists  for  ‘military  presence  in   space,’  whatever  that 
might  mean.”  Longer  term  effect  would  be  “inevitable  blurring  of  a 
meaningless  and  arbitrary-but 
still  restrictive-line 
separating  U S .  
civilian  and military  space  activities.”  (W  S tar ,   6/22/69,  C4) 
June  23:  New   Yo r k   T imes   interview  of  M /G   Jewel1  C.  Maxwell  (U SA F ) ,  
Director  of  Supersonic  Transport  Development,  reflected  optimism 
about  SST’s  future  despite  fact  program  had  slipped  “two  quarters” 
while  Administration  deliberated  allocation  of  funds  for   prototype con- 
struction.  Gen.  Maxwell  said  program  currently  was  “marking  time” 
a t  cost of  $11 million monthly and  had  $90 million  to  $100 million left, 
but  he  had  no  doubts  U S .   would  push  ahead  with  construction.  Gen. 
Maxwell  was  leaving  project  to  become  Commander of  Armament  De- 
velopment  and  Test  Center  a t  Eglin  AFB,  Fla.  (Phelps,  N Y T ,   6/23/69, 
62 1 
June  24:  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos  CCLXXXV I I   from  Baikonur  into  orbit 
with  254-km  (157.8-mi)  apogee,  186-km  (115.6-mi)  perigee,  88.9-min 
period,  and   51.7’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  July  2.  ( GSFC  SSR, 
6/30/69;  7/15/69;  SBD,  6/25/69,  244;  W  Star,  6/24/69,  A l )  
House  passed  by  vote  of  388  to  6  H.R.  12307,  FY  1970  Independent 
Offices  and   HUD   appropriations  bill  which  provided  NASA  $3  billion 
for  R m ,   $53.233  million  for  new  facilities,  and  $643.750  million  for 
research  and   program  management-to 
total  $3.696  billion.  Bill  cut 
NSF  budget  request  by  $80  million  to  total  $418  million.  (Tex t ;   CR, 
6/24/69,  H5154-5;  W  Post,  6/27/69,  A4)  
Senate Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space Sciences  ordered  favorably 
reported  with  amendment  in   form  of  substitute  bill  H.R.  11271,  FY 
1970  NASA  authorization  of  $3.716  billion.  Committee  recommended 
$250.851  million  reduction  from  amount  authorized  by  House  [see 

186 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

June 24 

June  101,  adjusting  total  to  President’s  revised  budget-$45  million 
less  than  authorization  requested  in  h is   original budget.  Recommended 
authorization  would  provide  $3.020  billion  for   R&D,  $58.2  million  for 
construction  of  facilities,  and   $637.4  million  for   research  and  program 
management.  Recommendation  was  lowest  made  by  Committee  since 
1962-$435  million  less  than  i ts   FY  1969  recommendation.  (CR, 
6/24/69,  D543;  Committee  Rpt  91-282) 
With Apollo  11 launch “minus-23 days” MSFC Director,  Dr.  Wernher  von 
Braun,  visited  3,000-yr-old  temple  of  Apollo  a t   Delphi,  Greece.  After 
consultation  with  oracle,  Dr.  von  Braun  said,  “I am  convinced that  we 
w i l l   succeed  because  no  other  space  operation  was  ever  so  well  pre- 
pared  in  advance.”  Oracle, he  said, “was  ambiguous, a s   usual.”  (Time, 
7/4/69,  35;  AP,  W  Post,  6 /25 /69)  
0  MSFC  issued  RFPS on  eight-month  study  of  integration  of  Centaur  and 
Sa turn   S-IVB  stages  for  possible  use  for  future  unmanned  high- 
velocity  missions.  Proposals  for   study,  which  would  include  six launch 
vehicle configurations,  were  due  July  10.  ( MSFC  Release  69-153) 
Willy  Ley,  space  author  and   rocket  expert,  died  a t   age  62,  apparently 
from  a  heart  attack.  Ley-also 
been 
planning  consultant  to  NASA-had 
one  of  founders  of  German  Rocket  Society,  fellow  of  British  Inter- 
planetary  Society,  and   member  of  American  Institute  of  Aeronautical 
Science.  Among  his  last  published  books  were  Rockets7 Missiles  and  
Men  i n  Space  and   Watchers  uf  the  Skies.  (AP ,  W  Star,  6/25/69,  B5; 
NYT,  6 /25 /69 ,41 )  
June   25:  NASA  published  Lunar  Orbiter  I Preliminary  Results  (SP-197), 
including  assessment  of  lunar  terrain  and   results  of  secondary  experi- 
ments  in  selenodesy,  micrometeoroids,  and  radiation.  Launched  Aug. 
10, 1966, spacecraft  had  been  first  U S .  vehicle  to  orb i t  moon,  first  to 
obtain  detailed  photographic  coverage  of  near  and  fa r   sides  of  moon, 
and   first  to  photograph  ear th   from  moon’s  vicinity.  Photos  showed 
fractured  and   faulted  lunar  crust  with  mass-wasting where  large  boul- 
ders  had  tumbled  into  craters.  Moon  appeared  to  have  been  highly 
dynamic  and  affected  by  volcanic  activity,  but  despite  overall  rough- 
ness,  some  photos  showed  regions  of  relative  smoothness.  Surface  of 
fa r   side  appeared  much  rougher  than  near  side  with  higher  terra-to- 
mare  ratio.  Meteoroid  sensors  registered  no  impacts  during  mission, 
indicating  meteor  activity  near  moon  w a s   no  greater  than  tha t   near 
earth. Radiation  dose ra te   dur ing   transit  to moon  corresponded  to  that 
produced  by  galactic  cosmic  rays,  but  dose  rates  as  high  as  70  mrad 
per  h r   and   7  rad   per  h r   were  experienced during  solar  flares  Aug.  26  
and   Sept.  2,  1966.  (Tex t)  
US. and  Spain  exchanged notes  in  Madrid  confirming  10-yr extension- 
to  Jan.  29,  1 9 8 G o f   1964 agreement  establishing  NASA  space  tracking 
and  acquisition  facility  near  Madrid.  Since  June  1965,  facility  had 
supported  all  Surveyor  and   Lunar  Orbiter  flights  to  moon,  four  Mar- 
iner  flights to Mars and  Venus,  four Pioneer  interplanetary  probes,  and 
all manned  Apollo  flights.  It  would  support  Apollo  11 and   passage  of 
Mariners  V I   and   VZZ  near  Mars  during  sununer;  210-ft-dia  parabolic 
antenna  for  tracking  and  communication in   interplanetary  space  would 
be  built  dur ing  next  three  years.  (NASA Release  69-97) 
NASA  announced  appointment  of  Astronaut  James  A.  McDivitt  as  Man- 
ager for Lunar Landing Operations in MSC’S  Apollo Spacecraft Program 

9 

187  

June  25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Office.  McDivitt,  who  would  remain  in   USAF,  would  be  responsible  for 
planning  lunar  landing  missions subsequent  to  first  landing  and  would 
no  longer  be  candidate  for  space  flight  crew  assignments.  (NASA   Re- 
lease 69-96) 
0  At  Salzburg  news  conference preceding  celebration  of  h is   75th  birthday, 
German  rocketry  pioneer  Prof.  Hermann  Oberth  proposed  that  man 
extract  usable  raw  materials  from  moon  and   store  them  suspended  in 
gravity-free  zone  between  moon  and  earth.  Materials  could  then  be 
retrieved  from  area  and   brought  to  earth.  He  suggested  erection  of 
giant  concave  “space  mirrors”  to  gather  celestial  light  and   reflect  i t   on 
ear th   as  heat  to  melt  polar  caps  and  improve  earth’s  climate.  He  pre- 
dicted  development  of  electrically  propelled  spacecraft  and   electromag- 
netic  catapults  to  launch  spacecraft  without  consuming  fuel.  During 
celebration,  sponsored by  Hermann  Oberth  Society of  Nuremberg,  Dr. 
Wernher  von  Braun,  MSFC   Director,  said  Oberth’s  ideas  on  rocketry 
published  in   1923  remained  valid  to  date.  (NYT,  6/29/69,  3 )  
FAA  announced i t  had  proposed rule  establishing  “area  navigation  routes” 
to  relieve  a ir   congestion.  Multiple  flight  paths  had  been  made  possible 
by  increasing  availability  of  computerized a irborne   navigation  e q u i p  
ment.  (FAA   Release  69-70) 
June  26:  Javelin  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Natal,  Brazil, 
carried  Southwest Center for Advanced  Studies experiment to  481.6-mi 
(775-km)  altitude  to   study  ionosphere-protonosphere transition  region 
by  measuring  vertical  profiles  of  ionospheric  parameters.  Rocket  and 
instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  Excellent  data  on  electron  tem- 
perature,  ion  temperature,  and  ion  composition were  obtained.  (NA SA  
Rpt  SRL) 
M /G   Edmund  F.  O’Connor,  Director  of  Program  Management  at  MSFC, 
would  return  to  duty  with  USAF  after  Apollo  11 mission,  MSFC  Deputy 
Director,  Technical, Dr. Eberhard  F. M.  Rees,  announced. Maj.  O’Con- 
nor  would  be  replaced  by  Lee  B.  James, Manager  of  Sa turn   Program 
Office.  ( MSFC  Release  69-155) 
JPL   Director,  Dr.  William  H.  Pickering,  announced  appointment  of  Dr. 
Clarence  R .   Gates  as  manager  of  JPL’S  newly  established  Mission 
Analysis Div. New  division  would  incorporate Systems Analysis section, 
Systems Analysis Research section,  and  J P L   Navigation Program  which 
Dr.  Gates had  headed  since  1968.  ( JPL  Release  524) 
Sa turn  V  1st stage  (S-IC-11) 
caught  on  fire  in   test  stand  a t  Mississippi 
Test  Facility  dur ing   acceptance  test,  scheduled  to  last  125   secs.  Test 
was  terminated  automatically after  96  secs  when  temperature  on  No.  3 
engine turbopump  exceeded  limit.  F ire  was  extinguished by  fire-control 
system  built  into  test  stand  after  burning  for   over  half  hour.  (MSFC  
Release  69-156) 
0  NAS  and  NAE   formed  joint  committee  chaired  by  Gen.  Bernard  A. 
Schriever  ( USAF,  Ret.)  to  advise  HUD   on  scientific and  technical  aspects 
of  “Operation  Breakthrough”--HuD 
program  to  develop  low-cost, 
mass-produced  housing-and 
to  encourage  broad  industrial  and   pro- 
News  Rp t ,   8-9/69, 
fessional  participation  in   program.  ( NAS-NRC-NAE 
1; NAS  P IO )  
Sealab  I11  medical  officer  Cdr.  Pau l   G.  Linweaver  said  extreme  cold- 
result  of  breathing  helium  gas  under  pressure-was  ma jor   contributor 

188 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
J u n e  26 
to  Feb.  1 7  death  of  Aquanaut Berry L.  Cannon i n  USN’S  Man-in-the-Sea 
project.  Autopsy  reports  had   indicated  Cannon  had  been  asphyxiated 
by  carbon  dioxide  from  faulty  breathing  apparatus.  Linweaver  said 
Cannon  was  so  cold  he  did  not  know  anything  was  wrong  with 
apparatus.  (AP,  N Y T ,  6/27/69,  17 )  
launched  Cosmos  CCLXXXV I I I   in to   orb i t   with  270-km 
June  27:  U.S.S.R. 
(167.7-mi)  apogee,  199-km  (123.7-mi)  perigee,  89.2-min  period,  and 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  July  5.  ( GSFC  SSR,  6/30/69; 
51.7’ 
7/15/69) 
Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  NASA  Wallops  S ta-  
tion  carried  Univ.  of  Colorado  experiment  to   65.9-mi  (106-km)  alti- 
tude  to  measure  density  of  hydroxyl  radical  between  43.5-  and   62.1-mi 
( 70- and  100-km)  altitudes,  using  scanning uv monochroniater. Rocket 
and   instruments  performed  satisfactorily  and   all  experimental  ob jec- 
tives were  achieved.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
*  In   Science,  JPL   scientist  Dr.  Leonard  D.  Jaffe  sa id   despite  successful 
landing  of  seven  unmanned  spacecraft  on  moon  controversy  over  den- 
sity  of  lunar  surface  material  continued.  Further  analysis  of  data 
showed  relation  of  density  of  lunar   surface  layer  to  depth  was  best 
determined  from  spacecraft  measurements of  bearing  capacity  as  func- 
tion  of  depth.  Comparison  of  these  values  with  laboratory  measure- 
ments  of  bearing  capacity  of  low-cohesion  particulate  materials  as  a 
function  of  percentage  of  solid  indicated  bulk  density  at  lunar  surface 
was  approximately 1.1 g r  per  cc  at  depth  of  5 cm.  (Sc ience ,  6/27/69, 
1514-6) 
NASA  announced  selection  of  Collins  Radio  Co.  to  provide  two  210-ft 
space  communications  antennas  and  supporting  concrete  pedestals  for 
NASA  Deep  Space  Network  stations  near  Canberra,  Australia,  and  
Madrid,  Spain.  (NASA   Release  69-98) 
*  U.S.,  U.S.S.R.,  and  26  other  nations  agreed  dur ing   Geneva  meeting  of 
subcommittee of  Committee on  Peaceful Uses  of  Outer  Space that  inter- 
national  law,  rather  than  national  law ,   should  determine  liability  for 
damage  caused  by  spacecraft.  Question  of  whether  to  fix  ceiling  on 
damage  claims remained  unanswered.  (Reuters,  N Y T ,  6/29/69,  2 )  
Philip  M.  Boffey  in   Science  sa id   nomination  by  President  Nixon  of 
William  D.  McElroy  to  head  NSF  [see  June   191  “was  particularly  in- 
teresting  because  i t   seemed  to  carry   out  a  pledge  made  by  Nixon  on 
28  April  that  politics  would  play  no  par t   in   selection  of  a  new  NSF  
director.”  Choice  had  been  “greeted with  enthusiastic  praise  and  a  sign 
of  relief  by  leaders  of  the  scientific  community,”  since  i t   had  been 
difficult  to  find  scientist  willing  to  take  the  $42,500-a-year  post. 
(Sc ience ,  6/27/69,  1504-6) 
0  AEC   announced  it  had  implanted  two  compact,  10-w,  nuclear-power gen- 
erators  in   Pacific  Ocean  off  San   Clemente  Island,  Calif.,  in   depths  of 
60   and   130 f t   to  subject  devices  to  marine  growth  in   one-  to  two-year 
test  to  determine  their  long-term behavior  in   ocean environment. Deep- 
water  testing  would  follow  in   AEG program  to  develop  second  genera- 
tion  of  highly  reliable,  long-endurance,  economic,  radioisotope-power 
source  for   terrestrial  and   marine  applications.  ( AEC   Release  M-152) 
June  28:  NASA’s Biosatellite  Z I I   ( Biosatellite-D)  primate  experiment  was 
successfully  launched  from  ETR  a t   11:16  pm  EDT  by  two-stage,  Long- 

189 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 
June  28 
Tank,  Thrust-Augmented  Thor-Delta  ( DSV-3N)  booster  into  orb i t  
with  245.1-mi  (394.4-km)  apogee,  224.4-mi  (361.1-km)  perigee,  92.1- 
min  period,  and   33.6”  inclination. 
The  1,535-1b  spacecraft  carried  15-lb  male  pigtail  monkey  named 
Bonny  in  two-gas  atmosphere  similar  to  earth’s  (20%   oxygen  and 
80%  nitrogen) -being 
used  for   first  time-with 
sea-level  pressure 
(14.7  psi)  and   75°F  temperature.  Pr imary   objective  was  to  provide 
suitable  physiological  environment  for  instrumented  monkey  and  
measure  functioning  of  central  nervous  system  or  cardiovascular  and  
metabolic  systems.  Secondary  objective  was  to  evaluate  monkey’s  per- 
formance in  orbit.  Monkey was  carefully  instrumented  so that  scientists 
could  monitor  wave  patterns  from  10  brain  areas  fo r   first  detailed 
studies  of  brain  activity  in  orbit  ever  made.  Scientists  would  also 
record  heart  action  and   respiration,  monitor  circulatory  and   urinary 
systems,  and  observe performance  on  two  behavioral  tasks-short-term 
memory  and  eye-hand  coordination.  Some  80%  of  the  experimental 
data  would  be  radioed  to  ear th   by  high-speed  telemetry  a t   rate  of 
22,4$00 bps  18-26  times per  day.  Spacecraft would  be  retrieved  in  mid- 
a i r   or  off  ocean  surface  after  reentry.  Monkey  would  be  flown  to 
Hawaii  laboratories,  where  scientists  would  examine  him  for  changes 
i n  bone  density,  muscle  tone,  blood  cell mass,  fluid balance,  and   repro- 
ductive  system.  [See  July  7-8.1 
Biosatellite  111  was  th ird   and   last  spacecraft  in  Biosatellite  series. 
Riosatellite  I  (launched  Dec.  14,  1966)   had  failed  to  deorbit  on  com- 
mand  after  three  days  in   orbit  because  of  retrorocket  system  failure 
and had  not  been  recovered. Biosatellite  11, successfully  launched  Sept. 
7,  1967,  and  recovered  Sept.  9,  1967,  had  demonstrated  that  plants 
required  gravity  to maintain  orientation  and  showed  effect  of  radiation 
on  living  organisms.  Biosatellite  project  was  managed  by  ARC  under 
OSSA  direction.  (NASA   P ro j   Off; NASA  Release  69-79) 
U.K.’s  three-stage  Black  Arrow  booster  exploded  50  secs  after  launch 
from Woomera Rocket Range  dur ing   first  full-scale test.  (UP I ,   W  S tar ,  
6/28/69,  A3 )  
*  White  House  announced  President  Nixon  would  observe  Apollo  11 
splashdown and   recovery  aboard  U.S.S.  Hornet  and   proceed  to   Philip- 
pines,  Indonesia,  Thailand,  India,  and  Pakistan.  He   would  meet  with 
Asian leaders  “to  reemphasize h is  longstanding concern with  peace  and  
progress  in  Asia.”  Announcement  was  released  in  New  York  City. 
(PD, 7 /7 /69 ,926 )  
June  29:  AEC’S  SNAP-3A  nuclear  generator,  launched  on  board  USN’S 
Transit  IV-A  navigational  satellite  June  29,  1961,  completed  eight 
years  in   orbit-three  years longer  than  five-year design  lifetime-after 
circling  ear th  40,530  times  and  traveling  more  than  1 billion  mi.  F irs t  
nuclear  generator  to  operate  in  space,  5-in-dia, 5Y2-in-high SNAP-3A 
converted heat  given  off  by  plutonium  directly  into 2.7  w of  electricity. 
Five SNAP  (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power)  generators had   been 
launched  to  date,  including  two  on  NASA’s  Nimbus  111  (launched April 
14) .  Atomic-fueled  generator  would  be  placed  on  lunar   surface  by 
Apollo  12   astronauts  to  power  instrument  package. 
(AEC   Release 
M-150) 
New   Yo rk  Times editorial said:  “The Administration’s action  in   ordering 
production  started  on  MIRV  multiple  warhead  missiles  before  opening 

190 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

June  29 

negotiations  for   a  moratorium  with  Moscow  touches the  most  sensitive 
point  in   the  projected  missile-curb  talks.  Equally  grave  is  the  manner 
in   which  the  A i r   Force  quietly  awarded  the  $88-million  contract  to 
General Electric,  on  the  day President  Nixon  spoke favorably  of  propo- 
sals  for  a  Soviet-American moratorium  on   MIRV  flight  testing  to   head 
off  production  and  deployment of  the  weapon  by  either  side.  Given  this 
situation,  the  country  is  entitled  to  an   explanation  from  the  President 
of  his  intentions  in  the  Soviet-American missile-control  talks,  which  he 
has   personally held  up  for more   than  seven months.”  (NYT ,   6/29/69, 
10) 
June  30:   At  small  White  House  dinner,  ApoZZo  10  Astronauts  Thomas  P. 
Stafford,  John  W. Young,  and   Eugene  A.  Cernan  presented  President 
Nixon  and   Vice  President  Agnew  with  four  wrinkled  flags  which  had 
been  carried  aboard  spacecraft  during mission.  Stafford  told  President, 
“.  . . these  flags  have  been  to  the  moon  and  31  times  around  i t ,   so 
we  thought  you’d  like  to  have  them  just  the  way  we  brought  them 
back.  That’s  why  we  didn’t  press  out  the  wrinkles  when  we   had  them 
framed.”  (Dean, W  Star,  7/1/69,  D1 )  
Intelsat  I  (Ea r ly   B i rd )   comsat,  which  had  been  retired  in   orbit  during 
December  1968, had  been  reactivated  and  was  working  with  Intelsat-11 
F-3  to  provide  communications between  North  America,  Europe,  and  
Latin  America,  ComSatCorp  announced.  Reactivation  would  compen- 
sate for   failure  of  In te lsa t-I l l   F-2,  which malfunctioned  when  mechan- 
ically  despun antenna  locked.  (ComSatCorp Release  69-37) 
0  Univ.  of  Chicago  scientist  Anthony Turkevich  had  found  by  analysis  of 
data  from  three  Surveyor  spacecraft  that  rocks  on  lunar  surface  con- 
tained  sufficient  oxygen  to  maintain  life  without  supplemental sources, 
UPI  reported.  In  interview  Turkevich  had  said  that,  with  nuclear  o r  
solar  power  sources,  oxygen  extraction  from moon might  cost  less  than 
shipping  oxygen  supplies  to  moon  from  earth.  Also,  there  was  little 
danger  that  moon  rocks  and   dust  carried  into  LM  by  returning  astro- 
nauts  would  create  explosion  hazard  because  of  oxygen  lack.  He  had 
been  unable  to  determine  whether  moon  had  sufficient  hydrogen  to 
allow  chemical  creation  of  water  by  future  colonists  or  valuable min- 
erals in  commercially exploitable  quantities  and  had  found  no  evidence 
of  fossil  fuel  supplies.  (W  S tar ,   6/30/69,  A5 )  
USAF  announced  award  of  $718,009  increment  to   $1,177,125  cost-plus- 
incentive  contract  with  Avco  Corp.  for   design,  fabrication,  test,  and 
support  through  orbital  infancy  of  satellite  fo r   investigation  of  funda- 
mental processes  of  magnetic storms.  (DOD  Release 554-69) 
0  L/G I r a  C.  Eaker  ( USAF,  Ret.)  criticized MOL cancellation in  Detroit News: 
Although 80% of  U S .   space budget  had  been  devoted  to  peaceful pur-  
poses  in   space,  “it  has   been  recognized  generally  that  prudence  dic- 
tated  tha t   we  should  ultimately  possess  the  capability  of  intercepting, 
inspecting  and,  if  need  be,  destroying  hostile  weapons  in  space.  . . . 
Cancellation  of  the  MOL   project  concedes  to  the  Russians  control  of 
space.  After  about  1972 the  Russians will  have  the  capability  of  over- 
hauling  and  destroying  our  reconnaissance satellites,  and  they  will  also 
be capable of  placing weapons  in   space which  we   can  neither  intercept, 
identify  nor   disarm.”  (D e t r o i t  News, 6/30/69) 
I n  Av ia t ion   Week  Robert  Hotz wrote:  “There  need  be   no  tears  shed  over 
the  passing of  the  U S .  Air  Force manned  orbiting laboratory  ( M O L )  .” 
191 

Junc  30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Program   “has  been  so  stretched  out  by  funding  cuts  and   low  keyed 
management  tha t   its  technology  has   become  obsolete  and   its  costs 
astronomical.  I t   is  a  classic  example  of  what  happens  to   a  ma jor  
technical  development  program  that  is not  permitted  to  pursue  i ts  goals 
a t   the  maximum  pace  possible.  I n  contrast,  the  ICBM  development  and  
Apollo  lunar  landing  programs  have  proved  what  can  be  achieved  in  
a  relatively  shor t   period  a t   relatively  economical  funding.”  ( A v   JV Ic ,  
6 /30 /69)  
During  June:  NASA’s plans  fo r   two  three-planet  Grand  Tours-8- 
to  11-yr  
described  by  JPL   scientist  James  E. 
missions  to  outer  planets-were 
Long  in   Astronautics  and  Aeronautics.  Envisioning  1,200-lb spacecraft 
launched  by  Titan-Centaur,  Long  described  missions  tha t   had  been 
identified  and  analyzed:  four-planet  missions,  including  Jupiter,  Sat- 
urn,  Uranus,  and   Neptune,  from  1976  to  1979   (earth-launch  da te s ) ,  
with  1977  and   1978  giving  best  combination  of  closest-approach  alti- 
tude,  flight  time,  and   launch  energy;  three-planet  missions  to  Jupiter, 
Sa turn ,   and  Pluto  from  1976 to  1979,  with  1977 and   1978 preferred ;  
and   three-planet  missions  to  Jupiter,  Uranus,  and   Neptune  from  1977 
to  1980. Long  said,  “The  fortuitous concurrence  of  mission  technology 
and   experience  suitable  for   the  challenges  of  missions  to  the  outer 
planets,  with  a  unique  outer-planet  alignment  in   the  1976-80  period, 
should  make  exploration  of  these  planets,  as  a  class,  a  high-priority 
candidate  for  program  support.”  ( A & A ,   6/69,  32 -47 ;   NASA   Release 
69 -84 )  
Laser  range-finding  equipment  was  installed  at  AFCRL’S  Lunar  Laser 
Observatory  near  Tucson,  Ariz.  Constructed  largely  with  NASA  funding, 
Observatory  was  built  specifically  f o r   lunar  laser-ranging  experiments. 
I  OAR   Research  Rev iew ,   3-4 /70 ,   31) 
President  Nixon’s  Space  Task  Group  had  established  that  less  expensive 
space  operations  i n   fu ture  depended  on  NASA  and   USAF  development  of 
lower  cost  boosters,  J.  S. Butz, Jr.,  said in  A ir   Force  and  Space  Digest. 
Jo in t   effort  on  booster  selection  would  be  made  within  understanding 
signed by  Dr.  Thomas Q. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  and  Dr.  Robert C .  
Seamans,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force.  Two  major  complicating 
factors  existed:  “F irs t   NASA   and  the  Air  Force  must  overhaul  their 
bu r e au c r a~ i e s . ’~  Second  was  “requirement  for  a  compromise  between 
military  and   civil  needs.”  While  USAF  needed  vehicle  which  could  be 
launched  quickly  in   large  numbers  and   carry   sufficient  fuel  for   ex- 
tensive  space  maneuvers,  NASA  wanted  larger  vehicle  to   carry   more 
people  and   large  cargo  volume.  More  difficult  would  be  choice  of  re- 
entry  vehicle.  Both  NASA  and   USAF  wanted  winged  configuration  for 
operational  flexibility  and  airliner-style  landings,  but  development  costs 
would  be  high.  ( A F / S D ,  6/69,79-81) 
0  Ku r i   Stehling  reviewed  Space  Age  Management  by  former  NASA   Admin- 
is tra tor   James  E.  Webb  in   AIAA  Astronautics  & Aeronautics:  “Despite 
the  bumpy  course  of  NASA’s history-technically, 
fiscally,  and   mana- 
gerially;  despite  Webb’s  motherhood  ways,  as  reflected  in   this  book; 
and   particularly  despite  the  Johnson  Administration’s  retrenchment  of 
the  space  program  and   our   sudden  awareness  of  the  backstage  noises 
i n   our  society  which  have  moved  up  fron t   so  discordantly  ( i t   would 
have  taken  a  superhuman  individual  to  have  foreseen  these)-if  we 
see  a  manned  lunar   landing  next  month  w e   will  owe   i t   in  no   small 

192 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Dur ing   J u n e  

measure  to  the   managerial  role  played  by  James  Webb  and   his  asso- 
ciates.  And  i n  assessing  the  event,  the historian  will  be  forced  to  try  to 
make  sense  of  this  book.”  ( A& A ,  6/69,  74)  
Commentary  i n   West  Berlin’s  independent  Tagesspiegel:  “Some  people 
take  off  for   the  moon  while  others  try   to  learn  to   operate  a  fa rm  
tractor.  Our  culture  will  depend  on  mastering  this  schizophrenic  s i tua-  
tion.”  (A t la s ,  7/69,  16 )  
Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  released  1969  Aerospace  Facts  and  Figures. 
During  1968 industry  sales  reached  $29.5  billion,  up  8.1% over  1967, 
with  civil  transport  aircraft  accounting  for   ma jor   share.  These  sales 
were  expected  to   decline  in   1969 when  current  models were  phased  out 
before  third-generation  je t   transports  were  delivered  in   substantial 
quantities.  Total  industry  sales were expected  to   decline to  $28.7 billion 
in   1969 bu t   1968 backlog  for   60 ma jor   companies  was  $31  billion- 
approximately  2%  times  that  in   1960. 
Overall  space  program  expenditures  during  FY  1969 were  estimated 
$6.3 billion-$4.1 
billion  for  NASA,  $2.1  billion  for   DOD,  $117  million 
for  AEC,  and   $34  million  for   other  agencies.  Space  expenditures  de- 
clined  approximately  $300  million  from  1967.  Aerospace  R&D,  includ- 
ing  NASA’s,  reached  $8  billion.  (Tex t)  
NSF  published  Scientific  and  Technical  Personnel  in   the  Federal  Govern- 
(NSF   69-26).  Professional  scientific  and  technical  per- 
ment,  1967 
sonnel  in   Federal  Government  numbered  204,200  in   October  1967- 
5%  increase  over  October  1966.  Engineers,  numbering  81,200,  were 
largest  of  three  ma jor   groups-scientists, 
engineers,  and   health  pro- 
40%  of  1967  total.  DOD  continued  as   major 
fessionals-comprising 
Government  employer,  with  76,900  scientific  and   technical  employees, 
of  uh ich   9392  were  engineers  and   scientists.  .(Text) 

193 

July  1969 

July  1: Apollo 8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  and  family  flew  from  New  York 
for   nine-day  tour  of  U.S.S.R.  Institute  for  Soviet-American  Relations 
in   Moscow  had   extended  invitation  through  Soviet  Embassy  in   Wash- 
ington,  D.C.  Itinerary  included  MOSCOW, Leningrad,  Novosibirsk,  and  
Crimea.  ( W  Post,  7/1/69,  A15;  AP,  W  Star,  7/1/69,  A4) 
Preliminary  investigation  had   revealed  leak  in   small  fuel  line  on  Sa turn  
V  1st  stage  (S-IC-11)  No.  3  engine  had   caused  June  26  fire,  MSFC  
announced.  Board  had  been  convened  to  conduct  fur ther  investigations 
and   recommend  preventive  measures.  Stage’s  No.  3  and   No.  5 engines 
would  be  replaced;  other  three  engines  received  minor  damage  and  
would  be  repaired  i n   place.  Accident  would  not  affect  launch  prepara- 
tions  for   Apollo  11 mission;  inspection  of  Apollo  11  vehicle  SA-506 
had  confirmed  tha t   its high-pressure  fuel  lines  were  i n   good  condition. 
MSFC  Release  69-156) 
0  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  consolidated  its  Rocketdyne  Div.  and 
Atomics  International  Div.  into  new  Power  Systems  Divs.  headed  by 
Jay  D.  Wethe,  Vice  President  of  Aerospace  and   Systems  Group.  (NAR 
Release  N-14) 
*  U.K.  Defence  Ministry  said  i t   had  transferred  its  nuclear  strike  force 
from   delta-wing  bombers  to  Polaris  submarines.  Seven  eventually 
would  be  brought  into  service.  (Reuters,  B  Sun,  7/2/69,  A2) 
July  2:  Preliminary  countdown  demonstration  test  (CDDT )  
for   July  16 
Apollo  11  launch  was  successfully  completed  a t   KSC .   Except  for  3-hr 
18-min  hold  dur ing   which  technicians  repaired  leaky  fuel  valve,  5%- 
day   test  had  run   smoothly.  (AP ,  B  Sun,  7/3/69,  A4) 
0  Unofficial Communist  sources sa id  U.S.S.R.  would  launch  Luna  spacecraft 
July  10, which  would  attempt  to   scoop  up  lunar   sample  and  re turn   i t  
to  earth, Associated  Press  reported.  Sources  said  launch  would  be  third 
attempt  to  conduct  successful mission;  first  had  reportedly  exploded  on 
launch  pad  a t   Baikonur  in   early  April,  and   second  had  exploded  in 
flight  June  14, when  2nd   s tage   ignited.  One  source  said  Soviet  space 
officials were  “very  disturbed  over  the  success  of  the  American  Apollo 
program.  Losing  the  moon  race   will  be  a  terrible  blow  to  them.” 
( B  Sun,  7/3/69,  A l )  
0  Cosmonauts Gherman  S.  Titov,  Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov,  and  Georgy  T. 
Beregovy  were  among  Soviet  officials  who  met  Astronaut  Frank  Bor- 
man  and   family  on  arr iva l   a t  Moscow’s  Sheremetyevo  Airport  a t   s tar t  
of  nine-day  U.S.S.R.  visit.  Asked  if  Soviet  cosmonaut  might  visit  US . ,  
Borman  said,  “I’m  sure   that  will  be  discussed.  Cooperation  in  space 
activities  is an  important  aspect  of  the space program.”  Bormans  break- 
fasted  in   Moscow  and  returned  to  a irpor t   for  flight  to  Leningrad. 
Schedule  called  for  visit  to  Zvezdny  Gorodok-Star  City-where 
cos- 
monauts  lived  and  to  space communications  center  i n  Crimea;  nothing 

195 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
July  2 
i n   program  indicated  visit  to  U.S.S.R.  launching  center  a t  Baikonur  in  
Kazakhstan.  (AP, W  S tar ,  7/2/69,  A14) 
Time-Life,  Inc.,  would  pay  minimum  of  $400,000  for   exclusive  book 
r igh ts  of  lunar  landing  story  to  the  combine  established  by  NASA  astro- 
nauts  in   1959, Don  Kirkman  said  in   Washington Daily  News.  Money 
would  be  split  equally  into  60  shares  for   52  active  astronauts  and  
widows  of  8 deceased.  ( W  News,  7/2/69,  7 )  
*  NASA  announced  award  to Bendix  Field  Engineering  Corp.  of  $30 million, 
one-year,  cost-plus-award-fee  contract  extension  for  operation  and  
maintenance  of  ma jor  portion  of  Manned  Space Flight  Network.  Exten- 
sion  was  th ird   exercised  under  option  and   brought  total  funding  to 
$139,215,832.  (NASA   Release  69-100) 
July  3:  European  Launcher  Development  Organization  ( ELDO)   attempt  to  
place  Italian  ELDO  F-8  spacecraft  in to   polar  orb i t   from  Woomera 
Rocket  Range  failed  when  West  German  3rd  stage  of  Europa  booster 
malfunctioned.  U.K.  1st  stage  and   French  2nd  stage  performed  satis- 
factorily.  ( S B D ,  7/16/69,  14; AP,  W S tar ,   7/3/69,  A3;  NASA  In t  Aff) 
*  Apollo  11 booster,  spacecraft,  and  Astronauts  Neil A.  Armstrong,  Michael 
Collins,  and  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  completed  final  countdown  rehearsal 
test.  Astronauts  achieved  simulated  liftoff  a t   9:32  am  EDT-eXaCt 
time 
of  scheduled  July  16 launch.  Final  countdown  for   manned  lunar   land- 
ing  mission  would  begin  July  10.  (AP ,  B  Sun,  7/4/69,  A10) 
*  Apollo  11  astronauts  would  leave  three  items  on  lunar   surface  to  com- 
memorate  landing,  NASA  announced.  Silicon  disc,  11/2-in-diaY would 
carry   statements  by  Presidents  Eisenhower,  Kennedy,  Johnson,  and  
Nixon;  messages  of  goodwill  from  leaders  of  73  countries;  list  of 
leaders  of  Congress  and   members  of  four  congressional  committees 
responsible  for   NASA  legislation;  and  names  of  NASA’s top  management, 
past  and   present.  Statements,  messages,  and   names  had  been  etched  on 
disc  by  process  used  to   make  microminiature  electronic  circuits.  Each 
message  had  been  reduced  200  times,  to  barely  visible  dot. 
Three- by  five-foot  nylon  American  flag  with  tubing  along  top  edge 
would  be  erected  on  eight-foot  aluminum  staff  on   airless  moon.  Two 
other  U S .   flags  and   flags  from  136  nations  and   50  U S .   states  would 
be  carr ied   to  moon  and   returned  to  earth.  Plaque  left  on   LM  descent 
stage  would  bear  images  of  two  hemispheres  of  ear th   and   inscription 
“Here  men  from  the  planet  ear th   first  set  foot  upon  the  moon  July 
1969, A.D.  We  came  in   peace  for  all mankind.”  It  would  bear  names 
of  Apollo  11  crew-Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin, 
Jr.,  and  Michael Collins-and  President  Nixon.  (NASA   Releases 69-83E, 
69-83F,  69-83H)  
At  Leningrad  news  conference  dur ing   U.S.S.R. 
tour,  Astronaut  Frank  
Borman  said he   hoped  U S .   and   Soviet  spacemen  would  fly  together  in  
jo in t   mission  by  mid-1970s.  (Reuters,  W   Post,  7/4/69,  A3) 
*  Editorial  i n   Washington Post  entitled  “Our  Man  on  the Moon”  criticized 
White  House  decision  to  leave  on  moon  plaque  on  Apollo  11   LM  de- 
scent  stage with  signature  of  President  Nixon:  “The  proposed  plaque 
would  state tha t   ‘we  came  in  peace  for   all  mankind.’  Tha t  message,  to- 
gether  with  the  names  of  the  three  brave  men  who  made  the  voyage 
would  seem to  us  to  be  enough.”  Editorial erroneously  cited April  1968 
article  by  NASA  Historian  Eugene  M.  Emme,  “Historical  Perspectives 
on   Apollo,”  saying  tha t   nowhere  did  Mr.  Nixon’s  name  appear.  Name 

196 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  3 

did  appear  with  reference  to  post-Sputnik statements  in   October  1957 
and  to  promises  of  lunar   landing  by  1971  in  1960 election  campaign. 
(W Post,  7/3/69,  A14;  Journ  of  Spacecraft  and  Rockets,  4/68, 
369-81) 
*  Apollo  11 might  signal  end   to  KSC  area’s  economic  boom,  Wa l l   Street 
Journal  said.  NASA  had   announced  slack  in   Apollo  launchings  and   cu t  
in  KSC  employment  from  23,500  to  18,500  persons.  Brevard  County 
(s i te   of  KSC)  housing  construction  had  fallen  some  40%,  from  3,438 
units  in  1967 to  2,080  in   1968, and was  currently  down  another  4<0%. 
(Prugh ,   WSJ ,  7 /3 /69 ,28 )  
Message from President  Nixon  was  read  a t  opening of  summer session  of 
18-nation Disarmament  Committee  in   Geneva:  “.  . . draf t   agreements 
have  been  submitted  by  the  United  States  and   by  the  Soviet Union  to 
prevent  an  arms  race  on  the  seabeds.  Although  differences  exist,  it 
should  not  prove  beyond  our   ability  to  find  common  ground  so   that  a 
realistic  agreement  may  be  achieved  that  enhances  the  security  of  all 
countries.  . . . Our  goal should  be  to  present  a  sound  seabed arms  con- 
trol  measure  to  the  24th  General  Assembly  of  the  United  Nations.” 
(PD,  7/7/69,  929-30) 
At  Par is   press  conference  Sud-Aviation  President  Henri  Ziegler  denied 
reports  that  France  was  dropping  Concorde supersonic  transport  pro j -  
ect  for  economic  reasons.  Milan  aerodynamic  system  developed  for 
Mirage  supersonic  fighter-bomber  was  being  tested  on  French  proto- 
type.  It  consisted  of  two  small nose wings  which  shortened  takeoff  and  
landing  runs   and   retracted  in   f i g h t   to  reduce  resistance.  (NYT ,  
7/5/69,  28)  
Ju ly   4:  NASA  officials  ordered  technicians  to  repaint  Sa turn   V  3rd   stage 
(S-IVB)  after  they  discovered old  coating had  begun  to  peel.  Thermal 
paint  would  help  protect  super-cold  hydrogen  fuels  from  sun’s  heat. 
Repainting  of  stage,  scheduled  to  boost  manned  Apollo  11  spacecraft 
toward  moon  July  16,  would  not  affect  launch  date.  (AP,  W  S tar ,  
7/5/69,  A13) 
At U.S.  Embassy Independence Day  Par ty  in  Moscow  Apo l lo  8 Astronaut 
Frank  Borman  signed  autographs with  Cosmonauts Gherman  S.  Titov, 
Georgy T.  Beregovoy,  and  Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov. Among  1,000 per- 
sons  attending  reception  given  by  U S .   Ambassador  Jacob  D.  Beam 
were Vasily  V.  Kuznetsov,  U.S.S.R.  First  Deputy Foreign Minister,  and 
Mikhail  P.  Georgadze,  Secretary  of  the  Presidium  of  the  Supreme 
Soviet.  They  were  highest  ranking  Soviet  officials  to  attend  annual 
July  4  reception  since  1964  attendance  of  Nikita  S.  Khrushchev  a s  
head  of  government and  Communist Party.  (Clarity,  NYT,  7 /5 /69 ,   28 ;  
AP,  B  Sun,  7/5/69,  A2) 
Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge, Presidential  Science Adviser,  addressed  Independ- 
ence  Day  celebration  a t   Dearborn,  Mich.:  “For  untold  millions  of 
years  the  human  animal  was  chained  to  the  earth.  Sixty  years  ago  he 
found  a  way  of  soaring  into  i ts   atmosphere. Ten  years  ago  he  learned 
to  break  the  chains  of  gravity  and   to  soar  out  into  space.  This  month 
the  first  man  will  set  foot  on  another  world.  Later  this  month  two 
spacecraft  w i l l   reach Mars  and   send  back  new  information  about  that 
Planet.  Americans  will  have  no   reason  to  be  ashamed  of  their  nation 
on  those  days.  I s  it worth while?  Is it worth while  to  lift  the  spirits  of 
. 
millions  of  human  beings?  If  not,  what  else  is  worth  while?” 

197 

Jidy  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Developing  lunar  landing  technology  was  relatively  easy.  “The  laws 
of  nature  which  made  i t   possible  have  been  well  known  for   a  long 
time.  The  engineering  skills  required  . . . were  available  and   were 
brilliantly  organized.  Hundreds  of  thousands  of  Americans  worked 
together  to  make  this  dream  come  true.  They  had   faith  and   they  had 
hope. 
“The  problems of  our   cities  and   the  other  social  problems which  be- 
set us  a re  not  all  that  easy.  I n  this  area  human  beings  a re   not  working 
together  but  are  in   conflict. We  find  that  we  do  not  yet  know  the  cause 
of  these  troubles  nor  do   we  yet  have  the  mechanisms for  curing  them. 
Hence  we  must  study,  we  must  experiment,  we   must  t r y   and   we  will 
often  fail.  . . . And  we  shall  learn  from  our  failures.”  (Tex t ;   CR, 
7/29/69,  E6415-7) 
Analysis  of  lunar  surface  would  provide  key  to  earth’s  history  by  indi- 
cating whether  moon’s  origin  was  catastrophic  or  noncatastrophic,  Dr. 
H.  Alfv5n  and  Dr.  G.  Arrhenius  of  Univ.  of  Ca l iforn ia‘a t  San  Diego 
said  in   Science.  Radiometric  dating  of  igneous  lunar  rocks  might  pro- 
vide  information  on  time of  their  solidification.  If  catastrophic  alterna- 
tive  was  correct,  rocks  should  date  to  less  than  4.5  eons,  minimum age 
of  moon,  and  predominant  age  should  be  approximately 0.7  eon,  with 
ma jor   surface  and   subsurface  features  less  than  0.7  eon.  If  noncata- 
strophic  alternative  proved  correct,  predominant  age  of  lunar  rocks 
should  exceed 4  eons,  a t  least,  since  i t  was  likely moon  predated  earth. 
(Sc ience ,  7/4/69,  11-7) 
9  Japanese  freighter  had  been  h i t   by  wreckage  of  Soviet spacecraft,  Japa-  
nese  diplomats  reported  to  five  Western  delegations  on  legal  subcom- 
mittee  of  U.N.  Committee  on  Outer  Space meeting  in   Geneva.  June   5 
damage  to  Dai  Chi Chinei  while  outside  territorial  waters  and   near 
Siberian  coast  had  previously  been  attributed  to  unidentified  object.  I t  
was  believed  to  be  first  authenticated  case  of  terrestrial  damage caused 
by  falling  space  objects.  (Hamilton, NYT,  7/5/69,  28)  
July  5:  Apollo  11 Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong  (commander) ,   Edwin  E. 
Aldrin,  Jr.  ( LM   pilot),  and Michael Collins  ( C M  pilot)  held  press  con- 
ference at MSC.  Astronauts were  seated 50  f t  from  nearest  newsmen  and 
were  partially  enclosed  in  plastic  booth  as  part  of  plan  to  limit  crew’s 
contacts  dur ing   21   days   immediately preceding  flight  and  prevent  de- 
velopment  of  illness.  Collins  told  press  that  from  CM   viewpoint,  Apollo 
11 should not  be  very  different  from  previous manned Apollo missions. 
He  did  not  feel  “slightest  bit  frustrated”  about  going  to  moon  without 
landing  on  i t :   “I’m  going  99.9  . . percent  of  the  way  there,  and  that 
suits  me  fine.” 
LM  flight  plan  would  pick  up  where  ApoZZo  10 left  off  with  phasing 
maneuver,  Aldrin  explained.  There  would  be  number  of  “firsts”:  “the 
ultimate  test,”  actual  touchdown;  1 / 6   g  environment;  new  thermal 
conditions;  two-man  EVA on  lunar  surface;  sleeping  in  LM  on  moon; 
s tar   sighting technique  with  alignment telescope  on  lunar  surface;  and  
powered  ascent  from moon  with  seven-minute engine burn.  One  of  im- 
portant  early  activities  after  exiting  from  LM  on moon would  be  deter- 
mining  best  pace  for  moving  about:  “.  . . there  have  been  several 
different  techniques employed in   the  partial  zero gravity  training.  And, 
i t  looks  like  you  can walk  conventionally one  foot  after  another.  I t  also 
looks  as  though  you  can  do   a  two-footed  hop-kangaroo 
style.”  In 

198 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Ju ly   5 

training  in  a ircraf t   flown  a t   1/6  g,  “a  fairly  rapid  pace”  appeared 
quite  easy t o  perform.  “ I t   looks  like  we  shouldn’t  have  too much  diffi- 
culty  in  moving  a t  something like  6,  8,  or  10 miles  per  hour.” 
Armstrong  sa id   crew  would  use  “somewhat  hybr id   methods  of 
manual  and   automatic”  for  descent to moon.  “The  predicted method  a t  
this  point,  although  we  have  a  great  deal  of  flexibility  and   choice, 
based  on  the  situation  at  the  time,  would  be   to  maintain  manual  con- 
trol  of  attitude  and  automatic  control  of  throttle  through  the  final  de- 
scent  from  an  altitude  of  somewhere between  500  and   1000  feet  until 
such  time a s  the  automatic  throttle  rated  descent  was  unsatisfactory,  a t  
which  time  we’ll  go  full  manual  on  the  throttle  . . . flying  i t   in  a 
manner  like  a  normal  VTOL machine.” 
Code  names  for  CM  and   LM  had   been  selected  a s   “representative  of 
the  flight,  the  nation’s  hope,”  Armstrong  revealed.  LM  would  be  called 
“Eagle” for  U S .   national  emblem,  and CM  would  be  called “Columbia” 
for  U S .   symbol,  statue  on  top  of  Capitol,  and  Jules  Verne’s  fictional 
spacecraft,  “Columbiad,”  which  flew  to  moon  100  yrs  ago.  (T ran -  
script;  O’Toole,  W Post,  7/6/69,  A l )  
Ju ly   5-6:  In   Moscow  Apo l lo  8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  placed  wreaths  at 
tombs  of  Vladimir  I.  Lenin,  founder  of  Soviet  state;  rocket  designer 
Sergey  Korolev;  and   Cosmonauts Yuri  A.  Gagarin  and  Vladimir  M. 
Komarov. Later  he  placed  wreath  at  tomb  of  Soviet Unknown  Soldier. 
Borman  and   family  visited  S tar   City,  home  of  cosmonauts  outside 
Moscow,  where  he  presented  color  film  of  ApoZZo  8.  Cosmonauts  pre- 
sented Borman  with  model  of  Vos tok   I ,   first  manned  spacecraft.  Later 
Borman  toured  major  space  tracking  station  a t   Eupatoria  near  Yalta 
in  Crimea.  (AP ,  W  S tar ,  7 /5 /69 ,   A13 ;   upi, W  S tar ,   7 /7 /69 ,   A2) 
July  6 :  NASA’s Mariner  V I   (launched Feb.  24)   and  Mariner  VZZ  (launched 
March  27 )   were  performing  well  and  had  traveled  41 million  mi  and  
39 million mi  from  earth.  Mariner  VZ, scheduled  for  July  31 flyby, was 
9 million  mi  from Mars ;   Mariner  VZZ, scheduled  for  Aug.  5 flyby,  was 
11 million mi  from Mars.  (NASA  Release  69-102) 
*  Dept.  of  Commerce  announced  it  had  successfully  tracked  free-drifting 
buoy  i n   deep  ocean  with  satellite  telemetry  in   test  off  east  Florida 
coast.  Navigational  data  were  relayed  via  satellite  to  GSFC for  proces- 
sing. Experiment  proved ocean currents could be  traced  accurately  and 
atmospheric and  oceanographic data could be obtained  from  sensors on 
drifting  buoy  and   transmitted  with  navigational  information  from  re- 
mote  regions  of  world.  (NASA   Release  6 9 4 1 )  
*  In   Washington  Sunday  Star,  David  Van  Praagh   discussed  President 
Nixon’s  planned  Asian  tour,  to  follow  mid-Pacific recovery  of  Apollo 
11 crew:  Nixon  would  find  “the  problems  of  this  planet’s  most  popu- 
lous  continent  present  a  striking  contrast.  They  are   not  subject  to 
quick,  rational,  scientific  o r   dramatic  solutions.  Usually  they  can  not 
even  be  tackled  through  modern  communications. The  vast  majority 
of  Indians  and   Pakistanis  for  example,  can’t  read  o r   write  and  do  not 
own  a  tiny  transistor  radio  o r   TV set  to  monitor  the  Pacific  splash- 
down.  They  live  in   a  ra ther   backward  age  and   most  of  them  are 
hungry.”  (W  S tar ,   7/6/69,  D14) 
Ju l y  7:  US. News  & Wo r ld  Report  published interview with Dr.  Thomas 0. 
Paine,  NASA  Administrator.  Apollo  11 lunar  landing  would  be  “culmi- 
nation  of  America’s  satisfying  everyone  tha t   it  is  indeed  the  leading 

199 

July  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

technological nation  that  it thought  i t  was  before  Sputnik blazed  across 
the  skies.”  U.S.S.R.  would  continue  to   put  great  stress  on  space  and 
move  ahead  steadily.  “. . . there’s  always  the  danger  that  we  may  feel 
we  can  relax  now-having 
perhaps  slack 
attained  the  lunar  goal-and 
. . . i f   we were not  to  start new programs now,  I think  the  situation 
off. 
might  well  reverse  and   the  Soviets might  once  again  develop  superior 
technological  capabilities  in   space.”  Space  technology  could  affect  f u -  
ture  defense posture.  I n  the past,  “wherever  man  has  flown  farther  and 
higher  and  faster,  wherever he  has  developed new  capability  to  observe 
from  higher  areas,  to  carry  out  operations  in   new  media,  this  has  had 
a  major  effect  on  the  equations  of  international  power.  We’re  quite 
confident  that  this  will  probably  be   true  again  in   space.”  Application 
of  space  to  defense  a rea   was  DOD’S  job.  ‘‘We  do  not  consider  Apollo 
applications  as  any  kind  of  substitute  for  MOL.” 
Journey  of  man  to  another  solar  system  was  “completely  out  of  the 
realm  of  possibility”  for  next  generation;  “but  i n   the  more  distant 
future,  if  i t   were  ever  possible  . . . to  control  the  energy  of  nuclear 
fusion  and  adapt  i t   in   some  efficient  way  to  the  propulsion  of  space- 
craft,  i t  might  be   possible  to  think  in   terms  of  longer  voyages  to  an -  
other  star.”  Fundamental  breakthrough  would  have  to  be  made. 
Chance  that  life  existed  in  other  solar  systems  seemed  “absolutely 
100 per  cent.”  ( U S  News ,   7/7/69) 
0  Bonny,  p ig ta i led  monkey  launched  on  board  NASA’s Biosatellite  111  June 
29,  was  showing  marked  decrease  in   interest  and  efficiency.  Although 
he  was  still  in   satisfactory  physical  condition,  Bonny  was  becoming 
much  less  energetic  and   was  consuming  less  food  and  water.  (AP ,  
W  Star,  7/5/69,  A3;  W Post,  7/5/69,  A6) 
ApoZZo  10 commander  Thomas  B.  Stafford  received  Flying  Tiger  Pilot 
Trophy,  presented  every  two  years  by  Flying  Tigers,  group  of  World 
War  I1  veterans.  Trophy  was  presented  during  27th  reunion  in  Ojai, 
Calif.  (AP,  W  S tar ,   7/7/69,  A2) 
0  White  House  announced  President  Nixon  had  canceled plans  to  dine  with 
Apollo  11 astronauts  July  15, eve  of  launch.  MSC  Director  of  Research 
and  Medical  Operations,  Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  had  expressed  concern 
that  crew might  catch  earthly  illness from  President,  which  could  com- 
plicate  lunar  landing  mission.  (AP,  B  Sun, 7 /8 /69 )  
Apollo  11 lunar  samples would  not  be  first moon  material  to  reach  earth 
and  to  undergo  scientific  examination,  Los  Angeles  Times  quoted  Dr. 
Dean  R.  Chapman,  Chief  of  ARC  Thermo-  and  Gas-Dynamics  Div..  as  
saying  in   interview.  Tektites-molten  pieces  of  lunar  surface  in  form 
of  chunks  of  black  glass-had 
fallen  to  earth  when  meteorites  struck 
moon  with  tremendous  force.  Most  recent  tektite  shower  had  occurred 
700,000  yrs  ago. While  tektites’  origin  was matter  of  scientific dispute, 
Dr.  Chapman  believed  most  commonly  held  theory-lunar 
origin.  In  
working  out  shower’s  trajectory,  he  had  determined  tektites  came  from 
Tycho  crater  on moon’s  southern  hemisphere.  He  believed  Tycho  to  be 
700,000  yrs  old  and  that  crusts  of  earth  and  of  moon  were  intimately 
related.  (Getze,  LA  T imes ,   7/7/69) 
Newsweek‘s  42nd  space  age  cover  story  since  October  1957  contained 
comments  from  “opinion  makers”  on  Apollo  11 mission. 
Dr.  Robert  Jastrow,  Director  of  NASA’s Goddard  Institute  for  Space 
Studies,  said  scientific  basis  for  mission  was  to  discover  secret  of 

200 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  7 

earth’s  past  through  study  of  lunar   rocks.  Resolution  of  “cold  moon” 
versus  “hot  moon”  theory  controversy-whether  moon  was  formed 
cold,  o r   cooled  off  shortly  after  i t s   birth,  o r   whether  it  was  like  ear th  
r ide   w i t h  
molten  or  partly  molten  inside with  volcanic surface-“may 
Apollo  11.” 
Southern Christian Leadership  Conference President,  the  Rev.  Ralph 
D.  Abernathy,  said:  “A  society  tha t   can  resolve  to  conquer  space;  to 
put  man  in   a  place  where  in   ages  past  it  was  considered  only  God 
could  reach;  to  appropriate vast  billions;  to  systematically set about t o  
discover  the  necessary  scientific  knowledge;  that  society  deserves  both 
acclaim  and   our  contempt  . . . acclaim  for   achievement and  contempt 
for bizarre social values.  For  though  it has  the  capacity to meet extraor- 
dinary  challenges,  i t   has  failed  to  use  its  ability  to  rid  itself  of  the 
scourges  of  racism,  poverty  and   war,  all  of  which  were  brutally  scar- 
r ing   the  nation  even  as  i t   mobilized  for  the  assault  on  the  solar 
system.” 
Anthropologist  Dr.  Margaret  Mead  sa id :   “This  can  be  a  first  step, 
not  in to   space  alone,  bu t   in to   the   disciplined  and   courageous  use  of 
enhanced  human  powers  for  man,  ennobled as  he  is  today,  as  the  first 
men  step on  the moon.” 
Philosopher  Lewis  Mumford  sa id :   “Space  exploration  . . . is  strictly 
a  military  by-product;  and  without  pressure  from  the  Pentagon  and  
the Kremlin  it would  never  have found  a place in  any national budget.” 
Best  hope  was  “that  this  colossal  perversion  of  energy,  thought  and 
other  precious  human  resources  may  awaken  a  spontaneous  collective 
reaction  sufficient to  bring  us  down  to  earth  again.  Any  square mile  of 
inhabited  ear th   has  more  significance  for  man’s  future  than  all  the 
planets  in   our  solar  system.”  (New sweek ,  6/7/69,  3, 60-1) 
Original  equipment  of  field-sequential  color  TV  system  which  would  be 
used  by  Apollo  11  to  transmit  pictures  from  moon  [see  April  51  was 
presented  to  Smithsonian  Institution  by  inventor  Dr.  Peter  C.  Gold- 
mark,  President  of  CBS  Laboratories.  Apollo  11  would  carry   three- 
pound  miniaturization  of  system  in   Westinghouse  camera.  (Schaden, 
W  Star,  7/8/69,  B1) 
DOD  announced  award  of  $356,713,045 fixed-price contract t o  McDonnell 
Douglas  Corp.  for  F 4  Phantom  I1  high-performance  jet  fighter  a ir-  
craf t   for  USN  and   USAF  use.  (DOD  Release  568-69) 
Ju ly   7-8:  NASA  terminated  Biosatellite  111  mission  to  determine  long-term 
effects  of  weightlessness  on  living  organisms  when  Bonny,  pig-tailed 
monkey  on  board,  registered  extremely low  metabolic state and   refused 
to  drink  water  after  receiving  10  emergency  water  commands.  Space- 
craf t  had   been  scheduled to  remain  in   orb i t  30  days  after  launch  June 
29,  but  monkey’s  condition-as 
indicated  by  steadily  lowering  body 
temperature,  reduced  hear t   rate,  shallow  breathing,  substantial  periods 
of  sleep  dur ing   day,  and   general  sluggishness-had 
declined  steadily 
for  several  days. 
Spacecraft  separated  and   parachute  deployed  successfully,  but  re- 
covery  a ircraf t  was  unable  to  retrieve  spacecraft  in  midair  as  planned 
because of  clouds  and  rainstorms.  Capsule was  recovered  from  Pacific 
off  coast  of  Kauai  a t   7:36  pm  EDT,  minutes  after  splashdown,  and 
flown  to  Hickam  AFB,  Hawaii,  laboratories,  where  monkey  was  re- 
moved  from  capsule  immediately  and   given  intensive  care.  Without 

201 

July  7-8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

pr ior   warning  from  changes  in   physiological  parameters  being  re- 
corded,  Bonny  died  suddenly  a t  6:04  am  EDT July  8.  Detailed analyses 
of  data  would  be  made  during  next  six  months  and  formal  report 
would  be  issued  after  Jan.  1, 1970.  Despite  curtailed  mission,  experi- 
menters  expected  significant  information.  (NASA P ro j   Off;  ARC  As tro-  
gram ,   7/17/69,  1) 
Jzdy 8: Rep.  John V.  Tunney  (D-Calif.)  introduced H. J.R.  810, “designating 
the day which man  lands on the  moon,  and  the  anniversary  of  that  day 
each  year  thereafter  a s  a  national  holiday  to  be  known  a s   ‘Space  Ex- 
ploration  Day.‘  ” Resolution was  referred  to  House  Judiciary  Commit- 
tee.  (CR,  7/8/69,  €35725) 
CBS  Enterprises Inc.  announced first  agreement for  regular  satellite trans- 
mission  of  news  stories  had   been  reached  with  CBS  Newsfilm  sub- 
scribers  i n   Australia  and  Japan.  I t   would  eventually  lead  to  daily, 
instantaneous,  intercontinental  transmission  of  TV  news  by  satellite, 
company  said.  ( CBS  Enterprises  Release,  7 /8 /69 )  
July  9: Apollo  8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman met  in  Moscow  with  MstisIav V. 
Keldysh,  President  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  and  spent  44 min 
with  U.S.S.R.  President  Nikolay  V.  Podgorny  in   talk  which  Borman 
said  was  “encouraging  and  beneficial”  in   efforts  to  achieve  US.- 
U.S.S.R.  cooperation  in   space.  (AP,  W Pos t ,   7/10/69,  A23) 
*  Apo l lo   Program  Management:  Staff  S tudy   was  submitted  to  House  Com- 
mittee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  by  Subcommittee  on  NASA  Over- 
sight.  I t   identified key  concepts contributing  to  successful evolution  of 
NASA-industry  management  team  and  areas  where  additional  studies 
would  be  useful  in   application  of  its  expertise.  Key  factors  included 
clear  definition of  primary  objective,  monitoring  and  auditing  systems 
that  allowed  vertical  and  horizontal  information  flow,  refinement  in 
program-control  techniques  using  incentive  contracts,  correlation  and 
definition  of  multiple-program  interfaces  by  use  of  systems-oriented 
staff  groups,  real-time  and  flexible management  reporting  system,  and 
balance  between  governmental in-house capability  and  industrial  capa- 
bility.  (Text) 
Die  proof  of  1.05-  by  1.80-in  10-cent  airmail  stamp  commemorating 
“First  Man  on  the  Moon,”  attached  to  envelope,  would  be  carried  by 
Apollo  11 and canceled  on Moon  b y  Astronauts Neil A.  Armstrong  and 
Edwin E.  Aldrin, Jr.,  Postmaster General Winton M.  Blount  announced. 
On  return  to  earth,  d ie   would  be  used  to  produce  commemorative 
stamps  for  August  issue.  Hand-canceled “Moon  Letter”  would  undergo 
21-day  decontamination  period  a t   LRL  and  be  returned  to  Post  Office 
Dept.  for  display  in   Washington,  D.C.,  and   later  throughout  U S .   and 
abroad.  Stamp  was  designed  by  Pau l   Calle,  modeled  by  Robert  J. 
Jones,  and  engraved  by  Edward  R.  Felver  and  Albert  Saavedra.  I t   de- 
picted  astronaut  stepping from  spacecraft onto lunar  surface.  (PO  Dept 
Releases 107, P-37;  W Pos t ,   7/10/69,  A13) 
Some observers  on  ear th  might  be  able  to  see moon-bound Apollo  11 on 
two  occasions,  NASA  announced. At  2:4&:18  GET, exhaust  plumes  from 
S-IVR 
firing  in   parking  orbit  over  Gilbert  Islands  in   South  Pacific 
would  be  visible  to  naked  eye  for  several minutes  over  large  par t   of 
sky.  For  several hou r s  after translunar  injection  burn,  CSM/LM,  S-IVB, 
and  four  spacecraft-lunar-module-adapter  ( SLA)   panels  would  be  vis- 

202 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
July  9 
ible  through  telescope  to  observers in  U.S.,  Mexico,  Central  and   South 
America,  and   western  Africa.  (NASA  Special Release) 
As  NASA  prepared  fo r   Apollo  11 lunar  landing,  space  contractors,  engi- 
neers,  and   scientists  cited  thousands  of  “space  technology  transfers,” 
down-to-earth rewards  from  space  program,  Wall  Street  Journal  said. 
Side  benefits  ranged  from  medical  innovations  and   safer  highways  to 
new  management  techniques,  commercial  products,  and   industrial 
tools.  They  included  liferaft  w i t h   bucket  keel  to  prevent  capsizing  in  
rough  water  and   inner  tube  that  inflated  automatically  to  keep  craf t  
afloat  i f   outer  skin  was  punctured,  computer  system  to  track  down 
fathers  behind  i n   child  support  payments,  inertial  navigation  systems 
that  were  standard  equipment  on  new  360-  to  400-passenger Boeing 
747,  and   thermal  mapper  developed  for   satellites,  being  used  to  seek 
oil  formations,  diagnose  cause  of  sinking  a irpor t   runways,  and   find 
sources  of  water  pollution.  Other  space  age  spinoffs  were  plastic  resin 
marketed  a s   commercial laminates,  adhesives,  and   coatings ; devices  to 
monitor  internal  stress  in   dams  during  ear th   tremors;  data-processing 
techniques to  record  train  traffic and  to match power-generating capaci- 
ties  to  demand;  electromagnetic  hammer  tha t   smoothed  and   shaped 
metal  without  weakening  i t ;   and  luminous  devices  for  a ircraf t   exit 
signs,  map  reading,  and   gun  sites. Medicine  was  benefiting  from mini- 
aturized  electronic  devices  in   cardiac  pacemakers, remote-handling and  
manipulation  equipment that  had   improved prosthetic  devices  like  ar t i-  
ficial  limbs,  space-helmet-like hoods  to  measure  oxygen  consumption 
while  patient  exercised,  and   computer  to  provide  sharper  x-ray photos. 
(Tanner,  PS J ,   7 /6 /69)  
0  MSFC  announced  it would  exercise  option  in   existing  contract  with  Com- 
puter  Sciences Corp.  to  allow  continued  support  services  through  June 
30,  1970,  a t   cost  of  $6,081,887.  (MSFC  Release  69-157) 
July  10:  Apollo  11 countdown began  at  KSC   a t   8 :OO   pm  EDT in   preparation 
for  launch  toward  moon  a t   9:32  am  EDT July  16.  (Apollo  11 Status 
Rpt 1 
launched  Cosmos  CCLXXXZX   from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t   with 
U.S.S.R. 
324-km  (201.3-mi)  apogee,  208-km  (129.2-mi)  perigee,  89.6-min 
period,  and   65.4’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  July  15.  (GSFC  S S R ,  
7/15/69;  SBD,  7/15/69,  5 )  
Four-stage  Pacemaker  rocket  launched  from  NASA  Wallops  Station 
carried  58-lb  instrumented  payload  to  65,000-ft  altitude  and  reentered 
atmosphere  a t  7,000  mph.  Pr imary   objective  was  to  evaluate  perform- 
ance  of  carbon  phenolic,  synthetic  resin,  as  ablative  material.  Second- 
ary  objective  was  to  evaluate  performance  of  low-density  ablative 
materials-pyronne 
foam,  polymer blend,  and  phenolic nylon-for 
pos- 
sible use  on manned  lifting-body  reentry  vehicles.  (WS Release  69-12; 
ws PIO)  
American  Academy  of  Achievement  presented  1969 Gold  Plate  “Man  of 
Achievement”  Awards  to  Dr.  William H.  Pickering,  JPL Director,  and 
to  ApoZZo  8  Astronauts  William  A.  Anders  and   Frank  Borman.  (LA 
Her-Exam,  6/19/69;  AFJ,  6/21/69,  30) 
Sen.  Spessard  L.  Holland  (D-Fla.),  for  himself  and   Sen.  Edward  J. 
Gurney  (R-Fla.) , introduced  S.J.R.  133 “to  redesignate  the  area   in   the 
state  of  Florida  known  a s  Cape  Kennedy a s  Cape Canaveral.”  Measure 

203 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  10 
was  referred  to Senate Committee  on  Interior  and  Insular Affairs.  (CR, 
7/10/69,  S7819) 
0  National  Geographic  Society  cartographer  and   “backyard  stargazer’’ 
David  Moore was  one  of  few  amateur  astronomers  selected  by  NASA  to 
help nearly  200 professionals  who  had  volunteered to  attempt  sightings 
of  Apollo  11 spacecraft,  Washington  Evening  Star  said.  Through  tele- 
scope  in   yard  of  his  Wheaton, Md.,  home  he  would  watch  for  “small 
brilliant  flashes when  rocket  engines are   turned  on  or  ‘burned’  o r   . . . 
when  waste  water  is   ejected  from  the  spacecraft.”  In   ejection,  water 
froze  instantly  and   resultant  ice  crystals  flared  in  sunlight.  NASA   had 
credited  Moore  with  one  of  few  sightings  of  earthbound  Apollo  10. 
(Radcliffe, W  S tar ,   7/10/69,  D2)  
*  Apollo  11 and   current  nationwide  water  shortage  were  “two  illustrations 
of  man’s  efficiency  in   achieving the  thrills  of  life  and man’s  inefficiency 
in   not  achieving  the  necessities  of  life,”  Drew  Pearson  said  in  Wash-  
ington  Pos t .   “At  Cape  Kennedy,  the  United  States  is  about  to  launch 
the  most  carefully  rehearsed,  most  expensive, most  unnecessary project 
of  this  century  by  which  man  will  reach  a  piece  of  drab,  radioactive, 
lava-like  real  estate  hitherto  romantic  because  of  distance-the  moon. 
The  launching  will  succeed  because  a  vast  amount  of  money  and  the 
best  scientific brains  in  America over  a  period  of  seven years have been 
lavished on  this moon  shot. Meanwhile,  up  the  Atlantic  Coast,  the  Capi- 
tal  which  voted  the  $20  billion  to  reach  the  moon  is  desperately  short 
because  of  lack  of 
of  the  second  essential  to  man’s  life-water-all 
planning,  lack  of  foresight,  and   lack  of  money-the 
same  ingredients 
which  have  put  the  moon  shot  on  the  verge  of  success.”  ( W   Pos t ,  
7/10/69,  F11) 
July  11: Apollo  11 Astronauts Neil A.  Armstrong, Michael Collins,  and  Ed- 
win  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  underwent last  ma jor   preflight  medical examination 
a t   KSC and  were  cleared  for   July  16  launch.  (Apollo Status  Rpt;  UPJ, 
W  Pos t ,   7/12/69,  A4) 
0  At  Cape  Kennedy  press  conference,  ApoZZo  8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman 
termed  “totally  ridiculous”  cancellation  of  President  Nixon’s  dinner 
with  Apollo  11  crew  on  eve  of  launch  to  avoid  contaminating  crew 
with  presidential  germs.  He had  delivered  invitation  to  dinner  to  White 
House  and  President  Nixon  had  accepted  when  MSC Medical Director, 
Dr.  Charles A.  Berry,  criticized  dinner  [see  July  71. 
Borman  said  his  talks  with  U.S.S.R.  officials  during  recent  tour  had 
left  him  convinced  they  planned  lunar  landing  soon  but,  “from  the 
people  on  the  subways to  their  president,  all  I heard  was  that  they  are  
wishing  success  for  Apollo  11.” (Greider,  W  Pos t ,   7/13/69,  A4) 
NAS  published Plan  f o r  U.S.  Participation  in the  Global  Atmospheric  Re -  
search  P rog ram .   I t   recommended  five-year  effort  including  Pacific  test 
of  global  weather  observing  system  and  large-scale  atmospheric  study 
in   1973,  series  of  small  regional  studies  beginning  in  1969  or  1970, 
and   experiments to   improve  numerical models  of  atmosphere for  com- 
puter  forecasting,  with  continued  development  of  computer  100  times 
faster  than  currently  available.  Total  effort  would  require  10  yrs,  with 
plans  for  second  portion  to  be  based  on  information  gained  dur ing  
first  5 yrs. 
Report,  prepared  by  NRC committee,  said  developments  in  computers 

204 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Ju ly   1 1  

and   satellites  had  made  i t  possible  “to  advance toward  the  goal  of  ac- 
cura te   two-week  forecasts  and,  eventually,  toward  intelligent  modifica- 
tion  of  the  weather.”  Use  of  satellites  such  as  Nimbus 111,  launched 
April  14, and  expansion of  other  observing systems made  i t   technically 
and   economically  possible  to  provide  adequate  global  observations for  
long-range  forecasts.  Recommended  test  of  global  observing  system 
would  require  2  satellites with  advanced  instrumentation,  nearly  1,000 
balloons,  and  135 instrumented buoys. Simultaneous cloud-cluster study 
would  require  1 2  additional aircraft,  several  ground  stations,  and  com- 
puter  facility.  Participating Government agencies would  be  responsible 
for  determining  program  costs.  (Tex t ;   NRC  Release) 
*  NASA  and  USAF  announced cooperative flight  test  program  using  two  USAF 
YF-12A  a ircraf t   and   spares,  ground  equipment,  maintenance  per- 
sonnel,  and  base  support  a t  Edwards AFB,  Calif.  NASA  would  budget  for 
and  fund  $10 million  for  program  through  FY  1974. About  $4 million 
had  been  made  available  by  completion of  X-15  and  XB-70  flight  pro- 
grams.  USAF  purpose  in  two-part  program  was  to  gather  data  on  a ir-  
craft  operational  factors,  procedures,  limitations,  and   possible  bomber 
penetration  tactics.  NASA  would  seek  data  on  altitude-hold  a t  supersonic 
speeds, boundary  layer noise,  heat  transfer  under  high  speed,  airframe- 
propulsion  system  interactions,  and   other  characteristics.  ( DOD Release 
581-69)  
MSFC   issued RFPS  for  design, development,  test,  and  delivery  of  four  flight 
models  of  manned  lunar  roving  vehicle.  Four-wheeled, 400-lb  vehicle 
would  be   carried  to  moon  on  board  LM  in  1971,  to  transport  astro- 
nauts,  tools,  lunar  samples,  and   other  equipment  and  experiments. 
(NASA   Special Release) 
*  Emperor  Haile  Selassie  of  Ethiopia  toured  MSC  dur ing   five-day  visit  to  
U.S.  (Reuters,  W Post,  7/10/69,  A23;  Apollo  Status Rp t ;   NASA  P A O )  
Ju ly   1 2 :  NASA  program  of  returning  man  from  lunar   landing  was  based  on 
conclusion  there  was  no   risk,  Stanford  Univ.  geneticist  Dr.  Joshua 
Lederberg  said  in   Washington Post.  “We  could  not  mount  an  effective 
quarantine  against  a  real  peril  of  global  infection  unless  we  were  pre- 
pared  to  sacrifice  the  astronaut,  which  is  unthinkable.”  Arguments  for 
zero  risk  were  “quite  persuasivey’-lack  of  atmosphere  on  moon,  “an 
absolutely  necessary condition  for  life  to  flourish,”  and  fact  that  ear th  
had   experienced  lunar   material  samples  from  secondary  meteorites. 
Main  purpose  of  quarantine  was  “to  protect  the  samples from  earthly 
contamination-not 
altogether  successfully,  in  view  of  the  exhalations 
from  the  landing  rocket  and   from  the  astronauts’  space  suits.  I t   was 
then  reasonable  to  add  on  whatever  additional  precautions  against 
back-contamination were  possible without impeding the m i s~ ion .~ ’  P ro j -  
ect  had  helped  show  lunar  arrangements would  be  “quite  inappropri- 
a te   to  a  real  risk,  for   example a  sample  return  from  Mars.”  For   Mars 
program,  “we  must  learn  a  great  deal  more  by  instrumented  observa- 
tions  left  there,  before  we  can  begin  to  design  the  precautions  needed 
for  samples,  or  men,  returned  to  earth.”  ( P  Post,  7/12/69,  A15) 
*  “Poor  People’s  Campaign”  Director, 
the  Rev.  Hosea  Williams  of 
Southern Christian Leadership Conference, said  “hungry”  people  from 
five  southern  states  would  demonstrate  a t   Cape  Kennedy  July  15  on 
eve  of  Apollo  11 launch  and  would  t ry   to  get  “as  close  a s   possible”  to 

205 

July  12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

launch  site  with mules  and   wagons.  “We’re  not  against  things  like  the 
space  shot,  but  there’s  been  a  miscalculation  in   priorities.”  (Reuters, 
W  Pos t ,   7/13/69,  A5) 
NASA  said Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F.  Dobrynin  had   rejected  US. in-  
vitation  to  watch  Apollo  11 launch.  U.S.S.R.  originally  had  accepted, 
but  Soviet Embassy in  Washington  sa id  Dobrynin  would  be  out  of  the 
country.  (AP,  W  Stur,  7/13/69,  A9) 
*  USN reported  eight-ship  Soviet Naval  fleet  was  heading  south  25  mi  east- 
southeast  of  Miami,  Fla.,  on  course  tha t   could  provide  view  of  Apollo 
11 launch.  U.S.  carr ier   a ircraf t   and  destroyer  escort  Gary   shadowed 
squadron,  officially  en  route  to  Havana  for   July  26   commemoration  of 
Cuban  revolution.  (Homan,  W  Pos t ,   7/12/69,  A l ;   AP,  W  Pos t ,  
7/13/69,  A5) 
launched  Luna  XV  unmanned  spacecraft  from  Raikonur 
July  13:  U.S.S.R. 
into  selenocentric  orbit  to  conduct  “further  scientific  studies  of  the 
moon  and near  lunar   space,”  Tass  announced.  Spacecraft was  expected 
date  of  launch  of  NASA’s Apollo 
to  reach  moon  late  July  16-scheduled 
11 manned  lunar   landing mission. There was  speculation that  Luna  X V  
was  Soviet  attempt  to  land  spacecraft  on  moon  and   return  i t   to  ear th  
w i t h   sample of  lunar   soil  before  U S .   landed.  ( W  Pos t ,   7/14/69,  A l ;  
S BD ,   7/18/69,  22 ;   R  Sun, 7/14/69,  A l ;   GSFC S S R ,   7 /15 /69)  
Washington  Sunday  S tar   published  Associated  Press  interview  with  Dr. 
Charles  A.  Berry,  MSC  Director  of  Medical  Research  and   Operations: 
While  4,514 h r s   of  weightlessness  endured  by  U S .   astronauts  in   space 
had  produced  no  serious  medical problems,  on  moon  “we  will  be  plac- 
ing  men  in  an   entirely  new  environment.”  After  four  days  of  weight- 
lessness,  they  would  step  onto  surface where gravity  field  was  one-sixth 
tha t   of  earth. 
At Mission  Control Center in  Houston, Dr.  Berry  would  be  watching 
Apollo  11 astronauts’  heart  rate,  oxygen  consumption, and  temperature 
of  water  that  cooled  spacesuits.  Preflight  physicals  had  enabled doctors 
to  draw  metabolic  profile  of  each  astronaut,  including  work  capacity 
on  ear th   a t   various  hear t   rates,  oxygen  consumption,  and  body  heat 
generated.  “We  know  the  heat  production  level  which  the  portable  life 
support  system  can  handle  without  being  overburdened.  If  i t   reaches 
that  point  for  five minutes, we  will  tell  the  astronauts to  stop  and  rest.’’ 
Because  of  spacesuits’  bulk  astronauts  would  s tar t   with  simple  tasks 
and   work  up  to  tougher  ones.  Excitement could  affect  ability  to  sleep 
in   four-hour rest  period planned  before  lunar  walk.  “We  might  have  to 
make  a  real-time  decision  on  whether  to  give  them  a  sleeping  pill  o r  
perhaps  a  stimulant.” 
Apollo  had  taught  one  “amazing  medical  fact-that 
the  loss  of  red- 
blood-cell mass  apparently  is   caused  by  a  pure  oxygen  atmosphere.” 
Results  of  using  mixed  nitrogen-and-oxygen atmosphere  in   spacecraft 
since  January   1967 Apollo  fire had  indicated  nitrogen  apparently  pro- 
tected  cells.  (Benedict,  AP,  W  Star,  7/13/69,  A9) 
From  summer residence,  Caste1 Gondolfo,  Pope  Pau l   V I   asked  Christians 
worldwide  to  pray  for   Apollo  11 astronauts  and   said  mission  showed 
man  was  a  “giant.”  (AP ,   B  Sun,  7/14/69,  A5) 
At  White  House  religious  service  the  Rev.  Pau l   H.  A.  Noren  of 
Mount  Olivet  Church  in   Minneapolis  led  300  people  in   prayer:  “We 

206 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Ju ly   13 

ask  Thy  divine  protection  for   our   space pioneers  who  will  soon  make 
footprints  on  the  moon.”  (AP,  NYT,  7/14/69,  23)  
*  New York  Times editorial:  “This  is  the  week  of  the  moon.  The  count- 
down  is  on  a t  Cape Kennedy and,  if  all goes well,  a week  from  today  a 
manned  vehicle  will  for  the  first  time  alight  on  another  celestial  body. 
. . . all mankind  will  share  in   the  exhilaration  of  discovery.  Ever  since 
man  evolved  he   has  been  exploring,  extending  his  domain  over  all 
parts  of  his  planet.  Now  tha t   insatiable  curiosity  is   bursting  i ts   ter- 
restrial  bounds  to  provide  ou r   first  personal  knowledge of  the  nearest 
neighbor  in   the  cosmos.  It  is   an   inspiring  adventure,  a  testimony  not 
only  to man’s  imagination  in   amassing knowledge  of  nature,  bu t   to  h is  
courage, h is  perseverance and  h is  indomitable spirit.”  ( N Y T ,  7 /13 /69)  
*  I n   Washington  Evening Star William  Hines  said:  “. . . Space Adminis- 
tra tor   Thomas  0.  Paine  was  dead  right  when  he   acclaimed  Project 
Apollo  a s   ‘a  triumph  of  the  squares.”’  While  word  “square”  was  in  
disrepute,  “you  w i l l   find  no   umbrage  taken  by  the  clean-cut  s tars   of 
this  week’s  cosmic  drama  if  you  called  them  squares.  They  are,  and  
probably  proud   of  it.  There  was  no  fight  from  Neil  Armstrong  when 
Congress  told  him  to  plant  an   American  flag  on  the  surface  of  the 
moon.  . . . The  Apollo  program  is  not  only  run   by  squares,  bu t   for 
squares,  as  well;  its  thrills  and   glories  appeal  to  the  vast  majority  of 
Americans who,  a t  the bottom, a r e  just  as square  as  any Armstrong  on 
or  Neil  or  any  other.”  (W  Star, 7/13/69,  D2) 
Earth-Jack 
Wing  of  Lockheed  C-5A  static  test  specimen  cracked  dur ing   stress  tests 
a t   point  below  aircraft’s  contract  specifications  bu t   above  its  design 
limit.  USAF  later  said  cause  of  crack  was  overloading  of  wing  area 
where  spar  attached  to   lower  rear   beam  cap ;   it would  not  requ ire   ex- 
tensive  redesign.  I t   was  first  major  performance  failure  reported  for 
C-5A.  Contractor  was  planning  modification  and   retesting  of  static 
specimen.  (USAF   Memo  8/18/69;  W  Post,  7/15/69,  A2) 
July  14:  Apollo  11  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Michael  Collins,  and 
Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  appeared  in   nationally  televised  press  conference. 
Interview  with  four  newsmen  was  conducted  over  closed-circuit  TV, 
with  astronauts  a t   KSC  and  press  15  m i   away.  TV  cameramen  allowed 
in   auditorium  with  crew  had  undergone  thorough  medical  examina- 
tions.  Armstrong,  mission  commander,  sa id   tha t   after  decade  of  plan- 
ning  and  ha rd   work  astronauts were  “willing  and   ready  to  attempt  to 
achieve  our   national  goal.  Th is   is  possible  because very  many  Ameri- 
cans  across  the  nation  have  dedicated  themselves  to   quality  craftsman- 
ship and   ingenuity.” 
I n   response  to  question  on  astronauts’  attitudes  toward  mission, 
Armstrong  said  fear   was  not  unknown,  but  added:  “Fear  is   charac- 
teristic  particularly  of  a  knowledge  tha t   there  may  be  something  tha t  
you  haven’t  thought  of  and  feel  tha t  you might  be  unable  to  cope with. 
I think  our   training  and   all the work  that  goes in to   the  preparation  for 
a  flight  does  everything  i t   can  towards  erasing  those  kinds  of  possi- 
bilities  and   I would  say  that  a s   a  crew  we  . . . have  no  fear  of  launch- 
ing   out  on  this  expedition.”  (Wilford,  N Y T ,   7/15/69,  1, 20 )  
Chances of  U.S.S.R.’s  Luna  XV successfully  returning  to  ear th  with lunar  
sample were  small  because  of  complexity  of  operations  required,  NASA 
Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E. 

207 

July  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Mueller,  told  KSC  Center Directors’  Briefing.  Landinga deploying equip- 
ment,  collecting  and   storing  samples,  and   then  lifting  off  “are   not 
simple  things  to  do   . . . and  doing  it  remotely  is  more  difficult  than 
doing  i t  with men  in   space.  I  don’t  think  by  any means  impossible,  but 
. . . the   chances of  being  able  to  carry   i t   ou t   on  the  first  mission  are  
relatively  low  compared  to  the  kind  of  probability  that  we   would  as- 
sociate  with  our  own  landings.” 
If  Luna  XV   were  able  to  successfully  retrieve  lunar  sample,  feat 
would  be  “significant  technological step  and   one  that  represents  a  con- 
siderable  degree  of  prestige,”  he  said,  but  “each  country  [ U S .   and 
U.S.S.R.]  will  obtain  its  proper  share  of  credit.  . . . The   first  sample 
returned  i f   i t   were  possible  to  do  so  and  the  first  man  landing  on  the 
moon  are   significant  events,  each  in   their  own  right,  and   are   to  be 
treated  a s   such.”  (Transcr ip t)  
*  IAF  announced  official  endorsement  of  absolute  world’s  records  for  Dec. 
21-27,  1968,  Apo l lo   8 mission’s  10   lunar   orbits:  altitude,  234,672.5 
m i ;   greatest  mass  lifted  into  ear th   orbit,  282,197  lbs;  total  time  in  
space  for  an  astronaut,  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  572  hrs   10 min  16  secs. 
A p o l l o   8 world  class  records:  duration  of  lunar  mission,  146  hrs   59 
min  49  secs;  duration  in   lunar  orbit,  20  hrs   14 min  13.2  secs. 
To  obtain  IAF  certification  of  Apollo  11, crew  would  be  given  torn 
halves  of  four  $1 bills  for   comparison  with  other  halves  on  return  a s  
proof  same men  returned  as  took  off.  NAA  would  submit  claim  for  ab -  
solute  world  record  for   extravehicular  activity  ( EVA )   for  successful 
Apollo  11 mission.  (AP ,  N Y T ,  7/15/69,  20) 
*  N e w   Yo r k   Post  published  results  of  Louis  Harr is   poll  which  showed 
American  people  favored  manned  lunar  landing  by  51%   to  41%.  In 
February poll public opinion had  been  opposed  by 49%  to  39%. Harr is  
attributed change to  feeling “if  we  have gone this far ,  we   ought to  finish 
the  job.”  He  said  56%  of  1,607  adults  polled  from  June   16  to  22  were 
opposed  to  annual  $4-billion  outlay  for  space  program,  while  37% 
favored  it-little 
change  from  55%   for  to  34%   against  in  February. 
Reaction  to  Apo l lo   10  flight  had  been  generally  favorable.  ( N Y T ,  
7/15/69,  20) 
Expectation  of  one million‘ tourists  to  witness  Apollo  11 launch  had  led 
to  extraordinary  precautions  a t   Cocoa  Beach,  Fla.,  Washington  Po s t  
said.  Tank  truck  would  be  stationed  a t   City  Hall  to  fuel  police  cars ;  
airboats  would  stand  by  to  rush  casualties  to  hospital  if   ambulances 
could  not  penetrate  automobile  traffic;  and  officials  were  concerned 
about  scores  of  a ircraf t   circling  overhead  to  glimpse  spacecraft. 
(Greider, W   Pos t ,   7/14/69,  A l )  
Washington  Evening  Star  special  supplement,  “Voyage  to  the  Moon,” 
commented:  “Hanging  in   the  sky,  attracting man’s  attention  for  untold 
generations,  the  moon  has  been  the  reputed  home  of  gods  and   god- 
desses  of  all  religions,  primitive  and  modern.  If  all  these  deities  lived 
there  a t   any  one  time,  the  reasons  for  its  battle-scarred  appearance 
would  be  obvious.  But  assuming  that  none  did  . . . that  pock-marked 
face  still  poses  more  questions  than  i t   answers.”  (W   Star,  7 /14 /69)  
Aerospace  Systems Laboratory  had  been  established  a t   Princeton  Univ. 
to  investigate U S .   space program  and   other  broad  areas  of  applied  re- 
search,  including transportation systems, New Yo rk  T imes  said.  Project 

208 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

J u l y   14 

( N Y T ,  

was  assisted  by  NASA  and   other  Federal  agency  grants. 
7/14/69,  23 )  
*  NASA  announced  availability  of  16-in-dia  globe  of  moon  prepared  by 
USAF  Aeronautical  Chart  and   Information  Center  from  NASA  photos 
made  by  Lunar   Orbiter  series.  Love11  Observatory, Ariz.,  prepared  a r t  
work  with  exaggerated  color  tones  showing lunar   landscape  bathed  in 
morning  sunlight  and   large  Ring  Plains,  o r   explosive craters,  on  f a r  
side.  One  globe  had  been  presented  to  President  Nixon  by  Apollo  10 
astronauts.  (NASA  Release  69 -836 )  
*  Harold W.  Adams,  Deputy  to  Vice  President-Chief Engineer  of  Douglas 
Aircraft Co.,  received  AIAA  Aircraft Design  Award of  citation  and  $500 
honorarium  a t   AIAA  Aircraft  Design  and   Operations  Meeting  in   Los 
Angeles.  Citation  read:  “In   recognition  of  your  outstanding  contribu- 
tions  to  the  safety  and   economic  practicality  of  commercial  a i r   trans- 
portation  dur ing   the  past  38  years  by  development  of  a ircraf t   design 
principles  for  high  reliability  and   ease  of  maintenance.”  Adams  was 
specialist in  electric  and  hydraulic  systems.  ( AIAA  Release,  7 /9 /69)  
0  Oceanographer  Jacques  Piccard  cast  off  in  48-ft  research  submarine 
from  West  Palm  Beach,  Fla.,  for   rehearsal  of  1,500-mi Gulf  Stream 
Drift  t o   study  ocean  depths  [see  April  71.  If  four- to  five-day  tr ia l   run 
was  successful,  team would  remain  submerged for  30  days  and  drift  to 
Boston.  (UPI ,   W S ta r ,  7/14/69,  A10) 
July  15:  President  Nixon  sent  telegram  to  Apollo  11  astronauts:  “On  the 
eve  of  your  epic  mission,  I  want  you  to  know  that  my  hopes  and  my 
those  of  all  Americans-go  with  you.  Years  of  study  and 
prayers-and 
planning  and   experiment and ha rd   work  on  the  par t   of  thousands have 
led  to  this  unique  moment  in   the  story  of  mank ind ;   i t   is  now  your 
moment  and  from  the  depths of  your  minds  and  hearts  and  spirits w i l l  
come  the  triumph  all  men  will  share.  I  look  forward  to  greeting  you 
on  your  return.  Until  then,  know  that  all  that  is  best  in  the  sp ir i t   of 
mankind  will  be  with  you  dur ing   your  mission  and  when  you  return 
to  earth.” 
President  also  telephoned  astronauts:  “.  . . as  you  lift  off  to   the 
moon,  you  lift  the  spirits of  the  American  people  a s   well  as  the  world. 
. . . You  carry with you a  feeling  of  good  will  in   this greatest  adventure 
man  has  ever  taken.  . . .” ( P D ,  7/21/69,  997)  
0  First  notables  to  arrive  a t  Cape  Kennedy on  eve  of  Apollo  11 launch  in-  
cluded  former  President  and   Mrs.  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  and  Southern 
Christian  Leadership  Conference  President,  the  Rev.  Ralph  D.  Aber- 
nathy.  Johnsons  arrived  in   military  aircraft  assigned  by  President 
Nixon,  to  attend  luncheon  honoring  James  E.  Webb,  former  NASA  
Administrator. 
Abernathy  led  25  poor  southern  families  to  protest  Federal  funding 
priorities.  Dr.  Thomas 0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  met  group  of  150 
poor  people  outside KSC  gate where  Abernathy  requested 40  VIP  passes 
to  launch,  asked  Dr.  Paine  to  join  fight  against  poverty,  and  urged 
that  NASA  technology  be  converted  to  finding  new  ways  to  feed  poor. 
Dr.  Pa ine   agreed  to  admit members of  group  to  launch  and  pledged  to 
do   what  he   could  to  adapt  space-developed  food  concentrates  to  aid 
undernourished.  “It  will  be  a  lot  harder  to  solve  the  problems  of 
hunger  and   poverty  than   it  is  to   send  men  to   the   moon.’’  But,  “if  it 

209 

July  15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

were  possible  fo r   us  not  to  push  that  button  tomorrow  and   solve  the 
problems  you  are   talking  about,  we  would  not  push  the  button.”  He 
said  space  program  and   science  could  be  used  to  help  solve  poverty 
problems.  “I want  you  to  hitch  your  wagon  to  our  rocket  and  tell  the 
people  the  NASA  program  is  an  example of  what  this  country  can  do.” 
The  poor  people  sa id   they  would  pray  for  Apollo  11 astronauts. 
By  evening  500,000  tourists  had   arrived  in  Brevard  County,  site  of 
KSC, with  total  one  million  expected by  early  morning.  Air  traffic  had 
quadrupled,  with  10 local  airfields  handling  over  1,200 small  aircraft, 
and   200  private  jets.  Aircraft  were  to  bring  Vice  President  Sp iro   T. 
Agnew,  over  200  Congressmen,  60  ambassadors,  19  governors,  41) 
mayors,  and   other  public  figures  July  16.  More  than  1,000  police 
struggled  to  control  road  traffic,  and   hordes  settled  to  sleep  on  beaches 
from  which  they  could  see  illuminated  spacecraft  on  launch  pad. 
(Weinraub, N Y T ,  7/16/69,  22 ;   Greider,  W  Pos t ,   7 /16 /69)  
*  Proximity  of  probable date of  lunar  landing to  date of  arrival  of  Mariner 
VZ and   VZZ  cameras near Mars  surface would  provide U S .  TV  viewers 
with  “double  space  feature,”  NASA  said.  Gerald  M.  Truszynski,  NASA 
Associate Administrator  for  Tracking  and   Data  Acquisition,  credited 
feat  to  advances in   electronics  through  which  streams  of  signals  could 
be  returned  from  moon  and   from  Mars  into  tracking  centers  and 
switching  points  on  earth,  thence  via  comsats  into  TV  networks 
throughout  globe.  Apollo  11 mission would  include eight  color  telecasts 
from  spacecraft.  Lunar  telecasts  would  be  black  and   white  since  LM 
would  lack  power  for  color  TV.  Mars  telecasts  from Mariner  V I  would 
produce  50  photos;  Mariner  VZZ  would  deliver  91.  Best  resolution 
from  closeup  would  be  900  f t ;   i t   had   been  2  mi  in   1965 Mariner  IV 
photos  and   was  100 mi  by  best  optical  means  from  earth.  (NASA  Re- 
lease  6 9 4 3 1 )  
0  Europeans  were  “as excited  as many Americans”  about Apollo  11 launch, 
New  York  T imes   reported.  But  “only  the  sharpest  observer  of  the 
Soviet news  media  could guess,  a s  he  went  to  bed  tonight,  that  Ameri- 
cans will  try  to  send men  to  the  moon  tomorrow,”  according  to  BaIti- 
more  Sun.  Last  mention  of  Apollo  11  in   Soviet press  had  been  July  9 
meeting  of  President  Nikolay  V.  Podgorny  with  Astronaut  Frank 
Borman. 
In   U.K.,  BBC and  commercial TV  were  planning  extensive Apollo  11 
coverage,  some  live  via  comsat.  British  newspapers  were  competing 
with  special  space  supplements  and   guides.  Exceptions  to  generally 
“adulatory”  reportage  was  The  T imes   of  London  article  in   which  phi- 
losopher Lord  Russell had  said:  “Men  will  not  be  content  to  land  upon 
the  moon  and   try   to  make  it  habitable.  They  will  land  simultaneously 
from  Russia and   the  United  States,  each party,  complete  with  H-bombs 
and   each  intent  upon  exterminating  the  other.” 
American  Embassy  in   Warsaw  was  packed  every  day  with  Poles 
viewing  space films.  Spain’s  Evening  Daily  Pueblo  had  sponsored con- 
test  to  send  25   readers  to  Apollo  11 launch.  In   France  22-page space 
supplement  issued  by  France-Soir  had  sold  1.5  million  copies  a t   $ 1  
each.  BiZd  Zeitung  in   Germany  had   noted  7  out  of  57   Apollo  super- 
visors were  of  German  origin.  Austrian press  had  lionized  Dr. Wernher 
von  Braun  dur ing  recent visit  to  Salzburg. 
Volume  of  Western  European  newspaper  space  devoted  to  lunar 

210 

July  15 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
landing mission  rivaled  that  in   U S . ,  New  Y o r k   T imes   said,  and   “the 
States.  . . . B u t .   . . respect  voiced  by  individuals  i s  often  for America’s 
whole  story of  the moon  effort  is improving  the  ‘prestige’  of  the  United 
technological  power,  not  he r   humanity  or  civilization.”  (Lewis,  N Y T ,  
7 /16 /69 ,20 ;   B Sun,  7/16/69,  A8,  Mills,  A9) 
Across U.S.  on  eve  of  Apollo  11 launch,  newspaper  editorials commented 
on  lunar   landing mission: 
Los  Angeles Herald-Examiner: “It is w i t h   an   almost breathless  sense 
of  awe  that  we  await  tomorrow’s  blast-off  from  Cape  Kennedy-the 
launching  of  three  space explorers on  the  most  ambitious  and   fearsome 
adventure  in   all  human  history.  Mere  words  cannot  capture  the  im- 
mensity  of  the  flight  of  Apollo  11. Quite  literally,  man  will  be  attempt- 
ing  a  final  break  of  the  chains  which  have  bound  him  to  this  earth.” 
(LA  Her-Exam,  7 /15 /69)  
Newport  News,  Va.,  Times-Herald:  “Now,  this  triumph  of  human 
courage  and  knowledge  stands  poised  on  the  threshold  of  accomplish- 
ment.  For  a few  fleeting moments,  the  attention  of  the world  w i l l  follow 
the  Eagle  a s   it  ferries  i ts   two  astronauts  toward  a  destiny  until  now 
only  dreamed  of  in   our  history.  Then,  most  probably,  our  attention 
will  filter  back  to  the  pressing  problems  on  earth.”  (T imes-Hera ld ,  
7 /15 /69)  
Milwaukee  Journal: “Apollo  11 i s   providing  insight  into  the  mean- 
ing  of  life  and   the  imperatives  of  human  society.  I t   is  forcing  us  to 
face  the  grim  paradox  of  exploiting  human  reason  and   the  marvels  of 
machinery  to  soar  into  the  majesty  of  space  while  the  world  becomes 
fragmented  into  selfish national sovereignties-some 
armed,  some  arm-  
ing,  with  the  hideous  capacity  to  end   life  itself.”  (Milwaukee  Journal, 
7 /15 /69)  
Denver  Pos t:   “The  Soviet attempt  to  send  an   unmanned  spaceship to 
the  moon  in  advance  of  Apollo  11 is   a  bold  b id   to  draw  attention  to 
Soviet  space  prowess.  But  even  if  it  succeeds  . . . in   mechanically 
scooping up  samples  of  the  moon  and   returning  to  earth,  the  Soviet 
project  will  not  overshadow the  American mission.  Instead,  the  Soviet 
flight  will  serve  to  underscore  the  expensive duplication  of  effort  cre- 
ated  by  the  space race.  If  the  Russians  and  Americans had  cooperated, 
rather  than  competed,  the  risks  and   the  costs  involved  in  landing  a 
man  on   the  moon  would  have been  fa r   less.”  (Denver   Post,  7 /15 /69)  
Washington  Evening  Star:  Soviet Luna  XV  seemed  strangely  timed. 
During  their Moscow  discussions  on  space cooperation,  U.S.S.R.  Presi- 
dent  Nikolay  V.  Podgorny  had   not  given  Astronaut  Frank   Borman 
“slightest  h in t   that  the  Kremlin  was  planning  to  send  an  unmanned 
spacecraft  to  the  moon  to  coincide with  the  history-making  Apollo  11 
American mission.”  Was  it  really  possible  “to  work  together  in   space 
exploration  with  a  country  that  seems  to  be  playing  tricks  with  ours 
at  a moment  when  we  are   engaged  in  a  historic  effort  to  land  men  on 
the  moon?”  (W  Star,  7/15/69,  A12) 
San  Francisco  Mayor  Joseph  Alioto  urged  San  Franciscans  to  fly  U S .  
flag  from  Apollo  11 blastoff  to  splashdown  and   to  sound  every  bell, 
siren,  and   whistle  in   the  city  a t   splashdown.  (AP,  W Post,  7/17/69, 
A27) 
Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket launched  by  NASA  from Wallops Station 
carried  Univ.  of  Wisconsin  payload  to  129.9-mi  (209-km)  altitude  to  

211 

July  15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

examine  aurora l   directions  and  intensities  of  isotopic  component  of 
cosmic  x-rays.  Magnetometer  and  startracker  functioned  as  planned 
bu t   doors  and   covers  shielding  proportional  counters  failed  to  eject 
and  no  x-ray data  were received.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
NASA  awarded  General  Electric  Co.'s  Aircraft  Engine  Group  $18.7- 
million,  fixed-price  contract  with  performance-award provision  to  con- 
struct  and   test  two  experimental  quiet  je t   a ircraf t   engines.  To  cut 
development costs,  C F - 6  and  TF-39  engines developed  for  DC-10  and  
C-5A  a ircraf t   would  be  used  a s   core  of  new  engine.  Engines  would 
produce  4,900-lb  thrust  a t   cruise  and   22,000-lb  thrust  for   takeoff. 
Work  was  par t   of  OART'S  Quiet  Engine  Research  Program  to  develop 
turbofan  engine with  noise level  15-20  db  below  present  engines.  Con- 
tract  would  be  managed  by  LeRc.  (NASA   Release  69-103) 
July  16-24:  Apollo  11   (AS-506)  manned  lunar   landing  mission  flown  by 
NASA  achieved eight-year  national  goal  set  by  President  Kennedy May 
25,  1961. On  July  20,  spacecraft's  LM-5,  Eagle,  landed  on  lunar   sur-  
face  and   first  man  stepped  out  onto  moon.  Two  astronauts  performed 
assigned  tasks  on  lunar  surface  before  reentering  LM  to  lift  off  from 
moon,  redock  with  CSM-107,  Columbia,  and  return  safely  to  earth. 
Ju l y  16-19:  Mission  began  a t  9:32  am  EDT  July  16, when  spacecraft 
w a s   launched  from  KSC  Launch  Complex  39,  Pad   A,  by  Sa turn   V  506 
booster.  Liftoff  was  relayed live  on TV  to  33  countries  on  6  continents, 
watched  by  estimated  25   million  TV  viewers  in   US . ,   and  heard  on 
radio  by  millions  of  listeners.  Launch  events  occurred  as  planned  and  
(commander) , 
spacecraft  carried  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong 
Michael Collins  ( CM   pilot) , and   Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  J r .   ( LM   pilot) , into 
circular  parking  orbit  with  118.5-mi  (190.7-km)  altitude.  After  post- 
insertion  checkout  CSM  separated  from  Sa turn   V  3rd  stage  (S-IVB) 
and   LM  Eagle. Crew  successfully  transposed  CSM  and  docked  with  LM, 
ejected  CSM /LM   from  S-IVB,  and   conducted  first  SPS burn.  Successful 
propellant  dump provided  impulse to  S-IVB  for  slingshot  maneuver  to 
earth-escape  velocity.  Translunar  injection  maneuver  was  so  accurate 
that  first  midcourse  correction  was  not  required.  Midcourse  correction 
No .   2,  at  26:45  GET,  was  so  accurate  that  th ird   and  fourth  maneuvers 
were  not  necessary. 
Crew  conducted  two  unscheduled color  TV  broadcasts-for  16 min 
beginning  at  10:32 GET  (taped for  11:26  GET transmission)  and  for   50  
min  beginning  at  30 :28  GET-and 
one  scheduled 36-min  transmission 
beginning  a t   33:59  GET.  Broadcasts were  very  clear  and  showed  ear th ,  
onboard  computer  keyboard,  and   crew.  At  55:08  GET  (4:40  pm  EDT 
July  18 )   crew  began  96-min color  TV  transmission  with  excellent  pic- 
ture  resolution,  coverage,  and   general  quality.  Viewers  in   North 
America,  South America, Japan,  and Western Europe  saw  live  pictures 
of  CSM  and   LM  interiors,  CSM  exterior,  and   earth  and   watched  crew 
removing  probe  and   drogue,  opening  spacecraft  tunnel  hatch,  prepar- 
ing  food,  and  housekeeping LM. 
Apollo  11  passed  into  moon's  sphere  of  influence  a t   61:40  GET, 
214,546.8  mi  (345,205.8 km)  from  earth,  traveling  a t   2,990  fps  rela- 
tive  to  earth.  Spacecraft entered  lunar   orb i t  with  194.3-mi (312.6-km) 
apolune  and   70.5-mi  (113.4-km)  perilune  a t   75:56  GET  (1:28  pm 
EDT  July  19) after  first  SPS  burn.  During  second lunar  orbit,  live  color 
TV  transmission  showed  spectacular  views  of  lunar   surface  and  ap- 

212 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

J d y   16-24 

July  16-24:  Apollo  11’s  successful  manned  lunar  mission  achieved  the  national  goal 
set  eight  years  earlier  b y   President  John  F .   Kennedy ,   who  told  Congress  May   25, 
1961:  “ I   believe  th i s   nation  should  commit  i t se l f   to   achieving  the  goal,  b e f o r e   this 
decade  i s   out,  of  landing  a  man  on  the  Moon  and  returning  him  safely  t o   Earth.” 

proach  path  to  Site  2.  Armstrong  pointed  out  lunar  landmarks  and 
described unexplained glow  near  crater  Aristarchus  which  some  scien- 
tists  believed  to be  volcanic activity. Second SPS  burn   circularized  orbit 
with  75.6-mi  (121.6-km)  apolune  and   61.9-mi  (99.6-km)  perilune. 
Aldrin  transferred  to  LM for  two-hour housekeeping,  voice  and   telem- 
etry  test,  and   oxygen-purge-system check. 
Ju ly   20-21: Armstrong  and   Aldrin  reentered  LM  a t   95:20  GET and  
checked  ou t   all  systems  before  firing  SM  reaction-control-system 
thrusters  to  separate  CSM  and   LM on  fa r   side  of  moon.  LM  descent- 
propulsion-system engine  propelled  L M  to  within  9.8  m i   (15.8  km)   of 
lunar   surface.  Because  LM-powered  descent  maneuver-initiated 
a t  
about 4.6  mi  (7.4  km)   downrange from  
perilune  of  descent  orbit-was 
planned  position,  landing  point  was  also  shifted  downrange.  During 
final approach phase,  crew  noted  that  landing  point  t o  which  spacecraft 

213 

July  16-24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

214 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  16-24 

J u l y   16:   Saturn  V  ( l e f t )   thrust  Apollo  11  spacecraft  toward  the   nioon,  watched  by 
fo rme r   NASA  Administrator  James  E .   W e b b   (below  at  l e f t ) ,   former  President  L y n d o n  
B.  Johnson,  and  V i c e   President  Spiro  T. Agnew  at  Kennedy  Space  Center.  I n   KSC 
Launch  Control  Center  (above )  mission  olpicials relaxed  after  launch ; Iejt  to   r igh t   were 
Charles  W .  Matthews,  NASA  D e pu t y   Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  F l igh t ;  
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  Director  of  MSFC;  Dr.  George E.  Mueller,  Associate  Adm in i s -  
trator  for Manned  Space  F l igh t ;   and  L/G Samuel  C. Phillips,  Apollo  Program  Director. 

was  heading  was  in  center  of  large,  rugged  crater  with  5- to  10-ft-dia 
boulders.  Consequently crew  flew  past  crater  to  more  suitable  touch- 
down  point  by  controlling  attitude manually and   adjusting  descent  rate 
and  horizontal  velocity.  Officials  later  attributed  change  in   course  to 
malfunction in  onboard  radar   and   subsequent critical o,verload of  com- 
puter,  which  caused  warning  alarms  and   could  have  aborted  mission. 
LM  landed  on moon  a t  102346 GET (4:18 pm  EDT July  20)  in  Sea  of 
Tranquility,  20,800  f t   west  and   8,000-5,000 
f t   south  of  center  of 
planned  landing  ellipse.  Landing-point coordinates  were approximately 
23.5”E and   0.64”N and  site  altitude  was  approximately 8,600 f t  below 
moon’s  mean  radius. 
Armstrong  reported : “Houston,  Tranquility  Base  here-the  Eagle 
has   landed.” 
Mission  Control  replied:  “Roger,  Tranquility.  We  copy  you  on  the 

215 

July  16-24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

216 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  16-24 

uys  about  to  turn   blue.  We  are   breath- 

ground.  You  got  a  bunch 
ing  again.  Thanks a  lot.” 
Armstrong  sa id   landing 
a  contained  numerous  boulders  up  to  
two  feet  i n   diameter,  some apparently  fr 
ed  by  LM engine exhaust, 
dark   gray.  Crew  imme- 
and   surface  color  varied  f r o  
diately  adapted  to  one-sixth 
in   LM and   moved  with 
ease.  About  two  hours  after 
uts  requested  and   were 
granted  permission  to  perform  extravehicular  activities  (EVA)  on 
h r s   earlier  than  o r i g  
moon’s  surface  before  sleep  perio 

ing  checks,  Armstron 
LM hatch,  descended 
LM  ladder,  and   deployed  modularized  equipment  stowage  assembly 
(MESA )   containing  camera,  which  recorded  his  descent  to  lunar  sur-  
face.  Aldrin  remained  inside  LM  and   recorded  Armstrong’s  descent 
with  16-mm Maurer  camera. 
Armstrong  took  man’s  first  step  on  moon  a t   109:24 GET  (10:56  pm 
EDT  July  20).  Some 600  million  viewers  on  earth-one-fifth  of  world 
live  TV  transmission  and   heard  him  describe 
population-watched 
feat  a s  “one  small step  for  a  man-one 
giant  leap  for  mankind.” 
Collins,  orbiting  moon  alone  in  CSM  Columbia,  was  unable  to  see 

July  20-21:  “One  small  step  for  a   man-one 
giant  leap  for  mankind.”  Astronaut  Neil 
A .   Armstrong  ( t o p   l e f t )   descended  the   L M   ladder  to   set  the  f irs t   f o o t   on   sur face  
of the  moon. Astronaut  Edw in  E.  A ld r in ,  J r .   (bo t tom  l e f t ) ,  photographed  by  Armstrong, 
deployed  the  passive  seismic  experiments  package,  w i th   the   laser  ranging  retrore- 
j lec tor ,and   the   Eagle  in  the   background.  T h e   lunar  surface  TV   camera  was  in  the 
the   Un i ted   S ta tes   remained  on   th e   surface  of th e   moon. 
far  le f t .   Below,  th e   flag  of 

217 

July  164% 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

landing  and   subsequent  EVA  because  CSM  was  not  equipped  to  receive 
TV  transmission. Armstrong  said  moon had  “stark  beauty  all  its  own” 
like  desert  in  southwestern  US. Lunar  surface  was  “fine  and   pow- 
dery”  and   could be  kicked  up  loosely.  “I t   adheres  like  powdered char-  
coal  . . . but  I  only  go  i n   a  small  fraction  of  an   inch.  I  can  see  my 
footprint  in   the  moon  like  fine  grainy  particles.”  Armstrong  checked 
LM  exterior  and   reported  penetration  of  LM  footpads  into  lunar   sur-  
face  was  three  to  four  inches  and   tha t   s tru t   collapse  was  minimal. 
Blast  of  descent  engine  had   not  formed  crater  in   surface  and   about 
one  foot  of  clearance  remained  between  engine bell  and  lunar  surface. 
He  reported  only  problem  was  seeing  his  footing  in  darkness  of  LM 
shadow.  He  emplaced  microdot  containing  messages  from  world  lead- 
ers,  collected  contingency  sample  of  lunar   soil  near  LM  ladder,  and  
reported  that,  although  surface  consisted  of  soft  loose  material,  mate- 
r ia l   six  or  eight  inches  under  surface  was  very  ha rd   and  cohesive. 
Rocks  were  very  slippery,  apparently  because  vesicles  (pores)  were 
filled  with  powdery  surface  material. 
Armstrong  photographed  Aldrin’s  descent to  lunar  surface  a t   11 :15 
pm  EDT  and   astronauts  unveiled  plaque  mounted  on  s tru t   behind 
ladder  and   read   its  inscription  to  their  worldwide  TV  audience: 
“Here men  from  the  planet  earth  first  set  foot  on  the moon  July  1969, 
A.D.  We  came  in   peace  for   all  mankind.”  Armstrong  then  removed 

218 

TV  camera  from  MESA,  obtained  panorama,  and   placed  camera  on 
tripod  40  f t   from  LM  to  view  subsequent  EVA.  Aldrin  experimented  to 
assess mobility  on  moon  by  walking,  running,  leaping,  and   doing  two- 
footed  kangaroo  hops  between  LM  and  camera.  He  indicated  some 
difficulty  in   maintaining  balance  but  said  that  his  agility  was  better 
than  expected and  that  he  was  able  to  move  with  great  ease.  Mass  of 
inertia  and   caused  “slight  tendency  . . . to  tip  back- 
ut  to  lose  my  balance  in   one  direction,  recovery  is  
quite  na tura l   and   easy.  You’ve  just  got  to  be   careful  landing  in  
the  direction  you  want  to  go   in.” 
Aldrin  deployed  solar  wind  composition  experiment  in  sunlight 

219 

July  16-24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

the  whole  history  of  man  all the  people  on  this  ear th   a re   truly  one- 
one  in   their  pride  in   what  you  have  done  and  one  in  our  prayers  that 
you  will  return  safely  to  earth.”  Astronauts  saluted  President  and 
expressed honor  and  privilege  of  representing U S .  and world  on moon. 
Continuing  EVA, Armstrong  collected  bulk  sample  of  assorted  su r -  
face  material  and   selected  rock  chunks,  inspected  LM,  deployed  pas- 
sive  seismic  experiment  package  and  laser  ranging  retroreflector,  and  
collected  two  core  samples  and   20  lbs  of  discretely  selected  material. 
Throughout  EVA continuous  black-and-white coverage  of  crew  activity 
provided  live  documentation,  with  telemetered  data  and   voice  com- 
ments.  Lunar  surface  photography  included  both  still  and   sequence 
coverage  using  Hasselblad, Maurer  data-acquisition,  arid  Apollo  lunar 
surface  close-up  cameras.  Astronauts  completed  EVA, transferred  film 
and   samples to  LM,  reentered  LM  and   jettisoned  equipment  according 
to  plan,  closing  hatch  by  111:39 GET ( 1 : l l   am  EDT July  2 1 ) .  Arm- 
strong  and   Aldrin  rested  inside  LM  seven  hours  and   checked  out 
systems. 
At  124:22  GET (1:54 pm  July  21)  LM  successfully  lifted  off  moon, 
after  21  hrs   36  min  on  lunar   surface.  A l l   lunar   ascent  and   rendezvous 
maneuvers  were  nominal.  Eagle reported  to  Mission  Control:  “Eagle 

220 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Ju ly   16-24 

TRYBUNA  LUDU,  WARSAW.  POLAND.  JULY  21,  1%9 
Trybuna  Ludu  ~
z
I- 
" ->,.I 
-*,- 
- * I  
.-.< 
n - m . o l m  
mm* 
MlASTA  I WS@ W O D k 4 " I W  SZACIE 
Po 103 q o d d n d  
Gzhv iek   wyhdowal  25 rocznica odrodzenia Palski 
n a  K s i e Z y c u  

i

 

E, MOSCOW,  JULY  22,  1969 

I 

I 

221 

July  1 6 4  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  24:  Y e l c o m e   back  to  ea r th :   Apollo  11  Astronauts  Neil  A .   A rm s t rong ,   Michael 
Collins,  and  Edw in   E .   A ld r in ,   J r .   ( l e f t   to   right  inside  the  mobile  quarantine  f a c i l i t y ) ,  
we re   greeted  b y   P re s iden t   N ixon   a bm r d   the  U . S . S .   Hornet  a f t e r   their  splashdown. 

is  back  i n   orbit,  having  left  Tranquility  Base,  and  leaving  behind  a 
replica  from  our  ApoZZo  11  patch  with  an  olive  branch.”  LM  docked 
with  CSM  a t   128:03  GET. Crew  transferred  with  samples  and   film  to 
CSM,  and  LM  ascent  stage  was  jettisoned  in to   lunar   orbit.  SM   reaction- 
control-system separation  maneuver  placed  CSM  into  orbit  with  72.0 
m i   (115.9-km)  apolune  and   63.0-mi  (101.4-km)  perilune,  where  crew 
rested  and   prepared  fo r   return  to  earth. 
July  22-24:  c r ew   fired  SPS engine  a t   135:24  GET  (12:55  am  EDT 
July  2 2 ) ,  injecting  CSM  into  transearth  trajectory  after  59 h r s   28  min 
(30  revolutions)  in   lunar   orbit.  Midcourse correction  No.  5,  a t   150:30 
GET,  was  so  accurate tha t   sixth and  seventh corrections  were  not  neces- 
sary.  During  18-min color TV transmission, crew  demonstrated weight- 
lessness  of  food  and   water  and   showed  scenes  of  moon  and   earth. 
Aldrin  showed  in-space  preparation  of  ham  sandwich  and  Collins 
showed  viewers  how  to  drink  water  from  teaspoon  and  from  water 
gun.  Final,  121/-min  broadcast  at  177:32  GET sent  message  of  appre- 
ciation  from  each  astronaut  to  all who  helped make ApoZZo  11 mission 
possible. 
CM   separated  from  SM   on  schedule  a t   194:49  GET. Because  of  de- 
teriorating  weather  in   nominal  landing  area,  splashdown  point  was 

222 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

J d y   16-24 

moved  247.4  mi  downrange,  where  weather  was  excellent.  Parachute 
deployment and  other  reentry  events  occurred a s  planned. 
Apollo  11  splashed  down  in   mid-Pacific a t   1 2 5 1  pm  EDT  July  24, 
15 mi  from  recovery sh ip  U.S.S.  Hornet,  195  hrs   19 min  after  launch. 
Swimmers  attached  flotation  collar  and   seven-man  raf t   to  spacecraft 
and   helicopter  dropped  biological  isolation  garments,  which  were 
donned  by  astronauts  inside  CM   and   by  one  swimmer.  Two  other 
swimmers  moved  upwind  of  CM   on  another  large  raft.  Postlanding 
ventilation  was  turned  off  and   C M   powered  down,  and  astronauts 
climbed  ou t   and   helped  swimmer  close  hatch.  Swimmer  then  decon- 
taminated  all  garments,  hatch  area,  flotation  collar,  and   area  around 
postlanding  vent  valves  with  Betadine  disinfectant.  Helicopter  carried 
astronauts  to   recovery  ship,  where  they  entered  32-ftslong  mobile 
quarantine  facility  ( MQF)  with  recovery  physician  and  technician. 
They  were  congratulated  by  President  Nixon  and   Dr.  Thomas  0. 
Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  who  were  on  board   ship.  Crew,  physician, 
and   technician  remained  inside  MQF  until  i t   was  delivered  to  Lunar 
Receiving  Laboratory  (LRL) in   Houston  July  27. 
CM   was  retrieved,  placed  in   dolly  on  board  recovery  ship,  moved 
to  MQF,  and  mated  to  transfer  tunnel.  From  inside  MQF /CM   contain- 
ment  envelope,  MQF  engineer  removed  lunar  samples  and   equipment 
through  decontamination  lock  and  CM   was  sealed  until  delivery  to 
LRL. Sample  return  containers,  film,  and   other  data  were  flown  to 
Johnston  Is land   and   to  Houston  for  transport  to  LRL. 
Primary  ApoZZo  11  mission  objective-to 
perform  manned  landing 
on  moon  and   return-and 
all  detailed  test  objectives  were  achieved. 
All  launch vehicle  and spacecraft  systems performed  according  to  plan, 
with  only  minor,  corrected  discrepancies.  Flight  crew  performance  was 
outstanding;  all  three  crew  members remained  in  excellent  health  and 
their  prevailing  good  spirits  and   proficiency  were  ma jor   factors  in 
mission’s  success.  Accomplishments  included  first  manned  lunar  land- 
ing  and  re turn ;   first  lunar   surface  EVA;  first  seismometer,  laser  re- 
flector,  and   solar  wind  experiment  deployed  on  moon;  first  lunar  
soil  samples  returned  to  ear th ;   largest  U.S.  payload  ever  placed  into 
lunar  orb i t   (72,037.6  lbs  a t   lunar  orb i t   insertion) ; acquisition  of 
numerous  visual  observations,  photos  and   TV  transmissions  of  scien- 
tific  and  engineering  significance;  and  first  operational  use  of  MQF  
and   LRL. 
Apolto  11   was  eighth  Apollo  mission  to  date,  fifth  manned  Apollo 
mission,  and   first  manned  lunar   landing  mission.  Mission  acquired 
major  quantities  of  data  for  subsequent  Apollo  flights.  First  manned 
Apollo  mission,  ApoZZo  7  (Oct.  11-22,  1968) ,  had  verified  operation 
of  spacecraft  for   lunar-mission  duration.  First  manned  lunar  orbital 
mission,  Apollo  8  (Dec.  21-27,  1968) ,   had  proved  capability  of 
Apollo  spacecraft  and  hardware  to  operate  ou t   to  lunar  distance  and 
return  through  earth’s  atmosphere. ApoZlo  9  (March  3-13,  1969)  had 
proved  capability  of  LM  to  operate  in   space under  manned  conditions. 
ApoZZo  10  (May  18-26,  1969)  had  successfully  operated  complete 
Apollo  spacecraft  on  lunar  orbital  mission  and   had   provided  ma jor  
quantities  of  scientific  and   training  materials  for   ApolZo  11 .   Apollo 
program  was  directed  by  NASA Office of  Manned Space Flight;  MSC  was 

223 

July  16-24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

responsible  for  Apollo  spacecraft  development,  MSFC  for   Sa turn   V 
launch  vehicle,  and   KSC  for   launch  operations.  Tracking  and   da ta  
acquisition  was  managed  by  GSFG  under  overall  direction  of  NASA 
Office  of  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; NASA  Re- 
lease  69-83K;  NYT ,   7/16-25/69;  W  Pos t ,   7/16-25/69;  W  Star, 
7/16-25/69;  B  Sun,  7/16-25/69; 
PD ,   7/28/69,  1016) 
July  16:   U.S.S.R.’s  Luna  X V   (launched  July  13)  entered  lunar   orbit  a t  
3:OO  pm  Baikonur  time  (6 :OO   am EDT) with  all  systems  functioning 
normally,  Tass  announced.  Sir  Bernard  Lovell,  Director  of  U.K.’s 
Jodrell  Bank  Experimental  Station,  sa id   spacecraft  was  transmitting 
telemetry  data  bu t   no   photographic  signals.  ( S B D ,  7/18/69,  22;  AP, 
W  Star,  7/17/69,  A l )  
I n   Cape  Kennedy  interview  before  Apollo  11   launch,  Vice  President 
Spiro  T.  Agnew  said,  “It  is  my  individual  feeling  that  we  should 
articulate  a  simple,  ambitious,  optimistic  goal  of  a  manned  flight  to 
Mars  by  the  end  of  this  century.  Whether  we  say  it  or  not,  someone’s 
going  to  do  it.” 
After  liftoff,  Vice  President  told  NASA  launching  team,  ‘‘. . . all  the 
time  I  was  out  there  I  couldn’t  help  thinking  of  you,  the  people  in  
here  and   all  over  NASA  who  have  done  such  a  brilliant  job   in  putting 
together  the  combined  effort  behind  those  three  gentlemen  who  a re  
off  on  this  historic  mission.  . . . I  bit  the  bullet  for  you  today  as  fa r  
a s  Mars  is   concerned. But  on  the  other  hand  . . . I may  be  a  voice  in  
the  wilderness.” 
I n  Washington,  D.C.,  Senate Majority  Leader  Michael  J.  Mansfield 
(D-Mont.)  told  press,  “I  think  we  have  a  lo t   of  problems  here   on 
ear th   that  we  must  face  up  to  and   when  we  settle  those  we  ought  to 
consider  future  space  ventures.”  Senate  Majority  Whip  Edward  M. 
Kennedy  (D-Mass.)  said,  “The  Apollo  program  is  for  landing  a  man 
on  the  moon  and  exploration  and  should  take  another  one  to  two 
years.  I  think  after  that  the  space program  ought  to  fit  into  our  other 
national  priorities.”  (Witkin,  NYT ,   7/17/69,  1 ; Transcript,  Agnew 
statement  to  NASA  launch  crew;  Unna,  W  Po s t ,   7/17/69,  A l )  
At  White  House,  President  Nixon  proclaimed  July  21   National  Day  of 
Participation.  “Apollo  11 is   on  its way  to  the  moon.  . . . Never  before 
ha s   man  embarked  on  so  epic  an  adventure.  . . . As  the  astronauts 
go   . . . we  on  ear th   will  want,  as  one  people,  to  be  with  them  in  
sp ir i t   . . . and   to  support  them  with  prayers  tha t   all  will  go  well.”  All 
Executive  departments  and   Government  agencies  would  be  closed 
and   U S .   flag  would  be  displayed  on  public  buildings. 
With many  members a t  Cape Kennedy,  Senate and House met  briefly 
and   conducted  only  routine  business.  Congressional  Record  was  filled 
with  comments  on  Apollo  11   and   wishes  for  Godspeed  to  astronauts. 
( P D ,  7/21/69,  997-8;  CR ,  7/16/69) 
*  During  CBS TV  interview  a t   Cape  Kennedy  following  Apollo  11  launch, 
former  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  said,  “If  our  industrial  people, 
these  great  managers  of  industry,  the  laboring  people  of  the  country, 
the  government,  the  scientists,  all  with  the  help  of  Congress,  can  get 
together  and  do   a  job   like  this  there’s  just  nothing  we  can’t  do.”  T o  
world’s  ills,  “w e   must  apply  some  of  the  great  talent  tha t   we’ve 
applied  to   space.”  There wasn’t  “a  single  thing  that  our  country  does, 

224 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Ju ly   16 

that  our  government  does,  tha t   our  people  do,  that  has  greater  poten- 
tial  fo r   peace  than   the  space  effort.”  (UPI, N Y T ,   7/17/69,  2 0 )  
Between  750,000  and   1 million  persons  crowded  Brevard  County,  Fla., 
to  witness  launch  of  Apo l lo   11, including  5,000  dignitaries  headed  by 
Vice  President  Spiro T.  Agnew  and  former  President  Lyndon B.  John- 
son.  The  Rev.  Ralph  D.  Abernathy  and   40  representatives  of  Poor  
People’s  Campaign  watched  launch  from  bleacher  seats  with  10,000 
guests  including  families  of  Apollo  program  personnel,  while  other 
representatives  marched  outside  KSC. Par is   Mutch  had  brought  105 
European  businessmen.  Some  3,100  press  members  were  a t   special 
stand.  As  Apollo  spacecraft  lifted  from  launch  pad  there  was  some 
applause,  bu t   most  spectators  stared  in  silence  until  Sa turn   V  rocket 
disappeared  overhead.  Afterward  many  were  caught  in   monumental 
traffic  jams.  Banana  River,  five  miles  south  of  Launch  Complex  39, 
was  clogged  with  several  thousand boats  registered  from  New  England 
to  Texas.  (Greider,  W Post,  7/17/69,  A l ;  Weinraub,  N Y T ,   7/17/69, 
21 ;   Lyons,  N Y T ,   7/17/69,  21)  
*  Apollo  11  launch  brought  mood  of  reflection  across  Nation,  New   Y o r k  
Times  said.  Dawn  was breaking  in  western U S .  when  blastoff  occurred. 
Workers  i n   San   Francisco’s  open  a ir   fish  markets  stood  in   silence  to 
hear  radio  report.  In   San   Diego  motorists  crossing  U.S.-Mexican 
border  listened  to  countdown on  car  radios. 
I n   mid-America,  classes  were  postponed  a t   Air  Force  Academy  in  
Colorado  Springs,  Colo.,  while  cadets  watched  launch  on  TV.  Cow- 
hands  a t   northern  Wyoming  ranch,  inaccessible  to  radio  or  TV,  in- 
terrupted  work  to  honor  Apollo  11. Ranch  owner  Dr.  Oakleigh  Thorn 
I1  said,  “We  feel  so  close  to  the  moon  shot  out  here,  because  we’re 
so close  to  the  stars  and   sky.” 
In   Biloxi,  Miss.,  harbor   fishermen  paused  on  wharf  to  hear  count- 
down.  In   Tennessee,  tobacco  farmers  listened  to  transistor  radios  in 
fields. 
Washington,  D.C.,  schoolteacher  said,  “The  astronauts  didn’t  just 
go  to  the  moon.  All  our  minds  went  to  the  moon  and  intellectually 
man’s  horizons  have  jumped  leaps  and  bounds  beyond  the  historical 
situation 
they’ve  always  been  confined 
to.” 
(Fosburgh,  NYT ,  
7/17/69,  1 )  
Worldwide  audience  focused  on  Apollo  11 launch: 
At  summer residence,  Caste1 Gondolfo,  Italy,  Pope  Pau l  V I   asked  for 
prayers  fo r   U S .   astronauts  a  few  hours  before  launch  toward  moon. 
U.S.S.R.  radio  and  TV gave  factual  accounts  of  Apollo  11  launch 
but  maintained  third  day  of  silence  on  Luna  XV.  Major  Soviet  news 
program  a t   8:30  pm  Moscow  time  showed  tape  of  Apollo  11  liftoff 
taken  from  live  comsat  coverage. 
In   U.K.  TV  viewers  saw  launch  via  transatlantic  satellite.  BBC 
scheduled  live  coverage  through  July  24   splashdown  and  would  relay 
broadcasts  to  continent  by  cable.  London  newspapers  frontpaged 
Apollo  1 1 .   Daily  Express  headline  read,  “Ho  Hum-Anyone 
for  the 
Moon  Today?”   over  report  on  relaxed  astronauts. 
Polish TV viewers saw  launch  via  45-min transmission  directly  from 
Cape Kennedy.  Hundreds  of  Germans  and   Americans  crowded  Apollo 
1 1   exhibit  in   Mannheim,  Germany,  department  store. 

225 

July  16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

Swedish  TV  viewers  were  advised  by  state  broadcasting  company 
not  to  turn   off  sets  Sunday  night-so 
they  could  be  awakened  for 
scheduled  moon  landing  Monday. 
Hippies  in   I r an   held  milk  and  honey  pots  in   Teheran  restaurant  to 
toast  astronauts.  I n   Egypt,  Moslem  world’s  leading  moon  expert, 
Sheikh  Ahmand  Hared i   said,  “The  Koran  urges  Moslems  to  look  up 
from  their  earthly  abode  to  what  lies  behind  the  moon  and   stars.” 
Japanese  department  stores  featured  models  of  Apollo  command 
module.  In  Greece, Aspis-Pronoia insurance  company issued  first  outer- 
space  life  insurance  policy,  to  cover  ApoZlo  11 crew  a t   $10,000  each. 
In   Spain  people  called  event  most  interesting  since  Columbus  discov- 
ered America. 
Israel’s  state  radio  broadcast  in   Hebrew  from  Cape  Kennedy  while 
Israelis  stood  around  TV  sets  and   portable  radios  in   streets.  U.S. 
Embassy  in  Tel  Aviv  and   U.S.  Consulate in   Jerusalem  opened  ApoZZo 
11  information  offices.  ApoZZo  11  reaction  was  “generally  tepid”  in 
Lagos,  Nigeria.  Radio  Nigeria  reported  launch  seven  minutes  into  its 
morning  broadcast.  Later  i t   became  number  one  newscast  item. 
Most  of  Latin  America  missed  launch  on  TV  because  of  failure  of 
In te lsa t-I l l   F-2 
June  29.  Latin  American  newspapers  and  TV  cor- 
respondents  traveled  to  U S .   to  cover  launch  and   were  reported  to  be 
outraged  by  absence  of  TV  coverage in  their  countries.  In   Colombia, 
government  asked  TV  manufacturers  to  put  sets  in   all  town  squares. 
Bogota  students  would  have  July  21  off  to  watch  lunar  landing.  ( N Y T ,  
7/17/69,  21,  22 ;   Bishop,  C T r i b ,  7/17/69) 
0  Harry   F.  Guggenheim  said  in   Washington  Evening  Star  article  that 
rocket  expert  Dr.  Robert  H.  Goddard  “was  to  the  moon  rocket  what 
the  Wright  brothers  were  to  the  airplane.”  Guggenheim,  administrator 
of  Daniel  Guggenheim  Fund   for  the  Promotion  of  Aeronautics dur ing  
period  i t   helped  support  Dr.  Goddard’s  research,  traced  career  of 
“Father  of  modern  rocketry”  from  early  experiments  in  1908.  Among 
Goddard’s  inventions  were:  first  liquid-fuel  rocket,  first  smokeless 
powder  rocket,  and   first  practical  automatic steering  device  for  rockets. 
I t  was  no  wonder  American  Rocket  Society  had  conceded  to  Goddard 
“the  almost  single-handed  development  of  rocketry  ‘from  a  vague 
dream  to one of  the most significant branches  of  modern  engineering.’  ” 
He  had  left  “testimony to  the  power  of  one  solitary  individual  to  effect 
change  and   to  transform  the  future.”  While  Dr.  Goddard  had  died 
without  fame  which  had  accrued  to  Wright  brothers  in   their  lifetime, 
“he  died  still  believing  that  man  would  one  day  shatter  the  fetters  of 
Earth‘s  gravity  and   stride  majestically  into  the  vast  reaches  of 
space.  I  wish  he   were  here  now  to  share  this  moment.  I t   belongs  to 
him.”  (AP, W  Star,  7/16/69,  A15) 
As  par t   of  NASA  and  Washington  National  Gallery of  Art  program,  Eye- 
witness to  Space,  group   of  artists  attended  ApoZlo  11  launch  to  paint 
facets  of  mission.  Program   originated  in   1963 when  artists  were  in-  
vited  to  cover  Mercury  9  mission.  Among  those  commissioned  to 
record Apollo 11 were  Peter Hurd, Robert Rauschenberg, Lamar  Dodd, 
and   James  B.  Wyeth.  Since  program  started,  25   artists  had  produced 
more  than  500  sketches  and   paintings.  (Casey,  W  Pos t ,   7/13/69,  G1 ;  
Hicks,  NYT,  7/15/69,  33;  W  S ta r ,   7/17/69,  A12) 

226 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 
Ju ly   16 
*  Apollo  11 was  producing  noticeable  effect  on  business  and  consumer 
products,  Washington  Post  said.  Snoopy  the  Astronaut  dolls  were 
selling  out;  sales of  color  TV  sets had  risen  in   some  stores;  and  sales 
of  “moon  maps  and  globes,  as  well  as   toy  rocket  ships  and  lunar  ex- 
ploration  vehicles  had  also  lifted  skyward.”  Two  Washington,  D.C., 
department  stores  were  offering  Japanese  telescopes  ranging  from 
$19.99 to  $1,000.00.  One  toy  store manager  said  sales  of  space-related 
toys  had   jumped  70%  or  80%  in  two  months.  Rockets  propelled  by 
solid-fuel inserts  sold  for   $1.50  to  $5.00  complete  with  recovery  para- 
chute.  One  Washington  store  had  sold  out  supply  of  $10  spacesuits. 
Demand  for   rental  of  color  TV  sets  in   Washington  area  had   been 
“terrific,”  according  to  area   dealer.  (Cushing, W Pos t ,   7/16/69,  D11) 
*  NAS  announced  formation  of  Universities  Space  Research  Assn.  (USRA )  
-national  consortium  of  48  universities-to 
foster  cooperation  among 
universities,  other  research  organizations,  and  Government  for  ad- 
vancement  of  space  research  [see  Jan.  101.  I t   would  acquire,  plan, 
construct,  and  operate  laboratories  and  other  facilities  fo r   R&D  and 
education  in  space science and  technology  and  had   submitted  proposal 
to  NASA  for  management  of  Lunar  Science  Institute  in   Houston,  Tex. 
Existing  contract  between  NASA  and  MAS  would  expire  in  autumn. 
( NAS  Release) 
U.S.  newspaper  editorials  hailed  ApoZZo  11 launch. 
Miami  News:  “All  America,  represented  by  three  lonely  men  in 
space,  is  on  its  way  to  the  moon.  In   fact,  this  is   a  people’s  effort, 
arousing  the  interest  and  participation  of  all  the  people  of  this  coun- 
try.  This  i s  evidenced  by  the  more  than  one  million  persons  on  hand 
a t   Cape  Kennedy  . . . fo r   the  s tar t   of  the  moon  voyage  and  by  the 
many  millions  who  join  in   the  adventure  by  television.  Today’s  mag- 
nificent  launch,  and  the  elan  stirred  in   our  people  by  it,  makes  this 
one  of  America’s  most  splendid  hours.”  (M iam i  News,  7/17/69,  A16) 
Washington  Evening  Star:  countdown  which  culminated  in   Apollo 
11 liftoff,  “regardless  of  NASA’s official  records,”  had   begun,  “when 
primitive  man  first  looked  up   into  the  night  sky  to  gaze  a t   the  moon, 
and   to  feel  the  first  stirring  of  wonder.”  (W  Star,  7/16/69,  A22) 
Huntsville  T imes:   Manhattan  Project  had  climaxed  with  July  16, 
1945,  explosion  of  world’s  first  successful  atomic  bomb.  “Men,  i t  
seems, can  only pray  that  the  consequences of  the  quest  of  the  planets 
may  be  better  than  those  born  in   the  irreversible  explosion on  a  New 
Mexico  desert  24  years  ago.”  (Huntsville  T imes ,   7/16/69) 
Chicago  Sun-Times:  “Man  has  always  looked  upward  to  the  stars, 
first  i n   fear  and  awe,  then  in   need  to  know.  Today  the  first  great  step 
to  the  firmament  w i l l   be  taken.  If  i t   is   successful man  will  stand  on 
standing  there  will  reach  outward.” 
the   threshold  of  outer  space-and 
( C  Sun-Times,  7/16/69) 
Svenska  Dagbludet,  Stockholm,  Sweden,  welcomed  Apollo  11  launch: 
“One  of  the   greatest  adventures  of  human  history  begins  today.  . . . 
Studies  of  the  moon  will  to  a  great  degree  enrich  our  knowledge  of 
both  the  earth  and  space.  Among  other  things  it  w i l l   be  possible  to 
make  comparisons  which  will  propel  science  by  leaps  in  various 
disciplines.  . . . While  we  can  predict  much  that  may  result  from 
conquest  of  the  moon,  there  w i l l   in   all  likelihood  be  many  results 

227 

July  16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

which  we  cannot  even  imagine  now.  All  great  discoveries  and   bold 
undertakings  have  brought  advances  which  no  one  could  have  fore-  
seen from  the  outset.” 
Arbe te t ,   Malmo,  Sweden:  “There  is   an   irra t iona l   element  in   these 
feats  of  discovery which  fortunately  dominates  the  prosaic  calculation 
of  gains.  Then  one  can  regret  that  man’s  fantasy  seems  incapable  of 
being  fired  for   such  a  tremendous  task  as  eliminating  starvation  from 
our   earth,  or  for   bringing  peace  to  Biafra  or  for  eliminating  the  U S .  
Negro  ghettos.  . . . Three   men  will  be  lifted  to  world  acclaim  today 
on   the  crest  of  mankind’s  greatest  ever  coordinated  effort.  . . .” (Am 
Embassy,  Stockholm) 
July  17: White  House  announced  Apollo  11 crew  on  way  to  moon  was 
carrying  Soviet  commemorative  medals  brought  back  to  US. by 
Astronaut  Frank  Borman,  who  had  received  them  from  widows  of 
Cosmonauts Yuri  A.  Gagarin  and   Vladimir  M.  Komarov  dur ing   h is  
Moscow  visit.  Apollo  11 also  carried Apollo 204  crew  patch  and   com- 
memorative medals struck  for  families  of  Astronauts Virgil  I.  Grissom, 
Edward  H.  White,  and   Roger  B.  Chaffee  before  astronauts  died  in 
Jan.  27,  1967,  fire. 
President  Nixon  said,  “The  names  of  Gagarin  and  Komarov,  of 
Grissom,  White,  and   Chaffee,  share  the  honors  we  pray  w i l l   come  to 
Armstrong,  Aldrin,  and   Collins.  I n   recognizing  the  dedication  and 
sacrifice  of  brave  men  of  different  nations,  we  underscore  an   example 
we  hope  to  set:  that  if  men  can  reach  the  moon,  men  can   reach  agree- 
ment.”  (PD,  7/21/69,  999) 
Aerospace  industry  was  having  its  greatest  week  in  history  with  Apollo 
11 launch,  said  N e w   Y o r k   T imes ,   but  aerospace  stocks  remained  in  
doldrums.  Wall  Street  was  “bearish  about  the  industry  and,  from  an 
investment  standpoint,  unenthusiastic  about  space.”  Security  analysts 
interviewed agreed Apollo  11 would  have  little  effect  on  long-depressed 
stocks,  which  commenced  decline  in   1968;  many  were  selling  near 
lows  for   year.  Aerospace  industry  was  chief  beneficiary  of  space pro-  
gram  funds,  but  largest  portion  of  $34  billion  spent  since  1960  had 
been  allocated  before  “really  spectacular  shots”  occurred.  While 
Apollo  program  had  been  “treniendous  boon  to  the  aerospace industry 
and   to  the  advancement  of  technology,”  i t   represented  small  part  of 
total  industrv  revenues and   outlook  was  for   further  decline.  (Hammer. 
N Y T ,   7/17/69,  63)  
-
-
 
0  Teletype from German ship Vegesuck reported  numerous  pieces  of  Sa turn  
V *faunch  vehicle  from  Apollo  11  h e r e   sighted  d r ipp ing   into  sea 
around   ship.  Vegesack  had   been  a t   position  some  375  mi  east-north- 
east  of  Cape Kennedy when  Apollo  11 lifted  off  toward  moon  July  16. 
( W News,  2/3/70) 
e  Apo l lo   11 launch  continued  to  draw  wide  editorial  comment  in   foreign 
and  national press. 
New   Yorlc T imes:  “One  could  hardly  watch  the magnificent spectacle 
of  the  liftoff,  let  alone  contemplate  the  feats  of  human  ingenuity  tha t  
made  i t  possible,  as well  as  the  courage and   skill  of  the  flyers,  without 
some  reflection  upon  the  meaning  of  this  event.  . . . The  temptation  is  
strong  to  fa l l  back  upon  lyricism.  The  poetry  of  the  thing  has  yet  to  
find  i ts   expression  in   any  of  the  earnest,  proficient  Americans  who 
have  ventured  away  from  the  Ea r th ;   yet,  the  stunning  beauty  of 

228 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  17 

man’s  most  marvelous  creation,  as  it  rose  in   i ts   majesty  toward  the 
unknown,  toward  the  future,  could  be  matched  only  by  the  profound 
sense  of  having  been  present  a t   an  end  to   something  and   therefore 
necessarily  a t  a  beginning.”  (Wicker, N Y T ,   7/17/69) 
Chicago  Tribune:  “The  Apollo  11  blastoff  was  a s   beautiful  a  one 
as  we’ve  seen.  It  displayed  every  b i t   of  the  precision  and   the  careful 
planning  which  we  have  come  to  expect  from  NASA.”  One  of  most 
“satisfying”  things  was  that,  “like  our  earlier  launchings,  i t   took  place 
within  the  sight  of  anybody  who  wanted  to   go  to   the   Florida  coast 
to  watch i t ,   and  was  broadcast  live  to  countless millions  more  in   every 
corner  of  the  world.  People  w i l l   not  fa i l   to  contrast  this  with  the 
secrecy  of  Russia’s  unmanned  Luna  15,  which  may  reach  the  moon 
today  on  a  mysterious mission  of  its  own.”  ( C  T r i b ,  7/17/69) 
Christian Science Monitor:  “And  although  i t   is  an   American moon- 
craft,  bearing  American men  . . . the  venture  is,  in   the  best  sense,  a 
universal  one.  I t   is  the  result  of  American  technology  putting  to  use 
the  knowledge,  techniques  and   discoveries  in   which  all  nations  and  
races  have  participated.  . . . all nations  and  peoples  are   taking  part.” 
(C SM ,  1/17/69) 
Seattle  T imes:   “The  space  program  ha s   yielded  immense  new  re-  
sources  in   . . . scientific  and   technological  advances which  . . . make 
the  program  worth while  even  beyond  the  explorations  and  discoveries 
-and 
national  pride-offered 
by  the  ventures  into  outer  space.  I t  
strikes  us,  therefore,  that  the  time  is   a t   hand  for  these  so-called  by- 
products  of  the  space program, which  hold  such promise  for  utilization 
in   behalf  of  mankind,  to  be  put  to  work  for  that  purpose.”  (S T imes ,  
7/17/69) 
Bulgarian  Telegraph Agency  report  carried  in   Bulgarian  newspapers 
Rabotnichesko  Delo,  Narodna  Mhd e zh ,   T rud ,   and   Kooperativno  Celo 
commented:  “In   the  coming  days  all  humanity  will  follow  this  flight 
with  interest  and   tension.  And  surely  there  is   no  one  on  our  old 
planet  who  will  not  ask  himself  this  question:  ‘Will  i t   succeed?”’ 
(Am  Embassy,  Sofia) 
*  Florida  Legislature  had  neglected  to  send  President  Nixon  copy  of  its 
June  6  resolution  asking  him  to   restore  original  name  “Cape  Ca- 
naveral”  to  Cape  Kennedy,  Orlando  Sentinel  said.  Fate  of  project 
seemed  to  rest  with  jo in t   resolution  introduced  in   Congress  July  10 
for  same  purpose.  (Or lando   Sentinel,  7/17/69,  14A)  
*  DOD estimates  i n   transcript  of  closed session  of  U S .   Senate  revealed tha t  
by  1974 U.S.S.R.  could have  420 SS-9  missiles,  or  total  of  1,260 war- 
heads.  Even  i f   Phase  I  of  U S .  Safeguard were  deployed by  that  time, 
1,000  arr iv ing   Soviet  warheads  would  be  able  to  knock  ou t   all  bu t  
135-150  Minuteman  missiles-far 
below  DOD estimates  of  what  was 
needed  fo r  adequate  U S .   second  strike  capability.  ( AFJ ,   12/6/69) 
July  18:  I n   response  to  telephone  inquiry  by  Astronaut  Frank   Borman, 
Mstislav  V.  Keldysh,  President  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  sent 
telegram  guaranteeing  that  Luna  X V ,   orbiting moon,  would  not  inter- 
fe re  w i t h   Apo l lo   11 mission  and   assuring  Borman  that  he   would  be  
notified  of  any  changes in   spacecraft’s  course.  Under  1967 U.N.  Outer 
Space Treaty,  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  were  bound  to   furnish  each  other  this 
kind  of  information.  (Wilford,  NYT ,   7/19/69,  1 )  
Apollo  passive  seismic  experiment,  par t   of  extravehicular  activity  to  be 

229 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 
J u l y   18 
performed  by  ApoZlo  11 astronauts on  moon,  was  described  in  Science 
a s   “the  most  exciting  experiment  in   seismology.”  Dr.  G.  Latham  and  
Dr.  M.  Ewing  of  Columbia  Univ.’s  Lamont-Doherty  Geological  Ob- 
servatory,  Dr.  F.  Press  of  MIT, and   Dr.  G.  Sutton  of  Univ.  of  Hawaii 
explained  objective  was  to  detect  naturally  occurring  seismic  events 
on  lunar  surface  through  early  Apollo  scientific  experiment  package 
(EASEP)  planted  on  moon.  Package  weighed  105 bs and   would  trans- 
mit da ta  to  ear th  one year  ( o r  maximum  two  years) ,   dur ing  lunar  days 
because  i t s   solar  cell  panels  required  illumination  to  provide  power. 
Complete  Apollo  lunar   surface  experiments package  ( ALSEP) , contain- 
ing  a t   least  three  additional  experiments  for  measurements  of  solar 
wind  and  magnetic  field,  would  be  included  on  Apollo  12  for  day  and  
night  operation. 
I n   ApoZZo  11 experiment  astronaut  would  remove  instrument  from 
LM  to  smoothest area  within  6.6-9.8 
f t   (20-30  m )   of  LM, unfold  solar 
panels,  adjust  package  level  to  within  So ,   orient  i t   with  azimuth  for 
maximum  illumination  of  solar  panels,  and   aim  antenna  toward  earth. 
MSC  would  issue commands to  uncage and  level seismometers and  select 
proper  gain.  Expected  sources of  lunar  seismic  activity included  several 
hundred  monthly  moonquakes,  thermal  stresses  produced  by  rapid 
temperature  variations  at  surface;  tidal  stresses  exerted  by  ear th   and  
sun ;   and   meteoroid  impacts.  By  end  of  Apollo  program,  scientists 
hoped  to  have  achieved  crude  curves  of  travel  time  for   body  and 
surface  waves  and   beginning  of  seismicity  map  of  moon. 
During  post-Apollo  period,  seismologists  wanted  to  achieve  wider 
distribution  of  detectors  to  map  seismically  active  belts  in   greater  de- 
ta i l ;   study  mechanisms  of  energy  release;  lower  minimum  detectable 
ground  motion  of  individual  seismometer ; and  improve  performance 
of  longper iod   seismometer systems  a t  ultralong-period  end  of  spectrum 
for  recording  surface  waves  from  moonquakes,  free  oscillations  of 
moon,  and  lunar  tides.  (Science,  7/18/69,  241-50) 
White  House  confirmed  President  Nixon  would  talk  with  ApoZlo  11 
astronauts  over  two-way  TV  hookup  as  they  first  set  foot  on  moon. 
Nixon  and   Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong  and   Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr., 
would  be  visible  on   split  screen  to  ear th   TV  viewers.  President  could 
watch  on White House TV,  but  astronauts would  have no  view  of  him. 
President  Nixon  planned  to  spend  evening  of  July  20  watching 
ApoZZo  11 progress  on  TV  with  former  Astronaut  Frank  Borman, 
White House  liaison  with NASA.  (Lyons,  W  Pos t ,   7/19/69,  A9) 
ApoZlo  10 mission  (May  18-26),  first  lunar  orbital  mission  with  com- 
plete  Apollo  spacecraft,  was  adjudged  successful by  NASA.  Mission  had 
achieved  all  objectives;  systems  had  performed  according  to  plan 
with  only  minor  anomalies  and  crew  had  acquired  ma jor   quantities 
of  photographic  tra in ing   materials  for  subsequent  Apollo  missions. 
(NASA  P ro j  Off) 
*  Zzvestiu gave first U.S.S.R.  report  of  President Nixon’s  July  17  announce- 
ment  that  medals  of  two  dead  Soviet  cosmonauts would  be  placed  on 
moon  by  Apollo  11 astronauts.  Factual  account  of  mission  carried  no 
comment.  ( W  Post,  7/19/69,  A10) 
Pr ide   Inc.  Operations Director Marion  Barry  called  on  black  community 
to  work  dur ing   July  21   National  Day  of  Participation  declared  by 
President  Nixon  in   honor  of  ApoZlo  11 lunar   landing.  During  Wash- 

230 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  18 

ington  press  conference  he  said,  “Why  should  blacks  rejoice  when 
two  white  Americans  land  on  the  moon  when  white  America’s  money 
and  technology  have  not  even  reached”  the  inner  city?  “Why  should 
blacks  celebrate  Monday  . . . when  President  Nixon  didn’t  feel  that 
Dr.  Martin  Luther  King’s  assassination  deserved  to  be  observed?’’ 
(Paka ,   W Post,  7/19/69,  A9)  
*  Richmond,  Va.,  News-Leader  editorial  approved Vice  President  Sp iro  T. 
Agnew’s  calling  for   flight  to  Mars  by  end  of  century  [see  Ju ly   161: 
“One  day,  man  will  go  beyond  the  planets,  to  other  solar  systems; 
right  now  . . . that  is  not  within  our  technological  reach.  But Mars  is, 
and  so  are   the  other  planets.  The  moon  is  in   earth‘s,  and  man’s,  own 
crib.  Plans  and  commitments  should  be  made-now-for 
man  to  take 
( R   News-Leader, 
grown-up  strides  in  the  real  world  of  space.” 
7/18/69) 
After  four  years  of  “running  a t   top  speed,”  MSC  had  failed  to  turn 
Houston,  Tex.,  into  “science  city,”  said  Thomas  G.  Plate  in   Science. 
Houston  area,  as  largest  petrochemical  industry  area   in   U S . ,   was 
“going  its  own  booming  way”  while  4,600  NASA  people  and  9,000 
employees  of  125  private  firms  working  on  NASA  business  in  area  
helped  to   shape  space age  community  a t   MSC.  “The  injection  of  $140 
million  a  year  in    money and  the  impact  on  the  life  of  the area 
and  of  the  9000  employees  of  . . . high-technology  firms  serving  MSC 
of  NASA  workers-some  2500  of  them  R&D  scientists  and  engineers- 
has  so  far  had   surprisingly  little  effect.  But  meanwhile  the  space 
community  has  developed  i ts   own  special  character  with  its  own  style 
of  life  and  its  own  special goals.”  (Sc ience ,  7/18/69,  265-9) 
*  ComSatCorp  reported  second  quarter  earnings  of  $1,976,000  (20  cents 
per  share)  ; earnings  had  been  $1,506,000  (15  cents  per  share)   in 
similar  1968  period.  Earnings  for  first  six  months  of  1969  totaled 
$3,501,000  (35  cents per  share)  and  $3,405,000  (33  cents  per  share)  
i n   1968.  (ComSatCorp Release 6 M 3 )  
July  19:  Montreal,  Canada,  Gaze t te   commented  on  Apollo  11  mission : 
“Lyndon  Johnson,  more  than  any  other  man,  is   responsible  for  meet- 
ing  the moon-shot deadline this  week.  . . .’’ (Am  Consul, Montreal) 
Pittsfield,  Mass.,  Berkshire  Eagle  editorial  said:  “I t   subtracts  nothing 
from  the  extraordinary  human  and  technical  achievement  represented 
by  Apollo  11  to  say  that  the  projected  lunar  landing  is   an  occasion 
not  only  for  awe  and  pride  but  also for  a  thoughtful  reappraisal  of  our 
whole  approach  to  the  new  frontier  of  space.”  (B  Eagle,  7/19/69) 
Ju l y  20: “We  have  entered  a  new  era,”  Dr.  Thomas 0. Paine,  NASA  Admin- 
istrator,  told  press i n  Houston  following Apollo I1 lunar  landing.  “The 
significance  of  the  tr ip   is  tha t   mankind  is  going  to  establish  places 
of  abode  outside  of  his  planet  earth.” 
I n   telephone  call  to  White  House,  Dr.  Paine  had   told  President 
Nixon,  “I t   is my  honor  on  behalf  of  the  entire NASA  team  to  report  to 
you  that  the Eagle has  landed  on  the Sea  of  Tranquility  and  our  astro- 
nauts  are   safe  and  looking  forward  to  starting  the  exploration  of  the 
moon.”  Dr.  Pa ine   said  President  Nixon  had  spoken  with  “excitement 
and   awe  i n   his  voice”  and   mood  was  that  of  “considerable  tension 
relieved.’,  NASA  planned  tentative  six  additional  manned  lunar  missions 
over  next  few  years.  Dr.  Paine  praised  U.S.S.R.’s 
cooperation  in   pro- 
viding  Luna  XV  information  to   Astronaut  Frank  Borman  [see  July 

231 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
July  20 
181. He   also  said  if   Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  had   not  assumed 
manual  control  of  LM  to  steer  it  from  crater  dur ing   lunar   landing, 
‘Lwe might  . . . have  had   considerable difficulty.”  (McGehan, B  Sun, 
7/21/69,  A l )  
*  CBS  presented  interview  with  former  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson 
which  had  been  taped  July  5 .   President  Johnson  credited  space  pro- 
gram   with  sparking  “revolution  of  the  60s”  and   said,  “We  can’t  dis- 
card   space.  We’re  just  beginning.”  US. had   enough  money  “to  do 
all  the  things  we  need  to  do”  in   space,  education,  and   health.  “What 
we  must  have  is  the  determination  to  do  it.”  He  said  his  last  act  a s  
president  had  been  to  send  Apollo  8  photos  of  ear th   to  186  leaders 
of  foreign  governments.  ( W   Post,  7/21/69,  A7) 
*  Astronaut  F rank   Borman  repeated  Apollo  8  reading  from  Genesis  a t  
White House service  attended by  President  and  family, Vice  President, 
Cabinet members,  Congressmen,  and  members  of  Joint  Chiefs of  Staff, 
and   of  diplomatic corps.  During  sermon, Dr.  Pau l   S.  Smith,  President 
of  Whittier  College  and  member  of  Religious Society of  Friends,  sa id :  
“ I t  was  a philosopher . . . who,  two  thousand  years  ago,  first  recounted 
a voyage to  the  moon.  Lucian  called  i t   The T ru e  History  but  confessed 
in   the  preface  that  he  wrote  ‘of  things  which  are   not  and  never  could 
have  been.’  I t   was  a  political  satirist’s  precautionary  disclaimer  be- 
cause  his  real  subject  was  the  stupidity  of  human  warfare.  His  lunar  
voyagers  got  caught  up   in   internecine  strife  between  the  moonmen 
and   the  sunmen  over  the  colonization  of  Venus!  If  there  is   something 
instructive  in   the  thought,  i t   may  be  the  implication  that  after  two 
millennia  of  philosophy men  are  still  fighting  over  real  estate  and   still 
dying  in   the  name  of  philosophical  abstractions,  but  that  a  voyage  to 
the  moon  is   just  a s   feasible  (though  somewhat more  expensive)  a s   a 
t r ip   to   Timbuktu.”  (Wiegers,  W Post,  7/21/69,  B1;  C R ,   7/22/69, 
H6189-90) 
*  Hours  before  lunar   landing  attempt  by  Apollo  11  Astronauts  Neil  A. 
Armstrong  and  Edwin E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  Pope Pau l  VI  said  at Caste1 Gon- 
dolfo,  Italy:  “ In   the  ecstasy  of  this  prophetic  day,  a  real  triumph  for 
means  produced  by  man  for   the  domination  of  the  universe,  we  must 
not  forget  man’s  need  to  dominate  himself.  Admiration,  enthusiasm 
and   passion  f o r   instruments,  for  the  products  of  man’s  hand,  fascinate 
us,  perhaps  to  the   point  of  madness.  . . . This  is  the  danger:  We  must 
beware  of  th is  worship.”  (Schmick, B  Sun, 7/21/69,  A4) 
*  Tass  announced  tha t   Lunu  XV   was  still  functioning  normally  in  lunar 
orb i t   with  109.4-km  (68-mi)  apolune,  16.1-km  (10-m i)   perilune,  1-hr  
54-min period,  and   127”  inclination.  S ir   Bernard  Lovell,  Director  of 
U.K.’s  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental  Station,  said  Luna  XV  had   con- 
ducted  two  midcourse  corrections  and   speculated  tha t   spacecraft  was 
preparing  either  to  land  o r   to  observe Apo l lo  11 landing.  ( AP,  B Sun, 
7/21/69,  A l )  
July  20-21:  White  House  was  flooded  with  congratulatory  cables  and  tele- 
phone  calls  on  Apollo  11  landing,  from  heads  of  state  throughout 
world.  Washington  Post  estimated  half  billion  persons  had  watched 
lunar   touchdown  on   worldwide  TV, and   NBC said  123  million  in   U S .  
saw  it,  mostly  in   their  own  homes.  But  35,000  baseball  fans  in   New 
York  had  learned  of  landing’s  success  when  words  “They’re  on  the 
moon”  flashed  on  scoreboard  a t   Yankee  Stadium.  I n   New  York’s 

232 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Ju ly   20-21 

Harlem,  many  of  50,000  attending  soul  music  festival  booed  lunar  
landing  announcement.  At  massive  “Moon  In”  a t   Central  Park ,  
enthusiastic  crowd  of  young  people watched  landing  on  huge  outdoor 
TV  screen i n   steady downpour  and   bought  “lunar  dogs,”  “Apollo  rock 
candy,”  a n d   “moon  picnic”  boxes. 
Composer and  band  leader  Duke Ellington made  singing debut  with 
“Moon  Maiden,”  song  he  wrote  to  celebrate  Apollo  11 success,  taped 
for  ABC.  New   York   T im e s   sold  out  950,000  copies  of  July  21   issue 
announcing  lunar  landing  and   announced  it  would  repr in t   entire 
edition  July  24   as  souvenir.  Special  Florida  Times-Union  edition 
datelined  ‘’Moonday,  July  21’’  sold  out  in  Jacksonville  within  two 
hours.  Estimated  8,000  Western  Electric  Co.  employees  left  work  o r  
failed  to  show  up  in   protest  against  being  denied  access  to  TV  o r  
radios  on  job   during  lunar  landing.  Des  Moines,  Iowa,  TV  stations 
received  some  complaints  from  viewers  over  absence  of 
regular 
programs. 
Crime rate  fell  in   Los  Angeles,  while  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  17  prisoners 
sawed  their  way  out  of  Chatham  County  prison  branch  while  guards 
watched  Apollo  11 on  TV. 
At  MSC, Houston  Welfare  Rights  Organization  members  demon- 
strated  around  display  of  LM,  calling  on   U S .   to  set  new  goal-elimi- 
nation  of  poverty.  (AP ,  B Sun,  7/22/69;  W  Pos t ,  7/21/69;  7 /22 /69 ;  
Apollo  11 Mission  Commentary,  7 /21 /69 ;   NYT,  7/17/69,  7 /27 /69)  
Millions  around  world  hailed  Apo l lo   11 landing: 
Soviet  Premier  Alexsey  Kosygin  complimented  U S .   on  lunar  land- 
ing  and   expressed  interest  in   widening  US.-U.S.S.R. 
space  coopera- 
tion  during  July  21  Moscow  discussion  with  former  Vice  President 
Hubert  H.  Humphrey,  who  was  ending  Soviet visit.  Soviet TV  did  not 
carry   live  coverage  of  Apollo  11  lunar  landing  July  20;  Tass  an -  
nouncement was  read  by  newscaster and  carried  in   two-paragraph  item 
on  Pravda’s  front  page.  Evening  paper,  Izves t ia ,   accorded  story  more 
space  and  featured  photo  of  astronauts  on  moon.  On  TV,  Cosmonaut 
Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov  described  landing  as  “major  landmark”  and  
said  crew  had  coped  “brilliantJy”  with  mission.  Georgy  Petrov,  Di- 
rector  of  Soviet  Institute  for  Cosmic  Research,  called  ApoZZo  ll  “out- 
standing  achievement” but  said  more  data  per  ruble  could  have  been 
gathered  by  unmanned  probes. 
Statue  dedicated  to  Apollo  11 astronauts  was  unveiled  July  21  in 
sports  stadium  at  Cracow,  Poland. 
In   U.K.,  Queen  Elizabeth watched lunar  landing  on   TV,  then  cabled 
President  Nixon  “warmest  congratulations.”  Prime  Minister  Harold 
Wilson  expressed  “heartfelt  relief.”  At  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental 
Station  astronomers  applauded  and   director,  S ir   Bernard  Lovell,  said 
that  “the  fu ture   ha s   been  revolutionized.”  David  Threlfall  collected 
$24,000  on  five-year-old  bet  that  man  would  land  on  celestial  body 
before  1971.  Betting  shop  had  given  him  thousand-to-one  odds  [see 
May  291. 
In   Wollongong,  Australia,  local  judge  heard  cases  while  watching 
ApoUo  11 lunar   landing  on  portable  TV set. 
Czechoslovakia  issued  two  postage  stamps  July  21   commemorating 
lunar   landing,  while  record  crowds a t  U S .  Embassy  exhibition  tapered 
off  after  exhausting  supply  of  Apollo  giveaway  materials. 

233 

July  20-21 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Five  thousand  Hungarians  walked  through  American  Embassy  in 
Budapest  July  21,  picking  up  USIA  pamphlet Man on  the  Moon. 
I n   Romania,  bouquets  were  tossed  through  US. Embassy  fence  to 
foot  of  flagpole  and   several  Romanians  reported  large  numbers  of 
Bulgarians  were  crossing  border  to  watch  live  TV  coverage  of 
Apollo 11 .  
Cuban  government  decided  not  to  jam  Voice  of  America  broadcast 
of  Apollo  11  lunar   landing.  I n   Algiers  news  was  ignored  except  for 
announcement  in   government-controlled newspaper  that  “the  man  is  
on  the  moon.”  I n   Ghana,  village  chief  listening  to  V O A   broadcast 
feared  astronauts  might  fall  off moon  if  not  careful. 
I n   Bangkok,  freedom  for   622  pardoned  prisoners  was  delayed  be- 
cause  guards  refused  to  leave  TV  sets  showing Apollo  l l .  
Lunar  landing  stole  top  play  in   Israel  and   Egypt,  from  accounts  of 
their  fierce  fighting  a t   Suez Canal. 
In   Singapore,  g ir l   born   half  hour  after  lunar  landing  was  named 
Luna.  I n   Pakistan,  boy  baby  was  named  Apollo. 
Prime  Minister,  Mrs.  Ind i ra   Gandhi,  and  Indian  Parliament  gave 
standing  ovation  to  Apollo  11  astronauts  a t   opening  of  day’s  business 
in   New  Delhi  July  21. 
I n   Japan,  Emperor  Hirohito  called  off  customary  daily  stroll  and 
interr.upted  lunch  to watch  Apollo 11  on TV. 
Iroquois  Indians  in   Brantford,  Ontario,  Canada,  feared  lunar  land- 
ing  might  plunge  ear th   into  darkness  and   release  monsters  from 
earth’s  core.  The ir   medicine  man  and   chief,  Joseph  Logan,  Jr.,  had 
said  moon  was  sacred  to  his  people  and   “we  are   not  supposed  to  dis- 
turb   her.” 
I n   Taipei,  Formosa,  Nationalist  China  Parliament  member  Hsieh 
Jen-chao  invited  Apollo  11   astronauts  to  attend Moon  Festival  honor- 
ing  rabb i t  which  Chinese legend said lived  on moon  and   could  provide 
eternal life. 
Some  devout  Moslems  in   Somalia  refused  to  believe  Apollo  11  
lunar  landing  was  reality.  Following  radio,  press,  and  word-of-mouth 
announcement,  fist  fights  broke  out  July  21  in  Mogadiscio  streets 
between  believers  and   disbelievers.  Parents  of  baby  boy  born  on  lunar 
landing  day  broke  with  Muslim  tradition  and   named  child  Armstrong 
Abdurahman  Osman. 
In   Brussels  workers  in   rad io   and  TV  studios  suspended  strike  dur-  
ing  transmission  of  Apollo  11  mission  film. 
I n   Brazil  several  thousand  persons  cheered  a s   they  witnessed  tele- 
vised  lunar  landing  a t  Museum  of  Modern Art  in   Rio  de  Janeiro  while 
church  bells  rang   outside.  I n   Santiago  de  Chile  people  rushed  out  of 
restaurants  to  look  a t   moon,  forgetting  it  was  midafternoon  when 
they  learned  of  lunar   landing. 
While  rest  of  world  focused on  lunar   landing,  one quar ter   of  world’s 
population  labored  through  sixth  moon  of  Chinese lunar  year  unaware 
of  event.  Approximately  800 million  people  in   Communist  China  had 
heard  no  news  of  lunar   landing.  Only  deviation  from  “total  blackout 
on  space exploration”  was  July  17  story  of  Astronaut  Frank  Borman’s 
visit  to  Moscow,  reported  by  New  China  News  Agency.  ( C   Trib, 
7/22/69;  W Post,  7/21-22/69;  W  Star,  7/22/69;  NYT,  7/22/69; 
234 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Ju ly   20-21 

B Sun,  7/21-22/69;  Am  Embassy,  Prague,  Bucharest, Brussels,  Buda- 
pest,  Mogadiscio) 
0  Press  in   U.S.  and   around  the  world underscored  Apollo  11 ’s   landing  on 
moon  and   man’s  first  steps  on  another  planet. 
S t .   Louis  Post-Dispatch:  “There  is  no  doubt  that  the  United  States 
should  continue  to  support  a  substantial  spacefaring  program.  Any- 
thing  else  would  be  a  denial  of  the  scientific  spirit  of  the  century  and  
the  qualities  tha t   have  made  America  what  i t   is.  But  its  scope  should 
be  measured  by  findings  and   probabilities-and 
one  other  factor. 
Fu ture   spacefaring  ought  to  be  a co-operative effort  of  all  nations  able 
to  participate,  with  the  benefits  to  be   shared  by  all.”  ( S t .  Louis  P-D, 
7/20/69) 
Washington  Sunday  Star:  “A  creature  that  can  stand  where  Arm- 
strong  and   Aldrin  stand  tonight-that 
can,  in  the  future,  move  among 
the  spheres  and   literally  explore new  worlds  . . . is  unlikely  to  give up  
on  the  hard   task  of  perfecting  himself  and   his  life  in   his  natural  en- 
vironment on  earth. The God who  brought  him  thus  fa r   from  a blob  of 
squirming  protoplasm  . . . is  unlikely  . . . to  let  man  blow  i t   all  now. 
Here  . . . must  be  the  answer  to  the  national  debate  as  to  whether  we 
go  ahead  in   space,  or  whether  we  tend  to  our  knitting  a t   home.  We 
are   bound  to  do   both.  . . . The  progressive expansion  of  the  physical 
and  spiritual domain of  man  inevitably  will  intensify  our  determination 
and   ability,  i n   concert  with  other  nations,  to  build  a  home  world 
where  hunger,  fear  and  violence  no  longer  have  a  place.”  (W   Star, 
7/20/69,  G1) 
William  Hines  in  Washington  Sunday  Star:  “One  cannot  question 
the  majesty  of  conception or  magnitude  of  effort  tha t   made  Apollo  11 
possible.”  But  one  could  ask,  “Is  this  trip  really  necessary?”  One  saw 
i n   Apollo  “that  fundamental  failing  called  hubris,  which  got  so many 
protagonists  into  hot  water  in   the  old  Greek  mythology.  Hubris  in 
English  is   usually  taken  to  mean  prideful  arrogance;  in  ancient 
Greek  the  word  meant  simple  insolence.  The  Apollo  enthusiast  rejects 
the  concept of  hubr is ;   he   says we  go  to  the  moon  not  because we  a re  
arrogant,  but  because  we  are   driven,  and  thereby  implicitly  rejects  the 
concept  of  free  will  and  substitutes  sappiness  for  sassiness.  The  ma- 
jority  asks,  ‘But  if  w e   didn’t  go,  what?’  and   the  minority  responds, 
‘If  we  didn’t  go,  so   wha t?’”   (W   Star,  7/20/69,  G2) 
Humorist  Art  Buchwald  in  Washington Pos t:   “Sometimes  one  gets 
the  feeling  that  the  right  hand  germs  in   the  Government don’t  know 
what  the  left  hand  germs a r e  doing. This was  brought  home  to me  . . . 
when  I  read  about  the  millions  of  dollars  that  were  being  spent  to  see 
that  the  astronauts  did  not  br ing   back  a  single  germ  from  the  moon. 
Unfortunately,  across  the  page  from  that  story  was  another  that  the 
Army  was  going  ahead  with  open  a ir   testing  of  nerve  gases  and   germ 
warfare.”  ( W  Post,  7/20/69,  B6) 
Los  Angeles  Herald-Examiner:  “America’s  moon  program  has  bene- 
fited  all  mankind.  I t  has  brought  better  color  television,  water  purifi- 
cation  a t   less  cost,  new  paints  and  plastics,  improved  weather  fore- 
casting,  medicine,  respirators,  walkers  for  the  handicapped,  laser 
surgery,  world-wide  communications,  new 
transportation  systems, 
earthquake  prediction  system  and   solar  power.  . . . The  Mars  goal 
235 

July  20-21 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

should br ing   benefits  to   all mankind  even  greater  than  the  tremendous 
contributions  of  the  moon  program.”  (LA  Her-Exam,  7/20/69) 
Baltimore Sun:  “. .  it is still almost incredible  tha t   in  the afternoon 
of  a  Sunday  on  ear th   two  humans  found  themselves  within  a  vehicle 
resting  on  the  surface  of  the  moon.  Nothing  could  quite  prepare  one’s 
mind  for  that,  o r   for  the  subsequent  moment  of  climax,  the  actual 
setti’ng  of  a  human  foot  on  the  substance  of  our   barren   satellite.  One 
of  the  mysteries  tha t   had   engaged  the  infinitely  inquisitive  mind  of 
man  is   now  made  tangible.  Others  remain  beyond  our  planet  and  
upon  it.”  ( B  Sun,  7/21/69,  A16) 
Chicago Da i ly   News:  “These  have been  moments to  savor-moments 
in   which  uncounted  millions  have  shared  the  immediacy  of  a  turning 
point  in   history.  This  time  there  was  no  lapse  of  weeks  o r   months, 
waiting  for  the  event  to  be  confirmed. We  were  all  there,  bound  to-  
gether  by  the  miracle  of  communication  that  intertwined  all  the  other 
miracles  of  technology  tha t   marked  man’s  first  step  on  a  celestial 
body.”  (C  Da i ly   News ,   7/21/69) 
Milwaukee  Journal:  “Superlatives  pale  before  the  magnificence  of 
the  achievement.  . . . but  how  many  years  before  the  astounding 
performance  of  Armstrong  and   Aldrin  will  seem  a s   primitive  as  the 
pioneering  work  of  the Wright  brothers?”  ( M I ,  7/21/69,  14) 
Cleveland  Plain  Dealer:  “Man’s  store  of  scientific knowledge  w i l l   be 
vastly  enriched  by  the  landing  on  the  moon.  I n   no  other  single  event 
in   history  has  there  been  greater  opportunity  to  unlock  the  mysteries 
of  the  universe.”  (P l a i n  Dealer,  7/21/69) 
London  Daily  Sketch:  “America’s  moon  triumph  offers  this  old 
( B   Sun, 
world’s  bickering  and  jealous  people  a  parable  of  hope.” 
7/22/69,  A l )  
Montreal  S ta r :   “The  deepest  hope  for  a  world  starved  for   some  form 
of  symbolism,  of  an   attempt  a t   harmony  in   place  of  selfishness  and  
narrow  nationalism, came from  the  astronauts,”  CFOX Radio, Montreal, 
broadcast.  “Eliminate  war?   Yes!  Eliminate  poverty?  Yes!  But  the 
exploration  of  space  will  help  us,  not  impede  us,  in  reaching  these 
goals.”  (Am Consul,  Montreal) 
Arbetet,  Malmo,  Sweden  (principal  organ  of  Social  Democratic 
P a r ty )  : “No  Soviet  politician  has   ever  before  used  such  conciliatory 
tones  toward  the  U S A .   a s   did  Foreign  Minister  Gromyko  recently 
in   h is   speech  before  the  Supreme  Soviet.  . . . This  Russian  position 
seems  generally  to  be  based  on  fears  of  a  confrontation  with  China. 
. . . One  of  the  side effects can  be  increased Russian  interest  in   broader 
scientific  cooperation  in   space  research.  Nothing  else  could  be  better 
designed  for  global  cooperation,  since  nothing  else  gives  us  clearer 
testimony that  we  live  in   one world.”  (Am Embassy, Stockholm) 
Ju l y  21:  ?J.S.S.R.’s  Luna  X V   (launched  July  13)  had   landed  on  moon  a t  
6:45 pm  Moscow  time  (11  :45  am  EDT)  and   had   ended  its  work,  Tass 
announced.  Spacecraft  had  “reached  the  moon’s  surface  in   the  preset 
area”  after  52  revolutions  around  moon  and   86  communications  ses- 
sions  dur ing   which  “the  work  of  the  new  systems  of  the  station  was 
checked,  the  parameters  of  the  trajectory  of  the  movement  was  meas- 
ured,  and  scientific  research  was  conducted.”  Tass  said  Luna  X V   had 
demonstrated  capability  to  land   on  various  areas  of  lunar  surface  by 

236 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Ju ly   21 

changing  selenocentric  orb i t   and   that  mission  had  yielded  important 
data  on  spacecraft  systems. 
S i r   Bernard  Lovell,  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental  Station  Director, 
said  signals  from  spacecraft  had  ended  suddenly  and   estimated  craft 
might  have  landed  i n   Sea  of  Crises,  about  500  m i   from  Sea  of  Tran-  
quility.  “If  we  don’t  get  any  more  signals,  we  will  assume  it  crash- 
landed.  But  we  don’t  make  that  assumption  a t   the  moment.”  (Gwertz- 
man, NYT,  7 /22 / 69 ,1 , 29 )  
*  Univ.  of  Texas  astronomers  reported  second  unsuccessful  attempt  to 
bounce  laser  beam  off  reflector  left  on  moon  by  Apollo  11 astronauts. 
McDonald  Observatory  Director,  Dr.  Harlan  Smith,  sa id   he   expected 
eventual success.  (AP,  B  Sun, 7/22/69,  A8) 
Galabert  International Astronautics  Prize  for  1969 was  awarded  i n  Pa r i s  
to  Apollo  11 astronauts.  Award  of  $4,000  was  presented  annually  fo r  
notable  contributions  “to  human  progress  for  the  advancement  of  all 
sciences  and   techniques  associated  with  astronautics.”  ( AP,  B  Sun, 
7/22/69,  A8) 
HUD   Secretary  George  W.  Romney  addressed  International  Platform 
Assn.  i n   Washington,  D.C.:  “I  do   not  propose  tha t   we  now  abandon 
our  efforts  to  extend  man’s  reach  still  further  beyond  our  planet,  any 
more  than  we  abandoned  our  domestic goals  while  we  were  reaching 
for  the  moon.  But  I  do  believe  the  time  has  come  for  a  revision- 
our  national  priorities.  I  believe  tha t   in   the 
in   fact,  a  reversal-of 
decades  ahead,  the  public  interest  and   indeed  our  national  survival 
require  us  to   assign  our  housing  and   urban   goals  a  h igh   priority-at 
least  comparable  to  the  priority  we  gave  our  space  program  in   the 
decade  jus t   ending.”  (HUD  News;  Hutchens, W  Star, 7/22/69,  A6)  
*  South Korea  dedicated i ts   first  superhighway, linking  Seoul with  Inchon. 
It  was  named  Apollo  in   honor  of  US. moon  landing.  (AP ,   W Post, 
7/23/69,  C5) 
July  22:  U.S.S.R. 
launched  two  unmanned  satellites.  Cosmos  CCXC, 
launched  from  Plesetsk,  entered  orbit  with  323-km  (200.7-mi)  apogee, 
192-km ( 119.3-mi)  perigee,  89.6-min period,  and  65.4”  inclination  and  
reentered  July  30.  Molniyu  1-12  comsat,  launched  from  Baikonur, 
entered  orbit  with  39,526-km  (24,560.3-mi)  apogee,  496-km  (308.2- 
inclination.  (GSFC SSR, 
m i )   perigee,  711.0-min  period,  and   64.9’ 
7 /31 /69 ;   SBD,  7/28/69,  62 ;   NYT,  7/23/69,  26 )  
Scientists a t  MSC,  monitoring  seismometers left on  lunar  surface by  ApoZZo 
11 astronauts,  recorded  five-minute tremor  they  said  could  have  been 
internal  activity-moonquake-or 
meteoroid  strike  on  surface.  Scien- 
tists  expressed concern  that  seismometer was  overheating,  probably  be- 
cause  of  damage  to  protective  cover  from  LM exhaust,  and   might  not 
survive  heat  of  lunar  moon.  (McGehan,  B  Sun, 7/23/69,  A l ;   Cohn, 
W Post,  7/24/69,  A15) 
*  Scientists a t  Lick  Observatory  in  California  unsuccessfully  tried  for  th ird  
consecutive night  to  bounce ruby  laser  beams  off  reflector  left on  lunar  
surface by Apollo  11 astronauts.  They admitted difficulty in  pinpointing 
reflector’s  exact  location  and   speculated  tha t   it  might  have  been 
knocked  down  by  LM exhaust  dur ing   ascent.  (AP,  W  Star,  7/23/69, 
A71 
*  NASA  announced  revised  plans  for   first  orbital  workshop,  with  1972 

237 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  22 
launch  using  first  two  stages  of  Sa turn   V  to   launch  workshop  and  
Apollo  Telescope  Mount  together.  Workshop  would  be  outfitted  on 
ground  and  would  arr ive   in   253-mi circular  orb i t   equipped  for   imme- 
diate  occupancy  by  astronauts  and  with ATM  attached.  Program  objec- 
tives remained  same a s  when  NASA  ifitended  to  use  Sa turn  IB  2nd  stage 
a s   1971  workshop:  to  provide  environment  in   which  man  could  live 
and   work  for  extended  periods  in   space  and   to  study  man’s  physio- 
logical  and  psychological  responses  and   capabilities  in   space.  ATM 
would  permit man  to  operate high-resolution  astronomical telescopes  in 
space,  free  from  earth’s  atmosphere. 
Sa turn   V  hardware  from  Apollo  program  was  available  for  revised 
plan.  (NASA  Release  69-105;  Simons,  W  Post,  7/22/69,  A l )  
President  Nixon  addressed  2,000  American  Field  Service  students  from 
60 countries  on White  House lawn:  “. . . in   the  year  2000 we  will,  on 
this  earth,  have  visited  new  worlds where  there  w i l l   be  a  form  of  life. 
I know  this  w i l l   happen,  and   I want  to  tell  you  a s   I  look  forward  and  
dream  about  that  fu ture   . . . this  is   the  kind  of  world  I  would  like  to 
see  and   the  kind  of  exploration  of  tha t   new  world  tha t   I  know  all 
Americans  want.  I  hope  that  when  the  next  great  venture  into  space 
takes  place  that  it  w i l l   be   one  in   which  Americans  will  be  joined  by 
representatives  of  other  countries.”  (PD, 7/28/69,  1016-7) 
U.K.  radioastronomer  S ir   Bernard  Love11  told  press  a t   U.K.’s  Jodrell 
Bank  Experimental  Station  that  Apollo  11  and   Luna  XV . ’  increased 
hopes  for  US-U.S.S.R. 
space  cooperation  because  “this  is   the  first 
time  the  United  States  has  been  demonstratively  superior  in   a  vital 
par t   of  the  space program.  American  approaches for  collaboration may 
be  received with  sympathy  in   the  Soviet Union  as  they  can  no  longer 
regard  themselves  a s  masters.”  (AP ,   B  Sun,  7/23/69,  A4) 
*  Wall  Street  brokerage  houses  were  watching  effect  of  Apo l lo   11 success 
on  stocks a s  market  resumed  trading  after  July  21  holiday.  Some firms 
believed  lunar   landing  would  generate  enthusiasm, although  its  impact 
would  be  restrained  by  uncertainties  over  surtax extension, House com- 
mittee  vote  to  cu t   oil  depletion  allowance  (ma jo r   tax  benefit  of  petro- 
leum  industry) , and  apparent  standoff  a t   Vietnam  peace  conference. 
( UPI,  W  S tar ,   7/22/69,  C7). 
*  Washington Post  said  i t   found  intellectuals  “deeply  divided”  on  implica- 
tions  of  lunar  landing.  Univ.  of  California  physicist  Dr.  Owen  Cham- 
berlain  had   said  achievement  showed  “mankind  can  be  in   charge  of 
h is   destiny.  . . . We  should  now  come  back  and   put  our  emphasis  on 
the  surface  of  the  globe”  to  achieve  peace,  lessen  poverty,  control  over- 
population,  and  preserve  our  environment. 
Univ.  of  California  chemist Dr.  Harold C.  Urey  said  if   some  of  space 
effort  reliability  rubbed  off  on  industry,  “spin-off”  would  be  enormous 
and   space  program  would  pay  for   itself.  Less  than  l/z  of  1% of  GNP 
was  spent  on  space  and  i f   lessened  there  was  no  guarantee  i t   would 
be  spent  on  necessary  domestic  programs. 
Harvard  Univ.  biochemist Dr.  George  Wald had  said:  “What  should 
have  been  a  great  flight  of  the  human  spirit  comes  to  us  heavy  with 
threat.  Those  almost  miraculous  guidance  systems  tha t   so  uncannily 
find  their  targets,  will  they  one  day  be  guiding  missiles  to  find  u s?”  
Dr.  Wald  wondered  if  Apo l lo   11 had   opened  new  horizons  for   h is  
students.  “I  am  afra id   that  they  see  in   this  an   exercise  in   great  wealth 

238 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
July  22 
and  power,  heavy  w i t h   military  and   political  overtones.  I  am  afra id  
that  they  feel  a  little more  trapped;  a  little  more  disillusioned,  a  little 
more  desperate.” 
Most  overseas  intellectuals  tended  to  concur  with  historian  Prof. 
Arnold  J.  Toynbeds  judgment,  “If  we  are   going  to  go  on  behaving  on 
ear th   a s  we  have  behaved here  so  far,  then  a  landing  on  the  moon  will 
have  to  be   written  off  a s   just  one more  shocking misuse  of  mankind’s 
slender  surplus product.” 
But  Oxford  Univ.’s  Prof.  A.  J.  Ayer  had  said,  “I  doubt  if  Prof. 
Toynbee ha s   any  evidence tha t   men  a re   being  prevented  in  any  large 
numbers  from  turning  their  minds  to  meaningful  pursuits  by  the  part 
which  they  play,  or  the  interest  which  they  take,  in   the  exploration 
of  space.  . . . I  think  that  these  spatial  explorations  . . . are   intellec- 
tually  stimulating,  especially  to  young  people.”  ( w  Pos t ,   7/22/69, 
A14) 
Australian  Civil  Aviation  Minister  Reginald  Swartz  said  passengers  on 
transpacific  Qantas  Airlines  flight  would  see  Apollo  11 reentry  July 
24  when  command  module  would  parallel  their  a ircraf t   for  four  min- 
utes  during  descent near  Gilbert  and   Ellice  Islands.  (Reuters,  iV  Post, 
7/23/69,  A12) 
U S .  Pa ten t   O5ce   issued  patent  No.  3,456,387  to   Clyde A.  Tolson, Asso- 
ciate  Director  of  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation,  for  equipment  to 
operate  emergency  windows  and   exits  in   a ircraf t   and   space  vehicles. 
Without  action  of  occupants,  sensors would  detect  abnormal conditions 
and   computer  would  weigh  considerations  before  opening  appropriate 
escape  exits. 
Patent  No.  3,456,445  was  issued  to  Curtiss-Wright  Corp.  for   im-  
proved  version  of  astronaut maneuvering  unit,  Cap  Pistol,  intended  to 
propel  man  outside  space  vehicle  by  capsules  spaced  along  tape  s tr ip  
and fired  by  engine in  pistol  fashion.  Inventors were  Joseph F.  Loprete, 
Max  Beniele,  and   Richard  E.  Biehl.  (P a t   OfE  PIO; Jones,  NYT ,  
7/26/69,  31) 
Goodyear  Aerospace  Corp.  had  invented  USAF Pilot  Airborne  Recovery 
to  keep  ejecting  je t   fighter  pilot  aloft  and   out  of  range 
Device  (PARD)  
of  enemy  ground  fire  until  h is   midair  retrieval  by  rescue  aircraft. 
Ballute  (balloon-parachute)  attached  to  main  parachute  had  burner 
suspended  below  and   fueled  from  propane  tank  on   pilot’s  back.  At 
250”F, hot  a i r  kept  parachute  above ground  for  30 min.  System  could 
be  operated  automatically  to   carry   pilot  6,000  f t   or  manually  to 
10,000-ft  hovering  altitude.  (NYT, 7/22/69,  58)  
National  and   international press  continued  comment  on  Apollo  11 lunar 
landing. 
Philadelphia  Inquirer:  “Will  this  magnificent  accomplishment  serve 
as  inspiration,  urging  Americans  and  all  mankind  on  to  a  genuine 
‘giant  leap’  forward,  not  merely  into  the  infinite  reaches  of  space  but 
into  the  infinite  possibilities  of  achievement on  ear th   where  the  space 
age  has   recorded  many  more  failures  than  successes?  Or  will  the 
inspiration  be   abandoned  before  the  veiled  censure  of  those  who  seem 
to  suggest  the  solution  of  all  human  dilemmas  lies  in   turning  away 
from  space  to  other  priorities?”  Cutbacks  a t   hour   of  triumph  would 
be  only  waste  of  investment  in   technology  which  could  be  helped  in  
solving ear th  problems. “This  is no  time to  falter,  ou r  astronauts should 

239 

Ju ly   22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

come home to  a world  and  nation  determined  to  fulfill  the  prophecy  in  
Commander Armstrong’s  words.”  ( P  Znq,  7/22/69) 
K w h i n g t o n  Pos t:   I t  was  foolish  “to  leap  from  this  historic moment 
to  eager  expectations  of  the  day  when  men  will  live  and   work  in  
space,  when  colonies  will  be  established,  food  raised  and   industrial 
products  built  on  heavenly  bodies  other  than  the  earth.  These  things 
will  doubtless come  in   their  own  good time.  But this  is  not  the  occasion 
on  which  to  make  a  new  national  commitment  in   space  that  would 
keep  NASA’s program  going a t  the  frantic  pace which  fulfilled President 
Kennedy’s  great promise  for  the  moon.  Now  is  the  occasion,  rather,  to 
establish  a  steady  program  of  space  development,  one  removed  from 
the  political  debate  over  national  priorities,  which  w i l l   ensure  tha t   we 
establish a  firm base for fu ture  generations to build  upon while creating 
a t   home  . . . a  kind  of  society  which  will  allow  them  to  use  fully  the 
new  opportunities  opened  up   by  the  three  new  American  heroes  and  
the  tens  of  thousands  of  other  people  who  made  their  flight  possible.” 
(W Post,  7/22/69,  A24) 
Handels  Och  Sjofartstidning,  Goteborg,  Sweden:  “This  is   a  small 
step  for  a  man,  but  a  grea t   one  for  humanity.  Neil  Armstrong’s  com- 
mentary  when  he  stepped down  onto the  surface  of  the  moon has  every 
prospect  of  becoming  one  of  those  winged  expressions  which  genera- 
tions  of  school  children  w i l l   commit  to  memory.  . . . Now  should  be 
the  time  to  replace  the  extraordinarily  costly  space  race  with  coopera- 
tion  between  the  Soviet  and   the  U.S.A.”  (Am  Embassy,  Stockholm) 
Stockholm Expressen:  “The  ‘moonshot’  . . . was  imposing. But  i t  also 
gives  a  horrible  feeling  to  think  that  the  U S A .  can  handle  tremendous 
technical  problems  with  such  ease  while  i t   is   considerably  more  diffi- 
cult  to  cope  with  those  of  a  complicated  social,  political  and   human 
nature.”  (Am  Embassy,  Stockholm) 
Canadian  Montreal  Star:  “The  scientific  information  which  results 
from  Apollo  11  is  an  extra  dividend  from  an  enterprise  which  has 
produced  its own  benefits  for   the  human  spirit  and, perhaps,  for  human 
solidarity.”  (Am Consul, Montreal) 
J u ly   23:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Thor-Burner  booster  into  orb i t   with  531.5-mi  (855.2-km)  apogee, 
488.4-mi  (785.8-km)  perigee,  101.3-min  period,  and   98.8’  inclination. 
(GSFC  SSR,  7/31/69;  Pres  Rp t   70  [69]) 
*  NASA’s HL-10  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloting  by  NASA  test  pilot  William H. 
Dana,  reached  68,000-ft  altitude and  mach  1.2  dur ing   22nd  flight  west 
of  Rosamond, Calif.  Purpose was  to  obtain  performance,  stability,  and 
control  data.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
*  Scientists  monitoring  seismometer  left  on  lunar   surface  by  Apollo  11 
astronauts  told  press  a t   MSC   five-minute  event  recorded  July  22  was 
either  meteoroid  strike o r   moonquake similar  to  mild  California  earth- 
quake  recorded  on  East  Coast.  MIT  geologist,  Dr.  Frank  Press,  said 
tremor  would  have  magnitude  of  four  or  five  according  to  Richter 
scale,  on  which  ma jor   earthquake  registered  seven  o r   eight.  Seismic 
reading  was  strong  indication  tha t   moon  was  layered  with  outer  crust 
and   inner  mantle  like  ear th   and   supported  theories  that  moon  was 
formed near  o r   torn   from  earth.  Layering,  he  said,  “would  imply  that 
a t  one time there  was  enough heat  so  tha t   the heavier  rocks went  to  the 

240 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  23 

(McGehan,  B  Sun, 

interior  and   the   lighter  ones  to  the  surface.” 
7/24/69,  A l ;   Lyons,  NYT,  7/24/69, 1) 
*  NASA  announced  selection  of  McDonnell Douglas Corp.  and  North Ameri- 
can Rockwell Corp.’s  Space Div.  to  conduct parallel  $2.9-millionY 11-mo 
design and  planning  studies  of  12-man earth  orb i ta l  space station  which 
could be  developed  by  1975 and   have  10-yr lifetime.  Companies would 
also  include  conceptual design  of  50-man  space base  composed  of  spe- 
cialized  modules  assembled  in   low  ear th   orb i t   in   late  1970s and   early 
1980s to   serve a s  centralized  scientific  and   technical  facility  i n  orbit. 
Aerojet-General Corp.,  General Electric  Co.,  and  Hughes Aircraft Co. 
had   been  selected  for  final  competitive  negotiation  of  contract  to  de- 
velop  advanced  optical  communications  experiment.  Companies would 
compete  for   one $5-million contract  to  develop wideband  laser  commu- 
nications  system  to  be  placed  on  board  Applications Technology Satel- 
lite ATS-F,  scheduled for  launch  in   1972, for  communications between 
satellite  and  transportable  ground  station. 
(NASA  Releases  69-108, 
69-109) 
0  Canadian  Zs is   Z International  Satellite  for   Ionospheric  Studies  (launched 
Jan.  30 )   was  adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  Nine  of  ten  experiments 
were  operational;  ion mass  spectrometer had   been  turned  off  after  one 
week  of  operation,  when  i t   developed  high-voltage problems,  and   since 
had  been  used  only  for  shor t   periods  to  collect  engineering  data.  Low- 
frequency  receiver  experiment  had  been  providing  indirect  ion  data, 
thus  compensating  partially  for   IMS  loss.  Onboard  tape  recorder  wa s  
providing  excellent  topside  ionograms  of  Antarctic  area  and   other 
previously inaccessible areas.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
*  Full-color  lunar   photos  from   ApoZZo  11, including  one  of  man  first 
setting  foot  on  moon,  would  be  released  by  NASA  to   press  and  TV  four  
days  after  splashdown,  following  two-day  decontamination  of  film, 
NASA  announced. Superintendent of  Documents,  GPO, was  taking  orders 
from   public  for   photos  to  be  filled  in   late  August.  Series of  reproduc- 
tions  of  paintings  by  American  artists  recording  space  program,  “Eye- 
witness  to  Space,”  also would  be  released.  (NASA   Release  69-831) 
*  Successful  ApolZo  11 mission  was  expected  to  spur  reservations  on  first 
lunar  passenger  flight,  Washington  Evening  Star  said.  Before  launch 
Pan  American  World  Airways  held  30,000  reservations  and   Trans  
World  Airlines,  5,000.  Pan   Am  spokesman said  rush   began  after  film 
“2001:  a  Space  Odyssey”  was  first  shown  in   1968. I n   letters  acknowl- 
edging  reservations,  Pan   Am  was  saying,  “Starting  date  of  service  is  
not  yet  known.  Equipment  and   route  will,  probably,  be  subject to  gov- 
ernment  approvals.”  TWA  was  saying,  “We  will  be  in   contact  with  you 
again,  a s   soon  a s   technological  advances  develop  to  the  point  where 
we  can  project  departure date.”  (W  Star, 7/23/69,  A7) 
*  In  Pravda Soviet academician, Prof.  Leonid  I.  Sedov, said  space research 
was  developing  in   so  many  different  directions  that  realization  of  fu- 
ture  projects  would  require  huge  material  expenditure  and   concen- 
tration  of  creative  efforts  of  “countless  highly  qualified  workers  and 
specialists.”  He  said,  “Not  one  individual country  can  afford  the’ prac- 
tical  implementation  of  all  the  technically  feasible  and   worthwhile 
projects.”  While  scientists  had   sa id   unmanned  spacecraft  could  not 
always  be   substituted  for  manned  vehicles,  “flights  by  automatic  sta- 

241 

July  23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

tions  have  preceded  and   will  continue  to  precede  manned  flights.” 
Human  feelings  and   observations,  “especially  when  something  turns  
up  unexpectedly  and   unforeseen,  cannot  be  completely  replaced  by 
automatic  stations.”  But  unmanned  probes  would  continue  a s   path- 
finders  because  they  were  “cheaper,  more  simple  and   less  dangerous 
vehicles  for  research.”  (Reuters,  W Post,  7/24/69,  A15) 
*  U.S.  delegate to U.N.  William B.  Buffum,  responding  to  Soviet tribute  to 
Apollo  11 astronauts  by  U.S.S.R.  delegate  Aleksey  V.  Zakharov,  said 
before  Security  Council  he   hoped  “fraternal  spirit”  demonstrated  by 
astronauts and   cosmonauts would  lead  to  greater  cooperation  on  ear th  
also.  (NYT ,   7/25/69,  31) 
I n   h is   fourth  reference  to  Apollo  11 within  week,  Pope  Pau l   V I   said  a t  
summer  palace,  Caste1 Gondolfo,  Italy : “Catholic  faith,  not  only  does 
not  fear  this  powerful  confrontation  of  its  humble  doctrine  with  the 
wonderful  riches  of  modern  scientific  thought,  but  it  desires  i t   . . . be- 
cause  tru th   although  diverse  on   various  levels  . . . is  one  and   because 
such  a  confrontation  is  of  mutual  advantage  to  faith  and  to  study  in 
every field.”  (AP, W Post,  7/24/69,  A15) 
*  Rep.  Louis  Frey,  Jr .   (R -F la . ) ,   introduced  for   himself  and   Rep.  William 
Chappell  (D-Fla.)  H.J.R.  834   “to  redesignate  the  area   in   the  State  of 
Florida  known  as  Cape  Kennedy  as  ‘Cape  Canaveral.’ ” Measure  was 
referred   to  House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics.  (CR, 
7/23/69,  H6238) 
0  Czechoslovakian  Communist  Par ty   Central  Committee’s  weekly  Tribuna 
said  of  Apollo  11 landing:  “ I t   would  be  premature  today  to   try  to  a t-  
tempt  a  detailed  evaluation  of  the  historical  significance  of  this  act. 
Surely  i ts   influence  w i l l   be  no  smaller  than  tha t   of  Columbus’  travels 
many  centuries  ago.”  (Am  Embassy,  Prague)  
July  24:  President  Nixon  welcomed  returned  Apollo  11  astronauts  aboard 
U.S.S.  Hornet:  “I  think  I  am  the  luckiest  man  in  the  world  . . . 
not  only  because  I  have the honor  to  be President  of  the  United  States, 
but  particularly  because  I  have  the  privilege  of  speaking  for  so   many 
in   welcoming  you  back  to   earth.”  Washington  had  received  messages 
from  more  than  100  foreign  governments :  “Emperors,  Presidents, 
Prime  Ministers,  and  Kings,  have  sent  the  most  warm  messages  that 
we  have  ever  received.  They  represent  over  2  billion  people  on  this 
earth,  all  of  them  who  had  the  opportunity,  through  television,  to  see 
what  you  have  done.”  Week  of  mission  had   been  “the  greatest  week 
in   the  history  of  the  world  since  the  Creation,  because  a s   a  result  of 
what  happened  in   this  week,  the  world  is   bigger,  infinitely,  and   also, 
a s   I  am  going  to  find on  this  t r ip   around  the  world  . . . as  a  result  of 
what  you  have  done,  the  world has  never  been  closer  together  before.” 
(PD, 8/4/69,1032-3) 
*  At  MSC   news  conference following Apollo  11 splashdown, Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller, NASA  Associate  Administrator  for Manned  Space  Flight,  said : 
“. . . we  now  stand  a t  what  is  undoubtedly  the  greatest  decision  point 
in   the  history  of  this  planet.”  Apollo  11 had   proved  “that  man  is   no 
longer  bound  to  the  limits  of  the  planet  on  which  for  so  long  he  has 
lived.  We  will  re turn   to  the  moon  first  in   November  and  then  a t  
regular  intervals  in   the  coming  year.  But  these  tr ips   are   only  the  first 
step.  . . . Will  we  press  forward  to  explore  other  planets  or  will  we 
deny  the  opportunity  to  the  fu ture?   To  me,  the  choice  is   clear.  We 

242 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
July  24 
must  take  the   next  step.  . . .  Th is   is  the  time  for  decision.  . . .  The 
knowledge  possessed  by  men  is  sufEcient,  the  resources  a re   adequate 
for   the task  of  carrying  out this next  step.  . . . 
I n   th is   moment  of  man’s  greatest  achievement,  i t   is  timely  for   us 
66 
to  dedicate ourselves to  the unfinished work  so  nobly begotten by  three 
of  us.  To  resolve  that  this  nation,  under  God,  will  jo in   with  all  men 
in   the  pursuit  of  the  destiny  of  mankind  will  lead  to   the  way  to  the 
planets.” 
I n   answer  to   questions,  Dr.  Mueller  said  next  ma jor   step  should  be  
manned  landing  on  Mars  which  would  be  possible  %ometime  after 
1980.” 
L/G Samuel C.  Phillips  ( USAF) , Apollo  Program  Director,  told  press 
Apollo  team  was  “strongest  team  that’s  ever  assembled  in   the  history 
of  man.  It  has  the  strength  of  technical  and   engineering  confidence, 
scientific competence,  and  management competence  that’s  unexcelled.  I t  
has   the   dedication  that’s  necessary  to  be  able  to  tackle  an  almost  im- 
possible  job  and   bring  it  through”  and   an   exciting  fu ture   in   lunar 
exploration. 
Second manned  lunar landing mission,  Apollo  12, would  be  launched 
from  KSC Nov.  14  toward  touchdown  on  Site  7  in  moon’s  Ocean  of 
Storms.  Pr imary   objective  would  be  to  deploy  Apollo  lunar  surface 
experiment  package  (ALSEP) , explore  and   survey  mare  area,  and   re- 
turn   samples to  earth.  Secondary  objective,  if  LM  softlanded  on  target, 
would  be  to  examine  Surveyor   IIZ  spacecraft  (launched  April  17, 
1967), which  was  resting  on moon  near  planned  Apollo 12 touchdown 
point.  Astronauts  would  have  two  periods  for   extravehicular  activities 
(EVA ) ,   during  which  they  would  explore  surface  and   conduct  experi- 
ments for  over three  hours and  walk  farther  away  from  spacecraft  than 
had  Apo l lo   11  crew.  Maximum  lunar  stay  time  would  be  28-32  hrs. 
Schedule called  for   planning  to  fly  follow-on  missions  through  Apollo 
15  a t   four-month intervals  and   missions  after  tha t   a t   five-month inter- 
vals.  (Transcr ip t)  
USAF  launched unidentified  satellite  from Vandenberg  AFB  by  Thor-Agena 
booster.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  136.1  mi.  (219  km)  ; perigee, 
110.6  mi  (178  km)  ; period,  88.4  m in ;   and  inclination,  74.9O.  Satel- 
lite  reentered  Aug.  23.  (GSFC SSR ,   7/31/69;  8/31/69;  InteraviaAir- 
Letter,  7/25/69,  5 ;  Pres  Rp t   70  [69]) 
In   nationwide  reaction  to  safe re turn   of  Apollo  1.1  astronauts,  New  York 
Stock  Exchange went wild  though  stocks continued  to  fall.  Numbers  on 
annunciator  boards  flapped  in   unison  as  message  “New  York  Stock 
Exchange  shares  the  world’s  joy  a t   the  safe  return  of  Apollo  from  the 
moon-Astronauts  Armstrong, Aldrin,  and  Collins-So  proudly  we  hail 
Vou”  appeared  on  tape  and   illuminated  on  screen.  Along  Fifth  Avenue 
church  bells  rang.  Hayden  Planetarium  suspended  usual  program  to 
throw  “splashdown  party”  with  champagne  and  live  color  telecast  of 
Apollo  11 recovery  operations  flashed  on  blackened dome. 
San  Franciscans  exploded  firecrackers  and   threw  ticker  tape  from  
windows,  and   10-story-high  figure  “11”  was  fashioned  in   lighted  win- 
dows  a t  MIT  in  Boston.  Des Moines,  Iowa,  rang  Liberty  Bell  reproduc- 
tion  for  first time since its 1950 installation  on  S ta te  House grounds. 
In   Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong’s  home  town,  Wapakoneta,  Ohio, 
high school band  marched playing moon  songs. Moniclair, N. J.,  theater 

243 

July  24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

marquee  read,  “Congratulations  Buzz  Aldrin-MIqntclair’s  Man  on   the 
Moon.” 
I n   Huntsville,  Ala.,  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  MSFC  Director,  was 
hoisted  on  shoulders  of  four   local  councilmen while  thousands  a t  MSFC  
site cheered and  waved  banners  saying  “Huntsville is  Rocket City.” 
City  of  Houston  planned  “Texas  size”  celebration  for  ApoZZo  11 
astronauts Aug.  16, including  ticker-tape  parade  and   huge  program  in  
city’s  Astrodome  coliseum.  (Sloan,  Weinraub,  Hicks,  Borders,  UPI, 
N Y T ,  7 /25 / 69 ,67 ,29 , 69 ,   31,30;  B Sun, 7 /25 /69 ,45 )  
Trans  World Airlines  filed  first  application  with  Civil Aeronautics  Board 
for  routes  between  ear th   and  moon.  Airline  said  i t   had   received  1,200 
reservations  during  final  four  days  of  ApoZlo  11  mission. 
(TWA  
Release) 
Safe landing  of  ApoZZo  11   in   Pacific  made  “splash  applauded  around  the 
world,”  New  Yo rk   Times said.  I n  U.S.S.R.  TV  viewers  had  live  cover- 
age  for  first  time  dur ing   mission  as  Moscow  TV station  hooked  into 
Eastern  Europe’s  Intervision  network  for  live  transmission  of  astro- 
nauts  being  deposited  on  carrier  Hornet.  Later,  station  devoted  first 
two-thirds  of  final  newscast  to  ApolZo  11 and   announced  that  Soviet 
President  Nikolay  V.  Podgorny  had  sent  telegram  to  President  Nixon 
offering  “our  congratulations  and   best  wishes  to  the  space  pilots.” 
Soviet Academy  of  Sciences president Mstislav  V.  Keldysh  called  voy- 
age  “a  big  contribution  to  space  exploration  and   further  progress  of 
world  science.”  Cosmonauts sent message  to  ApoZZo  11  crew:  “We  . . . 
closely  followed  your  flight.  We  wholeheartedly  congratulate  you  on 
the  completion of  your  wonderful  journey  to   the moon  and   safe  return 
to  earth.” 
In  London Lloyd‘s  of  London’s Lutine Bell tolled  twice  for good news 
of  splashdown of  ApoZZo  1 1 .  S ir   Bernard  Lovell,  Jodrell  Bank  Experi- 
mental  Station  Director,  said,  “The  successful  conclusion  of  this  im- 
mense  project  marks   the  beginning  of  a  new  phase  when  man  must 
concern  himself  with  the  greatest  issues  of  peaceful  coexistence  in  
extraterrestrial  space.” 
Thunderstorm  in   Pa r i s   drove  many  people  off  streets  a t   time  of 
splashdown. On  Riviera,  bells  tolled  for  five  minutes  and   ancient  can- 
non  boomed. 
Mayor  Pascal  Rossini  of  Ajaccio,  Corsica,  sent  invitation  to  astro- 
nauts  to  visit  Corsica  dur ing   1969 bicentennial  of  Napoleon’s  birth. 
I n  Warsaw crowd  of  300 Poles broke  into  applause a t  U.S.  Embassy. 
Over  Pacific  on  Qantas  airliner  flying  under  Apollo  reentry  point, 
crew  and   80  passengers saw  space capsule reenter.  I n   Canberra  Pr ime  
Minister  John  Gorton  invited  astronauts  to  visit  Australia. 
Pope  Pau l   VI  sent  telegram  to  President  Nixon  with  prayer  “that 
this  immense  achievement may  foster  peace  and  prosperity  and   scien- 
tific  and   moral  progress  for  all  mankind.”  Congratulatory  messages 
were  sent  by  President  Giuseppe  Saraga t   of  Italy,  President  Yahya 
Khan  of  Pakistan,  Pr ime   Minister  Eisaku  Sato  of  Japan,  President 
Chung  Hee  Pa rk   of  South  Korea,  U.N.  Secretary  General  U  Thant, 
President  Gustav  Heinemann  of  West  Germany,  and   Pr ime   Minister 
John  Gorton  of  Australia.  (Collier,  N Y T ,   7/25/69,  31;  Mills,  3 Sun, 
7/25/69,  A6;  AP,  B  Sun, 7/25/69,  A6) 
*  More  TV  coverage  of  ApoUo  11  mission  had  been  transmitted  overseas 

2pIE 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  24 

via  satellites  to  worldwide  audience  than   of  any  previous  event, 
ComSatCorp announced.  More  than  230  h r s   of  satellite  time  for   200 
programs  were  transmitted  dur ing   nine-day  mission.  Previous  record 
was  225  hrs,  set  by  Mexico  Summer  Olympic  Games  during  18  days 
in   October 1968. Broadcasters  estimated tha t   500 million  persons were 
able  to watch  A p o l b  11’s TV  broadcasts  in   more  than  40 countries  on 
5 continents.  ( ComSatCorp Release  69-46) 
0  During  stop  a t  Hickam AFB,  en  route  to  MSC  from Apollo  11 splashdown, 
Apollo  8 Astronaut  Frank  Borman  said it would  be  “helpful  and  hope- 
ful  for  U S .  and   U.S.S.R.  to  cooperate  in   space missions.  He  saw  “in- 
dications,’  dur ing   h is   tour   of  U.S.S.R. 
that  Russians  would  be  inter- 
ested,  bu t   “talk  is   cheap”  and   U.S.S.R.  “is  still  supplying 85  per  cent 
of  the  munitions  to  North  Vietnam.”  He   said  U.S.  had  gone  “95  per 
cent  of  the  way”  toward  promoting  cooperation.  I t   was  up  to  U.S.S.R. 
to   do  the  rest.  (UPI,  N Y T ,   7/26/69,  12 )  
USAF  promoted  ApoZZo  11  Astronaut  Michael  Collins  to  full  colonel.  I n  
congratulatory  message  Gen.  John  P.  McConnell,  Air  Force  Chief  of 
Staff,  sa id   Apollo  11  mission  was  “indeed  a  momentous  achievement” 
and   promotion  was  “token  of  appreciation  for  the  part  you  played.” 
( UPI,  N Y T ,  7 /25 /69 ,28)  
0  NASA  Office  of  Space  Science  and   Applications  announced  estabiishment 
of  Ear th   Resources  Research  Data  Facility  a t   MSC,  containing  docu- 
mentation  from  NASA  and  user  agency  investigators  in  Ear th  Resources 
Survey  Program   over  past  three  years.  Information  was  available  for 
examination  in  facility  by  all  interested  persons.  (NASA   Ann) 
*  Rep.  Louis  Frey,  Jr.  (R-Fla.) , introduced  ,House Jo in t   Resolution  “pro- 
viding  for  the  establishment  of  the  Astronauts  Memorial  Commission 
to  construct  and  erect with  funds  a  memorial  in   the  John  F.  Kennedy 
Space  Center  . . . to  honor  and   commemorate the  men  who  serve  as 
astronauts  in   the  US. Space  Program.”  Measure,  cosponsored  by 
House  Committee on  Science  and   Astronautics,  was  referred  to  Com- 
mittee  on  House  Administration.  (CR,  7/24/69,  H6293) 
July  25:  NASA  launch  from  ETR  of  In te l sa t - I l l   F-5  failed  to  reach  planned 
synchronous  orbit  when  3rd   stage  of  Long-Tank  Thrust-Augmented 
Thor-Delta  booster  malfunctioned.  Satellite  entered  low  ear th   orbit 
w i t h  3,354.8-mi  (5,399-km)  apogee,  167.2-mi (269-km) perigee,  146.7- 
min period,  and  30.3” inclination  instead  of  elliptical  orbit with 23,000- 
mi  (37,007-km)  apogee  and  175-mi  (281.6-km)  perigee.  Mission, 
originally  scheduled  for   launch  in   October  1969,  had  been  resched- 
uled  for  July  1 7  to  replace  In te lsa t-I l l  F-2,  which  had   stopped operat- 
ing  over  Atlantic  June  29.  Launch  had  been  delayed  for  technical 
(NASA   Release  69-119;  SBD,  7/29/69,  65;  GSFC  SSR ,  
reasons. 
7 /3  1/69) 
0  Apollo  11   recovery physician,  Dr.  William  R.  Carpentier,  reported  from 
inside  Mobile  Quarantine  Facility  onboard  U.S.S.  Hornet  that  astro- 
nauts had  completed preliminary medical examination  and  were  “fine.” 
Astronaut Neil A.  Armstrong’s  slight  ear  infection  had  disappeared and  
all  three  astronauts  were  in   excellent  condition.  (Wooten,  N Y T ,  
7 /26 /69 ,1 )  
Two  boxes  of  lunar  samples from  Apollo  11  arrived  a t  Lunar  Receiving 
Laboratory  in   Houston,  where  they  would  be  examined  and   used  in  
experiments. (W i lford ,   N Y T ,   7/26/69,  1) 

245 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
July  25 
e  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA Administrator,  told  news  conference  aboard 
U.S.S.  Hornet  he   expected U.S.S.R.  to  land   men  on  moon  within  18 
mos.  “My  guess  is  it41 be   much  sooner  than   most  people  think.”  He 
thought  U.S.S.R.  had   lost  race  “by  keeping  their  program  so  secret.” 
U S .  had  encouraged  suggestions from  scientists  throughout  non-Com- 
munist  world,  while  details  of  Soviet  program  were  known  only  to 
“small  elite,”  Apo l lo  11 success would  eventually lead to  closer coopera- 
change  i n   the  attitude  . . . but  a  steady  interest  on  their  part.  I  don’t 
in   space  exploration.  “I  don’t  look  for  any  early 
tion  with  U:S.S.R. 
see  joint  efforts  but  cooperation  from  time  to  time.”  (UPI, NYT, 
7/25/69,  30) 
President  Nixon  arrived  a t  Guam  International  Airport  after  flight  from 
carr ier   Hornet. He  said,  “As  I  stand  here  and   think  of  what  happened 
today,  the  completion of  that  historic  flight  to  the  moon  and   the  land- 
ing  on  the moon,  I  can  say  that  I am  sure  all of  us-all 
of  the  Ameri- 
can  citizens  around  the  world-are 
proud  today  of  what  has  hap- 
pened.  . . .” ( P D ,  8 /4 /69 ,1033)  
Senate  unanimously  adopted  S.R.  224,  introduced  by  Sen.  Michael  J. 
Mansfield  (D-Mont.)  for  himself  and   Sen. Everett M.  Dirksen  (R-Ill.) , 
expressing  gratitude  on  behalf  of  Senate  and   of  all  American  people 
for  “dedication,  devotion,  courage  and   effort  of  all  associated  with  the 
Apollo  program  and   with  the  Apollo  11  mission.”  (CRY  7/25/69, 
SS575) 
*  I n   telephone interview,  evangelist  and  presidential  religious  adviser  Billy 
Graham  took  issue  with  July  24  statement  of  President  Nixon  in   wel- 
coming  Apollo  11 astronauts back  to  earth.  Graham  told  UPI,  “. . . as 
a  Christian,  I  would  contend  that  there  have  been  three  much  much 
greater  days”  than  those  of  lunar   landing  and  moon  walk.  They  were 
first  Christmas,  day   on  which  Christ  died,  and   first  Easter.  While  he 
did  not wish  to  detract  from  “magnificent achievement,” he  felt  “Presi- 
dent  was  speaking  extemporaneously. And  I’ve  found  from  years  of 
speaking  extemporaneously  that  in   the  excitement  and   emotion  of  a 
moment,  you  don’t  think  through  every  statement  you  make.”  Associ- 
ated  Press  later  quoted  Graham  as  saying,  “I  know  that  President 
Nixon  agrees that  the  greatest  single event in  history  was  the  coming of 
Christ”;  he  was  sure  President  Nixon  meant  moon  walk  was  probably 
man’s  greatest  accomplishment.  ( W  Pos t ,   7/26/69,  A10) 
Plans  for   proposed  $1-million Neil  A.  Armstrong  Aerospace  Museum  a t  
Apollo  11 astronaut’s  birthplace,  Wapakoneta,  Ohio,  called  for  co rn  
pletion  in   1970,  Ohio  Historical  Society  Director  Daniel  R.  Por ter  
said.  (UPI,  W  Pos t ,   7/26/69,  B7)  
*  National  and  international  press  commented  on  successful  completion of 
Apollo  11 mission : 
Washington Pos t:   “It has  been  eight  days  of  triumph  for   America, 
eight  days  of  triumph  for   mankind.  Much  more  will  undoubtedly  fol- 
low  a s   the  secrets  of  space  bow  to   the  advances  of  science.  But  it  is 
enough  now-more 
than  enough  for  an   entire  lifetime  when  you  think 
about  it-to 
have  seen  the  first  men  walk  on  the  moon  and   then,  less 
than   four  days  later,  to  welcome  them  back  home  safely.”  (V Pos t ,  
7/25/69) 
New York  Times: “For  the  first  time in  history,  men have  gone from 
this  ear th   to  another  celestial  body,  landed  there  and   returned  home,  . 

2476 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  25 

even  bringing  back  with  them  extraterrestrial  matter.  Not  since  the 
human  race  evolved  has  there  been  a  comparable  event,  nor  one  so 
capable of  lifting  all mankind’s  horizons,  dreams and  aspirations. What 
was  fantasy  t o   preceding  generations  is  now  accomplished  fact.  The 
achievement w i l l   be  remembered  so long as   civilization survives.” 
Of  President  Nixon’s  round  the  world  tour,  Times  said:  “The  spec- 
tacular  success  of  Apollo  11 has  vastly  increased  good  feeling  toward 
the United  States throughout  the  world.  The President  obviously wants 
to  capitalize  on  it  both  for  foreign  and   domestic  political  purposes.” 
( N Y T ,  7/25/69,  46) 
Cleveland,  Ohio,  Plain  Dealer:  Apollo  11  mission  “closes  out  one 
aspect  of  the  exploration  program  but  opens  wide  the   door  of  what 
can  be  an   almost  endless journey.  . . . Although the  Apollo  program  is 
not  complete,  the  lure   of  Mars,  5 million  miles  away,  grows  in   bold 
anticipation of  the future.  . . . the race has only just begun.”  (Cleveland 
Plain  Dealer,  7/25/69) 
Newport  News,  Va.,  T imes   Herald:  “All  of  the  money  poured  into 
the  space  program  would  appear  justified  if  one  of  the  side  products 
was  the  kind  of  cooperation  [with  the U.S.S.R.]  now  possible.”  (New- 
port  News  Times Herald7 7/25/69) 
E l  Rai  El Amm ,  Khartoum,  Sudan:  “America  achieved a  victory  for 
the human  mind  by  sending  th e  first man  from  the  earth  to  the  moon. 
. . . But  America,  the  great  power  that  achieved  this  astonishing  big 
success,  must  stop  doing  things  that  are   far   below  these  standards.” 
(Am  Embassy,  Khartoum) 
Somali  News ,   Mogadiscio, Somali:  “I t   is  true  that  the  responsibility 
for   the Apollo-Eleven is  entirely  American,  but  the message left  behind 
on  the moon  for  posterity  by  the  astronauts  . . . acknowledges the  uni- 
versal  aspect  of  such  a  feat.  We  think  . . . of  those  courageous  astro- 
nauts not  . . . as  Americans but  a s  worthy  representatives of  the human 
race  on  whose  total  achievement  they  relied  in   carrying  out  their 
mighty  and  splendid mission.”  (Am  Embassy,  Mogadiscio) 
Motion  picture  footage  of  Apollo  I 1  lunar  landing  mission  would  be  re- 
leased  for  sale  to  commercial  producers  after  quarantine  period,  NASA 
announced.  Two  600-ft  rolls  would  be  made  available  initially:  one 
would  include prelaunch, launch,  and  recovery  operations;  other would 
include  all  usable  onboard  footage.  (NASA  Release  69-83L) 
July 26:  Apollo 11  astronauts, enclosed in  mobile quarantine  facility  (M Q F ) ,  
arrived  a t   Pear l   Harbor,  Hawaii,  where  they  were  greeted  by  12,000 
cheering  people  and  Mayor  of  Honolulu Frank  F.  Fasi.  MQF  was  then 
transported  to aircraft which would  carry  i t  to Lunar Receiving Labora- 
tory  in   Houston.  At  LRL, scientists owned   first  of  two  boxes  of  lunar 
samples  and  made  preliminary  exadinations  of  samples  in   one  box. 
(Wooten, Wilford,  NYT ,   7/27/69,  47,  1) 
A t  lunar  landing celebration dinner  in  Huntsville,  Ala.,  Dr.  Wernher  von 
Braun,  MSFC  Director,  said:  “We  worked  together  and  together  we 
accomplished  our  par t   of  the  mission.  The  moon  is  now  accessible. 
And  someday,  because  of  the  beginning  that  we  have  made  here,  the 
planets  and   the  stars  may  belong  to  mankind.  This  reach  toward  the 
heavens,  toward  the  stars,  can  eventually  loose  the  human  race  from 
the confines  of  this  ear th   and  maybe  even this  solar  system and give  i t  
immortality  in   the   immense  and  never-ending reaches  of  space.”  For 

247 

July  26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

first time,  “life  has  left  i t s  planetary  cradle and   the  ultimate  destiny  of 
mankind  is no   longer  confined.  When  the Mayflower  landed  on  Ameri- 
can  shores  the  pilgrims  did  not  envision the  nation  tha t   would  eventu- 
ally  evolve.  Neither  can  we  truly  say  what  will  eventually spring  from 
the  footprints  around   Tranquility  Base.”  (Tex t)  
*  At  state  dinner  in   Manila,  Philippine  President  Ferdinand  E.  Marcos 
exchanged  toasts  with  President  Nixon  and   commented  on  Apollo  11: 
“. . . we  participate  in   the  celebration  of  this  achievement as man  as- 
pires  for   the  stars,  the  stars  outside  of  this  world  and   the  s tars  within 
himself  and  within  his  spirit.  It  is  the  hope  of  humanity,  a s   i t   is  the 
hope  of  the  Philippines,  tha t   this  vision  and  this  genius,  this  courage 
and  this ingenuity  shall  be  utilized  for  the  solution  of  man’s  problems.” 
( P D ,  8/4/69,  1036-7) 
New  York  T imes   interview  quoted  Dr.  William  H.  Pickering,  JPL Di- 
rector:  “Now  tha t   Apollo  has  been  accomplished,  rather  than  set  an-  
other ambitious goaI we  should have a period  of  consolidation,”  during 
which  “the  balance  should  be  increased  toward  unmanned  effort.” 
There  was  talk  of  exploring  universe,  “but  the  solar  system  is   only  a 
small par t   and  it’s  going  to  be  a  long  time  before  we  venture  out.  We 
a re  making a  very local exploration.”  He  believed  solar  system  explora- 
tion  would  pay  off  in   understanding  of  history  and  evolution  of  solar 
system and,  possibly,  discovery of  life  on  another  planet  and   in   social 
benefits.  “The  trouble  with  the  social  world  is  that  we  cannot  agree  on 
goals.  We  talk  of  weather  control  . . . bu t   control  for   whom?  The 
farmer  o r   the  sportsman  or  the  businessman?”  (Reinhold,  N Y T ,  
7/27/69,  47)  
Creation  of  U.N.  Space  Institute was  urged  by  Columbia Univ.  law  pro- 
fessor  Richard  N.  Gardner  in   New  Yo rk   T imes .   I t   would  be  “center 
for   the  cooperative  planning  of  space  exploration  in   which  all  U.N. 
members would be invited  to  take part.”  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  could divide 
responsibilities  for   instrumented  landings  on  different  planets.  There 
should  be  “United  Nations  Space  Station”  in   outer  space manned  by 
astronauts from  all U.N.  nations  and  trained  a t  U.N.  Space Institute.  I t  
would  gather  information about  solar  system  and   universe and be  used 
for  practical  ear th   applications.  ( N Y T ,  7/26/69,  24) 
0  London  Economist  editorial:  ‘:When  Europe  drew  pride  and   status  from 
i ts  colonies,  the  Americans had  none:  the  tables  a re   turned  now.  While 
the United  States  rings  July  21st  red  on  its  calendar,  Europe  faces  the 
probability  that  when  the  planets  a re   opened  up  we  Europeans  will 
have  no  part  in   doing  it.  The  idea,  a t   this  late  stage,  of  a  European 
manned  space  programme  is  nonsense.  The  policy  that  would  make 
more  sense would  be  to  approach  the  United  States  to  see  if  the  Ad- 
ministration  w i l l   accept  some  foreign  collaboration  in   the  hugely  ex- 
pensive  next  years  of  i ts   space  programme.  If  the  next  American 
objective  is   Mars,  a  sensible  Administration  may  welcome  help  and  
if  this  excludes  pressure  to  co-operate  with 
participation-especially 
the  Russians.  . . . There will  be  no  opportunity  in   this  generation  tha t  
i t  would  cost  us  more  to  miss.”  ( C S M ,  8 /1 /69)  
0  Federal  Register  published  rule  signed  by  NASA  Administrator,  Dr. 
Thomas  0. Paine,  which  made  unauthorized  manufacture,  sale,  repro- 
duction,  or  possession  of  official Apollo  flight  insignia,  “or  any  color- 

248 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Ju ly   26 

ation  thereof,”  mis 
in   prison.  (Federul 
ont-Doherty Geolog 
Houston  his  team  had  detected  14 “unusual  seismic  events”  from  seis- 
mometers left  on moon  by  Apollo 11 astronauts. They believed walls  of 
lunar  craters  had  been  falling  in   as  different par ts   became  hotter  than 
others during highest lunar  temperatures  and  felt they might  be  observ- 
ing  “initial  stages of  the  process by  which  fresh  new  craters  a r e  trans- 
formed  to  old.”  ( W  Po s t ,   7/28/69,  A6)  
0  President  Nixon  toured  Jakar ta   Fa ir   during  Indonesian  visit.  He  offered 
to  send  Indonesian  President  Suharto  and  other  world  chiefs  of  state 
a  piece  of  the  moon  as  a  souvenir.”  I n   evening  a t   state  dinner  in  
( 6  
Jakarta,  President  Suharto  said:  “I  underline  Mr.  Armstrong’s  mo- 
mentous  enunciation,  when  he,  as  the  first  human  being,  put  his  feet 
on  the  moon,  declaring:  ‘These  are  small  human  steps  which  form  a 
great  leap  to  mankind.’  This  leap  has  occurred  in   the  outer  space,  a 
very expansive space full of  mysteries,  but  it has  not  taken place  in   this 
world  of  ours,  which  seems  to  be  contracting  and  is  relatively simpler. 
. . . I t  is the task  of  all nations in  this world  to  realize peace and  unity.” 
( N Y T ,  7/28/69,  18; P D ,  8/4/69,  1043 -6 )  
0  Apollo  11 flight was  public  relations  man’s  and  reporter’s  dream,  James 
Clayton  said  in   Wushington  Po s t .   NASA  had  kept  “very  little,  if  any- 
thing”  from  hundreds  of  U.S.  and  foreign  press.  More  than  3,500  sets 
of  press  credentials  had  been  issued  a t   MSC  and  Cape  Kennedy.  Most 
went  to  Americans,  but  55  foreign  countries  were  represented,  includ- 
ing  Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia,  and  Romania.  There  were  111 news- 
men  representing  Japan  among  800 foreign  newsmen,  several of  whom 
had  been  waiting  in   Houston  since Apollo  10 flight May  18-26.  Voice 
of  America  joined  in   transmitting  news  abroad.  At  peak,  Apollo  11 
story  was  going  out  in   22  languages  to  every  world  area  except  some 
Communist  countries.  “Even  those  had   the  radio  beams  directed  a t  
them.”  ( W  Post,  7/27/69,  B6) 
Psychological,  technical,  and  political  factors  had  combined  to  enable 
U.S.  to  win  lunar  landing  race  over  U.S.S.R.,  said  Harry  Schwartz  in  
N ew   York  T imes .   Moscow  had   shown  overconfidence  in   underrating 
American  capabilities,  ignored  lunar  rendezvous  technique  adopted  by 
US., and  purged  Nikita  S.  Khrushchev,  who  had  been  “enamored  of 
space exploits and  the  propaganda  they  gave  him.”  New  Soviet  leaders 
had  changed priorities  to  concentrate on  domestic problems.  Since U.S. 
lunar  landing,  however,  “two  very  different reactions  are   visible  in   the 
Soviet  Union.”  Scientists,  engineers,  and  many  ordinary  people  were 
overcome  with  admiration.  Ideologists  and   Soviet  propaganda  man- 
agers  were  deeply  unhappy,  “and  their  regret  that  it  was  not  Soviet 
(NYT, 
cosmonauts  who  went  to   the  moon  is   scarcely  hidden.” 
7/27/69) 
Washington Sunday Star  editorial said:  “Apollo  11 has  cast a  harsh  light 
on  life on earth,  showing man’s  failures  in  sharp  contrast  to  his breath- 
taking  technical  achievements.  It  is  a  vision  that  should  . . . be  ex- 
ploited  as   an   incentive  to  get  the  vitally  needed  jobs  done  on  earth.” 
But,  the  U S .   could  not  withdraw  from  space.  “The  complete  Apollo 
program  . . . should  be  funded.  Beyond  that,  serious  consideration 

249 

July  27 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

should  be  given  to  the  establishment of  permanent  manned  stations on 
the  moon  so  that  we  may  truly  explore  and   perhaps  exploit  the  new 
world  that  we  have  already  conquered.  The  manned  orbiting  station 
that  NASA  has  proposed  should  be  provided  to  test  the  ability  of  men 
to  live  and  work  for   long  periods  in   weightlessness.  And  fa r   more  em- 
phasis  should  be  placed  . . . on   unmanned  probes  of  the  planets.” 
Minimum  requirement  should  be  enough  momentum  in   program  to 
prevent  it  from  falling  apar t   through  disuse.  Every  effort  should  be 
made  “to  enlist  the  cooperation,  the  technical  help,  and   the  financial 
support of  any nation  tha t   is  willing  to  contribute to  the  adventure  that 
must,  finally,  be  seen  a s   the  collective  achievement  of  all  mankind.” 
(W  S tar ,   7/27/69,  E l )  
0  In  Washington  Sunday  Star  William  Hines  sa id :   “Considering  how  very 
little  he had   to do  with  the  whole  enterprise,  i t  is remarkable  how  much 
political  mileage  President  Nixon  got  out  of  the  flight  of  Apollo  11. 
The  plaque,  the  phone  call  and  the  t r ip   to  greet  the  returning  heroes 
all  were  benefits  Nixon  inherited  rather  than  earned.”  Official  NASA 
space  age  history  This  New  Ocean,  published  by  GPO in   1966,  men- 
tioned  Nixon  only  once  in   648  pages  “and  there  hardly  a s   an   aggres- 
sive  champion  of  manned  space  flight.”  Book  said  Nixon,  as  Vice 
President  and   as  presidential  candidate  running  against  John  F.  Ken- 
nedy,  had  defended Eisenhower Administration’s attitude  toward  space 
which  ruled  out  manned  flights  to  moon  in   foreseeable  future.  “The 
new  President’s  belated enthusiasm blurs memories of  the  olden  days,” 
Hines  said.  “But  ‘This  New  Ocean’  remains,  proving  perhaps  that  all 
government-sponsored history  books  should  be  armed  to  self-destruct 
whenever a  change  of  administration  occurs.”  (W  Star,  7/27/69,  E4) 
Ju ly   28:  JPL engineers  sent  signals  to  Mariner  V I   to  turn   on  TV  camera 
and   scientific  experiments  that  would  measure Mars  surf ace  character- 
istics  and  atmosphere.  Spacecraft  (launched  Feb.  24)   began  tracking 
Mars and  would  begin  taking  first  of  33  far-encounter pictures  771,500 
mi  from Mars  early  July  29.  Full-disc photos would  be  received  at  JPL  
July  29.  (AP, B Sun,  7/29/69,  A5)  
9 c‘eologists  a t   Lunar   Receiving  Laboratory  held  press  conference  on 
Apollo  11 samples  and   expressed  surprise  a t   discovery  of  tiny  glass- 
like  crystals  in   lunar   dust.  Analyses  had  revealed samples  were  crystal- 
line,  igneous,  fragmented,  scoriaceous,  and   vesicular.  They  confirmed 
theory based  on Surveyor  V  data that  lunar material  contained titanium 
and   indicated  presence  of  number  of  minerals.  Columbia Univ.  scien- 
tist  Dr.  Pau l  Gast  said,  “The most  exciting  discovery to  date  has  been 
that of  the glass. There is something going on  on  the moon  fa r  different 
than  on  the  earth.”  He  said  scientists  speculated impact  of  meteoroids 
on  moon  had  vaporized  lunar  material  and   caused  i t   to  rain  back  on 
surface  in   small  drops  which  formed  tiny  yellow,  brown,  and   clear 
pieces  of  glass  few  tenths  of  millimeter  in   diameter.  (Lyons,  NYT, 
7/29/69,  1; Sehlstedt,  B  Sun,  7/29/69,  A l )  
U S .  applied  to Astronautic Committee  of  IAF  for  six world  records based 
on  Apollo  11 achievements:  duration  of  stay  on  lunar   surface  outside 
spacecraft,  Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  2  hrs  21  min  15 secs;  dura-  
tion  in  lunar  orbit,  Astronaut Michael Collins,  59  hrs   27  min  55  secs; 
duration  of  stay  on  lunar  surface,  Astronauts  Armstrong  and  Edwin 
E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  21  h r s  36 min  16 secs;  duration  of  stay  on  lunar   surface 

250 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
Ju€y 28 
inside  spacecraft,  Aldrin,  19 h r s   45  min  52 secs;  greatest  mass  landed 
on moon,  Armstrong  and  Aldrin,  7,211 kg  (15,897 lbs)  ; greatest  mass 
2,648  kg   (5,837  lbs) . Records  would  not  be  acknowledged  officially 
lifted  in to   lunar   orbit  from  lunar  surface,  Armstrong  and   Aldrin, 
until  NASA  presented confirming data  and  Federation  officials approved. 
( N Y T ,  7/29/69,  16 )  
At  state  banquet  in   Bangkok,  Tha i   King  Bhumibol  Adulyadej  toasted 
President  Nixon : “Last  week’s  breathtaking  aehievement of  Apollo  11 
and   its  brave  American  crew  cannot  be   measured  solely  in   scientific 
terms,  for  i t  also  indicates man’s  ability to  look  beyond h is  earthbound 
problems and  to  set his sights  on  new  horizons  in  quest  of  wider knowl- 
edge  and   deeper understanding  of  himself  and  h is   environment.”  ( P D ,  
8/4/69,  1049-50) 
*  Gloom  and  embarrassment over Apollo  11   success  and  crash  of  Luna XJ’ 
on moon had  caused controversy among Soviet leaders,  including Com- 
munist  Par ty   Secretary  Leonid  I.  Brezhnev  and   President  Nikolay V. 
Podgorny,  a t  July  21-23  meeting  of  Eastern  European  leaders  in War-  
saw,  New  Yorlc Times  said.  Reports  of  enthusiastic  public  response  to 
Apollo  feat  across  Eastern  Europe  had  been  interpreted  a s   sign  of  lin- 
gering  and   latent  sympathy for  U S .   I t  was  strongest  in  technologically 
advanced  East  Germany  and   Czechoslovakia,  but  had  been  noted  as 
well  in  Poland,  Hungary,  and  Romania.  (Hofmann, N Y T ,  7/28/69,  7 )  
*  U.K.’s  Royal  Geographical Society awarded  special  gold  medal-its 
first 
for  space  exploration-to  Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  for  leading 
Apollo  I 1  mission.  Other  gold medalists  included  Capt. Roald  Amund- 
sen,  first  to  reach  South  Pole;  Adm.  Robert  E.  Peary,  first  to  reach 
North  Pole;  Sir  Edmund  Hillary,  conqueror  of  Mt.  Everest;  and  S ir  
John  Hunt,  leader  of  Everest  expedition.  (AP ,  W  Star,  7/28/69,  A5) 
Senate  Committee  on  Banking  and   Currency  favorably  reported  S.J.R. 
14-0 with  amendments, providing  for  striking  of  medals honoring  U S .  
astronauts  who  had  flown  in   outer  space.  ( C R ,  7/28/69,  D681) 
MSFC   announced  resignation  of  M /G   Edmund  F.  O’connor  (USAF )   , Di- 
rector  of  Program  Management,  would  be  effective  July  31.  Gen. 
O’Connor,  on  loan  to NASA  from USAF  for past  five years,  would  become 
Vice  Commander  of  Air  Force  Aeronautical  Systems  Div.  He  would 
be  succeeded by  Lee  B.  James,  Sa turn   V  Manager,  MSFC.  (MSFC   Re- 
lease 69-166) 
*  USAF  released  A ir   Force  Review  of  the  C-5A  Program .  Total  cost  of  120 
Lockheed  C-5A  aircraft  had  increased  from  $3.369  billion  a t   1965 
contract  award  to   total  $5.125  billion,  overrun  of  $1.756  billion.  At 
DOD press  conference Air  Force  Secretary Robert C.  Seamans, Jr.,  criti- 
cized  “ambiguities  and   deficiencies”  in   original  contract  and  hinted 
remaining  39  a ircraf t   in   120-plane package  might  not  be  purchased 
unless  revisions  were  made  in   contract.  (Tex t ;   Phillips,  W  Pos t ,  
7/29/69,  A l )  
*  I1 Mattino  del  Lunedi,  Asmara,  Ethiopia,  said  of  Apollo  11  mission’s 
completion:  ‘‘. . . today  we  not  only  admire,  but  exult.  Because  this 
‘almost  superhuman’ exploit  has  been  accomplished  by  a  society  which 
is   free  and   pluralistic,  by  a  society  which  has  no   close  and  oppressive 
traditions,  by  a  society  which  has   founded  its  political  and   constitu- 
tional  structure  not  on  a  totalitarian  ideology  but  on  the  democratic 
philosophy  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  I t   has  been  accom- 

251  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
July  28 
plished  by  a  nation,  the  American  nation,  whose  characteristic  . . . is 
the   fusion  of  the   sp ir i t   of  precision  and   discipline  . . . with  the  sp ir i t  
of  freedom.  . . . Th is   i s   the  reason  why  we  today  exult.  Because  we 
know  tha t   the  conquest  of  Apollo-11  is   in   the  service  of  man  and   not 
to   oppress him.”  (Am  Consul,  Asmara) 
Norrlandska  Social-Demokraten,  Boden,  Sweden,  editorial  commented 
that  Russian  press  was  surprisingly  generous  with  praise  of  men  be- 
h ind  ApoEZo  l l and  American space research  in  general  during mission, 
but  now  press  seemed  to  fear  landing might  have  increased  respect  for 
U S .   around   the  world.  “It  is  surely  disturbing  for  Pravda  and  the 
Russian  Par ty   leaders  that  the  American  conquest  of  the  moon  . . . 
witnessed  by  the  greater  part  of  the  Communist  world,  crushed  the 
myth  of 
(Am  Embassy, 
the  Communist  system’s  superiority.” 
Stockholm) 
*  Within  76 hrs   after Apollo  11 splashdown,  Bantam Books  and New   Y o r k  
T imes   published  W e  Reach  the  Moon,  416-page paperback  account  of 
U S .   space program  from  1961 through  Apollo  I l ’ s   success.  Early  pub- 
lication  was  effected by  nearly  2%  yrs  of  planning.  Book  went  to  press 
immediately  after  July  24  splashdown while  aerospace  reporter  John 
Noble  Wilford  was  completing text.  Final  copy  was  telexed  to  Chicago 
printer  July  25.  F irs t   printing  comprised  375,000  copies.  Hardcover 
edition  would  be  published  by  W.  W.  Norton  &  Co.  in   September. 
( N Y T ,  7/29/69,  16) 
July  29:  First  pictures  of  Mars  taken  by  NASA’s Mariner  V I ,  launched  Feb. 
24  to  fly  by  Mars  equator, were  received  a t  JPL.  Full-disc photos,  taken 
between  771,500  and   450,000  mi  from  Mars,  were  flashed  on  screen 
every  five  minutes.  They  showed Mars  as  dull,  gray,  egg-shaped  body 
with  crack  in   surface  and  bright  spot-southern 
polar  cap-with 
ragged  edge.  Better  pictures  were  expected  a s  spacecraft  traveled  closer 
to  Mars.  (AP ,   B  Sun,  7/30/69,  A1 ; Lannan,  W  Star,  7/30/69,  A 3  j 
J P L   radar   readings  which  showed  8.3-mi  altitude  variation  in   Mars’ 
north  equatorial  zone  and   included corrected  figures  for  Mars’  ephem- 
eris,  or  orbital  path,  were  expected  to  ensure  accuracy  of  TV  cameras 
aboard  Mariners  V I   and  V I I ,  NASA  said.  Experimenters  hoped  to  ob- 
tain  photos  identifying  objects  900  f t   across  a t   close  approach  and 
pictures  were  expected  to  be  500  times  better  than  those  taken  to  date 
by  earth-based  telescope  cameras.  Readings  were  obtained  at  NASA’s 
Goldstone  Tracking  Station  in   California  by  team  directed  by  Dr. 
Richard M.  Goldstein dur ing  planet’s  closest  approach  to   ear th   (Mars  
had  been  within  45  million  mi  of  ear th   June  9 ) .   They  would  be   of 
great  interest  to  astronomers  because  they  showed  tha t   areas  which 
appeared  light  to  telescopes  might  be  either  high  or  low  in  elevation. 
Optically  dark  areas  appeared  to  be  of  medium  elevation  to  radar-  
scanners.  ( NASA  Release  69-111  ; J P L   Release  530) 
e  NASA  released  first  photos  taken  by  Apollo  11  astronauts  on  and  near 
lunar   surface,  including  four  color  stills  and   16-mm  film  of  LM  de- 
scent.  Film  opened  as  LM  swung  low  and   curved  slightly  over  area 
pocked  with  craters  and   rocks  and  showed  dust  being  scattered  by 
exhaust  a s  LM  touched  down  safely.  I t   then  showed  Astronaut  Neil  A. 
Armstrong  as  he  descended  ladder  to  surface,  took  first  step  on  moon, 
and   deployed  initial  equipment. 

252 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Ju ly   29 

Still photos  showed  closeup  of  brownish  surface sprinkled  with  foot- 
prints,  silhouettes  of  LM  and  US .   flag,  Armstrong  inside LM,  and  earth 
with  Europe,  Africa,  and   Asia  visible.  (Witkin,  N Y T ,   7/30/69,  1; 
Cohn,  W Post,  7/30/69,  A l ,  A3) 
0  LRL  scientists continued  examining lunar  samples and   preparing  them  for 
experiments on  living  organisms. Experimentg,  scheduled to  hegin  July 
29,  would  be  delayed one  day  to  repair  cracked  glove  which  permitted 
scientists  outside  vacuum  box  to  handle  objects  inside  and   to  allow 
more  time  fur  grinding  samples to  uniform  size.  (AP ,   N Y T ,   7/30/69, 
19) 
NASA  Wallops  Station  announced  award  of  401mo,  $936,311 contract  to 
Rice Univ.  to  investigate  relationship  between  field-aligned currents and  
aurora l   particle  fluxes  and   document  and  summarize  findings.  Rice 
would  construct  and  test  suitable  flight  and  ground  instrumentation  for 
three  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket payloads;  prepare  and  preflight- 
test  payloads ; and  acquire,  record,  reduce,  analyze,  and  publish  result- 
ing  magnetic  and  aurora l   particle  data.  (WS  Release  69-14) 
FCC,  at  White  House  request,  decided  to  delay  for  60   days  decision  on 
establishment of  domestic comsat  system  to  enable  Nixon  Administra- 
tion  to  study  issues  and  make  recommendations.  (Aug,  W  Star, 
7 /29 /69)  
*  Rep.  William  G.  Bray  (R-Ind .)   introduced  H.J.R.  844,  providing  for 
distribution  of  Apollo  11 lunar  samples to Governors of  50  states.  ( C R ,  
7/29/69,  H6486) 
*  New  York  weathermen were  being  deluged  with calls  blaming  10 days  of 
rain  and  overcast  weather  in   northeastern  U S .   on  Apollo  11, Associ- 
ated  Press  said.  WCBS  radio  news  meteorologist Dr.  Robert  Harr is   had 
said,  “We’ve  had  an  abundance  of  calls  from  all  sorts  of  people who 
are   absolutely  certain,  through  their  Bible  studies,  that  the  Lord  has 
taken  the  sun  away  from  us.”  (AP, B Sun, 7/30/69,  A6) 
National  Assn.  of  Government  Employees  President  Kenneth  T.  Lyons 
told  House  Interstate  and   Foreign  Commerce  Committee  landing  on 
moon  would  soon  be  safer  than  landing  a t  most  U S .  airports.  “DO  we 
have  to  have  NASA  take  over  from  the  FAA  in   order  to  get  a  little  sense 
into  our  a irpor t   and   a ircraf t   traffic  management  jumble?”  (Bentley, 
B  Sun, 7/29/69,  A5) 
July  30-31:  NASA’s Mariner  V I ,  launched  F ib .   24  on  Mars  equatorial  flyby 
mission,  approached  Mars  and   completed  1 7  pictures  of  planet  taken 
at  about  111,400-mi  altitude,  which  showed  ragged  edges  of  polar 
cap, W-shaped cloud,  and   seas,  deserts,  and   craters seen  by Mariner  ZV 
in   1965. 
As   spacecraft  neared  and   swung  around  Mars  i t   took  24   close-up 
pictures  from  about 2,000  mi  a t  closest  point.  Pictures  were  so  sharply 
defined and  detailed  that  they  were  shown live  on  TV instead  of  being 
refined  and   released  later  in   photographic prints  a s  originally  planned. 
by  computers  a t   JPL to   clear  ou t   static,  highlight 
Pictures-enhanced 
images,  ad jus t   contrast  and   brightness,  and  exaggerate  f e a t u r e e w e r e  
spectacular.  They  showed  tha t   Mars  was  heavily  cratered  and  looked 
very  much  like  moon.  One  photo  showed  11-mi-dia crater  closely  re- 
sembling  moon’s  Copernicus  crater  and   diagonal  ditch  resembling 
lunar   rille.  During  closest  approach,  onboard  TV  cameras  took  12  

253 

July  30-31 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

high-resolution  and   1 2   medium-resolution  pictures,  stored  some  on 
board  for  later  playback,  and  transmitted  some  immediately to  ground 
stations for conversion to  images a t  JPL.  Three  of  four   onboard experi- 
to  take  pictures,  uv  spectrometer  to  identify  and  measure 
ments-TV 
gases in   upper atmosphere, and  infrared  radiometer  to measure planet’s 
temperature-functioned 
satisfactorily.  Only  anomaly  was  failure  in  
cooling  of  one  channel  on  infrared  spectrometer, designed  to  identify 
gases  in   lower  Martian  atmosphere,  which  prevented  proper  acquisi- 
tion  of  data. 
JPL   controllers  temporarily  lost  contact  with  second Mariner,  Mar- 
iner  V I I ,  en  route  to  Mars,  a t  6 :OO   pm  EDT July  30.  Engineers  specu- 
lated  that  spacecraft  had  been  thrown  out  of  alignment when  struck  by 
micrometeoroid  traveling  a t   40 mps  and   had   locked  on  planet  Jupiter 
o r   another  bright  object.  Contact with  Mariner  V I I  was  regained  seven 
hours  later  by  switching from  one  antenna  to  another  and   proper  atti- 
tude  was  restored  by  rolling  spacecraft  around  until  i t   locked  on  s tar  
Canopus. Although  some  of  data  being  transmitted  appeared  to  be  ab-  
normal,  flyby  mission  was  still  expected  to  succeed. 
Mariner  V I   would  continue  taking  pictures  and   play  back  recorded 
near-encounter  data  during  final  phase  of  mission.  Data  would  be 
compared  with  data  from  Mariner  VIZ  (launched March  27 ) ,   which 
would  fly  past  Mars polar  region Aug.  4.  (NASA   Release  69-26A;  Sulli- 
van,  NYT ,   8/1/69,  1;  Auerbach,  W Post,  8/1/69,  A I ;   Lannan,  W 
Star, 7/31/69,  AS;  NASA  News  Release,  9/11/69) 
Ju ly  30:  On  arrival  in   Saigon,  Republic of  Vietnam,  President  Nixon  said: 
“I  am  happy  that  the  moon  landing,  which  in  its  universality  signifies 
a  symbolic drawing  together  of  all mankind,  has  provided  an   occasion 
for me  to  meet  with  President Thieu  in  the  capital  of  his  country.” 
Later,  after  discussions  with  President  Nixon,  President  Nguyen 
Van  Thieu  said,  “The  Vietnamese people  fully  concur  in   the  message 
of  peace  which  the  three  brave  American  astronauts  deposited  on  the 
moon  for  all mankind.”  ( P D ,  8/4/69,  1 0 5 1 4 )  
*  During Apollo  11 celebration,  credit  should be  given  to  former  NASA  Ad- 
ministrator  James  E.  Webb,  “whose  organizational  skill,  vision  and 
drive  played  a  ma jor   par t   in  its  success,”  M IT   Provost,  Dr.  Jerome  B. 
Wiesner,  and  MIT   physicist  Jerrold  Zacharias  said  in   letter  to  New 
Y o r k   T imes .   “There  never  was  any  question  regarding  the  technical 
feasibility  of  a  manned  lunar  landing.  The   real  question  was  whether 
o r  not  we  could organize  and  manage  so  large  and  complex  a  program 
on  the  time  schedule laid  down  by  President  Kennedy.”  Webb  had  or-  
ganized, defended, and  managed program,  “and  a s  the world  celebrates 
this  great  technical  and  human  achievement  we  should  also  honor  the 
man  who  directed  its  accomplishment.”  ( N Y T ,  8/5/69,  32 )  
LRL scientists  began  injecting pulverized  lunar   samples into  sterile  white 
mice  in   attempt  to  discover  germs  or  chemicals hazardous  to  human 
beings.  Mice,  born  by  Caesarean section  and   raised  in   sterile  environ- 
ment  so  that  they  would  be  extremely  sensitive  to  infection,  would  also 
have samples mixed  in   their  food  and   air.  (UP I ,   W  Star,  7/31/69,  AS; 
AP,  B  Sun, 7/30/69,  A l )  
World  Health Organization Director General, Dr. M.  G.  Candau,  and   Dr. 
Karel  Raska,  Director  of  WHO’S  Communicable Disease  Div.,  said  in 

254 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

July  30 

Houston  that  Soviet scientists  had 
itiated”  plans  fo r   lunar 
laboratory.  Soviet delegates  to   i 
tional  conferences had 
subject  bu t   no  details  were  available.  WHO officials were  in   Houston  to 
observe LBL a t  U.S.  Government invitation.  (I Po s t ,  7/31/69,  A3) 
After  two-hour  inspection  of  Tu-144  a t   Moscow’s  Sheremetyevo  Inter- 
national  Airport,  Pan   American  World  Airways  president  Najeeb  E. 
Halaby  said Soviet supersonic transport had  left  group  of  U S .   aviation 
experts  “very,  very  impressed.”  U.S.S.R.  apparently  had  progressed 
further  i n   testing  than  U.K.  o r   France  with  Concorde,  and  Tu-144 
had  reached  900 mph,  breaking  sound barr ier   several  times.  Concorde 
hoped  to  reach  mach  1 in   s ix   months  and  U.S.  SST was  a t   least  five 
years  behind.  Aeroflot  planned  to  put  Tu-144 in   service  by  1973.  Pan 
Am  would  review  all  information  available  before  deciding  whether  to 
order  a ircraf t   as  hedge  against  competition.  Halaby  liked  Tu-144’s 
design  and   advanced  instrumentation  and   was  impressed with  amount 
of  titanium  used  in   construction.  Russians had  told  him  aircraft’s  noise 
level  was  low  in   landings  and   takeoffs.  ( N Y T ,  7 /31 /69 ,   58) 
0  Senate  passed  S.J.R.  140,  providing  for  striking  of  niedals  honoring 
American  astronauts  who  had  flown  in  outer  space.  (CRY  7/30/69, 
S8786) 
Subcommittee on  Science, Research,  and  Development  of  House Commit- 
tee  on  Science  and  AstFonautics  published  Science,  Technology,  and 
Public  Po l icy   During  the  Ninetieth  Congress .   Report  covered  1967- 
1968,  giving  details  behind  94  public  laws  passed  that  authorized, 
funded,  or  otherwise  affected  R&D  in   U.S.  and   45  additional  bills  on  
which  Congress  took  legislative  action.  I t   included  reviews  of  US. 
policy  for  science  and   technology  by  Organization  for  Economic  Co- 
operation  and   Development  and   by  NSF  for  United  Nations  Educa- 
tional,  Scientific,  and   Cultural  Organization.  Both  reviews  showed 
pluralistic  na ture   of  U S .  public  policy  for  science,  built  up  by  laws, 
executive  orders,  and  other  expressions  of  policy  as  they  occurred. 
(Tex t)  
July 31:  USAF  launched unidentified  satellite from Vandenberg  AFB  by  Thor- 
Agena  booster  into  orb i t   with  333.1-mi  (536-km)  apogee,  288.9-mi 
(44 .8 -km )   perigee,  94.6-min  period,  and   75.0”  inclination.  ( GSFC 
SSR,  7/31/69;  Pres  Rp t   70  [69]) 
0  At  state  dinner  in  New  Delhi,  India,  Acting  President  Mohammed  Hiday- 
atullah  exchanged toasts  with  President  Nixon  and   congratulated  him: 
“The  epic  flight  to  the  moon  and   back  by  three  of  your  countrymen 
has amazed the world  and marks a new  stage in  science and  technology. 
On  behalf  of  the  Government and   people  of  India,  and   myself,  I  con- 
gratulate  you,  and  through  you,  the  people  of  your  country  on  this 
historic  occasion.  . . . We  a re  glad  to  know  tha t   you  are   sharing  the 
knowledge  you  have  gained  with  the  rest  of  the  world.”  ( P D ,  8 /4 /69 ,  
1056-9) 
Sequence of  five color  photos of  Apollo  11 Astronauts Neil A.  Armstrong 
and   Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  performing  extravehicular  activities  on  lunar 
surface  were  released  by  NASA.  Vivid sequence showed  Aldrin  descend- 
ing  ladder  to  surface,  walking  near  LM, posing  near  US. flag,  deploy- 
ing  seismometer,  and  walking  with Armstrong’s  reflection  visible  in   his 
visor.  NASA  also  released  two-part  16-mm  film  which  showed  moon 

255 

July  31 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

fading  away  as  LM  ascended  and   LM’S  rendezvous with  CSM  i n   lunar  
orbit.  I t   also  showed  Astronaut  Michael  Collins  shaving  inside  CSM. 
(V Pos t ,   8/1/69,  A7;  Witkin,  N Y T ,  8/1/69,  16) 
0  Hans  H.  Maus,  Director  of  Executive  Staff  a t   MSFC,  and   Dr.  George  N. 
Constan,  Director  of  Michoud  Assembly  Facility,  retired  after  com- 
bined  total  of  51  yrs  Government service.  Maus,  expert  in   rocket  de- 
velopment and  production  engineering, had   received USA’s Exceptional 
Civilian  Service  Award  and   number  of  citations  for  development  of 
manufacturing  methods,  process  automation,  assembly,  and  tooling 
concept development. Dr.  Constan had  served with USA  a t  Milan,  Joliet, 
and  Redstone  Arsenals  before  his  appointment  to   Michoud  in   1961. 
( MSFC  Release  69-167) 
0  Soviet Academician,  Dr.  Anatoly  A.  Blagonravov,  conceded  that  compe- 
tition  with  U.S.S.R.  might  have  been  ma jor   factor  in   U.S.  determina- 
tion  to  reach moon  and   said  that  in   space there  was  no  way  to   declare 
a  winner,  Space  Business  Daily  reported.  “I  don’t  preclude  the  idea 
that  such  a  boosted  preparation  of  the  Apollo  project  was  in   some 
tition  is  no  obstacle  to  success.  . . . Science is  boundless in   its  develop- 
measure  the  result  of  competition with  us.  Basically  a  healthy  compe- 
is  no  finishing 
ment  and   i t  cannot  be  compared  to  a  horse  race-there 
line.  The   interests  of  science  are bound  to   win  anyway.  . . .” U.S.S.R. 
would  continue  research  in   “several  ma jor   scientific  areas,”  make  “ex- 
tensive  use  of  automatic  devices  for   exploring  outer  space,”  and   pay 
“due  attention”  to moon  and   to  both  manned  and   unmanned  missions. 
Cosmos,  Zond,  and  Pro ton   spacecraft  would  continue  to  be  used  for 
research  and  Soyuz  spacecraft  would  be  converted  into  “modules  of 
orbital  space  laboratories  designed  for   research  in   lengthy  flight.” 
( SBD ,  7/31/69,  79) 
Man’s  knowledge  of  Venus,  Mars,  and   moon  had  been  enormously  en- 
hanced by  unmanned Mariner missions,  New   Y o r k  Times  editorial said. 
They were  relatively  inexpensive and  did  not  risk  human  lives.  “Never- 
theless,  American  political  leadership  has   been  so  obsessed  with  send- 
ing  a  man  to  the  moon  tha t   unmanned  probes  of  the  planets  became 
the  stepchildren  of  the  national space program.  There were  times when 
even  the  continued  existence  of  the  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory-the 
center  for  these  unmanned  flights-seemed 
in   doubt.  Now,  in   the  new 
phase  of  American  space exploration  begun  in   the  wake  of  Apollo  1 1 ’ s  
historic  achievement, the major  cost-benefit advantages of  Mariner  type 
unmanned  flights  need  to  b e   more  fully  appreciated  by  Washington 
policy  makers,  and   even  more  intensively  exploited  than  in   the  past, 
even  as  the  manned  exploration  of 
the  moon  continues.”  ( N Y T ,  
7/31/69,  32) 
During  July:  NASA-appointed  Astronomy  Missions  Board  recommended 
long-range  program  in   space  astronomy  to  NASA.  Board  of  19  leading 
U.S.  astronomers  chaired  by  Dr.  Leo  Goldberg,  Harvard  College  Ob- 
servatory Director,  had been  appointed in   1967 to propose programs for 
1970s.  NASA  published  Board’s  report  in   Novernber  [see  Nov.  91. 
(Tex t ;   NASA  Release  69-149;  NASA  OSSA) 
0  Data  were  relayed  by  two  Vela  nuclear  detection  satellites  launched May 
23  that  led  to  discovery of  x-ray s tar   between  constellations  Centaurus 
and   Lupus  [see  Aug.  141.  (Sullivan,  N Y T ,   8/14/69,  7 )  
0  NAS  published  Physics  of  the  Earth  in Space:  The  Role  of  Ground-Based 

256 

0  NAS  report  to  Congress, Technology: Processes  of  Assessment  and  Choice, 
was published by  House  Committee on Science and Astronautics. Pane l  
headed  by  Harvey  Brooks  of  Harvard  Univ.  strongly  urged  creation  of 
“constellation  of  organizations,  with  components  located  strategically 
within  both  political branches,  that  can  create  a  focus and   a  forum  for  
responsible  technology-assessment  activities  throughout  government 
and  the private  sector.”  Such  organizations “must  be  separated  scrupu- 
lously  from  any  responsibility  for  promoting  or  regulating  technologi- 
cal  applications.”  (Text) 
0  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  published  A  S tudy   of 
Technology Assessment:  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Public  Engineer- 
ing  Po l icy ,   National  Academy   of  Engineering.  Report  recommended 
establishment of  technology assessment task  force of  members  of  public 
and  private  organizations with  knowledge of  subject  under  assessment, 
including  behavioral  and  political  scientists.  (Tex t)  
0  NSF  published  Research  and  DeveEopment  in   Indus try ,   1967:  Funds, 
1967 ;   Scientists  and  Engineers,  January  1968  (NSF 69-28)  : Histori- 
cally,  about  70%  of  US. R&D  had   been  performed  by  industrial  sector. 
In   1967, industry  spent $16.4  billion  for  R&D,  four  and  half  times  1953 
level  of  $3.6  billion.  Federal  agencies  financed  51%   of  1967  total,  or 
$8.4  billion.  Ratio  was  down  from  1959 high  of  59%.  NASA  and   DOD 
furnished  89%  of  Federal  funds  to  industry  in   1967  and  supported 
89%  of  158,000 R&D  scientists and   engineers working  on  Federal  pro- 
grams  in   January  1968. NASA’s R&D  cost  was  $55,400  per  scientist  or 
engineer, while  DOD spent $51,600.  Industry  spent 88 billion  of  its own 
funds  for  R&D  in   1967, 11% more  than  in   1966 and  265%  more  than 
in  1953. 
I n   January  1968, 387,900  full-time-equivalent R&D  scientists  and  en- 
gineers  were  in   industry  sector,  of  which  59%  worked  on  company- 
financed  R&D  projects.  Industrial  spending  for   basic  research  reached 
$655  million  in   1967,  5%  higher  than  previous  year  and  more  than 
four  times  1953 level.  (Text) 
0  MOL  cancellation  “should  a t  most  be  a  ‘postponement,’ ” Dr.  Edward  C. 
Welsh,  former  NASC  Executive  Secretary,  sa id   in   Air  Force/Space  D i-  
ges t .   “Contrary  to  assertions made  by  people  who  should know  better, 
the MOL  was  not  planned  as a weapon  system and  would  not  have been 
a  threat  to  any  other  nation.”  MOL  observations would  be  “as  peaceful 
as  those  obtained  on  the NASA  Gemini and  Apollo flight. Men  on  board 
the  spacecraft  can  be  justified  by  the  contributions  men  make  in  
matters  of  choice  of  observations,  maintenance,  and   communication 

2 

During  July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

with  earth.”  MOL  would  not  duplicate  NASA’s Apollo  Applications  pro- 
gram.  “To try  to   combine  the  Air  Force  and   NASA manned  programs 
would  waste  much  of  the  investments already  made,  would  delay  both 
programs,  would  increase  the  total  cost  over  the  long  run ,   and   would 
violate  the  sound  administrative  principle  of  having  the  experts  do 
what  they  have  been  trained  to  do.  Failure  to  get  a  maximum  re turn  
from  this  national-security  system  would  seem  to  be  woefully  short- 
sighted  and  wasteful.”  ( A F / S D ,  7/69,  60-1) 
American  Embassy  science  attach6  in   New  Delhi  reported  completion of 
Ind ia-US .   project  to  erect  @-in  telescope  a t   Hyderabad.  Project  was 
started  in   1955 and   completed  just  before U.S.  lunar  landing.  (O’Neill, 
W Post,  8/31/69,  D5) 

258 

August  1969 

August  1: Univ.  of  California’s  Lick  Observatory successfully  recorded  first 
hits on laser  reflector  left  on moon by  Apo l to  11 astronauts.  Hits,  which 
came  after  2,000-3,000  unsuccessful  attempts  by  Lick  and  Univ.  of 
Texas’s  McDonald  Observatory,  were  made  by  Lick’s  12O-in telescope 
-.world’s 
second  largest.  Scientists  fired  500  pulses  with  pure  red 
beam  of  ruby  laser.  Each  pulse  lasted  15-20  billionths  of  a  second, 
reached  moon  in  1.3  secs,  and   bounced  back  in   same  time.  Target- 
18-in-square panel  of  100  three-faced  prisms  of  fused  silica-was 
hit 
about  three-fourths  of  time.  ( GSFC  Historian) 
J P L   engineers  reported Mariner  VIZ, en  route  to  Mars,  had  suffered  sud- 
because  of  gas  leak  from  pressure 
den  change  in   velocity-possibly 
could  throw  off  its  approach  to 
can  in  infrared  spectrometer-that 
Mars.  Also,  20  of  92  telemetry channels,  including  one  tha t   aimed  TV 
camera  platform  toward  Mars,  had  not  operated  properly  after  con- 
trollers  lost  contact with  spacecraft  July  30. When  engineers  turned  on  
TV  cameras,  however,  they  began  taking  pictures  that  appeared  to   be 
of  Mars.  (Auerbach,  W  Post,  8/2/69,  A4 ;   NASA   News  Release, 
9/11 /69) 
*  Dr.  Wilmot  N.  Hess,  Director  of  Science  and   Applications  a t   MSC,  an-  
nounced he  would  leave  NASA  in   September to  become  Director  of  Re- 
search  Laboratories  for  ESSA  in  Boulder,  Colo.  His  successor  had  not 
yet  been  selected.  Dr.  Hess  said  he  was  taking  new  position  because 
job  was  challenging  one  in   growing  organization  w i t h   important  mis- 
sion.  “We  have  passed  a  milestone in  the’manned  space  flight  program 
by  the  recent  lunar  landing.  We  have  put  the  Lunar  Receiving  Labora- 
tory  into  operation  and  it  is  performing  i ts   mission  well.  We  have 
placed  instruments  on  the  moon  successfully  and   have  the  scientific 
program  for  the  next  several  lunar   missions  well  organized.”  Before 
going  to  MSC,  Dr.  Hess  served  a s  Chief  of  Laboratory  for  Theoretical 
(M S C   Release  69-54) 
Studies  a t   GSFC,  1961-1967. 
ZnteEsat-ZZI  F-2  comsat  (launched  Dec.  18,  1968 ) ,   which  had  stopped 
operating  June   29   when  mechanically  despun  antenna  malfunctioned, 
was  restored  to  service.  Intelsat  I  (Ea r ly   Bird) , reactivated  June   30, 
had  worked  with  IntelsatZI  1;-3  to  provide service dur ing   interruption. 
(ComSatCorp Release  69 -49 )  
*  President  Nixon  arrived  a t   Lahore,  Pakistan,  during  round-the-world 
journey.  Pakistan  President Yahya  Khan  said  a t   a irpor t ,   “The  City  of 
Lahore  is  happy  to  receive  you  on  i ts   historic  soil  and   to  share  your 
joy  at  the  most  recent  and  the  most  memorable  triumph  of  human 
courage, determination, and  scientific  skill which  was  achieved  by  your 
astronauts  when  they  were  first  to  land  on  the  moon.”  ( P D ,  8 /4 /69 ,  
1060) 
*  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  outlined  possible  1981-1982 
manned  mission  to  Mars  in  speech before  Commonwealth  Club  in   San  

259 

August  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Francisco.  With  “window  opening”  on   Nov.  12,  1981,  expedition 
‘‘would  set  for th   from   ear th   orb i t   [where  spacecraft  were  assembled] 
in   two  six-man  vehicles,  each  propelled  by   three  nuclear  rockets.”  At 
end   of  Mars  injection  bu rn   by  two  outer  rockets,  rockets  would  be 
disengaged  and   re turn   to  ear th   orb i t   fo r   later  reuse.  Th i rd   rocket 
would  remain  unfired  a s   spacecraft  coasted  to  Mars.  On  nine-month 
journey  spacecraft  could  be  joined  and   spun  to  provide  artificial 
gravity. 
“On  August  9,  1982, the  craf t  would  arr ive   a t  Mars,  and   the  unused 
rocket  fired  to  brake   each  ship  into  Mars  orbit.  About  three  months 
would  be  spent  orbiting Mars while two  surface landers  . . . took  astro- 
nauts  down  to  surface  fo r  a  month-long  stay.  These  landers  would  also 
be  three-man  laboratories  in   which  men  could  live  and  work  produc- 
tively  on  the  surface  of  Mars.  At  the  end  of  their  surface  research  the 
astronauts  would  rendezvous  again  with  the  spacecraft  overhead,  and  
then  begin  the  re turn   voyage  by  firing  the  nuclear  engine  again  on 
October  28,  1982.”  Spacecraft  would  swing  by  Venus  Feb.  28,  1983, 
using Venus’  orbital motion  around  sun  to   re tard   i t   and  sling  i t   toward 
earth.  “Returning  to  ear th   on   August  14,  1983,  the  nuclear  rocket 
would  fire  for   the  th ird   time  to  put  each  space  ship  into  ear th   orbit. 
The  crews would  re turn   to  ear th  via  the shuttle.  After  refurbishing,  the 
space  ships would  be  available  for   the  next  voyage.” 
To   hold  option  open  for   Mars  voyages  in   1980s,  U.S.  should  in  
1970s  develop  reusable  shuttle  for  flight  between  ear th   and   low  ear th  
orbit,  permanent  orbiting  space  station,  and   nuclear  rocket  propulsion. 
(Tex t)  
e  LRL  technicians  Ronald  J.  Buffum  and   George  E.  Williams,  accidentally 
exposed  to  lunar   samples  when  glove  used  to   examine  samples  cracked, 
were  placed  in  quaran t ine  with  Apo l lo   11 astronauts,  2  doctors,  and   12 
technicians,  cooks,  and   other  employees.  ( W  Po s t ,   8/2/69,  A4) 
*  James  L.  Stamy,  Deputy  Manager  of  Michoud  Assembly  Facility  since 
1962,  became  Acting  Manager,  replacing  Dr.  George  N .   Constan,  who 
retired  July  31.  (M S FC  Release  69-169) 
U.S.  Army  Collateral  Investigation  Board  appointed  to  investigate  March 
12  crash  of  AH-56A  Cheyenne helicopter,  in  which  civilian  pilot  David 
A.  Beil  lost  his  life,  issued  report.  I t  found  accident  was  caused  by  d i-  
vergent,  low-frequency,  main-rotor  oscillation  and  pilot  had   been  killed 
by  rotor  blades.  Manufacturer,  Lockheed-California  Co.,  had  “failed 
to   exercise  due  care   and   judgment  in   the  planning  and  execution  of 
flight  288  and   in   so   doing  failed  to   adhere  to   an   acceptable  level  of 
sound  industrial practice.”  (Tex t)  
*  M /G   James  T.  Stewart,  former  Vice  Director  of  USAF’S  Manned  Orbiting 
Laboratory  ( M O L )   program,  had  been  named  AFSC  Deputy  Chief  of 
Staff  for  Systems, Gen.  James  Ferguson,  AFSC  Commander,  announced. 
Gen.  Stewart  would  replace  M /G   John  L.  Zoeckler,  who  retired  from 
USAF  July  31.  (AFSC   Release  130.69) 
USN  announced  award  of  $461-million  contract  to  Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corp.  for   development  of  S 3 A  carrier-based  antisubmarine-warfare 
aircraft,  formerly  designated  VSX.  Contract,  to  be  funded  over  five 
years,  was  for  6  R&D  a ircraf t   with  option  to   procure  193 production 
models,  contingent  upon  successful  development  phase.  ( DOD Release 
647-69)  

260 

August  2 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 
August  2:  Press  conference on  Mariner  V I   preliminary  results  was  held  a t  
JPL.  Scientists  reported  experiments had  revealed  tha t   recurring  white 
blob  seen i n   previous Mars  pictures  was  300-mi  wide  crater  with  peak 
i n   center;  linear  features  known  as  canals  were  actually  large,  irregu- 
lar,  low-contrast  splotches without  specific  detail;  temperature  in  equa- 
torial  area  ranged  from  75°F  to  -100°F;  atmosphere  was  almost 
nonexistent;  Mars had  no  sharply defined borders  separating light and  
dark  areas ;   and  Martian  surface  was  more  heavily  cratered  than  pre- 
viously  believed. 
Dr.  Charles  A.  Barth  of  Univ.  of  Colorado  said  any  life  on  Mars 
would  be  very  different  from  life  on  earth,  perhaps  form  that  used 
carbon  dioxide.  He  said uv spectrometer had  found  atomic carbon  and 
carbon monoxide, but  no  traces  of  nitrogen-essential 
to  life  on  earth. 
Dr. George C.  Pimentel of  Univ.  of  California  a t  Berkeley  said infra-  
red  spectrometer had  detected  presence of  unknown  compound  related 
to  methane,  building  block  of  life  on  earth.  He  also  reported  detection 
of  super-thin  layer  of  water  ice  hanging  in   atmosphere  above  Mars 
equator.  (Auerbach,  W Post,  8/3/69,  A3 ;   Lannan,  W  Star,  8/3/69, 
A5 1 
televised  two  good  test  pictures  before  start  of  its 
NASA’s  Mariner 
first  series  of  34  approach  shots  more  than  1 million  mi  from  Mars. 
(AP ,   W  Star,  8/2/69,  A3;  NASA  News  Release,  9/11/69) 
Initial  results  of  tests  a t   MSC’S  Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory  in   which 
mice  were  exposed  to  lunar   samples  showed  no  indication  of  life  on 
ported.  All  24  sterilized  mice  that  had  lunar  dust  injected  into  their 
stomachs  July  31  and   240  mice  inoculated  Aug.  1 were  “alive  and 
kicking.  . . . They have  shown no  untoward  reaction  to  the  sample and 
seem  to  be  in  very  good health.”  (AP, W  Star, 8/3/69,  A5) 
*  Lick  Observatory  scientists  said  at  news  conference  they  had  measured 
distance  between  earth  and   moon  to  be  226,970.9 mi,  based  on  data 
from  Aug.  1  test  in  which  laser  beam  successfully  hit  reflector  on 
moon,  LRL preventive  medicine  specialist  Dr.  Norman  D.  Jones  re- 
moon.  Figure  was  accurate  to  within  150  f t   and   eventually  might  be 
pinned  down  to  inches.  (AP ,  NYT,  8/4/69,  13)  
Romanian  President  Nicolae  Ceausescu  met  President  and  Mrs.  Nixon 
on  arrival  a t   Otopeni  Airport,  Bucharest.  President  Nixon  replied  to 
welcome:  ‘‘. . . this  significant  moment  in   the  history  of  relations  be- 
tween  our  two  countries  coincides with  a  great  moment  in   the  history 
of  the  human  race.  Mankind  has   landed  on  the  moon.  We  have  estab- 
lished  a  foothold  in  outer  space. 
there  are   goals  we  have  not 
reached  here  on  earth. We  a re   still 
ding  a  just  peace  in   the  world. 
This  is  a  work  that  requires  the  same  cooperation  and   patience  and 
perseverance from  men  of  good  will  that  i t   took  to  launch  that  vehicle 
to  the moon.’’  (PD, 8/4/69,  1065) 
Washington  Post  editorial:  “It is   not  often  tha t   the  public  has   a  chance 
to  share  i n   the  day  to  day  unraveling  of  scientific mysteries.  The  men 
and   women  who  engage  in   basic  research  prefer  to  work  quietly  in 
laboratories  and   eventually announce  their  findings  in   the  atmosphere 
of  scholarly  meetings  or  academic  publications.  But  a t   Houston  and 
Pasadena  [MSC  and   J P L ]   these  days,  the  public  has   become  a  silent 
observer of  the plodding work tha t   goes in to  basic  research.  Regardless 
of  the  drama  that  is  involved,  the  study  of  the  rocks  brought  back  by 

261 

August  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Apollo  11 from  the  moon  and   of  the  pictures  being  transmitted  back 
by  Mariners 6 and   7  a s  they fly  past  Mars  is simply  basic  research.  Al- 
though  results  a re   trickling  ou t   each  day,  the  dimensions  of  each  dis- 
covery  are   hard   to  measure  and   an   understanding  of  their  cumulative 
impact is likely  to  be   long  in   coming.”  ( W  Pos t ,   8/2/69,  A12) 
August  3:  At  Andrews  AFB,  on  re turn   from  world  tour,  President  Nixon 
sa id :   “ In   Bucharest  I  noted  tha t   so  many,  particularly  of  the  young 
people,  held  up  a  newspaper  picture  of  the  astronauts  landing  on  the 
moon,  and  everywhere we  went  i t  was  the  same.  Some way,  when  those 
two  Americans  stepped  on  the  moon,  the  people  of  this  world  were 
brought  closer  together.  . . . I  really  feel  in  my  heart  tha t   it is  . . . the 
sp ir i t   of  Apollo,  that  America  can  now  help  to  bring  to  all  relations 
with  other  nations.  The  sp ir i t   of  Apollo  . . . can  br ing   the  people  of 
the  world  together  in   peace.”  ( P D ,  8/4/69,  1071-2) 
New   Yo r k   T imes   published  interview  in   which  Grumman  Aircraft  Engi- 
neering  Corp.  President  Llewellyn  J.  Evans  expressed  concern  over 
possibility  of  failure  in   future  space  missions.  “I t   has  been  one  big 
gamble up  to  this  point.  Th is   country must  come  up  with  rescue hard-  
ware.  I t   would  be  shocking  i f   someone  got  stuck  in  orbit  someplace.” 
He  saw  need  for  four  space  facilities:  space  station  in  ear th   or  lunar 
orbit,  shuttle  for  travel  between  ear th   and   space  laboratory,  space 
“tug”  to  go  between  nonatmospheric  orbits,  and  rescue  vehicle. 
(Kampel, N Y T ,  8/3/69,  F7 )  
New  Y o r k   T imes   editorial  commented  on  Apollo  11   lunar  landing  and 
Mariner  V I   Mars  mission:  “Future  generations  may  well  regard  the 
last  two  weeks  of  July  1969  a s   the  most  revolutionary  and   significant 
fortnight  of  the  entire  twentieth  century.  Not  for  300  years  has   any 
comparable  quantum  leap  in   man’s  knowledge  of  the  cosmos  taken 
place in   so  brief  a  time.”  ( N Y T ,  8 /2 /69 ,   10) 
There  was  no  question  that  manned  Mars  mission  could  be  “organized, 
equipped  and  flown,  possibly  by  1985 o r   1986,” William Hines  said  in 
Washington  Sunday  Star.  “But  the  cost  of  such  a  flight  would  be  tre- 
mendous.”  Apollo  had  cost  $25  billion  over  eight  years.  Project  Mars 
“would  cost four times as much over a period twice as long.”  Taxpayers 
and  legislators  “should  listen  to  the  professional  pitchmen  of  space 
with a  dubious ear,  demanding  facts  instead  of  the  sort  of  rhetoric  Dr. 
George  E.  Mueller  delivered  on  Apollo  11 splashdown day.”  (W   Star, 
8/3/69,  C4) 
August  3-4:  Photos  of  Mars  taken  from  65,000-mi  altitude by  NASA’s Mar- 
iner  VZZ  were  received  by  JPL  and   shown  live  on   TV.  Although  pic- 
tures  were  clear,  canals  were  barely  visible  a s   dark  splotchy  areas, 
indicating they were not  sharply defined  features  as previously believed. 
Viewers  saw  100-mi-wide,  750-mi-long  dark   streak  identified  as 
Agathadaemon canal,  Cerberus canal in  light  Plateau  Elysium area, and 
Martian  south  pole  with  craters  filled  with  substance  resembling  snow 
o r   ice.  Pictures  showed  white  gr id   pattern  around  Nix  Olympica, 
identified  by  Mariner  VZ photos  a s   300-mi-wide crater.  Absence  in 
Mariner  VZZ  photos  of  bright  streak on   Tempe desert  near Mars  north 
pole that  had  been  visible  in  Mariner  V I  photos suggested meteorologi- 
cal  phenomenon  similar  to  earth’s  seasonal  changes.  South  polar  cap, 
which  was  2,500  mi  across  in   Mariner  VZZ  photos,  shrank  to  250  mi 

262 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

August  3 4  

eiving  Laboratory 
containing  charcoal-gray  dust  and  assorted 
rocks  ranging  from  gravel  to  size  of  orange.  NASA  geologist  Dr.  Jeffrey 
L.  Warner  described  rocks  a s   “different  from  anything  we  have  on 
earth.”  Some of  rocks had  flat  faces and   appeared  to  have  been  broken 
off  larger   chunks  of  material.  Rocks  in   first  box  of  samples had  been 
rounded.  Some  rocks  contained  unidentified  crystals  that  sparkled ; 
others  had  “an  unusual  smattering  of  what  appeared  to  be  metallics,” 
possibly  ilmenite  (iron-titanium  mineral  ox ide) ,   important  source  of 
titanium.  (uP1,  W Post,  8/5/69,  A6;  AP,  B  Sun, 8/5/69,  A l )  
*  NAS-NRC  Space  Science  Board  issued  The  Outer  Solar  System:  A  Pro- 
g ram   for  Exploration. Report  detailed  program  for   unmanned  explora- 
tion  from  1974  to   early  1980s;  reaffirmed  goals  set  by  earlier  study 
emphasizing experiments  contributing  to  understanding  of  origin  and  
evolution  of  solar  system,  of  life,  and   of  dynamic  processes  in  terres- 
tr ia l   environment;  and   agreed  exploration  would  concentrate  on 
planets  but  time  in  flight would  permit  study  of  interplanetary  medium. 
Missions  recommended  were  1974 Jupiter  deepen try   probe  and   flyby, 
1976 Jupiter  orb i t ,   1977 earth-Jupiter-Saturn-Pluto probes,  1979 earth- 
Jupiter-Uranus-Neptune probes,  and   earth-Jupiter-Uranus entry  probes 
in  early  1980s.  Vigorous  national  program  could  be  developed  for 
small  fraction  of  total  NASA  program  cost  and   increased  portion  of 
space budget  should be  devoted to  planetary  exploration.  Report,  origi- 
nating  from  June   1968 study  chaired  by  Dr.  James  A.  Van  Allen  of 
Univ.  of  Iowa  and   Dr.  Gordon  J.  F.  MacDonald of  Univ.  of  California 
at  Santa  Barbara,  recommended  NASA  include  long-term  outer  solar 
system  exploration  plan  in  1971 congressional  budgetary  presentation. 
(Tex t)  
NASA’s Pegasus  ZZZ meteoroid  detection  satellite,  launched  July  30,  1965, 
reentered  earth  atmosphere  a t   2 ;04   am  CDT over  Indian  Ocean  a t  
3 .4”N .   latitude  and  56.7”E.  longitude.  Pegasus 111 was  last  in   series  of 
three  Pegasus  satellites  with  96-ft-long  detector  panels  launched  to 
determine frequency of  meteoroids in   near-earth environment. All  three 
had  been  turned  off  i n   1%8 after  operating  for  more  than  double  de- 
sign  lifetime.  Few  hours  before  reentry,  controllers  commanded Pega- 
sus  111  beacon  to  begin  operating  again  and  beacon  functioned 
satisfactorily  until  satellite  was  destroyed  by  reentry  heat.  ( MSFC  Re- 
lease  69-170;  GSFC SSR ,   8 /15 /69)  
*  ERC announced  it  had  developed  and   successfully  flight-tested  “Flying 
Baton,”  simple,  low-cost  device  to  provide  eye-level  artificial  horizon 
for pilots.  Developed by  Center’s William J.  O’Keefe,  device  could  con- 
tribute  to more  “head-up”  flying,  be  used  for  precision  attitude  flying, 
and  allow pilot more  time  to look outside aircraft.  (ERC Release 69-19) 
DOT and   HUD  announced  $166,734  project  for  studies  to  recommend 
short-  and   long-term  relief  from   a ircraf t   noises  a t   John  F.  Kennedy 
International  Airport,  New  York;  O’Hare  International  Airport,  Chi- 
cago;  Bradley  International  Airport,  Hartford,  Conn.;  and  Cape  Ken- 
nedy  Regional  Airport,  Fla.  Studies were  to  define  noise  problems,  to 
identify  activities  affecting  problems,  to   identify  approaches  to  land 

263 

August  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

August  2 :   JPL   press  conference  reported  new  information  on  Mars  f rom   the   Mariner  VI 
flyby.  T h e   far-encounter  photo  above,  ta k en   463,250  miles  f rom   Mars  Ju ly   29,  showed 
Meridiani  S inus   and  Sabacus  S inu s   m  a  dark  fea ture   near  the   equator.  T h e   bright 
area  at  t h e   top  was  Cydonia.  T h e  sou th   polar  cap  showed  a t   th e   bo t tom   of  the   planet. 

August  4-5:  Mariner  VI1  transmitted  f i r s t   close-up  photo  of Mars’  sou th   polar  cap. 
In  the   photo  below,  taken   3,300  m i les   f r o m  Mars  Aug .   4 ,   th e   south  pole  was  believed 
to   b e   a t   t h e   lower  right.  Th r e e   large  craters  showed  par t ly   bare  floors.  Snowd r i f t -  
l i k e   formations  and  a n   irregular  cloud-like  object 
(upp e r   l e f t )   were  apparent. 

264 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Augiist  4 

August  4-5  : Scientific  instruments  on  board  Mariner  VI1  co l lec ted   de ta i led   da ta   on 
the  Mars  surface  and  atmosphere  as  the   spacecraf t   made   i t s   close-encounter  f lyby   of 
the  southern  hem isphere   and  polar  reg ions .   Mariner  VI  used  similar  ins trumen ts   to  
gather  informa t ion  on  the   equatorial  regions  of Mars  on   its  Ju l y   30-31  f l y b y .  

use  compatible  with  airport  locations,  and  to  analyze  feasibility  of 
compatible land  development  in   high-noise areas.  (DO T   Release  18369) 
*  ApoZZo  8 commemorative medallions containing  metal carried  on  mission 
were  being  distributed  to  NASA  employees  “as  a  token  of  appreciation 
for  each individual’s  efforts  in making  the United  States  lunar  program 
possible,”  NASA  Hq.  Week ly  Bulletin  said.  (NASA   Hq  WB ,  8/4/69,  1) 
August  41-5:  NASA’s  Mar iner   V I 1   transmitted  first  closeup  photos  of  Mars 
south  pole  as  i t   flew  within  2,100 mi  of  planet.  Dr.  Robert  P.  Sharp, 
geologist  at  Cal Tech,  said 31 photos might  look  like  “baby  pictures  of 
Earth.  This  is   what  the  Ear th  might  have  looked  like  some  four  billion 
years  ago  before  i t   developed  an   atmosphere  and  oceans to  weather  its 
surface and  nurture  life.”  Photos taken on pass  Aug.  4 were  transmitted 
to  JPL Aug.  5. 
Polar  cap,  which  had  appeared  gleaming  white  in   more  distant 
photos,  looked  dull  gray   in  closeups.  Pictures  showed  south  polar  cap 
sibly  frozen carbon  dioxide-piled 
with  snow-like substance 
up  in 
vast  dunes;  pocked  with 
steeply  walled  cra ters ;   and much  darker 
than  desert  to  north.  Floor  of  bright  circular  Hellas  desert  area,  be- 
lieved  to  be   shallow  crater  o r   collapsed  area,  was  strangely  free  of 
meteorite impact craters. 

265 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
August  4-5 
Mariner  VZZ  (launched  March  27)   with Mariner  F’Z 
(launched  Feb. 
24 )   had provided most  detailed  information to  date on Mars,  including 
198 photos  covering  20%  of  planet  and   detailed  scientific  da ta   from 
onboard  experiments. Data  indicated : thin  Martian  atmosphere had  no 
detectable  nitrogen;  south  polar  cap,  which  appeared  white  and  
smoothly  circular  in   telescope  pictures,  was  ragged  with  da rk   splotch 
i n   center;  surface  temperatures  ranged  from  75°F   to  -100°F; 
some 
of  narrower  thin  dark  lines called canals might  be   segments of  rubbled 
rims  of  craters  up  to  300  mi  across;  and   Martian  surface,  though 
heavily  pocked,  was  not  a s   rugged  a s   lunar   surface.  (AP ,   B  Sun, 
8/6/69,  A l ;   AP,  W  Star,  8/6/69,  AT;  Auerbach,  W  Pos t ,   8/6/69, 
A3) 
August  5: Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  and  other  top  NASA 
officials  testified  on  fu ture  space programs  before  Senate Committee on 
Aeronautical  and   Space Sciences. 
Introducing  programs,  Dr.  Pa ine   said:  “The  decade  of  the  1970’s 
and  1980’s should have  a program  as bold  in  concept and   as productive 
a s  we  have had  in   the  decade of  the  1960’s.  . . . we  need  to  have  clear 
objectives  to  focus our   work  and  a  commitment, subject  . . . to  annual 
review,  as  to  what  these  achievements  w i l l   be.  Our  general  goal  area 
should be  the  continued  exploration  of  the  solar  system  while  deriving 
the  maximum  scientific  and  practical  benefits  here  on  ear th   from  the 
space program.  There  is no  question that,  a t   some  future  time,  we  will 
have  the  capability  for   manned  planetary  exploration  and   we  need  to 
face  now  some  of  the  decisions  that  will  not  bear  fruition  for  more 
than  a  decade.  Although  I  do  not  believe  that  we  w i l l   see manned  ex- 
ploration  of  the  planets  in   the  1970’s  in   the  United  States  . . . I  do  
think  this  could  come  in   the  1980’s.  I t   is   by  no  means  clear  that  for  
the  Soviet Union  the  decision may  not  be  made  to  mount  a  crash  pro-  
gram  and bring  this  in   before  the  end  of  the  decade  of  the  1970’s.” 
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  MSFC  Director,  described  possible  1981- 
1982,  12-man,  2-ship  expedition  to   Mars  [see  Aug.  11.  Each  space- 
craf t   would  weigh  1.6  million  lbs  a t   departure  from  ear th   orb i t   and  
would  be  270  ft  long,  “smaller  than  what  we  are  flying  already  to  the 
moon.” 
NASA  was  using  “concept  of  reusability”  in   planning,  to  improve 
and   reduce  cost  of  operating  in   space,  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA 
Associate  Administrator  for   Manned  Space  Flight,  told  Committee. 
Reusability  could be   achieved “through  the  reuse  of  launch  and  space 
vehicles  and  . . . through  the  reuse of  a mission module such  as a  space 
station”  put  into  orb i t   and   used  over  10-yr  o r   even  20-yr  period. 
Space shuttles  would  be  designed to  run   100 or  more  flights.  Modules 
and   vehicles  would  be  designed  for  multiple  applications  in  earth, 
lunar,  and   synchronous  orbits.  Space  tug  would  permit  travel  from 
space station to  other  spacecraft  and  back  again-“general  purpose  . . . 
equipment.”  I n   ear th   orbital  operations,  “it permits  us  to  fly  off  from 
the space station  over to . . . an OAO,  orbiting astronomical observatory, 
either  to  repair  or  check  the  OAO,  o r   to  br ing   i t  back  to  a  space station 
where  i t  can then  be  loaded on  the  space shuttle for  re turn   to  ear th   and  
then  brought  back  into  orb i t   after  repairs.”  (Transcr ip t)  
Four  LRL technicians-Miss  Heather  A.  Owens,  Chauncey  C.  Park,  Roy 
G.  Coons,  and  Riley  Wilson-were 
placed  in   isolated  area  under  quar-  

266 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

August  5 

antine  after  being  exposed  to  lunar   material  when  line  carrying  con- 
taminated  material  from  vacuum  chambers  to  disposal  area  burst, 
spraying lunar  material  into  examining room.  Mishap, second in  which 
LRL technicians  were  exposed  to  lunar  material  [see  Aug.  11, brought 
total  number  of  persons under  quarantine to 23.  (AP,  W Post, 8/6/69, 
A3;  MSC  Hist  Off) 
*  NASA  announced resignation  of  Astronaut  F.  Curtis Michel,  effective Aug. 
18. Dr.  Michel,  who  had  been  on  one-year leave of  absence from  NASA 
to  do  scientific research  a t  Rice Univ.  in   Houston,  said  that-although 
he  was  reluctant  to  leave  NASA  and  prospect  of  flight  in   space-he 
wanted  to  devote  full  time  to  research  a t   Rice.  Resignation  reduced 
number  of  NASA  astronauts  to   48. (MSC   Release  69-55) 
0  NASA  notified  Instituto  Geofisico  del  Peru   that  $2-million NASA  tracking 
station  near  Lima,  Peru,  would  be  closed  because  of  shifting  program 
requirements  and   economic  reasons.  Station,  to  be  phased  out  by  No- 
vember, had  participated  i n  more than  75 satellite missions since  1957. 
(NASA   Release  69-117) 
0  Dept.  of  Interior  announced  gran t   of  $100,225  for   research  into  health, 
safety,  and   water  pollution  in   coal  mining  operations.  Island  Creek 
Coal  Co.  would  determine  if  miners  equipped  with  self-contained 
breathing  apparatus  similar  to  astronauts’  could  work  efliciently  in  
mines  filled  with  nitrogen  o r   other  inert  gas.  (DOI   Release  17784-69) 
Augu s t   6:  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos CCXCI   from  Baikonur  into  orb i t  with 
527-km  (327.5-mi)  apogee,  143-km  (88.9-mi)  perigee,  91.2-min 
period,  and  62.2’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Sept.  8.  (GSFC SSR, 
8 /15 /69 ;   9 /15 /69 ;   SBD,  8 /7 /69 ,   109)  
NASA’s H G l O   lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  A. 
Manke,  reached  78,000-ft altitude  and mach  1.55 a€ter a i r   launch  from 
B-52  a ircraf t   a t   45,000-ft  altitude west  of  Rosamond,  Calif.  Objective 
of  flight,  23rd  in   series,  was  to  obtain  data  on  performance,  stability, 
roll  control.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
and  control-especially 
0  NASA  named  flight  crews  for   Apollo  13  and  1 4  lunar  landing  missions. 
Prime  crewmen  for  Apollo  13 were  Astronauts  James  A.  Lovell,  J r .  
(commander) ,   Thomas  K.  Mattingly  I1  ( C M   p i lo t ) ,   and  Fred  W. 
Haise,  Jr.  ( LM   p i lo t ) .  Backup crew was  composed  of  Astronauts  John 
W.  Young,  John   L.  Swigert,  Jr.,  and  Charles M.  Duke,  Jr.  Apollo  1 4  
prime  crewmen  were  Astronauts  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.  (commander), 
S tuar t  A.  Roosa  ( CM  p i lo t) ,   and  Edgar  D.  Mitchell  ( LM   pilot).  Backup 
crewmen  were  Astronauts  Eugene  A.  Cernan,  Ronald  E.  Evans,  and  
Joe  E.  Engle. 
Both  missions  would  include  lunar  exploration  and  deployment  of 
Apollo  lunar  surface experiment packages  (ALSEP) . Total lunar  surface 
stay  time would  include two EVA  periods  of  three  hours each  and would 
not  exceed  35  hrs..  Flights  would  be  first  for  Astronauts  Mattingly, 
Haise,  Roosa,  and  Mitchell.  (NASA  Release 69-115) 
ApoZZo  I I  Astronauts Neil A.  Armstrong  and  Edwin E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  quar-  
antined  in   LRL,  discussed  lunar   surface  activities  with  about  40  scien- 
tists  and  geologists  over  closed-circuit  TV. Astronauts  said  lunar  
surface  was  rich  with  interesting  rocks.  They  described  small,  walnut- 
size  fragments which  appeared  translucent  o r   transparent,  with  reflect- 
ing  surfaces  like  quartz  crystals;  spatters  of  glass  on  rocks,  especially 
on  rocks  on  bottom  of  craters;  and  rocks  shaped  like  automobile  dis- 

267 

August  6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

tributor  caps, which  appeared  to  be weathered or  eroded and   sculptured 
a t   top  i n   cylindrical  shape.  Astronauts  said  they  regretted  not  being 
able  to  retrieve  more  lunar   rocks  and   suggested that  future  Apollo  as- 
tronauts  be  equipped  with  extra  pocket  o r   shoulder  bag  so  they  could 
collect  interesting  rocks  as  they  saw  them.  ( W  Pos t ,   8/7/69,  A4;  AP, 
B Sun, 8/7/69,  A8) 
Atheist  Madalyn  Murray  @Hair-on 
behalf  of  herself,  her  husband 
Richard  @Hair,  and   her  “Society  of  Separationists”-fiIed 
su i t   i n  
Austin,  Tex.,  District  Court  against  NASA  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas 
0. Paine,  to  prevent  U.S.  astronauts  on  duty  from  practicing  religion 
on  earth,  in  space,  o r   “around  and  about  the  moon.”  She   objected 
specifically  to ApoZZo  8 Christmas Eve  1968 Bible  reading  by  Astronaut 
Frank  Borman and  placing by  ApoZZo  I I  Astronauts Neil A.  Armstrong 
and   Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  of  disc  containing  microfilmed  prayers  on 
moon  July  20.  (UPI ,   W  Po s t ,   8 /7 /69)  
Dissatisfaction  with  substandard  performance  in   other  parts  of  society 
was  “something worthwhile that  the  Space Program  is  contributing  to 
the  United  States,”  NASA  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  said  in  
speech  before  National  Press  Club  in  Washington,  D.C.  “ I   hope  we  
have  spurred  our  society  and   our  people  to  . . . demand  higher  per- 
formance,  to  set  bolder  goals,  and  then  to  have  the  gumption  to  stand 
up  before  the  whole  world  and  demonstrate  whether  or  not  the  goals 
are   achieved.”  Space  program  had  also  taught  “need  for  broadly  en- 
listing  not  only  American  capability,  bu t   the  best  people  from  around 
the  world  willing  to  throw  their  competence  and   a  portion  of  their 
careers  into  challenging  endeavors.”  I t   had  “unleashed  in   the  1960’s 
the  talents  and  energies  of  a  technological  generation.”  U S .  must  con- 
tinue “to  put  together bold programs  tha t  will  release  the  creative  ener- 
gies  of  our  people  in   productive  channels.” 
Dr.  Paine  thought  history  would  record  a s   “the  great  contribution 
of  our  generation”  astronauts’  blazing  of  “trail  for   all  future  genera- 
tions  of  men  who want to  . . . conquer new  worlds.  . . .  Through man’s 
brains,  energy  and   resources  life  can-and 
life  will-extend 
itself 
through  the  solar  system.  . . .  The  1980’s  are  very  clearly  the  decade 
in  which  both  we   and   the  Sov ie t   Union,  with  reasonable-sized  space 
programs  in   the  1 9 7 0 ’ ~ ~  will  develop  a  technological  capability  for 
landing  on  Mars.” 
In   response to  questions,  Dr.  Paine  sa id :   “ I t   seems  clear  to  me  that 
there  are   increasing  opportunities  for  all  nations  to  work  together  in  
space  exploration  and   application.  Certainly  we  and  the  Russians  can 
and   should  cooperate  more  closely  in   space  science  so   our  two  pro- 
grams  can  produce  greater  results  than  the  simple  sum  of  their  out- 
puts.,,  (Transcr ip t)  
*  Future  space  program  was  described  by  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA 
Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  before  National 
Space Club  in   Washington,  D.C.  Reusable  nuclear  vehicle  to  serve  as 
space  shuttle  between  space  station  in   ear th   orbit  and   space  station 
in  lunar   orb i t  would  be  “final  link  that  would  permit  us  to  reduce  the 
cost  of  operation  to  something like  $200 for   moving  a  pound  of  mate- 
r ia l   from   the  earth’s  surface  to  the  lunar   surface  and   return  a s   com- 
pared  to  something  like  $100  thousand  a  pound  using  today’s  tech- 

268 

, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

August  6 

niques.  Similar  reductions  in   the  cost  of  transportation  to  the  earth 
orbital  station  will  permit  us   for  the  first  time  to  consider  processing 
materials  in  space,  to  use  space  for  the  kind  of  laboratory  work  that 
we  now  associate  with  ground-based  laboratories.”  By  end  of  1970s 
“we  would  find  so many  uses  for  operations  in  synchronous  orb i t  both 
for  observing  the  universe  and   for  observing  the  ear th   tha t   we  would 
have  established  a  space  station  in   synchronous  orb i t   which  would  be 
regularly  supplied by  a nuclear  shuttle  system  and  which  would  provide 
us  with  direct  television  broadcasting  and   direct  rad io   broadcasting 
to  the  homes  of  all  people  in   the  world,  as  well  a s   providing  us  with 
great stellar  observatories and  a viewing  platform  for  a ir   traffic  control, 
navigation  and   for  a  permanent  weather  watch. 
“.  . . this  approach  to  using  space  is  one  that  is   readily  extended, 
once  the  shuttle  capability  has   been  developed,  to  a  corresponding 
approach  for  planetary  exploration  and  . . . the  same  nuclear  shuttle 
system  together  with  the  space  station  modules  need  only  to  be  sup- 
plemented  by  a  Mars  landing  module  to   permit  us  to  carry   out  the 
first  manned  planetary  expedition  to  Mars.”  (Tex t)  
August  7:  Scientists  a t   JPL   presented  conflicting  opinions  to  newsmen  on 
preliminary  da ta   from  Mariner  V I   and   Mariner  V I 1   flybys  of  Mars. 
Dr.  George 6. Pimentel and Dr. Kenneth C.  He r r   of  Univ.  of  California 
at  Berkeley  said  data  from  infrared  spectrometer indicated  presence  of 
gaseous  ammonia  and  methane  in   Martian  atmosphere.  “We  are   con- 
fident  that  we   have  detected  solid  carbon  dioxide  that  is  not  on  the 
surface;  that  is,  i t   is  suspended  as  a  cloud  above  the  polar  cap.  Our 
data  are  consistent  with  and  suggest that  the  polar  cap  is   composed  of 
water  ice  and   probably  not  solid  carbon  dioxide  near  the  polar  cap 
edge.”  If  life  did  exist  on  Mars,  they  said,  i t   could  be  in  region  near 
edge  of  polar  icecap  where  “polar  ice  provides  a  reservoir  of  water” 
and  solid  carbon  dioxide  cloud  “provides  protection  from  ultraviolet 
radiation.” 
Dr.  Gerry  Neugebauer  of  Cal  Tech  said  temperature  of  Mars  was 
“strong  circumstantial  evidence  that  the  polar  caps  a re   in  fact  pre- 
dominantly made  of  carbon  dioxide.”  Infrared   radiometer  experiment, 
which  measured  temperatures  on  Martian  surface,  indicated  tha t   tem- 
perature of  south polar cap was  close to  -253”F, 
temperature a t  which 
carbon  dioxide  would  solidify  in   thin  Martian  atmosphere. 
uv  spectrometer experiment had  found  large  amount  of  uv   radiation 
reflected  from   south  polar  icecap,  indicating  tha t   uv  light  from  sun 
was  penetrating  thin  Martian  atmosphere  and   reaching  surface.  Dr. 
Charles W.  Hord  of  Univ.  of  Colorado said  strong  uv  radiation  reach- 
ing  surface  “would  destroy many  of  the  important molecular bonds  of 
organic  compounds.”  If  life  d id   exist  on  Mars,  he  said,  i t   “must  be  
pretty  strong  stuff,”  or  i t   must  have  some means  of  protection  against 
UV  rays. 
Dr.  Robert B.  Leighton of  Cal Tech  said  one of  most  striking  results 
of  Mariner  photos  was  indication  of  dynamic  process  occurring  on 
Martian  surface.  Unlike  rest  of  Martian  surface,  which  was  heavily 
cratered  and   closely  resembled  moon,  Hellas  area   appeared  to  be 
smooth  and   free  of  craters.  “Hellas  is  the  first  non-lunar-like  feature” 
discovered by  Mariner  V U ,  he   said.  Apparently  there  was  “activity  in 

269 

August  7 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
tha t   region  . . . obliterating craters  a s  fast  a s   they  are   being  formed.” 
(Bishop,  WSJ,  8/8/69;  Sullivan,  NYT,  8/8/69,  1; Lannan,  W  Star, 
8/8/69,  A4)  
*  Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory  scientists  issued  first  comprehensive report 
on  preliminary  study  of  lunar  samples  collected  by  ApoZZo  I I   astro- 
nauts.  Experiments  indicated  there  was  no  life  in   sample  and  traces  of 
organic material reported earlier were  probably  from astronauts’  space- 
suits  and   containers,  rubber  gloves,  and   tools  used  to  handle  material. 
(Traces  of  hydrocarbons  in   two  samples  of  lunar  dust  had   been  re- 
ported  Aug.  6 . )   Autopsies  performed  on  48  mice  injected  with  lunar 
dust  and   then  killed  had  shown  no  signs  of  germs  or  illness.  Detailed 
analyses  of  samples  would  begin  in   la te   September  when  material 
would  be  released  from  quarantine  and   distributed  to  146  principal 
investigators  in  9  countries.  (AP ,  W Star,  8/8/69,  A4 ;   Sullivan, N Y T ,  
8 /7 /69 ,1 )  
Sen.  Ralph  W.  Yarborough  (D-Tex.)  offered  amendment to   H.R.  11271, 
N 1970  NASA authorization  bill  [see  June  241,  to  increase  funds  for  
NASA  R&D  and  program  management  from  amount  reported  by  Senate 
Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences to  amount  passed  by 
House.  Increases would  total  $256.50 million  in   R&D  and   $6.35 million 
in  research  and   program  management.  #He sa id :   “My  amendment 
authorizes  the  bare   minimum  tha t   we,  a s   a  nation,  should  commit  to 
space.  I t s   adoption  is   vital  to  the  proper  balance  in   our  national 
priorities;  i t  is  vital  to  the  future  of  our   exciting  and   promising  space 
program;  and  i t   is  vital,  in  my  opinion,  to  the  interests  and  well-being 
of  our  country.”  (CR,  8/7/69,  59383) 
Washington  Post  published  results  of  July  26-28  Gallup  survey,  which 
found  public  lukewarm  about  Government  funding  of  manned  Mars 
landing.  While  majority  of  young  adults  favored  idea,  majority  of 
those  30  or  over  opposed  it.  Generally,  39%  of  those  polled  favored 
attempt  to  land man  on  Mars,  53% opposed,  and   8% had  no  opinion. 
Blacks  opposed  by  340-1 ratio.  ( W  Post,  8/7/69,  F4) 
At  White  House  dinner  for  West  German  Chancellor Kurt  G.  Kiesinger, 
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  MSFC  Director,  told  press  putting  man  on 
Mars  by  1982 posed  less  risk  than  putting man  on  moon  because  most 
technical  problems had  been  solved.  In   time space travel  would  become 
commonplace,  with spacecraft carrying  passengers.  On Martian  surface 
man  could  move  from  home  to  car  or  office  in   completely  controlled 
environment.  (Shelton,  W Post,  8/8/69,  D2) 
*  MSFC  announced  award  of  two  contracts.  Eight-month, $400,000  contract 
had  been  given  to  General  Dynamics Corp.  to  study  experiment  mod- 
ules  fo r   proposed  manned  space  station.  Study,  which  would  comple- 
ment  space  station  investigations  being  conducted  by  McDonnell 
Douglas  Corp.  and   North  American  Rockwell  Corp.,  would  examine 
variety  of  experiments  suitable  for  manned  space  station,  analyze 
scientific  and   engineering  community’s  need  for   experiment  modules, 
and  develop concepts for   least  number  of  modules needed  to meet  these 
requirements. 
Martin  Marietta  Corp.  had  been  awarded  $1,170,000  contract  to 
fabricate,  test,  and   deliver  15  Sa turn  V  workshop rate  gyro  processors 
and   1 module  test  set  and   to  retrofit  22  Apollo  Telescope  Mount  rate- 

270 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

August  7 

gyro  processors  for  Apollo  Applications  program.  Work,  expected  to 
take  18 mos,  would  be  done  in   Orlando,  Fla.  (MSFC  Releases  69-172, 
69-173) 
9  With  encouragement  from  President  Nixon  and  Vice  President  Sp iro   T. 
Agnew,  NASA  had  “begun  drumming  up  pressure  for  the  huge  sums 
required  to  send  men  to  Mars  i n   the  early  1980’s,”  New  Y o r k   Times 
editorial  said.  “But  the  latest  Mariner  information  makes  the  proba- 
bility  of  life  on  Mars  much  less  than  it  seemed  even  a  week  ago,  thus 
removing much  of  the  original motivation  for  such  a  project.  The  shift 
of  emphasis  now  proposed  to   unmanned  satellites  would  be  fa r  
cheaper;  scientifically  i t   would  also  be  fa r   more  productive.”  ( N Y T ,  
8/7/69,  32) 
August  8-14:  Zond  VZI  automatic  space  station  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R. 
from  Baikonur  with  “powerful  carr ier   rocket”  and  placed  on  free- 
re turn   lunar  trajectory  from parking orbit.  Tass said mission objectives 
were  to  study  moon  and   near-lunar  space  further,  photograph  lunar 
surface,  and test  improved onboard systems and  design of  “rocket-space 
complex.”  All  equipment was  functioning normally. 
On  Aug.  11  Tass  announced  that  spacecraft  had  circled  moon  on 
flight  plan  similar  to  tha t   of  Zond  Y  (launched  Sept.  15,  1968)  and 
Zond  VZ  (launched Nov.  10,  1968) ,  had  photographed  lunar  surface, 
and was  returning  to  earth. Zond  VZZ  reentered  atmosphere by  skipping 
across  outer  layers  of  atmosphere  to  reduce  its  entry  speed  and  then 
descended  and   softlanded  in  predetermined  area  near  Kustanay  in 
northern  Kazakhstan  Aug.  14.  (SBD,  8/11/69,  120-1;  8/18/69,  152; 
N Y T ,   8/9/69,  26;  8/12/69,  6 ;   8/15/69,  14;  GSFC S S R ,   8/15/69) 
August  8:  NASA announced selection  of  Heliodyne Corp.  and  Wolf  Research 
and   Development  Corp.  for  final  negotiations  leading  to   one-year  $1- 
million,  cost-plus-award-fee  contract  with  two  one-year  options  to 
operate  National  Space  Science  Data  Center  a t   GSFC.  (NASA Release 
69-118) 
In   Washington Daily  News  column Sen.  Everett M.  Dirksen  (R-I l l .)  sa id :  
Unknowing  voices  clamor  to  us  to  give  up  the  search  into  the  un- 
6 6  
known.  They  ask  us  to  spend  the  money  on  things  here  on  earth.  They 
ask  for  something that  already  has  been  done. Where  do  you  think  the 
money  is spent  that  sent Apollo 11 to  the moon?  I t  wasn’t  spent on  the 
moon.  There  are   no  creatures  there  to  benefit  from   the  billions  spent 
to  finally  land  Neil  Armstrong  and  Buzz  Aldrin  in   the  Sea  of  Tran-  
quility.  The  money  was  spent  here  on  earth,  where  i t   enriched  the 
laborers,  the  craftsmen,  the  technicians,  the  engineers,  the  scientists- 
and   their  neighborhoods.  It  enriched  the  millions  and  millions  of 
people  who  always  benefit  from  industry.  . . . ( W  News,  8/8/69,  2 3 )  
*  Washington Po s t   editorial:  “There  was  a  certain  logic  in  playing  down 
the  purely  scientific  aspects  of  the  Apollo  program  in   the  past  sincr 
the  effort  w a s   to  land  men  on   the  moon  before  the  Russians  did.  But 
that day  is past.  The scientists of  space,  as contrasted  with  its  engineers 
and   technicians,  have  been  forced  into  the  back  seat  of  the  manned 
space program.  I t  is  time  now  to  make  them  the  navigators.  The  choice 
of  missions-for 
future  flights  to  the  moon  and  for  future  operations 
that will  lead some day  to  a  t r ip  to Mars and  eventually other  planets- 
should  be  largely  in   their  hands.  They,  fa r   better  than  the  men  who 

271 

August  8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

created  the  hardware  and  the  knowledge  necessary  to  make  space  travel 
possible,  know  the  areas  most  appropriate  for   exploration  in   terms  of 
gaining  knowledge.”  ( W Pos t ,  8 /8 /69 )  
Augus t   9-15: NASA’s Os0  V I   (OSO-G)  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory  was  suc- 
cessfully  launched  from  ETR a t  3:52  am EDT by  two-stage Thor-Delta  N 
booster  to  study  sun  and   i ts   influence  on  earth’s  atmosphere.  Orbital 
parameters:  apogee,  348.0 m i   (560  km) ; perigee,  307.6 m i   (495  km) ; 
period,  95.2  min;  and   inclination,  32.96”.  Pr imary   mission  objective 
was  t o   obtain  high-resolution  spectral  da ta   f rom   pointed  experiments 
in   10- to   20-kev  range  and   1 to  1,300 A  range  dur ing   one  solar  rota- 
tion  and  make  raster  scans  of  solar disc  in   selected wavelengths.  Space- 
craf t   would  obtain  data  from  nonpointed  and   pointed  experiments  for  
more  than  one  solar  rotation  for   extended  observations  of  single  lines 
and   solar flares. 
Puc  (Package  Attitude  Control)  system,  carried  pickaback  on  Delta 
2nd  stage,  was  ejected  in to   orb i t  with  340-mi  (547.1-km)  apogee,  300- 
inclination.  Pri- 
m i   (482.7-km)  perigee,  94.2-min  period,  and   32.9’ 
mary  objective  was  to  flight-test  long-life,  low-power,  three-axis  PUC  
earth-stabilized  control  system  for   Delta  2nd  stage  and   to  demonstrate 
feasibility  of  using  stage  as   experimental  platform. 
O s0   V I   was  spin-stabilized,  weighed  640  lbs,  carr ied   seven  experi- 
ments,  was  designed  with  six-month  lifetime,  and   had  tw o   main 
( lower)  , which  carr ied   nondirectional  scanning  ex- 
sections-wheel 
periments  and   basic  support  equipment,  and   sail  (upp e r ) ,  which  car-  
ried  pointed  experiments.  I t   was  similar  to  previous  O S O S   but  had 
unique  capability  which  enabled  two  sun-pointing  telescopes  to  study 
i n   detail  uv and   x-ray  spectra  a t   any  point  on  solar  disc  and   would 
provide  greater knowledge  of  solar  atmosphere  (chromosphere)  as  well 
as   outermost  layer  (co rona )   visible  only  through  special  instruments 
or  du r ing   total  solar  eclipse.  Experiments,  designed  to  continue  and 
extend  work  of  preceding  oso  spacecraft,  were  provided  by  Harvard  
College  Observatory,  Naval  Research  Laboratory,  Rutgers  Univ.,  Los 
Alamos  Scientific  Laboratories,  Univ.  of  New  Mexico,  Univ.  of  Bo -  
logna,  and  University  College  (London ) .  
Both  tape  recorders  were  operating  a t  liftoff  and   were  still  operating 
satisfactorily.  Spacecraft  stabilized  and   acquired  sun   as  scheduled 
shortly  after  entering  orbit.  By  Aug.  15  all  experiments  had   been 
turned  on   and   were  operating  satisfactorily.  Two  minor  anomalies- 
higher  than  planned  use  of  current  by  motor  tha t   provided  fine  eleva- 
tion  pointing  and  lower  than  expected spacecraft operating  temperature 
-were 
not  expected  to  affect  spacecraft  operation  adversely. 
Os0   V I   was  seventh  in   series  of  eight  oso  spacecraft  designed  to 
provide  direct  observation  of  sun   dur ing   most  of  11-yr  solar  cycle. 
Os0   I (launched March  7,  1962)   and  Os0  II  (launched  Feb.  3,  1965)  
had  surpassed  their  six-month  design  lifetimes  and   together  provided 
more  than  8,600 hrs   of  scientific  information.  OSO-c 
(launched  Aug. 
25,  1965)  had  failed  to  reach  orb i t   when  booster  malfunctioned. 
Os0  ZII  (launched  March  8,  1967)  and   O s0   ZV 
(launched  Oct.  18, 
1967)   continued  operating  satisfactorily,  each  providing  7%  h r s   of 
real-time  da ta   daily.  Os0  V  (launched  Jan.  22,  1969)  had  both  tape 
recorders  and   seven  of  eight  experiments  operating  satisfactorily  after 
six  months  i n   orbit.  oso  program  was  managed  by  GSFC  under  OSSA 

272 

ASTRONAUTlCS  AND  AERONAUTlCS,  1969 
Allgrlst  9-15 
direction.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; NASA  Releases  69-112,  69-11214,  69-123; 
Pres  Rpt  70  [69]) 
August  9:  “Scientists  who  have  long  felt  that  their  role  was  secondary  to 
that  of  engineers  in   the  Apollo  project”  were  complaining  openly  and 
trying  to  force  greater  emphasis  on  science  in   planning  fu ture   lunar  
landing  missions,  John  Noble  Wilford  reported  in   New  Y o r k   T imes .  
“Their  argument  is  that,  with  the  success  of  Apollo  11,  the  project’s 
goal  should  be  to  learn  as  much  as possible  about  the  moon  and  not 
merely  to  repeat  the  demonstration  that  moon  landings  are   possible.” 
Dr.  Elbert  A.  King,  curator  of  Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory, had  said 
in  interview  that  NASA   administration  did  not  have  “enough  sympathy 
with,  or  understanding  of,  scientific  objectives.”  Casting  science  in  
“piggyback  role”  for  first  manned  lunar  landing  was  understandable, 
he  said.  “NO   one  really  criticizes  that,  because  . . . getting men  to  the 
moon  and  back  had  to  be  a  massive  engineering  effort.  But  now  that 
we   have  accomplished  that  goal,  the  justification  for  future  lunar   ex- 
ploration  is   largely  science.  There  has   to  be  a  shift  of  emphasis.” 
Scientists were pressing for more  active  role  in mission planning, return 
of  larger  amounts  of  lunar  samples,  selection  of  scientists  for  flight 
crews,  and  more  time  between  missions  in  which  to  evaluate  data  for 
applications  to  future  experiments.  ( N Y T ,  8/10/69,  44) 
*  Soviet scientist  Dr.  Valery A.  Krasheninnikev  and  academician Dr.  Alek- 
sandr  P.  Lisitzin  had  returned  to  San  Diego  from  55  days  with  U S .  
Deep  Sea Drilling  Project  aboard  drilling  ship Glomar  Challenger  con- 
vinced  their  findings  were  “more  important  to   man  than  the  samples 
from  the  moon,”  Associated  Press  reported. 
Concentrated  drilling  between  Honolulu  and   Guam  had  produced 
rocks  and  sedimentary  cores  showing microorganisms  in   perfect  state 
of  preservation.  They might provide history  of  earth’s  creation.  Project 
w a s   cooperative venture of  Scripps Institution of  Oceanography, Woods 
Hole  Oceanographic  Institution,  Lamont  Geological  Observatory  of 
Columbia Univ.,  Univ.  of  Miami  Institute  of  Marine Science, and  Univ. 
of  Washington.  ( N Y T ,  8/10/69,  45 )  
Augus t   10:  Apollo  11 Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong, Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr., 
and  Michael  Collins  and   20  other  persons  quarantined  in  Lunar  Re- 
ceiving  Laboratory  were  released  shortly  after  9:00  pm  CDT-four 
hours  earlier  than  planned.  Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  Director  of  Medical 
Research  and  Operations, MSC,  said  astronauts,  who  had  been  confined 
since  July  24,  showed  no  signs  of  any  possible  infection  from  exposure 
to moon.  He  cautioned  that  astronauts might become  ill  after  release- 
not  from  lunar  contamination,  bu t   from  earth  organisms  to  which  they 
were  highly susceptible  after  long  period  of  isolation.  Report  on  health 
of  persons  under  quarantine  would  be  presented  by  NASA  Aug.  11  to 
Interagency  Committee  on  Back  Contamination,  which  had  approved 
early  release.  (Sehlstedt,  B  Sun,  8/11/69,  A1 ; AP,  W Pos t ,   8/10/69, 
A7  1 
*  NASA   had  assured  Post  Office  Dept.  that  master  die  for   10-cent  moon 
landing  commemorative stamp  [see  July  91  had   gone  all  the  way  to  
lunar  surface  as  planned.  I t   had   returned  to  ear th   in   CM   and  been 
rushed  to  Washington,  D.C.,  July  31  after  decontamination  a t   MSC. 
However,  moon  letter  envelope  with  die  proof  of  moon  landing  stamp 
had  not  been  postmarked  on  lunar   surface.  Because  of  tight  schedule 

273 

August  10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS.  1969 

Q 

fo r   lunar   EVA,  letter  had   been  left  with  Astronaut  Michael  Collins  i n  
CM   Columbia  while  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong  and   Edwin  E.  Al- 
dr in ,   Jr.,  worked  on   moon.  “Moon  Landing”  postmark  had   been  ap- 
plied  dur ing   re turn   voyage.  Letter  had   been  decontaminated  a t   MSC 
and  returned  to Postmaster General Winton M.  Blount Aug.  5. (Fa ir ies ,  
W  S tar ,   8/10/69,  H11) 
*  Space program  spinoffs  of  medical  benefit  to  mankind  were  described  by 
Howard  A.  Rusk,  M.D.,  in   New  York  Times. NASA’s Scientific  Infor-  
mation  Div. provided  stockpile  of  knowledge  indexed  in  computer  tapes 
and   distributed  on   microfiche.  Collection  of  250,000  documents  in -  
creased  by  approximately  75,000  items  annually.  NASA  Technical  Utili- 
zation  Div.  selected  inventions,  ideas,  and   new  techniques  fo r   use  in  
nonaerospace  activities, 
including  medicine,  and   distributed  them 
through  eight  regional  centers.  Under  interagency  agreement,  NASA  and  
HEW   Social and  Rehabilitation  Services Administration  reported  results 
of  aerospace  research  to   solve  problems  of  4  million  physically  o r  
mentally  disabled  Americans  of  working  age.  Research  had  developed 
technique  fo r   sharpening  x-rays, micrometeorite  sensor  to  record  Park-  
insonian  tremors,  and   technique  for   applying  electrodes  with  spray  of 
conductive  material.  (NYT ,   8/10/69,  55) 
William  Hines  in  Washington  Sunday  Star  sa id   time  was  “ripe”  for   NASA 
reorganization,  “not  merely  the  firing,  promoting  and   transferring  of 
officials,  but  the  functional  restructuring  of  the  agency  as  well.”  There 
was  some  suspicion  tha t   no   place  existed  fo r   Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine, 
NASA  Administrator,  who  was  “not  only  a  Johnson-administration  hold- 
over,  but  a  card-carrying  Democrat  as  well.”  Some  observers  believed 
Apollo 8 Astronaut  Frank  Borman,  “the  President’s  curren t  darling  and  
space  confidant,”  might  be  next  NASA  Administrator.  “The  idea  of 
putting  astronauts  in   charge   of  the  space  program  may  seem  incon- 
gruous,  but  it  is  clearly  not  beyond  the  realm  of  possibility  in   the 
image-conscious  R ixon   regime.” 
Paine’s  fate  would  determine  that  of  Associate  Administrator  for 
Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller.  With  lunar   landing, 
Apollo  had  changed  from  developmental  to  operational  effort.  Chris- 
topher  C.  Kraft,  Director  of  Flight  Operations  a t   MSC,  would  likely 
transfer  to  Washington  as   Apollo  Program   Manager-possibly 
“con- 
trolling  all  space  missions  for   NASA.”  Hines  saw  possibility  of  Apollo 
Program  Director,  George H. Hage’s moving  into position being  vacated 
by  L/G  Samuel  C.  Phillips,  Apollo  Program   Director,  who  was  re jo in-  
ing   USAF.  “George  M.  Low,  Apollo  chief  a t   Houston,  may  replace  the 
Houston  Center  director, Robert  R.  Gilruth,  if  Gilruth  can  be  prevailed 
upon  to  retire.”  There  was  talk  about  moving  MSFC  Director  Dr. 
Wernher  von  Braun   to   Washington  “to  do   what  h e   does  best:  charm 
money  out  of  Congress.”  Dr.  Ku r t  H.  Debus,  KSC  Director,  “may  retire 
to  make  way  for  Rocco  Petrone.  . . .” (W S tar ,  8/10/69,  G4) 
*  History  of Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  from  1936, “when  the  ‘crazy  scien- 
tists’  under  . . . Dr.  Theodore  von  KQrm6n l i t   off  one  of  their  rockets 
i n   the  dry  gulch  called  the Arroyo  Seco,”  to  curren t   time,  when  “JPL’S 
sights  are   set  a  little  higher-and 
far ther   out,”  was  traced  by  John  
Lannan  in   Washington  Sunday  S tar .   JPL   controlled  NASA  Deep  Space 
h‘etwork  with  jurisdiction  over  space  efforts  10,000 m i   from  ear th   and  
beyond,  though  its  Goldstone  facility  also  had   participated  with  GSFC 

274 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Augost  10 

in  support  of  Apolto  11. I t s   space  flight  operation  facility  was  “actual 
directorate”  for  handling  cosmic  penetration  flights.  I t   was  currently 
gearing  for  Martian orbiter series  in   1971  and  for  1973 Viking landers. 
Future  held  possibilities  of  developing  and  directing  missions  leading 
to  Grand  Tour   of  planets.  JPL   was  owned  by  Federal  Government and  
staffed  and   operated  by  Cal Tech.  (W  Star, 8/10/69,  63)  
*  George  Gallup  released  results  of  first  poll  of  President  Nixon’s  popu- 
larity  since  Apollo  11  success.  Poll  showed  65%   of  U.S.  public  ap- 
proved  his  performance  in   o3ice.  Poll  July  11-14,  before  ApoZZo  11 
mission,  had  shown  58%  approval.  (W Post,  8/11/69,  A2) 
0  Apollo  11 had  opened  vast  market  for   medals,  tokens,  and   pins  to  col- 
lectors who  specialized in  commemorative pieces,  New  York  T imes  said. 
Medals  issued  by  several  countries  after  Apollo 8  were  “few  compared 
to  the  meteoric  shower  of  commemoratives  for  the  moon  landing.” 
Medal  by  Ralph  J.  Menconi  portrayed  Apollo  11  astronauts  on  face 
s ide ;   reverse  showed  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong  and  Edwin  E. 
Aldrin,  Jr.,  with  LM on  lunar  surface  and   ear th   in   background.  Medal 
designed  in  U.K.  by  Pau l   Vincze  depicted  astronaut  on  lunar  surface 
with  names  of  Apollo  11 astronauts.  Reverse  showed  figure  of  Hermes 
holding  winged  staff  of  flight  and   olive  branch  with  Saturn V  in   back- 
ground.  (Haney ,  N Y T ,  8 /10 /69)  
A u g u s t   11:  Lunar  scientist  Dr.  Harold  C.  Urey  discussed  moon  findings  at 
San  Diego,  Calif.,  press conference after  return  from  study of  Apollo  11 
lunar  samples  a t   LRL. There  was  “no  evidence  whatever”  of  life  on 
moon  and,  “at  present,  no  age  of  the  rocks  on  the  surface of  the  moon 
is  known.”  Fine  dust  on  lunar  surface consisted  of  50%  glass-lO% 
in 
form  of  small  beads,  40%  as  broken-up  beads-and 
‘‘something  else” 
containing  minerals  similar  to  those  in  lunar  rocks.  Dust  and  rocks 
evidenced  shock  as  though  produced  by  “rather  large  collisions  some- 
where  that  dug  up  material  considerably  deeper  in   the  moon  than  the 
few  centimeters  they  have  been  investigating.”  There  was  no   evidence 
of  water.  Chemical analyses had  shown high  concentration  of  titanium 
in   lunar  samples characteristic  of  area where Surveyor  V  and  Apollo  11 
had  landed.  “No  such  . . . titanium  concentration  occurs  anywhere 
that  we  know  of  on  the  surface  of  Earth.” 
No   one  had  “anticipated  what  we  a re   finding.  And  I  believe  that  no 
one  has  a  good  explanation  of  how  i t   got  that  way.”  I t   would  take 
“much more”  than  nine  more  Apollo  manned  landings  to  solve  lunar 
mysteries.  He  saw  no   economic  value  i n   future  lunar   colonization  but 
“an  observatory  on   the  moon  would  be  a  wonderful way  to  investigate 
the  heavens,  because  the  difficulties  of  the  atmosphere  would  dis- 
appear.”  (Space  Wo r ld ,  12 /69 ,35 -42 )  
0  Rep.  George  P.  Miller  (D-Calif.),  Chairman  of  House  Committee  on 
Science  and   Astronautics,  told  House:  “. . . I  do   not  a t   this  time wish 
to  commit  ourselves  to  a  specific  time  period  for  setting  sail  for  Mars. 
I  believe  that  there  are  many  tasks  that  can  be  accomplished  that  will 
ultimately  provide  that  capability,  but  w i l l   be  less  costly  and  will  be 
necessary  in   meeting  short  term  objectives.”  He  urged  priority  atten- 
tion  to  intermediate steps and balanced program  “that  fully  exploits  the 
great  potential  of  unmanned  spacecraft,  while  a t   the  same  time  main- 
taining  a  vigorous  manned  flight  program.” 
He  advocated  continuation  of  lunar  exploration  to  obtain  “experi- 

275 

August  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

ence  of  operating  a  Base  for   science and   exploration  on  another  heav- 
enly body”;  manned earth-orbital operations leading  to  long-term space 
station  supported  by  low-cost  shuttle  rocket;  greater  emphasis  on  ap- 
plications  satellites  tha t   “have  the  greatest  potential  for  economic 
re turn   in   the  near  term”;  larger  funding  for  unmanned  planetary  ex- 
ploration,  “an  area  in   which  the  U S .   may  soon  be  overshadowed by 
the  Soviet  Union” ; continued  NERVA  development  because  “improved 
propulsion  is   a  key  to  space  leadership”;  and   “special  emphasis  on 
ERS  satellites,  “which  promise  to  yield  so much  . . . to  agriculture  and 
(Tex t ;   C R ,  8/11/69,  H 7 2 5 1 4 )  
industry:, 
On  first  day  out  of  quarantine,  Apollo  1 1   crew  visited  MSC  offices,  then 
enjoyed  official day  off.  NASA  spokesman said  astronauts had  requested 
their  activities  be  kept  secret.  (UPI ,   W  Pos t ,   8/12/69,  A3) 
Approximately  nine  hours   of  satellite  time  had  been  booked  for  TV 
coverage  abroad  of  Apollo  11   astronaut  events  during  coming  week, 
ComSatCorp  said.  They  included  more  than  two  hours  live  coverage 
of  Aug.  12  MSC   news  conference, to  be  relayed  via  In te lsa t-I l l   F-2  to 
Western  and   Eastern  Europe  and,  in   part,  to  Tokyo  and   Sydney  via 
Pacific  Intelsat-III  F - 4 .   Nearly  two  hours  coverage  of  New  York 
ticker-tape  parade  and   visit  to  U.N.  would  be  transmitted  to  Europe 
Aug.  13.  Ceremonial  dinner  in   Los  Angeles,  later  in   day,  would  be 
taped  for  transmission  to  Europe  Aug.  14.  (ComSatCorp  Release 
69-50) 
Sen.  J.  WiIIiam  Fulbright  (D-Ark.)  told  Senate:  “ I t   would  be  a  major 
step  forward if  we  could now  negotiate  a new  space treaty  which  would 
go  beyond  the  disavowal of  national  claim  of  sovereignty in   the  exist- 
ing  treaty  and  explicitly  recognize  the  United  Nations  as  the  ‘owner’ 
or  sovereign of  extraterrestrial bodies and  also  define  the  functions  and  
responsibilities  of  a  United  Nations  space  authority,  particularly  the 
ways  in  which  i t  would  regulate  and  coordinate  national space explora- 
tion  programs.  The  overall  objective  of  such  a  treaty  would  be  to 
regulate  but  not  eliminate the  competition in   space. One  benefit  of  such 
an  arrangement  is  that  it  would  allow  the  space  powers to  reduce  their 
expenditures  and   so  reallocate  funds  to  more  pressing  domestic  and  
international requirements.”  ( G R ,  8/11/69,  59633) 
New   Y o r k   T imes   editorial:  “On  that  eventful  day  when  the  first  men 
walk  on  the  surface  of  Mars,  they  will  find  much  ‘magnificent  desola- 
tion’  akin  to  that  seen  by  Neil Armstrong  and  Edwin Aldrin  when  they 
strolled  on  the  moon  last  month.  Tha t   virtual  certainty  emerges  from 
the brilliantly  successful exploration  of  the  red  planet  just  completed  by 
Mariners  6  and   7.  Their  expedition  lacked  the  human  drama  of 
Apollo  11,  bu t   the  scientific  information  they  returned  may  well 
qualify  the  two  Mariners  a s   the  most  scientifically  productive  enter- 
prise  men  have  yet  carried  out  in   space.”  ( N Y T ,  8 /11 /69)  
*  Subcommittee  on  NASA  Oversight  submitted  to  House  Committee  on 
Science  and   Astronautics  report  Engineering  Management  of  Design 
and  Construction  of  Facilities  of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space 
Administration.  Report  concluded  that  closer  economic  scrutiny  of 
design  and   construction  management  a t   NASA  executive  level  could 
“yield  dividends  in   more  efficient  management  and  lower  costs  a t   the 
field  centers.”  Organization  of  Office  of  Facilities  was  “progressive 
step.”  .Cost  accounting  of  administrative  expenditures  needed  to  be 

276 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

August  11 

improved  and   engineering  management  costs  should  be  clearly  identi- 
fied  for  all  projects  a t   all  centers.  (Text) 
August  12-18:  NASA’s 951-lb  A t s   V 
Applications  Technology 
(ATS-E) 
Satellite  was  launched  from  ETR  a t  7:Ol  am EDT  by  Atlas  (SLV -3C ) -  
Centaur  booster  on mission  to  conduct  carefully  instrumented  gravity- 
gradient-orientation  experiment  for  basic  design  information  on 
stabilization  and   control  of  long-lived  spacecraft  in   synchronous  orb i t  
and   to  obtain  useful  data  from   onboard  experiments  during  first  30 
days  in   orbit.  Spacecraft  successfully  entered  elliptical  transfer  orb i t  
with  26,737.2-mi  (43,020.2-km)  apogee,  5,297.0-mi  (8,522.9-km)  peri- 
gee,  686.5-min  period,  and   17.9’  inclination. 
Because of  anomaly which  required  excessive fuel  to maintain  stable 
spin  condition,  apogee-kick  motor  was  fired  on  first  apogee  instead  of 
second and   spacecraft  had  to  be  biased  so  it would  dr if t   from  position 
over  India  to  intended  station  over  area  west  of  Ecuador.  Maneuver 
successfully  placed  A ts  V  into  near-synchronous  orbit  with  22,927-mi 
(36,889.5-km)  apogee,  22,221-mi  (35,753.6-km)  perigee,  1,464.0-min 
period,  2.7’  inclination,  and  6.9’  per  day  westward  drift. Active  nuta- 
tion  control was  overpowered  by  unidentified  force  tha t   caused  space- 
craf t   to  go  into  flat  spin,  preventing  ejection  of  motor  case  without 
possibility  of  damage  to  spacecraft.  Controllers  were  investigating 
alternatives-stopping 
spacecraft  spin,  restoring  spacecraft  to  normal 
spin  mode,  o r   minimizing  ejection  hazard-which 
could  be  executed 
Aug.  25  when  spacecraft  became  visible  to  Rosman,  N.C.,  ground 
station.  Spacecraft  was  not  in   danger  thermally  o r   electronically  and 
was  expected  to  become  stable  and   operational  after  successful ejection 
of  kick  motor. 
A ts   V was  fifth i n  series of  seven ATS  satellites designed to  investigate 
and  flight-test  technological  developments  common  to  number  of  satel- 
lite  applications  and  useful  to  satellites  operating  in   stationary  orbits, 
conduct  carefully  instrumented  gravity-gradient  experiments  for  basic 
design  information,  and  flight-test  experiments  peculiar  to  orbits  of 
various  missions.  A ts   Z  (launched  Dec.  6,  1966)  had  exceeded  test 
objectives  and  was  still  operating  satisfactorily.  A t s   ZZ (launched April 
5,  1967 ) ,   though  judged  a  failure  because  of  eccentric  orbit,  had 
transmitted  some  useful  data  before  being  turned  off  Oct.  23,  1967. 
A t s   IN  (launched Nov.  5,  1967)   had   operated  successfully  and  trans- 
mitted  color  photos  of  earth.  A t s   ZV  (launched Aug.  10 ,   1968)   had 
remained  in  parking  orbit  when  Centaur  failed  to  complete  second 
burn   and  had  reentered  Oct.  17,  1968. ATS  program  was  managed  by 
GSFC under  OSSA  direction.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
August  12 :   Apollo  11   Astronauts Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr., 
and  Michael Collins held  first  postflight  press  conference  at  MSC, na r -  
rating  45-min film  of  mission and   answering questions.  On  meaning  of 
lunar  landing,  Collins  said  i t   was  “technical  triumph  for  this  country 
to  have  said what  i t  was  going  to  do  a  number  of  years  ago,  and   then 
by  golly  do   it.  Jus t   like  we  said  w e   were  going  to  do.  Not  just  . . . 
purely  technical,  but  also  a  triumph  of  the  nation’s  overall  determina- 
tion,  will,  economy,  attention  to  detail,  and   a  thousand  and  one  other 
factors  tha t   went  into  it.” 
To  Aldrin mission meant  “that  many  other  problems perhaps  can  be 
solved  in  the  same way  by  taking  a  commitment to  solve  them  in   long 

277 

August  12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

time  fashion.  I  think  tha t   we  were  timely  in   accepting  this  mission  of 
going  to  the  moon.  I t  might  be   timely  a t   this  point  to  think  i n  many 
other areas  of  other missions that  could  be  accomplished.” 
Armstrong  said  moon  landing  heralded  “beginning  of  a  new  age.” 
He  said  moon  was  “stark  and   strangely  different  place,  but  i t   looked 
friendly  . . . and   proved  to  be   friendly.”  Astronauts  had  much  less 
trouble  than  expected  on  lunar   surface.  Pr imary   difficulty  was  that 
“there  was  jus t   fa r   too  little  time  to  do   the  variety  of  things  that  we 
would  have  liked  to  have  done.  . . . We  had  the  problem  of  the  5  year 
old  boy  in  a  candy store.  There  are jus t   too many  interesting  things  to  
do.” 
Armstrong  said  that  dur ing   landing  they  “were  concerned  about 
running  low  on  fuel  on  range  extension  w e   did  to  avoid  the  boulder 
field  and   craters.  We  used  a  significant  percentage  of  our  fuel margins 
and   we  were  quite  close  to  ou r   legal  limit.”  On  possibility  of  abor t  
dur ing  period  they  were  receiving alarm  signals, Aldrin  said procedure 
i n   preparation  simulations had  been  always to  “keep  going  as  long  as 
we  could.  . . . The  computer was  continuing  to  issue  guidance  . . . and  
i t  was  continuing  to  fly  the  vehicle  down  in   the  same way  tha t   i t   was 
programmed  to  do.  The  only  thing  that  was  missing  . . . is  that  we 
did  not  have  some  of  the  displays  . . . and  we  had  to  make  several 
entries  . . . to  clear  up  that  area.”  Armstrong  added,  “We  would  have 
continued  the  landing  so long  as  the  trajectory  seemed  safe.  And  land- 
ing  is   possible  under  these  conditions,  although  with  considerably  less 
confidence  than  you  have  when  you  have  the  information  from  the 
ground  and   the  computer  in   its  normal  manner  available  to  YOU.” 
(Transcr ip t)  
*  Leningrad  astronomer  Nikolay  A.  Kozyrev  called  for  lunar  laboratories 
over,  under,  and  on  moon’s  surface.  Soviet  and   American  space  ex- 
ploration  had  made  scientists  “more  confident  that  this  is  not  a  dead 
accumulation of  rocks but  a  space body  with  a very  interesting  history 
whose  life  also  continues  today.”  Lunar  research  goals  were  establish- 
ment  of  astronomical  instruments  on  stable  platforms  in   lunar  orbit, 
permanent  scientific  laboratory  on  moon,  spacecraft  launching  centers 
on moon  for  planetary  exproration,  and   laboratory stations  under  lunar 
surface o r  in   natural  caves,  “to  give  reliable  protection  from  dangerous 
radiation  and   meteorite  hits.”  ( UPI,  NYT,  8/13/69,  11) 
MSFC  announced  award  of  $15,455,800 contract  modification  to  Boeing 
Co.  for  continued  Sa turn   V  systems  engineering  and   integration.  Con- 
tract  covered  work  from  June  1967  through  June  1970  and  continued 
effort  through  10  Sa turn  V  boosters.  (MSFC Release  69-177) 
*  New  Jersey  State  Div.  of  Clean  Air  and   Water  requested  order  from 
Superior Court, Newark, asking seven  airlines  to  stop polluting  a i r  with 
je t   engine  exhaust  a t   Newark  Airport.  Su i t   called  for  modification  of 
existing  jet  engines  with  air-pollution-control  devices  or  for  switching 
to  new  smokeless  engines  and  asked  imposition  of  $2,500  fine.  I n  
Washington,  Air  Transpor t   Assn.  spokesman  said  that  “it  would  be 
hard   to  make  a  case  for  massive  retrofit  with  the  absence  of  a  ma jor  
health  hazard.”  He  said  studies  had  shown  that  jet  engine  pollution 
was  only  one percent  of  total  problem  and  was  case  of  “visibility”  and  
“esthetics”  rather  than  health  danger.  United  Airlines  spokesman said 

278 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

August  12 

November  1968 engine modifications  to  three  of  airline’s  Boeing 727s 
ion.  (Sullivan,  NYT,  8/13/69,  1) 
had  sharply  decreas 
*  Philadelphia  Evening 
editorial:  “The  public  ceremonies honor- 
ing  the  astronauts  underscore  identity  in   a  larger  and   much  more  re- 
sponsible  sense-a 
feeling  of  community,  rooted  in   a  family  and  
expanding  to  embrace  the  nation,  perhaps  ultimately  the  world.  There 
are   other  words  for  it-awareness 
of  a  common  purpose,  a  sense  of 
decency  both  public  and  private,  a  common  s tandard   of  behavior  and  
a  common  sense of  service  and   loyalty  to  country.  This  is  what  made 
Apollo  succeed,  and  this  is what  the  nation  is   recognizing  as  the  cele- 
bration  begins  today.”  ( P  Bull, 8/12/69) 
Augus t   13:  NERVA  experimental engine  (XE )   was  successfully  run   through 
two  bootstrap  startups  in   open-loop control  and   three  autostart  experi- 
ments  in   Jackass  Flats,  Nev.  Objective  was  to   obtain  additional  data 
about  engine  in   s tar tup   phase.  Engine  and   test  facility  operated  nor- 
mally  and   all  test  objectives  were  achieved.  (NASA  P ro j   Off;  SBD, 
9/2/69,  4) 
*  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket launched  by  NASA  from WSMR  carried  GSFC- 
Dudley  Observatory payload  to  collect  micrometeoroids dur ing  Perseid 
meteor  shower  and  to  study electric  field.  Rocket  and   instruments  func- 
tioned  satisfactorily  and  data  were  expected  from  all experiments. Data 
would  be  compared  with  da ta   from  Nike-Apache  mission  t o   be 
launched Aug.  22.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
*  ApolZo  11 Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  Michael 
Collins,  their  families,  and  NASA  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine, 
flew  in  presidential  jet  from  Houston  to  New  York,  Chicago,  and  Los 
Angeles  during  day  of  cross-country celebrations. 
Three-hour New  York  visit  included  greeting  a t  City  Hall  by  Mayor 
John  V.  Lindsay,  motorcade  to  U.N.  for   greeting  by  U.N.  Secretary 
General U  Thant,  and  ticker-tape  procession to  John  F.  Kennedy  Inter- 
national  Airport  for  departure  to  Chicago.  New  York  Public  Events 
Commissioner  John  S.  Palmer  estimated  crowds  a t   4  million;  other 
observers  sa id   there  were  fewer  and   blamed  ahead-of-schedule  ap- 
pearance  and TV  coverage. 
I n   Chicago, welcoming  crowd  was  estimated  a t   3.5  million.  Mayor 
Richard  J.  Daley  greeted  party  a t   Civic  Center  and   presented  medals 
symbolic  of  honorary  citizenship  to  astronauts  and  Dr.  Paine.  Illinois 
Gov.  Richard B.  Ogilvie  said,  “To  these  first  citizens of  the  new  epoch, 
the  people  of  Chicago and  Illinois  offer  their  profound  admiration  and 
respect.”  Astronauts  spoke  to   15,000  young  people  in   Grant  Pa rk  
before  returning  by  helicopter  to  O’Hare  International  Airport  fo r  
flight  to  Los  Angeles. 
Mayor  Samuel  W. Yorty  met  par ty   a t   Los  Angeles  International 
Airport.  After  brief  ceremony,  party  sped  to  Century  Plaza  Hotel  for 
reception  preceding  state  dinner.  (Lelyveld,  NYT,  8/14/69,  1 ;   Ober- 
dorfer,  W Post,  8/14/69,  A l ;   NASA  PAO) 
*  Climaxing  day  of  cross-country  celebrations,  President  and   Mrs.  Nixon 
hosted  formal  state  dinner  at  Century  Plaza  Hotel  in   Los  Angeles  to 
honor  Apollo  11 astronauts,  their  wives,  and   “historic  achievement of 
the  first  manned  landing  on  the  moon.”  Guests  included  other  astro- 
nauts  and  wives;  widows  of  Astronauts  Virgil  I. Grissom  and   Edward 

279 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

August  13 
H.  White 11; Mrs.  Esther Goddard,  widow  of  rocket pioneer Dr.  Robert 
H.  Goddard;  NASA  and   other  space  program  officials;  U.S.  and   inter- 
national  aviation  pioneers;  Cabinet  members;  Chief  Justice  and   Mrs. 
Warren  E.  Burger;  governors  of  44 states;  members of  Joint  Chiefs of 
Staff; Diplomatic Corps members representing 83 nations;  Mrs.  Dwight 
D.  Eisenhower, widow  of  former  President;  former Vice  President  and 
Mrs.  Hubert  H.  Humphrey;  and   Congressional leaders. 
President  asked  NASA  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  to  read 
citation  of  posthumous  awards : “The  National  Aeronautics  and   Space 
Administration  awards  posthumously to  Virgil  I.  Grissom, Edward  H. 
White, and  Roger B.  Chaffee the NASA  Distinguished Service Medals  for 
professional  skill,  courage,  and   dedication  to  duty  in  Project  Apollo. 
They  gave  their  lives  in   their  country’s  historic  undertaking  to  realize 
the  goal  of  landing  men  on  the  moon  and   returning  them  safely  to 
earth.” 
President  also  asked  Dr.  Paine  to  read   citation  of  NASA  Group 
Achievement  Award  to  ApoZZo  11 Mission  Operations  Team  “for  ex- 
ceptional  service  in   planning  and   exemplary  execution of  mission  op- 
erational  responsibilities  for  . . . first  manned  lunar  landing  mission.” 
Award  was  presented  to  Apollo  Flight  Control  Engineer  Stephen  G .  
Bales,  who  had  made  decision  to  proceed  with  lunar  landing  when 
computers failed  just  before  Eagle’s  landing  on  Sea  of  Tranquility,  on 
behalf  of  400,000  persons  who  had  contributed  to  Apollo  program 
success. 
Vice  President  Sp iro  T.  Agnew,  as  NASC  chairman,  presented Medal 
of  Freedom, nation’s  highest civilian  honor,  to  Apo l lo   1 1   astronauts  for 
participation  in  “a  unique  and   profoundly  important  adventure.  The 
accumulated scientific knowledge  and  technological  ability  of  mankind 
made  man’s  first  step  on  the  moon  practicable;  the  courage  and   skill 
of  men  like  these  made  i t   possible.  Their  contributions  to  this  under- 
taking  will  be  remembered  so   long  a s   men  wonder  and  dream  and 
search  for  truth  on  this  planet  and   among  the  stars.” 
Replying  to  honors,  Astronaut  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  sa id :   “What 
Apollo  has  begun  we  hope will  spread  ou t   in   many  directions,  not  just 
in  space,  but  underneath  the  seas  and  in   the  cities,  to  tell  us  unfor-  
gettably  that  we  can  do  what  we  will  and  must  and   want  to  do.” 
During  evening  orderly  crowd  of  peace  and   antipoverty  protesters 
gathered  outside  hotel.  ( P D ,   8/18/69,  1141-2,  1148-51  ; Roberts, 
N Y T ,   8/15/69,  1 4 ;  B  SU I Z ,  8/14/69,  A l )  
0  MSFC  announced  award  of  three  10-mo contracts  totaling  $1,370,000  to 
McDonnell  Douglas Corp.,  North  American Rockwell  Corp.,  and  Lock- 
heed  Aircraft  Corp.  to  study design  concepts and   development  require- 
ments  for  nuclear  rocket  stage  that  could  replace  Sa turn   V  3rd   stage 
(S-IVB) 
for  advanced missions beginning  in  late  1970s and   serve  a s  
workhorse  for  earth  orbital  and  planetary  applications. 
McDonnell  Douglas  received  $570,828  to  deveIop  and   evaluate  two 
alternative  stage  concepts-one  with  modified  Sa turn   V  hardware, 
other  with  new  stage  design  and  advanced  design  techniques.  NAR  re- 
ceived  $511,734  to study modified  Sa turn  V hardware concept only  and  
Lockheed  received  $287,000  to  study  advanced  design  concept  only. 
( MSFC  Release  69-180) 
New  Yo rk   Times  editorial  on  Aug.  12   Apo l lo   1 1   news  conference  in 

280 

August  13 

nerve-wracking  moments  before  touchdown-the 
overburdened  com- 
puter  and   the  near-exhaustion  of  their  fuel  supply  before  Neil  Arm- 
strong  and   Edwin  Aldrin  found  a  suitable  landing  spot-might 
have 
ssion.  Tha t   all  turned 
forced  a  very  different  ending  to  the  histor 
out  perfectly  is  a  tribute  to  the  astronauts’ 
courage  and  poise  as  
well  as  to  the  ability  of  the  back-up  personnel  a t  Mission  Control  in  
Houston.”  ( N Y T ,  8/13/69,  40) 
Apollo  11 commander  Neil  A.  Armstrong  stood  to   inherit  100,000-franc 
fortune of  Mme.  Anna E.  Guzman,  widow  of  French  industrialist,  which 
had  been  held  i n   trust  by  Academy  of  Science of  Institute  of  France 
since  her  1891  death,  according  to   article  Rep.  James  G.  Fulton 
(R-Pa.)  inserted in  Congressional Record. Legacy-once  worth $20,000 
but  currently  decreased  in   value  to  $290  exclusive  of  interest-was 
to  
be  awarded  to  first  scientist  t o   make  personal  contact  with  heavenly 
body  other  than Mars.  ( C R ,  8/13/69,  E7023) 
I n  Senate, Sen. William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  called  for  a t  least  temporary 
halt  in  USAF  plans  to  purchase  Lockheed  C-5A  cargo  aircraft  while 
U.S.  Comptroller  General  studied  aircraft’s  costs  and  value  to  be 
gained  from  further  purchases.  (CR, 8/13/69,  S9972-8) 
9  Rep.  J .   Herbert  Burke  (R-Fla.)  introduced  joint  resolution  calling  for  
redesignation  of  Cape  Kennedy  as  Cape  Canaveral.  ( C R ,   8/13/69, 
H7387) 
Augtcst  14: U.S.S.R. 
Cosmos  CCXCII  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit 
launched 
with  765-km  (475.4-mi)  apogee,  745-km  (462.9-mi)  perigee,  99.9-min 
period,  and   74.0”  inclination.  ( GSFC  SSR ,   8/15/69;  SBD ,   8/20/69, 
169 ;  UN  Public  Registry) 
NASA  announced  that  8  of  1 4  aerospace research  pilots  trained  for  USAF’S 
Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  program  terminated  June  10 would  join 
NASA.  One,  L/C  Albert  H.  Crews  (USAF)  , would  be  assigned  to  Flight 
Crew Operations Directorate  a t  MSC.  Seven would  be  astronauts,  bring- 
ing  total number  of  active NASA  astronauts  to  54:  Maj.  Karol H.  Bobko 
(W A F ) ,   L/CDR  Robert  L.  Crippen  ( U S N ) ,   Maj.  Charles  G.  Fullerton 
(U SA F ) ,   Maj.  Henry  W.  Hartsfield,  Jr.  (USAF ) ,   Maj.  Robert  F.  Over- 
myer  ( USMC)  , Maj.  Donald  H.  Peterson  (USAF)  , and  L/CDR  Richard 
H.  Truly  (USN )   . Effective  date  for  new  assignments had   not  been  set. 
Maj. Bobko, Maj. ‘Hartsfield, and  Maj.  Peterson would  complete studies 
fo r   graduate  degrees  before  assuming  astronaut  duty.  (NASA  Release 
69-120) 
*  NASA  announced  appointment  of  eight-man  failure  review  committee  to 
determine  why  Intelsat-III  F-5  comsat  did  not  achieve  planned  orbit 
after  launch  from  KSC July  25.  (NASA  Release 69-119) 
Discovery  of  x-ray  “star”  between  constellations  Centaurus  and   Lupus 
f rom  da ta   relayed  during  July  by  two  Vela  nuclear  detection satellites 
launched May  23  had  been  announced  by  Los  Alamos  Scientific Lab- 
oratory  astronomers, New   York  Times reported.  Dr.  J.  P.  Conner,  Dr. 
d R.  D.  Helian  said  object  had   twice  the  intensity  of 
most  brilliant  x-ray  sources  previously  known-in 
constellation  Scor- 
pius-and 
had  not  yet  been  identified  in   wavelengths  observable  by 

281 

August  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

human  eye.  No  obvious  source  of  x-ray  emissions had  been  identified, 
such  a s   stars,  stellar  explosions,  o r   pulsars.  (Sullivan,  N Y T ,   8/14/69, 
7 )  
*  Cross-country ceremonies f o r  Apo l lo   11 astronauts constituted  “probably 
the  single  greatest  peacetime celebration  in   the  nation’s  history,”  New 
Y o r k   Times  editorial  said.  “It was  more  than   a  tribute  to  three  COU- 
rageous and   able men;  it was  also  an  act  of  homage  to  the hundreds  of 
thousands  of  workers, engineers,  technicians  and   scientists  whose  ha rd  
work  over  almost  a  decade  made  the  moon  landing  possible.  At  the 
most  fundamental  level,  perhaps,  the  outpouring  of  national  rejoicing 
stemmed  from  the  renewed  sense  of  purpose  the  Apollo’s  incredible 
fea t   had  brought  to  a  nation  long  torn   and   depressed  by  military 
travail  abroad  and   racial  and   generational  antagonisms  a t   home.  The  
essence  of  that  sentiment  was  well  stated  by  Mr.  Armstrong  when  he 
declared a t  the  United  Nations  that  ‘we  citizens  of  ear th  who  can  solve 
the  problem of  leaving  ear th   can  also  solve  the  problems  of  staying  on 
earth.’ ” ( N Y T ,  8 /14 /69)  
Research  submarine Ben  Franklin  surfaced  300  mi  south  of  Nova  Scotia, 
ending  1,2OO-mi,  month-long  Gulf  Stream  Drift  by  Swiss  ocean- 
ographer  Jacques  Piccard  and   team  which  included  MSFC  researcher 
Chester  B.  May  [see  July  141. During  journey  team  had  noted  Gulf 
Stream  contained  fewer  fish,  stronger  current,  and  more  turbulence 
than  expected.  (UPI,  W  S tar ,   8/14/69,  A l ;   Blakeslee,  NYT ,   8/8/69, 
38) 
August  15:  Results  of  preliminary  qualitative  study  of  Mariner  VZ photos 
were  summarized  in   Science  by  Dr.  Robert  B.  Leighton,  Dr.  Norman 
H.  Horowitz, Dr.  Bruce  C.  Murray,  and   Dr.  Robert  P.  Sha rp   of  Cal 
Tech;  Alan  6. Herriman  and  Dr.  Andrew T.  Young  of  JPL;  Bradford 
A.  Smith of  New Mexico State Univ.;  Merton E.  Davies  of  RAND Corp.; 
and   Conway  B.  Leovy  of  Univ.  of  Washington:  Surface  of  Mars 
“appears  similar  to  that  of  the  Moon,  but  there  are  significant  differ- 
ences;  some  features  seen  from  Ear th   are   characterized; 
the  ‘blue 
haze’  hypothesis i s  disproved;  and  new  phenomena associated  with  the 
polar  cap  are   discovered.”  Mars  resembled moon  in   abundance,  form, 
arrangement,  and  size  of  craters,  bu t   there  appeared  to  be  break  in 
size-distribution  curve  of  craters  in   some  parts  of  Mars  not  character- 
istic  of  moon-apparently 
because  Mars  had   more  effective weathering 
and   transportation  process  than  moon.  Similarities  between  Martian 
and   lunar  surfaces  included  craters  with  slump  blocks,  terrace,  and 
rad ia l   dry- debris  avalanche  chutes  on  steep  inner  surfaces;  central 
peaks,  polygonal outlines, blocky  ejecta  rims,  and  i r r e g d a r  ejecta;  and 
irregularly  sinuous  ridges.  Differences  included more  subdued  relief  of 
many Martian  craters,  flatter  floors,  fewer central peaks,  more  subdued 
debris  blankets,  absence  of  obvious  secondary  craters  and  rays,  and 
greater  abundance  of  “ghost”  craters.  Photos  showed  no   sinuous  rilles 
and   no  distinctive  earth-like  phenomena  such  as mountain  ranges,  tec- 
tonic  basins,  stream-cut  topographs,  dune  fields,  playa  flats,  or  other 
arid-region  features.  (Science, 8/15/69,  685-90) 
Classical  astronomical  data  on  figures  of  moon  and  terrestrial  planets 
were  being  supplemented  by  new  information  from  Lunar  Orbiter 
program.  Comparable  fu ture   planetary  probes  would  provide  funda- 
mental  data  from  simple  experiments,  Cornel1  Univ.‘  radiophysicists 

282 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
Angrist  15 
Dr.  Brian  T.  O’Leary,  Dr.  Malcolm  J.  Campbell,  and   Dr.  Carl  Sagan 
said  in   Science. Lunar  Orbiter  results  had   revealed  lunar  mascons’ 
nonuniform  surface  distribution  th a t   could  explain  lunar   dynamical 
asymmetries “and  perhaps similar  asymmetries for Mars  and Mercury.” 
(Science, 8/15/69,651-7) 
*  Astronaut  Joseph  P.  Kerwin was  uninjured  when  raulty  landing  gear  on 
T-33 
jet  trainer  forced  belly  landing  a t   Ellington  AFB,  Tex.  (AP, 
W Star, 8/16/69,  A2) 
Soviet  newspaper  said  T u - 1 4 ,   Soviet  supersonic  transport,  had  been 
flying  beyond  sound  barrier  “for  extended  periods  of  time”  with  no 
difficulty,  Associated  Press  reported.  ( W Post,  8/16/69,  A2) 
C-5  Galaxy  aircraft  would  demonstrate  its  cargo  and  troop  delivery 
capability  in   joint  usAF-usA-Lockheed-Georgia  c o .   Transport  Air 
Drop  and  Jettison  Test  (TADJET) program  to  begin  in   early  October, 
DOD announced. Approximately 150  flights from Pope  AFB,  N.C.,  would 
airdrop  equipment  and   men.  During  transport  phase,  C-5  would  be 
loaded  and  unloaded  some  50  times  and  perform  mating  maneuvers 
with  air-transportable  dock  that  could  handle  cargo  capacity  of  three 
C-5s.  (DOD Release 683-69) 
August  15-17:  Second National  Air  Exposition  a t   Dulles  International  Air- 
port,  Va.,  featured  large static display  including  first public appearance 
of  Lockheed  C-5A,  world’s  largest  aircraft,  and   flying  exhibitions  by 
F-111  and  other  aircraft.  (P rog ram ;   NYT,  8/16/69,  46 )  
August  16:   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCXC I I I   from  Plesetsk  into  orbit 
with  244-km  (151.6-mi)  apogee,  202-km  (125.5-mi)  perigee,  88.9-min 
period,  and  51.7”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Aug.  28.  (GSFC SSR, 
8/31/69;  UN  Public  Registry;  SBD,  8/20/69,  166)  
0  Estimated 250,000  persons watched  Apollo  11   astronauts  parade  in  Hous- 
ton,  Tex.  Crowd  threw  confetti,  ticker  tape,  and  “moon  certificates”-- 
streets were  two   to  three  feet 
fake $100  and $1,000  paper money-until 
deep  in  litter.  Later,  55,000  persons  attended  gala  in   Houston’s  Astro- 
dome coliseum, which was  filled to  capacity. Total  of  31 astronauts  and 
families rode  through  cheering  throngs.  (UPI,  W Po s t ,   8/17/69,  A12) 
*  Associated Press  said Austin,  Tex.,  Judge  John  R.  Brown  had  granted  re- 
quest  of  atheist Madalyn  Murray  O’Hair  for  three-judge  Federal  court 
to  hear  her  suit  against  NASA seeking  to  prevent  astronauts  on  duty 
f rom   practicing  religion  [see  Aug.  63.  (AP,  W  Po s t ,   8/16/69,  A3 )  
*  Agnew  E.  Larsen,  space  research  consultant  with  Frankford  Arsenal, 
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  died  a t   age  73.  He   had  received  1930  Robert  J. 
Collier Trophy  as  member  of  Harold  F.  Pitcairn’s  staff  for  developing 
and applying autogiro  and  demonstrating  i ts  possibilities for  safe aerial 
transport.  (NYT,  8/18/69,  31;  Neely,  Pegasus,  12/50,  10) 
August  17:   Apo l lo   11  astronauts  discussed  possible  manned  Mars  landing 
by  1982  on  CBS  TV  program  “Face  the  Nation.”  Astronaut  Neil  A. 
Armstrong  said,  “I  am  quite  certain  that  goals  of  the Mars  variety  are  
within  our  range,  should we  choo se .   . . that  investment  of  our  national 
resources.”  First  exploratory  flights  could  be  combined  with  earth- 
orbiting  spacecraft  to  develop  long-term  capability  with  same  kind  of 
spacecraft.  It  w a s   “well  within  our  capability”  to   be  prepared  f o r  
Mars  launch  in   1981. 
Astronaut  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  said he  was  “not  so sure  . . . this  is 
the  time  that  we  can  accurately  set  a  date  like  1981.” Setting  goal was 

283 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
August  17 
worthwhile but  a s   intermediate  goals  were  reached  “I  believe  we  will 
be  able  to better  define exactly what  our   longer  term goals a r e  in   terms 
of  ten  years  from  now.” 
Astronaut  Michael  Collins  said,  “I  don’t  think  1981 is  too  soon.  I 
think  i t   is  well  within  our  capabality  to  do   so.)’  Long-duration  trip 
?equires  careful  design  and   testing  of  the  equipment,  which  could 
easily  be  done  in   Ear th   orb i t   with  a  number  of  ancillary  benefits.”  He 
defended  Bible  reading  in   space  and  announced  he  would  not  fly  in 
space again,  because h e   found  i t   increasingly  difficult  “to  keep  up  year 
after  year”  with  rigorous  training  required.  (SBD,  8/19/69,  159 ;  
W  Po s t ,   8/18/69,  A2;  NYT ,   8/18/69,  33) 
*  Japan   successfully  launched  her  largest  rocket  to  date-four-stage,  75-ft- 
long,  4.5-ft-diaY 43.8-ton  MU3D-Kyodo 
News  Service  reported. 
Rocket  reached  100-mi  (160.9-km)  altitude  in   435  min,  with  last 
stage  reaching  1.8 mps-about  half  speed  thought  needed  to  orbit  satel- 
lite-and 
splashing  down  in   Western  Pacific  after  7  min  3 5   secs  of 
flight.  (B  Sun, 8 /18 /69 ,   A4) 
President  Nixon’s  post-Apollo 11  tour  of  Asia  and  Romania  July  25- 
Aug.  3, plus  his  remarks  and   reactions  aboard  U.S.S.  Hornet  a t  splash- 
down  and  during  welcoming  ceremony  for  astronauts,  were  recorded 
i n   New  York  Times  Magazine  article  by  Max  Frankel  and  Robert  B. 
Semple,  Jr.  Authors  were  among  press  accompanying  President  and 
Mrs.  Nixon  on  tour.  President  and  party  had  basked  “in  reflected 
moonglow.”  When  President  walked  toward  reviewing  stand  in   Guam, 
spectator  had  remarked,  “that’s  his  moon  walk.”  Apollo  11 had  given 
President  “new  exuberance.”  ( N Y T  Magazine,  8/17/69,  26-9,  76-80) 
Rep.  George  P.  Miller  (D-Calif.),  as  Chairman  of  House  Committee  on 
Science and  Astronautics,  had  forced NASA  to pay  $5,522  for  USAF  jet  to 
transport  32  committee members  and  wives  to  Aug.  13 Apollo  11 state 
dinner  in  Los  Angeles,  Rowland  Evans  and   Robert  Novak  said  in 
Washington Pos t .   NASA  also  had  to  pay  $19,342  for  chartered  com- 
mercial jet  for  space officials and $2,800 for  Aug.  12  Houston luncheon, 
and  White House was  charging  agency  with  most  of  estimated $75,000 
cost  of  state  dinner.  ( W  Pos t ,   8/17/69,  B7) 
*  Controversy  was  building  up  over  astronauts’  future,  Apollo  program, 
and   manned  space flight  generally,  Harry   Schwartz said  in  New  York 
T imes .  Three  ma jor   debates were  over  whether  engineer-astronauts  or 
scientist-astronauts  should  be  sent  on  future  Apollo  missions;  who 
should  control  mission  schedules and  astronaut  activities,  “NASA  hier- 
archy,,  or  ground-based  scientists  in   NASA;  and   whether  U.S.  should 
emphasize unmanned  probes  or  crash  program  to  put  men  on  Mars  in 
early  1980s.  “The  fact  that  i t  is  the  scientists  who  have  been  resigning 
while  astronauts  with  test  pilot  backgrounds  have  been  receiving  un- 
precedented  public  acclaim  makes  i t   evident  where  the  balance  of 
power  lies  for  the  moment  within  NASA.  But  the  issue  is  fa r   from 
settled,  since  NASA  itself  must  and  does  use  the  prospect  of  scientific 
advances  as  a  key  argument  in   seeking  appropriations  for  space  ac- 
tivities.  Hence  the  dissident  scientists  could  have  substantial  leverage 
if they  teamed  up  with  Congressmen  and   others  who  oppose the  space 
appropriations  for  other  reasons.  I t   would  not  be  surprising  . . . i f  
NASA  sought to  ease the  scientists’ irr i ta t ion  by  satisfying  some  of  their 
demands.”  ( N Y T ,  8/17/69,  D2) 

284 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
August  18 
August  18:  Swiss physicist  Dr.  Johannes Geiss,  originator  of  Apollo  11 ex- 
periment  to  t rap   atomic  particles  trom  solar  wind  on  lunar  surface, 
would  use  “deliberate  speed”  in   assaying results,  New  Y o r k  Times re- 
ported.  NASA  courier  had  delivered  square  foot  of  aluminum  foil  ex- 
posed  on  moon  fo r  an hour  to  catch particles  emitted by  sun.  Dr.  Geiss 
and   associates  in   Berne Univ.’s  Physics  Institute  had   devised plan  for 
dual study of  foil in  Berne and   a t  Federal Polytechnic a t  Zurich.  Analy- 
ses,  determining  components  by  spectrometer,  would  require  several 
weeks.  NASA  would  not  release  remaining  three  square  feet  of  fo i l   to  
him  un t i l   1970.  ( N Y T ,  8/18/69,  34) 
*  British  Aircraft  Corp.  and  Sud-Aviation announced completion of  second 
phase  of  Anglo-French  Concorde  supersonic  transport  flight  develop- 
ment  program.  Two  prototypes  were  being  readied  for  transonic  phase 
to  push  aircraft’s  speed beyond mach  1 in   early September. Two  proto- 
types had  logged  104  flying h r s   in   39  and  24   flights  and  had  achieved 
speeds to mach  0.95  and  altitudes  to  40,000  ft.  Concorde 002 was  being 
prepared  for  supersonic flights to mach  2,  or  1,400-mph cruising  speed, 
i n   tests  expected  to  begin  a t   year’s  end.  (BAc/Sud-Aviation  Release 
10C/69) 
August  19:  McDonald  Observatory  in   Texas  successfully  recorded  i ts   first 
hits on  laser  reflector  left  on moon  by ApoZZo  11 astronauts at  9:30  pm 
CDT.  Scientists  said  distance  a t   that  moment  was  232,271.406  mi  and 
moon  was  131.2  f t   farther  from  earth  than  previously  believed.  Lick 
Observatory  in  California  had   recorded  first  hits  Aug.  1 and  had  esti- 
mated  earth-moon  distance  to  be  226,970.9  mi  a t   that  time.  (AP ,   W 
Star, 8 /21 /69 ,   A3) 
U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  CCXCZY  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t   with 
343-km 
(213.1-mi)  apogee,  205-km  (127.4-mi)  perigee,  89.7-mi 
period,  and   65.4’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Aug.  27.  ( GSFC SSR, 
8 /31 /69 ;   SBD,  8/20/69,  166 ;   UN   Public  Registry) 
*  NASA  announced  selection  of  Chester M.  Lee  as Apollo  Mission  Director, 
succeeding George  H.  Hage,  who  had  been  elected  vice  president  for 
product  development with  Boeing Co.  Lee,  retired  USN  captain  who  had 
served  in   Po lar is  missile  program  and  in   Directorate  of  Research  and 
Engineering  in  Office  of  Secretary  of  Defense,  had  been  Assistant 
Apollo  Mission  Director  since  August  1966,  (NASA   Release  69-122) 
August  20:  Study  of  possible  Space  Technology  Applications  and   Research 
Laboratory  ( STARLAB) ,   sponsored  by  NASA  and   American  Society  for 
Engineering  Education,  was  completed  a t   MSFC. Eleven-week  design 
project  focused  space-developed  technology  on  ear th   resources  use, 
crop-maturity  prediction,  soil  analysis,  vegetation  vigor,  sea  farming, 
and   other  ear th   problems.  Final  presentation  in   project,  which  had 
participation  of  21   faculty  members  from  18 colleges  and  universities, 
was  report  on  orbiting  space  laboratory  illustrating  systems approach 
that  could be  valuable  in   solving major  ear th  problems.  (MSFC  Release 
69-179) 
Wushington  Post  published  letter  from  former  Secretary  of  State  Dean 
Rusk.  He  recommended  U S .  abandon idea  of  space race with U.S.S.R.; 
“throw  wide  open  the  doors  on  international  cooperation”;  proceed 
with  development  of  near-earth  space  capabilities  and  activities  con- 
tributing  to  understanding  of  ea r th ;   and  “take  advantage  of  NASA’s ex- 
traord inary   ability  to mobilize  scientific,  technical,  industrial  and  other 

285 

August  20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

talents”  for   other  tasks,  like  a i r   travel  and   a i r   pollution  problem- 
solving.  “Manned  flights  to   %e  planets  might  better  be  a  decision  for 
the  next  generation.”  ( W  Po s t ,   8/20/69,  A28) 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld  R. 
August  21:   NASA’s X-24A 
Gentry,  successfully  completed  th ird   flight  after  air-launch  from  B-52 
a ircraf t   over  South  Rogers  Lake  Bed,  Calif.  Objectives  of  unpowered 
flight  were  to  obtain  handling  qualities,  stability  and  control  deriva- 
tives,  flow  visualization  over  af t  ,portion  of  vehicle,  and   longitudinal 
trim  curves  and   lift-to-drag ratio  a t   15” upper-flap  setting.  Procedural 
to  be  launched  35  secs  early  and   some  planned 
error   caused  X-24A 
data  were  not  obtained.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
Intelsat  I  (Ea r ly  B i r d )   had  been  put  back  into  orbital  retirement  and   full 
communications  service  via  Zntelsat-IZZ  F-2  had   been  restored,  Com- 
SatCorp announced.  Intelsat  I,  reactivated  June  30  after  six-month re- 
tirement  to  compensate for   failure of  Zntelsat-Ill  F-2  until  service was 
restored  Aug.  1, would  remain  in   orbit  and  would  be  capable of  opera- 
tional  service  if   needed.  Restored  Intelsat-III  F-2  was  handling  620 
full-time  commercial  circuits  serving  countries  in   Atlantic  area   and 
( INTELSAT  Release 
transatlantic  TV  programming  when  ordered. 
69-53) 
0  NASA  launched  series  of  three  sounding  rockets  from  Wallops  Station. 
Nike-Tomahawk  carr ied   GSFC  payload  to  141.1-mi  (227.0-km)  alti- 
tude  to  test  neutral-mass spectrometer  system  with  unique  sample-flow 
and   test-leak  subsystem  necessary  for   making  high-pressure  neutral- 
constituent  measurements  on  planned  Mars  and   Venus  missions  and 
to  demonstrate  capability  of  sterilized-mass-spectrometer electronics  in 
flight  environment  for  first  time.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned 
satisfactorily  and  complete data  were  obtained. 
Nike-Tomahawk  carried  GSFC  and   Univ.  of  Michigan  payload  to 
197.6-mi  (318.0-km)  altitude  to  measure  nitrogen  density  and   tem- 
perature.  Secondary  objectives  were  to  evaluate Omegatron  system  de- 
signed  for  San  Marco-C satellite,  measure  density  and  temperature  of 
nitrogen  simultaneously, compare  Pitot-static-probe  and  thermosphere- 
probe  density  in   74.6-mi  (120.0-km)  region,  and   validate  mass  spec- 
trometer  nitrogen  measurement  and   electrostatic-probe  electron 
temperature  data.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily  and 
complete  data  were  obtained. 
Nike-Apache  carried  Univ.  of  Michigan  payload  to  124.3-mi 
(200.0-km)  altitude  to  measure  neutral  atmospheric  density  by  Pitot 
technique  in  18.4-  to   74.6-mi  (30.0- to  120.0-km)  region.  Rocket  and  
instruments  functioned  satisfactorily  and  all atmospheric measurements 
made  by  Pitot  probe  were  excellent.  (NASA  Rpts  SRL) 
0  Every  scientist-astronaut  except  one-geologist  Harrison  Schmitt-had 
been  removed  from  NASA’s lunar   landing  tra in ing   list,  Victor  Cohn  re- 
ported  in   Washington  Po s t .   Report  was  later  denied  by  NASA.  Cohn 
said  remaining  scientists  had  been  assigned to  tra in   for  longdura t ion ,  
earth-orbiting  Apollo  Applications  missions  beginning  in   1972.  ( W 
Pos t ,   8/21/69,  A l ;   8/22/69,  A18) 
0  Washington Post  published letter  from  Irene  S. Rubin  in  Lampang, Thai- 
land.  Real  impact  of  Apollo  I 1   success  in   Thailand  had   been  “on  the 
group  of  educated  men  who  have  some  effect  on  government.  Their 
primary  reaction  was  not  one  of  shared  accomplishment  bu t   of  shame 

286 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

August  21 

in   the  gap   thus  dramatized  between  themselves  and   the  developed 
countries.”  Though U.S. could not  hide  technological  capacity,  “I  think 
we  should be  more  aware  of  the context  into which news  of  the  Apollo 
mission  is  received.  Fa r   from   bringing  the  world  closer  together  with 
such performances, we  may  be  arousing  bitterness  and   obstinacy in  the 
misallocation of  development funds.”  ( W Post,  8/21/69,  A18) 
launched  Cosmos  CCXCV  in to   orb i t   with  473-km 
August  22:  U.S.S.R. 
(293.9-mi)  apogee,  270-km  (167.8-mi)  perigee,  91.9-min  period,  and  
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Dec.  1  (GSFC  SSR ,   8 /31 /69 ;  
71.0’ 
12 /15 /69)  
Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carried  GSFC 
and   Dudley  Observatory  payload  to  98.2-mi  (158.0-km)  altitude  to 
provide  background  particle  collection  for   comparison  with  data  from 
Nike-Apache  launched  Aug.  13 during  Perseid  meteor  shower.  Rocket 
and  instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  Data  were  expected  from  all 
experiments.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
*  NASA  named  Rocco  A.  Petrone,  Director  of  Launch  Operations  at  KSC 
since  1966, to  succeed  L/G  Samuel  C.  Phillips  (USAF)   as  Director  of 
Apollo  Program,  effective  Sept.  1. He  would  be  succeeded  by  Deputy 
Director  of  Launch  Operations  Walter  J.  Kapryan.  Petrone  had  been 
Sa turn   Pro jec t   Officer  and   Apollo  Program  Manager.  His  awards  in- 
cluded  NASA  Exceptional  Service  Award  for  direction  of  Apollo  7 
checkout  and   launch  and   NASA  Distinguished  Service  Medal,  NASA’s 
highest  award,  for  direction  of  Apollo  8 checkout  and   launch.  (NA SA  
Release  69-124) 
*  IAA  announced selection  of  Dr.  Charles A.  Berry, Director  of  Medical Re- 
search  and  Operations a t  MSC,  to  receive  Daniel  and   Florence Guggen- 
heim  International  Astronautics  Award  for  1969.  Award  and   $1,000 
prize  would  be  presented dur ing   20th  International  Astronautical  Con- 
gress  in   Argentina  in  October.  (UPI,  W  Pos t ,   8/23/69,  B3) 
0  NASA’s alleged  neglect  of  pure  science research goals in   favor  of  engineer- 
ing  pursuits  and   “glamor”  had  caused  undercurrent  of  dissatisfaction 
among  scientists,  Science  noted.  When  interviewed by  Science  Dr.  F. 
Curtis Michel,  Dr.  Donald  U.  Wise,  and   Dr.  Elbert  A.  King,  who  had 
resigned  from  NASA  recently,  declined  to  attribute  their  resignations 
directly  to   ma jor   dissatisfactions  w i th   NASA  and   denied  that  they  had 
resigned  to  protest  emphasis  on  engineering  ra ther   than  scientific  re-  
search.  They  did,  however,  express  some  dissatisfaction  with  role  of 
basic  science  in   space  exploration  and   impatience with  NASA’S  manage- 
ment  of  scientific  projects  and   admitted  they  were  lured  from  NASA 
by  prospects  of  new  positions  tha t   offered  more  time  for   scientific  re- 
search.  (Sc ience ,  8/22/69,  776-8) 
AIAA  announced  election  of  Honorary  Fellows:  Secretary  of  the  Air 
Force,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.;  German  rocket  pioneer  Hermann 
Oberth;  and  Northrop  Corp.  founder  John  K.  Northrop.  Dr.  Seamans, 
former  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  was  honored  for  “organizing  the 
research,  development  and  operational base which produced  the  Apollo 
program.”  Honors would  be  presented  a t  Oct.  23 banquet  in  Anaheim, 
Calif.  (A IM   Release) 
I n   letter  advocating  postponement of  decision  on  manned  Mars  landing 
[see  Aug.  201  former  Secretary  of  State  Dean  Rusk  had  “gone  to  the 
hear t   of  what  is  bound  to become a  critical  national  decision,”  Richard 

287 

August  22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Wilson  said  in   Washington  Evening  S h r .  “Now  that  we  know  we  can 
and   will  do  this  thing  does  it make  any  difference  in   the  eons  of  time 
yet  to  come  when  we  do   it?  Fifty  years  from  now  might  we  not  have 
developed  fa r   cheaper  and  more  efficient’ways to  do  i t ?   Mars  will  still 
be  there.  . . . The  space  men  have  shown  us  not  only  the  moon,  but 
what  a  beautiful  planet  we  have  in‘wha t   may  otherwise  be  a  wholly 
desolate  solar system-a 
beautiful  planet  that  needs  loving care   to  pre- 
serve  it.”  (W  Star, 8/22/69,  A15) 
0  I n   telephone  interview,  UCLA  astronomer  Dr.  Samuel  Herrick,  Jr . ,   said 
planetoid Geographos, due to  pass  ear th  a t  5.6-million-mi distance  Aug. 
27,  would  be  best  site  of  all  asteroids  for  eventual space station  beyond 
moon  and   good  spot  for  manned  o r   unmanned  spacecraft  landing.  I t s  
farthest  point  from  sun  in  given  orbit  was  least  distant  from  sun  and 
from  ear th   of  all  minor  planets.  But  astronauts  landing  on  i t   would 
have  to  “dig  in   and   tie  themselves  down”  since  its  estimated g wa s   so 
slight  “even  a  sneeze  directed  a t   the  surface  would  propel  a  man  off 
into space.”  (AP ,  B Sun, 8/23/69,  A3) 
*  I n   Science,  M IT   Lincoln  Laboratory  scientists  Alan  E.  E.  Rogers  and 
Richard  P.  Ingalls  reported  mapping  Venus  surface  reflectivity  by 
radar   interferometry  a t  3.8-cm wavelength  for  region  from  -80’ 
to 0” 
to  +40”  latitude.  Map  was  free  from  two- 
longitude  and  from  -50’ 
fold  range-Doppler  ambiguity,  presented  new  features,  and  clearly  de- 
lineated  features  previously  observed.  I t   showed  large  circular  regions 
of  significantly lower reflectivity  than  their  surroundings, with  size  and 
appearance  of  lunar   maria.  (Sc ience ,  8/22/69,  797-9) 
*  At  National  Amateur  Astronomers  convention  in   Denver,  Colo.,  six- 
member  panel  including  Northwestern  Univ.  astronomer  Dr.  J.  Allen 
Hynek  and  Univ.  of  Arizona  physicist  Dr.  James  E.  McDonald  sug- 
gested UFO  investigation  be  taken  from  USAF  and  placed with  scientific 
body.  Panelists  said  since  UFOS  apparently  presented  no  danger  to 
national  defense,  they  were  unimportant  to  USAF.  Panel  disagreed  with 
1968  Condon  Report  on  UFOS  [see  Jan.  91.  Hynek  said  UFO  research 
should  continue.  (AP ,  W  Star, 8/24/69,  A17) 
August  23:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Titan  IIIB-Agena  booster.  Satellite  entered  orbit  with  234.3-mi 
(377.0-km)  apogee,  85.8-mi  ( 138.1-km)  perigee,  89.6-min  period, 
and   108.1”  inclination  and   reentered  Sept.  7.  (GSFC  S S R ,   8 /31 /69 ;  
9/15/69;  SBD,  8/26/69,  190) 
Chemical analysis  of  moon  rocks  a t  Lunar Receiving  Laboratory had  dis- 
closed  their  age  might  range  from  2  billion  to  4.5  billion  yrs-far 
greater  than  most  scientists  expected-lunar 
scientists  in  touch  with 
LRL  colleagues  said.  It was  “almost conclusive evidence that  i t  has been 
billions  of  years  since  these  rocks  crystallized.”  Finding  might  settle 
difference  between  geologists  who  had  viewed  lunar  surface  as  having 
had  continuous  history  and  those  like  Dr.  Harold  C.  Urey  who  be- 
lieved  moon  was  ancient,  undisturbed  place  made  of  material  which 
would  help  unfold  history  of  early  planets.  Later,  MSC  Director  of 
Science  and   Applications,  Dr.  Wilmot  N.  Hess,  said  Dr.  Oliver  A. 
Schaeffer and  Dr.  John  Funkhouser  of  State Univ.  of  New  York,  Dr. 
Joseph  Zahringer  of  Max  Planck  Institute  in   Heidelberg,  and   Dr. 
Donald  Bogard  of  MSC  had  measured  solar  particles  trapped  in   lunar 

288 

August  23 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
rocks  to  determine  lunar  material’s  age.  (Cohn,  W  Pos t ,  8/24/69,  A I ;  
UPI,  W S tar ,   8/25/69,  A4) 
*  Ten  space  pioneers  were  named  to   first  National  Space  Hall  of  Fame. 
Honorees,  chosen  by  Houston  City  committee,  would  be   feted  at  first 
annual  awards dinner  in   Houston, Tex.,  Sept.  27.  They  included Astro- 
naut  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  first American  to  journey  in   space;  former 
Astronaut  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.,  first  American  to  orb i t   in   space;  late 
Astronaut  Edward  H.  White  11,  first  man  to  walk  in   space;  Dr. 
Wernher  von  Braun,  MSFC  Director; 
late  Rep.  Albert  Thomas 
(D-Tex.),  staunch  supporter  of  space  program;  Dr.  Kurt  H.  Debus, 
KSC Director;  la te  Dr.  Hugh L.  Dryden,  former  NASA  Deputy  Adminis- 
t ra to r ;   Dr.  Maxime  A.  Faget,  Director  of  Engineering  and   Develop- 
ment  a t  MSC ;   Dr.  Robert R.  Gilruth,  MSC  Director;  and   late Dr.  Robert 
H.  Goddard,  father  of  rocketry.  Hall  was  in   Albert  Thomas  Center  in 
Houston.  (UPI,  N Y T ,  8 /25 /69 ,8 )  
August  24:  Th is   Week   published  interview  with  science  fiction  author 
Arthur  C.  Clarke : Most  important  recent  outer  space  discovery  was 
pulsars-“It’s 
possible  tha t   they  might  be  signals  from  some  higher 
civilization.”  Scientific surprise  in  Apollo  program  was  “its  immaculate 
perfection.  You  don’t  expect  that,  no  matter  how  carefully  you  pre- 
pare.”  Clarke was  writing  space exploration  documentary  which  would 
show  “whole  span  of  human  interest  in   space,  back  to  the  Babylonian 
astronomers  and   on  up  through  the  colonization  of  the  solar  system.” 
I t  would  include Stonehenge which  was  “as  big  a  burden  for  the  prim- 
itive  economy  that  built  it-in 
fact,  probably  a  much  bigger  burden 
than  the  Apollo  program  is   for   us.”  (Bradford,  This  Week ,  8/24/69, 
7 )  
*  Transfer  of  USAF  M O L  officers to  NASA  astronaut  corps  [see  Aug.  141 was 
criticized  in   Washington  Sunday  Star  by  William  Hines:  “With  the 
initial  moon  landing  now  an   accomplished  fact,  the  pace  of  manned 
space operations  has  slowed down  to  three  flights per  year.  This means 
that  no  more  than  nine  men  can  f ly   annually,  and   with  54   astronauts 
now  on  board,  this,  in   turn ,   means  an   average  of  s ix   years  between 
flights.”  Though  pace  might  accelerate  in   time  and  future  space  sta- 
tions  would  increase  annual  number  of  crew  assignments, “the  glamor 
and   glory  of  being  a n   astronaut-particularly 
a  nonflying  one-no 
longer  compensates for  the  enforced  idleness  imposed  by  the  modified 
flight  schedule.”  (W  S tar ,   8/24/69,  D4)  
August  25:  Postmaster  General  Winton  M.  Blount  announced  that  “First 
Man  on  the Moon”  postage stamp would  be  issued  Sept.  9 in  Washing- 
ton,  D.C.,  in   conjunction  with  National  Postal  Forum.  Printed  from 
master  die  carried  to  moon  on  ApoZZo  I I  mission  (Ju ly   16-24),  10- 
cent  a irma i l  stamp would  be   50%  larger  than  conventional commemo- 
rative  stamps  and  would  be  dedicated  in   special  ceremony  attended  by 
ApoZZo  I I   Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  and  
Michael  Collins.  Post  Office  had   received  500,000  first-day  cover  re- 
quests within  three  weeks  after  stamp  was  announced  July  9  and   was 
still  receiving  60,000-80,000 
from  foreign 
requests  daily-one-fifth 
countries.  ( PO  Dept  Release  130) 
0  Dr.  ,Harry  H.  Hess,  Chairman  of  NAS-NRC 
Space  Science  Board  and  
member  of  NASA’s  Science  and   Technology  Advisory  Committee  for 

289 

August  25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Manned  Space  Flight  since  1963,  died  of  hear t   attack  suffered  while 
attending  Board  meeting  a t   Woods  Hole,  Mass.  Dr.  Hess,  Blair  pro- 
fessor  of  geology  a t   Princeton  Univ.,  was  one  of  scientists  who  had 
analyzed  Apollo  11 lunar   samples.  I n   1960 he  had   advanced  theory 
that  volcanic  activity  on  ocean  floor  caused  continental  drift.  He  had 
been  past  president  of  Mineralogical  Society  of  America  and   of  Geo- 
logical  Society  of  America,  chairman  of  site-selection  committee  for  
NSF’S  Project Mohole,  and   adviser  to   numerous  other  Federal  agencies. 
( UPI,  W Po s t ,  8/27/69,  A10;  Science,  8 /29 /69 ,882 )  
Robert  E.  Bernier,  former  ComSatCorp systems engineer  for   Intelsat  I11 
program,  became  NASA  European  Representative  in  Office  of  Inter. 
national  Affairs.  He   replaced  Clotaire  Wood,  who  would  re turn   to 
Office  of  Advanced  Research  and   Technology  a t   NASA  Hq.  Bernier 
would  begin  his duties a t  American Embassy in   Pa r i s  in   early  October. 
(NASA   Release  69-125) 
*  Scientist-astronaut  Dr.  William  E.  Thornton,  who  had  been  grounded  in 
spring,  received  USAF  clearance  to  continue  jet  pilot  training.  Thornton 
had  had  difficulty  landing  because of  distortion  of  vision  called  anisei- 
konia,  which  reduced  hig  depth  perception.  Vision  had  been  corrected 
with special glasses.  ( UPI,  W Star, 8/26/69,  A3 ;   W Po s t ,  8/26/69,  A9) 
*  F‘ushington  Pos t   published  results  of  July  30-Aug.  4  Harr is   survey  of 
1,577 U S .  households to  determine  attitude toward  spending $4 billion 
annually  for  decade to  explore moon  and  other  planets.  While  53%  of 
those  polled  approved  funding  for   lunar  landing,  narrow  plurality  of 
47%  was  opposed  to  further  $4  billion  annually;  U%  favored.  Per-  
sons  under  30  favored  extension  of  space  program  60%  to  34%  but 
those  over  50  opposed  i t   59%  to  30%.  Black  citizens  were  opposed 
68%  to  19%.  ( W  Po s t ,  8 /25 /69 )  
August  25-30:  Eighth  International  Symposium on  Space Technology, first 
ma jor   international  space meeting  since  Apollo  11 launch,  was  held  in  
Tokyo.  In   opening  speech,  general  chairman  Tsuyoshi  Hayashi  ex- 
pressed world’s  appreciation  to  U.S.  for making  “a  grea t  leap  for  man- 
kind”  but  said  many  other  nations  had  contributed  to  scientific 
knowledge  that  made  lunar  landing  possible.  He  asked  recognition  of 
moon  as  international  territory. 
Among  400 scientists  from  19  countries  attending meetin, 0‘  were  NASA 
Apollo  Applications  Program  Director  William  C.  Schneider ; Dr. 
Christopher C.  Kraft,  Jr.,  MSC  Director  of  Flight Operations, and M.  P. 
Frank  from  MSC;  Herbert  A.  Wilson,  Jr.,  Chief  of  Applied  Materials 
Div.,  from   L aw ;   OGO  Project  Manager  Wilfred  E.  Scull  from  GSFC; 
Dr.  Thomas  Vrebalovich  from  JPL;  and   Leon  C.  Hamiter,  Jr.,  MSFC 
engineer.  Hamiter  presented  paper  on  increased computer  capacity  and 
lighter  weight  flight  hardware.  Prof.  Masahiko Kid0  of  Japan’s  Ehime 
Univ.  said  legal  status  should  be  developed  for  moon  before  disputes 
arose  over  lunar   real  estate.  Other  participants  urged  steps  to  outlaw 
military  use  of  moon. 
Dr.  Werner  J.  Kleen,  Director  of  European  Space  Research  and  
Technology Center, said  ESRO had  been  given permission  to  put  comsat 
into  orb i t   and  would  s tar t  work  in   autumn.  Japan  announced  its  space 
development  corporation  would  begin  operations  Oct.  1 and   would 
launch  M S 4   three-stage  rocket  in   early  1970,  followed  by  comsat 

290 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
August  25-30 
launch.  (Shabecoff,  NYT,  8/26/69,  11;  MSFC Release  69-181;  NASA 
In t  Aff) 
August  26:  Moon  landing  would  change  human  lives,  British  novelist  and  
scientist  C.  P.  Snow  said  in   Look .   “I  am  afraid  that  in   the  long  run, 
perhaps  a  generation,  perhaps  longer,  it  will  have  a  bad  effect. I t  will 
give  us  the  feeling,  and  the  perfectly  justified  feeling,  that  our  world 
has  finally  closed  in.  This  is  forever  the  end  of  the   mortal  frontier.” 
Space  enthusiasts  thought  lunar  landing  would  liberate  human  imagi- 
nation  but  “I  believe  . . . tha t   human  imagination  is  going  to  be  re- 
stricted-as 
to  an  extent  i t   was  when  the  last  spots  on  the  globe  had 
been  visited,  the  South  Pole  and  the  summit  of  Everest.  Nowhere  on 
ear th   for   adventurous man  to  go.  Very  soon,  there  w i l l   be  no  place  in  
the  universe  for   adventurous man  to  go.”  (Look ,  8/26/69,  68-72) 
*  NASA announced  award  by  URC  of  $2.5-million  contract  to  Ling-Temco- 
Vought  Aerospace  Corp.  to  design,  develop,  and  flight-qualify larger 
1st-stage solid  rocket  motor  for  Scout  booster.  New  Algol  111  motor 
would  have  44- or  45-in  dia,  4  or  5  in  wider  than  Algol  IIB,  and 
would  enable  Scout  to  place  400-lb  payload,  100  lbs  more  than  I IB  
capacity,  into  orbit  with  300-mi altitude.  (NASA   Release  69/126) 
Bright red  lights, believed by  observers to be meteors,  flashed across Cali- 
fornia,  Nevada,  and  Arizona  a t  8:50 pm  PDT.  North  American  Air  De- 
later  identified  lights  as   parts  of  Soviet 
fense  Command  (NORAD)  
booster  burning  during  reentry.  Booster had  launched Cosmos CCXCIV 
Aug.  19.  (AP ,  W  Star,  8/27/69,  A5;  later  ed,  813) 
Augus t   27:  NASA’s 148-lb drum-shaped  Pioneer  E  failed  on  5:29  pm  EDT 
launch  from  ETR  by  Thrust-Augmented  Improved  Thor-Delta  (DSV- 
3L )   booster.  Satellite  had  been  intended  for  solar  orbit  to  collect 
inter- 
scientific  data  on  electromagnetic  and   plasma  properties  of 
planetary medium  near  earth’s orbital  path  during  six or  more passages 
of  solar  activity  centers. 
Jettison  of  three  s t r a p o n   solid-propellant rockets,  1st-stage Thor  en- 
gine  cutoff,  and  2nd-stage  ignition  occurred  as  planned  but  vehicle 
began  gyrating,  veered  off  course,  and  was  destroyed  by  Range  Safety 
Officer  a t   8 min  2  secs  GET.  Pioneer  E  and  TETR  c  test  and  training 
satellite,  carried  as  secondary  payload  to  test  Apollo  communications 
network,  splashed  into  Atlantic  about  300  mi  southeast  of  Barbados. 
Preliminary  analysis of  data indicated  loss of  hydraulic  pressure during 
1st-stage bu rn  had  permitted engine nozzle to develop uncontrolled gim- 
baling  and   vehicle  gyrations.  Investigation  would  be  conducted  to  de- 
termine  exact  cause  and  action  to  prevent  recurrence. 
Pioneer  E  was  last  in   series  of  five  spacecraft  designed  to  provide 
continuing  measurements  over  the  solar  cycle  a t   widely  separated 
points  in   interplanetary  space.  Pioneer  VZ (launched  Dec.  16,  1965), 
Pioneer  VIZ  (launched  Aug.  17,  1966),  Pioneer  VZZI  (launched  Dec. 
16,  1967) ,   and  Pioneer  ZX  (launched  Nov.  8, 1968)  had   received 
25,000  commands  from  ground  and  were  still  producing  useful  data 
from  widely  scattered positions  i n   heliocentric orbits.  Most  recent  Pio- 
neer  missions had   provided  new  information  on  functions  of  magneto- 
sphere,  additional  data  on  h d i n g   tha t   diffuse  solar  plasma  regions 
appeared  to  have  attraction  of  their  own,  measurements  of  cosmic  dust 
populations,  da ta   on  changes  in   electrical and  magnetic characteristics 

291 

August  27 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

of  solar  corona,  and   targets  fo r   precision  rada r   tracking  which  led  to 
establishment of  reliable  value for earth-moon-mass ratio  and  sun-earth- 
mass ratio.  Pioneer program was managed by ARC  under  OSSA  direction. 
(NASA   P ro j   Off; NASA  Release  69-116;  SBD,  8/29/69,  213) 
Moon  was  twin planet  of  earth,  formed  from  same whirling  gas  cloud,  in  
early  view  of  two  LRL scientists  studying  ApoZZo  11  samples.  Dr.  S. 
Ross  Taylor  of  Astri  National  Univ.,  Canberra,  Australia,  said, 
“Moon’s  composition is  unlike  the  earth‘s.  But  it  is  not  outside  our   ex- 
perience.  I t  is  like  the material you would  expect if  the ear th   and  moon 
were  formed  a s   a  double  planet.”  He  thought  moon  was  younger  twin, 
while  Dr.  Oliver  A.  Schaeffer of  State  Univ.  of  New  York  thought  it 
might  be  equally  old. 
Age  of  two  lunar   rocks had   been  estimated  a t   3.1  billion  yrs,  “give 
o r   take  . . . 200 million  years,”  by  measuring  proportion  of  argon  40 
to  potassium  i n   rocks,  Dr.  Schaeffer  said.  Lunar  highlands  might  be 
4.5  billion  yrs  old.  Moon,  he   thought,  never  grew  big  enough  to  melt 
internally  and   produce  geologic  activity  to  change  lunar   surface  and  
leave  younger  rocks.  Dr.  Taylor’s  studies  had  shown  unusually  high 
amounts  of  refractory  material  and   absence  o r   low  concentration  of 
volatile  materials,  implying  volatile  material  had  boiled  away  in   melt- 
ing  process. He  inferred rock  chemistry was  different  from  deep  mantle 
of  earth  and  from  cosmic  abundances-distribution  of  elements  that 
would  be  expected  in  distant,  more  primitive  planet  captured  by  earth. 
(Cohn,  W  Post,  8/28/69,  A l )  
MSC  Deputy Director George  S. Trimble  announced his  resignation,  effec- 
tive  Sept.  30,  after  2%  yrs  with  NASA.  He  had   been  Director  of  Ad- 
vanced  Manned  Missions  Program  in  NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space 
69-70;  w Post,  8/28/69,  A8 ;   NASA  Ann,  10 /13 /67)  
Flight  before  appointment  to  MSC  post  Oct.  13,  1967.  (M S C   Release 
NASA  announced  selection  of  RCA   Service  Co.  to  receive  two-year,  cost- 
plusgward-fee  contract  with  one-year  option  for  logistic  support  to 
Space  Tracking  and   Data  Acquisition  Network  ( STADAN)  , Manned 
Space  Flight  Network  ( MSFN)  , and   NASA  Communications  Network 
( NASCOM)  . Contract was  expected  to  exceed  $17 million.  (NA SA   Release 
69-127) 
*  American  Airlines  began  showing NASA  color  film  of  Apo l lo   11  and  dis- 
tributing  free  copies  of  CBS  News  recording  “Man  on  the  Moon”  and  
free cut-out lunar modules for children  on  “Americana”  flights between 
East  Coast and  California  through  Sept.  23.  (NYT,  8 /18 /69 ,   23)  
Augus t   28:  Leading  lunar   scientist  Dr.  Harold  C.  Urey  told  conference  on 
nuclear  energy  a t   Argonne  National  Laboratory  near  Chicago he  was 
“pleased”  a t   discovery  that  age  of  lunar  rocks  might  range  between 
3 billion  and   4.5  billion  yrs   [see  Aug.  231  and   had  “expected  this  for 
a  long  time.  . . . But  I’m  not  making  any  more  bets  on  the  moon’s 
origin.”  He was  “puzzled”  by  once-molten lunar  sea ma ter ia l ;   i t  might 
have  been  formed  by  huge  meteor  o r   asteroid  impacts  rather  than 
volcanism  and  moon might have  originated  out  of  cluster  of  such  aster- 
oidal debris.  (Cohn,  W  Post,  8/29/69,  A3)  
( IATA)  , 
*  Fiftieth  anniversary  of 
International  A ir   Transport  Assn. 
founded  in  Amsterdam Aug.  28,  1919. International  flying  under  IATA 
auspices  in   1919  amounted  to  3,500  passengers;  in   1969  i t   was  ex- 
pected  to  total  300  million.  Organization  was  still  devoted  to  original 

292 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

August  28 

principles : promotion  of  safe,  regular,  and   economical  a i r   transport; 
collaboration  among  international  carriers ; processing  of  technical 
matters and  common  fares ;   and   functioning a s  clearinghouse for  settle- 
ment  of  member  airline  accounts.  From  original  membership  of  s ix  
airlines,  IATA  had  103  participating  members.  (Bamberger,  N Y T ,  
8 /24 /69 ,86 )  
launched  Cosmos  CCXCVZ  from  Baikonur  into  orb i t  
August  29:  U.S.S.R. 
with  299-km  ( 185.8-mi)  apogee,  227-km  (141.1-mi)  perigee,  89.6- 
min  period,  and   64.9’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Sept.  6.  (GSFC 
SSR,  8/31/69;  9/15/69;  SBD,  9/3/69,  9;  UN  Public Registry) 
Some  plants  treated  with  lunar  dust  in   early  August  were  showing unex- 
pected  responses.  Treated  plants--including 
seedlings  of  several  com- 
mon  food  plants  like  wheat,  tomatoes,  cucumbers,  and  limes-were 
generally  huskier and  slightly greener  than  untreated  plants.  NASA  state- 
ment  said : “The  seedlings  challenged with  lunar   materials  uniformly 
look  better  than  the  controls  (untreated  p lan ts) .   Germination  in   the 
presence  of  lunar  soil  indicates  that  it  is  behaving  like  a  source  of 
nutrients.”  P lan t  cells in   tissue culture  showed  “some  evidence of  subtle 
change  as  a  result  of  lunar  inoculation.”  Dr.  J.  A.  Vozzo,  plant  pa- 
thologist  a t  Lunar Receiving  Laboratory,  emphasized tha t  changes were 
minor  and   could  not  yet  be  positively  attributed  to  lunar  dust.  (Cohn, 
W  Pos t ,   8/30/69,  A l )  
NASA  selected  General Electric  Co.  to  receive  three-year,  $4-million,  cost- 
plus-award-fee contract  with  two-year  option  to  provide  engineering 
and  mission-related  support  to  LaRC  for  Viking  Project-series 
of 
planetary  probes  which  would  begin  softlanding  on  Mars  in  1973. 
(NASA   Release  69-128) 
0  New  determination  of  abundance  of  water  in   Mars  atmosphere  was  re- 
ported  in   Science  by  Illinois  Institute  of  Technology  astronomers 
Tobias  Owen  and  Harold  P.  Mason.  New  spectrograms  of  planet  had 
been  obtained  in   region  of  water-vapor band  a t  8,200 A  during  Febru-  
ary   and  March  1969. Amount  of  precipitable  water  was  found  to  be 
about  1 5  p.  Abundance reaffirmed  that  some  water  was  present  a t  cur- 
ren t   epoch  bu t   otherwise  had   little  bearing  on  evolution  of  Martian 
atmosphere. Water  vapor did  not  imply liquid  water  existed  on Martian 
surface.  (Sc ience ,  8/29/69,  893-5) 
August  31:  Washington Post  Sunday  supplement Potomac  published profile 
of  Dr.  Richard  T.. Whitcomb, head  of  8-Foot Tunnels Branch  a t   LaRG. 
He had   won  1954  Robert  J.  Collier Trophy  for  design  of  “coke  bottle” 
aircraft  fuselage  configuration  that  enabled  a ircraf t   to  pass  through 
mach  1 with  increased power.  More  recently  he  had  devised supercriti- 
cal wing,  which  would permit  subsonic jet  a ircraf t  to  approach mach  1. 
If  adopted  by  commercial  aircraft  manufacturers,  wing  would  cut 
nearly  one  hour  from  curren t   five-hour  transcontinental  flights.  ( P o -  
tomac, 8/31/69,  l, 5-7) 
DOD  internal,  classified  memoranda  suggested  Government  would  waste 
money  buying  additional  Lockheed  C-5A  aircraft,  Washington  Post 
article  said.  Central  conclusion was  that  most  efficient  and  least  costly 
transportation  network  to  support  two  ma jor   and   one  “brushfire”  war 
“for  which  military  wants  to  be  prepared  consists  of  the  existing  three 
squadrons  (58 )   [of]  C-5As  plus  smaller carr iers   like  the  C-141  and  
modern  freighters.”  (Nossiter,  W  Pos t ,  8/31/69,  A l )  

293 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

During  August 
During August:  Pace  magazine  published  articles  by  Vice  President  Sp iro  
T.  Agnew,  also  NASC  Chairman,  and   by  NASA  Administrator,  Dr. 
Thomas 0. Paine. 
Dr.  Paine  said,  “To  improve  conditions  in   our   society  we  need  to 
create  more  wealth  through  greater  productivity  based  on  new  tech- 
nology.  We  should  be  restless  and   dissatisfied  with  our  slowness  in 
overcoming  social  ills,  and  I  hope  that  the  space  program  w i l l   con- 
tinue  to  spur  us  onward  here.  If  we  can  go  to  the  moon,  why  can’t  we 
build  grea t   and  shining  cities?  Why  can’t  we  eliminate  ignorance, 
crime and  poverty?  If  our  space program  highlights  such questions and  
helps  form  a  national  commitment  to  find  new  solutions,  i t   will  have 
served the  nation  well.  Our  space advances should embolden the  nation 
to   proceed forward with  increased confidence  in  these  other  areas.  Our 
Apollo  program  has   demonstrated  anew  what  Americans  can  accom- 
plish  given  a  national  commitment,  capable  leadership  and   adequate 
resources. 
Man’s  future  in  space  is  limitless.  We  have  embarked  on  a  new 
b <  
stage  of  evolution  that  will  engage  all  future  generations  of  men.  We 
face  the  unknown  in   countless  areas:  What  are  the  effects  of  sustained 
zero  and  artificial  gravity?  Of  time-extending flight  a t   nearly  the  ve- 
locity  of  light?  Of  societies  genetically  selected  for  extraterrestrial 
living? 
“We  must  find  the  answers. We  must  move  vigorously  forward  in 
space.  The  practical  benefits  alone  justify  this  venture,  but  there  are  
many  other  compelling  human  reasons.  Progress  in   space  should  con- 
tinue  to  spur  us  onward  to  find  new  solutions  to  our  age-old problems 
here  on  Spaceship Earth. We  must  make  the  blue  planet  Ear th   a  home 
base,  worthy  of  men  who  will  set  for th   one  day  on  journeys  to  the 
stars.” 
Vice  President  Agnew  said : “With  the  remarkably  successful  Apollo 
moon-landing program  on  the  verge  of  culmination, we  a re   now  faced 
with  a  need  to  define  jus t   what  we  should  proceed  to  do   to  make  use 
most  effectively  of  the  results  of  our  past  and   continuing  space-explo- 
ration  investment.  Wealthy  as  our  economy  is,  rich  a s   our  technology 
ha s   become,  we  must  plan  carefully  in  order  to  meet  a  wide  range  of 
urgent  national  requirements.  . . . It  is  our   hope  that,  with  a  carefully 
reasoned  set  of  goals  adequately  funded  by  the  people  through  their 
Congress,  the  nation  and  the  world  w i l l   reap  the  maximum  possible 
benefit  from mankind’s  most  ambitious undertaking. We  must  keep  our 
horizons  wide  and   our  sights high.  Despite  its many  internal  domestic 
priorities,  this  nation  should  never  turn   inward,  away  from  the  oppor- 
tunities  and  challenges  of  its  most  promising  frontier.”  (Pa c e ,  8/69, 
2-41 
Four  hundredth  anniversary  of  Mercator’s  map  of  the  world,  published 
in   Rhenish  city  of  Duisberg  in   1569  by  Gerhard  Kremer  (known  by 
his Latin  name  Gerardus Mercator).  Map  translated  earth’s  sphere  into 
plane  on  chart  on  which  straight  line  drawn  by  navigator  cu t   across 
all meridians  a t   same angle.  Mercator  projection  was  still  standard  for 
worldwide sea  navigation  and  for   aeronautical  charts despite  its  distor- 
tion  of  northern  latitudes.  (NYT,  8/17/69;  EH)  
0  “Technologically  and   managerially,  Apollo  was  difficult,”  Englebert 
Kirchner  said in  Space/Aeronautics  editorial.  “Politically  and   socially, 

294 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

During  August 

i t   was  simple.  Just  the  reverse  is   true  about  the  great  problems  of  our 
society.  What  is  making  these  so  h a rd   to  solve  is  not  technology  but 
serious  disagreement  about  goals  and  priorities,  about  what  is  good 
for  whom,  who  is   to  get  what  and   who  should  pay  for  it.  The  space 
program  does  not  hold  the   answer  to  these  questions.  Trying  to  find 
them  in   Apollo w i l l   only  distort  and  therefore  belittle  an   incomparable 
achievement.  Apollo  took  us  to  the  moon,  to  that  shining  disk  in   the 
sky  that looks so unbelievably distant.  Isn’t  that  enough?”  ( S / A ,  8/69, 
27) 
9  AFSC  Newsreview  editorial  commented  on  Apollo  11:  “If, like  the  early 
Vikings  or   Columbus  a t   the  shores  Qf  the  New  World,  Amundsen  a t  
Antarctica,  Hillary  at  the   peak  of  Mt.  Everest-our 
astronauts  stood 
alone with  their  thoughts  on  unknown  soil,  they  were  not  alone.  With 
them  was  the   invisible  presence  of  the  most  extensive,  highly  trained, 
professionally  competent,  and  thoroughly  dedicated  task  force we  have 
known. We  i n  the  Air  Force Systems Command salute the astronauts  on 
their  accomplishment.  We  a r e   proud  that  we  have  been  able  to  con- 
tribute  to  their  magnificent  achievement.”  ( AFSC Newsreview,  8/69,  2 )  

295 

September 1969 

September  I :   L/G  Samuel  C.  Phillips,  NASA  Apollo  Program  Director,  be- 
came Commander of  Air Force  Space and Missile Systems Organization 
( SAMSO) .   Gen.  Phillips  had  been  Director  of  Minuteman  program  be- 
fore  assignment to  NASA  in   January  1964 as  Deputy  Director  of  Apollo 
program.  He  was  succeeded by  Rocco A.  Petrone  [see Aug.  221.  (NASA 
Ann,  7/31/69) 
*  S.  Pau l  Johnston  retired as Director  of  Smithsonian  Institution’s National 
Air  and  Space Museum. He would  represent AIAA  on  NRC.  ( A & A ,  9/69, 
1 5 )  
*  Scientific Research  article commented  on  attitude  toward  science of  Pres- 
ident Nixon  and Dr. Lee A.  DuBridge, Presidential  Science Adviser:  “If 
there’s  a  Nixon-DuBridge science policy  it  is  this:  to  revitalize federal 
support  of  basic  research .   . . and  to  point  government-financed applied 
research  toward  the  solution  of  the  country’s many  social ills.”  (Sc ien -  
tific Research,  9/1/69,  11-12) 
September  2:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCXCVII  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit 
with  309-km  (192.0-mi)  apogee,  204-km  (126.8-mi)  perigee,  89.6- 
min  period,  and  72.8”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Sept.  10.  ( GSFC 
SSR ,  9/15/69;  SBD,  9 /3 /69 ,8 )  
Qatron  Corp.  announced  i t   had  received  $275,000  contract  from  GSFC 
to  build  several  recorder-receiver  switching  and  preprogrammable 
patch  systems  for  Apollo  program.  (W  S tar ,   9/2/69,  A16) 
September  3:  NASA’s H G l O   lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot 
William  H.  Dana,  reached  81,000-ft  altitude  and  mach  1.42  after  a i r -  
launch  from  B-52  aircraft west  of  Rosamond,  Calif.  Primary  objective 
of  Bight,  24th  i n   series  and  first  with  new  engine,  was  to  obtain  sta- 
bility,  control,  and  engine data.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
*  Tokyo Univ.  scientists successfully launched four-stage Lambda  rocket  in  
preparation  for  launch  of  Japan’s  first satellite in   late September.  (UP I ,  
W  News,  8 /4 /69 ;   Harrison,  W  Post,  9/24/69,  A9) 
*  MSFC  announced  contract  awards:  McDonnell  Douglas  Astronautics  Co. 
was  awarded  $97,340,000  cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee contract  to  pro- 
vide  for   two  Saturn  V  Workshops-one 
for  launch  in   1972 and  second 
for  backup.  McDonnell  Douglas  also  received  $87,450,000  cost-plus- 
fixed-fee/award-fee  contract  modification  for  continued  work  on  two 
airlock modules  for  Apollo Applications  ( AA )   program  cluster,  includ- 
ing  tests,  checkout, documentation, and  logistics support. 
Boeing  Co.  received  $25,130,376  contract  modification  extending 
period  for  completion  of  Saturn  V  1st stage  (S-IC-15) 
from  June  30, 
1970, to  June  30,1971.  (MSFC  Releases 69-199,69-200,  69-201) 
Swedish  aircraft  constructor  Has  Fancher  had  said  that  in   194-4  Adolf 
Hitler  took  delivery  of  first  Junkers  390  a ircraf t   w i t h   14,400-hp  en- 
gine constructed  specially to  bomb  New  York,  Washington Da i ly   News 
reported.  Fancher,  pilot  on  aircraft’s  nonstop  test  flight  between  Ger- 

297 

September 3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

many  and   South America,  said  plane weighed  93 tons with  bombs  and  
had  planned  range  fo r   nonstop  flights  from  Bordeaux  in   occupied 
France  to New  York  and   return.  Aircraft,  delivered  too  late  for   use  in  
war,  had   been  burned  by  Germans.  Comparable  aircraft  was  not  built 
until  1956,  Fancher  said.  ( W  News,  9 /3 /69)  
September  4: Some  NASA  scientists  were  helping  their  communities and  hid- 
ing  their  a id   projects  “as  tho   they  were  sinful,”  Ray  Cromley  said  in  
Washington Daily  News .  Scientists  were  using  space-acquired skills  “to 
help  their  fellow  men  in   ways  they  were  uniquely  qualified.”  Projects 
included  applying  systems  analysis  to  a i r   pollution  problem,  planning 
school expansion  to  meet  population  expansion,  applying  systems  con- 
cept  to  town  management and  to  city  police  force problems, developing 
new  concepts  for  a irpor t   planning  and   new  technique  for  vandalism 
prevention,  developing  improved  communications  systems  for  city 
emergency departments,  and   helping  an   agency develop ways  of  evalu- 
ating  proposals  for  study  and   development  contracts  with  private  in- 
dustry.  ( W  News ,   9/4/69,  2 3 )  
September  5 :  First measurement of  Mars  uv  dayglow, made  dur ing  Mariner 
VZ Mars  flyby  July  31,  was  reported  in  Science  by  Univ.  of  Colorado 
astrogeophysicists  C.  A.  Barth,  C.  W.  Hord,  J.  B.  Pearce,  K.  K.  Kelly, 
A.  I.  Stewart, G.  E. Thomas, and  G.  P. Anderson;  Johns Hopkins physi- 
cist W.  G.  Fastie;  and   JPL’S  0. F.  Raper.  Emission  features  from  ion- 
ized  carbon  dioxide  and  carbon  monoxide were  measured  in   1,900 A 
to  4,300  A  spectral  region.  Lyman alpha  1,216 A  line  of  atomic hydro- 
gen  and   1,304 A,  1,356 A,  and   2,972  A  lines  of  atomic  oxygen  were 
observed.  Prime  objective  of  experiment was  to  search  for   nitrogen  in  
Martian  atmosphere.  First  analysis  had  shown  no  evidence of  nitrogen 
emissions  in   uv  spectrum  of  upper  atmosphere  (Sc ience ,   9/5/69, 
lOOb5 )  
*  Aerobee 170  sounding  rocket was  launched by  NASA  from  W S M R  carrying 
Naval  Research  Laboratory  payload  to  conduct  solar  physics  studies. 
Mission  was  unsuccessful.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
September  6 :   Astronauts  Frank  Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and 
William A.  Anders were  named winners  of  1969 Harmon  International 
Astronaut’s  Trophy  for  December  1968 ApoZZo  8 mission.  Maj.  Jerauld 
R.  Gentry  (USAF )   was  awarded  Aviator’s  Trophy  for  testing  NASA’s 
H G l O   lifting-body  vehicle.  Harmon  trophies  were  awarded  annually 
to world’s  outstanding  pilots  for  feats  of  individual  piloting  skill.  ( UPI, 
W  S tar ,  9/7/69,  A7) 
ApoZZo  11   astronauts attended  celebrations  in   their  hometowns.  I n  Wapa- 
koneta, Ohio,  Neil A.  Armstrong was  cheered by  crowd  estimated  at  10  
times  normal  7,000  population,  addressed  teen-age  rally,  and   led  pa- 
rade   including Gov.  James A.  Rhodes,  Dr.  Albert  D.  Sabin  (developer 
of  oral polio vaccine), and comedian Bob Hope-all  Ohioans. Edwin  E. 
Aldrin,  Jr.,  on  second visit  to  hometown  as  astronaut,  presented Mont- 
clair,  N.J.,  Library  with  autographed  photo  of  plaque  left  on  moon; 
Library  named  its  science  collection  in   his  honor.  Astronaut  Michael 
Collins,  who  was  born  in  Rome,  Italy,  visited  New  Orleans, La.,  a s  h is  
adopted  hometown.  He  attended  luncheon  in   his  honor  and  visited 
NASA’s Michoud  Assembly  Facility.  ( W  Pos t ,   9/7/69,  A3) 
September  7:  Self-testing-and-repairing  ( S T A ~ )  computer  to   direct  un- 
manned  spacecraft  of  multiyear  missions  to  outer  planets  and   inter- 

298 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

September  7 

galactic  space  had  passed  preliminary  tests  and   would  begin  full-scale 
ground  operation  a t   JPL   dur ing   week,  J P L   announced.  Believed  first 
computer  capable  of  detecting  i ts   own  failures  and   repairing  itself, 
STAR  had  been  developed  by  Dr.  Algirdas  A.  Avizienis,  JPL computer 
expert,  who  was  trying  for  9070 probability  tha t   it would  last  15 yrs, 
to  control  operations  to  Neptune  or  Pluto  in   solar  system Grand Tours  
scheduled  for  late  1970s.  During  9-to-11-yr  minimum  lifetime,  STAR 
would  automatically  switch on  up  to  three  backup  units  to  replace  de- 
fective parts.  By  1974, more modest model might replace defective parts 
twice  for  use  on  shorter  missions  like  one  to   Jupiter.  STAR  could  also 
aid  in   hospital  and  supersonic-aircraft  automation.  ( J P L   Release  532) 
September  8: NASA’s 363-ft-tall Sa turn  V  launch  vehicle,  tipped  with  Apollo 
1 2  spacecraft  scheduled to  carry   astronauts  toward moon  Nov.  14, was 
placed on  launch  pad  a t  KSC.  (AP,  W Post,  9/9/69,  A2) 
MSFC  announced  selection  of  McDonnell  Douglas Corp.  to  receive  11-mo, 
$2,899,986  contract  for  preliminary  design  and   planning  for  12-man 
earth-orbital  space  station  for   possible  mid-1970  launch.  Station- 
initial element  of  large  space base  and means of  investigating  effects  of 
long-duration  space  flight  on  man-would 
have  IO-yr  lifetime,  subject 
to  expendables  resupply  and   crew  rotation.  Parallel  eff orf  was  being 
conducted by  MSC  and North  American Rockwell  Corp.  (MSFC   Release 
69-204) 
0  Mexican  President  Gustavo  Diaz  Ordaz  announced  in   Coahuila, Mexico, 
that  President  Nixon  had  accepted  invitation  for  Apollo  11 astronauts 
to  s tar t   round-the-world tour  in   Mexico.  He  repeated  congratulations 
to  Government  and   US. people  on  Apollo  11 success:  “The  Ubited 
States  gave  proof  of  i ts   greatness when  i t   achieved this  triumph,  but  i t  
became  even  greater  when  they  understood  i t   and   accepted  i t   a s   a 
triumph  of  all  humanity.”  President  Nixon  was  in   Mexico  to  attend 
dedication  of  Amistad  Dam  on   Rio Grande.  (PD,  9 /15 /69 ,1241 )  
September  9:  NASA’s X-24A 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld 
R.  Gentry  (U SA F ) ,   reached  mach  0.6  after  air-launch  from  B-52  a ir-  
craft  a t  40,000-ft  altitude  over South Rogers Lake Bed,  Calif.  Purposes 
of  unpowered  flight,  four th   in   series,  were  to  evaluate  stability  and 
control  derivatives  at upper  flap positions, determine handling  qualities, 
and   obtain  flow  visualization  motion  pictures  of  tufts  on  vehicle’s  aft 
portion.  (NASA   P ro j  Off) 
0  Aerobee  150 M I   sounding  rocket,  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  with 
VAM-20  booster,  carr ied   Cornel1  Univ.  payload  to   97.8-mi  (157 .4  
km)   altitude  to  examine  sky  in   fa r   infrared  (5   p-1,600  p ) ,   using 
copper-doped-germanium, two  gallium-doped-germanium, and  indium- 
antimonide  detectors.  Loss  of  residual  helium  a t   162   secs  disabled 
attitude-control system.  Timing  failed  in   experimental  payload  and   no 
useful  scientific data were obtained. Some useful  engineering da ta   were 
collected.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
FRC  announced  award  of  $1.8-million  NASA contract  to   North  American 
Rockwell  Corp.  fo r   construction  of  new  supercritical  a ircraf t   wing. 
Wing,  which  utilized  airfoil  shape  with  flat  top  and   rear   edge  curved 
downward, had  been  developed  by Dr.  Richard T.  Whitcomb and  tested 
a t   LaRC.  Wind  tunnel  tests  indicated  new  shape  could  allow  highly 
eEcient  cruise  flight  a t   nearly  600  mph  a t   45,000-ft  altitude.  By  in-  
creasing  cruise  speeds  without  increasing  power,  wing  might  signifi- 

299 

September  9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

cantly  reduce  operational  cost  of  subsonic  jet  transport  flights  and 
allow  faster  travel,  lower  fuel  consumption  and  costs,  increased  opera- 
tional  range,  or  increased  payload.  Wing  would  be  mounted  on  modi- 
fighter  aircraft  a t   FRC  for  flight  testing.  (FRC Releases 
fied  Navy  F-J 
4-69,  15-69) 
Former  NASA  Apollo  Program  Director,  L /G   Samuel  C.  Phillips  (USAF)  , 
received Distinguished  Service Medal  from  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force, 
Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  in   Pentagon  ceremonies.  Award  was  fo r  
achievements  with  NASA  from  December  1964  to  August  1969.  Gen. 
Phillips had  left NASA  to  become commander  of  USAF  Space  and Missile 
Systems Organization  ( SAMSO)  in  Los Angeles.  ( AFJ ,   9/27/69,  8) 
At  ApoZZo  11 splashdown  party  a t   Shoreham  Hotel  in   Washington,  D.C. 
by  Apo l lo   11  astronauts  and  wives-NASA  Administrator, 
-attended 
Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  announced  new  Apollo  Achievement Award  of 
lapel  button  and  certificate.  He   presented  awards  to  NASA  Associate 
Administrator  for Manned  Space Flight,  Dr.  George E. Mueller;  former 
Apollo  Program  Director,  L /G   Samuel  C.  Phillips  (USAF)   ; and  former 
Deputy  Director  of  Apollo  Program  George H.  Hage.  (Beale,  W  S tar ,  
9/10/69,  F1) 
*  At  first  day  ceremonies  for  commemorative  moon  landing  stamp  in 
Washington,  D.C.,  Postmaster  General  Winton  M.  Blount  presented 
ApoZZo  11  Astronauts  Neil  A.  krmstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  and 
Michael  Collins  and  NASA  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  with 
albums  containing  32  stamps  each.  He  said:  “ In   the  largest  sense  we 
pay  tribute  today  to  the  spirit  of  man.  We  cannot  separate  the  accom- 
plishments  of  Apollo  11 from  those  of  Vostok  1; we  cannot  separate 
the  contributions  of  Michael  Collins,  or  Edwin  Aldrin  or  Neil  Arm- 
strong from  those  of  Goddard  and Einstein, Kepler  and Newton,  Coper- 
nicus  and  Galileo.  We  know  this.  And  in   the  knowing  again  we  find 
hope.  For  i f   men  of  all  nations,  together,  can  achieve  dominion  over 
the  heavens,  men  of  all  nations,  together,  can  achieve  peace  on  earth 
for  men  for  all  time.” 
Armstrong  said  astronauts  had  deferred  cancellation  of  stamps  until 
they  were  reunited  i n   CM ,   July  22.  They  had  then  grasped  canceler 
simultaneously and pressed  i t  upon  die-proof version  of  commemorative 
stamp  affixed  to  unaddressed  envelope.  Cancellation  date  remained  July 
20,  day  of  lunar  landing.  ( PO  Dept  Release  135;  Shandler,  W  S tar ,  
9/10/69,  A3) 
September  10: Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Wal- 
lops  Station  carried  Univ.  of  Illinois  and  GCA   Corp.  payload  to 
127.4-mi  (205-km)  altitude  to  measure  electron  density,  collision  fre- 
quency,  and  temperature  in   lower  ionosphere  on  quarterly  world  day. 
Payload  included  dual-frequency propagation  experiment.  Rocket  alti- 
tude  was  nominal  but  range  was  only  one-fourth that  predicted.  Instru- 
ment  performance  was  excellent and  good  da ta  were  expected  from  all 
experiments.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
Pau l   G.  Dembling,  NASA  General  Counsel  since  January  1967,  became 
NASA  Deputy  Associate Administrator.  Dembling, who  had   joined  NACA  
in   1945,  had  been  principal  drafter  of  bill  which  became  National 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Act  of  1958  and  h ad   received  NASA  Distin- 
guished  Service  Medal  in  1968  fo r   contributions  to  development  of 

300 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
September  10 
legal  framework  of  U S .   aeronautical  and   space  activities.  (NASA   Re- 
lease  69-131) 
Study  of  lunar   samples was  “bringing  to  light  a s   many  mysteries  as  i t  
unravels,”  New   Y o r k   T imes   editorial  said.  Theorists  were  cautious, 
with  evidence from  one  small  area,  Tranquility  Base.  “ I t   is  likely  tha t  
the  picture  w i l l   become  still  more  complex  when  a  representative  col- 
lection  of  samples becomes  available  from  ten,  twenty  or  thirty  areas 
spread  over  the  entire  lunar   surface.  But  even  the  limitations  of  the 
present  data  suggest  strongly  that  the  moon  is   very  different  from 
earth,  and  therefore  has much  to  teach human  science about  the  origin 
and  evolution of the  solar  system.  The case for  intensive scientific study 
of  the  moon-conducted 
in   par t   by  geologists and   other  scientists  sent 
strong.”  ( N Y T ,  9/10/69,  40) 
there  for  on-the-spot  investigation-is 
September  11 :   Press  conference  on  results  of  Mariner  V I   (launched  Feb. 
24)  and  Mariner  VIZ  (launched March 27)   was  held  a t  NASA Hq.  Some 
200  TV  pictures  of  Mars  were  taken  by  two  Mariners,  including  57 
high-  and  medium-resolution views  of  selected  Martian  surface  areas 
from  altitude of  only  few  hundred  miles.  Spacecraft measured Martian 
atmospheric  temperature,  pressure,  and   chemical  constituency  and  
measured  surface  temperatures  in   effort  to  correlate  thermal  charac- 
teristics  with  features  observed  in   TV  pictures.  Data  indicated  Mars 
was  heavily  cratered,  bleak,  cold,  dry,  nearly  airless,  and  generally 
hostile  to  any  earth-style  life forms. 
Dr.  Robert  B.  Leighton  of  Cal  Tech  said:  “We  got  nine  times  the 
number  of  f a r   encounter  pictures  that  were  originally  proposed  [few 
years  ago],  20  per  cent  more  near  encounter  pictures  than  were  pro- 
posed,  and  1,100  digital  pictures  which  were  entirely  impossible  ac- 
cording  to  schemes  a t   the  time  of  the  proposal.  . . . After  Mariner  4 
Mars seemed  to be  like  the moon.  At  last Mariners  6  and   7  have shown 
Mars  to  be   like  Mars  and  have  brought  out  Mars’  own  characteristic 
features,  some  of  them  unknown  and  unrecognized  elsewhere  in  the 
solar  system.” 
Dr.  Robert  P.  Sharp   of  Cal  Tech  said  Martian  terrain  could  be  d i-  
vided  into  three  types-crater, 
featureless,  and  chaotic.  Cratered  ter- 
ra in   was  widespread  and   common  on  Mars  and   resembled  moon. 
Featureless  terrain  was  represented  by  Hellas  area,  which  appeared  to  
be  upland  area,  150-mi-wide zone  that  gently  sloped  into  flat  feature- 
less  floor.  Chaotic terrain  had  series  of  “short  ridges,  little  valleys,  and  
irregular,  jumbled  topography.”  Chaotic  and  featureless  terra in   ap- 
peared  to  be  distinctly  Martian,  suggesting  ‘khat  on  Mars  we  have 
either  a  difference  in  processes  that  a re   operating  on  the  surface  o r  
within  the  crust  o r   w e   have  a  difference  of  material  from  one place  to 
another  on  Mars  and  different  than  on  the  moon,  or,  more  likely,  a 
combination  of  both.  . . . We  also  have  good  reason  for  believing  that 
the  evolutionary  history  has  been  somewhat  different.  Again,  there  a re  
scars  on  the  face of  Mars  tha t   w e   do  not  see  on  the  face  of  the  moon. 
And  there  have  perhaps  been  episodic  events  in   Martian  history  tha t  
a re   unique  to  the  planet  Mars.  We  end  up  with  the  conclusion  that 
Mars  is   its  own  planet.” 
Dr.  George C.  Pimentel  of  Univ.  of  California  a t   Berkeley  sa id   re- 
evaluation  of  initial  data  from  infrared  spectrometer had   shown infra-  

301 

September  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

red  spectral  features  earlier  ascribed  to  methane  and   ammonia  were 
actually  due   to  previously  undiscovered  absorptions  of  solid  carbon 
dioxide.  Reflection  peak  recorded  three  times  in   atmosphere  off  Mars’ 
br igh t   limb  showed  presence  of  solid  carbon  dioxide  a t   high  altitudes 
and  a t  latitudes  nor th   of  polar  cap.  Broad  absorption  near  9 p  recorded 
on  bright  limb  was  ascribed  to  solid  silica  o r   silicate  material  and 
broad   absorptions  near  12  p  recorded  near  dark  limb  were  tentatively 
ascribed  in   part  to  solid  carbon  dioxide  above ground.  Further  experi- 
mental work was  in  progress to refine  thermal map. 
In i t ia l   results  of  uv spectrometer  experiment  were  detection  of  ion- 
ized  carbon  dioxide,  carbon  monoxide,  atomic  hydrogen,  and  oxygen. 
Nitrogen  and  n i tr ic  oxide were not  detected and   no evidence was  found 
of  clouds,  blue  haze,  or  any  appreciable  atmospheric absorption  of  uv 
radiation.  Dr.  Charles  A.  Barth  of  Univ.  of  Colorado  said  important 
point  “is  that  the  atmosphere  of  Mars  is  different  than  the  atmosphere 
of  the  earth.  If  I  showed  you  a  spectrum taken  the  same way  from  the 
upper  atmosphere  of  the  earth,  we  would  see  a  plentiful  number  of 
nitrogen  bands.  We  could  see  emissions from  nitric  oxide.  We  could 
see  emissions from  atomic  nitrogen.  None  of  those  features  is  present 
in  the  atmosphere of  Mars.  . . .” 
Dr. Norman  H.  Horowitz of  J P L   presented biological  implications of 
Mariner  1969 results.  “There  is  nothing  in   the  new  data  that  encour- 
ages the  belief  that Mars  is  a body  of  life.  But  the  results  don’t  exclude 
this  possibility.  . . . The Mariner  6 and   7 data  strengthen  the  previous 
conclusion that  the  scarcity  of  water  on Mars  is  the  most  serious  limit- 
ing  factor for  life.  . . . Mars  is a cold desert  by  terrestrial  standards. If 
there  is life on Mars,  it must be   a  form  of  life that  can  utilize  water  in  
the  form  of  water  vapor  or  ice.”  (Transcr ip t ;   NASA  News  Release) 
Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR carr ied   Har-  
vai-d  Univ.  payload  to  conduct  solar  studies.  Rocket  and   instruments 
functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
*  President  Nixon  announced  intention  to  nominate  Secor  D.  Browne  to 
be member  of  Civil  Aeronautics Board  for   remainder  of  term  expiring 
Dec.  31,  1974.  He  would  replace  John  H.  Crooker,  who  had  resigned 
effective  Sept.  30.  Browne  would  also  be  designated  CAB  Chairman. 
(PD, 9/15/69,  1249)  
Sep tember  12:  NASA  began  distribution,  a t   MSC ,   of  about  18 lbs  (8.2  kgs) 
of  lunar  material  to  106 U S .   scientific  investigators  and   36  in   eight 
other  countries  for  university,  industrial,  and   governmental laboratory 
analyses.  Lot  comprised one-third  of  lunar  samples  returned  by  Apollo 
I I .   Another  15%  would  be  kept  as  examples  of  Tranquility  Base 
material.  Remainder would  be held  for  later  scientific experiments, with 
small  amount  possibly  available  on  loan  for  public  display.  Material 
had  been  quarantined  in   LRL  since  its  July  25   re turn ;   tests  on  animal 
and plant  life  had  shown no   ill  effects.  Interagency  Committee on Back 
Contamination  had  approved  release  of  samples  to  principal  investi- 
gators  or  their  representatives  whose  plans  for  safeguarding material 
had  been  approved by  MSC officials. 
Preliminary  LRL  examinations  had  disclosed  two  basic  rock  types, 
compacted lunar  soil  and   igneous  rocks.  Rocks  had  been  on  lunar   sur-  
face  from  10 to  150 million  yrs ;   igneous  rocks  had  crystallized  from 
3  to  4  billion  yrs  ago.  Approximately 3 kgs  of  samples would  be  de- 

302 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1y69 

Sep tembe r   12 

September  12:   NASA  began  d i s t r ibu t ion   of  18  pounds  of 
lunar  material  to   scientific 
investigators  i n   the   Un i ted   S ta te s   and  eight  other  countries  f o r   anaysis.  The   rock 
above,  one  of  the   samples  collected  b y   Astronauts  Neil  A .   Armstrong  and  Edw in   E .  
A ld r in ,   J f . ,   on   the  moon  July  20,  w a s   s tud ied   a t   MSC’S Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory. 

stroyed  dur ing   experiments;  residues  and  remaining  5.1  kgs would  be 
returned  to NASA.  Results  of  analyses were  to be  reported  early  in  1970. 
Among  measurements  to  be  made  were  those  of  physical  properties 
of  rocks  or  soil to  help  in   understanding  optical  observations  of  moon 
from  ear th   and   future  seismic experiments;  mineralogy  and  petrology 
to   show mineral  content,  amount  of  water  present  when  rocks  crystal- 
lized,  and how  surfaces were  eroded by  particles;  chemical composition 
of  rocks and   fines  to  determine concentration  of  92  elements occurring 
on  ear th   and   in   meteorites,  times  of  crystallization  of  igneous  rocks, 
and   periods  rocks  had  lain  on   lunar   surface.  Studies of  rare   gases  in  
soil would  furnish  first da ta  on isotopic  compositions of  solar materials. 
Biologists  and   organic  chemists would  determine  structures  and  abun- 
dances of  carbon  compounds in   and   on  lunar  surface  and   their  origin, 
catalog  microstructures  in   terms  of  organized  elements  and  micro- 
fossils, and  define presence  or  absence of  viable lunar   organisms.  ( NASA 
Release  69-130) 
0  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops  Station 

303 

September  12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

carried  Univ.  of  Illinois  and  GCA  Corp.  payload  to  117.4-mi  (189-kni I 
altitude  to  measure  electron  density,  collision  frequency,  and  tempera- 
ture  in  lower  ionosphere  a t  midnight.  Secondary  objective  was  to  test 
mechanical  delay  igniter  and   monitor, its  performance.  Simultaneous 
launch  from  Chamical,  Argentina,  studied  particle  precipitation  and 
transport  effects  across  equator.  Rocket  and  instruments  functioned 
satisfactorily.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
Spencer  M.  Beresford,  former  special  counsel  of  House  Committee  on 
Science  and  Astronautics,  was  appointed  NASA  General  Counsel  suc- 
ceeding  Paul  G.  Dembling,  new  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator 
[see Sept.  101.  (NASA   Release 69-173) 
-White  House  announced  President’s  Science  Adviser,  Dr.  Lee  A.  Du- 
Bridge,  would  visit  four Western  and  two  Eastern  European  countries 
in  September  and  October  to  discuss  arrangements  for  international 
scientific and  technological cooperation  and  explore specific possibilities 
for  strengthening  existing  arrangements.  ( P D ,  8/15/69,  ‘1251) 
*  Reuters  said  NASA  h ad   accepted  offer  of  French  sculptor  Marcel  Recher 
to  build  140-ft “Platform  for  the  Conquest  of  the  Cosmos”  at  K SC   as 
memorial  to  first  lunar  landing.  Recher  was  looking  for  sponsor  to 
contribute  $145,000  for  project.  ( W  Pos t ,   9/11/69,  A3) 
Dec.  15 debut  of Boeing 747 would  be  delayed  six  to  eight weeks, Boeing 
Co.  said.  P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.  had   en- 
countered  problems  in   meeting  performance  goals  in   362-passenger 
aircraft’s  engines.  ( N Y T ,  9/13/69,  46 )  
September  13: Aerospace Corp.  announced  election of  Dr. T. Keith  Glennan, 
President  Emeritus  of  Case  Institute  of  Technology  and  first  NA SA  
Administrator  (1958-1961),  as  Chairman  of  Board  of  Trustees.  Sher- 
rod  E.  Skinner  retired  as Chairman  and  L/G  James  H.  Doolittle  (USAF ,  
Re t .) ,   Vice  Chairman,  also  retired  during  annual  meeting  of  Board  of 
Trustees.  Skinner  and   Gen.  Doolittle  were  awarded  USAF  Exceptional 
Service  Award  by  Under  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  John  L.  McLucas 
in   El  Segundo,  Calif.,  ceremony  Sept.  1 2   (Aerospace  Release;  CR, 
9/25/69,  E7813) 
Smithsonian  Institution  Curator  of  Meteorites,  Dr.  Ku r t   Fredriksson, 
arrived  in  Washington,  D.C.,  carrying  10  g r   of  lunar  material  from 
LRL  in   nitrogen-filled plastic  bag  inside  steel briefcase.  One  of  six  men 
in   U S .   who  had  studied  lunar  samples,  he  later  said  Smithsonian  sci- 
entist  Dr.  Bryan  H.  Mason  would  receive  another  10-gr  set.  (Conroy, 
W  News,  9/16/69,  5)  
September  14:  NASA  announced  availability  of  Earth  Photographs  from 
Gemini  V I   Through  XZZ 
(NASA   SP-171),  collection  of  best  250  pic- 
tures  taken  between  1965 and  1967 from  altitudes  between  99  and  850 
mi  a s   Gemini  spacecraft  orbited  earth.  First  and   last  views  were  of 
Cape  Kennedy,  with  views  of  principal  areas  within  30”  latitude  of 
equator  between.  (NASA   Release  69-129) 
September  15:  Space  Task  Group  presented  report  The  Post-Apollo  Space 
Program:  Directions  fo r   the  Future  to  President  Nixon  a t   White 
House.  I t   recommended basic  goal  of  balanced  manned  and  unmanned 
space  program  conducted  for  all mankind,  with  emphasis  on  increased 
utilization  of  space  capabilities  for  services  to  man  through  expanded 
space  applications  program;  enhancement  of  U S .   defense  posture  fo r  
world  peace  and  security  through  exploitation  of  space  techniques  for 

304 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

September  15 

military  missions;  continuing  strong  program  of  lunar   and   planetary 
exploration,  astronomy,  physics,  and  ear th   and   life  sciences;  develop- 
ment  of  new  systems and  technology  for  space operations,  emphasizing 
commonality,  reusability,  and   economy  through  development  of  new 
space  transportation  capability  and   space station modules;  and   promo- 
tion  of  world  community  through  program  of  broad  international 
participation  and   cooperation. 
As  focus  fo r   development  of  new  capability,  Task  Group  recom- 
mended  US. accept  long-range  goal  of  manned  planetary  exploration 
with  manned  Mars  mission  before  end  of  century.  Activities  leading 
to  goal should  include initial concentration  on  exploiting  existing  capa- 
bility  and   developing  new  one  while  maintaining  program  balance 
within  available  resources;  operational  phase  using  new  systems  and  
capabilities  in  earth-moon  space,  with  men  living  and   working  in   that 
environment  for  extended  periods;  and   manned  exploration  missions 
out  of  earth-moon space,  using  experience of  earlier  two  phases.  Sched- 
ule  and   budgetary  implications  of  phases  were  subject  to  Presidential 
choice,  with  detailed  program  to  be  determined  in   normal  annual 
budget  and  program  review. 
Report  outlined  three  possible  NASA  programs  for  manned  Mars 
landing  before  century’s  end.  Option  I  would  launch  manned  mission 
in  mid-1980s and  would  establish  orbiting  lunar  station,  50-man ear th-  
orbiting  space  base,  and  lunar   surface  base.  Funding  would  rise  from 
curren t   $4-billion  level  to   $8-  to   $10-billion  level  in   1980.  Decision 
to  proceed  with  development  of  space  station,  earth-to-orbit  shuttle, 
and  space tug  would  be  required  in   FY  1971. Option  I1 would  include 
Mars  mission  launch  in  1986,  allowing  for  evaluation  of  unmanned 
Mars  mission  results  before  final  designation  of  landing  date  and  
require  about  $8-billion  maximum  annual  expenditure  in   early  1980s. 
Option  I11  would  include  initial  development  of  space  station  and 
reusable  shuttles,  a s   in  Options  I  and   11,  but  would  defer  decision  on 
manned  Mars  landing  date  while  maintaining  goal  of  after  1980 but 
before close of  century. Concurrent development of  space transportation 
system  and  modular  space  stations  wouid  require  rise  in  1976  annual 
expenditures  to  $5.7  billion,  while  their  development  in   series  would 
entail  $4- to  $S-billion  funding  level. 
Recommended  DOD  options were:  (A )   program  of  full military  space 
capability  in  case  of  overt  threat  to  national  security,  (B)   develop- 
ment  of  effor ts  to   counter  known  and  accepted  projections  of  security 
threat  and   increase  in  development  activities  i f   threat  increased,  and  
( 6 )   program  of  lower  level  system  deployment  with  technology  and 
support  effort  necessary  for  contingency planning  on  assumption  tha t  
lessening of  world  tensions  would  reduce emphasis on  national  defense. 
At  White  House  briefing  following  presentation,  .press  secretary 
Ronald L.  Ziegler  said President  Nixon  had  concurred  in   Task Group’s 
rejection  of  two  other,  extreme  space  programs,  one  to  land  men  on 
Mars  as  soon  a s   possible,  regardless  of  cost,  and   one  to  eliminate 
manned  flight  program  af ter   completion  of  Apollo.  He  did  not  know 
when  President  would make decision on course to  follow, but budgetary 
considerations  would  be  ma jor   factor.  (Text;  PD,  9/22/69,  1291; 
NYT,  9/16/69,  1) 
U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCXCV I I l   from  Baikonur  into  orbit  with 

305 

September  15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

162-km ( 100.7-mi)  apogee,  127-km  (78.9-mi)  perigee,  87.3-min  period, 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  same  day.  ( GSFC  S SR ,  
and   49.6O 
9/15/69;  SBD,  9/19/69,  81) 
Lunar   Rock  Conference  was  held  a t   Smithsonian  Institution,  with  par-  
ticipation  of  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator;  Dr.  Henry  J .  
Smith,  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  (Science) ; and   Lunar  
Receiving  Laboratory  scientists.  During  conference  NASA  released  PET 
Summary  of  Apollo  11 Lunar   Samples,  report  of  60-day  preliminary 
examination  of  48 lbs  of  Apollo  I I   lunar   samples  in  LRL by  university 
and   Government  scientists  on  NASA  Preliminary  Examination  Team 
(PET). 
Report  confirmed  existence  of  unexplained  erosion  process  on  lunar  
surface  indicated  in   Ranger,  Lunar  Orbiter,  and   Surveyor  photos, 
“unlike  any  process  so  fa r   observed  on   ear th” ;   sa id   unique  chemical 
composition  ( tha t   of  silicate  l iqu id)   of  Tranquility  Base  fines  and 
igneous  rocks   “implies  either  the  composition  of  the  rock  from  which 
the  liquid  was  derived  differs  significantly  from  that  of  the  mantle  of 
the  earth,  or  tha t   the  mechanism  by  which  the  liquid  was  formed 
differs  from  analogous  terrestrial  processes” ; and   concluded  there  was 
“very  good  chance  that  the  time  of  crystallization  of  some  of  the 
Apollo  11 rocks  may  date  back  to  times  earlier  than  the  oldest  rocks 
on  earth.” 
Samples  could  be  divided  into  fine-  and   medium-grained  crystalline 
of  igneous  origin,  breccias  of  complex  origin,  and   fines.  Crystalline 
rocks  differed  from  any  terrestrial  rock  and  from  meteorites  in   modal 
mineralogy  and  bulk  chemistry.  Erosion  had  occurred  on  lunar   surface 
bu t   there  was  no  evidence  i t   w a s   caused  by  surface  water.  Probable 
presence  of  assemblage  iron-troilite-ilmenite  and   absence  of  any 
hydrated  phase  indicated  crystalline  rocks  were  formed  under  ex- 
tremely  low  partial  pressures  of  oxygen,  water,  and  sulfur.  Absence  of 
hydrated  minerals  suggested  absence  of  any  surface  water  a t   T ran -  
quility  Base since rocks were exposed.  Rocks  and  fines  showed  evidence 
of  shock  o r   impact  metamorphism ; all  rocks  displayed  glass-lined 
surface  pits  possibly  caused  by  impact  of  small  particles;  and   fine 
material  and   breccia  contained  gases  that  indicated  they  were  derived 
from  solar  wind.  Measurements  on  igneous  rock  indicated  crystalliza- 
tion  3 billion  to  4 billion  yrs  ago.  Rocks  had   been within  one  meter  of 
surface  for   20  million  to   160  million  yrs.  Level  of  indigenous  volatiliz- 
able  and /or   pyrolyzable  organic material  was  extremely  low. All  rocks 
and   fines were  generally  similar  chemically.  Major  and  minor  constitu- 
ents were  same  as  in   terrestrial  igneous  rocks  and   meteorites,  but  dif- 
ferences  in   composition  were  significant.  Elements  that  were  enriched 
in   iron   meteorites  were  not  observed  o r   were  very  low  in   occurrence. 
No  evidence  of  biological  material  had   been  found.  Tranquility  Base 
soil was  fine grained,.granular,  cohesive,  and  incompressible,  with  hard-  
ness  increasing  a t   six-inch  depth.  I t   was  similar  in  appearance  and  
behavior  to  soil  a t   Surveyor  landing  sites.  (P rog ram ;   Text;  Science, 
9/19/69) 
NASA  announced  withdrawal  of  three  Apollo  range  instrumentation  ships 
-USNS  Redstone,  Mercury,  and   Huntsville-from 
tracking  network 
supporting  Apollo  flights.  Remaining  tracking  ship,  USNS  Vanguard, 
would  be  continued  on  station  in  Atlantic  about  1,000  mi  southeast  of 

306 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

September  15 

Bermuda.  NASA  sa id   reduction  of  Apollo  ship  support  was  based  on 
high  success  of  Apollo missions,  particularly  their  excellent “launch  on 
time”  record.  (NASA  Release  69-133) 
House  passed  H.J.R.  775,  to  authorize  President  “to  award  appropriate 
medals  honoring  those  astronauts  whose  particular  efforts  and  contri- 
butions  to  the  welfare  of  the Nation  and   of  mankind  have  been  excep- 
tionally  meritorious.”  (CR,  9/15/69,  H7870-2) 
September  16:  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  and  
Michael Collins  reported  on Apollo 11 mission  to  jo in t   session  of  Con- 
gress  called  in   their  honor.  Astronaut  Armstrong  said:  “Several weeks 
ago  I  enjoyed  the  warmth  of  reflection  on  the  true  meanings  of  the 
spirit  of  Apollo.  I  stood  in   the  highlands  of  this Nation,  near  the  Con- 
tinental  Divide,  introducing  to  my  sons  the  wonders  of  nature  and 
pleasures  of  looking  for  deer  and   for  elk.  I n   their  enthusiasm  for  the 
view  they  frequently  stumbled  on  the  rocky  trails,  but  when  they 
looked  only  to   their  footing,  they  did  not  see  the  elk.  To   those  of  you 
who  have  advocated  looking  high  we  owe  our   sincere  gratitude,  for 
you  have  granted  us  the  opportunity  to  see  some  of  the  grandest  views 
of  the  Creator.  To  those  of  you  who  have  been  our  honest  critics,  we 
also  thank,  fo r  you  have  reminded  us   that  we  dare  not  forget  to  watch 
the  trail.” 
Astronaut  Aldrin  said:  “Our  steps  in   space have  been  a  symbol  of 
this  country’s  way  of  life  as  we  open  our  doors  and   windows  to  the 
world  to   view  our   successes  and  failures  and   as  we  share  with  all 
nations  our  discovery.  The  Saturn,  Columbia,  and   Eagle,  and  the  ex- 
travehicular  mobility  unit  have  proved  . . . that  this  Nation  can  pro- 
duce  equipment  of  the  highest  quality  and   dependability.  This  should 
give all  of  us hope  and  inspiration  to  overcome  some  of  the  more  diffi- 
cult  problems  here  on  earth.  The  Apollo  lesson  is   that  national  goals 
can  be  met  where  there  is  a  strong enough will  to   d o s o . ”  
Astronaut  Collins  said:  “We  have  taken  to  the  moon  the  wealth  of 
this  Nation,  the  vision  of  its  political  leaders,  the  intelligence  of  its 
scientists,  the  dedication  of  its  engineers,  the  careful  craftsmanship  of 
its workers,  and  the  enthusiastic  support  of  its people.  We  have  brought 
back  rocks.  And  I  think  it  is  a  fa ir   trade.  For  just  as  the  Rosetta stone 
revealed  the  language  of  ancient  Egypt,  so may  these  rocks  unlock  the 
mystery  of  the  origin  of  the  moon,  of  our   earth,  and   even  of  our   solar 
system.” 
Astronauts  presented  Congress with  two  US. flags  which  previously 
had  flown  over  Senate  and  House  of  Capitol  and   had  been  carried  to 
moon  aboard  Apollo 11 spacecraft.  (CR,  9/16/69,  H7937-9) 
At  Smithsonian  Institution  ceremony  attended  by  Apollo  11  astronauts, 
Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  presented  two-pound, gray, 
lunar  rock  of  igneous,  breccia  type  to  Smithsonian  Secretary,  Dr.  S. 
Dillon  Riply,  for  Smithsonian  collection.  I t   would  be   sealed  in   nitro- 
gen-filled  container  covered  by  three-foot  glass  bubble  and  displayed 
to  public  beginning  Sept.  17  for  indefinite  period  in   Arts  and   In -  
dustries  Building.  At  presentation,  Astronaut  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr., 
said:  “Every  human  being,  every  animal  who  has   looked  up  into  the 
heavens  has  seen  that  rock.  It  is   a  fortunate  time  for   mankind  to  look 
up  and   be  able  to   say,  ‘here  is  the  moon.’” 
(Smithsonian  Release 
SI-15049;   Shelton,  W  Pos t ,   9/17/69,  B1) 

I 

307 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1969 
September  16 
0  Senate  passed  H.J.R.  775,  “to  authorize  the  President  to  award,  in   the 
name  of  Congress,  Congressional Space Medals  of  Honor  to  those  as- 
tronauts  whose  particular  efforts  and   contributions  to  the  welfare  of 
the  Nation  and   of  mankind  have  been  exceptionally  meritorious.” 
(CRY  9/16/69,  S10630) 
*  New  Yo r k  Times  editorial commented  on Apollo  11   and Mariner  VI   and  
V I I :  “The  unprecedented  advances i n   the  study  both  of  the  moon  and  
of  Mars  dur ing   the  past  few  weeks  have  produced  a  stunning  crop   of 
surprises  abou t   both  celestial  bodies.  On  the   closest  examination  yet, 
these  neighbors  in   space  have  proved  f a r   more  complex  and   strange 
than  previous  theories  have  led  men  to  believe.  And  the  magnificent, 
lifeless  desolation  of  the  lunar  and  Martian  surfaces  emphasizes  more 
than  ever  how  wonderful  i t   is   and  how  little  science  understands  why 
i t   is  that  this  th ird   planet  from  the  sun  is   so  uniquely  green,  vibrant 
and   overrunning with  life.”  ( N Y T ,  9/16/69,  40) 
September  17:  Space Task  Group  report  to  President  on  post-Apollo  space 
program  [see  Sept.  151 was  released  a t  White  House  press  conference 
by  Vice  President  Spiro  T.  Agnew  and   Space  Task  Force  Group 
members  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator;  Dr.  Robert  C. 
Seamans,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force;  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge, Presi- 
dential  Science Adviser;  and   William A.  Anders,  NASC  Executive Sec- 
retary.  Vice  President  Agnew  said  Task  Group  had  rejected  “crash 
program  of  the  magnitude  that  would  turn   loose  every  b i t   of  our  tech- 
nological  ability”  to  achieve  quickest  possible  manned  Mars  landing 
because “there  are  competing priorities  in   a  difficult  time  of  inflation.” 
Task  Group  had  also  rejected  “foregoing  the  substantial  benefits  that 
have  come  out  of  the  Apollo  program,  the  benefits  of  National 
prestige.” 
Dr.  Paine  said  all  three  options recommended to  President  in  report 
would  enable  NASA  to  “hold  together  the  team”  and  provide  “major 
challenge.” 
Dr.  DuBridge  said  all  three  options  held  “heavy  emphasis  on  ear th  
applications,  satellites,  for   studying  the  geology,  the  geography,  the 
atmosphere  of  the  oceans  of  the  ear th   and   bringing  space  technology 
directly  and immediately to  the  benefit  of  the  people  on  earth. All  three 
programs  also  . . . include  heavy  emphasis  on  scientific  programs,  to 
extend  our  scientific  knowledge  of 
the  ear th   itself,  of 
the  moon, 
through  additional  lunar   expeditions,  interplanetary  space  and  addi- 
tional  scientific  information  about  the  moon  and  the  planets.”  He  also 
cited  emphasis  on  international  collaboration.  (Transcript) 
NASA  released  America’s  Next  Decade  in   Space:  A  Report  for  the 
Space  Task Group .  Major  points  had  been  incorporated  in   Task  Group 
report.  (Tex t)  
*  Aerobee 150 M I   sounding  rocket was  launched by  NASA  from WSMR  with 
VAM-20  booster.  Rocket  carried  AFCRL  payload  to  135.5-mi (218-km) 
altitude  to  calibrate  Harvard   College  Observatory  spectrometer  on 
board   orbiting  Os0  V I   by  telemetering,  grazing  incidence,  scanning 
EUV monochromator  to  study  active  regions  of  sun  simultaneously  a t  
300  to  1,440 A.  Pointing  was  marginal  bu t   data  were  100%   satisfac- 
tory.  (NASA  Rpt SRJ.) 
AH-56A  helicopter,  under  development  by  Lockheed  California  Co.  for 

308  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

September  17 

USA,  was  destroyed  when  it  broke  loose  and   moved  downwind  inside 
wind  tunnel  a t  ARC.  Flying debr is  punctured  steel wall  and   injured  two 
men  in  control room.  (NASA  Release 69-154) 
First  day  of  public  display  of  lunar   rock  a t   Smithsonian  Institution  a t-  
tracted  8,200  visitors,  including  former  NASA  Administrator  James  E. 
Webb.  Webb  said:  “The  rock  represents  all  the  work  and   all  the  sub- 
mergence  of  personal  ambitions  that  thousands  put  into  the  space 
effort.  I t  proves  we  have  the  scientific,  tech 
a1  and  managerial  capa- 
bility  of  expanding  our  space values for   us 
der  the  sea,  on  the  land 
and  in   the  air.”  (Schaden,  W  Star,  9/18/ 
Senate  adopted  by  85-0  vote  amendment  offered  by  Sen.  William  Prox-  
mire  (D-Wis.)  to  S.  2546,  FY  1970  military  procurement  authoriza- 
tion,  which  would  require  study  and  review  by  Cpmptroller General of 
profits  made by  Government agencies,  including NASA,  on  contracts fo r  
which  there  had   been  no  formally  advertised  competitive  bidding. 
(CR,  9/17/69,  S10743-52) 
*  Rep.  George A.  Goodling  (R-Pa .)   introduced H.R.  13838 “to  provide  fo r  
the  distribution  to  the  several  States,  for  display  to   the  public  . . . 
samples  of  the  lunar  rocks  and   other  lunar  materials  brought  back  by 
the  Apollo  11 mission.”  ( C R ,  9/17/69,  H8098) 
New  Y o r k  T imes  editorial:  “The  space age is here  to  stay,  but  the  precise 
contours  of  how  far   and   how  fast  this  nation  will  go  in  the  decades 
ahead will  have  to  be  determined  on   a  pragmatic  basis,  almost  year  by 
year  and   Administration  by  Administration.”  ( N Y T ,  9/17/69,  4 0 )  
September  18: U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos CCXC IX   from Baikonur  in to  orb i t  
with  219-km  (136.1-mi)  apogee,  207-km  (128.6-mi)  perigee,  89.2- 
min  period,  and   64.9’ 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Sept.  22.  ( CSFC 
SSR,  9/30/69;  SBD,  9 /19 /69 ,81 )  
NASA’s H G l O   l if t ingbody   vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  A. 
Manke,  reached  79,000-ft altitude and mach  1.39 after  air-launch from 
B-52  a ircraf t   west  of  Rosamond,  Calif.  Purpose  of  flight,  25th  in  
series and  12 th  using engine, was  to  obtain  stability  and  control data  a t  
various  angles  of  attack  in   speed  range  around  mach  1.2.  (NASA   P ro j  
O f f )  
*  NASA  and   AEC  announced  successful completion  of  NERVA nuclear  experi- 
mental  rocket  engine  (XE )   testing  in   Jackass  Flats,  Nev.  Tests,  from  
March  through August,  had  included 28  successful engine  startups and  
3  h r s   48  min  cumulative  operating  time,  with  3.5  min  a t   full  power 
(55,000-lb  t h ru s t ) .   XE  program  had  explored  wide  variety  of  operat- 
ing  modes  and   pressure  and   temperature  conditions,  demonstrated 
automatic  startups  using  bootstrap  techniques,  demonstrated  stability 
of  nuclear  rocket  engine performance,  and  validated  design  and   opera- 
tion  of  engine  test  stand  No.  1. XE  engine  runs   concluded  series  of 
years.  Design  and   development 
successful  technology  tests  over  se 
rocket  was  being  initiated  on  
of  flight-rated  75,000-lb-thrust  N 
oduced.  Nuclear  rocket  program  was  managed 
clear  Propulsion  Office.  (NASA  Release  69-134; 
AEC-NASA  Release M-216) 
*  President  Nixon  addressed 24th  session  of  U.N.  General Assembly:  “Of 
all  man’s  grea t   enterprises,  none  lends  itself  more  logically  or  more 
compellingly to  international  cooperation  than  the  venture  into  space. 

309 

September  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Here,  truly,  mankind  is  one:  a s  fellow creatures from  the  planet  Earth, 
exploring  the  heavens  that  all  of  us   enjoy.  The  journey  of  Apollo  11 
to  the moon  and  back  was  not  an end,  but  the  beginning. 
“There  w i l l   be  new  journeys  of  discovery.  Beyond  this,  we  a re   just 
beginning  to  comprehend  the  benefits  that  space  technology  can  yield 
here  on  earth.  And  the  potential  is   enormous.  For  example,  we  are  
now  developing  ear th   resource  survey  satellites,  with  the  first  experi- 
mental  satellite  to  be  launched  sometime  early  in   the  decade  of  the 
seventies.  Present  indications  are  that  these  satellites  should be  capable 
of  yielding  data  which  could  assist  in   as  widely  varied  tasks  as  these: 
the  location  of  schools  of  fish  in   the  oceans,  the  location  of  mineral 
deposits  on  land,  the  health  of  agricultural crops. 
“I  feel  it  is  only  r igh t   that  we  should  share  both  the  adventures  and  
the  benefits  of  space.  As  an   example  of  our  plans,  we  have  determined 
to  take  actions  with  regard  to  ear th   resources  satellites.  . . . The  pur-  
pose  . . . is that  this  program  w i l l   be  dedicated to  produce  information 
not  only  for  the  United  States,  but  also  for  the  world  community. We 
shall  be  putting  several  proposals  in  this  respect  before  the  United 
Nations.  These  are   among  the  positive,  concrete  steps  we  intend  to 
take  toward  internationalizing  man’s  epic  venture  into  space-an 
ad-  
venture  that  belongs  not  to  one  nation  but  to   all  mankind.”  (PD, 
9/22/69,  1275-81) 

September  18:  D r .   V i k ram  A .  Sarabhai  ( l e f t ) ,  Chairman  o j   th e   Indian  Space  Research 
Organization,  and  D r .   Thomas  0 .  Pa ine ,   NASA  Adm in is tra tor ,   signed  an  agreemen t   at 
NASA  Headquarters  f o r  a  cooperative  exper imen t   t o   broadcast  educational  TV  programs 
f r o m  NASA’s planned  ATS-F  sa te l l i te   d irec t   to  5,000  small  Indian  villages. 

310 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 
September  18 
Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  and  Dr.  Vikram  A.  Sarab-  
hai,  Chairman  of  Indian  Space  Research  Organization,  on  behalf  of 
Ind ia   and  U S .   signed  agreement  at  NASA  Hq.  to  provide  direct  TV 
broadcasts  from  satellite  to  some  5,000  small  Ind ian   villages.  Broad- 
casts  would  be  first  from  satellite  to  small  receivers  without  ground 
relay.  Experiment would  utilize  ATS-F,  sixth  in   NASA  series  of  Applica- 
tions  Technology  Satellites,  scheduled  for   mid-1972  launch.  Ind ia  
would  use  experimental  ground  station  a t   Ahmedabad  and   others  to 
transmit  TV  programs  to  satellite,  which  would  relay  them  to  village 
receivers.  Increased  onboard  power  and   deployable  satellite  a.ntenna 
w i t h   high  pointing  accuracy  made  direct  broadcast  possible.  (NASA  
Release  69-135) 
*  Senate  began  consideration  of  H.R.  11271,  FY  1970 NASA  authorization 
bill  passed  by  House  June   10  and   reported  with  amendment  in   form 
of  substitute  bill  by  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space 
Sciences  June   24.  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  introduced  new 
Section 7:  “Of  the  funds  authorized  . . . $300,000,000  . . . earmarked 
for  operation of  the  Apollo missions shall  not  be  obligated or  expended 
until  the  Administrator,  in  consultation  with  the  State  Department, has 
fully  explored  the  possibilities  of  international  cooperation  and   cost- 
sharing  in  space  exploration,  and  has  reported  to  Congress on  the  re- 
sults  of  these  efforts.”  Efforts  should  include possibility  of  establishing 
international consortium with  NASA  as manager  of  operations  or  possi- 
bility  of  bringing  space exclusively  within  U.N.  jurisdiction  and   con- 
trol,  establishing  “United  Nations  Space  Council  modeled  after  the 
World  Health  Organization.”  ( C R ,  9/18/69,  510895-907) 
List  of  U S .   attempts  during  1969  to  effect  cooperative  space  agreement 
with  U.S.S.R.  was  entered  in   Congressional  Record: 
April 30, NASA  Administrator,  Dr. Thomas 0. Paine,  forwarded copy 
of  Opportunities  for  Participation  in  Space  Flight  Investigations  to 
Academician  Dr.  Anatoly  A.  Blagonravov  and  assured  him  that  pro- 
posals  by  Soviet  scientists  of  experiments  to  fly  on  NASA  spacecraft 
would  be  welcomed.  Supplements  to  NASA  document  were  to  be  sent 
routinely  to  Soviet Academy. 
May  29,  Dr.  Paine  invited  Academician  Blagonravov  to  attend 
Apollo  11  launch  and  to   discuss,  informally,  mutual  interests  in  coop- 
erative  space projects.  Dr.  Blagonravov had  declined. 
August 21,  Dr.  Paine  invited  Academician  Prof.  Mstislav V.  Keldysh 
to  send  Soviet scientists  to  Sept.  11-21  briefing  a t  NASA  Hq.  for  inves- 
tigators who  might  wish  to  propose  experiments for  1973 Viking  mis- 
sions  to  Mars.  Dr.  Paine  suggested meeting  serve  as  opportunity  fo r  
discussion  of  planetary  exploration  plans  contributing  to  coordinated 
efforts  beneficial  to  both  countries.  Prof.  Keldysh  had   declined,  but 
asked  for  copies  of  meeting materials  so Soviet  scientists might develop 
later  discussions.  ( C R ,  
proposals.  He  had  suggested  possibility  of 
9/18/69,  S1095-6) 
*  Post  Office  Dept.  announced  delay  in  delivery  of  moon  landing  stamp 
first  day  covers because  of  “unprecedented number  of  requests.”  Proc- 
essing  crew  of  100 -mo re   than  twice  number  normally  employed- 
were  working longer  shifts  with more  special canceling equipment than  
ever  before  to  handle  “response  from  people  all  over  the  world.”  ( PO  
Dept.  Philatelic  Release  50) 

311 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

September  18 
*  Senate  swore  i n   Sen.  Ralph  T.  Smith  (R-Ill.)  to  serve  unexpired  term  of 
late Sen.  Everett  M.  Dirksen  (R-Ill.)  and   adopted  resolution  assigning 
him  to   Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space  Sciences  to   re- 
place  Sen.  Charles  McC.  Mathias  (R-Md.) , reassigned  to   Government 
Operations  Committee.  (CR,  9/18/69,  S10763) 
Senate  passed  by  voice  vote  S.  1857,  FY  1970  NSF  authorization  of 
$487,150,000.  (CR,  9/18/69,  S10764-70) 
*  Senate passed  by  record  vote  of  81 to   5,  S.  2546,  FY  1970  military  pro- 
curement  authorization  which  included  amendment  requ ir ing   study 
and   review  by  Comptroller  General  of  profits  on  Government  contracts 
for   which  there  had  been  no   advertised  competitive  bidding  [see  Sept. 
171.  (CR,  9/18/69,  S10888-91) 
September  19:  Canadian  Black  Bran t   IV  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by 
NASA  from  Barre ira   do   Inferno, Natal,  Brazil,  carry ing   MSC and   Univ. 
of  California  payload  to   provide  detailed  scientific  measurements  of 
charged  particle  environment  in   South  Atlantic  Anomaly  region.  Sec- 
ondary  objectives  were  to   measure  magnetic  field  strength  and   flight- 
evaluate  payload  telemetry-system  performance.  Rocket  reached  532-mi 
(856-km)  altitude,  with  performance  higher  than  expected.  All  experi- 
ments  performed  satisfactorily  and  da ta   were  obtained  on  all channels. 
(NA SA   Rpt  SRL )  
*  Senate  passed  by  voice  vote  B.R.  11271, FY  1970  NASA  authorization  of 
$3.716  billion,  allocating  $3.020  billion  fo r   R&D,  $58.2  million  for  con- 
struction  of  facilities,  and   $637.4  million  for  research  and   program 
management.  Total  was  $250.85  million  less  than  had  been  passed  by 
House  June   1 0   [see  also  June  241.  Senate  insisted  on  its  amendments 
and   requested  conference  with  House.  ( C R Y  S10977-99,  11002;  Tex t)  
*  White  House  announced  Apollo  11  astronauts  would  make  22-nation 
tour  starting  Sept.  29,  to  stress  U S .   willingness  to  share  space  knowl- 
edge.  I t inerary  would  include Mexico  City ; Bogota,  Colombia;  Buenos 
Aires,  Argentina;  Rio  de  Janeiro, Brazil;  Las  Palmas,  Canary  Islands; 
Madr id ;   Par is ;   Amsterdam  and   Brussels;  Oslo;  Cologne,  Germany; 
Berlin;  London;  Rome ; Belgrade,  Yugoslavia;  Ankara,  Turkey ; Kin- 
shasa,  Congo;  Teheran,  I r an ;   Bombay,  Ind ia ;   Dacca,  Pak is tan ;   Bang- 
kok,  Thailand;  Darwin  and   Sydney,  Australia;  Guam;  Seoul;  Tokyo; 
Honolulu;  and   re turn   to  Houston,  Tex.,  Nov.  5.  Additional  tr ip   to  
Ottawa  and  Montreal,  Canada,  was  planned  for   December.  (UPI ,   N Y T ,  
9/20/69,  5) 
oz  of  moon  dust  in   16 contamination-proof 
*  U.K.’s  first  lunar   samples-3 
boxes-arrived 
in   London  and   were  shown  to   scientists  and   press  a t  
Science  Research  Council.  Dr.  S.  0. Agrell  of  Cambridge  Univ.  and  
Dr.  P.  E.  Clegg  of  London  Univ.  had  flown  to  MSC to  collect  them. 
They  would  be   examined  by  14 British  research  teams.  (AP ,   Kansas 
C i t y   T imes ,   9 /20 /69)  
*  French  scientists,  using  “world’s  most  powerful  laser”  a t   Limeill  Weap- 
ons Research  Center  of  French  Atomic  Energy  Commission  near  Paris, 
had  generated  succession  of  tiny  thermonuclear  explosions,  Walter  Sul- 
livan  said  in   New  York  T imes .   I t   was  important  step  toward  taming 
hydrogen  bomb  energy.  It  also  underlined  concern  of  some  scientists 
tha t   lasers  might  simplify  design  of  devastating  nuclear  weapons. 
( N Y T ,  9/19/69,  1) 
*  Report  of  President  Nixon’s  Task  Group on  Space  [Sept.  151  and  Apollo 

312 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

September  19 

astronauts’  speeches  to  Congress  [Sept.  161 had   brought  some  “ration- 
ality  back  to  the  discussion of  whither  the  space program,”  Washington 
Post editorial said.  Acceptance by  President of  recommendation “would 
eliminate  talk  of  abandoning  manned  space  flight,  which  would  be  a 
foolish course of  action,  or  of  proceeding toward Mars  in   a  crash effort 
to  get  there  a s   quickly  a s   possible.”  It  was  important  “for  the  nation 
to push  ahead  on  the  immediate recommendations of  the  Task Group- 
exploring  the  moon,  developing  the  tools  tha t   a re   needed  for  system- 
atic  exploration  of  our  space  travel  capability,  and   extracting  from 
the  space program more  benefits  for  those  of  us  who  a re   earthbound.” 
( W  Pos t ,  9 /19 /69)  
September  20:  Economist  commented  on  lunar  investigation:  “Scientists, 
unlike  engineers,  are   not  a t   this  stage  interested  in   whether  the  moon 
can  be made  habitable;  but  this,  rather  than  its  age,  or peculiarities  of 
its  composition,  is  what  the  astronauts  went  out  to  the  moon  to  find. 
The  results  are  more  encouraging  than  anyone  but  the  confirmed s tar  
gazers  could  have  hoped.  Space  is   not  unfriendly;  nor  is  the  moon, 
superficially barren  though  i t  looks. What  we   need  are  more  assurances 
about  sources  of  water  which  space planners  continue  to  be  convinced 
is  trapped  in,  and  can  be  extracted  from,  the  rocks.  Also  more  data  on 
those  surprising  experiments  where  plants  have  thrived  on  moon  soil. 
. . . And  some  idea  about  whether  i t   will  be  possible  to  protect  man 
from  ultraviolet  radiation  up  there,  without  having  to  put  him  in   a 
protective  pressure  suit.”  (Econumist,  9/20/69,  1 7 )  
September  21:  Washington  Sunday  Star  commented  on  display  of  moon 
rocks  a t   Smithsonian  Institution:  “The  lunar   chunk  does  indeed  look 
like  something  that,  if  i t   turned  up  in   a  Bethesda  [Md.]  backyard, 
would  not  draw  a  second  glance.  And  yet  it  is  something  that,  until 
two  months  ago,  no  man  had  seen  before.  . . . It  is  a  promise  of  un- 
imagined  things  to  come.”  Judging  by  crowds  queued  up,  “Smith- 
sonian  has   booked  its  best  act  since  the  Mona  Lisa  came  to  town  six 
years  ago.”  (W  Star,  9/21/69,  C l )  
Bert  Greenglass,  former  head  of  Apollo  Program  Control  Office  a t   KSC 
and   later  Deputy  Director  of  Management Systems Div.  in  NASA  Office 
of  Technology Utilization,  joined  HUD   a s   Director  of  Management In -  
formation  and   Program  Control  Systems.  ( w   S t a r ,   9/24/69;  HUD  
P I O )  
0  Parade  magazine  called  for   establishment  of  July  4,  1976-200th 
anni- 
national  deadline  for  conquering  some  of  earth‘s 
versary  of  U.S.-as 
social  problems.  “Having  harnessed  our  special  strengths-money, 
men,  materials  and   the  organizational  genius  to  control  them-we 
con- 
quered space before  1970. Why  can we  not  conquer  some  of  our  social 
problems on  ear th   by  1976?”   (Parade ,  9/21/69,  1 )  
“The  notion  has  occurred  to  more  than  one  person  that  NASA,  having 
reached  the  moon  and  now  fearing  its  way  to  the  planets  possibly 
blocked  by  budgetary  obstacles,  might  find  the  requisite  new  worlds  to  
conquer  r igh t   here,  a t  home,”  William Hines  said  in   Washington  Sun- 
d a y  S tar .   It  was  “fundamental  precept  of  modern  technology  tha t   any- 
thing  which  can  be   imagined  can  be  accomplished.  A  cure  €or cancer, 
an  end  to  poverty,  a  cleanup  of  the  environment,  termination  of  the 
Vietnam  war,  even  effective nuclear  disarmament?  If  it  is  conceivable 
i t   is  achievable.”  While  NASA  could  be  depended  on  to  give  good  ac- 

313 

September‘ 21 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

count  of  itself  i n   scientific  and  engineering  situations,  “its  ability  to 
handle  problems  with  a  big  ‘people’  component  is  largely  untested.” 
Since  “people-problems” were  predominant  these  days,  maybe  NASA 
wouldn’t  work  out  so  well  after  all.  “But  on  the  second  thought,  no 
other  government  agency  is   showing  much  flair  for  coping  with  the 
human  element,  either.”  (W  Star, 9/21/69,  C4) 
September  22:  USAF  launched  two  unidentified  satellites  from  Vandenberg 
AFB  by  Thorad-Agena  booster.  First  entered  orbit  with  157.2-mi 
(252.9-km)  apogee,  110.0-mi  ( 177-km)  perigee  88.7-min,  period, 
and   85.0” inclination  and   reentered Oct.  12. Second entered  orbit  with 
308.2-mi  (495.9-km)  apogee,  305.1-mi  (490.9-km)  perigee,  94.4- 
min  period,  and  85.1”  inclination.  (CSFC  SSR ,   9/30/69;  10 /15 /69 ;  
UPI,  W  Post,  9/23/69,  A20;  Pres  Rp t   70  [69]) 
*  Japan  failed  in  fifth  attempt  to  launch  satellite when  four-stage,  unguided 
Lambda  booster  malfunctioned.  (Harr ison ,   W Post,  9/24/69,  A 9 )  
*  President  Nixon  announced  appointment  of  NAS  President,  Dr.  Philip 
Handler,  to  President’s  Science  Advisory  Committee.  He  would  replace 
Dr.  Frederick  S.  Seitz,  President  of  Rockefeller  Univ.  in   New  York. 
( P D ,  9/29/69,  1335 ;   W  News,  9/23/69,  44) 
President  Nixon  announced  establishment  of  series  of  Presidential  task 
forces,  including  Task  Force  on  Oceanography,  to  review  public  and 
private  efforts  in  oceanography  and   suggest  actions  to  accelerate  de- 
velopment  of  “increasingly  important  area  of  exploration” ; and  Task 
Force  on  Science  Policy,  to  review  present  policy  and   make’ recom- 
mendations  for  fu ture   scope  and  direction.  ( P D ,  9/29/69,  1304)  
launched  Cosmos  CCC into  orb i t   with  189-km 
September  23:  U.S.S.R. 
(117.4-mi)  apogee,  183-km  (113.7-mi)  perigee,  88.2-min  period, 
and   51.5”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Sept.  27. 
(GSFC   SSR ,  
9 /30 /69 ;   SBD,  9/25/69,  106) 
Aerobee  150 M I   sounding  rocket,  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  with 
VAM-20  booster,  carried  Univ.  of  Hawaii  payload  to  108.4-mi 
(174.4-km)  altitude.  Objectives were  to  obtain  high-resolution  spectra 
of  solar  disc  from  1,800  to  2,000  A,  using  high-resolution  echelle- 
grating  spectrograph  pointed  by  Univ.  of  Colorado  biaxial  pointing 
control.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily  and   photo- 
graphic  spectra  were  obtained  on  both  camera  cycles.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
*  President  Nixon  announced  decision  to  continue  development  of  SST. 
“The  supersonic transport  is  going  to  be  built.  The question  is  whether 
in  the  years  ahead  the  people  of  the  world will  be   flying  in   American 
supersonic transports  or  in  the  transports of  other  nations  . . . whether 
the  United  States,  after  starting  and   stopping  this  program  . . . finally 
decides to  go  ahead.  . . . I  have  made  the  decision  that  we  should  go 
ahead  . . . because  I  want  the  United  States  to  continue  to  lead 
the  world  in  a i r   transport.  And  i t   is  essential  to  build  this  plane  if  we 
are   to maintain  that  leadership.  . . . I have made  the  decision,  also,  be- 
cause . . . through  this plane we  are  going to  be able  to  bring  the world 
closer  together  in   a  true physical and   time  sense.  . . . Th is  is  a  massive 
stride  forward  in  the  field  of 
transport.”  President  said  prototype 
would  be  flown  in   1972.  ( P D ,  9/29/69,  1309) 
President  Nixon  would  ask  Congress  to  appropriate  $662  million  over 
five  years  to  assist  in   SST development,  Secretary  of  Transportation 
John   A.  Volpe  announced.  Federal  Government would  spend  estimated 

314 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
September 23 
$761 million  through  FY 1974, including $99 million  in   funds  already 
appropriated,  to  construct  and   flight-test  two  prototype  Boeing  SST 
models.  Total  development  cost  was  estimated  $1.5  billion,  with  $1.3- 
billion  Government  participation  to  be  repaid  from  sale  of  approxi- 
mately  300  aircraft  capable  of  carrying  300  passengers  each  a t  
maximum  1,800-mph speeds.  (DOT Release  21069) 
Modified  test-pilot  pressure  suit  delivered  by  ARC’S  Dr.  Alan  Chambers, 
Hubert  Vykukal,  and   Richard  Gallant  to  Stanford  Univ.  Hospital 
saved  life  of  Mrs. Mary Phillips,  who  was  hemorrhaging  uncontrollably 
after  minor  surgery.  G-suit, worn  by  pilots  to  avoid  blacking  out  dur-  
ing  high-speed  maneuvers,  applied  pressure  to  counter  draining  of 
blood  from  bra in   and  upper  body.  Fitted  to Mrs.  Phillips,  suit  arrested 
abdominal  bleeding  dur ing   10-hr  application.  (NASA  Release  69-168) 
*  USA   Atmospheric  Sciences  Laboratory  helium-filled  balloon  was  success- 
fully  launched  from  WSMR,  carrying  70-lb  scientific  payload  to   meas- 
ure   ozone  concentration,  cosmic  radiation,  and   atmospheric  pressure, 
temperature,  and   density  a t   160,000-ft  altitude.  The   600-ft-tall, 
1,700-lb balloon  drifted  to  New  Mexico  where  i t   released  payload  for 
recovery on  ground.  Data  would  be   used  for number  of  WSMR  projects. 
(USAF  PIO;   UPI,  W News, 9/24/69,  9 )  
Associated  Press  quoted  Col.  Edwin  E.  Aldrin  (USAF ,   Ret.)  a s   saying 
NASA  had  rejected  his  proposal  to  postpone  Apollo  12   and   run   i t   in 
tandem  with  Apollo  13 so  crews could  protect  or  rescue  each  other  in 
emergency.  Aldrin  was  father  of  Apollo  11 Astronaut  Edwin  E.  Aldrin, 
Jr.,  and   a  NASA   safety  consultant.  NASA  Manned  Space  Flight  Safety 
Director  Jerome  F.  Lederer  had   called  proposal  impractical,  “tremen- 
dously  expensive,  and  I  don’t  know  if  it  could  be  done.”  Lederer  had 
said  there  was  no  question  tha t   astronaut  rescue  capability  from  lunar 
surface  or  orbital  emergency must  be  provided,  but  i t   was  “out  of  the 
picture  for  Apollo.”  (Haughland,  AP,  W  Star,  9/22/69,  A4) 
*  FhdBration  Ahonau t ique   Internationale  posthumously awarded  its  high- 
NASA  test  pilot  Joseph  A.  Walker  for   “his 
est  honor-Gold  Medal-to 
many  enduring  contributions  to  the  advancement  of  aviation  made 
dur ing   a  21-year  flight  research  career  marked  by  extraordinary  per- 
fection  and  valor.”  Award  was  received  by  his  widow  a t  Edwards  AFB 
ceremony.  As  FRC  chief  research  pilot,  Walker  had  flown  X-15 
to  its 
highest  altitude,  354,200  ft  (67  m i)  ; was  first  man  to  fly  LLRV astro- 
nau t   training  craf t ;   was  author  of  20  technical  papers  and  articles; 
and  had  taught  ApoZZo  11 commander Neil A.  Armstrong  at  FRC. 
(FRC  
Release  17 -69 )  
0  MSFC  announced  award  of  $19,073,032  modification  to  IBM  contract  for 
fabrication,  checkout,  and  delivery  of  27   instrument  units  for  Sa turn  
IB   and  Sa turn  V  boosters.  Modification  revised  delivery  schedule,  ex- 
tended  performance  period  15  mos,  and   provided  for  assessment  of 
certain  MsFC  engineering  change  requests.  ( MSFC  Release  69-214) 
*  FAA,  Air  Transport  Assn.,  and   manufacturers  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp., 
Bendix  Corp.,  and   Wilcox-Sierra  Div.  of  American  Standard,  Inc,, 
successfully  flight-tested three  separate  but  compatible devices  compos- 
ing   a ircraf t   collision  avoidance system  ( CAS) capable of  issuing  micro- 
second warning.  Tests were  held  a t  Martin-Marietta Airport,  Baltimore. 
CAS  included  cesium  atomic  clock  so  precise  that  watch  of  similar  con- 
struction  would  lose  only  one  second  in   67   yrs.  System  operated  like 

315 

September  23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

balloon  around   a ircraf t  which,  when  penetrated  by  similarly  equipped 
plane,  provided  pilots  with  command  to  make  evasive  maneuver.  All 
a ircraf t   would  need  system  for   i t   to   be  effective.  Produc t   of  $12- 
million,  13-yr R&D,  system  could  be  operational  by  1971.  (Yarborough, 
W  Star,  9/24/69,  A7) 
*  I n   Pa r i s   press  conference  Presidential  Science  Adviser,  Dr.  Lee  A.  Du- 
Bridge,  and  French  Minister  f o r   Industrial  and  Scientific  Development 
Francois  X.  Ortoli  announced  plans  to   increase  flow  of  scientists  and  
specialists  between  France  and  U S .   to  broaden  scientific  and   technical 
cooperation  i n   wide  areas,  including  nuclear  research  for  peaceful 
purposes.  ( W  Post,  9/24/69,  A22) 
September  24:  Two  photometers  on  board  NASA's Ogo  V  orbiting  geophysi- 
cal  observatory  (launched  March  4,  1968)   had  successfully  scanned 
Lyman-alpha  radiation,  NASA  announced.  Data  were  expected  to  pro- 
vide  new  information  on  Lyman-alpha  emission  from  Milky  Way  and  
to   help  determine  what  portion  of  observed  radiation  was  from  geo- 
corona  and   what  portion  was  from  outer  space.  On   Sept.  1 2   Ogo  if 
had  pointed  a t   sun   and   spun  slowly  while  scanning  m irror   in  Univ.  of 
Paris experiment  rotated,  covering  30"  of  celestial  sphere.  On  Sept.  1 4  
spacecraft  returned  to  normal  three-axis-stabilized  operation,  where  it 
would  remain  until  December  when  second  series  of  maneuvers  would 
be  conducted  to   cover  remaining  portion  of  sky  and  provide  first  com- 
plete  mapping  of  extraterrestrial  Lyman-alpha  radiation.  Univ.  of 
Colorado  photometer,  which  provided  broader  coverage  of  Lyman- 
alpha  radiation  a t   180'  to  Univ.  of  Pa r i s   experiment,  would  be  used 
to   confirm  measurements  and   verify  calibration  levels. 
Ogo  V  had  18  of  24   onboard  experiments  still  operating.  I t   had 
provided  first  measurements  of  electric  fields  in   earth's  bow  shock  and 
comprehensive  data  on  particles  and   fields  in   earth's  magnetosphere. 
(NASA   Proj  Off;  NASA  Release  69-137) 
*  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCCZ  from   Baikonur  into  orb i t   with  279-km 
(173.4-mi)  apogee,  192-km  (119.3-mi)  perigee,  89.2-min  period, 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Oct.  2.  (GSFC   SSR,  9 /30 /69 ;  
and   65.4' 
10 /15 /69 ;   SBD,  9/25/69,  106) 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld  R.  Gentry 
*  NASA's X-24A 
( U S A F ) ,   reached  mach  0.62  after  air-launch  from  B-52 
aircraft  a t  
40,000-ft  altitude  over  South  Rogers  Lake  Bed,  Calif.  Purpose  of  un- 
powered  flight,  fifth  in   series,  was  to  obtain  data  on  upper-flap  control 
effectiveness,  handling  qualities  dur ing   change  from  lower-flap  to 
upper-flap  control,  and   effect  of  rudder  position  on  a i r   flow  around  
tail.  ( N A S A   P ro j  Off) 
Aerobee  150   M I   sounding  rocket,  launched  by  NASA  from  wsnm  with 
VAM-20  booster,  carried  Univ.  of  Colorado  Laboratory  for   Atmos- 
pheric  and   Space  Physics  payload  to   124-mi  (199.5-km)  altitude.  Ob- 
jective  was  to   obtain  high-resolution  spectra  of  Carbon  IV  resonance 
doublet  a t   1,548  and   1,550 A  using  high-resolution,  narrow-band  spec- 
trograph  with  echelle  as  principle  dispersing  element  and   SPARCS  solar 
pointing  control.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily. 
(NASA   Rp t   SRL)  
Board  of  Investigation  which  probed  Feb.  1 7  death  of  Sealab  111  Aqua- 
nau t   Berry  L.  Cannon  had  concluded  probable  cause  was  carbon  d i-  
oxide  poisoning  due   to  faulty  diving  gear,  USN  announced.  Gear  had 

316 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

September  24 

lacked  substance  for  filtering  carbon  dioxide  from  exhaled  breath. 
Associated  Press  said Sealab  I11 project  had been  “shelved”  because  of 
insufficient funds  for  FY 1970 and  quoted  USN spokesman a s   saying  i t  
would  be  continued  later.  Pro jec t   had  been  suspended  since  Cannon 
death.  (DOD Release  7 9 4 4 9 ;  W  Star, 9/24/69,  A9) 
*  Shawbury, England,  innkeeper  Jack  Warner  had  asked  U S .   Government 
for  license to   open first  pub  on  moon,  Associated  Press  said.  He  would 
call  i t   “The  Space  Inn”  or  “The  Lunatic  Tavern.”  (W  S ta r ,   9/24/69, 
A16) 
September  25:  Apollo  9 commander  James A.  McDivitt was  appointed Man- 
ager  of  Apollo  Spacecraft  Program  a t  MSC,  replacing  George  M.  Low, 
who  was  temporarily  on  special  assignment  to  MSC  Director  to  plan 
future  MSC  programs  and   work  on  organizational  matters.  (M SC   Re- 
lease 69 -66 )  
East  Germany’s  People’s  Chamber  unanimously  ratified  nuclear  nonpro- 
liferation  treaty.  West  Germany had  not  yet  signed.  ( P  I n q ,  9 /25 /69)  
*  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  reported  favorably  S. 
1287, which  authorized  appropriations  for  FYs  1970,  1971, and   1972 
for  metric  system  study.  (CR,  9/25/69,  H8488)  
September  25-26:  National  Seminar  for  Manned  Flight  Awareness  a t   MSC 
attracted  some  400  representatives  of  NASA,  DOD,  and  aerospace  in- 
dustry.  M SC   Director,  Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  said:  “I  think  w e   a re   all 
concerned  about  the  period  of  letdown  which  tends  to  occur  after  a 
great milestone  such as has  just  been  completed,”  but  NASA  “must  con- 
tinue  to  demonstrate  . . . that  success  can  follow  success.” 
Lee  B.  James,  Director  of  Program  Management a t   MSFC,  said  next 
moon  flights  could  suffer  from  lack  of  proper  employee  motivation. 
“We  are  completing  [rocket]  stages  with  welders  who  know  they  are 
going  to  be  laid  off.”  Sheet metal  workers  in  plants  with  termination 
papers  were  working  on  vital  space  hardware.  Twenty  defects  at- 
tributed  t o   human  error   had  been  uncovered  in  single  rocket. 
Apollo  Program  Director  Rocco  Petrone  said  future  moon  landings 
would  be  even  more  demanding  than  first,  with  astronauts spending  54  
hrs  on  moon  dur ing   some.  To  make  missions successful,  workers must 
be  motivated  to  pay  greatest  attention  to  detail. 
Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  Dr.  George  E. 
Mueller,  said  NASA  hoped  to  cut  payload  launch  costs  to  $200  per 
pound  and  reduce  number  of  workers  on  Sa turn   V  launches  from 
20,000  to  abou t   number  required  to  get  Boeing  747  off  ground.  (MSC 
Release  69-65;  Maloney,  H  Pos t ,   9/26/69) 
September  26: Glazing discovered on  lunar   surface  by  Apollo  11  astronauts 
w a s   analyzed  in   Science  by  Thomas  Gold  of  Cornel1 Univ.,  senior  in- 
vestigator  for   close-up  photography.  Glossy  surfaces  similar  to  glass 
found clumped in   centers  of  small lunar  craters  appeared  to  have  been 
swept  in  after  craters had been  formed. Glazed  areas  were  also  concen- 
trated  toward  tops  of  protuberances  and,  in  some  cases,  droplets  ap -  
peared  to  have  run  down  inclined  surface  and  congealed  on  sides. 
Glazing  might  have  originated  from  effect  of  exhaust  of  LM  descent 
stage,  splashing  of  liquid  drops  from  larger  impact  elsewhere,  shock 
heating  or  volcanism  on  moon,  same  impact  tha t   created  craters  in 
which  glazing  was  found,  o r   intense  racliation  heating.  Intense  radia- 
tion  was  most  probable  cause,  Gold  said.  Source  could  have  been  im- 

317 

September  26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

pact  fireball  on  moon,  impact  fireball  on  earth,  o r   most  likely,  solar 
outburst  in   geologically  recent  times.  (Sc ience ,  9/26/69,  1345-9) 
0  In  address  at  Clarkson  College  of  Technology  in  Potsdam,  N.Y.,  Dr. 
Thomas 0. Paine,  NASA Administrator,  said:  “We  know  that  hydrogen 
bombs  work  (unfortunately) -the  Lord  made  the  Universe  that  way. 
And,  of  course,  we  know  tha t   (fortunately)  fusion  energy  keeps  the 
sun  shining  every  day.  Our  great  visionary  dream  is  to  find  out  how 
to unlock  this energy for  spaceship propulsion. This  is  a grea t  challenge 
but  consider the  new  tools  that we  have available:  giant magnetic  fields 
with  superconducting magnets, tremendous power  densities  from  lasers, 
the  great energy of  nuclear power,  and new  high  temperature materials. 
These,  with  new  plasma  dynamic  developments,  may  usher  in  fusion 
power  in   the  eighties,  the  nineties,  o r   in   the  next  century.  Harnessing 
fusion  power  for  propulsion  is   an  even  farther-out  challenge,  but  i t  
could  prove  to  be  one  of  the  more  direct  applications.  We  won’t  have 
to  convert  the  fusion  energy  to  electricity;  just  fuse  a  couple  of  deu- 
terium  atoms and   then  let  them  blast  out  the  back  of  the  vehicle! 
“So  fusion  remains  a  tantalizing  promise  for  the  future.  . . . If  w e  
ever  do  achieve  such  propulsion,  we’ll  be  able  to  move  with  some  ease 
o u t   from  our  little  8,000-mile-diameter Solar  System.  All  of  the  9 
planets,  32  moons  and  1600  known  asteroids  w i l l   come  within  reach 
of  our  vehicles.  And,  indeed,  if  we  could  achieve high  efficiencies  in  a 
fusion  propulsion  process,  we  could  talk  of  eventual  relativistic  ve- 
locities, of  time compression, and  of  travel  to  the  nearest  stars.”  (Tex t)  
Venus,  “least  understood  of  the  inner  planets,”  should be  U.S.  space pro- 
gram  priority  target,  Kitt  Peak  National  Observatory  physicist  Dr. 
Donald M.  Hunten  and  Harvard  Univ.  physicist  Dr. Richard M.  Goody 
said  in   Science.  Some  fundamental  data  were  available;  quantitative 
theories  had  been  stated;  questions  about  atmosphere  could  be  an-  
swered  by  feasible  missions;  and   geophysicists’  interest  had  been 
aroused  and  offered  specialized  knowledge  needed  to   understand  com- 
plex  processes.  But  NASA  had  no  present  plans  for  investigation  of 
Venus’  lower  atmosphere. Uncertainty  as  to  Soviet intentions  had  been 
cited  a s   reason  for  giving  Venus  low  priority.  But  until  collaboration 
with U.S.S.R.  and   other  European  countries could  begin,  “we  have  no 
choice but  to  base  our  judgment  u  on  our  own  scientific  and  technical 
abilities  and  desires.”  (Sc ience ,  9726/69,  1317-23) 
0  Wa l l   Street  Journal  editorial:  “While  there  will  be  debate  on  the  Ad- 
ministration’s  approval  of  a  go-ahead on  the  supersonic  transport,  the 
President  plainly  picked  the  proper  method  for  financing  further  de- 
velopment  of  the  controversial  plane.  Earlier  there  had  been  talk  of 
setting  up  a  special  SST authority  that  would  raise  money  by  selling 
Government-guaranteed bonds  to  the  public.  The  idea  never  had  much 
to   recommend  it.  At  the  moment  the  SST faces  an   uncertain  economic 
future.  . . . If  the  plane  is a  flop,  the  Government would  be  stuck  one 
way  or  the  other.  . . . the  bond  plan  would  ease  the  current  pressure 
on  the  Federal  budget.  But  i t   also  would  fool  a t  least  par t   of  the  public 
about  the  financial  risk  that  the  Government  actually  is   assuming.  . . . 
Whether  one  especially  relishes  the  notion  or  not,  supersonic  travel  is 
sure  to  come  sooner  or  later.  In   heading  toward  that  development,  the 
Administration  is wise  to  avoid  financial  subterfuge.”  ( W S J ,  9 /26 /69)  
September  27:  Evidence for  detection  of  high-energy cosmic  gamma  radia- 

318 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

September  27 

tion  (above 50 mev)  from  point  source in   constellation  Sagittarius was 
reported  in  Nature.  Case  Western  Reserve  Univ.  and  Univ.  of  Mel- 
bourne  (Australia)  physicists  presented  preliminary  results  from  col- 
laborative  program  in   which  two  high:altitude  balloon  flights  were 
made  from  Parkes,  Australia,  Feb.  5-6  and   Feb.  26-27.  Object  was 
first  such  point  source  of  gamma  rays  detected  in   heavens.  Research 
was  supported  by  NASA,  NSF,  and   Australian  Research  Grants Commit- 
tee.  (F rye   e t   at.,  Nature,  9/27/69,  1320-1;  Sullivan,  N Y T ,   10/2/69, 
33 1 
*  Satellite  system which  combined  navigational  and   a i r   traffic  control  and 
collision  prevention  had  been  proposed  to  FAA  and   DOD  by  TRW Inc. 
Systems Group, Washington Evening  Star  reported.  Proposal called  for 
four  satellites,  one  in   permanent  orbit  with  others  revolving  around  i t  
a t   lower  altitudes.  Aircraft  would  radio  distinct  signal to  satellites  and  
its  position  relative  to  two  o r   more  satellites  would  be  determined  by 
ground  computers  that  could  figure  latitude  and  longitude  of  a ircraf t  
within  50  ft.  System,  based  on  delicate  measurement  of  time  for   a ir-  
craft signals  to  reach  satellite, would  cost estimated $100  million,  could 
be  i n   operation  by  mid-197Os,  and   was  also  being  proposed  to   avia- 
tion  industry.  (Lannan, W S tar ,   9/27/69,  A l l )  
September 28:  In   telephone call  to Apo l lo   11 commander Neil A.  Armstrong 
on  eve  of  Apollo  11 astronauts’  round-the-world tour,  President  Nixon 
asked  astronauts  to  invite  foreign  countries  to  become  “partners  in 
space”  with  U S .  He  also  invited  astronauts  and wives  to  White House 
dinner  Nov.  5.  (UP I ,   W  Star,  9/29/69,  A3) 
Washirigton. Post  columnist  Franklin  R.  Bruns,  Jr.,  said  10  days  after 
issuance  of  moon  landing  airmail  stamp  in  Washington,  D.C.,  “an 
already  tired  city  post  office  crew  had   just  passed  the  two-million first 
day  cover  mark.”  Post  Office  had  gone  “all  out”  to  cooperate  with 
those of  other countries  in  returning covers and with Voice  of  America, 
NASA ,   and  regular  servicers.  There  was  little  doubt  that  “new  first  day 
cover  record  is   in   the  making.”  IW   Post,  9/28/69,  F9) 
September  29: Apollo  11 astronauts  and  wives  arrived  in   Mexico  City  for 
start  of  39-day  tour  of  22  countries  [see  Sept.  191.  (AP ,   B  Sun, 
9/30/69,  A l )  
*  President  Nixon  approved  H.J.R.  775,  to  authorize  President  to  award 
Congressional  Space  Medals  of  Honor  to   astronauts  [see  Sept.  151. 
( C R Y  10/6/69,  1362)  
0  NASA  announced appointment  of  Daniel J.  Harnett  a s   Assistant  Adminis- 
tra tor   for  Industry  Affairs,  effective  Oct.  1.  He  would  be  responsible 
fo r  all  NASA  relationships  with  industry.  Before his  appointment he  had 
held  executive positions  with  Northrop  Corp.  (NASA  Release  69-139) 
September  .?0: USAF  launched  two  unidentified  satellites  from  Vandenberg 
AFB  by  Thorad-Agena  I)  booster.  First  entered  orb i t   with  303.2-mi 
(487.9-km)  apogee,  299.5-mi  (481.9-km)  perigee,  93.8-min  period, 
and  69.6’  inclination.  Second entered  orbit  with  58G.O-mi  (942.9-km) 
apogee,  574.8-mi  (924.9-km)  perigee,  103.7-min  period,  and  70.7’ 
inclination.  (GSFC  SSR ,   9/30/69;  SBD ,   10/7/69,  162 ;   Pres  Rpt  70 
C6911 
9  NASA’s HL-10 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Peter  Hoag  ( U S A F ) ,  
reached mach  0.9  after  air-launch  from  B-52  a ircraf t   a t  45,000-ft  alti- 
tude over  FRC.  Purposes of  flight,  26th in  series and  first  powered  flight 

319 

September  30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

for  Maj.  Hoag,  were  to  provide  pilot  training  and   obtain  stability  and  
control data. Winds  rose  from  5 knots  a t   launch  to  20  knots  a t   touch- 
down,  but  did  not  interfere with  flight.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
0  I n   speech before  Chicago Executive  Club in  Chicago, Ill.,  Vice  President 
Sp iro  T.  Agnew  said operation of  military  systems  in  space “to  enhance 
the  national  defense” must  be  one  objective  of  US. future  space pro-  
gram  to  ensure  “there  will  be  no  blind  reliance  on  good  faith.”  Vice 
President  Agnew  was  also  Chairman  of  NASC  and   of  President’s  Space 
Task  Group. 
Two  questions  dominated  speculation  over  national  space  policy,  he 
said:  Why  space?  And  Why  Mars?  “Mars  holds  the  greatest  promise 
of  a  capability  to  sustain  human  life.  I t   is  a  potential  resource  and   re-  
serve.  More  important  for  the  present  is  the  fact  that  the  mind  of 
America  functions  better  when  i t   focuses  upon  a  clear  target.  Manned 
exploration  of  the  Solar  System  is   too  nebulous  to  capture  the  public’s 
attention.  A manned  landing  on  Mars  is   as  understandable  a  challenge 
to  the  citizen  as  i t   is  to  the  scientist.  I t   is  a  test  that  can  be  put  in  a 
time  frame  and   i ts   anticipation  can  be  appreciated  by  all.”  (Tex t )  
*  MSFC  announced  selection  of  Bendix  Corp.  and  Boeing  Co.  for  further 
competitive  negotiations  on  cost-plus-incentive-fee contract  for  design, 
development,  test,  and  delivery  of  four  manned  lunar  roving  vehicles 
for  flight  to  lunar  surface  aboard  descent  stage  of  Apollo  LM   [see 
July  111.  First  operational  vehicle  would  be  delivered  in  early  1971 
for   launch  late  that  year. 
MSFC  also  had  awarded  $238,400  contract  to  Bryson  Construction 
and  $224,888 contract to Miller  and  Berry  for  construction of  two  clean 
rooms  for  Apollo  Telescope  Mount  (A TM )   assembly  and  test  and  had 
called for  bids for  checkout station  construction.  Bids were  due Oct. 21. 
( MSFC  Releases  69-220;  69-221) 
Federal  Electric  Corp.,  IT&T  Corp.  subsidiary,  announced  i t  had  received 
$21,321,680 NASA  contract  for continued work  as KSC  prime  contractor. 
(UPI,  W  S tar ,   9/30/69,  B7) 
a  Washington  Airlines  had   terminated  first  and  only  STOL service  between 
Washington  and  Baltimore after  one year  and  would  liquidate its  three 
Dornier  aircraft,  Washington  Post  said.  Company  had  lost  nearly 
$5,000  weekly  and   carried  25,000  passengers  instead  of 
targeted 
108,000 since  inauguration  of  service  Sept.  23-25,  196%. (Samuelson, 
W   Po s t ,   9/30/69) 
During September:  Dr.  Robert  C .  Seamans,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force, 
defended  value  of  Safeguard  ABM  defense  and   also  discussed  use  of 
space  for  strategic  deterrence,  writing  in  A ir   Force /Space   Digest:  “In 
terms  of  security,  the  space  age  presents  dangers-but 
i t   also  affords 
opportunities  for  increasing  strategic  stability.”  Dangers  stemmed 
from  weapons  placed  in  orbit:  “It  might  be  possible  to  trigger  such 
weapons  with  very  little  warning,  thus  increasing  the  risk  of  surprise 
attack.”  Outer  Space  Treaty  of  1967 might  help  avoid  this  danger, 
“while  providing  us  opportunities  for  other  sorts  of  military  systems 
that  could  strengthen  deterrence  rather  than  weaken  it.”  Each  gen- 
eration  of  space  vehicles  would  provide  additional  improvements  in  
monitoring  enemy  activities. “We  are  now  working on  a  satellite  early- 
warning  system  that  would  detect  missiles  a s   they  are   launched  from 
land  or  sea.”  Dispersed bomber  force  ‘‘would  be  able  to  take  off  from 

320 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

During  September 

i ts   bases  before  the  impact  of  enemy  weapons,  even  if  the  time  of 
flight  of  the  latter  were  greatly  reduced.”  ( A F / S D ,  9/69,  61-4)  
USAF  magazine  Airman  published  interview  with  Secretary  of  the  Air 
Force,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  former  NASA  Deputy  Administrator. 
NASA-USAF  X-15  program  had   been  highly  successful  in  providing 
data  for   many  disciplines  and   “very  good  test  bed”  for  atmospheric 
probe  instrumentation.  XB-70  program,  initiated  a s   manned  super- 
sonic  bombing  system,  was  “very  bold  step”  in   speeds  over  mach  3. 
When  technological  difficulties  and   rising  costs  resulted  in  decision 
against  XB-70  production,  NASA  with  USAF  had  initiated  experimental 
program.  Dr.  Seamans felt  USAF  was  not  using  NASA  expertise  to  fullest 
extent.  USAF  needed  new  manned  bomber,  new  fighter,  and  moderniza- 
tion  of  a i r   defense.  He  was  not  convinced  USAF  had  yet  established 
“best  relationships  with  industry  to  get  these  things  done.”  (A i rman ,  
9/69,  7-9) 
“There  appears  to  be  much  more  to  be  squeezed  from  Apollo  than  just 
the  incalculable  value  of  national  prestige  or  scientific  discovery,” 
Michael Getler  wrote  in   Space/Aeronautics.  “The  ability  to  mine  these 
supporting  talents,  to  judge  their  value  outside  manned  space  flight 
and  disseminate  and  apply  them  may  well  prove  the  most  telling  and 
measurable  argument  in  the  debate  which  i s   bound  to  continue  over 
Apollo’s  real  value.”  Apollo  had   combined  “much  of  what  we  have 
with  what  we  do  best.  Though  complex,  i t   was  manageable.  I t   had 
clear  goals, was well  funded,  enjoyed  fairly  widespread public  support, 
and  dangled  the  element  of  competition  in   fron t   of  our  involuntary 
reflex.  Most  importantly,  i t   tapped  an  industrial  base  and  an  en- 
thusiasm  for gadgetry  that  a re  unmatched anywhere. . . . Because many 
of 
today’s  challenges  confront  human  nature  and   not  technology, 
Apollo  can  be  made  to  seem  irrelevant.  In   fact,  however,  we  are   not 
left  alone  with  our  behavioral  troubles.  There  is   still  an   economy  to 
keep  sound,  industry  and  commerce  to  be  kept  competitive,  and   a 
government  to  be  made  more  efficient,  Failure  to  take  this  extraordi- 
nary  project  apart,  piece  by  piece,  and  examine i ts   usefulness  in  these 
areas  would  indeed  be  wasteful.”  ( S / A ,  9/69,  42-53) 
Dr. Mose L. Harvey  in  Science  and Public  Aflairs,  bulletin  of  atomic sci- 
entists,  discussed  lunar  landing  and  US.-Soviet  equation:  “The  capa- 
bility  of  the  United  States  to  continue  in  space,  and  otherwise  keep 
pace  with  the  scientific-technological  revolution,  depends  entirely  on 
continued  public  faith  in   the  ‘military-industrial  complex’  and   the 
‘scientific  and  technological  elite,’  if  one  wishes  to  keep  using  these 
unfortunate  terms.  It  was  only  because  we   were  able  effectively  to  or- 
ganize and  use  a  genuine  and  mutually  rewarding  partnership  between 
industry,  universities  and  government  that  we  were  able  to  effect  the 
moon  landing  and  to  do  the  other  near-miraculous  things  we  have 
done  in  space  and  in  other  fields  involving  advanced  science  and  ad- 
vanced  technology,  I t   is  precisely  on  this  partnership  that  the  superi- 
ority  of  the  American  way  over  the  Soviet  way  has  so  far   rested.” 
(Sc ience  and Public  Affairs,  9/69,  28-35) 
Atlas  published  translation  of  article  in   L’Espresso,  Rome,  by  Italian 
novelist  Albert0 Moravia on  implications  of  ApoZZo  12. “In  Columbus’s 
days,  men  were  offered  finite  goals,  like  the  discovery of  America;  o r  
they  were  offered  spiritual aims, like  the  search for  goodness,  truth  and 

321 

During  September 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

beauty.  At  that  time,  no  one  could  have  guessed  that  Columbus’s  dis- 
covery  was  only  a  beginning.  Tha t   other  discoveries  would  follow,  a 
second America,  a  third,  a  fourth,  and  so on  through  millions  of  years 
and  billions  of  kilometers.  But  today  tha t   is   happening.  Compared  to 
our  new  set of  goals,  the  aims of  Marx  and  communism  are  pure  imag- 
ination.  For  the  first  time the  real and   the  rational  are  about  to  become 
one.  We  are   now  a t   the  end  of  history-and 
post-history  is   just  be- 
ginning.”  (A t la s ,  9/69,  40-3) 
Atlas  sa id   its  “Talk  of  the  World”  section  had  “got  a  little  hoarse”  on 
subject  of  ApolZo  1 1 .   I t   quoted  rba  few  of  the  more  unusual  moon- 
thoughts”  from  international press.  E l   T iempo   in  Bogota  had  reported 
Colombian wool  fabrics  were  used  in  ApoZZo  11 spacecraft  upholstery. 
Canada’s  Kitchener  Waterloo  Record  had  said  LM had  touched  down 
on  moon  with  legs  made  in   Canada  by  Montreal  firm.  Oigu, in  Lima, 
Peru,  had  said  when  Sputnik  went  into  orbit  “it  was  noted  that  Pedro 
Paulet  Mostajo  had  invented  a  jet-propelled  rocket  back  in  1895.” 
Atlas  commented  that  “this  could  go  on   forever.”  (A t la s ,  9/69,  101 
0  I n   Astrophysical  Journal,  Princeton  Univ.  astronomers  Jeremiah  P.  O s -  
triker  and   Dr.  James  E.  Gunn  predicted  few  pulsars  should  be  found 
with  periods  more  than  1.5  secs,  from  results  of  their  quarantine  ex- 
ploration  of  pulsar  model.  (A s t ro   Journ,  9/69,  1395-1417) 
0  USAF  communications and  navigation  satellite programs  were  outlined  by 
L/G  John  W.  O’Neill,  Vice  Commander  of  AFSC, in  TRW   Space  Log. 
AFSC was  testing  new  UHF   communication terminal  in  conjunction  with 
Tacsat  I  tactical  comsat  and  had  tested  UHF  shipboard,  jeep,  van- 
mounted,  and   team-pack  terminals  a s   receivers  for  satellite  communi- 
cations.  Second-generation defense  comsats  would  have  earth  coverage 
antennas  and  also  steerable  narrow-beam antennas  to  direct  energy  to 
two  “spotlighted”  areas  on  earth’s  surface,  permitting  use  of  small  ter- 
minals  instead  of  large  ground  stations.  Proposed  navigation  satellite 
system  would  consist  of  high-altitude  satellites  transmitting  navigation 
signals  with  worldwide  coverage,  ground  stations  to  track  and  com- 
mand  satellites,  and  user  receiving  equipment.  Navsat  would  provide 
all  four  armed  services  with  common  g r id   for   mobile  operations  and  
could  be  used  by  aircraft,  ships,  submarines,  and   foot  soldiers.  Po- 
tential  for  a ircraf t   carr ier   operations  was  being  studied. 
Computer  revolution  would  provide  new  data  processing equipment 
“with  infinite  potential  for  influencing  satellite  design  and  function” 
in  future.  “We  are   pressing  hard   for  progress  in   laser  technology, 
which  appears  to  have  excellent  potential  for  communication  applica- 
tions.  We  a re   also  pushing  the  development  of  new  sources  of  power 
in  space in  which  a  breakaway from  our  heavy  reliance  upon  the  solar 
cell could make  future satellite development  a  whole  new  game.”  ( T RW  
Space  Log,  Summer/Fall  69,  3-17) 

322 

October 1969 

October 1 :  Boreas  ( E s r o  ZB )   satellite-designed,  developed,  and  constructed 
by  European  Space Research Organization-was 
successfully  launched 
by  NASA  from  WTR by  Scout booster.  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  237.4 
mi  (382  km)  ; perigee,  180.8 mi  (291  km)  ; period,  91.3  min;  and  in- 
clination,  85.1'.  Primary  NASA  mission  objectives were  to  place  Boreas 
into  planned  orb i t   and  provide  tracking  and   telemetry support.  Boreas 
was  backup  for  and  identical  to  Aurorae  (Esro  ZA )   successfully 
launched  by  NASA  Oct.  3,  1968.  I t   carried  eight  experiments  to  study 
aurora   borealis  (Northern  Lights)  and  related  phenomena  of  polar 
ionosphere,  representing  six  organizations  from  U.K.,  Denmark,  Swe- 
den,  and  Norway. 
Boreas  was  third  successful  ESRO  satellite  launched  by  NASA .   First 
success,  Iris Z  (Esro IZB )  , had  been  launched  by  NASA  May  16,  1968, 
to  replace  ESRO  I IA ,   which  had   failed  to  enter  orb i t  May  29,  1967. ESRO 
was  responsible  for  experiment .instrumentation,  delivery  of  spacecraft 
to  launch  site,  equipment  and   personnel  necessary  to  mate  spacecraft 
to  launch  vehicle,  and  spacecraft  testing.  NASA   provided  Scout  launch 
vehicle  and  launch  services  in   second  launching  on  cost-reinibursable 
basis  under  Dec.  30,  1966, agreement with  ESRO.  (NASA   P ro j   off; GSFC 
SSR,  10 /15 /69 ;   SBD,  10/3/69,  147) 
Solid-fuel U.K.  Falstaff  rocket,  carrying  equipment  to  measure  vibrations 
and   temperatures,  reached mach  5 after  launch  from  Australian  mono- 
rail  launcher  a t   Woomera,  Australia,  in  jo in t   U.K.-Australia  research 
program.  (Znteruvia, 11/69,  1751)  
0  Eleventh  anniversary  of  NASA,  established  by  National  Aeronautics  and  
Space Ac t   of  1958. (Space Act) 
Por tra i t   of  James' E.  Webb,  second  NASA  Administrator  (1961-1968), 
was  unveiled  in   anniversary  ceremony  a t   Smithsoniaii  Arts  and   In-  
dustries  Building.  Painted  by  Gardner  Cox,  por tra i t   would  eventually 
hang  in  NASA  Hq.  (P rog ram ;   NASA  Release  69-140) 
0  Lockheed  C-5A  Galaxy, world's  largest  aircraft,  took  off  from  Edwards 
AFB, Calif.,  with  410,OOO-lb  load-heaviest 
ever  carried  by  any  a ir-  
craft,  21,000  lbs  heavier  than  C-5A  was  expected  to  lift  even  under 
wartime  conditions,  and  28,100  lbs  heavier  than  record  i t   established 
June  16.  Aircraft,  G 5 A   No.  3,  reached  18,800-ft  altitude  burning 
21,000  lbs  of  fuel  during  climb.  ( P  Inq ,   10/2/69,  3 ;   UPI  Service, 
10 /2 /69)  
0  Sud-Aviation chief  test  pilot  Andre  Turcat  flew  Anglo-French Concorde 
001  supersonic  airliner  for  about  nine  minutes  a t   mach  1.05  (693  
mph ) ,   passing  sound  barrier  for  first  time.  Two  outer  engines were  a t  
full  force  and   two  inner  engines  at  less  than  capacity  force  dur ing  
36,000-ft-altitude  flight.  Concorde  flew  from  Toulouse-Blagnac  Air- 
port.  ( N Y T ,  10/1/69,  1) 
Vice  President  Sp iro  T. Agnew  said  a t  press  conference following  tour  of 

323 

October  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  1 : N A S A   launched  Boreas,  European  Space   Research   Organization  sa te l l i te ,  
to   s tud y   the  aurora  borealis  and  polar  a tmosphere .   In   the   photo  the   spacecraf t   was 
prepared  for launch  on  a  four-s tage   Scout  booster  f r o m   the  Wes tern   T e s t   Range .  
JPL:   ". . . the  cities  may  benefit  more  from  what's  happening  right 
here  at  the  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  than  they  do  from  what's  hap- 
pening  in  some  community  action  agency.  Now,  I'm  not  downgrading 
the need to  work  closely  with people  . . . but  I  think  it  would be  a  des- 
324 

ASTROSAUTICS  AKD  AEROSAUTICS,  1969 
October  1 
perate  mistake  . . . to  adopt  an   attitude  that  we  do   not  challenge  the 
unknown,  we  do   not  move  forward  simply  because  we  can’t  predict 
what we’re  going  to  find.”  Columbus “didn’t  find what he  went  for  bu t  
he   found  something  even  better.  Maybe  that  applies  to  the  situation 
with regard  to  the  ultimate goal  . . . about landing  a man  on Mars.  . . . 
we  may  do   something a  lot  better.” 
I n   reply  to  question,  he   said:  “We  will  never  reach  a  point  where 
we’ll  have  enough money  for  . . the  problems  of  the  cities  and   of  the 
population.  . . . we  could  spend  every  resource  we  have  and   forego 
any  scientific  exploration  and  forget  the  need  to  research  and  develop 
new  techniques.  . . . I  suppose you  come  down  to  the  final  determina- 
tion  that  you’ve  got  to  put  some  of  your  effort  in  the  future  and  not 
all  of  i t   in   the  present.  And  I  don’t  think  the  lack  of  a  focus  in   the 
space program  would  be  a  benefit  a t   all  to  the  future  of  the  cities  and  
the  problems  you  mention.”  (Transcr ip t)  
Daniel  J.  Harnett  was  sworn  in  as  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  In -  
dustry  Affairs.  He  had  held  executive  positions  with  Northrop  Corp. 
since  1964.  (KASA  Release  69-139) 
0  Soviet space  scientist  Dr.  Oleg  G.  Gazenko  said  a t   news  conference du r -  
ing  meeting  of  International  Academy  of  Astronautics  at  Cloudcroft, 
R’.Mex.,  i t   would  be  desirable  and  technically  feasible  for  cosmonaut 
to  be  member  of  future  Apollo  moon-landing  crew.  (AP ,   B  Sun, 
10/2/69,  A15) 
Twenty-third  anniversary  of  Naval Missile  Center  a t   Point  Mugu,  Calif., 
USN’S  principal  facility  for  testing  and  evaluating  air-launched missiles 
and  other  airborne  weapons  systems.  ( PMR   Missile, 10/3/69,  1) 
William  Teir,  Sa turn   IB  program  manager  a t   MSFC,  became  deputy  di- 
rector  for  management  of  Program  Management  directorate.  ( MSFC 
Release  69-225) 
*  Japan  inaugurated  sem io5c ia l   Space  Development  Corp.  to  coordinate 
space  activities,  including  orbiting  of  two  satellites-one 
in  1972  for 
ionospheric  observation  and  one  in   1974 for  communications. Corpo- 
ration  would  replace  system  under  which  projects  were  undertaken 
separately  by  different  ministries.  Its  539-million yen  ($1.5-million) 
capital had  been  raised  by  government fund  of  500 million  yen  and  39  
million  yen  from  private  industry.  (Reuters,  N Y T ,   10 /5 /69 ,   L27) 
October  2:  Astronaut  Alan  L.  Bean  described  plans  for  Apollo  12   extra- 
vehicular  activities  to  press  a t   KSC. Mission, to   begin  Nov.  14 ,  would 
include  two  31/2-hr EVA  periods  on moon.  For  first  EVA  main  objective 
was  to  deploy ALSEP,  deploy  TV  camera  and  take  photos,  deploy  lunar  
equipment  conveyor,  take  contingency  sample,  deploy  S-band  antenna 
and solar wind  experiment, and   collect lunar  material. 
After  rest  in  LM astronauts would  return  to  lunar  surface for  second 
EVA  period,  to  collect  good  documented sample  and   document  geologi- 
cally  interesting  features  with  photographs,  samples,  and   description. 
“There’s  not  going  to  be  a  lo t   of  time  to  pick  up  a  rock  and  think 
about  i t   . . . but  there’s  going to  be  time  to  look  a t   the  craters  and  try 
to  determine  what  kind  they  a re   and  where  they  came  from,  if  this 
one’s  different  from  that  one,  what  part  of  the  crater  you  want  to 
sample.  . . . We’re  going  to  take  photographs  a s   we  see  all  of  it.  And 
when  this  is  finished  we’re  hopefully going  to  be  over near  Surveyor.” 
Examination  of  Surveyor  111  (launched  April  17,  1967)  was  second 

325 

October  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

objective.  Crew  would  retrieve  par ts   fo r   evaluation  of  how  materials 
withstood  long-term  exposure  in   space. 
F ina l  surface experiment  would  be  conducted  after liftoff  from moon 
when  crew  crashed  LM  ascent  stage  onto  surface.  Crash  would  be  re- 
corded  by  seismometer  and   was  expected  to  provide  da ta   from  which 
scientists  could  make  inferences  about  moon’s 
internal  structure. 
(Transcr ip t)  
*  Aerobee  150  M I   sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from   WSMR  with 
VAM-20  booster  carried  MIT  payload  to  97.9-mi  (157.5-km j  altitude 
to  determine  precise  position  of  two  o r  more  x-ray  sources  and   evalu- 
a te   small  photoelectric  detector.  Rocket  and   instruments-including 
several  bands  of  proportional  counters,  slot  collimators,  modulation 
collimators,  aspect  cameras,  and   attitude  control  system-functioned 
satisfactorily.  All  collimators  gave  expected  rates  and   modulation  on 
s tar   X-1 
in   constellation  Scorpius  (ca l ibra t ion)   and   on  Sagittarius. 
(NASA   Rpt  SRL) 
At  MSFC  ceremony,  NASA  Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  presented 
awards  to  117  center  employees  and  industry  representatives,  mostly  in  
recognition  of  exceptional service  to   Apollo  program.  Employee  awards 
included  NASA  Medal  for  Distinguished  Service  to   MSFC  Director,  Dr. 
Wernher  von  Braun ;   Deputy  Director,  Technical,  Eberhard   F.  M. 
Rees;  Deputy  Director,  Management,  Ha r ry   H.  Gorman;  Director  of 
Science  and   Engineering  Hermann  K.  Weidner;  Vice  Commander, 
Aeronautical  Systems  Div.,  M / C   Edmund  F.  O’Connor  ( U S A F )   ; Direc- 
tor  of  Program  Management  Lee  B.  James;  and   Deputy  Director  of 
Science  and  ,Engineering  Ludie G.  Richard. 
NASA  Medal  for  Exceptional  Scientific  Achievement  was  presented 
to  James  A.  Downey,  111;  Erwin  Fehlberg;  Gerhard  B.  Heller;  Robert 
J.  Nauman;  and   Joseph  L.  Randall.  Other  awards  received  were  NASA 
Medal  fo r  Exceptional  Service  by  NASA  employees  and  NASA   Certificate 
for   Distinguished  Public  Service  by  industry  personnel.  MSFC  Re- 
lease  69-222  j 
October  3:  Ogo  VZ  Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory,  launched  into  low- 
altitude  polar  orb i t   June   5,  was  adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  Space- 
craft had   completed  first  d iurna l  cycle  and  had  provided  da ta   on  global 
characteristics  of  neutral atmosphere;  association  of  electric  fields with 
ionospheric  irregularities ; airglow  emissions  associated  with  oxygen, 
sodium,  and   molecular  nitrogen ; and   propagation  of  proton  whistlers. 
Performance  of  Ogo  VZ  subsystems  had   been  excellent  and   instrumen- 
tation  for   2 3  of  25   experiments  was  operational.  Active  three-axis  sta- 
bilization  had  been  maintained  since  initial  acquisition  and   gas  usage 
was  consistent  with  one-year  operation.  T o   extend  attitude-stabilized 
lifetime  beyond  one year,  operations  plan  had  been  modified  to  include 
manual  control of  gas   je t   firing.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
0  MSC  announced  appointment  of  Astronaut  L.  Gordon Cooper  as  Assistant 
for  Space  Shuttle  Program   in   MSC’S  Flight  Crew  Operations  Directo- 
rate.  Cooper  would  be  responsible  fo r   flight  crew  tra in ing   program, 
astronaut  inputs  into  design  and   engineering,  and   directorate’s  part 
i n   hardware  development  and   testing  for   Space  Shuttle.  He   would  re- 
main  on  flight  status and  eligible  for   space  flight.  ( MSC  Release  69 /67 )  
MSFC  announced  tha t   i t   had   issued  $10,751,000  contract  to  General 
Electric  Co.)s  Apollo  Systems Div.  for  electrical  support  equipment  for  

326 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  3 

Apollo  Telescope  Mount  and   launch  systems  for  Sa turn  
multiple  docking  adapter  and   airlock.  Work  was  to 
June  30,  1975. 
MSFC  had  also  issued  six-month  $56,727  contract  to  Bionic  Ins tru .  
ments,  Inc.,  to  develop  luna r   roving  vehicle  hazard  locator.  Locator, 
which  would  be   installed  on  lunar   rover  or  dual-model vehicle,  would 
use  laser  beam  to  spot  rocks,  holes,  and   other  obstacles  on  lunar  sur- 
face  and   display  on   screen  warning  of  obstacles  hidden  from  astro- 
nauts’  view.  ( MSFC  Releases  69-223,  6%224) 
Spain  awarded  i t s  Grand  Cross  of  Aeronautic Merit  to  Apollo  11 Astro- 
nauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  and  Michael  Collins. 
( UPI,  NYT, 10 /4 /69 ,23 )  
October  4:  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Wal- 
lops  Station  carried  223-lb  Cal  Tech  payload  to  146-mi  (234.9-km) 
altitude  to  study  intensity,  spectrum,  and  degree  of  isotropy  of  dif- 
fuse  x-ray  background  in   0.1-  to  20-kev  range  and   to  study  energy 
spectrum of  s tar  X-1  in   constellation  Scorpius in   0.1- to  15-kev range. 
Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily  and   good  data  were 
obtained  in  all  12  prime  data  channels.  (NASA   Rpt  SRL;  WS  Release) 
NASC  Executive  Secretary  William  A.  Anders,  Apollo  8  astronaut,  told 
Western  Conference of  Young  Presidents’  Organization  in  Phoenix, 
Ariz.,  tha t   U.S.  lost  $13  billion  each  year  in   agricultural  production 
from  insects,  disease,  and  fire.  Use  of  satellite  sensors  could  improve 
surveys of  agricultural and   forest  resources,  a id  mineral and  petroleum 
prospecting,  obtain  better  inventory  of  earth‘s  water  sources,  detect 
na tura l   and   man-made  geography  changes,  sense  ocean  currents  and  
temperatures to a id  fishing industry  and  improve routing  of  commercial 
shipping,  and   study effects  of  environmental and water pollution. While 
NASA  space  expenditures were  averaging  about  $4.5  billion  annually- 
about 2/3  of  1% of  GNP-nearly  $4 billion  was  spent in  U S .   for  non- 
durable  toys  and   sport  supplies,  $4.7  billion  for   foreign  travel,  and  
over  $6.5  billion  in   amusements. 
Anders  urged  international  harmony  through  space.  “We  travel 
through  space  on  a  small  planet.  The  Ear th   looked  so  tiny  in   the 
heavens  that  there  were  times  dur ing   the Apollo  8 mission when  I  had 
trouble finding it.  If  you  can  imagine yourself  in   a  darkened  room with 
only  one  clearly  visible  object,  a  small  blue-green  sphere  about  the 
size  of  a  Christmas  tree  ornament,  then  you  can  begin  to  grasp  what 
the  Ear th   looks  l&e from  space.  I  think  all  of  us  subconsciously think 
the  Ear th   is   flat  o r   a t   least  almost  infinite.  Let  me  assure  you  that, 
rather  than   a  massive  giant,  it  should  be  thought  of  more  as  the 
care.  . . .  From  space,  the  ear th   is   indivisible.  There  a re   no  flags,  no 
fragile  Christmas  tree  ball  which  we  should  handle  with  considerable 
national  boundaries.  Let  us  on  Ear th   then  use  the  Communications 
Revolution to  break  down  the  barr iers  which  separate  us,  so tha t   all  of 
Earth‘s  people  w i l l   be  truly  brothers.’’  ( C R ,  10/6/69,  E8190-2;  NASC 
P IO )  
Apollo  I 1  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  and 
Michael Collins  and   wives  arrived  a t  Las  Palmas,  Canary  Islands,  for 
two-day  rest  before  proceeding  to 
r id   and  meeting with  Gen.  Fran-  
our.  (AP,  NYT,  10 /6 /69 )  
cisco  Franco  dur ing   38-day  goo 
USAF  had  awarded  three-year,  $2O-million  contract  to  North  American 

327 

October  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Rockwell Corp.  Rocketdyne Div.  to  design new  rocket  engine  to  power 
payloads  in   space,  Business  Week   said.  United  Aircraft’s  P ra t t   & 
Whitney  Div.  was  also  working  on  concept,  magazine  believed.  (Bu s  
W k ,  10 /4 /69)  
October  5: GSFC  scientists  and   Smithsonian  Institution  ecologist Dr.  Helmut 
K.  Buechner planned  to  use  female elk  named Moe  for  first  experiment 
in  tracking  animals  by  satellite,  New  York  T imes   said.  Wearing  23-lb 
instrumentation  around  neck,  elk  was  expected  to  migrate  from  point 
in  Wyoming  to  national  elk  refuge  south  of  Yellowstone  Pa rk   at 
distance.  (Teltsch,  NYT ,   10/5/69,  16 )  
Jackson  Hole,  Wyo.-100-mi 
October  5-11:  International  Astronautical  Federation 
( IAF )   held  20th 
Congress in  Mar  del  Plata,  Argentina. 
Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned 
Space  Flight,  gave  Invited  Lecture  Oct.  6  on  Apollo  program,  space 
benefits,  Apollo  Applications  program,  and  lunar   exploration.  Apollo 
Applications program  would  “study  the  ear th   through  the  use  of  a  six 
lens  multispectral  camera  installation.  On  Apollo  9  some  of  the  rudi- 
mentary  work  w a s  done  using four lenses.  50% more kinds  of  informa- 
tion  will  be  brought  back  by  the  crews  of  Apollo  Applications.  Because 
almost everything on  earth  has  a  different  reflective  quality,  as  distinc- 
tive  as  a  signature  o r   a  fingerprint,  results  from  this photographic  ex- 
ploration  can  be  expected  to  yield  rich  rewards.  Many  of  the  earth 
sciences  look  to  this  kind  of  information  for  answers  to  previously 
unanswerable  questions.  Hydrologists  are   interested  in  discovering not 
only  the  depth,  but  also  the  temperature  of  the  waters  of  the  world, 
and   these  conditions  can  be  ascertained  from  space.  Warm  water  a t-  
tracts  certain  species  of  fish,  so  fishermen  are   also  interested  in   these 
experiments. 
“Agronomists  believe  that  soil  chemistry  will  reveal  itself  on  a 
large  scale  in  certain  kinds  of  filtered  photography.  Agriculturists 
know  that  different  crops,  a t  different stages  of  their  development  and 
in   different  states  of  health,  reflect  distinctive  amounts  of  light.  They 
hope,  using  the  photographs  we  will  take,  to  get  some  measure  of  the 
world’s  crop,  as  well  as  some  knowledge  of  i ts   condition.  Geologists, 
who  have found clues to mineral deposits  in   the  Gemini  and Apollo pic- 
tures,  look  to  this more  sophisticated  photography  for  additional  infor- 
mation,  and  for  distinctions  which  will  eventually permit  certain  kinds 
of  prospecting from  space. Cartographers  and  Geodesists  are   interested 
in   everything  from  urban  sprawl  to  continental  drift.” 
Sun   would  be  prime  target  for  exploration  in  Apollo  Applications 
program,  with  experiments  conducted  by  astronaut-astronomers  using 
Apollo  Telescope  Mount  (A TM )   in   orbit.  “For  the  first  time  we  will 
have  a  massive  set  of  instruments  with  high  resolution  for  looking  in 
some  depth  and   detail  a t   the  activities  of  the  sun  from  beyond  the 
veil  of  the  earth‘s  atmosphere.”  Program  would  consist  of  three  mis- 
sions  in to   near-earth  space,  one  of  2 8  days  and  two  of  56  days  each. 
First  step  would  be  establishment  of  Sa turn   V  workshop  in   orbit, 
planned  for  March  1972 launch,  followed  by  launches  of  solar  panels, 
ATM,  and   crew  of  three  for  28-day  stay.  Second  manned  mission  was 
scheduled  for  launch  about  three  months  after  first,  with  th ird   to  
follow  one month  after  re turn   of  second  crew.  (Tex t)  

328 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  5-11 

*  At  Th ird   International  History  of  Astronautics  Symposium  Oct.  10, 
organized  by  IAF  in   connection  with  its  20th  Congress,  A.  Ingemar 
Skoog  of  Swedish  Interplanetary Society traced  rocket  development  in  
Sweden  from  1807,  when  military  first  understood  possibilities  of 
rockets  in   warfare,  to  mid-l860s,  when  rockets  were  taken  out  of 
service.  “An  examination  of  the  rockets  preserved  a t   the  Army  Mu- 
seum  in   Stockholm, has  shown  that  all  1 4  rockets  are   still  fitted  with 
their  original propellant.  This will  be  tested  by  propellant  experts later 
this  year  i n   order  to   find  out  the  properties  of  a  140  years  old  pro- 
pellant.”  (Tex t)  
W.  Geisler  of  Polish  Astronautical  Society  had  submitted  paper  on 
history  and   development  of  rocket  technology  and  astronautics  in  
Poland  before  1949:  use  of  rockets  on  Polish  territory  by  Tar tars  
in  13th  century  probably  had  marked  introduction  of  use  of  rockets 
in  Europe.  (R6sum6) 
Frederick  I.  Ordway,  111,  of  Univ.  of  Alabama  delivered  paper 
“The  Alleged  Contributions  of  Pedro  E.  Paulet  to  Liquid  Propellant 
Rocketry.”  “Paulet,  a  Peruvian  chemical  engineer-turned-diplomat, 
spent  much  of  his  professional  foreign  service  career  in   Europe.  . . . 
his  claim  to  being  a  precursor  of  liquid  propellant  rocketry  rests  in 
a  letter  he   wrote  from  Rome  on  the  23rd  of  August  1927  that  was 
published  in   the  7  October  1927  issue  of  the  Lima,  Peru,  newspaper 
El  Cornercio.  Therein,  he  describes  liquid  propellant  rocket  engine 
experiments h e   had  conducted  . . . in   Par is   thirty  years  earlier.  . . . 
Relying  on  this  source  and  derivatives,  many  subsequent  writers  have 
accorded  Paulet  a  perhaps  undeserved  place  in  the  history  of  rock- 
etry.”  (Summary)  
October  6: U.S.S.R.  launched Meteor  ZZ weather  satellite  from  Plesetsk  into 
orbit  with  676-km  (420.1-mi)  apogee,  619-km  (384.6-mi)  perigee, 
97.6-min  period,  and  81.2’  inclination.  Powered  by  solar  cells,  satel- 
lite  was  designed to trace cloud  cover,  detect  presence  of  snow  on  dark 
and  daylight  sides  of  earth,  and   record  radiated  and   reflected  heat 
from  atmosphere.  (GSFC SSR,  10/15/69;  SBD,  10/7/69,  166 ;   A v  
W k ,  10 /20 /69 ,191)  
President  Nixon  announced  Ruben  F.  Mettler,  Executive  Vice  President 
of  TRW   Inc.,  would  be   Chairman  of  new  Presidential  Task  Force  on 
Science Policy  [see  Sept.  221.  (PD, 10/13/69,  1376)  
0  Apollo  8 Astronaut  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  and  wife  inspected  container 
vessel  American  Astronaut  in   London  and   signed  autographs for  long- 
shoremen.  Mrs.  Lovell  had   christened  vessel  in   April.  (Reuters,  C 
T r ib ,  10 /7 /69)  
Oc tober   7:  Anglo-French  supersonic  airliner  Concorde  001   reached  730 
mph  dur ing   110-min flight  from Toulouse,  France.  I t   was  second  time 
[see  Oct.  11.  (UPI ,   W  S tar ,  
aircraft  had  broken  sound  barrier 
10/8/69,  A13) 
*  Space  Power  Facility,  with  world’s  largest  high-vacuum chamber  (100-ft 
dia  by  120-ft height,  containing  800,000  cu  f t ) ,   and   Spacecraft  Pro-  
pulsion  Research  Facility  were  opened  officially  a t   LeRC.  Space  Power 
test  large,  space  electric  power  generating  systems  and  
Facility-to 
spacecraft-would 
first  test  Brayton  cycle  power  system  operated  with 
nuclear  isotope  o r   solar  heat.  Facility  could  produce  equivalent  of 

329 

October  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS, 1969 

vacuum  i n   space  100  to  300  m i   above  earth.  Propulsion  Research 
Facility  would  be  used  first  for  development  of  Centaur,  2nd-stage 
rocket vehicle.  (LeRC  Release 69-54) 
House  passed  384  to  5  amended  N  1970  NSF authorization  of  $477.3 
million.  Amendments  had  reduced  authorization  by  $3.3 million.  (CR, 
10/7/69,  H9151-62) 
*  US. and   U.S.S.R. 
in   Geneva  announced  agreement  on  draf t   treaty  to 
ban  placing  of  nuclear  weapons  on  world‘s  seabeds.  Proposed  treaty 
would  be  discussed  by  Geneva  Disarmament  Conference  and  U.N. 
General  Assembly.  I t   would  come  into  effect  when  ratified  by  U S . ,  
U.S.S.R.,  and   20  other  nations.  (Roberts,  W   Pos t ,   10/8/69,  A l )  
*  ApoZZo  I I   astronauts  placed  wreath  a t   Christopher Columbus  monument 
in   Madrid  and   la ter   met  Gen.  Francisco  Franco  and   Prince  Juan  
Carlos during  world  tour.  (UPI ,   W  S tar ,   10/7/69,  A6) 
*  Boeing Co.  had  responded  to   Federal  budget  trimming  by  eliminating 
11,230  jobs  between  Jan.  1 and  Sept.  26  and   would  continue  cutting 
back  1,000  jobs  monthly  well  into  1970,  Wushington  Post  said.  Re- 
duction  in   work  force  from  high  of  101,554 on  Jan.  19,  1968,  to 
83,765  on  Sept.  26,  1969, had  been  blow  to  Seattle.  Boeing  President 
T.  A.  Wilson  saw  problem  for  next  five  years  as  national  desire  to  
retrench,  with  mili&y  spending  under  especially  tight  rein.  (Wilson, 
W  Pos t ,   10/7/69,  A l )  
DOD  announced  General Electric Co.  was  being  awarded  $1,300,000  sup-  
plemental  agreement  to  previously  award id   USAF  contract  for   R ~ ; D  
of  Mark  12   reentry  vehicle.  Contract  was  managed  by  SAMSO.  (DOD  
Release  842-69)  
October  8:  France  successfully  tested  Diamant-B  carrier  rocket  1st  stage 
( 6 1 7 )  for  112 secs  a t  Vernon, France.  Test was  first  in   series  of  four 
planned  i n   initial  phase  of  qualification  testing.  (Znteravia,  11/69, 
1751)  
In  Pa r i s  during world  tour  ApoZZo  11 astronauts were  made  chevaliers  of 
French  Legion  of  Honor  by  Premier  Jacques  Chaban-Delmas and  met 
with  French  President Georges  Pompidou.  Pa r i s  Mayor  Etienne  Royer 
de   Vericourt  presented  them  with  city’s  Gold  Medal.  (UP I ,   C T r i b ,  
10 /9 /69)  
*  Two-man,  15-ft  submarine  Nekton  with  seven-inch  knife  taped  to  its 
mechanical  claw,  sliced  line  to  free  research  submarine  Deep  Quest, 
and   four-man  crew  trapped  on  ocean  floor  off  San  Diego,  Calif.,  for  
12  hrs.  Deep  Quest,  developed  by  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  for  under- 
sea  research  and   salvage, had  been  demonstrating  i t s   ability  to   raise 
and   lower  objects  when  its  propeller  became  snarled.  (AP,  W  Pos t ,  
10/9/69,  A3 )  
0  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  introduced  S.  3003,  “to  provide  for 
more effective control  over  the  expenditure of  funds by  the  Department 
of  Defense  and  the Kational  Aeronautics and  Space Administration  for 
independent  research  and   development.”  Measure was  referred  t o   Sen- 
a te  Committee on  Armed  Services.  ( C R Y  10/8/69,  S12100) 
Astronaut  Anthony  W.  England  suffered  symptoms  of  bends  while  test- 
ing  moon-walking equipment  in   vacuum chamber  a t  MSC.  NASA spokes- 
man  sa id   cause  of  symptoms,  which  disappeared  as  soon  a s   chamber 
was  returned to  full  atmospheric pressure,  was  not known.  England was 
placed under  24-hr observation.  ( UPI,  W  Pos t ,   10/9/69,  A28) 

330 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  8 

First  FB-111A  strategic  bomber  was  delivered  to  USAF  Strategic  Air 
Command  (SAC)   by  AFSC  in   Carswell  AFB, Tex.,  ceremonies.  Aircraft 
were  scheduled to become  operational dur ing   spring  and  summer 1970. 
General  Dynamics  Corp.  was  prime  contractor.  (General  Dynamics 
Release  1475)  
October  9:  Joseph  P.  Loftus,  Jr.,  Manager  of  MSC  Program  Engineering 
Office,  described  plans  for  fu ture   Apollo  lunar   exploration  a t   MSC 
press  conference.  Technological  objectives  were  to  increase  scientific 
payload  to  lunar  orb i t   and   to   lunar  surface,  permit  high  flexibility 
in   landing  site  selection,  increase  lunar  orb i t   and   lunar  surface  stay 
time,  increase  lunar   surface  mobility  w i t h   self-propelled  lunar   roving 
vehicle,  develop  and   demonstrate  advanced  techniques  and  hardware 
for  expanded manned  space mission capabilities,  develop techniques for 
achieving  point  landings,  and   demonstrate  closed-loop  onboard  navi- 
gation  capability  a s   applicable  to  advanced  missions. 
Scientific  objectives  were  to  investigate  ma jor   classes  of  lunar  sur-  
face  features,  surface processes,  and  regional  problems;  collect  samples 
a t   each  site  for   analyses on  ea r th ;   establish  network  of  surface  instru- 
mentation  to  measure  seismic  activity,  heat  flow,  and   disturbance  in 
moon’s  axis  of  rotation;  survey  and measure  lunar  surface  from  lunar  
orb i t  with  high-resolution  photography  and  remote  sensing;  investigate 
near-moon  environment  and   interaction  of  moon  with  solar  wind; 
map  lunar  gravitational  field  and  internally  produced  magnetic  field; 
and  detect  atmospheric  components  resulting  from  neutralized  solar 
wind  and   micrometeoroid  impacts. 
Achievement  of  scientific  objectives would  be  facilitated  by  addition 
of  scientific  instrument  module  ( S IM )   under  service  module  sector 
door.  SIM  would  consist  of  scientific  instruments  mounted  on  shelves 
behind  door,  which  would  be  deployed  pyrotechnically  after  crew  left 
lunar  surface.  Spacecraft  would  also  use  new  modular  equipment 
storage  assembly  (M E SA ) .   “Unlike  the  existing  MESA  i t  is  modular  and 
people,  instead  of  having  to  take  many  things  out  of  compartments and  
stick  them  into  a  bag  ; . . here  you  simply  take  hold  of  a  handle  . . . 
and   lift  out  a n   entire  shelf.  On  that  shelf  a re   all  the  things  required 
for  the  next  EVA  period.  So, it  is   one movement  instead  of  a  dozen.” 
One  tank  of  hydrogen  and   one  tank  of  oxygen  would  be  added  to 
extend  mission  capability  to   161/2  days.  Since  each  EVA  period  would 
increase  up  to   5  hrs   and   total  lunar  stay  time  would  increase  up  to 
200 hrs,  lithium hydroxide  would  be  increased for   portable life-support 
system  and  for  spacecraft,  and   insulation  would  be  increased  on  top 
of  spacecraft  around  docking  tunnel.  Minor  changes  would  be  made 
to  interior  garments  so  crew  would  have  more  suitable  environment 
and   crew  would  remove  spacesuits  and  sleep  in   hammocks  dur ing   rest 
periods on  lunar   surface.  (Transcr ip t)  
*  Boosted  Arcas  I1  sounding  rocket  launched by  NASA  from  Resolute  Bay, 
Canada,  carried  GSFC  payload  to   68.4-mi  (110-km)  altitude  to  obtain 
electron-density  and   collision-frequency  profiles  of  high-latitude  quiet 
D  region  and   positive  ion-density  measurements.  Rocket  and  instru- 
ments  performed  satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
Lunar  scientist  Dr.  Harold  C.  Urey  said  in   lecture  a t  Univ.  of  California 
a t   San  Diego  that  new  evidence had  been  uncovered  during  Apollo  11 
mission  that  moon  had  been  formed  by  collision  process  begun  about 

331 

October  9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

4.5  billion  yrs  ago.  Water  might  have  been  present  on  moon  tempo- 
rarily  and  might  still  be   beneath  lunar   surface.  Information was  to  be 
made public by  NASA  in   January   1970.  (UPI, W  Pos t ,   10/10/69,  A 5 )  
0  Apollo  11  astronauts,  welcomed  by  crowds  in   Amsterdam  dur ing   world 
tour,  presented  Queen  Juliana  with  plaque  similar  to  one  they  left  on 
lunar  surface.  I n   Brussels  later  in   day  they  were  decorated  by  King 
Baudouin  with  insignia  of  the  Order  of  Leopold,  nation’s  highest 
honor.  (AP,  Huntmille  T imes ,   10/9/69;  UPI, W  Star,  10/10/69,  A9) 
* ARC  Director,  Dr.  Hans  Mark,  had  announced  appointment  of  Executive 
Assistant  Director  Loren  G.  Bright  as  Director  of  newly  established 
Directorate  of  Research  Support,  ARC  Astrogrum  reported.  Divisions 
i n  new  directorate included  computation,  research  facilities  and   equip- 
ment,  and   technical  services.  ( ARC  Astrogrum,  10/9/69,  1) 
Sen.  Edward  W.  Brooke  (R-Mass.)  delivered  Landon  Lecture  at  Kansas 
s t a t e  Univ.:  “With  this  new  generation  of  weapons  [MIRVs]   about  to 
sprout  from  the  arsenals  of  the  Soviet Union  and   the  United  States,  I 
have  been  joined  by  almost  half  the  Senate  and  a  sizable  number  of 
House members  in   calling  for  a  joint moratorium  on  flight  tests  of  the 
so-called MIRV  systems.”  (Text) 
October  10: Nuclear energy  in   space was  discussed in   address  opening U S .  
Technical  Forum  a t  Nuclex  69  in   Basel,  Switzerland, by  Milton  Klein, 
Manager  of  AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Office  and   Director 
of  AEC  Space  Nuclear  Systems  Div.:  “A  forward  looking  space  pro- 
gram  such  as  that  envisioned by  the  Task  Group  [see  Sept.  15,  171 
will  mean  growing  reliance  on  nuclear  systems.  . . .  As  an   integral 
part  of  a new  capability  for  space transportation,  we  look to  the  nuclear 
rocket  to  provide  the  propulsion  to  move  large  payloads  from  low 
ear th   orbit  to  geosynchronous  orbit  or  to  lunar  orbit  to  support  ex- 
tended  lunar  exploration.  It  also  offers  major  advantages  for  trans- 
porting  heavy  payloads  into  deep  space.”  NERVA  development  was 
being  initiated,  with  nuclear  engine  expected  to  be  in   operation  in 
late  1970s.  “ I t   is  also  possible  to  envision  ultimately  the  use  of  a  con- 
trolled  thermonuclear,  or  fusion,  reaction  for  producing  propulsion 
energy.  Obviously  development of  such  a  propulsion  system  for  space 
. Apollo  11 astronauts  lunched  with  King  Olav  of  Norway  in  Oslo  before 
would  come  only  after  the  development  of  a  useful  controlled  thermo- 
nuclear  reaction  in   a ground  based  plant,  a  goal  that  has not  yet  been 
achieved.”  (Tex t)  
spending  weekend  a t   cottage  of  Norwegian  Defense  Minister  Otto 
Greig Tidemand  dur ing  world  tour.  (UPI, W  Star,  10/10/69,  A9) 
0  President  Nixon  announced  James  H.  Wakelin,  Jr.,  former  Assistant 
Secretary  of  the Navy  for  R&D,  would  be  chairman  of  new  Presidential 
Task Force  on Oceanography  [see  Sept. 221.  ( P D ,  10/13/69,  139 34 )  
October  11-18:  U.S.S.R.’s  Soyuz  VZ, carrying  Cosmonauts Georgy  S.  Sho- 
nin  and  Valery  N.  Kubasov, was  successfully  launched  from  Baikonur 
a t  4:lO  pm  Baikonur  time into  orb i t   with  229-km  (142.3-mi)  apogee, 
194-km  (120.6-mi)  perigee,  88.8-min  period,  and   51.7’ 
inclination. 
Tass  said  spacecraft  carried  equipment  to   test  methods  of  welding 
materials  i n   weightlessness  and   did  not  carry   docking  equipment used 
on  Soyuz ZV and   Soyuz  V  Jan.  14-18.  Western  speculation,  later  con- 
firmed,  was  that  Soyuz  V I   would  rendezvous w i t h   other  spacecraft. 

332 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
October  11-18 
Soyuz VZZ,  carrying  Cosmonauts Anatoly  V.  Filipchenko, Vladislav 
N.  Volkov,  and   Viktor  V.  Gorbatko,  was  launched  from  Baikonur  a t  
3 :45   pm  Oct.  12   into  orb i t   with  217-km  (134.8-mi)  apogee,  200-km 
( 124.3-mi)  perigee,  88.4-min  period,  and   51.6”  inclination.  Tass  said 
spacecraft’s  mission  was  “maneuvering  in   the  orbit,  staging  joint 
navigation  observations of  the  spaceships . . . in   group  flight,  observa- 
tion  of  celestial  bodies  and   the  horizon  of  the  Earth,  determination  of 
the   real  luminosity  of  stars,  observation  of  changes  in   illumination 
created by  the  Sun  and other  scientific experiments.” 
Th ird   spacecraft,  Soyuz  VZZZ,  carrying  Cosmonauts  Vladimir  A. 
Shatalov  and   Dr.  Aleksey  S.  Yeliseyev,  was  launched  from  Baikonur 
a t  3:29  pm  Oct.  13 into  orb i t  with  278-km  (172.7-mi)  apogee,  215-km 
( 133.6-mi)  perigee,  89.4-min  period,  and   51.6”  inclination.  I t s   mis- 
sion,  Tass  said,  was  “comprehensive simultaneous  scientific  studies  in  
near-terrestrial space in  accordance with  an  extensive program ; testing 
of  the  complex  system  of  controlling  a  simultaneous  group  flight  of 
three  space  ships;  mutual  maneuvering  of  ships in   orbit  with  the  aim 
of  solving  a  number  of  problems  of  developing  the  piloted  space 
system.”  TV  viewers  received  announcement  of  flights  about  30  min 
after  launches  and  saw  video-tape  recordings  of  launches  about  1% 
hrs   later.  Ultimate  goal  of  three-spacecraft  mission  was  not  given.  In  
prelaunch  interview  shown  on  TV  several  hours  after  launch,  Dr. 
Yeliseyev  said  group  mission  would  conduct  experiments  leading  to 
“creation  of  still more powerful orbiting stations.”  Tass  reported  crews 
had  checked  out  equipment  and   communicated with  each other.  Soyuz 
VZ  was  conducting  medical-biological tests,  Soyuz  V I 1  was  observing 
and  photographing  ear th   and   celestial  bodies,  and   Soyuz  VI11  was 
conducting  research  on  polarization  of  solar  light  reflected  by 
atmosphere. 
On  Oct.  Id  Tass  reported  Soyuz  VZZ  and   Soyuz  V l lZ   had  moved 
close  together,  carried out  “mutual  observation-photography and movie 
filming,”  studied  “possibility  of  exchanging  information  with  the  aid 
of  light  signals  and  visceral  optical  methods,”  conducted  series  of 
medical  experiments, and   observed  “effect  of  erosion  by  micrometeor- 
ites  on  the  condition  of  illuminators  and  optic  systems  of  the  craft.” 
On Oct.  1 5  spacecraft  approached  to  within 500 yds  during  rendezvous, 
while  Soyuz  VZ  hovered  nearby. 
On  Oct.  16   Radio  Moscow  announced  Soyuz  V I   had  successfully 
completed  mission  and  had  softlanded in  preset  area  100 mi  northwest 
of  Karaganda  a t  12:52 pm  Moscow  time.  No  information  on  other  two 
S o y a  spacecraft was  given until  Tass  announced  softlanding  of  Soyuz 
VZl  a t   12:36  pm  Oct.  1 7   and   of  Soyuz  VZZZ  a t   12:lO  pm  Oct.  18. 
Western  officials  speculated missions  had  not  achieved  all  objectives. 
Tass  said  all  major  tasks  were  carried  out  with  “high  efficiency.” 
(Gwertzman,  NYT,  10/12-14,  18/69;  SBD,  10/14/69,  195;  10/ 
21/69,  230;  Reuters,  W Post,  10/15-16/69;  AP,  W  Star,  10/16/69, 
A l ;   Reston,  LA  Times, 10/19/69,  A2;  GSFC  SSR,  10/15/69; 
10/31/69) 
October  I I :  Apollo  12  Astronauts  Charles Conrad,  Jr.,  Richard  F.  Gordon, 
Jr.,  and   Alan  L.  Bean  held  press  conference  a t   MSC.  Code  names  f o r  
Apollo  12  LM and   C M  had  been  selected,  they  said,  from  entries  sub- 

333 

October  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

mitted  by  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  and  Grumman  Aerospace 
Corp.  employees.  CM   would  be  called  “Yankee  Clipper”  and   LM, 
“Intrepid.” 
Major  differences  from  ApoZZo  11  mission  would  be  increase  in 
geology  and   photography.  Detailed  documented  sample  collection 
would  be  team  effort.  Description  would  tell  geologist  about  rock’s 
location,  includidg  how  i t   was  related  to  other  rocks,  whether i t   was 
partially  covered,  and   why  it  attracted  attention.  Astronauts  would 
carry   bags  and   tongs  a t   all  times  dur ing   EVA  to  collect  rocks  when 
sighted  instead  of  being  limited  to  collecting  dur ing   specific  period 
of  EVA. 
Photographic  activities,  described  by  Conrad  as  “the  world’s  great- 
est  zero-G  juggling  act,”  would  include  multispectral  photography  of 
lunar  surface,  using  four  Hasselblad cameras  in  hatch  window.  Three 
cameras  would  have  black-and-white  film  with  filters;  fourth  would 
have  infrared  film.  Purpose of  camera  setup,  Gordon  explained,  was  to  
“photograph  the  illuminated  side  of  the  moon  from  one  minute  after 
sunrise  to  one  minute  prior  to  sunset  in  a  stiff  manner.”  Every  20 
secs  “cameras  would  be  activated,  to  give  complete  s tr ip   photography 
across  the  surface  of  the moon.  . . .  The  big  step  photography  I  think 
is  probably  one  of  the  most  important  things  we’re  doing  on  this 
flight.  . . .” (Transcr ip t ;   MSC  Release  69-68) 
*  At  Fourth  Annual  AVLABS  Awards  Banquet  of  USA  Aviation  Material 
Laboratories  in  For t   Eustis,  Va.,  NASA  Deputy Associate  Administrator 
fo r   Aeronautics Charles W.  Harper  discussed NASA-USA  cooperation  in  
aeronautics.  “Aviation,  both  military  and  civil,  has  suffered  in  past 
years  from  a  scarcity  of  new  young blood  bringing  new  ideas  and  new 
tra in ing   to  research.  For  several  years  NASA  has   been  constrained  by 
personnel  limits  and  so  unable  to  bring  this  kind  of  new  talent  into 
i ts   aeronautics  problem.  A  joint  Army-NASA  program  may  provide 
a  unique  opportunity  to  increase  the  interest  of  our  universities  in  the 
challenges of  aviation  technology  and  to  br ing  the  new  scientists  they 
tra in   into  the  job  of  finding  solutions.”  (Tex t)  
October  12:  Walter Sullivan  described mystery of  cosmic  rays  in  New  Y o r k  
T imes .  “No   natural  phenomena  with  which  we  have  intimate  contact 
a re   more  awesome.”  Scores  of 
these  high-energy  particles  flashed 
through  human  body  every  second  with  energy  capable  of  piercing 
six  feet  of  lead.  Some  believed  them  accountable  for   aging  process. 
Recent  Australian  observations  had  shown  some  particles  (mostly 
protons)  h i t   atmosphere  with  100-billion-bev energy.  Princeton  Univ. 
physicists  Dr.  Jeremiah  P.  Ostriker  and   Dr.  James  E.  Gunn  had  SUE ” 
gested  pulsars  might  be  superaccelerators  of  cosmic  ray  particles. 
(NYT,  10/12/69,8) 
October  12-13:  ApoZZo  11  astronauts  visited  West  Germanv  during  world 
tour.  They  were  escorted  to  Berlin  Wall  by  Mayor‘Klaus  Schuetz. 
(NA SA   EH;  B Sun ,   10/14/69) 
October  13:  MSC  announced  award  of  $4.1-million  modification  to  IBM 
Corp.  contract  for   design,  development,  implementation, maintenance, 
(RTTC)  which  sup- 
and   operation  of  real-time  computer  complex 
ported  Apollo  lunar  landing  missions.  Modification  definitized  re- 
quirements  to  support  Apollo  lunar  surface  experiments  package 

334 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  13 

( ALSEP)  and   continyed  work  under  multi-inventive  arrangement  cov- 
ering  cost,  performance,  schedule,  and   equipment  management.  (M SC  
Release  69-69)  
0  NASA  and   DOT award  of  $165,908  contract  to   Booz-Allen  Applied  Re- 
search Inc.  for   six-month study  of  total U S .   investment in  aeronautical 
R&D  since  1945  was  announced  by  Secretary  of  Transportation  John 
A.  Volpe.  Jo in t   effort was  to  develop  methods  of  assessing  national 
benefits  which  accrued  from  RLW  development  expenditures.  (DOT  
Release  22269) 
a  Flaws  i n  F-111s  produced  to  date were  detailed  by L/G  John W.  O’Neill, 
Vice  Commander  of  AFSC,  and   L/G  George  S.  Boylan,  Jr.,  Deputy 
Chief  of  Staff , Programs  and   Resources,  USAF  Hq.,  in   testimony before 
Senate Committee on  Appropriations.  Aircraft  were  seriously  short  in 
engine  power  for  nonnuclear  missions.  Their  weight  had  grown  with- 
out  commensurate  engine power  increase  and   thus  acceleration  time 
was now  four minutes.  Outlay of  $80 million was  necessary  to  overhaul 
450  F-111s  to  correct  serious  flaw  in   wing  boxes.  (Testimony) 
lzves t ia   published  article  by  Soviet space scientist Alexander Koval,  Vice 
President  of  International  Astronomical  Commission.  I t   was  “high 
time”  that  space knowledge  was  used  for  advancement of  communica- 
tions,  meteorology,  geodesy,  and   navigation.  Since  space exploration 
was  not  cheap,  simpler  and   more  reliable  experiments  must  be  tried 
before  complex  and  expensive  ones.  Three  practical  applications  of 
space  research  were  industrial  use  of  high  vacuum  and   absolute  cold, 
industrial  use  of  rocketry  innovations,  and   putting  “production-tech- 
nical  complexes”  in  space.  ( W Post,  10/15/69,  A21) 
October  14:  U.S.S.R.  launched Intercosmos  I  into orb i t  with  626-km  (389.0- 
m i )   apogee,  253-km  (157.2-mi)  perigee,  93.3-min  period,  and  48.3’ 
inclination.  Spacecraft  carried  experiments  from  U.S.S.R.,  East  Ger- 
many,  and  Czechoslovakia,  including  x-ray  spectrograph  to  determine 
which  areas  of  sun  were  chief  producers  of  x-rays  and  whether 
these emissions were  polarized.  It  reentered  Jan.  2,  1970.  (GSFC SSR, 
10/15/69;  1 /15 /70 ;   SBD,  10/15/69,  203;  Interavia,  11/69,  1751)  
0  Apollo  1 1   astronauts  were  received  a t   Buckingham  Palace  by  Queen 
Elizabeth  dur ing   their  visit  to  U.K.  on  22-nation  tour.  (Reuters, 
B  Sun, 10 /15 /69)  
October  15: Astrobee  1500 sounding  rocket launched by  NASA  from Wallops 
Station  carried  102-lb GSFC  payload  to  1,600.0-mi  (2,575-km)  altitude 
and  transmitted  35   min  of  data.  Primary  objectives were  to  measure 
cosmic  radio  noise  intensities  over  600-khz  to  3-mhz  frequency  band, 
continue  evaluation  of  Astrobee  performance,  and   verify  new  Alcor 
1B  2nd  stage.  Secondary  objective  was  to  test  receiver  system  for 
Explorer  XXXV I I I   Radio  Astronomy  Explorer  (launched  July  4, 
1968). Solid-fueled  Astrobee  1500 weighed  11,600  lbs  and  was  being 
developed  to  provide  research  rocket  to  carry  heavy  scientific  pay- 
loads  to  h igh   altitudes  with  relatively  easy  handling.  (W S   Release 
69-17;  NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
0  NASA  acknowledged  i t   was  reviewing  proposed  orbital  flight  of  monkey 
with  transplanted  heart.  Pro jec t   was  one  of  two  based  on  work  of 
Dr. Christiaan Barnard, South African surgeon and heart  transplant  pio- 
neer.  Second  Barnard-based  study  would  deal  with  effects  of  space 

335 

October  15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

flight  on mechanism  of  rejection  of  foreign tissues  in   living  organisms. 
Both  proposals  had  been  submitted  by  General  Electric  Co.  Reentry 
Systems Div.  ( W Post,  10/16/69) 
Washington Post  reported  interview  with  L/G  Samuel C.  Phillips,  Com- 
mander  of  USAF  Space and  Missile Systems Organization  (SAMSO)   and 
former  NASA  Apollo  Program  Director.  Space  shuttle  was  SAMSO’S  top 
priority  program.  New  family  of  spaceships  was  being  roughed  out 
on  drawing  boards.  “From  a  military  standpoint,  we  need  to  be 
aggressive  advocates  of  the  capability  to  take  a  look  a t   and   deal  as 
necessary  with  space vehicles  of  another  country.”  USAF  and NASA  were 
dividing  labor  on  space  shuttle  program,  which  would  cost  estimated 
$1 billion.  Pace  of  program  would  depend on  progress  toward  devel- 
opment of  reusable  rocket  engine which  would  not  burn  itself  out  as  i t  
hurtled  into  space,  LeRoy  E.  Day,  Chief  of  NASA  Space  Shuttle  Task 
Group,  said.  (Wilson,  W  Pos t ,   10/15/69,  A3) 
0  USAF  Space  and  Missile  Systems  Organization  ( SAMSO)   had  awarded 
$14,303,150  contract  to  General  Dynamics’  Convair  Div.  for  manu- 
launch  vehicles  for  NASA  and  for   con- 
facture  of  six  Atlas  (SLV-3C) 
version  of  one  USAF  launch  vehicle  (SLV-3) 
to  later  configuration, 
Convair  announced.  (Convair  Div  Release  1481) 
USAF  dedicated  365-ft-long,  $3.3-million  telescope  on  9,200-ft  elevation 
in  Sacramento Mountains  in  southeast New  Mexico.  Described  as most 
important  new  solar  observing  facility  constructed  in  U S .   in  decade, 
telescope  would  expand  solar  research  capability  of  USAF’S  Sacramento 
Peak  Observatory  and   provide  unequaled  image  stability.  Telescope 
would  be  used  for  research  on  solar  centers  of  activity-sunspots, 
magnetic  fields,  solar  flares,  and  plage  areas.  Sacramento  Peak  solar 
research  was  endeavoring  to  identify  causal  relationships  to  predict 
solar  energy  variations  and   environmental  disturbances  affecting  USAF  
operations.  Observatory  would  participate  in  Global  Flare  Pa tro l   Net- 
work  support  of  NASA’s Apollo  12   mission,  scheduled  for  Nov.  1 4  
launch.  Operated  by  ESSA’S  Space  Disturbance  Center  in   Boulder, 
Colo.,  network  would  give  warning  of  any  solar  flares  dangerous  to 
mission.  (USAF   Release  1 0 4 9 - 4 2 ;   AP,  NYT,  10/19/69,  6 2 ;  ESSA  PIO) 
0  Eastern  Airlines  became  first  U S .   carr ier   to  employ  antihijacking  system 
developed  by  FAA.  System  combined  knowledge  of  certain  behavioral 
tra i ts   of  hijackers  with  weapon  screening  device.  Program  was  joint 
effor t  of  FAA,  Air  Transport  Assn.,  and  Eastern,  with  assistance  from 
U S .  Marshal’s O5ce .   ( FAA   Release 69-119) 
Washington Post  editorial  sa id :   “I t   is  a  pity  that  the  Soviet Union  con- 
tinues  to  wrap  its  space  program  in   secrecy.  The  flights  of  Soyuz  6, 
7 and 8  were  launched  in  secret  and  on a mission also  kept  secret  from 
the  people  whose  labor  supports  the  government  that  is  paying  for  it. 
The  contrast  with  the  openness of  the  American  space program  could 
not  be  sharper  and   i t   is   our  lack  of  knowledge  of  what  the  Russians 
are   doing  that  makes  d i5cu l t   any  assessment  of  the  meaning  of  these 
flights.”  As  long  as  U.S.S.R.  preferred  to   operate  in   secret,  “there  is 
little  that  Americans  can  do  other  than  congratulate  them  on  their 
successes.”  ( W  Pos t ,   10/15/69,  A18 )  
Oc tober   16:  NASA  estimated  total  cost  of  Viking  project  a t   $750  million, 
Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science 
and  Applications,  sa id   in   testimony  before  House  Committee  on   Sci- 

336 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 
October  16 
ence  and   Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Space  Science  and  Applica- 
tions.  “We  have  . . . made  a  substantial  effort  to  accurately  determine 
funding  requirements  before  beginning  hardware  development.  We 
believe  our   estimates  a r e   sound  and  tha t   the  Viking  mission will  make 
ma jor   scientific  advance in   ou r   knowledge  about Mars.” 
While  earliest  estimates  for  Earth  Resources Technology  Satellite 
( ERTS)  program  were  about $50 million,  curren t  preliminary  estimates 
varied  from $100 to $200 million,  depending on  selection of  spacecraft, 
sensors,  telecommunications  network,  and   ground  data-handling  sy s -  
tem.  “The  study  and   design  effort  underway  will  provide  for  formal 
cost  definition  by  the  beginning  of  hardware  development  in  mid- 
1970.” 
In   Applications Technology Satellite  (ATS)  program,  18 experiments 
had  been  chosen  in  a i r   traffic  control  and   communications,  orbiting 
spacecraft  communications  and   tracking,  interference  measurements, 
and   meteorology.  Instructional  TV  experiment  would  be  conducted 
after  completion of  originally  planned  ATS-F  program  [see  Sept.  181. 
“We  a re   well  into  the  definition  phase  for  ATS  F & G ,   and  plan  to 
select  a  contractor  for  hardware  development  later  this  year  with  the 
launch  of  ATS  F  in   1972.”  (Tex t )  
e  Aerobee  150 MI  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA   from  WSMR   carried 
GSFC  payload  to  127.2-mi  (204.7-km)  altitude  to  obtain  high-resolution 
spectrograms  of  belt  and  sword  stars  of  Orion.  Excellent  spectrum  of 
s tar   zeta  in  Orion  was  obtained  and  good  spectrum  of  s tar   epsilon 
in  Orion was  recorded.  (NASA   Rpt SRL) 
e  Apo l lo   11 astronauts  and  wives  on  world  tour  had   private  audience with 
Pope  Pau l   V I   a t  Vatican  and   later  met  with  bishops  from  around  the 
world.  During  Papal  audience,  200  dissident  bishops  attending 
“shadow  synod”  near  Vatican  issued  denunciation  of  meeting.  Pope 
had  previously  refused  to  see  them.  Priests said  poor  people  of  world 
would  interpret  astronauts’  audience  with  Pope  to  mean  “that  the 
Church  is  ready  to  link  itself  with  power,  of  which  the  astronauts  a re  
the  symbol, and   that  she  refused  to  accept  direct  contact  with  weak -  
(AP ,   P  BUZZ, 
ness,  of  which  our  modest  assembly  is   a  symbol.” 
10 /16 /69)  
* U.S.S.R.  Cosmonauts Georgy  T.  Beregovoy  and   Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov 
would  arrive  i n   New  York  Oct.  20  to  begin  two-week  visit  to  U S .   as 
guests  of  astronauts,  Apollo  8 Astronaut  Frank  Borman  announced. 
He had  extended  invitation  dur ing  his  July  tour  of  U.S.S.R.  Beregovoy 
had  flown  Soyuz  ZZZ mission,  Oct.  26-30,  1968 ;   Feoktistov was  scien- 
tist  aboard  Oct.  12,  1964,  Voskhod  I  flight.  I t inerary   was  expected  to 
include  MSC,  Grand  Canyon,  California,  Detroit,  and  Washington, 
D.C.  (NASA   Release  69-141;  AP,  W Star,  10 /21 /69)  
0  At  LeRC  technical  conference  on  plasmas  and   magnetic  fields,  LeRC 
Electromagnetic  Propulsion  Div.  Chief  Wolfgang  E.  Moeckel  said, 
“Man  has   reached  the  Moon  and   there  is   now  some  talk  about going 
to  the  stars,  but  we  are   not  yet  ready  with  propulsion  systems  that  are  
suitable  for  exploring  our  own  solar  system.”  Manned  flights  to  dis- 
tant  planets  would  become  reasonable  only  with  advanced  nuclear  pro- 
pulsion  systems.  Thermonuclear  fusion  rocket,  i f   feasible,  could  reduce 
manned  Mars  mission  to  four   to  five  months and   journey  to  Jupiter 
o r  Sa turn   to  under  three  years.  Solar  electric  rockets  looked  promising 

337 

October  16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

for  unmanned  probes  to  planets  a s   remote  a s   Jupiter.  ( IRRC   Release 
69-58;  LeRC  PAO )  
* AIAA  announced  former  ARC  director  H.  Julian  Allen  had  been  named  to 
receive  1969  Daniel  Guggenheim  Medal.  Medal-presented 
annually 
by  AIAA,  American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers,  and   Society  of 
Automotive Engineers  for  achievement in   advancement of  aeronautics 
-would 
be  awarded  Oct.  21   dur ing   AIAA  Sixth  Annual  Meeting  and  
Technical Display in  Anaheim, Calif.  ( AIAA  Release) 
*  Dr.  Charles  Stark  Draper,  head  of  MIT’S  Instrumentation  Laboratory 
since  1940, said he   had  been  replaced because  “they  are   going  to  take 
the  lab”  out  of  defense work  and   ‘‘ konver t   it  to  civilian  purposes.’ ” 
MIT  had   set  up  committee  with  veto  power  over  research  projects. 
Prof.  Charles  L.  Miller  had  been  named  as  Dr.  Draper’s  successor. 
( AP,  W Pos t ,   10/17/69,  A3) 
Nobel  Prize  in   Physiology  or  Medicine  was  awarded  in   Stockholm, 
Sweden,  to  U.S.  scientists  Dr.  Max  Delbruck, Cal  Tech  biologist;  Dr. 
Alfred  D.  Hershey, director  of  Carnegie  Institution’s  genetics  research 
un i t ;   and  Dr.  Salvador E.  Luria, MIT  microbiologist.  Award  recognized 
discoveries  concerning  viruses  and  viral  diseases  including  reproduc- 
tive  processes  of  bacteriophage  virus  which  infected  bacteria.  Scien- 
tists would  share $73,000 cash Drize for  what  selection  committee called 
setting  “the  solid  foundation  o’n  which  molecular  biology  rests.”  (Lee, 
N Y T ,  10 /17 /69 ,1 )  
In   age  of  lunar  landings  there  was  boom  in  superstition  in  U.K.,  London 
Express  Service  reported  in   El  Paso  Herald-Post.  Psychological inves- 
tigation  of  140 Manchester Univ.  students  had  revealed  12%  believed 
in   old  superstitions  and  London  street  survey  had  shown  “pattern  of 
belief  incredible  a  few  years  ago.”  One  U.K.  astrologer  received  more 
than  100,000 letters  yearly;  three-fourths  of  population  studied  news- 
paper  horoscopes regularly;  and   3 out of  10 winners in   premium  bond 
stakes  reckoned  they  owed  winnings to  “lucky numbers  under  a  partic- 
ular star.”  (EZ Paso  Herald-Post,  10/16/69,  6 1 2 )  
*  Meteor  Crater,  Arizona,  640-acre  site  containing  crater  three  miles  in  
circumference  and  570  f t   deep,  was  attracting  200,000  visitors  an -  
nually as “finest  example on  earth”  of  what Apollo  11   astronauts found 
on  moon.  (Arline, W  Star,  10/16/69,  A21) 
Oc tober  17: Mariner Mars  1969 missions were adjudged  successful  by  NASA. 
Both spacecraft had  performed  satisfactorily  with  only minor  anomalies 
in   transit  to  Mars.  Mariner  V I   (launched  Feb.  24)  had  encountered 
Mars  July  31  and   had  returned  valuable  data  on  Mars  equatorial 
region.  All  scientific instruments except  one of  two  channels of  infrared 
spectrometer operated  successfully.  Mariner  VZI  (launched March  27)  
had  encountered Mars  Aug.  5 with  all  scientific  instruments  operating 
successfully  and  had   returned  good da ta   on Mars  southern  hemisphere. 
Scientific data  provided  by  two  spacecraft  included more  than  2,000 
uv  spectra  and  more  than  400  infrared  spectra  of  atmosphere  and  
surface.  Infrared   radiometer  returned  more  than  800  near-encounter 
and   100,000 far-encounter  surface  and   atmospheric measurements. TV 
cameras produced  198 high-quality  analog pictures  of  Martian  surface. 
Tracking  data  provided  measurements of  mass and   ephemeris of  Mars, 
bu t   degree  of  success  of  celestial mechanics  experiment  was  yet  to  be 
determined.  S-band  occultation  experiment  determined  electron  and 

338 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  17 

temperature  profile  of  ionosphere and  temperature  and   pressure  profile 
of  lower  atmosphere.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
*  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCCZZ  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t   with  320-km 
(198.8-mi)  apogee,  207-km  (128.6-mi) .perigee,  89.6-min  period,  and 
65.4”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Oct.  25.  ( GSFC SSR,  10 /31 /69 ;  
SBD,  10/20/69,  226) 
*  NASA  announced  appointment  of  L/G  Frank   A.  Bogart  (USAF,  Ret.)  as 
MSC Associate Director,  succeeding Wesley  L.  Hjornevik,  who  had  been 
nominated Deputy  Director  of  Office  of  Economic  Opportunity.  Bogart 
would  be   succeeded  as  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for   Manned 
Space  Flight  (Management)  a t   NASA  Hq.  by  Harry   H.  Gorman,  MSFC 
Deputy  Director  (Management).  (NASA  Release  69-144) 
At  Moscow meeting of  Franco-Soviet Grand  Commission,  formed  in  1967 
to  boost  cooperation,  France  and   U.S.S.R.  signed  protocol  to  join  in 
attempt  to  put  laser  reflector  on  moon.  French  laser  reflector  would  be 
launched  by  Soviet rocket.  (Reuters,  B Sun,  10 /18 /69)  
*  Cambridge  Univ.  astronomer  Fred  Hoyle  said  in   Science  indications 
that  igneous lunar  rocks were perhaps  a s  old  as meteorites might  “lead 
to  the  suggestion  that  the  moon  experienced  a  period  of  intense  vo l-  
canic  activity  early  in  its  history.”  There  was  no  need  for  volcanoes 
to   have  occurred  i n  situ  on  moon.  “Considerations  of  angular  monien- 
tum  show  tha t   planetary  material  probably  separated  from  the  sun 
when  the  radius  of  the  latter  was  considerably greater  than  its  present 
value.  Current  work  on  stellar  structure  requires  that  the  effective 
surface  temperature  or*  the  solar  condensation  be  substantially  con- 
stant  a t   3500”  to  4000°K  dur ing   this  phase,  independent  of  radius. 
Hence,  for  comparatively  large  radii  the  luminosity  would  have  been 
very  much  greater  than  the  present-day value,  so  that  primitive  plane- 
tary  material  could  well  have  been  considerably  hotter  than  would  be 
estimated for  material  a t   corresponding  distances  from  the  present-day 
sun.  . . .  I t   will  be  of  great  interest  to  see  if  the  recently  acquired 
samples  of  lunar  material  establish  the  existence  of  such  a  hot  phase, 
and,  if  so,  to  discover i f   any  features  of  terrestrial geochemistry, which 
have  hitherto  been  attributed  to  igneous  activities  on  the  ear th   itself, 
really  belong  to  the initial  primitive  phase  of  the  solar  system.”  ( S c i -  
ence,  10/17/69,  401) 
* Gravity  a t   ApoZZo  I I   lunar  landing  site  had  been  determined  to  be 
162,821,680  milligals  from  data  telemetered  to  ear th   by  LM  on  lunar 
surface,  MSC  scientist  Richard  L.  Nance  reported  in  Science.  Gravity 
w a s   measured  with  pulsed  integrating  pendulous  accelerometer.  Meas- 
urement  could  suggest order  of  magnitude  of  other anomalies, provide 
guide for  future  surveys,  and   indicate  degree of  homogeneity  of  moon. 
Radius  of  moon  a t   an   observation  point  could  be  determined  inde- 
pendently  of  other  methods  of  measurement. 
(Sc ience ,   10/17/69, 
384-5  ) 
*  Science  published  letter  from  Cornell  Univ.  astronomer  Dr.  Brian  T .  
O’Leary,  former  NASA  scientist-astronaut:  Comment  from  NASA   officials 
that  he   had  resigned  from  NASA  program  because  he  did  not  want  to 
become  pilot  was  oversimplification.  “The  budgetary  delays  in  plans 
for  scientific  space  flights  and   the  inability  to  carry   on  a  reasonable 
amount  of  scientific  research  in   the  meantime  were  equally  important 
reasons.”  (Sc ience ,  10/17/69,  313) 

339 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
October  17 
*  Univ.  of  Iowa  astronomers  Dr.  James  A.  Van  Allen  and Dr.  Richard  S. 
Yeh  reported  in   Science  that  abstract  measurements  made  by  lunar  
orbiting  Explorer  X X X V   dur ing   1967-68   showed  i t   unlikely  that 
alpha-particle  emissivity  of  moon  was  greater  than  0.064  per  square 
cm  per  sec per  steradian. And  it was  extremely unlikely  i t   was  greater 
than  0.128.  (Values were  0.1  and  0.2  of  1966 provisional  estimates  by 
H.  W.  Kraner  and  others.)  Result  implied  abundance  of  uranium-238 
i n   outer  crust  of  moon  was  much  less  than   typical  of  earth’s  litho- 
sphere,  though  i t   was  consistent  with  abundance  of  uranium-238  in 
terrestrial  basalt  o r   in   chondritic  meteorites.  (Sc ience ,   10/17/69, 
370-2) 
*  NASA  selected TRW  Inc.  and  General Electric  Co.  for  contract  negotiations 
to  conduct competitive studies  for  Ear th  Resources Technology Satellite 
( ERTS)  program.  Studies  would  determine  how  designs  of  existing 
spacecraft  could  be  adapted  with  minimum  modifications  to  ERTS  re- 
quirements  and   to  evaluate  orbital  and   ground-based  processing 
requirements.  Final  negotiations  were  expected  to  lead  to  two  $500,- 
000,  firm-fixed-price  contracts.  First  ERTS  flights  would  be  launched 
in  early  1972 to  evaluate  sensors  for  monitoring  ear th   resources  and 
to  assess  scope  and   requirements  of  eventual  Earth  Resources  Satellite 
( ER S )   program.  (NASA   Release  69-142) 
Dr.  Charles A.  Berry,  MSC  Director  of  Medical Research  and  Operations, 
received  Mission  of  the  Doctor  award,  presented  annually  by  Italy’s 
Carlo  Erba  Foundation  to  a  doctor  for  his  “human  qualities  and  tal- 
ent.”  (A P ,  N Y T ,  10 /17 /69)  
Washington  Evening  S tar   editorial  commented  on  US .-Ind ia   agreement 
to  provide  first  direct  TV  broadcasts  from  satellite  to  small  receiving 
stations  [see  Sept.  181:  “All  parties  involved  in   this  unusual  enter- 
prise  seem  confident i t  will  succeed.  If  they  are  proved  right,  the  whole 
idea  can  be  broadened  to  enrich  . . . every  land  on  every  continent 
where  there  is  need  to  spread  knowledge  and  forge  unifying  links 
(W   S ta r ,  
between  cities  and   isolated  hamlets  in  the  hinterland.” 
10/17/69,  A12) 
In  interview  published  by  New  York  T ime s ,  Boeing  Co.  Vice  President 
H.  W.  Withington  said  SST  cost,  quoted  a t   $40  million,  would  climb 
to  $50  million  o r   $60  million  if  inflation  continued  a t   current  rate. 
He  did  not  expect  increase  to  cut  heavily  into  sales.  Under  current 
forecast,  Boeing  would  have  to  raise  “about  $2-billion  to  go   into 
production,  and   that’s  assuming we  get  50  per  cent  progress  payments 
[half  of  the  purchase  price]  in   the  1973-74  period.  I’m  not  so  sure 
we’ll  be  able  to  do  this.”  (Lindsey, NYT ,   10 /17 /69)  
S i r  George  Edwards, Chairman  and  Managing Director  of  British  Aircraft 
Corp.,  told  American  Newcomen  Society  meeting  in   New  York  that 
Anglo-French Concorde  supersonic  transport  had  completed 75   flights 
and  approximately 128  flying hrs.  (BAC Release  42 /69)  
*  ComSatCorp  reported  third-quarter  net  income  of  $1,446,000  ( 1 4  cents 
per  sh a r e ) ,   decline  from  20  cents  per  share  for  second  quar ter   and  
from  $11,760,000  (17   cents  per  share)   for  third  quarter  of  1968. 
Earnings  for  first  nine  months  of  1969  totaled  $4,947,000  (49   cents 
per  sh a r e ) ,   down  from  $5,054,000  (50 cents  per  share)   for  first  nine 
months  of  1968. ComSatCorp  said  revenues  failed  to  reach  expected 
level  because  of  interruption  of  service  on  In te lsa t-I l l   F-2  June  29 

340 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  17 

and   amortization costs  had  depreciated because  of  expansion of  conisat 
system. As  of  Sept. 30, ComSatCorp was  leasing  1,364 circuits  full-time, 
increase  of  522 over Sept. 30, 1968. (ComSatCorp Release  59) 
Dr.  Caryl  P.  Haskins,  Carnegie  Institution  President,  announced  404n 
telescope  of  advanced  design would  be  erected  atop  8,000-ft  Las  Cam- 
panas  Mountain  in   north  central  Chile.  I t   would  be   first  telescope  of 
Carnegie  Southern  Observatory,  which  eventually  would  house  200-in 
reflector  similar  to  that  a t   Mt.  Palomar  Observatory  in  California. 
New  telescope,  expected  to  be  operational  in  one  year,  would  be 
equipped with  ultrasensitive  photoelectric  instruments  to  measure  light 
from  remote  sources  and   with  digital  data  system.  (Carnegie  Insti- 
tution  Release) 
October  18:  Cosmos  CCCZZZ  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  from  Plesetsk  into 
orbit  with  457-km  (284.0-mi)  apogee,  268-km  (166.5-mi)  perigee, 
91.7-min  period,  and   70.9’ 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Jan.  23, 
1970.  ( G S F C  SSR,  10 /31 /69 ;   1 /31 /70 ;   SBD,  10/21/69,  233) 
*  ApoZZo  1 I  astronauts  arrived  a t  Belgrade from  Rome  during  world  tour. 
They  were  cheered  by  crowd  estimated  a t   400,000  to  500,000  persons 
between  a irpor t   and   tomb  of  Yugoslavia’s  Unknown  Soldier,  where 
they placed  wreath.  Later,  a t   luncheon  in   their  honor,  President  Tito 
said,  “I  do  not  like  invaders  on  earth,  but  I  hold  in   high  esteem  the 
conquering  of  celestial  bodies,  and  I  express  my  wishes  for  biggest 
success.”  (NYT ,   10/19/69,  L69;  UPI,  W  S tar ,   10/19/69,  A4) 
Proposed  Nixon  Administration  program  of 
low-budget  oceanic  and  
marine  science  activities  was  announced  in  Washington,  D.C.,  by  Vice 
President  Sp iro   T.  Agnew.  Program  sought  establishment  of  coastal 
zone management program,  modest  grants  for  state  planning  and  regu- 
latory  mechanisms,  and   National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Agency, 
currently  under  consideration  by  Congress  and  Ash  Commission  on 
Federal Reorganization. Program  also proposed coastal  laboratories for 
lake  restoration,  International 
regional  problems,  pilot  project  of 
Decade  of  Ocean  Exploration,  and  accelerated  program  of  Arctic 
research.  (Lannan,  W  S tar ,   10/19/69,  A12) 
October  19: Boeing Co.  President  T.  A.  Wilson  was  quoted  in   Washington 
Pos t   interview a s   saying  747  airliner  was  biggest  financial  gamble  h is  
firm had ever  taken.  Huge  a ircraf t  would  compete  with  Lockheed  1011 
and McDonnell  Douglas DC-10,  which  were  smaller  but  less  expensive 
to  purchase  and  operate,  with  three  engines instead  of  four.  While  a ir-  
lines  were  seeking  ways  to  retrench,  Boeing  Co.  was  building  747  in  
plant  bigger  than  vertical  assembly  building  for  Sa turn   V  a t   KSC.  To 
date,  Boeing  Co.  had  announced  183  orders  for  747-not 
enough  to 
recoup  itsexpenses  w i t h   a ircraf t   price  a t   $20  million  each.  McDonnell 
Douglas had  orders  for  97   DC-10s  and  options  on  104  orders.  Lock- 
heed  had  181 orders  for  1011s.  (Wilson, W Post,  10/19/69,  B5) 
John N.  Wilford  said  in  New York Times: “Even  though  the  Soyuz flights 
accomplished  less  than  American  observers had  expected,  they  served 
notice  that  the  Soviet  Union  may  have  forged  ahead  in  space-station 
development  while  the  United  States was  concentrating  on  the  Apollo 
moon  flight  preparations.’’  But  if  U.S.S.R.  had   meant  missions  as  be- 
ginning  of  first  space  station,  “they  fell  fa r   short.”  There  were  “no 
link-ups  of  vehicles,  no transfers  of  crews  between  ships  and  no  test  of 
the  effects  of  long-duration weightlessness. None  of  the  three  ships  was 

341  

October  19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

placed  in   an   orb i t   high  enough  fo r   the  prolonged  flights  being  con- 
sidered  for  space  stations.” 
Mission  accomplishments could  prove  useful  for  construction  of  fu- 
ture  space  stations.  “They  proved  that  they  were  able  to  launch  three 
manned  spacecraft  in   three  consecutive  days, which  the  United  States 
has  not  done.  Such  precision  launchings  are   necessary  for  space  sta- 
tion  deployment.”  Missions  also  had  demonstrated  first  welding  in 
space.  “ I t   will  probably  be  necessary  to  weld  together  sections  of  a 
space  station,  ra ther   than  rely  solely  on   the  mechanical  clamps  used 
for  present  docking operations,  and  to make  repairs by  welding  during 
flight.”  ( N Y T ,  10/19/69,  E9) 
October  20: Capt.  Chester M.  Lee  (USN ,   Re t .) ,   Apollo  12  Mission  Director, 
described  Apollo  12  plans  to  press  a t   NASA  Hq.  [see  Oct.  21.  Mission 
would be launched toward moon  a t  11 :22  am  EST  Nov.  14 ,  carrying As- 
tronauts  Charles Conrad,  Jr.  (commander) , Alan  L.  Bean  ( LM  p i lo t ) ,  
and  Richard  F.  Gordon,  J r .   ( C M   p i lo t ) .   Primary  objectives  would  be 
to  perform  selenological  inspection,  survey  and  sample mare  area,  de- 
ploy  Apollo  lunar  surface  experiment  package  ( ALSEP) , develop  tech- 
niques  for  point  landing  capability,  and  photograph  candidate  landing 
sites. 
Basic flight plan  would  be  similar  to  one for  ApoZZo  11  ( Ju ly  16-24] 
with  modifications  to  improve  landing  accuracy  and  increase  data  re- 
turn. Launch  azimuth had been  narrowed  from  72O-108O  for Apollo  11 
to  72”-96”  for  Apollo  12  and  trajectory  had  been  changed  from  free- 
return  to  hybrid.  Lunar  orbit  stay  time  for  Apollo  12   would  be 
increased  from  59.6  hrs   for ApoZZo  11  to  89  h r s ;   lunar  surface  stay 
time,  from  21.6  hrs  to  31.5  hrs ;   EVA  from  one  2-hr  32-min period  to 
two  3-hr   30-min  periods;  and  total  mission  time,  from  195.3  hrs   to 
2M.7  hrs.  LM  sleeping  arrangements  would  be  improved  with  ham- 
mocks,  color  TV  if  repaired  by  launch  date  would  be  used  on  surface, 
and  LM   ascent  stage  would  be  crashed  onto  lunar  surface  near  seis- 
mometer  after  ascent  from  moon  and  redocking.  To  increase  naviga- 
tional accuracy crew would  avoid  waste  and water  dumps 10 hrs  before 
landing  to  prevent  thrust  that  might  carry   them  off  course,  would 
approach  moon  upside-down  so  landing  radar   would  be  operational 
dur ing   entire  landing  phase,  and   would  speed  up  descent  to  conserve 
fuel  at  landing.  (Transcr ip t)  
0  Tass  reported  Soviet  scientists  had  tested  “electric  jet  plasma  engine” 
producing  jet  flow  of  gas  that  reached  75 mps.  Engine  “needs  neither 
fuel  nor  oxidizer  from  the  ground.  Once  the  aircraft  is  taken  to  the 
ionosphere  i t   is   able  to  continue  flying  using  only  atmospheric  nitro- 
gen.”  Tass  said  engine might be  used  to  power  “superfast”  jetliners  in 
upper  atmosphere. 
Washington Post  quoted  U S .   scientists  as  saying  this  was  misinter- 
pretation.  No  a ircraf t   could  fly  high  enough  to  take  advantage  of  such 
a n   engine.  Soviet  development  sounded  like  “very  interesting”  break- 
through,  which  U S .   was  not  even  pursuing.  It  appeared  to  be  n ew  
version  of  ion  engine,  which  NASA  would  use  aboard  SERT  spacecraft 
later  in  year.  But  SERT  engine  would  carry  its  own  fuel.  Electrical 
power  supply to  convert  nitrogen  to  electrified gas  would  be  too  heavy. 
(O’Toole,  W  Pos t ,   10/21/69,  A23) 
*  NAS  released  Scientific  Uses  of  the  Large  Space  Telescope,  report  of  ad 

342 

ASTRONAllTlCS  A N D   AERONAUTICS ,   1969 

Ortoher  20 

hoc  committee of  NAS-NRC  Space  Science Board  appointed  to  consider 
scientific  functions  and  practical  feasibility  of  placing  in   earth  orb i t  
o r   on  lunar  surface  diff raction-limited,  optical  telescope  with  120-in 
aperture.  Committee  concluded LST would  make  dominant  contribution 
to  understanding  content,  structure,  scale,  and  evolution  of  universe 
and   provide  important,  decisive  information  in   other  astronomical 
fields;  efficient  space  astronomy  program  would  also  require  continu- 
ing series  of  smaller telescopes;  and  most  effective utilization  of  power- 
ful  space  telescope  would  require  substantial  increase  in   ground-based 
instruments.  (Tex t)  
0  Washington  Evening  Star  editorial  commented  on  Soyuz  V l ,   V l l ,  
and  V I I l :  “The  latest  Soviet space spectacular,  i t  would  seem,  adds  up 
to  a  small  s tep   for  mankind  and   a  giant  step  for  the  welding  trade. 
There  is  nothing  overwhelmingly  impressive  about  having  three  space- 
craft  in   orb i t   at  once.  All  tha t   is  required  these  days  is  the  decision  to 
get  them  up  and  the  money  to  build  three  rockets  and   launch  facilities. 
Even  the  highly  touted welding  experiment does  not  constitute  a  major 
technical breakthrough.  I t  d id   raise  the  honorable  trade  to  new  heights, 
but  the  conditions under  which  the  tests  were  made  could have  been- 
and  probably  have  been-largely 
duplicated  in   the  laboratory.”  (W  
S tar ,   10 /20 /69)  
Aquanauts  Dr.  Larry  Hallanger,  Dr.  David  Youngblood,  Wally  Jenkins, 
and   Richard  A.  Waller  had  successfully  completed  two-day experiment 
in   first  self-contained  undersea  laboratory  50  f t   below  Atlantic  near 
Riviera  Beach,  Fla.,  Associated  Press  reported.  Hydro-Lab,  16  f t   long 
and  8 ft  in  diameter,  supplied  its  own  electricity  from  fuel  cell  similar 
to   cell  used  for  power  in  Apollo  spacecraft.  I t   was  built  by  Perry 
Oceanographics,  Inc.  (W   S ta r ,   10/20/69,  A3) 
Sari  Francisco  Board  of  Supervisors  had  voted  to  negotiate  with  Texas 
niillionaire  Lamar  Hunt  on  least?  of  22-acre  Alcatraz  Island,  United 
Press  International  reported.  Hunt  planned  underground  museum  in 
tribute  to   ApoZZo  11, while  restoring  island’s  historic  buildings.  (W 
Star.,  10/20/69,  B4) 
Oc tober   20-23:  AIAA’S  Sixth  Annual  Meeting  and   Technical  Display  was 
held  i n   Anaheim,  Calif.  Among  6,559  persons  attending  were  Cosmo- 
nauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and  Konstantin P.  Feoktistov with  Apollo  8 
Astronaut  Frank  Borman,  host  for  their  U S .   visit.  At  press  conference 
Beregovoy  sa id   military  use  of  space  was  not  practical:  “The  aim  of 
our  program  is  the  exploration  of  space.  In   our  minds,  space  is  the 
scene  of  peaceful  work  and  investigation.”  Feoktistov  said  U S . -  
U.S.S.R.  space  race  was  “first  phase  of  space  flight.”  Space  research 
was  now  in   second  phase.  “I  think  we  can  say  that  in   that  phase Soviet 
and  American  scientists  are   intensely  helping  each  other.”  U.S.S.R. 
wanted  to  send  unmanned  spacecraft  to  moon’s  vicinity,  outer  planets, 
and  solar  orb i t   and   to  develop weather  and   communications satellites. 
Soviet  plans  called  for  manned  space  stations  and   manned  flights  to 
vicinities  of  Mars,  Venus,  and   Mercury.  Asked  when  astronauts  and  
cosmonauts  might  fly  side  by  side,  Beregovoy  said,  “We  are   going 
parallel  but  different  ways  now,  but  in   principle  such  a  possibility 
exists.  Maybe  a  year,  maybe  three  years.  Maybe  a s   soon  as  we  learn 
(AIAA  Release  11/3/69;  O’Toole,  W Post,  10/24/69,  A3) 
English.” 
ESSA  Administrator  Robert  M.  White  described  new-generation 

343 

October  20-23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

weather  satellite  ITOS that  would  be   launched  in   prototype  by  NASA 
later  in   1969 and   in   operational  form  by  ESSA in  early  1970.  “I t   com- 
bines  in  one spacecraft  both  the  stored-data and  direct readout  cameras 
of  the  present  two-satellite  [ TIROS] arrangement.  Fewer  launches  will 
be  required  to  keep  the  system  in   operation.  The  design  allows  for 
growth  and  the  capacity  to  accommodate a  variety  of  instruments  to 
meet  new  and  developing needs.”  System  would  contain  high-resolution 
infrared  radiometer  for  “nighttime  observations  approaching  daytime 
pictures  in   resolution  and   quality”  thus  providing  24-hr  weather  satel- 
lite  coverage.  “This  step  will  enable  us  to  meet  fully  the  first  national 
program  objective-providing 
twice-daily  observations  of  the  en t ire  
earth,  both  by  stored  and   direct  readout  systems,  day  and  night.” 
(Tex t)  
USN  NC - 4  flying  boat’s  Lis- 
Fifty  years  of  transatlantic  flight-from 
bon  arrival  May  27,  1919, to  June  3,  1969, maiden  Atlantic  crossing 
traced  in   paper  by  Dr.  Richard  K.  Smith, Ramsey 
of  Boeing  747-was 
Fellow  a t   Smithsonian  Institution’s  National  Air  and   Space Museum. 
During  “the  Heroic Years  on  the North  Atlantic  between  27  May  1919 
and  27  May  1939, there  were  175  flights  across  the  Atlantic;  142 were 
by  airplanes,  33  by  airships.  . . . I t   is  confidently  believed  that  all  the 
persons who  flew  the  Atlantic  by  airplane  during  tha t   period  could  be 
accommodated aboard  a  747,  perhaps  with  some  seats  to  spare.  How- 
ever,  at  least  three  more  747s  would  be  required  to  lift  those  persons 
who  flew  by  airship  during  1919-1937!” 
(Tex t )  
MSC  Flight  Operations  Director  Christopher  C.  Kraft,  Jr.,  said 
Apollo  program  might  be  extended  to  1973 to  allow  NASA  to  fly  three 
space  station  training  missions  in  1972.  “It’s  going  to  be  some  time 
before  we  settle  it.  But  it’s  going  to  be  difficult  to  handle  both  Apollo 
and  Apollo  Applications from  an  operational  point  of  view  as  well  as 
a people  point  of  view  in   1972.”  Revised  launch  schedule  set  Apollo  19  
landing  back  to  November  1972 and   Apollo  20  to  May  1973. Between 
Apollo  18  launch  Feb.  11,  1972,  and   Apollo  19  were  three  orbital 
flights  preparatory  for  establishment of  first  U.S.  permanent  space  sta- 
tion  in   1975.  These  flights  could  come  just  after  Apollo  18,  in  May 
1972 and   in  September 1972. Further  reason  for  ApolIo  landings  delay 
was  possibility  they  would  be  made  in   remote  lunar  areas  like  crater 
Tycho,  almost  1,000 mi  below  moon’s  equator  and  rated  among  t o p  
priority  landing  sites.  (O’Toole,  W Post,  10/23/69,  A21) 
Dr.  Arthur  D.  Code,  Univ.  of  Wisconsin  astronomer,  reported  dis- 
covery  that  relatively  young  stars  in   constellations  Orion  and   Scorpius 
were  generating  heats  of  45,000”F-5,000” 
hotter  than  had  been 
thought.  Finding,  from  data  obtained  by  NASA’s Oao   I1  satellite 
(launched Dec.  7,  1968), suggested young  stars might be  more massive 
and  maturing  faster  than  originally  believed  and  supported  theories  of 
thermonuclear  processes  in  stars’  interiors  that  generated  such  heats. 
Oao  I1 da ta   also  showed  younger  stars  had  more  complex  chemical 
composition  than  s tars   formed  near  universe’s  beginning.  They  con- 
tained  fairly  large  amounts of  carbon,  silicon, magnesium, and  heavier 
elements,  as  well  a s   predominant  hydrogen  and  helium.  Other  Oao  I1 
data  indicated  particles  in  interstellar  space  were  variety  of  complex 
matter,  much  of  which  might  be  debris  ejected  from  stars.  (Wilford, 
NYT ,   10/21/69,  C19) 

344 

ASTROSAUTICS  .4ND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  20-23 

MSC  Director  of  Engineering Development Maxime A.  Faget  outlined 
concept  of  space vehicle  with  two  reusable  stages-booster 
rocket  and 
orbiter  craft-both  with  fixed  wings,  long  fuselages,  and  rear   rocket 
engines.  Vehicle  would  be  225  f t   high  and   weigh  2.5  million  Ibs  a t  
launch.  Orbiter  vehicle,  capable  of  carrying  25,000  lbs  of  cargo  and  
passengers,  would  be  attached  pickaback  to  booster  stage’s  upper  half. 
Booster,  burning  liquid  hydrogen  and   liquid  oxygen,  would  elevate 
orbiter  to  fringe  of  space,  separate,  drop  away,  and   cruise  to  landing 
like  jet  airliner.  Booster  probably  would  be  piloted  by  two  astronauts. 
Orbiter would  ignite  rocket engine  to  continue upward  to  space station 
orbiting  a t   300-mi  altitude.  After  link-up  with  space  station,  transfer 
of  cargo  or  12  passengers,  and   pickup  of  new  load,  orbiter  would  be 
steered  by  pilot  into  atmosphere  and  controlled  glide  to   landing  on 
10,000-ft runways  used  by  aircraft.  Key  to  reentry  would  be  orbiter’s 
L‘angle of  attack”  when  hitting  atmosphere.  Faget  proposed  60’  angle 
with  nose  up ,   so  flattened  bottom  would  catch  airflow  to  slow  descent. 
Small jet  engines would  be  fired  to  help  control  final  descent  phases of 
both  orbiter  and  booster.  Outer  surface  of  vehicles  would  be  made  of 
metal  alloys  that  could  sustain  temperatures  to  2,700’F.  Wilford, 
NYT,  10/24/69,  4 3 )  
Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  discussed 
DOD space activities:  “In  communications, meteorology and  surveillance 
. . . we  are  actively  pursuing  increased  capability.  . . . Tactical  com- 
munications  using  satellite  relays  are  presently  being  intensely  tested 
and   show  great  promise  in  improving  control  of  field  units  and  in- 
creasing  . . . cooperation  between  land,  sea  and   a ir   forces.  In  surveil- 
lance,  our  efforts  have  produced  results.  Of  first  importance  is  a  new 
satellite early  warning  system  that will  do  a great deal  to  further  insure 
our  ability  to   deter  nuclear attack.”  Savings in  space travel  costs  ‘Lmust 
be  linked  to  the  recovery  and   reuse  of  space  vehicles.  . . . Since major 
improvement in  our  ability  to  use  space environment would  be  of  direct 
assistance  to  both  NASA  and   the  military,  we  are   jointly  planning  our 
research  and  development  towards  this  objective.”  (Tex t )  
Major  A IAA   awards  presented  included  Louis  W.  Hill  Space  Trans- 
portation  Award  to  George  M.  Low,  former  Manager  of  Apollo  Space- 
craft Program  a t  MSC,  currently  on  special  assignment to  MSC   Director, 
for  “his  leadership  role  in  bringing  the  Apollo  Program  to  fulfillment, 
and  to  the  thousands  of  engineers who  dedicated their  careers,  without 
public  recognition,  to  the  conquest  of  space.”  Daniel  Guggenheim 
Medal  for  1969 was  presented  to  retired  ARC  Director  H.  Julian  Allen 
for  “personal  contributions  to  outstanding  research  and   development 
leading  to  vastly  improved  re-entry  bodies,  missiles,  satellites,  and 
spacecraft,  and  for  leadership  in   directing  and  inspiring  a  large  group 
of  research  men  a t   Ames  Laboratory.”  Lawrence  Sperry  Award  was 
given  Edgar  C.  Lineberry,  Jr.,  Chief  of  Orbital  Mission  Analysis 
Branch,  MSC,  for  “significant  advancement  in   the  field  of  rendezvous 
mechanics  through  his  development  of  the  space  maneuver  logic  and 
associated  control  techniques,  and  his  formulation  of  the  mission  plans 
which  contributed  decisively  to  the  success of  all rendezvous operations 
conducted  dur ing   United  States  manned  space  flights.”  De  Florez 
Training  Award was  given  to  Gifford  Bull,  Principal  Engineer  and  En- 
gineering  Pilot  a t   Cornell  Aeronautical  Laboratory,  for  “establishing 

345 

October  20-23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

the  use  of  variable  stability  airplanes  a s   flight  dynamics  training  ve- 
hicles  fo r   engineering  test  pilots.’’ 
New  A IAA   Award  fo r  Spacecraft  Design  was  awarded  Otto  E.  Bartoe, 
Jr.,  Vice  President,  Aerospace  Div.,  Ball  Brothers  Research  Corp.,  for 
“concept  and  preliminary  design  of  the  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory 
spacecraft  configuration  and  control  systems,  the  first  embodiment  of 
the  spin-despin  design.”  Aerospace  Communications  Award  was 
awarded  Dr.  Eberhardt  Rechtin,  Director  of  DOD Advanced  Research 
Projects  Agency  and  former  JPL  Assistant  Director  for  Tracking  and 
Data  Acquisition,  fo r   “development  of  phase  lock  systems  for  space 
communications,  guidance  and  control,  and  for  contributions  to  the 
design,  development  and  operation  of  NASA’s Deep  Space  Network.” 
( MSC  Release;  AIAA  Releases;  AIAA  Booster,  10/20/69) 
Honored  as  new  Honorary  Fellows  a t   Honors  and  Award  Banquet 
Oct.  23  were  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force 
and  former  NASA  Deputy  Administrator;  German  rocket  pioneer  Her- 
mann  Oberth;  and  Northrop  Corp.  founder  John  K.  Northrop. 
Among  29   new  Fellows  were:  Apollo  8 Astronaut  Frank  Borman, 
Deputy  Director,  Flight  Crew  Operations  Directorate,  MSC ;   former 
GSFC  Director,  Dr.  Ha r ry  J.  Goett, Chief  Engineer,  Space and  Re-Entry 
Systems  Div.,  Philco-Ford  Corp. ; Najeeb  E.  Halaby,  President,  Pan 
American  World  Airways,  Inc. ; Samuel  L.  Higginbottom,  Vice  Presi- 
dent,  Operations  Group,  Eastern  Airlines,  Inc. ; L/G  Samuel C.  Phillips, 
Commander  of  USAF  Space  and Missile  Systems Organization  (SAMSO )  
and  former  NASA  Apollo  Program  Director;  John  G.  Borger,  Chief 
Engineer,  Pan  American  World  Airways,  Inc. ; Walter  Haeussermann, 
Director,  Astrionics  Laboratory,  MSFC;  Dr.  John  C.  Houbolt,  Vice 
President  and  Senior  Consultant,  Aeronautical  Research  Associates  of 
Princeton.  ( AIAA  Release) 
During  third  AIAA  President’s  Forum,  Under  Secretary  of  Interior 
Russell  E.  Train  said,  “Photographs  of  Earth,  taken  by  our  astronauts 
from  the  vicinity  of  the  Moon,  bring  home  more  forcefully  than  the 
words  of  all  scientists  of  all  times  the  fact  that  w e  live  on  a  finite 
planet  with  finite  but  poorly  known  resources.”  ( A&A ,   2/70) 
launched  Cosmos  CCC lV   into  orbit  with  760-km 
October  21:  U.S.S.R. 
(472.2-mi)  apogee,  742-km  (461.1-mi)  perigee,  99.8-min  period,  and 
inclination.  ( GSFC  SSR,  10/31/69) 
74.0’ 
*  NASA’s Annual  Honor  Awards  Ceremony was  held  in  Washington,  D.C., 
with  keynote  speaker  Dr.  Charles  H.  Townes,  Univ.  of  California  a t  
Berkeley  physicist  and   member  of  President’s  Task  Force  on  Science 
Policy. 
Recipients  of  NASA  Distinguished  Service  Medal  were:  L/G  Frank 
A.  Bogart  ( USAF,  Ret.),  MSC  Associate  Director;  Robert  E.  Bordeau, 
Assistant  Director  fo r   Projects,  GSFC;  Dr.  John  F.  Clark,  GSFC  Di- 
rector;  Charles  W.  Mathews,  Deputy  Associate  Administrator,  OMSF;  
Ozro  M.  Covington,  Assistant  Director  for  Manned  Flight  Support, 
GSFC;  George  H.  Hage,  Boeing  Co.  Vice  President  for  Product  De- 
velopment  and  former  NASA  Apollo  Program  Deputy  Director;  Dr. 
George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight;  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space 
Science  and  Applications;  Rocco  Petrone,  Apollo  Program  Director ; 
L/G  Samuel  C.  Phillips,  Commander  of  USAF  Space  and  Missile  Sys- 

346 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  21  

tems  Organization  ( SAMSO)  and   former  Apollo  Program  Director; 
Julian  W.  Scheer,  Assistant  Administrator  for  Public  Affairs;  Dr. 
Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  and   former  NASA 
Deputy  Administrator;  Willis  H.  Shapley,  Associate Deputy  Adminis- 
t ra to r ;   and   Gerald M.  Truszynski,  Associate  Administrator  for  Track- 
ing  and   Data  Acquisition. 
Distinguished  Public  Service  Medal  was  awarded  to   Dr.  Harry  H. 
Hess  (posthumously), former  Princeton  Univ.  geologist  and  Chairman 
Space Science Board,  and  to  Dr.  Townes. 
of  NAs-NRc 
Exceptional Bravery Medal  was  awarded  to  Charles  J.  Beverlin  and 
Billy  B.  McClure  of  General  Dynamics Corp.  a t   KSC,  each  for  prompt 
action  dur ing   “accidental  depressurization of  an   Atlas  launch  vehicle” 
which  “prevented  destruction  of  a  Mariner  Mars  space  vehicle  and 
potential  in ju ry   to  his  comrades.” 
Special  recognition  given  to  employees  of  NASA  and   leading  aero- 
space  industries  for  their  role  in   successful  Apollo  lunar  landing  re-  
sulted  in  largest  number  of  annual  awards  to  date.  Exceptional 
Scientific Achievement  Medal  was  awarded  to  25   persons,  Exceptional 
Service Medal to  97,  and   Public  Service Group Achievement  Award  to 
29.  Other  awards  included  Group  Achievement  Award,  Public  Service 
Award,  and  Certificate  of  Appreciation.  (P rog ram ;   NASA  Release 
69-143;  NASA  Personnel Div) 
*  MSC  Director,  Dr. Robert R.  Gilruth,  announced appointment of  Dr.  Gene 
Simmons,  M IT   professor  of  geophysics,  to  new  position  of  MSC  Chief 
Scientist  and   of  Anthony  J. Calio  as  Director  of  Science  and  Applica- 
tions.  Dr.  Simmons would  divide  his  time  between  MIT  and   NASA,  re- 
porting  directly  to  MSC  Director.  At  MSC  Dr.  Simmons would  attempt 
to  emphasize  strong  role  of  science in   future manned  flights  and   lunar 
exploration  and   to  effect  close  ties  between  NASA  programs  and  scien- 
tific  community.  ( MSC  Release  69-72) 
*  Visiting  Cosmonauts Georgy  T.  Beregovoy  and  Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov 
received Presidential pens  and  bronze  inaugural medals from  President 
Nixon,during  brief  stop  a t  White House.  Later  they  flew  to  MSC,  where 
they  were  honored  a t   dinner  by  30  astronauts.  Apo l lo   8  Astronaut 
jet  aircraft.  (PD, 
Frank  Borman  showed  cosmonauts  NASA  T-38 
10/27/69,  1485;  AP,  W  S tar ,   10/22/69,  A3) 
*  Richard  W.  Cook,  Deputy  Director  for  Operations  in   Science  and  En- 
gineering  Directorate,  MSFC,  would  become  Deputy  Director,  Manage- 
ment,  to  MSFC  Director,  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  MSFC  announced. He 
would  succeed Harry  H.  Gorman, new  NASA  Deputy  Associate Adminis- 
tra tor   for  Manned  Space Flight  (Management),  for  one  or  two  years, 
( MSFC  Release 
or  until  permanent  replacement  became  available. 
69-232) 
Oc tober  22: Cosmos CCCV  was  launched by  U.S.S.R.  from  Baikonur.  Satel- 
lite  entered  orb i t   with  340-km  (211.3-mi)  apogee,  203-km  (126.1-mi) 
perigee,  88.4-min  period,  and   51.4’  inclination  and  reentered  Oct.  24. 
(GSFC  SSR ,   10/31/69;  SBD ,   10/27/69,  254) 
*  Press  conference  on  preliminary  science  results  of  Biosatellite  111 
(launched  June  28 )   was  held  a t   NASA  Hq.  Spacecraft,  carrying  male 
macaque  monkey  Bonny,  had  been  launched  on  30-day mission  to  in- 
vestigate  physiological  problems  during  space  flight  but  had  been 
deorbited  after  81/2  days  when  monkey’s  condition  deteriorated. 

347 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
October  22 
John  W.  Dyer,  Manager  of  Biosatellite  Project  Operations  at  ARC, 
said  all  of  automatically  controlled  functions  performed  “beautifully” 
after  launch  and   spacecraft  and  instrumentation  performed  well 
throughout  mission.  “The  animal  was  reported  to   be   enthusiastically 
eating  and   drinking,  and   after  four  o r   five  days,  a  routine  operation 
capable of  going the  duration  of  on-board consumables was  projected.” 
Clear da ta   on  Bonny  and   entire  flight  system  were  recorded  a t   16 sta- 
tions  in   180 intervals  of  5  to  10 min  each  and  good  quality  data  were 
returned  from  onboard  tape  and   film  records  recovered  with  capsule. 
Bonny  remained  alert  until  eighth  day,  providing  much  new  infor- 
mation  on  cycles of  sleep  and wakefulness  a t  zero g.  Dr.  W.  Ross  Adey 
of  UCLA,  principal  experimenter, sa id   one  important  discovery was  al- 
terations  in   circadian  rhythms,  daily  rhythms  in   physiological  func- 
tions.  “At  least  i t   is  clear  that  if  there  is  not  an  actual  prolongation  of 
the  rhythms  there  is  a  very  significant  phase  shift  so  tha t   the  animal 
woke  later  and  later  each  day.”  Most  interesting  discovery about  sleep 
patterns  was  that dream  sleep, which  constituted  20% of  normal  night’s 
sleep  on  ear th   and   was  characterized  by  rapid  eye  movements  ( R E M ) ,  
occurred  in   space.  “ I t   had   never  been  clear  in  space  whether  man  or 
animals  have  this  REM  sleep,  and  there  is  evidence  that  decreased 
gravitational  inputs,  o r   decreased  inputs  from  the  body  will  seriously 
disrupt  it.  So   we  were  very  interested  to  see  that  REM   sleep  in   the 
monkey  . . . that  there  was  indeed  a  great  deal  of  sleep  of  this  REM  
type,  and  that  i t   occurred  in  . . . an   intermediate  stage  of  sleep.” 
One  of  first  abnormalities  noted  in   Bonny  was  pendular  eye  move- 
ment,  swinging movement  that  occurred when  vestibular  mechanism  in 
inner  ear  was  disturbed.  Fluid  was  moving  in   some  fashion  that  might 
indicate  pressure  or  cooling  i f   i t   occurred  on  earth.  “None  of  these 
conditions  applied here.  But  the  weightlessness would  allow movements 
of  the  fluid  which  were  probably  unusual.  . . . This  is  interesting  be- 
cause  the  Apollo  astronauts  who  have  now  much  more  room  to  move 
around than  in  . . . the Mercury and  Gemini  spacecraft  have  . . . almost 
uniformly  reported  some degree  of  vestibular  disturbances.” 
By  eighth  day,  bra in   and  body  temperature  and  central venous  pres- 
sure had  dropped  dangerously. Fluid  loss by  sweating and   diuresis  was 
high,  apparently  because  of  redistribution  of  blood  in   visceral  pools 
from  weightlessness.  On  recovery  Bonny  was  semicomatose  and  his 
temperature  was  below  35°C.  Immediate  resuscitation  measures  w i t h  
intravenous  fluid  were  begun  and   monkey’s  condition  improved  sub- 
stantially.  “The  temperature  came  up  to  about  35.8,  the  heart  rate 
stabilized,  and  the  blood  pressure  came  up.  . . . And  the  animal  was 
lifting  his  head  . . . and  making  coordinated  movements  with  all  four 
limbs.  And  then  quite  suddenly,  about  twelve  hours  after  recovery,  a 
condition  of  ventricular  fibrillation  ensued.  I t   came  on  very  suddenly, 
and   the  heartbeat  became  totally  disordered.  And  there  was  no  re- 
covery.  Th is  i s   a  common  occurrence in  monkeys of  this  species  when 
recovering  from  hypothermia  . . . and  death  is  almost  a  certainty.” 
Autopsy  revealed  20%  loss  in   body  weight,  much  higher  than 
3%-8%   reported  for   astronuats  in  early  days  of  flights.  Restraint, 
weightlessness,  and   decreased feedback  from  peripheral  structures had 
decreased  shivering  response,  and   monkey  had  failed  to  respond  to 
falling  temperature with  normal  thermogenic  response.  Restraint  and ,  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  22 

particularly,  weightlessness  had  led  to  pooling  of  blood  in   thorax  and 
abdomen,  raising  central venous pressures  and   leading  to  loss  of  fluid 
through  kidney  and   sweating. Dr.  Adey  said  mission  was  “highly  suc- 
cessful  in   revealing  physiological  effects  of  weightlessness  in  spite  of 
the  reduced  duration  of  the  experiment’,  and  indicated  “great  value  of 
carefully  designed  animal  experiments  in  collection  of  important  bio- 
medical  da ta   relevant  to  manned  flight.” 
Virtually  every  piece  of  information  that  could  be  drawn  about 
manned  space flight  indicated  similar  changes in   astronauts,  though  to 
smaller  degree,  he  said.  Scientists  still  did  not  know  whether  gravity 
was  necessary  for  long-duration  space  flights.  “Therefore,  I  think  it  is 
premature  to  consider the  design of  space platforms  or  the  larger  space 
stations  until  we  know  more  from  the  biomedical point  of  view  about 
what  is  absolutely  necessary.”  President’s  Science Advisory  Committee 
report  to  President  Nixon,  being  printed,  would  say  necessary  bio- 
medical basis  for  elaborate  space  platforms  and   space  stations  did  not 
exist  in  NASA  or  in  scientific  community.  (Transcr ip t)  
Retirement  of  Dr.  Abe  Silverstein,  LeRC   Director,  was  announced  by  Dr. 
Thomas 0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator.  ,He would  be   succeeded  Nov .   1 
by  OART  Acting  Administrator  Bruce  T.  Lundin.  In   requesting  retire- 
ment,  Dr.  Silverstein  wrote:  “AS NASA  engages  in   its  second  ten-year 
program,  i t   may  be  important  that  the  men  whose  decisions  initiate 
the  new  long-range  projects  be   available  to  complete  them.  Since  I  do 
not  think  I  can  stretch  my  40  years  of  service  into  50,  it  is  perhaps 
best  . . . i f   I  bow  out  now.”  Few  have  made  so  great  a  contribution  to 
our  national space effort,”  Dr.  Paine  said. 
Dr.  Silverstein  had  been  first  Director  of  Space  Flight  Programs  in 
NASA  Hq.  in  1958.  Under  his  leadership  first  U S .   man-in-space pro-  
gram,  Project  Mercury,  had  been  planned  and   groundwork  laid  for 
Gemini  and  Apollo  programs.  He  had  joined  NASA  at  Langley  Aero- 
nautical  Laboratory  in  1929 and   helped  design  and   later  was  in   charge 
of  Full-scale  Wind  Tunnel. Transferring  to  Lewis  Laboratory  in  1943, 
he  was  responsible  for  conception,  design,  and   construction  of  first 
U S .   supersonic-propulsion wind  tunnels.  After  three  years  with  NASA  
Hq.,  1958-1961,  he  returned  to  LeRC  as  Director. 
Lundin  had  served  NASA  since  1943,  when  he  joined  staff  a t  Lewis. 
I n  1961 he  was  appointed Associate Director  for Development.  I n  May 
1968 he  went  to  NASA  Hq.  a s  Deputy  Associate Administrator  for   OART. 
(NASA   Release  69-145;  LeRC  Release  69-61;   LeRC  Biog  4/67) 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  A. 
0  NASA’s X-24A 
Manke,  reached  mach  0.6  after  air-launch  from  B-52  aircraft  a t  
40,000-ft  altitude  over  South  Rogers  Lake  Bed,  Calif.  Objectives  of 
unpowered  flight,  sixth  in  series,  were  to  check  out  new  pilot,  evaluate 
handling  characteristics  with  30”  upper  flap,  and   evaluate  handling 
qualities  a t  various  roll  ga in   settings  of  stability  augmentation  systems 
(SAS ) .   (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
0  At  Moscow  ceremony  honoring  Soyuz  VI,  V I I ,  and   V I I I   cosmonauts, 
Soviet  Communist  Par ty   General  Secretary  Leonid  L.  Brezhnev  said 
U.S.S.R.  had  “an  extensive space program  drawn  up  for  many  years.” 
Main  road  lay  in  orbital  space  stations.  “Our  road  of  space  conquest 
is the  road   of  solving vital  fundamental  problems, the  problems  of  sci- 
ence  and  technology.”  While  U.S.S.R.  favored  international  space  co- 

349 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
October  22 
has   been  achieved  in   the  flight  . . . just  completed.  Our  science  ap-  
ma jor   advance  i n   the  development of  space  techniques 
operation, 
proached  the  setting  up  of  long-term orbital  stations  and  laboratories 
-the  decisive means of  extensive  exploration of  outer  space.”  (Clarity, 
N Y T ,   10 /23 /69 ,78)  
Discovery  of  possible  planet,  in   orbit  around  NPO-532  pulsar  about 
6,000  light  years  from   solar  system,  was  reported  by  Cornel1 Univ.  as- 
tronomer  Dr.  Thomas  Gold.  Discovery,  by  astronomers  a t   Arecibo 
Ionospheric  Observatory  in   Puerto  Rico,  was  indicated  by  wobble  in 
pulsation  ra te   from  NPO-532,  pulsar  or  neutron  s tar   in   Crab  Nebula. 
Planet was  same distance  from  neutron  s tar   as Mercury  was  from  sun. 
( K  Post,  10/22/69,  A9) 
October  23:  Apollo  12  countdown demonstration  test  (CDDT)   began  a t  KSC 
in   preparation  for  launch  to moon  Nov.  14.  (UPI ,   N Y T ,   10 /25 /69)  
I n   Kinshasa,  Republic  of  Congo,  Apollo  11 astronauts  were  awarded 
National  Order  of  the  Leopard,  Congo’s  highest  decoration,  by  Presi- 
dent  Joseph  D.  Mobutu  for  “setting  an  example  to  all  mankind.” 
(C Trib, 10 /24 /69)  
*  Cosmonauts  Georgy  T.  Beregovoy  and  Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov  told 
press  conference a t  MSC  they had  declined invitation  to  visit  Cape Ken- 
nedy  because  they  could  not  reciprocate  and   invite  U S .   astronauts  to 
Soviet launch  facilities.  ( C  T r ib ,   10 /24 /69)  
*  Dr.  George  E,  Mueller, NASA  Associate  Administrator  for   Manned  Space 
Flight,  addressed 25th  Annual General Meeting of  IATA  in   Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.  “Within  the  next  ten  years  we  can  expect  the  full  effect 
of  the  space  age  to  be  felt. New  insights  into  our  complex  environment 
will  spur  the  development  of  new  industries,  new  products  and   the  new 
jobs  which  we  need  to  gainfully  employ  our  expanding  population.” 
Air  transportation  would  be  one  of  first  areas  “dramatically  affected” 
by  space  experience.  “An  inertial  guidance  system  fundamentally  the 
same  as  that  which  carried  Apollo  11 to  the  moon  is   now  being  in- 
stalled  in  the  Boeing  747.  Data  concerning  the  flammability  of  non- 
metallic materials,  accumulated for  use  in  the Apollo Modules,  is  being 
utilized  for  interior  fittings.  . . .” Other  space-to-aviation  transfers  in- 
cluded  composite  materials  to  withstand  stresses  and  temperatures  not 
previously  encountered,  optical  tooling  for  large  structures,  welding 
with  new  materials  and  by  new  processes  in   new  aircraft,  and   general- 
purpose  onboard  digital  computers.  “The  use  of  solid-state  large-scale 
integrated  circuits  for  multiplexing  and   self-checking  circuits  will 
eliminate most cabling  and  much  maintenance.” 
Desired  characteristics  of  space  shuttle,  which  could  be  operational 
by  1976, would  anticipate  those  of  next  generation  of  a i r   transports, 
possibly,  global  transport  “so  that  no  place  on  ear th   would  be  more 
than  an  hour  from  any  other.”  (Tex t)  
October  24:   USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB   by 
Titan  IIIB-Agena  booster  into  orbit  with  395.8-mi 
(636.8-km) 
apogee,  78.3-mi  (125.9-km)  perigee,  92.1-min  period,  and   108.1’  in- 
clination.  Satellite  reentered  Nov.  8.  (GSFC  SSR,  10 /31 /69 ;   Pres  R p t  
70  ~ 6 9 1 )  
U.S.S.R.  launched  two  Cosmos  satellites, Cosmos CCCVZ,  launched  from 
Baikonur,  entered  orb i t   with  307-km  ( 190.8-mi)  apogee,  203-km 
(126.1-mi)  perigee,  89.5-min  period,  and   64.9”  inclination  and  re- 

350 

October  24 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
entered  Nov.  5.  Cosmos  CCCVII  enter 
(1,340.3-mi)  apogee,  213-km  (132.4-mi)  p 
and   48.4”  inclination.  (GSFC  SSR,  10/31/69;  11/15/69;  SBD, 
10/27/69,  255) 
Apollo  1 2  spacecraft was  lashed  by  40-mph winds dur ing   second  day  of 
countdown  demonstration  test  ( CDDT)  a t   KSC.  Officials  said  exercise 
proceeded  without  difficulty.  (W Post,  10/25/69,  A9;  UPI,  N Y T ,  
10/25/69) 
*  Dr.  Gene  Simmons,  MSC  Chief  Scientist,  told  press  at  MSC  reported  con- 
flict between  scientists  and  engineers in  U.S.  space program  was  “more 
apparent  than  i t   is   real.”  MSC  officials  were  making  great  efforts  to 
increase  scientific  return  from  nine  remaining  Apollo  missions.  Dr. 
Simmons was  “not  sure there  is this  rift.”  (W Post,  10/25/69,  A9) 
LaRc  announced  award  of  $313,620,000  cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee 
contract  to  Martin  Marietta  Corp.  for  construction  of  lander  portions 
of  two  Viking  spacecraft  scheduled  to   softland  on  Mars  in   summer 
1973 and  for   project  integration  services.  (LaRC  Release) 
0  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences President,  Prof.  Mstislav  V.  Keldysh,  said 
i n   Stockholm,  “We  no  longer  have  any  time  plan  for  manned  moon 
trips.  Right  now  we  a re   concentrating  on  constructing  big  satellite 
space  stations.”  He  predicted  expanded  scientific  cooperation  between 
U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  with  possibility  of  cosmonauts and   astronauts  aboard 
same  spacecraft  in  future.  In   Sweden  for  Swedish  Academy  of  Engi- 
neering’s  50th  anniversary,  Prof.  Keldysh  implied U.S.S.R.  planned  to 
assemble  spacecraft  in  orbiting  stations  and  launch  them  from  there. 
He  indicated  existence  of  conflicting  views  in  U.S.S.R.  as  to  space  re- 
search  funding.  “My  personal  view  is   that,  when  man  has  taken  his 
first  step  into  space,  you  cannot  stop  further  development.” 
(U P I ,  
W  Pos t ,   10/25/69,  A3) 
*  Visiting  U.S.S.R.  Cosmonauts  Georgy  T.  Beregovoy  and   Konstantin  P. 
Feoktistov  went  on  “Flight  to  the  Moon”  ride  a t   Disneyland,  Calif., 
dur ing  U.S.  tour.  They  received  Mickey  Mouse  watches  and  caps  from 
employees  dressed  as  cartoon  characters  in  spacesuits.  Beregovoy  said, 
“Now  we  are   admitted  to  this  particular  society.” 
(U P I ,   N Y T ,  
10/25/69,  3 )  
October  25:  Economist  said  of  Soviet  Soyuz  “fiascoy’  U.S.S.R.  had 
tried  “highly  ambitious  link-up  of  the  components  of  a  permanent, 
orbiting space station,  something the  Americans will  be  i n   no  shape  to 
do   for  perhaps  five  years.  The  fact  that  the  Russians  apparently  failed 
must  have  been  humiliating  to  them,  and   gratifying  to  the  Americans, 
but  i t   is  unlikely  to  be  more  than  a  temporary  check  to  a  programme 
that  has  rolled  with  considerable  success  since  the  Russians  put  the 
world’s  first  satellite  in  orbit  more  than  a  decade  ago.  The  slow  prog- 
ress  reflects  the  state  of  Soviet  industry,  bu t   is  steady  progress  with 
few   loose  ends.  The   American  programme,  trimmed  and  squeezed  by 
political  pressure  and  public  opinion,  is  trailing  appreciably  more 
loose  ends;  despite  the  victory  on  the  moon  Nasa  will  have  to  set 
about  tidying  them  up.  And  it  is  then  that  the  Russians  will  have  the 
last  laugh.”  (Econom is t ,  10/25/69,  20) 
Oc tober  26:  Estimated  1.5 million  persons  lined  streets  of  Bombay,  India, 
to  welcome  Apollo  11 astronauts.  It was  largest  reception  given  to   as- 
tronauts  and   wives during  22-nation tour.  ( AP,  B  Sun,  10/27/69,  A 3 )  

351 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
October  26 
U.S.S.R.  Cosmonauts Georgy  T.  Beregovoy  and  Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov 
attended football  game in  San  Diego,  Calif.,  during  two-week U S .   tour. 
When  interpreter  failed  to  explain  game  clearly,  Beregovoy  described 
action  a s   “All  fall  down,  all  get  up,  all  fall  down.”  (AP,  W  Star, 
10/27/69,  A5) 
Eureka,  Calif.,  h igh   school  senior  Ronald  Titus  had  identified  sketch  of 
fu ture   space  station  released  by  Tass  Oct.  11  as  identical  to  drawing 
in   Sperry  Gyroscope  Co.  advertisement  in   February  1962  Scientific 
American, New  Y o r k  T imes   reported.  Original Soviet caption  had  said 
i t   was  “Soviet  sketch  of  a  future  space  station.”  Sketch had  appeared 
in   Eureka  Times-Stundard and   New  Y o r k   Times  as  concept  of  Soviet 
space station.  ( N Y T ,  10/26/69,  11) 
0  I n   $100,000  experiment  to  evaluate  claims  tha t   je t   noise  had  caused  fe- 
male minks  to  panic  and   ea t  their  young,  USAF  planned  to  send  je t   a ir-  
craft  through  sound  barr ier   over  Univ.  of  Alaska’s  experimental mink 
farm  near  Petersburg.  On  ground,  observers from  Dept.  of  Agriculture 
and   Cornel1  Univ.  would  study  mink  reaction  to  sonic  boom.  Since 
1962  USAF  had  paid  25   claims  totaling  $67,000  for  mink  problems 
alleged  to  have  been  caused  by  supersonic  aircraft.  (P in to ,   W  S tar ,  
10/26/69,  A22) 
0  Comsat  issue  had  emerged  as  “classic  case  of  governmental indecision- 
the  result  of  divided  federal  responsibilities,  complicated technical  and 
legal  issues,  and  powerful,  competing  industrial  interests,”  Robert  J. 
Samuelson  said  in   Washington  Post  article.  Nearly  year  had  passed 
since  task  force  appointed Aug.  14,  1967, by  President  Johnson  to  for- 
mulate  “national  communications policy”  had  submitted  report.  Nixon 
Administration  had  begun  separate  investigation.  Meanwhile,  “sup- 
porters  of  a  domestic system, frustrated by  repeated delay,  are  pushing 
the  White  House  and  the  FCC  for  a  quick  decision.”  ComSatCorp had 
always  been  “ardent  advocate.”  In   1965 and   1966,  NBC  and   ABC  had 
“enthusiastically  embraced”  comsats  as  means  of  transmitting  TV 
signals.  Recently,  CBS  President  Dr.  Frank  M.  Stanton had   become  con- 
vert,  “apparently  provoked”  by  AT&T’S  new,  higher  TV  signal  rates. 
Within  month,  White  House  might  propose  approval  of  domestic 
comsat  system  but  FCC   would  still  have  difficult  task  of  approving 
specific  system.  Only  limited  number  of  comsats  could  be  orbited 
24,000  mi  above  equator  without  interfering  with  each  others’  trans- 
mission,  even  if  Government were  to  allow  more  than  one  comsat  sys- 
tem.  If  comsats  assumed  ma jor   role  in   communications,  any  decision 
allocating  ownership  rights  could  involve  multimillions  in   eventual 
annual  revenue.  At  first  networks  had  asked  to  be  allowed  to  create 
separate  system,  while  ComSatCorp and   AT&T  advocated single  system. 
Unresolved  issue  helped  explain  “extended  years  of  study.”  However, 
recent changes made compromise more  likely.  ( V  Pos t ,   10/26/69,  F1) 
October  27:  NASA’s H L l O   lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot 
William  H.  Dana,  reached  60,500-ft  altitude  and   rnach  1.6-vehicle’s 
fastest  speed  to  date-after 
a ircraf t   west  of 
air-launch  from  B-52 
Rosamond,  Calif.  Objective  of  flight,  27th  in   H L l O   series  and   14th 
with power,  was  to obtain stability  and  control  da ta  a t  transonic speeds. 
(NASA   P ro j   Off;  AP,  N Y T ,   10/29/69,  12 )  
0  Dr.  Persa  R.  Bell,  Chief  of  MSC Lunar  and  Ear th   Sciences  Div.  and  Man- 
ager  of  Lunar  Receiving Laboratory,  announced  his  resignation,  effec- 

352 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  27 

tive  in   January   1970. B e  said  he  would  return  to  scientific research  a t  
Oak Ridge National Laboratory.  Until  his departure  Dr.  Bell  would  act 
as  special  assistant  to  Anthony  J.  Calio,  MSC  Director  of  Science and  
Applications,  evaluating  and   making  recommendations  on  LRL  opera- 
tions  and   performing  scientific  research  within  LRL.  Bryan  R.  Erb ,  
Deputy  Chief  OB  Lunar  and   Ea r th   Sciences  Div.,  would  be  acting  LRL 
manager  for  Apollo  12  mission.  (MSC   Release 69-74) 
*  Thomas W.  Ray,  historian  a t   Defense  Communications Agency,  became 
Assistant  NASA  Historian  for   Manned  Space  Flight,  replacing  William 
D.  Putnam,  who  had  resigned  in   August  to  jo in   RAND  Corp.  (NASA  
Note) 
October 28:  Temperature measurements from satellite  soundings had  proved 
so  valuable  they  were  being  used  to  prepare  basic  maps  of  Northern 
Hemisphere weather, ESSA  announced.  Soundings, made  by  91-lb  satel- 
lite  infrared  spectrometer  (SIRS) on board NASA’s Nimbus 111  (launched 
April  14) , had   provided  unprecedented  coverage  of  conditions  over 
oceans  and  other  areas where  few  upper-air  measurements were  made. 
Use  of  SIRS  data  had  proved  so  successful  tha t   special  computer-to- 
computer  link  had  been  installed  between  GSFC  and  National  Meteoro- 
logical  Center  in  Suitland,  Md.,  to  permit  regular  use  of  data  in 
analyses  of  weather  conditions  over  eastern  Atlantic  and   most  of  Pa-  
cific  from  surface  to  53,000-ft  altitude.  Improved  version  of  SIRS  was  
being  readied  for  flight  on  next  Nimbus  launch  in   spring  1970.  (ESSA  
Release  ES  69 -67 )  
NASA  announced  selection  of  Boeing Co.  Aerospace  Group  to  receive  $19- 
million,  cost-plus-incentive-fee contract  to  design,  develop,  test,  and 
deliver  four   flight-qualified  lunar   roving  vehicles  and  related  test  and  
training  equipment.  Four-wheeled vehicles  would  be  carried  on  board 
Apollo  LM  descent  stages  in   1971-72  to  transport  astronauts  on  lunar 
surface and  store equipment and  lunar  samples.  (NASA   Release 69-147) 
*  Apo l lo   11  astronauts  were  welcomed  by  estimated  100,000  persons  in 
Bangkok,  Thailand,  after  flight  from  Dacca,  Pakistan,  during  world 
tour.  ( C  T r i b ,  10/29/69) 
*  Dr.  William  D.  McElroy,  NSF  Director,  announced  36-mo  extension  of 
Deep  Sea  Drilling  Project,  which  was  nearing  end  of  l8 -mo   contract 
period.  To  date,  holes  up  to  3,231  f t   deep  had   been  drilled  a t   more 
than  66  sites  in   Atlantic  and  Pacific  Oceans,  in  water  depths  up  to 
20,140  f t ,   to  retrieve  sediment  samples  that  had  rained  onto  ocean 
floor  for millions  of  years.  Pro jec t  sought data  on  inner  space-history 
and  origins  of  ocean  basins  and   continents.  Contract  extension-from 
June   30,  1970,  to  June  30,  1973 -cove red   additional  drilling  dur ing  
1 5  two-month cruises  of  drilling  ship  GZomar  Challenger.  ( NSF  Release 
69-14) 
October  29: Apollo  12 Astronauts  Charles Conrad,  Jr.,  Richard  F.  Gordon, 
Jr.,  and   Alan  L.  Bean  achieved mock  liftoff  a t   11:22  am  EDT-exact 
minute  planned-completing 
final  phase  of  initial  countdown  demon- 
stration  test  (CDDT )  for  Nov.  1 4  launch  to  moon.  No  major  problems 
arose  in   spite  of  gusty  winds and   rain  tha t   would  have  delayed  actual 
launch.  ( W  Post,  10/30/69,  AS) 
Second  official  public  display  of  lunar  rock  fragment  retrieved  from 
moon  by  ApoZZo  11 astronauts  was  unveiled  a t   MSC  by  Dr.  Robert  R. 
Gilruth,  MSC  Director.  Exhibit  included  12  photograph  and  text  panels 

353 

October  29 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

and   four-foot-diameter  opaque  sphere  with  20-in  viewing  port.  ( MSC 
Release  69-73) 
*  NASA  launched  Arcas  sounding  rocket  from  Wallops  Station  carrying 
Pennsylvania  State  Univ.  payload  to  study  ion   composition.  Mission 
did  not  meet  minimum  scientific  requirements.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
*  Space  shuttle  was  “first  step  or  keystone  to   the  success  and  growth  of 
future space flight developments  for  the  exploration  and  exploitation  of 
space,”  LeRoy  E.  Day  and  B.  G.  Noblitt  of  Space Shuttle Task  Group, 
NASA  OMSF,  said  in   paper  presented  a t   IEEE  EASCON  Session  on  Ear th  
Orbiting  Manned  Space  Station  in   Washington,  D.C.  “Large  experi- 
ment  modules  and   unmanned  satellites  can  be  placed  into  low  ear th  
orb i t  and   retrieved  as  desired.  Propulsive  stages  and  payloads  . . . des- 
tined  for  higher  energy  orbits  can  be  placed  into  low  ear th   orbits.” 
On-orbit  reusable  shuttles  like  space  tugs  and  nuclear  stages  “become 
economically  advantageous  once  propellants  can  be  inexpensively  de- 
livered  to  ear th   orbit.  . . . On-orbit maintenance  services  can  be  pro-  
vided  for   malfunctioning  o r   inoperative  satellites.  . . . short  duration 
special  purpose  orbital missions can  be  conducted by  the  space shuttle 
itself  t o   augment  or  complement  space  station  activities.  The  design 
and   operational  characteristics  of  the  space  shuttle  will  also  provide  a 
potential  capability  to   conduct space rescue missions-a 
capability  that 
is  not  practical  with  conventional expendable launch  systems:”  (Tex t )  
8  DOD announced  i t   would  scrap  B-58  supersonic  bomber  and  cut  back 
continental  a i r   defenses  in   economy  drive  necessitated  by  congres- 
s iona l   reductions  in   defense  budget.  ( DOD Release  927-69 ;   Homan, 
W Post,  10/30/69,  A9) 
Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg, AEC  Chairman,  testified  before  Senate  Jo in t   Com- 
mittee  on   Atomic  Energy  during  hearings  on  environmental  effects  of 
producing  electric  power:  “In   the  years  ahead  today’s  outcries  about 
the   environment  will  be   nothing  compared  to   cries  of  angry  citizens 
who  find  that  power  failures  due   to  a  lack  of  sufficient  generating 
capacity  to  meet  peak  loads  have  plunged  them  into  prolonged  black- 
outs  . . . when  their  health  and  well  being  . . . may  be   seriously  en- 
dangered.  The  environment  of  a  city  whose  life’s  energy  has   been  cut 
-whose 
transportation  and   communications a re   dead,  in   which  medi- 
cal  and  police  help  cannot  be  had,  and   where  food  spoils  and   people 
stifle  o r   shiver  while  imprisoned  in   stalled  subways  or  darkened  sky- 
this also  represents  a dangerous environment that  we  must 
scrapers-all 
anticipate  and   work  to  avoid.  . . I  believe  that  the  judicial  develop- 
ment  of  nuclear power  a s   a ma jor   source  of  energy for  the  future  is  in  
the  public  interest  and   tha t   five,  ten  and   a  hundred  years  hence,  men 
will  look  back  with  favor  on  the  course  we  are   taking  today.”  (Tex t)  
Former  astronaut  and   aquanaut M.  Scott  Carpenter  announced  he  would 
become  President  and   Chief  Executive of  Sea  Sciences  Corp.,  private 
enterprise  formed  to  develop  underwater  projects.  Prince  Bernhard  of 
The  Netherlands  would  be  board  chairman.  (UPI ,   W  S ta r ,   10/30/69, 
A16 )  
Cosmonauts Georgy  T.  Beregovoy  and   Konstantin  Feoktistov  spent  half 
hour   riding  into  Grand  Canyon  on  mules  after  arriving  in   Arizona 
(UPI ,   W  S tar ,  
from  San   Francisco  during  two-week  U S .   tour. 
10/30/69,  A3) 
October  30:  Dr.  Gary  V.  Latham  of  Lamont-Doherty Geological  Observa- 

354 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

October  30 

tory  said  i n  Washington, D.C.,  that  evidence  of  vibrations  recorded  by 
seismic equipment  left  on  moon  by  ApoZZo  11 astronauts  “now  looks 
more  like  volcanoes  we   see  on  earth  than  anything  else.”  Concept  of 
volcanoes  caused  by  isolated  pockets  of  radioactive  heating  d id   not 
conflict  with  “cold  moon”  theory  but  was  &‘new working  hypothesis.” 
Among  things  affecting  data  received  on earth before Apollo 11 seismic 
equipment  failed  were  gasping,  creakings,  and   groanings  of  LM lower 
stage.  (Lannan,  W  Star,  10/31/69,  A3) 
*  LeRC  announced  award  of  $25,518,000  cost-plus-incentive-fee contract  to  
General Dynamics Corp.  Convair Div.  to  design  and   build  first  of  new 
series  of  improved  Centaur  upper  stage  rockets.  General  Dynamics 
would  update  and  simplify  Centaur  system  and   make  it  compatible 
with  Titan  I11  booster.  Centaur,  first  liquid  hydrogen,  liquid  oxygen 
rocket  developed  by  U.S.,  had  been  used  with  Atlas  booster  to  launch 
successfully  Surveyor,  Mariner,  OAO,  and  ATS  satellites.  ( LeRC   Release 
69-65)  
*  Dr.  Murray  Cell-Mann of  Gal  Tech  was  named  winner  of  1969  Nobel 
Prize  in   physics  for  “fundamental  work  in   nearly  all  domains  of  his 
field,”  especially  for  “discoveries  concerning  the  classification  of  ele- 
mentary  particles  and   their  interactions.”  Dr.  Gell-Mann,  who  would 
receive  $72,800 award,  had  introduced  concept  of  quark-hypothetical 
particle  from which  other  particles  of  nucleus of  atom were  made-and 
had  proposed  eightfold-way theory  tha t   many  particles  might  change 
places  and   their  differences  from  each  other  lay  in   their  energy  quo- 
tient.  Dr.  Gell-Mann was  member  of  NASA  Physics Advisory  Committee 
from  1964, to  1969. 
Chemistry  prize  was  awarded  Prof.  Derek  H.  R.  Barton  of  Imperial 
College  of  Science  and  Technology  in  London  and   Prof.  Odd  Hassell 
of  Univ.  of  Oslo  for  work  to  develop  and  apply  concept  of  conforma- 
in   chemistry.  (Getze,  LA   T imes ,   10/31/69;  AP,  W  Star, 
tion 
10/30/69,  A1 ; NASA  OSSA) 
*  Dr.  Harold  Brown,  former  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  was  inaugurated 
as  president  of  Cal  Tech  dur ing   day-long ceremonies  on  campus.  He 
succeeded  Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge, who  had  become  Presidential Science 
Adviser.  ( L A  T imes ,   9 /4 /69)  
October  31 : NAS-NRC  Space  Science  Board  published  Lunar  Exploration: 
Strategy  for  Research  1969-1 975. Best  use  of  manned  lunar-landing 
capability  in   lunar  exploration  would  entail  shift  of  emphasis  from 
technological development  to  exploitation  of  existing  Apollo  technology 
for  scientific  objectives.  Board  recommended : immediately  focusing 
lunar  program  on  optimizing  returns  on  investment  already  made  in 
Apollo  through  maximum  use  of  existing  Apollo  technology;  giving 
priority  to  current  Apollo  lunar-exploration  phase  should  choice  be 
necessary  in   early  1970s between  funding ma jor   new  manned  explora- 
tion  technology  and  funding  extensions  of  Apollo  lunar  technology; 
periodic  reevaluation  of  NASA’s proposed  lunar  landing  sites;  earliest 
possible  extensions  of  Apollo  technology  to  increase  scientific  returns 
and  increasing  interval  up  to  s ix   months  between  missions  to  allow 
incorporation  of  improvements;  early  provision  of  roving  vehicle  to 
transport  astronauts  a t   least  3.1-6.2  mi  (5-10  km)  from  LM; i n c h -  
sion  i n   Apollo  16 to  20  time  frame,  in   high-inclination  orbit,  of  ex- 
periments  i n   gravimetry  by  satellite-to-satellite  tracking  technique, 

355 

October  31 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

altimetry,  magnetometry,  x-ray  and   gamma-ray  spectrometry,  and 
medium- and   high-resolution  photography ; and   increase  in  supporting 
research  in  orbital  sensing techniques,  both  active  and   passive. 
Board  also  recommended  high-priority  consideration  for  long-dis- 
tance,  remotely  controlled,  traversing  vehicle  for  later  missions;  careful 
review  of  Apollo  program  management  structure  to  increase  role  of 
scientists  in   influencing  basic  policy  and   mission  hardware ; specific 
support  to  lunar   experiment  definition  as  integral  part  of  Apollo  pro- 
gram   and   more  substantial  investment  in  developing experiment pack- 
ages  easily  modified  and  interchanged  even  shortly  before  flight;  and  
high-priority  attention  to  management,  handling,  distribution,  and 
analysis  of  lunar  samples brought  to  earth.  (Tex t ;   NRC   Release) 
NASA  announced  new  quarantine  procedures  for  Apollo  12  lunar  landing 
mission  scheduled  for  launch  Nov.  14.  Procedures  had  been  recom- 
mended  by  Interagency  Committee  on  Back  Contamination.  If  astro- 
nauts’  condition  was  normal  at  splashdown  they  would  don  fresh  flight 
suits  and   oral-nasal  masks  instead  of  biological  isolation  garments 
(BIG) used  on  Apollo  11. BIG would  be  available  in  case of  unexplained 
crew  illness.  Swimmer  would  swab  hatch  and  adjacent  areas  with 
liquid  decontamination  agent  and   crew  would  be  carried  by  helicopter 
to  mobile  quarantine  facility  (MQF) on  board  recovery  ship.  Subse- 
quent  crew  quarantine  procedures would  be  same  as  for Apollo  11. 
Spacecraft  would  be  returned  to  Hawaii  by  recovery  ship,  where 
team  would  deactivate  pyrotechnics and   flush  and  drain  fluid  systems 
(except wa ter) .   I t  would  then  be  flown  to  Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory 
for  storage  in  special  room  until  release  from  quarantine  Jan.  7,  1970. 
(NASA   Release  69-148A) 
e  Measurement of  transient Faraday  rotation  of  Pioneer  V I   (launched into 
solar  orb i t   Dec.  16, 1965)   as  i t  was  occulted  by  sun  Nov.  21   through 
Nov.  24,  1968, was  reported  in  Science  by  members  of  JPL   and  UCLA  
staff.  JPL’S  210-ft  antenna  a t  Barstow,  Calif.,  equipped w i t h   automatic 
polarization  tracking  system,  was  used  to  observe  three  large-scale 
transient  phenomena,  measurements of  which  indicated  Faraday  rota- 
tion  of  40’  had  occurred.  Duration  of  each  was  approximately  two 
hours.  Phenomena  appeared  to  be  correlated  with  observations  of 
solar  radio  bursts  with  wavelengths  in  dekametric  region.  (Sc ience ,  
10/31/69,  596-8) 
Tektite  I1 project,  in  which  more  than  50  scientists  would  spend varying 
periods  i n   ocean  over  seven-month  span  starting  in   spring  1970, was 
announced  by  Secretary  of  the  Interior  Walter  J.  Hickel.  Program 
would  include  major  marine  scientific  mission  and   extensive  human 
behavioral  studies,  with  emphasis on  problems  of  small  crews  in  isola- 
tion  for  extended  periods  under  stress  conditions.  (In ter ior   Dept 
Release) 
*  Aerospace  industry  employment would  continue  to  decline  from  record 
achieved  in  1968,  according  to  semiannual  survey  results  released  by 
Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  Total  employment  was  expected  to  drop  
from  1,388,000 to  1,305,000  (67%) between  March  1969  and  March 
1970 because  of  reduced  expenditures  for  civilian  space  program  and 
declining  sales  of  civilian  transport  a ircraf t   during  phase-out  of  cur- 
ren t   models  and  commencement  of  production  on  new  aircraft.  ( A I A  
Release  6 9 4 5 )  

356 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
October  31 
*  Walter  Rundell,  Jr.,  of  Iowa  State Univ.  Dept.  of  History  described  U.S. 
Government  historical  programs  a t   National  Convention  of  Southern 
Historical  Assn.  in   Washington,  D.C.  : “NASA’s historical  program  be- 
gan   in   1959 under  the  leadership of  Eugene M.  Emme.  Two  years  later 
Emme  launched  the  official  publications  with  h is   Aeronautics  and  A s -  
tronautics: A n  American Chronology  of  Science  and  Technology  in   the 
Exploration  of  Space,  1915-1960.  This  has   been  followed  by  similar 
annual chronologies and   chronologies devoted to   the  Mercury, Gemini, 
and   Apollo  projects.  Since  1966 the  office  has   published  several  mono- 
graphs,  some  written  under  contract  by  private  scholars,  rather  than 
being  undertaken  by  the   permanent  staff. A  good  example is   Th is  New 
Ocean:  A  H is tory   of  Project  Mercury,  by  Swenson,  Grimwood,  and  
Alexander.”  (Tex t)  
During  October:  The   Atlantic  commented  on  Apollo  11:  “We  enthusiasti- 
cally  jo in   the  rest  of  human  kind  in  applauding  the  feat  of  the  Apollo 
11 astronauts and   their  NASA  sponsors. It is an   achievement far   greater, 
even,  than  the  construction  and   successful  l a un ch i ng   of  The  Brick 
Moon,  which  happened  in   these  pages  exactly  one hundred  years  ago.” 
Story,  by  Edward  Everett  Hale,  had  told  of  group  of  New  Englanders 
who  had  constructed  artificial  moon  of  bricks  and   launched  i t   into 
orbit  to  provide  perpetual  navigation  aid  for   seamen.  “SO fa r   as  we 
can  determine,  the  launching  of  The  Brick  Moon  provoked  consider- 
ably  less  public  interest  than   the  latest  American  lunar  expedition.” 
(A t lan t ic ,  10/69,  3) 
German  space  program  was  described  in  International  Science  Notes 
published  by  Dept.  of  State.  For  1969, German  space budget  was  $88 
million,  with  $51 million  for   national  program  and   remainder  for  in- 
ternational  programs.  Amount  was  approximately  16.5%  of  total  Sci- 
ence Ministry budget. During  1969 to  1973, program  would  be  directed 
to  extraterrestrial  research,  development of  scientific  and  applications 
satellite  technology  (communications,  TV,  navigation,  and  meteor- 
o logy) ,   and   development  of  launcher  technology  in  cooperation  with 
other  European  countries.  Plans  included  two  German  Azur  research 
satellites  to  measure  ear th   radiation  belt  and   density  composition  of 
higher  atmosphere,  both  to  be  launched  by  United  States  rockets;  de- 
velopment  of  two  solar  probes  (Helios)  in   cooperation  with NASA ;   re- 
search  comsat  (Symphonie)  to  be  developed  with  France;  and  
participation  in  ESRO  research  programs  and  in   development  of  ELDO 
launcher.  (Sc ience  Policy  Bull,  10/69,  51) 

357 

November  1969 

November  1 :   I n   Sydney,  Australia,  during  world  tour  of  Apollo  11 astro- 
nauts,  Astronauts  Michael  Collins  said  NASA  might  someday  send 
women  on  space flights.  “NASA  ha s  never  barred  women,”  he  told  news 
conference.  ‘‘Flying  background  is  usually  what  has  prevented  the 
young  ladies  from  participating.”  (AP, W  Pos t ,   11/2/69,  18 )  
Visiting  Soviet Cosmonauts Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov and   Georgy  T.  Ber- 
egovoy  viewed  Apollo  11 lunar   rock  sample a t   Smithsonian  Institution 
during  tour   of  Washington, D.C.  (W S tar ,   11 /2 /69)  
Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge,  Presidential  Science  Adviser,  addressed  Sigma  Xi 
Convention in  Palm  Springs,  Calif.:  “Science  is  now  a  part  of  society, 
is  a  part  of  politics,  is   a pa r t   of  the  social  and   economic system.  Scien- 
tists  must  carefully  ponder  the  relevance of  their  work  to  the  problems 
of  human  beings.  . . . They must  ask  the  question of  whether  the  scien- 
tific  work  in   which  they  are   engaged  is  of  sufficient  importance  to  the 
progress  of  knowledge  and   its  application  to  be  worthy  of  public  sup- 
port.  They must  face  the  fact  tha t   budgetary  problems  will  be  difficult 
in   the  years  ahead  and  that  we  must  reevaluate  priorities  and   reevalu- 
a te   the  mechanisms  that  we  have  adopted  for   allocating  our   limited 
funds.”  (Tex t )  
In   first  large-scale  attempt  a t   radar   mapping  of  ice-buried  continent  sur-  
rounding  South  Pole,  scientists  of  Scott  Polar  Research  Institute  in 
Cambridge,  England,  would  make  a t   least  20  flights  with  airborne- 
radar-equipped  USN 6 1 3 0  Hercules  aircraft  from  McMurdo  Sound  in  
Antarctic,  New  Yo r k   Times  said.  Radar  equipment  already  had  pene- 
trated  more  than  14,800 f t   of  ice,  recording  profile  of  mountains  and 
valleys  underneath.  (Sullivan,  N Y T ,   11 /1 /69 ,   30) 
*  Article  in  Komsomolskaya  Pravda   acknowledged  publicly,  for  first  time, 
that  U.S.S.R.  had  conducted  underground  nuclear  tests  “several  years 
ago”  to blast  oil  storage areas  in  deep salt bed.  In   same issue Andronik 
M.  Petrosyants,  Chairman  of  State Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  said 
he   had  discussed  Soviet  program  with  US. in   Vienna  in  April.  (UPI ,  
C T r i b ,  11/2/69,  16 )  
November  2:  I n   Washington  Post  Thomas  O’Toole  traced  NASA  plans  for 
planetary  exploration from May  1971  launch  of  two Mariner  spacecraft 
for  Mars  to  Grand  Tours  of  planets  beginning  in  1977  and  1979. 
“What  comes  after  the  two  Grand  Tours?   Nobody  really  knows,  but 
the  space agency’s  dreamers  abou t   unmanned  missions  have  a  plot  al- 
ready written  and  i t  reads a  little  better  than most  science fiction  does.” 
Spacecraft  would  circulate  through  asteroid  belt  for  year,  making 
asteroid counts  and  photographing  larger  asteroids.  Beyond  that,  scien- 
tists  would  like  to  rendezvous  with  a  comet  and   investigate  Saturn’s 
rings.  ( W  Pos t ,   11/2/69,  B3) 
November  2-3:  AFRCL  conducted program  to   measure  polar  cap  absorption 
(PCA )   event  and   to  determine  effects  on  earth’s  upper  atmosphere. 

359 

November  2-3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Thirty-six sounding  rockets-Nike-Iroquois,  Black  Brant,  Nike-Javelin, 
Sidewinder-Arcas, and   Arcas---were 
launched  from  Churchill Research 
Range  to  37.3-  to  124.3-mi  (60-  to  200-km)  altitudes  to  measure 
energies  and   densities  of  charged  particles,  atmospheric  temperatures 
and  composition,  and   geomagnetic  fluctuations.  Background  data  had 
been  provided  from  eight  sounding  rockets  launched  before  program 
and  support  was  provided  by  measurements  from  Vela,  Pioneer,  ATS, 
Explorer,  OV,  and   ESRO  satellites;  from  instruments  on  board  KC-135 
a ircraf t ;   and   from  ground-based  instruments.  ( S B D ,   11/19/69,  80) 
November  3:  NASA’s H G l O  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Peter  C. 
Hoag  ( USAF)  , reached  66,000-ft altitude and  mach  I .4  after  air-launch 
from  B-52  aircraft  a t  45,000-ft  altitude  west  of  Rosamond,  Calif.  Ob- 
jective  of  powered  flight,  28th  in   series,  was  to  obtain  stability  and 
control  data  a t   various  angles  of  attack  and   stability  augmentation 
settings.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
*  Analysis  of  lunar  soil  samples supported  theory  that  moon  once was  par t  
of  ear th   and  became separated  in   cataclysmic tidal  wave,  Dr.  John  A. 
O’Keefe,  Assistant  Chief  of  GSFC’S  Laboratory  for  Theoretical  Studies, 
said  in   lecture  at  Northern  Illinois  Univ.  Theory  would  explain  why 
both  earth’s  crust  and   moon  were  deficient  in  precious  metals,  nickel, 
and  cobalt  and  would  account for  indications of  intense  heat  in  moon’s 
formation.  Heavy  metals  would  have  sunk  to  earth‘s  core  when  i t   was 
molten;  moon  had  no  heavy  core,  so  i t   must  be  par t   of  earth’s  crust. 
(UP I ,   LA  Her-Exam,  11 /4 /69 ;   W  News,  11/4/69) 
0  Sa turn  V  1st stage  (S-IC-12)  was  successfully  fired  for  125  secs  a t  Mis- 
sissippi  Test  Facility  in  first  ground  test  since  failure  of  s-IC-11 
June  
26,  which  caused  test-stand  fire.  NASA  board  of  investigation  had   con- 
cluded fire  had  been  caused by  polyethylene disc  dust  cover  that  should 
have  been  removed  before  test  and  recommended  12   corrections  in 
assembly,  preparation,  and   test  procedures.  ( MSFC  Release  69-237) 
NASA  published  Mariner-Mars  1969:  A  Preliminary  Report 
(NASA  
SP-225),  summarizing  results  of  Muriner  VZ (launched Feb.  24)   and 
Mariner  VZZ  (launched March  27)   and   describing  Mariner  program, 
spacecraft,  flights,  equipment,  experiments,  and   observations.  (Tex t)  
*  ApoZZo  11 astronauts on world tour  arrived  in  Seoul, Korea,  for  overnight 
stay.  They  were  treated  as  state  guests  and   decorated  in  ceremony  a t  
presidential  mansion.  (AP, W  S tar ,   11/3/69,  A21) 
0  Richard  W.  Cook,  former  MSFC  Deputy  Director  for  Operations,  Science 
and   Engineering,  became  Deputy  Director  for   Management,  replacing 
Harry   H.  Gorman,  who  had  been  reassigned  to  NASA  Hq.  Ludie  G. 
Richard,  former  Deputy  Director  (Technical),  Science  and   Engineer- 
ing,  became  Deputy  Director  of  directorate.  (Murshall S tar ,   11/12/69, 
1) 
USAF  issued  RFPS  to  airframe  and  engine manufacturers  for   development 
of  EL1  strategic  aircraft,  formerly  designated  Advanced Manned  S tra-  
tegic  A ircraf t   ( AM S A ) .   Proposals  were  due  by  spring  1970.  (DOD Re- 
lease  946-69) 
launched  Cosmos  CCCVZZI  into  orb i t   with  408-km 
November  4:  U.S.S.R. 
(253.5-mi)  apogee,  270-km  ( 167.8-mi)  perigee,  91.2-min  period, 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Jan.  5,  1970.  (GSFC SSR ,  
and  71.0’ 
11/15/69;  1 /15 /70)  
NASA  launched  two  sounding  rockets  from  WSMR  with  VAM-20  boosters. 

360 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

November  4 

Aerobee  150 carr ied   Naval  Research  Laboratory  payload  to   124.0-mi 
(199.6-km)  altitude  to  photograph  images  of  sun  and   part  of  corona 
in   150-400  A  and   400-650 A  region.  Rocket  and   instruments  func- 
tioned  satisfactorily  and  excellent  spectroheliograms were  obtained. 
Aerobee  150 M I   carried  American  Science  and  Engineering,  Inc., 
payload  to  112.5-mi  (181-km)  altitude  to  obtain  high-resolution  pic- 
tures  of  time  development of  solar  flare  in   x-ray  region  of  spectrum. 
Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily,  photographing  1B  
limb flare  with  appreciable x-ray emission  that  lasted  throughout  flight. 
(NASA  Rpts SRL) 
*  Plans  for   launch  of  first  of  two  Jupiter  probes  from  KSC between  Feb.  26  
and   March  15,  1972,  were  outlined  by  Charles  F.  Hall,  manager  of 
Pioneer  F  and   G  projects  a t   ARC, during  meeting  of  scientists,  engi- 
neers,  and   contractors  a t   Mountain  View,  Calif.  Launched  by  Atlas- 
Centaur  booster,  Pioneer  F would  take  610-770  days  to  reach  Jupiter 
on  voyage  through  planet’s  heavy  radiation  belt  to  within  90,000  m i  
of  Jupiter  surface.  I t   would  carry  60  lbs  of  instruments  and   photo- 
graphic  equipment  to   conduct  13  experiments  to  measure  solar  wind 
and   space dust  and   analyze  Jupiter’s  radiation  and   atmosphere.  Probe  
would  be  first  to  travel  to  asteroid  belt  between  Mars  and  Jupiter  and 
eventually would  leave  solar  system.  Pioneer  G  Jupiter  probe  would  be 
launched  in   early  1973.  (UPI ,   P  Bull,  11 /5 /69)  
*  House  and   Senate  conferees,  in   executive session,  agreed  to  file  confer- 
ence  report  on  differences  between  Senate-passed  [see  Sept.  19 )   and 
House-passed  [see  June  101  versions  of  H.R.  11271,  FY  1970  NASA 
authorization.  Report  would  retain  Senate-passed  authorization  of 
$3.716  billion.  ( C R ,  11/4/69,  D1023) 
At  televised  news  conference  in   Moscow  on  Soyuz  V I ,   V I I ,   and   VI11 
mission  [see  Oct.  12-18],  Mstislav  V.  Keldysh,  President  of  Soviet 
Academy  of  Sciences,  said  U.S.S.R.  hoped  to  have  permanent  space 
station  in  ear th   orb i t   “certainlyy’ within  10 yrs  “and  I  think  less  than 
five  years.”  Station  plans  did  not  rule  out  manned  lunar  exploration 
but,  he  said,  “I  can  only  say  such  operations  are   not  planned  for  the 
coming  months.  Shall  we  study  the  universe  with  the  help  of  auto- 
matic  (unmanned)   spacecraft?  We  shall.  Shall  we  fly  to  the  moon 
and   the  other  planets  of  the  solar  system  in   the  fu ture?   I  think  we  
shall  because  such  travel  is  one  of  the  further  aims  of  mankind  in  
conquering  outer  space.”  (Gwertzman, NYT ,   11/5/69,  16) 
*  AEC-NASA  Nuclear  Rocket  Development  Station  in   Jackass  Flats,  Nev., 
was  “scaling  down  operations,  laying  off  workers,  husbanding  the  fa- 
cilities  i t   already  has-and  waiting,”  New  Y o r k   Times  reported.  Like 
many  U S .   space  research  and   test  centers,  “their  futures  uncertain 
amid  an  increasing  emphasis  on  defense  and   domestic  matters  at  the 
expense  of  space,”  station’s  scientists  and  engineers  were  “waiting  for 
President  Nixon  to  decide  on  the   direction  and   pace  of  the  national 
space effort  in   the  next  decade.”  (Wilford,  N Y T ,   11/4/69,  20)  
Apo l lo   11 astronauts  on  world  tour  arrived  in   Tokyo.  Tight  security 
measures prompted  by  fears  of  possible  attack  by  radical  students  pro- 
testing  Japan’s  defense treaty  with  US. permitted  public  exposure  for 
only  half  hour.  Police  estimated  120,000 people  watched  brief  parade 
down  Ginza,  Tokyo’s  main  street.  Later  astronauts  and   wives  were 
received  by  Emperor  Hirohito  and   Empress  Nagako.  Astronauts  were 

361 

November 4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

time 
presented  cultural  medal  by  Prime  Minister  Eisaku  Sato-first 
medal had  been  presented  to foreigners,  (Pepper, B Sun, 11/5/69,  A2) 
Visiting  Soviet  Cosmonauts  Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov  and   Georgy  T. 
Beregovoy left  New  York’s  John  F.  Kennedy  International  Airport  f o r  
Moscow  after  two-week  US. visit.  During  a irpor t   interview Feoktistov 
said he   liked  US. astronauts’  “sincerity  and   hopeful approach  to  life.” 
Beregovoy  said,  “Friendship  is  a  force  which  will  help  the  world  to 
conquer  space.’’  Apollo  8  Astronaut  Frank   Borman  was  a t   a irpor t  
to   see  them  off.  ( N Y T ,  11/5/69,  52)  
National  Transportation  Safety  Board  opened  hearings  in   Washington, 
D.C.,  on  midair  collisions.  In   last  31 yrs   of  recorded  aviation  history 
there  had  been  only  1 2   m ida ir   collisions  with  passenger  fatalities, 
Clifton F.  von  Kann,  Vice  President  for  Operations  and   Engineering 
of  Air  Transport  Assn.,  testified.  “Even  with  the  explosive growth  of 
a ir l ine   service  dur ing   the  last  ten  years,  there  have  been  ju s t   four 
collisions with  airline passenger fatalities.”  (Sehlstedt,  B Sun, 11/5/69, 
A91 
November  5:  NASA  announced  decision to  install  color  TV  camera  on  Apollo 
12  LM  for   operation  on  lunar   surface.  Decision  had  been  made  after 
three-hour  test  using  unified  S-band  transmitter.  Engineers  had  simu- 
lated  varying  re turn   signal  strengths to  Manned  Space Flight  Network 
tracking  antennas.  Camera  had  been  refurbished  after  flying  in  Apo l lo  
20  CM .   (MSC Release  69-75) 
Apo l lo   I 2   Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  and 
Michael  Collins,  with  wives,  were  welcomed  by  President  Nixon  a t  
m i t e  House  ceremony  on  their  return  from  44,650-mi  around-the- 
world  goodwill  journey.  President  called  38-day,  29-stop  tour  of  22 
countries  ‘‘most  successful  goodwill  t r ip   in   the  history  of  the  United 
States.”  F irs t  men  on   the  moon  had  demonstrated  they  were  “the  best 
possible  ambassadors  America  could  have  on  this earth.”  Armstrong 
said  astronauts had   been  receiv6d  everywhere, “not  just  as  individuals, 
but  a s   representatives  of  the  United  States”  and  of  “scientific  and  
technological  accomplishment  . . . that  serves  as  a  symbol  . . . of  a 
willing  and   talented  nation  assembling  its  resources  and   firm  in  i ts  
w i l l   . . . to  share  for  the  benefits  of  all mankind.” 
During  journey,  astronauts  had  given  22  news  conferences,  been 
received by  20  heads  of  state,  and  received  decorations  on  nine  occa- 
sions.  (PD,  11/10/69,  1563;  Robertson,  NYT,  11/6/69,  22 )  
NASA  had   put  into  operation  $2.6-million,  six-story-high  flight  simulator 
for   advanced  a ircraf t   (FSAA) a t   ARC,  ARC  announced.  Largest  piloted- 
a ircraf t   simulator  ever  built  would  provide  research  data  on  handling 
characteristics  of  faster  and   larger  jets  to  ensure  safe  control by  their 
pilots.  Designed  by  ARC  engineers  John  C.  Dusterberry,  Maurice  D. 
White,  and  Shizuo Doiguchi,  simulator had   motion-generator with  100 
f t   of  lateral  motion,  10 f t   of  vertical  motion,  and   8  f t   of  forward  and  
backward  motion,  combined  with  pitch,  roll,  and   yaw  motions.  I t   was 
operated  by  general-purpose,  digital-analog  computer,  which  could  be 
programmed  with  flight  characteristics  of  most  aircraft.  FSAA  could 
simulate  aerodynamics  of  hypersonic  and   supersonic  flight  by  reentry 
vehicle- such  as space  shuttle.  (ARC  Release  69-13) 
0  Research  to  improve materials  and   lubricants  for   aerospace might  aid  in  
replacement  of  human  h ip   jo in t   with  prosthesis  better  than  any  yet 

362 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
November  5 
developed,  LeRC  scientist  Robert  L.  Johnson  announced.  Bearing  prop- 
erties  of  materials-like 
cobalt  alloy-used 
i n   commercial  h ip   joints 
could be  improved by  changing crystal structure of  metal  to  hexagonal 
form,  Johnson  had  found  i n   NASA  studies.  Interest  in   these  alloys  had  
led  to  cooperative program  with  Cornel1 Medical Center  in  New  York. 
(URC   Release 6 9 4 6 )  
Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff,  Dean  of  MIT  School  of  Engineering  and  
former  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and  
Technology, was among persons inside MIT  Instrumentation Laboratory 
when  students  from  MIT  and   other  Boston,  Mass.,  campuses  demon- 
strated  against  laboratory’s  defense  work  and   were  confronted  by 
police.  Later  Dr.  Bisplinghoff  said:  “The  university  has   set  as  policy  a 
deliberate movement  from  Department  of  Defense  and   space  research 
to  a  different  mix:  more  and   more  research  relevant  to  societal  prob- 
lems.  It’s  going  to  take  a  considerable  time  to  make  the  transition, 
however,  and   i f   we  are   going  to   continue  on  the  same  scale  of  opera- 
tions  . . . we’re  going  to  need  lots  of  time  and   new  money.”  I t   would 
be   up  to  Congress to  change  emphasis,  not  MIT.  Instrumentation  Lab- 
oratory, meanwhile,  would  honor  commitments to  DOD, including  work 
on  Poseidon  missile.  (Nordheimer,  N Y T ,   11/9/69,  61)  
Giant $6-million solar  furnace  had   been  built  by  French  National  Center 
for  Scientific  Research  a t   Odeillo  in   Pyrenees  fo r   tasks  ranging  from 
testing  effects  of  atomic bomb  flashes  to  production  of  exotic materials 
for  electronic  industries,  New  York  Times  reported.  More  than  20,000 
m irrors   focused  sunlight  on  %-in  steel  plate  to  melt  hole  through 
plate  in   seconds.  Furnace  also  had  63 flat, m irrored   panels holding  180 
small  m irrors   to   follow  motion  of  sun  and   parabolic  array   of  9,000 
mirrors,  mounted  to  form  north-facing  wall  of  nine-story  building. 
Movable  panels  on  hillside  reflected  sunlight  into  paraboloid;  tower 
held  material  to  be  exposed  to  extreme  heat  a t   focal  point  of  parab- 
oloid.  (Sullivan,  NYT ,   11/5/69,  49) 
November  6:  Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Laboratories  launched  997-ft- 
tall,  34-million-cu-ft  helium  balloon-largest 
ever  built-from  Hollo- 
man  AFB,  N.  Mex.  Balloon,  pa r t   of  NASA’s cosmic  ray  ionization  pro- 
gram  ( CRISP), was  to  have  provided  high-altitude  platform  for  13,800- 
lb   payload  to  measure  cosmic  radiation  in   upper  atmosphere.  I t   had 
been  scheduled  to  dr if t   eastward  a t   108,000-ft  altitude  for  24  hrs,  but 
descended  3  h r s   after  launch  because  of 
(MSC   Roundup, 
leak. 
11/14/69,  2 ;   MSC  Release  69-70) 
*  House  adopted  conference  repor t   on   H.R.  11271,  FY  1970  NASA   au-  
thorization,  and   sent  i t   to  Senate  for   further  action.  Report  retained 
Senate’s  $3.716-billion  authorization-$280  million  below  FY 1969 
NASA  authorization and  $285 million  less  than  $3.966  billion  passed  by 
House  June  10.  I t   accepted  House  amendment  requiring  astronauts 
to  plant  U S .   flag  on  any  planet  visited  for   first  time  on  US.-financed 
mission,  Senate  amendment  requiring  public  disclosure  of  names  and 
salaries  of  employees  who  exchanged  positions  between  NASA  and 
aerospace industry,  and  House provision  withholding  funds  to  any  col- 
(House  Rpt  9 1 4 0 9 ;   CR, 
lege  which  barred   military  recruiters. 
11/6/69,  H 1 0 6 7 M )  
0  Senate  Committee  on  Appropriations  favorably  reported  with  amend- 
ments  H.R.  12307  FY Independent  Offices  and  KUD  bill,  which  in -  
363 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
November  6 
eluded  $3.715  billion  NASA  appropriation.  (CR ,   11/6/69,  D1034; 
Senate Rpt  91-521) 
Ten  NASA  employees and   four  support contractors  received  special  awards 
a t   White  Sands  Test  Facility  for   participation  in   extensive  Apollo 
propulsion  system  test  programs.  (MSC  Release  69-76) 
November  7:  West  Germany's  157-lb Azur  (GRS-A) 
research  satellite  was 
successfully  launched  by  NASA  from  WTR  by  four-stage  Scout  booster. 
Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  3,145.4  km (1,954.5  m i)  ; perigee,  383.8 
km  (238.5  m i ) ;   period,  121.9  min;  and   inclination,  103".  Pr imary  
NASA  objective  was  to  insert  spacecraft  in to   quasi-polar  orbit  in   which 
i t   could  study  Van  Allen  belt,  Northern  Hemisphere  aurora l   zones, 
and   spectral  variation  of  solar  particles  versus  time  dur ing   solar  flares. 
The  &&-high,  30-in-dia  cylindrical  satellite  carried  seven  experi- 
ments  from  five  German  research  institutes  to  continue  studies  con- 
ducted  by  NASA  Explorer  and   OGO  satellites.  Data  would  be  available 
exclusively  to  German  principal  investigators  for  one  year.  Launch 
was  first  in   series  of  cooperative  missions  between  NASA  and   German 
Ministry  for  Scientific  Research  ( BMWF) under  July  1965  agreement. 
BMWF  was  responsible  for  design,  development,  fabrication,  and   test- 
ing  of  spacecraft  and   experiments  and  for  ground-support  equipment 

November  7 :   W e s t   German  research  satellite  Azur-first 
in  a  cooperative 
satellite 
orbited  f r o m  WTR  b y   NASA   to  
Federal  Repub l ic   o f   Germany  and  NASA   program-was 
s tud y   the   earth's  radiation  be l t s ,   auroral  zone,  and  effects  o f   solar  proton  even t s .   The  
spacec ra f t   wa s   photographed  during  checkout,  be fo re   ma t ing   t o   i t s   Scout  booster. 

364 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

November  7 

and   data-reduction  facilities.  NASA  was  responsible  for   Scout  booster, 
(NASA  Release 
launch,  and   tracking  and   da ta   acquisition  support. 
69-146;  NASA  P ro j  .off;  GSFC  SSR,  11/15/69;  AP,  C T r i b ,  11/10/69) 
Apollo  12  countdown  began  a t   KSC  a t   12:OO  pm  EST  for   launch  toward 
moon  a t   11:22  am  EST  Nov.  14.  Countdown,  originally  scheduled  to 
begin  a t   7:OO  pm  EST Nov.  8,  had   been  started  early  to  reduce  costs 
by  eliminating  overtime  that  would  have  been  paid  to  launch  crews. 
( UPI,  N Y T ,  11 /8 /69 ,20)  
*  Senate adopted  conference report  on  H.R.  11’271, FY 1970 NASA  authori- 
zation  bill  [see  Nov.  61,  thus  clearing  bill  for   White  House.  ( C R ,  
11/7/69,  S13918-9) 
*  Number  of  eminent  selenologists  had  confirmed  dating  of  Apollo  11 
moon  rocks  a t  4.5 billion  yrs  o r  more,  to  presumed  formation  of  solar 
system, indicating  lunar  surface  was  fa r   older  than   any  material  origi- 
nating  on  earth’s  surface,  John  Lannan  said  in   Washington  Evening 
Star. Same lunar   scientists  had   “lashed  out”  a t  what  they  claimed were 
NASA’s “restrictions  on  the  free  flow  of  scientific  information.”  Lunar 
investigators  would  present  findings  at  January   symposium bu t   many 
felt  “information  of  such  significance  should be  published  immediately 
through  normal  scientific  channels.”  Counterargument  was  “that  all 
the  investigators  get  an  even  break  this  way.”  (W  Star, 11/7/69,  A l )  
Analysis of  organic combustion products  generated by  LM descent  engine, 
deemed  major  and   least  controllable  source  of  organic  and  inorganic 
contamination  in   lunar  sample  collection  procedure,  was  reported  in 
Science by B.  R.  Simoneit and  A.  L.  Burlingame  of  Univ.  of  California 
at Berkeley,  D.  A.  Flory  of  MSC,  and   I. D.  Smith  of  MSC’S  White Sands 
Test  Facility.  Major  gaseous combustion  products  found  in   model  en- 
gine’s  exhaust  were  ammonia,  water,  carbon  monoxide,  nitrous  oxide, 
oxygen,  carbon  dioxide,  and   nitric  oxide.  Minor  products  were  acety- 
lene,  hydrogen  cyanide,  ethylene,  formaldehyde,  propadiene,  ketene, 
cyanous  acid,  hydrazoic  acid,  various  methylamines,  acetaldehyde, 
methylnitrite,  formic  acid,  n i trous   acid,  butadiene,  nitrilohydrazines, 
nitromethane,  and   nitrosohydrazines  with  other  oxidized  derivatives 
of  unsymmetrical  dimethylhydrazine  and   hydrazine.  Ion  intensities  of 
species  in   a l l   mass  spectras  were  estimated  as:  gases,  87.7%;  com- 
pounds  of  carbon,  hydrogen,  and   oxygen,  6 .0% ;   and   compounds  of 
carbon,  hydrogen,  and   nitrogen  (with  traces  of  oxygen) ,   5.8%. 
( S c i -  
ence,  11/7/69,  733-8)  
November  8:  Apo l lo   11  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin, 
Jr.,  and  Michael Collins received first Pere Marquette  Discovery  Award 
of  silver  medal  from  Father  Marquette  Tercentenary  Commission  of 
Marquette  Univ.  ( C R Y  12/4/69,  E10223) 
*  Economist  editorial  commented:  “If  the  Russians  are   ever  going  to  get 
another  prestige  victory  over  the  United  States,  and   not  the  sort  of 
worldwide  humiliation  they  have  endured  with  Luna  15  during  the 
American  moon  landing,  and   then  with  the  triple  Soyuz  anti-climax, 
they  will  have  to  pull  something  off  soon.  For   if  no t   the  Soviet plan- 
ners may  see  increasingly  less  reason  to  continue  spending  even  1  per 
cent  of  the  country’s  gross  national  product  on  i ts   cosmonauts.  . . . 
What  is  ironic  is  that  a  Soviet  slowdown  could  be  seen  as  a  m irror  
image  of  the  runn ing  battle  in   the United  States  between  the  scientists 
and   the  space engineers,  but  with  the  Russian  scientists  coming  ou t   on 

365 

November  8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

top.  The   Academy  of  Sciences  is  widely  regarded  a s   the  repository 
of  all that  is  most stuffily conservative in  Soviet science.  Tha t  may have 
been  the  central cause of  the Russian  flop.”  It was  also  blow  to Ameri- 
cans who  relied  for   new  space  funds  on  Nixon  Administration’s  “con- 
tinuing fear   of  what  the  Russians  may  yet  do.”  (Econom is t ,  11/8/69, 
12 -3 )  
*  Dr.  Vesto M.  Slipher,  astronomer who  headed  team tha t   discovered planet 
Pluto  i n   1930  and  discoverer  of  aurora-like  radiations  of  night  sky, 
died  at  age  93.  H e   had   been  director  of  Lowell  Observatory  in   Flag- 
staff, Ariz.,  191619541. (UPI,  L A   Times, 11/10/69) 
November  9:  Canadian  Black  Brant  VB  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by 
NASA  from  Wallops Station carry ing  450-lb  Naval Research Laboratory 
payload  containing  telescope  instrumented  for   infrared  astronomy. 
Telescope,  completely  cooled  with  liquid  helium  to  keep  telescope 
radiation  from  interfering  with  measurements,  contained  photoelectric 
detectors  sensitive  to  optical  radiation  in   region  between  visible  light 
and   microwaves.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily  and  
payload  was  recovered.  (WS  Release  69-18) 
Apollo  12  Astronauts  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.,  and  
Alan  L.  Bean  underwent  last  ma jor   pre3ight  medical  examination  a t  
KSC and  were cleared  for  Nov.  € 4  launch.  Dr.  Charles A.  Berry,  Direc- 
tor  of  Medical Research  and   Operations  a t   MSC, said  astronauts  were 
rested  and   i n   good  spirits  and   showed  no  evidence  of  any  infectious 
disease  that  might  interfere with  launch.  (UPI,  N Y T ,   11/10/69,  10) 
NASA  published  A  Long-Range  Program  i n   Space  As tronomy:   Position 
Paper  of  the As tronomy   Missions  Board  (NASA  SP-213),  which  Board 
had   submitted to NASA  in   July.  Board  of  19 leading U S .  astronomers- 
chaired  by  Dr. Leo  Goldberg, Harvard  College Observatory  Director- 
had  been  appointed  by  NASA  in   autumn  1967  to  consult  scientific  com- 
munity  and  propose program  for  1970s. 
Astronomy had  “far  greater  potential  for   advancement by  the  space 
program  than  any  other  branch  of  science.”  Astronomical  instruments 
in   space  could  reach  regions  of  electromagnetic  spectrum  unable  to 
penetrate  earth’s  atmosphere;  thus,  “most  fundamental  problems  of 
astronomy may  be  brought  within  range  of  solution.” 
Board  provided  guidelines  for  minimum  balanced  program  costing 
$250  million  annually  in   1970s and   optimum  program  “proceeding  a t  
fastest  possible  ra te   consistent  with  available  scientific  and   technical 
manpower”  and   costing  $500  million  annually  dur ing   same  period. 
Proposals  included  “careful  assignment of  priorities  and  balanced  allo- 
cation  of  resources  in   order  to  optimize  scientific  progress  on  such 
problems  a s   the  origin  of  the  universe;  the  course  of  stellar  evolution, 
including  the  ultimate  destiny  of  the  Sun  and   solar  system;  the  exist- 
ence  of  other  planetary  systems,  some  of  which  may  support  other 
forms  of  intelligent  l ife ;   and   other  problems  with  deep  philosophical 
significance  which  a re   of  grea t   interest  to  everyone  and  a re   therefore 
properly  supported  by  public  expenditure.” 
Board  recommended  increased  effort  in  x-ray  and   gamma-ray  as- 
tronomy  using  Explorer  spacecraft  with  large  payload  capability; 
optical  w  astronomy  program  leading  to  large  space  telescope  in 
1980s;  R&D of  detectors  and   small  cooling  systems  for   infrared   astron- 
omy  from  spacecraft  to  complement ground  and   a ircraf t   observations ; 

366 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

November  9 

observation  of  astrophysical  objects  in   longwave  rad io   portion  of 
spectrum;  more  sophisticated  solar  spacecraft  to   extend  observations 
of  solar  surface  and   study  effects  of  so la t   activity  on  ea r th ;   continued 
observations  of  planets  from   ear th   orb i t   using  OAOS  and   Small 
Astronomy  Satellite;  more  advanced  observation  of 
interplanetary 
medium,  cosmic  rays,  and   magnetic  fields,  with  astronomy  instrumen- 
tation  on  planetary  and  Explorer  spacecraft;  and   augmented  experi- 
ments  using  aircraft,  balloons,  and   suborbital  rocket  launches.  (Tex t ;  
NASA  Release  69-149) 
*  Cal  Tech  astronomer  Dr.  J.  B.  Oke  reported  discovery  of  new  kind  of 
galaxy  with  tiny,  brilliant  nuclei  like  quasars  a t   visual  edge  of  uni- 
verse,  billions  of  light  years  away.  Like  quasars,  galaxies  emitted 
powerful  rad io   signals  but,  unlike  quasars,  they  seemed  to  have  spiral 
arms  like  Milky  Way  galaxy.  Thus,  they  might  be  “missing  link  in  
the  evolution  of  the  universe.”  First  evidence  of  new  galaxies  had 
been  found  by  $250,000,  32-channel  photoelectric  spectrometer  atop 
200-in  telescope  at  Mt.  Palomar,  Calif.  (Dighton,  AP,  W  Po s t ,  
11/10/69,  A l )  
New  Yo r k   T ime s   editorial:  “Apollo  12  must  not  be  taken  for  granted. 
I t   is  another  extremely important  step  in   man’s  exploration  of  earth’s 
na tura l   satellite,  a  venture  accompanied  by  grea t   risk  yet  p romXng  
large  rewards  in   additional knowledge.  The mere  fact  that  the  Apollo 
12  astronauts  are   scheduled to  spend  almost three  times  a s  long  walk- 
ing  on  the  moon  as  their  predecessors and   to  br ing   back  to  ear th   part 
of  Surveyor  3-which 
landed  in   1967-emphasizes 
how  much  more 
complex  and   ambitious  this  mission  is.”  Second  moon  landing  might 
seem  less  glamorous  than  first,  “bu t   i t   requires  great  bravery  and   skill 
from  all  involved,  and,  i f   successful,  could  move  lunar  science  ahead 
substantially.”  ( N Y T ,   11/9/69,  14 )  
Joint  US.-U.S.S.R.  moon  flight  was,  again,  advocated  by  Jess  Gorkin  in 
Parade. Magazine had proposed cooperative space venture  Jan.  9,  1966. 
“The  idea had   international appeal.  Residents of  Moscow  spoke warmly 
of  the  concept.  Letters  of  approval poured  in   from   all  over  the  United 
States  a s   well  a s   Europe  and   Asia.  The  proposal  was  supported  by 
newspapers  around   the  world.”  NASA  had   “been  sharing  the  country’s 
space  knowledge  with  other  nations  for   years.”  U S .   scientists  had 
worked  closely  with  scientists  from  nations  whose  scientific  payloads 
were  launched  aboard  U S .   rockets.  (Pa rade ,   11 /9 /69)  
November  10: The   Biomedical  Foundations  of  Manned  Space  Flight:  A   Re- 
port  of  the Space  Science  and  Technology  Panel  of  the  President’s  Sci- 
ence Adv i so ry   Committee  was  submitted  to President’s  Science Adviser, 
Dr.  Lee  A.  DuBridge:  “ In   order  to   define  an  appropriate  mix  of 
manned  and   unmanned  operations,  NASA  will  need  to  ‘qualify man  for 
space  flight’  i n   the  broadest  sense.  Tha t   is,  NASA  should  pursue  a  bio- 
medical  program  which  explores  the  optimization  of  man’s  role  in  
space,  the  limitations  on  his  effectiveness  and   means  to  circumvent 
those  limitations  . . . a  program  to  determine  the  best  use  of  man  a s  
a  space subsystem in   interaction  with  automated  subsystems.  An  effec- 
t ive   program  directed  to  this  objective  exceeds  the  present  capabilities 
of  NASA  and   involves  resources  not  yet  developed  in   the  biomedical 
community.” 
Report  criticized  NASA  for   not  implementing  previous  recommenda- 

367 

November  10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

tions  toward  strong  biomedical  research  capability.  “Pressures  for 
early  and   reasonably  certain  success  led  to  placing  primary  emphasis 
initially  on  validation  of  the  capability  to  construct,  orbit,  and   recover 
manned  spacecraft,  with  long-range,  scientific  goals  in  the  biomedical 
field  set  aside  as potentially  interfering with  flight  objectives.  Scientific 
requirements  were  thus  deemphasized  a t   the   very  time  when  develop- 
ment  of  basic  scientific  knowledge  and   a  cadre   of  scientific  talent 
should  have  been  begun.”  NASA  was  now  faced  “w i th   the  question  of 
qualifying  man  for   more  complex  tasks  in   space,  for  longer  duration 
flights,  and   of  evaluating  man  as  an  integral  par t   of  the  spacecraft 
man-machine  system,  without  sound  biomedical  foundation.”  In   par-  
ticular,  “decisions concerning  development  directions  for  the  next  gen- 
eration  of  manned  spacecraft  systems  for   use  in   ear th   orb i t   must  be 
made  without  an  adequate  basis  of  understanding.” 
NASA  should  plan  overall  biomedical  program  using  resources,  per- 
sonnel,  and  experience of  other  Government areas,  especially  DOD,  and 
support  multidisciplinary  environmental  medical  laboratories  within 
universities.  Report  favored  international cooperation  in   space explora- 
tion  for  peaceful purposes, close  communications with  biomedical com- 
munity,  and   broadened  participation  of  biomedical  scientists  in   space 
flight programs.  NASA  should  affiliate biologically  and  medically  trained 
astronauts  with  research  components  of  NASA  or  qualified  institutions. 
They  should  be  assigned  to  MSC  flight-crew  organization  only  when 
participating  in  specific  missions.  Report  recommended that  NASA  con- 
sider  separating  space biomedical  research  from  organization  conduct- 
ing   space missions  and   from  flight  medical  services.  (Tex t)  
NASA  announced  Apollo  12  LM guidance-system targeting  for   Site  7  land- 
ing  point  on  moon’s  Ocean  of  Storms  had  been  changed  to  improve 
crew’s  ability  to  observe  landing  point  dur ing   late  portion  of  descent. 
Crew  would  attempt  to  land  close  to  Surveyor  ZZZ spacecraft  at  2.990 
south  latitude  by  23.204  west  longitude.  Original  aiming  point  was 
2.982  south  latitude  by  23.392  west  longitude--1,118 
f t   northeast  of 
Surveyor  111.  (NASA   Release  69-148B) 
*  NASA  announced  resignation  of  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate 
Administrator  for Manned Space Flight,  effective Dec.  10. No   successor 
was  named  and  Dr.  Mueller  did  not  reveal  his  plans  for  future.  Dr. 
Thomas 0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  said:  “ I t   is  due  to  Dr. Mueller’s 
creative  leadership of  the magnificent manned  space flight  organization 
that  the  flight  of  Apollo  11 . . . achieved the  national  goal  set  in  May, 
1961.  . . . We  regret  that  Dr. Mueller has   made  the  decision  to  re turn  
to  private  life,  but  recognize  that  decision  comes  at  a  time  when  the 
task  he  accepted  is   complete  and   a  sound  foundation  for  our  fu ture  
national  space  program  has   been  established.” 
Dr.  Mueller,  who  had   directed  manned  space  flight  program  for  six 
years,  had  received  NASA  Distinguished  Service Medal,  achieved  early 
operational  flight  schedule in   Gemini program,  formulated  concept  for  
thorough  and   comprehensive  ground   testing  permitting  all-up  flight 
testing  and  early  operational  availability  of  Saturn-Apollo  hardware, 
introduced  improved  techniques  tha t   established  efficient  management 
of  nationwide  industrial  complex  for  first  lunar   landing  and   return  on 
schedule and  within  cost,  and  formulated  low-cost  space transportation 

368 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

November  10 

and   operations  which  were  basis  for  space  shuttle  and   space  station 
programs.  (NASA  Release  69-151) 
Senate  considered  B.R.  12307,  FY  1970  Independent  Offices  and   HUD  
bill  which  contained  $3.715  billion  NASA  appropriation.  I t   rejected  by 
22  to  46 amendment  by  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  that  would 
have  reduced  F’Y 1970 NASA  funds  by  $100 million.  Conference report 
accompanying  bill  noted  considerable  concern  about  “future  of  fund- 
ing  for  manned  lunar  programs  because of  budget  constraints  . . . and  
a  question  of  National priorities.”  Conferees suggested Congress, NASA, 
and   Administration  review  manned  lunar  program  policy  for  future 
“and  decide  and   determine  policy”  and  that  Committees  on  Appropri- 
ations  be  “advised  a t   earliest  possible  date.”  (CR,  10/11/69,  D1046, 
S13989,  S14010-6,  S14025-50,  S14053;  House  Conf  Rpt  91-649)  
Aircraft  collision  was  “one  of  the  most  important  specific  difficulties 
facing  the  continuing  expansion  of  aeronautical  services  in  the  United 
States,”  NASA  OART  said  in  prepared statement for  National  Transporta- 
tion  Safety Board  [see  Nov.  141.  Continuing  increase  in   a i r   passenger 
and  cargo transportation and  number  of  general-aviation  a ircraf t  would 
further  increase  collision  risk.  Advent  of  jumbo  jet  and  SST  would  in-  
crease  number  of  fatalities  and   value  of  equipment  lost  in   individual 
collisions.  Best  long-term  solution  was  “development  of  an  adequate 
traffic control  system,  adequate  airports,  and  adequate  airspace  utiliza- 
tion  techniques.”  Until  achieved, other  means  for  preventing  collisions 
must  be  developed  for  commercial  and  general-aviation  aircraft.  NASA 
was  developing  two  approaches  for  needs  of  general-aviation.  (Tex t)  
Biggest  engineering  problem  facing  108-yr-old M IT   a t   close  of  1960s was 
one  of  identity,  Eric Wentworth  said  in  Washington Po s t ,   “namely  the 
increasingly  disputed  place  of  war-related  research  within  its  academic 
confines.”  MIT   ranked  first  among  U S .   universities  in   receipt  of  DOD  
funding,  which  in  1968  accounted  for  almost  half  of  Institute’s  $17- 
million budget.  Since March  4  day-long work  stoppage by  students and  
young  faculty  members  protesting  MIT’S  heavy  military  involvement, 
President  Howard  W.  Johnson  and  other  MIT  leaders  had  moved  to 
reassess  MIT’S  role.  They  had   declared  temporary  halt  on  accepting 
new  contracts  for  classified  research  at  Instrumentation  Laboratory 
and   Lincoln  Laboratory  and   established  commission to  review  labora- 
tories’  role.  Commission  had   recommended  continuing  basic  DOD  re- 
search  but  avoiding  advanced  development  of  weaponry,  reducing 
secrecy,  and   shifting  efforts  toward meeting  domestic and   social  needs. 
Meanwhile,  Instrumentation  Laboratory  had   already  “come  to  the 
end  of  an   era.”  I t s   founder  and   head,  Dr.  Charles S. Draper,  had  been 
“eased  out  of  his  job  as  director  although  he  may  continue  in  other 
capacities.”  His  accomplishments  with  laboratory  had  included  on- 
board  guidance  navigation  systems  “that  took  Apollo  11  spacemen  to 
the moon  last  summer.”  ( W  Post,  11/10/69,  2 )  
November  II: Senate  passed  68  to  1,  H.R.  12307,  FY  1970  Independent 
Offices and   HUD   bill  containing  $3.715  billion  NASA  appropriation  with 
$3.019  billion  for  R&D,  $58.2  million  for  construction  of  facilities,  and  
$637.4  million for  research  and  program management.  ( C R ,  11/11/69, 
S14099-108) 
Hughes Aircraft Co.  executive  team held  press  conference aboard  private 

369 

November  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

yacht  near  Cape  Kennedy,  Fla.,  to  announce  company  President  How- 
a rd   R.  Hughes’  intention  to  rename  Surveyor  111  “Hughes  Automated 
Lunar   Observer”  (HA LO ) .   Hughes’  assistant,  Peter  Maheuson,  said 
Hughes  was  understood  to  have  asked  NASA  to  use  acronym  in   all  a ir-  
to-ground  communications.  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.  had  manufactured 
Surveyor   111,  which  landed  on  moon  April  19,  1967.  Pieces  of  un- 
manned  spacecraft  were  to  be  returned  by  Apollo  12  for  examination 
a t  LRL.  (Lannan, W  S tar ,   11/12/69,  A l )  
0  West  German  ambassadors  in   Moscow,  Washington,  D.C.,  and   London 
signed  nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty  sponsored  by  U S .   and   U.S.S.R. 
(Morgan,  W Post,  11/29/69,  A l )  
Secretary of  the  Interior Walter  J. Hickel announced DOI-NASA  agreement 
to  enlarge Merritt  Island  National  Wildlife Refuge within  KSC  area   by 
25,830  acres,  to  total  83,796  acres.  Agreement put  all  but  KSC’S  most 
intensely  used  land   within  wildlife  sanctuary  established  in   1963.  Mer- 
r i t t   Island’s  eagle  population  had  been  depleted  by  land  development 
until  NASA  began  acquiring  land   in   area.  (DOI Release  20242-69) 
0  Behind  “computerized  smoothness”  of  Apollo  12   countdown,  there  was 
“smoldering  and   sometimes  explosive  struggle”  a t   KSC   among  scien- 
tists,  engineers,  and   Government  officials  over  how  to  run   space  pro- 
gram,  John  Noble  W-ilford  said  in   New  York  T imes .   General 
uncertainty  over  fu ture   of  NASA  and   of  space  priorities  was  fueling 
“internal  feud”  which  began  to  be  exposed  after  July  Apollo  11 lunar 
landing.  Successful  Apollo  12   flight  could  intensify  controversy  by 
raising  “stakes”  in   struggle.  Scientists  wanted  greater  emphasis on  sci- 
entific  experiments;  scientist-astronauts  were  disenchanted  a t   slim 
prospects  of  space flights ; engineers,  especially  a t  MSC,  resented  scien- 
tists’  attitude.  ( N Y T ,  11/11/69,  1) 
November  12:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  CCCIX   from  Plesetsk  into  orbit 
with  353-km  (219.3-mi)  apogee,  191-km  (118.1-mi)  perigee,  89.9- 
min  period,  and  65.4”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Nov.  20.  ( GSFC 
SSR,  11/15/69;  11 /30 /69 ;   SBD,  11/14/69,  59) 
0  Os0  V I   Orbiting  Solar  Observatory  (launched  Aug.  9 )   was  adjudged 
successful  by  NASA.  All  spacecraft  systems  had  operated  satisfactorily 
and  all primary  objectives had  been  met.  Spacecraft had been  operating 
at  slightly  lower  than   expected  temperatures  and  elevation  motor  cur-  
rent  was  higher  than  on  previous  flights.  As  result,  elevation  servo 
j i t ter   was  less  than  2  a rc   secs,  zero  to  peak,  best  achieved  on  any  oso 
flight.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
Countdown f o r  Apollo  12  lunar   landing mission continued  at  KSC   despite 
discovery  of  leak  in   fuel  tank.  Officials  said  launch  crews  would  have 
ample time to  replace  tank  and   check  out  replacement without  delaying 
liftoff  Nov.  14.  (O’Toole,  W Post,  11/13/69,  A l )  
Observers  on  ear th   would  have  two  opportunities  to  see  Apollo  1 2  after 
launch  Nov.  14,  NASA  announced.  During  first  opportunity,  57   min 
after  liftoff,  oxygen  release  from  Sa turn  V  3rd  stage  (S-IVB)  would 
be   visible  on  east  coasts  of  North  and   South  America  and  western 
Europe  and  Africa.  During  second opportunity,  about  15 hrs   after  lift- 
off , spacecraft  would  be  visible  dur ing   translunar  coast  through  tele- 
scopes  in   US . ,   Mexico,  Central America,  South  America,  Europe,  and 
western  Africa.  (NASA   Release  69-148C) 

370 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 
November  12 
Dr.  Kur t   H.  Debus,  KSC  Director,  announced  resignation  of  Albert  F. 
Siepert,  KSC  Deputy  Director  (Management),  effective  Dee.  1.  He 
would  become  Program  Associate  a t   Univ.  of  Michigan’s  Institute  for  
Social  Research  and   project  manager  fo r   large-scale  organizational 
research  study  sponsored  by  General  Motors  Corp.  Siepert  had  been 
executive  officer  a t   National  Institutes  of  Health  before  joining  NASA 
and   had   received  HEW’S  Distinguished  Service Award  ( 1 9 3 3 ,   Arthur 
S.  Flemming Award  (1950), NASA  Exceptional  Service Medal  (1968), 
and   NASA  Distinguished Service Medal  (1969) .   ( KSC  Release  464-69) 
Rep.  Joseph  E.  Kar th   (D-Minn.) , Chairman  of  Subcommittee  on  Space 
Science  and   Applications  of  House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astro- 
nautics,  addressed National  Space Club  in  Washington,  D.C.  : “During 
the  entire  spectrum  of  our  second and  th ird   decades  in   space,  manned 
space  flight  ha s   not  merely  been  emphasized,  but  has  literally  canni- 
balized  any  hope  for  ma jor   scientific  planetary,  interplanetary,  com- 
munications,  meteorological,  oceanographic  ( in   cooperation  with 
satellites) , ear th  resources satellite  programs,  etc.!  I  must  conclude . . . 
tha t   the  only  valid  justification  for  early  development  of  the  [space] 
shuttle  is  to  supply  the  newborn  50-100  crew  manned  space  stations 
and   the  manned  exploration  of  Mars.” 
From  1958 to  1969 U S .   had   launched  approximately  750 spacecraft, 
Kar th   sa id :   USAF,  380;  NASA,  241;  USN,  91 ;   and  jo in t   USAF-uSN,  37. 
(Tex t)  
Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe  announced  new  FAA  regula- 
tion  establishing  maximum  noise  level  for  new  subsonic  transport  a i r -  
craft  a t   93-108  effective  perceived  noise  decibels-up 
to  10  epndbs 
less than  those for noisiest  a ircraf t  already  in  service.  Regulation would 
be  effective Dec.  1, but  a ircraf t   like  Boeing  747  with  high-bypass-ratio 
engines for which application  for   type certificate  was made  before  Jan. 
7,  1967,  would  be  granted  additional  time  to  comply.  (DOT   Release 
69-124) 
November  13:  NASA’s X-24A 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld 
R.  Gentry  ( USAF)  , reached  mach  0.65  after  air-launch  from  B-52  a i r -  
craf t   a t   45,000-ft  altitude  over  South  Rogers  Lake  Bed,  Calif.  Purpose 
of  unpowered  flight,  seventh in   series,  was  to  obtain  stability  and  con- 
trol  data  at  30”  upper-flap  setting  and  various  rudder   settings.  (NASA  
P ro j   Off) 
President  Nixon  telephoned Apollo  12  Commander Charles  Conrad,  Jr., 
to  wish  crew  good  luck  on  eve  of  launch.  (PD,  11/17/69,  1604)  
President  Nixon  sent  to  Senate  nomination  of  Dr.  George  M.  Low  as 
NASA  Deputy  Administrator.  Manager  of  Apollo  spacecraft  a t   MSC  
since  1964,  Dr.  Low  had   served  space  program  since  1949,  when  he 
joined  NACA.  He  was  recipient  of  NASA’s Outstanding  Leadership  and  
Distinguished  Service  Awards  and   had  received  Arthur  S.  Flemming 
Award in  1963 a s  one of  the  10 outstanding  young men  in  Government. 
(PD, 11/17/69,  1597) 
0  Apollo  12  prelaunch  press  conferences were  held  a t   KSC  and  MSC .   Opera- 
tions  were  proceeding a s  planned  toward  launch  from  KSC  a t   11 :22  am 
EST Nov.  14. Astronauts  were  in   good  health  and  weather was  expected 
to  be  within  minimums  for  launch.  Liquid-hydrogen  tank  that  had 
leaked Nov.  12  had  been  replaced,  liquid  hydrogen  and   liquid  oxygen 

371 

November  13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

had  been  loaded, and   conditions were  all go. Launch  azimuth had  been 
expanded  to  160’  to  provide  120 min  additional  time  for  liftoff  and  
greater  opportunity  for  launch  on  Nov.  14.  (Transcr ip t)  
In   message  transmitting  to  Congress NASA’s Twentieth  Semiannual  Re- 
por t ,   President  Nixon  said:  “During  this  decade, we  have  successfully 
met  many  challenges  and   have  achieved  significant  progress  in   our 
ability  to  utilize  space  for   practical  applications,  scientific  exploration, 
and   expansion  of  man’s  frontiers.  We  have  subsequently landed  astro- 
nauts  upon  the  Moon,  explored  its  surface,  and  returned  these  men  to 
Earth.  This  historic  event  was  made  possible  because  of 
the  solid 
foundation  of  a broad   range  of  earlier  activities,  and   through  the  skill 
and   dedication  of  the  many  contributors  to  our  space program.”  ( P D ,  
11/17/69,  1603;  CR ,   11/13/69,  S14274) 
*  U S .   and   U.S.S.R.  space  programs  had  common  problem-what 
to  do  
next  in   space  exploration,  Associated  Press  quoted  Cosmonaut  Kon- 
stantin  P.  Feoktistov  a s   saying  in   Moscow.  Both  countries  understood 
need  for   new  space  exploration  technology,  “and  we,  as  well  as  the 
Americans,  are   facing  the  choice  of  a  new  direction.”  (AP,  W P o s t ,  
11 /l4/69) 
*  House  Appropriations  Committee  approved  full  $95.9  million  requested 
by  President  Nixon  for  continued  SST  development.  ( C R ,   11/13/69, 
D1065;  AP,  B  Sun,  11 /14 /69)  
At  42nd  scientific  session  of  American  Hear t   Assn.  in   Dallas,  Tex., 
Dutch  scientist  Dr.  A.  C.  Arntzenius  described  application  of  jet  pro- 
pulsion  principle-for 
every  movement  in   one  direction,  there  is   an 
equal  opposite  movement-in 
experiments  to  increase  blood  pumped 
by  animal  heart  without  increasing  heart  action.  With  research  team 
from  medical  faculty  of  Rotterdam  he   had  strapped  piglets  and  dogs 
to  “frictionless”  table  that  slid  in   synchronization  with  animal  hear t-  
beat.  Movement  made  i t   unnecessary for  ventricle  to   expend  energy  to 
accelerate  blood  a s   it  left  heart.  When  blood  started  toward  animal’s 
head,  table was  moved  in   direction  of  its  feet,  forcing blood  in   opposite 
direction  without adding to  demands on heart.  (UPI ,   W S tar ,  11 /23 /69 ,  
A l l ;   Am  Heart  Assn  P IO )  
0  DOD  announced  General  Dynamics Corp.  was  awarded  $66,850,000  sup- 
plement  to  previously  awarded  USAF  contract  for  production  of  F-111 
a ircraf t ,   bringing  total  obligations  to  $2,608,785,766. 
( DOD  Release 
982-69) 
November   14-24:  Apo l lo   12 (AS-507),  second manned  lunar   landing  mis- 
sion,  was  successfully  flown  by  NASA.  Spacecraft’s  LM-6 ,   In t rep id ,  
made  pinpoint  landing  Nov.  19  on  lunar  surface  near  Surveyor   I l l ,  
which  had  landed  April  19,  1967.  Two  astronauts  deployed  experi- 
ments,  took  photos,  and   collected  samples in   two  EVA  periods  on  moon 
before  lifting  off  to  dock  with  orbiting  CSM-108,  Yankee  Clipper,  and 
re turn   safely to  earth. 
November  14-18:  Spacecraft  carrying  Astronauts  Charles  (Pe te)  
Conrad,  Jr.  (commander) ,   Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.  (CM p i lo t) ;   and  
Alan  L.  Bean  ( LM   pilot)  was  launched  from  KSC  Launch  Complex  39, 
Pad   A,  by  Sa turn   V  booster  a t   11:22  am  EST  Nov.  14.  Launch  was 
watched  by  3,000  invited  guests,  including  President  and   Mrs.  Nixon. 
Weather  conditions  a t  launch were minimal:  peak  ground  winds  of  1 4  
knots,  light  ra in   showers,  broken  clouds  a t   800  f t ,   and  overcast  a t  

372 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

November  14-24 

November  14:  Pres iden t   N ixon   and   his  daugh ter   Tr ic ia   ( fo r eg roun d )   watched  prepa-  
rations  f o r   the   launch  of  Apollo  12  f r o m  KSC, wh i le   D r .   Thomas  0 .  Pa ine ,   NASA   Adm in -  
is tra tor ,   sh ie lded   M r s .   N ixon   f r o m   ra in .   Seconds  in to   flight  a n   electrical  discharge 
the  cond i t ion .  
shut  down   the   spacecraf t   fuel  ce l ls ,   bu t   th e   astronauts  corrected 

10,000  ft  with  tops  a t   21,000  ft.  During  ascent  observers  on  ground 
saw  two  parallel  streaks  of  lightning  flash  between  clouds  and   launch 
pad.  NASA  reported  electrical  transients,  later  attributed  to  electrical 
potential  discharges  from  clouds  through  spacecraft  to  ground,  had 
suddenly shut  off  spacecraft’s  electrical  power  a t   00:36  GET and  turned 
on  numerous  alarms  in  CM.  Spacecraft  automatically  switched  to 
backup  battery  power  while  crew  restored  primary  power  system. 
Commander Conrad  radioed,  “We  had   everything  in   the  world  drop 
out.”  Control  Center  commented,  “We’ve  had   a  couple  of  cardiac  a r -  
rests  down  here,  too.”  “There  wasn’t  time  up  here,”  Conrad  answered. 
Power  system  remained  normal  throughout  rest  of  mission.  Space- 
craft  entered  planned  parking  orb i t   with  118-mi  (189.9-km)  apogee 
and   115.0-mi  (185.0-km)  perigee. 
After  postlaunch  checkout  CSM  separated  from  Sa turn   V  3 rd   stage 
(S-IVB)  and   LM, code-named  Intrepid.  Onboard  TV  initiated  after 
separation  clearly  showed  CSM  transposing  and   docking  with  LM  at 
3:27  GET and   ice  on  windows  from  ra in   €rozen dur ing   liftoff.  Crew 
ejected  CSM/LM  from  S-IVB  and   conducted  first  SPS burn  for  trans- 
lunar  insertion.  Slingshot maneuver  placed  S-IVB  into  ear th  orb i t  with 

373 

November  14-24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS.  1969 

515,549.4-  to   560,429.9-mi  (829,519.0-  to  901,731.7-km)  apogee  and  
93,213.2-  to  109,324.1-mi  (149,980.0-  to  175,902.5-km)  perigee  and  
period  of  39  to  45   days,  instead  of  heliocentric  orb i t   planned,  because 
of  error   in  instrument  unit.  To  ensure  that  electrical  transients  dur ing  
launch  had  not  affected  LM  systems,  Conrad  and  Bean  entered  LM  at 
7 :20  GET for  housekeeping  and   systems  checks.  All  checks  indicated 
systems were  satisfactory.  Translunar  insertion  maneuver  was  so  accu- 
rate  that  midcourse  maneuver  No.  1 was  not  necessary.  Midcourse 
correction  No.  2, a t   30:53  GET, placed  spacecraft  on  desired  hybrid 
circumlunar  trajectory  with  closest  approach  of  69.1  m i ;   third  and  
four th   maneuvers  were  not  necessary.  Good-quality  TV  coverage  of 
preparations  for  and   performance  of  midcourse  maneuver  was  trans- 
mitted  for  47  min. 
Conrad  and   Bean  began  transfer  to  LM  dur ing   translunar  coast  % 
h r   earlier  than  planned  to  obtain  full  TV  coverage  through  Goldstone 
tracking  station.  The  56-min  transmission,  beginning  a t   62 :52  GET, 
showed  excellent  color  pictures  of  CSM,  intravehicular  transfer,  LM  in-  
terior,  earth,  and  moon.  Gordon  reported  crew was  in   good  condition. 
TV broadcast  scheduled for  81:30 GET before  lunar  orb i t   insertion  was 
canceled because of  sun  angle  and  glare  on  spacecraft  windows. 

374  

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT IC S ,   1969 

November  14-24 

November  1&21:  Apo l lo   12  CSM  and  LM   separated  i n  Lunar  o rb i t   and  the  LM  Intrepid 
made   a p inpo in t   landing  on  the  moon  N o v .  19,  600  f e e t  away  f r o m  Surveyor  111, which 
had  landed  Ap r i l   19,  1967. Astronauts  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  and  A l an   L .  Bean  dep loyed  
experiments,  took   photos,  and  collected  samples  i n   two   EVA pe r iod s .   A t   l e f t   Conrad, 
photographed  b y   Bean,  examined  Surveyor  111 in   the  Ocean  of  S to rm s ,   w i th   In t rep id  
on  the  horizon.  Abo v e ,   a  crewman  used  hand  tools  f r o m  a  tool  carrier. 

Spacecraft  entered  lunar  orbit  with  194.3-mi  (312.6-km)  apolune 
and  72.0-mi  (115.9-km)  perilune  at  83:25  GET  (10:47  pm  EST  Nov. 
17 )   after  first  SPS  burn.  During  first  lunar  orb i t   good  quality  TV 
coverage  of  lunar   surface was  transmitted  for  33 min.  Crew  provided 
excellent  descriptions  of  lunar   features.  Second  SPS  burn   circularized 
orb i t   with  76.1-mi 
(122.5-km)  apolune  and  62.5-mi  (100.6-km) 
perilune  a t   87:47  GET.  Conrad  and   Bean  transferred  to  LM  for  11/2-hr 
housekeeping, voice  and   telemetry test,  and   oxygen-purge-system check 
and   then  returned  to  CM .  
November  18-21:  Conrad  and   Bean  reentered  LM  and   checked  ou t  
all  systems  before  firing  reaction-control-system  thrusters  a t   107  :54 
GET  to  separate  CSM  and   LM.  Descent-propulsion-system engine  pro- 
pelled  LM  to  position  4.6-5.8  m i   north  of  expected  ground  track  and 
error   was  corrected  during  powered  descent  maneuver.  LM  guidance 
computer  was  updated  dur ing  powered descent to  compensate €or indi- 
cations  that  trajectory  was  4,200  f t   short  of  target  point.  At  entry  into 
approach phase  trajectory was  close to nominal. Crew took  over manual 
control  a t   370  f t ,   passed  over  r igh t   side  of  target  crater,  and  flew  to  
left for  landing  on moon's  Ocean  of  Storms about 600 f t  from Surveyor 
ZIZ spacecraft  a t  111:32  GET  ( 1 5 5  am  EST  Nov.  1 9 ) .  Landing  coordi- 
nates  were  approximately  3.036"  S and   23.418O  W.  Conrad  reported 
extensive  dust  obscuring  view  during  final  descent.  After  landing  he  
reported  sighting  CMS  orbiting  overhead.  Gordon,  orbiting  moon  in  

375  

November  14-24 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
CM  Yankee   Clipper,  reported  sighting  Surveyor   111  and   Intrepid  on 
moon. 
Conrad  opened  LM  hatch  a t   115:ll GET,  descended  LM  ladder,  and  
deployed modularized  equipment  stowage assembly  (MESA)   containing 
camera  which  recorded  h is   descent  to   lunar   surface.  Conrad  reported 
seeing  Surveyor  I I I   spacecraft  and   sa id   LM  had   landed  25   f t   down- 
range   from  lip  of  crater.  Conrad,  inches  shorter  than Neil  A.  Arm- 
strong,  who  had  stepped  onto  moon  July  21,  had   difficulty  taking  last 
step  from  ladder.  When  he  touched  lunar   surface  at  115.22  GET  ( 6 : M  
am  EST  Nov.  19)  Conrad  said,  “Whoopee!  Man,  that  may  have  been 
a  small step for   Neil,  but  that’s  a  long  one  for  me.”  He  said  lunar   sur- 
face  was  soft  and   loosely  packed,  causing  h is   boots  to  dig  in   a s   he  
walked,  and   sun  was  bright  like  a  spotlight.  LM  had   landed  so  gently 
i ts   shock-absorbing legs  were  barely  telescoped  by  gentle  impact. 
Conrad  recorded  Bean’s  descent  to  lunar   surface  a t   115:52  GET 
( 7 : l 4  am EST  Nov.  1 9 ) .  Shortly  after  color  TV  camera  was  removed 
from  MESA  bracket,  transmission  was  lost  and   was  not  regained  for 
remainder  of  EVA.  Crew  colIected  40- to   50-Ib  contingency sample  and 
reported  mounds  resembling  volcanoes.  Mounds  were  4  f t   high  with 
flattened  tops  5  f t  wide  and   sides  sloping  out  to  15- to  20-ft dia.  Con- 
rad   said  he   saw  neither  breccia  nor  vesicular  rocks,  only  basalts. 
Lithium  hydroxide  canisters  and   contingency  sample were  transferred 
to LM ;   S-band antenna,  solar  wind  composition experiment,  and  Amer- 
ican  flag  were  deployed a s   planned.  ALSEP  with  SNAP-27  atomic  gen- 
f t   from  LM.  Shortly  after  deployment 
era tor   was  deployed  600-700 
passive  seismometer transmitted  to  ear th   signals  from  astronauts’  foot- 
steps  a s  they  returned  to  LM.  During  deployment astronauts kicked  up 
dust  and   some  adhered  to  instruments.  Overall  effect  would  be  deter- 
mined  through  long-term  measurements  of  system’s  engineering  pa- 
rameters.  Conrad  and   Bean  dusted  each  other  off  and  entered  Intrepid 
after  3 hrs   56 min  walking on  lunar   surface. 
After  resting  inside  LM  and   checking plans  for  second  EVA  period, 
astronauts  left  LM  a t   131:33 GET  (10 :55   pm  EST  Nov.  19) ,  1 h r  
min  ahead  of  schedule.  Astronauts  stored  LM  TV  camera  in   equipment 
transfer  bag  for  re turn   to  earth  for  failure  analysis.  Conrad  walked  to 
ALSEP  site  to  check  leveling  of  lunar   atmosphere  detector.  Astronaut 
movement  on  surface  was  recorded  on  passive  seismometer  and  lunar  
surface  magnetometer.  EVA  traverse  took  crew  to  ALSEP  deployment 
site,  Head  Crater,  Bench  Crater,  Sharp   Crater,  Halo  Crater,  Surveyor  
I I I   site,  Block  Crater,  and   back  to  LM.  Astronauts  walked  1,500-2,000 
f t   from  LM,  covering  abou t   6,000-ft  distance,  their  confidence  and 
speed  increasing  with  experience.  After  walk  Conrad  reported  he  had 
fallen  once  but  Bean  had   picked  him  up  without  difficulty.  Conrad 
rolled  grapefruit-sized  rock  down  wall  of  Bead   Crater  about  3 0 0 4 0 0  
f t   from  passive seismometer, but  no   significant  response  was  detected. 
Crew obtained desired photographic  panoramas,  core  samples,  trench 
sample,  lunar   environment  sample,  and   assorted  rock,  dirt,  bedrock, 
and   molten  samples.  They  reported  fine  dust  buildup  on  all  sides  of 
larger   rocks  and   said  soil  color  lightened  a s   depth  increased.  Crew  re- 
ported  Surveyor  footpad  marks  were  still  visible  and   entire  spacecraft 
looked  brown,  a s   i f   something  had   rained  on  it.  Glass par ts   were  not 

376 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
November  14-24 
broken.  Crew  retrieved  par ts   of  Surveyor   I I I ,   including  TV  camera 
and   soil scoop.  They  then  retrieved  solar wind  composition experiment 
and  stowed  it  i n   equipment  bag,  took  stereo  pictures  near  LM,  and 
transferred  all  collected  samples,  parts,  and   equipment  to  LM.  They 
dusted  off,  reentered  LM,  and   jettisoned  equipment  according  to  plan, 
closing  hatch  by  134:82  GET  (2 :44   am  EST  Nov.  20 )  , after  3 h r s   49 
min  walking  on  lunar  surface  in   second  EVA  period. 
While  LM  was  on  moon  Gordon,  orbiting  moon  in   CSM,  completed 
lunar  multispectral  photography  experiment  and   photographed  Wall 
of  Theophilus and   future  landing  sites,  F r a  Mauro  and   Descartes.  Film 
would  be  analyzed  to  aid  scientists  in   planning  for   fu ture   sample  col- 
lection  and  in  extrapolating known compositions from  returned  samples 
to  par ts   of  moon  that  would  not  be   visited. 
At  142204 GET  (9:26  am  EST  Nov.  20)  LM  successfully  lifted  off 
moon  after  31 h r s   31 min  on  lunar   surface,  leaving  LM  descent stage. 
Astronauts  brought  back  95 lbs   of  lunar   surface  samples, parts  of  Su r -  
veyo r  111,  films,  and  miniature  flags of  136 nations,  50  U S .   states,  and 
4  U S .   possessions.  A  1.2-sec  overburn  of  LM  ascent propulsion  system 
caused  by   incorrect  manual  switching  sequence  prevented  automatic 
shutdown  of  engine  and  resulted  in  insertion  velocity  32  fps  greater 
than  planned,  placing  LM  in   orb i t   with  71.4-mi  (114.9-km)  apolune 
and   10.6-mi  ( 17.1-km)  perilune.  Crew  quickly  recognized  discrep- 
ancy,  manually  shut  down  engine,  and   used  RSC  trim  maneuver  to  
enter  planned  orb i t   with  53.3-mi  (85.8-km)  apolune  and  10.1-mi 
(16.3-km)  perilune. 
Rendezvous  maneuvers  occurred  as  planned  and   LM  docked  with 
CSM  a t  145:36  GET  ( 1 2 5 8  pm  EST  Nov.  20 ) .  Tv  was  transmitted  from 
CSM  for  last  24   min  of  rendezvous  sequence.  Crew  transferred  with 
samples,  equipment,  and   fib  to   CSM ;   LM   ascent  stage  was  jettisoned 
and  intentionally  crashed  onto  lunar   surface  a t   5:17  pm  EST  Nov.  20 
about 44.9  mi  (72.2 km)   southeast of  Surveyor  111. Crash was  detected 
by  seismometer left  on  moon  and   produced  reverberations  lasting  for 
more  than  30  min.  Crew  made  CSM  plane-change maneuver  a t   159:05 
GET  and  took  high-resolution  and   stereo-strip  photos  and   tracked  land- 
marks,  to  conclude planned  photography  of  F r a  Mauro,  Descartes,  and 
Lalande. 
November  21-24:  Crew  fired  SPS engine  a t   172:27  GET  (3 :49   pm 
EST  Nov.  2 1 ) ,   injecting  CSM  in to   transearth  trajectory  after  89  hrs  
2  min  ( 4 4  revolutions)  in   lunar   orbit.  Midcourse correction  No.  5,  a t  
188:28  GET,  was  so  accurate  tha t   sixth  correction  was  not  necessary. 
TV  transmission  of  receding  moon  and   spacecraft  interior  was  trans- 
mitted  for  38 min,  beginning a t  192:27 GET.  Good-quality transmission 
of  question-and-answer period  with  scientists  and   press  was  conducted 
for  37   min,  beginning  a t   224307  GET.  F ina l   midcourse  correction- 
No.  7 a t  241  :24 GET-resulted 
in   predicted entry velocity  of  36,116 fps 
CM  Yankee   Clipper  separated  from 
and   flight  pa th   angle  of  -6.47'. 
SM  a t  244:07  GET.  Parachute  deployment and   other  reentry  events  oc- 
curred  as  planned.  Yankee  C l ipper   splashed  down  in   mid-Pacific  at 
244:36  GET  ( 3  :58  pm EST  Nov.  24 ) ,  4.03  m i  from  recovery ship U.S.S. 
Hornet.  Astronauts,  wearing  flight  suits  and   masks,  were  carried  by 
helicopter  from  CM   to  recovery  ship,  where  they  entered  mobile  quar-  

377 

November  14-24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

antine  facility  ( MQF)  with  recovery  physician  and   technician.  Crew, 
physician,  and  technician  remained  inside  MQF  until it was  delivered to 
Lunar   Receiving  Laboratory  in   Houston. 
CM  was  retrieved  and   mated  to  MQF  transfer  tunnel  on  board   re- 
covery ship.  From  inside MQF/CM  containment  envelope,  MQF  engineer 
removed  lunar  samples  and   equipment  through  decontamination  lock 
and   C M   was  sealed  until  delivery  to  LW.  Sample  re turn   containers, 
film,  and   other  da ta   were  flown  to  Pago  Pago   and   to  Houston  for  
transport  to  LRL. 
Pr imary   ApoZZo  12 mission  o b j e c t i v e e t o   perform  selenological  in- 
spection,  survey,  and   sampling  of  mare  area,  deploy  and  activate 
ALSEP, develop  techniques  for   point  landing  capability,  develop  man’s 
capability  to  work  in   lunar   environment,  and   obtain  photos  of  candi- 
date exploration sites-were 
achieved.  All  launch vehicle  and  spacecraft 
systems performed  according  to  plan,  with  only  minor  and  corrected 
discrepancies.  Flight  crew  performance  was  outstanding.  All  three 
crew  members  remained  in   excellent  health  and   good  spirits.  Accom- 
plishments included  first  use  of  hybrid  trajectory,  largest  US. payload 
placed  into  lunar  orb i t   (72,335  lbs  after  lunar   orbit  insertion),  first 
demonstration  of  point  landing  capability,  first  use  of  two  EVA  periods, 
first  recharge  of  portable  life-support  system,  first  double-core-tube 
sample, first  re turn   of  samples from vehicle  previously landed on moon, 
longest  distance  traversed  on  lunar   surface,  first  multispectral  photog- 
raphy  from  lunar  orbit,  and   longest  lunar   mission  to  date. 
ApoZZo  12 was  ninth  Apollo  mission  to  date,  sixth  manned  Apollo 
mission,  and   second  manned  lunar  landing  mission.  ApoZZo  I1  (Ju ly  
16-24,  1969)  had  proved  capability  to  perform  manned  landing  on 
moon  and   return  and   to  retrieve  lunar  samples  for  study  on  earth. 
Apollo  program  was  directed  by  NASA  O 5 c e   of  Manned  Space  Flight; 
MSC   was  responsible  for  Apollo  spacecraft  development,  MSFC   for 
Sa turn  V  launch  vehicle,  and   KSC  for  launch  operations.  Tracking  and 
data  acquisition  was  managed  by  GSFC  under  overall  direction  of  NASA 
O 5 c e   of  Tracking  and   Data  Acquisition.  (NASA   P ro j   Off; Mission 
Commentary;  NASA  Release  69-148;  FonF;  NYT,  11/15-26/69;  W 
Post,  11/15-26/69;  W  S ta r ,   11/15-26/69;  B  Sun,  11/15-26/69) 
November   14: President  Nixon  became  first  Presidpnt  to  witness  space 
launch while  in   office when  he,  Mrs.  Nixon, and  daughter  Tricia viewed 
ApoZZo  12 launch  at  KSC.  President  called  liftoff  “spectacular.”  Later 
he  addressed NASA  personnel in  Launch Control:  “.  . . I  know  there has 
been  a  lo t   of  discussion as  to  what  the  fu ture   of  the  space  program  is. 
. . . I  do   think  you  can  be  assured  that  in   Dr.  Paine  and  his  colleagues 
you  have  men  who  are   dedicated to  this  program,  who  are  making  the 
case  for   i t   . . . as  against  other  national  priorities  and   making  i t  very 
effectively. I  leaned  in   the  direction  of  the  program  before.  After  hear- 
ing  what  they  have had   to  say with  regard  to  our  future  plans,  I  must 
say   that  I  lean  even  more  in   that  direction.  . . . I  realize  that  in   those 
within  the  program  . . . there  are  different  attitudes  a s   to   what  the 
emphasis should be,  whether we  should  emphasize  more  exploration  o r  
more  in   taking  the  knowledge  we  have  already  acquired  and   making 
practical  applications  of  it.  . . . We  want  to  have  a  balanced  program, 
but  most  important,  we  a r e   going  forward.  America  . . . is  first  in 
space.”  (Carroll, B  Sun,  11/15/69,  A l ;   PD,  11/17/69,  1601-2) 

378 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
November  14 
Tass  carr ied   ApoUo  12 report  shortly  before  launch.  Report  described 
mission  objectives  and  ended:  “We  wish  a  successful flight  and   a  safe 
re turn   to  the  courageous  team  of  the  American  spaceship Apollo  12.” 
(Reuters,  W  Po s t ,   11/15/69,  A6)  
0  While  there  was  some  “feeling  of  dejavu”  a t   Cocoa  Beach,  near  Apollo 
12 launch  site,  some  residents,  especially  local  business men,  believed 
interest  in   Apollo  12 was  “ jus t   as  keen  as  in  any  other  launching,” 
New   York T imes   said.  Manager  Hal  Saunders of  Cape Kennedy Hilton 
Hotel  had   said,  while  pace  seemed  calmer  and   more  organized, people 
were  no  less  excited  than  before.  He  felt  there  were  more  tour is ts   a t  
Cape  Kennedy  this  week  than   in   July  bcause  “fewer  were  scared  by 
press  reports  . . . tha t   all  facilities  would  be  jammed.”  Many were  see- 
ing   launch  fo r   first  time  “and   i t   is  still  a  thoroughly  thrilling  experi- 
ence.”  (Blakeslee, N Y T ,   11/14/69,  33) 
*  Liverworts grown  in   lunar  soil a t  LRL  had   reached  three-inch  height  and  
were  “green  and   happy,”  Washington  Post  said,  while  controls,  grown 
in   ear th   soil,  were  “puny-not 
even  an   inch  high-and 
pale.”  Differ- 
ence  in   plants,  commonly  found  on  rocks  and  in   forests  and   among 
first  to  grow  in   volcanic areas,  had  been  considered  small  when  first 
noted  in  August.  However,  LRL  Chief  of  Preventive  Medicine,  Dr. 
William Kemmerer, now  called difference “one  of  the  really  unexpected 
results  of  the  lunar  mission.”  P lan t   tests  had  been  conducted  to  see  if 
lunar  material  caused  harm   to   ear th   plants.  Control  plants  had  been 
grown  in   desert  soil.  Tobacco  cells  and   soy  bean  cells  in   culture  with 
lunar   soil had  done better  than   controls  in   ear th  so i l ;   ferns were  grow- 
ing  “more  spectacularly”  than  some  grown  in   ear th   soil.  Man’s  knowl- 
edge  of  trace  mineral  requirements  in   plants  and   animals  was  “very, 
very  limited,”  Dr.  Kemmerer had  said.  “I  don’t  think  we’ll  find  some- 
thing  going  on  in  lunar  nutrition  that we  don’t  find  on  the  earth.  I  do 
(Cohn,  W  Po s t ,  
think 
important  questions  have  been  raised.” 
11 /14 /69)  
0  Control  of  Azur,  West  German  research  satellite  launched  by  NASA  Nov. 
7, was  phased  over  to  German  control  center.  Turn-on  and   checkout of 
all  subsystems  and  instruments  had  been  completed  within  six  days 
after  launch.  All  housekeeping  and   scientific  da ta   values  were  well 
within  expected  ranges,  but  spurious  commands  had   been  occurring 
intermittently;  program  of  protective  commands  had  been  developed 
to  keep  spacecraft  in   proper  mode  of  operation.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
NASA  and   DOD announced  signing  of  agreement  between  NASA  and   U S .  
Army  Materiel  Command  to  expand  national  capability  in  low-speed 
aviation  technology  through  jo in t   use  of  NASA  test  chambers,  wind 
tunnels,  and   other  facilities.  Agreement  expanded  effort  a t   ARC  and 
established  similar  arrangement  a t   LaRC  and   LeRC. 
(NASA Release 
69-150) 
*  LeRC  announced  award  of  $2.5-million  letter  contract  to  United  Aircraft 
Corp.’s  P ra t t   & Whitney  Div.  to  build  and   test  18 RL-10  A3-3  rocket 
engines.  Engine,  developed  in   1958  and   first  liquid-hydrogen  and  
liquid-oxygen  engine  to  be   flown  in  space,  would  be  used  on  Centaur 
high-energy  upper-stage  rockets  in   early  1970s. (LeRC  Release  69-68)  
U S .   astronauts  and   Soviet cosmonauts,  in   jo in t   space efforts,  could  suc- 
ceed  in   improving  US.-Soviet  relations  where  “tired  old  politicians” 
had   failed,  Sen.  Barry  M.  Goldwater  (R-Ariz.)  said  dur ing   visit  to 

379 

I 

November  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

MSC.  “Maybe  this  would  be   a  way  to   break  through  to   the  rulers  of 
Russia.  When  you  get  professional  people together-scientists, 
aviators 
. . . you  find  you  have  many  common  problems.”  Sen.  Goldwater said 
he  hoped  Apollo  8 Astronaut  Frank   Borman  would  not  seek  Senate 
seat  i n   1970  but  would  wait  awhile  “and  take  mine.” 
(UPI ,   N Y T ,  
11/16/69,  79)  
WAF  announced  decision  not  to  fund  C-5A  procurement  beyond  FY 
1970 program  of  23  aircraft.  Budget  constraints had  reduced  program 
requirements  from  120  to  81 aircraft.  (DOD Release  998-69) 
National Aeronautic  Assn.  conferred  title  “Elder  Statesman  of  Aviation” 
on  Adm.  Joseph  J.  Clark  ( USN,  Ret.) , Katherine  Stinson  Oteroo,  and  
William A.  Patterson,  retired  President  of  United  Air  Lines.  (W  Star, 
11/15/69,  A3 )  
launched  Cosmos  CCCX  into  orb i t   with  332-km 
November  15:  U.S.S.R. 
(206.3-mi)  apogee,  203-km  ( 126.1-mi)  perigee,  89.8-min  period, 
(GSFC  S S R ,  
and   64.9”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Nov.  23. 
11 /15 /69 ;   11 /30 /69)  
Washington  Post  editorial  on  Apollo  1 2   launch:  “Through  the  peculi- 
arities  of  our  time,  we  a re   all  about  to  become  participants,  albeit 
vicariously,  in   the  kind  of  research  and   exploration  that  has  been 
carried  out  previously  by  lonely  scientists  almost  in   isolation.  Radio 
and   television  make  it  possible  for   us   to  watch  and  to  hear  two  ex- 
plorers  as  they  go  about  the  somewhat mundane  business  of  making 
and   recording  observations,  picking  up  rocks,  and   setting  up  equip- 
ment.  As  these  flights  roll  on  through  the  next  few  years,  we  will 
watch  the  slow  process  of  exploration proceed.  In   a way,  it will  be  l ike  
being  there  when  Darwin  traveled  around  the  world  and   made  the  ob- 
servations  that  resulted  in   his  theory  of  evolution  o r   when  Lewis  and 
Clark  explored  the  Northwest. Not  too  much  should  be  expected  from 
any  one  tr ip   o r   any  one set  of  experiments. It is   the  totality  of  knowl- 
edge,  not  its  fragments,  that  counts.”  ( W  Pos t ,   11/15/69,  A20) 
Americans  had  generated  only  “scant  enthusiasm”  for   Apollo  12   launch, 
New  York  Times  said.  I n   contrast  to  Apollo  11 ,   July  16,  “television 
sets  in  bars   and  business  offices drew  only  small, languid  crowds.  . . .” 
Collective  sense  of  anticlimax  was  “perhaps  predictable  considering 
the  intense  national  emotion  spent  on  the  first  moon  landing  four 
months ago.”  Contributing to indifference might have been  “the mount- 
ing  preoccupation  with  the  war  in   Vietnam,  the  peace  rallies,  the  con- 
troversy  surrounding  Vice  President  Rgnew  and   earthly  social 
problems.”  However,  “there  were  no  reports  of  the  kind  of  demonstra- 
tions  tha t   protested  the  Apollo  11 flight.”  Marchers  in   antiwar  protests 
had  appeared  “to  show  little  interest”  in   Apollo  12 .   (Reinhold, N Y T ,  
11 /15 /69)  
*  FAA  announced  proposal  to  extend  hourly  flight  quotas  in   effect  a t   five 
high-density  a irpor ts   serving  New  York,  Chicago,  and   Washington, 
D.C.,  for  9-12  mos  beyond  Dec.  31 expiration  date.  Experience  with 
quota  system  since  June  1 inception  indicated  i t   had  relieved  conges- 
tion  and   reduced  delays.  (FAA Release  69-125) 
November  1 6 :   During  “Meet  the  Press”  interview  shown  on  NBC   TV  Dr. 
Thomas  0.  Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  said  he  thought  Apollo  11 
spacecraft  would  have  crashed  if  Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  had 
not  piloted  i t   on  final  lunar   approach.  Quick  reactions  by  Apollo  12  

380 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
November  16 
crew  had  helped  save  mission  from  power  fa i lure   on  its  launch.  “I 
think  tha t   the  [ApoZZo  121 launch  would  have  been  a  success.  But  we 
felt  a  good  deal  better  with  the  astronauts  there.”  Dr.  Paine  thought 
U.S.S.R.  would  attempt moon  tr ips   “in  the  next  few  years.”  ( W  Po s t ,  
11/17/69,  A3) 
0  First  public  display  of  21.1-gm  ApoZZo  11  moon  rock  a t   American 
Museum  of  Natural  History  in   New  York  attracted  largest  crowd  in  
museum’s  history-42,195 
persons.  Display  would  run   for  2%  mos 
a s  highlight  of  museum’s  centennial celebration.  (NYT,  11/16/69,  66 ;  
AP, W  S tar ,   11/17/69,  A l )  
Merger  of  U S .   and   U.S.S.R.  satellite  systems  into  worldwide  comsat 
link  for  all nations was proposed  in  report  of  Sept.  21-25  international 
conference a t   Talloires,  France,  released  by  sponsors  Carnegie  Endow- 
ment  for   International  Peace  and   Twentieth  Century  Fund.  I n   Com-  
municating  b y   Satellite:  A n   International  Discussion,  task  force  ap-  
pointed  to  consider new  rules  and   regulations  for   international  satellite 
communications  said : “Obstacles  undoubtedly  exist  to  achieving  the 
goal  of  an   integrated,  global  system,  but  technical  compatibility 
between  the  two  ma jor   satellite  communications systems-Intelsat 
and  
Intersputnik  ( through   the  Soviet  Orb i ta)  -is 
not  difficult  to  obtain. 
Their  orbital  systems  are   complementary;  their  frequency  plans  can 
be  coordinated;  a  single  ground  station  can  operate  in   either  system, 
and  their  transmitting  and  receiving  equipment  can  be   adapted  for 
operation  in   both  systems.” 
All  nations  should  have  access  to  global,  integrated  comsat  system 
with  “willingness  and  ability  to  accept certain  technical  and   adminis- 
trative  requirements”  only  relevant  consideration.  No  political  condi- 
tions  should  be  applied  to  membership.  Voting  rules  should  “take 
account of  the  special contributions”  of  countries  like U S .   and U.S.S.R. 
“while  recognizing  the  interests  of  virtually  all  nations  in   the  basic 
rules  of  operation  of  the  system.”  No   nation  should  be  allowed  to 
broadcast  sound  and   TV  into  territory  of  other  nations  without  their 
consent.  (Tex t ;   AP,  W  S tar ,   11/17/69,  A12) 
Space race was  underway in  summer  of  1945, as US . ,   U.K.,  and  U.S.S.R. 
searched  for  key  men  who  had  effected  Germany’s  “staggering  lead  in 
rocketry,”  David Owen  of  London  Daily  Telegraph said  in   Washington 
Pos t .   Article  traced  escape  of  Wernher  von  Braun  and  Peeneiniinde 
rocket  scientists  from  defeated  German Gen.  Hans  Kammler  who  had 
ordered  them  shot  rather  than  have  them  captured  by  Allies;  hiding 
of  rocket  drawings  and   records  in   remote  Harz Mountain  cave;  volun- 
tary  surrender  of  scientists  to  US . ;   and withdrawal  of  scientists,  docu- 
ments,  and rockets by U S .  before U.K.  and  U.S.S.R.  could capture  any 
but  small  pa r t   of  German  rocketry  effort.  ( W   Pos t ,   11/16/69,  B3) 
November  17:  NASA’s H L l O  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA test  pilot 
William H.  Dana,  reached  66,000-ft  altitude  and   mach  1.6  in   powered 
flight  after  air-launch  from  B-52  a ircraf t   a t  45,000-ft  altitude west  of 
Rosamond,  Calif.  Objectives  of  flight,  29th  in  series,  were  to  obtain 
stability  and   control  data  and   airspeed  calibration.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
Senate  and   House  conferees  on  H.R.  12307,  N 1970  Independent 
O5ce s   and   HUD appropriations  bill,  agreed  to  $3.006-billion  NASA  R&D 
appropriation  instead  of  $3  billion  proposed  by  House  and   $3.019 
billion  proposed  by  Senate.  Appropriation  for  construction  of  facilities 

381 

November  17 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

was  $53.2 million  ss  proposed  by  House  ra ther   than   $58.2  million  as 
proposed by  Senate, and  research  and program management appropria- 
tion was  accepted  a t  Senate’s  $637.4 million  rather  than  $643.7 million 
proposed  by  House.  Conferees  also  agreed  on  $44O-million  FY  1970 
(Conference  Rp t   91-649;  CRY   11/17/69, 
appropriation  for   NSF. 
D1078) 
Space  p rog r an   could  provide  tools  and   knowledge  to  help  eliminate  a i r  
pollution,  NASC  Executive Secretary William  A.  Anders,  former Apollo 
8  astronaut,  said  in   speech  before  Governors’  Conference  on  Cali- 
fornia’s  Changing  Environment  in   Los  Angeles.  With  remote  sensors 
i n   a ircraf t   “pilot  can  quickly  and   accurately map  pollution  levels  over 
a wide  axea  and   range  of  altitudes.”  Pollution  map  of  entire U S .  could 
he  generated  each  day.  “Thus,  aircraft  and   satellites  with  these  remote 
sensors  offer  the  unique  advantage  of  being  able  to  view  large  areas 
through  new  eyeballs  very  quickly  and   selectively.  Further,  by  com- 
puter,  the  data  can  be  reduced  to  formats  that  can  be  quickly  and  
easily  understood.”  Aircraft  and   satellite  surveys would  provide  “data 
which  supplement  surface  techniques  and   which,  in   some  cases,  can’t 
be  gathered  in   any  other  way.”  Rather  than  fantastically  expensive, 
satellite  measurements  could  “be  competitive  with  surface  systems.” 
(Tex t)  
0  Soviet space program  had  been  severely  set  back  by  ‘‘catastrophic  explo- 
sion  of  10-million-lb-thrust  prototype  booster  dur ing   preparatory 
launch  operations  a t  Tyuratam  last  summer,”  Av ia t ion   Week & Space 
Technology  reported.  U.S.S.R.’s  manned  orbiting  platform  (MO P )   pro-  
gram,  “already  a t  least  a  year  behind  schedule and   proceeding  slowly, 
has  been  further  retarded  because  of  the  . . . failure.  Last  month’s 
triple  Soyuz  launch  has  emerged  as  a  prime  example  of  rescheduling 
necessitated  by  the  booster’s  absence  and   by  the  aftermath  of  short- 
term  and  conflicting  political  decisions.  . . . 
“Failure  of  the  booster  prototype  was  only  one  event  in   a  largely 
chaotic  year  fo r   the  Soviet space program.  During  1969  the  Russians: 
shifted  much  of  their  large  booster  inventory  to  military  purposes  in  
connection  with  the  Chinese  border  crisis” ; postponed  scheduled  late 
spring  launch  of  Soyuz  V I   “because  all  remaining  non-military  facili- 
ties  were in   turn   preempted by  a  highly  compressed lunar  effort”;  and  
hastily  launched  Luna  X V   “in  an   effort  to  prove,  in   event  of  an 
Apollo  failure,  tha t   a t   least  a  one-way  soft  landing  from  lunar   orb i t  
could  be  performed  unmanned  and,  alternately,  that  failure  would  not 
result  in   loss  of  human  life.”  ( A v  Wk, 11/17/69,  26-7) 
SST  economics  were  discussed  by  FAA  Administrator  John  H.  Shaffer 
before  Long  Island  Assn.  of  Commerce  and   Industry  in   Manhasset, 
N.Y.  Study  of  simulated  SST operation  in   1 9 8 0 ~ ~  with  comparison  of 
SST and   subsonic  jets  based  on  total  operating  cost  ra ther   than  direct 
operating  cost  and   using  1969  values,  had   shown  “SST  beats  the  707 
substantially  and  comes much  nearer  to   equaling  the  impressively low 
747  costs.”  Elements  of  ground  support  and   overhead  costs  gained 
advantage  of  SST’S  greater  productivity  in   seat-miles  per  hour.  “The 
2707-300  [SST] is  two  th irds   as big  as  the  747  and  i t   flies  three  times 
a s  fast,  so  it will  do   twice  a s  much  as  the  747  (and  4% times  the  707 
o r   DC - 8 )   i n   the  same  time  period.”  By  1978,  SST introduction  date, 
aircraft’s  total  operating  cost  “comes  within  one-tenth  of  a  cent  per 

382 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

November  17 

seat-mile of  matching the  440-seat economy  version of  the  747.”  (Tex t)  
Univ.  of  California  a t  Berkeley  astronomer Dr.  David  Cudaback reported 
that  observations  indicated  dust  clouds  in   sky  might  contain  great 
quantity  of  diamond  grains,  each  few  thousandths  of  inch  in  diameter. 
(AP, W  Star, 11/18/69,  A10) 
November  18:  President  Nixon  signed  H.R.  11271  (P.L.  91-119),  $3.715- 
billion  NASA  FY  1970 Authorization  Act.  It provided  for   R&D:  Apollo, 
$1.691  billion ; space  flight  operations,  $225.6  million;  advanced mis- 
sions,  $2.5  million;  physics and   astronomy, $117.6  million;  lunar  and  
planetary  exploration,  $138.8  million ; and   bioscience,  $20:4  million. 
Space  applications  R&D  authorization  was  $128.4  million.  Also 
authorized  were  $112.6  million  for  launch  vehicle  procurement,  $9 
million  fo r   sustaining  university  program,  $27.5  for  space  vehicle 
systems,  $33.5  for  electronic  systems,  and   $22.1  million  for  human 
factor  systems. 
Act  allocated  $20.2  million  fo r   basic  research,  $36.9  million  for 
space  power  and   electric  propulsion  systems,  $50  million  for  nuclear 
rocket,  $22.8  million  for   chemical  propulsion  systems,  $278  million 
for  tracking  and   data  acquisition,  and  $5  million  for  technology 
utilization. 
For   construction  of  facilities,  law  authorized  $8  million  for  ERC, 
$670,000  for  GSFC,  $12.5  million  for  KSC,  $4.7  million  for  LaRC,  $1.7 
million  for   MSC,  and  $500,000  for  Wallops  Station.  Act  authorized 
$637.4  million for   research  and  program management.  ( P D ,  11 /24 /69 ,  
1643;  PL   91-119) 
*  Senate and  House  adopted conference report  on H.R.  12307, Independent 
Offices and   HUP  appropriations bill  including FY 1970 NASA  funding of 
$3.697  billion  and   $440  million  for  NSF.  Bill  was  forwarded  to  Presi- 
dent  Nixon  for  signature.  (CR,  11/18/69,  S14574-9,  H10981-7) 
House by  vote  of  362  to  25,  passed  and  sent  to  Senate  H.R.  14794, DOT 
FY  appropriations  bill  containing  $96  million  for  SST  development 
program.  (CR,  11/18/69, H10990-1034) 
President  Nixon  approved  S.  1857,  $480-million  National  Science 
Foundation  Authorization  Act,  1970  (P.L.  91-121). 
( P D ,  11/24/69, 
1643) 
Sen. William Proxmire  ( D-Wis.)  introduced,  for  himself  and  cosponsors, 
S.J.R.  285,  authorizing Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  to  under- 
take  comprehensive study  of  all  possibilities  for   international  coopera- 
tion  in   space exploration.  ( C R ,  11/18/69,  S 1 4 5 9 3 4 )  
President  Nixon  announced membership  of  Task  Force  on  Air  Pollution, 
with  Arie  Jan   Haagen-Smit,  Chairman  of  California  Air  Pollution 
Board,  a s  chairman.  I t  would  evaluate  effectiveness of  efforts  to  curtail 
a ir   pollution  and   recommend  further  actions.  ( P D ,   11/24/69,  1624)  
New  York  Times editorial asked:  “Why  should lunar   research  be  limited 
to  what  this  country can  afford?  Even  if  the  Soviet Union  is  unwilling 
to  cooperate,  there  a re   very  substantial human  and   material  resources 
in Western  Europe,  Japan  and   other  areas  that  could  be  mobilized  for 
the  task  of  lunar  exploration  and   settlement  that  lies  ahead.  President 
Nixon  could  demonstrate  h igh   statesmanship  by  offering  to  turn   the 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  into  the  International 
Aeronautics  and   Space  Administration  if   others  will  join  to  help 
carry   the  burdens  of  the  effort  and   provide  additional  talents  for  the 

383 

November  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

job.  And  if  NASA  became  IASA,  even  Moscow-after 
its  recent  space 
disappointments-might  see  advantages  in   joining  the  common  effort 
( N Y T ,   11 /18 /69)  
to  make  the  moon  a  lever  for  uniting  mankind.” 
AEC  released  report  of  investigation  into  May  11 fire  a t  AEC  plutonium- 
handling  facility  a t   Rocky  Flats,  Colo.  Estimated  damage  to  buildings 
and   equipment  was  $45 million  excluding  cost  of  plutonium  recovery. 
F ire  had  originated  in   plutonium  storage cabinet;  cause was  unknown. 
(A EC   Release M-257) 
November   18-19:   LeRC’S  work  in  development  of  longer  lasting,  high- 
temperature-enduring,  corrosion-resistant  materials  was  described  a t  
conference  on  Research  in   Aerospace  Materials  a t   Center.  Conference 
was  attended  by  400  scientists  and   engineers  from  universities,  indus- 
try,  and   Government.  New  alloying  concept  had  yielded  “WAZ-20,” 
alloy  of  nickel,  tungsten,  aluminum,  zirconium,  and   carbon  with  melt- 
ing  point  150’  higher  than   conventional  cast-nickel-base  alloys  and  
higher  strength  a t   2,200°F,  for  possible  use  in   1st-stage turbine  stator 
vanes.  Also  reported  were  use  of  prealloyed powders  to  improve prop- 
erties  of  nickel-base  alloys ; dispersion-strengthened nickel-base  alloys 
and   solid-state welding  of  these  materials;  developments  in   chromium, 
molybdenum,  and   tungsten  alloys  and   fiber  composites;  and  experi- 
mental  techniques  developed  to  predict  properties  of  materials  after 
10-20  yrs  of  use  from  tests  lasting  less  than  year.  (LeRC  Release 
69-70;  LeRC  PIO) 
November   19:   In   international  reaction  to  Apo l lo   12  moon  walk  Moscow 
Radio announced landing  eight minutes after touchdown, followed  with 
brief  progress  bulletins,  and  broadcast  seven-minute  film  on  event 
seven  hours  after  LM  landed  on  moon.  Foreigners  in  Moscow  said  BBC 
broadcast  was  jammed  by  two  stronger  stations  just  before  lunar 
touchdown. 
Pope  Pau l   VI  at  Vatican  watched  astronauts  on  TV,  then  knelt  for 
shor t   prayer.  He  sent  message  to  President  Nixon:  “Many,  many 
congratulations  to  you  and   the  American  nation  on  yet  another  mag- 
nificent  step  for  the  human  race.” 
S ir   Bernard  Lovell,  Director  of  U.K.’s  Jodrell  Bank  Experimental 
Station,  saluted  “precision  and  accuracyyy of  Apo l lo   12   lunar   landing. 
He  said,  “Until  the  Russians  achieve  a  rocket  with  the  thrust  of  the 
order  of  Saturn  5,  or  greater,  i t   is  unlikely  they  will  be  able  to  stage 
any  manned  flight  comparable  with  Apollo.”  London’s  morning  news- 
papers  put  Apo l lo   12  story  well  down  on  fron t   pages  in   contrast  to 
Apo l lo  11  banner  headlines. 
I n   Helsinki,  Finland,  Soviet  diplomats  attending  strategic  arms 
limitation  talks  toasted  Apo l lo   12  crew. 
Tokyo  TV  dealers  expressed  unhappiness  because  repeat  of  run  on 
color  sets  after  Apo l lo   11   landing  failed  to materialize. 
West  German Foreign  Minister Walter  Scheel said Apo l lo   12  was  an 
invitation to Europe  to  organize its  own  space potential. 
Egyptian  newspapers  gave  Apo l lo   12   second  billing  to  continuing 
conflict with  Israel.  I n  Poland millions watched  lunar  landing by  direct 
TV  transmission.  I n   Sweden  TV  reception  was  poor  and   viewer  inter- 
est  lagged. 
Former  Argentine  President  Arturo  U.  Illia,  in  Buenos  Aires,  called 
lunar   landing  “a  victory  for   democracy.” 

384 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
November  19 
Australians  watched  landing  10  secs  before  U.S.  because  of  time 
lag.  I n   France many  viewers were  unable  to  watch  landing  because  of 
electric  utility  strikes. Moon  walk  was  one  of  few  programs  shown  on 
Italian  TV  during  day  of  general  strike. 
Shah  of  I r a n   sent  congratulations  to  President  Nixon  and  Apo l lo   1 2  
crew  for   “untiring  endeavor.”  Landing  was  shown  live  on  Iran ian   TV. 
West  Germany’s  Wickert  Public  Opinion  Institute  estimated 82%   of 
German  adults  watched  TV shots  of  lunar  landing,  92%   watched 
Apollo  1 1 .   I t   concluded Apo l lo   1 2   lacked  suspense  that  attended  first 
moon  shot.  (AP,  B  Sun, 11/20/69,  A l ;   Robinson,  NYT,  11/20/69, 
30 ;   W Post,  11/20/69,  A16;  Spencer,  W  Star,  11/21/69,  A6) 
Reaction  to  Apo l lo   12   lunar   landing  was  “almost  a  ho-hum,”  Associated 
Press  reported.  “It  seemed  t o   indicate  they  a r e   now  taking  moon 
voyages  for   granted.” 
At  White  House,  President  and  Mrs.  Nixon  arose  before  dawn  to 
watch  moon  walk  on  TV.  President  had   commented  i t   was  “first  time 
anybody  has  sung  from  the  moon,”  as  Astronaut  Charles  Conrad,  Jr., 
hummed  while  conducting  lunar   tasks. 
I n   Philadelphia’s  Franklin  Institute,  where  thousands  had  gathered 
in   July  to  watch  Apollo  11   lunar  landing,  only  45  persons  showed  up 
to  watch  Apollo  12 .  
Of  12  New  Yorkers  interviewed  by  New York  Times, only  Bernard 
Granite  of  the  Bronx  had   watched  lunar  landing.  He  said,  “The  first 
one  was  more  exciting.  Th i s   one  was  anticlimactic,  but  I  still  think 
they  a r e   justified  in  spending  the  money.” 
Portland,  Ore.,  secretary  Jeanne  Paulson  said,  “I’m  a t   the  point 
where  I  think  the  money  should  go  to  the  poverty  program.  There 
are   too  many  starving  people  in   the  slum  ghettos.’’ 
Des  Moines,  Iowa,  secretary  Eileen  Brown  said,  “The  biggest  con- 
cern  seemed  to  be  that  they  couldn’t  make  the  TV work  rather  than 
whether  they  could  perform  their  assignments. What  do  we  think  they 
a r e  up  there  for,  anyway,  to  put  a  show  on  for   us?” 
Police i n  Los Angeles,  Calif.,  attributed  sharp d rop  in   reported  crime 
to  Apollo  12   moon  landing  and   walk. 
I n   Washington,  D.C.,  McKinley  High  School  teacher  said,  “This 
doesn’t  concern  us  a t   all.  There  a r e   far   more  important  things  going 
on  here.”  Question  for   his  pupils  was  “whether  we  w i l l   survive  to 
the year  2000.”  (AP ,  B Sun, 11/20/69,  A l ;  Robinson, NYT,  11/20/69, 
31;  W  Post,  11/20/69,  A16;  Spencer,  W  Star, 11/21/69,  A6) 
NASA  Launch  Vehicle  Review  Board  recommended  resumption  of  launch 
operations  for  spacecraft  using  Delta  booster.  I n   interim  report  board 
said  recommendation  was  based  on  findings  of  Failure  Review  Board 
which  had  investigated  failures  of  Delta  71  (July  25)   and   Delta  73 
(Aug.  2 7 ) .   Delta  71,  carrying  Zntelsut-ZZZ  F-5,  had  failed  because  of 
motor  case  rupture  or  nozzle  failure;  Delta  73,  carrying  Pioneer  E, 
had  failed  because  of  vibrating  relief  valve which  caused  hydraulic  oil 
leak.  Failure  Review  Board  suggested  additional  internal  insulation, 
pressure  tests,  equipment  x-rays,  installation  of  specially  tested  and 
selected  valves,  and   new  acceptance  tests  of  hydraulic  system.  Next 
mission  scheduled  with  Delta  was  U.K.’s  Skynet  comsat  Nov.  21. 
(NASA  Release  69-152) 
NASA  announced  selection  of  Aerojet-General Gorp.  to  receive  $S-million, 

385 

November  19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

cost-plus-award-fee contract  for   development  of  advanced  optical  com- 
munications  experiment-first 
laser communications  system  to  be  used 
on satellite.  Lasers provided  extremely wideband  communications func- 
tion  and   would  be  able  to  transmit  hundreds  of  TV  channels  around  
the  world,  greatly  increasing microwave capability.  Experiment  would 
scheduled for  launch  in   1972,  and   could  be 
be   placed on  board   ATS-F, 
expanded  to  include  spacecraft-to-spacecraft  communications  between 
to  be  launched  in   1974.  (NASA  Release  69-153) 
and   AT-, 
ATS-F 
Delegation  of  10  Soviet  scientists  visited  Brookhaven  National  Labora- 
tory  a t   Upton,  N.Y.  During  luncheon  they  peered  through  microscope 
a t  12-gm piece of  lunar   matter  brought  back  by  ApoZlo  1.2  €or study  a t  
laboratory’s  nuclear  research  facilities.  Scientists  were  on  two-week 
tour  arranged  through  memorandum  of  cooperation  on  peaceful  uses 
of  atomic  energy.  Group  of  U S .   scientists  would  pay  reciprocal  visit 
to  U.S.S.R.  early  in   1970.  (Kaufman,  N Y T ,   11/20/69,  45)  
DOD announced  Martin  Marietta  Corp.  would  receive  $2,313,740  supple- 
mental  agreement  to  previously  awarded  USAF  contract  for  design, 
development,  fabrication? and   delivery  of  Titan  I11  booster.  Contract 
would  be  managed  by  Space  and  Missile  Systems Organization.  (DOD 
Release  1003-69) 
November  20:  U S .   newspaper  editorials  commented  on  Apollo  12  landing 
on  moon: 
Washington Post:  “The  sheer  joy  of  these  two  astronauts  . . . shines 
out  over  everything  else.  They  are   obviously  moon-struck.  Conrad 
sounded  like  the  most  eager  and  happiest  young  geology  student  in  the 
universe  as he  hummed  and   laughed  his  way  from  rock  to  rock,  grab-  
bing  one  after  the  other  and   complaining  that  he  couldn’t  get  enough. 
And  who  would  have  thought  that  one  of  these  highly  skilled  men 
would  resort,  a s   Bean  did,  to  bonking  the  television  camera  with  a 
hammer  in   an   effort  to  make  i t   work?  Unfortunately,  the  failure  of 
the  camera  did  deprive  us  of  seeing  this  frolic.  . . .  There  was much 
to  be  learned  from  i t   about  the  moon  and  about  the  men  who  combine 
such  cool  technical  competence  with  such  zest  for  a  serious  and  
dangerous  job.”  ( W  Pos t ,   11/20/69) 
Detroit  News:  “To  travel  230,000  miles  and   h i t   the  target  on  the 
button  is  almost  unbelievable  except  that  NASA,  its  crews  and   i t s   ma- 
chines  are  making  believers  of  us  all.  But  there’s  a  lesson  to  be  taken 
to  heart  in  the  camera’s  freak failure.  Conrad  and  Bean  tried  to  remedy 
the  defect.  . . .  But  they  had  to  drop  tha t   to  get  on  with  more 
essential  scientific  exploratory  experiments. Conrad’s  oxygen  limit  was 
four  hours.  Be   hadn’t  time  to  spare.  . . . that  should  be  warning  to 
those  euphoric  advocates  of  setting  a  target  date  for  a  t r ip   to  Mars. 
A n   astronaut  limited  to  four  hours  work  on  the  moon  is  a  reminder 
of  the  vast  project  ahead  in   confounding  the  elements in   this  untapped 
lunar  mystery. Prophecies of  colonizing the moon  should be  set  against 
that  four-hour  limit,  even  though  we  no   doubt  will  improve  on  it.” 
( D  News ,   11/20/69) 
Atlanta  Constitution:  “This  second  landing,  more  than  900  miles 
from  where  the  pioneers  of  Apollo  11  put  down  last  July,  notably  ex- 
tends  our  knowledge.  New  landing  techniques,  a  longer  lunar   stay, 
all  serve  to  push  back  a  fantastic 
nuclear-powered  experiments-they 

386 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

November  20 

fron t ier   which  only  a  few  shor t   years  ago  was  regarded  as  a  most 
implausible province  of  man.”  (A t lan ta  Constitution,  11/20/69) 
Houstin  Chronicle: “Our  admiration  for  the  coolness and   the  skill  of 
astronauts  Conrad,  Bean  and   Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.-the 
latter  still 
in  lonely  orb i t   around  the  Moon-is 
boundless.  The   astronauts  con- 
tinue  to  perform,  one mission  after  the  other,  in   s torybook   perfection. 
We  marvel,  too,  a t   the  ability  of  the  technicians  on  the  ground  to 
quickly respond  to  unexpected  eventualities,  like the  electrical  difficulty 
just  af ter  the  launch,  and   to  enable the mission to  proceed unimpaired. 
These achievements inspire all men. They lift our  sights for  the  future.” 
(H  Chron,  11/20/69,  2  Sec,  5 )  
Birmingham  News:  “The  flight  has  been  so  predictably  on  schedule 
that  i ts  very  success  is  certain  to   help  push  moon  travel  back  into  the 
ho-hum  recesses  of  blase  mankind’s  mind,  a s   each  success  in   the 
Mercury  and  Gemini  and  early Apollo  series  made  ear th   orbital  space- 
flight  seem  routine.”  ( B  News ,   11/20/69) 
*  Apollo  8  Astronaut  Frank  Borman  received  gold  medal  for   “distin- 
guished service  to humanity’’  from National Institute of  Social Sciences 
in  New  York.  Institute  President  Frank  Pace,  Jr.,  said,  “The  great 
scientific adventure  in  which  you extend the  reach  of  man  cannot  equal 
for  us  the moments in  which you  expanded the  human  spirit.”  Borman 
replied,  “The  awesome  power  of  today’s  technology  undoubtedly  ter-  
rifies  many  social  scientists.  But  fa r   from  subjugating  man,  I  think 
this  technology,  if   properly  applied,  is   the  only  chance  to  preserve  the 
dignity  of  human  life.”  (AP ,  W  Star,  11/21/69,  A2) 
*  Second  largest  lunar   sample  shown  to  public  to  date-67.7-gm  moon 
exhibit  a t  Sekoniki 
on display  a t  USIA  “Education-U.S.A.” 
rock-went 
Pa rk   in  Moscow.  One  of  1 4  moon  rocks  thus  fa r   released  by  NASA  for 
publicity  tours,  rock  later  would  travel  with  USIA  exhibit  to  Tashkent, 
Baku,  and  Novosibirsk, where  i t  would  become  first  US. exhibit  ever 
shown  in   Siberia.  Other  moon  rocks had   been  scheduled  for  showing 
at  30  U S .   museums.  Largest  lunar   sample-Smithsonian 
Institution’s 
expected to  be  only  permanent  display.  NASA  also 
478.8-gm  rock-was 
had  approved  display  of  samples  entrusted  to  U S .   scientists  who 
wished  to  show  them  in   their  home  towns.  (Lardner,  W  Post, 
11/24/69,  A l ;   USIA PIO) 
0  In   NASA-funded  project  U.S.  Bureau  of  Mines  was  seeking  way  to  get 
water  and   a i r   from  lunar   rocks,  build  underground  lunar   shelters  like 
mines,  weld  and  melt  lunar   materials,  and  mine  planets  like Mars  and 
Venus which  might  bear  substances more valuable  than  those  on moon, 
Associated  Press  said.  First  lunar   mining  would  occur  dur ing   Apollo 
13 mission  in   March.  Astronaut  would  bore  10-ft hole  in   lunar   crust 
to  determine  what  lay  beneath  and   to  test  dr i l l   designed  for  NASA  by 
Martin  Corp.  Scientists  a t   U S .   Bureau  of  Mines  research  center  in  
Bruceton, Pa.,  and  a t   six other  locations  had  been  studying  since  1965 
possible  use  of  lunar  materials  to  build  and   support  manned  lunar 
station.  Project  Director  Thomas  C.  H.  Hutchinson  had  said,  “Even 
i f   we  found  pure   platinum  on  the  moon,  i t   would  cost  too  much  to 
br ing  it back.”  Goal was  to   establish manufacturing processes on  moon 
to  speed exploration  of  planets.  (AP,  W  Po s t ,   11/20/59,  A78) 
Cosmonaut  Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov  said  in   Pravda:  “The  Americans 

387 

November  20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

have  not  been  entirely  rational  i n   adapting  aviation  control  panels  to 
the  needs  for  space  flight.  The  control  system  of  the  Soyuz  ship,  fo r  
example,  seems  to  me  to  be  simpler,  more  logical  and  therefore  more 
perfect.”  Feoktistov,  who  toured  U.S.  Oct.  20  to Nov.  4, congratulated 
his  new  acquaintances  i n  U S .   on  Apo l lo   12 lunar  landing  and  wished 
them  “complete  success.”  (AP,  W  S tar ,   11/20/69,  A6) 
Moon  “loomed  large  i n   Chinese  tradition,’’  bu t   700  million  people  of 
Communist  China  had   not  been  told  of  Apo l lo   12  luna r   landing, 
Christian  Science  Monitor  said.  Though  “elite  hierarchy  i n  Peking  . . . 
learned  of  Intrepid’s  touchdown  a s   fast  as  the  Soviets,”  story  of 
Apo l lo   12  had  not  passed  beyond  select  group  of  leaders.  “Indeed 
the  Chinese people  have  yet  to  be  told  by  their  government-controlled 
press  and  radio  of  the  flight  of  Apollo  11.  . . .” Some  might  hear  of 
flight  from  foreign  radio  broadcast,  but many  were  jammed  by  Peking. 
VOA  report  to  Hong  Kong  on  Intrepid’s  lunar  landing  had  been 
“curiously  overlaid  with  martial  music  from  a  Chinese  Communist 
radio  station  on  the  ma in land”   (Hughes,  CSM ,   11/20/69) 
Wash ing ton   Da i ly   News  reported  song  called  “The  Wondrous  Tele- 
phone,”  by  Thomas  P.  Westendorf,  had  been  published  in  1877  with 
cover  showing g roup  of  men  talking  by  telephone  to  man  in  the  moon. 
( W  News ,   11/20/69,  52 )  
*  Apo l lo   11  CM   was  being  readied  a t   North  American  Rockwell  plant  in  
Downey,  Calif.,  fo r   tour  of  50  state  capitals  and  final  resting  place  a t  
Smithsonian  Institution  i n   Washington,  D.C.,  Associated  Press  re- 
ported.  NASA  was  sponsoring  tour.  ( C SM ,  11 /20 /69 )  
North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  announced  plans  to  develop  for  NASA 
flying  lunar  excursion  experimental  platform  ( FLEEP) -one-man, 
jet- 
propelled  craft  with  adjustable  hand  controls-to 
transport  astronauts 
across  luna r   surface.  ( AP,  NYT ,   11/22/69,  38 )  
*  Use  of  space  technology  in   “complete  and  systematic  rehabilitation”  of 
Washington,  D.C.,  was  proposed  by  RCA   president  Robert  W.  Sarnoff 
in speech before  Fourth  Annual Computer  Age  Conference  of  National 
Industrial  Conference  Board  in   New   York  City.  “A  comprehensive 
systems  effort  to  revitalize  the  city  and  its  environs  should  invoke  a 
nationwide  response  . . . a s   broad  and  enthusiastic  a s   that  inspired  by 
the  Apollo  moon  landing.”  (Text) 
e  MSFC  announced  award  of  $8-million  letter  contract  to  McDonnell 
Douglas  Corp.  for  two  sets  of  structural  components  for  Saturn  V  3 rd  
stage  (S-IVB) 
fo r   Sa tu rn  V  manned  orbital  workshop.  Work  would 
be  completed by  January  1972.  (MSFC  Release 69-249) 
e  Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe  announced  award  of  $279,032 
contract  to   Control  Data  Corp.  Melville  Space  and  Defense  Systems 
Div.  for  22-mo  study  of  pilot  warning  instrument  ( PW I )   systems  that 
would  improve  pilots’  ability  to  detect  other  aircraft  in   flight.  ( FAA  
Release  69-126) 
November   21-23:  U.K.’s  Skyne t   A  (IDCSP-A)  military  comsat  was  success- 
fully  launched  from  ETR  a t  7:37  pm  EST  by  NASA  for  USAF  and  U.K.  by 
Long-Tank  Thrust-Augmented  Thor-Delta  ( DSV-3M)  booster.  Space- 
craft  entered  transfer  orbit  with  23,045.4-mi  (37,080.1-km)  apogee, 
160.7-mi  (258.6-km)  perigee,  655.3-min  period,  and  27.6O  inclination. 
Primary  NASA  objective  was  to  place  spacecraft  into  synchronous 

388 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

November  21-23 

transfer  orb i t   accurate  enough  for  apogee  motor  to  place  spacecraft 
into  synchronous  equatorial  orbit. 
On  Nov.  23   apogee  motor  was  fired  and   spacecraft  entered  cir- 
cular  orb i t   with  22,216.5-mi 
(35,746.4-km)  apogee,  21,558.3-mi 
(34,687.3-km)  perigee,  1,431-min period,  2.M”  inclination,  and   1.3’ 
per  day  eastward  orbital  drift.  Drift  rate  was  increased  to  8’  per  day 
to  ensure  arrival  on  station over  Ind ian   Ocean  by  Dec.  30.  All  systems 
except  primary  communications  system  had   been  turned  on  and   were 
operating  satisfactorily. 
Skyne t   A  was  first  of  two  U.K.  military  comsats  scheduled  to  be 
launched  over  Ind ian   Ocean  under  DOD-U.K.  agreement. USAF  managed 
project  for  DOD and  would  reimburse  NASA  for  launch  services.  U.K. 
would  reimburse  USAF.  Skynet  B  would  be  launched  in   May  1970. 
Spacecraft  consisted  of  two  concentric  cylinders  containing  apogee 
motor,  solar  cells,  despun  antenna,  high-pressure  hydrazine  stabiliza- 
tion  system,  and   redundant  x-band  communications  system.  I t   w a s   32 
in  high,  54  in   in   dia,  and  had   five-year  lifetime. 
Initial  operation  of  spacecraft  telemetry  and   command  functions 
were  performed  from  USAF  satellite  control  facility.  Control  of  orbital 
operations  would  be  transferred  to  U.K.  telemetry  command  facility 
after  spacecraft  reached  station.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; SBD,  11/26/69,  114 )  
November   21:  Apo l lo   12 Astronaut  Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.,  orbiting  moon 
in   CSM,  set  new  world  record  for  solo  space  flight.  Gordon  piloted 
CSM  alone  for  37   hrs  41   min,  breaking  30-hr  20-min  record  set  by 
Astronaut  L.  Gordon  Cooper,  Jr.,  in   Fuith  7 May  15-16,  1963.  (UP I ,  
W  Star,  11/21/69,  A7) 
0  NASA’s H G l O   lifting-body  vehicle  piloted  by  Maj.  Peter  C.  Hoag 
(USAF )   reached  78,000-ft  altitude  and   mach  1.4  in   powered  flight 
after  air-launch from  B-52  a ircraf t   a t   45,000-ft  altitude west  of  Rosa- 
mond,  Calif.  Purpose  of  flight,  30th  in   series,  was  to  obtain  stability 
and  control data  a t  varying  stability  augmentation  gain  settings.  (NASA  
P ro j  Off) 
President  Nixon  and   Pr ime   Minister  Eisaku  Sato  of  Japan  issued  joint 
statement following White House discussions on  international  situation. 
On  space,  statement  sa id :   “The  Prime  Minister  congratulated  the 
President on  the  successful moon  landing  of  Apollo XII,  and  expressed 
the  hope  for  a  safe  journey  back  to  earth  for   the  astronauts.  The 
President  and   the  Prime Minister  agreed  that  the  exploration  of  space 
offers  grea t   opportunities  for  expanding  cooperation  in   peaceful scien- 
tific projects  among all nations.  I n  this  connection, the  Prime  Minister 
noted with  pleasure tha t   the United  States and   Japan   last  summer  had 
concluded  an   agreement  on  space  cooperation.  The  President  and   the 
Prime Minister  agreed  that  the  implementation of  this  unique  program 
i s   of  importance  to   both  countries.”  (PD,  11/24/69,  1633-7) 
Inaccurate  signals  from  controlling  gyro  mechanism had   caused Sept.  17  
destruction  of  AH-56A  helicopter  inside  wind  tunnel  a t   ARC,  NASA 
announced.  Investigation  board,  appointed  by  ARC  Director,  Dr.  Hans 
Mark,  had  determined  accident  did  not  result  from  malfunction  of 
rotor  control  system  or  of  wind-tunnel systems and   equipment.  Board 
recommended  greater  use  of  computers to  analyze rotor  systems before 
test,  study  of  safety  systems  and   hazards  and   procedures  for  wind- 

389 

November  21 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

tunnel  crews in   emergencies, and  addition  of  metal  barr iers   to   protect 
control  room  and   sections  near  tunnel.  I t   sa id   visual  close  observa- 
tion  of  tests  should  be  minimized.  AH-56A  was  under  study  for   s ta-  
bility  and  control  a t  USA  request.  (NASA  Release  69-154) 
*  Total  $21.35-billion  investment  “in  the  development  and   demonstration 
of  a  national  manned  lunar   landing  capability”  was  detailed  by  Dr. 
Thomas  0.  Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  in   letter  to  Sen.  Clinton  P. 
Anderson  (D-N.  Mex.),  Chairman  of  Senate  Committee  on  Aero- 
nautical  and  Space  Sciences.  “At  the  time  of  i ts   establishment,  the 
national  goal  of  a  manned  lunar  landing  and   return  in   this  decade 
represented  the  most  difficult  technological endeavor  ever  to  challenge 
the  American  nation.  During  this  period,  senior  NASA  officials  in   testi- 
mony  before  the  Congress estimated  the  cost  . . . a t  between  $20  and  
$40 billion.”  Estimate  was  refined  to   approximately  $19.5  bilIion  in  
March  1964, with  assumption  “there  would  be  a  timely  initiation  of  a 
follow-on  program  which  would  bear  a  portion  of  the  relatively  fixed 
cost  required  to  develop  and   sustain  this  national  capability.” 
Estimates  then  and   annua l   reassessments  had  reflected  total  program 
cost,  including  cost  of  initial  lunar   landing.  Lunar   objective  “was  not 
simply  an  end  in   itself  but,  rather,  provided  the  focus  for  the  effort 
to  a t ta in   space supremacy for  whatever  the  national  interest  required.” 
I n  March  1966 NASA  had  furnished  estimate of  $22.718  billion  based 
on  assumption  tha t   there  would  not  be  timely  initiation  of  follow-on 
program.  In   April  1969  NASA  furnished  estimate  of  $23.877  billion, 
which  would  still  be   valid  if  negative  assumption  had  materialized. 
“But  with  the  success  of  Apollo  11, we  have  the  opportunity  to  utilize 
this  demonstrated  capability  in   a  more  meaningful  way.  By  improving 
payloads  and   modifying  spacecraft  to   increase  lunar  surface  systems, 
we  can  enhance  significantly  the  re turn   of  scientific  data  from  both 
lunar  orbit  and   the  lunar   surface.” 
NASA  had  met  national  commitment “at  a  cost  nearer  the  lower  end 
of  the  range  of  estimates”  despite  “unpredictable  substantial  infla- 
tionary  conditions.”  Actual  cost  accrued  through  July  31,  1969,  was 
$21.35  billion,  of  which  $2  billion  was  value  of  flight  hardware  avail- 
able  for  future  flights.  Capital  assets  included  were  approximately 
$2.8  billion  and were  “of  continuing  national value.” 
Apollo  was  “triumph  in   management  as  well  as  in   technology  and  
engineering  which  united  government,  industry  and   universities  in   a 
common  peaceful undertaking.  At  least  one-half  million  people  worked 
on  the manned  lunar   landing  program  . . . dur ing   the  eight years  from 
its  announcement to  i ts   initial  success.”  (Tex t)  
*  U.S.  radioastronomers  had  been  unable  to  obtain  funds  for   facilities 
recommended  five  years  ago  and   were  beginning  to  fear   “that  the 
momentum  that  has  attracted  talented  researchers  from  engineering 
and   physics  into  rad io   astronomy  may  soon  be  lost,”  Robert  W.  Hol- 
comb  said  in   Science.  “Pulsars  and   the  interstellar  clouds  provide 
astronomers  with  the  opportunity  to  extend  their  ideas  about  stellar 
evolution into very early  and  very  late stages,  and  most  of  the pertinent 
research  must  be  done   with  radio  telescopes.  These  instruments  a re  
also  required  for  some  of  the  most  important  cosmological problems 
currently  being  considered.”  (Sc ience ,   11/21/69,  984-6) 
*  At  opening  day  ceremonies  of  American  Bible  Week  in   New  York, 

390 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

November  21 

sponsors, Laymen’s  Committee of  American Bible Society and   Catholic 
Biblical  Assn.  of  America,  awarded  citation  to  crew  of  ApoUo  8  for 
reading  from   Genesis  a s  they  orbited moon  dur ing   Dec.  21-27,  1968, 
mission.  (N Y T ,  11/22/69,  41)) 
e  Astronaut  promotion  policy  seemed  “certain  to  discomfit someone  after 
the  end   of  Apollo  12   no   matter  whether  it’s  followed  o r   ignored,” 
Washington  Post  said.  President  Johnson  had  decreed  in   1965  that 
each  military  astronaut  would  get  one  spot  promotion  after  his  first 
space  flight.  A p o l b   12  commander  Charles  (Pe te )   Conrad,  Jr.,  and 
CM   pilot  Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.,  had  both  received  promotions  to 
commander,  USN.  Apollo  1 2  LM  Pilot  Alan  L.  Bean,  also  commander, 
USN,  now  rated  promotion  to  captain,  bu t   was  jun ior   crewman  in   age, 
service  in   grade,  and   space  experience.  Bean  promotion  might  “ irr i-  
tate”  others  but  would  be  fa ir   to  Bean.  Promotion  for   all  three  astro- 
nauts  would  be  “unfair  to  other  astronauts  who  have  flown  twice  or 
three  times  and  only  promoted  once.”  President  Nixon  might  have  to 
make  “sticky”  decision.  ( W  Pos t ,   11/21/69,  A17) 
Secretary  of  Transportation John  A.  Volpe  announced award  of  $200,000 
FAA contract  to  Univ.  of  Tennessee a t  Knoxville for  two-year study  of 
methods  of  reducing  sonic  boom,  to  help  FAA  establish  certification 
standards  for   new  aircraft.  (FAA   Release  69-127) 
DOD  announced  General  Electric  Co.  would  receive  $5,192,730  supple- 
mental  agreement  to  previously  awarded  USAF  contract  for  R&D  of 
Mark  15  reentry  vehicle.  Contract  would  be   managed  by  Space  and  
Missile Systems Organization.  ( DOD  Release 1015-69) 
November  22:   Weightlessness  dur ing   extended  space  tr ips   “reduces  the 
flexibility  of  men’s  bones,”  Soviet  scientist  V .   V.  Pa r in   said  in   inter- 
view  published  in   Komsomolskaya  Pravda   in  Moscow.  “The  organism 
of  a  cosmonaut  dehydrates  in   weightlessness  and   calcium  leaves  the 
bones.”  Probable  solution  would  be  to  create  artificial  gravity  in  
space,  Pa r in   said.  (UPI,  W  Po s t ,   11/23/69,  A6) 
e  Economist  commented  on   perils  of  prolonged  space  voyages:  “When 
astronauts begin  to  do  tours  of  duty  that  could  run   from  three  months 
to  a  year  a t   a  time  on  the  moon,  o r   on  orbiting  ear th   platforms- 
still  more  when  they  embark  on  2Vz  year  trips  to  Mars- the   problems 
will  be  much  greater. The ir  bodies may  adapt  themselves  to  conditions 
of  weightlessness  or  low  gravity,  and   to  living  in   atmospheres of  rather 
less  density  than  on  earth,  and   then  find  i t   hard   to  r e ad ap t   back  to 
ear th   conditions  again.  If,  over  time,  the  changes become  irreversible, 
we  could  witness  the  evolution  of  a  new  race  of  space hominoids with 
whom  we  could communicate but  not cohabit.”  (Economist, 11 /22 /69)  
Apo l lo   12   congratulatory telegrams  a t   MSC  suggested “crew  members  of 
Apollo  1 2  will  not  be   lacking  their  own  fan  club,”  Washington  Post 
article  said. Meanwhile,  Apollo  11  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong  and 
Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  and  Apollo 8 crew continued  to  receive  fan mail. 
Biggest  fans  of  space program  appeared  to  be  “little children  and   sup- 
porters  of  prayers  in   outer  space.”  (Lardner,  W  Pos t ,   11/22/69,  A6 )  
November  23 :   ESRO’S  Boreas  (E s r o  I B ) ,   launched  Oct.  1 into  lower  than 
planned  orbit,  reentered  atmosphere  after  52  days  in   orbit.  During 
th is   period  spacecraft  and   all  experiments  functioned  satisfactorily. 
ESRO accumulated  large  quantity  of  scientific  data  and   adjudged  mis- 
sion  successful.  (GSFC  S S R ,  11/30/69;  NASA  P ro j   off) 
391 

November  23 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
*  New  Y o&   T imes   editorial  commented  on  Apo l lo   12 :   “It  is   almost  in-  
credible  that  such  g ian t   strides  could  have  been  made  in   the  few 
months  that  separated  Apollo  1 2   from  Apollo  11.”  Navigational 
capabilities  available  to Neil Armstrong  last July  were  “so  inexact  tha t  
for   days  o r   weeks  after  h is   landing  there  was  no  certainty  even  as  to 
jus t   where Eagle had   touched  down.  Intrepid,  on  the  contrary,  landed 
within a  few  hundred  feet  of  Surveyor  3,  the  prime  target  of  its  crew’s 
planned  collection  activities.  It  will  take  months,  perhaps  years,  to 
harvest  the  full  scientific  gains  from  Apollo  12. Already,  however,  i t  is  
evident  that  mankind  is  still  a t   the  stage  where  the  more  i t   learns 
about the moon,  the more mysterious and  puzzling  that  na tura l   satellite 
appears  to  be.”  ( N Y T ,  11/23/69,  1 2 )  
*  Nonspace nations were  expressing growing  resentment  at  U.N.  over  lack 
Qf  progress  on  treaty  covering damages for   space accidents,  New   Y o r k  
Times  said.  Members  of  28-nation  Outer  Space  Committee  had  com- 
plained  that  they  cooperated  with  space powers  on  space rescue  treaty 
in   1967 on  understanding  tha t   treaty  on  damages would  be  pushed  to 
completion.  U S .   had  reassured  nonspace  nations  that  i t   wanted  im- 
mediate  action  on  damages  treaty  but  U.S.S.R.  had  been  “balking” 
over  provision  for  binding  arbitration  when  damage  claims  Were  not 
settled  by  direct  negotiations  or  through  commission.  Other  disagree- 
ments  included  financial  ceiling  on  liability  for   single  accident-US. 
objections  to  US. and   U.S.S.R. 
had  suggested  $500  million-and 
tendency  to  negotiate  directly  and  consult other  nations  later.  (Teltsch, 
N Y T ,   11/23/69,  73)  
November  24:   Following  successful  completion  of  Apollo  12   President 
Nixon  issued  statement:  “This mission  has  shown conclusively  that  the 
system  we  have  developed  has  enormous  scientific  potential  and   we 
can  now  look  forward  to  utilizing  that  capability.  . . .  The  triumph  of 
Apollo  12   is   not  only  an  American  triumph.  Th is   second  voyage  to 
the  surface  of  the  moon  represents  another  great  victory  of  the  human 
mind  and   spirit,  one  which  will  lift  the  sights  and   raise  the  spirits  of 
men  everywhere.”  ( P D ,  12/1/69,  1659)  
During  telephone call  from  White  House  to  U.S.S.  Hornet,  shortly  after 
Apo l lo   12   splashdown  and  recovery,  President  Nixon  told  Apollo  12  
astronauts  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.,  and   Alan  F. 
Bean  of  their  promotions  to  captain,  USN.  ( P D ,  12/1/69,  1659) 
Christopher  C.  Kraft,  Jr.,  MSC  Director  of  Flight  Operations,  told  press 
a t  MSC  he  wanted  full  report  on  piloting  difficulties in   landing  on moon 
before  committing  Apollo  13  to  landing  attempt  on  moon’s  rugged 
lunar  landing-described 
central  highlands.  Full  discussion  of 
by 
Astronaut  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  a s   “no  easy  task”-was 
important 
aspect  of  what  must  be  learned  dur ing   crew  debriefing,  Kraf t   said. 
(Wilford, N Y T ,   11/25/69,  33)  
*  U.S.S.R.  launched  two  Cosmos  satellites  from  Plesetsk.  Cosmos  CCCXZ 
entered  orbit  with  467-km  (290.2-mi)  apogee,  272-km  (169.0-mi) 
perigee,  91.9-min  period,  and   71.0”  inclination  and   reentered  March 
10,  1970.  Cosmos  CCCXII  entered  orb i t   with  1,180-km  (773.2-mi) 
apogee,  1,141-km  (709.0-mi)  perigee,  108.5-min  period,  and   74.0” 
inclination.  ( GSFC SSR ,   11/30/69;  3/31/70;  SBD ,   11/26/69,  112)  
*  President  Nixon  signed  nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty  in   Washington, 
D.C.  Presidium  of  the  Supreme Soviet ratified  treaty  simultaneously in 

392 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
November  24 
Moscow,  with  President  Nikolay  V.  Podgorny  signing  document.  U.S. 
and  U.S.S.R.  were  23rd  and  24th nations  to  ratify  treaty,  which  would 
become  e%ective  after  ratification  by  43  countries.  ( P D ,   12/1/69, 
1658;  NYT ,   11/25/69,  1) 
*  Aurora  Exped i t ion-dur ing   which  ARC’S  Convair  990 a ircraf t   would 
make  about  12  flights from  For t   Churchill,  Canada,  to  study  aurora   in  
polar  regions-began  with  first  data  flight.  Twenty-five  university, 
industry,  NASA  and   other  U S .   Government,  French,  and   Canadian 
scientists  would  operate  a t  altitudes  up  to 40,000 f t  across  and  parallel 
to  aurora l   oval  in  flights  until  Dec.  18.  (NASA   Note  to  Editors, 
11/12/69;  NASA  News  Release  69-165) 
*  U.S.  Geological Survey  Director  William T.  Pecora  said  in  Washington, 
that  rocks  brought  back  by  Apo l lo   11   were  geologic  “hors 
D.C., 
d’oeuvre”  bu t   ApoZZo  12 rocks  “w i l l   be  a  veritable  feast.’’  Geologists 
were  delighted  “by  the  onsite  descriptions  provided  by  astronauts 
(UPI ,   N Y T ,  
Conrad  and  Bean”  who  were  “eager  rock  hounds.” 
11/25/69,  32 )  
Washington Evening  S tar   editorial  commented  on  Apo l lo   12’s man-made 
lunar   quake:  ‘‘It  seems  that  when  the  lunar   lander  was  sent  rocketing 
down  to  crash  on  the  Ocean  of  Storms,  i t   left  the  moon  ‘ringing  like 
a  gong’  fo r   some  30  minutes.  This,  in   the  words  of  one  ecstatic 
scientist,  constitutes  ‘a  major  discovery  . . . quite  beyond  the  range 
of  our  experience.’ ” Scientific curiosity  “is a  good  thing-provided 
it’s 
kept within  reasonable limits.  . . .  Just  suppose tha t   their  first  reading 
was  right,  and  that  the  moon  really  is  some  sort  of  celestial  gong. 
Remember  what  happened  when  people  got  too  enthusiastic  with  the 
Liberty  Bell.”  (W  S tar ,   11/24/69,  A12) 
USAF  announced  successful  completion of  tests  a t  Arnold  Engineering  and 
Development  Center  at  Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  to  qualify  41,000-lb-thrust 
turbofan  engine-largest  U.S.  military  jet  engine-for 
TF-39 
USAF’S 
C-5  Galaxy  transport,  world’s  largest  aircraft.  ( AFSC  Release  183.69) 
Senate  Interior  Committee held  hearing  on  July  10 S.J.R.  133 by  Sens. 
Spessard  L.  Holland  (D-Fla.)  and  Edward  J.  Gurney  (R-F la .)   to 
return  original  name,  “Cape  Canaveral,”  to  Cape  Kennedy.  Sen. 
Gurney  said  name  “Canaveral”  “may  well  be  the  oldest  geographical 
point  in   the  United  States,  certainly  on  the  east  coast,  recorded  even 
before  the  ancient  names  of  Cape  Cod  and   Jamestown.”  KSC  would 
retain  late  President  John  F.  Kennedy’s  name.  Witnesses  suggested 
name change had  been  made  “with h igh   emotions”  and  without proper 
legal proceedings. Cape  had  been  renamed  for  late  President  by  execu- 
tive  order  from  President  Lyndon B.  Johnson  Nov.  29,  1963.  (Greider, 
W Pos t ,   11/25/69,  A3) 
Jack  C.  Swearingen,  former  Chief  of  Program  Control  in  MSFC  Apollo 
Applications  Program  Office,  became  Assistant  Director  in  Science 
and   Engineering.  (Marshall  Star,  11/12/69,  1) 
*  Raymond  Einhorn,  former  NASA  Director  of  Audits,  became  Special 
Assistant  to  NASA  Acting  Associate Administrator  for  Organization  and  
Management. He  would  be   succeeded  by  Martin  Sacks,  Special Assist- 
an t   to  Assistant  Administrator  for   Special  Contracts  Negotiation  and 
Review.  (NASA  Ann,  11/20/69) 
Washington  Evening  S tar   editorial  commented  on  proposal  by  Carnegie 
Endowment for  International  Peace  and   Twentieth Century  Fund  con- 

393 

November  24 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
ference  that  U S .   and   U.S.S.R.  merge  comsat  systems  [see  Nov.  161. 
“Intelsat  . . . is  already  a  going  concern-an 
increasingly  successful 
and   expanding  one-operating 
on  a  global  scale.  Open  to  every coun- 
try   on  a  nonpolitical,  nondiscriminatory  basis,\it  has   no  reason  what- 
ever  to  consolidate  itself  and   its  resources  with  Russia’s  Intersputnik 
setup-a 
system  tha t   exists  only on  paper,  and  not  very  clearly  a t  that. 
. . .  I n   the  circumstances, the  Talloires  panelists  would  have  been  on 
sounder  ground  had  they  recommended tha t   the  Kremlin  join  Intelsat. 
Such  a  move  would  better  serve  not  only  Russia’s  interests,  but  the 
cause  of  East-West cooperation  as  well.”  (W  Star,  11/24/69,  A12) 
November   25:  NASA’s X-24A 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld 
R.  Gentry  (USAF )  , completed  eighth  glide  flight  at  FRC.  Objective  of 
flight,  last  glide  flight  in   series,  was  to  obtain  stability  and   control 
data  a t   30” upper  flap  setting  and   0‘.  rudder   bias  setting.  (NASA   P ro j  
off’) 
Two  boxes  of  lunar   samples from  ApoZZo  12 arrived  a t   Lunar  Receiving 
Laboratory  in   Houston,  where  they  would  be  examined  and  used  in 
experiments.  (AP ,   W  Star,  11/26/69,  A2) 
Pakistan  President  Yahya  Khan  sent  “hearty  felicitations”  to  President 
Nixon and  American people  on Apollo 12 success.  “May  your  endeavor 
lead  to  increasing  expansion  of  the  bounds  of  human  knowledge  and 
br ing   forth  newer  possibilities  of  lasting  peace  and  progress  on  earth.” 
( N Y T ,  11 /26 /69 ,24 )  
Wash ing ton   Post  Apollo  12  editorial:  “Although  it  will  be  weeks  or 
months  before  we  know  what  the  harvest  of  knowledge  from  this  t r ip  
has   been,  the  first  impression  is   tha t   the  harvest  has  been  a  rich  one. 
The  astronauts  accomplished  everything  they  had  been  asked  to  do  
and  more. The pinpoint landing indicates  tha t  the  navigational problems 
a re   not  nearly  a s   grea t   a s   once  thoaght,  clearing  the  way  fo r   fu ture  
astronauts  to  go  precisely  where  the  scientists  want  them  to.  The  ease 
with which Mr.  Conrad  and  Mr.  Bean  functioned on  the moon’s  surface 
indicates  that  their  successors will  be   able  to  range  far ther   afield  and  
undertake  more  complicated  assignments.  Even  the  accidental  fall  of 
Pete  Conrad  is   a  plus.  I t   cuts  down  the  fear  that  a  fall  would  be 
extremely serious  and  points  out  . . . that man  may  be  more  adaptable 
to  alien  conditions  than  he   dreams.”  ( W   Po s t ,   11/25/69,  A20) 
At  hearing  on  suit  of  atheist  Madalyn  Murray  O’Hair  to   ban  broadcast 
of  prayers  by  U S .   astronauts  in   space  [see  Aug.  161,  U S .   Attorney 
Seagel Wheatley  and  NASA  counsel asked  dismissal  of  suit  on  grounds 
Mrs.  O’Hair  and   her   Society  of.  Separationists  lacked  necessary  legal 
standing to  sue Government. Justice  Dept.  Attorney  James Barnes  said, 
“NASA  has   no   plans  to  instruct  astronauts  what  to  say.  The  statements 
tha t   the  astronauts made  a re  their  own.  . . .  NASA  has  no  intention  of 
circumscribing  . . . the  astronauts’  rights  in   the  free  exercise  of  reli- 
gion.”  (UPI,  W  Po s t ,   11/25/69,  A8) 
NASA  was  using  July  26   edict  against  unauthorized  use  of  Apollo  flight 
insignia  to  make  “unauthorized”  possession  of  souvenir  Apollo  flight 
patches  Federal  offense,  *Wushington Post  said.  While  astronauts  felt 
they  should  be  only  ones  entitled  to  distribute  patches,  businessmen 
contended  they  ought  to  be  in   public  domain.  NASA  contractors  like 
Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering  Corp.  had   been  granted  exceptions to  
blanket  rule.  (Lardner,  W Post,  11/25/69,  A8) 

394  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
November  26 
November  26:   Explorer  X L I   Interplanetary Monitoring  Platform  (launched 
June 21 )   was  adjudged  successful by  NASA.  Spacecraft was functioning 
satisfactorily  and   mission  objectives  had  been  exceeded.  Nine  opera- 
tional experiments were  providing  detailed  information  on  galactic  and  
solar  cosmic  rays,  interplanetary  medium,  and   distant  magnetosphere. 
All  systems and  experiments were functioning  satisfactorily  and  re turn-  
ing  useful  data  except GSFC and  Univ.  of  Maryland  plasma  experiment 
and   Univ.  of  Iowa  and   Univ.  of  California  energetic  particle  experi- 
ment,  which malfunctioned  dur ing  orbits  10 and   15. 
Preliminary  data  indicated 
that  although  spacecraft  had  been 
launched  close  to  solar maximum,  sun  had   been  unusually  quiet.  How- 
ever,  low-energy  galactic  cosmic  rays  appeared  to  be  more  stro-ngly 
modulated  than  observed  previously  and   interplanetary  conditions 
appeared  to  be   more  disturbed.  Observations  would  be  continued 
throughout  solar maximum.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
*  NASA’s Pioneer  VZ  (launched Dec.  16, 1965)  and   Pioneer  VZl  (launched 
Aug.  17, 1966) were  performing  three  new  experiments on solar system 
scale,  possible  only  because  spacecraft’s  extremely  long  lifetimes  had  
allowed  them  to  reach  necessary  positions  in   space,  ARC  announced. 
On  Nov.  6,  when  Pioneer  V I   and   Pioneer  VZI  were  175  million  m i  
apar t   on   common  line  with  sun,  scientists  had  observed  changes  in 
behavior  of  solar  wind  particles  due  to  passage  through  space.  On 
Nov.  29,  when  spacecraft  reached  fa r   side  of  sun   on  common  line 
with earth,  engineers would  conduct  150-million-mi interplanetary com- 
munications  experiment.  On  Dec.  2,  when  spacecraft  reached  points 
on  common  spiral  line  leading  out  from  sun,  scientists  would  measure 
different  kinds  of  solar  particles  coming  from  same  events  on  sun. 
(ARC  Release 69-15) 
a  President  Nixon  signed  H.R.  12307  into  P.L.  91-126, 
Independent 
Offices  and   HUD   FY  1970  appropriations  act,  which  included  $3.697- 
billion  NASA  appropriation-down 
$299  million  from   $3.995-billion 
FY  1969 NASA  appropriation  and   $181  million  from  President  John-  
son’s  budget  request  of  $3.878  billion. 
Act  allocated  $3.006  billion  for   R&D,  down  $364  million  from  FY 
1969 allocation  and  $162 million  below  Johnson  request.  Construction 
of  facilities  allocation  for   N 1970  was  $53.2  million,  up  $31.4 
million from FY  1969 but  $5 million below  Johnson  request.  Allocation 
fo r   research  and   program  management  of  $637.4  million  was  $34.3- 
million  increase  over  N  1969  and  $13.5  million  below  Johnson 
request. 
Act  also  contained  $44O-million  NSF  N  1970  appropriation. *  (PD, 
12/1/69,  1669; Texts) 
*  Senate confirmed nomination  of  George M.  Low  a s  NASA  Deputy  Admin- 
istrator.  ( C R ,  11/26/69,  S15140, D1126) 
November  27:   Geologists  a t   Lunar   Receiving Laboratory  examined  several 
large,  dust-covered, crystalline  rocks  from  first box  of  Apollo  12  lunar  
samples.  Largest  rock  weighed  3-4  lbs  and  was  5 in   long  and  4%  in 
thick.  (Rossiter,  W  S tar ,   11/27/69,  A4) 
*  NASA  released  first  photos  taken  by  Apollo  12  astronauts  on  and   near 
lunar  surface,  including  color  stills  and   16-mm  film  showing  solar 
eclipse,  LM  descent  to  moon,  astronauts  walking  on  moon,  and   LM 
separating from  CSM. 

395 

November  27 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Still  photos  showed  closeup  of  Ocean  of  Storms,  bleak,  dull-gray 
area   strewn  with  rocks  and   sprinkled with  footprints and   an   astronaut 
inspecting  Surveyor   ZIZ,  with  LM  in   background  a t   top  of  crater  rim. 
(AP ,   N Y T ,   11/28/69,  32 )  
November   28:  Geologists  a t   Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory  held  press  confer- 
ence  on  Apollo  12   lunar   samples  and   expressed  surpr ise   a t   samples’ 
differences  from  rocks  retrieved  by  Apollo  11. Preliminary  examina- 
tion  of  samples  showed  they  were  crystalline  and   larger   than   antici- 
pated.  Dr.  Jeffrey  L.  Warner,  MSC geologist,  said  rocks  returned  by 
Apollo 11  contained  up  to  1 2%  titanium  oxide,  but  those  from  Apollo 
12  contained  only  about  2%--amount  consistent  with  terrestrial  rocks. 
He  said  geologists  were  very  puzzled  by  absence  of  breccia  rocks  in  
Ap0110  12  samples because 75%  of  rocks from Apollo 11 were  breccia. 
Crystalline  rocks  were  similar  to  volcanic  rocks  found  by  Apollo  11, 
but  some of  Apollo 12  rocks were  coated with  glass  and had  protruding 
crystals  up  to  2-34  in   long.  (Rossiter,  W  Post,  11/29/69,  A3 ;   W  Star, 
11 /29 /69 ,   A l )  
Apollo  12  astronauts,  enclosed  in  mobile  quarantine  facility,  arrived  a t  
Pear l  Harbor, ,Hawaii, where they  were  greeted by  huge  crowd, Marine 
band,  civic  and  military  officials,  and   hula  troupe.  (Rossiter,  W  Post, 
11/29/69,  A3 )  
President  Nixon  announced  intention  to  nominate  Apollo  11  Astronaut 
Michael  Collins  a s   Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Public  Affairs  to 
succeed Dixon  Donnelly  who  had  resigned  in   January.  Nomination was 
submitted  to  Senate Dec.  2.  (PD,  12 /1 /69 ,1667 ;   12/8/69,  1702) 
Mars’  reddish  color  might  be  attributed  to  carbon  suboxide,  Univ.  of 
Massachusetts physicists  William  T.  Plummer  and   Robert  K.  Carson 
reported  in  Science.  They had   found  reflection  spectrum  of  Mars  could 
be  well  matched  from  0.2  p  through  1.6  p  and   farther  by  polymers  of 
carbon  suboxide.  (Sc ience ,  11/28/69,  1141-2) 
I n   Science  article  advocating  large-scale  mobilization  of  scientists  to 
solve  world’s  “crisis  problems,”  John  Platt,  Associate  Director  of 
Univ.  of  Michigan Mental  Health  Research  Institute,  sa id   human  race 
was  on  steeply  rising  “S-curve”  of  change.  “We  are   undergoing  a 
great  historical  transition  to  new  levels  of  technological  power.  . . . 
In   the  last  century,  we  have  increased  our   speeds  of  communication by 
a  factor  of  107;  our   speeds  of  travel  by  102;  our  speeds  of  data 
handling  by  lo6 ;  our  energy  resources by  lo3 ;  our  power  of  weapons 
by  lo6; our  ability  to  control diseases by  something like  102;  and   our 
rate  of  population  growth  to  l o 3   times  what  it  was  a  few  thousand 
years  ago.”  Within  last  25   years  “the  Western  world  has   moved  into 
an  age  of  jet  planes,  missiles  and  satellites,  nuclear  power  and   nuclear 
terror.”  But  S-curve was  beginning  to  level  off.  “This means  tha t   if  we 
could learn how  to manage  these  new  powers and  problems in   the  next 
few  years  without  killing  ourselves  by  our  obsolete  structures  and  
behavior,  we  might  be  able  to  create  new  and   more  effective  social 
structures  that  would  last  for   many  generations.”  (Sc ience ,  11/28/69, 
1115-21) 
0  Science  editorial  said  faltering US. public  support  of  science pointed  to 
conclusion:  “Science has   established  no  secure  claim  in   i ts   own  r igh t  
upon  the  priorities  of  our  national  treasury.”  At  World  War  11’s  end, 
U.S.  taxpayer  had  become  leading  patron  of  science.  “For   the  next 

396 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

November  28 

20  years,  public money  flowed  in   increasing  volume  to  the  support  of 
science.“  Public  support  “began  to  level  out  in   1965,  and   the  support 
of  university  science  is   now  down  about  $250  million  from  the  1965 
peak  of  $1.3  billion.”  In   foremost  U.S.  universities  “federal  funding 
of  science  h a s   exerted  pressures  tending  to  divide  and   dissolve  that 
fra i l   community.  At  best,  i t   has   installed  and   expanded  scientific  de- 
partments  . . . without  regard  to  the  needs  and   priorities  of  the  uni- 
versity  as  a  whole.  . . . At  worst,  i t   has  established  in   the  universities 
entirely  inappropriate  activities,  motivated  by  the  interests  of 
the 
mission-oriented  granting  agencies  and   often  inimical  to  free  inquiry 
and   to  the  humanity  of  science.”  (Science,  11/28/69,  1101)  
November  29:  Apollo 12 astronauts,  enclosed  in   mobile  quarantine  facility, 
arrived  a t  Ellington  AFB,  Tex.,  where  they  were  greeted  by  500  cheer- 
ing  persons,  including  their  families  and  NASA  officials.  MQF was moved 
i n  motorcade  to  Lunar  Receiving Laboratory,  where  astronauts  would 
remain  until  Dec.  10.  (DeLone,  W Post,  11/30/69,  A3) 
*  Conclusion  that  rings  of  Sa turn   were  water  ice  of  extraordinarily  low 
temperature  was  announced  by  Dr.  Gerard  P.  Kuiper,  Director  of 
Univ.  of  Arizona  Lunar   and   Planetary  Laboratory.  Researchers  had 
ruled  out  earlier  theory  that  composition  could  be   ammonia  ice  by 
comparing  spectra  of  rings  and   ices  of  number  of  compounds. Team 
had  studied  infrared  reflection of  spectrum of  rings with interferometer 
attached to 61-in NASA  telescope at LPL  observatory near  Tucson.  (Univ. 
of  Arizona  Release  6911.29  d h )  
November 30:  Following publication  Nov.  29  by  Pravda   of  article  describ- 
ing U S .  moon  rock  exhibit in  Moscow,  crowd  of  “thousands,”  eager  to 
see  display,  smashed glass  door  and   nearly  demolished room  in  which 
Apollo  films were  shown.  (Clarity, NYT,  12 /1 /69 ,   18 )  
Worldwide program  to provide widest  display possible  of  Apollo 11 lunar 
samples was  announced  by  NASA.  Of  15 moon  rocks  weighing between 
2/3  and   21/2  oz,  8 were  for  U S .   display  and   7  had  been  released  to  
USIA  for  overseas showing.  I n   addition  to  Smithsonian  Institution  dis- 
play,  exhibits  would  include  rock  traveling  with  Apollo  11  CM   on 
tour  of  50   state  capitals  and   two-month showings in   30 museums  and 
planetariums  dur ing   year.  USIA  would  show  six  stones  on  world  tour, 
and  seventh  a t   Expo  ’70  in   Osaka,  Japan.  (NASA  Release  69-155) 
Completion  of  multimillion-dollar  electron  microscope, twice  a s  powerful 
as  any  previously  existing,  a t   Laboratory  of  Electronic  Optics  in 
Toulouse, France,  opened  question  “Will  we  ever  be   able  to  look  in to  
the  very  hear t   of  th ings?”   Walter  Sullivan  said  in   New  York  Times. 
Instrument,  without  i t s   accelerator,  weighed  22   tons  and   stood 
10  f t   tall.  Interviews  with  US . ,   French,  and  U.K.  scientists  had  re- 
vealed  wide  feeling  that  “before  long  it  may  be  possible  . . . to  see 
individual  atoms  and   ‘read’  the   genetic  message  in   a  s trand   of  DNA 
(deoxyribonucleic ac id)  .” Univ.  of  Chicago biophysicist  Dr.  Humberto 
Fernandez-Moran  had  said  when  tha t   stage  was  reached,  it  might  be 
possible  not  only  to  predict,  but  also  to  design  life  a t   the  molecular 
level.  (N Y T ,  11/30/69,  E9)  
During November:  It  was  “no  government  secret”  tha t   NASA,  “preoccupied 
with  putting men  on  the moon,”  had   neglected  aeronautics  in   favor  of 
space,  C.  V.  Glines  said  in   Armed  Forces  Management. But  pressures 
generated  by  “airways  crisis  of  1st year,  an  ever-growing divergence 

397 

During  November 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

between  civilian  and   military  aeronautical  R&D  requirements  and  
applications  and   concern  for   loss  of  US. preeminence  in   aeronautics 
a re  demanding tha t   attention  be  given  to  national aeronautical research 
and   development  policies.”  Effects  of  Nixon  Administration  “study 
timetable”  for  long-range  NASA-DOT  civil  R&D  program  would  affect 
DOT-FAA  1972 budgets. Meanwhile,  “quiet  gains a re  being  made  in   the 
aeronautics  side  of  the   NASA  house.”  NASA  a ircraf t   technology  budget 
would  increase  from   $94.9 million  in   FY  1969 to  over $100 million  in  
FY  1970, with  fur ther   increase in   FY  1971 and   new  high  in   FY  1972, 
“when  the  long-range  study  gives  new  directions  for  aeronautical 
research.”  (A rm e d   Forces  Management,  11/69,  3 4 4 )  
Astronautics  & Aeronautics  magazine  published  special  issue  containing 
“1973  Viking  Voyage  to   Mars”  by  NASA  Viking  project  management. 
Two  orbiters  would  release  two  softlanders  to  search  for   life,  map 
Martian  surface  from  orbit,  monitor  Martian  weather,  study  atmos- 
phere,  and   take  three-dimensional  color  photos  from  ground.  Flight 
directors  on  ear th   would  probably  choose  landing  site  from  orbiter 
reconnaissance  photos  taken  a t   arrival.  A  science  satellite  in   its  own 
right,  the  orbiter  would  also  relay  a  record  volume  of  interplanetary 
data  from  the  lander  to  earth.  Nuclear-powered  instrument  platform 
based  on  Surveyor  would  push  evolution  of  automation  step  further 
dur ing  mission.  ( A & A ,   11/69,  30-59) 
*  A rm y   Digest  published  interview  on  space  spinoffs  with Harry   N.  Lowe, 
Jr.,  Chief  of  Extraterrestrial  Research  Agency  of  USA  Office  of  Chief 
of  Engineers:  Space program  should  re turn   profit  to  Nation.  Tangible 
spinoff  results  were  being  observed  in   medicine,  communications, 
engineering,  and   architecture.  Savings in   building  industry  and   related 
engineering  fields  alone  would  eventually  exceed  present  cost  of  entire 
space  program.  “We  have  seen  the  world’s  largest  building  put  up  at 
the  Cape,  and   other  scientific  and   engineering  marvels  a t   Huntsville 
and   Houston.  We  have  had  to  work  with  scientists  and   others  to  an  
extent  never  before  necessary.  We  have  had  to  develop  and  apply  new 
concepts and   s tandards   of  performance.” 
Extraterrestrial Research Agency work  included  design  and construc- 
tion  concept  for  semipermanent  lunar  base,  definition  of  effort  to 
develop  lunar   construction  capability,  and  studies  with  NASA  of  lunar  
vehicles  and mobility.  Analyses of  lunar   samples indicated  no   need  for 
change  in   concepts  of  lunar   construction.  With  water  source  and  
cheaper  transportation,  “man  can  colonize  the  moon.”  ( A r m y  Digest, 
11/69,  30-1) 
NSF  Reviews  of  Data  on  Science  and  Resources  (NSF   69-36)  reported 
nearly  13,000  scientists  and   engineers  became  immigrants  into  U S .  
in   FY  1968, less  than  4% growth over  1967 level.  U.K.  and   India  were 
largest  sources  of  immigrant  scientists  and   engineers,  with  2,400  com- 
ing   from  U.K.  and   1,400  from  India.  (NSF   69-36,  No.  18,  1 )  

398 

December  1969 

December 1:  NASA  announced  Australis  Oscar-A,  39-lb  spacecraft  designed 
and   constructed  by  amateur  rad io   operators  a t   Melbourne  Univ.  in 
Australia,  had   been  accepted  for  launch  Jan.  9,  1970,  as  secondary 
payload  on  Tiros-M.  Radio  Amateur  Satellite  Corp.,  group  of  U S .  
amateurs,  was  preparing  satellite  for   launch,  testing  and   qualifying 
i t   to  comply  with  NASA  requirements.  Australis  Oscar-A would  transmit 
low-power signals  on  two  amateur bands-29.45  mhz  in   10-meter band 
and   14 .05  mhz  in  2-meter band-that  would  be  used  by  radio  ama- 
teurs  throughout  world  for   tra in ing   in  satellite  tracking  and  for  rad io  
propagation  experiments. 
Australis  Oscar-A  would  be  fifth  satellite  launched  under  Project 
Oscar  and   first  accepted by  NASA  as  secondary  payload.  Four  previous 
satellites  had  been  launched  by  group  of  U S .   radio  operators  on 
Pacific  Coast  in  conjunction  with  DOD  spacecraft. 
(NASA   Release 
69-157) 
In   interview  released  by  United  Press  International  Dr.  Wernher  von 
Braun,  MSFC Director,  said  he  knew  of  nothing  which  could  feasibly 
send  man  to  the  stars  in   the  predictable  future.  NERVA  prototype,  only 
working  model  of  new-generation  engine  in   US . ,   was  too  bulky  for 
flight.  Refined  version,  scheduled  for  test  flight  in   mid-I970s,  was 
expected  to   land man  on  Mars.  Beyond  that  all was  conjecture.  “There 
is  no  design  concept  and   even  the  basic  idea  of  a  controlled  thermo- 
nuclear  reaction  has   not  been  demonstrated.”  It  was  not  known  what 
thrust  could  be   generated  by   fusion  engine.  U.S.S.R.  had  announced 
development  of  plasma-jet  o r   ion-thrust  engine  which,  a s   designed, 
would  not  be  useful  i n   deep  space  o r   close  to  earth.  U.S.  scientists 
had been  working on plasma-jet theory and electric propulsion machine. 
Science  fiction  concept  of  space  distortion  o r   warp  through  which 
spacecraft  could  travel  in   “null  space”  where  distances  were  shorter 
and  speeds  faster  had  some  basis  according  to  Einstein’s  theory  of 
relativity.  I n  Univ.  of  Maryland  experiments “presence of  gravitational 
radiation  has  been  tentatively  discovered . . . [and]   can  be  interpreted 
a s   the  interaction  of  such  a  warp  with  the  sensor  used  in   the  experi- 
ment.”  Despite  this,  “there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  possibility  of 
utilizing  such  interactions  as  a  space  propulsion  system.”  (W   Star, 
12/1/69,  AS) 
0  Roger  Lewis,  President  of  General  Dynamics Corp.,  announced  appoint- 
ment  of  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for 
Manned  Space  Flight,  a s   General  Dynamics Vice  President,  effective 
immediately.  Dr.  Mueller’s  resignation  from  NASA  would  be   effective 
Dec.  10.  (General  Dynamics  Release  1491) 
ApoZZo  I 1  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr . ,   and  
Michael  Collins  visited  Canadian  Parliament  in   Ottawa.  Canadian 
Prime  Minister  P ierre   E.  Trudeau  said  astronauts’  contributions  to 

399 

December  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

science and  .humanity “will  live  a s  long  a s  mankind  lives.”  Astronauts 
would  conclude  two-day Canadian  visit  with  Dec.  2  visit  to  Montreal 
and   tour   of  nearby  factory  where  LM  landing  pads  were  made.  (UP I ,  
W  Po s t ,   12/4/69,  B3) 
*  Eleven  scientists  and   technicians  joined  Apollo  1 2   astronauts  in   quaran-  
tine  a t  Lunar  Receiving Laboratory  after  accidental  exposure  to  lunar  
samples.  (UPI,  N Y T ,   12/2/69,  49) 
0  Role of  ERC  in   electronics-related  aeronautical  R&D  was  described  by  ERC 
Director  James  C.  Elms  in   testimony  before  House  Committee  on 
Science  and   Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Advanced  Research  and  
Technology.  Center  had  continued  research  on  electronic  components 
and   devices,  especially  application  of  microelectronics  and   large-scale 
integrated  circuits  to  advanced  avionics  systems;  on  application  of 
advanced technology to  instrumentation  for  sensing and  controlling  a i r -  
craf t  motion  and  attitude;  on  optics  and  microwaves;  on  psychological 
instrumentations;  on  data  processing;  and   on  electrical  power  systems. 
ERC  had   14 programs  in   aeronautical R&D,  including  a i r   traffic  control, 
V/STOL  guidance,  navigation  and  flight  control,  collision  avoidance, 
use  of  navigational  and  communications  satellites  in   aviation,  support 
technology,  remote  detection  of  clear  a i r   turbulence,  physiological 
monitoring,  and   NASA  intercenter  research  in   high-speed  flight  using 
YF-12  aircraft.  (Testimony) 
December   2 :   Boeing  747  slated  f o r   passenger  service  with  Pan   American 
World Airways beginning mid-February 1970 flew  from  Seattle, Wash., 
to  John  F.  Kennedy  International  Airport  with  176 passengers  in   first 
public  preview  of  jumbo  jet  flight.  PaSSengerS-PAA 
officials,  flight 
startled  by  shudder  as  plane’s  wheels  were 
crew,  and   press-were 
buffeted  by  rough  spots  on  runway.  Phenomenon  was  repeated  when 
plane  touched  down  in   New  York  after  4-hr   5-min  flight.  Passengers 
also  were  critical of  “interior  noise level  in  the  rear   half  of  the  plane.” 
(Witkin,  NYT ,   12/3/69,  1 )  
0  Scientist  Dr.  Edwin  C.  T.  Chao,  quarantined  with  Apo l lo   1 2  astronauts 
a t  LRL,  said  mound  on  moon  photographed  by  Astronaut  Charles Con- 
rad ,   Jr.,  during  ApoZZo  1 2   moonwalk  could  be  crushed  rock  ejected 
from  crater.  MSC  geologist  Dr.  Robin  P.  Brett  said  1.5-lb rock  among 
ApoZlo  1 2   samples had  been  formed  fa r   beneath  surface  and   could  be 
(UP I ,   NYT ,  
deepest  piece  of  lunar   material  man  had  yet  studied. 
12/4/69,  17) 
Gayle  Planetarium  in   Montgomery,  Ala.,  opened  formally  with  exhibit 
of  luna r  sample through  Dec.  7. MSFC  announced i t  would  display luna r  
rock  during  February  and  March  1970.  (MSFC   Release  69-258) 
*  Austin,  Tex.,  District  Judge  Jack  Roberts  dismissed  suit  by  atheist  Mrs. 
Madalyn  Murray  O’Hair  and   Society  of  Separationists,  Inc.,  to  stop 
astronauts  from  saying  prayers  in   space  [see  Nov.  251.  He  ruled 
prayers  were  not  NASA  policy  but  individual  decision  by  astronauts.  If 
NASA  had  forbidden  astronauts  to  pray  in   space  it  would  have  been 
unconstitutional  abridgment  of  their  rights.  Mrs.  O’Hair  planned  to 
appeal  decision.  ( N Y T ,  12/3/69,  44) 
*  Washington  Po s t   editorial  praised  Nov.  20   speech  of  RCA   President 
Robert  W.  Sarnoff  which  called  for  use  of  space  technology  in   “full- 
scale  pilot  program”  to  rehabilitate  Washington,  D.C.  : Nation  “needs 
to  know  whether  the  computer-age technology that  sent  us  to  the  moon 

400 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

December  2 

twice  can  be  used  to  solve  the  problems  of  American  cities.  Tha t  
question  i n   a  slightly  different  form  has  been  plaguing  the  space  com- 
munity. Are  vital  national  resources  needed  to  meet  the  crisis  at  home 
being  diverted  to  the moon  and   beyond?” 
Sarnoff  speech “picks  up  from   a  series  of  addresses  by  Dr.  Thomas 
0. Paine,  administrator  of  the  National Aeronautics  and   Space Admin- 
istration,  suggesting  that  modern  technology  can  assist  in   solving  the 
problems of  cities,  provided  there  is   a  national  commitment to  do 
( W Post,  12/2/69,  A181 
December  3 :  Dr. George M.  Low was sworn in  a s  NASA  Deputy Administrator 
by  Dr.  Thomas 0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator.  (NASA   Release  69-159) 

December  3:  D r .   George  M .   Low-ueteran 
of  Mercury,  Gem in i ,   and  A p o l l o   p r o -  
sworn  i n   as  Depu ty   Administrator  o f   NASA  b y   D r .   Thomas  0 .  Pa ine ,  
grams-was 
Administrator,  a f t e r  No v .   26  Senate  confirmation. 

*  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos CCCX I I I   from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t  with  247-km 
(153.5-mi)  apogee,  197-km  (122.4-mi)  perigee,  88.9-min  period,  and  
65.4”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Dec.  15.  ( GSFC  SSR,  12 /15 /69 ;  
SBD,  12/4/69,  148)  
*  NASA  selected  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.  Space  Systems  Div.  and  RCA   Corp. 
Astro-Electronics Div.  to  receive  parallel  four-month,  $250,000  fixed- 
price  study  contracts for  definition  and  design of  Atmosphere Explorer 
and   AE-D.  Spacecraft  would  ca r ry   experiments  to 
spacecraft  AE-c 
study  atmospheric  composition  and   characteristics 
in  lower  ther- 
mosphere.  (NASA  Release  69-158) 
*  A t   opening  session  of  Governors’  Conference  in  Washington,  D.C.,  Presi- 
dent  Nixon  presented  to  governors mementos from  ApoZZo  I I  mission 
for  people  of  50  states,  Commonwealth  of  Puerto  Rico,  District  of 

401 

December  3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Columbia,  and  Trus t   Terr i tor ies   of  Virgin  Islands,  Guam,  and  Ameri- 
can  Samoa.  Each  presentation,  consisting .of  state  flag  and   chip  from 
moon’s  surface,  bore  inscription:  “This  flag  of  your  state  was  carr ied  
to  the  Moon  and   back  by  Apollo  11, and   this  fragment  of  the  Moon’s 
surface  was  brought  to  Ea r th   by  the   crew  of  tha t   first  manned  lunar  
landing.”  ( P D ,  12 /8 /69 ,1696)  
President  Nixon  announced  appointment  of  Apo l lo   11 Astronaut  Neil  A. 
. 
Armstrong  as  Chairman  and   member  of  Peace  Corps  National  Ad- 
visory  Council  to   succeed  W.  Thomas  Johnson,  Jr.,  who  resigned 
May  27.  ( P D ,  12/8/69,  1696)  
DOD  announced  USAF  contract  awards.  Martin  Marietta  Corp.  received 
$1,081,000  supplemental  agreement  to  previously  awarded  contract  to 
design, develop,  and   fabricate  Titan  I I IC   boosters  and   associated  aero- 
space  equipment.  Contract  would  be  managed  by  Space  ahd   Missile 
Systems Organization  ( SAMSO ) .  
Philco-Ford  Corp.  received  $44,375,975  contract  for  engineering, 
furnishing,  installing,  and   testing  a ircraf t   control  and  warning  system. 
Contract  would  be  managed  by  Oklahoma  City  A i r   Materiel  Area. 
( DOD  Release 1046-69)  
Secretary of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe  announced  FAA plans  to h u e  
proposal  to  control  emission  of  a ircraf t   smoke  in   flight  in   effort  to 
combat  a i r   pollution.  (FAA   Release  69-129) 
December  4:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  on  Thor-Agena  booster 
from  Vandenberg  AFB  into  orb i t   with  135.3-mi  (249.9-km)  apogee, 
105.6-mi  (169.9-km)  perigee,  88.4-min  period,  and   81.4O  inclination. 
Satellite  reentered  Jan.  10,  1970.  (GSFC  SSR ,   12 /15 /69 ;   1/15/70; 
Pres  Rpt  70  [69]) 
December  5:  NASA  launched  two  sounding  rockets  from  WSMR  to  conduct 
stellar  x-ray  studies.  Nike-Apache carried  Dudley  Observatory  payload 
and  Aerobee  150  carried  University  of  Wisconsin payload.  (NASA   P ro j  
O f f )  
NASA  and   public  TV  would  participate  in   first  full-scale  experiments  in  
use  of  satellites  to  transmit  TV  programs  domestically,  John  W.  Macy, 
Jr.,  President  of  Corp.  for   Public  Broadcasting  announced.  Scheduled 
for  near  future,  tests  would  transmit  public  broadcasting  programs 
using  A t s   ZZZ  spacecraft  in   orb i t   and  NASA  ground  stations  a t   Rosman, 
N.C.,  and  Mojave,  Calif.,  to  indicate  technical  problems  and  operating 
costs  of  satellite  transmission.  NASA  had   authorized  first  regular  use  of 
i ts   satellites  domestically  for   other  than  purely  scientific  purposes  in  
letter  to  Macy,  Chairman  of  Satellite  Task  Force  organized  by  CPB   to 
represent  public  broadcasting  interests  in   satellite  field.  ( CPB  Release) 
*  Successful results  of  seeding  hurricane  Debbie  on  Aug.  18 and   20  were 
announced  by  Secretary  of  Commerce Maurice  H.  Stans  and   Secretary 
of  the  Navy  John  H.  Chafee  a t   Washington,  D.  C.,  press  conference. 
Analysis  of  silver  iodide  seeding  had  suggested  storm  was  weakened 
by  intervention.  While  scientists  could  not  state  absolutely  that  hurr i-  
canes  could  be   modified,  Secretaries  pledged  their  departments  to  in- 
tensified  effort  in   Project  Stormfury,  jo in t   venture  of  ESSA  and   USN. 
(Schmeck, NYT,  12/5/69,  90)  
*  DOD announced  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  was  receiving  $100,000  initial 
increment  to  $2,532,250  fixed-price  USAF  contract  for  experimental 
studies  of  airflow  characteristics  of  advanced a ircraf t  engines.  Contract 

402 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

December  5 

would  be  managed  by  AFSC  Aeronautical  Systems  Div.  (DOD Release 
1052-69) 
0  Analysis of  Pesyanoe enstatite  achondrite samples confirmed new  isotopic 
composition  of  xenon  in  Pesyanoe  meteorite  was  due   to  presence  of 
component like  tha t   in   solar  gas,  Kurt  Mar t i   of  Univ.  of  California  a t  
San  Diego  reported  in  Science.  Xenon  in   Pesyanoe meteorite  was  mix- 
ture  of  several  components.  Solar-type xenon  was  new  component  de- 
ficient  i n   neutron-rich isotopes  a s  compared to  both  trapped  chondritic 
and  terrestrial  atmospheric  xenon.  (Sc ience ,  12/5/69,  1263-5) 
December  7:  Astronomers  were  contemplating  possibility  tha t   universe 
might  be   several  times  larger   than   previously believed a s   result  of  ob- 
servations  from  Oao I I ,  NASA  announced.  Spacecraft,  launched  Dec.  7, 
1968,  had  discovered  tha t   many  galaxies  were  much  brighter  in   uv  
radiation  than  expected,  confirmed that  hot  s tars  lost  as much  as  sun’s 
total  mass  in   100,000 yrs  and   equivalent  of  earth‘s  mass  in  1 yr,  and 
indicated  that  if   extra  mass  assumed  to  exist  as  unobservable  matter 
in   universe  was  present  it  did  not  radiate  in   UV,  suggesting  that  uni- 
verse was  not  closed  system. 
Oao II’s  performance  dur ing   first  year  in   orb i t  had   been  exceptional. 
By  Nov.  9,  Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory’s  sky-mapping  in -  
strument  package,  in  169 days  of  operation,  had  taken  5,884  pictures 
during  observations  of  2,265  individual  square   areas  of  sky.  Univ.  of 
Wisconsin  experiment  had  studied  568  specific  objects  during  1,995 
observations  i n   165   days  of  operation.  Achievements  had  prompted 
some  astronomers  to  rank  Oao  I I   with  invention  of  telescope  in  its  im- 
portance  to  astronomy.  (NASA   Release  69-156) 
Dr.  John  M.  DeNoyer,  former  Assistant  Director  for  Research  a t   U.S. 
Geological  Survey,  became  Director  of  Ear th   Observations  Programs 
in   NASA  Office  of  Space  Science  and   Applications.  (NASA   Hq  WB, 
1 /5 /70]  
“Eyewitness to  Space,”  exhibit  of  works  of  over  70  U S .   artists  commis- 
sioned  by  NASA  to  document  its  activities,  opened  a t   National  Gallery 
of  Art  in  Washington,  D.C.  Show  included  paintings,  drawings,  and 
sculpture  by  James  B.  Wyeth,  Mitchell  Jamison,  Norman  Rockwell, 
Lamar  Dodd,  William  Thon,  and  Robert  Rauschenberg.  Eight-foot 
montage  of  disparate  space themes by  Rauschenberg  was  largest  litho- 
graph  ever  made,  according  to  Gallery’s  Curator  of  Art  H.  Lester 
Cooke.  (Constantine,  W  Star,  12/7/69,  J8) 
December  8:  Recording  by  seismometer on  moon  of  seven  external  impacts 
near  Apollo  12  landing  site  since  astronauts  left  moon  Nov.  20  was 
reported  by  Columbia Univ.  scientist  Dr.  Gary  V.  Latham,  principal 
investigator  for  Apollo  program’s  seismic  research.  Each  impact  had 
produced  tremors.  Dr.  Latham  said  meteors  might  have  struck  Ocean 
of  Storms,  whose  surface  resonated  when  hit.  Lack  of  internal  quakes 
indicated  moon  had  not  been  heated  substantially  for  abou t  4.6  billion 
yrs.  (AP, W  Star,  12/9/69,  A6) 
Edgar  L.  P ire t ,   U.S.  Embassy  Scientific  Attach6  in   Par is ,   accepted  Pr ix  
P ie r re  Guzman  gold  medals  on  behalf  of  Apo l lo   I I   Astronauts  Neil  A. 
Armstrong, Edwin E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  and  Michael Collins.  Award had  been 
established  by Mme.  Anna  Emile Guzman  in   1889 for  first  persons  “to 
find  the  means  of  communicating  with  a  heavenly  body-Mars 
ex- 
cluded”  [see  Aug.  131.  ( AP,  W Post,  12/9/69,  A23) 

403 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
December  8 
Apo l lo  11 lunar  landing had  been  selected  number  one foreign news  story 
of  year  by  Japan’s  Kyodo  news  service,  Associated  Press  said.  Second 
was  President Nixon’s  decision to  reduce US. troom   in  Vietnam:  th ird  
was  Communist  China’s  ninth  party  congress  inL Peking.  ( S t .  ‘Lou i s  
G-D,  12 /8 /69)  
LeRc’s  60-mw test  reactor  a t  Plum  Brook  Station,  Ohio,  completed  100th 
cycle  of  operation.  I t   had  begun  full-power  operation  in   April  1963. 
Since  then  i t   had  participated  in  1,100  irradiations  of  experiments  in 
nuclear  propulsion,  energy  conversion, basic  radiation  effects,  and  nu- 
clear  physics  programs.  About  30  active  irrad ia t ion   experiments  in 
progress  ranged  from   nuclear  fuel  material  tests  to  studies  of  atomic 
and  molecular  structure  of  matter.  (LeRC  Release  69-72) 
Rep.  Edgar  F.  Foreman  (R-N. Mex.)  introduced  H.C.R.  464  for  Con- 
gressional  recognition  of  Goddard  Rocket  and  Space Museum,  Roswell, 
N.  Mex.,  as  memorial  to  Dr.  Robert  H.  Goddard,  “who  pioneered  in 
rocket experimentation and   contributed  to America’s  success  in  landing 
men  on  the  moon.”  ( C R Y  12/8/69,  H11865) 
By  vote  of  330  to  33  House  passed  H.R.  15090,  $69.9-billion  DOD FY 
1970  appropriations  bill.  ( C R ,  12/8/69,  (Hl1865-909) 
0  Princeton  Univ.  scientists  had  observed  sudden  speedup  in   fastest  and  
youngest  pulsar,  in   heart  of  Crab  Nebula,  Walter  Sullivan  reported  in  
New  Y o r k  T imes .  With  second  discovery  of  periodic  phenomenon,  as- 
tronomers had  taken word “glitchyy from electronic  engineers and  astro- 
nauts  to  describe  sudden  udeparture  from  normal  “pulsar  behavior. 
( N Y T ,  12 /8 /69 )  
December  9 :   LeRC   Director  Bruce  T.  Lundin  discussed  fu ture   interest  in 
0.7  to  mach  1.4-before  House  Com- 
transonic  speed  range-mach 
mittee  on   Science  and   Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Advanced 
Research  and   Technology  during  hearings  on  U S .   aeronautical  ac- 
tivities:  “Cruise  speeds  of  commercial  and   military  transports  have 
already  reached  about Mach  0.85,  and  further  increases  to  about Mach 
1.15  are   of  interest  hecause  this  speed  can  be  attained  without  sonic 
boom  effects.  The  transonic speed  range  is also  critical  for  a  supersonic 
transport  because  performance in   this  range determines subsonic cruise 
efficiency.  Transonic  speed  characteristics  are   important  t o   fighter  a i r -  
craf t   because  they  are   required  to  maneuver  a t   these  speeds,  and   they 
are   important  to  bomber  a ircraf t   because  they  affect  the  engine  size 
which  is   necessary  to   accelerate  to  higher  supersonic  speeds.  . . . It  is  
in   this  speed  range  tha t  many  interactions,  shock waves,  and   flow  sepa- 
rations  occur  that  become  important  to  the  thrust,  drag,  and  stall 
margin  of  the  engine  and   on  the  lift,  drag   and  buffet  characteristics  of 
the  aircraft.  Unfortunately,  mathematical prediction  techniques  do   not 
work  well  in  this  speed  range  and  experimental  testing  becomes  of 
ma jor   importance.”  Only  very  small models could be  used  in  transonic 
tunnels  “and  scaling  up  results  from  very  small models  to  full  size  a ir-  
planes  is  a t  best  difficult and   usually  impossible.  We  will  be  paced  here 
for   some  time  to  come  by  the  capabilities  of  our  experimental  facili- 
ties.”  (Testimony) 
0  Sen.  Robert  J.  Dole  (R-Kans.)  introduced  S.R.  167   “providing  for  the 
display  in   the  Capitol Building  of  a  portion  of  the  moon.”  Resolution 
was  referred  to  Senate  Committee  on  Rules  and   Administration.  ( C R ,  
12/9/69,  S16142) 

404 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

December  10 

December  10: NASA  announced  it  was  proceeding  w i t h   plans  and  prepara- 
tions  for  launch  of  Apollo  13 manned  lunar   landing  mission  to  F r a  
Mauro  on  March  12,  1970.  Decision  was  based  on  review  of  photos 
taken  of  F r a   Mauro  area  and   successful  demonstration  of  pinpoint 
landing  techniques  by  Apo l lo   12. F ra   Mauro  was  flat,  vast  highland 
area  about  110 mi  east  of  Apollo  12 landing  point  on Ocean  of  Storms. 
(NASA  Release 69-162) 
*  Apollo  12 Astronauts  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.,  and 
Alan  L.  Bean  and   25   other  persons  quarantined  in   Lunar  Receiving 
Laboratory  were  released  one  day  ahead  of  schedule.  Dr.  Charles  A. 
Berry,  Director  of  Medical Research  and Operations  a t  MSC,  said  astro- 
nauts  were  in  good  physical  condition.  ( B  Sun,  12/11/69,  A l )  
Electrical  fire  damaged  GSFC  offices,  laboratories,  and  equipment  includ- 
ing  150-lb Small  Scientific  Satellite  scheduled  for  1970  launch  in   Ex- 
plorer  series.  Damage  to  satellite and  laboratory  facility  was  estimated 
a t   $400,000. There  were  no  injuries.  Origin  of  fire  was  being  investi- 
gated.  (W  Star,  12/10/69,  B1 ;   GSFC  Historian) 
*  End  of  e r a  in   satellite watching would  come with  discontinuation  in   June 
1970  of  Smithsonian  Institution’s  optical  tracking  program,  John 
Lannan  said  in  Washington  Evening  Star.  NASA  already  was  terminat- 
ing  10-yr  support  of  Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory’s  efforts 
at  Cambridge,  Mass.  Optical  tracking  had  cost  $4  million  annually 
since  1958,  first  through  NSF,  then  NASA.  Program  had  led  to  nation- 
wide  “Dial-A-Satellite’7 telephone net  by  which  tape-recorded messages 
told  callers  where  satellites could  be  seen  in   sky.  Service had  become 
“Dial-A-Phenomenon” to note  ecological, geophysical, and  astronomical 
events,  since  decay  of  only  visible  satellites,  Echo  Z and  Echo  ZZ. 
Smithsonian Observatory had  watched  satellites with  worldwide  battery 
of  Baker-Nunn cameras,  which  had  been  phased  out  except  for  observ- 
ing  maneuvers  i n   major  space  flights.  Observatory’s  geodetic  program 
was  being  expanded,  with  two  lasers  operational,  one  on  Mount-Hop- 
kins,  Ariz.,  the  other  in   Athens,  Greece, but  financial  support  had  been 
halved  for  current fiscal year  and  would  be  cut  to  $1.3  million  in  1971. 
(W  Star, 12/10/69,  A26;  Smithsonian  PAO) 
December  11:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos CCCXZV from  Plesetsk  into  orbit 
with  465-km   (288.9-mi)  apogee,  296-km  (183.9-mi)  perigee,  91.6- 
min  period,  and  71.0’  inclination  and  reentered March  22,  1970.  ( GSFC 
SSR,  12 /15 /69 ;   3/31/70;  SBD,  12/15/69,  193)  
USAF  YF-12A  supersonic  a ircraf t   made  first  flight  from  Edwards  AFB, 
Calif.,  under  jo in t   NASA-USAF  sponsorship,  opening  program  to  ad- 
vance U.S.  knowledge of  aerial defense tactics and future  of  commercial 
aviation  [see  July  111.  (AFSC  Newsreview, 2/70,  1) 
NASA  announced  appointment  of  Charles W.  Mathews,  Deputy  Associate 
Administrator  for Manned  Space Flight,  as  Acting  Associate Adminis- 
trator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  replacing  Dr.  George  E.  Mueller. 
(NASA  Ann )  
“Into  the  New  Realm,”  exhibit  of  documentary  history  of  U.S.  Govern- 
ment  in   space  from  early  balloon  ascensions  to  origination  of  Apollo 
program,  opened  a t   National  Archives  in   Washington,  D.C.  Exhibit 
included  original  of  National  Space Act  of  1958, which  created  NASA, 
and  copies  of  correspondence on  establishment  of  U S .   space  program 
from  President  Eisenhower ; President  Kennedy;  first  NASA  Adminis- 

405 

December  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

December  11:  USAF  YF-12A  supersonic  a ircraf t   m ad e   i t s   f i r s t   research  flight  f r o m  
Edwards   AFB,  to  op en   a  jo in t   NASA-USAF  program   t o   advance  know ledge   o f   h igh-per-  
fo rman c e   f l igh t .  Spec ia l   ins trumen ta t ion   ins ta l led   b y   NASA  increased  the   value  of   the 
f l y ing   t e s t   bed   f o r   accumulating  da ta .   P i lo ts   w e r e   f r o m   NASA  and  the   A i r   Force. 

tra tor ,   Dr.  T.  Keith  Glennan;  former  NASA  Administrator  James  E. 
Webb;  and   others.  (Na t l  Archives PIO)  
President  Nixon  issued  proclamation  commemorating Dec.  17  as Wright 
Brothers Day:  “On  December  17,  1903, Orville and  Wilbur Wright  . . . 
stepped from  a homemade contraption  onto an  ocean beach  in   the  State 
of  North  Carolina,  aiter  completing the  first  successful  airplane  flight. 
“Almost  sixty-six  years  later,  another  man  stepped  from  another 
craf t   onto  another  plain  . . . the  waterless  Sea  of  Tranquility  on  the 
Moon.  Man  had  not  only  removed  his  bondage  to   the  earth,  but  had 
expanded his  horizons  to  outer  space.”  (PD, 12/15/69,  1732)  
0  Former  astronaut  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.,  formally  announced  candidacy  for 
Democratic  nomination  for  U S .   Senate  seat  being  vacated  by  Sen. 
Stephen M.  Young  (D-Ohio) . ( N Y T ,  12/12/69,  33) 
December  12:  NASA’s H G l O  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot 
William  H.  Dana,  reached  80,000-ft  altitude  and   mach  1.4  after  a ir-  
launch  from  B-52  a ircraf t   a t   45,000-ft  altitude  west  of  Rosamond, 
Calif. Objective of  powered  flight,  31st  in  series, was  to  obtain  stability 
and  control data.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
0  ApoZZo  12 Astronauts  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.,  and  
Alan  L.  Bean  held  press  conference  a t   MSC  and   showed  movies  and  
slides  of  mission.  Explaining failure  of  color  TV  camera,  Conrad  said: 
“What  apparently  happened  . . . is   that  I  took  the  thing  off  MESA  and  
set  it down. The  MESA  was  in   the  sun  a t  the  time  and   . . . I  apparently 
either  pointed  i t  a t  the  sun   o r  pointed  i t  a t  the  MESA,  which  was  in   the 
sun  and  a  pretty  br igh t   reflector  . . . and   just  tha t   few  seconds . . . was 
406 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 
December  12 
enough  to  sunburn   the  camera.  . . , I didn’t  realize  i t  was  a s   sensitive 
to  light  as it is.” 
Dust  on  surface was  a ma jor   problem, Conrad  said.  Ground  was  soft 
and   astronauts sank  i n  significantly.  It was  difficult to  keep  experiment 
package  clean.  “I t   was  almost  impossible for   us  to  walk  around  those 
packages without  our   little  dust cloud  and   a t   any   time  the  dust  hit  the 
surface  of  the  package  it  stuck  and   the  worst  thing  you  could  do   was 
t ry   to  rub  i t  off  because you  jus t   smeared i t  over them  even worse.  . . .” 
To   question  about  d f i c u l t y  in   landing  LM  on  moon,  Conrad  replied 
he  had  misinterpreted  correct  gage  reading  and   underestimated  accu- 
racy  of  LM’S descent.  “. . . I felt tha t   tha t   gage was no t   . . . giving me 
have  gotten  the  velocity  killed  quite  a s  well  a s  I did  . . . and   so  I was 
the  proper  information.  I  found  it  quite  ha rd   to  believe  that  I  could 
continually  going  out the  window  to get  roll  information and   a  general 
idea  of  my  lateral  and  horizontal  velocities.”  Although  Conrad  felt 
landing  on  moon  was  not  “an  amateur’s  game,”  he  felt  satisfactory 
landings  under  completely  instrumented  flight  rule  conditions  could  be 
made.  Crew  had   suggested adding  instrument  that  would  provide  auto- 
matic  nulling  of  horizontal  and   lateral  velocities  bu t   would  leave  pilot 
w i t h   rate  of  descent command. Conrad  said he  d id   not  think  dust  dur-  
ing  descent would  be  problem  on  future  missions  “as  long  a s   you  get 
a  look  a t   your  landing  site before  you  get  into  the  dust,  and  ascertain 
perfectly  all  r igh t   to   go  in   and   land,  IFR.  . . . I 
that  it’s  all  right-it’s 
don’t  recommend  any  change  from  the  procedures  tha t   we’re  using 
right  now.” 
Bean  said  photos  of  moon  were  realistic,  bu t   photos  of  ear th   were 
not.  “As  we  view  the  Moon  from   the  Earth,  it’s  white  and  flat;  it’s 
quite  pretty.  When  you  get  up  a t  the Moon  . . . it’s much  the  same;  it’s 
either  white  o r   concrete colored  o r  grey.  . . . But when  you  look  a t  the 
E a r t h .   . . i t  kind  of  sparkles,  and   . . . you  can’t  capture  i t  on  the  film. 
It’s  sor t   of  like  taking  a  picture  of  an   emerald  . . . and   hoping  to  get 
it.” 
Gordon  said  he  had  mixture  of  emotions, ‘‘a  mixture  of  thoughts,  as 
to why  is it all here?   And  . . . what  the  function tha t  each  person,  each 
part,  each molecule,  each  body  performs,  in   the  overall  scheme  of  why 
is   it, what  is   it, and   from where  d id  it  come.”  (Transcript) 
*  Lunar  Receiving Laboratory  scientists  told  press  a t   MSC rocks  retrieved 
from  moon  by  Apo l lo   12 crew  were  younger,  lower  in   titanium,  and  
higher  i n  nickel  than  those retrieved  by  Apollo  11 and  showed  no  signs 
of  bacteria  o r   toxicity.  Dr.  Oliver  A.  Schaeffer  of  New  York  State 
Univ.  a t  Stony  Brook  said A p o l b  12 samples seemed  to  be  2.2  billion 
to  2.5  billion  yrs  old,  compared  to   3.8  billion  to 4,6 billion  yrs  old  for 
ApoUo  11 samples. “The  younger  age means  the  . . . activity,  whether 
volcanic  o r   meteorite  impact,  took  place  over  an   extended  period  of 
time,  not  on  a  shor t   time  scale.” 
Dr.  S.  Ross  Taylor  of  Australian  National  Univ.  said  chemistry  of 
Apollo  12 and   Apollo  11 samples was  basically  similar  bu t   had  many 
interesting  differences.  “The  surface  is   not  completely  homogeneous 
across the moon.  There a re  differences in   chemistry probably  reflecting 
. . . it looks  a s  though  we  could have  two   ex- 
i n   the  underlying  rock. 
tremes  of  differences.”  Apollo  12  samples from  Ocean  of  Storms  had 
about  half  titanium  content  found  in   ApoUo  I1 samples  from  Sea  of 

407  

December  12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Tranquility.  They  had   few  refractory  elements  and   fewer  volatile  ele- 
ments.  (Wilford, NYT ,   12/13/69,  20 ;   Cohn,  W Po s t ,   12/13/69,  A10) 
Senate  confirmed  nomination  of  former  Apo l lo   11  Astronaut  Michael 
Collins  to  be  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for   PubIic  Affairs.  ( C R ,  
12/12/69,  D1201) 
*  Moon  was  gray   and   colorless,  rather  than  orange  from   oxidation  of  fer- 
rous  oxide in   rocks by  photolytically  liberated  oxygen,  UCLA  geophysi- 
cist  Dr.  Willard  F.  Libby  noted  in   Science. He   suggested reason  “lies 
in  the  solar wind’s  bringing  in  atomic hydrogen  to  replace  that  lost  by 
the  photolytic  decomposition  of  water  vapor.” 
(Sc ience ,   12/12/69, 
1437-8)  
Results  of  four  rad io   occultation  measurements  of  Mars’  atmosphere, 
ionosphere, and   surface  configuration by  Mariner  V I   and   V I 1  were  re-  
ported  in  Science  by  JPL’S  Dr. Arvydas  J. Kliore,  Dr.  Gunnar  Fjeldbo, 
and  Boris  L.  Seidel  and  Goddard  Institute  for  Space  Studies’  Dr.  S. 
Ichtiaque Rasool.  Measurements had  provided  refractivity  data  in  Mars 
atmosphere a t   four  points  above  its  surface.  For  atmosphere consisting 
predominantly  of  carbon  dioxide,  surface  pressures  between  6  and  7 
millibars  at  three  points  of  measurement  and   3.8  a t   fourth,  indicated 
elevation  of  3.1-3.7  m i   ( 5 - 6   km ) .   Temperature  profile  measured  by 
Mariner  V I  near  equator  in   daytime  indicated  temperatures  in   strato- 
sphere abou t   100°K  warmer  than  those  predicted  by  theory.  Measure- 
ments  by  Mariner  V I   taken  a t   79”N  a t   beginning  of  polar  night 
indicated  conditions were  favorable for  condensation of  carbon  dioxide 
a t   almost  all  altitudes.  Mariner  V I 1   measurements  taken  a t   5 8 ” s   in 
daytime  and  38”N   a t   night  also  showed  carbon  dioxide  condensation 
was  possible  a t   altitudes  above  about  15.5 mi  ( 2 5  km)  . Measurements 
of  electron  density  in   ionosphere  showed  upper  atmosphere  was  sub- 
stantially  warmer  than   in   1965,  possibly  because  of  increased  solar 
activity  and   proximity  to  sun.  (Sc ience ,  12/12/69,  1393-7) 
*  TOR-SHOK  energy-absorbing  system  designed  for  Apollo  program  was 
being  installed  by  State  Highway  Commission  of  Kansas  along  ma jor  
arteries  in   and   about  Topeka,  Republic  Steel  Corp.  announced.  De- 
veloped  by  Ara,  Inc.,  system  used  multiple-telescoping,  lightweight, 
high-strength  steel  tubing  to  attach  guardra i l   to  its  mounting  posts, 
concrete abutments,  or  other  roadside  objects. When  car   struck  guard- 
rail,  most  of  impact  force  was  transmitted  from  ra i l   to  TOR-SHOKS, 
rings  that  absorbed  shock  by  turning  inside  out.  (Republic  Steel Re- 
lease R-1053) 
*  NASA  was  allowing  Apo l lo   12 crew  and   colleagues to  take  part  in   Jewish 
National  Fund  dinner  Dec.  14   in   Houston  “after  years  of  guarding 
against the  use  of  its  astronauts  as  fund-raisers,”  Associated  Press  said. 
Proceeds  of  $100-a-plate  affair  honoring  Apo l lo   12  and   other  astro- 
nauts  would  be  used  to  plant  trees  in   Israel.  (AP ,   W Po s t ,   12/13/69, 
A12) 
*  DOD  announced  General  Electric  Co.  would  receive  $5,333,250  supple- 
mental  agreement  to  previously  awarded  USAF  contract  for  R&D  of 
Mark  12   reentry  vehicle.  Contract  would  be  managed  by  Space  and  
Missile  Systems Organization  ( SAM SO ) .   ( DOD   Release  1068-69) 
December  13: NASA  successfully  launched  first  two  in   series  of  Nike-Apache 
sounding  rockets  carrying  chemical cl6ud  experiments from  NASA  Wal- 
lops  Station.  Rocket  launched  a t   5:22  pm  EST  carried  sodium  experi- 

408 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

December  13 

ment  which  created  reddish-orange cloud visible  for hundreds  of  miles. 
Rocket  launched  a t   7:30  pm  EST carried  trimethylaluminum  ( TM A )  
experiment which created  bluish-white cloud.  Pr imary   objective  was  to 
measure  wind  directions  and   speeds  i n   25-  to  135-mi  (40.2-  to 
217.2-km)  region  and   temporal  variations  tha t   occurred  throughout 
night.  Four   TMA   experiments  and   two  acoustic  grenade  experiments, 
postponed because of  cloud cover,  would  be  rescheduled.  (WS  Releases 
69-19,  69-20) 
*  Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  carrying  GSFC payload  was  launched  by 
NASA  from   WSMR  to  conduct  stellar  w  studies.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
*  Pan   American  World  Airways  took  delivery  of  first  Boeing  747  to  be 
turned  over  to  commercial line  in   ceremony a t  Boeing  Field  in   Seattle, 
Wash.  Later  in   day,  362-passenger transport  left  on  six-hour  flight  to 
Nassau, Bahamas.  I t  was  scheduled to  fly  to  New  York  same day.  (AP ,  
W  Star,  12/14/69,  A25) 
Smithsonian  Astrophysical Observatory  in   Cambridge, Mass.,  said  comet 
Tago-Sato-Kosaka, discovered  Oct.  10 by  Japanese  astronomers,  was 
being  observed by  astronomers  in   Southern Hemisphere and   should  be 
visible  to  naked  eye  throughout  US. in  mid-January  1970. I t  was  first 
comet  visible  without  telescope  in   more  than  two  years.  (UPI,  W  S tar ,  
12/14/69,  A33) 
December  15: At meeting of  American  Geophysical Union  in  San  Francisco, 
Columbia  Univ.  scientist  Dr.  Gary  V.  Latham,  principal  investigator 
for  Apollo program’s  seismic research,  proposed  detonation  of  nuclear 
device  on  moon  to  assist  analysis  of  lunar  interior.  He   announced  ten- 
tative  plans  for  placement  of  one-  to  five-kiloton  bomb  on  lunar  far  
side  by  unmanned  Atlas-Agena rocket  between  Apollo  15 and  16  mis- 
sions  in   November  1970  and   envisioned  possible  cooperative  effort 
with  U.S.S.R.  “I expect  to  run   into  a  large  number  of  political  snags. 
But  these  problems  are  not  insurmountable  if  we  include  the  Russians 
. . . and  agree  to  share  the  da ta   with  them.  . . . I  would  like  to  ask 
them  to  put  the  bomb  on  the  moon.”  Proposal  was  to  be  submitted  to 
NAS  for  approval.  Nuclear  blast  would  send  seismic  waves  through 
moon’s  core.  These  would  be  measured  to  yield  information  on  nature 
and  origin  of  lunar  interior.  (Reuters,  W  Pos t ,   12/16/69,  A2) 
*  NASA  established  14-member Apollo  Orbital  Science Photographic  Team 
to  provide  scientific guidance  in   design,  operation,  and  data  utilization 
of  photographic  systems  for   Apollo  lunar  orbital  science  program. 
Chairman  was  Frederick  J.  Doyle  of  US. Geological  Survey.  (Apollo 
Prog   Off) 
NRC   Panel  on Remote  Atmospheric Probing  issued Atmospheric  Explora- 
t ion   b y   Remote  Probes,  Volume  1, Summary  and  Recommendations, 
of  final  report  to  NAS-NRC  Committee  on  Atmospheric Sciences.  Report 
recommended that  National  Center  for  Atmospheric Research  organize 
scientific  committee  to  formulate  w i t h   NASA  “an  integrated  remote  at- 
mospheric probing  program  a t  the  unique Wallops  Island  facility;  and 
that  NASA  establish  procedures  for   the  utilization  of  the  facility  and  
make  widely  known  its  availability  for   atmospheric  research.”  Report 
also  recommended  inclusion  of  atmospheric  probing  among  scientific 
missions  of  Haystack  rada r   a t  MIT  and Millstone radar   and  urged  de- 
velopment  of  new  facilities  for   remote  atmosphere probing  by  Doppler 
radar.  (Tex t)  

409 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
December  15 
Senate,  by  vote  of  85  to  4,  passed  H.R.  15090,  $69.3-billion  DOD fl 
1970  appropriations  bill.  (CR, 12/15/69,  516743-4,  516750-1, 
S16782,  5167841-96) 
*  Gen.  James  Ferguson  (WAF), AFSC  Commander,  said  in  keynote  address 
before  Air  Force  Eatigue  and   Fracture  Conference  a t   Miami  Beach, 
Fla.:  “Our  potential  adversaries  a r e   pushing  on  all  frontiers  of  tech- 
nology.  We  cannot  safely  do  less,  and  yet  we  must  achieve  our  tech- 
nological goals with less in  the way  of  money, manpower,  and  facilities.” 
Each  aircraft  “w i l l   have  t o - b e  better,  more  capable,  stronger,  more 
durable,  and  preferably  less costly.”  (Tex t)  
December  16:   NASA  announced  appointment  of  Robert  N.  Lindley,  Vice 
President  Program  General  Manager  of  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.,  as  
Special  Assistant  to  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for   Manned  Space 
Flight.  (NASA  Ann )  
*  Senate  Committee  on  Appropriations  voted  in   closed  session  to  cut  ap- 
proximately  $16  million  from  House-recommended  allocation  of  $96 
million for   SST  development under  H.R.  14794, DOD FY 1970 appropri- 
ations  bill.  (Reuters,  B Sun,  12/17/69,  A9) 
Man  Will Never  Fly Memorial Society held  10th annual meeting  a t  Kitty 
Hawk,  N.C.  on  eve  of  66th  anniversary  of  Wright  brothers’  first  a i r -  
plane  flight.  Society’s  highest  honor,  National  Anti-aviation  Citation 
Presentation,  was  awarded  in   absentia  to  President  Nixon  for   his  de- 
cision  to  spend  $1.3  billion  on  two  prototype  SSTS.  “Since  Britain, 
France  and  Russia  have  already  built  SST prototypes,”  citation  said, 
“an  all-American SST  will  . . . give  the  United  States  a  smashing  avia- 
tion  fourth.” 
Julian  Scheer,  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Public  Affairs  and 
founding  member  of  society,  narrated  films  showing  simulations  of 
lunar  surface  used  by  NASA  for   training.  They  indicated  “that  you  can 
really  fake  things  on  the  ground-almost 
to  the  point  of  deception.” 
Society’s  600  members  included  aviation  pioneers,  military  pilots,  a ir-  
line  executives, and  aerospace newswriters.  (Wilford,  NYT,  12/18/69, 
30)  
Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe announced selection of  Robert 
P.  Selfridge,  Director  of  Greater  Rockford  (Ill.)  Airport,  to  receive 
FAA  Award  for  Distinguished Service for  his  “contribution  in   develop- 
ing  and  promoting  the  cause  of  General  Aviation”  and   for  his  “con- 
structive  suggestions,  imagination,  dedication  and  service  to 
the 
aviation  users,  above  and  beyond  the  role  of  an  Airport  Director.” 
(FAA   Release 69 -67 )  
December  16-17:  USNS  Vanguard ,  which  provided  only  sea-going  link  in  
NASA  tracking  and   communications network  during  Apollo  flights,  was 
on  display  a t   Por t   of  Baltimore,  Md.  ( W  Post,  12/15/69,  B8;  NASA 
PAO )  
December  17:   SNAP-27  nuclear  generator  placed  on  moon  by  Apollo  12 
astronauts  had   continued  to  operate  du r ing   first  28-day-and-night 
to  +283”F,  AEC  an- 
lunar .  cycle  despite  temperatures  from  -291°F 
nounced.  It was  producing  more  than  70  w  of  electricity  to  power  five 
instruments  deployed  Nov.  19  to  transmit  lunar  data.  (AEC   Release 
M-274) 
NASA  Aerobee  150  M I   sounding  rocket  launched  from  WSMR with 
VAM-20  booster  carried  AFCRL  payload  to  127-mi  (204.3-km)  alti- 

410 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

December  17 

tude.  Objective  was  to  calibrate  Harvard  College  Observatory  spec- 
trometer  on  board   orbiting  Os0  V I   by  studying  active  regions  of  sun 
simultaneously  a t   300-41N)  A  with  telemetering,  grazing  incidence, 
scanning EUV  monochromator. Rocket and  instruments functioned  satis- 
factorily.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
USAF  took  delivery  of  first  operational  C-5  Galaxy  a ircraf t   in  ceremony 
a t   Lockheed-Georgia Co.  plant  i n   Marietta,  Ga.  Later,  a ircraf t   was 
flown  to  Altus  AFB,  Okla.,  for   use  by  Military  Airlift  Command.  (DOD 
Release  1078-69;  USAF  PIO) 
*  Termination  of  Pro jec t  Blue  Book-USAF 
an-  
investigation  of  UFOs-was 
nounced  by  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamaas,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force. 
Project’s  continuation  could not  be justified  “on  the  ground  of  national 
security  or  in   the  interest  of  science.”  Decision was  based  on  evalua- 
tion  of  Jan.  9  report  by  Univ.  of  Colorado,  NAS  review  of  Univ.  of 
Colorado  report,  and  USAF  investigations  of  UFO  reports  since  1948. 
USAF  had   concluded:  no   UFO  reported,  investigated,  and   evaluated  by 
USAF  had   threatened  U S .   security;  there  had  been  no   evidence  that 
“unidentified”  sightings  represented  technological  developments  or 
principles  beyond  range  of  scientific  knowledge;  and   there  had   been 
no  evidence that  “unidentified”  sightings  were  extraterrestrial  vehicles. 
Pro jec t   Blue Book  records would  be  retired  to  USAF  archives  a t  Max- 
well  AFB,  Ala.  (DOD Release  1077-69)  
( N ICAP )   , 
*  National  Investigations  Committee  for  Aerial  Phenomena 
10,000-member private  UFO-investigating group,  released  statement  on 
termination  of  USAF  Pro jec t  Blue Book:  “Congress can  now  discuss  the 
possibility  of  turning  over  UFO 
investigations  to  a  civilian  federal 
agency  or  a  private  scientific  organization.”  USAF  decision  “increases 
the  need  for  an   active  program  of  research  and   education.”  (N ICAP  
Release) 
s  London-to-Sydney Air  Race  commemorating  first  England-to-Australia 
flight  in  1919 by Ross and  Keith Smith started a t  Gatwick Airport  near 
London,  with  89  entries  competing  for  $112,000  in   prizes.  (NYT ,  
1/5/70,  61) 
Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  in   letter  to  Sen.  Clinton  P. 
Anderson,  Chairman  of  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space 
Sciences,  summarized  recent  NASA  efforts  to  improve  international  co- 
operation  in  space. He  had  visited major  European  capitals and  Canada 
and   hoped  to  visit  Australia  and   Japan,  to  explain  “planning  for  U S .  
space  activities  in   the  next  decades.”  Foreign  space  authorities  had 
been  invited  to  “sponsor  their  own  industrial participation  in  the  NASA 
conference  on  space  shuttle  conceptsy’ held  in  October.  “Additional 
mechanisms  a re   being  developed  to  permit  foreign  space  interests  to 
keep  in   touch  with  and   even  contribute  to  our  studies  over  the  next 
year,  especially  in   the  space  shuttle  and   station  programs.” 
In  letters  to  President Mstislav  V.  Keldysh and  Academician Anatoly 
A.  Blagonravov of  Soviet Academy  of  Sciences Dr.  Pa ine   had  invited 
Soviet  proposals  for   experiments  on  U S .   spacecraft,  offered  use  of 
laser  reflector  left  on moon by  Apo l lo  11 astronauts,  invited  Soviet pro- 
posals  for   lunar   sample  analysis,  invited  Soviet  scientists  to  Viking 
Mars  1973   conference,  offered  to   discuss  coordination  of  planetary 
programs,  and   reiterated  U S .   readiness  “to  meet  anytime,  any  place, 
to  consider  any  possibilities  for   cooperation  o r   coordination  between 

411  

December  17 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
us.”  There  had  been  “no  substantial  response.”  (CR, 1/21/70,  S259) 
Senate,  by  vote  of  58  to  22,  rejected  amendment  submitted  by  Sen. 
William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  to  strike  from  H.R.  14794, DOT  FY 1970 
appropriations  bill,  $80  million  for   SST  development.  (CR, 12/17/69, 
S 17003, S 17005-48) 
Maj.  Alexander P.  de  Seversky, long-time advocate of  air  power,  received 
USAF  Exceptional  Service  Award  a t   Pentagon  ceremony  for  “excep- 
tionally  meritorious  service”  to  U.S.  aviation  from  1918 to  1969.  (W  
S tar ,   12/18/69,  A2) 
*  Surprise  had   been  expressed  over  enthusiastic  reception  in   Moscow  of 
U.S.  lunar  rock  exhibit,  Washington  Evening  S tar   editorial  noted. 
There  was  really  nothing  surprising,  however.  “From  a  narrowly  na- 
tionalistic point  of  view,  the  Russian people  and  the  Soviet government 
can claim that, were  i t  not  for   the early Russian  successes in   space, that 
piece  of  rock  would  still  be  resting  on  the  moon.  But  it  is  more  likely 
that  the Russians,  and  the  other peoples  of  the Earth,  see the  first moon 
landing  for  what  i t   truly  was:  A  triumph  for  the  collective  ingenuity 
of  Man.”  (W  Star,  12 /17 /69 )  
December  18:   Selection  of  investigators  and  investigation  areas  for  1973  
Viking  mission  to  Mars  was  announced  by  NASA.  LaRC  would  manage 
overall  project  an d   be  responsible  for  lander  portion  of  spacecraft. 
JPL   would  manage  orbiter  portion  and  be  responsible for  tracking  and 
data  acquisition.  Viking,  follow-on  to  1964-1965,  1969,  and  1971  
Mariner  Mars  flights,  would  consist  of  two  instrumented  spacecraft  in 
Mars  orbit, each  of  which would  detach landing  capsule  for  softlanding 
on  Mars.  Mission  objectives  included  detection  of  life  if   it  existed. 
(NASA   Release 69-166) 
Hot  firing  of  twin  RL-10  Centaur  engines marked  first use  of  LeRC’s  new 
Spacecraft  Propulsion  Research  Facility,  B-2 
stand,  a t   Plum  Brook 
Station,  Ohio  [see  Oct.  71,  and  first Centaur  tests  a t  Plum  Brook  since 
structural  tests  in  mid-1960s. Since then,  Centaur,  configured with  1st- 
stage  Atlas,  had  launched  seven  Surveyor  spacecraft  to  moon,  two 
Mariner  spacecraft  to  Mars,  one  OAO,  and  one  ATS.  (LeRC  Release 
69-76) 
NASA  announced  appointment  of  John  A.  Whitney  as  Assistant  General 
Counsel  for  Procurement  Matters.  (NASA  Release  69-167) 
*  Planned  U S .   participation  in   1971  Par is   Air  Show  was  announced  in  
Washington,  D.C.,  by  Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe  and 
Secretary  of  Commerce  Maurice  H.  Stans.  DOT  would  coordinate  ex- 
hibition  of  U.S.  aircraft  on  flight  line.  (DOT   Release 26669) 
*  Senate  and   House  cleared  for   President’s  signature  H.R.  15090.  $69.6- 
billion  DOD  FY  1970  appropriations  bill.  TCR,  12/18/69,  Sl7181-6; 
_ _ _ _   _ _  
H12706-8) -, 
Tom Wicker  commented  in   New  Yo rk   Times  on  suggested  detonation  of 
nuclear  device on  moon  [see  Dec.  151.  “Aside  from  the  obvious  ques- 
tions about the effects  of  nuclear  fallout in  the moon’s  atmosphere, what 
might  be  the  total  environmental  consequences of  such  an   explosion- 
for   the  moon  itself,  for  those  who  w i l l   be  visiting  it  from  earth,  for  
other  objects  in   the  solar  system?”  Fast  performances  had  indicated 
“some  unexpected  and  probably  unwelcome  result.”  Indus  and  Ganges 
River  irrigation  systems  had  contaminated  soil  in   India  with  salt  that 
rose  from  earth  with  water  and  Aswan  Dam  was  spreading  disease 

412 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

December  18 

with  irr iga t ion   waters  i n   Egypt  and   damaging  fertile  Nile  delta  by  in- 
US . ,   oil  leaks  from  ocean 
terfering  with  anci 
floor  set off  by  sc 
s had   ruined  San ta  Barbara, 
Calif.,  coast.  “Mo 
oeing 747,  Concorde supersonic 
airliner, C-5A  Galaxy jet,  and   SST would  “spew  their  poisons  on  man- 
kind.”  Could  man  master  anything  that  really  mattered?  “Certainly 
not  nature,  and  least  of  all himself;  ra ther   i t  is   altogether  likely  that  i f  
the  Biblical  flood  someday  engulfs  the  earth,  i t   will  flow  from  seeded 
clouds.  That  might  even  be  a  fitting  end.”  ( N Y T ,  12/18/69,  4 6 )  
December  19: Results of  Apollo  11  experiment to t r ap  atomic particles  from 
solar  wind  on   lunar  surface  [see  Aug.  181 were  reported  in  Science  by 
originator  Dr.  Johannes  Geiss  and   Univ.  of  Berne,  Switzerland,  team. 
Helium-4 solar  wind  flux  dur ing   ApoZZo  11  excursion  was  5.1 million 
to  7.5  million atoms per  sq  cm per  sec.  Solar wind  direction  and energy 
were  essentially not  perturbed by moon.  Evidence for  solar  wind  albedo 
had  been  found.  (Science, 12/19/69,  1502-3) 
December  20:  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  CCCXV  in to   orb i t   with  541-km 
(336.2-mi)  apogee,  518-km  (321.9-mi)  perigee,  95.2-min  period, 
and   74.0’  inclination.  ( GSFC  SSR,  12 /31 /69)  
Apollo  11  Astronaut Neil A.  Armstrong  arrived in   Bangkok, Thailand,  to 
meet  with  Peace  Corps  officials  on  Presidential mission.  (AP ,   W Post, 
12/21/69,  A17;  W  Star,  12/21/69,  D7) 
Lunar   rock  sample weighing 34.1 gm  left Lisbon, Portugal,  for  Wa sh ing  
ton,  D.C.,  after  eight-day  exhibit  that  attracted  some  60,000  persons, 
including 400 leaders  of  Portuguese  scientific, military,  and  educational 
world.  Rock,  shown  on  Portuguese TV  to  estimated  9 million  viewers, 
would  be   sent  to  Prague.  ( N Y T ,  12/21/69,  22 )  
*  Bell Aerosystems Co.  announced i t  would  become Bell Aerospace  Go.  Div. 
of  Textron,  Inc.,  effective  Jan.  3,  1970,  when  Bell  Aerospace  Corp. 
would  merge  into  Textron.  (Bell  Aerosystems  Release  52 )  
December  21 :  Apollo  12  astronauts  and   wives  attended  Sunday  services  a t  
White House  and   later  were  guests  a t   informal  dinner  given  by  Presi- 
dent  and   Mrs.  Nixon.  They  stayed  overnight  a t   White  House.  ( P D ,  
12/22/69,  1763; AP,  B  Sun, 12/22/69,  A3) 
*  Philadelphia  Inquirer  editorial  criticized  Dec.  1 5  proposal  of  Columbia 
Univ.  scientist  Dr.  Gary  V.  Latham,  principal  investigator  of  seismic 
experiments for   NASA  Apollo missions,  to  set off  nuclear  blast  on moon: 
“. . . the  whole  idea seems  fundamentally repugnant  and whether  scien- 
tifically  sound  or  not  likely  to  lead  into  ramifications  outweighing any 
possible  re turn   in   scientific  knowledge.  . . . Reaction  against  such  an  
experiment  would  be  even  more  intense,  if  i t   were  undertaken  in   co- 
operation,  a s  proposed, with  the  Soviet Union.  Nuclear  devices  a re   not 
toys  to  be  used  for   scientific  game  playing  anywhere  on  ear th   or  in 
space.”  ( P  Znq,  12/21/69) 
December  22:  USAF  ordered  temporary  halt  to  F-111  operations  following 
15th F-111  crash  since  aircraft’s  inception  in   1965. Accident occurred 
45 m i   northwest  of  Nellis  AFB,  Nev.,  when  aircraft,  in   shallow dive  to 
drop   smoke bombs  and   fire  rockets,  struck  ground  past  target  and  ex- 
ploded, killing  USAF  pilots  Maj,  James L.  Anthony  and   L /C   Thomas  J .  
Mack.  (Witkin,  N Y T ,   12/23/69,  13) 
Washington  Evening  Star  editorial commented  on  Dec.  17  USAF  termina- 
tion  of  Project Blue Book:  “Loyal  saucer people,  undeterred by  bureau- 

December  22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

cratic huffiness,  will  now  look forward  to  that  impending  twilight  when 
a  strange galaxy  of  glowing,  humming,  reds,  greens  and   lavenders  will 
settle  over  the  [USAF]   Academy  a t  Colorado  Springs,  sp ir i t   i t   away  to 
Arcturus  or  Andromeda  and   put  the  specimens  in  a  zoo.”  (W   Star, 
12/22/69,  A14) 
December  23:  U.S.S.R.  launched  two  Cosmos  satellites.  Cosmos  CCCXV l  
entered  orbit  with  1,638-km  ( 1,017.8-mi)  apogee,  147-km  (91.3-mi) 
perigee,  102.8-min  period,  and   49.4”  inclination.  Cosmos  CCCXV l l  
entered  orb i t   with  296-km  (183.9-mi)  apogee,  191-km  (118.7-mi) 
perigee,  89.3-min  period,  and   65.4”  inclination;  i t   reentered  Jan .   5, 
1970.  (GSFC SSR,  12 /31 /69 ;   1 /15 /70)  
ApoZZo  I 1  Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  joined  comedian  Bob  Hope  in 
entertaining  15,000 U S .   troops  a t   field  headquarters  of  25th  Infantry 
Div.  near  Saigon,  South  Vietnam.  (UPI,  W  Star,  12/24/69,  AS) 
*  Astronauts  Alan  L.  Bean,  R.  Walter  Cunningham,  and   Joseph  P.  Ker- 
win  were  grounded  by  NASA  for  30  days  for   minor  infractions  of 
a ircraf t   flight  rules.  Groundings-apparent  attempt  by  NASA  to  empha- 
size  importance  of  safety  dur ing   jet  tra in ing   flights-were  first  for   as- 
meetings.  (O’Tode,  w Post,  1 /7 /70 ,   A3) 
tronauts;  in   past,  infractions  had  been  discussed  a t   weekly  pilot 
House  adopted  H.R.  765,  authorizing  Smithsonian  Institution  to  display 
US. flag  presented  to  House  by  Apollo  11 astronauts.  (CR,  12/23/69, 
H13090) 
*  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  announced  selec- 
tion  of  McDonnell  Douglas Corp.  a s   prime  contractor  for  development 
and  production  of  F-15  advanced tactical  fighter  aircraft.  Initial  award 
would  be  $1,146,385,000  fixed-price  contract  for   engineering,  design, 
and   fabrication  of  20  aircraft.  First  wing  of  107  aircraft  would  be 
(DOD   Re- 
produced  under  later  contract,  not  to  exceed  $936,591,000. 
lease  1095-69) 
December  24:  T iros   Operational  Satellite  ( TOS) System-joint 
effort  of 
NASA  and   ESSA  to  provide  systematic,  daily,  worldwide  cloud-cover ob- 
adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  TOS system was  operated 
servations-was 
in   support  of  National  Operational  Meteorological  Satellite  System 
( NOMSS)  . It  included  four  advanced vidicon-camera-system stored-data 
spacecraft  for  remote  global  cloud-cover  observations  and  five  auto- 
matic-picture-transmission  (A PT )   direct-readout  spacecraft  for  local 
cloud-cover  observations.  Nine  spacecraft  had  been  successfully 
launched  and   operated  in   orb i t ;   tenth  had  been  qualified  but  had  not 
been  launched  because  of  extended  life  of  earlier  spacecraft.  (NASA  
P ro j   Off) 
*  Nimbus  111,  launched  by  NASA  April  14, was  adjudged  successful.  Space- 
craf t   had  achieved  primary  and   secondary  objectives  July  1 4  when  i t  
completed  three  months  in   orbit  with  all  experiments  operating  suc- 
cessfully.  Spacecraft  had  acquired  representative  number  of  global 
samples  from  which  vertical  temperature  profiles  of  atmosphere  were 
derived,  mapped  global  radiative  energy  balance  of  ear th   atmosphere 
and   cloud  cover,  demonstrated  feasibility  of  surface  tracking  and-ob- 
taining  remote  da ta   from  platforms  on  earth’s  surface  and   in   atmos- 
phere  via  IRLS  system  and   temperature  profile  determination  by 
infrared   spectrometry, and   demonstrated SNAP-19  as  auxiliary  power 
system.  .(NASA   P ro j   Off) 
A t s  V Applications Technology Satellite,  launched Aug.  12, was  adjudged 

414 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

December  24 

unsuccessful  by  NASA.  Pr imary   objective-deployment  and   exercise  of 
gravity-gradient  stabilization  system-had 
not  been  achieved  because 
spacecraft  failed  to  despin  properly.  Secondary  objectives,  except  for  
operation  of  ion   engine, were being  achieved.  (NASA  P r o j  Off) 
NASA’s Biosatellite  111,  launched  June  28,  was  adjudged  unsuccessful by 
NASA.  Although  da ta   obtained  from  mission  had   been  significant,  pri- 
mary  objective-to  operate spacecraft  for more  than  15 days to provide 
suitable physiological environment  fo r   instrumented  monkey-had 
not 
been  achieved.  Spacecraft  had  been  deorbited  af ter   8%  days  beeause 
of  monkey’s  rapid  physiological  deterioration.  Monkey  had   died 
shortly  after  recovery July  7.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
House  Committee on   Science  and   Astronautics’  Subcommittee on   Space 
Science and   Applications  published  Future  of  the  Bioscience  Program 
of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration.  Report  con- 
cluded  bioscientific  experimentation  on  man  and   animals  in   first  dec- 
ade  of  space  flight  had  been  “relatively  meager.”  Scientific  research 
on manned  flight had been  “minimal”  and  had  not  included biomedical 
experimentation  of  kind  done  i n   Biosatellite  program.  More  research 
was  urgently  needed  on  biological  influence  of  zero gravity  and   effects 
of  change  o r   elimination  of  rhythmic  daily  periodicity  of  animal  and 
plant  life on  earth.  Space technology  now  permitted  advanced scientific 
research  on  these  and  related  biological  factors. 
While  professors  exchanged  scientific  theories  freely,  NASA  repre- 
sentatives  inclined  toward  “protecting  jurisdiction  authority  and   ex- 
tending  organizational  power  within  the  framework  of  their  agency.” 
Complete  information  exchange should prevail,  especially  in  bioscience, 
“which  eventually may  affect  human  life.”  “Rivalry”  between  science 
and  engineering  was  “real.”  I n   NASA,  science  was  “used”  but  “rarely 
accepted  in   its  own  r igh t   by  the  engineering management.” 
While  knowledge  from  14-day  missions  was  adequate  to  proceed 
with  planning  of  28-day  AAP  mission,  i t   was  inadequate  to  proceed 
safely  with  proposed  56-day  flight  o r   longer  planetary  flights  without 
monitoring  astronauts  on  28-day mission  in  experiments  “beyond  any 
yet  undertaken  in  manned  flight.”  Further  biosatellite  exploration  with 
primates  and  instruments was  “merited  if  not  indeed  prescribed.”  Final 
evaluation  of  Biosatellite  111  would  determine  new  mechanisms  and  
improved monitoring  of  test  mammals to  be  programmed. 
Subcommittee endorsed  proposal  of  Dr.  W.  Ross  Adey,  NASA’s prin- 
cipal  investigator  for  Biosatellite  111,  that  basic  measurements  be  re- 
quired  on  all flight  crews and  recommended  reinstitution  of  biosatellite 
experiments  with  animals  in  ear th   orbit,  extension  of  bioscience 
research  to  planets  when  technologically  feasible,  uprating  of  science 
role  as mission objective, and  NASA  and Congress delegation of  “highest 
relative  priority”  to  “bioscience  programs  which  offer  the  most  im-  
mediate re turn   to  the  taxpayers  through  . . . medicine and  physiology.” 
Subcommittee further  recommended  NASA  examine  and   implement  “to 
fullest  practicable  extent”  recommendations  of  President’s  Scientific 
Advisory Panel  for   “new  level  of  biomedical research  capability,”  that 
OMSF  conduct  biomedical  experiments  on  astronauts  during  28-day 
AAP  missions, and   that NASA’s scientific investigations  be  planned  “with 
close  and   continued  participation  of  the  academic  research  institu- 
tions.’, 
(Text) 
USAF  changed  Dec.  22  temporary  suspension of  F-111A  a ircraf t   to  com- 

415 

December  24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

plete  ban  on  all  F-111A 
flights  a s   result  of  investigation  to   date  of 
Dec.  22  crash  a t  Nellis  AFB,  Nev.,  which  killed  two  pilots.  Preliminary 
study  indicated  cause  of  crash  as  “failure  of  i ts   left  wing  pr ior   to  its 
impact  with  the  ground.”  ( C SM ,  1 /5 /70 ;   W S tar ,   12/25/69,  A3 )  
December  25:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Intercosmos  I I   into  orb i t   with  1,169-km 
( 7 2 6 . 4 - 4   apogee,  200-km  (124.3-mi)  perigee,  98 .4m in   period, 
and   48.4”  inclination  to  study  ionosphere.  Tass  said  equipment  on 
board   was  designed  in   Bulgaria,  Czechoslovakia,  East  Germany,  and  
U.S.S.R.  ( B  sun, 12 /27 /69 ;   GSFC  SSR ,   12/31/69) 
December  26:  Studies of  shock and  thermal metamorphism of  olivine  trachy- 
basalt  by  nuclear  explosion  a t   Nevada  Test  Site  fo r   comparison 
studies  of  Apo l lo   11  lunar   samples were  described  in  Science.  Prelimi- 
nary   examination  of  Apollo 11  lunar  surface material  suggested many 
samples  would  be  mafic  igneous  rocks  showing  shock  metamorphism 
produced  by  meteorite  impact.  (James,  Science,  12/26/69,  1615-9) 
December  26-31:  American  Assn.  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  held 
136th  meeting  in   Boston,  Mass.  Panel  discussion  of  fu ture   of  U.S. 
space  program  was  disrupted  by  some  50  student  protesters  who  con- 
verged  on   panel  chairman  Dr.  Charles  Stark  Draper,  former  director 
of  MIT’S  Instrumentation  Laboratory,  and   participants.  Protesters  said 
they  objected  to  space program  because  funds  could be  better  spent  to  
solve  social  ills  on  earth.  They  littered  podium  w i t h   signs  and  papier- 
mache moon  rock.  Dr.  Draper  justified  continuation  of  space program 
because  of  its  technological  and  prestige  contributions.  “Space  is  a 
bargain.” 
Outgoing  AAAS  president  Dr.  Walter  O r r   Roberts  met  continued  ob- 
jections  in  his  attempt  to   justify  space  program  on  basis  of  applications 
and   was  almost  shouted  down  when  he  suggested US.-U.S.S.R. 
coopera- 
tion  in  internationalized  space  stations.  I n   presidential  address  Dr. 
Roberts,  President  of  University Corp.  for  Atmospheric Research,  said 
space technology  had  “vastly  enlarged  the  arsenals  of  the  United  States 
and  the U.S.S.R.,  bringing  to  reality  hitherto fanciful  modes  of  military 
surveillance,  communications, and  weaponry.”  Time  had  come  “for  us 
to   take  a  bold  new  step  in  space.  I  propose  tha t   this  nation  call  upon 
the  Soviet  Union  to  jo in   hands  in  space,  with  a  jointly  conducted, 
earth-oriented  space  program  that  will  put  the  new-found  Soviet  and 
American  skills  in   space  to  work  for  the  direct  benefit  of  man.” 
Dr.  J .   Allen  Hynek,  Northwestern  Univ.  astronomer  and   consultant 
to  USAF  Project  Blue  Book,  expressed  fear  tha t   USAF  would  destroy 
classified UFO records  because of  Dec.  17 termination  of  project.  “I   do 
not  believe  we  are   being  visited  by  little  green men.  . . . I do   believe  a 
phenomenon  exists,  and   that  i t   is  worthy  of  scientific  attention.” 
Dr.  Lewis M.  Branscomb, Director  of  National  Bureau  of  Standards, 
and   Dr.  Gordon  J.  F.  MacDonald,  Vice  Chancellor  of  Univ.  of  Cali- 
forn ia   at  San ta   Barbara,  called  for  hard ,   new  look  a t   manned  space 
flight  spending  and   urged  moratorium  on  pressure  for   early  manned 
missions to  Mars. 
Dr.  S.  Fred  Singer,  Deputy Assistant  Secretary  of  Interior,  said,  “If 
we  downgrade  the  manned  space  program  we  may  find  we  don’t  have 
any   space  program.” 
Panel  of  young  scientists  from  Harvard  Univ.  and   MIT,  invited  by 
AAAS,  attacked  cbmisuse7y of  science  in  formal  papers  presented  before 

416 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
December  26-31 
meeting.  Allen  S.  Weinraub,  graduate  student  a t  Harvard,  said  science 
was controlled by  Federal Government and  large corporations that  held 
pursestrings.  Panel  member  Larry   W.  Beeferman  of  MIT  called  NASA 
“the  national  aerospace  subsidy  administration.” 
At  press  conference  following  meeting,  Presidential  adviser  on  
hunger  Dr.  Jean  Mayer  said,  “We  can  feed  everybody-and 
feed  them 
very  well-and 
go  to  the  moon  a s  well.” 
Dr.  Frank   J.  Low,  Univ.  of  Arizona  scientist,  reported  discovery  of 
I r t ron s ” - c e l l s   of  creation-at 
centers  of  12  galaxies  so  far ,   includ- 
u 
ing  Milky  Way.  He  believed  both  matter  and   antimatter  were  created 
i n   each  and   then  annihilated  each  other,  continuously  spraying  out 
debris  to  fill  universe,  making  stars,  planets,  and   new  worlds.  Theory 
had  originally  been  proposed  by  British  astronomer  S i r   James  Jeans 
early  in   century.  (Lannan, W  Star, 12/28/69,  A7;  W Post,  12/27/69, 
B6;  12/29/69,  A l ,   A7;  12/30/69,  A2;  Science,  1/2/70,  11-6) 
December  27:  Scientists  from  U S . ,   Canada,  and   France,  participating  in 
NASA-sponsored  25-day  probe  of  aurora   borealis  Nov.  24  to   Dec.  18 ,  
had  discovered very  high  ratios  of  red  oxygen  emissions to  blue  nitro; 
gen  emissions  in   earth’s  upper  atmosphere,  NASA  announced.  Higher 
measured  ratios  indicated  many  solar  electrons  that  bombarded  atmos- 
phere  might  have  been  low  energy.  There  might  be  more  oxygen  in 
polar  atmosphere than  a t  other latitudes,  or  high  temperatures  in   upper 
polar  atmosphere.  Studies  in   airborne  laboratory-NASA  Convair  990 
jet  a ircraf t  Galileo-also 
detected bombardment  of  earth’s  atmosphere 
by  protons.  Comparison  of  light  emission caused  by  protons  and   elec- 
trons  would  help  explain  particles’  origin.  Measurement  from  six 
photometers  and   three  spectrometers  would  provide  explanation  of 
newly  discovered phenomena.  (NASA Releases  69-165,  69-169) 
December 28:  Sigurd A.  Sjoberg became  MSC   Director  of  Flight  Operations, 
succeeding  Dr.  Christopher  C.  Kraft,  Jr.  Sjoberg  had   been  Deputy 
Director  of  Flight  Operations  since  1963.  ( M S C  Release  70-1) 
December 29:  NASA  announced decision to close Electronics  Research Center 
a t   Cambridge,  Mass.  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA  Administrator,  told 
staff:  “. . . we  must  effect  reductions  and   consolidations  across  the 
board  if  we  are   to  reshape  our   programs  to  meet  the  nation’s  fu ture  
needs in   aeronautics and  space.  . . . We  are  simply faced with  the  ha rd  
fact  tha t   NASA  cannot  afford  to  continue  to  invest  broadly  in   electronics 
research  as  we  have  in   the  past.”  Phasing  down  of  ERC  work  would 
begin  immediately.  F ina l   plans  were  in   preparation  for   placement  of 
personnel  and  disposition  of  real property  in  Cambridge. Center, which 
opened  Sept.  1, 1964, had  850  employees.  Six  buildings,  representing 
$30-million  investment,  were  in   final  phases  of  construction. 
(NASA  
Release  69-171) 
NASA  exhibit  a t   Expo  70  in   Osaka,  Japan,  March  1 5  through  September 
would. feature  F-1  rocket  engine,  models  of  Explorer  V I I ,   VIII,  and  
XI, tools  being  developed  for   Sa turn   V  Workshop,  and   Sa turn   V 
launch  vehicle  digital  computer,  MSFC  announced.  Exhibit  also  would 
display weather and communications satellites, Apollo spacecraft,  space- 
suits,  flight  cameras,  and  moon  rocks.  (MSFC   Release  69-273) 
*  Five-year program  to  improve  detection  of  clear  a i r   turbulence  (CAT)  - 
with  cooperation  of  NASA,  DOT, DOD, and  ESSA-was 
announced  in 
Washington,  D.C.,  by  ESSA  Administrator,  Dr.  Robert  M.  White.  P ro j -  

417 

December  29 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

ect  would  seek  improvement  of  long-range  weather  forecasting  and  
development of  onboard  portable  detection  devices  for  a ircraf t   to  lo- 
cate  CAT  in   time  to  permit 
ilot  to  take  evasive action  o r   prepare  for  
penetration.  ( UPI,  NYT,  12729/69,  57) 
President Nixon  announced  intention  to  appoint Abbott M.  Washburn  a s  
U.S.  Representative  to  Plenipotentiary  Conference  on  Definitive  Ar- 
rangements  for  the  International  Telecommunications  Satellite  Con- 
sortium,  with  rank  of  Ambassador,  succeeding William  W.  Scranton, 
whose  resignation  would  be  effective Dec.  31.  ( P D ,  1/5/70,  5 )  
December 30:  Cambridge, Mass.,  city  officials and   industrialists set up   study 
group  to  protect  their  interests  in   $60-million  ERC,  which  NASA  was 
closing  [see  Dec.  291.  Municipal  officials  called  NASA  move  “a  clear 
breach  of  faith  on  the  pa r t   of  the  Federal  Government”  and   hinted 
possible  court  action  to  stop  closing,  on  breach  of  contract  grounds. 
They  said  they  had  not  been  consulted about NASA’s decision.  (Fenton, 
N Y T ,   12/31/69,  10) 
*  In   Pravda ,   Soviet Academician  and   automation  expert  Dr.  Boris  N.  Pet- 
rov  said  U.S.S.R.,  in   effort  to  conserve  resources,  had  decided  not  to 
compete with U.S.  in   manned  lunar  exploration,  but  to  concentrate  on 
launching  unmanned  vehicles  into  m t e r   space  and   on  creation  of  per- 
manent  space  stations  around  earth.  “Our  program  by  no  means  ex- 
cludes manned  flights  to  the  moon,  but  a t   the  present  time,  we  attach 
prime  importance  to  lunar  exploration  by  unmanned  vehicles.  The 
economic  side  is  of  no  small  importance. Unmanned  vehicles  are  many 
times  less  expensive  than  manned.”  (Gwertzman, N Y T ,   12/31/69,  11) 
Soviet scientist  Nikolay A.  Kozyrev  told  Soviet Committee  for  Inventions 
and   Discoveries he   had  discovered  active  volcano  on  moon.  He  had 
detected  glowing  rocks  in  Aristarchus  crater  in  1955  and   obtained 
spectrogram  of  crater’s  gas  in   1958.  Comparing  spectrogram  with 
others  obtained  from  active  volcanos in  Soviet Far   East,  he  had  found 
them similar.  (UPI ,   W  News,  12/31/69,  9) 
*  Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe  announced  10-mo extension, 
to  Oct.  25,  1970, of  FAA  rule  setting  hourly  flight  quotas  a t   five  high- 
density  airports  serving  New  York,  Chicago,  and   Washington,  D.C. 
Decision was  based  “on  operational  experience  . . . which  clearly  es- 
tablishes  that  the  traveling  public  has  benefited  substantially  from  this 
measure.”  ( FAA   Release 69-137) 
December  31: President  Nixon  in   San  Clemente,  Calif.,  announced  1969 re- 
cipients  of  National  Medal  of  Science,  Federal  Government’s  highest 
award  for  distinguished  achievement in   science,  mathematics,  and   en- 
gineering,  including:  Purdue   Univ.  chemist  Herbert  C.  Brown,  for 
LLdiscovery and   exploration  of  hydroboration  reaction  and   for  develop- 
ing  i t  in to  a ma jor   and  powerful tool  in   chemical synthesis”;  Princeton 
Univ.  mathematician  William  Feller,  “for  original  and  definitive  con- 
tributions  to  pure  and   applied  mathematics,  for   making  probability 
available  to  users,  and   for   pioneering  work  in   establishing  Mathemati- 
cal  Reviews”;  Jack  S .  C .  Kilby,  Texas  Instruments  Inc.,  for   “original 
conceptions and   valuable  contributions  in  the  production  and   applica- 
tion  of  integrated  circuits”;  and  Wolfgang K.  H.  Panofsky,  Director  of 
Stanford  Univ.  Linear  Accelerator  Center,  for  “classic  experiments 
probing  the  elementary particles  of  matter  and   for  contributions to  ad- 

418 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Decembet  31 

vancing  the  means  of  experimentation  in   this  challenging  field.”  ( P D ,  
1 /5 /70 ,   10-1) 
During  December:  NASA  issued  Apollo  11:  Pre l im inary   Science  Report 
(NASA  SP-214)  , summarizing  scientific  findings  of  first  manned  lunar 
landing  mission  July  16-24.  I n   foreword  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA 
Administrator,  said : “The  concept  of  traveling  across  the  vastness  of 
space to new  worlds has s t irred  the  imagination of  men everywhere. . . . 
The  success  of  this  mission  ha s   opened  new  fields  of  exploration  and 
research  . . . which  will  lead  to  a  greater  understanding  of  our  planet 
and   provide  a  new  insight  in to   the  origin  and   history  of  the  solar 
system.” 
Report  included  photographic  review  of  Apollo  11 mission  with  ob- 
servations  by  crew-Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin, 
Jr.,  and   Michael Collins.  Descriptions  of  geologic setting  of  lunar  ma- 
terial,  soil  mechanics  investigation,  passive  seismic  experiment,  laser 
ranging  retroreflector,  and   solar  wind  composition  experiment  were 
provided  by  principal  investigators. 
I n   addition to major  findings  reported  Sept.  15 in   summary  by  NASA 
Preliminary  Examination  Team  (PET) , SP-214  reported  passive  seis- 
mic  experiment  package  deployed on  moon  had  operated  satisfactorily 
for 21  days  and  had  detected seismic signals  from  astronaut  activity  or 
LM  motions.  Whether  actual  lunar  seismic  events  had   been  detected 
was  uncertain.  Laser  reflector  deployed  on  moon  had  been  used  a s  
target  for   earth-based  lasers  and   distance  to  moon  had   been  measured 
to within  four-mile accuracy. Future  studies  would  be  made  on  distance 
variation  to   study motion  of  moon  and  earth.  Preliminary  analysis  had 
been  made  on  par t   of  aluminum  foil  and  showed  helium,  neon,  and 
argon ;   isotopic  composition  of  each  element  had  been  measured. 
(Text ; NASA  Release  69-160) 
Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  MSC  Director,  was  named  to  receive  first  “at 
large”  award  i n   17-yr  history  of  $10,000  Rockefeller  Public  Service 
Awards  for  “distinguished  service  to  the  government  of  the  United 
States and  to  the  American people.”  Other  1969 recipients  included Dr. 
John  W.  Evans,  Director  of  USAF’S Sacramento  Peak  Observatory,  in 
science,  technology,  or  engineering  category.  ( A F / SD ,   1/70,  24-5) 
*  Vice President  Sp iro  T.  Agnew,  NASC  Chairman,  discussed future  of  U S .  
space  program  in   Space  Ag e   News:  “It  is  my  personal  belief  that  a 
vigorous space effort is essential  to  the welfare of  th is  country,  particu- 
larly  since i t  has  contributed so much to   our  international prestige,  our 
national security  and  our  economy.  I can  assure you  that  the  President 
shares  th is   view.”  Through  11 yrs   of  space  activity  U.S.  had   “gained 
one  of  its  most  priceless  resources-trained, 
experienced professionals 
capable of  creating,  managing,  and  operating a  complete  range  of  space 
systems dedicated  to  bringing  the  benefits  of  space  within  reach  of  all 
of  us  here  on  Earth.”  U.S.  had  “just  begun  its  space  program.  The 
success  of  the  first  decade indicates an  enlarged  effort  in   the  decade  to 
come.”  (Space   Ag e   News,  12 /69 )  
Coming age  of  economy  space  flight  was  discussed by  J.  S.  Butz,  Jr.,  in  
A i r   Force  and Space  Digest.  Space shuttle  was key  to  opening of  space 
“much  a s   the  railroads  opened  a  stream  of  travel  into  the  American 
West.”  I t  was  “complex  and   expensive system  that  is within  our   grasp 

419 

During  December 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

if   the  nation’s  technology  and   management  a re   willing  to  meet  chal- 
lenges of  herculean  proportions.”  I n  prospect was  day  when  astronauts 
would  be   a s  numerous  a s  present  day  airline pilots,  space flights would 
be  scheduled, almost  daily,  and   “virtually  any  young  man  who  yearns 
to  voyage  into  space  w i l l   be  able  to  do  so  a t   some  point  in   his  life.” 
( A F / S D ,  12/69,  3 7 4 4 )  
0  Space/Aeronautics  described  1969  as  U.S.S.R.’s  “most  active  and   most 
frustrating”  year  in   space.  “ In   the  fall  of  1968  it  was  possible  to  be- 
lieve  . . . tha t   the  Soviet Union  might  fly men  around  the  moon  before 
the  United  States.  A  year  later  i t   was  possible  to  ask:  ‘Where  are   the 
Russians?’ ’’ Most  failures  were  in   attempts  to  prepare  man’s  way  to 
moon.  “The  inglorious  performance  of  Luna  15,  jus t   a s  America  was 
landing  men  on  the  lunar   surface,  could  almost  be   called  the  least  of 
Russia’s  lunar   problems.  By  fa r   the  worst  . .  must  be  repeated  tech- 
nical  troubles  with  the  long-awaited ‘super  booster,’  the  rough  equiva- 
lent  of  Sa turn   5.  If  semi-official rumors  are   to  be  accepted  a s   accurate, 
the  Russian  vehicle  is  in   a  great  deal  of  difficulty. 
“The  . . . l aun ch ing   of  Soyuz 6,  7,  and   8  were  impressive in  many 
ways-but  Western  officials  still  counted  the  group   flight  as  a  disap- 
pointment  to  the  Russians.  . . . The  most  skeptical  Western  estimates 
now  a re   that  the  Russians  may  have  abandoned  the  big  booster,  tha t  
they  will  not land  men  on  the  moon before  1972  . . . and   that  no  large 
Soviet  station  will  be  assembled  in   orb i t   before  the  last  half  of  the 
’70s.’’ (Space /Aeronau t ics ,   12/69,  24 -6 )  
“Dethronement”  of  Dr.  Charles Stark  Draper  as  head  of  MIT  Instrumen- 
tation  Lab  had  resulted  from  campaign  waged  by  “coterie  of  self- 
appointed zealots who  insist tha t   defense  research  is   ‘war  research’  and 
cannot  be  tolerated,”  William  Leavitt  said  in   A i r   Force  and  Space 
Digest  article.  On  campus  these  days,  “genius  is  not  enough  to  keep 
you  on  the  job.  Your  work  has   to  be  politically,  morally,  and  socially 
acceptable”  to  these  zealots.  ( A F / SD ,   12/69,  46-50) 
0  NSF  published  American  Science  Manpower,  1968,  report  of  National 
Register  of  Scientific  and   Technical  Personnel : Almost  298,000  scien- 
tists-nine 
to  National  Reg- 
percent  of  whom  were  women-reported 
ister  in   1968.  Of  these,  three-fifths  were  in   physical  and  mathematical 
sciences,  one-fifth  in   life  sciences,  remainder  in   behavioral  and   social 
sciences.  Registration  was  up  23% over 242,800 in   1966.  Industry  em- 
ployed  32%  of  1968  registrants,  down  from  34%  in   1966.  Scientists 
employed  in   educational  institutions  increased  from  36%  to  40%. 
Those  in   Federal  Government  remained  a t   10% both  years.  Federal 
Government  provided  funds  for  at  least  some  of  work  of  127,400 
scientists,  or  43% of  total  registrants.  (Tex t)  
0  In   American  Scholar  architect  R.  Buckminster  Fuller  said:  “It  seems 
eminently  clear  that  we  not  only  must  put  our  space  programs  on 
highest  priority  of  attention  and   resource  investment  bu t   that  all  hu- 
manity  must  be  accredited  and   financed  to  enter  into  a  new  re-educa- 
tional  system tha t   is  geared  to  develop  our  most  prominent  awareness, 
that we  indeed are   i n  space  and   that  all  of  our   concern  is with  the  fact 
tha t   our   space-vehicle  Ear th   and   its  life-energy-giving  Sun,  and  the 
tide-pumping  Moon  can  provide  ample  sustenance  and   power  for  all 
humanity’s needs to  be  derived  from  our   direct energy  income without 
further  robbing  our   fossil  fuels  energy  savings  account.  I n   reality,  the 

420 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

During  December 

Sun,  the  Ear th   and   the Moon  a re  nothing  else  than  a  most  fantastically 
well-designed  and  space-programmed  team  of  vehicles.  A l l   of  us  are ,  
always have  been,  and  so  long a s  we  exist,  always  will  be-nothing  else 
but-astronauts.  Let’s  pull  our   heads  out  of  the  bra in   benumbing, 
mind  frustrating,  misinformedly  conditioned  reflexes.  If  i t   is  going  to 
be  ‘All  ashore who’s  going  ashore,’  once more  intent  to  return  to  non- 
space DOWN HERE ON   EARTH, humanity i s  doomed.”  (Amer ican  Scholar, 
Winter  1969-70,  2 7 4 7 )  
During  1969: I n  1969-the  year  man  first  set foot  on  another celestial body 
-US.  orbited  54   spacecraft  and   U.S.S.R.,  70.  U S .   total  included  31 
orbited  by  DOD.  NASA’s 23  included  2  satellites  orbited  for  DOD   a s  
secondary  payloads. 
Highlight  of  1969  was  achievement of  major  goal  in   NASA’s Apollo 
program-to 
land  man  on  the  moon  and   re turn   him  safely  to  earth. 
Lunar  landing  system  completed  final  phases of  test  and   demonstration 
when Apollo  9 demonstrated operation  of  LM  in  ear th   orb i t   and  Apollo 
10 demonstrated operation  of  complete Apollo  spacecraft  in  lunar  orbit, 
with  LM making  two  passes  within  47,000  f t   of  lunar   surface.  Apollo 
program  climaxed with  Apollo  11,  July  16-24,  when  LM  Eagle  landed 
on  moon  and  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong  and   Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  J r .  
-first  men  on  the  moon-performed 
tasks  on  lunar  surface,  redocked 
with  CSM  in  lunar   orbit,  and   returned  safely  to  ear th   with  lunar  
samples.  Apollo  12  successfully  accomplished  second  manned  lunar 
landing  with  pinpoint  accuracy,  touching  down  close  to  Surveyor  111, 
which  had  landed  on  moon April  19,  1967. Crew  set  up  first  ALSEP  on 
lunar  surface and  returned  safely  to  ear th  with lunar   samples and  par ts  
of  Surveyor  I l l .  
Unmanned  Mariner  V I  and   Mariner  V I 1  passed  within  2,000 mi  of 
Mars,  transmitting  more  than  200  times  more  data  about  Mars  than 
were  obtained  by  Mariner  ZV 
in   1964.  Spacecraft  measured  chemical 
composition and   temperature  of  atmosphere  and  surface  and   took  198 
high-quality  pictures,  providing  new  insight  into  Mars  surface  charac- 
teristics.  Other  scientific achievements included orbiting  of  Os0  V,  Os0 
V I ,   O go   V I ,   and   Explorer  XLI.  Applications  satellites  included 
In te lsa t-I l l   F-3,  In te lsa t-I l l   F A ,  and  In te lsa t-I l l   F-5  for  ComSat- 
Corp;  Essa  I X   meteorological satellite  for  ESSA;  Nimbus  111;  and   A ts  
V.  Biosatellite  I I I   provided  significant  biological  data  on  instrumented 
monkey  on  board,  but  mission  was  terminated  early  after  monkey’s 
physiological  condition  deteriorated,  and  monkey  died  shortly  after 
recovery.  Pioneer  E,  scheduled  to  enter  solar  orbit,  and   its  secondary 
payload TETR-c  were destroyed shortly  after  launch when  Delta  booster 
malfunctioned. 
Some  189  meteorological  sounding  rockets,  85  scientific  sounding 
rockets,  and   60 high-altitude  balloons  were launched. 
NASA-IJSAF  XB-70  and   X-15  programs  were  concluded  and  n ew  
jo in t   program  was  icitiated  to  continue  aeronautical  R&D,  using YF-12 
supersonic  aircraft.  First  operational  C-5A,  military  cargo  transport 
and   world’s  largest  aircraft,  was  delivered  to  USAF  and  by  November 
seven  C-5As  had  accumulated 1,320 hrs  flying  time.  Aeronautical  R&D 
continued  to  improve  quality  and   quantity  of  options  available  in  a ir-  
craft  technology,  and   a ircraf t   industry  made  first  flights  of  several 
wide-bodied  jumbo  jet  transports  for  civil  use,  including  Boeing  74,7. 

421 

During  1969 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

New  SST design  with  delta  wing  was  approved  by  FAA  and   prototype 
construction  was  recommended by  President  Nixon. 
NASA’s  H L l O  lifting-body  vehicle completed 3 successful glide  flights 
and   1 5  powered  flights  included  first  supersonic flight  a t  mach  1.1 and  
lifting-body  vehicle  completed  7 
54,000-ft  altitude.  USAF’S  X-24A 
flights. 
DOD space  program  included  orbiting  of  2  Vela  nuclear-detection 
satellites,  7  Orbiting  Vehicle  research  satellites,  Tacsat  I  tactical  corn- 
sat,  Egrs X I I I   (S e co r  X I I I )   geodetic satellite  (launched  by  NA SA ) ,   and  
U.K.’s  Shynet  A  comsat  (launched by  NASA) .   Titan  I I IM   development 
was  terminated  and   USAF’S  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (MOL) pro- 
gram  was  canceled  because of  budget  cutbacks. 
NASA  and   AEC  completed ground  tests  of  XE experimental  rocket  en- 
gine  with  28   successful  startups  and   2.8  hrs   of  operation,  including 
3.5  min  a t  full  thrust,  and  validated  test  stand  No.  1 in   Jackass  Flats, 
Nev.  SNAP-27  generator  was  used  a s   electrical  power  source  for 
Apo l lo  12  experiments left  on moon  and  SNAP-19  was  auxiliary power 
system  for   Nimbus  I I I .   SNAP-29  program  was  terminated.  New 
liquid-propellant  rocket  engine  was  developed  and   new  triprapellant 
system  produced  record  performance  for  chemically powered  engines. 
U.S.S.R.’s  70  payloads  included  55   Cosmos  satellites  and   2  In ter-  
cosmos,  2  Meteor,  1 Luna,  1 Zond,  5  Soyuz,  and   2  Venus  spacecraft, 
and   2  Molniya  I  comsats.  Manned  Soyuz   ZV  docked  with  manned 
Soyuz   V  and   two  cosmonauts  transferred  from  Soyuz   V  to  Soyuz  ZV 
before  returning  to  earth.  Manned  Soyuz  V I ,   V I I ,   and   V I I I ,  launched 
on  three  successive  days,  rendezvoused  in   orb i t   and  performed  experi- 
ments including photography,  communications, and  welding.  Luna  XV, 
apparent unmanned  challenger  to NASA’s Apollo  11 for  first  lunar   land- 
ing   and   return,  crashed  onto  lunar   surface  in   July.  U.S.S.R.’s  Tu-144 
delta-wing supersonic  transport  successfully  reached  speeds  up  to  900 
mph  and   was  demonstrated  publicly  in   90-min  test  flight.  (P r e s   Rp t  
70  [69] ; NASA  Release  69-161;  GSFC  SSR ,  12 /31 /69)  
*  Year  1969 was  one  of  critical  decision  and   realignment  of  programs  for 
NASA  as  primary  goal  of  first  decade was  achieved through  Apollo  pro- 
gram.  Post-Apollo  planning  had  preceded  the  coming  of  the  Nixon 
Administration  and   Apollo  11.  Budget  retrenchment  accelerated 
throughout  Government  as  cost  of  Vietnam  war  continued  high  and  
White  House  sought  to  lessen  inflation  by  fiscal  economy.  Nationwide 
reevaluation  of  societal  priorities  emphasized  problems  of  pollution, 
poverty,  and  crime. 
Successful lunar   landings  of  Apollo  11 and   12-seen 
and   acclaimed 
worldwide-mushroomed  U S .   enthusiasm  for  manned  space  achieve- 
ment.  NASA  announced  development  of  plans  for   further  lunar  missions 
and  post-Apollo planetary  exploration.  But year  was  turning  point,  with 
completion of  a ma jor   goal and   examination  of  possible  new  goals and  
priorities  for   the  next  decade.  Phasing  down  of  Apollo  program  after 
climax  brought  shifts  in   program  emphasis  and  in   personnel. Most  of 
in i t ia l   Sa turn   V  launch  vehicles  had   been  completed.  Hardware  re-  
quirements  would  decrease  as  missions  slowed.  Peak  costs  dur ing  
1960s  had  built  NASA  base  of  people,  technology,  and   facilities  as 
national  capability  to   conduct  space  missions. 
Fu ture   space  objectives  and   budget  options  were  examined,  within 

422 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

During  1969 

Government  and   outside,  for  ba lance   between  more  manned  missions 
and   more  unmanned  scientific  exploration  and   applications  of  knowl- 
edge  already  gained.  Criticism  of  past  emphasis on  engineering  rather 
than  on  science was  partly  answered by  decision  to  provide  more  time 
for   scientific  study  and  planning  between  the  next  Apollo  lunar   mis- 
sions.  Program   plans  included  Apollo  Applications,  missions  to  Mars 
and   Jupiter,  long-range  studies  of  Venus-Mercury mission  and   three- 
planet  grand   tours,  development  of  permanent  space  station,  joint 
NASA-DOD  studies  of  space transportation  system  with  reusable  shuttle, 
and   accelerated  aeronautics  activities. 
NASA  FY  1970  appropriation  of  $93.697 billion  was  $181  million  be- 
low  budget  proposed  by  outgoing  President  Johnson  and   $19  million 
below  President  Nixon’s  amended  request  for  $3.716 billion.  Cutbacks 
in   Government  spending  forced  NASA  to  announce  1970  closing  of 
Electronics  Research  Center  and   DOD to  cancel Manned  Orbiting  Lab- 
oratory  ( MOL) program.  Dr.  Thomas  0.  Paine,  NASA  Administrator, 
told  E&C  employees  in   December  that  agency had  to   “effect  reductions 
and   consolidation  across  the  board   i f   we  are   to  shape  our  programs  to 
meet  the  nation’s  future  needs  in   aeronautics  and   space.”  Reductions 
in   work  force-largely 
in   contractor  personnel-were 
brought  by 
planned  phasing  out  of  Apollo program  as well  a s  by  budget cuts.  Year 
of  man’s  first  landing  on  moon,  despite  its  global  impact,  ended  with 
space  goals  and   levels  of  effort  for   the  next  decade  an   open  question. 
(P r e s  Rpt  70  [69] ; A b A  6 9 )  
*  In  its  international  cooperation  program,  NASA  successfully  launched 
three  foreign  satellites-Canadian  I s i s   I,  th ird   of  series  to  conduct 
ionospheric  measurement;  Bo rem   (E s ro  I B )   for  European  Space  Re- 
search  organ iza t ion   on  reimbursable  basis;  and   West  German  Azur  
under  cooperative  project  to  conduct  radiation  belt  measurements. 
Agreements  for  new  projects  were  reached  with  U.K.,  Italy,  Nether- 
lands,  and   Canada.  U.K.  agreement  called  for  1971  launch  of  satellite 
on  NASA  Scout vehicle  to  measure  ionospheric particles  and   radio  noise 
and  experiment to fly  on  board  NASA’s  Nimbus-E in   1972.  Italian  agree- 
ment  provided  for   1970 launch  of  San Marco-C satellite  on  NASA   Scout 
vehicle  from  Italian  San   Marco  range  in   Ind ian   Ocean  and   use  of 
range for  launching NASA  spacecraft into equatorial orbit. 
Under  Netherlands  agreement  two  Dutch scientists  would  participate 
a s   observers  i n   OAO  program.  Canadian  agreement  called  for  reim- 
bursement  launching  of  Canadian  comsat.  Project  Helios,  cooperative 
endeavor  with  West  German  Ministry  for  Scientific  Research  to  place 
two  solar  probes  (1974-1975)  closer  to  sun  than  any  other  spacecraft, 
would  obtain  data  on  solar processes  and  earth-sun relationship.  Under 
another  agreement  with  West  Germany,  Project  Aeros,  NASA  would 
launch German-developed satellite  in  1972 for   aeronomy measurements. 
I n   agreement with  Indian  space agency,  ATS-F  satellite  would  be  made 
available  for   experimental  educational  TV  broadcasting  directly  and  
by  relay  to  receivers  in   5,000  Indian  villages. 
Additional  cooperative projects  during  1969  included  launch  of  one 
Italian,  two  U.K.,  and  two  French  experiments;  continuation  of  sound- 
ing  rocket  projects  with  Australia,  Brazil,  Canada,  Ind ia ,   Japan,  Nor- 
way,  Pakistan,  Spain,  and   Sweden;  inclusion  of  Canadian  and   French 
experiments  on   Convair  990  flights  to  study  auroras   in   northern  lati- 

423 

During  1969 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

tudes;  and   extension  of  aeronautical  research  projects  with  Canada, 
France,  West  Germany,  and   U.K.  Agreement  with  Spa in   for  NASA 
Madrid  tracking  station  was  extended  in   June   until  1984  and   negotia- 
tions  were begun with Australia  for extension of  tracking  arrangements 
until  same  year. 
Lunar   surface  material  returned  by  Apo l lo   11  astronauts  was  dis- 
tributed  to  39  principal  investigators  from  nine  countries-Australia, 
Belgium,  Canada,  Finland, West  Germany,  Japan,  South  Africa,  Switz- 
erland,  and  U.K. 
International  highlights  in   1969  included  around-the-world  tour  of 
Apollo  11  astronauts to dramatize conviction that  successful lunar   land- 
ing  was  triumph  for  all  mankind;  travels  of  NASA  Administrator,  Dr. 
Thomas  0.  Paine,  to  inform  ministerial  and   space  agency  officials 
abroad  of  U S .   space  plans  and  invite  their  participation;  and  partici- 
pation  of  foreign  experts  in   NASA  conference on  space shuttle  concepts. 
Efforts  by  NASA  to  develop cooperative programs  w i t h   U.S.S.R.  con- 
tinued  during  1969, but  met  with  limited  success.  (P r e s  Rp t   70  [69 ] )  
Drone  a ircraf t   was  reportedly  impaled  with  spear  of  light  from  experi- 
mental  laser  and   destroyed  in  three  milliseconds a t   Air  Force  Special 
Weapons Laboratory, Kirtland  AFB, N.  Mex.  Account  in  Av ia t ion   Week  
& Space  Techno logy  was  later  denied by  USAF  officials. 
Tri-service  laser  weapon  research  programs,  principally  sponsored 
by  ARPA,  were  studying  number  of  military  applications  of  lasers,  ac- 
cording  to  magazine.  USAF  had  increased  planned  funding  of  high- 
energy  gas  laser  development  in   FY 1969  from   $0.5  million  to  $2.5 
million  to  make  use  of  power  output  increase  achieved by  United  Air- 
craf t   Corp.  in   1968. And  $1.5  million  had   been  given  to  exploratory 
development  of  high-power  solid-state  lasers.  For  FY  1970  USAF  had 
asked  $8  million  to  exploit  United  Aircraft  development.  ( A v   Wlc, 
1/12/70,  16-7;  USAF  PIO;  A&A,  4/70,  16-21) 
*  Aerospace industry  sales  of  $28.3  billion  in  1969 were  second highest  in 
industry’s  history  despite  anticipated  decline  of  4.1%  from  1968 
record  of  $29.5  billion.  All  areas  of  aerospace  endeavor  leveled  off  ex- 
cept  nonaerospace  sales  by  aerospace  companies,  which  increased. 
Commercial  aerospace  sales,  principally  jet  transports,  were  $5,800 
million,  down  from  $6,429  million  in   1968.  Trend  resulted  from  phas- 
ing  out  of  current  transport  models  while  jumbo  jet  production  was 
beginning.  Sales  by  aerospace  industry  to  DOD were  $16.2  million  in 
1969  and  $16.6  billion  in   1968.  Military  aircraft  sales  totaled  $10 
billion  in   1969 and  $10.7  billion  in  1968. Space sales dropped to  $4,4#99 
million  from  $5,108 million  in  1968,  because  of  approaching  comple- 
tion  of  Apollo  program  hardware  phase  and   cancellation  of  MOL. 
(Aerospace ,  Winter,  1970) 
U S .   scheduled airlines carr ied   159 million passengers;  in   1949 they  had 
carr ied   less  than  17  million.  In   1969  airlines  accounted  for  75%  of 
common  carrier  passenger-miles between  U.S.  cities;  in   1949 they  had 
accounted for  14%. I n   1969 18.3 million passengers flew  between  U S .  
and   other  countries;  in   1949  there  were  2.2  million.  U.S.  scheduled 
airlines  produced  3.2  billion  ton-miles  of  a i r   freight  service  in  1969, 
increase  of  15.7%  over  1968.  (1970 A i r   Transport  Facts  & Figures) 
Air  carr ier   accidents  decreased from  73  in   1968 to  68  in   1969. Accident 
rate was  down  from   1.12  per  100,000 h r s   flown  to 0.98.  Fatal  accidents 

424 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

During  1969 

had  dropped  from  16  to  10 and   total  fataIities from  352  to  160, lowest 
since  1957.  Fatality  ra te   was  2.3  per  100,000 hrs   flown;  i t   had  been 
5.4  in   1968. To ta l   a ir   carr ier   accidents had  declined steadily  from  102  
in   1959 to  1969’s 68.  (FAA Release 70-23 
0  Number  of  active  pilots  in   U S .   reached  720,Q28,  rise  of  4%   over  1968 
total.  Student pilots  dropped  3% from  end  of  1968,  to  203,520  a t   end 
of  1969.  (FAA  Release 70-37)  
0  Best  seller  of  books  published  by  New  Y o r k   Times  dur ing   year  was  W e  
Reach  the Moon. by  John  Noble Wilford. Book  sold  1 million  copies  in 
U S .   and   abroad.  ( N Y T ,  2 /22 /70)  

425 

Appendix A 
SATELLITES,  SPACE  PROBES,  AND  MANNED 
SPACE  FLIGHTS 

A  CHRON ICLE  FOR  1969 

The  following tabulation  was  compiled  from  open  sources  by  Leonard  C. 
Bruno  of  the  Science and  Technology Division  of  the  Library  of  Congress. 
Sources included the United Nations  Public  Registry;  the Satellite  Situation 
Report  issued  by  the  Operations  Control  Center  a t   Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center;  public  information  releases  of  the  Department  of  Defense,  NASA, 
ESSA,  and   other  agencies,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Communications Satellite 
Corporation.  Russian  data  are   from   the  U.N.  Public  Registry,  the  Satellite 
Situation Repor t ,   translations from  the Tass News  Agency,  statements in   the 
Soviet  press,  and   international  news  services’  reports.  Data  on  satellites  of 
other  foreign  nations  are  from   the  U.N.  Public Registry,  the  Satellite  Situa- 
t ion   Repor t ,   government  announcements,  and  international  news  services’ 
reports. 
This  tabulation  lists  payloads  that  have  ( a )  orbited;  ( b )   as  probes,  as- 
cended to  a t  least the 4,000-mile  altitude tha t   traditionally  ha s  distinguished 
probes  from  sounding  rockets,  etc.;  or  ( c )   conveyed  one  or  more  humans 
into space,  whether orbit was  attained  or  not,  Furthermore,  only  flights tha t  
a t  least  can  be  shown  by  tracking  data  to  have  fulfilled 
have  succeeded-or 
our   definition  of  satellite  or  probe  o r   manned  flight-are 
listed.  Date  of 
launch  is referenced  to  local  time  a t   the  launch  site. An  asterisk  by  the  date 
marks those  dates  tha t   are   one day   earlier  in   this  tabulation  than  in  listings 
which  are   referenced  to  Greenwich Mean  Time.  A  double  asterisk  by  the 
date marks  dates  of  Soviet launches  which  are  a  day   later  in   this  compila- 
tion  than  in  listings  which  are   referenced  to Greenwich  Mean  Time. 
World  space  activity  declined  for  the  second  straight  year.  There  was  a 
against  119  in   1968--and  a 
decline  in   the  total  successful  launches-110 
against  138 in   1968. The  difference 
decline  in   total  payloads  orbited-124 
between  launches  and   payloads  is  of  course  accounted  for   by  the  multiple- 
payload  launches  (DOD is  the  principal  user  of  this  system,  with  7 multiple- 
payload launches orbiting  a  total  of  19 payloads and   a s  many  as 5  payloads 
on  one  Titan  IIIC;  NASA  had  2  multiple  launches  totaling  4  payloads  in 
1969  and  the  same  in  1968;  the  U S S R . ,   whose  last  multiple-payload 
launch  was  in   1965, had   none) .  
Of  the  1969 world  total,  the  United  States  launched  40  boosters carrying 
54  payloads  (compared  to  45  and   6 4  in   1968) .  Of  these  totals,  DOD was  re- 
sponsible for   19 launches and  31 payloads. The  4.6 launches made  the  lowest 
U S .   total  since 1963, and   the  54  payloads  are   the  fewest  since  1961. Eight 

427 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

of  NASA’s total  were  nOn-NASA  missions-Intelsat~III  F-3,  In te lsa t-I l l   F A ,  
In te lsa t-I l l   F-5,  Boreas,  Azur ,   Skyne t   A ,   Essa IX, and   Eg r s   X I I I .   The 
U.S.S.R.  launched  70  boosters  i n  1969;  i t  had   launched  741  in   1968. 
I n  1969 manned  space flight peaked  both  in  quantity  and  in   achievement. 
Four  U S .  Apollo flights put  12  astronauts  in   space and  five  U.S.S.R.  Soyuz 
flights  orbited  11  cosmonauts,  for   a  record  23 men  in   space  in   one  year. 
ApoUo 11 was  naturally  the most  dramatic, with  the United  States  achieving 
its  manned  lunar  landing  goal.  In   steady  progression,  the  successes  of 
Apo l lo   9 in  ear th   orb i t   and  Apollo  10  in   lunar  orb i t   prepared  the  way  for 
the  Apollo  1 1   lunar  touchdown  on  July  20,  1969. The  Apollo  12 follow-up 
lunar  landing  four months  later  further  demonstrated man’s  ability  to  func- 
tion  in   the  lunar  environment. 
The Soviet Union  performed  two lunar missions in   1969, both  unmanned. 
Luna  XV  impacted  the moon  and   Zond  V I I  was  the  third  successful  Soviet 
circumlunar  flight,  reentry,  and  recovery.  The  U.S.S.R.  also  launched  two 
Venus  probes,  both  of  which  landed  on  the  planet.  The  five  Soviet manned 
flights i n   ear th   orbit  performed  rendezvous  and   docking  and  accomplished 
the  first crew exchange in  orbit. 
As  we  have  cautioned  in   previous years,  the  “Remarks”  column  of  these 
appendixes  is   never  complete  because  of  the  inescapable  l a g   behind  each 
flight of  the  analysis and  interpretation  of  the  results. 

428 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

09 
W W 

rn  
N + 

cu n r( 

8 

C 

429 

.“ .* 
‘Ft- O G  
g f i  
n- 
g z  
I- * *  
n““ 

g .3. 
M E  E %  
4- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

2 
m 

09 
m Lo 

m m n 

Po 10 m 

8 

L: * Lo 

2 
m 

N E! 

-1 m r( 

430 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

-! 
W 
0 r( 

2 
a 

N a 

2 
W 

2 
m 

2 
m 

2 
N 
r( 

a 
N 

P LD co 

CI t- W 

CI m 
$+ 

m m 
r! 
N 

c 

N N 
2 
h 

W 0.1 

2 
k 

0 0 )  
i 
h 
431 

A 

AERON 

1969 

J 3 :: 
- .- 
w E 
d 

4 
0 m 

r! 
d 
,-I -I 

W m 

10 
m 
m 

t- 10 -I 

0 p 1  
ri 
N N 

I 

! 

n :: 

* v) 
4 
E 

432 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

s 
0 

L- oo x 
a 

m 

433 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

m - 
0 ." 
- 
x 
." 

.z 
t- 

i 
m 

W (0 

z 
m 

m 
0 ea 

8 0  co 
cn 

10 0 N 

0 N 
." 

g 
Lo 
N 

w 
N 
Q 
F 

434 

w 
N 
$ F 

m 
4 
i 

ASTRONAU 

D AE 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

m m N 

N 
W co 

m 
m 
N 

03 m 
2 

t- 
0 3 

03 co N 

CCJ 
0 3 

t- 
Lb n 

m 
n 
P 
i; 

436 

t 
m 

2 
m 

9 
N 4 

m 2 

F 
m 

to 
m 
n 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

o! 
0 t- 

2 
m 

I 
m 10 

I 
m 0 

m 
rl m 

2 
0 

'9 
m 
m 

2 
W 

-! 
$1 
t- 

4 I? 4 

'd 
N rl 

(0 
0 rl 

(0 
rl N

0 0 
O

n t- 'd 

rl 01 N 

m 
0 
N 

m 
*
4 

m 
o
J 
N 

 

 

2 
rl 

2 
m 
P 
rl 

x 
N 
O
N 

I 
m 0 

2 
0 4 

u W 
N

 

m 
0 t- 

rl m 1 
N 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

2 
m 

2 :: 

439 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

d 
c- -. 
w 
rl -. N 1 
a, ' 
E 
d 

": 
LD w 

cu 
m n 

W .. 
0; 
r( N -. Lo 
1 
3 E 
d 

4 
Lo W 

o? m 00 

W Lo N 

L- 
3 rl 

03 
N m 

t- 
a0 rl 

- 
W 
i 
A 

n 
3 
5-l 

N B 

In 
N ..4 

M m 
..4 

c.. 
m m 
r( N 

t- N 
d: 
m W 

0 N 4 

8 
I4 N 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

g 
.# Y E 
Y 
B 
.- 
u- a 
l 6  
a %  
" €  B €  
t 8  

3 m 

'4 m rl a 

0 m 
4 
0 rl 

t- N I 
0 

-? 
N m 

2 
rl 
t-. 
W 

t- m 3 
W 

2 
m 

2 
0 
t-. 
W 

.# 
4 
'0. m 0 

3 
m 

K 
0 rl 

N 2 

m m m 

t- N s 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

m m ca 

2 
m 

le 
(D cu 

N m 

m 
N 

co 

m 

la 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

-. 
i 
Y 
W 
t- 

p: * u) 

m 
la * 

* N 
t 
b 

c; 
W \ 
m Y 
W 
1 
8 B 
1 
d 

4 
u) W 

2 
m 

N E: 

0 0 N 

K 
m 

m 
rl N 

m N 
t'. 
0 rl 4 

.%a 
9 ) -  
8 1  
PI- 

'0, 
t 
+J 

4 N 
t 
+J 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

2 m 

c 
0 )  

-9 N M 

-9 N N 

I? N 
I 
h 

m 
N 
2 
h 

0, 

a 
R 
h 

- 
co 
R 
h 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

m 
4 4 

4 0 01 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

0 m 
W 

W m 

.-I d .-I 

t- 
W d 

0 
W 3 
N 

N m 
*I) 

rg 50 .-I 

2 
Lo Lo 

m 
WJ N 

m 
WJ 

m m m 

t- N m 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

E 
n 

2 
m 

0 0 W 

0 
-$ 05 

a B 

E 
n 

5'! 
m ID 

W 0 03 

-$ n 
W 

m 

s 
t- 

I 
Ln 

0 * 
50 

f: 
3.4 1D 

o! 
W W 

t- 
N 3.4 

4 
1D W 

f: m 
m 

2 
t- 

Lo t- d 

N la 4 

50 
Vd N 

f 
3.4 

D 
W 
W 

f- m 3 

2 

d W 
*. 
...I 

3.4 ea 

N cu 

2 
b 
4 .

 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

d 
W --. 
W --. m 
P 
8 + I 
P; 

0: 2 

'9 m m 

i 
W --. 0 
--. m 
.-I 
a 
L 
* 
81 
P; 

m 
N t- 

'9 m m 

rl 2 

t- N " 

0 
m 
.-I 

N 
m 
rl 

N N 
ti 
4 .  

eo N 
L+ 
4 

m 
N 
ti 
4 

la rl 
J 
8 m 

m 
rl 
3 
J 

N N 
4.i 8 
m 

N 
4.i 
8 
m 

450 

ASTRON 

D  AERONA 

%9 

2 
10 

d: 
10 en 

'9 m 
10 

5 
0 t- 

r! 
10 m 

m 
3 3 

0 
0 w 

10 t- IO 

3 2 

f 
10 

t 
m 

t- 
3 3 

M t- 3 

n 0 M 

(0 m 10 

t- n N 

0 w -a 

N 1 Fl 

ea N 
ci 
8 
m 

3 
ci 
5 
m 

0 
w 
ci a 
8 

3 
ci 8 

451 

10 

ci 
i; 

U U 
i; 
+i 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

05 t- 3 

452 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Y 
Lo W 

2 
t- 

s 
t- 

2 
Lo 

-2 0 

d: m 
6 

TI m 
0 rl 

m 
N rl 

t- 
W ,-I 

rl 
W -3 

(0 
N rl 

2 
W 

ea c.a 
rl 

m t- 

L- H 
ci 
8 

4 
d 
8 

H 
N 
J 
i; 

453 

N N 
4 
8 

6 N 
J 
0" 

* N 
J 
0" 

* N 
ci 
8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

2 
W 

2 m 

s 
0 ,-4 

f 2 

m eo cu 

". 
10 Lo 
rl 

4 n 
a 
3 
PI D 

454 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  '1969 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

-8 N 
6 
0 

c 
b 
6 
El 
z 

m 
6 a" 

456 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

W 2 

v) LD 3 

d m 
,-I 

m m 
N 

N 
N Eo  

3 
m 

2 
3 

d N r( 

W 
Eo  
05 

m 
9 3 

-3 
m 
3 

W 
N t- 

-8 
6 
d 

+ 3 
u' 
a" 

0 N 
u' 
a" 

m 
N 
6 
a" 

05 N 
1 
fa 

u) N 
u' a" 

457 

Appendix B 
CHRONOLOGY  OF  MAJOR  NASA  LAUNCHES,  1969 

This  chronology  of  ma jor   NASA launches  in   1969 is   intended  to   provide 
an accurate and  ready historical  reference,  compiling and  verifying’informa- 
tion  previously  scattered  in   several  sources.  It  includes  launches  of  all 
rocket  vehicles  larger  than  sounding  rockets  launched  either  by  NASA  or 
under  “NASA  direction”  (e.g.,  in   1969  NASA  provided  vehicles  and  launch 
facilities  and  launched ComSatCorp’s  three  Intelsat  111  satellites, ESSA’S Essa 
I X ,  USA’S  Egrs  X I I I   as  a  secondary payload, ESRO’S Boreas, West Germany’s 
A zu r ,   and  U.K.’s  Skynet  A,  a s   well  a s   Isis  I  in   jo in t   US.-Canadian  pko- 
g ram ) .   NASA  sounding  rocket  launches  a re   published  annually  by  the  God- 
da rd  Space Flight  Center Historian in  Goddard  Projects  Summary:  Satellites 
and  Sounding  Rockets. 
An  attempt  has   been  made  to  classify  performance  of  both  the  launch 
vehicle  and  the  payload  and   to  summarize  total  results  in   terms  of  primary 
mission.  Three categories  have been  used  for evaluating vehicle  performance 
(S) , partially  successful  (P)  , and   unsuc- 
and   mission  results-successful 
cessful  (U )  . A  four th   category,  unknown  (Unk)  , has   been  added  for   pay- 
loads  when  vehicle  malfunctions  did  not  give  the  payload  a  chance  to  
exercise  its  main  experiments.  These  divisions  are   necessarily  arb i trary  ; 
many  of  the  results  cannot  be  neatly  categorized.  Also  they  ignore  the  fact 
that  a  grea t   deal  is learned  from missions  that  may  have  been  classified  as 
unsuccessful. 
Rate of  launch  is  referenced to  local  time  a t  the  launch  site.  Open  sources 
were  used,  verified  when  in   doubt  with  the  project  offices  in   NASA  Head- 
quarters  and   with  NASA  Centers.  For  fur ther   information  on  each  item,  see 
Appendix A  of  this volume  and   the  entries in   the main  chronology  a s   refer- 
enced  in   the  index.  Prepared  April  1970 by  William  A.  Lockyer,  Jr.,  His- 
torical  and   Library  Services Branch,  Kennedy  Space Center. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

461 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

D 

9 

9 

f f l  

f f l  

rn 

f f l  

f f l  

? 

D 

rn 

? 

5 
Y 

? 

9 

s 
Y 

N 4 
M 
4 

I? N 
6 
4 

 
5

 
2

 
 
 
 
n
d
y
-
s
a
n
d
i
m
u
a
t
a
t
r
s
s
 
e
.
 
s
G
o
 
e
 
.
d
n
t
4
 
e
o
1
t
 
)
n
s
z
9
e
o
 
 
.
3
W
v
i
N
t
2
o
c
/
N
n
 
6
m
o
u
6
t
 
u
9
f
n
 
,
r
a
o
1
 
e
s
i
(
v
 
t
t
n
a
n
o
 
t
c
e
r
 
i
u
e
m
b
d
h
d
r
e
i
E
o
t
r
r
n
e
o
 
p
 
r
r
d
n
x
a
a
n
l
e
o
 
e
f
 
s
p
t
 
a
l
-
e
 
e
w
7
i
c
b
s
n
a
 
 
 
e
e
u
n
W
i
t
q
e
c
i
l
l
S
 
l
l
o
e
A
 
t
t
 
r
n
a
.
s
o
 
S
i
e
n
f
 
r
a
d
 
a
 
.
V
e
y
l
y
f
h
r
l
 
t
i
c
s
r
r
 
n
r
o
i
e
a
n
u
t
n
l
c
i
a
n
o
M
a
L
i
s
f

 
 
 
 
.
 
 
 
.
 
 
 
 
 
V
 
 
t
e
g
s
T
)
 
,
I
d
d
,
.
S
P
:
7
t
a
.
t
I
s
S
n
O
e
e
l
e
.
i
r
u
E
I
6
r
E
b
m
m
i
J
S
h
N
a
 
e
S
9
d
c
r
.
 
L
n
p
v
i
 
s
1
o
r
 
 
n
r
U
t
,
m
A
r
o
o
o
T
a
m
n
a
r
 
 
 
f
S
u
r
r
n
,
o
l
a
r
r
 
 
9
t
t
o
E
e
d
o
d
a
e
r
 
s
 
1
 
t
v
t
a
e
m
l
p
r
A
 
n
r
n
 
s
o
m
o
y
r
6
e
a
u
 
s
i
u
o
o
G
2
h
l
n
n
 
o
i
a
l
i
S
h
n
:
 
r
l
p
u
r
9
P
,
p
f
c
r
n
p
 
 
 
 
l
e
 
n
 
I
n
a
o
.
 
 
n
A
 
D
F
b
 
 
l
f
a
M
e
i
t
t
d
i
o
o
a
:
f
e
s
a
e
1
 
t
d
-
 
L
s
c
 
 
d
o
x
0
 
 
h
 
i
n
r
d
O
.
 
t
m
e
T
o
0
n
t
c
 
e
s
a
r
d
f
d
a
G
0
n
 
i
a
c
e
c
.
m
e
 
 
n
,
s
h
u
a
.
 
B
c
 
 
6
4
t
0
c
)
a
g
 
f
a
c
a
 
i
2
t
0
W
e
r
m
l
f
 
n
L
 
i
r
u
0
(
u
i
e
 
6
s
R
t
i
c
d
 
a
3
o
s
 
d
s
.
d
 
1 
a
v
n
 
n
n
.
r
6
a
 
n
 
1
P
o
;
 
 
'
n
f
o
o
5
a
P
m
a
8
1
r
a
N
R
i
r
m
r
M
a
1
 
l
 
D
h
 
t
s
h
 
 
 
4
 L
n
n
r
 
s
C
d
t
e
t
e
,
o
T
 
.
s
A
i
u
s
i
2
,
r
D
a
t
 
i
S
w
f
e
6
n
a
 
i
m
l
f
 
r
E
,
s
 
l
1
n
d
e
 
.
a
i
S
p
 
 
.
r
.
v
o
 
u
e
 
m
s
4
e
m
J
 
 
m
g
 
e
r
d
6
n
C
I
 
1
g
~
w
'
n
o
l
3
n
a
o
p
'
 
p
n
i
6
.
r
 '
 
s
S
a
 
i
V
 
m
d
d
i
f
 
d
3
t
s
l
 
 
.
l
s
a
8
n
e
0
 
a
r
O
t
a
a
L
e
r
r
6
u
n
a
.
 
a
r
t
s
f
3
h
o
N
t
n
:
f
o
l
n
n
a
a
3
(
o
 
l
o
t
e
n
a
 
p
u
g
 
 
 
n
 
 
C
v
4
m
y
T
o
x
t
t
l
i
 
s 
a
f
o
d
t
 
 
b
a
S
A
e
r
 
.
l
s
a
0
m
d
e
t
s
 
E
A
V
 
e
 
r
s
2
s
t
 
e
d
y
t
 
c
E
e
v
e
f
A
y
e
e
n
 
a
n
i
e
l
r
2
 
n
r
t
n
 
l
r
i
d
o
;
c
i
 
.
2
u
 
 
i
a
a
P
v
r
l
o
c
d
a
 
:
i
t
h
t
o
 
a
.
o
 
1
e
x
w
b
9
b
p
n
u
0
o
C
H
N
S
1
1
a
c
L
o
s
a
1
f
t
t

 
 
 
 
 
r
o
l
.
-
 
o
-
e
t
n
a
,
t
2
c
r
a
o
e
2
i
 
J
m
d
t
p
(
p
e
 
O
i
 
 
t
t
m
l
e
s
l
i
e
e
 
u
o
.
e
g
0
d
&
 
o
o
7
o
g
a
9
p
t
 
n
n
1
r
a
i
 
e
i
s
K
f
 
a
 
 
s
.
.
s
7
K
w
'
n
 
t
d
f
 
.
a
 
U
.
e
a
e
r
n
t
r
t
t
i
c
a
 
i
n
 
d
l
e
s
J
l
U
n
c
u
e
 
a
o
a
t
n
a
p
 
n
a
o
 
S
s
o
F
e
t
A
c
 
r
,
h
3
O
 
 
S
n
.
2
c
U
r
e
n
o
 
 
 
v
n
y
.
t
r
v
i
a
a
s
o
g
o
u
i
f
 
N
d
e
m
 
n
v
s
 
 
A
a
e
I
n
 
S
w
i
r
O
h
A
 
e
r
c
v
N
e
 
 
a
o
v
l
.
t
o
 
o
 
y
i
r
o
b
b
 
t
 
t
)
r
n
t
8
o
 
 
i
o
d
d
 
6
b
 
.
c
0
r
e
e
6
r
e
7
h
r
o
,
1
 
i
f
9
c
l
f
2
s
 
1
a
n
l
 
n
/
n
a
u
s
7
 
a
a
n
o
.
a
1
9
w
r
i
L
i
2
2
f
t
t

 
S

 
S

 
S

 
)
R
T
 
W
t
u
o
(
c
S

 
s
d
 
l
;
e
n
i
f
o
i
 
s
d
s
n
i
m
a
 
A
 
s
S
e
l
A
c
i
N
t
r
-
a
n
p
o
N

 
V
 
)
C
 
n
S
r
X
u
t
(
a
S

 
g
n
i
d
n
a
l
 
r
a
n
u
l

 
d
e
n
n
a
M

 
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R
 
 
 
)
e
n
A
t
e
i
-
l
m
l
w
e
 
r
+
t
e
a
a
u
G
(
S
z
A

 
*
7

 
.
v
o
N

 
.
 
8
,
 
0
 
7
9
)
1
0
.
6
1
-
8
M
-
 
-
M
o
S
S
l
A
C
L
l
o
(
p
A

 
4
1

 
.
v
o
N

 
M
3
-
V
S
D

 
a
t
l
e
D

 
;
n
 
s
o
n
i
o
s
s
i
t
i
 m
a
c
A
i
 
n
S
e
u
t
A
i
m
l
N
l
m
e
-
t
o
~
a
c
s
o
N

 
)
A
 
A
-
m
 
t
e
m
n
y
(
k
S

 
*
1
2

 
.
v
o
N

 
.
e
m
i
t

 
h
c
i
w
n
e
e
r
G
 
y
b
 
r
e
t
a
l

 
y
a
d
 
e
n
o

 
:
e
t
i
s

 
h
c
n
u
a
l
 
t
a
 
e
m
i
T
 
*

Appendix  C 
CHRONOLOGY  OF  MANNED  SPACE  FLIGHT,  1969 

Th is   chronology  contains  basic  information  on  all  manned  space  flights 
during  1969  and,  taken  with  Appendix  C  to  the  1965,  1966,  and   1968 
editions  of  this publication,  provides  a  summary record  of  manned  explora- 
tion  of  the  space environment  through  1969.  The  information was  compiled 
by  Leonard C.  Bruno of  the  Science and  Technology Division of  the  Library 
of  Congress. 
The  year  1969 was  manned  space flight’s  most  prolific  year  to  date.  Four  
Apollo  flights  and   five  Soyuz  flights  put  a  record  23  men  into  space.  The  
Soviets  accomplished  the  first  crew  transfer  in   orbit.  The  United  States 
achieved  i ts   goal  of  landing  a man   on   the  moon  and   returning  him  safely 
to  earth-and 
did  i t   again  four  months  later. 
None  of  the  five  Soviet  flights  left  ear th   orbit.  Rather,  all  performed 
earth-related  experiments. Soyuz  IV ,   carrying  one  cosmonaut,  docked  with 
Soyuz  V,  carry ing   a  3-man crew.  Two  members  from  Soyuz  V  transferred 
to  and  remained  in  Soyuz  IV  until  reentry.  Ten  months  later,  Soyuz  VZ 
hovered near  Soyuz  V I 1  and  Soyuz  V I I I  a s  they  performed  close rendezvous 
maneuvers  but  did  not  dock.  Soyuz  V I   tested  welding  techniques  in  its  de- 
pressurized spacecraft  chamber. 
The  early  March  earth  orbital  flight  of  Apo l lo   9 was  the  first  successful 
manned  flight  of  the  Apollo  LM,  and   ApolZo  10 successfully  demonstrated 
the  complete  system  dur ing   its  circumlunar  flight.  Apo l lo   1 1 ’ s   Neil  Arm- 
strong and  Edwin E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  returned  safely to  ear th  with  lunar   samples 
af ter   becoming the  first  men  to  walk  on  the moon.  And  the  Apo l to   1 2  crew 
took  an  extensive lunar   walk  and  retrieved  a  soil  scoop from  Surveyor  111, 
which  had  been  on  the  moon  for   2%  years. 
By  the end  of  1969, the United  States had  conducted a  total  of  22 manned 
in   ear th   orbit,  2  in   lunar  orbit  and   2  lunar  landings- 
space  flights-16 
with a total  of  24  different crewmen.  Of  the  24  American  astronauts,  10  had 
participated  in  2 flights each,  and  5 had   flown  three times,  The Soviet Union 
had   conducted  a  total  of  1 5  manned  flights,  all  in   ear th   orbit,  with  2 1  cos- 
monauts.  Three  cosmonauts  had  flown  twice  each.  Cumulative  totals  for 
manned  spacecraft  hours   on  flight  had  reached  2,303  hours  56 minutes  for 
the United  States and   1,054 hours 8 minutes  for  the  Soviet Union.  Cumula- 
tive  total  man-hours  in   space were  5,833 hours   57   minutes  for  the  United 
States  and   1,698 hours  47 minutes  for  the  U.S.S.R. 
Data  on  U.S.  flights  are   the  latest  available  to  date within  NASA.  Although 
minor  details  a re  subject  to  modification a s  data  a re   refined,  ma jor   aspects 
of  all U.S.  manned  flights remain  subject  to   direct observation  by  interested 
citizens  of  the  world,  with  a  significant  portion  of  recent  missions seen l ive  
on  worldwide television. 

465 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

03 

466 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1%9 

467 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

4168 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
8
*
m
&
3
Q

 
9

 
 
?
C

 
 
 
5
Q
o
\

 
5
 
.
8
S
 
.
:
S
0
.
U
6
:
2
 
1
y
 
b
c
i
 
f
y
i
c
r
e
a
v
P
o
 
c
n
e
i
R
 
d
e
 
d
.
9
n
6
a
/
l
4
 
d
2
n
/
7
a
 
M
 
 
T
.
D
s
t
e
E
 
n
m
r
 
m
o
o
H
r
p
f

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
,
s
o
s
,
-
I
n
-
I
g
y
u
p
n
I
t
I
i
n
V
o
a
o
a
V
 
i
d
 
v
i
d
k
t
t
 
 
z
s
 
a
e
c
w
I
 
e
a
r
v
t
o
e
I
i
a
d
r
d
y
v
f
I
w
r
e
n
V
i
o
e
s
s
e
 
 
p
b
y
S
,
s
r
S
 
I
e
o
o
l
a
V
l
 
c
 
u
a
f
 
d
 
c
o
s
I
f
u
e
u
 
f
a
I
 
t
m
l
 
o
s
I
t
c
s
a
V
S
f
a
u
r
w
 
y
o
 
t
n
 
 
0
o
u
f
b
 
 
t
o
r
0
d
e
u
m
r
S
e
8
l
n
a
o
p
i
.
 
e
1
a
h
h
d
n
 
 
 
W
t
 
e
 
I
.
d
i
,
n
m
h
w
l
I
 
n
i
I
c
d
I
h
a
a
V
n
V
 
e
 
t
t
t
.
a
u
r
i
h
y
 
e
w
r
a
 
E
g
,
h
 
u
v
l
s
I
W
i
P
y
o
e
 
l
V
 
d
T
h
a
u
f
t
O
e
f
r
q
 
 
S
h
r
a
z
p
i
 
o
 
'
c
n
r
u
m
u
t
 
t
c
a
i
h
y
d
o
o
b
o
o
c
o
n
h
r
r
 
r
e
r
S
g
3
o
a
p
p
f
t

 
 
 
l
 
 
 
 
 
V
 
 
 
o
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
:
t
d
d
.
g
d
I
-
r
-
d
d
l
d
-
s
m
r
o
.
f
s
.
f
r
,
 
-
r
n
r
g
h
n
r
.
r
a
n
s
e
o
s
e
n
V
e
I
o
e
M
t
a
e
n
t
e
i
e
n
e
n
e
n
e
t
a
n
i
t
n
e
r
A
e
o
V
c
g
o
c
o
o
t
u
t
L
n
v
v
i
t
T
m
i
 
b
a
a
a
n
 
t
h
v
i
m
k
c
f
f
e
a
a
r
r
i
e
s
i
r
 
q
i
i
u
u
u
k
 
m
s
A
o
a
e
t
r
l
u
i
t
o
n
m
 
p
 
c
f
p
n
 
a
l
i
 
 
 
s
e
t
e
I
s
c
l
c
o
 
a
 
c
p
h
e
n
o
d
 
d
i
d
 
s
c
a
 
s
.
e
 ~
r
a
i
I
t
 
n
.
o
n
e
,
m
r
t
i
c
i
e
t
a
m
e
s
h
t
d
n
e
r
e
 
u
m
 
n
e
r
V
h
d
r
h
a
e
a
j
 
d
T
a
 
 
g
 
d
r
.
t
e
y
e
j
e
t
a
d
c
o
 
n
l
i
o
e
d
t
m
c
e
l
o
a
m
E
e
b
m
a
e
a
l
v
a
h
t
n
a
o
o
a
p
 
e
i
c
g
i
A
v
t
 
e
 
e
G
 
 
o
 
o
 
t
r
l
e
r
t
d
o
g
 a
n
h
t
t
o
d
S
a
x
S
t
l
 
u
r
r
d
 
e
s
c
b
a
 
 
n
B
o
e
 
 
l
S
t
n
o
t
i
r
 
e
I
a
,
e
e
 
 
 
w
c
I
i
y
r
e
a
s
o
r
f
L
 
 
c
e
s
 
l
r
d
V
c
V
h
t
i
g
I
c
t
f
 
a
e
a
e
M
u
l
h
~
T
t
 
s
B
i
 
 
d
e
 
v
d
o
o
n
 
e
I
"
I
c
a
a
.
n
d
n
m
 
p
n
n
e
 
r
e
 
y
t
 
L
r
h
n
i
.
V
r
s
x
t
h
h
e
l
s
c
n
-
p
y
 
s
i
c
e
o
r
s
s
o
 
u
p
b
3
i
 
a
 
k
.
c
a
d
i
 
 
i
n
s
p
e
t
e
b
c
s
o
a
i
t
.
S
s
c
 
.
d
i
r
 
 
c
d
l
r
 
s
l
n
i
s
t
r
l
 
e
h
n
e
s
 
o
z
t
a
 
c
e
n
f
y
6
s
f
a
i
b
e
e
 
f
1
r
 
r
 
 
n
a
l
r
o
o
e
n
o
u
d
t
r
3
p
m
i
a
h
n
l
l
a
e
a
r
 
a
w
v
u
e
r
 
 
e
i
t
t
i
g
 
k
a
d
i
c
i
n
e
f
p
x
m
a
o
c
s
g
w
r
c
i
a
a
s
d
e
h
 
 
l
 
 
f
u
o
 
o
u
c
c
 
e
m
 
c
i
e
 
w
l
n
e
t
n
s
a
r
z
u
t
i
r
c
n
e
p
f
o
y
t
a
 
c
i
a
o
h
n
s
t
h
r
r
 
o
 
f
t
i
a
i
c
u
i
 
u
o
t
o
a
d
o
s
o
S
d
i
e
l
e
f
f
r
b
c
 
r
a
c
r
 
n
j
i
 
t
e
 
o
q
o
l
r
e
r
h
t
a
f
h
h
t
e
 
f
 
r
d
n
n
 
a
a
n
c
m
 
 
 
e
h
f
f
l
i
n
 
s
f
 
k
m
g
 
d
t
d
l
B
t
a
 
p
t
 
a
i
u
d
o
m
e
e
e
 
e
a
a
e
h
v
n
 
s
.
o
t
s
 
d
e
c
b
e
 
n
n
e
s
r
c
 
 
z
d
t
a
h
o
t
s
V
e
r
t
g
e
t
e
e
d
p
o
c
e
e
e
 
t
s
w
 
 
t
i
o
i
a
i
r
 
c
o
i
l
 
 
l
t
e
c
d
d
d
t
c
t
r
i
g
a
i
l
n
i
o
e
r
n
d
w
 
e
r
 
s
I
n
a
p
 
e
d
h
p
l
 
n
u
o
t
d
u
e
e
i
t
n
u
o
 
t
o
-
e
n
e
t
n
e
 
 
r
a
r
y
 
a
t
c
o
c
"
o
f
d
8
s
v
i
e
s
 
n
l
D
,
i
n
h
a
g
i
e
i
 
a
a
t
o
l
,
r
b
u
o
a
b
s
a
s
 
I
t
n
P
e
n
d
n
r
d
a
e
 
o
w
m
c
o
p
a
 
d
 
n
 
a
e
d
i
p
e
d
V
l
 
W
U
r
n
s
i
h
o
h
 
s
 
e
b
i
 
n
p
d
a
e
a
p
 
e
d
r
s
d
o
 
i
 
n
s
c
h
m
t
a
l
 
s
c
t
d
-
.
a
p
 
 
u
c
b
b
s
e
e
a
m
 
.
a
e
p
e
r
o
n
o
d
i
c
o
l
e
 
 
d
 
d
 
 
 
s
e
z
v
e
a
l
s
w
o
s
e
e
d
i
v
t
t
B
?
.
 
e
c
r
o
p
n
c
u
c
e
 
 
t
n
p
e
c
 
 
r
,
t
d
d
l
t
r
l
 
e
a
e
s
l
u
 
s
t
t
i
I
t
p
t
i
s
o
V
 
s
r
s
b
i
e
e
c
u
a
 
i
 
i
u
d
y
f
i
c
n
o
c
e
f
i
s
e
I
v
i
 
y
M
n
d
o
u
h
s
m
c
b
s
l
 
e
h
o
a
o
t
s
a
~
o
e
o
a
e
l
I
s
 
r
s
o
I
f
o
o
n
a
a
b
o
u
n
e
q
W
e
p
e
r
-
S
c
n
r
r
m
r
l
e
r
e
a
l
l
r
l
V
e
i
S
S
r
S
S
T
o
S
o
p
b
e
a
c
a
g
o
c
a
a
e
c
d
C
a
e
s
c
r
s
r
i
t
t
t

 
n
i
n
 r
1
2
 
s
r
 h
8
1
1

 
3
4
1

 
n
i
m
3
4
 
s
r
 h
8
1
1

 
0
4
1

 
n
i
m
 
1
5
 
s
r
 h
8
1
1

 
3
7
1

 
e
l
b
 
t
a
o
l
N
i
a
v
a

 
e
l
b
a
 
t
l
o
~
N
a
v
a

 
o
k
n
 
 
v
o
e
o
h
k
k
o
t
l
a
p
o
b
i
V
l
r
i
a
F
G
 
,
N
 
.
V
 
 
.
V
v
 
a
r
 
l
i
r
a
o
o
i
t
d
t
a
k
a
n
l
i
V
A
V

 
v
 
o
n
s
i
a
n
b
o
u
h
K
S
 
 
.
.
S
N
 
y
 
y
g
r
r
e
o
l
e
a
G
V

 
e
l
b
 
t
a
o
l
N
r
a
v
a

 
v
o
l
a
 
t
v
a
e
h
y
S
e
s
 
i
.
A
l
e
Y
 
r
i
 
m
y
e
i
d
x
a
e
l
l
A
V

 
I
V
 
z
u
r
o
S

 
6
1

 
.
t
c
O

1 
1

 
.
t
c
O

 
I
I
V
 
z
u
y
o
S

 
7
1

 
.
t
c
O

 
2
1

 
.
t
c
O

 
l
I
I
V
 
z
u
y
o
S

 
8
1

 
.
t
c
O

 
3
1

 
.
t
c
O

 
n
i
m
 
6
3
 
s
r
h
 
4
1
2

 
0
4
3
,
8
3
2

4 
4

 
9
6
2
,
0
0
3

 
.
r
J
 
 
.
,
r
n
J
o
 
d
,
d
r
o
a
 
n
G
r
a
n
e
o
 
.
B
F
C
 
.
 
 
d
L
s
e
r
a
l
 
r
n
h
a
a
c
h
l
i
C
A
R

 
,
 
 
8
,
2
7
 
D
1
)
0
 
I
5
6
 
-
O
-
-
M
M
S
U
A
C
W
L
(
A

 
4
2

 
.
v
o
N

 
4
1

 
.
v
o
N

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1969 

470 

Appendix D 
ABBREVIATIONS OF  REFERENCES 

A B C  
AEC   Release 
Aero   Daily 
Aero   Tech  
AF  Mgm t  
AFFTC  Release 
AFHF   News le t ter  
AFJ 
AFNS  Release 
AFOSR  Release 
AFRPL  Release 
AFSC  Newsreview 
AFSC  Release 
A F I S D  
AFSSD  Release 
AIA  Release 
A IAA   Facts 
A IAA   News  
AIAA  Release 
A IP   News  
Amer   A v  

Listed  here  are   abbreviations  for  sources cited  in   the  text.  This  list  does 
not  include  all  sources  provided  in   the  chronology,  for  some  of  the  refer- 
ences cited  a r e  not  abbreviated.  Only  references that  appear  in   abbreviated 
form  a r e   listed  below.  Abbreviations  used  in   the  chronology  entries  them- 
selves a r e  cross-referenced in   the  Index. 
AIAA’S  magazine,  Astronautics  & Aeronautics 
A&A  
NASA’s Astronautics  and  Aeronautics  1969 
A & A   69 
[this  publication1 
American  Broadcasting  Company 
Atomic  Energy  Commission  News  Release 
xqiaIsMau  Liwa  am d so ia p .  
Aerospace  Technology  magazine 
(formerly  Tech -  
nology  W e e k )  
Armed   Forces  Management  magazine 
Air  Force  Flight  Test  Center  News  Release 
A i r   Force  Historical  Foundation  Newsletter 
Armed   Forces  Journal  magazine 
Air  Force  News  Service  Release 
Air  Force Office  of  Scientific Research News  Release 
Air  Force  Rocket  Propulsion  Laboratory  News 
Release 
Air  Force  Systems  Command’s  Newsreview 
Air  Force  Systems  Command  News  Release 
A i r   Force  and  Space  Digest  magazine 
Air  Force  Space  Systems  Division  News  Release 
Aerospace  Industries  Association  News  Release 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics’ 
Facts 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics’ 
N ew s  
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics 
News  Release 
Amer ican   Znstitute  of Phys ics   News  
Amer ican   Av ia t ion   magazine  (formerly  Aerospace 
T  echnobgy  ) 
Associated  Press  news  service 
NASA  Ames  Research  Center’s  A s t rogmm  
NASA  Ames  Research  Center  News  Release 
A t lan ta   Journal  and  Cons t i tu t ion   newspaper 
Av ia t ion   Daily  newsletter 
Av ia t ion   W e e k   &  Space  Technology  magazine 
B irm ingham   News   newspaper 
Baltimore S u n   newspaper 
Business  W e e k  magazine 
Chicago  Daily  News   newspaper 
Chicago  Tr ibune   newspaper 
Canadian  Press  news  service 
Columbia  Broadcasting  System 
Chemical  & Engineering  News   magazine 

A P  
ARC   Astrogram 
ARC  Release 
A t lan ta   J I C  
A v   Daily 
A v   W k  
B   News  
B  S u n  
Bus   W k  
C Daily  News  
C T r ib  
Can  Press 
CBS 
C&E  News  

471 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Communications  Satellite  Corporation  News  Release 
Congressional  Quarterly 
Congressional  Record 
Christian  Science  Monitor  newspaper 
Chicago  Tribune  News  Service 
Denver  Post  newspaper 
Dow  Jones  news  service 
Department  of  Defense  News  Release 
Department  of  Transportation  News  Release 
NASA  Historical  Division  (Code  EH )  
NASA  Electronics  Research  Center  News  Release 
Environmental  Science Services  Administration  News 
Release 
Federal  Aviation  Administration  News  Release 
Facts  o n   File 
NASA  F l igh t   Research  Center  News  Release 
NASA  F l igh t   Research  Center’s  FRC   X-Press 
General  &ectric  Forum   magazine 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s  Goddard  New s  
NASA   Goddard  Space  Flight  Center News  Release 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s  Satellite  S i tu-  
a t ion   Repor t  
Houston  Chronicle  newspaper 
Hous ton   Post  newspaper 
Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory’s  Lab-Oratory 
J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  News  Release 
American  Ins t i tu te   of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics’ 
Journal  o f   Spacecraft  and  Rocke ts   magazine 
Kansas  C i t y   Star  newspaper 
Kansas  C i t y   T im e s   newspaper 
NASA   John  F.  Kennedy  Space  Center  News  Release 
Los  Angeles  Herald-Examiner  newspaper 
Los  Ange les   T im e s  newspaper 
NASA   Langley  Research  Center’s  Langley  Researcher 
NASA  Langley  Research  Center  News  Release 
Los  Angeles  Times  News  Service 
Library  of  Congress  Information  Bu l le t in  
NASA  Lewis  Research  Center  News  Release 
NASA  Lewis  Research  Center’s  Lew is   News  
M iam i   Herald  newspaper 
M iam i   News   newspaper 
Minneapolis  T r ibun e   newspaper 
NASA  George  C.  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center’s 
Marshall  S tar  
Milwaukee  Journal  newspaper 
NASA   Manned  Spacecraft  Center  News  Release 
NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center’s  Space   News  
Roundup  
NASA   George  C.  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  News 
Release 
National  Aeronautic  Association  N ew s  
National  Aviation  Club  News  Release 
National  Academy  of  Engineering News  Release 
North  American  Newspaper  Alliance 
North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  News  Release 
North  American  Rockwell  Corp.  Skywr i ter  
National  Academy  o f   Sciences  News  Release 
National  Academy  of  Sciences-National  Research 
Council  News  Release 
National  Academy  of  Sciences-National  Research 
Council-National  Academy  of  Engineering  N ew s  
Repor t  
NASA  Announcement 
NASA  Headquarters  Personnel  Bulletin 
NASA  Headquarters  V e e k l y  Bu l le t in  

472 

DOT  Release 
EH  
ERC  Release 
ESSA  Release 
FAA  Release 
FonF 
FRC  Release 
FRC   X-Press 
G E  Fo rum  
Goddard  New s  
CSFC  Release 
CSFC  S S R  
H  Chroii 
H  Post 
JPL   Lab-Oratory 
JPL   Release 
J S R  
KC  Star 
KC   T im e s  
KSC  Release 
LA  Her-Exam 
L A   T im e s  
Langley  Researcher 
LaRC  Release 
LATNS 
LC  I n f o  Bull 
LeRC   Release 
Lew is   News  
M He r  
M  News  
M  T r i b  
Marshall  S tar  

MJ 
MSC Release 
MSC  Roundup  
MSFC  Release 
NAA  New s  
NAC   Release 
NAE  Release 
NANA  
NAR  Release 
NAR   Skywr i ter  
NAS   Release 
NAS -NRC   Release 
NAS-NRC-NAE  News   Rpt 

NASA  Ann 
NASA  H q   PB 
NASA  H q   W B  

ASTRONAUTICS 

N   News 
Natl  Obs 
NBC 
NGS  Release 
NMI- 
NN 
NSC  Release 
NSF  Release 
N   V a   S u n  
N Y   News 
N Y T  
NYTNS  
0 S e n  
Oakland  l'rib 
Omaha  W-H 
P Bu l l  

P A 0  
PD 
P   In q  
P I 0  
P M R  Missile 
P M R  Release 
Pres  R p t   70  [691 

S A  
SED  
SAO   Release 
Sc i   Ame r  
Sci  Serv 
SD  
SD  Union 
SF 
SF  Ch ron  
S P  
S R  
SSN 
S t   Louis  G-D 
S t   Louis  P-D 
Testimony 
Text 
Transcript 

UP1 
USGS  Release 
US  News 
W   New s  
w Post 
W  Star 
WH  Release 
W J T  
WS  Release 
W S J  

No.  8 

News 

National  Space  Club  News  Release 
National  Science  Foundation  News  Release 
Northern  Virginia  S u n   newspaper 
New   Yo r k   Daily  News  newspaper 
New   Yo r k   T ime s   newspaper 
New  York  Times News  Service 
Orlando  Sentinel  newspaper 
Oakland  Tribune  newspaper 
Omaha   World-Herald newspaper 
Philadelphia  Evening  and   Sunday   Bu l le t in   news- 
paper 
Public  Affairs  Office 
National  Archives  and  Records  Service's  W e e k l y  
Compilation  of  Presidential  Documents 
Philadelphia  Inquirer  newspaper 
Public  Information  Office 
USN  Pacific Missile  Range's  Missile 
USN  Pacific Missile  Range  News  Release 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Repo r t   of 
the  President, 
Transmitted  t o   the   Congress  January  1970  (report 
of  activities  during  1969) 
Space  Aeronautics  magazine 
Space  Business  Daily  newsletter 
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory  News  Re- 
lease 
Scientific  American  magazine 
Science  Service  news  service 
Space  Digest  magazine 
San   Diego  Union newspaper 
Space  Flight  magazine 
San   Francisco  Chronicle  newspaper 
Space  Propulsion  newsletter 
Saturday  Review  magazine 
Souiet  Sciences  in  the  New s ,   publication  o f   Electro- 
Optical  Systems,  Inc. 
S t .   Louis  Globe-Democrat newspaper 
S t .   Louis  Post-Dispatch newspaper 
Congressional testimony,  prepared  statement 
Prepared  report  or  speech  text 
Official  transcript  of  news  conference  or  Congres- 
sional  hearing 
United  Press  International  news  service 
U S .   Geological  Survey  News  Release 
U S .   New s   &  World  Report  magazine 

unday  Star  newspaper 
une  newspaper 
NASA Wallops  Station  News  Release 
Wa l l   S tree t   Journal  newspaper 

473 

INDEX  AND  LIST  OF  ABBREVIATIONS 
AND  ACRONYMS 

A 
AA.  See  Apollo  Applications  program. 
AAS.  See American  Astronautical Society. 
AAAs.  See  American  Assn.  for  the   Ad- 
vancement  of  Science. 
ABC.  See  American  Broadcasting  Co. 
Abelson,  Dr.  Philip  H.,  179-180 
Aberdeen,  Md.,  49 
Abernathy,  Rev.  Ralph  D.,  201,  209,  225 
ABM.  See Antiballistic missile  system  and 
Safeguard. 
The  ABM  and   the  Changed  Strategic 
Military  Balance,  U.S.A.  us.  U.S.S.R. 
(American  Security  Council  repo r t ) ,  
_ _  - 
131 
Abbot,  Dr.  Charles  G.,  147 
ABRES.  See  Advanced  Ballistic  Reentry 
System. 
Accident 
aircraft,  19,  40-41,  362,  4 2 4 4 2 5  
AH-56A 
(helicopter),  260,  308-309, 
389-390 
F - I l lA ,   155,  413,  415-416 
T-33,  283 
Tu-144, 121 
XV 4 B ,   80 
X-15,  177 
XB-70,  11 
launch  vehicle 
Saturn  V,  188,  195 
U.S.S.R.  booster,  382 
liftingbody  vehicle,  29 
Lunar  Landing  Training  Vehicle,  5, 
17.1 
Se&b  111,  51,  52,  57,  77,  188-189, 
316-317 
spacecraft,  392 
Apollo  AS-204,  206 
Biosatellite  I I I ,   162 
Adams,  Harold  W., 209 
Adams,  Maj.  Michael  J.  ( U S A F ) ,   177 
Adey,  Dr.  W.  Ross,  348-349 
ADS.  See  Airport  Data  System. 
Adulyadej,  King  Bhumibol  (Tha i land ) ,  
25 1 
Advanced  Ballistic  Reentry  System 
(ABRES ) ,   10 
Advanced  Manned  Strategic  Aircraft 
( AM S A ) .   See  B-1. 
Advanced  Marine  Vehicles  Meeting,  Sec- 
ond,  156 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
(ARPA ) ,   119,  346, 424 
Advanced  vidicon  camera  system  (AVCS )   , 
5 7 5 8  
AEC.  See  Atomic  Energy  Commission. 
AEC-NASA  Nuclear  Rocket  Development 
Station,  361 
AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Of- 
fice,  76,  87,  94,  309,  332 
Aero  Club  of  Washington,  29 
Aerobee  (sounding  rocket) 
150 
airglow  experiment,  49 
solar  astronomy,  48-49,  302,  360-361 
stellar  data,  71,  79,  179,  402,  409 
ultraviolet  astronomy,  4 8 4 9 ,   78,  409 
x-ray  astronomy,  78,  179,  402 
150  A,  139 
150  M I  
infrared  astronomy,  299 
solar  astronomy,  104,  108,  111,  113, 
140-141,  308,  314,  316,  361,  410- 
411 
stellar  data,  31-32,  118,  184, 326,  337 
ultraviolet  astronomy,  6,  31-32,  43, 
140-41,  179,  184,  308,  410-411 
upper-atmosphere  data,  38,  42,  179 
x-ray  astronomy,  65-66,  70,  104,  108, 
118,  186,  326,  361 
170,  298 
350,  27-28 
Aeroflot,  255 
Aerojet-General  Corp.,  87,  94,  154,  168, 
241,  385-386 
Aeronautics,  113-114,  369 
anniversary,  129,  133,  292-293,  410 
award,  21,  72-73,  87,  101,  127,  132, 
150,  178,  200,  209,  283,  293,  298, 
315,  338,  345-346,  410 
cooperation,  204-205,  321,  334,  379, 
397398 ,   417418 ,   421-422,  423-424 
employment.  77.  150.  356 
exposition,  52,  161-162,  173,  283,  412 
funds  for,  14-15,  60,  70,  78,  113,  119- 
120,  193,  205 
general  aviation.  See  General  aviation. 
military,  14-15,  52,  66,  111-112,  131, 
207,  397-398 
NASA  program,  14-16,  38,  44,  66,  70, 
84,  119-120,  204-205,  397-398,  400, 
421-424 
noise  abatement.  See  Noise,  aircraft. 

475 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

research  (see  also X-15,  X-24,  XB-70, 
XV 4 B ,   YF-12,  etc.),  11, 44,  70,  72, 
78,  84-85,  92,  103,  120-121,  123,  155, 
184,  193,  205,  299-300,  315-316, 
321,  335,  350,  362,  369,  397-398, 
400, 402403 ,   404,  417-418,  421-422, 
423-424 
statistics,  34,  40-41,  70,  102,  124,  136, 
150,  176,  193,  356,  424-425 
U.S.S.R..  120 
Aeronautics  and  A s t ronau t ic s :  A n  A m e r t  
can  Chronology  of  Science  and  Tech -  
nology  i n   the  Exploration  of  Space ,  
1915-1960,  357 
Aeros,  Project,  423 
Aerospace  Corp.,  304 
Aerospace  Facts  and  Figures,  1969,  193 
Aerospace  Industries  Assn. 
( A K A ) ,   109, 
124,  150,  193,  356 
Aerospace  industry, 35,  77,  80,  95-96,  97, 
124,  150,  164,  193,  228,  317,  330,  347, 
356,  361,  363,  424 
Aerospace  Medical  Assn.,  130-131 
Aerospace  Systems  Laboratory  (Prince- 
ton  Univ.),  208-209 
AFCRL.  See  Air  Force  Cambridge  Re- 
search  Laboratories. 
Africa,  101 
AFSC.  See  Air  Force  Systems  Command. 
Agathadaemon  canal  (M a r s ) ,   262 
Agena 
(booster).  See  Atlas-Agena; 
Long-Tank  Thrust-Augmented  Thor- 
Agena;  Thor-Agena;  Thorad-Agena; 
and  Titan  IIIB-Agena. 
Agnew,  Vice  President  Spiro  T.,  54.  83, 
135.  191. 232.  380 
Apo l lo   9  miss;on,  65 
Apo l lo   11  mission,  210,  224,  225 
awards  bv.  91-92.  100 
oceanography,  56,’  341 
press  conference,  65,  308,  323-325 
space  program,  65,  152,  224,  225,  231, 
271,  294,  308,  320,  323-325,  419 
Agreement.  See  international  coopera- 
tion;  International  cooperation,  space; 
and  Treaty. 
Agrell,  Dr.  S.  O.,  312 
Agriculture,  Dept.  of,  14,  76,  106,  141, 
352 
AH-56A  (Cheyenne)  (helicopter),  106, 
115,  148,  150,  160,  260,  308-309,  389- 
390 
Ahmedabad,  India,  311 
AIA.  See Aerospace  Industries  Assn. 
AIAA.  See  American  Institute  of  Aero- 
nautics  and  Astronautics. 
Air  cargo,  113-114,  369,  424 
Air  Force  Academy,  170, 225 
Air  Force  Armament  Development  and 
Test  Center,  186 
Air  Force  Assn.,  86-87 
Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Labora- 
tories 
(AFCRL ) ,   164,  308,  359-360, 
4 1 0 4 1 1  
Lunar  Laser  Observatory,  192 

Air  Force  Fatigue  and   Fracture  Confer- 
ence,  410 
Air  Force  Museum,  38,  119,  177 
A i r   Force  Rev iew   of  the  C-5A   Program, 
_ _ _  
251 
Air  Force  Special  Weapons  Laboratory, 
424 
Air  Force  Systems  Command 
( A F C S ) ,  
140,  260,  295,  331,  410 
Aeronautical  Systems  Div.,  4 0 2 4 0 3  
Air  pollution,  147,  278-279,  285-286, 
383,  402,  4 1 2 4 1 3  
A i r   T ra f f i c  .Activity  Repo r t ,   102 
Air  t r a 5 c   control,  15,  32,  .55,  369 
FAA  regulation,  32,  4 3 4 4 ,   188,  253, 
3x0 
s a i i h e  use  in,  37,  47,  319 
statistics,  34,  102,  109,  369 
Air  Traffic  Controllers  Organization.  44 
Air  Transport  Assn.  of  America  (ATA) ,  
80,  278,  315,  336 
Air  transportation.  See  Air  traffic  con- 
trol;  Aircraft;  Airlines;  Airports; 
General  aviation; 
and  Supersonic 
transport. 
Aircraft 
(see  also  individual  aircraft, 
such as C 5 A ,  F-111,  X-15,  XB-70). 
accident,  11,  19,  4 0 4 1 ,   80,  121,  155, 
177,  260,  283,  308-309,  362, 389-390, 
413,  415416 ,   424-425 
air  pollution,  278-279,  402,  413 
air  show,  146,  168,  169,  173,  283,  412 
antisubmarine,  15,  131 
award,  72-73,  87,  178,  200,  209,  298, 
315,  345-346 
bomber.  4.  15.  86.  99.  111-112.  117. 
131,  ,133,  155,  169, ’ 183,  K,’ i97: 
205,  297-298,  321,  360,  413,  415416  
cargo,  113-114,  369,  424 
.
.
 
carrier,  206 
collision  study,  70,  315-316,  319,  362, 
369 
cost,  88,  177,  186,  314-315,  340,  341, 
410 
delta-wing,  195,  422 
exhibit,  38,  119,  177 
fighter,  1, 4,  9,  13,  15, 39,  86,  129, 
131, 
4 
155.  197.  201.  283.  372.  413.  41 
flvine‘ boat-  133:  344 
- - -  
f ire&   1,  5,  9,  13-14,  61,  71, 
121, 
I 
- - - I  
159-160,  161-162,  168, 173,  197, 
255, 
283.  297-298.  323.  329.  340 
general-aviation,  l d 1 5 ,   441, 70,  102, 
109,  124,  150,  369 
helicopter,  35,  79,  106,  115,  124,  129, 
131,  141,  148,  150,  160,  260,  308- 
309.  389-390 
hovercraft,  156 
hypersonic,  15 
interception,  73,  205,  400,  405,  421 
noise.  See  Noise,  aircraft. 
reconnaissance,  73 
record,  79,  129,  151,  158,  177,  323 
regulations,  3,  4 3 4 4 ,   57,  188,  253,  371, 
380,  402 

476 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

research  (see also  X-15.  X-24.  XB-70. 
XV4B ;   YF-12,  k tc . j ,   11, ‘ 44,  70: 
72-73,  78,  85,  92,  123,  155,  183-184, 
193, 205.  299-300.  315-316.  321.  335. 
350:  362.  369.  397-398.  h0. ,402: 
-, 
403;  404,’  421h22 ,   4 2 3 4 2 4  
~ 
safety,  9,  4 0 4 1 ,   70,  148, 208,  362,  369, 
4 2 4 4 2 5  
seaplane,  133 
sonic  boom.  See  Sonic  boom. 
statistics,  34,  4 0 4 1 ,   70,  102,  113-114, 
136,  150,  193,  356 
STOL, 29,  32,  50,  84,  89,  114,  320 
supersonic.  See  Supersonic  transport, 
Concorde,  F-8,  F-14A,  F-111,  Tu -  
144,  x-15,  XB-70,  YF-12,  etc. 
tracking,  14Q 
traffic  control.  See  Air  traffic  control. 
training,  283 
transport  (see  also  Supersonic  trans- 
po r t ) ,   40-41,  57,  70,  75,  113-114, 
121,  136,  150,  162,  168-169,  193, 
208-209,  356,  362,  369,  424 
jet,  45-46,  47,  121, 168-169,  175, 193, 
212,  278-279,  299-300,  304,  341, 
350,  369,  371,  400,  409,  421-422, 
424 
military,  38,  107,  123-124,  128-129, 
130,  138,  151,  207,  212,  281,  283, 
293.  323.  359.  380.  411.  421 
STOL,’29,  32,  50,  84, ‘89,  114,  320 
Vietnam  war  use,  99 
V/STOL,  15,  75,  84,  92 
VTOL, 75,  80,  114,  129 
wind-tunnel  testing,  183-184,  299,  379, 
389 
Airci&  Owners  and  Pilots  Assn.,  138- 
139 
Airglow,  49,  171-173 
Airlines,  9 ,   29,  40-41,  50,  70,  84,  176, 
424-425 
Airlock,  128 
Airport  Data  System  ( A D S ) ,   117 
Airports  (see  also  Air  traffic  control; 
Noise,  aircraft ; and  individual  air- 
ports,  such  a s   Washington  National 
Airport),  32,  54,  253 
FAA  plans,  156 
facilities,  55,  88-89,  113-114,  117,  176, 
369 
fog,-42 
funds  for,  32,  123,  156,  182 
NASA  role  in,  253 
noise  control,  3,  263-265,  371 
pollution  control,  278-279 
regulation,  3,  32,  43-44,  57,  369,  380, 
418 
runway  research,  29 
statistics,  34,  70,  102,  109,  117,  176 
Ajaccio,  Corsica,  244 
Alabama,  Univ.  of,  329 
Alaska,  179 
Alaska,  Univ.  of,  83,  352 
Alcatraz  Island,  343 
Alcock,  John  W.,  129 

Aldrin,  Col.  Edwin  E.,  Jr. 
( U S A F ) ,   315, 
414 
Apo l lo   11 mission,  307,  442 
celebrations  for,  279-280,  282,  283, 
298,  300 
commemorative  medal,  275 
commemorative  stamp,  202,  273-274, 
289,  300 
Congress,  report  to,  307 
extravehicular  activity,  198-199,  212, 
217-220,  255,  267-268,  273-274, 
277-278 
flight,  212-224,  277-278,  421 
luna r   landing,  232,  262,  271,  277- 
278,  281,  421 
medical  aspects,  137,  156-157,  245, 
273 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  mes- 
sages  and  welcome  to,  209,  242 
preparations  for,  5,  108,  114,  156- 
157,  168,  182,  196,  204 
press  conference,  198-199,  207,  267- 
268,  277-278,  280-281,  362 
quarantine,  76,  141,  223,  247,  267, 
273,  276 
record,  250-251 
significance  of,  277-278,  281 
splashdown,  222-223 
TV  interview,  283-284 
awards  and   honors,  147,  233,  237,  251, 
255,  279-280,  327,  365,  403 
Canadian  visit,  312,  3 9 9 4 0 0  
commemorative  stamp  ceremony,  289, 
300 
tribute  to,  228,  243,  279-280,  391, 
399-400 
White  House  visit,  319,  362 
world  tour,  312,  319,  327,  330,  332, 
334,  335,  337,  341,  350,  351,  353, 
359,  360,  361-362 
Alexander,  Charles  S.,  357 
Algae,  159 
Algiers,  234 
Algol  I IB   (rocket  engine),  291 
Algol  111,  291 
Alioto,  Mayor  Joseph,  211 
Allen,  H.  Julian,  53,  338,  345 
Allen,  Richard  J.,  68-69 
Alley,  Carroll,  71  
A loue t te   I  (Canadian  satellite),  30 
A loue t te   11,  30 
Alphanumeric  system,  156 
ALSEP.  See  Apollo  lunar  surface  experi- 
ment  package. 
Altus  AFB,  Okla.,  411 
Alvizienis,  Dr.  Algirdas  A.,  299 
American  Academy  of  Achievement,  203 
American  Airlines,  292 
American  Assn.  for  the  Advancement  of 
Science  (AAA S )   , 2-3,  159,  184, 4 1 6 4 1 7  
American  Assn.  of  School  Adminis- 
trators,  46 
American Astronautical Society  ( A A S ) ,   183 
American  Bible  Society,  Laymen’s  Com- 
mittee,  390-391 

477 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

American  Bible  Week,  390-391 
(ABC )  , 146, 
American  Broadcasting  Co. 
352 
American  Cancer  Society  Seminar,  96 
American  Chemical  Society,  110,  184 
American  F ie ld   Service,  238 
American  Geophysical  Union,  116,  409 
American  Heart  Assn.,  372 
American  Ins t i tu te   of  Aeronautical  Sci- 
ences.  187 
American  Ins t i tu te   of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics  ( A I A A ) ,   21,  60,  79,  297 
award,  21,  72-73,  209,  338.  3 4 5 4 4 6  
Honorary  Fellows,  287,  346 
meetines.  21.  72-73.  78.  134.  343-346 
Th e   P&t-Apollo  Space  *  Program:   A n  
A l A A   V iew ,   151-152 
President’s  Forum,  346 
American  Management  Assn.,  56 
American  Museum  of  Natural  History, 
381 
American  Physical  Society,  40,  120 
American  Rocket  Society,  226 
American  Samoa.  401-402 
American  Science  &  Engineering,  Inc., 
104,  361 
Amer ican   Sc ience   Manpower ,   1968  (NSF  
repo r t ) ,   420 
American  Security Council,  131 
American  Society  for  Engineering  Edu- 
cation,  285 
American  Society of  Biological  Chemists, 
184 
American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engi- 
neers,  338 
American  Standard,  Inc.,  Wilcox-Sierra 
Div..  315 
American  Systems,  Inc.,  105 
American  Telephone  &  Telegraph  Co. 
(AT&T),  352 
American  Univ.,  136 
America’s  N ex t   Decade  i n   S pa c e :   A   Re -  
por t   f o r  the   Space  Task   Group ,   308 
Ames  Research  Center 
( A R C )  
( N A S A ) ,  
315,  348,  379 
award,  21,  338 
experiment,  395 
flight  simulator,  362 
management,  190,  292 
personnel,  53,  332 
research,  aircraft,  123,  362,  393 
Thermo  and  Gas-Dynamics  Div.,  200 
Amistad  Dam,  299 
(advanced  manned  strategic  air- 
AMSA 
c ra f t ) .   See  B-1. 
Amsterdam,  Netherlands,  312,  332,  350 
Amundsen.  CaDt.  Roald.  251 
An-22 
(U.S.S:R. 
turboprop  transpor t) ,  
121,  159,  162,  168 
Anaheim,  Calif.,  287,  338,  343 
Ancient  Order  of  Hibernians,  72 
Anders,  William  A.,  308 
a ir   pollution,  382 
Apo l lo   8  mission,  6-7,  59,  71,  87,  203, 
327 

Apo l lo   11  mission,  5 
appointment  to   NASC,  141,  184 
awards  and  honors,  2,  6,  10,  68,  87, 
100-101,  132,  203,  298,  390-391 
receptions  for,  9,  13 
technology  utilization,  space,  327,  382 
White  House  visit,  6,  32 
Anderson,  Sen.  Clinton  P.,  24,  29,  118, 
390,  411 
Anderson,  G.  P.,  298 
Anderson,  Minister  for  Supply  Kenneth 
McC.  (Aus tra l ia) ,   34 
Andoya,  Norway,  18,  20 
Andrews  AFB,  Md.,  262 
Andromeda  galaxy  (M31) ,   99 
Andromeda   S tra in ,   The ,   181 
Animal  experiments,  space,  18-19,  139, 
189-190,  200,  201-202,  261,  335-336, 
347-349,  415,  421 
Ankara,  Turkey,  312 
Anniversary 
aircraft,  129,  133,  410,  411 
- 
manned  space  flight,  8,  202 
NASA,  323- 
Naval  Missile  Center,  325 
satellite.  33.  51.  59.  83 
..,  _-, - _  
Antarctica,  159,  257,  559- 
Antenna,  29,  44.  148,  179,  187,  189,  356 
spacecraft,  137,  143,  259,  322 
Anthony,  Maj.  James  L. 
( U S A F ) ,   413 
Antiballistic  missile  ( A B M )   system  (see 
also  Safeguard) ,   33,  83,  89,  320 
congressional  consideration,  39,  46-47, 
52,  53,  81,  103,  111-112,  124,  131 
funds  for  48,  53,  131 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  views 
on,  43,  80,  81 
opposition  to,  40,  46-47,  89,  103,  114, 
124,  131,  136 
sites,  39,  43,  80 
U.S.S.R.,  43,  48,  50,  53,  62,  80,  89, 
129,  131,  140 
Antihijacking  system,  336 
Apollo  (program)  (see   also  Apollo  Ap- 
plications  program)  6,  70,  77,  195, 
207,  256,  294-295,  308,  325,  357 
astronaut.  See  Astronaut. 
award,  68-69,  117,  280,  300,  326,  345- 
346,  346-347 
cost,  6,  43,  46,  88,  262,  390,  422 
criticism,  2,  273 
funds  for,  15,  134,  138,  249-250,  311, 
355-356,  422-423 
landing  site,  77,  345 
launch 
Apo l lo   9  (AS-504),  62-65,  421 
Ap0110  IO  (AS-505),  142-145,  421 
Apo l lo   11  (P-S-506),  168,  212-224, 
421 
Apo l lo   12   (AS-507),  372-378,  421 
management,  202,  274,  287,  297,  313, 
356,  422-423 
plans  for,  66-67,  73,  77,  81-82,  102, 
344,  351,  422-423 

478 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

sight 

policy,  37,  51,  81-82,  86-87,  111,  136, 
271-272,  273,  284,  355-356,  422-423 
press  comment  (see  also  Apollo  mis- 
sions),  1,  250,  321 
progress,  6,  65,  76,  77,  144-145,  223- 
224,  246-247,  420,  421-423 
tracking,  140,  306-307 
Apollo  (Spacecraft),  7,  5 6 5 7 ,   59,  73, 
149,  197 
(AP S )  , 64, 
ascent  propulsion  system 
143,  377 
command  and   service  module.  See 
Command  and   service module. 
command  module.  See  Command 
module. 
computer  error,  174 
control,  26-27,  232,  375 
crewman 
optical 
alignment 
( C P A S ) ,   64 
debrE,  89 
descent  propulsion  system  (DPS )  , 64, 
143,  213,  375 
escape  device,  94 
equipment,  14,  77,  91,  102,  111,  168, 
201,  373-377 
exhibit,  105,  161-162,  417 
heat  shield,  27 
landing  system,  26-27,  378,  405 
launch.  See  Apollo  (program). 
launch  vehicle.  See  Saturn. 
life-support  system,  123,  206,  267,  378 
lunar  module.  See  Lunar  module. 
reaction  control  system  (RC S ) ,   64,  143, 
213,  222,  375 
recovery,  141,  223,  378 
service module,  143 
service  propulsion  system  (SPS),  64, 
143,  212-213,  222,  373,  375,  377 
test,  65,  77,  143-144 
Apo l lo   4  mission,  65 
Apo l lo   5  mission,  65 
Apo l lo   6  mission,  65 
Apo l lo   7  (spacecraft),  20-21 
Apo l lo   7 mission,  65,  68,  72-73,  144, 223, 
287 
Apo l lo   8  (spaceoraft),  105,  161-162,  168 
comuuter  error.  174 
Apollo‘  8  mission,  371  71,  141,  149,  155, 
158-159,  391 
award,  2,  6,  10,  32,  68,  87,  100-101, 
132,  136,  203,  287,  298,  390-391 
commemorative medals,  265 
commemorative  stamp,  8,  %,  59,  129- 
1.w -_. 
Congress,  report  to,  7 
Johnson,  President  Lyndon  B.,  6-7,  13, 
232 
moving  picture  color  film,  8,  46 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  20,  32, 
34,  61-62 
orbit,  73 
physiological  aspects,  28 
press  comment,  1,  2,  26 
press  conference,  7,  25,  54 
reaction  to,  European,  54 

reception,  13 
record,  208 
religious  aspects,  268,  283,  390-391, 
394.  400 
results,’  111,  116,  180 
significance,  2,  6-7,  16,  20,  39,  65, 
73,  92,  129-130,  144-145,  223 
success,  47 
U.S.S.R.,  comment  on,  25,  26 
Ap o l lo   9  mission,  161-162,  328 
award,  91-92 
biological  aspects,  61  
extravehicular activity,  5,  33,  64,  81,  91 
launch,  62-65,  67,  421 
moving  picture  color  film,  81 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  65  
photographs,  64,  81,  116-117 
preparations  for,  5,  16,  23,  26-27,  33, 
58,  61  
press  comment,  67,  72,  80,  89,  90 
press  conference, 26-27,  33,  61,  77,  91, 
116-1 17 
significance. of,  65,  145,  223,  421 
spacecraft  debris,  89 
splashdown,  64 
success,  130 
TV  coverage,  50,  67 
U.S.S.R.,  comment,  80 
Apo l lo   10  mission,  116,  138,  169,  174, 
180,  200 
launch,  142-143,  421 
moving  pictures,  159 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  157 
photographs,  90, 142-144,  149,  159 
preparations  for,  16,  23,  33,  73,  77, 
82-83,  90,  104,  108,  118,  137,  138, 
142 
press comment,  147-148,  149-150,  152- 
154,  155,  157 
press  conference,  33,  108 
significance of,  152-154,  158,  223,  421 
splashdown,  143 
success,  230 
TV  coverage,  90,  108,  142-143, 
149 
U.S.S.R.,  comment, 157,  158 
Apo l lo   11  mission,  135,  170-171,  187, 
188,  342,  368,  370,  388 
achievement,  223,  233,  235-236,  24% 
243,  245-249,  250-251,  309-310,  378, 
390,  391,  419,  421,  422,  424 
awards  and  honors,  233,  237,  242,  243- 
244,  251,  279-280,  282,  283,  284,  298, 
327,  343,  365,  4 0 3 4 4  
biological  aspects,  141,  156-157,  245, 
261,  273,  293,  356,  391 
book,  135-136,  252 
commemorative medals,  275 
commemorative  stamps,  202,  233,  273- 
274,  289,  300,  311,  319 
Congress,  report  to,  307 
cosmonaut  medals,  228,  230 
cost,  186,  271,  390 
criticism, 201,  205-206,  210,  211,  230- 
231,  235,  273 

147, 

479 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

experiments,  259 
laser,  114,  220,  223,  237,  259,  261, 
285.  411.  419 
seis&c,  l h ,  223,  229-230,  237,  240- 
seis&c,  l h ,  223,  229-230,  237,  240- 
241,  249,  354455 ,   419 
241,  249,  354455 ,   419 
solar  wind,  219,  223,  230,  285,  413, 
solar  wind,  219,  223,  230,  285,  413, 
419 
419 
extravehicular  activity,  74,  108,  114, 
182,  198,  208,  212,  217-220,  223, 
243,  255-256,  267-268,  273-274,  278 
Eyewitness  to  Space  (a r t   program) ,  
226,  241,  403 
implications  of,  200-201, 
238-239, 
239-240,  240-241,  242-243,  261-262, 
268-269,  277-278,  282,  284,  286-287, 
291,  300,  307,  309-310,  321-322 
launch,  168,  212-224,  421 
lunar   landing,  114,  168,  181-182,  215- 
220,  232-236, 
238-239, 
277-278, 
280-281,  370,  378,  380,  404,  421,  422 
lunar   rock  samples,  75-76,  114,  168, 
223,  247,  250,  260,  261-262,  263, 
266-267.  267-268.  270.  275.  288-289. 
290,29%  306,  353-354; 359;  365,  378; 
386,  387,  397,  402,  407-408,  421 
medical  aspects,  130-131,  137,  156- 
157, 204,  206,  223,  245,  261,  266-267, 
273 
moving  picture  film,  247,  252,  277,  292 
museum  memorial,  proposed,  343 
Nixon.  President  Richard  M..  190. 
1961197,  200,  204,  209,  219-220,  223; 
224,  228,  230-231,  242,  244,  246, 
249-250,  261,  262,  275,  279-280,  284, 
402 
observance  of.  206.  208.  209-211.  225- 
’ 
226,  232-234,  239,  244,  380 
photographs,  212-223,  241,  247,  252- 
253,  255-256,  419 
Dreuarations  for.  5.  23.  105.  108.  114. 
A  127,  141, 144, 14$,  149,  156-157,  168; 
169-170,  178,  179-180,  181-182,  195, 
196-200,  203,  204,  205-206,  209-210 
press  comment,  157,  193,  207,  208, 
210-211.  225-226.  227-228.  228- 
229,  231,  235-236,  239-24,  244, 
246-247,  249-250,  261-262,  271- 
272,  276,  279.  280-281.  282.  295. 
308;  357 
foreign,  193,  210-211,  225-226,  227- 
228,  229,  231,  236,  240,  242,  247, 
248.  251-252.  321-322 
press  conference;  108,  182,  198-199, 
199-200,  204,  207,  231-232,  242- 
243,  250,  267-268,  277-278,  280-281 
quarantine,  75-76,  141,  223,  247,  266- 
267,  273,  276 
records.  250-251 
religious  aspects,  206-207,  232,  235, 
242,  246-247,  253,  268,  283-284,  391, 
394.  400 

222-223,  230 

TV  coverage,  212,  217,  225-226,  232- 
234,  244-245,  276 
U.S.S.R.  and,  206,  225,  230,  233,  238, 
242,  244,  251,  256,  273,  311,  386 
wager,  160-161,  233 
Apollo  11 : Preliminary  Science  Report, 
419 
Ap2 lo   12 mission,  370 
achievement,  378,  392,  394,  421,  422 
biological  aspects,  356,  377-379,  391 
experiments,  4 0 6 4 7 ,   410 
seismic,  325-326,  342,  376-377,  403 
solar  wind,  376-377 
extravehicular  activity,  243,  325-326, 
334,  342,  372,  376-377,  378,  386- 
387.  394. 395-396 
- - . , - - -, - - -  - - - 
launch,  372-378,  421 
lunar   landing.  368,  375.  395-396,  407. 
421,  422 
I 
lunar  rock  samples,  334,  376-377,  378, 
393,  394,  395,  396,  407-408,  421 
moving  picture  films,  395,  407 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  371,  372, 
378,  384,  385,  389,  392 
photographs,  334,  376-378,  395-396, 
41-17 
power  failure,  373-374,  380-381 
preparations  for,  105,  243,  299,  315, 
342,  350,  353,  362,  366,  368,  370, 
371-372 
press  comment, 367,  379,  380,  386387 .  
391,  392,  393,  394 
press  conference,  243,  325-326,  333- 
334,  342,  371-372,  406-407 
public  reaction  to,  379,  380,  384385 ,  
388,  391,  396 
quarantine,  356,  377-378,  396,  397, 
399,  405 
records,  378,  389 
splashdown, 377-378 
TV  broadcasts,  342,  362,  373-376,  377, 
380,  384385 ,   386 
U.S.S.R.  and,  379,  384,  387-388 
Apollo  13  mission,  182,  267,  315,  387, 
392,  405 
Apollo  14 mission,  267 
Apollo  15 mission,  409 
Apollo  16 mission,  409 
Apollo  18 mission, 344 
Apollo  19 mission,  344 
Apollo  20  mission,  344 
A D O ~ ~ O  Achievement  Award  ( N A S A ) .   300 
Ai0110  Applications program,  55,  87,’ 200, 
258,  393 
contract,  59,  77,  85,  94,  154,  270-271, 
297 
funds  for,  15, 67,  82,  109,  119,  138, 163 
management,  344 
plans  for,  37,  66-67,  110,  122,  128, 
151-152,  286,  328,  423 
Apollo  lunar  surface  experiment  package 
(ALSEP )   , 334-335 
Apollo  12 mission,  230,  243,  325,  342, 
376,  421 

4%0 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Apollo  13 mission,  267 
Apollo  14 mission,  267 
Apollo  Orbital  Science  Photographic 
Team,  4Q9 
Apollo  Telescope  Mount  ( A TM ) ,   16,  17, 
237-238 
contract,  11, 71,  77,  177,  270-271,  320 
experiment,  328 
funds  for,  15-16 
test,  48-49 
- -  
Auulications  Technolorn  Satellite  (ATS )  
program, 23,  139, i50, 360,  402,'414- 
415,  421,  423 
contract,  241,  337 
experiment, 337 
funds  for,  15 
Applied  Physics  Laboratory  (Johns  Hop- 
kins  Univ.),  37 
APS.  See  Ascent  urooulsion  svstem. 
APT.  See  Automatic i i c t u r e   transmission. 
Aquanaut,  51,  86,  343,  354 
accident,  51,  52,  57,  77,  188-189,  316- 
317 
record.  110 
Ara,  Inc:,  408 
Arcas  (sounding rocke t) ,   18,  20,  28,  33- 
34,  41,  79,  331,  354 
Arctic.  101.  341 
Arctowski,  'Henry,  Medal,  121 
Arcturus  ( s t a r ) ,   175 
Arecibo  (Puer to   Rico)  Ionospheric  Ob- 
servatory,  121,  350 
Arenosillo,  Spain,  94,  132,  133 
Argentina,  79,  287,  304,  384 
Argentine  Radio  Astronomy  Institute, 
- - -  
181 
Argonne  National  Laboratory,  24,  182, 
292 
A r i e l  IV  (U.K.  satellite),  59 
Aristarchus  (lunar  c r a t e r ) ,   139-140,  213 
Arizona,  168, 291 
Arizona,  Univ.  of,  16-17,  288,  417 
Lunar  and  Planetary  Laboratory,  397 
Steward Observatory, 164 
Armed  Forces  Day,  140 
Armed  Services  Board  of  Contract  Ap- 
peals,  160 
Arms  Control  and   Disarmament Agency, 
30 
AGstrong,  Neil  A.,  315,  414 
Apollo  11 mission,  178,  402 
celebrations  for,  279-280,  282,  283, 
284,  298,  300 
commemorative medal,  275 
commemorative  stamp,  202,  273-274, 
289,  300 
Congress,  report  to,  307 
extravehicular activity,  198-199,  212, 
217-220,  255,  267-268,  273-274, 
278,  421 
flight,  212-224,  278,  380,  421 
lunar  landing,  232,  239-240,  241, 
252-253,  262,  271,  277-278,  280- 
281,  380,  421 
medical  aspects,  137,  156-157,  245, 
273 

Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  209, 
242,  319 
preparations  for,  5,  108,  114,  156- 
157,  168,  181-182,  196,  204 
Dress  conference.  198-199.  207.  267- 
268,  277-278,  '280-281,'362  ' 
quarantine,  76,  141,  223,  247,  267- 
268,  273,  276 
record,  250-251 
significance of,  278,  282 
splashdown,  223 
TV  interview,  283 
appointment, 402 
awards  and  honors,  233,  237,  246,  251, 
255,  279-280,  281,  327,  365,  403 
Canadian  visit,  312,  3 9 9 4 0  
legacy,  281 
Thailand  visit,  413 
tribute  to,  228,  243-244,  391,  392,  399- 
400 
White  House  visit,  362 
world  tour,  312,  319,  327,  330,  332, 
334,  335,  337,  341,  350,  351,  353, 
359,  360,  361-362 
Armstrong,  Neil  A.,  Aerospace  Museum, 
746 
A&id  Engineering Development  Center, 
138,  183-184,  393 
Arnold,  Henry  H.,  Trophy,  87 
Arntzenius,  Dr.  A.  C.,  372 
ARPA .   See  Advanced  Research  Projects 
Agency. 
Artificial  horizon,  263 
ARTS.  See Automated  radar  tracking  sys- 
tems. 
Ascent 
system 
propulsion 
(Apollo),  64, 143,  377 
Asia,  101,  140 
Aspis-Pronoia insurance  company,  226 
Associated  Industries,  Inc.,  117,  125 
Asteroid, 288,  359 
Astrobee  1500  (sounding rocket),  335 
Astrobotanist,  103 
Astrology,  338 
Astronaut  (see  also  Cosmonaut;  Extra. 
vehicular  activity),  20,  71,  83,  105, 
168,  173,  178,  185,  186,  329,  337, 
342,  343,  347,  394 
accident,  206,  283 
achievements.  17.  50.  420 
Apollo  mission.  'S e e   Apollo  missions 
(8, 9,  10,  11,  12,  13 ) .  
appointment,  83,  141,  184,  317,  326, 
396.  402 
Canada,  visit  to,  3 9 9 4 0  
crew  assignment,  5,  105,  187-188 
former,  43,  75,  134,  327,  406 
fund  raising  by,  4Q8 
goodwill  tour,  32,  37,  38,  41,  46,  49, 
51,  52,  155,  195-196,  197,  199,  202, 
204,  299,  312,  319,  327,  330,  332, 
334,  335,  337,  341,  350,  351,  353, 
359,  360,  361-368,  424 
hazards,  28,  179-180,  205,  207,  278, 
281,  380-381,  391 

( A P S )  

481 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

honors,  2,  6-7,  9,  10,  13,  39,  53,  68, 
87,  91,  101-102,  132,  136,  200,  203, 
233,  237,  246,  251.  255,  279-280, 
282,  283,  289,.  298,.  307,.  319,  327, 
330,  332,  346, 347,  350,  360,  361- 
362,  365,  387,  390-391,  396,  403 
luna r   landing  story,  contract,  196 
memorial,  53,  233,  245,  246,  304 
physiology,  61,  71,  81,  130-131,  137, 
142, 204,  206,  245,  273,  284,  317,  330 
political  aspirations,  168 
Presidential  mission.  413 
press  conference,  7,'  26-27,  41,  53-54, 
61,  75,  158-159,  196,  198-199,  204, 
207,  267-268, 
277-278, 
280-281, 
325-326.  333334 .   362,  396.  406-407 
promotion,'  M ,  39i,  392' 
quarantine,  76,  141,  223,  247,  267,  273, 
276,  356,  377-378,  396,  397,  400,  405 
record,  208,  250-251,  389 
religion,  268,  391,  394,  400 
resignation.  267 
scieitist-astronaut,  284,  286,  290,  339, 
351,  355-356 
Smithsonian  Institution  ceremony.  307 
space  rescue.  See  Space  rescue  ireaty. 
training,  114,  142,  155,  156-157,  181- 
182,  284,  414 
tributes  to,  228,  242,  246,  276,  279- 
281,  282,  362,  385,  392 
USAF,  281,  289 
White  House  liaison,  230,  232 
White  House  visit,  32,  56,  157,  191, 
204,  232,  319,  362,  413 
women  as,  359 
Astronautics  Engineer  Award,  68 
Astronauts  Memorial  Commission  (pro- 
posed),  53,  245 
Astronomy  (see  also  individual  observa- 
tories,  planets,  sounding rockets,  and 
satellites  such  a s   Mariner  VI,  Ma r -  
ine r   V I I ,   Oao  11;  Pulsar;  Radioas- 
tronomy;  S ta r ;   Telescope),  109 
award,  121 
gamma  ray,  2,  124,  318-319,  366-367 
NASA  program,  15-16,  66,  69,  76,  94- 
95,  124,  136,  138,  156,  256-257,  263, 
361,  366-367,  403,  422-423 
solar,  90-91,  121,  160,  336,  366-367, 
295 
steiiir,  42,  134-135,  160,  322,  344,  350 
ultraviolet,  3,  99,  124,  298 
U.S.S.R.  program,  103,  120,  278 
x-ray,  104,  118,  120,  124,  133-134,  160, 
. 
281-282,  366-367 
Athens,  Greece,  405 
ATA.  See Air  Transport  Assn.  of  America. 
A t lan t ic   I 1   (communications  satellite) . 
See  Intelsat-I1  F-3. 
Atlantic  City,  N.J.,  46,  89 
Atlantic  Ocean,  18, 30,  64,  133,  137,  291, 
343,  344,  353 
Atlantis  (undersea  laboratory),  123 
Atlas  (booster),  347,  355 

F,  10,  83 
Atlas-Agena  (booster),  106,  409 
Atlas-Centaur  (booster),  114,  154,  177, 
355,  361,  412 
AC-19,  92 
SLV-3C.  55,  277 
ATM.  See  Aoollo  Telescooe  Mount. 
Atmosphere,=9, 18,  19,  205  21,  23,  24,  25, 
27,  33-34,  38,  41-42,  83,  88,  94,  204- 
205,  329,  357,  359-360,  409,  414 
Atmosphere  Explorer  A E - c   (spacecraft), 
401 
Atmosphere  Explorer,  AE-D,  401 
Atmospheric  Exploration  by  Remo te  
P robe s   (NRC   repo r t ) ,   409 
Atomic  Energy  Commission  ( A E C )  
(see 
also  A E C ~ N A S A  Space  Nuclear  Pro- 
pulsion  Office;  NERVA;  Rover;  SNAP ;  
and  Vela  programs),  106,  110 
Argonne  National  Laboratory,  24,  182, 
On "  L Y 4  
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,  386 
budget,  14-15,  42,  110,  193,  361 
contract,  47-48,  94 
cooperation,  27,  43,  88,  105,  177-178, 
309,  332,  422 
deep-water  test,  189 
magnet,  superconducting,  24 
nuclear  power,  peaceful  use  of,  25,  43, 
130,  189,  354 
nuclear-powered  deep  submergence  re- 
search  vehicle,  27 
nuclear  reactor,  28,  130,  177-178,  189 
nuclear  rocket  engine,  76,  87,  105,  130, 
309,  422 
personnel,  30,  125,  184 
Rocky  Flats,  Colo.,  facility  fire,  135, 
384 
Space  Nuclear  Systems  Div.,  332 
Atoms  for  Peace  program,  41 
ATS.  See  Applications  Technology  Satel- 
lite  program. 
A t s   I  (Applications  Technology  Satel- 
l i t e ) ,   150,  277 
A t s   11,  150,  277 
A t s   111,  88,  277,  402 
A t s   IV ,   277 
A t s   V 
(AT S -E ) ,   86,  148,  277,  414-415, 
421 
ATS-F,  86,  118,  241,  311,  337,  423 
ATS-G,  86,  118,  337 
Atwood.  .T.  Leland.  147 
Aurora,'43,  48,  51152,  54,  58,  72,  83,  90- 
91,  171-173,  253,  257,  323,  364,  393, 
417,  423-424 
Aurora  7  (spacecraft),  134 
Aurora  borealis,  323,  393,  417 
Aurora  Expedition,  393,  417 
Aurorae  (E s ro   I A )   (satellite),  323 
Austin,  Tex.,  268,  283,  400 
Australia,  25,  43,  233,  244,  319,  334,  385 
communication  via  satellite,  140,  202 
international  cooperation,  space,  34, 
137,  177,  318-319,  323,  399,  411, 
423-424 

482 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

tracking  station,  34, 148,  189,  424 
Australian  National  Univ.,  292,  407 
Australian  Research  Grants  Committee, 
319 
Australian  Weapons  Research  Establish- 
ment,  117 
Australis Oscar-A  (spacecraft),  399 
Austria,  210 
Autogiro,  283 
Automated 
systems 
tracking 
radar 
(ART S ) ,   55 
Automatic  picture  transmission  ( A P T ) ,  
414 
Avco  Corp.,  191 
AVCS.  See  Advanced  vidicon  camera  sys-  
tem. 
Aviation  Material Laboratories  (AVLABS )   , 
334 
Aviation  Progress  Committee,  88-89 
AviationISpace Writers  Assn.,  138 
Aviator's  Trophy,  298 
Awards,  338,  355 
civic,  10,  50,  279,  289,  330,  403,  419 
Government,  1-2,  54,  178,  251,  255, 
307,  308,  330,  332,  350,  410,  418- 
419 
NASA,  10,  34,  38,  91-92,  154,  265, 
280,  300,  326,  346-347,  371 
institutions,  168,  287.  338.  365 
military,  101,  300,  304,  334,  412 
society,  345-346 
achievement,  122-123,  127,  138,  203 
aeronautics,  21,  72-73,  87,  101,  127, 
132,  150,  178,  ZOO,  209,  283,  293, 
298,  315,  338,  345-346,  410 
astronautics,  21,  68-69,  72-73,  87, 
100-101,  132,  134,  182-183,  237, 
251,  298,  345-346 
exploration,  251 
science, 136 
technology,  54,  117,  345-346 
AX  (close  support  aircraft),  131 
Ayer,  Prof.  Alfred  J.,  239 
Azcarrago,  Gen.  Luis  (Spa in) ,   180 
Azur  (W.  German  satellite),  357 
364-365,  379,  423 
Azur  
(GRS -A ) ,  

B 

B-1 
(advanced manned  strategic  aircraft, 
AM S A ) ,   86,  131,  169,  360 
(Stratofortress),  15, 86,  183 
B-52 
flights,  113,  117,  133,  148,  159, 
HL-10 
174-  267.  297.  309.  319.  352.  360. 

B-58  (supersonic  bomber),  354 
Back  contamination,  76,  136-137,  141, 
156-157,  175,  176,  179-180,  181,  205, 
235,  261,  270,  273,  302,  356 
Bacteria,  159 
Baikonur,  U.S.S.R.,  195-196 

launch 
Cosmos,  58,  105,  186,  237,  267,  293, 
305-306,  316,  347,  350-351 
Luna XV,  195,  206,  224 
Molniya 1-12,  237 
Soruz  IV ,   11 
S iyuz   v;11 
Soyuz  VI,  332 
a 
soyuz  V I I ,   333 
soyuz  V M ,  333 
Baker,  Norman,  146 
Baker-Nunn  camera.  405 
Baku, -U.SZS.R.,  38f 
Baldeschwieler,  Dr.  John  D..  117 
Bales,  Stephen  G.,  280 
Ball  Brothers  Research  Corp.  Aerospace 
Div.,  346 
Balloon,  86,  156,  205,  257,  315,  319,  363, 
421 
Ballute  (balloon-parachute), 239 
Baltimore,  Md.,  320,  410 
Bangkok,  Thailand,  243,  251,  312,  353, 
413 
Bantam  Books,  252 
Barbados, West  Indies,  88,  291 
Barbados  Oceanographic  and   Meteoro- 
logical Experiment  (BOMEX ) ,   88 
Barium  Cloud  Experiment  (BCE ) ,   82,  105 
Barker, Tom,  134 
Barnard,  Dr.  Christiaan,  335-336 
Barnard's  Star,  109 
Barnes,  James,  394 
Barreira  do  Inferno.  Natal.  Brazil.  312 
Barry,  Marion,  230-231 
' 
Barstow,  Calif.,  356 
Barth,  Dr.  Charles  A.,  261,  298,  302 
Barth.  Robert  A..  Jr.,  52 
Bartoe,  Otto  E.,  Jr.,  346 
Basel,  Switzerland, 332 
Baudoin  I,  King  of  Belgium,  46,  55,  332 
BBC.  See  British  Broadcasting  Corp. 
BCE.  See  Barium  Cloud  Experiment. 
Beam,  Ambassador  Jacob  D.,  197 
Bean,  Capt.  Alan  L.  (USN) 
Apollo  12  mission 
extravehicular activity,  243,  325-326, 
333-334.  342.  372.  376-377.  386- 
387,  394,  395 
' 
flight,  372-378 
lunar  landing,  375-376,  385,  386- 
387 
medical  examination,  366 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  371, 
392 
plans  for,  105,  325-326,  342,  353, 
365,  366,  368,  371-372 
press  conference,  325-326,  333-334, 
406407  
quarantine,  356,  377-378,  396,  397, 
405 
splashdown,  377 
fund-raising  dinner,  408 
grounded,  414 
promotion,  391,  392 
White  House  visit,  413 

483 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Beecher,  William,  50 
Beeferman,  Larry  W.,  417 
Beggs,  James  M.,  52,  59,  79,  95,  178 
Beil,  David  A.,  260 
Belgium,  32,  37,  46,  55,  132,  234,  312, 
4% 
Belgrade,  Yugoslavia,  312,  341 
Bell  Aerosystems  Co.,  103,  413 
Bell,  Dr.  Persa  R.,  352-353 
Bellcomm,  Inc.,  38 
B e n   Franklin  (PX-15) 
(research  sub- 
marine),  103,  282 
Bench  Crater  (moon),  376 
Bendix  Corp.,  111,  177,  315,  320 
Bendix  Field  Engineering  Corp.,  196 
Benedict,  Howard,  104 
Benetnasch  ( s t a r ) ,   79 
Beniele,  Max,  239 
Bennett,  Dr.  Ivan  L.,  Jr.,  174 
Benoit,  Dr.  Robert,  159 
Beregovoy,  M / G   Georgy  T.,  195,  197 
Apo l lo   10 mission  message,  158 
press  conference,  343,  350,  362 
US .   visit,  337,  343,  347,  350,  351,  352, 
354,  359,  362 
Beresford,  Spencer  M.,  304 
Berkeley,  Calif.,  383 
Berlin,  West,  37,  49,  55,  334 
Berne,  Univ.  of,  413 
Physics  Institute,  285 
Bernhard,  Prince  (Netherlands),  354 
Bernier,  Robert  E.,  290 
Berry,  Dr.  Charles  A.,  110 
Aoo l lo   9  mission.  61  
Ai0110  11 missioh,  130-131,  200,  204, 
206,  273 
Apo l lo   12  mission,  366,  405 
award.  287.  340 
interview,  ,206 
press  conference,  61 
Betadine  (disinfectant),  156-157 
Bethpage,  N.Y.,  26 
Beverlin,  Charles  J.,  347 
Biehl,  Richard  E.,  239 
Biloxi,  Miss.,  225 
Biological  isolation  garments  (B IG ) ,  141, 
156-157,  356 
Th e   Biomedical  Foundations  of  Manned 
Space  F l igh t :   A   Repo r t   o f   the  Space 
Science  and  Technology  Panel  o f   the 
President's  Science  Adv i so ry   Gomm i t -  
t e e ,   367-368 
Bionic  Instruments,  Inc.,  327 
Biosatellite  (program),  23 
Biosatellite  I,  190 
Biosatellite  11,  78,  160,  190 
Biosatellite  I l l ,   162,  189-190,  200,  201- 
202,  347-349,  415,  421 
Biosatellite-F,  138,  163 
Bird,  John  D.,  4 
Bisplinghoff,  Dr.  Raymond  L.,  178,  363 
Black  Arrow  (booster),  190 
Black  Brant 
(Canadian 
rocket),  360 

sounding 

Black  Brant  IIIB,  59,  127 
Black  Brant  IV,  312 
Black  Brant  VB,  366 
Blagonravov,  Dr.  Anatoly  A.,  80, 185- 
186,  311,  411 
Block  C ra te r   (moon),  376 
Blount,  Postmaster  General  Winton  M., 
129-130,  202,  274,  289,  300 
Blue  Book,  Project,  411,  413-414,  416 
BMWF.  See  Germany,  West,  Ministry  of 
Scientific  Research. 
BOB.  See  Budget,  Bureau  of. 
Bobko,  Maj.  Karol  H.  (WAF ) ,   281 
Boeing  Co.,  122,  164 
Aerospace  Group,  353 
booster,  Saturn  V,  47,  278,  297 
contract,  1,  25-26,  47,  278,  297,  320 
employment,  330 
j e t   passenger 
transport.  See  Boeing 
707  and  Boeing  747. 
lunar  roving  vehicle,  320,  353 
personnel,  285 
space  station,  25-26 
supersonic  transport,  17,  314-315 
Vert01 Div.,  92 
Boeing  707  ( j e t   transport),  88,  382 
Boeing  747  ( j e t   passenger 
t ran spo r t ) ,  
203 ,304 ,317 ,344 ,350 ,371 ,   382-383 
maiden  flight, 4 5 4 6 ,  421 
transatlantic,  169,  344 
orders,  341 
Paris  Air  Show  exhibit,  162,  169,  175 
preview  flight,  400 
Boffey,  Philip  M.,  189 
Bogard,  Dr.  Donald,  288-289 
Bogart,  L / G   Frank  A. 
(USAF ,   Re t . ) ,   346 
Bogota,  Colombia,  226,  312 
Bohr,  Niels,  Library,  164 
Bolender,  Carroll  H.,  91  
Bolger,  Philip  H.,  21 
Bologna,  Univ.  of,  272 
Bombay,  India,  312,  351 
BOMEX.  See  Barbados  Oceanographic  and 
Meteorological  Experiment. 
Bonn,  W.  Germany,  37,  48,  55,  177 
Bonny  (space  monkey),  190,  200,  201- 
202,  347-349,  415,  421 
T h e   Book  of  Mars,  89 
Boosted  Arcas  I1  (sounding  rocket),  28, 
331 
Booth,  William,  2 
Booz-Allen  Applied  Research,  Inc.,  335 
Bordeau,  Robert  E.,  346 
Bordeaux,  France,  297-298 
Boreas  (E s r o   I B )   (satellite),  323,  391, 
423 
Bo;;&, 
John  G.,  346 
Borman, Col.  Frank  (U SAF ) ,   71,  229,  274, 
337.  343.  347.  362.  380 
Apo l lo   8  mission,  6-7,  32,  34,  39,  68, 
71,  268 
appointment,  131 
awards  and  honors,  2,  6-7,  9,  10,  39, 
68,  87,  100-101,  132,  136,  203,  298, 
346,  387,  390-391 

484 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

goodwill  tour,  32,  37,  38,  41,  46,  48, 
49,  51,  52,  53-54 
moon,  exploration  of,  102 
political  aspirations,  168,  380 
press  conference,  7,  41,  53-54,  158- 
159,  196,  204 
receptions  for,  9,  10,  13 
space,  exploration  of,  158-159 
visit  to   Czechoslovakia.  136.  155 
visit  t o   U.S.S.R., 
195-196,’  197,  199, 
202,  204,  210,  211,  245,  337 
White  House  activities,  6,  32,  56-57, 
230,  232 
Boston,  Mass.,  29,  105,  112,  363,  416 
Boulder,  Colo.,  90,  259,  336 
bps:  bits  per  second 
Bradley  International  Airport,  263 
Bramley,  Eric,  136 
Branscomb,  Dr.  Lewis  M.,  416 
Brantford,  Canada,  234 
Bray,  Rep.  William  G.,  253 
Brayton  Cycle  space  power  generator,  58 
Brazil,  175,  179,  186,  234,  423424  
Brett,  Dr.  Robin  P.,  400 
Brevard  County,  Fla.,  197,  210,  225 
Brewster,  Wash.,  179 
Breuhnev,  Leonid  I.,  23,  127,  129,  251, 
349-350 
T h e   Brick Moon  (nove l) ,   357 
Bright,  Loren  G.,  332 
Bristol,  U.K.,  105 
British  Aircraft  Corp.,  61,  105,  285,  340 
British  Broadcasting  Corp.  (BBC) , 225 
British  Ex terna l   Telecommunication  Ex- 
ecutive,  32 
British  Interplanetary  Society,  187 
Bromine,  128 
Bronk,  Dr.  Detlev  W.,  1-2 
Brooke,  Sen.  Edward  W.,  183,  332 
Brooks,  Harvey,  257 
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,  386 
Brown,  Arthur  W.,  129 
Brown,  Eileen,  385 
Brown,  Dr.  Harold,  355 
Brown,  Dr.  Herbert  C.,  418 
Brown,  Judge  John  R.,  283 
Brown  Univ.,  168 
Browne,  Secor  D.,  302 
Bruceton,  Pa.,  387 
Bruns,  Franklin  R.,  Jr.,  319 
Brussels,  Belgium,  37,  46, 55,  234,  312 
Bryson  Construction  Co.,  Inc.,  320 
Bucharest,  Romania,  261.  262 
Buchwald,  Art,  235 
Buckhorn,  Calif.,  174 
Buckingham  Palace,  U.K.,  335 
Budapest,  Hungary,  234 
Budget,  Bureau  of  (BOB), 5-6,  32,  108- 
109 
Buechner,  Dr.  Helmut  K.,  328 
Buenos  Aires,  Argentina,  312,  384 
Buffum.  Ronald  5..  260 
Buff um;  William -B . ,   242 
Bulgaria, 24,  229 
Bull,  Gifford,  345-346 

Bullpup  Cajun  (sounding  rocke t) ,   178 
Burcham,  Dr.  Donald  P.,  135 
Burcher,  Eugene  S., 138 
Bureau  of  Fisheries,  9 
Bureau  of  Sport  Fisheries  and   Wildlife, 
14 
Burke,  Rep.  J.  Herbert,  281 
Burlingame, A.  L., 365 
Bush,  Dr.  Vannevar,  184 
Butz,  J.  S.,  Jr.,  192, 419-420 
C 

trans- 

(military  cargo 
(Galaxy) 
C -5  
por t) ,   393,  411 
C-5A,  57,  212,  293,  411,  413 
contract,  17,  123-124,  128-129,  130, 
132,  138,  251,  380 
cost,  17,  107,  128-129,  138, 251,  281 
Par is   Air  Show,  162 
record,  151,  323 
static  test,  207 
test  flights,  57,  151,  283,  323,  421 
(Hercules) 
C-130 
(transport  a ircraf t) ,  
359 
C-141 
(military  transpor t) ,   293 
CAB.  See  Civil  Aeronautics  Board. 
California,  177,  291 
California  Air  Pollution  Board,  383 
California  Ins t i tu te   of  Technology  (Cal- 
Tech ) ,   117 
award,  338,  355 
(self-testingand-repairing)  , 
computer 
2911-299 
-. - 
galaxies,  discovery  of,  367 
~ 
Mariner  VI,  269,  282,  301 
Mariner  V I I .   265,  269-270,  301 
pulsar  signal  research,  121 
California  Museum  of  Science  and  Tech- 
nology,  123 
California,  Univ.  of,  42,  179,  238,  395 
Berkeley,  53,  72,  110,  167,  186,  261, 
301-302,  346,  365,  383 
Lawrence  Radiation  Laboratory,  53, 
i i n  
Lick- Observatory,  42,  237,  259,  261, 
285 
Los  Angeles  (UCLA),  174,  288,  348- 
349,  356,  408 
San  Diego,  8,  331-332,  403 
Santa  Barbara.  263.  416 
Calio,  Anthony  J., 347,  353 
Calle,  Paul,  202 
Cambridge,  Mass.,  405,  417,  418 
Cambridge,  U.K.,  359 
Cambridge  Univ.,  42,  312 
Camden,  N.J.,  54 
Camera,  77,  91,  116-117,  405 
Apo l lo   11 ,   201,  217 
Apo l lo   12,  334,  362,  376377 ,   386 
Essa  IX.  57-58 
Mariner’  VI,  55,  252,  253-254,  338 
Mariner  V U ,  252,  259,  338 
Cameron,  Dr.  Roy  E.,  159 

485  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Campbell,  Dr.  Malcolm  J.,  180 
Canada,  155,  3 9 9 4 0 0  
Avo110  11  reaction.  236.  240 
cdoperation,  30,  132,  393,  411,  417, 
423-424 
satellite,  30,  241,  423 
sounding  rocket  (see  also  Sounding 
rocket,  international  programs),  59, 
127,  312,  366, 4-24 
Canaveral Council of  Technical  Societies, 
83 
Canberra,  Australia,  34,  189,  292 
Cancer,  96 
Candau,  Dr.  M. G.,  254-255 
Cannon,  Berry  L.,  52,  57,  77,  188-189, 
316-317 
Canopus  (starT,  55,  92,  99,  117 
Cap  Pistol 
(astronaut  maneuvering 
un i t ) ,   239 
Cape  Canaveral,  Fla.,  180-181,  203-204, 
229.  242.  281.  393 
Cape ' Kennedy,'  Fla.  (see  also  Eastern 
Test  Range  and   Kennedy  Space 
Center),  228,  304,  398 
Apollo  11  launch,  183,  186,  204,  205- 
206.  224-226.  249 
name  controversy,  180-181,  203-204, 
229,  242,  281,  393 
Cape  Kennedy  Regional  Airport,  Fla., 
263 
Cape Keraudren,  Australia,  25,  43 
Cape  Parry,  Canada,  71  
Carbon  dioxide,  57,  128,  365,  408 
Carbon  suboxide,  3% 
Cardiff,  Wales,  134 
Cardiovascular  pressure  transducer,  128 
Carlos,  Prince  Juan   (Spa in) ,   330 
Carnarvon  Tracking  Station,  Australia, 
M 
Carnegie  Endowment  for  International 
Peace,  381,  393-394 
Carnegie  Institution  of  Washington,  341 
Carnegie  Southern  Observatory,  341 
Carpenter,  Cdr.  M. Scott  (USN ,   Ret.), 
21-22,  86,  134,  354 
Carpentier,  Dr.  William  R.,  245 
Carson,  Robert  K.,  3% 
Camwell  AFB,  Tex.,  331 
CAS.  See  Collision  avoidance  system. 
CAS.  See  Cooperative  Applications  Satel- 
lite. 
Case  Institute  of  Technology,  125,  304 
Case Western  Reserve  University,  319 
Caste1 Gondolfo,  Italy,  206,  225,  232,  242 
CAT.  See  Clear  a ir   turbulence. 
Catholic  Biblical Assn.  of  America,  390- 
391 
Catterson, Dr.  A.  Duane,  142 
Cayey,  Puerto  Rico,  27 
CBS  Laboratories, 102,  201 
CDDT.  See  Countdown  demonstration test. 
Ceausescu,  President  Nicolae 
(Ro- 
man ia) ,   261 
Centaur  (booster  upper  stage)  (see  a lso  

Atlaq-Centaur),  330,  355,  412 
Centaurus  (constellation),  256,  281 
Central America,  370 
Centralization  of  Federal  Science  A c -  
t i v i t i e s   (House  repor t) ,   161 
Cerberus  canal  (Mars), 262 
( U S N ) ,   16,  90, 
Cernan,  Cdr.  Eugene  A. 
108,  142-144,  152-153,  191,  267 
Cerro  Tololo,  Chile,  133-134 
Certificate  of  Appreciation  ( N A S A ) ,   347 
CF -6   (turbofan  engine),  212 
(helicopter), 
CH-54H  (Flying  Crane) 
35 
Chaban-Delmas, 
Premier 
Jacques 
(France) ,   330 
Chafee,  Secretary  of  the  Navy  John  H., 
4,  402 
Chaffee,  L /C d r   Roger  B. 
( U S N ) ,   228 
Chamant,  Jean,  162 
Chamberlain,  Dr.  Owen,  238 
Chambers,  Dr.  Alan  B.,  315 
Chamical,  Argentina, 304 
Chanute,  Octave,  Award,  73 
Chao,  Dr.  Edwin  C.  T.,  400 
Chapman, Dr.  Dean  R.,  200 
Chappell,  Rep.  William,  242 
Charles,  Robert  H.,  123-124 
(Apo l l o   10  C S M ) .   See 
Charlie  Brown  
Command  and   service  module. 
Charyk, Dr.  Joseph  V.,  137,  179 
Chayes,  Abram,  131 
Chicago  Executive  Club,  320 
Chicago,  Ill.,  24,  28,  34,  44,  263,  279, 
320,  380,  418 
Chicago,  Univ.  of,  121,  191,  397 
Childs,  Marquis,  154 
Chile,  234,  341 
China,  Communist,  234,  236,  388,  404 
missile  threat,  43,  80,  181 
nuclear  test,  181 
China,  Nationalist,  234 
Chlorine,  128 
Chrysler  Corp.,  117-118,  155 
Space  Div.,  49,  94,  101,  113,  123,  154 
Churchill  Research  Range,  Canada  (see 
also  Fort  Churchill,  Canada),  21,  23, 
31,  38,  4 1 4 2 ,  43,  48,  49,  51-52,  54,  58, 
72,  107,  113,  360 
Circadian  rhythms,  180 
Civil  Aeronautics Board  (CAB),  136, 244, 
302 
Civil  Air  Patrol,  49 
Clark,  Evert,  69 
Clark,  Adm.  Joseph  J.  (USN ,   Ret.),  380 
Clark,  Dr.  John  F.,  346 
Clark  Univ.,  Robert  Hutchings  Goddard 
Library,  147 
Clarke,  Arthur  C.,  39,  289 
Clarkson  College  of  Technology,  318 
Clayton,  James,  249 
Clear  a ir   turbuence  (CAT ) ,   417-418 
Clegg,  Dr.  P.  E.,  312 
Cleveland,  Ohio,  34 
Clifford,  Secretary  of  Defense  Clark  M., 
4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

132,  283, 

Clifton,  Dr.  H.  Edward,  51,  86,  110 
Cloudcroft,  N.  Mex.,  325 
CM.  SIX  Command  module. 
Coahuila,  MX., 299 
COAS.  See  Crewman  optical  alignment 
sight. 
Cochran,  John,  105 
Code,  Dr.  Arthur  D.,  99,  344 
Cohn,  Victor,  81-82,  136, 286 
College,  Alaska,  257 
Collier,  Robert  J.,  Trophy,  101, 
29.1 
Cojhis,  Michael,  4,14 
Apo l lo   11  mission,  4 0 1 4 0 2  
celebrations  for,  279-280,  282,  283, 
298,  300 
commemorative  medal,  275 
commemorative  stamp,  202,  273-274, 
289,  300 
Congress,  report  to,  307 
flight,  212-224,  277,  421 
lunar  landing,  277 
medical  aspects,  137,  156-157,  245, 
273 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  209, 
242 

press .conference,  198,  207, 
281,  362 
quarantine,  76,  141,  223,  247,  273, 
276 
record,  250-251 
significance  o f ,   277 
splashdown,  223 
TV  interview,  283-284 
appointment, 396,  408 
awards  and  honors,  233,  237,  251,  255, 
279-280,  327,  365,  403 
Canadian  visit,  312,  399400  
commemorative  stamp  ceremony,  289, 
300 
promotion,  245 
tribute  to,  228,  339-400 
White  House  visit.  362 
world  tour,  312,  319, -327,  330,  332, 
334,  335,  337,  341,  350,  351,  353, 
359,  360,  361-362 
Collins  Radio  Co.,  189 
Collision  avoidance,  aircraft,  70,  315- 
316,  319,  362,  369 
( C A S ) ,   air- 
Collision  avoidance  system 
craft,  315-316 
Cologne,  W.  Germany,  312 
Colombia,  226 
Colon  d e   Carvajal  y  Maroto,  Cristobal, 
52 
Colorado  Springs,  Colo.,  134,  170,  225 
Colorado,  Univ.  of,  5,  22,  34,  41,  72,  127, 
179,  189,  261,  298,  302,  314,  411 
.  Laboratory  for  Atmospheric  and  Space 
Physics,  316 
Columbia 
(Apo l l o   1 1 ) .   See  Command 
module. 
Columbia  Radiation  Laboratories,  71  

Columbia  Univ.,  71,  117,  174,  230,  250, 
273,  354-355,  403 
Columbus,  Christopher,  226,  330 
Columbus,  Diego,  52 
Comet,  359,  409 
Comet  (aircraft) , 162 
Command  and  Data  Acquisition 
(CDA )  
station  (E S SA ) ,   58 
Command  and   service  module  (CSM) 
Apo l lo   8 ,   7 
Apo l lo   9  (G um d r o p )   (CSM-104),  5, 
6 2 6 5 .   72 
Apo l lo   * lo  
(Cha r l ie   B rown )  
(CSM- 
1061,  16,  90,  108,  142-144,  159 
~ 
(CSM-107). 
Apo l lo   11 
(Co lumb ia )  
108,  212-218,  222,  255-256 
Apollo  12  ( Y a n k e e   C l i p p e r )   (CSM- 
1081,  372-376,  377,  389,  395 
contract,  70 
Command  module  ( C M )  
A D O ~ ~ O  
8.  7 
Apollo  9 ,  (G um d r o p )  , 5,  26-27,  62,  64, 
Apollo  9 ,  (G um d r o p )  , 5,  26-27,  62,  64, 
65,  81,  91-92 
65,  81,  91-92 
Apo l lo   10  (Cha r l ie  B r o w n ) ,  362 
Apo l lo   10  (Cha r l ie  B r o w n ) ,  362 
Apollo  11  ( C o l um b i a ) ,   141,  198-199, 
Apollo  11  ( C o l um b i a ) ,   141,  198-199, 
212,  222-223,  226,  388,  397 
212,  222-223,  226,  388,  397 
Apo l lo   12  ( Y a n k e e   C l i p p e r ) ,  333-334, 
Apo l lo   12  ( Y a n k e e   C l i p p e r ) ,  333-334, 
372-373,  377-378. 
372-373,  377-378. 
Commerce,  Dept.  of,  50,  88,  199,  402 
Commission  on  Federal  Reorganization, 
341 
Commission  on  Human  Rights 
(New 
York),  2 
Commission  on  Marine  Science,  Engi- 
neering  and  Resources,  9,  56 
Committee  on  Scientific  and  Technical 
Communication  (SATCOM)  , 174-175 
Committee  on  Space Research  (COSPAR )   , 
136-137 
Commonwealth  Club,  San  Francisco, 
259-260 
Commonwealth  Scientific  and  Industrial 
Research  Organization,  121 
Communications  b y   Sa te l l i te :   A n   Inter- 
national  Discussion,  381 
Communications  satellite  (see  also  indi- 
vidual  satellites:  Echo  I I ,   ln te l sa t   I ,  
In te l sa t - I l l   F-2,  Molniya  I-11,  etc.), 
140,  343 
benefits,  33,  37,  47,  137 
conference,  24,  88 
contract,  61,  66,  171,  241 
cooperation,  402 
international,  88,  117,  132,  157,  357, 
381,  393-394 
ground  station,  27,  61,  135,  137,  171 
launch 
failure,  245,  281,  385 
ln t e l sa t - I l l   F-3,  3 9 4 0 ,   151 
In te l sa t - l I I   F-4,  150-151 
In te l sa t - I l l   F-5,  245,  281,  385 
Molniya  I-11,  106 
Molniya  1-12,  237 
plans  for,  23,  114,  290-291 
(IDCSP-A)  , 388-389 
Skyne t   A  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Taccomsa t   I ,   44 
military,  44,  66,  131,  140,  322,  346, 
388-389,  422 
rates,  30 
use  of,  18,  47,  61,  75,  111,  137,  140, 
202.  253.  257.  286.  340341 .   402 
U S .   policy,  253,  352 
Communications Satellite Act  of  1%2,  53  
Communications  Satellite  Corp. 
(Com- 
SatCorp),  290 
Annual  Meetlng  of  Shareholders,  137 
Apo l lo   11  TV  coverage,  225-226,  244- 
245,  276 
A t lan t ic   11.  S e e   Intelsat-11  F-3. 
contract,  171 
cooperation,  179 
Ear ly   B i rd .   See  In te lsa t   I .  
FCC  regulation,  30,  352 
ground  station,  61,  137,  171 
INTELSAT,  101-102 
In te lsa t   I  (E a r l y   B i r d ) ,   61,  137,  191, 
259,  286 
Intelsat-11  F-3 
( In te l sa t   11-C;  A t lan-  
t ic   I I ) ,   191,  259 
Intelsat-I11  F-1,  40,  135,  151 
In te l sa t - I l l   F-2,  23,  30,  40,  61,  151, 
191,  245,  259,  276,  286,  340-341 
Intelsat-111 F-3,  39-44),  137,  140,  151, 
421 
Intelsat-111 F 4 ,  140,  150-151,  276,  421 
In te l sa t - I l l   F-5,  245,  281,  385,  421 
Intelsat  IV,  114 
rates,  30 
revenues,  54,  61,  231,  340-341 
sate!lite  program,  114,  137 
services,  18,  50,  137,  179,  244-245, 
276,  286,  340-341 
Computer,  71,  87,  139,  174,  177,  203, 
204-205,  290,  298-299,  322,  334-335, 
350,  362 
Computer  Sciences  Corp.,  48,  203 
ComSatCorp.  See  Communications  Satel- 
lite  Corp. 
Concorde  (U.K.-France  supersonic  trans- 
po r t ) ,   13-14,  26,  146,  197,  255,  413 
flights,  61,  71,  105,  162,  173,  285,  323, 
329,  340 
Condon,  Dr.  Edward  U.,  5,  8,  20,  50,  288 
Cone,  Clarence  D.,  Jr.,  96- 
Congress,  47-48,  68,  210,  232,  311,  314- 
315,  341,  361,  411 
Apo l lo   8 mission,  7 
Apo l lo   11   mission,  186,  207,  279-280, 
307,  312-313 
ComSatCorp  report  to,  61  
Defense,  Dept.  of,  99,  104,  123-124, 
178 
Federal  Aviation  Administration,  156 
NASA’s Tw en t i e th   Semiannual  Repor t  
to,  372 
President’s  messages 
airports,  182 
budget,  14-15,  107 
S ta te   of  the   Un ion ,   13 
Science,  Secretary of  (proposed),  3 

 

space  program,  51,  80,  81-82,  95,  104, 
1%.  294 
Conge& ,  House  of  Representatives,  108- 
109,  114,  124,  169,  186,  224,  238, 
270,  307,  332,  361,  3 8 1 4 8 2  
bills  introduced.  2.  18.  52.  53.  113.  138. 
,
.
202,  242,  2&,  253,‘309,  & 
bills  passed,  53,  176,  186,  307,  312, 
330,  363,  383,  404,  412,  414 
Committee  on  Appropriations,  184, 
369,  372,  383 
Committee  on  Armed  Services,  39,  99 
Committee  on  House  Administration, 
245 
Committee  on  Interstate  and  Foreign 
Commerce,  40,  253 
Committee  on  Judiyiary,  202 
Committee  on  Science  and  Astro- 
nautics,  18,  66-67,  69,  70,  113, 
115,  117,  147,  245,  257,  275-276, 
284,  317 
Subcommittee  on  Advanced  Re- 
search  and  Technology,  76,  84,  92, 
400.  404 
Subcommittee  on  Manned  Space 
Flight,  71,  73-74,  91  
Subcommittee  on  NASA   Oversight, 
202,  276-277 
Subcommittee  on  Science,  Research, 
and  Development,  5 2 5 3 ,   161,  255 
Subcommittee  on  Space  Science  and 
Applications,  74,  76,  78,  84-86, 
118.  162.  336-337.  371.  415 
Congress,  Senate,  57,  78,  103,  131,  186, 
224,  276,  281,  309,  312,  332,  361, 
363,  369,  381-382,  383,  390.  406.  412 
bills  introdiced,  22,  26,  29,  118,  150, 
183,  330,  383,  404 
bills  passed,  13,  246,  255,  308,  312, 
361,  365,  369,  383,  410,  412 
Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space 
Sciences,  13,  79-80,  312 
NASA  budget,  24,  118,  186-187,  270, 
311 
testimony,  119-120,  123,  127,  130, 
131,  134,  160,  266 
Paine,  Dr.  Thomas  O.,  letter  to,  390, 
4 1 1 4 1 2  
Paine,  Dr.  Thomas  O.,  nomination, 
79-80 
Committee  on  Appropriations,  135, 
363-364,  369,  410 
Committee  on  Armed  Services,  86, 
111-112,  330 
Committee  on  Banking  and  Currency, 
115,  251 
Committee  on  Commerce,  133,  150 
Subcommittee  on  Aviation,  88-89 
Committee  on  Foreign  Relations,  22, 
53,  57,  383 
Committee  on  Government  Operations, 
312 
Committee  on  Interior  and  Insular  Af-  
fairs,  203-204,  393 

488 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS, 

1969 

Committee  on  Labor  and   Public  Wel- 
fare,  42 
Committee  on  Rules  and   Adrninistra- 
tion,  404 
Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy, 
354 
nominations  approved  and  confirmed, 
43,79-80,  87,  118, 130,  184, 395,  408 
nominations submitted  to,  91,  141,  180, 
371 
resolution,  133,  203-204,  229 
Congressional Medal  of  Honor,  2 
Congressional  Space  Medals  of  Honor, 
307,  308,  319 
Conklin,  Dr.  Edward  K.,  175 
Come r ,   Dr.  J.  P.,  281-282 
Conrad,  Capt.  Charles  (P e t e ) ,   Jr.  (u sN )  
Apo l lo   12   mission 
extravehicular activity,  333-334,  342, 
372,  376-377,  386-387,  394,  395 
flight,  372-378 
lunar  landing,  375-376,  385,  386-387 
medical  examination,  366 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  371, 
392 
plans  for,  105,  342,  353,  365,  366, 
368,  371-372 
press  conference,  333-334,  406-407 
quarantine,  356,  377-378,  396,  397, 
455 
splashdown, 377-378 
fund-raising  dinner,  408 
promotion,  391,  392 
White  House  visit,  413 
Constan,  Dr.  George  N.,  256,  260 
Contact:  The   S to ry   o f   the  Early  B i rd s ,  52 
Contract  (see  also  under  agencies,  such 
a s   NASA,  U S A F ) ,   25 
cost-plus-award-fee, 30,  59,  196,  292, 
293,  385-386 
cost-plus-fixed-fee,  1,  38,  85,  87-88, 
154 
cost-dus-fixed-fee/award-fee.  297.  351 
cost-plus-incentive-fee, 150,‘  160,’  191, 
320,  353,  355 
fixed-price,  14,  32-33,  48,  401,  402- 
403,  414 
fixed-price-incentive-fee, 71,  212 
study,  25-26,  46,  47,  94,  105,  111,  120, 
128,  241,  270,  280,  335,  340,  451 
Control  Data  Corp.,  Melville  Space  and 
Defense  Svstems  Div..  388 
Convair 
( G d i l e o )   (je;  a ircraf t) ,   133, 
393,  417,  4 2 3 4 2 4  
Convention  of  CooDeration  for  the  Se- 
curity  of  Air  Navigation,  148 
Convocation  on  Ecology  and  the  Human 
Environment,  132 
Cook,  Richard  W.,  347,  360 
Cooke,  H.  Lester, 403 
Cooke, W.  J.,  164 
Coons,  Roy  G.,  266-267 
Cooper,  Col.  L.  Gordon  ( U S A F ) ,   326 
Cooperative  Applications Satellite  ( C A S ) ,  
86 

Copernicus  (moon  cra ter) ,   253 
Copernicus,  Nicolaus,  300 
Cornell  Aeronautical  Laboratory,  2,  42. 
345-346 
Cornell  Medical  Center,  362-363 
Cornell  Univ.,  114,  121,  180,  299,  317, 
339,  350,  352 
Coronagraph, 127 
Corporation for  Public  Broadcasting, 402 
Cortright,  Edgar  M.,  21 
Cosmic  ray,  29,  134-135,  177,  187,  3 3 4  
395 
Cosmic  Ray  Ionization Program  (CR I SP ) ,  
363 
Cosmonaut,  41,  48,  249,  365-366 
Apo l lo   10  mission  message,  158 
Apo l lo   1  I  mission  message,  244 
astronauts,  meeting  with,  168,  195- 
196,  197,  199 
awards  and  honors,  23-24,  39,  349-350 
film,  104 
interview,  25,  159-160,  372,  387-388 
medals  placed  on  moon,  228,  230 
Soyuz  IV  mission,  11-12,  23-24,  332, 
422 
so yu z   v   mission,  11-12,  23-24,  332, 
422 
Soyuz  V I   mission,  332-333,  336,  341- 
342,  343,  349-350,  361,  365-366,  382, 
420.  422 
S o y u i   V I 1  mission,  333,  336,  341-342, 
343,  349-350,  361,  365-366,  420,  422 
Soruz  VI11 mission.  333,  336.  34J-342. 
space’cooperatibn, 196,  325,  351  ‘ 
US. visit,  337,  343,  347,  350,  351,  352, 
354,  359,  362.  387-388 
Cosmos  (U.S.S.R.’  sa te l l i te) ,   422 
Cosmos  CCLX I I I ,   9 
Cosmos  CCLX IV ,   24 
Cosmos  CCLXV ,   43 
Cosmos  CCLXV I ,   56 
Cosmos  CCLXV I I ,   58 
Cosmos  CCLXV I I I ,   67 
Cosmos  CCLX IX ,   67 
Cosmos  C C L X X ,   70 
Cosmos  CCLXX I ,   80-81 
Cosmos  C C L X X l l ,   82 
Cosmos  CCLXX I I I ,   89 
Cosmos  CCLXX IV ,   90 
Cosmos  C C L X X V ,   94 
Cosmos  CCLXXV I ,   101 
Cosmos  CCLXXV I I ,   101 
Cosmos  CCLXXV I I I ,   105 
co sm o s   CCLXX IX ,   109 
Cosmos  C C L X X X ,   116 
Cosmos  CCLXXX I ,   137 
co sm o s   CCLXXX I I ,   148 
Cosmos  c c L x X X 1 1 1 ,   158 
Cosmos  CCLXXX IV ,   160 
co sm o s   C C L X X X Y ,   169 
Cosmos  CCLXXV I ,   181 
Cosmos  CCLXXXV I I ,   186 
Cosmos  CCLXXXV I I I ,   189 
Cosmos  CCLXXX IX ,   203 

489 

Cosmos  CCXC ,   237 
Cosmos  GCXC I ,  267 
Cosmos  CCXCII ,   281 
cosmos  c c x c 1 1 1 ,   283 
Cosmos  C C X C N ,   285 ,   291 
Cosmos  CCXCV ,  287 
Cosmos  CCXCV I ,   293 
Cosmos  CCXCV I I ,   29T 
Cosmos  C C X C V M ,   305-306 
Cosmos  CCXC IX ,   309 
Cosmos  CCC,  314 
Cosmos  CCCI,  316 
Cosmos  CCCII ,   339 
Cosmos  CCCIII,  341 
Cosmos  CCCIV ,   346 
Cosmos  CCCV ,   347 
Cosmos  CCCV I ,  350-351 
Cosmos  CCCVII ,   350-351 
Cosmos  CCCVIII ,   360 
Cosmos  CCC IX ,   370 
Cosmos  CCCX ,   380 
Cosmos  CCCXI ,   392 
Cosmos CCCX I I ,  392 
Cosmos  CCCXIII ,   401 
Cosmos  CCCX IV ,   405 
cosmos  CCCXV ,   413 
Cosmos  CCCXV I ,   414 
cosmos  CCCXV I I ,   414 
COSPAR. See  Committee  on  Space  Re- 
search. 
Council  of  Economic  Advisers,  3 
Countdown  Apollo  (US. Paris  Air  Show 
theme) ,   161-162 
(CDDT )   , 
Countdown  demonstration  test 
108,  118,  182,  195,  350,  351,  353 
Covington,  Ozro  M.,  117,  346 
Cox,  Gardner,  323 
Crab  Nebula,  16-17,  42,  71,  78,  118,  164, 
350,  404 
Cracow,  Poland,  233 
Creason,  R.  L.,  57 
Crewman 
optical 
( C O A S ) ,   64  
Crews,  L/C Albert  H.  ( U S A F ) ,   281 
Crichton,  Michael,  181 
Crimea,  U.S.S.R.,  195 
Crippen,  L /Cd r   Robert  L. 
( U S N ) ,   281 
CRISP.  See  Cosmic  Ray  Ionization  Pro- 
gram. 
Cromley,  Ray  (Raymond  Avolon) , 298 
Crossfield,  A.  Scott,  29 
Crooker,  John  H.,  302 
Crowley,  Mrs.  Peggy,  46 
CSM.  See  Command  and  service  module. 
Cuba,  51,  234 
Cudaback,  Dr.  David,  383 
Cunningham,  R.  Walter,  21,  72-73,  105 
Curtiss-Wright Corp.,  239 
Cyanogen,  139-144) 
Czechoslovak  Academy  of  Sciences,  136 
Czechoslovakia,  155,  233,  249,  251,  335 
Czechoslovakian  Communist  Party,  242 

alignment 

Dacca,  East  Pakistan,  312,  353 
Daddario,  Rep.  EmiIio  Q.,  114 
Dade  County,  Fla.,  9 
Dai  Chi  Chinei  (Japanese  fre igh ter) ,  
1 98 
D&i,  Mayor  Richard  J.,  279 
Dallas,  Tex.,  2-3,  372 
Dana,  William  H.,  117,  148,  240,  297, 
381,  406 
Daniel  and  Florence  Guggenheim  Inter- 
national  Astronautics  Award,  287 
Daniel  Guggenheim  Fund  for  the   Pro- 
motion  of  Aeronautics, 226 
Darwin,  Australia,  312 
Davies,  Merton  E.,  282 
Day,  LeRoy  E.,  131,  336,  354 
Day,  Melvin  S.,  135 
Dayton,  Ohio,  138 
DC -8   ( j e t   transport),  88,  382 
DC-10 
( j e t   transport),  212,  341 
Dearborn,  Mich.,  197 
“Debrief:  Apollo  8” (color  film),  8 
Debus,  Dr.  Kurt  H.,  10,  122,  274,  289, 
9 -7  a1 I 
Deception  Island,  Antarctica,  159 
Deep  Quest  (research  submarine),  330 
Deep  Space  Network 
( D S N ) ,   34,  180, 
189,  274-275,  346 
Deep  Submergence  Rescue  Vehicle,  112 
Deep  submergence  research  vehicle,  27 
Defence  Research  Board 
(Can- 
( D R B )  
a d a ) ,   41 
Defense  Communications  Agency,  353 
(see  also  U.S. 
Defense,  Dept.  of 
(DOD )  
Air  Force,  US. Army,  and   US. 
Navy),  5,  116,  316-317 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency, 
119,  346,  424 
aircraft,  4,  11,  15,  35,  39,  86,  99, 
106,  107,  111-112,  115,  123-124, 
128-129,  130,  131,  135,  151,  155, 
183,  201,  251,  260,  283,  293,  319, 
320-321,  354,  372,  379,  389490 ,  
417-418,  424 
anniversary, 59 
award,  99-100,  101,  346 
budget,  14-15,  42,  86,  99,  107,  109- 
110,  131,  178,  181,  193, 354,  410,  412 
communications  satellite  system,  131, 
319,  345,  385,  388-389 
contract,  48,  123-124,  130,  135,  136, 
201,  251,  330,  372,  386,  408 
cooperation, 88,  399,  417-418 
NASA,  11,  34,  38,  58-59,  86-87,  88, 
119,  151-152,  153,  176-177,  200, 
317,  345,  368,  379,  388-389,  417- 
418,  421,  422,  423 
cooperation,  international,  388-389 
facilities.  43  
missile  program,  10,  15,  33,  39,  43,  46- 
47,  53,  80,  81,  89,  103,  112,  124, 
131,  136,  183,  190-191,  229,  320-321 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
D 

sight 

490 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

(DPS )  , 64, 

MOL,  15,  21,  86-87,  110,  151-152,  176- 
177.  178.  181.  200.  260.  281.  289.  423 
personnel,'4,  119,  i93,  '251,'285,'  346 
R&D,  11,  14,  15,  a, 67,  88,  106, 
124.  136,  164.  257.  330,  345.  363, 
space  program,  15,  59,  86-87,  131, 
151-152, 
164,  167,  176-177,  193, 
200.  304-305.  319.  345.  388-389. 
4191-420,  421,  '422,  423 
Defense  Satellite  Communications  Sys- 
tem  (D SC S ) ,   66,  131 
De  Florez  Training  Award,  345-346 
De  Gaulle,  President  Charles  (F rance ) ,  
41 
Deiiruck,  Dr.  Max,  338 
Delphi,  Greece,  187 
Delta  (booster)  (see  also  Thor-Delta), 
135,  385,  421 
Dembling,  Dr.  Pau l   G.,  300-301 
Denebola  ( s t a r ) ,  79 
Denmark,  323 
DeNoyer,  Dr.  John  M.,  403 
Denver,  Colo.,  75,  183,  288 
de  Seversky,  Alexander  P.,  412 
Des  Moines,  Iowa,  243,  385 
Descartes  (moon).  377 
Descent  propulsidn  system 
143,  213,  375 
Detroit,  Mich.,  337 
Dewart,  Prof.  Leslie,  39 
Diaz Ordaz,  President  Gustavo  (Mexico), 
299 
DGhton,  Ralph,  185 
Dirksen,  Sen.  Everett  M.,  246,  271,  312 
Disarmament,  13,  21,  30,  33,  67,  81,  86, 
131,  155,  174,  181,  183,  190-191,  197, 
xi!? 
Discoverer  I  (satellite),  59 
Disney,  M.  J.,  164 
Disneyland,  Calif.,  351 
Distinguished  Public  Service  Award 
( U S N ) ,   138 
Distinguished  Public  Service  Certificate 
(NASA ) ,  326 
Distinguished  Public  Service  Medal 
( N A S A ) ,   154,  347 
Distinguished  Service  Medal  (USAF )  , 300 
Distinguished  Service  Medal  ( N A S A ) ,   10, 
13,  91,  101,  154,  280,  287,  326,  346- 
347 _ _ .  
lunar 
DLRV.  See  Dual-mode 
vehicle. 
Dobbins  AFB,  Ga.,  80, 151 
Dobrynin,  Ambassador  Anatoly  F.,  206 
Docking,  83 
Apollo  9,  62,  64 
Apollo  11,  212,  222,  421 
Apollo  12,  373,  377 
Soyuz  l V   and   Soyuz  V,  11-12,  19,  120 
Dodd,  Lamar,  226,  403 
Dodd,  Sen.  Thomas  J.,  184 
Doiguchi,  Shizuo,  362 
Dole,  Sen.  Robert  J.,  404 
Donnelly,  Dixon,  3% 

roving 

Doolittle,  L / G   James H.  (USAF,  Ret.),  304 
DOT. See  Transportation,  Dept.  of. 
Douglas  Aircraft  Co.,  209 
Downey,  Calif.,  388 
Downey,  James A.,  III, 326 
Downs,  Dr.  George  S.,  56 
Doyle,  Frederick  J.,  409 
DPS.  See  Descent  propulsion  system. 
Drake,  Dr.  Frank  D.,  121 
Draper,  Dr.  Charles  Stark,  338,  369,  416, 
420 
D& r see   Defence  Research  Board  (Can- 
ad a ) .  
Dryden,  Dr.  Hugh  L.,  184,  289 
Dryden,  Hugh  L.,  Memorial  Fellowship, 
68-69 
DSCS.  See  Defense  Satellite  Communica- 
tions  System. 
DSN.  See  Deep  Space  Network. 
Dual-mode  lunar  roving  vehicle  (D LRV ) ,  
111 
Dublin,  Ireland,  121 
Dubridge,  Dr.  Lee  A.,  54,  355 
ABM  System,  83  
appointment,  42,  43 
basic  research,  52-53,  68,  297 
international  cooperation,  78,  304,  308, 
316 
press  conference,  49-50,  316 
science,  political  aspects  of,  42,  122, 
297 
space  program,  national,  6,  17-18,  38, 
49-50,  5 2 5 3 ,   68,  78,  82,  134,  197- 
198,  308 
Dudley  Observatory  (Albany,  N.Y.)  , 159, 
279,  287,  402 
Duff,  Brian  M.,  115-116 
Duke,  Capt.  Charles  M.,  Jr.  (U SAF ) ,   267 
Duke  Univ.,  19,  109 
Dulles  International  Airport,  Va.,  89,  283 
Dusterberry,  John  C.,  362 
Dyer,  John  W.,  348 

E 

(A p o l l o   11  L M ) .   See  Lunar 
Eagle 
module. 
Eaker,  L / G   I r a   C.  (USAF,  Ret.),  191 
Early  Apollo  scientific  experiment  pack- 
age  (EASEP ) ,   230 
Early  Bird  (communications  satellite). 
See  Intelsat  I. 
Earth  (see  also  Earth  Resources  Tech- 
nology  Satellite),  20,  49,  76,  136, 
158,  198,  394 
crust,  360 
magnetic  field,  171-173,  177,  185 
magnetosphere,  115,  185,  257,  291,  316 
mapping,  124,  173 
motion.  175 
photographs  of,  59,  62-63,  64,  81,  90, 
116-117,  143,  149,  222,  232,  304, 
328,  346,  4 0 6 4 7  

491 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

resources  measurement,  37,  62-63,  75, 
85,  100,  116-117,  245,  276,  304,  308, 
420-421 
shape,  83 
f r o m   Gem in i   V I  
Ear th   Photographs 
Through   X I 1   (NASA  SP-171),  304 
Ear th   Resources  Technology  Satellite 
(ERTS)  program,  85,  139,  156,  157, 
245 
benefits,  33,  37,  119-120,  162,  276 
contract,  151,  340 
cost,  162,  337 
funds  for,  15,  66,  69,  138,  164 
international  cooperation, 310,  416 
EASEP.  See  Early Apollo  scientific experi- 
ment  package. 
Eastern  Airlines, Inc.,  29,  336,  346 
Eastern  Test  Range 
(see  also 
(ETR )  
Cape  Kennedy  and  Kennedy  Space 
Center),  launch,  23 
Apo l lo   9  (AS--504),  33,  62 
Ap0110  10  (AS-5051,  90,  142 
ApoZZo  1 1   (AS-506),  212 
Apo l lo   12  (AS-507),  372-373 
Atlas-Agena,  106 
Atlas-Centaur, 55,  92,  277 
failure,  245,  291 
LongTank   Thrust-Augmented  Thor- 
Delta,  40,  150,  189-190,  245,  388 
Thor-Delta,  22 
Thor-Delta  N,  272 
Thrust-Augmented 
29 1 
Thrust-Augmented  Thor-Delta,  57 
Titan  IIIC,  44, 155 
Echo  I 
(communications  satellite),  405 
Echo  11,  175, 405 
Eclipse,  solar,  395 
Edison,  Thomas  A.,  Memorial  Lecture, 
74 
EDP  Technology,  Inc.,  2 
Edwards  AFB ,   Calif.,  38,  177,  205,  315, 
323.  405 
Edwards,  S ir   George,  340 
Eglin  AFB,  Fla.,  186 
Egrs  XI11  (S e co r  X I I Z )   (Seauential  Col- 
l a t ion   of  Range  satellite) ,*107, 422 
Egypt.  See  United  Arab  Republic. 
Eiffel  Tower,  41 
Einhorn,  Raymond,  393 
Einstein,  Prof.  Albert,  182,  300 
Eisele,  L / C   Donn  F.  ( U S A F ) ,   21,  72-73 
Eisenhower,  President  Dwight  D.,  47, 
60,  196,  405 
Eisenhower,  Mrs.  Dwight  D.,  280 
El  Segundo, Calif.,  304 
ELDO.  See  European  Launcher  Develop- 
ment  Organization. 
ELDO  F - 8   (ELDO  satellite),  196 
Electric  propulsion,  337-338,  342 
Electron  microscope,  397 
Electronics  Research  Center 
( N A S A ) ,   128 
aeronautical  research,  70,  263,  400 
appropriations, 113,  383 

Improved  Delta, 

(ERC )  

closing,  417,  418,  423 
Elizabeth  11,  Queen  of  Great  Britain, 
38.  233.  335 
Elk  expeiiment,  328 
Ellice  Island,  239 
Ellington  AFB,  Tex.,  5,  103.  182,  283,  397 
Ellineton.  Duke.  233 
_ _  
Elms,  J&es  C.:  139,  400 
Emme,  Dr.  Eugene M.,  196,  357 
Emmerton, Bill,  183 
Engine 
(see  also  individual  engines, 
snch  as  F-1.  H-1) 
airciaft,  19,  34,  35,’  342,  402 
jet,  25,  32-33,  176, 212,  371,  393,  413 
aollution  bv,  278-279.  413 
Quiet  Engine  Research  Program,  25, 
32-33,  212 
supersonic  transport,  17,  173,  323, 
329,  413 
turbofan,  45-46,  212,  304,  393 
electric,  17,  134,  342 
nuclear  (see  also  N E R V A ) ,   28,  190 
rocket,  70,  79,  101,  104,  105,  162,  185, 
327-328,  379,  417 
fire,  195 
test,  104 
Engineering,  1, 97 
Th e   Engineering  P ro f e s s ion :   A  New  
Prof i le ,   97 
Engineers, 97,  99,  179,  193,  257,  351,  398 
Engineers  Joint  Council,  97 
England,  Dr.  Anthony  W.,  330 
Engle,  Capt.  Joseph  H.  ( U S A F ) ,   267 
Environmental  Science  Services  Admin- 
istration  (ESSA )  
budget,  14,  15 
Command  and  Data  Acquisition  sta- 
tion.  58 
cooperation, 9,  402,  414,  417 
personnel,  259 
satellite.  15.  88.  205.  343-344.  353, 
414,  42 i  
’ 
launch,  57-58,  107 
Space  Disturbance  Center,  90,  336 
weather  modification,  402 
epndh:  effective  perceived  noise  in   deci- 
bels 
Equal  Employment  Opportunity  Commis- 
sioh,  77 
Erb,  Bryan  R.,  353 
Erba,  Carlo,  Foundation,  340 
ERC.  See  Electronics Research  Center. 
ERTS.  See  Earth  Resources  Technology 
Satellite  program. 
(Ear th   Resources  Technology 
ERTS-A 
Sa te l l i te) ,   66,  85,  151 
ERTS-B,  66,  85 
Escape  system,  94 
ESRO.  See  European  Space  Research  Or- 
ganization. 
Esro  IB.  See  Boreas. 
Esro  I IA   (ESRO  satellite),  323 
Esro  I IB .   See  Iris  1. 
ESSA.  See Environmental Science Services 
Administration. 

492 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Essu  V I 1   (meteorological  satellite),  58 
Essa  I X   (TOS-C),  57-58,  421 
Ethiopia,  205,  251 
ETR.  See  Eastern  Test  Range. 
Eupatoria,  U.S.S.R.,  199 
Eureka,  Calif.,  352 
Eurocontrol,  148 
Europa  (booster),  1% 
Europe  (see  also  International  coopera- 
tion  and  
International  cooperation, 
space),  74,  135,  137,  140,  262,  370 
European  Launcher  Development  Organ- 
ization  (ELDO ) ,  114,  196,  357 
European  Space  Research  and  Tech- 
nology  Center,  290 
European  Space  Research  Organization 
(ESRO ) ,  357,  360 
launch,  satellite 
Bo rem   (E s ro   I B ) ,  323,  391,  423 
satellite,  82,  290 
Heos  I ,   82 
ESRO  IIA,  323 
Iris  I  (E s ro   I I B ) ,   323 
EUY.  See  Ultraviolet,  extreme. 
EVA.  See  Extravehicular  activitv. 
Evans,  Albert  J.,  84 
Evans,  Dr.  Joh  
n  W.,  419 
rn  J.,  92,  262 
Evans,  LlewellJ 
Ronald  E.  ( U S N ) .   267 
Evans.  L /Cd r  
Evans;  Rowland,  284 
Evans,  Dr.  W.  D.,  281 
Ewing,  Dr.  Maurice,  230 
Exceptional  Bravery  Medal  ( N A S A ) ,   347 
Exceptional  Civilian  Service  Award 
(USA),  256 
Exceptional 
Achievement 
Scientific 
Medal  (NASA ) ,  10,  13,  326,  347 
Exceptional  Service  Award  (U SA F )   , 304, 
412 
Exceptional  Service  Medal  (NA SA ) ,  91, 
326,  347 
Exhibit,  52,  161-162,  173,  226,  283,  309, 
313,  400,  403,  405-406,  410,  412,  417 
Expanded  U s e   of  Federal  Research  Fu- 
cilities  by  Un ive r s i ty   Investigators  ( re -  
po r t ) ,   56 
Experiment  module,  128  , 
Experimentoy  Corp.,  159 
Explorer  (program),  50,  138,  360,  364, 
366-367,  405 
Explorer  I  (satellite),  38,  77 
Explorer  V U ,  417 
Explorer  V I I I ,   417 
Explorer  X I ,   417 
Explorer  X X X I ,   30 
Explorer  X X X l l l   (IMP-D) , 185 
Explorer  X X X I V   (IMP-F),  129 
Explorer  X X X V   (IMP-E),  185,  340 
Explorer  X X X V l l I  
(Radio  Astronomy 
Explorer  RAE-A), 115,  335 
Explorer  X L I   ( IM P -G ) ,  185,  395,  421 
Explorers  Club,  2 
Expo  70,  417 
Extraterrestrial  life,  152,  200,  289 
Mars,  55,  90,  92,  103,  184-185,  271, 
302 

moon,  261,  270 
Venus,  103 
Extraterrestrial  Research  Agency  (USA ) ,  
398 
Extravehicular  activity  (EVA ) ,  331  
Apo l lo   9,  5,  33,  62,  64,  81,  9 1  
Apo l lo   11 ,   74,  108,  182,  198,  208,  212, 
217-220,  223,  243,  255,  274 
Apollo  12,  243,  325,  334,  342,  376-377, 
39s 
Apolio  13,  267 
Apollo  14,  267 
Eyewitness 
to  Space 
gram),  226,  241,  403 

(NASA   a r t   pro- 

F 

F-1  (rocket  engine),  79,  105,  162,  185, 
417 
F i - .  (Phantom  11) 
(fighter  a i rc ra f t ) ,  
129,  201 
F 4 E ,  9 
F-8 
(ELDO spacecraft),  196 
F-8  (supersonic  carrier  fighter),  44,  155 
F-8B,  9 1  
F-8C,  9 1  
F-14A 
(supersonic  fighter  a i rc ra f t ) ,   13, 
15,  39,  131 
F-15  (fighter  a i rc ra f t ) ,   15,  169 
F-15A,  131 
F-106  (research  je t   a i rc ra f t ) ,   155 
(supersonic  fighter),  135,  164, 
F-111 
283.  372 
F - l l lA ,   49,  52,  123,  155,  413,  415-416 
F-UlB,  15,  39 
FAA.  See  Federal  Aviation  Administra- 
tion. 
Fabiola,  Queen  of  Belgium,  46 
Faget,  Dr.  Maxime  A.,  289,  345 
Fairbanks,  Alaska,  58,  83 
Falstaff  (U.K.  rocket),  323 
Fancher.  Has.  297-298 
Farmer,'Dr.  C.  B.,  90 
Fasi,  Mayor  Frank  E'.,  247 
Fastie,  William  G..  359 
FB-111  (supersonic  bomber),  86 
FB - I l lA ,   331 
FCC.  See  Federal  Communications  Com- 
mission. 
Federal-aid  Airport  Program,  156 
Federal  Air-Sea 
Interaction  Research 
Program,  88 
Federal  Airport  Act,  156 
Federal  Aviation  Administration 
accident  investigation,  19 
air  pollution,  402 
air  trafEc  control,  15,  19,  34,  4344 ,  
55,  57,  148,  156,  188,  253,  315-316, 
319,  388,  418 
airports,  57,  117,  123,  156,  176 
antihijacking  system,  336 
award,  54,  123,  127,  178,  410 
budget,  15,  398 

( FAA )  

493 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

contract,  25,  46, 55,  89,  388,  391 
cooperation,  315 
forecast.  70 
landing  system,  89 
noise,  aircraft,  3,  25,  32,  46,  371,  391 
personnel,  58,  123,  141 
regulations,  3,  9,  19,  32,  43-44,  57, 
138439 ,   188,  371,  402,  418 
transport,  supersonic  (see  also  Super- 
sonic  transpor t) ,   15,  123 
design  and  development,  17,  422 
Federal  Communications  Commission 
(FCC ) ,   30,  102,  253,  352 
Federal  Council  for  Science  and  Tech- 
nology,  56 
Federal  Electric  Corp.,  320 
Federal  Polytechnic,  Zurich,  285 
Federal  Support  to  Un ive r s i t ie s   and  Co l -  
leges,  Fiscal  Y ea r   1967  (NSF repor t) ,  
106 
Fhd6ration  AGronautique  Internationale, 
315 
Fedorov,  Dr.  Yevgeny  K.,  112 
Fehlberg,  Erwin,  326 
Feller,  Dr.  William,  418 
Felver,  Edward  R.,  202 
Feoktistov,  Konstantin  P.,  195,  197,  372 
Apo l lo   11  and  Apo l lo   12  mission  com- 
ment.  233.  387-388 
U.S.  visit,  337,  343,  347,  350,  351,  352, 
354,  359,  362,  387-388 
Ferguson,  Gen.  James  ( U S A F ) ,   260,  410 
Fernandez-Moran, Dr.  Humberto,  397 
Filipchenko,  Anatoly  V.,  333 
Filton  Airfield,  U.K.,  105 
Finger,  Harold  B.,  20,  69,  87,  91,  115, 
118 
Finland,  384,  424 
Finney,  John,  178 
Fire,  405 
“First  Man  on  the  Moon”  (commemora- 
tive  postage s tamp) ,   202,  273-274,  289, 
300,  311,  319 
Fisher,  Adrian  S.,  30 
Fisher,  Pau l   C.,  48 
Fjeldbo,  Dr.  Gunnar,  408 
Flagstaff,  Ariz.,  366 
FLEEP.  See Flying  lunar  excursion experi- 
mental  platform. 
Flemming,  Arthur  S.,  Awards,  50,  371 
Flight  Research  Center  (FRC )  
( N A S A ) ,  
59,  92,  119,  123, 299-300,  315 
11, 
Flight  simulator  for  advanced  aircraft 
(F SAA ) ,   362 
Flight  Test,  Simulation,  and   Support 
Conference, 3rd,  72 
Florida  Legislature,  180,  229 
Flory,  D.  A.,  365 
Flying  Baton  (artificial  horizon  device), 
263 
Flying lunar  excursion experimental plat- 
form  (FLEEP),  388 
Flying  Tiger  Pilot  Trophy,  200 
Flying  Tigers,  200 

FOBS. See  Fractional  Orbiting  Bombard- 
ment  System. 
Fog  Drops,  Project,  42 
Foreman,  Rep.  Edgar  F.,  404 
Formosa,  234 
Fort  Churchill,  Canada,  393 
Ft.  Davis,  Tex.,  90 
For t   Eustis,  Va.,  334 
Foster,  Dr.  John  S.,  Jr.,  4,  11, 99,  131 
Foster,  William  C.,  30 
Four  Corners,  Calif.,  113,  133,  148,  159 
Fra  Mauro  (moon),  377,  405 
France,  168,  397 
aircraft,  29,  162,  197 
Apollo  missions,  reaction  to,  16,  210, 
244,  385 
astronauts  visit  to,  32,  37 
communications  satellite  system,  56, 
114,  132 
Concorde 
(U.K.-France 
supersonic 
transport),  13-14,  26,  61,  71,  105, 
146,  162,  173,  197,  255,  285,  323, 
329,  340,  413 
international  cooperation,  196,  339, 
393,  411,  417,  423-424 
laser,  339 
satellite,  86 
test,  330 
Franco  Bahamonde,  Gen.  Francisco 
(Spa in) ,   327,  330 
Franco-Soviet Grand  Commission,  339 
Frank,  M.  P.,  290 
Frankel,  Max,  284 
Frankford  Arsenal,  283 
Franklin  Institute,  161,  385 
FRC.  See  Flight  Research  Center. 
Fredriksson,  Dr.  Kurt,  304 
French  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  312 
French  Legion  of  Honor, 330 
French  National Center  for  Scientific Re- 
search,  363 
Frey,  Rep.  Louis,  Jr.,  53,  242,  245 
Fricker.  John.  164 
Frye,  William R.,  147 
FSAA.  See  Flight  simulator  for  advanced 
aircraft. 
Fubini,  Dr.  Eugene  G.,  173 
Fuchlow,  Capt.  William D.  ( U S A F ) ,   49 
Fuel,  138,  342,  355,  379 
Fuel  cell,  343 
Fulbright,  Sen.  J.  William,  29,  276 
Fuller,  R.  Buckminster, 420 
Fullerton,  Maj.  Charles  G. 
( W A F ) ,   281 
Fulton,  Rep.  James  G.,  281 
Fungus,  159 
Funkhouser,  Dr.  John,  288 
Fusion  energy,  318 
Future  o f   the  Bioscience  Program  of  the 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  A d -  
ministration,  415 
G 
Gagarin,  Col.  Yuri  A.  (U.S.S.R.),  41,  51, 
104,  199, 228 

494 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Galabert 
International  Astronautics 
Prize,  237 
Galilei,  Galileo,  300 
G a l i l w   (Convg r   990  j e t   a i rc ra f t ) ,   133, 
393,  417,  423 
Gallant,  Richard  P.,  315 
Gallup,  George,  poll,  270.  275 
Gamma  ray,  2,  45,  124,  318319 ,   366 
Gandhi,  Prime  Minister,  Mrs. 
Indira 
( Ind ia ) ,   158,  234 
GAO.  See  General  Accounting  Office. 
Garber,  Paul,  133 
Gardner,  Prof.  Richard  N.,  248 
Garner,  Howell  D.,  4 
GARP.  See  Global  Atmospheric  Research 
Program. 
Garwin,  Dr.  Richard  L.,  117 
Gast.  Dr.  Paul.  250 
Gates,  Dr.  Clarence  R.,  188 
Gayle  Planetarium,  400 
Gazenko,  Dr.  Oleg  G.,  325 
GCA  Corp.,  34,  49,  113, 300,  304 
Geisler.  W..  329 
Geiss,  Dr.  Johannes,  285,  413 
Gell-Mann,  Dr.  Murray,  117,  355 
Gemini  (urogram),  110,160,257,304,357 
Gemini  VI1 mission  71 
Gemini  X I 1   mission,  71  
General  Accounting  Office  (6 .401 ,   47-48, 
138 
General  aviation 
aircraft,  70,  102,  109,  124, 
award,  410 
collision  avoidance  system,  396 
employment,  150 
The   Magnitude  and  Economic  Impact 
o f   General  Aviation  ( s tudy ) ,   109 
research,  15  
safety,  40-41,  369 
tax,  182 
General  Dynamics  Corp.,  399 
Atlas-Centaur,  114,  336,  355 
award,  347 
contract,  47,  270,  336,  355,  372 
Convair  Div.,  114, 336,  355 
F-111,  164,  372 
General  Electric  Go. 
Aircraft  Engine Group,  212 
award,  147 
contract,  32,  191,  293,  330,  340,  391, 
408 
laboratory,  undersea,  51 
MIRV  missile,  191 
neutron  radiography  research,  168 
quiet  je t   engine,  32 
Re-Entry Systems  Div.,  336 
reentry  vehicle,  391,  408 
spacecraft,  293,  340 
supersonic  transport  engine,  17 
turbofan  engine,  17 
General  Motors  Corp.,  371 
General  Telephone  &  Electronics  Inter- 
national,  171 
Geneva  Disarmament  Conference,  81,  155 
Geneva,  SrPitzerland,  189,  197,  198 

Gentry,  Maj.  Jerauld  R. 
( W A F ) ,   101, 
113,  133,  286,  298,  299,  371 
Geodetic  satellite,  33,  86,  107,  422 
Geogapho s   (planetoid),  288 
Geological  Society  of  America,  290 
Geomagnetism, 96 
Georgadze, Mikhail  P.,  197 
GEOS-C   (geodetic  satellite),  86 
Gerathewohl,  Dr.  Siegfried  J.,  180 
Germany,  East,  251,  317,  335 
Germany, West 
Apollo  flights, reaction  to,  16,  193, 225, 
244,  384 
astronaut  visit  to,  32,  37,  48,  49,  334 
cooperation,  space,  76,  114,  132,  177, 
196,  364,  379,  4 2 3 4 2 4  
Ministry 
Scientific  Research 
of 
(BMWF ) ,   364 
space  program,  76,  114,  177,  357,  364, 
379,  423 
Gesell,  Gerhard  A.,  138-139 
GET:  ground  elapsed  time 
Getler,  Michael,  321 
Ghana, 234 
Ghiorso,  Albert,  110 
Gilbert  Island,  239 
Gill,  C.  James,  38 
Gilruth,  Dr.  Robert  R.,  10, 274,  289,  317, 
347,  353,  419 
Glasstone,  Dr.  Samuel,  89 
Glendale,  Ariz.,  39 
Glenn,  Col.  John  H.,  Jr.  (USMC ,   Ret.), 
43,  289,  406 
Glennan,  Dr.  T.  Keith,  125,  184,  406 
Glines,  Carroll V.,  397 
Global  Atmospheric  Research  Program 
( C A R P ) ,   88,  204 
Global  Flare  Patrol  Network,  336 
G l omm   Challenger  (drilling  sh i p ) ,   273, 
"? "  a33 
Goddard  Institute  for  Space  Studies,  2, 
174,  200,  408 
Goddard  Memorial  Dinner,  68 
Goddard,  L J C   P.  M.  ( R N ) ,   129 
Goddard,  Dr.  Robert  H.,  147,  226,  280, 
289,  300,  404 
Goddard,  Mrs.  Robert  H.,  147,  280 
Goddard,  Robert  H.,  Award,  21 
Goddard,  Robert  H.,  Historical  Essay 
competition,  69 
Goddard,  Robert  H.,  Memorial  Trophy, 
611 
Goddard,  Robert  Hutchings,  Library,  147 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  (GSFC )  
Apollo 9 ,  65 
Apo l lo   10,  145 
Apo l lo   11,  224,  274-275 
Apollo  12,  358 
award,  117,  154,  346 
buoy-tracking  experiment,  199 
contract,  271,  297 
cooperation,  353 
Extraterrestrial  Physics  Branch,  50 
facilities,  383,  405 
fire,  405 

495 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Laboratory  for  Theoretical Studies,  360 
mapping,  50 
National  Space  Science  Data  Center, 
1, 271 
patent,  82 
personnel,  259, 290 
satellite  animal-tracking  experiment, 
- 
328 
satellite  monitoring 
Essa  IX, 58 
Explorer  XLI  (IMP-G)  , 185 
Manne r   V ,  127 
Oao  II  (oAo-A~). 99 
OS0  v  (OSO-F),  22 
Ogo  V I   (oGo-F),’~~~ 
R e h y   I  and   Re lay   11,  124 
Satellite  Tracking  Center,  37 
Small  Scientific  Satellite,  405 
sounding  rocket  experiments 
astronomical,  107, 140, 184, 335, 337, 
488 
atmospheric  data,  9, 18, 19, 21, 25, 
31, 33-34, 38, 41, 94, 132, 133, 286 
electric  fields,  71, 279, 331 
instrumentation  test,  286 
vehicle  performance  test,  28, 335 
weather  data  analvses.  353 
Goett,  Dr.  Harry  J.,  346 
Gold,  Dr.  Thomas,  121, 317, 350 
Goldberg,  Dr.  Leo,  156, 256, 366 
Golden  Kev  Award.  46 
Goldmark,  -Dr.  Peter  C.,  102, 201 
Goldstein,  Dr.  Richard  M.,  252 
Goldstone  Tracking  Station, 56,  137, 179, 
252, 274, 374 
Goldwater,  Sen.  Barry  M.,  13, 379-380 
Goldwater,  Rep.  Barry  M.,  Jr.,  169 
Golovin,  Dr.  Nicholas  E.,  119 
Goodell,  Sen.  Charles  E.,  13 
Goodling,  Rep.  George  A.,  309 
Goody,  Dr.  Richard  M.,  318 
Goodyear  Aerospace  Corp.,  239 
Gorbatko,  Victor  V.,  333 
Gordon,  Capt.  Richard  F.,  Jr.  (USN) 
Apollo  12 mission 
flight,  372, 374, 375-376, 377, 389 
medical  examination,  366 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  371, 
392 
plans  for,  105, 342, 353, 365, 366, 
368, 371-372 
press  conference,  333, 406 
quarantine,  356, 377-378, 396, 397, 
m5 
splashdown,  377 
fund-raising  dinner,  408 
promotion,  391, 392 
record,  389 
White  House  visit.  413 
Gorkin,  Jess,  367  ’ 
Gorman,  Harry  H.,  326, 347, 360 
Gorton,  Prime  Minister  John  G.  (Aus- 
tralia),  117, 244 
Gottlieb,  Dr.  Peter,  116 
Governors’  Conference,  401 

Governor’s  Conference  on  California’s 
Changing  Environment,  382 
Graham,  Billy  (William  F . ) ,   246 
Grand  Canyon,  A r k ,   337, 354 
Grand  Cross  of  Aeronautic  Merit,  327 
Granite,  Bernard,  385 
Grant,  3, 32, 52, 209, 319 
Gravity,  71, 78, 86, 182, 190, 206 
artificial,  117-118, 391 
Great  Salt  Lake,  49 
“Great  Transatlantic  Air  Race  of  1969,” 
129 
Greece,  226 
Green,  Dr.  Robert  L.,  46 
Greenherg,  D.  S., 114-115 
Greenglass,  Bert,  313 
“Greenhouse”  effect  (Venus),  128 
Grimwood,  James  M.,  357 
Grissom,  L / C  Virgil  I.  ( U S A F ) ,   228 
Grissom,  Mrs.  Virgil  I.,  279 
Gromyko,  Foreign  Minister  Andrey  A. 
(U.S.S.R.),  236 
Groton,  Conn.,  27 
Group  Achievement  Award  ( N A S A ) ,   34, 
154, 347 
Grumman  Aircraft  Engineering  Corp., 
13, 26, 39, 42, 46, 92, 111, 262, 394 
GSFC. See  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center. 
Guam,  273, 284, 312, 402 
Guam  International  Airport,  246 
Guggenheim,  Daniel,  Medal,  338, 345 
Guggenheim,  Harry  F., 226 
Gulf  of  Mexico,  157 
Gulf  Stream  Drift  Mission,  103, 209, 282 
Gumdrop   (Apo l lo   9  command  and  serv- 
ice  module).  See  Command  and  serv- 
ice  module. 
Gunn,  Charles  R.,  54 
G um ,   Dr.  James  E.,  322, 334 
Gurney,  Sen.  Edward  J.,  203, 393 
Gutenberg,  Johann,  161 
Guzman,  Mme.  Anne  E.,  281, 403 
Gwertzman,  Bernard,  152, 181 

H 

Haagen-Smit,  Arie  Jan,  383 
Haeussermann,  Dr.  Walter,  346 
Hage,  George  H.,  33, 108, 182, 274, 285, 
300, 346 
Haggerty,  James  J.,  Jr.,  89, 95 
Haggerty,  Dr.  Patrick  E.,  117 
Th e   Hague,  Netherlands,  37 
Haile  Selassie,  Emperor  of  Ethiopia,  205 
Haise,  Fred  W.,  Jr.,  267 
Halahy,  Najeeb  E.,  255, 346 
Hale,  Edward  Everett,  357 
Haley  Astronautics  Award,  72 
Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  103 
Hall,  Charles  F.,  361 
Hall,  Mayor  Chuck,  9 
Hallanger,  Dr.  Larry,  343 
Hallgren,  Dr.  Richard  E.,  50 

496 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

( U S A F ) ,  

HALO.  See Hughes Automated  Lunar  Ob- 
server. 
Halo  Crater  (moon),  376 
Hamiter,  Leon  C.,  Jr.,  290 
Hand.  Alfred.  54 
Handier,  Dr.  ‘Philip,  19 
Haney,  P a u l   P.,  116,  118 
Haredi.  Sheikh  Ahmand,  226 
Harlow,  Dr.  James  G.,  70 
Harmon  International  Aviator’s  Trophy, 
298 
Harnett,  Daniel  J.,  319,  325 
Harper,  Charles  W.,  21,  334 
Harrier  (VTOL a i rc ra f t ) ,   129,  162 
Harrington,  Michael,  4 
Harris,  Louis,  poll,  22,  208,  290 
Harris,  Dr.  Robert,  253 
Hartford,  Conn.,  263 
Hartsfield,  Maj.  Henry  W.,  Jr. 
281 
Harvard  College,  77 
Harvard  College  Observatory,  256,  272, 
308,  366,  411 
Harvard  Univ.,  89,  131,  238,  257,  302, 
318,  416-417 
Harvey,  Dr.  Mose  L.,  321 
Hassell,  Prof.  Odd,  355 
Hawaii,  134,  190 
Hawaii,  Univ.  of,  314 
Hawaiian  Telephone  Co.,  32 
Hawker  Siddeley  Aviation  Co.,  162 
Haworth,  Leland  J.,  184 
Hayashi,  Tsuyoshi,  290 
Hayden  Planetarium,  243 
Haynes,  Charles  G.,  19 
Haynos,  Joseph  G.,  82 
Head  Crater  (moon),  376 
Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  Dept.  of 
( H E W ) ,   83,  106,  110,  141, 274 
Heart  transplant,  1 
Hearth,  Donald  P.,  76 
Heavy  ion  linear  accelerator  ( H I L A C ) ,   110 
Heavy  lift  helicopter 
( H L H ) ,   131 
Hedin,  Sven,  50 
Heinemann,  President  Gustav 
(West 
Germany),  244 
. 
Helian,  R.  D.,  281 
Helicopter,  79,  129 
accident,  260,  308-309,  389 
astronaut  pickup,  141 
civil,  35,  124 
military,  106,  115,  131,  148,  150,  160, 
260,  389 
record,  79,  129 
U.S.S.R.,  35,  79 
Heliodyne  Corp.,  271 
Helios,  Project  ( sun   probe 
),  76,  177, 
357,  423 
Heliports,  176 
Helium,  156 
Hellas  (Ma r s ) ,   269 
Heller,  Gerhard  B.,  76,  326 
Helsinki,  Finland,  384 
Heos  I  (ESRO  satellite),  82 

Hero  of  the  Soviet  Union,  1 
Herr,  Dr.  K en i e th   C.,  269 
Herrick,  Dr.  Samuel,  Jr..  288 
Herriman.  Alan  G..  282 
Hershey,  Dr.-Alfred  D, 338 
Hess,  Dr.  Harry  H.,  167,  289-290,  347 
Hess.  Dr.  Wilmot  N..  259.  288 
HEW.‘  See  Health,  Education,  and   Wel- 
fare,  Dept.  of. 
Heyerdahl,  Thor,  146 
Hibbs,  Albert  R.,  34 
Hickam  AFB,  Hawaii,  201,  245 
Hickel,  Secretary  of  the  Interior  Walter 
J.,  356 
Hiday atullah,  Mohammad,  255 
Higginbottom,  Samuel  L.,  346 
HILAC.  See  Heavy  ion  linear  accelerator. 
Hill,  Louis  W.,  Space  Transportation 
Award,  345 
Hill,  Ambassador  Robert  C.,  180 
Hill.  William.  Oreanization.  161 
Hillary,  S i r   Edm lnd ,   251  ’ 
Hines,  William  M.,  28,  90,  119,  176,  186, 
207.  262.  274.  289.  313 
Hirohito,  Emperor  ( Japan ) ,   234,  361 
Hirondelle  (turboprop  a i rc ra f t ) ,   162 
“Historical  Perspectives  on  Apollo,”  196 
Hitler,  Adolf,  297 
Hjornevik,  Wesley  L.,  339 
HL-10 
(lifting-body  vehicle),  29 
test  flight,  422 
award,  298 
glide,  117,  174, 422 
powered,  113,  133,  148, 
159, 
240,  267,  297,  309,  319, 
352, 
381,  389,  406,  422 
HLH.  See  Heavy  lift  helicopter. 
Hoag,  Maj.  Peter  C. 
( U S A F ) ,   174, 
.%O.  389 
Hoagiand,  Hudson,  50 
Hodgson,  Alfred  S.,  19  
Holcomb,  Robert  W.,  390 
Holland,  Sen.  Spessard  L.,  203,  393 
Holloman  AFB,  N.  Mex.,  363 
Honolulu,  Hawaii,  99,  273,  312 
Hooker,  Dr.  Stanley,  21 
Hoover  Dam,  87 
Hope,  Bob,  414 
Hord,  Dr.  Charles  W.,  269,  298 
Hornig,  Dr.  Donald  F.,  3 
Horowitz,  Dr.  Norman  H.,  282,  302 
Hotz,  Robert  B.,  191 
Houbolt,  Dr.  John  C.,  346 
Housing  and  Urban  Development,  Dept. 
of  ( H U D ) ,   237 
airport  study,  263-265 
funding,  42,  184,  369,  383,  395 
Operation  Breakthrough,  188 
personnel,  87,  91,  115,  313 
Houston,  Tex.,  137,  148,  183,  249,  255, 
261,  398 
Ap o l lo   8  stamp  ceremony,  129 
Apollo  11 mission 
celebration,  244,  283 

184, 
360, 

319, 

497 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

press  conference,  280-281 
astronauts  at,  75,  267,  279,  281,  283, 
312,  408 
employment,  231 
Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory,  223,  378, 
394 
Lunar  Science  Institute,  8,  227 
National  Space Hall  of  Fame,  289 
Houston  Welfare  Rights  Organization, 
233 
Hovercraft,  156 
Hoyle,  Fred,  339 
Hsieh,  Jen-chao,  234 
HUD.  See  Housing  and   Urban  Develop 
ment,  Dept.  of. 
Hughes  Aircraft  Co.,  61,  241,  369 
Space  Systems  Div.,  401 
Hughes  Automated  Lunar  Observer 
(HALO )   (Su rveyo r   I l l ) ,  370 
Hughes,  Howard  R.,  370 
Human  factor  systems  program,  154 
Humphrey,  Vice  President  Hubert  H., 
20,  233,  280 
Humphrey, Mrs.  Hubert  H.,  280 
Hungary,  46, 234,  251 
Hunt,  S ir   John,  251 
Hunt,  Lamar,  343 
Hunten,  Dr.  Donald  M.,  318 
Huntsville, Ala.,  170,  244,  398 
Hurd,  Peter,  226 
Hurricane  Debbie,  402 
Hutchinson,  Thomas  C.  H.,  387 
Hyderabad,  India,  258 
Hydrogen  bomb,  312 
Hydro-Lab  (underwater  laboratory),  343 
Hydroxyl  radical,  189 
Hynek,  Dr.  J.  Allen,  28,  288,  416 
Hypatia  Rille  (moon),  159 
Hypersonic  aircraft,  15,  87,  362 

I 

IAA.  See  International  Academy  of  Astro- 
nautics. 
IAF .   See  International  Aeronautical  Fed- 
eration  and  International Astronautical 
Federation. 
IATA.  See  International  Air  Transport 
Assn. 
IBM.  See International  Business  Machines 
Corp. 
ICBM.  See  Intercontinental  ballistic  mis- 
sile. 
IEEE.  See Institute  of  Electrical and  Elec- 
tronics  Engineers. 
Illia,  President  Arthuro  U.  (Argentina), 
384 
Illinois,  28 
Illinois  Institute  of  Technology,  293 
Illinois  Institute  of  Technology  Research 
Institute,  11 
Illinois,  Univ.  of,  34,  41,  113,  300,  304 

gyro 

ILRV.  See  Integral  Launch  and  Reentry 
Vehicle. 
ILS.  See  Instrument  landing  system. 
Ilyin,  Lt.  (U.S.S.R.),  33,  39 
IME.  See  Interplanetary  Meteoroid  Ex- 
periment. 
IMP.  See  Interplanetary  Monitoring  Plat- 
form. 
IMP-D,  185 
IMP-E.  185 
IMP -G ;   185 
Imperial  College  of  Science  and  Tech- 
nolonv,  355 
IMS.  ~ G i ' I o n  mass  spectrometer. 
Inchon,  South  Korea,  237 
Independence  Day,  197-198 
India,  190,  234,  398,  412 
cooperation,  118,  120,  258,  311,  340, 
423 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  visit  to, 
255 
Indian  Ocean, 25,  140,  263,  389,  423 
Indian  Space  Research Organization, 311 
Indiana  Univ.,  102 
Indonesia, 200,  249 
Inertial 
integrating 
reference 
( IR IG ) ,   14 
Ingalls,  Richard  P.,  288 
Institute  for  Soviet-American  Relations, 
195 
Institute  for  Strategic  Studies,  106 
Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics 
Engineers  ( I E E E ) ,   177,  354 
Instituto  Geofisico  del  Peru,  267 
Instituto  Nacional  d e   TBcnica  Aero- 
spacial,  180 
Instrument  landing  system  ( IL S )  , 89 
Integral  Launch  and  Reentry  Vehicle 
( I LRV ) ,   47 
INTELSAT .   See  International  Telecommu- 
nications  Satellite  Consortium. 
Intelsat  I  (E a r l y   Bird) (communications 
sa te l l i te) ,  61,-137,  191,  259,  286 
Intelsat-I1  F-3 
(Intelsat  11-C;  A t lan t ic  
111,  191,  259 
Intelsat-I11 F-1,  50,  135,  151 
In te l sa t - I l l   F-2,  30,  40,  61,  151,  191, 226, 
245,  259,  276,  286,  340 
Intelsat-111 F-3,  23,  3 9 4 0 ,   137,  140,  151, 
421 
h te l sa t -111   F-4 ,   23,  140,  150-151,  276, 
421 
In te l sa t - I l l   F-5,  245,  281,  385,  421 
Intelsat  IV,  114 
Interagency  Committee  on  Back  Contam- 
ination,  141, 273,  302,  356 
Intercontinental  ballistic  missile  ( ICBM )  
(see  also  Multiple  independently  tar- 
getable  reentry  vehicle),  48,  140 
Intercosmos  I 
(U.S.S.R.  satellite),  335, 
422 
Intercosmos  11,  416,  422 
Interior,  Dept.  of,  14,  51,  76,  141,  267, 
356 

498 

, 1969 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

International  Academy  of  Astronautics 
( I A A ) ,   325 
International  Aeronautical Exposidon,  52 
International  Aeronautical  Federation 
( I A F ) ?   208,  250 
International  Air 
Transport  Assn. 
( IATA )  , 292-293,  350 
International  Astronautical Congress,  287 
International  Astronautical  Federation 
( I A F ) ,   328 
International  Astronomical  Commission, 
335 
International  Aviation  Service  Award 
( F A A ) ,   54 
International  Business  Machines  Corp. 
( I B M ) ,   25,  79,  91,  315,  334 
Federal  Systems  Div.,  71  
Watson  Laboratory,  117 
International  cooperation  (see  also  Dis- 
armament  and  T rea ty ) ,   51,  261,  262, 
300,  392,  393,  417 
air  transportation,  121,  148,  292-293 
aircraft  (see  also  Concorde) , 161-162, 
4 2 3 4 2 4  
astronomy,  181, 319,  417 
meteorology,  45,  78-79,  204-205 
military,  117,  132,  289 
nuclear  power,  25,  43,  316,  386,  409 
oceanography,  133,  197,  330,  341 
science  and  technology,  78,  102,  304, 
3 16 
International  cooperation,  space 
(see 
also  European  Launcher  Develop- 
ment  Organization;  European  Space 
Research  Organization;  International 
Telecommunications  Satellite  Con- 
sortium;  Space 'rescue  t rea ty ) ,   1,  39, 
43,  55,  75,  101-102,  103,  117,  158, 
167,  175,  238.  248.  255,  285,  290, 
308-310.  312.  349-350.  379.  423-424 
law,  189,  i98,  229,  392 
I
,
 
military,  117,  132,  389 
satellite.  102.  169 
communications,  61,  171 
DOD-U.K., 
388-389 
earth  resources,  33,  310 
Europe,  132,  196,  323,  357,  416 
NASA 
-Australia,  177,  399 
-Canada,  30,  241,  423-424 
-ESRO,  323,  423 
-Germany, West,  76,  114,  177,  357, 
364,  379,  4 2 3 4 2 4  
-India,  311,  340, 423 
-Italy,  177,  423 
-Netherlands,  423 
-U.K.,  23,  59,  323,  385,  388-389, 
422,  423 
- U S S R . ,   19,  196,  381,  394,  411, 
416 
U.S. 
-NATO,  132 
-U.S.S.R.,  25,  393394. 
sounding  rocket.  See  Sounding  rocket, 

international  programs. 
space research,  4,  43,  44, 102,  168-169, 
290 
Europe,  74,  248,  383,  411,  416 
France-U.S.S.R.,  339 
U.S.-Australia,  137,  177,  319,  423 
-France,  4 2 3 4 2 4  
-Germanv.  West.  177 
-Italy,  lii, 423  ' 
-.--., - 
-Japan,  383,  389,  411 
-TTK  4 2 3 4 2 4  
- U S S R  
25,  26,  41,  78,  95-96, 
103,  i95,  202,  211,  231,  233, 
238,  240,  245,  246,  247,  248,  311, 
318,  325,  343,  351,  367,  383, 
409,  411412 ,   424 
tracking 
U.S.-Australia,  34,  148,  189,  424 
.Perii.  267 

International  Decade  of  Ocean  Explora- 
tion,  341 
International  Geomagnetic  Reference 
Field,  173 
International  History  of  Astronautics 
Symposium,  Third,  329 
International  Platform  Assn.,  237 
International  Rice  Research 
Institute, 
163 
International  Symposium  on  Space Tech- 
nology,  Eighth,  290 
International  Telecommunications  Satel- 
lite  Consortium  (INTELSAT)  , 381,  394 
conference,  24,  26,  56,  88,  101 
membership,  61  
satellite,  40, 114,  150 
International  Union  of  Radio  Science, 
U.S.  National  Committee,  115 
Interplanetary  Meteoroid  Experiment 
( I M E ) ,   105 
Platform 
Interplanetary  Monitoring 
( I M P ) ,   30,  185 
Interrogation,  recording,  and  
location 
( IRLS )   system,  107 
communications 
Intersputnik 
(U.S.S.R. 
satellite  system),  381,  394 
(A p o l l o   12  LM).  See  Lunar 
Zntrepid 
module. 
Iodine,  128 
Ion  mass  spectrometer  ( I M S ) ,   241 
Ion  propulsion,  48,  342,  399,  415 
Ionosphere,  30,  33-34,  41,  84,  113,  135, 
160,  188,  257,  300,  304,  323,  339,  423 
Iowa,  28 
Iowa  State  Univ.,  Dept.  of  History,  357 
Iowa,  Univ.  of,  263,  340,  395 
Iran,  385 
IRIG.  See  Inertial  reference  integrating 
gyro. 
Iris  I  (E s r o   IZB)   (International  Radia- 
tion  Investigation  Satellite),  323 
Irwin,  Maj.  James  B. 
(U SAF ) ,   105 
Is is   I  (ISIS-A) 
(International  Satellite 
for  Ionospheric  Studies),  30,  241,  423 

499 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Island  Creek  Coal  Co.,  267 
Israel,  226,  384,  408 
“Issues  and  Answers” 
(TV   program), 
146 
Italy,  155,  244,  384-385 
Borman,  Col.  Frank  ( U S A F ) ,   visit  to, 
32,  37 
cooperation,  space,  132,  177,  423 
ELDO  F-8  spacecraft,  196 
satellite,  423 
IT&T  COrp.,  320 
ITOS (meteorological  sa te l l i te) ,   3443 
J 

J-2 
(rocket  eng ine) ,   70,  101,  104-105, 
162,  185 
Jackass  Flats,  Nev.,  87,  178,  279,  309, 
361,  422 
Jackson  Hole,  Wyo.,  328 
Jackson,  Nelson  P.,  Award,  69 
Jaffe,  Dr.  Leonard  D.,  85,  116,  139,  141, 
189 
Jakarta,  Indonesia,  249 
James,  Francis,  181 
James,  Lee  B.,  188,  251,  317 
Jamison,  Mitchell,  403 
Japan,  82,  140,  168,  175 
Apollo  I 1   and  Apollo  12  missions,  re- 
action  to,  226,  234,  244,  249,  361 
booster,  284,  297,  314 
Cabinet,  9 
international  cooperation,  space,  118, 
120,  383,  389,  411,  423-424 
International  Symposium  on  Space 
Technology,  290 
launch,  rocket,  284,  297 
National  Defense  Council,  9 
space  debris  damage,  198 
space  program,  118,  120,  290,  314,  325 
Jastrow,  Dr.  Robert,  2,  200 
Javelin  (sounding  rocke t) ,   188 
Jeans,  S i r   James,  417 
Jenkins,  Wally,  343 
Jerusalem,  Israel.  226 
Jet  belt,  103 
J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  (JPL)  (Cal- 
Tech ) ,   85,  184,  248 
Agnew,  Vice  President  Spiro  T.,  visit 
to.  323-325 
award,  203,  346 
computer,  299 
Deep  Space  Network,  34,  180,  189, 
274-275,  346 
Goldstone  Tracking  Station,  56,  137, 
179, 252,  274,  374 
history,  274 
lunar   research 
mascons,  116,  120 
surface,  34-35,  189 
Mariner  Project,  55-57,  90, 133,  250, 
252,  253-254,  256,  259,  261-262, 
265-266,  269,  282,  298,  301-302,  408 

personnel,  6,  135,  188, 290 
Pioneer  VI,  356 
Viking  Project,  57,  111,  274-275,  412 
Jewish  National  Fund,  408 
Jobe,  Capt.  Robert  Earle  ( U S A F ) ,   49 
Jodrell  Bank  Experimental 
Station 
(U.K.),  158,  224,  232,  233,  237,  238, 
244,  384 
Johns  Hopkins  Univ.,  1,  37,  43,  46,  49, 
298 
Dept.  of  Biology,  184 
Johnson,  President  Lyndon  B.,  3,  20 
ADOUO 8  mission.  13 
Apollo  11  mission 
Cape  Kennedy  visit,  209,  224 
message,  196 
astronauts’  promotion.  391 
awards  by,  1, 6 
budget,  14,  40,  109 
NASA,  14-16,  109-110,  395,  423 
communications  policy,  352 
Kennedy  Space  Center,  393 
memoirs,  136 
space  program,  6-7,  10,  20,  60,  231- 
3.13 
S ta te   of  the   Union  Message,  13 
-1- 
Johnson,  Mrs.  Lyndon  B.,  209 
Johnson,  Robert  L.,  363 
Johnson,  W.  Thomas,  Jr.,  402 
Johnston  Island,  223 
Johnston,  S.  Paul,  297 
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  180,  280 
Jo in t   Commission  on  Scientific  and 
Technical  Communications  (proposed) 
( N A S - N A E ) ,   175 
Jo in t   Computer  Conference,  139 
Jones,  Dr.  Norman  D.,  261 
Jones,  Robert  J.,  202 
Jordan,  Sen.  Len  B.,  13 
JPL.  See  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory 
(CalTech). 
Juliana,  Queen  (Ne ther lands) ,  332 
Junkers  390  (bomber),  297 
Jup i ter   (p lane t ) ,   16,  76,  115,  157,  192, 
263,  299,  338,  361,  423 
Justice,  Dept.  of,  130, 394 

K 

Kahn.  Richard  S..  157 
~~ Kamm,-Robert  W.,  20 
Kammler,  Gen.  Hans  (Germany),  381 
Kansas  S ta te   Highway  Commission,  408 
Kansas  S ta te  Unik.,  332 
Kapryan,  Walter  J.,  287 
Kapustin  Yar, U.S.S.R.,  67 
Karaganda,  U.S.S.R.,  333 
Karth,  Rep.  Joseph  E.,  371 
Kauai,  Pacific  Ocean,  201 
Kaufman,  Harold  R.,  134 
Kazakhstan,  U.S.S.R., 
196,  271 
Kazakov,  Vasily,  159 
Kedrov,  Boniface,  157 

500 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Keldysh,  Prof.  Mstislav  V.,  25,  202,  229, 
2&,  311,  351,  361,  411 
Kellv,  K.  K..  298 
Kelli;  Orr,  4 
Kennedy,  Sen.  Edward  M.,  131,  147,  148, 
175,224 
Kennedy,  President  John  F.,  20,  38,  44, 
60, 175,  196,  212,  240,  393,  405 
Kennedy,  John  F.,  International  Airport, 
N.Y.,  263,  279,  362,  400 
Kennedy,  John  F.,  Medal  for  National 
Civic  Service,  72 
Kennedy  Space  Center  ( K S C ) ,   393 
accident,  162 
Apollo/Saturn  (see  a lso   Apollo  mis- 
sions),  118,  195,  299,  350,  351 
astronaut  memorial 
(proposed),  53, 
245 
astronauts  at,  5,  207,  325,  371 
award,  10,  122,  154,  289 
budget.  122 
contract,  122,  320 
facilities,  341,  383 
launch  operations 
(see  also  Launch 
Complex  34,  37,  39;  and  Apollo 
missions),  65,  122,  137,  145,  173, 
361,  371 
lunar  landing  memorial,  304 
meeting,  33 
personnel,  122,  154,  287,  313,  371 
press  conference,  207,  325,  371 
spacecraft  delivery  and   shipments  to, 
149,  182 
visits  to,  136 
Agnew,  Vice  President  Spiro  T.,  65, 
210,  224 
Johnson,  President  Lyndon  B.,  209, 
on" 
44- 
Johnson.  Mrs.  Lvndon  B..  209 
Nixon,  President  Richaid  M.,  378 
Nixon,  Mrs.  Richard  M.,  378 
Nixon.  Miss  Tricia.  378 
Kepler,  Johann,  300 
Kerwin,  Cdr.  Joseph  P.  ( U S N ) ,   283,  414 
' 
Key  Biscayne,  Fla.,  38 
Keyhoe,  Maj.  Donald  E.  (USMC ,   Ret.),  8 
Khan,  President  Yahya  (Pak i s tan ) ,   244, 
259.  394 
Khrunov,  Yevegeny,  11-12,  23 
Khrushchev.  Premier  Nikita  (U.S.S.R.). 
197,  249 
Kiesinger,  Chancellor  Kurt  G.  (W.  Ger- 
many),  48,  270 
Kilby,  Jack  S.  C.,  418 
IGng,  Dr.  Elbert  A.,  273,  287 
King,  Dr.  Martin  Luther,  231 
Kinshasa,  Congo,  312,  350 
Kirchner,  Englebert,  294 
Kirkman,  Don,  1% 
KirtIand  AFB,  N.  Mex.,  424 
Kiruna,  Sweden,  18,  20,  24,  27 
Kitt  Peak  National  Observatory,  17,  318 
Kitty  Hawk  Flyer  (a i rc ra f t ) ,   177 
Kitty  Hawk,  N.C.,  88,  410 
Kleen,  Dr.  Werner  J.,  290 

( U.S.S.R.  ) , 

Klein, Milton,  130,  332 
Kliore,  Dr.  Arvydas  J.,  408 
Knight,  Maj.  William  J.  (U S  
A F ) ,   87  
Knoxville,  Tenn.,  391 
Knutson,  Don,  169 
Komarov,  Col.  Vladimir  M. 
(U.S.S.R.), 
199,  228 
Koran,  226 
Korea,  South,  237,  244 
Korolev,  Sergey  P.,  199 
Kosygin,  Premier  Alexey  N. 
233 
Koval,  Alexander,  335 
Kozlov,  Mikhail  V.,  1 
Kozyrev,  Dr.  Nikolay  A.,  139,  418 
Kraft,  Christopher  C.,  Jr.,  10,  274,  290, 
344,  392,  417 
G am e r ,   James J.,  50 
Kraner,  H.  W.,  340 
Kranz,  Eugene  F.,  91 
Krause,  Dr.  Helmut  G.,  183 
Kremlin,  33,  39 
Borovitsky  Gate,  23 
Kryter,  Karl  D.,  26 
KSC. See  Kennedy  Space  Center. 
Kubasov,  Valery  N.,  332 
Kubat,  Jerald  R.,  130 
Kuiper,  Dr.  Gerard  P.,  397 
Kuznetsov,  Vasily  V.,  197 

L 

L-loll  airbus,  341 
Laboratory  for  Electronics,  Inc.,  89 
Laboratory  of  Electrical  Optics,  Tou- 
louse,  France,  397 
La  Canada-Flintridge,  Calif.,  85 
Lagos,  Nigeria,  226 
Lahore,  Pakistan,  259 
Lalande  (moon),  377 
Laird,  Secretary  of  Defense  Melvin  R., 
11, 34 
C-5A,  123,  138 
defense  budget,  86,  99 
press  conference,  4,  33 
Sentinel  ABM ,   33,  39,  53 
space  program,  146 
Lambda  (Japanese  booster),  297,  314 
Lamont-Doherty  Geological  Observatory, 
174, 230,  249,  273,  354-355 
Lampang,  Thailand,  286 
Landon  Lecture,  332 
Langley  Aeronautical  Laboratory,  349 
Langley  Research 
Center 
(LaRC) 
( N A S A ) ,   379 
Aircraft  Noise  Reduction  Laboratory, 
120 
budget,  383 
buffeting  research,  123 
contract,  94 
cooperation,  379 
j e t   shoes,  4 
Molecular  Biophysics  Laboratory,  96 

501 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

259, 
327, 
409, 

patent,  4 
personnel,  21,  290,  293 
sup e r c n t i cd   wing,  44,  293,  299 
Viking.  Project.  59.  111.  293,  412 
You&"'Scie&e  Con,es; 
105. 
Lannan.  John,  21,  40,  153,  167, 365,  405 
La  Plata,  Argentina,  181 
Lapp,  Dr.  Ralph  E.,  37 
LaRC.  See  Langley  Research  Center 
( N A S A ) .  
Larsen,  Agnew  E.,  283 
Las  Palmas,  Canary  Islands,  312,  327 
Las  Vegas,  Nev.,  49 
Laser 
lunar  experiments,  192,  339 
Apo l lo   11 ,   114,  220,  223, 
237, 
261,  285,  411,  419 
322, 
use  of,  37,  127,  312,  318, 
386,  405,  424 
Latham,  Dr.  Gary  V.,  230,  249, 
,  354, 
413 
Latin  America,  101,  226 
Launch  Complex  34,  122 
Launch  Complex  37,  122 
Launch  Complex  39,  122 
Apollo  launches  from 
Apo l lo   9,  62 
Apo l lo   10,  73,  108,  142 
Apo l lo   11 ,   149,  212 
Apo l lo   12,  372 
La  Violette,  Pau l   E.,  160 
Lawrance,  Charles  L.,  Award,  138 
Lawrence  Radiation  Laboratory 
(Univ. 
of  Calif.),  53,  110 
Leavitt,  William,  420 
Le  Bourget  Airport,  Paris,  162,  169 
Lecky-Thompson,  S / L   Tom  ( R A F ) ,   129 
Lederberg,  Dr.  Joshua,  205 
Lederer,  Jerome F.,  315 
Lee,  Capt.  Chester  M.  (USN, Ret.),  285, 
- -- 
242 
Leicester.  Univ.  of.  22 
Leighton;  Dr.  Robert  B.,  269,  282,  301 
Lenin,  Vladimir  I.,  199 
Leningrad,  U.S.S.R.,  196,  278 
Leonov,  L / C   Aleksey  A.  (U.S.S.R.),  48, 
158 
Leovy,  Conway  B  282 
LeRC. 
See  Le& 
Research  Center 
(NASA  1. 
Lesher,  Dr.  Richard  L.,  135 
Lewis  Research  Center  (LeRC)  (NASA), 
7s  
award,  50,  134,  154 
booster,  56,  355,  412 
Brayton  Cycle  space  power  system,  58 
contract,  212,  355 
cooperation,  379 
Electromagnetic  Propulsion  Div.,  134 
ion  propulsion,  48,  342 
noise  abatement,  33,  120,  212 
Plum  Brook  Station,  404 
Propulsion  Systems  Acoustics  Branch, 
50 
research,  155,  362-363,  384,  404,  412 

Space  Power  Facility,  329 
Spacecraft  Propulsion  Research  Fa- 
cility,  329-330,  412 
Lewis,  Roger,  399 
Ley,  W a y ,   187 
Libby,  Dr.  Willard  F.,  408 
Library  of  Congress,  184 
Legislative  Reference  Service,  95 
Science  Policy  Research  Div.,  161 
Lick  Observatory,  Calif.,  42,  237,  259, 
261,  285 
Lifting-bodv  vehicle 
H C 1 0 ,   -29,  113,  117,  133,  148,  159, 
174,  184,  240,  267,  297,  298,  319, 
352,  360, 381,  389,  406,  422 
M2-F2.  29 
M2-F3;  29 
X-24,  29 
X-24A,  101,  113,  133,  286,  299,  316, 
349,  371,  422 
Light  Iutratheater  Transport  (LIT) air- 
craft,  92 
Lima,  Peru,  267,  322 
Limeill  Weapons  Research  Center,  312 
Lincoln  Center,  N.Y.,  8 
Lincoln  Univ.,  168 
Lindbergh,  Charles  A.,  100,  177 
Lindley,  Robert  N.,  410 
Lindsay,  Mayor  John  V.,  279 
Lindsey,  Robert,  156 
Lineberry,  Edgar  C.,  Jr.,  345 
Lingenfelter,  Dr.  Richard,  174 
Linweaver,  Cdr.  Pau l   G.  (USN), 188 
Lisbon,  Portugal,  37,  53,  344,  413 
Lisitzin,  Dr.  Aleksandr  P.,  273 
LIT.  See  Light  Intratheater  Transport 
aircraft. 
Little,  Brown  &  Co.,  135 
Little,  Stephen,  90 
Lloyd's  of  London,  244 
LLRV.  See  Lunar  Landing  Research  Ve- 
hicle. 
LLTV.  See  Lunar  Landing  Training  Ve- 
hicle. 
LM.  See  Lunar  module. 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  79,  157-158 
A H 5 6 A   (helicopter),  106,  115,  148, 
150,  160, 260,  308,  389-390 
aircraft  engine,  402 
C-5A  (cargo  transport),  17,  57,  107, 
123-124,  128,  130,  132,  138, 151,  162, 
207,  251,  281,  283,  293,  323,  380, 
411,  421 
contract,  128,  130,  132,  150,  160,  251, 
280,  402 
L-loll  airbus,  341 
nuclear  rocket,  280 
XV-4B  (VTOL   a i rc ra f t ) ,   80 
Lockheed,  Allan  H.,  157 
Lockheed-California  Go.,  115,  260,  308 
Lockheed-Georgia Co.,  57,  151, 283 
Lockheed,  Malcolm,  157 
Lockheed  Missiles  &  Space  Co.,  47 
Loftus,  Joseph  P.,  Jr.,  331 
Logan,  Joseph,  Jr.,  234 

502 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

, 55,  56,  129,  134, 

f  Commerce  and  In-  

the   A s -  
tronomy:  Po s i t ion   Pape r   of 
(NASA   SP- 
tronomy  Missions  Board 
2131,  366 
Long-Tank 
Thrust-Augmented  Thor 
(Thorad)-Agena  D 
(booster),  107, 
171,  173,  319 
Long-Tank 
Thrust-Augmented  Thor 
(LTTAT )   -Delta  (booster),  40, 150,  189- 
190,  245,  272,  388 
Loprete,  Joseph  F.,  239 
Los  Alamos  (N.  Mex.)  Scientific Labora- 
tory,  272,  281 
Loa  Angeles,  Calif.,  123,  209,  300,  382 
aerospace  industry,  71  
Apollo  flights,  reaction  to,  235-236, 
385 
astronaut’s  dinner  and  visit  to,  276, 
279,  284 
Los  Angeles  International  Airport,  102, 
279 
Lounsberrv.  Ernest  D..  4 
Lovelace, -W.  Randolph,  11,  Award,  182 
Lovell,  S ir   Bernard,  158,  224,  232,  233, 
237,  238,  244,  384 
Lovell,  Capt.  James  A,,  Jr. 
( U S N ) ,   71, 
329 . _. 
Apollo  8  mission,  32,  68 
Apo l lo   11  mission,  5 
Apollo  13 mission,  267 
appointment, 83 
awards  and  honors,  2,  6-8,  10,  68,  87, 
100,  101,  132,  298,  391 
press  conference,  6 
record,  208 
receptions  for,  9,  13 
White  House  visit,  6,  32 
Lovell,  Mrs.  James  A,,  Jr.,  329 
Low,  Dr.  Frank  J.,  417 
Low,  Dr.  George  M.,  108,  274,  317,  345, 
371,  395,  401 
Lowe,  Henry  N.,  Jr.,  398 
Lowell  Observatory,  Ariz.,  209,  366 
Lown,  Dr.  Bernard,  128 
LRL.  See  Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory. 
LST.  See  Lunar  surface  telescope. 
LTTAT.  See LongTank  Thrust-Augmented 
Thor-Delta. 
LTV  Aerospace  Corp.,  11, 91,  291 
Lucian,  232 
(W .   Ger- 
Luebke,  President  Heinrich 
many),  158 
Luna  XV  (U.S.S.R.  lunar   probe) ,   195, 
207-208,  224,  229,  232,  238,  382 
launch,  206 
moon  landing,  236,  251,  422 
press  comment,  211,  420 

(Tucson, 

Lunar  and  Planetary  Laboratory  (Tuc- 
son,  Ariz.),  397 
,Lunar  Exploration:  S t ra tegy   f o r   R e -  
search,  1969-1975 
(Space  Science 
Board  repor t) ,   355 
Lunar  Landing  Research Vehicle  (LLRV)  , 
315 
Lunar  Landing  Training Vehicle  (LLTV ) ,  
5,  103,  173,  182 
Lunar  Laser  Observatory 
Ariz.),  192 
Lunar  module  ( L M ) ,   111,  169,  182,  185, 
205,  320,  353,  365 
Apo l lo   9  ( S p i d e r )   (LM-31,  5,  26-27, 
33,  62-65,  67,  72,  81,  8P-90,  91,  130, 
421 
Apollo  10  ( S n o o p y )   (LM -41 ,   16,  90, 
142-144,  159,  421 
Apo l lo   11  ( E a g l e )   (LM-5),  21,  46, 
108,  141,  162,  179,  196,  198-199, 
210-213,  215,  217-222,  237,  255- 
256.  355 
moon’  landing,  199-200, 
212-213, 
215,  232,  252,  317,  322,  421 
moon  liftoff, 220,  222 
plaque  on,  ‘196  ’ 
Apollo  12   ( I n t r e p i d )   (LM -6 ) ,   333- 
334,  342,  362,  368,  372-379,  395- 
397 
moon  landing,  375-376,  407 
moon  liftoff,  377 
contract,  4 2 4 3  
exhibit.  105.  161-162 
Lunar  Orbiter 
(program),  187,  20% 
282-283 
Lunar  O rb i te r   1  Preliminary  Results 
(NA SA   SP-197),  187 
Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory 
(NA SA ) ,   45,  103,  259,  370 
Apo l lo   11  postage  stamp,  202 
astronauts  at,  75-76 
Apo l lo   11,  247,  260,  267,  273 
Apollo  12,  378,  397,  400,  405 
criticism, of,  95,  176 
lunar  samples, 75-76,  95 
Apollo  11,  222-223,  247,  250,  253, 
260,  261,  263,  270,  275,  288,  302- 
304,  306 
Apo l lo   12,  356,  378,  394,  395-396, 
407 
personnel,  260,  266,  273,  352-353,  400, 
405 
Lunar  Rock  Conference,  306 
Lunar  roving  vehicle  ( L R V ) ,   205,  320, 
327,  353,  355-356 
dual-mode  (D LRV ) ,   111 
Lunar  Science  Institute,  8,  75,  227 
Lunar  surface  telescope  ( L S T ) ,   123,  343 
Lundin,  Bruce  T.,  349,  404 
Lupus  (constellation),  256,  281 
Luria,  Dr.  Salvador  E.,  338 
Lutine  Bell  (Lloyd‘s  of  London),  244 
Lyman-alpha radiation,  316 
Lyons,  Kenneth  T., 253 

(LRL )  

503 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

M 

M2-F2 
(liftingbody  vehicle),  29 
M2-F3,  29 
McCarthy,  Joseph  W.,  81 
McClure,  Billy  B.,  347 
McCollum-Pratt  Institute,  184 
McConnell,  Gen.  John  P. 
(U SAF ) ,   112, 
245 
McDivitt,  Col.  James  A. 
(U SAF ) ,   5,  26- 
27.  51,  63-65,  72.  91.  161,  168,  187- 
188,  3 i 7  
MacDonald,  Dr.  Gordon  J.  F.,  263,  416 
McDonald,  Dr.  James  E.,  288 
McDonald  Observatorv,  Tex.,  17,  90, 
237,  259,  285 
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.,  410 
airlock,  128,  297 
collision  avoidance  system,  315-316 
contract,  14,  91,  123,  201,  241,  280, 
297,  299,  388,  414 
employment,  185 
F - 4   Phantom,  9,  201 
Saturn  V,  117,  280,  388 
space  station,  241,  270,  299 
STOL aircraft,  29 
Titan  IIIC,  14 
McDonnell  Douglas  Astronautics  Co., 
297 
McDowell,  James,  38 
McElroy,  Dr.  William  D.,  184,  189,  353 
Mack,  L/C Thomas  J.  ( U S A F ) ,   413 
Mackin,  Dr.  Robert  J.,  Jr.,  135 
MacLeish,  Archibald,  20 
McLucas.  John  L..  304 
McMurdo  Sound,  359 
Macy,  John  W.,  Jr.,  402 
Madrid,  Spain,  37,  52,  180,  187,  189, 
312.  327.  330.  424 
Magnet,  superconducting,  24 
Magnetic  field,  171,  173,  177,  185,  230 
Magnetosphere,  115,  185,  257,  291,  316, 
395 
- 
The   Magnitude  and  Economic  Impact  of 
General  Av ia t ion   ( s tudy ) ,   109 
Magnuson,  Sen.  Warren  G.,  133 
Maheuson,  Peter,  370 
Mahlberg,  Dr.  Paul,  103 
Mahnken,  Conrad  V.  W.,  51,  86,  110 
Mahon,  Joseph  B.,  118 
Mailer,  Norman,  135-136 
Man  of  Achievement  Award  (American 
Academy  of  Achievement),  203 
“Man  on  the  Moon”  (CBS News  record- 
ing ) ,   292 
Man  on  the  Moon  (pamph le t ) ,  234 
Man  Will  Never  Fly  Memorial  Society, 
410 
Management,  148-149,  192-193,  202 
Manchester,  U.K.,  122 
Manchester  Univ.  (U .K . ) ,   338 
Mandelbaum,  Leonard,  51 
Manhasset,  N.Y.,  382 
Manhattan  Project,  53,  161,  227 

Manila,  Philippines,  248 
Manke,  John  A.,  113,  133,  159,  184,  267, 
309,  349 
Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (MOL), 
110,  151-152,  200,  260 
appropriations,  15,  110 
cancellation,  176,  178,  179,  181,  186, 
191,  257-258,  281,  422,  423,  424 
an d   NASA,  21,  86-87,  104,  146 
pilots,  281,  289 
Manned  orbiting  platform  (MOP)  pro- 
gram  (U.S.S.R.),  382 
Manned  space  flight  (see  also  Apollo 
program,  Apollo  8,  9 ,   10,  11,  and  
12  missions;  Gemini  program;  As- 
tronaut;  Cosmonaut;  Manned  Or- 
biting  Laboratory;  Soyuz  IV ,   V,  VI, 
V U ,   and  VI11  missions;  Space  bi- 
ology;  and   Space  s ta t ion ) ,  71  
achievements.  17.  39.  47.  65.  72-73. 
91,  101,  212,  246-247,  259,  262,  372; 
378,  384 
advantages.  17-18.  74-75.  242 
cooperason,  248 
criticism,  82,  167,  204,  262,  289,  423 
EVA.  See  Extravehicular  activity. 
funding,  14-15,  28,  29,  109-110,  356 
hazards,  80,  157,  281,  327 
longduration,  94,  178, 200,  337-338 
lunar 
landing,  manned.  See  Moon 
landing,  manned. 
military  aspects,  86-87,  104,  200 
policy  and  plans 
US.,  15-16,  18-19,  37,  47,  51,  66- 
67,  72,  74,  80,  81-82,  86-87,  94- 
95,  104,  119-120,  134,  167-168, 
214-215,  268-269,  304-305,  313, 
320,  367-369,  371,  384,  405,  416, 
422-423 
U.S.S.R., 
120,  170-171,  241-242,  292 
Manned  Space  Flight  Network  (M S F N )  , 
10,  117,  196,  362 
Manned 
Spacecraft  Center 
(M S C )  
( N A S A ) ,   27,  74,  185,  231,  233,  245, 
249,  288,  289,  290,  312,  337,  339, 
365,  366 
Apollo  spacecraft,  65,  145,  223-224, 
230 
astronauts  at,  61,  75-76,  114,  198, 200, 
273,  276,  277,  330,  391 
award,  10,  91.  287,  289,  340.  345- 
346,  419 
facilities,  114,  334,  383 
Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory.  See  Lu- 
nar  Receiving  Laboratory. 
lunar  rock  sample  exhibit,  353-354 
management,  47,  65,  223-224,  378 
National  Seminar  for  Manned  Flight 
Awareness,  317 
personnel,  131,  259,  282,  292,  317,  326, 
347,  417 
press  conference,  61,  77,  108,  198, 242- 
243,  277-278,  280-281,  333-334,  350, 
371-372,  392,  396,  406-408 
quarantine  procedures  (see  also  Lunar 

504 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

328 

(moon) ,  

138, 256, 

Receiving  Laboratory),  75-76,  141, 
179-180,  273,  356 
real-time  computer  complex,  334 
space  station,  299 
spacecraft  test.  See  Apollo 
(space- 
craf t)  . 
visits  to  
visits  to  
cosmonauts,  337,  350 
cosmonauts,  337,  350 
Haile  Selassie, Emperor  of  Ethiopia, 
Haile  Selassie, Emperor  of  Ethiopia, 
205 
205 
Mannhe&,  W.  Germany,  225 
Mansfield,  Sen.  Michael  J.,  224, 
,  296 
(Philip- 
Marcos,  President  Ferdinand  E. 
pines),  248 
Mar  del  Plata,  Argentina,  327, 
Mare  Imbrium  (moon) ,   180 
Mare  Marginis  (moon),  180 
Mare  Occulum  (Hidden  Sea)  
180 
Marietta,  Ga.,  411 
Mariner  (program) ,   15,  23,  56, 
359 
Mariner  (spacecraft),  359 
Mariner  I11  (Mars  probe) ,   55 
Mariner  I V   (Mars  probe) ,   54,  89,  210, 
253,  421 
Mariner  Y  (Venus  probe),  127,  160 
Mariner  V I   (Mariner  F )   (Mars  p ro b e ) ,  
117,  167,  187,  250 
launch,  55 
photographs,  90,  210,  250,  252,  253, 
262,  266,  282 
results,  133,  261,  262,  266,  269,  298, 
301-302,  338-339,  408,  421 
Mariner  V I 1   (Mariner G )   (Mars probe) ,  
55,  117,  167,  187 
control, 99,  103,  253,  254,  259 
launch,  92 
photographs,  90,  210,  252,  253-254, 
259,  261,  262-263,  265,  266,  269 
results,  133,  262,  265-266,  301-302, 
338-339,  407408 ,   421 
Mark,  Dr.  Hans  M.,  53,  332,  389 
Mark  12  (reentry  vehicle),  330,  408 
Mark  15, 391 
Marks,  Leonard  H.,  56,  88 
Marquette,  Father,  Tercentenary  Com- 
mission,  365 
Marquette,  Pere,  Discovery  Award,  365 
Marquette  Univ.,  365 
Mars  (planet) 
(see  also  Mariner  111, 
Mariner  I V ,   Mariner  VI,  Mariner 
V I I ,  and  Viking  program),  105,  146, 
320 
atmosphere,  55,  75,  92-93, 
184-185, 
250,  261,  266,  269,  293,  298,  301, 
338,  398,  408.  421 
T h e   Book  of  Mars, 89 
canals,  261,  262,  266 
color,  3% 
craters,  261,  262,  269-270,  282,  301 
ephemeris,  338 
equatorial  region, 338 
exploration  of,  74-75,  94,  147,  169, 
176,  187,  197,  235-236,  247,  260, 

250, 
266, 

262,  268-269,  271-272,  276,  337 
benefits,  337 
cost,  336-337 
funding,  67,  262,  270,  271 
international  cooperation,  248 
manned,  95,  178,  205,  224,  231,  242, 
247,  262,  266,  268,  269,  271,  276, 
277,  283,  288,  305,  320,  325,  344, 
371,  399 
plans  for,  15-16,  57,  136,  205,  231, 
293,  343,  344,  359,  398,  399,  412, 
4 2 2 4 2 3  
spacecraft,  15-16,  59,  160,  205,  338, 
359,  412 
unmanned,  256,  271,  283,  421 
ionosnhere.  408 
l ife   i n ,   55,  90,  94,  185,  261,  269-270, 
271,  302,  308,  398 
mass,  339 
photographs  of,  55,  89,  90,  210, 
252.  .259.  261.  262-263.  265. 
2821  %1,'339,  398,  421 
' 
poles,  252,  262-263,  265,  266 
265, 
surface,  55,  92,  250,  252,  261, 
, 421 
269-270.  282.  301.  338.  398.  408 
temperature,  55,  250,  261,  268 
water  on,  90,  261,  269,  293,  302 
Marshall,  Justice  Frederick  M.,  2 
Marshall  Saace  Flight  Center 
(M S F C )  
(NA SA ) ;   71,  105;  116,  122,  195,  270, 
(NA SA ) ;   71,  105;  116,  122,  195,  270, 
290,  317,  417 
290,  317,  417 
Apollo  Telescope  Mount,  12,  71,  177, 
Apollo  Telescope  Mount,  12,  71,  177, 
320,  327 
320,  327 
Astrionics  Laboratory,  347 
award,  10,  69,  147, 288,  326 
contract,  11,  25,  58,  17,  91,  105,  111, 
113,  177,  205,  270,  271,  297,  299, 
320,  327 
Saturn,  25,  47,  49,  77,  87,  91,  94, 
101,  104,  113,  117,  132,  315,  388 
Engineering  Laboratory,  83 
launch  vehicle.  See  Saturn. 
lunar  rock  sample  exhibit,  400 
Lunar  roving  vehicle  (LRV), 111,  205, 
320,  327 
management,  64,  113,  146,  223-224, 
378 
meeting,  122,  156 
Neutral  Buoyancy  Simulator,  17 
personnel,  13,  77,  103,  185,  187-188, 
251,  255,  325,  360,  393 
Saturn  I  Workshop,  1.14,  297,  327,  388 
Space  Sciences  Laboratory,  76-77 
Space  Technology  Applications  and 
Research  Laboratory  ( STARLAB ) ,   285 
space  station,  128,  270,  299 
Marsten,  Dr.  Richard  B.,  139 
Marti,  Kurt,  403 
Martin,  James  S.,  Jr.,  111 
Martin-Marietta  Airport,  Baltimore,  315 
Martin  Marietta  Corp.,  85,  160, 270,  351, 
386,  387,  402 
Martin,  Minta,  Lecture,  75 
Maryland,  Univ.  of,  71,  75,  182,  395,  399 
Mascon  (mass  concentration  of  gravita- 
tional  pu l l ) ,   73,  116,  120,  180,  283 

505 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Mason,  Dr.  Bryan H.,  304 
Mason,  Harold  P.,  293 
Mason-Rust  Co.,  58 
Massachusetts  Ins t i tu te   of  Technology 
(NIT),  35,  89,  131,  178,  347,  409, 
416,  417 
award,  178 
Div.  of  Sponsored  Research,  14 
experiment,  118 
Instrumentation  Laboratory,  338,  363, 
369,  416,  420 
Lincoln  Laboratory,  288,  369 
Martin,  Minta,  Lecture,  75 
military 
research, 
demonstrations 
against,  67,  136,  363,  369 
Union  of  Concerned  Scientists,  40 
Massachusetts,  Univ.  of,  396 
Materials  technology,  58,  85,  203,  350, 
362,  363,  384 
Mathematics,  1 
Mathews,  Dr.  Charles  W.,  131,  346,  406 
Mathias,  Sen.  Charles  McC.,  Jr.,  13,  312 
Mattingly,  L /Cd r   Thomas  K.,  I1  (USN), 
267 
Maurer  camera,  217 
Maus,  Hans  H.,  256 
Maxwell  AFB,  Ala.,  411 
Maxwell,  M / G   Jewell  C.  (USAF ) ,   127,  186 
May,  Chester  B.,  103,  282 
Mayer,  Dr.  Jean,  417 
Mead,  Dr.  Margaret,  201 
Medal  of  Freedom,  280 
“Meet  the   Press”  (TV  program),  145 
Melbourne,  Univ.  of,  319,  399 
Melville  Space  and  Defense  Systems 
Div.,  Control  Data  Corp.,  388 
Memorandum  of  Understanding,  30,  176 
Men  of  the   Year,  2 
Menconi,  Ralph  J.,  275 
Mercator,  Gerardus,  294 
Mercator  projection,  294 
Mercury  (p lane t ) ,   16,  69,  76,  110,  119, 
134,  138,  147 
Mercury  (program),  357 
Mercury  compounds,  128 
Meredith,  Scott,  135,  136 
MESA.  See  Modularized  equipment  stow- 
age   assembly. 
Meteor,  279,  287 
Meteor  I  (U.S.S.R.  meteorological  satel- 
l i te ) ,   91,  422 
Meteor  11,  329,  422 
Meteor  Crater,  Ariz.,  338 
Meteorite,  28,  45,  403,  416 
Meteorological  satellite  (see  also  iudi- 
vidual  satellites,  such  as  A t s   Ill, A t s  
I V ,   Essa  IX, Meteor  I ,   Me teo r   I I ,  
N imbu s   I ,   N imbu s   11,  N imbu s   I I I ) ,  
33,  43,  47,  111,  157,  357 
Barbados  Oceanographic  and   Meteoro- 
logical  Experiment,  88 
cooperation,  45,  88,  205 
GlobaI  Atmospheric  Research  Pro- 
gram,  88,  204 
ITOS  program,  344 

Nimbus  program,  18,  23,  86,  88,  107- 
108,  139,  205,  353,  414,  421,422,  423 
T iros   program,  23,  57,  85,  344,  399, 
414 
U.S.S.R.,  91,  329,  422 
Meteorology,  42,  44, 78,  86,  88,  132,  139, 
204.  353 
- 7   - - -  
Metric  system,  317 
Metroliner  (high-speed  tra in) ,   17 
Mettler,  Ruben  F.,  329 
Metzenbaum,  Howard  M.,  411 
Mexico,  146,  299,  370 
Mexico  City,  Mexico,  312,  319 
Meyer,  Karl  E.,  161 
Mi-10  (U.S.S.R.  helicopter),  35 
Miami,  Fla.,  103,  123,  148,  206 
Miami  Beach,  Fla.,  410 
Miami,  Univ.  of,  123 
Institute  of  Marine  Science,  273 
Michel,  Dr.  F.  Curtis,  267,  287 
Michigan,  28 
Michigan,  Univ.  of,  136,  286 
Mental  Health  Research  Institute,  396 
Michoud  Assembly  Facility  (MSFC )   , 58, 
118,  256,  260,  299 
Micrometeoroid,  159,  279,  287 
Microminiaturization,  196 
Midwav  Island.  112 
MiG  (0.S.S.R. ’fighter  a i rc ra f t ) ,   1 
Military  Airlift  Command,  411 
Milky  Way  (galaxy),  115,  118,  316 
Milledgeville,  Ga.,  88 
Miller,  Prof.  Charles  L.,  338 
Miller,  Rep.  George  P.,  18,  113,  138,  275 
Miller,  Dr.  Joseph  S.,  42 
Miller,  Dr.  Maynard  M.,  2 
Miller  and   Berry,  320 
Mineralogical  Society  of  America,  290 
Mink  experiment,  352 
Minneapolis,  Minn.,  206 
Minnesota,  Univ.  of,  31  
Institute  of  Technology,  38,  42 
Minuteman  (missile),  230,  297 
Mirage  (French  fighter  a i rc ra f t ) ,   162 
Mirage 
(French 
supersonic 
fighter- 
bomber  a ircraf t) ,   197 
MIRV.  See  Multiple  independently  target- 
able  reentry  vehicle. 
Missile 
antiballistic  missile 
( A B M ) ,   33,  39, 
40,  43,  47,  52,  62,  80,  81,  83,  89,  103, 
112,  117,  124,  131,  136,  230,  320 
award,  345 
contract,  191,  362 
detection,  183,  321 
foreign 
Communist  China,  43,  80,  181 
U.S.S.R.,  10,  43,  48,  50,  53,  62,  89, 
116,  129,  131,  140,  181,  183,  229, 
332 
interc&kineutal  ballistic 
( ICBM ) ,   48, 
140.  230.  297 
limitation  6f,  13,  21,  67,  81,  86,  131, 
155,  173,  181,  183,  190,  196,  332 
multiple  independently  targetable  re- 

506 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

as- 

entry  vehicle  (M IRV ) ,  10,  116,  183, 
190,  191 
nuclear,  10,  81,  86,  129,  135,  155,  181 
test,  173,  181,  183,  191,  325 
underwater-to-surface,  155,  197,  362 
Mission  Control  Center 
( N A S A ) ,   137, 
215,  220,  374 
Mission  of  the   Doctor  award,  341 
Mississippi  Test  Facility  (MTF), 24,  104, 
182,  185,  188,  360 
MIT.  See  Massachusetts 
Institute  of 
Technology. 
Mitchell,  Cdr.  Edgar  D.  ( U S N ) ,   267 
Mitchell,  Jesse  L.,  154 
Mobile  quarantine  facility  (MQ F ) ,  223, 
247,  356,  377-378,  396 
Mobutu,  President  Joseph  D.  (Congo), 
350 
Modularized 
stowage 
equipment 
sembly  (MESA),  217,  331,  376,  407 
Moe  ( e lk ) ,   328 
Moeckel,  Wolfgang  E.,  338 
Mogadiscio,  Somalia,  234 
Mohler,  Dr.  Stanley  R.,  180 
Mohole,  Project,  290 
Mojave,  Calif.,  402 
MOL.  See  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory. 
Mo ln iya   I-11  (U.S.S.R.  communications 
satellite),  106 
Mo ln iya   I-12,  237 
Moltke  Crater  (moon),  159 
Monkey  experiment,  190,  200,  201-202, 
335,  347-348,  415,  421 
Monochromator,  309,  411 
Monroney,  Sen.  A.  S.  Mike,  88-89 
Montclair,  N.J.,  243-244 
Montclair,  N.J.,  Library,  298 
Montgomery,  Ala.,  400 
Montreal,  Canada,  312,  322 
Moon  (see  also  Apollo  missions,  Lunar 
Orbiter,  Lunar  Receiving  Lahora- 
tory,  etc.),  131,  136,  142,  420 
base,  123,  160,  169,  250,  305,  387,  398 
colonization  of,  102,  134,  191,  397 
color,  217,  408 
contamination  from.  76.  136-137.  141. 
156,  175,  176,-  i79,  '181,  205,'  235; 
261,  270,  273,  274,  302,  303,  356 
crater,  173,  200.  208,  209.  215,  249, 
345,' 376 
distance  from  earth,  261 
exploration  of,  2,  14,  47,  48,  50,  59, 
73,  74-75,  82,  96,  110,  111,  113, 
119,  129,  147,  148,  149,  160,  164, 
167,  169,  170,  175,  177,  185,  308, 
313,  317,  331,  355 
international  cooperation,  102 
manned,  67,  108 
globe,  208 
gravity,  157,  340 
laboratory,  278 
landing,  169,  197 
equipment,  80,  111, 388 
manned,  33,  37,  43,  46, 53,  55,  67, 
72,  74, 75,  77,  82,  90,  91,  92, 

103,  106,  108-109,  111,  120,  122, 
134,  137,  143,  144,  146,  147, 
149,  262,  267,  271,  272,  278, 
281,  287,  325,  351,  405,  411, 
418,  420,  421,  423 
anniversary,  202 
commemorative  stamp,  202,  273, 
289 
criticism,  204 
implications  of,  238,  307,  311,  322 
legal  aspects,  290 
memorial  sculpture,  304 
plans  for,  168,  169,  170,  176,  178, 
179,  182,  185,  187,  188,  325, 
334,  342,  354,  356,  368 
U.S.,  199,  208,  212,  252,  362,  368, 
370,  372,  384,  385,  389,  390, 
391,  392,  398 
commemoration  of,  196,  254 
plans  for,  205,  207,  243 
U.S.S.R.,  246,  361,  365 
soft,  141,  382 
unmanned,  35,  141,  170,  189.  339. 
365.  370.  419.  423 
U.S%:R.,  i36,  251,-382 
landing  site,  7,  35,  67,  77,  82,  90,  116, 
142.  342.  345.  356.  368,  369,  377.  378 
laser  'experiment,  114,  192,  219, ' 223, 
236,  237,  259,  261,  285,  339,  419 
life  on,  103,  167,  261,  270,  275,  313 
lunar  orbit,  record,  208,  250 
magnetic  field,  230 
mascon,  93,  116,  120,  180,  283 
mining,  191,  387 
nuclear  explosion  on,  proposed,  167, 
409,  412,  413 
observatory,  169 
origin  of,  198,  241,  292,  332,  360,  409 
passenger  flight  to,  241,  244 
photographs  of,  90,  92,  116,  159,  179, 
187,  201,  208,  218,  219,  220,  241, 
252,  253,  255,  306,  325,  334,  343, 
376,  395,  405,  407,  4Q9,  419 
probe,  Luna XV,  200 
seismic  experiment,  114,  223,  230,  237, 
240,  248,  325,  342,  354,  376,  377, 
419 
solar  wind  experiment,  219,  223,  230, 
285,  315,  413,  419 
station.  167.  388 
surface,  7 , '   20,  28,  34-35, 
103,  141, 
146,  152,  159,  160,  174,  187,  189, 
240.  308,  338,  340.  419 
analvsis  of.  198;  250:  360 
composition,  250,  376 
glazing,  317 
-220,  223, 
sample,  195,  200,  208,  219 
243,  246,  247,  250, 
253,  2%. 
260,  262,  267,  275, 
285,  290, 
301,  302,  304,  306, 
307,  312, 
356,  360, 
325,  339,  343,  354, 
380,  386, 
365,  373,  376,  379, 
387.  393.  398.  412 
biological  tests,'  261,  293 
exhibit,  309,  314,  401,  412 

507 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

preliminary  study,  270,  288,  292, 
306 
tavern,  317 
telescope  on,  123,  332,  342 
TV   telecasts  from,  210,  217,  362,  373, 
374 
volcanic  activity,  139,  187,  212,  339, 
418 
water  on,  167,  275,  313,  332,  398 
“Moon  In”  (Central  Park,  New  York) ,  
233 
“Moon  Maiden”  ( song ) ,  279 
Moore,  David,  204 
Moore,  George  S.,  123 
Moore,  Wendell  F.,  161 
Moorer,  Adm.  Thomas  H.  ( U S N ) ,   180 
MOP.  See  Manned  orbiting  platform. 
Moravia,  Alberto,  321 
Morea,  Saverio  F.,  185 
Moritz,  Bernard,  130 
Morocco,  146 
Moscow,  12,  152,  185,  339,  362 
antimissile  defense,  50 
astronaut  visit,  195, 202 
cosmonaut  ceremony,  23,  33,  349 
lunar  rock  exhibit,  412 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
treaty  sign- 
ing,  370,  392-393 
press  conference,  21,  372 
Moser,  Dr.  Jiirgen  K.,  121 
Moslems,  226,  234 
Motorcycle,  129 
Mt.  Everest,  303 
Mt.  Hopkins,  Ariz.,  405 
Mt.  Palomar  Observatory,  341,  367 
Mountain  View,  Calif.,  361 
MQF.  See Mobile  quarantine  facility. 
M S 4  (Japanese  rocket),  290-291 
MSC.  See  Manned  Spacecraft  Center. 
MSFC.  See Marshall  Space  Flight  Center. 
MSFN .   See  Manned  Space  Flight  Net- 
work. 
MU3D  (Japanese  rocket),  284 
Mueller,  Dr.  George  E.,  131,  274,  405 
Apollo  Applications,  67 
Apollo  program,  73,  74,  77,  88,  262 
award,  10,  300,  346 
’ 
earth  resources  satellite,  33 
lunar   exploration,  67,  74,  123,  157,  246 
manned  space  flight,  73,  74 
press  conference,  29,  77,  242-243 
resignation,  368,  399 
reusable  launch  and  space  vehicles, 
266 
space  program,  29,  243,  262 
space  shuttle,  350 
space  station,  74,  131,  267 
U.S.S.R. 
space  program,  29,  207-208 
Muller,  Pau l   M.,  116,  120 
Multiple  docking  adapter,  128 
Multiple  independently  targetable  reen- 
try  vehicle  (M I R V ) ,   10,  116,  183,  190, 
332 
Mumford,  Lewis,  201 
Murphy,  Sen.  George  L.,  150 

Murray,  Dr.  Bruce  C.,  282 
Muscat  and   Oman  (sultanate),  48  
Museum,  space  (proposed),  346 

N 

N A A .   See  National  Aeronautics  Assn. 
NAE .   See  National  Academy  of  Engineer- 
ing. 
NA F EC .   See  National  Aviation  Facilities 
Experimental  Center. 
Nagako,  Empress  ( J a p a n ) ,   361 
Nance,  Richard  L.,  339 
NA S .   See  National  Academy  of  Sciences. 
NA SA .   See  National  Aeronautics  and 
Space  Administration. 
N A S A   Apollo  Lunar  Exploration  Office, 
74 
NA SA   Apollo  Program  Office,  68-69 
N A S A   Astronomy  Missions  Board,  156, 
256,  366 
N A S A   Communications  Network 
( N A S -  
C O M )  , 292 
N A S A   Historical  Advisory  Committee,  178 
N A S A   Launch  Vehicle  Review  Board,  385 
N A S A   Office  o f   Advanced  Research  and 
Technology 
( O A R T ) ,   21,  84,  87,  212, 
368 
NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space  Flight 
( O M S F ) ,   22,  145,  223,  292,  378,  415 
NASA  Office  of  Public  Affairs,  10 
NASA  Office  of  Space  Science  and  Appli- 
( O S S A ) ,   76,  78,  118,  173, 
cations 
190,  245,  277,  292,  403 
Lunar  and   Planetary  Programs  Div., 
55 
NASA  Office  of  Tracking  and   Data Acqui- 
sition  ( O T D A ) ,   65,  145,  224,  378 
NASA  Physics  Advisory  Committee,  355 
NASA  Preliminary  Examination  Team 
( P E T ) ,   306,  419 
NASA   Science  and  Technology  Advisory 
Committee  for  Manned  Space  Flight, 
94 
NASA  Space  Shuttle  Task  Group,  336, 
354 
NASC.  See  National  Aeronautics  and 
Space  Council. 
NASCOM .   See  NASA   Communications  Net- 
work. 
NAS-NRC  Space  Science  Board.  See  Na- 
tional  Academy  of  Sciences  and  Na- 
tional  Research  Council. 
Nassau,  Bahamas,  409 
Natal,  Brazil,  179,  186,  188 
National  Academy 
Engineering 
of 
( N A E )  , 99,  189 
Committee  on  Public  Engineering 
Policy,  257 
National  Academy  of  Sciences  ( N A S I ,  2, 
184,  314,  410 
advisory  committee  to  HUD,  189 
annua l .  meeting,  121 
antiballistic  missile  ( A B M )   system,  89 

508 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

applications  satellite  study,  47 
award,  121 
Committee  on  Atmospheric  Sciences, 
409 
cooperation,  141 
food  management  for  aerospace  ve- 
hicles  conference,  110 
Lunar  Science  Institute,  8,  75-76,  227 
president,  election  of,  19 
report,  19,  136,  257,  263,  343,  355 
space  program,  19,  136,  226,  263,  355 
Space  Science  Board,  19,  94,  124,  136, 
164,  167,  263,  390,  343,  347 
Committee  on  Space  Medicine,  164 
Universities  Organizing  Committee  for 
Space  Sciences,  8 
UFO  study  review,  5,  411 
World  Data  Center  A  for  Rockets  and 
Satellites,  1 
National  Aeronautic  Assn.  ( N A A ) ,   101 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Act, 
300,  323,  405 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Admin- 
istration 
(see  also  NASA 
(NA SA )  
centers,  programs,  satellites,  and  re- 
lated  headings,  such  a s   Ames  Re- 
search  Center,  Apollo  program,  Essa  
ZX), 75,  79,  86,  87,  135,  300,  304, 
313,  323,  337 
accomplishments,  1,  7,  10,  13,  14, 
16,  18,  25,  38,  64,  65,  68,  71,  77,  80, 
92,  145,  160, 212,  230,  242,  246,  251, 
372,  421,  4 2 2 4 2 3  
agreement.  See  International  coopera- 
tion,  space ;   and  Treaty. 
anniversary,  33,  51,  83,  323 
Apollo  Orbital  Science  Photographic 
Team,  410 
Apollo  204  Review  Board.  See  Apollo 
204  Review  Board. 
astronaut.  See  astronaut. 
Astronomy  Missions  Board,  4,  156,  256 
awards  and  honors,  2,  6,  8,  10,  22, 
32. 33.  38.  43.  46.  47.  49.  59.  68- 
_ _   _ _  
69:  72;  87;  100-101,  i17,  ’118,‘ 123, 
138-139,  168,  200,  204,  237,  251, 
255.  266.  279-280.  288-289,  326, 
337;  3451346,  3461347,  350,  360, 
362,  364,  371,  387,  388,  403,  419 
Apollo  Achievement  Award,  362 
Distinguished  Pub l ic   Service  Certifi- 
cate,  326 
Distinguished  Pub l ic   Service  Medal, 
154,  346-347 
Distinguished  Service  Medal,  10,  13, 
91,  154,  280,  287,  326,  346 
Exceptional  Bravery  Medal,  347 
Exceptional  Scientific  Achievement 
Medal,  10,  13,  326,  347 
Exceptional  Service  Medal,  91,  287, 
326,  347 
Group  Achievement  Award,  154,  346 
Outstanding  Leadership  Award,  371 
Public  Service  Award,  92,  347 
budget,  FY  1970,  3,  5 -6 ,   14-16,  22, 

28, 38,  106,  108-110,  115,  116, 
122,  147,  163,  167,  204,  208,  305, 
390,  423 
bills  signed,  383,  395 
House  consideration 
appropriations,  184,  186,  381-382 
authorization,  18,  66,  67,  69,  70, 
71,  74,  78,  84,  85,  91,  108-109, 
112-113,  117,  118,  138,  147,  176, 
276,  329,  337,  361,  363 
press  comment,  4,  28,  81-82,  95,  108, 
155,  163,  421 
Senate  consideration 
appropriations,  364-365,  369,  382, 
383 
authorization,  24,  118,  120,  123, 
127,  130,  131,  134,-  160,  186, 
265-266,  270,  307,  311,  312,  330, 
361,  365 
conference,  17,  106,  111, 122,  169,  317, 
337,  375,  384,  411 
contract,  25,  35 
aeronautics,  335 
aircraft,  300 
communications  system,  241,  386 
computer  services,  71,  88,  177,  203, 
335 
engine,  32,  70,  79,  85,  91,  212,  291, 
379-380 
facilities.  271.  320 
guidance  and’navigation,  13 
instrumentation,  11,  24,  76,  91,  253 
launch  vehicle,  47,  49,  70,  77,  88, 
91,  94,  100,  113,  117,  133,  154, 
278,  297,  315,  355,  389 
life  support  system,  123,  173 
nuclear  propulsion,  93,  105 
space  equipment,  21,  92-94,  111, 
297,  320,  327,  353 
space  shuttle,  26,  4 8  
space  station,  11,  26,  240,  270,  299 
spacecraft,  30,  43,  46,  59,  70,  154, 
160,  297,  340,  351,  401 
study,  38,  47,  105.,  111,  128,  151, 
187, 240,  270,  340 
support  services,  1,  24,  30,  38,  47, 
59,  85,  88,  91,  100,  104,  114,  292, 
293 
telescope,  71,  177,  320,  327 
tracking,  189,  196 
cooperation,  103,  111,  170, 402 
AEC,  88,  105,  178,  310,  332,  422 
Commerce,  Dept.  of,  88 
ComSatCorp,  178 
DOD,  11,  34,  38,  87,  88,  146,  152, 
153,  176-177,  345,  368,  379,  389, 
417 
ESSA,  356,  414,  417 
Interior,  Dept.  of,  51,  356 
NSF, 88,  356 
Transportation,  Dept.  of,  88,  417 
USA,  49,  334,  379 
USAF,  21,  29,  86,  119,  146,  176,  192, 
205,  258,  321,  336,  363,  389,  405, 
421 

509 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

U.S.  Bureau  of  Mines,  387 
U.S.  Coast  Guard,  51 
USN, 44, 51,  119 
cooperation,  international.  See  In ter-  
national  cooperation,  space;  and  
Sounding  rocket,  international  pro- 
grams. 
criticism,  176,  204,  205,  231,  272,  284, 
287,  289,  340,  364,  367-368,  398,  413, 
415,  418,  423 
employment, 66,  69,  197,  231,  361,  363, 
390.  422-423 
exhibit,  105 ,762 ,   403,  405,  417 
facilities,  176,  245,  277,  312,  329,  362, 
383,  417.  418.  423 
history,  351,  353,  357 
inaugural  parade  float,  21 
launch,  23,  420 
Apo l lo   9  (AS-504),  62 
Ap0110  10  (AS-505),  142 
Apo l lo   11  (AS-506),  211-223 
Apo l lo   12   (AS-507),  372-378 
failure 
Intelsat-I11 F-1,  135 
In te l sa t - I l l   F-5,  245,  281 
Pioneer  E,  291 
postponed,  61,  62,  107,  108 
probe 
Mariner  V I   (Mariner  F ) ,  55 
Mariner  V I 1   (Mariner  G ) ,  94 
satellite,  22-23,  30,  3 9 4 0 ,   57,  107, 
173,  185,  189-190,  245,  323,  364, 
388-389 
A t s   V  (ATS -E ) ,   276 
A zu r   (GRS -A ) ,   364 
( Biosatellite-D) , 
111 
Biosatellite 
189-190 
Boreas  (Esro  I B ) ,  323 
Essa  IX  (TOS-G)  , 58 
Explorer  X L I   ( IMP < ) ,  
In te l sa t - I l l   F-3,  39-40 
I S i S   I  ( IS IS - -A ) ,   30 
Nimbus I I I   (Nimbus-B2),  107 
OgO  V I   (OGO -F ) ,   171 
OS0  v  (OSO-F),  22 
os0  V I   (oso -c ) ,   272 
Skyne t   A  
( IDCSP -A ) ,   389 
sounding  rocket 
Aerobee  150,  49,  78,  80,  179,  302, 
361,  402,  409 
Aerobee  150A, 139 
Aerobee  150 MI,  9,  38,  42,  43,  65- 
66,  71,  104,  108,  111,  113,  118, 
141,  179,  184,  186, 299,  309,  314, 
316,  326,  337,  361,  410 
Aerobee  170,  298 
Aerobee  350,  27 
Arcas,  18,  19,  33,  41,  354 
Astrobee  1500, 335 
Black  Brant  IIIB,  59,  127 
Black  Brant  IV,  312 
Black  Brant  VB,  366 
Boosted Arcas  11, 28,  332 
B d p u p  Cajun,  178 
Javelin,  188 

185 

510 

Nike-Apache,  33-34, 
41,  43,  48, 
49,  51-52,  54,  58,  106,  113,  118, 
120, 135,  159,  176,  189, 279,  286, 
287,  300,  303,  402,  408 
Nike-Cajun,  9,  18,  19,  21,  23,  24, 
25,  27,  28,  30,  31,  33-34,  38,  41, 
94,  132, 133,  135 
Nike-Tomahawk, 27-28,  29,  49,  71, 
72,  83,  112-113,  133,  211-212, 
286,  327 
Orion  E,  79 
Pacemaker,  203 
Sidewinder-Arcas, 79 
legal  suit,  270,  283,  394,  401 
Lunar  Landing  Training  Vehicle,  5, 
173,  182 
Lunar  Planetary  Missions  Board,  94 
management,  15,  24,  148,  167,  195, 
203,  254,  276,  287,  390 
Management  Advisory  Council,  70 
manpower.  See  Employment. 
memorial,  lunar  landing,  304 
organization,  139, 167,  274,  332 
patents,  4,  82 
Performance  Evaluation  Board.  70 
personnel,  9,  42,  46,  67-68,  80,’87,  100, 
103,  115,  116,  129,  136,  139,  188, 
260,  274,  281,  289.  290,  291,  293, 
299,  300;  304,  323;  360;  362,  371, 
394-  395.  396.  399.  400.  417 
appointment,  7,  19,  20,  ’53,-  70,  76, 
z 
z
-
 
83,  173,  185,  251,  285,  290,  304, 
317.  319,  325.  326.  332.  339.  353. 
403:  405:  410:  412’ 
’ 
’ 
‘ 
resignation;  135:  251,  259,  267,  292, 
297,  340,  347,  352,  368,  371 
retirement,  13.  19,  53.  256.  349 
procurement,  25 
 
I
,
programs 
aeronautics,  11,  15,  16,  39,  42,  44, 
, 65,  70,  78,  84,  110,  113,  120,  121, 
123,  138,  177,  205,  212,  263,  321, 
334,  362,  368,  379,  398,  400,  417, 
4 2 1 4 2 2  
art,  226,  403 
astronomy,  3,  15,  16,  22,  23,  28,  35, 
37,  55,  57,  66,  73,  76,  85,  89,  92, 
94,  111,  119,  123,  136,  138,  160, 
192,  257,  263,  266,  276,  283,  305, 
318,  328,  337,  359,  361,  367,  412 
communications, 23,  37,  39,  150,  151, 
402 
earth  resources,  15,  16,  33,  37,  47, 
49,  66,  69,  85,  119,  138,  151,  161, 
163,  305,  308,  328,  337,  339,  357 
historv.  357 
international,  7,  21,  26,  30,  59,  74, 
.I 
85,  103,  167,  169,  177,  202,  268, 
305,  309,  311,  411,  4 2 3 4 2 4  
manned  space  flight,  6,  15,  16,  18, 
19,  23,  27,  28,  33,  47,  64,  66,  74, 
77,  82,  86,  91,  94,  104,  109,  111, 
119,  134,  151,  163,  178,  208,  223, 
237,  260,  266,  308,  312,  321,  331, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

343-344,  355,  367,  371,  378,  390, 
421 
meG&ology,  23,  47,  57,  69,  85,  107, 
151,  204,  3 4 4   353,  409,  414 
nuclear  propulsion,  16,  37,  77,  105, 
109,  130,  138,  260,  268,  269,  309, 
332,  383,  399,  404,  422 
soundme rocket.  124.  421 
space  medicine,'  18, '19,  23,  51,  72, 
76,  78,  123,  128,  130-131,  136,  138, 
154,  164,  189,  190,  200,  201-202, 
206,  273,  335-336.  348-349.  367- 
368,  415 
space reqcue,  21,  315 
space  science,  15,  37,  77,  78,  120, 
134,  136,  151,  167,  171,  185,  305, 
308,  331,  337,  338,  355 
space  station,  15,  16,  17,  66,  73,  83, 
86,  94,  111,  120,  138,  146,  167, 
169,  237,  241,  260,  266,  268,  269, 
305,  328,  343,  344 
technology  utilization,  23,  66,  70,  75, 
127,  202,  274,  337,  362 
tracking  and   da ta   acquisition,  37, 
149,  187,  210,  267,  307,  423 
Science and  Technology Advisory  Com- 
mittee  for  Manned  Space  Fiight,  94 
Semiannual  ReDort  to   Congress .   371 
Space  Task  Group  repor<  305,  308, 
312-313 
test,  17, 403 
aircraft.  263.  405.  421 
ion  eniine.  47 
' 
launch-  vehicle,  103,  185,  195,  196, 
272,  360,  412 
lifting-bodv  vehicle.  29.  101.  112, 
11t  133,  148,  159,  174,  184,  240; 
267,  286,  297,  299,  300,  316,  319, 
349,  352,  360,  371,  381,  389,  394, 
407,  421 
Lunar  Landing  Training,  103,  182 
nuclear,  87,  178,  190,  294,  310,  410 
parachute,  79,  183 
spacecraft,  117,  195,  196, 351 
universities.  3.  25.  56.  106.  109.  156. 
227,  304,'363,  368,  382,  415 
I
,
X-15.  See X-15. 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Council 
(NA SC )  
award,  87 
Chairman,  20,  54,  66,  91,  294,  320,  419 
Executive  Secretary,  49,  87,  147,  184, 
257,  281,  327 
President's  Space  Task  Group  recom- 
mendation,  167,  171 
National  Air  and   Space  Museum,  297, 
344 
National  Air  Exposition,  Second,  283 
National  Amateur  Astronomers  conven- 
tion,  288 
National  Anti-aviation  Citation  Presen- 
tation,  410 
National  Archives,  405 
National Assn.  of  Government  Employees, 
253 

National  Aviation  Club,  Award 
for 
Achievement,  127 
National  Aviation  Facilities  Experimental 
Center  (NAFEC ) ,   89 
National  Aviation  Planning  Commission 
(proposed),  26 
(NBC )   , 146, 
National  Broadcasting  Co. 
357 
National  Center  for  Atmospheric  Re- 
search,  167,  409 
National  Civil  Service  League,  122 
National  Collegiate Athletic  Assn.,  83 
National  Conference  on  Pub l ic   Admin- 
istration,  1969,  148 
National  Council  on  Marine  Resources 
and  Engineering  Development,  56,  99 
National  Day  of  Participation  (A p o l l o  11 
mission),  224,  230 
National  F l igh t  Data  Center  ( N F D C ) ,   117 
National  Gallery  of  Art,  Washington, 
D.C.,  403 
National  Geodetic  Satellite  program,  86 
National  Geographic  Society,  100,  101, 
204 
National  Indus tr ia l   Conference  Board, 
388 
National  Ins t i tu te  of  Social Sciences,  387 
National  Institutes  of  Health  ( N I H ) ,   2, 
110 
Investigations  Committee  on 
National 
Aerial  Phenomena  (N ICAP ) ,   8,  411 
National  Medal  of  Science,  1, 418 
National  Meteorological Center,  353 
National  Oceanic 
and  Atmospheric 
Agency  ( N O A A )  
(proposed),  14,  150, 
341 
National  Oceanographic  Center,  9 
National  Operational  Meteorological  Sa t-  
ellite  System  ( N OM S S ) ,   86,  422 
National  Order  of  the  Leopard,  350 
National  Postal  Forum,  289 
National  Press   Club,  268 
National  Register  of  Scientific and  Tech- 
nical  Personnel,  420 
National  Research  Council  ( N R C )  , 205, 
297 
 
Committee  on  Radio  Frequency  Re- 
quirements  for  Scientific  Research, 
125 
Geophysical  Research  Board,  Commit- 
tee  on  Solar-Terrestrial  Research, 
F.7 -., . 
Panel  on  Remote  Atmospheric  Prob- 
ing,  409 
Space  Science  Board,  18,  94,  124,  136, 
164,  167,  263,  289,  343,  347,  355, 
356 
National  Science  Board.  121 
National  Science  Foundation  (N SF )  , 32, 
35,  53,  182,  290,  405 
Amer ican   Science  Manpower ,   1968, 
420 
cooperation, 88,  90 
Deep  Sea  Drilling  Project,  353 
Federal  Suppor t  
to   Un ivers i t ies   and 

511 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Colleges,  Fiscal  Year  1967,  106 
funds  for,  15,  40,  110,  113,  184,  312, 
329,  383,  395 
grants,  319 
personnel,  114,  121,  189 
R&D  Activities  of Local  Governments, 
1966  and   1967,  97 
Reviews  of Da ta   on   Science  and   Re- 
sources,  398 
Scientific  Activities  of Nonprofit  Insti- 
tutions,  1966,  96 
Scientific  and   Technical  Personnel  in 
the  Federal  Government,  1967,  198 
National  Science  Teachers  Assn.,  105 
National  Sea  Grant  Program,  9 
National  security,  35,  258,  306,  411,  419 
National  Security  Council,  2 
National  Security  Industrial  Assn.,  33, 
178 
National  Seminar  for  Manned  Flight 
Awareness,  317 
National  Society  of  Professional  Engi- 
neers,  37 
National  Space  Club,  16,  67,  68,  111, 
268,  371 
National  Space  Hall  of  Fame,  289 
National  Space  Science  Data  Center,  1, 
271 
National  Telemetrv  Conference.  117 
National  Transpoitation  Safety  Board, 
19, 40,  362,  369 
National  Urban  Coalition,  115,  116 
NATO.  See  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Or- 
ganization. 
Nlugle,  Dr.  John  E.,  69,  84,  127,  139, 
179,  336,  346 
Nauman.  Robert  J..  326 
Naval  Missile  Center,  325 
Naval  Research  Laboratory,  22,  74,  78, 
84,  111,  124,  171,  272,  298,  361,  366 
Atmosphere  and   Astrophysics  Div.,  2 
Naval  Weapons  Center,  34,  41  
Navigation  satellite,  33,  37,  47,  190,  322, 
357 
NBc.  See  National  Broadcasting  Co. 
NC-4  (flying  boa t ) ,   133, 344 
Near  East,  140 
Need  for  lmproved  Guidelines  in   Con-  
tracting  for  Research  with  Govern- 
ment-Sponsored  Nonprofit  Contractors, 
47-48 
Neilson,  Thomas  H.,  124 
Nekton  (submarine),  330 
Nellis  AFB,  Nev.,  49,  155,  413,  416 
Nelson,  Bryce,  59-60,  163 
Neptune  (p lane t ) ,   263,  299 
NERVA.  See  Nuclear  Engine  for  Rocket 
Vehicle  Application. 
Ness,  Dr.  Norman  F.,  50 
Netherlands  32,  132,  423 
Neugebauer,  Dr.  Gerry,  269 
Neutrography,  168-169 
Nevada,  291 
Nevada  Tes t   Site,  416 
New  Delhi,  India,  234,  255,  258 

New  Jersey,  Div.  of  Clear  Air  and  
Water,  278 
New  Mexico,  315 
New  Mexico,  Univ.  of,  272 
New  O&aus,  La.,  96,  105,  298 
New  Orleans  Chamber  of  Commerce.  140 
New York,  N.Y.,  90-91,  129,  190,  232- 
233,  363 
Apollo  11 moon  rock  exhibit,  381 
astronauts  in,  8,  276,  279,  387 
cosmonaut  visit,  337 
air  services  and   traffic,  13-14,  34,  43- 
44,  418 
meeting,  40,  387,  388 
train  services,  17,  105 
New  York  City  Medal,  8 
New  York  Society  of  Security  Analysts, 
29 
New  York  State  Supreme Court,  2 
New  York  State  Univ.,  288 
Stony  Brook,  407 
New  York  Stock  Exchange,  150,  238, 
243 
New  York  Univ.,  121 
Newark,  N.J.,  72 
Newark,  N.J.,  Airport,  9,  278 
Newcomen  Society  i n   North  America, 
340 
Newell,  Dr.  Homer  E.,  Jr.,  110,  111,  178 
News  conference.  See  Press  conference. 
Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  300 
NFDC.  See  National  Flight  Data  Center. 
Niagara  Falls  International  Airport,  103 
NICAP.  See  National  Investigations  Com- 
mittee  on  Aerial  Phenomena. 
Nigeria,  226 
N IH .   See National  Institutes  of  Health. 
Nike-Apache  (sounding  rocket) 
auroral  data,  43,  48, 51-52,  54,  58 
cosmic radiation,  107 
electron measurement,  33-34,  113,  300, 
303-304 
hydroxyl  radical measurement,  189 
ionospheric  experiments,  33-34, 
41, 
113,  135,  300 
micrometeoroid  sampling,  159,  176, 
279,  287 
upper-atmosphere  data,  41,  49,  135, 
286,  408-409 
x-ray  astronomy,  118,  120, 402 
Nike-Cajun  (sounding  rocket),  133 
upper-atmosphere  data,  9,  18,  19,  20, 
21,  23,  25,  27,  28,  30-31,  33-34,  38, 
40-41,  94,  132,  133,  135 
Nike-Iroquois  (sounding  rocket),  360 
Nike-Javelin  (sounding  rocket),  360 
Nike-Tomahawk  (sounding  rocket) 
contract,  253 
electron  measurement,  71,  113 
instrumentation  test,  27-28,  286 
upper  atmosphere  data,  29,  49,  72,  83, 
286 
x-ray  data,  134,  211-212,  327 
Nikolayev,  Adrian  G.,  158 
Nimbus  (program) ,   23,  139 

512 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

N imbus   I  (meteorological  sa te l l i te) ,   108 
N imbus   I I ,   18,  108 
N imbus   I I I   (Nimbus-B2) , 85,  88,  107- 
108,  205,  353,  414,  421,  422 
Nimbus  D,  85 
Nimbus  E,  85,  423 
Nimbus  F,  85 
Nippon  Electric  Co.,  Ltd.,  82 
Nitric  oxide,  34,  41,  179,  365 
Nitrogen,  13P-140,  179 
Nix  Olympica  (Mars  c ra te r ) ,   262 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  4,  26,  56- 
57 
Air  Force  Academy  address,  170 
Amistad  Dam  dedication,  299 
antiballistic  missile  (ABM ) ,  39,  46-47, 
80,  81,  83,  89,  121,  129 
Apo l lo   8  mission,  20,  32,  34,  61-62  
Apo l lo   9  mission,  64-65 
Apo l lo   I O   mission,  157 
Apo l lo   I I   mission,  196,  224,  249,  250, 
261,  262,  275,  284,  401-402 
astronauts 
communications  with,  209,  219- 
220,  230 
dininn  with.  200.  204 
s ta te  -dime; 
for,’ 279-280 
tr ibu te   to,  228,  242,  246,  362 
U.S.S.  Hornet  greeting,  223 
- 
messages  to,  244  - 
moon  plaque,  196 
National  Day  of  Participation,  224, 
230-231 
Apo l lo   12  mission,  371,  372,  378,  384, 
385,  389,  392 
appointments  and  nominations  by,  6, 
9,  17-18,  30,  46,  68,  117,  121,  141, 
184,  189,  302,  314,  329,  332,  392, 
402,  418 
arms  limitation,  183,  190-191 
Asian  tour,  199,  247,  248,  251,  255 
astronaut  goodwill  tour,  32,  299,  319 
astronauts,  visit  with,  191,  413 
award  to.  410 
awards  by,  68,  101,  418-419 
bills  signed,  383,  395 
budget,  107,  109-110,  138,  186-187 
ComSatCorp  report  to,  6 1  
Congressional  Space  Medal  of  Honor 
approved,  319 
European  tour,  50,  55,  56-57,  61-62 
inauguration,  18,  20-21 
international  cooperation, space,  20,  32, 
43,  238,  3 0 9 3 1 0  
MIRV  missile,  190-191 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
392-393 
office  performance,  275 
science,  40,  54,  56,  297 
space  program,  national,  9,  20,  32,  38, 
43,  49-50,  78,  80,  82,  95,  104,  108- 
109,  110,  115,  117,  119-120,  238, 
271,  371,  372,  423 
Space  Task  Force  Group  report  to, 
167,  304-305,  308,  312-313,  332 

treaty,  41, 

( in  

supersonic  transport,  32,  43,  58-59,  82, 
95,  123,  137,  314-315,  318,  372,  410, 
422 
task  forces,  314,  329,  332 
U.N.  address,  309-310 
Vietnam  War,  404 
White  House  religious  service,  232 
world  tour,  247,  251,  259,  261,  262, 
284 
Wright  Brothers  Day,  406 
Nixon,  Mrs.  Richard  M.,  261,  279,  284, 
372,  378 
Nixon,  Miss  Tricia,  378 
NOA :   new  obligational  authority 
budget) 
Nobel,  Alfred  B.,  Prize i n  Chemistry,  355 
Nobel,  Alfred  B.,  Prize  in   Physics,  355 
Nobel,  Alfred  B.,  Prize  in   Physiology  o r  
Medicine,  338 
Noblitt,  B.  G.,  354 
Noise,  aircraft,  3,  15,  25,  32,  %,  78, 
120,  173,  212,  263,  265,  371,  391,  400 
NOMSS.  See  National  Operational  Satel- 
l i te   System. 
NORAD.  See North  American  Air  Defense 
Command. 
Noren,  Rev.  Pau l   H.  A.,  206-207 
Normvle.  William  J..  108-109.  115 
Norris,  Henry W.,  111 
North  American  Air  Defense  Command 
( N O R A D ) ,   89,  291 
North  American  Rockwell  Corp. 
( N A R )  
Aerospace  and  Systems  Group,  195 
aircraft,  11,  85,  169,  177 
Apollo  spacecraft,  59,  388 
Atomics  International  Div.,  195 
Autonetics  Div.,  135 
award,  69,  147 
contract,  47,  85,  94,  132,  135,  270,  280 
escape-to-orbit vehicle,  94 
flying 
lunar   excursion  experimental 
platform  (FLEEP) , 388 
Power  Svstems  Div..  195 
Rocketdyne  Div.,  70,  79,  85,  101,  104, 
195,  327-328 
Saturn V,  24,  132,  280 
Space Div.,  70.  77.  241 
space  shuttle,  ‘47  ’ 
space  station,  270,  299 
North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization 
( N A T O ) ,   132 
North  Pole,  251  
Northern  Illinois  Univ.,  360 
Northrop  Corp.,  287,  319,  325,  346 
Northrop,  John  K.,  157-158,  287,  346 
Northwestern  Univ.,  288,  416 
Astronomv  Dent..  28 
&  Co.,  252 
Norton,  W:W. 
Norway,  18,  20,  132,  323,  423 
Nossiter,  Bernard  D.,  107.  135 
Nova  Scotia,  Canada,  282 
Novak.  Robert  D.  S..  284 
, - - -  
Novikov,  Kirill,  2 1  
Novosibirsk,  U.S.S.R.,  195,  387 
Noyes,  Crosby  S.,  154-155,  177 

513 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

NR-1 
(nuclear-powered  deep  submer- 
gence  research  vehicle),  27 
NRC.  See  National  Research  Council. 
NSF.  See  National  Science  Foundation. 
Nuclear  Engine  for  Rocket  Vehicle  Ap- 
plication  (NERVA ) ,   105, 266,  332,  399 
contract,  94 
funds  for,  16,  66,  109,  120,  163 
NERVA  I,  94 
NERVA  XE,  177-178,  279,  309,  422 
test,  87,  177-178,  279,  309,422 
Nuclear  explosion,  167,  409,  4 1 2 4 1 3  
Niiclear  fallout.  412-413 
-  - _. . _ _   -. 
Nuclear  generator,28,  -130,  177-178,  189, 
190,  329430 ,   414,  422 
Nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty,  13,  41, 
52,  57,  58, 78,  317,  370,  392-393 
Nuclear  power,  4,  37,  130,  189,  354 
Nuclear  propulsion,  37,  66,  76,  87,  94, 
130,  156,  200,  260,  280,  332,  337- 
338,  399,  404,  422 
Nuclear  test,  155,  181, 359 
Nuclear  test  ban  treaty,  13,  81 
Nuclear weapons  (see  also Disarmament; 
Missile;  and  Trea ty) ,   81,  86,  131,  135, 
136,  155,  181,  330 

0 

Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory,  45,  353 
OAO .   See Orbiting  Astronomical Observa- 
tory. 
Oao  11  (Orbiting  Astronomical  Observa- 
tory) ,   134 
awards  for  contributions  to,  154 
disorders,  106,  173 
experimental da ta   from,  3, 99,  344,  403 
OART.  See  NASA  Office  of  Advanced  Re- 
search  and  Technology. 
Oberth,  Prof.  Hermann,  188,  287,  346 
Oberth,  Hermann,  Society of  Nuremberg, 
188 
Ocean  of  Storms  (moon),  243,  368,  375, 
393,  3%,  403,  407-408 
Oceanography  (see   also  Aquanaut;  Pro-  
jec t   Tek t i te   I  and  11;  and  Sea lab)  
award,  50 
contract,  353 
cooperation,  51,  88,  356 
international  aspects,  133,  197 
manned  flight  contributions  to,  160 
record,  86,  110 
research,  17,  27,  51,  88,  103,  110,  209, 
273,  282,  330,  343 
satellite  use  in,  88,  199 
US. program,  9,  56,  133,  150,  314, 
341,  353,  356 
O’Connell,  Joseph  J.,  Jr.,  40 
O’connor,  M / C   Edmund  F.  ( U S A F ) ,   188, 
251 
Odeillo,  France,  363 
OECD.  See  Office  for  Economic  Coopera- 
tion  and  Development. 

Office  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  De- 
velopment  ( OECD) , 255 
Directorate  for  Scientific  Affairs,  59- 
60 
Office  of  Economic  Opportunity,  339 
Office  of  Science  and  Technology  (Pres- 
ident’s),  42,  43,  106,  119,  174 
OFO.  See Orbiting  Frog  Otolith. 
OGO .   See  Orbiting  Geophysical  Observa- 
_ _ _  
tom. 
Ogo  ’r;  171 
Ogo  I l l ,   171 
O m  IV .   171 
050  V..171.  316 
Ogo  V,.171,  316 
o&  v i   (OGO-F), 
- - -  
OgO  V I   (OGO-F), 
171,  326,  421 
171,  326,  421 
- 7  
O’Hair,  Mrs.  Madalyn  Murray,  268,  283, 
O’Hair,  Mrs.  Madalyn  Murray,  268,  283, 
394,  400 
394,  400 
O’Hair,  Richard.  268 
O’Hair,  Richard.  268 
O’Hare  In te rnakon2   Airport,  28,  102, 
263-264,  279 
Ohio,  406 
Ohio  Historical  Society,  246 
Ohio  S ta te   Univ.,  156 
Ojai,  Calif.,  200 
Oke,  Dr.  John  B.,  367 
O’Keefe,  Dr.  John  A.,  50,  360 
O’Keefe, William  J.,  263 
Olav  V.  King  (Norway),  332 
O’Leary,  Dr.  Brian  T.,  180,  339 
OMSF.  See  NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space 
Flight. 
On  the   Edge  of  the  Moon 
(London 
Times  supplement),  169-170 
O’Neill,  L/G John  W.  I U S A F ) .   322 
, , --- 
Operation  Breakthrough  ( H U D )  , 188 
“Operation  Paperclip,”  13 
Operations  Research  Society  of  America, 
183 
Orbiting 
Astronomical  Observatory 
(OAO ) ,   3,  23,  106,  154,  266,  344,  367, 
487 
Orbiting  Frog  Otolith 
(space- 
(OFO )  
c ra f t ) ,   154 
Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory  ( 
O G O ) ,  
171,  173,  364 
Orbiting  Solar  Observatory  ( o s o )  , 
23 
Orbiting  Vehicle  (ov)  (research 
satel- 
l i te ) ,   83-84,  155,  164 
Order  of  Lenin  Medal,  24 
Order  of  Leopold,  332 
Ordway,  Frederick  I.,  111,  329 
Orion  (constellation),  337,  344 
Orion  I1  (sounding  rocke t) ,   79 
Orlando,  Fla.,  271 
Ortoli,  Francois  X.,  316 
Osaka,  Japan,  417 
Oscar,  Project,  399 
Osgood,  John,  52 
Oslo,  Norway,  312,  355 
Osman,  Armstrong  Abdurahman,  234 
OSO.  See  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory. 
os0   I  (Orbiting  Solar  Observatory),  22- 
23,  272 
OSO I I ,   22-23,  272 
Os0  I I I ,   23,  272 

514 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
Electronics  Research  Center  (ERC) , 
Os0  IV ,   23,  272 
OS0  v  (OSO-F),  22,  23,  28,  56,  108,  272, 
417,  423 
international  cooperation,  space,  74- 
421 
Os0  V I   ( O S O - G ) ,   272,  308,  370,  411,  421 
75,  169,  268,  311,  411412 ,   424 
legal  suit,  268, 283,  394,  400 
oso-c,  272 
management.  148-149 
OSSA.  See  NASA  O 5 c e   of  Space  Science 
space-program,  national,  15-16,  66,  68, 
and  Applications. 
Ostriker,  Dr.  Jeremiah  P.,  322,  334 
74-75,  100,  119-120,  145-146,  169, 
175-176,  192,  199-200.  207,  259- 
Oteroo,  Katherine  Stinson,  380 
260,  266,  268,  294,  417,  424 
O’Toole,  Thomas,  46,  62,  92,  95,  359 
space  station,  169 
Otopeni  Airport,  Romania,  261 
U.S.S.R.  space  program,  120,  145-146, 
Ottawa,  Canada,  312,  399 
169,  199-200,  266 
Our   Na t ion   and   the   S ea   ( repo r t ) ,   9 
space  station,  75,  120 
Ou t e r   Solar  S y s t em :   A   Program   for Ex -  
Pakistan,  190,  244,  259,  394,  423 
p lora t ion  
(Space  Science  Board  re- 
Pakistan  Space  and  Upper  Atmosphere 
port),  263 
Research  Committee,  99 
Outstanding  Leadership  Award  ( N A S A ) ,  
Palm  Springs,  Calif.,  359 
Palmer,  John  S.,  279 
OV  1-16  (orbiting vehicle  research  satel- 
Palo  Alto,  Calif.,  257 
l i t e ) ,   164 
Palomar,  Calif.,  134 
OV  1-17,  83-84 
Palos  Verdes,  Calif.,  54 
OV  I-17A.  83 
OV  1-18,  83 
Pan  American  World  Airways,  Inc.  (P a n  
Am),  81,  175,  241,  346,  400,  409 
OV  1-19,  83 
Panofsky,  Wolfgang K.  H.,  4 1 8 4 1 9  
OV  V-5,  155 
Parachute,  143,  183 
OV  V-6 ,   155 
P A R D   See  Pilot  Airborne  Recovery  De- 
OV  V-9,  155 
vice. 
Overmeyer,  Maj.  Robert  F.  ( U SM C ) ,   281 
Parin,  Dr.  Vassily  V.,  158,  391 
Owen,  David,  381 
Paris,  France,  159,  197,  244,  290,  312, 
Owen,  Tobias,  293 
316 
Owens,  Miss  Heather A.,  266-267 
astronaut  visit,  37,  41 
Oxford,  Pa.,  168 
award,  237,  403 
Oxford  Univ.,  239 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  visit,  55, 
61-62 
Paris  Air  Show,  161-162,  168,  173,  412 
US .   exhibit,  105,  161-162,  168,  169, 
175 
U.S.S.R. 
exhibit,  146-147,  159-160, 
162,  168 
Paris,  Univ.  of,  22,  316 
Park,  Chauncey  C.,  266-267 
Park,  President  Chung  Hee 
Korea),  244 
Park,  William  C.,  73  
Parker,  Dr.  Eugene  N.,  121 
Parker,  Jack  S.,  147 
Parkes,  Australia,  137,  319 
Pasadena,  Calif.,  158,  261 
Pasadena  Chamber  of  Commerce,  158 
Patent,  4,  82,  159,  239 
Patterson,  William  A.,  380 
Pau l   VI,  Pope 
Apo l lo   10  flight,  152 
Apo l lo   11  flight,  206,  225,  232,  242, 
244 
Aio-Cio  12  flight,  384 
astronauts  visit,  51,  337 
., visit,  61  
Nixon,  President  Richard  M 
Paulet,  Pedro  E.,  329 
Paulet  Mostajo,  Pedro,  322 
Paulson,  Jeanne,  385 
Paumalu,  Hawaii,  179 
PCA.  See  Polar  cap  absorption. 
Peace  Corps,  413 

Pa c   (Package  Attitude  Control)  system, 
272 
Pace,  Frank,  Jr.,  387 
Pacemaker  (sounding  rocket),  203 
Pacific  Ocean 
Apo l lo   10,  143 
Apo l lo   11,  168,  223 
Apo l lo   12,  377 
B iosa te l l i te   I l l ,   201 
communications  satellite,  18,  137,  140 
Deep  Sea  Drilling  Project,  353 
Sealab  I11  project,  51  
U.S.S.R.  rocket  test,  112,  116,  156 
Packer,  Dr.  Leo  S.,  83 
Pago  Pago,  378 
Paine  Field,  Wash.,  45 
Paine,  Dr.  Thomas  O.,  274,  306,  349,  368 
aeronautics,  66 
Apo l lo   11  mission,  199-200,  209-210, 
223,  231-232,  279,  380-381 
appointment,  46,  68,  87,  100,  401 
appointments  by,  70 
awards  and  honors,  168,  300 
awards  by,  6,  32,  132,  154,  280,  326 
budget,  15-16,  66,  109-110,  119-120 
Deep  Space  Network  facility,  Madrid, 
180 

P 

(South 

515 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Peace  Corps  National  Advisory  Council, 
442 
Pe&e,  J.  B.,  298 
Pearl  Harbor,  Hawaii,  396 
Pearson,  Drew,  204 
Peary,  Adm.  Robert  E.  ( U S N ) ,   101,  251 
Pecora,  William  T.,  393 
Pegasus   I l l   (meteoroid  detection  satel- 
l i te ) ,   64,  263 
Pell,  Sen.  Claiborne,  22 
Penn  Central  Co.,  17,  105 
Pennsylvania,  Univ.  of,  67 
Pentagon,  34,  412 
Perez-Marin,  Gen.  Antonio  (Spa in ) ,   180 
Perl,  Dr.  Martin  L.,  124 
Perry  Oceanographics,  Inc.,  343 
Perseid  meteor  shower,  279,  287 
Peru,  267,  322 
PET.  See  NASA  Preliminary  Examination 
Team. 
1 1   Lunar 
PET  Summary  of  Apo l lo  
Samnles.  306 
Petersburg,  Alaska,  352 
( U S A F ) ,   281 
Peterson,  Maj.  Donald  H. 
Petrone.  Rocco  A.,  10, 274.  297,  317,  346 
Petrosyants,  Andronik  M.;  359 
Petrov,  Dr.  Boris  N.,  418 
Petrov,  Prof.  Georgy  I.,  233 
Phantom  F - 4E   ( je t   fighter),  9 
Phelps,  Robert  H.,  82 
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  283,  385 
Philco-Ford  Corp.,  402 
Education  and  Technical Services  Div., 
87-88 
%ace  and  Re-Entrv  Svstems  Div..  346 
Phiiippines,  190,  200,‘ 248 
Phillips,  Mrs.  Mary,  315 
Phillips,  L/G  Samuel  C.  ( U S A F ) ,   274,  297 
Apo l lo   8 ,   16 
Apo l lo   I l ,   178,  182,  243 
awards  and  honors,  10,  68,  87,  300, 
346-347 
space  shuttle,  336 
Phoenix,  Ariz.,  327 
Physics,  77,  160,  256-257,  355 
Phys ics   of 
the   Ear th   i n   S pa c e :   T h e  
Ro l e   of  Ground-Based  Research   ( N R C  
repo r t ) ,   256-257 
Phys io logy  
i n  
th e   Space   Environment 
(Space  Science  Board  repo r t ) ,   18-19 
Piccard,  Dr.  Jacques,  103,  209,  282 
Pickering,  Dr.  William  H.,  184-185,  188, 
203,  248 
Pilot  Airborne  Recovery  Device  ( P A R D ) ,  
239 
( PW I ) ,   sys- 
Pilot  warning  instrument 
tems,  388 
Pilots,  425 
Pimentel,  Dr.  George  C.,  269,  301-302 
P in   Main,  Canada,  71  
Pioneer  (interplanetary  p robe ) ,   89,  360 
Pioneer  V I ,  291,  356,  395 
P ioneer   V I I ,   291,  395 
Pioneer  V l l l ,   180,  291 
Pioneer  I X ,   159,  291 

Pioneer  E,  23,  291,  385,  421 
Pioneer  F,  76,  361 
Pioneer  G,  76,  361 
Piret,  Edgar  L.,  403 
Pitcairn.  Harold  F..  283 
Plamondon,  Joseph hi -133 
P lan   for U.S.  Par t ic ipa t ion   i n   the  Global 
A tmospher ic   Research   Program  
( N R C  
repo r t ) ,   204-205 
Planetary  Explorer  (program),  163 
Planetoid,  288 
Plate,  Thomas  G.,  231 
Plateau  Elysium  (Ma r s ) ,   262 
Platt,  John,  396 
Plesetsk,  U.S.S.R. 
Cosmos  launch,  67,  70,  80-81,  82,  91, 
101.  137.  148.  181.  203.  237.  281. 
283;  285;  297;  339;  341;  370;  392, 
401,  405 
Me teor   I  launch,  91 
Me teor   I1  launch,  329 
Plum  Brook  Station.  Ohio.  404.  412 
Plummer,  William  T.,  396 
I
,
 
Pluto  (p lane t ) ,   192,  263,  299,  366, 
Plutonium,  135,  384 
Plvmouth.  Eneland.  133 
p i d b :   perceived  noise  in  decibels 
V. 
Podgorny, 
President 
Nikolay 
(U.S.S.R.),  24,  210,  211,  244,  251, 
392-393 
Point  Barrow,  Alaska,  9,  19,  30,  38 
Point  Mugu,  Calif.,  325 
Poland,  210,  225,  233,  244,  251,  384 
Polar  cap  absorption  ( P C A ) ,   359-360 
Polish  Astronautical  Society,  329 
Pompidou,  President  Georges  (France) 
330 
Poor  People’s  Campaign,  205-206,  209. 
210 
Pout?  AFB.  N.C..  283 
P i i e r ,   Dgniel  R i - 2 4 6  
Porter,  Dr.  Richard  W.,  136-137 
Portland,  Ore.,  385 
Portugal,  32,  37,  413 
Poseidon  (missile),  363 
Th e   Pos t-Apo l lo   Space   Program:   An  
A l A A   V i ew ,   151-152 
Th e   Pos t-Apo l lo   Space  Program:   Direc- 
t ions   f o r   the   Future 
(Space  Task 
Group  repo r t ) ,   304-305 
Post  Office  Dept.,  8,  129-130,  202,  273- 
274,  300,  311,  319 
Potsdam,  N.Y.,  318 
Prague,  Czechoslovakia,  413 
Pratt,  Perry  W.,  21 
P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.,  United  Aircraft 
Cqrp.,  25,  32-33,  46,  304,  328 
Presidential  Task  Force  on  Science 
Policy,  314,  329,  346 
President’s  Council  on  Youth  Oppor- 
tunity,  135,  170 
President’s  Science  Advisory  Committee, 
42,  73-74,  117,  151,  184,  314 
President’s  Space  Task  Group,  78,  131, 
134,  167,  173,  192,  320 

516 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

T h e   Pos t-Apo l lo   Space   Program:   D i -  
rections  for  t h e   Future 
( repo r t ) ,  
304-305,  308,  312-313,  332 
Press,  Dr.  Frank,  230 
Press  comment 
antiballistic missile  ( A BM )   system,  46- 
47,  129 
Apo l lo   8  mission,  1,  2,  26 
An0110  9  mission.  67.  72.  80.  90 
Apo l lo   10  mission,  147-148,  ’ 149-150, 
152-154,  155,  157 
Apo l lo   I 1   mission 
foreign,  193,  210-211,  225-226,  227- 
228,  229,  231,  236,  240,  242,  247, 
248,  251-252,  321-322 
moon  plaque,  196-197 
US., 157,  174,  192-193,  207,  208, 
210-211.  225-226.  227.  228-229. 
231,  235-236,  239-240,  ’ 244,  245- 
247,  249-250,  261-262,  271-272, 
276,  279,  280-281,  282,  295,  308, 
nr“ 33 I 
Apo l lo   12  mission,  367,  379,  380,  386- 
387,  391,  392,  393,  394 
astronaut  ceremonies,  279,  282 
Blue  Book,  Project,  413-414 
C S A   (cargo  a i rc ra f t ) ,   293 
communications  satellite,  26,  394-395 
disarmament,  190-191 
docking  (So yu z   IV  and  Soyuz  V I ,  19 
international  cooperation,  space,  26, 
43,  175,  248,  367,  383-384 
lunar  exploration,  152-153,  154,  313, 
383-384 
lunar  rock  samples,  261-262,  313,  412 
Mariner  V I ,   256,  262,  271,  308 
Mariner  V U ,  256,  262,  271,  308 
Mars,  manned  flight  to,  231,  262,  271 
MOL,  179,  181,  186,  289 
moon 
contamination  from,  175,  176 
international  research,  4-5 
nuclear  blast  on,  412-413 
NASA  Administrator,  46 
objects  in   orbit,  149-150 
pulsars,  134-135 
Science,  Secretary  of 
(proposed),  3 
science  and  technology,  1,  2-3,  154, 
162-163,  321,  396-397,  4 0 0 4 1  
space  biology,  391 
space  program,  national,  4-5,  43,  80, 
81-82,  95,  119,  154-155,  161,  163, 
248,  271-272,  289,  309,  313,  321, 
359,  419-421 
space  results,  203,  227,  228,  242,  256 
space  station,  80,  391 
supersonic  transport  (SST) , 137,  318, 
413 
UFO’s, 8-9,  20,  413-414 
U.S.S.R.  space  program,  336,  342,  343, 
351,  365-366 
Press  conference 
aircraft,  128-129 
antiballistic  missile  ( A B M )   system,  33, 
43 

Apo l lo   8  mission,  7,  25,  54 
Apo l lo   9  mission,  26-27,  33,  61,  77, 
91,  116-117 
Apo l lo   10 mission,  33,  108 
Auollo  11  mission.  108.  182.  198-199. 
‘204,  207,  231,  242-243,267-268,  275; 
277-278,  280-281,  4 0 7 4 0 8  
A ~ o l l o  12  mission,  243.  325-326,  333- 
-334,  342,  371-372,  392,  406-408 
Apollo  13  mission,  392 
astronaut.  See  Astronaut. 
Biosatellite  I l l ,   347-349 
cosmonaut,  343,  350,  372 
Defense,  Dept.  of,  4,  33,  99,  128-129 
disarmament,  21,  174 
earth  resources  program,  116-117 
Haney,  Paul,  116 
international  cooperation,  space,  25, 
41,  102,  158,  169,  196,  238,  245,  325 
manned  space  flight,  29,  53-54 
Mariner  VI,  261,  269-270,  301-302 
Mariner  V I I ,   269-270,  301-302 
Mars,  manned  flight  to,  224,  243,  283- 
284,  305 
moon 
lunar  surface  samples,  250,  267-268, 
275,  396,  407-408 
nuclear  explosion  on,  167 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  43  
Oao  I l ,   129 
President’s  Space  Task  Group  report, 
308 
mace  failure,  262 
space  program,  national,  49-50,  54,  77, 
122,  148,  158-159,  170-171,  224, 
231-232,  242-243,  248,  305,  323-325, 
417 
space  station,  169 
supersonic  transport 
197 
Ill,  369-370 
Su%yor 
UFOS,  8 
U.S.S.R.  space  program,  29,  170-171, 
204,  246,  343,  350,  361 
women  a s   astronauts,  359 
Press,  Dr.  Frank,  230 
Preston,  Lancashire,  U.K.,  161 
Price,  Don  K.,  136 
Pride,  Inc.,  230-231 
Princeton  Univ.,  127,  184, 290,  322,  334, 
404,  418 
Aerospace  Systems  Laboratory,  208- 
209 
Prix  Pierre  Guzman,  403 
Probe  (see  also  individual  probes,  such 
as  Mariner  VI,  Mariner  VU ,   Venus 
V ,   and  Venus   V I ) ,   15,  66,  89 
interplanetary,  66,  76,  136-137,  187, 
192,  366-367,  421 
Jupiter,  16,  76,  192,  263 
lunar.  See  Luna  XV,  Lunar  Orb i ter   I ,  
Zond  V ,  Zond  V I ,  an d   Zond  V U .  
Mars,  16,  18, 57,  76,  95,  111, 119,  136- 
137,  224,  231,  266,  343 
Mercury,  16,  69,  76,  343 

( S S T ) ,   81,  186, 

517 

Neptune,  192,  263 
Pluto.  192 
Saturn,  192,  263 
sun,  37,  177,  357 
Uranus,  192,  263 
U.S.S.R.,  42,  75,.  120,  136-137,  140, 
141-142.  160.  171 
Venus,  16,  69,‘76,  136-137,  318,  343 
“Progress,  Coexistence,  and  Intellectual 
Freedom”  (essay),  163 
Propulsion  Joint  Specialist  Conference, 
Fifth,  134 
Proton,  171,  417 
Proxmire,  Sen.  William,  130,  281,  309, 
311,  330,  369,  383,  412 
Public  Service  Award  ( N ~ s A ) ,   92,  347 
Pueblito  de  Allende,  Mexico,  45 
Puerto  Rico,  121,  401-402 
Pulkovo  Observatorv.  139-140 
Pulsar,  16-17,  42,  i8, 121-122,  134-135, 
289,  322 
acceleration,  56,  121,  334,  404 
optical,  164 
Purcell,  Joseph,  99,  129,  154 
Pu rdue  Univ.,  418 
Putnam,  William  D.,  353 
PWI.  See  Pilot  warning  instrument  sys-  
tems. 

Q 
Qantas  Airlines,  239 
Qatron  Corp.,  297 
Quamme,  Hal  J.,  80 
Quarantine  of  astronauts 
Apo l lo   1 1   mission,  75-76,  141,  223 
273,  276 
Apo l lo   12  mission,  356,  377-378,  396, 
397,  400,  405 
Quark 
(theoretical  elementary  particle 
of  matter),  355 
Quasar  (quasi-stellar  ob jec t ) ,   99,  367 
Quiet  Engine  Research  Program,  25,  32- 
33,  212 

R 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 
Radio  Corporation  of  America  (RCA) . 
Radio  Amateur  Satellite  Corp.,  399 
88,  113,  388,  400,  401 
Astro-Electronics  Div.,  139,  401 
Radio  signal,  115,  367 
Radioastronomy,  123,  181,  390 
Radioisotopes,  132 
Radiometer,  175,  254,  344 
Radiophysics,  161 
Radiotelescope,  42 
Radome,  331 
RW.  See  Research  and   development. 
R&D  Ac t iv i t ies   of  Local  Governments, 
Fiscal  Yea r s   1966  and  1967 
(N SF   69- 
14 ) ,  -97 
R&D  an  the  A i r c ra f t   and   Missiles  ln -  
du s t r y ,   1957-68  (NSF  69-15),  164 
RAND  Corp.,  282,  353 
Randall,  Joseph  L.,  326 
Randall,  Judith,  1 
Raper,  0.  F.,  298 
Rapid  eye  movements  (REM), 348 
Raska,  Dr.  Karel,  254 
Rasool,  Dr.  S.  Ichtiaque,  127-128,  408 
Raspevin,  K.,  1 
Rat  experiment,  139 
Rathjens,  George  W.,  131 
Rauschenberg,  Robert,  226,  403 
Ray,  Thomas  W.,  353 
Raymond,  John  M.,  Jr.,  180 
RCA.  See  Radio  Corporation  o f   America. 
R C A  Service  Co.,  113,  292 
RCS.  See  Reaction  control  system. 
RDT&E  (research,  development,  test,  and 
engineering).  See  Research  and  de- 
velonment. 
Reactibn  control  system  (Rcs),  64,  143, 
213,  222,  375 
Real-time  computer  complex  (RTCC) , 334 
Ream.  Harold  E..  103 
Recher,  Marcel,  304 
Rechtin,  Dr.  Eberhardt,  346 
Reconnaissance  satellite,  192 
Record 
aircraft,  79,  129,  152,  157,  177,  323 
oceanographic,  86,  110 
spacecraft,  208,  250-251,  378,  389 
Redstone  Arsenal,  Ala.,  256 
Reentry  vehicle,  192, 330,  389,  408 
Rees,  Dr.  Eberhard  F.  M.,  10,  188,  326 
Regency  Corp.,  75 
Regulus  ( s t a r ) ,   79 
Reichley,  Paul,  56 
Relativity,  theory  of,  71 
Re lay   I  (satellite),  124 
Re lay   11,  124 
Religious  Society  of  Friends,  232 
REM. See  Rapid  eye  movements. 
Rendezvous 
US.,  5,  27,  64,  91,  198,  249,  256,  345, 
377 
U.S.S.R.,  11,  12,  120,  332,  333,  422 
Republic  Steel  Corp.,  408 
( R F P ) ,   120,  128, 
Request  for  proposals 
151,  205 

518 

Rabi,  Dr.  Isidor  I.,  39 
Radar,  156 
aircraft,  156,  359 
mapping  use,  288 
sidelooking,  47 
tracking,  55,  64,  65 
U.S.S.R.,  50,  62 
Radiation 
(see  also  Ultraviolet  and 
X-ray) 
cosmic,  107,  155,  184,  318-319,  403 
effects, 78,  83,  96,  136,  164 
gamma,  318-319 
lunar.  313.  317 
measurement,  83,  84,  175,  187 
solar,  83,  107,  133,  187,  269 
trapped,  84,  173 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

42, 
257 

Rescue  of  astronaut.  See  Space  rescue. 
Research  and   development  (R&D),  4, 
151,  175,  255 
aeronautics,  15-16,  113,  148,  164,  193, 
335 
benefits.  40.  75.  128.  335 
,
,
 
coniputir,  i39  
employment,  96,  97,  150,  231 
Federal  surwort,  3.  29,  35,  40, 
257,  297  - -  
funds  for,  14-16,  96-97,  110,  164, 
DOD, 14,  15,  40,  124,  136,  330 
FAA,  15 
NASA,  14-15,  47,  108-109,  113,  138, 
176,  177,  184,  193,  257,  312,  330 
U.S.S.R.,  60 
Research   and  Deve lopmen t   i n   Indus try ,  
1967:   Funds ,   1967;   Scientists  and  En-  
gineers,  January   1968 
(NSF   69-28), 
257 
Resolute  Bay,  Canada,  28,  331 
Resor,  Secretary of  the  Army  Stanley R., 
4.  148 
Re i sab le   launch  and  space  vehicles,  25, 
29,  47,  82, 254,  260,  266,  268,  345,  354, 
423 
Rev iews   of  Da ta   on  Sc ience   and  R e -  
sburces   (N SF   69-36),  398 
Reynolds,  O r r   E.,  78 
RFP.  See  Request  for  proposals. 
Rhodes,  Gov.  James  A.,  298 
Rice  Univ.,  58,  76,  253,  2457 
Richard,  Ludie  G.,  326,  360 
Richardson,  Robert,  50 
Rickover,  V / A   Hyman  G. 
( U S N ) ,   132 
Rindner,  Dr.  Wilhelm,  128 
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Brazil,  312 
Museum  of  Modern  Art,  234 
Ripley,  Dr.  S.  Dillon,  307 
Rivers,  Rep.  L.  Mendel,  39 
Riviera  Beach,  Fla.,  343 
R G l O  A 3 3   (rocket  engine),  379 
Roberts,  Judge  Jack,  400 
Roberts,  Dr.  Walter  Orr,  44,  167,  416 
Rockaway  Beach,  N.Y.,  133 
Rockefeller  Public  Service  Award,  419 
Rockefeller  Univ.,  1,  19,  314 
Rocket  belt,  161 
Rockwell,  Norman,  403 
Rocky  Flats,  Colo.,  135,  384 
Rogers,  Alan  E.  E.,  289 
Rogers,  Secretary  of  State  William  P., 
52,  174 
Rolls-Royce,  Ltd.,  Bristol-Siddeley  En- 
gine  Div.,  21 
Rom,  Frank  E.,  156 
Romania,  46,  234,  249,  251,  261,  262,  284 
Rome,  Italy,  37,  55,  298,  312,  341 
Romney,  Secretary  of  Housing  and   Ur- 
ban  Development  George  W.,  87,  237 
Roosa,  Maj.  S tua r t   A. 
(USAF ) ,   267 
Rosamond,  Calif.,  HL-10 
(lifting-body 
vehicle)  flight,  184,  240,  267,  297,  309, 
352,  360,  381,  406 

Rosman,  N.C.,  402 
Rossi,  Dr.  Bruno,  89 
Rossini,  Mayor  Pascal,  244 
Royal  Crown  Cola  International,  43 
Royal  Geographical  Society,  251 
Royal  Navy  (U.K.), 129 
Royal  Society  of  Scientists,  38 
Royer  de  Vericourt,  Mayor  Etienne,  330 
RTCC.  See  Real-time  computer  complex. 
Rubey,  William  C.,  76 
Rubin,  I rene   S.,  286 
Rudolph,  Dr.  Arthur,  10,  13,  182 
Rundell,  Walter,  Jr.,  357 
Rusk,  Dean,  285,  287 
Rusk,  Dr.  Howard  A,,  274 
Russell,  Lord  Bertrand  A.  W.,  210 
Rutgers  Univ.,  272 
Ryan,  Gen.  John  G. 
( U S A F ) ,   180 
Ryan,  Rep.  William  F.,  124 
Ryle,  Sir  Martin,  42 

S 

S 3 A   (antisubmarine  a i rc ra f t ) ,   15,  131, 
260 
S-IC.  See  Saturn V  (booster),  stage,  1st. 
S-11.  See Saturn V  (booster),  stage,  2nd. 
S-IVB.  See  Saturn  V  (booster),  stage, 
3rd. 
Saavedra,  Albert,  202 
Sabin,  Dr.  Albert,  298 
SAC.  See  Strategic  Air  Command. 
Sacks,  Martin,  393 
Sacramento  Peak  Observatory,  336,  419 
Safeguard  (formerly  Sentinel)  (antibal- 
listic  missile  system),  33,  43,  83, 
114,  320 
congressional  consideration,  39,  46-47, 
52,  53,  103,  131,  229 
name  change,  89 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M..  views 
on.  43.  80.  81 
press  comment,  4 6 4 7 ,   81,  129 
Sagan,  Dr.  Carl,  180 
Sagittarius  (constellation),  318-319,  326 
Saigon,  South  Vietnam,  254,  414 
St.  Alban’s  School,  Washington,  D.C., 
133. 
S t - j i h n ,   Virgin  Islands,  51,  110 
St.  Peter’s  Basilica,  152 
Sakharov,  Prof.  Andrey  D.,  163 
Salon  Internationale  de  I’A6onautique 
et  de  1’Espace.  See  P a n s   Air  Show. 
Salzburg,  Austria,  188 
SAMSO.  See  USAF  Space  and  Missile  sy s -  
tems  Organization. 
Samuelson,  Robert  J.,  101,  352 
San   Clemente  Island.  Calif..  51.  189 
San  Diego,  Calif.,  .57,  225,  273,  275, 
330,  331,  352 
San  Francisco,  Calif.,  130,  211,  225, 
259-260,  354,  409 
Board  of  Supervisors,  343 

519 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

San  Marco-C  (Italian  sa te l l i te) ,  286, 423 
Sanders  Associates,  Inc.,  91 
Santa  Monica,  Calif.,  20 
Santa  Susana,  Calif.,  28 
Santiago,  Chile,  106, 234 
Sarabhai,  Dr.  Vikram  A.,  310 
Saragat,  President  Giuseppe  (I ta ly) ,   244 
Sarnoff,  Robert  W., 388, 40041 
SAS.  See  Stability  augmentation  system 
and  Small  Astronomy  Satellite. 
SATCOM. See Committee on  Scientific and 
Techn’ical  Communication. 
Satellite  infrared  spectrometer  (SIRS), 
353 
Sato,  Prime  Minister  Eisaku  (Japan) ,  
244. 361-362. 389 
Saturn  (planet),  192, 337-338 
rings,  359, 397 
Saturn  I  Workshop  (spacecraft),  15, 16, 
17, 104, 114 
Saturn  IB   (booster).  contract.  25. 49. 
94, 101, 113, 154, 315 
Saturn  V  (boos ter) ,  228, 275, 317 
capability,  96, 170-171, 384 
contract,  25, 47, 70, 77, 87, 91, 113, 
132, 278, 280, 297, 315, 388 
engine 
F-1, 105, 185 
J-2, 105, 185 
exhibit,  105, 417 
launch 
AS-504, 62-65, 67 
AS-505, 16, 142-145 
212-224 
AS-506,  108, 168, 195, 196, 
AS-507,  299, 372-378 
AS-508, 182 
program,  13, 67, 69, 76-77, 
109-110, 
119-120, 134, 138, 163-164, 
251, 422 
stage 
1st  (S-IC),  182, 188, 297 
test,  118, 188, 195, 360 
2nd  (S-111,  70, 77, 132. 182 
test,  24, 104, 185 
3rd  (S-IVB),  89, 105, 117, 128, 142, 
182, 
187, 197, 202-203, 280, 370, 
373-374, 388 
Saturn  V  Workshop  (spacecraft),  237- 
238, 270-271, 297, 326-328, 388, 417 
Saunders,  Hal,  379 
Saunders,  Stuart  T., 17 
Savannah,  Ga.,  233 
Savchenko,  Boris,  152 
Saxbe, Sen.  William  B.,  13 
Schaeffer,  Dr.  Oliver  A.,  288, 292, 407 
Scheel, Walter,  384 
Scheer,  Julian  W.,  7, 116, 118, 347, 410 
Scherer,  Capt.  Lee  R.  (USN ,  Ret.),  74 
Schiller,  Karl,  162 
Schirra,  Walter  M.,  Jr.,  21, %,  72-73, 
75, 173 
Schmitt,  Harrison  H.,  286 
Schneider,  William  C.,  10, 290 
Schorn,  Dr.  Ronald,  90 
Schriever, Gen.  Bernard  A.  (USAF, Re t .) ,  
188 

Scheutz,  Mayor  Klaus  (W.  Germany), 
3% 
Schwartz,  Harry,  284 
Schweickart,  Russell , L.,  5, 26, 62-65, 
81, 91, 161-162, 168 
Sciacca,  Prof.  Michele  Federico,  239 
Science  (see  also  National  Academy  of 
Sciences),  11, 65, 122, 148-149 
award,  1-2 
benefits,  68, 162-163, 321 
Government  support  of,  28, 29, 42, 
359, 396-397 
human  needs,  359 
national  policy  and  goals,  2-3, 40, 52- 
53, 67, 132, 161, 314-315 
Presidential  Task  Force  on  Science 
Policy,  314, 329, 346 
President’s  Science  Advisory  Commit- 
tee,  42, 73, 117, 151-152, 184, 314 
U.S.S.R.,  59-60, 250 
the  USSR  (OECD 
Science  Policy 
in 
s tu dy ) ,   59-60 
Science Research  Council  (SRC)  (U.K.)  , 
18, 20, 24, 27, 59, 312 
Science,  Secretary  of  (proposed),  2-3 
Science,  Technology,  and   Public  Policy 
During  the  Ninetieth  Congress  (House 
repor t) ,   255 
Scientific Activities on  Nonprofit Institu- 
tions,  1966  (N SF   69-16),  96-97 
Scientific and  Technical  Advisory  Com- 
mittee  (STAC)  (University-NASA) ,  10 
Scientific  and   Technical  Personnel  in 
the  Federal  Government,  1967 
( N S F  
69-26), 193 
Scientific  instrument  module  ( S I M ) ,   331 
Scientific  Study  of  Unidentified  Flying 
Objects,  5 
Scientific Uses  of  the  Large  Space  Tele- 
scope  (Space  Science  Board  repor t) ,  
342-343 
Scientist-astronaut,  284, 286, 290, 339, 
351, 356, 370 
Scientists,  41),  52-53, 96-97, 124, 178- 
179, 193, 257, 273, 284, 287, 316, 351, 
.
.
 
356. 398. 420 
Scientists,  Engineers,  and  Physicians 
f r om   Abroad,  Fiscal  Years  1966  and  
(N SF   69-10),  178-179 
1967 
Scientists for  Social and  Political Action, 
124 
SCLC. See  Southern  Christian  Leadership 
Conference. 
Scoruio  X-1 ( s t a r ) .   133-134 
(constellation),  65-66,  184, 
Scorpius 
281-282, 326, 327, 344 
(USAF ) .   5, 26-27. 
Scott,  Col.  David  R. 
62-65, 91, 105, 161-162, 168 
Scott,  Sen.  Hugh  D.,  29 
Scott  Polar  Research  Institute,  359 
Scout  (booster),  59, 86,  291, 323, 364- 
365, 423 
Scranton,  William  W., 104, 418 
scr ipps   Institution  of  Oceanography, 273 
Scull,  Wilfred  E.,  290 

520 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Sea  of  Crises  (moon),  237 
Sea  of  Okhotsk,  175 
Sea  of  Tranquility  (moon),  159,  168, 
215,  221-222,  237,  249,  271,  280,  301, 
306,  407-408 
Sea  Sciences  Corp.,  354 
Seaborg,  Dr.  Glenn  T.,  30,  la, 3% 
Sealab  I11  (underwater  laboratory),  22, 
51,  57,  77,  188-189,  3 1 6 4 1 7  
Seamans,  Secretary  of 
the  Air  Force 
Robert  C.,  Jr.,  167,  192,  300,  308, 
414 
AIAA  presidency,  21,  79 
appointment,  4 
awards  and  honors,  287,  346,  347 
Blue  Book,  Project,  411 
C 5 A ,   128 
military  space  program,  13,  21,  320, 
321,  345 
MOL,  21,  87,  104 
space  program,  national,  21,  60,  75, 
87,  104 
supersonic  bomber,  111-112,  183,  321 
U.S.S.R.  missile  and  space  program, 
21,  140 
X-15.  177.  321 
Seaplane  bases,  176 
Seattle,  Wash.,  45,  330,  400,  409 
Seattle-Tacoma  Airport,  Wash.,  169 
Secor  X I I I   (E g r s  X I I I )   (Sequential  Col- 
lation  of  Range  satellite),  107,  422 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission 
( S E C ) ,   132 
Sedov,  Prof.  Leonid  I.,  241-242 
Seidel.  Boris  L.,  408 
Seim,  Sandra  E.,  160 
Seismometer  experiment,  lunar 
Apo l lo   11  mission,  114,  223,  229-230, 
237,  240-241,  249,  354-355,  419 
Apo l lo   I 2   mission,  326,  342,  376,  403 
Seitz,  Dr.  Frederick  S.,  8,  19,  154,  314 
Selfridge,  Robert  P.,  410 
( STAR )   com- 
Self-testing  and  repairing 
puter,  298-299 
Semiconductors,  128 
Semple,  Robert  B.,  Jr.,  284 
Sentinel  (antiballistic  missile  system). 
See  Safeguard. 
Seoul,  S.  Korea,  312,  360 
Serenitatis  (moon),  180 
SERT I  (Space  Electric  Rocket  Te s t ) ,   48 
SERT 11,  48,  342 
Serv-Air,  Inc.,  59 
Service  module  ( s M ) ,   7,  142 
Service  propulsion  system  ( S P S ) ,   64,  14-2, 
143,  212-213,  375 
Seversky, Maj.  Alexander  de,  184, 412 
Shabad,  Theodore,  39 
Shaffer,  John  H.,  58,  156,  382-383 
Shannon,  Dr.  James  V.,  3 
SHAPE  (Supersonic  High  Altitude  Pa ra -  
chute  Experiment)  Project,  183 
Shapley,  Willis  H.,  347 
Sharp  Crater  (moon),  376 
Sharp,  Dr.  Robert  P.,  265,  282,  301 

Sharpe,  Mitchell  R.,  69 
Shatalov.  Vladimir  A..  11-12.  23,  158, 
159-160,  168,  333 
' 
Shawbury,  U.K.,  317 
Sheldon,  Dr.  Charles  S.,  11,  95-96 
Shepard,  Capt.  Alan  B.,  Jr.  (USN), 132, 
267,  289 
Sheremetyevo Airport,  U.S.S.R.,  152,  195 
Shoes,  jet,  4 
Shonin,  Georgy  S.,  332 
Shriver,  Ambassador  R.  Sargent,  41, 
161-162 
Shub,  Anatole,  33 
Sidewinder-Arcas  (sounding  rocke t ) ,   79, 
360 
Sidey,  Hugh,  174 
Siegel,  Dr.  Peter  V.,  180 
Sigma  Xi  Convention,  359 
Significant  Achievements  in   Space   Sc i-  
ence,  1967  (SP-167),  160 
Sikorsky,  Igor  I.,  150 
Silverstein,  Dr.  Abe,  349 
SIM.  See  Scientific  instrument  module.' 
Simat,  Helliesen,  &  Eichner,  Inc.,  113 
Simmons,  Dr.  Gene,  347,  351 
Simoneit,  B.  R.,  365 
Singapore,  234 
Singer,  Dr.  S.  Fred,  416 
Singlinger,  A.,  &  Co., 177 
SIRS.  See  Satellite  infrared  spectrometer. 
Sjoberg,  Sigurd  A.,  417 
Sjogren,  William  L.,  116 
Skinner,  Sherrod  E.,  304 
Skoog,  A.  Ingemar,  329 
Skyne t   A  
(U.K.  communica- 
(IDCSP-A) 
tions  satellite),  385,  388-389,  422 
Skynet  B,  389 
SLA .   See  Spacecraft-lunar-module-adapter 
panels. 
Slipher,  Dr.  Vest0  M.,  366 
Sloop,  John  L.,  178 
SM.  See  Service  module. 
Small  Astronomy  Satellite  ( S A S ) ,   367 
Smelt,  Dr.  Ronald,  79 
Smith,  Bradford  A.,  282 
Smith,  Dr.  F,  Graham,  121-122 
Smith,  Ambassador  Gerard  C.,  30,  81 
Smith,  Dr.  Harlan  J.,  237 
Smith,  Dr.  Henry  J.,  306 
Smith,  I.  D.,  365 
Smith,  Keith,  411 
Smith,  Sen.  Margaret  C.,  118 
Smith,  Dr.  Pau l   S.,  232 
Smith,  Sen.  Ralph  T.,  312 
Smith,  Dr.  Richard  K.,  344 
Smith,  S i r   Ross  Macpherson,  411 
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory 
(Cambridge,  Mass.),  3,  79,  129,  403, 
405,  409 
Smithsonian  Institution,  29,  147,  297, 
304,  328,  344 
astronaut  dinner,  7 
exhibit 
aircraft,  119,  133 
flag,  U.S.  (A p o l l o   l l ) ,  414 

521 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

lunar  rock  sample,  304,  306,  307, 
309,  313,  359,  387,  397 
spacecraft,  388 
TV  equipment,  201 
Webb,  James  E.,  portrait  unveiling, 
323 
Smoke  hood,  9 
SMS.  See  Synchronous  Meteorological 
Satellite. 
(Systems  for  Nuclear  Auxiliarv 
SNAP 
Power)  oroeram.  28 
SNAP-$A 
-(n;clea; 
generator),  190 
SNAP-19,  414,  422 
SNAP-27,  410,  422 
SNAP-29.  422 
(A p o l l o   10  LM).  See  Lunar 
Snoopy  
module. 
Snow,  Lord  Charles  (C.P.),  39,  291 
Society  of  Automotive  Engineers,  338 
Society  of  Separationists,  Inc.,  268,  394, 
400 
Sod i im   experiment,  408-409 
Software  Fix  ( SOF IX ) ,   139 
Sokolov,  Oleg  M.,  146 
Solar  cell,  82,  322,  329 
Solar  flare,  90-91,  187,  361,  364 
Solar  furnace,  363 
Solar  physics,  132-133,  136-137,  160, 
366-367 
sounding  rocket,  104,  108,  111,  140- 
141,  176,  298,  302,  308,  314,  360- 
361,  410-411 
Solar  wind,  177,  219,  223,  230,  285,  376- 
377,  408,  413,  419 
Solid  propellant,  291 
Somali  Republic,  234,  247 
Sonic  boom,  11, 26,  58-59,  183-184,  255, 
352,  391 
Sonnett,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  21 
individual 
Sounding  rocket 
(see  also 
sounding  rockets:  Aerobee,  Arcas, 
Astrobee  1500,  Black  Brant,  Boosted 
Arcas  11,  Nike-Apache,  Nike-Cajun, 
Nike-Iroauois.  Nike-Tomahawk. Orion 
11,  Pacemaker,  Sidewinder-Arcas) , 
3,  124,  203 
foreign,  139-140,  156,  421-422 
Canada,  59,  127,  312,  366,  423-424 
funds  for,  124 
international  programs 
NASA-Argentina,  303-304 
-Australia,  423 
-Brazil,  179,  186,  188,  423 
-Canada,  21,  23,  31,  38,  41-42, 
43,  48,  49,  51-52,  54,  58,  59,  71, 
72,  113,  127,  312,  331,  366,  423- 
424 
-India,  118,  120,  423 
-Japan,  118,  120,  411,  423 
-Norway,  18,  20,  423 
-Pakistan,  423 
-Spain,  94,  132,  133,  423 
-Sweden,  18,  20,  24,  27,  423 
-U.K.,  18,  20,  24,  27 
U.K.-Australia,  323 

Sounding  Ro ck e t s :   The ir   Ro l e   i n   Space  
(Space  Science  Board  re- 
Research  
po r t ) ,   124 
South Africa,  424 
South  America,  370 
South  Atlantic  Anomaly  region,  312 
South  Florida,  Univ.  of,  110 
South  Pole,  251,  359 
South  Rogers  Lake  Bed,  Calif.,  133,  286, 
299,  316,  349,  371 
Southern  Christian  Leadership  Confer- 
ence  (SCLC), 201,  205-206 
Southern  Historical  Assn.,  357 
Southwest  Center  for  Advanced  Studies, 
43,  48.  51-52,  54.  188 
Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  25,  202, 
229,  244,  351,  361,  366,  411-412 
Soviet  Committee  for  Inventions  and 
Discoveries,  418 
Soviet  Institute  for  Cosmic Research,  233 
Soyuz  (U.S.S.R.  spacecraft),  109 
Soyuz  111  mission,  337 
Soyuz  IV  mission,  11-12,  23,  332,  422 
Soyuz  V  mission,  11-12,  23,  332,  422 
soyuz  V I   mission,  332,  336,  341-342, 
343,  361,  365-366,  382,  420,  422 
launch,  332 
s o y u z   V I 1   mission,  333,  336,  341-342, 
343,  361,  365-366,  382,  420,  422 
launch,  333 
Soyuz  VI11   mission,  333,  336,  341-342, 
343,  361,  365-366,  382,  420,  422 
launch,  333 
Space  accident  liability,  392 
Space   Ag e   Management,  192-193 
“Space-Age  Management  and  City  Ad- 
ministration”  (conference  pape r ) ,   148- 
- - _  
1 49 
Space  biology,  61,  62,  72,  81,  96,  178, 
180.  200.  302.  336 
animal  experimknts,  18,  139,  154,  189- 
190,  200,  201-202,  261,  335,  347- 
349,  415.  421 
atmosphere,  artificial,  206 
environment,  effects,  18-19,  71,  130- 
131,  138 
life  support  system,  12,  123,  190,  206, 
378 
lunar  dust  experiment,  261,  293,  379 
medical  benefits,  75,  78,  96 
motion  sickness,  142 
NASA  program,  138,  367-368,  381-382, 
415 
nutrition,  110 
Phys io logy   in  the   Space   Environment 
(NAS-NRG repo r t ) ,   18 
radiation  effects,  78,  96,  136-137,  164, 
190 
Space   Resources  for Teachers:   B io logy ,  
Inc lud ing   Suggestions  for   Classroom 
A c t i v i t i e s   and  Labora tory   Exper i-  
men ts ,   72 
weightlessness,  effects,  17,  18-19,  48, 
117-118,  136,  201,  206,  348-349,  391 
Space  debris.  See  Spacecraft  debris. 

522 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Space  Development  Corp.  ( J a p an ) ,   325 
Space  Disturbance  Center,  90,  336 
Space  Exploration  Day  (proposed),  202 
Space  law,  189,  290 
Space  law  treaty,  13,  229,  276,  320 
Space manufacturing module  (proposed), 
XR 
S&e,  military  use  of,  290,  320-321,  343 
communications,  44, 66,  131,  322,  346, 
389,  422 
history,  329 
navigation,  322 
reconnaissance,  345 
US.,  13,  21,  186,  190-191,  200,  336, 
343,  345,  416 
U S S R . ,   21,  50,  190-191,  416 
Space,  peaceful  use  of,  6-7,  11,  13,  14, 
20,  24,  157-158,  191,  196,  219-220, 
224,  244,  249,  343-344,  390 
Space  program,  national  (see  also  indi- 
vidual  programs,  such  as  Apollo 
program  and  National  Aeronautics 
and   Space  Administration,  budget), 
96,  208-209,  252,  390 
achievements,  6-7,  10,  59,  71,  148-149, 
372,  4 2 1 4 2 4  
manned  space  flight,  2,  13,  14,  17- 
18,  25,  39,  6 2 6 5 ,   68,  71-72,  77- 
78,  80,  91,  101,  148-149,  239-240, 
242-243,  244,  245,  251-252,  277- 
278,  280,  282,  298-299,  386-387, 
392-393.  394 
Agnew,  Vice  President  Spiro  T.,  65, 
100,  152,  224-225,  231,  271,  294, 
308,  320,  323-325,  419 
benefits.  See  Space  results. 
budget,  14-16,  22,  38,  49-50,  67,  81- 
82,  95,  109,  167,  270,  305,  366,  383, 
395,  4 2 2 4 2 3  
Cost,  4,  5 6 ,  38,  42-43,  47,  87-88,  95- 
96,  154,  158, 208,  262,  271,  327,  390, 
416,  4 2 2 4 2 3  
criticism,  2-3,  151-152,  176,  201,  204, 
273,  287,  367-368,  385,  416-417,  423 
Eisenhower,  President  Dwight  D.,  47, 
60,  250,  a 5  
employment,  66,  69,  80,  422-423 
exhibit,  403,  405-406 
international  aspects  (see  also  Inter- 
national  cooperation)  4,  6-7,  20,  26, 
32,  41,  43,  48,  54,  75,  168,  199,  235- 
236,  238,  244-246,  249,  262,  268,  290, 
309-310,  327,  362,  367,  381,  389, 
393-394,  411-412,  416,  423-424 
Johnson,  President  Lyndon  B.,  1, 6-7, 
10,  13,  14-16,  17,  20,  60,  110,  192, 
224-225,  231,  232,  395,  423 
Kennedy,  President  John  F.,  6,  44,  60, 
174,  175,  212,  240,  405 
lunar  landing.  See  Moon,  landing. 
management,  24,  57,  84,  111,  148-149, 
202,  274,  276-277,  368,  370 
military  aspects,  9,  21,  38,  51,  75,  80, 
86-87,  104,  146,  167,  174,  176-177, 
179,  185,  200,  304-305,  320,  416 

Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  9,  20, 
32,  38,  43,  49,  61,  65,  68,  78,  80, 
81,  95,  104,  108,  109,  110,  115,  117, 
119,  224,  238,  246,  250,  262,  271, 
304-305,  309-310,  362,  371,  372,  378, 
43R 
obi&tives,  6,  37,  44,  49-50,  73-75,  76, 
77-78.  81-82.  85-86.  130.  134.  151- 
152,  273,  275-276,’  285%; 
-285, 
304-305,  308.  318,  331,  421,  4 2 2 4 2 3  
policy,  10,  24,  4 9 5 0 ,   51,  60,  74-75, 
80-81.  86-87.  104-  111.  116.  119- 
120,  i47,  i 4 d i 4 9 ,   i 6 7 Z x i i i% , 1 7 7 ,  
208,  232,  237,  239-248, 
242-243, 
248-250,  256,  271-272,  284,  287-288, 
290,  294-295,  320321 ,   351,  370,  378, 
422-423 
p o s ~ ~ p o i i o ,  38,  44,  47,  6-7, 
69,  77, 
118,  119-120,  151-152,  167,  178, 
266.  270.  271.  283-284.  305.  312- 
313;  328;  337-338,  344  359,  361, 
372,  399,  412,  4 2 2 4 2 3  
budget,  28,  69,  110,  119-120,  147. 
3 6 M 6  
cost,  162,  262,  336-337 
suggested  programs,  37,  85-86,  94-  
95,  123,  235-236,  259-260,  263, 
266,  268-269,  275-276,  304-305, 
308,  312-313,  342-343,  355-356, 
366-368,  381,  397-398,  415 
significance,  1,  2,  16,  20,  39,  51,  52- 
53,  65,  68,  129-130,  174,  175-176, 
197-198.  200-201.  224-225.  231-232. 
235-2361  242-243,262,266269,  2771 
278,  294-295,  307,  321-322,  346,  380, 
4 2 0 4 2 1  
U.S.S.R.  vs.  U.S.  See  Space  race. 
Space  race,  95-96,  285-286,  321,  343, 
365-366,  381 
booster,  95-96.  170 
ea r th   applications,  74-75 
funds.  48 
lunar ’exploration,  74-75,  96,  170-171, 
195,  211,  238,  246,  249,  256,  271- 
272,  273 
Ganned  space  flight,  341-342 
military,  48 
planetary  flights,  74-75,  84-85,  96 
space  station,  74-75,  96,  341-342,  351 
Space  rescue,  21,  262,  315,  354 
Space  rescue  treaty,  130,  392 
Space   Resources  for  Teachers:   B io logy ,  
f o r   Classroom 
Including  Suggestions 
A c t i v i t i e s   and  Laboratory  Exper imen ts ,  
?r) I Y  
Space  results  (see  also  Ea r th ;   Moon; 
Mars;  Venus; 
individual  probes, 
satellites,  an d   sounding rockets),  17, 
75,  170,  268-269,  298,  312-313,  321, 
394,419 
agriculture,  37,  119,  276,  285,  327 
aircraft,  75,  350,  400 
architecture,  398 
astronomy,  28,  37,  75,  90,  99,  115, 

523 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

120, 121-122,  124,  160,  256,266,  308, 
408,  419 
communications,  2,  33,  37,  47,  75,  100, 
111,  235,  298,  335,  398 
earth  sciences,  33,  37,  49,  73,  75,  100, 
116-117,  119-120,  124, 203,  235,  245, 
276,  285,  298,  308,  327,  382 
economic  benefits,  2,  75,  167,  203,  227, 
238,  276,  350,  419 
education,  17,  47,  75,  298 
engineering,  203,  238,  267,  335,  350, 
398,  400,  408 
geology,  2,  33,  37,  203,  308,  327,  328, 
4 0 7 4 8  
international  relations,  65,  94,  102, 
261-262,  308,  419 
materials  technology,  2,  75,  203,  235, 
3sn 
medicine,  47,  203,  235,  274,  315,  262- 
263,  398 
meteorology,  33,  47,  111, 235,  308,  327, 
335,  414 
military,  75,  174 
navigation,  33,  47,  70,  100,  203,  335, 
400 
oceanography,  160.  199,  203,  327,  346 
photography,  328 
religion,  39 
science,  68,  230,  240-241,  308,  356, 
392 
so&i  science,  147,  148-149,  242,  294, 
323-325,  400-401 
technology,  2,  37,  174,  203,  230 
Space  Science  Board 
See 
(NA S -NRC ) .  
National  Academy  of  Sciences  and 
National  Research  Council. 
Space  Science  Education  Conference,  17 
Space  shuttle,  25,  29,  47,  73-74,  109, 
120,  131,  138,  262,  266,  276,  305, 
326,  350,  354,  362,  368-369,  371, 
419-420 
cooperation,  29,  173,  336,  411,  424 
nuclear,  268 
reusable,  23,  29,  47,  74,  82,  260,  268- 
269,  345.  354.  423 
Space  station  (see also  Manned  Orbiting 
Laboratory;  Saturn  I  Workshop; 
Sa tu rn   V  Workshop),  21,  47,  262, 
276,  289,  351,  354,  371 
contract,  25-26,  120,  241,  270,  299 
design,  17,  28,  120,  128,  285,  349 
international  cooperation,  102,  169, 
248,  411,  416 
militarv.  86-87.  104 
NASA  program,'  66-67,  73-74,  83,  91, 
94,  104,  108-109,  111,  131,  138,  146, 
167,  169,  178,  237-238,  260,  266, 
268-269,  305,  343-344,  368-369,  423 
press  comment,  80,  351,  391 
press  conference,  169 
U.S.S.R.,  12, 24,  75,  120, 146, 271,  278, 
333,  341.  343.  349-350.  351.  361. 
382;  420,.422  ' 
Space Task  Group.  See  President's  Space 
Task  Group. 

Space  Technology  Applications  and   Re- 
search  Laboratory  (STARLAB ) ,   285 
Space  Tracking  and   Data  Acquisition 
Network  (STADAN ) ,   292 
Space  transportation 
(see  also  Space 
shu t t le ) ,   169-170,  177,  270 
Space  tug,  262,  266,  305 
Spacecraft  (see  also  individual  space- 
craft,  such  a s   Apollo,  Lunar  Or- 
biter,  Luna,  Mariner,  Surveyor) 
accident,  29,  162,  206 
communications,  26,  44,  117,  159,  210, 
241 
control,  11-12,  26-27,  56,  58,  59,  92, 
106.  142-143.  173.  259.  278.  291.  333 
' 
debris,  89,  13d,  143,  198,  200 
design,  17,  120,  151,  171,  241,  266, 
270,  272,  276-277,  343-345,  388, 
397-398. 
.401 
development  testing,  44 
electrical  systems,  11-12,  27,  37,  114, 
135,  173,  373-374 
environment  control  system,  17,  141- 
142,  173-174 
equipment,  2,  54-56,  102,  122,  142, 
143,  217-218,  298-299,  332 
escape  system,  94,  239 
exhibit.  105.  161-162.  417 

hazards,  149-150 
heating.  26-27.  263 
instrumentation;  14,  55,  58,  91,  107, 
115,  133,  151-152,  171,  316,  326, 
338,  340 
landing  system.  26-27.  29.  140.  141- 
142,-160,  181-182,  183, 378,  405 
life  support  system,  12,  123,  173-174, 
206,  378 
propulsion.  See  Engine  and  individual 
-  launch  vehicles,  such   as  Saturn. 
recovery,  190,  201-202,  222-223 
reentry  control system, 47,  271 
reusable  (see  also  Space  shuttle).  25- 
26,  47,  266 
Spacecraft  debris,  28,  89,  198,  228,  291 
Spacecraft-lunar-module-adapter 
( SLA )  
panels,  202-203 
Spacesuit,  12,  77,  91,  206,  313 
Spain,  94,  132,  133,  180,  187,  189,  226, 
327,  330,  423-424 
Spanish  Space Research  Council,  180 
Spartan  (missile),  62 
Speas,  R.  Dixon,  Associates,  109 
Spectrograph,  90 
Spectrometer,  38,  42,  55,  77,  171,  179, 
254,  261,  269,  286,  301-302,  367,  410- 
411,  414,  417 
Sperry  Gyroscope  Co.,  352 
Sperry,  Lawrence,  Award,  345 
Sperry  Rand  Corp.,  42 
Sperry  Gyroscope  Div.,  42 
UNIVAC  Federal  Systems  Div.,  55 
Spica  ( s t a r ) ,   79 
5.244 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Sp ide r  
(Apo l lo   9  L M ) .   See  Lunar 
module. 
Spilhaus,  Dr.  Athelstan  F.,  159 
s p i r i t   of  S t .   Louis  (a i rc ra f t ) ,   177 
Spivak,  Lawrence  E.,  184 
Sproul  Observatory,  109 
SPS.  See Service  propulsion  system. 
Spu tn ik   I  (U.S.S.R. 
satellite),  20,  161 
SR-71 
(strategic 
reconnaissance  air- 
craft),  73 
SRC.  See  Science  Research  Council 
(U .K . ) .  
SS-9 
(U.S.S.R.  missile),  116,  140,  229 
SSRC.  See  Swedish  Space  Research  Com- 
mittee. 
SST.  See  Supersonic  transpor t  
SST  Authority  (proposed),  137 
Stability augmentation  system  ( S A S ) ,   349 
STAC.  See  Scientific  and  Technical  Ad- 
(University-NASA) . 
visory  Committee 
STADAN.  See  Space  Tracking  and  Data 
Acquisition  Network. 
Stafford,  Col.  Thomas  P.  ( U S A F ) ,   16,  90, 
108,  142-144,  152r153,  191 
Stamp,  commemorative,  8,  46,  59,  129- 
130,  202,  233,  273-274,  289,  300,  311, 
3 19 
Stamy,  James  L.,  260 
Stanford  Research  Institute,  Calif.,  26, 
257 
Stanford  Univ.,  117,  124,  136,  174,  205 
Linear  Accelerator  Center,  418 
Stanford  Univ.  Hospital,  315 
Stanton,  Dr.  Frank   M.,  352 
Star,  3,  6,  16, 32,  42,  55,  66,  79,  99,  133- 
134,  134-135,  136,  184,  256,  326,  327, 
337,  344,  359 
STAR.  See  Self-testing and   repairing  com- 
puter. 
S ta r   City  (Vzyozdni  Gorodok,  U.S.S.R.)  , 
195-196 
Star  Tracking  Rocket  Attitude  Position- 
ing  ( S T R A P )   system,  6,  43 
STABLAB.  See  Space Technology  Applica- 
tions  and   Research  Laboratory. 
State,  Dept.  of,  7,  24,  25,  43,  88,  130, 
311,  357 
Statler  Hilton  Hotel,  Washington,  D.C., 
132 
Stehling,  Kur t   R.,  192 
Sterne,  Joseph,  78 
Stewart,  A.  I.,  298 
Stewart,  M / G   James  T.  ( U S A F ) ,   260 
Stockholm,  Sweden,  338 
(short  takeoff  and  landing)  a ir-  
STOL 
craft,  29,  32,  50,  84,  89,  113-114,  320 
STOLpOrt,  89 
Stoltenberg,  Dr.  Gerhard,  Minister  for 
Scientific  Affairs  (W .   Germany),  48, 
177 
Stone,  Dr.  Robert  G.,  115 
Stonehenge,  U.K.,  289 
Storms,  Ocean  of  (moon),  243,  368,  375, 
405,  478 
Strategic Air  Command  (SAC),  331 

Study  of  Air  Cargo  an d   Air  Passenger 
Terminal  Facilitation 
repo r t ) ,  
(DOT 
113 
A   S tu d y   of  Technology  A s se s smen t :   R e -  
po r t   of  the  Comm i t tee   on.  Pu b l i c   En- 
gineering  Po l icy ,   National  Academy   of 
Sciences,  257 
Stuhlinger,  Dr.  Ernst,  77 
Submarine,  27,  99-100,  112,  140,  330 
missile-carrying,  195 
Sudan,  247 
Sud-Aviation  (France) ,   61,  71,  173,  197, 
285,  323 
Suez  Canal,  234 
Suharto,  President  (Indonesia),  249 
Suitland,  Md.,  353 
Sullivan,  Walter  S.,  28,  90,  181, 312,  334, 
397,  404 
Summer  Space  Education  Program  for 
the   Cities,  170 
Sun   (see  also  Eclipse,  solar;  Radiation, 
solar;  Solar  flare;  Solar wind;  etc.), 
37,  49,  121,  288,  299,  329,  335,  336, 
420-421 
satellite  data,  28,  111,  115,  133,  155, 
185,  271-273,  364-365,  395 
sounding  rocket  data,  111,  113,  124, 
298,  361-562,  410 
Sunblazer  (program),  163 
Supersonic  transport  (SST)  (see  also 
Concorde  and   Tu-144) 
award,  178 
benefits,  81,  314-315,  382-383 
Cost,  186,  314-315,  340,  382-383 
criticism,  82,  413 
design  and   development,  1,  11,  404, 
421-422 
economic  aspects,  382-383 
flight  plans,  146-147,  255,  285 
foreign,  1,  13-14,  61,  84,  146-147,  197, 
255,  422 
funds  for,  15,  81,  82,  110,  137,  186, 
314-315,  318,  372,  383,  410,  412 
hazards,  369 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  32,  43, 
58,  82,  95,  123,  137,  314-315.  318. 
372,  383,  410,  421-422 
press  comment,  137,  318,  413 
press  conference,  81,  186,  197 
sonic  boom,  11,  26,  58-59,  183-184, 
255,  352 
Surveyor  (program) ,   34-35,  141,  187, 
191 
Surveyor  I I I   (spacecraft),  372,  377,  396 
examination  of,  plans  for,  243,  325- 
326 
renaming  of  (proposed),  369-370 
retrieval  of  parts,  342,  367,  376-377, 
421 
Surveyor  V  ( luna r   probe) ,   250,  275 
Sutton,  Dr.  George,  230 
Swarthmore  College,  109 
Swartz,  Reginald  W.,  239 
Swearingen,  Jack  C.,  ,393 

525 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Sweden,  18,  20,  24,  27,  50,  226,  227-228, 
236,  240,  252,  323,  384,  423 
Swedish  Academy  of  Engineering,  351 
Swedish  Interplanetary  Society,  329 
Swedish  Space  Research  Committee 
(SSRC ) ,   18,  20,  24,  27 
Swenson,  Loyd  S.,  Jr.,  357 
Swigert,  John   L.,  Jr.,  267 
Switzerland, 4% 
Sydney,  Australia,  121,  137,  312,  359 
Syrnphonie  (W.  German  comsa t) ,  357 
Symposium  on  Military  Oceanography, 
160 
Synchronous  Meteorological 
Satellite 
(SMS),  69,  86,  139 
Systems  engineering,  35,  388 
Syvertson,  Clarence  A.,  53  
T 
T-33 
( je t   tra iner) ,   283 
Tacsut  I  (tactical  communications  satel- 
l i te ) ,   44,  322,  422 
Tactical  Satellite  Communications  Pro- 
gram,  131,  140 
TACV.  See  Tracked  Air  Cushion  Vehicle. 
TADJET.  See Transport  Air  Drop  and  Jet- 
tison  Test. 
Tago-Sato-Kosaka  comet,  409 
TAID.  See  Thrust-Augmented  Improved 
Thor-Delta  booster. 
Taipei,  Formosa,  234 
Talkeetna,  Alaska,  171 
Talloires,  France,  381,  394 
Tampa,  Fla.,  110 
Tape,  Dr.  Gerald  F.,  112,  117 
Tappaan,  Francis  D.,  147 
Tashkent,  U.S.S.R.,  387 
Ta sk   Force  on  Air  Pollution,  383 
Task  Force  on  Oceanography,  314 
Task  Force  on  Science  Policy,  314 
Taylor,  D.  J.,  164 
Taylor,  Henry  J.,  138 
Taylor,  Dr.  S.  Ross,  292,  407 
TCFM.  See Temperature-control flux  mon- 
itor. 
itor. 
Teague,  Rep.  Olin  E.,  71 
Teague,  Rep.  Olin  E.,  71  
Technology,  11,  53,  132,  135,  136,  146, 
Technology,  11,  53,  132,  135,  136,  146, 
148-149,  151,  162-1639  257,  321,  396 
148-149,  151,  162-1639  257,  321,  396 
Techno logy   i n   Re trospec t   and  Critical 
Techno logy   i n   Re trospec t   and  Critical 
Even ts   i n   Sc ience   (TRACES )  
Even ts   i n   Sc ience   (TRACES )  
(repor t) ,  
(repor t) ,  
11 
11 
Techno logy:   Processes  o f   Assessment 
. 
and   Choice  ( N A S   repo r t ) ,   257 
Technology  utilization,  space,  34,  44,  70, 
119-120,  157,  298,  309-310,  335,  388, 
416 
Teheran,  Iran,  226,  312 
Teir,  William,  325 
Tektite,  200 
Tek t i te   I,  Project,  51,  86,  110,  138 
Tek t i te  11,  Project,  356 
Tel  Aviv,  Israel,  226 
Telemetry,  117 
Telescope,  29,  133-134,  257,  259,  272, 
336,  341,  342-343,  390,  403 

gamma-ray,  127 
lunar   surface,  123,  331,  342-343 
space,  81,  122,  342-343,  366-367 
spectrographic,  90 
Television,  146,  227 
Ap o l lo   9 ,   50,  67 
A p o l lO   10.  90,  108,  142-144,  147-1489 
149 
Ap o l lo   1 1 ,   182,  201,  207,  210,  212-223, 
244-245,  267,  276,  279 
A po l l o   12,  342,  362,  374-376,  377,  380, 
384-385,  386 
color,  102,  210,  342,  362 
educational,  337,  423 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  18,  50 
soyuz   v, 11-12 
s o y u z   IV ,   11-12 
space  probe  use  of,  55,  210,  259,  261, 
262,  301,  338 
tube,  105-106 
via  satellite,  18,  30,  39-40,  47,  50,  61, 
137,  151,  179, 286,  311,  340,  402,  423 
Teller,  Dr.  Edward,  167 
Temperature-control 
monitors 
flux 
( T C FM ) ,   133 
Tennessee,  225 
Tennessee,  Univ.  of,  391 
Space  Institute,  20 
Tepper,  Dr.  M o m s ,   139 
Ter  Horst,  J. F.,  9 
TERLS.  See  Thumba  Equatorial  Rocket 
Launching  Station. 
TETR  c  (test  and  training  sa te l l i te) ,   291, 
42 1 
Texas,  397 
Texas  Instruments,  Inc.,  117,  418 
Texas,  Univ.  of,  17,  90,  237,  259 
McDonald  Observatory,  17,  90,  259 
Textron,  Inc.,  Bell  Aerospace  Co.,  413 
TF-39 
( turbofan   eng ine) ,   212,  393 
Thailand,  190,  251 
Thant,  U,  U.N.  Secretary  General,  158, 
244,  279 
Thimann,  Kenneth  V.,  162-163 
Thiokol  Chemical  Corp.,  177 
Th i s   N ew   Ocean:   A  H is tory   of  Pro jec t  
Mercury ,   250,  357 
Thomas,  Rep.  Albert,  289 
Thomas,  David  D.,  58 
Thomas,  David  E.,  Jr.,  4 
Thompson,  Dr.  Floyd  L.,  21 
Thon,  William,  403 
Thor-Agena  (booster),  23,  4.0,  59,  86, 
127,  243,  255,  402 
Thor-Burner  (booster),  240 
Thor-Delta  (booster),  22,  54 
Long-Tank,  Trust-Augmented,  40,  150, 
189-190,  245,  272,  388 
Thrust-Augmented,  57 
Thrust-Augmented  Improved,  30,  185, 
291 
Thorad.  See  Long-Tank  Thrust-Aug 
mented  Thor-Agena  D. 
Thorad-Agena  (booster),  48,  314 

526 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Thorad-Agena  D  (booster),  107,  171- 
Thorad-Agena  D  (booster),  107,  171- 
173, 319 
173, 319 
Thoren,  Kip  S.,  121 
Thoren,  Kip  S.,  121 
Thorn,  Dr.  Oakleigh,  11,  225 
Thorn,  Dr.  Oakleigh,  11,  225 
Thornton,  Dr.  William  E.,  290 
Thornton,  Dr.  William  E.,  290 
Threlfall,  David,  161,  233 
Threlfall,  David,  161,  233 
Thrust-Augmented  Improved  Thor-Delta 
Thrust-Augmented  Improved  Thor-Delta 
(booster),  30,  185,  291 
(booster),  30,  185,  291 
(TA ID )  
- (TA ID )  
Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta  (booster), 
or-Delta  (booster), 
57 
Thumba  Equatorial  Rocket  Launching 
Station  (TERL S ) ,   118,  120 
Tibet.  50 
Tidemand,  Defense  Minister  Otto  Grieg 
(Norway),  332 
Time,  Men  of  the   Year  award,  2 
Time-Life,  Inc.,  1% 
Tiros  (meteorological  satellite),  23,  139 
Tiros-M,  85-86,  399 
Tiros-N,  85-86 
Tiros  Operational  Satellite 
svs- 
(TO S )  
- ,
tem,  57,  414 
Titan  I11  (booster),  15,  355,  386 
Titan  IIIB-Agena,  288,  350 
Titan  IIIB-Agena  D,  23,  66,  109,  169 
Titan  IIIC,  14,  44,  118,  155,  402 
Titan  IIIM,  185,  422 
Titan-Centaur  (booster),  118,  192 
Titanium,  275 
Tito,  President  Josip  Broz  (Yugoslavia), 
341 
L / C   Gherman  S.  (U.S.S.R.),  158, 
Tiio; 
195,  197 
Titus,  Ronald,  352 
TMA.  See  Trimethy1aluminum  experi- 
ment. 
Tokyo,  Japan,  82,  290,  312,  361-362,  384 
Tokyo  Univ.,  297 
Tolson,  Clyde  A.,  239 
Toowoomba,  Queensland,  Australia,  148 
Torrey,  Volta  W.,  138 
system), 
(energy-absorbing 
TOR-SHOK 
408 
s e e   Tiros  Operational  Satellite 
TOS. 
system. 
(TOS )  
Toulouse,  France,  329,  397 
Toulouse-Blagnac  Airport,  France,  13, 
61.  323 
- 7   ~- 
Townes,  Dr.  Charles  H.,  82,  94,  167,  346 
Toynbee,  Prof.  Arnold  J.,  239 
TRACES.  See  Technology  i n   Retrospect 
and  Critical  Events  in  Science. 
Tracked  Air  Cushion  Vehicle 
(TACV ) ,  
163 
Tracking,  47-48,  59,  199,  204,  322,  399 
aircraft,  140 
animal,  328 
Apo l lo   11  mission,  204,  224 
deep  space  ( D S N ) ,   34,  180,  189,  274- 
275,  346 
laser,  37,  405 
MSFN ,   10,  33-34,  117,  196,  292,  362 
NASCOM,  292 
radar,  55,  291-292 
ship,  306-307,  410 

 

STADAN,  292 
station 
Australia,  34,  148,  424 
Pew.  267 
-  _ _  
Spa&, -424 
US.,  142,  274-275,  374,  405 
Train,  Russell  E.,  346 
Tranquility  Base.  See  Sea  of  Tranquility. 
Trans  World  Airlines,  81,  241,  244 
Transformation  of  Imagery  (TRIM),  139 
IV-A 
(navigational  satellite), 
Transit 
190 
Transplan,  Inc.,  113 
Transport  Air  Drop  and  Jettison  Test 
(TADJET ) ,   283 
Transportation,  17,  105,  113-114,  163, 
208,  209 
Transportation, Dept.  of  (DOT), 58,  113- 
114,  410 
air  cushion  vehicle,  163 
air  traffic  control,  32,  88-89,  123,  388, 
418 
airports,  32,  123 
budget,  14,  78,  383,  398,  412 
contract,  89,  163,  335,  388 
cooperation,  88,  417-418 
exhibit,  412 
noise  abatement,  263-265 
personnel,  52,  79 
R&D,  335,  417-418 
supersonic  transport,  32,  43,  95,  123, 
146-147,  412 
TurboTrain,  105 
Transportation  Facilities  Committee,  113 
Treaty 
damages  for  space  accidents,  392 
missile  control,  21,  33,  81,  131,  174, 
181,  183,  190-191,  332 
nuclear  nonproliferation,  13, 41,  52,  57, 
78,  317,  370,  392-393 
nuclear  test  ban.  13.  81 
outer  space,  13, ’320’ 
seabed,  weapon  ban  on,  81,  86,  155, 
197,  330 
space  rescue,  21,  130,  392 
Triesneck  Crater  (moon),  159 
TRIM.  See  Transformation  of  Imagery. 
Trimble,  George  S.,  292 
( TM A )   experiment, 
Trimethylaluminum 
49,  408-409 
Trubshaw,  Brian,  105 
Trudeau,  Prime  Minister  Pierre  E.  (Can- 
ad a ) ,   399-400 
The  True  History  (by  Lucian),  232 
Truly,  L /Cd r   Richard  H.  ( U S N ) ,   281 
Truszynski,  Gerald  M.,  10,  210,  347 
TRW  Inc.,  58,  66,  329,  34.0 
Systems  Group,  113,  319 
Tu-22  (U.S.S.R.  supersonic  bomber),  1 
Tu-144  (U.S.S.R.  supersonic  transport), 
1,  5,  121,  14.6-147,  152,  159,  173,  255, 
283,  422 
Tu-154  (U.S.S.R. 
je t   transport),  121 
Tucson,  Ariz.,  157-158,  192,  397 
Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  138,  183-184,  393 
527 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Tunney,  Rep.  John  V.,  202 
TurboTrain,  105 
Turcat,  AndrB,  61,  71,  173, 323 
Turkevich,  Anthony,  191 
“2001:  A  Space  Odyssey”  (f i lm) ,   241 
Twentieth  Century  Fund,  393-394 
Tycho  ( lunar   c ra te r ) ,   200 
Tyuratam,  U.S.S.R.,  382 
U 

U.A.R.  See United  Arab  Republic. 
Udall,  Rep.  Morris  K.,  168 
Uebel,  Theodore  C.,  54 
-
-
 
UFO.  See  Unidentified  flvine.  obiect. 
U.K.  See  United  Kingddm. 
Ultraviolet  (uv), 3,  6,  31-32,  43,  55,  78, 
99,  124,  134, 136, 179,  184, 298,  302, 
366,  403,  4 9  
extreme  (EUV ) ,  140,  308,  411 
U.N.  See  United  Nations. 
Underground  nuclear  test,  359 
Unidentified  flying  object  (UFO), 5,  8-9, 
20,  50-51,  288,  411,  413-414,  416 
Unidentified  satellite,  23,  40,  66,  86,  106, 
109,  127,  169,  240,  243,  255,  288,  314, 
319,  350,  402 
Union  of  Concerned  Scientists,  40 
Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics.  See 
U.S.S.R. 
United  Air  Lines,  278-279,  380 
United  Aircraft  Corp.,  21,  105,  173,  4243 
P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.,  25,  32,  46,  304, 
_ _  -, - . - 
328.  379 
(U.A.R.)  ,  140, 
United  Arab  Republic 
226,  384,  413 
United  Kingdom  (U.K.),  16,  106,  168- 
169.  381 
-  I 
-
- ~  
aircraft,  Concorde,  13-14,  26,  61,  71, 
105,  146,  162,  173,  197,  255,  285, 
323,  329,  340,  410,  413 
Apo l lo   11  and   Apo l lo   12  missions,  re- 
action  to,  210,  225,  233,  236,  238, 
244,  384 
astronauts 
award  to,  251 
visit  by,  32,  38,  312,  335 
booster,  190,  196 
cooperation,  defense,  132 
cooperation,  space,  18,  20,  23,  24,  27, 
59,  132,  196, 323,  385,  388-389,  $22, 
423-424 
Defence  Ministry,  195 
House  of  Commons,  38 
launch,  satellite,  388 
lunar   sample  exhibit  and  study,  312, 
423 
nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty,  78 
satellite,  23,  59,  385,  388-389,  422,  423 
science  and  technology,  398 
space  program,  59,  132,  323,  385,  388- 
389,  423-424 
United  Nations  (U.N.),  8,  24,  26,  175, 
276,  279,  282,  311 

Committee  on  the   Peaceful  Uses  of 
Outer  Space,  189,  198,  392 
Scientific  and  Technical  Subcommit- 
tee,  157 
Committee  on  the   Peaceful  Uses  of 
the  Seabed  and  Ocean  Floor,  22 
Disarmament  Committee,  197 
General Assembly,  197,  309,  330 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  address, 
309-310 
Secretary  General,  244 
Security  Council,  24~2 
Space  Council  (proposed) ,   311 
Space  Institute  (proposed) ,  248 
United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific, 
and   Cultural  Organization,  255 
(pro- 
United  Nations  Space  Council 
posed),  311 
Un i t ed   S ta tes   and  Sov ie t   R iva lry  
i n  
SDace:  W h o   1 s   Ahead  and  H o w   Do  
t i e   Contenders  Compare? ,   95 
Un i ted   S ta tes   Space   Science  Program ,  
136 
United  Technology  Center,  48 
Universe,  403 
Universities,  168 
and  space  effort,  8,  171,  227 
Federa l   support,  32,  40,  54,  56,  106, 
397 
gran ts   to,  3,  32,  52 
military  research,  40,  67,  136, 363,  369 
N AS A  program,  3,  25,  56,  106,  109,  156, 
171, 227,  302,  334,  363,  368,  383,  415 
Universities  Organizing  Committee  for 
Space Sciences, 8 
Universities  Space  Research  Assn. 
( U S R A ) ,   227 
University  College  (London),  22,  272 
University  Corp.  for  Atmospheric  Re- 
search,  44,  416 
Upton,  N.Y.,  386 
Uranus  (p lane t) ,   192,  263 
Urey,  Dr.  Harold  C.,  238,  275,  288,  292, 
331 
United  S ta tes   (U.S.)  (see  also  appropri- 
a te   agencies  and  Congress) 
award,  1-2,  50,  54,  100-101,  121,  418 
budget,  3,  4,  14-16,  22,  86,  99,  107, 
109-110 
communications,  24,  56,  88,  101-102, 
381 
defense,  4,  40,  46-47,  48,  86,  99,  130, 
132,  183 
disarmament,  13,  30,  81,  86,  155,  197 
education,  3,  105-106,  136,  147,  168, 
174 
health,  147,  266-267 
housing,  188,  237 
international  cooueration.  4.  22.  24-25. 
43,  56,  78-79,  88,  lO l i102 ,   133, 204; 
258,  261,  386,  417 
medical  research,  96,  128 
meteorology,  78,  88 
treaty.  See 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
Nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty. 

528 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

oceanography,  9,  22,  51,  56,  99-100, 
110,  133,  197,  209,  314,  341,  353 
pollution  abatement,  147, 267,  278-279, 
285-286,  354,  383,  402,  412-413 
research  and  development,  3,  28,  54- 
56,  96-97,  136,  164, 257 
science  and   technology,  3,  11,  14-15, 
19-20,  28-29,  40,  42,  43,  106,  117- 
118,  121-122,  125,  174-175,  178-179, 
184, 255,  297,  313-315,  321,  346-347, 
359,  396-397,  4*19 
space  program.  See  Space  program, 
national. 
space  rescue  treaty.  See  Space  rescue 
treaty. 
transportation 
(see  also  Supersonic 
transport),  17,  32,  52,  79,  105,  163 
Vietnam  war.  See  Vietnam  war. 
US. Aeronautics  and   Space  Activities 
for 1968  (President’s  repo r t ) ,   17 
U S .   Air  Force  ( U S A F )  
(see  also  indi- 
vidual  bases,  centers,  and  commands, 
such  a s   Air  Force  Systems  Com- 
mand,  Arnold  Engineering  Develop- 
ment  Center,  Edwards  A F B ) ,   68,  75, 
79,  138,  163-164,  167,  177,  245,  284, 
355,  410 
aircraft  (see  also  individual  aircraft, 
such  as  C-5A. 
F-111A. 
C-130. 
X-15,  XB-701,  4,  17,  38,’49,  52,  57, 
80,  106-107,  111-112,  115,  119,  123- 
124.  128.  131,  138,  140,  151,  169, 
183,  201,  205,  207,  239,  251,  281, 
283,  293,  321,  323,  331,  352,  354, 
360,  372,  380,  405,  411,  413,  415- 
416,  421-422 
award,  87,  101,  304,  346-347,  412,  419 
booster,  386 
budget,  15, 424 
communications  satellite,  322 
contract,  14,  48,  66,  85,  123-124,  128, 
135,  150,  191,  327-328,  330,  336, 
372,  386,  391,  402-403,  408,  414 
cooperation,  21,  29,  86-87,  119,  146, 
176, 192, 205,  257-258,  283,  321,  336, 
388-389,  405,  421-422 
laser,  424 
launch,  371 
balloon,  363 
reentry  vehicle,  10 
satellite,  23,  40,  66,  83,  86,  106,  109, 
127,  155,  169,  240,  243,  255,  288, 
314,  319,  350,  402 
liftiw-bodv  vehicle.  421-422 
_ _  
_ _  
missire  prbgram,  43,  229,  297 
MOL,  15,  87,  104,  110,  146,  151,  176- 
177,  178-179.  181.  186.  191.  200. 
257-258,  260,’281,  289,  $22,  423,  424 
navigation  satellite,  322 
personnel,  4,  9,  21,  124,  130,  141,  180, 
188,  260,  274*, 281,  289 
reentry  vehicle,  391 
research,  164,  183-184 
satellite,  191 
sonic  boom  test,  352 

space  program,  13,  193 
space  shuttle,  336 
telescope,  336 
UFO, 5,  8-9,  288,  411,  413414 ,   416 
US. Army  (U SA ) ,   235 
aircraft,  131, 148,  150, 160,  308-309 
contract,  148, 150 
cooperation,  49,  283,  334,  379 
personnel,  4,  398 
satellite,  107-108,  422 
Transport  Air  Drop  and   Jettison  Test 
(TADJET)  program,  283 
universities  research,  136 
U.S.  Army  Atmospheric  Sciences  Labora- 
tory,  315 
U S .   Army  Aviation  Material  Labora- 
tories  ( AVLABS )  , 334 
U.S.  Army  Ballistics  Laboratory,  49 
U S .   Army  Collateral 
Investigation 
Board,  260 
U S .   Army  Materiel  Command,  379 
U S .   Bureau  of  Mines,  387 
U S .   Coast  and   Geodetic  Survey,  117 
U S .   Coast  Guard,  9,  51 
U S .   Comptroller  General,  281,  309 
U S .   Deep  Sea  Drilling  Project,  273 
U S .   Geological  Survey,  393,  403,  409 
U S .   Information  Agency 
( U S I A ) ,   234, 
387,  397 
U S .   Lake  Survey, 9 
U S .   Marshal’s  Office,  336 
U S .   Naval  Academy,  101 
U S .   Navy  (USN), 123,  206 
aircraft,  13,  15,  39,  44,  91,  119,  133, 
155, 201,  260 
anniversarv.  133.  325 
aquanaut  inquiry,  57,  77,  316-317 
award,  10,  138 
contract,  13,  39,  91,  201,  260 
cooperation,  27,  44’,  51,  119,  402 
deep  submergence  research  vehicle,  27, 
112 
launch,  371 
missile,  325 
navigation  satellite  system,  37,  190 
Project  Tektite,  51,  138,  356 
personnel,  4,  134 
Sealab  111  experiment,  22,  51-52,  57, 
77,  316-317 
spacecraft  recovery,  64,  143,  190, 223, 
242,  244,  245-246,  284,  377,  392 
Stormfury  Project,  402 
tracking  shim  306 
U S .   Pa t&   dffice,  239 
U S .   Post  Office,  273,  289 
U S .   Public  Health  Service,  76 
U S .   Supreme  Court,  7 
U S .   Weather  Bureau,  157 
WAF .   See  U S .   Air  Force. 
USAF  Aeronautical  Char t   and  Informa- 
tion  Center,  209 
USAF  Museum,  11 
USAF  Space  an d  Missile Systems  Organi- 
( S A M S O ) ,   297,  300,  336,  346- 
zation 
347,  386,  391,  408 

529 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

USNS Huntsville,  306 
USNS Mercury ,   306 
USNS Reds tone ,   306 
USNS Vanguard ,   306,  410 
us=.  See  Universities  Space  Research 
Assn. 
U.S.S.  E l k   R i v e r ,   22,  52 
U.S.S.  Ga r y ,   206 
U.S.S.  Guadalcanal,  64 
U.S.S.  Horne t ,   190,  223,  242,  244,  245, 
246,  284,  377,  392 
U.S.S.  Pr ince ton ,   143 
U.S.S.  York town ,   10 
U.S.S.R. 
(Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Re- 
publics)  (see  also  Soviet  Academy 
of  Sciences,  etc.),  21,  39,  49,  78,  89, 
129.  130.  131.  136-137. 
145-147. 
1751176,  '197,  370 
aircraft,  1,  5,  35,  79,  121,  146-147, 
152,  159,  162,  168,  173,  225,  283,  422 
antiballistic  missile  svstem.  62.  89 
Apo l lo   8  mission  (comment),  25,  26 
ApoZZo  9  mission  (comment),  80 
Apo l lo   10  mission  (comment),  157 
Apo l lo   11  mission 
(comment),  206, 
225,  230, 233,  242,  244,  251,  256,  273 
ApoZlo  12  mission  (comment),  384 
award,  23-24 
booster.  95-96.  170-171.  382 
Borman,  Col.  'Frank 
( U S A F ) ,   visit  to, 
195-196,  197,  199,  202,  204,  210, 
211,  337 
budget,  48 
communications  satellite,  106,  381,  422 
communications 
satellite  conference, 
24,  26 
cooperation,  space,  19,  25,  26,  41,  56, 
74,  78,  96,  101-102,  189,  195,  196, 
202,  211,  229,  231-232,  233,  238, 
240,  245,  246,  247,  248,  311,  318, 
325,  339,  343,  351,  367,  379-380,  381, 
383-384,  409,  411-412,  416,  424 
cosmonaut.  See   Cosmonaut. 
disarmament,  21,  33,  81,  86,  174,  181, 
197,  330 
electric  engine,  342 
Foreign  Ministry,  21 
launch,  422 
probe,  351 
Luna  X V ,   206,  382 
Venus   V .   2.  8 
>  -,  - 
Venus  V I ,   7-8 
Zond  V l I ,   271 
satellite 
Cosmos,  9,  24,  43,  56,  58,  67,  70, 
80-81,  82,  89,  90,  94,  101, 
105.  109.  116.  137.  148.  158, 
160:  169:  181:  186:  183:  203. 
237:  2671  281;  283;  285;  287; 
293,  297,  305-306,  309,  314, 
316.  339.  341.  346.  347.  350- 
351;  360;  370,  380,  392,  401, 
405,  413,  414 
Intercosmos  I ,   335 
Intercosmos  11,  416 

Me teor   I ,   9 1  
Me teor   11,  329 
Mo ln iya   1-11,  106 
M d n i y a   1-12,  237 
Soyuz   IV ,   11-12 
Soyuz  v ,  11-12 
SOYUZ V I ,   332-333 
Soyuz  V U ,   332-333 
SOYUZ V l l l ,   332-333 
lunar   rock  exhibit,  reception  of,  412 
May  Day  celebration,  127,  129 
missile  and   rocket  program,  10, 43,  48, 
50,  52,  53,  106,  116,  129,  131,  140, 
229 
nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty,  41,  78, 
392-393 
nuclear  test  explosion,  112,  359 
meteorological  satellite,  91,  329 
Pa r i s   Air  Show  exhibit,  146-147,  168 
probe,  2,  7-8,  42,  75,  78,  136-137,  140, 
141-142,  160,  171,  271,  351,  422 
Luna  X V ,   195,  206,  207-208,  211, 
224,  229,  232,  236-237,  238,  251, 
382 
rocket  test.  112.  156 
science  and   technology,  59-60,  103, 
273,  278 
space  program,  24,  29,  48,  72,  74-75, 
86.  95-96.  104.  120.  169.  170-171. 
185-186,  195, 200,  241-242,  246,  249, 
256,  266,  268,  278,  318,  335,  336, 
341-342, 
343,  349-350,  351,  361, 
365-366,  372,  382,  383-384,  399,  418. 
420.  421.  422 
I  --, --- 
space  station,  11-12,  24,  75,  146,  271, 
278,  332-333,  341-342,  343,  349-350, 
351.  361.  382.  420.  422 
spacecraft.  See  U.S.S.R.,  satellite;  and 
individual  spacecraft,  such  as  Luna 
X V ,   Molniya  1-11,  Soyuz  IV ,   Zond 
vu. 
spacecraft  debris,  130,  198,  291 
S ta te   Committee  on  Atomic  Energy, 
359 
supersonic  transport,  1,  5,  121,  146- 
147,  152,  159,  173, 255,  283,  422 
weapons,  4,  10,  48,  80,  95,  116,  129, 
181,  191,  330,  332,  416 
Weather  Bureau,  112 
UV. See  Ultraviolet. 

V 

(U.S.S.R.  helicopter),  79 
V-12 
Vacuum  chamber,  329-330 
VAM-20 
(booster),  31,  65-66,  108,  111, 
179,  184, 308,  326,  360-361,  410 
Van  Allen,  Dr.  James  A.,  90,  167,  263, 
340 
Van  Allen  radiation  belt,  84,  90-91,  364 
van  d e   Kamp,  Dr.  Peter,  109 
Van  Derwalker,  John   G.,  51,  86,  110 
Van  Nuys,  Calif.,  102 
530 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Van  Praagh,  David,  199 
Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif.  (see  also  West- 
ern  Test  Range),  launch 
Advanced  Ballistic  Reentry  System,  10 
satellite  launch  vehicle 
Atlas-F,  10,  83 
Thor-Agena,  40,  86,  127,  243,  255, 
402 
Thor-Burner,  240 
Thorad-Agena,  314 
Thorad-Agena  D,  319 
Titan  IIIB-Agena,  288,  350 
Titan  IIIB-Agena  D,  23,  66,  109,  169 
Vanguard  I  (U.S.  satellite),  83 
Vanguard  11,  51  
Varsavsky,  Dr.  Carlos,  118 
Vatican  City,  55,  337 
Vecchietti,  George  J.,  132 
Vega  (aircraft),  158 
Vega  ( s t a r ) ,   92 
Vegesack   (German  freighter),  228 
Vela  (constellation),  56 
Vela  .(nuclear  test  detection  satellite), 
281,  360,  422 
V e l a  IX, 155,  256 
V e l a   X, 155,  256 
Venus  (p lane t ) ,   260 
atmosphere,  2,  6,  43,  75,  127-128,  140, 
141-142,  160,  318 
exploration  of,  66,  69,  76,  84,  119, 
136-137,  256,  286,  318,  343,  423 
magnetic  field,  160 
map,  288 
messure.  140.  141-142.  160.  171 
probe,  2,  7 4 ,   16,  89;  119-120,  127- 
128,  140,  141-142,  160,  171 
surface,  103,  171,  288 
temperature,  140,  141-142,  171 
Venus  (U.S.S.R. 
interplanetary  probe), 
422 
Venus   111  (V en e ra   I l l ) ,  89 
Venus   IV  (V en e ra   I V ) ,   2,  89,  140,  160 
Venus   V   (V en e ra   V ) ,  2,  8 ,   23,  42,  141- 
142,  171 
Venus  VI   (V en e ra   VI 1 ,   7-8,  23,  42,  140, 
141-142,  171 
Verne,  Jules,  199 
Very  Low  Frequency  Propagation  Satel- 
lite,  131 
Vidal,  Eugene  Luther,  54 
Vienna,  Austria,  359 
Vietnam,  North,  245 
Vietnam  war,  4,  14,  22,  48,  57,  99,  404, 
422 
Vernon,  France,  330 
Viking,  Project 
contract,  59,  160,  293,  351 
experiments,  311 
fundine.  15.  336-337 
l and in i '  system,  160,  351,  412 
plans  for,  16,  57,  111,  118,  275,  336- 
337,  398,  411,  412 
Villard,  Henry  Serrano,  52 
Vincze,  Paul,  275 
Virgin  Islands,  401-402 

Voice  of  America  ( V O A ) ,   234,  249 
Volcano,  159,  418 
Volkov,  Vladislav  N., 333 
Volpe,  Secretary  of  Transportation  John 
A.,  58,  371,  402,  410,  412,  418 
contract  award.  89.  335,  388.  391 
SST,  43,  81,  95;  31&-315 
Volynov,  Boris,  11,  23 
von  Braun,  Dr.  Wernher,  13,  77,  188, 
210,  274,  381 
Apollo  11  mission,  187,  247-248 
awards  and  honors,  10,  147,  289,  326 
European  visit,  187 
Mars mission,  266,  270 
press  conference,  170-171 
U.S.S.R.  space  program,  170-171 
von  Kann,  Clifton  F.,  362 
von  Kb rm in   Gas  Dynamics  Facility 
(Tullahoma,  Tenn.) , 138 
von  Ktirmbn,  Theodore,  274 
Voskhod  I mission,  337 
Vos tok   I  (U.S.S.R.  spacecraft).  199 
Vos tok   I  mission.  104 
Vozzo,  Dr.  J. -A.,  ' 293 
Vrebalovich,  Dr.  Thomas,  290 
V/STOL  aircraft,  15,  75,  84,  92 
vsx  (antisubmarine  aircraft).  See  S-3A. 
VTOL  aircraft,  75,  80,  114,  129,  199 
Vykukal,  Hubert  C.,  315 

W 

Waddell.  .lack.  45-46 
_ _   ._ 
Wakelin,  J am e s   H.,  Jr.,  332 
Wald,  Dr.  George,  89,  238-239 
Walker,  Joseph -A.,  315 
Wall,  Dr.  Frederick  T.,  8 
Wall  of  Theophilus  (moon ) ,  377 
Waller,  Richard  A.,  51,  86,  110,  343 
Wallops  Station  ( N A S A ) ,   58,  409 
contract,  88,  154,  253 
funding,  383 
launch,  sounding  rocket 
Aerobee  150  A,  139 
Aerobee  350,  27 
Arcas,  33-34,  41,  354 
Boosted  Arcas  11,  28 
Astrobee  1500,  335 
Black  Brant  IIIB,  59,  127 
Black  Brant  VB,  366 
Bullpup  Cajun,  178 
Nike-Apache,  33-34,  41,  49,  113, 
135,  159,  176,  189,  286,  300,  303- 
304,  408-409 
Nike-Cajun,  18,  25,  33-34,  41,  94, 
132,  133 
Nike-Tomahawk,  27-28,  29,  49,  211- 
212,  286,  327 
Pacemaker,  203 
Sidewinder-Arcas,  79 
r 
recovery  experiment,  79 
Walters,  Robert,  115 
Wampler,  Dr.  E.  Joseph,  42 

53 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Wapakoneta,  Ohio,  243,  298 
Wapakoneta,  Ohio,  243,  298 
Warner,  Jack ,  317 
Warner,  Jack ,  317 
Warner,  Dr.  Jeffrey  L.,  263,  396 
Warner.  Dr.  .Teffrev  L..  263.  396 
Warren,  Chief  Justice  Earl,  168 
Warren;  Chief  Jusiice ’Earl;  168 
Warren,  Dr.  Shields,  164 
Warren,  Dr.  Shields,  164 
Warsaw,  Poland,  211,  244,  251 
Warsaw,  Poland,  211,  244,  251 
Washburn,  Abbott  M.,  418 
Washburn,  Abbott  M.,  418 
Washington  Academy  of  Sciences,  54 
Washington  Academy  of  Sciences,  54 
Washington  Airlines,  50,  320 
Washington  Airlines,  50,  320 
Washington,  D.C.,  2,  80,  180,  196,  204, 
Washington,  D.C.,  2,  80,  180,  196,  204, 
225,  355,  362,  385,  388,  392,  393,  417 
225,  355,  362,  385,  388,  392,  393,  417 
Apo l lo   11   postage  stamp,  289,  319 
Apo l lo   11   postage  stamp,  289,  319 
astronauts  in,  7,  32,  56-57,  157,  191, 
astronauts  in,  7,  32,  56-57,  157,  191, 
204,  231,  232,  307,  413 
204,  231,  232,  307,  413 
awards  presented  in,  50,  54,  100-101, 
awards  presented  in,  50,  54,  100-101, 
117.  127 
117.  127 
co smdn i i t s   in,  337,  359 
exhibit,  133,  388,  403,  406,  413 
meetings,  24,  32,  54,  56,  68,  72,  74,  78, 
111,  115,  116,  120,  121,  133,  148, 
170,  178,  237,  268,  357,  371 
nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty  signed, 
370 
press  conference,  9,  182, 224,  301,  355, 
402 
Washfigton  National  Airport,  43,  380, 
418 
Washington  National  Gallery  of  Art,  226 
Washington,  Univ.  of,  273,  282 
Wa tchers   of  the   Sk ies ,   187 
Watson,  James  Craig,  Medal,  121 
Watson,  Postmaster  General  W.  Marvin, 
8 
W e  Reach   th e   Moon ,   252,  425 
Weapon  systems,  41,  42,  136,  155,  191, 
257,  330,  332,  424 
Weather  modification,  42,  205 
Webb,  James  E.,  7,  42,  184, 406 
luncheon,  for,  209 
portrait  of,  323 
Space   A g e   Management,  192 
Weber,  Dr.  Joseph,  182 
Weeghman,  Richard  B.,  164 
Weidner,  Hermann  K.,  326 
Weightlessness,  effects  of,  19,  48,  117 
animals,  201,  348-349 
human  beings,  17,  136, 206,  391 
Weinberg,  Steven,  131 
Weinraub,  Allen  S.,  417 
Welsh,  Dr.  Edward  C.,  39,  87,  141,  257 
Wenk,  Dr.  Edward,  Jr.,  99 
Wentwortb,  Eric,  369 
West  German  Air  and  Space  Research 
Institute.  48 
West  Palm  Beach,  Ha.,  209 
West  Virginia  Univ.,  70 
Westendorf,  Thomas  P.,  388 
Western  Electric  Co.,  233 
(see  also 
Western  Test  Range 
(WTR )  
Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif.),  launch,  23 
Long-Tank  Thrust-Augmented  Thor 
(Thoradl-Agena  D,  107,  171 
Scout,  59,  323,  365 
Thorad-Agena,  48 

Thrust-Augmented 
Improved  Thor- 
Delta,  30,  185 
Westinghouse  Astronuclear  Laboratory, 
87 
Westinghouse  Electric  Corp.,  108, 144 
Weston  Instruments,  Inc.,  Electro  Me- 
chanical  Research  Aerospace  Sciences 
Div..  41 
Wethe;  Jay  D.,  195 
Wetherill,  John  Price,  Medal,  161 
Whalen.  R e a  Charles  W..  Jr..  116 
Wheatlev.  seapel.  394 
Wheator;,’ Md.:  204 
Wheeler,  Gen.  Ear le  G.  ( U S A ) ,   180 
- 
“Where  the   Legend  Starts” 
(U.S.S.R. 
film),  104 
Whitcomb,  Dr.  Richard  T.,  44,  293 
White,  L/C Edward  H.,  I1  ( U S A F ) ,   228, 
280,  289 
White,  Mrs.  Edward  H.,  11,  280 
White,  Maurice  D.,  362 
White  House,  34,  83,  109,  178, 304,  364, 
422 
Apo l lo   11  mission,  190,  196,  219,  224, 
228,  230,  232,  284 
Apo l lo   12  mission,  385,  392 
appointments,  49,  68,  91  
astronauts  at,  32,  72,  157,  191,  200, 
204,  232,  319,  362,  413 
awards presented  at, 6, 68 
press  conference,  32,  43 
space  program,  38,  167,  238,  253,  270, 
304-305,  352,  389 
White,  Dr.  Robert  M.,  344,  417 
White  Sands  Missile  Range  (W S M R ) ,   N. 
Mex.,  119 
launch 
Aerobee  150 
solar  astronomy,  48,  302,  361 
stellar  data.  71,  79,  402,  409 
ultraviolet  ‘astronomy,  48-49,  78, 
409 
x-ray  astronomy,  78,  402 
Aerobee  150 MI 
infrared  data,  299 
solar  astronomy,  104,  108,  111, 
140,  308,  314,  316,  361,  410 
stellar  data,  31,  118,  184, 326,  337, 
4G9 
ultraviolet  astronomy,  6,  31,  43, 
140,  179,  184,  308,  410 
x-ray  astronomy,  65-66,  71,  104, 
108,  118,  325,  361 
Aerobee  170, 298 
balloon,  315 
Nike-Apache,  micrometeoroid 
sam- 
pling,  279,  287 
White,  Gen.  Thomas  D.,  Space  Trophy, 
101 
White  Sands  Test  Facility,  365 
Whitney,  John  A.,  412 
Whittaker,  Ph i l ip   N.,  104,  123,  130,  132 
Whittier  College,  232 
WHO.  See  World  Health  Organization. 
532 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Wicker,  Tom  (Thomas Grey),  412 
Wickert  Public  Opinion  Institute,  38% 
Wiesner,  Dr.  Jerome  B.,  35,  131,  254 
Wilcox-Sierra  Div.  of  American  Stand- 
ard,  Inc.,  315 
Wild,  Dr.  J.  P.,  121 
Wilford,  John  Noble,  252,  273,  370 
Wdhelm,  Janusz,  164 
Williams,  George  E.,  260 
Williams,  Rev.  Hosea,  205 
Wilson,  Rep.  Charles  H.,  52 
Wilson,  Gill  Robb,  Trophy  for  Arts  and 
Letters,  87 
Wilson,  Prime  Minister  Harold  (U.K.)  , 
38,  158,  233 
Wilson,  Herbert  A.,  Jr.,  290 
Wilson,  Richard,  288 
Wilson,  Riley,  266-267 
Wilson,  T.  A.,  330,  341 
Wimberley,  Robert  C.,  76 
Wing,  aircraft,  44,  46,  84,  207,  293,  299 
Winns  Club.  150 
Winte,  Ralph  F.,  19 
Winter  Study  on   Uses   of  Manned  Space 
Flight.  1975-1985,  Proceedings,  94 
Wisconsin,  28 
Wisconsin,  Univ.  of,  3,  29,  80,  99,  129, 
344,  402,  403 
Wise,  Dr.  Donald  U.,  287 
Withington,  H.  W.,  340 
Wolf  Research  and  Development  Corp., 
271 
Wolff,  Rep.  Lester  L.,  177 
Wollenhaupt,  Wilbur  R.,  174 
Wolloneone,  Australia.  233 
Wom en  as-  astronauts,  359 
“The  Wondrous  Telephone”  ( song ) ,  388 
Wood,  Clotaire,  290 
Woods  Hole,  Mass.,  290 
Woods  Hole  Oceanographic  Institution, 
273 
Woomera  Rocket  Range,  Australia,  99, 
190,  196,  323 
Worcester  Foundation  for  Experimental 
Biology,  50 
( U S A F ) ,   105 
Worden,  Capt.  Alfred  M. 
World  Center  for  Exploration  Founda- 
tion,  2 
World  Data  Center  A  for  Rockets  and 
Satellites,  1 
World  Health  Organization  (W H O ) ,   311 
Communicable  Disease  Div.,  254 
World  War  I ,   133 
World  Weather  Program,  78 
Wray,  James,  28 
- 
Wrieht  brothers.  88.  177.  226.  236 
- 
Wright  Brothers Day,  406,  410 
I  - - - I  
Wright,  Orville,  52,  W ,  410 
Wright,  Wilbur,  406.  410 
Wright-Patterson  AFB,  Ohio,  11,  38, 
1 I s .  
1 1 1  
WSMR. See  White  Sands  Missile  Range. 
WTR.  See Western  Test  Range. 

119, 

Wyeth,  James  B.,  226 
Wyld,  James  H.,  Propulsion  Award,  134 

X 

X-1 
( s ta r ) ,   326,  327 
X-15 
(rocket  research  a i rc ra f t ) ,   87,  11% 
133,  177,  205,  315,  321,  421 
(lifting-body  vehicle),  29 
X-24 
X-24A,  101,  113,  133,  286,  299,  316,  349, 
371,  421 
(supersonic  aircraft),  11,  38, 
XB-70 
205,  321,  421 
XE  (nuclear  rocket  engine),  177-178, 
279,  309,  422 
Xenon,  403 
X-ray,  168 
experiment,  22,  71,  78,  179,  326,  335 
mirror.  104 
polarimeter,  71  
184, 
179, 
radiation,  66,  71,  104,  108, 
327,  361 
127, 
124, 
source,  99,  104,  118,  121, 
326, 
-282, 
133-134,  136,  160,  186, 281 
335,  366,  402 
.a f t ) ,  
X V 4 B   (Hummingbird)  (VTOL 
aircr 
80 

Y 

t r i je t ) ,   168 
Yak-40  (U.S.S.R. 
Yamaguchi,  Japan,  135 
(Apo l l o   12   command 
Yankee  C l ipper  
module).  See  Command module. 
Yarborough,  Sen.  Ralph  W.,  270 
Yeh.  Dr.  Richard  S..  340 
Yeli’seyev,  Dr.  Aleksky  S.,  11-12,  23,  159, 
168,  333 
Yellowstone  National  Park,  107,  328 
Yelvan.  Eduard  V..  1.  152 
YFL12‘ ( j e t   intercept&),  400,  421 
YF-12A,  72,  205,  405 
Yorty,  Mayor  Samuel W.,  279 
Young,  Dr.  Andrew  T..  282 
Young,  Cdr.  John  w.  (USN),  16, 90, 
142,  152,  159,  191,  267 
Young  Presidents’  Organization.  327 
Young,  Sen.  Stephen -M.,  405 
Youngblood, Dr.  David,  343 
Youth  Science  Congress,  105 
Yugoslavia,  24,  249,  341 

108, 

Z 

Zacharias,  Jerrold  R.,  254 
Zihringer,  Dr.  Joseph,  288 
Zakharov,  Aleksey  V.,  242 
Zakharov,  Matvey  V.,  129 

533 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1969 

Zamayatin,  Leonid,  21 
Zholudev,  Gen.  Leonid  V. 
121 
Ziegler,  Henri,  197 
Ziegler,  Ronald  L., 305 
Ziehl,  Dr.  Donald,  85 

(U .S .S .R . ) ,  

Zoeckler,  M / G   John  L.  (U SAF ) ,   260 
Zond  V  (U .S .S .R .   space  probe) ,   271 
Zond   V I ,   271 
Zond  V U ,  271,  422  
Zvezdny  Gorodok  (Star  City) (U.S.S.R.), 
195 

534 

NASA  HISTORICAL  PUBLICATIONS 

HISTORIES 
*  Robert  L.  Rosholt,  A n  Administrative  History  of  N A S A ,   1958-1963,  NASA  SP- 
4101,  1966, $4.00.* 
Loyd  S.  Swenson, James  M.  Grimwood,  and   Charles  C.  Alexander,  Th i s   New  
Ocean:  A   History  of  Project  Mercury,  NASA  SP-4201,  1966,  $5.50. 
*  Constance  McL.  Green  and  Miitton  Lomask,  Vangua rd :  A   History,  NASA  SP- 
4202,  1970;  also  Washington:  Smithsonian  Institution  Press,  1971,  $12.50. 
Alfred  Rosenthal,  Ven ture   In to   Space:  Early  Years  of  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center, NASA  SP-4301,  1968,  $2.50. 
*  Edwin  P.  Hartman,  Adventures  in  Research:  A  History  of the   Ame s   Research 
Center,  1940-1965,  NASA  SP-4302,  1970, $4.75. 
HISTORICAL STUDIES 
Eugene  M.  Emme  (ed . ) ,   History  o f   Rocke t   Technology  (Detroit:  Wayne  State 
University,  1964). 
*  Mae  Mills  Link,  Space  Medicine  in  Project  Mercury.  NASA  S P 4 0 3 ,   1965, 
$1.00. 
Historical  S k e t ch   of  N A S A ,   NASA  EP-29,  1965  and  1966. 
Katherine  M.  Dickson  (Library  of  Congress),  History  of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics:  A   Preliminary  Bibliography, NASA  HHR-29,  Clearinghouse  for 
Federal  Scientific  and  Technical  Information,  Springfield,  Va.  22150,  $3.00. 
William  R.  Corliss, History  o f  N A S A   Sounding  Rocke ts ,  NASA  SP-4401  (1970). 
CHRONOLOGIES 
*  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics:  A n   American  Ch rono lom   of  Science  and  Tech-  
nology  in  th e   Exploration  of  Space,  1915-1960,  compiled  by  E .   M.  Emme, 
Washington:  NASA,  1961. 
_
_
 
*  Aeronautical  and  Astronautical  Events  o f   1961,  published  bv  the  House  Com- 
mittee  on  Science  and  Astronautics,  1962. 
Aeronautical  and  Astronautical  Events  of 1962,  published  by  the  House  Com- 
mittee  on  Science  and  Astronautics,  1963. 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1963,  NASA  SP-4004,  1964. 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1964,  NASA  SP-4005,  1965. 
e  Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1965,  NASA  SP-4006,  1966. 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1966,  NASA  SP-4007,  1967,  $1.50. 
*  Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1967,  NASA  SP-4008,  1968,  $2.25. 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1968,  NASA  SP4 01 0 ,   1969, $2.00. 
=  James  M.  Grimwood,  Project' Mercury:  A   Chronology,  NASA  SP-4001,  1963. 
*  James  M.  Grimwood  and  Barton  C.  Hacker,  w i t h   Peter  J.  Vorzimmer,  Project 
Gemini Technology and  Operations: A  Chronology, NASA SP-4002,  1969, $2.75. 
*  Ivan  D.  Ertel  and   Mary  Louise  Morse,  Th e   Apollo  Spacecraft:  A   Chronology, 
Vol.  I ,   Th rough  November  7 ,  1962, NASA  S P 4 0 9 ,  $2.50. 
=  Mary  Louise  Morse  and  Jean  Kernahan  Bays,  T h e  Apo l lo   Spacecra f t:   A   Chro- 
nology, Vol.  11,  November  8,1962-September  30,1964,  NASA  SP-4013  (1971) 

* A l l   titles  with  prices  can  be  ordered  from  the  Superintendent  of  Documents, 
Government  Printing  Office,  Washington,  D.C.  20402. 

$7  U . S .   GOVERNMENT   PR IN T ING   OFFICE:  1971  0-408-803 

POSThlASTrR 

I f   Undeliverable  ( Seitrori  1 5 8  
I'orml  ALnua l )   Do Not Kcturn 

I t <  HN ICA I   TRANSLA 'TIONS 
lnforma t ion   publis&ed  in  a  foreign 
isnjiuage conc ide r r r i   to  mer l t   NASA 
distribution  in  English 

technical  infornidtion  c o n d e r e r l  
i inpor tanr ,   comp lr te ,  an2  a  I d s t i n g  
conerrbution  to  e x i w n g  lm ) v  ledgc 
T fCHN ICAL  NOTI S  I n f o rm a i i im   lesi 
broad  in   scope but  n c \ c r t l l e l c > s  of 
impor tance   as  a cr~n trrbucwn  to  tx is t ing  
know ledge  

SPFC IAL   PUBLICATIONS 
informa t ion   d c r i . r c J   from  o r  of  value 
to  ??A%'%  activities  Publications  inc!ic(!e 
mn t i r en c e   procecdtngs, monographs ,  
i1at.i  comp i l a t io iq   handbooks,  source 
T E C I IN I CA L   ~ K ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ A ~ ~ ) U h l S  
1)o i i l .c   anrl  5 p c u ~ l  bibliographies 
Informa t ion   receiving  limited  d is tr ibu-  
tion  because  o f   preliminary  tlata, 
sccur iq   c!assiticariori,  or  o th e r   reasons 

CONTRACTOR   REPORTS   Scientilic 
Jnd   technical  informa t ion   generated 
un J e r   n  NASA   con t rac r  o r  gran t   a n J  
consiJered  an   im po r t an t   ton tr ihu t ion   t o  
t r i s r i n g   knowledge 

TiLIZATION 
PUBL ICA7  1 
nforma t ion   on tcch- 
nol<)gy uscd  by  NASA  tha t  ma1  be 
I I I  p m r c u l c r   inrer tr t   i n  commcrcial a n d  
other  non  aerospace  applicatrons 
Publicdtions  include Tech  Briefs, 
T i t t ino logy   Utilization  Rcpo r t s   and  
Uo tc \ ,   m r l  Tdinolocy  Survebs 

