NASA  SP-4016 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D  
A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 7 1  

Chronology  on  Science, Techno logy ,   and  Po l icy  

T ex t   by  
S c i e n c e  a n d   T e c h n o l o g y  Division 
L i b r a r y   of  Congress 

Sponsored   by 
NASA  H i s to r i ca l   Office 

1972 
Scientific and Technical Information O f i c e  
NATIONAL  AERONAUTICS  A N D   SPACE  ADMINISTRATION 

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents 
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D .C .  20402 
Price  (paper cover) $ 3 .8 0  
Stock Number  3300-00483  
L ibrary  o f  Congress Ca ta log  Ca rd  Number 6S-60308 

Foreword 

This  volume  is  the  eleventh  in  NASA’s series  of  annua l   chronologies  of 
astronautics  and   aeronautics.  The   intent  is  to  provide  a  preliminary  his- 
torical  reference  which  a t   least  identifies,  orders,  and  offers  partial  docu- 
mentation for  key events of  the year. 
One  of  the  curious  aspects  of  these  chronology  volumes  is  tha t   the  very 
process of  documenting NASA’s  portion  of  them  reveals not  only  continuities 
but  also  distinctive  patterns  in   the  unfolding events.  Each  year  has   seemed 
to  emerge with  characteristics  of  its  own.  The  year  1971  was  no  exception. 
As  NASA’s record  unfolds  in  these  pages,  i t   can  clearly  be  seen  as a  transi- 
tional  o r  bridging  year.  On  the   one hand   many  on-going programs  demon- 
strated  their  value  in   solid  accomplishments:  Apollo  14  and  Apollo  15 
brought manned lunar scientific exploration to  dramatic maturity ; Mariner 9 
went  into  orb i t   around  Mars  after  its  400-million-kilometer  journey  and 
began  its  extensive  photography  of  tha t   fascinating  nearby  planet;  O S 0   7 
discovered  “polar  caps”  on  the  sun ;   in   aeronautics  je t   a ircraf t   equipped 
with  the  experimental supercritical  wing  made 27  successful  research  flights 
and  the  quiet  je t   engine program  was  successful  in   its  initial  tests. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  shape  of  the  next  decade  of  the  space  program 
took  much  firmer  shape.  It  became  clear  that  after  a  decade  in   which  the 
moon  was  the  major  focus  of  the  U.S.  space  program,  the  next  ten  years 
would  emphasize  earth-orbital  programs  geared  to  intensive  study  of  ou r  
homeland  in   the   cosmos,  the  planet  Earth.  In   manned  spaceflight,  even  as 
the  final  preparations  were  underway  for  the  final  two  Apollo  lunar   mis- 
sions,  all  flight systems  for  Skylab were in  final manufacturing  stages  or  in  
checkout;  another  year’s  intensive  study  by  NASA  and  industry  had  refined 
and  hardened  the  design  of  the   space shuttle  to   the  point  that we  could  ask 
Administration  approval to  proceed,  confident that  a  reusable,  cost-effective 
space transportation  system could be built. 
In   unmanned  space  programs,  the  first  Ear th   Resources  Technology 
Satellite was  readied  for   its launch  in  1972,  while  a ircraf t   flights  were test- 
ing  its  remote  sensing  devices.  In  aeronautics,  the  jo in t   Department  of 
Transportation-NASA study  of  national  civil  aviation  R&D  requirements led 
to  the  contract  for  design  of 
the   experimental  STOL  transport  aircraft. 
Administratively, the  quintupling  of  funds  for   space technology  transfer  to 
the  civilian  economy  and   the  establishment  of  the  NASA  Office  of  Applica- 
tions  were  other  indications  of  the  increased  priority  fo r   practical  benefits 
from  space  research.  While  all  of  the   foregoing  was  accomplished  within 
the  constraints  of  the  lowest  space  budget  since  1962,  congressional ap- 
proval  of  an   FY  1972 budget  that  was  slightly  larger   ended  the  trend  of 
progressively  smaller space budgets  tha t  had  begun  in   1967. Th is  was  taken 
in  NASA  a s  endorsement for   the  new  stable  realignment of  the space program 
toward  the  needs  of  man  on  ear th   for  the  decade  ahead. 
I  commend  to  you,  in   the  pages  tha t   follow,  1971, the  year  of  transition. 

October 31,  1972 

James C.  Fletcher 
Administrator 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

iii 

Contents 

Foreword  ............................................... 
NASA  Administrator James C . Fletcher 
Illustrations  ............................................. 
Preface  ................................................. 
January   ................................................ 
February  ................................................ 
March  .................................................. 
April  ................................................... 
May  .................................................... 
June   .................................................... 
July  .................................................... 
August  .................................................. 
September  ............................................... 
October  ................................................. 
November  ............................................... 
December  ............................................... 
Summary  ............................................... 
Appendix  A:  Satellites,  Space Probes,  and  Manned  Space  Flights, 
a  Chronicle fo r   1971  .................................... 
Appendix  B :   Chronology of  Major  NASA Launches, 1971  . . . . . . . .  
Appendix  C:  Chronology of  Manned Space Flight,  1971  . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix  D : Abbreviations of  References  .................... 
Index  and  List  of  Abbreviations and  Acronyms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

PAGE 
iii 

vii 
ix 
1 
35 
59 
93 
119 
151 
185 
215 
245 
275 
305 
337 
365 

371 
407 
411 
415 
419 

V 

M 
AGE 
NOT  FIL 
Illustrations 

Dr.  George  M.  Low  and   Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  watch  Apollo  14 
launch  activities  in   F ir ing   Room  2  ........................ 
Saturn  V  propels  Apollo  14   toward  the  moon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
The  modularized  equipment  transporter  leaves  tracks  across  the 
lunar surface  ........................................... 
Scientists  examine  a  seismic  reading  of  the  S-IVB  impact  on  the 
moon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
A p o l b  14   astronauts  relax  in   the  recovery raf t   after  splashdown. . .  
Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb congratulates test  pilot Thomas McMurtry 
after the first  flight of  the supercritical  wing on  the TF-8A  . . . . . .  
Cosmonaut  Yur i   A.  Gagarin  and  U.S.S.R.  Premier  Nikita 
Khrushchev respond to  crowds  celebrating  the  first manned space 
years  ago  .................................... 
flight-10 
Dr.  James C.  Fletcher  is  sworn  in  as  NASA  Administrator  by  Judge 
James  A.  Belson  as  President  Nixon,  Mrs.  Fletcher,  and  Dr. 
George  M.  Low  watch  ................................... 
Astronaut Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  the  first  American  in   space,  stands 
by  the  plaque  marking  Launch  Complex  5/6  in  ceremonies  10 
years  after  the  Freedom  7  flight  .......................... 
25,  1961-urges  Congress to  commit  the 
President  Kennedy-May 
United States  to  landing a man  on  the  moon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
The Mariner 9 spacecraft  and  its  flight  path  to Mars  . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Interior of  the U.S.S.R.’s  SaZyut  1  ............................ 
Lee  Scherer,  Director  of  NASA’s Apollo  Lunar  Exploration  Office, 
exchanges lunar  samples  with  Soviet Academy  of  Sciences Presi- 
dent Aleksander P. Vinogradov  ............................ 
President  Nixon  and  Secretary  of  Agriculture  Clifford  M.  Hardin 
are  briefed  on  the  Corn Blight  Watch  Experiment  . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Apollo  15  prelaunch  activities :  NASA  Administrator  James  C. 
Fletcher  talks  with  NASC  Executive Secretary William  A.  Anders, 
L/G  Samuel C.  Phillips  (U SAF ) ,   and  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Ad- 
ministrator  for  Planning Wernher von Braun  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
The lunar  roving vehicle Rover on  the moon near Hadley Rille,  with 
Astronaut David R.  Scott  ................................. 
Astronaut  James 3. Irwin  scoops a  trench  in  the lunar   sur€ace . . . .  
The A p o l b  15 command  and service modules with the  SIM  bay  orb i t  
the moon  .............................................. 
v i i  

PAGE 

26 
26 

28 

28 
31 

66 

100 

114 

123 

143 
149 
155 

159 

169 

202 

204 
205 

206 

Apo l lo   15 CM splashes down  on  two  parachutes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
before  noise  tests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
NASA’s  experimental, quieter  je t   aircraft engine is  checked  out ju s t  
The “Genesis  rock”  collected  on  the moon  by  the Ap0110  15 mission 
A  white light  coronagraph of  solar streamers with  inset of  the Os0 7 
Orbiting Solar  Observatory  . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . 
Interior  of  the  1-g training  model  of  Skylab’s  Orbital  Workshop. . 
Mariner 9 photo  of  a  sinuous rille  on the  surface of  Mars  . . . . . . . . 
One of  man’s  first  closeup photos of  the Martian  moon  Phobos  . . . . 
Nix  Olympica,  gigantic  volcanic mountain on Mars  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
The   descent  apparatus  of  the  U.S.S.R.’s  Mars  3,  which  landed  a 
capsule on  the  surface of  Mars  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Space Activity,  1957-1971  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Graph-US.-U.S.S.R. 
Table-Summary  of  Soviet and  United  States Payloads  by  Mission 
Category  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

PAGE 
208 

24J 
258 

270 
285 
316 
317 
317 

338 

366 

367 

viii 

Preface 

A  chronicle  is  not  a  history  explaining  “whys”  and   “wherefores”  in  
refined  literary  form.  But  a  reference  of  immediate  usefulness  is  provided 
by  a  chronology  attempting  to  be  comprehensive,  with  documentation  to 
available  sources.  Astronautics  and   Aeronautics  for  1971,  the  eleventh 
annual  volume  so  compiled,  also  helps  give  future  historians  a  runn ing  
s tar t   on  events  in   aerospace science  and  technology  gleaned  from  the  vast 
contemporary  literature.  More  detailed  chronology  will  be  derived  from 
historical  research  in   the  primary  document  sources  a s   well  a s   from  oral 
interviews  concerning  pivotal  events  not  necessarily  committed  to  paper 
form.  This  volume  is  thus  but  a  first  step  in   the  historical  process. 
One  of  the  intrinsic  features  of  this  annual  chronology  is  the  inclusion 
of  policy  statements,  some  commentary  on  the  impact  of  technology  and  
social  concerns,  and   biographical  notes  which  amplify  the  central  story  of 
hardware,  programs,  and   science  activities.  I t   covers  worldwide  aerospace 
events.  As  with  earlier  volumes  the  reader  is   advised  to  make  use  of  the 
detailed  index  for  subjects  of  particular  interest.  I t   has  been  somewhat 
surprising  that  a  few  readers  find  it  of  value  to  read  through  the  entire 
volume.  A  concise  chronology  does  not  seek  high  l i terary   marks  other 
than  brevity,  accuracy,  and  source  citation  to  assist  additional  research. 
General  editor  of  this  volume  was  the  Deputy  NASA  Historian,  Frank   W. 
Anderson,  Jr.,  and  the  technical  editor  was  Mrs.  Carrie  E.  Karegeannes. 
The  entire  NASA  Historical  Office  participated  in   source  selection,  review, 
and  publication.  Archivist Lee  D.  Saegesser  collects  current  documentation. 
The  Science  and  Technology  Division  of  the  Library  of  Congress,  under 
an  exchange  of  funds  agreement,  drafts  monthly  segments  in  comment 
edition  form,  which  are   circulated  for  corrections  and   use.  At  the  Library 
Mrs.  Patricia  D.  Davis,  Mrs.  Carmen  B.  Brock-Smith,  and   Mrs.  Shirley M. 
Singleton carry   principal  responsibility.  At  the  end  of  the  year,  the  entire 
manuscript  is   reworked  to  include  comments  received  and  recent  additional 
information.  Arthur  G .  Renstrom  of  the  L ibrary   of  Congress  prepared  the 
extensive  index,  which  is  indispensable  to  the  usefulness  of  a  chronology. 
The  index  serves  also  as  a  glossary  of  abbreviations  and  acronyms  used 
in  the  chronology. 
Appendix A,  “Satellites,  Space Probes,  and  Manned Space Flights,  1971,” 
Appendix  B,  “Chronology  of  Major  NASA  Launches,  1971,”  and  Appendix C, 
“Chronology  of  Manned  Space  Flight,  1971,”  were  prepared  by  Leonard 
C.  Bruno  of  the  Library  staff.  Appendix D,  “Abbreviations of  References,” 
wa s   prepared  by  Mrs.  Brock-Smith. 
Without  the  validation  throughout  NASA  and  other  Federal  agencies,  the 
content  of  this  volume  would  be  less  reliable  and   less  nearly  complete. 
Comments,  additions,  and  criticisms  are   always  welcomed  by  the  NASA 
Historical  0 5 c e .  

Eugene M.  Emme 
NASA Historian 

ix 

January  1971 

January  I :  Discovery  of  galaxies  Maffei  1 and   Maffei  2  about  3  million 
light  years  from  earth  was  reported  in   Astrophysical  Journal by  team 
of  Univ.  of  California  a t   Berkeley,  Cal  Tech,  and  Carnegie  Institution 
astronomers  headed  by  Robert  Landau  of  Univ.  of  California  a t  
Berkeley.  Galaxies  previously  had  been  obscured  by  interstellar  dust 
i n   Milky  Way.  Team  had  begun  study  after  Landau  read  1968  report 
of  Italian  astronomer  Paolo  Maffei  that  two  strange  objects  had  been 
observed  on  infrared  photo  Maffei  made  of  region  between  constella- 
tions  Perseus  and  Cassiopeia. Using Mount  Palomar  and  Lick  Observa- 
tory  telescopes  and  advanced  astronomical  tools  and  research  tech- 
niques,  team had  located  galaxies  twice  as fa r  from earth a s  Andromeda, 
nearest  galaxy  to  Milky  Way.  Team  believed  brighter  of  new  galaxies 
might  be  larger  than  either  Milky  Way  o r   Andromeda  and  thus  pos- 
sibly  largest  member  of  local  group  of  galaxies,  measuring  50000  to 
100 000  light  years  in   diameter.  (Astrophysical  Journal,  1/1/71, 
L25-31) 
9  Washington Post  editorial  commented  on  “verbal  violence”  at Dec.  26-31, 
1970, AAAS  convention  i n   Chicago:  “I t   should  not  be  beyond  the  power 
of  scientists  to  restore  reason  to  its  normal  throne  a t   their  conventions. 
They had  better  set  about  doing so without further paltering  or  delay- 
by  calling  in  the  police  i f   necessary  to  eject  disrupters  and  impose 
order.  I t   is  a  scientific  fact,  we  beIieve,  that  only  a  single  speaker  can 
be  heard  at  a  particular  time  in   a  particular  place.  Those  who  want 
to  hear  him  should  be  free  to  do  so;  those  who  do  not  should  be  free 
to  go  away.  This  is  not  alone  the  basis  of  science;  i t   is  also  the 
essence  of  freedom.”  (W  Post,  1/1/71,  A18) 
January  2:  GAO  sent  report  to  Congress  that  North  American  Rockwell 
Corp.  stood  to  receive  extra  $1.5  million  for  beating  target  costs  on 
NASA  contract  to  develop  F-1  rocket  while,  actually,  target  cost  had  
been  overstated  originally  by  $5  million.  NR  had  not  used  most  cur- 
rent  cost  data  available.  GAO  recommended  that  NASA  seek  adjustment 
in   lees  to  NR  and  ensure  that  cost  estimates  in   existing  and  future 
contracts  were  based  on  accurate,  complete  data.  Report  included  NR 
statement  of  disagreement with  findings  and  recommendations.  (Beck- 
ler, W Post, 1/3/71,  A8) 
USAF  long-range  planners  were  advocating  DOD development  of pilotIess 
combat  aircraft,  Business  Week   reported.  DOD had  consulted  USAF, 
USN,  and  NASA  about  operational  robots  and  had  talked  with  RAND 
Corp.,  Aerospace  Corp.,  and  Mitre  Corp.  Ryan  Aeronautical  Div.  of 
Teledyne,  Inc.,  Boeing  Co.,  Northrop  Corp.,  and   Cessna  Aircraft  Co. 
also  had   given  DOD their  views.  Experts  felt  existing  technology  used 
in   unmanned  spy  a ircraf t   made  pilotless  combat  aircraft  possible.  DOD 
had  approved experimental hardware and flight tests.  (Bus Wk, 1 /2 /71)  
1 

January  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January  4 :  NASA  was  looking  a t   a i r   bases  in  the  Carolinas,  south  Florida, 
and   the  Bahamas  as  possible  landing  site  for  space  shuttle  rocket 
launched  from  KSC,  UPI  said  in   Philadelphia  Inquirer. NASA  engineers 
also  were  considering  refueling  shuttle  booster’s  1st  stage  in   flight 
so  that  it  could  return  to  launch  site  for  landing,  like  aircraft.  ( P  Znq, 
1/4/71  ) 
*  Discovery  of  cloud  of  hydrogen  gas  80  billion  km  (50  billion  m i )   long 
and   traveling  through  space  a t   210 000  km  per  h r   (130 000  mph )   in  
different  direction  and  a t   60”   angle  from  solar  system  was  reported 
in   Washington  Pos t .   In   interview Dr.  Gary  Thomas,  head  of  Univ.  of 
Colorado  team  of  astronomers  that  discovered  cloud,  had  said  i t   would 
take  cloud  a t   least  50  yrs  to  pass  by  solar  system  and  could  take 
forever.  “For  all  we  know  . . . it’s  been  there  forever.”  Cloud  was 
discovered  first  by  Ogo  5  in   September  1969  and   later  confirmed  by 
same satellite  three  times.  (O’Toole,  W  Post,  1/4/71,  A l l )  
New  York  Assemblyman  Andrew  J.  Stein  told  Washington,  D.C.,  press 
conference he  had  76  cosponsors  for  bill  which  would  ban  supersonic 
transports  from  operating  a t   New  York‘s  John  F.  Kennedy  Interna- 
tional  Airport.  Bill,  if  passed,  would  make  i t   illegal  to  operate  any 
aircraft  producing  noise  at  levels  above  that  of  existing  subsonic  jets. 
(Sehlstedt,  B  Sun,  1/5/71,  A6) 
January  5:  Mayor  Carl  B.  Stokes  of  Cleveland,  Ohio,  and  LeRC  Director 
Bruce  T.  Lundin  announced  that  LeRC  would  assist  Cleveland’s  Div. 
of  Air  Pollution  Control  by  identifying  and  cataloging  trace  elements 
and   compounds  in   a ir ,   determining  their  concentrations,  and  finding 
trends  or  patterns  related  to  weather,  season,  and  geographical  area. 
(LeRC Release  71-1) 
Oklahoma  Governor  Dewey  H.  Bartlett  told  state  legislature  in   Oklahoma 
City  there  was  good  possibility  that  Oklahoma  could  become  launch 
site  for  NASA  space  shuttle.  “Based  on  the  launch  azimuth  and  the 
orbital  inclinations  . . . Oklahoma  provides  both  a  desirable  launch 
and  recovery location.”  (Da i l y  Oklahoman,  1/6/71,  1) 
January  6 :   NASA  announced  award  of  $$-million,  cost-plus-fixed-fee con- 
tract  modification  to  Ball  Brothers  Research  Corp.,  Inc.,  for  changes 
in   OSO-H  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory to  increase  experiment  capacity. 
Change  orders  definitized  by  contract  included  larger  physical  volume 
to  handle  larger  experiment  packages,  improved  command  system 
security,  and   increased  power  for  instruments.  OSO-H  would  be 
launched  in   mid-1971.  (NASA  Release  71-2) 
*  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  had   rejected  Dec.  30,  1970,  DOD  proposal  that 
firm  accept  $200-million  loss  on  disputed  C-SA  contract,  Lockheed 
Board  Chairman  Daniel  J.  Haughton  announced  a t   New  York  press 
conference.  Lockheed  had   chosen  to  take  matter  to  court.  Haughton 
estimated  litigation  would  take  two  to  five  years.  (Getler,  W  Post, 
1/7/71,  A l )  
Permanent  appointment  of  Gustav  E.  Lundquist  a s   Associate  Adminis- 
tra tor   for  Engineering  and  Development  w a s   announced  by  John  H. 
Shaffer,  FAA  Administrator.  Lundquist  had  been  in   acting  capacity 
since  January  1970.  David  R.  Israel,  former  Deputy  Director  of 
Defense  Communications  Planning  Group  in  DOD,  had  been  named 
Director  of  newly  created  Office  of  Systems  Engineering  Management 

2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January  6 
and   Spencer  S.  Hunn   had   been  named  Director  of  National Airspace 
System  Program  Office  i n   FAA.  (FAA  Release  71-2) 
NOAA  said  scientific  team  that  studied  23 310 000-hectare  (90 000-sq-mi) 
region  east  of  Barbados  in   summer  of  1969 had  reached  preliminary 
conclusion  that  dust  blown  off  North  African  deserts  into  upper  a i r  
ended  in  atmosphere over  South  Atlantic  and   influenced  North  Amer- 
ican  weather.  Scientists,  who  had  hoped  to  find  atmosphere  relatively 
free  of  particulate  matter,  had  discovered  instead  African  dust  in  
Barbados  a i r   a t   levels  to  5000  m  (16000   f t ) .   (O’Toole,  W  Post, 
1/7/71,  A15) 
JWUUTY  7:  NASA  launched  series  of  three  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets 
carrying  GSFC  experiments  to  obtain  temperature, . pressure,  density, 
and   wind  data  in  upper  atmosphere  by  detonating  grenades  and  
recording  their  sound  arrivals  on  ground. Rocket  launched  from  Point 
Barrow,  Alaska,  reached  122-km  (75.8-mi)  altitude,  with  all  19 
grenades  exploding as  planned.  Rocket  launched  from  Wallops  Station 
reached  130.9-km  (81.3-mi)  altitude,  with  16  of  19   explosions  con- 
firmed  by  ground.  Third  rocket  was  launched  from  Churchill  Research 
Range.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
Release  of  “Statement of  Government  Policy  on  Satellite  Telecommunica- 
tions  for  International  Civil  Aviation  Operations’’  was  announced  by 
Clay  T.  Whitehead, Director  of  Telecommunications  Policy  for  Execu- 
tive  Office  of  the  President.  Statement  said  U.S.  would  promote  pre- 
operational  deployment  of  satellite  communications in   Pacific  in  1973 
and  in   Atlantic  in  1975.  DOT  and FAA  would  assume program  manage- 
ment  responsibility  for  preoperational  and  operational  systems  and  
services.  Dept.  of  State,  with  DOT, would  seek  international  use  of 
preoperational system  and  initiate  cooperative  efforts with  other  nations 
to  establish  operational  system  by  1980.  U.S.  would  use  commercial 
communications  facilities  to  maximum.  U.S.  Government  would  use 
UHF   frequency band  near  1600 mhz  in   both  preoperational  and  opera- 
tional  satellite  air-traffic-control  communications.  Experimental  evalua- 
tion  of  independent  surveillance  by  satellite  should  begin  with  system 
deployment  in   Pacific  and  be  followed  by  preoperational  evaluation 
in   air-traffic-control environment after  1975. Unified  program  to  satisfy 
Government  and  airline  requirements  should  be  adopted  to  provide 
economic  benefits  of  single  program.  ( EOP Release) 
January  8 :   Three  aerospace  teams,  including  seven  European  firms  inter- 
ested  in   support  roles,  submitted  proposals  to  MSFC  on  preliminary 
design  of  research  and   applications  module  (RAM )   proposed  for  space 
shuttle  and   space  station.  Proposals  were  submitted  by  McDonnell 
Douglas  Corp.,  General  Dynamics  Corp.,  and   General  Electric  Co. 
Team  headed  by  General  Dynamics  would  include  MATRA of  France, 
ERNO  of  Germany,  SAAB  of  Sweden, Hawker Siddeley of  U.K.,  and   Fiat 
of  Italy.  General  Electric  team  would  include  Messerschmitt-Boelkow- 
Blohm  of  Germany and Thompson-csF of  France.  (MSFC  Release 71-10) 
*  HUD  had  evolved  $4-million  pilot  project  to  put  1500 unemployed  space 
industry  technicians  and   former  servicemen  to  work  in  model  cities 
projects,  Washington Post  reported.  Plan,  developed  by  HUD  Assistant 
Secretary  Floyd  Hyde,  would  recruit  unemployed  and   give  them  fast 
orientation  courses  on  urban  problems  on  assumption  tha t   aerospace 

3 

January  8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

skills  could  be  transferred  to  urban  improvement.  Hyde  proposed  to 
start  project  in  March  with  up  to  350  participants  and  estimated  cost 
to  Government of  about $2000  per person placed  in   new  job.  ( W  Post, 
1/8/71  ) 
S t .   Louis  Post-Dispatch editorial  commented  on  Dec.  23,  1970,  DOD  an- 
nouncement  that  Sprint  ABM  had  successfully  intercepted  ICBM  nose- 
cone  over  Pacific:  Announcement  “proved  only  two  things : the military 
establishment recognizes  that  the  wrir  in  Congress  over  f u l l   deployment 
of  the  ABM   system  is  fa r   from  over;  consequently  the  real  target  of 
the  test  firing  was  not  a  nose  cone  but  Congressional  critics  whose 
arguments  the  Pentagon  has  yet  to  refute.”  Paper  wondered  “why  the 
secondary  Sprints  a re   needed  in   the  allegedly  foolproof  Safeguard 
system  if  the  Spar tan   is  as  successful  as  the  military  claims  it  to  be.” 
More  puzzling  was  “how  the  Pentagon  can  call  the  Sprint  a  success 
when  the  crew  that  fired  it  from  a  South  Pacific  atoll  was  told  in 
advance  exactly  when  the  nose  cone  target  would  be  fired.”  ( S t  Louis 
P-D,  1/8/71) 
January  9 :  Apollo  14 Astronauts Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  Edgar  D.  Mitchell, 
and  S tuar t  A.  Roosa held press  conference  a t  MSC.  Astronauts described 
plans  for  Jan.  31  lunar  landing  mission  and  said  they  were  eager  to 
‘fly  on  what  Mitchell  called  “a  more  mature  spacecraftn  in  which 
“residual  risks  go  down.”  (Lannan, W S tar ,   1/11/71,  A4) 
Economist  editorial  discussed  lunar  science  investigations : “The  growing 
importance  of  all  this  peering  at,  prodding,  pounding,  baking  and 
growing  plants  upon  moon  soil  is   that  the  results  are  contradicting 
most  of  the  moon  theories  of  the  past  15  years.  I t   is  not  often  that 
scientific  concepts  are   set  by  the  ears,  and   the  piquancy  this  time  lies 
in  the  way  that  the  bulk  of  serious  scientists  originally  believed  that 
putting  men  on  the  moon  was  an   unnecessary  extravagance;  instru- 
ments  and   unmanned  probes  could  do  the  job,  they  felt,  for  a frac- 
tion  of  the  cost  and   none  of  the  risk.  But,  as  it  turns  out,  they  could 
not.  The  instruments  that  were  sent  to  the  moon  ahead  of  the  astro- 
nauts  did  not  produce  the  same  results  that  the  actual  collection  of 
rock  samples has  done,  and  it  will  be  interesting  to  see  if  the  Russians 
have  done  any  better  out  of  the  robot  shovelling  of  Luna  16.”  (Econo- 
m is t ,  1/9/71) 
January  10:  U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1  lunar  rover,  energized  by  solar  cells 
after  surviving  second  lunar  night  on  moon’s  Sea  of  Rains,  completed 
th ird   exploration  operation,  moving  about  128  m  (140  yds)  during 
435-hr  period.  Vehicle  had  been  inoperative  since  beginning  of  lunar 
night  Dec.  23,  1970,  and   had  been  opened  to  receive  solar  energy 
Jan.  8.  I t   had  been  released  on  surface  by  Lum   17, which  had  soft- 
landed  on  moon  Nov.  17,  1970.  ( S B D ,  1/11/71,  28;  1/12/71,  35) 
0  Newspapers  reviewed  Of  a  Fire  on  the  Moon  by  Norman  Mailer.  In  
New  York  Times  Book  Rev iew   Morris  Dickstein  said  book  aimed  at 
confrontation  with  “brave  new  world  of  science  and   technology.” 
Mailer  found  himself  “frustrated  a t   every  turn.  The  event  seems  pack- 
aged,  distant,  unapproachable.  . . .”  Mailer  gave  “rather  depressed 
personal  account  of  his  attempt  . . . to  make  an   approach  to  the 
mission,  especially  to  the   astronauts  and   their  machines.”  Mailer  felt 
“betrayed  by  the  gap  between  his  romantic  expectations  and  the  gray 
but  immense  realities.  Seeking  to  understand,  he   turns   the  book  into 

4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January 10 

an   account  of  the  other  America,  the  Wasp  hinterland.”  In   end 
Dickstein  concluded,  “This  is  not  perhaps  the  book  on  the  impact  of 
technoIogy  that  we  needed,  bu t   it  is  important  nonetheless,  and   offers 
(NYT  Book  Review,  1/10/71,  1, 
much  to  ponder  and   prey  on.” 
42 -45 )  
I n   Washington  Sunday  Star,  Day  Thorpe  said:  “Mailer  wasn’t  a 
passenger  on  Apollo  11,  but  in   his  motel  rooms  in  Houston  and  
Canaveral,  and   in   his  home  in   Provincetown  . . . he  has  pu t   together 
a  long  and   excellent  book  about  the  flight,  the  story  not  only  of  what 
the  adventure  meant  to  the  three  astronauts  who  lived  it  but,  no  less 
interesting,  what  it  meant  to  Mailer  himself.  The  bureaucrats  Mailer 
encountered  first  in   hermetic  Houston  and  then  in   hermetic  Canaveral 
were  unlike  all  other  bureaucrats.  They  were  infallibly  courteous, 
considerate  and   helpful,  and   they  invariably  told  the  truth.”  Mailer 
showed  ApoWo  11  astronauts  as  “three  human  beings,  as  similar  as 
necessary  for  their  mission,  but  as  unlike  one  another  as  experimental 
prototypes should  be.”  (W  Star, 1/10/71,  D  6 )  
*  M /G   John  B.  Medaris  (USA ,   Ret.)-first  Commanding General  of  Army 
Ballistics  Missile  Agency  ( ABMA )   a t   Redstone  Arsenal,  Huntsville, 
Ala.,  in  1955 and  head  of  team  that  launched Explorer  1 Jan.  31,  1958 
-had  become  an   Episcopal  priest,  National  Enquirer  reported.  He was 
curate  of  Church  of  Good  Shepherd  in  Maitland,  FIa.  (Nut1  Enq, 
1 /10 /71 )  
January  11 .- Apollo  1 4  Astronauts Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  Edgar  D.  Mitchell, 
and  S tuar t   A.  Roosa  began  preflight  semiquarantine  at  KSC   to  mini- 
mize  their  exposure to  disease  or  illness  that  could  delay Jan.  31 liftoff 
toward  moon.  Astronauts  would  be  restricted  to  three  buildings  and  
contacts  would  be  limited  to  160  persons,  all  of  whom  had  undergone 
comprehensive  medical  examinations.  ( UPI,  W  Star,  1/11/71,  A9) 
Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Point  Barrow, 
Alaska,  carried  GSFC  payload  to  115.9-km  (72-mi)  altitude  to  obtain 
temperature,  pressure,  density,  and  wind  data  in  upper  atmosphere by 
detonating  grenades  and   recording  their  sound  arrivals  on  ground. 
Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily,  with  all  19 grenades 
exploded  and   recorded  a s   planned.  Launch  was  par t   of  series  of  simi- 
la r   experiments a t   three  sites  [see  Jan.  71.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL )  
January  11-14:  Second  annual  Lunar  Science  Conference  in  Houston  at- 
tracted  750  scientists  who  had   been  studying  55.8  kg  (123  lbs)  of 
lunar   material  gathered  by  Apollo  11  and  Apollo  12 missions. 
ARC   team  of  scientists  headed  by  Dr.  Charles  P.  Sonett  announced 
that  first  measurements of  moon’s  interior  indicated  moon  had  basalt- 
like  mantle  338  km  (210   m i )   deep  surrounding  “cool  core  of  pr i-  
mordial  olivine-like rock.”  Measurements suggested  moon’s  outer  layer 
was  melted  dur ing   first  biIlion  years  of  its  4.5-billion-yr  history. 
Measurements  had  been  made  with  ARC   magnetometer placed  on  moon 
by  Apollo  12  astronauts  and   also  made  by  Explorer  35 moon-orbiting 
satellite  launched  July  19,  1967.  (ARC   Release  71-2) 
Cornel1  Univ.  astrophysicist  Dr.  Thomas  Gold  said  stratifications 
found  in   Apollo  12  lunar   surface  samples  were  caused  by  ear th   in  
same  process  that  made  near  side  of  moon  different  from  fa r   side. 
Moon  passed  behind  ear th   with  face  turned  earthward  for  four  days 
dur ing   regular  monthly  cycle  and   was  bombarded  by  high-energy 

5 

January  11-14 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

electrons  in  earth’s  magnetic  field.  Dr.  Gold  said  he  and  coworkers 
had  reproduced  lunar  surface  markings  inside  vacuum  chamber  by 
bombarding  finely  ground  earth  material  and  small  amounts  of  lunar 
soil  with  high-energy  electrons  up  to  800  ev.  Dr.  Gold‘s  theory  of 
“electrostatic  motion”  was  disputed  a t   meeting  by  Univ.  of  California 
physicist  Dr.  Harold  C.  Urey.  (Lannan,  W  Star,  1/12/71,  A l )  
NASA  announced  plan  to  continue  lunar  exploration  with  unmanned 
robots  after  last  Apollo  manned  lunar  landing  in   1972.  Plan  would 
cost minimum $1 billion.  Robot  vehicles  would  travel  965 km  (600 m i )  
across  lunar  surface  and   re turn   to  ear th   with  samples  or  would  ren- 
dezvous  with  other  robot  spacecraft  that  could  return  samples  to  earth. 
NASA  spokesman  said,  “We  sincerely  hope  that  collaboration  with  the 
Russians takes  place  in   space.  A  common  program  to  explore  the  moon 
with  instrumented  spacecraft  remotely  controlled  from  earth  might  be 
the  best  way  to  help  that  collaboration  take  place.”  (O’Toole,  W Post, 
1/14/71,  A l )  
Dr.  Gerald R.  Taylor,  MSC  scientist,  described laboratory  experiment 
in   which  three  highly  resistant  strains  of  bacteria  were  killed  within 
10 hrs   of  contact  with  one  core  sample from  a  number  of  centimeters 
below  surface  of  moon’s  Sea  of  Tranquility.  Micro-organisms in  pro- 
tein  soup  had  been  exposed  to  lunar  soil. 
Dr.  Narenda  Bhandari  of  Tata  Institute  of  Fundamental  Research 
in   Bombay,  India,  reported  that  analysis  of  cosmic  ray  tracks  on 
moon  had  provided  “conclusive  proof”  of  existence  in   lunar   soil  of 
fossils  from  chemical  elements  far   heavier  than  any  previopsly  discov- 
ered  in   nature  or  in  laboratory.  If  verified,  discovery  would  greatly 
extend  periodic  table  of  elements.  (Wilford, NYT,  1/14/71,  9 )  
Dr.  P.  Buford  Price  of  Univ.  of  California  a t   Berkeley,  said  during 
interview  tha t   ApoZZo  12  lunar  samples  might  contain  first  real  evi- 
dence  of  “magnetic  monopoles,”  basic  force  units  that  were  to  mag- 
netism  what  electrons  were  to   electricity.  If  their  existence  could  be 
confirmed,  i t   would  mean  rewriting  books  on  magnetism  and  electro- 
dynamics.  Dr.  Price’s  group  of  scientists  appeared  to  have  found  two 
fossil  tracks  of  nuclear  type of  particles  which,  theoretically,  could  have 
been  made  by monopoles  in   two lunar  cysts.  (Lannan, W Star,  1/14/71, 
A3 ) 
Dr.  Aleksander P.  Vinogradov,  Soviet  academician  and  Director  of 
Vernadsky  Institute  for  Analytical  Chemistry  in   MOSCOW, told  con- 
ference U.S.S.R.  would  continue to  explore moon with unmanned space- 
craft and  would  attempt bolder  missions  in  future.  He believed U.S.S.R. 
would  exchange  lunar  samples  with  U.S.  beginning  with  samples  of 
Sea  of  Fertility  returned  by  Soviet  Luna  16.  He  said  main  task  for 
Lunokhod  1 ,   Soviet moonwalker still  on  moon,  was  to  determine  how 
eight-wheeled  vehicle  could  best  move  about  moon  and   how  i t   could 
best  be  used  in   future.  “We  discovered  that  the  moonwalker  can  move 
in  very  large  angles  and   can  go  down  into  craters  a t   angles  of  20 
degrees.  The  mechanical  qualities  o€  this  car   a r e   very  good.”  Dr. 
Vinogradov  said  Lunokhod  1  carried  instrument  to  analyze  soil,  but 
device  had  not  done  so  thus  far.  He  described  Luna  16  samples  as 
bearing  no  evidence  of  water  o r   life  on  moon.  Dr i l l   used  to  d ig   sam- 
ples  had  been stopped at  330  mm  (13  i n )   below  lunar  surface  because 
i t   hit  rock.  “We  were  afra id   to  send  it  any  deeper.”  Dr.  Vinogradov 

6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January  11-14 

described  Sea  of  Fertility  a s   “blackish  powder”  sprinkled  with  “cos- 
mic  beads.”  Luna 16   sample  was  similar  to  soil  brought  back  by 
Apollo  12   from  Ocean  of  Storms  and  not  very  different  from  samples 
returned  by  Apollo  11  from  Sea  of  Tranquility.  Age  of  Sea of  Fertility 
had   been  calculated  a t  4.6  billion  yrs,  older  than  some  rocks  returned 
by  Apollo  missions.  (O’Toole,  W Pos t ,   1/15/71,  A l )  
Dr.  Pau l   W.  Gast,  chief  of  MSC  Earth  and  Lunar   Sciences  Div., 
reported  discovery by  MSC  scientists  of  “exotic  components”  in   lunar 
soil  believed  to  be   fragments  from  primitive  crust  that  covered  moon 
4.5  billion  yrs   ago.  Fragments  differed  from  other  Apollo  lunar  sam- 
ples  and  were  thought  to  be   pieces  of  crustal  bedrock  scattered  by 
impact  of  meteorites  pounding  more  ancient  lunar   highlands.  Dis- 
covery,  through  chemical  analysis,  supported  theory  tha t   moon  once 
had  hot,  molten  surface  and  that  crust  had  hardened  as i t   began  cool- 
ing   off.  Discovery  also  helped  explain  why  lunar  soil  was  mostly  one 
billion  years  older  than  lunar  rocks. 
Dr.  John  A.  Wood  of  Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory  de- 
scribed  norite  found  in  chemical  analysis  of  five  soil  samples.  Norite 
wa s   lighter  in   color  than  most  Apollo  samples  and  did  not  appear  to 
be  chemically  native  to  landing  sites.  Most  norite  represented  “near- 
surface  material  in  an  ancient  lunar  crust.”  Coarser  grained  relative 
of  norite  might  have  come  from  “somewhat  deeper  in   the  moon- 
perhaps  several  miles.”  If  discovery  proved  true,  samples  would  go 
back  in  age  to  beginnings  of  solar  system. 
Dr.  Gerald  J.  Wasserburg-Cal 
Tech  physicist  who  had  dated 
Apollo  12  Sample  13,  oldest  rock  yet  found,  a t   4.5  billion  yrs   (other 
Sample  13’s 
Apollo  12   rocks  were  about  3.4  billion  yrs  old)-said 
oldest  parts  were  granite  that  crystallized  early  in   lunar  history  and 
could  be  some  of  original  crustal  material  and  some  of  “magic  com- 
ponent”  tha t   accounted  fo r   difference  in   ages  of  lunar  rocks  and   soil. 
Dr.  Wasserburg  believed  tha t   fact  there  was  always  some  missing  in- 
gredients  in   lunar  soil  meant  soil  contained  debris  from  granites  and 
other  materials  originating  elsewhere  on  moon. 
Dr.  Gary  V.  Latham,  Apollo  program  chief  seismic  investigator, 
reported Apollo 12  seismometer was  recording weak  but  frequent moon- 
quakes  along  rilles  near  landing  site.  He  suggested  rilles  might  be 
“fault  zones,”  where  slight  movements  in   lunar   surface were  occurring. 
(Wilford, NYT ,  1/17/71,4:7;  Gast,  MSC) 
Janzmry 1 2 :  U.S.S.R. 
launched Cosmos  390  from  Baykonur  into  orbit  with 
270-km  (167.8-mi)  apogee,  202-km  (125.5-mi)  perigee,  89.2-min 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Jan.  25.  (GSFC  SSR ,  
period,  and   65.0’ 
1/31/71;  SBD ,   1/13/71,  a) 
Library of  Congress published U d e d  States  and  Soviet  Progress  in Space:  
Some  New   Contrasts,  report  by  Dr.  Charles  S.  Sheldon  11,  Chief  of 
Congressional Research  Service  Science  Policy  Research  Div.  Report 
summarized “how  far   these  two  major  space powers  have  come  in   the  
last  13 years,”  gave  “answers  to  frequently  raised  questions about  the 
comparative  aspects  of  the  two  programs,”  and   looked  a t   possible 
fu ture  developments. 
Since U.S.S.R.  did  not  disclose  information  on  i ts   space budget  and  
manpower, exact comparison with  U S .  could  not  be  made.  Dr.  Sheldon 
specuIated,  however,  that  Soviet  budget  was  about  2%   of  Giw-more 

7 

January  12- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

than  twice  as  much  as U S .   percentage-and 
that  Soviet  space  work 
force  was  close  to   600000  persons.  Greatest  number  of  successful 
launches  from  a  single  site  to  earth  orbit  and   beyond  between  1957 
and  1970  had  been  311  from  Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif.  U.S.S.R.’s  Bay- 
konur  was  second  with  282,  followed  by  KSC  with  189  and   Plesetsk, 
U.S.S.R.,  with  147. There seemed to  be  little  difference  between U S .  and 
U.S.S.R.  space programs  in   general purpose  and   direction.  Both  were 
broadly  based  with  elements  of  scientific  exploration,  technology  de- 
velopment,  national  image  building,  practical  applications,  and  mili- 
tary  support  services.  Although military  missions made  up  about  t w o  
thirds  of  launches  by  both  countries,  number  of  presumptively  spe- 
cialized  U.S.  military  missions  had  declined  from   34 missions in   1966 
to   16 in   1970, while U.S.S.R.  total  had  increased  from  28  missions  in 
1966 to  57 i n   1970. 
Although  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  were  competing in  space  they  were  also 
cooperating.  Cooperation already  under  way  included  exchange of  in-  
formation  a t   scientific  meetings,  negotiation  of  treaties,  trad ing   of 
space-collected  weather  pictures,  joint  efforts  to  write  textbook  on 
space  biology,  coordination  of  efforts  on  geomagnetism,  and  negotia- 
tion  on  possible  common  designs  for  docking  attachments  to  facilitate 
space rescue or jo in t  projects.  (Text) 
Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops  Station 
carried  GSFC  experiment  to  132.5-km  (82.3-mi)  altitude  to  obtain 
temperature,  pressure,  density,  and  wind  data  in   upper  atmosphere  by 
detonating  grenades  and  recording  their  sound  arrivals  on  ground. 
Rocket  and  inslruments  functioned  satisfactorily  with  1 4   of  19   gre- 
nades confirmed by  sound.  Launch was  part  of  series  of  similar experi- 
ments from  three  sites  [see Jan.  71.  (NASA  Rpt SRL) 
MSFC  announced  i t   was  checking  out  extreme  uv  coronal  spectrohelio- 
graph,  first  flight  instrument  to  be  delivered  for  ATM  solar  observatory. 
Instrument  was  one  of  two  designed  by  Ball  Brothers  Research  Corp. 
uv  spec- 
from  NRL   concepts.  Second  NRL   flight  instrument-extreme 
trograph-would 
be  shipped  to  MSFC  in   March  1971.  (MSFC   Release 
71-7) 
AFSC  announced  plans  to  launch  1500-w  FRUSA  (flexible  rolled-up  solar 
a r r ay )   in   fall  1971.  Two  panels  would  roll  into  cylinder  25  cm  (10 
in )   in  diameter  for  launch  and  would  unroll  in  space to  overall  length 
of  1 0  m  (32  f t ) ,   oriented  to  sun  and  held  rigid  by  parallel  extension 
arms.  FRUSA  would  be  placed  in  740-km  (460-mi)  polar  orbit  by  Thor- 
Agena  booster  fo r   six-month  flight  to  test  electrical  and  dynamic 
characteristics.  (AFSC  Release 309.70) 
DOD  announced  award  of  $148 399 036  to  Boeing  Co.  for   f u l l   production 
of  SUM 
(short-range  attack  missile).  Award  brought  total  obligated 
to  date  under  fixed-price-incentive-fee USAF  contract  to  $183 599 036. 
(DOD   Release 30-71) 
January  13 : U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1  unmanned  lunar   rover  explored  lunar 
surface   fo r   six  hours,  testing  navigation  and   steering  techniques. 
Vehicle covered  553 m  (1814 f t ) ,  bringing  total  distance  traveled  since 
landing  Nov.  17,  1971,  to  2930  m  (9610  f t ) .   Lunokhod  I would  be 
parked  until  Jan.  15   because  high  angle  of  sun  during  lunar   noon 
made contrast range for TV pictures  unacceptably low.  ( S B D ,  1/14/71, 
47) 

8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January  13 

Calibration had  been  completed  a t  MSFC on  new  tube wind  tunnel capable 
of  test  speeds  u p  to  twice  speed  of  sound, Marshall S tar   reported.  Tube 
was  130  cm  (52   in)   in   diameter  and   was  119  m  (390  f t )   long.  It 
would  be  used  in  wind-tunnel test  program  for   space shuttle.  (Illarshall 
Star,  1/13/71,  1) 
NASA  launched  two  Nike-Gaj un  sounding  rockets.  Rocket  launched  from 
WSMR  carried  MSC   experiment  to   study  atmospheric composition. Mis- 
sion  was  partial  success.  Rocket  launched  from  Churchill  Research 
Range  carried  GSFC  grenade  experiment  and   functioned  satisfactorily. 
(SR l is t)  
*  Delivery  of  first  operational  automated  radar   terminal  system  (ARTS  III) 
to  new  control  tower  a t   Chicago’s  O’Hare  International  Airport  was 
announced  by  Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe.  Computer- 
based  system  would  be  operational  by  mid-1971.  Components,  when 
added  to  existing  a irpor t   surveillance  radars,  would  permit  display  of 
vital  flight  information  on  radar   scopes  used  by  a i r   traffic  controllers. 
Alpha-numeric data  tags  would  be  attached to  related  a ircraf t  target  o r  
“blip.”  (FAA   Release  71-5) 
January  1 4 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  391  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t   with 
796-km  (494.6-mi)  apogee,  266-km  ( 165.3-mi)  perigee,  95.2-min 
period,  and  70.9’ 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Feb.  21,  1972. 
(GSFC   SSR, 1/31/71;  2/29/72;  SBD,  1 /15 /71 ,56)  
January  16 :   Tokyo  Univ.  Institute  of  Space  and  Aeronautical  Science 
launched  two  rockets  from Uchinoura  to  collect  data  on  oxygen density, 
electron  density,  and   temperature  in   preparation  for  launch  of  Japa- 
nese  satellite  Feb.  12.  S-210  observation rocket  launched  at  11 :OO   am 
local  time  reached  115-km  (72-mi)  altitude;  Kappa  9-M 
launched  a t  
4:45  pm  local  time  reached  357-km  (222-mi)  altitude  in   303  sec. 
(SBD,  1 /20 /71 ,73)  
*  Soviet  Academician  Dr.  Anatoly  A.  Blagonravov  said  in   broadcast  tha t  
Soviet  lunar  vehicle  Lunokhod’s  safety  margin  and  “perfect  design” 
had  “surpassed  all  expectations.”  He  said  at  this  stage  of  space  tech- 
nology  man  could  not  have  stayed  on  moon  for  a s   long  a  time  a s  
Lunokhod  had.  I n   future  it  would  be  possible  to  assign  to  automatic 
devices  such  tasks  as  studying  meteorites,  exploring  volcanoes,  and  
studying  radiation  in   near-moon space.  What  was  more  important  “is 
that  we  now  have  an  almost  ideal  means of  conveyance  on  the  moon,  a 
means  independent  of  super-rigorous  conditions of  vacuum  and  sharp  
changes  of  temperature.  We  can  load  such  a  selenomobile  with  dif- 
ferent scientific apparatus.”  (AF Mag, 6/71,59-9) 
*  Richard  Hirsch,  author  and   retired  White House  and  NASC  staff  member, 
died  of  heart  attack  a t   age  58.  Hirsch  had  been  writing  book  on  NASA 
in  Praeger  Press  U.S.  Government  Departments  and   Agencies  series. 
(W Star,  1/17/71,  E19) 
January  1 7 :   U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1   lunar   rover  returned  to  Luna  17  land- 
ing  stage,  completing  one  of  planned  experiments  for  Luna  17 .   Tass 
said  vehicle  “turned  in  its  tracks  about  half  a  kilometer  [about  one 
th ird  mile]  from  the  landing  area.  For  some time  the  old  track  showed 
clearly  on  the  television  screen  and  the  controllers  . . . used  i t   for  
guidance.  For  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  cosmonautics there  was 
a  solution  to  a  practical  navigation  problem:  The  return  of  the  self- 
propelled  apparatus  to  a  preplanned  point  a t   a  preplanned  time  on  the 

9 

January  17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

surface  of  a  different  celestial  body.”  Vehicle  had  traveled  3173  m 
(10 410  f t )   since  it  landed  on  moon’s  Sea  of  Rains  Nov.  17,  1970. 
(SBD, 1/19/71,  68)  
Ornithologists  working  with  FAA  had  attached  midget  rad ios   to  migra- 
tory  whistling  swans  to   trace  migration  patterns  and  help  avoid  colli- 
sions  with  aircraft,  New  York  Times reported.  In   jo in t   project  of 
Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  and  Queens  Univ.  in  Kingston,  Ontario,  small 
a ircraf t   pursued  migrating  flock  between  U S .   and  Canada  to  monitor 
radios.  FAA  spokesman had  said  a ircraf t  collisions with  birds  occurred 
C L  fairly  frequently”  though  fatalities  were  “very  rare.”  (Devlin,  NYT, 
1 /17 /71 ,41)  
January  18:  Widow  of  Astronaut  Virgil  I.  Grissom,  one  of  three  astro- 
nauts  killed  in  Jan.  27,  1967, Apollo  spacecraft  fire,  filed  $10-million 
suit  i n   Brevard  County  Circuit  Court  against  North  American  Rock- 
well  Corp.  and  subsidiaries  North  American  Aviation,  Inc.,  Rockwell 
Standard Corp.,  and Rockwell  Standard Co. Mrs.  Betty Grissom charged 
negligence  in  fire  which  killed  her   husband  and  Astronauts  Roger  B. 
Chaffee and  Edward  H.  White  11.  Suit  asserted  spacecraft  did  not 
have  proper  fire  extinguisher  system,  had   no   emergency  egress,  and 
was  “defective”  because  electrical  wiring  permitted  electrical  a rc   to 
flash i n  cabin.  (AP, W S tar ,   1/19/71,  B10) 
January  18-21:  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  Acting  NASA  Administrator,  and 
Mstislav  V.  Keldysh,  President  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  met 
in  Moscow  with  representatives  of  other  agencies  to  exchange  views 
for  increased  US-U.S.S.R. 
cooperation  in   exploration  and   use  of 
outer  space  for  peaceful  purposes.  At  close  of  meetings,  joint  com- 
munique  was  released  by  Soviet  Academy  and   U S .   Embassy  in 
Moscow.  Academy  and   NASA  officials  had  found  discussions  “useful” 
and  had  agreed  to  exchange  lunar  surface  samples.  Procedures  were 
established  to  produce  recommendations  for   joint  consideration  of 
results  of  space  research,  improvement  of  existing  weather  da ta   ex- 
changes,  research  with  meteorological  rockets,  techniques  fo r   studying 
natural  environment, expanded exchange of  da ta   on  space biology  and  
medicine,  and   work  in   other  fields.  Preliminary  document  was  ini- 
tialed  on Jan. 21.  (NASA  Release 71-9) 
January  19: Apollo  1 4  Astronauts Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  Edgar D.  Mitchell, 
and   S tuar t   A.  Roosa  completed  final  dress  rehearsal  for   scheduled 
Jan.  31 launch  toward  moon.  Countdown  began  a t  9:23  am  EST,  with 
simulated  liftoff  on   time  a t   3:23  pm  EST.  (P Znq,  1/20/71,  3 )  
NASA  announced  i t   was  requesting  proposals  from  potential  US. and 
foreign  experimenters  for   investigations  of  data  to   be  acquired  from 
ear th   resources  experiment  package  (EREP )   to  fly  on  manned  Skylab 
spacecraft  in  la te   1972.  Data  would  be  used  to  appraise  value  and  
direct  applications  of  space  observations  in   agriculture,  geography, 
forestry,  geology,  hydrology,  oceanography,  and   cartography.  Objec- 
tives  of  EREP  were  to  extend  use  of  sensors;  use  man  to   observe,  dis- 
criminate,  and  select  study  areas ;   and   provide  early  source of  unique 
research  data  fo r   analysis.  Three-man  experimental  space  station 
would  be manned  by  three  different crews  for  total  five  months  dur ing  
eight-month mission  in   circular  orbit  of  435  km  (270  m i )   with  50’ 
inclination.  Astronauts  would  investigate  solar  astronomy,  space medi- 
cine,  space  physics,  bioscience,  and   material  processing in  addition  to  

10 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January  19 

operating  EREP  sensors,  including  six  high-precision,  70-mm  cameras, 
infrared  spectrometer,  multispectral  scanner,  microwave  radiometer/ 
scatterometer  and  altimeter,  and  passive  radiometer.  (NASA  Release 
71-5) 
Return  of  Apollo  11 Astronaut  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  to  active  service 
with  USAF  in   July  1971  was  announced by  Gen.  John  D.  Ryan,  USAF 
Chief  of  Staff.  Col.  Aldrin would  assume command  of  AFSC’S  Aerospace 
Research  Pilot  School  a t   Edwards  AFB,  Calif.  He  had  joined  NASA  in 
January   1964 a s   astronaut trainee  after  serving with  USAF  in  Germany 
and  Korea. He  held  B.S.  degree from  U S .   Military Academy  and Sc.D. 
degree from  MIT.  (NASA  Special Release;  DOD  Release 45-71) 
launched  Meteor  7  meteorological  satellite  from 
January  20:  U.S.S.R. 
Plesetsk  into orb i t  with  655-km  (407.0-mi)  apogee,  629-km  (390.8-mi) 
inclination.  (GSFC  SSR,  1 /31 /71  ; 
perigee,  97.5-min  period,  and   81.2’ 
SBD,  1 /26 /71 ,96 )  
0  President  Nixon  announced intention  to  nominate James  H.  Wakelin,  Jr., 
a s   Assistant  Secretary  of  Commerce  for  Science  and   Technology  suc- 
ceeding  Myron  Tribus,  who  had  resigned  in   November.  Nomination 
was  submitted  to  Senate Jan.  25.  (PD, 1 /25 /71 ,84 ;   2 /1 /71 ,141)  
U.S.  Geological  Survey published  The National  Atlas  of  the  United States 
of  Ameriea,  first  official  national  atlas  produced  in  U S .   Preface  noted 
that  revised  editions  might  be  “greatly  expedited’’  by  “repetitive  cover- 
age  a t   shor t   time-lapse  intervals,  possibly  from   orbiting  satellite  sys- 
tems.”  Systems might  “expedite the   production  of  more  up-to-date and  
less  costly  regional  and  state  as well  a s  national  atlases o r  even  make  i t  
possible  to  obtain  directly  from  storage  data  banks  and  electronic 
computers  the  type  of  information  now  gained  in   par t   from  maps  and 
atlases.”  (DO I   PIO ;   Text) 
January  21 : USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  by  Titan  IIIB-Agena 
booster  from  Vandenberg  AFB  into  orbit  with  244-mi  (392.7-km) 
apogee,  130.4-km  (81-mi)  perigee,  89.2-min period,  and  110.8’  incli- 
nation. Satellite reentered Feb. 9.  (Pres Rpt 72)  
Cosmos 392  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  into  orbit  with  276-km  (171.5-mi) 
apogee, 203-km  (126.1-mi)  perigee,  89.2-min period,  and  64.9’  inclina- 
tion.  Satellite  reentered  Feb.  2.  (GSFC  SSR,  1 /31 /71 ;   2/28/71) 
USAF  X-24A  l if t ingbody  vehicle, piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  John A.  Manke 
in  joint  program,  completed  21st  flight from FRC.  Objectives of  powered 
flight  were  to  expand  flight  envelope  to  mach  1.5,  determine  lateral- 
directional  derivatives,  and  obtain  longitudinal  trim  and ,  lift-to-drag 
data  with  40’  upper  flap  a t   0’  rudder  bias.  Two  of  four  engines were 
shut  down  because  of  sticky  angle-of-attack  indicator ; alternate  two- 
engine  flight  plan  was  followed  and  completed  successfully.  (NASA  
Proj Off) 
*  ATM  acceptance  checkout  a t   MSFC  was  nearing  completion  and  ATM 
would  be  ready  for  prototype  acceptance testing  in   early March,  MSFC 
announced.  ATM  would  fly  on  Skylab  cluster  in   1972.  (MSFC   Release 
71-11) 
Grumman Aerospace  Corp.  confirmed  that  investigators  of  Dec.  30,  1970, 
crash  of  first prototype F-14A  Tomcat  fighter  a ircraf t  had  found prob- 
able  cause  to  be  crack  in   titanium  hydraulic  lines  caused  by  vibra- 
tions  in  hydraulic  pumps.  Grumman  and   USN investigators had   recom- 

11 

January  21 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

mended  replacing  titanium  hydraulic  lines  with  heavier  stainless  steel 
and  installing  mufflers on  hydraulic  pumps.  (Newsday ,   1/22/71,  15) 
AFSC  announced  award  of  $8.2-million  contract  to  Bendix  Corp.  Instru- 
ment  and  Life  Support  Div.  for  7053  improved  aircraft  altimeters. 
Improved  altimeters-to 
be  delivered  to  USAF  and   USN  beginning  in 
early  1972-had 
two  operating  modes  and  plus-minus  accuracy  factor 
of  no  greater  than  76  m  (250  f t ) .   Some  previously  used  systems  had 
errors  in   excess  of  305  m  (1000  f t ) .   (AFSC  Release  5.71) 
*  President  Nixon  nominated  R/A  Don  A.  Jones  a s   Director  of  National 
Ocean  Survey  of  NOAA  and   R/A  Harley  D.  Nygren  as Director  of  the 
Commissioned  Officer  Corps  of  NOAA.  Both  had  held  these  positions 
in   acting  capacity  since  October  1970.  (PD, 1/25/70,  8 5 )  
January  21-22:  Mockup  of  12-man space  station  concept  being  studied  by 
McDonnell  Douglas  Astronautics  Co.  for  NASA  was  inspected  by  100 
Government  and   industry  representatives  attending  quarterly  review 
a t   MSFC.  Mockup  was  10  m  (33   f t )   in  diameter  and  15 m  (50   f t )  
tall,  with  four  decks  and   large  simulated power  section.  Concept  called 
for  tunnel  section  in   center  with  3-m  ( l o - f t )   diameter. 
(MSFC  
Release  71-13;  MSFC P IO )  
January  22:  NASA  announced  reorganization  of  Office  of  Manned  Space 
Flight  to  reflect  new  management  requirements  for  future  manned 
flight  programs.  Reorganization  established  two  new  technical  support 
offices,  Engineering  and   Operations  Office  and  Quality  and  Safety 
Office ; established  two  functional  offices,  Administration  Office  and 
Program  Analysis  Office ; and   abolished  Mission  Operations,  Field 
Center  Development,  Institutional  Operations,  and  Space  Medicine 
organizations. 
M/G  John  D.  Stevenson  (USAF,  Re t .) ,   Director  of  Mission  Opera- 
tions,  became  Deputy  Director  of  Engineering  and  Operations.  Capt. 
Robert  F.  Freitag  (USN,  Ret.),  Director  of  Field  Center  Development, 
became  Special Assistant  to  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight.  Space  Medicine  Office  had  been  combined  with  other  life 
science  activities  under  Dr.  James  W.  Humplireys,  Director  of  Life 
Sciences,  as  announced Dec.  3,  1970.  (NASA  Release  71-10) 
New  world  distance  record  in   heavyweight  turboprop  class  was  claimed 
by  USN  for  P-3C  Orion  aircraft  piloted  11 280  km  (7010  m i )   by 
Cmdr.  Donald  H.  Lilienthal  in  nonstop  flight  from  Atsugi  Naval  Air 
Station,  Japan,  to  Patuxent  Naval  Air  Station,  Md.,  in   15 hrs  21  min. 
Previous  record  of  7662  km (4761 m i )   had  been  set  by  Soviet  11-18 
a ircraf t   in  1967.  (DOD Newsfilm  Release  60-71) 
*  Plastic-coated  solar  cells  were  being  developed  by  LeRC  and  Lockheed 
Missiles  &  Space  Co.  scientists  to  reduce  cost  of  solar  cell  power  sys- 
tems.  Cells,  which  produced  abundant  power  when  formed  into  panels 
or  arrays,  were  lightweight,  flexible,  insulated,  completely  sealed,  and  
resistant  to  breakage.  (LeRC Release 71-5) 
Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Andoeya, 
Norway,  carrying  Norwegian  experiment  for  auroral  studies.  Rocket 
and  instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (SR  l is t)  
Apollo  11  and  ApoUo  12   lunar  rock  groups  differed  in  potassium- 
uranium  abundance  systematics,  JPL scientists  Dr.  Fraser  P.  Fanale 
and   Douglas  B.  Nash  reported  in  Science.  Difference  indicated  “that 
relatively  little  exchange  of  regolith  material  has  occurred  between 

12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January  22 

Mare  Tranquillitatis  [Sea  of  Tranquility]  and   Oceanus  Procellarum 
[Ocean  of  Storms].  Two  suites  appear  to  have been  derived from mate- 
rials  of  identical  potassium  and   uranium  content.”  I t   appeared  unlikely 
“that  bulk  lunar  material has  the ratio of  potassium  to  uranium  found  in  
chondrites.  However,  systematic  differences  in   the  potassium-uranium 
ratio  between  Apollo  samples  and  crustal  rocks  of  the  earth  do  not 
preclude  a  common  potassium-uranium  ratio  for  bulk  earth  and   lunar 
material.”  (Sc ience ,  1/22/71,  282-4) 
NSF  released  report  on  industrial  R&D  spending  in  1969.  Funds  had 
totaled  $18.4 billion,  6%  above  1968 level  and   about  50% more  than 
$12.6  billion  i n   1963.  Growth  was  1%   from  1968  to  1969.  Deflated 
1969  ievel  was  22%  above  that  of  1963.  Industrial  firms  accounted 
for  about  70%  of  R&D  in  U S .   Federal  financing  of  R&D  in   industry 
amounted  to  $8.6  billion  i n   1969,  same  a s   in  1968. Although  Federal 
support  was  primarily  responsible  for  increases  in   industrial  R&D 
between  1953  and   1966,  funds  had  leveled  off,  rising  less  than  3% 
between  1966  and  1969.  I n   real  dollars,  Federal  support  showed  a 
decline.  (NSF   Highlights,  1 /22 /71 ,1)  
*  President  Nixon  announced  intention  to  nominate  Thomas  E.  Carroll  to 
be  Assistant  Administrator  for  Planning  and  Management  of  Environ- 
mental Protection Agency.  Nomination was  submitted to  Senate Jan.  25. 
( P D ,  1/25/70,88) 
*  Harry   F.  Guggenheim-financier, 
philanthropist,  sportsman,  and  pub- 
in  Sands  Point,  N.Y.,  a t   age  80.  His  enthusiasm for  avia- 
lisher-died 
tion  as  pilot  in  World  War  I  had  led  him  to  persuade  his  father, 
Daniel  Guggenheim,  to  establish  Guggenheim  School  of  Aeronautics a t  
New  York  Univ.,  first  university  school  of  aeronautics  in  U S .  
Daniel  Guggenheim  Fund  for  the  Promotion  of  Aeronautics,  Inc., 
of  which  Harry   Guggenheim  was  president,  helped  establish  aero- 
nautical  engineering  schools  at  MIT,  Georgia  Institute  of  Technology, 
Gal  Tech,  Univ.  of  Washington,  Stanford  Univ.,  and   Univ.  of  Michi- 
gan.  Fund  aided  Charles A.  Lindberg  after  first  transatlantic  crossing. 
Daniel  and   Florence  Guggenheim  Foundation,  established  in   1924, 
sponsored much  of  pioneer  rocket  research by  Dr.  Robert  H.  Goddard. 
( N Y T ,  1 /23 /71 ,1)  
January  23 :   Apollo  14  backup  pilot  Eugene  A.  Cernan  narrowly  escaped 
death  when  helicopter  in   which  he  was  practicing  lunar  landing 
maneuvers crashed  and  burned  in  Indian  River  near  KSC.  After  leap- 
ing  from  helicopter  and  swimming  toward  shore  Cernan  was  rescued 
and  taken  to  Patrick  AFB  for   treatment  of  minor  cuts  and  bruises  and 
singed  eyelids and   eyebrows.  (UPI,  W Pos t ,   1/24/71,  A5 )  
*  Baltimore  Sun  editorial  praised  US.-U.S.S.R. 
agreement  to  exchange 
lunar  samples : “The  scientists and  engineers are  unmistakably pointing 
the  way  which  soon  or  late must  be  taken  if  men  a re   to make  the  most 
of  opportunities  offered  them  by  the  opening  of  vast  new  extrater- 
restrial  horizons of  inquiry  and   adventure.”  ( B  Sun,  1/23/71) 
January  24 :   Aerobee  150  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from 
WSMR  carry ing   GSFC  experiment  to  study  stellar  spectra.  Rocket  and 
instruments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR l is t)  
*  Love11  Lawrence,  Jr.,  chief  research  engineer  for  Chrysler  COT.  since 
1964,  died  a t   age  55.  Lawrence  had  been  President  of  American 
Rocket  Society,  recipient  of  1950  Goddard  Memorial  Lecture  Award, 

13 

January  24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

President  of  Reaction Motors,  Inc.,  and   key  figure  in  development  of 
of  USA  Kedstone  ballistic  missile.  (N Y T ,  1/25/71,  39 )  
January  25 -26 :   Intelsat-IV  F-2  comsat  was  launched  by  NASA  for  Com- 
SatCorp on  behalf  of  INTELSAT.  Satellite, launched from ETR  a t  7:36  pm 
EST  by  Atlas-Centaur booster,  entered  elliptical  transfer  orbit.  Primary 
objective  was  to  place  satellite  into  transfer  orbit  accurate  enough  for 
onboard  propulsion  systems  to  place  spacecraft  in  planned  synchro- 
nous  orbit. 
Apogee  kick  motor  was  fired  at  1O:U  pm  EST,  Jan.  26,  about 
11 hrs   earlier  than  planned  because  of  slight  temperature  fluctuations 
in   apogee  motor  shaft.  Intelsat-IV  F-2  entered  orbit  with  36410 .4   km 
(22  624.4  m i )   apogee,  35  740.0  km  (22  207.8  m i )   perigee,  1450-min 
period,  and  0.59”  inclination.  Satellite  would  drift  from  position  a t  
124” east  longitude  over  Pacific  to  permanent  station  over  Atlantic 
a t   25.5”  west  longitude  by  about March  19. 
Intelsat-IV  F-2  was  first  in  Intelsat  IV  series  of  advanced  comsats. 
Satellite-largest 
commercial  comsat  launched-was 
5.4  m  (17.6  f t  ) 
high  with  237.5-cm  (93.5-in)  diameter  and  weighed  1397  kg  (3080 
lbs)   a t   launch.  I t   had   1 2   transponders,  providing  1 2   TV  channels 
and  3000-9000 
telephone  circuits,  and   was  capable  of  multiple-access 
and   simultaneous  transmissions.  Expected  lifetime  was  seven  years- 
two  years  more  than  Intelsat  I11  comsats  and  over  five  years  more 
than  Intelsat  I.  (NASA   P ro j   Off;  ComSatCorp  Release  71 -4 ;   Com- 
SatCorp P IO )  
January  2 5 :   Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  Director  of  Medical  Research  and  
Operations  at  MSC,  directed  four-hour  physical  examination  of  Apollo 
1 4  astronauts  and   declared  them  “certified  and  ready  to  fly.” 
Countdown  for  launch  began  on  schedule a t   9:00  am  EST  in  prep- 
aration  for  liftoff  toward  moon  at  3:23  pm  EST  Jan.  31.  (AP,  B  Sun, 
1/26/71,  A5) 
NASA  launched  four  sounding  rockets.  Two  Nike-Apaches,  launched  from 
Churchill  Research  Range,  carried  GSFC  experiments  to  study  ener- 
getic  particles  and  fields.  Aerobee  150,  launched  from  WSMR,  carried 
Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  experiment  to  study  Venus  W.  Aerobee  170, 
launched  from WSMR,  carried  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  experiment to  study 
dawn  airglow.  All  rockets  and  experiments  functioned  satisfactorily. 
(SR l is t)  
Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  MSC  Director,  named  to  five-man  board  chaired 
by  Astronaut  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  to  investigate  Jan.  23  crash  of 
NASA  helicopter  piloted  by  Astronaut  Eugene A.  Cernan.  (MSC   Release 
71-03  ) 
Newsweck  commented  on  “shrinking  space  shuttle.”  U S .   space  program 
had  been  “hit  with  another  budgetary  broadside.”  Space  shuttle  to 
service  planned  space  station  “will  get  no  more  than  a  th ird   of  the 
money  its  designers  insist  they  need  to  build  it.”  Original  request 
for  $300  million  had  been  cut  by  NASA  to  $225  million.  “Now  White 
House  budgeteers  have  shrunk  i t   to  $105  million-and 
i t   has  yet  to 
face  the  anti-technology faction  in  Congress.”  (Newsweek ,   1/25/71) 
Steel  stress  plate  2.5  cm  ( 1  in )   thick  and  61 crn  (2  f t )   wide  on  F-111A 
fighter  cracked  dur ing   ground  testing  a t   McClellan  AFB,  Calif.  Later 
USAF  reported  crack  came  a t   subzero  temperatures  under  loads  equal 

14 

January 25 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
to  60% of  maximum  load  a ircraf t  was  designed  to  withstand.  (W Post, 
1/30/71,  A4,) 
January  25-27:  Ninth  annual  AIAA  Aerospace  Sciences  Meeting  was  held 
i n   New  York.  Dr.  Coleman  duP.  Donaldson,  President  of  Aeronautical 
Research  Associates,  delivered  Hugh  Dryden  Research  Lecture,  “Cal- 
culation  of  Turbulent  Shear  Flows  for  Atmospheric  and  Vortex 
Motions.” 
Sylvanus Albert  Reed  Award  was  presented  to  I r a   G.  Hedrick,  Vice 
President  of  Engineering  for  Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.,  for  tech- 
nical  excellence,  design  innovation  and  leadership  in   the  structural 
development  of  several  generations  of  aerospace vehicles.” 
Space  Science Award  was  presented  to  Univ.  of  California  physicist 
William  I.  Axford  for  “outstanding  contributions  to  the  fluid  dynamics 
of  the  sun-earth  environment  and  to  the  theory  of  cosmic  ray   inter- 
action with  the  solar wind.” 
Robert  M.  Losey  Award  went  to  Verner  E.  Suomi  of  Univ.  of 
Wisconsin  for  “creativity  and   ingenuity  in   designing advanced meteor- 
ological  sensors  for  satellite  applications  as  exemplified  by  the  Spin- 
Scan  camera which  has made  i t  possible  to  view  the  earth’s  atmosphere 
as an  entity.” 
G.  Edward  Pendray  Award  was  presented  to  Dr.  Nicholas  J.  Hoff 
of  Stanford  Univ.  for  “outstanding  contributions  in   the  fields  of  struc- 
tures  and  structural  mechanics  through  his  many  books  and  publica- 
tions,  as  well  as  direct  consultation  for  government  agencies  and 
industry.” 
Martin  Goland, President of  Southwest Research Institute,  was  named 
new  President  of  AIAA.  (A IAA   Release,  1/8/71,  1 /27 /71)  
January 26:  U.S.S.R.’s  Venus  7  (launched Aug.  17, 1970)  had  landed  intact 
on  planet  Venus  Dec.  15  and   “relayed  scientific  information  from   the 
surface  of  another  planet  for  the  first  time,”  Tass  announced.  Space- 
craft,  equipped  with  “highly  stable  frequency  generators,”  transmitted 
signals  for  2 3   min,  recording  surface  temperature  a t   748  K  t- 20” 
(475°C  f 20 ” )   and  pressure,  a t   90   t- 15  atmospheres.  Tass  said 
continuous measurements of  the  atmospheric parameters were  made  all 
the  way  to  surface  and   i t   was  established  “that  Venus  possesses  an  
unusually  hot  atmosphere  the  density  of  which,  a t   the  surface,  is  
about  60  times  greater  than  the  density  of  the  atmosphere  on  the 
earth’s  surface.”  (Sou  Rp t ,   3/2/71,  4 ;   Gwertzman,  NYT ,   1/27/71,  1 )  
*  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos  393  into orbit with 417-km  (259.1-mi)  apogee, 
281-km  (174.6-mi)  perigee,  91.3-min  period,  and   70.9”  inclination. 
Satellite  reentered  June  16.  (GSFC  SSR ,   1 /31 /71 ;   6 /30 /71)  
e  International aspects of  U S .  space program  were  discussed  by  Dr.  George 
M.  Low, Acting NASA Administrator,  in  luncheon speech before National 
Space Club  in  Washington, D.C.:  Cooperation with Western nations  in 
past  decade  had  included  70  countries,  250  specific  agreements,  and 
more  than  24  joint  satellite  projects  a t   run-out  cost  in  excess  of  $400 
million.  More  than  50%  of  total  had  been  funded  by  other  nations.  I n  
1970s,  “opportunities  exist  for  cooperation  on  a  significantly  larger 
scale.”  US. wished  “to  build  a  foundation  for  important  benefit-  and  
cost-sharing  in   the  ma jor   space  programs  of  the  future.”  Canada, 
having  the  most  obvious  potential 
Japan,  and   Australia-“countries 
fo r   post-Apollo  work-sharing”-had 
been  given  “every  chance  to 

15 

January 26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

become  fully  acquainted  with  ou r   plans  and   studies”  to  enable  them 
to  decide whether  they wished  to  commit  their  own  resources. 
European  Space  Conference  had  put  several  million  dollars  into 
studies  of  post-Apollo program  possibilities and   some member  countries 
had  invested  still  larger  amounts.  British,  French,  and  West  German 
firms  were  working  with  NASA  prime  contractors  on  space  shuttle 
design  studies.  Europe  would  have  to  choose  between  significant 
participation  in   shuttle  funding  and  funding  independent  European 
rocket  program.  Decision  would  be   necessary  “even  if  Europe  funds 
only  10 per  cent  of  the   shuttle’s  price  tab.”  U S .   had  said  it  would 
“sell  launch  services fo r   projects  consistent with peaceful purposes  and 
existing  international  agreements  . . .  [and]  that  general  technical 
access  to  the  en t ire  program  would  be  available,  but  that  technology  a t  
the  level  of  commercial  know-how  would  be  transferred 
in  either 
direction  only  where  one  side  required  it  to  complete  its  commitments 
to   the  other.”  Since  Europe  was  talking  of  only  10% share  of  shuttle 
program,  “we  said  tha t   we  would  retain  decision-making responsibility 
except  where  European  costs  were  directly  affected,  in  which  case 
decisions would  be joint.” 
In   US.-U.S.S.R.  cooperation  in   space,  “it  is  particularly  important 
that we  give clear  recognition to  both  . . . competition and cooperation.” 
U S .   was  competing with  U.S.S.R.  “because  accomplishments  in  space 
represent  a  measure  of  the  state  of  ou r   technology;  and  in   today’s 
world,  the  level  of  our  technology  is  of  first  importance,  strategically, 
economically,  and  politically.”  U S .   was  cooperating  with  U.S.S.R. 
“because  we  both  live  in  a  vast  universe  that  must  be  explored,  where 
important  new  knowledge  is  t o   he  gained,  for  the  benefit  of  all  men, 
everywhere.” 
While  U S .   retained  demonstrated  lead  over  U.S.S.R.,  “it  will  not 
be  an  enduring  lead  without  ma jor   new  initiatives  on  ou r   part- 
initiatives  like  the   space  shuttle  and  the  exploration  of 
the  outer 
planets.  . . .” 
In   Jan.  18-21  Moscow  talks  with  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  “we  
specifically  agreed,  initially,  to  exchange  three  grams  [ O . l l   oz]  of 
sample  obtained  from  Luna  16,  for   three  grams  each  from  Apollo  11 
and   12.  These  relatively  small  amounts  are   sufficient  for  detailed 
scientific examination of  a comparative nature.” 
Additional  meetings  on  compatible  docking  arrangements  had  not 
been  held  because  “docking  discussions  are   well  underway,  and   the 
planned  exchange of  information is taking  place.” 
On  visit  to  Soviet  cosmonaut  tra in ing   area  a t   S tar   City,  “we 
were welcomed  by  Cosmonauts Beregovoy, Nikolayev, Leonov, Shatalov, 
and   Valentina  Tereshkova. We  were  shown  the  Soyuz  mission  trainer, 
and  were  invited  to  attempt  to  dock  two  Soyuz  spacecraft  in   the ir  
docking  trainer.  While  there,  I  also  presented  a  plaque  in  memory  of 
Yuri  Gagarin  [first  man  in   space]  from  the  U S .   astronauts.”  (Tex t)  
President  Nixon  announced  appointments  of  members  of  President’s 
Science Advisory Committee  for  terms expiring Dec.  31,  1974: Dr.  Lee 
A.  DuBridge, former  Presidential  Science Adviser;  Dr.  Herbert  Fried- 
man  of  NRL ;   Dr.  Daniel  P.  hloynahan,  former  Counsellor  to  the 
President ; Kenneth  H.  Olsen,  President  of  Digital  Equipment  Corp. ; 

16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
January 26 
and Dr.  John G.  Truxal of  Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute.  ( P D ,  2/1/71, 
120)  
Sen.  Edward  M.  Kennedy  (D-Mass.)  introduced  S.  302  to  authorize 
National  Pa rk   Service  acquisition  of  historic  site  in   Auburn,  Mass., 
where  first  liquid-fuel  rocket  Right  was  launched  by  Robert  H.  God- 
dard   in   1926. Bill  was  referred  to  Committee  on  Interior  and  Insular 
AiTairs.  (CR,  1/26/71,  S222) 
*  Philadelphia  Inquirer  editorial  commented  on  Apollo  14 :   “With  $a0 
million  of  taxpayers’  money  behind  it and  the dubious fu ture  of  manned 
spaceflight depending  on  it,  the Apollo  14  mission  to  the  moon  . . . is 
grimly  earnest  business.”  If  mission  was  successful  there  would  be 
“another  Apollo  shot  i n   midsummer,  two  more  next  year.”  If  it  was 
not,  there would be “a whale of  a battle  in Congress and elsewhere  about 
appropriations and  the wisdom  of  the whole  idea.”  (P Inq ,   1 /26 /71)  
Sylvia  Porter  analyzed  Federal  budget  in   Washington  Evening  Star  to 
show  part  individual  taxpayers  played  in  financing  Federal  projects. 
Only  small  segment  of  tax   dollars  was  taken  by  “controversial”  pro- 
grams.  If  L‘you eliminated space entirely,  you’d  have only  2c more  left; 
if  you  cut  out  foreign  aid  entirely,  this  would  give  you  only  another 
2c extra.”  (W Star,  1/26/71,  A l l )  
January  26-28:  House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics  held  12th 
annual seminar with Panel  on  Science and  Technology  to  discuss  inter- 
national  science  policy.  In   keynote  address  Secretary  of  State William 
P.  Rogers  said:  “Our  basic  goal  is  to  put  science  and  technology  at 
humane-ends .”   U S .   was  increasing 
the  service  of  human-and 
emphasis on  science and  technology  in   ou r  aid  to  developing countries. 
LC 
We  are   encouraging  an   international  effort  to  preserve  the  quality  of 
the  world‘s  environment.  And  we  are   seeking  greater  international 
cooperation  to  enhance  the  benefits  of  technology  and   to  curb  i ts  
dangers.  . . . We  now  want  to  . . . make  the  exploration  of  space  a 
truly  international  endeavor.  Space  should  not  be  the  exclusive  pre- 
serve  of  a  small  number  of  countries.  Our  post-Apollo  program  aims 
a t   the  development  on  a  multilateral  basis  of  a  new  generation  of 
reusable  space  vehicles  designed  to  make  the  exploration  and  use  of 
space  easier,  and  more  economical.”  (Text;  Transcript) 
January  27 :   Apollo  1 4  astronauts  completed  test  of  ability  to  react  to  in-  
Right  emergencies  in  KSC  simulators.  During  four-hour  session,  engi- 
neers  simulated  malfunctions  tha t   could  occur  dur ing   flight  and  
monitored astronaut reactions.  (AP, B Sun, 1/28/71,  A10) 
*  USN  P-3C  Orion  turboprop  antisubmarine  aircraft  established  world 
record  for  nonrefueled,  long-distance  Right  for  heavyweight  turboprop 
aircraft.  P-3C  Orion,  piloted  by  Cdr.  Donald  H.  Lilienthal 
(U SN ) ,  
attained  speed  of  808   km  per  h r   (502  mph ) .   Previous  record  of  727 
km  per  h r   (452  mph)  had  been  established  by  Soviet  11-18  in   May 
1968. ( A F  Mag, 4/71,  15) 
President Nixon  announced recipients  of  1970 National Medal  of  Science, 
Federal  Government’s  highest  award  for   distinguished  achievement  in  
science,  mathematics, and  engineering. Recipients included  Dr.  George 
E.  Mueller,  Senior  Vice  President  of  General  Dynamics  Corp.  and 
former  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight. 
Dr.  Mueller  received  award  fo r   “his  many  individual  contributions 
to  the  design  of 
the  Apollo  System,  including  the  planning  and  

17 

January  27 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

interpretation  of  a  large  array   of  advanced  experiments necessary  to 
insure  the  success  of 
this  venture  into  a  new  and   little  known 
environment .” 
Other  recipients  were:  Dr.  Richard  D.  Brauer,  professor  of  mathe- 
matics,  Harvard  Univ.;  Dr.  Robert  H.  Dicke,  professor  of  physics, 
Princeton  Univ. ; Barbara   McClintock,  Carnegie  Institution  of  Wash- 
ington  geneticist;  Dr.  Albert  B.  Sabin,  president  of  Weizmann 
Institute  of  Science  in   Rehovoth,  Israel;  Dr.  Allan  R.  Sandage,  Cal 
Tech  astronomer;  John  C.  Slater,  professor  of  physics  and  chemistry, 
Univ.  of  Florida;  Dr.  John  A.  Wheeler,  professor of  physics,  Princeton 
Univ.;  and   Dr.  Saul  Winstein,  deceased,  formerly  professor  of 
chemistry a t  UCLA.  (PD, 2/1/71,124) 
Dr.  Edward  E.  David,  Jr.,  OST Director  and  President’s  Science  Adviser, 
addressed AIAA  luncheon held  in  conjunction with House  Committee  on 
Science  and  Astronautics’  19‘71  international  science  panel : “One  of 
the  key  challenges  facing  this  nation,  and   other  nations  as  well,  is 
finding  means  by  which  technology  can  be   advanced,  shared,  and  
applied  to  common  problems  without  restricting  our 
individual 
national  ability  to  compete  for  markets  with  the  products  of 
this 
technology.”  This  could  be  done  by  application  of  comsats for  global 
point-to-point  communication. “Here  we  have  seen  the  initial  research 
blossom  into  a  demonstrated  capability  and   then  into  an  international 
cooperative venture.”  Intelsat  story  “indicates  that  we  should  have  no 
illusion about the readiness of  nations to  give up competitive advantages 
without compensating return.  At  the  same time  it  is fa ir   to  say  that  we 
have seen  there  a  willingness  to accept indirect  as well  as direct  benefits 
. . . such  things  a s   enhanced  international  security  resulting  from 
international  stability,  an   enriched  quality  of  life,  and  better  under- 
standing  of  man  a s   a  biological entity.  This  is  a  hopeful  sign  and  i t   is 
a  point  of  view  which  I  think  needs  to  be  emphasized  and  cultivated.” 
(CR, 2/1/71,  E320-3) 
National  Religious  Broadcasters,  at  annual  convention  in  Washington, 
D.C.,  celebrated  50th  anniversary  of  first  religious  broadcast  on  com- 
mercially  licensed  station  by  beaming  their  closing  program  around 
world  in   first  international  religious  broadcast  transmitted  by  satellite. 
(Janson, NYT,  1 /28 /71 ,1)  
*  USN plans  to  maintain  offensive  capability  without  exorbitant  investment 
were  described by  Adm.  Elmo  R.  Zumwalt,  Jr.,  Chief  of  Naval  Opera- 
tions,  in  speech  before Cleveland,  Ohio,  chapter  of  American Ordnance 
Assn.:  “We  intend  to  develop  small,  high  speed  platforms.  These  will 
include  escorts  having  a  hard  punch  but  which  do  not  individually 
constitute  a  high  percentage  of  our  total  capability.  These  will  prob- 
ably  b e .  . . hydrofoils,  a i r   cushion  platforms  and  surface  effect  ships. 
We  have  placed  a  very  high  priority  on  the  surface  effect  ship  on 
the  premise  that  this  offers  the  potential  for  destroyer-size  ships  to 
conduct  anti-submarine  warfare  on  top  of  the  water  a t   speeds  2  or 
3 times  greater  than  the  fastest  submarines.” With  addition  of  V/STOL 
aircraft,  “one  can  envision  a  fleet  of  highly  mobile  craft  which  would 
be  a  potent  striking  force  when  concentrated,  or  a  number  of  unique 
and   flexible  weapons  systems  when  operating  as  individual  units.  By 
supplementing this  force  with  small  high  speed  craft  a s  missile-launch- 

18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January 27 

ing   platforms  we  will  add   a  new  dimension  to  our  present  powerful 
aircraft  carriers,  frigates,  destroyers,  and   guided missile  ships.”  (Tex t)  
January  28:  NASA  launched  two  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  from  TERLS 
carrying  Ind ian   experiments  to  study  ionosphere.  Rockets  and   instru- 
ments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR l is t)  
NASA  announced  award   to  Lockheed  Electronics  Co.  of  $800 000, 
cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  for  scientific  and   technical  support  services 
fo r   MTF  Earth  Resources  Laboratory.  Contract  covered  one  year  with 
provision  for  two  one-year  extensions.  Company  would  support  labora- 
tory  i n   research  on  application  of  remote-sensing  data  to  Mississippi- 
Louisiana-Gulf  area.  Data  would  be  obtained  from  aircraft,  ERTS, 
Skylab,  Gemini,  and  Apollo  experiments.  (NASA Release  71-13) 
*  ESRO  awarded  six-month  study  contracts  for  European  regional  comsat  to 
(S.A.  Engins  M.A.T.R.A.  of 
three  European  consortiums-MESH 
France,  ERNo-Raumfahrttechnik GmbH  of  West  Germany,  SAAB  Aktie- 
bolag  of  Sweden,  and   Hawker  Siddeley Dynamics  Ltd.  of  U .K . ) ,   STAR 
(Satellites  for  Telecommunications,  Applications,  and   Research),  and  
COSMOS,  led  by  Marconi  Space  and   Defence  Systems  in   U.K.  ( S F ,  
4 /71 ,121 )  
0  Senate  adopted  S.R.  15,  modifying  Senate  rules  on  total  number  of 
Senators  assigned  to  certain  standing  committees.  Committee  on  Aero- 
nautical  and   Space  Sciences  was  set  a t   11 members. 
Senate  also  adopted  S.R.  16,  electing  majority  members  of  Senate 
Committees. Members  elected  to  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space 
Sciences  were  Sen.  Clinton  P.  Anderson  (D-N.  Mex.),  Chairman; 
Sen. Warren G. Magnuson  (D-Wash.) ; Sen. S tuar t  Symington  (D-Mo.) ; 
Sen.  John  C.  Stennis  (D-Miss.);  and   Sen.  Howard  W.  Cannon 
(D-Nev.).  ( C R ,  1/28/71,  S406) 
0  President  Nixon  submitted  to  Senate  nominations  of  Robert  M.  White 
as   Administrator  of  NOAA ,   Howard  W.  Pollock  as  Deputy  Adminis- 
trator,  and   John  W.  Townsend,  Jr.,  as  Associate  Administrator.  White 
had  served  as   Acting  Administrator  of  NOAA   since  his  appointment 
as  Acting  Deputy  Administrator  Oct.  9,  1970.  Before  establishment  of 
NOAA,  he  was  Administrator  of  ESSA.  (PD, 2/1/71,  127,  141 )  
0  Award  of  $23 800  contract  to  American  Airlines  to  determine  feasibility 
of  using  STOL  aircraft  for  short-haul  runs  was  announced  by  Secre- 
tary   of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe.  Six-month  study  would  cover 
certification  and   safety,  avionics,  STOL  service  categories,  system  devel- 
opment  requirements,  user  and   community  acceptance  criteria,  metro- 
flight  feasibility  demonstration,  New  York  area   STOLport  sites,  and  
STOLport acceptance.  (DOT Release 1771 )  
European  Organization  for  Nuclear  Research  announced  in   Geneva  tha t  
it  had  effected  first  head-on  collision  between  intense  beams  of  high- 
energy  protons.  Beams  of  protons  were  injected  into  intersecting 
storage  rings  by  28-bev  particle  accelerator  a t   nearly  speed  of  light. 
Collisions  occurred  a t   intersection  points  of  two  rings  in   which  very 
high  vacuum  was  maintained.  Experiment  would  enable  scientists  to 
study  fundamental  reactions  that  took  place  in   interior  of  s tars   or 
in  upper  atmosphere.  ( N Y T ,  1 /29 /71 ,7 )  
New  York   Times  editorial  commented:  “The  important  steps  recently 
taken  toward  great  Soviet-American  space  cooperation  a re   still  small, 
but  they  provide  a  beginning  for  a  much  wider  and   mutually  advan- 

19 

January  28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

tageous  effort.  This  recent  progress  also  suggests  that  there  is  now  a 
political  interest  in   cooperation  in   Moscow  as  well  as  in   Washington, 
(NYT, 
a  welcome  change  from  the  situation 
in   earlier  years.” 
1/28/71) 
Christian  Science  Monitor  editorial  praised  Soviet  Y e n ,   7  softlanding 
on  Venus,  “another  major  first  in  the  conquest  of  space.”  Apollo  14 
would  be  “bigger  attention-getter”  because  there  was  “more  glamour 
and  excitement  in   manned  space  flight.”  But  U.S.S.R.  had  achieved 
remarkable  technological  performances.”  U.S.S.R.  could  point  “with 
4G 
justifiable  pride”  to  fact  that,  while  Venus  7  was  transmitting  signals 
from  Venus  to  earth,  moonrover  Lunokhod  1 was  also  sending  infor- 
mation from moon.  ( C SM ,  1/28/71) 
January  29:  President  Nixon  in   message  transmitting  FY  1972  budget  to 
Congress  sa id :   “Science  and  technology  can  make  major  contribu- 
tions  to  the  public  by  developing  creative  solutions  to  a  wide  range 
of  national  problems..  . . I  am  proposing  in   this  budget  a  substantial 
expansion  in   outlays  for  federally  supported  research  and  develop- 
ment.’,  President  recommended  increased funding  to  “make  greater  use 
of  our  scientific  and  engineering  capabilities  and  resources  to  cope 
w i th .   . . pollution,  crime,  health,  transportation,  and  other  environ- 
mental  and   social  problems ; strengthen  research  essential  to  the 
advancement  of  our  technology  and  economic  productivity;  and  
increase  our  investment  in   fundamental  science  which  leads  to  the 
long-term  progress  of  our   society.”  President  recommended  increase 
in   NSF   budget  from  $506 million  in  1971 to  $622 million  in  1972. 
In   1972,  defense  spending  would  increase  but,  even  with  increase, 
would  “drop  from  36%  of  total  spending  in   1971  to  34%  in   1972.” 
Human  resources  programs’  share  would  be  42%  of 
total.  Budget 
proposed  “sharing  Federal  revenues  with  States  and  communities,” 
national  strategies  to  improve health  care”  and   to  ensure  “an  income 
<<  
floor  for  every  iamily,”  and  efforts  toward  “full-employment  in   peace- 
time with  relative  price  stability.”  ( P D ,  2/1/71,  130-9) 
*  President  Nixon  sent  $229.2-billion  FY  1972 budget  request  to  Congress, 
including  total  science  R&D  budget  of  $16.7  billion.  Total  request  for 
( N O A )   of  $3.271  billion  (1.4%  of 
NASA  new  obligational  authority 
total  U.S.  budget)  was  $27  million  less  than  FY  1971  NOA   of  $3.298 
billion.  NASA  expenditures  were  budgeted  to  decline  $216.5  million 
against  decline  of  $486.4  million  in  FY  1971.  Reduction  to  $3.152 
billion  placed  proposed  NASA  FY  1972  funding  a t   lowest  level  since 
1962.  Of  budget  request,  $2.518  billion  would  go  for  R&D,  $56.3 
million  for  construction  of  facilities,  and   $697.4  million  for  research 
and  program management. 
Apollo  funding  decrease  of  $302.2  million,  to  $612.2  million- 
reflecting  cancellation  of  Apollo  18  and  19-wodd 
be  partially  offset 
by  increase  from  $515.2  million  in   FY  1971  to  $672.8  million  in 
FY  1972  for  manned  space  flight  operations.  Manned  space  flight 
operations  would  include  $535.4  million  for  Skylab,  $100.0  million 
for  space  shuttle,  and   $37.4  million  for  orbital  systems  and  experi- 
ments.  Advanced  missions  would  receive  $1.5  million,  to  br ing   total 
for  manned  space  flight  (including  Apollo)  to  $1.286  billion,  down 
$144.6 million  from FY 1971. 
Funding  for  space  science  and   applications  programs  would  in- 

20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1911 

January  29 
crease  $184.7  million,  from  $565.7  million  in   FY  1971  to  $740.4 
million  in   FY  1972.  Increases  would  go  to  physics  and   astronomy 
program  for  solar  observatory  ($19  million  in   FY  1972),  High 
Energy  Astronomical  Observatory  ($13.4  million) , and   space  tele- 
scope  study  ($500 000).  Funding  for  lunar  and   planetary  exploration 
would  increase  $166.6  million,  to  $311.5  million,  with  $38.3  million 
going  toward  Mariner-Venus/Mercury  1973,  $180.4  million  toward 
Viking  project,  and  $18.8  million  toward  supporting  research  and  
technology  advanced  studies.  Funding  for  Pioneer  program  of  plan- 
etary  exploration  would  decrease  from  $35.5  million  in   FY  1971  to 
$17.6 million.  Funding  for  bioscience  program,  including  Biosatellites, 
was  eliminated  from  NASA  budget  for  FY  1972.  Increase  of  $15.5 
million  in  space  applications  programs,  to  $182.5 million  in   FY  1972, 
included  $48.5  million  for  Ear th   Resources  Survey,  $13  million  for 
Synchronous  Meteorological  Satellite,  and  $60.3  million  for  ATS. 
Total  for  advanced  research  and  technology  programs  decreased 
from  $264.2  million  in   FY  1971  to  $212.8  million.  STOL  technology 
program  would  receive  $15  million,  against  $1.9 million  in  FY  1971. 
NERVA  rocket  funding would  decrease from  $32  million  in  FY  1971  to 
$9.9 million. 
Tracking  and  data  acquisition  funding  would  fall  $26  million,  to 
$264 million. 
DOD’s  FY  1972  budget  of  $76  billion  for  outlays  included  $1.55- 
billion  space  funding,  $500 000  less  than  previous  year  [see  April  21. 
Budget  also  included  $370  million  for  B-1 
intercontinental  bomber, 
up  from  $75  million  in  FY  1971;  $39  million  for  LAMPS  antisub- 
marine-warfare  helicopter,  up  from  $4  million,  $145  million  for  a i r  
defense  aircraft  system  (AWAC S ) ,   up  from  $87  million,  $47  million 
for  USAF  AX  close-support  aircraft,  up  from  $28  million,  $409 million 
for  Poseidon  missile  system,  and   $926  million  for  Minuteman  I11 
program,  up from $720 million  in  FY 1971. 
AEC   funding  for  NERVA  and   space  electric  power  would  decrease 
from $84 million  in  FY  1971 to $39.7 million. 
Increase  of  $437  million  in   total  DOT  FY  1972  budget  of  $7.8 
billion  would  go  mostly  to  expanded  aviation  and   urban  mass  transit 
spending.  DOT  funding  for  reduction  of  aircraft  noise  and   study  of 
environmental  effects  of  SST  would  increase  from  $27  million  in   FY 
1971  to  $54  million.  These  funds  also  would  be  used  for  pollution 
reduction  from  Coast  Guard  installations.  NOA  of  $235  million  was 
requested  for  SST  prototype  program,  up  from  $210  million  in  FY 
1971.  (US  Budget  for  FY  1972;  BOB  Special  Analysis;  NASA  budget 
briefing  transcript ; DOD  budget  briefing  transcript;  AIAA  release  71-2; 
CR,  1/29/71,  H265;  DDR&E  Dir  Foster  Testimony,  4/2/71) 
NASA  released  Jan.  28  briefing  on  FY  1972  budget  request,  in   which 
Dr.  George  M.  Low,  NASA  Acting  Administrator,  sa id :   “For  the  past 
several  years we  have  repo r ted . .   . a  further  decrease in   budget  author- 
ity.  This  year  we  can  report  a  clear  halt  in   this  trend:  the  budget 
authority  for  FY  1972  is  a t   the  same  level  a s   the  funds  appropriated 
for  FY  1971.  The  exact  figure  for  FY  1972  is  $3.271  billion. 
NASA  would  compIete  Apollo  program  with  four  previously  planned 
missions  but  would  delay  Apollo  17  five months  to  ensure  that  mission 
carried  experiments  originally  scheduled  for  canceled  Apollo  18  and  

21 

January 29 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

19.  Skylab  missions  would  be  delayed  about  four  months,  to  follow 
as  soon  as  practical  af ter   last  Apollo  flight.  Plans  for  unmanned 
planetary  exploration  included  two  Mars  orbiters  in   1971,  Jupiter 
flybys  in   1972  and   1973,  launch  in   1973  for  Venus-Mercury  ,flyby in  
1974, and  two  Viking  launches  in   1975 to  land  on  Mars  in  1976. 
Dr.  Low  said  NASA  had  asked  for  $190  million  for  space  shuttle 
in  FY  1972.  “We  have  included  in  our  budget  $100  million.  This 
reduction  means  essentially  that  we  will  move  out  with  the  engine 
development  exactly  as  we  had  planned;  that  we  are   still  in  a position 
to  make  a  decision  after  we  have  completed  the  studies  on  the  a i r  
frame  development,  whether  to  continue  with  additional  design  or 
whether  to  proceed  with  the  development  of  the  a ir   frames.” 
Near-earth  science  programs  included  Orbiting  Solar  Observatories 
in  1971,  1973,  1974,  and   1975  and   last  orbiting  Astronomical  Ob- 
servatory in   1972. 
Space  applications  program  would  progress  as  planned,  including 
two  ERTS,  two  Nimbus  experimental  weather  satellites,  two  Synchro- 
nous  Weather  Satellites,  and   two  advanced  communications  experi- 
and ATS-G. 
ments with ATS-F 
New  FY  1972 projects  would  include s tar t   of  work  on  High  Energy 
Astronomy  Observatory  ( H EAO )   and  program  for  exploration  of  outer 
planets.  “To  do  this  we  will  develop  a  versatile  new  spacecraft,  and  
we  will  plan  Grand  Tour  missions  to  Jupiter,  Saturn,  and  Pluto  in 
1976-1977;  and  to  Jupiter,  Uranus,  and  Neptune,  in   1979.”  NASA 
also  would  study  mission  to  orbit  Jupiter  a s   alternative  to  first  Grand 
Tour. 
Major  new  initiative  in   aeronautics  in  FY  1972 would  be  develop- 
ment of  experimental STOL aircraft. 
Downward  trend  in   aerospace  industry  employment  on  NASA  pro- 
grams  would  be  halted  during  FY  1972. “Although  aerospace  jobs  will 
continue  to  decline  in   FY  1971,  we  expect  employment  to  start 
increasing  by  the  middle  of  FY  1972, with  the  end-of-year level  being 
about  equal  to  that  a t   the  beginning  of  the  year.” 
NASA  would  reduce  civil  service  work  force  by  1500  positions  by 
end  of  FY  1972, bringing  total  decrease  to  6800  since  July  1967. 
Work  on  NERVA  nuclear  rocket  engine  would  be  limited  to  “essen- 
tially  long-lead  time  items,”  preserving  ability  “to  move  forward .   . . 
when  the  need  arises,”  without  large  expenditures  in  FY  1972. 
Program  included  “no  plans  a t   this  time  for  a  manned  Mars  land- 
ing mission.”  (Transcript) 
*  NASA  launched  two  sounding  rockets  to  obtain  da ta   on  ionosphere.  Nike- 
Apache,  launched  from  Univ.  of  Michigan’s  Keweenaw  Rocket  Launch 
Site  ( K R L S ) ,   carried  GSFC  payload  to  121.9-km  (76.2-mi)  altitude  to 
obtain  data  during  magnetic  activity  in   ionosphere  while  radiofre- 
quency  absorption  in   2-  and   10-mhz  region  of  spectrum  was  high. 
Rocket  and  instruments  functioned satisfactorily. 
Boosted  Arcas  11,  launched  from  Wallops  Station,  carried  GSFC 
experiment  to  122-km  (75.8-mi)  altitude  to  study  enhanced  ionization 
of  lower  ionosphere  and   its  relationship  to  precipitation  of  energetic 
electrons.  One  telemetry  channel  with  one  RF  probe  was  lost;  a l l  
other  instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpts  SRL)  
0  Lunar  landing  trainer  crashed  and   exploded  a t   Ellington  AFB,  Tex.  NASA 

22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
January 29 
pilot  S tuar t   M.  Present  parachuted  to  safety.  Tra iner   was  one  of  two 
$1.9-million  craft  used  by  Apollo  1 4  commander Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr., 
in  training.  Preliminary  investigation  indicated  cause  of  crash  was 
loss  of  electrical  power.  MSC  Deputy  Director  Christopher  C.  Kraft, 
Jr.,  later  said  accident  should  not  affect  Apollo  14  mission  since  LLTV 
electrical  system  was  “totally  different  from  the  one  in  the  lunar 
module.”  (MSC  Release 71-05) 
Selected  fire  departments  across  U.S.  would  be  testing  new  fire-resistant 
outfits developed  by  MSC  for  use  by  NASA  rescue crews, NASA  announced. 
Prototype  outfit  had  been  displayed  a t   symposium  of  International 
Assn.  of  F ire   Fighters.  Clothing included  thermal  underwear,  coverall, 
chaps,  two  kinds  of  trousers,  two  jackets,  and   two  proximity  suits 
that  permitted  fire  fighters  to  move  close  to  fire  or  even  enter  flames. 
Nonflammable  materials  in   garments  had  been  develoDed  to  ensure 
maximum  safety  of  Apollo  crews  in  oxygen-rich  atmosphere.  (NASA 
‘2 
Release  71-12) 
Micrometer-sized  silicate  grains  from  all  depths  in   Apollo  11  and  
Apo l lo   12  lunar  core  samples  showed  unusually  high  density  of 
nuclear  tracks,  Univ.  of  California  physicists  reported  in   Science. 
Densities  exceeding  100 billion  per  sq  cm  in   several  percent  of  grains 
indicated  possibility  that  grains  had  been  irradiated  in   space  as 
extralunar  dust  orbiting  sun  before  being  caught  by  moon  to  build 
lunar  soil-a 
possible  extralunar  origin  of  part  of  lunar  soil.  (Barber, 
Hutcheon,  Price, Science, 1 / 2 9 / 7 1 , 3 7 2 4 )  
*  Evidence  obtained  from  uv  photometers  aboard  two  NRL  Aerobee  150 
sounding  ro ck e t s -on e   launched  from  White  Sands  into  night  sky  in  
August  1967  and  one  Oct.  13,  1969-had 
indicated  ear th   was  im- 
mersed  in  magnetoglow,  NRL  scientists  reported  in   Science.  Glow,  from 
large  volume  of  glowing  helium  ions,  a t   304  A,  was  similar  to  geo- 
coronal  hydrogen  glow  “in  that  i t   extends  to  very  high  altitudes, 
but  it  is  unique  in   that  i t   is  largely  confined  to  the  closed  field  line 
portion  of 
the  magnetosphere.”  Because  of  magnetic  containment, 
radiation  had  been  termed  “magnetoglow.”  Observations. of  magneto- 
glow  from  inside  and  outside  magnetosphere  cavity  promised  to  pro- 
vide  “valuable  means  of  studying  the  structural  dynamics  of 
the 
magnetosphere.”  (Johnson, Young, Holmes,  Science,  1/29/71,  379-81 ; 
NRL   PAO )  
*  European  Broadcasting  Union  said  in   Geneva  that  i t   would  provide  live 
TV  coverage  of  Apollo  1 4   for  21   countries  in   Western  Europe  and  
North  Africa  and  coverage  for  TV  stations  in  U.S.S.R.  and   Eastern 
Europe.  Fourteen  multilateral  broadcasts  would  be  transmitted  via 
to  earth   station  at  Raisting,  West  Germany.  ( N Y T ,  
Zntelsat-ZZZ  F-6 
1/31/71) 
NASA  and  ARPA  announced selection  of  ARC  as  site  for  ILLIAC  IV  computer. 
ILLIAC  IV  program  was  ARPA-sponsored  R&D  effort  to  develop,  test,  and  
evaluate  parallel  array   processing concept  by  constructing and   operat- 
ing   large-capacity  computer.  ARC  would  perform  final  system  inte- 
gration  and   testing,  operate  computer  for  DOD,  and   perform  NASA 
research  in   aeronautic  fluid  mechanics.  Program  had  started  a t   Univ. 
of  Illinois  in   1966  and  was  approaching  manufacturing  phase.  ILLIAC 
IV  computer was  being  built  by  Burroughs  Corp.  and   would  be  moved 
to  ARC  after  completion  in  summer of  1971.  (NASA Release  71-14) 

23 

January  29 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
Senate  adopted  S.R.  20,  electing  minority  members  to  Senate  Committees 
fo r   92nd  Congress.  Elected  to  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space 
Sciences  were  Sen.  Carl  T.  Curtis  (R-Neb.),  Sen.  Margaret  C.  Smith 
(R-Me.),  Sen.  Barry  M.  Goldwater  (R-Ariz.),  Sen.  Lowell  P.  Weicker 
(R-Conn.),  and  Sen.  James L. Buckley  (R.N.Y.).  (CR ,  1/29/71,  S505)  
lanzcary  30:  President  Nixon  sent  individual  messages  from  Caneel  Bay, 
Virgin  Islands,  wishing  success  to  Apollo  14 astronauts  Alan  B.  Shep- 
ard ,   Jr.,  Edgar  D.  Mitchell,  and   S tuar t   A.  Roosa  on  eve  of  launch. 
Message  to  Shepard  sa id :   “The  courage  and   determination  you  have 
displayed  in   coming  back  against  such  great  odds  to  fly  aga in   have 
earned  our  unanimous  admiration  a t   home  and   abroad.  That  this 
important  mission  should  be  entrusted  to  our  Nation’s  first  man  in  
space  makes  us  especially  proud  and   confident  in   its  success.”  ( PD ,  
2 /8 /71 ,151)  
LRV  had  run   into  development  difficulties  that  had   boosted  estimated 
cost  more  than  60% ,   Thomas  O’Toole  said  in   IVashington  Post.  Cost 
was  now  estimated  a t   $41  million,  $12  million  more  than  $19  million 
stipulated  in   October  1969  contract  let  to  Boeing  Co.  and   General 
Motors  Corp.  Overrun  was  due  “almost  entirely  to  overtime  paid  to 
the  two  companies  to  make  sure  the  Rover  will  be  ready  to  fly  with 
Apollo  15  when  it  takes  off  for  the  moon  July  25.”  Trouble  with 
electronic  controls  and   independent  harmonic  drive  and   other  prob- 
lems  had  delayed  testing  of  LRV  until  Dec.  14,  1970,  almost  three 
months late.  ( W Post,  1/30/71,  A3 )  
*  Threat  of  military  superiority  was  “inherent”  in   Soviet  space  program, 
N ew   York  Daily  News  said.  “For  it  was  the  the  development  of  a 
Russian  rocket  for  intercontinental  bombardment  that  led  the  way  to 
the  technological  race  in   space  in   the  first  place.  We  certainly  had 
nothing  like  i t   on  Oct.  4,  1957,  when  the  Russians  startled  the   world 
with  the  orbiting  Sputnik  and   came  along  a  month  later  to  launch 
Sputnik  11,  a  1200-pound  [500-kg]  vehicle  carry ing   a  live  dog . .   . .” 
U S .   Sa turn   rocket  had  no  military  usefulness;  “one  doubts  that  the 
Russians  can  say  the  same  about  their  spacecraft  launching  vehicles.” 
(Greene, N Y  News,  1/31/71) 
Smithsonian  Institution  commissioned  a t   Fort  Pierce,  Fla.,  the  Johnson- 
Sea-L ink ,   five-man  submersible  research  vessel  designed  to  operate  in  
water  to  depth  of  900  m  (3000  f t ) .   First  of  its  kind,  8-m  (25-f t)  
vessel  could  remain  under  water  for  up  to  48  hrs.  (AP ,   W  S ta r ,  
1/30/71,  A9) 
January   31-February  9 :  NASA’S  Apollo  14  (AS-509)  carried  three-man 
crew  on  successful  lunar   landing  mission.  LM-8  Antares  landed  on 
moon’s  F r a   Mauro  and   two  astronauts  conducted  experiments  and  
explored  lunar  surface  for  9  hrs   24  min  before  rejoining  orbiting 
CSM-110  and   returning  safely  to  earth  with  lunar   samples  in   CM 
K i t t y  Hawk. 
Janua ry   31-February  3 :   Spacecraft,  carry ing   Astronauts  Alan  B. 
Shepard,  Jr.  (commander) ,   S tuar t   A.  Roosa  (CM p i lo t) ,   and   Edgar 
D.  Mitchell  (LM   p i lo t) ,   was  launched  from  KSC   Launch  Complex  39, 
P a d   A,  a t   4:03  pm  EST Jan.  31  by  Sa turn   V  booster.  Launch  was 
40  min  3  sec  later  than   planned  because  of  high  overcast  clouds  and  
to  75.6”. 
rain.  Delay  caused  revision  of  flight  azimuth  from  72’ 
Launch  was  watched  by  about  2500  invited  guests,  including  Vice 

24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January 31-February  9 

President  Spiro  T.  Agnew,  Pr ince   Juan   Carlos  and   Princess  Sophia 
of  Spain,  and   Apollo  11   Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Jr. 
Spacecraft  and   S-IVB  combination  entered  parking  orbit  with 
188.9-km  (117.4-mi)  apogee  and   183.1-km  (113.8-mi)  perigee.  Mid- 
course  correction  (MCC-1)  modified  trajectory  so  spacecraft  arrival 
time  a t   moon  would  be  same  as  if  launch  had  been  on  time.  CSM 
separated  from  LM/S-IVB/IU  at  3 :02  GET.  Onboard  TV  was  initiated 
to  cover  CSM  docking with  LM,  but  difficulty  in   docking  was  encoun- 
tered.  First  five  docking  attempts  by  CM  pilot  Roosa  were  unsuc- 
cessful.  Mission  Control  in  Houston,  watching on  TV,  studied problem 
that  could  prevent extraction  of  LM and make lunar  landing impossible. 
Alternate  missions  also  were  under  study.  Astronauts  noted  catches 
seemed  properly  cocked  but  did  not  release.  Sixth  t ry   however,  was 
successful;  docking was  achieved  a t   4:57  GET,  1 h r   54  min  later  than 
planned. 
Separated  S-IVB/IU  impacted  lunar  surface  at  83:18  GET  (2:41  am 
EST  Feb.  4)  a t   7O49’  south  latitude  and  26”  west  longitude  174   km 
(108   m i )   southeast  of  planned  impact  point.  Apollo  12   seismometer 
detected  impact  and  showed  vibrations  for  about  2  hrs. 
Unscheduled  2-hr  22-min  TV  transmission  from  spacecraft  was 
initiated  a t   1O :OO   GET  to  troubleshoot  probe  and  drogue  of  docking 
mechanism.  Crew  removed  probe  and   drogue  but  found  no  foreign 
material  or  abnormal  damage.  Capture  latch  assembly  was  actuated 
and  system  performed  nominally.  Crew  and  ground  were  unable 
to  determine  why  CSM  and  LM  had  failed  to  dock  properly,  but  they 
found  no  indication  that  systems  would  not  work  normally  again. 
Officials  decided  mission  would  continue  as  planned  [see  Feb.  I]. 
Second  midcourse  correction,  with  10.1-see  SPS  burn   at  30:36  GET, 
increased velocity  by  21.7  m  per  sec  (71.1  fps) .   Following  maneuver, 
crew  completed  about  nine  frames  of  dim-light  photography  on  earth‘s 
dark  side  and   continued  to  check  out  systems.  GET  update  was  per- 
formed  a t   55:40  GET  to  add  the  40  min  3  sec  lost  by  launch  delay. 
MCC-3,  scheduled  for  60:38  GET,  was  not  necessary.  Third  TV  trans- 
mission,  fo r   42  min  beginning  a t   60:40  GET,  showed  Shepard  and  
Mitchell  transferring  into  LM  and  checking out  LM  systems.  M C C 4 ,   a t  
77:38  GET  with  0.6-sec  SPS  burn,  changed  velocity  1.1  m  per  sec 
(3.5 fp s ) .  
February  4-6:  Apollo  14  entered  lunar  orb i t   with  314.1-km  (195.2- 
m i )   apolune and  108.2-km  (67.2-mi)  perilune  after  LOI  burn  at  82:37 
GET,  including  40-min  update  ( 1  :55  am  EST  Feb.  4 ) .  Roosa  called  to 
Mission  Control:  “.  . . you’re  not  going  to  believe  this-it 
looks  just 
like  the  map.”  Shepard  described  the  moon  and   near-moon  space  as 
“really  quite  a sight.  No  atmosphere a t  all.  Everything  is  clear  up  here. 
Really  fantastic.”  Mitchell  said  moon  looked  like  “a  plaster  mold  that 
somebody  has  dusted  with  grays  and  browns.”  Region  where  daylight 
stopped  and  darkness  began  had  “some  fairly  high  crater  walls  and 
high  country,  with  those  long  shadows,  i t   really  looks  rugged.  I t   looks 
like  you  could  walk  along  that  surface  into  the  darkness  and  fall  into 
nothing.’’ 
Shepard  and   Mitchell  reentered  LM and  checked  out  systems  before 
firing  RCS  thrusters  a t   104:28  GET  to  separate  CSM  and   LM.  spur ious  
bit  in   LM  guidance  computer  was  corrected  to  preclude  inadvertent 

25  

January 31-February  9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January  31-February  9 :   Propelled  in to  
space  by  the   Sa turn   V, Apollo  14  carried 
Astronauts  A lan   B.  Shepard,  Jr . ,   Stuart 
A .   Roosa,  and  Edgar  D.  Mitchell  to   the  
moon  on   the   third  successful  United 
States  lunar  landing mission. A f te r   Feb.  5 
touchdown, Shepard and Mitchell  explored 
the   Fra  Mauro  area  fo r   9  hours  24 
minutes  in  two  extravehicular  periods 
before  the   LIVI  Antares  l i f ted   them   off  to 
rejoin  Roosa  in  the   orbiting  CM  K i t t y  
Hawk  for  the   return  to  earth.  Prelaunch 
activities  were  monitored  by  Dr.  George 
M .   Low  ( a t   le f t   be low ) ,   Ac t ing   NASA 
Administrator,  and  Dr.  Wernher  von 
Braun,  Deputy  Associate  Administrator 
for  Planning,  in  Firing  Room  2  a t   KSC. 

26 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January  31-February  9 

abort  dur ing   powered  descent,  and   Shepard  controlled  descent  manu- 
ally. 
LM  Antares  landed  on  moon’s  Fra  Mauro  a t   1 0 8 5 4  GET  (4:17  am 
EST  Feb.  5)   on  8’  slope  9-18  m  (30-60  f t )   short  of  planned  landing 
point.  “We  seem  to  be   sitting  in   a  bowl,”  Mitchell  said.  “It’s  choppy, 
undulating.  There  is  a  large  depression  to  our  right  to  the  north  of 
us,  which  forms another  bowl.  And  I  can  see  several  ridges  and   rolling 
hills  of  perhaps  35  to  40  feet  (10  to  12 meters)  in   height.” 
First  EVA  began  49  min  later  than  planned  because  of  intermittent 
PUS   communications.  Shepard  started  down  ladder,  deployed  MESA 
containing  camera  which  recorded  descent,  and   stepped  on  lunar  sur- 
face  a t   114:30  GET  (9:53 am  EST  Feb.  5 ) .  Mitchell  stepped  down  six 
minutes later.  “Not  bad  for  an   old  man,”  Mission  Control  told  Shepard 
as  he  touched  surface.  “You’re  right,”  Shepard  replied  “I’m  on  the 
surface.  It’s  been  a  long  way  and  I’m  here.  The  surface  on  which  the 
forward  footpad landed  is extremely soft.  . . . it’s  in  a  small  depression. 
The  soil  is  so  soft  that  i t   comes  all  the  way  to  the  top  of  the  footpads, 
i t   even  folded  over  the   sides  to  some  degree.  . . , we  can  see  the 
boulders on  the  rim.  I t   looks  as  though  we  have  a  good  traverse  route 
up  to  the  top of  the Cone.” 
Crew  collected  19.5-kg  (43-lb )  contingency  sample;  deployed  TV, 
S-band  antenna,  American  flag,  and  solar  wind  composition  experi- 
ment;  and   photographed  LM,  lunar  surface,  and  experiments.  ALSEP 
was  deployed  about  152  m  (500  f t )   west  of  LM  and  laser-ranging 
retroreflector was deployed  about 30  m  (100 f t )   west  of  ALSEP.  Mitchell 
conducted  active  seismic  experiment,  firing  13  thumper  shots  into 
lunar  surface.  Signals  were  recorded  by  geophones  and   transmitted  to 
earth.  Eight  of  the  21  cartridges misfired,  but  the  13  fired  sent  vibra- 
tions  18-21  m  (60-70  f t )   into  moon.  Crew  was  granted  30-min exten- 
sion  on  EVA  and  reentered  LM  after  4  hrs   49 min. 
After  resting  inside  LM  and  checking  plans  for  second  EVA  period, 
astronauts  left  LM  a t   131:48 GET  ( 3 : l l  am  EST  Feb.  6)-2  hrs  27  min 
earlier  than  planned.  Astronauts  loaded  MET  with  photographic  equip- 
ment  and   lunar  portable  magnetometer  (LPM )   and   proceeded  toward 
Cone Crater.  MET  bounced  slightly  during  traverse  but  appeared stable. 
Astronauts’  main  problem  was  lunar  dust  which  stuck  to  their  space 
suits  up  to  their  knees.  “We’re  filthy  a s   pigs,”  Mitchell  said.  “Every- 
thing’s  going  to  be  covered  with  dust  before  long.”  LPM  site measure- 
ment  was  made  at  first  stop  and  LPM  traverse  measurement was  later 
made  near  Cone  Crater.  Geological  features  were  described  and  mate- 
rials  collected.  Crew  was  unable  to  reach  rim  of  Cone  Crater  because 
slopes  were  steeper  than  expected  and   climb  would  have  required 
running  behind  time  line  by  about  30  min.  Samples were  collected  in  
traverse  crew  dug  0.5-m 
blocky  field  near  rim.  On  return  leg  of 
( 1.5-ft )  trench  and  collected  samples.  Unsuccessful  triple-core-tube 
attempt  was  made  and   other  containerized  samples  were  collected. 
Alignment  adjustment  was  made  to  ALSEP  central  station’s  antenna  to 
improve signal  strength  being  received  a t   MSFN  ground  stations.  Crew 
was  unable  to  perform  a  number  of  secondary  tasks  because  of  time- 
line and  minor problems. 
Just  before  reentering  LM  Shepard  made  surprise  announcement: 
“You  might  recognize  what  I  have  in   my  hand  as  the  handle  for  the 

27 

January  31-February  9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

28 

A S TRONAU T IC S   A N D   AERONAUT ICS ,   1971 

January  31-February  9 

February  4-6:  Tracks  o f   the   modularized  equipment  transporter,  used  for   the   first 
t ime  o n  the  Apollo  14 mission,  were photographed  ( a t  top   l e f t )  leading  across  t h e  lunar 
sur face   f r om   the   LM Antares.  T h e   inverted  umbrella  of  the   S-hand  antenna  was  posi- 
tioned  b y   t h e   astronauts  to  the   l e f t   of 
t h e   LM.  Luna r   dus t   clung  to  the   legs  of 
Astronaut  Edgar  D.  Mitchell  ( a b o v e )   as  he   moved  across  t h e   sur face   during  extra- 
vehicular  activity.  Meanwhile,  in  the   Manned  Spacecraft  Center  at  Houston,  Texas,  a 
seismic  reading  of  the  Feb.  4  impact  on   the   moon  of  the   Sa turn   launch  vehicle’s  S-IVB 
stage  was  examined  by   Dr.  Maurice  Ewing  (bo t tom   l e f t ) ,   Director  of  Columbia 
University’s  Lamont-Doherty  Geological  Observatory,  and  Columbia  graduate  student 
David  Lammlein.  T h e   impact  released  energy  comparable 
t o   11  tons  of  TNT. 

contingency  sample  return  and  i t   just  so  happens  to  have  a  genuine 
six  iron  on  the  bottom  of  it.”  Shepard  dropped  golf  ball  OR  lunar 
surface  and  on  third  attempt  drove  ball  about  366  m  (400  yd s ) .  
Astronauts  reentered  LM  a t   136:26 GET,  after  4  hrs  35  min,  bringing 
total  EVA  time to 9 hrs 24 min. 
While  LM  was  on  moon,  Roosa,  orbiting  moon  in   CSM,  completed 
bootstrap  photography  of  Descartes  landing  s i te   and   astronomic pho- 
tography,  including  Gegenschein  experiment,  and   prepared  for  short- 
ened  rendezvous technique. 
Shepard  and   Mitchell  depressurized  LM,  discarded  excess  equip- 
ment,  repressurized  LM,  and   lifted  off  lunar  surface  with  43  kg 
(94.8 Ibs)  of  samples  a t   142:25 GET-33 
hrs   31  min  after  landing on 
moon.  During  braking  phase  for  docking,  telemetry  indicated  that 
abort  guidance  system  had  failed,  but  no  caution  and   warning  signals 
were  on.  Docking  was  accomplished  successfully  at  144:13  GET  (3:36 
pm  Feb.  6 )   with  no  probe-drogue  problems.  Probe  was  returned  to 

29 

January 31-February  9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

earth  fo r   postflight  analysis.  Excellent  T V   during  rendezvous  and  
docking showed  docking maneuver  clearly.  Crew  transferred  from  LM 
to  CSM  with  samples,  equipment,  and  film.  LM  ascent  stage  was  jetti- 
soned  and   intentionally  crashed  onto  lunar  surface  a t   148:22  GET 
(7:05  pm  EST  Feb.  6 )   a t   3 O  35'  south  latitude  and   19" 40'  west  longi- 
tude.  Impact  was  recorded  by  Apollo  12 and  Apollo  14  ALSEPS.  Trans- 
ear th   injection  maneuver,  on  schedule  a t   149:16  GET,  injected  CSM 
into  transearth  trajectory  after  66 hrs  40 min  (34  revolutions)  in  lunar 
orbit. 
February  7-9:  MCC-5  a t   166:14 GET  increased velocity  by  152  mm 
per  sec  (0.5  fp s ) .   MCC-6  and  MCC-7  were  not  required.  Inflight 
demonstrations  of  composite  casting,  liquid  transfer,  and   heatflow 
connection  were  televised  beginning  a t   172  :30  GET.  Press  briefing  at 
195:09  GET  (6:32  pm  EST  Feb.  8)  was  of  good  quality. 
CM K i t t y  Hawk  separated  from  SM   a t  216:12  GET.  Parachute  deploy- 
ment  and   other  reentry  events  occurred  as  planned  and   K i t t y   Hawk 
splashed  down  in  mid-Pacific about  7  km  ( 4  nm)   from  recovery ship 
U.S.S.  New   Orleans  at  216:42  GET  (4.05  pm  EST  Feb.  9 ) .  Astronauts, 
wearing  flight  suits  and  masks,  were  carried  by  helicopter  from  CM  
to  recovery  ship,  where  they  entered  mobile  quarantine  facility  with 
recovery  physicians  and  technician.  Crew,  physicians,  and  technician 
would  remain  inside  MQF  until  ship  neared  Samoa  and  would  then 
be  transferred  to  another  MQF  for  flight to  LRL  quarantine  in  Houston. 
CM  was  retrieved  and   mated  to  MQF  transfer  tunnel  on  board  recovery 
ship.  From  inside  MQF-CM  containment  envelope,  MQF   engineer  re- 
moved  lunar  samples  and   equipment through  decontamination lock  and  
CM   was  sealed  until  delivery  to  LRL.  Sample  return  containers,  film, 
and  other  data  were  flown  via  Pago  Pago  to  Houston  for  LRL. 
Pr imary   Apollo  14  objectives-to  make  selenological  inspection,  sur- 
vey,  and   sampling  of  materials  in   preselected  region  of  F ra   Mauro; 
deploy  and  activate  ALSEP;  develop  man's  capability  to  work  in  lunar 
environment;  and  photograph  candidate  exploration  sites-were 
achieved.  Launch  vehicle  and   spacecraft  systems performance was  near 
nominal  except  for  docking  problems,  spurious  signals,  and  an   occa- 
sional  loss  of  communications.  Flight  crew  performance  was  excellent. 
Crew  exhibited  exceptional  poise  during  CSM/LM  docking  attempts 
and  while  troubleshooting AG  computer.  Accomplishments  included first 
use  of  MET,  largest  payload-32  500  kg  (71  650  1bs)-placed 
in   lunar 
orbit,  longest  distance  traversed  on  lunar   surface,  largest  payload 
returned  from  lunar  surface,  longest  lunar   surface  stay  time,  longest 
total  EVA,  first  use  of  shortened rendezvous technique, first active seismic 
experiment, and  first  inflight  technology  demonstrations. 
Apollo  14   was  11th  Apollo  mission  to  date,  8 th   manned  Apollo 
mission,  and   3rd   successful  lunar  landing  mission.  Apollo  11  (July 
16-24,  1969)   and   Apollo  12   (Nov.  14-24,  1969)   had  proved  capabil- 
ity  to  land  men  on  moon  and   retrieve  lunar   samples  for  study  on 
earth.  Apollo  13  (April  11-17,  1970) ,   aborted  by  SM  tank  explosion, 
had  demonstrated  capability  to  perform  under  emergency  situation 
and  re turn   crew  safely  to  ear th   under  alternate  plan.  Apollo  program 
was  directed  by  NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space Flight;  MSC  was  respon- 
sible  for  Apollo  spacecraft  development,  MSFC  for  Sa turn   V  launch 
vehicle,  and  KSC  for  launch  operations.  Tracking  and  data  acquisition 

30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

January 31-February  9 

w a s   managed  by  GSFC under  overall  direction  of  NASA  Office  of  Track- 
ing  and Data  Acquisition.  (NASA  Proj Off; NASA  Release 71-245;  NYT, 
2/1-10/71;  W Pos t ,   2/1-10/71;  AV W k ,  2 /15 /71 ,19)  
January  31:  President  Nixon  in   Caneel  Bay,  Virgin  Islands,  issued  state- 
ment  following  successful ApoZZo  14  launch:  “Today, we  take  the  most 
amazing  things  almost  for  granted.  I t   is  difficult  to  imagine,  but  some 
day  the  discovery  of  the  New  World  will  seem  almost  inconsequential 
alongside  the  explorations  of  ou r   own  time.  I n   a  way  we  a r e  like  the 
people  who  must  have  stood  on  the  dock  at  Palos,  Spain,  and  watched 
Columbus’  ships  disappear,  believing  they  were  watching  the  end  of 
a  great  event,  when  they  were  watching the  beginning. But  where  they 
watched  the  world  being  opened,  and  did  not  know  it,  we  are   watch- 
ing   the  heavens  being  opened  and  we  do  know  it.  While  those  men 
went  under  the  patronage  of  individual  monarchs, our  men  go  for  the 
American people  and,  in  a  larger sense, for  all mankind.”  ( P D ,  2/8/71, 
151-2) 
Vice  President Spiro T. Agnew  told workers  a t  KSC after  ApoZZo  14 launch 
that  days  of  declining  space  budget  were  past  and   “we’re  going  for- 
ward  together  not  just  to  the  moon  but  I’m  certain  that  the  American 
program  will  continue  and   press  forward  into  the  reaches  of  inter- 
planetary  space.”  (AP, W  S tar ,   2/11/71,  A7) 
Nike-Apache sounding rocket,  launched  by NASA  from Univ.  of  Michigan’s 
Keweenaw  Rocket  Launch  Site  ( KRLS)  , carried  GSFC payload  to  184.8- 
km  (114.8-mi)  altitude  to  obtain  data  dur ing   magnetic  activity  in 
ionosphere  while  radiofrequency  absorption  in   2-  and   10-mhz region 

February  9:  Sa f e l y   back  on   ea r th   a f t e r   a  nine-day  journey  to   explore  the   su r face  
o f   the   moon,  the  Apollo  14  astronauts  watched  a  pararescueman  close  their  command 
module  hatch  fo l low ing   splashdown  in   the   planned  Pac i f ic   Ocean   landing  zone. 

31 

January 31 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

of  spectrum was  high.  Rocket  and  instruments  functioned satisfactorily. 
Data  would  be  compared with  data  from  similar launch  Jan.  29.  (NASA 
Rpt SRL;  NASA Release 71-1) 
Tenth  anniversary  of  Mercury-Redstone mission  that  carried  chimpanzee 
Ham  up  to  253-km  (157-mi)  altitude  on  suborbital  flight.  Ham  was 
recovered  in  good  health.  He  was  now  ward  of  National  Zoo  in   Wash- 
ington, D.C.  (AP, W Post, 1/31/71> A4; Natl Zoo PIO) 
Capabilities  of  NASA’s largest  computer  were  described  by  Dr.  Robert 
Jastrow,  Director  of  GSFC Institute  for   Space  Studies,  in   New  York 
Times  Magazine  article:  “The  ‘thinking’  of  this  machine  is  carried 
out  in  a  computing  unit,  containing  100,000  transistors,  which  per- 
forms   10 million  elementary  actions per  second, such  a s   addition  and 
subtraction,  comparisons  of  numbers,  logical  choices between  alterna- 
tives.  . . .” Numbers  and   words  employed  “are   stored  in   its  memory, 
which  has  a  capacity  for  holding  one  million  separate  items  of  infor- 
mation  and  can  produce  . . . items,  or  ingest  new  ones,  in   less  than 
one-millionth of  a  second.  . . . In  normal use,  5  per  cent of  this memory 
is  filled  up  with  the  programing  instructions  which  furnish  the  instinc- 
tive  reactions  of  the  machine.’’  Machine  also  received  “specialized 
training”  from  GSFC staff,  “a  set  of  instructions  also  placed  in   the 
machine’s  memory,  and   taking  up  . . . 10 per  cent  or  15 per  cent  of 
the  total  memory  capacity.”  Remainder  of  computer’s  memory  con- 
tained  facts  pertinent  to  problem  at  hand.  Computer  executed  24-hr 
global  weather  forecast  in  two  hours.  Process  required  “one  trillion 
additions  and  subtractions,  which  would  take  a  person  working  at  a 
desk  calculator  10,000 years  to  complete.”  (NYT   Mag,  1/31/71,  14ff) 
Author  Norman  Mailer  said  in   San  Francisco  that  Americans  were  a s  
interested  in   Apollo  14  as  they  would  be  in  “border  war  in  Bolivia.” 
He  criticized  images  of  astronauts  projected  by  NASA.  They  were 
tough  men-daredevils” 
but  NASA  presented  them  as  “priests.”  NASA 
c c  
was  “asking  this  country  to  love  saints  and   Americans  a re   not  noted 
fo r  that.”  (AP,  W Post,  1/31/71,  A24) 
*  Los  Angeles  T imes   editorial  commented  on  space  funding:  “If  Congress 
wants  to   be  truly  responsible  about  our  national  priorities,  it  will 
avoid making  further  cuts which  would  damage  the  space program  out 
of  proportion  to  the  savings  involved.”  In  addition  to  “advancing  the 
frontiers  of  knowledge  about  the  origins  of  the  ear th   and  the  nature 
of  the  universe,”  space  program  promised  “to  pay  off  in  much  more 
concrete ways.” 
We  are   already  reaping  huge  benefits  from  weather  and  commu- 
LC 
nications  satellites,  as well  as  from  the  development  of  compact,  high- 
speed  computers,  new  metals  and  fabrics,  microminiature  circuits  and  
many  other  technological  advances.”  Space  program  also  promised 
more  efficient  use  of  earth’s  resources,  help  in  global  attack  on  envi- 
ronmental  pollution,  possible  prediction  of  earthquakes,  and  hope  for 
more  productive  agriculture by  use  of  lunar  soil ingredients. 
“The  line  between  true   and  false  economy  is  hard  to  draw.  But  the 
space program  is  one  area  where  the  time  has  come  to  draw  it.”  (LA 
T imes .  1 /31 /71 )  
, 
During  January:  Creation  of  global  resources management  system  was  dis- 
I 
,
I
 
cussed  by  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Adminis- 
tra tor   for  Planning,  in   guest  editorial  in   Astronuzltics  & Aeronautics: 

32 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

During January 

Can  we  afford  to  create  a  global  resources  management  system?  I 
Gb 
think  we  cannot  afford  not  to  develop  it.  As the  richest  nation  in   the 
world  we  have  a  moral  obligation  to  bring  our  new  technology  to   bear 
to  help  the  helpless.  But  let  us talk  about  our  national  security.  On 
both  well-fed  sides  of  the  Iron   Curtain,  an   uncomfortable  amount  of 
raw  thermonuclear  power  has  been  piled  up  in   the  name  of  ‘deterring 
the  other  side.’  In   the  meantime,  the  under-fed,  over-populated  par t  
of  the  world,  too  poor  to  build  thermonuclear  bombs,  has  quietly 
developed  a  f a r   more  terrifying  threat  to  the  thermonuclear  powers: 
the  Population  Bomb.  I s   is  not  just  common  sense  to  spend  a t   least 
a  small  pa r t   of  our  tax  money  set  aside  for  national  security  on  the 
task  of  defusing  that  bomb?  I t   is  gratifying  indeed  to  know  that,  by 
establishing  a  global  Earth-resources  survey  and   management  system, 
we  can  combine  a  project  bound  t o   vastly  enhance  our   national  secu- 
r i ty   with  a  noble  contribution  to  the  welfare  of  the  world,  a  charity 
quite  likely  to  save  the  lives  of  millions.”  ( A & A ,   1/71,  2 6 5 )  
e  NSF  released  Research  and  Development  in   Local  Governments,  Fiscal 
Years   1968  & 1969  (NSF 7 1 - 6 ) :  Local  government R R ~ D  expenditures 
doubled  between  1966  and   1969,  from  $20  million  to  $40  million. 
Approximately  50%   of  funds   spent  by  local  governments  for  R&D 
came  from  Federal  Government.  Life,  social,  and  engineering  sciences 
were largest  fields in local government R R ~ D .  (Tex t)  

33 

PRECEDING  PAGE  BLANK  NOT  FILldD 

February  1971 

February  1:  Capt.  Chester  M.  Lee  (USN), Apollo  Mission  Director,  dis- 
cussed  Apollo  14’s  docking  problems  with  press  a t   MSC  and  assured 
press  mission  would  continue  toward  moon  as  planned:  “. . . first  of 
all  we  did  have  a  successful  docking  and  every  indication  is  that  it 
w a s   a  normal  docking.”  Engineers  “have been  making  extensive  analy- 
sis here   and w e  can  find  nothing wrong with  the  probe.  So  f a r   as we’re 
concerned  it’s  all  operating.  We  do  not  fully  understand  why  it  did 
not  operate  o r   why  the  first  attempts  a t   docking were  not  successful. 
However,  we   are   confident  tha t   the  drogue  . . . is  good.  A s   to  the 
cause,  it  could  have  been  a  foreign  particle.  . . . w e   did  ask  the  crew 
to look  diligently for  any foreign particles  and  they  didn’t  find  any.  . . . 
We  did  ask  them  to  inspect  the  probe  head  very  carefully  . . . to  see 
i f   there  were  any  foreign  particles.  We  found  none.  If  tha t   were  the 
problem,  it  apparently  dislodged  and  is  no   longer  there  and   is   no 
longer  causing  a  problem  . . . and   the  probe  certainly  works  now.” 
(Transcript) 
Newspaper  editorials  commented  on  ApoZZo  1 4  difficulties in   docking  CSM 
with  LM [see Jan.  31-Feb.  91. 
New   Y o r k   T imes   said  that  “as  the  world  waited  tensely  for  the  out- 
come  of  the  struggle  to  solve  the  problem,  there  was  a  deep  sense  of 
disappointment  at  the  possibility  that  all  the  effort,  tra in ing   and  plan- 
ning  tha t   went  into this mission  have  been  imperiled.”  ( N Y T ,  2/1/71, 
30 1 
Washington Evening S ta r  editorial caIIed Apollo I 4  “pressure mission.” 
I t   had  “already  qualified  for  several  entries  in   the  record  book.  I t   is  
the  first  Apollo  mission  to  be  crewed  entirely  by  men  who  have  never 
before  flown  in  earth  orb i t   and  commanded  by  a  veteran  whose  total 
previous time  in   space was  15 minutes.  The mission  is  led  by  the  oldest 
man  to  go  into  space,  the  first  American  to  ride  a  rocket,  the  only 
astronaut  to  return  to  active  duty  after  a  medically  enforced period  of 
idleness.  I t   is   the  first  Apollo  shot  to  be  delayed  because  of  weather. 
I t   is  the  first  to  run  into  a  ma jor   problem  on  its  first  day  out.  It  is   a 
mission  that,  in  the  opinion  of  many  in   the   top  ranks  of  the   space 
agency,  will  decide  the  fu ture   of  manned  space  flight.”  (W   S tar ,  
2/1/71) 
*  Zzvestia  published  ApoZZo  1 4  story  filed  by  its  New  York  correspondent 
claiming  that  cane  presented  as joke  to  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  before 
launch  had  become  “symbolic”  of  entire  mission.  Report  emphasized 
mission’s  technical difficulties.  (AP,  It” Pos t ,  2/2/71,  A6) 
NASA  issued  memorandum change  to  solicit  proposals  for  participation  in  
analysis  of  space  flight  da ta   from  photography  and   auxiliary  records 
acquired  on  Apollo  lunar  exploration  missions.  Apollo  15,  16,  and   17  
would carry  three  orbital scientific instruments designed to provide pho- 
tos  and  supporting  data,  panoramic  camera,  mapping  camera  system, 
and   laser  altimeter.  Proposals  also  were  solicited  for   analysis  of  lunar 

35 

February  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

photography  from  ApoZZo  14  and  for  photos  of  astronomical  objects 
from  Apollo  missions  1 4  through  17.  (NASA  Memo  Change  36)  
*  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  announced  it  would  accept $200-million  loss  on 
C-5A  transport  imposed  by  DOD  as price  of  resolving  contract  disputes 
[see  Jan.  271.  Lockheed  Board  Chairman  Daniel  J .   Haughton  said  in 
statement  released  to  press  that  acceptance meant Lockheed  would  for- 
fe i t  $100  million  it had  already provided toward  G 5 A  costs  and would 
repay  second  $100  million  by  securing  lien  on  its  investment  in  
Lockheed-Georgia  plant.  Lockheed  sa id   i t   expected  to  conclude  re- 
structured  credit  arrangement  successfully  within  a  few  weeks,  pro- 
viding  additional  financing  for  G l O l l  Tr iS tar   transport  and  other 
programs.  (Lockheed Release,  2/1/71) 
President  Nixon  resubmitted  to  92nd  Congress  proposals  previously  sub- 
mitted  to  91st  Congress,  including proposed  legislation  to  increase  a i r -  
line  passenger  ticket  tax  and   departure  tax  on  international  flights  to 
cover  cost  of  civil  a i r   and   ground  security  program,  particularly  sky 
marshals  established  by  Federal  Government  to  combat  aerial  hijack- 
ing.  President  noted  “number  of  airline  hijackings  that  seemed  to  be  
taking place  almost  daily months ago has  been  reduced.”  ( P D ,  2/1/71, 
109-20) 
*  Interpretation  of  Gum  Nebula  as fossil  of  super  nova,  or  exploded  star, 
was  reported  in  Astrophysical  Journal  by  CSFC  astronomers Dr.  John  C. 
Brandt, Theodore P.  Stecher,  and  Dr.  Stephen P.  Maran  and Kitt  Peak 
National  Observatory  astronomer  David  L.  Crawford.  Gum  Nebula, 
largest  known  object  within  Milky  Way  Galaxy,  extended  60’  across 
southern  sky.  Light  took  some  3000  yrs  to  cross  i t   at  speed  of  299 000 
km  (186000   m i )   per  sec.  Previous  theory  had  been  that  nebula 
glowed  visibly  because  i t   contained  “hot”  stars  that  ionized  surround- 
ing  hydrogen  gas  cloud.  New  interpretation,  based  on  more  accurate 
information  on  nebula’s  distance  from  earth,  indicated  Gum  Nebula 
was  produced  with  pulsar  during  supernova explosion  some  11 000  yrs 
ago  when  burst  of  radiation  ionized  surrounding  hydrogen.  (A s t ro -  
physical  Journal, 2/1/71,  L99-104) 
*  Discovery  of  rarest  nuclear  particle  anti-omega-minus baryon  in  photo  of 
nuclear  interaction  was  reported  by  physicist  Dr.  .Gerson Goldhaber of 
Univ.  of  California  a t   Berkeley  a t   American  Physical  Society  meeting 
i n   New  York.  Particle’s  track  had  been  found  in   search  of  more  than 
500 000  photos  and  further  confirmed  that  baryon  particles  had  anti- 
particles.  Photos  of  particle  collisions  were  taken  in  heavy-hydrogen- 
filled  bubble  chamber  of  particle  accelerator  a t   Stanford Linear  Accel- 
erator Center  (AP ,  NYT ,  2/2/71,  19 )  
*  Promotion  of  Thomas  W.  Morgan,  Manager  of  KSC  Apollo-Skylab  Pro-  
grams,  to  rank  of  permanent  brigadier  general  in  USAF  was  noted  in 
Armed  Forces Journal. ( A F J ,  2 /1 /71 ,45)  
February  1-3  : Joint  US.-U.S.S.R. 
editorial  board  for   preparation  and 
publication of  review  of  space biology  and  medicine held  second  meet- 
ing  in  Washington,  D.C.  Cochairmen  were  Professor  Melvin  Calvin  of 
Univ.  of  California  and  Professor  Oleg  6. Gazenko,  Director  of  Insti- 
tute  of  Medical  Biological  Problems  of  Soviet  Ministry  of  Health. 
(NASA  Release 71-16) 
February  2 - 4 :   North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization’s Natosat  2  (N a t o   2 ;  
NATO-B)  military  comsat  was  launched  from  ETR  at  8:41  am  EST by 

36 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

February 2 - 4  

NASA  for  USAF  and  NATO  by  thrust-augmented  Thor-Delta booster. 
Spacecraft  entered  transfer  orb i t   with  37  712.2-km  (23  433.3-mi) 
apogee,  272.9-km  (169.6-mi)  perigee,  673.9-min  period,  and   25.9’ 
inclination.  Pr imary   NASA  objective  was  to  place  spacecraft  into  trans- 
f e r   orb i t   accurate  enough  for   onboard  propulsion  systems  to  place 
spacecraft  in  acceptable synchronous orbit. 
Apogee  motor  was  fired  a t   11:56  pm  EST  Feb.  4,  placing  Natosat  2 
into circular orbit with 37 053.0-km  (23  023.7-mi)  apogee,  34 493.6-km 
( 2 1  433.3-mi)  perigee,  and   0’ 
inclination.  Spacecraft  would  dr if t  
about  1’  per  day  from  135’  east  longitude  until  i t   reached  permanent 
station  over Atlantic  a t  26’  west  longitude in  late March. 
Natosat  2  was  second  of  two  NATO  comsats  launched  under  DOD- 
NATO  agreement. USAF  managed  project  €or DOD  and  would  reimburse 
NASA  for  launch services.  NATO  would  reimburse  USAF.  Initial  operation 
of  satellite  telemetry  and   command  functions  were  performed  from 
USAF  satellite  control  facility.  Control  of  orbital  operations  would  be 
transferred  to  NATO  after  spacecraft  reached  station.  (NASA  P ro j   Off)  
February  2:  President  Nixon  sent  message  to  Congress  transmitting  Aero- 
nautics  and  Space  Report  of 
the  President,  Transmitted  to  the  Con- 
gress  January  2971:  “The  activities  of  our  space  program  dur ing   the 
year  are  consistent  with  the  recommendations I  made  in   March  for   a 
balanced space program.  Our  goals  a re  continued exploration,  scientific 
knowledge  and   practical  applications.  The technology  acquired  through 
our  space programs  has  many  practical  applications  on  ear th   ranging 
from  communications, meteorology and   navigation  to  agriculture,  edu- 
cation  and  transportation.”  Specific  objectives  were  continued  lunar 
exploration to  increase  scientific  return  on  Apollo  program  investment, 
exploration  of  solar  system  and  universe,  reduction  of  space operation 
costs,  expansion  of  knowledge  of  “man’s  ability  to  perform  produc- 
tively  in  the  hostile  environment  of  space  and  to  relate  this  knowl- 
edge  to  uses  here on  earth”  and  application  of  space technology  to  envi- 
ronmental  problems.  “We  should  also  promote  international  coopera- 
tion  in  ou r   space  program  by  pursuing  jo in t   space  ventures,  exchang- 
ing   scientific  and  technical  knowledge,  and  assisting  in  the  practical 
application  of  this  knowledge.  We  a r e   greatly  encouraged  by  Euro- 
pean  interest  in   joining  us  in   cooperative  post-Apollo  planning.” 
Year  1970  had  produced  “substantial  contributions  to  continued 
U S .   pre-eminence  in  civil  aviation,  major  improvements  in   aero- 
nautical  services,  and   impressive  developments  in   a  sound  SST  pro- 
gram.”  New  military  aeronautics  programs  initiated  in  1970  would 
“enhance  our   national  security.’’  (P re s   Rpt  71 ;   PD,  2/8/Tl.,  158) 
White  House  Office  of  Management  spokesman sa id   FY  1972  spending 
f o r  public  relations  would  be  cut  $45  million,  or  nearly  30%,  under 
Nov.  6  Presidential  order  to  curtail  “self-serving  and  wasteful  public 
relations  activities.”  NASA  PR  spending  would  be   cut  from  $13.7  mil- 
lion  to  $9.7  million,  one  of  three  largest  cuts.  Other  agencies  most 
effected we re   HEW  and DOD.  ( h a p ,  W News,  2/2/71) 
U.K.  government  agreed  to  finance  half  of  BAC’S  contribution  to  NR’s 
Phase  B  space  shuttle  study  for  NASA.  Total  financing  was  about 
$550 000.  (SF, 4/71,  121)  
Sen.  David  H.  Gambrel1  (D-Ga.)  was  assigned  to  Senate  Committee  on 
Aeronautical and Space Sciences.  (NASA  LAR  X /7)  

37 

February  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

*  New  York   Times  editorial  on  NASA  decision  to  continue  Apollo  14 mis- 
sion:  “Space  officials know  that  they  have  taken  on  an  extra  degree  of 
responsibility  with  the  ‘go’  decision,  and  have  opened  the  way  fo r  
massive  recrimination  should  their  judgment  be  proved  wrong  by  later 
developments. Nevertheless  there  i s   some  reassurance  i n   the   fact  tha t  
for  a  time  seemed  certain  to  
the  original  docking  problem-which 
abort  the  flight-was 
successfully  overcome  by  the  astronauts  thou- 
sands  of  miles  from  earth.  The  nation  and  the  world  will  be  watching 
this  flight  with  renewed  hope-and 
admiration  for  the  brave  men  em- 
barked  upon it.,,  ( N Y T ,  2 /2 /71 ,34)  
February  3 :   Total  new  obligational  authority  fo r   U.S.  space  program  in- 
cluding  all  pertinent  agencies  in   President  Nixon’s  proposed  FY  1972 
$73.6  million,  or  l . l% ,   from  FY 
budget  was  $4.707  billion-down 
1971  space  NOA   of  $47 80   billion-Space  Business  Da i ly   estimated. 
Total  FY  1972 space  expenditures  would  be  $4.633 billion,  down  5.2% 
from $4.888 billion  in FY  1971.  (SBD ,  2/3/71,  148) 
February  4: Rolls-Royce Ltd.  declared bankruptcy.  Prestigious British  auto- 
motive  and  aircraft  engine  company  blamed  collapse on  losses  incurred 
in   developing  RB-211  engine  fo r   Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  TriStar 
airbus.  Rolls-Royce  said  i t   could  not  proceed  with  engine  under  cur- 
rent  fixed-price contract.  (Lee, NYT ,  2/5/71,  l )  
*  USN  P-3C  Orion  turboprop  antisubmarine  aircraft  achieved  world’s  rec- 
ord  fo r   altitude  in  horizontal  flight  of  13 686 m  (44  900  f t ) .   Previous 
record  of  12990 m  (42618   f t )   had  been  set  by  Soviet  11-18  in  June 
1969.  ( A F  Mug,  4 /71 ,15)  
Training  model  of  French-made  uv  panorama  (S-138)  experiment- 
only  foreign-made  experiment  fo r   first  Skylab  flight-was 
delivered  to 
McDonnell  Douglas  Astronautics  Co.  a t   Huntington  Beach,  Calif. 
Experiment  would  gather  photographic  da ta   on  massive  hot  stars. 
Training  model,  which  weighed  68  kg  (150  lbs)  and  was  1.2  m 
(3 .8   f t )   high,  would  be  incorporated  with  other  training  equipment 
a t   McDonnell  Douglas.  Flight  model  would  be  delivered  in  May. 
( MSFC  Release 71-19) 
House  adopted  resolution  setting  number  of  members  of  Committee  on 
Science  and  Astronautics  a t   30  and  resolution  providing  for  assign- 
ment  of  majority  and  minority  members  of  Committee.  Majority 
(Democratic)  members  were:  George  P.  Miller,  Calif.,  Chairman; 
Olin  E.  Teague,  Tex.;  Joseph  E.  Karth,  Minn.;  Ken  Hechler,  W.  Va.; 
John  W.  Davis,  Ga.;  Thomas  N.  Downing,  Va.;  Don  Fuqua,  Fla.; 
Earle  Cabell,  Tex.;  James  W.  Symington,  Mo.;  Richard  T.  Hanna, 
Calif.;  Walter  Flowers,  Ala.;  Robert  A.  Roe,  N.J.;  John  F .   Seiberling, 
Jr.,  Ohio;  William R.  Cotter,  Conn.;  Charles B.  Rangel,  N.Y.;  Morgan 
F.  Murphy,  Ill.;  Mike  McCormack,  Wash.  Minority  (Republican) 
members  were:  James  G .   Fulton,  Pa.;  Charles  A.  Mosher,  Ohio; 
Alphonzo Bell,  Calif.;  Thomas M.  Pelly, Wash.;  John  W.  Wydler, N.Y.; 
Larry  Wynn,  Jr.,  Kans.;  Robert  D.  Price,  Tex.;  Louis  Frey,  Jr.,  Fla.; 
Barry  M.  Goldwater,  Jr.,  Cali€.; Marvin  L.  Esch,  Mich.;  R.  Lawrence 
Coughlin, Pa.;  John N.  Happy  Camp, Okla.  (CR,  2/4/71,  H428, H434) 
Winners  of  11th  annual  Federal  Women’s  Award  were  announced  by 
Patricia  R .  Hi&  Assistant Secretary of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare. 
They  included  Rita  M.  Rapp,  Subsystems Manager  of  Apollo  Food  and 
Personal  Hygiene  Items  and  Head  of  Tests  and  Integration  Activities 

38 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

February  4 

for  Skylab  Food  System  a t   MSC.  Winners,  selected  from  119  upper- 
grade   Federal  career  women  nominated,  would  be   honored  a t   Feb.  25  
dinner in  Washington,  D.C.  (Federal  T imes ,  2 /17 /71 ,3 ;   Dean, W Star, 
2/4/71,  C3) 
*  U.S.S.R.  would  spring  “Sputnik-like  surprises”  on  U.S.  this  decade  tha t  
could  make  major  U.S.  military  weapon  systems  technically  obsolete, 
Dr.  Eberhardt  Rechtin,  DOD  Principal  Deputy  Director  of  Defense 
Research  and  Engineering, told  Univ.  of  Southern  California  audience. 
U.S.  response  would  have  to  be  doubling  of  current  $7-billion-per-year 
defense budget.  (Tex t)  
February  5 .- President Nixon  telephoned MSC Director of  Flight  Crew  Opera- 
tions Donald K.  Slayton and  asked him  to  send President’s  congratula- 
tions  to  Apollo  1 4  astronauts  and  ground  crew.  Later  President  issued 
statement:  “Apollo  14’s  successful landing  on  the  moon  was  a  thrilling 
event  fo r   humanity.  I  congratulate  the  astronauts  and   also  the  thou- 
sands of  other  dedicated people who  helped make  this awesome achieve- 
ment possible.”  ( P D ,  2/8/71,  173)  
USAF’S  X-24A  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Cecil  Powell  (USAF ) ,  
successfully  completed  22nd  flight  a t   FRC.  Purpose  of  glide  flight  was 
to check out new  pilot.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
*  Government-industry program  for   development  of  experimental  je t   STOL 
a ircraf t  was  proposed  by  NASA  and   DOT  at meeting  of  NAE  Aeronautics 
and   Space  Engineering  Board  in   Washington,  D.C.  Program  would 
pool  Government  and  industry  funds  in   partnership  to   develop  low- 
noise-level  je t   STOL  technology.  Development  of  prototype  and  opera- 
tional  a ircraf t  for   commercial use  would  be  left  to  competitive  industry 
decision  and  financing.  NASA  later  said  development  of  experimental 
aircraft  was  necessary  to  complete  technology  and  proof-of-concept 
work  for  production  of  economically  and  environmentally  acceptable 
STOL a i r   transport  system.  Roy  P.  Jackson,  NASA  Associate  Adminis- 
tra tor   for  Advanced  Research  and  Technology,  estimated that  research 
a ircraf t   could  be  flight-tested  in  approximately  two  years  from  incep- 
tion  of  cooperative program.  (NASA   Release  71-20;  NAE  P IO )  
Collapsed  craters  formed  in  terrestrial  basalt  flows  near  Grants, N.  Mex., 
exhibited  size-frequency distributions  similar  to  those  for  craters  in 
terraces  on  inner  walls  of  lunar  crater  Copernicus, ARC   scientists  Ron- 
ald  Greeley  and  Donald  E.  Gault  reported  in   Science.  Similarities  sug- 
gested  Copernicus craters  had  origin  similar  to  basalt  collapse  craters. 
Scientists suggested that  interior  terraces  of  Copernicus were  lava  flows 
through  fractures  dur ing   postimpact  adjustments  after  formation  of 
Copernicus.  (Sc ience ,  2/5/71,477-9) 
Acid  hydrolysis,  vacuum  crushing,  and   vacuum  pyrolysis  experiments 
to  investigate  amount:  nature,  and   isotopic  composition  of  carbon  in 
Apollo  12 sample  12023  were  described  in  Science  by  A R C   exobiolo- 
gists  Sherwood  Chang,  Keith  A.  Kvenvolden,  James  G.  Lawless,  and  
Cyril  A.  Ponnamperuma  and  UCLA  geologist  I.  R.  Kaplan.  Results 
indicated  that  sample  contained  indigenous  carbide  and  methane  in  
amounts  comparable  to  those  found  in  Apollo  11  fines.  Hydrolyzable 
carbide  in   Apollo  12 sample was  heavier,  isotopically, than  any known 
carbide  phase  in   meteorites.  Large  difference  between  isotope  values 
for   lunar  and  meteorite  carbide  suggested “that  the  former  was  either 
native  to  the  moon  o r   deposited  by  meteorites  and   subsequently  sub- 

39 

February  5 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

jected  to isotope fractionation  processes  on  the lunar  surface.”  If  meteor- 
ites  were  not  source  of  lunar  carbide,  “then  w e   a re   left  with  the  pos- 
sibilities  tha t   the  carbides  represent  primordial  indigenous  lunar  car-  
bon,  however  formed, o r   the  product  of  interaction  between  solar  wind 
carbon  and  metals  or  metal  oxides  or  minerals  on   the  lunar  surface.” 
Evidence  existed  for  presence  of  carbides  in  Apollo  11  rocks  but 
amounts  were  too  low  for   isotopic  measurements.  “If  the  carbon  was 
indeed  indigenous  to  the  lunar  rocks,  the  observed  range  of  isotopic 
composition would  be more  representative  of  primordial  lunar carbon.” 
(Sc ience ,  2/5/71,474&) 
President  Nixon’s  FY  1972  science  budget  was  analyzed  in   Science: 
Budget  proposed  selective  increases  for  R&D  which  would  “start  the 
federal  science  budget  upward  again  after  several  years  of  virtually 
static  financing.”  Impact  in   FY  1972 spending  would  not  be  dramatic 
“since  there  is  a  lag  of  as much  as  2  or  3 years  between  the  obligation 
and  actual  spending”  but  budget  served  as  “declaration  of  intentions.” 
Nixon  Administration  showed  “inclination  to  maintain  high-quality 
capabilities  fo r   research  but  to  restrain  expansion  of  research  and, 
particularly,  of  manpower  training  except  in   areas  judged  to  contribute 
to  the  solution  of  major  nation  problems.”  Priorities  were  indicated 
by  choices  of  agencies  and  programs  for  major  increases:  NSF  budget 
would  exceed  $600  million  for  first  time,  with  major  portion  of  in- 
creases  going  to  additional  support  of  research  grants.  New  cancer 
research  program  would  receive  $100  million.  Substantial  increases 
would  provide  funds  for  research  on  environmental problems,  highway 
safety,  a i r   traffic  control,  and   crime reduction.  DOD  R&D  spending would 
be  increased with  additional  funds  split  between  work  on  strategic  and 
tactical weapons. 
Obligational  authority  for  total  Federal  science  budget  would  rise 
to  $16.7  billion  from  $15.6  billion  in   FY  1971, but  estimated expendi- 
tures  would  rise  only  from  $15.3  to  $15.6  billion.  NSF  would  get  new 
obligational  authority  of  $622 million  in  FY  1972 but would  spend  esti- 
mated $546 million.  (Sc ience ,  2 /5 /71 ,459-60)  
Astronomers  had  asked  Tucson,  Ariz.,  to  modify  its  outdoor  lighting  so 
their  view  of  heavens  would  not  be  obstructed  by  nighttime  glare, 
Science  reported.  Astronomers  at  Kitt  Peak  National  Observatory, 
National  Radio  Astronomy  Observatory,  Steward  Observatory,  Lunar 
and  Planetary  Laboratory,  and  Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observa- 
tory  had  complained.  (Bazell,  Science,  2/5/71,  561) ) 
February  6 :  N e w   Yo rk  T imes  editorial  commented  on  Apollo  14 lunar  land- 
ing :   ‘ L .  . . no  one  who  sat  entranced  before  the  picture  of  yesterday’s 
historic  events  can  have  doubted  that  Antares  has  scored  a  major 
triumph  in  the  effort to  advance lunar  exploration.  Today  Shepard  and  
Mitchell  will  face  new  problems  and  grasp  new  opportunities  as  they 
lope  their  way  toward  Cone  Crater  and  its  geological  riches.  These  two 
brave  and  highly  skilled  men-along  with  their  partner,  astronaut 
Roosa,  in   lunar-orbiting  Kitty  Hawk-are  writing  another  brilliant 
and   memorable chapter  in   man$  still-infant  probing  of  earth‘s  nearest 
neighbor  in  the  vast  reaches  of  space.”  ( N Y T ,  2/6/71,  28)  
February  7 :  RM  Radiation/Meteoroid  satellite  launched  pickaback  with 
Of0  satellite  Nov.  9,  1970,  reentered  atmosphere  and  disintegrated. 
Satellite  had  demonstrated that  advanced radiation  system was  feasible 

40 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

February 7 

and   accurate  and  had  verified  improved  instrumentation  for  measuring 
meteoroid  impact,  flux,  direction,  and  speed.  (NASA  Release  7 1 4 0 )  
February  7-8: U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1 lunar  rover,  which  landed  on  moon 
on  board  Luna  17 Nov.  18,  1970,  traveled  597  m  (653   yds)  across 
moon  dur ing   first  two  traverses  since  end  of  third  lunar   night.  (SBD, 
2 /10 /71 ,182)  
February  8:  ApoZZo  14  Astronauts Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  Edgar  D.  Mitchell, 
and  S tuar t   A.  Roosa  held  25-min  press  conference,  televised  from 
spacecraft  during  transearth  coast.  Mitchell  called  mission  “quite  a 
success”  in   spite  of  failure  to  reach  Cone  crater  dur ing   second  EVA: 
“I  think  the  majority  of  the  type  rocks  we  would  find  at  the  rim  were 
in   the  boulder  field  that  we  were  working,  although  i t   was  a  disap- 
pointment,  just  as  a  matter  of  challenge,  not  to  get  up  there.  I  think 
we  accomplished  the  scientific  objectives  that  we  went  for.” 
Shepard  explained major  problem was  “the  undulating  terrain where 
you  simply  couldn’t  see more  than  100 to  150 yards  [90 to  140 meters] 
away  from  you.  Consequently,  you  were  never  quite  sure  what  land- 
mark  would  appear  when  you  topped  the  next  ridge.  We  were  very 
surprised  when  we  . . . approached  the  ridge  which  we  thought  to  be 
the  rim  of  Cone  Crater,  to  find  there  was  another  one  behind  it.  And 
that  was  the  beginning  of  the  real  problem.  As  fa r   as  we  were  con- 
cerned,  our  only  problem  was   the  amount  of 
time  allotted  for  the 
excursion.  To  us  i t   was  just  a  matter  of  working  against  the  clock. 
I  don’t  believe  that  we  were  disoriented  or  lost  any  time.  I  think  i f  
we  had  wanted  to  reach  the  top  of  the  crater  and  did  nothing  else, 
that  we  could  have  done  that  within  the  time  period  allotted.  But  I 
think  the  method  to  which  we  reverted  . . . of  collecting  rocks  from 
a  point  not  quite  near  the  top  of  the  crater  provided  a  lot  more  geo- 
logically  and   gave  us  a  better  cross-section of  the  rocks  in   the  area  . . . 
than  had  we  gone  to  the  crater  and  back  and  not  collected  as  many 
rocks.”  (NYT,  2/9/71,  26 )  
*  Nutosat  2  military  comsat,  launched  by  NASA   for  USAF  and  NATO  Feb.  2, 
was  adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  Spacecraft  was  in  satisfactory  orbit 
and  was  functioning  normally.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
*  Aerobee  170 sounding  rocket  was  launched by  NASA  from  WSMR  carrying 
Univ.  of  Michigan  experiment  to  observe  airglow.  Rocket  and  instru- 
ments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR l is t)  
USN  P-3C  Orion turboprop  antisubmarine  aircraft, piloted  by  Cdr.  Donald 
€I. Lilienthal  ( USN) , broke  four  “time-to-climb”  records  by  climbing 
from  brake  release  to  3000  m  (9843  f t )   in  2  min  59  sec,  to  6000  m 
(19  685  f t )   in   5 min  48  sec;  to  9000  m  (29  528  f t )   in  10 min  31 sec, 
and  to  1 2 0 0 0  m  (39  370  f t )   in   19 min  53  sec.  Aircraft  also  posted 
new  maximum  altitude  record  for  its  cIass  of  1 4  050  m  (46  100  ft). 
( A I :  Mug, 7 /71 ,15 )  
Sen.  Clinton  P.  Anderson  (D-N.  Mex.),  Chairman  of  Senate  Committee 
on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences,  said  in  Washington,  D.C.,  that 
cutback  in  funding  for  NERVA  development  in   NASA  FY  1972  budget 
was  gross  error   reflecting  on  management  capability  of  NASA.  Cutting 
program  funding  to  $30  million  would  mean  virtual  halt  in   work  on 
NERVA.  (AP, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 2/9/71) 
*  NASA  announced  i t   had  awarded  Bellcomm,  Inc.,  17-mo,  $11.5-million 
extension  to  contract  for  systems  analysis,  study,  planning,  and  tech- 

41 

February  8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

nical  support  to  manned  space flight  program.  Extension,  which  would 
continue  through  May  1972,  brought  total  value  of  contract  since 
March  1962 to $91 million.  (NASA  Release 71-17) 
President  Nixon  sent  message  to  Congress  outlining  1971 environmental 
program.  Program  included  measures  to  strengthen  pollution  control, 
control  emerging  problems  including noise  pollution,  promote  environ- 
mental  quality  in  land  use  decisions,  further  institutional  improve- 
ment,  expand  international  cooperation,  and  establish  “World  Heritage 
Trust  to  preserve  parks  and   areas  of  unique  cultural  value  throughout 
the world.”  (PD, 2/15/71,187-204) 
February  8 -9 :   NASA  Aerospace  Advisory  Panel  met  a t   MSFC  to  discuss 
safety  aspects  of  LRV,  Skylab  spacecraft,  and   proposed  space  shuttle. 
(MSFC  Release  71-23) 
February  9 :   Following  Apollo  14   splashdown,  President  Nixon  telephoned 
Apollo  14   astronauts  aboard  recovery  ship  U.S.S.  New  Orleans  to 
express  personal  congratulations  on  successful  completion  of  mission. 
He  released  statement  comparing  Apollo  14  with  May  5,  1961, Free- 
dom  7 mission  flown  by  Astronaut Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr . :   “The  differ- 
ence  between  that  first  flight  and  this  latest  is  a  measure  of  how  fa r  
we  have  progressed  in   space  in  the  short  span  of  10  years.  But  two 
things  have  not  changed:  the  courage  and  determination  of  the  men 
who  fly  these  missions,  and  the  skill  and  dedication  of  the  thousands 
here  on  ear th   who  make  their  flights  possible.”  (PD,  2/15/71,  205) 
0  Cosmos 394  was  launched by  U.S.S.R.  into  orbit with  613-km  (380.9-mi) 
apogee, 572-km  (355.4-mi)  perigee,  96.5-min  period,  and 65.8O  inclina- 
tion.  (GSFC  SSR ,  2/28/71) 
lifting  body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Jerauld  R.  Gentry 
NASA’s M2-F3 
(USAF )  , successfully  completed  fifth  flight  after  air-launch  from  B-52 
aircraft  at  FRC.  Purpose  of  flight  was  to  compare  flight  characteristics 
of  M2-F3  with  those  of  M2-F2.  Maj.  Gentry was  only  active pilot  who 
had  flown  both  vehicles.  Mission  was  his  last  before  leaving  for  duty 
in  Southeast Asia.  (NASA   P ro j  Off) 
0  Rep.  George  P.  Miller  (D-Calif.),  Chairman  of  House  Committee  on 
Science  and  Astronautics,  introduced  H.R.  3981,  $3.271-billion  FY 
1972  NASA  authorization  bill.  Bill  authorized  appropriations of  $2.518 
billion  for  R&D,  $56.3  million  for  construction  of  facilities,  and  $697.4 
million  for  research  and   program  management.  ( C R ,  2/9/71,  H588; 
NASA  LAR x/11) 
Christian  Science  Monitor  editorial  commented : “Technically,  the  feats 
of  Apollo  1 4   . . . a r e   invaluable.  The  scientific  data  obtained  have 
opened  many  new  paths  to  broader  knowledge.  But  far   more  note- 
worthy  should  be  the  effect  which  these  can  have  upon  man’s  view 
of  his  place  and  role  in   the  universal  scheme.  I t   is  already  historical 
fact  that  America’s  space  program  has  helped  focus  sharper  attention 
on  challenges  a t   home.  This  is  bound,  in   the  long  run,  to  be  one  of 
the  program’s  greatest  contributions.”  ( CSM ,   2/9/71) 
Former  New  Mexico  Governor  David  F.  Cargo presented Apollo  I 1   moon 
fragments  to  Museum  of  New  Mexico  at  ceremony  in   Santa  Fe.  Later, 
AP   said  incumbent  Governor  Bruce  King  had  claimed  lunar   samples 
for  people  of  New  Mexico,  while  Cargo  said  they  had  been  presented 
to  him,  personally,  by  President  Nixon.  A P   said  White  House  records 

42 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

February 9 

showed  plaque  presented  with  moon  fragments  was  inscribed  “to  the 
people  of  the  State  of  New  Mexico.”  (AP,  IT’ Post,  2/11/71) 
DOD  said  USA  had   been  directed  to  continue  development  of  Hardsite 
Defense,  supplementary  ABM  system  that  included  modified  Sprint 
interceptor  missiles  and  smaller,  less  expensive  radars  than  those  used 
in   Safeguard  ABM  system.  (AP,  B  Sun,  2/10/71,  A l )  
February  10: Soviet  President  Nikolay Podgorny  sent  message  to  President 
Nixon:  “Please  accept  . . . our  congratulations on  the  successful  con- 
clusion  of  the  flight  of  the  spacecraft  Apollo  14 and   on  the safe  return 
of  the  American  astronauts.”  Tass  said  he  also  asked  President  Nixon 
(Reuters,  C T r ib ,  
to  forward  best  wishes  to  “courageous  crew.” 
2/11/71) 
European  interest  i n   U S .   space  program  had  “with  notable  exceptions” 
dwindled  since  Apollo  1 1 ’ s   first  lunar  landing  and   “trouble-fraught” 
Apollo  13,  New  York   Times said.  Despite  extensive  press  and  TV 
coverage,  Europeans had  taken  Apollo  14 for  granted.  “In   some  coun- 
tries  local  events  overshadowed  man’s  third  visit  to  the  moon,”  but  in  
West  Germany  opinion  poll  had   shown  that  64% favored  continuation 
of  manned  space  flights.  Frankfurter  R d s c h a u   editorial  had  said, 
“What  Shepard  and  Mitchell  carried  off  couldn’t  have  been  done  by 
a Lunokhod.” 
Polish  newspapers  had  given  equal  prominence  to  Lunokhod  1 and 
Apollo  14, but  stressed  technological  feat  of  unmanned  vehicle. 
Soviet  press  had  highlighted  Apollo  14  difficulties  to   suggest  supe- 
riority  of  unmanned  vehicles.  Soviet man  in   street  “seemed  bored with 
space  exploration,  although  some  Russians  went  out  of  their  way  to 
ask  Westerners  about  the  United  States  moonshot.”  Komsomolskaya 
Pravda ,   Soviet  youth  daily,  had  praised  astronauts’  “indisputable 
bravery.” 
In   U.K.  Apollo  14  had  been  overshadowed  by  unrest  in   Northern 
Ireland  and   collapse of  Rolls-Royce Ltd.  Live TV  coverage of  Apollo  14 
had  been  less  than  of  previous Apollo  missions. 
Earthquake  and   civil  disorders  had  crowded  Apollo  14  from  front 
page  of  Italian  newspapers,  and  Feb.  7  power  blackout  in   New  York 
had  received  as  much  space  as  launch.  Italian  radio  and   TV coverage 
had  been  thorough  but  audiences  seemed  smaller  than  for  previous 
Apollos.  Pope  Pau l   VI  had   praised  Apollo  14  as  advance  for  all  man- 
kind. 
I n   France  interest  had  waned  as  mission  progressed.  Newspapers 
and  TV  offered  comprehensive  coverage  but  “excitement  of  two  years 
ago”  had  vanished. 
Spaniards,  too,  were  losing  interest  in   space  exploration  and  public 
interest  had   declined  in  Hungary  and  Yugoslavia.  Communist  student 
leader  in  Zagreb  had  said,  “If  the  Americans  and   Russians  would 
cooperate  in   space  instead  of  carrying  their  rivalries  to  the  moon, 
maybe  there  could  be  some  scientific progress on  earth  and  maybe  the 
smaller  nations  could  be  helped  to  contribute  their  knowledge  instead 
of  being  shut  out  of  science  by  the  expense.”  ( N Y T ,  2/10/71,  24)  
Apollo  14  technical  problems  were  discussed  by  Dr.  George  M.  Low, 
Acting NASA  Administrator, in  interview published by New  York  T ime s :  
“I  feel  that  what  we’ve  seen  on  Apollo  14  is  about  the  number  of 
problems  one must  expect  on  any  given  flight  with  such  a  complicated 

43 

February  10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

piece  of  hardware.  Yet  the  spacecraft  design  is  such  that  i t  is  forgiving 
of  failures.  And  we  hope  we’ll  always  be  able  to  work  around   them 
and  press  on  with  the mission.”  (Witkin,  NYT ,   2/10/71) 
e  MSC  scientists  reported  instruments  left  on  moon  by  Apollo  astronauts  had  
apparently  survived  sudden  drop  in   temperature  dur ing   lunar   eclipse. 
Instruments  registered  no  unusual  seismic  events  or  radiation  fluxes 
dur ing   eclipse.  Temperature  a t   Apollo  12  site  dropped  from  348.9  K 
to  170.4  K  (-153’F), 
a  178.5  K  (321.3OF)  change.  Tem- 
(168.3’F) 
perature  a t   Apollo  14 site  dropped  from  341 K  (154.1’F) 
to  170.4  K 
( N Y T ,  2 /11 /71 ,40)  
(-153’F). 
*  Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  Director  of  Medical  Research  and   Operations, 
announced  at  MSC  tha t   Apo l lo   14 Astronaut  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  had 
become  first  man  to  gain  weight  while  in   space.  Other  two  crew 
members  had  lost  weight:  Edgar  D.  Mitchell  had  lost  0.5  kg   ( 1  lb )  
and   S tuar t   A.  Roosa  had  lost  4.5  kg  (10   lb s ) .   Shepard  had   gained 
0.5  kg  ( 1  Ib ) .   NASA  physicians  were  making  fluid  tests  on  astronauts 
to  determine  reason  for  weight  loss  dur ing   space  flight.  (Altman, 
N Y T ,  2 /11 /71 ,40)  
0  Milwaukee  Journal  editorial  on  Apo l lo   14  commented:  “The  real  return 
on  Apollo  lies  in  the  future-beyond 
the  more  difficult  missions  of 
flights  15,  16  and  17.  I t   is  in  Skylab,  reusable  space  shuttles  and  
sophisticated  space  stations  to  come.  I t   is  in   the  complex  monitoring 
of  the  earth  and  its  resources  from  space.  I t   is  in   the  co-operation 
and   internationalization  of  space  programs  tha t   appear  to  be  develop- 
to  replace  competition.  Here  is  the  payoff.  To   this 
ing-hopefully 
Apollo  14  and  its  crew  have  made  their  extraordinary  contribution.” 
( M J ,  2/10/71) 
0  NASA  announced  renaming  of  five  recently  reorganized  units  of  Office  of 
Advanced  Research  and   Technology  ( OART ) . Aeronautical  Research 
Div.  became  Aerodynamics  and  Vehicle  Systems  Div. ; Environmental 
Systems  and   Effects  Div.  became  Aeronautical  Life  Sciences  Div. ; 
STOL  Program  Office  became  STOL Technology  Office;  ATET  Program 
Office  became  Supercritical  Technology  Office;  and   Lifting  Body 
Program  Office became Entry Technology O5ce .  
Dr.  Leo  Fox,  Deputy  Director  of  Biotechnology  and   Human  Re- 
sources  Div.,  was  named  Director  of  Aeronautical  Life  Sciences  Div. 
(NASA   Special Release) 
*  NASA  announced  appointment  of  Harry   W.  Johnson,  Vice  President  for  
Engineering  i n   Gates  Learjet  Corp.’s  Aircraft  Div.,  a s   Director  of 
OART’S  Aeronautical  Propulsion  Div.  (NASA  Release  71-19) 
Sen.  Clinton  P.  Anderson  (D-N.  Mex.),  Chairman  of  Senate  Committee 
on  Aeronautical  and   Space  Sciences,  introduced  S.  720,  $3.271-billion 
FY  1972  NASA  authorization  bill,  identical  to  House  bill  introduced 
Feb.  9  ( C R ,  2/10/71,  S1193) 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  President  Charles  S.  Wagner  announced  that 
Lockheed  would  lay   off  up   to  6500  employees  a s   result  of  financial 
collapse  of  Rolls-Royce  Ltd.  British  concern  was  unable  to  make 
scheduled  deliveries  of  engines  for  Lockheed  L-1011  Tr iS tar   airbus. 
Lockheed  had  orders  for  178  TriStars  from  seven  airlines  and   three 
holding  companies  a t   approximately  $16  million  each.  (Witkin,  NYT ,  
2 /11 /71 ,67)  
Long Beach, Calif., Harbor  Commission refused  to  renew  Howard Hughes’ 

44 

ASTRONAUTiCS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

February  10 

lease  on  3-hectare  (7.2-acre)  site  where  eight-engine  wooden  flying 
boat  Spruce  Goose  had  been  in   hangar  for  more  than  23  yrs.  Lease 
would  be  terminated  on  Sept.  1 expiration  because  property  could  be  
more  profitably  developed  as marine  terminal.  Hughes  had  designed 
and   built  a ircraf t  a t  estimated $24-million  cost.  Aircraft,  67  m  (219 f t )  
long with  97.5-m  (320-ft)  wingspan,  had  been  flown  once,  by  Hughes 
Nov.  3,  1947.  I t   had  not  been  seen  by  public  since.  (UPI,  Y Post, 
2/12/71,  A8) 
*  President  Nixon  submitted  nomination  to  Senate of  Herbert  F.  DeSimone 
to  be  Assistant  Secretary  of  Transportation  for  Environment  and  
Urban  Systems.  (PD, 2/15/71,  209,  217)  
February  11: President  Nixon  signed  Seabed Arms  Control Treaty  in   State 
Dept.  ceremony  held  simultaneously with  ceremonies  in   Moscow  and  
London.  He  said:  “I t   has  been  very  properly  pointed  out  that  the 
seabed  is  man’s  last  frontier  on  earth,  and  that  frontier  can  either  be 
a  source  of  peril  or  promise.  By  the  signing  of  this  treaty,  we  have 
pledged  to  seek  its promise  and   to  remove  its peril.”  Treaty was  “indi- 
cation  of  progress  that  ha s   been  made  and   continues  to  be  made 
toward  the  goal  that  we  all  seek:  the  control  of  instruments  of  mass 
destruction,  so  that  we  can  reduce  the  danger  of  war.”  (PD, 2/15/71, 
211-2) 
Dr.  Robert  Jastrow,  Director  of  GSFC  Institute  for  Space  Studies,  was 
quoted  as  saying  in   London  that  people often  forgot  intelligence  factor 
in   debate  over  manned  versus  unmanned  space  missions.  Dr.  Jastrow 
had  pointed  out  that  by  time  unmanned  space  exploration  technology 
reached  level  of  achievement  already  exhibited  in   manned  exploration, 
lunar  exploration-or 
even  Martian  exploration-might 
haTe  advanced 
to  stage  of  extended  expeditions  or  space  station.  Then  human  per- 
formance  would  again  have  jumped  ahead  of  machines.  (Cowen,  CSM, 
2/11/71) 
February  11-12:  Delegation  from  11-nation  European  Space  Conference 
met  a t   Dept.  of  State  with  State  Dept.,  NASC,  and  NASA  officials  to 
continue  discussion  of  possible  cooperation  in  post-Apollo  space  pro- 
gram,  particularly  space  shuttle  and   space  station.  Conference  Presi- 
dent  The0  Lefevre,  Belgian  Minister  for  Scientific  Policy  and  Plan- 
ning,  in  address  raised  question  of  availability  to  European  nations 
of  U.S. 
launchers  if  European  collaboration  in   post-Apollo  projects 
failed  to  materialize,  o r   materialized  to  smaller  degree  than  U S .  
requested.  U.S.  condition  that  its  launch  vehicles  be  made  available 
only  for  uses  compatible  with  international  agreements  raised  diffi- 
culties  for  Europeans,  especially  since  Intelsat  agreement had  not  been 
completed.  ESC was  proposing  that  each  party  supply  its  partner  “with 
any  element  of  the  space  system  which  i t   is  asked  to  supply,  while 
leaving  to  its  partner  the  final  responsibility  for  complying with  the 
international  agreements it  has  undertaken.  . . . these  agreements a re  
identical  for  the  U S .   and   the  European  countries.” 
(Tex t ;   Joint 
Communiqu6 
February  12: LRL scientists  opened  first  box  of  lunar  samples  returned  by 
A p l l o   14 .   Samples  included  one  rock  almost  pure   white  with  some 
grey  flecks  and   one  with  10  times  more  potassium,  thorium,  and  
uranium  than   was  found  in   A p Z b  11 and   12 samples.  Dr.  Paul  Gast, 
Director  of  Planetary  and  Earth  Sciences  a t   MSC,  said  preliminary 

45 

February  12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

studies  of  samples were  “not  inconsistent”  with  idea  that  lunar  high- 
lands  might  represent  lunar  crust.  “If  this  additional  evidence  that 
the  (highlands)  materials  on  the  moon  contain  abundant  rocks  with 
high  potassium  and  high  uranium  and   high  thorium  . . . i t   means  the 
highlands  a re   almost  as  old  as  the  moon  itself.  What  we’re  saying  is 
that  there  is  a  layer  of  unknown  thickness  . . . on  the  surface  of  the 
moon  which  is  of  very  different  composition  than  the  average  moon.” 
(AP, W Star, 2/13/71,  A l )  
Apollo  14  Astronaut  Edgar  D.  Mitchell  had  tried  personal  experiment  in  
mental telepathy  dur ing  flight  to moon  and back, AP  reported.  Mitchell, 
who  had  life-long  interest  in  psychic  phenomena,  had  concentrated  at 
prearranged  times  on  symbols. Psychic  in  Chicago had  concentrated a t  
same time  in   attempt to  receive  signals.  Mitchell  confirmed that  he  had 
conducted  experiment,  but  declined  to  reveal  details.  (AP,  B  Sun, 
2/13/71,  A l )  
Analysis  of  low-frequency sound  from  Apollo  14  spacecraft  passing  188 
km  (117  m i )   over  Bermuda,  obtained  from  infrasonic  sensors  in   Ber- 
muda,  was  presented  in  Science  by  Columbia  Univ.  geologists.  Signals, 
reminiscent  of  N-waves  from   sonic  booms,  were  horizontally  coherent, 
had  nearly  identical  appearances  and   frequencies,  and  had  supersonic 
trace  velocities  across  tripartite  sensor  arrays.  They  had  identical  ar- 
rival  times  after  spacecraft  launch  from  ICSC  and  were  only  coherent 
signals  recorded over  many hours.  Observations “seem  to  establish  that 
the  recorded sound comes from the  rockets at high elevation”  but  values 
of  surface  pressure  appeared  explainable  by  combination  of  “kinetic 
theory  approach to  shock  formation  in   rarefied  atmospheres with  estab- 
lished  gas-dynamics shock  theory.”  (Cotten,  Donn,  Science,  2/12/71, 
565-7)’ 
Age  and  composition effects  on  alteration  of  lunar  optical  properties  were 
described  in  Science.  Evidence  from  Apollo  11 and  Apollo  12 samples 
and  telescopic  spectral  reflectivity  measurements  indicated  that  lunar 
seas  “are   similar  in  mineralogy  on  a  regional  scale  and   that  the   high- 
lands  are   consistent  with  an  anorthositic-gabbro  composition.  Bright 
craters  and   rays  in  both  regions  expose  materials  that  are  relatively 
crystalline  compared  with  their  backgrounds, which  are   richer  in   dark 
glass. With  age,  bright craters and  rays  in  the maria  darken  i n  place by 
meteorite impact-induced vitrification  and mixing with the  surrounding 
material.  Highland  bright  craters  and  rays  may,  however,  darken  pr i-  
marily  through  regional  contamination  by  iron   and   titanium  rich  m r e  
material.”  (Adams, McCord, Science,  2/12/71,567-71) 
*  MSFC   announced  appointment  of  Dr.  William  R.  Lucas,  Director  of 
MSFC’s  Program  Development  Directorate,  as  MSFC  Deputy  Director, 
Technical, effective  Feb.  15. Dr.  Lucas’  position  would  be  assumed by 
James  T.  Murphy  in   acting  capacity.  (MSFC   Release  71-25) 
*  NASA  announced  publication  of  second  annual  Research  and  Technology 
Operating  Plan  (RTOP)   Summary.  FY  1971 edition  identified  and  de- 
scribed  hundreds  of  NASA  research  and   technology  efforts.  (NASA  Re- 
lease 71-18) 
USN  announced cause of  Dec.  30,  1970, crash  of  F-14  Tomcat  fighter  a ir-  
craf t   on  second  test  flight  was  two  pencil-thin  hydraulic  lines  that  rup- 
tured  after  severe vibration.  Findings  confirmed  those  of  aircraft  man- 

46 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

February 12 

ufacturer,  Grumman  Aerospace Corp.  USN  said problem  could  be   cor- 
rected  without major  redesign  or  changes.  (AP,  NYT,  2/15/71,  44)  
Philadelphia  Evening  Bulletin  editorial  commented  on  signing  of  seabed 
treaty:  “A  quar ter   century  of  fear  and  mistrust  has  left  both  the  U.S. 
and  U.S.S.R.  with  vast  nuclear  power,  but  little  real  security.  The  Sea- 
bed  Treaty  is   not  going  to  reverse  this,  but  i t   is  one  more  slim  strand 
across  the  chasm  of  nationalistic  rivalry  upon  which  mankind  may 
eventually suspend a bridge.”  ( P  Bull, 2/12/71) 
February  13 :  President  Nixon  announced  intention  to   nominate  Apollo  14  
Astronaut  Edgar  D.  Mitchell  for  promotion  to  grade  of  captain  in  USN. 
Astronaut  S tuar t   A.  Roosa  had  been  promoted  by  USAF  to  grade  of 
lieutenant  colonel.  ( P D ,  2 /22 /71 ,266)  
NASA  released  9  color  photos,  1 4  black-and-white photos,  and   segment of 
16-mm film  taken  during  Apollo  14  mission.  Pictures showed  LM, foot- 
prints,  tire  tracks,  Astronauts  Shepard and  Mitchell  dur ing  EVA,  Ameri- 
can  flag  on  surface,  and  large boulders.  (AP, W  Star,  2/14/71,  A3) 
February  14 :  Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was  launched  by  NASA  from 
Fairbanks,  Alaska,  carrying  Rice  Univ.  experiment  to   conduct  aurora l  
studies.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (SR  l is t)  
*  Historical  value of  Apollo 14  was  appraised  by Thomas O’Toole  in  Wash- 
ington  Pos t   article.  Mission  “may  well  be   remembered  as  a  turning 
point  in  the  sense  that  i t   taught  man  what  his  role  could  be  in   the 
exploration  of  space.”  Apollo  11  and  Apollo  12  landings  had  been 
“feats  of  technology  tha t   showed  the  world  what  its  richest  nation 
could  do  when  i t   set  its  mind  to  something. Apollo  14 went  a  giant 
step  further,  to   a  place  where  man  might  appreciate  what  he  had  done 
and   what  he  could  do  in  the   fu ture   on  the  surface of  the  moon  o r   an-  
other planet.”  ( W  Post, 2/14/71,  C1) 
JPL announced  selection  of  Howard  H.  Haglund,  former  Surveyor project 
manager,  to  be  project  manager  for   DOT’S  People  Mover  transit  sys- 
tem  a t   Morgantown,  W.  Va.  Dr.  Albert  R.  Hibbs  would  be  deputy 
project  manager.  JPL   was  initiating  research  and  design of  automated, 
computer-controlled  system  under  $1 353 000  DOT  contract. 
( JPL 
Release  570)  
February  15 :  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.’s  second G l O l l  TriStar,  piloted  by 
Lockheed  test  pilot  Ralph  C.  Cokeley,  made  maiden  flight  from  Lock- 
heed  facility  at  Palmdale,  Calif.  Aircraft  was  flown  a t  speeds well  un- 
der   966-km-per-hr  (600-mph)  capacity  to  test  control  surfaces  and 
hydraulics  systems.  First  Tr iS tar   had  been  flown  Nov.  16,  1970.  (AP, 
B Sun, 2/16/71,  A6) 
Aviation  Week  & Space  Technology editorial  commented:  “Apollo  14 . . . 
demonstrated  tha t   man  still  has  much  to  learn  about  the  moon.  Even 
with  the  ability  to  land  in   relatively  rough  areas  and   to  extend  useful 
working  time  on  the  moon,  the  experience of  the  Apollo  14  duo  in  the 
F ra   Mauro  area   indicates  that  better  new  equipment  is  needed  to  ex- 
tend  the  range and  accuracy of  their explorations. And  once the  various 
typical  areas of  the  lunar  surface  are  reached  i t   is obvious that  vehicles 
with  payloads  much  larger  than  Apollo  will  be  required  to  haul  the 
equipment needed  to  establish  permanent  scientific working  stations  on 
the  lunar   surface.  For  not  until  that  is  accomplished  will  man  really 
begin  to  reap the full harvest of  knowledge from  his  lunar  capabilities.” 
(Hotz, A v  W k ,  2 /15 /71 ,9)  

47 

Februaq- 15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

British  A ircraf t  Corp.  said  in  London  that  Concorde test  flights had  “met 
with  success  unique  in   the  annals  of  commercial  aircraft  flight  devel- 
opment.”  BAC  chief  test  pilot  Brian  Trubshaw  told  press  conference he 
was  optimistic  since  British  and  French  prototypes had  flown  total  393 
hrs  56   min,  including  92  hrs   35  min  a t   supersonic  speeds.  Aircraft 
had  maintained  directional  stability  at  twice  speed  of  sound  and  on 
stalling  two  of  its  fou r   engines  a t   same  speed.  Modifications would 
be  made  on  nacelles  before next phase  of  test  flights because  of  Jan.  22  
incident  to  French  prototype  001 at mach  2  over Atlantic.  Air  pressure 
had  broken  off  forward  intake  ramp  of  No.  4  engine  and  engine  had 
fallen off  into sea.  (Berger, B Sun, 2/16/71,  C6) 
February  16:  Univ.  of Tokyo’s  Space and  Aeronautics  Institute  successfully 
launched  Japan’s  second  satellite,  63-kg  (139 - lb )   Tanse i   (MST-1)  , 
from  Uchinoura  Space  Center  with  four-stage  Mu-4S  booster.  Orbital 
parameters:  apogee,  1110  km  (689.7  m i ) ;   perigee,  990  km  (615.2 
m i )  ; period,  106 m in ;   and  inclination,  29.7O.  Puvpose  of  mission  was 
to  conduct  “engineering  test  for   the  launching  of  scientific  satellites.” 
Tanse i ,   “Light  Blue,”  was  named  fo r   Univ.  of  Tokyo  colors.  First 
satellite,  Ohsumi-named 
for   district  from  which  i t   was  launched- 
had  been  launched Feb.  11, 1970.  (UN  General Assembly  Release  71- 
03697;  SBD,  2/17/71,  211;  NASA  Off  In t   Aff;  W  Star,  2/16/71,  A7) 
Scientists  a t   MSC, after  studying Apo l lo   14 photos  and  questioning crew, 
reported  Astronauts  Mitchell  and  Shepard  had  turned  back  within 
25-50  m  (80-165  f t )   of  Cone  Crater  during  second  EVA  period.  Crew 
was  apparently  misled  by  slight  downhill  slope  around  top  of  Cone 
Crater  which  led  them  to  believe  it  was  not  part  of  crater. Ridge astro- 
nau ts   were  struggling  to  reach  appeared  to  have  been  southeast  of 
Cone.  (AP, B Sun, 2/17/71,  A l )  
0  European  Space Conference  President  The0  Lefevre,  Belgian  Minister  for 
Scientific Policy  and  Planning,  told  Brussels  press  conference that  U S .  
had  refused  at  Feb.  11-12  conference in  Washington, D.C.,  to  sell U S .  
launch  vehicles  fo r   European  comsats.  Lefevre  said  State  Dept.  had 
told  him,  however,  that  if  two  thirds  of  Intelsat’s  72  members  agreed 
that  launch  vehicles  should  be  so1cPU.S.  would  sell.  ( N Y T ,  2/17/71, 
1 4 ;  W Post, 2/17/71,  A13) 
*  NASA  announced  publication  of  Th i s   Island  Ear th   (NASA  SP-250).  Book, 
edited  by  L ~ R C  Deputy  Director  Oran  W.  Nicks,  contained  color  pho- 
tos  of  ear th   taken  on  U S .   space  flights.  In  foreword  Dr.  George  M. 
Low,  NASA  Acting Administrator,  said:  “Photographs  such  as  this  book 
contains  increase  our   understanding  of  the  relationships  between  our  
activities  and  our  environment.  I t   is  somewhat  paradoxical  that  man’s 
new  ability  to  voyage  in   space  has  provided  him  with  a  valuable  way 
to  appreciate  his  Earth.”  (NASA   Special Release,  2/16/71) 
February  17:  USAF  launched  four  satellites  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by  one 
Thor-Burner  I1 booster.  Unidentified satellite  entered orb i t  with  832.0- 
km  (517-mi)  apogee,  767.7-km  ( 4i77-mi)  perigee,  100.8-min  period, 
and  98.8’ 
inclination.  Ca l isphere   3,  4,  and  5-launched 
to  provide 
targets  for  radar  calibration  and  evaluate surface  material  erosion  and 
d rag   effects  vis-a-vis  their  inert  gold  or  aluminum  su r face s -en te red  
orbits  with  833.6-km  (518-mi)  apogee,  762.8-  to  772.5-km  (474-  to 
480-mi)  perigee,  100.8-min period,  and  98.8’ 
inclination.  (Pres   Rpt 
72 ;   SBD, 2 /18 /71 ,224)  

48 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

February  17 

Unidentified  satellite  launched  by  USAF  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by  Thor- 
Agena  booster  exploded  about  40 sec  after  liftoff. 
(UPI ,   W  Star, 
2/ 18/7 1 ) 
*  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  395  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  545-km 
(338.7-mi)  apogee,  529-km  (328.7-mi)  perigee,  95.3-min  period,  and  
74.0’  inclination.  (GSFC  SSR ,  2/28/71;  SBD,  2/19/71,  224)  
*  Presidential  Management  Improvement  Certificate  was  presented  to 
NASA  Interplanetary Monitoring Platforms  ( IMP )   Management Team  in 
NASA  Hq.  ceremony.  Award  was  for  “efficient  program  management and 
design  improvements which  permitted  deferment of  a  launch for   a  year 
while  maintaining  the  achievement  of  program  objectives.”  (NASA  Org 
& Mgmt Off) 
NAS  and  NAE   released  Jamaica  Bay  and  Kennedy  A i rpo r t :   A  Multidisci- 
plinary  Environmental  S tud y .   Report,  prepared  a t   request  of  Por t   of 
New  York  Authority,  recommended  against  expansion  of  John  F. 
Kennedy  International Airport.  “Any  runway  construction  will  damage 
the  natural  environment  of  the  Bay  and   reduce  its  potential  use  for 
conservation,  recreation,  and  housing.”  ( NAS-NAE  Release  2/17/71) 
*  U S .   Dept.  of  Justice  asked  Supreme Court  to  deny  atheist  Mrs.  Madalyn 
Murray O’Hair’s  request that  U S .   astronauts  be  prohibited  from under- 
taking  religious  activities  dur ing   lunar  missions.  Solicitor  Gen.  Erwin 
Griswold  said  astronauts  carried  only  personal  religious  items  which 
improved  their  morale  and  contributed  “to  the  success  of  the   flight.” 
(UPI,  H Post, 2/17/71) 
*  MSC  announced award  of  $800 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  to  Lockheed 
Electronics  Co.  for  first  year  performance  of  scientific  and  technical 
support  services  for   Earth  Resources Laboratory  a t  MTF.  (M S C  Release 
71-07) 
February  18:  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  396  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit 
with  268-km  (166.5-mi)  apogee,  189-km  (117.4-mi)  perigee,  89.0-min 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  March  3.  ( GSFC  SSR, 
period,  and   65.4’ 
2/28/71;  3/31/71;  SRD,  2/19/71,224) 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  A. 
USAF’S  X-24A 
Manke,  successfully  completed  23rd  flight  a t   FRC.  Objectives of  pow- 
ered  flight were  to expand flight envelope to mach  1.5,  determine lateral- 
directional  derivatives,  and  determine longitudinal  trim  and  lift-to-drag 
ratio  with  40° upper  flap  setting  and  0’  rudder  bias.  Pilot  performed 
pushovers,  pullups,  and  aileron  doublets  a t   a  number  of  angles  of 
attack.  (NASA   P ro j  Off) 
*  NASA  Contractor  Equal  Employment Opportunity Program   activities  were 
transferred  from  Procurement  Office  to  Industrial  Relations  Office. 
Joseph  M.  Hogan  would  continue  to  direct  group  and  would  report  to 
Robert  E.  King,  Director  of  Industrial  Relations.  Personnel  and  func- 
tions  concerned with  participation  of  minority-owned business  in  NASA 
procurements would  remain  in  Procurement Office.  (NASA  Special Ann) 
NASA  selected Wyle Laboratories  to  receive cost-plus-award-fee contract  fo r  
instrument  repair,  maintenance, and   calibration  services  a t  L ~ R C .  Con- 
tract  was  for  one year  with  two  one-year  renewal  options  a t   $7.5  mil- 
lion for  three  years.  (NASA  Release 71-22) 
February  19 :   President  Nixon  was  expected  to   name  Univ.  of  Utah  Presi- 
dent,  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  a s   NASA  Administrator,  Washington Post 
reported.  Dr. Fletcher,  a  physicist,  had  been  an  aerospace executive  and 

49 

February  19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

consultant  to  NACA,  DOD,  and   President’s  Science Advisory  Committee. 
(O’Toole,  JV  Pos t ,  2/19/71,  A l )  
*  Evidence of  nature  of  clouds of  Venus  derived  from  comparing  polariza- 
tion  observations with  theoretical  calculations  was  reported  in  Science 
by  James  E.  Hansen  and  Dr.  Albert  Arking  of  Goddard  Institute  fo r  
Space  Studies.  Linear  polarization  of  sunlight  multiply  scattered  by 
atmosphere  and   Venus  cloud  particles  had  been  computed  and   com- 
pared  with  observations  over  wavelength  range  from  uv to  infrared 
region.  Refractive  index  of  cloud  particles  was  1 . 4 5 t   0.02  a t   0 . 5 5 , ~  
wavelength.  There  w a s   indication  of  slight  decrease in value  from   uv 
to  near-infrared  region;  mean  particle  radius  was  very  near  l p  and 
most  of  particles  were  spherical.  Cloud  layer  occurred  high  in   atmos- 
phere  where  pressure  was  about  50 millibars  o r   equivalent  to  approxi- 
mately  20-km  (12.4-mi)  altitude  on  earth.  Results  fo r   index  of  refrac- 
tion  eliminated  possibility  that  visible  clouds  were  composed  of  pure 
water  or  ice.  Aqueous  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid  and  carbon  sub- 
oxide  “are  not  absolutely  excluded,  but  the  liklihood  for  either  is  not 
high.  A  new  look  a t   the  question of  the  Venus  cloud  composition  seems 
in  order.”  (Science, 2/19/71,669-72) 
Boosted  Arcas  I  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill 
Research Range carrying Univ.  of Houston  experiment to  measure low- 
altitude x-ray spectrum and  electron  flux  above 30 500 m  (100 000  f t ) .  
Rocket  reached  59.1-km  (36.7-mi)  altitude  and  mission  was  100% 
successful.  (NASA   Rpt SRL)  
*  ComSatCorp reported  net  income  fo r   1970 was  $17 501  000  ($1.75  per 
sh a r e ) ,   up  from  $7 129  000  (71   cents  per  share)   for  1969.  Operating 
of  $22 564  000 
revenues  for  1970  reached  $69 598 000-increase 
(48%  )  over  $47 034 000  received  in   1969.  ( ComSatCorp  Release 
71-10) 
Ten  Western  European  nations  agreed  to  cooperate  in  building  300-bev 
particle  accelerator  on  frontier  between  France  and   Switzerland. Accel- 
era tor   would  fit  into  tunnel  forming  2-km  (11/4-mi)  ring.  Decision  to 
proceed  with  $260-million  project  had  been  awaited  since  1964. 
( N Y T ,  2 /20 /71 ,28)  
*  The  Decision To Go  to  the Moon, book  by  John M. Logsdon, was  reviewed 
in   Technology  Rev iew:   “Logsdon  has  done  a  considerable  service  in 
pulling  together  the  elements  of  the   histories  of  official U.S.  space pol- 
icy,  of  .GermamAmerican  rocket  engineering and   the  obsessive  aiming- 
for-the-stars that  went  with  it,  of  congressional enthusiasm  for   extra- 
terrestrial  responsibilities,  and  finally  of 
the  months  of  Kennedy’s 
greatest  vulnerability.  The  factual  part  of  the  book  leaves  one  ready 
to  draw  one’s  own  conclusions.”  Review  had  concluded  “that  we  can- 
not  hope  for   any  useful  Apollo-sized  program  in   the  absence  of  any 
counteEpart  of  the  von  Braun  team,  tirelessly  bringing  to  perfection  a 
thing  that  had  not  been  asked  for.’’  (Wheeler, Tech  Rev ,   2 /19 /71 ,22)  
February  20:  National  Urban  Coalition  released  C o z m t e r b u d g e t A   Blue- 
pr in t   f o r   Changing  National  Priorities,  1971-1976.  Report  noted  d i-  
minishing  public  support  for   science and  technology  and   recommended 
4%   increase  in  R&D  funding  to  prevent  deterioration  of  Government’s 
role  in  science and technology  in national  affairs. Space program  should 
be  kept  a t   funding  level  jus t   over  $3 billion,  rather  than  Qg5.9-billion 
level  reached  in  1966.  Space  shuttle  and  station  programs  should  be 

50 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

February 20 

continued  but  on  stretched  schedule.  Mars  mission  should  be  under- 
taken  only  when  i t   could  be  done  internationally.  Value  of  space  pro- 
gram  as  whole  lay  in   its  scientific yield,  practical  results,  and   national 
leadership.  ( C R ,  5/21/71,  ELE836-98;  NUC   PIO) 
Award  of  contracts  up  to $100 000 each  to  LTV  Aerospace  Corp.  and  Rohr 
Corp.  for  preparation  of  proposals  for  installation  of  tracked  a i r   cush- 
ion  vehicle  ( TACV )   system  along access  road  to Dulles Airport  in   Chan- 
tilly,  Va.,  was  announced by  DOT.  Negotiations for   similar contract  with 
Grumman Aerospace  Corp.  were continuing.  (DOT  Release  3071) 
February  21 : Aerobee  350  sounding  rocket,  launched  by  NASA  from  Wal- 
lops Station  a t  7:43  pm  EST,  carried 440.4-kg  (971 - lb )   Columbia Univ. 
payload  to  196.3-km  (122-mi)  altitude to   search  for  x-ray  polarization 
of  Crab  Nebula.  Rocket  and   instruments-including 
two  polarimeters 
sensitive  to   x-rays  a t   2.6  kev  and  5.25  kev-functioned 
satisfactorily. 
Payload  recovery  would  be  attempted  after  daybreak  Feb.  22.  (WS  
Release 71-1  ) 
Text  of  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  interview  by  West  German  magazine 
Der  Spiegel  was  released  to  U.S.  press.  NASA  Associate  Administrator 
for  Planning  was  convinced tha t   in   20  yrs  “we  shall  have  reached  the 
point  where  space  travel  will  earn   more  than  i t   is  costing.”  Earnings 
from “bread and butter  programs”--comsats,  weather-monitoring space- 
craf t ,   and   ERS  satellites-could  pay  for  permanent  lunar  bases  and 
manned  exploration  of  Mars.  “Most  important  product  of  the   seven- 
ties”  would  be  application  of  “all that the space program has taught  us.” 
(Wilford, NYT,  2 /21 /71 ,75)  
*  L a R c  engineers were  using  automobile fitted with  diagonal braking  system 
to  measure  slipperiness  of  wet  runways  and  predict  aircraft  stopping 
distance  to  prevent  accidents,  NASA  announced.  Technique  could  pro- 
vide  data  for  realistic  calculations  of  crosswind  limitations.  Stopping 
distances  of  car  were  measured from  97-km-per-hr (60-mph)  speed  for  
skidding  locked  wheels  on  we t   and  dry   runways. Tests showed  ratio  of 
wet-to-dry  stopping  distances  fo r   auto  correlated  well  with  those  of 
representative  aircraft.  (NASA  Release 71-21) 
February  22 :   Portable  magnetometer  carried  during  Apollo  14   EVA  had 
detected  unexpected  bulge  in   moon’s  magnetic profile,  ARC  announced. 
Data  indicated  lunar  magnetic  field  a t   point  297  m  (325   yds)  north- 
east  of  Apollo  14   landing  s i te   was  about  100  g a m m a e t h r e e   times 
higher  than  measurements a t   Apollo  12  site.  Another  reading,  457  m 
(500 yds)  away near  edge of  Cone  crater, measured  about 40  gammas. 
( A R C   Release,  7 1 4 )  
First  flight  model  LRV  had  begun  six-week  acceptance testing  by  Boeing 
Co.  preliminary  to  scheduled  delivery  to  NASA  on  April  1, NASA  an-  
nounced.  Model  would  transport  two  astronauts  on  three  extravehicu- 
l a r  traverses  during Apollo  15  mission  in  July.  Second LRV  flight model, 
being  built  at  Boeing,  was  scheduled for  testing  in   last  week  of  March 
and   fo r   April  delivery.  Third  model  was  scheduled  for  May  delivery. 
(NASA  Release 71-25) 
Julian  Scheer  resigned  position  a s  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Pub-  
lic  Affairs. He  had  joined  NASA  as consultant  in   November  1962  and  
directed  NASA  public  affairs  activities  since November  1963.  Announc- 
ing  %beer's  resignation  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  Acting  NASA  Administra- 
tor,  said,  “Under  Julian  Scheer’s  leadership,  the  story  of  ou r   achieve- 
51 

February  22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

ments  in  space has  been  told  well,  and  the  public  was  fully  and   openly 
informed.”  Under  Scheer’s  direction,  NASA  had   handled  press  require- 
ments  for   Apollo  flights,  including worldwide  communications network 
for  disseminating  live  TV  photos  from  moon;  developed  worldwide 
exhibit  program;  begun  regular TV  and  radio network  services ; started 
publications  program;  produced  more  than  100 major  films  on  NASA 
programs ; and  developed  education program.  (NASA  Release  71-26) 
President  Nixon  accepted  resignation  of  Apollo  11 Astronaut  Michael 
Collins  a s   Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Pub l ic   Affairs  effective 
April  11.  Collins  would  become  Director  of  Smithsonian  Institution’s 
National Air  and   Space Museum.  (PD, 3/1/71,  384) 
Aerobee  350  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops  Sta- 
tion  carrying Columbia Astrophysics  Laboratory payload to  study x-ray 
polarization. Mission was  unsuccessful.  (SR list) 
Reuters  quoted  sources as  saying DOD would  pay  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp. 
$10  million  incentive  award  to  1969  $1-billion  contract  for  develop- 
ment  and  first  year  production  for  superior  work  on  Poseidon  missile. 
Award  increased  contract  price  from  $70  million  to  $80  million. 
Lockheed  had  bettered  contract’s  specifications  for  delivery  schedule, 
reliability,  and range.  (NYT, 2 /23 /71 ,41)  
February  23:  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  Acting  NASA  Administrator,  testified 
before  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  and 
Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  on  NERVA   space  nuclear  propul- 
sion  program:  “AS we  prepared  our  FY  1972 budget  request,  we  were 
faced  with  one  of  three  choices  for  NERVA”-to 
continue  with  full 
scale  development  of  flight  engine;  proceed  a t   reduced  rate,  empha- 
sizing  technology  and  long-lead  time  development;  or  cancel  NERVA 
program.  “Because  there  is  simply  no  need  to  proceed  with  full  scale 
development  now,  and  in   view  of  fiscal  constraints,  we  decided  to  . . . 
continue  with  the  development  of  long  lead  items  and  technology,  but 
to  not  proceed  with  the  full  development  effort.  This  will  preserve  the 
technology  that  has  already  been  gained,  and  the  hard  core  capability 
that  now  exists,  without  requiring  a  major  expenditure  of  funds.” 
NASA  and  AEC   support  of  NERVA  project  was  “clear  example  of  sus- 
tained  support  over  many  years  of  an   advanced  development  even 
though  we  have  not  yet  come  to  the  point  of  proposing  the  specific 
missions  on  which  i t   would  be  used.”  While  best  chemical  propulsion 
systems  operated  a t   specific  impulse  of  450  sec,  “with  nuclear  pro- 
pulsion  we  have  demonstrated  . . . equivalent  specific  impulse  of  825 
seconds  and  have  every  confidence  that  the  technology  we  are   develop- 
ing   . . . can  raise  this  to  a t   least  900  seconds.  Thus ,   our  justification 
for  the  large  and   continuing  investment  in   the  NERVA  program  is  that 
we  have  a  way  of  breaking  one  of  the  principal  limiting  constraints 
on  space flight by  doubling our  propulsion efficiencies for  many  impor- 
tant classes of  large  space missions.” 
Dr.  Low,  in  response  to  questions,  testified  that  NASA  plan  to  stretch 
out  NERVA  development  program  would  necessitate  immediate  employ- 
ment  cutback  from  2500 persons  to  800.  U S .   had  invested  $1.4  billion 
in   NERVA  since  1955.  (Transcript;  W Post,  2/24/71;  B  Sun, 2/24/71, 
A7 1 
Milton  Klein,  Manager,  NASA-AEC  Space  Nuclear  Systems  Office, 
testified on  NERVA  program  status:  “Eighteen  rocket  reactors  have  been 

52 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

February 23 

tested,  each  adding  importantly  to  our  knowledge.  Two  experimental 
engines,  which  couple  the  reactor  with  the  other  principal  components 
necessary  to  form  a  complete  nuclear  rocket  engine,  have  been  oper- 
ated.  The  last  of  these  engines, XE,  was  started  up  28   times  and  tested 
over  a  wide  variety  of  conditions.  We  have  accumulated over  14 hours 
of  system  operating  experience,  including  more  than  four  hours  at  or 
near  design  power.’’  Specific  impulse  “of  825  seconds  has  been  dem- 
onstrated  for  extended  durations  in   a  flight  size  reactor.  A  range  of 
thrust  levels,  including  75,000  pounds  [34,000  kg],  has   been  demon- 
strated  over  a  wide  range  of  conditions,  including  the  ability  to 
throttle  down  to  about  one-half  design  thrust  a t   full  specific  impulse. 
The  ability  to  stop  and  s tar t   a t   will  has  been  demonstrated.  Finally, 
this  system  has  proved  to  be  quite  predictable,  an   important  feature 
from  a  development  and  operational  standpoint.  All  of  the  technology 
goals  of  the  program  have  been  met  and  the  potential  for  perform- 
ance growth  shown.”  (Transcr ip t)  
Activity  a t   Shuang-ch‘eng  spaceport-from  which  Chinese  Communists 
launched  Chicom I on  April  24,  1970-indicated 
imminent  launch  of 
another  satellite,  according  to  sources quoted  in   Washington Post.  US. 
space specialists  had  said  second  Communist  Chinese  launch  would  be 
further  proof  of  steady  scientific  progress  regardless  of  internal  politi- 
cal  turmoil  in   Red  China.  (Wilson, W   Post,  2/23/71,  A16) 
Citizens  Bank  and  Trust  Co.  of  Maryland  would  submit  requests  for 
space-derived technical  information  to  NASA’s Regional  Dissemination 
Centers,  NASA  announced.  NASA  centers  would  advise  bank’s  patrons 
as  to  available  data  and  outline  charges  to  cover  service  cost.  (NASA 
Release  71-23) 
February  24:  NASA  development  of  short-haul  jet  transportation  system was 
discussed  by  Dr.  George M.  Low,  Acting  NASA  Administrator,  a t  Coun- 
cil  for  Advancement  of  Science  Writing  Seminar  on  Science  and  
Public  Policy  in   Washington, D.C.:  “We  estimate  that  the  market  for 
short-haul  transportation  will  approach  40  billion  passenger  miles  by 
1980,  and  may  well  be  between  100  and  300  billion  passenger  miles 
by  1995.  The  problems  of  developing  such  a  system  are   exceedingly 
complex.  Involved  a r e   a ircraf t ,   airways,  airports,  avionics,  ground 
transportation,  and   appropriate  regulations.  To  be  acceptable,  the  sys- 
tem  must  be  low  in  noise,  low  in  pollution,  and   low  in   its contribution 
to  the  congestion  of  local  transportation.  The  service  must  be   easily 
accessible,  dependable,  and  comfortable. And  the  fare  must  be  reason- 
able.”  If  development  were  to  take  normal  course,  “it  would  move 
ahead  very  slowly.  And  in   the  meantime,  a  domestic  need  would  go 
wanting.”  Foreign  competition,  with  funding  by  foreign  governments, 
“would  step  in  to  fill the  gap.” 
“Here  we  have  a  good  case  where  the  government  should  help. 
The  need  exists;  an   integrated  approach  involving  government  and 
industry  is  required;  and  the  initial  development  risk  is  high.”  DOT 
was  responsible  for  overall  short-haul  transportation  system ; NASA  had 
responsibility  for  developing experimental  research  aircraft.  “But  NASA 
will  not  do  this  alone;  we  intend  to  approach  this  development  in 
partnership-a 
joint  enterprise-with 
industry.  NASA  and   industry  will 
share  the  development  responsibility  . . . and  costs.  The  production 
airplanes  . . . will  be  built  by  industry  on  a  purely  commercial,  com- 
53 

February  24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

petitive  basis.  But  the  government  will  have  served  the  industry  in  
speeding  the  commercial  availability  of  the  aircraft,  and   will  have 
served  the  people  by  speeding  the  availability  of  a  needed  service.” 
(Text) 
NASA  launched  three  sounding  rockets.  Arcas  launched  from  Barking 
Sands,  Kauai,  Hawaii,  carried  GSFC  experiment  to  56.7-km  (35.2-mi) 
altitude  to  obtain  ozone  measurements  in  conjunction with  Nimbus  IV  
overpass.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily  and  pay- 
load was recovered  successfully. 
Black  Brant  VB,  launched  from  Wallops  Station  a t   8:14  pm  EST, 
carried  216.8-kg  (478-lb)  NRL  instrumented  telescope  to  281.6-km 
(175-mi)  altitude  for  infrared  astronomy  studies. Telescope was  double- 
walled  with  unique  helium  cooling  system  that  maintained  unit’s  tem- 
perature  a t   5.4  K  (-450’F) 
to  prevent  telescope’s  own  radiation  from 
interfering  with  measurements.  Rocket  and  instruments  functioned 
satisfactorily;  payload  would  be  recovered  after  daylight  Feb.  25. 
Aerobee  150,  launched  from WSMR,  carried  ARC  experiment to  study 
micrometeorites.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily. 
(NASA   Rpt  SRL;  WS  Release  71-2;  SR  l is t)  
*  ComSatCorp  announced election  of  John  L.  Martin,  Jr.,  as  Assistant  Vice 
President  for  Domestic  and  Aeronautical  Satellite  Systems.  (ComSat 
Corp Release  71-11) 
*  Crises  facing  airlines  in  early  1960s  and   1970s were  contrasted  by  Floyd 
D.  Hall,  Chairman  and   Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Eastern  Airlines, 
Inc.,  in  speech  before  northeast  region  of  Aviation/Space  Writers 
Assn.  in   New  York.  Jet  aircraft  had  offered  “radically  improved  seat- 
mile  factor”  in   1960s.  There  were  no  appreciable  unit-cost  savings  in 
wide-bodied  equipment  of  1970’s.  “In   sharp  contrast  with  a  decade 
ago,  technology  promises  little  help.”  Economists  were  predicting  no 
general  economic  boom  of  mid-1960 proportions  for  at  least  five  years 
and   there  was  “no  traffic  surge in   sight  so  great  as  to  mask  or  counter- 
balance  our  other  problems.”  There  was  “new  and  ominous  militancy” 
in  labor  outlook  which  had  “sent  costs  soaring  . . . at  rate  greater  than 
normal  even  in  our  inflation-ridden  economy.”  In   1959, U S .   trunkline 
aviation  industry  had  been  committed  to  $1.7  billion  in   new  aircraft. 
“Ten  years  later,  in  1969, w e   were  committed  to  $4.7  billion-$6 
bil- 
lion  when  the  cost  of  spares  and  associated  ground  equipment is  added 
- - o r  more  than  three  times  as much.  The  value  of  flight  equipment on 
order  at  the  end  of  1969 . . . equals  nearly  87  percent  of  the  net  book 
value  of  existing  flight  equipment.  The  total  commitment  amounts  to 
more  than  the  debt and   equity  capital  of  all  eleven  trunklines  combined 
a s   of  year-end  1969.”  I n   1960s  “when  airlines  sought  new  capital  to 
finance  their  new  jet  fleets,”  capital  had  been  more  readily  available 
and   airlines  were  able  to  compete  for  it  against  other  industries  on 
C I  
fairly  favorable  terms.  Today  we,  a  high-risk  industry,  are   competing 
for  i t   against  low-risk  industries,  and  a t   a  time  when  the  availability 
of  capital is limited.”  (Tex t)  
February   25:  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  397  into  orbit  with  2241-km 
(1392.5-mi)  apogee,  584-km  (362.9-mi)  perigee,  113.8-min  period, 
and 65.8” inclination.  ( GSFC  S SR ,  2/28/71  ) 
President  Nixon  addressed  Nation  by  radio  upon  transmitting  foreign 
policy  report  for  1970s  to  Congress:  “Over  the  past  two  years  in 

54  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

February 25 

some  fields  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  United  States  have  moved  ahead 
together.  We  have  taken  the  first  step  toward  cooperation  in  outer 
space.  We  have  both  ratified  the  treaty  limiting  the  spread  of  nuclear 
weapons.  Just  2  weeks  ago,  we  signed  a  treaty  to  prohibit  nuclear 
weapons  from  the  seabeds.”  Most  significant  result  of  negotiations 
between  U S .   and   U.S.S.R. 
in   past  year  “could  be  in   the  field  of 
arms   control.”  SALT  had  produced  “most  searching  examination  of 
the  nature  of  strategic  competition  ever  conducted  between  our  na- 
tions.,’  If  talks  continued  in   cooperative  vein  there  was  “reason  to 
hope  that  specific  agreements will  be  reached  to  curb   the  arms  race.” 
( P D ,  3/1/71,298-304) 
*  President  Nixon  transmitted  to  Congress  second  annual  report  on  foreign 
policy,  Un i ted   States  Foreign  Po l icy   for  the  1970’s:  Building  for 
Peace:   Space  was  “clearest  example  of  the  necessity  for  international 
scientific  cooperation  and  the  benefits  that  accrue  from  it.  The   world 
community  has  already  determined  and  agreed  that  space  is  open  to 
all  and   can  be  made  the  special  province  of  none.  Space  is  the  new 
frontier  of  man,  both  a  physical  and  an  intellectual  frontier.  . . . As 
mutual  help  and   cooperation  were  essential  to  life  on  the  American 
frontier,  so  i t   is  on  the  frontier  of  space.  I t   is  with  that  sense  that 
we  approach  the  sharing  of  both  the  burdens  and  the  fruits  of  our 
space  activity.  . . . We  have  some  250  agreements with  74  countries 
covering space cooperation.”  Space was  “the  only  area  of  which  i t   can 
be  literally  said  that  the  potential  for  cooperation is  infinite.  . . . We 
have  opened  virtually  all  of  our  NASA  space  projects  to  international 
participation.” 
President  said  he  would  submit  to  Senate  shortly  ICAO  treaty  which 
recognizes  aircraft  hijacking  a s   a  crime  .  .  . and   ensures  that 
L <  
hijackers  will  be  subject  to  prosecution  or  extradition  i f   apprehended 
on  the  territory  of  contracting  states.”  U.S.  intended  “to  exert  every 
effort  to  ensure  the  widest  possible  international  acceptance  of  this 
convention.” 
President’s  report  said  i t   was  “settled  U.S.  policy  to  encourage 
international  cooperation  in   basic  science.”  Closely  allied  was  national 
policy  on  technology  exchange.  U S .   preeminence  in  both  fields  posed 
question  as  to  extent  of  its  sharing  scientific  and  technological  knowl- 
edge.  “There  a re   obvious  security  implications  in   many  technological 
developments,  for  example  in   the  nuclear and  space fields.”  U.S.  policy, 
however,  “is  to  keep  those  areas  as  circumscribed  as  possible,  and   to 
take  the  leadership  in   encouraging  the exchange of  scientific  and   tech- 
nological information.”  (PD, 3/1/71,305-77) 
0  Appointment  of  Dr.  Marshall  E.  Alper,  Manager  of  JPL’S  Applied 
Mechanics  Section  since  1964,  to  succeed  Howard  H.  Haglund  as 
Manager  of  JPL’S  Civil  Systems  Project  Office  was  announced  by  Dr. 
William  H.  Pickering,  JPL   Director.  Haglund  had  been  appointed 
Project  Manager  of  DOT’S  automated  transit  system,  JPL’S  principal 
civil systems project.  ( J P L   Release 571) 
February 25-26:  Crew  station  review,  during  which  stowed  equipment was 
fitted  to  first  flight  model  LRV  for  first  time,  was  held  a t   Boeing  plant 
in   Kent,  Wash.  Review  concentrated  on  manual  tasks of  astronauts  in  
setting  up  and  operating  LRV.  Activities  included  fitness  checks  of 
hardware  to  be  installed  on  LRV  after  deployment  from  LM,  walk- 

55 

February  25-26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

through  rehearsal  of  manual  loading  and   preparation  of  LRV  equip- 
ment,  and   reverification  of  relationships  between  stowed  components 
and  LRV.  (MSFC   Release 71-33) 
February  26: Cosmos 398  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  into orbit with  232-km 
(144.2-mi)  apogee,  191-km  (118.7-mi)  perigee,  89.0-min  period,  and  
5 1 . 6 O   inclination.  (GSFC  SSR ,  2/28/71) 
NASA’s M2-F3  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  test  pilot  William  H.  Dana, 
completed  sixth  flight  after  a i r   launch  from  B-52  a ircraf t   over  FRC. 
Objectives  were  to  obtain  M2-F3  and  B-52  adapter  compatibility  by 
captive  flight  a t   9000-m  (30000 - f t )   altitude  and   mach  0.46  to  0.67, 
expand  flight  envelope  to  mach  0.85  by  climbing  to  13 700  m  (45  000 
f t )   and  releasing  M2-F3,  obtain  stability  and  control  data  a t  mach  0.8, 
investigate  lateral  phugoid,  and   obtain  performance  da ta   a t  mach  0.8. 
Alternate  flight  plan  was  flown  after  one  of  three  engine  chambers 
malfunctioned,  but  vehicle  reached  mach  0.8  and  most  objectives  were 
achieved.  (NASA   P ro j  Off) 
OLeRC  announced  it  was  accurately  producing  and   measuring  surface  con- 
tamination  to  spacecraft  by  harsh  elements  in   outer  space  under  simu- 
lated  space vacuum  conditions  in  liquid-helium-cooled  space tank  linked 
to  computer.  Facility  could  achieve  and   maintain  very  high  vacuum. 
LeRC  Aerospace  Environment  Branch  also would  study  effect of  exhaust 
from  small  reactor  control  thruster-like 
those  used  for  Apollo  attitude 
control-on 
optical  properties  of  nearby  surfaces  in  space,  such  as  
Skylab surface.  (LeRC Release 71-6) 
0  UPI  released  rare   photo  of  sun  in   which  silhouette  of  jet  aircraft  created 
optical  illusion  that  sun  was  only  five  times  wider  than  aircraft.  Photo, 
showing  sun  spots  as   black  patches  and  large   white  areas  described 
as   possible  incipient  solar  flares,  was  taken  by  Pennsylvania  State 
Univ.  astronomers  using  special  filters  on  automatic  camera. 
(U P I  
Photo  E d )  
NASA  announced  availability  to  general-aviation  manufacturers  of  A 
S tudy   of  NACA   and  NASA   Pablished  Information  of  Pertinence  i n  
the  Des ign   of  Light  Aircraft,  Volumes  I ,   11,  and   111.  Information  on 
structural  design,  propulsion  subsystems,  landing-gear  loads,  flutter, 
refined  performance  calculation  procedures,  and   high-horsepower  pro- 
pellers  was  obtained  from  1 0  000  aeronautical  documents  that  NASA 
had  organized,  cataloged,  and   evaluated.  (NASA   Release  71-27) 
The  Supersonic  Transpor t ,  study  by  George  N.  Chatham  and   Franklin  P. 
Huddle,  was  released  by  Science  Policy  Research  Div.  of  L ibrary   of 
Congress  Congressional  Research  Service.  Study  found  many  uncer- 
tainties  concerning  SST:   “as  to  the  verity  of  the  competition  from  for- 
eign  SST  developments;  as  to  whether  the  Boeing  SST  will  produce  the 
economic  gains  claimed  for  i t ;   as   to  the  extent  of  engineering  risk 
this  vehicle  represents;  and   as  to  whether  i t   can  stand  alone,  without 
other  supporting  elements  of  a  complete  system  of  air  transportation.” 
SST’S  environmental  aspects  had  received  bulk  of  critical  attention  but 
most  of  postulated  effects  a re   found  to  be  non-existent  o r   of  a  scale 
u 
making  detection  difficult.’’  Most  uncertainties  were  in   field  of  eco- 
nomics.  “I t   is  likely  that  these  can  be  resolved  only  by  actual  expe- 
rience with  the product  in  use.”  (Tex t)  
Februury  27:  President  Nixon  announced  intention  to  nominate  Dr.  James 
C.  Fletcher  to  be  NASA  Administrator  succeeding Dr.  Thomas 0. Paine, 

56  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

February 27 

whose  resignation  was  effective  Sept.  15,  1970.  Dr.  Fletcher  had  been 
President  of  Univ.  of  Utah  a n d   College  of  Eastern  Utah  since  1964. 
He  had  organized  Space  General  Corp.,  subsidiary  of  Aerojet-General 
Corp.  i n   1960  and  served  as  President  1960-1962  and  Chairman  of 
Board  1962-1964.  From  1960  to  1962  he  was  President  of  Space 
Electronics  Corp.,  which  he  founded.  Dr.  Fletcher  had  been  Associate 
Director  of  guided  missile  laboratory  a t   Ramo-Woolridge  Corp.  He  
was  member  of  Air  Force  Science  Advisory  Board  and  Naval  War- 
fare Panel. 
Nomination was  submitted  to  Senate March  1.  ( P D ,  3/1/71,  3 8 3 4 ;  
3 /8 /71 ,437)  
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  President  Nixon’s  nominee  for  NASA  Adminis- 
trator,  told  Salt  Lake  City  press  conference  he  favored  grand  tour  of 
solar  system’s  larger  planets  by  unmanned  spacecraft.  “I t   would  be 
very  exciting  for  man  to  go  beyond  the  moon,  but  I  suspect  that’s 
beyond  the  country’s  budget.”  Dr .   Fletcher  did  not  think  it would  be 
necessary  to  curtail  space  exploration  sharply  in   coming  years  despite 
budget  cuts.  “We’ll  have  to  do  better  for  the  same  amount  of 
money..  . . And  we  may  tend  to  reduce  manned  flights  in   favor  of 
unmanned  flights.”  (AP,  W  S ta r ,   2/28/71;  UPI ,   LA   Times,  2/28/71) 
*  Special  Apollo  Awards  Ceremony  was  held  a t   MSC  to  recognize  indi- 
viduals  and  support  groups  for  their  contributions  to  A p d l o   13   and 
ApoZZo  14   missions.  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  Acting  NASA  Administrator, 
presented  NASA  Distinguished  Service  Medals  to  Walter  J.  Kapryan, 
ICSC  Launch  Operations  Director;  Eugene  F.  Kranz,  ApoZZo  14  Flight 
Director;  Glynn  S.  Lunney,  ApdZo  13  Flight  D irec tor ;   former  astro- 
naut  James  A.  McDivitt,  Apollo  Spacecraft  Program  Manager;  Dale 
D.  Myers,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for Manned  Space Flight;  and 
Sigurd  A.  Sjoberg, ApoZZo  23  Flight  Operations Director. 
NASA  Distinguished Public  Service Medal  was  presented  to  James  J .  
Gavin,  Jr.,  of  Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.’s  LM  team  and   Public 
Service  Medal  to  Donald  E.  Eyles  of  MIT.  NASA  Exceptional  Service 
Medals  were  presented  to  23  employees  of  MSC   and  KSC.  Group 
Achievement  Awards  were  presented  to  DOD  Recovery  Forces  and  
Manned  Spaceflight  Support  Network.  (NASA   Special  Ann,  2/26/71  ; 
NASA  Release  71-28) 
February  28:  Analysis  of  discolorations  on  camera  that  had  landed  on 
moon  with  Surveyor  3  April  19,  1967,  was  reported  in  Science  by 
JPL   scientist  Dr.  Leonard  D.  Jaffe.  Camera  had  been  retrieved  from 
lunar   surface  by  ApoZZo  12  astronauts  Nov.  20,  1969.  Discoloration 
pattern  indicated  that  camera  had  been  whitened  by  impact  of  par- 
ticles  blown  from  lunar  surface  by  exhaust  of  LM  a s   it  landed  and  
also  that  many  particles  had  moved  a t   very  low  angles  to  the  hori- 
zontal.  (Science, 2/28/71,  798-9) 
*  George  H.  Stoner,  Senior  Vice  President  of  Boeing  Co.,  died  in  Seattle 
a t   age  53.  Stoner  had  previously  worked  on  pilotless  a ircraf t   and  
Saturn  programs  and  was  to  have  received  NASA’s highest  industry 
award  for  his  role  in   development  of  Sa turn   V  booster.  (AP,  NYT ,  
3 /2 /71 ,39)  
During  February : Opportunity  for  participating  i n   post-Apollo  program 
had  resulted  in   deep  division  of  opinion  among  European  countries, 
Dr.  Peter  Stubbs  reported  in   Technology  Review:  “. . . never  has  SO 
57 

During February 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

much  furore   been  generated  on  the  basis  of  so  little  ha rd   fact.  But 
politics  have  taken  over  the  scene  to  the  almost  entire  exclusion  of 
rational  procedures.”  France  and  West  Germany  had  not  forgiven 
U.K.  fo r   “welshing  on  them  over  the-by  US. standards  archaic!- 
Europa  launcher.”  There  was  fear  that  without  independent  launch 
vehicle  for  commercial  satellites,  Europe  could  not  compete  on  fa ir  
terms  with  U.S.  “Beneath  the  European  tussle  of  threat  and  counter- 
threat  . . . run  deeper  waters:  France’s  desire  for  her  own  telecorn- 
munications  satellite  system  to  propagandize  former  African  colonies ; 
West  Germany’s  urge  to  become  a  fully  fledged  space  power;  the 
British  Government’s  intense  anxiety  to  enter  the  Common  Market- 
even  possibly,  in  part,  by  blackmailing  its  way  in  over  the  space 
program.”  ESRO  had  built  competency  “which  should  not  be  allowed 
to  go  by  the  board  simply  because  a  bunch  of  politicians  can’t  decide 
to  what  proper  purpose  i t   should  be  put.”  (T e c h  Rev,  2/71,  14) 
Future  of  U S .   space  program  was  subject  of  articles  in  America  Illus- 
tra ted ,   USA  publication  distributed  in   U.S.S.R.  Jay  Holmes  described 
plans  for  next  two  decades  in  space  including  planetary  exploration 
and  Grand  Tours  of  outer  space,  practical  applications  of  space  tech- 
nology,  and  international  cooperation  in   space.  Technical  advance- 
ments  directly  traceable  to  U.S.  space  program  were  described  by 
James  J.  Haggerty,  who  forecast  additional  space  benefits  in  future. 
Reusable  space  shuttle  and   earth-orbiting  stations,  continued  lunar 
exploration,  and   manned  voyages  to  Mars  were  discussed  in  article  on 
earth, moon,  and Mars.  ( A m  ZZZ,2/71) 
U.S.S.R. 
issued  1971-1975  five-year  plan  with  new  emphasis  on  prac- 
tical  benefits  from  space.  Main  attention  was  focused  on  spaceborne 
communications,  meteorology,  earth-resources  survey,  geographical  re- 
search,  and   solution  of  other  economic  tasks.  ( A F   Mag,  6/71,  54-9) 
NSF  issued  Scientific  Activities  of  Independent  Nonprofit  Institutions 
1970  (NSF  71-9).  Independent  nonprofit  institutions  employed  23 700 
scientists  and   engineers  in  January  1970,  down  from  25 600  employed 
in   1967.  Decrease  resulted  from  shift  of  several  large  research  insti- 
tutes  from  nonprofit  sector  to  other  sectors  of  economy  and  from 
slackened  rate  of  increase  in  R&D  activities  by  nonprofit  institutions 
during  1966-1969. 
Life  scientists  composed  largest  occupational  group-331/3  %  of 
total.  Engineers  followed  with  22%.  R&D  expenditures  amounted  to 
$845  million  in   1969,  actual  increase  of  676,  but  in   terms  of  constant 
dollars  only  1.3%  over  1966  total.  Research  institutes  and  nonprofit- 
administered  Federally  funded  R&D  centers  together  accounted  for 
more  than  6634%  of  scientists  and  engineers  and  about  75%  of 
intramural R&D expenditures.  (Text) 
*  NSF  released  Federal  Funds  for  Academic  Science,  Fiscal  Yea r   1969 
(NSF   71-7).  Ten  Federal  agencies  reported  total  $2.314  million  for 
academic  science  activities  during  FY  1969-same 
level  of  funding 
reported  for  FY  1968.  HEW   was  primary  source,  accounting  for 
$1.245  million,  or  more  than  SO%,  of  all  obligations  from  Federal 
Government.  NSF  was  second  with  $362  million,  DOD  was  th ird   with 
$272  million.  Dept.  of  Agriculture  accounted  for  $155  million,  NASA 
for  $125  million,  and  AEC   fa r   $121 million.  (Tex t)  

58 

March  1971 

March  1 :   President  Nixon  submitted  to   Congress  nomination  of  Dr.  James 
C.  Fletcher  as  NASA Administrator  [see  Feb.  271.  (PD,  3/8/71,  437)  
President Nixon  presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal  to  Apo l lo   14 
Astronauts  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  Edgar  D.  Mitchell,  and   S tuar t   A. 
Roosa  a t  White House  dinner.  President  recalled  briefing  of  President 
Eisenhower  after  Soviet  launch  of  Sputnik 1 : “And  the  briefing  was  a 
very exciting  one by  one of  the  scientific  advisers  to  the  President.  . . . 
But  then  I  shall  never  forget  that  a t   the  conclusion  . . . the  one who 
was  briefing  the  President  . . . turned  to  him  and  said,  ‘Mr.  President, 
members  of  the  Cabinet,  I  simply  want  to  say  tha t   probably  the  most 
important discovery we  will  make  in   our  exploration of  space  i s  not  on 
this  chart.’  And  that  was  a  lesson  for   me.  I t   w a s  a great  lesson  for  the 
American  people.  Exploration  . . . involves  going  into  the  unknown.” 
In   space,  “we   think we  know  what  we  want  to  find  and  what we  may 
find,  but  the  more  we  explore  w e   break  into  new  vistas  of  knowledge. 
. . . America  must  continue  to  be  a  great  nation.  We  must  explore the 
unknown,  not  because  of  what  we  are   going  to  find  or  think  we  a re  
going to  find, not  because  of  the  uses that  w e   expect  to   get  from  space, 
but  because  there  is   something  there,  something  there  tha t   we  must 
explore.  It’s  there  to  find.  . . . this Nation  with  all  of  its  capability  and  
with  all  of  its  promise  i s   first  in  space  today  and  America,  as a  great 
nation,  must  set  as  its  goal  remaining  first  in   space,  because that’s  the  
way  to  continue  to  be  a  great  nation.  This  is  a  goal  tha t   we  must  set 
for   ourselves. 
“NOW, to  do  this  requires  thousands  of  men  and   women  on  the 
ground,  devoted  and  dedicated  men  in  the  scientific  field,  in   the  engi- 
neering  field  and  other  areas.  I t   requires  very  brave  men  going  on 
these  journeys  into  outer  space  with  all  of  the  uncertainties  that  we 
saw  on  Apollo  13  and  very  brave  women  waiting  a t  home  with  their 
children,  their  fathers,  and  their  mothers.”  (PD, 3/8/71,  407-11) 
*  Apo l lo   14 Astronauts Alan  B.  Shepard, Jr.,  Edgar D. Mitchell,  and   S tuar t  
A.  Roosa  held  news  briefing  in   Washington,  D.C.  Crew  showed  film 
and  slides  and  described  mission  and  preliminary  results. 
To  question  on  future  of  manned  space  flight  Shepard  said:  “The 
relative  comparison  of  the  efficiency  of  the  manned  versus  the  un- 
manned  systems,  I  think  we  tried  over  the  years  to  show  where  we 
feel  that  man  has  h i s   point,  has   his  place  in   space  . . . and  with  14, 
certainly,  there  were  several  instances  where basic  reflexes,  basic  judg- 
ment,  and  human  instincts  made  i t   a  successful  flight  where  it  would 
not  have  been  successful otherwise. 
“Obviously,  we  brought  back  a  lot  more  rocks  than  the  Lunokhod 
has  brought  back.  But  I don’t  think  that  is  the point.  I  think  the  point 
is  that  we  have  chosen  to  exercise  par t   of  the  expenditures  of  our 
manned  flight.  I  think we   have  shown on  the  14 . . . that manned space 
money  along  the  areas  that  we  have  found  to  be  successful;  that  is, 
59 

March  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

flight  can  contribute  on  a  scientific  basis  and   contribute  efficiently 
when  it  comes  to  assessing  the  dollar  value put  on  it.”  (Transcript) 
*  NASA  announced  selection  of  Mississippi  Test  Facility  near  New  Orleans, 
La.,  a s  site  fo r  sea-level testing  of  space shuttle  rocket engines.  Testing 
under  simulated  altitude  conditions  would  be  done  a t   USAF’S  Arnold 
Engineering  Development  Center  a t   Tullahoma,  Tenn.  Test  program 
would  include  some  1200 development  and   acceptance tests  from  1973 
through  1979, with  45 to  50  sustaining  engineering tests  per  year  after- 
ward,  and   some  100  development  tests  under  simulated  altitude  con- 
ditions  from  1974  through  1976.  Site  Evaluation  Board  had  selected 
sites after  surveying  existing  Government-owned  o r   controlled  proper- 
ties.  Space  shuttle  engine  would  be  reusable,  high-performance, high- 
chamber-pressure  engine  using  liquid  hydrogen  and  liquid  oxygen. 
First  stage would  be  larger  than  J-2  engine  in  Saturn V,  with 249 500- 
kg  (550  000-lb)  thrust.  Orbiter  stage  engine  would  have  extendable 
nozzle skirt for use  in space.  (NASA   Release 71-30) 
MSFC  issued  RFPS  to  Aerojet-General Liquid  Rocket  Co.,  United  Aircraft 
Corp.  P ra t t   &  Whitney Div.,  and  NR   Rocketdyne Div.  on  development 
of  main  engines f o r   two-stage  reusable  launch  vehicle  (space  shu t t le) .  
Companies  had  been  performing  preliminary  design  and  definition 
studies  of  shuttle  under  independent,  $Qrnillion,  parallel  contracts 
since June   1970. In  June  1971  one company would  be  chosen to  develop 
engine.  (MSFC Release 71-37) 
National  Civil  Service League  announced selection  of  10 Federal  officials 
to  receive  annual  Career  Service  Awards.  Recipients  included  NASA 
Associate  Deputy  Administrator  Willis  H.  Shapley,  cited  for  “his 
administrative  expertise  which enables him  to  help design ma jor  policy 
directions  a t   NASA  and   interpret them  to  the  Congress  and  the  public.” 
Honorees would  receive $1000,  watches,  and  citations  a t  banquet  April 
23  in  Washington, D.C.  (W  Star, 3/2/71,  A2) 
Aerobee  170 sounding  rocket w a s  launched by  NASA  from   WSMR carrying 
Univ.  of  Wisconsin  experiment  to  study  stellar  UV.  Rocket  and  instru- 
ments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR l is t)  
*  Multipurpose  system  of  three  large  in-orbit satellites  and  network  of  132 
ear th   stations  to  provide  nationwide  communication  services  to  vari- 
ous  customers  was  proposed  by  ComSatCorp  President  Joseph  V. 
Charyk  in   letter  to   FCC  Chairman Dean  Burch. Proposal would  require 
initial investment of  $250 million.  (Tex t)  
AIAA  published  The   Supersonic  Transpor t:  A  Factual  Basis for Decision. 
Report  by  ad  hoc  committee  concluded  that  DOT plans  for  SST proto- 
type program  were  “reasonable  and  proper  and   in  the  best  interests  of 
this  nation.”  Committee  found  SST performance objectives  could  be  met 
“with  a s   high  a  confidence  level  as  on  any  previous  developmental 
program  pr ior   to  flight  test.”  Technically,  successful  production  SST 
could be  built following prototype phase,  which  was  estimated to  require 
additional  Federal  funding  of  $250  million  over  two  years.  Stretchout 
in  prototype funding would cause “extensive  immediate cost  increases”; 
resulting  delay  in  production  a ircraf t   market  penetration  would  “cur- 
tail  total  revenues, reduce  new  job   opportunities  and  impair  favorable 
impact  on  international  balance  of  trade.”  Abandonment  of  U.S.  SST 
Program  could  lead  to  “takeover  of  U.S.’s  traditional civil  a ircraf t  sales 
dominance  by  foreign  interests.”  SST would  meet  demands  f o r   inter- 

60 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March  1 

continental  a i r   travel  dur ing   1980s while  providing  productivity  gain. 
SST  would  “meet  o r   better  all  engine-noise  specifications”  and   two 
prototype  SST’S  would  “not  produce  any  equilibrium  environmental 
changes.”  (Text) 
March  2:  A p o l b   14  astronauts  and   families  visited  both  houses  of  Con- 
gress.  Astronauts  reported  to  Senate  and  House  on  mission.  Com- 
mander  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  told  Senate  they  had  “a  totally  success- 
fu l   mission,  not  only  from  the  areas   of  scientific  and  technical  en- 
deavors  achieved,  but  also  in   the  areas  of  international  prestige  and  
the  tremendous posture  of  this  country.”  ( C R ,  3/2/71,  52306-7) 
*  Appointment  of  Dr.  Alfred  J.  Eggers,  Jr.,  NASA  Assistant  Admh is tra tor  
for  Policy,  a s   Assistant  Director  for  Research  Applications,  NSF,  was 
announced by  Dr.  William D.  McElroy,  NSF  Director.  Dr.  Eggers would 
head  major  new  organizational  unit  of  NSF  designed  to  support  re- 
search  applied  to  environmental  and  societal  problems.  ( NSF  Release 
71-118) 
March  3 : Communist  China  launched  her  second  satellite,  from  Shuang- 
ch‘eng  a t   8:15  pm  local  time.  Satellite  entered  orbit  with  1815-km 
(1127.8-mi)  apogee, 266-km  (165.3-mi)  perigee,  105.9-min period,  and  
inclination.  Launch  was  unannounced,  but  it  was  monitored  by 
69.9’ 
NORAD   and  accidently  observed  by  BSN  pilot  returning  to  carrier  off 
Vietnam  coast  after mission over Southeast Asia.  First  satellite, Chicom 
1 ,   had  been  launched  April  24,  1970.  (GSFC  SSR ,   3/31/71;  Finney, 
NYT ,   3 /4 /71 ,1 )  
launched  Cosmos  399  from  Baykonur  into  orb i t   with  438-km 
0  U.S.S.R. 
(272.2-mi)  apogee,  196-km  ( 121.8-mi)  perigee,  90.8-min  period,  and  
64.9O  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  March  17.  (GSFC   SSR,  3/31/71; 
SBD ,  3 /8 /71 ,40 )  
NASA  announced prime and backup crews  for Apollo  16 mission,  scheduled 
for  launch  in  March  1972. Prime  crewmen were John  W.  Young  (com- 
.  mander) ,   Thomas  K.  Mattingly  I1  (CM p i lo t) ,   and   Charles  M.  Duke, 
J r .   (LM   p i lo t ) .   Backup  crewmen  were  Fred  W.  Haise,  Jr.,  Stuart  A. 
Roosa,  and  Edgar  D.  Mitchell.  Mission  would  last  about  12  days,  with 
lunar  surface  stay  time  of  about  67  hrs-including 
three  EVA  periods 
totaling  about  20  hrs.  Site  for  lunar  landing  had  not  yet  been  selected. 
(NASA  Release 71-31) 
Dr.  George  M.  Low,  Acting  NASA  Administrator,  presented NASA  FY  1972 
budget  request  to  House  Committee  on  Science and   Astronautics:  FY 
1972  projects-including  Apollo  15  and  16,  two  Mariner  spacecraft, 
first  ERTS  satellite,  and  continuing  work  toward  fu ture   flights  of 
Apollo  17, Skylab, earth  resources and  ATS  satellites, and Viking probes 
-represented 
“the  fulfillment  of  enterprises  of  the  1960’s,  the  tailing 
off  to  completion  of  work  in  progress  fo r   many  years.  By  1974  the 
number  of  NASA  space launches per  year  will  have  declined  from  26  in  
1966  to   eight.  After  the  Skylab  missions  in  1973, we  face  a t   least  4 
years  in  which  there  will  be  no  United  States  manned  space  flight. 
“Five  years  ago  there  were  over  390000   people  in   industry  em- 
ployed  on  NASA  work.  By  the  end  of  fiscal  year  1971  that  figure  will 
be   about  108000 .   The  decline  will  continue  €or  a  few  more  months, 
but  we  expect  i t   to   s tar t   increasing  by  the  middle  of  fiscal  year  1972, 
with  the  end-of-the-year  total  being  about  equal  to  that  a t   the  begin- 
ning.”  U.S.  was  “running  a  serious  risk  of  losing  too  much  of  the 

61 

March  3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

aerospace  capability  tha t   is  an essential  ingredient  of  our  long  term 
national strength  and  security.” 
There  was  every  indication  U S .   would  lose  leadership  in  space 
“unless  we  move  forward  now  with  our  space programs  for  the  1970’s. 
I n   1970 the  Soviets  launched  88  payloads  into  space compared  to  . . . 
36  fo r   the  United  States.  Their  R&D  budget  is  continuing  to  increase. 
They have seldom missed  a  launch window  in   the  exploration of  Venus 
and  Mars  while  we  have  many  gaps  in   our  planetary  program.  We 
would  expect  them  to  use  automated vehicles  and   sample  return  space- 
craft  from  the  planets,  while  we   have  no   such  program.  Finally  the 
Soviets have  a  systematic continuing manned  space  flight  program  and  
have  stated  that  they  expect  to  fly  a  space  station  before  w e   do.”  U.S. 
should  continue  to  compete  with  U.S.S.R.  “because  accomplishments 
in   space  represent  a  measure  o€  the  state  of  our   technology;  and  in 
today’s  world,  the  level  of  our   technology  is  of  first  importance,  s tra-  
tegically,  economically,  and   politically.”  Dr.  Low  believed  U.S.  could 
cooperate  with  U.S.S.R.  “in  the  areas  we  have  under  discussion  with- 
out  prejudicing  any  of  our   vital  national  interests.” 
NASA  was  reexamining  procurement  policies  and   practices  and  “be- 
ginning  a  serious  critical appraisal  of  the  proper  size,  composition,  and 
organization  of  NASA’s institutional  base.”  Position  reduction  of  1500 
in   FY  1972 budget  was  in   anticipation  that  “reduction  of  this  m a p i -  
tude  would  be  found  possible  without  unduly  impairing  our  ability  to 
carry   out  the  program.  Our  budget  justifications  show  this  reduction 
as a  flat  percentage  cut-about 
The  actual  adjustments  . . . will  be  refined  a s   ou r   study  of  the  NASA 
all  of  our  major  activities. 
5.10/,-in 
institutional  base proceeds.” 
NASA  program  was  1.4%  of US. budget,  contrasting  with  53%  for 
domestic  programs  related  to  human  and   physical  resources,  yet  U.S. 
stood  to  gain  “tremendous benefits  now  and  in  the  future”  from  explo- 
ration  and  applications  of  space  science  and  technology.  And  whole 
fu tu re  “as  a  nation  and  as  mankind”  depended  on  space  science.  “For 
in   order  to  survive  in   the  changing  environment on  our  planet  Earth, 
we  must  understand  the  processes  that  govern  our   universe.” 
Dr .   Wernher  von  Braun,  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Plan- 
ning,  said  purpose  of  NASA  Meteorology  Program  was  to  “develop  and 
demonstrate  sensors  and   spacecraft  fo r   making  those  meteorological 
measurements  that  will  enable  a  continued  improvement  in  weather 
forecasting  throughout  the   world  with  an  ultimate  v iew   to  a  limited 
degree  of  weather modification and   control  of  severe weather  systems. 
Projections  indicate  tha t   by  about  1980 i t   should  be  possible  to  reach 
a  global  capability  to  acquire  information  throughout  the  atmosphere 
and   to   develop  comprehensive weather  models.  Once  developed,  these 
models  can  be  used  to  make  1 4 d a y  weather  forecasts  and  long-range 
climate  estimates.”  Ability  to  develop  weather  models  would  permit 
basic experimenting in weather control. 
Space  shuttle  was  key  NASA  development  believed  essential  in  1970s, 
Dr.  von  Braun  said,  presenting  U.S.  with  its  greatest  technology  chal- 
lenge  fo r   space  in   this  decade.  “Preliminary  analysis  indicates  that  if 
the  shuttle  is  used  in   lieu  of  current  expendable  systems,  the  trans- 
portation  costs  will  be  reduced  by  a t   least  a  factor  of  ten.  . . . Only 
by  an  investment  now  will  we  be  able  to  have operational  an   economi- 

62 

March 3 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
-  Findings  that  l i k e d  light  flashes experienced by  astronauts  in   periods  of 
cal transportation  system by  the end  of  the  1970’s  to support a vigorous 
and  balanced space flight program.”  (Transcript) 
otherwise  total  darkness  to  high-speed  cosmic  rays  passing  through 
eye  retina  were  reported  a t   NASA  and   American  Nuclear  Society  Con- 
ference  in  Las Vegas,  Nev.  Findings  were  from  studies  by  scientists  of 
Univ.  of  Washington  at  Seattle  and   Univ.  of  California  a t   Berkeley. 
Dr.  Cornelius  A.  Tobias  and   Dr.  Thomas  F.  Budinger  of  Univ.  of 
California  a t   Berkeley  had  twice  exposed  themselves  to  low  doses  of 
cyclotron-accelerated cosmic rays  aimed a t   their  eyes in  effort  to  repro- 
duce  flashes  described  by  Apollo  11 Astronaut  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr., 
and   Apollo  14   Astronaut  Edgar  D.  Mitchell.  Scientists  said  they  saw 
flashes  tha t   differed  from  visual  phenomena  associated  with  x-rays or 
electrical  and   magnetic  exposures.  They  concluded  that  flashes  came 
from   ionization  and   excitation  of  atoms in  retina  as  it was  bombarded 
by  cosmic  rays,  Evidence  indicated  flashes  were  detected  by  retinal 
rods,  structures  in   eyes  tha t   allowed  night  vision.  Radiations  were  not 
believed  to  be  hazardous  to  astronauts  on  sho r t   flights,  but  long- 
duration  effects  had  not  yet  been  evaluated.  (Wilford,  NYT,  3/4/71, 
18 1 
NASA  launched  two  Arcas  sounding  rockets.  Boosted  Arcas  I,  launched 
from   Churchill Research  Range,  carried  Univ.  of  Houston  experiment 
t o   64.9-km  (40.3-mi)  to  measure  low-altitude  x-ray  spectrum  and 
electron  flux  above  30 500  m  (100  000  f t ) .   Rocket  and   instruments 
functioned  satisfactorily.  Data  would  be  correlated  with  high-altitude 
data  from  Black  Brant  launched  30  sec  earlier  by  Canadian  National 
Research Council. 
Arcas  launched  from  Barking  Sands,  Kauai,  Hawaii,  carried  GSFC 
experiment  to  58.6-km  (36.4-mi)  altitude  to  obtain  ozone  measure- 
ments  in   conjunction  with  overpass  of  Nimbus ZV  satellite.  Rocket 
and  instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  Launch  was  second  in   series 
of  two;  first  had  been  launched  Feb.  24.  (NASA  Rpts  SRL) 
White  House  announced  that  Dr.  Edward  E.  David,  Jr.,  President’s  Sci- 
ence  Adviser,  had  chaired  working  conference  with  industry,  educa- 
tion,  and  Government  representatives  on  employment  problems  of 
scientists  and  engineers  in   aerospace  and  defense  industries.  Meeting 
had  been  called  a t   President  Nixon’s  request.  (PD, 3/8/71,  436) 
Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex.)  introduced  H.R.  5529  “to  authorize  the 
coinage of  5O-cent  pieces  to  commemorate the  Apollo  11 lunar  landing 
and  to  establish  the  Apollo  Lunar  Landing  Commemorative  Trust 
Fund.”  Measure  was  referred  to  House  Committee  on  Banking  and 
Currency.  (CR,  3/3/71,  H1254) 
March  4 :   Dale  D.  Myers,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight,  testified  before  House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics 
dur ing   hearings  on  NASA  FY  1972  authorization  bill:  “With  the 
Apollo  14  scientific  instruments  operating  properly,  we  now  have  be- 
gun  to  develop  the  networks  of  instrumentation  a t   different  locations 
on  the  lunar   surface  which  will  allow  us  to  use  normal  triangulation 
procedures  to  establish  the  details  of  the  moon’s  structure.  We  have 
two  passive seismometers and   two  suprathermal  ion  detectors  in   opera- 
tion,  one  each  a t   the  Apollo  12   and   Apollo  14  sites,  about  115 miles 
[I85  km]  apart.  Last  week  several  moonquakes  were  reported  . . . 
63 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
March  4 
when  the  moon  reached  i ts   perigee.  Our  instruments  pinpointed  the 
location  of  these  events  . . . close  to  the  F ra   Mauro  crater  area. 
“We  also  have  a  laser  ranging  retroflector  a t   the  Apollo  11 Tran- 
quility  Base  and  another  a t   F ra   Mauro-750   miles  [1200  km]  apar t .  
The  laser  ranging  team  a t   the  MacDonald  Observatory  in  Texas  has 
reported  high-quality  returns  from  the  Apollo  14   reflector.  As  the 
world’s  observatories  refine  their  ability  to   use  these  instruments,  w e  
hope  that  they  will  be  able  to  detect  random  wobbles  of  the  earth’s 
rotational  axis.  If  so,  this  may  contribute  to  the  ability  to  predict 
major  earthquakes.” 
During  past  year,  design  and  essentially  all  phases  of  development 
testing  had  been  completed  for  Skylab  and  flight  hardware  was  in  
fabrication.  Definition  of  space  shuttle  was  nearing  completion.  To 
develop  limited  capability  to   rescue  Skylab  astronauts  from  space, 
NASA  had  initiated  design action  on  modification kit  to  give  Skylab  CM 
capacity  to  carry   two  men  up  to  orb i t   and   five  men  back  to  earth. 
Stranded  astronauts  could  use  Skylab  cluster  a s   shelter  while  modifi- 
cation  kit  was  installed  and  Apollo-Saturn IB  launch  vehicle  assigned 
to  next  revisit  was  made  ready  for  launch.  (Transcript) 
0  New  Yo r k   Times  editorial  commented  on  nomination  of  Dr.  James  C. 
Fletcher  as  NASA  Administrator:  “Mr.  Fletcher’s  highest  priority  a t  
NASA  will  undoubtedly  be  to  try  to  restore  morale,  insofar  a s   possible, 
in   a  program  whose  ranks  have  been  decimated by  the  budget  cuts  of 
recent  years.  NASA’s  new  chief  apparently  takes  the  job   with  few  illu- 
sions. This is suggested  by his  recent comments  that  budgetary problems 
w i l l   probably  force  a  shift  from  manned  to   unmanned  space  explo- 
ration,  especially  beyond  the  moon.”  Such  realism  should  “serve  Mr. 
Fletcher  well  in  the  difficult  days  ahead  as  he  tries  to  lead  NASA  to- 
ward  a  new  equilibrium  with  a  Congress  largely  disillusioned  about 
the  worth  of  showy  and   ultra-expensive  ventures  in  space.”  ( N Y T ,  
3/4/71) 
March 5:  Cold-cathode ion  gauge left  on moon  by  Apollo  14  astronauts  had 
discovered  first  hard  evidence  of  gas  escaping  from  lunar  surface,  Dr. 
Gary  V.  Latham,  Apollo  program  chief  seismic  investigator,  said  at 
MSC.  At  same  time,  seismometer left  a t  Apollo  14  mission  landing  site 
had  detected  moonquake,  suggesting  quake  might  have  released  gas 
from  moon  or  that  sudden  venting  of  gas  trapped  in   cavern  beneath 
lunar  surface  initiated  quake.  (O’Toole, W Post,  3/6/71,  A l )  
Analysis  of  magnetometer  da ta   from  Ezp lorer   35  (IMP-E) 
(launched 
July  19,  1967)  was  described  in  Science  by  ARC   scientists  J.  D.  Mina- 
lov  and   Charles  P.  Sonett,  MIT scientist  J.  H.  Binsack,  and  Univ.  of 
Manchester,  England,  scientist  M.  D.  Moutsoulas.  Magnetization  of 
selected  nonmare  areas  on  moon’s  f a r   side  was  inferred  from  positive 
disturbances  in   magnitude  of  magnetic  field  exterior  to  magnetic  sig- 
na ture  of  lunar cavity.  (Science, 3/5/71,892-5) 
NASA  launched  two  sounding  rockets.  Nike-Cajun, launched  from  Kourou, 
French  Guiana,  carried  GSFC experiment to  23.1-km  (14.4-mi)  altitude 
to  verify  rocket  vehicle  and  launch  facility  compatibility  and   rocket 
vehicle  and  rada r   tracking  system  compatibility  in  preparation  for 
fu ture   launches.  Rocket  performed  satisfactorily;  no  instrumentation 
was  carried  on  flight. Launch  was  first  in  series  of  four. 
Arcas,  launched  from  Barking  Sands,  Kauai,  Hawaii,  carried  GSFC 

64! 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March 5 

experiment  to   58-km  (36-mi)  altitude  to  obtain  ozone  measurements 
in   conjunction  with  overpass  of  Nimbus  ZV  satellite  and  to  study 
anomalous absorption  detected  by  Arcas  launched  Feb.  24.  Rocket  and 
instruments  functioned  satisfactorily  and  good  data  were  acquired. 
(NASA  Rpts SRL) 
*  FAA plan  to  create  V/STOL  Special Projects Office  to  formulate  and  main- 
tain  development  plan  for  V/STOL  program,  provide  executive  man- 
agement  of  FAA  V/STOL  R&D,  and   make  economic  studies  and  market 
analyses  of  V/STOL  sales  and  service  potential  was  announced by  John 
H.  Shaffer,  FAA  Administrator.  Jerold  M.  Chavkin,  Special  Assistant 
to  Associate  Administrator  for   Engineering  and   Development,  would 
be acting Director  ( F A A  Release 71-2%) 
*  Election  of  Dr.  ,Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  AEC  Chairman,  as honorary  member 
of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  was  reported  in   Washington  Post. 
( W Pos t ,  3/5/71,  A18) 
March 5-6:  Apollo  14  Astronauts Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  Edgar  D.  Mitchell, 
and  S tuar t  A.  Roosa  spent  26  h r s   in   Chicago,  dur ing  which  they  were 
honored  a t   City  Council  meeting,  attended  civic  luncheon,  and  pre- 
sided  a t   press  conference  with  3000  high  school  students.  (Chicago 
Today ,  3/7/71) 
March  6-8:  Apo l lo   14  Astronauts  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  S tuar t   A.  Roosa, 
and  Edgar  D.  Mitchell,  and  wives  on  three-day visit  to New  York  taped 
TV  programs,  visited  U.N.,  and   rode  in   motorcade  from  hotel  to  City 
Hall for  official reception.  (Montgomery, N Y T ,  3/9/71,  1 )  
March  8:  USAF  X-24A 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Cecil  Powell 
reached  mach  1 and   18 300-m  (60 000-ft)  altitude  dur ing  
(usAF), 
24th  flight  from  FRC  in   jo in t   NASA-USAF  research  program.  Purpose 
of  powered  flight  was  to  determine  lateral-directional  derivatives  with 
power  on  and   to  determine  longitudinal  derivatives  a t   mach  0.6 
(NASA  P ro j   Off) 
U S .   Supreme  Court  refused  to   grant  hearing  to  atheist  Mrs.  Madalyn 
Murray  O’Hair  on  appeal  of  suit  charging  NASA  had  knowingly  used 
taxpayers’  money  fo r   religious  activities  by  permitting  astronauts  to 
conduct  Bible  readings  and   prayer  services  while  orbiting  moon. 
(Reuters, B Sun,  3/9/71,  A3) 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  and   Microwave  Communications,  Inc.,  would 
petition  FCC   fo r   authorization  to  construct  and operate  $169.4-million 
domestic  comsat  system  under  name  MCI  Lockheed  Satellite  Corp., 
Washington  Evening  Star  reported.  F irms   said  system  could  be  opera- 
tional  by   1975  and  produce  $70  million  per  year  revenues.  (W  S tar ,  
3/8/71,  A12) 
Economic  slump  that  hit  Cape  Kennedy  and   Brevard  County,  Fla.,  after 
space  program  cuts  appeared  to  be   bottoming  out,  New  York   Times 
reported.  Three  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  county  economic  devel- 
opment  council  were  spending  $260 000  annually,  “compared  with 
next  to  nothing  three  years  ago,”  to  promote  KSC  tours   and  area’s 
natural  assets.  Decline  i n   job s   since  1968  had  leveled  off  and   panic 
sale of  homes a t  bargain prices  had  ended.  (Janson, N Y T ,  3/8/71,  25)  
March  9:  NASA  supercritical  wing  was  flown  successfully  from   FRC   dur ing  
first  flight  on  TF-8A  jet  a ircraf t   piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  Thomas  C. 
McMurtry.  Purposes  of  flight  were  to   conduct  functional  check  of  a ir-  
craft  and   stability-augmentation  system  and   evaluate  low-speed  han- 

65 

March 9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March  9: D r .   Richard  T .   Wh i t com b   ( l e f t ) ,  deve lope r   o f   NASA’s supercritical  w ing ,  
congratulated  te s t   p i lo t   Thomas  C .   McMurtry  a f t e r   the   successful  f irs t   f l igh t   o f   the 
w ing   on  th e   T F - 8 A   j e t   aircraft.  Program  Manager  John  G .  McTigue  looked  on.  Th e  
new   a i r fo i l   shape,  undergoing  te s t s   at  the  Flight  Research  Center,  wa s   designed  to  
reduce  bu f le t ing   a t   high  subsonic  speeds  ana!  pe rm i t   increased  a i rc ra f t   pe r fo rmance .  

dling  qualities.  Aircraft  reached  3000-m  (10  000-ft)  altitude  a t   220 
and 300 knots.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
U.S.S.R.’s  Lunolchod  1 lunar   rover was  activated  on moon’s  Sea  of  Rains 
af ter   surviving  four th   lunar  night  since  landing  on  moon  on  board 
Luna 17 Nov.  17,1970.  ( S BD ,  3 /10 /71 ,55)  
U.S.S.R.  had  again  tested  “hunter”  satellites,  designed  to  locate  and  
destroy  other  satellites,  George  C.  Wilson  reported  in   the   Washington 
Post.  Cosmos  394  (launched  Feb.  9 )   had  entered  circular  orb i t   and 
had  been  intercepted  by  Cosmos  397  (launched  Feb.  2 5 ) ,   he  said. 
Satellites’  inclination  suggested  launches  were  from  Plesetsk  rather 
than  Tyuratum  [Baykonur]  and  “probably  means  tha t   the  Soviet 
Union  considers its satellite  inspection  system  in  the  operational rather 
than experimental category.”  ( W Post, 3/9/71,  A3) 
Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science 
House  Committee  on  Science and  Astronautics:  “. . . true   boundaries 
and  Applications,  testified  in   FY  1972  authorization  hearings  before 
of  ou r   ecological  system  have  not  been  determined,  but  they  certainly 
extend  to  the  known  dimensions of  the  universe.  The  forces  and   laws 
which  affect  the  most  distant  star  are   directly  relevant  to  the  problems 
of  energy  generation and   control  on  Earth.  Mankind  is  jus t   beginning 
to  grasp  the  fact  tha t   all  natural  systems  a r e   intimately  related  and 
interdependent”  and   man  must  learn  “to  manage  wisely  what  he  can, 
and  to  live  in   equilibrium  with  what  is  beyond  his  control.  It  is   to 

66 

March  9 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
these  ends  . . . that  we  have  structured  the  nation’s  continuing  space 
activities in  science and  applications.” 
Most  significant  new  astronomy  program  element  was  HEAO,  “de- 
signed  to  unlock  some  of  the  most  profound  and  puzzling  secrets  of 
modern  physics.”  There  was  evidence that  in   pulsars  and   quasars  “a 
whole  new  regime  of  power  generation  exists  and  operates  a t   levels 
tha t   cannot  be  explained  by  modern  nuclear  physics.”  Understanding 
these  energy  processes might  lead  to  harnessing  of  powers  “heretofore 
unimaginable.” 
Both  planetary  and   lunar  exploration  should  provide  clues  to  earth‘s 
past  and   future,  to  factors  that  caused  long-period  environmental 
changes and  how  to  control  them.  Earth  observations program  also was 
addressed  to  fundamental  problems  of  environmental  and  ecological 
management.  Satellites  could  see,  record,  and   transmit  information  on 
causes  and   effects  in   global  air-ocean-earth  interactions. 
Trend  in   U S .   space  science  and   applications  had  been  decreasing 
budget  and   launch  rates;  OSSA  had  had  to  “cut  back  ongoing projects, 
dispense  with  backup  payloads,  stretch  launch  schedules  and  mission 
intervals,  and   defer  promising  new  projects,”  but  had  “preserved  a 
steady  momentum  and  a  balanced  program  thrust  wherever  possible.” 
High  level  of  productivity  in   science,  exploration,  and   applications  had 
been  possible  “because  of  the  background  in   technology,  in   engineer- 
ing,  in   conceptual  thinking  that  was  built  up  earlier.”  But  many 
valuable  and   important  missions  had  been  deferred  into  future,  “a 
future  we  expect  will  permit  us  to  revolutionize  the  way  space  is 
explored  and   used.”  Key  feature  of  this  revolution  would  be   reusable 
space  shuttle  “that  makes  access  to  space  for  man  and  machines  an  
economical,  routine  excursion  rather  than  the  difficult  task  i t   presents 
now.”  (Transcr ip t)  
0  NAS  released  Priorities  for  Space  Research,  1971-1980.  Report  of  study 
group  of  NAS-NRC  Space  Science  Board  recommended  priorities  for 
NASA  OSSA  programs  a t   three  funding  levels  for  space  missions  in  
1970s.  Study  was  made  a t   NASA’s request.  Highest  priorities  were 
recommended  for  probes  of  Venus  and   Jupiter  beginning  in   1975; 
completion  of  three  remaining  Apollo  manned  lunar  missions  and  
unmanned  landers  and  rovers  for  lunar  and   planetary  studies;  series 
of  HEAO   satellites  for  x-ray,  gamma-ray,  and   cosmic-ray  exploration; 
Small  Astronomy  Satellites  ( SAS )   ; increased  astronomy  rockets,  bal- 
loons,  and   aircraft;  development  of  mirror  for  Large  Space Telescope 
(UT) ; continued  study  of  earth-orbiting  gyroscope  and  ESRO  sun- 
orbiting  satellite  for  studies  of  gravitational  physics  in   mid-1970’s; 
pair  of  satellites  to  study  interaction  between  earth’s  magnetosphere 
and  solar  wind  and   doubling  of  funds  for  solar-terrestrial  physics; 
three  satellite  programs  and  increased  data  analysis  for  meteorology 
and  earth  resources  surveys ; and   ground-based  research  to  support 
Viking  softlander  and  fu ture   exobiology  missions.  Report  recom- 
mended  next  larger  level  of  NASA  funding  provide  for  1.5-m  (60- in)  
space  telescope,  OSO,  and  additional  Atmospheric Explorers  and   Ear th  
Resources  Satellites.  Grand  Tour  of  planets  between  1975  and   1980 
was  recommended  only  if  NASA’s budget  was  increased  still  further. 
( NAS--NRC-NAE  News, 3/9/71) 

67 

March  9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

William  A.  Anders,  NASC  Executive  Secretary  and   Apollo  8  Astronaut, 
and   Astronauts  John  L.  Swigert,  Jr.,  William  R.  Pogue,  and   Jack  R. 
Lousma  met  with  President  Nixon  a t   White  House  to  report  on  their 
visits  to  17   college  campuses  from  October  to  December  1970.  At 
White  House  press  conference  later,  Anders  said  meetings  with  stu- 
dents  had  been  “very  positive.”  Students had  been  “very  curious about 
the  Space Program.”  (PD, 3/15/71,  475;  Transcr ip t)  
Communist  China  possibly  had  made  limited-range  3200-km  (2000-mi) 
shot  of  prototype  ICBM  in   late  1970,  Secretary  of  Defense  Melvin  R. 
Laird  said  in  posture  statement  before  House  Armed  Services  Com- 
mittee.  Range  probably  had  been  limited  to  keep  test  within  Chinese 
national  borders.  “Estimated  earliest  possible  [Communist  Chinese] 
ICBM  capability  is  1973,  with  the  more  likely  time  being  the  mid- 
1970s.”  (Testimony) 
March  10: Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  unani- 
mously  approved nomination  of  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  as  NASA  Admin- 
istrator,  following  one-hour hearing.  Dr.  Fletcher  told  Committee  U S .  
had  made  “some  small  steps”  toward  cooperation  with  U.S.S.R. 
in  
space.  “I  think  we  can  make  these  even  larger  steps.”  Asked  i f   he 
thought  NASA  needed  any  change  in  direction  Dr.  Fletcher  said,  “No 
organization  is  perfect,  and  a  new  administration  will  always  look 
a t   the  program  to  see  if  i t   can  make  any  changes and   I  intend  to  do 
that.”  I n   response  to  question  from  Sen.  Margaret  Chase  Smith 
(R-Me.),  Dr.  Fletcher  said  i t   was  “not  NASA’s mission”  to  act  as  tech- 
nological  WPA  in  a id ing   depressed  areas  through  the  channel  of  space 
contracts.  ( C R ,  3/10/71,  D144;  O’Toole,  W Post,  3/11/71) 
*  NASA  launched  series  of  five  sounding  rockets  from  Wallops  Station  to 
collect  data  for  comparison with  data  collected  during  March  7,  1970, 
solar  eclipse.  Two  Nike-Cajuns  each  carried  31-grenade  payload  to 
113-km  (70.2-mi)  altitude.  All  but  one  grenade  ejected  and   exploded 
as  planned.  Three  Nike-Apaches  carried  Pitot-static  probe  payloads  to 
179-km  (111.2-mi) , 178-km  (110.6-mi) , and  171-km  (106.3-mi)  alti- 
tudes.  Rockets  and  instruments  functioned satisfactorily  and  good  data 
were obtained.  (NASA  Rpts SRL) 
First  flight  model  LRV  was  formally’ delivered  to  NASA  in  ceremony  a t  
Boeing  Co.’s  Space  Center  at  Kent,  Wash.  Dr.  Eberhard  F.  M.  Rem, 
MSFC  Director,  accepted  first  of  three  flight  models  from  Boeing  Co. 
Group  Vice  President  for  Aerospace  0. C.  Boileau.  Model  would  be 
shipped  to  arrive  a t   KSC   March  15   for  final  checks  and  installation 
aboard   Apollo  15  LM.  Delivery  would  be  two  weeks  before  April  1 
contract  delivery  date.  (NASA  Release  71-38;  Boeing Release  3/10/71) 
NASA  plans  to  develop  first  space  rescue  capability  during  1972  Skylab 
program  were  described by  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  Deputy  Associate 
Administrator  for  Planning,  before  AAS  meeting  in  Washington,  D.C.  : 
Studies  indicated  NASA  could  have  rescue  spacecraft  standiag  by  on 
launch  pad  20  days  before  scheduled  Skylab  launch  in  spring  1973. 
Rescue  technique  would  be  facilitated  by  equipping  Apollo  spacecraft 
with  two  extra  seats  beneath  three  regular  crew  seats.  In   space  emer- 
gency,  modified  spacecraft  would  be  launched  with  two-man  crew 
ra ther   than  three.  I t   would  rendezvous  with  distressed  Skylab  vehicle 
to  recover  three-man  Skylab  team.  Rescue  vehicle  would  have  im- 

68 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March  10 

proved  hydraulic  telescoping  landing  legs  to  absorb  impact  on  land  
if  water  landing  was  not  practical.  (AP,  Huntsville  Times, 3/11/71) 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Tracking  and   Data  Acquisition  Gerald 
M.  Truszynski  testified  on  FY  1972  budget  request  dur ing   House 
Committee  on  Science and   Astronautics authorization  hearings.  During 
1970 OTDA supported some 50  ongoing scientific,  applications, planetary, 
and   lunar  experiment  missions  a s   well  as  some  1 4  new  flight  projects 
launched in   year  by  NASA  and  DOD.  During Apollo 13 mission,  with  safe 
return  after  inflight  explosion,  MSFN  “demonstrated  that  it  is,  in   fact, 
the  astronauts’  life-line  to  earth.”  Valuable clues  to  origin  of  explosion 
were  found  in   analysis  of  recorded  telemetry  data.  MSFN  was  still 
supporting  experiments  left  on  moon  by  A p o l b   12  and   14   missions. 
After  FY  1972’s Apollo  1 5  and   16 missions,  network  would  be  continu- 
ously  monitoring  16   ALSEP  experiments.  Satellite  network  provided 
tracking  and  data  acquisition  for  average  monthly  workload  of  some 
40  earth-orbital  satellites,  including  NASA’s scientific  and   applications 
satellites  and   projects  of  other  Government  agencies and   foreign  coun- 
tries.  DSN  supported  Mariner  6  and  7  probes  in  extended  mission 
phase  and  Apollo  13,  a s   well  as  four  ongoing  Pioneer  missions 
(6  through  9 ) .  Data  acquired  by  Goldstone  antenna  on  effect  of  solar 
gravitation  on  Mariner  spacecraft  signals  had  verified  Einstein  theory 
of  delay  of  200  microseconds  in  return  of  signals  from  gravitational 
field  of  sun.  Construction  continued  on  second  64-m  (210-ft)  antenna 
a t   Tidbinbilla,  Australia,  and  ground  was  broken  for  third  near 
Madrid, Spain.  (Transcript) 
ComSatCorp  released  1970  annual  report.  Highlights  of  1970  included: 
declaration  of  corporation’s  first  dividend;  increase  in   net  income 
from  70  cents  per  share  to  $1.75;  submission  to  FCC  of  proposal  for 
domestic  comsat  system  for  lease  to  AT&T;  completion  of  Bartlett  ear th  
station  a t   Talkeetna,  Alaska,  and  nine  new  foreign  earth  station  an- 
tennas,  bringing  total  antennas to  51 ; beginning  of  construction  of  new 
antenna  a t  Andover,  Me.;  launch  of  the  last  three  Intelsat  I11  satellites; 
and   election  of  Joseph  H.  McConnell  a s  ComSatCorp Chairman.  (Text) 
*  Informatics Tisco announced i t  had  received  one-year, $4.8-million,  incen- 
tive  contract  extension  from  NASA  for  operation  of  NASA  Scientific  and 
Technical  Information  Facility  a t   College  Park,  Md.  (Informatics 
Release) 
*  Sen.  Joseph  M.  Montoya  (D-PI.  Mex.)  introduced  S.  1184,  “to  establish 
a  Department  of  Science  and  Technology,  and   to  transfer  certain 
agencies  and  functions  to  such  Department.”  Bill  provided  that  NASA, 
NSF,  and   AEC   be  transferred  to  new  department.  Sen.  Montoya  had 
introduced  similar  legislation  on  Oct.  12,  1970.  (CRY  3/10/71, 
s2800-12;  NASA  LAR ,  x / 2 2 )  
Sen.  Winston  L.  Prouty  (R-Vt.)  introduced  S.  1168,  $619-million  NSF 
FY  1972 authorization  bill.  (CRY 3/10/71,  S2783-4) 
Murch  11 .- Senate  confirmed  nomination  of  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  a s   NASA 
Administrator.  (CRY 3/11/71,  53088) 
Goddard  Memorial  Trophy  for  1971   was  presented  by  Mrs.  Esther 
Goddard  to  James  E.  Webb,  NASA  Administrator  from  1961 to  1968, 
a t   14th  annual  Goddard  Memorial  Dinner  in   Washington,  D.C. 
for  late  Dr.  Robert  H.  Goddard, 
National  Space  Club  award-named 
“father  of  American  rocketry”-was 
given  to  Webb  for  “unprece- 

69 

March  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  l!Xl 

dented  accomplishments.”  Citation  said  his  management  of  Apollo 
program  leading  to  manned  lunar  landing  “was  matched  only  by  the 
accomplishments  in   international scientific  cooperation,  the  technology 
utilization  program,  the  sustaining  university  program  and   the  greatest 
industrial  team  ever assembled.’’ 
Astronautics Engineer Award was  presented to Dr.  Rocco A.  Petrone, 
Apollo  Program  Director,  “for  his  outstanding  personal  leadership  of 
the Apollo mission  to the  Moon.” 
Wallace  H.  Deckert  of  ARC   Advanced  Aircraft  Programs  Office  was 
awarded  Hugh  L.  Dryden  Memorial  Fellowship  “in  recognition  of  the 
need  for  the  continued  scientific  and  intellectual  growth  of  the  indi- 
vidual,  who  is  already  pursuing  the  challenges  of  research,  exploration 
and   administration  in  astronautics,  so  that  he  may  continue  to  seek 
and   maintain  a  pre-eminence  in  outer  space  for  the  United  States.” 
Nelson  P.  Jackson  Aerospace  Award  was  presented  to  NASA-NOAA 
Space  Meteorology  Team  “for  opening  a  revolutionary  dimension  in  
observing  earth‘s  weather,  and   for  significant  help  in  mankind’s  per- 
petual  battle  with  the  elements.’’  National  Space  Club  Press  Award 
was  presented  to  Kenneth  F.  Weaver  of  National Geographic magazine 
“for  his  illuminating  and   imaginative  editorial  contributions  to  astro- 
nautics  and  his  excellence  in   conveying  to  the  public  at  large  man’s 
expanding concept of  his cosmos.” 
Dinner,  which  honored  “decade  and  more  of  international  coopera- 
tion  in   space,”  was  attended  by  Apollo  14 astronauts,  Soviet  Ambassa- 
dor  Anatoly  F.  Dobrynin,  Indian  Ambassador  Lakshmi  Kan t   Jha, 
comedian  Bob  Hope,  and   US. Ambassador  to  U.N.  George  Bush. 
(Program ;   Dean, W Star, 3/13/71,  C1) 
NASA  OART  officials  testified  before House Committee on  Science and Astro- 
nautics  dur ing   hearings  on  FY  1972 NASA  authorization.  Roy  P.  Jack- 
son,  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and   Technology, 
said  aeronautics  was  largest  part  of  OART  program  for  first  time.  In  
military  aviation,  “work  is  under  way  at  the  Centers  in  support  of  the 
F-14  for  the  Navy.  , . . Over  a  dozen  wind  tunnels  and  simulators  . . . 
are  used  in  this  support.  We  are  helping  the  USAF  with  . . . the  F-15, 
their  new  B-1  bomber  and  we  plan  to  assist”  with  the  A-X.  One  ARC  
facility  was  on  indefinite  loan  to  USA.  “ In   all,  w e   use  over  a  th ird   of 
our  available  facility  time  to  support  military  needs.  Research  on 
transonic  aerodynamics, the  NASA  supercritical  airfoil,  fly-by-wire flight 
controls,  spin  stabilization,  and  advanced structures  using  beryllium o r  
composites  a r e   some  of  the  areas  where  NASA  is  making  research  con- 
tributions  to  meet  military  requirements  in  the  future.” 
In  civil  aviation  effort,  OART  was  providing  DOT  with  assistance  on 
SST.  ARC   was  assisting  FAA  in   certification  studies  of  Concorde  and  SST. 
ARC  flight  simulator  for  advanced  aircraft  was  “proving  to  be  the  most 
useful  facility  available  in   the  free  world  for  studying  airworthiness 
standards  for  supersonic  transports.’’  NASA  and   DOT  were  completing 
joint  study  of  “relationships  between  the  benefits  that  accrue  to  the 
Nation  from  aviation  and   the  level  of  R&D  effort.  The  study  displays 
the  ways  in   which  civil  aviation  can  affect  regional  development, 
population  distribution,  [and]   land  use,  and  contribute  to  many  other 
social  and   economic  goals  of  the  Nation.’’  Problems  under  study  in- 
cluded  a ircraf t   noise,  a i r   pollution  from  a ircraf t   engine  emissions,  and 

70 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March  11 

aeronautical  operating problems “such  as approach  and   landing safety, 
delays,  congestion,  and   community  noise  caused  by  operation  of  a ir-  
craft.”  OART  Aeronautical Operating  Systems Div.  had  established joint 
STOL  operating  problems  experiments program  with  DOT and   FAA, and  
Aeronautical Life  Sciences Div.  “to  study man’s  role  in   advanced aero- 
nautical  systems  . . . as  an  operator,  as  a  passenger,  and  as  a  member 
of  the community exposed to air operations.” 
Apollo  11 Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong, Deputy  Associate  Adminis- 
trator  (Aeronautics),  described improvements in   a ircraf t  materials  and  
structural design:  “I  have been  particularly  impressed with  the progress 
of  the  composite  materials.  The  potential  of  boron  and  carbon  fibers 
imbedded  in   an  epoxy  resin  matrix  to  provide  high  strength,  low 
weight  structures  has  been  discussed  with  you  for  several  years.  This 
year  the  testing  of  special  glass  fibers  has  revealed  the  possibility  that 
low  cost, stiff  composites may  be  fabricated  with much  greater  strengths 
than  previously  thought  possible.  Composites  a r e   finding  application 
both  as  a  replacement  for  metallic  components  and   by  augmenting 
metal  strengths  using  selective  reinforcement.  I n   the  forthcoming year 
we  propose  to  construct  several  airplane  components  of  primary  struc- 
ture  for  installation  and  flight  demonstration.  We  believe  that  these 
new  materials  will  find  widespread  use  in  the  industry  when  the  
technical  risk  has   been  demonstrated to  be  acceptable.” 
Milton  Klein,  Manager  of  Space Nuclear Systems  Office,  reported  on 
progress  of  NERVA  program:  “Through  the  systematic engineering  de- 
sign  process  . . . design  concepts  to  be  incorporated  in   NERVA  were 
formulated,  requirements  were  specified,  and  a  baseline  engine  design 
has  been  established.  The  design  provides  a  thrust  level  of  7 5 0 0 0   lbs 
E334 000  newtons],  and  a  specific  impulse  of  825  seconds.  High  relia- 
bility  and  safety  in  operation  a re   provided  through  the  use  of  redun- 
dancy  in  critical  areas  and   conservative  design  approaches.  The  en- 
durance  goal  for  the  reusable  system  is  3.0  hours,  coupled  with  the 
ability  to  undergo  60  start-and-stop cycles,  and   the  key  fuel  element 
technology  continued  to  make  good  progress  toward  that  goal.” 
(Transcript) 
RCA  Corp.  announced  i t   had  filed  application  with  FCC  for  construction 
and  operation  of  $l98-million  domestic  satellite  system  for  50  states 
and   Puerto  Rico.  System  would  consist  of  three  satellites  and   13 major 
earth  stations.  At  Washington,  D.C.,  news  conference,  Howard  R. 
Hawkins-President 
of  RCA   Global  Communications,  Inc.,  and   RCA 
Alaska  Communications,  Inc.--said  system  could  begin  first  phase  in  
1974.  System  would  include  distribution  of  motion  pictures  by  closed 
circuit  telecasts  instead  of  film.  (AP, NYT ,   3/12/71,  62)  
NASA  announced  award  of  $18 704 300  cost-plus-award-fee  contract  to 
Boeing  Co.  for  installation  and   technical  support  services  a t   KSC.  Con- 
tract  was  for  11 mos  with  four  one-year  options.  New  contract  com- 
bined  work  previously  performed  under  three  separate  contracts. 
TWA,  which  had  been  performing  support  services,  had  been  denied 
preliminary 
to  halt  contract  award,  in   Federal  court 
injunction 
March  10.  (NASA  Release  71-39;  W S J ,  3/12/71) 
Sen.  George  McGovern  ( D 3 . D . )   introduced,  for   himself  and   cosponsors, 
S.  1191 “to  assist  workers whose  jobs  may  be  terminated  by  reduction 
in  defense  and   space spending, to  establish  a  system  of  benefits  to  ease 

71 

March  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

the  transition  of  such  workers  to  civilian  occupations,  to  minimize  the 
hardships  encountered  by  communities  which  a r e   dependent  upon 
defense  industry  and   employment,  to  encourage  cooperation  between 
the  United  States  and   defense  contractors  in   meeting  the   challenge  of 
economic  conversion  and   diversification  brought  on   by  changing  de- 
fense  needs,  . . . and   to  facilitate  the  transfer  of  public  and   private 
resources  to  new  national  priorities.”  Bill  would  require  tha t  portion  of 
profits  from  military,  space,  and   atomic  energy  contracts  be  deposited 
i n   reserve  to  be  administered  by  National  Commission  on  Peacetime 
Transition.  Funds would  be  available to  benefit workers  who  lost  income 
a s   a  result  of  cutbacks.  Bill  was  referred  to  Senate  Committee  on 
Government  Operations.  ( C R Y  3/11/71,  S2926-35) 
*  Kansas  C i t y   Times  editorial  commented  on  appointment  of  Dr.  James  C. 
Fletcher  as   NASA  Administrator:  Dr.  Fletcher  had  “earned  respect  a t  
Utah  as  a  master  of  administrative  analysis  and   detail,  a  man  able  to 
wring  the  last  measure  of  usefulness  out  of  every  available  dollar  and, 
a t   the  same  time,  to   command  intense  loyalty  from  those  who  work 
with  him.  No  qualities  a re   likely  to  prove  of  more  service  to  a  man 
responsible  for  leading  the  American  space  program  out  of  its  nad ir  
of  tight  money  and   flagging  morale.”  ( K C  T imes ,  3 /11 /71)  
*  New   York   Times  commented  on  orbiting  of  second  Communist  Chinese 
satellite:  I t  had  provided  “impressive  evidence  of  the  advance  of  Com- 
munist  China  in   war-related  technology.  I t   hardly  needs  underlining 
tha t   a  rocket  capable  of  orbiting  a  sputnik  could  also  deliver  a 
hydrogen  -bomb  to  a  distant  target  on  ear$.” 
I t   was  evident  that 
“Ma0  Tse-tung  has  been  trying  to  insulate  a  small  group  of  scientists 
and   their  activity  in  weapons  development  from  the  general  turmoil  of 
the  cultural  revolution  as  well  as  from  the  inadequate  supply  of  prac- 
tically  everything  i n   normal  Chinese  economic  life.  Tha t   effott  has 
apparently  been successful.”  ( N Y T ,  3/11/71,  38 )  
March  1 2 :   Apollo  1 4   astronauts  were  presented  Distinguished  Service 
Medals  a t   DOD  ceremonies.  Secretary  of  the   Navy  John  H.  Chaffee 
presented  USN  DSM  to  Astronauts  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  and  Edgar  D. 
Mitchell.  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  pre- 
sented  USAF  DSM  and   Command  Pilot  Astronaut  Badge  to  Astronaut 
S tuar t  A.  Roosa.  (N A S A  Ac t iv i t ies   4/15/71,  61; DOD  Release  218-71; 
MSC Hist Off) 
New  photographic  process  that  produced  nickel  image  by  exposing  ammo- 
nium,  lithium,  lead,  and   nickel  hypophosphite  to  electrons  or  x-radi- 
ation  had  been  developed  by  LeRC  scientists  Dr.  Warren  H.  Philipp, 
Dr.  Charles  E.  May,  and   Stanley  J .   Marsik,  Lewis  News  reported. 
Advantages  were  tha t   nickel  compound  was  cheaper  and  more  abun- 
dan t   than   silver  used  in   standard  photographic  process  and ,   because 
nickel  compound  was  not  sensitive  to  visible  light,  process  eliminated 
need  ’for darkroom  o r   cassette  containers  for  undeveloped  film.  (Lew i s  
News,  3 /12 /71 ,1 )  
March  13-17:  ExpZorer  43  ( IMP-I)  Interplanetary  Monitoring  Platform 
was  launched  by  NASA  from  ETR  by  three-stage,  thrust-augmented 
Thor-Delta  M-6  booster  a t   11 :15  am  EST.  Spacecraft  entered  highly 
elliptical  orbit  with  206 049-km 
(128  032-mi)  apogee,  241-km 
(149.8-mi)  perigee,  6012-min  period  ( 4   days  1 2   hrs   12  m in ) ,   and  
28.6’ 
inclination.  P r ima ry   objective  was  to  investigate  dur ing   pe- 

72 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March  13-17 

riod  of  decreasing  solar  activity  and  through  several  solar  rotations, 
the  nature  of  the  interplanetary  medium  and  interplanetary-magneto- 
spheric  interaction,  including  characteristic  features  of  solar  wind, 
interplanetary  fields  and   sector  structure,  and  modulation  effects  on 
cosmic  rays.  By  March  17  onboard  computer  and   9  of  12  science 
experiments  were  operating  satisfactorily. 
Explorer  43  was  first  of  series  of  second-generation spacecraft  de- 
signed  to  study  solar-lunar-terrestrial  relationships.  I t   was  eighth  of 
10  IMPS  and   at  288  kg  (635 lbs)   was  largest  as well  as most  advanced 
spacecraft  i n   Explorer  series.  Seventh  IMP,  Explorer  41,  had  been 
launched  June  21,  1969,  and   was  still  operating.  IMP   program  was 
managed  by  GSFC  under  OSSA  direction.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; NASA  Release 
71-35;  SSR ,  3/31/71) 
March  13:  U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1 unmanned  lunar  rover  explored  457-m 
(500-yd)  crater on moon,  made  chemical  analysis of  soil, photographed 
area  around  crater,  and  “engaged  in   Cosmo-physical measurements,” 
Tass announced.  (UPI ,   W Star, 3/14/71,  A15) 
0  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carry- 
ing  Univ.  of  Colorado  airglow  experiment.  Mission  was  unsuccessful. 
(SR list) 
In   cable  to  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.),  Jean-Jacques  Servan- 
Schreiber,  member  of  French  National  Assembly,  said  Anglo-French 
Concorde  supersonic  transport  “looks  to  us . . . like  an  industrial 
Vietnam.”  Every Concorde cost  analysis  had  proved  to  be  wrong.  Cost 
had  “multiplied  here,  as  it  will  everywhere,  four  times  the  initial 
evaluations.”  Facts  had  not  been  available  until  recent  months.  “Now 
the  public  eye  is  on   the  project  and   what  i t   sees  is  bankruptcy.” 
(Kenworthy, N Y T ,  3/14/71,21) 
March  14 :   FRC  and   MSC  scientists  and  engineers  would  begin  research  in  
adapting  Apollo  hardware  to  “fly-by-wire”  electronic  control  system 
for  future  aircraft,  NASA  announced.  System  substituted  lightweight 
wires  for  push-rods  and  added  redundant  wire  paths  at  different  loca- 
tions  in   aircraft,  to  make  overall  system  less  vulnerable  to  damage. 
Electronic  system  could  soften  bumps,  sways,  and   lurches  of  aircraft 
in   rough  weather  and  ease  pilot’s  load.  (NASA  Release  71-36) 
Moscow  newspaper  Sotsialisticheskaya  Zndw tr iya   quoted  unidentified 
“Chief  Designer  of  Spaceships’’  as  saying  U.S.S.R.  was  preparing 
further  manned  orbital  flight  of  long  duration  as  prelude  to  creation 
of  permanent  space  laboratory.  Soyuz  spacecraft  had  “undergone 
necessary  modifications  to  insure  fulfillment  of  a  long  and  extensive 
program.”  Later  New  York   Times  said  designer  was  believed  to  be 
Mikhail  K.  Yangel,  member  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences.  ( N Y T ,  
3/15/71  ) 
March  15 :   Detection  of  “possible  spinar”-celestial 
object  which  could 
be  link  between  galaxies  and  quasars  in  outer  space-was 
described 
by  NRL   team  headed  by  Dr.  Herbert  Friedman  in   Astrophysical  Jour- 
nal.  Spinar,  200  million  light  years  from  earth,  could  be  en t ire   galaxy 
of  collapsed  and  rotating  neutron  stars  or  single,  massive  pulsar. 
Object  had  been  found  by  x-ray  detector  aboard  Aerobee  sounding 
rocket. 
In   interview  with  Washington  Evening  Star  later,  Dr.  Friedman 
said  new  source,  classified  as a  Seyfert  Galaxy,  emitted  “soft  x-rays.” 

73 

March  15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Sp inar   would  rad ia te   1000  times  less  visible  light  than  quasar  and  
12 000  times  more  infrared   than  visible  light  energy-approximately 
what  had  been  found  i n   Seyfert  Galaxy.  But  x-ray  emissions  perhaps 
as  much  as  10  trillion  suns  indicated  i t   might  be  powered  by  same 
mechanism  as  pulsar.  Dr.  Friedman  speculated  that  pulsar  such  as  
spinar  could  be  missing  link  between  conventional  galaxy  like  Milky 
Way  and   quasars  and   tha t   spacecraft-mounted  x-ray  detectors  would 
thousands”  of  such  sources.  (Astrophysical  J o u r d ,  
find  “tens  of 
3/15/71,  G81-5;  Lannan,  W  Star,  3/19/71,  B5)  
from  Fox 
*  NASA  launched  two  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rockets-one 
Main,  Dew  Line  Station,  Alaska,  and  one  from  P i n   Main-to 
study 
electric  fields.  Rockets  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily. 
(SR L is t)  
House  Committee  on  Appropriations  by  vote  of  26  to  15 approved  full 
$290  million  requested  by  DOT  for  continued  SST  development.  ( C R ,  
3/15/71,  D164;  AP, N Y T ,  3 /16 /71 ,62)  
*  F C C   deadline  for  filing  proposals  to  build  domestic  comsat  systems.  Eight 
proposals  had   been  filed,  calling  for  launch  of  19  satellites  and   ex- 
penditure of  more  than  $1 billion. 
Fairchild  Hiller  Corp.  and  Tele-Communications,  Inc.,  had  said 
they  would  petition  FCC   for  permission  to  orbit  domestic  comsat  sys- 
tems,  WaZl  Street  Journal  reported.  Fairchild  Hiller  proposal  called 
for  two  satellites  in   equatorial  orbit  with  third  reserve  satellite  on 
ground.  Tele-Communications  envisioned  $66-million  comsat  system  of 
two  satellites  and  six  ground  stations  to  start.  ( W S J ,  3/15/71,  13; 
3 /16 /71 ,7 )  
Feasibility  of  comsats  for   helicopter  communications  had  been  demon- 
strated  by  tests  conducted  with  DOD’S  Tacsat  1  comsat  over  Pacific 
Ocean,  Av ia t ion   Week   &  Space  Technology  reported.  Tests  a t   UHF 
and   super-high  (X-band)   frequencies  used  different  antennas  for  
each,  mounted  on  Army/Bell  UH-ID  helicopter  atop  rotor  mast  to 
avoid  signal  modulation  by  rotating  blades.  ( A v   W k ,   3/15/71,  39 )  
U S .   and   U.S.S.R.  opened  fourth  round  of  Strategic  Arms  Limitation 
Talks  (SALT )   in   Vienna.  (AP,  W  Star,  3/15/71,  A3 )  
President  Nixon,  in   Key  Biscayne,  Fla.,  sent  message  to  Congress  trans- 
mitting  10th  annual  report  of  U S .   Arms  Control  and  Disarmament 
Agency:  “For  the  first  time  a  realistic  dialogue  is  tak ing   place  be- 
tween  the   Soviet  Union  and   ourselves  about  the  management  of  our 
strategic  relations.  The  mutuality  of  interests  which  brought  us  to  the 
table  encourages  our  hope  that  the  Strategic  Arms  Limitation  Talks 
will  succeed.”  (PD, 3/22/71,  492) 
N ew   Yo rk   T imes   editorial  commented  on  Pioneer  F :   “The  mission  of 
Pioneer  F-the 
spacecraft  that  will  be  launched  next  year  to  visit 
giant  Jupiter  and   send  back  photographs  and   scientific  data-opens 
some  of  the   most  exciting  vistas  yet  in   the   en t ire   space  program. 
If  accomplished.  . . this  mission  would  mark  a  major  advance  in  man’s 
understanding  of  a  hitherto  unpenetrated  section  of  the  solar  system.” 
( N Y T ,  3 /15 /71 ,38 )  
illurch  15-16:  NASA  launched  two  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  from  Kou- 
rou,  French  Guiana,  carry ing   GSFC  experiments  to  measure  ozone 
distribution  a t   low  latitudes  near  equinox  from  70-  to  15-km  (44-  to 
9-m i)   altitude.  Rockets  reached  75.5-  and   72.5-km  (46.9-  and  45.1-mi) 

74 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March  15-16 

altitudes  with  rockets  and  
instruments  functioning  satisfactorily. 
Launches were  second  and   th i rd   in   four-launch series;  first  had  been 
conducted March 5.  (NASA Rpts SRL) 
March  15-18:  AIAA  Space  Shuttle  Development,  Testing,  and   Operations 
Conference/NASA  Space  Shuttle  Technology  Conference  was  held  in  
Phoenix,  Ariz.  Charles  J.  Donlan,  Deputy  Associate  Administrator 
(Technical),  OMSF,  said  NASA  plans  called  for  unmanned  testing  of 
reusable  space  shuttle  beginning  in   1976  and  manned  tests  in  1977. 
Fully  operational  vehicle  would  be  ready  in  1979. 
Col.  John  G.  Albert,  USAF  Director  of  Space  Operations,  said  DOD 
was  “putting  its  faith  in   the  shuttle  and  as  a  result  we  are   not  develop- 
ing  any  other  space  rocket  beyond  the  present  Titan  3.  We  intend  to 
use  the  shuttle  for  all  military  space  operations.”  Use  would  include 
communications,  navigation,  weather-watching,  and  
surveillance. 
Shuttle  would  place  military  satellites  in  orbit  and   perform  special- 
ized  missions  in   orbit  for  periods  up  to  seven  days.  Col.  Albert  told 
news  conference later  that  DOD  would  “certainly  make  a  sizable  fund- 
ing  contribution  at  the  proper  time”  to  assist  NASA  in  shuttle  develop- 
ment.  To  be  useful  to  the  military,  shuttle  must  be  able  to  operate 
like  jet  transport  with  quick  turnaround  on  runway  after  conventional 
landing.  (AP, B Sun, 3/16/71) 
Jean  Bernard  LaGarde, liaison  officer for  European Space Conference 
and  French  representative  to  ESC,  said  Europe would  contribute  $1  bil- 
lion  to  U S .   manned  space  programs  in   future  if  U.S.  lifted  ban  on 
launching  comsats  for  European  nations.  LaGarde  said  U S .   would 
have  to  give  positive  answer  by  late  April  o r   early  May.  (LA  Times, 
3/17/71) 
AIAA  President  Martin  Goland  a t   banquet  March  16 presented Haley 
Astronautical  Award  of  $500,  medal,  and   certificate,  to  Apollo  13 
Astronauts  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  Fred  W.  Haise,  Jr.,  and  John  L. 
Swigert  for  “exceptional  manner  in  which  the  Apollo  13  crew  con- 
ducted  themselves  and  their  spacecraft  under  extraordinary  circum- 
stances of  extreme stress.” 
Octave  Chanute  Award  of  $500  and  certificate  was  presented  to 
William M.  Magruder,  Director  of  SST Development  for  DOT, for  “out- 
standing  contributions  by  a  pilot  to  the  development  of  safer,  more 
efficient a i r  transportation.” 
AIAA  History  Manuscript  Award  for  “best  historical  manuscript 
dealing  with  the  science,  technology,  and  impact  of  aeronautics  and 
astronautics  on  society”  went  to  Constance  McLaughlin  Green  and 
Milton  Lomask  for  “A  History  of  Project  Vanguard”  [published  in 
NASA  Historical  Series  in   March  as  Vanguard-A  History,  S P 4 2 0 2 1 .  
(AIAA  Release;  AZAA  Bull,  3/71;  NASA  Hist  Off) 
March  16:  Peking  Radio  announced  tha t   Communist  China’s  second  satel- 
lite,  launched  March  3,  was  transmitting  scientific  data  in   “whistles, 
pips,  bleeps,  and   blurrs.”  Announcement  broke  two-week  silence  on 
launching  of  satellite.  New  China  News  Agency  said  satellite  weighed 
220.5  kg  (486  Ibs)  and  was  in   elliptical  orbit.  (Reuters,  W Post, 
3/17/71,  A12) 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Organization  and  Management Richard 
C.  McCurdy  testified  on  research  and   program  management  (R&PM) 
budget  request  dur ing   House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics 

75 

March  16 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  197l 
hearings  on  NASA  FY  1972  authorization:  FY  1972  request  was  $21 
million  less  than  in   FY  1971, primarily  because  of  continuing  reduc- 
tion  in   permanent  positions.  Request  of  $697.4  million  was  based  on 
further  reduction  of  Government  personnel of  1500 positions,  lowering 
employment  to  28 350-total 
reduction  of  6971   positions  from  1967 
peak  and   lowest  level  since  1963.  Cut  of  “some  20  percent  in   the 
1967-72  period  is   by  a  considerable margin  the  greatest,  proportion- 
ately,  to  be  made  by  any  Government  agency  in   the  period.”  Of  total 
NASA  force,  scientists and  engineers made up  4 4 ~ 8% ~  
technicians  26.7%, 
administrative  personnel  13.9%,  and   clerical  14.6%.  H ir ing   restric- 
tions  had  reduced  number  of  new  college  graduates  added  to  work 
force  and   raised  average  age  to  41.3,  with  rate  of  8/10  a  year  each 
year, endangering health  and vigor  of  NASA. 
“In  the  past  decade,  the  aerospace  industry,  overall  as  well  as  that 
portion  serving  NASA,  has  passed  through  a  substantial  perturbation. 
Contractor  employment  climbed  to  a  high  peak,  then  dropped  drasti- 
cally.  The  current  estimate  for  industry  employment  on  NASA  work  a t  
the  end  of  this  year  and   next  is  about  108,000-less 
than  one-third 
of  what  it  was  a t   the  peak  of  the  space  program.  But  with  the  major 
reductions  in   the  space  program  over  the  last  several  years,  this  is 
how  i t  must  be.” 
Daniel  J.  Harnett,  Assistant  Administrator  for  Industry  Affairs  and 
Technology  Utilization,  testified  on  NASA  management  of  its  new  tech- 
nology  as  “a repository  of  national  resources”:  Some  2 0 0 0 0   technical 
contributions  had  been  disclosed  by  NASA  contractors,  3500  in   past 
year.  Another  4000  had  been  reported  by  NASA  employees  from 
inhouse  projects.  Contributions  reported  were  evaluated,  defined,  and  
published  for  use  by  others.  Allocations  for  FY  1972  were  increased 
over  previous  year  a s   NASA  began  to  work  with  innovative  events  of 
early  stages  of  1970s R&D  programs.  (Transcr ip t)  
0  President  Nixon  transmitted  NASA’s 22nd  Semiannual  Report  to  Congress 
covering July 1 to Dec.  31, 1969. 
In   letter  accompanying  report,  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  Acting  NASA 
Administrator,  wrote,  “The  two  successful  Moon  missions  [ApoUo  11 
and   121  fulfilled  the  national  goal  of  a  manned  lunar   landing  and  
safe  return  within  the  decade  of  the  sixties  and   convincingly demon- 
strated  the  technological  competence  of  the  Apollo  program.”  Flights 
had  shown  “value  of  the  space  program  as a  unifying  force  in   inter- 
national  relations,  for  interest  in  the  Moon  landings  and  in  the  astro- 
nauts  transcended  national  boundaries.  This  Nation,  in   turn,  took  the 
view  that  the  achievement was  a  triumph  for  all  mankind  even  though 
the  deed  itself  was  performed  by  American  astronauts.”  (Tex t ;   CR, 
3/17/71,  H1631) 
*  President  Nixon  transmitted  to  Congress  NSF  annual  report  for  FY  1970. 
He  said:  “Science  has  entered  an   era   of  unprecedented  fruitfulness. 
The  investment we  have  made  in   the  last  three  decades  offers  us  an 
a r ray   of  scientific  talent  and   a  heritage  of  scientific  achievement  un- 
precedented  in   human  history.”  (PD, 3/22/71,  495-6) 
*  NASA  launched  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  from  Fairbanks,  Alaska, 
carrying  Univ.  of  Alaska  experiment  to  conduct  auroral  studies.  Mis- 
sion was  unsuccessful.  (SR l is t)  
0  Sen.  Edward  M.  Kennedy  (D-Mass.)  introduced  S.  1261,  t o   authorize 

76 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March  16 

NSF “to  undertake  a  loan  guarantee and   interest  assistance  program  to 
aid  unemployed  scientists  and  engineers  in  the  conversion  from 
defense-related  to  civilian,  socially-oriented  research,  development,  and  
engineering activities.”  (CR, S3225-31) 
Senate  passed  S.R.  17,  establishing  Joint  Committee  on  the  Environ- 
ment.  (CR,  3/16/71,  S3317-25) 
March  17:  NASA  supercritical  wing,  flown  on  TF-8A  je t   a ircraf t  piloted  by 
test  pilot  Thomas  C.  McMurtry,  successfully  completed  second  flight 
from  FRC.  Aircraft  reached  7600-m  (25  000-ft)  altitude  and  300  knots 
(mach 0.75).  Purpose  of  flight  was  io   continue evaluation of  aircraft’s 
handling  qualities  a t   higher  altitudes  and  speeds.  (NASA  P ro j   O f f )  
Dr.  George  M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  testified  before  Senate 
Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  dur ing   hearing  on 
US.-U.S.S.R. 
space  cooperation:  Recent  agreements  had  been  d i-  
rected  toward  “achieving  common  objectives,”  not  “exchange  of  tech- 
nology.”  Review  of  relations  between  NASA  and  U.S.S.R.  “suggests 
that  we  should  exercise  considerable caution  in  assessing  the  prospects 
for   prompt  and  effective  implementation  of  these  agreements.”  But 
U S .   negotiators  of  October  and  January  agreements  had  observed 
“definite  improvement”  over  past  decade.  Negotiations  had  been 
“more  straight  forward,  less  political.  . . . A  closer  kind  of  relation- 
ship  seems  to  be  intended  by the.Soviet  side.  The   top  level  of  the 
Soviet  Academy  for  the  first  time  participated  directly.  The  negotia- 
tions  were  attended by  the  first  instances  of  meaningful  access to  Soviet 
facilities.” 
Dr.  Low  said  he  had  “spent  a  half-hour  o r   more  inside  the  Soviet 
simulator  with  a  young  Russian  engineer  who  explained  in  detail  the 
working  of  that  spacecraft  and  answered  every  question  that  I  had. 
Later  on,  I  was  in   the  docking  and  rendezvous  trainer  with  one  of 
their  cosmonauts  and  was  allowed  to  attempt  to  fly  a  docking  of  one 
Soyuz  against  another.  I  did  not  succeed  in  bringing  the  two  together. 
In  addition,  in  January  our   delegation  was  invited  to  the  principal 
Soviet  tracking  station  in   the  Crimea.  Unfortunately,  the  time  avail- 
able  . . . did  not  permit  u s   to  make  this  visit,  but  we  have  every  inten- 
tion  of  doing so in  the  future.” 
Advocating  “air  of  cautious  optimism,”  Dr.  Low  said  U.S.S.R.  had, 
“in  effect,  met  the  schedules laid  down  in  the  first  agreement  with  a 
variance  of  only  a  few  days.  I n  any  event, we  have  laid  out  and  agreed 
to  specific milestones  for  an   even-handed exchange,  so  that  neither  side 
will  gain more  than  the  other.” 
In   response  to  question,  Dr.  Low  said  military  components of  US. 
and  Soviet  space  programs  had  not  been  discussed  a t   NASA-soviet 
Academy  of  Sciences meetings.  (Transcr ip t)  
*  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Fairbanks, 
Alaska,  carrying Univ.  of  Alaska  experiment to  conduct auroral studies. 
Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (SR  l i s t )  
Doyle  G.  Berry,  owner  of  Berry  Aviation  Co.,  said  in   New  Orleans  tha t  
he  had  reached  exclusive agreement with  U.S.S.R.  to  sell Tu-144 super- 
sonic  transport  in   Western  Hemisphere.  Contract  was  being  drawn  up 
subject to State Department approval.  (NYT, 3/19/71) 
Two  Sprint  missiles  successfully  intercepted  ICBM  nosecone  over  Pacific 
in   latest  test  of  Safeguard  defense  system.  I t   was  first  time  two  mis- 

77 

March  l’i 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

siles  were  used  in   Safeguard  test.  Target  was  launched  from  Vanden- 
berg   AFB,  Calif.,  6700-km  (4200-mi)  distance.  (Reuters,  C T r i b ,  
2 /23 /71 ,8)  
March  18: House  voted  215  to  204  to  end  Federal  funding  for   SST devel- 
opment.  I t  was  first  time  in   seven  years  that  House  had  voted  against 
measure  though  i t   had  passed  House  in   1970 by  only  20  votes.  Wash- 
ington  Post  said  turnaround  was  due   to   growing  ecological  and   eco- 
nomic  lobby  against  SST program,  to  new  House  members  who  voted 
33  to  18  against  it,  and   to   spotlight  on  record  vote.  I t   was  first  time 
House had  cast  recorded  vote  on  SST issue.  Post  said supporters of  SST 
program  predicted House vote would  kill  program,  a t  least  for present; 
private  industry  could  not  raise  funds  needed  to  finance  it.  (CR, 
3/18/71,  H 1 7 1 7 4 9 ;  Lyons, W Post, 3/19/71,  A l )  
0  NASA  launched  two  sounding rockets.  Nike-Caj un,  launched  from  Kourou, 
French  Guiana,  carr ied   GSFC  experiment  to  125-km  (77.7-mi)  alti- 
tude  to  measure  upper  atmospheric p re s su ra ,   temperatures,  densities, 
and  winds  near  equatorial  latitudes  and  to  verify  operation  of  ground 
instrumentation  in  preparation  for  fu ture  grenade missions.  Rocket  and  
instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  All  18  grenades  detonated  and 
were  recorded  on  ground.  Launch  was  last  of  four  in  Kourou  series. 
Previous  launches  had  been  conducted March  5  and  March  15-16. 
Nike-Tomahawk,  launched from  Fox Main, Dew  Line Station, Alaska, 
carried  experiment  to   study  electric  fields.  Rocket  and  instruments 
functioned satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpt SRL; SR l is t)  
*  Dr.  Marvin  J.  Kelly,  former  President  and  Board  Chairman  of  Bell 
Telephone  Laboratories,  died  at  age  77.  After  retiring  from  Bell  in  
1959  Dr.  Kelly  had  been  named  adviser  to  NASA  Administrator  and  
consultant  to  IBM,  Ingersoll-Rand  Co.,  and  Kennecott  Copper  Corp. 
( N Y T ,  3 /20 /71 ,32 )  
March  19:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos Po0  into  orb i t   with  1005-km  (624.5- 
m i )   apogee,  983-km  (610.8-mi)  perigee,  104.9-min  period,  and   65.8’ 
inclination.  (GSFC  SSR,  3/31/71;  UPI,  W  S tar ,   3/19/71,  A6)  
*  NASA  launched  three-Nike-Tomahawk sounding  rockets  from  Alaska:  one 
from  Fox  Main,  Dew  Line  Station,  carrying  GSFC  experiment  to  study 
electric  fields;  one  from  Fairbanks,  carrying  Univ.  of  Alaska  experi- 
ment  to  conduct  aurora l   studies;  and   one  from  Fox  Main  carrying 
GSFC  experiment  to  study  magnetic  fields.  Rockets  and  instruments 
functioned satisfactorily. 
*  Senate passed  unanimously  S.  1117,  to  regulate  public  exposure  to  sonic 
booms  by  prohibiting  supersonic  flights  of  civil  a ircraf t   over  conti- 
nental U.S.  ( C R ,  3/17/71,  S3466-76) 
GAO  study  had  disclosed  that  cost  overruns  on  6 1  weapon  systems  had 
reached  $33.4  billion,  of  which  some  $9.5  billion  had  taken  place 
before  production  began,  Washington Pos t   reported.  Report  blamed 
“deliberate  underestimating,”  unanticipated  development  difficulties, 
faulty  planning,  poor  management,  bad  estimating,  inflation,  and   de- 
s ire  to  exploit  new  technology.  I t   said  newer  DOD programs  “are  char- 
acterized  by  a  slower  development  pace  and   more  conservative  pro- 
curement  practices.”  (Nossiter,  W  Post,  3/19/71,  A l )  
*  Astronaut  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  received  Honorary  Knight  of  St.  Pa tr ick  
Award  from  College  of  Engineering,  Univ.  of  Missouri  a t   Columbia, 
Mo.  ( N A S A  Activities,  4 /15 /71 ,61)  

78  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March  19 

Boeing  Co.  had  presented  to  its  management  results  of  diversification 
study  completed  by  panel  of  Boeing  executives,  Wall  Street  Journal 
reported.  Principal  conclusion  had  been  that  best  chances  for  new 
nonaerospace  work  lay  in   fields  of  surface  transportation  and   com- 
munity  development.  Study  envisioned  broadening  Boeing’s  business 
base  so  that  in   10  years’  time  one-third  of  Boeing’s  output  would  be 
outside its traditional product  lines.  ( W H Y  3/19/71) 
0  Washington  Post  editorial  commented  on  House  vote  against  SST fund-  
ing:  “.  . . we  do  not  see  the  need  to  h u r r y - e i t h e r   across  the  oceans 
o r   into  the  building  of  an   a ircraf t  which  will  convenience  only  a  tiny 
fraction  of  the  population  a t   a  time when  great  numbers  of  our  people 
have  more urgent  needs.  Some would  say that  we  can  have  the  SST and  
everything  else  a t   the  same  time,  and   perhaps  we  can.  But  we  aren’t 
doing  the  other  things,  which  is  precisely  why  the  SST has  become  a 
very  meaningful symbol of  misplaced  values  and  disordered  priorities.” 
( W  Post,  3/19/71) 
Murch  20:  NASA  launched  two  sounding  rockets.  Nike-Tomahawk  launched 
from  Fox  Main,  Dew  Line  Station,  Alaska,  carried  GSFC  experiment to 
study electric  fields. 
Aerobee  170 launched from  WSMR carried  Univ.  of  Wisconsin experi- 
ment  to s tudy  soft  x-rays,  but mission  was  unsuccessful.  (SR  l is t)  
Tass  reported  on  meeting  of  Soviet Transport  Commission  of  Council  of 
Mutual  Economic  Assistance  in  Moscow.  Soviet  bloc’s  economic  alli- 
ance  had  discussed  “coming”  introduction  of  Soviet  supersonic  trans- 
port  T u - 1U   and  fu ture   operation  of  subsonic  jumbo  jets  on  Soviet 
bloc  routes.  Report  had  mentioned  no  date  for  introduction  of  Tu-144 
into commercial service.  (Shabad, NYT,  3/21/71) 
Murch  21:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Titan  IIIB-Agena  booster  into  orbit  with  39 266.4-km  (24  399-mi) 
apogee,  328.3-km  (204-mi)  perigee,  701.8-min  period,  and  63.2O  in- 
clination.  (Pres Rpt 72 ;  A v  Wk, 4/26/71,  19 )  
0  NASA  launched two  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rockets from  Alaska.  Rocket 
launched  from  Fox  Main,  Dew  Line  Station,  carried  GSFC  experiment 
to  study  electric  fields. Rocket  launched  from  Fairbanks  carried  Univ. 
of  Alaska  experiment  to  conduct  aurora l   studies.  Rockets  and   instru- 
ments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR l is t)  
March  22:  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from 
Fox  Main,  Dew  Line  Station,  Alaska,  carrying  GSFC  experiment  to 
study magnetic  fields.  Rocket  and  instruments functioned satisfactorily. 
(SR list) 
*  New  York  attorney  Paul  Sawyer  was  sworn  in  as  consultant  to  NASA 
Administrator  on  NASA  Public  Affairs  Program.  Sawyer  was  member 
of  law  firm  of  Phillips,  Nizer,  Benjamin,  Krim,  and   Ballou.  (NASA 
Release 7 1 4 6 )  
Approval  of  full  appropriations  fo r  National  Air  and   Space Museum  and  
increases  in   funding  fo r   National  Museum  of  Natural  History  were 
in  testimony  before 
urged  by  Sen.  Barry  M.  Goldwater  (R-Ariz.) 
Senate  Appropriations  Committee’s  Subcommittee  on  Appropriations 
fo r   Dept.  of  Interior  and  Related  Agencies.  Top  priority  in   Air  and  
Space  museum  budget  was  $1.9  million  for  planning  and  redesign 
of  new  building  to  be  opened  July  4,  1976.  “The  building project  has 
been  on  dead  center  fo r   five  years  now,  though  Congress  provided 

79 

March  22 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

authority  €or i t   in   1966. Land  is  set  aside  on  the  Mall  and  a  complete 
set  of  blueprints  are   in   hand,  ready  for  use;  but  a  combination  of 
resistance  by  the  budget  bureau  and   a  recommendation from   the   Sen- 
a te   Committee  on  Rules  and  Administration  have  held  the  building 
back.”  Museum  was  needed  to  “tell  the  story  of  America’s  monumental 
achievements in  flight.  I t   will  offer  a  mixture  of  regular  and   shifting 
exhibits  of  original  a ircraf t   and  spacecraft  from  which  the  average 
citizen  can  see  fo r   himself  the  significant  breakthroughs  in   flight  and  
what  lies  beyond.”  Sen.  Goldwater  supported  request  for  redesign  of 
original  plans  for  Museum  as “surest  and   swiftest  route  toward  com- 
pletion  of  the  project.’’  Since  building  was  authorized  in  1966,  esti- 
mated  expense  of  $40  million  had  climbed  to  $70  million.  ( C R ,  
3/23/71,  S3605-7) 
*  FAA  announced  s tar t   of  ma jor   program  to  criss-cross  U.S.  with  area  
navigation  airways.  Four  transcontinental  routes  would  link  New  York 
City  with  s a n   Francisco  and  Los  Angeles,  effective  April  29.  FAA 
would  announce  additional  115  area  navigation  routes  within  next 
two  months.  Shorter  interim  area  navigation  routes  had  already  been 
established  to  test  and   develop  a i r   traffic  control  and  piloting  tech- 
niques.  Area  navigation  used  airborne computers  that  permitted  pilots 
to  extrapolate  signals  from  existing  ground  navaids,  allowing  greater 
choice  and  flexibility  in   route  selection.  (FAA Release  71-33) 
DOD  was  developing three  a ircraf t   for  “what  some  influential  lawmakers 
view  a s   essentially  the  same  mission,”  close  a ir   support,  Wushington 
Post  reported.  To  buy  USA’S  Cheyenne  helicopter,  USAF’S  AX,  and 
USMC’s  British-built  Harrier-about 
1000 a ircraf t   all  told-would 
cost 
taxpayers  $4  billion  to  $5  billion  over  next  few  years.  (Getler,  W 
Pos t ,  3/22/71,  A l )  
March  23:  Dr.  George M.  Low,  Acting  NASA  Administrator,  testified  before 
House  Committee  on  Appropriations’  Subcommittee  on  HUD-Space- 
Science in  support  of  NASA  FY  1972 budget  request:  “We have recently 
settled  on  a  single  set  of  performance  characteristics  for  the  prelimi- 
nary   design  of  the  two-stage  fully  reusable  [space]  shuttle.  Alternate 
approaches  are   also  still  under  study.  We  expect  to  be  in  a  position  to 
make  decisions  this  summer  on  how  we   will  proceed  with  a irframe  
design  or  development  in  FY  1972. The $100 million  recommended  in 
the  FY  1972  budget  will  support,  in   addition  to  the  engine  develop- 
ment,  either  continued  intensive  design  studies  and  related  efforts  o r  
the initiation of  airframe development.” 
Dr.  Low  noted  “tremendous interest  in  exploration dur ing  Apollo  11, 
when  an   estimated  107 million  people  in   the  U S .   watched  our  first 
manned  lunar  landing mission;  and   we  saw  i t   again  last  month,  when 
104 million watched Apollo  14.”  (Text) 
NASA  announced  award  of  $S-million,  cost-plus-award-fee  contract  to  
Mason-Rust  for   support  services  a t   Michoud  Assembly  Facility.  Con- 
tract was  for  one year  with two  one-year  options.  (NASA  Release 7 1 4 7 )  
March  24 :   USAF 
launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Thorad-Agena  boostey.  Orbital  parameters:  235-km  ( 146-mi)  apogee, 
172.2-km  ( 107-mi)  perigee,  88.5-min  period,  and   8 1 . 5 O   inclination. 
Satellite reentered April 12. (Pres  Rpt 72) 
*  Senate  voted  51 to  46 to  cu t   off  all  Federal  funding  fo r   SST,  apparently 
ending  controversial  project.  House had   voted  to  stop  Federal  funding 

80 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March  24 

March  18.  Specific  proposal  before  Senate  had  been  to   provide  $134 
million  more  for   continued  work  on  two  SST prototypes  fo r   next  three 
months.  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  said  Nixon  Administration 
had  requested  $235  million  for  SST development  in   FY  1972  budget, 
but  he  predicted  tha t   if  White House  continued  to   seek  appropriations 
it  would  be  defeated,  Wall  Street  Journal  reported.  ( C R ,   3/24/71, 
S3818-69;  WSJ,  3/25/71) 
President  Nixon  issued  statement  following  Senate  disapproval  of  funds 
for   SST, calling  action  “a  reversal  of  America’s  tradition  of  staying  in 
the  vanguard  of  scientific  and   technological  advance.”  He  said:  “It has  
always been  America’s  pride,  and   the  source  of  much  of  our  strength, 
tha t  we  have  constantly  reached  out  toward  new  horizons in  the  search 
for  knowledge--not  from  a  chauvinistic  desire  to  be  number  one,  but 
f rom   the  conviction  that  we  must  continue  to  develop  the  countless 
new  benefits  tha t   flow  from  exploration  of  the  unknown.  Development 
of  the  SST has  been  a  pa r t   of  tha t   psoud,  creative,  and  deeply  humanis- 
tic  tradition.  Though  the  Congress  has  declined  to   continue  helping 
fund   this  development,  I  shall  strive  to  ensure  that  the  tradition  is 
maintained.”  (PD, 3 /29 /71 ,541)  
Boeing  Co.  Vice  President  for  Industrial  Relations  Lowell  P.  Mickelwait 
said  company would  lay  off  about  7000  workers  and  disband  SST pro- 
gram  as  result  of  Senate’s  rejection  of  SST financing.  Plans  were  in  
anticipation  of  notice  of  SST program  termination  from  DOT. Of  work- 
ers  to  be  laid  off  within  seven  weeks  of  notice,  4500  were  force  work- 
ing  directly  on  SST production.  Others were  clerical  and   office  workers. 
Mickelwait  said  Seattle-area work  force  could  drop  to  26 500  or  remain 
a s   high  as  31 000  after  SST program  cancellation.  Estimate  of  29 000 
workers was  “reasonable.”  (AP, B Sun, 3/25/71,  A l )  
NASA  announced  selection  of  RCA  Corp.  to   receive  $12-million,  cost-plus- 
award-fee contract  for   Atmosphere  Explorer  ( A E )   satellites  C,  D,  and 
E.  Spacecraft  would  be  launched  in   1973,  1974,  and   1975  to   study 
upper  atmosphere  between  80  and   240  km  (50  to   150  m i ) .   NASA 
Release 71 -43 )  
NASA  announced  availability  of  computer  information  packages  NASA/ 
STIMS  (Scientific  and   Technical  Information  Modular  System)  and  
NASA/RECON  (Remote Console)  from  Computer Software Management 
and  Information  Center  (COSM IC ) ,   operated  by  Univ.  of  Georgia  un- 
der  NASA  contract.  Packages would  enable  users  to  set  up  on-line infor- 
mation  retrieval  systems  similar  to  NASA’s. (NASA  Release  71-44)  
March  25:  ARC   researchers  had  used  sensors  on  twin-engine  Cessna  401  
light  aircraft  to  detect  and  measure  oil  spills  in   Pacific  Ocean  off 
California,  NASA  announced.  Sensors  had  detected  slicks  from  heavy 
and  light  crude  oils  and  light  diesel  oil.  ARC   researchers  John  P. 
Millard  and   John  C.  Arveson  had  said  approach  should  be  applicable 
to satellite-borne sensor system.  (NASA  Release 71-42) 
West  Germany’s  Bochum  Observatory  reported  Communist  China’s  sec- 
ond  satellite  (launched  March  3)  had  stopped  transmitting  signals  on 
March  23.  Scientists  did  not  know  whether  satellite  had  failed  o r   had 
been  turned off.  (AP, W Star, 3/25/71,  A l )  
President  Nixon  sent  message  to  Congress  proposing  establishment  of 
Dept.  of  Natural  Resources,  Dept.  of  Community Development,  Dept. 
of  Human  Resources,  and  Dept.  of  Economic  Affairs.  Dept.  of  Natural 

81 

March  25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1Wl 

Resources  would  absorb  Dept.  of  Interior  and  would  include  func- 
tions  of  DOT,  NOU, 
and  civilian  power  functions  of  AEC.  While  DOT 
w a s   relatively  new  entity  i t   was  “organized  around  methods  and   not 
around  purposes.”  Much  of  DOT would  be  moved  into  new  Dept.  of 
Economic  Affairs,  “but  those  functions  which  particularly  support 
community  development  would  be  placed  in   the  Department  which  is 
designed to meet that  goal.’’ 
Dept.  of  Economic  Affairs  would  include  National  Transportation 
Safety  Board,  Transportation  Systems  Center,  FAA,  Science  Informa- 
tion  Exchange  program  from  Smithsonian  Institution,  and   Office  of 
Technology  Utilization from NASA  ( P D ,  3 / 2 5 / 7 1 , 5 4 5 6 0 )  
*  President  Nixon  spoke by  telephone  with  Boeing  Co.  employees  in   Seat- 
tle,  Wash.,  and   Wichita,  Kans.,  to  express  thanks  for  work  on  SST 
project:  “The  reason  I  fought  so hard  to  keep  the  SST project  alive  was 
tha t   I  believe  deeply  tha t   America  must  remain  in   the  vanguard  of 
scientific  and  technological  progress-the 
kind  of  progress  your  team 
represents.”  ( P D ,  3/25/71,560-1) 
Report  that  Japan  planned  to  build  supersonic  transport  aircraft  since 
U S .   had  dropped  SST program  was  denied  by  Shoichi  Akazawa,  offi- 
cial  of  Japanese  International  Trade  and  Industry  Ministry  in   Tokyo. 
(Reuters,  a7 Post, 3/25/71,  A23) 
Economic  impact of  end  of  SST subsidy was  described by  Frank  C.  Porter 
in   Wushington Post:  While move  could  idle  13 000 workers across US., 
“it is   unlikely  immediately  to  cause more  than  a  ripple  in   the  $1 tril- 
lion  American  economy.”  Some  experts  had  suggested  that  continued 
SST development  could  cost  more  jobs  ultimately  than  i t   would  create. 
Meanwhile,  i t   would  cost  U S .   Government  extra  $97  million  to  scrap 
program:  contract  termination  costs  of  $52  million  to  Boeing  Co.,  $33 
million  to  General  Electric  Co.,  $10  million  in   miscellaneous  termina- 
tion  costs,  and  $2  million  to  close  SST project  office  at  DOT. Govern- 
ment  also  would  have  to  return  $22.4  million  in  downpayments made 
by airlines.  ( W  Pos t ,  3/25/71,  A23) 
Tass  announced  construction  by  Soviet scientists  of  ‘‘world’s  first  operat- 
ing  installation”  to  convert  atomic  energy  directly  into  electricity. 
Installation  had  produced  “several  kilowatts”  for  “new  major  achieve- 
ment  of  Soviet  atomic  science  and  technology.”  AEC  said  later  that, 
while  U S .  had  done  same  thing  on  smaller  scale,  U.S.S.R.  might  be 
closer  to  building  unit  large  enough  to  power  giant,  multichannel 
comsats,  long-range  space  missions,  o r   compact  power  station  under 
sea or in  remote places.  (Cohn,  W Pos t ,  3/26/71,  A l )  
*  Sen.  Edmund  S.  Muskie  (D-Me.)  introduced,  for   himself  and  cospon- 
sors,  S.  1382,  “to  authorize  the  Secretary  of  Transportation  to   carry  
out  a  special  program  of  transportation  research  and  development 
utilizing  the  unique  experience  and  manpower  of  the   airframe  and  
defense industries.”  (CR, 3/25/71,  S3900) 
9  French  government approved  plans  fo r   construction  of  world’s  first  com- 
mercial  air-cushion  railroad  t o   relieve  auto  traffic  crisis.  (Hess,  NYT, 
3 /26 /71 ,65)  
March  26:  Intelsut-IV  F-2, 
launched  by  NASA  for   ComSatCorp  Jan. 25, 
began  commercial  service,  transmitting  to  15  ear th   stations  in  West- 
e rn   Europe,  Latin  America,  and  North  America.  Satellite  was  initially 

82 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March 26 

carrying  830  circuits  and  transmission  was  excellent.  ( INTELSAT  Re- 
lease 71-20;  ComSatCorp PIO) 
*  NASA  announced  plans  for   first  launchings  of  NASA  sounding rockets  from 
French  Guiana  Space  Center  a t   Kourou  in  cooperative  France-US. 
upper-atmosphere  research  project.  Project  would  launch  20  French 
Centaure  and  NASA  Nike-Cajun rockets  to  obtain  da ta   on  structure  and 
circulation  of  equatorial  atmosphere  between  30-  and   95-km  (18- and 
60-mi)  altitudes.  Under  agreement  between  French  National  Center 
fo r   Space  Studies  (CN E S )   and   NASA,  CNES  would  provide  Centaure 
rockets  with  sodium  vapor  payloads,  F-1  launcher,  launch  team,  and  
tracking  and   ground  support.  NASA  would  be  responsible  fo r   Nike- 
Cajuns  with  grenade  and  ozone  payloads,  one Nike with  an   inert  2nd 
stage,  and  ground  support  for  payloads.  Each  agency  would  bear  cost 
of  its agreed responsibilities.  (NASA   Release 71-53) 
LeRC  tests  had  shown  turbofan  built  by  General  Electric  Co.’s  Aircraft 
Engine  Group  was  quieter  than  any  in   use  on  commercial  jets,  NASA 
announced. Noise  data  from  January   tests  of  three  GE  turbofans  had 
been  analyzed.  Francis  J ,   Montegani  of  L ~ R C  Quiet  Engine  Project 
had  said  if  four   quiet  turbofans  were  installed  in  long-range  subsonic 
transport,  noise  level  would  be  within  FAA  standards. 
(NASA  Release 
71-81) 
*  Despite  basic  differences,  lunar   samples  were  not  completely  different 
from  terrestrial  rocks,  Northern  Illinois  Univ.  geologist  S.  S.  Goldich 
wrote  in  Science.  Basalt  horn€els from  Keweenawan  Duluth  complex  in  
Minnesota,  containing  7%   by weight  of  titanium,  were  similar  in  many 
respects  to  ApoZZo  11  lunar  samples.  Hornfels’ texture,  a s   well  as pri- 
mary  textures  in  lunar   rocks,  resembled  those  in   Keweenawan  rocks. 
(Science, 3 /26 /71 ,1245-6)  
Preliminary  results  of  studies  of  nuclear  tracks  in   glass  lens  cover  of  TV 
camera  landed  on  moon  by  Surveyor  3 April  19,  1967, and  retrieved 
by  Apo l lo   12  mission  were  reported  in   Science  by  Washington  Univ. 
physicists G.  Crozaz  and R.  M.  Walker.  Studies gave  information  about 
low-energy  nuclear  particles  from  sun   and  provided  basic  calibration 
rate  of  nearly  10 
for  nuclear  tracks  in  lunar  rock  surfaces-erosion 
millionths  cm  per  year.  Results  also  suggested  “small-scale  erosion 
process  i n  lunar  rocks.” 
Use  of  Surveyor  3  TV  camera  glass  filter  had  enabled  .General 
Electric  Co.  scientists  R.  L.  Fleischer,  H.  R.  Hart,  Jr.,  and  G.  M. 
Comstock  to  determine, for  first  time,  energy  spectrum of  solar  cosmic- 
ray   particles  of  iron   group  over  energy  range  from   1 to  100  million 
ev  per  nucleon.  Difference  between  observed  spectrum  and  limiting 
spectrum  derived  previously  from  lunar  rock  tracks  gave  erosion  rate 
of  0  to  2  A  per  year.  “High-energy  fission  of  lead,  induced  by  galac- 
tic  cosmic  ray   protons  and   alpha  particles,  has  also  been  observed.” 
(Science, 3/26/71,  1 2 3 7 4 1 )  
Element  variation  and   possible  material  source  of  ApoZZo  12  crystalline 
rocks  was  discussed  in   Science  by  Univ.  of  Tokyo  geologists  Ikuo 
Kushiro  and  Hiroshi  Haramura.  Chemical  analysis  of  nine  rocks  had 
shown  five  rocks  contained  normative  quar tz ;   others  had  normative 
olivine  and   hypersthene.  Rocks  showed  wide  range  in   ratio  of  iron   to  
magnesium.  Findings  led  investigators  to  suggest  rocks,  with  one  ex- 
ception,  represented  different  par ts   of  differentiated  magmatic  body, 

83 

March  26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

in   which  magmatic  differentiation  by  crystallization  and   settling  of 
olivine  was  most  effective.  Source  material  of  original  magma  might 
be  peridotite  with  o r   without  plagioclase  o r   spinel  o r   garnet,  depend- 
ing  on  depth  of  magma  generation.  (Sc ience ,  3/26/71,  1235-7) 
*  Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  MSC  Director,  had  been  selected  to  receive  1971  
James  Watt  International Medal  from  Institution  of  Mechanical Engi- 
neers  in   Lpndon,  MSC  Roundup  announced.  Dr.  Gilruth  had  been 
nominated  by  American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers  and  was 
cited  for  his  “distinguished  services  to  Aeronautical  and   Space  Re- 
search  and  for  . . . engineering  leadership which  inspired  and  directed 
the  Manned  Space  Flights  and  successful  landings  on  the  Moon.” 
(M SC  Roundup,  3 /26 /71 ,1 )  
0  NASA  announced  appointment  of  B.  Porter  Brown,  Director  of  Opera- 
tions  Support  Requirements  in  OMSF,  a s   Special  Assistant  for  Mis- 
sions, Skylab Program,  OMSF.  (NASA Release  71-45)  
New  York  attorney  Pau l   Sawyer,  who  had  joined  NASA  to  evaluate 
agency’s  public  relations  efforts  on  March  22,  had  taken  30-day leave 
from  law  firm  in   which  he  represented astronauts  in  negotiating  exclu- 
sive  rights  to  their  stories  fo r   magazines,  Washington Post  reported. 
Sawyer had  said  he  would  not  be  representing  astronauts  during  NASA 
assignment.  ( W  Post,  3/26/71,  A3) 
March  27:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  4001  into  orbit  with  291-km  (180.8- 
m i )   apogee,  186-km  (115.6-mi)  perigee,  89.2-min period,  and  72.8” 
inclination.  Satellite reentered April 9.  ( GSFC SSR, 3/31/71;  4/30/71) 
Wa shhg ton  Post  editorial  commented  on  NASA’s public  information  pol- 
icy:  “There  is  something  strange  about  the  decision  . . . to  bring  in   a 
New  York  lawyer,  Paul  Sawyer,  as  a  consultant  on  its  public  affairs 
policies.  NASA  has had,  for a  decade  now,  what  seems  to  u s   and   to most 
journalists to  be  the  most  effective  and   most  honest  public  information 
program  in  government.  I t   is  hard  to  see why  public monies should  be 
spent  to  study  it,  particularly  when  the  man  chosen  to  make  the  study 
has  represented the  astronauts  in  recent  months  in   negotiating  private 
contracts  for   the  stories  of  their  activities.”  ( W  Pos t ,   3/27/71,  A18) 
Pattern  of  recent  ICBM   construction  in   U.S.S.R.  might  presage  deploy- 
ment  of  new  Soviet  offensive  weapon  system,  according  to  US. offi- 
cials  quoted  in  New  York  Times. Construction detected  Dec.  20,  1970, 
had  shown  20  holes  large  enough  to  accommodate  Soviet  SS-9  ICBM  
o r   even  larger  weapons.  Holes  were  distributed  in  five  clusters  along 
wide  a rc  forming  Soviet  offensive missile  system from Polish border  to 
Chinese frontier.  (Szulc, N Y T ,  3 /21 /71 ,1)  
*  New  Republic  published  interview with  Communist  China  Premier  Chou 
En-lai  by  Edgar  Snow.  Premier  had  said  in   Peking:  “.  . . our   nuclear 
tests  are  still  in  the  experimental  stage,  and  every  test  carried  out  is  
limited  and  made  only  when  necessary.  The  aim  of  our  nuclear  tests 
is  to  break  the  nuclear  monopoly  and  nuclear  blackmail  and  prevent 
a  nuclear  war.  Therefore,  each  time  when  we  conclude  a  test,  we 
declare  that  a t   no  time  and   in  no  circumstances  shall  China  be  the 
first  to  use  nuclear  weapons.”  (N ew  Republic,  3/27/71,  20-3) 
had  contacted  DOT, WilliamaM. Magruder,  Director  of  DOT’S  SST pro-  - 
March  28:  Foreign  sources  interested  in   buying  SST development  package 
gram, told  press  in  Washington, D.C.  Inquiries  had  come  from  Japa- 
nese  trading  firm  Ataka,  from  Middle  East  source,  and  from  West 

84 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1W l  

March  28 

German  source.  Magruder  said  congressional  leaders  “have  made  no 
attempt  to  discourage”  plan  to   seek  package  to  recoup  termination 
costs  of  SST  program,  estimated  a t   between  $97 million  and   $157  mil- 
lion,  depending  on  whether  airlines  got  back  SST purchase  deposits. 
(AP, B Sun, 3/29/71,  A3) 
JPL  announced  that  Dr.  Gary  A.  Flandro,  former  JPL  scientist  who  for- 
mulated  planetary  Grand  Tour  concept,  had  been  named  winner  of 
British  Interplanetary  Society’s  Golovine  Award  for  “outstanding  con- 
tributions  to   astronautics”  through  basic  mathematical  work  he  did 
a t   JPL   from  1965  to   1968.  Dr.  Flandro,  now  associate  professor  a t  
Univ.  of  Utah,  would  receive  award  in  June.  ( JPL   Release  574)  
*  Eugene  C.  Draley,  LaRC  Director  f o r   Center  Development,  died  a t   age 
55.  Draley  had  joined  LaRC   research  staff  in   1938  and   had  held  in- 
creasingly  responsible  positions,  from   Head  of  8-Foot  High-speed 
Tunnel  to  LaRc  Assistant  Director.  (LangZey Researcher,  4/2/71,  1) 
Sherman  M.  Fairchild,  founder  and   board  chairman  of  Fairchild  Hiller 
Corp.,  died  a t   age  74.  Fairchild  had   invented  first  aerial  camera  and  
had  been  honored  in  1970  by  Smithsonian  Institution  for  50  yrs’ 
service  in   aviation  industry.  (Fowle,  N Y T ,   3/29/71,  32 )  
March  29:  X-24A 
lifting  body  reached  its  maximum  speed  of  1687  km 
(1048 mph)  and  21  300-m  (70 000-ft)  altitude  dur ing  25th  flight  from 
FRC.  USAF aircraft,  launched  from  EL52  aircraft,  was  piloted  by  NASA 
test  pilot  John  A.  Manke  on  powered  flight  to  expand  flight  envelope, 
determine  lateral-directional  derivative  with  rudder  bias  a t   2’ 
toe 
out,  and  check  lateral-acceleration  feedback  to  control  system.  (NASA 
Pro j   Off;  Pres  Rpt  72 )  
*  U.S.S.R.  announced  that  Soviet  supersonic transport  Tu-144 had  reached 
designed  2400-km-per-hr  (1500-mph)  speed  a t   16  700-m  (55 000-ft) 
altitude  during  test  flight  Nov.  12,  1970.  (N Y T ,  3/29/71,  53 )  
0  NASA  announced award  of  seven-month study contracts  totaling $1 387 576 
to  nine  universities  and  one  NASA  center  to  define  requirements  for 
seven  astronomy  experiments  for  proposed  High  Energy  Astronomy 
Observatory ( HEAO )  . ( MSFC  Release 71-52) 
*  FAA   and  DOT  announced  awards  totaling  $14246542   in   amendments  to 
contracts  with  IBM  Federal  Systems  Div.  for  additional  equipment and  
services to  automate  a i r   traffic  control  system.  (FAA  Release  71-35) 
*  Immediate  one-year  freeze  on  deployment  by  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  of  land- 
based  missiles  was  urged  by  Sen.  Henry  M.  Jackson  (D-Wash.)  in  
Senate  speech.  Both  countries  would  retain  freedom  to  ensure  sur- 
vivability  of  strategic  land-based  forces  as  long  as  they  did  not  add 
to offensive potential.  ( C R ,  3/29/71,  S4035-6) 
Editorial  in   Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology  commented  on  rejec- 
tion  by  Government  of  further  SST  funding:  “The  fate  of  the  SST 
should  serve  notice  . . . that  the  aerospace  industry  can no  longer 
survive with  its  political  naivete  and   aloofness  from  the  fray.”  I t  was 
“sad  day  when  a  deliberate  national  decision  is   made  to  abandon  a 
major  frontier  of  technological  advance.  But  i t   will  be  even  sadder 
when  the  victors  in  this  significant  debate  gird  for  their  next  assault 
on  the  space  shuttle  program.”  (Hotz, A v   W k ,  3/29/71,  9 )  
March  30:  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  Acting  NASA  Administrator,  testified  on 
aerospace unemployment  before Senate Committee on  Aeronautical and 
Space  Sciences  during  FY  1972 authorization  hearings:  From  number 

85 

March  30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

of  studies  of  unemployment  of  scientists  and   engineers,  estimated 
30 000  to  40 000  were  out  of  work  a t   end  of  1970.  “The  majority  of 
these  came  from  aerospace-related  industries.  Projections  indicate  that 
this  number  could  more  than  double  by  June  1972, which  means  that 
as  many  as   30  percent  of  the  Nation’s  aerospace  scientists  and   engi- 
neers  will  be  unemployed.  The  effect  of  this  national  trend-in 
terms 
of  an   individual  scientist  o r   engineer  being  reemployed-is  magnified 
by  the  concentration  of  this  unemployment,  geographically  and   by 
tra in ing   and   experience.  . . . This  not  only  causes  great personal  hard-  
sh ip   but  . . . represents  the  loss  of  a  tremendous  national  resource.” 
NASA-sponsored  survey  by  Battelle  Memorial  Institute  of  persons  la id  
off  by  group  of  NASA  contractors  from  June   1968  to  September  1970 
had   made  preliminary  findings:  only  31% had  found  permanent  jobs, 
32%  had   found  temporary  jobs,  32%  were  still  unemployed,  and  
5%  had  left  work-force.  Average  person  was  unemployed  31  weeks. 
Of  those  who  had  found  permanent  jobs,  only  18% returned  to  aero- 
space.  Of  those  permanently  employed  outside  of  aerospace,  only  12% 
reported  having  positions  highly  related  to   aerospace  skills  and  50% 
reported  new  positions  unrelated  to  aerospace.  Unemployment  ra te   of 
those  over  50  was  48%.  Of  those  who  had   found  permanent  work 
outside,  31%  said  they  would  not  re turn   to  aerospace  if  given  oppor- 
tun i ty ;   16% said  they  would.  Preliminary  results  of  survey  indicated 
we  a re   losing  much  of  the  aerospace  capability  that  is  an   indis- 
c c  
pensable  ingredient  of  our   long  term  economic  strength  and   national 
security.” 
I n   closing,  Dr.  Low  made  point  that  there  was  “no  either/or  choice 
between  technological  advances  and   social  advances.  Without  tech- 
nology,  we  cannot  maintain  the  capability  to  deal  effectively with  any  
national  problem.” 
Dr.  Low  was  questioned  on  his  testimony  tha t   U.S.S.R.  was  spend- 
ing   more  on  R&D  than  U.S.  was  spending  in   total  science  and  tech- 
nology  area.  He  answered  that  Soviet  space  program,  with  apparent 
Soviet  policy  of  steadily  increasing  R&D  investment,  would  soon  match 
and   then  surpass  U S .   program  in   size  and   accomplishment.  “For  this 
comparison,  I  am  dealing  with  the  combined  civil  and   military  space 
programs  of  both  nations;  to  try   to  differentiate  between  civil  and  
military  activities  of  the  U.S.S.R.  would  be  speculative  a t   best.  The 
most  difficult  comparison  to  t ry   to  make  between  the  U S .   and  
U.S.S.R.  economies  or  programs  is  in   terms  of  absolute  costs:  each 
national  economy  is  geared  and  motivated  to  produce  a  different,  non- 
parallel  mix  of  goods  and   services.”  ( C R ,  7/31/71,  E8611-2) 
Dale  D.  Myers,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight,  discussed  future  of  Apollo  program:  “We  can  now  move  with 
confidence  to  the  final  phase.  . . . In   these  last  missions, we will  expand 
the  capability  of  the  system  very  dramatically.  Design  changes  in   the 
spacecraft  and   supporting  equipment  will  allow  the  two  astronauts  in  
the  luna r   module  to  remain  on  the  moon  up   to  67 hours,  as  compared 
with  34  hours  on  Apollo  14. The  scientific  payload  landed  on  the  moon 
will  be  doubled  to  above  1200 lbs  [54& kg].  Changes  in   the   command 
and   service  modules  will  permit  up   to  10  days  total  flight  time  and  
major  increases  i n   orbital  scientific  activities.  Dur ing   the  Apollo  15 

86 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

March  30 

and   16 missions  small  subsatellites  will  be  placed  in   lunar  orbit  and  
will  continue  to  make  scientific  measurements  long after  the  astronauts 
return  to earth.” 
In   Skylab  program,  “three  separate  three-man  Skylab  flight  crews 
will  be  selected  during  the  coming  year.  Scientist  astronauts  will  be 
included.  . . . They  plan  to  perform  about  50  experiments  in   various 
disciplines.  Twenty  of  these  a re   in   the  life  sciences,  to  determine  how 
human  beings  adjust  and   perform  under  the  conditions  of  prolonged 
space flight, up to 2 months’ duration. 
“They  will  also  operate  the  Skylab  Ear th   Resources  Experiment 
Package  in  the  second  space  flight  phase  of  NASA%  ear th   resources 
program.  These  observations w i l l   be  in   conjunction  with  [and]  com- 
plementary  to  those  [of]  the  automated ear th   resources test  technology 
ERTS, to be  launched in   1972.” 
FY  1972 request  for  space shuttle  of  $100 million  would  provide  for 
broad  spectrum  of  studies,  including  analysis  of  new  alloys  and   prom- 
ising  external  materials  for  thermal  protection ; test  demonstrations of 
design  concepts  for  structures;  wind-tunnel tests  to  define  aerodynamic 
heating,  launch  aerodynamics, etc. ; design  of  long-leadtime hardware, 
subsystems,  and   test  devices;  initiation  of  scaled  model  for  flight  tests; 
dynamics testing;  electronic-data-bus-system demonstration testing;  and 
integration  of  upgraded  fuel-cell  electrical  power  subsystem  with  other 
components  for  proof-of-concept  testing.  (Transcript) 
Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  testified  on 
DOD   applications  of  space  transportation  system  and  DOD-NASA 
team- 
work  on  space  shuttle : “Present  DOD  satellite  communications program 
consists  of  two  major  systems:  The  long  distance  point  to  point  or 
strategic system  and  the  local-area  multiple-user or  tactical  system.  . . . 
We  are  pursuing  a  new  system  called Defense  Satellite Communications 
System,  Phase  11,  which  can  provide  many  voice  channels  to  selected 
limited  areas  of  the  earth.  These  present  and  proposed  systems  give 
us  the  flexibility for  voice  and   teletype  communications from our  forces 
overseas  and  allow  rapid  transmission  of  photographic  images  from 
operational  theaters  to  the  United States.” 
In   conjunction with  NASA  studies, USAF  was  analyzing defense applica- 
tions  of  space  shuttle  to  provide  better  insight  into  utility  of  concept 
for  DOD.  USAF  was  providing  NASA  with  data  to  help  ensure  that  con- 
figuration  was  of  maximum  utility  to  DOD. 
NASA  and   USAF  had  worked  jointly  on  engine  development. Air  Force 
“has  supported  advanced  development  efforts  on  liquid  rocket  engines 
in   the  past,  and  more  recently  concluded  a  hydrogen/oxygen  high 
performance  engine  demonstration  program.”  Engine,  XLR-129,  had 
“provided  the  basis  fo r   selection  of  the  reusable  high  pressure  rocket 
engine  concept  for  the  shuttle.  I t   also  provided  design  data  for  a 
250 000-pound [ 1100-kilonewton] thrust engine which  supports the  cur- 
rent  shuttle engine design concepts.’’ 
In   operational  testing  area,  “USAF  and  NASA  recently  conducted 
unpowered  approach  and   landing  demonstrations  with  F-111s  and  
l3-52s.  . . . These  demonstrations  investigated  terminal  area  energy 
management  for  maneuvering  reentry  vehicles  and   have  a  relationship 
to  the  Space Shuttle  operational  concepts.”  (Transcript) 

87 

March  30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

DOT  request  to  Congress  for  $97.3  million  to  terminate  SST Development 
program  was  prepared  by  James  M.  Beggs,  Under  Secretary  of 
Transportation.  Sum  did  not  include  repayment  of  $58.5 million  risk 
capital  contributed  by  nine  U S .   airlines  and   KLM  Royal  Dutch  Air- 
lines  to  support  SST R&D.  (AP,  NYT,  3/31/71,  3 :27)  
*  U.K.  government  and   Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  agreed  on  terms  for  per- 
petuating  Rolls-Royce engine  developed for  Lockheed’s  GlOll Tr iS tar  
jet  transport  after  two-day  meetings  i n  Washington,  D.C.  Terms  would 
be  submitted  to  airlines  tha t   had  ordered  a ircraf t   and  to  banks  financ- 
ing  sales.  (Witkin, NYT,  3 /31 /71 ,1)  
ABC,  CBS,  and   NBC  TV  networks  had   filed  statement  with  FCC  saying  they 
planned  use  of  other  domestic  comsats  for  program  transmission  rather 
than   building  separate satellite system  of  their  own,  Wall Street  Journa l  
reported.  Networks  were  negotiating  with  several  companies  on  use 
of  domestic  comsats  bu t   would  like  to  keeD  their  own  oDtion  oDen  in  
case  negotiations  failed  to  lead  to  %atisfa&ory”  arrangiments.  *( W S ] ,  
30 /30 /71 ,6 )  
U.S.S.R.  a t   Geneva  disarmament  conference  introduced  draf t   treaty  that 
would  bind  nations  “not  to  develop,  produce,  stockpile  or  otherwise 
acquire’’  microbiological  or   other  biological  agents  or  toxins  “not 
designed  for  the  prevention  of  disease  or  for  other  peaceful  purposes.” 
(Lusinchi, NYT,  3 /31 /71 ,1 )  
March  31 : Canadian  Isis 2  (ISIS-B) 
International Satellite  for  Ionospheric 
Studies  was  launched  by  NASA  from  WTR  6:57  pm  PST  by  thrust- 
augmented  three-stage  Thor-Delta  booster.  Satellite  entered  orbit  with 
1423-km  (884.2-mi)  apogee,  1355-km  (842.0-mi)  perigee,  113.5-min 
period,  and  88.2’ 
inclination.  Pr imary   NASA  objectives  were  to  place 
Isis 2  into  circular  ear th   orbit  that  would  permit  study  of  topside  of 
ionosphere  above  electron  peak  of  F  region  and   to  extend  cooperative 
Canadian-US.  program  of  ionospheric  studies  initiated  by  Alouette  1 
(launched  Sept.  28,  1962)   by  combining  sounder  data  with  correlative 
direct  measurements  for  time  sufficient  to  cover  latitudinal  and  diurnal 
variations  dur ing   high  solar  activity.  Spacecraft  was  operating  satis- 
factorily  and   was  expected  to  be  fully  operational  by  April  17. 
Canadian-built  Isis 2  was  eight-sided  spheroid  that  weighed  264  kg 
(582  lbs)  , was  127  cm  (50  i n )   in   diameter  with  two  sounder  antennas, 
and   carried  1 2   ionospheric  investigation  experiments.  Satellite  was 
fourth  in   series  of  five  satellites  to  improve  understanding  of  iono- 
spheric  physics.  First  launch  in   series  (Nov.  28,  1965)   had  orbited 
Canada’s  Alouette  2  and   U S .   Explorer  31.  Isis 1 had  been  launched 
Jan.  30,  1969.  ISIS  program  was  joint  undertaking  of  NASA  and  
(DRB )   under  December  1963 
Canadian  Defence  Research  Board 
Memorandum  of  Understanding.  DRB  was  responsible  for  spacecraft 
design,  fabrication,  electrical  testing,  experiment  integration,  and  
satellite  control.  NASA  provided  launch  vehicle  and   launch  facilities. 
(NASA   P ro j  Off; NASA Release 71-41 ) 
NASA  announced  confirmation  of  text  of  agreement  with  Soviet  Academy 
of  Sciences  on  exchange  of  lunar   samples  and   on  procedures  toward 
recommendations  fo r   jo in t   consideration  of  objectives  and   results  of 
space  research  [see  Jan.  18-211.  Agreement  had  been  confirmed  by 
exchange  of  letters  between  Dr.  George M.  Low,  Acting  NASA  Adminis- 

88 

March  31 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
trator,  and   Academician  Mstislav  V. Keldysh,  President  of  Soviet 
Academy.  (NASA  Release 71-57) 
*  Data  from  Explorer  42  (Uhuru ,  launched  Dec.  12,  1970)  w a s   reported 
a t   American  Astronomical  Society  meeting  in  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  by 
Dr.  Riccardo  Giaconni  of  American  Science  and   Engineering,  Inc., 
principal  investigator  for  satellite.  Explorer 42  had  detected  new  x-ray 
pulsar  Cygnus  X-1  generating  x-ray  pulses  a t   15 per  sec  in   Constel- 
lation  Cygnus,  13 new  x-ray  objects  in   Milky  Way  and  remote  gal- 
axies,  and   confirmed  that  quasar  3C273  in   Seyfert Galaxy  was  x-ray 
emitter.  Quasar was  billion  light years  away-most 
distant  object  from 
ear th  known to emit x-rays.  (NASA  Release 71-50) 
*  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill 
Research  Range  carrying  TRW  Inc.,  experiment  to  conduct  aurora l  
studies.  (SR l is t)  
MSFC  announced  award  of  $2 24+9 700,  one-year contract  to  A i r   Products 
and   Chemicals,  Inc.,  to  supply  and   deliver  liquid  hydrogen  for  all 
Government  aerospace use  in   eastern  U.S.  (MSFC   Release  71-55) 
During March:  Prestige  of  U.S.  science was  being  undermined  by  assaults 
from   many  side-which  might  leave U S .  “a  second-rate power  and   a 
P.  Lessing  wrote  in   Fortune 
third-rate  place  to  live”-Lawrence 
article. 
Funds  had  been  “damagingly  cut  in   such basic  areas  a s  the  life  and 
medical  sciences  . . . while  a large  amount  of  advanced  but  abstract 
technology,  which  could  begin  to  solve  the  problems  of  overcrowding, 
energy,  pollution,  transportation,  and   waste,  . . . are   going  neglected.” 
New  hostility  to  science  and  technology  had  arisen among many  “ordi- 
nary   Americans,”  even  from  within  science  itself,  and  among  young 
activists.  But  if  man’s  store  of  knowledge  were  torn  down,  man  would 
“backslide not  a  few  centuries  bu t   two  hundred  thousand  years.” 
Severe  cutback  in  research  and  development  because  of  Vietnam 
war,  inflation,  and  contracted economy-with  Federal R&D  expenditures 
declining  in  real  dollars  by  more  than  20%-possibly 
endangered 
whole  structure  of  science.  Decline  followed post-World  War  I1  growth 
that  had  produced  antibiotics,  atomic  power,  cryogenics,  computers, 
had   spurred  U.S.  to   do  its  own  basic  research.  “From  . . . only  a 
je t   planes,  rocket  vehicles,  radar ,   transistors,  masers,  and  lasers  and  
sparse  dozen  Nobel  Prizes  in   the  forty years  up  to  1940, U.S.  scientists 
went  on  in   the  next  thirty  years  to  win  forty-five.” 
“While  men  and   talent  a r e   . . . going  to  waste  the  things  that  need 
doing  . . . keep piling  up.”  U S .   was  beginning  to   lag   behind  other 
nations  in   high-energy  physics,  radioastronomy,  plasma  physics,  con- 
transportation,  and  life 
ventional  energy  research,  space  science, 
sciences.  “With  two  of  the  later,  more  scientifically  oriented  Apollo 
moon  flights  canceled,  though  equipment  is  bought  and  paid  for, 
work  on NASA’s forward-looking space station,  nuclear-powered rocket, 
and   unmanned planetary  exploration  vehicles has  been  so cut  back  tha t  
after  1975 almost  nothing  will  be  scheduled.  And  research funds  in  life 
sciences  were  still  lagging  20%  behind  research  capacity-in 
field 
that  held  promises  fo r   much  safer   biological  insecticides,  genetic 
repa ir   of  congenital defects, and   basic  attacks  on  cancer  and  heart  dis- 
ease.  (Fortune, 3/71,88-9,  153-5) 

89 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
During  March 
Production  of  formaldehyde,  acetaldehyde, and   glycolic  acid  in   uv tests 
under  simulated  Martian  conditions  indicated  organic  material  was 
probably  be&  produced  by  sunlight  on  Mars’  surface,  JPL scientists 
Dr.  Norman  H.  Horowitz,  Dr.  Jerry   S.  Hubbard,  and  Dr.  James  P. 
Hardy  reported  in  Proceedings  of  National  Academy  of  Science  of 
U SA .  Same organic  compounds were  believed  to  have  been  precursors 
to  biological  molecules  on  primitive  earth.  Dr.  Horowitz said  findings, 
obtained  from  irradiation  of  fine  soil  and   powdered  glass  samples by 
high-pressure  xenon  lamp  and  low-pressure mercury  lamp,  provided 
“most  favorable  indication  for   a  possible  Martian  biological  evolution 
tha t   we  have  had  in   the  last  five  years.”  There  were  “still  many  un- 
certainties,  however,  which  won’t  be  resolved  until  we  land  on  the 
planet.”  (Proceedings of N A S ,   3 / 7 1 , 5 7 4 4 )  
Promise  of  zero  g  in  manufacturing  in   space  was  described  by  A.  R. 
Sorells  in   A m r i c a  Illustrated,  USIA  publication  distributed  in   U.S.S.R. 
Technicians  anticipated  fu ture   world  of  factories  in  space,  where 
machines  were  grown  molecule-b y-molecule,  a s   nature  grew  plants. 
First  space workshops  were  scheduled  to  fly  dur ing   decade as  pioneers 
of  later  manufacturing  islands  circling  above  earth.  Even  dream  of 
perpetual motion  machines might materialize.  ( A m  Ill, 3-71,  34-37) 
NASA  published  Manned  Space  Program  Accident/Incident  Summaries. 
Result  of  NASA  Safety  Office  survey  of  accidents  and  incidents  that 
occurred  dur ing   Apollo  Program  development  years  could  be  used  in 
NASA  training  programs.  Of  some  10 000 case  documents  reviewed,  508 
mishaps had   been  studied  closely.  Of  these,  47%   had  occurred  dur ing  
operational  test  and  checkout.  Procedural  deficiencies  were  largest 
contributor  to  acc iden ts-46%-and  
74%   had  human  error   a s   con- 
tributing  factor.  ( NASA Awareness) 
Scientific impact  of  SST was  described by  James  J.  Haggerty  in  A ir   Line 
Pilot  magazine:  “SST  . . . represents  one  of  the  most  sweeping  aeronau- 
tical  advances  since  Kitty  Hawk,  one  that,  brought  to  fruition,  will 
have follow-on  impact  comparable to  the  introduction  of  je t   propulsion 
or  the  first  conquest of  the  sound  barrier.  I t  has  particular  importance 
as  a  research  vehicle,  because  there  is  no  other  airplane  flying  or  in  
development  with  its  particular  combination of  performance  character- 
istics.  I t   is equally important  a s  an  impetus to  technology,  since  the  SST 
contains  thousands  of  components  that  have  never  been  built  before.” 
-  . . a thrusting force pushing  aeronautical technology  to  a new  plateau.” 
SST was  “atmospheric  Apollo,  a  prober  of  new  regions  of  flight  and 
( A i r  L h e  Pilot,  3 /71)  
The  Making  of  an  Ex-astronaut by  former  astronaut Dr.  Brian  T.  O’Leary 
was  reviewed by  Edwin  E.  Salpeter  in  Bulletin of  the A tom ic  Scientists: 
“The most  apparent human  drama  in  the  book  is  the clash  between  two 
alien  cultures,  or  rather  the  struggle  of  a  minority  culture,  the  scientist 
surrounded  by  the  dominant  culture  of 
the  technologist-testpilot- 
administrator  combination.”  I t   was  interesting  psychological  sidelight 
that  Dr.  O’Leary  had  not  worried  about  “large  but  inevitable  dangers 
inherent  in  spaceflight itself,  but  bitterly  resented the  additional danger 
of  flying jets  (about  a  10 per  cent probability  of  death  in  a  jet  accident 
over  a  10-year  service  in   the  program).”  While  jet  flights  had  been 
emphasized,  opportunities  for  scientist-astronauts  to  participate  in 
space missions had  receded  and   opportunities  fo r   keeping up  scientific 

90 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

During March 

career  in   space  program  “were  severely  limited.”  Dr.  O’Leary  had 
become,  in  1968,  first  scientist-astronaut  to  resign.  (Bull  of  A tom ic  
Scientists, 3/71,  44) 
Second  edition  of  one-volume  Soviet  space  encyclopedia  C o sm n a u t i c s  
was  published  in   Moscow,  Book  listed  as  editor  Valentin  Petrovich 
Glushko,  reputed  chief  designer  of  Soviet  rockets  and  missiles,  and  
featured  biographical  article  on   him  describing  h is   work.  Pravda ,   in  
post-publication  article  on  encyclopedia, had  identified  chief  editor  as 
“Professor G.  Petrovich.”  (NYT,  3 /19 /71 ,3)  
*  Freeze  on  missile  testing  was  advocated  by  Stanford  Univ.  geneticist  Dr. 
Joshua  Lederberg  in   Bulletin  of  Atomic  Scientists:  “From  a  technical 
standpoint,  the  most  amenable  place  for  controls  is  testing;  a  com- 
prehensive freeze  on  all  missile  tests  would  be  most  easily  verified  and 
would  provide  the  utmost  assurance  against  the  perpetuation  of  a 
costly  technology  race.  I t   would  complicate some  peaceful applications 
of  space  technology.  However,  none  of  these  require  precise  reentry 
after  a  brief,  high  velocity  flight.  Furthermore,  nothing  would  be  lost 
in   requiring  a  definite  pattern  of  international  participation  in  space 
missions to  assure that  these were  a  net  benefit  to  the  whole  earth  from 
which  they  have embarked.”  (Bu l l  of  Atomic  Scientists, 3/71,  4-6,  43)  

91 

April  1971 

A p r i l   1:  Discovery  that  comets  were  made  of  water-ice  and   discovery  of 
new  concept  of  dynamics  of  interstellar  hydrogen  gas from  data  ob- 
tained  by  Ogo  5  (launched  March  4,  1968)  and   Oao  2  (launched 
Dec.  7,  1968)  were  announced.  Dr.  Charles  Lillie  and  Dr.  Gary 
Thomas  of  Univ.  of  Colorado  and   Prof.  Jacques  E.  Blamont  of  Univ. 
of  Par is   said  a t   NASA  Hq.  press  conference  tha t   OAO   observations  in- 
dicated  comets  were  water  with  traces  of  methane,  ammonia,  and 
cyanogen.  OGO  observations  showed  gas  surrounding  comets  to  be 
composed  almost  totally  of  hydrogen  and  that  interstellar  wind  pre- 
viously  believed  to  be  coming  from  constellation  Hercules  actually 
seemed  to  be  coming  from  Sagittarius  and  Scorpius.  Scientists  now 
surmised  that  there  was  no  stellar  wind,  but  only  apparent  wind 
caused  by  passage  of  solar  system  through  thin  and   nearly  stationary 
interstellar  medium  of  hydrogen.  (Lannan, W  S tar ,   4/2/71,  A9) 
U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  402  from  Baykonur  into  orb i t   with  1035-km 
(643.2-mi)  apogee, 948-km  (589.1-mi)  perigee,  104.9-min period,  and 
64.9’  inclination.  (GSFC SSR ,  4/30/71;  SBD ,   4/5/71,  181) 
*  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  Acting  NASA  Administrator,  summarized  reasons 
NASA  proposed  space  shuttle  development  a s   top  space  priority  for 
1970s, dur ing   Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space  Sciences 
NASA  FY  1972 authorization  hearings:  U S .   “should  and   w i l l   continue 
an  active  space program  from  now  on”  and  new  approach  was  needed 
to  make  space  “practical  and   economical”  for   all  Users-NASA, 
DOD, 
other  Government  agencies,  and  commercial  enterprises.  Reusable 
shuttle,  “entirely  new  concept  in  space  operation,”  would  deliver  and 
retrieve  manned  and  unmanned  payloads;  “we  will  be  able  to  repair, 
modify,  or  update  payloads  in   orb i t   and  . . . reduce  drastically  the 
costs  of  payloads  by  taking  advantage  of  the  much  larger  weight  and 
volume  that  will  be  available.  . . . When  future  space  programs  using 
the  shuttle  are   compared  with  those  using  conventional  launch  vehi- 
cles,  the  shuttle  offers  a  very  real  economic  advantage.” 
Shuttle  development  should  proceed  in  FY  1972  because  necessary 
technology  was  available,  delay  in   development  would  widen  existing 
four-year  gap  in   U S .   manned  space  flight  schedule,  and   shuttle  was 
“keystone  to  the  total  plan  for  the  U S .   space program.” 
KASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  Dale  D. 
Myers  discussed  candidate  concepts  for   space  shuttle : “The  principle 
objective  in   examining  various  systems  is  to  determine  which  systems 
have  the  greatest  potential  for  low  operational  costs  together  with  low 
development  costs.  The  most  attractive  system  . . , is  the  fully  reusable 
system  where  nothing  is  discarded  in   the  course  of  the  flight  and  the 
orbiter  and   booster  are   ‘turned  around’  with  minimum  maintenance 
f o r  reuse.  Th is   concept  has  been  the  subject  of  intense  ‘phase  B’ defi- 
nition  studies over . . . the past  9 months.” 
Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  Associate  Administrator  for   Space  Science  and  
Applications,  reviewed  OSSA  programs,  goals,  and   motivations : “When 
PRECEDING  PAGE  BLANK  NOT  FILM c 
93 

April  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

we  speak  of  ‘space’  science  and  ‘space’  applications,  we  a re   talking 
about  using  a  new  technology  . . . to   enhance  scientific  progress  and  
its  translation  into  benefits.  In   this  role,  NASA  is  a  service  agency;  we 
provide  the  technology,  the  engineering,  the  management,  and   the 
leadership  tha t   make  possible  the   exploration  of  space  and  the  prac- 
tical  use  of  space flight.  The scientific  community, which  represents  the 
focus of  man’s  unceasing  drive  for  understanding,  identifies  the  prob- 
lems  and  the  unknowns,  and  designs  the  experiments  tha t   will  answer 
the  key  questions.  Society levies  demands  upon  us  fo r   useful  services, 
valuable products,  and   improvements in   the  quality  of  life.”  There was 
no  difficulty  in   identifying  needs  or  new  missions;  acute  problem  was 
to  select  those  offering  greatest  reward  as  range  of  highest  national 
priorities  expanded  but  resources  remained  limited.  (Transcript) 
Rep.  George  P.  Miller  (D-Calif.),  Chairman  of  House  Committee  on 
Science  and  Astronautics,  introduced  H.R.  7109,  $3.434-billion  FY 
1972  NASA  authorization  bill.  Bill  added  $163  million  to  Administra- 
tion’s  requested  $3.271  billion,  including  additional  $45  million  for 
Skylab  and   $25  million  for  space  shuttle,  $39.9  million  for  NERVA 
engine,  and   $25  million  for   aeronautical  research  and  technology.  Bill 
provided  $2.668  billion  for  R&D,  increase  of  $150  million  over  re- 
quested  $2.518  billion;  $58.6  million  fo r   construction  of  facilities,  up 
$2.3  million  from  $56.3-million  request;  and   $706.9  million  for   re- 
search  and  program  management,  increase  of  $9.5  million  over  re- 
quested $697.4 million.  (H  Rpt 92-143) 
Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences President  Mstislav  V . Keldysh  told  session 
of  Soviet Par ty   Congress tha t   “we  must  to  a  large  extent  apply  [space 
activities]  to  the  solution  of  practical  problems.  Armed  Forces  Journal 
later  observed that  previously,  U.S.S.R.  had  spoken  mostly  of  further- 
ing   “scientific  knowledge”  a s   basis  of  its  space  program.  (AFJ ,   6/71, 
5479) 
*  Leaders  of  aerospace  industry,  professional  societies,  and  academic com- 
munity  met  with  President  Nixon;  Dr.  Edward  E.  David,  Jr.,  Science 
Adviser  to  President;  and  James  D.  Hodgson,  Secretary  of  Labor. 
Meeting  discussed  Technology  Mobilization  and   Reemployment  Pro-  
gram  to  alleviate  unemployment  in   aerospace  industry.  (PD,  4/5/71, 
592)  
Tenth  anniversary  of  Air  Force  Systems  Command.  AFSC-in 
charge  of 
planning,  developing,  and  acquiring  all  USAF  weapon  and  space  sys- 
tems  and  supporting technologies-administered 
annual  contracts  worth 
about  $48  billion.  Annual  expenditures  accounted  fo r   more  than  one 
four th   of  total  USAF  budget.  AFSC   was  staffed  by  9600  officers,  1 8 5 0 0  
airmen,  and  31 000  civilians.  (AFSC  Release  94.71;  AFM,  4/71,  43) 
Apr i l   2 :  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  403  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  213- 
km  (132.4-mi)  apogee,  205-km  (127.4-mi)  perigee,  88.6-min  period, 
(GSFC  SSR, 
and   81.3’ 
inclination.  Satellite  Ieentered  April  14. 
4/30/71;  SF ,   10/71,  386) 
0  NASA’s supercritical  wing,  flown  on  TF-8A  jet  aircraft  piloted  by  test 
pilot  Thomas  C.  McMurtry,  successfully  completed  th ird   flight  from 
FRC.  Objectives of  flight-to 
expand  flight envelope  to  higher  altitudes 
and   higher  speeds,  evaluate  augmented  stability  and  control,  and 
determine 
loads  and  buffet  boundaries-were 
achieved.  Aircraft 
reached  10 700-m  (35 000-ft)  altitude  and   mach  0.8.  (NASA   P ro j   Off) 

9 4  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

April  2 

*  NASA  announced  ic  was  expanding  its  airborne  research  program  by  ac- 
quiring  two  Lockheed  U-2  high-altitude  a ircraf t   under  loan  agree- 
ment  with  USAF  and  concentrating flights over four ecological test  areas 
in   U S .   Program  objectives  were  to  simulate  da ta   output  of  ERTS 
scheduled  for   1972  launch,  collect  data  simultaneously  over  various 
test  sites  with  passes  of  ERTS  and   Skylab  after  they  were  orbited,  sup- 
port  earth  resources  survey  programs  of  other  agencies,  and  make 
observations  in   astronomy,  atmospheric  physics,  and   geophysics  for  
NASA’s physics  and   astronomy programs.  (NASA  Release  71-60)  
Dr.  John  S.  Foster,  Jr.,  Director  of  Defense  Research  and   Engineering, 
testified  on  DOD space  activities  dur ing   authorization  hearings  before 
Senate  Committee  on   Aeronautical  and   Space  Sciences:  DOD  space 
funding  program  for   FY  1972  called  f o r   $1552.6  million,  slightly 
under  the  $1553.1 million  of  FY  1971.  “The  design  and  fabrication  of 
a  new  set  of  satellites  intended  to  replace  the  interim  Defense  Satellite 
Communications System  (DSCS)  will  be  completed  in   1971. These satel- 
lites,  to  be  launched  next  month,  have  significantly  higher  power  and  
greater  bandwidth  than  their  predecessors,  and  each  is  equipped  with 
a  versatile  set  of  antennas  capable  of  serving  fixed  and  transportable 
users  dispersed  over  large  areas  of  the  earth.  Among  these  are   steer- 
able  antennas  which  can  be  oriented  to  satisfy  contingency needs  in  
changing  global  situations.  To  exploit  the  potential  of  this  new  sys- 
tem,  we  will  need  better  surface  terminal  equipment.  Accordingly, we 
intend  to  continue  the  intensive  development  of  new  reliable  terminals 
and   modulation  and  antijamming  equipment.” 
In   FY  1972,  DOD expected  “to  start  developing  a  satellite  communi- 
cations  system  tha t   operates  in   the  military  ultra-high-frequency 
( U H F )   band  and  is   tailored  to  the  characteristics  of  the  mobile  users. 
When  deployed,  this  system  should allow  u s   to  retire  much  of  ou r   HF  
radio equipment.” 
Use of  navigational satellites “has  the potential  of  attaining a  continu- 
ous,  highly  accurate  worldwide  position-fixing  system.  Tha t   system 
could  support  many  ground,  sea,  airborne  and   space  applications.” 
In   FY  1972, DOD planned  “to  undertake  system  definition  and   design 
studies  of  the  next-generation  Defense  Navigation  Satellite  System 
( DNSS ) .” 
Under  Doppler  Geodetic  Satellite  Program  coordinated  by  Defense 
Intelligence  Agency,  geodetic  Doppler  receivers  would  observe  USN 
navigation  and  other  Doppler-equipped satellites.  Program  would  pro- 
vide worldwide geodetic data. 
DOD  proposed  “to  continue  a  small  eflort  in   FY  1972  to  develop 
propulsion  technology  for   high-energy  orbit-to-orbit  stages  tha t   w i l l  
be  compatible  with  the  shuttle  system,  with  a  view  to   future  space 
maneuvering  missions projected  for   the  late  1970’s  and   early  1980’s.” 
(Transcr ip t)  
*  USAF  planned  to  measure  static electrification  on  Titan  I I IC   missile  from  
preignition  to  orbit  a t   KSC dur ing   second  quarter  of  1971, AFSC  an- 
nounced.  Data  would  be  gathered  from  two  field  meters---one  on  mis- 
sile  and  one  on  ground-and  would  help  define  electrostatic  require- 
ments fo r  fu ture  missile systems.  (AFSC  Release 82.71) 
AEC   announced  i t   was  developing  plutonium-fueled water  recovery  and  
waste  management  system  fo r   crew  on  extended  space  flights.  Device 

95 

April  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

converted liquid  wastes  into sterile  dr ink ing  water  by  high-temperature 
processing  and  disposed  of  nonmetallic  cabin  wastes  by  incineration. 
System  would  meet  needs  of  four   astronauts  for   up  to  180 days.  (AEC  
Release 0 -47 )  
*  LeRC  announced  award  of  $4 264 734,  fixed-price,  supplemental  agree- 
ment  to  United  Aircraft  Corp.  P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.  fo r   12   RL-10 
rocket  engines for   Centaur  boosters.  (LeRC  Release  71-11) 
April  4:  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  404  from  Baykonur  into  orb i t   with 
1009-km  (627-mi)  apogee,  817-km  (507.7-mi)  perigee,  103.1-min 
period,  and   65.7’ 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  same  day.  ( GSFC 
SSR, 4/30/71;  SF’  10 /71 ,386)  
NASA  manned  space flight  officials proposed  four-launch  program  to  place 
astronauts  i n  ear th  orb i t   to map  U S . ,  study  ear th   resources,  and   study 
pollution.  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Manned  Space Flight  Dale 
D.  Myers  said  in   AP-reported  interview  that  program  was  in   pre- 
liminary  stages  and  would  require  additional  funding  from  Congress. 
MSC  Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft,  Jr.,  said project  would  keep 
U S .   in   manned  space  flight  business  dur ing   period  when  U.S.S.R. 
would  probably  be  very  active  in  the  field.  Project  would  fill  four-year 
gap  between  Skylab  and   manned  space  shuttle  tests.  I t   would  also 
directly  benefit  mankind,  Kraft  explained:  “The  two-man  crews  w i l l  
fly  a t  a  higher  inclination  than  we’ve  ever  flown  before  in   ear th   orbit. 
Using  photographic  and  other  sensing  equipment  developed  in   the 
space  program,  they  could  accurately  map  the  entire  United  States, 
including  Alaska.  The  astronauts  also  could  make  ear th   resources  and 
environmental measurements.”  ( AP,  W  Star,  4/4/71,  A16) 
*  Team  of  108  scientists  from   U S .   and  six  foreign  countries  had   been 
chosen  from  some  500  scientists  who  submitted  proposals  to  partici- 
pate  in   definition  phase  of  proposed  outer  planets  missions  in   late 
1970s,  NASA  announced. Teams  from  13 investigating  areas  would  be 
represented  by  team  leader  on  Outer  Planets  Mission  Steering  Group 
responsible  for   integrating  overall  science.  Scientists  represented  26 
U.S.  institutions  and  institutions  in   Canada,  Denmark,  West  Germany, 
France, Sweden, and  U.K.  (NASA Release 71-56) 
April  5 :   First  simulated  altitude  test  of  manned  Apollo  15  CM   in   KSC 
vacuum  chamber was  postponed  after  oil  was   found  leaking  from  light 
fixture.  Problem  did  not  affect  spacecraft.  ( S BD ,  4/6/71,  183) 
Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space  Sciences  continued  hear- 
ings  on  NASA  FY  1972  authorization.  Roy  P.  Jackson,  NASA  Associate 
Administrator  fo r   Advanced  Research  and   Technology,  testified  that 
WRC   quiet  engine  program  was  proceeding  on  schedule:  “Tests  of 
full-scale  fans  for  the  engine  have  revealed  much  new  information ‘on 
the  interrelationships  among  noise,  aerodynamic  performance,  and 
structural  integrity.  The  complete  experimental  engine  will  be  oper- 
ated  i n   about  6  months.  Results  . . . indicate  tha t   we  may  expect  to 
better  the  original  noise  abatement  goals.  Program  results  are   given 
to   industry  on  a  continuing  basis.  . . . We  can  expect  some  of  our 
improvements to  be  adopted  by  industry  in  new  engine  designs before 
completion of  our  program.” 
NASA-AEC  Space Nuclear  Systems Office  Manager  Milton  Klein  said: 
“Reactor  power  sources will  be   required  to  provide  power  in   amounts 
greater  than  a  few  kilowatts  for   many  of  the  missions  of  the  future. 

96 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

April  5 

For  unmanned  military  satellites,  radiation  hardening-mandatory 
for  
certain  military  missions-and 
low  recurring  costs  for  multiple  mis- 
sions  a re   important  advantages  of  small  reactor  systems.  For   un- 
manned  NASA  ear th   orbit  missions,  reactors  become  cost  effective 
above  a  few  kilowatts,  a  power  range  needed  fo r   such  applications 
missions  as communications  satellites.  In   manned  missions  . . . over- 
riding  advantage  of  reactor  systems  is   their  ability  to  accommodate 
unforeseen  large  increases  in   power  demand.”  Advanced  reactor  sys- 
tems “are needed for  electric  propulsion systems capable  of  high  energy 
missions . . . to the f a r  planets.” 
Associate Administrator  for   Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition  Gerald 
ground  stations  . . . operated  by  NASA,  which  a re   supplemented by  an  
M.  Truszynski  reported  that  satellite  network  included  “ten  electronic 
optical  tracking  network  operated  by  the  Smithsonian  Astrophysical 
Observatory. The  electronic  stations  provide  a worldwide system which 
. . . tracks each satellite,  . . . determines the  status of  onboard  systems, 
. . . commands  the  satellite’s  functions,  and  . . . acquires  stored  or 
real-time  da ta   from  the  satellite.  The  optical  stations,  which  include 
laser  capabilities  a t   selected  sites,  provide  specialized  services  in   pre- 
cision orbital tracking.”  (Transcript) 
*  URC  was  studying blown-flap  STOL aircraft  using  series  of  fans  mounted 
atop  each  flap  semispan, Av ia t ion   Week & Space  Technology  reported. 
Concept  was  similar  to  f a d f l a p  arrangements  studied  in   wind  tunnel 
tests;  Bleed  a i r   from  main  engines  was  ducted  to  periphery  of  each 
fan  nacelle  and  drove  fans   through  tip  turbines.  Flow  from  fans   then  
passed  over  flaps,  which  could  be  deflected  up  to  60’  fo r   landing. 
( A v  W k ,  4 /5 /71 ,44)  
April  5-7:  Conference on  Remote  Sensing of  Chesapeake  Bay  was  held  at 
Wallops  Station  to  identify  primary  environmental  problems  of  area  
and  determine  extent  to  which  remote  sensing  from  a ircraf t   o r   satel- 
lites  could  contribute  to   solution.  States  of  Maryland  and   Delaware, 
Commonwealth  of  Virginia,  NASA,  and   Smithsonian  Institution  par- 
ticipated.  Chesapeake  Bay  area   was  one  of  four  regional  test  sites  un- 
der  consideration  for  evaluation of  remote  sensing  techniques.  Experi- 
ments  would  be  conducted  in   area   using  data  to   be  acquired  by  first 
Earth  Resources  Technology  Satellite  ( ERTS-A)  scheduled  for  launch 
by  NASA  in   spring  1972.  (NASA  Release  71-55;  WS PAO )  
National  Endowment  for  Humanities  sponsored  Thomas  Harriot  Sym- 
posium  a t   Univ.  of  Delaware,  honoring  Elizabethan  mathematician, 
astronomer,  geographer, navigator,  and  philosopher sent  to  New  World 
in   1585  by  his  patron,  S i r   Walter  Raleigh.  Harriot  had   written  first 
English  account  of  wealth  of  America,  A  Briefe  and  True  Report  of 
the  New  Found  Land  of  V irg in ia .  After  350  yrs  of  obscurity,  Harr io t  
was  being  revived  by  scholars  who  were  mentioning  his  name  with 
Kepler and   Galileo,  New  York   Times  reported.  Harr io t   had  independ- 
ently  begun  telescopic observation of  heavens  in   July  of  1609,  a t  about 
time  Galileo  did  in  Italy,  and   had  drawn  what  was  believed  to  be 
earliest  map  of  moon  in  which  vast  seas  and   craters  were  recog- 
nizable.  He  had  observed  and   counted  sun  spots  through  telescope 
using  London  fog as filter  and  had  calculated  period  of  solar  rotation 
and   traced  moons  of  Jupiter.  In   1601 he   had   discovered  law  governing 
refraction  of  light.  (Reinhold, N Y T ,  4/8/71,39) 

97 

April  6 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
April  6 :  Intelsat  1  (Ear ly   Bird),  in   orbit  over  Pacific,  was  reactivated  to 
mark  its  sixth  anniversary  and   relay  first  message  ever  transmitted 
directly  from  Hawaii  to  U S .   East  Coast  via  commercial  satellite. 
Satellite-first 
commercial  comsat-had 
been 
launched  from  KSC 
April  6,  1965,  (ComSatCorp Release  71-23) 
Distribution  of  about  6.8  kg  (15   lbs)   of  the  42.6  kg  (94  lbs)   of  samples 
returned  from  moon’s  F ra   Mauro  area  by  ApoUo  14   astronauts  had 
begun,  NASA  announced.  To  date,  187  scientific  teams  in   U S .   and   1 4  
foreign  countries  had  been  scheduled  to  receive  samples.  Additional 
proposals for  consideration under  Apollo  14   through  Apollo  17  sample 
program  were  under  review.  More  than  700  scientists  would  analyze 
samples,  believed  to  include  material  formed  at  same  time  a s   original 
lunar  crust.  Investigating  teams  in   U S .   were  a t   65   different  institu- 
tions  in   30  states  and  Virgin  Islands.  The  56   foreign  teams  were  a t  
41   institutions.  (NASA  Release  71-62)  
0  Third  attempt  to  test  manned  Apollo  15  LM  in   simulated  environment 
was  completed  a t   ICSC.  Two  attempts  dur ing   previous  week  had  been 
unsuccessful  because  technician  failed  to  open  oxygen  valve  and 
because  two  oxygen  regulators  failed.  ( SBD ,  4/7/71,  192)  
*  LeRC  announced  award  of  $ 7 9 3 9 4 0 0   follow-on  contract  to  General 
Dynamics  Corp.  Convair  Div.  for  Centaur  launch  and  test  support 
services  a t   ETR.  Cost-plus-award-fee  contract  would  cover  one  year, 
dur ing   which  six  Centaurs  would  be  launched.  (IRRC  Release  71-13) 
Dr.  F.  A.  Speer,  head  of  MSFC’S  Mission  Operations  Office  in   Program 
Management,  became  manager  of  newly  augmented  HEAO  task  team 
a t   MSFC.  Team  would  continue  feasibility  and  definition  work  for 
proposed  1975 mission.  (MSFC  Release 71-75) 
*  A P   quoted  Fairchild  Hiller  Corp.  spokesman  as  saying  firm  was  serving 
as  clearinghouse  for  proposals  for  SST  funding.  “Sketchy  and  tenta- 
tive  plans’’  existed,  A P   said,  to  finance  SST  through  public  stock  issue 
backed  up  by  $1 billion  in  bank  loans.  (AP, B  Sun, 4/7/71,  A6) 
April  6-7:  Space  Shuttle  Technology  conference  at  MSFC   discussed  space 
vehicle  propulsion  systems  with  operational  life  requirements  of  100 
flight  missions.  (MSFC   Release  71-59;  MSFC  PAO )  
launched  Cosmos  405  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with 
April  7:  U.S.S.R. 
681-km  (423.2-mi)  apogee,  674-km  (418.8-mi)  perigee,  98.2-min 
(GSFC  SSR ,   4/30/71;  SBD ,   4/8/71, 
period,  and  81.2’ 
inclination. 
197 )  
U.S.S.R.’s  Lurwkhod  1  lunar  rover  began  sixth  lunar  day  on  moon’s  Sea 
of  Rains,  traveling  301  m  (988  f t )   across  lunar  surface  and  com- 
pleting  two  communications sessions  with  ground.  Vehicle  had  landed 
on  moon  on  board  Luna  1 7  Nov.  17,  1970.  ( SBD ,  4/9/71,  205) 
*  NASA  and  Dept.  of  Agriculture  announced advance  plans  were  under  way 
for  ground  and  a i r   study  of  possible  southern  corn  leaf  blight  during 
1971  growing season.  Remote  aerial  sensing techniques would  be  used 
in  coordination  with  special  ground  observations.  NASA  high-altitude 
a ircraf t   would  photograph  cornbelt  area  using  special  infrared  and  
natural  color  film.  Data  would  be  sent  to  photo-interpretation  team 
at  Purdue  Univ.  for  analysis.  (NASA  Release  71-64) 
Computer  method  being  developed  by  NASA  and   Stanford  Univ.  team 
would  provide  simple  means  of  viewing  hear t   in   action,  NASA  an- 
nounced.  System projected three-dimension animated  cartoon-like image 

98 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

April  7 

of  any  desired  chamber  of  patient’s  heart  in   lines  of  light  on  com- 
puter  screen.  Display,  which  would  enable  doctors  to  detect  cardiac 
malfunctioning more  simply  than  by  conventional  diagnostic  methods, 
was  derived  from  two-dimensional  “x-ray  movies”  made  by  injecting 
x-ray  contrast  dye  into  desired  heart  chamber.  (NASA  Release  71-58) 
President  Nixon  sent  message  to  Congress  proposing  improvements  for 
District  of  Columbia:  “A  number  of  construction  projects  included  in  
my  budget  for  fiscal  year  1972   . . . point  to  an   attractive  new  look 
for  Federal  Washington by  1976.  These  include  the  Smithsonian  Insti- 
tution’s  plans  to  build  a  new  National  Air  and  Space Museum  on  the 
Mall  and  a  new  display  area  for  cultural  and  technological  advances 
of  the  past  two  centuries  in   the  National  Museum  of  History  and 
Technology.”  President  asked  Congress  to  appropriate  necessary  funds 
for  these  and  other  projects.  ( P D ,  4/12/71,  605-10) 
President  Nixon  transmitted  Marine  Science  Aflairs : A n n w l   Report  of 
the  President  to  the  Congress  on  Marine  Resources  and  Engineering 
Deve lopmen t:   U S .   marine  science  program  in  1970 had  been  marked 
by  sound  accomplishments  and  “new  policies  and  programs  that  ful- 
fill  the  objectives  of  the  Marine  Resources  and   Engineering  Develop- 
ment  Act.”  FY  1972  budget  request  provided  $609.1  million  for 
marine  science,  technology,  and   services,  “an  increase  of  more  than 
$70  million  over  my  request  of  a  year  ago.  These  funds  will  permit 
NOAA   to  undertake  priority  programs  of  fundamental  importance  to 
the  Nation’s  marine  science  interests;  they  will  permit  us  to  continue 
the  accomplishments  of  the  Sea  Grant  program;  to  further  our  par- 
ticipation  in   the  International  Decade  of  Ocean  Exploration;  to  insure 
that  necessary  marine  research  and  development  is  conducted  for  
national  security  purposes;  and  to  make  certain  that  marine  research 
and  development,  generally,  continue  to  make  productive  contributions 
to  our  growing  use  of  the  sea”  ( P D ,  4/12/71,  611) 
Szpril  8 .- Miniature  analytical  clinical  laboratory  to  monitor  astronauts’ 
health  on  spacecraft  was  being  developed  a t   Oak  Ridge National Labo- 
ratory,  AEC   announced.  “Gravity-Zero”  system  would  permit  astro- 
nauts  to  perform  quickly  and   automatically  16   parallel  chemical  tests 
on  samples  of  plasma  or  serum,  based  on  colorimetric  determinations. 
Test  results  would  be  automatically  radioed  to  ground  control,  which 
would  recommend  action  to  astronauts.  (A EC   Release  0-51) 
MSFC  announced  award  of  $29 136 622  contract  modification  to  Chrysler 
Corp.  for  additional  work  in   Saturn  IB  program.  Chrysler,  prime  con- 
tractor  for  Sa turn   IB  first  stage  (S-IB),  would  maintain  nine  boosters 
in  storage  and  make  prelaunch  checkout  of  three  of  the  boosters  for 
Skylab program.  (MSFC  Release 71-60) 
0  Fritz  von  Opel-engineer,  pilot,  and  industrialist-died 
in   St.  Moritz, 
Switzerland, a t   age  71.  Von  Ope1  had  flown  in   rocket-propelled  glider 
in   1929  and  had  developed  rocket  car which  he  drove  a t   more  than 
3 km  ( 2  m i )   per  minute  in   1928.  (UPI,  NYT ,   4/12/71,  38) 
Ap r i l   9 :  Cosmic  ray   tracks  found  in  helmets  of  Apollo  astronauts  had  indi- 
cated  that  exposure  during  space  mission  was  sufficient  to  damage 
certain  nonreplaceable  cells  on  long  flights,  General  Electric  R&D 
Center  team  reported  in   Science.  On  two-year  mission,  fraction  of 
cells  killed  could  rise  to  0.12%  in   cerebral  cortex,  0.05%  in   retina, 
and  more  than  1.5%  for  giant  cells.  Proportions  might  be  “highly 

99 

April 9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

worrisome,  since  additional  safe  shielding  would  impose  important 
weight  considerations  on  spacecraft  design.” 
(Comstock,  Fleischer, 
et at., Science, 41/9/71,  154-6) 
April  12: Tenth  anniversary  of  U.S.S.R.’s  Vostok  1, first  manned  space 
flight,  piloted  by  Cosmonaut  Yuri  A.  Gagarin.  Anniversary  was  cele- 
brated  in   Moscow  with  6000  guests  attending  memorial  meeting  in  
Kremlin’s  Palace  of  Congresses and   with  Soviet newspapers  filled  with 
articles  commemorating flight. 
At Moscow  ceremony Mstislav V.  Keldysh,  President  of  Soviet Acad- 
emy  of  Sciences, said U.S.S.R.  was  looking forward  to  time “when  man 
will  make  interplanetary  flights.  Tremendous potentialities  in   the  study 
of  the  earth’s  natural  satellite  were  uncovered  by  the  flights  of  Amer- 
ican  astronauts  to  the  moon  and   the  development  in   our  own  country 
of  new  types  of  automatic  lunar  stations.”  Successful  operation  of 
U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  I  lunar  rover  represented  start  of  new  era   envi- 
sioned  by  Soviet  scientists,  Keldysh  said.  U.S.S.R.  would  emphasize 
unmanned  flights  with  particular  stress  on  long-term  orbiting  space 
stations. 
Cosmonaut  Andrian  G.  Nikolayev  told  meeting U.S.S.R.’s  1971-1975 
economic  plans  called  for  “fundamental  development  of  scientific  re- 
search,  with  a  significant  role  for  lunar  and  solar  investigation.” 

April  12:  T en th   anniversary  of  the  first  manned  space  Bight,  made  by  Cosmonaut 
Y u r i   A .   Gagarin  in   the   Vostok  1.  In  the  Ap r i l   14 ,   1961,  photo  Gagarin  and  U .S .S .R .  
P rem ie r   N i k i ta   Khrushchev,  standing  atop  the  Lenin-Stalin  Mausoleum,  responded 
to   a  welcome  b y   crowds  during  a  ceremony  in   Moscow’s  Red   S q w r e .   (Ph o to   by  
courtesy  of 
the  National  A i r   and  Space   Museum ,   Smithsonian 
Ins t i tu t ion .)  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

April  12 

In   letter  to  Pravda ,   group  of  Soviet  cosmonauts  said  “it  is  our 
opinion  that  businesslike  cooperation of  space  researchers  of  different 
countries,  including  the  U.S.S.R.  and  the  United  States,  should develop 
and   grow  stronger  in   the  interests  of  peace  and  friendship  among  the 
peoples of  our planet.” 
Soviet  Academician  Boris  N.  Petrov  said  in   article  reprinted  in   a 
number  of  Soviet  journals  that  “main  trend  of  the  next  development 
of  cosmonautics  and  space exploration . . . w i l l   probably  be  as  follows: 
Further  investigation  of  near-Earth  space,  studying  the  Earth  from 
space  for  purposes  of  space  meteorology,  geology,  agriculture,  ocean- 
ology,  and   marine  and   a i r   navigation.  The  task  of  constructing  space 
exploration  facilities  and  the  usage  of  outer  space  for  peaceful  pur-  
poses  is  the   favorable  basis  for  fruitful  international  cooperation 
wherein  both  big  and  small  countries  can  effectively  participate.” 
U.S.S.R.  had  ‘‘always  directed  its  efforts  into  a n   arena  of  peace  and 
international  cooperation.  . . . The  time  is  not  behind  the  mountains 
when  the  remarkable  idea  about  construction  of  long-duration,  piloted 
orbital  stations will be  implemented.” 
Soviet  M i l i tary   Rev iew   editorial  said  Soviet  space  program  had 
demonstrated  “the  benefiting  the  whole  of  mankind  and  the  contribu- 
tion  to  worldwide  progress.  The  Gagarin  flight,  as  all  subsequent 
achievements  of  Soviet  space  exploration,  demonstrated  the  organizing 
and  guiding  role  of  the  Communist  Par ty   of  the  Soviet  Union,  and  the 
inexhaustible  potentialities  of  the  socialist  social  system  and  of  the 
Soviet  economy,  science,  and   technology.  Consistency  and  purposeful- 
ness  are   a  feature  of  the  Soviet program  of  exploration in   outer  space, 
on   the  Moon  and  on  the  planets  of 
the  solar  system.”  (Yuenger, 
C  T r i b ,   4/13/71;  Shabad,  N Y T ,   4/13/71;  UPI,  W  News,  4/12/71; 
UPI,  L A   Her-Exam,  4/12/71;  SBD ,   4/12/71,  263) 
0  Apollo  11  Astronaut  Michael  Collins  assumed  duties  as  Director  of 
Smithsonian  Institution’s  National  A i r   and  Space  Museum.  He  had 
served  as  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Public  Affairs  after  leaving 
NASA.  (Smithsonian Ann;  Smithsonian P IO )  
*  NASA  selected  Boeing  Co.  Commercial  Airplane  Group,  General Dynamics 
Corp.  Convair  Div.,  and  Lockheed-Georgia  Co.  to  conduct  nine-month 
studies  to  determine  benefits  of  applying  advanced  aeronautical  tech- 
nologies  to  1975-1985  transport  aircraft.  ( NASA  Release  71 -66 )  
0  NASA  announced  award  of  $2-millionY one-year,  fixed-price  contract  to 
General  Dynamics  Corp.  Convair  Div.  for  definition  and  preliminary 
design  of  Research  and  Applications  Module  (RAM )   that  could  be 
attached to space shuttle.  (NASA  Release 71-67) 
Apr i l   13:  NASA%  supercritical  wing,  flown  on   TF-8A 
jet  aircraft  piloted 
by  test  pilot  Thomas C.  McMurtry,  successfully completed  fourth  flight 
from  FRC. Purposes  of  one-hour  flight-to 
expand  flight  envelope  to 
higher  altitudes  and   higher  speeds,  evaluate  augmented  stability  and 
control,  determine  handling  qualities  with  stability  augmentation  sys- 
tem  on  and   off,  determine  structural  loads  and  buffet  boundaries,  and 
make  preliminary  evaluation  of  ‘flutter characteristics-were  achieved. 
Aircraft  reached  10 700-m  (35  000-ft)  altitude  and   mach  0.9.  (NASA  
P ro j  Off) 
NAE  announced election  of  29  US. engineers  to  NAE,  bringing  total  mem- 
bership  to  356. New  members  included L/G Samuel C.  Phillips  (USAF), 

101 

April  13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
Commander  of  SAMSO;  Joseph  F.  Shea,  Senior  Vice  President  and  
General Manager  of  Raytheon Co.  Equipment Div.;  and  Ronald Smelt, 
Vice  President  and  Chief  Scientist,  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  ( NAE 
Release) 
Apr i l   14:  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  4 6  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t   with 
222-km  (137.9-mi)  apogee,  199-km  (123.7-mi)  perigee,  88.6-min 
period,  and   81.3’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  April  24.  (GSFC SSR, 
4/30/7  1 ) 
Representatives of  79  INTELSAT  member  nations  opened  negotiating  and  
organizing  meeting a t  Dept.  of  State.  Twelve  observers,  including  rep- 
resentatives  from  Communist  countries,  attended.  Purpose  of  meeting 
was  to  discuss  proposed  agreement  to  base  member  nation’s  voting 
power  on  its  use  of  INTELSAT  and  limit  U S .   power  to 40%.  (AP, NYT, 
4 /15 /71 ,14)  
Communist  Par ty   General Secretary Leonid  I. Brezhnev  had  been  guiding 
Soviet  space  research  and  rocket  engineering  since  1963,  Wall  S tree t  
Journal  reported.  Information  had  been  contained  in   article  circulated 
to Moscow  correspondents by  a Soviet news  agency.  (W S J ,  4 /14 /71 ,1 )  
Discovery  of  “first  incontrovertible  evidence”  of  existence  of  natural 
plutonium  244  by  team  of  Univ.  of  California  at  Berkeley  scientists 
was  described  by  Dr.  Calvin  Alexander  in   Washington,  D.C.,  press 
interview.  Dr.  Alexander  and   team  had  baked  1 5  mg  of  Pu   2 4 L t w o  
vacuum  system  a t   2144.3  K  (3400’F). 
thirds  of  world’s  supply-in 
Pu   244 had  been  made  expressly  for  experiment by Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory.  I t   survived  experiment  almost  intact,  having  lost  only 
a  hundred  milliom  atoms of  mass”  in   form  of  rare   gas,  xenon.  Those 
( 6  
atoms  had  provided  “fingerprint”  for  Pu   244  similar  to  fingerprint 
found  in   certain  meteorites.  Scientists  had  suspected meteorite  finger- 
print  had  been  remnant  of  completely  decayed  Pu  244,  but  until 
Berkeley  experiment they  had  had  no  “file”  against  which  to  check  it. 
(Lannan, W S ta r ,  4/15/71,  A6) 
AAAS  held  symposium  in   Boston  on  use  of  long-baseline  interferometry- 
antennas  thousands  of  miles  apart,  working  together,  to  determine 
angular  width  and  precise  direction  of  distant  radio  sources.  Three 
teams  of  astronomers who  had  worked  independently  reported  obser- 
vation  in   distant  space of  what  appeared  to  be  two  objects  flying  apart 
a t   10  times  speed  of  light,  but  were  unable  to  agree  on  plausible  ex- 
planation  for  phenomenon  that  defied  laws  of  physics  that  said  such 
velocity  was  impossible.  Discovery  had  been  made  originally  by  nine- 
man  team  of  scientists  from  MIT,  GSFC, JPL, and   Univ.  of  Maryland. 
Team,  under  direction  of  Dr.  Irwin  I.  Shapiro  of  MIT ,   using  MIT 
Haystack  antenna  and   JPL’S  Goldstone  antenna,  had  observed  two 
components  of  quasar  3C-279  accidentally  dur ing   experiments  con- 
ducted  in   October  1970  to  observe  passage  of  3C-279  around   sun. 
Discovery  also  was  described  by  Dr.  David  L.  Chauncey  of  Cornell 
Univ.  and   team  from  Cal  Tech  and  National  Radio  Astronomy  Obser- 
vatory.  Dr.  Alan  T.  Moffet  of  Cal  Tech  reported  on  joint  observations 
of  phenomenon with Australian  astronomers.  . 
Following  symposium,  Rumford  Premium,  oldest  scientific  prize 
given  in   US . ,   was  presented  to  21  scientists  from  U S .   and  Canadian 
observatories  who  had  pioneered  in  development  of  baseline  inter- 
ferometry.  (Sullivan, NYT, 4/15/71,  33)  

102 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

April  14 

MSC  announced  signing  of  $11 577 561  supplemental  agreement  with 
Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.  for  changes  in  Apollo  LM contract.  Agree- 
ment  brought  total  value  of  contract  since  January  1963  to  $1617  
510 000 (MsC-Release 71-18) 
Dr.  Armand  N.  Spitz,  astronomer  and   author,  died  a t   age  66  after  heart 
attack.  Dr.  Spitz  had  founded  Spitz  Laboratories,  organized  NASA 
Moonwatch  program  of  using  volunteer  astronomers  to  track  satellites, 
and  created  Spitz  planetarium--small,  inexpensive instrument  used  in  
schools  and   small  museums.  He  was  member  of  AAS,  fellow  of  AAAS, 
consultant  to  NSF,  and  author  of  numerous  publications.  (W   Star, 
4/16/71,  B5)  
Apr i l   15:  France  launched  90-kg  (198-lb)  D2-A  satellite  Tourmsol  (Sun- 
flower)  from  Kourou,  French  Guiana,  by  Diamant-B booster.  Satellite, 
which  would  measure  radiation  for  six  months,  entered  orbit  with 
696-km  (432.5-mi)  apogee,  457-km  (284-mi) perigee,  96.2-min  period, 
and  46.3’  inclination.  (GSFC  SSR,  4/30/71;  SBD ,   4/16/71,  239;  SF, 
6 /71 ,197 ;   Spacewarn, 3/23/71,6) 
President  Nixon  transmitted  to  Congress  World  V e a t h e r  Program,  Plan 
for  Fiscal  Year  1972. Report  described significant  activities  of  program 
and   planned  participation  of  Federal  agencies.  I n   message  of  trans- 
mission  President  said:  “Satellite  technology  is  being  used  with  in- 
creasing  effectiveness  to  gather  global  information  for  earlier,  more 
accurate predictions  and  warnings  of  hazardous weather.  New  stations 
a re  being established for  long-term measurement of  atmospheric change. 
Computers  have  been  programmed  to  determine  the  effect  of  pollution 
upon  the  atmosphere.  A  major  international  experiment i n   the Atlantic 
Ocean  is  being  prepared  under  the  Global  Atmospheric  Research 
Program.  During  the  past  year  many  nations,  inchd ing   the  United 
States,  have  indicated  their  support  of  this  tropical  experiment  and  
have  made  tentative  commitments  to  provide  ships,  aircraft,  satellites, 
and  other  observing  facilities.  Linked  with  an   increased  computer 
capability  to  assess  and   integrate  results,  this  experiment  should  be 
an   important  step  toward  attaining  a  true  understanding  of  the  global 
atmosphere.”  ( P D ,  4/19/71,630) 
*  President  Nixon  transmitted  to  Senate Convention for  the  Suppression  of 
Un luwfd   Seizure  of  Aircraft  and  requested  advice  and  consent  to 
ratification.  Convention  “to  ensure  that  all  hijackers,  wherever  found, 
would  be  subject  to  severe punishment  for  an   act  which  endangers  the 
safety  and   lives  of  passengers  and  crew  aboard”  had  been  signed  a t  
Diplomatic  Conference  at  The  Hague  Dec.  16,  1970.  President  said: 
“Because  of  the  worldwide  threat of  hijacking,  the   Convention provides 
that  a l l   States  may  become  parties.  I  hope  that  i t   will  be  applied  uni- 
versally.”  (PD, 4/19/71,630) 
0  New  US.-U.S.S.R.  missile  gap  was  described by  Sen.  Henry  M.  Jackson 
(D-Wash.)  in   speech  before  American  Society  of  Newspaper  Editors: 
“Today  the  United  States  bomber  force  is  less  than  600,  our  sub- 
launched  missiles  have  numbered  656  for  four  years,  and  our  land- 
based  missiles  have  totaled  1,054  for  four  years.  During  this  time  the 
Soviet  bomber  force has   remained  almost  constant,  but  their  submarine 
missile  force  has  grown  to  almost  400  launchers  and   is  expected  to 
overtake  ours  in   two  to  three  years.  And  the  Soviet  land-based  inter- 
continental  force  has   risen  to  over  1,440  operational  launchers-with 

103 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

l 
April  15 
more  on  the  way.  Thus,  while  the  Soviets  are   gaining  and   w i l l   soon 
ex  ed  us  in   missile  weaponry  a t   sea,  we  have  already  fallen  distinctly 
behi  d them on land. 
‘‘  ver  the  same  period,  the  actual  destructive  power  of  the  U S .  
forces  has  continually  decreased,  while  the  Soviet’s  destructive  power 
y-1.:, 
has  gre  tly  increased,  until  the  total megatonnage that  the  Soviets could 
inst  U S .  targets  is  several  times  our  own. 
deliver  a 
“The  onh   strategic  area  in   which  we  are   staying  ahead  is  in  the 
number  of  i 
ividual  warheads,  and  we  a re   doing  that  only  by  going 
to  small-yield  ultiples.  Even  here,  the  Soviets  could  in   time  overtake 
us,  since  their 
issile  forces  have  considerably  greater  payloads  than 
ours.y7 (Tex t)  
\ 
Ap r i l   16 :   NASA  announced  development  of  new  underwater  camera  system 
plastic  cases  could  automatically \ c i c k   off  one  frame  per  hour  for 
designed  to  photograph  algae  on  bottom  of  Lake  Erie.  Developed  by 
rotection  Agency,  35-mm  Nikon-F  camera 
LaRC  for  Environmental 
with  Braun  Lite  515  flash 
it,  timing  electronics,  and  water-tight 
more  than  10  days  underwater  and  unattended.  Summer  1970  joint 
study  with  Canadian  Centre  of  Inland  Waters-Project  Hypo-had 
investigated  causes  of  eutrophication  (process  leading  to  overabun- 
dan t   algae  growth,  robbing lake  of  oxygen). The  400 color  slides taken 
traced  developments  in   seasonal  surge  of  algae  growth  and   revealed 
previously  unobserved  effects  of  bottom  currents  on  sediment  resus- 
pension.  (NASA  Release  71-65) 
*  Government  of  Jamaica  had  asked  U S .   to  assist  in  surveying  Jamaica’s 
natural  resources  with  aircraft  specially  equipped  for  purpose,  NASA 
announced.  U.N.’s  Food  and  Agricultural  Organization  had  invited 
NASA  to  provide  instrumented  6 1 3 0  aircraft  to  gather  experimental, 
thermal  imagery  data  by  cameras  for  high-  and   low-altitude  infrared 
photography  and  sensors during  flights  a t  altitudes  from  900  to  7600 m 
(3000 to  25 000 f t )   over  Jamaica  and  selected coastal waters.  Jamaican 
Geological  Survey and  U S .   Geological  Survey would  provide personnel 
and  equipment  for  gathering  ground  data.  (NASA   Release  71-70) 
U S .   and   Canadian  scientists  were  planning  to  build  $12-  to  $15-million 
upper-atmosphere observatory  to  study  relationship  of  space  energy  to 
weather,  radio  communications,  and  other phenomena on  earth, Science 
reported.  Transmitter  and   four  receivers  would  be   erected  near  Great 
Lakes,  “where  the  earth’s  magnetic  field  causes  ionized  layers  of  the 
upper  atmosphere  to  form  a  low-density  ‘trough.’  ” Preliminary  engi- 
neering  studies  fo r  observatory, which  was  scheduled  for  completion  in  
1974,  were  being  conducted  under  $99950   NSF  grant. 
(Science, 
4/16/71,244) 
*  ComSatCorp  reported  net  income  for  first  quar ter   of  1971  had  increased 
to  $6 691 000  (67  cents  per  share)   from  $3 345 000  (33   cents  per 
sha re )   for  first  quarter  of  1970.  Operating  revenues  for  first  quarter 
of  1971  totaled  $21 934 000,  increase  of  $6 499 000  ( 4 2% )   over 
$15 435 000  received  in   first  quarter  of  1970.  (ComSatCorp  Release 
71-25) 
*  Science  editorial  commented  on  underemployment  of  scientists  and  engi- 
neers:  “Some  companies  and  congressmen  would  like  to  believe  that 
high  technology  can  be  effectively  directed  to  solving  problems  of 
society  such  as  pollution.  This  is  only  wishful  thinking.  A  limited 

104 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

April  16 

number  of  individual  scientists  and   engineers  a re   being  hired  by 
municipalities,  states,  and   industries,  but  no  mass  h ir ing   is  likely.” 
It  would  be  “mistake  to  place  too  much  dependence on  government.” 
Retraining  without  specific  job  openings was  “waste  of  money,  time, 
and  emotion.”  Experience  had   shown  scientists  and   engineers  quickly 
developed  needed  skills  on  the  job.  “What  is  needed  is  a  strenuous 
effort  to  identify  possible  openings  that  match  to  some  degree  the 
potentialities  of  individuals.”  (Abelson,  Science,  4/16/71,  221) 
Ap r i l   17:  U.S.S.R.  launched Meteor  8 meteorological  satellite from  Plesetsk 
into orbit with 633-km  (393.3-mi)  apogee,  609-km  (378.4-mi)  perigee, 
inclination.  (GSFC  SSR,  4/30/71;  SBD, 
97.1-min  period,  and  81.2’ 
4/21/71,265) 
April  17-18:  Wallops  Station  held  open  house  for  public  in   joint  Federal 
activities  in   area  that  included  Assateague  National  Seashore  Park, 
Chincoteague  Coast  Guard  Station,  and   Chincoteague National  Wild- 
life Refuge.  (WS Release 71-5;  WS PIO)  
April  18 :   FAA  issued  multiyear  aviation  forecast:  passengers  carried  by 
scheduled  airlines  would  increase  from  173.2  million  expected  in  
FY  1971   to  186.9  million  in   FY  1972.  Increase  of  8% would  con- 
trast  with  growth of  about  2%  in   FY  1970 and  1% increase  expected 
in   FY  1971.  Annual  growth  rate  of  10% was  projected  through  re- 
mainder  of  decade,  with  total  passengers  reaching  513.5  million  in  
FY  1982.  Over  12  yrs  covered  by  forecast,  number  of  hours  &flown in  
general  aviation  was  expected  to  double,  reaching  49.6  million  in  
FY  1982. Scheduled revenue  passenger-miles  flown  by  U.S.  certificated 
airlines  was  expected  to  grow  from  133.7  billion  in  FY  1971 to  147.3 
in  FY  1972,  10.2%  increase.  By  FY  1982,  figure  would  reach  485 
billion.  (FAA   Release 11-49) 
April  19: U.S.S.R. 
launched  unmanned  Salyut  1  orbital  scientific  station 
from  Baykonur  into  orbit  with  269-km  (167.2-mi)  apogee,  256-km 
(159.1-mi)  perigee,  89.7-min  period,  and  51.5”  inclination.  Tass  said 
experiment  was  designed  for  “perfecting  the  elements  of  the  design 
and   the  on-board  systems  and   for  conducting  scientific  research  and 
experiments  in  space.”  Western  speculation,  later  confirmed  [see 
April  23-25],  was  that  Salyut  1  would  dock  with  manned  spacecraft 
(GSFC  SSR, 
in  attempt  to  establish  first  manned  orbital  workshop. 
4/30/71;  SBD ,   4/20/71,  254;  Mills,  B Sun,  4/20/71,  A l )  
MSC  announced  issuance of  RFPS  for  development  of  human  waste  collec- 
tion  and  storage  system  for  space  shuttle  orbiter  stage.  Contractor 
would  receive  $90 000,  cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  under  which  firm 
would  fabricate  for  testing  one  fully  functional  unit  that  could  be  used 
individually  dur ing   week-long  test  by  team  of  three  men  and  one 
woman.  (MSC  Release  71-23) 
0  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  was  launched by  NASA  from  TERLS  carrying 
Ind ian   experiment  to  study  luminescent  clouds.  Rocket  and   instru- 
ments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR L is t)  
Space Program  Advisory  Council,  established  by  NASA  to  advise on  space 
program  goals  and  objectives  and   aid  in  reviewing plans  for  and  work 
in  progress on  space programs  and  accomplishments, held  first meeting. 
Council  of  prominent  scientists  would  report  to  NASA  Deputy  Admin- 
istrator on findings of  four committees-Applications,  Physical Sciences, 
Life  Sciences,  and   Space Systems.  (NASA  Release  71-71) 

105  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
April  20 
Ap r i l   20: Dr.  George M.  Low,  Acting NASA  Administrator, and Alan  Gotlieb, 
Deputy  Minister  of  Canadian  Dept.  of  Communications,  signed  agree- 
ment  a t  NASA  Hq.  for   first  cooperative international  project  for  experi- 
mental  communications  technology  satellite.  Cooperative Applications 
Satellite  C  (CAS-c) would  be  launched  into  geostationary  orbit  by 
NASA  in   1974 to  conduct communications experiments with  ground  ter- 
minals  operating  a t   extremely high  frequencies,  test  one-kilowatt  solar- 
power-cell  arrays  that  would  unfurl  in   space  like  window  shades,  and 
test  electric  propulsion  and   stabilization  systems.  Canadian  DOC would 
be  responsible  for   design,  construction,  integration,  and  subsystems 
testing  of  spacecraft and  for  tracking,  data  acquisition,  command,  and 
control  of  spacecraft  after  it  reached  orbit.  NASA  would  provide  Thor- 
Delta  booster,  launch  services,  superefficiency  power  tubes  and   associ- 
ated  equipment,  and   environmental  testing  of  integrated  spacecraft. 
Thel\e would  be  no  exchange  of  funds  between  DOC   and  NASA.  Project 
was  fifth  in   series  of  cooperative  satellites  which  began  with  launch 
of  A l ow t t e   1 Sept.  28,  1962.  (NASA   Release  71-72) 
National  Space  Club  luncheon  honored  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden,  late  NASA 
Deputy  Administrator,  physicist,  and  Director  of  NACA  from  1947  to 
1958. Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  said  in  
speech:  “Dr.  Dryden  held  that  the  decentralization  of  authority  was  a 
desirable  goal  and  dictatorial  control  of  projects,  funds,  and  facilities 
should  be  avoided.  He  knew  that  ideas  and  skills  would  be  widely 
dispersed.  Even  though  the  goals  of  applied  research  and  development 
projects  were  concrete  and  specific,  the  approach  to  these  goals  had  
to   be  diversified.  Freedom  of  the  agencies  and   scientists  engaged  in  
the  work  was  a  necessity  here,  as  it  was  in   fundamental  research,  if 
the  best  use  was  to  be  made  of  their  abilities.  These  concepts  have 
lived  and   grown,  and  I  believe,  still  represent  the  fundamental  policy 
for  the management of  programs at NASA  today.” 
During  luncheon,  bust  of  Dr.  Dryden,  commissioned  by  National 
Space  Club  and  executed  by  sculptress  Una  Hanbury,  was  officially 
presented  to  NAS  President,  Dr.  Philip  Handler.  (Text;  NSC   News 
L e t t e r )  
MSFC   announced  award  of  $1 081 343  contract  to  Research,  Inc.,  to 
design,  fabricate,  install,  and  check  out  electrical  heating  devices  for 
space  shuttle  prototype  heat  protection  systems.  Device  would  be 
installed  in   an   existing  structural  test  facility  at  MSFC   and  would  heat 
up  to  1600 K  (2500°F)   on  lower  surface  and   1300 K  (1800°F)  on 
top  surface of  test  articles.  Work  on  device  would  be  funded  in  incre- 
ments,  beginning  with  $100 000  for  preliminary  design  phase.  (M S FC  
Release  71-67)  
0  Astronaut  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  received  Golf  Magazine’s  All-America 
Award  for   making  first  golf  shot  on  moon  during  Apo l lo   14 mission 
(Jan .  31-Feb.  9 ) .   ( N Y T ,  4 /21 /71 ,57)  
April  21:  L ~ R C  had  turned  over  to  St.  Vincent  Charity  Hospital  in   Cleve- 
land,  Ohio,  small analog  computer  designed by  L ~ R C  scientists  Vernon 
D.  Gebben  and  John  A.  Webb,  Jr.,  a t   cost  of  $1500,  NASA  announced. 
Computer  measured  increase  o r   decrease of  stroke  volume  of  heart,  o r  
changes in  length of  time  heart  valves  remained  open,  to  detect  certain 
abnormalities  early  in   develapment.  Hospital  planned  to  use  computer 

106 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1W l  

April  21 

experimentally  before  application  to  human  patients  recovering  from 
open hear t  surgery.  (NASA  Release 71-69) 
MSC  announced  signing  of  $10 699 4,004, contract  modification with  Mar- 
-  Soviet  ICBM  construction  program  was  increasing,  Secretary  of  Defense 
tin  Marietta  Corp.  f o r  equipment  in  support  of  Skylab  earth  resources 
experiment  package  ( EREP)  . Modification brought  total  value  of  con- 
tract  since February  1970 to  $60 million.  (MSC Release  71-25) 
Melvin  R.  Laird  said  in   speech before American Newspaper  Publishers 
Assn.  in   New  York:  “In   December  and   January   i t   began  to  look  a s   if 
the  Soviet  Union  was  slowing  down  i ts   rapid  ra te   of  ICBM  deploy- 
ments  after  having  reached a  level of  land-based ICBM’s that  gave  them 
approximately  400 more  than  the  1054 possessed  by  the  United States. 
The  situation  began  to  change  in   February  and   March.  . . . More 
recent  evidence  confirms  the  sobering  fact  that  the  Soviet  Union  is 
involved  in   a  new-and 
construction  pro- 
apparently  extensive-ICBM 
gram.”  (Text ) 
*  FAA-DOT  program  to  lower  base  of  positive  control  airspace  to  5486  m 
(18 000  f t )   over  entire  U.S.  by  end  of  1971 was  announced  by  FAA 
Administrator  John  H.  Shaffer.  Purpose  was  to  reduce  potential  for  
midair  collisions.  Current  positive  control  base  was  between  5486  and  
18 288  m  (18 000  and  60 000  f t )   over  northeastern  and  north  central 
U.S.  and   between  7315  and  18 288  m  (24  000  and   60 000  f t )   over 
remainder  of  conterminous 48  states.  (FAA   Release  71-50) 
*  Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe  announced  appointment  of 
John  E.  Hirten,  former President  of  Institute  of  Planners  of  California, 
as  Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  of  Transportation  for  Environment  and 
Urban  Systems.  Hirten  would  succeed  Michael  Cafferty,  who  had 
returned  to  private  law  practice.  (DOT   Release  R-24) 
April  22:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  on  Titan  IIIB-Agena  booster 
from  Vandenberg  AFB  into  orbit  with  400.7-km  (249-mi)  apogee, 
130.4-km  (81-m i)   perigee,  89.8-min  period,  and   110.9’ 
inclination. 
Satellite  reentered  May  13.  (GSFC SSR,  4/30/71;  5/31/71;  Pres  Rpt 
72)  
e  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics  favorably  reported  with 
amendment  H.R.  7109,  9g3.434-biHion  NASA  authorization  bill  [see 
April  11.  (Tex t ;  NASA LAR  X /35)  
*  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carried 
Dudley  Observatory  payload  to  123.5-km  (76.7-mi)  altitude  to  meas- 
ure particulate  matter  in  upper  atmosphere by photometer, microphones, 
plasma  detector,  and  particle  collection.  Rocket  and   instruments  func- 
tioned  satisfactorily  and  payload  was  recovered  as  planned.  (NASA  Rpt 
SRL )  
*  Largest  in f f  ux  of  immigrant  scientists,  engineers,  and   physicians  over 
past  20  y r s   was  reported  by  NSF  f o r   FY  1970. After  sharp   decline  of 
21%  between  1968 and   1969, rise  of  30%  in  1970 had  brought  num- 
ber  of  entries  to  over  1 3 0 0 0  level.  (NSF  Highlights,  4/22/71,  1 )  
Ap r i l   23-25:  U.S.S.R.’s  Soyuz  IO - c a r r y i n g   Cosmonauts  Vladimir  A. 
Shatalov,  Aleksey  S.  Yeliseyev,  and   Nikolay  N.  Rukavishnikov-was 
launched  from  Baykonur  a t   4:54  am  local  time  April  23   (6:54  pm 
EST  April  22 ) .   Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  224  km  (139.2  m i ) ;  
perigee,  200  km  (124.3 m i )  ; period,  88.2  min;  and   inclination,  5 1 . 3 O .  
Tass  said  spacecraft  would  conduct  jo in t   experiments  with  Salyut  1 

107  

April  23-25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

(launched  April  19 ) ,   make  comprehensive  check  of  onboard  systems, 
test  manual  and   automatic  control  systems,  check  out  spacecraft  ori- 
entation  and  stabilization  in   different  flight  conditions,  and  conduct 
medical-biological  research  on  influence  of  space  flight  factors  on 
human  organism. 
On  April  24  Soyuz   10  linked  with  Sa lyu t   1 for   5%  hrs,  undocked, 
and   pulled  away.  Taped  pictures  released  later  on  Moscow  TV  showed 
Soyu z   10  moving  away  from  Salyut  1 after  docking  experiment while 
commentator said : “The principles  of  rendezvous and   docking with  the 
use  of  new  equipment were  tested  and  checked  ou t  in   the  course of  the 
joint  experiment. A  rigid  mechanical l ink-up  was  achieved,  followed  by 
undocking  of  the  manned  ship  from   the  orbital  station.  After  the  end 
of  this  experiment  in  maneuvering,  both  vehicles  continued  to  fulfill 
their  program.”  According  to  information  released  later,  Soyuz  10 
caught up with Salyut  1 in   two  stages.  First stage automatically brought 
Soyuz   10 within  180 m  (590  f t )  of  target  vehicle;  in  second,  approach 
and  docking  were  effected  manually.  After  separation  Soyuz   10 cir- 
cled  Salyut  1  fo r   about  one  hour,  photographing  and  filming  it  from  
various angles. 
Tass  announced  Soyuz   10 reentered  and  landed  near  Karaganda, 
Kazakhstan,  a t   4:40  am  Baykonur  time  April  25   (6:40  pm  EDT April 
24)   after  “fulfilling  the  program  of  studies.  The  studies  carried  out 
dur ing   this  flight  a re   a  stage  in   the  general program  of  work  with  the 
(GSFC  SSR,  4/30/71;  NYT,  4/23-26/71; 
orbital  scientific  station.” 
W Post, 4/25/71,  A l )  
April 23:  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos 407  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  818- 
km  (508.3-mi)  apogee,  791-km  (491.5-mi)  perigee,  100.9-min  period, 
inclination.  (GSFC  SSR ,  4’/30/71;  SBD,  4/26/71,  290)  
and   74.0’ 
*  NASA  announced  tentative  schedule  for  12-day  Apollo  1 5  manned  lunar  
landing  mission.  Spacecraft,  carrying  three-man  crew,  would  be  
launched  from  KSC a t   9:34  am  EDT July  26.  Apollo  15 LM would  land 
near   moon’s  Hadley  Rille  a t   about  6:15  pm  EDT July  30.  Two  astro- 
nauts  would  spend  67  hrs   on  moon  making  three  trips  across  surface 
on  LRV.  Spacecraft and   crew  would  splash  down  in   Pacific  a t  4:46  EDT 
pm  Aug.  7.  (NASA Release 71-73) 
USAF  F-111  on  test  flight  from  Edward  AFB,  Calif.,  crashed  on  gunnery 
range  near  Barstow,  Calif.,  killing  pilot  and   copilot,  who  had  ejected. 
(UPI,  JP Post,  4/25/71,  A2) 
NASA  launched  two  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  from  WSMR.  One  car- 
ried  Univ.  of  Colorado and  GSFC  experiment to  study  airglow,  and   one 
carried  Dudley  Observatory  and  GSFC  experiment  to  collect  micro- 
meteoroids.  Rockets  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (SR 
l is t)  
Perspective in  science fund ing  was  drawn  by  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  NASA 
Associate Administrator,  in   Science  editorial:  “The  funding  proposed 
fo r   1972  for  basic  science  ($2.4  billion),  or  even  that  for  the  entire 
space  exploration  program  ($3 billion),  is  a  very  small  fraction  of 
the  fund ing   that  is   proposed  for   effor ts  to  ameliorate  societal  prob- 
lems  today  ($90  billion).  The  real  need  is no t   so  much  fo r   additional 
dollar  attention  a s   it  is  for  attention  of  a  different  kind.  Ideas,  new 
approaches,  and   new  insights  into  the  wise  management  and  utiliza- 
tion  of  our   human  and   na tura l   resources  are   what  is  required.  Many 

108 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1Rl 

April  21 

experimentally  before  application  to  human  patients  recovering  from 
open heart surgery.  (NASA  Release 71-69)  
MSC  announced  signing  of  $10 699 4,004  contract  modification with  Mar- 
tin  Marietta  Corp.  for   equipment  in   support  of  Skylab  earth  resources 
experiment  package  ( EREP)  . Modification brought  total  value  of  con- 
tract  since  February  1970 to  $60 million.  (MSC Release  71-25) 
9  Soviet  ICBM  construction  program  w a s   increasing,  Secretary  of  Defense 
Melvin  R.  Laird  said  in   speech  before American Newspaper  Publishers 
Assn.  in  New  York:  “In   December  and  January  i t   began  to  look  a s   if 
the  Soviet  Union  w a s   slowing  down  its  rapid  rate  of  ICBM  deploy- 
ments  after  having  reached  a  level  of  land-based ICBM’s tha t   gave  them 
approximately  400 more  than  the  1054 possessed  by  the  United  States. 
The  situation  began  to  change  in   February  and  March.  . . . More 
recent  evidence  confirms  the   sobering  fact  that  the  Soviet  Union  is 
involved  in  a  new-and 
construction  pro- 
apparently  extensive-ICBM 
gram.”  (Tex t)  
0  FAA-DOT  program  to  lower  base  of  positive  control  airspace  to  5486  m 
(18 000  f t )   over  entire  U.S.  by  end  of  1971 was  announced  by  FAA 
Administrator  John  H .   Shaffer.  Purpose  was  to  reduce  potential  for  
midair  collisions.  Current  positive  control  base  was  between  5486  and  
18 288  m  (18 OOO  and   60 000  f t )   over  northeastern  and  north  central 
U.S.  and   between  7315  and  18 288  m  (24  000  and   60 000  f t )   over 
remainder  of  conterminous 48  states.  (FAA   Release  71-50) 
Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe  announced  appointment  of 
John  E.  Hirten, former President  of  Institute  of  Planners  of  California, 
as  Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  of  Transportation  for  Environment  and  
Urban  Systems.  Hirten  would  succeed  Michael  Cafferty,  who  had 
returned  to  private  law  practice.  (DOT Release  R-24) 
April 22 :   USAF  launched  unidentified  sateIlite  on  Titan  IIIB-Agena  booster 
from  Vandenberg  AFB  into  orbit  with  400.7-km  (249-mi)  apogee, 
130.4-km  (81-m i)   perigee,  89.8-min  period,  and  110.9’  inclination. 
Satellite  reentered  May  13.  (GSFC  SSR,  4/30/71;  5/31/71;  Pres  Rpt 
72 ) 
House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics  favorably  reported  with 
amendment  H.R.  7109,  $3.434-billion  NASA  authorization  bill 
[see 
April  11.  (Tex t ;  NASA  LAR X /35)  
Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carried 
Dudley  Observatory  payload  to  123.5-km  (76.7-mi)  altitude  to  meas- 
ure particulate matter  in  upper  atmosphere by photometer, microphones, 
plasma  detector,  and  particle  collection.  Rocket  and   instruments  func- 
tioned  satisfactorily  and  payload  was  recovered  as  planned.  (NASA  Rpt 
SRL) 
Largest  influx  of  immigrant  scientists,  engineers,  and   physicians  over 
past  20  yrs  was  reported  by  NSF  fo r  FY  1970. After  sharp   decline  of 
21%  between  1968 and  1969, rise  of  30%  in  1970 had  brought  num- 
ber  of  entries  to  over  13000 level.  (NSF   Highlights,  4/22/71,  1) 
April  23-25:  U.S.S.R.’s  Soyuz  10-carrying  Cosmonauts  Vladimir  A. 
Shatalov,  Aleksey  S.  Yeliseyev,  and   Nikolay  N.  Rukavishnikov-was 
launched  f rom   Baykonur  a t   4:54  am  local  time  April  23   (6:54  pm 
EST  April  22 ) .   Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  224   km  (139.2  m i )  ; 
perigee,  200 km  ( 1N . 3  m i )  ; period,  88.2  min;  and   inclination,  5 1 . 3 O .  
Tass  said  spacecraft  would  conduct  joint  experiments  with  Sulyut  1 

107 

April  24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

building  spacecraft  and  conducting  launch  operations.  NASA  provided 
Scout  booster,  two  experiments,  technical  consultations,  launch  crew 
training,  and   spacecraft  tracking  and  da ta   acquisition.  (NASA  Release 
71-63;  NASA  Pro j  Off; GSFC S SR ,  4/30/71) 
*  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  408  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  1510-km 
(938.3-mi)  apogee,  200-km  ( 124.3-mi)  perigee,  102-min period,  and 
81.8’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Dec.  29.  (GSFC   SSR ,   4/30/71; 
12/31/71;  S F ,   10/71,  386) 
*  New  Yo rk   Times editorial  commented  on  Soyuz-Salyut mission:  “The 
latest  Soviet  spade  spectacular  follows  a  long  series  of  indications  by 
Kremlin  leaders  that  their  present  priority  in  manned  space  flight  is 
establishment of  a  long-lasting  station  in  space.  This  latest  experiment 
seems  an   important-as  well  as  expensive-step 
on  the  road  toward 
that  objective.”  But  there  was  no  guarantee  that  space  stations  would 
be  restricted  to  benign  purposes.  “Logically,  there  should  be   no  na-  
tional  space  stations  in  space.  All  such  facilities  should be  operated by 
the  United  Nations  employing  crews  from  many  nations  and   they 
should  all  be  open  to  appropriate  international  inspection.”  Principle 
had  been  recognized  in  Antarctic  “where  the  presence  of  Soviet scien- 
tists  in  American  bases  and  American  scientists  in  Soviet  bases  has  a 
long,  useful  and  honorable  history.  With  the  latest  Soyuz  and   Salyut 
vehicles  in   orbit,  the  sensitive  issues  raised  by  space  stations  must  be 
faced in  the nearest future.”  ( N Y T ,  4/241/71) 
Soviet  bloc  geologists  meeting  in  four-day  conference  at  Riga,  Latvia, 
had  decided  to  establish  International  Coordinating  Center  of  Marine 
Exploration  in  U.S.S.R.,  New   Yo rk   Times reported.  Center,  to  ensure 
rational  use  of  mineral  resources  of  the  oceans,”  would  be  open  to 
( 6  
members  of  Council  of  Mutual  Economic  Assistance  (Comecon) , eco- 
nomic  alliance  of  U.S.S.R.  and  Eastern  Europe.  (Shabad,  N Y T ,  
4 /24 /71 ,9 )  
Ap r i l   25:  First  flight-model  Lunar  Roving  Vehicle  (LRV) was  installed  on 
board  Apollo  15   LM  on  test  stand  at  KSC .   LM  would  be  moved  to 
Vehicle  Assembly  Building  May  8  to   be  mated  to  Saturn  V  booster 
and  CSM.  Complete  Apollo  15  vehicle  would  be  rolled  out  to  launch 
pad  May  11.  (M S FC   Release  71-71;  Murshull  S ta r ,   4/28/71,  1) 
At  press  conference  following Soyuz   10 landing  Cosmonaut  Aleksey  S. 
Yeliseyev  described  Sulyut  1 as  “overwhelming.  I t   was  a  little  like  a 
train  entering  a  railroad  terminal.  That’s  how  we  felt  as  our  rather  big 
Soyuz  eased  up  to  the  station. 
The  rendezvous  maneuver  began  from  a  long  distance  away.  At 
LL  
first  we   could  not  see  the  orbital  station  and  w e   corrected  our  orbit 
to  get  closer.  We  first  saw  the  Salyut from  a  distance  of  about  15  kilo- 
meters  [9 mi].  A t   that  distance  we  were  able  to  see  the  station  through 
a  special  optical device. At  first  it looked  very tiny,  just  a  black  spo t .  . . 
of  small size.  The  station  flashed  special  light  beacons  fo r   easier  recog- 
nition.  From  that  moment  on  w e   kept  it  constantly in   view  a s  we  pro- 
ceeded with  the  rendezvous maneuver. 
“As we   approached the  station, we  kept looking a t  the  station  through 
instruments.  I t   was  quite  an   imposing  sight.  Then  the  docking  took 
place.  All  the  time  we  kept  the  required  components  of  the  station 
in  the  field  of  vision  of  our  television  and  optical  devices.  Then  we 

110 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

April  25 

separated  and   circled  the  station,  looking  a t   i t   from  all  sides  and  
shooting movie film of  it. 
I t   was  an   overwhelming  sight:  There  was  this  structure  in   flight, 
b t  
with  a  tremendous  amount  of  apparatus  and  all  sorts  of  antennas.”’ 
(Shabad, N Y T ,  4 /26 /71 ,1 ;   4/27/71,30) 
Cosmonaut Konstantin P.  Feoktistov  later  said tha t   in   future,  “it  will 
become  necessary  to  learn  to  dock  a  relatively  small  transport  space- 
ship  with  a  high  flying  multipurpose  laboratory.  . . . i t   is  already 
necessary  to  look  for  more  national  technical  solutions,  in   particular 
of  docking  units,  as  much  depends  on  their  design  and   perfection. 
A  new  version  of  docking units  was  tested  dur ing   the  flight.” 
Cosmonaut  Boris  Yegorov  said  “operations  of  docking  and   rendez- 
vous  lead  to  a  considerable  emotional  burden  on  the  cosmonauts. 
Medical  men  and  engineers  are  looking  for  and  finding  the  most 
rational  combination of  man  and   automatic  equipment  in   such a  com- 
plex  maneuver  in   orbit.  . . . quite  a  few  problems  of  engineering  and  
cosmic  psychology  must  be  solved  to  achieve  the  best  possible  coordi- 
nation of  man and automatic equipment.” 
Soviet  comments  on  its  space  station  program  had  shifted  in  em- 
phasis  to  possible  future  docking  experiments between  Salyut  satellites 
and manned  spacecraft  and  had  “left  open  the  question of  whether  . . . 
Soyuz  10  . .  . succeeded  in  doing  all  i t   set  out  to  do,”  Anthony 
Astrachan  later  suggested  in   the  Washington  Pos t .   Comments  by 
Feoktistov  strongIy  suggested  that  the  Soyuz-Salyut  experiment  was 
only  prelude  to   creation  of  permanent  orbital  lab.  ( W   Pos t ,   4/26/71, 
A1 1 
Texas  A&M  Univ.  scientists  had  irradiated  five  grams  of  lunar  soil  to 
determine  whether  its  elements,  apparently  soluble  in   water,  were 
absorbed  in   growing  lettuce  plants,  AP  reported.  Laboratory  plants 
growing  in  moon  soil  mixture  had  grown  better  than  those  in  ordi- 
nary   soil.  Dr.  Pau l   Baur,  Jr.,  botanist  working  a t   MSC,  had  said  if  
plants  took  up  activated  elements  from  lunar   soil  they  could  be 
detected  on  x-ray  plates.  “This  may  give  us  new  clues  to  the  ferti- 
lizer  requirements  of  plants.”  (W  Star,  4/25/71,  A16) 
9  NASA  launched  two  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  from  TERLS.  One  car-  
ried  India-Japan  experiment  to  study  ionosphere.  Mission  was  partial 
success.  Second  rocket  carried  Indian  experiment  to  study  luminescent 
clouds. Mission was unsuccessful.  (SR l is t)  
Interview  with  Chien  Wei-chang,  professor  of  engineering  a t   Chinghua 
Univ.  in   Peking  who  had  worked  at  JPL   from  1940 to  1946, was  pub- 
lished  in  Washington  Post.  Asked  if  he  had  had  anything  to  do  with 
China’s  ear th   satellite  program,  Chien  had  replied,  “What  do  you 
th ink?”   (Roderick, AP, W Post, 4/25/71,  A26) 
*  U.S.S.R.  was  “clearly  a  b ig   jump  ahead”  of  US. in   “post-moon  race 
operations,”  Detroit  News  editorial  said.  “Credit  must  be  given  the 
Russians  for  having  the  shrewdness  to  go  all  out  for  orbital  space 
stations  when  they  realized,  as  they  must  have  done  before  Armstrong 
and  Aldrin  landed  on  the  moon  . . . that  they  were  sure   to  lose  the 
moon  race.  We  shall  have  to  watch  for  a  few  years  because  the  deci- 
(De tro i t   New s ,  
sion  has  been  made  to  slash  the  space  budget.’’ 
4/25/71,4M) 

111 

April  25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

ICSC  tourist  facilities  were  described  in   New  York   Times  travel  section: 
In   these  days  of  popular  denigration  of  space  exploration,  the  tourist 
( 6  
is  likely  to  approach  this  vast  space-age  outdoor  science  museum  in 
a  defensively  skeptical  frame  of  mind.  Three  o r   more  hours  later  he 
is   likely  to  leave  the  center  convinced  that  it  was  a  valuable  and  
exciting  experience.”  ICSC  was  “one  of  the  least  commercialized  major 
tourist  attractions  of  the,world.”  NASA  was  “selling  . . . on  tapes  and  
i n   guide  lectures,  but  not  offensively  and   not  at  the  expense of  infor- 
mation  you  want.”  There  was  little  evidence  of  security  “and  the 
guides emphasize  that  you  may  photograph  anything you  see.” 
(Fried- 
lander,  N Y T ,  4/25/71) 
April  26:  NASA  launched  series  of  four  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  from 
Arenosillo,  Spain,  carrying  Spanish  experiments  to  study  luminescent 
clouds.  Rockets  and  instruments  functioned satisfactorily.  (SR  l is t)  
“The  short and  uneventful flight  of  Soyuz  10 suggested . . . that  the  Soviet 
Union  ran   into  technical  difficulties  in  its  first  attempt  at  establishing 
a  manned  workshop  in   earth  orbit,”  Thomas O’Toole  said  in   Washing- 
ton  Post.  “Just  what  the  difficulties might have  been  is   unclear,  but  the 
landing  of  Soyuz  10 after  only  two  days  in   space,  the  brief  time  Soyuz 
spent  docked  with  the  Salute  workshop  and   the  apparent  failure  to 
transfer  crew  members  . . . all  added  up  in   American  minds  to  a 
bungled  mission.”  ( W  Post, 4/26/71,  A21) 
*  Possibility  of  using  electrically  controlled  optical  sensors  and  signal 
processes-techniques 
used  to  guide  military  missiles  to  targets-was 
being  examined as  substitute  for  sightless  eyes  by  Huntington  Institute 
of  Applied  Medical  Research  team  led  by  Dr.  Robert  H.  Pudenz, 
New  York   Times  reported.  Electrical  impulses,  as  coded  messages, 
would  stimulate  visual  cortex  of  central  nervous  system  and  communi- 
.
,
 
cate  pulses  of  information  to  brain  bv  wav  of  optic  nerve.  Artificial 
system  would  bypass  eyes  and  optic  nerve  and   radio  signals  directly 
to brain.  (Holles, N Y T ,  4 /26 /71 ,23)  
*  House Committee on Armed  Services’  subcommittee investigating  Dec.  30, 
1970,  crash  of  USN  F-14  Tomcat  fighter  a ircraf t   dur ing   test  flight  a t  
Grumman  facility  in   Calverton,  N.Y.,  received  communication  from 
identified  source  containing  13 allegations  of  defects  and   deficiencies 
in   F-14A  design,  manufacture,  testing,  and  administrative  controls. 
Rep.  F.  Edward  Hebert  (D-La.),  as  Chairman  of  investigation  sub- 
committee,  ordered  full  inquiry  into  charges.  (Subcom Rpt,  12/20/71) 
Sonic  booms  from  USAF  jets  had  smashed  prehistoric  ruins  and   caused 
disintegration  of  cliff  faces  a t   Yellowstone  and   Teton  National  Parks, 
Director  of  National  Pa rk   Service  George  B.  Hartzog  said  in   testi- 
mony  before  House  Committee  on  Appropriations’  Subcommittee  on 
Department  of  the  Interior  and  Related  Agencies.  He   believed  jets 
originated  in   California  but  had  received  no  meaningful  response  from 
correspondence with  USAF.  (Testimony) 
April  26-28:  NAS  held  annual  meeting  for  first  time  in   $4.25-million 
Washington, D.C.,  facility  that  contained 68Psea t   Dryden  Auditorium. 
Auditorium  had  been  funded  in   part  by  Hugh  L.  Dryden  Memorial 
Fund  as  tribute  to  former  NACA  director  and   NASA  Deputy  Adminis- 
trator  who  died  i n   December  1965.  Dr.  Dryden  had  been  NAS  Home 
Secretary for  10 yrs. 
Dr.  Frederick  Seitz,  former  NAS  President,  paid  tribute to Dr.  Dryden 

112 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
April  26-28 
a t   opening  session:  “I  am  particularly  pleased  that  these  remarks  can 
manned  missions.  I n  
owing  several  successful 
d  as  by  fa te   to  the 
n’s  professional  life  w 
scientific  and   technological  watershed  represented  by  a  successful 
Apollo  program.  Today we  stand  beyond  that  watershed  and   are  privi- 
leged  to  inspect new vistas.” 
Dr.  Dryden  had  become  “perhaps  the  central  figure”  in   US .   tran- 
sition  to  space  age  following  1957 launch  by  U.S.S.R.  of  first  success- 
ful  Sputnik.  He  had  helped  prepare  legislation  to  establish  NASA.  “In  
this  process,  he  . . . drew  upon  his  creative  genius  in   helping  to  devise 
an  administrative and  operational  instrument which would make  flexible 
use  of  the  existing  and   potential  resources  of  our  country  and  a t   the 
same  time,  focus,  in   a  relentlessly  systematic  way,  upon  well-defined 
missions.  Many  individuals  have  contributed  to  the  success  of  our 
space  program,  but  none  have  been  more  crucial  than  Hugh  Dryden 
working  a t   his  broadest  as  the  scientist,  the  administrator,  and   the 
visionary.” 
Dr.  Seitz  estimated  Dryden  Memorial  Fund  contribution  to  audi- 
torium’s  construction  represented  nearly  40%  of  total  cost. 
Following  Dr.  Seitz’  remarks,  bust  of  Dr.  Dryden  presented  to  NAS 
by National Space Club was unveiled. 
At  business  session,  NAS  announced  decision  to  increase  membership 
to  include  leaders  i n   medical,  social,  and  behavioral  research.  Limit 
of  50  new  members  elected  annually  would  be  raised  to  75  in   1972 
and  100 . in  1973. Thereafter limit would  be  reduced  over  several years 
N ew s   Rpt,  3/71,  1; Text;  NASA  Special  Ann; 
to  60.  (NAS-NRC-NAE 
Program;  Schmeck, NYT, 4 /28 /71 ,3 :32)  
Apr i l   26-29:  American Physical Society held spring meeting in  Washington, 
D.C. 
Dr.  Gary  V.  Latham,  chief  Apollo  program  seismologist,  said  most 
quakes  shaking  two  Apollo  seismometers  left  on  moon  appeared  to  be 
coming  from  one  place  that  could  be  644  km  (NO m i )   below  lunar  
surface.  Dr.  Latham  guessed  quakes  were  result  of  molten  rock  being 
moved  about  under  moon  by  tidal  forces  on  earth.  Larger  quakes were 
too  deep  to  be  caused  by  escaping  gas,  which  led  to  his  theory  tha t  
sublunar  volcano  caused  quakes.  He  was  unable  to  pinpoint  quake 
source,  except  that  they  emanated  from  somewhere  along  1290-km 
n  by  Apo l lo   12  and  
(800-mi)  line  between  seismometers  left 
Apollo  14  astronauts.  (O’Toole,  W Post,  4 
Discovery  by  U b r u   (Explorer  42) 
Astronomy  Satellite 
(launched  Dec.  12, 1970)  of  slowdown  in   spin  ra te   of  x-ray  s ta r  
Centaurus  X-3 
in   Milky  Way  Galaxy  was  reported  by  Dr.  Riccardo 

113 

April  26-29 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
floated  freely  through  atom  unless  they  h i t   i ts   nucleus  squarely.  If 
Dr.  Davis’  observations  were  confirmed,  they  would  contribute  to 
understanding  of  how  sun  produced  energy.  Neutrinos  were  thought 
to  be  largely  produced  by  reactions  that  began  with  fusion  of  two 
hydrogen  nuclei  (protons).  (Sullivan, NYT,  4/30/71,  3:23) 
Dr.  V.  Paul  Kenney  of  Notre  Dame  Univ.  told  press  briefing  that 
every  20  years  or  so  we  get  a  1000  fold  increase  in  the  energy  of 
6 6  
our  accelerators  and   each  time  we  enter  a  new  era  of  physics.” 
(Lannan, W Star, 4/30/71,  A16) 
Forty-second  annual  scientific  meeting  of  Aerospace  Medical  Assn.  was 
held  in   Houston,  Tex.  Approximately 5000  aerospace doctors  attended. 
Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  MSC  Director  of  Medical  Research  and  Opera- 
tions,  was  out-going president.  ( MSC Release  71-22) 
April  27:  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  was  sworn  in  as  NASA  Administrator  by 
D.C.  Superior  Court  Judge  James  A.  Belson  in   White  House  ceremony 
attended by  President  Nixon.  (NASA  Off  Admin;  W Post, 4/28/71,  A 2 )  
USN  TF-SA  jet  a ircraf t  with  NASA’s supercritical  wing,  piloted  by  test pilot 
Gary Krier, successfully completed  fifth  flight  from FRC. Flight  achieved 
planned  purposes : to  extend  flight  envelope  to  higher  dynamic  pres- 
sures;  evaluate  augmented  stability  and  control ; determine  handling 
qualities,  structural  loads,  and  buffet  boundaries ; and   make  prelimi- 
nary   evaluation  of  flutter  characteristics  at  higher  dynamic  pressures. 
Aircraft  reached  7600-m  (25  000-ft)  altitude  and   mach  0.9. 
(NASA 
P ro j  Off) 
Pau l   F.  Bikle,  ,Director  of  FRC since  1959,  would  retire  May  31,  NASA 
announced.  To  ensure  smooth  transition  until  appointment  of  new 

April  2 7 :   D r .   James  C .   Fletcher  was  sworn  in   as  NASA  Administrator  b y   District  of 
Co lumb ia  Superior  Court  Judg e  James  A .  Belson m President  Nixon,  M r s .  Fletcher,  and 
D r .   George  M. Low,  Depu ty   Administrator  ( b e h i n d ) ,  watched  in   the  President’s  o f i c e .  

114 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
April  27 
director  De  E.  Beeler,  FRC  Deputy  Director,  was  named  Acting  Direc- 
tor  with  Bikle  acting  as   a n   adviser.  (NASA  Release  71-77) 
Ap r i l   2 8 :   NASA  announced  decision  to  discontinue  quarantine  of  astronauts, 
spacecraft,  and   lunar   samples  for  remaining  three  Apollo  Bights.  Dr. 
George  M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  said  NASA  had   concluded 
from  analysis  of  Apollo  11, 1 2 ,   and   14  quaran t ine   information  “that 
there  is  no  hazard  to  man,  animal,  o r   plants  in   the  lunar   material. 
These  results  have  been  reviewed  by  the  Interagency  Committee  on 
Back  Contamination,  and   tha t   committee  has  recommended  tha t   fur- 
ther  lunar   missions  need  not  be  subject  to  quarantine.”  (NASA   Release 
71-78) 
U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  4 9  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t   with  1228-km 
(763-mi)  apogee,  1172-km  (728.3-mi)  perigee,  109.4-min  period,  and 
74.0”  inclination.  ( G E F C   SSR ,  4/30/71;  SF ,   10/71,  386)  
*  Dr.  Clarence  L.  Johnson,  Senior  Vice  President  of  Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corp.,  received  NAE’S  sixth  Founders  Medal  for  designing  advanced 
aircraft  and   for  experimental  and   theoretical  investigations  in   aero- 
space  sciences.  Dr.  Johnson  was  best  known  fo r   his  work  in   designing 
Hudson  bomber,  Constellation  and   Superconstellation  transports,  P-38, 
T-33  trainer,  F-90,  JetStar, U-2,  Warning  S tar ,  YF-12A,  and   SR-71. 
( N A E  Release, 7/13/71;  NAE  Br idge ,  7 /71 ,1 )  
Apr i l   2 9 :   USN  TF-8A  jet  aircraft  with  NASA’s  supercritical  wing,  piloted  by 
test  pilot  Thomas  C.  McMurtry,  successfully completed sixth flight  from 
FRC .   Purposes  of  flight-to 
explore  flutter  boundary  and   evaluate  sta- 
bility  and   control  characteristics-were 
achieved.  Aircraft  reached 
1 2  000-m  (40 000-ft)  altitude and  mach  0.95.  (NASA   P ro j  Off) 
*  Aerobee  170  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carrying 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  and   GSFC   experiment  to  study  solar  x-ray 
emissions.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (SR  l is t)  
NASA  announced  selection  of  Boeing  Co.  to  build  Mariner  Venus-Mercury 
’73  spacecraft-first 
to  explore  two  planets  on  single  mission.  Boeing, 
one  of  four  companies  that  had   submitted  proposals,  submitted  esti- 
mated  cost  of  $47  million,  with  award  fee  based  on  performance. 
(NASA   Release  71-81 ) 
Major  Soviet  space  station  project  included  “powerful  new  launch  vehicle 
i n   the  class  of  America’s  Sa turn   5,” Kenneth  Gatland  said  in   New  
Scientist  and  Science  Journal  article.  Prototype  had   been  destroyed  by 
fire  i n   1969 while  undergoing  static  test  on  launch  pad  a t   Baykonur, 
h e  reported.  (N e w  Sc i  & Sc i  J ,  4/29/71,256-7) 
Change  in   name  of  Fairchild  Hiller  Corp.  to  Fairchild  Industries,  Inc., 
was  approved  by  stockholders  a t   annual  meeting  in   Germantown,  Md. 
( W  Pos t ,  4/29/71,  B11) 
Apr i l   29 -30 :   Geology  fieId  t r ip   and   lunar   EVA  practice  session  using  lunar 
roving  vehicle  simulator  was  conducted  a t   China  Lake,  Calif.,  by 
Apollo  15 prime  and   backup  commanders  and   LM  pilots.  Astronauts 
would  use  LRV  to  explore  moon’s  Sea  of  Rains  dur ing   July  luna r  
landing  mission.  (NASA   Special  Release;  W  S tar ,   4/30/71,  A9) 
Ap r i l   30 :  Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  TERLS 
carrying  India-GsFC  experiment  to  study  ionosphere.  Rocket  and   in-  
struments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR list) 
Recent  Soviet  launches  “indicate  continued  progress  toward  a  system  for 
inspecting  and   possibly  destroying  American  satellites,”  George  C. 

115 

April  30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Wilson  reported  in   the   Washington  Pos t .   Cosmos  400,  target  satellite 
launched  March  19,  was  hunted  by  Cosmos  404,  launched  April  4, 
which  “went  through  a  series  of  maneuvers  under  propulsion supplied 
by  the  giant  SS-9  rocket.  . . . The  Soviet  Union  has  conducted  such 
space  marksmanship  tests  before  . . . But  this  time  the  test  showed 
more  sophistication  . . . as  the  hunter  satellite  stayed  in   phase  with 
the  target  for  a  longer  period  of 
time  than  on  previous  shots.” 
(W Post, 4/30/71,  A l )  
USAF  placed  its  257  operational  F-111s  on  suspended  status  after  inves- 
tigation  of  April  23  fatal  crash  showed  cause  to  be  failure  of  ejection 
capsule to  function.  (Schmidt, N Y T ,   5/2/71,  66) 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  announced  retirement  of  Director  of  Pro- 
gram  Management  Lee  B.  James,  effective May  31.  James,  who  would 
return  to  academic  community,  would  be  replaced  in   acting  capacity 
by  James  T.  Shepherd,  Deputy  Director  (Technical),  Program  Man- 
agement.  (MSFC  Release  71-77) 
During  Ap r i l :   NASA  issued  Funds  for  Research,  Development,  R&D  Plant 
and  Scientific  and  Technical  Information,  Fiscal  Years  1970-1972: 
Annual  Report  to  The  National  Science  Foundation.  In   FY  1972 
budget,  NASA  was  seeking  authorization  of  $3.271  billion.  Effect  on 
programs  would  be:  Funds  for  basic  research  would  remain  a t   FY 
1970  level  in   FY  1971  and  rise  in  FY  1972,  reflecting  increased 
funding  for  Viking  and   initiation  of  outer  planets  Grand  Tour  project. 
In   applied  research,  estimates  for  FY  1971  reflected  10%  increase 
over  1970  and  slight  increase  in   FY  1972,  primarily  for  ear th   re- 
sources  surveys  and   space  station.  Budget  authority  for  development 
activities  would  decline  in  1971  and  1972, primarily  as  result  of  com- 
pletion  of  Apollo  program  and  reduction  in  NASA-AEC  NERVA  program 
effort.  R&D  funds  were  requested  in  FY  1972  for  space  shuttle  tech- 
nology  and  engine  development  facilities.  (Tex t)  
AIA  Aerospace  Research  Center  published  National  Technology  Suppor t:  
A  Study  of  Research  and  Development  Trends and  Their  Implications: 
New  patterns  were  emerging  in  magnitude  and  direction  of  R&D  in  
U S .   “Recent  R&D  trends  reflect  diminishing  governmental  leadership 
in   R&D  which  could  lead  to  an  erosion  of  the  national  research  effort. 
The  impact of  continued inflation,  the  higher  costs  and longer leadtimes 
associated  with  increasingly  sophisticated  projects,  plus  accelerated 
efforts  to  meet  specific  national  goals,  suggest an   even  greater  degrada- 
tion  of  the  total  R&D  effort  than  an   examination  of  expenditures would 
indicate.” 
Recent  growth  of  industrial  financing  and   leveling  of  Federal  fund- 
ing   indicated  shift  in   direction  of  national  R&D  activities.  (Whereas  
industrial  research  and  development  has  focused  primarily  upon  prod- 
uct  improvement and  product  development,  most  of  the  nation’s  basic 
research  and  the  high  risk,  high  cost  activity  has  been  financed  by  the 
Federal  Government.  Although  their  respective  R&D  programs  fre- 
quently  a r e   complementary,  certain  technological  projects  traditionally 
initiated  o r   sponsored  by  the  Federal  Government  are   beyond  the 
financial  scope  of  private  enterprise.  Consequently,  a  reduction  in  
Federal  R&D  activity  could  have  a  negative  impact  on  the  level  of 
sophisticated effort nationally.” 

116 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

During  April 

Investments  i n   higher  education,  level  and   nature  of  Federal  R&D 
support,  and   utilization  of  existing  manpower  “provide  some  indica- 
tion  of  the  long-term  scientific  and   technical  capability  of  the  nation. 
Previous  Federal  support  of  certain  programs  h a s   had   a  feedback 
effect  on  the  desirability  of  pursuing  certain  careers.  Thus  the  failure 
to  consider  the  long-term  relationship  among  various  fields  of  science 
implies  fu ture   imbalances.”  Establishment  of  longer  range  RW  priori- 
ties and  well  defined national  technological  strategy  was  needed.  (Tex t)  
*  Challenge  of  educational  satellite  telecommunications  was  discussed  in  
Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists  by  Delbert  E.  Smith:  While  advances 
in   comsat  technology  promised  to  revolutionize  global  communication, 
“it  is  not  certain  that  educational  uses  of  such  a  satellite  system  will 
develop  concomitantly.  They  may,  in   fact,  be  lost  in   the  speed  with 
which  ou r   society  utilizes  the  more  spectacular  and   commercialIy 
viable  facets  of  the  medium.”  Educational  Satellite  Center  a t   Univ. 
of  Wisconsin  had  been  established  to  work  toward  “fuller  understand- 
ing   of  the  social,  cultural,  political  and   legal  consequences  of  the  in- 
evitable  massive  transformations  in   global  communication  patterns 
which  a r e   imminent.”  Objectives  of  EDSAT  Center  were : to  provide 
focus  for  multidisciplinary  research  and  tra in ing   in   educational  and  
social  applications  and  impact  of  comsats,  to  develop  working  models 
for   application  of  satellite  telecommunications  systems  to  educational 
and  social  problems,  to  develop  and  maintain  satellite  transmission  and  
reception  capability  for  integration of  hardware  and  software  research, 
and   to  disseminate  information  on  educational  and   social  applications 
of  space  telecommunications.  (Bull  of  Atomic  Scientists,  4/71,  14-8) 
0  Changes  and  chances  in  US.-U.S.S.R. 
foreign  affairs  were  described  by 
Dr.  Hans  J.  Morgenthau  of  Univ.  of  Chicago  and  City  Univ.  of  New 
York  in   Foreign  Affairs:  ‘ L .  . . fu ture   of  American-Soviet  relations  is 
shrouded  in   uncertainty.  Neither  amity  nor  enmity  is  foreordained. 
Those  who  proclaim  the  inevitability  of  conflict  on  ideological  grounds 
are   as   wrong  as   those  who  assert  the  inevitability  of  peace,  or  even 
friendship,  because  the  United  States  and   the  Soviet  Union  have 
become  more  restrained  in   words  and  deeds  in   dealing  with  each 
other.  The  fu ture   depends  first  of  all  upon  how  the  two  governments 
conceive  of  their  respective  interests  and   how  they  will  go  about 
defending  and   protecting  them.  If  they  conceive  of  them  in   com- 
patible  terms  and   pursue  them  with  appropriate  concern  for  each 
other’s  sensibilities,  the   fu ture   might  well  witness  the   realization  of 
Roosevelt’s  dream,  Stalin’s  grand  design,  and  Mao’s  nightmare : the 
cooperation  of  the  United  States and   the  Soviet  Union  in   establishing 
and   maintaining  a  modicum  of  order  in   the  world.  Otherwise  the 
world  will  continue  to  hover  on  the  brink  of  self-destruction.”  (Foreign 
Affairs, 4/71,  4 2 W 1 )  
Study  completed  by  TRW  Inc.  for  DOD  and   CIA  estimated  that  multiple 
warheads  flight-tested  to  date  with  Soviet  SS-9  ICBMS  were  not  accu- 
ra te   enough  to  knock  out  U.S.  Minuteman  ICBMS  in   surprise  attack. 
Study  said  warhead  accuracy  probably  could  not  be  improved  enough 
with  current  techniques  to  achieve  first-strike  capability. 
(Getler, 
W Post, 6/17/71,  A l )  
NSF published  Research and  Development  in  Industry,  1969 :  Funds,  1969 ;  
Scientists  & Engineers,  January  1970  (NSF 71-18).  I n   1969  industry 

117 

During April 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

spent  $18.5  billion  for  ~ - 6 %  above  1968  level  of  $17.5 billion  and 
5  times  amount  spent  on  R&D  in   1953. Increase  in   1968-1969  was  due 
to  increase  in   companies’  own  funds.  Between  January   1969  and 
January   1970  full-time  equivalent  number  of  R&D  scientists  and   engi- 
neers  employed  in   industry  dropped  from  387 100  to  380 600. Decline 
recorded  by  NSF  in   13-yr  series  of  reports,  was  primarily  caused 
-first 
by  cutbacks  in   personnel  working  on  Federal  R&D  programs.  Most  of 
R&D  unemployment  among  scientists  and  engineers occurred  in  aircraft 
and   missiles  industry.  Number  of  R&D  professionals  in   DOD  programs 
remained  level  between  1968 and  1969. Federal Government was  source 
of  47% of  R&D  dollars spent by  industry dur ing   1969,  down  from  59% 
in  1959. DOD  and  NASA  furnished 89% of  Federal R&D  funds  to  industry 
i n   1969  and  supported  89%  of  industrial  scientists  and  engineers 
working  on  Federal  programs,  a t  average  annual  cost  of  $56 200  each. 
In   1969  industry  financed 53% of  its  R&D  with  its  own  funds,  increase 
from  41%  in  1959.  Industry  allocated  3%  of  its  1969  R&D  funds  to 
basic  research  with  more  than  50%  of  this  amount  spent  on  physical 
sciences.  (Tex t)  
Government  Ex e eu i v e   editorial  noted  that  many  experts  feared  “nation’s 
wealth  of  technological  brainpower  has  . . . been  clobbered by  budget 
cuts  close  to  the  point  of  no  recovery.  And  history  records  so  con- 
sistently  it’s  become  a  politico-economic  truism  that  the  civilization 
which  does  not  face  up  to  these  technological  challenges  sooner  or 
later  becomes  captive  of  the  civilization  which  does.”  ( G m t   Exec, 
4 / 7 1 , 9 )  

118 

May  1971 

M a y   1 :   NASA  launched  two  sounding  rockets  from  WSMR.  Aerobee  150 
carried  GSFC  experiment  to  study  stellar  W,  and   Aerobee  170  carried 
MIT-GSFC  experiment  to  study  stellar  x-ray  sources.  Rockets  and  in- 
struments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR l is t)  
May  2:  FY  1972 NASA  budget placed  agency “in  good  shape”  for  next  year, 
Dr.  Edward  E.  David,  Jr.,  Presidential  Science  Adviser,  said  in   A P  
interview  published  in   Chicago  Tr ibune .   “I  think  there  will  have  to 
be  some  major  decisions  i n   the  next  18 months  about  the  future  of 
the  space  program.”  He  also  said  that  there  was  “activity”  in   Com- 
munist  Chinese missile  program,  “but  at  the  moment  . . . I  would  say 
their  activities  are   more  threatening  to  the  Soviet Union  than  they  a re  
to  us.”  (AP, C  T r i b ,  5 /2 / 71 , 8 )  
*  Previously  unidentified  Soviet  “specialist  in   space  engineering”  had  been 
identified  as  Boris  V .   Raushenbakh,  corresponding  member  of  Soviet 
Academy  of  Sciences,  New  York   Times  said.  Raushenbakh,  jet  com- 
bustion  engineer,  had  joined  Soviet  Cosmonauts  Konstantin  P.  Feok- 
tistov  and  Boris  B.  Yegorov  in   giving  interviews  to  Soviet  reporters 
on  Salyut  1-Soyw  IQ  mission  April  23-25  a t   mission  control  center 
for  Salyut-Soyuz.  Times  said  i t   was  believed  to  be  first  time  that 
Academy  member  had  been  publicly  associated  with  operation  of 
space  experiment.  Normally,  only  former  cosmonauts  were  identified 
with  mission  control  on  ground.  (Shabad, N Y T ,   5/2/71) 
May  3 :   U.S.S.R.  was  “showing  signs  of  an  accelerated  effort”  in   space 
“stretching  far   beyond  the  implications  of  last  month’s  start  on  an  
orbiting  space  station,”  Av ia t ion   Week  &  Space  Technology  said. 
“Latest  analysis  of  orbital  changes  achieved  by  Cosmos  382,  launched 
by  a  Proton  booster  . . . last  fall  . . . shows  that  the  large  unmanned 
satellite  was  moved  once  at  an   acceleration  corresponding  precisely 
to  that  required  for  lunar   orbit  insertion  and  once  a t   exactly  the 
velocity  change needed  for  trans-earth injection.”  ( A v  W k ,  5/3/71,  13) 
Dept.  of  Labor’s  Manpower  Administration  began  Technology  Mobiliza- 
tion  and Reemployment Program  to  help  find  jobs  for 30 000 of  100 000 
iinemployed  scientists,  engineers,  and  technicians  in   1 4   target  areas 
hit  by  layoffs  in  aerospace  and   defense  industries.  (Labor  Dept  P IO )  
Defeat  of  SST  program  and   “widespread  public  antipathy  toward  tech- 
nology”  had  “encouraged  the  political  liberals  to  intensify  their  attack 
on  defense  spending  and   press  for  a  larger  welfare  budget,”  Robert 
Hotz  said  in   Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology  editorial.  “The  Air 
Force  B-1  supersonic  bomber  program  will  inherit  a11  the  supersonic 
transport’s  onus  since  it  has  basically  the  same  flight  characteristics.” 
( A v  W k ,  5 /3 /71 ,9 )  
May  3-14:  International  Workshop on  Earth  Resources  Survey Systems was 
held  a t   Univ.  of  Michigan  to  inform  representatives  of  51  countries 
and  international  organizations  of 
latest  techniques  for  interpreting 
ear th   resources  data  acquired  by  a ircraf t   and  satellite  remote  sensing 

119 

May  3-14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

systems. Workshop  was  sponsored  by  NASA,  Dept.  of  Agriculture,  NOAA, 
U S .   Geological  Survey,  USN  Naval  Oceanographic  Office,  AID,  and  
Dept.  of  State. 
Ambassador  George  H.  W.  Bush,  U S .   Representative  to  U.N.,  in 
welcoming  address  called  space  technology  a  global  tool  and  said, 
“for  a  global  tool  to  be  used  productively  and  efficiently,  there  must 
be  a  climate  of  international  cooperation.”  Workshop  and  U.N.  could 
provide  policy  makers  and  program  managers  in   developing  countries 
6 6  
with  the  basic  information  to  enable  them  to  consider  seriously  how 
this  new  technology  may  help  them  meet  their  needs.” 
Dr.  William  T.  Pecora,  Under  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  said  in 
keynote  address  that  earth-surveying satellites were  “must”  for  world’s 
welfare.  “Whether  or  not  our  great  population  can  avoid  intolerable 
social  problems  of  a  crowded  world  and  maintain  the  hoped-for living 
standards  is  a  matter  of  conjecture,  but  our  ability  to  survive  will 
depend  i n  large part  on  critical  assessment  of  all  the  earth’s  resources.” 
Leonard Jaffe,  NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator  for Applications, 
described  NASA  Earth  Resources  Aircraft  Program  ( ERAP)   : “Instead 
of  waiting  for  data  acquired  from  spacecraft,  users  are   presently 
obtaining multispectral  data  of  Earth  phenomena  from  sensors  carried 
by  NASA  aircraft  . . . to  evaluate  the  sensors  and  to  develop  a  solid 
foundation  for  observational  and  interpretive  techniques  for  earth- 
resources  space missions.”  ERAP  included RB-57FY P-3AY and  C-130B 
aircraft.  “We  shall  shortly  add  two more  high  altitude  (U-2)  aircraft.’’ 
Lockheed  C-130B  was  flying  optical  and  infrared  laboratory  with 
24-channel multispectral  scanner  to  provide  information  on  signatures 
used  to  separate,  classify,  and  identify  specific  earth  resources.  “This 
is  an  expansion of  the  12-channel scanner  of  the  University  of  Michi- 
gan  C 4 7  aircraft  which  we  also  use  for  the  same purposes.  The  P-3A 
or  Electra  is  our  radio-wave  instrument  development  laboratory.” 
Radio  antennas  on  underside  of  a ircraf t  were  used  heavily for  oceano- 
graphic  and   hydrological  studies.  Since  remotely  sensed  data  had  to 
be  verified  with  actual  ground  data,  “complementary  ground  efforts 
are   necessary  dur ing   the  research  phase  of  the  program.” 
In   spacecraft  program  to  begin  in   1972,  “ERTS  satellites  will  be 
placed  into  a  920-kilometer  [ 570-mi1,  sun-synchronous  (near   po lar)  
orbit.  This  will  permit  the  satellite,  with  its  narrow-angle  sensors,  to 
observe  the  same  spot  on  Earth  once  every  18  days.  I t   also  ensures 
that  observations  are   made  with  a  nearly  constant  solar-illumination 
angle  required  for  developing  identification  signatures.  The  altitude 
permits  narrow-angle sensors  to  be  used  to  obtain  virtually  undistorted 
images.”  (NASA  Release  71-74;  GE  Challenge,  Summer  1971;  Tran-  
scr ip t)  
May  4 :   Apollo  15 Astronauts  David  R.  Scott  and   James  B.  Irwin  demon- 
strated  LRV  Rover  for  press  at  IGC.  Newsmen  were  permitted  to  take 
turns  driving vehicle  a t  maximum  16-km-per-hr (10-mph)  speed.  Scott 
told  press,  “We  expect  this  little  buggy  to  work  just  fine  on  the  moon. 
It’s  really  a  very  straightforward  little  vehicle,  just  like  driving  your 
own  automobile.”  On  first  LRV  excursion,  Scott  and   Irwin  would  drive 
about  one  kilometer  (six  tenths  mile)  from  Apollo  1 5  landing  site  a t  
Hadley Rille  to west  edge  of  foothill  for  Hadley Delta  a t   average speed 
of  eight  kilometers per  hour  (five  miles  per  hou r ) .   On  second  excur- 

120 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS7 1971 

May  4 

sion  next  day,  they  would  drive  to  location  as  fa r   as  eight  kilometers 
(five miles)  from landing site and  seek place  to  climb  front  and  survey 
valley.  “We’ll  be  looking  for  bedrock  or  some  unique  feature  tha t  
might  have  sprung  up  from  the  moon  with  the  front,”  Irwin  told 
press.  “If  we  see  i t   and  the  tra i l   upward  looks  traversable,  we  might 
climb  as  high  as  600  f t   [180  m]  to  get  to  it.”  Th ird   and  last  tr ip   on 
th ird   day  on  moon  would  take  astronauts  to  edge  of  Hadley  Rille  and  
north  along  ravine  to  sample  crater  cluster  that  appeared  to  scientists 
to  be  volcanic  in   origin.  On  return,  astronauts  would  park   LRV 90  m 
(300  f t )   east  of  LM with  TV  camera  pointed  directly  a t   LM.  Irwin 
told  press  if  all  went  well  worldwide  TV  audience would  get  first  live 
picture  of  spacecraft  rocketing  off  moon  on  first  leg  of  return  journey 
to earth.  (O’Toole,  W Post, 5 /5 /71)  
MSFC  announced  plans  to  launch  914mm   (36 - in )  Stratoscope I1  balloon- 
borne astronomical telescope  from MSFC  in  August.  Objective of  mission 
was  to  study  Galaxies  M31   and  M32,  Planetary  Nebula  (NGC  7662) ,  
Orion  Nebula,  and  planet  Saturn.  Stratoscope I1  project  management, 
previously  directed  by  Princeton  Univ.,  had  been  recently  assigned  to 
MSFC  as  par t   of  project  reorganization.  Seven  previous  launches  had 
been  from  National  Center  for  Atmospheric  Research‘s  Scientific  Bal- 
loon  Flight  Station  at  Palestine,  Tex.  (MSFC   Release  71-78) 
Apo l lo   11  Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  received  14th  annual  Sylvanus 
Thayer  Award  from  U S .   Military  Academy  Assn.  of  Graduates  in  
ceremony  a t  West  Point,  N.Y. Citation  read:  “For  his  selfless  devotion 
to  this  nation’s  aviation  and   space  efforts  reflecting  the  ideals  symbol- 
ized  in  the  West  Point  motto-Duty,  Honor,  Country.  His  outstanding 
accomplishments,  spanning more  than  two  decades  of  aeronautical  his- 
tory,  have  made  him  an  acknowledged  leader  among  American  space 
pioneers.” 
Earlier  he  received  sabre  from  1800-member cadet  corps  and   told 
cadets,  “As  I  stood  on  the  Sea  of  Tranquility  and  looked  up  at  the 
Earth,  my  impression  was  of 
the  importance  of  the  small,  fragile, 
remote  blue  planet.”  Asked  about  future  of  U S .   space  programs, 
Armstrong  told  press,  “I  am  certainly  optimistic,  but  we’re  doing  con- 
siderably  less  than  we’d  like  to.  But  space  is  here  to  stay  for  all 
humanity.”  (NASA   PAO ;   Everly,  AP,  N Y   Post,  5/5/71,  1 7 )  
US. space  program  was  “beyond  the  days  of  reacting  to  each  major 
Soviet  space event,”  Dr.  George M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator, 
said  in  speech before  Aviation/Space  Writers  Assn.  meeting  in  Wich- 
ita,  Kans.  NASA’s FY  1972  request  was  typical  of  those  to  come  for 
several  years;  “we  have  made  no  commitment  to  any  new  program 
beyond  the  1972  budget.”  In   response  to  questions,  Dr.  Low  said 
Soviet  Salyut  1-Soyuz  10 mission  was  “not  clearly  successful  or  un- 
successful.”  I t   was  “inconceivable”  that  total  planned  mission  was 
48-hr  (flight to  rendezvous  and   dock  briefly.  But  U.S.S.R.  had  “strong 
program.  They  a re   concentrating  very  hard   on  a  major  space effort.” 
( A e r o  Da i ly ,   5/10/71) 
NASA  planned  to  study  “dial-a-plane”  system  in   which  computer  would 
accept  telephone requests,  determine best  aircraft  itinerary  to minimize 
tr ip   lengths  and  passenger  waiting,  and  provide  effective  a i r   transpor- 
tation  system  for   smaller  cities  and  less  densely  populated  areas,  NASA 
announced.  If  studies  proved  concept  feasible,  proposal  for   demon- 

0 

121 

May  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

stration  project  would  be  made  to   DOT  and   FAA,  with  NASA  supplying 
route-scheduling  computer  and   software.  (NASA Release  71-79) 
Spokesman  for  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  announced  personnel  a t   I<SC 
District  O f h e   would  be  cut  from  30  to  15, effective  June  30.  Change 
was  “result  of  a  greatly  diminished  workload  for   NASA  and   the  Air 
Force  in   the  Cape Kennedy  area.”  (Cocoa,  Fla,  Today ,  5/5/71,  B1) 
U.S.S.R.  had   been  runn ing   more  than  seven  years  behind  U S .   in   devel- 
opment  of 
third-generation  computers  using 
integrated  circuits, 
Mikhail  Y.  Rakovsky,  Deputy  Chairman  of  Soviet  State  Planning 
Committee,  said  a t   Moscow  news  conference.  Integrated  circuit  com- 
puters  had  appeared  in   U S .   in   1964  but  were  scheduled  fo r   produc- 
tion  i n   U.S.S.R.  under  five-year  plan  that  went  into  effect  this  year. 
U.S.S.R.  ranked  fifth  among world’s  computer  users,  behind  U.S.,  West 
Germany, U.K.,  and  Japan.  (Shabad, N Y T ,  5 /5 /71 ,13 )  
Bipartisan  115-member  congressional  group-Members 
of  Congress  for  
report  criticizing  proposed  B-1  bomber 
Peace  Through  Law-issued 
aircraft  as  unnecessary,  ineffective,  and   obsolete  in   nuclear  age.  Re- 
port  was  prepared  by  Sen.  George  S.  McGovern  ( D S . D . )   and   Rep. 
( C R ,  5/5/71,  H3558-63) 
John  F.  Seiberling  (D-Ohio). 
May  4 -6 :   Conference  on  aircraft  safety  and   operating  problems  was  held 
a t   LBRC.  NASA  speakers  reported  on  supercritical  wing  work,  effects  of 
a ircraf t   noise,  general  aviation  a ircraf t   experience,  STOL  operations, 
collision  hazard  warning,  steep  instrument  approaches,  ditching,  trail- 
ing  vortex,  exhaust  pollutants,  and  sonic  booms.  (NASA  Release  71-76; 
LaRC  PIO) 
May   5:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  AFETR  on  T i tan   I I IC  
booster  into  eccentric  orb i t   with  35  787-km  (22  237-mi)  apogee,  295- 
km  (183.3-mi)  perigee,  631-min  period,  and   26.4’ 
inclination.  Ac- 
cording  to  press  reports  satellite  was  reconnaissance  mission  to  monitor 
Soviet  and   Communist  Chinese  missile  tests  and   provide  30-min warn- 
ing   of  long-range  rocket  attack.  The  800-kg  (1800-lb)  satellite  would 
be  transferred  to  synchronous  orbit  and   stationed  over Asia  a t   36 000- 
km  (22  300-mi)  altitude.  (GSFC S S R ,  5 /31 /71 ;   World  Data  Center  A ;  
SBD ,  5 /6 /71 ,28 ;   AP,  B Sun ,  5/6/71,  AS) 
Tenth  anniversary  of  first  U S .   manned  space  flight.  Freedom  7-Mer- 
cury  spacecraft  launched  May  5,  1961-had 
achieved  objective  of  put- 
t ing   man  into  suborbital  flight  when  Astronaut  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr., 
went  to  185-km  (115-mi)  altitude  dur ing   15-min  flight.  Anniversary 
was  observed  a t   ICSC  with  exhibition  of  Mercury  spacecraft  and   Red- 
stone launch  vehicle  in  main  auditorium,  motion  pictures  on Freedom  7 
and  Apollo  14,  and   guided  tours.  Following  commemorative  ceremony, 
Shepard  visited  Freedom  7  Elementary  School  in   Cocoa  Beach,  Fla., 
where  he   told  students  he  had  made  his  last  venture  into  space  and  
would  step  aside  to  give  younger  astronauts  a  chance.  (MSC  Release 
71-28;  MSC  PAO;  W S tar ,  5 /6 /71)  
*  U.S.S.R.’s  Salyut  I  orbital  scientific  station  launched  April  19 had  com- 
pleted  425   orbits  of  ear th   by  1 :OO   pm  Moscow  time  (6 :OO   am  EDT ) .  
( FBIS-SOV-71-95,  5/10/71, 
All  systems  were  functioning  normally. 
L11) 
NASA  and   DOT  released  information  given  in   Jo in t   DOT-NASA  C iv i l  
Av ia t ion   Research and  Development  Policy  S t u d y  Report  dated  March 
1971.  Study  had  been  recommended  by  Congress  and   made  by  NASA, 

122 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

May  5 

M a y   5 :   Dedication  ceremonies  for  the  
historic  launch  site  at  Kennedy  Space 
Center  marked  the   10th  anniversary  o f  
the   first  US. manned  space  flight,  flown 
on  the  Freedom  7 Mercury  spacecraft. 
T h e   first  American 
to  go  in to   space, 
Astronaut  A lan   B .   Shepard,  Jr.-who 
also  was  commander  o f   the   Apo l lo   14 
lunar  landing  mission Jan .  31-Feb.  9  this 
year-stood 
b y   the   plaque  marking  the  
site  at  Launch  Complex  5 / 6   during  cere- 
monies  attended  by  3000  guests.  The   site 
had  been restored t o  i t s  original condition. 

DOT, and  FAA,  with  assistance  from  DOD,  CAB,  and  eight  other  Federal 
agencies.  Report  concluded  that  aircraft  noise  abatement  deserved 
highest  priority  because  OI widespread  concern  for  environment  and  
because  noise  abatement  program’s  success  would  affect  solution  to 
other  aviation  problems.  Study  recommended  reductions  of  a t   least 
10 decibels  every  10 yrs  until  aircraft  noise  w a s   suppressed into  com- 
munity background  noise. 
Continued  Federal  support  a t   high  level  of  aeronauticaI  R&D  was 
necessary  to  ensure  strong  technical  base.  Continued R&D  was  essential 
i f   current  and   future problems  of  civil aviation  were  to  be  solved  and  
i f   civil  aviation  was  to  contribute  to  such  fu ture   areas  as  regional 
development.  Study  recommended  Government  evaluate  i ts   regulatory 
role  to  be  certain  that  policies  were  not  inhibiting  innovations  by 
industry  and   that  NASC develop  permanent  mechanism  to  review  and  
recommend  policies  affecting civil  aviation  that  embraced  several  agen- 
cies.  Study  called  for  exchange  of  middle  management  personnel  be- 

123 

May  5 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

tween  aviation-related  agencies  like  NASA,  DOT,  DOD,  and  CAB.  (NASA 
Release 71-82 ;   Text; A v  Wk, 5/10/71,20-1) 
Eastern  Airlines  signed  conditional  agreement  with  Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corp.  to  purchase  50  L-1011  TriStar  je t   a ircraf t   which  it  had  pre- 
viously  ordered.  Eastern  thus  became  first  of  nine  companies  with 
L - l o l l   orders  to  reaffirm purchase  agreement  since  February  bank- 
ruptcy  of’  Rolls-Royce,  Ltd.,  manufacturer  of  aircraft’s  RB-211  en- 
gines.  (Bedingfield, N Y T ,  5 /6 /71 ,63 )  
*  Soviet  pilots  in   Egypt  were  testing  “superjets,”  probably  Mi&%, 
ac- 
cording  to  diplomatic  sources quoted  by  UPI  in   Boston  G b b e .  Aircraft 
were  understood  to  be  capable  of  reaching  altitudes  to  2 4 0 0 0   m 
(80  000  f t )   and  speeds  up  to  three  times  speed  of  sound.  They  out- 
matched  U.S.  F 4  Phantoms  used  by  Israeli  a i r   force.  ( B  Globe, 
5/5/7176  1 
USN  was  concerned  that  F-14  fighter  aircraft  might  go  into  potentially 
dangerous  flat,  fast  spin,  Capt.  Lionel  E.  Ames,  Jr. 
( U S N ) ,   F-14 
Project Manager, said  in  testimony  before  Senate Committee  on  Armed 
Services.  (Transcript) 
May   6 :  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos  410 from  Baykonur  into  orbit  with  288- 
km  (179-mi)  apogee,  203-km  (126-mi)  perigee,  89.2-min  period,  and 
65’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  May  18.  ( S BD ,  5/7/71,  39 ;   GSFC 
SSR ,  5/31/71) 
Sen.  Edward  W.  Brooke  (R-Mass.)  introduced  S.  1805,  “to  provide 
relocation  assistance,  training  assistance,  and  interest  supplements to  
adversely  affected  workers  separated  from  their  employment  because 
of  the  termination  of  defense  and  space  contracts.”  ( C R ,   5/6/71, 
56341) 
After  meeting  with  President  Nixon  a t   White  House,  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  John  B.  Connally,  Jr.,  announced  President’s  intention  to 
send  to  Congress  request  for  legislation providing  $250 million  in   loan 
guarantees  for   Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  ( PD ,  5/10/71,  738)  
Administration officials  had  been  “playing politics  with  some  of  the  most 
sensitive  secrets  that  come  into  the  Pentagon-namely, 
the  intelligence 
gleaned  from our  space photography,”  Jack Anderson said  in  Washing- 
ton  Post.  Satellite  reconnaissance  intelligence,  known  by  code  name 
Tango-Kilo” was  so tightly  guarded that some DOD   intelligence  analysts 
C L  
could  not  get  clearance.  “Yet  Defense  Secretary  Me1  Laird  and  CIA 
Chief  Richard  Helms  have  been  giving  out  selective  T-K 
intelligence 
to  favorite  senators  to  win  support  for   the  defense  budget.”  ( W  Post, 
5/6/71,  F7)  
Federation  of  American  Scientists  issued  report  I s   There   a n   R&D   Gap? 
Report  examined DOD  charges that  U.S.S.R.  R&D  expenditures exceeded 
those  of  U S .   and   would  result  in  Soviet  assumption  of  technological 
superiority.  Conclusion  reached  was:  “Th is   entire  episode  has  been  a 
classical  numbers  game  featuring  selective  disclosure,  questionable 
assumptions, exaggeratedly precise  estimates,  misleading  language, and 
alarmist  nonsequiter  conclusions.”  There  was  “no  claim,  much  less  any 
evidence” that  U.S.S.R.  was  spending more  than  U.S.  on  military  tech- 
nological advances as measured by  “military  technology  b a s e r e s e a r c h ,  
exploratory  develapment and  a  fraction  of  advanced  development.’’  No 
one  had  claimed  to  be  able  to  measure  Soviet  expenditures  in   this 
category.  “These  expenditures  would  amount  to  a  few  billion  a t  most 

124 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

May  6 

and   be  most  difficult  to  estimate.  Necessary  expenditures  become 
progressively  larger  as  one  moves  from   research on   basic  technological 
discoveries  to   development  of  weapons.  This  shows  the  extreme  Hi$- 
culty  in   making  meaningful  comparisons  on  a  financial  basis  of  e f -  
f o r t s  to  protect  against  technological  surprise.  Neither  the  funding no r  
numbers  of  personnel  involved  are   a  sensible  measure  of  original 
technological  advance.  Of  f a r   greater  importance  is  the  organization 
and   application  of  available  intellectual  and   other  resources.”  (Senate 
Com  on Armed  Services, Hearings  on  FY  1972 Au th ;   Science, 8/29/71, 
707-9) 
May  7 :  U.S.S.R. 
launched  eight  Cosmos  satellites  from  Plesetsk  on  one 
booster.  Each  satellite  w a s   about  0.8  m  (2.5  f t )   in   diameter,  0.9  m 
( 3  f t )   long,  and  weighed  36-45  kg  (80-100  lb s ) .   Cosmos  411  entered 
orbit  with  1493-km  (927.7-mi)  apogee,  1317-km  (818.3-mi)  perigee, 
113.8-min period,  and  74’ 
inclination.  Others entered  following  orbits: 
Cosmos  412 ,   1536-km  (954.4-mi)  apogee,  1482-km  (920.9-mi) 
perigee,  116.1-min period,  and  74’  inclination; 
Cosmos 413 ,   1508-km  (937-mi) apogee,  1476-km (917.2-mi)  perigee, 
115.7-min period,  and 74’  inclination; 
Cosmos  414 ,   1495-km  (928.9-mi)  apogee,  1428-km  (887.3-mi) 
perigee,  115.1-min period,  and  74,O  inclination; 
Cosmos  41 5,  1501-km  (932.7-mi)  apogee,  1453-km  (902.9-mi) 
perigee,  115.4-min period,  and   74O  inclination ; 
Cosmos  416,  1493-km  (927.7-mi)  apogee,  1373-km  (853.1-mi) 
perigee,  114.4-min  period,  and  74’ 
inclination ; 
Cosmos  41 7 ,   1494-km  (928.3-mi)  apogee,  1345-km  (835.7-mi) 
perigee,  114.1-min period,  and   74O  inclination ; 
Cosmos  418 ,   1494-km  (928.3-mi)  apogee,  1401-km  (870.5-mi) 
perigee,  114.8-min  period,  and   74O  inclination.  (CSFC  SSR,  5/31/71  ; 
SBD, 5/11/71,  53 )  
0  Nonexplosive  Spr in t   missile  guided  by  Safeguard  radar   system  success- 
fully  intercepted  Polaris  missile  warhead  over  Pacific  Ocean  during 
DOD  test.  DOD  spokesman  later  said  Sprint,  launched  from  Kwajalein 
Missile  Range  in  Pacific,  had  passed  close  enough  to  target  fired  from 
USN missile-firing ship U.S.S.  Observation Island  to  have destroyed  it  if 
i t   had  been  armed  with  operational  nuclear  warhead.  (UPI ,   W Post, 
5/13/71,  A4) 
French  President  Georges Pompidou  w a s  passenger aboard  Concorde 001, 
French  prototype  of  Anglo-French supersonic airliner,  in  75-min flight 
from   Pa r i s   to  Toulouse.  Aircraft  reached  twice  speed  of  sound.  Later, 
Concorde  002,  British  prototype,  was  forced  to  turn   back  after  taking 
off  from  Toulouse  because  of  faulty  landing  gear.  Aircraft  circled  for 
half  hour  a t   600  m  (2000  f t )   but  made  perfect  landing  38  min  after 
takeoff.  (Reuters,  B Sun, 5 /8 /71)  
0  A IA   President  Karl  G.  Harr ,   Jr.,  told  press  in   Washington,  D.C.,  tha t  
aerospace  industry  employment  would  decline  almost  12%   dur ing  
1971-much 
less  than  the  17%%   loss  in   1970.  “This  lends  support 
to  our  expectations  that  1972 will  see  a  reversal  of  the  declining  em- 
ployment  trends  experienced  dur ing   the  past  three  years.”  AIA  fore- 
cast  industry’s  payroll  would  shrink  by  year’s  end  to  943  000 persons, 
first  drop below  one million  since  record  keeping  began  in   1959.  From 
1969  to  1970,  industry  had  been  forced  to  release  more  than  one 

125 

May  7 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

third  of  its  labor  force.  AIA  survey  indicated  a ircraf t   industry  employ- 
ment  would  decline  by  6 7 0 0 0   to  506000 ;   missiles  and  space  by 
39  000,  to  291  000 ;   and   commercial  transport  aircraft  by  14 000,  to 
76 000.  (AP, W S tar ,  5/7/71,  A 3 )  
Wallops  Station  announced  selection  of  Lockheed  Aircraft  Service  Co. 
to  receive  $300 000,  cost-plus-award-fee contract  for  a ircraf t   mainte- 
nance  and   operations  a t   Wallops  Station.  Contract  would  cover  one 
year,  beginning  in  July,  with  two  one-year  options.  (WS  Release  71-7) 
Library  of  Congress  Congressional  Research Service released  report,  The 
Soviet  S S T .   Report  by  John  D.  Holmfeld  summarized  progress  of 
Tu-144 from press  reports  and U S .  and U.K.  technical  journals.  Tu-144 
was  “clearly  an   aircraft  which  is  competitive  with  the  Concorde.”  I t  
had  27.1-m  (89-ft)  wing  span  and  Concorde’s  was  25.6  m  (84   f t )  ; 
i t  was  56  m  (184 f t )   long and   Concorde was  62.1  m  (204  f t ) .  Tu-144 
weighed  149 700  kg  (330  000  lb s )  ; Concorde  weighed  174  600  kg 
(385000   lb s ) .   Tu-144  would  cruise  a t   2490  km  per  h r   (1550  mph)  
a t   19  800-m  (65  000-ft)  altitude;  Concorde  cruised  a t   2170  km  per  h r  
(1350 mph)   at  altitude  of  18 000 m  (60 000 f t )  . On New  York-London 
route,  Concorde  flight  time was  estimated a t   3 hrs  and  30  min;  Tu-144 
probably  would  require  3  hrs  and  10 min.  Tu-144 maximum  range  was 
estimated  to  be  6400  km  (4000  m i ) .   Tu-144  was  powered  by  four 
Kuznetsov  NK-144  turbofan  engines  with  127  480-newton  (28  660-lb) 
thrust.  Concorde’s  four  Rolls-Royce  Olympus  engines  had  146 000- 
newton  (32  825-1b) thrust.  (Text) 
M a y   7-8:  Working  Group  on  Philosophy,  Science,  and  Technology  met  at 
MIT.  NASA  Associate  Administrator,  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  reviewed 
U S .   space program:  “I t   is  improper,  I  believe,  to  claim  the  ability  to 
assess  at  this  time  the  impact  of  space  on  human  history.  Ou r   involve- 
ment  in   space  has  not  been  an   isolated  event,  nor  even  a  short  term 
episode,  in  man’s  growing  awareness  of  his  universe  and  h is   built-in 
drive  to  dominate  it.  Space  is  simply  another  dimension  of  human 
endeavor,  of  success  and   failure,  of  progress  and  achievement.  The 
reasons  that  the  Space  Age  began  when  and  how  i t   did  could  be  dis- 
cussed  a t   length;  the  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  we  stand  now  well 
within  it,  and  cannot  have  the  perspective  to  grasp  its  full  implica- 
tions.  But  one  can  discern  numerous  impacts,  many  of  which  con- 
tribute  in  a  variety  of  ways  to  our  country  and  to  the  world.  Among 
these  contributions  have  already  been:  An  uplifting  of  the  human 
spirit,  with  an  undoubtedly  major  impact  on  the  human  horizon,  the 
scale  of  man’s  thought,  and  his  estimate  of  his  own  capabilities.  The 
openink  of  a  new  frontier.  Major  advances  in  technology  and  in   our 
expectation  of  technology.  The  development  of  practical  applications, 
with  the  special  long  range  impact  of  a  quantum  jump  in  communi- 
cations.  Substantial  contributions  to  the  advancement  of  science  and 
human  knowledge.  The  exploration of  our  solar  system. 
“These  benefits  are   worth  a  substantial  investment  of  the  Nation’s 
resources,  not  to  the  neglect  of  other  needs  of  our  Nation  and  human- 
ity,  but  as part  of  our  investment in  the  continuing  future and  strength 
of  our Nation.”  (Tex t)  
Ma y   8:  Mariner  8  (Mariner-H)  Mars  probe,  launched  by  NASA  from  ETR, 
Launch  Complex  36,  Pad   A,  at  9:11  pm  EDT, failed  to  enter  orbit 
when  Centaur  stage  of  Atlas-Centaur booster  malfunctioned after  nor- 

126 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

May  8 

mal  countdown  and   liftoff. Anomalies  began  to  appear  with  Centaur 
main  engine  start.  Centaur  stage  oscillated  in   pitch  in   diverging  man- 
ner  and  subsequently tumbled  out  of  control,  engines shut  down  from 
starvation  caused  by  tumbling,  and  Centaur  and   spacecraft  separated 
and  reentered  earth’s  atmosphere  approximately  1500  km  (900  m i )  
down  range  and  400  km  (250  m i)   north  of  Puerto  Rico. 
Failure  investigation  team  composed  of  LeRC,  General  Dynamics 
Convair  Div.,  KSC,  and  JPL   personnel  had  been  established  to  deter- 
mine  cause of  failure and   recommend  corrective  action  required  before 
launching Mariner-I.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
Interview  with  T u - l U   designer,  Academician  Aleksey  N.  Tupolev,  was 
published  in   Pravda.  Asked  to  comment  on  report  Tu-144  would  go 
into  commercial  service  before  Concorde  Anglo-French supersonic a ir-  
liner,  Tupolev  said:  “In   accordance with  world  standards,  a  new  plane 
must  fly  several  million  kilometers before  it is granted  a  ladder  for  the 
boarding  of  the  first  passengers.  Many  stages  of  development  and   test- 
ing   a r e   already  behind  the  TU-144.  And  things  here  a re   good  abso- 
lutely  according to  the  program.”  ( FBIS-SOV-71-97,  5/17/71,  L13)  
May 9:  Of0  Orbiting Frog  Otolith  satellite, launched  by  NASA  Nov.  9,  1970, 
reentered  atmosphere. Mission  had  been  adjudged  successful  Dec.  11, 
1970. All  objectives-including  maintenance  of  two  bullfrogs  in   space 
to  obtain  information on  functioning and   adaptability  in  weightlessness 
of  vestibule,  portion  of  inner  ear  which  controlled  balance-had 
been 
achieved.  (GSFC SSR, 5/31/71) 
*  First  detailed  Soviet  analysis of  US. plan  for  Grand  Tour  of  outer  planets 
was  reported  by  New  York  Times.  In   Vestnik, principal  publication  of 
Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences, Soviet  space expert Timur  M.  Eneyev  had 
suggested that  four  missions  covering two  planets  each  might  be  more 
successful  than  the  two  missions  to  three  planets  contemplated  by  NASA. 
He  indicated  Soviet  scientists  favored approach of  delivering  automatic 
space  stations  to  outer  planets  and  suspending  them  by  balloons  in 
planetary  atmosphere. He  said  technique, “for  all  its  exotic aspects  and 
difficulties  of  realization,  is  probably  the  most  promising  because  it 
would  yield  f a r   more  data  about  the  nature  of  the  giant  planets  than 
could  be  obtained  from  fly-by  trajectories.’’  (Shabad,  NYT ,   5 /9 /71)  
May  10 :  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  held  first  press  conference as  NASA  Admin- 
istrator.  I n   response  to  questions  Dr.  Fletcher  said  strength  of  US. 
depended critically  on  development  of  new  technology.  “And  this means 
new  technology  of  all  kinds-electronics,  computers,  materials,  as well 
a s  military  technology.  And  I  think  that’s  . . . why  NASA  . . . programs 
should  be  vigorously  pursued.’’  NASA  had  studied  possibility  of  second 
Skylab and  “many  other  manned  missions in   space,  most  of  them  some- 
what  cheaper  than  the  second  Skylab;  and   we  intend  to  look  at  these 
very  carefully  to  see  what  programs,  i f   any,  made  sense after  . . . the 
first  Skylab  is  flown.”  Dr.  Fletcher  thought  NASA  STOL experimental 
a ircraf t  program was  “long overdue.” 
Asked  his  personal  plans  for  NASA,  Dr.  Fletcher  said,  “I  can’t  say 
that  I  want  to  go  in   a  new  direction  from  the  way  NASA  has  been 
going,  except  maybe  up  instead  of  down.”  He  was  interested  in   inter-  . 
national  cooperation  in   space  and  “whole  business  of  commercial  use 
of  the  things  that  NASA  has been  developing,”  including  “strides  in  the 
applications  satellites  area.”  He  was  “great  supporter  of  the  shuttle,” 
127 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
May  10 
and   had   been  “for  many  years  before coming to  NASA.”  With  develop- 
ment  of  shuttle,  or  “a  cheap  transfer  system  to  orbit  . . . it’ll  open  up 
all  kinds  of  new  things  you  can  do  in  space.  Since  the  costs  will  be 
much  less-the 
costs  per  launch  will  be  so much  less.  Tha t   is,  all  kinds 
of  new  applications,  all  kinds  of  new  science  programs,  new  manned, 
near-earth  programs,  almost  anything  you  can  think  of  can  be  done 
much  cheaper  once  you  have  the  shuttle  developed.”  With  sufficient 
funds,  NASA  would  probably  pursue  space  station.  “But  in  my  judg- 
ment,  if  you  have  to  decide  between  the  shuttle  and   the  space  station, 
you  pick  the  shuttle  first  because  you  have  to  have  that  for  the 
second.”  (Transcript) 
U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  419  from  Baykonur  into  orbit  with  340-km 
(211.3-mi)  apogee,  203-km  (126.1-mi)  perigee,  87.5-min  period,  and  
51.5”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  May  12.  (SBD,  5/18/71,  8 8 ;  
GSFC  SSR, 5 /31 /71)  
NASA  announced  signing  of  contract  with  Telesat  Canada  under  which 
NASA  would  launch  two  Telesat  satellites  for  Canadian  Domestic  Com- 
munications  System.  Telesat’s  Anik  (Eskimo  for  “brother”)  satellites 
would  each  provide  12   RF  channels-10  for  commercial  use  and   two 
in   reserve.  Each  RF   channel  would  be  capable  of  carrying  one  color 
TV  channel  or  up  t o  960  voice  channels.  System  would  be  first  opera- 
tional  comsat  system  established  entirely  for  domestic  communications. 
Two  satellites would  be  launched  from  KSC,  one  in   late  1972  or  early 
1973  and  one  six  months  later.  Telesat  would  reimburse  NASA  for 
Thor-Delta  booster  and  launch  services  and   would  have  options  for 
additional  launches as  required.  (NASA  Release  71-85) 
LRV  qualification  test  unit,  replica  of  flight  LRVS,  was  delivered  to  MSFC 
by  Boeing  Co.,  prime  LRV  contractor.  Second  flight  model  LRV,  sched- 
uled  for  use  on  January  1972 Apollo  16 mission,  would  be  turned  over 
to  NASA  May  12   and  stored  a t   Boeing’s  Kent,  Washington,  Space 
Center until  after  Apollo  15 mission in  July  1971. (MSFC  Release 71-80) 
MSFC  announced  new  projects  in   research  program  on  application  of 
remote  sensing  techniques.  Land-use  survey  of  five  north  Alabama 
counties  would  photograph  area  from  a i r   with  remote  sensing  camera 
to  study  how  land  was  being  used.  Results  would  be  used  by  Top  of 
Alabama  Regional  Council  of  Governments.  In   “ground  truth  survey” 
with  Alabama  A&M  Univ.,  MSFC  would  supplement aerial  photography ; 
university  personnel  would  make  sample  ground  study  to  correlate 
remote  sensing  information.  ( MSFC   Release  71-79) 
*  Experiments  by  airlines  to  fill  “growing  gap  in  transportation  for  small 
isolated  communities”  caused  by  rising  operating  costs  of  larger  a ir-  
craft,  loss  of  train  service,  and  steady  population  drop  were  described 
in   New  York  T imes .  Frontier  Airlines  was  using  15-passenger Beech- 
craft  99s  to  serve seven  communities in   rura l   Nebraska, Wyoming,  and  
South  Dakota. Trans-Texas International  Airlines  was  using Beechcraft 
on  some  routes  and  planned  to  evaluate other  small  a ircraf t   as  replace- 
ment  for  full  sized  airliners,  and  Allegheny  Airlines  had  turned  over 
its  service  in   16 cities  to  nine  small  a i r   taxi  lines,  some  of  which  used 
Beechcraft 99s. 
More  than  50  small  towns  had  lost  regularly  scheduled  a i r   service 
in  past  five  years.  Growing number  of  independent  a i r   taxi  commuter 
airlines  using  10- to  20-passenger  a ircraf t   were  gaining  economic  sta- 

128  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

May  10 

bility,  improving  safety  records,  and   carrying  increasing  number  of 
passengers over  short  routes  that  regular  airlines  did  not  want.  (Lind- 
sey, NYT,  5 /10 /71 ,29)  
May  10-14: International  Solar  Energy  Society  held  conference  a t   GSFC. 
I n   keynote  speech  Dr.  Manfred Altman, Univ.  of  Pennsylvania  nuclear 
engineer,  said  there  was  “great  need”  for  U S .   and   other  countries  to 
develop  energy  sources  “for  which  they  will  not  have  to  compete.” 
There  was  “total  absence  of  a i r   and   water  pollution”  in  use  of  solar 
energy.  “We  are   facing  an   uncertain  future  as  fa r   a s   energy  resources 
and  energy converters are  concerned.  One  thing which  we  have learned 
. . . in   the  aerospace industry  is  that  one  cannot  make  choices  among 
alternatives  unless  they  are   all  roughly  a t   the  same  stage  of  develop- 
ment.  Let  us  make  sure  that  solar  energy  is  brought  up  to  the  level 
of  the  other  contenders-lest  we  make  poor  choices  later  on.  Solar 
energy  is  not  just  a  dream-if  we  will  it-it 
can  play  a  major,  bene- 
ficial  role  in   our  lifetime.”  (CR,  6/4/71,  S8262) 
May  11:  NASA  announced  availability  of  new  publications:  Space  Shuttle 
Technologies,  F Y  1971 Programs,  compilation  of  110 projects  making 
up  NASA  shuttle  technology  program,  described projects  and  listed  FY 
1971  funding for  each. 
Significant  NASA  Inventions  Available  for  Licensing  in   Foreign 
Countries listed  abstracts  of  inventions in   which  NASA  owned  principal 
or  exclusive  rights  and  which  were  available  for  patent  licensing  in  
various  countries.  (NASA  Special  Release ; NASA  Release  71-83) 
*  General Dynamics Corp.  demonstrated CL-215  A i r  Tanker  over Anacostia 
River  in  Washington, D.C.  Amphibious  aircraft  scooped  up  5.5  cu  m 
(1440  ga l)   of  water  from  river,  took  off,  and  released  water  from  two 
2.7-cu-m  (720-gal)  tanks  to  show  what  i t   could  do  to  forest  fire. 
General  Dynamics  was  interested  in   selling  three  CG215 s   a t   $1.4 
million  each to  U S .   Forest Service, Washington  Post  reported.  (Barnes, 
W Post, 5/12/71,  B1)  
Visit  to  U S .   by  Soviet  Americanologist  Georgy  Arbatov  reflected  con- 
tinuing  tension  between  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.,  Joseph  Kraft  said  in   Balti- 
more  Sun. While  Arbatov  had  been  received  cordially  “in  very  high 
places,”  difficulties  arose  “whenever  conversations came  round  to  spe- 
cifics.”  Subject  of  strategic  arms  had  been  particularly  thorny,  “for 
the  Russians  appear  to  be  forcing  the  pace  in  the  arms  race  with  the 
new  holes  apparently  set  out  for  deployment  of  an  improved  SS-9  or 
some  other  monster  weapon.”  ( B  Sun, 5/11/71,  17 )  
New  York  Times  editorial  advocated  reimbursement  by  Government  of 
airlines’  investment  in  SST:  “The  bill  which  the  SST lobby  seeks  to 
amend  is  a  Supplemental Appropriations  bill  that  contains  money  for 
the  Government’s closing  costs  arising from  cancellation of  the  contract 
for  the  plane.  The  bill  does  provide  an  opportunity  for  the  Govern- 
ment  to  consider  its  debt  of  honor  to  the  airlines.  They  were  strongly 
advised by  the  Department of  Transportation  in   1967 to  advance money 
to  the  Boeing  Company,  to  be  credited  against  the  fu ture  purchase  of 
SST’S.  The   airlines  realistically  recognized  that  this  was  risk  capital  if  
the  plane  should  prove  a  technological  failure,  but  in   view  of  the 
Federal  Government’s  insistent  if  unwise  pressure  in  behalf  of  the 
plane,  they  had  good  reason  to  rely  upon  continued Government  back- 

9 

129 

May  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

ing   for  the  project.  Although  the  $58.5-million  involved  is  not  a  legal 
obligation,  Congress  should honor  this  commitment.”  ( N Y T ,  5/11/71) 
M a y   1 2 :  USAF  X-24A  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  Maj.  Cecil  A.  Powell 
in  joint  NASA-USAF 
research  program,  reached  21  000-m 
(USAF)  
(70000 - f t )   altitude  and   mach  1.35  dur ing   26th  flight  after  a i r   launch 
from  B-52  a ircraf t   f rom   FRC.  Objectives  were  to  determine  lateral- 
directional  derivative  with  rudder  bias  a t  2O  toe  out,  check  out  lateral 
acceleration  feedback to  control  system,  and  check  out  automatic mach 
schedule for upper flaps.  (NASA  Pro j  Off) 
*  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carrying 
MSC   experiment  to   study  airglow.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned 
satisfactorily.  (SR l is t)  
NASA’s work  on  quiet  engines was  described  by  Roy  P.  Jackson,  Associ- 
ate  Administrator,  OART,  at  1971  Society  of  Automotive  Engineers 
Meeting  in   Atlanta,  Ga.:  ‘‘The  first  objective  of  our  work  on  design 
principle  fo r   quiet  engines  is  an  experimental  CTOL  [conventional- 
takeoff-and-landing]  engine  and  nacelle  with  15   to  20  PNdb  [per-  
ceived  noise  in  decibels]  less  noise  than  the  comparable JT3D  class  of 
engines  in   service  today.  Program  began  in  1969  and  would  be  com- 
pleted  by  end  of  1972.  General  Electric  co .   and  NASA’s LeRC   were 
working  together  on  program.  “I t   is  on  schedule  and  should  meet  or 
surpass  the  noise  reduction  objectives.  We  believe  that  production  of 
retrofit  and   new  aircraft  beginning  in  1976.  . . . Such  quiet  engine 
quiet  engines  using  this  technology  could  begin  to  be  available  for 
installation  in  aircraft  and   the  size  of  the  707  and  DC-8  could  permit 
this  class  of  a ircraf t   to  operate  fully  10 db   lower  than  the  present  FAR 
36  standard  for  new  aircraft.”  NASA  expected  “to  continue  technology 
that  will  show  how  to  drive  the  noise  level  down  another  significant 
increment  like  6  db   within  a  f ew   years.”  Aircraft  “the  size of  the  707 
should  be  able  to  operate  a t   a  noise  level  of  92  EPNdb  [effective  per- 
ceived  noise  in  decibels].  Our  objective  is   to  develop  the  necessary 
technology  for  this  by  1977.  Production  engines  meeting  such  noise 
standards  could  then  be  developed  by  industry  through  normal  devel- 
opment  and  certification  cycles  and  be  available  for  next-generation 
a ircraf t   of  all  types  beginning  in  the  late  1970’s  o r   early  1980’s.’’ 
(Tex t)  
House,  in   Committee  of  the  Whole,  agreed  to  amendment  to  H .R .   8190, 
supplemental  FY  1972  appropriations  bill,  to  appropriate  $85.3  mil- 
lion  fo r  continued  SST  development.  Record  teller  vote  was  201  to  195, 
with  2  voting  “present.”  After  committee  rose  on  request,  for  separate 
vote,  SST  amendment  w a s   agreed  to  by  vote  of  201   to  197.  ( C R ,  
5/12/71.  H3837-62) 
*  President  Nixon  congratulated  House  fo r   reversing  earlier  position  on 
Federal  funding  for  SST:  “Congress  has   today  taken  an   important  first 
step  on  behalf  of  thousands  of  workers  across  the   country  who  have 
been  engaged  in  the  SST  program-and  whose  vital  skills  and  experi- 
ence  might  otherwise be  lost  to  the  Nation.”  ( P D ,  5/17/71,  755)  
LM  similar  to  those  used  on  Apollo  11, 12, and   1 4  was  placed  on  perma- 
nent  display  a t   Smithsonian  Institution’s  National  Air  and  Space Mu- 
seum.  ( W Po s t ,  5/7/71,  B1;  Smithsonian P IO )  
NASA  released  A p o l b   11 M i s swn   Report  (NASA   SP-238)  , summarizing 
events  and  results  of  July  16-24,  1969, Apo l lo   11 manned  lunar  land- 

130 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

May  12 

ing   mission.  Report  was  for  sale  by  National  Technical  Information 
Service in  Springfield, Va.  (Text) 
New  York  State  Court  of  Appeals  approved  sale  of  Cornel1 Aeronautical 
Laboratory  to  EDP  Technology,  Inc.,  affirming  lower  court  ruling  that 
sale  of  research  facility  to  private  firm  was  legal.  ( W   Post,  5/13/71, 
K11) 
May  13:  Uhuru  (Exp lorer   4 2 )   Small Astronomy  Satellite-launched  Dec. 
12,  1970-was 
adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  Satellite  had  completed 
full  systematic  scanning  of  galactic  plane  and  substantially  complete 
scan  (95% )  of  celestial  sphere.  Experiment  instrumentation  was  func- 
tioning  in   outstanding  manner,  exceeding  many  design  objectives. 
Spacecraft  control  section  performance-except  for  tape  recorder  and  
slight  decrease  in  telemetry  modulation,  which  had  not  affected  da ta  
quality-was 
excellent.  Acquired  scientific  data  had  touched  on  every 
aspect  of  observational  x-ray  astronomy  and   significant  unexpected 
phenomena had  been  observed. Discovery  of  three  new  x-ray pulsars- 
Cygnus  X-1,  Centaurus X-3,  and  Lupus  X-1-revealed 
class  of  pul- 
sating  x-ray  source  that  differed  in   many  respects  from  previously 
known  x-ray pulsar  in  Crab Nebula.  (NASA   Pro j  Off) 
0  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carrying 
MSC   experiment  to  study  airglow.  Rocket  and  instruments  functioned 
satisfactorily.  (SR l is t)  
*  Senate  Committee  on  Appropriations  favorably  reported  H.R.  8190,  sup- 
plemental  FY  1972  appropriations  bill  that  contained  $85.3-million 
for  further  SST  development. 
In   New  Yo rk   T imes   Richard  Witkin  said  bipartisan  House  effort 
t o   resurrect  SST  program,  led  by  minority  leader  Rep.  Gerald  R .   Ford 
(R-Mich.) , had  been  “kept a t  low  key  so  as not  to  alert the  opposition.” 
Knowing  issue  could  be  raised  when  H.R.  8190 came up, “rescue team” 
had  “sounded  out  colleagues  to  see  if  the  job   layoffs  and  other  effects 
of  the  SST’S  defeat  had  raised  doubts  in  the   minds  of  some  who  had 
voted  to  cancel  the  program.”  Help  had  been  enlisted  from  Adminis- 
tration  and   from  AFL  President  George  Meany.  ( C R ,  5/13/71,  D412; 
N Y T ,  5/13/71,  26) 
*  Federal  court  in   Orlando,  Fla.,  had  dismissed  $5-million  damage  suit 
filed  by  widow  of  Astronaut Virgil  I.  Grissom,  killed  in   Jan.  27,  1967, 
Apollo  spacecraft  fire, on grounds i t  was  filed after  statute  of  limitations 
expired,  Washington  Post  reported.  ( V  Post,  5/13/71,  A9) 
*  MSC   announced  selection  of  Dynalectron  Corp.  Land-Air  Div.  to  receive 
$1 805 000,  one-year,  cost-plus-award-fee contract  for   support  services 
a t  White Sands Test  Facility, N.  Mex.  (M SC  Release 71-33) 
*  William M.  Allen,  Boeing  Co.  Chairman,  received  1970 Robert  J.  Collier 
Trophy  dur ing   Washington,  D.C.,  ceremonies.  Citation  was  to   “the 
Boeing  Company  a s   leader  of  the  Industry-Airline-Government team 
which  successfully  introduced  the  747  into  commercial  service  with 
particular  recognition  to  P ra t t   &  Whitney  division  of  the  United  Air- 
craf t   Corporation  and   to  Pan   American  World  Airways.” 
(NAA  
Release) 
USAF  cleared  40  F-111s  to  fly  a f te r   main  parachute  compartments  had  
been  fitted  with  new  ejection  explosives.  Entire  F-111  fleet  had  been 
restricted  April  29  following April  2 3  crash  near  Edwards  AFB,  Calif., 
that killed  both crewmen.  (UPI ,  N Y T ,  5 /15 /71 ,9)  

131 

May  13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

President  Nixon  designated  Robert  C.  Tyson  Chairman  of  U S .   delega- 
tion  to  World  Administrative  Radio  Conference  for   Space Telecommu- 
nications  in   Geneva,  June  7  through  July  17.  (PD, 5/17/71,  759)  
Sen.  Clinton  P.  Anderson  (D-N.  Mex.),  Chairman  of  Senate  Committee 
on  Aeronautical  and   Space  Sciences,  submitted  to  Senate  resolutions 
authorizing  printing  of  Committee  reports  International  Cooperation  in 
Outer  Space:  A  Sympos ium   and  Soviet  Space  Programs,  1966-70  as 
Senate documents.  ( C R ,  5/13/71,5684&5) 
May  14 :  Three men  would  spend  up  to  56  days  in   MSC  altitude  chamber  in  
early  1972  to  obtain  medical  data  and  evaluate  medical  experiment 
equipment  for  Skylab  program,  NASA  announced.  Test  would  closely 
simulate  Skylab  conditions  so  that  differences  observed  dur ing   actual 
flight  might  be  attributed  to  causes  such  a s  weightlessness which  could 
not  be  simulated  in  chamber  tests.  Test  would  evaluate  16   medical 
experiments  and  selected  items  of  experiment  equipment  and  aid  in 
training  ground-based  medical  operations  team  for  their  participation 
dur ing   actual  space  flight.  Chamber was  6  m  (20  f t )   in   diameter  and 
w a s   being  modified  to  resemble  Skylab  Workshop  crew  quarters.  At- 
mosphere  would  be  70%  oxygen  and  30%  nitrogen  a t   34.5  kilonew- 
tons  per   sq  m  ( 5  ps i)   pressure  with  45%  to  60%   humidity.  (NASA 
Release  7 1-86 ) 
Evidence  obtained  by  two  Aerobee  sounding  rockets  launched from WSMR 
March  14,  1969,  supported  “closed  universe  theory”  that  expanding 
universe  would  slow  down  and  then  reverse  itself  until  cosmos  com- 
pressed  again  in to   fireball,  team  of  NRL  and   Johns  Hopkins  Univ. 
scientists  said  in  Nature. X-ray  telescopes aboard  rockets  had  observed 
x-ray  flux  in  Coma  and  Virgo  galaxies  20  times  as  great  as  would 
have  been  expected  from  individual  galaxies.  This  proved  gas  in  clus- 
ters  was  different  from  intergalactic  gas  and  supported  theory  that 
gases  were  spread  around   universe  in   sufficient  density  to   br ing   on  
collapse  of  universe.  (Meekins,  Fritz,  et  al.,  Nature,  5/14/71,  107-8)  
*  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  issued  statement  saying  it  would  be  forced  into 
bankruptcy  i f   i t   could  not  find  sufficient  financing  for  G l O l l  TriStar 
airbus.  Bankruptcy  could  “create  great  confusion,  greatly  increased 
costs  to  the  government  and  displacements  and  hazards  for  Lockheed 
employes and shareholders.”  (Text) 
MSC  announced  issuance  of  RFPS  on  $400000  design  study  of  space  shut- 
tle  auxiliary  propulsion  system.  Study  would  define  oxygen-hydrogen 
system  compatible for   use  in  both  booster  and  orbital  vehicles.  (MSC  
Release  71-35) 
May   1 6 :   MSC  announced issuance  of  RFPS  for  technological  development  of 
new  surface  materials  that  could  stand  environmental  extremes  ex- 
pected  to  be  experienced  by  space  shuttle.  MSC  would  award  fixed- 
price  contract  to   company  that  designed  and   developed  best  ceramic 
insulator.  (MSC  Release 71-36) 
May   17 :   Completion  of  first  phase  of  high-altitude  photography  for  jo in t  
NASA,  Dept.  of  Agriculture,  and  cornbelt  states  1971  Corn  Blight 
Watch  Experiment  [see  April  71  w a s   announced  by  NASA.  RB-57F 
a ircraf t   based  at  Scott  AFB,  Ill.,  had  obtained  black  and  white  photos 
of  areas   of  cornbelt  region  to  orient  personnel  using  remote  aerial 
sensors  and   ground  observations  to  study  possible  southern  corn  leaf 
blight  dur ing   1971 growing  season.  Second  phase,  to   obtain  baseline 

132 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

May  17 

color  infrared  photos,  was  in   progress  for   completion  later  in   month. 
Infrared  photos  would  be  used  for   analysis  of  soil  conditions  before 
emergence  of  corn  crop.  Th ird   phase,  from  June   to   September, would 
consist  of  high-altitude  infrared  photography  in   test  areas  every  two 
weeks.  (NASA  Release 71-88) 
U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1  lunar  rover  completed  six months  of  lunar  explo- 
ration  and  was  still  functioning  satisiactorily.  P ravda   reported  vehicle 
was  being  activated  on  a  month-to-month basis  by  Crimea  tracking 
station.  According  to  Pravda ,   Lunokhod  1 ’s   systems  “began  to  give 
out”  at  beginning  of  fifth  lunar  day  in   early  April,  but  recuperated. 
“Now  a t   the  height  of  the  sixth  lunar  day  the  vehicle,  heeding  com- 
mand  from  earth,  continues  to  live,  work  and  move  about  as  if  it 
[were]  only  yesteday,  and  not  Nov.  17   [ 19701, that  i t   descended  from 
the  landing  stage  that had  brought  it  to  the  Sea  of  Rains. The  viability 
of  the  Lunokhod’s  design  had  turned  out  to  be  f a r   greater  than  its 
creators  expected.”  ( N Y T ,  5/18/71) 
*  D.  J.  Fink,  Vice  President  of  .General Electric  Co.  and  General  Manager 
of  Space  Div.,  told  Ninth  International  Symposium  on  Space  Tech- 
nology  and   Science  in   Tokyo  that  U S .   d id   not  have  monopoly  on 
earth  resources programs.  “A11  of  us  need  the  ingenuity  of  the  entire 
world  on  how  to  utilize  this  technology,  so  I  encourage your  expanding 
participation  and cooperation.”  (GE Reprint) 
NASA’s 13  scientist-astronauts  were  -‘fuming,”  Thomas  O’Toole  said  in 
Washington  Pos t .   They  had  been  selected  to  be  members  of  Apollo 
crews  landing  on  moon,  primarily  as  geologists,  and   members  of  Sky- 
lab  crews,  as  physicians,  physicists,  and  chemists.  But  “no  geologist 
has   landed  on  the  moon  yet,  and   only  one has  a  chance of  making  it,” 
O’Toole  said.  Among  names  of  nine  prime  Skylab  crew  members  and  
six  backups  recently  circulated  a t   MSC,  three  prime  and   two  backup 
members  were  scientists  and  “this  enraged  the  scientists  who  were 
hoping  for   two-thirds  representation  on  Skylab.”  Three  meetings  had 
taken  place  between  scientist-astronauts  and  senior  NASA  officials- 
Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  Associate  Administrator  for   Space  Science  and 
Applications;  Dr.  Homer  E.  Newell,  Associate  Administrator ; and 
Dale  D.  Myers,  Associate  Administrator  for   Manned  Space  Flight. 
Scientist-astronauts  had  asked  for  more  freedom  in   developing  their 
scientific careers.  O’Toole  said  NASA  officials had  been  said  to  be  sym- 
pathetic,  “but  the  gripe  about  getting  their  own  experiments  aboard 
Skylab fell on deaf  ears.”  ( W Pos t ,  5/17/71,  A l )  
Eastern  Airlines  announced  i t   was  introducing  advanced  magnetometer 
a t   departure  gates  of  ma jor   airports  in   US.,  Puer to   Rico,  and  Virgin 
Islands  to  detect  potential  hijackers  carrying  weapons.  Device,  with 
existing  equipment, could  provide  Eastern  with  100%   screening capa- 
bility,  according  to  Eastern  Manager  of  Operational  Safety  Jack  E. 
Shields.  ( N Y T ,  5 /19 /71 ,45)  
May  18: U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  420  from  Baykonur  into  orbit  with 
248-km  (154.1-mi)  apogee,  200-km  (124.3-mi)  perigee,  88.9-min 
period,  and   51.7O  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  May  29.  (GSFC  S SR ,  
5/31/71) 
*  Benefits  of  US.-U.S.S.R.  cooperation  in  space  under  agreements signed 
by  NASA  and  Soviet Academy  of  Sciences in  October  1970 and  January  
1971  were  described  by  Arnold  W. Frutkin,  NASA  Assistant  Adminis- 

133 

May  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

trator  for  International  Affairs,  during  testimony  before  House  Com- 
mittee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  International 
Cooperation  in  Science  and   Space:  “If  a  cautious  optimism  proves 
justified,  we  can  expect  definite  benefits.  Each  side will  gain  access  to 
lunar  materials  from  sites  additional  to  those  i t   had  explored  on  its 
own.  We  will  nearly  double  the  coverage  of  our  operational  meteoro- 
logical  satellites. We  shall  have  created  a  global  network  for  sounding 
rocket  observations  of  basic  importance  to  world  meteorological  re- 
search.  We  shall  have  demonstrated  a  mutual  participation  in   earth 
resources  survey  work.  We  can  greatly  expand  our  knowledge  of  the 
behavior  of  man  in  flight  through  data  on  Soviet missions  in  addition 
to  our   own.  We  shall  make  i t   possible  to  avoid  any  undesirable  dupli- 
cation  of  scientific  work  in   space,  to  plan  complementary  missions, 
and  to  verify  anomalous  results-all 
helping  us   to  develop  opportu- 
nities  for  more  rational  and  economic  conduct  of  space  science  and 
exploration.”  Successful performance of  rendezvous  and  docking agree- 
ment  ‘‘will  give  us  greater  flexibility  in   space  emergencies  and  for 
joint  activities  in  space  which  could  go  a  long  way  toward  reducing 
international  tensions  and   demonstrating  common  human  interest.” 
(Testimony) 
*  Sen.  Robert  P.  Griffin  (R-Mich.)  introduced  for  Sen.  Edward  J.  Gurney 
(R-Fla.)  S.R.  101,  “to  authorize  and  request  the  President  to  issue 
a  proclamation  designating  July  20,  1971,  a s   ‘National  Moon  Walk 
Day.’ ” (CR,  5/18/71,  S7165) 
FAA  released  annual  statistical  report  on  aircraft  landing  facilities  in  U S .  
and  its  territories : Airports,  heliports,  and  seaplane  bases  totaled 
1 1 2 6 1  as  of  Dec.  31,  1970 -ne t   increase  of  211  over  end  of  1969. 
Included were  20  facilities  in   Puerto  Rico,  4  in   Virgin  Islands,  and   11 
in  South  Pacific  Island  territories.  During  1970,  204  airports,  35  
heliports,  and  11  seaplane  bases  had  been  reported  abandoned.  Of 
national  total,  4260  landing  facilities  were  classified  as publicly  owned 
and  7001  a s   privately  owned  and  operated.  (FAA Release  71-68)  
May   19 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  Mars  2 probe  toward  Mars  from  Baykonur  a t  
9:23  pm  local  time  (12:23  pm  EDT).  At  10:59  pm  Baykonur  time 
( 1 5 9  pm  EDT) spacecraft was  injected  into  flight  trajectory  for  Mars 
from   “artificial  ear th   satellite”  in  terrestrial  orbit,  according  to  Tass. 
Instruments  were  said  to  be  working  normally  and  flight  was  said  to 
be  close to calculated course. 
Pr imary   objective  of  six-month,  470-million-km  (292-million-mi) 
mission,  Tass  said,  was  to  conduct  complex  research  of  Mars  and   its 
atmosphere  and  study  characteristics  of  solar  plasma,  cosmic  rays, 
and  radiation  along Mars  route.  Satellite was  scheduled  to   reach  Mars 
vicinity  in  November,  when  planet was  129 million  km  (80 million  m i )  
from  earth.  Mars  2  was  said  to  weigh  4650  kg  (10 250  1bs)-almost 
five  times  weight  of  1000-kg  (2200 - lb )   Mariner-I  scheduled  fo r  
launch  by  NASA  toward  end  of  May.  Size  of  Mars  2  had  led  U.S. 
space  experts  to  predict  that  it  might  attempt  Mars  orbit. 
Mars  1 ,  launched  Nov.  1, 1962,  had  failed  when  radio  contact  was 
lost  106  million  km  (66  million  m i )   from  earth.  Zond  2,  launched 
Nov.  30,  1964, had  also  ended  in   communication  failure.  (GSFC SSR, 
5/31/71;  SBD,  5/21/71,  112 ;   Shabad,  NYT,  5/20/71,  1; FBIS-SOV- 
98-71,5/20/71,  L1;  A&A ,   1962;  1963 ;  1 9 6 4 )  

May 19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
*  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  421  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t   with  4 6 4 km  
(288.3-mi)  apogee,  273-km  (169.6-mi)  perigee,  91.9-min  period,  and 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Nov.  8.  (GSFC  S SR ,   5/31/71; 
70.9’ 
11/30/71;  S BD ,  5 /21 /71 ,119)  
Vice  President  Spiro  T.  Agnew  presented  Harmon  International  Avia- 
tor’s  Trophy  for  1970  to  Apollo  11  Astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong, 
Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  and  Michael  Collins  in   Washington,  D.C.,  cere- 
mony.  Other  recipients  were  RAF  Squadron  Leaders  Graham  Williams 
and   Leslie  Lecky-Thompson,  first  to  cross  Atlantic  nonstop  in   VTOL 
aircraft,  and  Tu r i   Wideroe  of  Norway,  first  female  airline  pilot. 
( W  Po s t ,  5/20/71,  A28) 
*  Aerobee 150 sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carrying 
MSC   experiment  to  study  uv  spectra.  Rocket  and  instruments  func- 
tioned satisfactorily.  (SR  l i s t )  
Vanguard  satellite  whose  launch  had  been  attempted  Dec.  6 ,   1957, was 
presented  to  National  Air  and  Space  Museum,  Smithsonian  Institu- 
tion,  by  Dr.  John  P.  Hagen,  former  director  of  U.S.  IGY   satellite pro-  
gram.  Spherical  payload  of  Test  Vehicle  3  (TV-3),  first  complete 
Vanguard  launch  vehicle  with  three  live  stages,  had  been  thrown 
clear  when  vehicle  exploded  on  pad.  (NASA  Hist  Off;  Vanguard-A 
H i s to ry ,  SP-4202 ,1970)  
*  Senate,  by  unanimous  vote  of  94,  passed  H.R.  8190,  supplemental  FY 
1972  appropriations  bill  that  authorized  use  of  $10  million  provided 
in   Independent  Offices  and  HUD   Appropriations  Act,  1971,  for  im- 
provements  to  MTF/Slidell  Computer  Complex.  Before  passage  Senate 
voted  58  to  37  to  strike  from  bill  $85.3  million  for  continued  SST 
development  and,  by  vote  of  92   to  3,  adopted  amendment  appropri- 
ating  $155.8  million  for  expenses  to  terminate  SST program.  Expenses 
included  $58.5  million  refund  to  airlines;  $85.3  million  refund  to 
Boeing  Co.,  prime  a irframe   contractor,  and  to  General  Electric  Co., 
prime  engine  contractor;  and  $12  million  to  cover  administrative 
costs.  Earlier,  White  House  Press  Secretary  Ronald  L.  Ziegler  had 
told  press  Administration  had  decided  after  May  18  meeting  with 
Boeing  officials  that  i t   would  cost  more  to  continue  with  SST  develop- 
ment  than  to  terminate  program.  Bocing  had  added  condition  to  com- 
pletion  of  contract;  condition  called  for   development,  a t   $350-million 
( C R ,   5/19/71,  S7343-63, 
cost,  of  quieter  engine  fo r   prototypes. 
S7442-56;  Lyons,  W  Po s t ,   5/20/71,  A l ;   W S J ,  5/21/71,  1) 
NASA  announced  award  of  $61.6-million,  cost-plus-award-fee contract  to 
General  Electric  Co.  fo r   hardware  development  of  Earth  Resources 
Technology  Satellite  ( ERTS)  system.  Under  provisions  of  award-which 
definitized  July  27,  1970, letter  contract-GE  would  develop  two  flight 
and  ERTS-B)  , provide  equipment  and   services 
spacecraft  ( ERTS-A 
needed  for  GSFC  ground  data-handling  system,  and   develop  spacecraft 
receiver  and  six ground  platforms  for   remote-site data-coIIection-system 
experiment.  (NASA  Release 71-89)  
*  Administration  officials expected  U.S.S.R.  to  test-fire  SS-9  ICBMS  within 
few  months,  New  Yo rk   T imes   reported.  Two  silos  were  being  rebuilt 
at  Baykonur  test  center  i n   Kazakhstan  to  same  dimensions  as  larger 
silos  that  had  been  appearing  all  over  western  Russia  since  December. 
(Beecher, N Y T ,  5 /19 /71 ,1 )  

135 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
May  20 
May 20:  NASA  held  Hq.  news  conference on Mariner  status.  Dr.  George M. 
Low,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  reported  on  failure  of  May  8 
Mariner-H  launch.  Review  by  JPL,  LeRC,  and  General Dynamics Con- 
vair  Div.  personnel  had  isolated  failure  to  integrated  circuit  in   pitch 
channel  of  rate  gyro  preamplifier  in  Centaur  stage  autopilot.  When 
Atlas-Centaur ignited,  “amplifier  output  was  . . . only  20  to  40 percent 
of  what  i t   should  be.”  Second  anomaly  had  been  noted  25  sec  after 
main  engines started;  “engines  did  not  gimbal all  the  way  to  the  stops. 
. . . At  1.2  degrees  they  stopped  and  hung  up.  So  the  signal  for  the 
first  20  or  25  seconds  indicated  that  the  engines  oscillated  with  in- 
creasing amplitude  in  response  to  autopilot  signals but  the  signals were 
a t   a  lower  gain  than  they  should have  been.  . . . With  the  engine  then 
thrusting  at  an  angle,  the  vehicle  wound  up  and  started  tumbling.” 
Amplifier  had  functioned  properly  dur ing   checkout  40  min  before 
liftoff,  “so  sometime  between  T-30  minutes  and  the  Atlas  sustainer 
engine shutdown ignition  of  the  Centaur  stage,  this  component  failed.” 
Investigators  had  assumed  “that  we   had  in   the  circuit  a  failed  diode 
or  a  diode with  a  loose  connection  in  it,  that  a  voltage  transient  dur ing  
powered  flight  . . . then  got  into  the  integrated  circuit  and   caused  all 
of  the other  events.” 
To  avoid  repetition  of  anomaly,  NASA  was  “subjecting  the  autopilot 
cans to  additional  temperature  cycling and  vibration  tests”  to  ascertain 
they  were operating within  limits  “under  some  off-nominal conditions.” 
New  test  was  being conducted  on  autopilots for Mariner-I Atlas-Centaur 
23  “to  make  sure  that  the  diodes  a re   indeed  there  and   properly  func- 
tioning  and  properly  protecting  the  integrated  circuit  . . . before  we 
fly again.” 
Failure  of  three  Atlas-Centaurs in  15 flights  had  led  to  appraisal  of 
general  quality  of  the   vehicle,”  Dr.  Low  said.  Conclusion  “was  that, 
LC 
i f   anything,  quality  has  improved.  There  is  no  trend  away  from  im- 
proving quality.  . . .” 
Vincent L.  Johnson, Deputy Associate Administrator,  OSSA,  described 
checkout  problem with  propellant  utilization  in  Atlas-Centaur 23.  Short 
had  been  discovered  in   system  that  measured  amount of  hydrogen  and  
oxygen  in   tanks  and   controlled  flow  of  each  propellant  to  engine. 
“Therefore  it  became  necessary  to  open  the  tank  and  get  inside  to 
locate  the  fault,  find  i t   and   fix  it.”  Reassembly  was  expected  to  be 
completed  by  weekend  and  five-  to  seven-day checkout  on  Mariner-I 
begun.  Launch  date  could  occur  from  May  28  until  June  6  with  good 
launch windows available.  (Transcript) 
Dr.  James C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator, reviewed  NASA  program  before 
25th  annual  conference of  AIAA  Board  of  Governors in   Williamsburg, 
Va.:  “This  country  needs  space  programs  that  move  out  vigorously  to 
create  new  technology.  A  space  effort  that  limps  along  on  yesterday’s 
knowhow  will  not  do  much  for  the  country.  A  slow  program  may  cost 
less,  but  be  worth  nothing  in   terms  of  meeting  the  country’s  needs. 
And  a  slow p r o g r a m - o r  no  program-is 
all we  are  going to  have with- 
QUt  the  strong  support  of  the  public.  . . . We  should  invent  and   fly 
scientific knowledge  from space  we  could  not  get  in   any  other way  . . . 
more  self-supporting  satellites.  We  are   seeking  and  getting  valuable 
about  the  Earth  and  its  atmosphere,  the  sun  and   the  planets,  and  the 
universe.  And  about  man  himself.’’  National  security  was  a t   stake. 

136 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

May  20 

“I t   would  not  be   safe  for   the  United  States,  with  its  great  responsi- 
bilities  for  world  peace,  to  lag   behind  any  other  country  in   space 
technology.  This  is  an   axiom we  did  not  quibble  about  in   the  ’60s and  
should  not  quibble  about  in   the  ’70s.”  Space  program  had  proved 
“excellent  hotbed  for  forcing new  technology,  which  in   turn  raises  our  
national  productivity  and  prosperity  and   increases  our  ability  to  solve 
pressing  social  problems  of  today’s  urban  society.”  Finally,  space  ex- 
ploration  was  needed  as  inspiration  for  modern  man.  “I  think  we  are  
inspired,  and   our  children  are   inspired,  to  be  living  in  an   age   when 
man  first  moved  out  into  space and  began  the  exploration  of  our  solar 
system.  I  think  we  should  be  ashamed  of  ourselves,  as  a  society,  if  
we  withdrew  from  space  exploration  now  after  such  an   auspicious 
beginning.”  (Tex t)  
*  Astronaut  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  was  named  Deputy  Director  of  Science 
and  Applications at  MSC.  Veteran  of  four  space  flights  totaling  nearly 
30  days  in  space, Lovell  would  assist  in   overall  management of  Science 
(NASA   Special  Release ; wsc  Release 
and  Applications  Directorate. 
71-34) 
NASA-inspired  Earth  Awareness  Foundation-nonprofit, 
educational  and 
advisory  body  originated  by  NASA  officials  and  Apollo  astronauts- 
marked  first  anniversary.  Group  was  chartered  to  develop  community 
solutions  to  environmental  problems  using  NASA-developed  knowledge 
to  maximum  extent  practicable.  During  first  year  group  had  estab- 
lished  community  chapters  called  “Earth  I  Care”  clubs,  mostly  on 
school  campuses ; started  “Summer  Scientist”  program  to  study  pollu- 
t ion ;   established  newsletter;  presented  awards  for  concern  with  en- 
vironmental  quality ; and   produced  slides  and  films  on  environment 
from  NASA  photos  taken  in   orbital  flight.  (MSC PAO )  
President  Nixon  announced  agreement  between  U.S.  and   U.S.S.R.  “to 
concentrate  this  year  on  working  out  agreement  for  the  limitation  of 
the  deployment  of  antiballistic  missile  systems  (ABM s ) ”   and  to  “agree 
on  certain  measures with  respect  to  the  limitation  of  offensive  strategic 
weapons.”  Agreement  had  been  made  “in  the  conviction  that  i t   will 
create  more  favorable  conditions  for  further  negotiations  to  limit  a l l  
strategic  arms.”  President  called  agreement  “major  step  in   breaking 
the  stalemate  on  nuclear  arms  talks.”  Agreement  was  announced 
simultaneously in Moscow.  ( P D ,  5/24/71,783) 
House,  by  rollcall  vote  of  116  to  157,  rejected  entire  sum  of  $155.8 
million  that  had   been  approved  by  Senate  May  19  for  termination  of 
SST program.  Senate  and  House  conferees  then  met  in   executive  ses- 
sion  to  resolve  differences  between  Senate  and   House  versions  of 
H.R.  8109,  supplemental FY  1972 appropriations  bill. 
At  evening  session,  House  agreed  by  voice  vote  to  include  in   bill 
$97.3  million  for  SST  termination  costs,  but  rejected  inclusion  of 
$58.5  million  for  refunds  to  airlines.  (CR,  5/20/71,  D449;  5/21/71, 
57594) 
Plans  for  offshore  a irpor t   in   Atlantic  Ocean  off  Long  Beach,  N.Y.,  were 
described  by  Lawrence  Lerner  of  Litton  Industries  Environetics Div. 
a t   national  convention  of  NoIsE-organization  to  represent  persons 
bothered  by  aircraft  noise.  Called  ctvetp~rt,’7 facility  designed  to 
handle jet  a ircraf t  would  consist  of  14-km (9-mi)  platform 8 km  (5  m i )  
offshore,  constructed  on  reinforced  concrete.  Facility  could  b e   pre- 

137 

May  20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

fabricated  on   land  and   floated  to  its  location.  With  nine  runways  in  
operation,  wetport  could  serve  50%  more  a i r   traffic  than   New  York’s 
airports  combined.  “Fingers”  of  structure  would  contain  basins  and  
harbors  for  80  to  120 ships.  (Carper,  Y Post,  5/21/71) 
May   21:  Draft  treaty  to  establish  new  organization  to  operate  worldwide 
comsat  system was  approved  by  73  of  79  nations  holding  membership 
in   INTELSAT.  Key  provisions  of  treaty  included  creation  of  new  policy- 
making  board  of  governors  on  which  U S .   control  would  shrink  from 
52%  to  40%,  appointment  of  new  director  general  to  assume  control 
of  INTELSAT  system  currently  operated  by  ComSatCorp,  new  six-year 
contract  with  ComSatCorp  for  continued  operation  and   technical  man- 
agement  of  INTELSAT  system,  and  limitation  of  board  of  governors  to 
12  nations  that  used  INTELSAT  most.  Board  actions  on  important  mat- 
ters  were  to  require  two-thirds  vote.  No  single  nation  nor  any  three- 
nation  group would  be  able  to  block  decision  under  board‘s  considera- 
tion.  Agreement  could  be  amended  either  by  two  thirds  of  members 
holding  two  thirds  of  investment  or  by  85%  of  members  holding  45% 
of  investment.  Signatories would meet  every  year  to  determine member- 
ship  shares  on  which  seats  on  board  would  be  based. 
Following  approval  of  agreement,  President  Nixon  said:  “. . . this 
kind  of  breakthrough,  through  which  i t  will  be  possible  to  have  instant 
communication  around  the  world,  will  reduce  the  ignorance.  I t   will 
increase  the  information.  I t  will  reduce  those  areas  of  difference  which 
exist  because  of  ignorance  and  lack  of  information  to  a  minimum.” 
(W  S ta r ,   5/21/71  ; PD,  5/24/71,  786-7;  INTELSAT  PIO)  
*  President  Nixon  presented  National  Medal  of  Science  to  nine  scientists 
in   White  House  ceremony.  Recipients,  announced  Jan.  27,  included 
Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  Senior  Vice  President  of  General  Dynamics 
Corp.  and   former  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight.  ( P D ,  5 /24 /71 ,784)  
*  Dr.  Donald  L.  Holmquest,  scientist-astronaut  selected  in   August  1967, 
had  been  granted  one-year  leave  from  NASA  for  teaching  and  medical 
research  a t   Baylor  Univ.  School  of  Medicine  in   Houston,  NASA  an-  
nounced.  Dr.  Holmquest  would  pursue  “sub-specialty  studies  in   the 
field  of  nuclear  medicine  in   addition  to  general  medical  research  and  
research  related  to  NASA  programs,  such  as   a  more  convenient  method 
of  measuring  changes  in   body  calcium.yy He  would  return  to  astronaut 
program May  15,1972.  (MSC  Release 71-73) 
Senate  voted  27  to  25  to  adopt  conference  report  on  H.R.  8190,  supple- 
mental  FY  1972  appropriations  bill.  Report  deleted  $58.5  million  for 
refunds  to  airlines  from  SST  termination  funds.  ( C R Y  5/21/71,  57593- 
7697, S7610-20) 
William  M.  Magruder,  Director  of  SST Development  for  DOT,  told  press 
in   Washington,  D.C.,  that  Ataka  and   Co.  of  Japan  had   suggested  it 
could  obtain  financing  of  $500  million  o r   more  from  major  Japanese 
industrial  concerns  to  resurrect  SST  program.  I n   return  Ataka  would 
become  50%  partner  in   enterprise.  On  May  23,  however,  A taru  
Takizawa,  Vice  President  of  Ataka  and   Co.,  said  in   Tokyo  there  was 
no  tru th   to   report  that  his  firm  made  exploratory  proposal  to  revive 
U S .   SST  program.  (Aug, W  Star,  5/22/71;  AP,  a7 Po s t ,   5/23/71) 
US.-sponsored  resources  survey  of  Jamaica,  in   which  NASA  provided 
C-130  a ircraf t   [see  April  161,  had  been  described  as  among  most 

138 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

May  21 

complete  and  efficient  jobs  accomplished  in   a i r   and   ground  data 
reported.  Allen  H.  Watkins,  MSC  Manager 
gathering,  MSC  R o d ~ p  
of  Earth  Observations Aircraft  Program,  had  said  95% of  data  acqui- 
sition  objectives had  been  achieved  in  “most  complete  ground  tru th ing  
that  the  a ircraf t   program  has   ever  experienced.” 
(MSC   Roundup, 
5 /21 /71 ,1 )  
*  Boeing  Co.  Chairman  William  M.  Allen  received  National  Transporta- 
tion  Award  of  silver  bowl  from Vice  President  Spiro T.  Agnew  dur ing  
Washington,  D.C.,  ceremonies.  Award  was  for  Boeing’s  construction 
of  747 jumbo jet  aircraft.  (AP, B Sun, 5/22/71) 
*  F A A   said  a i r   traffic  congestion  had  eased  sufficiently  a t   New  York’s 
Kennedy  International  Airport  to  permit  suspension  of  hourly  limits 
on  landings  and   takeoffs  that  it  imposed  in  1969. Flight  quotas would 
probably  be  removed  after  June   15.  (Lindsey,  N Y T ,   5/22/71,  54:3) 
*  New  York   Times  editorial  commented  on  NASA  under  new  Administrator, 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher:  “The  task  of  reversing  NASA’s  downhill  course 
will  not  be  easy,  but  there  a re   grounds  for  believing  that  this  period 
of  doldrums  can  be  overcome.  I t   will  help  . . . if  the  agency’s  efforts 
in  respect  to  Mariner  9  and  Apollo  15  succeed  as  planned.”  Two 
forces  at  work  suggested  “NASA  may  yet  recapture  some  of  the  public 
support  and  interest  which  evaporated  after 
its  first  spectacular 
Apollo  flights  to  the  moon’s  surface.  One  is  the  capability  of  satellites 
to  survey the  earth  with  an   efficiency never  before known.  . . . Beyond 
this  there  is  the  promising  possibility  of  use  of  space  research  as  a 
means  of  encouraging  international  cooperation.  . . . over  the  next 
decade  NASA  may  make  its  most  important  contribution  as  an  instru- 
ment  for  demonstrating  that  men  and  women  from  many  nations  and  
many  ideologies  can  work  together  for  the  benefit  of  all  the  earth.” 
( N Y T ,  5 /21 /71 ,23)  
*  New  Yo rk   Times  editorial  praised  end  of  SST:  “This  action  expresses  a 
sound  sense  of  na t iond   priority  and   of  concern  with  ecological  values. 
I t   also  exposes  last  week‘s  surprise  vote  in  the  House  to  revive  the  SST 
as  a  political  power  play  that  reflects  no  credit  on  the  leadership  of 
either  party.  To  reopen  a  major  issue  without  advance  warning  to 
opponents  was  highhanded;  to  do  so  without  getting  up-to-date  cost 
estimates  from  the  Boeing  Company  was  frivolous.”  ( N Y T ,  5/21/71) 
May   21-22:  Application of  laminar  air-flow  techniques in   medical  surgery 
was  discussed  during  symposium  on  Clean  Room  Technology  in  Sur- 
gery Suites a t   IGC. 
(NASA  Special Release  5/14/71;  KSC  PAO )  
May  22:  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  422  into  orbit  from  Plesetsk  with 
1011-km  (628.2-mi)  apogee,  986-km  (612.7-mi)  perigee,  105-min 
period,  and   74O  inclination.  (CSFC SSR ,   5/31/71;  SF ,   11/71,  428)  
*  U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1 lunar  rover  would  begin  “a  new  mode  of  opera- 
tion  requiring  only  minimum  movements,”  Tass  announced.  Vehicle 
would  remain  in   semihibernation, photographing surrounding area  and  
transmitting  da ta   to  earth  until  its  instruments  wore  out.  (UPI,  N Y T ,  
5/23/71;  SBD,  5 /25 /71 ,129)  
0  Reuters  quoted  MSC  spokesman  as  saying  scheduled  technical  talks  be- 
tween  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  on  space  cooperation  had  been  postponed 
because  Soviet specialists were  too  busy  to  attend.  ( N Y T ,  5/23/71) 
*  Future  space  shuttle  missions  were  described  by  Dale  D.  Myers,  NASA 
Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  in   speech  before 

139 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
May  22 
South  Carolina Lions Clubs  in  Greenville,  S.C.:  “These  payloads cover 
the  areas  of  space physics,  astronomy,  space  applications,  life  sciences, 
unmanned  planetary  exploration,  and   earth  resources,  military  and  
commercial.”  Payloads  ranged  from  113-kg  (250-lb)  Explorer  and  
Space  Physics  Satellites  to  9100-kg  (20  000-lb)  astronomy  mission 
requiring  annual  revisits  by  the  shuttle  for  servicing  maintenance 
u 
and   updating  of  instrumentation.”  Sortie  flights  conducted  solely  by 
shuttle  could  be  made  within  its  seven-day  orbit  capability.  Scientist 
could  “conduct  his  own  experiment  in  the  orbiting  shuttle  and   return 
with  the  data  as  well  as  his  own  observations.  When  the  space  station 
becomes  operational,  crew  rescue  missions  could  also  be  flown.”  (Tex t)  
*  Activities of  Soviet aircraft  industry were  described in  Izvestia by  U.S.S.R. 
Aviation  Industry  Minister  Pave1  Dementyev:  “Recently  the  I G 6 2 ,  
TU-134  and   Y A K 4 0   aircraft,  which  a re   of  a  high  modern  technical 
standard,  have  been  developed  and  are  being  produced  and  used.  This 
year  the  major  route  TU-154  aircraft  comes  into  service.  These  liners 
are   the  basic  aircraft  of  our  civil  fleet  and  are   to  replace  their  prede- 
cessors-the  TU-104,  AN-10,  IL-18  and  IL-14.” 
(FBIS-~ov-71-103, 
5/27/71,  K5 )  
Soviet  progress  i n   thermonuclear  synthesis  was  described  in  Pravda 
article  by  Mstislav  V.  Keldysh,  President  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences:  “Over  recent  years we  have  successfully developed  work  on  high- 
temperature  plasma  in   connection  with  the  search  for  ways  of  solving 
the  problem  of  thermonuclear  synthesis.  In   the  5-year period  that  has 
begun  the  creation  of  a  Tokamak-type  installation  with  optimum 
parameters  is  planned  in   order  to  increase  two  or  three  times,  the 
density  of  the  particles  and  the  retention-time  of  the  plasma,  which 
is  an  essential  condition  for  the  creation  of  a  thermonuclear  reactor. 
Evidently  the  time  has  already  come  for  starting  research  into  the 
transformation  of  the  energy  emitted  in  the  process  of  thermonuclear 
5/27/71,  L1 )  
synthesis  into  electrical  energy.”  (FBIS-sov-71-103, 
Washington  Evening  S tar   editorial  said  “sad  little  commentary  on  the 
times” had  arisen  from NASA  report  of  space age spinoff, a miniaturized 
ultrasonic  alarm  system  that  had  been  used  to  aid  accident  and   illness 
victims.  “But  the  purpose  which  NASA  foresees  is  what’s  depressing.” 
NASA  OART  saw  invention’s  main  value  “in  preventing minor  challenges 
to  teachers  or  fights  between  students  from  developing  into  major  dis- 
turbances  or  even  riots.  That’s  the  view  from  space  of  this  poor  earth 
beneath,  but  what  a  pity.  Whatever  happened  to  that  luminous  blue 
ball,  ashine  in   the  limitless,  starry  n igh t?”   (W   Star,  5 /22 /71)  
May  23:  Chinese-built  version  of  Soviet  ~ i c i l 9  fighter  produced  at  Muk- 
den,  Manchuria,  a t   rate  of  200  per  year  had  been  “backboneyy of 
Communist  Chinese  Air  Force  for  number  of  years,  New  York   Times 
said.  So many had  been  produced  from  blueprints  supplied by  U.S.S.R. 
before  Sino-Soviet  split  in   early  1960s that  Communist  China had  sold 
some  to  neighboring  Pakistan.  Western  sources  quoted  by  Times  had 
recently  reported  that  2800 combat  a ircraf t  of  Communist  Chinese  Air 
Force  were  being  supplemented  by  new  jet  fighter  of  Chinese  design 
being  produced  in   China  at  rate  of  10 per  month. Aircraft,  called  F-9 
in  West,  flew  a t  twice  speed  of  sound, had   combat range  of  480  to  800 
km (300  to  500  m i )   and   could  operate  above  15 000  m  (50 000  f t )  . 
( N Y T ,  5/23/71) 

140 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1971 
M a y  24 
May  24 :   NASA  supercritical  wing,  flown  on  T F 4 A   jet  aircraft  piloted  by 
NASA  test  pilot  Thomas  C.  McMurtry,  successfully  completed  seventh 
flight  from  FRC.  Aircraft  reached  1 2  900-m  (42  500-ft)  altitude  and  
mach  0.98.  Objectives  were  to  expand  flight  envelope  to  higher  alti- 
tudes  and  explore  flutter  and   buff et  boundaries,  evaluate  stability  and 
control  characteristics,  and   evaluate  control  system.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
At  Apollo  1 5  press  briefing  in   Washington,  D.C.,  Astronaut  Alfred  M. 
Worden,  CM   pilot,  described  planned  activities  in   lunar   orbit,  includ- 
ing  first  “working walk”  i n   space.  At  320 000  km  (200 000  m i )   from 
earth  on  return  journey  from  moon,  he  would  move  outside  CM,  hand- 
walk  on  7.6-m  (25-ft)  tether  along  rail,  and   open  bay  in   SM  to 
retrieve  two  canisters  of  film  used  to   photograph  moon  while  space- 
craft  was  in   lunar  orbit.  I t   was  necessary  to  retrieve  film  before  SM 
was  jettisoned  160  km  (100  m i )   from  earth  before  CM’S  reentry. 
Worden  said  one  hour  had  been  allotted  to  space walk  but  underwater 
practice  had  indicated  retrievals  could  be  completed  in  20  min.  Two 
roundtrips  from  CM   to  SM  were  necessary  because  only  one  canister 
could be  carried a t  a time. 
First  canister  would  weigh  36.3  kg  (80 lbs)  and  hold  2000  m 
(6700  f t )   of  film,  including  more  than  1600 exposures  of  lunar  sur-  
face  taken  from  113-km  (70-m i)   lunar  orbit.  Photos  would  be  en- 
larged  on  earth  to  compose  blowup  15.2  m  (50  f t )   wide  and  160 km 
(100  m i )   long  showing  details  on  lunar  surface  a s   small  a s   1.5  m 
(5  f t )   in   diameter.  NASA  hoped  these  would  include  photo  of  LRV. 
Second  canister  would  weight  3.6  kg  (8 lbs)   and  hold  1100 m  (3600 
f t )  of  film  used  in mapping camera. 
While  Worden  retrieved  cannisters,  CM’S  hatch  would  be  opened. 
Astronaut  James  B.  Irwin  would  guide  Worden  along  tether  and  
Astronaut  David  R.  Scott  would  stow  canisters  when  Worden  passed 
them  through  hatch.  Worden  told  press,  “We’re  going  to  be  doing 
something  out  there,  not  just  testing  out  an  engineering  concept  or 
working  out  a  procedure  to  do  something.”  (Transcr ip t)  
Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.  pilots  Robert  K .   Smyth  and  William  H. 
Miller  conducted  successful  58-min  flight  of  USN  F-14  from  Grumman 
facility  a t   Calverton,  N.Y.  Same  pilots  had  flown  first  USN  F-14  on 
second  flight,  on  Dec.  30,  1970,  when  i t   crashed  into  woods  near 
Grumman  facility  seconds  after  they  successfully  ejected.  Aircraft  was 
kept  a t   speeds  below  467  km  per  h r   (290  mph)   dur ing  maneuvers  to 
familiarize pilots with handling characteristics.  (Witkin, NYT ,  5/25/71) 
Rep.  Glenn  M.  Anderson  (D-Calif. )  introduced  Emergency  Conversion 
Loan  Act  to  a id   victims  of  aerospace  industry  depression.  Legislation 
would  immediately  qualify  jobless  engineers,  scientists,  and   techni- 
cians  for  conversion  loans  from  banks  in   amounts up  to  60% of  prior 
salary,  but  not  to  exceed  $12000.  (CR ,  5/24/71,  m 9 1 5 )  
*  Dept.  of  Labor  released  results  to  date  of  Technology  Mobilization  and 
Reemployment  Program  to  relocate  unemployed  aerospace  and  defense 
industry  personnel.  While  10 284  professionals  had  registered  with 
state  unemployment  agencies  since  program’s  May  3  inception,  about 
300  jobs  had  come  into  registry.  These  did  not  include  aerospace  and 
defense  jobs  already  listed  but  not  yet  tallied.  Labor  Dept.  spokesman 
sa id   program  hoped  to  provide  jobs  for  about  30000   out  of  about 
141 

May  24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

100 000  scientists,  engineers,  and  technicians  it  would  serve  over  next 
two years.  (Shabecoff, N Y T ,  5/25/71) 
M a y  24-25:  Technical  conference sponsored  by  MSFC  and  Huntsville,  Ala., 
section  of  Optical  Society  of  America  a t   MSFC  reviewed  research  in  
holography  and  optical  filtering  being  conducted  by  NASA,  industry, 
and  universities.  Holography  was  technique  of  using  lasers  to  obtain 
three  dimensional  image  of  object  or   scene  without  use  of  camera  or 
lenses.  Method  was  employed  in  display  systems  and   testing.  (MSFC  
Release  71-85 ;   MSFC  PAO )  
M a y  24-26:  Eleventh  European  Space  Symposium  was  held  in   West  Ber- 
l in ,   Germany,  to  discuss  applications  satellites.  In   welcoming  address 
Dr.  Manfred  Bodenschatz  of  German  Society  for   Aviation  and  Astro- 
nautics  (DGLR) sa id :   “We  have  passed  through  the  infancy  period  of 
space  flight  and  realized  the  untold  possibilities  of  utilization.  . . . 
It  is  only  to  be  regretted  that  the  general  public  has  not  apparently 
fully  realized  this  and  one  does  . . . begin  to  note  a  certain  indiffer- 
ence  to  space  flight  accompanied  by  the  feeling  that  the  major  space 
powers  will  be  doing  it  for  us   anyway.”  Purpose  of  symposium  was 
“to  demonstrate clearly  that  a  whole  range  of  , . . fields  of  application 
already  exists  and   must  be  enlarged  upon,  and   that  European  space 
technology, science,  and  industry  can  and  must  render  i ts   own  impor- 
tant  contribution  here  i f   i t   does  not  want  to  be  left  hopelessly  behind.” 
( S F ,  10/71,  393-4) 
M a y   25:  USAF’S  X-24A 
lifting  body,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  A. 
Manke,  successfully  completed  27th  flight  after  a i r   launch  from  B-52 
aircraft  over  FRC  in  joint  NASA-USAF  program.  Objectives of  powered 
flight were  to  determine  lateral-directional  derivatives  with  rudder  bias 
toe  out,  evaluate  handling  qualities  with  y  accelerometer  feed- 
a t   2’ 
back  and  power  on,  determine  transonic  pitch  damping,  and  obtain 
upper-flap pressure  with  upper  flaps  at  1 3 O .   Although  only  three  of 
four  engine  chambers  ignited,  most  objectives  were  achieved,  with 
vehicle  reaching  19 500-m  (64  000-ft)  altitude  and  mach  1.1.  (NASA  
P ro j   O f f )  
*  Tenth  anniversary  of  President  Kennedy’s  message  to  Congress  urging 
that  U S .   “commit  itself  to  achieving  the  goal,  before  this  decade  is  
out,  of  landing a  man  on  the  moon  and  returning him  safely  to  earth.” 
Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex.)  said  on  House  floor:  “As   we  attempt 
to  plan  for   a  significant  and  aggressive  national  space  program  for 
the  1970’s,  i t   is  well  to  remember  that  on  this  date  in   1961  the  late 
President  John  F.  Kennedy  made  an   equally  difficult  and  challenging 
decision.  I t   is  time  again  that  we  seize  the  initiative  and  make  a  posi- 
tive  decision  for  a  strong  national  space  program.’’  (CRY  5/25/71, 
S7698,  E5023) 
Apollo  15   lunar  surface  experiments-passive 
seismic,  lunar  surface 
magnetometer,  solar  wind  spectrometer,  suprathermal  ion  detector, 
cold  cathode  gauge,  and  heat  flow-were 
described  by  experimenters 
during  NASA  Hq.  press  briefing  on  Apollo  15   science  objectives.  Mis- 
sion  would  return  up  to  68  kg  (150 lb s )   of  lunar  samples rather  than 
maximum  44.5  kg  (98   lbs)   for  previous  Apollo  missions;  man-hours 
spent  on  moon  would  increase  from  18  to  40 ;   and   area  covered  could 
extend to 56  km  (35 m i)   by use of  LRV. 
Dr.  Gary  V.  Latham,  Apollo  Program  Chief  Seismologist,  said  pri- 

142 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

May  25 

May  25:  T en th   anniversary  of  President  Kennedy’s  message  t o   a  jo in t   session  o f  
Congress  urging  that  the   Un i ted   S ta te s   “commit  itself  t o  achieving  the   goal,  be fo re   this 
decade   is  ou t ,   o f   landing  a  man  on   the  moon  and  returning  him  sa f e l y   to  earth.”  Th e  
goal  was  achieved  when  Astronaut  Ne i l   A .  Armstrong,  on  the   Apollo 11 mission,  became 
the   first  man  to   set  a foot  on  the   lunar  surface,  a t   1 0 5 6   p m   EDT, Ju ly   20,  1969. 

mary  aim  of  passive  seismic experiment was  to  discover where  moon- 
quakes  occurred.  “SO f a r  we  have  identified  11 zones  in   which  moon- 
quakes  occur,  but  one  of  these  is  particularly  active,  accounting  for  
about  80 percent  of  the  energy  we  record.”  Source might  be  “an  iso- 
lated  pocket  of  magma  under  pressure  at  depths  between  30  and   400 
miles  [SO and   600 km] .” Third  seismometer,  to  be  placed  on  moon  by 
Apollo  15,  was  expected  to  provide  data  as  to  whether  all  11  zones 
corresponded to  same  source mechanism ; i.e.,  small magma  reservoirs. 
Active  zone  fell  on  line  that  bisected  Apollo  12  and  14 seismometer 
stations,  “so  tha t   makes  15 an  exceedingly  vital  station  to  us.  If  we   jus t  
get  one  perigee  passage  and  a  couple  of  these  moonquakes  before 
station  12 or  14 ceases  to  function,  we’ll  have  taken  quite  a  step  for- 
ward.”  Apollo  15  would  be  a t   edge  of  prominent  mascon  basins, 
Serenatatis  and   Imbrium.  “We  expect  . . . to  impact  an  S-IVB  smack 
in  the  middle  of  one of  them,  probably  Serenatatis.  So this  will  be  the 
first time we  get seismic waves propagating  through one of  these mascon 
features,  and,  hopefully,  w e   w i l l   be   able  to  say  something  about  how 
its  structures  differ  from  the  other  mare  we  have  been  able  to  record 
seismic waves  through.” 

143 

May  25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Edward  M.  Davin,  Program  Scientist,  Lunar  Surface  Experiments, 
said  Apollo  12 magnetometer  had  been  ‘‘very  successfully  recording  a 
surprising  magnetic  field.  . . . we  now  have  a  general  model  of  the 
moon  based  upon  three layers  . . . a  crust,  an   inner  layer,  and  a  core.” 
Apollo  15  lunar  surface  magnetometer  could  determine  “if  there  is 
any   asymmetry  i n   the  magnetic  field”  and   provide  additional  informa- 
tion  on  electrical  conductivity  that  indicated  thermal  distribution  of 
lunar   interior. 
JPL scientist  Dr.  Conway  W.  Snyder  sa id   solar  wind  spectrometer 
experiment  would  be  “measuring  the  weather  in   space.  The  solar wind 
which  is  a  plasma-this 
is  an   ionized  gas-is 
quite  analogous  to  
weather  on  earth.  . . . it  is  the phenomenon  tha t   determines  what  mag- 
netic  fields a re   in   space,  affects  cosmic  rays,  and   generally  is  the  fun-  
damental  entity  i n   space  once  you  stop  considering  the  planets  them- 
selves.”  With  addition  of  second  spectrometer  on  moon  “we  hope  to  
be  able  to   s ta r t   making  some  definite  interpretations of  the  very  com- 
plicated  kind  of  plasma  effects  that  go  on  the  moon.” 
Suprathermal  ion  detector  experiment  was  described  by  Rice  Univ. 
scientist  Dr.  Kent  Hills.  ApoZZo  12  and   14  ion   detectors  had   revealed 
ion  clouds  that  were  not  lunar-oriented  bu t   had   been  formed  elsewhere 
“from  an   expanding  neutral  gas  cloud.”  With  Apollo  15  experiment, 
th ird   station  nor th   of  other  two  would  give  “extended  distance  with 
which  to  investigate  these  things  and   . . . a  different  direction.” 
Cold  cathode  gauge  experiment  would  indicate  amount  of  gas  on 
moon,  Dr.  Francis  S.  Johnson  of  Univ.  of  Texas  a t   Dallas  said.  Ion  
detector  already  on  moon  had  detected  gas  clouds  in   which  concentra- 
tion  sometimes  increased  100 times.  With  second  gauge  “we  hope  tha t  
there  will  be  the prospect  oE  seeing  the  same  event  on  two  gauges,  and  
then  we  will  be  able  to  tell  quite  a  lot  more  about  where  these  gas 
sources  would  be  and   also  learn  something  about  how  they  propagate 
across the  lunar  surface.” 
Heat  flow experiment,  with  3-m  (10-ft)  drill,  was  to measure  amount 
of  heat  coming from   interior  of  moon,  Columbia  Univ.  astronomer  Dr. 
Marcus  E.  Langseth  said.  Measurement  would  be  made  by  monitoring 
heat  budget  in  near-surface  material  ( lunar   regolith)  over  one  year 
with  thermometers  on  probes  about  2  m  (6  f t )   below  lunar  surface. 
Measurements  could  be  useful  in   resolving  contradictory  da ta   from 
magnetometer experiments on  Apollo  12  and  14. 
Experiments  outside  Apollo  15 ALSEP  package-laser 
ranging  retro- 
flector,  lunar   field  geology,  and  lunar  soil  mechanics-were 
discussed 
by Wesleyan  Univ.  astronomer  Dr.  James  E.  Fa l ler ;   Donald  A.  Beattie, 
Program   Manager,  Lunar   Surface  Experiments;  and   Dr.  James  K. 
Mitchell  of  Univ.  of  California  a t   Berkeley.  Laser  a r ray   would  provide 
th ird   leg  of  triangle  formed  by  laser  retroflectors  on  ApoZZos  12 and  
14,  improve  rang ing   reliability  from  curren t   stations,  and   “provide 
for   greater  efficiencies  in   telescope  use  time.”  Geology  experiment 
objectives were  to  sample Apennine Mountain  front,  study Hadley  Rille, 
examine  mare,  sample  volcanic  complex  to   north  of  landing  site,  and  
study cluster  of  craters southeast  of  landing site.  Soil mechanics  experi- 
ment  would  measure  density,  strength,  compressibility  and   adhesive 
and   cohesive  characteristics  of  material  on  lunar  surface.  “The  th ing  
tha t   is  going  to  be  of  considerable  interest  is  the  lunar   roving  vehicle 

144 

May  25 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
because  if  we  can  calibrate  this  vehicle  . . . a  knowledge  of  vehicle 
tracks  and  power  consumptions should provide  . . . continuous  record 
of  the  soil  conditions  a s   the  crew  m 
d  from   point  to  point.”  (Tran- 
scr ip t)  
Mstislav  V.  Keldysh  was reelected  President  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences  a t   general  assembly  meeting  in  Moscow.  Following  reelection, 
Tass  sa id :   “The  successes  of  the  U.S.S.R.  in   the  exploration  of  space 
have  been  associated  with  Keldysh’s  work.  They  included  the  first 
Sputniks,  the  flights  to  the  moon  and  around  i t ,   flights  to  the  planets 
of  the  solar  system,  the  first  manned  space  flight,  the  first  experimental 
orbital  station,  the  return  o l   Luna  16 with  lunar  soil  to  the  earth  and  
5/26/71,  L1;  Shabad, 
the  first  Soviet moon  rover.”  (FBIS-Sov-71-102, 
N Y T ,  5 /31 /71 ,32 )  
Sen.  Lawton  Chiles  (D-Fla.)  inserted  House Memorial  780  from  Florida 
Legislature  i n   Congressional  Record  “to  request  that  Kennedy  Space 
Center  be  the site  for   construction of  the  space shuttle.”  (CR,  5/25/71, 
S7680) 
Gen.  Charles  P.  Cabell  (USAF,  Ret.),  former  CIA  Deputy  Director  and  
NASA  consultant,  died  at  age  68  after  heart  attack.  (Honsa,  ?V Pos t ,  
5/27/71,  B17) 
May   26:  NASA  supercritical  wing,  flown  on   TF-8A  je t   aircraft  piloted  by 
NASA  test  pilot  Thomas  C.  McMurtry,  successfully  completed  eighth 
flight  from  FRC.  Objectives of  flight-to 
explore  flutter  boundary  and 
evaluate  stability  and   control  characteristics  near  speed  of  sound- 
we re   achieved.  Aircraft  reached  1 4  000-m  (46  000-ft)  altitude  and 
mach  0.975  with  military  rated  power  and  10 600-m  (35  000-ft)  alti- 
tude  and  mach  1.1 with  afterburner.  Flight  was  last  in  exploratory 
flight  program;  aircraft  would  be  checked  out  and  cleaned  before 
beginning  performance-data-gathering  program  in   late  July  or  early 
August.  (NASA   Pro j   Off) 
0  Cooperative US. and  West  Germany  barium  cloud  experiment originally 
scheduled  for   launch  during  April  20-26 
launch  window,  had  been 
postponed  until  September because  of  unfavorable  weather  conditions 
and  minor  technical  difficulties,  NASA  announced.  Experiment  was  to 
study  behavior  of  barium  ion  cloud  at  high  altitudes  to  measure mag- 
netic  and  electrical  fields  in  space  and  to  study  plasma  physics.  (NASA 
Release) 
*  RAND   Corp.  report  The  Space  Shuttle  as  an   Element  2n  the  National 
Space  Program  (RM  6244-1PR)  completed  in  October  1970-study 
that  questioned  economic  feasibility  of  NASA’s reusable  space  shuttle 
entered  in  Congressional  Record’  by  Sen.  Walter  F. 
program-was 
Mondale  ( D-Minn.)  Study, undertaken  for  USAF,  concluded  “total  space 
funding  requirements  over  the  next  20  years  are   not  significantly  dif- 
ferent  for  plans  that  use  the  shuttle  and  those that  accomplish the  same 
missions without the  shuttle.”  Results  indicated  “that  criteria other  than 
cost  should  be  used  to  evaluate  the  desirability  of  the  space  transport 
system.”  ( C R ,  5/26/71,  S7823-9) 
Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  on  Senate  floor  questioned  need  for  
space  shuttle  and   space  station:  “ I   have  written  to  NASA  on  a  number 
of  occasions  to  ask  whether  . . . there  is  a  need  for   the  space  shuttle- 
space  station.  All  NASA  has  told  me  in  reply  is  that  first,  the  shuttle 
would  enable  u s   to  continue  to  have  an  active  space  program,  and  

145 

May  26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

second,  i t   would  reduce  the  costs  of  the  space  program.  But  why  do  
we  actually  need  i t ?   What  would  i t   help  us  to  accomplish  tha t   we 
could  not  otherwise  accomplish?  NASA  seemingly  has  no  answer  to 
these  questions.”  ( C R ,  5/26/71,  S7811-2) 
0  DOD  spokesman  Jerry  W.  Friedheim  told  press  new  large missile  silos be- 
ing   built  in   U.S.S.R.  appeared  to  be  designed  for  two  different  kinds 
of  ICBMS  but  more  than  half  of  new  holes  might  be  fo r   relatively  small 
SS-11  IC BM .   (Getler, W Post, 5/27/71) 
NSF  published  Recent  Trends  in  Enrollment  and  Manpower  Resources  in 
Graduate Science Education, 1969-70.  Graduate  enrollment  in   sciences 
and  engineering  declined  slightly  between  1969 and  1970. Decrease  and  
declining  growth  ra te   1967-1969  contrasted  with  9%  annual  rate  of 
increase  i n  enrollment  fo r   advanced  degrees  in   science  and  engineering 
tha t   characterized  seven-year  period  from  1960  to  1967.  Number  of 
faculty  and  post-doctoral  students had   increased  during  1969-1970,  bu t  
annual  rates  of  growth were  “ fa r  below”  comparable  figures  fo r   1967- 
1969.  (NSF  Highlights, 5/26/71) 
May  26-28:  NASA’s second  Goveinment-Industry  System  Safety  Conference 
was  held  at  GSFC.  In   keynote  address  Rep.  Je r ry   L.  Pettis  (R-Calif.) 
said:  “The  traumatic  and  inspiring  experience  of  Apollo  13 now  can 
be  given  profound  symbolic  meaning.  The  life  on  board  became  vi- 
tally  important  to  millions  of  fellow  passengers  on  Spaceship  Earth. 
Fo r   a  few  moments  in   history  we  glimpsed  the  highest  priority.  The 
support  crew  focused  on  solving  the  most  urgent  problem-and 
suc- 
ceeded  like  seasoned  professionals.” 
Agenda  covered  results  of  application  of  NASA  system  safety  tech- 
niques  to  automotive  design,  oil  drilling  and   exploration,  consumer 
products,  surface  ships,  helicopters  and  urban   transit,  and  aeronautics 
and   space.  NASA’s first  System  Safety  Conference  had  been  held  in  
1968.  (NASA   Release  71-52;  CR ,  6/7/71,  E 5 5 2 3 4 ;   GSFC  PAO )  
May  27: Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  announced  i n   released 
statement  he  had   approved  launch  of  Mariner-I  Mars  probe:  “I  have 
reviewed  the  results  of  the  Mariner  H  failure  analysis,  and   of  the  
Mariner  I  Launch  Readiness Review.  I  am  satisfied  that  a  complete and  
thorough  job   has  been  done,  that  the  failure  has   been  identified,  and  
tha t   proper  corrective  action  has  been  taken.  At  the  same  time,  I  fully 
recognize  that  the  Atlas-Centaur  is  an   extremely  complex  vehicle,  tha t  
there  are  literally  thousands  of  parts  and   components  that  must  func- 
tion  perfectly,  and   that  a  finite  probability  of  failure  must  exist  on 
each  launch.”  Failure  of  Mariner-H  May  8  had  been  traced  to   inte- 
grated  circuit  in   Centaur  booster.  (NASA  Release  71-92) 
launched  Cosmos  423  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  489-km 
U.S.S.R. 
(303.9-mi)  apogee,  279-km  (173.4-mi)  perigee,  91.9-min  period,  and  
(G SFC   S S R ,   5/31/71; 
71’ 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Nov.  26. 
11/30/71;  SBD ,  6/2/71,  169) 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  met  with  M SC   officials  du r -  
ing   his  first  official visit  to  Center.  Later,  a t   press  conference,  he  sa id  
NASA’s image  could  not  rest  on  “absolutely  fantastic  achievement”  of 
first  lunar   landing  by man.  NASA  needed  to  convince  taxpayers  of  basic 
technology  that  had   been  developed  on   way  to  moon.  Each  par t   of 
NASA  program  “has  to  be  defended  as   a  separate  piece.”  (Maloney, 
H  Post, 5/28/7  1 ) 

146 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

May  27 

*  Growing climate in   U.S.  of  “irrational  hostility”  toward  science and  tech- 
nology w a s   scored  by  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  NASA  Deputy Associate 
Administrator  for  Planning, 
in   speech  before  Washington,  D.C., 
chapter  of  Aviation/Space  Writers  Assn. : “ I t   is  irrational  precisely 
because  those most  vocal  . . . a re   the  very  ones professing  the  greatest 
concern  about  poverty,  poor  housing,  hunger,  and   the  quality  of  the  
environment. All  of  these  problems of  society  depend  in  varying  degree 
upon  our  technoIogica1  capabilities,  and  certainly  on  increased  pro- 
ductivity  for  their  solutions.  Some  . . . require  advanced research  into 
the  nature  of  the  environment and  ecological  interactions.”  Anti-science 
and  anti-technology  voices  were  doing  U.S.  “great  disservice.  The 
problems  they  are   rightly  anxious  and  concerned  about  cannot  be 
solved  by  a  return-to-nature cult.”  Resources  of  knowledge  that  awaited 
man  in   space  had  “great  significance  to  man,  to   Ear th   environment, 
and  to  the  ecology. We  are   learning  of  the  relationships  between  Ear th  
and  Sun  and  their  effects  on  our  lives  which  could  be  learned  in   no 
other  way  save  by  means  of  the  rocket  and  spacecraft.”  (Tex t)  
LeRC  announced  NASA  had  awarded  Air  Research  Manufacturing  co .   of 
Garrett  Corp.  $4.5-million7 /I.O-mo,  cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  to  build 
fou r   turbine-alternator  compressors  ( TAC )   for   experimental  nuclear 
power  generation  system.  System  w a s   to  produce  up  to  100  kw  a s  
part  of  LeRC  Brayton  cycle  power  conversion  system.  (LeRC  Release 
71-23;  NASA  Release  71-93) 
Soviet  scientist  Anatoly  Fedoseyev,  head  of  Soviet  delegation  to  Par is  
Air  Show,  defected  to  West,  according  to  French  sources  later  quoted 
by  U P I .   ( U P I ,  W  Post,  6/20/71,  A l )  
*  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  had  said  settlements  with  US. Government  on 
military  contracts  and  other  problems  had  resulted  in  net  loss  of  $86.3 
million  in   1970 and $96.6 million  in  fourth quarter  of  1970, Wall Street 
Journal reported.  ( W S J ,  5 /27 /71 ,3 )  
May  27-June  6 :  Twenty-ninth  Par is   International  Air  Show  was  held  a t  
Le  Bourget Airport.  More  than  one  million  visitors  to  world’s  largest 
a i r   show  viewed  Soviet  Tu-144  supersonic  transport  in  its  first  ap- 
pearance  in   West ; Anglo-French  supersonic  airliners,  Concorde  001 
and  002 ;   Soviet  Mi-12,  world’s  largest  helicopter;  Lockheed  C-5A 
Galaxy,  world’s  largest  a ircraf t ;   Lockheed  1011  TriStar ; and  more 
than  200  private  a ircraf t   in  total  exhibition  of  600  aircraft.  U S .  
Pavilion  exhibited  Apollo  moon  rocks.  Canadian  Pavilion  contained 
mockup  of  integrated  STOL  system  envisaging  10-min  a ir   hops  be- 
tween  suburban  shopping  areas  and  city  centers.  ( B   Sun,  5/26/71, 
5 /31 /71 ;   Hess, N Y T ,  5/26/71) 
Muy   2 8 :   M a r s   3  probe  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  from  Baykonur  a t   8:26 
pm  local  time  (11:26  am  EDT) into  park ing   orb i t   from  which  i t   was 
injected  into  heliocentric  trajectory  toward  Mars.  Payload  would  sup- 
plement  that  of  Mars  2,  launched  May  19.  All  instruments  functioned 
normally.  By  10  pm  Moscow  time  (3  pm  EDT), Mars  2  was  2 4 9 5 0 0 0  
km  ( 1  550 000 m i)   from ear th  and Mars 3 was  44  000 km  (27  000 m i )  , 
Tass  reported.  Each  satellite weighed  4650  kg   (10 250  lbs)  and  had  as 
prime  mission  objective  complex  research  of  Mars  and   its  atmosphere. 
Tass  said  that  Mars  3  carried  instrumentation  for  exploration  of  Mars 
and  neighboring  space,  for   investigating  solar  radio  emission  in   one- 
meter  wave  band  in   experiment  developed  and  manufactured  by 

147 

May 28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

French  specialists  i n   French-Soviet  cooperative  program,  and   for 
measuring  characteristics  of  solar  plasma  and   cosmic  rays.  ( FBIS-SOV- 
71-104,  6/1/71,  L1;  S BD ,   6/2/71,  69;  Shabad,  NYT ,   5/29/71,  1) 
U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  424  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t   with  287-km 
(178.3-mi)  apogee,  198-km  (123-mi)  perigee,  88.9-min  period,  and  
65.3O  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  June   10.  (GSFC S SR ,   5/31/71  ; 
6/30/71;  SBD ,  6 /2 /71 ,169)  
New  mission  plan  had  been  adopted  for  Mariner-I  (Mariner  9 )   Mars 
probe  scheduled  for  launch  no  earlier  than  May  29,  NASA  announced. 
New  plan-which  would  provide  high-quality  data  re turn   for  all  of 
original  experiments  but  less  data  than  planned  for   original  two- 
spacecraft  mission-assigned  65”  inclination,  12-hr period,  and  1200-km 
(750-mi)  periapsis  (low  point  in   orb i t   around  Mars)   to  Mariner-I, 
with  Nov.  14,  1971,  arrival  date.  New  inclination  would  yield  map  
covering  almost  70%  of  Mars  and   period  would  ensure  two-tape-load- 
per-day data  return.  (NASA   Release 71-94) 
0  Soviet  Aviation  Industry  Minister  Pave1 Dementyev  told  P a r i s  press  con- 
ference  Soviet  supersonic  transport  Tu-144  was  expected  to  go  into 
commercial  service  in   late  1973  o r   early  1974,  about  same  time  as 
Anglo-French  Concorde.  Only  one  Tu-144  was  operational;  two  other 
prototypes  under  construction  were  expected  to  fly  a t   year’s  end. 
Tu-144 had   logged  several  hundred  flying  hours  and   flown  at  2458  km 
per   h r   (1528  mph )   a t   6100  m  ( 2 0 0 0 0   f t ) .   Aleksey  N.  Tupolev,  de- 
signer  of  Tu-144,  sa id   at  press  conference  tha t   P an   American  World 
Airways  President  Najeeb  E.  Halaby  was  interested  in   aircraft,  “but 
i t   is  too  soon  to  speak  about  markets  or  negotiations  with  interna- 
tional  airlines  until  the  Tu-144  has  completed  its  test  program.” 
(Reuters,  W Pos t ,  5/29/71) 
December  1970  Mariner  6  and   Mariner  7 experiments  to  simulate  w 
spectrum  tha t   would  be  viewed  by  uv  spectrometer  observing  Jupiter 
o r   other  outer  plants  were  described  in   Science  by  Univ.  of  Colorado 
scientists  J.  B.  Pearce,  K.  K.  Kelly,  and   C.  A.  Barth,  and   JPL   scientist 
A.  L.  Lane.  Mixture  of  ammonia,  nitrogen,  and   hydrogen  had  been 
released  from  spacecraft  240  million  km  (149  million  m i )   from  earth 
and   120  million  km  (74.5  million  m i )   from  sun.  Spectra  were  re- 
corded  while  gases  were  illuminated  by  sunlight.  (Science,  5/28/71, 
941-3) 
Fourth  round  of  Strategic Arms  Limitation  Talks  ended  in  Vienna.  Talks 
would  resume  in   Helsinki  July  8.  ( W  Pos t ,   5/29/71) 
May   29 :   Countdown  for  launch  of  NASA’s Mariner-I  spacecraft  toward  Mars 
orb i t   was  interrupted  by  hold  a t   4:59  pm  EDT  72  min  from  launch. 
Hold  was  caused  by  difficulty  in  interpreting  data  from  Centaur  stage 
guidance  package.  Difficulty  was  not  resolved  by  6 pm  and  launch  was 
postponed  to  next  day.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
*  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  425  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t   with  550-km 
(341.8-mi)  apogee,  508-km  (315.7-mi)  perigee,  95.1 min  period,  and  
74”   inclination.  (GSFC SSR ,  5/31/71;  SBD,  6/2/71,  169 )  
M a y   30:  NASA  successfully  launched  Mariner  9  (Mar iner-I)   from  ETR  a t  
6 :23   pm  EDT  on  Atlas-Centaur  23   booster  into  398-million-km  (247- 
million-mi)  direct-ascent trajectory toward Mars.  No  problem  had   been 
found  in   Centaur  guidance  package  when  May  29   da ta   was  fully 
understood.  Launch was second attempt  to  send  spacecraft  to orb i t  Mars 

148 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

May  30 

May  30:  Mariner  9,  launched  from   t h e   Eastern  Test  Range  on  a   398-million-kilometer 
(247-m i l l ion-m i le)  direct-ascent  trajectory,  headed  toward  the   planet  Mars.  Encoun- 
tering  Mars  NOD .   13,  the   spacecraft  would  be  the   first  to  orbit  a   planet  other 
than  earth.  Mariner  %weighing  1000  kilograms  (2200  pound s )   and  spanning  almost 
7  meters  (22%  f e e t )   w i th   its  solar  panels  eztended-would 
orbit  Mars  90  days  to  
study  the   atmosphere  and  sur face   in  detail  and  map  70  percent  of 
the  surface. 

during  1971  opportunity;  Mariner  8  (Mariner-H)  launch  attempt 
May  8 had  failed  because  of  malfunction  in   Centaur  stage  of  booster. 
Scheduled  for  arrival  a t   Mars  on  Nov.  14,  Mariner  9  would  make 
detailed  study  of  Martian  surface  and  atmosphere  and   map  70%  of 
surface  dur ing   planned  90-day  orb i t   of  planet. 
Launch  vehicle  performance  and  spacecraft  injection  were  nominal. 
Spacecraft separated  from  Centaur,  deployed  four  solar  panels  a t  6:40 
pm,  and   locked  sensors on   sun  a t   7:16  pm,  soon  after  leaving  earth's 
shadow.  About  four  hours  into  flight  Canopus  sensor  was  energized 
and   spacecraft  rolled  55"  a n d   locked  onto  s ta r   Achernar.  Canopus  ac- 
quisition  was  achieved a t  10:26 pm  and spacecraft  would  remain in  sun- 
Canopus  orientation  for  mission  except  dur ing   maneuvers.  All  space- 
craft systems were operating normally. 

49 

May  30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Mariner  9  weighed  1000  kg  (2200  l b )   a t   launch  and  carried  six 
scientific  experiments:  infrared  radiometer  to  measure  surface  tem- 
perature ; w  spectrometer  to  investigate  composition  and   structure  of 
atmosphere ; infrared  interferometer  spectrometer  to  measure  surface 
and  atmospheric  radiation ; S-band  occultation  experiment  to  study 
pressure  and  structure  of  atmosphere;  TV  cameras  to  transmit  low- 
and   high-resolution  photographs  of  surface ; and   experiment  to  inves- 
tigate  Martian  gravity  field.  Orbit  of  spacecraft  was  designed  to  guar- 
antee  it  would  not  hit  Mars  for  at  least  17  yrs,  to  avoid  contamination 
of  planet  before  studies  on  surface  were  made  by  landing  spacecraft. 
OSSA  assigned  project  responsibility  to  JPL,  including  mission  oper- 
ations  and   tracking  and   data  acquisition.  Launch  vehicle  was  respon- 
sibility  of  LBRC,  with  contractor  General  Dynamics  Corp.  Convair 
Division.  (NASA  Proj Off; NASA  Release 71-75) 
May  30-June  6 :  Apo l lo   14  Astronauts  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  Edgar  D. 
Mitchell,  and  S tuar t   A .   Roosa  during  visit  to  France  attended  Par is  
Air  Show ; inspected  aerospace  facilities  a t   Bretigny,  Toulouse,  and  
Salon-de-Provence, and  attended  reception  by  Mayor  of  Dijon.  (NASA 
Release 71-84;  MSC  PIO) 
Muy  3 1 :   Since  Tu-144 had  been  exposed  to  Western  inspection  a t   Par is  
Air  Show,  Soviet  press  had  been  “slowly  coming  to  grips  with  prob- 
lems  of  supersonic flight  long passed  over  in   silence,”  New  Yo rk  T imes  
reported.  Sowetskaya  Rossiya  had  quoted  Western  comments  that 
Tu-144’s  engines were  quieter  and   produced  less  pollution  than   those 
of  Concorde.  “Extensive  discussion”  of  possible  environmental  and 
health  problems  caused  by  supersonic  transport  had  not  been  reported 
in U.S.S.R.  previously.  (Shabad, NYT ,  5/31/71) 
*  Communist  China  was  preparing  to  test-fire  its  first  liquid-fuel  ICBM 
beyond  its  borders,  probably  into  Indian  Ocean,  New  Yo rk   T imes  
quoted  U S .   China  experts  as  saying.  Preparations  for  ICBM  launch 
included  outfitting  of  tracking  ship  and  extension  of  missile  range 
tracking  stations  in  Sinkiang  Province,  but  political  consideration 
might  cause  deferment  of  testing  for  several  months.  I t   was  estimated 
i t  would  take  a t   least  three  years  after  initial  testing  for  China  to  move 
its  first  group  of  operational  ICBMS.  (Beecher, N Y T ,   5/31/71) 
Igor  I .   Sikorsky,  founder  of  Sikorsky  Aircraft  Div.  of  United  Aircraft 
Corp.,  had  been  named  1971  recipient  of  USAF  Academy’s  Thomas  D. 
White  National  Defense  Award,  presented  annually  for  contributions 
‘<to the  national  defense  and  security  of  the  United  States,”  Aviation 
Week   & Space  Technology  reported.  (Aw   W k ,  5/31/71,  23 )  

150 

June  1971 

June  1 :   US.-Canadian  agreement  on  jo in t   program  to  use  satellites  and  
a ircraf t   in  surveys  of  natural  environment  was  announced  by  NASA. 
Objective  was  to  advance  remote  sensing  technology  fo r   monitoring 
air,  water,  land,  forest,  and  crop  conditions and  for  mapping  ice  move- 
ments,  ocean  currents,  and   geologic,  hydrologic,  vegetation,  and  soil 
phenomena.  Canadian  Dept.  of  Energy,  Mines  and  Resources  ( EM R )  
would  receive  da ta   a t   ground  station  in   Prince  Albert,  Saskatchewan, 
and  data-handling  facility  at  Ottawa  directly  from  NASA’s ERTS  satel- 
lites,  scheduled  for  1972  and  1973  launch.  Canadian  and   U.S.  test 
areas  would  be  designated.  Ground  and  aircraft  data  acquired  and  
exchanged  would  be  available  to  international  community  a s   soon  as 
practicable.  No  funds  would  be  exchanged  between  EMR  and  NASA. 
(NASA  Release  71-95  ) 
*  British  aviatrix  Sheila  Scott  left  London  Airport  in   twin-engine  Piper 
Aztec  for   55 000-km  (34  000-mi)  flight  around  world  one  and  one 
half  times,  during  which  her  physical  reactions  would  be  relayed  via 
Nimbus  4  satellite  to  ground  station  a t   Fairbanks,  Alaska,  and  then  to  
GSFC  computer.  NASA  and  U.K.’s  Institute  of  Aviation  Medicine  had 
installed  equipment  in   aircraft  to  monitor  pulse,  breathing,  voice, 
brainwaves,  mental  alertness,  and  other  functions  while  Miss  Scott 
spent  18  hrs  in   a i r   under  cramped  conditions.  Instrumentation  also 
would  monitor  a i r   pollution  at  normal  flight  level  of  3000  m  (10  000 
f t ) .   (Cerutti, C T r i b ,  6/2/71;  NASA  OSSA )  
*  Storage  lifetime  of  seals,  O-rings,  and  gaskets  in   rocket  engines  and 
Sa turn   IB  and   Saturn  V  booster  stages  had  been  extended  from  8 to 
10  yrs  in   program  of  rocket  test  firing  a t   MSFC,  MSFC   announced. 
(M S FC  Release  71-91) 
Comments  on  U S .   Mariner  9  and  U.S.S.K.  M a r s   2  and  3  missions  were 
made  in  New York   Times  editorial : Three  spacecraft-“one  American 
speeding toward  Mars  represent  the  best  type  of 
and  two  Soviet-now 
international  competition.  Their  rivalry  centers  about  the  pursuit  of 
knowledge,  with  the  honors  going  to  that  nation  whose  instruments 
send  back  the  most  important  data  on  the  red  planet  that  is  one of  the 
earth‘s  nearest  space neighbors.”  U S .   led  Mars  race  to  date,  “because 
of  the  brilliant  feats  by  Mariners  4,  6,  and  7.  In  the  1960’s  the  pic- 
tures  and  other  data  acquired  by  these  pioneering  vehicles  completely 
revolutionized  scientists’  views  of  the  Martian  terrain  and  environ- 
ment.”  ( N Y T ,  6 /1 /71)  
*  NASA  issued Management  Instruction  continuing  NASA  Historical  Advisory 
Committee  to  advise  and   assist  in   implementation  of  NASA  historical 
program  and   designating  as  members  Dr.  Louis Morton,  Chairman  of 
Dartmouth  College  Dept.  of  History,  Committee  Chairman;  Dr.  A. 
Hunter  Dupree,  Dept.  of  History,  Brown  Univ.;  Dr.  Melvin  Kranz- 
berg, Dept. of  Humanities, Case Western Reserve Univ.;  Dr.  Rodman W. 
Paul,  Dept.  of  History,  Cal  Tech;  and  Dr.  John  B.  Rae,  Dept.  of  His- 

151 

June 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

tory,  Harvey  Mudd  College.  Executive  Secretary  fo r   Committee  was 
James  P.  Nolan,  Jr.,  of  NASA  Office  of  Management  Development. 
(NASA NMI  1156.2C) 
President  Nixon  submitted  to  Senate  nomination  of  Frederic  G.  Donner 
for  reappointment  as member  of  ComSatCorp Board  of  Directors.  ( P D ,  
6 /7 /71 ,867)  
June 2 :  DOD spokesman  Jerry  W.  Friedheim  told  press  in  Washington,  D.C., 
tha t   cost  increase  fo r   USN  F-14  fighter  a ircraf t   was  about  $2  billion. 
If  tentative  plans  to   produce  more  than  700  a ircraf t  materialized,  cost 
would  increase  $2.8  million  per  aircraft,  from   $11.5  million  to  $14.3 
million.  Earlier,  manufacturer  Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.  had   blamed 
cost  increase  on  inflation  and   other  factors  contributing  to  poor  busi- 
ness conditions.  (Witkin, NYT,  6 /3 /71 ,15 )  
Physicist  Dr.  Edward  Teller  criticized  DOD secrecy  in   speech  a t   PMR  Hq. 
a t   Point  Mugu,  Calif.  H e   said  Soviet  development  of  SS-9 
ICBM  and  
expanded  ABM  system  posed  threat  to  U.S.  deterrent  capability  bu t  
DOD secrecy  made  i t   impossible  to  reveal  details  of  threat.  As  result, 
many  in   Congress  and   Nation  doubted  threat’s  reality.  (PMR Missile, 
6 /3 /7191)  
June 3.- House,  by  vote  of  302  to  64,  passed  H.R.  7109,  $3.433  billion 
FY  1972  NASA  authorization  bill,  after  agreeing  by  voice  vote  to 
amendment  deleting  $500 000  for  feasibility  studies  of  offshore  a i r -  
ports.  House  rejected  amendment  tha t   would  have  eliminated  $125 
million  for  space  shuttle  system.  ( C R Y  6/3/71,  H4588-628) 
At  Par is   Air  Show Apollo  14 Astronauts  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  Edgar  D. 
Mitchell,  and   S tuar t   A.  Roosa  met  in  Soviet  Pavilion  with  Vostok  4 
Cosmonaut  Pave1  R.  Popovich  and   Soyuz  9 Cosmonauts  Vitaly  I. 
Sevastyanov  and   Andrian  G.  Nikolayev.  Astronauts  saw  models  of 
Baykonur  launch  complex,  Vostok  1 ,  and  Soyuz  spacecraft ; examined 
display  devoted  to  10th  anniversary  of  first  space  flight  by  Yur i   A. 
Gagarin  on  April  12,  1961;  ascended  to  Soyuz  C M ;   and   admired 
Lumkhod   1 lunar  vehicle  and   Luna 16 unmanned  spacecraft  tha t   had  
returned  lunar  samples  to  earth.  Later  astronauts  and   cosmonauts 
went  to  U.S.  Pavilion  where  cosmonauts  were  shown  Apollo  12 space- 
craft  and   other  exhibits.  Cosmonauts  presented  astronauts  with  model 
of  Soyuz  spacecraft ; astronauts  reciprocated  with  small  Soviet  flag 
they  had  carried  to  moon  aboard  Apollo  14  and   NASA  astronaut  badges. 
( FBIS-SOV-71-108,  6/4/71,  F1; NYT ,  6 /3 /71 ,41 )  
Ground  test version  of  Skylab workshop  arr ied  at MSFC  aboard  NASA  barge 
Or ion   from  MSC.  Called  “dynamic  test  article,”  workshop  would  be 
modified  for  extensive  structural  testing  in   MSFC  dynamic  test  tower 
dur ing  two-month program  to  start  about Nov.  1. (MSFC Release 71-93) 
Langley  Visitor  Information  Center  was  dedicated  in   formal  ceremonies 
a t   L aRC .   Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  attended,  in   first  official  visit  of  new 
NASA  Administrator  to  any   NASA  center.  Rep.  Thomas  N.  Downing 
(D-Va.)  said  in  dedication  speech:  “Space  ,flight has  opened  up  new 
vistas  of  flight  and   of  the  mind  to  understand  the  universe  and   our  
place  in   it.  Our  technology  has  become  the  world’s  best  and   ha s  
brought  us  prosperity  in   a  highly  competitive  environment.” 
Dr.  Fletcher  said  center  would  give  public  broad  understanding  of 
what  was  happening  i n   aerospace  technology.  Science  was  “part  of  our 

152 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June  3 

everyday  life.”  Technological  society  would  continue  “for  the  next  100  
or perhaps  1,000 years.” 
Center  displayed model  aircraft,  model  spacecraft,  lunar  sample,  and 
suit  used  by  Astronaut  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  while  training  for 
Apollo  14 mission.  (Langley Researcher, 5 /28 /71 ,1 ;   6/11/71,  1: Tex t)  
NASA  Performance  Evaluation  Board  had  given  NR  Space  Div.  incentive 
award  fees  of  $234600   and   $307350  for  Apollo  CSM  and  Sa turn   V 
2nd  stage  (S-11)  , NASA  announced. Awards  covered  management per- 
formance under  contracts  dur ing   1970.  ( NASA  Release 71-97) 
in  Space”  exhibit  opened  a t   Smithsonian  Institution.  Exhibit  in- 
“USAF 
cluded  two  Vela  nuclear  detection  satellites  and   DOD  comsat,  scale 
models  of  wind  tunnels  and   space  chambers,  no-torque  impact  wrench 
to  counter  effect  of  weightlessness,  astronaut  equipment,  prototype 
space  tool  for  tests  simulating  weightlessness  under  water,  and   sextant 
used  on  Dec.  4-18,  1965,  Gemini 7 mission.  Also  exhibited  were  scale 
models  of  AFCRL  solar  telescope  and  Titan  boosters  and  integrating 
maneuvering  life  support  System-NASA-USAF 
spacesuit  for  EVA  out- 
side  orbiting  laboratories.  (AFSC Newsreview,  9/71,  8-9) 
*  House  agreed  to  H.R.  461  electing  Rep.  Mendel  J.  Davis  (D-S.C.)  to 
House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics.  (CRY 6/3/71,  H4628) 
June   4 :  Mariner  9 ,  en  route  to  Mars  on  orbiting mission,  successfully com- 
pleted  first  midcourse  maneuver  with  5.11-sec  burn   that  produced 
6.7-m-per-sec  (15.1-mph)  velocity  change.  Maneuver placed  Mariner  9 
on   trajectory  that  would  approach  to  within  1600  km  (1000  m i )   of 
Mars ;   second  maneuver  would  be  conducted  Oct.  24  i f   necessary  to 
correct  trajectory  further.  Spacecraft  had  traveled  21 779 000  km 
(13  533 000 m i)   since launch May  30 and was  2 076 000 km  ( 1  290 000 
m i )   from  earth,  traveling  at  10 985  km  per  h r   (6826  mph ) .   I t   was 
scheduled  to  reach  Mars  vicinity  Nov.  13.  (NASA   Releases  71-96, 
7 1-1 00 ) 
*  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  426  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  1996-km 
(1240.3-mi)  apogee,  389-km  (241.7-mi)  perigee,  109.2-min  period, 
and  74”  inclination.  (GSFC SSR, 6/30/71;  SBD ,   6/14/71,  231) 
lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  John  A. 
0  USAF  X-24A 
Manke,  completed  28th  flight  from  FRC   in   joint  NASA-USAF 
test  pro- 
gram.  Objectives  were  to  obtain  lateral  directional  derivatives  with 
rudder  bias  at  2”   toe  out,  evaluate  handling  qualities  with  power  and 
yaw  accelerometer  feedback  system  on,  and  determine  supersonic lift- 
to-drag  ratio  data  and  longitudinal  trim.  Flight  was  intended  to  reach 
maximum  mach  number,  but  only  two  of  four  chambers  ignited.  Pilot 
immediately switched  to  two-chamber profile  and  mission  plan.  (NASA 
P ro j  O f f )  
Draft  treaty  on   lunar  law  was  submitted  to  U.N.  Secretary  General 
U  Thant  in   letter  from  Soviet  Foreign  Affairs  Minister  Andrey 
Gromyko  with  request  it  be  included  in  agenda  of  26th  U.N.  General 
Assembly  meeting:  “In   all  stages  of  the  exploration  of  outer  space, 
the  Soviet  Union  has  invariably  advocated  a  progressive  development 
of  international  space  law  in   the  interests  of  all  people.  The   building 
of  a  firm  international  foundation  for  the  activity  of  states  in   outer 
space  promotes  the  cause  of  peace  and   helps  to  strengthen  mutual 
understanding  and  cooperation  between  states.”  Soviet  government 
felt  “steps  should  be  taken  now  with  the  object  of  further  elaborating 

153 

June  4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

and   giving  concrete  expression  to  the  standards  of  international  law, 
regulating  the  activity  of  states  on  the  moon.” 
Trea ty   specified  that  fu ture   exploration  and   use  of  moon  be  based 
upon  consideration  for  well  being  of  present  and   future  generations ; 
barred  use  of  moon  for  “hostile  actions”;  reaffirmed  ban   on   deploy- 
ment  of  nuclear  and  other  weapons  of  mass  annihilation  on   moon  and  
on  use  of  moon  for  military  purposes;  ensured  against  unfavorable 
change  o r   pollution  of  lunar  environment;  specified  that  surface  and  
interior  of  moon  could  not  become  property  of  any  state,  states,  per- 
sons,  or  organizations;  and   urged  that  signatory  states  ensure  that  all 
steps  be  taken  to  preserve  man’s  life  and  health  on  moon.  (Tass, 
FBIS-~OV-71-l10,  6/8/71,  A1  ) 
President  Nixon  sent  message  to  Congress  on  energy  sources.  Of  solar 
energy,  President  sa id :   “The  sun  offers  an   almost  unlimited  supply  of 
energy  if  we  can  learn  to  use  it  economically.”  NASA  and   NSF  were 
reexamining  their  efforts  in   this  area  and   we  expect  to  give  greater 
6 6  
attention  to  solar  energy  in   the  future.”  President  proposed  that  all 
important  Federal  energy  resource  development  programs  be  consoli- 
dated  within  new  Dept.  of  Natural  Resources.  “We  believe  that  the 
p lann ing   and  funding  of  civilian  nuclear  energy  activities  should  now 
be  consolidated  with  other  energy  efforts  in   a n   agency  charged  with 
the  mission  of  ensuring  that  the  total  energy  resources  of  the  Nation 
a re   effectively  utilized.  The  Atomic  Energy  Commission  would  still 
remain  intact,  in  order  to  execute  the  nuclear  programs  and  any   related 
energy  research  which  may  be  appropriate  as pa r t   of  the  overall  energy 
the  Department  of  Natural  Resources.”  ( P D ,   6/7/71, 
program  of 
855-66) 
John  C.  Lindsay  Memorial  Award  for  1971  was  presented  to  Harry   E. 
Peters  of  GSFC  Laser  Data  Systems  Branch  dur ing   GSFC  Scientific  Col- 
loquium.  Award,  given  annually  to  GSFC  employee who  had  made  out- 
standing  contribution  to  science  or  technology,  was  presented  for 
individual  contributions  to  the  advancement  of  hydrogen  maser  fre-  
quency  standards  resulting  in   most  stable  frequency  standards  known 
and   making  possible  dramatic  improvement  in   space  tracking  and  
system precision.  (Goddard  N ew s ,  6/14/71,  1 )  
June  6-30:  S o y m  11-carrying  Cosmonauts Georgy T. Dobrovolsky, Vladis- 
lav  N.  Volkov,  and  Viktor  I.  Patsayev-was 
launched  by  U.S.S.R.  from 
Baykonur  a t   9:55  am  local  time  (12:55  am  EDT )   to  join  S d y u t   I 
“orbital  scientific  station”  (launched  April  1 9 ) .  After  manned  flight 
record  of  almost  24   days  in   space,  mission  ended  in   tragedy  June   30 
when  the  three  cosmonauts  were  found  dead  in   returned  spacecraft. 
Orbital  parameters  for  Soyua; 11  were  apogee,  237  km  (147.3  m i )  ; 
perigee,  163 km  (101.3  m i )  ; period,  88.4  m in ;   and  inclination,  51.5’. 
Spacecraft  dbcked  with  Sd yw t   1  a t   10:45  am  Moscow  time  (3:45  am 
EDT)   June  7.  Tass  announcement  said:  “In  accordance  with  the   Soviet 
programme  of  creating  long-term  orbital  stations,  the  ‘Salyut’  orbital 
scientific  station  has  started  to  function  as  the  first  piloted  scientific 
station.  . . . After  successfully  docking  the  Soyuz-11  transport  space- 
ship  with  the  scientific  station  . . . the  crew  of  Soyuz-11  entered  the 
scientific  station.  Solved  for  the  first  time  was  the  engineering  and  
technical  task  of  delivering  a  crew  to   an   orbiting  scientific  station  by 
a  transport  ship.”  Tass  said  Salyut-Soyuz  space  system  was  20  m 

154 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June 6-30 

(66 f t )   long,  weighed  more  than  25  tons,  and   consisted  of  compart- 
ments  containing  equipment  for  scientific  and   technical  experiments, 
for  spacecraft  control,  and  for  crew  work  and   rest.  Cosmonauts would 
check  out  spacecraft  subsystems ; test  orientation  and  navigation  equip- 
ment ; study  geological-geographical  objects  on  earth’s  surface,  atmos- 
pheric  formations,  and  snow  and  ice  cover;  study  physical  character- 
istics,  processes,  and  phenomena  in   atmosphere  and   outer  space;  and  
study  medico-biological  influence  of  space  ,flight  factors  on  human 
organism. 
Cosmonauts  checked  out  systems,  conducted  experiments,  and   sent 
messages  of  thanks  to  scientists,  engineers,  and   workers who  took  par t  

June 6-30: Soyuz  11  carried  Cosmonauts  Georgy  T .   Dobrovolshy,  Vladislav  N. Vo lkav ,  
and  V ik tor   I .   Patsayev  into  space  f o r   transfer  to  Salyut  1,  an   “orbital  scientific 
station”  launched  Apr i l   19.  A f te r   a  record-breaking  24-day  flight  the   crew,  return- 
ing  in  t h e   Soyuz  11,  died  before  landing  because  a n   imper fec t ly   sealed  ha tch  
permitted  air  to  escape.  T h e   interior  view  of 
the   forward  section  of 
the   Salyut 
spacecraft’s  ma in   working  area  shows  the   command  and  control  panel  and  two  seats. 

155 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
June 6-30 
in  creation  of  space  station  system.  TV  transmissions  showed  crew 
performing  duties  in   spacecraft.  After  one  week  in   orbit,  crew  was 
in   good  health  and  had  completed  first  phase  of  experiments with  all 
systems  functioning  normally.  Crew  was  allowed  one-day  rest  before 
continuing  experiments.  By  1:00  pm  Moscow  time  (6:OO  am  EDT )  
June  13 Salyut-Soyuz station  had  completed  100  orbits  of  earth. 
Cosmonauts  continued  to  follow  preplanned  program  of  work,  rest, 
and  two  hours  of  exercise  per  day  and  reported  they  were  in  good 
health.  Experiments  included  communications  with  ground  via  orbit- 
ing  Molniya  I  comsat,  astronomical  observations,  medical  experi- 
ments,  observation of  cyclone  in   Pacific  near  Japan,  and  experiments 
with  plants  in   hothouse  on  board.  They  reared  tadpoles  into  frogs  and 
grew  cabbages  and  onions.  By  12:OO  noon  Moscow  time  ( 5 : O O   am 
EDT )   June  22  station  had  completed  245  orbits  of  earth.  Station  com- 
pleted  18th  day  in   orbit  June  24,  surpassing  17-day  17-hr  endurance 
record set by S o ym  9 June 2-19,1970. 
On  June  29  cosmonauts  completed  flight  program  and  prepared  for 
reentry.  Crew  transferred  equipment  to  Soyuz  11  and  undocked  from 
Salyut  1  at  9:28  pm  Moscow  time  (2:28  pm  E D T ) .   Crew  reported  suc- 
cessful  undocking  and  said  all  systems  were  functioning  normally.  At 
1:35  am  Moscow  time  June  30  (6:35  pm  EDT  June  29 )   spacecraft’s 
braking  engine  was  fired  for  prescheduled  period.  At  end  of  engine 
firing  communication with  S o ym  11  crew  ceased. 
Tass  said:  “According  to  the  program,  after  aerodynamic  braking 
in  the  atmosphere  the  parachute  system  was  put  into  action  and 
before  landing-the 
soft-landing  engines were  fired.  The  flight  of  the 
descending  apparatus  ended  in  a  smooth  landing  in  the  pre-set  area. 
Landing  simultaneously  with  the  ship,  a  helicopter-borne  recovery 
group,  upon  opening .the  hatch,  found  the  crew  . . . i n   their  seats, 
without  any  signs  of  life.  The  causes  of  the  crew’s  death  a re   being 
investigated.”  ( GSFC SSR ,  6 /30 /71 ;   FBIS-Sov-71-109-126,6/7-30/71; 
Newsweek, 7/12/71) 
June  7:  Preparations  for  Apollo  15  mission  were  proceeding  on  schedule 
with  liftoff  planned  for  July  26,  Capt.  Chester  M.  Lee  (USN ,   Ret.), 
Apollo  Mission  Director,  told  press  in   Washington,  D.C.  Astronauts 
would  be  able  to  remain  on  lunar  surface  for  long  EVA  periods  be- 
cause  of  new  spacesuit  that  would  give  astronauts  greater  mobility 
and  facilitate  experiments.  New  suit  had  neck  and   waist  convolutes 
to  permit  bending  a t   neck  and  waist,  improved  zipper  for  pressure 
control,  improved  thermal  garment,  more  abrasive  material  protec- 
tion,  and  increased  water  and  oxygen  supply.  Suits  also  had  pocket 
for  fru i t  bar  so astronauts  could  take  bites dur ing  mission.  (Transcr ip t)  
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  said  in  Washington  that 
Salyut  l - S o y m   11  mission  was  “clear  demonstration  of 
the  Soviet 
Union’s  continuing  interest  i n   manned  space  flight  and  represents  a 
fur ther   experiment  to  determine  the  value  of  manned  earth  orbital 
operations.”  He  wished  Soviet  cosmonauts  “every  success  in   their 
mission.”  (Reuters, B  S u n ,  6 /8 /71)  
Washington  Evening  Star  editorial  commented  on  Salyut  1-Soym   11 
mission:  “The  Russians  deserve  congratulations  for  the  achievement, 
which  puts  them  some  two  years  ahead  of  the  United  States  in   the 
space  platform  game.”  News  from  Moscow  implied  “that  another 

156 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June 7 

kind  of  breakthrough  may  be  in   the  making; 
development  of  fa r  
greater  significance  to  the  future  of  man  in   spac  than  the  momentary 
triumph  of  an   orbital  linkup  o r   a  moon  landing.  There  is  evidence 
that  the  traditional  Soviet  passion  for   secrecy  in   space  is  beginning  to 
COOL” (W S ta r ,  6 /7 /71)  
*  Tu-144  Soviet  supersonic  transport  was  expected  to  go  on  international 
market  a t  $25  million  less  than  Anglo-French Concorde,  Armed  Forces 
Journal  said.  Informed  scmrces  had  said  U.S.S.R.  would  offer  airlines 
up  to  10 yrs  credit  to  obtain  sales  in West.  ( A F J ,  6/7/71,  13 )  
*  House  passed  H.R.  7960,  g622-milIion  FY  1972  NSF  appropriations  bill 
by  vote  of  319  to  8.  FY  1971  appropriation  was  $511  million.  ( C R ,  
6/7/71,  H4763-85 
Retired  Lam   scientist  William  J.  O’Sullivan,  who  had  conceived  and  
developed  Echo  I  comsat  (launched  Aug.  12,  1960 ) ,   died  at  Newport 
News,  Va.,  a t   age  55.  He  had  received  NASA  Exceptional  Scientific 
Achievement  Award  in  October  1961  and  National Rocket  Club  award 
for  conceiving  use  of  lightweight  inflatable  satellites  for  communica- 
tions  relay  and  a ir   density  studies.  ( W  Pos t ,  6/8/71,  C8) 
Jun e  8 :  USAF  launched  Sesp  satellite  on  Thor-Burner  I1   booster  from  Van- 
denberg  AFB  into  orbit  with  579.4-km  (360-mi)  apogee,  544-km 
(338-mi)  perigee,  95.8-min  period,  and   90.2”  inclination.  Satellite, 
(GSFC   SSR, 
would 
test  infrared  celestial  mapping  sensor  system. 
6/30/71;  Pres  Rpt  72 ;   SBD ,   6/11/71,  221) 
Senate Committee  on  Aeronautical and  Space Sciences  favorably reported 
H.R.  7109,  $3.281-billion  NASA  FY  1972 authorization  bill-$152  mil- 
lion  less  than  $3.433  billion  approved  by  House  June  3  and  almost 
$10  million  above  NASA  request  of  $3.271  billion.  Committee  deleted 
$45  million  increase  voted  by  House  for  Skylab  and  additional  $25 
million  House  had  voted  for  space  shuttle. 
Committee  version  of  bill  would  provide  $2.543  billion  for  R&D, 
$55.3  million  for  construction  of  facilities,  and  $681.3  million  for 
research  and  program  management. Total  of  $3.281  billion  was  lowest 
total  recommended  by  Senate  Committee  since  FY  1962  and  was 
$35.1  million  less  than  total  Committee  recommended  in  FY  1971. 
(S  Rpt 92-146) 
*  U.S.S.R.’s  Mars   2  and  Mars  3  spacecraft  were  functioning  normally  en 
route  to  Mars,  Tass  announced.  At  6 :OO   am  Moscow  time  June  8 
(11:OO  pm  EDT  June  7 )   M a r s   2,  launched  May  19,  had  completed  1 4  
communications sessions  and  was  4 897 000  km  ( 3  042 900  m i )   from 
earth.  M a r s   3 ,   launched  May  28,  had  completed  19  communications 
sessions  and  was  2 880 000  km  ( 1  789 000  m i )   from  earth.  (Sov  Rp t ,  
6 /25 /71 ,7 )  
FAA  released  statistics  on   aircraft  hijacking:  Since  1961,  28  persons had 
been  convicted  for  hi jacking  US. a ircraf t   and  had  received  sentences 
of  up  to  50  yrs  or  l ife ;   12   cases  were  awaiting  tr ia l   or  outcome  of 
mental  examinations;  and   in   8  others  charges  hac!  been  dismissed 
when  offenders  were  committed  to  mental  institutions.  FAA  said  146 
persons  had   participated  in  113 successful  and   unsuccessful  h i j a ck ing  
of  U S .   aircraft.  Of  these,  92   persons  were  listed  as  fugitives,  one  of 
whom  was  believed  to  have  committed  suicide.  Fifteen  hijackers  who 
fled  to  Cuba  had  returned  and   had  been  tried.  (FAA   Release  71-82) 

157  

June 8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

N R   Rocketdyne  Div.  had   been  granted  $26 228 158 contract  modification 
for   continued  support  on   Sa turn   launch  vehicle  rocket  engines,  M sFC  
July  1,  1971, through  Dec.  31,  1972- 
announced.  Contract-effective 
allowed  analysis  of  F-1,  J-2,  and  H-1  engine  performance,  field  engi- 
neering,  logistics,  and   retention  of  Rocketdyne  problem-sdving  group 
fo r  remainder  of  Sa turn  program.  (MSFC   Release 71-97) 
*  Washington Daily  News  editorial  commented  on  Salyut  1-Soyuz  11  mis- 
sion:  “What  is  significant  . . . is  not  the  docking,  in   itself,  but  the 
evidence  o i  the  Soviet  Union’s  zealous  determination  to  exceed  every- 
body  i n   space-for  whatever  purpose.  There  is  nothing  in   all this  tha t  
the  U S .   space  agency  cannot,  when  it  chooses,  accomplish-given 
the 
funds  and   priorities.  It  is  not  a  question  of  firsts-the  U S .   has   had 
its share  of  those,  and more.  The  difference  is  that  to  Russia  the priori- 
ties  and   judgments  a re  made  in   one  place,  the  Kremlin.  In  the  United 
States,  not  only  the  space  agency  but  the  President,  Congress  and   the 
prevailing  public  mood  share  the  decisions.”  ( W  News,  6/8/71) 
June  9 :  Newspaper  editorials  commented  on  Salyut  1 S o y u z   I 1   missions : 
New  Y o r k   T ime s :   “I t   must  be  recognized  tha t   Salyut  and   its  suc- 
cessors  raise  important  new  problems  i o r   international  law  and  inter- 
national  relations.  Back  in   1960,  dur ing   the  celebrated  case  of  the 
American  U-2  plane  shot  down  over  the  Urals,  Soviet  leaders  became 
very  indignant  about  a  manned  American  vehicle  flying  over  their 
country.  There  have  been  no  similar  protests  about  the  manned  and  
unmanned  satellites  of  the  space  era,  but  uneasiness  must  grow  as  
political  leaders  in   many  countries  contemplate  the  potential  military 
uses  of  large  semipermanent  manned  space  stations  such  as   Salyut.” 
( N Y T ,  6/9/71) 
Baltimore  S u n :   “One  point  the  achievement  demonstrates  is  the 
intensity  of  Russian  concentration  on  a definite program.  As  repeatedly 
defined,  and  demonstrated  in   practice,  it  is  a  program  which  sees  orbi- 
tal  endeavor  as   the   logical  next  step,  with  deeper  explorations  limited 
fo r  the time to automatic systems.”  (B  Sun ,  6/9/71) 
MSFC   announced  i t   was  evaluating  proposals  to  provide  technical  systems 
to  develop  and   calibrate  instruments  for   marine  and   atmospheric  re- 
search  from  6  firms  out  of  80  who  had  received  RFPS.  Contract  winner 
would  install  equipment  in   MTF’S  Central  Instrument  Facility.  ( MSFC  
Release 7 1-99) 
Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense David  M.  Packard,  in   testimony  before  Sen- 
ate  Banking  and  Currency  Committee  investigating  financial  status  of 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  warned  against  danger  of  setting  precedent  in 
passing  legislation  to  guarantee  up  to  $250  million  in   private  loans  to 
Lockheed:  “It’s  very  desirable  not  to  establish  a  precedent  that  the 
government  will  [ a id )   any  company  that  gets  into  irouble.”  (Samuel- 
son, N Y T ,  6/10/71,  1 )  
NASA  selected  eight  firms  to  negotiate  contracts  for  MSFC  engineering 
support  services.  One-year  contracts  to  be  negotiated  were:  $8  million 
to  Brown  Engineering  Co.  for  services  a t   Astronautics  Laboratory, 
$1.5  million  to  Hayes  International Corp.  for  services  a t   Product  Engi- 
neering  and   Process  Technology  Laboratory,  $4  million  to  Federal 
Electric  Corp.  for  services  a t   Quality  and  Reliability  Assurance  Labo- 
ratory,  $3.5  million  to  Northrop  Services  Inc.  for  services  a t   Aero- 
Astrodynamics  Laboratory,  $1 million  to  Planning  Research  Corp.  for 

158 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June 9 

June 10: Director  Lee   R .   Scherer  o f   NASA’s Apo l lo   Lunar  Exploration  O f i c e   received 
Soviet  lunar  samples  f r o m   V i c e   President  Aleksander  P .   Vinogradov  o f   the  Soviet 
Academy   o f   Sciences  in   exchange  f o r  Apollo  11  and  12  samples.  Participating  in   d e  
ceremony  at  the   Academy   in   Moscow  we re   ( l e f t  to   r i g h t )   D r .   Pau l   W. Ga s t ,   Ch ie f   o f  
the   Manned  Spacec ra f t   Center‘s  Planetary  and  Earth  Sciences  D iv i s ion ;   Scherer ; 
P r o f .   Vinogradov;  interpreter  l g o r   Poch i ta l in ;   and  Soviet  Academician  Boris  Pe t rov .  

services  at  Central  Systems  Engineering  Office,  and   $10  million  to 
Sperry Rand  Corp.  for  services a t  Astrionics Laboratory.  (NASA   Release 
7 1-1 02) 
June  10: U.S.  and   U.S.S.R.  exchanged  lunar  samples  in  Moscow  ceremony 
to  mark  expansion  of  cooperation  in  space.  Lee  R.  Scherer,  Director 
of  Apollo  Lunar  Exploration  Office,  presented  three  grams  (0.10  0 2 )  
of  ApoZZo  I 1   and  three  grams  of  ApolZo  12 lunar   material  to Academi- 
cian  Aleksander P.  Vinogradov, Vice  President  of  Soviet  Academy  of 
Sciences,  and  received  three  grams  of  Soviet  Luna  16  samples  in 
return.  Scherer  said,  “Although  the  quantity  of  material  is  small,  its 
significance  is  very  great.”  U S .   Embassy  in  Moscow  released  state- 
ment  saying  exchange  provided  opportunity  for  scientists  of  both 
countries  to  benefit  from  study  of  material  from  lunar  areas  to  which 
they  would  not  otherwise have  access.  “The  exchange of  lunar  samples 
exemplifies the  desire  of  NASA,  as stated  in  the  agreement of  January  21, 
to  expand  cooperation  in   space  research  and  exploration.  The  U S .  
Government  looks  forward  to  the  broadening  and  deepening  of  this 
cooperation.”  (NASA   Release  71-103  ; Shabad, N Y T ,   6/11/71,  10 )  
Aerobee  350  sounding  rocket  was  launched by  NASA  from Wallops  Station 
carrying  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  experiment to  study  airglow.  Rocket and  
instruments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR l is t)  
0  Appointment  of  L/G  Charles  H.  Terhune,  Jr.,  (USAF,  Ret.),  as  Deputy 
Director  of  J PL   was  announced  by  Dr.  William  H.  Pickering,  JPL 
Director.  Gen.  Terhune  would  assume  duties  July  9,  succeeding Adm. 
John  E.  Clark  (U SN ) ,   who  had  announced  his  retirement.  (JPL   Re- 
lease 571 ) 

159 

June  10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

for  OMSF  space  shut 
program  were  announced  by 
i n  Washington,  D.C., 
ould  be  responsible  for  overall 
cluding  assignment  of  responsibilities,  basic  perform- 
ance  requirements,  control  of  major  milestones,  and   fund ing   alloca- 
tions  to  NASA  centers.  Da le   D.  Myers,  Associate  Administrator  for 
Manned  Space  Flight,  had  assigned  responsibility  for  program  con- 
trol,  overall  systems  engineering  and   systems  integration,  and   overall 
responsibility  for  definition  of  elements  of  total  system  tha t   interacted 
with  other  elements to MSC,  which also would  be  responsible  for shuttle’s 
orb i ter  stage.  MSFC  would  be  responsible  for  booster  stage  and  shuttle’s 
main  engines.  KSC   would  be  responsible  for  design  of  launch  and  
recovery  facilities.  All  three  centers  would  station  personnel  a t   MSC 
for systems engineering  and   integration  activity.  (NASA   Release 71-104) 
June   11 :   Cosmos  427  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  from  Plesetsk.  Satellite 
entered  orb i t   with  301-km  (187-mi)  apogee,  207-km  (128.6-mi)  peri- 
gee,  89.7-min  period,  and   72.9’ 
inclination  and   reentered  June   23. 
(GSFC   SSR ,  6 /30 /71 ;   SF ,  11/71,  456) 
Dr.  James  C .   Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  delivered  commencement 
address  at  Cal  Tech:  “One  of  the  paths  we  can  take-the 
obvious  one 
to  help  develop some new  area of  high  technology  that will  serve to 
-is 
strengthen  our   Nation’s  economic  base,  and   thus  indirectly,  ou r   whole 
culture.  We  don’t  necessarily  have  to  perform  this  task  with  produc- 
tivity  foremost  in   our  minds  . . . even  though  that’s  really  the  way  i t  
works. 
“A  second  path-and 
the  demand  for  this  path  will  be  growing 
rapidly,  I  believe-is 
to  attack  directly  the  social,  economic,  and   other 
serious  problems  of  ou r   time  that  have  a  definite  technological  com- 
ponent.  Problems  of  ecology  . . . have  technological  solutions.  Urban 
and  interurban  transportation  have  technological  solutions.  As  soon  as 
we  determine  the  appropriate  political  system  which  will  spend  the 
time  and   money,  we  already  know  a  good  deal  abau t   how  to  solve 
problems  like  these,  and   what  remaining  technology  needs  to  be  devel- 
oped  will  undoubtedly  appear.  Other  problems  such  as  rural  and  ghetto 
health,  housing,  hunger,  and   poverty,  have  only  a  partly  technological 
solution ; still  others,  with  strong  human  and   sociological  components, 
a r e   even  harder   to  deal  with,  and   it  may  be  a  long  time  before 
problem-solvers  learn  to  deal  with  ‘people’  problems.  . . . while  i t  
wasn’t  easy  to  land  men  on   the  Moon-it  was  nevertheless  a  straight- 
forward,  engineering  kind  of  problem.  And  as  someone has  said,  there 
weren’t  any   people  between  here  and   there.” 
he  thought  few  persons  “yet  realize  what  a  broad 
Th ird   path-and 
and   important  path  it  can  be  in  years  ahead”-was 
“to  pursue  long- 
range  study  and   research  on  applications  of  problem-solving  techniques 
to  some  of  the  more  purely  human  problems.”  (Tex t)  
NASA  Wallops  Station  participation  in  Cornell  Univ.  experiment  to  obtain 
data  on  importance  of  celestial,  magnetic,  topographic,  and  meteorologi- 
cal  cues  in   guidance  systems  of  nocturnally  migrating  birds  was  an-  
nounced  by  NASA.  Station  would  provide  support  in   tracking  birds with 
18-m  (60-f t)   dish  on  space  range  antenna  ( SPANDAR )  . Birds  would  be 
captured  in   nets,  examined,  and   small  magnets  would  be  attached. 
They  would  then  be  released  by  weather  balloon  to  continue  flight 
under  varying  cloud  conditions.  Each  b ird   would  be  tracked  by  radar  

160 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June  11 

as  i t   made  orientational  decision  and  departed  in   migration.  (NASA 
Release 71-98) 
*  Space  officials  feared  budget  pressures  could  prompt  either  President 
Nixon  or  Congress  to  cancel  final  two  Apollo  missions  in   1972,  Wall 
Street  Journal  said.  In  event  of  cancellation,  NASA  would  propose to  use 
Apollo  equipment  for  “lengthy  orbital  flights  due  to  s tar t   in   1973”  in  
the Skylab program.  ( W S J ,  6/11/71,  1) 
NSF  released  Federal  Support  to Universities  and  Colleges,  Fiscal  Yea r  
1970.  Between  1969  and   1970  Federal  funds  had  declined  by  $227 
million,  or  nearly  7% ,   to  level  of  $3.227  billion-lowest 
funding  level 
since  1966  and   first  drop  in   actual  dollars  in  Federal  support  since 
1963. Decline  might  be  attributed  to  shift  in   Government  policy  from 
direct  Federal  grants  for  facilities  construction  to  subsidizing  interest 
charges  on  loans  from  non-Government  sources.  ( NSF  Highlights, 
6/11/71,  1 )  
0  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  Chairman  Daniel  J.  Haughton  told  Senate Com- 
mittee  on  Banking  and  Currency  he  would  resign  if  change  in   Lock- 
heed  management  was  condition  for  firms  receiving  $250-million 
Government  loan  guarantee.  (Samuelson,  W  Pos t ,   6/12/71,  A l )  
June  13:  Appointment  of  Laurence  T.  Hogarth  as  Deputy  Director,  Office 
of  Long-Range Plans,  in  NASA  Central Planning  Office  became  effective. 
( N A S A  Ac t iv i t ies ,  7/15/71,  119) 
June  1 4 :   Status of  space  shuttle  technology  was  described  by  MSFC  propul- 
sion  engineer  Gerald  M.  Thompson  during  AIAA/SAE  Seventh  Propul- 
sion  Joint  Specialist  Conference  a t   Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  Because 
“shuttle  propulsion technology  has  been  vigorously pursued  in   a  totally 
organized  approach  for  several  years,”  no  major  technology  work 
remained  to  be  done  before  shuttle  main  engine  development  phase 
began.  Designs  with  strong  technical  bases  were  ready  to  proceed. 
However,  if  hydrogen  propulsion was  selected  for  air-breathing engines 
that would  return  shuttle stages  to  landing  fields on mission  completion, 
additional 
technology  development  would  add   about  one  year  to 
schedule.  Main  engine  development  was  to  begin  in   1971, with  flight 
certification  targeted  for  March  1978.  ( MSFC   Release  71-103) 
Plans  for  joint  experiments  in   which  ATS-F 
(scheduled  for  May  1973 
launch)  would  be  used  from  September  1973 to  May  1974 to  explore 
technical,  economic,  and  educational  practicality  of  regular  TV  trans- 
missions  to  low-cost  ground  receivers  in  remote  areas  of  U S .   were 
announced  by  NASA,  HEW,  and   Corp.  for  Public  Broadcasting. Experi- 
ment  would  begin  with  transmission  of  educational  and   health  pro- 
grams  to  ground  receivers  in   Rocky  Mountain  region  and   Alaska. 
NASA  was  designing  15-w  transmitters  to  operate  in   2500-  to  2690-mhz 
band  and  would  provide  access  to  ATS  ground  station.  Other  ground 
transmission  and  receiving  facilities  would  be  provided  by  HEW  and 
CPB.  (NASA  Release  71-105) 
Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from WSMR  carrying 
Univ.  of  Hawaii  solar  astronomy  experiment.  Rocket  and  instruments 
functioned satisfactorily.  (SR list) 
*  Japanese  Space Development  Committee’s  First  Technical Div.,  which  had 
been  investigating  performance  of  Mu-4  carr ier   rocket  that  orbited 
Tansei  satellite  Feb.  16,  had  recommended  that  plans  for  launching 
first  “full-fledged”  scientific satellite  during  summer  1971 be  approved, 

161 

June  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Space  Business  Da i ly   reported.  Recommendation  followed  assessment 
of  malfunctions  dur ing   launch  and  orbit  which  caused  mission  to  fall 
short  of  its  programmed  objectives.  Satellite,  which  had  orbited  earth 
96  times  to  date,  had  malfunctions  of  its  solar  battery  performance 
measuring  device,  control  command  device,  and   stabilization  device. 
(SBD ,  6 /14 /71 ,228)  
Sen.  Hubert  H.  Humphrey  (D-Minn.)-who 
had  been  Vice  President 
Space  Seminar  of  Hugh  O’Brian 
under  President  Johnson-addressed 
Youth  Foundation  a t   KSC :   “One  of  the  reasons that  I  have  been  active 
in   the  Space Program  is  because  I  believe  that  this program  did  some- 
thing  for  all  of  the  things  I  thought  were  important  in   life.”  Space 
program  was  “pioneer  i n   beginning  to  make  the  discovery  in   environ- 
mental  control.”  I t   had  proved  men  could  live  in   pure  environment 
and   “that  there’s  a  relationship  between  the  living  space  that  we  have 
and   the  number  of  people  that  can  be  there  . . . [and]  that  you  can 
have  clean  water  and  clean  air.  And  it’s  proven  to  us   that  you  can 
work  together.” 
Space  program  had  helped  produce  computer  and  had  developed 
satellite  monitoring  system.  Possibly  “one  of  the  greatest  efforts  for 
world  peace  has  come  right  out  of  the  science  and  technology  of  space 
research.” 
Sen.  Humphrey  recalled  his  role  as  negotiator  of  Nuclear  Test  Ban 
Treaty:  “I   went  to  Moscow  when  i t   was  signed.  I  have  the  pen  that 
President  Kennedy  used  to  sign  the  treaty  . . . he  said,  ‘I  give  you 
this  pen,  Hubert,  because  it’s  your  treaty.’  ” 
He  had  been  in   Moscow  when  ApoZZo  I I   Astronaut  Neil  A.  Arm- 
strong  made  first  moon  walk.  “ I   was  in  the  offices  of  Pravda  and 
Izvestia  . . . and  a  dispatch  came  through  from  Reuters  . . . noting 
that  the  launch  had  been  successful,  and  I  had  said  to  the  editors  of 
Pravda,  ‘Why  don’t  you  run   this  as  a  headline?’  There  was  nothing  in 
their  paper  that  indicated  that  our  launch  had  taken  place.  And  when 
I  went  to  Izvestia  the  same  afternoon  I  said  ‘Look,  the  launch  has 
taken  place  and  I  see  nothing  in  your  headlines  in   your  papers.’  I  am 
happy  to  tell  you  that  they  were  somewhat  embarrassed  and  the  next 
morning,  a t   the  National  Hotel,  under  my  door  was  a  copy  of  Pravda 
and  Izvestia  with  front  page  stories  saying  that  there  had  been  a  suc- 
cessful  launch.”  When  Neil  Armstrong  “touched  down  that  Sunday 
night  . . . the  only  information  that  I  was  able  to  get  was  out  of  the 
Voice  of  America  through  the  United  States  Embassy  because  the 
Russians had  blacked O U ~ . ”   (CRY  6/18/71,  H548G7 )  
Representatives of  Bankers  Trust  Co.  and   Bank  of  America  told  Senate 
Banking  and  Currency  Committee  investigating  financial  condition  of 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  that  they  would  not  make  fur ther   loans  to 
(Samuelson,  W  Po s t ,  
Lockheed  without  Government  guarantee. 
6/14/71,  A2)  
0  Role  of  radioelectronics  in   space  was  described  in  Pravda   by  Soviet 
Academician  V.  Andreyanov:  “Radioelectronics  might  be  called  the 
nervous  system  of  cosmonautics.  I t   links  our  planet  by  living  threads 
with  the  spacecraft  and   apparatuses  when  they  fly  to  Mars,  work  on 
the  moon,  or  study  the  earth  and   circumterrestrial  space,  like  the 
Salyut  station.  In   less  than  15  years,  research  into  space  and   the 
nearest  planets  has  not  only  stimulated the  development  of  many  fields 

162 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June  14 

of  science  and  technology  bu t   has  also been  accompanied by  the  emer- 
gence  of  new  fields  of  knowledge  and   technical  methods.  A  ‘spacifica- 
tion’  of  the  sciences  had  been  noted.  Concepts  which  were  earlier  un- 
usual  have  also  appeared  in  radioelectronics : space  rad io   communi- 
cations,  space  telemetry  and  television,  space  radionavigation,  and 
radio  methods  for  studying  celestial  bodies  and  interplanetary  space.” 
(FBIS-sOV-71-123 ,6 /23 /71 ,  
L5)  
June   15:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  a t   11:41  PDT  from  Vanden- 
berg  AFB   on new  Titan  I I ID   booster.  Satellite  entered orbit with 289.7- 
km  (180-mi)  apogee,  178.6-km  (111-mi)  perigee,  89.1-min  period,  and 
96.3O  inclination.  Booster  used  five-segment,  3-m  ( l o - f t )   solid-fuel 
strap-on  boosters  and  was  reportedly  capable  of  placing  6800  kg 
(15  000 lbs)   i n   low  earth  orbit.  Satellite  reentered Aug.  6.  (GSFC  SSR ,  
6/30/71;  8/31/71;  SBD ,  6 /18 /71 ,258 ;   Pres  Rpt 72 )  
NASA  announced  completion  of  supercritical  wing  shakedown  flights 
aboard  modified  USN  F-8 
je t   fighter  from  FRC.  Last  flight  in   eight- 
flight  series  to  allow  test  pilots  to   “get  feel”  of  a ircraf t   and   investigate 
effects on  wing  at various speeds and altitudes,  had  taken place May  26. 
FRC   officials reported  finding  no  “surprises”  dur ing   test  series  and  said 
a i r   foil  appeared  to  confirm  wind-tunnel tests.  Research  a ircraf t  would 
be  off  flight  status  for   two  months  while  small  irregularities  on  wing 
surface  were  corrected  and  network  of  about  250  pressure  sensors 
was  added  to  wing’s  top  surface  to  locate  and  measure  any  shock  wave 
created  i n   a ir   flow.  Effectiveness  of  supercritical  wing  depended  on 
moving  shock  wave  to  near  back  of  wing  for  increase  in   total  wing 
efficiency.  (NASA  Release  71-101) 
Rep.  F.  Edward  Hebert,  Chairman  of  House  Armed  Services  Committee, 
announced  that  he  would  move  to  block  $806-million  procurement 
funds  f o r   USN  F-14  je t   fighter  aircraft  until  USN  solved  overcost prob- 
lems.  Funds  were  included  in   $21.9-billion  military  weapons  authori- 
zation  bill  before  House.  (AP ,   W Po s t ,  6/16/71,  A2) 
Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.  released  statement  saying  i t   would  be 
very  appropriate”  for  Congress to  stop  funding USN’S  F-14  jet  fighter 
6 b  
aircraft  until  cost-overrun  problems  were  settled.  (W   S tar ,   6/16/71, 
A4 1 
Dr.  Vasily  V.  Parin-Soviet 
physiologist,  former  President  of  Soviet 
Academy  of  Medical  Sciences,  and  member  of  Soviet  Academy  of 
Sciences-died 
at  age  68   of  liver  ailment.  Dr.  Pa r in   had  been  known 
primarily  for  his  work  during  1960s on  human  physiological problems 
dur ing  space flight  and had  authored  studies  on  effect of  weightlessness 
on  functioning of  heart  and  circulatory  system.  He  had   received  Order 
of  Lenin, U.S.S.R’s  highest  award,  in   1963 for  his  work  in  developing 
Soviet medical science.  (AP, N Y T ,  6/17/71,  42)  
June  15-1 7:  House  Committee  on  Science and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee 
on  NASA  Oversight held  hearings  on  failure  of  Atlas-Centaur to  launch 
A t s   4  into  planned  orbit  Aug.  10,  1968,  and  fa i lure   to  orbit  OAB-B 
Nov.  30,1970,  and Mariner 8 May  8 ,1971 .  
Dr.  George  M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  testified  June   15  
on  NASA  policy  on  backup  spacecraft  and  Centaur  reliability:  “ In   the 
manned  program,  all  possible  steps  are   taken  to  assure  the  safety  of 
the  astronauts.  Single  point  failures  are   reduced  to  an   absolute  mini- 
mum.  Missions  are   planned  to  build  upon  the  previous missions so  as 

163 

June 15-17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

to  reduce  the  number  of  unknowns.”  Within  missions,  “plateaus  a r e  
established  so  that  all  systems  can  be  checked  out  in  real  time  pr ior  
to  committing  to  the  next  plateau.  Vigorous  testing  procedures  cou- 
pled  with  redundancy  and   in   many  cases  dual  redundancy  are   adopted 
before a system is ‘man-rated.’ ” 
In   Skylab  “we  are   building  a  back-up  workshop  which  will  be 
brought  r igh t   up  to  the   point  of  actual  checkout.  Th is   will  permit 
us  t o  proceed  with  the  program  even  in  the  event  that  the  first  work- 
shop  would  not  be  successfully  launched.  Similarly,  we  will  have  a 
single  back-up  Command  and   Service  Module-Saturn  IB  capability 
fo r   the  three manned visits  to  the workshop.”  Capability w a s  built  into 
program  and  was  “key  to  the  plan  for  a  rescue  capability  in   Skylab 
which we  recently  adopted.” 
In  earth-orbital  automated  programs  “we  generally  plan  a  series  of 
related  missions,  using  identical  or  similar  hardware.  If  we  have  a 
mission  failure,  decisions  will  then  be   made,  based  on  all  available 
factors,  whether  we  w i l l   ( 1 )   prepare  and   fly  a  specific  back-up  to  the 
mission  which  failed,  ( 2 )   modify  succeeding  flights  . . . to  achieve 
the  objectives,  or  ( 3 )   defer  achieving the  mission  objectives  to  fu ture  
years.” 
In   planetary  programs,  with  launch  opportunities  a t   only  discrete 
intervals,  NASA  usually  had  provided  fo r   two  identical  launches.  Each 
launch  in  dual  mission  was  planned  to  complement  its  twin,  while  a t  
same  time  serving  as  backup  i f   twin  were  lost.  This  year  Mariner  9 
was  backup, flying hybrid mission. 
Atlas-Centaur  launch  vehicle  had  history  of  3  failures  out  of  16 
operational  vehicles,  without  apparent  relationship  between  failures, 
giving probability  of  success of  80% if  based  solely  on past  experience. 
Launch  vehicles  for   automated  missions-such 
as  Scout,  Delta,  and  
Atlas-Centaur-were 
“complex  systems  without  much  redundancy,  and  
cannot  be  expected  to  achieve  reliabilities  much  greater  than  about 
90% without very  major  and   costly  changes.  They certainly  cannot  be  
considered  ‘man-rated’ vehicles.”  Addition of  redundant  systems  would 
be  investigated  again but  was  not  complete solution.  Redundancy added 
weight,  reduced  payload  capability,  and  was  expensive.  For  launch 
vehicles  of  size of  Titan-Centaur, which  would  carry  Viking and  Grand 
Tour   payloads,  additional  redundancy  might  be  practicable  and   desir- 
able  and  would  be  actively  studied.  Major  increase  in  reliability  of 
achieving  orbit  would  be  one  of  important  attributes  of  space  shuttle. 
Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  Associate Administrator  for  Space Science  and  
Applications,  on  June   16  continued  testimony  on  backup  philosophy, 
expanding  on  application  in  OSSA:  “We  do  not  schedule backup  mis- 
sions  for   observatory spacecraft.  We  always  buy,  and  intend  to  fly,  a t  
least  two  flight  units  of  a  new  series  of  observatory-class  spacecraft. 
When  we  have  a  fa i lure  or  a  malfunction  in  a  spacecraft  or  a  launch 
vehicle  we  will  always  do  everything  possible  to  thoroughly  under- 
stand  and  correct  all  other  fu ture  missions which  could  conceivably  be 
subject  to  a  similar  malfunction. When  w e   have  a  failure  we  will  al- 
ways  review  the  effect of  the  loss  on  the  program,  determine  the  alter- 
native  recovery plans  by  which  we  can  attain  the  objectives  of  the  lost 
mission,  assess  the  cost  and  any  other  impact  of  those  alternatives  on 
the  program  and  then  decide which  alternative  to  choose.” 

164 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June 15-17 

Vincent  L.  Johnson,  Deputy  Administrator  fo r   Space  Science  and  
Applications,  testified  June  17  : “ In   the  basic  considerations  which 
establish  the  philosophical  approach  to  reliability  of  unmanned  space 
vehicles,  the  over-riding  necessity  for   protection  of  the  lives  of  human 
passengers is  absent.  The  result  is  an   approach  to  reliability  in   which 
cost  and  simplicity  play  a  much  larger  part.  We  have  not  imposed  a 
requirement  fo r   total  elimination  of  single  point  failure  modes,  but 
have  concentrated  upon  reducing  the  probability  of  failure  by  careful 
design,  parts  application,  ma jor   quality  and  reliability  efforts,  and, 
most  importantly,  tender  loving  care.  Our  launch  vehicles  . . . a re  
characterized  a s   simplex  systems,  implying  lack  of  the  complexity 
characteristic  of  redundancy.”  (Testimony ; Subcom  Rpt,  10 /71)  
Representatives  of  nine  European  Space  Conference  member  countries 
and   five Atlantic  and   Pacific  area  countries  met  a t  FAA  Hq.  to  explore 
possibilities  for  unified  preoperational  program  in   aeronautical  satel- 
lites  over  Pacific  and  Atlantic  Ocean  areas.  At  final  meeting,  group 
decided  to  establish  International  Collaboration  Ad  Hoc  Group   t o  
make  specific  proposals  for   unified  program  to  Second  Aeronautical 
Satellite Meeting  in  Madrid  Aug.  3.  (FAA   Releases  71-91,  71-93) 
l u n e   16: NASA  interest  in  “phased  approach”  to  development  of  reusable 
space  shuttle  system  was  announced  by  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA 
Administrator.  Contractor  studies  near  completion  indicated  “pre- 
ferred  configuration”  was  “two-stage  delta-wing  reusable  system  in  
which  the  orbiter  has  external  propellant  tanks  that  can  be  jettisoned.” 
While  studies  to  date  had  favored  “concurrent  approach”  in   which 
development  and   testing  of  orbiter  and   booster  stages  would  proceed 
simultaneously,  NASA  also  had  studied  feasibility  of  sequencing devel- 
opment,  test,  and  verification  of  system’s  features.  “We  now  believe 
that  a  ‘phased  approach’  is  feasible  and  may  offer  significant  advan- 
tages.”  Additional  studies  in   progress,  plus  those  nearing  completion, 
would  enable  NASA  “to  make  a  decision  this  fall  on  the  technical  and  
programmatic  approach  to  be  followed  in  the  space  shuttle program.” 
(NASA  Release 71-107) 
0  NASA  and  USAF  signed  agreement  to  conduct  jo in t   Transonic  Aircraft 
Technology  (TACT)  Program  to  explore  application  of  supercritical 
wing technology  to  highly  maneuverable advanced  aircraft.  F-111  was 
selected  a s   test  bed  aircraft.  NASA’s Law ,   USAF,  and  General Dynamics 
Corp.  had  completed  more  than  1600  hrs  of  wind-tunnel  tests  to 
develop  supercritical  a i r fo i l   for  TACT  program.  Final  configuration 
development  and   wind-tunnel tests  for   low-speed  high-lift  devices  and 
transonic  and   supersonic  conditions  would  be  conducted  a t   ARC. 
(AFSC  Release 188.71;  NASA  Release 71-124) 
House  considering  H.R.  8687,  FY  1972  military  procurement  authoriza- 
tion  bill  agreed  to   amendment cutting $806  million  for   procurement  of 
F-14A  jet  fighter aircraft.  (CR ,  6/16/71,  H5266-303) 
*  Thirtieth  anniversary  of  opening  of  Washington  National  Airport.  Num- 
ber  of  passengers  using  facility  annually  had  grown  from   fewer  than  
400000  in   1941   to  nearly  10  million  in   1970.  At  commemorative 
ceremonies  FAA  award  for   extraordinary  service  was  presented  to  
Edward  V.  Rickenbacker,  veteran  pilot  and  retired  Eastern  AirIines 
Chairman.  Airport  received  commemorative  plaque  from  Arlington 

165 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June 16 
County  (Va.)  Board.  (FAA  Release  71-89;  Bernstein,  W  News ,  
6 /16 /71 ,35 ;   Eisen,  W Pos t ,  6/17/71,  D3) 
June  17:  NASA  announced  selection  of  Descartes  as  lunar   landing  site  for  
Apollo  16,  scheduled fo r   launch  in   March  1972.  Descartes,  in   central 
lunar   highlands,  provided  opportunity  to  sample  volcanic-like  high- 
lands basin  fill  and  uplands  volcanic  terrain.  (NASA  Release  71-106) 
Impact  of  NASA  installations  on  local  communities was  described  by  NASA 
Deputy  Assistant  Administrator  fo r   Industry  Affairs  George  J.  Vec- 
chietti  in  testimony before House  Select Committee on  Small Business’s 
Subcommittee  on  Small  Business  Problems  in   Smaller  Towns  and  
Urban  Areas.  During  hearings  on  impact  of  Government installations 
on  small  business,  Vecchietti  testified : “The  rapid  growth  of  facilities 
and  activities  at  NASA  installations  over  the  past  few   years  have  un- 
questionably  generated  development  o€  a  wide  range  of  commercial 
facilities.  . . . Unfortunately  . . . most  of  the   impacts a re  of  an   intangi- 
ble  nature  and  difficult to   quantify.  Economic  impacts,  for  the  most 
part,  have  been  favorable.  But  . . . those  communities bordering  NASA 
installations  have  been  adversely  affected  by  the  wind-down  in   space 
activity.”  (Testimony) 
Apollo  7  Astronaut  R.  Walter  Cunningham  announced  his  resignation 
from  NASA,  effective  on  or  about  Aug.  1, to  become  Vice  President  of 
Operations  fo r   Century  Development  Corp.,  developers  of  Greenway 
Plaza in Houston, Tex.  (NASA  Releuse 71-110) 
New  civilian  program  to  “absorb  the  nation’s  technical  talent,  respond  to  
ou r   unmet  social  needs,  and   enlist  widespread  enthusiasm  and  sup- 
port”  was  proposed  by  Sen.  Edward M.  Kennedy  (D-Mass.)  in   speech 
before  National  Society  of  Engineers  meeting  in   Washington,  D.C. 
The  development  of  new  cities  may  be  the  important  challenge  we 
66  
face,  because  i t   dramatizes  the  need  for  new  research  and  engineering 
in   the  way  the  challenge  of  the  Soviet  Sputnik  spurred  the  American 
space  program  in   the  la te   fifties  and   early  sixties.”  (Tex t)  
Launching  of  eight  Soviet  Cosmos  satellites, Mars  2,  and  Muriner  9  had 
raised  number  of  man-made  objects  in  space  to  2378,  Reuters  re- 
ported.  Of  total,  little  more  than  one  fifth  were  satellites  o r  payloads; 
remainder  was  space  junk.  Spokesman  for   USAF  Air  Defense  Com- 
mand  had  said  USAF  had  recorded  2840  objects,  760  payloads,  and  
2080  bits  of  debris  that  had  decayed  since  launch  of  Sputnik  1 
Oct. 4,1957.  (LA T imes ,  6/17/71) 
*  President  Nixon  issued  Proclamation  4060  commemorating World  Law 
Day.  He  said:  “We  can  see  many  heartening  evidences  that  law  is  
becoming  stronger  and  more  just  around  the  world  under  the  pres- 
sures  which  reason  and   necessity  exert.  Within  the  nations,  human 
rights  and   ecological  wisdom  continue  to  gain  stature  in   the  law. 
Among  the  nations,  security  and  cooperation-on 
every  fron t   from 
space  to   the  seabeds-are 
being  enhanced  through  negotiations,  treat- 
ies,  and  conventions.  The  United  Nations  is  entering  i t s   second  quar- 
ter  of  a  century,  and   many  other  international  organizations  a r e  
working  effectively  through  and  for  world  law.”  (PD,  6/21/71,  942)  
June I 7 - J d y   2:  Fourteenth  Plenary  Meeting  of  Committee  on  Space.  Re- 
search  (COSPAR)  was  held  in   Seattle,  Wash.  International  meeting  of 
scientists  hosted  by  NAS  included  symposia  and  working  groups  on 

166 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June 17-July  2 

1970  total  solar  eclipse,  astronomical  observations  from   space,  use  of 
stratospheric  balloons  in  space  research,  and   lunar   lasers. 
Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.  scientist  Dr.  Henry  C.  Courten,  pro- 
fessor  of  astronomy  a t   Dowling  College,  said  mysterious  tracks  on 
photographic  plates  he  made  dur ing   1966  and   1970  solar  eclipses 
appeared  to  be  of  small  planet  or  asteroid  belt  inside  Mercury’s  orbit. 
Cal  Tech  scientist  and   lunar   expert  Dr.  Gerald  J.  Wasserburg  told 
COSPAR  meeting  four  rocks  gathered  by  A p o l b   14  astronauts  had 
ages  ranging  from  3.85  billion  to  3.95  billion  yrs.  Ages  were  sur- 
prising  “since i t   was  anticipated  that  F r a  Mauro  would  yield  rocks  of 
greater  antiquity.”  Discovery  suggested  tha t   volcanism  was  active  on  
moon  f a r   longer  than  had  been  thought  and  was  still  forming  lunar  
crust  more  than  600  million  yrs  after  moon  came  into  being.  I t   also 
suggested  that  Sea  of  Rains  had   been  carved  by  collision  600  million 
yrs  after  moon’s  formation,  o r   100  million  to  150  million  yrs  later 
than lunar experts had  originally  believed. 
Soviet  scientists  Yuri  G.  Nefyuduv,  L.  I.  Kakurin,  and   A.  D. 
Yegorov  said Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts  Andrian  6 .  Nikolayev  and  Vitaly  I. 
Sevastyanov “found  it  difficult  to  keep  the  upright  posture  and   had  to 
be  assisted  while  walking”  during  first  three  hours  after  return  from 
June  2-19,  1970,  mission.  “Next  day  . . . their  walk  was  still  inade- 
quate  and   erect  positions  were  maintained  with  great  efforts.”  When 
cosmonauts  returned  to  physical  activity,  few  days  after  flight,  effects 
of  prolonged weightlessness had proved temporary. 
Astronaut  John  W.  Young  represented U.S.  astronaut  corps  a t   cere- 
mony  to  honor  10th anniversary  of  first  space  flight  by  Soviet Cosmo- 
nau t   Yur i   A.  Gagarin.  He  asked,  “What  better  tribute  to  the  memory 
of  Yuri  Gagarin  can  we  offer  than  the  hope  that  the  growing unity  of 
this  COSPAR  meeting  so  well  exemplifies- 
effor ts   in  space-which 
may  one  day  extend  to  all  the  Ea r th?   (NAS   Release,  4/21/71;  AP, 
W  Post,  6/13/71,  A7;  O’Toole,  W  Post,  6/27/71,  A l ;   UPI,  W  Post, 
6/28/71,  A7; NA SA  Ac t iv i t ies ,  7/15/71,107) 
NAS  and  NRC   submitted  to  COSPAR  United  States  Space  Science  P ro -  
gram,  comprehensive  summary  of  scientific  research  in   space  science 
in   U.S.  dur ing   1970.  Report  included  summaries  of  observations from 
spacecraft,  sounding  rockets,  high-altitude  balloons,  and   a ircraf t   made 
o r   reported dur ing   1970 and  discussed flights planned  for  1971.  (Tex t)  
June  18: Discoveries  of  identical,  complex  patterns  of  amino  acids  and  
pyrimidines  in   two  meteorites might  indicate  basic  phase  of  chemical 
evolution  leading  to  origin  of  life,  ARC   scientist  Dr.  Cyril  A.  Ponnam- 
peruma  told  meeting  of  New  York  Academy  of  Sciences.  Team  of  ARC  
scientists  had  found  tha t   Murray  meteorite  tha t   fell  in   Kentucky  in  
1950  had   same  18  amino  acids,  plus  two  pyrimidines,  as  were  dis- 
covered  in  December  1970  in   Murchison  meteorite  (which  fell  in 
Victoria,  Australia,  in   September  1969) .   “Starting  with  these  18 
amino  acids,  it would  be  theoretically  possible  to   build  up  a  living  or- 
ganism.”  Discovery  appeared  to  be  first conclusive proof  of  extraterres- 
tr ia l   chemical  evolution,  strengthening  case  fo r   chemical  evolution 
theory  and  increasing  likelihood  of  l ife   elsewhere  in   universe.  (NASA 
Release 71-709) 
David  S.  .Gabriel,  Deputy  Manager  of  AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  Systems 
Office,  was  appointed  by  Bruce  T.  Lundm,  L ~ R C  Director,  to  cha ir  

167 

June  18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Centaur  Quality  and   Workmanship  Review  Board.  Board  was  to 
“carefully  examine  and   reevaluate  the  philosophy,  practices  and   pro- 
cedures  employed  in   the  Centaur  quality  assurance  and   workmanship 
program”  and  to  report  findings  and   recommendations by  mid-August 
1971.  (Review  of  Recent  Launch  Failures,  House  Sci  &  Astro  Com, 
NASA  Oversight Subcoin,  10 /71 ;   OSSA) 
U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  I  lunar  rover,  on  moon’s  Sea  of  Rains,  completed 
experiments  fo r   eighth  lunar  day  and  was  put  in  stationary  position 
for  lunar  night.  Experiments  had  included  examinations  of  lunar 
rocks,  stereoscopic  panoramic  photography,  and   measurements  of 
chemical  composition  and   physico-mechanical  properties  of  crater 
150 m  (164  yds)  in  diameter.  Vehicle  had  traveled  more  than  10 km 
( 6  m i )   since  landing  on moon  Nov.  17,  1970,  and was  still functioning 
normally.  (Sou Rpt, 7/8/71,  12 )  
Second  phase  of  joint  NASA,  Dept.  of  Agriculture,  and  corn  belt  states 
1971   Corn  Blight  Watch  Experiment  [see  May  171  had  been  com- 
pleted  and  participating  RB-57F  aircraft  was  photographing  seven- 
state area of about  11.7 million  hectares  (45000   sq m i)   in  third  phase 
of  experiment, NASA  announced.  (NASA Release 71-112) 
Pravda   described  French  bubble  hydrogen-filled  chamber  “Mirabelle,” 
scheduled to  enter  operation  soon  for  particle  research.  Active  volume 
of  chamber  was  cylinder  4.5  m  (24.8  f t )   long  and   16 m  (52.5  f t )   high 
with  1.6-m  (5.3-ft)  diameter.  In   opinion  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences  member  Anatoly  Logunov,  “the  considerable  volume  of  ‘Mira- 
belle’  will make  i t  possible  . . . to  trace  the  mechanism  of  b ir th   of  new 
particles  during  the  collision  o€  the  known  ones.  I t   is  also  planned  to 
carry   out  a  research  into  the  symmetry  of  elementary  particles.  The 
chamber  which  has  almost  the  largest  volume  in  the  world  today  in 
tor  is   a  qualitatively  new  means  for  research  into  . . . elementary 
the  aggregate with  the  most  powerful  in  the  world  Serphukov Accelera- 
6/22/71,  L3 )  
particles.”  ( FBIS-SOV-71-120, 
June  19:  Soviet space  official  Anatoly  Fedoseyev,  head  of  Soviet  delegatfon 
to  Pa r i s   Air  Show,  had  defected  to  West  May  27,  UPI  quoted  French 
sources  as saying.  Reportedly  Fedoseyev  had  been  refused  asylum  a t  
Le  Bourget Airport  in  Pa r i s  by  French  officials, who  later  relented  and 
allowed  him  to proceed to NATO  Hq.  in Brussels  aboard  USAF  helicopter. 
Fedoseyev wa s   believed  to  be   one  of  highest  ranking Russians to   defect 
to  West-vice  minister  in   charge  of  space  research  for   Soyuz  and 
Luna  spacecraft  programs.  Sources  had  fu r th e r   reported  that  80 mem- 
bers  of  Soviet  delegation  to  Air  Show  had  been  recalled  to  Moscow 
May  27  and  Soviet  oficials  had  refused  to  sit  down  with  French 
Defense Minister Michel  Debr6  at  official luncheon in  protest  of  French 
action.  UPI  said  both  NATO  and  U S .   officials  later  had  denied  knowl- 
edge  of  Fedoseyev  and   his  mission.  (UPI,  W  Po s t ,   6/20/71,  A19) 
June   20:   PAET  Planetary  Atmosphere  Experiments  Test  was   launched  by 
NASA  from Wallops  Station  a t  3:31 pm  EDT  on  four-stage Scout booster. 
Pr imary   objective  was  to  investigate  means  of  determining  structure 
and   composition of  unknown  planetary  atmosphere.  Secondary  objec- 
tives  were  to  determine  profile  of  water  vapor  in  earth‘s  atmosphere, 
with  altitude,  from  absorption  measurements  of  reflected  sunlight  in 
in f ra red ;   investigate  effect  of  radio  signal  attenuation  on  relay  com- 
munications  when  transmitting  from  aft  hemisphere  of  a  blunt  entry 

168 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUMCS,  1911 

J u n e  20 

June 18:  NASA   announced  completion  o f   the  second  phase  of 
t h e   1971  Corn  Blight 
Wa tch   Experiment  by   NASA,  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  and  the   corn  belt  states. 
President  Mixon  and  Secretary  of  Agriculture  C l i fo rd   M. Hardin  (cen ter   le f t   to  
r igh t )   were  br ie fed   i n   Indianapolis  June   24  on  the   RB-57  aircraft‘s  role  in  the  
experiment,  by  A i r   Force  Ma j ,   Francis  X. McCabe  and  Dr.  A r c h   B.  Park ,   Ch ie f   o f  
NASA’s Earth  Resources  Survey  Program.  In  the   second  phase,  color  in frared   photos 
were  taken   o f  the   test  area  for  analysis  o f   soil  conditions  be fore  emergence  o f   the   corn 
crop.  In  the   third  phase, J u n e  to November,  high-altitude  IU photos  would  be  made  every 
the   southern  leaf  blight’s  occurrence  in  t h e   crop. 
two   weeks  to  watch  for  signs  of 

vehicle;  determine  i f   nearly  circular  spiral  pitching  motion  could  be 
achieved  with  blunt  entry  vehicle;  obtain  flight-performance data  on  
low-density  ablator ; and   measure  vehicle  and   spacecraft  performance 
parameters. 
Spacecraft achieved planned trajectory  within nominal limits,  reached 
6500-m-per-sec  (21  327-fps)  entry  vehicle  velocity  a t   time  of  sepa- 
ration,  and   impacted  within  expected  area   965  km  (600  m i )   down- 
range  about  158 km  (85  nm)   northeast  of  Bermuda.  PAET  entry  vehi- 
cle  instrumentation  was  functioning  during  reentry.  Real-time  and 
delayed-time playback  telemetry  records  covering  reentry  period  and  
radar   track  to near impact were obtained. 
PAET  entry  spacecraft  was  641  cm  (25.2  in )   long  and  91.4  crn 
(36   i n )   in   diameter.  Forebody  was  blunt  cone  with  spherical  seg- 
ment  nose  and   afterbody  was  hemispherical.  PAET  program  was  di- 
rected  by   OART.  ARC   was  responsible  for   spacecraft  design,  fabrica- 
tion,  and   testing.  Wallops Station was  responsible  for   launch,  tracking, 
and   data  acquisition.  (NASA  Proj  Off;  WS  Release  71-10) 

169 

June  20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

ARC  would  join  California  Statewide  Air  Pollution  Research  Center  in  
n  late June,  NASA  announced.  Program 
smog research  program  to  sta 
would  include  12  Cessna  40 
rcraft  flights  over  San   Francisco  Bay 
area   yearly  for  three  years,  to  trace  photochemical  production  of  pol- 
lutants  and   their  dispersion  in  atmosphere.  Aircraft  would  ca r ry   some 
230  kg  (500 lbs)   of  research  equipment  for  tests a t  altitudes  to  5200 m 
(17  000 f t )  . Data  collected  would  be  available  to  research  collaborators 
and   data  users  in   Air  Pollution  Control  Office  of  U S .   Environmental 
Protection  Agency,  California  State Air  Resources  Board,  Los  Angeles 
Air  Pollution  Control  District,  Assn.  of  Bay  Area  Governments,  and  
other  NASA  centers.  (NASA  Release 71-108) 
June 21 : Extrasensory  perception  tests  aboard  Apollo  14 ,  launched  Jan.  31, 
were  described  by  Apollo  14  Astronaut  Edgar  D.  Mitchell  dur ing  press 
conference  a t   Foundation  for  Research  on  the  Nature  of  Man  a t  
Durham,  N.C.  In   unauthorized  experiment,  Mitchell  had   tried  to  send 
messages  to  four  “receivers”  on  earth  while  en  route  to  moon.  He  had 
carried  cards  bearing  ESP  test  symbols  and   concentrated  on  random 
order  of  cards  while  receivers  on  ear th   wrote  down  order  in   which 
they  believed  he  was  “transmitting.”  While  plan  had  called  for  “trans- 
mission”  once  daily  for  six  days,  Mitchell  had  been  able  to  perform 
experiment  for  only  four  days.  Two  of  his  receivers  had  reported 
receptions”  for  all  six  days,  one  for  one  day  only,  and  another  for 
( 4  
two  days.  Mitchell  said  preponderance  of  wrong  answers  was  signifi- 
cant  because  it  was  “so  far   below  chance  that  the  odds  a r e   approxi- 
mately  3000  to  one  against  i t   being  a  chance  result.”  If  i t   was  not 
chance,  Mitchell  said,  results 
indicated  “extrasensory  exchange.” 
Mitchell  declined  to  identify  his  receivers,  but  Olof  Johnsson  of  Chicago 
had   said he was  one psychic  who had participated.  (AP, N Y T ,  6/22/71, 
22 ;   UPI,  W Star, 6/22/71,  A l )  
*  Senate  passed  S.J.R.  101, to  “authorize  and   request  the  President  of  the 
United  States  to  issue  a  proclamation  designating  July  20,  1971,  as 
‘National Moon Walk Day.’  ” ( C R ,  6/21/71,  S9476) 
*  NAE   announced  reelection  of  Clarence  H.  Lindner  as   full-time  President 
for  three-year  term,  and   election  of  new  members  to  NAE   Council. New 
council  members  were  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff,  NSF;   Francis  H. 
Clauser,  Cal  Tech;  James  Hillier,  RCA   Corp.;  Frederic  A.  L.  Holloway, 
S tandard   Oil  Co.  of  New  Jersey;  J.  Ross  Macdonald,  Texas  Instru- 
ments,  Inc.;  and Kenneth  G. McKay,  AT&T.  Robert W.  Cairns,  Hercules, 
Inc.,  was reelected to Council.  (NAE  Release) 
*  S t .   Louis  Post-Dispatch  editorial  described  plight  of  McDonnell  Douglas 
Corp.  in   “aerospace  depression”:  Total  employment  was  off  almost  a 
third  from  high  of  43  500  in   mid-1967  and   layoffs  were  continuing 
though  a t   declining  rate.  “The  loss  of  these  14,100  jobs  is  equivalent 
to  a  loss of  income for  all  the  families  in  a city  of  35,000  persons.  . . .” 
I n   one  30-day  period,  1600 McDonnell  Douglas  workers  had   been  laid 
off.  “That  is  equal  to  20  per   cent  of  the workforce  from  a  city  the  size 
of  Berkeley,  where  the  corporation  has   its  headquarters.”  Hope  for 
McDonnell  Douglas  “rests  in   large  measure  with  the  company’s  plans 
to  produce  the  F-15 
fighter-bomber.  Already  Congress  is  looking  a t  
this  program  with  a  wary  eye,  and   . . . there  a re   indications  that 
production  may  be  slowed  as  pa r t   of  an   increasingly  cautious  con- 
gressional  approach  to  military  spending.”  ( S t  Louis  P-D,  6/21/71  ) 

170 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

J ~ n e  21-25 

June  21-25:  US.-U.S.S.R.  negotiations  on  compatible docking  systems  for 
spacecraft  resumed  as  three  joint  working  groups,  including  some  20 
Soviet  scientists  and  engineers,  met  with  NASA  scientists  and  engineers 
a t   MSC.  Purpose  of  meeting  was  to  devise  single  set  of  technical  re- 
quirements  for  docking  systems.  Soviet  delegation  was  headed  by 
Boris  N.  Petrov,  Chairman  of  Intercosmos Council  of  Soviet  Academy 
of  Sciences.  Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  MSC   Director,  headed  NASA  group 
participating  in   meetings  provided  for  in   US.-U.S.S.R. 
agreement 
reached in Moscow Oct.  28,1970. 
Delegates  discussed  possibility  of  joint  test  flights  to  test  require- 
ments  being  developed  for  docking  systems.  Experiments  “might  be 
conducted  between  spacecraft  of  the  Apollo  and   Salyut  station  types 
and  between  spacecraft  of  the  Soyuz  and   Skylab  programs,”  NASA 
statement said. 
Soviet  visitors  were  escorted  on  tour  of  MSC  by  Astronauts  Fred  W. 
Haise,  Jr.,  Thomas  K.  Mattingly  11,  and  John  W.  Young.  Several 
“flew”  computerized simulators  used  to  train  Apollo  astronauts  to  dock 
CM  and   LM  for  lunar  landing.  (NASA  Release  71-111;  Transcr ip t)  
Jamaican  and  U.N. officials  visited  MSC  to  review  data  acquired  by  NASA, 
Jamaican  Geological  Survey,  and   U S .   Geological  Survey  during  earth 
resources  survey  of  Jamaica  made  in  April  a t   request  of  Jamaican 
government  and  U.N.  Food  and  Agricultural  Organization.  NASA’s 
instrumented  C-130  aircraft  had  gathered  data  on  Jamaica  water  sup- 
ply.  Jamaica  had  average  508-cm  (200-in)  annual  rainfall  but  much 
mountain  river  water  never  reached  reservoirs.  I t   was  believed  that 
submarine  springs  carried  portion  of  water  offshore  into  Caribbean 
Sea.  Allen  H .   Watkins,  Manager  of  MSC  Earth  Observations Aircraft 
program,  said excellent  data  gathered on  flights had  been  supplemented 
by  most  nearly  complete  “ground  truth”  operation  yet  attempted  by 
MSC  aircraft  program.  During  MSC  visit,  Jamaican  group  was  trained 
by  NASA  to  use  equipment needed  for  later  analysis  of  data  in   Jamaica. 
(MSC   Release 7 1 4 2 )  
June  22:  NASA  received  design  patents  No.  220980   through  220985   for 
early  conceptual  designs  of  space  shuttle.  Inventors  were  employees 
of  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  and  North  American Rockwell  Corp.  Space 
Div.  (Jones, N Y T ,  6/26/71;  Patent Off  P IO )  
*  MSC   announced  selection  of  GE  Houston  Operations  to  receive  $576730, 
cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  for  Skylab  flight  garments  and   crew  provi- 
sions.  ( MSC Release 7 1 4 1 )  
Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carrying 
MSC  experiment  to  study  atmospheric  composition.  Rocket  and   instru- 
ments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR l is t)  
Soviet  scientist  Anatoly  Fedoseyev,  said  to  have  defected  to  West  on 
May  27  [see  June   191, had  been  given  permission to  stay  in   England, 
London  T imes   reported.  (London  T imes ,   6/22/71  ; British  Embassy 
P IO )  
Sen.  Jacob  K.  Javits  (R-N.Y.) 
introduced  for  himself  and   cosponsors 
amendment  to  H.R.  7109,  FY  1972 NASA  authorization  bill  that  would 
require  “reasonable  and  economic”  percentage  of 
recycled  scrap 
materials  be  used  in  NASA  construction  and  procurement  programs. 
( C R ,  6/22/71,59615-20) 

171 

June 23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
June 23:  Dr.  James C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  testified  before Senate 
Committee  on   Appropriations’ Subcommittee on  HUI),  Space,  and   Sci- 
ence  dur ing   hearings  on  NASA  FY  1972  appropriations  bill.  He  urged 
that  “strong  program  in   space and  aeronautics  is  essential  to  our  long- 
term  national  well-being.  Our  capabilities  as  a  Nation  to  deal  with 
domestic  problems  of  high  priority-poverty, 
cities,  the  environment 
. . . and   indeed,  our  pursuit  of  happiness  and   cultural  advance-ulti- 
mately  depend  on  whether  we   can  maintain  a  strong  economy  with 
continually  increasing  productivity.  Increasing  productivity,  in   turn, 
depends  primarily  on  technological  advance,  which,  in   turn,  results 
primarily  from  the  large  scale  focussed  technological  efforts  like  our 
major space programs.” 
In   addition  were  both  long-term and  near-term  direct  benefits,  many 
already  realized.  “When  50,000  lives  were  saved  as  a  result  of  satellite 
advance warning  at  the  time  of  hurricane  Camille,  the  space  program 
probably paid  for  itself.  . . . 
“I  believe  that  the  space  program  is  a  value  in   itself  to  the  nation 
and  to  the  whole  world.  With  our  everyday preoccupation, necessarily, 
with  the  many  serious  and   often  depressing  problems  we  face  . . . 
there  is,  I  believe,  a  human  hunger  for  positive  elevating  goals  to 
work  for  at  the  same time  as we   do  what  needs  to  be  done  in  all  these 
other  difficult  areas.  I  believe  the  strong  attraction  that  the  landing 
of  the  first  man  on  the  moon  had  on  people  everywhere,  and  much  of 
the  underlying  basis  of  support  in   the  country  for  the  space program, 
stems  from  the  fact  that  the  space  program  provides  such  goals.  The 
space  program  gives  us  goals  seemingly  beyond  human  capability, 
goals  which  transcend  earthly  boundaries.’’ 
Space  shuttle  had  tremendous impact  for  future  because  it  not  only 
reduced  cost  by  being  reusable itself,  but  i t  also  gave options of  reusing 
payloads.  “You  do  not  have  to  throw  them  away  once  you  put  them 
up  there.  . . . There  a re   many  more  application  satellites we  can  use 
with  this  kind  of  an  arrangement,  because  we  will  be  able  to  reuse 
them.” 
Skylab,  “first  and   only  NASA  experimental space  station,”  due  to  fly 
in   1973,  would  be  “larger  but  2  years  later  than  the  Soviet  Salyut 
now  in   orbit.”  U.S.S.R.  probably would  be  able  to  “do  things  in  space, 
laboratories,  2  years  earlier  than  we  . . . to  know  what  the  ear th   is 
like,  to  know  what  the  clouds  are   like,  to  understand  more  about  the 
earth’s  resources.  . . . Another  aspect,  which  I  am  uncertain  about, 
is  what  they  plan  to  do  in   a  military  way.  . . . they  will  have  the 
potential  of  doing  military  things  on  this  same  vehicle.  We  do  not 
plan  to  do  this  on  the  Skylab.  We  also  must  consider  the  scientific 
value  of  Salyut,  which  I  think  is  important,  but  not  as  important  to 
us  a s   the  applications  and   the  military  aspects of  it.” 
Associate  Administrator  for  Organization  and  Management  Richard 
C.  McCurdy  testified  that  “models”  of  anticipated  further  reduction  of 
1500  civil  service  positions  in   fall  “indicate  that  we  have  reached  a 
point  in   which  really  good  people  of  considerable  experience will  be 
going out  the  door.  Certain  parts  of  our  operations will  be  closed.  This 
means  that  we  have  come  to  a  place  where  reductions  in   force  a r e  
eating  into  our  capability  to  do  the  job.”  (Transcript) 

172 

June 23 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
*  House  Committee  on  Appropriations  favorably  reported  H.R.  9382,  FY 
$3.272 
1972  HUD-space-science  appropriations  bill  which  cont 
billion  NASA  appropriation.  Committee  recommended 
tion  in  
Apollo  program  funding  from  $612.2 million  requested  to  $610.2 mil- 
lion;  increase  in   Skylab  funding  from $535.4 million  to  $550.4 million 
to  provide  rescue  capability;  additional  $5  million  over  estimate  for 
STOL  development,  to  total  $115  million;  deferment  of  $20  million 
proposed  for  space  shuttle  facilities;  and   reduction  of  $6.6 million  in  
$726.6  million  requested  for  research  and   program  management. 
(H Rpt  9230 .5)  
*  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  reached  compromise  agreement  at  Geneva  conference 
on  draft  treaty  to  provide  compensation  for  damages  caused  by  objects 
from  outer  space  and  submitted  draf t   articles  of  proposed  treaty  to 
legal  subcommittee  of  U.N.  Committee  on  Outer  Space.  Key  articles 
provided  for  arbitration  with  final  decision  not  binding  on  signatory 
states,  although  there  would  be  moral  and  political  obligation  to  pay 
compensation  high  enough  to  restore  injured  person  or  damaged 
property  to  original  condition,  if  possible.  (UPI,  W  Star, 6/23/71,  A12) 
NASA  held  pre-proposal  conference  for  study  of  tracking  and  data  relay 
satellite  system  (TDRSS) 
to  provide  design  and   cost  information  on 
tracking  and  data  relay  satellites  and   interfacing  elements  of  overall 
system.  TDRSS  was  envisioned  in   RFP  as  providing  extended  coverage 
and   service  to  comsats  in  near  ear th   orbit.  NASA  intended  to  award 
two  separate  and  concurrent  contracts  for  definition  studies  of  system 
to  include  spacecraft,  user  telecommunications  system,  ground  station, 
and  network  scheduling  and  operations  control  center.  About  90  RFPS 
had  been  mailed  in   advance  of  conference.  (NASA  Release  71-113; 
NASA  PAO)  
*  Rep.  J .   Edward  Roush  (D-Ind.)  introduced  H .R .   9379,  “bill  to  establish 
an   Office  of  Technology  Transfer.”  He  said:  “As  a  nation  we  have 
enjoyed  many  valuable  side-effects,  spin-offs  or  ‘fallouts’  from  [Fed- 
eral]  research.  Many  of  the  examples  of  the  miracles  of  modern  sci- 
ence,  o i  technology  transfer,  the  path  from  ‘science to  sales’ come  from 
the  annals  of  NASA,  largely  because  NASA  has  made  a  concerted  effort 
to   accomplish the  transfer  of  their  space technology  to  everyday usage 
(CR,  6/23/71, 
and   have  publicized  that  effort  especially  well.” 
H5825-6) 
*  NASA  announced  receipt  of  more  than   600  proposals  from  potential  do- 
mestic  and   international  users  of  da ta   expected  from  ERTS  and  ear th  
resources  experiment  package  to  be  carried  on  Skylab.  I t  was  greatest 
number  of  proposals  for  experiments  ever  received  by  NASA  in  re- 
sponse  to  announcement  of  opportunity  fo r   analysis  of  space-derived 
data.  ERTS-A  would  be  launched  in   spring  1972  and   ERTS-B 
in  1973. 
First  Skylab  carrying  EREP  would  be   launched  in  1973.  Proposals  in  
response to February  invitation  had   come from more  than  550 domestic 
and   80  international sources.  They  were  being  evaluated  by  nine  pan- 
els  of  more  than  100  scientific  experts  in  various  disciplines.  (NASA 
Release  71-114) 
U.K.  government  confirmed  to   Congress  that  financing  of  Rolls-Royce 
engines  fo r   Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.’s  GlOll  Tr iS tar   je t   a ircraf t  
would  “not  become  effective,’  unless  Congress  acted  by  Aug.  8  to  
authorize  U S .   Government  loan  guarantee  to  Lockheed  as  requested 

173 

June 23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

by  Nixon  Administration.  Confirmation  was  in   letter  to  Senate  Bank- 
ing  and Currency Committee.  (NYT, 6 /24 /71 ,56)  
NASA  selected  General  Electric  Co.  and   RCA  Service  Co.  for  further  com- 
petitive  negotiations  leading  to  award  of  contract  for  technical  sup- 
por t  services at MTF.  (MSFC Release 71-109) 
launched  Cosmos  428  from  Baykonur  in to   orbit  with 
June   24 :   U.S.S.R. 
248-km  (154.1-mi)  apogee,  204-km  (126.8-mi)  perigee,  89-min  pe- 
riod,  and   51.7O  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  July  6.  (GSFC  SSR ,  
6 /30 /71 ,7 /31 /71 ;   SBD,  6 /25 /71 ,299)  
NASA  launched  three  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  carrying  GSFC  experi- 
ments  to  obtain  temperature,  pressure,  density,  and  wind  data  between 
35  and   95  km  (22   and  59   mi)  by  detonating  grenades  and   recording 
their  sound  arrivals  on  ground.  Rocket  launched  from  Point  Barrow, 
Alaska,  reached  110.8-km  (68.9-mi)  altitude,  with  all  19  grenades 
exploding a s  planned.  Rocket  launched from  Churchill Research Range 
carried  19  grenades to  124.4-km  (77.3-mi)  altitude;  17  soundings were 
recorded.  Rocket  launched  from  Wallops  Station  carried  31  grenades 
to  114.3-km  (71-mi)  altitude;  all  31  detonated  and  were  recorded  on 
ground.  (NASA Rpts SRL) 
0  Aerobee 350 sounding  rocket was  launched  by  NASA  from WSMR  carrying 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  x-ray  astronomy  experiment.  Rocket  and  
instruments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR  l is t)  
aeronautical  re- 
USAF  YF-12  aircraft,  one  of  two  in   joint  NASA-USAF 
search  program  to  advance technology  of  supersonic military  and   civil 
aircraft,  crashed  on  routine  flight  from  Edwards  AFB,  Calif.  Both 
pilots parachuted  to  safety. 
Coincidentally,  NASA  announced  addition  of  another  USAF  YF-12 
to  program.  New  a ircraf t   was  specially  instrumented  for  inflight  pro- 
pulsion  studies  of  engine  internal  flow  dynamics,  propulsion  and  a ir-  
frame  interreactions,  a i r   inlet  dynamics,  atmospheric  turbulence  and  
temperature  variations,  rapid  airflow  changes,  and  factors  affecting 
inflight  stopping  and   restarting  of  engines.  (AFSC   PIO ;   FRC  Release 
16-71;  Aero  Da i ly ,  6/28/71,  316) 
Lowell  Observatory  astronomers  had  made  first  accurate  mapping  of 
weather of  Mars  a s  result  of  worldwide  cooperation of  observatories in  
NASA-funded  ground-based planetary  patrol  program  centered at Lowell, 
Christian  Science  Monitor  said.  Principal  investigator  Dr.  William  A. 
Baum  had  said  object  of  program,  begun  in  1969, was  to  “maintain 
nearly  continuous  photographic  surveillance  of  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  
Venus  during  favorable  periods.”  Mars  weather  seemed  analogous  to 
weather in  arid  regions of  earth.  (C SM ,  6/24/71) 
*  TRW  Inc.  would  develop  conceptual  designs  for  manned  research  labora- 
tory   to  support  communications  and   navigation  experiments  under 
10-mo, $288 000  contract,  MSFC  announced.  Study  assumed  laboratory 
would  be  launched  in  1980s and  could  be   flown  a s   research  and   appli- 
cations  module  o r   a s   segment  of  orbiting  space  station.  (MSFC Release 
71-108) 
*  Information  systems  on  board  manned  orbital  stations  could  collect  data 
on  geological  formations  and  potential  mineral  deposits,  G.  Katys, 
head  of  Soviet  institute  for   problems  of  control,  said  in  interview 
released  by  Tass.  TV  systems,  panoramic  cameras,  radiometers,  and 
spectrometers in   infrared  range  would  find  application  on  orbital  sta- 

174  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June 24 

tions  for  ear th  resources research.  There would  be  need  to  install  heat- 
sensitive  devices  to  locate  volcanoes  and   sources of  geothermal energy 
and   TV  cameras  to  clarify  topographic  maps.  Identification  of  photos 
had  already  produced  tangible  results  in   hydrologic  and   oceanologic 
research.  Photos  of  rocks,  geological  structure,  and   tectonic  distur- 
bances  had  been  interpreted.  Cosmonauts  on  orbital  stations  could 
conduct  research  in   various  sectors  of  earth's  surface,  choosing  most 
interesting  zones.  ( FBIS-SOV-71-126,  6/30/71,16-17) 
MSFC  announced selection  of  NR  Rocketdyne Div.  for  l6-m0,  $1.1-million 
contract  to  develop  turbopump  assemblies  for  hydrogen  and   oxygen 
space  shuttle  auxiliary  propulsion  system  ( APS)  technology  program. 
Six-phase  contract  included  exploratory  study;  design  for   tubopump 
components;  fabrication  of  turbopump  system;  testing,  refurbishing, 
acceptance  testing,  and   delivery  to  NASA  ; and   engineering  support. 
(MSFC  Release 71-110) 
MSFC  announced  it  had  modified  existing  contract  with  Martin  Marietta 
Corp.  for   work  in   Skylab  Program  to  incorporate  ear th   resources 
experiment  package  ( EREP) 
into  flight  version  of  multiple  docking 
adapter,  device  to  permit  Apollo  spacecraft  to  dock  with  Skylab  clus- 
ter.  Total  cost  of  modification  was  $6070  500.  EREP   would  contain 
photographic  experiments  to  study  earth  from  orbit.  (M S FC   Release 
7 1-1 11 ) 
0  JPL   announced  selection  of  Motorola,  Inc.,  Government  Electronics  Div. 
f o r   negotiations  on  $2  179 000  contract  with  award  fee  to  design, 
fabricate,  and   test  flight-data  subsystem  for   NASA  Mariner  Venus- 
Mercury  spacecraft  for  1973  mission.  JPL   also  had  selected  Litton 
Industries  Guidance  and  Control  Systems  Div.  for  negotiations  on 
$10.4-million  contract  for  development,  fabrication,  and  testing  of 
gas  chromatograph/mass  spectrometer  ( to   be  carried  on  Viking 
lander)  to analyze Mars surface.  (JPL Releases 581 ,582)  
*  House passed  by  voice  vote  H.J.R.  742 making  continuing  appropriations 
for  FY  1972,  including  provisions  under  H.R.  9382  for  NASA,  NASC, 
and  NSF  [see June 231.  (CR, 6/24/71,  H5848-50) 
NSF  released  Federal  R&D  Expenditures  Related  to  Budget  Functions, 
1960-72.  Between  1960 and   1972 chief  areas  of  Federal  R&D  funding 
had  been  defense,  space  research  and  technology,  and  health-totaling 
86% o f   estimated R&D  expenditures  of  $15.7  billion  for  1972. In   1960 
same  three  categories  had  totaled  95%   of  $7.3-billion  R&D  funding. 
Throughout  1960-1972  period,  these  three  functions  had  led  in   R&D 
expenditures  in   same order.  Ratio  of  R&D  expenditures to  total  Federal 
budget  outlays  rose  from  8.5%  in   1960 to  12.4%  in   1965.  Ratio  had 
decreased  each  year  since  1965  and  7.4%  estimated  for   1972  was 
lowest  in  1960-1972  period.  Decline  reflected  more  the  absolute  in- 
crease  in   total  Federal  outlays  since  1965-from  $111 billion  to   esti- 
mated  $211  billion  in   1972,  excluding  interest-than 
any  substantial 
absolute  decline  in   R ~ D  expenditures.  These  expenditures  rose  from 
$13.8  billion  in   1965  to  $16.3  billion  in   1968,  but  dropped  back  to 
$15- to $16-billion  range after that. 
Defense consistently  accounted  for  bulk  of  R&D  expenditures bu t   its 
share  fell  from   8 7%   of  Federal  R&D  total  in   1960  to  53%  in   1966, 
when  space  expenditures  peaked.  Later  defense  share  increased  but 
leveled  off  from  1968  a t   57%   to  58%  of  total  Federal  R&D.  Space 

175  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June 24 
research  and  technology  rose  from  5% share   of  Federal  R&D  expendi- 
tures  in   1960  to  36%  in   1966. “This  function  experienced a  dramatic 
rise  in   funds  during  that  period  followed  by  sharp  cutbacks.”  Space 
had   been  only  function with  smaller  R&D  expenditure  in  1970, 1971, or 
1972  than  in  1966. I ts  expected  1972 share was  20%.  (NSF   Highlights, 
6 /24 /71 ,1)  
Dr.  Addison  M.  Rothrock,  retired  NASA  Director  of  Plans  and   Programs, 
died  in   Alexandria,  Va.,  a t   age  68. During  4.5-yr career  as  propulsion 
research  scientist  he  had  joined  NASA’s  predecessor,  NACA,  in  1926 and  
had  become  Assistant  Director  fo r  Research  in   1947.  When  NASA  was 
established  in   1958 he  was  appointed to  similar  post.  Dr.  Rothrock had 
retired  from  NASA  in   1963  to  serve  as professor  of  applied  science  a t  
George Washington Univ.  ( W Post, 6/27/71,  C6 )  
June 25 :   Four-stage Javelin  rocket,  launched by  NASA  from Wallops  Station 
at  4:44,  am  EDT,  carried  NOAA  experiment  t o   662-km  (411-mi)  alti- 
tude.  Objective  of  mission  was  to  investigate  region  of 
ionosphere 
above maximum  electron  density,  where  i t   could  be  treated  a s  electron 
gas,  Data  was  to  be  compared  with  data  from  GSFC  Langmuir  probe 
in   payload  and   with  measurements  taken  simultaneously by  NBS  Iono- 
sphere  Sounding Station  a t  Wallops  Island,  Va.  Mission  was  unsuccess- 
ful.(  WS Release 71-12;  SR  List) 
NASA  announced  assignments within  MSC   Flight  Crew  Operations  Direc- 
torate:  ApoZZo  10  Astronaut  Thomas  P.  Stafford  had  been  named 
Deputy  Director  and  ApuZZo  14  Commander  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr., 
would  resume  duties  as  Chief  of  Astronaut  Office.  Stafford  also  would 
assist  Donald  K.  Slayton,  Director  of  Flight  Crew  Operations,  in  
technical  matters  related  to   flight  crew  activities.  Post  of  Deputy 
Director  had  previously been  vacant.  (NASA  Release  71-116) 
ComSatCorp  filed  with  FCC   for  first-step  rate  reduction  of  25%  for  
Atlantic  area  satellite  services,  effective  July  1,  and   proposed  second- 
step  reduction  for  leased  voice-grade channels  affecting  Atlantic  and  
Pacific  area  in   early  2972,  provided  satellite  traffic  met  forecast  in- 
creases.  ( ComSatCorp  Release 71-36) 
Tass  reported  death  of  Soviet  rocket  designer  Aleksey  Isayev  and  identi- 
fied  him  fo r   first  time  as  designer  of  engines fo r   Vostok  and   Voskhod 
rockets  and  Soyuz  manned  spacecraft.  Tass  said  Soviet  unmanned 
“interplanetary  stations”  also  had  been  created  under  Isayev’s  direc- 
tion.  Izvestia  said  in  biographical  sketch  that  Isayev  was  one  of  main 
creators  of  a ircraf t   tha t   had  made  world’s  first  je t   powered  flight  on 
May 5 ,1942 .   (AP, W Star, 6/27/71,  A l l )  
June  26:  Anatoly  Fedoseyev,  who  had  been  described  as  Soviet  space 
expert,  had  sought  asylum  from  U.S.S.R.  in  France  on  May  27  [see 
June   191  and   was  in   England  “reportedly  talking  to  British  and  
American  interrogators,“  Chicago  Tr ibune   editorial  said.  “He  could, 
if  he  desired,  supply  information  of  great  value  in  the  launching  of 
ou r   own  space  laboratory,  Skylab,  in  1973. More  important,  he  could 
tell  us   whether  Salyut  is  being  used  as  a  superspy  in  space  to   track 
our  Polaris  submarines.”  Some  scientists  believed  Polaris  might  be 
tracked  by  heat  produced  in  its  nuclear  reactors.  “And  they  suspect 
that  the  cosmonauts aboard  Salyut  are   busy  testing  this  very  concept 
with delicate electronic sensors.”  ( C  T r i b ,  6/26/71) 

176 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June 26 

Soviet  Salyut  1-Soyuz  11  cosmonauts  were  described  by  Dr.  Vladimir 
Dupik  in  Sovietskaya  Rossiya  article  as  best-fed  crew  in   history  of 
space  flights.  Length  of  flight  had  necessitated  diet  of  four  hot  meals 
daily  including  “first  breakfast”  of  veal,  bread,  candy,  and   coffee; 
second  breakfast”  of  tongue,  sausage,  and   curds ;   lunch  of  dried, 
G b  
salted  fish,  borscht,  meat,  bread,  cake  and  black  curran t   juice.  Fourth 
meal  was  not  described.  Oven  had  been  installed  in   spacecraft  for  
first  time  in   Soviet space program,  spices  had  been  added  to  meats  to 
improve  flavor,  and   14  varieties  of  meat  carried  had   “higher  moisture 
content  which  makes  them  juicier  and   gives  off  a  nice  aroma.’’  (UPI, 
W S tar ,  6/27/71,  A l l )  
NASA  announced  resignation  of  Ronald  J.  Philips,  Director  of  Office  of 
Technology  Utilization,  effective  July  3 .  He  would  become  Senior  Vice 
President  of  technology  application  program  sponsored  jointly  by 
International  City  Management  Assn.,  National  League  of  Cities,  U S .  
Conference of  Mayors,  and  Ford   Foundation.  (NASA  Release  71-117) 
*  New  York   T imes   reported  comments  on  U.S.S.R.  acceptance  a t   Geneva 
conference  of  idea  that  claims  commission  of  outside  parties  could  fix 
amount  of  compensation for  damages  caused  by  objects  launched  into 
space.  Observers saw  acceptance as  “major  breakthrough  in  seven-year 
United  Nations  effort  t o   complete  space  treaty  covering  payment  for 
such  damages.’’  While  U S .   and   smaller  powers  had  urged  course, 
U.S.S.R.  had  heretofore  refused.  (Teltsch,  N Y T ,   6/26/71,  5) 
AAAS  Board  agreed  to  accept  invitation  from  AAAS  Soviet  counterpart 
Znaniye  (Knowledge)  for   annual  exchange  of  four  scientist-lecturers. 
( A A A S  Bulletin, 2 /72 ;   AAAS  P IO )  
IATA  Secretary  General  Knut  Hammarskjold  expressed  IATA’S  opposition 
to  proposed  use  of  UHF   band  in  satellite  communications  along  a ir  
routes  over  Pacific  Ocean.  He   said  its  use  would  make  system  twice 
as  costly  as  one  functioning  on  VHF   band  already  employed  in  airway 
communications.  Opposition  was  expressed  in  letter  to  U S .   and  mem- 
ber  governments  of  ESRO,  which  planned  similar  system  for  Atlantic 
Ocean.  ( N Y T ,  6 /26 /71)  
June 28:  NASA  press  conference  at  MSC  summarized  June   21-25  US.- 
U.S.S.R.  discussions  on  joint  space docking.  Dr.  Robert R.  Gilruth,  MSC 
Director  and   head  of  NASA  delegation  to  discussions,  said  talks  had 
been  friendly  throughout.  “I t   was  a  period  of  ha rd  work  covering very 
difficult  technical  areas.”  Meetings  had  been  successful  “in  reaching 
conclusions,  in  principle,  on  all  these  subjects  that  we  discussed,  and 
in   some  detail  in   several  of  the  subjects.”  Need  had  been  felt  by  both 
sides  for  “possibility  of  flight  studies  to  test  the  technical  require- 
ments  for  docking and  rendezvous,  . . . one  that  would  use  the  actual 
kind  of  compatible  . . . equipment”  that  would  make  possible  space 
rescue  from  spacecraft  of  either  side  that  might  be  in   trouble.  U S .  
and   Soviet  CMS  and  space  stations  with  mixed  crews  could  orbit  ear th  
within  four   years.  Soviet  crews  and   U S .   crews  “would  no  doubt,  if 
they  docked,  . . . want  to  open  the  hatches and  visit  with  one another.” 
Dr.  Gilruth  said  flight  test  might  take  place  in   mid-70s.  (Transcr ip t)  
*  Sen. Walter  F.  Mondale  (D-Minn.),  on  behalf  of  himself,  Sen.  Clifford  P. 
Case  (R-N.J.),  Sen.  Jacob  K.  Javits  (R-N.Y.),  and  Sen.  William 
Proxmire  (D-Wis.),  called  up  his  amendment  to  H.R.  7109,  FY  1972 

177  

June 28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

NASA  authorization  bill,  which  would  delete  from  bill  $138  million  for 
space  shuttle  development.  ( C R ,  6/28/71, 
,510061-80  ; 10084r112) 
Senate  passed  H.R.  7960,  $706.5  million  FY  1972 NSF  authorization  bill. 
Bill  included  $2.5  million  for  Global  Atmospheric  Research  Program 
(GARP )   ; $4 million  for  Arecibo  Observatory  in   Puerto  Rico;  $7.7  mil- 
lion  for Kitt  Peak  National  Observatory;  $2.5  million  for  Cerro  Tololo 
Inter-American  Observatory  in   Chile ; $7  million  for  National  Radio 
Astronomy  Observatory;  and   $19  million  for   National  Center  for 
Atmospheric  Research.  Report  accompanying  bill  described  program 
of  Research  Applied  to  National  Needs  (RANN )   established  by  NSF 
dur ing   FY  1971  to  coordinate  research  in   selected  environmental, 
social,  and   technological  problems.  Major  research  efforts  consolidated 
to  form   RANN  were :  weather  modification,  earthquake  engineering, 
interdisciplinary  research  relevant  to  problems  of  our  society  ( IRPOS)  , 
a n d   other  efforts  formerly  funded  under  scientific  project  support. 
( C R ,  6/28/71,  S997P-81;  S Rpt 92-232) 
*  MSC  announced  award  of  $125 000,  one-year,  fixed-price  R&D  contract  to 
N R   to  study  safety  techniques  for  spacecraft  in   ear th   orbit. 
(MSC  
Release 71-44) 
Bruce  N.  Torell  was  elected  President  of  P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.  of  United 
Aircraft  Corp.  a t   regular  meeting  of  board  of  directors.  Torell  would 
succeed  Bernard  A.  Schmickrath,  who  was  elected  a  vice  president. 
Changes  would  be  effective  July  1.  (P&W  Eagle,  7/71,  2)  
Gen.  Thomas  D.  White  Space  Trophy  for  1970  was  presented  to  B /C  
Robert  A.  Duffy  ( U S A F ) ,   Vice  Commander  of  SAMSO ,   in   Washington, 
D.C.,  ceremony.  Citation  was  for  efforts  bringing  “dramatic  improve- 
ments  in   the  effectiveness  and  maneuverability  of  advanced  re-entry 
systems,  and  in   both  the  effectiveness  and   variety  of  penetration  aids 
designed  to  compound  the  difficulties  of  an   enemy  in   intercepting  re- 
entry systems.”  (W  S tar ,  6/29/71,  A4 )  
0  NASA  announced  i t   had   issued  Management  Study  of  N A S A   Acquisition 
Processes,  report  of  team  established  in   September  1970  to  review 
NASA  project  and   program  planning  for  R&D  and   activities  and  proce- 
dures  for  acquiring  goods  and   services  from  definition  of  require- 
ments  through  contract  award.  Report  covered  processes used  for acqui- 
sitions  leading  to  use  of  formal  source  evaluation  boards  for  agency- 
level  and  field  center-level  source  selections.  Study  group  had  con- 
cluded  that  basic  framework  of  NASA  acquisition  process  was  sound, 
but  i t   recommended  some  improvements  in   project  planning,  source 
solicitation,  and   source  selection.  (NASA  Release  71-118;  Tex t)  
June  2 8 3 0 :   AAS  17th  annual  meeting  in   Seattle,  Wash.,  was  devoted  to 
exploration of  outer  solar system. 
JPL   astronomer  Dr.  Donald  G.  Rea  said  Jupiter  was  biggest  enigma 
and   challenge  to  most  space  scientists.  I t   “emits  about  three  times  as  
much  energy  as   i t   receives  from  the  Sun.  I t   has  a  magnetic  field  20 
times  that  of  Earth,  intense  radiation  belts,  and   apparently  rotates  a t  
three  different  speeds.  An  important  characteristic  for  flight  projects 
is  its  gravity  which  will  allow  us  to  send  a  spacecraft  to  study  Jupiter 
and   then  continue  on”  to  investigate  outermost  planets  of  solar  system. 
JPL   scientist  James  E.  Long  recommended  spacecraft  be  launched 
i n   1981 for  insertion  into  Jupiter  orb i t   early  in   1984  after  750-day 
tr ip   from  earth.  “Depending  on  Jupiter’s  radiation  hazard,  the  space- 

178 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June 28-30 

c ra f t  will  have  an   active  li 
“imperative  that  we  get  direct 
phere  over  long  periods  . . 
involved.” 
Technology  for  Thermoelectric Outer  Planet  Spacecraft  (TOPS)  , sus- 
tained  by  self-repairing  computers  and   capable  of  10-yr  scientific 
missions  to  outer  planets,  was  described  by  J P L   engineers  Car1  C. 
Wertz,  Paul  0. Chelson,  and  Richard  A.  Easton,  J P L   computers being 
developed  and   tested  were  STAR  (self-testing  and  repa ir ing)   and  CATS 
(computer-aided telemetry system) . Both  had  built-in  redundancy, with 
backup  parts  fo r  each  unit  that  might  fail.  Easton  said  STAR  computer 
was  spacecraft’s  brain  and   CATS  computer  its  nervous  system.  Self- 
repairing  computers were  needed  for  outer  planetary  mission  because 
potentially  hazardous  environments, such  as  the  asteroid  belt  between 
6‘ 
Mars  and  Jupiter,  or   radiation  from  Jupiter  itself,  require  that  Grand 
Tour  spacecraft  subsystems  be  self-adaptive  to  either  transient  or  per- 
manent  failures.  Another  consideration  is  the  eight-hour  roundtrip 
communications delay  from  Neptune  or  Pluto.” 
Leonard Jaffe, NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator for  Applications, 
received  Lloyd  V.  Berkner  Award,  presented  annually  by  AAS  to  per- 
sons  making  significant  contributions  to  commercial  space  utilization. 
AAS  Flight  Achievement  Award  was  presented  to  Astronaut  John  L. 
Swigert, Jr.,  for Apollo 13  crew. 
LaRC   Director  Edgar  M. Cortright  received  AAS  1970  Space  Flight 
Award  “in  recognition  of  h is   contribution  to  space ‘flight through  early 
planning  for  the  organization  of  NASA,  his  direction  of  the  Lunar  and 
Planetary  Program,  his  influence while  Deputy  Associate Administrator 
of  the  Office  of  Space  Science  and  Applications,  and   later  the  Office 
of  Manned  Space  Flight  and  his  current  position  as  Director  of  NASA 
Langley Research  Center.” 
In   speech  on  technology  crisis  Cortright  sa id :   “I t   is  ironic  that  after 
10  years  of  ‘delivering  the  goods’  in  an   unparalleled  manner,  culmi- 
nating  in   manned  exploration  of  the  Moon,  the  space program  is  fight- 
ing  for  its  life  with  a  host  of  other  priority  programs.  Already  the 
national  team  of  Government,  industry,  and   university  scientists,  engi- 
neers,  and  technicians  has  been  reduced  to  about  1/3 of  its  peak  of  over 
400000.  If  we  are  not  to  see  the  progress  of  a  decade  of  dedicated 
national  effort  squandered  away,  we  had  better  make  our  case  for 
space loud  and  clear.  I  think  we  have  a  compelling  case-even 
in  these 
days  of  relevancy.”  ( J P L   Releases  577,  578,  579;  N A S A   Ac t iv i t ies ,  
7/15/71,  117  ; 8/15/71,  129-34;  Langley  Researcher,  7/19/71,  1 ; 
Boeing Release 5 -0826 )  
June  29:  Mariner  9 ,  en  route  to  Mars,  was  7 900 000  km  ( 4  909 000  m i )  
from  earth  a t   9:OO  am  EDT after  traveling  82  500 000  km  (51  263 000 
m i )   and   receiving  over  500  commands  since  launch  May  30.  Space- 
craft  was  expected  to  accomplish  its  basic  90-day  scientific  mission 
objectives,  but  was  using  more  nitrogen  gas  than  predicted  for  main- 
taining  attitude  stabilization.  Current  predictions  indicated  nitrogen 
gas  supply would  be  depleted  in   early  August  1972, nine  months  after 
spacecraft  went  into  orbit  around  Mars.  Increased  ra te   of  consumption 
was  due  to  circuit  design  error   in  attitude-control-system electronics. 
(NASA  P ro j  Off;  NASA Release 71-120) 

179  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
June  29 
Tenth  anniversary  of  launch  of  SNAP-3AY  first  radioisotope  thermo- 
from KSC  aboard USN  Transit  &A  satellite 
electric  generator-launched 
by  Thor-Able-Star booster  June  29,  1961,  in   joint  NASA-DOD-AEC  pro- 
gram  to  develop  use  of  nuclear  power  in   space.  SNAP-3A  was  still 
transmitting  signals  earthward  but  was  no  longer  in   use.  I t   had 
orbited  earth  more  than  50  000  times  and  traveled  more  than  2.4  bil- 
lion  km  (1.5  billion  m i ) .   (AEC   Release  0-103;  A&A ,   1961)  
Senate,  by  vote  of  82  to  5,  passed  H.R.  7109,  $3.281-billion  FY  1972 
NASA  authorization  bill,  after  rejecting  by  vote  of  64?  to  22  Mondale 
amendment No.  233  that  would  have  deleted  from  bill  $138 million  for 
space shuttle program. 
Senate  also  passed  by  voice  vote  H.J.R.  742,  making  continuing 
appropriations  for  FY  1972, after  rejecting  by  vote  of  63  to  24  modi- 
fied  Proxmire  amendment  limiting  ceiling  for  defense  expenditures  to 
$68  billion.  (CRY  6/29/71,  S1012fj-62,  S10177, S10272-98) 
*  Plans  for  1974 World  Weather  Program  experiment  GATE  (GARP   Atlantic 
Tropical  Experiment)  were  announced by  NOAA .   P a r t  of  Global  Atmos- 
pheric  Research  Program  (GAR P )  , project  would  study  behavior  of 
cloud  clusters  and  their  role  in  larger  circulation  of  atmosphere  in  
Atlantic  Ocean  area   from  west  coast  of  Latin  America  eastward  to 
Ethiopia,  with  more  intensive  study  of  cloud  clusters  in   smaller  ocean 
area.  GATE  project  was  one  of  succession  of  experiments  to  increase 
understanding  of  atmosphere  in   order  to  develop  numerical  models 
and  program  computers  for  long-range  weather  prediction.  ( NOAA 
Release 71-82) 
MSFC  announced  award  of  $97996   contract  to  Brown  Engineering  Co. 
for  development  of  systems  simulator  to  assess  life  support  and  habit- 
ability  requirements for  future  space applications.  Simulator was  sched- 
uled  for  Oct.  1 delivery.  (MSFC  Release 71-112) 
President  Nixon  transmitted  to  Congress  th ird   annual  report  of  National 
Science  Board,  Environmental  Science:  Challenge  for   the  Seventies. 
Report  found  environmental  science  “unable  to  match  the  needs  of 
society  for  definitive information, predictive  capability,  and  the analysis 
of  environmental systems  as  systems.  Because  existing  data  and  current 
theoretical  models  a re   inadequate,  environmental  science  remains  un- 
able  in  virtually  all  areas  of  application  to  offer  more  than  qualitative 
interpretations  or  suggestions of  environmental change  that  may  occur 
i n   response  to  specific  actions.”  Situation  constituted  “crisis  for  the 
Nation.”  Report  recommended  establishing  national  program  for  ad- 
vancing  science  of  environmental  systems.  ( P D ,  7/5/71,  1019;  Text) 
June  30:  Soyllz  11  Cosmonauts  Georgy  T.  Dobrovolsky,  Vladislav  N.  Vol- 
kov,  and  Viktor  I.  Patsayev  were  posthumously  awarded  titles  of  Hero 
of  the  Soviet Union  for  “heroism  and  courage  shown  during  the  test 
of  the  new  space  complex,  the  orbital  station  Salyut  and  the  transpori 
ship  Soyuz-11.”  Cosmonauts  had  died  during  reentry  from  June  6-30 
mission.  (FBIS-SOV-71-127,  7/1/71,  L1)  
Soviet  government ordered  formation of  special  commission  to  investigate 
deaths  of  Soyzu  11   cosmonauts  dur ing   reentry  from  24-day  mission. 
(Mills, B Szm,  7/1/71,  A l )  
0  President  Nixon  sent  message  to  Nikolay  V.  Podgorny,  Chairman  of 
Presidium  of  Supreme Soviet,  on  death  of  Soyuz  11  cosmonauts:  “The 
American  people  join  me  in   expressing  to  you  and   the  Soviet  people 

180 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June  30 

our  deepest  sympathy  on  the  tragic  death  of  the  three  Soviet  cosmo- 
nauts.  The  whole  world  followed  the  exploits  of  these  courageous 
explorers  of  the  unknown  and   shares  the  anguish  of  their  tragedy. 
But  the  achievement  of  cosmonauts  Dobrovolsky,  Volkov  and   Patsayev 
remains.  I t   will,  I  am  sure,  prove  to  have  contributed  greatly  to  the 
fu ture   of  space  and   thus  to  the   widening  of  man’s  horizons.”  ( P D ,  
7 /5 /71 ,1010)  
*  Donald  K.  Slayton,  MSC  Director  of  Flight  Crew  Operations,  sent  cable 
on  behalf  of  U.S.  astronauts  to  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences:  “We 
share  with  the  world  community  deep  sorrow  for  the  loss  of  Cosmo- 
nauts  Georgy  Dobrovolsky,  Vladislav  Volkov  and  Viktor  Patsayev, and  
we  mourn  with  all  the  Russian people  the  deaths  of  three  brave  coun- 
trymen.”  (Reuters,  B Sun,  7/1/71,  A2 ;   MSC  pro) 
US. manned  space  flight  program  would  continue  on  schedule  despite 
Soyuz  I I  tragedy,  Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  MSC   Director,  told  press  in  
Houston. 
Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  MSC Director  of  Medical Research and  Opera- 
tions,  said  cosmonauts  could  have  been  killed  by  a  toxic  gas  that  acci- 
dently  escaped, either  by  a  chemical  reaction  o r   by  a  substance being 
heated  inadvertently.  He  said  odds  were  1000  to  1 against  one  cosmo- 
naut  dying  from  effects  of  24  days of  weightlessness  and  i t  was  almost 
impossible  for  all  three  to  die  simultaneously from  weightlessness. 
Dr.  George  M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  told  press  cosmo- 
nauts’  deaths  might  have  been  caused  by  failure  of  spacecraft’s 
oxygen-supply  system  o r   by  physical  rupture  of  spacecraft.  Deaths, 
he  said, were  “a  terrible  tragedy.  They were  pioneers  in   their  achieve- 
ments  in  space-in 
establishing  the  first  manned  space  station.  Our 
hearts  go  out  to  their  families  and   to  their  colleagues.  The  cause  of 
their  death  is  not  yet  known  to  us.  But  I  would  speculate  that  the 
fault  was  with  the  spacecraft  and  not  with  the  men.  In   all  of  ou r   ex- 
perience  man  has  readily  adapted  to  new  conditions,  while  machines 
have  sometimes  failed.”  Dr.  Low  said  he  did  not  expect  changes  in  
NASA%  Skylab  program  because  of  cosmonauts’  deaths:  “All  of  our 
experience  in   24   manned  flights  suggests  we  can  and  should  move 
ahead.”  (UPI,  W  S tar ,   7/1/71,  A3;  N A S A   Ac t iv i t ies ,   7/15/71,  107 )  
Aerobee  150 sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from WSMR  carrying 
GSFC  solar  astronomy  experiment.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned 
satisfactorily.  (SR l is t)  
0  Discovery  of  two  discrete  sources  of  very-high-energy  gamma  rays  in 
southern  Milky  Way  by  team  of  scientists  from  Case  Western  Reserve 
Univ.  and  Univ.  of  Melbourne, Australia,  was  announced by  NSF.  Rays 
had  been  detected  by  instruments  aboard  three  balloon  flights  made 
a t   altitude  of  40  km  (25   m i )   in   stratosphere  on  Feb.  6  and  27  and 
Nov.  27,  1969.  All  three  balloons  had  been  launched  from  Australia. 
Newly  discovered  sources  also  emitted x-rays.  Scientists hoped  that  fact 
sources emitted  both  gamma  and   x-rays  might  provide  additional  clue 
as  to  how  their  energy was  generated.  They  might  be   related  to  other 
unusual  objects  discovered  dur ing   last  decade  such  as  quasars  and  
pulsars.  (NSF Release  71-171) 
0  Breaking-in  process  of  world’s  most  powerful  atom-smasher-500-bev 
accelerator  a t   Batavia,  111.-began  with  first  firing  of  protons  around 
6.4-km  (4-mi)  ring.  Accelerator  would  build  up  to  original  design 

181 

June 30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

energy  of  200  bev  and  was expected  ultimately  to  produce  seven  times 
the  energy of  Soviet  accelerator  a t  
rpukhov, near  Moscow.  (Sullivan, 
N Y T ,  7 /2 /71 ,24 )  
*  International  law  had  been  “enuichedY’ by  draf t   of  international  conven- 
tion  on  responsibility  for   damaging  space  objects,  Tass  reported  from 
Geneva.  Document  had   been  completed  by  juridical  subcommittee of 
U.N.  Committee  on  the  Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer  Space.  Tass  said  con- 
vention,  which  would  be  submitted  to  September meeting of  U.N.  space 
committee,  provided  “reliable  and  acceptable  . . . juridical  foundation 
for  %tiling  problems  of  material  responsibility  which  . . . may  arise 
due  to  the  rapidly  expanding  research  programmes  and  the  use  of 
space.”  (FBIS-~ov-71-126 ,6 /30 /71 ,   L8 )  
*  Soviet  progress  in   science  and  technology  was  discussed  in  Sovetskaya 
Rossiya  article  by  M.  D .  Millionschikov, Vice  President  of  Soviet Acad- 
emy  of  Sciences:  “In   recent  years  there  has  been  an   immense  improve- 
ment  in  the  development  of  astronomy  and  astrophysics.  Our  science 
has  made  discoveries  of  fundamental  significance  and  has  shifted  con- 
siderably  the  limits  of  phenomena  in  the  universe  known  to  man. 
Research  into  the  nature  of  powerful  sources of  radiowaves  discovered 
some  years  ago  has  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  objects  noted  are  
located  almost  on  the  edge  of  the  observable  area  of  the  universe  a t  
a  distance  of  5  billion  light  years.  The  power  of  radiation  exceeds  a l l  
currently  known  scales.  In   order  to  explain  the  colossal  energy  they 
radiate  from  the  standpoint  of  the  most  powerful  known  mechanism 
for  emitting  energy-thermonuclear 
synthesis-it 
is  necessary  to  sup- 
pose  that  its  source  must  be  simultaneous thermonuclear  explosion  of 
a  mass  equivalent  to  a  hundred  million  stars  the  size  of  the  sun.” 
( F B I S - ~ O V - 7 1 - 1 3 4 , 6 / 3 0 / 7 1 ,   L1 )  
Miss  Baker-13-yr-old 
South  American  squirrel  monkey  launched  and  
returned  from  483-km  (300-mi)  altitude  on  USA  Jupiter  missile  May 
28,  1959-arrived 
at  Alabama  Space  and  Rocket  Center,  where  she 
would  reside  permanently.  Monkey  was  transferred  from  U S .   Naval 
Aerospace  Medical  Institute.  (Huntsville  T imes ,   6/29/71) 
*  Award  by  DOT of  $3.5-million  contract  to   Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.  for 
construction  of  tracked  a i r   cushion  research  vehicle  was  announced  by 
Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe.  Vehicle,  15.5  m  ( 5 1   f t )  
long  and  weighing  nearly  27 000  kg  (60  000  lbs)  , would  accommo- 
date  four  persons  including  operator  and   test  engineer.  DOT would 
test  vehicle  at  its  High  Speed Test  Center  in   Pueblo,  Colo.,  on  its  com- 
pletion¶ scheduled  for  March  1972.  (DOT Release  FRA  971)  
0  FAA announced  award  of  $390 000  contract  to  Saphier,  Lerner,  Schindler 
-Environetics 
(Div.  of  Litton  Industries)  for   proposed  two-phased 
study  of  offshore  jetport  [see  May  211  to  serve  metropolitan  New 
York City.  (FAA   Release 71-99) 
NASA  leaders  were  “realistic  enough  to  sense that  their  case for  the  [space] 
shuttle  must  be  built  on  more  than  chauvinistic  appeal  to  national 
prestige,  which  sold  the  Apollo  in  the  early  1970s,”  Jonathan  Spivak 
said  in  Wall Street  Journal.  They  were  “working ha rd   to  trim  the shut- 
tle’s  prospective  costs,  demonstrate  its  economic  payoff  and   convince 
the  scientific  community  that  it  offers  attractive  new  opportunities  for  
research.”  But  NASA’S  “primary  problem”  was  “convincing  the  public 
and  the  politicians  that  i t   still  makes  sense to  go  into  space a t   all.  The  

182  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

June 30 

moon  is  no  Ionger  a  glamorous  goal;  Mars  is  too  f a r   distant  and  
expensive,  and  orbiting space stations  to date have made  few  influential 
converts.”  (VS , I ,  6/30/71,  10 )  
During  June:  Skylab was  described  in   article  by  Dr.  George  M. Low,  NASA 
Deputy  Administrator,  in  Astronautics  &  Aeronautics:  “By  f a r   the  
largest  manned  spacecraft  we  have  ever  built,  Skylab will  be  the  fore- 
runner  of  permanent  stations  in   space.  In   orbit  435  km  [270  mi] 
above  Earth,  the  Skylab  cluster  will  be  36  meters  [118  f t]   long  and  
w i l l   weigh  82 238  kilograms  [E31304   lbs].  One  of  its  major  compo- 
nents  will  be  a  workshop with  362  cubic meters  [474  cu  yds]  of  work 
area.  Other  parts  will  include  a  Multiple  Docking  Adapter,  Airlock 
Module,  Apollo  Command  and   Service  Module,  and  an   Apollo  Tele- 
scope  Mount,  the   last  of  these  a  full-fledged  solar  observatory  capable 
of  observing, monitoring,  and   recording  phenomena  on   the  Sun’s  sur- 
face  that  cannot  be   seen  from  Earth.”  Skylab  would  carry   from  earth 
orbit  “about  50  scientific,  medical,  applications,  and  solar-astronomy 
experiments. Twenty  of  these  will  be  in   the  life  sciences,  to  determine 
how  man  performs  and   adjusts  under  conditions  of  prolonged  space 
flight.  The  study  of  materials  and   manufacturing  will  be  another  area  
of  interest.  By  means  of  an  electron-beam generating  device  and   an  
electric  furnace,  metals  will  be  melted,  molded,  and   welded,  and   other 
metallurgy  and   crystal  tests  performed  in   a  work  chamber  exposed  to  
zero-gravity  and   the  vacuum  of  space.”  ( A& A ,   6/71,  20-1) 
*  NASA  released  two  publications  for   sale by  Superintendent  of  Documents, 
G P O .   Apollo  14  Prelimin,ary  Science  Report  (NASA  SP-272),  prepared 
by  MSC,  described Apollo 1 4 :  mission  and summarized scientific results. 
On   the  Moon  W i t h  Apollo  15,  guidebook to  Hadley Rille  and  Apen- 
nine  Mountains,  had  been  prepared  by  Dr.  Gene  M.  Simmons,  MSC  
Chief  Scientist.  Publication  would  aid  in  following progress  of  Apollo 
15 mission  by  giving  timeline  for  mission,  describing  and   illustrating 
lunar surface scientific experiments, and defining terms.  (Texts) 
*  NASA  released  Goals  and  Means  in  the  Conquest  of  Space  by  R.  G .  
Perel’man 
(NASA   Technical  Translation  F-595  dated  May  1970 ) .  
Translation  of  Tseli  i  Pu t i   Pokoreniva  Kosmosa,  “Nauka”  Press, 
Moscow,  1967, concluded:  “The  time  will  come  when  space liners will 
be  sent  across  interstellar  routes,  but  the  achievements of  Soviet  sci- 
ence  and  technology  w i l l   never  be   forgotten,  since  they  first  made  it 
possible  for  man  to  set  foot  in   the  universe,  and  since  the  labor  of 
every Soviet citizen is involved.”  (Text) 
S tanford   Univ.  and   MIT   experiments  to  determine  internal  structure  of 
protons  and   neutrons  by  use  of  21-bev  beam  a t   Stanford’s  Linear 
Accelerator Center were  described in  Scientific  American  by  Dr.  Henry 
W.  Kendall of  MIT  and Dr.  Wolfgang K.  H.  Panofsky of  Stanford  Univ. 
Scientific  team  had  smashed  what  they  thought  were  basic  atom  par-  
ticles,  to  find  that  “the  way  ultrahigh-energy electrons  a r e  scattered  by  
protons  and   neutrons  suggests tha t   these  ‘elementary’  nuclear  particles 
have  a  complex  internal  structure  consisting  of  pointlike  entities.” 
New  entities  had  been  named  “partons”  because  they  seemed  to  be  
parts  within  parts.  Scientists  had  concluded,  “I t   is  still  too  early  to 
say  whether  the  parton  model  will  lead  to  an   understanding  of  the 
nucleon’s  structure  or  whether  entirely  new  ideas  may  be  required.” 
(Scientif;c American, 6/71,  61-77) 

183 

PRECEDING  PAGE  BLANK  NOT  FIL 

July  1971 

July  1: Bodies  of  dead  Soyuz  11 cosmonauts,  killed  dur ing   return  from  
June  6-30  mission,  lay  in   state in   flower-decked biers  in   Central House 
of  Soviet  Army  i n   Moscow.  Thousands  of  persons  waited  in  miles- 
long  line to  pay  last  respects.  Top  Communist  Par ty   and   U.S.S.R.  gov- 
ernment  leaders  appeared  shortly  af ter   hall  was  opened.  Bodies  would 
be  cremated  in  preparation  for  July  2  funeral.  (Gwertzman,  N Y T ,  
7 / 2 / 7 1 , 1 4 ;   B Sun, 7 /2 /71)  
Newspaper  editorials  commented  on  death  of  Soyuz  I 1  cosmonauts: 
Chicago  T r ibune :   “Any  one  of  a  million  things  could  have  gone 
wrong,  because  there  are   a  million  things  that  have  had  to  go  right 
fo r   each  Soviet  and  American  success  in   space.  I t   is   no  discredit  to 
Russian  scientists  that  something went  wrong  a t   the  last  moment.  I t   is  
testimony  to  the  good  fortune  and  skill  and  care  of  the  United  States 
space prbgram  that something  of  this  kind  hasn’t  happened  yet  to  us.” 
( C  T r i b ,  7 /1 /71)  
Christian  Science  Mon i tor:   c L .   . . those  men  who  fly  such  missions 
are  taking  the  risk  for  the  aspirations  of  mankind  to  break  the  limita- 
tions  of  earth’s  gravitational  and   atmospheric  fields.  They  depend  on 
the  accumulating technological  knowledge  of  mankind  to  protect  them. 
As  a  result,  the  Soyuz  11  event  argues  the  more  determinedly  that 
the  moment  chiefly  the  United  States  and  the  Soviet 
nations-for 
share  their  space  research  efforts.”  ( C SM ,  7 /1 /71)  
Union-should 
Washington Post:  “The  special  sorrow  that  must  be  felt at  this event 
does not  proceed  from  their  numbers-three 
deaths  next  to,  say,  thou-  
sands  among  the  world‘s  more  recently  savaged  refugees.  Nor  does  it 
proceed  alone  from  their  conspicuous  bravery,  their  willingness  to 
take  the  ultimate  risk  in   pursuit  of  a  national  mission:  daiIy,  men  in  
combat  make  the  same  commitment  and  do  so  minus  the  glory  and 
unambiguous  sense  of  purpose  that  cosmonauts  and   astronauts  share. 
So  it  is more  than  the  death  of  three  men  on  a  high  risk  venture  tha t  
must  move  the  earthbound  to   a  special  sorrow:  it  is  the  death  of  these 
men  in   pursuit  of  the  ultimate  adventure,  exploration  of  the  outer 
beyond.”  ( W Pos t ,  
limits  of  human  knowledge  and  endurance-and 
7 /1 /71)  
New  Y o r k   T ime s :   “. . . i t   should  be  apparent  that  the  staggering 
dangers  of  space  can  be  met  most  effectively  by  mobilizing  all  the 
knowledge  and   talent  available  irrespective  of  nationality.  I t   is  time 
to  abandon  the  wasteful  irrationality  of  prestige-motivated competition. 
The  real  lesson  of  this  tragedy  is  . . . that  space  exploration  ought  to 
be  a  cooperative endeavor  of  all  nations.”  (N Y T ,  7 /1 /71)  
Baltimore Sun :   “The  three  cosmonauts lived  in   space  for   almost  23 
days,  and   by  all  indications  the  station’s  operation  came  up  to  its 
designers’  hopes.  Only  in  the  final  brief  stage,  a  stage  often  successful 
before,  d id   disaster  intervene.  I t   is  tragedy,  bu t   it  is  not  defeat.”  (B  
Sun,  7/1/71) 

185 

July  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

*  MSC  announced  award  of  four,  four-month,  fixed-price  extensions  to  
contracts  for   space  shuttle  preliminary  design.  McDonnell  Douglas 
Corp.,  North  American  Rockwell  Corp.,  and  General  Dynamics  Corp. 
would  each  receive  $2800000 ,   and   Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  would 
receive $1 400 000.  (MSC Release 71-46) 
NASA  issued  invitation  to   scientists  to   participate  in   definition  phase  fo r  
Planetary  Explorer  missions  to  Venus.  Emphasis  would  be  on  low-cost 
approach  using  spin-stabilized  Explorer  spacecraft  launched  by  Delta 
booster.  From  respondents  to  invitation  NASA  would  select  scientists  to  
play  active  role  in   defining  typical  payload  for  initial missions  in   1976 
and   1977  and   to  make  recommendations  fo r   subsequent  orbiter  and  
probe  missions  in   1978  and   1980.  (Tex t ;   NASA  Release  71-124) 
Apollo  11   Astronaut  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  retired  from  NASA  to  become 
Commandant  of  Aerospace  Research  Pilot  School  a t   Edwards  AFB, 
Calif.  He  had  logged  289  hrs  53 min  in   space  dur ing   astronaut  career. 
(AP ,  W Po s t ,   7/2/71,  A3 )  
*  LaRC  Director  of  Aeronautics  Laurence  K.  Loftin  assumed  fo r   one  year 
post  of  Special  Assistant  fo r   Aeronautics  to  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  
Air  Force  for   R&D  Gran t  L.  Hansen.  ( A w  Pk, 5/31/71,  23)  
*  Robert  F.  Froehlke  was  sworn  in   as   Secretary  of  the  Army.  (USA   P IO )  
July  2:  Ashes  of  S o p z  11  Cosmonauts  Georgy  T.  Dobrovolsky,  Vladislav 
N.  Volkov,  and  Viktor  I .   Patsayev,  killed  dur ing   reentry  from   June   6- 
30  mission,  were  buried  in   Kremlin  Wall  in   Moscow’s  Red  Square. 
Military  funeral,  climaxing  national  day   of  mourning,  was  watched  by 
millions  of  TV  viewers  and   attended  by  leading  Soviet  and   foreign 
officials  and  thousands  of  o ther   onlookers.  Condolences  were  sent  by 
world  leaders.  Astronaut  Thomas  P.  Stafford  represented  President 
Nixon  a t  funeral. 
Eulogy  at  funeral  was  presented  by  Andrey  P.  Kirilenko,  head  of 
funeral  commission:  “On  a  small  island  of  the  motherland  traveling  a t  
a  fantastic  speed  across  the  expanses  of  the  universe  they  were  filled 
with  courage  and   the  conviction  tha t   the   tasks  of  the  par ty   and  people 
would  be  fulfilled ; and  they  fulfilled  these  tasks,  successfully  com- 
pleting  a  complex  and   varied  program  o i  scientific  research  and   tech- 
nical  experiments.  The  results  of  their  observations  a re   invaluable  for  
science,  for  the  fu ture   of  space  technology,  fcr  mankind.  For  24   days 
w e   saw  the  valorous  cosmonauts  on   the  television  screens  and  listened 
to  the ir   voices.  With  unbated  attention  w e   followed  their  work.  Mil- 
lions  of  people,  as  i t  were,  became  intimately  linked  with  the   heroes  of 
the  cosmos.  We  all  impatiently  awaited  the  cosmonauts’  safe  return  to 
home  territory.  Their  lives  tragically  came  to  an   end  when  the  long 
cosmic journey was close to  completion.” 
Letter  from  19  surviving  cosmonauts  printed  i n   Pruwdu  said:  “To- 
day  we  a re  paying  the  last  tribute  to   ou r  talented  and  courageous com- 
rades.  There  is  not  only  grief  in   our   hearts,  but  also  pr ide   fo r   what 
they  have  done  for   the   homeland  in   outer  space.  We  know  tha t   ou r  
road  is  a  difficult  and   thorny  one,  bu t   we  never  doubted  the  correct- 
ness  of  ou r   choice  and   were  always  ready  fo r   any  difficult  flight.  We 
express  firm  confidence  tha t   what  happened  cannot  stop  the  fur ther  
development  and   perfection  of  space  engineering  and   man’s  s tr iv ing  
for  space,  striving  fo r   knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  the  universe.” 

186 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Ju ly  2 
(FBIS-sOV-129--3,  7/6/71,  L1;  Kingston,  Canada,  Whig-Standard, 
7 /2 /71 ,1 ;   AP, W Star, 7/1/71,  A2) 
Unofficial  sources  in   Moscow  said  deaths  of  Soyuz  11  cosmonauts  had 
been  caused by  embolism which  occurred  because  of  improperly sealed 
hatch,  according  to  press  reports.  London Evening  News   Moscow  cor- 
respondent  Victor  Louis  reported  cosmonauts had  failed  to  close  hatch 
securely  dur ing   undocking  from  Salyut  1; as  spacecraft  reentered  at- 
mosphere  i t   had  lost  pressure  and   crew  had  been  deprived  of  oxygen. 
Official  commission  formed  to  investigate  deaths  had  not  yet  released 
findings.  (Mills,  B  Sun,  7/3/71,  A l ;  Auerbach,  W Post,  7/3/71,  A l )  
Soviet Embassy  in   Washington,  D.C.,  was  opened  to  public  for  signing 
of  condolence  book  fo r  Soyuz   11  cosmonauts.  ( W  Post,  7/3/71,  A12) 
NASA  launched  series  of  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  carrying  GSFC 
grenade  experiments  to  obtain  temperature,  pressure,  density,  and 
wind  data  between  35   and  95  km  (22   and   59   m i ) .   First  rocket, 
launched  from  Churchill  Research  Range,  carried  19   grenades  to 
122.4-km  (76.1-mi)  altitude,  with  all  19  grenades  exploding  a s  
planned. 
Second  rocket  was  launched  from  Point  Barrow,  Alaska,  with  31 
grenades,  bu t   electrical  power  to  DOVAP  ground  transmitter  was  lost 
and  no  trajectory  data  were  recorded  beyond  4.5  sec  GET.  All  gre- 
nades  exploded  and   were  recorded,  but  data  were  not  useful  with- 
out  trajectory  data.  Third  rocket,  launched  from  Point  Barrow  as 
backup,  successfully  carried  19  grenades  to  94.5-km  (58.7-mi)  alti- 
tude,  with  all  grenades  detonating  and   recorded  a s   planned. 
Fourth  rocket,  launched  from  Wallops  Station,  carried  19  grenades 
to  122-km  (75.8-mi)  altitude.  All  19   grenades  detonated  as   planned 
and  1 4  sound arrivals were  recorded.  (NASA  Rpts SRL) 
NASA  announced  award  of  $2.3-million  contract  to   Sperry  Rand  Corp. 
Flight  Systems  Div.  for  design  and   construction  of  STOLAND.  Ad- 
vanced  STOL  avionics  system  based  on  digital  computer  would  pro- 
vide  navigation  and   control  information  to  pilot  via  advanced  elec- 
tronic  displays  and   drive  aircraft’s  control  surfaces  in  response  to  
inputs  from  pilot  or  computer.  STOLAND  would  be  installed  in   C-8 
Buffalo  a ircraf t   being  modified  as  je t   STOL  aircraft  in   NASA-DOT-FAA 
program  to  develop  data  base  for  systems  concepts,  design  criteria, 
operational  procedures,  and  certification  criteria  for  STOL  aircraft, 
STOL  runways,  and   STOL  a i r   traffic  control  system.  (NASA Release 
71-125) 
Decline  of  science  in  America  was  discussed by  Arnold  Thackray,  Univ. 
of  Pennsylvania  professor  of  history  and  sociology,  in   Science : “That 
some  new  social  accommodation  and   organization  of 
the  scientific 
enterprise  is  in   process  of  formation  is,  I  think,  evident  from  the 
present  restlessness  in   the  larger  scientific and   political  community . . . 
reflected  in  a  host  of  articles,  meetings,  discussions,  and   resolutions. 
From  a  historian’s  perspective  the  central  question  would  seem  to  be 
whether  specialist  societies  will  reorganize  in   ways  that  help  accom- 
modate broader  social concerns, o r  whether such  societies will  undergo 
a  relative  decline  in   importance.  It  could  well  be   that  generalist 
societies,  like  the  AAAS  and   the  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  are  
better  adapted  to  pioneer  these  new  roles,  which  also  cut  across  tra-  
ditional  disciplinary  boundaries  and  concerns.  If  so,  we  may  be  on  

187  

July  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

the  edge  of  a  new  era   in   the  life of  scientific  societies  as  social  organ- 
isms,  an  e ra   in   which  both  general  and   scientific  politics  feature  un- 
ashamedly  in  the  raisons  d’etre  of  reinvigorated  and  reorganized  gen- 
eralist scientific societies.”  (Science, 7/2/71,27-31) 
NSF  published  Unemployment  Rates  f o r   Scientists,  Spring  1971.  Rate 
was  2.6%  in  1971, jumping  from  1.5%  in  1970. National  unemploy- 
ment  rate  for   all  workers  for  first  quar ter   1971   averaged  6.5%. 
Doctorates  experienced  1.4%  unemployment  rate  in   1971   and   0.9% 
i n   1970, while  nondoctorate  scientists  were  reported  at  3.570  ra te   in  
1971  and   2.9%  in  1970.  Defense  and   space  constituted  largest  areas 
of  activity,  with  11% and   4%   of  unemployed.  Approximately  45% 
of  1971   unemployed  scientists  reported  last  science-related  job   had 
been  supported  to  some degree by  Government  funds.  (NSF  Highlights, 
7 /2 /7191)  
John  R.  Schaibley,  Executive  Assistant  to  Apollo  Program  Director, 
OMSF,  died  in   Virginia  after  extended  illness.  He  had  been  with  NASA 
since  1959  and  had  received  NASA  Exceptional  Service Medal.  (NASA 
Ann) 
July  3 :   U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1  lunar  rover  was  activated  following  eighth 
lunar   night  since  vehicle  was  landed  on  moon  by  Luna  17  Nov.  17, 
instrumentation  compartment  was  295  K 
1970.  Temperature  in 
(72OF), pressure  was  100 375  newtons  per  sq  m  (753  mm  mercury), 
and all  systems were functioning  satisfactorily.  (Tass,  FBIS-sov-129-3, 
7/6/71,  L1) 
Ju ly   4 :   Boris  Petrov,  chairman  of  Soviet  Intercosmos  Scientific  Council 
on  Space,  said  in  Pravda   that  deaths  of  Soyuz  1 1   cosmonauts would 
not  halt  U.S.S.R.’s  manned  orbital  space  station:  “New  flights  into 
space,  the  building  of  new  manned  orbital  stations  of  the  Salyut  type, 
lie  ahead.  Undoubtedly,  larger  and  more  complex  multipurpose  and 
specialized  manned  space  stations  will  be  built.  One  can  say  with 
confidence  that  the  1970s  will  become  an   epoch  of  the  development 
and   broad  use  of  long-term  manned  orbital  stations  with  changing 
crews  which  will  make  i t   possible  to  switch  from  occasional  experi- 
ments  i n   space  to  a  regular  vigil  by  scientists  and   experts  in   space 
laboratories.”  (UPI ,   NY   News ,  7/5/71,  7 )  
July  5:  L/G  Samuel C.  Phillips,  SAMSO  Commander, had  been  appointed  to 
NASA  Space  Systems  Advisory  Committee,  Aviation  Week  &  Space 
Technology reported.  ( A v  W k ,  7 /5 /71 ,9)  
*  Av ia t ion   Week  &  Space  Technology  editorial  commented  on  deaths  of 
Soviet  cosmonauts:  “Space  technology  has  already  proved  some  of  i ts  
greatest  gains  for   the  common  good  on  earth  a re   in  medical  areas. 
If  the  deaths  of  the  Soyuz  11  cosmonauts  focus  more  attention  not 
only  on  the  need  for  this  research  but  also  for   the  need  to  share  it 
with  all  mankind,  they  will  have  made  a  contribution  fa r   beyond  the  
specific achievements”  of  their  voyage.  (Hotz,  A v   W k ,  7/5/71,  7 )  
July  6 :  Apollo  15  Astronauts  David  R.  Scott,  James  B.  Irwin,  and   Alfred 
M.  Worden  began  three-week  preflight  medical  isolation  to  minimize 
exposure  to  disease  or  illness  that  could  delay  planned  July  26  launch 
to  moon.  Crew  would  be   confined to   ICSC  crew  quarters,  training  build- 
ing, and  launch pad  until  liftoff.  ( W  Pos t ,  7/7/71,  A13) 
Award  of  $1.4million  cost-plus-fixed-fee  contract  to   Boeing  Co.  Vertol 
Div.  for  fabrication  and  test  of  hingeless,  low-disk  loading  tilt  rotor 

188 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

July  6 

w a s   announced  by  NASA.  Contract was  par t   of  jo in t   USA-NASA  program 
to  provide  technology  for  design  of  research  aircraft.  Although  actual 
flight  had  not  been  scheduled,  rotor  would  be   fabricated  consistent 
with flight application.  (NASA Release 71-126) 
*  M S C   announced  selection  of  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp. 
to   receive 
$380 009,  10-mo,  firm-price  extension  to  contract  for   design  study  of 
space  shuttle  auxiliary  propulsion  system  (APS) . McDonnell  Douglas 
would  define  oxygen-hydrogen system compatible fo r   both  booster  and 
orbiter vehicles.  (MSC Release  71-47) 
*  Astrologer  Jeane  Dixon  in   Fashington  Daily New s   predicted  “tremen- 
dous  adventures  in  space  for  the  United  States  . . . provided we  keep 
an  eye  on  platform placements  and   docking attempts above earth.”  She 
also  said  that  three  US. satellites had  been  intercepted  “and  deadened” 
by U.S.S.R.  (V News ,  7/6/71,  7 )  
jzdy  7:  NASA  announced  i t   had  issued  RFPS  for  automated  HEAO  to  study 
high-energy radiation  from  space.  Proposals were  due Aug.  27  a t  MSFC 
and  contract  would  be  awarded  early  in   1972  i f   HEAO   became  ap -  
proved  project  in   FY  1972.  Single  contract  for  two  spacecraft  would 
continue  through  launch  and   mission  operations  support  for  seven 
years.  Contract  called  for  system  engineering of  HEAO  payload;  design 
and  development  of  spacecraft ; pFocurement  and  integration  of  orbit 
adjust  stage  and   shroud;  integration  of  experiments;  design,  develop- 
ment,  and   delivery  of  one  set  of  HEAO  ground  support  equipment;  and  
launch  operations  support.  Winning  contractor  also would  provide mis- 
sion  operations  support  for  observatory  for  up  to  two  years  for  each 
mission.  (NASA  Release 71-127) 
Institute  of  Rehabilitation  Medicine  a t   New  York  Univ.  Medical  Center 
had  accepted  for  evaluation  and  testing  motorized  wheelchair  con- 
trolled  by sight-switch, NASA  announced. Switch,  worn  on  head,  enabled 
user  to  open  and   close  circuit  controlling chair’s  wheel  movements  with 
his  eyes.  I t  had  been  developed  under  NASA  direction  to help  astronauts 
in   training  to  operate equipment under  extreme flight  conditions.  Insti- 
tute’s  director,  Dr.  Howard  A.  Rusk,  had  estimated  that  more  than 
100000   quadriplegics-persons  with  no  use  of  arms  or  legs-could 
achieve  mobility  i f   chair  could  be  made  available. 
(NASA  Release 
71-122;  A&A   1970) 
Pravdu  article  said  prospects  were  good  for  US.-U.S.S.R.  agreement  in 
SALT,  which  resumed  in   Helsinki  July  8,  but  stressed  that  agreement 
must  provide  “equal  security”  for  both  nations.  “Action  is  met  by 
counteraction.  If  one  side  strengthens  its  defense,  then  the  other  fever- 
ishly  looks  for   new,  more  powerfuI  means  to  pierce  the  defensive 
shield  of  the  opponent.  Th is   process,  if  i t   is  not  stopped  with  the  help 
of  reasonable agreements in   curbing  the  arms   race,  is  endless.”  (NYT ,  
7 /8 /71 ,3)  
July  8 :   NASA  launched  NRL’S  S o h d   10  (Ezpplorer  &) 
(Solrad-C)  solar 
radiation  satellite  from  Wallops  Station  a t   6:58  pm  EDT  by  Scout 
booster.  Satellite entered orb i t  with  630.3-km  (391.7-mi)  apogee, 436.3- 
km  (271.1-mi)  perigee,  95.3-min  period,  and  51” inclination.  NASA 
mission  objective was  to  place satellite  in   orb i t  where  i t   could  monitor 
sun’s  x-ray and   uv emissions. 
Solrad  10, 115-kg  (253.5413)  12-sided  cylinder,  carried  1 4  experi- 

189 

July  8 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
ments  to  monitor  solar  electromagnetic and   uv  radiation  continuously 
and   to  measure,  on  command,  stellar  radiation  from  other  celestial 
sources.  Information  gained  by  satellite  was  expected  to  contribute  to 
better  understanding  of  physical  processes  in   solar  flares  and   other 
solar  activities  and   potential  effects  of  this  activity  on  shortwave com- 
munications  and   on  manned  space  travel.  Satellite  was  th ird   in   series 
of  solar  radiation  satellites  launched  from  Wallops  Station  in  joint 
NASA-NRL  program.  Two previous satellites were Explorer 30  (Solrad 8, 
launched Nov.  19 ,1965 )   and  Explorer 37  (Solrad 9 ,  launched March  5, 
1968) .   Solrad program  was  sponsored  jointly  by  OSSA and  Naval  A ir  
Systems  Command,  with  NRL providing  project  management  for  mis- 
sion.  (NASA  P ro j   Off;  NASA  Release 71-115;  WS  Release  71-13) 
0  Technological  intelligence  concerning  SALT was  reaching  U.S.  through 
Soviet  scientist who  had   defected  to West  under  pseudonym  of  Anatoly 
Fedoseyev  [see  May  261  but  had  been  identified  subsequently  a s  
Ignatiy A.  Nikitrine,  deputy director  of  Soviet space program  iq   charge 
of  electronics and  cybernetics, Don  Cook of  Los Angeles Times  reported 
in   Washington Post. Meanwhile, AP said,  British  officials insisted  scien- 
tist’s  real  name  was  Fedoseyev  and  that  he  was  expert  in   field  of 
powerful  magnetrons’’  whose  research had  applications  to  Soviet space 
( 6  
effort.  ( W  Post,  7/8/71,  A l ;   AP,  W Post,  7/9/71) 
U S .   and  Soviet astronomers had  concluded  joint  observations of  quasars 
to  determine  their  size  and   structure,  Tass  reported.  Observations had  
been  conducted  from  three  locations-in  Crimea,  in  eastern,  and  in  
western  parts  of  U.S.-about 
1 0 0 0 0   km  (6200  m i )   apart.  Soviet 
scientists  had  used  22-m  (72-ft )  radiotelescope.  ( FBIS-SOV-71-132, 
7/9/71,  L1)  
*  MSC  announced  selection  of  Lockheed  Electronics  Co.,  Inc.,  to  receive 
$20-million,  one-year,  cost-plus-award-fee  contract  for  general  elec- 
tronic,  scientific,  and  computing  center  support  services,  a t   MSC. 
(MSC Release 71-48) 
*  MSFC  announced  award  of  $325000  contract  to  North  American  Rock- 
inspace  propellant  logistics  and  
well  Corp.  for  12-month  study  of 
safety.  (MSFC Release 71-116) 
*  Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had   released  market  analysis that  showed  i t  could 
60%  more 
sell  a t   least  400  new  G l O l l  TriStar  jet  airbuses-about 
than  needed  for  firm to  break  even,  Dow  Jones reported  in  Washington 
Evening Star.  (W Star,  7/8/71,  B9) 
Ju l y  9: NASA  began  distribution  to  24  US. scientists  of  lunar  soil  samples 
returned  by  Soviet  Luna  16  spacecraft  and   exchanged by  U.S.S.R.  for 
A p o l b   11  and  12  samples  June   10.  About  50%  of  total  three  grams 
(one  tepth  ounce)  of  material  would  be  distributed  to  principal  U.S. 
experimenters  in   stages.  First  lot  was  about  600  mg  (9   g ra in s ) ,   o r  
about  20%  of  total  sample.  Dr.  Pau l   Gast,  chief  of  MSC  Planetqry  and  
Ear th   Sciences  Div.,  had   said  Soviet  scientists  had   implied  samples 
from  Sea  of  Fertility  differed  from US .   lunar   samples because  regolith 
was thinner  and   closer  to  underlying  s tra ta   than  soil  of  other  lunar  
mare  areas.  Dr.  G a t  said  Soviet samples contained wider  grains  than 
did U.S. samples.  (NASA  Release 71-128) 
Aerobee  170B  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  to 
191.5-km  (119-mi)  altitude on  flight  performance  mission.  Rocket  and  

190 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Ju ly  9 

instruments  functioned  satisfactorily  and  payload  was  recovered.  (SR 
list; P ro j  Scientist) 
President  Nixon,  in   Proclamation  4066  proclaiming  Oct.  24   United 
Nations  Day,  said:  “Through  the  UN,  we  a l l   share   stewardship  over 
the  planet  Earth:  together  we  face  the  challenges  of  coordinating 
measures  to  heal  and  protect  the  world’s  fragile  ecosystems;  of  en- 
suring  that  the  new  resources  of  the  sea  are   developed  for  the  benefit 
of  all  mankind;  of  promoting  international  cooperation  in   the  use 
of  outer space.”  (PO, 7/12/71,1044) 
*  Appointment of  Robert  E.  Bower,  Director  of  Advanced  Development  for 
Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.,  as  Director  for  Aeronautics  a t   LaRC  had 
been  announced  by  LaRC  Director  Edgar  M.  Cortright,  Langley  Re- 
searcher  reported.  Bower  succeeded  Laurence  K.  Loftin,  Jr.,  who  had 
become  Special Assistant  for  Aeronautics  to  Assistant  Secretary  of  the 
Air  Force  for  R&D  [see  July  1 3 .   (Lang ley  Researcher,  7/9/71,  1) 
*  Award  to  Global  Associates  of  $4-millionY one-year,  cost-plus-award-fee 
contract  to  provide  institutional  support  services  a t   MTF  was  an -  
nounced  by  MSFC.  Selection  had  been  made following  competitive  nego- 
tiations  during  which  eight  firms  had  submitted  proposals.  Contract 
included maintenance of  rocket stage  testing  facilities  in   standby  status 
and  support  services  for  other  F idera l   agencies  using  MTF..  (MSFC 
Release 71-117) 
International Galabert Prize,  awarded  annually  by  French  for  outstanding 
successes  in   exploration  of  outer  space,  had  been  presented  to  Soviet 
Academy  of  Sciences  for  Luna  16, Tass  reported.  (FBIS-SOV-71-133, 
7/9/71,  L2) 
Sen.  Hugh  Scott  (R-Pa.)  sa id   a t   Washington,  D.C.  press  conference, 
‘‘I  hope  to  see  the  day  when  our  astronauts  go  up  in   Russian  space- 
craft  and  the  Russian cosmonauts in   ours.”  He would  explore idea  w i t h  
Soviet  Ambassador  Anatoly  F.  Dobrynin  before  he   left  for  visit  to 
U.S.S.R.  in   August,  “if  our  own  government  will  permit  me  to  do  so.” 
(UPI,  W Post, 7/10/71,  A3) 
Ju ly   1 0 :   Soviet  defector  Anatoly  Fedoseyev  told  London  Da i ly   Telegraph 
he  had  left  U.S.S.R.  because  life  had   become  unbearable  and  “sooner 
or  later  I  would  have  finished  up  in   a  prison  or  concentration camp.” 
He  had  laughed  a t   reports  he  was  space  expert  comparable  in   impor- 
tance  to  NASA%  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  and   tha t   his  name  was 
Nikitrine  [see  July  51.  Fedoseyev  told  Telegraph  he  had  “nothing  to 
do  with  space  projects”  and   was  not  ABM  specialist.  (AP, W  Star, 
7/10/71) 
J d y   1 1 :   Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  commented  on 
Salyut  1 -So ym   11   docking  in   AP  interview  published  by  Chicago 
Tr ibune .   Docking  indicated  U.S.S.R.  was  “more  or  less  on  schedule 
in  their  declared  program  for  developing a  major  experimental station 
in   space,  a t   least  two  years  ahead  of  us.”  In   answer  to  question  Dr. 
Fletcher  said  prospect  “frightens  me  only  because  I  don’t  know  what 
they’re  doing  there.  They  may  have  some  military  purposes  that  we 
don’t  know  about.”  On  U.S.S.R.’s 
two  vehicles  en  route  to  Mars  he 
said  tha t   ‘%re don’t  know  what  these  vehicles  a re   going  to  do,  but  it’s 
conceivable  that  there  will  be  attempts  to  land.”  Dr.  Fletcher  said 
NASA  had  been  “shocked  and  saddened”  by  loss  of  Soyuz  11 w sm  
191 

July  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

nauts  but  “we  find  no  reason  to  make  any  major  changes  in  our  plans 
for  manned missions.”  (AP, C Trib, 7/11/71) 
e  Jeffrey  T.  Hamilton,  Special  Assistant  to  NASA  Assistant  Administrator 
for   Industry  Affairs  and  Technology  Utilization,  became  Director  of 
Technology  Utilization,  succeeding  Ronald  J.  Philips,  whose  resigna- 
tion  had  been  announced June  26.  (NASA  Ann,  7/13/71) 
Dr.  William  H.  Pickering,  JPL   Director,  announced appointment  of  Dr. 
Aaron  Finerman  of  State Univ. of  New  York  a t  Stony Brook  to  manage 
JPL’S  newly  established  Office  of  Computing and   Information  Systems. 
(JPL Release 583) 
Boeing  Co.  was  reactivating  767  project  that  was  “simmering on   a  back 
burner”  while  SST  was  alive,  William  Hines  said  in   Washington 
Sunday  S t a r .   Project  “borrows  liberally”  from  NASA  a ircraf t   develop- 
ment  work.  Boeing  767  subsonic  jet  would  be  about  same  size  as 
Boeing  707,  with  same  passenger  capacity,  but  would  be  more  than 
160  km  per  h r   (100  mph)   faster.  Cruising  speed  would  be  1167 km 
per  h r   (725 mph)   or  mach  0.98,  “about  the  greatest  achievable with- 
out generation of  a sonic boom.” 
LaRc  Director  Edgar  M.  Cortright  had  said  aircraft’s  speed  was 
attributable  to  its  supercritical  wing  that  could  operate  a t   speeds  near 
mach  1 in   shockproof  condition.  Boeing  spokesman  had  said  a ircraf t  
could  be  in   service  by  end  of  decade.  Hines  said  Boeing  also  was  con- 
sidering production of  stretched version  of  727.  (W  Star, 7/11/71,  D4 )  
J d y  12:  U.S.S.R.  announced  findings  of  special  commission  which  investi- 
gated  deaths  of  S o y a  I I   cosmonauts  during  reentry  from  June  6-30 
mission.  Official  report  distributed  by  Tass  said  spacecraft’s  flight  had 
proceeded  normally  up  to  descent  trajectory,  with  cosmonauts  Georgy 
T.  Dobrovolsky,  Vladislav  N.  Volkov,  and  Viktor  I.  Patsayev  perform- 
ing  according  to  flight  program.  About  30  min  before  landing  “there 
occurred  a  rapid  drop  of  pressure  within  the  descent  vehicle,  which 
led  to  the  sudden  death  of  the  cosmonauts.  This  is  confirmed  by  the 
medical  and  pathologico-anatomic examinations. The  drop  in   pressure 
the  ship’s  sealing.  An  investigation  of  the 
resulted  from  a  loss  of 
descent  vehicle,  which  made  a  soft  landing,  showed  that  there  are   no 
failures  in  its  structure.”  (Tass,  FBIS-SOV-133-3,  7/12/71,  L1) 
NASA  launched  series  of  three  Nike-Cajun  sounding  rockets  carrying  GSFC 
grenade experiments to  obtain  temperature, pressure,  density, and  wind 
data  beGeen   35   and  95  km  (22   and  59  m i )   by  detonating  grenades 
and   recording  their  sound  arrivals  on  ground.  Rocket  launched  from 
Churchill  Research  Range  carried  19  grenades  to  124.9-km  (77.6-mi) 
altitude  with  18 grenades detonating  as planned  and   16 sound  arrivals 
recorded.  Rocket  launched  from  Point  Barrow,  Alaska,  carried  31 
grenades  to  108.8-km  (67.6-mi)  altitude  with  31  explosions  and   30 
sound  arrivals  recorded.  Rocket  launched  from  Wallops  Station  car- 
ried  19  grenades  to  135.8-km  (84.3-mi)  altitude,  with  19   explosions 
and  sound arrivals recorded.  (NASA  Rpts SRL) 
0  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight  Dale  D.  Myers 
had   selected  MSFC  to  integrate  two  proposed  earth  orbital  projects, 
space  station  and  research  and  applications  modules  (RAM), by  super- 
vising  definition,  design,  and   verification  of  design  concepts,  MSFC 
announced. Development  of  space  station  would  follow  development  of 

192 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Ju ly   12 

space  shuttle.  RAM  was  family  of  space  payload  carr ier   modules  to  be 
delivered  to  ear th  orb i t   by  shuttle.  (MSFC  Release  71-118) 
*  NASA  announced  availability  of  two  new  publications.  First,  Implantable 
Biotelemetry  Systems  (SP-50944, 
listed  biomedical  telemetering  in- 
struments  developed  by  NASA  for  monitoring  physiological  functions 
in  human  beings  and  animals  and   described  devices  and  techniques 
for  radiotelemetry  physiological  monitoring.  Analysis  of  Apollo  10 
Photography  and  Visual Observations  (SP-232)  described  Apollo  10 
mission  and  contained  miniature  halftones  of  photos  taken  by  ApoZZo 
10  astronauts,  which  could  be  obtained  for  study. 
(NASA  Release 
71-30;  NASA  Hq  WB ,   7/12/28) 
*  FAA  announced  i t   would  lower  base  of  area-positive-control  airspace 
(A PC )   from  7300  m  (24000   f t )   to   5500  m  (18000   f t )   over  south- 
western  US . ,   effective  Aug.  19,  to  provide  operating  aircraft  with 
additional  protection  against  midair  collisions.  (FAA   Release  71-105) 
*  President  Nixon  forwarded  to  Congress  nomination  of  L/G  Benjamin  0. 
Davis,  Jr.  (USAF,  Ret.) , Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  of  Transportation 
for  Safety  and   Consumer  Affairs,  to  be  Assistant  Secretary  of  Trans- 
portation  (Safety  and  Consumer  Affairs).  ( PD ,  7/19/71,  1060)  
AFSC  announced  reassignment  of  officers:  M/G  Lee  V.  Gossick,  Deputy 
Chief  of  Staff,  Systems,  would  become  Chief  of  Staff  for  AFSC  on 
departure  of  M /G   Clifford  J.  Kronauer;  M /G   Kenneth  W.  Schultz, 
Deputy  for  Minuteman,  SAMSO,  Norton  AFB,  Calif.,  would  succeed 
M /G   Gossick  as  Deputy  Chief  of  Staff,  Systems;  B/G  Abner  B.  Martin 
would  succeed  M/G  Schultz as  Deputy  for  Minuteman;  B/G  Herbert  A. 
Lyon,  Assistant  Deputy  Chief  of  Staff,  Systems,  AFSC,  would  succeed 
B/G  Martin  as  Deputy  for  Reentry  Systems;  B/G  William  W.  Gilbert, 
Vice  Commander  of  USAF  Flight  Test  Center,  Edwards  AFB,  Calif., 
would  command  European  Communications  Area,  with  additional 
duties  a s   Deputy  Chief  of  Staff , Communications,  USAF,  Europe. 
(AFSC  Release 216.71;  AFSC  P IO )  
J u l y  13:  ApoZlo  15  completed  simulated  liftoff  a t   9:34  am  EDT in  prepara- 
tion  for  launch  from  KSC  July  26.  Spacecraft was  unmanned  and  fully 
loaded with  propellants. Astronauts would  practice  countdown  in   space- 
craft without fuel July  14.  ( S BD ,  7 /14 /71 ,56 )  
*  Selection  of  NR  Rocketdyne  Div.  for  negotiations  leading  to  award  of 
$500-rnilliony cost-plus-award-fee contract  for  development  and  delivery 
of  35  space  shuttle  engines by  1978 was  announced by  NASA.  Selection 
followed  12-mo competition dur ing  which  NASA  had  accepted  proposals 
from  three  firms  on  April  21.  Program  would  be  managed  by  MSFC 
and  would  support  space  shuttle  orbital  flights  beginning  in   1978. 
(NASA  Release  71-131) 
NASA  launched  two  Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rockets  from  Wallops  Sta- 
tion  carrying  Univ.  of  Texas  experiments to  study  ionosphere.  Rockets 
and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (SR  l is t)  
Sleep  analyzer  developed  for NASA  by  Dr.  James D.  Frost  of  Baylor  Univ. 
and   built  by  SCI  Electronics,  Inc.,  Div.  of  SCI  Systems,  Inc.,  as  Skylab 
experiment had  been  made  available  as  research  device  to US. medical 
institutions,  NASA  announced.  Device  would  record  quality  of  sleep  of 
Skylab astronaut dur ing  28-day stay  in   space by  combining  and  evalu- 
a t ing   inputs  of  electro-encephalogram and  electro-occulogram.  Medical 
application  of  device  could  be   to  treat  insomniacs  and   other  patients 

193 

July  13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

experiencing  “sleep  neuroses.”  FAA  doctors  were  considering  study  of 
sleeping  patterns  of  a i r   controllers  and  pilots  after  stressful  duty. 
(NASA  Special Release) 
*  Senate  Committee  on  Banking  approved  by  vote  of  10  to  5  revised  bill 
authorizing  Government  guarantee  of  loans  to  companies  whose  failure 
would  “adversely and  seriously  affect  the  economy  of  the  nation.”  Bill 
would  permit  Government  to  guarantee  up  to  $2  billion  in  such  loans, 
with  limit  of  $250  million  for  one  company.  Bill  represented  first 
legislative  test  of  Administration’s  efforts  to  save  Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corp.  from  bankruptcy,  New  York  Times  said. 
(Witkin,  NYT ,  
7 /14 /71 ,1)  
President  Nixon  announced  appointments  to  Citizen’s  Advisory  Com- 
mittee  on  Environmental Quality,  including  Apollo  8 Astronaut  Frank 
Borman.  ( P D ,  7/19/71,1056) 
FAA  announced award  of  $530 125 contract  to  Cornell  Aeronautical Labo- 
ratory,  Inc.,  for  analytical  and  experimental program  to  develop  new 
microwave  landing  system  ( MLS)  for  civil-military  common  use,  to 
replace  VHF /UHF  
instrument  landing  system  ( ILS)  developed  in   early 
1940s. Microwave  system  would  provide  more  precise  electronic  guid- 
ance  to  a ircraf t   on  approaches  and  landings  than  current  system ; 
selectable  flight  paths  to  permit  greater  number  of  aircraft  operations 
at  a irpor ts ;   closer  spacing of  parallel  runways;  and   procedures to  ease 
noise  over  surrounding  communities.  (FAA   Release  71-109) 
U S .   faced  no  d ire   threat  from  current  “numbers  o r   accuracy’’  of  Soviet 
SS-9  missiles,  but  must  extend  its  own  antimissile  system  as  “bargain- 
ing  chip”  with  U.S.S.R.  a t   SALT,  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  David 
Packard  said  in  testimony  before  House  Committee  on  Foreign  Rela- 
tions’  Subcommittee on  Arms  Control.  ( N Y T ,  7/14/71,  7 )  
Secretary  of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe  announced  FAA  was  consider- 
ing  major  policy  change  to  permit  establishment  of  FAA  facilities  and 
services  a t   privately  owned  airports  open  to  public.  Such  facilities 
and   services  were  restricted  to  publicly  owned  airports.  FAA  Admin- 
istrator  John  H.  Shaffer  said  policy  change would  be  “in  accord  with 
FAA%  assigned  mission  and   responsibility  of  assuring  safety  and  effi- 
ciency  of  all  civil  aircraft  operations  and  of  promoting  a i r   commerce 
and civil aeronautics.”  (FAA   Release 71-110) 
Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  AEC   Chairman,  was  formally presented  with  mem- 
bership  in   Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  by  Soviet  Ambassador  Anatoly 
F.  Dobrynin  in   ceremony  a t   Soviet  Embassy  in  Washington,  D.C. 
( AEC  Release 0-120) 
Cornell  Univ.  and   EDP  Technology,  Inc.,  announced that  contract  for  sale 
of  Cornell  Aeronautical  Laboratory  by  Cornell  to  EDP  had  been 
allowed  to  expire  by  mutual  consent.  (Van Gelder, NYT ,  7/14/71,  58 )  
J d y  14:  Apollo  15  completed  final  practice  countdown  a t   KSC  in  prepara- 
tion  for  launch  to moon  July  26.  (Wilford, NYT ,  7/15/71,  16 )  
0  Discovery  of  hydroxyl molecule  in   interstellar  dust  between  stars of  M-82 
and  NGG 2 5 3   galaxies  97  billion  km  (60  billion  m i )   from  earth  by 
use  of  big  dish  radio  telescopes,  was  reported  by  Dr.  Leonid  N. 
Weliachew,  visiting  fellow  a t   Cal  Tech  from  Meudon  Observatory  in  
France.  Discovery  implied  tha t   chemical  evolution  was  proceeding 
throughout  universe.  Hydroxyl  was  considered  a  chemical  essential  to 
evolution  of  life.  (LATNS,  W Post,  7/15/71,  A3 ;   B  Sun, 7/19/71) 
194 

July 14 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
MSFC  announced  award  of  $250000,  10-mo,  “phase  A”  contract  to  NR  
Space Div.  to  study  feasibility  of  developing  low-cost,  reusable,  chemi- 
cal-propulsion stage  that  could  be  launched  from  ear th   on  space shuttle 
booster  and   refueled  in   space  for  up  to  10 missions.  Vehicle  could  be  
used  for  high-lift  capability  to  low  earth  orbit,  for  placing  large  pay- 
loads  in   geosynchronous  orbit,  and  for  lunar  and  unmanned  planetary 
missions.  (MSFC  Release 71-120) 
0  MSC  announced  award  of  three  seven-month,  firm,  fixed-price  contracts 
for  development of  new  surface materials  for  space shuttle  orbiter  stage. 
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.  would  receive  $325 000 ; GE  Aerospace 
Group,  $319200 ;   and  Lockheed  Missiles  and  Space  Co.,  $322500. 
(MSC  Release  71-50) 
Sen.  Hubert  H.  Humphrey  (D-Minn.)  and   Sen.  Edmund  S.  Muskie 
(D-Me.)  proposed  U S .   and   U.S.S.R.  freeze  deployment  of  nuclear 
weapons  while  they sought  agreement to  control  strategic  arms  at  SALT. 
Joint  proposal  was  made  during  hearings  of  Senate  Committee  on 
Foreign  Relations’  Subcommittee  on  Arms  Control.  (Finney,  NYT ,  
7 /15 /71 ,1)  
July  15 :  Senate Committee on  Appropriations favorably reported H.R.  9382, 
FY  1972  HUD-space-science appropriations  bill  that  contained  $3.325- 
billion  NASA  appropriation.  Committee  added  $24  million  for  NERVA  to 
NASA  request  of  $2.518  billion  for  R&D, making  total  of  $2.542  billion, 
and   rejected  House  recommendations for  cuts  in  construction  of  facili- 
ties  appropriation,  including  $20  million  for  space  shuttle  funding. 
( C R ,  7/15/71,  D703;  SBD ,  7 /16 /71 ,70 )  
LaRC  awarded $3 934 000 contract  to  Carey General  Contractors,  Inc.,  and 
Metropolitan  Construction  Co.  of  Missouri  for  joint  construction  of 
4200-sq-m  (45  500-sq-ft )  Aircraft  Noise  Reduction  Laboratory.  Re- 
search  facility,  to  be  completed  by  November  1972,  would  include 
acoustics  physics  laboratory,  applications  area  with  anechoic room  and  
reverberation  room,  and  external  effects  simulation  laboratory.  (NASA 
Release  71-133) 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  presented  LM  similar  to  those 
used  for  Apollo  11, 12,  and  14   lunar  landings  to  Michael  Collins, 
Director  of  Smithsonian  Institution’s  Air  and  Space  Museum  and 
Apollo  11  astronaut.  LM  would  remain  on  permanent  display  a t  
museum.  (Smithsonian Release  111-71  ; NASA  PAO )  
Ju l y   2 6 :   USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Thorad-Agena booster.  Orbital parameters:  apogee,  506.9  km  (315  m i )  ; 
perigee,  487.6  km  (303  m i )  ; period,  94.5  min;  and  inclination,  75’. 
(Pres  Rpt  72 ;  SBD, 7 /26 /71 ,109)  
*  U.S.S.R.  launched Meteor  9  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  642-km  (398.9- 
m i )   apogee,  615-km  (382.1-mi)  perigee,  97.2-min  period,  and  81.1” 
inclination.  Tass  said  satellite  carried  meteorological  equipment  to 
obtain  pictures  of  clouds  and  snowcaps  on  day  and  night  sides  of  earth 
and   data  on  thermal  energy  reflected  and  radiated  by  earth  and  atmos- 
phere.  ( GSFC  SSR,  7/31/71  ; SBD ,   7/19/71,  78 ;   FBIS-SOV-71-137, 
7/16/71,  L1) 
*  Findings  on  atmosphere of  Mars  from  uv  spectrometer observations made 
dur ing   NASA’s  1969 Mariner  flyby  missions  were  reported  in   Science 
by  Univ.  of  Colorado  scientists  Dr.  Charles A.  Barth  and  Dr.  Charles 
W.  Hord:  “Mars  . . . reffects  sunlight  in   the  ultraviolet,  but  i t   is  the 

195  

July  16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

atmosphere,  not  the  surface,  that  is  responsible  for  the  reflected  light. 
Even  though  there  a re   atmospheric  scatterers  in   addition  to  the 
molecular  scatterers,  i t   is  possible  to  relate  the  intensity  of  the  scat- 
tered  radiation  with  the  atmospheric  pressure.  The   variation  of  the 
pressure  over  the  planet  reveals  the  topography  to  vary  over  7  kilome- 
ters  [41/2 miles]  in   height  and  to  be  correlated  with  visible  features. 
The  carbon  dioxide  polar  cap,  in   addition  to  being  a  cold  trap   for 
volatile  gases  in   the atmosphere,  may  also  be   a  very  efficient  absorp- 
tion  trap   fo r   nonvolatiles.  This  last  property  may  make  the  cap  a 
repository  for   gases  produced  by  geological  or  biological  activity.” 
(Sc ience ,  7/16/71,197-201) 
*  Lowell  K.  Zoller,  Chief  of  Program  Control  Group  in  MSFC  Office  of 
Program  Development,  had  been  appointed  manager  of  task  team 
for   research  and  applications  modules  (RAM )   by  MSFC  Director,  Dr. 
Eberhard  F.  M.  Rees,  MSFC  announced.  RAM  was  proposed  family  of 
space payload  carrier  modules  to  be  delivered  to  ear th   orbit  by  space 
shuttle.  ( MSFC  Release 71-122) 
White  House  announced  President  Nixon  would  accept  resignation  of 
Dr.  William  D.  McElroy  as Director  of  National  Science Foundation. 
Dr.  McElroy  would  remain  in   position  until  February  1972.  ( P D ,  
7 /26 /71 ,1078)  
Ju l y   16-18:  Lewis  Research  Center  celebrated  30th  anniversary.  Ground- 
breaking  had   been  on  Jan.  23,  1941, but  anniversary  celebration  had 
been  postponed  fo r   summer  weather.  Ceremonies  honored  former 
LeRC  employees  who  had  transferred  to  other  NASA  centers,  retired 
employees,  and  visiting  NASA  officials,  including  Dr.  George  M.  Low, 
Deputy  Administrator.  Each  employee  received  30th  anniversary  coin 
and  special  anniversary  edition  of  Lewis  News .   Anniversary  exhibi- 
tion  included  F-106  aircraft,  Apollo  8,  Gemini  7 ,  and  Mercury  space- 
craft.  Center  Director  Bruce  T.  Lundin  described  progress  of  LeRC- 
which  had  been  dedicated  May  28,  1943,  as  aircraft  engineering 
research  laboratory  by  Dr.  George  W.  Lewis,  NACA  Director  of  Aero- 
nautical  Research,  for  whom  i t  was  later  named.  Center now  occupied 
3400  hectares  (8500  acres)  with  4000-member staff  and  plant  valued 
a t   $311 million.  Open  House  was  held  for  general  public  July  17   and 
18.  (LeRC  Release  71-30;  Lewis  News ,   7/16/71,  1 ;  NASA  Hq  WB, 
7/5/7171) 
July  17:  U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1 lunar  rover  completed  experiments planned 
for  ninth  lunar  day  on  moon’s  Sea  of  Rains  and  was  preparing  for 
lunar  night,  Tass  announced.  Experiments  included  stereoscopic  pho- 
tography  of  crater  bed  and   slopes,  chemical  analysis  of  rock,  studies 
of  crater  190 m  (208  yds)  in  diameter,  and   measurements of  cosmic 
radiation.  Vehicle  had  traveled  10.2  km  (6.3 m i )   over  lunar  surface 
since  landing  on  moon  Nov.  17,  1970.  (FBISSOV-138-3,  7/20/71,  L1 )  
Nine  Soviet scientists  visited  AEC’S  Nevada  test  site  near  Las  Vegas  dur- 
ing meeting  of  U S .   and  Soviet  scientists  on  peaceful  uses  of  atomic 
energy.  ( N Y T ,  7 /14 /71 ,41 ;   AEC  PIO) 
Ju l y   19:  Apollo  15 astronauts  would  wear  pressure  suits-instead  of  flight 
coveralls  as originally  planned-during 
LM  jettison,  NASA  announced. 
Requirements for  crew  to  wear  suits  had  been  reevaluated after  deaths 

196 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

July  19 

of  three  cosmonauts dur ing   reentry  from  June  6-30  Soyuz 11  mission. 
(NASA  Release  71-134) 
U.S.S.R.  sent  telegram  to  American  Science  and   Engineering,  Inc.,  de- 
signer  of  Apollo  1 5  x-ray  detector,  accepting  invitation  to  cooperate 
with  U S .   in  studying x-ray  sources  during  Apollo  15 mission.  Soviet 
scientists  would  train  2591-mm  (102-in)  telescope  on   same  region  of 
sky  that  Apollo  15  crew  would  explore  during  re turn   to  ear th   and  
would  compare  notes  on  how  strongest  x-ray  source  in   sky  appeared 
through  telescope  and   through  x-ray  detector.  (McElheny,  W Pos t ,  
7/21/71,  A10) 
Clare  F.  Farley,  Executive  Officer  in  Ofice  of  NASA  Administrator  since 
1968,  became  Assistant  Administrator  for  Technology  Utilization. 
Farley  was  succeeded  a s   Executive  Officer  by  Henry  E.  Clements, 
formerly  of  USAF  Hq.  Directorate  of  Space Research and  Development. 
(NASA  Ann, 7/12/71) 
Sen.  B.  Everett  Jordan  (D-N.C.) 
introduced,  for  himself  and  cospon- 
sors,  S.  2302  “to  establish  an   Office  of  Technology  Assessment  for  the 
Congress  as  an  a id   in  the  identification  and  consideration  of  exist- 
ing  and  probable  impacts  of  technological  application;  to  amend  the 
National  Science  Foundation  Act  of  1950;  and  for  other  p ~ r p o s e s . ’ ~  
(CRY  7/19/71,  511346) 
0  President  Nixon  submitted  to  Senate  nomination  of  Stanford  Univ. 
chemist  John  D.  Baldeschwieler  to  be  Deputy  Director  of  OST. He  
would  succeed  Dr.  Hubert  Heffner,  who  had  resigned  to   return  to  
duties a t  Stanford.  ( P D ,  7/26/71,  1066,1080) 
Apollo  program’s  contribution  to  lunar  science  was  praised  in  Av ia t ion  
Week   &  Space  Technology  editorial:  “Apollo  has  taken  lunar  explo- 
ration  out  of  the  hands  of  tree-full-of-owls  theorists  and  put  i t   into 
the  care   of  the  lunar   explorers,  who  will  eventually  provide  sufficient 
data  to  unravel  some  of  the  major  mysteries  of  the  moon  and  ou r  
universe.”  (Hotz, A v  W k ,  8 /19 /71 ,7 )  
Los  Angeles  Harbor   Commission  granted  one-year  extension  t o   lease 
with  Hughes  Tool  Co.  for  storage  area  for   Spruce  Goose,  mammoth 
wooden  flying  boat  designed  by  Howard  Hughes  and  flown  once,  on 
brief  taxi  test  in   1947  [see  Feb.  lo] .   (UH, W  Pos t ,   7/21/71,  C8)  
Ju l y  20:  Final  countdown  fo r   July  26  launch  of  Apollo  15 manned  lunar  
landing  mission began  a t   ICSC  a t  6:30  am  ED T .   (AP,  B  Sun,  7/21/71, 
A1  ) 
More  than  20  hrs   of  live  TV  coverage  from  ApoIIo  15   spacecraft  and 
lunar   surface  would  be  carried  via  orbiting  Intelsat  comsats,  ComSat- 
Corp  announced.  Coverage  would  include  liftoff,  transposition  and  
docking,  intravehicular  transfer,  landing  site  approach,  lunar  surface 
exploration,  first  color  broadcast  of  lunar  liftoff,  rendezvous and  dock- 
ing, film  transfer  in  space,  lunar   eclipse,  press  conference from  space, 
and  splashdown. ( ComSatCorp Release 71-39) 
launched  Cosmos  429  from  Baykonur  into  orb i t   with  256-km 
*  U.S.S.R. 
(159.1-mi)  apogee,  177-km  (110-mi)  perigee,  88.8-min  period,  and  
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Aug.  2.  (GSFC SSR,  7/31/71; 
51.7’ 
8/31/71;  SBD, 7 /26 /71 ,109)  
*  President  Nixon  issued  Proclamation  4067  designating  day  a s   National 
Moon  Walk  Day,  “to  commemorate the  anniversary  of  the  first  moon 
walk  on  July  20,  1969,  and  to  accord  recognition to   the many  achieve- 

197  

- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
July  20 
ments  of  the  national  space  program.”  He  said,  “Two  years  after  the 
first  landing  . . . other  brave  men  a re   .following in   the  footsteps  of 
[Astronaut  Neil  A.]  Armstrong  and   [Astronaut  Edwin  E.]  Aldrin 
to  explore  the  unknown  and   advance  scientific  knowledge  for  the 
benefit of  all mankind.”  (PD, 7/26/71,1068) 
U.S.S.R., 
i n   first  status  report  on  Sulyut  1  (launched  April  19 )   since 
deaths  of  Soyuz  11  cosmonauts June   30,  said  Salyut  1  was  function- 
ing   normally  after  1490 orbits  of  earth.  Tass  said  station  was  in  orb i t  
with  262.3-km  (163-mi)  apogee  and  223.7-km  (139-mi)  perigee  and  
all  systems  were  functioning  normally.  (UPI,  C  T r ib ,   7/21/71) 
e  Senate by  unanimous  vote  of  87  passed  H.R.  9382,  FY  1972 HUD-space- 
science  appropriations  bill  that  included  $3.321  billion  NASA  appro- 
priation  and   $647-million  NSF  appropriation  (af ter   adopting  amend- 
ment  increasing  NSF  research  funds  by  $25  million).  (CR,  7/20/71, 
S11478-502) 
Senate  passed  H.R.  9388,  FY  1972 AEC   authorization  bill  that  contained 
additional  $37  million  in  operating  costs  for  space  nuclear  propulsion 
program,  bringing  total  authorization  for   space  nuclear  propulsion  to 
$52 million.  (CR, 8/20/71,S11502-65) 
Members  of  28-nation  U.N.  Scientific  Subcommittee  on  Space,  meeting 
in   New  York,  had  agreed  to  establish  study  panel  to  examine  uses  of 
satellites  for  ear th   resources  surveys,  New  Yo rk   Times  reported. 
Agreement  represented  compromise.  U.S.  and   U.S.S.R.  had  opposed 
earlier  Swedish  proposal  that  panel  consider  establishment  of  opera- 
tional  systems  within  U.N.  framework.  U.S.  position,  expressed  by 
NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  International  Affairs  Arnold  W. 
Frutkin,  had  been  that  practical  application  of  using  satellites  for 
remote  sensing  of  ear th   would  be  demonstrated  adequately  only  after 
testing  of  NASA’s ERTS in  spr ing  of  1972.  (Teltsch,  N Y T ,  7/20/71,  1 2 )  
Wapakoneta, Ohio,  birthplace  of  ApoZZo  11 Astronaut Neil  A.  Armstrong, 
celebrated  second  anniversary  of  first  moon  walk  by  Armstrong  with 
display  of  flags  and   model  of  LM  on  concrete blocks  on  street  corner. 
Fo r   third  anniversary,  in   1972, Armstrong  expected  to  return  to  home 
town  for  dedication  of  $l-million  Armstrong  Museum  being  con- 
structed  a t   edge  of  town.  Daniel  R.  Porter,  Director  of  Ohio  Historical 
Society,  had  said  museum  would  feature  Ohio’s  contributions  to  aero- 
space  age  from  early  balloon  ascents  through  achievements  of  Wright 
brothers,  who  had  lived  in   Ohio,  to  space  exploits  of  Ohioan  Astro- 
naut  John  H.  Glenn.  Exhibits  would  include  experimental  a ircraf t  
flown  by  Armstrong  as  test  pilot,  gallery  of  flight  artifacts,  “NASA 
Room”  containing  space travel  exhibits,  and  “infinity  cube,”  mirrored 
room  with  lighting  to  give  effect  of  projection  in to   infinity.  (Wilford, 
N Y T ,  7 /21 /71 ,22)  
FAA announced  award  of  two  cost-sharing  research  contracts  totaling 
almost  $6  million  to  Boeing  Co.  to  determine  feasibility  in   design 
hardware  of  acoustical  treatment  techniques  in   reducing  noise  levels 
of  United  Aircraft  Corp.  Pra t t   &  Whitney  Div.’s  JT8D  and   JT3D 
engines.  (FAA   Release 71-118) 
Ju ly   21 : Senate-House conferees on   H.R.  7109,  FY  1972  NASA  Authoriza- 
tion  bill,  filed  H  Rpt  92-368  proposing  compromise  bill  authorizing 
$3.355  billion.  Report  authorized  $702.7  million  for  space  flight 
operations,  $30  million  above  NASA  request  of  $672.7  million,  and  

198 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

JuIy 21 

recommended  $15  million  be  spent  on  Skylab  rescue  capability  and  
$15 million on space shuttle.  (H  Rpt 92-368) 
Black  Brant  VC  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops 
Station  on  test  and  support  mission  to  evaluate  flight  performance. 
Vehicle  developed  aerodynamic  instability  and   payload  broke  off. 
(SR  l is t ;   P ro j  Scientist) 
*  President  Nixon  accepted  resignation  of  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg  as  AEC 
Chairman,  effective  on  date  to  be  determined,  but  asked  him  to  re- 
main  a s   head  of  U.S.  delegations  to  atomic  energy  conferences  in  
U S S R . ,  Geneva,  and  Vienna  dur ing   1971.  President  also  asked  Dr. 
Seaborg  to  serve  as consultant  after  meetings.  He  sa id :   ‘&As a  world 
famous  chemist,  scholar,  and  administrator,  you  have  contributed  in  
a  unique  and   meaningful  way  to  f a r   greater  understanding  and   appli- 
cation of  the miracles of  the  atom.” 
President  submitted  to  Senate  nomination  of  James  R.  Schlesinger, 
Assistant  Director  of  Office  of  Management  and   Budget,  to  be  AEC  
member  and successor  to  Dr.  Seaborg as AEC   Chairman.  (PD, 7/26/71, 
1069 ,1080)  
“Apollo  Day”  was  celebrated  in   State  of  Indiana.  Gov.  Edgar  H.  Whit- 
comb  attended  ceremonies  at  Spr ing   Mill  State  Park   honoring 
Indiana-born  astronaut,  the  late  Virgil  I.  Grissom  who  was  killed  in 
Jan.  27,1967,  Apollo  fire.  (MSFC  Hist Off) 
Dr.  Dudley  G.  McConnell,  Assistant  Executive  Secretary  in   NASA  Office 
of  Administrator,  became  Director  of  Office  of  Scientific  and  Techni- 
cal  Information  in   NASA  Office  of  Industry  Affairs  and   Technology 
Utilization.  (NASA   Release  71-142) 
J u l y  22:  NASA  and  AFCRL  scientists  would  measure  plume  from  Apollo  15 
dur ing   launch  July  26  in   attempt  to  solve  mystery  of  ApoZZo  12 light- 
ning  strike  dur ing   Nov.  14,  1969,  launch,  AFSC  announced.  Measure- 
ments  were  par t   of  Lightning  Strikes  to  In-Flight  MissiIes  program 
to  test  conductivity  and   electrical  field  breakdown  strength  on  Minute- 
man  and  Atlas  missiles.  Scientists  theorized  tha t   exhaust  plume  acted 
as  electrical  conductor  and   might  have  influenced  electrical  fields  in  
thunder clouds and provoked lightning stroke. 
AFCRL  project  scientist  John  L.  Heckscher  said  USAF  tests  showed 
tha t   “the  rocket  plume  acts  as  a  good  conductor  of  electricity-like 
a 
wire  . . . stretched  from  the  rocket  to  the  ground.  And,  should  the 
rocket  enter  a  thunder  cloud,  it  would  act  like  a  lightning  conductor. 
In   the  Apollo  15   launch  we’re  primarily  interested  in   the  effective 
length  of  the  conducting  plume.  The  rocket  is  363  feet  [110  m]  long, 
and  the  visible  portion  of  the  plume,  which  contains  incandescent car- 
bon  particles  and  other  burning  matter,  is  perhaps  another  500  ft 
[152  m]  of  good  conductor.  However  the  trailing  invisible  portion 
may  also  be  electrically  conductive  and   that’s  what  we  want  to  find 
out.”  (AFSC  Release  180.71) 
*  Mariner  9,  launched  by  NASA  May  30,  had  covered  1 4 2 6 0 0 0 0 0   km 
(88600000  mi)  in  167-day  journey 
to  Mars.  Spacecraft  was 
1 5 3 0 0 0 0 0   km  ( 9 5 0 0 0 0 0   m i )   from  earth  and   had   received  more 
than 600 commands.  (NASA  Release 71-136) 
to  measure  oxygen  content  of  blood  by 
ARC-developed  oximeter-device 
light  absorption  of  blood  circulating  through  ear-was 
being  used  by 
National  Cancer  Institute’s  Leukemia  Service  for   early  detection  of 

199 

July 22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

shock,  NASA  announced.  Device  had  been  introduced  to  Cancer  Insti- 
tute  by  Biomedical Application Team  (BATEAM)  of  Research Triangle 
Institute.  Team  was  employed  by  NASA  to  exchange  space-developed 
technology  between  physical  and  medical sciences.  Oximeter had  been 
developed  in  1960s to  study  effects of  rapid  acceleration  in   centrifuge 
on  subjects,  to  determine  reactions  to  simulated  manned  space  flight 
conditions.  (NASA  Release 71-132) 
Tass  said  Communist  Pa r ty   Central  Committee  and  Soviet  Council  of 
Ministers  had  decided  to  unveil  busts  of  Salyut  1Soyyuz  11 Cosmo- 
nauts  Georgy  T.  Dobrovolsky,  Vladislav  N.  Volkov,  and   Viktor  I. 
Patsayev  in   their  home  towns  and   to  erect  obelisk  in   their  honor  a t  
landing  site  of  Soyuz  11  spacecraft.  Memorial  plaques  would  be 
placed  on  buildings  a t   cosmonaut  tra in ing   center  and  a t   cosmonauts’ 
schools.  Cosmonauts’  names  would  be  given  to  their  schools  and  to 
streets  in  Odessa,  Moscow,  and  Aktyubinsk,  cosmonauts’  home  towns. 
(FB IS -SOV -71 -142 ,7 / 22 /7 1 )  
*  Japan   would  launch  scientific  observation satellite  from  Uchinoura  Space 
Center  Sept.  20,  Space  Business  Da i ly   reported.  Satellite  design  and 
planned  orbit  would  be  similar  to  that  of  Japan’s  Tansei,  launched 
Feb.  16.  (SBD ,  7 /22 /71 ,96 )  
SES-100B  Surface Effect  Ship,  built  fo r   USN  by  Textron  Bell  Aerospace 
Div.,  was  launched  a t   Michoud  Assembly  Facility.  Ship  was  23.7  m 
(78  f t )  long,  weighed  90  700 kg   (100  tons) , and  traveled  at 41 m  per 
sec  (80 knots)  on  a ir   cushion  maintained  by  eight  lift  fans  and  con- 
tained  by  catamaran-style  side  hulls  and   flexible  bow  and   stern  seals. 
Test and evaluation program would  be conducted in  Lake Pontchartrain 
and  Gulf  of  Mexico  beginning  July  23.  (Bell Aerospace  Div  Release) 
July  23:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos 430  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  265- 
km  (164.7-mi)  apogee,  187-km  (116.2-mi)  perigee,  89-min  period, 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered Aug.  5.  (GSFC  SSR,  7/31/71; 
and  65.4’ 
8 /31 /71 ;   SBD ,  7/26/71,  109)  
Battery  and   companion  unit  in   Apollo  15  LM failed  dur ing   tests  a t   ICSC 
and   were  replaced.  Investigation  revealed  battery  had  been  contami- 
nated  with  magnesium  chips.  Problem did  not  delay  countdown,  which 
continued  on  schedule  toward  9:34  am  EDT liftoff  July  26.  (Wilford, 
N Y T ,  7/24/71,29) 
9  NASA’s M2-F3  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  William  H. 
Dana,  successfully completed seventh flight  from FRC,  reaching 18 300-m 
(60000 - f t )   altitude  and  mach  0.83.  Objectives were  to  expand  flight 
envelope  to  mach  0.85,  obtain  stability  and   control  data  a t  mach  0.8, 
and   evaluate  reaction  control  system.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
*  Appointment  of  John  P.  Donnelly,  Vice  President  for  Corporate  Com- 
munications  of  Whittaker  Corp.,  as  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for 
Public  Affairs  effective  Aug.  15, was  announced  by  NASA.  He  would 
be  responsible  for   development and direction  of  public affairs  activities, 
including  public  information,  public  services,  and  educational  pro- 
grams.  Acting Public Affairs chief  since resignation  of  Julian W.  Scheer 
March  22  had  been  Alfred  P.  Alibrando, Director,  Public  Affairs  Div. 
(NASA  Release  71-137;  NASA Ann,  2/23/71) 
*  NASA  announced  i t   had  signed  agreement with  New  York  Times  Special 
Features,  syndicate  division  of  New  York  T ime s ,  for  one  byline  article 
each  by  Apollo  15  Astronauts  David  R.  Scott,  James  B.  Irwin,  and  

200 

July  23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
Alfred M.  Worden af ter  mission and  three  articles  by Scientist-A 
Harrison  H.  Schmitt  while  crew  was  on  lunar  surface.  Agreement, 
extending  to  30  days  after  mission’s  end,  provided  for  payment  by 
Special Features  of  50% of  gross proceeds  from  syndication of  articles. 
I t   also  permitted  still  photos  in   Apollo  15  astronauts’  homes  and   inter- 
views  of  family members.  Agreement  did  not  infringe  on  NASA  policy 
of  free  flow of  information  to  all  media  nor  limit NYT   coverage  of  all 
aspects of  space program.  (NASA Release  71-138) 
*  The  Decision  T o  Go  t o   the  Moon  by  John  M.  Logsdon  of  George  Ya sh -  
ington  Univ.  was  reviewed  in  Science  by  L.  Vaughn Blankenship,  State 
Univ.  of  New  York  a t   Buffalo  political  scientist:  Book  pulled  together 
most  of  the  publicly  available  data  and   commentary  on  the  events 
u 
surrounding  President  Kennedy’s  decision  in  May  1961  to  commit  the 
United  States  to  effecting  a  lunar  landing  before  1970.”  Logsdon 
seemed  to  conclude  that  “because  the  decision  process  somehow  corre- 
sponded to  his  theory  of  how  decisions  are,  or  should be made  . . . the 
It  was  “legitimate  to  choose  to 
decision  must  have  been  a  good 
present a  history  of  this  decision  within  the  limited  framework adopted 
in  this  book”  but  “less  legitimate  to  tout  this  decision  as  evidence of 
a  political  system  operating  a t   its  best.  Or  i f   i t  is  its  best,  we  may  well 
worry  for  the  future.”  Dr.  Logsdon  replied  to  review  Sept.  17.  (Science, 
7/23/71,317-8;  9/17/71,1079-80) 
GAO  published  Comparison of  Military  Research  and  Development  Expen- 
ditures  of  the  United  States  and  the  Soviet  Union.  Report  quoted 
Organization  for  Economic  Co-operation and  Development  ( OECD )   a s  
saying  much  Soviet  R&D  was  likely  to  have  been  directed  toward  mili- 
tary  and  space  programs.  Spin-off  to  civilian  industry  in   U.S.S.R.  was 
considered to  have  been  small  because  all  invention  and   innovation  of 
military  application,  while  in   principle  available  for  civilian  use,  was 
surrounded  by  impenetrable  security  blanket.  Consequently,  s tra in   of 
R&D  effort  had  been  much  greater  for  Soviet  economy  than  for  that 
of  U S .   (CRY  7/31/71,  E8607-81) 
Ju l y   24 :   President  Nixon  issued  statement  supporting  legislation  before 
Congress  to  provide  emergency  loan  guarantees  for  major  business 
enterprises  confronted with  temporary  financial  stringencies : “The  ad- 
ministration  originally  sought  legislation  only  to  help  the  Lockheed 
Aircraft  Corporation.  That  support  is  still  needed  very  badly.  But  I 
have  instructed  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  Connally  . . . to  accept  the 
broader  legislation.  I t   wouId  be  most  useful  in   providing  a  systematic 
procedure  for  helping  any  major  business  enterprise  with  temporary 
financial  problems  whose  failure  would  adversely  affect  the  economy 
of  the  Nation  or  a  region  thereof.”  ( P D ,  7/26/71,  1078) 
July  25:  President  Nixon  telephoned  Apollo  15  astronauts  to  extend  good 
wishes on eve of  launch.  ( P D ,  8/2/71,1099) 
launch  complex  where  Apollo  15  spacecraft  and  Sa turn   V  booster 
*  KSC 
stood  ready  for  liftoff  had   been  struck  by  lightning  11  times  dur ing  
past  six  weeks,  Va sh ing ton   Post  reported.  First  strike,  June  14,  had  
been  equivalent  to  98000   amps-almost 
three  times  as  powerful  as 
average  lightning  strike  and  two  thirds  as  strong  a s   biggest  lightning 
strike  ever  recorded  in   Florida.  Two  more  strikes  had   followed  within 
15 min  of  each  other  and   a  31 000-amp strike  had  h i t   launch  pad  one 
day  later.  On  July  20  five  separate lightning bolts  with  total  amperage 

201 

July  25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

July  26-August  7:  Apollo  15  carried  three  astronauts  on  the  f ou r th   successful  lunar 
landing  mission,  returning  them   w i t h   77  kilograms  (170  pound s )   of  samples  after 
66  hours  55  minutes  on  the   moon’s  su r face .   During  prelaunch  ac t iv i t ie s   in   Firing 
R o om   1  o f   the  Kennedy   Space  Center‘s  Launch  Control  Cen te r ,   D r .   James  C .  
Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator  ( r i g h t )  , spoke  w i t h   NASC  Executive  Secretary  W i l l iam  A .  
d n d e r s ;   L/G  Samuel  C .   Ph i l l ip s  
fo rme r   Apo l lo   Program  D i rec to r ;   and 
(USAF ) ,  
D r .   We rnhe r   von  Braun,  Depu ty   Associate  Administrator  f o r  Planning  ( l e f t  to   r i g h t ) .  

of  almost  1 0 0 0 0 0   amps  had  been  recorded.  Ninth  strike  of  2 2 0 0 0  
to  date a t  6600 amps- 
amps had  occurred  June   25,  and  last-weakest 
had  occurred  July  19. Neither  spacecraft  nor  launch  vehicle  had   been 
damaged. Apollo  15 was  first  spacecraft  to  have  even  a  near  miss  from 
lightning  strikes  while  being  prepared  for  launch.  (W Post,  7/25/71, 
A16) 
July  26-August  7:  NASA’s Apollo  15  (AS-510)  carried  three-man  crew  on 
fourth  successful  lunar  landing  mission.  LM-10  Falcon  landed  on 
moon’s  Hadley-Apennine region  and   two  astronauts  conducted  experi- 
ments,  rode  first  manned  lunar  roving  vehicle  (LRV )   on  moon,  and  
explored  lunar  surface.  After  66  hrs   55  min  on  surface,  Falcon  re- 
joined  orbiting  CSM-112  E d e a v o r   and  astronauts  transfered  for  safe 
return  to earth with lunar  samples. 
July  26-28:   Spacec ra f t -ca r ry ing   Astronauts  David  R.  Scott  (com- 
mander) ,   Alfred  M.  Worden  ( CM   p i lo t) ,   and   James  B.  Irwin  (LM 
launched  from  KSC  Launch  Complex  39,  Pad   A,  on  time 
pilot)-was 
a t  9:34  am  EDT July  26  by  Sa turn  V  booster.  Launch was  watched  by 
185 members  of  British  Astronomical 
2000  invited  guests-including 
Society  and   Royal  Astronomical  Society  and   41   Congressmen-and 
estimated 1 million other viewers. 
Spacecraft  and   S-IVB  combination  entered  parking  orbit  with 
171.4-km  (106.5-mi)  apogee  and  169.4-km  (105.3-mi)  perigee.  Trans- 
lunar  injection  (TLI) was  achieved  a t   2:56  GET and   CSM  separated 
from  LM/S-IVB/IU  a t   3:22  GET. Docking of  CSM  with  LM  a t  3:34  GET 
was shown clearly by onboard color TV. 

202 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

July  26-August  7 

seismometer 55 sec after impact. 
First  midcourse  correction  (MCC-1)  was  canceled  because  space- 
craft  trajectory  was  near  nominal.  Shortly  af ter   CSM-LM  docking, 
telemetry  data  indicated  electrical  sh 
service  propulsion  system 
(SPS) . Troubleshooting  isolated  pro 
d  MCC-2  a t   28:41  GET 
used  SPS  bank  A  to  analy 
n t   short.  Data  indicated 
bank  A  could  be  safely 
nually.  Modified  procedures  were 
developed  for  using  bank  B  alone  for  remaining  midcourse corrections 
except  lunar  orbit  and   transearth  insertions,  which  would  be  dual 
bank  burns. 
Scott  and  Irwin  entered  LM  a t   33:56  GET,  50  min  earlier  than 
planned,  to  check  out  LM  communications and  other  systems.  TV  pic- 
tures  of  CSM  and  LM  interiors  were  shown  between  34:55  and   3 5 ~ 4 6  
GET.  During  checkout  crew  discovered  range/range-rate  exterior  glass 
cover  had  broken,  removing  helium  barrier.  Crew  began  LM  house- 
keeping  1% hrs  earlier  than  scheduled  and   vacuumed  broken  glass. 
At  61  :13  GET,  during  preparations  for  water  chlorination,  water  leak 
developed  in   CM   chlorination  septum  gland  but  was  stopped  by  crew, 
following  repair  instructions  from  ground,  and  water  was  absorbed 
with  towels.  Door  of  scientific  instrument  module  ( S IM )   was  jettisoned 
a t  74:06 GET. 
J d y  29-August  4:  Apo l lo   15  entered  lunar   orbit  with  314.8-km 
(195.6-mi)  apolune  and   107.5-km  (66.8-mi)  perilune  after  LOI  burn  
a t   78:32  GET  (4:06  pm  EDT  July  29 ) .   “This  is  really  profound  . . . it’s 
fantastic,”  Scott  said  of  view  from  moon.  Apennine Mountains  looked 
unreal.  “They  stand out in  tremendous relief.  They  appear  to be smooth 
o r  rounded. But  they  are  cratered  and  in  many  places  rough  in   texture. 
We  don’t  see  any  jagged  peaks.  They  don’t  look  like  . . . any  other 
mountains we’ve  seen on earth.” 
CSM-LM  undocking  and  separation  maneuver  was  initiated  dur ing  
12th  lunar  revolution,  on  far   side  of  moon  a t   100:14  GET,  but  space- 
craft  did  not  undock.  Worden  entered  tunnel  to  inspect  CSM-LM  um- 
bilical  and   found  plug  was  loose.  After  he   reconnected  plug  and 
adjusted  spacecraft  attitude,  undocking  and   separation  were  achieved 
a t   100:39  GET-about 
25   min  later  than  planned. 
LM Falcon  touched  down  in  moon’s  Hadley-Apennine  region  near 
Salyut  Crater  a t   104:42  GET  (6:16  pm  EDT  July  30)  about  600  m 
(656  yds)   north-northwest  of  planned  target.  “OK  Houston,”  Scott 
said  after  touchdown,  “the  Falcon  is  on  the  plain  a t  Hadley.”  He  said 
LM’S  engine  had  stirred  up  so  much  dust  that  landing  site  had   been 
completely  obscured  from  15-m  (50-ft )  altitude  to  touchdown:  “We 
dew IFR  from  then  on  down.” 
\ 
Stand-up  extravehicular  activity  ( SEVA)  to  observe  and  photograph 
landing  site  and  surrounding  a rea   began  after  cabin  depressurization 
a t   106:43  GET.  Scott  pu t   his  head  out  of  upper  hatch  and  described 
and   photographed  area  for   33  min.  Scott  said  he   could  describe  site 

203 

July  26-August  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

July 29-August  4:  Apollo  15  entered  lunar  orbit  July  29  and  th e   LM  Falcon  touched 
down  in  th e   moon’s  Hadley-Apennine  region  J u l y   30  for  three  EVA  periods  of 
exploration.  T h e   lunar  roving  vehicle  Rover,  deployed  during  th e   f irs t   EVA  July  31, 
was photographed  by  Astronaut  James  B.  Irwin  near  Hadley  R i l le   ( r igh t  center  abo v e ) ,  
w i th   the   Hadley  Delta  in  the   background  and  S t .   George  Crater  partially  visible  a t  
t h e   upper  right  edge.  Astronaut  David  R.  Scott  was  working  at  th e   Rover.  I n   th e  
photo  at  right  Irwin  scooped  a  trench,  w i th   Mount  Hadley  in  the   background.  A 
gnomon  indicated  the   local  vertical  and  the   sun  angle.  Meanwhile  CM pilot  Alfred  M. 
Worden, orbiting  the   moon  in  Endeavor,  completed  lunar  and  astronomic photography. 

for  hours.  Area  was  covered  with  craters,  but  strewn  with  very  few 
large   boulders;  it  was  hilly,  but  not  rocky  or  rugged. 
First  EVA  began  July  31 at 9:04  am  EDT.  Scott climbed down  ladder, 
deployed  MESA  containing  camera  which  recorded  his  descent,  and 
stepped  on  lunar  surface.  Irwin  followed  and,  while  Scott  removed  TV 
camera  from  MESA  and   deployed  i t   on  tripod,  Irwin  collected  contin- 
gency  sample.  Crew  had   difficulty  deploying LRV  Rover;  during  check- 
ou t   they  found  tha t   fron t  steering  mechanism  was  inoperative  and   tha t  
there  were  no  readouts  on  LRV  battery  No.  2  amp-volt  meter.  Battery 
was  found  to  be  operating  satisfactorily  and   decision  was  made  to 
perform  EVA-1  without  LRV  front-wheel  steering.  Crew  mounted  LRV 
and   proceeded on  EVA-1  traverse  a t   121:45 GET.  Crew  described  EVA 
a s   “exploration  a t   its  greatest,”  and  repeatedly used  words  “fantastic,” 
“breathtaking,”  and  “spectacular”  to  describe  features  as  they  rode 
LRV  a t   about  eight  km  per  h r   (five  m p h ) .   Scott  said  Rover  handled 
quite  well:  “I t   negotiates  small  craters  quite  well,  although  there  is  a 

204 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1971 

July %-August 

7 

lot  of  roll.  The  steering  is  quite  responsive  . . . and   I  can maneuver 
pretty  well.  . . . There  is  no  accumulation of  d ir t   in   the  wire  wheels.” 
Stops  a t   stations  where  crew  collected  lunar  samples  and   took  photos 
were  broadcast  on  TV  with  excellent  transmission.  At  end  of  traverse 
ALSEP  was  deployed.  Scott  and   Irwin  reentered  LM  after  6 hrs   33 min 
exploring  surface,  28  min  sooner  than  planned  because  Scott  used  up 
more oxygen  than  anticipated. 
After  resting  inside  LM,  recharging  and   repairing  portable  life  sup- 
port  system  (PLSS), and   reviewing  plans  for  second  EVA, astronauts 
left  LM a t   l42:15  GET (7:49 am  EDT Aug.  1). LRV  was  powered  up, 
circuit  breakers  were  cycled,  and   LRV  fron t   steering was  found  to  be 
completely operational.  EVA-2 
traverse  included  stops  at  Spur   Crater, 
Dune  Crater,  Hadley  Plains,  and   area  between  Spur   and   Window 
craters.  Numerous  samples  and   photos  were  obtained  and  TV  trans- 
mission  was  good.  Crew  completed  heat  flow  experiment  initiated  dur- 
ing   EVA-1,  collected  core  sample,  and   deployed  U.S.  flag.  After  stow- 
ing sample container  and   film  in LM,  astronauts  reentered LM a t   1499327 
GET, after  7 h r s   12  min  on  surface dur ing   EVA-2. 
Third  EVA  began  a t  163:18 GET (4:52  am EDT Aug.  2 ) ,   1 h r  45 min 
later  than  planned  because  of  cumulative  changes  in   surface  activities 
timeline.  Late  s tar t   and   requirement  to  protect  nominal  liftof€  time 
required  shortening EVA.  Alternate  EVA  p lan   was  devised  with  traverse 
west  from  LM  to  Hadley  Rille.  Astronauts  traveled  to  Scarp  Crater, 
“The  Terrace”  near  Rim  Crater,  and   Rim  Crater,  collecting  samples 
and  photographing  lunar   surface  features.  Scott  tripped  over  a  rock 

205 

July 26-August  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

July 29-August  4:  T h e  command  and’service  modules  w e r e  photographed  i n   lunar  orbit 
the  scientific  instrument  module  ( S IM )   bay, 
f r o m   the   lunar  module,  giving  a  v iew   of 
housing  cameras  and  sensors  to   record  data  from  the  moon’s  su r face   and  atmosphere. 

and  fell,  but  experienced  no  difficulty  in   getting  up.  Astronauts  re- 
trieved  drill-core-stem  sections  and  samples  near  ALSEP,  returned  to 
LM,  off-loaded LRV  and   stationed  it  for  TV  coverage  of  LM  liftoff,  and 
reentered  LM  a t   168:08 GET,  after  4  hrs   50  min-bringing 
total  EVA 
time to 18 hrs  35 min. 
While  LM  was  on  moon  Worden,  orbiting  moon  in   Endeavor,  com- 
pleted  lunar  and   astronomic photography  and   prepared  for  rendezvous. 
H i s   observations included  discovery  of  fields  of  cinder  cones  made  by 
volcanic  eruptions,  delineation  of  landslide  or  rock  glacier  on  north- 
west  rim  of  crater  on  lunar   farside,  interpretation  of  ray-excluded  zone 
around  crater Proculus a s  result  of  fault  system, and  discovery  of  layers 
on  interior  walls  of  several  craters,  suggesting volcanic  collapse  craters 
of  calderas  in maria. 
Scott  and   Irwin  depressurized LM,  discarded  excess  equipment,  re- 
pressurized  LM,  and  lifted  off  lunar   surface  with  77  kg (170  lbs)   of 
lunar   samples  a t   171:34 GET  ( 1 : l l  pm  EDT  Aug.  2)-66  hrs  55  min 
after  landing  on  moon.  Liftoff,  accompanied by  USAF  anthem  “Off  We 
Go  Into  The  Wild  Blue  Yonder”  taped  and  broadcast  by  astronauts 
from  LM,  was  photographed  in  color  by  camera  on  LRV  left  on  moon 
and   was  seen  by  millions  of  TV  viewers.  Spacecraft  docked  success- 
fully  a t   173:36  GET,  as  TV  viewers  watched.  Scott  and  Irwin  trans- 
ferred  from  LM  to  CSM  with  samples,  equipment,  and  film.  CSM-LM 
separation  and  LM  jettison  were  delayed  one  revolution  to  verify  that 

206 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

July 26-August  7 

CSM  and  LM  hatches  were  completely  sealed.  LM  ascent  stage  was  jet- 
tisoned  and  intentionally  crashed  onto  lunar  surface  a t   26"  22'  north 
latitude  and   15'  east  longitude  a t   181:30  GET, 93 km  (59  m i)   west  of 
Apollo  15  ALSEP site.  Impact  was  recorded  by  Apollo  12 ,   A p o l l o   14 ,  
and Apollo  15  seismometers. 
Orbit-shaping  maneuver  was  performed  during  "3rd  lunar  revo- 
lution  in   preparation  for  subsatellite  launch.  Scientific  subsatellite was 
launched  a t   222:39  GET (4 :13   pm  EDT Aug.  4 )   into  lunar  orbit  with 
141.3-km  (87.8-mi)  apolune  and   102.0-km  (63.4-mi)  perilune.  Hex- 
agonal,  36-kg  (80-lb)  satellite  79  cm  (31   i n )   long and   36  cm  (14 i n )  
in   diameter  carried  three  experiments  and  was  housed  in  SIM  bay 
with  seven  other  new  experiments.  Satellite  extended  three  11/-m 
(5 - f t )   booms,  one  with  magnetometer  to  measure  interplanetary  and 
earth  magnetic fields  near  moon  and   two  for  stabilization.  Satellite also 
carried  charged-particle  sensors  and  equipment  to  detect  variations  in  
lunar  gravity  caused  by  mascons. 
Transearth  injection  maneuver  a t   223:49  GET put  cSM   on  trajectory 
for  home  after  85  hrs  18 min  (74 revolutions)  in   lunar   orbit. 
August  5 -7 :   At  241:58  GET  (11:32  am  EDT Aug.  5 )   Worden  left 
CSM  for  inflight  EVA to   retrieve  panoramic  and   mapping  camera  film 
cassettes  from  SIM  on  SM.  He  made  three  tr ips   to   SIM  bay,  two  to 
retrieve  cassettes  and  one  to  observe  condition  of  instruments,  re- 
entering CSM  af ter  38-min 12-sec EVA. 
CM   Endeavour  separated  from  SM at  294:44  GET. Drogue  and   main 
parachutes  deployed  but  one  of  three  main  parachutes  partially  closed 
dur ing   descent,  causing  harder   landing  than  expected.  CM  splashed 
4 
down  in  mid-Pacific  about  10.1  km  (5.5  nm )   from  recovery  ship 
U.S.S.  Ok inawa  at 295:12  GET (4:47  pm  EDT Aug.  7)-12 
days  7  h r s  
12  min  after  liftoff.  Astronauts,  w e   ring fresh  flight  suits,  were  car-  
ried  by  helicopter  to  biomed  area 
on  recovery  ship  for  post-flight 
examinations.  After  being  declared  in   very  good  shape,  astronauts 
were  flown  on  following  day  to  Hickam  AFB, Hawaii,  and   to  Ellington 
AFB, Tex.  CM   was  retrieved  and   placed  on  board  recovery  ship.  Lunar 
samples,  data,  and   equipment  were  flown  to  E l l i ig ton   AFB, and   CM  
was  off-loaded a t  San Diego. 
Mission  achieved  primary  Apollo  15  objectives:  to  make  seleno- 
logical  survey  and  sampling  of  materials  in  preselected  area  of 
Hadley-Apennine region ; emplace  and   activate  surface  experiments; 
evaluate  capability  of  Apollo  equipment  to  provide  extended  lunar  
surface  stay  time,  increased  EVA  operations,  and   surface  mobility ; 
and   conduct  inflight  experiments  and   photographic  tasks  from  lunar  
orbit.  Launch  vehicle  and  spacecraft  systems  performance  were  near 
n  Delta  V  thrust  switch 

rb i ts)  ; first  subsatellite 

207 

July 26-August  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

launched  in   lunar  orb i t ;   and   largest  amount  of  lunar  samples brought 
to  earth. 
Apollo  15  was  12th  Apollo  mission  to   date,  9th  manned  Apollo 
mission,  and  4 th   successful  lunar  landing  mission.  A p o l b   14  mis- 
sion  had  been  conducted  Jan.  31-Feb.  3.  Apollo  program  was  di- 
rected  by  OMSF;   MSC  was  responsible  for   Apollo  spacecraft  develop- 
ment,  MSFC  fo r   Sa turn   V  launch  vehicle,  and   KSC  fo r   launch  opera- 
tions.  Tracking  and  da ta   acquisition  was  managed  by  GSFC  under 
(NASA  P ro j   Off; NASA  Release  71-245; 
overall  direction  of  OTDA. 
NYT,  7/26-8/7/71;  W Post,  7/27-8/8/71; 
GSFC  SSR,  7/31/71; 
NASA  Special  Release;  NASA  Release  71-119K;  Lannan,  W  S tar ,  
7/30/71,  A l ;  AP, W S tar ,  8/1/71,  A101 
Ju ly  26: President  Nixon  issued  statement  on  successful  Apollo  15  launch: 
“The  flight  of  Apollo  15 is  the  most  ambitious  exploration  yet  under- 
taken  in   space.  Even  as  i t   reflects  man’s  restless  quest  fo r   his  own 
future,  so   it  also  reenacts  another  of  the  ‘deeper  rituals  of  h is  bones’- 
not  only  the  compulsion  of  the  human  spirit  to  know  where  we  are  
going,  but  the  primal  need  in   man’s  blood  to  know  from  what  we 
have  come.  We  hope,  by  this  journey,  to  know  better  the  origins  of 
something  more  of  the  mysteries  of  God’s  great  work.  And  . . . we 
Earth,  the  moon,  and   their  other  planets.  We  hope  to  understand 
hope  to  understand  more  of  man  himself.”  ( P D ,  8/2/71,  1088) 

August  7:  S a f e   splashdown--with  an  extra  bump.  The   Apollo  15  command  module, 
to  the  waves  on  two   o f   its  three 
completing  i t s   1%-day  lunar  mission,  descended 
to   35  k m  
impac t   velocity 
parachutes.  T h e   third  parachute  collapsed,  increasing 
pe r   h r  
(22  m p h ) ,   but  d id   not  endanger 
the  astronauts  o r  
the  spacec ra f t .  

208 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
July 26 
*  House  and  Senate  conferees  submitted  H.  Rpt.  92-377  on  H.R.  9382, 
FY  1972  HUD-space-science appropriations  bill.  Report  recommended 
total  NASA  appropriation  of  $3.298  billion.  Recommended  NASA  ap- 
propriation  included  $2.523  billion  for  R&D  instead  of  $2.518  billion 
proposed  by  House  and   $2.542  billion  proposed  by  Senate;  $52.7 
million  for  construction  of  facilities  instead  of  $33.8  million  proposed 
by  House  and   $56.3  million  by  Senate;  and  $722.6  million  fo r   re- 
search  and  program  management  a s   proposed  by  Senate,  instead  of 
$720 million  a s  proposed by  House. 
Report  also  recommended  $622-million  NSF  appropriation,  $1.150 
million  below  NSF  budget  request.  (H  Rpt 92-377) 
*  Rep.  Joel  T.  Broyhill  (R-Va.)  introduced H.R.  10065 “to  redesignate the  
Washington  National  Airport  a s   ‘Neil  Armstrong  Airport.’  ” Bill  was 
referred  to  House  Committee  on  Interstate  and   Foreign  Commerce. 
(GR,  7/26/71,  H7164) 
area  coalition  of  scientists,  en- 
Union  of  Concerned  Scientists-Boston 
gineers,  and   other  professionals-issued 
report  saying  A E C   tests  had 
confirmed  unreliability  of  emergency  cooling  system  designed  to  sup- 
ply  water  to  nuclear  reactors  but  that  AEC   continued  to   license  opera- 
tion  and  construction  of  reactors  containing  system.  Report  said  if 
accident  occurred  “resulting  catastrophe  and  loss  of  life  might  well 
exceed  anything  this  nation  has  seen  in   time  of  peace.”  (AP,  NYT, 
7/27/71,  53)  
July  27:  U.S.S.R.’s  Mars   2  (launched May  19 )   and Murs  3 (launched May 
28 )   were  continuing  to   operate  satisfactorily  en  route  to  Mars,  Tass 
announced. By  6:OO  am Moscow  time  (11 :00 pm  EDT  July  26)   Mars  2 
had  completed  43   communications  sessions  and   was  17  580 000  km 
(10 924 000  m i)   from  ear th ;   Mars  3  had  completed  38  sessions  and  
was  16 400 000  km  (10 190 000  m i)   from  earth.  Data  from  Mars  2 
and  Mars  3 measurements  of  corpuscular  beams  of  solar  and   galactic 
cosmic  radiation  had  confirmed  da ta   from  same  measurements  con- 
ducted  by  Lunokhod  1 lunar   rover  on  moon.  (Tass,  FBIS-Sov-1&3, 
7/27/71,  L1)  
*  House  agreed  to  conference report  on  H.R.  7109,  FY  1972 NASA  authori- 
zation  bill,  and   sent  measure  to  the  Senate  for  further  action.  Report 
had  recommended  total  authorization  of  $3.355  billion  [see  July  211. 
(CR, 7/27/71,  H7185-8,  D768) 
Aerobee  170 sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from WSMR  carrying 
Univ.  of  Michigan  experiment  to  study  airglow.  Rocket  and  instru- 
ments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR list) 
UPI  compared  $4OO-million  cost  of  ApoZZo  14  mission  (Jan.  31-Feb.  9 )  
with  $445-million  cost  of  Apollo  15  mission.  Breakdown  of  Apollo  15 
cost  was  reportedly:  CSM,  $65  million;  LM,  $50  million;  Sa turn   v 
booster,  $185 million;  ALSEP, $25  million;  LRV,  $8 million;  lunar  orbit 
science  laboratory,  $17  million;  and   operations,  $95  million.  Total 
estimated  cost  of  entire  A ~ o l l o  lunar  exploration  program  through 
Apollo  17  was  $26.5  billion.  (UPI, NYT,  7/27/71,  14 )  
NASA’s Apollo  15  was  5351st  man-made  object  launched  since  U.S.S.R.’s 
Sputnik  I  Oct.  4,  1957, according to Air  Defense Command Hq.  figures 
reported  by  AP.  Center was  tracking 2454 objects still  in  orbit.  (NYT, 
7/27/71,14) 

209 

July 28 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
July 28:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Molniyu  1-18  comsat  from  Plesetsk  to  ensure 
operation  of  a  system  of  long-distance telephone  and   telegraphic  radio 
46 
communications,  and   also  the  transmission of  programs  of  USSR  cen- 
t ra l   television  to  points  of  the  ‘Orbita‘  network  . . . in   the  fa r   north, 
Siberia,  the  Far   East,  and   Central  Asia.”  Orbital  parameters : apogee, 
39 340 km  (24  444.7  m i )  ; perigee,  995  km  (618.3 m i)  ; period,  707.2 
m in ;   and   inclination,  65.3”.  (GSFC  SSR ,  7/31/71  ; Tass,  FBIS-SOV-71- 
145,7/28/71,  L1;  SF ,   1 / 72 , 30 )  
*  Senate  agreed  to  conference report  on  H.R.  7109,  FY  1972 NASA  authori- 
zation  bill  that  recommended  $3.355-billion  authorization.  Bill  was 
cleared  for  President’s  approval.  ( C R ,  S12328-9) 
NASA  announced  i t   would  s tar t   Life  Scientist  Program,  recommended  by 
NAS,  to  increase  cooperation between  university  and  NASA  life  scientists 
in   advancing  disciplines  related  to  NASA  mission.  Disciplines  included 
medical,  biological,  behavioral,  bioengineering,  and  life  support  engi- 
neering  sciences  as  related  to  support  of  living  systems  in  aeronautic 
and  space  operations,  and  exobiology-inquiry 
into  existence  of  life 
outside  universe,  scientific  origin  of  life,  and   planetary  ecology.  Pro- 
gram  would  start  with  selection  of  five  scientists  from  different  uni- 
versities  by  evaluation  of  proposed  investigations  and  their  relevance 
to  NASA%  needs  and  interests.  Scientists  selected  would  spend  one  th ird  
of  time with  their  graduate  students  at  MSFC,  ARC ,   o r   LaRC.  Each  would 
be  awarded  three-year  grant  on  step-funded  basis. 
(NASA   Release 
71-140) 
jet  fighter 
USN  had  been  forced  to  drop  plans  for  purchase  of  F-14B 
aircraft-more 
powerful  version  of  F-14  Tomcat  fighters-because 
of 
continuing  financial  problems,  which  had  already  pushed  estimated 
price  to  $16  million  per  aircraft,  Wushington  Post  reported.  (Getler, 
W  Post, 7/28/71,  A l )  
Soviet  biochemist  Zhores  Medvedev,  in   book  smuggled  to  West,  had  said 
that,  despite  space  achievements, science  in  U.S.S.R.  was  being  throt- 
tled  by  bureaucracy  and  political  ideology,  AP   reported.  In   Plight  o j  
Soviet Science Today   Medvedev  had  said  system  willing  to  let  only 
certain  scientists  travel  abroad  harmed  U.S.S.R.  (AP,  N Y T ,   7/29/71, 
37  1 
Ju ly  29:  USAF  X-24A  lifting-body  vehicle  had  completed  flight-test program 
and   would  be  reshaped  and  renamed X-24B,  FRC  announced.  Decision 
to  end  flight  operations  and   reshape  vehicle  had  been  made  by  joint 
NASA-USAF  flight  research team. 
X-24A  was  one  of  three  lifting-body  vehicles  in   joint  NASA-USAF 
program  managed  since  1967  by  FRC.  Vehicle  had  made  28  flights- 
10 glide  and  18 powered-since  beginning test program  April  17 ,  1969, 
reaching  1687 km  per  h r   (1048 mph)   and  22  000-m  (71  000-ft)  alti- 
tude.  New  X-24B  would  be  built  around  existing  basic  X-24A  struc- 
ture,  but  outward  appearance  would  be  changed  dramatically,  with 
sharply  pointed  flat-iron  shape  replacing  bulbous  one.  New  shape 
would  also  have  improved  hypersonic  lift-to-drag  ratio  that  would 
permit  investigation  of  how  well  vehicle  designed  for  good  hypersonic 
performance  would  perform  a t   low  supersonic,  transonic,  and  subsonic 
speeds,  with  emphasis on  landing.  Other  changes would  include  4.6-m 
(15-f t)   extension  of  nose,  removal  of  rear   center  fin,  1.5-m  (5-f t)   wid- 
ening  in  rear,  and  680-kg  (1500-lb)  increase  in   weight.  Modifications 

210 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

July  29 

would  be  completed  by Martin  Marietta  Corp.  in  about  one  year.  (FRC  
Release  18-71) 
0  NASA  announced selection  of  Martin Marietta  Corp.  to  receive  $12-million7 
award-fee contract  to  support  JPL   in   design  and   development  of  major 
subsystems  of  Viking  Orbiter.  Martin  Marietta  would  assign  engineers 
and   technicians  to  JPL   and  provide  major  subassemblies  for  propul- 
sion system.  (NASA  Release 71-143) 
House,  by  vote  of  362  to  30,  agreed  to  conference  report  submitted 
July  26  on  H.R.  9382,  FY  1972 HUD-space-science appropriations  bill 
that  recommended  NASA  appropriation of  $3.298  billion.  ( C R ,  7/29/71, 
H7363-72) 
*  U.K.  Aerospace  Minister  Frederick  Corfield  told  Parliament  Black  Arrow 
Iaunch vehicle  would  be  abandoned  after  final  launch  in  1971. Project, 
which  cost  $27.6  million  and  took  s ix  years  to  develop, was U.K.’s  only 
satellite  launching  program.  (AP,  W  Star,  7/30/71) 
*  Moscow  Trud  published  account of  test  flight  by  Soviet pilot  Oleg Gudkov 
of  new  supersonic  fighter  aircraft  to  ascertain  whether  aircraft  could 
be  brought  out  of  spin.  Test  had  been  successful.  (FBIS-SOV-71-149, 
8/3/71,  M 1 )  
DOD spokesman  Jerry   W.  Friedheim  said  next  round  of  48   F-14  Tomcat 
fighter  a ircraf t   for  USN  probably  would  not  include  improved  “B” 
version  but  denied  July  28  Washington  Post  report  tha t   USN  had 
dropped  plans  to  purchase  F-14Bs.  Friedheim  said  i n   press  interview 
that  new  engine  to  power  F-14B  had  fallen  behind  schedule and  that 
lag   in   production  had  affected  decision  on  next  48   aircraft.  When 
engine  became  available,  “assessment  will  be  made  on  proceeding with 
( W Post, 7/29/71,  A7) 
the F-14B.” 
0  F irs t   two  DC-10 
jet  transport  a ircraf t   were  delivered  by  manufacturer 
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.  to  American  Airlines  and   United  Airlines 
a t  Long Beach,  Calif.  (Bedingfield, N Y T ,   7/30/71,  54) 
House,  by  vote  of  306  to  98,  agreed  to  Senate amendment to   H.R.  9667, 
$2.9-billion  FY  1972 DOT  appropriations bill  that  included $58.5 million 
to  repay  airlines  for  money  they  invested  in   SST.  ( C R ,   7/29/71, 
H7373-87) 
Washington Post  editorial  criticized  NASA  agreement with New  York Times 
Special  Features,  syndicate  division  of  New  York   Times,  for  byline 
articles  by  ApoZZo  15 astronauts  [see  July  231  and  reprinted  excerpt 
from  Sept.  19,  1963, New  York  T imes   editorial  that  had  scored  earlier 
NASA  agreement  with  publications.  Post  said:  “.  . . we  would  like  to 
record  . . . some  reservations  about  the  practice  of  commercializing 
the  space  program  by  permitting  any  of  its  official  participants  to  sell 
personal  accounts  of  their  experiences.  Strictly  in   legal  terms,  there 
is  not  much  doubt  that  such  material  is  subject  to  copyright  protec- 
tion.  But,  leaving  aside  regulations,  there  is  a  question  of  propriety, 
first  raised  back  in   1963,  when  the  Field  Enterprises  Educational 
Corp.  and  Life  Magazine  nailed  down  contracts  totaling  $1 million 
for  the  personal  stories  of  16  astronauts  over  a  four-year  span.”  New 
York  Times  editorial  in   1963 had  said  sale  of  astronauts’  stories  repre- 
sented  “stain  of  commercialism  on  the  record  of  the  space  program,” 
and   that  astronauts  “should  not  be  permitted  to  reap  enormous  private 
profits  from  outside  sources  on  the  basis  of  their  participation  in   a 
great  national  effort.”  ( W  Pos t ,   7/29/71,  A14) 

211 

July  29 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

e  Dept.  of  Commerce  issued  Metric  America  (SI?-345).  Report  said  U S .  
was  only  major  nation  tha t  had  failed  to  convert to  metric  system  and  
urged  Congress  to  effect  conversion  within  10  yrs.  (AP,  B  Sun, 
7/30/71,  A l ;  DOC  PIO)  
July  30:  President  Nixon  telephoned  congratulations  and  good  wishes  to 
ground  and  flight  crews  of  Apollo  15 following moon  landing.  ( P D ,  
8 /2 /71 ,1099)  
*  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  431  from  Baykonur  into  orbit  with  284-km 
(176.5-mi)  apogee,  165-km  (102.5-mi)  perigee,  89-min  period,  and  
51.7”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Aug.  11.  (GSFC  SSR ,   7/31/71; 
8/31/71,  SBD, 8 /2 /71 ,148)  
Apollo  missions  plus  Surveyor,  Orbiter,  and  Soviet  missions  had  per- 
mitted  first  detailed  study  of  formative stages  of  planetary  body,  UCLA 
scientist  Dr.  George W. Wetherill said  in  Science  article.  “Future  work 
will  require  sampling  distinctly  different  regions  of  the  moon  in   order 
to  provide  data  concerning  other  important  lunar   events,  such  as  the 
time  of  formation  of  the  highland  regions and  of  the  mare  basins,  and 
of  the  extent  to  which  lunar  volcanism  has  persisted  subsequent  to  the 
first  third  of  lunar  history.  This  work  will  require  a  sufficient  number 
of  Apollo  landings,  and   any  further  cancellation  of  Apollo  missions 
will  jeopardize  this  unique  opportunity  to  study  the  development  of  a 
planetary  body  from  its  beginning.  Such  a  study  is  fundamental  to 
our  understanding  of  the  earth  and  other  planets.”  (Science, 7/30/71, 
383-92) 
House,  by  vote  of  192 to  189, passed  H.R.  8432,  to  authorize  emergency 
loan  guarantees  to  major  business  enterprises.  Bill  would  provide  for 
$25O-million  loan  to  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  to   stave  off  bankruptcy, 
New  York  Times  said.  ( C R ,  7/30/71,  H7453-520;  Shanahan,  N Y T ,  
7 /31 /71 ,1 )  
B/G  Benjamin  N.  Bellis  (USAF) ,   project  manager  for  F-15 
jet  fighter 
aircraft  and   for   F-14  and  F-15 
jo in t   engine  development,  said  in  
interview  with  Washington  Evening  Star  tha t   USN  had  instructed  him 
to  drop  plans  for  construction  of  F-14B  engine  in  FY  1972  and  1973 
and  t o   assume  USN  would  not  want  new  engines until  a t   least  FY  1974. 
DOD  spokesman  Jerry   W.  Friedheim  later  told  Star  that  top  DOD  offi- 
cials  insisted  no  final  decision  against  proceeding  with  advanced 
version  of  F-14  had  been  made.  (Kelly,  W  Star,  7/29/71,  4 )  
White  House  announced  Administration  had  requested  $ l l2-m i l l ion  
supplemental  appropriation  for  DOD  to  pay  for   12   additional  F-111 
fighter  bombers.  Washington  Evening  Star  later  said  this  would  be 
sufficient  to  keep  production  line  a t   General  Dynamics  Corp.  Fort 
Worth,  Tex.,  plant  o  en.  I t   -had been  scheduled  to   close  in   spring  of 
1972.  (W S tar ,  7/31771,  A13) 
President  Nixon  formally  changed  name  of  Presidential  Boeing  707 
a ircraf t   from  A i r   Force  One  to  The  Spirit  of  ’76. Change was  made 
a t   request  of  David  J.  Mahoney,  Chairman  of  American  Revolution 
Bicentennial Commission.  A i r   Force  Two would  retain  its  name.  (AI?, 
W Pos t ,  7/31/71,  A2)  
FAA  Administrator  John  H.  Shaffer  announced  FAA was  installing  new 
computer-assisted  weapon  detection  system  a t   one  gate  of  Dulles 
International  Airport  i n   Virginia  to  keep  potential  hijackers  from  
boarding  commercial  flights.  System  automatically  screened  passen- 

212 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

July 30 

gers  a t   rate  of  20  per  min  as they  p 
through  electro-magnetic 
evaluated  by  computer 
fields  that  detected  metal.  Information 
that  could  discriminate  between  d i  
tal  objects  on  basis  of 
weight.  Alarm  sounded  when  excess  metal  or  gun  was  detected. 
(FAA   Release  71-126) 
*  New   Y o r k   Times editorial  commented  on  resignation  of  Dr.  Glenn  T. 
Seaborg a s  AEC   Chairman and  appointment of  Dr.  James R.  Schlesinger 
to   succeed  him:  “In   an  earlier  e ra   the  nation  looked  to  the  A.E.C. 
primarily  to  produce  the  nuc 
ons  on  which  national  defense 
policy  rested.  Today  the  emp 
shifted  to  the  task  of  generat- 
ing vast  amounts  of  nuclear  energy  for  present  and   future  needs,  to  
do  so  economically  and  in   a  manner  that  safeguards  the  environment, 
and   i t   is  in  this  area  particularly  that  Dr.  Schlesinger will  be  expected 
to   throw  light  and   show  leadership.”  He  could  “take  another  hard  
look  a t  the  prospects for  controlled  thermonuclear  fusion  a s   an   energy 
source.  Substantially  increased  research  funds  invested  in   this  area 
might  enable  this  country  in   the  decades  ahead  to  increase  power 
production  and  consumption  greatly  a t   minimum  cost  to  the  environ- 
ment.’,  ( N Y T ,  7 /30 /71 ,30)  
July  31 : President  Nixon,  a t   ceremonies  marking  dedication  of  Rathbun 
Dam  in   Centerville,  Iowa,  referred  to  Apollo  15 astronauts:  “At  this 
very  hour,  if  you  were  watching  television  you  could  see  tha t   fantas- 
tic  ride  in   a  golf  cart  on  the  moon.”  Apollo  15 astronauts  “look  down 
on  earth.  What  does  i t   look  l ike?   Well,  we’ve  had  descriptions  from 
other  astronauts  and  often  they  have  remarked  about  the  fact  tha t  
from  f a r   out  there  the  ear th   looks  like  a  very  peaceful  planet.”  (PD, 
8/9/71,112-5) 
New  Y o r k   Times  editorial  commented  on  Apollo  15  lunar   landing: 
“Today,  tomorrow  and   Monday  will  come  the  payoff  for   the  years  of 
work  by  the  astronauts  and  thousands  of  others  who  made  possible 
last  night’s  success.  The  trek  across  the  moon’s  surface  these  next 
three  days  wilI  be  the   longest  both  in   time  and  in   distance  to  date, 
partly  because  of  the  availability  of  the  lunar  rover  to  permit  moon 
rides  as  well  as moon  walks.  The  vast  variety  of  geological  conditions 
in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Falcon’s  landing  site  suggests  that  these 
excursions may  be extremely  fruitful.”  ( N Y T ,  7/31/71) 
*  NASA  launched  two Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  from  ESRANGE, Kiruna, 
Sweden,  to  sample  noctilucent  clouds  and   particulate  matter  in   upper 
atmosphere.  First  payload  was  launched  to  altitude  of  114,  km  (70.8 
m i )   and  recovered within  2  hrs  15  min  after  launch  in   good  condi- 
tion.  Mission was considered 100% successful. 
Second  payload  attained  106  km  (65.9  m i )   and   was  recovered 
within  2  hrs   of  launch.  Two  of  eight  collector  doors  opened  prema- 
turely  and   caused  slightly  reduced  apogee,  but  experiment  results 
were  not  affected  and   mission  was  judged  100%  successful.  (NASA 
Rpts SRL) 
During JuZy:  Sen.  Howard  W.  Cannon  (D-Nev.)  praised  US. space  shut- 
tle  program  in  Aerospace article:  “Logic  dictates  that  we  should move 
ahead  w i t h   the  shuttle  program,  Experience  tells  us   that  the  aero- 
space  industry  can  respond  to  even  seemingly  impossible  challenges- 
and   that  nations  tha t   reject  the  major  challenges of  their  times  do   not 
remain  major  powers.  And  a  ha rd   fact  of  international  economics  is 

213 

During July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

that  the  United  States  can  remain  prosperous  in   th is   world  only  by 
maintaining  and  utilizing 
its  advanced  technology.” 
(Aerospace, 
7/71,3-7) 
First  book  taken  from  ear th   to  moon  was  not  microfilmed  Bible  carried 
by  Astronaut  Edgar  D.  Mitchell  on  Apollo  14  (launched  Jan.  31, 
1971)  as  had  been  reported  by  UPI,  Robert  H.  Goddard  Library 
publication  Goddard  Biblio  Log  said.  Astronaut  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr., 
had   carried  miniature  copy  of  Rober t   Hutchings  Goddard-Father  of 
the  Space  Age   on  Apollo  11  (launched  July  16,  1969,  45  years  after 
Goddard’s  first  liquid-fueled  rocket  flight)  but  had   not  been  allowed 
by  NASA  to  leave  book  on  moon.  Apollo  11  astronauts had  given  three- 
by  two-inch  book,  published  by  Achille  J .   St.  Onge,  to  Mrs.  Esther 
Goddard,  who  had  donated  i t   to  Goddard  Library  a t   Clark  Univ. 
(Goddard  B ib lw   Log,  7/71,11-2) 
After  more  than  quar ter   century  of  dominating  international  aviation 
scene,  U S .   was  “well  on  its  way  to  becoming,  if   not  a n   also-ran,  just 
another  contender  for  the  trophies  of  the  world’s  aviation  markets,” 
John  F.  Loosbrock  said  in   Air  Force  Magazine  article.  “For   indica- 
tors,  one  only  had  to  stroll  the  display  line,  watch  the  flying  demon- 
strations,  and  eavesdrop  a t   the  chalets”  a t   Pa r i s   Air  Show.  Bitterest 
pill  was  “lack  of  American  presence  in  the  supersonic-transport  com- 
were  impressing  customers,  the  press,  the  public.  . . .”  Equally  im- 
petition,  while  the  Soviet  TU-144  and  the  Anglo-French  Concorde 
portant  was  “dazzling  a r ray   of  commercial  and   military  aviation 
products”  displayed  by  European  suppliers.  For   U S .   to  forge  ahead 
again  in   aviation  and   advmced  technology  generally  it  was  going  to 
require  “new  ways  of  looking  a t   the  problem,  new  ways  of  doing 
things.  We  a re   pricing  ourselves  out  of  the  market,  not  only  for  what 
we  hope  to  sell  abroad,  but  even  for   what  we  would  like  to  sell  to 
ourselves.”  (AF  Mag,  7/7,  6 )  

214 

August  1971 

August  1 :   Pope  Pau l   VI  told  crowd  assembled  a t   Castel  Gondolfo  that  he  
had  sent  confidential message  to  Apollo  15 astronauts  on  their  July  26- 
Aug.  7  lunar   mission.  Astronauts  had  replied:  “Our  journey  is  for   all 
men  and  we  hope  that  the  talents  which  God  has   given  us   will  enable 
us  to  satisfy  those  who  so  kindly  support  our  undertaking.”  (AP, 
W  Star, 8/2/71,  A2 )  
Number  of  accredited  newsmen  covering  ApoUo  15  mission  had  dwin- 
dled  to  402  from  high  of  1200  for Apollo  11,  UPI  noted.  ApoUo  12 
had  been  covered  by  700  newsmen  and  Apollo  14 ,  by  600.  (W   Star, 
8/1/71,  A10) 
*  Cuban  internal  radio  newscasts  gave  detailed  account  of  Apollo  15  mis- 
sion.  Radio  RELOJ,  all-news  station  in  Havana,  read  reports  of  astro- 
nauts’ activities  on moon.  ( N Y T ,  8/3/71) 
Twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  AEC .   In   statement  commemorating  event 
Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  outgoing  AEC   Chairman,  said,  “The  primary 
mission  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  to  develop  and  use  atomic 
energy  to  improve  the  public  welfare,  to  promote  world  peace  and   to 
assure  the  common  defense  and  security  ha s   been  a  success.” 
(A EC  
Release  0-131) 
August  2:  Twin  eight-cent  stamps  commemorating decade  of  US. achieve- 
ment  in   space  were  issued  dur ing   ceremonies at  KSC,  MSC,  and   MSFC 
in   conjunction  with  Apollo  15   mission.  Stamps,  depicting  Apollo  15 
lunar  landing  and  LRV  carrying  Apollo  15  astronauts,  later  went  on 
sale  throughout  U.S.  (MSFC   Release  71-132;  NYT,  7/18/71,  24;  W 
Star, 8/1/71,  B7; MSFC  PAO )  
*  Interview  of  Dr.  Rocco  A.  Petrone,  Apollo Program  Director,  was  pub- 
lished  by  US. News  & Forld  Repor t .   Dr.  Petrone  said:  “Many  peo- 
ple  think  Apollo  had  only  a  singular  goal-that 
is,  land   a  man  on  the 
moon  and re turn   him  safely  to  earth.  Tha t   was  not  the  only  goal  of 
Apollo.  Very  clearly,  in   President  Kennedy’s  address  to  the  Congress 
in   May  of  1961,  a  landing  on  the   moon  was  chosen  a s   a  focal  point. 
The  intention  was  that  the  U.S.  would  become  pre-eminent  in   space- 
learning  to  operate,  I  believe  a s   President  Kennedy  said,  on   a  new 
ocean,  a  new  frontier.”  Space  research  was  “definitely  relevant.  Many 
of  the  problems we’re  trying  to  solve have  to  do  with  the  environment. 
We’ve  already  made  a  head  s ta r t   in  that  field  with  our  work  on  
spaceships,  which  requires  that  we  carry  the  environment  with  us. 
We  have  got  to  purify  the  gases  we  have,  we’ve  got  to  remove  odors, 
we  have  to  restore  the  oxygen  we  use.  . . . We  are   learning  how  to 
rehabilitate  an   environment.  These  tools,  these  techniques,  these  un- 
derstandings  will  have  relevance here  on  earth.”  (U S  News ,   8/2/71) 
*  Newspapers  commented  on  Apollo  15  mission,  while  astronauts  were 
exploring lunar  surface. 
Christian  Science  Monitor  editorial  praised  Apollo  15: “Once 
again,  a  superbly  synchronized  lunar  mission  has  proven  man’s 

215 

August  2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

capacity  to  focus  the  knowledge  of  hundreds  of  specialists  to  achieve 
a  singular  goal.  Apollo  15  is  one  more  grand  historic  achievement. 
I t   testifies  to  the  benefit  tha t   science  and   technology,  properly  har- 
nessed, can reap fo r  mankind.”  (CSM ,  8/2/71) 
French  novelist  and   TV  critic  Jean  Dutourd  commented  on  Apollo 
15  TV coverage in   France  Soir. I t  had  made  him  walk  away  from  TV 
set.  “It must  be  c o n f e s ~ e d , ~ ~  he  wrote,  “that  these  experiments  are  an 
unspeakable bore.”  (Reuters,  W Pos t ,  8/3/71,  A l l )  
New  York  Times  editorial  defended  manned  space  flight:  “After 
Apollos  16 and  17  next  year,  there  are   no  known  plans  of  any  nation 
to  send  any  more  men  to  the  moon.  A  vast  and  complex  technology 
developed  a t   the  cost  of  many  billions  of  dollars  over  the  last  decade 
is   being  abandoned  even  as  its  vast  potentialities  are   being  demon- 
strated.  If  American  resources  do  not  permit  manned  lunar  explo- 
ration  beyond  the  end  of  next  year,  the  United  Nations  should  take 
over  the  task,  appealing  to  all  governments  for  funds  and  soliciting 
contributions  a s   well  from  private  individuals  and  private  business 
enterprises.  The  dusty  planet  that  is  the  moon  could  become  the 
planet  of  human  cooperation,  a  new  frontier  of  hope  for  all  man- 
kind.”  ( N Y T ,  8/2/71,  22 )  
9  Senate  approved  conference  report  submitted  July  26  on  H.R.  9382, 
FY  1972  HUD-SpaCe-SCienCe  appropriations  bill  that  included  $3.298- 
billion  NASA  and   $619-million NSF appropriations.  Bill  was  cleared  for  
President’s  approval.  (CR,  8/2/71,  5 1 2 8 3 2 4 ;   PD,  8/16/71,  1157)  
Louis  H.  Brennwald,  former  Vice  President  of  Northrop  Aircraft  Corp. 
in  charge  of  Puerto  Rico  operations,  became  Director  of  Administra- 
(ARC   Astrogram,  9/2/71,  1;  A R C  
tion  for  Ames  Research  Center. 
P I O )  
*  Senate  by  vote  of  49  to  48   passed  and   cleared  fo r   President’s  approval 
H.R.  8432,  authorizing  $250  million  for   emergency  loan  guarantees 
to  ma jor   business  enterprises.  Legislation  ended  immediate  threat  of 
bankruptcy  to  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  and  assured  Lockheed  ade- 
quate  funds  to  complete construction  of  G l O l l  TriStar  jet  transport 
aircraft, Washington Post  later  said. 
President  Nixon  issued  statement  following  Senate  action : “The 
Senate’s  decision  to   approve  a  government  loan  to  the  Lockheed 
Corporation  is  in   the  best  interests  of  all  the  American  people.  I 
greet  this  vo te-as   I  greeted  the  vote  in  the  House  of  Representatives 
last  week-with 
gratitude  and   deep  satisfaction.  This  action  will  save 
tens  of  thousands  of  jobs  that  would  otherwise have  been  eliminated. 
I t   will  have  a  major  impact  on  the  economy  of  California,  and   will 
contribute  greatly  to  the  economic strength  of  the  country  a s   a  whole. 
I t   will  help  ensure  that  the  Nation’s  largest  defense  contractor,  and  
its  largest  airframe  manufacturer,  will  continue  serving  the  Nation’s 
needs.  I t   will  also  help  ensure  that  this  country  will  continue  to  play 
a  leading  role  in   the  development  of  aerospace  technology.”  (CR, 
8/2/71,  S12823-63;  Samuelson,  W  Po s t ,   8/3/71,  A l ;   PD ,   8/9/71, 
116-7) 
August  2-6:  U S .   and   Soviet  scientists met  in   Moscow  to  recommend  jo in t  
projects  and   exchanges  in   near-earth  space  research,  investigations  of 
moon  and  planets,  development  of  spave  meteorology,  and  space  ap- 
plications  related  to  na tura l   environment.  Recommendations of  three 

216 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1971 

August  2-6 

working  groups  representing  NASA   and   Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences 
would  be  forwarded  to  Academy  President  Mstislav  V.  Keldysh  and 
to  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  for  consideration- 
U S .   participants  were  led  by  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  NASA  Associate 
Administrator  for   Space  Science  and   Applications ; Deputy  Associate 
Administrator 
(Science)  Leonard  Jaffe;  and  NOAA’S  Director  of 
National  Environmental  Satellite  Services  David  S.  Johnson.  U.S.S.R. 
participants  were  headed  by  Dr.  Boris  N.  Petrov,  Chairman  of  Coun- 
cil  for   International  Cooperation  in   Space  Research  of  Soviet  Acad- 
emy  of  Sciences;  Vice  President  Aleksander  P.  Vinogradov  of  Soviet 
Academy;  and   Deputy  Chief  L.  A.  Aleksandrov,  Deputy  Chief  for 
Technology,  Main  Administration  of  Hydrometeorology  Services, 
U.S.S.R.  Council  of  Ministers.  (NASA  Release  71-147;  NASA  In t   Aff)  
August  3 .- Astronaut-geologist  Harrison  H.  Schmitt  praised  ApoZZo  15 
astronauts  in  MSC  briefing  for  their  completion  of  EVA  geological 
activities:  “I  don’t  think  there   is  any  question  that  we   had  a  fan- 
tastic  exploration  mission.  There’s  just  no  question  in   my  mind  we 
sent  two  very  competent  observational  scientists  to  the  moon.”  Sam- 
ples  collected,  Schmitt  said,  “sounded  very  much  like  . . . crystalline 
rocks  . . . tha t   may  well,  and  I  emphasize  may  . . . represent  the  early 
lunar  crust.  I  am  not  sure  until  we  see  the  samples  that  we’re  much 
closer  to  understanding  the  origin  of  the  rille  than  when  w e   started, 
except  tha t   there  probably  are   some  origin  theories  that  can  be 
eliminated now. 
‘? think  tha t   the  net  result  of  the  mission  was  to  indicate  that  our 
preliminary  thinking  about  the  moon  . . . still  looks  like  a  valid  pic- 
ture,  it’s  a  valid  foundation  [on]  which  to   attempt  to  further  select 
sites  and   to  further  approach  the  analysis  of  rocks  and   soils  tha t   are  
brought  back.”  (Transcr ip t ;   AP,  B  Sun, 8/4/71,  A6) 
Apollo  15  LM  Falcon’s  liftoff  from  moon  was  described  by  Tom  Wicker 
in   New  York  T im e s :   ‘‘The  first  televised  liftoff  of  a  manned  space- 
craft  from  the  moon  had  none  of  the  beauty  and   power  of  those 
moments  when  a  huge  Sa turn   rocket  rises  majestically  into  space 
from  Cape  Kennedy.  The  quick  pop  that  sent  off  the  Falcon  in  a 
shower  of  sparks  looked  more  like  something  held  over  from  the 
Fourth  of  July,  and  the  par t   of  the  landing  craft  left  on  the  moon  was 
all  too  suggestive of  an  auto  graveyard.”  Two  years  after  first  moon- 
walk,  “Americans  do  not  . . . seem  nearly  so  interested  as  they  were 
in  these  prodigious  feats  of  modern  man.  Even  in   living  color  and  
liven  up 
with  tha t   great  American  love  object-an 
auto,  of  sorts-to 
the  scene,  the  latest  moon  show  seemed  to  need  something.  Unfortu- 
nately  the  LEM  liftoff  didn’t  turn   out  to  be  it.”  ( N Y T ,  8/3/71,  27)  
U.S.S.R.’s  Lumkhod  1 lunar  rover  (landed  on  moon  by  Luna  17  Nov. 
17,  1970)   was  powered  up  to  begin  experiments  for  10th  lunar   day. 
(UPI,  W Po s t ,  8/4/71,  A6) 
*  New   Yo rk   Times editorial  commented  on  Apollo  15: “All  the  evidence 
suggests  tha t   this  is  the  most  productive  scientific  expedition  ever 
carried  out  in  space.  Even  before  the  astronauts’  own  return,  the 
information  they  have  sent  back  has  already  forced  reconsideration 
of  some  key  ideas  about  the  natural  history  of  the  moon.  In   ultimate 
perspective,  however,  it  may  tu rn   out  that  the  dividends  from  the 
Falcon’s  stay  on  the  moon  w i l l   be  a s   substantial  in   the  realm  of 

217 

August  3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

changed  human  ideas  and  aspirations  as  in  scientific  knowledge.  For 
millions  who  watched  the  superb  television  pictures  of  the  two  astro- 
nauts  working  comfortably  on  the  lunar  surface,  the  image  that  came 
across  was  tha t   of  a  friendly  moon,  a  place  where  men  could  walk 
and   ride  and   work  with  ease.  This  is  a  fa r   cry  from  the  traditional 
picture  of  the  moon  as  a  hostile,  alien  environment  totally  inhospit- 
able to man.”  ( N Y T ,  8 /3 /71)  
GAO  investigation  of  NASA  selection  of  NR  Rocketdyne  Div.  for   prime 
contract  for  final  design  and  manufacture  of  reusable  space  shuttle 
[see  July  131  was  requested  by  Bruce N.  Torell,  President  of  P ra t t   & 
Whitney  Div.  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.,  in  telegram  to  Elmer  B. 
Staats,  U S .   Comptroller  General.  Bases  for  protest  were  that  source 
selection  had  disregarded  objective  of  the  RFP,  NASA  had   failed  to  
conduct  “written  or  ora l   discussions”  on  proposals,  P ra t t   &  Whitney 
felt  its  proposal  was  “clearly  entitled  to  a  superior  technical  evalua- 
tion  to  the  technical  proposal  of  Rocketdyne,”  and  NASA  had  failed 
to  give  proper  consideration  to  “Pra t t   &  Whitney’s  test-proven  flight 
weight  design  and  greater  expesience.” 
I n   letter  to  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  nine  sena- 
tors  requested  that  no  award  of  space  shuttle  engine contract  be  made 
until  GAO  investigation  had  been  completed.  ( C R ,  8/6/71,  S13789) 
0  Arcas  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from   Wallops  Station  car-  
rying  Univ.  of  Pennsylvania  Ionospherics  experiment.  Rocket  and  
instruments functioned satisfactorily.  (SR list) 
*  Twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  invention  of  computer  by  Dr.  J.  P.  Eckert 
and  Dr.  John  W.  Mauchly  of  Univ.  of  Pennsylvania. New   York   Times 
editorial  Aug.  9  commented  on  anniversary:  “Man’s  invasion  of 
space,  up  to  and  including  Apollo  15’s  latest  feats,  would  have  been 
impossible  without  computers.  So  would  much  of  the  rest  of  modern 
science and  technology.”  (Smith, N Y T ,  8/4/71,  43:  N Y T ,  8/9/71,  2 8 )  
Dr.  Georgy  N.  Babakin,  prominent  Soviet  space  scientist  who  had  de- 
signed  equipment  for   unmanned  Soviet  spacecraft,  died  a t   age  56. 
Izves t ia   obituary  said  Dr.  Babakin  had  been  recipient  of  Hero  of 
Socialist  Labor,  highest  Soviet  civilian  title,  and  corresponding mem- 
ber  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  and  had  made  “a  great  contribu- 
tion  to  the  development  of  Soviet  space  technology  and  the  study  of 
the moon and Venus.”  ( N Y T ,  8 /5 /71 ,34 )  
*  Of  80  new  underground  missile  silos  being  constructed  by  U.S.S.R.,  a t  
least  6  had  been  started  after  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  announced  May  20 
tha t   they  would  seek  to  limit  construction  of  nuclear  weapons,  Wush- 
ington  Post  quoted  sources  as  saying.  (.Getler,  W Pos t ,   8/3/71,  A l )  
August  4 :   NASA  issued  RFPS  to  major  a irframe   manufacturers  for  design 
and  fabrication  of  two  experimental  transport  jet  STOL  a ircraf t   to  
start  Quiet-sToL  program  to  relieve  a irpor t   noise  and  congestion. 
Aircraft,  incorporating  propulsive  lift  principles,  would  provide  tech- 
nological  data  and  experience  for  developing  environmentally  accept- 
able,  economical,  and  safe  fan-jet STOL  transport  system  in   NASA-DOT- 
FAA-USAF  program.  Program  would  implement  major  recommenda- 
tions  of  jo in t   NASA-DOT  Civil  Aviation  Research  and  Development 
(CARD) Study  by  providing  industry  with  basis  for  STOL  development, 
Government  regulatory  agencies  with  rules  for  STOL  certification  and  

218 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

August  4 

tactical  airlift  capability. 

operation,  and   USAF  with  modernized 
(NASA  Release 71-146) 
seek- 
of  wealthy  private  citizens-was 
Committee  for  the  Future-group 
ing  to  finance  return  t r ip   to   Hadley  Rille,  ApoZZo  15  landing  site, 
with  surplus  Apollo  spacecraft,  Reuters  reported  in   Baltimore  Sun. 
Group  hoped  to  recover  contemplated  $4800-million investment  by 
selling moon  rocks,  TY  film,  and  photographic  and  literary  rights,  and  
by  charging  for   scientific  experiments  conducted.  Group  had  an-  
nounced  proposal  to  operate  mission  “Harvest  Moon”  after  final 
ApoIIo  flight  in  1972  because  i t   seemed  incredible  that  man  could 
invest  $25  billion  and  10  yrs   to  reach  moon  and  then  “stop  without 
. . . looking  a t   the  moon’s  value  to  man  and  his  future.”  Members  of 
committee  had   spoken  informally  with  NASA  officials,  Reuters  said. 
Officials  had  said  privately  that  plan  stood  little  chance  of  approval. 
(B  Sun, 8/4/71,  A6) 
*  NASA,  National  Weather  Service  and  Environmental  Data  Service 
spokesmen,  questioned  by  Washington  Post,  said  their  agencies  had  
received  complaints  from  public  that  ApolZo  15 mission  had  caused 
heavy  rainfall  over  Washington,  D.C.,  area.  They  denied  that  mis- 
sion  was  responsible  and   that  rains  accompanying  Apollo  13 and  14 
missions  had  been  anything  more  than  coincidence.  (Cohen,  W  Post, 
8/5/71,  B1) 
Senate  Committee  on  Armed  Services  unanimously  approved  H.R.  8687, 
$21-billion  FY  1972  military  procurement  authorization,  decrease  of 
$100  million  over  House-passed  figure  of  $21.1  billion.  Committee,  a t  
Administration’s  request,  restored  $801  million  for  procurement  of 
48  F-147  carrier-based  fighter  aircraft  built  for  USN  by  Grumman 
Aerospace  Corp.  (CR,  8/4/71,  D824;  Finney,  N Y T ,   8/5/71,  11) 
August  4-13:  ARC’S  specially  equipped  Convair  990  jet  a ircraf t   Galileo 
carried  29  scientists  and  4500 kg  (10 000 lb s )   of  instruments  on  series 
of  ‘flights from  Hickham  AFB,  Hawaii.  Purpose  of  flights  was  to  in- 
vestigate  Mars’  invisible  infrared  light  radiations  while  flying  above 
99%   of  earth‘s  occluding atmospheric water  vapor  during Mars’  closest 
approach  to  earth  since  1671.  Flight  path  was  869 km  (540  m i )   south 
of  Hawaii  along  13” north  latitude  meridian.  Mars  was  about  56  mil- 
lion  km  (35  million  m i )   from  earth.  Galileo  also  carried  vector  mag- 
netometer  to  investigate continental  dr if t   and sea floor  spreading in  ARC  
experiment.  Expedition was  sponsored by  ARC   Airborne  Science  Office. 
(NASA   Release  71-145;  UPI,  N Y T ,   8/7/71,  8 ;  ARC  Astrogram,  8/19/ 
7 L 1 )  
August  4-20:  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  outgoing  AEC   Chairman,  and  group 
of  US. nuclear  scientists  toured  peaceful  nuclear  energy  facilities  in 
U.S.S.R.  at  invitation  of  Chairman  Andronik  Petrosyants  of  Soviet 
State  Committee  for  Nuclear  Energy.  (A EC   Release  0-126;  AEC   P IO )  
August  5:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  432  from  Baykonur  into  orbit  with 
252-km  (156.6-mi)  apogee, 200-km  (124.3-mi) perigee,  89.1-min  period 
and  51.7”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered Aug.  18. (GSFC SSR, 8/31/71, 
SBD, 8 /9 /71 ,179 )  
ESRO and  FAA  announced  in   Madrid  agreement  on  program  for  use  of 
satellites  to  control  civil  a i r   traffic.  At  least  four  satellites  would  be 
launched  over  Atlantic  and   Pacific  beginning  in   1975.  System  would 
be  used  for  air-to-air communications and   as  navaid  to  avoid  midair 

219 

August  5 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

collisions.  Committee  to  administer  program  would  be  appointed  from 
ESRO,  FAA,  and  representatives  of  Australia,  Canada,  Ireland,  Philip- 
pines,  Japan,  and  Portugal.  (Reuters,  B Sun,  8/6/71,  A2)  
British  aviatrix  Sheila  Scott  arrived  at  London  Airport  in   Piper  Aztec 
a ircraf t   to  complete  55 000-km  (34  000-mi)  solo  flight  dur ing   which 
she participated  in  NASA  Nimbus  4  experiment  [see  June  11. Miss  Scott 
claimed seven records.  ( W Post, 8/6/71,  A6) 
First  commercial  flight  of  McDonnell  Douglas  DC-10 
jet  transport  a ir-  
craf t  was ‘flown by  American Airlines between Los Angeles and Chicago. 
More  than  80%  of  seats  were  occupied  dur ing   3  h r   18  min  flight. 
( C R ,   8/6/71,  E9096-7;  Yarborough,  W  Star,  8/18/71,  D10;  AAL 
PRO ) 
Soviet  engineer  0. Sashin  described  in   Sotsialisticheskaya  Industriya  ac- 
tivities  of  U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1 lunar   rover,  landed  on  moon  by 
Luna  17,  Nov.  17,  1970:  At  time  of  launch  “it  w a s   supposed  that  the 
whole  . . . program  could  be  fulfilled  in   3 lunar  work  days.  . . . Over 
these  three  days  Lunokhod-1  . . . visited  a  multitude  of  craters,  re- 
peatedly  surmounting  rock  fields.  . . . In   all,  dur ing   the  3  working 
days  envisaged  by  the  initial  program,  42  radio  communications ses- 
sions were  held  with  Lunokhod-1,  dur ing  which  8,924  radio  commands 
were  issued  and   fulfilled.  . . . the  route  covered  by  the  apparatus 
amounted  to  3,551  meters  [3883  yards],  the  television  cameras  trans- 
mitted  to  earth  more  than  80  high-quality  panoramas  of 
the  sur-  
rounding  locality  and  the  scientists  obtained  vast  information  about 
the moon.  The  fourth  working day passed,  then  a  fifth, and  a  sixth.  . . . 
Each  was  succeeded  by  a  2-week  lunar  night  with  all  its  ‘charms’  in- 
cluding  an  outside  temperature  which  drops  to  below  minus  150 
degrees.  But  the  next  morning  came  and  Lunokhod-1,  roused  by  a 
radio  command  from  ear th ,   obediently set  about  its  work. 
“The  work  of  the  self-propelled lunar  scout  . . . continues.  . . . 132  
radio  communications sessions  have  been  held  . . . in   which  22,792 
radio  commands  have  been  given.  A  route  10,226  meters  [ll 183 
yards]  . . . over  the  lunar   surface  has  been  covered.  The  10th  work- 
ing   day  on  the  moon  has  arrived.  And  again  the  indefatigable  scout 
[is]  continuing  its  search.”  (FBIS-~ov-158-3,  8/16/71,  L1-3) 
Results  of  Harr is   survey  of  1614  U S .   households  on  priority  areas  for 
cuts  in   Federal  funding were  published  in   Washington Post.  Top  three 
candidates for  cuts were  Vietnam  war,  foreign  aid,  and  space program ;  
50%  of  those  polled  favored  cut  in   space  program;  13%  would  cut 
program  least  of  Federal  spending  areas  listed.  Support  for  spending 
in   education, urban  aid,  and   environmental areas,  Harris  said, “appears 
to be on  the  rise.”  (Harris, W Post, 8 /5 /71)  
August  6 :  USAF  launched  nine  satellites  from  Vandenberg AFB  by  one Atlas 
booster  at  5:11  pm  PDT  (8 : l l  pm  ED T ) .   Ov  1-20  Orbiting  Vehicle- 
carry ing   energetic  proton  analyzer,  particle  energy  and  flux  thermal 
detector,  and  w solar  radiation expe r imen t -en te red  orbit with  1932.8- 
km  (1201-mi)  apogee,  136.8-km  (85-mi)  perigee,  105.9-min  period, 
and   92”  inclination  and   reentered Aug.  28.  Ov  I-21-carrying 
velocity 
mass  spectrometer,  atmospheric  composition  sensor,  and  ELF/VLF  an-  
tenna  effects transceiver-entered  orbit with 917.3-km  (570-mi)  apogee, 
788.6-km  (490-mi)  perigee,  101.9-min  period,  and  87.6”  inclination. 
Cannonball  2  (OAR  901)  carried  accelerometers to  model  atmospheric 

220 

August  6 

I t   reentered  Sept.  19. 
Five  remaining  satellites  were  ejected  from  Ov  1-21.  RTD  701, 
which  would  serve  as  calibration  target,  enter 
with  915.7-km 
569-mi)  apogee,  774.1- 
87.6’ 
inclination.  Four 
data  for  use  i n   design  and   de 
parameters : apogee,  917.3 
(474-482  m i )  ; period  101. 
(Pres   Rpt  72 ;   SBD,  8/10/71,  187 ;   GSFC SSR,  1/31/72) 
0  President  Nixon  approved  H.R.  7109,  $3.384-billion  NASA  FY  1972  au- 
thorization  bill  that  became  P.L.  92-68.  Total  authorization  was  $84 
million  above  budget  request  of  $3.300  billion  and   $86  million  above 
FY  1971   new  obligational  authority  (NOA )   of  $3.298  billion.  Bill 
authorized  for  R&D  $2.603  billion,  increase  of  $85.5  mill‘ ion  over 
budget  request  of  $2.518  billion  and   decrease  of  $90  million  from 
FY  1971  authorization  of  $2.693  billion;  for  construction  of  facilities, 
$58.4  million,  up  $2.1  million  from  budget  request  of  $56.3  million 
and  $24  million  above  FY  1971   authorization  of  $34.5  million;  and  
for  research  and  program  management, $723  million,  down  $4  million 
from  budget  request  of  $727  million  but  $40  million  above  $683.3 
million  authorized in  FY  1971. 
Bill  included  $29.3-million  budget  amendment  to  cover  Federal  pay 
increases.  I t   added  $30 million  to  budget  request  for  Skylab  and Space 
Shuttle  programs,  $43  million  for  nuclear  power  and  propulsion,  $2.5 
million  for  ear th   resources  survey,  and  $12.5  million  for  aeronautical 
research  and   technology.  It  reduced  requested  authorization  for  lunar  
and   planetary  exploration  by  $10  million.  (PD,  8/9/71,  1136;  NASA 
Budget  Off; A&A   1970 )  
Final  communications  session  of  10th  lunar  day  was  held  by  Soviet 
ground  controllers  with  Lunokhod  1  lunar  rover  on  moon,  Tass  an- 
nounced.  Vehicle  had  traveled  215  m  (235  yds)   during  10th  lunar 
day,  bringing  total  distance  covered  since  landing  on  moon  Nov.  17, 
1970, on  board  Luna  17  to  10 452  m  (11 430  yds) . (FBIS-SOV-159-3, 
8/17/71,  L1 )  
0  NSF  announced  $51000   gran t   to  Emory  Univ.  to  develop  and  evaluate 
experimental  program  to  reorient  former  defense-aerospace  scientists 
and   technologists  into  research  on  societal  problems. 
( NSF  Release 
71-177) 
Daniel  J .   Haughton,  Chairman  of  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  told  press  in  
London  that  he   hoped  G l O l l  Tr iS tar   a irbus   and   Rolls-Royce RB-211 
engine  program  would  be  revived  in   “matter  of  weeks.”  Lockheed 
needed  more  orders  to  reach  estimated  breakeven  figure  on  Tr iS tar  
sales  of  from  255  to  265 aircraft.  (AP,  NYT,  8/7/71,  28)  
on  of  Dr.  James  R.  Schlesinger and William 0. 
a  Senate confirmed nom 
c.  (CR ,  8/6/71,  D845) 
Doub  as members 
August 7: President  Nixon  issued  statement following successful  splashdown 
of  Apollo  15  spacecraft:  “Apollo  15 has  returned  safely  to  Earth.  I t  
brings with  i t  new  proof  of  man’s  invincible will  to  master  the  moment 

221  

August  7 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

of  his  own  destiny.  I t   brings  new  tribute  to  man’s  unquenchable thirst 
for  understanding.  I t  brings  the  seeds of  scientific understanding which 
may  open  a  new  chapter  in   the  history  of  our  planet.  We  salute  Astro- 
nauts  Scott,  Irwin  and   Worden,  who  have  stood  poised  on  behalf  of 
mankind  on  the  brink  of  man’s  new  world.’’  ( P D ,  8/16/71,  1154)  
*  Delegation  of  congressmen  watched  Apollo  splashdown  from  onboard 
recovery  ship  for  first  time.  Congressmen-prevented 
from  attending 
previous  manned  space  splashdowns  by  limited  space  on  ships  and  
expense  of  flying  them  from  Washington,  D.C.,  to  mid-Pacific-were 
flown  to  U.S.S.  Okinuwa  from  Hawaii  by  helicopter.  Congress  was  not 
in   session.  Watching  ApolZo  15  splashdown  were  Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague 
(D-Tex.) , Chairman  of  House Committee on  Science and  Astronautics’ 
Subcommittee  on  Manned  Space  Flight;  Rep.  Edward  P.  Bolane 
(D-Mass.) ; Rep.  J.  Edward  Roush  (D-Ind.) ; Rep.  Richard  T.  Hanna 
(D-Calif.);  Rep.  Joseph  M.  McDade  (R -Pa . ) ;   and  Rep.  Charles  A. 
Mosher  (R-Ohio).  (W Post, 8/8/71,  A10) 
U.N.  Secretary  General U  Than t   said  in  message  to  President  Nixon  that 
Apollo  15  was  “another  brilliant  chapter  in  man’s  peaceful  exploration 
of  outer space.”  (Reuters, N Y T ,  8/8/71) 
Philadelphia  Inquirer  editorial  praised  Apollo  15  crew : “Their  workman- 
like  approach  to  arduous  tasks,  combined  with  fascinating  descriptive 
commentary,  gave  Scott  and   Irwin  good  credits  for  showmanship  as 
well  as  technical  expertise.  And  the  superb  orchestration  from  mission 
control  in   Houston  with  Joseph  Allen  directing  the  score  with  the 
precision  of  a  maestro  on  the  podium,  added  an   esthetic  touch  to  a 
performance  that  should win  raves  from  drama  critics  as  well  as  space 
buffs.  All  concerned  with  Apollo  15   rate  the  nation’s  applause  for  an 
almost  flawless  performance  thus  far.”  ( P  Znq,  8/7/71) 
Arcas sounding  rocket launched  by  NASA  from  Ft.  Greely,  Alaska,  carried 
GSFC  experiment  to  obtain  ozone  measurements  in   conjunction  with 
Nimbus  4  satellite  overpass.  Because  of  problems with  ground  tracking 
equipment  no  telemetry  signal  was  received  from  payload  until  rocket 
reached  27-km  (16.8-mi)  altitude  on  descent  side  of  apogee.  Radar 
did  not  acquire  rocket  or  ejected  payload  and  payload  was  not  recov- 
ered.  Flight,  first  in   three-flight  series,  was  rated  partially  successful. 
Second  and  third  rockets  in   series  would  be  launched  Aug.  9  and  14. 
(NASA  Rpt SRL; SR l is t)  
August  8 :  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos 433  into orbit with 299-km  (185.8-mi) 
apogee,  112-km  (69.6-mi)  perigee,  88.6-min  period  and   49.4’ 
inclina- 
tion.  Satellite  reentered  Aug.  9.  (GSFC  SSR,  8 /31 /71)  
ApoZZo  15  Astronauts  David  R.  Scott,  James  B.  Irwin,  and  Alfred  M. 
Worden  were  greeted  by  crowd  of  3500  persons  dur ing   brief  stopover 
in  Hawaii  en  route  to  Ellington  AFB,  Tex.  On  arrival  in  Texas  astro- 
nauts were cheered by  2500 persons who waved  banners  and   flags while 
band  played  “Fly  Me  to  the  Moon.”  Astronauts  were  first  to  re turn  
from  moon  without  being  required  to  undergo  quarantine.  (Stevens, 
N Y T ,  8 /9 /71 ,1 ;   AP,  C T r i b ,  8/10/71) 
Soviet President  Nikolay  V.  Podgorny  had   sent  congratulations  to  Presi- 
dent  Nixon  on  successful  completion  of  A p o h   15  mission,  Tass  re- 
ported.  Podgorny had   asked  President  Nixon  to  convey  congratulations 
and  good  wishes  to  “ c o u r a g e o d   A p o l b   1s astronauts.  (FBIS-sOv-71- 
153,8/9/71,  G I )  

222 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1971 
August 8 
Newspapers  published preliminary  summary  of  Apo l lo   15 ’s   scientific  a n d  
technical  achievements. Thomas O’Toole  said  in   Washington Post:  “The 
voyage  of  Apollo  15  did  f a r   more  than  extend  man’s  reach  into  the 
heavens.  I t   showed  dramatically  that  man  belongs  in   space.  At  the 
end  of  their  three  days  on  the  moon  and  six  in  lunar   orbit,  the  astro- 
nauts  . . . had  gathered  more  scientific  information  about  the  moon 
than  all  the  manned  and   unmanned  spacecraft  that  had  flown  before 
them.” 
Cameras  and  instruments  in   SIM  had  made  first  extensive  observa- 
tions  from  lunar  orbit.  One  of  first  findings  was  confirmation  tha t  
moon  was  not  perfectly  round  and  was  dimpled.  Evidence  from  seis- 
mometer  was  backed  up  by  bistatic  radar   in   which  spacecraft  signals 
were  used  to  penetrate  lunar   surface  to  core.  Seismometer’s  reception 
of  LM’S  impact  on  moon  indicated  that  even  small  explosion  or  impact 
could  be  recorded a t  extreme range  and  verified  earlier hypothesis that 
meteorite impacts were  being recorded daily  from all over lunar  surface, 
Addition o i  Apollo  15 station  to  existing  seismic  net  completed  triangu- 
la r   array   of  instruments  for  determining  focal  points  of  moonquakes. 
Data  from  cold  cathode  gauges  a t   Apollo  landing  sites  and   mass 
spectrometer  in  orbiting  Endeavour  confirmed  presence  of  thin  lunar  
atmosphere.  Spectrometer  picked  up  pockets  of  neon  and   argon  and  
scooped  up  carbon  dioxide that  had  apparently  burst  from  fissure near 
where sun  was  lighting  lunar  surface  at  daybreak.  Other  data  obtained 
by  Endeavour’s  instruments  indicated  lunar   highlands  were  rich  in  
aluminum  and   deficient  in  magnesium.  Waterless  basins  were  rich  in  
magnesium  and  deficient  in   aluminum.  Most  highland  regions  con- 
tained  three  times  as  much  aluminum a s   lowlands,  and  one  mountain- 
ous  region  had  five  times  as  much  aluminum  a s   typical  lunar   basin. 
Magnetometer  on  subsatellite  launched  into  lunar  orbit  discovered 
moon  had  electromagnetic  boundary  layer.  Camera  system  recorded 
data  for  comprehensive  map  of  areas  never  before  flown  over,  with 
details and  resolution previously  impossible. 
Report by Astronauts David R.  Scott and James B.  Irwin of  terracing 
along sides  of  Hadley Rille  identical  to  terracing  noted  on  sides  of  two 
tallest  mountains  in   Apennine  group-Hadley  Delta  and  Mt.  Hadley- 
suggested mountains  and   Hadley  Rille  had  been  thrust  up  from  moon 
by  internal  pressures  tha t   built  up  inside  moon  when  object  the  size 
of  state  of  Rhode Island  struck moon  and  created Sea of  Rains 4 billion 
yrs  ago.  Scientists  had  previously  thought  Hadley  Rille  to   be  younger 
than mountains and  independent of  their  formation. Samples might hold 
clues  to  sun’s  history  and   its  effects  on  ear th   climate,  past  and  future. 
Walter  Sullivan  said  in   New  York  T ime s :   “Sun-determined changes 
in   the  earth’s  climate have  controIIed  man’s  history,  from  the  ice  ages 
tha t   plagued  the  cave men  to  the  desiccation  that  buried  Middle  East- 
ern   civilizations,  not  under  invading  armies  but  invading  sands.  By 
understanding  the  role  of  the sun  in   these  past  events, man may be  able 
to  assess  the  effect  our  parent  star  will  have  in   determining  climates 
of  the  future.”  (W   Star,  8/8/71,  AlO;  W Post,  8/8/71,  B1 ;   NYT, 
8 /8 /71   ) 
*  Newspaper  editorials praised U.S.  exploration. 
New  York  T ime s :   “The  Apollo  program  was  born  a  decade  ago  as 
an  element  in   Soviet-American rivalry  for  prestige  and  political  advan- 

223 

August  8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

tage.  But  the  program’s  brilliant  success has  made  obsolete  the  nation- 
alistic  considerations  that  seemed so important  in   the  early  1960’s.  Now 
i t  is evident that lunar  exploration  and  eventual settlement  offer  rewards 
and   challenges for  all  mankind.  Do  Washington  and  Moscow  have  the 
courage  a n d   imagination  to  begin  m a k i n g t h a t   prospect  a  reality?” 
( N Y T ,  8 /8 /71)  
Washington  Pos t:   “There  seems  to  be  very  little  doubt  that  the  mis- 
sion  completed  yesterday  by  astronauts  Scott,  Irwin  and   Worden  has 
been  the  most  productive  in  the  history  of  the  Apollo  program.  The 
yield  of  scientific  data  has  already  been  large  and  much  more  is  sure 
to  come  as  laboratories  around  the  world  analyze  the  rocks,  pictures 
and   other  material.  . . . The  trip  has  been  a  bonanza  . . . and  i t   may 
well  go  down  in  history  as  one  of  the  most  useful  expeditions  ever 
conducted  i n   helping  mankind  understand  the  universe  in   which  i t  
lives.”  ( W Post, 8 /8 /71 )  
Responsibility  for  NASA  space tug  activities was  assigned to  MSFC by  Dale 
D.  Myers,  Deputy  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  in  letter  to 
Dr.  Eberhard  F.  M.  Rees,  MSFC  Director.  MSFC   would  manage  “in- 
house  and  contracted  activities”  and  provide  liaison  with  DOD and  
European  groups  interested  in  participating  in  development  and   use 
of  space  tug.  Dr.  Rees  later  said  Space  Tug  Project  Group  would  be 
established  within  Advanced  Systems  Analysis  Office  of  Program  De- 
velopment.  (MSFC  Release 71-178) 
Joint  NASA -US .  Geological  Survey  project  CARETS 
(Central  Atlantic 
Regional  Ecological  Test  S i te)   was  described  in   Washington  Post 
article.  NASA  high-altitude  aircraft  were  flying  from  Wallops  Station 
over  Maryland  and  Virginia  to  obtain  data  for  ecological  analysis. 
Information  gleaned  would  be  included  in   land  use  maps,  water  use 
and  pollution  maps,  and  research  reports.  (Pfeiffer,  W  Post,  8/8/71, 
C lO )  
U.S.S.R.  had   in  past  year  “become  the  potential  target  of  a  vastly  in- 
creased  number  of  nuclear  bombs  and  missile  warheads,”  Washington 
Sunday  S t a r   noted.  While  U S .   was  menaced  only  by  Soviet  nuclear 
weapons,  U.S.S.R.  had  become  “first  to  be  pu t   a t   a  disadvantage  in  
the  game  of  nuclear  p r o l i f e r a t i ~ n . ~ ~  France  and  China  had  begun 
deploying  missiles  that  could  reach  targets  within  U.S.S.R.  but  not 
targets  in   U S .   France’s  first  squadron  of  nine  intermediate-range 
nuclear  missiles  had  become  operational  Aug.  4.  Another  nine  were 
times  as 
to  be  added.  Missiles  carried  100-kiloton  warhead-five 
powerful  as  atomic bomb  dropped  on  Hiroshima-and 
sufficient  range 
to  reach  some  major  industrial  cities  of  U.S.S.R.  Communist  Chinese 
had  deployed  small  number  of  medium-range  nuclear  missiles  and 
U S .   experts  thought  they  were  not  concentrating  on  development  of 
intermediate  range  and   intercontinental  missiles. 
US. had  100  Minuteman  missiles,  50%   of  which  would  carry   up 
to  three  warheads;  54  T i tan   missiles;  41  submarines  carrying  16 mis- 
siles  each,  with  31  submarines  being  converted  to  carry  10-warhead 
Poseidon;  and   470  strategic  bombers.  U.K.  had  3 Polaris  submarines; 
40  Canberra  V-8  bombers;  and   2  aircraft  carriers  with  80  Buccaneer 
strike  a ircraf t   capable  of  delivering  nuclear  weapons.  French  also  had 
36  Mirage  IV-A  a ircraf t   capable  of  low-level  delivery  of  60-kiloton 
nuclear  bombs.  NATO  forces  in  Europe  had  7000  tactical  nuclear 

224 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

August  8 

weapons  available,  with  about  2250  missiles  and  aircraft  to  deliver 
them.  (Kelly, W Star, 8/8/71,  A15) 
A u gm t   9 :  Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  MSC  Director  of  Medical  Research  and 
Operations,  told  press  a t   MSC  that  preliminary  examination  of  Apollo 
15  crew  had  revealed  astronauts  were  in  good  health,  but  were  not 
returning  to  normal  as  rapidly  as  expected.  Examination  had  also 
revealed  that  Astronaut  David  R .   Scott  had  ruptured  blood  vessels 
under  four  fingernails-apparently 
dur ing  first  EVA  on  moon.  Ruptures 
had   resulted  from  increased pressure on  fingers  from  spacesuit  as Scott 
moved  his  arms  to  conduct experiments. Although  Scott had  mentioned 
some  discomfort  to  his  hands  after  EVA-1,  officials  had  assumed  dis- 
comfort  was  typical  hand  cramp  experienced  by  previous  astronauts. 
Dr.  Berry  said  Scott’s  in jury  was  not  serious  enough  to  warrant  space- 
suit modifications:  “It’s  just  one  of  those  things  that  you’ve  got  to  put 
up   . . . with,  and  we  keep  trying  to  make  suits  better  all  the  time,  and  
I  think  this  current  suit  is  probably  as  far   along  the  line  to  being 
comfortable and  providing  mobility  as  any  suit  we’ve  ever  had.  . . .” 
(Transcr ip t)  
*  NASA’S  M2-F3  lifting  body,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  William  H.  Dana, 
reached  mach  0.93  during  eighth  flight  from  FRC  in   joint  NASA-USAF 
program.  Purposes  of  flight  were  to  evaluate  effects  of  moving  center 
of  gravity  slightly  forward  and  of  decreasing launch  mach  number  by 
launching  a t   12  200-m  (40  000-ft)  altitude  instead  of  13 700  m 
(45000 f t ) .   (NASA   Proj  Off) 
*  Arcas  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Ft.  Greely,  Alaska,  carried 
GSFC  payload  to  obtain  ozone  measurements  in   conjunction  with 
Nimbus  4 satellite  overpass.  Because  of  problems  with  ground  track- 
ing  equipment,  no  usable  telemetry  signal  was  received  from  payload 
until  rocket  reached 45-km  (28-m i)   altitude  on  descent  side  of  apogee. 
Payload  recovery  was  not  successful;  telemetry  data  were  late  and 
quality  of  signal  was  poor.  Experiment  was  rated  partially  successful. 
Launch  was  second  in  three-flight  series.  First  had  been  conducted 
Aug.  7.  (NASA   Rpt SRL) 
Newspaper  editorials praised Apollo 15. 
Washington  Daily  New s :   “The  record  harvest  of  rocks  and   other 
data  brought  back  by  Apollo  15 may  turn   out  to  be  one  of  the  biggest 
steps  ever  toward  understanding  the  solar  system,  the  dominant  influ- 
ence  on  earthly  existence.  Th is   has  been  the  most  remarkable  decade 
of  research  and   development  in   history,  and  the  space  program  has 
been  the  core of  it.”  ( W News, 8 /9 /71)  
Philadelphia  Evening  Bulletin:  “The  pictures  taken  by  Endeavour 
and  the  data  being  supplied  by  the  tiny  satellite  the  astronauts  left 
orbiting  the  moon  a re   providing  the  most  exact  and  comprehensive 
intelligence  yet  about  minerals  on  the  moon.”  I t   was  “becoming  obvi- 
ous  that  what  we  spend  in   space  we  are   investing  in  the  future  of 
mankind.”  ( P  Bull, 8 /9 /71)  
Prague   newspaper  Rude  P ravo   commented  on  Apollo  15:  “The  scientists 
eagerly  anticipate  the  results  of  the  work  of  the  astronauts  and   instru- 
ments  which  were  sent  on  such  a  long  trip.  People  of  goodwill 
throughout  the  world  who  follow  these  flights  will  always  wait  long 
into  the  night  for  the  two  words  from  Houston,  Baykonur,  and   even- 

225 

August  9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

tually  from  other  places  on  earth:  ‘Mission  complete.’ ”  (FBIS-Czecho- 
slovakia-71-155,8/1  1/71,  D1) 
President  Nixon  had   sent  letter  to  daughter  of  Soyuz  I 1  Cosmonaut 
Georgy  T.  Dobrovolsky  after  seeing  photo  of  girl  at  cosmonauts’ 
funeral,  T im e   reported.  Letter  had  sa id :   “I  know  your  father  would 
want  YOU  to  face  his  loss  with  a  strength  a n d   courage  to  match  his 
own.  As  your  sister  Natasha  grows  older  I  know  you  will  help  her  
( T im e ,  
understand  how  very  proud  of  her  father  you  both  should  be.” 
8 /9 /71 ,31 )  
Augus t   10:  President  Nixon  approved  H.R.  9382,  FY  1972  HUD-space- 
science  appropriations  bill  tha t   contained  $3.298-billion  NASA  FY  1972 
appropriation  and   $619  million  NSF  appropriation.  Bill  became  P.L. 
92-78.  NASA  total  included  $2.523  billion  fo r   R&D,  $52.7  million  for 
construction  of  facilities,  and   $722.6  million  for  research  and  program 
management.  Bill  appropriated  $39  million  for  NERVA  program,  $13 
million  for  space  shuttle  main  engine  test  facilities,  and   $5.5  million 
for  space  shuttle  thermal-protection  facilities. 
President  also  signed  H.R.  9667,  $2.9-billion  DOT  FY  1972  appro- 
priations  bill  that  included  $58.5  million  to  repay  airlines  for  money 
they  invested  in   SST  but  eliminated  funding  for  SST  program.  Bill 
( P D ,  8/16/71,  1157;  NASA  Budget  Off;  H  Rpt 
became  P.L.  92-96. 
92-377) 
Scientists  a t   LRL  in   Houston  began  opening  bags  of  rocks  returned  from 
moon  by  Apollo  15 crew.  Before  and  after  day-long  debriefing  Astro- 
nauts  David  R .   Scott  and   James  B.  Irwin  assisted  geologists  in  identi- 
fying  samples.  Material  included  football-size  piece  of  black,  glass-like 
rock ; brick-size  chunk  of  volcanic  rock  pitted  with  small  cavities 
(vesicular  basalt)  ; and   91/2-kg  (21- lb)  rock,  largest single  sample  ever 
returned  from moon, from rim  of  Hadley  Rille. Scientists were  anxiously 
waiting  to  examine  crystalline  rock  in   sample  bag  No.  196, scheduled 
to  be  opened  Aug.  12 ,   that  Scott  had  described  as  possible  chip  of 
moon’s  original  crust,  ( W   Post,  8/11/71;  A P   B  Sun ,   8/10/71,  A l )  
Lagos,  Nigeria,  Morning  Post  congratulated  Apollo 15  astronauts  for  suc- 
cessful  mission,  which  they  attributed  to  ingenuity  and   resourcefulness 
of  NASA.  Lunar  explorations,  Post  said,  would  strengthen  faith  in   and  
appreciation  of  God’s  work.  ( FBIS-Nigeria-71-153,  8/11/71,  W6 )  
NASA  launched  three  sounding  rockets  from  WSMR.  Two  Aerobee  170  
sounding  rockets,  one  carry ing  NRL   experiment  to  study  stellar  spectra 
and   one  carry ing   GSFC  experiment  to  conduct  x-ray  studies,  were  un- 
successful.  Boosted  Arcas  I1  carried  GSFC  experiment  to  70-km  (43.5- 
m i )   altitude  to  measure  mobility  of  charged  particles  in   lower  D 
region.  Rocket  functioned  satisfactorily,  but  some  anomalous  da ta  were 
received.  Data  would  be  correlated  with  data  from  two  Nike-Cajun 
launches  scheduled  for  Aug.  31.  (SR  l is t ;   NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
Australian  pilots  Trevor  Brougham  and   Bob  Dickeson  landed  twin-engine 
Beechcraft  Baron  a ircraf t   a t   Darwin,  Australia,  after  125-hr  27-min 
flight  round  the  world  which  was  believed  to  have  set  world  record  for 
light  aircraft.  (Reuters,  W  Post,  8/11/71,  A6 )  
Augus t   I I :  Dr.  Pau l  W.  Gast,  Director  of  Planetary  and   Ear th   Sciences  a t  
MSC,  explained  a t   MSC  briefing  significance  of  photos  taken  by  Apollo 
15 astronauts:  Scientists had   always wondered  whether  ear th   and  moon 
h ad   a gradual  o r   cataclysmic  kind  of  history.  “What  we’ve  sor t  of  seen 

226 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

August  I1 

in   the  Apollo  15 site  i s   that  indeed  the  lunar  history  is  in   pa r t   cata- 
clysmic.”  Dr.  Gast  said  photos  of  Apennine  Mountains  confirmed  that 
mountains  wereformed  out  of  same  collision  that  created  Sea  of  Rains 
north  of  mountain  range,  involving  another  body  as  big  as  state  of 
Rhode  Island.  “We  theorized  that  this  would  be  the  case,”  Dr.  Gast 
said,  “but  until  now  it  had  just  been  a  hypothesis.”  Dr.  Gast  and   his 
colleagues had  examined  about  24  of  the  more  than  1400 photos  taken 
on  lunar  surface,  but  they  were  able  to  make  conclusions  because pic- 
tures  were  clear  and   detailed.  (Transcript;  O’Toole,  W Po s t ,   8/12/71, 
A13) 
August  12  : USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Titan  IIIB-Agena  booster.  Satellite  entered  orbit  with  402.3-km 
(250-mi)  apogee,  133.6-km  (83-mi)  perigee,  89.8-min  period,  and 
110.9’  inclination  and  reentered  Sept.  3.  (P re s   Rpt  72 ;   SF ,   2/72) 
U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  434  from  Baykonur  into  orbit  with  11 798-km 
(7331.0-mi)  apogee,  187-km  ( 116.2-mi)  perigee,  228.2-min  period, 
and  5 1 . 5 O   inclination.  (GSFC SSR ,   8/31/71;  SBD ,   8/13/71,  205) 
*  ApoZZo  15  Astronauts  David  R.  Scott,  James  B.  Irwin,  and  Alfred  M. 
Worden  held  press  conference  at  MSC,  during  which  they  showed  films 
and  described  mission.  Irwin  and  Scott  praised  performance  of  LRV 
Rover  and  said  i t  had  exceeded  their  expectations.  Showing  film  taken 
from  Rover  during  traverse,  Irwin  said  he  hoped  simulated  ride  didn’t 
make  viewers seasick.  Ride  on  LRV, he  said,  “is  kind  of  a  combination 
of  a  small  rowboat  in  a  rough  sea  and  a  bucking  bronco.” 
Scott  said  only  change  he  would  recommend  for  Rover  was  “some 
manner  of  strapping  yourself  in  the  vehicle  other  than  just  pure  seat 
belts.”  He  also  said  moon  should  be  explored  to  fa r   greater  extent 
than  was  currently  planned,  with  :‘a  whole  base  of  scientists”  and  “a 
Rover  that  can  carry  6  to  10  men.  I  think  we   can  . . . establish  bases 
on  the  moon  similar  to  those  in  the  Antarctic  and  explore  it  and  dis- 
cover  a  vast  amount  of  data  that  we  don’t  even  know  we  have  up 
there.” 
Core  sample  drilling,  Scott  said,  was  “one  of  the  best  things  we 
ever  did  on  the  moon.  I t   was  very  difficult,  very  time  consuming  and 
at  times  i t   was  rather  perplexing  . . . because  we  did  not  expect  the 
regolith  or  the  surface  material  to  be  quite  a s   well  integrated  or 
packed  as  it  was.  There  was  nothing  wrong  with  the  equipment,  it 
was  just  that  w e   encountered  the  unknown.  And  we  had  to  compen- 
sate  for  that  and  . . . that’s  why  man  goes  to   the  moon.  His  subjective 
mind  can  evaluate  the  situation  and  come  up  with  a  fix  f a r   better 
than  a  machine.  The  machine  would  have  stopped.  I t   would  have 
never  gotten  the  drill.” 
Scott  said  in   closing, “We  went  to  the moon  a s  trained  observers  . . . 
to  gather  data,  not  only  with  our  instruments  on  board,  but  with  our 
minds,  and  I’d  like  to  quote  a  statement  from  Plutarch  . . . : ‘The 
mind  is  not  a  vessel  t o   be  filled,  but  a  fire  to  be  lighted.’” 
Astronauts  later  revealed  they  had  left  plaque  and  tiny  silver  figure 
of  a  fallen  man  on  moon  a s   memorial  to  14  astronauts  and  cosmo- 
nauts  who  had  died  in   pursuit  of  space  exploration.  Plaque,  bearing 
names  of  eight  astronauts  and  six  cosmonauts, had  been  left  i n   small 
crater  about  6  m  (20   f t )   north  of  rille.  (Transcript;  AP,  B  Sun, 
8/13/71,  A l )  

227 

August  12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

*  Aerobee  170  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carry- 
ing   NRL  experiment  to  conduct  solar  studies.  Mission  was  partial  suc- 
cess.  (SR  list) 
LRL  geologists  Dr.  William  C.  Phinney  and  Dr.  Pau l   W.  Gast  described 
anorthosite  rock  from  Apo l lo   15 sample bag   No.  196  to   press  a t   MSC 
lunar  sample  briefing.  Dr.  Phinney,  praising  crew’s  descriptions  of 
samples,  said  ‘Las in   all  cases  so  fa r   where  we’ve  looked  a t   what  the 
rocks  are,  i t   matches  exactly  what  the  astronauts  sa id   it  was.  It’s 
. . . essentially  pure  
about  fist  size,  269  grams-1/-lb-anorthosite 
plagioclase.”  Grain  was  quite  coarse,  1-cm  (0.4-in)  grains,  “about  the 
coarsest  grain  size  of  any  lunar  rocks  that  we’ve  seen  so  far.”  I ts  
milky-white  color  suggested  ‘‘that  it  has  probably  undergone  a  fa ir  
amount  of  stress,  maybe  a  shock  type  of  deformation.” 
Rock,  popularly  called  “Genesis  rock,”  was  significant  because  it 
supported  hypothesis  tha t   moon  had  been  extensively  molten  with 
anorthosite  crystallizing  from   liquid,  floating  to  top,  and  producing 
anorthositic  crust.  Although  discovery  did  not  prove  hypothesis,  Dr. 
Gast  explained,  i t   was  “a  long  step  in  the  direction”  of  determining 
moon’s  origin.  “If  results  on  the  dating  of  this  anorthosite  and   some 
of  the  chemistry  on  i t   . . . turn   out  that  all  point  to  the  fact  that  i t   is 
essentially 4 .6  or  4.7  billion  years  old,  which  is  the  time  tha t   w e   think 
the  moon  formed,  . . . i t   gets  to  be  rather  difficult  to  argue  with  the 
hypothesis.”  (Transcript ) 
August  13 :   Dr.  Charles  A.  Beiry,  MSC Director  of  Medical  Research  and 
Operations,  described  A p o l b   15  crew’s  medical  status  to  press  at 
MSC.  Astronauts  James  B.  Irwin  and  David  R.  Scott  had  suffered  brief 
periods  of  irregular  heart  rhythm  on  moon,  probably  a s   a  result  of 
extreme  fatigue.  Irwin  also  had  dizzy  spells  in   space.  Arythmic  heart- 
beats  and  dizziness  had  not  been  disclosed  to  press  earlier,  Dr.  Berry 
said,  because  tests  were  still  being  conducted  and   complete  informa- 
tion  was  not  known.  Until  Aug.  13  Irwin  was  still  suffering  from 
effects  of  weightlessness;  he  still had  mild  dizzy  spells  and, when  lying 
prone,  felt  as  if  his  bed  we re   tilted  downward  about  30 ° .   Astronaut 
Alfred  M.  Worden’s  medical  data  dur ing   transearth  coast  EVA  had 
been  close  to  predicted,  and  Worden  was  adjusting  better  than  Scott 
and   I rw in .  
None  of  the  three,  however,  had  returned  to   preflight  norms,  but 
there  was  “no  medical  danger”  as  fa r   a s   crew  was  concerned. “Things 
from  past  space  flights  were  all  going  in  a  pattern  and  now  suddenly 
these  guys  don’t  fit  the  pattern.”  In   assessing  astronauts’  return  to 
normal  i t   was  important  to  note  how  Apollo  15  differed  from  previ- 
ous   manned  space  flight  missions.  Important  factors  were  longer  time 
spent  on   lunar  surface,  longer  lunar  orbit  stay  time,  and  longer  time 
spent in   100% oxygen atmosphere. 
Heartbeat  irregularities,  which  had  lasted  about  10  heartbeats,  were 
usually  associated  with  fatigue,  low  potassium  level,  and  increased 
adrenalin  flow-all 
of  which  were  present  in   astronauts.  Because  of 
fatigue  levels  of  which  astronauts  were  often  unaware,  flight  surgeons 
were  considering  recommending  that  first  EVAS  on  Apollo  16  and 
Apollo  17  be  shortened.  (Transcript;  AP,  NYT ,   8/14/71,  1 )  
NASA  announced  selection  of  Apollo  17  prime  and  backup  crews.  Pr ime  
crewmen  were  Eugene  A.  Cernan  (commander),  Ronald  E.  Evans 

228 

(NASA 

stay  time. 

August  13 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
( CM  pilot) , and   scientist-astronaut  Harrison  H.  Schmitt  (LM  pilot). 
Backup  crewmen were  David  R.  Sco 
B.  I rw in .   Apollo  17  would  be  laun 
lunar-landing  mission  w i t h   68-hr 
Release 71-149) 
New  York  Times  editorial  noted  that  U.S.  planned  to  cut  back  on  Apollo 
hile U.S.S.R.  Sulyut  I was 
program  to  fund  space station  and  shuttl 
already  in   orb i t :   “In   effect,  the  unique 
ican  capability  to  land 
men  on  the  moon  is   being  abandoned  ahead  of  the  original  schedule 
so  that  this  country  can  concentrate  on  an  attempt  to  compete  with 
what  already  exists  under  Russian  auspices.  To  make  it  even  more 
bizarre,  when  and   if  both  countries  have  rival  manned  space  stations 
in   orbit,  each  is   likely  to  suspect the  other  of  using  these  installations 
for   military  as  well  as civiiian  purposes.  This  is  a  prospect  that  liter- 
ally borders on lunacy.”  (NYT, 8 /13 /71 ,26)  
August  13-14:  New  Y o r k   T imes   published  series  of  three  articles  by 
Apollo  15  astronauts  describing  the  July  26-Aug.  7  lunar-landing 
mission. 
Astronaut  David  R.  Scott  said  excitement  of  being  on  moon  came 
in   waves:  “They  are   gentle  swells,  the  kind  that  stop  you,  buoy  you, 
but  never  sweep  you  off  course.  The  wave  enveloped  me  the  moment 
our   lunar   module,  Falcon,  cleared  the  peaks  of  the  Apennines  and 
pitched  over  for   our  final  descent  to  the  moon.”  Greatest  thrill  had 
been  discovery  of  anorthosite  rock:  “.  . . I  radioed  to  mission  con- 
trol,  ‘I  think  we  found  what  we  came  for.’  I  must  confess  that  the 
sight  of  tha t   rock,  sitting  there  millions  of  years  waiting  for  our  
arrival,  set  off  another  wave  of  excitement  for  me.  I t   triggered  a n  
emotion much  like  finding  The  Easter  Egg.  You  know,  there  a re   lots 
of  eggs  spread  across  the  lawn,  but  there’s  only  one  golden  one,  and  
there i t  was-The  Golden Egg.” 
Astronaut  James  B.  Irwin  said,  although  others  might  describe 
moon  as  barren   and   desolate  dead  world,  ‘‘it  can  be   a  beautiful  one 
to  anyone  who  loves  the  mountains  of  earth.  .  .  . When  I  first 
climbed  down  the  ladder  . . . I was  really  taken  back  by  those  moun- 
tains  [that]  almost  encircled  Hadley  Base.  They  seemed  so  close  and 
so  tall.  But  the  real  surprise  was  that  the  mountains,  a t   first  sight, 
were  not  grey  or  brown  as  I  had  expected. They  were  golden.  Looking 
to  the  south  and   east,  I  saw  the  reflection  of  the  early  morning  sun 
glancing  off  the  mountains,  especially  Hadley  Delta,  giving  them  a 
glow  of  gold.  I t   seemed  like  a  friendly  place,  which  surprised  me.  . . 
you  would  have  thought  we  would  have  felt  a  little  lost,  a  little  out  of 
place.  But  no,  I  felt  that  I  was  where  I  should  be.  I  knew  exactly 
what  to  do,  after  more  than  a  year  of  training,  and   I  felt  r igh t   a t  
home.” 
Astronaut  Alfred  M.  Worden  compared  orbiting  moon  in   CSM with 
“riding  in   a  free  a i r   balloon,  floating  over  the  countryside.  You  are  
suspended.  You  have  no  sensation  of  motion  unless  you  look  down 
and  see  the  lunar   landscape  sweeping below  you.  At  times,  I  thought 
of  myself  a s   a  bird,  soaring  without  sound,  seemingly  detached  from 
all  that  is  below.  . . . one  of  the  most  important  observations  from 
Apollo  15,  as  f a r   as  I’m  concerned,  is  the  apparent  evidence  of  a 
great  deal  more  volcanic  activity  in   the  moon’s  past.  I n   our  tra in ing  

229 

August  13-14 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
we  studied  and  discussed  volcanoes  . . . but  I  guess  I  wasn’t  really 
prepared  for   the  magnitude  of  the  volcanic  evidence  I  saw  on  the 
moon.”  ( N Y T ,  8/13/71,1;  8 /14 /71 ,1)  
August  14:  Arcas  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Ft.  Greely, 
Alaska,  carried  GSFC payload  to  obtain  ozone  measurements  in   con- 
junction  with  Nimbus  4 satellite  overpass.  Ozone  payload  and  ground 
telemetry  tracking  equipment  functioned  satisfactorily.  Payload  was 
recovered  and   good  data  were  collected.  Launch  was  last  in   three- 
flight  series  that  began  Aug.  7.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL) 
Chicago  Tribune  editorial  commented  on  Apollo  15 crew:  “Out  of  all 
they  saw,  collected  and  recorded  by  camera  they  hope  to  make  a 
significant  contribution  to  science  and   the  understanding  of  the   uni- 
verse,  and   they  hope  from  this  to  apply  what  they  learned  to  the 
betterment  of  life  on  earth.  If  there  is  one  regret,  i t   is,  as  Scott  said, 
that  after  the  vista  from  this  peak  of  experience,  what  comparable 
mountain  remains  to  be   searched?”  (C  T r ib ,   8/14/71) 
August  15: John  P.  Donnelly,  former  Vice  President  for  Corporate  Com- 
munications  for   Whittaker  Corp.,  became  NASA  Assistant  Administra- 
tor  for  Public  Affairs.  Appointment  had  been  announced  July  23. 
(N A S A  Ac t iv i t ies ,  8/15/71,  135) 
0  Baltimore  Sun  editorial  praised  NASA  decision  to  include  scientist- 
astronaut  Dr.  Harrison  H.  Schmitt  in  Apollo  17   crew:  “Exploration 
of  the  moon  can  be  scientifically  justified  as  a  great  and  extremely 
costly  project  only  by  the  fa i th  that  i t  will  produce  evidence  on  which 
the  world’s  whole  scientific  community  can  agree  regarding  the  ori- 
gins  and  age  of  the  moon,  the  earth,  perhaps  the  entire  solar  system.’’ 
Even  though  Apollo  program  was  to  end  with  Dr.  Schmitt’s  flight,  “it 
may  very  well  take  a  new  turning  by  reason  of  h is  presence.”  (B  Sun, 
8/15/71) 
August  16: France’s  Eole  (CAS-1)  Cooperative Applications Satellite  was 
launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops  Station  at  2:39  pm  EDT.  Four-stage 
Scout  boosted  spacecraft  into  orbit  with  906.1-km  (563.6-mi)  apogee, 
677.8-km  (421.2-mi)  perigee,  100.7-min period,  and  50.2O  inclination. 
Pr imary   NASA  objectives  were  to  place  spacecraft  into  appropriate 
ear th   orbit  to  obtain  meteorological  data  from  balloons  and  to  analyze 
meteorological  data  acquired  from  constant-density surface  balloons  for 
study  of  characteristics  and  movements  of  a ir   masses.  Secondary  NASA 
objective  was  to  acquire  technology  of  satellite  range  and   range-rate 
system  for  locating  free-moving balloons. 
The 85-kg  ( 187-lb) satellite-developed  by  France’s  Centre Nationale 
d’gtudes  Spatiales  (CNES )   and  named  for  mythical  God  of  Winds- 
would  collect  information  on  wind,  temperatures,  and  pressures  from 
up  to  500  instrumented  balloons  flying  at  11 900-m  (39  000-ft)  alti- 
tude  in   Southern  Hemisphere.  Balloons,  to  be  launched  by  CNES  and 
Argentine  personnel  from  three  sites  in   Argentina,  could  be  interro- 
gated  by  Eole  day  and  night,  individually,  in   sequence,  or  in   pro- 
grammed  group  of  up  to  64   a t   a  time. 
Eole’s  meteorological objectives  were  to  study  circulation  of  atmos- 
phere  from  tracks  of  balloons,  provide  basis  for  standard  reference 
system  of  pressure  and   temperature  to  be  used  in  World  Weather 
Program,  and   learn  more  about  local  winds.  Mission  would  prove 
feasibility  of  modified  Doppler  system  plus  range  measurements  to 

230 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

August  16 

determine  accurately  location  of  each  balloon  and   prove  out  super- 
pressure  balloon  design  and  lightweight,  frangible  balloon-borne elec- 
tronics. 
Eole  was  launched  under  May  27,  1966,  Memorandum  of  Under- 
standing  between  CNES  and   NASA  with  no  exchange  of  funds.  CNES 
designed,  built,  and   tested  spacecraft  and   balloons  and   would  manage 
balloon  launchings,  spacecraft  tracking,  data  acquisition,  and  data 
processing.  NASA  provided  launch  vehicle,  prelaunch  support,  launch 
operations,  and  initial  tracking  and  data  acquisition.  Data  would  be 
analyzed  simultaneously  by  CNES  and  by  Eole  Data  Interpretation 
Group  comprising  representatives  of  NASA,  CNES,  NCAR,  NOAA,  and 
UCLA.  (NASA  P ro j  off; NASq   Release 71-144) 
Gerald  J .   Mossinghoff,  formdr  Director  of  Congressional  Liaison  Div.  in  
NASA  Office  of  Legislative  Affairs,  became  Deputy  Assistant  Adminis- 
trator  (Po l icy) .   Robert  H.  Hood,  former  Manager  of  Spacecraft  and  
Launch  Systems  in   Washington,  D.C.,  office  of  McDonnell  Douglas 
Corp.,  became  Deputy  Assistant  Administrator  (Programs) .  
(NASA 
Ann,  8/13/71) 
August  16-ZU:  Working  Group  on  Remote  Measurement  of  Pollution  met 
at  LaRC  to  investigate  remote  sensing  in  identifying  and  monitoring 
contaminants.  Group  reported  trace  gases  were  amenable  to  remote 
sensing,  water  pollutants  could  b e   measured  in   limited  number,  and 
remote  measurement  of  specific  particulate  pollutants  would  follow 
only  after  improved  understanding  of  their  physical,  chemical,  and 
radiative  properties.  Remote  sensing  could  provide  essential  informa- 
tion  in   all  three  categories  that  could  not  be  obtained  from  other 
sources.  Satellites  and  aircraft  could  obtain  overall  picture  of  global 
or  regional  pollution  from  gases  but  were  inappropriate  for  local 
measurements  because  of  inability  of 
instruments  to  measure  gases 
in  upper atmosphere. 
Group  recommended  global  measurement  from  satellites  of  gases 
contributing  to  ozone  photochemistry and   radiative  equilibrium;  study 
to  establish  feasibility  of  measuring  these  gases  with  current  tech- 
niques  in   stratosphere  and   troposphere;  acceleration  of  research  on 
application  of  remote  sensing  to  water  pollution ; coordinated  physio- 
optical  research  program  to  advance  level  of  understanding  of  optical 
properties  of 
real  atmosphere ; immediate  measurement  of  earth‘s 
albedo,  reflected  electromagnetic  radiation  ;  and   establishment  of 
global  network  of  atmospheric  turbidity-monitoring  sites  to  determine 
any   changes  i n   worldwide  turbidity  due  to  man-made  particulate 
matter.  (Remote Measzcrement of  Pollution,  NASA  SP-285) 
AWmt  1 7 :  U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1  lunar  rover  completed  experiments and 
was  powered  down  for  11th  lunar  night  on  moon.  Vehicle  had  landed 
on   moon  on  board  Luna  17  Nov.  17,  1970.  (FBIS-SOV-71-137-3, 
8/13/71,  L1 )  
*  High-power  rada r   transmitter  was  being  added  to  3000-m-dia  (1000-ft- 
d i a )   radio  telescope  near  Arecibo,  Puerto  Rico,  in   joint  NASA-NSF 
program,  NSF  announced.  Modifications  would  make  telescope  most 
powerful  antenna  in   world  for  radar  studies  of  planets  and  satellites. 
(NSF Release 71-178) 
Completion  of  arrangements  for  exchange  of  four  computer  programs 
between  NASA  and  Japan’s  Hitachi  Central  Research  Laboratory  was 

231 

August  17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

announced  by  NASA.  Exchange,  negotiated  by  NASA  OART and   Com- 
puter  Software Management  and  Information  Center  (COSMIC)  oper- 
ated  a t   Univ.  of  Georgia  under  NASA  contract,  would  make  two 
Japanese  programs  available  to  U S .   users  in   exchange  for  two  NASA 
programs  tha t   had   been  available  to  U S .   public  for  several  years. 
(NASA  Release 71-148) 
OST released  Final  Repor t   of  the  Ad   Hoc  Supersonic  Transport  Rev iew  
the  O f i c e   of  Science  and  Technology,  March  30,  1969. 
Committee  of 
Release  of  previously  secret  report  was  prompted,  OST  said,  “by  con- 
tinued  public  interest  and   certain  impressions  that  the  government 
may  be  concealing  factual  data  on  the  SST program.”  Report  recom- 
mended  “termination  of  the  development  contracts  and  the  withdrawal 
of  Government  support  from  the  SST  prototype  program.”  Reasons 
given  were:  SST operating  costs  would  exceed  those  of  then-available 
subsonic  a ircraf t  ; “attendant  surcharge  makes  the  airline  market  un- 
certain” ; program  was  unattractive  to  private  financing  and   “sub- 
stantial  government  involvement  is  likely  to  be  sought  in   the  supply 
o r   guarantee  of  some  $3-5  billion  of  capital  for  the  certification  and  
production  of  a  U S .  SST” ; there  was  “substantial  uncertainty  regard- 
ing   the  range  and   payload  and  the  environmental  effects”  of  SST and 
“costs  and  duration  of  the  program  a re   both  likely  to  increase’’  in  
attempt  to  develop  production  a ircraf t ;   there  was  “substantial  doubt 
that  the  present  configurations  of  the  Conmrde  and  the  TU-144  will 
become  commercially  viable  aircraft”;  balance  of  payments  argument 
was  not  sufficiently  strong  to  warrant  Government  investment  in  SST ; 
U.S.  leadership  in   aviation  did  not  depend  upon  affirmative  SST deci- 
sion  in   near  future;  and,  “when  the  right  combination  of  technology 
and  market  demand appears,  the  U S .   aircraft  industry may well  decide 
on  its  own  to  proceed  with  the  development  and  production  of  an 
SST.”  (Tex t)  
Precision  stepping-drive  mechanism  to  position  scale  models  of  spacecraft 
accurately  about  horizontal  axis  in   wind  tunnels  and   other  testing 
situations  had  been  used  by  clock  manufacturer  to  replace  gears  and 
other  continuous-drive mechanisms  in   electric  clocks,  NASA  announced. 
Device,  developed  from  NASA  technology,  when  coupled  with  high- 
accuracy  oscillator  provided  accurate  time  by  advancing  digital  clock 
i n   increments  of  one  second  or  any  interval  required.  (NASA  Release 
7 1-153  ) 
*  U.S.  Postal  Service public  relations  officers  had   asked  Astronauts Neil  A. 
Armstrong  and   Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  to  accompany  cancellation 
of  lunar  landing  commemorative  stamp  on  moon  during  Ap0110  11 
mission  with  dialogue from  two  “casual,  conversational” scripts,  Julian 
W.  Scheer,  former  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Public  Affairs, 
said  in   Washington  Post  article.  “But  NASA,  figuring  the  first  manned 
lunar   landing  was  hairy  enough without  ceremonials,  declined  politely 
and,  instead,  Armstrong  and   Aldrin  quietly  canceled  the  first  moon 
stamp  and   came  home  without  postal  fanfare.” 
Washington  Post  editorial  commented  on  article:  “While  we  have 
not  cast  the  roles  and   read  the  script  aloud,  timer  in  hand,  it  is  our 
definite  impression  tha t   this  spontaneous  little  exchange  might  have 
been  good  for  the  better  pa r t   of  one  orbit  of  the  moon  and  good  also 

232 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

August  17 

for  a  veritable  barrage  of  phone  calls  from  a  flabbergasted  public.” 
( W Post, 8/17/71,  A14) 
*  George  W.  Cherry,  Director  of  Aeronautical  Operating  Systems  Div.  in  
NASA  OART,  received  AIAA  Mechanics  and  Control  of  Flight  Award  in  
ceremonies  a t  Hempstead,  N.Y.  Award was  for  “pioneering the  develop- 
ment  of  the  digital  control  system  for  space  vehicles  and   the  applica- 
tion  of  these  techniques  to  the  Apollo  Command  and   Service Modules 
and  the  Lunar   Modules.’’  ( N A S A  Activities,  9/15/71,  155 )  
*  Dr.  James  R.  Schlesinger  was  sworn  in   as  AEC   Chairman,  succeeding 
Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  whose  resignation  became  effective  Aug.  16. 
(AEC   pro) 
A u gw t   18: NASA  supercritical  wing,  flown  on  TF-8A  jet  a ircraf t  piloted  by 
NASA  test  pilot  Thomas  C.  McMurtry,  successfully  completed  ninth 
flight  from  FRC.  Objectives  of  flight-to 
obtain  pressure  distribution 
data  a t   high  supersonic speeds and   evaluate  augmented  damping  char- 
acteristics  a t   low  supersonic  speeds-were 
achieved.  Flight,  made  a t  
10  700-m  (35 000-ft)  altitude,  was  first  in   series  to  obtain  data  for 
performance  evaluation ; previous  Iflights  had  been  for  pilot  familiari- 
zation.  Pressure  distribution  data  were  obtained  from  mach  0.80  to 
0.97  and   damping  characteristics  were  evaluated  at  mach  1.1 and  1.6. 
(NASA  P ro j  Off) 
NASA  announced formation  of  Transport  Experimental Programs Office  in  
OART  to  direct  experimental STOL  transport  research  airplane program. 
RFPS  for  design  and  fabrication  of  STOL  a ircraf t   had  been  issued 
Aug.  4,  requesting  proposals  by  Oct.  15.  Program  would  provide  data 
and   experience  for  development  of  environmentally  acceptable,  eco- 
nomical,  and  safe  fan-jet  STOL  transport  systems.  New  office,  directed 
by  Gerald  G .  Kayten,  would  integrate  activities  of  STOL  Technology 
Office  and  Supercritical  Technology  Office.  (NASA   Release  71-155) 
*  NASA  announced  it  had  begun  joint  program  with  USA  Air  Mobility 
Research  and  Development  Laboratory  to  develop  flight  research 
vehicle  to  test  various  rotors  in  actual  flight  under  controlled  condi- 
tions  with  provision  for  extensive  engineering  measurements  dur ing  
maneuvers. L ~ R C  had  issued  RFPS  for  two  parallel  design studies requir- 
ing   10 mos  to  determine  feasibility  of  attaining Government’s  research 
goals  and  provide  development  plan  for  further  phases  of  program. 
Joint  NASA-Army  team  would  base  detailed  specifications  for  vehicle 
preliminary-design  competition  on  results  of  predesign  studies.  (NASA 
Release 71-152) 
P ra t t   & Whitney Div.  of  United Aircraft Corp.  filed  formal protest  against 
NASA  award  of  $500-miflion  space  shuttle  main  engine  contract  to  NR 
Rocketdyne  Div.  and  asked  Federal  Government  to  reverse  award.  I n  
letter  to  GAO,  P ra t t   &  Whitney  charged  selection  of  Rocketdyne  was 
“illegal,  arb i trary   and   capricious,  and   based  on  unsound  decisions” 
and   reiterated  complaints cited  Aug.  3  to  GAO.  (W Post,  8/19/71,  C12; 
SBD ,  8 /19 /71 ,230)  
Special  medallion  to  commemorate  1971   quadricentennial  of  Johannes 
Kepler  was  issued  by  American  Museum-hay den  Planetarium.  Kepler 
-born  Dec.  16,  1571-had 
founded  science  of  optics,  was  first  to 
ascribe  tides  to  moon,  shaped  much  of  comet  theory,  and   came  close 
to theory  of  gravity.  His Somnium,  highly  technical  “dream”  of  voyage 

233 

August  18 

ASTRONL4UTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

to  moon,  had  been  first  work  of  modern  science  fiction.  (American 
Museum-Hayden  Planetarium  Release,  8/13/71) 
August  18-24:  Thirteenth  International  Congress  of  the  History  of  Science 
was held  in  Moscow. 
Section  on  History  of  Aircraft,  Rocket,  and   Space  Science  and 
Technology  was  held  Aug.  19.  Paper  “The  Historiography  of  Rocket 
Technology  and  Space  Exploration”  submitted  by  Dr.  Eugene  M. 
Emme,  NASA  Historian,  was  summarized  a t   meeting  by  Dr.  Lloyd  S. 
Swensen,  Jr.,  of  Univ.  of  Houston.  Paper  covered  features  of  evolution 
of  rocket  technology  pertaining  to  beginning  of  space  exploration  and  
exploitation  and   discussed  work  of  international  pioneers like  Konstan- 
tin Tsiolkovsky,  Robert H. Goddard, and  Hermann  Oberth, who  became 
interested  in   space  exploration  before  deducing  that  liquid-propellant 
reactive  thrust  was  the  best  technology. 
Dr .   Swenson,  coauthor  of  book  This New  Ocean:  A  H is tory   of 
Project Mercury,  presented  his  own  paper  “On  the  Mixture  of  Science 
and  Technology  in   the  Apollo  8  Circumlunar  and   the  Apollo  11 Lunar 
Landing  Missions.”  Paper  examined  effect  of 
internal  pressures  on 
overall  posture  and  achievements  of  Apollo  project  as  illustrated  by 
Apollo 10 and 11. 
Anatoly  A.  Blagonravov and  V.  N.  Sokolsky  of  Soviet  Academy  of 
Sciences  submitted  paper  on  “Main  Lines  of  Research  in  the  Field  of 
the  History  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics.”  (Program ; NASA  Hist 
O f f )  
August  19: Apollo  1 7  Astronauts  Eugene  A.  Cernan,  Harrison  H.  Schmitt, 
and  Ronald  E.  Evans  held  press  conference  a t   MSC.  Ph.D.  geologist 
Schmitt  defended  his  selection  for  mission  and  declared  his  readiness 
to  “compete  with  anybody”  in  flying  Apollo  spacecraft.  Schmitt, 
selected  over  Astronaut  Joseph  E.  Engle,  said  Engle  was “one  of  the 
most  outstandingly qualified  test  pilots  in   the  business”  and  speculated 
that  Engle,  transferred  to  space shuttle  program,  would  “probably  . . . 
contribute  for  the  next  10  o r   15  years  a  . . . lot  more  than  maybe 
even  we  can  contribute  by  a  lunar  mission.”  Sending  a  “professional 
observer”  like  himself  to  moon,  Schmitt  explained,  would  significantly 
increase  knowledge  gained,  particularly  concerning  early  history  of 
ear th   and   sun.  (Transcr ip t ;   Reuters,  TV  Post,  8/20/71,  A2 )  
NASA  launched  series  of  three  sounding  rockets  from  Wallops  Station  to 
measure  diurnal  oxygen,  density,  pressure,  and   temperature  and  to 
obtain  comparisons  of  pitot  and  active-sphere  density  measurements. 
Rockets  were  launched  during  daylight  hours  and  data  would  be 
compared  with  data  from  similar  series  to  be  launched  during  dark- 
ness Aug.  20. 
Viper  Da r t   carried  WSMR  experiment  to  135-km  (83.9-mi)  altitude 
to  provide  density,  temperature,  pressure,  and  wind  data  from  40  to 
130  km  (25   to  80  m i ) .   Rocket  and  instruments  functioned  satisfac- 
torily,  with  Robinette  sphere  ejecting  and   inflating  as  programmed. 
Nike-Cajun carried  Univ.  of  Michigan  and  NOAA experiment to  126-km 
(78.3-mi)  altitude  to  measure  diurnal  variation  of  atomic  oxygen  in  
80-  to  120-km  (50-  to  75-mi)  region.  Rocket  and   instruments  func- 
tioned  satisfactorily.  Nike-Apache  carried  Univ.  of  Michigan  and 
GSFC  experiment  to  171-km  (106.3-mi)  altitude  to  obtain  diurnal 
measurements  of  density,  pressure,  and  temperature  and   obtain  com- 

234 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

August  19 

parisons  of  pitot  and  active-sphere  density  measurements.  Rocket  and  
instruments functioned satisfactorily.  (NASA Rpts SRL) 
French  Centre  National  d’gtudes  Spatiales  ( CNES) announced  U.S.S.R. 
would  cooperate  in   launching  two  space probes  from  France’s  Kourou 
Space  Center.  French  Veronique  rocket  would  launch  Soviet  radio- 
frequency  spectrometer  in   mid-December  in   first  use  of  Kourou  facili- 
ties  by  U.S.S.R.  France  would  also  track  Soviet MR-12  rocket  carrying 
French  mass  spectrometer  after  launch  in  December  from  Soviet  ship 
near Kourou. 
CNES  also  announced  French  Centaure  rocket  would  launch  Indian 
equipment  Oct.  8  to  test  recovery  system  for  space probe  instruments. 
(Reuters, N Y T ,  8/22/71,  35) 
*  Successful  completion  of  over  2000  hrs  of  tes t ing-equ iva len t   to  80-day 
space  mission-of 
prototype  water  vapor  electrolysis  system  was  an-  
nounced  by  NASA.  Developed  at  ARC,  system  converted moisture  in   a i r  
directly  into  hydrogen  and  oxygen  and  released  reclaimed  oxygen 
back  into  air.  I t   could  be  used  instead  of  heavy,  bulky  tanks  of 
breathing  oxygen  on  future  long-duration  space  missions.  I t   would 
also  reduce  load  on  humidity  control  equipment  by  removing  excess 
water  vapor  from  cabin  atmosphere.  (NASA   Release  71-150) 
NASA  and  Stanford  Univ.  Biomedical  Technology  Transfer  Team 
(BATEAM ) ,  fourth  BATEAM  to  be  established  and  first  formed  a t   lead- 
ing   medical  school,  would  apply  NASA-generated  aerospace  technology 
to  problems  in  cardiology,  NASA  announced.  Team  of  five  medical 
consultants  and  five  aerospace  engineering  consultants  under  Stanford 
Univ.  cardiologist  Dr.  Donald  C.  Harrison would  concentrate on  cardio- 
vascular medicine. 
NASA  had  eight  special  teams-four  working on  environmental prob- 
lems  and  four  on  biomedical  activities.  (NASA  Release  71-154) 
Data  obtained  during  Soviet  Zond  missions  from  September  1968  to 
October  1970  were  described  by  Soviet  scientists,  including  Oleg 
Gazenko  of  Academy  of  Sciences,  in  Moskovskaya   Pravda  article,  Tass 
reported.  Zond  spacecraft  had  carried  turtles,  drosophilas,  onions, 
wheat  and  barley  seeds,  chlorella  strains,  intestinal  bacilli,  and   other 
objects.  Total  dosage  of  radiation  had  been  same  for  all  flights.  After 
return  to  earth  turtles  were  active  and  had  good  appetite.  During 
experiments  they  lost  10%  of  weight.  “Some  blood  tests  . . . and 
electrocardiographs  did  not  reveal  essential  divergencies from  control 
animals.”  Morphological  and  histochemical  analyses  of  organs  and 
tissues  of  turtles  aboard  Zurzd  5  (launched  Sept.  15,  1968)  had   re- 
vealed  changes  in  glycogen  and  iron  content  of  liver  and   structural 
changes in   spleen.  Subsequent experiments had  not  confirmed  findings. 
Flight  conditions  had  given  rise  to  “comparatively  large  increase  in  
the  number  of  chromosome  changes  in   the  seeds  of  pine  and   barley, 
and  a  rise  in  the  mutants  of  chlorella  strains.”  (FBIS-sov-71-161, 
8/19/71,  L l )  
NASA  announced  issuance  of  RFPS  for  eight-month  study  of  applications 
of  dual-mode nuclear  rocket  engine  to  propel  spacecraft  and  generate 
electrical power  for  use on board.  (NASA  Release 71-157) 
*  Long-term  commitment  and   definition  of  policy  for   storage  and   cura- 
torial  handling  of  lunar  materials  had  been  urged  by  Cal  Tech  scien- 
tist  Dr.  .Gerald  J.  Wasaerburg,  AP  reported.  A  principal  investigator 

235 

August  19 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
of  lunar  material,  Dr.  Wasserburg  had   sa id   lack  of  planning  and  
handling  could  deny  fu ture   generations use of  moon  rocks  now  being 
studied.  ( P  Bull, 8/19/71) 
Washington  Evening  Star  editorial  commented  on  selection  of  scientist- 
astronaut  Dr.  Harrison  H.  Schmitt  for  Apollo  17   crew:  “The  argu- 
ment  for  the  scientist-astronaut  has  come.  So  f a r  a s  we  are   concerned, 
i t   always  made  sense.  Therefore,  any  congratulations  to  [ N A S A ~   for 
finally  putting  one  of  the  flying  geologists  to  work  might  be  accom- 
panied  by  a  raise  of  eyebrows  over  the  obvious  tokenism  of 
the 
assignment and   a  reproachful  question  a s   to  why  they  waited  so  long 
to  put  a  scientist  into  the  richest  geological  treasure  house  that  man 
has  yet discovered.”  (W  S tar ,  8/19/71) 
August  20: No  viable  organism  and  no   evidence  of  fossil  material  had 
been  found  in   Apollo  14 lunar  samples,  Lunar  Sample  Preliminary 
Examination  Team  reported  in   Science.  Major  findings  had  been : 
only  2  of  33  rocks  had  basaltic  textures;  samples differed  from  earlier 
lunar  rocks  and   from  their  closest  meteorite  and  terrestrial  analogs  in 
chemical  content;  chemical  composition  of  soil  resembled  that  of 
rocks ; rocks  displayed  characteristic  surface  features  and  shock 
effects  similar  to  those  of  Apollo  11 and  12 samples;  concentration 
of  solar-wind-implanted material  in   soil  was  large,  as in   ApoZZo  11 
and   12 material,  but  solar  wind  contents  of  rocks  ranged  from  tha t  
of  soil  “to  essentially  zero”;  carbon  content  of  Apollo  14 rocks  was 
within  range  of  that  for  ApoWo  11 and   12 rocks;  four   fragmental 
rocks  showed  surface  exposure  time  about  an   order  of  magnitude 
less  than  typical  exposure  times  of  ApoZZo  11 and  12 rocks;  broader 
range  of  soil  mechanics  properties  had  been  found  a t   Apollo  14 site 
than  a t   Apollo  11 or  12 sites  and  Surveyor  landing  sites;  and  no  evi- 
dence  of  biological  material  had  been  found  in   Apollo  14 samples to 
date.  (Sc ience ,  8/20/71,  681-93) 
Apollo  12, 14, and  15  seismometers  had  located  source  of  80%  of 
moonquakes in  area  10 km  (6 m i)   wide  and  650 km  (400 m i )   below 
lunar   surface  in   Ocean  of  Storms,  Dr.  Gary  N.  Latham,  Apollo  pro- 
gram  chief  seismologist,  reported  in   interview  published  i n   Wmh ing -  
ton  Pos t .   (Brett,  W Pos t ,  8J20/71,  A 2 )  
*  NASA  launched  series  of  three  sounding  rockets  from  Wallops  Station  to  
measure  diurnal  oxygen,  density,  pressure,  and   temperature  and  
obtain  comparisons  of  pitot  and active-sphere  density  measurements. 
Rockets  were  launched  during  darkness  and  da ta   would  be  compared 
with da ta  from  daylight series launched Aug.  19. 
Nike-Cajun  carried  Univ.  of  Michigan  and   NOAA  experiment  to 
132-km  (82-m i)   altitude  to  measure  d iurna l   variation  of  atomic  oxy- 
gen  in   80- to  120-km (50- to  75-mi)  region.  Nike-Apache carried Univ. 
of  Michigan  and   GSFC  experiment  to  180-km  (111.8-mi)  altitude  to 
obtain  d iurna l   measurements of  density,  pressure,  and   temperature  in  
80- to  120-km (50- to   75-mi)  region.  Viper  Dar t   carried  WSMR experi- 
ment  to  l u k m   (89.5-mi)  altitude  to  provide  density,  temperature, 
pressure,  and  wind  da ta   from  40  to  130 km (25  to  80 m i) .   All  rockets 
and   instrumentation  functioned  satisfactorily.  (NASA  Rpts  SRL) 
Three  Nike-Apache  sounding  rockets  were  launched  by  NASA  from  Wal- 
lops  Station  carrying  Univ.  of  Illinois  and   GCA  Corp.  experiments  to  
measure  electron  concentration,  collision  frequency,  and   temperature 

236 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

U.S.S.R. 
launched  Ve 
463-km  (287.7-mi) 
ionospheric  param 
consisted  of  instrument  compartment  and   recoverable  container  car-  
rying  scientific  equipment  for   heliophysical  research  and  Hungarian- 
Czechoslovakian-Soviet  instruments  to  study  micrometeors. 
Instru- 
ment  compartment  carried  equipment  fo r   heliophysical  and  iono- 
spheric  research  designed  by  Bulgarian,  East  German,  Czecho- 
slovakian,  and   Soviet  scientists.  Rocket  and   instruments  functioned 
(Tass,  FBIS-SOV-163-3, 
satisfactorily  and   payload  was  recovered. 
8/23/71,  L1 )  
Permanent  charter  for  INTELSAT  was  signed  by  54  nations-51 
of  whom 
were  members  of  80-member  interim  INTELSAT  con so r t ium -du r ing  
S ta te   Dept.  ceremonies.  Signatures  of  three  more  original  members 
were  required  for   two-thirds  majority  necessary  to   inaugurate  new 
agreement  providing  for   gradual  relaxation  of  U.S.  control. 
Under  permanent  charter  INTELSAT  Assembly  of  Parties,  prime 
organ  of  multitiered  organization,  would  meet  biennially  and  take 
decisions  with  one  vote  for   each  nation.  Annual  Meeting  of  Signa- 
tories  would  decide  on  financial,  operational,  and  technical  aspects 
of  programs  with  one  vote  for  each  member.  INTELSAT  Board  of 
Directors  would  meet  a t   least  four   times  a  year  to   vote  on  design, 
development,  construction,  establishment,  operation,  and   maintenance 
of  space  segment.  No  single  Board member  could  cast  more  than  40% 
of  total  vote;  decisions  would  be  taken  by  two-thirds  ma jor i ty ;   and  
nonveto  provisions had  been  written  in to   charter.  U.S.  had  agreed  t o  
relinquish  unilateral  veto  power  it  had  under  interim  arrangements. 
Permanent  charter  created  new  executive  organ  to  assist  Board  of 
Governors,  headed  first  by  Secretary  General  and   later  by  Director 
General.  ComSatCorp would  continue  to  provide  technical  and   opera- 
tional  management of  INTELSAT  space  segment under  six-year  contract. 
Net  investment  ceiling  of  U S .   $5  million  was  established  with  dis- 
cretion  in  Board  of  Governors to   increase  ceiling by  10%.  (Lydon, 
NYT ,   8/21/71,  40;  “Permanent  Arrangements  for   the  Global  Com- 
mercial  Communications Satellite  System  of  Intelsat,”  IAF  22nd  Int’l 
Astro  Congress, 9 /25 /71)  
August  21 .- WTTGTV 
in   Washington,  D.C.,  carried  one-hour  special  tele- 
cast  “Giant  Leap  for  Mankind.”  Program  reviewed  Apollo  program 
and  described  NASA  fu ture   plans.  (NASA Special  Ann,  8/18/71;  NASA 
PAO) 
*  Appointment  of  Richard  P.  Skully,  Manager  of  FAA’s Miami  Area  Of- 
fice,  a s   Director  of  FAA  Office  of  Environmental  Quality  was  an- 
nounced  by  FAA Administrator  John   H.  Shaffer.  (FAA Release  71-134) 
August  22:  Use  of  machines,  ra ther   than  men,  in   space  after  final  Apollo 
ated  by  Cornel1 Univ.  astronomer  Dr.  Thomas  Gold 
in   New   York  T imes   Magazine  article.  For  lunar   o r   Martian  explo- 
ration  he  suggested  “roving  vehicle  w i th   television  eyes  and   one  or 
two  telefactor  hands,  a  modern  version  of  a  centaur-half  man,  half 
automobile.”  Vehicle  could  travel  longer  distances  on  lunar  surface 

237 

August  22 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1971 

than  man and  retrieve  samples  of  different  terrain.  “The  remote 
hands  could  pick  up  rocks  and   examine  them  under  the  television 
eyes,  and,  if  desired,  pu t   them  in  a  hopper  for   eventual  transmission 
back  to  earth.  The  vehicle  might  then  rendezvous with  another  that 
has  earth-return  capability  and  hand  over  the  contents  of  the  hopper 
to  it.  While  this  type  of  vehicle  would  allow  us   to  explore  almost  all 
regions  of  the  moon,  manned  missions  have  been  severely  limited 
both  in   the  type  of  terrain  for  the  landing  and   the  distance  that  astro- 
nauts  can  travel  from   their  spaceship.”  Scientists  had  favored  use  of 
telefactor  with  sample-return  capability  but  “the  very  success  of  the 
Apollo  program  had  diverted  attention  from  it.”  Now  tha t   no   “really 
purposeful”  manned  program  was  planned,  Dr.  .Gold  asked,  “would 
not  this  be  the  r igh t   time  for  really  learning  how  to  do   good  remote 
control ? ” (N  YT Magazine,  8/22/71  ) 
August  23:  ApoZZo  15 Astronauts  James  B.  Irwin,  Alfred  M.  Worden,  and  
David  R.  Scott  addressed  National  Press   Club  luncheon  i n   Wash- 
ington,  D.C.,  before  flying  to  New  York  fo r   official  welcome  by  city 
and  appearance  a t   U.N.  Scott  called  for   greater  cooperation  in   space 
and   said  he   looked  forward  to  flight  with  Soviet  cosmonaut.  ‘‘I  know 
six  cosmonauts  personally,  and  I  would  be  glad  to  fly  with  any  one 
of  them  any  day.  And  I  hope  we  get  that  chance.”  Scott  said  core 
sample  3 m  (8%   f t )   long  he  had  brought  from  moon  contained  55  
separate  layers  of  soil  that  illustrated  last  2.4  billion  y r s   of  lunar 
history.  Layers,  discovered  through  x-ray  examination,  would  show 
changes  occurring  over  billions  of  years  in   sun’s  radiation  as  it  hit 
lunar   surface. 
Later,  in  telephone  interview  with  Washington  Post,  LRL  scientist 
Dr.  John  F.  Lindsay  sa id   layers  ranged  in   thickness  from  12.7  mm 
(1 /2   in)  to   127  mm  ( 5   i n )   with  each  stratum  probably  representing 
different  meteorite  impact  on  lunar  surface.  While  no  analysis  of  core 
could  be  made  until  i t   was  opened  by  geologists  in  January,  Dr. 
Lindsay  said  x-rays  had  indicated  that  Scott  had  not  drilled  through 
solid  rock.  (UPI ,   NYT,  8/24/71,  25;  Auerbach,  W Post,  8/24/71,  A3 )  
*  NASA  had  laid  off  approximately  740  employees  effective  Oct.  1 to   reduce 
to  authorized  FY   1972 level  of  28 352,  Aviation  Week  & Space  Tech-  
nology  reported.  MSC  had  dismissed  132 ;   MSFC,  197 ;   GSFC,  149 ;  
IRRC,  123 ;   URC,  5 4 ;   ARC,  78 ;   FRC,  12 ;   and   NASA  Pasadena  Office,  2. 
Force  reductions  a t   Hq.  and   KSC  had   been  made  entirely  through 
attrition.  ( A v  W k ,  8/23/71,  21)  
*  U.S.S.R.  had   improved  reliability  and   performance  of  Molniya  I  com- 
sa t ;   expanded  network  of  Orbita  system  ground  receiving  stations  to 
35,  including  Cuban  station  and  station  a t   Ulan  Bator  in  Mongolia; 
and  would  build  six  to  eight  additional  ground  stations  annually  fo r  
indefinite  period,  Aviation  Week   &  Space  Technology  reported.  Mon- 
golian station  had  been  activated  in  February  1970.  (Av  Wk,  8/23/71, 
51-2) 
President  Nixon  sent  memorandum  and  statement  of  Government patent 
policy  to   heads  of  executive  departments  and  agencies.  Improvements 
i n   1963  policy  statement  would  provide  agency  heads  with  authority 
to   permit  contractors  greater  rights  to  inventions  where  necessary  to 
achieve  use  or  where  equitable  circumstances  justified,  additional 
guidance  i n   promoting  use  of  Government-sponsored  inventions,  clari- 

238 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

August  23 

fication  of  states’  and   municipal  governments’  rights  in   Federal  Gov- 
ernment-licensed inventions,  and   more  definitive  data  base  for  evalu- 
a t ing   patent  policy’s  administration  and   effectiveness.  (PD,  8/30/71, 
1209) 
August  23-24:  Scientific  results  from  Om  2  were  reported  dur ing   Univ. 
of  Massachusetts  symposium  held  in  conjunction  with  AAS  conference. 
GSFC,  Lehigh  Univ.,  and   Univ.  of  Wisconsin  scientists  reported  dis- 
covery  of  “black  hole”  in   space,  remnant  of  star  that  had  shrunk  to 
such  density  that  no  light  could  leave  it.  Black  hole  would  be  result 
of  collapsing  process  in   which  material  remaining  from   burned-out 
star  was  drawn  i n   upon  itself  by  i ts   own  gravity.  Densities  of  black 
holes  were  said  to  be  so  great  that  globe  with  3.2-km (2-m i)   radius 
could  collapse  to  size  of  pinhead  and  still  retain  its  original  mass. 
( N Y T ,  9 /2 /71 ,14)  
August  24 :   Apollo  15  Astronauts  Alired  M.  Worden,  David  R.  Scott,  and  
James  B.  Irwin  rode  in   motorcade  to  City  Hall  in   New  York,  where 
they  received  gold  medals  from  Mayor  John  V.  Lindsay.  Astronauts 
presented  Mayor  Lindsay  with  flag  carried  on  Apollo  15  mission. 
Later  astronauts  were  welcomed  to  U.N.  by  Secretary  General  U 
Thant,  to  whom  they  presented  replica  of  plaque  they  had  placed  on 
moon  to  commemorate  astronauts  and  cosmonauts  who  had  died  in  
performance  of  duties.  (N A S A  Activities,  9/15/71,  147-8;  Kaufman, 
N Y T ,  8 /25 /71 ,1 )  
0  Locked-on  antenna  control  system  on  NASA’s A t s   3 applications  technol- 
ogy  satellite  (launched  Nov.  5,  1967)  had  caused  satellite  to  stop 
transmitting  data  temporarily,  NASA  announced.  Officials  believed 
antenna,  on  top  and  north  side  of  spacecraft,  had  overheated  and  
stopped  spinning  when  sun  was  north  of  equator  dur ing   summer. 
Antenna  had  operated  sporadically  dur ing   July  and  August,  bu t   offi- 
cials  said  malfunctioning  was  consistent  with  similar  past  problems 
and  antenna would  recover  a s  sun moved  south.  (NASA  Release 71-158) 
August  25:  NASA’s M2-F3  lifting-body  vehicle,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot 
William  H.  Dana,  reached  20 400-m  (67  0 0 0 f t   altitude)  and   mach 
1.05  dur ing   ninth  flight  from  FRC .   Objectives  were  to  determine 
aileron  effectiveness  at  speed  greater  than  mach  0.9,  obtain  stability 
and  control  da ta   at  mach  0.95  and   0.90,  expand  flight  envelope,  and  
evaluate speed brake.  (NASA P r o j  Off) 
Resignation  of  Apollo  11 Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  first  man  to  set 
foot  on  moon,  was  announced  by  NASA.  Armstrong,  Deputy  Associate 
Administrator  for   Aeronautics,  OART,  would  jo in   Univ.  of  Cincinnati 
a s   its  first  professor  of  aerospace  engineering  Oct.  1. He  would  con- 
tinue  to  serve  NASA  a s  consultant.  Armstrong had  joined  NASA  in   1955 
and  had  served  as  aeronautics  research  pilot  for  NACA  and   NASA.  He 
had  piloted  X-15,  X-1,  F-100,  F-101,  F-102,  F-104,  F-5D,  and  
B 4 7  a ircraf t   and,  as  B-29  “drop”  a ircraf t   pilot,  had  participated  in  
more  than  100  rocket  a ircraf t   flights.  Armstrong  had  been  selected  by 
NASA  as  astronaut  in   September  1962.  He  had  served  a s   backup  com- 
mand  pilot  for  Gemini  5;  command  pilot  for   Gemini  8  (launched 
March  16,  1966 ) ,   during  which  he  had  performed  first  successful 
docking  of  two  vehicles  in   space;  backup  command  pilot  fo r   Gemini 
1 1 ;   backup  command  pilot  for  Apollo  8;  and   commander  of  Apollo 
11. (NASA  Release  71-159) 

239 

August 25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
. Test  had  successfully demonstrated  capa- 
Experiment  Test,  launched  June  20,  was 
PAET  Planetary  Atmosp 
adjudged  successful b 
bility  of  selected  experiments  to  determine  structure  and  composition 
of  an  unknown  planetary  atmosphere  from  probe  entering  atmosphere 
a t  high  speeds.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
e  Appointment  of  Mrs.  Ruth  Bates  Harr is   a s   Deputy  Director  of  NASA 
Equal  Employment  Opportunity  Office  and   Director  of  NASA  Equal 
Employment  Opportunity  Program  was  announced  by  NASA.  Ap- 
pointment  was  effective  Oct.  4.  Mrs.  Harr is   had  been  Director  of 
Dept.  of  Human  Relations  of  Montgomery  County  (Md.)  Public 
Schools.  (NASA Special Ann)  
August  26:  Explorer  43  ( IMP-I)  interplanetary  monitoring  platform  was 
adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  Spacecraft,  launched  March  13,  had 
exceeded  objectives  and   was  functioning  nominally  with  11 scientific 
instruments  providing  detailed  information  on  galactic  and   solar 
cosmic  rays,  interplanetary  medium,  and  distant  magnetosphere.  All 
systems  and   scientific  instruments  were  functioning  normally  except 
GSFC  plasma  probe,  which  malfunctioned  30  days  after  launch,  and  
Univ.  of  Chicago  cosmic  ray   telescope,  which  partially  malfunctioned 
6 4  days after launch.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
0  NRL’S  Solrud  10  (Explorer  44) solar  radiation  satellite,  launched  by 
NASA  July  8,  was  adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  Spacecraft  was  func- 
tioning  nominally  and  all  15   scientific  instruments  had  been  turned 
on  and   were  operating satisfactorily.  (NASA P r o j  Off) 
*  Astronaut  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  received  rear   admiral  s tars   from  Sec- 
retary  of  the  Navy  John  H.  Chaffee  dur ing   Pentagon  ceremonies. 
Shepard  was  first  astronaut  to  achieve  rear   admiral  rank.  ( W   Post, 
8/27/71,  A l )  
Immediate  report  from  NASA  on  role  of  Dale  D.  Myers,  Deputy  Adminis- 
trator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  in  award  of  $500-million  space  shut- 
tle  engine  contract  to  NR   Rocketdyne  Div.  was  requested  by  Rep. 
William  R.  Cotter  (D-Conn.) . I n   statement  to  press,  Rep.  Cotter  said 
Myers  “as  co-chairman  of  the  jo in t   NASA-Pentagon  space  transporta- 
tion  system  committee,  may  have  been  instrumental  in   cutting  off 
A ir   Force  funding  of  P ra t t   &  Whitney’s  space  shuttle  research  under 
the  XLR-129  program.”  Cotter  said  P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.  of  United 
Aircraft  Corp.  had  based  i t s   contention  of  superior  “technical  know- 
how”  on  shuttle  engine  development  [see  Aug.  31  on  its  10-yr  XLR- 
129   research.  Myers  had  been  a  Rocketdyne  Vice  President  before 
coming to  NASA  in  1970.  (Text;  Warden,  C T r ib ,  8/27/71,22) 
Lee  B.  James,  former  Director  of  Program  Management  a t   MSFC,  had 
joined  faculty  of  Univ.  of  Tennessee  Space  Institute,  UPI  reported. 
James’  retirement  from  NASA  had  bcen  announced  April  30.  (UPI, 
W Po s t ,  8/27/71) 
August  27: U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  435 from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t   with 
478-km  (297.0-mi)  apogee,  272-km  (169.0-mi)  perigee,  92.0-min 
period,  and   70.9O  inclination.  Spacecraft  reentered  Jan.  28,  1972. 
(GSFC  SSR, 8 /31 /71 ;   1/31/72;  SBD, 9 /14 /71 ,27)  
test 
*  NASA’s supercritical  wing,  flown  on  TF-8A  a ircraf t   piloted  by  NASA 
pilot  Thomas  C.  McMurtry,  successfully  completed  10th  flight  from  
FRC.  Objectives  of  U -m i n   flight  were  to  obtain  additional  pressure 
distribution  and   performance  data  a t   high  subsonic  speeds  and  evalu- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

August  27 

August  27:  Noise  tests  of  NASA’s experimental,  quieter  j e t   aircraft  engine  were 
under  way  in  Peebles,  Ohio,  the   Lewis  Research  Center  announced.  T h e   project 
sought  to  develop  an   engine  o f  97850-newton  (22000 -pound )  thrust  that  would  operate 
a t   15  to   20  decibels  quieter  thun  engines  used  in  present  subsonic  a i r   transports. 
In the   pho to   t h e   engine  was  being  checked  out  be fore  the   General  Electric  Co.  noise 
tests,  A  probe  inserted  in  the  exhaust  nozzle  ( l e f t )   measured  the   smoke  produced. 

a te   flutter  characteristics  a t   low  supersonic  speeds.  Aircraft  reached 
12  000-m  (40 000-ft)  altitude,  with  pressure  distribution  and   per- 
formance data  obtained from  mach  0.80 to 0.97 and   flutter  characteris- 
tics evaluated  a t  mach  1.05  and  1.10.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
*  Experimental,  quieter  je t   a ircraf t   engine  was  undergoing  noise  tests  a t  
Peebles,  Ohio,  LeRC  announced.  Engine  was  being  developed  under 
contract  by  GE’s  Aircraft  Engine Group.  (LeRC  Release  71-38) 
*  Effects  of  levels  of  ionizing  radiation  on  passengers  and   crew  members 
in   supersonic  aircraft  flying  a t   18 000  to  20 000 m  (60 000  to  65 000 
f t )   were  described  in  Science  by  USN  biophysicist  Hermann  J. 
Schaefer.  Level  of  galactic  radiation  per  mile  fo r   SST was  smaller than 
that  fo r   conventional  jet  aircraft.  “Even  in  the  extreme  case  of  some- 
one’s  spending,  for  a  full  year,  10 )percent of  his  time  a t   SST altitude, 
the  integral  dose equivalent would  still  not  exceed  1 rem.”  Increase  in 
risk  of  shortening  residual  life-span  was  “insignificant.”  (Science, 
8/27/71,780-3) 
*  Easier  relations  between  Soviet  and   visiting  foreign  scientists  attending 
15th  International  Union  of  Geodesy  and  .Geophysics  in   Moscow, 
Aug.  1-14,  were  reported  in   Science  by  Philip  H.  Abelson.  “To  an  
extent  not  previously  possible,  Americans  were  entertained  profes- 
241 

August  27 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

sionally  and   socially  and   were  invited  to  visit  Soviet  research  facili- 
ties.  Only  a  few  Russians would  be  so  bold  as to  act  counter  to  official 
policy  in   their  contacts  with  foreigners;  therefore,  the  extent  of  the 
hospitality  reflected  national  policy.”  (Sc ience ,  8/27/71,  797-800) 
August  28:  Oxford  Univ.  atmospheric  physicist  Dr.  John  Houghton  told 
British  press  two-year  research  program  a t   Oxford  had  shown  “even 
with  500  SST aircraft  flying,  there  would  be   no  danger  of  ultraviolet 
radiation  at  ground  level  being  increased  by  any  significant  amount.” 
Dr.  Houghton  said  program  had  been  similar  to  research  that  had  led 
Univ.  of  California  a t   Berkeley  scientist  Dr.  Harold  Johnston  to   pre- 
dict  that  exhaust  from  supersonic  aircraft  could  have  dangerous  effect 
on  stratosphere  and   might  imperil  life  on  earth.  (London  Times  dis- 
patch,  N Y T ,  8/28/71,  4<1) 
Apollo  14  Astronaut  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  was  awarded  honorary  Doc- 
tor   of  Science  degree  by  Univ.  of  Miami  in   Oxford,  Ohio.  (N A S A  
Ac t iv i t ies ,  9/15/71,  155) 
August  29 :   Wa shhg ton  Post  editorial commented  on  DOT-NASA  report  that 
jet  engine  noise was  high-priority  problem  [see May  51.  Report  “does 
not  offer  all  the  solutions,  but  i t   does  recognize  that  sociological, 
economic  and  engineering  considerations  must  be  taken  into  account 
in   finding  them.  The  prescription  makes  good  sense  both  for  the  eco- 
nomically  strained  industry  and  the  exasperated  potential  passenger.” 
( W  Po s t ,  8/29/71,  B6 )  
August  30:  Election  of  Apollo  11  Astronauts Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E. 
Aldrin,  Jr.,  and  Michael  Collins  to  International  Aerospace  Hall  of 
Fame  was  announced by  Hall  of  Fame President Martin  R.  Engler,  Jr .  
Awards  for  1971  would  be  presented  to  astronauts  in   San   Diego, 
Calif.,  Oct.  23.  Astronauts  had  been  nominated  “in  view  of  their  epic 
flight  and   its  representation  as  one  of  the  greatest  single  scientific 
achievements in  the  history  of  man.”  (Letter  to  NASA  Historian) 
Dr.  Eberhard  F.  M.  Rees,  MSFC   Director,  announced  establishment  of 
temporary  HEAO   Office  in   MSFC’S  Program  Management  Directorate 
to  plan  High  Energy  Astronomy  Observatory.  Office  would  replace 
HEAO   Task  Team  formed  in   spring  1971.  (MSFC   Release  71-148) 
FAA  certification  of  201  series  Guppy  cargo  a ircraf t   and  sale  of  one  a ir-  
craft  to  Airbus  Industries  of  France,  European  cargo  airline,  were 
announced  by  aircraft’s  manufacturer,  Aero  Spacelines,  Inc.  New 
a ircraf t   was  sixth  in   Guppy  series,  created  to  airlift  space  booster 
components  for  NASA.  With  fuselage  7.6  m  (25  f t )   in   diameter,  new 
Guppy  could  lift  24 500  kg  (54 000  lbs)  of  cargo  and  fly  it  for  3200 
km  (2000  m i)   nonstop  at  470  km  per  h r   (290  m p h ) .   First  201 
series  Guppy  would  move  wing  and  fuselage  assemblies  of  Concorde 
supersonic  transport  and   300-passenger  European  airbus  from  points 
of  manufacture  to  Toulouse,  France,  for  assembly.  ( C   T r i b ,  9/2/71) 
Response  by  Soviet Ambassador Anatoly  F.  Dobrynin  to  National  Space 
Club  letter  of  condolence  to  Soviet  government  on  death  of  Soyuz 
cosmonauts  was  published  in   NSC  News  Le t ter:   “We  highly  appreci- 
ate  your  expression  of  respect  for   the  heroic  endeavour  of  the  space 
explorers  who  died  fo r   the  progress  of  all  mankind.” 
(NSC  News 
Le t ter ,  8/30/71,  2 )  
*  Yugoslavia  was  urging  other  East  European  countries  to  participate 
actively  in   INTELSAT,  Av ia t ion   Week  &  Space  Technology  reported. 

242 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1971 

August  30 

Discussions had  been  held  with  Rom*& 
and  Hungary  on  possibility 
tha t   they  would  use  ground  termkral  tha t   Yugoslavia  expected  to  be 
operational in  1974.  ( A v  Why 8 /30 /71 ,11)  
T im e   magazine  reviewed  Secret  Sentries  in   Space  by  Philip  J.  Klass. 
“No  one  else  has  written  in   comparable  detail  about  spy  satellites,” 
T ime   said.  Klass  had  described  latest  U S .   SAMOS  (satellite  and  mis- 
sile  observations  system).  “Big  Bird”  was  10  900-kg  (12-ton)  space- 
craft  capable  of  operating  in   orbit  for   several  months.  I t   could  trans- 
mit  high-quality  pictures  by  rad io   and   eject  capsules  of  exposed  film, 
which  then  dropped  by  parachute.  Big  Bird  also  included  infrared 
heat-sensing  equipment  that  allowed  it  to  “see”  through  ice  and  snow 
to  locate  Soviet  underground  weapons.  Klass  had  reported  heaviest 
concentration  of  long-range  Soviet  missiles  in   Siberia  and   behind 
Ural  mountains  in  Central  Asia.  (I’ ime ,  8/30/71,  26)  
Mrs.  Irene  Bolam,  named  i n  book  Ame l ia  Earhart  L ives   a s   being missing 
aviatrix  Amelia  Earhart,  filed  $1.5-million  libel  suit  against  authors 
Joseph  Klass  and  Joseph  Gervais.  Mrs.  Bolam  claimed  book  damaged 
her  reputation  by  depicting  her  as  bigamist,  spy,  and  traitor.  Book 
claimed  Amelia  Earhart  had  disappeared  in   1937  while  ffying  U S .  
spy  mission,  wa s   captured  by  Japanese,  and  might  have  been  World 
War  I1 Japanese propagandist  Tokyo  Rose.  (UPI,  W Post,  9/1/71,  D5 )  
*  Washington  Da i ly   News  editorial  commented  on  Aug.  25  resignation 
from  NASA  of  Apollo  11 Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong:  “Offhand,  i t   is 
regrettable  to  see  any  of  these  accomplished  men  leave  the  program 
they  helped  make  such  a  smashing  success.  But  Mr.  Armstrong  will 
be  teaching  engineering  and  it  will  be  no  surprise  i f   some  of  his 
students  wind  up  in   future  space  exploration.  So  count  his  ‘defection’ 
to  education  a s   another  spinoff  benefit  of  the  space  program.”  ( W  
News,  8 /30 /71 ,22)  
August  31 : NASA  and  Soviet Academy  of  Sciences had   confirmed results  of 
June  21-25  Joint  Working  Group  meetings  a t   MSC,  NASA  announced. 
Groups  had  considered  technical  requirements  for  compatible systems 
for  space  rendezvous  and   docking,  radio  and  optical  reference,  com- 
munications, life  support,  crew  transfer,  and  docking assemblies.  They 
had  agreed  to  study  experiments  to   test  technical  solutions.  Experi- 
ments  might  include  docking  spacecraft  of  Apollo  type  with  orbital 
scientific  station  of  Salyut  type  and   docking  spacecraft  like  Soyuz 
with  station  like  Skylab. Mission  models  would  test  suitability  of  tech- 
nical  requirements  and  solutions.  Next  working  group  meeting  was 
scheduled  for  late  November  in   MOSCOW, to  complete  agreement  on 
technical  requirements  for  compatible  systems.  Working  Groups  had 
been  established  under  Oct.  28,  1970,  agreement.  (NASA  Release  71- 
164) 
Denver  mint  held  preview  showing  of  nickel  alloy  Eisenhower  dollar 
which  would  be  released  in   October.  Back  of  coin  depicted ApoZZo  11 
lunar landing.  (UPI,  W Post, 9/2/71) 
0  President  Nixon,  from  San  Clemente,  Calif.,  issued  Proclamation  4078 
designating  Oct.  11 Columbus  Day,  1971.  He  said,  “ In   this  present 
age  of  epic  journeys  in   space,  we  can  appreciate  more  than  ever  the 
great  achievements of  Christopher  Columbus.”  ( P D ,  9/4/71,  1224-5) 
During  August:  Gabriel  Board  appointed  June   18  to  examine  and   re- 
evaluate  philosophy,  practices,  and   procedures  in   Centaur  quality 

243 

During August 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

assurance  and  workmanship  program  reported  findings  and   recom- 
mendations  to  House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics’  Sub- 
committee  on  NASA  Oversight:  “Aggressive  and   creative”  new  policy 
with  “thorough  and   conservative  approach  to  the  use  of  new  hard- 
ware  in   flight”  was  needed  to  improve  Atlas-Centaur  quality  and 
workmanship.  Board  recommended  enhanced  emphasis  on   employee 
motivation,  manufacturing,  engineering,  and   planning,  quality  assur- 
ance  planning  “with  preventative  aspects  dominant,  workmanship 
training,  inspection  training,  quality  audit,  and  vendor  control  im- 
provements.” 
(Rev iew   of  Recent  Launch  Failures,  Subcom  Pr in t ,  
10/7 1 ) 
USN  participation  in   space  shuttle  program  was  urged  by  L/Cdr  Preston 
E.  Beck  (USN ,   Ret.),  in   U.S.  Naval  Institute  Proceedings.  U S N   expe- 
rience  had  shown  close  parallel  between  life  support  criteria  and  fuel 
management for   nuclear  submarines  and  that  required  for  space  shut- 
tle.  USN  Office  of  Naval  Research  (ONR )   and   USN  Systems  Command 
should determine  feasibility  of  using  a i r   entrainment,  hydroskis, skids, 
and   hydrofoils  to  permit  sea-level landing  point  for  shuttle  spacecraft 
with  one  or  more  engine  inoperable  af ter   reentry.  Sea  transport  and 
barge  storage  of  fuels  and  oxidizers  fo r   shuttle  spacecraft  would 
ensure  safety  of 
flight  personnel  and  minimize  interference  with 
commercial  a i r   traffic.  Space  shuttle  orbiter  and   booster  structures 
could  be  moved  only  by  flyout  or  by  sea  because  of  size.  “The  obvious 
answer  is  final  assembly  at  the  launch  site  using  a  seaborne  logistic 
system.”  Naval  Air  and   Material  Center  had  facilities  for  develop- 
ment  of  space  shuttle  materials,  testing  of  components  and   subassem- 
blies,  and   supporting  engineering.  I t   seemed  pertinent  “that  the  Navy 
take  the  initiative  in   s tar t ing  to  support  the  space shuttle  program. The 
key  to  many  of  the  problems  now  being  subjected  to  resolution  is  the 
sea.”  ( U.S.  Naval  Institute  Proceedings,  8/71,  103-5) 
Electrical  power  development  for   space  was  summarized by  AIAA  Electric 
Power  Systems  Committee  in  Astronautics  &  Aeronautics  article : 
“Batteries  have  continued  to  be   employed  beyond  Explorer  I  for  
either  primary  power  o r   a s   an   element  of  power  subsystem.  Silver- 
zinc  batteries provided  13.5  kilowatt-hours  (Kwh)   of  electrical  energy 
for  the   Mercury  spacecraft,  up  to  6 3  Kwh  for   the  early  Geminis,  and  
65 Kwh  for  the Apollo  Lunar  Module.  Specific energies  have  advanced 
to  90  watt-hours  per  pound  (wh / lb)   f198 wh  per  kg]  in   unmanned 
Agena  vehicles.  The  continuing  flight  dependence  on  batteries  was 
dramatically  illustrated  by  the  rescue  phase  of  the  Apollo-13 mission, 
which  used  the  LM  batteries  for   power  after  the  failure  of  the  cryo- 
genic  supply  of  the  Service  Module  fuel  cell  system.  Undoubtedly, 
batteries  will  remain  a  vital  independent  power  source  in   manned 
missions  and  perhaps  unmanned  missions for  many  years.”  Committee 
recommended  that  “competitiveness  of  the  isotope  and  reactor  systems 
€or  powers  in   the  tens  of  kilowatts  be  encouraged  rather  than  in- 
hibited  and   that  the  technology  programs  for  both  be  kept  viable,’’ 
felt  “that  achieving  acceptance of  a  reactor  power  system  for   manned 
Earth-orbiting missions presents  a  major  challenge to  the  power  com- 
munity  in   the  1970s: 
and  criticized  lack  of  resources  “to  pursue 
effectively  all  of  the  advanced  reactor  power-system  options  that  have 
been  carried  along  most  of  the  1960s.”  (A&A ,   8/71,  22-30) 

244 

September  1971 

September  1 : Preliminary  results  of  Apollo  15  scientific  experiments were 
reported  by  principal  experimenters  a t   MSC  press  briefing. 
Columbia  Univ.  scientist  Dr.  Gary  V.  Latham  reported  that  three- 
station  seismometer  network  completed  on  moon  by  Apollo  15  had  
detected  39  events,  including  “most  significant  event  we’ve  recorded 
on  the  moon.”  Event  was  moonquake 800  km  (500  m i )   beneath  sur- 
face-greater 
depth  than  for  any  quake  recorded  on  earth-about 
644 
km  (400  m i )   west  of  crater  Tycho.  ApolZo  15  seismic  data  also  had  
revealed  tha t   swarms  of  quakes  occurred  on   moon  as  they  did  on 
earth.  Most  intense  swarm recorded  “contained 30  events  over  a  period 
of  just  2  and  a  half  days  . . . a t  very  regular  intervals,  a t   about 2  hour 
spacing,  and   culminated  in   the  largest  moonquake  yet  recorded.” 
Dr.  Latham,  Apollo  program’s  chief  seismic  investigator,  said  da ta  
from  missions  to  date  had  proved  “that  we  can  place  long  life  geo- 
physical  observatories  on  the  moon  and   they  can  exist  years,  which 
means  tha t   we  can  expect  to  maintain  a  network  of  stations  with 
larger  spacing  between  missions.” 
Two  heat  probes  drilled  almost  two  meters  (almost  six  fee t)   into 
surface  had  shown  that  moon  was  hot,  with  heat  concentrated  deep  in  
interior  o r   in  pockets  of  rad ioac the   mineral  160  km  (100  m i )   below 
surface.  Temperature  of  moon  increased  0.56  K  (1 °F )   each  foot 
deeper  into  moon,  indicating  heat  flow  from  interior  was  one  fifth 
earth’s  heat  flow.  Columbia  Univ.  scientist  Dr.  Marcus  E.  Langseth 
said  this  evidence showed  that  abundance  of  radioactive  minerals  in- 
side  moon  was  at  least  comparable  to  abundance  inside  earth.  I t   also 
suggested  moon  and   earth  were  formed  a t   same  time  from  same 
elements. 
Cal  Tech  scientist  Dr.  Leon  T.  Silver  and  U S .   Geological  Survey 
scientist  Dr.  Gordon  A.  S w a m   said  Apollo  15 had  discovered  green 
rocks  on  moon  composed  of  magnificently  colored  spheres  of  green 
glass.  Dr.  Pau l   W.  Gast,  Chief  of  MSC  Planetary  and   Earth  Sciences 
Div.,  said  75  kg  (165  lbs)   of  ApoZZo  15 lunar  rocks  had  been  logged 
to  date  and would  be  distributed  to  investigators.  (Transcript;  O’Toole, 
W Post, 9/2/71,  A l )  
0  NASA  announced  appointment  of  Dr.  Charles A.  Berry,  Director  of  Medi- 
cal  Research  and   Operations  a t   MSC,  as  NASA  Director  for  Life  Sci- 
ences.  Appointment  would  become  effective  when  successor  for  Dr. 
Berry  was  found.  Dr.  Berry  would  succeed  Dr.  James W.  Humphreys, 
Jr.,  who  became  Secretary-Treasurer  of  American  Board  of  Surgery. 
(NASA  Ann,  9/1/71;  NASA  Release  71-166;  Am  Bd  of  Surgery  PIO) 
Second  flight  model  of  LRV Rover  was  delivered  by  Boeing  Co.  to  KSC 
for  Apollo  16.  (MSFC  Release  71-144;  KSC  PIO) 
. 
*  MSFC  had  signed  level-of-effort  contract  with  NR  Rocketdyne  Div.  for 
design  of  Space  Shuttle  main  engine,  NASA  announced.  The  interim 
four  months  a t   $1 million  per  month-had 
contract-for 
been  signed 

245 

September 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

pending  GAO  review  of  protest  by  United  Aircraft  Corp.  Pra t t   &  Whit- 
ney  Div.  of  the  contract  award  [see  Aug.  31.  (NASA  Release  71-165) 
Former  F-14  project  manager  Capt.  Lionel  E.  Ames,  Jr.  (U SN ) ,   said  in  
interview  that  F-14 
fighters  would  cost  $16.6  million  each-almost 
$4  million  more  than  $12.7  million  announced  by  DOD  Aug.  10.  He 
said  confusion  over  cost  illustrated  some  of  problems  he  had  had  as 
project  manager  before  being  replaced.  (W Star,  9/2/71,  A l l )  
Finalization  of  order  for  175  F - 4   jet  fighter  aircraft  by  Federal Republic 
of  Germany  was  announced  by  Secretary  of  Defense  Melvin  R.  Laird 
at  DOD  press  conference.  Order  amounted  to  more  than  $750  million. 
(Transcr ip t)  
September  2-11  : U.S.S.R. 
launched  Luna  18  unmanned  lunar  probe  on 
Proton  booster  from  Baykonur  a t   6 :41   pm  local  time  (4:41  pm  Mos- 
cow  time,  9:41  am  E D T ) ,   inserting  vehicle  into  translunar  trajectory 
from  ear th   orbit.  Tass  said  purpose  of  mission  was  to  carry  out  fur-  
ther  scientific  research  of  moon  and  near-moon  space.  During  flight 
to  moon  29  communications  sessions  were  held  with  spacecraft  and  
data  on  parameters  and   systems  were  transmitted.  Midcourse  maneu- 
vers  were  conducted  Sept.  4  and  6  and  on  Sept.  7  Luna  18  entered 
lunar  orbit  with  99.8-km  (62-mi)  altitude,  1-hr   59-min  period,  and 
35”   inclination.  Spacecraft  made  54   revolutions  of  moon,  testing 
methods  of  automatic  near-moon navigation,  before  braking  for  moon 
landing. 
Luna  18  reached  moon’s  surface  Sept.  11  near  Sea  of  Fertility,  3 O  
34’  north  latitude  and  56O  30’  east  longitude.  Tass  announced  landing 
was  “unlucky”  and  communications  stopped  a t   10:48  am  Moscow 
time  (3  :48 am EDT ) . 
Luna   18  was  assumed  to  have  crashlanded.  Previous  mission  in 
series,  Luna  17,  landed  successfully  on  moon  Nov.  17,  1970,  and  
released  Lunokhod  1, self-propelled  lunar  rover  designed  to  carry  out 
9/3/71,  L1;  174-3,  9/8/71, 
scientific investigations.  (FBIS-SOV-172-3, 
L1;  173-3,9/12/71,  L1;  SF ,  11 /71 ,401)  
*  Oao  2-launched  Dec.  7,  1968, and   exceeding all  design  specifications- 
marked  its  1000th working  day.  ( N Y T ,  9/2/71,  1 4 )  
September  2:  Mariner  9  Mars  probe  had 
traveled  244316000   km 
in  solar  orbit  since  launch  May  30  and  was 
(151  805 000  m i )  
3 9 4 2 4 0 0 0   km  ( 2 4 4 9 7 0 0 0   m i )   from  earth,  traveling  a t   9 6 5 4 0   km 
per  h r   (59  987  mph ) .   Spacecraft was  expected  to  reach  Mars’  vicinity 
Mov.  13,  collect  atmospheric  and  surface  data,  and   map  70%  of 
Martian  surface  dur ing   90  days  in  orbit.  (NASA Special  Release, 
9 /2 /71   1 
0  Nike-Apache sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Churchill Research 
Range,  Canada,  carried  GSFC  experiment  to  investigate  polar  cap  ab- 
sorption  event.  Rocket  and  instruments  functioned  satisfactorily;  pay- 
load  recovery  was  delayed  until  Sept.  3  because  of  adverse  weather. 
(NASA  Rp t  SRL) 
*  U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1  lunar   rover,  landed  on  moon  by  Luna  17 Nov.  17, 
1970, had  safely  endured  10th  lunar  night  and  w i s   functioning  satis- 
factorily,  Tass announced.  (FBI%-sov-172-3) 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  held  news  conference  during 
first  visit  to  LeRC.  He  said  LeRc  would  play  major  role  in   development 

246 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September 2 

of  commercial  engines  geared  toward  reducing  noise  pollution  by 
future  jet  aircraft.  (Lew is  News,  9/10/71,  1; LeRc  PIO)  
Rep.  Leonor  K.  Sullivan  (D-Mo.),  Chairman  of  Consumer  Affairs  Sub- 
committee  of  House  Banking  and   Currency  committee,  sent  to  FTC 
material  on  Franklin  Mint,  private  corporation  that  produced  silver 
medallions  carried  on  Apo l lo   14  mission  Jan.  31-Feb.  9.  She  sug- 
gested  FTC  investigate  promotional  use  by  Franklin  of  medallions, 
which  had  been  melted  down  into  ‘minimoons’-coins 
advertised  a s  
containing  silver  that  had   been  to  the  moon.  Washington Da i ly   News 
said  Rep.  Sullivan’s  action  had  been  prompted  by  order  issued  by 
ApoZZo  14 commander Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  Chief  of  Astronaut Office, 
that  no  more  Franklin  Mint  medals  be  carried  on  NASA  missions. 
Shepard  had  noted,  News  said,  that  Apollo  14  crew  had  carried  200 
Franklin  medallions  in   CM   (which  never  left  lunar  o rb i t ) ,   had  dis- 
tributed  150  to  friends  and  relatives  on  mission’s  completion,  and  had 
returned  50  to  Franklin  with  understanding  they  would  be  made  into 
coins  for  members  of  Franklin  Mint  Collectors  Society,  but  not  used 
to  promote  sales.  (Thomasson,  Scripps-Howard, W News,  9/2/71,  24 )  
September  3 :  Successful  free-flight development test  of  parachute system  for 
Viking  Mars  landers  to   be  launched  in  1975 was  conducted  by  NASA 
at  DOT  Joint  Parachute  Test  Facility  in   El  Centro,  Calif.  Test  was  to 
verify  functioning  of  main  decelerator  parachute  and   its  deployment 
mechanism  and   confirm  structural  adequacy  of  system  design.  Deploy- 
ment  mortar  and  p a r a c h u t e 1 6   m  (53   f t )   in   diameter,  packaged  in  
instrumented  drop  vehicle  3  m  (10   f t )   long  and   51  cm  (20   i n )   in  
diameter-were 
dropped  from  NASA  B-57  aircraft  a t  altitude of  1 5  200 
m  (50 000  f t ) .   (NASA  Release  71-162;  FRC  PIO)  
0  President  Nixon  released  statement  on  dedication  of  new  USAF  Museum 
a t  Wright-Patterson AFB,  Ohio:  “The  United  States  Air  Force Museum 
demonstrates  in   a  most  compelling  fashion  the  tremendous  progress 
which  American  aviation  has  made  in   a  remarkably  brief  time.  I t  will 
afford  a  valuable  opportunity  for  future  generations  of  Americans  to 
learn  about  the  dedication  and  courage  and  skill  which  have  made 
that progress possible.” 
At  dedication  ceremonies  President  said,  “.  . . the  United  States 
intends,  and  we  resolve  today,  that  having  been  first  in   aviation  from 
the  beginning,  we  will  attempt  to  be  first  in   aviation  for  the  time  to 
come.  Th is   should  be  our  goal,  and  one  that  we  can  achieve.”  ( P D ,  
9/13/71,124&2) 
MSC  announced resignation  of  Dr.  Gene  M.  Simmons,  MSC  Chief  Scientist 
since  1969.  Dr.  Simmons  would  return  to  MIT  as  professor  of  geo- 
physics.  (MSC  Release 71-63)  
New  York  Times  editorial  said  scientists  were  pressing  NASA  to  “take 
another  look  a t   the  cancelled  Apollo  18  and   19   flights-flights 
for 
which  much  equipment  is  available.  The  Soviet  contribution  to  the 
new  picture  of  the  moon  is  still  miniscule,  despite  the  feats  of  the 
Luna  space  vehicles.  But  it  would  make  good  sense  for  the  United 
States  and   the  Soviet  Union  to  get  together  and   plan  joint  manned 
moon  flights,  perhaps  by  making  Apollo  18  and   19  the  first  truly 
international  ventures  to  earth’s  companion  in   the  skies.” 
( N Y T ,  
9 /3 /71 ,26 )  
*  International  Institute  for  Strategic  Studies  published  The   Military 

247 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
September 3 
Balance  1971-1972. Annual  report  of  London-based  independent  re- 
search  group  said  Communist  China  had   entered  nuclear  missile  race, 
U.S.S.R.  had  moved  further  ahead   of  U S .   in   ICBM  deployment,  and  
U.S.S.R.  was  challenging supremacy of  U S .   underwater  nuclear  strike 
force.  (Reuters, B Sun, 9 /3 /71 ,1 )  
Astronaut  Information:  American  and  Soviet  (Revised)  (71-204  SP) 
was  published by  L ibrary   of  Congress  Congressional  Research Service. 
Paper  provided  general  reference  on  astronauts  and  cosmonauts,  table 
of  U S .   and  Soviet space  flights,  and  description  of  highlights  of  each 
flight.  (Tex t)  
September  4 :   Concorde  001,  French  prototype  of  Anglo-French supersonic 
transport,  left  Toulouse  for  Cayenne,  French  Guiana,  on  first  leg  of 
first  transatlantic  test  flight,  to  Rio  de  Janeiro.  Flight  would  promote 
sale  of  aircraft  i n   South  America  and  continue  performance  t6sting 
and   long-range  flying  in   context  of  commercial  airports.  (BAc-Ahro- 
spatiale France Release 17C/71) 
September  4-5:  NASA  launched  series  of  two  Black  Brant  I I IB   sounding 
rockets  from  Resolute  Bay,  Canada,  carrying  Univ.  of  California  par- 
ticles  and  fields  experiments.  Flights  were  partially  successful.  (SR 
l is t ;   GSFC  P ro j  O f f )  
September  5:  NATO  intelligence  had  reported  U.S.S.R.  was  flight-testing 
swing-wing supersonic  strategic  bomber  designed  to  fly  a t   twice  speed 
of  sound  and   equipped  for  low-level  penetration  of  enemy  defenses, 
New  York   Times  said.  Aircraft,  christened 
by  NATO,  could 
become  operational  late  in   1973. Western military  intelligence  special- 
ists  believed  Backfire  marked  “emergence  of  entirely  new  Soviet  a i r  
weapons system.”  (Szulc, N Y T ,  9 /5 /71 , 1 )  
*  Exhibits  a t   new  86-million Air  Force  Museum  near  Dayton,  Ohio,  were 
described  by  New  York   T imes:   DC-6  Independence  used  by  President 
Truman ;   Constellation  Columbine  I I I   and   47J  Sioux  helicopter  used 
by  President  Eisenhower ; reproduction  of  Wright  1909  Military 
Flyer;  B-70,  only  remaining  ultrasonic  bomber ;  Douglas  World 
Cruiser New  Orleans, which  flew around world  in   1924; Soviet ~ i ~ 1 5 ;
and   relics  of  Wright  brothers’  K i t t y   Hawk.  Museum,  “first  permanent 
repository  of  Air  F o r b  memorabilia,” was  244 m  (800 f t )   long,  91  m 
(300  f t )   wide,  and  24  m  (80 f t )   tall  and  housed  150  aircraft.  It  was 
built  with  funds  provided  by  private  gifts.  N Y T ,   9/5/71,  28 ;   NASA 
Hist Off  ’r 
*  MIT-“probably 
com- 
the  world‘s  greatest  technological  university”-had 
mitted  itself  to  seeking  change  in   current  U S .   attitude  of  hostility 
toward  technology,  Pmh ing ton   Post  reported.  I n   series  of  statements 
that  “can  be  taken  jointly  as  a  new  scientists’  manifesto,”  MIT  leaders 
had  urged  change  in   national  attitude  toward  “harnessing  technology 
while  not  bowing  to  it,”  urged  end   to  scientists  disclaiming  responsi- 
bility  for  the  effects  of  their  work,  and  pledged  to  make  profound 
changes  in   their  own  teaching  and  research.  MIT  led  US. universities 
in   obtaining  Federal  research  funding,  with  $92  million  in   FY  1970, 
more  than  double  that  of  its  nearest  rival,  Stanford  Univ.,  which  had  
;received $39  million.  (Cohn, P Post,  9/5/71,  D2 )  
September  5-12  : First  US.-U.S.S.R. 
conference  on  Communication  with 
Extraterrestrial  Intelligence  ( CETI )  was  held  at  Byurakan  Astrophysi- 
cal  Observatory  in   Soviet  Armenia.  Conference was  sponsored  jointly 

 

24a 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September 5-11 

by  U.S.  and   Soviet  Academies  of  Science  and   organized  by  Soviet 
astronomer  Dr.  Yosif  S.  Shklovsky  and   Cornel1  Univ.  astronomer 
Dr.  Carl  Sagan.  Later  Dr,  Sagan  and  Cornel1  Univ.  astronomer  Dr. 
Frank   D.  Drake   reported  conference  conclusions  to  NAS.  Group  of 
scientists  had  concluded  that  civilization  in   another  solar  system 
“a  few  hundred  light  years  away”  might  be  trying  to  communicate 
with  other  bodies,  including  earth.  Man  had  acknowledged  existence 
of  other  universes  and  scientific  evidence  had  shown  that  amino  acids 
-building 
blocks  of  life-could  be  made  from  materials  and   energy 
sources  i n   space.  Scientists  had   recommended  coordinated  worldwide 
effort  to  intercept  messages  by  searching  sky  with  powerful  radio- 
telescopes.  (Sullivan,  N Y T ,   9/19/71,  4:8,  Auerbach,  W Pos t ,  9/23/71, 
A4;  NAS  P I O )  
September  6 :  Concorde  001 , French  prototype  of  Anglo-French supersonic 
transport,  landed  a t   Rio  de  Janeiro  after  successful  first  transatlantic 
test  flight,  piloted  by  French  test  pilot  Andre  Turca t   [see  Sept.  41. 
Turcat  told  newsmen  aircraft  had  flown  a t   mach  2  for  nine  minutes 
during  3240-km  (2015-mi)  flight.  (AP,  N Y T ,   9/7/71,  62 )  
U S .   and  British  space  experts  believed  purpose  of  four  Cosmos  launches 
in   past  10   mos  was  to  test  components  for  manned  lunar  landing, 
New  Yorlc  Times  reported.  Cosmos  434 ,   launched  Aug.  12 ,   was  said 
to  have  been  test  of  variable-thrust,  restartable  rocket  engine  s im i lar  
to  onboard  propulsion system  in  Apollo  CSMS.  Other  launches identified 
by  experts were  Cosmos 379 ,  Nov.  24 ;   Cosmos 382 ,  Dec.  2 ;  and  Cosmos 
398 ,   Feb.  26 .   Crucial  hardware  believed  to  be  missing  from  launches 
was  Sa turn   V-size  booster.  Some  of 
these  spacecraft  had  traveled 
farther  in   space than  previous Soviet flights  testing  manned  spaceflight 
equipment ; a t   least  three,  including  Cosmos  434 ,   had  demonstrated 
greater  ability  to  maneuver  in   space  than  any  previous Soviet  manned 
flight.  British  space expert  Geoffrey  E.  Perry,  who  had   first  announced 
discovery  of  Soviet  launch  site  at  Plesetsk  in   1966,  had  said  in   tele- 
phone  interview with  T imes   that  “the  Russians have  never  made  orbital 
changes  to  the  degree  that  they  have  demonstrated  on  these  Cosmos 
flights.”  He  was  convinced  tha t   “the  Soviet  Union  is   testing  a  large 
rocket  engine  similar  to  the  one  aboard  Apollo.  Even  some  of  the 
velocity  changes  made  by  these  Cosmos  flights  almost  exactly  match 
the  velocity  changes  of  Apollo  for  such  maneuvers  as  lunar  orbital 
insertion  and   trans-earth  injection.”  All  four  Cosmos  were  believed  to 
have  been  launched  by  Proton,  D-type, or  SL-4,  nonmilitary  boosters 
with  about  half  the  thrust  of  Sa turn   V.  Some  were  said  to  have  trans- 
mitted  recordings  of  human  voices  as  test  of  radio  communications. 
(Lyons, N Y T ,  9 /6 /71 ,1 )  
9  Soviet supersonic  transport  Tu-144 ,flew to  Bulgaria  on  second  flight  out- 
side  U.S.S.R.  Aircraft  had   appeared  a t   Par is   Air  Show  in   May  and 
June.  (UPI,  N Y T ,  9 /7 /71 ,62)  
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  for  Planning,  told 
press  in   Bremen,  Germany,  that  he   expected  to  visit  50-man  U S .  
research  station  on  moon  within  10 yrs,  a t   end  of  1970s or  beginning 
of  1980s. He  said,  “1’11  have  to  stay  there  a t   least  eight  or  10 days.” 
(AP, N Y T ,  9 /7 /71 ,18)  
Baltimore  Sun  editorial  praised  progress  of  NASA-Soviet  Academy  of 
Sciences  plans  for  compatible  spacecraft  rendezvous  and  docking  sys- 

249 

September 6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

tem:  “For  all  the  impediments,  actual  and   potential,  to  genuine  col- 
laboration  i n   an   almost  illimitable  project  which  no  single  nation  can 
ever  claim  for   its  own  alone,  America  and   Russia  have  managed,  i t  
seems,  to  come  to  terms  on  some  major  technical  points.”  Consulta- 
tions 
the  growth  of  sensible, 
that  produced  agreement  “indicate 
humane  realism  in   both  Washington  and   Moscow  in   looking  to  the 
future,”  (B  Sun, 9/4/71) 
September  6-1  6 :  Fourth  U.N.  International  Conference  on   Peaceful  Uses 
of  Atomic  Energy  was  held  in   Geneva.  U S .   exhibit  included  NASA 
demonstration  of  applying  nuclear  techniques  to  ultra-rapid  analyses 
of  environmental  materials  and   drugs,  using  satellites  and   computers. 
Signals  from  nuclear-powered  instruments  on   moon  were  relayed  to 
Geneva  from  CSFC  via  satellite.  NASA  also  displayed  lunar   samples  and  
SNAP-27  and  SNAP-19  generators. 
Mitchell  W.  Sharp ,   Canadian  External  Affairs  Minister,  said  a t  
news  conference  following  opening  session  tha t   i t   was  time  for  U S .  
and   U.S.S.R.  to  negotiate  underground  nuclear  test  ban. 
Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  Conference  Chairman  and   former  AEC   chair- 
man,  said  in   paper  tha t   plutonium  244,  heaviest  element,  could  assist 
in   determination  of  earth’s  age.  In   newspaper  interview,  Dr.  Seaborg 
said  leading  nuclear  scientists  agreed  that  nuclear-generated  power  was 
clean,  safe  and   necessary,”  but  that  people  of  world  needed  to  be 
< c  
convinced.  He  felt  tha t   responsibility  for  ensuring  safety  in   use  of 
nuclear  energy  should  eventually  be  transferred  from  A EC   to  some 
other  agency  but  move  would  be  “premature”  a t   present. 
Milton  Klein,  manager  of  AEC-NASA  Space Nuclear  Propulsion  Office 
and   Director  of  AEC   Space  Nuclear  Systems  Div.,  reported  on  NASA 
plans  to  send  nuclear-powered  space  probes  to  outer  planets  in   next 
five  years,  followed  by  manned  missions  using  atomic  engines  in   the 
1980s.  First  mission  using  nuclear  reactor  to  provide  onboard  elec- 
tricity  [Pioneer  F  Jupiter  flyby]  would  be  launched  in   1972. 
U.S.S.R.  withdrew  from  conference  program  paper  i t   had  intended 
to  read  entitled:  “Development  of  nuclear  power  systems  for  space  in  
the  U.S.S.R.”  and  substituted  paper  on  operation  of  small  Topaz  re- 
actor.  Washington Post  quoted  observers  a s   attributing  substitution  to 
U.S.S.R.  lag   in   space  nuclear  power  field.  One  observer  had  said  only 
other  explanation  might  be  that  they  were  embarrassed  by  failure  of 
Luna  18  “to  perform  on  the  moon.” 
( A E C   Releases  0-151,  153; 
Reuters,  W  Post,  9/10/71,  A13;  N Y T ,   9/12/71,  20 ;   Sullivan,  N Y T ,  
9 /16 /71 ,14 ;   O’Toole,  W Post,  9/16/71,  A21)  
September  7 :  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos 436  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t   with 
542-km  (336.8-mi),  apogeee,  510-km  (316.9-mi)  perigee,  95.1-min 
period,  and  74’  inclination.  (CSFC  SSR,  9 /30 /71 ;   SBD ,   9/15/71,  32 )  
France’s  Eole  satellite,  launched  by  NASA  Aug.  16, was  functioning  almost 
perfectly  af ter   22   days  in   orbit.  Total  of  111  balloons  had  been 
launched  from  three  Argentina  sites  for  Eole  to  track  and   acquire  data 
from  on  winds,  temperatures,  and   pressures.  Five  had   completed  one 
revolution  around  ear th   a t   11 850-m  (38  880-ft)  altitude and   had  been 
tracked  by  Eole.  Only  five  balloons  had  failed  to  respond  to  satellite 
commands  and   were  assumed  lost.  Balloons  would  be  launched  a t   ra te  
of  8  to  10  per  day  until  about  400  to  450  balloons  were  launched; 

250 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September 7 

another  50  to  100 balloons  would  be  launched  to  fill  in  gaps  in   a r ray  
caused by  failures.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops  Station 
carried  GCA  Corp  payload  to  176.4-km  (109.6-mi)  altitude  to  deter- 
mine  winds  from  vapor  trail  using  ARC  CV-990  instrumented  a ircraf t  
as  observing  platforms,  test  narrow-band  camera  filters  on  chemical 
releases  with  bright  sky  background,  and  provide  real-time  checkout 
of  observational  equipment  and   procedures  for  BIC  experiment  with 
low-altitude  barium  release.  Payload  contained  standard  barium  and  
sodium-lithium canisters.  Cloud  was  photographed by  both  ground  and 
CV-990  a ircraf t   cameras.  Flight  was  first  of  two;  second  rocket 
would  be  launched  Sept.  16.  (NASA  Rpt  SRL )  
Plans  to   store  lunar  rocks  in  vault-like  facility  at  MSC   to  retain  their 
original  condition  for  future  researchers  were  described  by  NASA  offi- 
cials  in   AP   interview  published  by  New  York  T imes .   LRL  curatorial 
and  research  projects  would  be  consolidated  in  specially  air-conditioned 
facility  covering  465  sq  m  (5000  sq  f t )   of  existing  laboratory  space 
scheduled  for  completion  in  time  for  March  1972 Apollo  16  mission. 
Dr.  John  H.  Pomeroy,  NASA’s Assistant  Director  for  Lunar  Sample 
program,  said  project  had  been  “a  very  important  aim  since  the  very 
beginning,  because  we   realize  these  are   unique  and  irreplaceable 
samples  and   i t   may  be  years  before  we  go  back  to  these  places.” 
( N Y T ,  9 /7 /71 )  
*  Patent  No.  3 603 433 was  granted  to MSC technicians  William  H .  Keathley 
and   Clarence  J.  Wesselski  for  spacecraft  emergency  shock  absorbers 
that  might  also  be  used  in  automobile  bumpers.  Disaster-avoidance 
device  backed  up  cyclic  deformation  system  in  struts  of  Apollo  CM  
couches.  System,  installed  in  spacecraft  since  Apollo  11   to  absorb 
energy  from  over-propulsion  at  launch  or  unusually  hard   landing, 
consisted  of  tightly  fitted  washers  on  rod.  Pressure  against  end  washer 
pushed  one  after  another  along line  as  force  decelerated.  (Jones, N Y T ,  
9/11/71,  33; Patent Off  PIO)  
James  J.  Kramer,  head  of  Quiet  Engine  Program  a t   IRRC,  became  Chief 
of  newly  formed  Noise  and   Pollution  Reduction  Branch  of  NASA’s 
Aeronautical  Propulsion  Div.  He  would  be  responsible  for  planning 
and  overseeing research  at  NASA  Centers  on  ways  to  reduce  noise  and  
pollutants  from  jet  aircraft  engines.  (NASA  Release 71-170) 
NSF  published  statistics  that  showed  Federal  R&D  funding was  on  upward 
trend.  Figures  were  taken  from  soon  to  be  published  report  Federal 
Funds  for  Research,  Development,  and  Other  Scientific  Ac t iv i t ies ,  
Vol.  XX.  Estimated  9%   increase  in   overall  Federal  funding  for  R&D 
from  1970  to  1972  indicated  upward  trend  after  decline  that  began 
in   1968.  Total  of  $15.3  billion  in   actual  obligations  for  1970  estab- 
lished  low  for  recent  years.  Although  1971   Federal  R&D  total  was 
expected  to  be  s a m d 1 5 . 4   billion-total 
$16.7  billion  requested  in 
President  Nixon’s  1972 budget  marked  new  high. 
NASA  had  risen  from  5%  share  of  Federal  R&D  in   1960 to  high  of 
34%  in   1965  but  was  expected  to  fall  back  to  19%  in   1972.  Final 
phase-out  of  Apollo  and  reduced  NERVA  engine  development  were 
expected  to  be  nearly  offset  by  increase  i n   other  NASA  programs  so 
that  1972 would  be   almost  a  leveling  off.  (NSF   Highlights,  9/7/71) 

251 

September 8 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September  8 :  NASA’s supercritical  wing,  flown  on  TF-8A  jet  a ircraf t   piloted 
by  NASA  test  pilot  Thomas  C.  McMurtry,  completed  11th  flight  from 
FRC.  Purposes of  one-hour  flight  were  to  complete  evaluation of  Butter 
characteristics  a t   high  subsonic and   low  supersonic  speeds  and   obtain 
additional  pressure,  distribution,  and   performance  data.  Aircraft 
reached  13 700-m  (45  000-ft)  altitude  and  all  objectives  were achieved. 
Flutter  characteristics  were  evaluated  a t   mach  0.97,  1.05,  and   1.10; 
pressure  distribution  and   performance  data  were  obtained  from  mach 
0.80  to  0.95  and   a t   mach  1.05 and   1.10.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
A t s   3  applications  technology  satellite,  which  had   temporarily  stopped 
transmitting  weather  pictures  because  of  locked-on  antenna  [see  Aug. 
241,  wa s   operating  again,  NASA  announced.  Although  spacecraft  was 
still  not  working  properly,  i t   was  transmitting  cloud-cover  pictures  of 
Western  Hemisphere dur ing   the  five  per  cent  of  the  time when  camera 
was  aimed a t  earth.  (NASA  Release 71-171) 
Apollo  Telescope  Mount  (ATM )   prototype  was  flown  to  MSC   from  MSFC 
for  extensive  thermal-vacuum-chamber  testing.  Tests  would  continue 
through  early  December.  (MSFC  Release  71-146;  MSFC  PIO ;   MSC  Hist 
O f f )  
*  U S .   and   U.S.S.R.  had   agreed  to  replace  Washington-Moscow  teletype 
“hot  line”  with  comsat  capable of  providing  instantaneous link  between 
capitals  in   any  crisis,  Washington  Post  reported.  Diplomatic  sources 
had   said  agreement had  been  worked  out  by  U S .   and   Soviet  communi- 
cations  experts  meeting  a t   SALT  in  Helsinki.  System  would  use  exist- 
ing  comsats  orbited  by  both  countries.  (Getler,  W  Post,  9/8/71,  3 )  
Initial  results  from  U.S.S.R.’s  Vertikal-2  rocket  launched  Aug.  20  were 
reported  by  Tass.  Experiments had  been  conducted a t   altitudes  between 
100 and  463  km  (62  and  288 m i ) .   Photos  had  registered  image of  sun  
in   several spectral  ranges  and   had  indicated  that  solar  flares  took  place 
during  rocket’s  flight.  Data  had  been  obtained on  temperature,  electron 
density,  and   other  parameters  of  sun’s  corona and   on  [flux of  particles 
causing  ionospheric turbulence.  (FBIS-SOV-174-3, 
9/8/71,  L2)  
*  Soviet  Foreign  Minister  Andrey  A.  Gromyko  submitted  memorandum  to 
U.N.  Secretary  General  U  Thant  expressing  hope  that  U.N.  General 
Assembly  would  call  world  disarmament  conference  on  nuclear  and  
conventional  weapons.  Memo  also  reiterated  Soviet  proposal  for  dis- 
armament  conference attended by  nuclear powers-China,  U.K.,  France, 
US.,  and  U.S.S.R.  (Tanner, NYT,  9 /9 /71 ,8 )  
*  Senate  by  unanimous  vote  of  53  agreed  to  ratification  of  Convention  for 
Suppression  of  Unlawful  Seizure  of  Aircraft  [see  April  151.  ( C R ,  
9/8/71,13892-95) 
*  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  released  GAO  report  that  showed  official 
cost  estimates  for  F-14  USN  jet  fighter  a ircraf t   had   risen  from  $11.5 
million  to  $16.7  million  per  aircraft  since  March  1971.  Sen.  Proxmire 
said  he   was  “drafting  amendments”  to  military  authorization  bill 
before  Congress  “which  would  terminate”  g5-billion  F-15  project. 
( W Post, 9 /9 /71 ,2 )  
*  NRC  released  Employment  of  New  Ph.D.’s  and  Postdoctozals  in   1971 : 
Science  Ph.D.s  who  received  degrees  in   1970  had  found  fewer  jobs 
than  had  1969 graduates  and  were  more  likely  to  remain  unemployed 
or  to  take  jobs  unrelated  to  their  training.  Of  13 000  1970 Ph.D.s  sur-  
veyed,  70.2%  had  found  suitable  employment,  14.3%  had   entered 

252 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September  8 

postdoctoral  training,  and  2.8% were  jobless  or  had  accepted  inappro- 
priate  employment.  I n   1969,  75.3%  of  graduates  had  found  appro- 
priate  jobs,  9.7%  had  entered  postdoctoral  training,  and   1.6% were 
unemployed or underemployed.  ( NRC Release) 
*  President  Nixon  submitted  to  Senate  nomination  of  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Sea- 
borg,  former  AEC  Chairman,  as U S .   Representative  to  General  Con- 
ference of  International  Atomic Energy Agency  in  Vienna, Sept.  21-27. 
Among  nominees  for  alternate  representatives  was  Dr.  T.  Keith  Glen- 
nan,  first NASA  Administrator  (1958-1961).  ( P D ,  9/13/71,1250,1261) 
White  House  announced  appointment  of  William  M.  Magruder,  former 
Director  of  SST  Development  for  DOT, as special consultant  to  President 
Nixon.  (PD, 9/13/71,1260) 
September  8-10:  NASA  and  United  Cerebral  Palsy  Research  Foundation 
sponsored conference on  neurologically  handicapped  a t   ARC.  Meeting- 
attended  by  scientists, physicians,  and   engineers-discussed 
application 
of  space  age  technology  to  neurological  disorders.  (NASA  Release  71- 
161 ; ARC  PAO) 
September  9-10:  NASA’s Stratoscope I1  telescope  was  successfully  launched 
by  giant  balloon  from  Redstone  Arsenal  Army  Airfield  a t   7:33  pm 
EDT on  eighth  flight  in   series  to  obtain  sharper  astronomical pictures 
than  possible  with  earth-based  photography.  Three   prime  scientific 
targets  were  Galaxies  M31  (Andromeda),  M32, and   Planetary Nebula 
NGC  7662. 
Stratoscope  11,  reused  with  modifications  for  each  flight,  weighed 
3800  kg  (8400  lbs)   and  had  optical  system  with  91-cm  (36-in)  aper- 
ture  and  photographic  resolution  of  0.1  a rc   sec-equal 
to  ability  to 
distinguish  two  objects  76  cm  (30  i n )   apar t   a t   distance  of  1600  km 
(1000 m i ) .   Photographs  would  be  made  in  visible  region  of  spectrum 
(4000-6000 A ) .  
Balloon-borne  telescope,  198  m  (650  f t )   long,  reached  operating 
altitude  a t   25200   m  (8280 0   f t )   and   performed  flawlessly  dur ing  
night-long  flight.  Stratoscope drifted  westward  a t   32  to  40 km  per  h r  
(20   to  25  mph)   and   returned  to  ear th   96.6  km  (60  m i )   northeast  of 
Little Rock, Ark.,  Sept.  10. 
Mission  objectives  were  accomplished  and  scientific  results  were 
being  evaluated.  Instrument  package  was  damaged  dur ing   landing, 
apparently  striking  top  of  oak  tree,  but  film  was  reported  intact. 
(MSFC  Releases  71-53,  71-141  ; Huntsville  T imes ,   9/10/71,  9 ;  
9/11/71) 
September  9 :  President  Nixon  honored  Apollo  15 astronauts  in  address  on 
economic  program  before  Joint  Session  of  Congress:  “Later  today,  in  
this  great  chamber,  the  Congress  will  pay  tribute  to  three  splendid 
Americans  back  from  the  moon.  Theirs  was  a  magnificent  achieve- 
ment,  a  stunning  testament  to  their  personal  skill  and  courage,  and 
also  to  what  American  technology  can  achieve. 
“Let  us  find  the  means  to  ensure  that  in   this  decade  of  challenge, 
the  remarkable  technology  that  took  these  Americans  to  the  moon  can 
also  be  applied  to  reaching  our  goals  here  on  earth.”  ( P D ,  9/13/71, 
1250-6) 
Senate  and  House  met  in   Joint  Session  to  receive  and   pay  tribute  to 
Apollo  15  astronauts,  who  reported  on  mission.  Mission  commander 
David  R.  Scott  said  of  A p l b  15  lunar   samples,  “As  I  approached  a 

253 

September 9 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

fragment  freshly  deposited  on  the  slopes  of  the  Apennine,  I  realized 
i t   had  been  undisturbed  since  befpre  life  came  out  of  the  sea  on 
earth.”  Astronaut  Alfred  M.  Worden  said  first  thing  noticed  after 
launch,  “particularly  when  we  got  into  ear th   orbit,  was  that  we  had  
a  further  view-we  were  further  away  from  earth,  and  our  view  was 
expanding. We  did  not  see  any  area  around  Cape  Kennedy.  What  we 
saw  were  continents  and   oceans.  . . . After  we  left  ear th   orb i t   and  for 
the  remainder  of  the  flight  our  view  was  one  of  the  earth.”  Astronaut 
James  B.  Irwin  described  Hadley-Apennine  campsite  a s   “friendly, 
beautiful  spot,  like  a  valley  in   the  high  mountains  of  the  ear th ;   and 
it  was  with  some  reluctance  that  we  left  our  valley  on  the  moon.”  He 
told  Congress:  “The  future  of  man’s  role  in   space  lies  in   your  hands. 
We  realize  very  well  the  grave  responsibilities  in   these  days.  The  deci- 
sions  you  make  will  determine man’s  travels  and  explorations  in   space. 
We  think  that  an  investment  in  space  technology  is  an  investment  in 
America. America  needs  space to  grow.”  (CR,  9/9/71,  H8224-5) 
Emergency loan  of  $250  million  was  granted  to  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp. 
by  Emergency  Loan  Guarantee  Board.  Board  was  established  by 
President  under  emergency  loan  bill  approved  by  Congress  Aug.  2. 
(AP, B Sun, 9/10/71,  A7) 
President  Nixon  submitted  to   Senate  nominations  of  representatives  and 
alternates  to  26th  session  of  U.N.  General  Assembly.  They  included 
Apollo  I 4   Astronaut  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  Chief  of  MSC   Astronaut 
Office, as alternate.  (PD, 9/13/71,1257,  1261) 
September  9-10:  Sixth  Annual  Aerospace  Mechanism  Symposium  was 
sponsored  a t   ARC  by  ARC,  Univ.  of  Santa  Clara,  and  Lockheed  Mis- 
siles  &  Space  Co.  Films  from  ApoZZo  15  LRV  Rover  on  moon  were 
shown.  Soviet  scientist  V.  S.  Syromyatnikov and   MSC   engineer  James 
C.  Jones  presented  papers  on  space  vehicle  docking  mechanisms. 
(NASA  Release  71-169;  ARC  Astrogram,  9/16/71,  1 )  
September  10:  USAF  launched  two  unidentified  satellites  from   Vandenberg 
AFB  by  single  Thorad-Agena booster.  One  entered  orbit  with  220.5-km 
(137-mi)  apogee,  169-km  (105-mi)  perigee,  88.3-min  period,  and 
inclination.  I t   reentered  Oct.  5.  The  other  entered  orb i t   with 
74.9’ 
506.9-km  (315-mi)  apogee,  487.6-km 
(303-mi)  perigee,  94.5-min 
period,  and   75’  inclination.  (Pres Rpt  72 ;   SBD,  9/23/71,  64 )  
launched  Cosmos  437  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  545-km 
*  U.S.S.R. 
(338.7-mi)  apogee,  520-km  (323.1-mi)  perigee,  95.2-min  period,  and  
74’  inclination.  (GSFC  SSR,  9/30/71;  SBD,  9/15/71,  32) 
September  I1 : French  CNES  satellite  control  station  a t   Bretigny,  France, 
inadvertently  transmitted  destruct  command  to  balloons  being  tracked 
by  Eole  satellite  (launched  Aug.  16) ,  causing  70  of  135   flying  bal- 
loons  to  be   cut  down.  Although  error   was  not  expected  to   degrade 
planned  scientific  accomplishments of  mission  significantly,  it  would 
delay  beginning  of  scientific  experiment  by  7  to   10  days.  CNES  insti- 
tuted  new  training  procedures  to  Eole  control  station  personnel  on 
transmitting  commands  to  satellite  and   designed  system  which  would 
alarm  when  certain  critical  commands-such 
as  balloon  destruct, 
gravity  gradient  retraction,  and  activation  of  magnetic  hysteris 
to  be  placed  into  Eole.  (NASA  P ro j   Off)  
rods-were 
September  13:  S-IC-511  1s t  stage  for   Sa turn  V  launch  vehicle  tha t   would 
launch  Apollo  16  toward  moon  in   1972  was  shipped  by  barge  from 

254 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September 13 

Michoud  Assembly  Facility,  to  arrive  a t   KSC  Sept.  17.  (MSFC   Release 
71-152) 
MSC  announced  contract  awards.  Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.  received 
$4 364 849  supplemental  agreement  for  changes  in  Apollo  LM  con- 
tract.  Agreement  formally  incorporated  procedural  changes  previously 
authorized  by  NASA  and  brought  total  value  of  contract  since  January  
1963 to $1 788 034 399. 
Boeing  Go .   was  awarded  $4.3-million,  one-year,  cost-plus-fixed-fee 
contract  fo r   reliability,  quality  assurance,  and  flight  safety  engineer- 
ing  a t  MSC.  (MSC  Releases 71-67,  71-68)  
Senate  by  vote  of  55  to  21   rejected  amendment  proposed  by  Sen.  Gay- 
lord  Nelson  (D-Wis.)  to  H.R.  8687,  FY  1972  military  procurement 
authorization.  Amendment  would  have  frozen  funds  for  USN  F-14 
and  USAF  B-1  and  F-15  a ircraf t   programs  until  final  environment 
(CR ,   9/13/71, 
impact  statement  had  been  made  on  programs. 
Sl418l-14210) 
Pressure  was  increasing  on  Nixon  Administration  to  relax  aeronautical 
satellite  system  policy  to  allow  first  preoperational  system  to  be 
jointly  owned  by  ESRO and  FAA,  Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology 
reported.  Original  decision  that  system  should  be  owned  by  com- 
merical  company  with  FAA  leasing  its  service  had  become  unpopular 
because  of  legal complexities.  ( A v  W k ,  9 /13 /71 ,21)  
Sep tember   14 :   U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosinos  438  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t  
with  273-km  (169.6-mi)  apogee,  181-km  (112.5-mi)  perigee,  89-min 
period,  and   65.3’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Sept.  27.  (GSFC   SSR, 
9/30/71;  SBD,  9 /23 /71 ,64)  
0  NASA  announced  appointment  of  Lee  R.  Scherer,  Apollo  Lunar  Explo- 
ration  Director,  a s   Director  of  Flight  Research  Center,  NASA’s facility 
for   flight-testing  high-performance  aeronautical  vehicles  a t   Edwards, 
Calif.  Appointment  would  b e   effective  Oct.  11.  Until  then  De  E. 
Beeler,  Deputy  Director,  would  continue  a s   Acting  FRC  Director. 
Scherer  had  been  Assistant  Director  for  Lunar  Programs  and  Mana- 
ger  of  Lunar  Orbiter  Program  from  its  inception  in   1963 through  its 
successful  completion  in   1967.  He  had  received  NASA’s Exceptional 
Service  Medal  in   1967  and   NASA’s Exceptional  Scientific  Achieve- 
ment Medal  in   1969.  (NASA  Release 71-176) 
*  ApoUo  15  anomalies were  discussed  by  Apollo  Mission  Director  Chester 
M.  Lee  dur ing   NSC  luncheon  and  Apollo  15  film  showing in   Washing- 
ton,  D.C.:  “I  have  been  queried  and   have  read  comments  that  . . . 
we  had  more  anomalies  than  we  have  seen  in   previous  missions.  In  
fact  this  is  not  so.”  List  of  40  anomalies had  been  compiled  by  NASA. 
“Twenty  of  these  had  to  do  with  the  experiments and   the  LRV,  most  of 
which  were  carried  for  the  first  time  on  this  mission.  This  compares 
with  30  total  anomalies on  Apollo  14, 
total  anomalies on  Apollo  12  
and  43   on  Apollo  10.  Therefore  I  would  conclude  that  w e   a r e   not 
retrogressing  in   so  fa r   as the  Apollo  hardware  performance  is   con- 
cerned.”  Lee  said  Iunar  stay  of  73  hrs  was  pIanned  for  Apollo  16. 
“The  additional 6 hrs  will  not  give  u s  more  EVA  time  than  we  planned 
on  Apollo  15,  but  will  allow  more  time  €or  EVA  preps,  sleep,  eating, 
etc.”  (Text) 
Nonflying  test  model  of  Lockheed  G 5 A   je t   cargo  aircraft  developed 
wing  crack  dur ing   static  testing  at  Lockheed’s  Marietta,  Ga.,  facilities. 

255 

September  14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Crack,  near  fuselage,  occurred  as  wing  was  subjected  to   stress  of 
approximately 130%. (Levine,  WSJ ,  9 /16 /71 ,9)  
September  15:  NASA  successfully  completed  12th  and  13th  flights  of 
TF-8A  je t   a ircraf t   equipped  with  supercritical  wing,  flown  from   FRC  
by  NASA  test  pilot  Thomas  C.  McMurtry.  TF-8A  flight  test  program 
was  being  accelerated  in  anticipation  of  adverse  landing  conditions 
when  lake  bed  at  Edwards,  Calif.,  became  wet  later  in   year.  Purposes 
of  flights were  to  expand  flight  envelope  to  higher  dynamic  pressures, 
obtain  pressure  distribution  and  performance  data  a t   higher  dynamic 
pressure,  evaluate  unaugmented  stability  and   control  characteristics, 
and  investigate  buffet  boundary  for  trim  flight  at  design  condition  of 
mach  0.99  a t   14 000 m  ( 46  000  f t )  . (NASA   P ro j   Off) 
*  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  described  planned  Skylab 
mission  medical  research  in  address  before  Utah  State Medical  Assn.: 
“.  , . we  will  be  looking f a r   beyond  the  requirements of  the  immediate 
mission;  we  will  be  seeking  answers  to  questions  with  a  strong  im- 
pact  on  the  future  of  manned  space  flight  during  the  remainder  of 
th is   century.”  Major  questions  as  yet  unanswered  after  Gemini  and  
Apollo  flights  were  the  causes  of  moderate  loss  of  weight  by  astro- 
nauts  early  in  flight,  moderate  cardiovascular  deconditioning,  mod- 
erate  loss  of  exercise  capacity,  and   minimal  loss  of  bone  density. 
Medical  results  from  Gemini  and  Apollo  missions  had  shown  that 
“1. There  were  no  major  surprises.  2.  As  of  now,  we  see  no  reason 
why  man  cannot  live  and   woik  effeciively  in   space  for  a  long  period 
of  time.  3.  Man  seems  to  adapt  to   space  flight  more  easily  than  he 
does  to  Earth’s  environment  after  returning  from  space.”  (Tex t)  
Apo l lo   15  astronauts  were  honored  by  Chicago  with  parade,  special 
City  Council  meeting,  and   civic  luncheon.  Mayor  Richard  J.  Daley 
presented  them  with  honorary  citizenship  medals.  (Wolfe,  C T r ib ,  
9/16/71) 
*  U.S.S.R.’s  Lunolchod  I  lunar  rover  had  successfully  completed  11th lunar 
day  of  work  on  moon  since  i t   wa s   landed  by  Luna 17  Nov .   17,  1970, 
Tass  announced.  During  11th  lunar  day  rover  had  made  “a  detailed 
survey  of  the  structure  of  the   moon  surface  in  the  area”  and  “pano- 
ramic  route  survey  of 
the  surrounding  locality,”  traveling  100  m 
(328  f t )   before  being  powered  down  fo r   11th lunar   night.  (FEW-SOV- 
180-3,9/16/71,  L1)  
September  16:  Discovery  of  six  amino  acids  of  extraterrestrial  origin  in  
Orgueil  meteorite  that  fell  in   France  in   1964 was  announced  by  ARC 
team  of  scientists  a t   annual  meeting  of  American  Chemical  Society 
in  Washington,  D.C.  Findings  further  supported  “pattern  of  chemical 
evolution”  theory  adopted  by  Dr.  Cyril  A.  Ponnamperuma  and  A R C  
team  after  their  discovery,  announced  June   18,  that  identical  amino 
acids  and  pyrimidines  existed  in  Murray  meteorite  tha t   fell  in   Ken- 
tucky  in  1950 and  Murchison  meteorite tha t   fell  in  Australia  in  1969. 
Theory  held  that  specific  set  of  amino  acids  and   other  life  chemicals 
found  in   three  meteorites  might  be  pa r t   of  basic  pattern  leading  to  
origin  of  life.  All  three  meteorites  were  believed  to  have  come  from 
asteroid  belt  and  to  date  from  formation  of  solar  system,  about  4.5 
billion  yrs  ago.  (NASA  Release  71-177) 
*  President  Nixon  was  host  to  ApoZZo  15 astronauts  and   families  a t   White 
House dinner.  (PD, 9/20/71,1288) 

256 

September  16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
Najeeb  E.  Halaby,  P a n   American  World  Airways  President  and  Chair- 
man,  discussed  space  shuttle  a t   Symposium  of  Society  of  Experimen- 
tal  Test  Pilots  in  Los  Angeles:  “NASA  has  already  shown  that  i t   appre- 
ciates  the  contributions  airlines  can  make  to  the  program,  by  having 
airlines  participate  with  space  contractors  in  the  development  of  the 
space  shuttle”  to  “make  the  eventual  space  shuttle  work  more  like  a 
standard  airliner  than  a  quarterly  experiment.”  Since  i t   took  less 
energy  to  orbit  objects  than   to  fly  them  across  U.S.,  “there’s  no  
reason  why  the  cost  of  Space  Shuttle  operations  should  not  become 
as  low  o r   lower  than  tha t   of  jets.”  Pan   Am’s  “most  glamorous vision” 
was  “Space  Shuttle  a s   an   a i r   transport,  carrying  passengers  from 
New  York  to  T o k y o - o r   Peking-in 
45  minutes,  or  from  Los  Angeles 
to  Rome  in  40.‘’ 
“We  can  visualize  a  rocket-powered vehicle with  100 passengers . . . 
launched  vertically  in  a  suborbital  trajectory  at  the  precise  azimuth 
for  its  intended  destination,  re-entering  the  atmosphere  without  excess 
g-forces,  gliding  unpowered  to  an  altitude  where  its  conventional  je t  
engines will  be  started,  then  landing  on  a  runway  like  a  conventional 
airliner.”  (Tex t)  
Nike-Apache  sounding  rocket  launched  by  NASA  from  Wallops  Station 
carried  GCA  Corp.  experiments.  Payloads  ejected  tra i l   of  sodium  and 
lithium  during  ascent  from   80-km  (50-m i)   to  170-km  (105-mi)  alti- 
tude  and  then  ejected  bar ium   at  170-km  altitude.  Both  trails  pro- 
duced  glowing,  colored  clouds  over  mideastern  U.S.  coastline.  Data 
on  wind  conditions  were  obtained  by  photographing  motion  of  vapor 
trails  and  clouds  from  cameras  aboard  ARC   Convair  990  a ircraf t .  
(WS Release  71-18) 
Senate confirmed nominations of  ApoUo  14 commander Alan  B.  Shepard, 
Jr.,  as  Alternate  U.S.  Representative  to  26th  session  of  U.N.  General 
Assembly  and  of  Dr.  Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  former  A EC   Chairman,  and 
Dr.  T.  Keith  Glennan,  €ormer  NASA  Administrator,  a s   U.S.  Repre- 
sentative  and   Alternate  to  15th  session  of  General  Conference  of  the 
( C R Y  9/16/71, 
International  Atomic  Energy  Agency  a t   Geneva. 
S 1 4 3 3 )  
September  17:  Age  of  Apo l lo   15  “Genesis  rock”  was  approximately  4.15 
billion  years,  Dr.  Liaquat  Husain  and  Dr.  John  F.  Sutter,  State Univ. 
of  New  York  a t   Stony Brook  scientists,  announced  at  press  conference. 
Anorthosite  sample  brought  back  by  Astronauts  David  R.  Scott  and 
James  B.  Irwin  dur ing   July  26-Aug.  7  mission  wag  150  million  yrs 
older  than  oldest ApoZb  12 rock,  Husain  said.  “This  is the  oldest lunar 
rock  found  on  any  of  the  missions so  far.”  (F ine   grains  of  soil  from 
earlier  missions  had  been  found  to  be  nearly  4.5  billion  yrs  old  and  
one Apollo  12 rock  had  contained some  fragments  that  had  crystallized 
4.5  billion  yrs  ago  but  rock  itself  was  thought  to  have  solidified  4 
billion yrs  ago.) 
Although  rock’s  age  was  not  the  hoped  4.6  billion  y r s - e s t im a t ed  
age  of  solar  system-it 
supported  theory  tha t   moon  was  once  molten 
mass.  Scientists  said  precise  age  of  rock  could  range  from  3.95  to 
4.35  billion  yrs.  Further  tests  had  been  scheduled  to  narrow  margin. 
Age  had  been  determined  by  measuring  relationship  of  radioactive 
potassium  and  argon  in   rock  samples  using  rare-gas mass  spectrome- 
ter  and  nuclear  reactor.  Cal  Tech  geologist  Dr.  Leon  T.  Silver  said, 

257 

September  17 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September  17:  The   wh i te   anorthosite  “Genesis  rock”  collected  on  th e   moon  b y  
Apollo  15  astronauts  was  about  4.15  billion  years  o ld ,   scientists  announced.  In   the 
photo  th e   samp le ,   oldest  lunar  rock  collected  so  far ,  was  i n   the  nonsterile  process- 
ing  line  of  the   Lunar  Receiving  Laboratom.  a t   the  Manned  Spacec ra f t   Cen te r .  

This  is  unquestionably one  of  the  most  important  rocks  ever  returned 
(6 
from  any  lunar  mission.  It  has  a  recording  in   its  minerals  of  many 
series  of  events  in   lunar  hE to ry - ev en t s   of  high  temperature  and  high 
pressure.”  (Auerbach,  W Post,  9/18/71,  A3 ;   AP,  B  Sun,  9/18/71, 
A10;  N Y T ,  9 /18 /71 ,25)  
MSC  announced  start  of  series  of  cold  weather  environment  tests  on  per- 
formance  of  Skylab  C M   postlanding  and  recovery  systems  in  Climatic 
Laboratory  a t   Eglin  AFB,  Fla.  Objectives  were  to  determine  perform- 
ance  characteristics  and   limitations  of  Skylab  CM   in   cold  weather, 
determine  CM   test  crew  response  to  cold  and  to  interior  environmen- 
tal  conditions of  CM,  and  determine  extent  of  ice  buildup  on  CM  exte- 
r ior   and  effect  of  ice  on  systems  performance.  Tests,  conducted  in  
chamber  with  274  K  (33’F)  water  temperature  and   269  K  (25’F) 
a i r   temperature,  were  necessary  because  spacecraft  would  pass  over 
areas  colder  than  previously  experienced  and,  in  event  of  emergency 
landing,  CM   and  crew  limitations  had  to  be  known. 
(MSC   Release 
7 1-70) 
Letter  by  Dr.  John  M.  Logsdon of  George  Washington Univ.,  responding 
to  criticism  of  h i s   book  The   Decision  T o   Go   to  the  Moon, was  pub- 
lished  in   Science.  Book  had   been  reviewed  by  L.  Vaughn  Blankenship 
in  Science  July  23.  Logsdon  wrote:  “Blankenship  reports  that  I  find 
the   Apollo  decision  ‘a  good  one’  and   ‘evidence  of  a  political  system 
operating  a t   its  best.’  I  do   no   such  thing.  I  do  suggest  . . tha t   ‘the 
decision  to  go  to  the  moon  was  a  representative  American  action,’  and  
was  the product  of  a  process  ‘typical  of  the  way  many major  decisions 
a re  reached.’ ” (Science, 9/17/71,1079-80) 

258 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September  17 

*  New  Orleans  Times-Picayune  editorial  commented  on  failure  of  Soviet 
Luna  18  mission:  “The  Soviet’s  automated  designs  and   performances 
are   not  to   be  belittled,  for  they  represent  research  and   development 
toward  deep-probe capability.  But  i t   is  interesting  that  Western  space 
observers  think  they  have  grounds  for   suspecting  that  the  Soviets  are  
in   fact working up  a  manned  lunar  program.  If  so,  more  than  prestige 
and  technological  display  are   involved ; i t   must  mean  agreement  that 
man  operates  on  the  moon  with  the   best  cost-benefit  ratio.’’  (New 
Orleans Times Picayune, 9/17/71) 
*  USAF’S  “fly-before-you-buy”  approach  to  procurement  of  new  equipment 
via  prototypes  was  described  by  Gen.  George  S.  Brown,  AFSC  Com- 
mander,  in   speech  before  15th Symposium of  Society of  Experimental 
Test  Pilots:  “We  want  the  confidence  of  demonstrated  performance 
in   our  acquisition  programs  before  deciding on  production”  to  provide 
“a  backlog  of  promising  technological  approaches  from  which  future 
requirements  can  be  met  as  they  develop.  While  this  may  cost  more 
initially,  in   the  long  run  we  w i l l   have  more  proven  technology  . . . and  
consequently  better  performing  weapon  systems  at  more  reasonable 
costs.”  (Tex t )  
September  19 :   NASA  announced  i t   had  granted  Univ.  of  Denver  limited 
exclusive  patent  rights  to  frangible-tube  energy  absorber  conceived 
and   developed  a t   LaRC  in   1961  and  patented  by  NASA  in  1964. Seven- 
year  rights  permitted  manufacture,  use,  and   sale  of  device  for  trailer 
support  wheel  structures,  passenger  automobile  bumpers,  and  eleva- 
tors.  DOT  was  considering  its  use  on  highway  guard  rails.  Device, 
made  of  hard  metal  alloy,  absorbed  shock  by  shattering  when  pressed 
against  suitably  shaped die by  downward force.  (NASA  Release  71-173) 
September  19-22:   NASA  launched  series  of  13 Nike-Cajun sounding  rockets 
from  Kourou,  French  Guiana,  carrying  GSFC  grenade  payloads.  Data 
would  be  correlated  with da ta   from  five  French  Centaure vapor  flights. 
Objective  was  to  determine  solar-driven  first  and  second  harmonic 
oscillations  in   temperature,  pressure,  density,  and  winds  in  upper 
atmosphere  in   equatorial  zone  between  altitudes  of  35  and  100  km 
(22   and   62   m i ) .   Each  Nike-Cajun  carried  31  grenades  to  altitudes 
from  114 to  125 km  (70-78  m i ) .   All  but  fou r   grenades  were  ejected 
and  exploded  as  planned,  and  all  13  flights  were  rated  successful. 
(NASA  Rpts SRL )  
September  20 :   Jo in t  West  German  and   NASA  barium-ion-cloud ( B IC )   probe 
was  launched  from  Wallops  Station  by  Scout  booster  a t   7 :31   pm  EDT. 
Objectives  of  cooperative  project  were  to  study  behavior  of  barium 
ion  cloud  released  a t   several  ear th   rad i i   and   to  determine  what  broad 
features  of  earth’s  magnetic  and   electric  fields  could  be  deduced. 
Barium  was  released  into  space  a t   11:05  pm  EDT  above  Central 
America.  Cloud  was  visible  over  North  and  South  America  and  ob- 
servations  were  made  from  all  prime  ground-based  optical  sites  for  
one  to  one  and  one  half  hours.  Parameters  of  4th-stage  burnout  were 
31 479-km  (19560-m i)   altitude,  6.77’  N  latitude,  and  74.26O  W 
longitude.  Barium  cloud  was  visible  to  naked  eye  for  approximately 
10 min.  Cloud  elongated  along  its  local  magnetic  field  line  to  length 
of  about  10 000-km  (6200-mi).  NASA  provided  vehicle  support  neces- 
sary  to  accomplish  mission  and   to   make  observations  a t   NASA  sites. 
(NASA   P ro j  Off; WS Release 71-19) 

259 

September 20 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

*  T im e   magazine  described  Soviet  swing-wing supersonic strategic  bomber 
Backfire  [see  Sept.  51.  Aircraft  believed  to  have  been  designed  by 
Andrey  N.  Tupolev, was  39.9 m  (131 f t )   long and  weighed  113 400  kg 
(250 000  lb s )  . Aerodynamicists believed  it  to  be  made of  stainless steel 
with  titanium  to  resist  heat  stress.  Airframe  had   skin  bonding  instead 
of  riveting.  Wings were  in   forward  position  and   jackknifed  back  about 
40”  for  speeds  of  mach  2.1  at  152000   m  (50000   f t )   or  mach  1 a t  
152  m  (500 f t )  . Aircraft  was  “apparently  crammed  with  sophisticated 
electronic  aids to  confuse  radar   tracking.”  Carrying  crew  of  three,  it 
had  estimated  payload  of  50   megatons  in   weaponry,  including  para- 
chute-dropped hydrogen  bombs.  “With  one  refueling,  Backfire  appears 
capable  of  striking  the  U S .   and  returning  home.”  Intelligence  sources 
also  had   reported  tha t   U.S.S.R.  was  “well  along  in  the  design  of  the 
M I G 2 5   and   M I G 2 7 ;   they  are  potential  successors  to  the  M I G 2 3  
‘Foxbat,’  one  of  the  most  advanced  fighters  in   the  world.”  (T im e ,  
9/20/71) 
*  ApoZZo  15  Astronauts  David  R .   Scott,  James  B.  Irwin,  and  Alfred  M. 
Worden  received  Order  of  Leopold  from  King  Leopold  of  Belgium  in  
Brussels.  (NA SA  Ac t iv i t ies ,   10/15/71,  172 )  
0  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  issued  statement  that  C-SA  program 
was  expected  to  cost  $4.9  billion,  increase  of  $300  million  over  1970 
figures:  “Taking  into  account  that  the  program  has  been  reduced  from 
120  planes  to  81, we  find  an  overrun  of  $2.2  billion.  On  a  unit  basis, 
the  costs  have  risen  from  $28  million  originally  estimated  for  each 
G 5 A  to  $60  million,  an  increase  of  over  100%.’y  (Tex t)  
FAA,  American  Airlines,  and   Aeronautical  Radio,  Inc.,  in   October  would 
begin  three-  to-six-month  operational  test  and  evaluation  of  automatic 
data  link  communications techniques,  FAA  announced.  American  Air- 
lines  747  a ircraf t   equipped  with  data  link  system  that  would  pr in t   out 
a i r   traffic  control  clearances,  terminal  advisories,  and   other  informa- 
tion  in   cockpit  and  automatically  process  pilot  position  and  weather 
reports  to  ground  would  test  whether  techniques  could  reduce  com- 
munications workload  on  pilots  and  controllers.  (FAA   Release  71-152) 
Office  of  Management and   Budget  had  released  $98.1  million  in   FY  1972 
funds  voted  for  science  education  and  institutional  support,  while  im- 
pounding  $30  million,  Av ia t ion   Week   &  Space  Technology  noted. 
“The  25%  holdback of  funding  at  the  basic  science level  is  considered 
by  some  in   Congress  as  highly  destructive  because  i t   will  tend  to 
reduce  the  number  of  fu ture   scientists.”  I t  was  viewed  as  “direct  con- 
tradiction  of  the  pro-science  policy  they  have  been  led  to  anticipate.” 
( A v  Wk, 9 /20 /71 ,15)  
September  20-26:  International  Astronautical  Federation  held  22nd  Con- 
gress in  Brussels. 
Apollo  15  Astronaut David R .   Scott told  opening session that  analysis 
of  2.7-m  (9-f t)   Apollo  15  lunar   core  sample had  disclosed  58  distinct 
layers  that  represented 58  “chapters  in  the  history  of  the  sun.”  Number 
of  ‘bpages in   each  chapter”  awaited  further  analysis.  Later  Scott  said 
in  interview  that  Dr.  Liaquat  Husain,  State  Univ.  of  New  York  at 
Stony Brook  scientist  who  had  analyzed Apollo  15 “Genesis”  rock,  was 
concerned  that  alteration  of  rock  by  shock  when  i t   impacted with  site 
a t   which  i t   was  found  might  have  partly  invalidated  determination  of 
rock’s  age a t  4.15  billion yrs. 

260 

September 20-26 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
ARC   engineer  John  C.  Arvesen  described development  of  method  for 
monitoring  biological  productivity  from  a i r   by  detecting  signs  of 
chlorophyll.  Monitoring  device,  when  tested  over  California  lakes  and  
offshore  areas,  had  produced  results  that  conformed  closely  to  readings 
obtained  by  arduous  direct  sampling  of  waters.  Ultimate  goal  was  to 
develop  satellite-borne  system  that  could  monitor  global  productivity 
of  oceans. 
Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  NASA  Director  of  Life  Sciences,  said  newly 
completed  studies  of  medical  data  from ApLZo  14  had  shown  radiation 
exposure  to  crew  that  was  more  than  twice  that  of  previous  Apollo 
missions.  Pr imary   reason  for  higher  exposure was  passage  of  A pU o  18 
spacecraft  close  to  Van  Allen  radiation  belts.  Dr.  Berry  said  radiation 
dose  was   “of  no  hazard  or   biological  significance.”  Soviet  scientists 
said  later  that  cosmonauts  carried  special  antiradiation  d rug   on  all 
space  flights  but  had  never  used  it. 
Dr.  Berry  said  Apollo  14   Astronaut  S tuar t   A.  Roosa  had  lost  27% 
of  fluid  within  h is   body  cells  during mission.  His  total  body  water  had 
dropped  18%  and   red  cells  in   his  bloodstream  had  decreased  9% .  
Losses  had  been  f a r   less  for  other  Apollo  14  astronauts  and  no  such 
dramatic  losses  had  been  recorded  for  Apollo  15  astronauts,  indicating 
that  individual  responses  to  space  varied  widely.  Heavy  loss  of 
exchangeable”  potassium  had  been  noted  in  astronauts  during  ex- 
<C  
tended  missions.  On  Apollo  15, loss  had  been  as  great  as  15%. Potas- 
sium  was  deemed  exchangeable because  i t   could  move  readily  in  and  
out  of  tissues  and  thus  could  be  purged  from  body. 
E.  6.  Johnson,  Equipment  and  Facilities  Branch  Chief  in   NASA 
Space  Nuclear  Systems  Office,  described  program  for  development  of 
teleoperator  systems  in  which  remote-controlled  devices  could  perform 
tasks  in  situations  dangerous  to  health  o r   safety  of  humans.  I n   space, 
teleoperator  could  enter  high  radiation  environment  of  space  station’s 
nuclear  power  plant  to  change  fuel  elements  or  make  repairs.  Johnson 
said  optical  o r   radioastronomy  observatory  on  moon’s  far   side  could 
be  run   for  40  to  50  yrs  using  computer-controlled teleoperators  whose 
control  could  be  assumed  from  earth  when  necessary. 
Fourth  International  Orbital  Laboratory  Symposium was  held  dur ing  
IAF   congress.  Sessions  discussed  earth  resources  technology  and  scien- 
tific  research  objectives  and   needs  of  developing  countries  in   regard 
to  earth  resources  research. 
IAA  Fifth  History of  Astronautics Symposium  on  Sept. 23 was  chaired 
by  JPL   Historian  R.  Cargill  Hall.  Soviet  Cochairman  V.  N.  Sokolsky 
did  not  attend  for   unexplained reason.  Papers  read  included “From  the 
History  of  the  Development  of  Powder  Rockets  in   the  U.S.S.R.,”  by 
Soviet  Academician  Yu  A.  Pobedonostsev,  which  traced  work  on 
Soviet  solid  propellants  leading  to  Katyusha  rocket  in  current  use ; 
“Comparative  AnaIysis  of  Projects  for  Jet  Planes  Constructed  up   to 
the  1940’s,”  by  V.  N.  Sokolsky;  “Evolution  of  Spacecraft  Attitude 
Control  Concepts  before  1951,”  by  R.  E.  Robertson  of  Univ.  of  CaIi- 
fornia  a t   San  Diego;  and  “Memoir:  The  Evolution  of  Aerospace 
Guidance Technology  a t   M.I.T.,  1935-1951,”  by  Dr.  C.  Stark  Draper. 
Fourth  International  Orbital  Laboratory  Symposium,  held  dur ing  
Congress,  discussed  ear th   resources  technology  and  scientific  research 
objectives  and  needs  of  developing countries. 

261 

September 20-26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Daniel  and   Florence  Guggenheim  International  Astronautics  Award 
was  presented  to  Professor  Luigi  Broglio  of  Univ.  of  Rome  for  achieve- 
ments  in   experiments  with  floating  platforms  to  launch  sateIlites  into 
equatorial  orbits. 
Only  cosmonaut  attending  IAF   Congress  was  Boris  B.  Yegorov,  only 
physician  to  travel  in   space  (launched  in   Voskhod  1 Oct.  12,  1964 ) .  
( IAA   Annual  Rpt  1971  ; Sullivan,  N Y T ,   9/21/71,  9/23/71,  9/27/71  ; 
Proceedings ) 
September  21:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos 439  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t  with 
278-km  (172.7-mi)  apogee, 208-km  (129.3-mi)  apogee, 89.3-min period, 
and   65.4"  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Oct.  2.  (GSFC  S S R ,   9 /30 /71 ;  
10/31/71;  SBD ,   10 /1 /71 ,101 )  
0  General  Dynamics  Corp.  released  F-111  program  status  report.  Aircraft 
had  amassed  total  of  115 209  hrs   on  4 4 4 6 3   operational  and   test 
flights.  Airframe  static tests  had  been  successfully completed with  some 
standards  exceeded  by  20%.  Tests  on  structural fatigue life  of  aircraft 
were  continuing.  Tactical  Air  Command  versions  of  F-111  were  being 
tested  through  16 000  hrs,  o r   four  service  lives,  and   would  soon  be 
assigned  to  service  units.  Strategic Air  Command  version  of  a irframe  
had  successfully  passed  one  of  four  service-life  tests  required.  To  date, 
356  F-111s  had  passed  proof  tests  begun  in   1969  and  291  of  these 
were  back  in  service.  F-111  had  accumulated  better  safety  record  a t  
100 000  hrs   than  any   other  Century  Series  fighter;  15  had  been  de- 
stroyed,  contrasting  with  4+0 F-104s.  USAF,  Boeing  Co.,  and   Convair 
Aerospace  Div.  team  had  completed  successful  series  of  launches  of 
short-range  attack  missile  ( SRAM )   to  be  used  on  FB-111s  and   B-52 
bombers.  Dur ing  launches  from  WSMR,  F-111  had  demonstrated  ability 
to launch  five SRAMS  in  rapid  succession a t   five different  targets.  (Tex t )  
Attempts  by  four  Soviet  aquanauts  to  break  59-day  record  for  underwater 
isolation  were  terminated  after  52  days.  Men  had  been  evacuated  from 
oceanographic  laboratory  Chernomor  a t   15-m  (50-ft)  depth  after  vio- 
lent  storm  on  Black  Sea  broke  power  and   communications  cables  of 
submarine's  chamber.  Zzvestiu  said  Nov.  11 tha t   experiment  had  been 
pronounced  successful  because  of  medical  and   oceanographic  findings, 
although  i t   had  failed  to  exceed  record  set  by  U S .   Project  Tektite  I 
April  15, 1969.  (Shabad,  N Y T ,   11/12/71,  1 0 ;  A&A   2969) 
September  22:  ARC   announced  completion  of  acceptance  tests  on  X-14B, 
VTOL  aircraft  tha t   could  simulate  hovering  flight  characteristics  of 
most  existing  and  proposed  VTOLS.  New  NASA  research  aircraft,  modi- 
fication  of  Bell  X-14A,  was  believed  to  be  first  digital-computer-driven 
VTOL  flight-simulator  aircraft.  X-14B  would  be  used  by  NASA  to  deter- 
mine  optimum  handling  qualities  for  any   VTOL  aircraft.  (ARC   Release 
7 1 4 7 )  
LeRC  received  its  sixth  IR-100  award  from  Industrial  Research Magazine 
dur ing   ceremony  a t   Museum  of  Science  and   Industry  in   Chicago. 
Award,  presented  annually  to  developers  of  100  most  significant  new 
products,  was  for  development  of  radiation-chemistry  method  of  pre- 
par ing   high-purity  metals  and   chemical  compounds.  Method  was  devel- 
oped  by  L ~ R C  scientists  Dr.  Warren  H.  Philipp  and   Stanley  J .   Marsik. 
(Lew i s  News, 9 /24 /71 ,1 )  
Air  Force  Assn.'s  Schilling  Trophy  was  presented  to  Apollo  15  Astro- 
nauts  David  R.  Scott,  James  B.  Irwin  and  Alfred  M.  Worden  i n  recog- 

262 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September 22 

’ 

nition  of  “their  unique contribution to  manned  spaceflight and science.” 
( N A S A  Ac t iv i t ies ,  10/15/71,  172; AFA  PIO)  
Nomination  of  Sen.  Howard  W.  Cannon  (D-Nev.)  for  Wright  Brothers 
Memorial  Trophy  for  outstanding  service  to  aviation  was  announced 
by  NAA.  Citation  was  “for  his  continuing  energetic  advocacy  of  and  
lasting  contribution  to  the  development  and  use  of  aviation  both  as  a 
viable  national  transportation  system  and   a s   an  essential  element  in 
maintaining  a  strong  military  posture.”  Trophy  would  be   presented 
i n  Washington, D.C.,  Dec.  17.  (NAA  Release) 
Senate  rejected  proposed  amendment  to  H.R.  8687,  FY  1972  military 
procurement  bill,  by  Sen.  George  S. McGovern  (D3 .D . ) .   Amendment 
would  have  reduced  funds  for  USAF  development  of  B-1  bomber  and  
related  programs  from  $370  million  to  $31  million.  (CR ,  9/22/71, 
51478614847 )  
*  Soviet aircraft  designer Andrey  N.  Tupolev was  quoted  by  Tass as  saying 
Soviet  designing bureau  would  do  all  it  could  to  put  Tu-144 supersonic 
transport  in   service  as  soon  as  possible.  Aircraft  had  returned  after 
successful  visit  to  Bulgaria  Sept.  6.  During  flight  i t   had  developed 
speed of  2300 km  per  h r   (1400 mph ) .   (FBrs-Sov-71-185,9/23/71,  L1 )  
NASA  announced  availability  of  S h u t l e  Technology  Program-Fiscal  Year  
1972 ,   compilation of  projects  making  up  NASA  FY  1972 Space Shuttle 
Technology Program.  (NASA Release 71-183) 
September  22-23:  Command  stored  in  Mariner  9  computer  before  May  30 
launch  towards  Mars  switched  spacecraft’s  radio  transmitter  from 
low-gain  omnidirectional  antenna  to  high-gain  antenna  for  increased 
signal  strength.  On  Sept.  23  spacecraft  was  14 million  km  (9  million 
m i )   from  Mars  and  had  traveled  approximately 290  million  km (180 
million  m i )   in  curving  trajectory.  Incroasing  distance  between  Mari- 
ner  9   and  earth  required  concentration of  radio  signals  in   narrow  beam 
to  maintain  communications a t   required  data  rates  dur ing   remainder 
of  mission.  Spacecraft  was  scheduled  to  reach  Mars  Nov.  13.  (NASA 
Release  71-184) 
September  2 3 :  Dr.  James C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  addressed annual 
meeting  of  National  Security  Industrial  Assn.  in   Washington,  D.C. : 
“I  am  impressed  with  the  soundness  of  this  new  space  program  for  the 
Seventies  and  I  urge  you  to  support  it.  I  also  believe  very  much  that 
our  country  needs  it.”  Among  program’s  strengths  were:  i t   had  con- 
gressional  backing ; i t  was  well  planned and well  balanced to  meet  basic 
national  needs,  including  national  security;  i t   stressed  earth  orbit  a s  
new  realm  of  prime  importance  and  great  opportunity,  where  Amer- 
( 6  
ica’s  capacity  for  world  leadership will  be  tested  not only in   this  decade 
but  in   the  decades  to  follow.”  Program  promoted  economic  progress 
based  on  new  technology,  was  essential  to  President  Nixon’s  peace 
policies  based  on  international  cooperation,  and  was  “already  part  of 
America’s  destiny,  as  all  of  you  can  testify  who  watched  the  Apollo  15 
operations on international  television.” 
NASA  had  been  “impressed  and  encouraged”  by  President’s  call  for 
new  programs  to  ensure maximum  enlistment of  technology  in  meeting 
challenge  of  peace  and  by  President’s  promises  to  present  those  pro- 
grams in  next session of  Congress. 
“Technology,  in my  judgment,  has  made  this  country  great  and  will 
keep  i t   great.  I t   is  certainly  true  that  we  need  adequate  political  con- 

263 

September 23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

trols  and,  if  possible,  social  controls  to  keep  technology  the  servant  of 
man,  and  not  his  master.  But  nevertheless  new  technology  we  abso- 
lutely  need  to  assure  jobs  and   a  better  life  for  all  Americans  in   the 
decades ahead.” 
Dr.  Fletcher  felt  recent  shuttle  studies  had  “reinforced  the  general 
belief  that  America’s  future  in   space  in   the  remainder  of  the  20th 
Century  depends  in   large  measure  on  our  skill  and   our  determination 
in   defining  and  developing  the  shuttle.”  (Edited  text) 
Vice  President  Spiro T.  Agnew  said  in   speech  that  U.S.S.R.’s  Foxbat 
fighter  aircraft  was  “now  operational  in   Egypt and   cannot  be  matched 
in   performance  by  anything we  have  in   operation.”  (Tex t)  
NASA  conducted  second  successful  test  of  Viking  Mars  lander  free-flight, 
development  parachute  system  at  DOT  Joint  Parachute  Test  Facility  a t  
El  Centro, Calif.  First  test  had   been  conducted  Sept.  3.  (FRC   PIO)  
Spencer M.  Beresford,  NASA  General Counsel,  testified  before  House  Com- 
mittee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee on  Manned  Space 
Flight  during  hearing  on  H.R.  4545,  Chapel  of  the  Astronauts  bill. 
NASA  had  agreed  to  consider request  by  Chapel  of  the  Astronauts,  Inc., 
to  purchase  up  to  seven  acres  (three  hectares)  of  land  adjacent  to 
ICSC  Visitor  Information Center  for  construction  of  “nondenominational, 
nonsectarian,  nonprofit  public  facility  for  worship  or  meditation  and 
a  memorial  to  the  astronauts.”  NASA  was  then  “actively  engaged  in 
the  defense  of  a  law  su i t   arising  from  the  reading  of  portions  of  the 
Bible  by  the  crew  of  Apollo  8  while  in   space.”  Wishing  to  avoid  a 
further  suit,  NASA  had  sought  assurance  that  Chapel  of  the  Astronauts, 
Inc.,  purpose  was  “truly  nondenominational.”  Corporation  had  com- 
plied  with  NASA’s request  for  assurance.  “I t   is  my  professional  opinion 
that  . . . i f   present plans  for  the  Chapel  a re   followed  and   i t   is  operated 
with  sound  discretion,  the  Chapel  Corporation,  NASA  and  the  United 
States  Government  a re   as  secure  from  successful  legal  attack  as  is 
possible.”  (Proceedings) 
Izvestia  published  interview  with  Soviet  a ircraf t   designer  Andrey  N .  
Tupolev  and   Aleksey  A.  Tupolev,  Tu-144  test  pilot  Mikhail V.  Kozlov, 
and   Tu-144 navigator  Georgey  N .   Bazhenov  on  Tu-144 Sept.  6 visit  to 
Bulgaria.  Kozlov  said  a ircraf t   had  flown  regular  a ir   route,  “but  we 
flew  almost  three  times  as  fast  and  twice  as  high  as  the  other  planes.” 
Although difficulties “did  not  arise,  we  did  seem  to  sense  a  dislocation, 
is  what  the  TU-144 
a  lack  of  coordination  between  the  future-which 
represents-and 
the  present,  even  the  past-those 
principles  which  are  
followed  by  the  ‘ground’  which  controls  ( the   flight  o f )   the  plane.” 
Tu-144  had  flown  a i r   route  on  automatic  pilot.  Aleksey  Tupolev  said 
aircraft  was  designed  for  30000  flying  hrs.  “This  is  10 years  of  work 
for  a  supersonic aircraft.  Every  system  and   every structure  is  designed 
L1 )  
for  this.”  (FBI+sOV-71-187,9/27/71, 
*  Miniature  computer,  the  size  of  an  automobile battery,  was  being  devel- 
oped  by  Honeywell  Aerospace  Div.  to  pilot  satellite  to  beam  educa- 
tional  TV  to  India  under  NASA  and   Indian  government  project  to  start 
in  1973,  AP  reported.  Computer  would  use  as  much  electricity  as 
30-w light  bulb.  ( N Y T ,  9/23/71,  1 4 )  
U S .   and   U.S.S.R.  ended  fifth  round  of  SALT  in   Helsinki.  N e w   York  
T imes   sources  said  some  progress  had  been  made  toward  agreement 
on  freeze  that  would  maintain  ICBM  arsenals  of  both  nations  a t   about 

264 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September 23 

in  Vienna  in   mid-November. 

current  levels.  SALT  would  resume 
(Hamilton, N Y T ,  9 /% /71 ,1)  
September  23-24:  Fortieth  anniversary  of  American  Institute  of  Physics 
was  observed  a t   AIP  annual  meeting  Sept.  23  and   a t   breakfast  of  AIP 
officers  and  governing  board  members  Sept.  24.  Dr.  Frederick  Seitz, 
Rockefeller  Univ.  President  and  former  NAS  President,  spoke  on  “Four 
Decades  of  AIP”  at  annual  meeting.  (A IP   Newsletter,  10 /71)  
September  2 4 :  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos 440  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit with 
789-km  (490.3-mi)  apogee,  271-km  (168.4-mi)  perigee,  95.2-min 
inclination.  (GSFC  SSR,  9/30/71;  SBD,  10/1/71, 
period,  and  70.9’ 
101 )  
*  Tenth  ‘flight of  M2-F3  lifting  body, piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot William  H. 
Dana,  was  prematurely  terminated  when  ignition  malfunction  in  two  
of  four  rocket  engines  caused  shutdown  of  remaining  engines.  Small 
fire  that  started  in  base  area  of  vehicle  during  fuel  jettison  was  extin- 
guished  when  jettisoning  was  stopped.  Vehicle  made  ha rd   landing  a t  
emergency  site  on  Rosamond  Dry   Lake.  Purpose  of  flight  was  to 
evaluate  stability  and  control  a t   mach  1.0  and   to  evaluate  reaction 
control  augmentation  system.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
White  House  announced  President  Nixon’s  approval  of  US.-U.S.S.R. 
agreements  negotiated  a t   SALT  to  reduce  risk  of  outbreak  of  nuclear 
war  and  to  improve  and   modernize  Washington-Moscow  direct  com- 
munications  link.  Both  nations  would  guard  against  accidental  or   un- 
authorized  use  of  nuclear  weapons,  arrange   for  rapid  communication 
should  danger  of  nuclear  war  arise,  and   notify  each  other  in   advance 
of  certain  planned  missile  launches.  Two  satellite  circuits  would  be 
established,  one  by  each  nation,  as  well  a s   multiple  terminals  to 
increase  reliability  of  link.  U.S.S.R.  would  provide  circuit  through  its 
own  satellite  system  and  U S .   would  arrange  for  channel  through 
INTELSAT  system. Agreements were to  be signed in  Washington Sept. 30. 
( P D ,  9/27/71,1318-9) 
Skylab  payload  shroud  (nosecone)  was  delivered  by  McDonnell  Douglas 
Astronautics  Co.  to  MSFC.  Shroud,  18.3  m  (60   f t )   long  with  6.7-m 
(22-f t)  diameter, weighed  almost  1 2  000 kg  (26 000 lbs) ,   and was  first 
major  piece  of  Skylab hardware  to  be  delivered  to  NASA.  (MSFC  Release 
71-162;  MSFC  P IO )  
Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space  Sciences  published  State- 
ments  b y   Presidents  of  the  United  Stat&  on   Internatidnal  Cooperation 
in   Space-A  Chronology:  October  1957-August  1971  (Sen.  Doc. 
92-40).  Statements by  Presidents  Eisenhower,  Kennedy,  Johnson,  and 
Nixon  had  been  compiled  by  Dr.  Eugene  M.  Emme,  NASA  Historian. 
I n  letter  of  transmittal  to  Committee  Chairman  Sen.  Clinton P.  Ander- 
son  (D-N. Mex.),  Committee  Staff  Director  James  J. Gehrig  said  state- 
ments  revealed “unanimous  agreement that  space research  and  explora- 
tion  should be  an   international  undertaking.”  (Tex t)  
Determination  of  crystallization  ages  for  six  Apo l lo   1 4   lunar  rocks  was 
described  in   Science  by  Dr.  Liaquat  Husain,  Dr.  John  F.  Sutter,  and 
Dr.  Oliver  A.  Schaeffer,  State  Univ.  of  New  York  a t   Stony  Brook 
scientists.  Rocks,  from  F ra   Mauro  region,  had  been  dated  by  measur- 
ing   argon  ratios  in   mass  spectrometer. All  six  rocks  gave  age  of  3.62 
to  3.92  billion  yrs,  same  as  that  of  fragmental  rocks  from  F r a   Mauro. 
Scientists  had  concluded  that  Imbrium  impact-ne 
of 
last  major 

265 

September 24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

events  in  evolution  of  pre-mare  lunar   surface-and 
crystallization  of 
significant  portion  of  pre-Imbrian  basalts  were  “essentially  contempo- 
raneous.”  (Sc ience ,  9/24/71,1235-6) 
Senate  rejected  by  vote  of  39  to  12 modification  of  amendment  proposed 
to  H.R.  8687,  FY  1972 
by  Sen.  Hubert  H .   Humphrey  (D-Minn.) 
military  procurement  bill.  Amendment  called  for  placement  of  funds 
for  MIRV  i n   special  Treasury  Dept.  account  to  be  used  only  when 
President  and   Congress  jointly  determined  tha t   Soviet  activity  in  
MIRV  field  necessitated  further  U.S.  testing  and   deployment.  ( C R ,  
9/24/7  1 , S 15020-68 ) 
*  Appointment  of  James  T.  Murphy  as  Director  of  FAA  Office  of  Air  Trans- 
portation  Security  was  announced  by  FAA  Administrator  John  H. 
Shaffer.  Murphy,  former  FBI  special  agent,  had   been  serving  on  acting 
basis  since May  1971.  (FAA   Release 71-153) 
September  24-25:  Apollo  15  Astronauts  David  R.  Scott,  James  B.  Irwin, 
and   Alfred  M.  Worden  were  honored  by  USAF  Academy  a t   Colorado 
Springs,  Colo.,  with  parade   and  special  civic  day.  They  received  USAF 
Distinguished  Service  Medals  from  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  Secre- 
tary   of  the  A ir   Force.  ( N A S A  Activities,  10/15/71,  172 )  
September  25 :   New  Yorlc  T imes   editorial  commented  on  US.-U.S.S.R. 
agreements  a t   SALT : “Improved  communications,  no  matter  how  desir- 
able,  will  not  offset  the  growing  danger  of  a  nuclear  holocaust  unless 
followed  speedily  by  substantive  steps  to  check  the  headlong  race  in  
strategic nuclear  arms.”  ( N Y T ,  9/25/71,  30 )  
September  26 :   Smithsonian  Institution’s  Langley  Gold  Medal  for  Aero- 
dromics  was  presented  to  L/G  Samuel  C.  Phillips 
(U SAF ) ,   SAMSO 
Commander  and   former  NASA  Apollo  Program  Director,  a t   ceremonies 
commemorating  Smithsonian’s  125th  anniversary.  Medal,  presented 
periodically  for  “meritorious  investigations  in   connection  with  the 
sciences  of  aeronautics  and   astronautics,”  was  established  in   memory 
of  Dr.  Samuel  P.  Langley,  aviation  pioneer.  Among  recipients  had 
been  Astronaut  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  in   1964  and   Dr.  Wernher  von 
Braun,  NASA   Deputy  Associate  Administrator  €or  Planning,  in   1967. 
(Smithsonian Release SI-131-71) 
September  2 6 3 0 :   International  Aeronautical  Federation  Annual  General 
Conference  was  held  in   Lucerne,  Switzerland. 
Gold  Space  Medal,  Federation’s  highest  award  for  space  achieve- 
ment,  was  presented  to  Astronaut  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  for  “his  coura- 
geous  achievements  and   leadership  as  the  Commander  of  Apollo  13.” 
I n   recognition  of  achievements  of  entire  ApoEEo  13  crew,  Astronauts 
Lovell,  Fred  W.  Haise,  Jr.,  and  John  L.  Swigert,  Jr.,  received  IAF’S 
V.  M.  Komarov  Diploma  for  1970.  Diploma  had  been  created  in  
memory  of  Cosmonaut  Vladimir  M.  Komarov,  killed  dur ing   Soyuz  1 
mission April  24,  1967. 
Cosmonauts  Andrian  G.  Nikolayev  and   Vitaly  I .   Sevastyanov  were 
awarded  Yur i   Gagarin  Gold  Medal  for  1970  for  achievements  as  crew 
of  S o p z  9 ,  June  2-19,1970. 
Gold  Air  Medal,  highest  IAF  award  for  aeronautics,  was  presented 
to  Capt.  Henry  T.  (D ick)   Merrill  for  contributions  to  aviation  over 
50 yrs.  Capt. Merrill,  civilian pilot, had  flown Atlantic in  1935 and  1937. 
Concorde  technical  team  of  BAC   and  A6rospaciale  employees received 
group  diploma  for  “valuable  example  set  by  . . . effective collaboration 
266 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September 26-30 

developed  since  1962 between  the  engineers  of  British  Aircraft  Corp., 
Akospaciale,  Rolls-Royce  and   Snecma,  operating  as  a  single  industrial 
team.” 
During  conference  LRV  was  presented  to  Swiss  Transport  Museum. 
(Letter  to  NASA  Administrator,  6/10/71; 
letter  to  NASA  Historian, 
9/29/71;  W  News,  9/30/71,  42 ;   A v   W k ,   10/18/71,  9 ;   BAC   PIO;  
NAA  P IO )  
September  27:  Feasibility  study  a t   MSC  had  ruled  out  use  of  small  Tv 
camera  on  LRV  Rover  while  in  motion  during  Apollo  16 mission,  Los 
Angeles  Times  reported.  Cost  would  exceed  usefulness  and  pictures 
might  be  hazy  and  induce  nausea  in  viewers  because  of  up-and-down 
motion  of  Rover  over  lunar  surface.  Necessary  adjustments  to  provide 
TV  from  Rover  would  cost  almost  $5  million.  ( L A  T imes ,   9/27/71) 
*  NASA  announced assignment  of  Robert 0. AIler,  Manager of  Space Station 
Operations,  Space  Station  Task  Force  for  OMSF,  to  Skylab  Program 
Office  as Director  of  Operations. Aller  would  be  responsible  for  coordi- 
nation  and  development  of  operationally  related  program  and  mission 
planning activities.  (NASA  Hq  VB) 
*  Willis  H.  Shapley, NASA  Associate  Deputy  Administrator,  testified  before 
House  Committee  on  Foreign  Affairs’  Subcommittee  on  Africa  on 
operation  of  NASA  tracking  station  in   South  Africa.  Subcommittee was 
investigating  U S .   business  involvement  in  South  Africa.  NASA  station 
was  manned,  staffed,  and  operated by  South African  Council  for  Scien- 
tific  and  Industrial  Research  (C S IR ) .   “Committed  a s   we  have  been  to  
attaining  the  important  national  objectives  entrusted  to  us,  we  have 
thought  of  o u r   stations  overseas  essentially  in  terms  of  their  efficiency 
in   supporting  our  flight  missions.  We  have  monitored  station  opera- 
tions  mainly  from  the  standpoint  of  technical  effectiveness  and  sound 
financial  management.  While  we  have  recognized  that  human  factors 
can  have  a  direct  bearing  on  performance,  we  are   limited  in  our 
ability  to  control  these  factors,  particularly  in   societies  where  statutes 
and  practices  differ  markedly  from  ou r   own.”  NASA  wished  “to  do  all 
we  can  to  see  that  the  NASA  station  in  South  Africa  reflects  to  the 
greatest  degree that  local  circumstances permit,  the  practices  and   ideals 
which  govern  employment  at  our  domestic  facilities.”  (Testimony) 
AFSC  announced  establishment  by  Aeronautical  Systems  Div.  ( A S D )   of 
Prototype Program  Office  a t  Wright-Patterson AFB,  Ohio.  Office, headed 
by  Col.  Lyle  W.  Cameron,  would  manage  aeronautical  prototype  pro- 
grams  for  USAF.  WAF  had  identified  as  candidate  aeronautical  projects 
advanced STOL  transport,  very low radar-cross-section  ( RCS )  test vehicle, 
lightweight  fighter  aircraft,  and  quiet  aircraft.  ( AFSC  Release  240.71) 
September  28-October  19 :   Luna  19,  U.S.S.R.’s 
second  unmanned  lunar 
probe  in   less  than  a  month,  was  launched  from  Baykonur  a t   3:OO  pm 
local  time  ( 6 : O O   pm  E D T ) .   In  earth  orbit  Luna  19  was  separated  from 
last  stage  of  booster  and  set  on  trajectory  toward  moon.  Tass  said 
mission  would  conduct  scientific  investigation  of  moon  and  near-lunar 
space  from  lunar   orbit.  During  flight  to  moon  26  communications 
sessions were  held  with  spacecraft  and  data  on  parameters  and  systems 
were  transmitted.  Midcourse  corrections  were  conducted  Sept.  29  and 
Oct.  1, and  on Oct.  3 Luna 19  entered lunar   orbit with  140-km (87-mi) 
altitude,  122-min  period,  and   40”  35’ inclination.  Tass  said  Oct.  19  
that  all  systems  were  operating  normally  and   spacecraft  was  conduct- 

267 

September &October  19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

ing   geophysical  research  of  moon’s  gravitational  field  and   taking  pho- 
tographs of  lunar  surface. 
Previous mission  i n   series,  Lzma  18, crashed on  moon while  attempt- 
ing   softlanding  Sept.  11.  (FBIS-SOV-188-3,  9/28/71,  L1;  FBIs-SOV- 
10/20/71,  L1;  SBD ,   9/29/71, 
192-3,  10/4/71,  L1;  FBIS-SOV-203-3, 
89 )  
September  28 : Japan   successfully  launched  its  th ird   satellite,  Shinsei 
(“New  S ta r” ) ,   from   Uchinoura  Space  Center  a t   1:00  pm  Tokyo  time 
(4:OO   am  EDT  Sept.  27 ) .   The  65.8-kg  (145-lb)  spacecraft  was 
Japan’s  first  scientific  satellite  and  was  launched  by  22.9-m  (75-f t)  
Mu  rocket  into  orbit  with  3892-km  (2418.4-mi)  apogee,  619-km 
(384.6-mi)  perigee,  133-min period,  and  3 1 . 2 O   inclination.  Purpose  of 
mission was  to  study cosmic  rays  and   solar  electric waves  for   one year. 
Shinsei was  26-sided  body,  75  cm  (30  i n )   in  diameter,  equipped 
with  5184  silicone  solar  batteries  and   used  “gravity-turn”  device  in  
lieu  of  conventional guidance  and  control  techniques.  Payload  included 
solar  radio  receivers,  cosmic-ray  detectors,  and   ionospheric  probes. 
Satellite  functioned  perfectly  and  relayed  scientific  information. 
Japan   had  become  four th   country  to  orb i t   satellite  with  successful 
launch  of  Ohsumi  Feb.  11, 1970.  (Spacewarn,  10/5/71,  2 ;   W Post, 
9/29/71,  A14;  W Post,  9/30/71,  A6;  GSFC  SSR,  9/30/71) 
*  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  4 4 1   from  Baykonur  into  orbit  with  266-km 
(165.3-mi)  apogee,  207-km  (128.6-mi)  perigee,  89.2-min  period,  and  
6 5 O   inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Oct.  10.  (GSFC  SSR,  9/3O/71; 
10/31/71;  SBD,  10 /1 /71 ,101)  
Completion  of  tests  to  determine  cause  of  A p o b   15 parachute  failure 
was  announced  by  NASA.  Possible  causes  were  fuel  dump,  which  ex- 
pelled  six  pounds  of  monomethyl  hydrazine  (MMH )   from  CM  reaction 
control  system,  and   flaws in   links  connecting suspension lines  to  risers. 
Officials  doubted  exact  cause  could  be   determined. Dump  through  hot 
engine  could  cause  tongues  of  flame  that  might  reach  parachute  lines. 
Flaws  were  detected  in   links  on  one  recovered  chute,  but  the  failed 
chute  had  not  been  recovered.  Corrective  action  would  be  taken  on  
both  possible  c a u s e   for   Apollo  16.  Dump  would  be  eliminated  and  
material  for  links changed.  (NASA Release 71-188) 
*  Dr.  Charles S.  Sheldon 11,  Chief  of  Science Policy  Research Division  of 
L ibrary   of  Congress,  commented  in   interview  after  Sept.  28   launch 
of  unmanned  lunar   probe  Luna  19  tha t   Moscow  still  had  plans  t o  
land   men  on  the  moon,  perhaps  about  1973  o r   1975.  Dr.  Sheldon said 
five  previous  Soviet  Zond  circumlunar  flights  had  been  capable  of 
carry ing   men  and   several  other  ear th   orbital  flights  had  simulated 
manned  lunar  landing  maneuvers.  Dr.  Sheldon  also  recalled  tha t  
Mstislav  V .   Keldysh,  President  of  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  had 
said  in  1969  tha t   manned  missions  to  moon  were  not  ruled  out. 
(Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/29/71,  A5) 
Selection  of  National  Science  Teachers  Assn.,  Washington,  D.C.,  for  
negotiation  of  $39 000,  19-mo,  cost-reimbursement contract  fo r   man- 
agement  and  operation  of  Skylab  Student  Project  was  announced  by 
NASA.  Purpose  of  project  was  to  stimulate  interest  i n   science  and   tech- 
nology  by  directly  involving  students  in   space  research.  NSTA  would 
notify  student  and  educational  community  of  opportunity  and   method 
of  participation,  develop procedures  f o r   evaluation  of  proposals  based 

268 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

September 28 

on  educational  value,  and  develop  certificates  of  participation  and 
awards  system  for  entrants.  NSTA also  would  develop  plans  for  en- 
tran ts   whose  proposal  ideas  had  been  selected  by  NASA  and   conduct 
Skylab  Student  Education  Conference  a t   ICSC  in   conjunction  with 
Skylab launch.  (NASA Release 71-183) 
U S .  patent  No.  3 608 844,  for  self-deploying  arm   to "serve  as  spacecraft 
boom  or  antenna,  was  granted  to  GSFC  engineers William T.  Tumulty, 
Jr.,  and   Wayne  P.  Sours.  Called  Minimech,  device  could  also  retrieve 
objects  from  burning  building,  serve  as escape  chute,  o r   erect  itself  as 
instant  tent  pole  o r   instant  plumbing.  I t   could  be  made   from  various 
materials  depending  on  purpose.  (NYT,  10 /2 /71 ;   P a t   Off  P IO )  
September 29-30:  NASA's  Os0  7  (OSO-H)  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory was 
launched  from  ETR a t   5:45  am  EDT by  two-stage Thor-Delta  DSV-3N 
booster  to  study  sun  and  i ts   influence  on  earth's  atmosphere.  Second- 
stage  anomaly  resulted  in  noncircular  orbit  of  575.7-km  (357.7-mi) 
apogee,  329.1-km  (204.5-mi)  perigee,  93.6-min  period,  and  33.1' 
inclination.  Pr imary   mission  objective  was  to  obtain  high-resolution 
data  from  solar  corona  in   particular  spectral  bands  in   EUV and  in  
visible  regions dur ing  one solar rotation. 
Tetr  3 (TETR-D) Test  and  Training  Satellite,  carried  pickaback  on 
Delta  2nd  stage,  was  ejected  into  orbit  with  571-km  (354.8-mi) 
apogee,  391-km  (243-mi)  perigee,  94.3-min  period,  and  33.0' 
in- 
clination.  Pr imary   objective  of  45-lb  (20.4-kg)  secondary  payload 
was  to  test  Manned  Space  Flight  Network  and  train  MSFN  personnel. 
Second-stage  anomaly  of 
launch  vehicle  separated  spacecraft  a t  
pitch  angle  outside  normal  sun  acquisition  limits.  For  eight  hours 
following  orbital  insertion,  ground  controllers  manually  commanded 
spacecraft  to   despin.  Pitch  angle  was  then  changed  to  place  it  within 
automatic  acquisition  range.  Sail  section  was  commanded  to  acqui- 
sition  mode  and  sail  acquired  and   locked  onto  sun  a t   approximately 
2 : O O   pin  EDT. Batteries  were  then  charged.  Orbit  would  permit  ob- 
servations  for more than a year. 
Os0  7,  improved  over  earlier  O S O S ,  provided  for  increase  in   experi- 
ment  size  and   weight  and   power  and  extended  capability  in   pointed 
mode,  including  stability  and  pointing  dur ing   night  portion  of  orbit. 
I t   was  spin-stabilized;  weighed  636  kg  (1403  lbs)  ; carried  six  sci- 
(lower) , which 
entific  experiments;  and   had  two  main  sections-wheel 
carried  nondirectional  scanning  experiments  and  basic  support  equip- 
ment,  and   sail  (uppe r ) ,   which  carried  pointed  experiments.  Experi- 
ments,  designed  to  continue  and  extend  work  of  preceding  oso  space- 
craft, were  provided  by  GSFC,  NRL, MIT, Univ.  of  New  Hampshire,  and  
Univ.  of  California  (San Diego). 
0 3 0   7  was  8 th   in  series  of  11  oso  spacecraft  designed  to  provide 
direct  observations  of  sun  dur ing   most  of  11-yr  solar  cycle.  Os0  I 
(launched  March  7,  1962)  and  Os0  2  (launched  Feb.  3,  1965)   had 
passed  their  six-month  lifetimes  and  together  provided  more  than 
8600  hours  of  scientific information.  OSO-c 
(launched  Aug.  25,  1968) 
had  failed  to  reach  orbit  when  booster  malfunctioned.  Os0  3 
(launched  Mar.  8,  1967)  and   Oso  4  (launched  Oct.  18,  1967)  trans- 
mitted  on  command  only.  Os0  5  (launched  Jan.  22,  1969)  had  both 
tape  recorders  and  seven  of  eight  experiments  operating  satisfac- 
torily  af ter   six  months  i n   orbit.  Os0  6  (launched  Aug.  9,  1969)   was 

269 

September  29-30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

jeptember  29-30:  Os0 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory 
was  launched  in to   orbit  to  study  the   sun  and  i t s  
influence  on  the   earth’s  atmosphere. H igh   spatial- 
and   spectral-resolution data  were  obtained  by  the  
pointed  experiments  on  the   sail  and  scanning  ex-  
periments  on   the   wheel.  First  x-ray  observations 
from  a  spacecraft  o f  the  beginning  o f  a  solar  pare 
and  of  solar  ‘Lstreamers” were  made  Oct.  3-6. 
The   white  light  coronagraph above,  f r om  a  Naval 
Research  Laboratory  experiment  on  Os0  7. showed 
three  coronal  streamers  f r om   the   sun.  T h e   black 
bullseye  i n   the  center  was  produced  by  a   circling 
occulting disc  tha t   caused  an   artificial  eclipse.  T h e  
distance  f r om  the   center  o f  the  disc  to  the   edge  of 
the   photograph  was  about  10  solar  radii,  or 
about  6.4  million  kilometers  ( 4   million  m i le s ) .  

relaying  information  from  all  seven  experiments.  oso  program  was 
managed  by  GSFC under  OSSA  direction.  (NASA  Proj  Off; NASA  Re- 
lease 71-163;  Spacewarn,  10/5/71) 
launched  Cosmos  44.2 from  Plesetsk  into  orbit 
September  29:  U.S.S.R. 
with  272-km  (169.0-mi)  apogee,  199-km  (123.7-mi)  perigee,  89.7-min 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Oct.  12.  (GSFC S SR ,  
period,  and  72.8’ 
9/30/71;  10/31/71;  SBD,  10 /4 /71 ,108)  
*  Fourteenth  flight  of  TF-SA  jet  a ircraf t   equipped  with  supercritical  wing 
was  completed, flown from  FRC  by  NASA  test  pilot Thomas C.  McMurtry 

270 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1971 

September 29 

in   accelerated  TF-8A  flight  test  program  [see  Sept.  151.  (NASA   P ro j  
O f f )  
Apollo  15  Astronauts  David  R.  Scott,  James  B .   Irwin,  and  Alfred  M. 
Worden  visited  KSC   to  thank  personnel  fo r   their  support  during 
ApoZZo  15  mission.  KSC  Deputy  Director  Miles  Ross  told  crowd  of 
about  5000  that  with  all  talent  assembled  in   VAB  “I  think  this  i s   the 
real  Kennedy  Center  for  the  Performing  Arts.” 
(Spaceport  News ,  
10 /7 /71 ,1)  
NASA  and  FAA  announced  agreement  for  joint  participation  in   flight- 
simulation  R&D  projects  a t   ARC.  NASA  would  make  ARC   simulation 
facilities  and  supporting  services  available  to  FAA.  FAA  would  pro- 
vide  its  own  technical  personnel  and  resident  director,  who  would 
coordinate  FAA  R&D  projects  with  ARC   director.  (NASA   Release  71-185) 
Engine  fell  off  USAF  C-5A 
training  aircraft  preparing  for  takeoff  from 
Altus  AFB,  Okla.  Later,  USAF  officials  said  preliminary  investigation 
had  traced  cause  to  structural  problems  in  pylons  that  held  engines 
to  wing.  Aircraft  had  accumulated  1300  flying  h r s   and  more  than 
3000  landings.  USAF  said  it  had  grounded  seven  C-5A’s  with  similar 
flying  hours  until  new  pylons  could  be  installed.  (Getler,  W   Pos t ,  
10 /7 /71 ,2)  
Senate  by  vote  of  61   to  28  rejected  amendment  proposed  by  Sen.  Wil- 
liam  Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  to  terminate  usx  F-14  fighter  aircraft  pro- 
gram  by  deleting  $801.6  million  from  H .R .   8687,  $51-billion  FY 
1972  military  procurement  authorization.  ( C R ,   9/29/71,  515329- 
15405 ) 
Virginians  fo r   Dulles,  citizen  group  representing  persons  living  near 
flightpaths  of  Washington  National  Airport,  filed  suit  in  U S .   District 
Court  to  prevent  stretch-jet  aircraft  from  landing  or  taking  off  a t  
Washington  National  and  to  ban  all  jet  traffic  at  airport  after  11  pm 
because of noise pollution.  ( W Pos t ,  9/30/71,  B3) 
*  Washington  Post  editorial  questioned  need  for  F-14  USN   fighter  air- 
c ra f t :   “The  F-14,  has  LOO  many  attributes  of  another  great  defense 
turkey  [F-111BI 
to  be  approved  at  this  time  by  the  Senate.  We 
believe  the  Senate  should  send  the  Navy  back  to  the  drawing  board 
to  come  up  with  either  an  improved  F 4  o r   a  new  fighter  plane  that 
is  not  too  costly  t o   be  purchased  in  adequate  numbers  and  that  has 
( W   Pos t ,  
a  reasonable  chance  of  performing  a  valid  function.” 
9/29/71,  A18) 
0  New  Orleans  Times-Picayune  editorial  commented  on  US.-U.S.S.R. 
agreement  on  New  York-Moscow  comsat  link  to  prevent  war  by 
nuclear  accident:  “The  technology  of  satellite  relay  is  beyond  us, 
but  we  recall  a  treaty  signing  recently  in  Washington  and  Moscow 
a t  which  the  signers  watched  each  other  on  satellite-relayed television. 
Yet  it  is  reported  that  the  link  may  take  a  lon 
time  and  require 
building  ground  stations  near  the  two  cities  an% launching  special 
satellites.  Cannot  the  hot  line  be  given  a  reserved  channel  on  present 
facilities?”  (New Orleans  Times-PicGyune, 9/29/71) 
September  30:  Medical  instructions  relayed  by  A ts   1  (launched  Dec.  6, 
1966)  from  equatorial  orbit  35 800  km  (22  300  m i )   above  the  earth 
saved  lives  of  two  women  in  remote  native  Alaska  villages.  Native 
medical  aide  in  Chalkyitsik,  northeastern  Alaska,  and  aide  in  Anatu- 
vuk  Pass,  north  central  Alaska,  broke  into  satellite  time  reserved  for 

271 

September 30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

relay  of  educational  broadcasts  to   Alaskan  village  centers  to  request 
advice  in   treating  hemorrhaging  pregnant  Indian  woman  and   Eskimo 
woman  suffering  appendicitus  attack.  Physician  in   Anchorage, Alaska, 
hearing  requests,  broke  into  broadcast  with  instructions  and   alerted 
medical  personnel  nearer  scenes.  Univ.  of  Alaska  officials  handling 
transmissions  telephoned  NASA  satellite  control  station  a t   Rosman, 
N.C.,  and   received  permission  to   extend  reserved  satellite  time  dur ing  
night.  Sen.  Mike  Gravel  (D-Alaska)  later  said  in  Washington,  D.C.: 
“I  am  grateful  for   the  teamwork  in   Alaska  and   a t   NASA  that  so  dra-  
matically  saved  two  lives,  and  I  am  so  proud  of  my  fellow  Alaskans 
who  responded  once  again  through  the  code  of  the  North-but 
this 
time  using  a  space  satellite.”  (AP,  B  Sun,  10/8/71,  A10)  
A p o l b   15  Astronauts  David  R.  Scott,  James  B.  Irwin,  and  Alfred  M. 
Worden  thanked  USAF  personnel  a t   Patrick  AFB,  Fla.,  for  their  sup- 
por t   dur ing   ApoZZo  15  mission  and   presented base  with  U S .   flag  they 
had  carried  to  moon.  Later,  astronauts  thanked  MSFC   employees  dur-  
ing six-hour visit  to Center.  (MSFC   Release 71-164;  NY  News ,   10 /1 /71 ,  
64 ;   MSFC  PAO )  
*  Formation  of  new  Military  Aircraft  Programs  Office  within  OART  and  
appointment  of  Albert  J.  Evans,  Director  of  Aerodynamics and   Vehi- 
cles  Systems Div.  in  OART,  as  its  Director  were  announced  by  NASA. 
Office  would  direct  ongoing  support  to  USAF  on  F-15  and  B-1  pro- 
grams  and  to  USN  on  F-14  program ;   USAF/NASA  Transonic  Aircraft 
Technology  (TACT)   Program   in   which  NASA  supercritical  wing  would 
be  flight-tested  on  modified  F-111  a ircraf t ;   USA/NASA  Tilt  Rotor 
Research  Aircraft  Technology  Program ;  and   other  possible  joint 
research,  experimental,  and  prototype  a ircraf t   programs.  William  S. 
Aiken,  Jr.,  Deputy  Director  of  Aerodynamics  and  Vehicle  Systems 
Div.,  would  succeed  Evans  in  former  post.  (NASA   Release  71-186) 
Lunokhod  1-which 
landed  on moon  Nov.  17,  1970,  on  board  Luna  17- 
was  declared  officially  dead  at  end  of  lunar  night  because  resources of 
its  isotope  heating  system  had  been  exhausted.  (SBD,  11/3/71,  18 )  
0  Secretary  of  State  William  P.  Rogers  and  Soviet  Foreign  Minister 
Andrey  A.  Gromyko  signed  two   nuclear  control  agreements in   formal 
ceremony  a t   State  Dept.  Agreements  called  for  improved  “hotline” 
communication  between  Washington  and  Moscow  via  comsats  and 
immediate  notification  of  any  unexplained  incident  involving  possible 
detonation  of  nuclear  weapon  which  could  cause  outbreak  of  nuclear 
war.  (Smith, NYT,  10/1/71,  1) 
During  September:  Dr.  James  C .   Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  said  in 
interview  published  by  A i r   Force  Magazine  that  NASA  planned  to  let 
hardware  contracts  for  space  shuttle  by  spr ing   1972,  contingent  on 
White  House  approval.  NASA  had  decided  in   summer  to  extend  pre- 
liminary  design  contracts  by  four  months  to  “look  more  intensively  a t  
alternative  configurations,”  examining  phased  approach  for  building 
reusable  upper  stage  first  and  testing  and   using  i t   with  interim 
expendable  booster,  instead  of  developing  reusable  booster  at  same 
time.  Reevaluation  of  design  concepts  was  stirred  by  need  for  addi- 
tional  analyses  and  research  and  by  need  to  trim  expenditures  “in  a 
given  year.” 
NASA’s  viewpoint  on  space  in   this  decade  was  “to  bring  the  pro- 
gram  down  to  earth,  both  figuratively  and  literally.  We  must  ask our-  

272 

sion  that  the  

limated  in   the  conviction  tha t   they  would  be much  slower  in   mastering 
intercontinental  ballistic missile  technology.  This  conviction,  advanced 
in  the  teeth  of  evidence-after 
all,  the ' Chinese  invented  the  rocket- 
was reinforced  b y   reports  of  widespread  technological  disruption  in  
the  Cultural  Revolution.  Their  two  successful  launchings  of  space 
satellites,  the  last  one  weighing  around  480 pounds  [218  kg],  in  
March  1971, should  have  disabused  even  the  most  skeptical  or  preju- 
diced.  In   any  case,  there  a r e   a  sufficient  number  of  recent  eyewitness 
accounts  by  Westerners  of  Chinese  scientific achievements  in   various 
fields to  dispell  any  notions  of  Chinese  technical  inferiority."  (Bull  of 
A tom ic  Scientists, 9/71) 

273 

PRECEDING  PAGE  BLANK  NOT & FlUdm 
. _ _ ^  - 

October  1971 

October  1 :   Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  said  strong  tech- 
nology  base  was  “absolutely  vital”  to   US., in   speech  before  14th 
Annual  Aerospace  Luncheon  of  Los  Angeles  Area  Chamber  of  Com- 
merce.  Indications  from  critics  of  lack  of  confidence  in   advancement 
of  “greatest  technological  evolution  in  the  history  of  mankind”  was 
reminder  that  “we  must  do  a  better  job   of  convincing the  man-on-the- 
street  of  the  [space]  program’s  merits.”  Public  needed  information 
( 6  to  put  its  priorities  in   proper  perspective.”  There  was  “something 
seriously  wrong”  when  “as  a  nation  we  pay  people more  not  to  work 
and  more  in   farm   subsidies  than  we  do  on  space  research,  a  program 
which  impacts  our   national  economy  and   vitally  affects  our  national 
security.  . . . I  am  convinced  that  further  erosion  of  our  technological 
leadership  will  start  u s   on  a  downhill  course  from  which  i t   will  be 
difficult  to  recover.”  But,  ” in   our  zeal  to  forge  ahead  in  technical  and 
scientific  fields,  it  is  possible  to  lose  sight  of  the  debt  we  owe  to  the 
great  American  public  tha t   so  steadfastly  sustained  us  during  the 
early  years.”  Average  American  had  his  priorities.  “But  he  needs  to 
be  informed  il  he  is   to  arrive  a t   an  intelligent  decision  about  how  to 
rank  his  priorities.”  Burden  of  convincing  public  of  necessity  for 
“continuing  well-balanced  space  program  for   the  1970’s  and  beyond” 
lay  with  those  in  program. 
Dr.  Fletcher  also  said:  “We  want  cooperation  with  the  Soviets  a s  
well  as  with  other  nations  throughout  the  world.  We  are  ready  to  do 
our  par t   io  get  it,  but  i f   we   have  learned  the  lessons  of  history,  we  
should  know  tha t   the  Soviets  will  not  be  eager  to  cooperate  with  a 
second-rate power.  . . . And  that  is what  we   will  become  if  we  do  not 
proceed  w i t h   the  space  shuttle  in   this  decade.  We  cannot  create  the 
environment  needed  for  space  cooperation,  or  an   era  of  enduring 
peace,  by  handing  over  a  monopoly  in  the  realm  of  orbital  flight  to 
the  Soviet Union o r  anyone else.”  (Tex t)  
Subcommittee  on  NASA  Oversight  transmitted  report  Rev iew   of  Recent 
Launch  Failures  to  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics. 
Subcommittee  had  held  hearings  June  15-17  on  failure  of  Atlas- 
Centaur  launch  vehicle  to  place  A t s  4  in  planned  orbit  Aug.  10,  1968, 
Nov.  30,  1970,  and  Mariner  8  May  8, 
and  failure  to  orbit  OAO-B 
1971. 
Subcommittee  concluded  that  NASA’s decision  not  to  attempt  re- 
covery  program  for   unsuccessful  Mariner  8  mission  using  proof-test 
model  “seems  justified”  on  grounds  Mariner  9  (launched  May  30) 
had  been  conceived  a s  backup  mission for   Mariner  8 from  beginning; 
to  alter  Atlas-Centaur  for  different  project  would  have  been  “chal- 
lenging;”  and   proof-test  model  could  better  be  used  as  Mariner  9 
backup,  if  necessary,  o r   in  1973 Venus-Mercury and Viking  projects. 
While  NASA’s backup  mission  and  recovery  policies  after  failures 
u 
seem  to  have  been  sound  in   the  past,”  decision  not  to  have  OAO-B 

275 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
October  1 
recovery  program  “appears  . . , to  have  been  an  unwise  exception.” 
To  forego  OAD-B  goals  “which  have  occupied  the  talents  and   efforts 
of  many  scientists  and  engineers  for  more  than  a  decade  in  order  to 
initiate  new  astronomical  experiments  [ HEAO   Project]  in   different 
portions  of  the  magnetic  spectrum  strikes  the  Committee  a s   a  deci- 
sion  of  questionable  merit.”  Committee  recommended  future  use  of 
prototype  spacecraft tha t   could  be   reengineered  and  launched  as par t  
of  flight  program  to  extract  full  value  from  expensive  hardware. 
Manufacturing  and  quality  control  procedures  in  Centaur  program 
could  be  improved. “I t   is  quite  clear  tha t   a  great  deal  can  and  should 
be  done  short  of  ‘man-rating’  Centaur,  which  would  significantly 
to   justify  . . . broad  scale,  independent  examination  by  disinterested 
improve  its  reliability.”  Centaur  stage  problems  “seem  serious  enough 
experts”  so  that  Centaur,  “which  figures  so  importantly  in   the  space 
program  of  the  next  decade, can  be  utilized  with  renewed  confidence.” 
(Tex t)  
McDonnell  Douglas  Astronautics  Co.  began  14-mo, $350 000  study  con- 
tinuation  for  system  definition  of  reusable  nuclear  stage  (RNS )   for  
multipurpose  space  missions.  Previous  studies  had  determined  that 
RNS  could  be  launched  by  either  Saturn  o r   space  shuttle  booster.  New 
study  would  focus  on  RNS concepts  to  be  launched  by  space  shuttle, 
but  would  consider  two-stage,  fully  reusable  shuttle,  shuttle  booster 
with  expendable  2nd  stage,  and  launch  of  RNS  as  complete  unit  or 
with  components  to  be  assembled  in   space.  Study  also  would  support 
NERVA  program.  (MSFC  Release 71-174) 
Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  for  R&D  Grant  L.  Hansen  discussed 
space  shuttle  a t   Air  Force  Assn.  meeting  in  Bethpage,  N.Y.  NASA  and  
USAF  work  on  shuttle  engine  had  been  helpful  to  shuttle  program  in 
areas  of  reusability  and  higher-pressure-engine technology.  USAF  had 
supported  advanced  development  efforts  on  liquid-fuel  rocket  engines 
and   had  concluded  hydrogen  and  oxygen  high-performance-engine 
demonstration  program.  Work  on  XLR-129 
reusable  rocket  engine 
had  provided  basis  for   shuttle’s  reusable  high-pressure-rocket  concept. 
Residual  hardware  of  USAF  XLR-129  program  had  been  turned  over 
to   NASA  for  shuttle  engine  program.  Development  of  shuttle  main 
engine  was  to  be  conducted  a t   USAF’S  Arnold  Engineering  Develop- 
ment  Center.  USAF  would  continue  in   1972  to  develop  technology  for  
high-energy  orbit-to-orbit  stages  compatible  with  a  shuttle  to  accom- 
plish  maneuvering missions for   late  1970s and  early  1980s.  ( A I ;  Mug, 
12/71,  34) 
*  More  than  15   astronauts  were  taste-testing  three  meals  daily  for  five 
days  in   MSC   experiment  to  evaluate  proposed  food  items  for  28-  and  
56-day  Skylab  missions  in   1973,  MSC   announced.  Tests  would  deter- 
mine  astronauts’  preferences  and   each  astronaut’s  energy  require- 
ments.  They  were  coordinated  by  Technology,  Inc.,  and  conducted  in  
MSC Life Systems Laboratory.  (M SC  Release 71-74), 
Twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  commissioning  of  Naval  A ir   Missile  Test 
Center  at  Point  Mugu,  Calif.  Center,  later  renamed  Pacific  Missile 
Range,  conducted  R B ~ D  for  Federal  agencies,  including  NASA. 
(PMR  
Missile, 10 /1 /71 ,1)  
Completion  of  DOT study  of  general-aviation  safety  was  announced  by 
Secretary  of  Transportation  John A.  Volpe.  General-aviation industry 

276 

, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

October  1 

consisted  of  133 814 single-engine aircraft,  16 000 multi-engine aircraft, 
2229  jet  aircraft,  33 992  flighl  instructors,  2170  FAA-approved  flight 
and  ground  schools,  and  732 729  pilots,  including  195  861   students. 
I n   1970  general  aviation  had   accounted  for  more  than  25  million 
flight hours and nearly 6 billion  km  (nearly 4 billion m i )   flown.  Of  621  
fa ta l   general-aviation  accidents  in   1970,  201  had  been  identified  as 
weather-caused.  Study  recommended  biennial  flight  review  of  pilot 
competency,  priority  support  of  FAA General Aviation Accident  Preven- 
tion  Program,  tightening  of  certification  requirements for flight  instruc- 
tors and pilots,  modernization of  FAA  flight service stations,  improvement 
of  FAA  reporting  of  real-time  weather  data,  review  of  FAA  general- 
aviation  structure,  clarification  by  FAA  of  regulations  covering general 
operating  and   flight  rules,  publication  of  FAA  regulations  in   separate 
par ts   ra ther   than   in   current  volume  format,  and   adoption  of  standard 
traffic  pattern  for  uncontrolled airports.  (DOT Release  20271) 
*  Impact  of  “leftish  student  movements”  was  described  in  Science  by 
Harvard  Univ. physicist  Dr.  Harvey  Brooks:  “Today  some  believe  tha t  
the  . . . movements,  which  a r e  worldwide,  form  the  vanguard  of  a  new 
revolution,  the  first  true   revolution  in   advanced  industrial  societies. 
If  so,  i t   will  be  the  first  in   modern  history  which  had  not  attempted 
to  ally  itself  with  science.  So  far  as  its  ideology  is   discernible  a t   all, 
it  seems  to  be   antiscientific  and   antirational,  more  akin  to  the  early 
Christians  than  to  the  modern  Marxists,  despite  the  Marxist  slogans.” 
(Science,  10/1/71,  21-9) 
October  1-5:  Fourth  International  Symposium  on   Basic  Environmental 
Problems  of  Man  in   Space was  held  jointly  in   Yerevan,  U S S R . ,  by 
rAA  and  Soviet Academy of  Sciences.  Papers dealt with medical problems 
of  prolonged  space  missions,  studies  of  mechanism  underlying  single 
and  combined  stress  effects  and   methods  of  ameliorating  deleterious 
influences, and  bioastronautical  contributions to general medical science 
and practice.  Symposium reviewed  results of  Soyu z  11-Salyut  1 mission, 
June  6-30, 
tha t   ended  with  crew’s  accidental  death  on  reentry.  (IAA 
Annual Rpt, 8/31/71  ; FBIS-Sov-71-~12,11/3/71) 
October 3:  Poorly  designed drive  system  controlling  tilt  of  “world’s  largest 
by  Max 
movable”  antenna,  100  m  (330  f t )   in   diameter-operated 
Planck  Institute for Radio Astronomy in  Bonn, West Germany-had 
set 
dish  oscillating a t  rate  of  once every second, New  York  Times  reported. 
OsciIIations  endangered  antenna’s  structure  and  made  observations 
“virtually  impossible.”  Antenna, a t  Effelsberg, West Germany, had  been 
cited  by  astronomers a s  demonstration  of  why  massive  and  costly  radio 
astronomy engineering enterprises  should be  under professional manage- 
ment  ra ther   than  scientific  direction,  Times  said.  (Sullivan,  NYT, 
10 /3 /71 ,82)  
October  3-6:  Os0  7,  launched  Sept.  29,  made  the  first  x-ray  observations 
from   spacecraft  of  beginning  solar  flare  and  solar  “streamers”  (long, 
tapered  structures  observed in   solar  corona).  Observations would  lead 
to  new  understanding  of  flares  not  possible  before.  Flares  had  many 
effects on  earth’s  environment, weather, and  communications. Streamers 
had  been  photographed  before  only  during  solar  eclipses  and   occa- 
sionally by short sounding  rocket  flights. Os0  7 experiment created own 
G L  eclipse”  by  using  occulting  disc. 
By  Oct.  6  all  six  scientific  experiments  had  been  turned  on.  NRL  

277 

October 3-6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

coronographs  obtained  first  observations of  corona  in   white  light  and  
EUV.  Wheel  section  experiments  obtained  scanning  data  continuously. 
Only  one of  two  tape  recorders was  operating but  would  be  sufficient  to 
achieve  mission  objectives. 
(NASA  Release  71-193  ; Goddard  Ne ,ws ,  
10/71,  2 ;   NASA  P ro j   Off) 
October  4 :  U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1, first  self-propelled  lunar  vehicle,  ceased 
operations  after  321   days  on  moon,  Tass  announced  Oct.  9.  Eight- 
wheeled  vehicle  stopped  transmitting photos  and   soil  analyses  to  ear th  
when  its  isotope  heat  reserves  were  exhausted  during  i ts   11th  lunar  
night  on  moon.  Depletion  of  nuclear  heat  source  had  caused  tempera- 
tures  on  rover  to  d rop   during  lunar   night.  Vehicle  had  been  landed 
on moon  in  Sea of  Rains by  Luna 17  Nov.  17,  1970. 
Solar-powered  Lunokhod  1 had  successfully  conducted  scientific 
and  technical  research  program  with  all  systems  functioning normally. 
I t  had  traveled  distance  of  10 540 m  (34  680  f t )  , exploring  more  than 
80 000  sq m  (860 000  sq  f t )   of  lunar   surface  and  had  produced  more 
than  500  panoramas,  2 0 0 0 0   TV  pictures,  25  chemical  analyses,  and 
hundreds  of  probes  of  physical-mechanical characteristics  of  lunar  soil. 
Vehicle  had  been  parked  on  level  surface  with  French-made  laser 
reflector  pointing  toward  earth,  to  permit  continued  use  of  laser  for 
10/12/71,  L1;  212-3, 
ranging  experiments.  (FBIS-sov-71-197-3, 
11/3/71,  L5 -6 ;   NYT,  10/10/71,  68 ;   A v  W k ,  10/18/71,  17 )  
0  NASA,  FAA,  and   USAF  began  joint  runway  research  program  at  Wallops 
Station  to  evaluate  methods  fo r   measuring  runway  slipperiness  a t  
military  and   civil  a irpor ts   and  improve  techniques  fo r   estimating  a ir-  
craf t   performance  on  runways  that  become  slippery  when  wet.  Tests 
would  be  followed  by  similar measurements a t  Houston  Intercontinental 
Airport,  Lubbock  (Tex.)  Regional  Airport,  Edwards  AFB  (Calif.) , 
Seattle-Tacoma International  Airport,  and   John  F.  Kennedy  Interna- 
tional  Airport  in   New  York.  FAA  Boeing  727  a ircraf t   instrumented  by 
L aRC  would  be used  fo r   flight portions of  program.  USAF  C-141  a ircraf t  
would  carry   personnel  and  equipment.  Runway  surface  measurements 
would  be  made  by   mu-meter-friction  measuring  device  provided  by 
diagonally  braked  automobile  developed  by  NASA  a t   LaRC. 
usm-and 
(NASA   Release  71-190) 
Award  of  $11 640 773  addition to cost-plus-fixed-fee contract.with  Chrysler 
Corp.  for  launch  operations  support  fo r   Skylab  from  Oct.  1,  1971, to 
June   30,  1973,  was  announced  by  KSC.  Addition  brought  amount  of 
contract  to  $25 016 708.  ( KSC   Release  226-71) 
0  Two  prototype  x-ray  devices  fo r   detecting  weapons  and  explosives  in 
carry-on  luggage  of  a i r   passengers  had  been  successfully  tested  a t  
Dulles  International  Airport  in  Virginia,  FAA  announced.  Low  radia- 
tion  x-ray  units-Hying 
Spot  developed  by  American  Science  and 
Engineering,  Inc.,  and  Bendix  Ray  Inspectoscope developed  by  Bendix 
Aerospace  Systems  Div.-sent 
x-ray  pulse  through  luggage  to  obtain 
shadowgraph, which  was  displayed on TV  screen. Devices  did not  affect 
photographic  film  or  recording  tape.  (FAA Release  71-162) 
October  4-5:  Representatives of  ELDO and   European  space  industries  met 
with  NASA  officials  a t   MSFC  to  discuss  project  for  space  tug  to  operate 
in  earth  orbit  in  conjunction  with  space  station  and  space  shuttle. 
Tug  would  transfer  payloads  in  space  and  perform  transportation 
services  in   orbit.  (MSFC Release  71-168;  MSFC  P IO )  

278 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
October 5 
October  5:  Apollo  15 Awards  Ceremony  was  held  a t   MSC.  Dr.  James C. 
Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  presented  NASA  Exceptional  Scientific 
Achievement  Medal  for  “accomplishments  in   the  Apollo  15 mission” 
to  Dr.  Larry  A.  Haskin,  Univ.  of  Wisconsin;  Dr.  Robert  0.  Pepin, 
Univ.  of  Minnesota;  Dr.  Leon  T.  Silver,  Cal  Tech;  Dr.  M.  Gene 
Simmons,  MIT;   and  Dr.  Gordon  A.  Swann,  U S .   Geological  Survey. 
NASA  Exceptional  Service  Medal  was  presented  to  22  MSC  employees 
and   NASA  Public  Service  Award  to  representatives  of  contractors 
Boeing  Co.,  Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.,  Delco  Electronic  Div.  of 
General  Motors  Corp.,  and   North  American  Rockwell  Corp. 
NASA  Group  Achievement  Award  was  presented  to  MSC  Extravehicu- 
lar   Mobility  Unit  Team,  MSC   Lunar  Orbit  Experiments  Team,  MSFC 
and  MSC   Lunar  Roving  Vehicle  Team,  MSC  Lunar  Traverse  Planning 
Team,  NOAA  Space  Flight  Meteorology  Group  a t   KSC,  and  MSC  Tele- 
vision  and  Lunar  communications  Relay  Unit  Team. 
Dr.  Fletcher  read  telegram  from  President  Nixon  congratulating 
Apollo  15  Team  which,  President  said,  deserved  “highest  praise  for 
their  vital  contributions  to  man’s  scientific knowledge  and  our  nation’s 
prominence in  space.”  (NASA   Ann,  10 /1 /71 ;   MSC  Roundup,  10 /8 /71 ,1 )  
KSC  announced  award  of  $33 157  979  addition  to  cost-plus-fixed-fee con- 
tract  with  Bendix  Corp.  for   support  services  for  Apollo  spacecraft  and  
Skylab  programs  from  Oct.  1,  1971,  to  Dec.  31,  1972.  Addition 
brought  total amount of  contract.to  $210 081 335.  (K SC  Release 227-71) 
*  Reuters  said  a t   least  12  supersonic,  swing-wing FB-111  bombers  armed 
with  six  nuclear  bombs  of  total  4.5-metric-megaton  (5  megaton)  yield 
were  on  constant  ground  a ler t   at  SAC   bases  in  northeast  U S .   News 
agency  quoted  SAC  spokesman  as  saying  portion  of  FB-111  force  had 
been  written  into  U.S.  nuclear  deterrent  force.  ( N Y T ,   10/6/71,  52 )  
0  Israel  had  begun  to  manufacture  missile  that  could  carry   450-  to  680-kg 
(1000- to  1500-lb) warhead  480  km  (300 m i )   or  more,  according  to 
Western  intelligence  reports  quoted  by  New  Yo rk   T ime s .   (Beecher, 
N Y T ,  10 /5 /71 ,1 )  
*  Daniel  and  Florence  Guggenheim  Space  Theater  a t   American  Museum- 
Hayden  Planetarium  was  dedicated  a t   ceremonies in  New  York.  (Invi- 
ta t ion)  
October  5-7:  Huntsville,  Ala.,  chapter  of  Society  of  Aerospace  Material  & 
Process  Engineers  held  national  technical  conference,  attended  by 
experts  from  five  NASA  centers,  Redstone  Arsenal,  other  Government 
agencies,  and   private  industry.  Papers  covered  composites  and  high- 
temperature  metals,  high-temperature  and  cryogenic  insulation,  reuse 
of  materials,  materials  compatibility  with  space  shuttle  environment, 
life  support  materials,  and  special  materials  testing.  (Marshall  S tar ,  
10 /6 /71 ,1 )  
Oc tober   6 :   NASA  test  pilots  successfully  completed  two  flights  of  TF-8A, 
modified  F-8 
jet  aircraft  with  supercritical  wing,  flown  from  FRC. 
Flight  15,  flown  by  Thomas  C.  McMurtry,  and  flight  16,  flown  by 
Gary  Krier,  were  part  of  accelerated  series  to  obtain  data  for  per- 
formance  evaluation of  TF-8A  [see  Sept.  151.  (NASA  P ro j   Off) 
Radiaastronomers  had  obtained  first  “picture”  of  distant  galaxy  from 
radio  signals  received  by  Synthesis  radio  telescope  near  Westerbork, 
Netherlands,  New  Yo rk   T imes   reported.  Picture  of  whirlpool  galaxy 
had  led  astronomers to  believe  radio-signal  photography  using  antenna 

219 

October 6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS, 1971 

systems  under  construction  or  planned  might  rival  photography  from 
exposures  at  visible  wavelengths.  Picture  from  Synthesis-1.6-km 
(1-m i)   row  of  12   identical  dish  antennas  set  along  east-west  line- 
seemed  to  confirm  hypothesis  that  explosive  events  in   core  of  each 
rotating  galaxy  sent  waves  spiraling  outward.  Success  of  Westerbork 
antenna  array   was  being  used  to  encourage  congressional  approval 
for  very  large  array   (V LA )   proposed  for  construction  in   southwestern 
U.S.  (Sullivan,  NYT ,   10/6/71,  43 )  
*  Senate by  vote  of  82  to  4  passed  H.R.  8687,  t21-billion FY  1972 military 
procurement  authorization  bill.  (CRY 10/6/71,  S15956-16004) 
*  Rep.  Joseph  E.  Karth  (D-Minn.)  resigned  from  House  Committee  on 
Science  and  Astronautics  to  take  seat  on  House  Ways  and  Means 
Committee.  (Off  of  Rep Ka r th )  
Rep.  James  G .  Fulton  (R-Pa .)   died  of  heart  attack  in  Washington, D.C. 
He  had  been  ranking  Republican  member  of  House  Committee  on 
Science and  Astronautics and  member  of  House  Committee  on  Foreign 
Affairs.  I n   1958  Rep.  Fulton  had  volunteered  at  committee  hearing 
to  serve  as  astronaut.  Wmhington  Post  obituary  said  he  had  fought 
hard   for  programs  to  keep  U S .   from  “dropping  out  of  the space race.” 
(Weil, W Post, 10/8/71,  B8 )  
October  6-8:  Science  fiction  writer  and  space  expert  Arthur  C.  Clarke 
addressed  Playboy  International  Writers  Convocation  in  Chicago.  He 
said,  “Much  of  the  criticism  of  space  expenditure  is  a  pure  excuse- 
a  deliberate  or  unconscious  avoidance  of  real  problems.”  Politicians, 
administrators,  and  Government  officials,  “often  too  stupid,  too  lazy 
or   often  too  corrupt  to  deal  with  the  abuses of  society  as  they  should 
and   could,  are   absolutely  delighted  to  have  the  space  program  a s   a 
scapegoat.”  Space  was  now  ccalmost a  dirty  word.”  ( N Y T ,   10/8/71, 
25 ;  Playboy  P IO )  
October  7:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  443  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with 
297-km  (184.6-mi)  apogee,  201-km  (124.9-mi)  perigee,  89.4-min 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Oct.  19.  (GFSC   SSR ,  
period,  and   65.4’ 
10/13/71;  SF ,  4 /72 ,132)  
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  enumerated  major  factors 
relevant  to  NASA  FY  1973  budget  request  in   speech  before  AIAA 
National  Capital  Section:  1.  “Program  continuity  must  be  main- 
tained.”  NASA  could  not  “shut  down  major  programs  for  several  years 
and  then  start  them  up  again  efficiently.”  2.  NASA  programs  had 
helped  stabilize  U S .   aerospace  industry.  ‘‘This  is  a  very  significant 
reason  for   maintaining  NASA  programs  up  to  o r   near  current  levels  at 
this  time.”  3.  NASA   would  reach  minimum  “institutional  base”  require- 
ment  for  efficient  management  of  approved  programs  in   current  fiscal 
year.  “I  will  strongly  resist  any  further  reductions.”  4.  Space  shuttle 
was  “next  logical  step  to  develop  our  national  capabilities  for  using 
space  more  economically  and   more  effectively  with  manned  and   un- 
manned  spacecraft,  for  both  civilian  and  defense  purposes.”  5.  U.S. 
was  lagging  behind  in   development  of  new  technology  for  commercial 
and   military  aviation.  “We  killed  the  SST  while  Britain  and   France 
went  ahead  to  build  the  Concorde,  and  the  Soviet  Union  built  a  com- 
peting  version.  The  Europeans-and 
our  Canadian  neighbors-are 
ahead  of  us  i n   Short  Take  Off  and  Landing  Aircraft.  The  question 
must  be  asked,  how  long  can  we,  as a  great  nation,  afford  to  be  mere 

280 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

October  7 

spectators  while  others  move  ahead  in   aircraft  technology?”  NASA  did 
not  intend  “to  shift  the  gears  of  our  space  program  into  the  ‘park’ 
position;  we  are   geared  up  for  continued  steady  and   impressive  prog- 
ress  in   those  areas  of  space activity  which  we  consider most  rewarding 
scientifically  or  most  important  to  o u r   national  security.”  Within  few 
years  “there  will  be  no  time  of  day  or  night,  year  in  and  year  out, 
when  men  are   not  working in   orbit  above  the  earth. And  i t   is  up  to  us, 
in   decisions  to  be  made  this  year  in  this  capital,  whether  these  men 
in  orbit will include Americans.”  (Tex t)  
e  NASA  announced  six-month  delay  in   development  of  space  shuttle  to  give 
contractors  more  time  to  study  in   detail  alternatives  resulting  from 
current  studies.  Under  new  schedule,  North  American  Rockwell  Corp., 
McDonnell  Douglas  Co.,  Lockheed  Missiles  &  Space Co.,  and  Grumman 
Aerospace  Corp.  would  study  designs until  April  30,  1972, rather  than 
concluding a t  end  of  October.  Selection  of  sites  for  shuttle  development 
and  operational  flights  would  be  deferred  until  overall  system  charac- 
teristics were  defined.  (NASA  Release  71-199) 
(M D A )   trainer  arrived  at  MSC  from 
Skylab  multiple  docking  adapter 
Martin  Marietta  Corp.  facility  at  Denver,  Colo.  MDA  trainer  was  flown 
to  MSC   aboard  NASA  Super  Guppy  aircraft.  (NASA  Release  71-187; 
MSC  P IO )  
e  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Plan- 
ning,  said  significance of  man’s  movement  into  space with  both  “auto- 
mated, unmanned spacecraft and  manned vehicles,’’  ought to be  grasped 
by every nation  and every individual.  Speaking a t  “Report  on  America” 
dinner  sponsored in   Washington, D.C.,  by  T ime  magazine fo r   group  of 
European businessmen,  he added:  “Man  has left  Earth. There is  a s  great 
an  awesome  potential  i n   tha t   simple statement  as  there  is  in  the  fact, 
man  appeared  on  Earth.  Human  destiny now  has  another  door  opened 
to  it  that  previously  was  firmly  locked.”  Satellite  investigations  and  
space  probes  had  advanced human  knowledge  about  earth,  moon,  and  
planets.  “Astronomers  now  a re   able  to  v iew   across  the  entire  electro- 
magnetic  spectrum  to  obtain  information  about  the  birth,  evolution, 
and  extinction  of  celestial  objects  previously beyond  reach  of  the  most 
powerful  telescope.  Space  is,  in   fact,  a  vast  laboratory  in   which  to  
experiment  with  weightlessness,  hard  vacuum,  solar  plasmas,  and  
extremely  high  cosmic  ray   particles. 
“The  potential  value  of  space  technology  for  Earth  applications 
alone, including long-range weather forecasting,  ear th  resources surveys, 
. . a t   billions  of  dollars 
and   communications,  has   been  estimated 
annually  to  the  world.”  ( N A S A  Activities,  11/15/71,  182)  
.) 
San  Francisco  Bay  area  was  being  surveyed  and   photographed  by  U-2 
reconnaissance  aircraft  in   U S .   Ceological  Survey  project  t o   gather 
continuous  information  fast  and   accurately  on  urban  development,  UPI 
reported.  Pro jec t   also  covered  Phoenix-Tucson  area   in   Arizona  and  
Baltimore-Washington, D.C.,  area   as  basis  fo r   more  thorough,  nation- 
wide study of  27  urban  regions.  I n   1972 NASA  ERTS satellite would  pro- 
vide  constant check  on  urban  growth patterns  and   development.  ( N Y T ,  
10 /7 /71 ,55)  
*  Small  “quasi-moon”  1.6  to  3.2  km  (1 to   2  m i )   i n   diameter  was  gravita- 
tionally  linked  to  ear th  and  moon  in   three-body team  of  celestial objects 
orbiting sun,  Dr.  Hannes 0. Alfven  of  Univ.  of  California a t  San Diego 

281 

October 7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

said  in  telephone  interview  with  New  York  Times.  Although  little 
asteroid,  named  Toro,  was  discovered  in   1964,  computer  calculations 
showing it was  locked  with  ear th  and  moon had  not been  reported  until 
September  a t   Nobel  Conference  in  Stockholm.  Toro  came  within  15  
million  km  (9 .3  million  m i )   of  earth  every eight  years.  Discovery  was 
first  indication  tha t   another  celestial  object  was  part  of  earth-moon 
system.  (Rensberger, NYT,  10 /8 /71 ,24 )  
DOD  spokesman  Je r ry   W.  Friedheim  announced  that  22  additional  C-5s 
were  being  grounded  a s   safety  precaution  pending  additional  tests  to  
find cause of  Sept.  29  incident  at Altus  AFB,  Okla.,  in  which  engine and  
pylon  mounting  fell  from  a ircraf t   dur ing   engine  warmup  fo r   takeoff. 
(Getler,  W  Post,  10/8/71,  A l )  
Dr.  Jerome  B.  Wiesner  was  installed  as  13th  President  of  MIT  at  cere- 
monies  in   Cambridge, Mass.  Dr.  Wiesner  had   been  science  adviser  to 
Presidents  Kennedy  and  Johnson.  (NYT,  10/8/71,  25;  MIT   PIO) 
President Nixon  issued statement on Oct. 6  death of  Rep.  James G.  Fulton. 
Rep.  Fulton would  be  “especially  remembered for his  unfailing  support 
of  ou r  space program.”  (PD,  10/11/71,  1382; Weil,  W  Post,  10/8/71, 
B8 1 
Mrs.  Leatrice  M.  P e nd r ay - e a r ly   rocket  experimenter,  syndicated colum- 
nist,  and  public  relations  executive-died 
in   Princeton,  N.J.,  at  age 
66  following long  illness.  She  had  been  cofounder  of  American  Inter- 
planetary  Society in   1930. Society had  been  renamed American Rocket 
Society  and  was  later  merged  with  Institute  of  Aerospace  Science  to 
form  American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and   Astronautics.  (NYT, 
10/9/71,  30 ;   A&A  1963) 
Charles  H.  Hubbell, well-known  ar t is t-hk tor ian  of  a i r   age-who 
in  1930s 
began  painting  winners  of  annual  Thompson  Trophy  Race-died 
a t  
age  72.  More  than  375  “Hubbells”  were  painted  for  TRW  Aviation 
Calendar  series  and  quarter  of  million  lithographic  reproductions  had 
been  published. Hubbell’s  pictures  had  hung  in  White House,  museums, 
palaces,  libraries,  and  homes  of  aviation  buffs.  (TRW   Calendar,  1972) 
October  9 :  India  successfully launched short-range rocket for   first  time from 
its  new  launching  facility  a t   Sriharikota  Island.  Indian-made  Rohini 
rocket was  launched  to   test  complex  a t   Sriharikota, near Madras,  from 
which  an   Indian  satellite  was  expected  to  be  orbited  in   next  three  or 
four years.  (Reuters, NYT,  10 /10 /71 ,15 )  
Nobel  Prize  for   Medicine  was  won  by  Vanderbilt  Univ.  physiologist 
Dr.  Ear l   W.  Sutherland,  Jr.,  for   discovery  of  how  cyclic  adenyl  acid 
regulated  work  of  hormones  in  human  body.  (Auerbach,  W  Post, 
10/15/71,  A l )  
October  10-13: Offshore  Airport  Center  Planning  Conference was  held  by 
AIAA  and   City  of  New  York  a t   Harriman,  N.Y.,  t o   identify  problems 
and  determine  feasibility  of  offshore  a irpor t   construction  in  metro- 
politan  New  York  area.  Conference  recommended  major  multifaceted 
study  to  develop  data  for  environmental  impact  report  and   compre- 
hensive  study  to  determine  economic  significance  of  commercial avia- 
tion  to  New  York  City  and   penalty  of  not  providing  adequate  facilities 
t o  meet  projected  aviation  demands.  (AIAA  Release,  10 /15 /71)  
October  11: U.S.S.R.’s  Salyut  I,  first  manned  space  laboratory  (launched 
April  1 9 )  , reentered  earth‘s  atmosphere on  command  and  disintegrated 
over  Pacific  Ocean  after  completing its  program,  Tass  announced. 

282 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

October  11 

Flight  of  orbital  station,  lasting  about  six months,  had  consisted  of 
two  phases.  First  w a s   station’s  jo in t   flight  with  Soyuz  10  spacecraft 
(launched  April  23 ) ,   piloted  by  Cosmonauts  Vladimir  A.  Shatalov, 
Aleksey  S.  Yeliseyev,  and   Nikolay  N.  Rukavishnikov.  Soyuz  10  linked 
up  with  S d y u t   1  for  Sl/,  hours,  undocked,  and   reentered  April  25. 
Second  phase  began  June  6  with  orbiting  of  Soyuz  1 1 ,   carrying 
Cosmonauts Georgy T.  Dobrovolsky,  Vladislav  N.  Volkov,  and  Viktor  I. 
Patsayev.  Spacecraft  docked  with  station  June   7  and   S o ym   11  three- 
man  crew  transferred  to  Salyut  1  for  23-day stay. While on  board,  crew 
carried  out  comprehensive scientific  and   technical  studies  and   experi- 
ments.  Upon  return June  30  after record-breaking nea r -m  days in  space, 
three  cosmonauts were  found  dead  in   spacecraft.  Soviet authorities said 
deaths  were caused  by  sudden  loss  of  pressure  in  Soyuz  capsule. 
Salyut  1  remained  in  orb i t   until  Oct.  11, when  brak ing   engine was 
switched  on  to  decelerate  spacecraft ; station  began  descending trajec- 
tory  and  entered  atmosphere.  Lost  with  Salyut  1  were  films,  tapes, 
biological  samples, and  scientific experiments left  on  board  by  Soyuz  10 
cosmonauts.  During entire lifetime,  orbital station’s  onboard  equipment 
operated normally.  Since spacecraft was  not  recoverable and  might  fall 
on  populated  area  if  left  to  deorbit  naturally,  i t   had  to  be  destroyed. 
(FBIS-SOV-201-3, 
10/18/71,  L1 ;   FBIS-SOV-205-3, 
10/22/71,  L1 ;  
Reuters,  B Sun,  10/16/71,  A3 ;   A v   W k ,  10/25/72,  14 )  
Space program  for  1970s was  outlined  by  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  NASA 
Deputy Associate  Administrator  for   Planning,  in  speech before  Society 
of  Sigma X i  a t  Daytona Beach,  Fla.  I t  would be “program  of  transition; 
a  program  in  which  the  exploration  and   technical  pioneering  of  the 
Sixties  w i l l   begin  to  pay  substantive  dividends;  it  is the  logical  transi- 
tion  to  the  intensive  and  economic  use  of  space  in   the  80’s  and  90’s. 
S trong  evidence will  emerge . . . that will  refute  many  of  the  arguments 
advanced  against  science  and  technology  a s   embodied  in  the  space 
program.”  Program’s primary  strength  was  “that  i t   is balanced  to meet 
the  basic  national  needs.”  Program  “strikes  a harmony  among  scientific 
exploration  2n  space,  the  practical  utilization  of  space,  and   the  develop- 
ment  of  improved  technologies for  space.”  (Tex t)  
Molniya  I1   ear th   station  in  U.S.  for  new  US.-U.S.S.R.  “hotline”  comsat 
would  be   under  U S .   Government  control  but  might  be  owned  and 
operated  under  contract  by  private  entity,  Av ia t ion   Week  &  Space 
Technology  reported.  Hotline  system  would  consist  of 
two  duplex 
telephone-bandwidth  circuits  for  secondary  telegraphic  multiplexing 
and   four   ground  stations  for  transmission  and  reception.  ( A v   W k ,  
10/11/71,  17 )  
0  U S .   scientists  conceded  that  U.S.S.R.  led  U.S.  in   many  areas  of  basic 
research  and   space  medicine  largely  because  U.S.  had   “opted  fo r   an  
engineering  approach  to  manned  space  flight  and  deliberately  ignored 
some  areas  of  theoretical  research  a s   irrelevant  to   the  moon  landing 
mission,”  Av ia t ion   Week & Space  Technology  reported.  Scientists were 
worried  that  political  developments  in   U.S.S.R.  could  harm  free   flow 
of  this  data.  ( A v  W k ,  10/11/71,  14-5) 
Satellite  photos  of  U.S.S.R.  had  shown  continued construction of  two  new 
classes  of  silos for  large missile,  construction of  third  class  of  silo,  and  
doubling  of  production  facilities  for  Soviet  missile  submarines,  New 
York  Times reported.  (Beecher, N Y T ,  10 /11 /71 ,9)  

283 

October  11-14 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,, 1971 
October 11-14: Jo in t   US.-U.S.S.R.  Space Biology  and  Medicine  Working 
G roup -cocha i red   by  Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  NASA  Director  for  Life 
Sciences,  and   Dr.  N.  N.  Gurovsky  of  Soviet Academy  of  Sciences-met 
in  Moscow.  Statement  issued  by  American  Embassy  on  completion  of 
meetings said  group had  begun  “exchange  of  data  and   results  from  the 
Soyuz  and  Apollo  programs  and   developed  recommendations and  pro- 
cedures  for  expanded  exchange  of  information  in   space  biology  and  
medicine.”  Recommendations would  be  forwarded  to  Dr.  George  M. 
Low,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  and   to  Soviet Academy  of  Sciences 
President  Mstislav  V.  Keldysh.  (NASA  Release  71-204) 
October  12:  Training  mockups  of  two   Skylab  spacecraft  components- 
Orbital Workshop  and  Apollo  Telescope Mount-arrived 
a t  MSC  aboard 
NASA  barge Orion  from  MSFC.  Shipment also  included multiple docking 
adapter  exterior  shell  and   portion  of  airlock  module  mockup.  Trainers 
and   hardware  would  be  used  by  MSC  for  tra in ing   prospective  Skylab 
crewmen  for  missions  scheduled  to  begin  in   early  1973.  (NASA  Release 
71-187;  MSC PIO)  
*  USAF  grounded  18 more  C-5  cargo  a ircraf t   a s   result  of  Sept.  29  incident 
a t  Altus  AFB,  Okla.,  in  which  C-5 
lost  engine  and  pylon  mounting  a t  
s ta r t  of  takeoff.  Action  removed  entire  fleet  of  47  aircraft  from  service. 
(AP,  B  Sun,  10/13/71,  A19) 
*  Washington Post  editorial  commented  on  Senate’s  Oct. 6 passage  of  $21- 
billion  military  procurement  bill:  “The  new  B-1  manned  strategic 
bomber,  the  F-14  Navy  fighter  plane,  the ABM,  the  main  battle  tank  or 
XM803-these  were among  the  controversial  items  that  easily  survived 
attempts  a t   elimination  o r   modification  by  amendment.”  What  had  
recently  been  billed  as  “the  issue  for  the  seventies,  a  great debate  over 
priorities  and  defense spending”  had  “gone  the  way  of  the  hula  hoop. 
On  the  par t   of  a  number  of  senators  who  jus t   a  few  years  back  had  
made  a  loud  and  dramatic  commitment  to  the  issue,  interest  was  low, 
absenteeism high,  and  preparation  for  debate pitiful.  Sen. Proxmire  and 
those  others  who  carried  the  main  burden  deserved much  better  from 
their  colleagues.”  ( W  Post,  10/12/71,  A18) 
October  13: U.S.S.R.  launched  eight  Cosmos  satellites  from  Plesetsk  into 
near  circular  orb i ts   with  single  booster.  Tass  reported  Oct.  14  tha t  
equipment w a s   functioning normally. Orbital parameters  were: 
Cosmos  444,  1510-km  (938.3-mi)  apogee,  1323-km  (822.1-mi) 
perigee,  114.1-min  period,  and   74’ 
inclination. 
Cosmos  445,  1513-km  (940.1-mi)  apogee,  1352-km  (840.1-mi) 
perigee,  114.4-min  period,  and   74O  inclination. 
Cosmos  446,  1513-km  (940.1-mi)  apogee,  1383-km  (859.4-mi) 
perigee,  114.8-min  period,  and   74’ 
inclination. 
Cosmos  447,  1516-km  (942-mi)  apogee,  1412-km  (877.4-mi) 
perigee,  115.1-min  period,  and  74’ 
inclination. 
Cosmos  448,  1518-km  (943.2-mi)  apogee,  1442-km  (896-mi) 
perigee,  115.5-min  period,  and   74’ 
inclination. 
Cosmos  449, 1542-km  (958.2-mi)  apogee,  1485-km  (922.7-mi) 
perigee,  116.2-min  period,  and   74’ 
inclination. 
Cosmos  450, 1531-km  (951.3-km)  apogee,  1464-km  (909.7-mi) 
perigee,  115.9-min  period,  and  74O  inclination. 
Cosmos  451,  1575-km  (978.7-mi)  apogee,  1490-km  (925.8-mi) 

284 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

October 13 

October 12 : Training  models of  Skylab's  Orbital  Workshop and  Apollo  Telescope Mount 
arrived  a t   the  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  from   fabrication  at  the   Marshall  Space  Flight 
Center.  They   would  be  used  f o r   training  crewmen  f o r   the   1973  mission,  planned  to 
include  three  separate  crews  o f   three  astronauts  each-the 
f i r s t   crew  to   stay  f o r  
28  days  and  the  nex t   two  f o r  56 duys each.  T h e  overhead  view  above shows  crew  quarters 
in  the  1-g   trainer  model  of 
the   Workshop.  A t   the   top  i s   the  general  control  and 
working  area  w i th   several  experiments.  A t   the   right  i s   the  wardroom,  where  crewmen 
would  prepare  and  eat  food  and  spend  leisure  time.  At  the   Cower  center  i.s 
the  waste 
management  compartment,  or  "space  bathroom."  At  the   l e f t   i s   the   sleep  compartment. 

inclination.  ( GSFC SSR,  10/31/71; 
perigee,  116.6-min period,  and   74' 
10/14/71,  L1 ;   SF ,  4/72,  132)  
FBIS-SOV-199-3, 
NASA  launched  series  of  three  sounding  rockets  from  White  Sands Missile 
Range,  New  Mexico.  Nike-Cajun  carried  ion   mass  spectrometer, x-ray 
detector,  ion probe, Faraday  rotation counter, magnetometer, accelerom- 
eter,  solar  aspect sensor,  telemetry,  and   tone-ranging system to  perform 
D-region  ion  composition  studies  under  subsonic  conditions.  Payload 
attained  80.8  km  (50.2  mi)  and  was  recovered  in  good  condition. 
Second Nike-Cajun  carried  similar instrumentation for  same purpose. 
Subsonic portion  of  flight  near  apogee provided principal  da ta ;   payload 
reached  80.8  km  (50.2 m i )   and   was  recovered  in  good  condition. 
Boosted  Arcas  I1  carried  electrometer,  magnetometer,  solar  aspect 
sensor,  telemetry,  and   tone-ranging  system  to  measure  ion  mobility  a t  
.  285 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
October 13 
altitudes  from  65   to  10  km  (40 to  6  m i ) ,   using  parachute-supported 
instrumentation  package.  Payload  reached  63.1-km  (39.2-mi)  and   was 
recovered in  good  condition.  (NASA  Rpts  SRL) 
Completion  of  NASA-US. Dept  of  Agriculture  experiment  to  gather  infor- 
mation  on  southern  corn  leaf  blight  from  a ircraf t   was  announced  by 
MSC.  Data  were  being  analyzed  but  preliminary  results  showed  blight 
could be  detected  and  its progress monitored by  sensor-bearing aircraft. 
Although southern  corn  leaf  blight  had  not  been  as severe as projected, 
its  widespread  presence  had  provided  “unique  opportunity  to  assess 
remote  sensing  as  a  tool  for  large-scale  crop  surveys.”  NASA  and   USDA 
were  analyzing  experiment  data  to  determine  usefulness  of  crop 
infestation  surveys  and   application  of  surveys  to   other  agricultural 
needs.  Results  of  analysis  would  be  announced  within  few  months. 
(MSC   Release  71-78) 
President Josip  Broz  Tito  of  Yugoslavia  and  Mrs.  Tito  visited  MSC dur ing  
state visit  to  U.S.  They  were  shown ApoZZo  9  C M ,  Mercury  and  Gemini 
spacecraft,  and  LM  test  article.  The  Titos  visited  Mission  Control  and 
saw  demonstration  of  spacesuit  and   Apollo  15  films.  Center  presented 
Tito  with  framed  and   autographed photo  of  earth  as  seen  from  moon’s 
vicinity  by  ApoZZo  8  astronauts.  (MSC  PAO )  
*  MSFC  announced  award  of  $1 197 000 incentive  contract  to  American 
Science  and  Engineering,  Inc.,  for   support  services  in   Skylab  ATM 
project.  Contract would  run  from Aug.  22,1971,  through  June 30,1972. 
( MSFC  Release  71-176) 
Sen.  Edward  M.  Kennedy  (&Mass.) 
introduced  amendment  to   S.  32, 
Conversion Research, Education and  Assistance Act  of  1971, to establish 
New  Cities  Research  and  Experimentation  Administration.  Agency 
(CRY   10/13/71, 
would  employ  defense  and  aerospace  personnel. 
S16259-63) 
Secretary  of  Defense  Melvin  R.  Laird  told  Washington, D.C.,  press  con- 
ference  that  Soviet  buildup  of  land-  and  sea-based missiles  was  “far 
outdistancing”  estimates  he  had  offered  to  Congress  seven  months  pre- 
viously.  He  confirmed  report  that  U.S.S.R.  was  expected  to  match 
U.S.  strength  by  deploying 41  Polaris-class missile  submarines by  1973. 
(Beecher, NYT,  10 /14 /71 ,5 )  
Adm.  Arthur  W.  Radford  (USN ,   Ret.)  in  letter  to  the  editor,  published 
by  Washington Post,  defended  USN  F-14  fighter  aircraft  against  sug- 
gestion  by  Post  Sept.  29  that  $800 million  in   funds  for  F-14  be  elimi- 
nated  from  military  budget:  ‘9n  conjunction  with  the  full  spectrum 
of  conventional naval  weapons  and  sensors,  the  design  capabilities  of 
the  F-14  a r e   credible  and  responsible  to  the  perceived  threat  for  the 
decade  ahead.  As  in  the  case  of  the  F 4 ,  which  has  now  reached  the 
end  of  its  growth  potential  against  a  constantly  upgraded  Soviet  tech- 
nology,  the  F-14  is  conceived  as  an  aircraft  to  be  used  for  more  than 
a  decade  into  the  future-it, 
too,  will  be  capable  of  substantial  per- 
formance  improvement  as  the  threat  changes  and  as  technology  is 
advanced.” 
Washington Post  responded  to  letter  with  editorial  comment:  ‘ L .   . . 
there  is  a  school  of  thought  which  holds  that  the  heavily  and  expen- 
sively  defended  [aircraft]  carrier  can  be  rendered  inoperable  by 
comparatively  simple  Soviet  weapons  and  thus  is  inadequate  to  the 
kind  of  US.-Soviet  conflict  that  is  presupposed  by  the  design  of  the 

2 8 6 .  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

October  13 

[carrier-based]  F-14. 
I t   is  this  view  which  we  find  persuasive  and 
which  therefore gives  us  pause  concerning the  usefulness  of  the  F-14.” 
(W Post,  10/13/71,  A18, A19) 
October  1 4 :   USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  into  orb i t   from  Vanden- 
berg  AFB  by  Thor-Burner  I1  booster.  Satellite  achieved  878.7-km 
(546-mi)  apogee,  795.0-km  (494-mi)  perigee,  101.6-min  period,  and 
98.9’  inclination.  (P ie s  Rpt  72 ;   SF7 4/72,  132)  
launched  Cosmos  45.2  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  280-km 
U.S.S.R. 
(174-mi)  apogee,  175-km  (108.7-mi)  perigee,  89-min  period,  and 
64.9”  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Oct.  27.  (GSFC S SR ,   10/31/71; 
SF ,  4 /72 ,132 )  
0  NASA  successfully  completed  17th  and  18th flights of  TF-SA  aircraft  with 
supercritical  wing,  flown  from  FRC  by  NASA  test  pilots  Thomas  C. 
McMurtry  and  Garry  Krier,  and  announced  results  in  accelerated 
program  to  evaluate  TF-SA  performance  in   advance  of  adverse  land- 
ing   conditions.  All  flight  objectives  had  been  achieved  in  series  to 
expand  flight  envelope  to  higher  dynamic  pressures,  obtain  pressure 
distribution  and  performance  data  a t   higher  dynamic  pressure,  evalu- 
ate  unaugmented  stability  and   control  characteristics,  and  investigate 
buffet  boundary  for  trim  flight  a t   mach  0.99  design  conditions  a t  
1 4 0 0 0   m  (46000   f t ) .   Pressure  distribution  and  performance  data 
had  been  obtained  over  mach  0.80  to  1.00  a t   altitudes  to  1 4 0 0 0  m. 
Unaugmented  stability  and   control  characteristics  had  been  evaluated 
from mach  0.70  to  0.99  at  10 700 m  (35  000  f t )  . Buffeting  had  neared 
that  predicted  from  wind-tunnel  tests  and  buffet  boundary  had  been 
penetrated  to  22”   attack  angle.  Buffeting  had  been  “intense  but  not 
severe.”  (NA SA   Proj Off) 
FAA  award  of  $229 746  planning  grant-offer  to  New  Jersey  Dept.  of 
Transportation  for  master  plan  of  V/STOLport 
to  serve  New  York 
metropolitan  and  northern  New  Jersey  areas  was  announced  by  FAA 
Administrator  John  H.  Shaffer.  (FAA   Release  71-168) 
*  Plans  for  establishment  of  International  Institute  of  Applied  Systems 
Analysis  by  US.,  U.S.S.R.,  U.K.,  France,  Italy,  Poland,  and  East  and 
West  Germany were  described in  New   York   Times by Walter  Sullivan: 
Project,  “fruit  of  four  years  of  private  Soviet-American negotiations” 
had  culminated  in  eight-nation  conference in   Paris.  Prominent  among 
principals  had  been  NAS  President,  Dr.  Philip  Handler,  and  Dzherman 
M.  Gvishiani,  Soviet  specialist  in   American  management  techniques. 
( N Y T ,  10/14/71,  1)  
Assembly  of  solar  radio  telescope  10 m  (33   f t )   in   diameter  was  nearing 
completion  at  Baldone,  Latvia,  Riga  Sovetskaya  Latviya  reported. 
Parabolic  antenna  would  enable  Latvian  Academy  of  Sciences  Radio- 
radiowaves.  ( F B I S - ~ O V - ~ ~ ,  10/22/71,  u) 
astrophysical  Observatory  scientists  to  study  all  fluctuations  of  sun’s 
Wall Street  Journal editorial  commented  on  KSC economy  drive:  “One  of 
the  first  things  that  occurs  to  householders  when  a  money  pinch  comes 
is  to  tu rn   off  all  the  unneeded  lights  to  save  money  on  electricity.” 
This  had  occurred  to  KSC  officials  who  “came  up  with  a  real  enough 
saving,  a n   estimated  $75000   a  year.”  KSC parking  lots  and   some 
buildings were  “a  little  dimmer  but  everything  continues to  function.” 
( W S I ,  10/14/71) 

287 

October 15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
October  15:  March  7  discovery  of  water  vapor  on  moon  by  two  suprather- 
mal  ion  detectors  left  on  lunar  surface  by  Apollo  12 and  14 astronauts 
was  announced  by  Rice  Univ.  scientists  Dr.  John  W.  Freeman  and  
Dr.  H .   Kent  Hills.  Water  bursts  had  been  found  14  min  apar t   at  two 
lunar  sites  just  after  seismometers  a t   sites  had  picked  up  swarm  of 
moonquakes.  Dr.  Freeman  said  in  Houston,  “I  think  this  proves  that 
the  moon  is  still  actively  quaking  and   venting  gas  and  also  indicates 
there  is  a  good  possibility  of  liquid  water  somewhere  on  the  moon.” 
He  said  bursts  were  best  described as  “geysers,”  but  cautioned  against 
likening  them  to  geysers  on  earth.  Later,  Washington  Post  reported 
that  Apollo  engineers  had  said  water  could  have  come  from  burst  tank 
on  descent  stage  of  Apo l lo   12  LM  or  from  backpacks  of  Apallo  12 
crew.  (O‘Toole, W Pos t ,   10/16/71,  A l ;  Reuters, B Sun,  10/16/71,  A3) 
Sky lab   airlock  trainer  was  flown  from  McDonnell  Douglas  Astronautics 
Co.  in   St.  Louis,  Mo.,  to  MSC  aboard  NASA  Super  Guppy  aircraft. 
(NASA   Release  71-187  ; MSC  P I O )  
Skylab astronauts  would  begin  extravehicular  tra in ing  in   pressurized suits 
in  MSFC   Neutral  Buoyancy  Space  Simulator  later  in  year.  Mockups  of 
Skylab  space  laboratory  modules  had  been  submerged  in  water  tank 
12 m  (40   f t )   deep  and   23 m  (75  f t )   wide,  which  simulated weightless- 
ness  of  space environment.  (NASA   Release  71-205) 
Univ.  of  Florida  was  using  KSC  particle  measurement  computer  system 
to  analyze  upper-air  samples  taken  by  aircraft  a t   various  altitudes, 
NASA   Activities  reported.  System  was  only  one  of  its  kind  in  Florida. 
( N A S A  Ac t iv i t ies ,  10/15/72,  169 )  
Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.  demonstrated  $500 000  Turbo-Mallard  am- 
phibious  aircraft  in  Potomac  River  for  DOT  and  CAB   ofiicials. Ten-seat, 
20-m  (66-ft)  aircraft  cruised  a t   355  km  per  h r   (220  mph)   and  could 
land  on  ground  or  in   water  as  shallow  as  1.5  m  ( 5  f t )   and  a t   least 
3000  m  (1000  f t )   long.  Grumman  had  $50000   contract  with  City 
of  New  York  for  feasibility  study  of  water  landings  and  takeoffs. 
(Levey, W  Post,  10/16/71,  B3 j 
NSF  published  Enrollment  Increase  in Science  and  Mathematics  in   Pu.blic 
Secondary  Schools,  1948-49  to 1969-70 (NSF   71-30).  Total  in  1969-70 
was  more  than  2.5  times  larger   than  total  enrolled  in   1948-49.  Largest 
relative  increases  were  reported  for  enrollments  in   psychology,  eco- 
nomics,  and  biology.  ( NSF  Highlights,  10/15/71) 
October  16: Sleeping bag,  handgun,  photos,  and  papers  carried  by  aviator 
Wiley  Post  on  flight  on  which  he  lost  his  life  Aug.  15,  1935, had  been 
donated  to  State  of  Oklahoma  for  display  by  historical  society,  AP  
reported.  Post  was  killed  with  comedian  Will  Rogers  when  aircraft 
engine  failed  after  takeoff  from  Pt.  Barrow,  Alaska,  on  sector  of  con- 
templated  flight  to  Siberia.  ( N Y T ,  10/17/71,  32 )  
Lasers  were  finding  increased  applications  in   defense  technology,  New 
York  Times  article  reported.  Weapon  scientists  were  “clearly  excited 
over  its  possibilities  as  a  deadly offensive  weapon  against  nuclear  mis- 
siles  and   aircraft.”  AEC   and  DOD  spokesmen  had  conceded  that  laser 
programs  were  underway  but  had  said  national  security  barred  dis- 
cussion  of  subject.  DOD  had  said  lasers  had  been  used  in  new  rang- 
finding  devices  and  in  medical  research  and   that,  while  it  was  pri- 
marily  USAF  program,  “some”  Army  research  was  also  going  on. 
(Ripley, N Y T ,  10 /16 /71 ,15)  

288 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
October  17 
October  17: USAF  launched  Sesp  1971-2  Space  Experiments  Support  Pro- 
gram  satellite  from Vandenberg  AFB  by  Thorad-Agena booster.  Orbital 
parameters:  801.5-km  (498-mi)  apogee,  774.1-km  (481-mi)  perigee, 
100.5-min  period,  and   92.7O  inclination.  Objectives  of  mission  were 
to  test  advanced  development  payloads-including  celestial  mapping 
IR scanner,  1500-w  flexible  roll-up  solar  cell  array ,   secure  command 
and  control  system,  and   energetic  particles  experiment.  (Pres   Rpt  72 ;  
SBD,  10/19/71,174) 
*  Eyewitness  to   Space  by  H.  Lester  Cooke  with  James  H.  Dean,  published 
by  Harry   N.  Abrams,  Inc.,  was  reviewed  by  Frank  Getlein  in  Wash- 
ington  Evening  Star.  Book  contained  more  than  250  paintings  and  
drawings  by  artists  in  NASA  ar t is t   program.  “What  they  have  created 
is  an  extraordinary  record  . . . because  i t   records  more  than  the  eye, 
even  the  trained  eye,  can  see.  The  sketches and  many  of  the  paintings 
do  indeed  record  what  any  eye  can  see,  bu t   the  seeing  is  special. 
Beyond  that,  artist  after  artist  a t   some  point  found  himself  pushed 
by  the  material  itself  into  taking  an   abstract,  symbolic  view  of  the 
space  flights  themselves,  painting  a  vision,  not  a  view.”  NASA  artists 
program,  “one  of  the  most  remarkable  ventures  in   art-government 
relations,”  had  brought  hundreds  of  artists  to  NASA  facilities  to 
paint  or  draw  what  they  saw  and   they  were  to  see  whatever  they 
wanted  and  depict  it  in   whatever  manner  suited  their  perceptions.” 
Only  requirement  was  that  all  work  was  to  be  turned  over  to  NASA, 
which  had  given  i t   to  National  Gallery.  Coauthor  Cooke  was  National 
Gallery  Curator  of  Painting.  I t   was  “hard  to  think  of  anything  in 
a r t   history  tha t   quite  compares  with  the  NASA  program.”  Getlein  re- 
called  Italian  TV  coverage  of  first  moon  walk.  “One  big  response  to 
the  event  was  to  convene  gatherings  of  famous Italians-non-scientists 
studios  . . . and  have  them  talk  about  the  moon.  But  at  many 
all-in 
points  in  the  protracted  coverage,  against  a  background  of  Beetho- 
ven,  a  beautiful  Tuscan  voice  read  Dante.”  Qualities  evoked  by  this 
“odd  response,  but  a n   oddly  perfect  one,”  were  “precisely  those  that 
have  eluded  American  television  coverage of  the  space  program.  They 
are   qualities  that  this  book  reaches  for  constantly  and  often  attains.” 
(W  Star,  10/17/71,  B5) 
October  18: Hear t   problems  encountered  by  Apolto  15 astronauts  neces- 
sitated  changes  in  diet  and   exercise  regimen  for   Apollo  16  astronauts, 
Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  NASA  Director  of  Life  Sciences,  said  in   speech 
before  annual  clinical  meeting  of  American  College  of  Surgeons  i n  
Atlantic  City,  N.J.  AI1  three  ApolEo  15  astronauts  had  experienced 
drops  in   potassium  levels  dur ing   July  26-Aug.  7  mission.  Astronaut 
James  B.  Irwin  had  developed  cardiac  arrhythmia  (irregular  heart- 
beat)  for  one minute  after  he  returned  to  CM  from   lunar  surface  and  
ventricular  contractions  (premature  heartbeats)  for  following  hour. 
Astronaut  David  R.  Scott  also  had  developed  cardiac  contractions 
dur ing   mission.  Because  of  findings,  first  Apollo  16  EVA  would  be 
shortened,  astronauts  would  rest  full  eight  hours  between  moonwalks, 
and  more  potassium  would  be  added  to  Apollo  16  diet.  (McGehan, 
B Sun, 10/19/71,  A5) 
Scientists  and   engineers  a t   MIT described  planned  Apollo  17   surface 
electrical  properties  experiment  to  probe  for  water  on moon,  in  tele- 
phone  interview  with  New  York  T ime s .   Experiment  consisted  of  68-  

289 

October 18 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

kg  (15-lb)  rad io   transmitter  with  four  35-m  (115-ft)  lengths  of  wire 
which  astronaut  was  to  unreel  on  lunar  surface  in  X  pattern  as  an-  
tenna.  Radio  signals  a t   varying  frequencies  would  be  beamed  into 
lunar  surface.  Small  receiver  on  LRV  would  receive  signals  bounced 
back  from  beneath  lunar   surface  and  signals  would  be  recorded  by 
tape  recorder  on  LRV.  Pattern,  timing,  and  strength  of  reflected  signals 
were  expected  to  indicate  presence  of  water,  i f   any,  and  kind  of 
material  in   lunar   subsurface.  Times  said  experiment’s  importance  had 
been  heightened by  Oct.  15 announcement of  discovery of  water vapor 
on moon.  (Wilford, JVYT,  10 /19 /71 ,29)  
NASA  board   investigating  Jan.  23  helicopter  crash   in   Indian  River  near 
rtsc-in  which  pilot,  Astronaut  Eugene  A.  Cernan,  escaped  injury- 
had  named  misjudgment  in   estimating  altitude  as  primary  cause, 
NASA  announced.  Mitigating  factors  were  lack  of  familiar  objects  on 
Indian  River  surface  to  help  pilot  judge  altitude,  possible  visual 
focusing on  false  water  surface  because  of  water’s  smoothness,  change 
in   sun  reflection  on  water  caused  by  change  in   course,  and  possi- 
bility  that  Cernan’s  experience  with  high-speed  a ircraf t   might  have 
contributed  to  altitude  misjudgment  in  slower  craft.  Board  said  Cer- 
nan’s  survival  training  as  astronaut  and   naval  aviator  was  ma jor  
factor  in   h is   escape  from  submerged  wreckage  and  burning  fuel. 
(NASA  Release 71-206) 
NASA  announced  receipt  of  three  proposals  for   design  and  fabrication  of 
two  experimental,  transport,  STOL  research  aircraft  with  propulsive 
lift-from  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.,  from  Boeing  Co.  with  Grum- 
man  Corp.,  and  from  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  with  North  American 
Rockwell  Corp.,  Bell  Aerospace Co.  Div  of  Textron,  Inc.,  and  Cornel1 
Aeronautical  Laboratories,  Ine.  Aircraft  would  provide  data  and 
experience  for  developing  environmentally  acceptable,  economical, 
and  safe  fan-jet  STOL  transport  systems  in  joint  NASA-DOT-FAA-USAF 
program  to  relieve  noise  and  congestion  a t   busy  airports. 
(NASA 
Release 7 1-207  ) 
President  Nixon  announced  appointment  of  Coleman  duPont  Donaldson 
as  member  of  Air  Quality  Advisory  Board  to  succeed  William  0. 
Doub,  who  was  appointed  AEC   member  Aug.  10.  Donaldson,  President 
of  Aeronautical  Research  Assn.  of  Princeton,  Inc.,  had  been  head  of 
aerophysics  section  of  NACA  Gas  Dynamics  Laboratory.  He  had 
worked  recently  on  development  of  techniques  for  computing  dis- 
persal  of  chemically  reacting  pollutants  in  atmosphere  and  genera- 
tion  of  turbulence.  Work  had  been  supported  by  NASA  and  Environ- 
mental Protection Agency.  ( P D ,  10 /25 /71 ,1426)  
NASA  wished  protocol  officials  who  scheduled  President  Nixon’s  t r ip   to 
Moscow  for   May  could  be  assigned  to   handle  space cooperation  talks 
as  well,  Av ia t ion   Week  &  Space  Technology  said.  Magazine  quoted 
NASA  official  as  saying,  “Anyone  who  would  schedule the  summer  ses- 
sion  for  Houston  and  the  winter  session  fo r   Moscow  just  can’t  be 
serious about an  agreement.”  ( A v  W k ,  10/18/71,11) 
USAF  Space  and  Missile  Systems  Organization planned  conceptual  design 
study  by  industry  of  spaceborne  system  for   tracking  Soviet  satellites 
a t   altitudes  beyond  480-km  (300-mi)  range  of  existing  ground-based 
Spacetrack  system,  Av ia t ion   Week  &  Space  Technology  reported. 

290 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

October 18 

Fivemonth  study  was  expected  to  begin  in  1972, magazine  said.  ( A v  
W k ,  10 /18 /71 ,9)  
U S .   technological  society  was  product  of  past  R&D  efforts,  President 
Charles  A.  Anderson  of  Stanford  Research  Institute  said  in  Aviation 
Week   &  Space  Technology  editorial.  Current  assault  on  U S .   leader- 
ship  in  science  and  technology  was  “both  external  and  internal.” 
Western  Europe,  Japan,  and   U.S.S.R.  were  progressing  in   areas  tra-  
ditionally  controlled  by  U S .   “In  radio  astronomy,  high  energy 
physics  and   conventional energy  research  we  have  already  been  su r -  
passed.  Internally,  a  new  national  distaste  for  science and   technology  is 
undermining  the  national  research  and   development  effort.”  ( A v   W k ,  
10 /18 /71 ,7)  
October  18-21:   Lunar   Science  Institute  held  conference  on  lunar  geo- 
physics  a t   MSC .   Scientists  said  new  evidence  from  Apollo  15  heat 
flow  experiment  indicated  moon  was  hotter  than  expected  and  might 
account  for   melting  temperatures  within  moon  and   volcanic  activity 
on   lunar  surface.  Thermometers placed  in  two  holes  near  Hadley  Rille 
had  shown  that  amount  of  heat  from   moon  was  one  half  tha t   of  heat 
measured  from  earth.  Since moon  was  one  four th   earth’s  size,  relative 
abundance  of  radioactive  isotopes  which  generated  heat  within  planet 
might  be  greater  in  moon  than  in   earth.  Lunar  scientists  also  were 
puzzled  by  area  across  Sea  of  Rains  and  Ocean  of  Storms  several 
times  more  radioactive  than  rest  of  moon.  Dr.  James  R.  Arnold  of 
Univ.  of  California  a t   San  Diego  said,  “ I t   is  not  obvious why  a  whole 
geographic  area  on  the  moon  would  be  different.” 
Dr.  John  W.  Freeman,  Jr.,  of  Rice  Univ.  referred  to  results  of 
Apollo  12  and  14  suprathermal  ion  detector  experiments  that  had 
discovered  water  vapor  on  moon  [see  Oct.  151. Dr.  Gary  V.  Latham, 
Apollo  program  chief  seismic  investigator,  said  neither  he  nor   Dr. 
Freeman  could  locate  source  of  tiny  moonquakes  tha t   released  gas 
from  beneath  lunar   surface,  including  water  vapor  seen  March  7. 
Dr.  Latham  described  sudden  and  large  surge  from  lunar  surface 
detected  by  seismometer  in   April  during  series  of  moonquake  swarms. 
Though  he  knew  of  no  volcano  on  moon,  he  compared  event-largest 
moonquake  yet  recorded-to 
volcanic  activity  on  earth.  ( MSC   Release 
72-77;  Maloney,  H  Pos t ,   10/19/71;  Brett,  W  Pos t ,   10/21/71,  F2 )  
October  18-29:   Team  of  10  NASA  officials  attended  Oct.  18  ELDO  Sympo- 
sium  on  space  shuttle  technologies  in   Paris.  Officials  then  divided 
into  four   working  groups  and   visited  industries  in  France,  Italy, 
Germany,  U.K.,  the  Netherlands,  and  Belgium  to  review  ELDO-SpOn- 
sored  space  shuttle  research  and  European  technological  capabilities. 
Team  including  Adelbert  0.  Tischler,  Chief  of  Shuttle  Technologies, 
OART ; william  A.  Summerfelt,  Engineering  Director,  Space  Shuttle 
Program  Office,  OMSF;   and   James  J .   Gangler,  Materials Branch  Chief, 
Materials  and   Structures  Div.,  OART. (NASA  Release  71-209) 
October  1 9 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  453  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with 
492-km  (305.7-mi)  apogee,  270-km  (167.8-mi)  perigee,  92.1-min 
inclination.  SatelIite  reentered  March  19,  1972. 
period,  and   70.9’ 
(GSFC  SSR,  10/31/71;  3/31/72;  SBD,  12/26/71,  195 )  
*  Saturn  IB  1st  stage  f o r  first  manned  Skylab  launch  vehicle  was  removed 
from   environmentally  controlled  enclosure  a t   Michoud  Assembly 
Facility  a f te r   three-year  hibernation.  Booster,  one  of  nine  IB  stages 

291 

October 19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

stored  there  in  December  1968,  would  begin  10-mo  refurbishment 
program  in  preparation  for  spring  1973  launch.  (MSFC Release  71- 
183)  
*  Development  of  surgical  implement  to  simplify  cataract  removal  with 
high-frequency  vibration  and  pump  to  liquify  and  remove  cataract 
and   lens  material  was  announced  by  LeRC.  Hand-held  instrument- 
developed  by  four-man  L ~ R C  team  in  cooperative  program  with  Dr. 
William  J.  McGannon,  prominent  Cleveland  eye  surgeon-had 
been 
successfully  tested  on  animals. NASA  was  seeking patent  on  instrument, 
which  would  reduce  cataract  operation  time  and  patient’s  convales- 
cent  period  by  minimizing  stitching  problem  in   most  cases.  Instru- 
ment made  only  small  puncture.  (NASA   Release  71-203) 
Sen.  Howard  W.  Cannon  (D-Nev.),  in  letter  to  President  Nixon,  a p  
pealed  fo r   inclusion  of  NERVA  funding  in  FY  1973 budget:  “I t   seems 
to me  . . . that  this  program  continues to  offer  the  nation’s  best  chance 
to  take  the  next  logical  step  forward  in  space, .and   that  the  already 
staggering  $1.4  billion  investment  in   succesful  R&D  would  make  con- 
tinuation  of 
the  program  not  only  desirable  but  mandatory,  since 
we  a re   so  close  to   a  flyable  engine.”  As  senior  member  of  Senate 
Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences,  Sen.  Cannon  was 
“greatly  disturbed  that  the  space  program  in  recent  years  has  been 
progressively  cut  back.”  If  US. space  program  was  to  continue  “the 
NERVA  funding  issue  is  terribly  important.  . . . i f   we   are  to  cast  aside 
our  earlier  desire  to  go  forward  in  space  and   subject  our  investment 
to  a  less-than-starvation  funding  level,  we  are   only  deceiving  our- 
selves.  I  believe  that  ra ther   than  merely  giving  lip  service  to  space, 
we  ought  to  consider  a  total  restructuring  o r   delegation  of  NASA’s role 
to  the military.”  (Text) 
FCC  ordered  AT&T  to  activate  transatlantic  cable  and   satellite  circuits  on 
one-to-one ratio.  Order  reversed  decision  made  in  May  to  set  ratio  a t  
five-to-one in  favor  of  satellites.  FCC  said  it  had  received  “strong  rep- 
resentations”  protesting  five-to-one ratio  from  European  countries  that 
had  50%   ownership  in  cables  but  less  than  30%  ownership  in  satel- 
lites.  (I7 Po s t ,   10/20/71,  C10) 
Aerobee  170 sounding  rocket  was  launched by  NASA  from  WSMR  carrying 
GSFC  payload  on  test  and  support  mission.  Rocket  and   instruments 
functioned satisfactorily.  (SR list) 
President  Nixon  announced  25  appointments  to  new  National  Advisory 
Committee  on  Oceans  and  Atmosphere  and   designation  of  Dr.  William 
A.  Nierenberg,  Director  of  Scripps  Institution  of  Oceanography,  and  
Dr.  William  J.  Hargis,  Jr.,  Director  of  Virginia  Institute  of  Marine 
Science,  a s   Chairman  and   Vice  Chairman.  ( P D ,   10/25/71,  1429) 
ICSC  announced  award  of  $99 189, 24-mo  contract  to   Univ.  of  Florida  for  
research  and  preparation  of  narrative  history  of  ICSC  Apollo  launch 
facilities  and   operations.  Contract  included  option  to  extend  fo r   six 
months.  (KSC   Release 24t5-71) 
ComSatCorp  had  requested  permission  to  build  two  antennas  29.5  m 
(97   f t )   in  diameter  a s   backup  systems  for   its  comsat  stations  in  
Andover,  Me.,  and  Etam,  W.  Va.,  Washington  Evening  Star  reported. 
(W  S tar ,   10/19/71,  A14) 
Former  astronaut  M.  Scott  Carpenter,  who  had  also  been  aquanaut  in  
USN’s  Sealab  Project,  testified  before  Senate  Committee  on  Com- 

292 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

October 19  

merce’s  Subcommittee on  Oceans  and  Atmosphere.  Carpenter,  presi- 
xplore  ocean  floor  if  he 
dent  of  Sea  Sciences  Corp.,  sa id   man 
is  to  understand  it,  just  as  he   had  to 
lunar  surface  to  under- 
stand  it.  Subcommittee was examining ocean  pollution.  (CR,  10/18/71, 
D1039;  Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/19/71,  A l )  
New   Yo r k   Times  editorial  commented  on  discovery  of  water  on  lunar 
surface  [see  Oct.  151:  “The  possibility  that  the  water  vapor  that  has  
now  been  detected  on  the  moon  was  originally  brought  there  by 
Apollo  astronauts  cannot  yet  be  dismissed.  Nevertheless,  even  before 
Drs.  Freeman  and  Hills  announced  their  finding  i t   was  becoming 
increasingly  clear  that  the  moon  is  a  much  more  complex  body  than 
had  been  supposed.  We  are   still  in   the very  infancy  of  the  era  of  moon 
exploration,  and  its  development  f o r   the  benefit  of  the  human  race.” 
(NYT,  10 /19 /71 ,40 )  
October  20 :   Apollo  16   preliminary  timeline  was  announced  by  NASA. 
Launch  was  scheduled  for  1:03 pm  EST  March  17 ,   1972.  Translunar 
insertion  would  occur  at  3:40  pm.  Lunar  landing  w a s   planned  for 
5:25  pm  March  21,  with  EVA  to  start  at  9:18  pm.  Second  EVA  was 
scheduled  for  7:48  pm  March  22,  and   th ird   for  7 :13   pm  March  23. 
LM  would  leave  moon  a t   6:23  pm  March  24  and   ear th   landing  was 
scheduled  for  4:14  pm  March  29.  (NASA   Release  71-211) 
Flight  path  of  Mariner  9,  en  route  to  Mars,  was  reported  sufficiently 
precise  f o r   orbital  insertion  without  Scheduled  second  midcourse  cor- 
rection.  Next  critical  event  for  Mariner  9  would  be  Mars  orbit  inser- 
tion  Nov.  13, when  spacecraft  would  begin  to  collect  atmospheric  and 
surface data  and  map  70%  of  Martian  surface  dur ing  90  days  in   orbit. 
At  9:OO  am EDT,  after  14t2.43 days in   flight, Mariner  9 was 88 847 850 
km  (55  207 500 m i )   from earth.  Spacecraft was  traveling  a t  59 220  km 
per  h r   (36 800 mph)  relative  to  ear th   and  had  traveled  total  distance 
of  more  than  349 452  100 km  (217 139 500  m i)   since May  30  launch. 
(NASA   P ro j  Of€) 
NASA  and  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  had  agreed  to  rapid  exchange  of 
findings  on  Mars  from  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  probes  nearing  that  planet, 
NASA  announced.  Recommendations of  Joint  Working  Groups  of  U.S. 
and  Soviet scientists who  met  in  Moscow  Aug.  2 - 6   to  negotiate  agree- 
ment  on  jo in t   projects  and   exchanges  in   space  research  and   applica- 
tions  had  all  been  approved.  Included  was  telegraphic  exchange  of 
findings  of  special  interest  by  NASA’s Mariner 9  (launched  May  30 )  
and  Soviet Mars  2  (launched May  19 )   and Mars  3 (launched May  28 ) .  
All  three  spacecraft were  scheduled  to  reach  Mars  orbit  in  November. 
NASA  and   Soviet  Academy  also  had  agreed  on  joint  seminars  to 
facilitate  analysis  of  data ; exploration  of  feasibility  of  transmitting 
magnetometer  data  from  U.S.S.R.  ground-based  observing  stations 
in   real-time  to  U S .   satellite  ATS-F 
(scheduled  for  mid-1972  launch) 
and  retransmitting  data  to  ground  with  da ta   from  onboard  mag- 
netometer ; and   bilateral  discussions  on  scientific  results,  objectives, 
and  strategy  of  planetary  exploration.  Further  agreements  were  to 
exchange  information  on  photography  from  past  and   fu ture   missions 
and  all  lunar  maps,  to  continue  exchange  of  lunar  samples,  to  con- 
duct  multipurpose  aerospace  and   field  experiments  on  environment, 
and   to  make  joint  efforts  in   remote  sensing  of  ocean.  Technical Note 
would  be  exchanged on  temperature  sounding from satellites  to  develop 

293 

October  20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

jo in t   experiment  over Western  Europe  in  1973  and  1974.  Information 
on methods o i  microwave  measurement and  of  da ta  on cloud emissivity 
would  also  be  exchanged.  Efforts  would  be  made  to  achieve similarity 
in   U S .   and  Soviet  requirements  for  ground  receiving  equipment. 
NASA  and  Soviet Academy  also had  agreed  to  research  topics  for  mete- 
orological  sounding  rocket  investigations  by  both  nations,  to  exchange 
alerts  of  stratospheric  warmings,  to  conduct  rocket  system  intercom- 
parison  tests,  and  to  present  scientific  results  in  regular  seminars  and  
symposia.  (Text;  NASA  Release 71-210) 
GAO  said  USAF  had  not  charged  ComSatCorp for  more  than  $6  million 
in  launch  service  costs  for  comsats.  Agency  blamed  $3.1  million  of 
loss  on  USAF  accounting procedures and  said  other  $3  million  was  not 
charged  because of  DOD-NASA 
agreement.  GAO  could  find  no  legal  basis 
fo r   changing  method  to  determine  costs  chargeable  to  ComSatCorp 
but  recommended  ComSatCorp  be  assessed  on  full  user-charge  basis 
for  future  launches  and   Intelsat  IV  series  that  began  in   January. 
(UPI ,   W Post,  10/21/71,  A15) 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  Chairman  Daniel J. Haughton  told  firm’s  annual 
meeting tha t   “we a re  now  on an upward track.”  He reported net  income 
for  quar ter   ended  Sept.  30  of  $2.2  million,  or  19  cents  pe r   share,  up  
from  $2  million,  o r   18  cents  per  share,  in  1970  period.  Sales  had 
climbed  from  $565  million  in   1970  to  $667  million.  Sales  for  all  of 
1971 were  estimated  at  close  to  $3  billion,  although  major  percentage 
would  be   booked  at  no  profit  because  of  Lockheed’s  settlement  with 
Government  on  G 5 A   military  transport  a ircraf t   and   Cheyenne  heli- 
copter  contracts.  Haughton  said  1972 sales  should  be  at  1970  level  of 
just  aver  $2.5  billion.  (Wright,  NYT,  10/21/71,  69) 
Sh if t   in   AEC’S  role  from  promoting  atomic  energy  to  protecting  public 
interest  in nuclear  affairs  was  announced by  Dr.  James  R.  Schlesinger, 
AEC   Chairman,  a t   annual  meeting  of  Atomic  Industrial  Forum  and 
American  Nuclear  Society  in  Bal  Harbour,  Fla.  I t   was  AEC’S  respon- 
sibility  to  “develop  new  technical  options  and  to   bring  those  options 
to  the  point  of  commercial application,”  not  to  “solve  industry’s  prob- 
lems which  may  crop  up  in   the  course of  commercial exploitation. Tha t  
is   industry’s  responsibility,  to  be settled  among industry,  Congress,  and 
the  public.”  AEC’S  role  w a s   “primarily  to  perform  a s  a  referee  serving 
the  public  interest.”  (Text) 
*  President  Nixon  submitted  to  Senate  nomination  of  Albert  C.  Hall,  Vice 
President  for  Engineering  and   Research  with  Martin  Marietta  Corp., 
to  be  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  (Administration).  Hall  would 
succeed  Robert  F.  Froehlke,  who  had  become  Secretary  of  the  Armv 
July  1.  (PD,  10/25/71,  1430,  144J;  USA  P I O )  
NASA  signed  $195 400 000  supplemental agreement  to  Apollo  LM  contract 
with  Grumman  Corp.  for  changes  to  increase  lunar   staytime,  activity 
support,  and  other  features  of  LM. (NASA  Activities,  11/15/71,  187) 
October  21 : ITOS-B 
Improved  Tiros  Operational  Satellite  failed  to  reach 
orbit  after  4:32   am  PDT  launch  by  NASA  for  NOAA   from  WTR  on  two- 
stage  long tank ,   thrust-augmented  Thor-Delta  (DSV-N-6) 
booster. 
Satellite,  weighing  306  kg  (675  Ibs),  had  been  intended  for  sun- 
synchronous orbit  to  make  regular,  dependable,  day  and  night  cloud- 
cover  observations by  both  direct  readout  and  onboard  storage. 
Flight  appeared  normal  through  Delta  first  burn.  At  start  of  last 

294 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

October 21 

period  (approximately  one  hour  coast),  pitch  and   yaw  altitude-control 
jets  began  pulsating  to  counteract  unknown  force  tending  to  tumble 
vehicle.  Pitch  and   yaw  jets  were  able  to  maintain  vehicle  in   proper 
altitude  until  gas  was  expended.  At  that  time,  unknown  force  caused 
vehicle  to  tumble.  Planned  vehicle  functions  remaining,  including 
second  Delta  burn   and   spacecraft  separation,  occurred  approximately 
on  time.  Planned  circular  orb i t   was  not  achieved  and   spacecraft  and  
Delta  2nd  stage  impacted  above Arctic  Circle.  Review board  was  being 
formed  to  investigate  Delta  2nd-stage  failure. 
ITOS-B  was  second  Tiros spacecraft  funded  by  NOAA  and   third  space- 
craft  in   ITOS  series.  First,  I tos  1 (Tiros-M), had   been  launched  Jan.  23, 
1970.  Second,  N o m   1  (ITOS-A) ,   was  launched  Dec.  11,  1970,  and  
ceased  operations  Aug.  19,  1971. Office  of  Space  Science  and   Applica- 
tions  had  overall  responsibility  for  mission,  with  Ear th   Observations 
Program  Ofice  managing  project  for  Headquarters.  Technical  and  
administrative  management  was  assigned  to  GSFC.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
Impact  of  aerospace  industry  slump  and  termination  of  lunar  excursion 
module  project  on  Grumman  Corp.  and  Long  Island,  N.Y.,  area   was 
described  by  New  Yorlc  T imes .   With  26 000  employees,  Grumman 
Corp.,  “reaches  ou t   into  every  corner  of  the  economy  of  Nassau  and  
Suffolk  Counties  and,  as  one  of  the  nation’s  largest  aerospace  com- 
bines,  even  fa r   beyond  those  two  counties  that  jointly  claim  Grumman 
as   their  own.”  Nearly  1000  subcontractors  depended  on  Grumman’s 
patronage.  F irm   was  “largest  real  estate  taxpayer  in   Nassau  County, 
the  largest  customer  for  the  Long  Island  Lighting  Company  and  hun- 
dreds  of  smaller  corporations.  And  in   salaries  for  its  employes  alone 
i t   pumps  nearly  a  th ird   of  a  billion  dollars  each  year  into  the  Long 
Island  economy.”  Grumman  figures  indicated  that  for  every  person 
laid  off,  4%  persons  somewhere  in  U.S.  economy  lost  their  jobs,  in-  
c lud ing   2%  in   Nassau  o r   Suffolk  Counties.  From  December  1969  to 
December  1970 nearly  5700 persons  a t  Grumman  had  lost  jobs;  14 250 
elsewhere  on  Long  Island  had  lost  jobs  as   result.  (Andelman,  N Y T ,  
10/21/71,45) 
*  NASA  director of  Safety  Jerome  F.  Lederer  gave  guidelines  for  noting  and  
meeting  problems  of  d rug   abuse  among  aerospace  employees  at  24th 
International  Air  Safety  Seminar  in  Mexico  City.  D rug   addiction  was 
not  yet  a  discernible  problem  among  NASA  and   its  contractor  em- 
C C  
ployees,  of  which  there  are  now  about  160000.  But  the  work  force 
of  the  fu ture   will  involve  many  young  people  who  have  experienced 
ha rd   drugs.”  (NASA  Release 71-208) 
*  AFSC  announced  USAF  development  of  battery-powered,  expendable,  re- 
mote-operating  weather  station  ( EROWS)  to  gather  data  from  inaccessi- 
ble terra in  or battle  fields and  transmit  data  320 km  (200 m i ) .  Dropped 
from  cargo  aircraft  and   helicopters,  EROWS  would  embed  itself  verti- 
cally  in   preselected  spot,  turn   itself  on,  monitor  its  surroundings,  and  
send  meteorological  data  to  control  recorder.  ( AFSC  Release  237.71) 
October 22:  Establishment  of  joint  NASA-DOT  Office  of  Noise Abatement  was 
announced  by  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  and   Secre- 
tary   of  Transportation  John  A.  Volpe.  Office  would  provide  overall 
leadership  and   focal  point  for  national  program  to  attack  noise  prob- 
lems  of  current  and   planned  transportation  systems.  Charles  R.  Foster, 
head  of  DOT  Office  of  Noise  Abatement,  would  be  Director  of  joint 

295 

October 22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
office.  Walter  F.  Dankhoff,  Chief  of  LeRc  Office  of  Operations  and  
Planning,  would  be  Deputy  Director.  New  office  would  be  responsible 
to  Robert  H.  Cannon,  Jr.,  Assistant  Secretary  of  Transportation  for 
Systems  Development  and   Technology,  and   to  Roy  P.  Jackson,  NASA 
Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and   Technology.  It 
would  also  integrate  programs  with  other  agencies  through  Inter- 
agency  A ircraf t   Noise  Abatement  Program   and   was  fulfillment  of 
some  of  recommendations  from  Civil  Aviation  Research  and  Develop- 
ment  ( CARD) Policy  Study.  (NASA Release 71-213) 
October  23:  USAF  launched  unidentified  satellite  from  Vandenberg  AFB  by 
Titan  IIIB-Agena  booster  into  orbit  with  392.7-km  (244-mi)  apogee, 
133.6-km  (83-mi)  perigee,  89.7-min  period,  and   1 1 0 . 9 O   inclination. 
Satellite  reentered  Nov.  17, 1971.  (Pres  Rpt  72 ;   S F ,  4/72,  132 )  
Aerobee  170  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carrying 
Cal  Tech  soft  x-ray  astronomy  experiment.  Rocket  and   instruments 
functioned  satisfactorily.  (SR  l is t)  
Preliminary  results  of  experiment  in  which  two  clocks were  flown  around 
the  world  to  test  Einstein  theory  of  relativity  had  indicated  “clock 
paradox”  of  theory  was  correct,  Dr.  J. C.  Hafele,  Washington  Univ.  in  
St.  L u i s  scientist,  told  meeting  of  American  Assn.  of  Physics  Teachers 
in   Rolla,  Mo.  Clocks,  carried  in   two  separate  aircraft,  had  not  kept 
same  time  as  master  clock  a t   Naval  Observatory  in  Washington,  D.C. 
Einstein  theory  said  that  as  body  approached  speed  of  light,  variables 
in  time,  size,  and   weight  changed.  (W  S tar ,   10/24/71,  A3) 
Dangers  inherent  i n   separation  of  science  and   government  were  discussed 
in   New  Yorlc  T imes   article  by  Dr.  Albert  Szent-Gyorgyi,  Nobel  Prize- 
winning  Hungar ian   biochemist  a t   Marine  Biological  Laboratories  in 
Woods  Hole,  Mass.  “Among  our  450  representatives  in   Washington 
there  is  not  a  single  scientist,  so  they  do  not  know  that  problems  a re  
like  equations  which  cannot  be  solved  by  trickery,  blows  o r   bombs, 
not  even  atomic  bombs.”  With  different  assumptions  different  self- 
consistent  systems  could  be  constructed ;  each  seemingly  logical. 
“Ptolemy  placed  the  ear th   a t   the  center  of  the  universe,  Copernius  the 
sun.  Each  system  is  perfectly  logical  and   self-contained.  Copernicus 
himself  never  dared  to  give  preference  to  his  own.  The  only  way  to 
decide  between  the  two  is  to  see  where  they  lead.  An  astronaut  basing 
his  calculation  on   Ptolemy  would  end  in   the  nowhere.  Our  present 
political  system  leads to poverty,  inflation,  unemployment,  crime,  drugs, 
war  and   the  neglect  of  our  priorities  toward  a  final  catastrophe.  The 
solution  is  not  separating  science  from  politics  . . . but  making  it pene- 
trate  into politics.”  ( N Y T ,  10 /23 /71 ,33)  
Oc tober   24 :  Latest  edition  of  Jane’s A l l   the  World’s Aircraft,  published  in 
London,  listed  series  of  Cosmos  satellites  that  could  intercept  other 
spacecraft  in  orbit,  determine  their purpose,  a n d  “blow  them  to pieces.” 
I n   report  of  Soviet  orbital  interception  tests  dur ing   year,  publication 
said  Cosmos  397  (launched  Feb.  25 )   had  passed  near  Cosmos  394 
(launched  Feb.  9 )   “and  was  subsequently  destroyed  i n   a n  explosion.” 
Cosmos  4 0  (launched  March  1 9 )   had  been  “interceptedy’ by  Cosmos 
404  on  404’s  launch  date,  April  3.  I n   preface,  editor  John  W.  R .  
Taylor  also  said  US. maintained  satellites  in   stationary  orb i t   over 
Pacific,  including  one  with  “fantastic  11-ton  reconnaissance  camera,” 

296 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

October  24 

to  monitor  launches  of  Soviet  and   Red  Chinese  long-range  missiles. 
(UPI,  N Y T ,  10/24/71,4) 
October 25: MSC  engineers were  studying  use  of  liquid oxygen  and  propane 
as  fuel  combination  for  recoverable ballistic  booster  ’that was  possible 
vehicle  for  space shuttle  transportation  system,  Av ia t ion   Week & Space 
Technology reported.  ( A v  W k ,  10/25/71,12) 
*  Decisions  on  NASA’S  space  shuttle  program  might  be  politically  timed, 
Aviation  Week  & Space  Technology  said.  Four  contractors  would  com- 
plete  study  contracts  in   spr ing   1972. “At  this  point,  President  Nixon- 
in  the  midst  of  his  re-election  campaign-might 
publicly  state  h is  
support  for  the  project.”  Selection  of  winners  “of  the  biggest  plum  in 
space”  would  not  be  announced  until  after  the  November  election, 
magazine said.  ( A v  W k ,  10/25/71,11) 
0  Execution  of  FAA-ESRO  Memorandum of  Understanding  for  joint  aviation 
satellite  program  had  been  delayed  from  Nov.  3  to  early  December 
because  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  could  not  complete  review 
of  proposed  program  in   time,  Av ia t ion   Week   &  Space  Technology 
reported.  Final  pre-bid  briefings  for  prospective  contractors  also  had 
been  delayed.  ( A v  W k ,  10/25/71,23) 
French  national  space  agency  Centre National  #Etudes  Spatiales  ( CNES)  
budget  request  for  1972  would  be  approximately  $150  million,  up 
from  $132.7 million  received  for  1971, Av ia t ion   Week   & Space  Tech- 
noZogy  reported.  Budget  would  be  augmented  to  cover  participation  in 
ELDO  Europa  3  launch  vehicle  program  if  production  of  advanced 
launch  vehicle  was  approved.  Increase  in   CNES  funding  would  be 
largely  offset  by  inflation,  French  officials  had  said.  ( A v   W k ,   10/25/ 
7 1 , 2 0 )  
Aviation  Week   &  Space  Technology  editorial  noted  “major  surprises” 
from  first  four  manned  lunar   explorations:  Possibility  of  existence  of 
water  or  ice  below  lunar  surface;  detection  of  heat  near  moon’s  core 
and  of  seismic  activity  on  moon;  greater  magnetic field  than  expected; 
and  fact  moon  was  “mineral  storehouse  of  tremendous magnitude with 
some  elements  in  combinations rarely  or   never  found  on  earth.”  There 
was  also  “sizable  accumulation  of  other  scientific  data  to  be  refined 
from  the  instrumentation  still  functioning on  the  moon  and  the  nearly 
400  Ib  [181  kg]  of  lunar  rocks  and  soil  samples.  . . . The  moon  has 
proved  to  be  a  scientific  bonanza  regardless  of  what  more  material 
benefits  may  be  realized  eventualiy.  All  of  this  must  be  a  cause  for 
considerable  chagrin  and   embarrassment  to  that  segment of  the  scien- 
tific  community  that  led  the  sneering  section  dur ing   the  early  stages 
of  the  Apollo  program  when  flight  testing  of  operational  hardware was 
of  necessity  its  primary  concern.”  (Hotz,  A v   W k ,  10/25/71,  7 )  
Mikhail  K.  Yangel,  Soviet  scientist  and  rocket  expert,  died  of  heart 
attack  a t   age  60.  Tass  later  quoted  obituary,  signed  by  Soviet  leaders, 
as  saying  Academician Yangel  had  “made  an  inestimabb  contribution 
to  the  cause  of  development  and   perfection  of  rocket-space  engineering 
and  exploration  of  near-earth  outer  space.”  (FBIS-Sov-71-207,  10/27/ 
71, L.3) 
October  25-28:  AIAA  held  8th  Annual  Meeting  and   Technical  Display  in  
Washington,  D.C.  Meeting  Chairman,  Pan   American  World  Airways 
President  Najeeb  E.  Halaby,  dedicated  meeting  “to  establishing  a 
rapport  between  supporters  of  technology  and  its  critics.”  I n   program 

297 

October 25-28 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

in troduc t ion  he  said,  “This  is a time  not  fo r  routine  reading  of  sophisti- 
cated  papers  about  a  future that  is  itself  i n  question,  but  for  addressing 
ourselves  to  the  basic  issue  of  where  we  a r e   headed-if 
anywhere.” 
Technical  display  included  space  shuttle technology  exhibits  by  NASA 
and   major  contenders  for  shuttle  contracts  and   models  of  Grumman 
F-14A  fighter  aircraft,  McDonnell  Douglas  F-15  fighter,  and   NR   B-1 
bomber  aircraft.  On  Oct.  25,  designated  by  AIAA  as  “Aerospace  Day,” 
Apo l lo   15  Astronaut  David  R .   Scott  narrated  NASA  Apollo  15  film. 
Panel  discussions  included  “Rocketry  in   the  1950’s”  chaired  by 
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for 
P lann ing ;   “STOL  and  VToL-Where  Do  They  F i t   I n ? ”   chaired  by  ARC  
Director  Hans  Mark  and  transmitted  by  telephone  link  up  to  LeRC 
employees ; and  “The  Aerospace  Professional-What 
Is  His  Fu ture?”  
with  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  as panel  member. 
Von  KBrmin  Lecture,  “Trends  in   the  Field  of  Automatic  Control  in  
the  Last  Two  Decades,’’  was  given  by  Dr.  Irmgard   Flugge-Lotz  of 
Stanford  Univ.  Automation  had  been  penetrating  nearly  every  field  of 
engineering.  Mathematical  theory  and  large  computing  equipment 
allowed  development  and   extension  beyond  handling  of  linear  and 
weekly  nonlinear  systems.  Investigation  of  systems  with  large  trans- 
port  time lags had  been  advanced. 
Major  A IAA   awards  presented  included  John  Jeffries  Award  to  Rich- 
a rd   S.  Johnston,  MSC  Deputy  Director  of  Medical  Research  and  
Operations,  for  “outstanding  contributions  to  the  advancement  of 
Manned  Space  Flight  and  aerospace  medical  research  through  your 
leadership  in   the  development  of 
life  support  systems.”  Lawrence 
Sperry  Award  was  given  to  Ronald  L.  Berry,  Chief  of  MSC  Planetary 
Missions  Analysis  Branch,  for  “many  outstanding  achievements  in   the 
field  of  manned  space  flight,  particularly  in  lunar  mission  analysis 
and  design  development.” 
Spacecraft  Design  Award  was  presented  to  Anthony  J.  Iorillo,  Man- 
ager  of  Special  Projects  for  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.,  for  “invention  of  the 
Gyrostat  stabilized  spacecraft  which  formed  the   basic  stabilization  and  
configuration  for  the  successful  Tactical  Communications  Satellite, 
Intelsat  IV,  and  a  series  of  other  satellites  now  in   design  and  produc- 
tion.”  Louis  W.  Hill  Space  Transportation  Award  was  given  to  Dr. 
Hubertus  Strughold,  Emeritus  Professor  of  Medicine  a t   Brooks  AFB, 
Tex.  Citation  said,  “With  his  prophetic  foresight  and  exceptional 
talents  h e   established  the  rational  biomedical  foundations  for  manned 
exploration  of  space.”  DeFlorez  Tra in ing  Award  went  to  Capt.  Walter 
P. Moran  of  American  Airlines  for  his  “pioneering  efforts  in   the  utili- 
zation  of  flight  simulation  to  increase  safety  and  economy  of  airline 
flight  training  and  checkout  operations.  . . .” Aerospace  Communica- 
tions  Award  was  presented  posthumously  to  Siegfried  H .   Rieger  for 
“his  personal  contributions  over  a  10  year  period,  in   analytical  work 
evolving  basic  concepts,  and  in   the  origination  and   implementation  of 
the  INTELSAT  Program  which  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  present 
worldwide  communications  satellite  network.” 
AIAA  History  Manuscript  Award  was  presented  to  Dr.  Richard  c. 
Lukas  of  Tennessee Technological  Univ.  f o r   “best  historical  manuscript 
dealing  with  the  science,  technology  and   impact  of  aeronautics  and 

298 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

October 25-28 

astronautics  on  society.”  Award  winning manuscript  was  “Eagles  East : 
The Army Air  Force and  the Soviet Union.” 
Among  23   new  Fellows  honored  a t   Honors  Night  Banquet  Oct.  28  
were  George H.  Hage,  Boeing  Co.  Vice  President  for  Product  Develop- 
ment  and  former  NASA  Apollo  Program  Deputy  Director;  Dale  D. 
Myers,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight;  Dr. 
Richard  T.  Whitcomb,  Head  of  8-Foot  Tunnels  Branch  a t   MRC; 
Eugene  S.  Love,  Chief  of  Space  Systems  Div.  a t   L ~ R C ;  James  W. 
Plummer,  Vice  President  and  Assistant  General  Manager  of  Lockheed 
Missiles  &  Space Co. ; Wilbur  L.  Pritchard,  Comsat  Laboratories  scien- 
t i s t ;   and  John  F.  Yardley,  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.  designer.  (Pro-  
gram ;   AIAA  Releases;  Lewis  News,  10/22/71,  1 )  
October  25-30:  Soviet  Communist  Pa r ty   General  Secretary  Leonid  I. 
Brezhnev  paid  state  visit  to  France  as  guest  of  French  President 
Georges  Pompidou.  Later  Tass  reported  that  they  had  discussed 
Soviet-French  cooperation  in   science  and  technology:  “They  noted 
with  satisfaction  the  successes  achieved  in   this  field  since  the  time  of 
signing  the  agreement of  June  30,  1966, and  expressed  their  apprecia- 
tion,  in   particular,  of  the  results  of  the  sixth  session  of  the  Mixed 
Soviet-French Standing Commission held  in Moscow  from July  22 to  24, 
1971.  In   this  connection  the  sides  referred  to  the  important  achieve- 
ments  in   cooperation  in  the  fields  of  space  exploration,  peaceful  uses 
of  atomic  energy,  as  well  as  high  energy  physics,  in   particular  the 
installation  of  a  French  laser  reflector  on  the  moon  surface,  the  com- 
missioning  of 
the  French  bubble  chamber  Mirabelle  at  the  Soviet 
proton  accelerator  in  Serpukhov,  the  Soviet-French contact  on  enrich- 
ing  French  natural  uranium  in   the  Soviet Union.”  (FBIS-SOV-71-210, 
11/1/71,  F4 )  
October  26 :   Identification  of  molecule  magnesium  tetrabenzporphine  in  
outer  space  as  forerunner  of  chlorophyll  by  Dr.  Fred  M.  Johnson, 
California  State  College  spectroscopist,  was  reported  in   Wushington 
Pos t .   Dr.  Johnson  had  analyzed  spectral  lines  taken  of  Milky  Way 
from  Lick  Observatory optical  telescope  dur ing   18-yr effort  to   identify 
nitrogen-bearing  hydrocarbons  among  hydrogen  clouds  in  interstellar 
space.  He  had  succeeded  after  analyzing  spectral  line  surrounding hot, 
young  star  i n   Orion  constellation.  Finding,  Dr.  Johnson  believed, 
might  provide  clue  to  building  blocks  of  life  in  universe.  “Whatever 
mechanism  occurs  here  occurs  throughout  the  universe  and  you  can 
be  sure i t  occurs in  the  solar  system.”  (O’Toole, W Post,  10/26/71,  A3) 
*  NAS  held  meeting on  molecular  constitutions of  interstellar  space. 
Dr.  William  J.  Welch,  Univ.  of  California  at  Berkeley  astronomer, 
said  23  different  molecules  had  been  detected  in   interstellar  space. 
Dr.  Arno  A.  Penzias  of  Bell  Telephone  Laboratories  said  new  radio- 
telescope  a t   Kitt  Peak,  Ariz.,  had  detected  amount of  carbon  monoxide 
that  “covers  vast  regions  of  space.”  Detected  carbon  seemed  “to  play 
a  disproportionately  large  role.”  Dr.  Benjamin M.  Zuckerman of  Univ. 
of  Maryland  said  i t   might  be  possible  that  carbon  monoxide  was 
formed  in  shells  around  very  young  and  very  old  stars  from  which  i t  
was  ejected  into  space.  (Lyons,  N Y T ,   10/27/71,  51)  
S o y m   I 2   accident  in  which  crew  lost  lives  [see  June  6-30] might  have 
been  “greatest  setback  in   Soviet  space  flight  activity  in   past  several 
years,”  Space  Business  Da i ly   reported.  October,  traditionally  “bumper 

299 

October 26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

month  for  Soviet  flight  programming”  had  seen  “relative  depression” 
this  year.  In   October  1970  U.S.S.R.  had  recorded  12  missions.  This 
year,  “up  to  last  week,  there  had  been  only  4  missions  recorded.” 
(SBD ,   10/26/71,  194)  
USAF  F-111  fighter-bomber wing  and  wing-carry-through structures  had  
withstood  test  loadings  equivalent  to  24 000  flight  hrs-four  
times 
estimated  number  of  hours  aircraft  would  fly  in  15  years--General 
Dynamics Convair Aerospace  Div.  announced. Aircraft  was  undergoing 
program  to  extend  service  life  beyond  original  15-yr  requirements. 
(General Dynamics Release  71-36) 
Rolls-Royce,  Ltd.,  and  P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.  of  United  Aircraft  Corp. 
signed  agreement  in   London  for  joint  development  of  Harr ier   VTOL 
aircraft’s  Pegasus  11 engine.  (Fairhall, Manchester Guardian, W Post, 
10/29/71,  D11;  P&W  PIO)  
USAF  Aeronautical  Systems  Div.  was  issuing  letter  contracts  for  STOL 
aircraft,  DOD announced.  Fairchild  Industries  would  receive $3 771 536 
for  15  light,  armed  STOL  a ircraf t ;   Helio  Aircraft  Corp.  would  receive 
$3 398 750  for  15  STOL  aircraft.  (DOD Release  911-71) 
October  27 :   Dr.  John  S.  Foster,  Jr.,  DOD Director  of  Research  and   Engi- 
neering,  and  team  of  DOD scientists  testified  before  congressional  Joint 
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  during  hearings  to  determine  whether 
treaty  could  safely  be  negotiated  to  ban  underground  tests  without 
inspection.  Dr.  Foster  and   Dr.  Stephen  J.  Lukasic,  Director  of  DOD 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  (ARPA )   , said  that,  while  advances 
had  been  made  in   detecting  underground  tests,  it  was  still  impossible 
to  spot  some  detonations of  up  to  100 kt.  (Lyons, N Y T ,   10/28/71,  1 )  
*  Authorization  by  President  Nixon  of  underground  test  of  five-megaton 
nuclear  warhead  on  Amchitka  Island  in  Aleutians  was  announced  by 
AEC   Chairman,  Dr.  James  R.  Schlesinger.  Announcement  came  shortly 
before  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals  for  District  of  Columbia  met  to  hear 
ora l   argument  on   petition  by  Committee  for  Nuclear  Responsibility 
and   six  other  environmental  organizations  to  delay  test.  Opponents of 
test  feared  $200-million  blast,  code-named  “Cannikin,”  could  release 
radioactive  gases  and   stimulate  seismic  sea  wave.  (A EC   Release  0-193; 
Kenworthy, N Y T ,   10/28/71,  1 )  
0  Aerobee  170 sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA  from  WSMR  carrying 
GSFC  stellar  spectra  experiment.  Mission  was  unsuccessful.  (SR  list) 
October  28:  U.K.  successfully  launched 66-kg  (145- lb)  Prospero  (X-3) , its 
first  technology satellite,  from Woomera  Test Range, Australia,  on Black 
Arrow  booster.  U.K.  thus  became sixth  nation  to launch  its own  satellite 
with  its  own  launch  vehicle.  Prospero  entered  orbit  with  1540-km 
(956.9-mi)  apogee,  552-km  (343-mi)  perigee,  106.4-min  period,  and  
82O  inclination.  Satellite,  developed  for  $28.8  million  in   six  years, 
carried  experiments  to  test  satellite  technology.  Prospero  was  first  and 
last  U.K.  satellite scheduled for  launch on U.K.  booster.  X 4 ,  scheduled 
for  launch  in   early  1974,  would  be  launched  by  NASA  Scout  booster. 
(GSFC  SSR, 10/31/71;  SBD,  11/2/71,  1 4 ;  Owen, KC   T imes ,  11/26/71) 
*  NASA  announced  establishment  of  Delta  Launch  Vehicle  System  Review 
Board  to  investigate  and   recommend  corrective  action  for  failure  of 
Thor-Delta 85  to  place Os0  7  in   planned  orb i t   Sept.  29 and   failure  of 
Thor-Delta  86  to  orb i t   ITOS-E  Oct.  21.  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  Associate 
Administrator  for  Space  Science  and   Applications,  had  appointed 

300 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1971 
October 28 
Dr.  William  R.  Lucas,  MSFC  Deputy  Director,  as  Board  Chairman. 
(NASA  Release  71-217) 
*  Regional  conference a t   ARC   explored  application  of  aerospace  technology 
to   community and  public problems.  Procedures for  locating  and   obtain- 
ing  technological  developments were  outlined  to  potential  manufacturers 
and   users.  Dr.  Joel  A.  Snow,  NSF  Deputy Assistant Director  for  Science 
and   Technology,  discussed  technology  in   changing  society  and  applica- 
tion  of  research to   national  needs.  NASA  Technology Utilization  Program 
was  described  by  Jeffrey  T.  Hamilton,  Director  of  Technology  Utiliza- 
tion  Office.  Dr.  Donald  C.  Harrison,  Chief  of  Stanford  Univ.  Medical 
Center Cardiology Dept.,  discussed NASA-Stanford biomedical  technology 
transfer  project.  Conference  officials  noted  that  of  1200 problems  sub- 
mitted  to  NASA  biomedical  and  technology  application  teams  to  date, 
200  had  been  brought  to  satisfactory  solution  through  aerospace  tech- 
nology.  (NASA  Release  71-216;  ARC   P I O )  
Rotating-cylinder-flap system  had  been  installed  in  wing  flaps  of  modified 
OV-1OA  Bronco  aircraft  provided  by  USN  for   research  into  STOL  a i r -  
craf t   characteristics  at  ARC,  ARC   As trogram   reported.  Cylinder,  when 
rotated  rapidly  in  direction  of  airflow,  induced  propeller  slipstream 
to  flow  smoothly  across  wing  surfaces  and  deflected  flap.  Wind-tunnel 
tests  had  shown  tha t   smoother  airflow  greatly  increased  lift  necessary 
fo r   STOL  operations.  (ARC  Astrogram,  10/28/71,  1 )  
Smithsonian  Institution’s  revived  plans  for  construction  of  $4O-million 
Air  and  Space Museum on  south side of  Mall  in  Washington, D.C.,  were 
described by  Museum  Director Michael Collins,  Apollo  11 Astronaut,  in  
interview published  by  Vashington Post.  Plans  for   building,  to  contain 
exhibit  areas  and   galleries  with  displays  on  history  of  aviation  and 
science and   technology  of  flight, would  be presented to National  Capital 
Planning  Commission  in  November.  Collins  said  only  best  items  in  
Smithsonian’s collection  would  be   exhibited  in   new  museum,  designed 
by  architect  Gyo Obata, who  had  designed previous building that  would 
now  cost  $70 million  to  construct.  Collins  said  Smithsonian  would  ask 
Congress to  appropriate funds  for  new  building i n  FY  1972.  (Scharfen- 
berg,  W Post,  10/28/71,  B1) 
Lockheed  Aircraft  C o r n   announced  sale  of  two  G l O l l  TriStar  iet  a ir-  
craft  to   British  charier  airline  Court  Line  Aviation.  Carrier  had  made 
“second  buy”  commitments to  purchase  three  additional  TriStars.  New 
orders,  first  since  Lockheed  received  U.S.  Government  guarantee  for  
$250-million  loan,  brought  total  Tr iS tar   sales  to   105, with  49  “second 
buys.”  ( W Post,  10/29/71,  D11) 
Rep.  George  P. Miller  (D-Calif.)  introduced  H.R.  11487 for   himself  and 
cosponsors.  Bill  would  authorize  sale  of  up  to  seven  acres  of  unim- 
proved  land  adjacent  to  KSC  Visitor  Information  Center  to  Chapel  of 
the  Astronauts,  Inc.  Organization  was  nonprofit  Florida  corporation 
interested  in   constructing  and   operating  nonsectarian  chapel  on  prop- 
erty.  No  federal  funds  were  involved  in   proposed  transaction.  (Tex t ;  
H Rpt 92-600)  
October 29:  NASA  held  Mariner 9  pre-encounter news  briefing  a t   NASA  Hq. 
Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  Associate Administrator  fo r   Space  Science  and  
Applications,  and   Robert  H.  Steinbacher,  Mariner  Project  scientist  a t  
JPL,  described  mysterious  yellow  dust  storm-greatest 
observed  since 
1956-that 
had  developed  on  Mars  Sept.  23   and   24   and   was  first 

301 

October  29 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
detected  through  telescopes  Sept.  26.  Steinbacher  said,  “The  question 
as Mariner  goes into orb i t   . . . is,  will  we  be  doing mapping  or  covering 
some  dynamic  atmospheric  phenomenon.  . . .” It  would  be  fortuitous 
“if, with  the  cameras  and other  instruments  of  Mariner  9, we  catch the  
most  dramatic  event  on  Mars.”  (NASA  Release,  10/20/71;  Haughland, 
W  Post,  10/30/71,  A3 ;   Sehlstedt,  B  Sun, 10/30/71,  A3)  
NASA’s 13th  Annual  Awards  Ceremony  was  held  in  Washington,  D.C. 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  presented  NASA  Distin- 
guished Service Medal  to  Charles  J.  Donlan,  Deputy  Associate Admin- 
istrator  (Technical),  OMSF;  Vincent  L.  Johnson,  Deputy  Associate 
Administrator,  OSSA;  Bruce T, Lundin,  LeRC  Director;  Bernard  Moritz, 
Deputy  Associate  Administrator,  Office  of  Organization  and  Manage- 
ment;  Oran  W.  Nicks,  L ~ R C  Deputy  Director;  and  John  W.  Townsend, 
Jr.,  NOAA  Associate  Administrator. 
Group  Achievement  Award  was  presented  to  Apollo  Recovery  Com- 
munications  ATS  Satellite  Support  Team,  GSFC ; Ionospheric  Studies 
Pro jec t   Team ;   Os0  7  Recovery  Team,  GSFC;  Planetary  Atmcsphere 
Experiments Test  Projects,  ARC  and H q ;   and  San Marco  Project Team. 
Other  awards  included Exceptional Service Medal  to  42  persons and  
Exceptional  Scientific  Achievement  Medal  to   28.  (P rog ram ;   NASA 
Release  71-218) 
*  Technique  f o r   accurately  forecasting  occurrence  and  location  of  solar 
flares  by  inferring  solar  magnetic  fields  from  hydrogen  light  photos 
taken  by  earth-based optical  telescopes was  announced by  NOAA.  Tech- 
nique,  developed  by  NOAA scientist  Patrick  S. McIntosh, was  alternative 
to   use  of  magnetographs  for  determining  solar  magnetic-field  data.  I t  
had  enabled NOAA’S  Space Environment Laboratory a t  Boulder,  Colo.,  to 
forecast  region  of  sun where solar  flares would  occur,  correctly  85% of 
time  for   all  flares  and   95%  of  time  f o r   major  flares.  NASA  had  con- 
tracted  with NOAA  to  refine  its solar  forecasting  capabilities  in   prepara- 
tion  fo r   operating  solar  telescopes  aboard  Skylab  beginning  in  spring 
1973.  (NOM  Release  71-153) 
*  Synthesis,  without  using  water,  of  six  amino  acids  that  formed  building 
blocks  of  life  by  exposing  combination  of  formaldehyde,  ammonia, 
methanol  vapor,  and   formic  acid  vapor  to  uv light  for   25   days,  was 
reported  in  Nature  by  Columbia  Univ.  scientists  Goesta  Wollin  and  
David €3.  Ericson.  Because chemicals  in  combination had  been  identified 
in  ’interstellar  space,  findings  suggested  life  might  arise  on  moon  or 
waterless planet.  (Nature, 10 /29 /71 ,615-6)  
October  30:  UPI  quoted  MSC  Deputy  Director  Christopher  C.  Kraft,  Jr.,  a s  
saying  i n   Houston  that,  because  of  success  of  Apollo  15,  NASA  was 
considering  addition to Apollo  program  of  extra mission  to  orbit moon 
and   return  to  earth.  (W Post,  10/31/71,  A20) 
*  Cracks had  been  found  i n   seven  engine pylons  on   seven C-5  cargo  trans- 
por t   aircraft,  all  apparently  due  to  “improper  fabrication,”  USAF  said 
in  status  report  to  Congress.  Pylons  would  be  replaced  and   a ircraf t  
released  for  flight.  New  pylon  design  was  under  study  and  might  be 
installed within three to  five months. Meanwhile  C-5s  could  be  expected 
t o   operate  without  difficulty with  normal  modifications and  repairs  for 
a t   least  6000  flight  hours.  Report  said  23   C-5s  had  been  returned  to 
service  since Oct.  12  grounding  of  en t ire  fleet following Sept. 29  engine 

302 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

October  30 

loss  a t   Altus  AFB,  Okla.,  and  subsequent  discoveries  of  engine  cracks. 
(Witkin, N Y T ,   10/31/71,  95) 
October  31 : Nixon  Administration’s  New  Technology  Opportunities  Pro-  
gram   “expected  to  be  announced  early  next  year”  was  described  by 
New  Yo r k   T imes .   Basic  concept was  to  define  technologies  that  could 
help  solve  domestic problems,  establish  R&D  priorities  accordingly,  and  
provide  incentives  for  industry  to  pursue  technological  goals.  Times 
said  program  could  be ma jor   step  toward  making  Government  partner 
for   first  time  in  industries  outside  aerospace  and   defense,  result  in  
greater  Federal  R&D  funding,  and  constitute  counterattack  against 
“those  who  increasingly  criticize  science  and  technology  as  disruptive 
and  destructive  forces  in  society.”  (Wilford, N Y T ,   10/31/71,  1 )  
USAF  commanders  believed  USAF  had  entered  “critical  period  in  which 
American strategic and  tactical  a i r  power  is  declining” while  U.S.S.R.’s 
“is  expanding,”  New   York  Times  reported.  Chief  elements  of  problem 
were  that  USAF’S  basic  weapon  systems,  B-52  bomber  and   F 4  fighter- 
bomber, were  nearing  obsolescence and  needed  to  be  replaced  at  “high 
cost” by J3-1  and F-15  ; satellite-gathered intelligence indicated  U.S.S.R. 
had  established  lead  over  US. in   land-based  ICBMS,  was  building 
emplacements  for  larger  missiles,  and  had  deployed  FOBS  to  bring 
missiles  on  target  from  any  direction;  and  developments  were  taking 
place  against  “background of  budgetary stringency” in  U S .   (Middleton, 
NYT ,  10 /31 /71 ,95)  
0  Revised  NASA  Policy  Directive  for  administering  Agency  activities  for  
protection  and   enhancement of  environmental quality  became  effective. 
(NASA  Pol  Dir  8809.6A) 
New  York   T imes   editorial  criticized  President  Nixon’s  decision  to  hold 
nuclear warhead test  Cannikin : “Multiple anxieties” had  found “respon- 
sible  expression  in   many  quarters.”  It  was  “simply  not  good  enough” 
for Administration to make known  its decision through AEC.  “There was 
a  time when  the  public  accepted  the  father-knows-best assurance  about 
‘overriding  requirements  of  national  security.’  But  tha t   time  is   not 
now.  Scrutiny and  skepticism by  Congress and  the  public  have  forced a 
healthy  re-examination  of  many  national  security  decisions  from  the 
manufacture  of  biological horror  weapons  to  the  defoliation  of  Vietnam 
to  the  roles  of  the  manned  bomber  and   the   a ircraf t   carrier.  Nuclear 
weapons  technology,  although  an  arcane  subject,  is  no  exception.” 
( N Y T ,  10/31/71,  16) 
London  Sunday  Express  reported  U.S.S.R.  was  building  launching  sites 
for   intercontinental  hydrogen  bomb  missiles  a t   unprecedented speed  in  
rocky  areas.  Paper  said  more  than  60  silos  had  been  photographed by  
spy  satellites  in   recent  months.  U.K.  Defence  Ministry  had  said  article 
was  speculative,  Reuters  reported.  ( N Y T ,  1/11/71,  48 )  
During  Oc tober:   NAS  published  Plans  fo r   U . S .  Participation  in  the  GARP 
Atlantic  Tropical  Experiment  and  Plan  for  U S .  Datu  Management  in  
the  Global  Atmospheric  Research Program.  Reports  of  panels  of  NCR’S 
U S .   Committee  for  the  Global  Atmospheric Research  Program  called 
for  increased  preparation  fo r   ma jor   tropical  observation  experiment 
in   Atlantic  i n   summer  1974.  Ad  Hoc  Tropical  Task  Group  said 
experiment would  require  geostationary satellite  “having  both  day  and  
night  imaging  capability,”  cIosely  spaced  array   of  ships with  calibrated 
radar ,   upper-air  wind-measuring systems,  and  from  10 to  12  aircraft. 

303 

During  October 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

GARP  Data Management Panel recommended  international  data manage- 
ment  for   project,  with  fulltime  professionals  appointed  by  U S .   and  
eriment dur ing  which  at  least  35 meteoro- 
logical  sounding  rockets were launched  from  area  nea r  Volgograd  and 
from Heuss Island  in  Franz Josef  Archipelago in  Soviet Arctic.  Purpose 
of  experiment was  to   determine  effect  of  sunspots  on  magnetic  storms. 
,Ground-based observatories  in  U.S.S.R.  and   Antarctic had  participated 
in   study.  Rockets  were  said  to  have  collected  vast  amount  of  data  on 
impact  of  solar  flares  on  earth’s  magnetic  field,  including  impact  on 
radio  communications.  (NYT,  11/5/71,  18; SBD ,   11/9/71,  a) 

304 

November  1971 

November 1 : Publication of  revised patent  licensing regulations  to  accelerate 
commercial use  of  space-related  patented  inventions o r   technology  was 
announced  by  NASA.  Revisions  would  permit  granting  of  exclusive 
licenses  a s   early  a s   nine  months  after  announcement  of  invention’s 
availability,  granting  of  more meaningful exclusive licenses to   qualified 
applicants  to  ensure  prompt  use  of  NASA  inventions,  and   provision  of 
royalty  payments  if  appropriate.  (NASA  Release 71-220) 
NASA  continued  to  receive  proposals  for  using  surplus  Apollo  hardware 
for  “Apollo  18”  lunar  mission,  Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology 
reported.  Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  MSC  Director,  had  suggested mission 
be  flown  in  April  1974 to map moon  from  polar  orbit.  During mission, 
which  would  cost  about  $190  million,  LM  would  be  converted  into 
massive  scientific  experiments bay.”  ( A v   Wk,  11/1/71,  15 )  
< L  
Lockheed  Missiles  &  Space  Co.  and   15  other  aerospace  firms  were  con- 
structing advanced  comsat model  to  compete  fo r   contract  for   INTELSAT 
v  series,  Aviation  Week  & Space Technology  reported.  Hardware from 
firms  in  Europe,  Canada,  and   Japan  would  arrive  a t   Lockheed  f o r  
assembly  before  year’s  end.  Frame  had  already  been  shipped  from 
Contraves  A.  G.  of  Switzerland.  Spacecraft  would  be   mounted  on 
platform  to  permit  testing  a t   1 g  in   simulated  space  environment  in 
spring  1972.  (Johnsen, Av  Wk,  11 /1 /71 ,21 )  
Airline  Pilots  Assn.  in   letter  to  FAA  expressed  concern  about  “decreasing 
margin  of  safety  in   takeoff  and  landing  a t   US. airports.”  Union 
President  John  J.  O 7 D o ~ e l l  said  “length  of  time  now  planned  by  your 
agency  fo r   installation  of  landing  aids  is  so  inadequate  tha t   i t   can 
only  invite  more  accidents,  increased  inconvenience t o   passengers,  and  
increased  cost  of  operation  for  the   airIines.”  Letter  criticized  FAA’S 
10-yr  plan  to   improve  airport  safety  and  called  for   accelerated  5-yr 
program.  O’Donnell said  ALPA  studies had  shown  tha t   573  persons had 
been  killed  in   past  10 yrs  in   approaches to  a irpor ts  not  fully  equipped 
with  instrument  landing  systems.  (Tex t)  
*  NSF  published  “Estimated  Academic  R&D  Direct  Pr ice   Trends  50  Percent 
Higher  Over  Decade  1961-71”  in  Science Resources Studies Highlights. 
Price  inflation  accounted for  estimated 50%  increase  in   direct  costs  of 
academic R&D  over  10 fiscal  years  ending  June   1971. Most  of  rise  had 
occurred  in   last  five  years,  when  compounded annual  increase  ra te  was 
5.0%. Preliminary  estimates  for  FY  1971  indicated  tha t   increase  from 
FY  1970 was  5.576,  equal  to  change  over preceding  year.  Increases  in  
s a l a r i e s a c c o u n t i n g   for  65%  of  academic  R&D  direct  costs-were 
responsible  fo r   large  increase  in   total  R&D  direct  costs.  Payments  to 
personnel  were  estimated  to  have  increased  two   th irds   over  decade; 
prices  of  equipment,  expendable  supplies,  and  miscellaneous  services, 
only  one  fifth.  (NSF  Highlights,  11/1/71) 
Yugoslavian  charter  airline  Air  Yugoslavia  announced  in   Belgrade  tha t  
it was  first  foreign carr ier  to  obtain permission from Communist  China 
to  organize char ter   flights to  Peking.  (AP,  W  Post,  11/2/71,  ALE) 

305 

November  1-2 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
November  1-2:  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator,  chaired 
symposium and workshop series sponsored by  NAE  in  Washington, D.C. 
Program,  “Application  of  Technology  To  Improve  Productivity  in   the 
Service  Sector  of  the  National  Economy,”  explored  methods  of  using 
technology  to   ease  social,  educational,  and  health  care  problems.  (NAE  
Release) 
November  2-5:  USAF  Titan  I I IC   booster  launched  Dscs  2-1  and  Dscs   2-2 
improved Defense  Satellite  Communications  System  satellites  from  ETR 
a t  10:09  pm  EST  into transfer orbits  and then  into separate,  synchronous 
orbits over  Pacific.  Orbital parameters  for both  spacecraft:  35 816.0-km 
(22  255-mi)  apogee,  35  807.9-km  (22  250-mi)  perigee,  1436.1-min 
period,  and  2.6’ 
inclination.  Immediately  after  launch  telemetry  diffi- 
culties  were  experienced  during  standard  operational  status  feedback. 
By  Nov.  5  malfunctions  had  been  corrected  and   satellites  were  func- 
tioning  satisfactorily. 
The  two  544-kg  (1200- lb) ,   2.7-  x  4-m  (9 -   x  13-f t) ,   TRW-built 
comsats  were  designed to  replace  smaller IDSCS  satellites launched  since 
1966.  First  of  improved  system,  new  satellites  would  increase  DOD  
communications volume.  Each satellite had 40-w output f o r  multichannel 
communications, including  1300 two-way voice  conversations,  TV,  tele- 
type,  and  data  relay  and  could  transmit  between  large  ground  terminals 
over  long distances,  a s  well  as  tactical  messages  between  small  portable 
ground  stations.  (P re s  Rpt  71 ;   AFSC  Newsreview,  1 /72 ;   SBD ,   11/4/71, 
25 ;  Detroit News,  11 /3 /71 ;   UPI,  M Her,  10/31/71) 
November  2 :  Mariner  9-launched 
by  NASA  May  30  and  expected  t o   orbit 
Mars Nov.  l k x p e r i e n c e d  anomolous  condition  at  1 1 : O O   am  EST that 
caused spacecraft  to  lose navigational lock  on  guiding  star Canopus and 
lock  on  wrong  s tar ,   Sirius.  Resulting  unfavorable  high-gain-antenna 
orientation  weakened  spacecraft’s  radio  signals.  After  extensive  check 
showed  instruments  were  still  working  and  spacecraft  was   disoriented 
by  only  few degrees, Mariner  9 was  commanded to  search for  Canopus; 
confirmation was  received  that  lock  had  been  acquired  at  2 5 1  pm  EST. 
Radio  signals  returned  full  strength  and  mission  operations  resumed 
planned  schedule.  J PL   officials  speculated  tha t   spacecraft  had  been 
struck  glacing  blow  by  dust  particle  o r   Canopus  sensor  had  been 
distracted  by  light  reflected  from  passing  dust  cloud.  (NASA   Proj  Off ;  
NYT,  11/4/71,  1 8 ;  W  Post,  11/3/71,  A3) 
U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  454  into  orbit  from  Plesetsk  with  346-km 
(215-mi)  apogee,  204-km  ( 126.8-mi)  perigee,  90.0-min  period,  and 
65.4O  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Nov.  16.  (GSFC  SSR,  11/30/71; 
SF ,  7 /72 ,179)  
0  Soviet  scientist  Boris  Nepoklonov  said  in   Tass  interview  that  data  from 
Lunokhod  1 (placed on   moon  by  Luna  1 7  Nov.  17,  1970)   would  help 
define  age  of  moon  more  precisely.  Information  showed  that  Sea  of 
Rains  was  one  of  oldest  lunar  formations.  Analysis  of  phototelevision 
panoramas  had  shown  that  large  craters  over  100  m  (328  f t )   in 
diameter  had  emerged  several  billion  years  ago,  while  small  cra ters  
up  to  10 m  (32.8  f t )   in  diameter were  millions of  years younger.  Study 
of  lunar   terrain  showed  many  layers.  Outer  layer,  from  0.2  to  0.5  mm 
(0.008  to  0.02  i n ) ,  was  loosest  and  had  poor  heat  conductivity,  which 
resulted  in   sharp  temperature fluctuations  on  lunar   surface  within  half 
hour.  Denser  layer  beneath  was  strong  enough  to  sustain  weight  of 

306 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November 2 

Lunokhod  1 .  Nepoklonov,  scientific  leader  of  Lunokhod  1  control  team, 
said  tha t   information  received  from  vehicle  would  be  published  in  
multivolume monograph. First book  had  already  appeared.  ( FBIS-SOV- 
71-212-3,  11/3/71,  L5-6) 
Federal  Government  had  filed  $3 690 290  suit  against  Bechtel  Corp.  in  
Federal  District  Court  in   San   Francisco,  Wall  S tree t   Journal  reported. 
Suit  charged  that  Bechtel’s  designs  for   space  environment  simulation 
chamber  for MSC  were  “inadequate,  improper  and  unsuited  for  the  pur-  
pose  intended.”  Chamber  had  failed  in  1964  NASA  test,  Government 
said.  ( W J ,   11/2/71) 
Nobel  Prize  f o r   physics  was  awarded  to  Dr.  Dennis  Gabor,  Hungarian- 
born  British  scientist with  Columbia Broadcasting System laboratories, 
for   invention  of  three-dimensional lensless  photography  system  known 
as holography. Nobel  Prize  for  chemistry was  awarded  to  German-born 
National  Research  Council  of  Canada  scientist  Gerhard  Herzberg  for 
“‘contributions  to  knowledge  of  electronic  structure  and   geometry  of 
molecules,  particularly  free  radicals.”  ( N Y T ,  11/3/71,  1 )  
House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics  favorably  reported  H.R. 
11484, bill permitting sale  of  land  a t   K S C   fo r   Chapel  of  the  Astronauts. 
( C R ,  11/2/71,  D1109;  H  Rpt  92-600) 
*  Rohr  Corp.  President  Frank  E.  McCreery  said  in  statement that  extensive 
investigation  had  produced  no  evidence that  Rohr  Corp.  had  delivered 
cracked  jet  engine  mountings  for  USAF’S  C-5A 
jet  transport  a ircraf t  
[see Oct. 301.  (UP I ,   N Y T ,  11/4/71,  C38)  
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  had  announced  Lcvoluntary” early  retirement  of 
Lockheed-California Div.  President  Charles  S.  Wagner,  Senior  Vice 
President  Dudley  E.  Browne,  and  Corporate  Vice  President  for  Manu- 
facturing  W.  A.  Pulver,  Wall  S tree t   Journal  reported.  Browne  would 
remain  a  director  and   member  of  board’s  executive  and  finance  com- 
mittees.  ( W S J ,  11/2/71,  16)  
November   2 -4 :   NASA  sponsored  conference  on  “Vehicle Technology  for  Civil 
Aviation:  The  70s  and  Beyond”  a t   LaRC  and  Williamsburg,  Va.  Dr. 
James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  said  in  Nov.  2  address  to   a ir-  
lines  and  a ircraf t   industry  executives  and  DOT  representatives  that 
environmental issue  of  noise  provided  “show  case  for  technoIogy”  and 
opportunity  to  apply technology  directly  to  the  solution of  a n  environ- 
b C  
increasing  public  concern.”  It  was  not  enough 
mental  problem  of 
“to  think  in  terms  of  more  power,  more  lift,  more  speed.  If  we  wish 
the  taxpayer  to  continue  to  support  civil  aviation,  we  should  take  as 
our  motto,  ‘Fly  Quiet!”’  NASA  could  be  proud  of  progress  made  in 
reducing  a ircraf t   noise.  NASA  wa s   “well  prepared”  to  develop  super- 
sonic  technology  that  would  “permit  supersonic flights  over  continents 
as  well  a s   oceans  without  harmful  sonic  boom  effects  and  outstrip  the 
current  foreign  models  in  speed,  capacity,  range,  and  profitability.” 
Dr.  Fletcher  described NASA  STOL aircraft  program  as  “first  research 
program  of  this  magnitude  focused  on  the  needs  of  civil  rather  than 
military  aviation.”  He  felt  U S .   should  establish  “clear  national  policy 
. . . to  maintain  our  leading  position  i n   world  a ircraf t   markets”  and 
“should  resolve  to  achieve this  goal  by  whatever  reasonable means  a re  
necessary,  with  emphasis  on  an  unequivocal  decision  to  stay  out  front 
in   aeronautical  research  and   technology.” 
FRC  engineer  Marvin  R.  Barber  said  NASA  study  had  predicted  that 
307 

November 2-4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

by  1982 small  a ircraf t  would  be  “most  economical  mode  of  transporta- 
tion  on  trips  of  between  40  and   450  miles  [65  and  725  kilometers].” 
B/G  Gustav  E.  Lundquist  (USAF,  Ret.)  said  attempts  to  introduce 
use  of  STOL  transport  to  public  had  been  unsuccessful  in   Northeast 
(NASA  Release  71-222; 
Corridor  between  Boston  and  Washington. 
Newport News Daily Press,  11/3-5/71) 
November  3:  NASA  announced  i t   had  begun  distribution  of  more  than  2200 
samples  and  polished  thin  sections  of  Apollo  15  lunar  material  to  U S .  
and  foreign  scientists.  Total  weight  of  largest  and  most  varied  sample 
collection was  about  three  kilograms  (six  and   a  half  pounds) .  Material 
would  be  analyzed  by  700  investigators  in   U S . ,   Virgin  Islands,  15 
foreign  countries,  and   ESRO.  (NASA   Release  71-223) 
Results  to  date  of  study  to  determine minimum  cockpit  visibility  required 
by  space  shuttle  pilot  to  make  safe  horizontal  ground  landings  were 
announced  by  FRC.  Tests,  begun  in  July  with  instrumented  T-33  jet 
a ircraf t   with  radar   system  to  judge  accurate  altitude  to  within  two 
feet  (0.6  me ters) ,   had  shown  pilots  could  land  aircraft  with  greater 
visibility  restrictions  than  expected.  Visibility  restriction  of  5”   had 
been  extended to  75” on  either  side,  or  total  of  150” in   225 approaches 
flown.  Restrictions  would  be  increased in   fu ture   to  160”. (FRC  Release 
26-71) 
*  Prototype  water-vapor  electrolysis  system,  developed  by  ARC   scientist 
Dr.  Theordore  Wydeven,  Jr.,  had  successfully  completed  more  than 
2000  hrs  of 
of  80-day  space  mission-Valley 
testing-equivalent 
[Calif.]  Journal reported.  System converted moisture in   a i r   into  hydro- 
gen  and   oxygen  and  released  reclaimed  oxygen  back  into  air.  I t   would 
eliminate  need  for  bulky  oxygen  tanks  on  space  missions  and   could 
be  used  as  onboard  oxygen  system  in   aircraft,  portable  oxygen  gener- 
ator  for  hospitals  and   homes,  and  a i r   conditioner  and  freshener  in 
mines,  a i r   ra id   shelters,  or  other  places  in   need  of  oxygenation. 
(Valley Journal, 11/3/71) 
*  Federal  Reserve  System  had  begun  supplying  banks  with  62  million 
copper  and   nickel  dollars  commemorating  President  Eisenhower  and 
A p d l o   11  lunar  landing,  AP   reported.  One  side  of  coin  carried  repro- 
duction  of  Apollo  I 1   astronauts’  emblem-eagle 
against  moon’s  sur- 
face.  ( B  Sun, 11/3/71,  A6 )  
Lack  of  Government  policy  for  engineering  was  scored  by  Sen.  Edward 
M.  Kennedy  (D-Mass.)  in   speech  telephoned  to  meeting  of  Institute 
of  Electrical  and   Electronic  Engineers  in  Boston,  Mass.  Sen.  Kennedy 
cited  communications  engineer  who  had  led  team  that  designed 
antenna  for  Apollo  15  LRV.  Engineer  had  received  special  com- 
mendation  from  NASA  for  his  leadership.  “He  also  received  a  layoff 
notice  from  his  firm  shortly  before  he  watched  his  antenna  in  action 
on  the  surface  of  the  moon.”  Engineers  possessed  great  potential  to 
contribute  to  Nation’s  needs.  “Engineers  who  can  produce  patents  for 
their  former  employers  can  provide  ideas  which  w i l l   benefit  society. 
Engineers  who  can  transmit  data  from  the  moon  can  help  p e e t   the 
data  processing  needs  of  our  technological  economy.  And  engineers 
who  could  have  taught  a t   our  leading  universities  must  have  some 
lessons  to  offer  of  benefit  to  us  all.”  (CRY 11/10/71,  S 1 8 0 0 3 4 ;   Off 
of  Sen Kennedy) 
Air  France  announced  first  firm  order  from  airline  for  A-300B  250- 

308 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November 3 

passenger  a irbus   being  built  by  European  consortium. 
(Reuters, 
W  Post, 11/4/71,  A2 )  
Dr.  Dennis  Gabor,  winner  of  1971  Nobel  Prize  for  physics,  said  in  
Bridgeport,  Conn.,  that  space  exploration  was  ‘‘stri&li  a  dead  end 
occupation.”  I t   was  “extremely  uninteresting-the 
only  interesting 
place  is  earth.”  Dr.  Gabor  made  comment  dur ing   interview  a t   Univ. 
(UPI,  W  Post,  11/5/71,  A7; 
of  Bridgeport  honors  convocation. 
W S tar ,  11/6/71,  A7) 
*  Fairchild  Industries,  Inc.,  had  agreed  to  acquire  Swearingen  Aircraft 
Co.,  Wad  Street  Jowna l   reported.  Agreement  called  for  Fairchild  to 
provide  up  to  $3 million  of  immediate  working  capital  for  Swearingen. 
New  subsidiary  would  be  formed.  (W S J ,  11/3/71,  1 7 )  
November  4 :   National  Capital  Planning  Commission  approved  plans  for 
Smithsonian  Institution’s  new  $4O-million  National  Air  and  Space 
Museum  after  hear ing   testimony  from  Museum  Director  Michael 
Collins,  Apollo  11 astronaut.  Dur ing  90-min  debate,  Commission mem- 
ber  Pau l   Th iry   described  museum  building,  designed  by  architect 
Gyo  Obata,  as  “industrial  type”  from  “elevator-air  conditioner  school 
of  architecture”  lacking  “classic  proportions.”  Collins  said  museum 
would  possess  “flavor  of  a i r   and   space.”  Commission  stipulated  that 
building’s  roof  remain  clear  of  mechanical  equipment  and   that  use 
of  granite  and   marble  be  considered  for  construction.  Final  approval 
of  plans  would  be  considered  following  Nov.  17  meeting  of  Fine  Arts 
Commission.  (Combes,  W  Pos t ,   11/5/71,  A14) 
*  Successful  first  launch  of  Poseidon  missile  from  surfaced  submarine  was 
observed  by  Soviet  trawler  a t   distance  of  805 m  (880 yd s ) .   Submarine 
U.S.S.  Nathaniel  Greene  was  surfaced  16 km  (10   m i )   east  of  Cocoa 
Beach,  Fla.  DOD  later  said  it  had   not  determined  if  Soviet  vessel  was 
intelligence-gathering  ship.  ( W  Pos t ,   11/5/71,  A5 )  
(NASTRAN)  , designed  to 
NASA’s structural  analysis  computer  program 
analyze  behavior  of  elastic  structures  in   space  program,  was  being 
used  by  Ford  Motor  Co.  in   predicting  performance  of  1973 light  truck 
components,  NASA  announced.  Ford  had  reported  60%  improvement 
in   predicting  behavior  of  components  under  stress  and   time-saving  of 
two  th irds   in   calculations.  Program  also  had  been  used  in   design  of 
people-mover  system  to  be  used  a t   TRANSPO  ’72  exhibit  planned  for 
spring  1972 a t  Dulles  International Airport,  Va.  (NASA   Release 71-221) 
Full-size  plywood  model  of  B-1  strategic  bomber,  designed  a s   replace- 
ment  for  USAF  €3-52, 
was  displayed  for  first  time  by  North  American 
Rockwell  Corp.  in  Los  Angeles.  ( W  Post,  11/5/71,  3 )  
Soviet computer  had  calculated  total weight  of  atmosphere a t  5 quadrillion, 
157   trillion  tons,  Tass  reported.  News  agency  said  calculation  was 
essential  for  research  in  cosmonautics,  space  geodesy and  gravimetry.” 
6 6  
Computer  had,  for  first  time,  taken  into  account  “all  the  peculiarities 
of  the  earth’s  relief  and  the  distribution  of  temperatures  on  its surface,” 
Tass said.  (UPI ,   San  Francisco  Examiner,  11 /5 /71)  
Wall  Street  Journu.1 quoted  Bank  of  America  as  saying  California’s  aero- 
space  employment  should  stabilize  near  end  of  1971 “and  hold  fairly 
steady  dur ing   1972.”  Bank,  in   annual  forecast  of  California  economy, 
had   said  overall  aerospace employment  in  state would  not  show marked 
improvement  until  early  1973  “when  defense  contracting  and   demand 
for  commercial  aircraft  pick  up.”  ( W S J ,  11/4/71,  42 )  

309 

November 4 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
*  Plans  of  naval  historian  R/A  Samuel  E.  Morison  (USN,  Ret.)  to  retrace 
by  a i r   and   sea  64000-km  (4Q000-mi)  first  circumnavigation  of  globe 
by  Ferdinand  Magellan  in   1519  were  described  by  New  York   T imes .  
Adm.  Morison  would  begin  two-month  voyage  with  Colombian  diplo- 
mat,  aviator,  and   explorer  Mauricio  Obregon  in   December.  ( N Y T ,  
11 /4 /71 ,45 )  
November  5:  Europa  2,  ELDO (European  Launcher  Development  Organiza- 
t ion)   multistage  rocket,  failed  to  launch  test-satellite  from  Kourou, 
French  Guiana,  i n   first  developmental  flight.  Two  minutes  forty  sec- 
onds  after  l if toff ,  dur ing   separation  of  1st stage  (British  Blue  S treak)  
and   2nd  stage  (French   Coralie) , rocket  acceleration  dropped  and  
rocket  fell  into Atlantic.  Failure  was setback  for  European  space organi- 
zation;  Europa  2  was  to  have  launched  363-kg  (800-lb)  satellite  into 
orbit.  Rocket’s  3rd  stage  was  West  German  Astris  unit.  Belgium  had 
set  up  ground  tracking  and   control  stations  and   Netherlands  had   sup- 
plied  station  equipment.  Italy  had  contributed  test  satellite.  (Reuters, 
N Y T ,  11 /6 /71 ,14 ;   SBD ,  11 /8 /71 ,36)  
inner 
First  combination  of  modern  radar  data  from  observations  of 
planets  with  existing  optical  observations  of  sun  and  planets  made 
between  1750  and   1970  had  shown  tha t   Pluto’s  mass  could  not  be 
determined  reliably  from  existing  data,  M IT   scientists  M.  E.  Ash, 
Irwin  I.  Shapiro,  and   W .   B.  Smith  reported  in   Science.  Total  300000  
measurements  had  been  made  dur ing   experiment  which  also  included 
available  observations  of  asteroids  Eros  and  Icarus.  Radar   data  were 
from  MIT’S  Millstone  Hill  and  Haystack  facilities;  optical  data  were 
from  original  observatory  reports  transformed  over  six  years  into 
machine-readable  form.  Results  had  shown  “insufficient  basis  for  the 
widespread  conclusion  that  Pluto’s  average  density  is  greater  than, 
or  even  comparable  to,  the   earth’s.’’  (Sc ience ,  11/5/71,  551-6) 
Commercial  pilot  Elgin  L.  Long  flew  from  San   Francisco  International 
Airport  to   Fairbanks,  Alaska,  in  twin-engine  P iper   Navajo  aircraft  on 
first  sector  of  32 000-km  (20  000-mi) , month-long  journey  over  North 
and   South  Poles  and  prime  and  180th  meridians  a t   Equator-geo- 
graphic  crossroads  of  world.  If  successful,  UPI  said,  Long  would  estab- 
lish  eight  aviation  records,  including  first  flight  around   the  world 
landing  on  all  seven  continents,  first  solo  flight  across  Antarctica,  and  
first  solo  from  Antarctica  to Australia.  (W  S tar ,   11/6/71,  A2 )  
*  National  Geographic  Society  was  quoted  in   Chicago  Tribune  as saying, 
Phobos,  Martian  satellite,  was  darkest  body  yet  observed  in   solar  sys- 
tem,  “possibly  because  meteoroids  had  scoured  i t   clean  of  reflecting 
dust.”  (C  T r i b ,  11 /5 /71)  
Issuance  by  USAF’S  SAMSO  of  $20 932 400  contract  to  Martin  Marietta 
Corp.  for   launch  services  for  Titan  I I IC   launch  vehicle  a t   ETR  was 
announced  by  DOD.  Initial  increment  was  $10 701  400.  (DOD   Release 
942-7  1 ) 
*  Washington  Pos t   editorial  commented  on  AEG IS  
test  of  five-megaton 
atomic  device  on   Amchitka  Island  in   Aleutians  scheduled  for   Nov.  6: 
“The  fact  tha t   this  particular  test  may  have  some  element  of  risk  in-  
volved  would  not  automatically  foreclose  the  question  of  whether  i t  
should  be  conducted.  If  the  test  does  involve a  risk  to  the  environment, 
i t   must  then  be  decided  whether  that  risk  is  worth  taking  in   view  of 
the  knowledge  to  be  gained.  In   any  case,  the  administration  would  be  

310 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November  5 

i n   fa r   better  shape  if  i t   had  let  the  debate  on  the   environmental 
aspect  run   free   and   then  made  its  case  fo r   tak ing   the  risk.  As  it  is, 
the  administration  is  in   the  position  of  assuring  Americans  and  
Canadians  alike  that  all  is  well-that 
it  knows  best.  We  sincerely 
hope  it  is  right.  Bu t   if  i t   is  wrong,  the  onus   on  the  administration 
will  be  fa r   greater  as  a  direct  result  of  the  evidence  we  now  have  of 
the  suppression  of   high-level  reservations  about  the   ecological  risks 
involved.”  ( W Po s t ,   11/5/71,  A26) 
November  6 :   AEC   detonated  five-megaton  hydrogen  bomb  on  Amchitka 
Island,  Alaska,  a t   11 am  local  time  ( 5  pm  EST). Supreme  Court  had  
refused  t o   order   delay  in   controversial  $200-million  Cannikin  project 
to  test  prototype  warhead  fo r   Spartan  missiles  of  Safeguard  ABM  
system.  No   earthquake  followed  detonation,  but  shock  waves  reverber- 
ating  from  deep  ear th   s tra ta   rocked  island  severely.  Dr.  James  R. 
Schlesinger,  AEC   Chairman,  broadcast  from  control  room  on  Amchitka 
immediately  following  blast:  “We  had   fairly  significant  ground  mo- 
tion  . . . but  sensation  was  just  about  what  we  had  expected.”  Tenta- 
tive  indications  were  that  blast  effects  were  “well  within  the  range 
of  projections.”  Dr.  Schlesinger  said  test  had  permitted  introducing 
of  Spartan  warhead  into  inventory  “while  minimizing  the  likelihood 
of  a  defective  warhead.  I  believe  the  final  results  of  Cannikin  will 
permit  the  A E C   t o   certify  the  Sparlan  warhead  for   introduction  into 
the  stockpile  within  the  appropriate  deployment  schedule.”  Report 
from   Palmer  Observatory  had  indicated  Richter  scale  reading  of  7.0. 
“So  i t   is  indicated  tha t   we  had  a  fu l l   yield  test.”  Control  board  indi- 
cated  “all  of  our  radiation  activity  monitoring  stations  are   reporting 
. . . not  even  a  trace  of  radioactive  release  to  this  point.  We  are   past 
the  12-minute mark.”  ( A E C   Release 0-204;  Turner,  N Y T ,   11/7/71,  1 )  
Award  by  Communist  Par ty   Central  Committee  and   Council  of  Minis- 
ters  of  U.S.S.R.  of  1971  state  prizes  for  achievements  in   science  and 
technology  was  announced  by  Tass.  State  prize  fo r   celestial  mechan- 
ics  had  been  awarded  to  unidentified  scientists  “who  have  developed 
new  methods  of  plotting  the  movement  of  natural  and   artificial  space 
objects.”  Research  provided  “a  theoretical  basis  for  the  solution  of 
engineering  problems  . . . in   the   flight  of  space  objects  and   their 
orientation  in   orbit.”  Later,  Prnvda  published  article  by  Soviet  Acad- 
emy  of  Sciences  President  Mstislav  V.  Keldysh  describing  prize-win- 
ning  research.  “A  cycle of  works  by  Ye.  P.  Aksenov,  G .  N.  Duboshin, 
and   others  is  devoted  to   research  into  the  various  astronomical, 
mechanical  and   mathematical  aspects  of  formulating  high  precision 
theories  of  the  strongly  perturbed  motion  of  artificial  and   natural 
satellites  of  the  planets  and   also  of  asteroids.”  ( FBIS-SOV-71-217, 
11/10/71,  L1;  218,11/11/71,  L1 )  
November  7:  ApoZZo  15  Astronauts  David  R.  Scott,  James  B.  Irwin,  and  
Alfred  M.  Worden  arrived  in   London  to  begin  two-week,  five-country 
tour  of  lectures  and   meetings  with  European  scientists.  (UPI ,   C T r ib ,  
11/8/7 1 )  
Two  goats  had  survived  30  hrs   in   pressure  chamber  a t   31  atmospheres 
to   pressure  a t   300  m  (1000  f t )   below  sea  level-breathing 
-equal 
same  oxygen  over  and   over,  New  York   Times  reported.  Experiment, 
conducted  by  Dr.  Jacques  Chouteau,  head  of  Laboratory  of  High- 
Pressure  Physiology  a t   Univ.  of  Marseilles,  replaced  bulky  apparatus 

311 

November  7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

normally  used  to  remove  carbon  dioxide  from  used  a i r   with  small 
cylinder  of  potassium  superoxide. When  a i r   breathed  by  goats  passed 
through  cylinder,  water  and   carbon  dioxide  in   used  a i r   reacted  with 
potassium  to  release  oxygen,  which  was  returned  to  chamber.  Times 
said  process,  developed  by  A ir   Liquide  under  French  military  con- 
tract, might  be  used  i n   space,  sealed  aircraft,  and   tanks.  U.S.S.R.  was 
believed  to  use  a  similar  technique.  (Hess,  N Y T ,   11/7/71,  84 )  
Maverick,  airborne  missile  guided  to  surface  targets  by  TV  camera  in  
nosecone,  had  gone  into  production  by  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.  under 
$69.9-million  contract  and  would  be  delivered  to  USAF  in   1972,  New 
Y o r k   Times  reported.  If  missile  proved  successful,  USAF  believed  its 
installation  on  fighter  a ircraf t   in  West  Germany  and  U.K.  could  help 
redress  U.S.S.R.’s 
“quantitive  armored  superiority 
in  Europe.” 
(Middleton, N Y T ,  11/7/71,  57 )  
Canadian  Defence  Ministry  had  announced  intention  to  mothball  hydro- 
foil  Bras  #Or ,   classified  as  world‘s  fastest  warship,  AP   reported. 
Aluminum  craft  61  m  (200   f t )   long had  been  developed  over  1 3  yrs 
at  $52-million  cost.  Vessel  had  attained  speed  of  116  km  per  h r  
(72   mph)   in  1969.  Major  reasons  for   decision  to  mothball  were 
vessel’s  lack  of  capability  in  Arctic  waters  and  fact  no  foreign  sales 
of  c ra f t  were  forecast, while  production costs were  up.  ( N Y T ,  11/7/71, 
5 )  
November  8 :  Dr.  Harrison  H.  Schmitt,  scheduled  to  become  first  scientist- 
astronaut  on  moon  dur ing   Apollo  17   mission,  addressed  41st  annual 
international  meeting  of  Society  of  Exploration  Geophysicists  in  
Houston,  Tex.  Dr.  Schmitt  said  lunar  exploration  “is  permanently 
terminating  for  this  generation  and   may  be  fo r   future  generations.” 
Chances  for  collecting  da ta   from  moon  were  “decreasing  rapidly.” 
In  response  to  questions  Dr.  Schmitt  said  mankind’s  future  could 
depend  on  scientific  understanding  of  knowledge  being  gathered  dur- 
ing Apollo program.  (A t lan ta  J&C,  11/14/71) 
0  President  Nixon  announced  appointment  of  Betty  Crites  Dillon  as  U S .  
Representative  on  International  Civil  Aviation  Organization  Council 
and  submitted  to  Senate  nomination  of  Mrs.  Dillon  for   rank  of 
Minister.  She would  succeed  Charles  F.  Butler  who  had  resigned Oct.  1. 
( P D ,  11/15/71,  1498 ,1517)  
November  9 :  Apollo  15  Commander  David  R .   Scott  told  press  in   London 
tha t   colonization  of  moon  was  %cry  practical  proposition.”  He  pre- 
dicted  eventual  manned  exploration  of  planets  and   said  man  would 
definitely  explore Mars.  “The  Apollo  missions  have  proved  that  man 
can  do  a  worthwhile  job   exploring space.”  Apollo  15  Astronauts Scott, 
James  B.  Irwin,  and   Alfred  M.  Worden  were  touring  Europe  to  brief 
scientists on their mission.  (Reuters, B Sun,  11/10/71,  A3 )  
*  House  Armed  Services  Committee’s  Subcommittee  on  Investigations 
opened  hearings  on   unscheduled  Oct.  26  landing  of  Cuban  An-24 
transport  a ircraf t  a t  New  Orleans International Airport.  Hearings  were 
to  determine  how  Soviet-built  aircraft  had   penetrated  U.S.  southern 
defense  facilities  so  effectively  that  first  knowledge  of  its presence  was 
received  when  pilot  requested permission  to  land,  10 min  from  a irpor t .  
Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology  later  said  incident  was  second 
Cuban  penetration  of  U.S.  airspace  in  25   mos.  DOD witnesses  at  pre- 

312 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November 9 

vious  hearings  had  blanied  October  1969  penetration  on  absence  of 
radar.  (CR, 11/8/71,  D1140;  Av Wk, 11/22/71,13) 
November  10-II: Mariner  9  (launched  by  NASA  May  30)  began  taking 
preorbit  science  photos  of  Mars,  showing  planet  as  featureless,  half- 
moon-like object,  hazy  and   dust-covered.  First  photos,  taken  over  2 4 h r  
period  from  distances  of  860 000  to  570 000  km  (535 000  to  355 000 
m i )   from  Mars,  were  transmitted  to  Goldstone  tracking  station  and 
then  to  JPL   Nov.  11.  They  were  not  as  clear  as  photos  taken  by 
Mariner  6  and   7  in  1969.  Astronomers  reported  dust  storm  of  “un- 
precedented”  duration  and  scope  ranging  over  much  of  planet,  ob- 
scuring  nearly  all  surface  details.  Dr.  William  H.  Pickering,  JPL  
Director,  said  storm  could  be  regarded  a s   a  “premium,”  since  oppor- 
tunity  to  see  dynamic,  unusual  event  on  another  planet  was  rare.  But 
protracted  period  of  bad  weather  over  Mars  could  jeopardize  mapping 
of  surface,  Dr.  Bradford  A.  Smith  of  New  Mexico  State  Univ.  said 
storm  appeared  to  have  reached  its  peak  about  Oct.  21  and  there  had 
been  “a  positive  but  very,  very  slow  clearing  of  the  dust.  . . . We’re 
quite  clearly seeing the  south polar  cap.”  Polar  cap,  he  said,  was  not  as 
bright  as  expected,  indicating  dust  had  not  cleared  away  completely 
in  that  region.  Scientists  believed  they  were  able  to   see  Deimos,  tiny 
outer  moon  of  Mars.  Photos,  made  in  three  sequences  at  intervals, 
provided  complete  coverage  of  planet  as  it  rotated  about  its  axis. 
First  two  sequences  each  covered  one  Martian  day ;   th ird   covered 
about  one  third  of  day.  Radio  signals  had  reached  Goldstone,  Calif., 
tracking  station,  were  relayed  to  JPL ,   and  were  fed  into  computers 
that  had  converted  signals  to  TV  images.  Mariner  9  was  scheduled 
to  enter  Mars  orbit  Nov.  13.  (NASA  Proj  Off;  Wilford,  N Y T ,   11/11- 
12/71;  Sehlstedt, B Sun,  11/11-12/71) 
November  1 I  : Two  USAF  comsats launched Nov.  2  from   ETR  by  Titan  I I IC  
as  part  of  improved  series  of  Defense  Satellite  Communications  Sys- 
tem  (DSCS)  satellites  were  in   operational  modes  as  programmed. 
After  insertion  into  synchronous  orbit  over  Pacific,  first  satellite  had 
failed  to  turn   on  its  telemetry  system.  Second  satellite  had  turned  on 
telemetry,  but  telemetry  was  sporadic.  Subsequent  efforts  of  ground 
controllers  were  successful  and   both  satellites  responded  to  ground 
commands.  ( S B D ,  11 /11 /71 ,55)  
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory  astronomers  said  in   Cambridge 
that  radio  signals  from  Apo l lo   I 5  CM  Endeavor  had  passed  into  radio 
“dead  spot”  behind  moon  on  Aug.  3,  faded  away,  and   reappeared  on  
receivers  of  observatory’s  46-m  (150-ft)  radio  antenna  two  minutes 
later.  Subsequent  analyses  had  confirmed  that  signals  had  been  trans- 
mitted through moon’s  body.  (AP, N Y T ,   11/13/71) 
*  Political  and   Security  Committee  of  U.N.  General  Assembly  unani- 
mously  approved  Convention  on  International  Liability  for  Damage 
Caused  by  Space  Objects.  Treaty  held  space  powers  “absolutely 
liable”  to  pay  compensation  fo r   loss  of 
life,  injury,  or  property 
damage.  Amount  of  compensation  would  be   determined  by  agree- 
ment  between  nation  responsible  f o r   damage  and  country  or  coun- 
tries  suffering  damage,  o r   by  three-member claims  commission,  whose 
decision  would  be  recommendation  not  legally  binding.  Canada, 
Japan,  Sweden,  and  I ran   abstained  from   voting  to  signify  dissatis- 
faction  because  treaty  did  not  compel  payment  of  compensation. 

313 

November  11 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Convention would  be  open  for  signature  in  Washington,  Moscow,  and 
London  following  General  Assembly  approval-which  wa s   assured, 
New  Yo r k   T imes   later  said.  Treaty  had   been  completed  after  seven- 
year  delay  caused  by  U.S.S.R.’s  contention  that  claims  should  be 
decided  directly  by  governments  through  diplomatic  channels  and 
without  arbitration.  U.S.S.R.  had  agreed  to  compromise  in  June. 
( N Y T ,  11/12/71,  1 ;  UN PIO)  
*  Retirement  of  Jerome  F.  Lederer  as  NASA  Director  of  Safety  Jan.  14, 
1972,  was  announced  by  NASA.  Internationally  recognized  authority 
on  a i r   and  space  flight  safety  had  joined  NASA  as  Director  of  Flight 
Safety  for  OMSF   June  1,  1967,  after  having  been  Director  of  Flight 
Safety  Foundation  since  1947.  Lederer,  who  had  received  NASA 
Exceptional  Service  Medal  in  1969,  would  return  to  Flight  Safety 
Foundation  as  part  time  consultant.  (NASA  Release  71-224) 
Magellanic  Premium  of  American  Philosophical  Society  was  presented 
to  JPL   mathematicians  Paul  M.  Muller  and  William  L.  Sjogren  a t  
Society’s Annual  General  Meeting  in  Philadelphia.  Muller  and  Sjogren 
were  cited  fo r   “their  discovery  of  lunar  mascons  leading  to  the  first 
detailed  gravimetric  map  of  the  moon.”  Magellanic  gold  medal  had 
been  presented  only  22  times  since  inception  in  1790.  Most  recent 
recipient  had  been  Dr.  William  H .   Pickering,  J P L   Director,  in  1966. 
( J P L   Release 604 )  
Mrs.  Betty  J.  Baldwin,  A R C   computer  programmer,  had  been  selected 
one  of  top  10  business  women  of 
the  year  by  American  Business 
Women’s  Assn.,  for  progress  as  NASA  civil  service  employee  and  in- 
terests  in  educational  and  character-building programs,  A R C   Astrogram 
announced.  ( A R C  Astrogram,  11/11/71,  1) 
Delivery  of  first  of  USAF’S  96  F-l11D  supersonic  jet  bombers,  equipped 
with  Mark  I1  avionics  package,  to   27th  Tactical  Fighter  Wing  at 
Cannon  AFB,  N .   Mex.,  wa s   announced  by  DOD  in   memorandum  to  cor- 
respondents.  (Kelly, W Star,  11/18/71,  A 4 )  
Future  of  Soviet  airlines  under  new  five-year  plan  being  drafted  by 
U.S.S.R.  Supreme  Soviet  was  described  by  G .   Ustinov  in  Izvestia 
article:  Draft  “envisages  the  introduction  on  the  civil  airlines  of  new, 
comfortable,  rapid,  and  more  economic  aircraft.  The  operation  of  the 
supersonic  TU-144  . . . will  begin.  Almost  all  existing  aircraft  will 
be  modified.  The  network  of  airports  will  be  expanded.  The  trans- 
portation  of  passengers  w i l l   increase  considerably,  and  . . . 100 mil- 
lion  hectares  E247  million  acres]  of  fields  and  forests  will  be  treated 
11/17/71,  K 4 )  
from the air.”  (FBIS-SOV-71-222, 
November  12 :   Pmh ing ton   Da i ly   News  editorial  said  Mariner  9  had  al- 
ready  accomplished  “enough  to  win  plaudits  from  any  but  the  most 
jaded.”  I t   had  “photographed  . . . one  of  Mars’  moons  . . . and  with 
luck  will  go  into  orbit  around  the  planet  itself,  taking  pictures  of 
surface details no bigger  than  a football  field. 
No  one  can  tell  where  the  ever-expanding  horizons  of  man’s 
6 6  
knowledge  will  lead,  no r   the  extent  to  which  Mariner  9  will  enlarge 
our  knowledge  of  the  solar  system.  But  jaded  we   a re   not,  and  w e  
a re  f rank  to   say  that  we  a r e  downright  thrilled  by  Mariner’s  exploits.” 
( W News,  11/12/71) 
*  Portrait  of  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  third  NASA  Administrator  (1969-1970) 
was  unveiled  in  NASA  Hq.  ceremony  attended  by  Dr.  James  C. 

314 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November  12 

Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator;  Dr.  Pa ine ;   and  Rep.  George  P.  Miller 
(D-Calif.) , Chairman  of  House  Committee  on  Science  and   Astro- 
nautics.  Portrait,  by  artist  William  Draper,  would  hang  a t   NASA  Hq. 
(Transcr ip t)  
*  Cost  of  full  operational  space  transportation  system  had  been  put  at 
$12.7  billion,  “although  new  cost-cutting  efforts  may  reduce  that 
figure,”  Univ.  of  Michigan  engineer  T.  A.  Heppenheimer  said  in  
Science  article.  Shuttle’s  scientific  benefits  “do  not  in   themselves  jus- 
tify  its  development.  . .  .  Defense,  commercial,  and  applications 
benefits  combine  as  well  to  furnish  the  justification.  Nevertheless,  the 
scientific  benefits  should  not  be  overlooked.  For  the  first  time, 
laboratory-type  investigations  may  be  carried  out  in   space,  not  by 
scientist-astronauts,  but  by  scientists.”  (Science,  11/12/71,  646-7) 
Seattle  T imes   quoted  Dow  Jones  News  Service a s   saying  Italian  govern- 
ment  had  approved  funding  of  $320  million  fo r   jo in t   Boeing  Co.  and 
Aeritalia  S.  P.  A.  development  of  STOL  a ircraf t   to   carry  100  to  150 
passengers.  Aeritalia  hoped  to  begin  production  in  1974  or  1975. 
Boeing  could  decide  to  produce  a ircraf t   in  U.S.  i f   market  warranted. 
(Seattle T im e s ,  11/12/71) 
Discovery  of  diamonds  in  1.4-kg  (3-lb)  .meteorite  that  fell  through  roof 
of  storehouse  on  Finnish  island  of  Havro  Aug.  2  was  announced  by 
Smithsonian  Center  for  Short-Lived  Phenomena.  I t   was  sixth  such 
meteorite  to  be  found.  First  discovery  of  meteoritic  diamonds  had 
been  made  by  Russian  scientists  in  1888  while  analyzing  meteorite 
found near  Novoured.  (UPI ,  N Y T ,  11/13/71) 
Univ.  of  Toronto  had  announced  discovery  by  astronomer  Dr.  Sidney 
Van  Den  Bergh  of  three  galaxies  composed  of 
thousands  of  stars, 
Washington Post  reported.  ( W  Po s t ,  11/12/71,  A36) 
November  12-13:   Scientists  a t   P.  N.  Lebedev  Physics  Institute  and  Soviet 
Academy  of  Sciences’  Crimean Astrophysics Observatory experimented 
with  laser  to  locate  reflector  left  on  moon  by  ApoZZo  15   astronauts 
during  July  26-Aug.  7  mission.  Pravda   later  quoted  Soviet  scientist 
A.  Sukhanovsky  as  saying  experiment  was  “continuation  of  research 
work  on  the  ‘earth-moon’  system  by  the  laser  location  method.”  First 
successful  experiment  to  locate  French  reflector  on  Lunokhod  1  had 
been  conducted  in  December  1970.  “The  accuracy  of  the  measurement 
of  the  distance  to  the  reflector  was  then  in  the  order  of  several meters.” 
In  current  experiment  “for  the  first  time  we  have  succeeded  in  meas- 
uring  the  distance  to  the  U.S.  angular  reflector.”  Fact  U S .   scientists 
had  not  succeeded  in   locating  French  reflector  on  Lunokhod  1  was 
“apparently  connected  with  differences  in  the  methods  of  calculating 
the  reflector’s  supposed  coordinates.”  ( FBIS-SOV-71-266,  11/23/71, 
L1 )  
November  13 -15 :   Mariner  9 ,  launched  by  NASA  May  30,  was  inserted  into 
elliptical  orb i t   around  Mars  a t   7:32  pm  EST  Nov.  13  after  15-min 
engine  burn  and  became  first  spacecraft  to  orb i t   another  planet  in  
solar  system.  Orbital  parameters  were  close  to  planned  ones:  1398-km 
(868.7-mi)  periapsis  altitude,  12-hr 34-min  period,  and   64.5O  inclina- 
tion.  Spacecraft  propulsion  system  and  attitude  control  systems  per- 
formed  flawlessly  after  400-million-km  (248-million-mi ) 
journey. 
Mariner  9  would  orbit  Mars  twice  daily  while  photographing  up  to 
70%  of  Martian  surface i n  next three months. 

315 

November  13-15 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND AERONAUT ICS ,   1971 

November  13-15:  Mariner  9  became  the   first  spacecraft  to  orbit  the   planet  Mars. 
T h e   f irs t   photos  of  the   planet  were  obscured  by   a  dus t   storm  but  later  pictures 
revealed  sinuous  rilles  whose  origin  was  puzzling.  T h e   valley  above,  700  kilometers 
(435   m i le s )   long,  was  photographed  Jan. 22,  1972,  in  the   Mars  Rasena  region. 
Such   rilles  m igh t   have  been  produced  by  collapse  o f   the   roof  over  subsurface  lava 
flows.  T h e y   raised  the   possibility  of  erosion  by  water  in  ancient  Martian  history. 

316 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November  13-15 

November  13-15: Inserted  in to   orbit 
around  Mars  Nov.  13,  Mariner  9 
took  man's  first  closeup  photos  of 
the   Martian  moon  Phobos  Nov.  29 
and 30. T h e  computer-enhanced photo 
at  the   right  was  taken   5543  kilo- 
meters  (3444   m i le s )   f r om   Phobos 
Nov.  30.  T h e   pro fus ion   o f   craters 
suggested  that  the  moon  is  very  old 
and  possesses  considerable  structural 
strength. T h e  Martian  volcanic moun- 
ta in   N i x   Olympica 
( b e l ow )   was 
photographed  in  late  January  1972 
as  the   p l a n e f s   dust  storm  subsided. 
T h e   mountain  was  500  kilometers 
(310 m i le s )   across  a t   the   base, more 
than   twice  as broad  as the  most  mas- 
sive volcanic p i le   on  the  earth. S teep  
cliffs  fell  from   the   mountain  flanks 
to   a   great  plain.  T h e   complex  muL 
tiple volcanic vent  at  the  summit  was 
65 kilometers  (40 m i le s )   i n  diameter. 

317 

November  13-15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTIGS,  1971 

First  photos  were  obscured  by  dust  storm  but  before  end  of  month 
Mariner  9  had  shown tha t  Mars bulged a t  equator,  was  “rougher  gravi- 
tationally”  than  expected,  and  probably  had  wide  variety  of  rock 
compositions ; instruments  had  detected  small  amounts  of  water  vapor 
a t   south  pole  and   warmer  a i r   pockets  above  pole  [see  Nov.  16-23]. 
Spacecraft  also  made  man’s  first  close  photo  of  potato-shaped Martian 
moon  Deimos  [see  Nov.  26-27]  and  photos  of  moon  Phobos  [see 
NOV. 29-30]. 
First  Mariner  photos  from  orbit  were  broadcast  live  by  national  TV 
network,  but  detail  was  limited  by  dust  storms  that  had  raged  on  sur- 
face  since  September.  Dr.  Robert  H.  Steinbacher,  J P L   project  scien- 
tist,  said  “We’re  hopeful that  as the  storm  dies  down  we   can  get  some 
good  pictures  of  the  dust  settling  to  the  surface.  This  is   an  unprece- 
dented chance  to  watch  changes in   the  Martian  weather.”  He  said  that 
if cameras  worked  properly  pictures  would  be  1000  times  better  than 
any earthbound telescopes had  taken. 
On Nov.  14  spacecraft  transmitted  three  sequences of  TV pictures.  Of 
more  than   60  photos  returned,  only  seven  revealed  surface  features. 
Dust  storm  continued  and  atmospheric  experts  could  see  no  sign  of 
abatement.  Dust  obscuring  planet  was  apparently  very  fine  sand 
which  high  winds  pushed  to  height  of  as much  as  16   km  (10   mi) 
above surface. 
On  four th   orbit  spacecraft  successfully  completed  orbit  tr im   ma- 
neuver  a t   9:44 pm  EST Nov.  15.  Maneuver  changed  orbital  period  of 
spacecraft  to  make  i t   synchronous with  Mars  viewing period  of  Deep 
Space  Station  antenna  a t   Goldstone,  Calif.  New  orbital  parameters 
were  1394-km  (866.2-mi)  periapsis  altitude,  11-hr  57-min  12-sec 
period,  and 64.34O  inclination. 
Data  from  remote-sensing  instruments  confirmed  earlier  observa- 
tions  that  carbon  dioxide  was  major  constituent  of  Martian  atmos- 
phere  and   also  suggested  possibility  of  “hot  spots”  on  planet.  Dr. 
Ellis  D.  Miner  of  JPL  said  sensor  detected  .average  temperature  rise 
of  6.7  K  (12’F) 
in  area   24  km   (15 m i)   square  below  Mars  equator. 
Temperature  rise  might  indicate  hole  in   cloud  cover  exposing moun- 
tain  peak  o r   plateau  reflecting  residual  heat  o r   evidence  of  internal 
source  of  heat  on  Mars.  uv spectrometer  da ta   indicated  dust  storm 
was  made  up   of  fairly  coarse-grained,  sandlike  particles.  (NASA   P ro j  
Off;  Wilford,  N Y T ,   11/14-16/71;  O’Toole,  W  Post,  11/14-15/71; 
W S tar ,   11/16/71,  A4) 
November  1 3 :   U.S.S.R.  announced Mars  2  and  Mars  3   (launched May  19  
and   May  28  and  scheduled  to  encounter  planet  Mars  within  tw o  
weeks)  would  attempt  to  put  first  man-made objects  on  “red”  planet. 
Dr.  Carl  Sagan,  Cornell  Univ.  astronomer,  said  Soviet  scientists  had 
told  him Mars 2 and  Mars  3   were  equipped  to  land  instrument  probes. 
He  said  he  understood  they  contained  flammable  material  that  would 
destroy  any  earth  bacteria  when  probes  completed  investigation.  (W  
Star,  11/14/71,  A6) 
November  1 4 :   Gold  issues  of  first  annual  United  Nations  Peace  Medal, 
issued  to  coincide  with  U.N.’s  26th  anniversary,  had  been  presented 
to  Apo l lo   15  astronauts,  AP  reported.  For  collectors,  medals  would 
be  in  silver and bronze.  (B  Sun, 11/14/71,  A3) 

318 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November  15-29 

. 

November  15-29:  Explorer  45   (SSS-A) 
Small  Scientific  Satellite  was  SUC- 
cessfully  launched  for  NASA  by  Italian  crew  a t   8:52  am  local  time 
(12:52  am  EST)  from  San  Marco  launch  platform  off  coast  of  Kenya. 
Four-stage  Scout  launch  vehicle  boosted  50-kg  (110-lb)  satellite  into 
orbit  with  27 034.5-km  (16 798.5-mi)  apogee,  220.8-km  (137.2-mi) 
perigee,  469-min period,  and   3.57O  inclination.  Pr imary   objective  was 
to  measure  characteristics  and  formation  of  earth‘s  r ing   current  and  
development  of  main-phase  magnetic  storms ; relation  between  mag- 
netic  storms,  aurora,  and  acceleration  of  particles  within  inner  m a g  
netosphere ; and   relative  importance  o€ various  diffusion  mechanisms 
in   populating  radiation  zones  a t   4-  to  5-earth-radii  elliptical  equa- 
torial orbit. 
By  Nov.  29   all  satellite  household  €unctions  were  nominal  bu t  
spacecraft  was  coning  a t   higher  angle  than  planned,  which  would 
make  data  reduction  slightly  more  difficult.  Attempts were  being  made 
t o   reduce  coning  angle.  Five  experiments  had  been  turned  on  and 
were  operating  satisfactorily.  One  experiment,  charged  particle  de- 
tector, remained to be turned on. 
Explorer  45 ,   26-sided  polyhedral  spacecraft  63.5  cm  (25   i n )   in 
diameter,  attained  length  of  5.8  m  (19 f t )   with  booms  deployed.  I t  
was  second U S .   satellite to  be  launched  by  Italy  under April  30,  1969, 
launch  agreement.  First  was  Uhuru  (Explorer  4 2 )   Small  Astronomy 
Satellite  launched  from  San  Marco  Dec.  12,  1970.  Explorer  45  was 
most  innovative  and  compact  satellite  in   Explorer  series  to  date;  on- 
board  data  handling  system  could  he  reprogrammed  by  ground  com- 
mand to concentrate on  specific sets of  data. 
Under  NASA  and   Univ.  of  Rome  agreement,  NASA  provided  booster 
and  satellite ; Italian  team  conducted  assembly,  checkout,  and   launch 
services  on  cost-reimbursable  basis.  NASA  OSSA  was  responsible  for 
overall  direction  of  program.  Satellite  was  designed  and  built  a t  CSFC, 
which  managed  project.  L am   managed  Scout  launch  vehicle.  (NASA 
P ro j  Off; NASA  Release  71-212) 
November  15 :   NASA’s M2-F3  lifting  body,  piloted  by  NASA  test  pilot  Wil- 
liam  H.  Dana,  successfully  completed  its  11th  flight  from  FRC.  Objec- 
tives  were  to  check  out  fuel  jettison  system  and   newly  installed  engine 
chamber purge system.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
Intersputnik, 
international 
space  communications  organization,  was 
formed  under  agreement  signed  in   Moscow  by  U S S R . ,   Bulgaria, 
Hungary,  East  Germany,  Cuba,  Mongolia,  Poland,  Romania,  and  
Czechoslovakia.  Tass  later  quoted  agreement  a s   saying  “organization 
is  open  for  accession  by  all  states  of  the  world.  It  will  coordinate  its 
activities  with  the  International  Telecommunications Union  as  well  a s  
with  other  organizations  whose  activities  are   related  to  the  use  of 
communication satellites.”  (UPI,  N Y T ,  11 /17 /71 ,9)  
*  FuII  deployment  of  Satellite  Early  Warning  System  ( S EW S ) ,   “possibly  in  
1972,”  would  alert  U S .   to  attack  from  any  point  on   globe  in   seconds 
-“time 
to  get  strategic  bombers  into  the  a i r   and   to  launch  a  missile 
counterstrike  before  enemy  warheads  arrive  on  U S .   t a rg e t s ” 4 J .S .  
News  8  P o r l d   Report  article  said.  DOD was  “fairly  confident”  tha t  
Pearl  Harbor   type of  attack  was  “becoming  almost  impossible.”  TWO 
SEWS  satellites,  launched May  5,  were  reported  in  near-stationary  orb i t  

319 

November  15 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

about  40 000 km (25  000  m i )   above  Indian  Ocean.  They  could  moni- 
tor   Soviet  and  Communist  Chinese  missile  launches  and  detect  and  
report  nuclear  explosions  in   atmosphere.  ( U S   News,  11/15/71,  10) 
*  President  Nixon  submitted  to  Senate  nomination  of  Dr.  H.  Guyford 
Stever  as  NSF  Director.  Dr.  Stever  would  succeed  Dr.  William  D. 
McElroy,  whose  resignation  would  be  effective  Feb.  1. Dr.  Stever  was 
member  of  National  Science  Board  and   of  Advisory  Panel  to   House 
of  Representatives  on  Science  and  Astronautics.  He  had  served  a s  
USAF  Chief  Scientist  and  as  Chairman  of  President  Nixon’s  Pre- 
Inauguration Task  Force  on  Science  and  Technology.  ( P D ,  11/22/71, 
1528,  1542) 
MSC   issued  RFPS  to  develop  and  test  polymer  seal  materials  for  space 
shuttle  propulsion  systems.  Proposals,  €or  fixed-price  R&D  contract, 
were  due   Dec.  3,  with  work  to  be  concluded  12   mos  after  contract 
award.  (M SC  Release 71-52) 
*  House  passed  and  sent  to  Senate  H.R.  11487,  bill  to  permit  sale  of  land 
the  Astronauts.  ( C R ,   11/15/71,  H10998, 
a t   KSC   for  Chapel  of 
D1171) 
FAA  announced  award  of  $1 59 362  contract  to  Northwest  Environmental 
Technology  Laboratories,  Inc.,  to  measure  and  evaluate  effectiveness 
of  airborne  commercial  seeding  techniques  in   dissipating  fog  at  a ir-  
ports.  (FAA  Release  71-185) 
RAND   Corp.  President  Henry  S.  Rowen  resigned.  New  Yo rk   Times  later 
quoted  sources  as  saying  h is   departure  had  been  caused  partly  by 
DOD’s  “dissatisfaction  with  Rand’s  role  in   the  release  of  the  Pentagon 
papers  [report  on  background  of  U.S.  involvement  in  Vietnam  War 
prepared  at  request  of  then  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  S.  McNamara 
and   classified  by  DOD].”  Both  Rowen  and  RAND   Board  Chairman  New- 
ton  N.  Minow  had  denied  relationship  between  Rowen  retirement  and  
Pentagon papers.  (Roberts, N Y T ,  11 /16 /71 ,22)  
Hanna  Reitsch,  described  by  Washington  Evening  Star  as  “Nazi  Ger- 
many’s  famous  daredevil  woman  test  pilot  and   the  only  woman  in  
German  history  ever  to  be  given  two  Iron  Crosses  for  her  exploits,” 
told  of  her  glider  research  during  Star  interview.  “I  am  searching  for 
the  right  currents  over  the  Alps.  I  don’t  have  to  worry  about  . . . 
borders  in  the  a ir .   . . . As  we  enter  space  work  more,  we  will  realize 
how  small  mankind  is  and   how  necessary  it  is  to  come  together  in  
peace.”  (Dean, W S ta r ,  11/16/71,  B7 )  
November  1.5-17:  AIAA  2nd  Symposium on  Uranium  Plasmas:  Research  and 
Applications was  held  in  Atlanta,  Ga.  Symposium  Chairman  Robert  G. 
Ragsdale, head  of  Advanced  Reactor Concepts  Section of  LeRC  Nuclear 
System  Div.,  described  cumulative  impact  of  papers  delivered  in  
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics : “Significant  progress  in   a  number  of 
research  areas  has  been  achieved  along  the  road  to  determining  the 
feasibility  of  gas-core  reactors  . . . [which]  harness  and  control  the 
energy  released  from  a  hydrodynamically contained  fissioning uranium 
plasma.  The  major  application  studied to  date is  a  gaseous-fueled rocket 
reactor.  Other  possible  applications,  such  as  nuclear-MHD power  gener- 
ators  and   breeder  reactors,  a re   also  beginning  to  receive  some  atten- 
an   engine  with  a  5000-sec  specific  impulse  and   . . . relatively  high 
tion.”  Developments  detailed  a t   symposium  argued  “the  possibility  of 
thrust-to-weight  ratio.”  Gas-core  reactors  “could  possibly  send  astro- 

320 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November  15-17 

nauts  to  Mars  and  return  them  safely  to  Earth  in   a  total  round-trip 
time of  60 days.”  (A&A ,   11 /71 ,6 )  
November  15-19:   Huntsville  Assn.  of  Technical  Societies  (HATS)   held 
international  Congress  on  Space  for  Mankind’s  Benefit  in   Huntsville, 
Ala.  Purpose  of  meeting was  to  communicate to  nonaerospace public, 
in   nontechnical  language,  practical  benefits  and   dividends  of  U S .  
space program. 
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for 
Planning,  in  keynote  address  said  tools  and   techniques  originating 
from  space  exploration  had  arrived  just  in   time  to  aid  ecologists  in  
saving  planet  earth.  “Many  benefits  are   now  being  realized,  but  we 
can  expect  fa r   greater  returns  as  increasingly  sophisticated  devices  go 
into  service.”  (Program ; Birmingham  Post-Herald,  11/17/71) 
November  16-23:   Photos  from Mariner  9   (launched May  30)   showed  dust 
storm  on  Mars  appeared  to  have  subsided  somewhat  over  south  pole 
area  Nov.  16 ,   and  by  Nov.  19  photos  showed  dust  settling  to  surface 
in  a t   least  two  regions  of  planet.  Scientists  believed  winds  might  have 
died down  in  these areas. 
Mariner  scientists  reported  in   news  conference a t   JPL   Nov.  19  that 
instruments  had  shown  planet  was  flattened  a t   poles  and  bulging  a t  
equator  and  had  more  irregularities  in   its  gravitational  field  than 
moon  had.  Bulge  was  discovered  in   area  called  Tharsis,  on  equator, 
making  planet’s  diameter  39   km  ( 2 4   m i )   greater  at  equator  than 
through  poles.  Infrared  spectrometer had  measured  reflected  radiations 
that  suggested  wide  range  of  rock  compositions  on  Mars  surface,  vary- 
ing   from  high  in  silicon  and  oxygen  to  low.  Spectrometer  had  also 
detected  small  amounts  of  water  vapor  at  south  pole,  as  had  been 
observed on previous Mariner  flights. 
On  Nov.  23 Mariner  9’s  infrared  interferometer  spectrometer  ( IR IS )  
detected  pocket  of  warm  a i r   above  south  polar  cap  in  same  region  as 
water  vapor  traces  had  been  found  earlier.  Air  pocket  was  about 
(Wilford,  NYT,  11/20/71,  51 ;   O’Toole,  W  Post, 
240  K  (-30°C). 
11/20,  23,  24/71 ; Miles,  LA  T imes ,   11/24/71  ; JPL   Hist  Off) 
November  1 6 :   NASA  notified  U.S.S.R.  of  Mariner  9  Mars  orbit  in  telexed 
message  to  I .   A.  Zhulin,  Soviet  space  expert,  in   Moscow.  Message, 
from  Dan  Schneiderman,  Mariner  9  Project  Manager  at  JPL,  said 
spacecraft  had  achieved  desired  orb i t   but  ephemeris  used  in   planning 
orbit  required  60-km  (37 -m i )   adjustment. Mars  “appears  brighter  than 
expected  by  a  factor  of 
two.  Surface  features  are   almost  entirely 
obscured, but  the  south polar  cap  can  be  seen  because  of  its  brightness. 
This  is  believed  to  be  the  result  of  a  dust  storm which  covers  the  entire 
planet.”  Infrared  instruments  on  the  two  Mariner  9  cameras  “appear 
to  be  seeing  the  [Martian]  surface,  but  interpretation  of  their  results 
is complicated  by  effects of  the  dust storm. 
Message  invited  Soviet  request  for  additional  orb i t   information  and  
described  Nov.  10   and  11  photos  taken  by  Mariner  9  before  Mars 
arrival.  Photos  had  shown  “four  distinct  dark  features,”  one  “possibly 
Nix  Olympica.”  Nov.  1 2  photos  had  shown  streaks  1000 km  (620  m i )  
long  originating  at  fourth  spot.  “Changes  in   appearance  of  these  four 
dark  areas  over  the  coming  weeks  may  provide  unique  information 
about the dust storm.”  (NASA  Release 71-229) 

321  

November  16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Pioneer-F,  250-kg  (550-lb)  spacecraft,  was  expected  to  be  ready  for 
launch  from  ETR  in   late  February  or  early March  1972  and   would  fly 
by  Jup i ter   i n   December  1973,  NASA  scientists  announced  a t   JPL   press 
conference.  Pioneer-G  was  to  be  launched  in   1973 and   fly  past  Jupiter 
i n   1974.  NASA  Director  of  Planetary  Programs  Robert  S.  Kraemer  said 
Pioneer  flights  would  be  “vital  precursor”  to  future  Grand  Tour   flights 
to  outer  planets.  Pioneer  spacecraft  would  be  first  to  penetrate  vast 
asteroid  belt  between  Mars  and  Jupiter  and   first  to  study  planet’s 
intense  radiation  belts.  (Wilford, N Y T ,   11/17/71,  26 )  
Assistant  chief  designer  for  U.S.S.R.’s  Lunokhod  1 moon  rover  said  in  
Tass  interview  that  all  goals  of  mission  had  been  attained.  Lunokhod  I 
had  landed  on  moon  Nov.  17,  1970,  on  board  Luna  17  and   had   ex- 
ceeded  expected  three-month  operating  time  and   provided  valuable 
information.  Mission  had   resulted  in   acquisition  of  new  skills  and 
development  of  new  techniques  and  control  methods.  Principles  of 
remote  control,  reliability,  and  durability,  as  well  as  power  supply, 
might  find  application  on  earth.  (FBIS-SOV-71-223-3, 
11/18/71, 
L2-3  ) 
NASA   announced  i t   had  issued  RFPS  for  use  of  space-related  technology  in  
solving  domestic  problems  of  a i r   pollution,  water  pollution,  solid 
waste management,  and  clinical medicine.  Proposals would  be  reviewed 
by  experts  in   each  field  a t   ARC ,   URC, 
and  MSC.  Responses  were  re- 
quested  by  Dec.  15,  1971.  One  o r   more  projects  in   each  field  might 
be  selected  for  negotiations  and  award  of  contract  worth  up  to  $75 000 
for maximum  of  one year.  (NASA   Release 71-226) 
*  Dr.  Cyril  A.  Ponnamperuma-Univ. 
of  Maryland  scientist,  former  Chief 
of  ARC   Exobiology  Branch,  and  leading  authority  on  chemical  building 
blocks  of  l i fe -commen ted   on  Oct.  29  report  by  Columbia  Univ.  scien- 
tists  of  “waterless”  synthesis  of  amino  acids  suggesting  life  might  arise 
on  waterless  planet.  Dr.  Ponnamperuma  said  chemical  reactions  in  
experiment  were  not  independent  of  water’s  role,  since  formic  acid- 
used  in   experiment-contained 
hydroxyl  which  was  water  molecule. 
Synthesis  of  life  building  blocks,  amino  acids,  tha t   had  been  identified 
in   interstellar  base  had  thus  not  been  waterless.  ( N Y T ,  11/17/71,  13) 
House  rejected  amendment  to  H.R.  11731,  FY  1972  Defense  Establish- 
ment  appropriations  bill,  tha t   would  strike  out  $801.6 million  for  F-14 
USN  jet  aircraft  procurement.  (CR, 11/16/71,  H11082-117) 
*  NAE  issued  An   Assessment  of  Industrial  Ac t iv i ty   in   the  Field  of  BW- 
medical  Engineering. Report  of  Committee on   Interplay  of  Engineering 
with  Biology  and   Medicine  recommended  creation  of  Government- 
supported  national  advisory  body  to  inform  and  make  recommendations 
on   development  and  marketing  of  biomedical  products.  I t   also  recom- 
mended  establishment  of  separate  Government  agency  to  develop  and  
test  prototype  products,  issue  licenses  for  production,  and   subsidize 
production  when  market  for  product  was  too  limited  to  allow  profit. 
(NA E   memo to press) 
*  Elrey  B .   Jeppesen,  Chairman  of  Board  of  Jeppesen  and   Co.-world’s 
largest  compiler  and   publisher  of  a i r   navigation  materials-received 
FAA%  Distinguished  Service  Award  “in  recognition  of  his  outstanding 
contributions  to  the  progress  and  safety  of  aviation.”  Award  was  pre- 
sented  a t   Colorado  Aviation  Historical  Society  Dinner  in   Denver. 
(FAA   Release 71-184) 

322 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November  17 
November  17:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos 4455  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t  with 
487-km  (302.6-mi)  apogee,  271-km  (168.4-mi)  perigee,  92.1-min 
period,  and   70.9’  inclination.  Satellite  reentered  April  9,  1972.  (GSFC 
S S R ,  11/30/71;  4/30/72;  SBD,  11 /23 /71 ,111)  
Lunar  roving  vehicle  (LRV)  which  would  transport  astronauts  John  W. 
Young  and   Charles  M.  Duke,  Jr.,  on  moon  dur ing   Apollo  16 mission 
had  successfully  completed  prelaunch  checks  and   been  installed  on  
lunar   module  for  flight,  KSC  announced.  Astronauts  Young  and   Duke 
would  make  three  excursions  on  LRV  in  Descartes  area   of  moon  dur ing  
mission,  scheduled  for  March  1972.  Final  approval  of  LRV  flight  readi- 
ness  was  given  by  Dr.  Rocco  A.  Petrone,  Apollo  Program  Director, 
after  installation  review.  LRV  was  managed  by  MSFC   and   was  built  by 
Boeing Co.  (KSC   Release 259-71) 
0  Skylab  flight  hardware  manufacturing  was  nearing  completion,  MSFC 
announced.  Post-manufacturing  checkout  would  soon  begin  a t   indus- 
trial  and   Government  installations.  Major  Skylab  spacecraft  compo- 
( A TM )  , airlock 
nents  include  Workshop,  Apollo  Telescope  Mount 
module  ( A M ) ,   and  multiple  docking  adapter 
(MSFC   Release 
( M D A ) .  
71-212) 
*  Appointment  of  David  S.  Gabriel  as   Manager  of  AEC-NASA  Space 
Nuclear  Systems  Office  was  announced  by  NASA.  Gabriel,  Deputy 
Manager,  would  succeed  Milton  Klein,  who  had   accepted  position  as 
Associate  Administrator  for  Research,  Development,  and  Demonstra- 
tion  Activities  in   Federal  Railway  Administration.  Gabriel  had  joined 
NACA  a t  LeRC  i n  1943.  (NASA  Release 71-228) 
Nike-Tomahawk  sounding  rocket  was  launched  by  NASA   from  Kenya, 
Africa,  carry ing   GSFC  experiment  to  conduct  stellar  astronomy  studies. 
Rocket  and   instruments  functioned  satisfactorily.  (SR  l is t)  
Fine  Arts  Commission-overseer  of  Federal  architecture  in   Washington, 
d a n s  for  $400-million National  A ir   and  %ace  Museum 
D.C.-endorsed 
but  requested  architect  Gyo  Obata  to  redesign  facade  details.  (Combes, 
W Post,  11/18/71,  H 3 )  
*  FAA  announced  appointment  of  Dr.  Alan  J .   Grobecker  of  Institute  for  
Defense  Analysis 
to   direct  new  DOT  High  Altitude  Climatic 
( IDA )  
Impact  Assessment Program.  Purpose  of  program  was  to  provide  basic 
data  for  projected  operation  of  supersonic  a ircraf t   a t   altitudes  ahove 
1 4  000 m  (45  000 f t ) .   (DOT  Release R-81)  
Apollo  15 astronauts  on  European  tour  met  with  Pope  Pau l   VI   in  Rome. 
Pope  told  them  he  hoped  their  voyage  to  moon  would  help  men  appre- 
ciate  God  and   live  in  harmony.  (AI’,  V Post,  11/18/71,  H 3 )  
9  House  by  vote  of  342  to  51  passed  H.R.  11731,  $7l-billion  FY  1972  
Defense  Dept.  appropriations  bill,  after  rejecting  amendment  to  ear- 
mark  $10  million  to  develop  two  prototype,  light,  air-superiority 
aircraft  for  USN  as  alternate to  F-14  aircraft.  ( C R ,  11/17/71,  H11162- 
203 ) 
*  Tass  quoted  U.S.S.R.  scientists  as  saying  it  was  possible  to  observe  long- 
life  plasma  a s   “light  of  blinding  brightness,  and   freely  soaring  in  
space,”  with  optical  instrument.  Optical  plasmatron  a t  Physics  Institute 
of  U.S.S.R.  Academy  of  Sciences  had   enabled  scientists  to  apply 
energy  to  plasma  by  light  beam  from  quantum  generator.  Broad 
application  of  technique  could  be  expected  in  physics,  technology,  and  
engineering.  (FBIS-sov-71-223-3, 
11/18/71,  L2 )  

323 

November  17 

ASTRONAU’l’ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Cambridge  Univ.  astronomer  Dr.  David  Dewhirst  said  in  Cambridge  tha t  
irregularities  i n   orb i t   of  Neptune,  eighth  planet  from  sun,  indicated 
possible  presence  of  another  body.  “But  I  must  emphasize  that  a t  
present  this  is  only  a  notion.”  Dr.  Dewhirst  said  U S .   Naval  Observa- 
tory  had   supplied  photos  for   study.  (UPI, W News ,   11/18/71,  15)  
Baltimore  Sun  editorial  commented  on  quantity  of  new  scientific  data  to 
be  expected  from  U.S.  Muriner  9  and   U.S.S.R.  Murs  2  and   3  probes 
of  Mars-data 
“certain  to  be  gathered  later  if  not  now.”  Whatever 
was  learned,  “the  store  of  mystery  held  by  the  skies  and  even  their 
nearest  objects  will  remain  enormous.  . . . The  admiration  for  man’s 
persistence  in   pitting  his  intelligence,  skill,  courage  and  inventiveness 
against  the  solar  system’s  magnificent  teases  is  equaled  by  the  folly 
of  supposing  we  shall  ever  read  any  but  a  few  of  their  overpowering 
riddles.”  ( B  Sun, 11/17/71) 
November  18 :   Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  said  in  speech 
before  National  Space  Club  that  Apollo  program  would  end  with 
Apollo  16  and  17  launches  in   1972.  Later,  responding  to  question 
concerning  possible  cancellation  of  Apollo  17  because  of  FY  1973 
budget  restraints,  Dr.  Fletcher  said,  “The  fate  of  Apollo  17  is  beyond 
my  control a t  the present  time.” 
NASA   was  shifting  emphasis,  Dr.  Fletcher  said  in  speech:  “When 
Apollo  ends,  most  of  our  space  activities  planned  for  this  decade  will 
be  in   Earth  orbit-and  Moon  exploration,  for  a  time,  will  be  left 
completely  to  the  Soviets.”  Continuing  effort  to  explore  planets  also 
was  related  to  ear th   studies.  “I   am  sure  that  much  of  what  we  learn 
will  have  direct  and   valuable  application  to  our  understanding  of 
Earth  and   our  current  concern  with  environmental  protection.”  Apollo 
photos  of  ear th   had  helped  create  concern  for  world’s  environment. 
“I  am  glad  to  say  that  NASA  is now  well  prepared  to  take  a  leading  role 
in  defining  and  responding  to  this  concern.”  Apollo  technology  and 
equipment  would  be  used  directly  in   Skylab  and   directly  o r   indirectly 
in  space  shuttle,  Dr.  Fletcher  said.  “Moreover,  we  gained  invaluable 
experience  in   Ear th   orbital  operations  in   the  Gemini  program  and  on 
the  way  to  the  Moon  and   back.  We  a re   well  prepared  for  the  next 
logical  steps  in   near-Earth  space.  I  wish  very  much  we  could  continue 
lunar   exploration  . . . but  if  we  have  to  make  ha rd   choices  in  this 
decade,  then  the  right  choice  is  to  return  to  Earth  orbit  and   defer 
lunar  exploration.” 
NASA   hoped  to  keep  open  option  of  additional  Apollo  missions  in  
earth  orbit.  “This  would  enable  us   to  carry   out  additional  experiments 
in   our  Earth  resources  program,  and   would  also  facilitate  our  planning 
for  cooperative  flights  with  the  Soviet  Union.” 
Worldwide  demand  for  applications  satellites  could  be  met  only  by 
production  of  space  shuttle.  “The  key  to  our  ability  to  help  our  coun- 
t ry   and   to  serve  mankind  i s   now  the  shuttle.  The  sooner  we  bu i ld   it, 
the  better we can serve.”  (Tex t ;  A v  W k ,  11/29/71,  1 3 )  
Bochum Observatory  in West Germany said  it had  received  what  appeared 
to  be  on  and   off  switching  signals  from  Soviet  Mars  probes,  Ma r s   2 
and  3.  (AP, W Pos t ,  11/19/71,  A3) 
Atomic  Energy  Commission  announced  Communist  China  had  conducted 
atmospheric  nuclear  explosion  test  of  low-yield  (20 00 0   tons)  a t   2 : O O  
pm  local  time.  Explosion  was  12th  Chinese  nuclear  test  and   first  since 

324 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November  18 

Oct.  14,  1970.  Test  was  conducted  a t   top  of  Lop  Nor   proving  ground 
in   Sinkiang  Province.  Dr.  Ralph  Lapp,  physicist,  later  said  pattern  of 
Chinese  nuclear  tests  indicated  Chinese  had  intended  to  explode  larger  
hydrogen  device  that  required  small  atomic  blast  to  trigger  thermo- 
nuclear  reaction.  Dr.  Lapp  believed  hydrogen  bomb  failed  to  go  o f f .  
Other  experts  said  explosion  could  have  been  test  of 
intermediate- 
range  ballistic  missile.  (Auerbach,  W  Post,  11/19/71,  A3;  Lyons, 
N Y T ,  11 /19 /71 ,1 )  
A IAA   Louis  W.  Hill  Space  Transportation  Award  was  presented  to  Dr. 
Hubertus  Strugbold,  former  chief  scientist  of  AFSC  Aerospace  Medical 
Div.,  dur ing   ceremonies  a t   San   Antonio,  Tex.  Citation  was  for  “sig- 
nificant  contributions  indicative  of  American  enterprise  and   ingenuity 
in   the  a r t   and  science  of  space  travel.”  Dr.  Strughold  was  cited  for 
establishing  rational  biomedical  functions  for  manned  space  explora- 
tion.  (AFSC   Newsreview,  1 / 72 ,13 )  
Moscow  radio  reported  first  Soviet  sounding  of  outer  space  by  radio 
wave.  Scientists  a t   Univ.  of  Kharkov  had  used  geophysical  rockets  and  
other  means  to  explore  to  5000-km  (3100-mi)  altitude.  Uninterrupted 
picture  of  electronic  concentration  “and  its  temporary  fluctuations  at 
any   point  a t   this  height  and   also  in  the  horizontal  plane”  had  been 
obtained.  Findings  had  confirmed  scientists’  model  of 
the  earth’s 
ionosphere.  ( FBIS-s0v-71-237-12/9/7l7  L4 )  
Senate  Committee  on  Appropriations  favorably  reported  H.R.  11731, 
$70.2-billion  FY  1972 Defense  Establishment  appropriations  bill,  after 
decreasing  House-passed  figure  by  $805.5  million,  (Sen  Com  Off) 
MIT   had  broken  even  financially  dur ing   1970-1971  academic  year,  AP 
reported,  “but  only  by  using  funds  that  otherwise  would  have  gone 
into  endowments.”  I n  final  annual  report  as  MIT   President,  Dr.  Howard 
W.  Johnson  had  said  outlook  was  not  bright  if  MIT   had  to  continue 
using  unrestricted  funds  for  current  costs.  Another  way  budget  was 
balanced  was  by  increasing  tuition  costs.  ( W  Pos t ,   11/19/71,  B5) 
November  19:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos 456  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with 
287-km  (178.3-mi)  apogee,  175-km  (108.7-mi)  perigee,  89.1-min 
inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Dec.  2.  (CSFC  S SR ,  
period,  and  72.8’ 
11/30/71;  12/31/71;  S BD ,  11 /23 /71 ,111)  
Working  Groups  of  NASA  and  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  on  develop- 
ment  of  compatible  space  rendezvous  and  docking  systems would  meet 
jointly  in   Moscow  Nov.  29  to  Dec.  7,  NASA  announced.  NASA  represen- 
tatives  headed  by  Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  MSC  Director,  would  meet 
with  Soviet  group  led  by  Academician  B.  N.  Petrov  to  continue  joint 
efforts  called  for  by  Oct.  28,  1970,  agreement.  (NASA   Release  71-231) 
*  Biostack,  West  German  experiment  to  study  biological  effects  of  cosmic 
radiation  during  space  flight,  would  be  carried  in   Apollo  16  CM ,   NASA 
announced.  Experiment,  by  Univ.  of  Frankfurt,  would  stack  four  layers 
of  biological  sys tems-spores ,   seeds  of  European  watercress,  bean 
embryos,  and  encysted  eggs  of  brine  shrimp-between 
different  physi- 
cal  detectors  of  heavy  particle  tracks  (nuclear  emulsions  and   plastics). 
Measurements  of  effect  of  particles  on  biologic  material  could  be 
compared  with  effect  of  same  particles  on  detecting  layers  to  provide 
data  on  strength  and   other  characteristics  of  particles.  Combined 
action  of  heavy  cosmic  ions  and   space  environment  would  be  evalu- 
ated  by  comparing  results  with  those  from  balloon-borne  Biostacks 

325 

November  19 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

and  with  ground-based  irradiation  experiments.  Research  on  biological 
effects of  heavy  nuclei  was  significant  because  of  possible  relationship 
to  biological  effects of  space  flight  on  man.  Experiment  was  sponsored 
by  German Ministry  for  Education  and  Science.  (NASA  Release 71-230) 
*  AEC   released  summary  report  on  effects  of  Nov.  6 Cannikin  blast  of  five- 
megaton  nuclear  device  on  Amchitka  Island,  Alaska.  Desired  da ta   had  
been  obtained  on  performance  of  Spartan  warhead.  Analyses  of  radio- 
active  melt,  expected  to  be  completed  by  spr ing   1972,  were  required 
to  evaluate  warhead  performance  fully.  There  had  been  “no  detectable 
release  of  radioactivity  to  the  marine  or  surface  environment.”  Meas- 
urements  would  “continue  for  a  number  of  years.”  No   large  ear th-  
quake  had  been  triggered  although  “hundreds  of  after-shocks”  had 
been  registered  in   vicinity  until  collapse  of  cavity  created  by  detona- 
tion.  Ground  motion  had   been  felt  “strongly  on  Amchitka,  distinctly 
a t   kdak ,   nearly  200  miles  [320  km]  away,  and   less  distinctly  a t  
Shemya,  somewhat  farther  away.”  No  large  ocean  wave  from  ocean 
floor  movement  had  been  recorded.  Observed  effects  on  living  species 
on  and   near  Amchitka  Island  had  indicated  %o  permanent  harm  will 
result  from  the  test  to  any  population  of  mammals,  birds,  fish,  other 
marine  life,  or  plant  life.”  (AEC   Release  0-221) 
On  second  anniversary  of  its  emplacement  on  moon  by  Apollo  12  astro- 
nauts,  atomic  battery  designed  to  power  Apollo  12  experiments  for 
one  year  was  still  generating  a t   more  than  70  w.  Battery  had   been 
designed  to  produce  63.5-w  power.  Apollo  12  instruments  were  still 
reporting  data.  Identical  batteries,  fueled  by  radioactive  plutonium  238 
and  taken  to  moon  by  Apollo  14  and   15, were  generating  more  than 
70  w.  Apollo  16 and   1 7  would  land  similar  batteries  on  moon  dur ing  
1972  missions,  AEC   reported.  (UP I ,   V Pos t ,   11/20/71,  A3 )  
*  O$ce  of  Management  and   Budget  had  asked  NASA  to  cut  FY  1973 budget 
request  “quite  a  few  million  dollars’’  below  $3.3-billion  FY  1972 
budget  according  to  New  Yo rk   Times’  sources,  Times  said.  Dale  D. 
Myers,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space  Flight,  had 
said  Apollo  16  and   17  “look  firm,”  but  could  “be  in   trouble’’  if  there 
was  significant  cut  i n   NASA  funding.  Other  sources  had  said  NASA 
had  alternate  plans  that  included  elimination  of  one  or  both  Apollo 
flights  and   curtailment,  cancellation,  o r   delay  of  other  projects. 
(Wilford, NYT ,   11/19/71) 
Daniel  Guggenheim  Medal  was  presented  to  Dr.  Archibald  E.  Russell, 
Chief  Designer  for  Bristol  Aircraft  Corp.,  dur ing   Washington,  D.C., 
ceremonies  marking  first  William  Littlewood  Memorial  Lecture  spon- 
sored  by  NAC   and   Washington  sections  of  A IAA   and   SAE.  Award  was 
for  “personal  devotion  to  aircraft  engineering  and   design  and  par- 
ticularly  for  his  leadership  of  the  Bristol  team  in   development  of  the 
Concorde  SST.”  Peter  G .   Masefield,  Chairman  of  British  Airports 
Authority,  delivered  first  Littlewood  lecture,  “Aviation  and   the  En- 
vironment.,’  NAC   Man  of  Distinction  Award  was  given  posthumously 
to  William  Littlewood,  former  American  Airlines  Vice  President  and  
aviation  engineering  consultant.  ( NAC  Release) 
*  President  Nixon  had  asked  Congress  for  $9.1  million  to  purchase  new 
presidential  backup  a ircraf t   to  replace  13-yr-old  Boeing  707  used  as 
backup  a ircraf t   for  Spirit  of  ’76,  Washington Post  reported.  Presi- 

326 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November  19 

dent’s  aircraft,  formerly  known  as   A i r   Force  One,  was  Boeing  707- 
320-B  delivered  to  USAF  i n   1962.  ( W  Post,  11/19/71,  B7)  
Senate  Committee  on  Foreign  Relations  favorably  reported  Protocol  to 
enlarge  ICAO  Council  membership  from  27  to   30  members.  Enlarged 
Council  would  reflect  expanding  membership  of  ICAO  due  to  establish- 
ment  of  increasing  number  of  civil  airlines  throughout  world.  ( C R ,  
11/19/71,  D1201;  ICAO  P IO )  
*  Mrs.  E.  Margaret  Burbidge  would  become  first  woman  director  of  Royal 
Greenwich  Observatory  i n   1972,  Washington  Post  reported.  British- 
born  former  professor  of  astronomy  a t   Univ.  of  California  would  not 
inherit  title of  Astronomer  Royal,  traditionally  bestowed  upon  Observa- 
tory  Director.  She  would  direct  staff  of  200,  including  25   women 
scientists.  (Nossiter, W Pos t ,  11/19/71,  A26) 
FAA  announced  availability  from  G P O   of  FAA  Statistical  Handbook  of 
Av ia t ion   (5007-0166).  Publication  contained  historical  and   statistical 
data  for  11 yrs  ending Dec.  31,  1969.  (FAA   Release  71-183) 
November  20 :  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  457  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit with 
1221-km  (758.7-mi)  apogee,  1184-km  (735.7-mi)  perigee,  109.4-min 
period,  and   74”   inclination.  (GSFC  S SR ,   11 /30 /71 ;   S BD ,   11/23/71, 
111 )  
Pioneer-F,  scheduled  for  early  1972  launch  and   Dec.  1973 Jupiter  flyby, 
began  its  final  test  i n   TRW  Inc.  vacuum  chamber.  Spacecraft  would 
operate  for  week  on  nuclear  batteries  in   cold  and   almost  total  darkness 
to  simulate  Jupiter  approach.  Pioneer’s  voyage  would  be  longest  space 
tr ip   to  date-an 
estimated  660  days-and  most  hazardous  since Pioneer 
would  attempt  for   first  time  to   fly  through  asteroid  belt.  Typical 
mathematical  model  of  asteroid  belt  gave  Pioneer  1-in-10 chance  of 
penetrating  belt  without  serious  mishap.  (O’Toole,  W  Post,  11/21/71, 
A3 1 
NASA  launched  two  Aerobee  170   sounding  rockets  carry ing   GSFC  stellar 
uv  experiments  from  WSMR .   One  flight  was  unsuccessful.  (SR  l is t)  
November  21:  New  Yo rk   T imes   sa id   Mariner  9  dust  s torm  encounter  had  
< L  made  possible  some  unique  experiments  in   global  meteorology- 
experiments  tha t   may  help  us   t o   understand  the   weather  of  our  own 
planet.”  Storm  had  lasted  longer  than  any  observed  so  far.  “Since  it 
is  hoped  that  Mariner  will  continue  sending  pictures  fo r   at  least  three 
months,  it  seems  likely  tha t   it  will  record  the   gradual  dissipation  of 
the  storm,  which  seems  to  have  already  begun,  and   in   doing  so 
hopefully  will  reveal  wind  patterns  on  the  planet.  Th is   may  help 
scientists  understand  why  the  storm  is  global,  a  phenomenon  never 
seen  on  earth,  and  establish  the  science  of  meteorology-now 
a  pro- 
a  more 
vincial  one  based  on   the  weather  of  only  one  planet-on 
cosmopolitan  basis.”  (Sullivan, N Y T ,  11/21/71,  4 : s )  
CBS  commentator  Walter  Cronkite  received  Bradford  Washington  Award 
of  Boston  Museum  of  Science  f o r   “ooutstariding  contribution  toward 
public  understanding  of  ~ c i e n c e . ’ ~  Award,  which  included  $5000  and  
gold  medal,  was  presented  by  Astronaut  James  A.  Lovell,  Jr.,  a t   din- 
ner  commemorating  museum’s  35th  anniversary.  Cronkite  was  CBS 
anchorman  for   coverage  of  most  NASA  manned  space  flight  missions. 
(AP, Denver Pos t ,  11/22/71;  Lovell Off) 
November  22:  Study  of  telemetry  from  unsuccessful  Europa  2  European 
launch  vehicle  that  failed  on  launch  Nov.  5 had  shown  vehicle  buckled 

327 

November  22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

a t   1st-end  stage  junction  2  min  30  sec  after  liftoff  during  excessive 
pitch-over  maneuver,  Av ia t ion   Week  &  Space  Technology  reported. 
Vehicle’s  structural  limits  were  exceeded;  2nd  stage  nozzle  pierced 
liquid  oxygen  tank  atop  1st  stage,  causing  it  to  explode;  2nd  stage 
separated  in  tumbling  flight  and  exploded  10  sec la te r ;   and  3rd  stage, 
4th  stage  perigee  motor,  and  payload  fell  into  South  Atlantic  about 
490  km  (305  m i )   downrange.  Failure  had  been  attributed  to  loss  of 
inertial-guidance-system  signals  between  1 min  45  sec  and  1 min  47 
sec  after  launch.  Engines  on  1st  stage  had  driven  Europa  2  below 
programmed  trajectory  because  corrective  signals  had  not  been  sent 
to  stage’s  autopilot.  Exact  cause  of 
inertial-guidance-system  break- 
down  had  not  been  determined.  If  cause  could  not  be  established 
before  Dec.  15,  launch  of  12th  satellite  in   Europa  1-2  development 
for  April  13,  1972-would 
series-scheduled 
have  to  be  delayed. 
( A v  W k ,  11 /22 /71 ,19)  
MSC   announced  i t   had  issued  RFPS  to   10  firms  for  $150000  firm-fixed- 
price  R&D   contract  to  study  space  walking  requirements  in   space  shut- 
tle  program.  Proposal  called  fo r   investigation  of  emergency,  contin- 
gency,  and   normal  extravehicular  and  intravehicular  activities  (EVA /  
IVA )   while  outside  earth’s  atmosphere  and  study  of  protective  equip- 
ment  needed  to  perform  EVA/IVA.  Proposals  were  due  Dec.  6 .   (M SC  
\ 
Release 71-83) 
*  New  $200-million international  airport  a t   Kansas  City,  Mo.,  was  being 
built  under  NASA-developed  management  system,  NASA  announced. 
Midwest  Research  Institute,  management  consultant  for  project,  was 
using  K C I   Management  Information  Center-fully 
equipped  briefing 
room  that  resembled  ICSC’S--ZS 
repository  for  reference  data  on  a ir-  
port project.  (NASA  Release 71-232) 
I t   was  “open  secret”  that  USAF  saw  space  shuttle  as  “broad  highway 
that  will  lead  to  manned  military  space  operations  by  the  United 
States,”  Universal  Science  News,  Inc.,  sa id   in  Dallas  Morning  News .  
While  “effort  to  keep  NASA’s civilian  image  seemed  so  important  a t  
one  time  that  the  military  were  allowed  to  s tar t   their  own  manned 
orbiting  laboratory  program,  even  though  NASA  has  a  similar  project,” 
recent  budget  squeeze  had  “forced  NASA  and  the  Air  Force  closer  to-  
gether  in  certain  areas.”  ( D a h s  Morning  News ,   11 /22 /71)  
*  USAF  reconnaissance satellite  “Big  Bird”  launched  in  June  was  described 
in   Newsweek  article:  “Streaking  through  its  orbit,  Big  Bird  scans 
broad  land  areas  with  one  wide-angle  camera,  radios  what  it  sees 
back  to  ground  stations,  and,  on  order,  turns   a  giant  ‘narrow  angle’ 
second  camera  on  targets  of  special  interest  fo r   closeup  pictures-a 
multiple  function  that  used  to  require  a t   least  two  less  sophisticated 
satellites.”  Cameras  in  satellites  160  km  (100  m i )   above  earth  “can 
clearly  photograph  objects  on  the  ground  the  size  of  small  cars.” 
(Newsweek ,  11/22/71,  18) 
November  23:  Four  extra  manned  space  flight  missions  to  use  four  Apollo 
spacecraft  and  one  Sa turn   V  launch  vehicle  left  after  1973  Skylab 
mission  were  proposed  by  MSC   officials  to  NASA  Associate  Administra- 
to r   for   Manned  Space  Flight  Dale  D.  Myers  a t   NASA  Hq.  Missions 
would  include  one  lunar  flight  and  three  Sa turn   IB-launched  earth- 
orbital  missions.  Houstun  Chronicle  later  quoted  MSC   Deputy  Director 
Christopher  C .   Kraft,  Jr.,  who  had  presented  proposal,  as  saying  MSC 

328 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November 23 

plan  called  for   one  mission  of  up  to  nine  days  in  lunar   orbit.  Astro- 
nauts  could  map  60%   of  lunar   surface  and  place  Nimbus  weather 
satellite  in   lunar   orbit  to  complete photography  of  en t ire  moon  in   one 
year.  (Hill, H  Chron,  11/29/71) 
Commercial  pilot  Elgin  L.  Long  flew  over  South  Pole  in   twin-engine 
P iper   Navajo  aircraft  to  become  first  man  to  make  solo  flight  over 
both  North  and  South  Poles  dur ing   one  journey.  Long,  who  left  San 
Francisco  Nov.  5,  had  flown  over  North  Pole  to  Stockholm,  then  to 
London,  Africa,  Brazil,  and  Chile  before  crossing  South  Pole.  ( W  
Post,  11/23/71,  B3) 
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Plan- 
ning,  was  first  speaker  in   L ~ R C  Awareness  Program  series.  Dr.  Von 
Braun  said  a t   LeRC:  “Our  agency  is  a t   the  crossroads.  Our  success 
story  is  our  greatest  enemy.”  After  four  successful  manned  lunar 
landings,  people  had  become  complacent.  If  NASA  fell  behind  U.S.S.R. 
in   space,  it  wouId  create  another  “Sputnik”  environment.  (Lewis 
News,  12/3/71,  1) 
*  NASA  announced  selection  of  TRW  Systems  Group  for  negotiations  leading 
to  $70-million  contract  fo r   development  of  High  Energy  Astronomy 
Observatory  ( H E A O )  . Seven-year  contract  for  two  spacecraft  would 
be  awarded  in  1972  and  was  expected  to  extend  through  launch  and 
mission  support  for  orbital  operations.  NASA  planned  to  launch  first 
HEAO   unmanned  scientific  satellite  from  ETR  on  Titan  111  booster  in  
(NASA   Release  71-233;  NYT, 
1975  and  second,  15   mos. 
later. 
11/26/71,  30) 
0  Soviet  defectors-writer  Leonid  Vladimirov,  who  defected  in  1966,  and 
scientist  Anatoly  Fedoseyev  [see  June  19l-said 
at  London  press  con- 
ference  that  Soviet  space  technology  had  lagged  behind  that  of  U S .  
and  had  produced  less  scientific  data.  Fedoseyev,  not  present  but 
responding  by  tape  recorder  to  questions  put  to  him  previously,  said 
he  did  not  think  Soviet  space  achievements  would  be   scientifically 
impressive for  some  time  because  Soviet  space  program  was  shor t   of 
funds  and  technology  level  was  low.  Fedoseyev  was  said  to  have  been 
responsible  for  bringing  down  U-2 
reconnaissance  a ircraf t   pilot 
Francis  Gary  Powers  in  May  1960,  Reuters  later  reported.  (Reuters, 
B Sun,  11/24/71,  A4) 
*  Senate by  vote  of  82   to  141  adopted  amendment  to  H.R.  11731,  FY  1972 
Defense  Establishment  appropriations  bill,  and   passed  bill  by  vote 
of 80 to  5.  Amendment  proposed by  Sen. Henry M.  Jackson  (D-Wash.) 
would  provide  $250  million  fo r   F 4  je t   a ircraf t   for   Israel.  (CRY  
11/23/71,  $29463-551) 
USN  Naval  Air  Systems Command  announced  issuance  of  $3-million  let- 
ter  of  offer  and   acceptance  to  U.K.  Ministry  of  Defence  for  product 
support  engineering  services  for  Pegasus  11  engines  for  Harr ier   a ir-  
craft.  Work  would  be   performed  by  Hawker  Siddeley  Aviation,  Ltd. 
(DOD  Release  1191-71) 
*  Washington Post  editorial  commented  on  plans  for   new  Air  and  Space 
Museum:  “We  are   glad  that  skyrocketing  costs  have  brought  the 
proposed  National  Air  and   Space  Museum  down  to  earth.  The  trou- 
ble  with  the  design  architect  Gyo  Obata  prepared  several  years  ago 
was  not  only  tha t   i t   would  now  cost  $70  million  to   build.  It  was  also 
f a r   too  grandiose,  bold  and   ambitious.”  U S .   a i r   and  space  accorn- 

329 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
November  23 
plishments  “have  a  very  prominent  place  in   the  hearts  of  the  Ameri- 
can   people  . . . they  should  also  have  a prominent  place  i n  the  nation’s 
capital.  But  that  is  not  to  say  tha t   we  need  o r   want  a  monumental 
aircraft  hangar.”  Museum  Director,  Apollo  11  Astronaut  Michael 
Collins,  had  described  new  museum  a s   “national  center  for   education 
about  the  science  and   technology  of  flight  and   its  economic,  social, 
cultural  and   political  meaning.”  New  model,  Post  said,  “shows  a 
pleasing  and   interesting  structure  that  is  well  behaved.  . . . If  i t   lacks 
architectural  excitement,  tha t   is  not  what  we  want  on  the  Mall.” 
Post  also  published  letter  from  Gilmore  D.  Clarke,  former  Chair- 
man  of  Commission  of  F ine   Arts,  protesting  construction  of  Air  and  
Space  Museum  on  Mall,  “on  a  site  of  restricted  size  whereon  the 
s truc ture   cannot  be  enlarged  in   the  course  of  years  as   the   science  of 
aviation  and  outer  space  technology  advances.  Whatever  is  built  will, 
within  a  decade  or  two,  prove  to   be  too  small.”  ( W  P o s t ,   11/23/71, 
A18,  A19) 
November  24 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  M d n i y a   ZZ-1  comsat  from  Plesetsk  to 
ensure  “functioning  of  the  remote  telephone-telegraph  rad io   commu- 
nications  systems  in   the  Soviet  Union,  for  relaying  central  television 
programs  to  stations”  in   Orbita  network  and  participating  interna- 
tional  networks.  Satellite  was  new  comsat  and   pa r t   of  fur ther   devel- 
opment  of  Soviet  satellite  communications  system.  Orbital  parameters : 
39 553-km  (24  577.1-mi)  apogee,  516-km  (320.6-mi)  perigee,  712.0- 
min  period,  and  65.0’ 
11/26/71, 
inclination.  ( FBIS-SOV-71-228-3, 
L1;  CSFC  SSR ,   11/30/71;  UN  Gen’l  Assembly,  A/AC.105/INF.243; 
SF ,   5/72,  179 )  
Tass  announced  tha t   French  equipment  on  Mars  3  (launched  May  2 8 )  
fo r   investigating  solar  radio  emission  in   one-meter-waveband  experi- 
ment  was  functioning  successiully.  French  instrumentation  was  manu- 
factured  by  French  specialists  under  French-Soviet  cooperative  pro- 
gram.  (FBIS-SOV-71-228-3, 
11/26/71,  L1 )  
MSFC  announced  selection  of  Itek  Corp.  to  perform  large  space  tele- 
scope  definition  study  under  $400 000,  12-mo  contract.  High-resolu- 
tion  optical  telescope  3  m  (120  i n )   in  diameter  would  be  placed  in  
630-  to  810-km  (391- to  503-mi)  orbit  aboard   research  and   applica- 
tions  module  ( R A M )   by  reusable  shuttle  vehicle  o r   T i tan   I11  launch 
vehicle  in   late  1970s  as  national  facility  for   operation  by  many  astron- 
omers.  (MSFC  Release 71-219) 
Merrill  H.  Mead,  Chief  of  ARC   Programs  and   Resources  Office,  had  been 
named  ARC  Deputy  Director  of  Administration,  ARC  Astrogram  re- 
ported.  (ARC  Astrogram,  11 /24 /71 ,1)  
Mariner  9  and   Soviet Mars  2  and   3  race  to  Mars  was  “exciting  race  fo r  
knowledge  and   the  fame  of  exploration,  exemplifying  the  kind  of 
peaceful  competition  the  world  needs,”  Washington  Evening  Star  edi- 
tor ia l   commented.  “If  Mariner  9  reveals  half  of  what  it  was  sent  ou t  
to  find,  i t   will  be  worth  much  more  than   the  $150  million  i t   is  cost- 
i,g.” 
(W  Star,  11/24/71) 
*  Boris  Sergievsky,  World  War  I  aviator  with  Imperial  Russian  Air  Force 
and   later  leading  test  pilot  in   US . ,   died  in   New  York  a t   age  83.  He 
had  set  seaplane  records  with  Pan   American  World  Airways’  Brazilian 
Clipper,  flown  Sikorsky  amphibian  aircraft  to   Chile  in   1931, and   been 
vice  president  of  Helicopter  Corp.  of  America.  ( N Y T ,  11/26/71,  38) 

330 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November 25 

November  25 :   T h e   Russian  Space  Bluff  by  Leonid  Vladimirov,  Soviet 
engineer-journalist  who  had  defected  in   1966,  had   been  published  i n  
U.K.,  AP   reported.  Book  sa id   Soviet  space  program  had  begun  as 
series  of  publicity  stunts  to  persuade  West  tha t   U.S.S.R.  had  reached 
level  of  advanced  technology  equal  to   that  of  U S .   Vladimirov  had 
said  that  U.S.S.R.  knew  ‘‘she  could  not  beat  America  to   the   moon 
because  she  cannot  build  a  moon  rocket.  Even  today  the  Soviet  Union 
cannot produce  any  significantly big je t  nozzles.” 
Mid-1960  flights  in   Voskhod  series  had  been  shor t   because  space- 
craft  were  overloaded  earlier  Vostok  type  with  some  equipment  re- 
moved.  Last-minute  modifications  had  been  engineering  disgrace. 
(AP, W S tar ,   11/25/71,  H7 )  
November  26-27:  Mariner  9  (launched  toward  Mars  May  30)   took  man’s 
first  close  photo  of  Martian  moon  Deimos  on  spacecraft’s  25th  revo- 
lution  of  Mars  Nov.  26.  Mariner  9  w a s   10  300  km  (6400m i )   from  
Mars  and   8500  km  (5300  m i )   from  Deimos  when  photo  was  taken. 
Picture  told  scientists  that  Deimos  was  almost  12.9  km  (8 m i )   in  
diameter  and   was  shaped  more  like  potato  than  grapefruit.  Dr.  Carl 
Sagan,  director  of  Cornel1  University’s  Laboratory  for  Planetary 
Studies,  cautioned  against  speculation  on  moon’s  makeup,  but  said 
“whatever  its  origins  the  Mariner  mission  represents  a  wonderful 
opportunity  to   study  it.”  Deimos  was  discovered  along  with  other 
Martian  moon  Phobos  in   1877  by  American  astronomer  Asaph  Hall, 
who  named  moons  after  two  sons  of  Greek  mythological  god  Ares- 
Mars  in   Roman  mythology-as 
given  by  Homer  in   Iliad. 
On  Nov.  27  Mariner  9  failed  in  attempt  at  closeup  photograph  of 
Martian  moon  Phobos.  JPL   ground  controllers  said  spacecraft’s  cam- 
era   wasn’t  pointed  correctly  when  attempt  was  made.  Orbit  of  Phobos 
was  not  known  precisely  enough  to  ensure  getting  photo.  Successful 
photo  of  Phobos  would  have  shown  greater  detail  than  recent  picture 
of  Deimos,  Mars’  other  moon,  since  Phobos  was  twice  as  large  as 
Deimos  and   spacecraft  passed  1600  km  (100  m i )   closer.  Mariner  9 
had  photographed  Phobos  Nov.  13 from  150 000  km  (93  000 m i )   out. 
(O’Toole,  W  Po s t ,   11/27/71,  A4;  W  Star,  11/28/71,  A6)  
November  26:  Univ.  of  Michigan  physicist  Lawrence  C.  Jones  was  quoted 
in   Kansas  C i t y   T ime s   a s   saying  use  of  liquid  hydrogen  as  nonpol- 
luting  automobile  fuel  was  ‘‘not  only  technically  and   economically 
feasible”  but  also  “desirable”  and   “may  even  be  inevitable.”  Hydrogen 
could  be  used  in   conventional  a ircraf t   and  automobile  gasoline  engines 
and   “has  the  desirable  fea ture  of  burning  very  efficiently.”  (KC  T imes ,  
11/26/71) 
Pravda  Vos toka   newspaper  of  Tashkent,  Uzbek  Republic,  published  ac- 
count  of  autumn  1966 detonation  by  U.S.S.R.  of  underground  nuclear 
charge  of  “unprecedented  force”  to   extinguish  na tura l   gas  fire  tha t  
raged  ou t   of  control  for  three  years  in   Central  Asia.  New  York   T imes  
said  la ter   that  successful  experiment  was  believed  to  be  first  use  of 
nuclear  explosion  to   quell  gas-well fire,  explosion  was  assumed  to  have 
been  of  low-yield,  and   disclosure  of  test  had  marked  first  Soviet  pin- 
pointing  of  location  of  peaceful  nuclear  blast.  (Shabad,  N Y T ,  12/2/71, 
2 )  
*  New  initiatives  in   technology  were  discussed  in   Science  editorial  by 
Philip  H.  Abelson:  I n   FY  1972,  77%  of  Federal  R&D  funding  would 

331 

November  26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

go  to  atomic energy,  space,  and  defense  research.  “Most  citizens would 
agree  that  in   view  of  our  many  domestic  needs  this  proportion  is  out 
of  line.”  Most  “would  view  favorably  the   prospect  of  engaging  pres- 
ently  unemployed  resources of  men  and  organizations  in  meeting social 
needs.”  Two  major  factors  made  this  d i5cu l t .   “First  one  cannot 
identify  a  single  goal  that  has  the  kind  of  dramatic  appeal  that  the 
moon  venture  had  in   the  circumstances  in  which  i t   was  announced. 
Announcement  of  a  lesser  single  goal  would  be  certain  to  draw  parti- 
san  sniping  and  could  prove  to  be  a  political  liability.  Second  . . . 
many  of  the  possible  initiatives  represent  a  further  invasion  by  the 
federal  government  of  matters  that  have  previously  been  considered 
the  domain  of  private  enterprise.”  Cynics  would  discount  new  initia- 
tives  as  election  year  ploy.  “However,  win  or   lose,  there  w i l l   remain 
after  the  election  a  residue  in  the  form  of  a  further  penetration  of 
government  into  the  management  of  the  nation’s  life.  There  could 
also  remain  a  residue  of  real  progress.  for  goals  once  enunciated  tend 
to  carry   with  them  a  momentum  of  their  own.”  (Science,  11/26/71, 
895 )  
November  2 7 :   U.S.S.R.’s  Mars  2  probe  (launched  May  19)  ejected  cap- 
sule  1380  km  (858  m i )   above  Mars  on  direct  trajectory  to  planet’s 
surface.  Capsule,  carrying  pennant  bearing  U.S.S.R.  hammer-and- 
sickle  coat  of  arms,  became  first  man-made  object  to  reach  surface. 
After  capsule  ejection  Mars  2  decelerated  and  entered  Martian  orbit 
with  25 000-km  (15 500-mi)  apogee,  1380-km  (858-mi)  perigee, 
1080-min  (18 -h r )   period,  and  48.9O  inclination. 
Mars  2  had  traveled  470  million  km  (292 million  m i )   to  reach Mars. 
During  flight  i t   had  explored  interplanetary  space and   three  midcourse 
corrections  had  been  conducted,  June  17,  Nov.  20,  and  automatically 
on  Nov.  27.  Spacecraft  was  reported  operating  normally  in   Martian 
orbit.  U.S.S.R.  did  not  indicate  whether  capsule  softlanded  o r   hard- 
landed  o r   what  mission  was.  (NYT,  12/1/71,  20 ;   O’Toole,  W  Post, 
12/1/71,  A23;  FBIS-SOV-71-231-3, 
12/1/71,  L1) 
Tass  reported  arrival  in  Moscow  of  Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  MSC Director, 
and   group  of  NASA  experts  “in  connection  with  the  forthcoming  tech- 
nical  conference  of  Soviet  and  American  experts  in  ensuring  com- 
patibility  of  means  of  approach  and  docking  of  spaceships  and   sta- 
t i o n ~ . ’ ~  Conference  would  take  place  Nov.  29  to  Dec.  7.  (FBIS-SOV- 
71-230,11/30/71,  L1)  
*  US. would  resurrect  SST program  and  have  “production model  by  1982,” 
FAA  Administrator  John  H.  Shaffer  predicted  in   Washington,  D.C. 
Shaffer,  who  had  recently  returned  from  world  tour  of  FAA  installa- 
tions,  said  France  expected  to  sell  three  Concordes  to  Chinese  Com- 
munists  and   Romania  was  expected  to  attempt  purchase  of  several 
used  U.S.  jetliners.  (UPI ,   W Post,  11/27/71,  A9)  
*  New  York   Times editorials  commented  on  recent  astronomical  events- 
Nov.  26  Mariner  9  photographing  of  Martian  satellite  Deimos  and 
Oct.  7  report  by  astronomer  Dr.  Hannes  0.  Alfven  of  discovery  of 
asteroid  Toro.  Deimos’  photo  was  “only  the latest  of  Mariner  9’s  unique 
accomplishments.  This  is  the  first  man-made  artificial  satellite  of  an- 
other  major  planet  in  the  solar  system  and  i t   has  already  journeyed 
more  than  a  million  miles  around  Mars.”  Barring  Mariner  9 malfunc- 
tion,  “lifting  of  the  dust  storm  in   the  days  ahead  should  permit  even 

332 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November 27 

greater  revelations  of  the  nature  of  this  planet  that  has  been  a  mystery 
to man throughout the  ages.” 
Evidence  suggested  asteroid  Tor0  might  crash  into  earth  after  200 
yrs,  Times  said.  “Any  such  collision  could  do  great  damage.  I t   may 
not  be  too  early  for  space  scientists  to  begin  thinking  about  ways  of 
nudging  Tor0  out  of  a  collision  course with  earth  when,  as  and  i f   the 
need  arises.  If  men  can  send  space  ships  across  hundreds  of  millions 
of miles  to  Venus  and  Mars,  i t   should  be  no  great  feat  to  visit  Toro- 
a  mere  nine  million  miles  [14   million  kilometers]  away  a t   present 
closest  approach-by  way  of  performing  whatever  celestial  engineering 
is  required  to  prevent  a  mammoth  cosmic  traffic  accident.”  ( N Y T ,  
11 /27 /71 ,30)  
November  28 :   Italy’s  Sun   Marco  3  (launched  April  24 )   reentered  atmos- 
phere  after  more  than  seven  months in   orbit.  Design  lifetime  had  been 
six  months.  Satellite  had  produced  excellent  data  on  density,  compo- 
sition,  and   temperature  of  equatorial  neutral-particle  atmosphere  at 
(GSFC  SSR ,   11/30/71; 
altitudes  of  222-723  km  (137 .9449 .2   m i ) .  
NASA  Pro j  Off) 
*  Senate  Committee  on  Nutrition  asked  Federal  Government  to  provide 
emergency food  for  highly  skilled  professionals  in  Seattle,  Wash.,  who 
had  been  h i t   by  aerospace  industry  unemployment.  Committee,  inves- 
tigating Seattle  situation  after  Dept.  of  Agriculture had  refused  request 
from  State  of  Washington  for  free  distribution  of  surplus  food  in 
Seattle,  said  many  families  were  going  hungry.  (Reuters,  W  Pos t ,  
11/29/71,  A6) 
November  29-30 :   Mariner  9 ,  orbiting  Mars  after  May  30  launch  on   400- 
million-km  (248-million-mi) journey,  photographed Mars moon  Phobos 
from  14682 -   and  5543-km  (9123-  and  3444-mi)  distances.  Photos, 
released  by  NASA  Dec.  1,  clearly  showed  Phobos  was  irregular,  potato 
shaped  chunk  of  rock  about  21  km  (13 m i )   wide  and  26  km  (16  m i)  
long,  with  a t   least  one  crater  6  km  ( 4  m i )   in   diameter.  ( L A  Times, 
12 /2 /71 ;   Reuters, N Y T ,  12 /2 /71 ,26)  
November  29:  Os0  7  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory, launched  by  NASA  Sept. 
29,  had  completed  more  than  850  orbits  of  the  earth  and  was  officially 
adjudged  a  success.  Pr imary   objective,  to  obtain  high-resolution  data 
from  solar  corona  in  particular  spectral  bands  in  EUV and  in  visible 
regions  during  one  solar  rotation,  had  been  achieved.  Fulfillment  of 
secondary  objective,  of  investigating  intensity  and  spectrum  of  solar 
and  cosmic  x-rays  from  nonpointed  instruments  beyond  one  solar 
rotation,  continued.  All  spacecraft  systems,  including  star-tracker- 
gyro  night-pointing  feature  new  to  oso-had 
operated  satisfactorily. 
Tape  recorder  No.  1, inoperative  when  first  interrogated  on  seventh 
orbit,  had  not  recovered  despite  several  attempts  to  operate  unit.  Tape 
recorder  No.  2  had  performed  required  data  storage  and  readout 
functions satisfactorily.  (NASA  Proj Off) 
U.S.S.R. 
launched  two  Cosmos  satellites  from  Plesetsk.  Cosmos  458 
reached  497-km  (308.8-mi)  apogee,  271-km  (168.4-mi)  perigee,  92.2- 
min  period,  and   70.0° 
inclination  and  reentered  April  20,  1972. 
Cosmos  459  reached  286-km  (177.7-mi)  apogee,  199-km  (123.7-mi) 
perigee,  89.4-min  period,  and   65.0’  inclination  and  reentered  Dec.  27 
[see  Dec.  271.  (GSFC, SSR ,   11/30/71;  12 /1 /71 ;   4/30/72;  S BD ,  
11/30/71,129;  SA ,  12 /13 /71 ,15)  

333 

November 29 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
9  U.S.S.R.’s  Mars  3 ,   launched  May  28,  was  continuing  its  flight  toward 
Mars.  At  9:OO  pm  Moscow  time  (1:OO  pm  EST)  spacecraft  was  138.8- 
million-km  (86.3-million-mi)  from  Mars,  having  traveled  approxi- 
mately  472  million  km  (293  million  m i ) .   ( N Y T ,  12/1/71,  20 ;   FBIS- 
SOV-71-231-3,  12/1/71,  L1 )  
U.N.  General Assembly  adopted  resolutions  directing Committee on  Peace- 
ful  Uses  of  Outer  Space  to  formulate  treaty  by  1972  charting  inter- 
national  course  for  space  exploration,  commending  proposed  liabilities 
convention  for  outer  space  travel  [see  Nov.  111,  and   recommending 
convention  of  working  group  on  remote  sensing  of  ear th   by  satellites. 
(Fulton, C Trib,  11/30/71) 
0  FAA  Administrator  John  H .   Shaffer,  in   letter  to  Airline  Pilots  Assn. 
President  John  J.  Q’Donnell,  rejected  ALPA’S  Nov.  1 request  for  accel- 
erated  five-year  plan  to  install  landing  aids  a t   U S .   airports.  Shaffer 
said  FAA  was  legally  unable  “to  accede  to  one  limited  group’s  requests 
to  the  prejudice  of  other  legitimate  demands.”  (Tex t)  
NASA  announced  publication  of  th ird   annual  Research  and  Technology 
Operating  P lan   Swmmary,  RTQP-72.  Publication  described  in   capsule 
form  hundreds  of  NASA  research  and   technology  efforts.  (NASA   Release 
7 1-234  ) 
November  29-December  7:  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.  space officials met  in  Moscow 
in   th ird   of  series  of  meetings  to  discuss  design  and  testing  of  com- 
patible  systems for  docking and  linking manned  spacecraft.  U S .  delega- 
tion  was  headed  by  Dr.  Robert  R.  Gilruth,  MSC Director,  and  U.S.S.R. 
delegation  was  headed  by  Academician  Boris  N.  Petrov.  Joint  com- 
munique  Dec.  7  said  progress  was  made  in   working  out  agreed  tech- 
nical  requirements  and   planning  possible  joint  test  missions.  ( NASA 
Release 71-244) 
November  30:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos 460  from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t  with 
539-km  (334.9-mi)  apogee,  518-km  (321.9-mi)  perigee,  95.2-min 
period,  and   74.0”  inclination.  (GSFC  SSR ,   11/30/71;  SBD,  12/2/71, 
141  ) 
Assignment  of  MSFC   as  lead  center  within  OMSF  for  concept  verification 
testing   system design  and  integration  to  verify  concepts  and  
announced  by  Dr.  Eber- 
hardware  from  NASA  definition  studies-was 
hard   F.  M.  Rees,  MSFC  Director.  Pr imary   purposes  of  CTV  program 
were  to  demonstrate  representative  shuttle  payload  concepts  in   research 
and   applications  modules  (RAM )   and   space  station  classes,  to  develop 
shuttle-payload  interface  requirements  from  viewpoint  of  payload  and  
users,  to  demonstrate  shuttle  capabilities  for  research  and   applications, 
to  support  design  and   development  of  Sortie Can  (payload  carr ier   for 
space  shuttle),  and   to  investigate  integration  and   operational  tech- 
niques  for  long-duration  mission  system  for  advanced  RAMS  and   for 
eventual  space  station.  CVT  program  would  be  par t   of  Space  Station 
Task  Team  headed  by  William  A.  Brooksbank.  CVT  work  would  be 
headed  by  Konrad  K.  Dannenberg.  (MSFC   Release  71-225) 
Meeting  of  NASA’s Comet  and   Asteroid  Missions  Science  Panel  a t   MSFC, 
chaired  by  Dr.  Ernest  Stuhlinger,  Associate  Director  for  Science,  dis- 
cussed  present  and   prospective  efforts  in   planetary  and   interplanetary 
probes.  Nine  scientists  from  education  field  and   Government  attended. 
(MSFC  Release 71-266;  MSFC  PAO )  
*  NASA  and  Small Business Administration  announced  publication  of  Testing 

334 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

November 30 

Methods  and  Techniqlces, summary  of  aerospace  technology  suitable  for 
profitable  adaptation  by  small  industrial  firms.  Booklet,  offered  with- 
out  charge,  contained  34   abstracts  of  innovative  processes  and   devices 
used  in   quality  control  and   nondestructive  testing,  with  emphasis  on 
physical  inspection  and   internal-flaw  detection.  (NASA  Release  71-236) 
U S .   patent  No.  3 624650   was  granted  to  JPL   engineers  Richard  L .  
Horttor  and  Richard  M.  Goldstein  for  method  of  mapping  planets  from 
ear th   station  with  radar   and   orbiting  transponder.  Patent  was  assigned 
to NASA.  (Jones, N Y T ,  12 /4 /71)  
*  USAF  had  announced  that  130-member  review  team  of  specialists  from 
USAF,  Lockheed,  and   other  aerospace  companies  would  make  year-long 
review  of  USAF  C-5A  program,  Wall  Street  Journal  reported.  Object 
of  review  was  to  “recommend  operational  refinements  or  aircraft 
modifications  where  necessary.”  ( W S J ,  11/30/71,  3 )  
DOD signed  $25-million  contract  with  Lockheed  Space  &  MissiIes  Corp. 
for  definition  and  development  phase  of  new-generation  submarine- 
launched  ULMS  (underwater  long-range missile  system)  with  maximum 
1 0  000-km  (6200-m i)  range.  (Reuters,  B  Sun,  12/1/71,  A12;  W  Post, 
12/1/71,  A14) 
November  30-December  2 :   Apollo  15  investigator’s  symposium  was  con- 
ducted  a t  Lunar  Science Institute in  Houston, Tex. Apollo Photo  Science 
Team  members  Robert  D.  Mercer  of  Dudley  Observatory  and  Lawrence 
Dunkelman  of  GSFC  described  photos  of  sun  and   interplanetary  dust 
taken  by  Apo l lo   15  CM   pilot  Astronaut  Alfred  M.  Worden.  Photos 
showed  features  of  solar  corona  and   zodiacal  light  never  before  ob- 
served.  Preliminary  examination  of  photos  showed  “light  levels  less 
than  can  be  seen  by  the  best  telescopes  on  earth.”  Analysis  of  photos 
would  permit  direct,  comparative  measurements  of  solar  phenomena’s 
relative  brightness  to  obtain  information  on  mechanisms  by  which 
energy  left  sun   and  on  distribution  of  particles  outward  from  sun. 
(M SC  Release 71-97) 
November  30-December  3 :   Joint  meeting  of  NASA  and  European  Space 
Conference  ( E SC )   was  held  in  Washington,  D.C.,  to  identify  candidate 
areas  for  possible  European  participation  in   post-Apollo  space  pro- 
grams.  Meeting  had  been  proposed  in   Sept.  1 letter  from  Under  Secre- 
tary   of  State  U.  Alexis  Johnson  to  Belgian  Science  Minister  The0 
Lefevre,  ESC  Chairman.  (NASA  Release  71-235,  71-241  ; NASA  PAO )  
During November:  ARC  research  into  heat  shields  to  protect  aircraft  pas- 
sengers  i n   crash  fires  was  described  in   Astronazctics  & Aeronautics  by 
ARC   and   Avco  Corp.  scientists.  Concept  of  surrounding  passenger 
compartment  by  fire-retardant shell  to  protect  occupants  long  enough 
for  fire  to  burn   out  or  be  extinguished  had  been  made  possible  by 
Apollo  program  research  into  fire-retardant materials  polyisocyanurate 
foam  and   intumescent  paint.  “Exposed  to  heat  . . . paint  expands  to 
many  times  its  original  thickness  and   insulates  the   surface  underneath 
it.  The  thermal-protection  mechanisms  of  these  materials  operate  on 
the  same  ablative  principles  . . . that  protect  our  astronauts  dur ing  
re-entry  of  the  Apollo  spacecraft.”  (Neel,  Parker,  e t   al.,  A&A ,   11/71, 
18-26) 
*  USAF  had   accepted  delivery  of  520-kg  (1150-lb)  comsat  from  TRW  Sys- 
tems  Group,  AFSC  Newsreview  reported.  Comsat  was  first  of  six  being 

335 

During  November 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
built  for  SAMSO  use  in   Phase  I1 of  U S .   Defense  Satellite  Communica- 
tions System  (DSCS). (ASFC  Newsreview, 11 /71 ,4 )  
AFSC  Aeronautical Systems Div. had  established Prototype Program  Office, 
AFSC  Newsreview  reported.  Objective of  prototype program  was  to  im- 
prove  performance  in  development  and  acquisition  of  weapon  systems 
by  placing  more  reliance  on  the  performance  of  “hardware”  and  less 
reliance  on  paper  analysis.  (AFSC Newsreview,  11/71,  1 )  
*  Columbia  J o u r a l i s m   Review  editorial  criticized  New   York   T imes   for 
Aug.  15  publication  of  “soap-opera style  exclusive  interviews  with  the 
families  of  Apollo  15  astronauts  obtained  through  the  newspaper’s 
Durchase  of  their  Dersonal  stories.”  T ime s   had  “condemned  this  kind 
o f   exploitation,  by -other  publishers,  only  eight  years  ago.”  (Columbia 
Jou rn  R e v ,  11 /12 /71 ,6)  
Article  by  Paul  Dickson  in   T h e  Progressive  discussed  “Empire  of  Think 
Tanks.”  R&D  in  U S .   had  become  “vast,  powerful,  and  well  financed 
empire  . . . replete  with  its  own  priorities,  powers,  and  pecking  order. 
Atop  this  empire  is  a  diverse  group  of  institutions  called  think  tanks, 
which  a s   agents  of  applied  research  and  policy  study  have  a  fateful 
impact  on  the  nation.  The  most  famous  of  these  . . . is  the  RAND 
Corporation  . . . a  prime  mover  in  military  research.” 
R&D  was  “particularly  critical  element  in   the  battle  over  national 
priorities  because  it  not  only  reflects  our  current  priorities  but  largely 
determines  what  will  be  technologically  feasible  in   the  future.’’  Lunar 
landings  had  shown  “how  much  is  possible  if  a  great  deal  of  thought, 
resources,  and  dedication  are   channeled  into  any  stated  goal.  The  vast 
majority  of  Project  Apollo  money  had  been  pumped  into  space  R&D 
during  the  decade  prior  to  the  first  landing.  There  is,  however,  a  catch 
example,  because  such  a  new  knowledge 
in  invoking  the  APO~~O /NASA  
as  is   developed  in   such  a  program  must  be  applied  and  directed  in 
order  to  get  anywhere.  If  not  conscientiously  applied,  well-performed 
research  can  lead  to  a  range  of  ends  from  a  simple  nonuse  to  a  more 
insidious  ruse-a  way  of  dodging  action  under  the  guise  of  studying 
the problem.” 
Independent  think  tanks  needed  to  be  scrutinized  along with  Feder- 
ally  sponsored  ones.  “Many  of  them  receive  the  bulk  of  their  funds 
from  the  Government,  and,  though  not  officially  ‘sponsored’  like  RAND, 
they  bring  up  the  same  questions  of  power,  unchecked  and  unanswer- 
( C R ,   11/3/71, 
able,  evoked  by 
the  officially  sponsored  outfits.” 
S 1752-5) 

336 

December  1971 

December  1 :  NASA%  M2-F3  lifting  body,  piloted  by  test  pilot  William  H. 
Dana,  reached  mach  1.22  and   21  300-m  (70  000-ft)  altitude  during 
12th  flight,  launched  from  B-52 
from  FRC.  Objectives  of  powered 
flight-acquisition  of  stability  and  control  data  above mach  1.0, expan- 
sion  of  flight  envelope,  and   evaluation  of  reaction  control  system- 
were  achieved.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
Quarterly  review  of  research  and   applications  modules 
( R AM )   study 
being  conducted  by  General  Dynamics  Corp.’s  Convair Aerospace  Div. 
was  held  a t   MSFC.  Work  on  specific  set  of  RAM   payload  carriers  was 
reviewed.  Preliminary  design  of  spacecraft  would  be  completed  during 
remainder  of  study.  (MSFC Release 71-217;  MSFC  PIO)  
e  Approval  by  NASA  Project  Designation Committee  of  designation QUESTOL 
for  quiet,  experimental, STOL  transport  research a ircraf t  was  announced 
by  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Public  Affairs  John  P.  Donnelly 
in  memorandum  to  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Advanced  Re- 
search  and  Technology Roy  P.  Jackson.  (Tex t)  
December 2:  U.S.S.R.’s  Ma r s   3  probe  (launched May  29 )   reached  vicinity 
of  Mars  and  ejected  capsule which  softlanded  on  planet.  U.S.S.R.  did 
not  announce  landing  until  Dec.  7  and   did  not  release  details  until 
Dec.  19. After  separation,  capsule  bearing  Soviet  coat  of  arms  entered 
Mars  atmosphere  and  parachuted  to  softlanding  in   Mars  southern 
hemisphere  between  Hectris  and   Phaetonis  in  area  45”  south  latitude 
and  158”  west  longitude.  Mars   3  continued  flight  into  orbit  with 
1500-km  (930-mi)  periapsis  and  11-day period.  Tass said signals  from 
landing  capsule  “were  received  and  recorded  on  board  . . . Mars  3 
and   later  . . . transmitted  to   the  earth  on  December  2-5.  The  video- 
signaIs  received  from  the  surface  of  Mars  were  brief  and  suddenly 
discontinued.”  ( FBIS-SOV-71-236,  12/8/71,  L1 )  
U.S.S.R.  launched  two  satellites.  Intercosmos 5, launched  from  Kapustin- 
Yar, entered  orbit with  1055-km  (655.6-mi) apogee,  197-km (122.4-mi) 
perigee,  97.2-min  period,  and   48.4”  inclination.  Satellite-joint 
project 
of  U.S.S.R.  and  Czechoslovakia-would 
continue investigation  of  radia- 
tion  and  dynamics of  corpuscular  flux  in   near-earth  space  and  investi- 
gation  of  nature  and  spectrum  of  low-frequency  electromagnetic oscil- 
lations  in   natural  plasma.  Intercosmos 5 reentered  April  7,  1972. 
Cosmos  461,  launched  from  Plesetsk,  entered  orbit  with  508-km 
(315.7-mi)  apogee,  488-km  (303.2-mi)  perigee,  94.5-min period.  and  
69.2”  inclination.  (FB IS -SOV -~~ -Z~~ ,  12/3/71,  L1;  L2 ;   GSFC  SSR ,  
12/31/71;  4/30/72;  SBD,  12 /7 /71 ,164 )  
Thomas  O’Toole  described  in   Washington  Post  effects  of  Mariner  9  data 
on  idea  that  life  existed  on  Mars:  “In  the  three  weeks  that  i t  has  spent 
in  Martian  orbit  so  far ,   Mariner  9  has  found  that  the  planet’s  atmos- 
phere  is  even  thinner  than  i t   was  thought  to  be-about 
260  times  as 
thin  as  Earth’s  atmosphere. I t   also  found Martian  surface  temperatures 
to  be  no  higher  than  80  degrees  below  zero.  To  date,  Mariner  9’s 

337 

December 2 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December  2 :   T h e   U.S.S.R.’s  M a r s   3  probe  softlanded  a  capsule  on   the   planet  Mars. 
T h e   capsule  transmitted  signals  20  seconds  be fore   falling  silent.  In  the   Tass  news 
here  in  descent  position-carried 
a 
service  photo  t h e   descent  apparatus-shown 
braking  cone 
tha t   also  served  as  a  heat  shield 
f o r   the   capsule.  T h e   cone 
f e l l   away  as  the   m i n   parachute,  stored  in  the   container  immed ia te ly   above  the  
capsule,  opened  to   slow  the   fall.  (Pho to   courtesy  o f   United  Press  In terna t iona l)  

cameras  have  been  frustrated  by  a  storm  that  has  covered  almost  all 
of  Mars  with  dust  for  more  than  two  months.  It’s  almost  impossible 
to  imagine  a  global  dust  storm,  and  when  one  thinks  of  a  global  storm 
lasting  for  two  months,  it’s  even  harder   to  imagine  life  surviving  such 
cataclysmic  weather  conditions.  . . . now  the  dust  has   begun  to  settle 
on  the  planet,  revealing  striking  features  that  man  has   never  seen 
before.  Nevertheless,  the  idea  that  there  might  be  life  among  those 
features  is  one  that  seems  to  be  a  dying one.”  ( W  Pos t ,   12/2/71,  A19) 
0  NASA  selected  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.,  Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.,  and  
Lockheed-Georgia  Co.  for  negotiations  of  three  separate  $1.5-million, 
six-month  contracts  for  design  phase  of  QUESTOL  (quiet,  experimental 
STOL)   program.  After  completion  of  design  phase  one  contractor 
would  be  selected  to  fabricate  two  experimental  transport  a ircraf t   for 
flight  research  program.  (NASA  Release 71-238) 
*  Description  by  Soviet  professor  of  physics  and   mathematics  M.  Marov 
of  Mars  2 scientific  program  to  Soviet  journalists  was  reported  by Tass: 
“Registration  of  various  radiations  from  Mars,  ranging  from  ultra- 
violet  light  to  radio  waves,  by  sputniks  from  a  comparatively  short 
distance  will  give  much  more  complete  information  about  Mars.  Cer- 
tain  findings  which  a re   still  quite  inadequate  a re   readily  available. 

338 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December 2 

I t   has  been  established  tha t   a t   least  nine-tenths  of  the  Martian  atmos- 
phere  consists  of  carbon  dioxide.  Nitrogen  is  practically  absent,  while 
water  vapors  a r e  very  scant.  The  thin  atmosphere  of  Mars  is  extremely 
heterogeneous.  I ts   structure  varies  widely  with  seasons,  the  time  of 
day   and   night.  The  structure  of  the  surface  in   the  areas  explored  is 
very  heterogeneous  too.”  (FBIS-SOV-71-233, 
12/3/71,  L3 )  
December  3 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  462  from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with 
1782-km  (1107.3-mi)  apogee,  227-km  (141.1-mi)  perigee,  105.2-min 
period,  and   65.7O  inclination.  Within  hours  after  launch,  Cosmos 462  
passed  close  to  Cosmos  459  (launched  Nov.  29 )   and   exploded  in  
apparent  test  of  satellite  interceptor  system  a t   low  altitude.  Mission 
was  first  satellite-intercept  test  using  target  below  258-km  (160-mi) 
altitude;  previous  tests  had  occurred  a t   altitudes  between  580  and  
885 km  (360  and   550 m i ) .   (GSFC S SR ,   12/31/71;  AP,  N Y T ,   1/2/71, 
25 ;   Av Wk, 12 /13 /71 ,20)  
0  Discovery  of  polar  caps  on  sun  by  Dr.  Werner  M.  Neupert  and   team  of 
GSFC  astronomers  was  announced  by  NASA.  Measurements  made  by 
Os0  7  (launched  Sept.  29 )   had  shown  black  areas  on  sun’s  north  and  
south  poles  with  temperature  of  1 0 0 0  000  K  ( 1  800  WOOF).  Hot 
areas  on  sun   associated  with  solar  Bares  registered  temperatures  of 
3 000 000  to  4 000 000  K  ( 5  400 OOOOF   to  7 200 OOOOF).  Data  from 
sounding  rocket  experiments  that  preceded  solar  polar  cap  discovery 
indicated  seasonal  variations  in   cap  sizes.  If  data  were  accurate,  caps 
were  largest  during  time  of  least  solar  activity  and   might  disappear 
near  most  active  times.  (NASA   Release  71-237;  NASA  Special  Release 
12 /6 /71)  
NASA  held  Mar iner   9  press  conference  a t   JPL.  Discussion  centered  on  dust 
storm  that  had  covered  planet  since  mission  began  and   on  origin  of 
Martian  craters. 
Dr.  Bradford  A.  Smith  of  New  Mexico  State  Univ.  said  storm  had  
begun  10 wks  earlier,  had  reached  peak  of  intensity  in  5th  wk,  and  
was  gradually  but  continuously  clearing.  Project  scientists  disagreed, 
however,  how  long  dust  would  obscure  Ma r s ;   predictions  ranged  from 
a  few weeks  to  months.  If  storm  continued  throughout  mission, pr imary  
objective  might  have  to  be  changed.  Dr.  Smith  explained  prime  objec- 
tive  “was  to  map  70  percent  of  the  planet  in   high  resolution.  If  the 
storm  does  not  clear  up  immediately,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  do  that 
within  the  nominal  mission.  An  alternative might  be  to  focus  on  the  
phenomenon  that  we  have  on  our   hands ;   that  is,  the  dust  storm.  And 
instead  of  studying  i t   in   bits  and   pieces  and   waiting  for  the  planet  to 
clear  up  . . . to  rearrange  our   sequences  to  make  an   all  out  study  of 
this  atmospheric phenomenon.”  Failure  to  complete mapping  as planned 
would  not  significantly  affect  Viking  Mars  landing  mission  because, 
with  only  slight  degradation,  Viking  zone could  be  mapped  in   last  half 
or  last  th ird   of  Mariner  9  mission.  ‘‘Also  Viking  has   the  capability  to 
keep  its  landers  in   orb i t   for  as  long  as  two  months  while  it  does  the 
mapping  . . . [and]  the  capability  to  do  some  photographic  site  selec- 
tion  even  if  there were  no  usable  pictures  returned  from  ’71.” 
Dr.  Harold  Masursky  of  U S .  Geological  Survey  described  four  h igh  
points  on  Mars,  all  with  large   summit  craters,  suggesting  tha t   they 
might  be  volcanic  calderas.  Great  alignment  of  relatively  young  topo- 
graphic  highs  with  summit  craters  suggested  that Mars  was  geochemi- 

339 

December 3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

cally  active-that 
in   not  too  distant  past  there  had   been  extensive  vol- 
canic  activity.  Similar  features  might  be  found  a t   lower  elevations; 
they  would  be  of  interest  because  they  had   been,  and   still  might  be, 
hot.  Such  volcanic  sources  had,  according  to  most  opinions,  produced 
terrestrial  atmosphere ; that  is,  carbon  dioxide  and   water  had  come 
from  such  volcanic  vents.  Dr.  Masursky  emphasized  that  volcanic 
agreement,  to  skepticism,  to  outright  disbelief .” 
theory  was  not  agreed  on ;   project  scientists’  views  ranged  from 
( 6  
Data  on  Mars  moons  Deimos  and   Phobos  were  described  by  Dr. 
James  B.  Pollack  of  ARC .   Deimos was  12 by  13y2 km  (7%  by  Sy2  m i )  
and  Phobos  was  21  by  26  km  (13  by  16 m i ) .  Moons were  ‘(among the 
darkest  objects  in  the  solar  system,”  reflecting  only  about  5%  of  sun- 
light  that  fell  on  them.  Moons’  darkness  could  be  attributed  to  basalts 
or  carbonaceous  chondrites  in  soil.  If  scientists  could  determine  reason 
for  darkness,  they  would  soon  be  able  to  determine  whether  moons 
were  captured  asteroids  o r   remnants  of  material  from  which  Mars  was 
formed.  (Transcr ip t)  
NASA  sent  message  to  Dr.  I.  A.  Zhulin  in  Moscow  via  telex  communication 
system  established  for  exchange  of  information  on  Mariner  9  and 
M a r s   2  and  M a r s   3  missions  to  Mars.  Message  congratulated  U.S.S.R. 
on success of  M a r s  2;  requested  Ma r s  2  coordinates,  orbital parameters, 
doppler  data,  and  data  from  uv  spectrometer;  and   provided  informa- 
tion  on  U S ,   Ma r ine r   9  photos  of  Mars  and   moons,  doppler  data,  and  
uv  spectrometer  data.  (NASA   Release 71-240) 
*  NASA  announced  establishment  of  new  Office  of  Applications  ( O A )  . Charles 
W.  Mathews,  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space 
Flight  since  1968,  was  named  Associate  Administrator  for  Applica- 
tions.  Leonard  Jaffe,  Deputy  Associate Administrator  for  Space Science 
and   Applications  (Applications)  since  1966, was  named  Deputy  ASSO- 
ciate  Administrator  for  Applications.  Personnel,. programs,  and   func- 
tions  of  Ear th   Observations  and   Communications  Programs  Divs. 
would  be  transferred  from  OSSA  to  new  office  and   OSSA  would  be  re- 
named Office of  Space Science  (OSS)   . 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator  said : “The  application 
of  space  technology  to  solving  problems  here  on  Ear th   is  perhaps 
NASA’s  most  important  new  thrust.  1 believe  it  appropriate  to  centralize 
into  a  single  office  in   NASA  Headquarters  all  of  the  resources  which 
we  can  muster  to  support  space  applications  to  Earth.”  (NASA  Release 
71-239) 
*  Joint  group   of  NASA  and   European  Space  Conference  technical  experts 
completed  four-day  meeting  a t   NASA  Hq.  to  identify  candidate  areas 
fo r   possible  European  participation  in   post-Apollo  space  programs. 
NASA  announced  Dec.  6  tha t   areas  identified  included  space  shuttle 
subsystems,  major  responsibility  fo r   orbit-to-orbit  space  tug,  early 
development  of  major  payload  elements  like  sortie  cans  and   research 
and   applications  modules,  and  support  studies  in   related  technology. 
Group’s  report  would  be  studied  by  U.S.  and  European  authorities. 
Group  had   proposed  February  1972  meeting  for  fur ther   technical 
definition  and   consideration  of  programmatic,  financial,  and   manage- 
ment  implications.  (NASA   Release 71-241) 
U S .   Embassy  in   Moscow  released  statement  to  press  about  Nov.  29- 
Dec.  7  NASA-Soviet Academy  of  Sciences  meeting  on   compatible  space 

340 

ASTKONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December  3 

docking system:  “The  main  purpose  of  this  th ird   working  session was 
to  discuss  the  technical  details  of  hardware  compatibility  and  to  dis- 
cuss  a  jo in t   American-Soviet space  mission.  I t   i s   intended  to  sign  a 
final  agreement within  two  months.  Details  will  not  be   given  out  until 
then.” 
AP,  in   bulletin  from  MOSCOW, said:  “American  and   Soviet  scien- 
tists  plan  to  sign  an  agreement  on  a  joint  manned  space  flight  within 
the  next  two  months,  a  U S .   Embassy  official  disclosed  today.” 
Sources  later  described  by  Washington  Pos t   as  “close  to”  NASA 
delegation  in   Moscow  said  in   response  to  press  query  that  i t   was 
misunderstanding  to  think  that  agreement  already  had  been  reached. 
NASA  spokesman in  Washington, D.C.,  told  press  AP   report  was  result 
of  misunderstanding  of  U S .   Embassy  report.  Embassy  statement  had 
stemmed  from  “routine  programs  report  . . . on  discussions  . . . now 
in  progress.”  Any  understanding  as  to  joint  test  mission  would  come 
after  current  talks  had  ended  and  been  subjected  to  recommendations 
and  approval. 
Press  later  commented  on  misundesstanding. New  Y o r k   Times said 
there  was  “considerable confusion  . . . as to  how  firm and   far-reaching 
is  the  apparent  understanding  between  the  American  and  Soviet  nego- 
tiators.”  Washington Post  said  Cosmonaut  Andrian  G.  Nikolayev  had 
said  a t   October  reception  for   US. governors  visiting  Moscow  that 
astronauts  and   cosmonauts would  work  together  in  space:  “We  speak 
the  common  language  of  space.”  Baltimore  Sun  said  “the  Russians 
are   traditionally  sensitive  about  any  publicity  before  official,  simul- 
taneous  announcements  are   made  on  any  bilateral  agreement.”  I t  
appeared  “the  Americans  had  inadvertently  talked  about  the  agree- 
ment  prematurely.’’  (AP  News  Service,  12/3/71;  Wilford,  N Y T ,  
12/4/71,  1 ;   Kaiser,  W  Pos t ,   12/4/71,  A l ;   Mills,  B  Sun,  12/4/71, 
A12) 
First  transatlantic  picture  telephone  call  was  made  successfully  between 
U S .   and  Sweden via  Zntelsat-ZV  F-2  orbiting  over Atlantic.  One-hour 
transmission  was  part  of  ceremonies  in   Sweden  and  at  ComSatCorp 
headquarters  in  Washington, D.C.,  formally  inaugurating  new  Nordic 
earth  station  at  Tanum,  Sweden,  jointly  owned  by  Denmark,  Finland, 
Norway, and  Sweden.  (ComSatCorp Release 71-67) 
*  USAF  announced  issuance  by  Aeronautical  Systems  Div.  of  $1 781 382 
fixed-price-incentive  contract  to  General  Dynamics  Corp.  for   aero- 
space ground  equipment  fo r   F-111  aircraft.  (DOD Release  1020-71) 
*  Senate  confirmed  nomination  of  H .   Guyford  Stever  a s   NSF  Director. 
( C R ,  12/3/71,  S20397) 
December  4 :  Unidentified  USAF  satellite  and  its  Atlas-Agena  booster  were 
exploded  by  radio  command  when  booster  malfunctioned  and  veered 
off  course  shortly  after  launch  from  ETR.  ( W  Pos t ,   12/7/71,  A7)  
*  U.S.S.R.’s  Mars  3,  approaching  Mars,  had  detected  possible  evidence  of 
earth‘s  magnetic  tail  farther  out  in  space  than  previously  reported, 
Pravda  article  said.  Both Mars  2  and  Mars  3  had  passed  through  area 
19  million  km  (12   million  m i )   from  earth,  where  they  had  detected 
magnetic  field.  When  Mars  3  passed  through  area  i t   recorded  streams 
of  charged  particles  whose  velocities  differed  from  those  observed  in 
solar  wind.  Soviet  scientists  speculated  tha t   particles  of  solar  wind 
were  mixed  with  those  of  earth’s  magnetic tail.  ( N Y T ,  12/5/71,  9 )  

341 

December 5 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December  5:  France’s  90-kg  (200-lb)  Polaire  scientific  satellite,  launched 
from   Kourou  Space  Center,  failed  to  enter  orbit  when  2nd  stage  of 
Diamant-B  booster  malfunctioned.  { FBIS-~ov-71-234,  12/6/71,  T2  ; 
SBD ,   12/7/71,  163) 
Launch  of  Intelsat-1V F-3  comsat,  scheduled for  Dec.  6  by  Atlas-Centaur 
booster,  would  be  postponed  indefinitely  pending  review  of  Dec.  4 
failure of  USAF  Atlas-Agena  mission,  NASA  announced.  ( N Y T ,  12/7/71, 
18 1 
0  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun,  NASA  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Plan- 
ning,  described  future  benefit  of  space  program  spinoff  in  Parade 
article  on  applications  of  space  technology  to   social problems.  “On  the 
1973  flights  in  the  Skylab  experimental  space  station,  a  medical  doc- 
tor   will  go  into  space  with  the  astronauts.  He  will  carry   out  a  com- 
prehensive program  of  experiments . . . to  establish  how  well  men  live 
and   work  in   weightless  conditions  in   an  enclosed  space  as  b ig   a s   a 
three-bedroom  house.”  With  data  obtained,  space  benefits  could  be 
achieved  in   a  few  years  and  made  available  to  people  everywhere. 
(Pa rade ,  12/5/71,  8 , 1 2 )  
Remaining  “puzzles”  of  solar  system  pattern  were  discussed  by  Walter 
Sullivan  in  N e w   Yo rk   Times  article:  General  assumption  was  that 
sun,  planets,  and  moons  had  been  formed  from  “swirling,  flattened 
cloud  of  material.”  But:  “Why  does  Mars  have  two   tiny  moons,  each 
only  a  few  miles  in   diameter,  yet  ou r   moon  is  a  quarter  the  diameter 
of  the  ea r th?   Why  do  some  of  the  outer  moons  of  Jupiter  go  the 
‘wrong  way’-counter 
clockwise-around 
that  huge  planet?  Why  is 
the  earth‘s  moon  formed  of  a  different  mix  of  elements  from  that  con- 
stituting  the  ea r th?”   Recent 
information  had  “illuminated  these 
questions  though  it  had  not  resolved  them.”  Earth’s  moon  was  giving 
off  “far   more  heat  than  had  been  predicted  on  the  basis  of  assump- 
tions  of  how  it  was  formed.’’ Mariner  9  photos  of  the  two  Mars moons 
had  shown  both  to  be  irregular  chunks  “rather  than  systematically 
spherical  bodies  in  the  manner  normally  attributed  to  moons  and 
planets.”  George  Washington  Univ.  scientist  J.  Martyn  Bailey  had 
proposed  that  all  seven  of  Jupiter’s  outer  moons  were  asteroids  cap- 
tured  by  that  planet’s  powerful  gravity  and  that  Jupiter’s  clockwise 
moons  had  been  captured  when  planet  was  farthest  from  sun,  while 
counter-clockwise moons  had   been  captured  when  Jupiter  was  nearest 
sun.  Lunar  Science  Institute  scientists  had  agreed  there  had  been 
sufficient  sorting  and  layering  on  earth‘s  moon  to  produce  radioactive 
crust  that  could  account  for  heat  flow.  Information  on  two  Martian 
moons  had  indicated  that  Phobos  and  Deimos  looked  much  like 
asteroidal  fragments  but  that  did  not  prove  that  they  were  captured 
asteroids.  They  could  have  been  formed  as  spherical  moons  from 
material  left  when  Mars  was  being  created  and  later  “battered  into 
their irregular shapes.”  ( N Y T ,  12/5/71,  4:s) 
*  New  York   T imes  editorial  praised  results  of  Apollo  lunar  exploration  and  
noted  there  was  “much  more  that  men  have  to  learn  about  this  puz- 
zling  neighbor  in  space.”  I t   had  been  reported  that  NASA  might  have 
to  cancel Apollo  16  and   17  for  budgetary  reasons.  “Such  action  would 
confirm  the  widespread  suspicion  that  the  United  States  was  less  inter- 
ested  in  the  scientific  results  of  lunar  exploration  than  in  the  prestige 
of  being  the  first  nation  to  land men  on  the  moon.’’  Announcement  that 

342 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December 5 

Soviet  flag  had  been  dropped  on  Mars  might,  however,  “impel  the 
Administration  to  decide  that  this  i s  not  the  time  for  the  United  States 
to  end  its  scientific  bridgehead  on  the  moon.  It  is  the  promising  re- 
search  prospects  from  continued  lunar  study,  not  Soviet  space  compe- 
tition,  that  give  the  really  valid  motivation  for  continuing  the  Apollo 
program  to  the  extent  that  existing  hardware,  including  the  already- 
manufactured  equipment  for  Apollos  1 6   and  17,  permits.” 
( N Y T ,  
12/5/71,4:10) 
*  Travel  writer  Morris  D ,   Rosenberg  described  his  visit  to  KSC  in  New 
York   Times  article:  Visit  had  provided  “whole  new  point  of  reference, 
more  understanding  of  the  complex  drama  you  see  on  TV  and  read 
about  in  the  newspapers,  and  a  better  appreciation  of  the  U S .   role  in 
space.”  Those  opposed  to  space  funding  might  be  unimpressed  by 
“avalanche  of  facts  and  figures”  but  it  was  doubtful  that  they  could 
“walk  away  from  this  2-hour  and  15-minute bus  tour  without  a  strong 
feeling of  pride.”  ( N Y T ,  12 /5 /71 ,1 )  
*  Contract  with  NR  that  was  expected  to  set  pattern  for  aerospace  indus- 
try  settlements  under  negotiation  was  approved  by  Long  Beach,  Calif., 
Local  887  of  United  Automobile  Workers.  Proposed  contract  called 
for  increases  of  30%  in   salary  over  34-mo  period.  (Wright,  N Y T ,  
12 /6 / 71 ,25 )  
December  5-6:  NASA  launched  series  of  eight  sounding  rockets  from  Point 
Barrow,  Alaska,  to  obtain  temperature,  pressure,  density,  and  wind 
data  in  upper  atmosphere.  Eight  payloads  consisted  of  four  Nike- 
Apache  pitot  density  probes,  two  Nike-Cajun  grenade  payloads,  one 
Nike-Cajun  pitot  atomic  oxygen,  and  one  Nike-Cajun  ozone  experi- 
ment.  All  launches  were  successful  except  one;  first  Nike-Apache failed 
when  rocket  motor  apparently  malfunctioned  and  payload  broke  off. 
(NASA  Rpts SRL; P ro j  engineer) 
December  6 - 1 1 :   U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  463  from  Baykonur  into 
orbit  with  285-km  (17‘7.1-mi)  apogee,  204-km  (126.8-mi)  perigee, 
89.2-min  period,  and  64.9’  inclination.  On  Dec.  7  satellite passed  over 
East  Pakistan  a t   perigee  on  14th  revolution,  British  Royal  Aircraft 
Establishment  at  Farnborough  and  British  Interplanetary  Society 
sources  reported.  On  16th  revolution,  perigee  was   lowered  to   188  km 
(116.8  m i ) ,   reducing  period  to  89.0  min.  Revolutions  30  and  46 
crossed  East  Pakistan  Dec.  8 and  9  and  on  revolution  48  apogee  was 
raised,  returning  to   original  period.  Satellite  reentered  Dec.  11. 
SpacejZight  magazine  reported  telemetry  had  revealed  that  some  con- 
sumables  were  used  at  twice  normal  rate  fo r   a  13-day mis-’ cion. 
Changes  in  orbit  supported  earlier  reports  of  U.S.S.R.’s  ability  to 
maneuver  satellites  for  precise  target  coverage.  Flights  of  Cosmos  463  
and  Cosmos  464  [see  Dec.  10-161  were  made  during  time  of  Indo- 
Pakistan  war.  Paths  would  permit  observation  of  events  in   Pakistan 
before  early  reentry;  any  film  cassettes  could  have  been  recovered 
within  four  hours  of  last  pass  over  East  Pakistan  on  each  flight. 
(GSFC  SSR,  12/31/71;  SBD,  12/7/71,  160 ;  SF ,   9/9/72,351;  W Post, 
1/7/72,  A16) 
December  6 :   NASA  was  “in  search  of  new,  clearly  defined  goals,  and 
the  search  is  not  going  well,”  John  N.  Wilford  said  i n   New  York  
Times  article.  “Self-preservation”  was  believed  to  be  factor  in   em- 
phasis  NASA  placed  on  current  “efforts  in   Moscow  to  reach  an  agree- 

343 

December 6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

ment  with  the  Soviet  Union  that  could  lead  to  jo in t   Soviet-American 
manned  space  missions.”  If  NASA  could  establish  opportunity  for  im- 
proved  relations  with  U.S.S.R.  through  space cooperation,  “this  would 
probably  create  the  need  for  a  series  of  post-Apollo  missions  of  his- 
toric  proportions.”  I t   would  be  “hard”  for  Administration  or  Con- 
gress  to  refuse  funds  for  such  an  effort.  Soviet  motives  in   current 
negotiations  might  be  saving  in  space  funds  through  cooperative ven- 
tures  or  “that  the  Soviet  Union  looks  to  cooperation as  a  way  of  shar-  
( N Y T ,  
ing  some  of  the  advanced  technologies  developed  by  NASA.” 
12 /6 /71 ,30 )  
*  J P L   announced  selection  of  Motorola,  Inc.,  Government  Electronics  Div. 
for  negotiation  of  $2.8-millionY cost-plus-fixed-fee  contract  for  design 
and  manufacture  of  two  communications  subsystems-modulation 
de- 
modulation  subsystem  ( MDS )   and  relay  telemetry  subsystem  (RTS )  - 
for Viking Orbiter  ’75 project.  ( J P L  Release 606) 
*  Dish-shaped  305-m  ( 1000-ft)  radiotelescope  a t   Cornel1  Univ.’s  Arecibo 
Observatory  near  San  Juan,  Puerto  Rico,  was  undergoing  $7-million 
modification  program  that  would  increase  telescope’s  sensitivity  2000 
times,  Dr.  Frank  D.  Drake,  Cornel1  Univ.  astronomer  and  former 
Arecibo  Observatory  Director,  told  San  Juan   meeting  of  American 
Astronomical  Society.  Modified  telescope  would  search  skies  for   un- 
usual  features  and   objects  “w e   cannot  even  begin  to  predict”  and 
organic  molecules  in   intergalactic  space  that  were  clues  to  evolution 
of  life  and  evidence  of  possible  distant  civilizations.  “We  expect  to 
devote  about  1 per  cent  of  our  time  to  just  listening.  If  any  civiliza- 
tion  is  advanced  enough  to  communicate  with  other  civilizations  in 
the  universe, we  might get  the message.”  (Goodwin, W Po s t ,   12/16/71, 
E91 
*  USAF  aircraft procurement  in  FY  1973 would  reach  “historic  low  of  fewer 
than   100,”  Av ia t ion   Week   &  Space  Technology  reported.  D O D   pre- 
liminary  budget  estimates  had  indicated  cyclical  d ip   reflecting  com- 
pletion  of  procurement  of  LTV  Aerospace  Corp.  A-7D  and  General 
Dynamics  Corp.  F-111  aircraft.  Magazine  said  USAF  procurement 
might  rise  in  FY  1974 when  McDonnell  Douglas F-15  fighter  a ircraf t  
and  NR‘s  B-1  bomber  had  passed  development  milestones.  ( A v   W k ,  
12/6/71,  13) 
House  defeatgd  by  vote  of  203  to  172 H.R.  11624,  “to  amend  the  Mili- 
tary  Construction  Authorization  Act,  1970,  to  authorize  additional 
funds  for  the  conduct  of  an  international  aeronautical  exposition.” 
(CR, 12/6/71,  H11830-1) 
9  Washington  Evening  S tar   editorial  commented  on  Administration’s New 
Technologies  Oppo5tunities Program  [see  Oct.  311 : Much  was  worth- 
while,  “especially  the  attempt  to  mount  a  genuine  program  of  conver- 
sion  from  defense  and  space-related  to  socially  useful  technological 
emphasis.”  But  “purely  economic  objectives  of 
the  program  are  
murkier,  a t   least  at  present.  Granted  that  this  nation  may  be  on  its 
way,  in   a  number  of  industrial  fields,  to  losing  the  technological  lead 
tha t   fo r   so  long  has  been  a  mainstay  of  our   economic  strength.  Does 
i t   follow  that  the  answer,  in  high-technology  fields  like  electronics  and  
commercial  aviation,  is  what  one  Presidential  adviser  has  called  ‘an 
unaccustomed  set’  of  supports  and   subsidies  to  industry?”  Question 
contained  “all  the  elements  of  explosive  controversy,  and  the   adminis- 

1 

344 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December  6 

tration  w i l l   be  hard-pressed  to  make  a  convincing  case.”  ( W   Star, 
12/6/71,  A10) 
December  6-9:  American  Geophysical  Union  held  annual  meeting  in   San 
Francisco.  MIT  seismologist  Dr.  Mehmet  Nafi  Toksoz  presented  find- 
ings  of  seismic  team  from   MIT,  Columbia  Univ.,  Univ.  of  Hawaii, 
and  General  Dynamics  Corp.  that  moon  had  been  subdivided  into 
layers  by  process  somewhat  similar  to  that  which  produced  layering 
within  earth.  Conclusion  had  been  reached  after  analysis  of  tremors 
induced  in   moon  by  spacecraft  impacts.  Report  was  released  simul- 
taneously a t  MIT ,   where  Dr.  Frank   Press,  coauthor  of  report,  told  press 
that  separation  into  layers,  some  3.3  billion  yrs  ago,  had  brought  SO 
much  radioactive  material  close  to  lunar  surface  tha t   there  was  not 
enough left  a t   depth  to  keep  lunar  interior  hot.  He  believed  deep  lunar 
interior  cooled  and  was  quiescent compared  with  earth.  Dr.  Press  said 
energy  released  i n   form  of  moonquakes  was  100  million  times  less 
than  in  earthquakes. 
Scientist  Steve Korn  of  TRW  Inc.  Viking  biological  instrument  team 
described  instruments  being  developed  for  $11-million experiments  to 
be  conducted by  two  Viking  l a d e r s  scheduled  for   1976 Mars  landing. 
Sophisticated  units  for  four  experiments  to  search  for  microdyopic 
life  on  Mars  would  be   among most  complex  systems  ever  flown  aboard 
unmanned  spacecraft.  Experiments  included  heat  release  experiment 
to  analyze  Martian  soil  for   photosynthetic  life  similar  to   plant  life  on 
ea r th ;   experiment that  would  add   nutrient  to   solid  sample  and  measure 
metabolic conversion ; gas exchange experiment to  monitor environment 
surrounding  sample  for  changes  in   gaseous  makeup  that  would  indi- 
cate  presence  of  living  organisms ; and  light-scattering  experiment  to 
provide  nutrient  to  soil  sample  and   detect  any  increases  in   scattering 
attributable  to   growth  of  microorganisms.  Also,  three-legged  probes 
would  snap  photos ; study  Martian  atmosphere ; return  meteorological 
data,  pressures,  temperatures,  wind,  and   humidity ; report  on  Mars’ 
magnetic  and   physical  properties ; and   check  seismic  events.  Probes 
would  be  lowered  by  parachute  and   retrorocket  after  landers  had 
obtained  orbit  in  procedure  designed  to  land  them  accurately  in  areas 
deemed  most  likely  to  be  habitats  for   life.  (Sullivan,  NYT,  12/10/71, 
29 ;  Miles, LATNS,  W Post,  12/19/71,  A41) 
December  7 :  Retirement  of  Astronaut  Richard  F.  Gordon,  Jr.,  from  NASA 
and  USN,  effective  Jan .   1,  1972,  was  announced  by  NASA.  Gordon, 
pilot  of  Gemini  1.2  (Sept.  12-15,  1966)  and  CM   pilot  for   ApoZZo  12 
(Nov.  18-24,  1969 ) ,  would  join  John  W.  Mecom,  Jr.,  organization  in 
New  Orleans,  La.  Retirement  would  reduce  number  of  astronauts  to 
46.  (NASA  Release  71-243) 
FRC  announced  award  of  $211 260,  cost-plus-fixed-fee  contract  to  LTV 
Aerospace  Corp.  for  design  and   construction  of  side  fairings  for 
NASA7s  supercritical  wing  test  aircraft,  modified  F -8   jet.  Installation  of 
side  fairings  would  improve  overall  a ircraf t   with  area  ruling,  an  
aerodynamic  design  feature  that  would  permit  a ircraf t   to  fly  more 
efficiently, and   provide  more  desirable  test  environment  for  evaluating 
aerodynamic  characteristics  of  supercritical wing  near  speed  of  sound. 
(FRC   Release 29-71) 
NASA  award  of  two  contracts  for  feasibility  studies  of  pressure-fed  engine 
fo r   water-recoverable space  shuttle  booster  was  announced  by  MSFC. 

345 

December 7 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

TRW  Inc.  would  receive  $400 000  and   Aerojet-General Corp.  $367 595, 
fo r  studies  ending  Feb.  29,  1972.  (MSFC   Release  71-230) 
*  Dr.  James  R.  Schlesinger,  AEC   Chairman,  announced  major  reorganiza- 
tion  of  AEC   operating  staff  to  “provide  a  coherent  management  struc- 
tu re   and  to  improve  program  effectiveness.”  Major  program  areas- 
national  security,  energy  and  development,  research,  and  production- 
would  be  directed  by  assistant  general  managers.  New  Div.  of  Con- 
trolled  Thermonuclear Research would  deal  with  development  of  fusion 
a s   new  energy  source.  New  position  of  Assistant  General  Manager  for 
Environment  and   Safety  would  increase  emphasis  on  environmental 
matters  and  safety  research.  New  Div.  of  International  Security Affairs 
and  Div.  of  Applied  Technology  were  being  established.  (AEC   Release 
0-258) 
RAND  Corp.  specialists  Robert  L.  Perry   and   Arthur  J .   Alexander  testified 
before  Senate  Committee  on  Armed  Services  that  France,  Sweden, 
U.K.,  and  U.S.S.R.  had  been  turning  out  excellent  fighter  aircraft  for 
fraction  of  what  U.S.  paid  in  money  and   manpower.  Cost  difference 
was  largely  due  to  simpler  design,  strict  “fly  before  you  buy”  policy, 
and  reliance  on  small  teams  of  experts  rather  than  on  huge  number 
of  men  and  machines.  Perry  said  government  05ces   monitoring  devel- 
opment  of  new  aircraft  in   France,  Sweden,  and  U.K.  rarely  contained 
more  than  30  specialists.  In   U S . ,   figure  was  normally  five  times  that. 
Within  European  countries  developing  aircraft,  skilled  workers  com- 
mitted  to  program  rarely  exceeded  700.  In   U.S.  “from  two  to  ten 
times  as  many  comparable  specialists  are   employed,”  Perry   said. 
(Getler,  W Pos t ,  12/8/71,  A25) 
*  U.K.  and   French  governments  agreed  on  undisclosed  pricing  policy  for 
Anglo-French  supersonic  transport  Concorde.  New  York   Times  later 
said  policy  favored  16  airlines  that  had  taken  options  on  74  Con- 
cordes.  (Giniger, N Y T ,  12/8/71,  5 )  
AFSC   announced  development  of  optical  aimpoint  guidance  ( OPTAG )  
system,  to  enable  bomb  or  missile  to   pinpoint  specific  target  within 
large  complex.  System  used  a  correlatron  to  compare previously  made 
photos  with  actual  scenery.  By  turning  photographic  and  optical  scenes 
into  electronic  images,  system  cued  control  fins  to  keep  bomb  or 
missile  on  course  dur ing   flight.  (AFSC   Release  245.71) 
December  7-9:  Skylab  multiple  docking  adapter  Crew  Compartment  F i t  
and  Function  Review  was  held  a t   Martin  Marietta  Corp.  facility  in  
Denver,  Colo.  Purpose  of  review  was  to   familiarize  astronauts  with 
MDA   equipment  and  storage  requirements.  (Marsha l l  Star,  12/1/71,  2 ;  
MSFC  PAO )  
December  8 :  NASA’s TF-8A  jet  aircraft  with  supercritical  wing,  piloted  by 
NASA  test  pilot  Thomas  C.  McMurtry,  successfully  completed  25th  and  
26th  flights  from  FRC.  Objectives  of  flights  were  to  investigate  buffet 
boundary  further  at  low  supersonic speeds  and  to  determine  effects  of 
aileron  position  and  angle  of  attack  on  wing  pressure  distributions. 
Buffet  boundary  was  penetrated  at mach  1.15 and  1 5  200-m  (50 000-ft) 
altitude.  Pressure  distribution  data  were  obtained  from mach  0.9  to  1.0 
a t  1 4  000-m (46  000-ft)  altitude.  (NASA P ro j  Off) 
0  Apolto  15 Astronauts  David  R.  Scott,  Alfred  M.  Worden,  and  James  B. 
Irwin  received  NASA  Distinguished Service Medal  from  Vice  President 
Spiro  T .   Agnew  in   Washington,  D.C.,  ceremony.  Citation  was  for 

346 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December 8 

< C  most  complex  and   carefully  planned  scientific  expedition  in   the  his- 
tory of  exploration.”  (NASA Release 71-242) 
Por tra i t   of  Dr.  Robert  H.  Goddard,  U.S.  rocket  pioneer,  was  unveiled 
by  artist Peter  Stevens and  Mrs. Goddard  and  presented  to Rep.  George 
P.  Miller  (D-Calif.,  Chairman  of  House  Committee  on  Science  and  
Astronautics,  by  National  Space  Club.  Ceremonies  were  held  in   Com- 
mittee’s  main  hearing  room,  where  portrait  would  hang.  (NSC News  
Letter,  11 /23 /71)  
Spartan  ABM   intercepted  one  of  several  reentry  vehicles  in   successful  test 
of  Spartan’s  ability  to  distinguish  actual  nuclear  warhead  from  flock 
of  dummies.  DOD  later  said  test,  above  atmosphere  over  Pacific,  was 
first  i n  which  Spartan,  its  associated  radar ,   and   its  computerized  radar  
guidance  system  were  required  to  make  this  distinction. 
(Fa r ra r ,  
C T r i b ,  12 /10 /71 ,12 )  
*  Fiftieth  anniversary  of  first  transatlantic  transmissions  by  American 
amateur  radio  “hams”  on  200-m  frequency.  Bouncing  radio  transmis- 
sions  off  ionosphere  over  long  distances  was  later  to  prove  seminal  in  
evolution  of  concepts for passive  reflector  satellites.  ( Q S T ,  12/71,  54-7) 
Baltimore  Sun  editorial  commented  on   softlanding  on  Mars  of  instru- 
mented  capsule  by  Soviet  M a r s   3 :   “For  the  first  time  man  has  been 
able  to   reach  Mars  with  implements  that  have  proved  capabIe  both  of 
surviving  a  landing  and  of  working,  for  a  time  a t  least,  after  they  have 
been  landed.  This  of  course  is  only  one  approach  to  the  new  studies 
of  brother  objects  i n   space.  The  United  States  Mariner  9  may  by 
photographic  means  add  valuable  pictorial  knowledge  to  that  which 
Mars  3  has   reported  by  signal.  And  even  if  neither  of  these  latest  raids 
on  the  unknown  returns  as  much  information  as  men  want,  they  have 
together  shown  that  the  means  by  which  more  and   more  can  be 
learned  a re   now  in   ou r   hands,  even  if  in   only  a  primitive  and   imper- 
fect state so far.”  (B  Sun, 12/8/71,  A18) 
0  Kan sa s   City  Times  editorial  commented  on  “ambiguous”  announcement 
of  progress  in   NASA-Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  meetings  to  develop 
compatible  space  docking  system  [see  Dec.  31:  “The  first  interpre- 
tation  was  that  agreement  soon  would  be  reached  on  a  joint  mission 
involving  astronauts  of  the  two  countries  in   an   orbital  linkup.  In  hasty 
clarification,  NASA  explained  that  the  mooted  accord  covered  only  the 
technical  matters which  could  make  such  a mission  possible.  . . . Either 
way,  the  conclusion  is  obvious:  The  two  space  powers  are  moving  a t  
last,  and   seriously,  toward  the  sort  of  shared  space  planning  that  logic 
and   economics  have  long  indicated  but  which  competition  and  secret- 
iveness have prevented.”  ( K C  T imes ,  12 /8 /71)  
December  9 :   ESRO  Council  meeting  in   Par is   agreed  on  fu ture   program 
based  on   applications  satellites.  Pr ior i ty  would  be  given  to  use  of  ELDO 
launch  vehicles  provided  ELDO’S  price  did  not  exceed  that  of  launch 
vehicles  available  elsewhere.  ESRO  budget  would  be  equivalent  of 
$283.6  million  from  1972 to  1974 and  $300 million  for following  three 
years.  From  1974 to   1980 at  least  $70 million  would  be  spent  on  con- 
struction  of  applications  satellites.  (AP,  N Y T ,   12/12/71,  9 )  
December  10-16: U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  464 from  Plesetsk  into  orb i t  
with  311-km  (193.3-mi)  apogee,  180-km  (111.9-mi)  perigee,  89.4-min 
period,  and   72’ 
inclination.  British  Royal  Aircraft  Establishment  and  
British  InterpIanetary  Society  sources  reported  tha t   drift  of  about  5’ 

347 

Decemher  10-16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

per  day  brought  satellite  over  East  Pakistan  on  revolution  44  Dec.  13 
a t   height  of  230  km  (142.9  m i ) .   On  revolution  46,  two-impulse 
maneuver  lowered  both  apogee  and   perigee,  with  89.0-min  period  and  
182-km  (113.1-mi)  perigee.  Westerly  dr if t   ra te   was  reduced  to  less 
than  1' 
per  day,  permitting  three  further  daylight  passes  over  Pakis- 
tan a rea  before reentry Dec.  16. 
Orbital  changes  supported  earlier  reports  of  Soviet  maneuvering 
capability.  Cosmos  463   [see Dec.  6-11]  and Cosmos 464  were  launched 
dur ing   Indo-Pakistan  war ;  altered  paths  permitted  observation  of 
Pakistan  before  early  reentry.  (GSFC  SSR,  12/31/71  ; SBD,  12/14/71, 
199 ;  SF ,  9 /9 /72 ,351 ;   W Post, 1/7/72,  A16) 
December  10: MSFC  announced  completion  of  study  of  offshore  oil  and  gas 
operations  by  team  of  MSFC,  MTF,  and  Michoud  Assembly  Facility 
experts.  Study,  made  for  U S .   Geological  Survey,  was  confined  to 
fkderally  managed  outer  continental  shelf  in  Gulf  of  Mexico  but  team's 
recommendations,  in  report  to  USGS, applied  to  all  outer  shelf  opera- 
tions.  Team  had  suggested measures to  produce  offshore  resources with 
safety  and   protection  from  pollution  of  marine  and   coastal  environ- 
ment.  (MSFC  Release 71-232) 
*  Development  of  lift-distribution  system  to  alleviate  stress  problems  in 
C-5A  a ircraf t   by  spreading  aerodynamic  loads  through  wings  rather 
than  concentrating  stress  on  small  areas  was  announced  by  Lockheed- 
Georgia  Co.  Vice  President  Robert  B.  Ormsby.  Modification  could  be 
installed  during  regular  modification  and  inspection  periods  and  would 
not  affect  aircraft's  handling.  (AP ,   W  Post,  12/12/71,  A3)  
U.K.  successfully  tested  experimental  hovertrain  in   805-m  (880-yd)  run 
a t   32  km  per  h r   (20  mph )   near  Cambridge.  Train,  developed  by 
Tracked Hovercraft, Ltd.,  to  reach maximum  483-km-per-hr (300-mph ) 
speed,  traveled  on  a ir   cushion astride  concrete track  and was  controlled 
from trackside.  (Scott, NYT,  12 /11 /71 ,54)  
December  11  : U.K.'s  Ariel  4   ( U K 4 )  satellite was  successfully  launched by 
NASA  on  Scout booster  from WTR  a t   12:47 pm  PST.  Orbital  parameters: 
apogee,  587  km  (364.8  m i ) ;   perigee,  472  km  (293.3  m i )  ; period, 
95.2  m in ;   and   inclination,  83".  Pr imary   objective  was  to  investigate 
interactions  between  electromagnetic  waves,  plasmas,  and   energetic 
particles  in   upper  ionosphere.  Ariel  4   weighed  99.6  kg  (220  lbs)   and  
carried  five  experiments-four 
provided  by  U.K.  groups  and  one  by 
Univ.  of  Iowa-to 
study  radio  noise  and  low-frequency radio  waves, 
measure  electron  temperature,  and  count  low-energy  charged  particles. 
Ariel  4  was  fourth  in  series  of  U.S.-U.K.  cooperative launches  that 
began  with  Ariel  1  April  26,  1962.  British  Science Research  Council 
( SRC )   was  responsible  for  satellite  design,  fabrication,  and   tests  in- 
cluding  all  but  one  experiment.  NASA  was  responsible  for  low-energy 
proton  and   electron  analyzer,  technical  support,  Scout  booster,  launch 
operations,  and   tracking  and   data  acquisition.  Ariel  2  had  been 
launched  March  27,  1964, and  Ariel  3, May  5 ,   1967.  (NASA  P ro j   Off; 
NASA  Release 71-277) 
President  Nixon  accepted  resignation,  for  personal  reasons,  of  David 
Packard  as  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  effective  Dec.  13.  President 
also  redesignated Secor D.  Browne  as  CAB  Chairman  for  term  expiring 
Dec.  31,  1972, and   announced intention  to  nominate Whitney Gillilland 
for  reappointment  as  CAB member  for  six-year  term  and,  upon  Senate 

348 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December  11 

confirmation,  as Vice Chairman  of  CAB   for  term  expiring Dec.  31, 1972. 
Gillilland  appointment  was  submitted  to  Senate  Dec.  13  and   confirmed 
Feb.  29,  1972.  ( P D ,  12/13/71,  1640-1;  12/20/71,  1672;  C R ,  2/29/ 
72, S2916) 
*  U S .   Senate  approved  Protocol  enlarging  ICAO  Council  membership  from 
27  to  30.  ( C R ,  12/11/71,  S21400-2) 
December  12 :   USN  manned  spacecraft  recovery  forces  in   Atlantic  and  
Pacific  would  cachet  and   cancel  philatelic  mail  for  March  17  launch 
of  Apollo  16,  Washington  Sunday  S tar   reported.  Covers  would  be 
processed  through  coordinators  a t   Norfolk,  Va.,  and   Honolulu.  From 
Hawaii  covers  would  be  forwarded  to  recovery  ship.  Since  Atlantic 
Recovery  Force  would  not  include  ship  with  post  office,  covers  would 
be  processed  by  Norfolk  post  office.  (W  S tar ,   12/12/71,  C l l )  
NOAA ,   after  one  year  of  functioning,  was  “hardly  a  wet  NASA,”  Thomas 
OToole  said  in   Washington  Post  article.  While  i t   had  been  predicted 
that  Government  would  spend  up  to  $2  billion  a  year  on  NOAA   by 
1970,  spending  “never  went  higher  than  $500  million  and   it’s  almost 
all  spent  on  surface  vessels.”  NOAA   expected  to  spend  no  more  than 
$700 000  for  undersea  research  in   1972.  ( W   Pos t ,   12/12/71,  A l )  
David  Sarnoff,  honorary  board  chairman  and   former  president  of  RCA  
Corp.,  died  a t  age  80  after  long  illness. Sarnoff,  often  called  “electronics 
prophet,”  had  played  major  role  in   development  of  radio  and  TV. 
( N Y T ,  12 /13 /71 ,1)  
December  13:  Apollo  16  spacecraft  was  rolled  out  from  ICSC  Vehicle 
Assembly  Building  to  Launch  Complex  39,  P ad   A,  in   preparation  fo r  
manned  lunar   land ing   mission  scheduled  for   launch  March  17,  1972. 
Rollout  was  watched  by  about  10000   persons  a t   KSC .  
(UP I ,   N Y T ,  
12/14/71,  12;  KSC  Release  263-71) 
First  photos  of  solar  flare  spouting  from  far   side  of  sun   were  taken  by 
Os0  7  (launched  Sept.  29,  1971) .   Photos  also  showed  for  first  time 
effects  of  massive  eruption  of  sun   traveling  through  its  outer  corona. 
Tongues  of  ionized  gases  were  shown  shooting  up  to  6%  million  km 
( 4  million  m i )   from  solar  surface.  NRL   Director  Capt.  Earle  W.  Sapp 
said  later  tha t   osos  were  increasingly  helpful  in   forecasting  sun’s 
weather  to  predict  effect  of  solar  storms  on  navigation  and  communi- 
cations  equipment.  (Lyons,  N Y T ,   1/11/72,  26)  
NASA’s TF-8A 
jet  aircraft  equipped  with  supercritical  wing,  flown  by 
NASA  test  pilot  Thomas  C.  McMurtry,  successfully  completed  27th 
flight  from  FRC .   Purposes  of  flight  were  to  obtain  wing  pressure  distri- 
butions  a t   low  angles  of  attack  and   to  obtain  stability  and   control 
characteristics  a t   design  conditions.  Pressure  distributions  were  ob- 
tained  from  mach  0.90  to   0.99  a t   14 000-m  (46 000-ft)  altitude.  sta- 
bility  and   control  da ta   were  obtained  a t   mach  0.99  a t   14000-m  alti- 
tude.  (NASA  Pkoj  Off) 
NASA  announced  establishment  of  two  new  positions  in   OART.  Dr.  Sey- 
mour  C.  Himmel,  LeRC   Director  of  Rockets  and   Vehicles,  was  ap- 
pointed  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  fo r   Technology.  George  W. 
Cherry,  Director  of  OART’S  Aeronautical  Operating  Systems  Div.,  was 
appointed  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for   Programs.  (NASA  Re- 
lease  71-246;  NASA  Ann,  12/15/71) 
President  Nixon  referred  to   Anglo-French  Concorde  supersonic  airliner 
a t   dinner  with  Pr ime   Minister  Marcello  Caetano  of  Portugal  and  

349 

December  13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

President  Georges  Pompidou  of  France  during  meetings  of  French 
and  U S .   heads  of  state a t   Angra  do  Heroisimo, The  Azores:  “When  I 
arrived  a t   the  airport  on  the  Spirit  of  ’76,  a  Boeing 707,  I  saw  parked 
in  front  of  me  a  Concorde which  had  carried  the  President  of  France. 
Our  Ambassador  to  France,  Mr.  Watson,  pointed  out  that  he  had  come 
from  France  a t   a  speed  three  times  as  fas t   as  we  had  come  from  the 
United  States.  I  do  not  speak  in  envy;  I  only  wish  we  had  made  the 
plane ourselves.”  ( P D ,  12/20/71,  1 6 6 1 4 )  
*  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  David  Packard,  whose  resignation  had 
been  accepted  by  President  Nixon  on  Dec.  11, sa id   a t   DOD  news  con- 
ference  that  new  orders  for  military  equipment  were  “leveling  off ,’ 
after  declining  sharply  following  1967-1968  peak  period  due  to  Viet- 
nam  war.  Total  defense  spending,  Packard  said,  w a s   less  than  7%   of 
current  GNP  and  probably  would  remain  so  for  several  years.  Wall 
Street  Journal  said  later  that  Packard  would  become  Chairman  of 
Hewlett  Packard  Co.,  electronics  firm  he  had  helped  to  found  in   1941. 
(Transcr ip t ;   VSJ, 12 /14 /71 ,14)  
largest  and  most  advanced  space  tracking  ship,  40 800 000-kg 
U.S.S.R.’s 
(45  000- ton) ,   230-m  (760-f t)   Cosmonaut  Yur i   Gagarin,  had  been 
unveiled  in  Odessa  Harbor,  New  York  T imes   reported.  Ship  was 
equipped  with  100  antennas,  including  four  large  parabolic  antennas 
for   deep  space  communications,  and  could  operate  at  sea  for  up  to  
one year.  (Shabad, N Y T ,  12 /14 /71 ,11)  
December  1 4 :   USAF  launched  four  unidentified  satellites  from  Vandenberg 
AFB  by  Thorad-Agena booster.  Orbital  parameters : 999.4-km  (621-m i)  
apogee,  983.3-km  (611-mi)  perigee,  104+.9-min period,  and  70°  in- 
clination.  (P re s  Rpt 72 ;  SBD ,  12/16/71,210) 
Team  of  ARC   astronomers  headed  by  Dr.  Charles  P.  Sonett  had  found 
evidence  that  sun’s  spin  rate  4.6  billion  yrs  ago  was  one  revolution 
every  three  hours  ra ther   than  current  one  rotation  every  27  days, 
A R C   announced.  Study  of  melting  histories  of  meteorites  recovered  on 
ear th   and  observations  of  young  stars  in  constellation  Taurus  led 
astronomers  to  believe  high  rotation  rate  and  other  mechanisms  typi- 
cal  of  newly  formed  suns  had  forced  flow  of  electric  gases  from  sun, 
causing  sun  to  lose  one  th ird   of  its  original  mass  in  a  few  million 
years  and  stripping  away  primordial  atmosphere  of  Mercury,  earth, 
and  Mars.  Complete  melting  could  have  occurred  in   asteroids.  Radio- 
active  dating  had  established  that  many  meteorites were  melted  about 
4.6  billion  yrs  ago.  A R C   astronomers  believed  inertia  of  gas  molecules 
thrown  out  by  sun   and  tied  to  sun   by  solar  magnetic  field,  with  inter- 
planetary  magnetic  field  itself,  would  have  slowed  sun’s  rotation  over 
4.6 billion yrs.  (ARC   Release 71-71) 
*  House  Committee  on  Science and   Astronautics published  For  the  Benefit 
of  All  Mankind:  A  Survey   of  the  Practical  Returns  From Space  Invest- 
ment.  Report  updated  and   expanded  study  of  tangible  benefits  and 
practical  returns  from space investment  based  on material  from Govern- 
ment,  industry,  and  press-including  extensive  NASA  research  in  tech- 
nology  utilization  at  Committee’s  request.  Committee  concluded  that 
illustrations  in  report  were  “extra  dividends  which  are   a  fallout  of 
ingenious  application  of  space  experience  by  business,  industry,  com- 
merce,  science,  government,  the  medical  profession  and   the  academic 
community.  Those  dividends  already  paid,  coupled  with  those  in  sight 

350 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December  14 

for  the  near-term  future,  affect  practically  every  facet  of  human  con- 
venience  and  concern.  They  promise  continuing  and  increasing  return 
on  the  space  investment  for  the  benefit  of  mankind  on  earth  today.” 
( H  Rpt 92-748) 
FAA  Administrator  John  H.  Shaffer,  in   speech  before  Aviation/Space 
Writers  Assn. 
in  Washington,  D.C.,  said  Anglo-French  Concorde 
supersonic  jet  transport  would  be  quiet  enough  to  land   a t   U.S.  a ir-  
ports.  Concorde  would  be  used  over  North  Atlantic  and  would  not 
cause  potentially  destructive  sonic  booms  over  U S .   Shaffer  predicted 
U S .   would  build  SST eventually.  (Reuters,  W Post  12/15/71,  E10) 
*  President  Nixon  inspected  Concorde  Anglo-French  supersonic  airliner  a t  
Lajes  Field,  The  Azores,  before  departing  for  U.S.  aboard  Presiden- 
tial  aircraft  Spirit  of  ’76  after  meeting  with  French  heads  of  state. 
( P D ,  12 /20 /71 ,1670 )  
DOD  Project  MAST  (military  assistance  to  safety  and   traffic)  was  exam- 
ple  of  “major  role”  of  transfer  of  technical  knowledge  from  DOD 
laboratories  to  civilian  scientific  community  in   “technological  revo- 
lution,”  Secretary  of  Defense  Melvin  R.  Laird  said  at  meeting  of 
Domestic  Action  Council  in  Washington, D.C.  Since  July  1970 incep- 
tion  of  program,  military  helicopters  had  flown  767  missions  and 
evacuated  983  civilian  patients  for  civilian  agencies.  (Tex t)  
December  15 :   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  465 .from  Plesetsk  into  orbit  with 
1011-km  (628.2-mi)  apogee,  969-km  (602.1-mi)  perigee,  104.8-min 
inclination.  (GSFC   SSR ,   12/31/71  ; SBD ,   12/16/71, 
period,  and   74’ 
210)  
U.S.S.R.’s  M a r s   2  and Mars  3  satellites were  “successfully  continuing  the 
scientific  exploration  of  Mars  and  the  space  near  the  planet  in  sub- 
stantially  different  orbits,”  Tass  announced.  To  date,  153   radio  com- 
munication  sessions had  been  held  with  M a r s   2  and   159, with  M a r s   3 
FBIS-SOV-71-241) 
USAF’S  X-24A  lifting  body  was  shipped  by  a i r   from  FRC  to  Martin  Mari- 
etta  Corp.’s  Denver  plant,  where  i t  would  be  modified  and  redesignated 
X-24B.  Modified  vehicle,  of  new  shape  with  improved  hypersonic lift- 
to-drag  ratio,  would  be  delivered  to  FRC  in  early  fall  1972. X-24A  had 
completed  28  flights  i n   joint  NASA-USAF 
research  program,  reaching 
1676 km  per  h r   (1048  mph)   and  21  600-m  (71  000-f t)   altitude.  (FRC  
Release 30-71  ; S BD ,  12 /17 /71 ,215)  
Purchase  price  of  $31.2  million  for  Concorde  supersonic  transport  was 
announced  at  Par is   press  conference by  Henri  Ziegler,  head  of  French 
government-owned ABrospatiale.  Announcement  was  made  on  behalf  of 
AQospatiale  and   BAC,  manufacturers  of  Anglo-French  aircraft.  Zieg- 
ler said first  six  Concordes would  be  ready  for  service by October  1974. 
New  York  Times  later  said  price  was  record  for  civilian  aircraft. 
(Hess, N Y T ,   12 /16 /71 ,93)  
List  of  Federal  agencies  using  MTF  for  scientific  activities  was  inserted 
i n   Congressional Record  by  Sen.  John  C.  Stennis  (D-Miss.).  Agencies 
included  Environmental  Protection  Agedcy,  US. Geological  Survey 
and   other  Interior  Dept.  activities,  USA  Corps  of  Engineers,  NOAA  and 
NASA.  Mississippi  State  Univ.  and  Louisiana  State Univ.  had  programs 
a t   MTF;  state  governments of  Mississippi,  Louisiana, and  Arkansas had 
established  full-time  liaison  with  MTF ;   and  Dept.  of  Agriculture  and 

351  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December  15 
other  Federal  agencies  were  investigating possible  use of  facility.  (CR ,  
12/15/71) 
*  Conversation  between  Mary  Ann  Harbert,  U.S.  citizen  released  Dec.  1 4  
after  nearly  four-year  internment  by  Chinese  Communists,  and   escort 
Col.  Leonard  W.  Johnson,  Jr.,  Commander  of  9th  Aeromedical  Evacua- 
tion  Group  a t   Clark  AFB  in   Philippines,  was  reported  by  AP.  Miss 
Harber t   had  asked,  “Have  you  put  any  men  on  the  moon  ye t?”   Col. 
Johnson  had  responded  with  description  of  U S .   space  program  that 
had  put  eight  men  on  moon.  Miss  Harber t   had   said,  “I  really  don’t 
know,  I  hadn’t  heard  about  i t .   Many  people  in   China  don’t  know  that. 
The  last  thing  we  knew  about  space  was  that  Russia  had  something 
circling the moon.”  (B  Sun ,  12/15/71,  A9)  
*  NSF  published  Industrial  R&D  Spending,  1970  (NSF   71-39). 
I n   1970 
total  R&D  performance  in   industry  amounted  to  $17.9  billion-3% 
below  1969 level  of  $18.3 billion  but  more  than  double  1958 amount. 
I n   constant  dollars,  1969-1970  decrease  was  nearly  8%.  Entire  drop 
in   industrial  R&D  spending  between  1969  and   1970 was  accounted  for 
by  decrease  in   Federal  R&D  funds  to  industry  from  $8.4  billion  to  $7.8 
billion.  Decline  of  8%  represented  lowest  level  of  Federal  R&D  dollars 
in  industry  since  1965.  (NSF  H i g h l i g h t s ,   12/10/71,  1 )  
December  15-1 6 :   Space  Shuttle  Aerothermodynamics  Technology  Confer- 
ence  at  A R C   discussed  technology  for  manned  spacecraft  that  could  fly 
to  aircraftlike  landing.  More  than  30  papers  were  presented  on  space 
shuttle  design,  operation  flight  mechanics,  flow  fields,  and  heat  trans- 
fer.  (ARC   As trogram ,  12 /23 /71 ,3 )  
European  Launcher  Development  Organization  ( ELDO )  Council,  meeting 
in   Paris,  adopted  $79.3-million  budget  to  cover  Europa  I  and   I1  de- 
velopment,  studies  and  preliminary  work  on  Europa  111,  construction 
of  F-15  and  subsequent  launchers,  and  launchers  for  Symphonie.  Gen. 
R .   Aubiniere  of  France  succeeded  Ambassador  R.  di  Carroba  of  Italy 
as  Secretary  General.  Gen.  H.  Hoffman  was  appointed  Technical 
Director,  G.  Van  Reeth  Administrative  Direetor,  and  J.  P.  Causse 
Deputy  Director  General,  to  act  for  ELDO  in   preliminary  talks  with 
U.S.  on  European  participation  in  post-Apollo program.  ( S F ,  2/72,  8 ;  
ELDO  P A O )  
December  1 6 :   Cosmos  466  was  launched  by  U.S.S.R.  from  Baykonur  into 
orbit  with  375-km  (233-mi)  apogee,  175-km  (108.7-mi)  perigee, 
90-min  period,  and  6 4 O   inclination.  Satellite  reentered  Dec.  27. 
( GSFC SSR ,  12/31/71  ; SBD ,  12 /17 /71 ,217)  
NASA’s M2-F3  lifting body,  piloted  by  test  pilot  William  H.  Dana,  reached 
mach  0.8  and   13 700-m  (45 000-ft)  altitude  dur ing   13th  flight,  a ir-  
launched  from  B-52  from  FRC.  Objectives  of  powered  flight  were  to 
obtain  stability  and  control  data  a t   speeds  above  mach  1.0,  expand 
flight  envelope,  and   evaluate  reaction  control  system.  Evaluation  of 
reaction  control  system  was  only  objective  achieved  because  engine 
shu t  down prematurely.  (NASA  Pro j  Off j 
Launch  of  Intelsat-IV  F+  by  NASA  for  ComSatCorp,  postponed  from 
Dec.  6  following  failure  of  USAF  Atlas-Agena  booster,  had  been  re- 
scheduled  for  Dec.  18,  KSC  announced.  NASA  project  officials  recom- 
mended  tha t   sensor  probe  be  added  to  Atlas  sustainer  system  to  pro- 
vide  information  on  engine  temperature  between  gas   generator  and  

352 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December  I6 

turbine  inlet  and   that  temperature  readouts  be  monitored  dur ing   Atlas 
ignition  sequence before  liftoff.  ( KSC Release  274-71) 
*  A P   quoted  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Public  Affairs  John  P. 
Donnelly  as  saying NASA  was  not  releasing  some  information  on  Soviet 
space  program  received  through  official  channels.  Clampdown  was 
being  made  at  U S S R ’ s   request  and   through  “bilateral  agreement.” 
AP   said  Donnelly  had  forbidden  NASA  engineers  who  had  returned 
from  NASA-Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  meeting  on  compatible  dock- 
ing  system  Nov.  29-Dec.  7  in  Moscow  to  talk  to  press.  Text  of  mes- 
sage  telexed  by  Soviet  scientists  to  NASA  a t   J P L   during  exchange  of 
Mars  2  and  3  and  Mariner  9  information  would  be  withheld  a t  
Soviet  request.  Soviet  scientists  had  sent  three  such  messages.  ( N Y T ,  
12/16/71,  27 )  
Australia’s  decision  to  accept  delivery  of  24  U S .   F-111C  aircraft  was 
announced  by  Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force, 
a t   USAF  news  briefing.  Matter  had  “been  under  discussion”  for  some 
time,  Seamans  said.  “ I   am  very  gratified  that  the  decision  has  finally 
been  made  and  we  can put  the  a ircraf t  in   shape  for  them  and  get  them 
over  to  Australia.”  (Transcr ip t)  
December  16-18:  IGC  added new  displays  to   outdoor exhibit  of  space hard- 
ware  a t   Visitor  Information  Center.  Spacecraft  facility  verification 
spacecraft  mockup  25  m  (82  f t )   tall  used  to  check  out 
vehicle-Apollo 
assembly  and  test  facilities  for  early  Apollo  missions-was 
placed  on 
temporary  display  with  Juno  2 and  Jupiter C rockets,  Gemini Titan  and  
Mercury  spacecraft,  Apollo  LM  mockup,  and  three  kinds  of  rocket  en- 
gines.  Full-scale  model  of  ApoZZo  15 LRV  would  remain  on  display  for 
several  weeks.  Scale  model  of  Mariner  9  spacecraft  had  been  added  to 
indoor exhibits.  (KSC  Release 273-71) 
December  17:  U.S.S.R.  launched  two  satellites  from  Plesetsk.  Cosmos  467 
entered  orb i t   with  465-km  (288.9-mi)  apogee,  266-km  (165.3-mi) 
perigee,  91.8-min  period,  and   71°  inclination  and   reentered  April  18, 
1972. 
Cosmos  468  entered  orbit  with  808-km  (502.1-mi)  apogee,  786-km 
(488.4-mi)  perigee,  100.7-min  period,  and  74O  inclination.  ( CSFC 
SSR ,   12/31/71  ; 4/30/72;  SBD ,   12/20/71,  226;  12/21/71,  230) 
Mariner  9  photographed  Martian  plateau  from  6500-km  (4000-mi)  alti- 
tude.  Photo,  released  by  J P L   Dec.  29,  showed  area  120  km  (75  m i )  
square  in   Phoenicis  Lacus  region,  covered  with  fault  lines  and  resem- 
bling  wrinkled  elephant  hide.  Faults  and  scarcity  of  craters  suggested 
region  was  volcanic  and  relatively  young  geologically.  (AP,  B  Sun, 
12/30/71,  A5 ; Miles, LA  T imes ,  12/30/71) 
Flight  version  of  multiple  docking  adapter  (MDA )  for  Skylab  was  ac- 
cepted  by  MSFC  a t   Martin  Marietta  Corp.’s  Denver  facility.  M D A - ~  
major  Skylab  module  being  readied  for  1973  launch-had 
been  de- 
signed  and  fabricated  by  MSFC.  Martin  Marietta  had   installed,  inte- 
grated,  and  tested  MDA  subassemblies  and  functional  equipment. 
( MSFC  Release  71-241  ) 
Rep.  William  R .   Cotter  (D-Colin.)  said  in  release to press  that preliminary 
GAO  audit  of  NR  Rocketdyne  Div.  $24-million  Sa turn   contract  had 
shown  “as  much  as $5 million  . . . was  diverted  to  underwrite  crucial 
research  on  Rocketdyne’s  winning  design  in   the  $500  million  space 
shuttle  main  engine  contract  [awarded  Sept.  11.”  Cotter  said  audit, 
353 

December  17  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

performed  a t   his  request,  showed  “that  work  performed  under  the 
Sa turn   contract  influenced  NASA’s  Source  Selection  Board,  the  group 
which  evaluated  the  space  shuttle  designs  submitted  by  Rocketdyne, 
P ra t t   81  Whitney  and  Aerojet  General.”  NASA  Assistant  Administrator 
for   Industry  Affairs  and   Technology  Utilization  Daniel  J .  Harnett  later 
told  press  NASA  audit  of  space  shuttle  engine  contract  had  shown  “no 
unfair  competition  advantage  was  given  to  Rocketdyne.”  (Tex t ;   AP, 
W  S tar ,   12/19/71,  E3 )  
*  Aviation  Hall  of  Fame  installed  1971 honorees  in   ceremony  a t   Dayton, 
Ohio : Aviatrix  Jacqueline  Cochran  for  “outstanding  achievements  in  
modern  aviation”;  Boeing  Co.  Board  Chairman William  M.  Allen,  who 
had  backed  R&D  that  led  to  Boeing  production  of  B 4 7 ,   B-52,  707, 
and  747  a ircraf t ;   Gen.  George  C.  Kenney  (USAF ,   Ret.),  who  had  or- 
ganized  and  commanded  SAC   from  1946 to  1948, commanded  Air  Univ. 
a t   Maxwell  AFB,  Ala.,  and  been  World  War  I  combat  pilot  in   France; 
and  late  Harry   F.  Guggenheim,  who  had  helped  establish  schools  of 
aeronautical  engineering  a t   U S .   universities  and  had  supported  Dr. 
Robert  H.  Goddard  in   rocket  development  and  jet  propulsion  develop- 
ment.  ( A F  M a g ,   1/72,  15-16) 
December  18:  President  Nixon  signed  H.R.  11731,  $70.5-billion7 FY  1972 
DOD  defense  establishment appropriation  bill.  Bill  became  P.L.  92-204. 
( C R ,  12/17/71,  D1339) 
December  19-20:  Intelsat-IV  F-3  comsat  was  launched  by  NASA  for  Com- 
SatCorp  on  behalf  of  INTELSAT.  Satellite,  launched  from  ETR  a t   8 : l O  
pm  EST  by  Atlas-Centaur booster,  entered  elliptical  transfer  orbit.  P r i -  
mary  objective was  to  place  satellite into  transfer  orbit  accurate  enough 
for  spacecraft  onboard  propulsion  systems  to  place  i t   in  planned  syn- 
chronous orbit. 
Apogee  kick  motor  was  fired  at  12:49  pm  EST  Dec.  20,  and   Intelsat- 
IV   F-3  entered orbit with  36 052.9-km  (22  402.2-mi)  apogee,  35  745.5- 
km  (22  211.2-mi)  perigee,  1442-min  period,  and  0.47’ 
inclination. 
Satellite  would  drift  from  position  at  284.2’  east  longitude  to  perma- 
nent  station  over  Atlantic  a t   19.5O  west  longitude  by  end  of  January  
1972. 
Zntelsat-ZV  F-3  was  second  comsat  in   Intelsat  IV  series.  Satellite 
was  238  cm  (93.7  i n )   in   diameter  and  528  cm  (208  i n )   high  and  
weighed  1412 kg  (3090 Ibs)  at  launch.  I t  had  12  transponders, provid- 
ing  12  TV  channels  and  3000-9000  telephone  circuits,  and  was  capa- 
ble  of  multiple-access  and  simultaneous  transmissions.  Expected  life- 
time  was  seven  years.  Intelsat-lV F-2  had  been  launched  Jan.  25  and  
was  operating  satisfactorily  over  Atlantic.  (NASA   P ro j   Off;  ComSat- 
Corp Release  71-66) 
December  19 :  Detailed  Tass description  of  Mars  2   and  3  missions  with  dia- 
grams  of  spacecraft  and   landing  procedures  appeared  in   Soviet  news- 
papers.  Enroute  to  Mars,  spacecraft  had  measured  solar  wind  particle 
streams,  measured  parameters  of 
interplanetary  magnetic  fields,  de- 
termined  electron  concentrations  in   interplanetary  medium,  studied 
solar  radio  emissions  with  Soviet-French  Stereo-1  experiment,  and  
studied  spacial  structure,  directivity,  and   mechanism  of 
radiation 
processes.  In   Mars  orbit  spacecraft  had  investigated  Mars  solar  wind 
flow  and  its  interaction  with  Mars  ionosphere,  recorded  spectrum  of 

354 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December  19 

charged  particles  and  variations  in   magnetic  field,  and   measured  re- 
fraction  of  radiowaves. 
Mars  3  descent  package  had  transmitted  pictures  only  briefly  after 
landing on  Mars  surface  Dec.  2,  Tass  sa id :   “At  the  computed  time,  the 
transmission  of  video  pictures  was  begun  and  continued  for  about  20 
sec.  During  that  period  a  small  pa r t   of  a  panorama  was  transmitted  in  
which  no  discernible  details  were  detected  because  of  [the  lack  of] 
contrast.  Now,  i t   is  still  difficult  to  say what  caused  the  termination  of 
the  transmission.  I t   is  possible  that  i t   was  associated  with  the  local 
peculiarities  i n   the  landing  area,  which  are   completely  unknown,  or 
with  the  dust  storm  raging  a t   the  time.  Apparently  the  dust  storm 
acted  as  a  ‘veil’  covering  the  surface  details  dur ing   the  panoramic 
exposure.  The  sudden  cessation  of  signals  made  it  impossible  to  obtain 
information from the scientific equipment.” 
Orbiting  vehicle  carried  infrared  radiometer,  two  TV  cameras, 
photometer,  and   instruments  to  measure  COZ  and   determine  water 
vapor  content,  surface  radio-brightness  temperature,  and  atmospheric 
density.  ( S o u  R p t ,  12/31/71,1-14) 
December  20:  U.S.S.R.  launched  Molniya  I-19  comsat  from  Plesetsk  into 
orbit  with  39  146-km  ( 2 4  324.2-mi)  apogee,  493-km 
(306.3-mi) 
perigee,  703.3-min  period,  and   65.4’  inclination.  Satellite  would  trans- 
mit  telephone,  telegraph,  radio,  and  TV  signals  to  link  far   north, 
(GSFC   Operations  Off;  Space- 
Siberia,  Central  Asia,  and  Fa r   East. 
warn,  12/28/71,  1 ;  SBD ,   12 /21 /71 ,230)  
Italy’s  Sun  Marco  3  (launched  April  24!  by  NASA)   was  adjudged  suc- 
cessful.  Satellite  had  transmitted  excellent  data  on  density,  composition, 
and  neutral-particle  atmosphere  a t   altitudes  of  222-723  km  (127.9- 
449.2  m i ) .   Only  failure  had  been  in  sun  sensors,  which  were  not 
essential  to  mission  success.  Sun Marco  3  had  reentered  Nov.  28  after 
more  than  seven  months  in  orbit  and  had  taken  good  measurements 
dur ing  reentry phase.  (NASA   P ro j  Off) 
December 21:  First  complete  details  on  Mars 2  and   3  instruments were  tel- 
exed  by  Soviet  scientists  to  NASA  scientists  a t   JPL over  direct  line  in- 
stalled  for  exchange  of  Mariner  9  and  Mars  2  and  3  data.  Message 
said  Soviet  Mars  spacecraft  each  had  two  radiometers,  four  photome- 
ters,  one  magnetometer, one  ion  trap,  one  spectrometer, and  device  to 
measure  cosmic radiation.  Analysis  of  data  from Mars  probes had  been 
delayed  while  Soviet  scientists  investigated  interruption  of  TV  trans- 
mission  from  capsule  dropped on Mars  by  Mars  3  Dec.  2.  Message  did 
not  state  cause  of  interruption  or  whether  transmission  had  resumed. 
JPL   officials  later  said  Soviet  message  had  given  location  of  Mars  2 
spacecraft  but  Soviet  scientisis  had  asked  that  information  not  be 
publicized.  (AP ,   Long  Beach,  Calif,  Independent-Press  Telegram, 
12/22/71  ) 
*  Flight  version  of  multiple  docking  adapter  (MDA )   for  Skylab  was  trans- 
ported  from  Denver  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  aboard  Super  Guppy  aircraft 
for  mating  with  airlock  module  ( A M )   being manufactured  by  McDon- 
ne11  Douglas Astronautics Co.  After  mating,  all  systems would  be  tested 
and   mated  modules  would  be  placed  in  large  altitude  chamber  where 
manned  and  unmanned  simulated missions would  be  conducted.  ( MSFC 
Release  71-241) 

355 

December 21 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

*  Gunman  disarmed  and   held  captive  four  Univ.  of  Maryland  security 
guards  outside  chemistry  building  dur ing   alleged  attempt  to  break 
into  laboratories  where  lunar   samples  were  kept.  Later  Dr.  Cyril  A. 
Ponnamperuma,  former  ARC  scientist,  said  he  believed  unsuccessful 
attempt  had  been  made  to  steal lunar  samples. Dr.  Ponnamperuma  was 
analyzing  samples  a t   Univ.  of  Maryland  for  traces  of  amino  acid, 
life.  (Meyer,  W  Post, 
hydrocarbons,  or  other  building  blocks  of 
12/22[71,  C l )  
Identification  of  galactic  x-ray  source GX3+  1 with  known  s tar   by  British 
technique  ‘employing  co- 
astronomers  using  lunar   occulation-new 
ordinated  observations from  two  sounding  rockets-had 
been  reported 
by  U.K.  Science  Research  Council,  New  York   Times  said.  Observa- 
tions-from 
Skylark  rockets  launched  from Woomera,  Australia,  Sept. 
27  and   Oct.  24,  when  GX3+ l’s   approximate  position  was  known- 
had  indicated  two  times  during  which  x-ray  source  had  disappeared 
behind  moon.  Data  had  enabled  Royal  Greenwich  Observatory astron- 
omer  L.  V.  Morrison  to  pinpoint  area  in   which  x-ray  source  lay  by 
using  photographic  plate  of  region  that  contained  star.  Attempts  to 
confirm  identification  would  be  made  in   next  two  months  but  report 
conceded  possibility  that  x-ray  source  could  be  associated  with  fainter 
s tar  not  visible on  existing plates.  ( N Y T ,  12/21/71,  22 )  
December  22:  NASA  announced flight  schedule  for  1972. Apollo  16  manned 
lunar  landing  mission  would  be  launched  in  March  and  Apollo  17   in  
December.  Pioneer-F would  be  launched  in   February  on  two-year  mis- 
sion  to  Jupiter,  and  ERTS  would  be  launched  into  polar  orbit  dur ing  
the  first  half  of  1972  to  obtain  earth  surface  imagery.  Other  launches 
would  include  Intelsat-IV  F-4,  F-5,  and   F - 6   comsats  for  ComSat- 
Corp;  HEOS-A2  Highly  Eccentric Orbit  Satellite  for  ESRO;  MTS  Meteo- 
roid  Technology  Satellite;  TD-1  scientific satellite  for  ESRO ; ITOS-C,  -D, 
and   -E  Improved  Tiros  Operational  meteorological  satellites  for 
NOAA ;   OAO-c  Orbiting  Astronomical  Observatory;  IMP-H 
Interplane- 
tary   Monitoring  Platform;  ESRO-4  scientific  satellite  for  ESRO ; Aeros 
scientific  satellite  in  cooperation  with  West  Germany;  SAS-B  Small 
Astronomy  Satellite;  Telesat-A  comsat  for  Canada;  Nimbus-E  R&D 
satellite ; and  SMS-A  Synchronous Meteorological  Satellite. 
In   addition,  NASA  schedule  would  include  broad  range  of  aeronau- 
tical  research  and  cooperative  exploration  with  other  countries.  Air- 
craft  noise  abatement  would  be  high-priority  goal,  with  development 
of  QUESTOL  aircraft,  construction  of  noise-reduction laboratory  at  LaRC, 
and  mating  of  acoustically  treated  nacelle  to  quieter  jet  engine.  Super- 
critical  wing  test  aircraft  would  be  fitted  with  side  fairings  to  increase 
flight  efficiency  and  wing  would  be  fitted  to  modified  F-111  aircraft 
for  tests  in  1973.  X-24A  lifting  body  would  be  modified  and  redesig- 
nated  X-24B  and   would  begin  flight  tests  in  fall  1972.  (NASA  Feature 
Release) 
- 
NASA  announced  it  had  authorized  MSFC  to  extend  for  one  month  the 
level-of-effort contract  with  NR  Rocketdyne  Div.  for  design  of  Space 
Shuttle  main  engine.  Action  had  been  taken  pending  completion  of 
GAO  review  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.  P ra t t   & Whitney  Div.’s  protest  of 
contract  award  to  Rocketdyne  [see  Aug.  31.  (NASA   Release  71-249) 
December  23: Zrztelsat-IV F-2,  launched  by  NASA  for  ComSatCorp  on  behalf 
of  INTELSAT  Jan.  25,  was  adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  Satellite  had 

356 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December 23 

been  placed  in   desired  synchronous  orbit  Jan.  27  and   was  now  in  
service  a t   24’  west  longitude  over  Atlantic.  (NASA  P r o j  Off) 
France’s  Eole  Cooperative  Applications  Satellite,  launched  by  NASA  Aug. 
16,  was  adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  Initial  data  tape  had   been 
received  by  GSFC  from  CNES  for   reduction  and   analysis  of  balloon- 
temperature,  .pressure-sensor,  and  wind-velocity  information.  Prelimi- 
nary   results  indicated  that  balloon  sensors,  interrogation  method,  and  
range-rate  system  for  position-locating  balloons  had  been  operating 
within  design  Iimits.  Satellite  position-location  technique  had  been  able 
to  locate  fixed  balloon  electronics  package  to  within  1.2 km  (0.8  m i )  
of  its  surveyed  position.  Location  of  free  moving  balloons  had  been 
within  3 km  (1.9 m i ) .   (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
Joint  West German and  NASA  barium-ion-cloud  ( B IC )  probe  launched  Sept. 
20  was  adjudged  successful  by  NASA.  Barium  had   been  released  a t  
planned  altitude,  latitude,  and   longitude,  and  cloud  generated  had  been 
recorded  by  special  cameras  for  about  75  min.  Cloud  elongated  to 
12 000  km  (7500 m i )   dur ing   observation  period  and   good  data  were 
obtained  during  cloud‘s  deceleration.  Striations observed  would  provide 
information  on  plasma  instabilities  and   on  electric  and   magnetic  fields 
i n  magnetosphere.  (NASA  P ro j  Off) 
9  NASA  announced  appointment  of  John  W.  King,  KSC   Chief  of  Public 
Information,  as  MSC   Public  Affairs  Officer.  Appointment  would  be 
effective  in   late  January  1972.  K ing   had  participated  in   more  than 
200  launches;  voice  of  “Jack  King”  was  well  known  to  Apollo  launch 
viewers.  (NASA   Release 71-250) 
GSA  had  said  i t  would  take bids  on   towers  and  equipment  from two  Sa turn  
launch  complexes  a t   ICSC,  AP   reported.  Equipment  from  Complexes  34 
and   37,  to  be  sold  in   one  lot,  included  cranes,  boom  hoists,  298  km 
(185 m i )   of  copper  and  steel  cable,  and   five  towers  weighing  total  of 
more  than  8.2 million  k g   (9000 tons) .   NASA  had  said  complexes, which 
cost  $147  million  to  build,  were  obsolete.  Complex  34  was  scene  of 
Jan .   27,  1967,  Apollo  fire  that  took  the  lives  of  Astronauts  Virgil  I. 
Grissom,  Roger  B.  Chaffee, and  Edward H. White  11.  It was  also launch 
site  of  Apollo  7  (Oct.  11-22,  1968 ) ,   first  manned  mission  in   Apollo 
program.  Complex 37 had   been  used  for pre-Apollo  unmanned  missions. 
N Y T ,  12/24/71,  C 7 ;   ICSC  Hist Off) 
Discovery  of  new  planetoid  by  Soviet  astrophysicist  N.  Chernykh  was 
reported  by  Moscow  publication  Sotsialisticheskaya  Zndmtriya.  Plan- 
etoid  had   been  described  as  celestial  body  of  16th magnitude  but  had  
not  been  identified  by  permanent  number  and  name.  Preliminary  calcu- 
lations  of  planetoid’s  orb i t   had   been  made  by  F.  Khanina  of  Soviet 
Academy  of  Sciences.  Chernykh  and  M.  Diritis  of  Latvian  State Univ. 
had  called  planetoid  “Riga.”  ( FBISSOV-71-231,  12/30/71,  u) 
*  DOD had  decided  to  postpone  production  decision  on  Lockheed  Aircraft 
Corp’s  Cheyenne  attack  helicopter  while  USA  flight-tested  a i rc ra f t  
against  two  competitors,  Wall Street Journal  reported.  Competitors  were 
United  Aircraft  Corp.  Sikorskv Aircraft Div.’s  Blackhawk  and  Textron, 
(Levine,  WS J ,  
Inc.,  Bell  Helicopter  Co.’s  ’helicopter,  Kingcobra. 
12 /23 /71 ,5)  
*  Chinese  Communists  were  building  missile  tracking  ship  tha t   could  be 
used  in   Pacific  for  tracking  and   analyzing  test-firing  of  ICBMS  capable 
of  application  against  European  portion of  U.S.S.R. a n d  U.S., Christian 

357 

December 23 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Science  Monitor  reported.  Monitor’s  sources  in  Washington,  D.C.,  had 
said  ship  could  be  used  to  spy  on  U S .   and   Soviet  missile  work  and  
to  expand  Chinese  satellite  program  into  wider  areas.  (Ashworth,  C SM ,  
12 /23 /71 ,1 )  
December 25: U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos 469  from  Baykonur  into orb i t  with 
262-km  (162.8-mi) apogee, 252-km  (156.6-mi)  perigee,  89.6-min period, 
inclination.  (GSFC   S SR ,   12/31/71;  Sou  Aero,  1/17/71,  1 5 )  
and   64.9’ 
*  U.S.S.R.  and   France  had  successfully  completed  joint  program  of 
sounding  rocket  launches  from  Soviet  ship Professor ZuboV  off  coast  of 
Kourou ,   French  Guiana,  Tass  announced.  Purpose  of  launches  was  to 
study  upper  atmosphere.  (FBIS-SOV-71-251, 
12/30/71,  L2 )  
*  U.S.S.R.  would  transfer  to  new  system  of  world  coordinated  time  a t   mid- 
night  Dec.  31,  Tass  reported.  (FBIS-SOV-71-251, 
12/30/71,  L1 )  
December 2 6 :  NASA  was  studying method  of  obtaining  samples of  comets by 
sending  spacecraft  to  rendezvous  with  comet  to  fly  through  comet’s 
head  or  tail,  Washington  Post  reported.  oss  Planetary  Programs 
Director  Robert  S.  Kraemer,  had  said  tha t   “best  shot  of  all  might  be 
going  right  through  the middle  of  a  comet,  to  find  out  what’s  going  on 
inside  the  comet.”  Not  all  comets  were  reachable  by  spacecraft,  but 
some  would  come  close  enough  to  ear th   in   next  20  yrs  to  make 
rendezvous  feasible,  Post  said.  Comet  $Arrest  would  fly  by  in   1976 and  
and  1982, comet Encke  in  1983, comet Giacobini-Zinner  in   1985. Comet 
“most  astronomers  would  like  to  probe”  was  Halley’s,  due  close  to  sun 
in   February  1986.  (O’Toole,  W  Post,  12/26/71,  C5) 
*  USAF  had  ordered  new  flying  procedures  to  reduce  structural  wear  and  
tear  on  C-5A  cargo  aircraft,  New  Yo rk   T imes   reported.  “Highly 
unusual  program  for  extending  a  plane’s  useful  life”  was  additional 
to  “more  routine  work  of  beefing  up  the  wings  in   areas  that  show  signs 
of  being  the  least  durable.”  There  were  indications  that  C-5A’s  struc- 
tural  needs  could  grow  beyond  usual  level  for  new  aircraft.  “If  so, 
huge  new  outlays  could  be  added  to  the  already massive costs  that  have 
made  the  aircraft  a  focus  of  debate.”  C-5A  had  already  overrun  initial 
total  cost  estimates  by  $1.2  billion.  Latest  figure  of  $4<.6 billion  was  for 
diminished  fleet  of  81  instead  of  120  aircraft,  which  were  to  have 
cost $3.4  billion.  (Witkin, N Y T ,  12 /26 /71 ,46)  
December 26-31  : AAAS  held  138th Annual Meeting  in  Philadelphia.  Activists 
protesting  U S .   policy  in   Vietnam  war  tossed  tomato  a t   former  Vice 
President  Hubert  H.  Humphrey  and   interrupted  speech  of  William 
P.  Bundy,  former  State  Dept.  Assistant  Secretary  in   charge  of  East 
Asian  affairs.  Science  reported  later  tha t   despite  “well  publicized” 
incidents,  observers  agreed  level  of  intensity  of  disruptions  was  lower 
than  in   recent  years.  New  Yo rk   T imes   attributed  relative  mildness  of 
meeting  to  fact  proceedings  were  not  televised,  thus  providing  “less 
tempting  platform  for  confrontations.”’ 
Symposium  on  “Astronomy  from  a  Space Platform”  held  Dec.  27-28 
included  papers  by  astronomers,  space  program  planners,  electronics 
specialists,  optical  designers,  and  researchers.  NASA  Skylab  Program 
Director  William  C.  Schneider,  presented  plans  for  Skylab  solar  astron- 
omy  experiments.  Dr.  George  H.  Ludwig,  Chief  of  GSFC  Information 
Processing  Div.,  analyzed  tradeoff  between  earth-based  and  space-based 
data  processing  in   astronomy  missions.  Dr.  William  F.  Hoffman  of 
NASA  Institute  for  Space  Studies  discussed  next-generation  infrared 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December 26-31 

space  astronomical instruments  and   discoveries  already  made  in  infra- 
red  region.  Panel  chaired  by  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  NASA  Associate 
Administrator  for   Space  Science,  reviewed  symposium  on  Dec.  28. 
Panel  also  included Dr.  Kar l   Henize,  astronaut-astronomer.  (Program ;  
Science,  10/15/71,  11/19/71;  1/7/72;  NYT ,   1/2/72,  3:9;  NASA 
Hist Off)  
December  27:  U.S.S.R.  launched  two  satellites  from  Plesetsk.  Cosmos  470 
entered  orbit  with  2572km  (159.7-mi)  apogee,  190-km  (118.1-mi) 
perigee,  88.9-min  period,  and  65.4O  inclination.  I t   reentered  Jan.  6, 
1972. 
Oreol,  joint  Soviet-French experiment  i n   Arcade  program  to  study 
upper  atmosphere  a t   high  latitudes  and  determine  nature  of  polar 
lights,  entered orbit with  2477-km  (1539.2-mi)  apogee,  400-km  (248.6- 
m i )   perigee,  114.6-min  period,  and  73.9O  inclination.  Satellite  carried 
instruments  to  study  spectrum  of  proirons  and  electrons,  to  measure 
integral  intensity  of  protons,  and  to  determine  ionic  composition  of 
atmosphere.  (GSFC  SSR ,   12/31/71  ; 1/31/72  ; Tass,  FBIS-SOV-71-249, 
12/28/71,  L1 ;  Sow Aero,  1 /17 /72 ,15)  
*  U.S.S.R.’s  Mars  2  and  Mars  3  had  discovered  presence  of  oxygen  and 
atomic hydrogen  in  Mars’  upper atmosphere,  Tass announced.  Hydrogen 
corona was  located  at  altitude  of  10  000-20  000  km  (6200-12  400  m i )  
above  surface,  and  oxygen  a t   700-1000  kin  (435-620  m i ) .  Spacecraft 
also measured temperature changes on Martian surface.  Individual  areas 
on  diurnal  side  did  not  exceed  258 K  (-lS”C,  or  5OF). On  nocturnal 
side,  temperature  in   some  regions  exceeded  that  of  environment  by 
20-25  K  (20-25OC,  o r   68-77’F). 
(FBIS-SOV-71-249, 
12/28/71,  L2)  
*  NASA  and  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  had  agreed  on  substance  and 
mechanics  of  future  exchanges  of  medical  and   biological  data  on 
their  experience  in  manned  space  flight,  NASA  announced.  Agree- 
ment’s  details  were  contained  in  recommendations  of  joint  working 
group  on  space biology  and  medicine which  met  in  Moscow  Oct.  9-13. 
Group-cochaired 
by  Dr .   Charles  A.  Berry,  NASA  Director  for  Life 
Sciences,  and  Dr.  N.  N.  Gurovsky  of  U.S.S.R.  Ministry  of  Health  and 
Academy  of  Sciences-recommended 
that  meetings  be  held  at  least 
once  annually,  with  next  meeting  held  in   U S .   during  May  1972; 
working  sessions  be  held  to  consider  ways  io  predict  state  of  human 
organism  during  and  after  space  flights,  response  of  certain  body  sys- 
tems  to  space  environment,  techniques  of  dysbarism  prevention, 
methods  of  preflight  and  postflight  medical  observations,  and  methods 
and  results  of  biological  experiments ; and  cochairmen  explore  possi- 
bility  of  an  exchange  o f   one  or  two  specialists  to  work  in   laboratories 
doing  similar  biomedical  research  in   space  programs  of  U.S.  and  
U.S.S.R.  (NASA  Release  71-251) 
*  NSF  interdisciplinary  conference  a t   Franklin  Institute  in  Philadelphia 
celebrated  400th  anniversary  of  birth  of  Johannes  Kepler.  Kepler- 
astronomer,  mathematician,  and  physicist-had 
devised  laws  of  plan- 
etary  motions  in  early  17th  century.  Laws  were  “just  as  valid  today 
as  at  the  time  of  their  announcement,”  Science  said.  (Science,  10/ 
15/71,  325 ;  NSF  PIO) 
*  Rising  volume  in  aerospace  industry  production  was  predicted  by  David 
A.  Loehwing  in   Burrons  magazine:  “NASA  is  readying  some  new  pro- 
grams, notably the  space  shuttle.  . . , Airline  revenues  are  climbing, and  
359 

December 27 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

some  pick-up  in   orders  for  transports  is  anticipated.”  DOD  procurement 
policies  “which  nearly  threw  a  few  companies  into  bankruptcy”  had  
been  revised.  “Most  important  there  is  a  growing  awareness  that  the  
Soviet  arms  buildup  poses  a  real  threat  to  U S .   security,  which  new 
weapons  must  be  developed  to  counter.”  Persuasive  but  “cynical” 
argument  fo r  l if t  in  aerospace  business in  1972 was political  expediency. 
“Over  half-a-million  people  have  been  laid  off  in  the  industry  since 
1968,  some  200,000  in   California,”  state  with  largest  number  of 
electoral  votes.  Barrons  quoted  political  observer  as   saying,  “Starting 
pretty  early  next  spring,  you’re  going  to  see  a  massive  injection  of 
funds into aerospace.”  (Barrons, 12/27/71  ) 
December  28: U S .  Patent  No.  3 631 294 was  awarded  to  Steven R. Hofstein, 
President  of  Princeton  Electronics,  Inc.,  for  Lithicon,  first  electronic 
storage  tube  to  record  on  silicon  and  silicon  dioxide.  Tube,  with  target 
area  consisting  of  more  than  10  million  silicon  storage  elements,  had  
been  used  by  JPL   to  record  Mariner  9  Mars  photos,  by  airlines  and  
Federal  agencies  to  inspect  parcels  that  might  contain  bombs;  by  hos- 
pitals  fo r   brief  x-ray  and   sonar  exposures,  and   by  libraries  to  retrieve 
microfilmed publications.  (Jones, N Y T ,  1 /1 /72 ,25 )  
*  International Institute  for  Strategic Studies  was  quoted  as  saying  in   Lon- 
don  that  30  to  70 new  Soviet  Sukhoi  Su-11 delta-wing  advanced  fighter 
aircraft  had  been  delivered  to  Soviet Air  Force  in   Egypt.  Aircraft were 
believed  to  be  capable  of  mach  2.5  speed  and  were  armed  with  air-to- 
a i r  missiles.  (Reuters, C S M ,  12/28/71,  2 )  
December  29 :  U.S.S.R.  launched  Meteor  10 from  Plesetsk  to  “obtain  mete- 
orological  information  necessary  for  an   efficient  weather  forecasting 
service.”  Orbital  parameters:  apogee,  890  km  (553 m i )  ; perigee,  876 
km  (544.3  m i ) ;   period,  102.6  m in ;   and   inclination,  81.2O.  (GSFC  
S SR ,   12/31/71;  Tass,  FBIS-sov-71-251, 
2/30/71,  L1;  sou   Aero  
1 /17 /72 ,15)  
NASA  telexed  thanks  to  Soviet scientist Dr.  I.  A.  Zhulin  for  “very  informa- 
tive  transmission”  of  Mars  2  and  3  da ta   that  included  description  of 
instruments  [see  Dec.  211  and  forwarded  Mariner  9  uv spectrometer 
results.  Message,  signed  by  Mariner  9  Program   Manager  Dan 
Schneiderman,  continued  exchange  between  JPL   and   Moscow  of  in- 
formation  from  U S .   and  Soviet  Mars  probes.  NASA  requested  more 
information  on  Soviet experiments  and  spacecraft  on  “detailed  level  . . . 
described  in   ou r   ICARUS  publication  previously  transmitted  to  you,” 
and   sa id   Mariner  9  photo  of  Mars  3  lander  site  area   was  being  dis- 
patched  by  diplomatic  pouch.  New  value  for  direction  of  Mars  polar 
axis  baaed  on  dynamic  considerations  was  included  in   NASA  message 
to  Moscow.  NASA  noted,  “Although  this  will  probably  cause  a  revision 
of  the  Mars  coordinate  system  a t   a  later  date,  we  will  continue  to 
observe  the  existing  convention  in   describing  the  positions  of  visible 
surface features.”  (NASA   Release 71-254) 
*  Failure  Review  Board  appointed  to  study  malfunction  of  Delta  85  and  
Delta  86  launch  vehicles  had  completed  report,  NASA  announced.  Fail- 
ure  of  Delta  86,  which  had   failed  to  orbit  ITOS-B  Oct.  21,  had  appar-  
ently  been  caused  by  leak  in  oxidizer  system’s  vent  valve,  which  caused 
2nd  stage  to  move  from  correct  attitude.  To  compensate  for  disturb- 
ance,  attitude  thrusters  using  stored  nitrogen  gas  fired  continuously  to 

360 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

December 29 

keep  rocket  properly  oriented,  depleting  nitrogen  gas  and   causing 
rocket  to  tumble  and  crashland  after  reignilion. 
Apparent  cause  of  Delta  85   malfunction  while  orbiting  Os0  7 
Sept.  29  had  been  nitrogen  gas  leak  in  2nd-stage hydraulic  reservoir 
system.  Although  control  of  spacecraft  had  been  lost  before  spacecraft 
separation,  satellite  had  entered  slightly  elliptical  orbit  and   had  ac- 
complished its mission objectives.  (NASA   Release  71-253) 
*  In   21   major  tests  since  April  1970,  Safeguard  ABM  system  had  had  17  
successes,  two  partial  successes,  and  two  failures,  Vashington  Da i ly  
News  reported.  USA  officials  had   termed  record  highly  successful  for 
complex  weapon  system  during  testing  phase.  Tests  had  included  inter- 
cepts  of  missiles  fired  against  Safeguard  test  network  and   firing  of 
ABMS   at  predetermined  points  in  space.  Most  significant  test  had  been 
firing  of  long-range Spartan  ABM  from  USA’s Meck  Island  test  complex 
in  Pacific.  Missile  had  intercepted  incoming  enemy  warhead  after 
picking  i t   out  of  group  of  decoys.  Spartan  had  been  designed  to  knock 
down  incoming warheads outside  atmosphere at  322 km  (200 m i )   from 
launch  site.  Superfast  Sprint  missile  was  being  developed  to  intercept 
warheads  penetrating  atmosphere  at  40-km  (25-m i)   distance.  About 
35   more  major  Safeguard  iests  were  planned  through  mid-1974, 
including  tests  of  missile’s  ability  to  launch  and  guide  large  numbers 
of  ABMS   simultaneously against  clusters  of  simulated warheads,  decoys, 
electric  jamming  devices,  and  other  missile  penetration  aids.  ( P  News, 
12/29/71) 
December  30 :   Mars  orbit  of  Mariner  9  was  changed  by  17-sec  engine 
firing  to  compensate  for  effects  of  dust  storm  on  mission  objectives. 
Periapsis was  raised  from  1388 km  (862 m i )   to  1650 km  (1025 m i )   to 
expand  area  covered  in   mapping  photos  and  to  provide  required  over- 
lapping  of  pictures.  Mapping  would  be  completed  in   three  20-day 
cycles  with  fourth  cycle  available  to  fill  in   open  areas  where  photos 
did  not  overlap.  Period  was  increased  by  1 min  19   sec  to  place 
periapsis  in   middle  of  Goldstone  viewing  period  for  maximum  data 
(NASA  Release  71-252;  Pasadena  Star-News,  12/31/71) 
return. 
9  Two  new  clean  rooms  for  checkout  of  Apollo  Telescope Mount  (A TM )   in  
Skylab  program  were  being  constructed  at  KSC.  Control  of  tempera- 
ture,  humidity,  and  a i r   in   rooms  would  help  prevent  contamination of 
delicate  lenses  and  other  critical  components  of  ATM  experiments. 
( K S C  Release 279-71) 
NASA  announced  award  of  $1.6-million,  cost-plus-fixed-fee  contract  to 
Aerospace  Corp.  for  studies  of  advanced  space  programs.  Studies, 
which  would  advance work  performed  under  previous  contract,  would 
include  space  shuttle  mission  and  payload  capture  analysis,  payload 
analysis  for  space  shuttle  applications,  analysis  of  advanced  program 
operations  and  logistics  analysis,  and   advanced  missions  safety. 
(NASA  Release  71-255) 
During  December:  U S .   manned  lunar  missions  Apollo  14   and   15 were 
voted  fifth  most  important  news  story  of  1971  in   A P   poll  of  member 
newspapers.  Communist  China  was  voted  number  one  newsmaker  for 
admission  to  U.N.,  changed  diplomatic  relations  with  U.S.,  and  
emerging  position  in   world  affairs.  ( W  Star,  12/27/71,  C9) 
Bell  Aerospace  Rendezvous  articles  described  csFc-devised  position- 
location  and  a ircraf t   communications  experiment  ( PLACE )  
to  test 

361 

During December 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

feasibility  of  transoceanic  a i r   traffic  control  system  tha t   would  use 
earth-orbit  satellites.  Experiment  was  designed  following  earlier  mis- 
sion  analyses  by  ERC.  “Scheduled  for  1973,  the   year-long  experiment 
will  determine  the  technical  and  operational  feasibility  of  using  com- 
munications  satellites  to  give  ground  control  centers  precise  and   un- 
interrupted  readings  and  control  of  a i r   traffic  over  the  North  Atlantic 
5 
24   hours  a  day.”  Experiment  would  employ  two  satellites-Ats 
launched  Aug.  12,  1969)   and   ATS-F 
( to   be   launched  in   1973)-and 
three  ground  stations.  PLACE   would  be  able  automatically  to  pinpoint 
to  within  one  mile  [1.6  km]  actual  positions  of  up  to  250  aircraft, 
update  information  once  a  minute,  and   predict  locations  between  up- 
dates.  Operational  PLACE  system  could  reduce  flight-corridor  widths 
to  48   km  (30 m i )   and   aircraft  spacings  from  15- to  5-min  intervals, 
permitting  same  corridors  to  accommodate  12   times  as  much  traffic 
without  affecting  flight  safety.  I n   bad  weather,  PLACE  could  simul- 
taneously  reroute  every  aircraft  within  flight  corridor.  Although 
PLACE  was  geared  only  to  North  Atlantic  a i r   traffic,  “it  is  the  fore- 
runner  of  what  could  become  a  worldwide  satellite  a i r   traffic  and   sur- 
face  control  network.”  (Rendezvous,  Summer/Fall,  71,  9-11  ; Aero- 
space Technology, 2 /26 /68 ,33 )  
*  Dr.  Charles  S.  Sheldon  11,  Chief  of  Science  Policy  Research  Div.  of 
L ibrary   of  Congress’  Congressional  Research  Service,  reviewed  Soviet 
space  program  in   AIAA  Student  Journal.  Soviet  program’s  physical 
size  and   upward  pace  “suggests  it  exceeds  in   real  terms  the  U.S.  pro- 
gram  a t   its  previous  maximum.”  I n   contrast  to  U.S.  program- 
which  had   been  eroded  as  programs  ended  and   technical  man- 
power  teams  broke  up-Soviet 
“application  of  resources  to  a  broad 
program  of  space  flight  has  continued  fairly  steadily  upward  toward 
an   ultimate  level  which  has  not  yet  been  publicly  defined.” 
Soviet  program  began  its  space  flights  with  adaptation  of  its  first 
ICBM ,   SS-6  Sapwood.  “This  vehicle,  with  improved  upper  staging,  is 
still  the  mainstay  of  the  present  program  while  ou r   corresponding,  but 
very  small,  Redstone  and   Vanguard  first  stages  have  long  since  dis- 
appeared  into history.” 
Largest  single  element  in   total  U.S.S.R.  program  was  Cosmos 
reconnnaisance  satellite,  which  stayed  in   low-circular  orb i t   a  few  days 
and  was  then  recovered  and  which  represented  “rather  passive  military 
support  flights.”  Other  elements  with  direct  weapon  implications  were 
special  uses  of  SS-9  Scarp  ballistic  missile  carr ier   with  space  versions 
carry ing   fractional  orbital  bombardment  system  (FOBS)   and  
F-1-r 
carrying  highly  maneuverable  payloads.  Some  payloads 
F-1-m 
launched  by  F-1-m 
“seem  almost  certainly  aimed  a t   developing  the 
them  and,  if  need  be,  destroy  them.  I n   a  series  of  flights  . . . such 
techniques  of  rendezvous  with  uncooperative  spacecraft  to  inspect 
inspectors  have  made  close  passes  on  other  Soviet  payloads  and   then 
have  themselves  been  blown  into  clouds  of  debris.  At  least  one,  instead 
of  being  destroyed  . . . was  deliberately  redirected  to  plunge  into  the 
atmosphere  and  ocean.”  (AZAA  S tu  J ,   12/71,  14-28) 
Safety  problems  of  space  shuttle  were  discussed  by  Director  I.  Irv ing  
Pinkel  of  LeRC   Aerospace  Safety  Research  and   Data  Institute,  in  
Astronautics  & Aeronautics  article.  “The  rocket  engine  must  have  an  
airplane-like  endurance  of  10  years  (100   missions).  The  airplane 

362 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

During December 

systems  must  operate where  rockets  do,  subject  to  space vacuum,  space 
radiation,  and  reentry  heating,  and   still  carry  a  fan  engine  with  high 
cycle temperature.”  (A&A ,   12/71,28-35) 
*  Attributes  of  Q-fan  engine  for   STOL  propulsion were  described  in   Aero- 
nautics & Astronautics  article  by  George  Rosen,  United  Aircraft  Corp. 
Hamilton  Standard  Div.  engineer:  “Q-Fan,  with  its  lightly  loaded 
rotor,  operating  a t   low  t ip   speeds  and   incorporating  controllable-pitch 
blading,  is  now  essentially  available  as  a  new  propulsor  uniquely 
matched  to  the  stringent  performance,  noise,  and   operational  require- 
ments  of  the  advanced  STOL  transport.  I t   offers  the  aircraft  designer 
flexibility  in   meeting the  specific  requirements of  a  given  aircraft  with 
a  limited  number  of  available  core  engines.  By  varying  the  size  of  the 
Q-Fan,  the  bypass  ratios  available  . . . could  range   from  1 5 : l   to  30:1, 
or more if  needed.”  (A&A ,  12/71,50-5) 
Slackening  of  U S .   R&D  was  scored  by  Eberhardt  Rechtin,  Principal 
Deputy  Director  of  Defense  Research  and  Engineering  in  DOD,  in  
Astronautics  &  Ae rowu t ic s   article:  “The  image  of  world  technical 
leadership  earned  by  our  electronics  and  aerospace  industries  in   the 
1960s  will  predictably  be  eroded  in   the  1970s  by  our  own  lack  of 
planned  ‘firsts’  in   contrast  with  the  continuing  achievements  of  the 
Soviet  Union,  France,  and  probably  Germany  and   Japan.”  Major 
source  of  future  wealth  “must  be  the  special  skills  of  ou r   population- 
yet  w e   are   presently  pricing  ourselves  out  of  the  world  markets,  in- 
cluding our  own.  We  a re  also  disseminating our  science, our  inventions, 
our  management expertise,  and   our  manufacturing  technologies  around 
the  world  in  a  way  which,  though  it  raises  the  standards  of  living 
elsewhere,  also  diminishes the  competitive advantages  of  our  own  peo- 
ple.”  While  U S .   had  been  world  leader  in   R&D  less  than  25  yrs,  “you 
hear  discussions  about  reordering  national  priorities  as  i f   we  could 
make  unilateral  decisions,  independent o€ the  international  competition 
if  international  int$ractions  were  not  a  significant,  much  less  a 
-as 
driving,  €actor-concerning  defense  R&D,  the  NASA  space  program,  tax  
incentives  to  industry,  or  a  wage/price  freeze.”  ( A& A ,   12/71,  22-7) 
G o d s   and  Means  in   the  Conquest  of  Space  by  Soviet  author  R .   G. 
Perel’man  (NASA  Technical Translation  F-595)  was  reviewed  in   Aero- 
space  Historian  by  Clarke  G.  Reynolds  of  Univ.  of  Maine.  Reynolds 
quoted  Perel’man  conclusion : after  “ c o n q ~ e r i n g ~ ~  Solar  System,  Com- 
munist  society  “will  take  a  further  bold  step,  Le.,  to  the  stars  of  our 
galaxy,  and   then  other  galaxies;  to  visit  and  study  the   planetary  sys- 
tems  and  civilizations  of  other  worlds  in   order  to  bring  other  islands 
of  intelligence  into  the  system  of  the  grand  circle  that  is  characteristic 
of  the  space  age  in   the  evolution  of  intelligent  life.”  (Aerospace  His- 
torian,  12/71,216-7) 
During W in te r :  Only  “small  fraction”  of  defense,  space,  and   atomic energy 
funding  during  1950s  and   1960s  had  been  spent  on  science  and  tech- 
nology  per   se,  Gabor  Strasser,  former  technical  assistant  to  Presiden- 
tial  Science  Adviser  Edward  E.  David,  Jr.,  said  in   Science  Po l icy  
Reviews.  DOD,  NASA,  and  AEC  funding  had  accounted  for  “about  two- 
thirds  of  our  entire  Federal  budget”  but  bulk  of  “these  huge  expendi- 
tures,,  had  gone  for  “such  ‘unscientific’  things”  a s   plants,  materials, 
labor,  tooling,  and   production. With  approach  of  mid-1970s “emphasis 
is  shifting  . . . toward  alleviation  of  domestic  social  and   environmental 
363 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
During Winter 
problems,  or  . . . improvement of  our  ‘quality  of  life.’  These  goals  a re  
not  so  science-and-technology  sensitive  as  going  to  the  moon,  as 
MIRV’s or  a s   phased-array  radars   have  been.”  Major  change  affecting 
current  scientific  and   technical  activities  was  “approach  required  to 
tackle  today’s  emerging  problems.”  Advancement  of  state  of  the  a r t  
was  less  important  than  “integration  of  existing  science  and   technol- 
ogy  with  what  is  already  known  and   yet  to  be  found  out  in   sociology, 
economics,  politics,  management  and 
institutional  arrangements.” 
(Battelle Sei Pol  Rev ,  Fourth Quarter 71,3-12) 
NASA  published  Mar iner-Venm   1967,  Final  Project  Report 
(NASA 
SP-190).  In   €oreword, Project  Manager  Glenn  A.  Reiff  said Muriner  5 
(launched June  14, 1967, toward  Oct.  19, 1967, flyby of  planet  Venus), 
apar t   from  significant  contributions  to  knowledge  of  deep  space,  had 
achieved  secondary  objeciive,  “to  gain  engineering  experience  by  con- 
verting  a  spare  Mariner-Mars  1964  spacecraft  into  one  that  could  be 
flown  to  Venus,”  with  substantial  savings.  Cost  of  mission  had  been 
10% less than  anticipated.  (Text) 

364 

Summary 

During  1971 : U S .   orbited  51  spacecraft  in   29  launches-including  Apollo 
14  and   15   CSMS  K i t t y   Hawk and   Endeavor  with  LMS  Antares  and  
Falcon  and   their  S-IVB  stages  intentionally  crashed  onto  moon. 
U.S.S.R.  orbited  97  payloads  in   8 3   launches;  Japan,  2 ;   U.K.,  1; 
France,  1 ;   Italy,  2  ( 1   for  U S .   on  U S .   booster)  ; and   Communist 
China,  1. U S .   total  included  33  orbited  by  DOD   in   17  launches  and   19 
by  NASA  in   1 3  launches.  NASA’S  total  included  1 launched  for  USAF  on  
behalf  of  NATO,  1 for France,  and  1 for U.K. 
NASA’s  manned  space  flight  program  contiiiued  with  launches  of 
Apollo  14  and  Apollo  15 manned  lunar  landing  missions. Mobile equip- 
ment  transporter,  used  for  first  time  on  ApoZlo  14  to  ca r ry   equipment 
and   samples,  allowed  astronauts  to  explore  3.5  km  (2.2  m i )   of  lunar 
surface  and   collect  43   kg  (94.8  Ibs)  of  samples.  On  Apollo  15, astro- 
nauts  traveled  28   km  (17.41  m i )   over  lunar  surface  on   four-wheeled, 
battery-powered  lunar  roving  vehicle  (LRV )  Rover  and   collected  77  kg 
(170  lbs)   of  lunar  samples,  including  one white  anorthosite  rock  about 
4  billion  yrs  old. 
Unmanned program was  highlighted  by Mariner  9 Mars probe, which 
traveled  400  million  km  (248   million  m i )   to  Mars  and   began  trans- 
mitting  photos  of  major  Mars  dust  storm  and,  later,  of  details  of 
Martian  surface and moons Deimos and  Phobos. Mariner  8 launch  vehi- 
cle  malfunctioned  a t   launch.  Os0  7  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory-res- 
cued  from  initially  incorrect  orb i t   by  ground  command-made 
first 
x-ray  observations  of  beginning  solar  flare  and   revealed  that  sun  had  
polar  caps.”  Other  unmanned  missions  included  Intelsat-IV  F-2   and  
C L  
Intelsat-IV  F -3   for  ComSatCorp  and   Explorer  43,  Explorer  44 ,   and  
Explorer  45  ( the   last  launched  fo r   NASA  by  I ta ly) .   Launched  as  sec- 
ondary  payloads  were  Subsatellite  on  Apollo  15 and   T e t r  3  on  Os0  7. 
All  elements  of  Skylab  flight  system  reached  final  manufacturing  and  
checkout  i n   preparation  for  1973  launch  and  intensive  engineering 
studies  on  Space  Shuttle were  conducted  throughout  year. 
In   joint  NASA-USAF  lifting-body  program,  M2-F3  and  X-24A  lifting 
bodies  made  17   flights,  including  first  supersonic  flight  by  M2-F3. 
X-24A  reached  1687  km  per  h r   (1048  mph )   before  completing  pro- 
gram  and   beginning  modification  for   new  flight  program  as   X-24B. 
I n   aeronautics  NASA  TF-SA  jet  aircraft  with  supercritical  wing 
made  27   successful  flights.  USN  F-14  fighter  aircraft  successfully  dem- 
onstrated  first  automatically  programmable  variable  sweep  wing.  USA 
CH - a B   helicopter  set  new  world  altitude  record  of  5120  m  (16 798 
f t )   while  carry ing   10 000-kg  (22  000-lb)  payload.  New  V/STOL  Wind 
Tunnel  at  L a R C   became  operational,  providing  greatly  improved  testing 
capability  for  scaled  models.  GE  quiet  experimental  engine  success- 
fully  completed  initial  tests  in  NASA  program  to  reduce  je t   engine 
noise,  and   NASA  let  competitive  design  contracts  for   development  of 
quiet,  experimental,  short  takeoff  and   landing  ( QUESTOL) 
transport 

I 

365 

During  1971 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
US.-U.S.S.R.  Space  Activity,  1957 -1971 
Successful Launches  t o  Earth Orbit or  Beyond 
r 
u.  5. 

1957 

1959 

1961 

I

l

l
1963 

 I 

1
1965 

I 
1967 

1 

t

i
1969 

 

1
1971 

aircraft.  SST  program  ended,  with  Congress  voting  to  terminate  pro- 
gram. 
In   sounding  rocket  program,  126  successful  flights  were  made  to 
study atmosphere, ionosphere,  auroras and  airglow, geomagnetic storms, 
meteor  streams,  and   trapped  radiation  fluctuations  and  to  make  astro- 
nomical  observations in  x-ray,  UV, and  radio  regions of  electromagnetic 
spectrum. 
DOD’S  33  payloads  included  orbiting  of  2  Defense  Satellite  Commu- 
nications  System  (DSCS-2)  military  comsats,  2  OV-I 
scientific  satel- 
lites, and Cannonball 2 and  Musketball. 
U.S.S.R.’s  83  launches  set  an   all-time  record  in   number  of  flights. 
The  97  payloads  included  81  Cosmos  satellites,  2  Luna,  2  Soyuz,  1 
Salyut,  2  Mars,  1 Intercosmos,  4  Meteor,  2  Molniya  I,  1 Molniya  11, 
and   Oreol  (launched  for   France) .   Soyuz  11, carrying  three-man crew, 

366 

During  1971 

- 0 m Q I v ) t -  
q l n w a e 4 - c  
. .  
W O W *   : : 
. .  
I-* 
. .  
. .  
-Id 
. .  
 
I
.
c F F lW L n - l - 4  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
. .  
. .  
. .  
. .  
. . . . .  
. 
1 - c .   . .  . m a   : :T '   : 
. . . .  
. . . . .  
 
.
.
.
 
.
*
. . . . .  
. . . . .  
f .   . 
 
.
.
.
. . . . .  
 
.
.
.
 
.
.
.
. . . . .  
. . . . .  
. . . .  
. . . .  
. . . .  
cna  :Lo   :  : : + e a . .  
. . . . .  
. . . .  
. . . .  
. . . . .  
. . . . .  
.
e
 
. . . . .  
. . . .  
. . . .  
. . . . .  
. . . . . . . .  
pfz  : m  
: -   : : m   : :m   ; 
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
. . . . .  
. .  
SI-  :u . . .  . m m - c :   : T '  
. . . .  
. .  
. . . . .  
. .  
. . . . .  
. .  
. . . . .  
. . . . .  
. .  
. .  
. . . . .  
.
  .
.
.
 
- 
.
rn at- .
.
 
. c v   . 
.
.
.
.
 
.
: w l 4   : -  
.
.
.
.
 
.
.
.
.
.
 
.
:-c  
.
.
.
.
 
.
: I+  

m  . a m *  

v)  :*ea : 
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  
. . . . . .  

 
 
 
 

.
.
.
.
. .  
gas  i 
. .   * 
. 
i ~ m m m  : : m   :v) : 
.
.
.
.
. .  
.
.
.
.
. .  
.
.
.
.
0
 
.
. .  
. .  
. .  
. .  
. .  
. .  
. .  
. .  
m c J   - .  
: : r m   f a -  : m e 4   : : 
. .  
. .  
03-  : . .  
. .  
. .  
. .  
. .  
. .  
. .  
. .  
. . . .  
c n o   . .FJIne-lom  .?I 
*  . 
. . . .  
m - l   . .  
.
.
 
.
.
. .  
. .  
 
.
.
. .  
 
.
.
. .  
.
.
 
. .  
.
.
 
. .  

. . .  
. .  
. .  
. . .  
. . .  
. .   * 
. .  
. .  
  . 
. .  
. .  
. . .  
. . .  
I
 
.
. .  
. . . . .  
. . . . .  
*
.
. .  
. .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

367 

During  1971 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

successfully  rendezvoused  and   docked  with  unmanned  Salyut  1  to  form 
first  orbital  scientific  station,  but  cosmonauts  died  dur ing   ear th   re- 
en try  because  of  improperly  sealed  hatch.  Murs  2  and  Murs  3  dropped 
instrumented  capsules  on  Mars  surface.  Mars  2  capsule  crashlanded 
and  Mars  3  capsule  transmitted  20  sec.  Lunokhod  1 lunar   rover  carried 
to  moon  on  board  Luna  17 Nov.  17,  1970,  continued  to  explore  lunar  
surface  until  October  1971,  when  isotope heat  reserves were  exhausted 
dur ing  its  11th lunar  night. 
Japan   launched  two  satellites-Tansei 
and   Shinsei.  China  launched 
Chicom  2,  France  launched  Tournesol,  U.K.  launched  Prospero,  and  
Italy  launched  Sun Murco  3 .   (NASA  Release  71-245;  NASA  Lifting Body 
Off;  GSFC  Sounding  Rocket  B r ;   NASA  Exec  Secretariat;  Sheldon, 
United  States a n d  Soviet  Progress  i n  Space,  L ibrary  of  Cong,  1 /22 /72)  
NASA’s  scientific  and   societal  achievements  advanced  national  goal  of 
alleviating  environmental  problems  and   expanding  basic  research  on 
behalf  of  humanity,  as   public  pressed  for  immediate,  usable  returns 
from  research  in   all  fields.  Apollo  manned  missions  swelled  storehouse 
of 
lunar 
information.  Unmanned  astronomical  missions  gathered 
unique  data,  including  new  clues  to  Martian  atmosphere.  NASA-devel- 
oped  inventions  saw  increased  use  beyond  space  exploration-in 
envi- 
ronmental  sciences,  communications,  medicine,  industry,  and   agricul- 
ture.  US.-U.S.S.R. 
space  meetings  set  stage  for  future  joint  space 
missions.  And  balanced  program  of  space  and   ,aeronautics,  despite 
low  funding  level,  continued  to  raise  U S .   prestige  as  aerospace  pio- 
neer  while  it  worked  to  improve  man’s  future.  Some  observers,  how- 
ever,  warned  of  higher  rate  of  technological  advances  abroad  than  in  
U S .   and   of  ever-growing  U.S.S.R.  space  program  and  technological 
capability.  Soviet  expenditures  on   space  were  estimated  a t   level  about 
double  U S .   peak  expenditure  of  1% of  GXP when  combined  NASA-DOD 
space  program  was  a t   highest  level  and   four  times  present  level. 
Dr.  James  C .   Fletcher  was  nominated  new  NASA  Administrator  by 
President  Nixon.  President  of  Univ.  of  Utah  and   former  aerospace 
th ird  
executive,  Dr.  Fletcher  took  office  April  27.  He  succeeded  NASA’s 
Administrator,  Dr.  Thomas 0. Paine,  who  had  resigned  Sept.  15, 1970, 
t o   re turn   to  industry.  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  Deputy  Administrator, 
had  served  as   Acting  NASA  Administrator  in   the  interim. 
Operating  a t   lowest  budget  level  since  1962, NASA  in   1971  continued 
phase-out  of  Apollo  program  with  successful  completion  of  Apollo  14 
and  15. Man’s  fourth  landing  on  moon,  in   Apollo  15 mission,  proved 
to  many  that  man  had   an   effective  scientific  role  in   space.  At  year’s 
end,  Apollo  16  had  been  scheduled  for  March  1972,  with  Apollo  1 7  
to complete program  later  in  year. 
Reduced  funding  forced  additional  reduction  of  personnel  as  well 
as   program  cutbacks,  stretching  out  remaining  Apollo  missions,  de- 
laying  first  Skylab  flight,  and  slowing  studies  of  space  shuttle.  NERVA 
nuclear  rocket  engine  program  was  reduced  to  holding  action.  Bio- 
science  funding  was  eliminated.  Aerospace  employment  in   industry 
throughout  nation  also  fell,  reflecting  cuts  in   DOD  spending  as  well  as  
in  NASA’s. 
Dur ing   year,  however,  Skylab  hardware   manufacture  neared  com- 
pletion  and   space  shuttle  work  continued.  Shuttle  preliminary  design 
contracts  were  extended  so  that  NASA  could  examine  alternative  con- 

368 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

During  1971 

figurations,  contingent  on  Administration  approval  of  shuttle  devel- 
opment.  I n   ERTS  program,  a ircraf t   tested  remote  sensing  devices  for 
gathering  ear th   resources  data  and  first  satellite  for  global  monitor- 
ing   of  resources  was scheduled  fo r   1972.  Dur ing   1971,  instrumented 
a ircraf t   measured  a i r   pollution,  investigated  corn  blight  infestation, 
and   sought  hidden  natural  resources.  Pioneer-F  spacecraft  for  planned 
1972  launch  and   December  1973  Jupiter  flyby  went  into  final  manu- 
facturer’s  tests.  Increased  emphasis  on  aeronautics  included  research 
into  a ircraf t   noise  reduction,  increased  a i r   transport  efficiency  with 
use  of  supercritical  wing,  and   STOL  a ircraf t   for  transportation. 
To  emphasize practical  goals  of  space  science,  NASA  established  new 
Office  of  Applications,  increased  technology  utilization  budget  from 
$1 million  to  $5  million,  and   issued  request  for  proposals  for  addi- 
tional  uses  of  space-developed  technology  to  solve  problems  of  society. 
Among  NASA  projects  were  NSF  contract  to  investigate  use  of  solar 
cells  to  electrify  homes  and   buildings  and   HUD  contract  to  study  appli- 
cation  of  space  technology  to  sewage  recycling.  Joint  NASA-DOT  study 
resulted  in   recommendations  for  civil  aviation  R&D  policy  (CARD) .  
Research  achievements  a t   NASA  centers  included  ARC   discovery  of 
amino  acids-building 
blocks  of  life-in 
second  meteorite.  Discovery 
strengthened  case  for  chemical evolution  of  life  elsewhere  in   universe. 
NASA  FY  1972 appropriation of  $3.298  billion  was  $27  million  more 
than  requested  $3.271  billion  and   $29  mi€lion  above  FY  1971  appro- 
priation  of  $3.269  billion-ha1 
ting  downward  trend  but  fa r   below 
1965 peak  of  $5.250  billion.  ( A & A   1971; O’Toole,  W Post,  1/2/72, 
A1  ; Sheldon, Soviet  Space  Programs,  1966-70,  Senate Doc  92-51) 
*  I n   international  cooperation program,  NASA  successfully  launched  NATO’s 
Natosat  2  military  comsat  for  USAF  and   NATO,  Eole  Cooperative Appli- 
cations  Satellite  for  France,  Is is   2  cooperative  U.S.-Canada  iono- 
spheric satellite,  and   Ar ie l   4  ionospheric satellite  for  U.K.  Italian  crew 
trained  by  NASA  launched  NASA’s Explorer  45  Small  Scientific  Satellite 
and   Italy’s  Sun Marco  3 from  I ta l ian  platform  off  coast  of  Kenya. 
Joint  NASA  and  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  meetings  on  compati- 
ble  spacecraft  rendezvous  and  docking  system  progressed  to  discus- 
sion  of  possible  joint  test  missions.  Data  obtained  by  NASA’s Mariner  9 
and   Soviet Mars  2 and  3  probes  were  exchanged under  agreement  tha t  
covered  broad  range  of  U.S.-U.S.S.R. 
cooperation  in   space  science 
and  applications.  Agreement  on  future  exchanges of  medical  and   bio- 
logical  manned  space  flight  data  called  for  meetings between  U.S.  and 
Soviet experts  at least  annually. 
U.S.  and   U.S.S.R.  exchanged Apollo  11 and   12 and   Soviet Lrcrua  16 
lunar   samples  and   Soviet  scientists  were  among  750  experts  attending 
Second  Annual  Lunar  Science  Conference  a t   Lunar  Science  Institute 
in   Houston.  First  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Conference  on  Communications with 
Extraterrestrial  Intelligence  was  held  in   Soviet  Armenia. 
Joint  meeting  of  NASA  and   European  Space  Conference  (ESC) iden- 
tified  candidate  areas   fo r   possible  European  participation  in   U.S. 
post-Apollo  space  programs,  including  design  and   development  of 
space shuttle  subsystems. 
International  Workshop  on  Earth  Resources  Survey  at  Univ.  of 
Michigan  was  cosponsored  by  NASA,  Dept.  of  State,  USN,  and   AID  to 
inform  representatives  of  51  countries  and   international  organizations 

369 

During  1971 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

of  latest  techniques  for  interpreting  ear th   resources  data  acquired  by 
a ircraf t  and satellite remote sensing systems. 
NASA’s C-130  a ircraf t   equipped  with  remote-sensing  devices  par-  
ticipated  in   U.S.  survey  of  Jamaica’s  natural  resources  undertaken  at 
request  of  U.N.  and  Jamaican  government.  NASA  signed  agreement 
with  West  Germany  for  series  o i   barium-ion-cloud  (BIC)  probe 
launches,  and  new  sounding  rocket  agreement was  signed with  France. 
Under  sounding  rocket  agreement,  20  French  Centaure  and   NASA 
Nike-Cajun  rockets  would  be  launched  from  Kourou  Center,  French 
Guiana,  in   cooperative France-U.S.  upper-atmosphere research  project. 
By  end  of  year  NASA  had  entered  into  cooperative agreements with 
39  countries,  including  agreements  on  lunar  samples,  tracking  and  
data  acquisition,  and  geodetic  satellite  program.  Scientists  of  87   coun- 
tries  besides  U.S.  were  participating  in   cooperative ground-based pro- 
grams  and   personnel  exchanges  and  62   countries  were  exchanging 
scientific  and   technical  information.  Since  the  beginning  of  1962, 
NASA  had  launched  21   satellites  under  international  agreements,  in  
addition  to  flying  21   international  experiments  on  NASA  satellites. 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  sounding  rocket  program,  683  cooperative 
rockets  had  been  launched  for  research.  (NASA   Release  71-245;  NASA 
In t   Aff;  “Selected  Statistics  on  Int’l  Affairs,”  2/17/72;  A&A ,   1971) 
Aerospace  industry  sales  continued  anticipated  decline  in   1971,  to  $23.3 
of  6.3%.  Commercial  aerospace 
billion  from  $24.9  billion-decrease 
sales,  primarily  jet  transports,  increased  7.1%  in   1971,  from  $4.578 
in   1970  to  $4.903  billion.  Increase  reflected  increased  deliveries  of 
wide-bodied  jet  transports. 
Space  sales  continued  decline,  to  $3.220  billion  from  $3.580  billion 
in  1970.  Aerospace  industry  remained  nation’s  largest  manufacturing 
employer  during  1971,  despite  continuing  drop  in   employment  from 
1 0 6 9  000  workers  in   December  1970  to  estimated  931  000  in  Decem- 
ber  1971. (Ae ro space ,  12/72,  3-5) 
*  Number  of  aircraft  landing  facilities  in   U.S.  passed  12  000  for  first  time, 
with  12  070  airports,  heliports,  and  seaplane  bases  in   operation  by 
Dec.  31 despite  abandonment  of  354.  Figure  a t   end  of  1970 had  been 
261.  Texas  kept  lead  with  1128  landing  facilities,  Alaska  was  second 
with  762,  and  California  was  third  with  746.  Of  national  total,  4418 
facilities were classified as publicly owned  and  7652 as privately  owned. 
(FAA   Release 72-50) 

370 

Appendix  A 

SATELLITES,  SPACE  PROBES,  AND  MANNED 
SPACE  J%IGHTS 
A  CHRONICLE   FOR  1971 

The  following  tabulation  was  compiled  from  open  sources by  Leonard  C. 
Bruno  of  the  Science and  Technology  Division  of  the  Library  of  Congress. 
Sources  included  the  United  Nations  Public  Registry;  the  Satellite  Situa- 
tion Report issued by  the  Operations Control Center  at Goddard Space Flight 
Center;  public  information  releases  of  the  Department  of  Defense,  NASA, 
NOAA,  and  other  agencies,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Communications  Satellite 
Corporation.  Russian  data  are  from  the  U.N.  Public  Registry,  the  SateZZite 
Situation  Report,  translations  from  the  Tass  News  Agency,  statements  in  
the  Soviet  press,  and  international  news  services  reports.  Data  on  satellites 
of  other  foreign  nations  are   from  the  U.N.  Public  Registry,  the  Satellite 
S i tw t ion   Report,  governmental  announcements,  and  international  news 
services reports. 
This  tabulation  lists  payloads  that  have  ( a )   orbited;  ( b )   as  probes, 
ascended  to   a t   least  the  4000-mile  altitude  that  traditionally  has  distin- 
guished  probes  from  sounding  rockets,  etc.;  o r   ( c )   conveyed  one  or   more 
human  beings  into  space,  whether  orbit  was  attained  or  not.  Furthermore, 
on ly   flights  that  have  succeeded-or 
at  least  can   be  shown  by  tracking  data 
to   have  fulfilled  our  definition  of  satellite  or   probe  or  manned  flight-are 
listed.  Date  of  launch  is  referenced  to  local  time  a t   the  launch  site.  An 
asterisk  by  the  date  marks  dates  that  a re   one  day  earlier  in   this  tabulation 
than  in   listings  which  are   referenced  to  Greenwich  Mean  Time.  A  double 
asterisk  by  the  date  marks  dates  of  Soviet  launches which  a re   a  day  later 
in  this  compilation than  in  listings  which  a re  referenced to Greenwich Mean 
Time. 
World  space  activity  increased  for  the  second  straight  year.  There  was 
against  114   in  1970 -and  
an   increase  in  the  total  succesful  launches-120 
a  marked  increase  in   total  payloads orbited-151 
against  130 in  1970.  The 
difference between  launches and  payloads  is  of  course  accounted for  by  the 
multiple-payload  launches  (DOD, the  principal  user  of  this  system  in   the 
past,  made  5 multiple  launches  in  1971,  orbiting  21   payloads;  NASA  made 
only  2 multiple  launches,  totaling  4  payloads;  the  U.S.S.R.  made  2 multiple 
launches, orbiting 16 payloads). 
Of  the  1971  world  total,  the  United  States  launched  29  boosters  carrying 
47  payloads-up  from  28  and  36  in   1970  and  marking  the  first  U.S.  in- 
crease  of  both  categories  in   one  year  since  1966. Of  the  1971  totals,  DOD 
was  responsible  for  17  launches and  33 payloads.  Five of  NASA’s  1 2  launches 
were  non-NASA  missions-Intelsat-IV  F-2  and  Intelsat-IV  F d  for  ComSat- 

371 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Corp,  Natosat  2 for  the  USAF  and  NATO,  Eole  Cooperative  Applications Satel- 
lite  for  France,  and  Ariel  4 ionospheric research  satellite  for  the  U.K.  The 
Soviet  Union  again  dominated world  totals,  launching  97  payloads  ( a  high 
for   the  U.S.S.R.)  with  a  record  83  launches.  I t   had  launched  88 payloads 
with  81 launches in   1970. 
The  year  was  marked  by  success and  tragedy.  The U S .   accomplished  two 
spectacular  manned  Apollo  lunar  flights,  but  the  Soviet  record  flight  of  the 
world’s  first  manned  ear th   orbiting  laboratory  returned  to  ear th   with  its 
crew  dead. Apollo  14 made  the  third  successful  U.S.  manned  lunar  landing 
and   returned  with  43   kg   (94.8  lbs)   of  lunar  samples.  Apo l lo   15 returned 
with  77  kg  (170   lbs)   of  lunar  material  and  employed  the  lunar  roving 
vehicle  for  the  first  time  on  the  moon.  The  U S .   also  successfully  photo- 
graphed  Mars  and  its  moons  with  Mariner  9  and  made  the  first  x-ray 
observations  from  a  spacecraft  of  a  beginning  solar  ‘flare  and  of  solar 
streamers with Os0 7. 
Early  in   the  year,  the  Soviet  Union  orbited  Sulyut  1, a  large  unmanned 
station.  The  three-man  crew  of  Soyuz  10 docked  with  the  station  but  en- 
countered  some  difficulties  and  returned  quickly  to  earth.  More  than  a 
month  later  the  three-man  crew  o i   Soyuz  11 docked  with  Salyut  1, trans- 
ferred  to  it,  and   conducted  experiments  from  the  linked  spacecraft  before 
undocking  and   returning  in  the  Soyuz  11. Although  the  Soyuz  11 mission 
set  a  new  world  endurance  record  for  the  longest  manned  space  flight- 
nearly  24  days-the 
three  Soviet cosmonauts  died  just  before  reentry  when 
an  imperfect  hatch  seal  vented  their  a ir   supply.  Mars  2  orbited  the  planet 
Mars  and  placed  the  first  man-made  object-a 
capsule  bearing  the  Soviet 
coa t -o f -a rm s -on  the  surface.  A  capsule  ejected  f ive   days  later  from Mars  3 
sent  back  video  signals  for  20  seconds  from  the  planet’s  surface  before 
shutting down. Luna  18 orbited  the moon  but  crashed on  its landing  attempt. 
Luna  19 went  into  lunar  orbit  and  remained  there  to  conduct  research 
and take photographs. 
Also  during  1971,  the  United  Kingdom  became  the  sixth  nation  to  orbit 
a  satellite  (P ro spe ro )   with  its  own  launch  vehicle.  Japan  launched  two  of 
i t s   own  satellites  ( T am e i  and  Sh in se i )  , and   the  People’s  Republic of  China 
launched  its  second  satellite  ( M a 0   2 ) .   In   addition  to  launching  its  own 
satellite  (Tourneso l)  , France  participated  in   a  cooperative launch  with  the 
Soviet  Union,  which  orbited  Oreol.  Italy  launched  NASA’s Explorer  45  and 
its  own  San  Marco  3  on  NASA  vehicles  from  its  facility  off  the  coast  of 
Kenya. 
As  we  have  cautioned  in   previous  years,  the  “Remarks”  column  of 
these  appendixes  is  never  complete,  because  of  the  inescapable lag   behind 
each  flight  of  the  analysis  and   interpretation  of  results. 

372 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

w 
3 

z 
h 

m 
% o h  
‘3 

P 6  
“2. 

d -. 

d 
c, 

d 
c, 

373 

a 
d 
c, 

a 
d 
c, 

% 
d 
c, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

a 

374 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

f 
W 

E 

I N 
2 

375 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

E m 

t z 

h h 2%  -2. 

376 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

5 n s V ... 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

2 
:: 

2 
m 

N 

4 
k 

-* 

L a 
a: 

h 
4 

4 
L 

379 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

c? 
mrn 
m m  "2 

h 
e? 
Ss; 
NC 

380 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

- 
1 X L  
Nd 

P 

N N 

P 4 

k 
u) 
it 
,. 
2 

381 

m 
N 
2 

.F N 
I 
4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1971 

L 4 j  
.I - 
a 
.I 
v1 

9 R 

4 z 
- 
-- 
1 
E l  
rth 

m 9  

P 
8 
U 

382 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

E ... - - ... 
d 

" f 
E u - .... 
L 

" f 
E ... 
I ... 
L 

- 
o! 
f B  
moa 

* I 
B u 

z 
8 
U 

P 
8 u 

t- 
i 

383 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

384 

ASTKONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

In z 

0: 
r( 0% 

o! m m 

385 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

c g s  % B  
cl 

W 
a 

386 

ASTRORAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

p! P 

.& 
"2 

b 1 

387 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1911 

- 
1 
m 

c? 
m I. 

T! 2I 
" 2  

R 

Y 
m d 

\4- P B  
-2 

4- 
-2 W v 1  0 -  

c? I 

- 
m c :  
m m  " 2  0- 

? 

388 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

4 

389 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

0 
S 

h 
v) 

o\ m 

x -. - 
m 
N 
a 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

a e 
I 
L 
P 

CI 
N h 

L B 
U 

3 
eo 

o! " B 

.. 
4 
U ." 
0 

2 
a 

E 
%I 
19 
I" 
I 
0 

391 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1971 

71 

m 

I 
8 
h N m  
8" z 
cl 

392 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

2 " 

2 
3 

0: 
oh 

2 

w 

w 

N 

L 3 
u) 

h 
N 
pb z 

393 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

:: 
e L 
u) 

d 
r( 
5 
1 
m 

i: 
5 
L 
m 

394 

d 
N 
e 
L 

Lo 
N 

'a 

.. 
m 
e 
u) 

\ 
ASTRO  AUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

M 
r( 

m 
N 
c 3 

0 d 

m 
N 
L ?i 
v1 

5 B 

395 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUT~CS, iwi 
I 

i 
.I 
d 
.I 
% .
 
-0 .s $ 2  
- 
2 .f! 
0 0  
I 
= i  
w w  
6 3  
4.- 
4%: 
@ G  

x 

.. 
- - 
U 
.I 
6i 
.I 

8 

.. 
p 
3 - 
I 
I* 
3; 
.I 

h 

- - 
I 
.I 
.I 
v) 

c 

f 
e 
.- 
." 
U 
6 
I 

x 

.. 
9 
- 
CI 
M 
.I 
v1 

w 

H 
8 u 

H 
8 u 

t 
8 
u 

8 
I s 

8 I s 

8 I s 

396 

ASTROh4UTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

h 
m N 

397 

i 
CS,  1911 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUT 
I 

398 

ASTRONXUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

0 h 

s 
4,Y * c( 

N 
; 
.f: 

t 

; 
z" 

B 4 

399 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

o! 
i? 

4 
C B  Nd 

400 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS.  1971 

i? 

2 
h 

3 

4 
8 

x 

3 h 

5 

z 
h 

I 
3 
2 

I 
d 
2 

0 
0 
z 
3 

c'4 
ti 
d 

N 
Li 
d 

m 
Li 
d 

W 

ti 
a" 

401 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

E 
m 

402 

s 
0- 
o w  
O N  
,-I- 

P 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

1 
m 0  

B 
B u 

8 I s 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

fi ." 

4 8 

2 
i? 

:: 
R 
a" d 

404 

In N 
G 
d 

h N 
G 
d 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

ING  

E 

Appendix  €5 

CHRONOLOGY  OF  MAJOR  NASA  LAUNCHES,  1971 

This  chronology of  ma jor  NASA  launches in   1971 is  intended to  provide an  
accurate  and  ready historical  reference, compiling and verifying information 
previously  scattered  in   several  sources.  I t   includes  launches  of  all  rocket 
vehicles  larger  than  sounding  rockets  launched  either  by  NASA  or  under 
“NASA  direction”  (e.g.,  in  1971 NASA  provided vehicles  and  launch  facilities 
and  launched  ComSatCorp’s two  Intelsat  IV   satellites  and  NATO’s Natosat  2, 
as  well  a s   Isis 2  in   a  joint  US.-Canadian  program,  Eole  in   a  cooperative 
US.-France  program,  and Ar ie l  4  in  a  cooperative US.-U.K.  program ;   also, 
under  a  NASA  and   University  of  Rome  agreement, an   Italian  team  launched 
a  NASA  satellite, Explorer  45,  from  Italy’s  San  Marco  platform  off  the  coast 
of  Kenya, on  NASA’s Scout booster;  an  Italian-built  spacecraft,  Sun Marco  3, 
also was  launched by  the  same team  from the  same site using a  NASA  Scou t) .  
An  attempt  has  been  made  to  classify  performance  of  both  the  launch 
vehicle  and  the  payload  and  to  summarize total  results  in  terms  of  primary 
mission.  Three  categories  have  been  used  for  evaluating vehicle  performance 
( S )  , partially  successful  ( P )  , and  unsuc- 
and  mission  results-successful 
cessful  ( U ) .  A  fourth  category,  unknown  (U n k ) ,  has  been  added  for  pay- 
loads when  vehicle malfunctions did not give the payload a  chance to exercise 
its main  experiments. These  divisions a re  necessarily a rb i t ra ry ;   many  of  the 
results  cannot  be  neatly  categorized.  Also  they  ignore  the  fact  that  a  great 
deal  is  learned  from  missions tha t   may  have  been  classified  as  unsuccessful. 
Date  of  launch  is   referenced to  local  time  at  the  launch  site. Open  sources 
were  used,  verified  when  in   doubt  with  the  project  offices  in  NASA  Head- 
quarters  and   with  NASA  Centers.  For  fur ther   information  on  each  item,  see 
Appendix  A  of  this  volume  and   the  entries  in   the  main  chronology  a s  
referenced  in  the  index.  The  information  w a s   compiled  in  May  1972  by 
Leonard  C.  Bruno  of  the  Science  and  Technology  Division  of  the  Library 
of  Congress. 

407 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

L4 

a 
9 

0 
g 
w 
w 
F 

409 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

410 

Appendix  C 

CHRONOLOGY  OF  MANNED  SPAclE  FLIGHT,  1971 

This  chronology  contains  basic  information  on  all  manned  space  flights 
dur ing   1971  and,  taken  with  Appendix  C  to  the  1965,  1966,  1968,  1969, 
and  1970 volumes of  this  publication,  provides a summary  record  of  manned 
exploration  of  the  space  environment  through  1971.  The  information  was 
compiled  by  Leonard  C.  Bruno  of  the  Science and  Technology  Division  of 
the  Library  of  Congress. 
The  year  1971  saw  a  moderate  increase  in   manned  space  flight  activity. 
Contrasting with  1970, in  which  one U S .  Apollo  flight  and  one Soviet Soyuz 
flight  placed  only  5  men  in  space,  1971   saw  two  Apollo  and  two  Soyuz 
flights  place  a  total  of  12  men  in   space. 
After  last  year’s  Apollo  13  mission  failure, the  1971  success  of  Apo l lo   14 
demonstrated again  the  viability  of  the  Apollo  system.  Two  of  its  astronauts 
spent  nearly  9+”  hours  exploring  the  moon’s  surface  and  returned  with 
4 3   kg  (95   lbs)   of  lunar  material.  These  accomplishments were  virtually 
doubled  six  months later when  Apo l lo   15’s lunar  crew  spent more  than  181/2 
hours  exploring  the  moon’s  surface  and  employed  the  lunar  roving  vehicle 
for  the  first  time.  The  crew  returned  to  earth  with  about  77 kg  (170 Ibs)  of 
lunar  samples. 
The  Soviet  three-man Soyuz  10  docked  with  Sa lyu t   1 ,   a  huge  unmanned 
space  station  launched  four   days earlier.  Some  difficulties were  encountered, 
for  no  crew  transfer was  effected  and Soyuz 10 returned  to  earth  1 4  minutes 
short  of  a  two-day  flight.  Soyu z   11  initially  met  with  better  luck.  I t   docked 
with  Sa lyu t   1  and   transferred  its  three-man  crew  to  inhabit  the  station. 
After  conducting  many  successful  experiments  and  setting  a  new  world 
record  for   the  longest  manned  space  flight,  the  three  Soviet  cosmonauts 
returned  to  Soyuz 11  but  died  ju s t   before  reentry  when  a n   imperfect  hatch 
seal  vented  their  a i r   supply. 
By  the  end  of  1971, the United  States  had  conducted a  total  of  25  manned 
suborbital,  16 i n   ear th   orbit,  3 in   lunar  orbit,  and  4  lunar 
space  flights-2 
a  total  of  30  different  crewmen.  Of  the  30  American 
landings-with 
astronauts,  10  had   participated  in   two  flights  each,  5  had  flown  three 
times,  and  1 had  flown  four  times.  The   Soviet  Union  had  conducted  18 
manned  flights, all  in  earth orbit,  with 25 cosmonauts.  Three had participated 
in  two  flights  each  and  two  had  flown  three  times.  Cumulative  totals  for  
manned  spacecraft  hours  in  flight  had   reached  2958  hours  45  minutes  fo r  
the  United  States  and  2097  hours  16  minutes  for   the  Soviet Union.  Cumula- 
tive  total  man-hours  in   space  were  7796  hours  24  minutes  for  the  United 
States  and   4403  hours  12  minutes  fo r   the  U.S.S.R. 
Data  on  U S .   flights a re   the  latest  available  to  date within  NASA,  although 
minor  details  are   subject  to  modification as  data  are   refined.  Major  aspects 
of  all U S .  manned  flights  remain  subject  to  direct  observation by  interested 
citizens  of  the  world, with  a  significant  portion  of  recent  missions seen  live 
on  worldwide  coIor  teIevision. 

41 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

- 
I 
0 - 
t E  
c 

N rn 

412 

AS'I'KONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

-. 

h 

413 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Appendix  D 

ABBREVIATIONS  OF  REFERENCES 

Listed  here  are  abbreviations  for  sources  cited  in  the  text. The  list  does 
not include all sources provided in the chronology, for some of  the references 
cited  are  not  abbreviated;  only  references  that  appear  in  abbreviated  form 
are listed  below. Abbreviations used in the  chronology entries themselves are 
cross-referenced in the  Index. 

A&A  
A&A   1971 

ABC 
AEC   Release 
Aero  Daily 
Aero Med 
AF   Mag 
AFFTC  Release 
AFHF   Newsletter 
AFJ 
AFNS  Release 
AFOSR  Release 
AFRPL  Release 
AFSC  Newsreview 
AFSC   Release 
AF&SD 
AFSSD  Release 
A I A  Release 
AIAA  Facts 

A I A A  News 
AIAA  ReIease 
A IP   Newsletter 
Amer   Av  

A P  
ARC  Astrogram 
Atlanta  J&C 
A v  Daily 
A v   W k  
B   News 
B S u n  
Battelle Sc i  Pol  Rev  
Bull  A tom ic  Sc i  
Bus  W k  
C  Daily  News 
C  T r ib  
Can  Press 
CBS 
C&E News 

A iAA ’ s   magazine,  Astronautics  &  Aeronautics 
NASA’s Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1971  [ th is  pub- 
lication] 
American  Broadcasting Company 
Atomic Energy Commission News  Release 
Aerospace Daily  newsletter 
Aerospace Medicine  magazine 
Air  Force Association’s A ir  Force Magazine 
Air  Force F l igh t  Test  Center News Release 
A i r   Force  Historical  Foundation Newsletter 
Armed  Forces Journal magazine 
Air  Force News Service Release 
Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific Research  News  Release 
Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory News Release 
A ir  Force Systems Command’s  Newsreview 
Air  Force Systems Command  News  Release 
A ir  Force and  Space Digest magazine 
Air  Force  Space Systems Division News  Release 
Aerospace Industries Association News  Release 
American  Ins t i tu te   of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics’ 
Facts 
American  Ins t i tu te   of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics’ 
News 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics 
News Release 
American  Ins t i tu te  of Physics Newsletter 
American  Aviation  magazine  (formerly  Aerospace 
Techno logy)  
Association Press  news  service 
NASA Ames Research Center’s  Astrogram 
A t lan ta  Journal  and  Constitution newspaper 
Aviation  Daily newsletter 
Aviation  Week  & Space  Technology magazine 
Birmingham  News  newspaper 
Baltimore S u n  newspaper 
Battelle  Memorial  Institute’s  Science  Policy  Reviews 
Bu l le t in  of the  Atomic  Scientists 
Business  Week  magazine 
Chicago Daily News  newspaper 
Chicago Tr ibune  newspaper 
Canadian Press news  service 
Columbia Broadcasting System 
Chemical & Engineering News magazine 

415 

C1 Press 
Columbia J  Rev 
E$ 
ComSatCorp  Release 
CSM 
CTNS  
DASA  Release 
D  News 
D  Pos t  
DJ  
DOC  P I 0  
DOD  Release 
DOT  Release 
EOP  Release 
FAA   Release 
FBIS-SOV 
FonF  
FRC  Release 
FRC  X-Press 
GE  Forum  
Goddard News 
GSFC  Release 
GSFC  SSR 
GT&E Release 
H  Chron 
H  Post 
J A  
J PL   Lab-Oratory 
J P L   Release 
J P R S  

J SR  
KC S t a r  
KC   Times 
KSC Release 
LA  Her-Exam 
LA  Times 
Langley  Researcher 
LaRC  Release 
LATNS  
LC  Info  Bull 
LeRC  Release 
Lewis News 
M H e r  
M News 
M  Tr ib  
Marshall S t a r  
M J  
MSC  Release 
MSC  Roundup  
MSFC  Release 
N Hav R e g  
N News 
N  Vu  Sun 
NAA   News 
NAC  Release 
NAE   Release 
NANA  
NAS  Release 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19il 

Cleveland  Press newspaper 
Columbia  Journalism  Review Magazine 
Communications  Satellite  Corporation  News  Release 
Congressional Quarterly 
Congressional Record 
Christian Science Monitor  newspaper 
Chicago Tr ibune  News Service 
Defense  Atomic Support Agency  News  Release 
Detroit  News  newspaper 
Denver  Post  newspaper 
Dow  Jones news service 
Department  of  Commerce  Public  Information  Office 
Department of  Defense  News  Release 
Department of  Transportation News Release 
Executive Office of  the  President  News  Release 
Federal Aviation  Administration  News  Release 
Foreign  Broadcast  Information  Service,  Soviet  number 
Fac ts  on File 
NASA  Flight  Research  Center News  Release 
NASA  Flight Research  Center’s  FRC  X-Press 
General k e c t r i c   Forum  magazine 
NASA  Goddard  Space  F l igh t   Center’s  Goddard  News 
NASA  Goddard  Space   F l igh t   Center News  Release 
NASA  Goddard  Space  F l igh t   Center’s  Sa te l l i te   S i tua-  
tion Report 
General  Telephone  &  Electronics  News  Release 
Houston  Chronicle  newspaper 
Houston Post  newspaper 
Journal  of Aircraft magazine 
Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory’s  Lab-Oratory 
Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory  News  Release 
Department of  Commerce  Joint  Publications Research 
Service 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and   Astronautics’ 
Journa l   of Spacecraf t   and   Rockets  magazine 
Kansas  City S t a r  newspaper 
Kansas City  Times  newspaper 
NASA  John  F.  Kennedy  Space   Center  News  Release 
Los Angeles  Herald-Examiner newspaper 
Los Angeles  Times  newspaper 
NASA  Langley  Research  Center’s  Langley  Researcher 
NASA  Langley  Research Center News  Release 
Los Angeles  Times News  Service 
Library  of  Congress Information Bulletin 
NASA  Lewis Research Center News  Release 
NASA  Lewis Research  Center’s  Lewis News 
Miami Herald  newspaper 
Miami News  newspaper 
Minneapolis  Tribune newspaper 
NASA  George  C.  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center’s 
Marshall  S t a r  
Milwaukee  Journal  newspaper 
NASA  Manned  Spacecraft  Center  News  Release 
NASA   Manned  Spacecraft  Center’s  Space   News 
Roundup 
NASA  George  C.  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  News 
Release 
New  Haven Register newspaper 
Newark  News newspaper 
Northern  Virginia  Sun newspaper 
National  Aeronautic  Association  News 
National Aviation  C lub  News  Release 
National  Academy  of  Engineering  News  Release 
North American  Newspaper  Alliance 
National  Academy  of  Sciences News  Release 

416 

ASTKONAUTICS 

AM>  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Release 

NAS-NRC 
1s  Rpt 
NAS-NRC-NAE  Net6 

NASA  Ann  
NASA  Hist  Off 
NA SAHQ  W B  
NASA In t  Aff 
NASA  Lar, X/8 
NASA  P r o j  Off 
NASA  Release 
NASA   Rp t   SRL 
NASA  S P 4 0 1 4  
NASC  Release 
Na t l  0 6 s  
NBC 
NGS  Release 
NMI 
NN 
NOAA  Release 
NR  News 
NR  Release 
NR  Skywriter 
NSC  News Le t ter  
NSC   Release 
NSF  Highlights 
NSF  Release 
NY  News 
NYT,  5:4 
NYTNS  
0 Sen 
Oakland  Trib 
Omaha  W-H 
OST Release 
P Bull 
P Inq  
P A 0  
PD 

P I 0  
PMR  Missile 
PMR Release 
Pres  Rp t  72 
SBD 
SAO Release 
Sc i  Amer 
SciServ 
SI) 
SD  Union 
S F  
S F   Chron 
SF   Exam 
Sou Aero 
Sov  Rp t  

S P  
Spaceport News 

Spacewarn 

SR 

National  Academy  of  Sciences-National  Research 
Council News  Release 
National  Academy  of  Sciences-National  Research 
Council-National  Academy  of  Engineering  News 
Report 
NASA  Announcement 
NASA  Historical Office 
NASA  Headquarters  Weekly Bulletin 
NASA  Office of  International  Affairs 
NASA  Legislative Activities  Report,  Vol.  X,  No.  8 
NASA  Project  Office  ( fo r   project  repor ted)  
NASA  Headquarters  News  Release 
NASA Report of  Sounding Rocket Launching 
NASA  Special Publication  #4014 
National Aeronautics and Space Council News Release 
National Observer magazine 
National Broadcasting Company 
National Geographic Society News  Release 
NASA  Management Instruction 
NASA  Notice 
National  Oceanic  and   Atmospheric  Administration 
News  Release 
North American Rockwell Corp.  News 
North  American Rockwell Corp.  News  Release 
North American Rockwell Corp.  Skywriter 
National Space Club News  Letter 
National  Space Club News  Release 
National  Science  Foundation’s  Science  Resources 
Studies  Highlights 
National Science Foundation News  Release 
New  York  Daily News  newspaper 
New  York  Times newspaper, section 5 page 4 
New  York Times News  Service 
Orlando Sentinel newspaper 
Oakland  Tribune newspaper 
Omaha  Todd -H e r a ld  newspaper 
Office  of  Science and Technology News  Release 
Philadelphia  Evening and  Sunday Bulletin newspaper 
Philadelphia  Inqu irer  newspaper 
Public  Affairs O 5 c e  
National  Archives  and  Records  Service’s  Weekly 
Compilation of  Presidential  Documents 
Pub l ic   Information Office 
USN  Pacific Missile  Range’s Missile 
USN  Pacific Missile Range News  Release 
Aeronautics and  Space Report  of the  President;  1971 
Activities,  March  1972 
Space Business Daily  newsletter 
Smithsonian Astrophysical  ObSeNatOrY  News  Release 
Scientific American magazine 
Science Service news  service 
Space  Digest magazine 
Sun Diego  Union  newspaper 
Spaceflight magazine 
Sun Francisco Chronicle newspaper 
Sun Francisco Examiner newspaper 
Soviet Aerospace newsletter 
Center for Foreign Technology’s Soviet Report  (trans- 
lations ) 
Space  Propulsion newsletter 
NASA  John   F.  Kennedy  Space  Center’s  Spaceport 
News 
IUWDS  World  Data  Center  A   for   Rockets a n d   Satel- 
lites’ Spacewarn Bulletin 
Saturday Reoiew  magazine 
417 

SR  list 
S SN  
S t   Louis  G-D 
S t  Louis P-D 
Testimony 
Text 
Transcript 

UP1 
U S G S  Release 
US N ew s  
W  N ew s  
w Pos t  
W  S tar  
WH Release 
WJT  
WS Release 
WSJ 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

NASA compendium of  sounding  rocket  launches 
Soviet  Sciences  i n   the  News ,   publication  of  Electro- 
Optical  Systems,  Inc. 
S t .  Louis  G lobe-Democra t  newspaper 
S t .  Louis Pos t-D ispa tch  newspaper 
Congressional testimony, prepared  statement 
Prepared  report o r  speech  text 
Official transcript  of  news  conference or Congressional 
hearing 
United  Press International  news service 
U.S.  Geological Survey News Release 
US. News  & Wo r l d  Repor t   magazine 
Washington Da i ly   N ew s  newspaper 
Washington Pos t   newspaper 
Washington  Evening  S ta r /Sun da y   S tar  
White House News  Release 
Wor ld   Joorsrnal  Tr ibune   newspaper 
N AS A  Wallops Station News  Release 
Wa l l  Street  Journal newspaper 

newspaper 

418 

INDEX  AND  LIST  OF  ABBREVIATIONS 
AND  ACRONYMS 

A 

A 3 0 0 B   (European  consortium  a i rbu s ) ,  
308-309 
AAAS.  See  American  Assn.  for  the   Ad- 
vancement  of  Science, 
AAS.  See  American  Astronautical  So- 
ciety. 
ABC.  See American  Broadcasting  Co. 
Abelson,  Dr.  Ph i l ip   H.,  241,  331 
ABM .   See  Antiballistic  missile  system. 
Accident 
aircraft,  277,  288,  305 
C-5,  271,  282,  284,  302-303 
Concorde.  48 
F-14,  11, b6-47,  112, 141 
F-111,  108 
YF-12,  174 
helicopter,  13, 14, 290 
lunar  landing  trainer,  22-23 
spacecraft,  357 
SOYUZ ,  156,  180-181,  185,  186,  191- 
192.  196-197,  277.  283.  299-300 
cause,'  187, 192 
I
,
 
Achernar  (s tar  ) , 149 
Ad  Hoc  Tropical Task  Force,  303 
Adak,  Alaska,  326 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
( A R P A ) ,   23,  300 
AE.  See Atmosphere  Explorer. 
AEC.  See Atomic  Energy Commission. 
AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Of- 
fice, 52,  96,  167,250,  323 
Aeritalia S. P.  A.,  315 
Aero  Spacelines,  Inc.,  242 
Aerobee  (sounding  rocke t)  
150 
micrometeorite  study,  54 
solar  astronomy,  161 
stellar  data,  1 3  
ultraviolet  astronomy,  14, 23,  119 
upper-atmosphere  data,  117 
x-ray  astronomy,  132 
170, 
airglow  experiment,  14, 41,209 
solar  astronomy,  228 
stellar  data, 227,  300 
test  and   support mission, 292 
ultraviolet  astronomy,  60, 327 
x-ray astronomy,  79,  119, 226,296 
170B.  190 
350,52,  159,  174 
Aerojet-General Corp.,  57,  346,354 
Aerojet-General  Liquid  Rocket  Co.,  60 

Aeronautical  Radio,  Inc.,  260 
Aeronautical  Research  Associates,  15 
Aeronautical  Research  Assn.  of  Prince- 
ton,  Inc.,  290 
Aeronautical  Satellite  Meeting,  Second, 
165 
Aeronautics  (see   also  Federal  Aviation 
Administration),  37,  52,  101 
aerospace  industry.  See  Aerospace  in- 
dustry. 
a i r   pollution.  See A ir   pollution. 
aircraft.  See  Aircraft. 
anniversary,  196 
awards  and   honors,  15,  75,  101,  115, 
131,  135,  139,  263,  266,  298-299, 
322.  326.  354 
b e n e i t s - 7 i  
cooperation,  39,  53,  70,  122,  132,  138, 
165,  168.  170.  171.  174.  187.  188.  218. 
224,  242,  272,  2f8 ,   286,  290,  i 9 5  
employment,  44,  81,  94,  125,  170,  295, 
- -_ ,  - - _  
309   349 
exhibit,  147,  150,  196,  198,  214,  248, 
301 
facilities,  195, 365 
funds, 2 0 , 5 3 , 9 4 , 2 2 1  
general  aviation.  See  General  aviation. 
history,  234,261,  282,301 
meeting,  122, 266,  307 
(see   also  U.S.  Air  Force, 
military 
a i r c r a f t ) ,   37,  70,  165,  174,  267,  272, 
278,  303,  312,  349 
NASA   program.  See  National  Aeronau- 
tics  and   Space   Administration,  pro- 
grams. 
noise  abatement.  See Noise,  aircraft. 
research  (see   also  Aircraft,  research; 
Lifting  body;  and   TF-8A,  X-15, 
YF-12,  e tc .) ,   23,  71,  73,  163,  171, 
189,  193, 287,  393 
space  technology  use  in, 
73,120,  151,187,  219,  256, 297 
statistics,  105, 134,  371-372 
Aeronautics  and   Space   Report  of 
President,  37 
Aeros  (scientific  sa te l l i te) ,  356 
Aerospace  Corp.,  1, 361 
Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  of  America, 
Inc.  ( A I A ) ,   116,  125 
AerosDace  industrv.  79.  82.  213.  232.  346 
employment,  3, -21,  41,  i 6 ,   81,  85,  94, 
118,  125,  130,  141,  170,  295,  309, 
333,  360 ,368  

the  

419 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

financial  problems,  124,  132,  216,  359- 
360 
NA SA   role,  280,  370 
union  contract,  343 
Aerospace  Mechanism  Symposium,  Sixth, 
254 
Aerospace  Medical  Assn.,  114 
Aerospace  Research  Pilot  School,  11,  186 
Aerospace  Safety  Research  and   D a t a   In -  
s t i tu te   ( L B R C ) ,   362 
Aerospace  Sciences  Meeting,  N in th   an- 
nua l   A IAA ,   15  
ABrospatiale,  266,  351 
AFCRL.  See  Air  Force  Cambridge  Re- 
search  Laboratories. 
AFETR.  See  Eastern Test Range. 
Africa,  329 
AFSC.  See  Air  Force  Systems  Command. 
Agena  (booster  upper   s tage) ,   11,  79,  80, 
107 ,195 ,  227,254,  289,296,  350 
Agency 
for  International  Development 
( A I D ) ,   120, 369 
Agnew,  Vice  President  Sp iro   T.,  24-25, 
31,  135,  139,264, 346 
Agreement.  See  International  coopera- 
tion;  International  cooperation,  space; 
and   Treaty. 
Agriculture,  Dept.  of,  58,  98,  120,  132, 
168, 286,  333,351 
AIA.  See  Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  of 
America,  Inc. 
A IA   Aerospace  Research  Center,  116 
AIAA.  See  American  Ins t i tu te   of  Aero- 
nautics  and   Astronautics. 
A IAA   Space  Shu t t le   Development,  Test- 
ing,  and  Operations Conference,  75 
AID.  See  Agency  for  International  Devel- 
opment. 
Aiken,  William  S., Jr.,  272 
Air-cushion  railroad,  82 
Air-cushion  research  vehicle,  182 
Air Defense  Command,  166 ,209  
Air  Force Academy,  150, 266 
Air  Force Assn.,  262,  276 
Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Labora- 
tories  ( A F C R L ) ,   153, 199 
Air  Force Museum,  247 ,248  
A i r   Force  One  (Pres iden t ia l   a i r c r a f t ) ,  
212,  326-327 
Air  Force  Science  Advisory Board,  57 
Air  Force  Systems  Command  ( A F S C ) ,   8, 
12, 94,  95,259,  267,  346 
Aeronautical  Systems Div.,  300,  336 
A i r   Force  Two   (Presidential  a i r c r a f t ) ,  
212 
Air  France,  308 
1’Air  Liquide,  312 
Air  pollution,  2-3,  70,  122,  150,  231, 
242,  251,  290,  322,  331 
Air Products and  Chemicals,  Inc.,  89  
Air  Quality Advisory Board,  290 
Air  traffic  control 
automation,  9,  80,  121, 187 
contract,  85,  187 
FAA  regulation,  107 ,139 ,193 ,277  
funds,  40 

NASA  role,  121, 187 
satellite use,  3,  219,362 
A ir  University,  354 
A ir  Yugoslavia,  305 
Airborne  Warning  and   Control  System 
( AW A C S ) ,   21  
Airbus  Industries,  242 
A ircraf t  
(see  also 
individual  aircraft, 
such  as  C-5A,  F-14,  F-111,  X-15), 
56,  239 
accident,  11,  13,  46,  48,  108,  112, 
141,  174,  271,  277,  282,  284,  288, 
290,  302,  305 
a i r   pollution.  See   Air  pollution,  air- 
craft. 
amphibious,  288,  330 
antisubmarine,  12, 17, 21,  38 
award,  101,  131,135,139,  326 
bomber,  21,  70,  87,  101,  119,  122,  224, 
239,  248,  255,  260,  262,  263,  272, 
279,  284,  298,  303,  309,  314,  337, 
344,  348,  358 
cargo,  141,  242,  260,  288 
carrier,  219,  224,  286,  303 
close-support, 21,  70,  80 
collision  study,  10,  107, 219-220 
contract dispute,  2,  36,  38,  147, 294 
cost,  54,  152,  210,  246,  252,  260,  351 
exhibit.  147.  214.  248 
fighter;  46,’70,  87,  101,  140,  152,  170, 
171,  210,  212,  239,  246,  248,  255, 
260,  262,  264,  271,  300,  323.  329. 
341,  344,  345,  352,  360. 
flying  boat,  197, 330 
foreign,  12,  140,  171,  211,  214,  224, 
248,  260,  264,  286,  312,  329,  346, 
360 
general-aviation,  56,  276 
helicopter,  13,  21,  30,  74,  80,  147, 
248,  290,  294,  295,  351,  357,  365 
hijacking.  See  Hijacking  of  aircraft. 
industry,  36,  44,  54,  60,  94,  132,  232, 
294,  346,  370 
instruments,  12 
interceptor,  101 
noise.  See Noise,  aircraft. 
pilotless,  1 
private,  147, 226,  310, 329 
race,  282 
reconnaissance,  94-95,  101,  120,  168, 
281,  329 
record,  12,  17,  38,  226,  310,  330,  366 
research 
(see   also  Aeronautics,  re- 
search ;   and   TF-8A,  x-15,  x-24, 
YF-12,  etc.),  53-54,  70-71,  104,  120, 
133,  138,  165,  224,  239,  245,  256- 
257,  278,  303,  307,  337,  338,  356,  370 
safety,  122, 262,  276,  305,  314 
sensor bearing,  120 ,231 ,286  
sonic  boom.  See Sonic boom. 
statistics.  54.  277 
SZL  19,  21,  22,  39,  71,  97,  122,  127, 
- 7   - - 1   - 
173,  187, 218,  233,  267,  280,  298,  300, 
315.  337.  338.  363.  365.  369 
super tr i t ica l   wing.  Bee  Wing,  aircraft, 
supercritical. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

supersonic.  S e e   Supersonic  transport, 
Concorde,  F-l4A, F-111, Tu-144, 
C-15, YF-12, etc. 
tanker,  129 
traffic,  271 
traffic  control.  See  Air  traffic  control. 
training,  101, 271 
transport  (see  also  Supersonic  trans- 
po r t ) ,   101, 109, 129, 308-309 
je t ,   47, 88, 124, 130, 132, 141, 147, 
174, 192, 211, 212, 216, 220, 278, 
301, 312, 332, 370 
V,/STOL,  18, 65, 329, 365 
VTOL,  135,262,298,300 
Airglow,  14, 41, 108, 130, 131, 159, 209 
Airline  Pilots Assn.,  305, 334 
Airlines 
(see   also  Air  pollution;  Air 
traffic  control;  Airports;  Noise,  air- 
craf t ;   and   Supersonic  transpor t)  
aircraft,  44, 54, 124, 211, 220, 301, 
307, 314 
fares,  36 
finances,  54, 359-360 
hijacking.  See  Hijacking  of  aircraft. 
safety,  305 
services,  129, 305 
statistics,  104 
supersonic  transport,  84-85, 88, 109, 
129, 137, 148, 157, 211, 226, 232, 
346 
(Skylab  compo- 
Airlock  module 
( A M )  
n e n t ) ,  183,284, 288,323, 355 
Airports  (see   also  A i r   pollution;  Air 
traffic  control;  Noise,  a ircraf t ;   and  
individual  a irpor ts   such  as   Wash- 
ington  National  A irpor t) ,   312, 328 
environmental  problems,  49, 248, 271, 
320 
facilities,  334, 370 
offshore, 137, 152, 182, 282 
regulation,  194 
runway  research,  278 
safety,  276-277, 305 
statistics,  134, 370 
supersonic  transport  ( S S T ) ,   314 
V/STOLpOrt,  287 
weapon  detection  devices, 133 
AirResearch  Manufacturing Go.,  147 
Airways,  80 
Akazawa,  Shoichi,  82 
Aksenov, Ye.  P.,  311 
Alabama  A ~ ; M  Univ.,  128 
Alabama  Regional  Council  of  Govern- 
ments,  128 
Alabama  Soace   and   Rocket  Center.  182 
Alaska,  96,101, 271,370 
Alaska,  Univ.  of,  76, 79, 272 
Albert,  Col.  john  6. ( U S A F ) ,   75 
Aldrin,  Col.  Edwin  E.,  Jr.  ( U S A P ) ,  
11, 
63, 111, 135, 186, 198, 214, 232, 
242 
Aleksandrov,  L.  A.,  217 
Aleutian  Islands,  300, 310 
Alexander,  Dr.  Calvin,  102 
Alexandria,  Va.,  176 
Alfven,  Dr.  Hannes  O.,  281, 332 
Alibrando,  Alfred P.,  200 

Allegheny  Airlines,  128 
Allen.  loseoh.  222 
Allen; William  M.,  131, 139, 354 
Aller,  Robert O.,  267 
Alouette  1  (Canadian  satellite).  88, 106 
Alouette  2. 88 
Alper,  Dr.’Marshall  E.,  55 
Alps,  320 
ALSEP.  See  Apollo  lunar   surface  experi- 
ments  package. 
Altimeter,  11 
Altman,  Dr.  Manfred,  129 
Altus  AFB,  Okla.,  271, 282, 284, 303 
AM .   See Airlock  module. 
Amchitka  Island, 300, 310, 326 
Ame l ia  Earhart  Lives,  243 
American  Airlines,  19, 211, 220, 260, 
298, 326 
American  Assn.  for  the   Advancement  of 
Science  ( A A A S ) ,   1, 102, 177, 187, 358 
American  Astronautical  Society 
( A A S ) ,  
68,89, 103, 178, 239 
American  Board  of Surgery,  245 
American  Broadcasting  Co.  ( A B C )  , 88 
American  Business  Women’s  Assn.,  314 
American  Chemical  Society,  256 
American  College  of  Surgeons, 289 
American  Federation  of  Labor  ( A F L ) ,  
131 
American  Geophysical Union,  345 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  
Astronautics  ( A I A A ) ,   282 
Aerospace  Sciences Meeting,  15 
Annual  Meeting  and   Technical  Dis- 
play,  8th,  297 
awards,  15, 75, 233, 298,325 
Board of  Governors conference,  136 
Electric  Power  Systems  Committee, 
244 
National Capitol  Section, 280, 326 
officers.  15 
Offshore  Airport  Center  P lann ing  
Conference,  282 
Propulsion 
Jo in t   Specialist  Confer- 
ence,  Seventh,  161- 
Space  Shu t t le   Development,  Testing, 
and  Operations Conference, 75 
The   Supersonic  Transport:  A  Fac- 
tu a l  Basis for Decision,  60 
Symposium  on  Uranium  Plasmas:  Re- 
search  and   Applications,  2nd,  320 
American  Institute  of  Physics  ( A P I ) ,   265 
American  Interplanetary  Society, 282 
American  Museum-Hayden  Planetarium, 
233, 279 
American  Newspaper  Publishers  Assn., 
107 
American  Nuclear  Society, 63, 294 
American  Ordnance Assn.,  18 
American  Philosophical  Society,  314 
American  Physical  Society, 36, 113 
American  Revolution  Bicentennial  Com- 
mission,  212 
American  Rocket  Society,  13, 282 
American  Science  and   Engineering,  Inc., 
89, 113,278, 286 

421 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS.  1971 

( N A S A ) ,  

American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engi- 
neers,  84 
American  Society  of  Newspaper  Editors, 
103 
American  Telephone  &  Telegraph  Go. 
(AT&T ) ,   170, 292 
Ames,  Capt.  Lionel  E.,  J r .   ( U S N ) ,   124, 
246 
Ames  Research  Center 
(ARC )  
39,  64,  251,  262,  340 
a i r  pollution  research,  170 
Airborne Science  Office, 219 
a ircraf t   research,  70,  271,335 
biomedical 
research,  167,  199,  210, 
253,  256,  257,  261,  369 
employment,  238 
Exobiology  Branch,  322 
ILLIAC  IV  computer,  23 
meeting,  253, 254,  301, 352 
micrometeorite  research,  54 
oil  spills  measurement,  81 
personnel,  216,  297,314,  330,  356 
sun,  rotation  of,  350 
water  vapor  electrolysis  system,  235, 
308 
Amino  acids,  167,  249,  256,  302,  322,  369 
An-10  (U.S.S.R.  a ir l iner) ,   140 
An-24  (U.S.S.R.  a i r l in e r ) ,  312 
Anacostia  River,  129 
Analysis  of  Apo l lo   10  Photography  and 
(NA SA   SP-232  ) , 
Visual  0 bservations 
193 
Anatuvuk  Pass,  Alaska,  271 
Anchorage,  Alaska,  271 
(USAF ,   R . ) ,   68 
Anders,  L/C  William  A. 
Anderson,  Charles A.,  291 
Anderson,  Sen.  Clinton  P.,  19,  42,  44, 
132,  265 
Anderson,  Rep.  Glenn M.,  141 
Anderson,  Jack ,   124 
Andoeya,  Norway,  12 
Andover,  Me.,  69, 292 
Andreyanov,  V.,  162 
Andromeda  (g a l axy ) ,  1 
Angra  do  Heroisimo,  The  Azores,  350 
Anik  (Canad ian  comsat),  128 
Animal  experiments,  space,  127,  182,  235 
Anniversary 
AEC,  215 
aeronautics,  165 
American  Institute  of  Physics,  265 
atomic battery,  326 
computer,  218 
Kepler,  Johannes,  359 
manned  space  flight,  100,  122,  142, 
152, 167,  197, 198 
NASA ,   32,  122,  196,  197,  198,  215 
nuclear  power,  space,  180 
radio,  347 
satellite.  98 
Smithsakian Institution, 266 
U.N.,  318 
USN,  276 
U.S.S.R.,  100,  152, 167 
Antarctic,  304 

Antenna,  69,  74,  95,  102,  231,  277,  279- 
2 8 0 . ~ 9 2 .  308 3sn 
Antibhlis&-&iGe 
( A B M ) ,   4,  43,  77, 
137,152,  194, 284,347, 361 
Ap::>ine 
Mountains  (moon) ,   145,  183, 
LL 1 
API.  See American  Institute  of  Physics. 
Applications  Technology  Satellite.  See 
A t s  1 ,  etc. 
Apollo  (program) ,   212,  230,  284,  328 
achievements,  44,  47,  76,  113,  183,  197, 
208,  217,  223,  312,  342,  361,  368 
anniversary,  196,  198,  326 
astronaut.  See  Astronaut. 
award,  57,  70,  179, 279 
criticism,  133 
funds,  17, 20-21,  161,  173, 229,  324,  342 
history,  30,  50, 215 
launch 
Apo l lo   14  (AS-5091,  24-30 
Ap0110  15  (AS-510),  202-208 
management,  70 
news  coverage.  215-216 
plans,  4,  21z22,  35,  61,  63-64,  68,  86- 
87,  89,  98,  108,  141,  142-145,  154- 
156,  215-216,  302.  305.  312.  324 
policy,  38,  50,  201,  258 
press  comment  (see   also  Apollo  mis- 
s ions) ,   17,  161,  197,  223-224,  229 
Apollo  (spacecraf t)  
anomalies,  255 
command  and   service module.  See Com- 
mand  and   service module. 
command  module.  See  Command  mod- 
ule. 
contamination,  56 
design,  17, 43-44,  86-87 
equipment,  55-56,  86-87,  247,  252 
exhibit,  353 
heat  shield,  335 
instrumentation,  35,  86-87,  223 
launch 
Apo l lo   14  (AS-5091,  24-30 
A D O ~ ~ O  
15  (AS-510) .   202-208 
launch  vehicle.  See  Saturn. 
life  support  system,  156,  196,  205 
lunar   module.  See  Lunar  module. 
lunar   roving  vehicle.  See  Lunar   roving 
vehicle. 
record,  30,  35,  207-208 
safety methods,  215 
scientific  instrument  module,  202-203, 
206-207,  223 
service  module.  See  Service  module. 
test,  90,  268 
Apollo Day,  199 
Apo l lo   8 mission,  239, 264 
Apollo  10  mission,  193 ,255  
Apo l lo   11  mission, 
commemorative  dollar,  243,  308 
commemorative  stamu.  232-233 
. *  
crew,  239 
light  flashes, 64 
lunar   samples,  5-7,  12-13,  16,  23,  30, 
39,  45,  46,  83,  115, 236 
exchange of,  159,  190,  369 

422 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
Of a F ire   on  the  Moon  (book  abou t ) ,   4 
press  comment,  232-233 
quarantine,  115 
Robert  Hutchings  Goddard-Father 
of 
t h e  Space  Age  (book  ca r r ied ) ,   214 
significance, 47,  76 
viewers, 43,  80 
Apollo 11 Mission Report  (NASA   SP-238), 
130 
Apollo  12   ( spacec ra f t ) ,  152 
Apollo  12  mission,  57,  69,  345 
atomic battery,  326 
ion  detector,  288 
lightning  strike,  199 
lunar   samples,  5-7,  12-13,  16,  23,  30, 
39,  45,  46,  83,  115, 236,  257 
exchange  of,  159,  190,  369 
quaran t ine ,  115 
results, 44,  51, 255 
seismometer,  203,  207,  236 
significance, 47,  76 
Apollo  13 mission,  30,  57,  59,  69,  75,  146, 
244,  266 
Apollo  14  ( spacec ra f t ) ,   4,  35,  43-44,  46, 
56 
Ap%lo  14  mission,  24-30,  80,  122,  208, 
361,  368 
,
,
.
 
anomalies.  24.  25.  30.  35.  43.  255 
atomic hatter;,  326 
award, 57,59,  106 
Bible  carried,  214 
biological  aspects,  5,  14.  17,  30,  35,  44, 
63,  261 
computer, 25,  30 
Congress, report  to,  61  
cost,  209 
docking,  25,  29,  30,  35,  38 
exhibit,  153 
experiments, 27 ,69  
ALSEP,  27-30 
cold-cathode gauge,  64 
extrasensory  perception  test,  46, 170 
laser,  27 
magnetometer,  27,  51 
seismometer,  25-27,  44,  63,  64,  113, 
203,  207,236,  245 
solar wind,  27 
supra therma l   ion  detector,  288 
thumper  shots, 27 
extravehicular  activity,  27,  29,  41,  47, 
48, 51,  86 
foreign  reaction,  35, 43 
golf  shot, 29,  106 
launch,  24 
lunar   landing,  25 
luna r   samples, 24,  27-30,  41,  45,  59,  98, 
236,265,  365 
medallions  carried,  247 
Nixon,  Pres iden t   Richard  M.,  messages 
and  statements,  24,  31,  39,  42,  59 
photographs,  27,  29,  30,  47,  48,  59 
preparations,  4,  10, 17 
press  comment,  17,  35,  38,  40,  43,  44,  47 
press  conference,  4,  35,  41,  59,  170 
quarantine,  5,  30,  115 
records,  30 

results,  30,  42,  44,  47,  51,  60,  183, 212, 
365,  368 
splashdown, 30  
TV broadcasts, 25,  30 
U.S.S.R., 
reaction  to,  35,  43 
Apollo  14  Pre l im inary   Science  Report 
( N A S A   SP-272),  183 
Apollo  15  (spacecraf t) ,   96,  98,  110 
Apollo  15 mission,  44,  61,  128,  139,  201- 
208,  253,  271,  272,  313 
anomalies, 203,  207,  255 
atomic battery,  326 
awards,  239,  279,  345 
biological  aspects,  188,  196-197,  208, 
222,  225,  228,  261 
celebration,  222,  238,  239,  256,  266 
seismometer,  142-143,  202,  207,  223, 
236,245 
solar  wind  spectrometer,  144 
suprathermal  ion  detector,  144 
extravehicular  activity,  141,  201-202, 
204-205,  207,  217,  222,  225,  227, 
228,  229,  255 
foreign  reaction,  215,  216,  222,  225,  226 
launch,  201 
launch  schedule, 108 
lunar  landing,  202,  203,  212 
lunar  liftoff.  205.  217 
Iunar  roving  vehicle,  24,  51,  55,  108, 
110,  115,  120,  128,  141,  142,  144, 
202,  204-206,  213,  215,  227,  256, 
365 
lunar   samde s .  
core  sampies,'227,  238,  260 
rock  samples,  142,  205,  206,  217,  223, 
225.  226.  228.  229.  230,  253,  308, 365 
.
.
 
commemorative  stamp,  215 
Congress,  report  to,  253 
cost, 209 
countdown,  193,  194,  200 
criticism,  219 
docking, 202,  206 
exhaust  plume  measurement,  199 
experiments,  86-87,  202,  223,  225 
ALSEP,  142, 1 U ,  205 
cold  cathode  gauge,  142,  144 
heat  flow,  142,  144, 205,  245,  291 
laser,  315 
magnetometer,  142, 144,  207 
NASA  film.  227.255.  298 
New  York  Time's  Special  Features 
agreement,  200,  211,  336 
Nixon,  Pres iden t   Richard  M.,  messages 
and  statements,  201,  208,  212,  213, 
221-222,  253,  279 
photographs, 35,  142, 205,  206,  207,  223, 
226 
preparations  for,  96,  110, 115,  156,  193, 
194 
press  comment,  213,  215-216,  217-218, 
222,  223-224,  225-226,  230 
press  conference,  120,  141,  142-145, 
156,  217,  227,  228,  245,  312 
press  coverage, 215,  361 
quarantine,  188,  222 
records,  207-208 

423 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

rendezvous,  206 
results,  207-208,213,  217,  218,  222,  223, 
226-227,  245,  365,  368 
splashdown,  207,  221,  268 
subsatellite,  87,  207,  225 
test,  200 
TV  broadcasts,  197, 202,  204,  206,  237, 
264 
U.S.S.R.  reaction,  222 
Apollo  16  mission,  44,  69,  216,  251,  324, 
342 
atomic  battery,  326 
crew,  61 
extravehicular activity,  228,  289,  293 
launch  schedule,  293,  356,  368 
launch  vehicle,  254 
lun a r  land ing  site,  166 
lun a r   roving  vehicle,  128,  245,  267,  323 
medical  asuects.  289 
preparatioik  for;  349 
space  flight  da ta   analysis,  35 
Apollo  17  mission,  44,  61,  209,  216,  324, 
342 
crew,  228-229,  234,  236,  312 
experiments,  21,  98,  289,  326 
launch  schedule,  21,  356,  368 
photographs,  35 
press  comment,  236 
press  conference,  234 
subsatellite,  87 
Apollo  18 mission,  20,  21,  247,  305 
Apollo  19  mission,  20,  22,  247 
Apollo  Lunar   Landing  Commemorative 
Trust  Fund ,   63 
Apollo  lun a r   surface  experiments  package 
( A L S E P ) ,   27-30,  142,  144, 205,  209 
Applications  Technology  Satellite  (AT S )  , 
61 
Apollo  Telescope  Mount  ( A T M )   (Skylab 
component),  8,  11,  183,  252,  284,  286, 
323.  361 
APS.  See  Auxiliary  propulsion  system. 
Aquanaut, 262, 292 
Arbator,  Georgy,  129 
ARC.  See  Ames  Research  Center. 
Arcas  (sounding  rocke t) ,   54,  63,  64,  218, 
222,225,  230 
Boosted  Arcas  I,  50,  63 
Boosted Arcas 11.  22.  226.  285 
Arecibo  (Pu e r to   R i c o j   Observatory,  178, 
231 ,344  
Arenosillo,  Spain, 112 
Ares  (Greek   mythological  god ) ,   331 
Argentina,  230 
Ariel  1  (U.K.  sa te l l i te) ,   348 
Ariel 2,  2 8  
Ariel  3,  348 
Ariel 4,  348,  369 
Arizona,  281 
Arkansas,  351 
Arking,  Dr.  Albert,  50 
Arlington  County  (Va.)  Board,  165-166 
Armenia,  U.S.S.R.,  369 
Armstrong,  Neil  A. 
a ircraf t   materials,  lecture  on,  71 
Apollo  11 mission,  111, 162,  198 

awards  and   honors,  121,  135,  209,  242 
resignation,  239,  243 
Armstrong.  Neil,  Airport  (proposed),  209 
Army  Ballistic  Missile  Agency  ( A BM A ) ,   5 
Army  Corps  of  Engineers,  122 
Arnold  Engineering  Development  Center, 
60,  276 
Arnold,  Dr.  James  R.,  291 
ARPA.  See  Advanced  Research  Pro jec ts  
Agency. 
ARTS  III.  See  Automated  radar   terminal 
system. 
AGeson,  John  C.,  81, 261 
Ash,  M.  E.,  310 
Assateague  National  Seashore  Park ,   105 
An   Assessment  of  Industrial  Actiuity  in  
the  F ie ld   of  Biomedical  Engineering, 
322 
Assn;  of  Bay  Area  Governments,  170 
Asteroid,  282,  310,  327,  332,  334 
Astrachan,  Anthony,  111 
Astris  (Wes t  German  booster),  310 
Astronaut  (see   also  Cosmonaut;  Extrave- 
hicular  activity;  Space  biology),  35, 
96,  191, 279,  341,  342 
accident,  13, 290 
anniversary,  122, 198 
Apollo  mission.  See  Apollo  missions. 
appointment,  11, 47,  176, 253 
astronaut-astronomer.  ,759 
awards  and   bonors:57,-59, 
65,  70,  72, 
78,  106,  121,  239,  240,  242,  256,  260, 
262-263.  266.  346-347 
celebrations  for,  222,  239,  240,  256,  266 
colleges,  visits  to,  68 
commemorative  coin,  308 
commemorative  stamp, 215 
Congress,  report  to,  61,  253 
crew  assignment,  61,  108 
damage  suit,  10,  131 
European  tour,  125,  150,  152, 311,  312, 
323 
former,  292,  301,  309,  330 
hazards,  63,  99,  115,  163,  181,  185,  261, 
325 
memorial,  227,  264,  301,  307,  320 
memorial  ceremony,  199 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  messages 
and   statements,  24,  31,  39,  42,  197, 
201,  208,  212,  221,  253 
physiology,  14,  17,  44,  197,  225,  228, 
256,  261,  276,  277,  289 
press  conference,  4,  41,  59,  141 ,227 ,312  
promotion,  240 
public  image  of, 4-5,  32 
quarantine,  5,  30,  35,  188,  222 
record,  35,  208 
religion,  49,  65 
resignation,  52,  166,  239,  243 
retirement.  186.  345 
scientist-astronaut,  87,  90,  133,  138, 201, 
217,229,  230,  312 
Skylab,  10,  87,  132,  133,  288,  346 
svace  cen ter   visits.  271.  272 
space  rescue,  64,  65 
' 
syndicated  article agreement,  200,230 

424 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

training.  115.  189 
and  NERVA   and   SNAP   programs),  219, 
tribute-to,  42,  76,  253 
324 
U.N.  visit,  239 
anniversary,  215 
White  House  dinner  and   visit,  59.  256 
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,  113 
Astronaut-astronomer, 
budget,  20-21,  58,  198-199,  363 
Astronaut 
Information:  American  and  
cooperation,  180,  197, 250 
Soviet  (Revised)  (71-204  S P ) ,  248 
criticism,  303 
Astronautics  Engineer  Award,  70 
laser,  288 
Astronomy  (see  also  individual  observa- 
nuclear  reactor,  180 ,209  
tories,  planets,  probes, 
sounding 
nuclear  rocket  engine,  52 
rockets,  and  satellites,  such  as  As- 
Oak   Ridge  National  Laboratory,  99 
teroid;  Comet;  Extraterrestrial  l i fe ;  
organization,  346 
Galaxv:  Mar iner   9 :   Moon:  Oao  2: 
personnel,  65,  194,  199,  213,  222,  233, 
Pulsa;;  Quasar ;   ‘Radioastronomy 
253,  290 
S t a r ;   Telescope),  40,  161,  253,  281, 
policy,  294 
310 ,342 ,347  
reorganization,  proposed,  69,  82,  153- 
award,  15, 17,  102 
154 
gamma  ray,  181 
Space  Nuclear  Systems Div.,  250 
infrared,  1,  54,  219,  321,  358-359 
undersea  nuclear  test,  300,  303,  310, 
international  cooperation,  10,  13,  16, 
326 
88-89,  159,  190,  216-217,  293,  321, 
water  recovery  and   waste  management 
340,  355,  360,  369 
system, 95-96 
meeting,  6,  178,  248-249,  291,  334,  344, 
Atomic  Industrial  Forum,  294 
Ats  I  (Applications  Technology  Satel- 
369 
NASA  program,  2-3,  9,  20-21,  21-22, 
l i t e ) ,  271 
57,  67,  69,  74-75,  90,  94-95,  96-97, 
Ats 3,  239,  252 
98,  103,  121,  127,  148,  174,  178-179, 
Ats 4,  163, 275 
286,  189,  211,  219,  231,  240,  334, 
Ats 5, 362 
34-5, 356,  365-366,  368 
ATS-F,  22,  161 ,293 ,362  
solar.  56,  67.  68.  73.  83.  113.  121.  161, 
ATS--G,  22 
167, 237,  240,252;  268,  269,  277,  287, 
302,  333,  335,  339,  349,  350 
Atsugi  Naval  A ir   Station,  Japan ,   12  
stellar,  13,  36,  38,  60,  113,  194.  226, 
Aubiniere,  Gen.  R.  (F r an c e ) ,   352 
239,  299,  300 
Auburn,  Mass.,  17 
Aurora,  12, 47,  76,  79, 89  
ultraviolet.  See  Ultraviolet. 
U.K.,  356 
Australia,  15,  102,  220,  226,  358 
U.S.S.R.,  101,  190,  218,  357,  362 
Automated  radar   terminal  system  (ARTS 
x-ray.  See  X-ray. 
I I I ) , 9  
AT&T.  See  American  Telephone  &  Tele- 
Automation,  295 
graph  Co. 
Auxiliary  propulsion  system  ( A P S ) ,   175 
Ataka  and   Co.,  8 4 8 5 ,   138 
Avco  Corp.,  335 
Atlanta,  Ga.,  130, 320 
Aviation  Hall  of  Fame,  354 
Atlantic  City,  N.J.,  289 
Av i a t iodSp a c e   Writers  Assn.,  54,  121, 
Atlantic  Ocean,  3,  13,  37,  103,  137,  165, 
147,  351 
180,  219,  303,  310,  349,  354,  357,  362 
AVL  802  (sa te l l i te) ,   221 
Atlantic  Tropical  Experiment,  303 
AWACS.  See  Airborne  Warn ing   and   Con- 
Atlas  (boos ter) ,  220 
trol  System. 
Atlas-Agena  (boos ter) ,   341,  352 
Awards,  106, 262,  307 
Atlas-Centaur  (booster),  14,  126-127, 
civic,  239, 256 
136,  146,  163,  164,  168, 244,  275,  342, 
foreign,  180, 191, 320 
354 
Government,  17,  38-39,  49,  138,  165, 
Atlas  (missile),  199 
322 
Atlas,  geographical,  11 
NA SA -   See   National  Aeronautics  and  
ATM.  See  Apollo  Telescope  Mount. 
Space   Administration. 
Atmosphere 
institutions,  79,  84,  266,  318,  327 
stellar, 168 
military,  72,  121,  150,  266 
upper   ( e a r th ) ,   3,  5, 8,  9, 78,  107,  109, 
society 
168,  171,  187,  192,  213,  220,  236,  324, 
achievement,  60, 242,  314 
333 ,343 ,370  
aeronautics,  15,  101,  131,  135,  139, 
weight,  309 
263,  266,  298,  326-327 
Atmosphere  Explorer  C  (AE-C)  satellite, 
astronautics,  13,  14,  70,  85,  179,  266- 
81 
267,  298 
Atmosphere  Explorer  D,  81 
science,  102, 314 
Atmosphere  Explorer  E,  81 
AX  (close-support  a ircraf t) ,   21,  70,  80 
Atomic  Energy  Commission  (AEC)  (see  
Axford, William  I., 15  
also  AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  O 5 c e ;  
425 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

B 

(advanced  strategic  bomber) ,   70, 
B-1 
121,  122,  255,  263,‘272,  284,  298,  303, 
309 .344  
E 2 9  (bomber 1 ,239  
B-47  (bomber 1,  239,354 
B-52 
(Stratofortress),  42,  56,  87,  142, 
303,  337,  354 
(NA SA   research  aircfaft 1,  247 
B-57 
B-70  (supersonic bomber),  248 
Babakin,  Dr.  Georgy N.,  218 
BAC .   See  British  Aircraft  Corp. 
Back  contamination,  115 
Backfire 
(U.S.S.R. 
supersonic  strategic 
bomber) ,   248,  260 
Bahamas,  2 
Bailey,  J. Martyn,  242 
Baker,  Miss  (space  monkey),  182 
Bal  Harbour, Fla.,  294 
Baldeschwieler,  John  D.,  197 
Baldone,  Latvia,  287 
Baldwin.  Mrs.  Bettv  .I..  314 
Ball  Brothers  Research‘ Corp.,  8 
Balloon,  121,  127,  167, 236,  250,  254 
Baltimore,  Md.,  281 
Bank  of  America.  162 
Bankers  Trus t   Co.,  162 
Barbados,  3 
Barber, Marvin  R.,  307 
Barium-ion-cloud  (BIC)  probe,  145,  251, 
259.  357.  370 
Barking  SHnds,  Kauai,  Hawaii,  54,  63,  64 
Barstow,  Calif.,  108 
Barth,  Dr.  Charles A,,  148,  195 
Bartlett, Gov.  Dewey H.,  2 
Baryon  particle,  36 
Batavia,  Ill.,  181 
BATEAM.  See  Biomedical  Technology 
Transfer  Team. 
Baton  Rouge,  La.,  89 
Battelle  Memorial  Institute,  86  
Baum,  Dr.  William  A.,  174 
Baur,  Dr.  Paul,  Jr.,  111 
Baykonur,  U.S.S.R.,  8,  66,  115, 135 
launch 
Cosmos,  7,  61,  93,  124,  128,  133, 174, 
197,  212,  219,  222,  227,  343,  352, 
358 
L u n a  18 ,246  
L u n a  19, 267 
Mars  2,  134 
Mars  3,  147 
Salyut  1 ,  105, 107 
Soyuz  10, 107 
Soyu i  11, 154, 226 
BayIor  Univ.,  193  
School  of  Medicine,  138 
Bazhenov,  Georgey  N.,  264 
Beattie,  Donald  A.,  144 
Bechtel  Corp.,  307 
Beck,  W C d r   Preston  E.  (USN, Ret.),  244 
Beechcraft  99   (transport  a ircraf t) ,   128 
Beechcraft  Baron  ( l igh t   a ircraf t) ,   226 
Beeler,  De  E.,  115, 255 

Beggs, James  M.,  88 
Bell,  Rep.  Alphonzo,  38 
Belgium,  291,  310 
Belgrade,  Yugoslavia,  305 
Bell  Aerospace Co.  See Textron, Inc. 
Bell  Helicopter Co.  See Textron,  Inc. 
Bell  Telephone Laboratories,  78,  299 
Bellcom,  Inc.,  41  
( U S A F ) ,   212 
Bellis,  B/G  Benjamin  N. 
Belson, Judge  James  A.,  114 
Bendix  Corp.,  278 
Aerospace  Systems Div.,  278 
Instrument  and   Life  Support  Div.,  12  
Beregovoy, Georgy  T.,  16  
Beresford,  Spencer M.,  264 
Berkner,  Lloyd  V.,  Award,  179 
Berlin,  West,  142 
Bermuda,  46 
Berry Aviation  Co.,  77 
Berry, Dr.  Charles A.,  114 
Apo l lo   14  mission,  14, 44,  261 
Apollo  1.5  mission,  225,  228 
appointment,  245 
Soyuz  I 1  mission,  180 
US.-U.S.S.R. 
Joint  Space  Biology  and  
Medicine Working  Group,  284,  359 
Berry,  Doyle G.,  77 
Berry,  Ronald  L.,  298 
Beryllium,  70 
Bethpage,  N.Y.,  276 
Bhandari, Dr.  Narenda,  6 
Bible  (carried  on  Apo l lo   14  mission),  214 
B IC .   See  Barium-ion-cloud probe. 
(U SAF   reconnaissance  satel- 
“Big  Bird” 
l i t e ) ,  328 
Bikle,  Pau l   F.,  114 
Binsack, J.  H.,  64 
Biomedical  Technology  Transfer   Team 
( BATEAM  ) , 235 
Biosatellite,  21  
Biostack  (cosmic  radiation  exper imen t) ,  
325-326 
Birds,  migration  of,  experiment,  160 
Bisplinghoff,  Dr.  Raymond  L.,  170 
Black  Arrow  (U .K .  booster),  211,  300 
Black  Brant  (sounding  rocke t) ,   63  
Black  Brant  IIIB ,   248 
Black  Brant VB,  54 
Black  Bran t  VC,  199 
Black  hole  (space  phenomenon), 239 
Black  Sea, 262 
Blackhawk  (he l icop ter) ,   357 
Blagonravov,  Dr.  Anatoly  A.,  9,  234 
Btamont,  Jaques  E.,  93 
Blankenship,  L.  Vaughn,  201,  258 
Blue S treak   (U.K.  booster  1s t  s tage) ,   310 
Bochum  Observatory  (West  Germany), 
81,  324 
Bodenschatz,  Dr.  Manfred,  142 
Boeing 707  ( j e t  passenger  transpor t) ,   130, 
192,  212,  326-327,  350,  354 
Boeing  727  ( j e t  passenger  transpor t) ,   278 
Boeing 747  ( je t  passenger  transpor t) ,   139, 
%A. 
Boeing  767  (subsonic  j e t   transpor t) ,   192 

4126 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Boeing Co.,  1, 79 
award,  131,  139,  279,  299,  354 
Commercial  Airplane  Group,  101  
contract, 8, 24,  71,  115, 198,  255,  290 
employment,  82 
j e t   passenger  transport.  See Boeing  707, 
727,747,  and   767. 
lunar   roving  vehicle,  24,  51,  245,  323 
Mariner  Venus-Mercury  spacecraft,  115 
missile,  8, 262 
personnel,  57,  131 
Space Center,  68 
STOL aircraft.  290.  315 
supersonic  transport,  56,  81,  82,  129, 
135,  139,  192 
Vertol  Div.,  188-189 
Boileau.  0. C..  68  
Bolam, Mrs.  Irene, 243 
Bolane,  Rep.  Edward  P.,  222 
Bombay,  Ind ia ,   6 
Bonn, West  Germany,  277 
Boosted Arcas.  See  Arcas. 
Borman,  CoI.  Frank   (USAF,  Ret.),  194 
Boston, Mass.,  102, 209,  308 
Boston Museum  of  Science,  327 
Boulder,  Colo.,  302 
Bower, Robert E.,  191 
Brandt,  Dr.  John  C.,  36 
Bras  d’Or  (Canad ian   hydrofoil  warship ) , 
312 
Brauer,  Dr.  Richard  D.,  18 
Brayton  cycle,  147 
Brazil,  329 
Bremen, West  Germany,  249 
Brennwald,  Louis H.,  216 
Bretigny,  France,  150, 254 
Brevard  County,  Fla.,  65  
Circuit Court,  10 
Brezhnev,  Leonid  I.,  102,  299 
Bridgeport,  Conn.,  309 
Bridgeport,  Univ.  of,  309 
A  Briefe  and   True  Report  of  the   New 
Found   Land   of  Virginia,  97 
Bristol  Aircraft  Corp.,  326 
British  Aircraft  Corp.  ( B A C ) ,   37,  48,  267, 
351 
British  Airports  Authority,  326 
British  Astronomical  Society,  202 
British  Interplanetary  Society,  85 
Broglio,  Prof.  Luigi,  262 
Brooke,  Sen.  Edward  W.,  124 
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,  113 
Brooklyn  Polytechnic  Institute,  17 
Brooks  AFB,  Tex.,  298 
Brooks, Dr.  Harvey,  277 
Brooksbank,  William  A.,  334 
Brougham,  Trevor,  226 
Brown,  B.  Por ter ,   84 
Brown,  Geu.  George  S.  (USAF), 259 
Brown  Engineering  Co.,  158,  180 
Brown  Univ.,  151 
Browne,  Dudley  E.,  307 
Browne, Secor D.,  348-349 
Broyhill,  Rep.  Joel T.,  209 
Brussels,  Belgium,  48,  168, 260 
Buccaneer  (U.K. s tr ike   a ircraf t) ,   224 

Buckley,  Sen.  J am e s   L.,  24 
Budinger,  Dr.  Thomas  F.,  63 
Bulgaria,  237, 249,  263,  319 
Bundy,  William  P.,  358 
Burch,  Dean,  60 
Burroughs  Corp.,  23 
Bush,  George,  Ambassador  to   U.N.,  70, 
120 
Butler,  Charles F.,  312 
Byurakan  Astrophysical  Observatory, 
U.S.S.R.,  248 

C 

C-5 
(military  cargo  transport  a i r c r a f t ) ,  
282,  284,  302-303 
C-5A,  335 
accident,  271,  307 
contract, 2,  36,  294 
cost,  260,  359 
modification,  348,  359 
Par is   Air  Show  exhibit,  147 
C-8 
(Buffalo) )  ( j e t   STOL a i r c r a f t ) ,   187 
C-47 
(research  transport  aircraft,  120 
C-130 
(Hercu les)   (NASA   research  trans- 
port  a i r c r a f t ) ,   104,  138-139,  171,  370 
C-l30B,  120 
C-141  (research  a i r c r a f t ) ,   278 
CAR.  See  Civil  Aeronautics Board. 
Cabell,  Gen.  Charles P.  (USAF,  Ret.),  145 
Cabell, Rep.  Earle,  38 
Caetano,  Pr ime   Minister  Marcello  (Por-  
tugal 1,  349-350 
Cafferty,  Michael,  107 
Cairns,  Robert W.,  170 
California,  81,  112,  360,  370 
California  Institute  of  Technology  (Cal 
T e ch ) ,   1, 7,  13, 102,  151,  170, 235,  245, 
279,  296 
California S ta te  A ir   Resources  Board,  170 
California  S ta te   College,  299 
California  Statewide  Air  Pollution  Re- 
search  Center,  170 
California,  Univ.  of,  6,  15,  23,  109,  281, 
327 
Berkeley,  1, 36,  63,’102,  145,  242,  248, 
299 
Los  Angeles  ( U C L A ) ,   18, 212,  231 
San  Diego, 261,269 
Calisphere 3  (calibration  satellite),  48 
Caliphere 4,  48 
Culisphere  5, 48 
Calverton,  N.Y.,  112, 141 
Calvin,  Prof.  Melvin,  36 
Cambridge,  Mass.,  313 
Cambridge,  U.K.,  348 
Cambridge Univ.,  324 
Camera,  27,  35,  38,  56,  85,  128 
underwater,  131 
Cameron,  Col.  Lyle  W.  ( U S A F ) ,   267 
Camp,  Rep.  John  N. Happy,  38 
Canada,  311,  313-314 
aircraft,  280-281 
award,  102 

427 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

and  

test), 

cooperation,  3,  15,  63,  88,  96,  104,  106, 
220,  305,369 
Defence  Ministry,  312 
Dept.  of  Communications,  106 
satellite, 88, 105, 369 
Canadian  Centre  of  In land   Waters,  104 
Canadian  Domestic  Communications  Sys- 
tem,  128 
(U.K.  bomber),  224 
Canberra  V-8 
Caneel  Bay,  Virgin  Islands,  24,  31 
Cannikin 
(underground  nuclear 
300,  303,  311,  326 
Cannon  AFB,  N.  Mex.,  314 
Cannon  Ball  2  (U SAF   sa te l l i te) ,   220-221 
Cannon,  Sen.  Howard  W.,  19,  213,  263, 
292 
Cannon,  Dr.  Robert  H.,  Jr.,  296 
Canopus  ( s t a r ) ,   149, 306 
Cape  Kennedy,  Fla.,  65,  217 
Carbon,  39 
Carbon  monoxide,  299 
CARD.  See  Civil  Aviation  Research 
Development  ( C A R D )   Policy  Study. 
Cardiovascular  medicine,  235 
Career Service Award,  60 
CARETS.  See  Central  Atlantic  Regi 
onal 
Ecological  Test  S i te   Project. 
Carey  General  Contractors,  Inc.,  195 
Cargo, David  F.,  42 
Caribbean  Sea,  171 
Carlos,  Prince  Juan,  25 
Carnegie  Institution  of  Washington,  1, 18 
Carolinas,  2 
Carpenter,  Cdr.  M.  Scott  (U SN ,   Ret.),  292 
Carroll,  Thomas E..  13 
CAS.  See  Cooperative  Applications  Satel- 
lite. 
Case  Western  Reserve  Univ.,  151,  181 
Cassiopeia  (constellation),  1 
Caste1  Gondolfo,  Italy,  215 
CATS.  See  Computer-aided  telemetry  sys- 
tem. 
C a u s e ,  J.  P.,  352 
Cayenne,  French  Guiana,  248 
CBS.  See  Columbia  Broadcasting  System. 
Centaur  (booster upper  s t ag e ) ,  14, 96,  98, 
148, 354 
Centaur  Quality  and   Workmanship  Re- 
view  Board,  168,  243-244 
Centaure  (French   sounding  rocke t) ,   83, 
235,259,  370 
(pu l s a r ) ,   113,  131 
Centaurus  X-3 
Centerville,  Iowa,  213 
Central  Atlantic  Regional  Test  S i te  
(CAR E T S )   project,  281 
( C I A ) ,   117, 
Central  Intelligence  Agency 
124 
Spatiales 
d’Etudes 
Centre  National 
( C N E S ) ,   83,  230,  235,  254,  291,  357, 
Century  Development  Corp.,  166 
Cernan,  Capt.  Eugene  A.  ( U S N ) ,   13,  14, 
228.  234 ~~. 
Cerro’ Tololo  Inter-American  Observatory, 
178 -.” 
Cessna  401  ( l igh t   a i r c r a f t ) ,   81 
Cessna  Aircraft  Co.,  1 

(pro-  

CETI.  See  Communication  with  Extrater- 
restrial  Intelligence. 
CH-54B  (he l icop ter) ,   365 
Chafee,  Secretary  of  the   Navy  John  H., 
72 ,240  
Chaffee,  L/Cdr  Roger  B.  (USN),  10,  357 
Chalkyitsik,  Alaska,  271 
Chang,  Sherwood,  39 
Chanute, Octave,  Award,  75 
Chapel  of 
the  Astronauts,  Inc. 
posed) ,   264,  301,  307,  320 
Charyk,  Dr. Joseph  V.,  60 
Chatham, George N.,  56 
Chauncev.  Dr.  David  L..  102 
Chavkin;Jerold  M.,  65   ’ 
Chelson,  P au l  O.,  179 
-
-
 
Chernomor  (U.S.S.R.  oceanographic  lab- 
oratory  submar ine) ,   262 
Chernykh,  N.,  357 
Cherry,  George  W.,  233,  349 
Chesapeake  Bay, 97  
Cheyenne  (helicopter 1 ,   80,  294 
Chicago,  Ill.,  1,  9,  46,  65,  220,  236,  262, 
-- - 
280 
Chicago,  Univ.  of,  117,240 
Chicorn  1  (People’s  Republic  of  China 
sa te l l i te) ,   53,  61 
Chicom 2,  61,  368 
Chien  Wei-chang,  111 
Chile,  178, 329, 330 
Chiles, Sen.  Lawton,  145 
China,  Communist.  See  People’s  Repuh- 
lic of  China. 
China  Lake,  Calif.,  115 
Chincoteague  Coast  Guard   Station,  105 
Chincoteague  National  Wildlife  Refuge, 
ins _._ 
Chinghua Univ.,  111 
Chou  En-lai,  84 
Chouteau,  Dr.  Jacques,  311-312 
Chrysler  Corp.,  99 
Church  of  Good  Shepherd,  Maitland, 
Fla..  5 
Chrysler  Corp.,  278 
Churchill  Research  Range,  Canada,  5,  9, 
14,  50,  63,  89,  174,  187,  192,  246 
CIA.  See  Central  Intelligence  Agency. 
Cincinnati.  Univ.  of.  239 
Citizen’s  Advisory  Committee  on  Environ- 
mental Quality,  194 
Citizens Bank  and  Trust  Go.  of  Maryland, 
53 
Civil  Aeronautics  Board  (CAB ) ,   124, 288, 
348-349 
Civil  Aviation.  See  Aeronautics. 
Civil  Aviation  Research  and   Development 
( C A R D )   Policy  Study,  122-123,  218, 
296,  369 
C L 2 1 5   (A i r   T ank e r ) ,   129 
Clark  AFB,  Philippines, 352 
Clark,  Adm.  John  E.  ( U S N ) ,   159 
Clark  Univ.,  214 
Clarke,  Ar thur   C.,  280 
Clarke,  Gilmore D.,  330 
Clauser,  Franc is  H.,  170 
Clements,  Henry  E.,  197 

428 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Cleveland,  Ohio,  2,  18,  106,  292 
Cloud  study,  105,  112,  213,  251,  257 
cM .   See  Command  module. 
CNES.  See  Centre  National  d’Etudes  Spa- 
tiales. 
Cochran,  Jacqueline,  354 
Cocoa  Beach,  Ra.,  122,  309 
Cokeley, Ra lph  C.,  47 
Cold  cathode  gauge  experiment,  144 
College of  Eastern Utah,  57 
College Park .   Md..  69 
Colli&,  Rob&  J.;  Trophy,  131  
Collins,  Col.  Michael  (USAF ,   R.),  52,  101, 
135,  195,  242.  301.  309.  330 
Collision  avoidance,  aircraft,  10, 107, 219- 
220 
Colorado  Aviation  Historical  Society,  322 
Colorado Springs,  Colo.,  266 
Colorado,  Univ.  of,  2,  93,  108, 148,  195 
Columbia  Astrophysics  Laboratory,  52 
Columbia  Broadcasting  System  ( C B S ) ,   88, 
307,  327 
Columbia,  Mo.,  78 
Columbia  Univ.,  144, 245,  302,  322,  345 
Columbine 111  (presidential  a i r c r a f t ) ,   248 
Columbus,  Christopher,  31,  243 
Columbus  Day,  243 
Coma  (ga laxy) ,   132 
Comecon.  See  Council  of  Mu tua l   Eco- 
nomic  Assistance. 
Comet, 93,  334,  358 
Command  module  ( C M )  
Apollo  9,  286 
Apollo  I4   ( K i t t y  H a w k ) ,  24-30,40,  247 
Apollo  15  (E n d e a v o r ) ,   96,  141,  201- 
202,  207-208,  268,  313 
Apollo  16, 326 
Skylab,  64,  258 
Soyuz, 152 
Command  and   service  module 
( C S M ) ,  
153. 233 
Apollo  14  ( K i t t y   H a w k )   (CSM-1101, 
24-30,  35,  365 
Apollo  I5  (End ea vo r )  
(CSM-1121, 
201-202,  206-207,  211,  229,  365 
Skylab,  164, 183 
Command  Pilot  Astronaut  Badge  ( U S A F ) ,  
72 
Commerce,  Dept.  of,  212 
Committee for   Nuclear  Responsibility,  300 
committee  for  the   Future,  219 
Committee  on  Space   Research  (CO SPAR ) ,  
166-167 
Common Market, 58 
Communication  with  Extraterrestrial  In-  
telligence  ( CET I )   conference,  248 
Communications  satellite  (see  also  indi- 
vidual  satellies:  Echo  I ,   ln te lsa t   I ,  
Intersat-IV  F-2,  Mo ln iya   I-18,  etc.) 
agreement,  106,  138,  219,  252,  272,  319 
anniversary,  98 
award,  298 
contract.  128.  173 
cooperation, ’ international,  17,  18,  58, 
106,  128,  138,  219-220,  252,  265, 
271,  272,  283,  319,  352,  356 

ear th  station.  238.  283 
FCC  regulations,  65,  71,  74,  88,  176, 292 
launch 
DSCS  2-1,  306 
DSCS  2-2,  306 
Intelsat-IV  F-2.  14 
Intelsat-IV  F-3;  354 
Molniya  2-18,  210 
Molniya  1-19,  355 
Molniya  11-1,  330 
Natosat  2  ( N a t o  2 ) ,  36 
military,  36,  79,  94,  306,  313,  336,  366, 
369 
NASA  program,  21-22,  41,  106,  128, 
173.  356 
use,  83,-98,  117, 197, 219,  252,  265,  271, 
272,  283,  341,  357,  362 
US. policy,  3,  17, 48 
Communications  Satellite  Corp.  (ComSat 
Corp) ,   294 
contract,  138 
Early  B ird .   See  ln te lsa t   1. 
ear th   station,  60,  69,  82,  292 
FCC  regulation,  176 
INTELSAT,  138, 237 
Intelsat  I   (E a r l y  B i r d ) ,  14  
Intelsat-I11 series,  14, 69 
Intelsat-IV series,  14, 294 
Intelsat-IV  F-2,  14,  82,  294,  341,  354, 
356-357,  365 
Intelsat-IV  F-3,  342,  352,  354,  365 
Intelsat-IV  F 4 ,  356 
Intelsat-IV F-5,  356 
Intelsat-IV F-6,  356 
revenues,  50 ,69 ,   104 
satellite  program,  60,  69,  294,  356 
services, 82 
Community  Development,  Dept.  of  (pro- 
posed !, 81 
Comparison of  MiZitary  Research  and  De-  
the  Un i ted  
velopment  Expenditures  of 
States  and  the   Soviet  Union,  201 
Computer,  127 
anniversary,  218 
automated  transit  system,  47 
ILL IAC   IV,  23  
industry use,  309 
medical  use,  106-107 
NASA,  32,  98,  135,  162, 174, 309 
Apollo  14,  25,  30 
contract,  187, 264 
program  exchange,  231 
pollution  research  use,  103,  288 
U.S.S.R.,  122, 309 
weapon  detection  system,  212 
Computer-aided  telemetry  system  ( C A T S ) ,  
179 
Computer  Software  Management  a n d   In-  
formation  Center  (COSM IC ) ,   81,  232 
Comstock, G.  M.,  83  
Concept  verification  testing  (CVT), 334 
Concorde  ( Anglo-French  sunersonic  trans- 
po r t ) ,   12&  127,  148,  314,  232,  242, 
266,  280,  332,  349-350,  351 
cost,  73 
environmental  problems,  150 

429 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

loan 

flights,  47,  125, 248,  249 
Par is   Air  Show  exhibit,  147,  214 
sales  price,  157, 346 
Cone  ( lunar   c r a t e r ) ,  27,  41,  48 
Conference  on  Remote  Sensing of  Chesa- 
peake Bay,  97 
Congress,  260,  296 
antiballistic  missile  system,  4 
atomic  energy, 
business  enterprises  emergency 
guarantee,  254 
c-5  cargo  transport,  302 
Defense  Dept.  of,  87,  152,  286 
Government  Accounting  Office  report 
to,  1 
Jo in t   Committee  on  Atomic  Energy, 
52, 300 
Jo in t   Committee  on  the   Environment 
and   Technology,  77 
Joint  DOT -NASA   Civil  Av ia t ion   R e -  
search  and  Development  Po l icy  
S tud y   Repor t ,   122-123 
Kennedy,  President  John   F.,  message 
to,  142,  215 
metric  system,  212 
national  security,  303 
Presidential  a ircraf t   request,  326-327 
President’s  messages 
Aeronautics  and  Space   Repor t   of  the 
Pres iden t ,   37 
budget,  20-21 
business  enterprises  emergency  loan 
guarantee,  124,  201 
economic  program,  253 
foreign  policy,  55 
hijacking  of  aircraft,  36 
marine  resources  and   engineering  de- 
velopment,  99 
National  Science  Board,  180 
Smithsonian  Institution.  301 
space  program,  14,  60,  64,  162,  344 
supersonic  transport  ( S ST ) ,   365-366 
Congress,  House  of  Representatives,  130, 
137,  142,  165,  178, 195,  198,  209,  211, 
212,  222 
astronauts  report  to,  61,  253 
bills  defeated,  78,  79,  344 
bills  introduced.  42.  44.  63.  94.  142. 
173,  209,  221,  301 
I
,
,
  I 
bills  passed,  152,  157,  175,  210,  211, 
212,  320,  323 
Committee  of  th e   Whole.  130 
Committee  on  Appropriations,  74,  173 
Subcommittee  on  Department  of  In -  
terior  and   Related  Agencies,  112 
Subcommittee  on  HUD-SpaCe-SCienCe, 
80,  172 
Committee  on  Armed  Services,  68,  163 
Subcommittee  on  Investigations,.  112, 
312 
Committee  on  Banking  and   Currency, 
63  
Subcommittee  on  Consumer  Affairs, 
247 
Committee  on  Foreign  Affairs,  280 
Subcommittee  on  Arms  Control,  194 

Committee  on  Interstate  and   Foreign 
Commerce,  209 
Committee  on  Science  and   Astronau- 
tics,  42,  94,  280,  307,  315,  347,  350 
Advisory  Panel,  318 
International  Science  Panel,  18 
membership,  38,  153 
NASA   budget,  107 
testimony,  61-62,  63,  66-67,  69, 
70-71,  75-76 
Subcommittee  on  International  Co- 
operation  in  Science  and   Space, 
-- - 
1.14 
Subcommittee  on  Manned  Space 
Flight.  264 
Subcommikee  on  NASA  Oversight, 
163-164,  244,  275 
Committee  on  Ways  and  Means.  280 
resolutions  passed,.  38 
Select  Committee  on  Small  Business, 
Subcommittee  on  Small  Business 
Problems  in  Small  Towns  and   Ur- 
ban  Areas,  166 
Congress,  Senate, 85, 308, 320,  349 
astronauts report  to,  61, 253 
bills  defeated,  80-81 
bills 
introduced,  17,  44,  69,  71-72, 
76-77,  82,  124,  134,  197 
bills  passed,  77,  78,  135,  178,  180,  198, 
210,  216,  280,  284 
Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space  
Sciences,  132, 265 
committee members,  24,  38 
Fletcher,  James C.,  nomination, 68 
NASA   budget,  41 ,44 ,157  
testimony,  52-53,  77,  85-86,  93- 
94,  96-97 
Committee  on  Appropriations,  131,  195, 
325 
Subcommittee  on  Appropriations  for 
Dept.  of 
Interior  and   Related 
Agencies,  79 
Subcommittee  on  HUD-SpaCe-SCienCe, 
80 
Committee  on  Armed  Services,  124, 
219,  346 
Committee  on  Banking  and  Currency, 
158,  194 
Committee  on  Commerce.  Subcommit- 
tee  on  Oceans  and ’  Atmosphere, 
292-293 
Committee  on  Foreign  Relations,  327 
Subcommittee  on  Arms  Control,  195 
Committee  on  Interior  a n d   Insular 
Affairs,  17 
Committee on  Nutrition,  333 
Committee  on  Rules  and  Administra- 
tion,  80 
conventions  ratified,  252 
military  procurement,  255,  266,  271 
NASA  budget,  171,  178,  198-199,  209, 
216 
nominations  approved  and   confirmed, 
69,  221,  257,341 
nominations  submitted  to,  11,  45,  57, 
152, 199,254, 312 

430 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

President’s  messages,  103 
resolutions  passed,  19, 24,  170  
space shuttle,  177-178,218 
supersonic  transport  ( S S T ) ,   80-81,  137, 
138, 211 
Connally,  Secretary  of  the   Treasury  John 
B..  124 
Constellation  ( transpor t   a ircraf t) ,  
Contamination,  space,  56 
Contract  (see  also  under  agencies,  such 
as   NASA,  U S A F ) .  
cost-plus-award-fee,  49,  71,  80,  81,  98, 
115,  126, 131,  135,  175, 191, 193,  211 
cost-plus-fixed-fee,  19,  49,  105,  147,  171, 
188, 255,  279,  344, 361 
fixed-price, 132,  171, 186, 195, 328 
fixed-price-incentive-fee, 341 
incentive,  69,  153, 286 
level-of-effort, 245,  356 
study,  85,  101,  132,  174,  190, 276,  330, 
345-346 
Contraves,  A.  G.,  305 
Convair  990  ( G a l i l e o )   ( je t   research  air- 
c r a f t ) ,  219,  251,  257 
Convention  for  the   Suppression  of  Un- 
lawful  Seizure  of  Aircraft, 252 
Convention  on  International  Liability  for 
Damage  Caused  by  Space  Objects,  313 
Conversion  Research,  Education  and   As- 
sistance  Act  of  1971, 286 
Cook,  Don,  190 
Cooke, H.  Lester,  289 
Cooperative  Applications  Satellite  C 
(CAS -c ) ,   106 
Copernicus  !lunar  c r a t e r ) ,  39 
Coralie  (French  booster),  310 
Corfield,  Aerospace  Minister  Frederick 
(1J.K.).  211 
Corn  Blight  Watch  Experiment,  98,  134, 
168,  286 
Cornell  Aeronautical  Laboratorv. 
131, 194, 290 
- I  
Cornell  Univ.,  5,  102,  160,  194,  237,  249, 
318,  344 
Laboratory  for   Planetary  Studies,  331 
Corp.  for  Pub l ic   Broadcasting 
( C P B ) ,  
161 
Corps of  Engineers,  351-352 
Cortright,  Edgar  M.,  179,  191,  192 
COSMIC.  See  Computer  Software  Man- 
agement  and   Information  Center. 
Cosmic  ray,  6-7,  63,  73,  83,  99,  148 
Cosmonaut,  175, 247 
anniversary,  152,  167 
awards and   honors,  180, 266 
death,  156,  180-181,  185,  186,  188, 
191,192,  196-197,242 
memorials  to,  200,  227,  239 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  message, 
226 
Sajyut  I-Soyuz   10 mission,  119 ,283  
Salyut  I-Soyuz  1 1   mission,  1 5 4 1 5 6 ,  
177,  180,181, 283,  366 
Soyuz 9   mission,  167 
Soyuz  10  mission,  107,  110 
Soyuz  I 1  mission,  154 

Inc.. 

space cooperation,  100 ,238 ,340  
training,  16 
Cosmonaut  Y u r i  Gagarin  (U.S.S.R.  track- 
ing  s h i p ) ,  350 
Cosmonautics  (U.S.S.R.  space  encyclope- 
d i a ) .   91 
COSMOS  (consortium),  18 
Cosmos 379  (U.S.S.R.  sa te l l i te) ,  249 
Cosmos 382.  249 
Cosmos 390,  7 
Cosmos 391,  9 
Cosmos 392,  11 
Cosmos 393,  15 
Cosmos 394,  42, 66, 296 
Cosmos  395,  49 
Cosmos  396,  49 
Cosmos  397,  54,  66,  296 
Cosmos  398,  56, 249 
Cosmos 399,  61 
Cosmos  400,  78,  116,296 
Cosmos  401,  84 
Cosmos  402,  93 
Cosmos  403,  94 
Cosmos  404,  96,  116, 296 
Cosmos  405,  98 
Cosmos  406,  102 
Cosmos 407,  108 
Cosmos  408,  110 
Cosmos  409,  115 
Cosmos  410,  124 
Cosmos  411,  125 
Cosmos  412,  125 
Cosmos  413,  125 
Cosmos  414,  125 
Cosmos  415,  125 
Cosmos  41b,  125 
Cosmos  417,  125 
Cosmos  418,  125 
Cosmos  419,  128 
Cosmos 420,  133 
Cosmos  421,  135 
Cosmos  422,  139 
Cosmos  423,  146 
Cosmos  424,  148 
Cosmos  425,  148 
Cosmos  426,  153 
Cosmos  427,  160 
Cosmos  428,  174 
Cosmos 429,  197 
Cosmos 430,  200 
Cosmos  431,  212 
Cosmos  432,  219 
Cosmos 433 ,  222 
Cosmos  4 3 4 , 2 2 7 ,  249 
Cosmos  435,  240 
Cosmos  436,  250 
Cosmos  437,  254 
Cosmos  438,  255 
Cosmos  439,  262 
Cosmos 440,  265 
Cosmos 441,  268 
Cosmos  442,  270 
Cosmos  443,  280 
Cosmos  444,  284 
co sm o s  445,  284 
Cosmos  446,284 

431 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Cosmos 447,  284 
Cosmos 448,  284 
Cosmos  449,  284 
Cosmos  450,  284 
Cosmos  451,  284 
Cosmos  452,  287 
Cosmos 453,  291 
Cosmos  454,  306 
Cosmos  455,  323 
Cosmos 456,  325 
Cosmos  457,327 
Cosmos  458,  333 
Cosmos  459,  333 
Cosmos  460,  334 
Cosmos 461,  337 
Cosmos  462,  339 
Cosmos  463,  343 
Cosmos  464,  347-348 
Cosmos 465,  351 
Cosmos  466,  352 
Cosmos  467,  353 
Cosmos 468,  353 
Cosmos  469,  358 
Cosmos  470,  359 
COSPAR.  See   Committee  on  Space   Re- 
search. 
Cotter,  Rep.  William  R.,  38,  240,  353- 
354 
Coughlin,  Rep.  R.  Lawrence, 38 
for  Advancement  of  Science 
Council 
Writing  Seminar  on   Science  and   Pub- 
lic  Policy,  53 
Council  for  Scientific  and   Indus tr ia l   Re- 
search  ( C S I R ) ,   South  Africa,  267 
Council  of  Mu tua l   Economic  Assistance 
(Comecon),  110 
Transport  Commission, 79 
Counterbudget-A  BLueprint  f o r   Chang- 
ing  National  Pr ior i t ies ,   1971-1976,  50 
Court L ine  Aviation,  301 
Courten,  Dr.  Henry  C.,  167 
CPB.  See  Corp.  fo r   Public  Broadcasting. 
Crab Nebula,  131 
Crawford, David  L.,  36 
Crater, 27,  39,  41,  48,  203 
Crimea.  U.S.S.R..  190 
Crimean  Astrophysics Observatory,  315 
Cronkite,  Walter,  327 
Crozaz,  G.,  83 
CSM.  See   Command  and   service  module. 
CTOL  (conventional  take   off  and   land- 
ing   a i r c r a f t ) ,   130 
Cuba,  215,238,  312-313,319 
Cunningham,  R.  Walter,  166 
Curtis,  Sen.  Carl T.,  24 
CVT:  concept  vertical  testing. 
Cyclic  adenyl  acid, 282 
Cygnus  (constellation 1,  89 
Cygnus x-1  (pu l s a r ) ,   131 
Czechoslovakia, 237,  319,  337 
D 
Daley,  Mayor  Richard J.,  256 
Dana,  William  H.,  56,  200,  225,  239,  265, 
319,  337,  352 

Daniel  and   Florence  Guggenheim  Foun-  
dation,  13 
Daniel  and   Florence  Guggenheim  Inter- 
national Astronautical  Award,  262 
Daniel  and   Florence  Guggenheim  Space 
Theater,  279 
Daniel  Guggenheim  Fund   for  th e   Pro- 
motion  of  Aeronautics,  Inc.,  13 
Dankhoff,  Wa l ter  F.,  296 
Dannenberg,  Konrad  K.,  334 
$Arrest  (come t)  
358 
Dartmouth College,  151 
~ 
Darwin,  Australia,  226 
David,  Dr.  Edward  E.,  Jr.,  18,  63,  94, 
119,  363 
Davis,  L/G  Benjamin  O.,  Jr.  (USAF, 
Re t .) ,   193 
Davis,  Rep.  John  W.,  38 
Davis,  Rep.  Mendel  J.,  153 
Davis,  Dr.  Raymond, Jr.,  113 
Dayton,  Ohio, 248 
Daytona  Beach, Fla.,  283 
DC-8  ( j e t   t r an spo r t ) ,  130 
DC-10  ( j e t  transpor t) ,   211,  220 
Dean,  James  H.,  289 
D e b r B ,   D e f e n s e   M i n i s t e r   M i c h e l  
(F r an c e ) ,   168 
T h e   Decision  T o   Go   to  the  Moon,  201, 
258 
Deckert,  Wallace H.,  70 
Deep  Space   Network  ( D S N ) ,   69,  313,  318 
Defence  Research  Board 
(Can- 
( O R B )  
a d a ) ,  88 
(see  also  US. 
Defense,  Dept.  of 
(DOD )  
Air  Force,  U.S.  Army,  a n d   U.S. 
Navy,  39,  117,  124,  146,  246,  286 
aircraft.  See Aircraft. 
award,  57 
budget,  20-21,  37,  58,  124,  180,  212, 
286,  322,  323,  325,  329,  3U ,   354, 
364 
communications  satellite system,  74,  95, 
153,  306,  366 
computer  programs,  23 
contract, 8,  52,  310 
cooperation,  123 
NASA,  69,75,  87,224,368 
cooperation,  international, 36-37 
criticism,  78 
MAST.  Project.  351 
missile  program,  4,  8-9,  21,  43,  52, 
I 
-
I
 
125,  347 
nuclear  tests,  underground.  300 
Pentagon  papers,  320 
personnel,  49-50,246,294,350 
procurement,  360 
R&D,  40,118,  363 
space  program,  95,  306,  310,  366,  368 
weapon  systems,  78,  288 
Defense  Intelligence Agency,  95 
Defense  Navigation  Satellite  System 
( D N S S ) ,   95 
Defense  Satellite  Communications  Sys- 
tem  (DSCS ) ,95,  306,366 
DeFlorez  Tra in ing  Award,  298 
432 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Deimos  (Mar t ian   moon) ,   314,  331,  332, 
340,342,  365 
Delaware,  97 
Delta 
(see   also 
(booster  upper   s tage)  
Thor-De l ta) ,   37,  164,  186,  269,  360- 
361 
Delta  Launch  Vehicle  System  Review 
Board,  300 
Dementyev,  Pavel,  140,  148 
Denmark,  96,  341 
Denver,  Colo.,  281,  322,  346,  351,  353, 
355 
Denver  mint,  243 
Denver,  Univ.  of,  259 
Descartes  ( lun a r   land ing   s i t e ) ,   29,  166, 
323 
De Sirnone,  Herber t  F.,  45 
Dewhirst, Dr.  David,  324 
DGLR.  See  German  Society  for  Aviation 
and   Astronautics. 
Dial-a-plane  system,  121 
Diamant-B  (French   booster),  103,  342 
di Carroba,  R.,  352 
Dicke,  Dr.  Robert H.,  I8 
Dickeson,  Bob.,  226 
Dicksou,  Paul, 336 
Dickstein,  Morris,  5 
Digital  Equipment Corp.,  16 
Dijon,  France,  150 
Dillon,  Mrs.  Betty Crites,  312 
Diritis,  M.,  357 
Disarmament,  55,  137,  148,  189,  190, 
194,  195,  218,  252,  264-265,  266 
Distinguished 
Pub l ic   Service  Medal 
( N A S A ) ,   57 
Distinguished  Service  Medal 
( N A S A ) ,  
57.59,  72,302,346-347 
Distinguished  Service  Medal  (U SAF ) ,   72, 
266 
Distinguished  Service  Medal  ( U S N ) ,   72 
District of  Columbia, 99  
Dixon, Mrs.  J e an e  L.,  189 
DNSS.  See  Defense  Navigation  Satellite 
System. 
Dohrovolsky,  Georgy  T.,  154,  180,  181, 
186, 192,200, 226,  283 
Dobrovolsky, Maria, 226 
Dobrovolsky, Natasha,  226 
Dobrynin,  Ambassador  Anatoly  R. 
(U.S.S.R.),  70,  191,  194,  242 
Docking 
Apollo  14, 25,  29,  30,  35,  38 
Apollo  15. 203 
multiple  .docking  adapter,  284, 
346,  353,  355 
S w u z  IO-Salyut  I,  108, 110,  283 
SOYUZ Il-SaZyUt  I ,   154,  158,  191, 
366 
trainer,  16, 77 
U.S.-U.S.S.R. 
cooperation,  117,  177, 
244,  249,  325,  332,  334,  340-341, 
347,  353,  369 
DOD.  See Defense,  Dept.  of. 
Domestic Action  Council,  351 
Donaldson,  Dr.  Coleman  D.,  15, 290 
Donlan,  Charles J.,  75,  302 

283, 

323, 

Donnelly,  John  P.,  200,  230,  337,  353 
Donner,  Freder ic  G.,  152 
Doppler  Geodetic  Satellite Program, 95  
DOT. See Transportation, Dept.  of. 
Doub, William  O.,  221,  290 
Douglas Aircraft  Co.,  338 
DOVAP  (ground  transm i t ter) ,   187 
Dowling  College,  167 
Downing, Rep.  Thomas N.,  38,152 
Drake,  Dr.  F r ank  D.,  249,344 
Draley,  Eugene C.,  85 
Draper,  Dr.  Charles S tark ,  261 
Draper,  William,  315 
DRB.  See  Defence  Research  Board  (Can- 
ada). 
Drug-addiction,  215 
Dryden, Dr.  Hugh  L.,  106,112-113 
Dryden,  Hugh   L.,  Memorial  FelIowship, 
70  
Dryden,  Hugh  L.,  Memorial  Fund,  112 
Dryden,  Hugh, Research Lecture,  1 5  
DSCS.  See   Defense  Satellite  Communica- 
tions  System. 
DSCS 2-1,  306,  313 
DSCS  2-2,  306,  313 
Network. 
DSN.  See Deep  Space  
Duboshin, G.  N.,  311 
.., 16 
DuBridge,  Dr.  Lee  A 
(Albany,  N.Y.), 
Dudley  Observatory 
108,  335 
Duffy,  B/G  Robert A. 
(U SAF ) ,   178 
M.,  Jr.  ( U S A F ) ,  
Duke,  L /C   Charles 
61, 
323 
Dulles  International  Airport,  Va.,  212, 
278 
Dune Cra ter   (moon ) ,  205 
Dunkelman,  Lawrence,  335 
Dupik,  Dr.  Vladimir,  177 
Duuree.  Dr.  A.  Hunter.  151 
Durham,  N.C.,  170 
’ 
Dutourd,  Jean,  216 
Dynalectron  Corp.,  Land-Air Div.,  1 3  
E 

107, 

Earhart,  Amelia,  243 
Ear th  
atmosphere.  See Atmosphere,  upper. 
crater,  39,  4 1 , 4 8  
density,  310 
Ear th  Awareness  Foundation,  137 
earthquake,  64  
energy  resources,  154 
environmental  problems  (see  also  Air 
pollution ;  Noise,  a ircraf t  ;  Pollu- 
t ion ) ,   10,  17,  20,  42,  49,  96,  147,  160, 
162 ,172 ,  178,  191,  215,  368 
Environmental  Science:  Challenge  for 
th e  Seventies,  180 
magnetic field,  104 
marine  research  and   development,  99, 
104 
oceans.  See Oceanography. 
origin  of,  345 
photographs,  286 

433 

Program 

(proposed), 

resources  measurement  (see  also  Earth 
Resources  Technology  Satellite),  10- 
11,  33,  44,  67,  97,  119-120,  132-133, 
133-134,  138-139,  139-140,  174-175, 
224,  324 
This  Island  Ea r th   (NASA SP-2501,  48 
Earth  Awareness  Foundation,  137 
Earth  Observations  Aircraft  Program, 
104, 139,  171 
Earth  Resources  Aircraft 
(ERAP ) ,  120 
Earth 
resources  experiment  package 
(EREP ) ,  10, 107, 173,  175 
Earth  Resources Laboratory,  19 ,49  
Ea r th   Resources  Technology  Satellite 
(ERTS), 19,  22,  61,  67,  87,  95,  97,  119- 
120,  135,  173,  198,  281,  356,  369,  370 
Eastern  Airlines,  Inc.,  54,  124,  133,  165 
Eastern  Test  Range  ( E T R )   (see  also 
Cape  Kennedy  and  Kennedy  Space 
Cen te r ) .  
contract,  98,  310 
launch 
Atlas-Agena,  341 
Atlas-Centaur,  14 
DSCS  2-1,  306, 313 
DSCS  2-2,  306,  313 
Explorer  43  (IMP-I),  72 
failure,  126-127 
High  Energy  Astronomy  Observa- 
tory  ( HEAO) , 329 
Intelsat-IV  F-2 ,   14 
Mariner  8  (Ma r ine r -H ) ,  126-127 
Mariner  9  (Mariner-I),  148 
Nato  2  ( NATO-R) , 3 6  
Os0  7  (OSO -H )   , 2 6 9  
Pioneer-F,  322 
unidentified satellite,  122, 341 
Easton,  Richard  A.,  179 
Echo  1 (comsat),  157 
Eckert,  Dr.  John  P.,  218 
Eclipse,  lunar,  44 
Eclipse,  solar,  68,  167 
Economic  Affairs,  Dept.  of 
81 
EoPTechnology,  Inc.,  131, 194 
Edwards  AFB,  Calif.,  11,  108,  131,  174, 
186, 255,  256 
Effelsberg,  W.  Germany,  277 
Eggers,  Dr.  Alfred J., 61 
Eglin  AFB.,  Fla.,  Climatic  Laboratory, 
258 
Egypt,  124, 360 
Eisenhower,  President  Dwight  D.,  59, 
243 ,248 ,265 ,  308 
El  Centro,  Calif.,  247,  264 
ELDO.  See  European  Launcher  Develop- 
ment  Organization. 
Electric field, 74,  78,  79 
Electric  propulsion, 244 
Electris  (M a r s ) .  337 
Electronics Research  Center  (EBC), 362 
Ellington  AFB,  Tex.,  22,207,  222 
Embolism.  187 
Emergency Conversion  Loan Act,  141  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
316 --- 
Emergency  loan  guarantee,  194,  201,  212, 
Emergency Loan  Guarantee Board,  2% 
Emme, Dr.  Eugene M.,  234,265 
Emory  Univ.,  221 
Employment  of  New  Ph.D.'s  and  Post- 
doctorals  in   1971  (NRC  s tudy ) ,   252 
Eucke  (comet),  358 
Endeavor  (A p o l l o   15 command  and  serv- 
ice  module).  See  Command  and   serv- 
ice  module. 
Energy absorber,  251,259 
Energy  sources,  129,  154 
Eneyev,  T imu r  M.,  127 
Engine  (see  also  individual  engines,  such 
a s  F-1,  H-1) 
aircraft,  271,  302, 307 
CTOL,  130 
jet,  38,  44,  88,  124,  125,  173-174, 
212,  221 
noise,  61,  83,  130, 241,  247,  251,  290, 
295-296 
quiet,  83,  96,  130, 241 
STOL,  97 
supersonic  transport,  61 ,126 ,174  
VTOL,  300,  329 
electric,  244 
nuclear  (see  also  NERVA )  , 235,  250,  320 
rocket,  96,  136, 158 
cooperation,  87  
space  shuttle,  80,  87,  98,  160,  161, 
193,  218,  233,  240,  245,  276,  320, 
356 
testing 
liquid,  87 
hydrogen,  87 
hydrogen/oxygen,  161 
Engineers,  107, 119, 308 
employment,  77,104-105,117-118 
Engle,  Caut.  Joseph  H, (USAF), 234 
Engler, Martin, Jr., 242 
Increase 
Enrollment 
in  Science  and 
in   Pub l ic   Secondary 
Mathematics 
Schools,  1948-49  to  1969-70 
(NSF   71- 
30 ) ,   288 
Envirmmental  Da ta  Service.  219 
Environmental program,  US., 42 
Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA ) ,  
104, 290,  351 
Environmental  Science:  Challenge  f o r  the 
Seventies,  180 
Environmental  Science  Services  Adminis- 
tration  (ESSA ) ,  19 
Eole  (CAS-1) 
(F rench   Cooperative  Ap- 
plications  Sa te l l i te ) ,  230,  250,  254,  357, 
369 
Eole Data Interpretation  Group,  231 
See  Environmental  Protection 
EPA. 
Agency. 
epndb:  effective  perceived  noise  in   deci- 
bels. 
ERAP.  See  Ea r th   Resources  Aircraft  Pro- 
gram. 
ERC.  See  Electronics  Research  Center. 
EREP.  See  Ea r th   resources  experiment 
package. 

434 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Ericson, David  B.,  302 
ERNo-Raumfahrttechnik GmbH, 3 , 1 9  
Eros  (as tero id) ,   310 
EROWS.  See  Expendable  remote-operating 
weather  station. 
ERTS.  See  Ea r th   Resources  Technology 
Satellite. 
ERTS-A,  97,  135,  173 
ERTS-B,  135, 173 
ESC.  See  European  Space  Conference. 
Esch,  Rep. Marvin L.,  38 
ESP.  See Extrasensory perception. 
(European  Sounding  Rocket 
ESRANGE 
R ang e ) ,  Kiruna,  Sweden, 213 
ESRO.  See  European  Space  Research 
Organization. 
E S R O ~  (scientific sa te l l i te) ,   356 
ESSA.  See  Environmental  Science  Serv- 
ices  Administration. 
“Estimated  Academic  RBD   Direct  P r ice  
Trends  50  Percent  Higher  Over  Dec- 
ade  1961-71,”  305 
Etam, W.  Va.,  292 
ETR.  See Eastern  Test Range. 
Europa  I  ( ELDO  booster),  328,  352 
Europa  11, 310,  327-328,352 
Europa  111, 297,352 
European  Broadcasting Union, 23 
European  Launcher  Development  Organ- 
ization  ( E L D O ) ,   278,  291,  297,  310,  347, 
352 
European  Organization  for  Nuclear  Re- 
search,  19  
European  Space  Conference  (E SC ) ,   16, 
45.  48.  75.  165. 335.  340.  369 

Eutrophication,  104 
EVA.  See  Extravehicular  activity. 
Evans,  Albert  J.,  272 
Evans,  L/Cdr  Ronald  E.  (U SN ) ,  228-229, 
234 
Exceptional  Scientific Achievement Medal 
( N A S A ) ,   255,  279,  302 
Exceptional  Service  Medal  (NASA ) .  188, 
255,  279,  302,  314 
Exhibit,  152,  153, 345 
Expendable  remote-operating weather  sta- 
tion  (EROWS), 295 
Explorer  (spacecraf t) ,   186 
Explorer  I  (sa te l l i te) ,   5 
Explorer  30  (So l rad  8 )   (Solar  Radiation 
Sa te l l i te) ,   190 
Explorer  35  (Interplanetary  Monitoring 
Satellite  (IMP-E 1,  64 
Explorer  37  (Solrad  9 ) ,   190 
Explorer  41 ,  73 
Explorer  42  (Uhu ru )   (Small  Astronomy 
Sa te l l i te) ,   89,  113,  131,  319 
Explorer  43  (IMP-I),  240,  365 
Explorer  44   (Solrad  l o ) ,  189-190,  240, 
365 

Explorer  45  (Small  Scientific  Sa te l l i te) ,  
319 ,365 ,369  
Extrasensory  perception  (ESP),  46, 170 
Extraterrestrial  life,  167,  248,  338,  345, 
368,  370 
Extravehicular  activity  (EVA ) ,  153, 328 
Apollo  14,  25-26,  41,  47,  48,  51 
Apollo  15,  115,  141,  142,  156,  201 
203-207,  217,  221,  225,  227,  228,  229 
Apollo  16, 61,  289,  293,  323 
Skylab, 288 
Eyewitness  to  Space,  289 
Eyles,  Donald E.,  57 

F 

F-1  (rocket  eng ine ) ,   1,  158 
F-1-m 
(U.S.S.R.  launch  vehicle),  362 
launch  vehicle),  362 
(U.S.S.R. 
F-I-r 
F-4 
(Phantom 
(fighter  a ircraf t) ,   124, 
246,  286,  303 
(fighter  a i r c r a f t ) ,   239 
F-5D 
(People’s  Republic  of  China  super- 
F-9 
sonic  fighter  a ircraf t) ,   140 
F-14  (Tom  C a t )   (supersonic  fighter  a ir-  
c r a f t ) ,   46,  70,  112,  124,  141,  152,  210, 
211,  212,  246,  252,  255,  271,  272,  284, 
286-287,  323,365 
F-l4A,  11, 165,298 
F-l4B,  210 ,211 ,212  
F-15 
(fighter  aircraft,  70,  170,  212,  255, 
272 ,298 ,303 ,  344 
(ELDO   launche r ) ,   352 
F-15 
F-90  (fighter  a ircraf t) ,   115 
F-100  (supersonic  fighter),  239 
F-101  (supersonic  fighter),  239 
(supersonic  fighter),  239 
F-102 
(fighter  a i r c r a f t ) ,   239 
F-104 
(supersonic  fighter  a ircraf t) ,   87, 
F-111 
108,  116,  131,  165,  212,  262,  272,  300, 
341,  344,356 
F - I l lA ,   14 
F-11lC,  353 
F-I l lD ,   314 
F-147 
(fighter  a ircraf t) ,   219 
FAA.  See  Federal  Aviation  Administra- 
tion. 
F A A   Statistical  Handbook  of  Aviation, 
327 
FA;.-  See  InternationaI  Aeronautical  Fed- 
eration. 
Fairbanks,  Alaska,  47,  76,  77,  310 
Fairchild  Hiller  Corp.,  74,  85,  98,  115 
Fairchild  Industries,  Inc.,  115,  300,  308 
Fairchild,  Sherman  M.,  85 
(ApoZZo  15  L M ) .   See  Lunar 
Falcon 
module. 
Faller,  Dr.  James  E.,  144 
Fanale,  Dr.  Fraser  P.,  12  
Farley, Clare F., 197 
FB-111 
(supersonic  fighter),  262,  279 
FBI.  See  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation. 
FCC.  See  Federal  Communications  Com- 
mission. 

435 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

( F B I ) ,  

Federal  Aviation  Administration 
( F A A )  
a i r   traffic  control,  85,  107,  121,  139, 
193,219-220,  260 
aircraft  certification,  218-219 
airports,  134,  165,  182,  194,  305,  320, 
334 
airwavs.  80 
award,  i 6 5  
collision  prevention,  10,  107,  193 
contract.  85,  182.  198,  320 
cooperation,  3,  71,  122,  187,  218-219, 
219-220,  255,  271,  297 
General  Aviation  Accident  Prevention 
Program,  277 
landing  system,  305,  334 
noise,  aircraft,  83,  198 
organization,  65, 82 
personnel,  2,  239,  266,  323 
satellite  communications  systems,  3, 
165 ,255 ,297  
statistics,  104-105,  134,  255,  277,  327 
transport,  supersonic  (see  also  Super- 
sonic  t ran spo r t ) ,   332,  351 
Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation 
266 
Federal  Communications  Commission 
( F C C ) ,   60,  65,  69,  71,  74,  176,  293 
Federal  Electric  Corp.,  158 
Fede ra l   Funds  for  Academic  Science, 
Fiscal  Year  1969  (N SF   71-7),  58 
Federal  Funds  f o r   Research,  Develop 
ment,  and   Other  Scientific  Activities, 
251 
Federal  R&D   Expenditures  Related  to 
Budget  Functions,  1960-72,  175 
Federal  Railway  Administration,  323 
Federal  Reserve  System,  308 
Federal  Suppo r t   to  Universities  and   Col- 
leges,  Fiscal  Year  1970,  161 
Federal  T rade   Commission  ( F T C ) ,   247 
Federal  Women's  Award,  38 
FBdBration  ABronautique 
Internationale 
( F A I ) .   See  International  Aeronautical 
Federation. 
Federation  of  American  Scientists, 124 
Fedoseyev,  Anatoly,  147,  168,  171,  176, 
190, 329 
Feld,  Bernard  T.,  273 
Feoktistov,  Konstantin  P.,  111,  119 
Fiat,  3 
Final  Report  of the  Ad  Hoc  Supersonic 
Transport  Review  Committee  of  the 
Ofice  of  Science  and   Technology, 
Ma rch  30,1969,  232 
Fine  Arts  Commission,  309,  323,  330 
Finerman,  Dr.  Aaron,  192 
Fink,  Daniel  J.,  133 
Finland,  341 
Flandro,  Dr.  Gary  A.,  85 
Fleischer, R.  L.,  83  
Fletcher,  Dr.  James  C.,  139,  298 
aeronautics,  280,  307 
Apollo  program,  324. 
appointment,  49-50,  57,  59,  64,  68,  69, 
72,  114, 368 

awards  and  honors  presented  by, 279, 
302 
budget,  57,  172,  280,  324 
international  cooperation,  space,  275 
Langley  Research  Center  visit,  152 
Lewis  Research  Center  visit,  246-247 
Lunar  module  (LM)  presentation  to  
National  A ir   and  Space Museum,  195 
Manned  Spacecraft  Center  visit,  146- 
147 
Mariner  9  (Mariner-I),  146 
noise  prevention,  aircraft,  307 
Paine,  Dr.  Thomas  O.,  portrait  unveil- 
ing,  314-315 
Dress  conference.  57.  127.  246 
space  program,  national, -57,  127,  172, 
256,  263-264,  272,  275,  280 
space  shuttle,  172.  218.  272,  275.  280 
.
.
 
space station,  172 
technology  utilization,  160,  172,  272- 
273,  340 
U.S.S.R.  space  program,  191-192 
Flight  Achievement  Award  ( A A S ) ,   179 
Flight  Research  Center  ( F R C )  
(NA SA )  
aircraft  electronic  control  system,  73  
contract,  345 
employment,  238 
l i f t ingbody  flight 
M2-F3,  42,  200,  225,  239,  337 
X-24A,  11,  39,  49,  65,  85,  142,  210, 
351 
personnel,  339 
space  shuttle  pilot  study,  308 
supercritical  wing.  See  Wing,  aircraft, 
supercritical. 
Flight  Safety  Foundation,  314 
Florida.  2.  301 
Florida; Legislature,  145 
Florida,  Univ.  of,  18,  288,  292 
Flowers,  Rep.  Walter,  38 
Flugge-Lotz,  Dr.  Irmgard,  298 
Flying  Spot  (x-ray un i t ) ,   278 
FOBS.  See  Fractional  orbiting  bombard- 
ment  system. 
Fsod  and  Agricultural  Organization,  104, 
171 
Fo r   the  Benefit  of All  Mankind:  A  Sur- 
vey  of  the  Practical  Returns  from 
Space  Znvestment  (House  repo r t ) ,   350- 
351 
Ford  Foundation,  177 
Ford,  Rep.  Gerald  R.,  131 
Ford  Motor  Co.,  309 
Ft.  Greely,  Alaska,  222,  225,  230 
Fo r t  Pierce,  Ha.,  24 
Fort Worth,  Tex.,  212 
475  Sioux  (helicopter),  248 
Foster,  Charles  R.,  295 
Foster,  Dr.  John  S.,  Jr.,  95,  300 
Foundation  for  Research  on  the   Na tu re  
of  Man,  170 
Fox, Dr.  Leo,  44 
Fox  Main,  Dew  Line  Station,  Alaska,  74, 
78.  79 
Fra  'Mauro  ( luna r   c r a t e r ) ,   24,  27,  47, 
64 ,98 ,   167 ,265  

436 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Fractional  orbiting  bombardment  system 
(FOBS ) ,   303,  362 
France, 242,  252 
air-cushion  railroad,  82 
a ircraf t   (see   also  Concorde),  224,  346 
Apo l lo   14  mission,  reaction,  43 
Apollo  15 mission,  reaction,  216 
award,  191 
booster,  310 
Concorde 
sunersonic 
(U.K.-France 
transpor t) ,   48,  147,  214,  248,  249, 
280,  332,  346 
international  cooperation,  50,  287.  299 
international  cooperation,  space,  16,  18, 
57-58,  96-97,  148,  230,  235,  259,  291, 
297,  299,  310,  330,  358,  359,  370 
launch,  satellite,  103,  230,  342,  368 
missile  program,  224 
National  Assembly, 73 
satellite,  57-58,  230,  342,  357,  365 
space  program,  58,  230,  234,  254,  311- 
312,  330,  358,  362 
uv   panorama  (5-138)  experiment,  38 
Frankfur t ,  Univ.  of,  325 
Frank l in   Institute,  359 
Frank l in  Mint,  247 
Franklin  Mint  Collectors  Society,  247 
Franz  Josef  Archipelago,  304 
FRC.  See  Flight  Research  Center. 
Freedona  7  (spacecraf t) ,   122 
Freedom  7 mission, 42 
Freeman,  Dr.  John   W.,  Jr.,  288,  291,  293 
Freitag,  Capt.  Robert  F.  (USN, Ret.),  12  
Frey,  Rep.  Louis,  Jr.,  38 
Friedheim,  Jerry   W.,  146,  152,  211,  212 
Friedman,  Dr.  Herbert,  16,  73 
Froehlke,  Secretary  of  the  Army  Robert 
F., 186, 294 
Frog  experiment,  127 
Frontier  Airlines,  128 
Frost.  Dr.  Tames D..  19.7 
FRUSA  (flexible  Tolied-up  solar  a r r ay ) ,   8 
Frutkin,  Arnold  W.,  133,  198 
FTC.  See  Federal  T r ad e  Commission. 
Fulton,  Rep.  James   G.,  38,  280,  282 
Fuqua,  Rep.  Don.,  38 

G 

Gabor,  Dr.  Dennis,  307,  309 
Gabriel,  David  S.,  167,  243,  323 
Gagarin,  Yuri,  Gold  Medal,  266 
Gagarin,  Col.  Yuri  A. 
(U.S.S.R.),  16, 
100.  152.  167 
Galmy,  1,’201,  253,  279,  315 
Galilei,  Galileo,  97 
Gambrel].  Sen.  David  H..  37 
Gamma ray,  181 
Gangler,  James  J., 291 
GAO.  See  General  Accounting  Office. 
GARP.  See  Global  Atmospheric  Research 
Program. 
Garrett  Corp.,  147 
Gast,  Dr.  P au l   W.,  7,  45,  190,  226,  228, 
245 

GATE  ( GARP  Atlantic  Tropical  Experi- 
m e n t ) ,   180 
Gates  Learjet  Corp.,  Aircraft  Div.,  44 
Gatland,  Kenneth,  115 
Gault,  Donald  E.,  39 
Gavin,  James J., Jr.,  57 
Gazenko,  Prof.  Oleg  G.,  36,  235 
GCA  Corp.,  236,  251,257 
GE.  See  General  Electric  Co. 
Gebben, Vernon  D.,  106 
Gehrig, James  J., 265 
Gemini  (p rog r am ) ,  324 
Gemini  (spacecraf t) ,   286 
Gemini 5 mission,  240 
Gemini 7 mission,  153 
Gemini  8  mission,  240 
Gemini  11   mission,  240,  345 
General  Accounting  Office  ( G A O ) ,   1, 78, 
201,  218,  233,  246,  252,  294,  353,  356 
General  aviation,  105,  122,  276-277 
General  Dynamics  Corp. 
Aerospace  Div.,  262,  300 
award,  17 
CL-215  Air  Tanker,  129 
contract,  98,  101,  341 
Convair  Aerospace  Div.,  337 
Convair  Div.,  101,  127,  136, 150 
F-111,  165,  212,  262,  300,  341,  344 
applications  module 
and  
research 
( R A M ) ,   3 ,337  
General  Electric  Co.  (GE ) ,   83,  133 
Aerospace Group,  195 
Aircraft  Engine  Group,  83,  241 
contract,  82, 174 
GE  Houston  Operations,  171 
quiet  j e t   engine,  83,  130, 241,  365 
R&D  Center,  99 
research 
and  
( R A M ) ,   3 
space shuttle,  195 
supersonic  transport  engine,  82,  135 
General  Motors Corp.,  24 
(G SA )   , 
General  Services  Administration 
357 
Geneva,  Switzerland,  19,  23,  88,  132, 
173,  177,  182,  199,  250,  257 
Gentry,  Maj.  Jerau ld   R.  ( U S A F ) ,   42 
George  Washington  Univ.,  176,  258,  342 
Georgia  Institute  of  Technology,  13 
Georgia,  Univ.  of,  81,  232 
German  Society  fo r   Aviation  a n d   Astro- 
nautics 
(Deutsche  Gesellschaft 
fuer  
Luft-  und  Raumfahr t   E.  V.)  (DGLR), 
142 
Germantown, Md.,  115 
Germany,  East,  237,  287,  319 
Germany, West, 81, 84-85,312 
aircraft,  246 
Apollo  14  mission,  reaction  to,  43  
computer  program,  122 
cooDeration. 287 
cooperation;  space,  19, 58,  96,  145, 259, 
310,  352,  356,  357,  370 
R&D, 362 
space  program,  3,  16, 325 
space shuttle,  291 

applications  module 

437 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Gervais,  Joseph,  243 
GET:  ground  elapsed  t ime  
Getlein,  Frank ,  289 
Giacobini-Zinner  comet,  358 
Giaconni,  Dr.  Riccardo,  89,  113 
Gilbert,  B/G  William  W. (USAF) ,  193  
Gillilland,  Whitney,  348-349 
Gilruth,  Dr.  Robert  R.,  14,  84,  171,  177, 
181,  305,  325,  332,  334 
Glenn,  Col.  John  H.,  Jr.  (USMC, Re t .) ,  
198 
Glennan,  Dr.  T.  Keith,  253,  257 
Glider  research,  320 
Global  Associates.  191 
Global  Atmospheric  Research  Program 
( G A R P ) ,   103,  178,  303-304 
Atlantic  Tropical  Experiment  (GATE), 
i Rn 
CY"  Data  Management  Panel,  303 
Glushko,  Petrovich,  91  
Goals  and  Means 
in   the   Conquest  of 
Space ,   183, 363 
Goat  experiment,  311 
Goddard  Ins t i tu te   for  Space   Studies 
(GSFC), 32,  45,  50,  35&359 
Goddard,  Mrs.  Esther,  69,  214,  347 
Goddard  Memorial  Dinner,  69 
Goddard  Memorial  Lecture  Award,  13 
Goddard  Memorial  Trophy,  69 
Goddard,  Dr.  Robert  H.,  13,  17, 234,  347 
Goddard,  Robert  H.,  Library,  214 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center 
(GSFC) 
(NASA ) ,  250,  335 
Apo l lo   15  tracking,  207 
astronomical  research,  35-36,  49-50, 
102, 339 
award,  302 
contract,  134-135,  356 
cooperation,  102-103 
employment,  238 
Laser  Da ta   Systems  Branch,  154 
meeting,  129, 146, 297 
patent,  269 
position-location  and   a ircraf t   communi- 
cations  experiment  (PLACE ) ,  362 
satellite monitoring 
Explorer  43  (IMP-I),  72,  240 
Explorer  45  (SSS-A), 319 
ITOS-B,  294 
Os0  7,  269 
Sc ien t if ic   Colloquium,  154 
sounding  rocket  experiments  (see  also 
Sounding  rockets) 
airglow,  108 
atmospheric  data,  2,  5,  8,  78,  174- 
175, 187 
electric  field,  78,  79 
energetic  particles  and   fields,  14 
grenade  experiment,  259 
ionosphere,  22,  31,  115-116 
magnetic field,  78,  79 
micrometeoroid  collection,  108 
ozone,  54, 63,  64-65,  74-75,  222,  225, 
230 
polar  cap   ahsorption,  246 
stellar  astronomy,  13,  119,  323 

test  and   support  miFsion,  292 
x-ray  studies,  226 
Goland, Martin,  15, 75 
Gold, Dr.  Thomas,  5,  237 
Goldhaber,  Dr.  Gerson,  36 
Goldich,  S. S., 83 
Goldstein,  R ichard  M.,  335 
Goldstone,  Calif.,  tracking  antenna,  69, 
102, 313,  318 
Goldwater,  Sen.  Barry  M.,  24,  79 
Goldwater,  Rep.  Barry  M.,  Jr.,  38 
Golf  Magazine,  All-America  Award,  106 
Golovine Award,  85 
Gordon,  Capt.  Richard J.,  Jr.  (USN, Ret.), 
345 
Gossick,  M /G   Lee V.  (USAF) ,  193  
Gotlieb, Alan,  106 
Government-Industry  System  Safety  Con- 
ference,  146 
Government  Pr in t ing   Office  (GPO ) ,  327 
Grants, N.  Mex.,  39 
Gravel,  Sen.  Mike,  272 
Greeley,  Ronald,  39 
Green,  Constance  McLaughlin,  75 
Greenville,  S.C.,  140 
Griffin,  Sen.  Robert  P.,  134 
Grissom,  L/C  Virgil  I.  (USAF), 10,  199, 
357 
Grissom,  Mrs.  Virgil  I.,  10,  131 
Griswold,  Solicitor  Gen.  Erwin,  49 
Grobecker,  Dr.  Alan  J.,  323 
Gromyko,  Foreign  Minister  Andrey  A. 
( U S S R . ) ,   153, 252,  272 
Grumman  Corp.,  290,  294,  295 
Grumman  Aerosuace  Corm.  167.  191 
aircraft,  128,  219,  288,'290,  338 
F-14,  46,  112,  141, 152,  163  
F-14A,  11, 112 
award.  15.57.279 
contra&,  253,'  288,  294,  338 
space shuttle, 281 
GSA.  See  General Services Administration. 
GSFC.  See  Goddard  Space  F l igh t   Center. 
Gudkov,  Oleg,  211 
Guerney,  Sen.  Edward  J.,  134 
Guggenheim,  Daniel,  13 
Guggenheim,  Daniel,  Medal,  326 
Guggenheim,  Daniel  and   Florence,  In ter-  
national  Astronautics  Award,  262 
Guggenheim,  Harry   F.,  13, 534 
Gulf  of  Mexico,  200 
Gum Nebula.  36 
Guppy  (cargo  a ircraf t  1 ,   242 
Gurovsky,  Dr.  N.  N., 284,  359 
Gvishiani.  Dzherman  M..  287 
GX3+1   '(x-ray  source);  356 
H 

H-1  (rocket  eng ine) ,   158 
Hadley-Apennine  region  ( lun a r   land ing  
s i t e ) ,   202,  203,  254 
Hadley Delta  ( lun a r  moun ta in) ,   120,  223 
Hadley  P la ins   (moon) ,   203 
438 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Hadley  Rille  (lunar landing  s i t e ) ,   153, 
144 ,183 ,219 ,226 ,291  
Hafele,  Dr.  Joseph  C.,  296 
Hage, George H.,  299 
Hagen, Dr.  John  P.,  135 
Haggerty, James J.,  58, 90 
Haglund,  Howard H.,  47,  55 
The  Hague,  Netherlands,  103 
Haise,  Fred  W.,  Jr.,  61,  75,  171,  266 
Halaby,  Najeeb  E.,  109,  148,  257,  297 
Haley  Astronautical  Award,  75 
Hall,  Albert  C.,  294 
Hall, Asaph, 331 
Hall,  Floyd  D.,  54 
Hall,  R.  Cargill, 261 
Halley's  comet, 358 
Ham  (chimpanzee),  32 
Hanbury,  Una,  106 
Hamilton,  Jeffrey  T.,  192, 301 
Hammarskjold, Knut,  177 
Handler,  Dr.  Philip,  106, 287 
Hanna,  Rep.  Richard  T.,  38,  222 
Hansen,  Grant  L.,  186,  276 
Hansen, James E.,  50 
Haramura,  Hiroshi, 83  
Harbert,  Wary Ann,  352 
Hardsite Defense, 43 
Hardy, Dr.  James  P.,  90 
Hargis,  Dr.  William  J.,  Jr.,  292 
Harmon  International  Aviator's  Trophy, 
135 
Harnett,  Daniel  J.,  76,  354 
Harr,  Dr.  Karl  G.,  Jr.,  125 
Ha r r ie r   (U .K .   V/STOL  a ircraf t) ,   80,  300, 
329 
Harriot,  Thomas, 97 
Harris, Louis,  survey,  220 
Harrison,  Dr.  Donald  C., 
Hart,  H.  R.,  Jr.,  8 3  
Hartzog, George B.,  112 
Harvard  Univ.,  18, 277 
Harvest  Moon  (proposed 
314 
H i i L y  Mudd  College,  152 
Haskin, Dr.  Larry A.,  279 
HATS.  See  Huntsville  Assn.  of  Technical 
Writers. 
Haughton,  Daniel  J.,  2,  36,  161,  221,  294 
Hawaii. 98.  222 
Hawaii;  Univ.  of,  161,  345 
Hawker  Siddeley  Group Ltd.,  3 
Hawker  Siddeley  Aviation,  Ltd.,  329 
Hawker  Siddeley  Dynamics Ltd,  19 
Hawkins, Howard R.,  71 
Hayes  International  Corp.,  158 
Health,  Education,  and  Welfare  (HEW), 
Dept.  of,  38,  58,  161 
HEAO.  See  High  Energy  Astronomy  Ob- 
servatory. 
Heat  flow  experiment,  142,  144, 205,  245, 
291.294.  295 
Heat  shield, 335 
Hebert,  Rep.  F.  Edward,  112,  163  
Hechler,  Rep.  Ken,  38 
Heckscher, John  L.,  199 
Hedrick,  I r a  G.,  15  

luna r   mission 

235,  301 

Heffner,  Dr.  Hubert,  197 
Helicopter, 295 
accident,  13, 14 ,290  
astronaut piekup,  30 
comsat  communication,  74 
military,  101,  294,  351,  357,  365 
record, 365 
U.S.S.R.,  147 
Helicopter  Corp.  of  America,  330 
Helio Aircraft  Corn..  300 
Helms,  Richard,  lk' 
Helsinki,  Finland,  148,  189,  252 
Hempstead, N.Y.,  233 
Henize,  Dr.  Karl,  359 
(Highly  Eccentric  Orbit  Satel- 
HEOS-AB 
lite 1 ,   356 
Heppenheimer,  T.  A.,  315 
Hercules  (constellation),  93 
Hercules, Inc.,  170 
Hero  of  Socialist  Labor,  218 
Hero  of  the  Soviet  Union,  180 
Herzberg, Gerhard,  307 
Heuss  Island,  Arctic  Ocean,  304 
HEW,  See Health,  Education,  and Welfare 
(HEW), Dept. of. 
Hewlett  Packard  Co.,  350 
Hibbs, Dr.  Albert R.,  47 
Hickam  AFB,  Hawaii,  207,  219 
High  Energy  Astronomy  Observatory 
( H E A O ) ,   67,  85,  189,  276 
Highly  Eccentric  Orbit  Satellite.  See 
HEOS-AB. 
High  Speed  Test  Center,  182 
Hijacking  of  a ircraf t  
Congress,  103 
ICAO  consideration of, 55 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  36,  54, 
_ _ _  
1 n3 
protective  measures  against,  133,  212- 
213,  278 
statistics.  157 
treaty,  55,  103 
U.S.,  36,55,  103, 157 
Hill,  Louis  W.,  Space  Transportation 
Award.  298.  323 
Hillier, James,  170 
Hills,  Dr.  H.  Kent,  144,  288,  293 
Himmel, Dr.  Seymour  C.,  349 
Bines, William,  192 
Hiroshima, Japan,  224 
Hirsch, Richard, 9 
Hirten,  John  E.,  107 
History Manuscript  Award  ( A I A A ) ,   75 
History of  Astronautics Symposium, Fifth, 
261 
H&hi 
Central  Research  Laboratory, 
231-232 
Hitt,  Patricia  R.,  38 
Hodgson,  Secretary of  Labor  James D.,  94 
Hoff,  Dr.  Nicholas J.,  15 
Hoffman, Gen.  H.,  352 
Hoffman,  Dr.  William  F.,  358 
Hofstein, Steven R.,  360 
Hogan, Joseph M.,  49 
Hogarth,  Laurence T., 161 
Holloway,  Frederic  A.  L.,  170 

439 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Holmes,  J a y  E.,  58 
Holmfeld,  John  D.,  126 
Holmauest.  Dr.  Donald.  138 
Hologiaphy,  142, 307 
‘ 
Homestake  Gold  Mine,  South Dakota,  113 
Honeywell,  I n c   Aerospace  Div.,  2 M  
Honolulu,  H a w k ,  349 
Hood,  Robert H.,  231 
Hope,  Bob,  70 
Hord,  Dr.  Charles W.,  195 
Horowitz.  Dr.  Norman  H..  90 
Horttor,  R ichard  L.,  335  ’ 
Horttor,  R ichard  L.,  335  ’ 
Hotz,  Robert B.,  119 
Hotz,  Robert B.,  119 
Houghton,  Dr.  John,  242 
Houghton,  Dr.  John,  242 
Housing  and   Urban  Development  ( H U D ) ,  
Housing  and   Urban  Development  ( H U D ) ,  
Dept.  of,  3,  135,  198,  209,  211,  216, 
Dept.  of,  3,  135,  198,  209,  211,  216, 
226 
funding, 
Houston  Intercontinental  Airnort.  278 
Houston,  Tex.,  138,  166,  288;290 
Apollo  1 4  mission,  25,  30 
Apo l lo   15  mission,  203,  222,  225-226, 
302,  335 
Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory,  30,  226 
meeting,  5,  114,  312,  369 
Houston,  Univ.  of, 50, 63  
Hovertrain,  348 
Hubbard,  Dr.  J e r ry  S., 90 
Hubbel, Charles H.,  282 
HUD.  See   Housing  and  Urban  Develop- 
ment, Dept.  of. 
Huddle, Franklin  P.,  56 
Hudson  (bomber  a ircraf t) ,   115 
Hughes  Aircraft  Co.,  298,  312 
Hughes,  Howard,  44,  197 
Hughes Tool  Co.,  197 
Human  Resources,  Dept.  of  (proposed) ,  
81 _ _  
Humphrey,  Sen.  Huber t   H.,  162,  195, 
266,358 
Humphreys,  Dr.  James  W.,  Jr.,  12,  245 
Hungary,  43,  237,  242-243 
Hunn,  Spencer S.,  3 
Huntington  Beach,  Calif.,  38 
Huntington  Institute  of  Applied  Medical 
Research,  112 
Huntsville,  Ala.,  5,  142,  279,  321 
Huntsville  Assn.  o f   Technical  Writers 
I HATS ). 321 
Hurr icane  Camille,  172 
Husain,  Dr.  Liaquat,  257,  260,  265 
Hvde.  Flovd  H..  3 
H idrofo i l  craft.’ 18 
Hidrofoil  warship,  312 
Hydrogen,  60,  89,  93,  175,  359 
Hvdrogen  bomb.  260.273 
Hydrogen  gas cloud,’2 
Hydroxyl,  194 
Hypo,  Project,  104 

I 
IAA.  See  In terna t iona l   Academy  of  Astro- 
nautics. 
IAEA.  See  International  Atomic  Energy 
Agency. 

IAF .   See  International  Aeronautical  Fed- 
eration  and   International  Astronautical 
Federation. 
IATA.  See  International  A ir   Transport 
Assn. 
IBM .   See  International  Business  Machines 
Corp. 
ICAO.  See  International  Civil  Aviation 
Organization. 
Icarus   (as tero id) ,   310 
ICBM .   See   Intercontinental  ballistic  mis- 
sile. 
IEEE .   See Institute  of  Electrical  and   Elec- 
tronic  Engineers. 
IFR :   instrument  flight  rules. 
11-18  (U.S.S.R.  a ir l iner) ,   12,  17,  38,  140 
11-62  (U.S.S.R.  a i r l in e r ) ,   140 
I L L IAC   IV   (compu ter) ,  23 
Illinois,  Univ.  of,  236 
IL S :   instrument  landing  system. 
IMP .   See  Interplanetary  Monitoring  P la t-  
form. 
(In terp lane tary   Monitoring  P la t-  
IMP-E 
fo rm ) ,  64 
IMP-H,  356 
Implantable  Biotelemetry  Systems  (NA SA  
SP-5094),  193 
Improved  Tiros  Operational  Satel!ite. 
See  I t o s  1 ,  etc. 
Independence  (presidential  a i r c r a f t ) ,  248 
Ind ia ,   19, 105,  111, 115,  235,  264,  282 
Ind ian   Ocean,  109,  150,  319-320 
Ind ian   River,  Ha..  13,  290 
Indiana,  199 
Indiana,  199 
Indus tr ia l   R&D  Spending,  1970 
Indus tr ia l   R&D  Spending,  1970 
71-39) 
71-39) 
352 
352 
Indus tr ia l   Research  Magazine  award,  262 
Indus tr ia l   Research  Magazine  award,  262 
~ 
~ 
Information  retrieval.  32.  81 
Information  retrieval.  32.  81 
Informatics  Tisco,  Inc.,  6 9  
Ingersoll-Rand  Co.,  78 
Institute  of  Electrical  and   Electronic 
Engineers  ( I E E E ) ,   308 
Institute  of  P lanners   of  California,  107 
Institute  of  Rehahilitation  Medicine,  189 
Institution  of  Mechanical  Engineers 
(London) ,   84  
INTELSAT.  See  International  Telecommuni- 
cations  Satellite  Consortium. 
Intelsat  (communications  satellite  series), 
198 
Intelsat  I  (Ear ly   B i rd ) .   14.  98 
Intelsat  111  series,  14, 69 
ln te lsa t   IV  series,  14, 294 
Intelsat-IV  F-2,  14,  82,  341,  354.  356- 
357,  365 
Intelsat-IV F-3,  342,  352,  354,  365 
Intelsat-IV F-4,  356 
Intelsat-TV F-5,  356 
Intelsat-IV F-6,  356 
Interagency  Aircraft  Noise  Abatement 
Program,  295 
Interagency  Committee  on  Back  Con- 
tamination,  115 
Intercontinental  ballistic  missile  ( I CM B ) ,  
4,  68,  77,  84,  103,  107,  117,  135,  146, 
150,  248,  264-265,  303,  357-358,  362 

( N S F  
( N S F  

440 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

satellite),  337, 

lntercosmos  5  (U.S.S.R. 
366 
to 
relevant 
research 
Interdisciplinary 
problems  of  our  society  ( IRPOS ) ,   178 
Interferometry,  102 
Interior,  Dept.  of,  81,  82,  351-352 
International  Academy  of  Astronautics 
( I A A ) ,   261,  277 
International  Aeronautical  Federation 
( I A F ) ,   262 
awards,  262-263 
International  Aerospace  Hall  of  Fame, 
242 
International  Air  Safety  Seminar,  295 
International  Air  Transport  Assn.  ( I A T A ) ,  
177 
International  Assn.  of  F i re   Fighters,  23 
International  Astronautical  Federation 
( IAF 1,  260-261 
InternationaI  Atomic  Energy  Agency 
( I A E A ) ,   253,  257 
International  Business  Machines  Corp. 
( I B M ) ,   78 
Federal  Systems  Div.,  85 
International  City  Management  Assn.,  177 
International  Civil  Aviation  Organization 
( I C A O ) ,   55,  312,  327,  349 
International  Conference  on   Peaceful 
Uses of  Atomic  Energy,  250 
International  Congress  of  the  History  of 
Science,  Thirteenth,  234 
International  cooperation  (see  also  Dis- 
armament  and   T rea ty )  
astronomy,  102,  190,  248-249 
computer  programs,  230-232 
ecology, 17 
natural  resources,  164 
nuclear  power,  50,  197, 250 
science  and  technology,  17, 55,  177,  299 
systems  analysis,  287 
International  cooperation,  space  (see  also 
European  Launcher  Development  Or- 
ganization;  European  Space Research 
Organization ;  Global  Atmospherics 
Research  Program ;  International 
Telecommunications  Satellite  Con- 
sortium),  15-16,  17,  37,  44, 45,  55, 
69-70,  77,  101,  119-120,  127,  275, 
31 1 
International  Cooperation 
in   Ou te r  
Space:  A  Symposium,  132 
luna r   surface  samples,  6,  10,  13,  16, 58, 
159.  190.  308.  369 
-, -  - 
military;  36-37,  41,  369 
satellite,  15,  18,  57-58,  219-220 
communications.  See Communications 
satellite.  cooneration. 
ea r th  resources;  10,  119,  132,  198, 369 
Europe,  15-16,  19,  57-58,  297,  310, 
319 
NASA- 
-Canada, 88,  356,369 
-Europe,  75 
-France,  230,  357,369 
-Germany,  West, 356 
-Italy,  109, 369 

-NATO. 36-37-41.369 
-U.K.,’  348,  369 
I -  
U.S.S.R.-Czechoslovakia,  337 
-France,  358-359 
sounding  rocket.  See  Sounding  rocket, 
international  programs. 
space research,  16 
Europe,  16,  141-142,  237,  347,  352 
France-U.S.S.R., 
147,  235,  330,  358, 
359 
U.S.-A&tralia,  15 
-Canada, 15-16,  96 
-Denmark.  96 
-Europe, 1 5 , 1 6 , 3 3 5  
-France, 96 
-Germany,  West,  96,  145, 259,  325, 
370 
-Japan,  15-16 
-Sweden,  96 
-U.K., 96 
U.S.S.R.,  7,  10,  16,  20,  43,  68,  77, 
100.  133.  139.  159.  171.  176-177. 
185;  191;  197,’ 
249,  275,  283, 
325,  330,  332, 
353.  358.  369 
space  shuttle,  3,  16,  45,  291 
space  station,  3,  45 
space  tug,  278 
Statements  by  Presidents  of the  United 
S ta te s  on  International  Cooperation 
in  Space-A  Chronology:  October 
(Sen.  Doc. 
1957-August 
1971 
92401,  265 
tracking 
France-U.S.S.R.,  235 
International  Coordinating  Center  of 
Marine  Exploration  in  U.S.S.R.,  110 
International  Decade  of  Ocean  Explora- 
tion,  99 
International  Galabert  Prize,  191 
International 
Institute 
for  Strategic 
Studies,  247-248,  360 
International  Institute  of  Applied  Sys- 
tems  Analysis  (proposed),  287 
International  Orbital  Laboratory  Sympo- 
sium,  261 
International  Solar  Energy  Society,  129 
International  Symposium  on  Basic  En- 
vironmental  Problems  of  Man in  Space, 
Fourth,  277 
International  Symposium  on  Space  Tech- 
nology,  Ninth,  133 
International  Telecommunications  Satel- 
lite  Consortium 
( INTELSAT ) ,   14,  45, 
48,  102,  138,  242-243.  265 
charter.  237 
International  Telecommunications  Union, 
319 
International  Union  of  Geodesy  and   Geo- 
physics,  241-242 
International  Workshop  on  Ea r th   Re- 
sources  Survey,  119,  369-370 
Interplanetary  Monitoring 
(IMP), 64,  356 
Intersputnik 
(international  space  com- 
441 

Platform 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

munications  organization),  319 
Intravehicular  activity  (IVA) ,  328 
Ionosphere,  19,  22,  31-32,  88,  111,  115, 
176,  193,  218,  236-237,  369 
Iorilla,  Anthony  J., 298 
Iowa,  Univ.  of,  348 
Iran,  313 
Ireland,  43,  220 
research 
See 
Interdisciplinary 
IRPOS. 
relevant  to  problems  of  our  society. 
Irwin,  Col.  James   B. 
(USAP )  
Apollo  15  mission 
celebrations  for,  222,  238 
Congress,  report  to,  254 
flight,  202-208 
lunar   rock  samples,  226 
medical  aspects,  188,  225,  228,  289 
preparations  for,  141,  188 
press  comment,  222 
press  conference,  120-121,  227 
report,  223 
splashdown,  207 
syndicated  article  agreement,  200- 
201 
Apollo  17  mission,  228-229 
awards  and   honors,  239,  260,  262-263, 
266,  346-347 
goodwill  tour,  311 
space  center  visits,  271,  272 
I s   There  an   R&U  G a p ?   ( r epo r t ) ,   124 
Isayev,  Aleksey,  176 
Isis  I 
(In terna t iona l   Satellite  for   Iono- 
spheric S tud ies) ,   88 
Isis  2  (ISIS-B)  , 88,  369 
Israel,  124, 279,  329 
Israel, David  R.,  2 
Italy,  3,  43,  291,  310,  315,  333,  355 
launch,  satellite,  109-110,  319,  365,  368, 
369 
I tek   Corp.,  330 
l to s   I  (T iros-M)   (Improved  Tiros Opera- 
tional  Satellite ),  295 
ITOS-B,  294,  295,  300 
ITOS-C,  356 
ITOS-V,  356 
ITOS-E, 356 
IVA.  See  Intravehicular  activity. 
J 

J-2 
(rocket  eng ine) ,   60,  158 
Jackson,  Sen.  Henry  M.,  85,  103, 329 
Jackson,  Roy  P.,  39,  96,  130,  296,  337 
Jaffe ,   Leonard,  179,  211,  340 
Jaffe, Dr.  Leonard  D.,  57 
Jamaica,  104,  138,  171,  370 
Jamaica  Bay  and  Kennedy   A i rpo r t :   A  
Multidisciplinary  Environmental  S tudy ,  
49 
Jamaica  Geological  Survey,  104,  171 
James,  Lee  B.,  116,  240 
Jane’s  A l l   the  World’s  A i rc ra f t ,   296 
Japan ,   243 
international  cooperation,  231-232 
international  cooperation,  space,  15,  111 

launch,  satellite,  48,  161,  200,  268,  368 
science  and   technology,  122,  291,  363 
space  objects  liability  treaty,  313-314 
space  program,  9,  220,  305 
supersonic  transport,  82,  84-85,  138 
Japanese  Space   Development  Committee, 
161 
Jastrow,  Dr.  Robert,  32,  45  
Javelin  (sounding  rocke t) ,   176 
Javits,  Sen.  Jacob   K.,  171,  177 
Jeffries,  John,  Award,  298 
Jeppesen  and  Co.,  322 
Jeppesen,  Elrey  B.,  322 
Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory 
( JPL)  (Cal 
T e ch ) ,   191-192,  211,  353,  355 
astronomical  research,  102 
award,  85, 314 
computer,  179 
contract,  47,  175, 211,  344 
Deep  Space  Network,  318 
Goldstone  Tracking  Station,  102,  313, 
318 
Jup i t e r   (p l an e t )   research,  178 
Mariner  program,  175 
Mariner  8  (Mar iner-H)   fa i lure   investi- 
gation,  1 2 6 1 2 7 ,  136 
Mariner  9  (Mar iner-I) ,   148,  301-302, 
306,  313,  321,  331,  339,  353 
Mars  (p lane t)   research,  90 
patent,  335 
personnel,  4 6 4 7 ,   55,  159-160,  191- 
192.  261 
Pioneer  spacecraft,  178,  322 
Surveyor  3 camera,  57 
Thermoelectric  Outer  P lane t   Space- 
craf t   ( TO P S ) ,   179 
transit  system,  47,  55 
Viking,  Project,  211,  344 
Je tS tar   ( j e t   transpor t) ,   115 
Jha,  Ambassador  Lakshmi  Kan t   ( I nd i a ) ,  
70 
Johns  Hopkins  Univ.,  10,  14,  132,  159 
Johnson,  Dr.  Clarence  L.,  115 
Johnson,  David  S., 217 
Johnson,  E.  G.,  261 
Johnson,  Dr.  Francis  S.,  144 
Johnson,  Dr.  Fred   M.,  299 
Johnson,  Harry   W.,  44 
Johnson,  Dr.  Howard  W.,  325 
Johnson,  Col.  Leonard  W.,  Jr.  (USAF), 
352 
Johnson,  President  Lyndon  B.,  162,  265, 
282 
Johnson,  U.  Alexis,  335 
Johnson,  Vincent  L.,  136,  164,  302 
Johnson-Sea-Link  (submersible  research 
vessel),  24 
Johnsson,  Olof,  170 
Johnston,  R ichard   S.,  298 
Joint  Do t -NASA   Civil  Aviation  Research 
and  Development  Po l icy   S tudy   Repo r t ,  
122 
Jo in t   Working  Group  (NASA-Soviet  Acad- 
emy  of  Sciences),  243 
Jones,  R /A   Don  A.  (U SN ) ,  12 
Jones,  James  C.,  254 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Jones,  Lawrence  C.,  331 
Jordan,  Sen.  B.  Everett,  197 
JPL.  See J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory. 
JT3D   ( turbofan   eng ine) ,   130,  198 
JT8D  ( turbofan   eng ine) ,   198 
Jup i ter   (m iss i le) ,   182 
Jup i ter   (p lane t)  
atmosphere,  179 
exploration 
spacecraft,  22,  74,  179, 322,  327,  367 
unmanned,  22,  67,  148,  322,  327,  356 
gravity,  178 
magnetic field,  178 
moon, 97 
photographs,  174 
radiation  belt,  178, 322 
rotation,  178 

K 

Kahurin,  L.  I.,  167 
Kansas  City, Mo.,  328 
Kaplan, Dr.  I a n  R.,  39 
Kappa   9-M 
(Japanese   rocke t) ,   9 
Kapryan,  Walter  J.,  57 
Kapustin-Yar,  U.S.S.R.,  337 
Karaganda,  Kazakhstan,  U.S.S.R.,  108 
Karth,  Rep.  Joseph  E.,  38,  280 
Katys,  G.,  174 
Katyusha  (U.S.S.R.  rocke t) ,   261 
Kayten,  Gerald G.,  233 
Kazakhstan.  U.S.S.R..  135 
Keathley,  William  H.:  251 
Keldysh,  Prof.  Mstislav  V.,  10, 89,  94,  100, 
140.  145.  217.  268.  284.  311 
Kelly,'  K. K., 148 
 
,
I
Kelly, Dr.  Marvin  J., 78 
Kendall,  Dr.  Henry  W.,  183 
Kennecott  Copper  Corp.,  78 
Kennedy,  Sen.  Edward   M.,  17,  76,  166, 
286.308 
Kennedy,-  Pres iden t   John  F.,  142,  162, 
201,  215,  265,  282 
Kennedy,  John  F.,  International  Airport, 
2.  49.  139 
7  ~- 
Kennedy  Space   Center 
7 
126,  301,  320,  328 
anniversary,  180 
Apollo/Satnrn.  S e e   Apollo  missions. 
astronauts  a t ,   5,  13,  17,  120,  188-189, 
271 
award,  57 
computer,  287 
contract,  71,  278,  279,  292 
economy  program,  287 
employment,  65 
exhibit,  122, 353 
facilities,  361 
launch  operations 
(see  also  Launch 
Complex  17,  34,  39  and   40;  and  
Apollo  missions),  7,  24,  30,  46,  95, 
98,  110,  128,  160,  200-201,  245, 
254-255,  347 
lightning  study,  201 
meeting,  162,  269 

( K S C )   (NASA), 

personnel,  57,  122,  357 
press  conference,  120 
space  shuttle,  2,  145 
Visitor  Information  Center,  264 
visits  to,  343 
Agnew,  Vice  President  Spiro  T.,  31 
Kennev.  Dr.  V.  Paul.  114 
Kent,  Wash.,  55,  68,  '128 
Kentucky,  167,  256 
Kenya,  Africa,  109,  323,  369 
Kepler,  Johannes,  97,  233,  359 
Keweenaw  Rocket  Launch  S i te   ( KRL S ) ,  
22,  31 
Key  Biscayne, Fla.,  74 
Khanina,  F.,  357 
Kharkov,  Univ.  of, 325 
King,  Gov.  Bruce,  42 
King,  John  W.,  357 
King,  Robert E.,  49 
K ingcobra   (he l icop ter) ,   357 
Kingston,  Ontario,  10 
Kirilenko,  Andrey  P.,  186 
K i t t   Peak   National  Observatory,  36,  40, 
178 ,299  
K i t t y   Hawk   ( a i r c r a f t ) ,   248 
K i t t y   Hawk  
( A p o l l o   14  command  and  
service  module).  See  Command  and 
service  module. 
Klass,  Joseph,  243 
Klass,  Ph i l ip   J.,  243 
Klein,  Milton,  52,  71,  96,  250,  323 
KLM   Roval  Du tch   Airlines.  88 
Knight  of  St.  Pa tr ick   Award,  78 
Komarov,  Vol.  Vladimir  M.  (U.S.S.R.), 
266 
Komarov,  V.  M.,  Diploma.  266 
Korn,  Steve,  345 
Kourou  Space  Center,  French  Guiana, 
64,  74,  78,  83,  103,  235,  259,  310,  342, 
358,  370 
Kozlov,  Mikhail  V.,  264 
Kraemar,  Robert  S.,  322,  358 
Kraft,  Christopher  C.,  Jr.,  23,  96,  302, 
328 
Kraft,  Joseph,  129 
Kramer.  .Tames  .T..  251 
Kranz,  E i g e n e  F.; 57 
Kranzberg,  Dr.  Melvin,  151 
Kremlin  Wall.  Moscow.  186 
Krier,  Gary,  114,  279,  287 
KRLS.  See Keweenaw  Rocket  Launch  Site. 
Kronauer,  M/G  Clifford  J.  ( U S A F ) ,   193 
Kushiro,  Ikuo,  83 
(U.S.S.R. 
Kuznetsov  NK-144 
turbofan 
eng ine) ,   126 
Kvenvolden,  Keith  A.,  39 
Kwajalein  Missile  Range,  125 
L 

GlOll  (T r iS t a r )   ( j e t   transpor t) ,   36,  38, 
44,  47,  88,  124,  132,  147,  173-174,  190, 
216,  221,  301 
Labor,  Dept.  of,  141 
Manpower  Administration,  119 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

LaGarde,  Jean  Bernard,  75 
Laird,  Secretary  of  Defense  Melvin  R., 
68,  107,  124,  264,  286,  351 
La je s   Field,  The  Azores,  351 
Lake  Pontchartrain,  La.,  200 
Land-Air  Div.,  Dynalectron  Corp.,  131 
Lane,  A.  L.,  148 
Langley  Gold  Medal  for Aerodromics,  266 
Langley  Research  Center  (LaRC)  (NASA )  
award,  179, 302 
brake,  diagonal,  studies,  51,  278 
camera,  underwater,  104 
conference  on  aircraft  safety  and   oper- 
a t ing   problems,  122 
contract,  49 
cooperation,  104,  210 
8-Foot  Tunnels  Branch,  299 
emdovment.  238 
enefgy  absorber,  frangible-tube,  259 
exhibit,  152 
flight  research  vehicle.  233 
meeting,  231 
patent,  259 
personnel,  107,  186,  191 
Scout  launch  vehicle,  319 
Space  systems  Div.,  299 
Visitor  Information  Center,  152 
V/STOL  Wind  Tunnel,  365 
Langley,  Dr.  Samuel  P.,  266 
Langseth,  Dr.  Marcus  E.,  144, 245 
Lapp,  Dr.  Ralph,  325 
LLRC.  See  Langley  Research  Center. 
Large  Space  Telescope  (LST ) ,  67,  330 
Las Vegas,  Nev., 63,  196 
Laser.  88.  288 
,
,
 
luna r   experiments,  27,  63,  144,  278, 
299,  315 
Latham,  Dr.  Gary  V.,  7,  64,  213,  142- 
143.  236.  245.  291 
Latvian  Academy  of  Sciences  Radioastro- 
physical  Observatory,  287 
Latvian  S ta te   Univ.,  357 
Launch  Complex  36,  30,  126 
Launch  Complex  37,  30,  357 
Launch  Complex  39,  202,  349 
Launch  platform,  floating,  262 
Lawless,  James  G.,  39 
Lawrence,  Lovell,  Jr.,  13 
Le  Bourget  Airport,  France,  147,  168 
Lebedev,  P.  N.,  Physics  Institute,  315 
Lecky-Thompson,  Squadron  Leader  Les- 
lie,  135 
Lederberg,  Dr.  Joshua,  91  
Lederer,  Jerome  F.,  295,  314 
Lee,  Capt.  Chester  M.  ( U S N ) ,   35,  156 
Lefevre,  Theo,  45,  48,  335 
Lehigh  Univ.,  239 
Leonov,  L/C  Aleksey  A.  (U.S.S.R.),  16 
Leopold,  King  of  Belgium,  260 
LeRc.  See  Lewis  Research  Center. 
Lerner,  Lawrence,  137 
Lessing,  Lawrence P.,  89 
Lewis, Dr.  George W.,  196 
Lewis  Research  Center  (LeRc) 
( N A S A ) ,  
238,  298,320,  362 
Aerospace  Environment  Branch,  56 

air-pollution  study,  2 
anniversary,  196 
Atlas-Centaur,  127,  136,  150 
award,  262,  302 
Awareness  Program,  329 
Centaur  launch  failure  investigation, 
127,  136 
computer,  106-107 
contract,  96,  98,  147 
cooperation,  292 
Mariner 9,  150 
noise  abatement,  295,  296 
personnel,  349 
Quiet  Engine  Project,  83,  96,  130,  241, 
246-247 
research,  56,  72,  262,  292,  320 
solar  cell,  12 
Library  of  Congress 
Congressional  Research  Service,  248 
Science  Policy  Research  Div.,  7,  56. 
368 
Lick  Observatorv.  Calif..  1.  299 
Life,  origin  of,  f i 7  
Life  suppor t   system,  96,  105,  156,  181, 
193,  196,  206,  235,  308,  311-312 
Lifting  bodv 
M 2 1 F 2 , b  
M2-F3,  42,  56,  200,  225,  237,  265,  319, 
337,  352,  365 
X-24A,  11,  39,  49,  65,  85,  130,  142, 
153,  210,  351,  356,  365 
Lightning,  199,  201 
Lightning  Strikes  to  In-Flight  Missiles 
program,  199 
Lilienthal,  Cdr.  Donald  H.  (W S N ) ,   12,  17, 
41 
Lillie,  Dr.  Charles,  93 
Lindbergh,  B/C  Charles  A. 
13 
Lindner,  Clarence  H.,  170 
Lindsay,  John  C.,  Memorial  Award,  154 
Lindsay,  Dr.  John  F.,  238 
Lindsay,  Mayor  John   V.,  239 
Liquid  hydrogen,  60 ,89 ,219 ,331  
Liquid  oxygen,  60,  219,  297 
Lithicon,  360 
Littlewood,  William,  326 
Littlewood,  William,  Memorial  Lecture, 
326 
Litton  Industries,  182 
Environetics  Div.,  137 
Guidance  and  Control  Systems  Div., 
175 
LLTV.  See  Luna r   landing  training  vehicle. 
LM.  See  Lunar  module. 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  65,  307 
AH-56A 
(Cheyenne) 
(helicopter), 
294.  357 
award, 115 
C-5A 
(cargo  transport),  2,  36,  147, 
260,  271,  294,  307,  335,  348,  358 
contract,  2,  36,  52,  147,  186 
financial  problems,  44-45,  124,  132, 
147,  161,  173-174,  194,  201,  212, 
216,  254,  294 
L- lo l l  
(T r iS ta r   j e t   t ran spo r t ) ,   36, 

(USAF,  Ret.), 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

38,  44,  47,  88,  124,  132,  147,  173- 
174,  190,  216,  221,  301 
patent,  171 
Poseidon  missile,  52 
sounding  rocket  experiment,  174 
STOL  a ircraf t ,   290 
T-33  ( j e t   t r a in e r ) ,   115 
U-2 
(high-altitude  a ircraf t) ,   95,  115 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Service  Co.,  126 
Lockheed  Electronics  Co.,  19,  49,  190 
Lockheed  Missiles  &  Space   Co.,  12, 
195,  281,  299,  305,  335 
Lockheed-Georgia  Co.,  101,  338,  348 
Loehwing,  David  A.,  359-360 
Loftin,  Laurence  K.,  Jr.,  186,  191 
Logsdon,  Dr.  John   M.,  50,  201,  258 
Logunov,  Anatoly,  168 
LOI:  lunar   orbit  insertion. 
Lomask,  Milton,  75 
London  Airport,  U.K.,  220 
London,  U.K.,  45,  48,  84,  85,  126,  300, 
311,  312,  314,  329,  360 
Long  Beach,  Calif.,  211,  343 
Long  Beach,  Calif.,  Harbor  Commission, 
44 
Long  Beach,  N.Y.,  137 
Long  Island  Lighting  Company,  295 
Long,  Elgin  L.,  310,  329 
Long,  James  E.,  178 
Loosbrock,  John   F.,  214 
Los  Angeles,  Calif.,  80,  220,  257,  309 
Los  Angeles  Air  Pollution  Control  Dis- 
trict,  170 
Los  Angeles  Chamber  of  Commerce,  275 
Los  Angeles  Harbor  Commission,  197 
Losey,  Robert  M.,  Award,  15 
Louis. Virtor.  187 
Louisiana,  351-352 
Louisiana  S ta te   Univ.,  351-352 
Lousma,  Mai.  J a ck   R.  ( U SM C ) .   68 
Love,  Eugene  S., 299 
Lovell,  Capt.  James  A.,  Jr.  (USN),  14, 
75,  137,  266,  327 
Low,  Dr.  George  M..  306.  368 
aeronau t ica lresearch ,   52-53,  54 
aerospace  unemployment,  85-86,  87  
Apo l lo   14  mission,  43,  44,  80 
awards by,  57 
backup  capability  i n   space  missions, 
163-164 
cooperation,  52-53,  54 
international  cooperation,  space,  15, 16, 
76-77,  105-106,  216-217 
Mariner  H.  136 
NASA  budget,  21,  22,  52-53,  61,  62, 
80,  85,  86,  93,  163-164 
Nuclear  engine  for  rocket  vehicle  ao- 
plication  -(  NERVA ) ,  52 
press  conference,  11-12,  136,  181 
quaran t ine   of  astronauts,  115 
Skylab  program,  163-164,  181,  183 
Soyuz  I1 mission,  180-181 
space  program,  21-22,  23,  51,  61,  62, 
75-76,  80,  93,  121,  181 
space  shuttle,  22,  80,  93 
Th is   Island  Ear th   (NASA  SP-2501,  48 

US.-U.S.S.R. 
space  cooperation,  10,  16, 
76-77,  88-89,  216,  283-284 
Lowell  Observatory,  Ariz.,  174 
LPM.  See  Lunar   portable  magnetometer. 
LRL.  See  Lunar   Receiving  Laboratory. 
LRV.  See  Lunar  roving  vehicle. 
LSI.  See  Lunar   Science  Institute. 
LST.  See  Large  Space  Telescope. 
LTTAT.  See Thor-Delta,  long-tank  thrust- 
augmented. 
LTV  Aerospace  Corp.,  344,  345 
Lubbock  (Tex.)  Regional  Airport,  278 
Lucas,  Dr.  William  R.,  46,  300-301 
Lucerne,  Switzerland,  266 
Ludwig,  Dr.  George  H.,  358 
Lukas,  Dr.  R ichard   C.,  298 
Lukasic,  Dr.  Stephen  J.,  300 
Luna  16  (U.S.S.R. 
lunar   p rob e ) ,   4,  6, 
145.  152.  159.  190.  369 
L u n a ’ l 7 ,  4,  9,  ‘41,  66,  98,  188,  217,  220, 
231,  246,  256,  272,  306,  322,  368 
Luna  18.  246.  250.  259,  268 
.
.
 
Luna  19;  267 
Lunar  and  Planetary  Laboratory  (Tucson, 
Ariz.) , 40 
Lunar   landing  training  vehicle  (LLTV) ,  
22-23 
Lunar  module  ( L M )  , 55-56,  57,  171,  233, 
24.4  294 
--  - 
Apo l lo   9, 286 
- - - I  
ApoUo  11, 13S131 ,   198 
A110110 12.  130.  288 
Ab0110  1%  244 
Apo l lo   I4  ( A n t a r e s ) ,   24-30, 
35,  40, 
47,  130, 365 
Apo l lo   15  (Falcon),  98,  108,  110,  120, 
199,  201-203,  213,  216218 ,   229, 
365 
Apollo  16, 293 
Apollo  17, 228 
Apollo  18, 305 
contract,  102-103,  255 
Lunar  Orbiter  (program) ,   212,  253,  294 
Lunar  portable  magnetometer  (L PM ) ,  27 
Lunar   roving  vehicle 
(LRV )   (Rover)  
(see  also  Lunokhod  I ) ,  42 
Apo l lo   15,  24,  51,  55-56,  108,  110, 
115,  120,  128,  141,  142,  144,  201, 
203.  213.  215.  245.  289.  308.  353 
,
,
 
lun a r ‘  excursion;  20k206 ,   213,  226, 
254,365 
Apollo  16,  128,  245,  267,  289,  323 
Aoollo  17.  289 
cost.  24 
, -  
.. 
Lunar  Sample  Preliminary  Examination 
Team,  239 
Lunar  Science  Conference.  Second.  5-7, 
369 
Lunar  Science  Institute,  291,  335,  342, 
369 
Lundin,  Bruce  T.,  2,  167,  168,  196,  302 
Lundquist,  B/G  Gustav  E.  (USAF, Ret.), 
2.  308 
- - -  
Lunney,  Glynn  S.,  57 
- 7  
Lunokhod  1  (U.S.S.R. 
lunar   surface  ex- 
p lorer) ,   145,  152,  246,  315,  368 

ceases  operations,  272,  378 
exploration,  4,  8,  9,  41,  66,  73,  88, 
133,  139,  168,  188,  196,  217,  221, 
231,  246,  256 
press  comment,  20,  43 
results,  9,  59,  100,  209,  220,  278,  302, 
322 
Lyon,  B/G  Herber t   A. 
( U S A F ) ,   193 
M 

M2-F2 
( l if t ing   body) ,   42 
M2-F3,  42,  56,  200,  225,  239,  265,  319, 
337,  352,  365 
M31  (Andromeda)   (ga laxy) ,   121,  253 
M32  (ga laxy) ,   121,  253 
M82  (galaxy,  194 
McClellan  AFB.  Calif..  14-15 
~. 
McClintock,  Barbara, '18 
McConnell,  Dr.  Dudley  G.,  199 
McConnell,  Joseph  H.,. 69 
McCreery,  Frank   E.,  307 
McCurdy,  Richard  C.,  75-76,  172 
McDade,  Rep.  Joseph  M.,  222 
McDivitt,  B/G  James  A.  ( U S A F ) ,   57 
MacDonald,  J. Ross,  170 
MacDonald  Observatory,  Tex.,  64 
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.,  3,  170,  186, 
195,  211,  220,  281,  298,  299 
McDonnell  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.,  344 
McDonnell  Douglas  Aeronautics  Co., 
12,  38,  265,  276,  288,  355 
McElroy,  Dr.  William  D.,  61,  196,  320 
McGannon,  Dr.  William  J.,  292 
McGovern,  Sen.  George  S.,  71-72,  122, 
263 
McIntosh,  Pa tr ick   S.,  302 
McKay,  Kenneth  G.,  170 
McMurtry,  Thomas  C.,  65-66,  77 ,94 ,   101, 
141,  145,  233,  240,  252,  256,  270,  279, 
346,  349 
McNamara,  Robert  S.,  320 
Madras.  India.  282 
Madrid;  Spain,  69,  165,  219 
Maffei  1  (g a l axy ) ,   1 
Maffei  2,  1 
Maffei, Paolo,  1 
Magellan,  Ferdinand,  310 
Magellanic  Premium,  314 
Magnesium  tetrabenzporphine,  299 
Magnetic  field,  78,  79,  104,  308,  341,  354 
Maenetoelow.  23 
MainetoGete;,  27,  51,  133,  144, 219,  285- 
286,  293 
Magnetosphere,  23,  357 
Magnetron,  190 
Magnuson,  Sen.  Warren   G.,  1 9  
Magruder,  William  M.,  75,  84-85,  138, 
3 5 1  
Mahiney,  David  J.,  212 
Mailer,  Norman,  4-5,  32 
Maine,  Univ.  of,  363 
Maitland,  Fla.,  5 
Mak ing   of  an   Ex-astronaut,  Th e ,   90-91 
Management  S tud y   of  NA SA   Acqumi- 
tion  Processes,  178 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 
Manchester,  Univ.  of  (U.K.), 64 
Manke,  John   A.,  11, 49,  85,  142,  153 
(see  also  Apollo 
Manned  space  flight 
program;  Apollo  8  through  Apollo 
17 missions ; Gemini  missions ; Astro- 
n au t ;   Cosmonaut;  Salyut  I ;   Salyut 
1-Soyuz  1 0 ;   Sa lyu t   1-Soyuz   11 ;  
Skylab ; Soyuz  missions ; Space   biol- 
ogy;  and   Space  s ta t ion) ,   1,  4,  43, 
217,  325 
achievements,  30,  42,  47,  48,  207,  208, 
223,  254,  312,  362 
advantage,  59,  218,  224,  315 
anniversary,  100,  122,  197,  198 
award,  84,  298 
cooperation  (see  also  Docking),  110- 
111,  185,  216,  238,  248,  325,  340- 
341,  343 
EVA.  See  Extravehicular  activity. 
funding,  20-21,  57,  64,  253,  368 
hazards,  59,  62,  115, 181,  185,  225,  228, 
255,  289 
landing, 
lunar  
landing.  See  Moon 
manned. 
military  aspects,  158,  191 
policy  and   plans 
U.S.,  10,  13,  62,  96,  176,  178,  181, 
216,  249.  256.  280.  283.  312.  328- 
,
.
,
,
 
356:  368' 
U.S.S:R.,  61,  105,  110,  111,  154-155, 
158,  188,  191-192,  249,  268 
Dress  comment.  215-216 
record,  30 
safety  aspects,  163-164 
Manned  Space  Flight  Network  ( MSFN 1, 
27,  69,  269 
Manned  Space   Program  A c c i d en t / ln c i -  
den t   Summaries,  90 
Manned 
Spacecraft  Center 
( M S C )  
( N A S A ) ,   8,  14,  38-39,  111,  133,  139, 
181,  286,  305 
aircraft  electronic  control  system,  73 
Apollo  spacecraft,  30-31,  208,  328 
Apo l lo   13 mission,  57 
Apo l lo   14  mission,  35,  44, 48,  57,  64 
Apo l lo   15  mission,  208,  215,  217,  225, 
226,228,234,  279 
Astronaut Office,  254 
astronauts at, 4, 225,234 
award,  57,  84, 279 
contract,  49,  102-103,  105,  106,  131, 
132,  171, 177,  186,  190,  195, 255,  320, 
328 
Ear th   and  Lunar   Sciences Div.,  7 
Ear th   Observations  Aircraft  program, 
138-139,  171  
e a r th   resources  experiment  package 
(EREP ) ,   107 
employees,  238 
Lunar  Receiving  Laboratory.  See  Lunar  
Receiving  Laboratory. 
lun a r  roving vehicle,  267 
Lunar  Science  Institute.  See  Lunar  
Science  Institute. 
meeting,  243,  291 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

patent,  251 
personnel,  113-114,  137,  176,  245,  247, 
357 
Planetary  and   Ea r th   Sciences  Div.,  45, 
24s  
press  conference,  4,  35,  228,  234 
Skylab,  171,  258,  276,  284 
sounding  rocket  experiments,  130,  131, 
135,  171 
space  environment  simulation  cham- 
ber,  307 
space  shuttle,  105,  132,  160,  195,  320, 
328 
Tito,  President  Josip  Broz,  visit,  286 
Mao  Tse-tung,  72 
Maran,  Dr.  Stephen  P.,  36 
Marconi  Space  and  Defence  Systems,  19 
Marietta,  Ga.,  253-254 
Marine  Resources  and   Engineering  De- 
velopment  Act,  99 
Marine  Science  A f ia i r s :   Annual  Report 
o f   the  Pres iden t   to  the  Congress  on 
Marine  Resources  and  Engineering 
Deve lopmen t ,   99 
Mariner  6  (Ma r s   p robe ) ,   69,  148 
Mariner  7.  69.  148 
Mariner  8  (Ma r ine r -H ) ,   126-127,  136, 
146,  148,  149,  275,  365 
Mariner  9  (Ma r ine r - I ) .   127,  139,  164, 
166.  246.  275.  353 
control,  153,  179,  199,  263,  293,  306, 
318,  321,  361 
cooperation,  340,  355,  360,  369 
cosi,  330 
launch,  146,  148-150 
Launch  Readiness  Review,  146 
photographs,  313,  314,  315,  321,  327, 
332,  340,  342,  347,  353,  365 
press  comment,  314,  324,  327,  330, 
332-333 
press  conference,  301,  339 
results,  314,  318,  324,  337-338,  339- 
340,  364 
test,  136 
Mariner  Venus-Mercury  (spacecraft),  75, 
115,  175 
Mariner-Venus  1967,  Final  Pro jec t   Re- 
port  (NASA   SP-190),  364 
Mark, Dr.  Hans M.,  298 
Marov,  M.,  338 
(see  also  Mariner  6 
Mars 
(p lane t )  
through  9,  Mars  1  through  3,  and 
Viking  P ro jec t )  
atmosphere,  195-196,  246,  337-338, 
350,  359 
dust  storm,  301-302, 
339,  355,  361,  365 
exploration,  45,  162,  191,  318,  324,  345, 
351,  354-355 
cooperation, 
international 
293-294,  321,  340,  355,  360 
manned,  22,  51,  320-321 
plans,  22,  146,  147 
softlanding,  337 
spacecraft,  62,  264 
life  on,  90,  338,  345 

321,  332-333, 

174-175, 

mapping,  246,  339,  361 
moon,  310,  331,  340,  342,  364 
photographs,  246,  321,  339,  353,  355, 
360 
poles,  321,  360 
radiation,  219,  338 
spectrometer  data,  195,  340 
surface,  246,  321, 337 
temperature,  359 
volcanism,  340,  353 
weather,  174 
Mars  I  (U.S.S.R.  Mars  p robe ) ,   134 
Mars  2 ,   134,  147,  157,  209,  293,  318,  324, 
330,  332,  338,  340,  341,  351,  353,  354, 
355,  357,  360,  368,  369 
Mars  3,  147,  157,  209,  293,  318,  324,  330, 
334,  337,  340,  341,  347,  351,  353,  354, 
355,  359,  360,  368,  454 
Marseilles,  Univ.  of,  311-312 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center 
(M SFC )  
( N A S A )  
Apollo  Telescope  Mount,  9,  11,  252, 
284 
astronaut  visits,  272 
commemorative  space  stamps,  215 
concept  verification  testing,  334 
contract,  99,  106,  158-159,  174,  175, 
180,  190,  245-246,  286,  330,  345- 
346,  356 
cooperation,  348 
employment,  238 
launch  vehicle.  See  Saturn. 
Life  Scientists  Program,  210 
lunar  roving  vehicle  (LRV), 68 
meeting,  42,  142,  278,  337 
Neutral  Buoyancy  Space  Simulator,  287 
offshore  oil  and   gas  operations  study, 
348 
personnel,  46,  98,  116,  240 
remote  sensing  techniques,  128 
Skylab, 152, 175,  265,  284,  323,  353 
space  shuttle,  3,  60,  106,  160,  175,  193, 
245-246,  345-346,  356 
space  station,  12,  192-193 
space  tug,  224,  278 
Stratoscope  I1  (balloon  borne  astro- 
nomical  telescope),  121 
Marsik,  Stanley  J.,  72,  262 
Martin,  B/G  Abner  B.  (USAF),  193 
Martin,  John   L.,  Jr.,  54 
Martin  Marietta  Corp.,  107,  175,  211, 
281,  294,  310,  346,  351,  353 
Maryland,  97,  224 
Maryland,  Univ.  of,  102,  299,  322,  356 
Mascon  (mass  concentration  of  gravita- 
tional  pu l l ) ,   109,  143 
Masefield,  Pe te r   G.,  326 
Maser,  89,  154 
Mason-Rust  Co.,  80 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology 
(MIT), 13, 64,  247,  248,  261 
award,  57 ,279  
experiment,  102,  119,  183,  289,  310, 
369 
funding,  248,  325 

447 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

239 
MAST.  See   Military  assistance  to  safety 
and   traffic. 
Masursky,  Dr.  Harold,  339-340 
Materials  technology,  23,  71,  132,  195, 
279,  320,  335 
Mathematics,  288 
Mathews,  Charles  W.,  340 
MATRA  (S.  A.  Engins  MATRA,  F rance ) ,  
3,  19 
Mattingly,  L/CDR  Thomas  K.,  I1  (USN), 
61,  171 
Mauchly,  Dr.  John  W.,  218 
Maverick  (missile),  312 
Max  Planck  Institute  for  Radio  Astron- 
omy,  277 
Maxwell  AFB,  Ala.,  354 
May,  Dr.  Charles E.,  72 
MCC :   midcourse  correction. 
MCI  Lockheed  Satellite Corp.,  65 
MDA .   See  Multiple  docking  adapter. 
MDS.  See  Modulation  demodulation  sub- 
system. 
Mead,  Merrill H.,  330 
Meaney,  George,  131 
Mechanics  and   Control  of  F l igh t   Award 
( A IAA )   , 233 
Mecom,  John   W.,  Jr.,  345 
Medaris,  M/G  John  B. 
(USA ,   Ret.),  5 
Medvedev,  Zhores,  210 
Melbourne, Univ.  of,  181 
Members  of  Congress  for  Peace  Through 
Law,  122 
Memorandum  of  Understanding,  88,  231, 
297 
Mental  telepathy,  46,  170 
Mercer,  Robert  D.,  335 
Mercury  (p l an e t ) ,   22,  167,  350 
Mercury  ( spacec ra f t ) ,   122,  286 
Merrill,  Capt.  Henry  T.  (D ick ) ,   266 
MESA.  See  Modularized  equipment  stow- 
age  assembly. 
MESH  (consortium),  19  
Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm,  3 
MET.  See  Mobile  equipment  transporter. 
Meteor 
(U.S.S.R.  meteorological  satell- 
i t e ) ,  366 
Meteor  7 ,  11 
Meteor  8, 105 
Meteor  9 ,  195 
Meteor  10, 360 
Meteorite,  9,  39,  167,  256,  315,  350,  369 
Meteoroid  detection,  4 0 4 1  
Meteorological  satellite  (see  also  indi- 
vidual  satellites,  such  as  A t s   3, 
A t s   5 ,   Essa  9,  I tos   1,  Me teo r   7 ,  

gram,  103,  178,  180 
ITOS  program,  294-295,  356 
Nimbus  program,  22,  151,  220,  329, 
356 

ological  Satellite, 

, 11,  105,  195,  360,  366 
Meteorology,  3,  10,  62,  70,  103,  180,  219, 
230,  303-304,  327 
Me t r ic   Ame r ica   (SP-345),  212 
Metropolitan  Construction  Co.,  195 
Meudon  Observatory,  France,  194 
Mexico  City,  Mexico,  295 
Mi-12 
(U.S.S.R.  helicopter),  147 
Miami,  Univ.  of,  242 
Michigan,  Univ.  of,  13,  22,  31,  41,  119- 
120,  209,  234,  236,  315,  331,  369-370 
Michoud  Assembly  Facility  ( M SPC ) ,   80, 
200,  254-255,  291,  348 
Mickelwait,  Lowell  P.,  81 
Micrometeorite,  54 
Micrometeoroid,  108 
Microwave  Communications,  Inc.,  65 
Midwest  Research  Institute,  328 
M i 0 1 5   (U.S.S.R.  fighter a i rc ra f t ) ,   248 
M iC -19 ,   140 
MiG-23  (Foxba t ) .   124, 260.  264 
~ i ~ - 2 5 , 2 6 0  
MiG-27,  260 
Military  assistance  to   safety  and   traffic 
(M A S T ) ,   351 
M i l i tary   Balance  1971- 1972,  The ,   247- 
248 
Military  Construction  Authorization  Act, 
344 
Milky  Way  (galaxy),  1 ,36 ,89 ,   113, 299 
Millard,  John  P.,  81 
Miller,  Rep.  George  P.,  38,  42,  94,  301, 
347 
Miller, William  H.,  141 
Millionschikov,  M.  D.,  182 
Minalov,  J.  D.,  64 
Miner, Dr.  Ellis D.,  318 
Minimech  ( self-deploying  arm 1,  269 
Minnesota.  8 3  
Minnesota;  Univ.  of,  279 
Minow,  Newton  N.,  320 
Minuteman  (missile),  117,  193,  199,  224 
Minuteman  111, 21 
Mirabelle  (particle  accelerator),  168,  2?9 
Mirage 
IV-A 
(F rench  
supersonic 
bomber),  224 
MIRV.  See  Multiple  independently  tar- 
getable  reentry  vehicle. 
Missile,  182,  193,  319 
air-to-surface  ( ASM 1,  312 
antiballistic  ( A B M ) ,   4,  43,  77-78,  137, 
152,  194,  284,  311,  347,  360-361 
contract,  8, 52 
foreign 
France,  224 
People’s  Republic  of  China,  68,  119, 
122,  150,  224,  248,  297,  320,  352, 
?c;7 
United  Kingdom,  224 
U.S.S.R.,  84,  85,  104,  107,  117,  135, 
137,  146,  152,  194,  218,  224,  248, 
362 
guidance,  112 

448 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

intercontinental  ballistic  ( ICBM ) ,   4,  21, 
68,  77,  84,  104,  107,  117,  135,  146, 
150,  152,  194,  199,  224,  248,  264, 
303,  357,  362 
limitation  of.  See Strategic  Arms Lmi- 
tation  Talks. 
multiple  independently  targetable  re- 
entry  vehicle  (M I R V ) ,   265,  364 
NATO,  224-225 
short-range-attack  ( SRAM ) ,   8,  262 
statistics, 103, 107,  224 
submarine-launched  ( S LM ) ,   19,  21,  52, 
103,  224,  283,  286,  309,  335 
test,  4,  78,  91,  95,  125,  135,  150,  199, 
265,  310-311,  346,  361 
tracking,  150,  176,  357-358 
Mississippi,  351-352 
Mississippi  State  Univ.,  351-352 
Mississippi  Test  Facility  (MTF )  
(NA SA ) ,  
60,  137,  174,  191,  341,  351-352 
Central  Instrument  Facility,  158 
Earth  Resources  Laboratory,  19, 49 
Missouri,  Univ.  of,  College  of  Engineer- 
ing  a t   Columbia,  78 
MIT.  See Massachusetts  Institute  of  Tech- 
nology. 
Mitchell,  Capt.  Edgar  D.  ( U S N )  
Apollo  14  mission 
Bible  carried,  214 
Congress,  report  to,  61  
docking,  25,  27 
extrasensory  perception  test,  46,  170 
extravehicular  activity,  25,  27,  41, 
47,  48,  51 
flight,  24-30 
medical  aspects,  5 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  24,  31, 
42 
preparations  for, 5,  10 
press  conference,  4,  41,  59,  170 
quarantine,  5,  30 
splashdown,  30 
Apollo  16 mission,  61  
awards and  honors,  72 
European  tour,  150,  152 
promotion,  47 
tribute  to,  41 
Mitchell,  Dr.  Jame s   K., 144 
Mitre  Corp.,  1 
MMH .   See  Monomethyl  hydrazine. 
Mobile  equipment  transporter  (MET ) ,   27, 
30  
Mobile  quarantine  facility  (M Q F ) ,   30 
Modularized  equipment  stowage  assembly 
(M E S A ) ,   27,  204 
Modulation 
demodulation 
(M D S ) ,   3 4  
Moffet,  Dr.  Alan  T.,  102 
Molniya  I  (U.S.S.R.  comsat  series),  156, 
238 
Molniya  1-18,  210 
Molniya  1-19,  355,  366 
Molniya  11-1,  330,  366 
Mondale,  Sen.  Walter  F.,  145,  177-178, 
180 
Mongolia,  319 

subsystem 

nomethyl  hydrazine  (MM H ) ,   268 
nopole,  6 
Montegani,  Francis  J.,  8 3  
Montoya,  Sen.  Joseph  M.,  69 
Moon  (see  also  Apollo  missions,  Lunar 
Science  Institute,  Lunar  Receiving 
Laboratory,  Sea of   Rains,  etc.),  120- 
121,  234,  313 
age,  257,  260,  265-266,  306-307,  365 
Apollo  lunar  surface  experiment  pack- 
age  ( ALSEP ),  27,  142,  206-207 
atmosphere,  223 
atomic  battery,  326 
base,  47,  51, 249 
cold-cathode gauge  experiment,  64,  142, 
144,  223 
colonization,  312 
communications,  207 
crater,  27,  39,  41,  48,  204,  205,  306- 
307 
dust,  27 
eclipse,  44 
electrical  properties  experiment,  287- 
290 
exploration,  281,  293 
equipment,  27,  47,  120-121,  204-206, 
238-239.  365 
international  cooperation,  6,  247-248 
manned,  4,  25-30,  40,  41,  47,  48,  51, 
59-60,  61,  86-87,  108,  120-121, 
130-131,  141,  183,  196-197,  202- 
208,  211-212,  219,  222-223,  223- 
224,  237-238,  247,  297,  302,  305, 
324,  342,  365 
unmanned,  4,  6,  8,  9,  10,  20,  43,  73, 
98,  100,  196,  220,  221,  237-238, 
246,  250,  256,  259,  267-268,  278, 
306,  366-368 
heat  flow  experiment,  142,  144, 205, 
245,  291 
landing 
manned,  27,  39,  40,  69-70,  76,  80 
anniversary,  326 
commemorative  coin,  243,  308 
commemorative  stamp,  215,  232 
implications,  208,  217-218,  368 
mementoes,  152 
U.S.S.R.  plans,  259,  268,  331 
(see  also  Lunok- 
unmanned,  U.S.S.R. 
hod  I ) ,  246 
landing  site,  30,  166,  202-203,  213,  217, 
219,  254 
laser  retroflector  experiment,  27,  64, 
144,  278,  299,  315 
life on, 6 
luna r   law  treaty,  153-154 
luna r   roving  vehicle.  See  Luna r   roving 
vehicle  and  Lunokhod  1. 
Lunar  Science  Conference,  5-7,  369 
magnetic  field,  51,  64,  144 
magnetometer,  luna r   surface,  51,  142, 
14, 293 
mapping,  141,  293-294,  305 
mountains,  223.  230 
navigation,  207 
origin,  109, 228,  245 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

photographs,  29,  30,  35,  141,  220,  223, 
225,  226-227,  254,  268,  278 
probe 
Luna  18, 246 
Luna  19,  267 
quake,  64,  113,  142-143,  236,  288,  291 
radioactivity,  291 
rilles,  7,  205 
seismic  experiment,  7,  25,  27,  44,  63, 
64,  113,  142-143,  203,  207,  236, 
245,  288 
shape, 223 
solar  wind  experiment,  27 
suprathermal  ion  detector  experiment, 
142, 288,  291 
surface,  7,  41,  223,  229,  306-307,  342, 
365 
sample,  147,  167, 238,  250,308,  369 
Apo l lo   11,  5-7,  12-13,  14,  23,  30, 
3 9 4 0 ,  4 5 4 6 ,  83,  115, 190, 236 
A po l l o   12,  5-7,  12-13,  16,  23,  30, 
39-40,  4 5 4 6 ,   83,  115,  190,  236, 
257 
Apollo  14,  24,  25-30,  41,  45-46, 
59,  98,  115,  236,  265 
Apollo  15,  142,  203,  207-208,  217, 
225-226,  228-229,  245,  253,  257, 
365 
core  sample,  228,  238,  260 
exchange  of,  10,  13,  16,  88,  159, 
190,  293,  369 
irradiation,  111 
Luna  16 ,6 ,   16, 190 
storage,  251 
temperature,  220,  245,  291 
volcanic  activitv.  212.  230.  291 
water  on,  6,  288;  2891294'291,  293,  297 
Moran,  Capt.  Walter  P.,  298 
Morgan,  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  W.  (U SAF ) ,  
36 
Morgantown, W.  Va.,  47 
Morgenthau,  Dr.  Hans   J.,  117 
Morison,  R JA   Samuel  E.  (USN ,   Ret.),  310 
Moritz,  Bernard,  302 
Morrison.  L.  V..  356 
Morton,  Dr.  Louis,  151 
Moscow,  6-7,  19-20,  73,  122,  162,  168, 
187.  200.  250,  268.  299.  321.  325. 
340,  357  ' 
I
.
,
.
communications,  171,  265,  271,  272 
International  Congress  of  th e   History 
of  Science,  Thirteenth,  234 
international  space  cooperation  meet- 
ings,  16,  159,  216-217,  243,  284,  293, 
332,  334,  340-341,  343-344,  353 
International  Union  of  Geodesy  and  
Geophysics  meeting,  241 
In terspu tn ik   agreement  signing,  319 
Mu tua l   Economic  Assistance  meeting, 
79 
Nixon,  President  R ichard  M.,  visit,  290 
Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  meeting, 
145 
Soyuz  11  cosmonaut  bur ia l   ceremonies, 
185-186 
treaty  signing,  45,  313-314 

Vostok  1 anniversary  celebration,  100 
Mosher,  Rep.  Charles  A.,  38,  222 
Mossinghoff,  Gerald  J.,  231 
Motorola,  Inc.,  Government  Electronics 
Div.,  171 
Mt.  Hadley  ( lunar   moun ta in) ,   223 
Mount  Palomar  Observatory,  Calif.,  1 
Moutsoulas,  M.  D.,  64 
Moynahan,  Dr.  Daniel  P.,  16-17 
MQF .   See Mobile  quaran t ine   facility. 
MR-12 
(U.S.S.R.  rocke t) ,   235 
MSC.  See  Manned  Spacecraft  Center. 
MSFC.  See  Marshall  Space  F l igh t   Center. 
MSFN.  See   Manned  Space  F l igh t   Net- 
work. 
MTF .   See  Mississippi  Tes t   Facility. 
(Meteoroid  Technology  Sa te l l i te) ,  
MTS 
356 
Mu-4S  (Japanese  booster),  48,  163-164 
Mueller,  Dr.  George  E.,  17,  138 
Mukden,  Manchuria,  140 
Muller,  P au l  M.,  314 
Multiple  docking  adap ter   ( M D A )  
(Sky- 
lab   componen t) ,   175,  183,  281,  284, 
323,346,  353,355 
Multiple  independently targe tab le   reentry 
vehicle  ( M I R V ) ,   266,  364 
Murchison  meteorite,  167,  256 
Murphy,  James   T.,  46,  266 
Murphy,  Rep.  Morgan  F.,  38 
Murray  meteorite,  167,  256 
Museum  of  New  Mexico, 42-43 
Museum  of  Science  and   Industry,  262 
Muske tba l l   (USAF   sa te l l i te) ,   221,  366 
Muskie,  Sen.  Edmund   S.,  82,  195 
Myers,  Dale  D.,  57,  63,  86,  93,  96,  133, 
139-140,  160,  192,  224,  240,  299,  326, 
328 

N 

NAA .   See  National  Aeronautic  Assn. 
NAC.  See  National  Aviation  Club. 
NACA.  See   National  Advisory  Committee 
for Aeronautics. 
NAE.  See  National  Academy  of  Engi- 
neering. 
 
NAS.  See  National  Academy  of  Sciences. 
NAS-NRC  Space  Science  Board,  67 
NASA.  See  National  Aeronautics  and  
Space   Administration. 
NASA  Aerospace  Advisory  Pane l ,   42 
NASA  Central  P lann ing   Office,  161  
NASA  Contractor  Equal  Employment  Op- 
portunity  Program,  49 
NASA-DOT  Office  of  Noise  Abatement,  295 
NASA  Historical  Advisory  Committee,  151- 
152 
NASA  Interplanetary  Monitoring  Platform 
( IM P )   Management  Team,  46 
NASA-NOAA  Space   Meteorology  Team,  70 
NASA  Office  of  Advanced  Research  and  
Technolopv  ( O A R T ) ,   14,  70,  130,  140, 
169,  232,  233,  239,  272,  349 

450 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

NASA  Office  of  Applications  (oA ) ,   340, 
369 
NASA  Office  of  Indus try  Affairs  and Tech- 
nology  Utilization,  199 
NASA  office  of  Legislative  Affairs,  231 
NASA  Office  of  Manned  Space   F l igh t  
(OM SF ) ,   12,  30-31,  84,  160,  188,  208, 
267,  291,  302,  314,  3% 
NASA  Office  of  Space   Science  ( oss) , 340 
NASA  Office  of  Space  Science  and   Appli- 
cations  ( O S S A ) ,   67,  73,  93-94,  136,  150, 
190,  270,  295,  302,  319,  340 
NASA   Office  of  Technology  Utilization,  82 
NASA  Office  of  Track ing   and   Da ta   Acqui- 
sition  (OTDA ) ,   30-31,  69,  208 
NASA  Pasadena  Office,  238 
NASA  Performance  Evaluation  Board,  153 
NASA  Project  Designation  Committee,  337 
(Remo te   Control),  81 
NASA/RECON 
NASA   Safety  Office,  90 
NASA  Scientific  and   Technical  Informa- 
tion  Facility, 69 
NASA   Source Selection  Board,  353-354 
NASA  Space  Program  Advisory  Council, 
106 
NASA  Space  Shu t t le   Technology  Confer- 
ence,  75 
NA SA   Space  Systems  Advisory  Commit- 
tee,  188 
(Scientific  and   Technical 
NASA /ST IMS  
Information  Modular  System),  81 
NASC .   See   National  Aeronautics  add  
Space   Council. 
Nash,  Douglas,  B.,  12-13 
Nassau  County,  N.Y.,  295 
National  Academy  of  Engineering  ( N A E ) ,  
49,  115, 170, 306 
Aeronautics  and   Space  Engineering 
Board,  39 
Committee  on  Interplay  on  Engineering 
with  Biology  Medicine,  322 
Founders  Medal,  115 
National  Academy  of  Sciences 
(NA S ) ,  
187-188,  210,  265 
Jama ica   Bay  a n d   Kennedy  Airport: 
A  Multidisciplinary  Environmental 
Study,  49 
meeting,  166-167,  248-249,  299 
P lan   for U S .  Da ta  Management  i n   the  
Global  Atmospheric  Research  Pro-  
gram,  303 
P lans   for   U S .   Participation 
i n   th e  
GARP   Atlantic  Tropical  Experi- 
ment,  303 
Space   Science  Board,  67 
United  S ta tes   Science  Program,  167 
National  Advisory  Committee  for  Aero- 
nautics  ( NACA )  , 49-50,  176 
Gas  Dynamics  Laboratory,  290 
National  Advisory  Committee  on  Oceans 
and   Atmosphere,  292 
National  Aeronautic  Assn.  (NAA )   , 263 
National  Aeronautics  and   Space   Admin- 
istration  ( NAS  ( )  (see  also  NASA  Cen- 
ters,  programs,  probes,  satellites,  and  
451 

related  headings,  such  as   Ames  Re- 
search  Center,  Apollo  program,  Mari- 
ner  9 ;   Intelsat-IV  F-2;   and   Space 
program,  na t iona l) ,   9,  306 
accident,  22,  290 
accomplishments.  See  Space  program, 
national. 
agreement.  See  International  coopera- 
t ion ;   space ;   and   Treaty. 
anniversary,  32,  180,  196,  198,  326 
astronaut.  See   Astronaut. 
awards  and   honors,  17,  38,  57,  60,  69, 
72,  75,  78,  84,  106,  121,  135,  138, 
154,  179,  233,  239,  242.  262-263, 
266267 ,   298-299,  318 
Distinwuished  Service Medal,  59,  302, 
364-365 
Exceptional  Scientific  Achievement 
Medal,  255,  279,  302 
Exceptional  Service  Medal,  255,  279, 
302,  314 
Group  Achievement  Award,  279,  302 
budget,  FY   1972,  14,  20-21,  22,  32,  37, 
38,  64,  116,  119,  121,  161,  280, 
326,  328,  368,  369 
bills  introduced,  42,  44 
bills  passed,  152,  175,  180,  198-199, 
210,  211,  216 
bill  signed, 221,  226 
House  consideration,  175 
appropriations,  80,  172,  173,  175, 
209,  211 
authorization,  61-62,  63,  65,  69, 
70-71,  75-76,  107,  152,  198,  209 
Senate  consideration,  209 
appropriations,  172,  180,  198;  209, 
216 
authorization,  52-53,  76,  85-88,  93, 
96,  171,  178,  180,  198,  210 
contract,  221,322 
aeronautics,  101,  160,  187,  189,  290, 
338,  365 
communication  system,  128, 344 
computer services,  190 
engine,  1, 96,  345-346 
facilities,  69,  195 
history,  292 
instrumentation, 50,  158 
launch vehicle,  99,  153,  158 
l i fe  support system,  180 
liquid  hydrogen,  89 
lunar  roving  vehicle,  24 
nuclear  power,  147, 276 
space  equipment,  175,328 
space  shuttle,  60,  101,  105,  106,  132, 
165,  186,  193,  218,  233,  240, 
245-246,  272,  276,  281,  298, 
320,  328,  345-346, 
353-354, 
356,  361,  368-369 
controversy,  218,  246,  353-354, 
356 
space station,  174 
spacecraft,  2,  81,  115,  135,  153,  211, 
294-295,  328 
Study,  85,  101,  132,  189-190,  276, 
345-346,  362 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

support  services,  19,  71,  80,  98,  107, 
158,  173, 190 ,191 ,279  
telescope, 286,  330 
cooperation, 2,  93-94,  97,  98,  102,  104, 
105, 130,160-161,170,253 
AEC,  52-53,96,99,116 
AFCRL,  199 
Agriculture,  Dept.  of,  98,  132,  168, 
286 
ARPA,  23  
DOD,  87 ,93 ,123  
DOT,  39,  53,  70,  122-123,  218,  247, 
264,  290 ,295 ,369  
FAA,  70,218,  271 ,278 ,290  
Geological  Survey,  224 
HEW,  161 
HUD ,   369 
NSF, 369 
Smithsonian Institution, 97 
USA,  70,188,  233,272 
USAF  (see   also  X-24A1,  70,  87,  165, 
174,  218-219,  225,  272,  278,  290, 
328,  365 
USN,  70 ,301  
cooperation, international.  See  Interna- 
tional  cooperation,  space;  Sounding 
rocket,  international  programs. 
criticism,  1,  32,  84,  133,  145-146,  211, 
218,  219,  277 
employment, 22,  61,  65,  76,  85-86,  238, 
368 
exhibit,  147,  152, 353 
facilities,  2,  8,  19,  20,  32,  42,  71,  80, 
94.  112.  126.  135.  152.  158.  191. 
195,  209,  218,  220,  226,  2 4 t   251; 
291-292,  343,  357,  365 
history, 9, 31,  50,  151,292 
launch 
Apo l lo   14  (AS-509) ,24  
Apo l lo   15 (AS-510),  201 
failure,  4,  126-127,  136,  146,  275, 
294,  300,  365 
postponed, 24,  342,  352 
probe 
barium-ion-cloud project, 259 
Mariner  9  (Mariner-I), 148 
(Planetary  Atmosphere  Ex- 
PAET  
periments T e s t ) ,   168-169,  240 
satellite 
A r ie l  4  (UK - 4 ) , 3 4 8  
Eole  1  (CAS-1),23&231 
Exp lorer  43  (IMP-I), 72 
Exp lorer  4.5  (SSS-A),  319 
Zntelsat-IY  F-2.  14  
Intelsat-IF  F-3,.  354 
Isis  2  (ISIS-B  ) , 88 
Na tosa t   2  (Na to  2 ;   NATO-B),  36- 
17 -. 
Os0  7  ( OSO-H  1 ,269  
Sun  Marco 3  (San Marco-C),  109- 
110 
SoZiad  10  (Exp lo re r   44) (Solrad- 
C ) ,  189-190 
schedule  for  1972.356 
sounding rocket 
Aerobee  150,  13,  14,  54,  119,  161, 
171  

Aerobee  170,  14,  41,  60,  79,  119, 
209,  226,  228,  292,  296,  300, 
327 
Aerobee  170B, 190-191 
Aerobee 350 ,52 ,159 ,174  
Arcas, 54,  63,  64-65,  218,  222,  225, 
230 
Boosred  Arcas I,  5 0 , 6 3  
Boosted Arcas 11,  22 ,226 ,285  
Black  Brant IIIB. 248 
Black Brant VB, 54  
Black  Brant  VC,  199 
iav e l in .   176 
-----, -  - 
I- Nike-Apache,  14,  19,  22,  31-32, 
68,  73,  105,  107,  108,  111, 115, 
213,  234,  236,  246,  251,  257, 
343 
Nike-Cajun, 3,  5,  8,  64,  68,  74,  78, 
112,  130,  131,  187,  192,  234, 
236,259,  285,  343 
Nike-Tomahawk, 12,  47,  74,  77,  78, 
79.  89.193.  323 
Viper Dart,  23k235 ,   236 
Stratoscope  I1  (balloon-borne  tel- 
escope) ,  253 
lawsuit,  65 
management. 41.  69 
manpower.  S e e  Employment. 
meeting,  5-7,  12, 53, 63,  75,  97,  98,  105, 
119-120,  142,  146,  173,  252,  254, 
378 
organizkion, 12,  44,  49,  69,  82, 98,  106, 
224,  233,  242,  251,  272,  295-296, 
340,  369 
patents,  171, 251,259,  305,  308 
personnel,  101,  106,  112,  137,  252-253, 
257,  290,  314-315,  368 
appointment,  12,  44,  46, 55,  56-57, 
59,  61,  68,  69,  72,  79,  84,  98,  114, 
116,  139,  159,  161,  167-168,  176, 
186,  188,  191,  192,  194,  196,  197, 
200,  216,  230,  231,  233,  240,  245, 
251,  255,  267,  295-296,  323,  330, 
357.  368 
death,'78, 85,  145,  176, 188 
promotion,  36,  47,  240 
resignation, 11, 51,  52,  166,  177,  192, 
239,243,247,  368 
retirement,  114,  116,  186,  240,  314, 
n l r  
Jck3 
procurement,  62 
programs,  22,  365-370 
aeronautics  (see   also  Wing,  aircraft, 
supercritical),  21,  23,  37,  39, 
53-54,  56,  66-67,  70-71,  73,  77, 
82,  94,  96-97,  101,  119-120,  121, 
122-124,  127-128,  130,  165,  172, 
173,  174,  187,  188-189,  195,  218, 
221,  233,  262,  269,  272,  278  290, 
307-308,  335,  337,  356,  365,  369 
astronomy,  2,  8,  9,  21,  22,  57,  67,  69, 
74-75,  89,  95,  97,  98,  103,  121, 
127,  148, 174,  17&179,  186,  189, 
211,219,  231,  240,334,  344,  356, 
365,  368 
communications,  22,  41,  106,  128, 
173,  356 

452 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

(See   also 

computer,  23,  32,  81,  98-99,  106-107, 
179, 187,  231-232,  264,309 
earth  resources,  10-11, 21,  48,  61,  67, 
87.  95.  96.  97,  119-120,  135,  170, 
l i 3 ,  175, 198;  221,  224;  281;  324, 
340,  356,  369-370 
manned 
flight 
space 
Apollo  program) 
achievements,  20,  30,  42,  47,  48, 
207-208,  221-222,  223,  253,  361- 
362,368 
criticism,  20,  43,  133, 236 
funding, 20-21,  57,64,. 254,  368 
international  cooperation  (see  also 
Docking),  110,  185,  216,  238, 
247,  325,  340-341,  343 
plans,  10,  21-22,  61,  88-89,  96, 
176, 216,328,  356,  368 
policy,  12, 59,  61-62,  115,  127,  181, 
215,230,256,280-281,283 
meteorology,  22,  62,  103,  134,  168, 
240,  252,  294,  329 ,356  
nuclear  propulsion,  21,  22,  41,  52-53, 
71,  89,  93,  115,  220,  226,  235, 
250,  276,  368 
sounding rocket,  366,  370 
space  biology,  21,  115,  127,  132,  138, 
189, 235,  245,  253,  256,  261,  284, 
288,289,  325,  359,369 
space  rescue,  23,  64,  68-69,  140,  173, 
198-199 
space  science,  20-21,  22,  88-89,  93, 
167.  369 
space shuttle.  See Space shuttle. 
space  station,  14,  38-39,  61,  84,  95, 
127,  164,  176,  183,249,  267,290- 
291.  302.324,  328,  361-362 
contract,  174 
crew  preparation,  selection,  and  
training,  38,  87,  106,  132,  173, 
193-194,  284,  342 
criticism,  145-146 
design,  3,  12, 71,  174, 183 
equipment,  265,  283,  283,  288,  353, 
.?SS --- 
experiments,  10-11,  38,  87,  107, 
132-133,  173,  175,  183,  193-194, 
342,  359 
funds,  20-21,  93,  157,  173,  198- 
199, 221,  368 
international  cooperation,  3,  10-11, 
38, 45,  173 ,278  
meeting,  42,  346 
plans,  6 8 4 9 ,   89,  127-128,  164, 
172,  192-193,  198, 229,  256,  290- 
291,  324,  334,  342 
test,  11, 64,  99,  132, 355 
space  tug,  224,  278,  340 
technology  utilization.  See   Technol- 
ogy  utilization,  space. 
tracking  and  da ta   acquisition  ( see  
also  T rack ing ) ,   21,  69,  97,  173, 
267,  36%370 
test 
aircraft,  83,  87,  233,  262,  278,  284 
concept  verification  testing  (CVT) 
system,  334 

lifting  body,  42,  200,  225,  239,  265, 
317,337,  352,365 
lunar module,  98, 200 
lunar  roving  vehicle,  24,  51,  55-56 
parachute,  247,  264,268 
remote  sensing,  97,  368-369 
space  shuttle,  60 
space  station,  11,  152,  252,  258, 
276,  355 
spacecraft,  93,  96,  193,  327,  369 
universities,  68,  85,  210 
National  Aeronautics  and   Space  Council 
( NA SC )  , 9,  45,  68,  123,  175 
National  Air  and   Space  Museum,  52, 
79-80,  101, 130, 135, 195, 301,  309,  323, 
329 
National  Atlas  of  the   United  S ta te s   of 
America,  11 
National  Aviation  Club  ( N A C ) ,   326 
National  Broadcasting  Co.  ( NBC )  ,88  
National  Capital  Planning  Commission, 
301,  309 
National  Center  for  Atmospheric  Re- 
search  ( N C A R ) ,   121,  178 ,231  
National  Civil  Service League,  60 
National  Commission  on  Peacetime  T ran -  
sition  (proposed),  72 
National  Endowment  for  the   Humanities, 
97 
National  Gallery of  Art,  289 
National  Geographic Society,  310 
National League of  Cities, 177 
National  Medal  of  Science,  17-18,  138 
National  Moon Wa lk  Day,  134,  170,  197- 
198 
National  Museum  of  Natural  History,  79- 
80 
National  Oceanic  and   Atmospheric  Ad- 
ministration  ( N O A A )  
award,  279 
budget,  99,  349 
contract,  302 
cooperation,  119-120,  231,  351 
personnel,  12, 19, 217 
satellite,  356 
launch,  294 
sounding  rocket  experiment,  176,  234, 
236 
Space Environmental  Laboratory,  302 
National  P a rk   Service,  17,  112 
National  Press Club,  238 
National  Radio  Astronomy  Observatory, 
40,  102, 178 
National  Religious Broadcasters,  18 
National  Research Council  ( N R C ) ,   252 
Un i ted   States  Space  Science  Program, 
167 
U.S.  Committee  for  the  Global  At- 
mospheric  Research  Program,  303 
National  Research  Council  of  Canada, 
J u b ,  157 

20 

energy  sources,  154 

453 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Enrollment  Increases  in  Science  and 
Mathematics 
in   Pub l ic   Secondary 
Schools,  1 9 4 8 4 9  t o  1969-70,288 
Estimated  Academ ic   R&D  D i rec t   P r ice  
T rend s   50  Percent  Higher  Ove r   I). 
ade  1961-71,305 
Federal  Funds  for Academ ic   Science, 
Fiscal  Yea r  1969, 58 
Federal  Funds  for Research,  Develop- 
ment,  and  O the r   Scientific  Ac t iv i t ie s ,  
251 
Federal  R&D  Expenditures  Re la ted   to  
Budget  Functions, 1960-72,  175 
Federal  Support 
to   Universities  and 
Colleges, Fiscal  Y ea r  1970,  161 
funds,  20,  40,  58,  157, 198,209,216,226 
grants.  221 
Fndus&Gk&D,  13,  117-118,  352 
Industrial  R&D  Spending,  1970, 352 
in te rd i scb l ina ry  conference,  359 
NASA  report  0 n - w ~  to,  116 
organization,  61,  69 
personnel,  61,  103,  170,  196,  301,  320, 
341 
Recent  Trends  in  Enrollment  and  Man- 
powe r   Resources 
in   Graduate  Sc i -  
ence  Education,  1969-70,  146 
Research  and  Development  i n   Indus- 
t r y ,   1969:  Funds,  1969;  Scientists  & 
Engineers,  January  1970,  117-118 
Research  and  Develoament 
in   Local 
Governments,  Fiscal  Yea r s   1968  & 
1969,  33 
Research  Applied  to  National  Needs 
( R A N N ) ,   178 
Sc ien t i f ic   Ac t iv i t ie s   o f   Independent 
Nonorofit  Institutions  1970.  58 
scientists  and   engineers,  unemployed, 
.
I
 
76,  117-118,  188 
Unemployed  Rates 
Sp r ing   1971, 188 
National  Science  Foundation  Act  of  1950, 
197 
National  Science  Teachers  Assn.  ( NSTA ) , 
268 
National  security,  32-33,  37,  86,  99,  136- 
137,150, 263,275,  281,  303,  360 
National  Security  Industrial  Assn.,  263 
National  Society of  Engineers,  166 
National  Space  Club  ( N S C ) ,   15,  69-70, 
106,  113, 324,  347 
Press  Award,  69-70 
National  Technology  Suppo r t :   A   Study 
o f   Research  and  Development  T rend s  
and  Their  Implications 
(A IA   s tudy ) ,  
116 
National  Transportation  Award,  139 
National  Transportation  Safety  Board,  82 
National  Urban  Coalition, 50  
National  Weather  Service, 219 
National  Zoo,  32  
NATO.  See  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organi- 
zation 
Natosat  2  (NATO-B) 
36-37,  41,369 

(military  comsat), 

for  Scientists, 

Natural  Resources,  Dept.  of  (proposed), 
81-82.  154 
Naugle,'Dr.  John  E.,  66,  93-94,  133,  164, 
217,  300-301,  359 
Naval Air  and  Material Center, 244 
Naval  Air  Missile Test  Center,  Calif.,  276 
Naval Air Systems Command,  190,329 
4 
Naval Observatory, 296,32 
Naval Oceanographic 050 
e,  119-120 
Naval  Research  Laboratory  ( N R L ) ,   8,  16, 
23,  54,  132,  189,  226,  240,  269,  277- 
278.  349 
Nava i  Warfare  Panel,  57 
Navigation satellite,  95 
NBC.  See National  Broadcasting Co. 
NCAR.  See  National  Center  for  Atmos- 
pheric  Research. 
Nebraska,  128 
Nefyuduv,  Yuri  G.,  167 
Nelson,  Sen.  Gaylord, 253 
Nepoklonov,  Boris,  306 
Neptune  (p l an e t ) ,  22,  179, 324 
NERVA.  See  Nuclear  energy  f o r   rocket 
vehicle  application. 
Netherlands,  291,  310 
Neupert, Dr.  Werner  W, 339 
New  Cities  Research  and  Experimenta- 
tion Administration  (proposed),  286 
New  Hampshire, Univ.  of,  269 
New  Jersey  Dept.  of  Transportation,  287 
New  Mexico,  42 
New  Mexico  S ta te  Univ.,  313,  339 
New   Orleans  ( a i r c r a f t ) ,  248 
New  Orleans  International  Airport,  312 
New  Orleans,  La.,  60,  77,  345 
New  Technology  Opportunities  Program, 
303.  344 
New York Academy  of  Sciences, 167 
New  York,  N.Y.,  2,279,282,  350 
a i r   services  and  traffic,  19.  126,  182, 
.
.
 . 
257,  288 
Apollo  14  mission,  reaction, 43 
astronauts  in,  65,  238,  239 
communications via  satellite,  271 
meeting,  15,  36 
New  York S ta te  Court of  Appeals,  131 
New  York  Times  Special  Features  agree- 
ment,  200,211 
New  York Univ.  Medical Center,  189 
Newell, Dr.  Homer E.,  108, 126,  133 
Newport  News,  Va.  157 
NGC  7662  (Planetary  Nebu la ) ,  253 
NGG253   (ga laxy ) ,   194 
Nicks,  Oran W.,  48,  302 
Nierenberg, Dr.  William A.,  292 
Nike-Apache  (sounding rocke t) ,   226 
airglow, 108 
cloud study,  105, 251,  257 
energetic  particles  and  fields,  14  
ionosphere  study,  19,  22,  31-32,  111, 
115 
micrometeoroid collection, 108 
pilot  density probe, 343 
polar  cap  absorption  data, 246 
solar eclipse  data, 68 
upper-atmosphere  data  108, 213,  234 

454 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Nike-Cajun  (sounding  rocket) 
airglow,  130,  131 
cloud  study,  112 
cooperative  experiment,  64-65,  74-75, 
112, 370 
euuatorial  atmomhere  data.  83  
gfenade  experiGent,  3,  5,’  8,  68,  174, 
187,  192, 259 
ionosphere  study,  285-286 
solarkclipse  comparison  data, 68 
upper-atmosphere  data,  3,  5,  8,  78,  174, 
187, 192, 234,  236,343 
Nike-Tomahawk  (sounding  rocket) 
auroral  study,  12, 47,  77,  89  
electric-field  study,  74-75,  78,  79 
ionosphere study,  193 
stellar  astronomy study,  323 
Nikitrine,  Ignatiy  A.  See  Fedoseyev,  Ana- 
toly. 
Nikolayev,  L/C  Andrian  6.  (U.S.S.R.), 
16 ,100 ,  152,167,  266 
Nikolayeva-Tereshkova,  Valentina,  16 
Nikon-F  (underwater  came ra ) ,  104 
Nimbus 
(meteorological  satellite),  22, 
329 
Nimbus 4,  63,  64-65,  151,  220,  222,  225, 
230 
Nimbus-E  (R&D   sa te l l i te ) ,  356 
Nix  Olympica  (M a r s ) ,  321 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  3,  186, 292 
Aeronautics a n d  Space  Report,  37 
Apollo  11  luna r  samples,  42-43 
Apollo  14   mission,  messages  and  s ta t?  
ments.  24.  31.  39.  42.  59 
Apollo  15  mission,  messages  and   state- 
,
,
,
I
,
 
ments,  201,  208,  212,  213,  221-222, 
253,  279 
appointments  and   nominations  by,  11, 
13,  16-17,  19,  45,  49-50,  56-57, 
59,  132,  152,  193,  194,  197,  252, 
254,  290,  292,  294,  312,  320,  3 4 a  
349,  368 
astronauts 
promotion,  47 
report  to,  67  
resignation,  52 
White House dinner,  256 
awards by,  59,  138 
bills  signed,  221,  226, 354 
budget,  20,  38,  40 
Columbus Day,  243 
conference on employment,  63  
Defense,  Dept.  of,  354 
emergency  loan  guarantee,  124,  201, 
216 
environmental  program,  42 
Environmental  Science:  Challenges  for  
the  Seventies,  National  Science 
Baard  Report,  180 
Fulton,  Rep.  Jame s  G . ,  dea th  of,  282 
hijacking  of  aircraft,  36,  55 
international  cooperation, 
space,  37, 
55.138.166.265 
messages  to. Congress,  37,  55,  74,  81-82, 
99 ,103 ,154 ,180  
NASA  appropriations,  20-21,221,226 

National Moon Walk Day,  197-198 
New  Technology  Opportunities  Pro- 
gram,  303 
nuclear  war  deterrent  agreement,  264- 
265 
nuclear warhead  test, 300 ,303  
patent  policy  statement,  238-239 
presidential  aircraft,  212,326-327 
public  relations activities order,  37 
reorganization plans,  81-82 
reports  transmitted  to  Congress,  37, 
54-55,  76,  180 
resignations  accepted  by,  196,  199,  348 
SALT  agreement,  137,264-265 
science,  40,  180, 251 
Seabed Arms Control Treaty,  45 
Soyuz  11  cosmonauts death,  message  to  
U.S.S.R.,  180-181 
space  program,  national,  37,  55,  59,  76, 
161,  263-264,  265 
mace   shuttle.  297 
supersonic  transport,  37,  81,  130,  349- 
350,  351 
Technology  Mobilization  and   Reem- 
ployment  Program,  94 
United  Nations  Day,  191  
USAP  Museum  dedication  statement, 
247 
U.S.S.R.  message  to  on  Apollo  I 4   mis- 
sion,  43 
World  Law  Day,  166 
NK-144  (turbofan  engine),  126 
NOAA.  See  National  Oceanic  and  Atmos- 
pheric  Administration. 
Nom  1  (National  Oceanic  and   Atmos- 
pheric  Administration  meteorological 
satellite),  294 
Nobel  Conference,  281-282 
Nobel  Prize,  89 
in  Chemistry,  307 
in  Medicine,  282 
in  Physics,  307,  309 
NOISE  (a i rc ra f t   noise  organization),  137- 
138 
Noise,  aircraft,  137,  138, 271 
contract,  198, 365 
NASA-DOT  Office  of  Noise  Abatement, 
295 
NASA  research,  241,  242,  251,  295,  307, 
365 
supersonic  transport,  2,  150, 307,  351 
Nolan,  Jame s  P.,  Jr.,  151-152 
NORAD .   See  North  American  Air  Defense 
Command. 
Norfolk,  Va.,  349 
Norite,  7 
North  American  Air  Defense  Command 
( NORAD ) ,   61  
North  American Aviation,  Inc.,  10 
North American  Rockwell  Corp.  ( N R )  
aircraft,  290,  298,  309,  344 
award.  279 
contract,  1 ,  178,  186, 190, 343 
Rocketdyne  Div.,  60,  158,  175,  193,218, 
233 ,240 ,245 ,353 ,356  

455 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Space Div.,  153,  171,195 
space  shuttle,  37 ,281  
North  Atlantic  Trea ty   Organization 
( N A T O ) ,   36-37,  41,  168,  224,  248,  365, 
369 
North  Pole,  310,  329 
Northeast  Corridor,  308 
Northern  Illinois Univ.,  83  
Northrop  Corp.,  1 
Northrop Aircraft  Corp.,  216 
Northrop Services,  Inc.,  158-159 
Northwest  Environmental  Technology 
Laboratories,  Inc.,  320 
Norway,  12, 341 
Notre  Dame Univ.,  114 
NR.  See North  American  Rockwell  Corp. 
NRC.  See National Research  Council. 
NRL.  See Naval  Research  Laboratory. 
NSC.  See  National Space Club. 
NSF.  See National  Science  Foundation. 
NSTA.  See   National  Science  Teachers 
Assn. 
Nuclear  engine  for  rocket  vehicle  appli- 
cation  (NERVA )  
cation  (NERVA )  
funds,  21,  41,  94,  195, 198,226, 292 
funds,  21,  41,  94,  195, 198,226, 292 
NASA   program,  22,  52,  71,  116,  251,  276, 
NASA   program,  22,  52,  71,  116,  251,  276, 
368 
368 
Nuclear  power,  83,  100,  154,  196,  199, 
213,  250 
Nuclear  propulsion,  41,  52,  96-97,  221, 
235.  250.  320-321 
Nuclear  submarine,  21  
Nuclear  test,  84,  310-311,  320,  324-325, 
326,  331 
Nuclear  Test  Ban Treaty, 162 
underground,  250,300 
Nuclear  weapons,  218,  224,  247-248,  252, 
265,266 
Nygren,  R/A  Harley  D.  (USN), 12  

0 

OA.  See NASA  Office of  Applications. 
Oak Ridge National  Laboratory,  99,  102 
Oao  2  (Orb i t ing   Astronomical  Observa- 
tory) ,   93 ,239 ,246  
OAO-B,  163 ,276  
OAO-C,  356 
OART.  See  NASA  Office  of  Advanced  Re- 
search  a n d  Technology. 
Obata,  Gyo,  301, 309,  323,  329 
Oberth, Hermann,  234 
Obregon,  Mauricio,  310 
O'Brian,  Hugh,  Youth  Foundation,  162 
Ocean  of  Storms  (Oceanus  Proce l larum)  
(moon) ,   7,12-13,236,291 
Oceanography 
international  aspects,  110, 112-113 
record,  262 
research,  24,  119-120,  262 
treaty,  45,  47,  75-76 
US. program,  99,292-293,348,349 
Odessa, U.S.S.R.,  200,  350 
O'Donnell,  John  J.,  3 5 ,  334 

OECD.  See  Organization  for  Economic  CO- 
operation  and  Development. 
Of  a Fire  on  the  Moon,  4 
Office of  Management  and  Budget  ( OM B ) ,  
199, 260,  297,326 
Office of  Naval  Research  ( O N R ) ,   244 
Office  of  Science  and  Technology  (oST) 
( President's  1 ,   232 -. 
Office  of  Technolorn  Assessment  (mo- 
posed),  197 
(pro- 
Office  of  Technology  Transfer 
posed),  173  
Offshore  Airport  Center  P lann ing   Con- 
ference.  282 
Offshore oil  study,  348 
Of0  (Orb i t ing  Frog Otolith  sa te l l i te) ,  40- 
41,  127 
OGO.  See  Orbiting  Geophysical  Observa- 
tory. 
Ogo  V  (Orb i t ing   Geophysical  Observa- 
tory) ,   2,  93  
O'Hair,  Mrs. Madalyn  Murray,  49 ,65  
O 'Hare  International  Airport,  9 
Ohio Historical  Society,  198 
Ohsumi (Japanese  sa te l l i te) ,  48, 268 
Oklahoma,  2,  288 
Oklahoma  City,  Okla.,  2 
O'Leary,  Dr.  Brian T.,  90-91 
Olsen,  Kenneth H.,  16-17 
Olympus  ( turbo je t  eng inge) ,   126 
OMR.  See   Office  of  Management  and  
Budget. 
OMSF.  See  NASA   Office  of  Manned  Space 
Flight. 
O n  the  Moon   w i th  A po l l o  15, 183 
ONR .   See Office of  Naval  Research. 
OPTAG.  See  Optical  aimpoint  guidance 
system. 
Optical  aimpoint  guidance  (OPTAG )   sys- 
tem,  346 
Optical  plasmatron,  323 
Outical Societv of  America.  142 
Okbita  network  (U.S.S.R.  comsat  sys- 
tem 1,  238,  330 
Orb i ta l   Workshop  (Sky lab   component), 
132,  152,164,  183, 284,  323 
Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory  ( O G O ) ,  
0 L 
Orbiting  Solar  Observatory  ( O S O )  (see 
also Os0  I ,  etc.),  2 ,21 ,   67 
Order  of  Lenin,  163 
Order  of  Leopold,  260 
Oreol  (Soviet-Frenrh  sa te l l i te) ,   359,  3'6 
Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation 
and  Development  (OECD ) ,   201 
Orgueil meteorite,  256 
Orion  (constellation),  299 
Orion (NASA   b a rg e ) ,   152,284 
Orion  Nebula,  121  
Orlando,  Fla.,  131 
Ormsby,  Robert  B.,  348 
O SO .   See  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory. 
Os0  I ,  269 
Os0 2,  269 
Os0  3,  269 
Os0 4,  269 
456 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19il 

Os0  5, 269 
Os0  6,  269 
Os0  7 ( o s o - n ) ,  269,  277,  302,  333,  34!% 
361,  365 
OSO-C,  269 
OSO--H,  2 
oss.  See NASA  Office  of  Space Science. 
OSSA.  See  NASA  Office  of  Space  Science 
and  Applications. 
OST.  See  Office  of  Science  and  T e c hnd -  
ogy  (President’s). 
O’Sullivan, William  J.,  157 
OTDA.  See  NASA  Office  of  Tracking  and  
Data  Acquisition. 
O’Toole,  Thomas,  24,  47,  112,  133,  223, 
337,  349 
Outer  Planets  Mission  Steering  Group, 
96 
(O rb i t ing   Vehicle  Research 
Ov  1-20 
Sa te l l i te) ,   220,  366 
OV I-21,220,366 
OV-1OA 
(Bronco) 
301 
Oxford. Ohio.  242 
Oxford’ Univ.;  242 
Oximeter,  199 
Ozone,  54,  63,  64-65,  74-75,  222,  225,  230 

(research  a ircraf t) ,  

P 

P-3A 
(turboprop  research  a ircraf t) ,   120 
P-3C  (antisubmarine  patrol  a i r c r a f t ) ,   12, 
17.  38.  41 
P-38  ifi‘ghter a i r c r a f t ) ,   115 
Pacific Missile Range  ( PMR), 152,276 
Pacific Ocean.  165.296-297 
Apollo  misSions,‘30,  108, 349 
communications satellite,  3,  74,  98,  176, 
177, 219-220,  313 
missile  interception  tests,  4,  77-78,  125 
oil  spills,  81 
Salyut  1 ,  282-283 
Packard,  David  M.,  158,  350 
PAET  (Planetary  Atmosphere  Experiment 
Te s t ) ,   168-169,  240 
Pago  Pago,  30 
Paine,  Dr.  Thomas  O.,  56-57,  314-315, 
368 
Pakistan,  140 
Palestine,  Tex.,  121 
Palmdale,  Calif., 47 
Palmer  Observatory, 311 
Palos,  Spain, 31 
Pan   American  World  Airways,  Inc.,  109, 
148, 257,  297-298,330 
Panofsky, Dr.  Wolfgang K.  H.,  183 
Parachute  test,  247,  264,  268 
Parin, Dr.  Vasily V.,  163 
Paris,  France,  148, 287,  291,  347, 351,  352 
P a r i s   International  Air  Show,  147,  150, 
152,  168,214,249 
Particle  accelerator,  36,  50,  168,  281-282, 
299 
Particle and   field experiment,  248 

Patent,  171,  238-239,  251,  259,  268,  305, 
308,  335,360 
Pa t r ick  AFB,  Fla.,  13, 272 
Patsayev,  Viktor  I.,  154,  180,  186,  192, 
200.  283 
Patuxknt Naval Air  Station,  Md.,  12 
Paul,  Dr.  Rodman W.,  151-152 
Pau l  VI,  Pope, 43,215,232 
Pearce,  J. B;,  148 
Pecora, Dr.  William  T.,  120 
Peebles, Ohio,  241 
Pegasus  11  (VTOL  a ircraf t   eng ine ) ,  
 300, 
-
.
329 
Peking,  People’s  Republic  of  China,  111, 
257,  305 
Pelly, Rep. Thomas M.,  38 
Pendray,  G .  Edward,  Award,  15  
Pendray,  MIS.  Leatrice M., 282 
Pennsylvania State Univ.,  56 
Pennsylvania, Univ.  Of, 129, 187,  218 
Pensacola, Fla., 182 
Pentagon, 4,  240 
Pentagon  papers  (background  report  on 
U.S.  in  Vietnam wa r ) .   320 
Penzias, Dr.  Arno A,,  299 
People mover  transit  system, 47 ,55  
People’s  Republic  of  China,  306,  352,  361 
aircraft,  140 
disarmament,  252 
launch,  satellite,  61,  365,  368 
missile  program,  68,  119,  122,  150,  224, 
248,296-297,  319-320,357-358 
nuclear  test,  84,  324-325 
satellite,  75,  81  
space program, 53,  72,  111, 368 
technology,  273 
Pepin, Dr.  Robert  O.,  279 
Perel’man,  R.  G.,  183. 363 
Perry,  Geoffrey  E.,  249 
Perry,  Robert  L.,  346 
Perseus  (constellation).  1 
Peters,  Harry  E.,  154 
Petrone,  Dr.  Rocco A.,  70,215,  323 
Petrov,  Dr.  Boris  N.,  101,  171,  188,  217. 
325,  334 
Pettis,  Rep. Je r ry  L.,  146 
Phaetonis  (M a r s ) ,  337 
Philipp,  Dr. Warren  B., 72,  262 
Philadelphia, Pa.,  314 
Philippines,  219-220.  352 
Philips,  Ronald  J.,  177, 192 
Phillips,  Nizer,  Benjamin,  Krim,  and  Bal- 
IOU.  79 
Phillips,  L/G  Samuel  C.  (USAF ) ,  101-102, 
188, 266 
Phinney, Dr. William, 228 
Phobos  (Ma r t ian   moon),  310,  331,  340, 
342.  365 
Phoenicis Lacus  (moon ) ,  353 
Phoenix, Ariz.,  75,  281 
Photography 
(see  also  Moon,  photo- 
g raph s ) ,  35-36,  72 
Pickering,  Dr.  WilIiam  H.,  55,  159,  192, 
313,  314 
P in  Main, Alaska, 74 
Pinkel,  I.  Irving,  362-363 
457 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Pioneer  (program) ,   21,  69 
Pioneer-F 
(interplanetary  probe) ,   74, 
250,322,  327,369 
Pioneer-G  (spacecraf t) ,   322 
P iper  Aztec  ( l igh t  a ircraf t) ,   220 
P iper   Navajo  ( l igh t  a i r c r a f t ) ,  310,  329 
PLACE.  See  Position-location  and   aircraft 
communications  experiment. 
Planetary  Explorer mission,  186 
Planetoid,  357 
Plans  f o r  U.S.  Par t ic ipa t ion   in  the  G A R P  
A t lan t ic   Trop ica l  Exper imen t ,  303 
Plasma, 320,  323 
Playboy  International  Writers  Convoca- 
tion,  280 
tion,  280 
Plesetsk,  U.S.S.R.,  8, 249 
Plesetsk,  U.S.S.R.,  8, 249 
Cosmos  launch,  9,  49,  66,  98,  102,  108, 
Cosmos  launch,  9,  49,  66,  98,  102,  108, 
125,  139,  146, 148,  153, 200,  240,  250, 
125,  139,  146, 148,  153, 200,  240,  250, 
254,  255,  262,  265,  270,  291,  306,  323, 
254,  255,  262,  265,  270,  291,  306,  323, 
325,  327,  333,  334,  337,  347,  351,  353, 
325,  327,  333,  334,  337,  347,  351,  353, 
359 
359 
Meteor  8  launch,  105 
Meteor  9  launch, 195 
Meteor  10  launch, 360 
Molniya  1-19  launch, 355 
Molniya  I l-1 ,   330 
Oreol  launch,  259 
P l igh t   of  Sov ie t   Science  Today ,  210 
PLSS.  See Por tab le  life  support  system. 
Plutarch,  227 
Pluto  (p l an e t ) ,  22,  179, 310 
Plutonium 244,  102, 250 
PMR.  See Pacific Missile Range. 
pndb:  perceived  noise  in   decibels. 
Pobedonostsev,  Yu.  A.,  261 
P o d g o r n y ,   P r e s i d e n t   N i k o l a y   V .  
(U.S.S.R.),  43,  180-181,  222 
Pogue,  Maj.  William  R.  ( U S A F ) ,   68 
Point  Barrow,  Alaska,  3,  5,  174, 187,  192, 
288,  343 
Point M u m .   Calif..  152.  276 
Polaire  (F r en ch  sa te l l i te) ,   342 
Poland,  43,  287,  319 
Po lar   cap  absorption,  196. 246 
Polaris  i m i d e - 1 ,   175,  176 
Pollack,  Dr.  James  B.,  340 
Pollock,  Howard W.,  19  
Pollution  control,  32,  42,  49 
Pomeroy,  Dr.  John  H.,  251 
Pompidou,  President  Georges  (F r an c e ) ,  
125, 299,  349-350 
Ponnamperuma,  Dr.  Cyril  A.,  39,  167, 
256,  322,  356 
Popovich,  Pave1 R.,  152 
Por t   of  New  York  Authority,  49 
Portable  life  suppor t   system  (PL S S ) ,   156, 
205 
Porter,  Daniel  R.,  198 
Porter,  F r ank   C.,  82 
Por ter ,   Sylvia,  17 
Portugal,  219-220 
Poseidon  (m iss i le) ,   52,  224,  309 
Poseidou  (nuc lear   submar ine) ,   2 1  
Position-location  and   a ircraf t   communi- 
cations  experiment  ( P L A C E ) ,   361-362 
Post,  Wiley,  288 

Postal  Service,  U.S.,  232 
Potomac  River,  288 
Powell,  Maj.  Cecil  ( U S A F ) ,   37,  65,  130 
Powers,  Francis  Gary,  329 
P r a t t   &  Whitney  Div.  See  United  Air- 
craf t   Corp. 
Present,  S tuar t   M.,  22-23 
President’s  Science  Advisory  Committee, 
16-17,  49-50 
Press,  Dr.  Frank ,   345 
Press  comment 
AAAS  convention,  1 
aerospace  industry,  309 
antiballistic  missile  ( A B M ) ,   4 
Apollo  program,  161,  197,  223-224,  229 
Apo l lo   11  mission,  232-233 
Apo l lo   14  mission,  17,  35,  38,  40,  42, 
43.  44.  47 
A p o h  15 mission,  213,  215-216,  217- 
218,  222,  223-224,  225-226,  230 
AKIOIIO 17  mission,  236 
atomic  bomb  test,  311 
computer,  invention  of,  218 
emergency  industrial  loan  guarantee, 
194 
engineers,  104-105 
F-14 
(fighter  a i r c r a f t ) ,   271,  287 
Fedoseyev,  Anatoly,  176 
Fletcher,  Dr.  James  C.,  appointment  of, 
64, 72 
international  cooperation,  space,  13, 
19-20,  247-248,  249-250,  347 
Kennedy  Space   Center  economy  drive, 
287 
Luna  18  mission,  259 
lunar   exdora t ion .   4.  223-224 
McDonnell  Dougfas ‘Corp.,  170 
Mariner  9,  314,  324,  327,  330,  332-333 
Mars  2.  324,  330 
Mars  3; 324,  330,  347 
military  procurement  bill,  284 
moon,  water  on,  293 
NASA ,   139 
NASA ,   139 
public  information  policy,  84 
public  information  policy,  84 
National  Air  and   Space  Museum,  329- 
National  Air  and   Space  Museum,  329- 
- - _  
3.111 
3.111 
New  Technologies  Opportunity  Pro- 
gram,  344-345 
New  York  Times  Special  Features 
agreement,  211 
noise,  aircraft,  242 
nuclear  warhead  test,  303 
nuclear  weapons  deterrent  agreement, 
266,  271 
People’s  Republic  of  China  satellite,  72 
Pioneer-F  probe,  74 
Rowe,  Henry  S.,  resignation,  320 
SALT  agreement,  189 
Sa lyu t   1-Soyus  10  mission,  110-111, 
156-157,  158 
Schlesinger,  Dr.  James   R.,  appoint- 
ment,  213 
scientist-astronaut,  230 
Seabed  Arms  Control  Treaty,  47 
Seaborg,  Dr.  Glenn  T.,  retirement,  213 
Soyuz  1 I  accident,  185 

458 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

space  program,  national,  32,  74,  223- 
224 
space shuttle,  14 
supersonic  transport,  78,  79,  85,  119, 
129-130,  139 
technology,  331-332 
technology  utilization,  140 
Tor0  (as tero id) ,   332-333 
space  program,  24,  101,  111, 
U.S.S.R. 
119 
Venus 7 , 2 0  
Press  conference 
aerospace  industry  employment,  125- 
126 
aircraft,  military,  121 
Apollo  program,  215 
Apo l lo   14   mission,  4,  35,  41,  59 
extrasensory  perception  tests,  170 
Apo l lo   15  mission,  120,  141,  142-144, 
156,  217,  227,  228,  245,  312 
lunar   samples,  238,  257-258 
Apollo  27  mission,  234 
C-5A  contract, 2 
comet,  93 
Concorde  (supersonic transpor t) ,   351 
ear th   resources  technology  satellite,  96 
F-14B  ( j e t  f igh ter) ,   212 
international  cooperation,  space,  191 
L-1011 
(T r iS t a r )   ( j e t   transpor t) ,   221 
launch vehicles,  U.S.,  sa le  of,  4% 
Lewis Research  Center,  246-247 
lunar   rock  sample storage,  251 
lunar   roving  vehicle,  120 
manned  space flight,  312 
Mariner  8, 136 
Mariner 9,  301-302,  321 
military  expenditures, 350 
National  A ir   and  Space  Museum,  301 
nuclear  test  ban,  250 
People's  Republic of China 
nuclear  test,  84 
satellite,  111 
Pioneer program,  322 
plutonium,  102 
Salyut  1-Soyuz  10  mission,  110,  119, 
191-192 
space  program,  national,  119,  121,  127, 
138,  146 
space shuttle,  272 
space station,  249-250 
supersonic  transport, 2,  127, 148, 150 
Toro  (quasi-moon), 281-282 
Tu-144,  264 
unmanned  spacecraft exploration,  57 
US.-U.S.S.R. 
space docking,  177 
U.S.S.R. 
computer  program,  121 
missile  program,  146, 286 
space  program,  329 
Price,  Dr.  P .   Buford,  6 
Price,  Rep. Robert  D.,  38 
Princeton  Electronics,  Inc.,  360 
Princeton,  N.J.,  282 
Princeton  Univ.,  18 
Priorities  for  Space   Research,  1971-1980 
( NAS-NRC  Space Science Board  report 1 ,  
67 

Pr i tchard ,   Wilbur  L.,  299 
Probe  (see  also  individual  probes,  such 
a s   Luna  18,  Luna   19,  Mariner  8, 
Mariner  9 ,   Mars  2,  Mars  3,  and  
Venus  7 )  
international cooperation,  145, 259 
interplanetary,  15,  20,  22,  67,  115,  175, 
179 
Jup i ter ,   22,  67,  74,  322,  327,  356,  369 
lunar.  See Luna  16,  Luna   17, Luna  18, 
Luna  19,  Surveyor  3,  and  Zond  2. 
Mars,  22,  146,  147-148,  191,  293,  318, 
321,  324,  337,  345,  351,  354-355,  360 
Mercury,  22,  175 
Neotune.  22.  179 
P l i to ,   22,  l i 9  
Saturn,  22,  121 
sun,  237,  252 
Uranus,  22 
4,  9,  15,  20,  134,  147-148, 
U.S.S.R., 
209,  237,  246,  267-268,  293 
Venus,  15, 22,  67,  115,  175,  186,  333 
Professor  Zubou  (U.S.S.R.  sh ip ) ,   358 
Pronulsion.  95.  98 
Pro ipero   (X -3 )  
(U.K.  technology  sateI- 
l i t e ) ,   300 ,368  
Proton,  19 
Proton  (U.S.S.R.  booster),  246,  249 
Proxmire,  Sen.  William  73,  81,  145,  177, 
252,  260,  271,  284 
Public  Service  Award  ( N A S A ) ,   279 
Pudenz.  Dr.  Robert  H..  112 
Pueblo,'  Colo.,  182 
' 
Puer to   Rico,  71,  133,  134 
Pulsar,  36,  67,  74,  89,  131 
Pulver,  W.  A.,  307 
Purdue  Univ.,  98 
Pyrimidines,  167 

Q 

Q-fan  engine,  363 
Quarantine,  5,  30,  115,  188,  222 
Quasar,  67,  74,  89,  102,  190 
Queens  Univ.,  10 
QUESTOL.  See  Quiet,  experimental,  short 
takeoff  and   land ing   transport  aircraft. 
Quiet  Engine  Project,  83,  96,  130,  241 
Quiet,  experimental,  short  takeoff  and  
transport  aircraft, 
landing 
(QUE STOL )  
218,  337,  338,  356,  365 

R 

Radar,  9,  48, 64,  222,  231,  260,  267,  310, 
347 
Radar-cross-section  (RCS )   test  vehicle,  261 
Radiation 
(see  also  Ultraviolet 
and 
X-ray) ,   9 
cosmic,  63,  197,  209,  219,  325 
effects.  235.  241,  242,  261,  325 
gamma,  181  
. 
measurement,  197,  209,  325 
solar,  189 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

RAM.  See  Research  and  Applications 
Modules. 
Corp.,  57 
320 ,336 ,346  
ch  and   development. 
Rangel,  Rep.  Charles  B.,  38 
RANN .   See Research  Applied  to  National 
Needs  program. 
Rapp,  Rita M.,  38 
Rathbun  Dam,  213 
Raushenbakh,  Boris  V.,  119 
(reconnaissance  research  air- 
RB-57F 
c r a f t ) ,   120,  168 
( j e t   engine),  38,  44,  88,  124, 
RB-211 
22 1 
RCA,  71, 81,  349 
RCA  Alaska  Communications,  Inc.,  71 
RCA  Global Communications, Inc.,  71  
RCA  Service  Co.,  174 
Rea,  Dr.  Donald  G.,  178 
Recent  Trends  in  Enrollment  and Man- 
power  Resources  in   Graduate  Science 
Education,  1969-70 
(N SF   repo r t )  ; 146 
Rechtin,  Eberhardt,  363 
Reconnaissance  satellite,  243,  296,  328 
Record 
aircraft,  12,  17,  38,  41,  220,  226,  330 
spacecraft,  30,  35,  207 
underwater,  314 
Redstone  (boos ter) ,   122 
Redstone  (missile 1,  362 
Redstone  Arsenal,  Ala.,  5,  279 
Redstone Arsenal  Army Airfield, Ala.,  253 
Rees,  Dr.  Eberhard  F.  M.,  68,  196,  224, 
242,  344 
Rehovoth, Israel,  18 
Reitsch,  Hanna,  320 
Relay  telemetry  subsystem  (RTS )  , 343 
Relativity,  theory  of,  296 
Reliability,  164 
Remote  sensing  (see  also  Ea r th   resources 
experiment  package;  Ea r th   Resources 
Technology Sa te l l i te) ,   96,  97,  104,  119, 
128,  132,  139,  198,  286,  318,  333,  369 
Rendezvous,  68 
Apollo  14 mission,  30 
Soyuz  10-Salyut  1  mission,  108,  110, 
121 

( R AM ) ,   3,  101,  192,  330,  334,  337,  341 
(R&D ) ,   46, 
Research  and   development 
178,  276,  320,  334,  363 
aeronautics  (see  also  Aeronautics,  re- 
sea rch ) ,   123,  271,  369 
cost,  116,  305 

AEC.  332 
DOD,  124, 332 
NASA,  20,  42,  93,  116,  175,  251,  332, 
336.  368 
NOAA,.  99 
science,  20,  33,  40,  89,  251 
U.S.S.R.,  86,  124,  201 
Research  and   Development  i n   Industry, 
1969:  Funds,  1969;  Scientists  & Engi- 
neers,  Janua ry   1970  (NSF  71-18),  117- 
1 18  
Research  and   Development 
in   Local 
Governments, Fiscal  Years  1968 & 1969 
(N SF   71-61,  33 
Research  and  Technology Operating  P lan  
(mop)   Summary,  46,  334 
Research  Applied 
to  National  Needs 
( R A N N   p rog ram ) ,   178 
Research,  Inc.,  106 
Research  Triangle  Institute,  200 
Resolute  Bay,  Canada,  248 
Reusable  nuclear  stage  ( R N S ) ,   276 
Review  o j   Recent  Launch  Failures 
(House  r epo r t ) ,   275 
Reynolds,  Clarke  G.,  363 
R F  : radio  frequency. 
RFP :   request  for  proposals. 
Rice  Univ.,  47,  144, 288,  291 
Rickenbacker,  Edward  V.,  165 
Rieger,  Siegfried  H.,  298 
Riga,  Latvia,  110 
R iea   (Dlanetoid).  357 
Ri&  C ia te r   (moon ) ,   205 
Ri&  C ia te r   (moon ) ,   205 
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Brazil,  248,  249 
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Brazil,  248,  249 
R G l O  (rocket  engine),  96 
R G l O  (rocket  engine),  96 
RM   (Radiation/Meteoroid  sa te l l i te) ,   40- 
RM   (Radiation/Meteoroid  sa te l l i te) ,   40- 
41 
RNS.  See  Reusable  nuclear  stage. 
Robert  Hutchings  Goddard-Father 
the  Space Age,  214 
Rohertson, R.  E.,  261 
Rockefeller  Univ.,  265 
Rockwell  S tanda rd   Corp.,  10  
Rockwell  Standard  Co., 
Roe,  Rep.  Robert  A.,  38 
Rogers, Will,  288 
Rogers,  Secretary of  State William  P.,  17, 
070 L I L  
Rohini  ( Ind ian   rocket),  282 
Rohr  Corp.,  307 
Rolla,  Mo.,  296 
Rolls-Royce  Ltd.,  38,  44,  88,  124,  173, 
221,  267,  300 
Romania,  243,  319 
Rome,  Italy,  257,  323 
Rome,  Univ.  of,  262,  319 
Roosa,  L/C  S tua r t   A. 
(USAF )  
Apollo  14 mission 
Congress,  report  to, 6 1  
docking,  25,  29 
flight,  24-30 

of 

460 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

lunar   photography,  27 
medical  aspects,  5,  30,  44, 261 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  24,  31, 
42,  43 
preparations  for,  4,  10 
press  conference,  4,  41,  59 
quarantine,  5,  30 
splashdown,  30,  42 
ApolIo 16 mission,  61  
awards and   honors,  72 
European tour,  150, 152 
promotion,  47 
tr ibu te   to,  42 
Rosamond  Dry  Lake,  Calif.,  265 
Rose,  Tokyo,  243 
Rosen,  George,  363 
Rosenberg,  Morris  D.,  343 
Rosman,  N.C.,  272 
Ross,  Miles,  271 
Rotating-cylinder-flap  system,  301 
Rothrock,  Dr.  Addison  M.,  176 
Rotor,  188-189 
Roush,  Rep.  J. Edward,  173,222 
Rover.  See   Lunar   roving  vehicle. 
Rowen,  Henry  S.,  320 
Royal  Astronomical  Society,  202 
Royal  Greenwich  Observatory,  327,  356 
RTD   701  (calibration  target  sa te l l i te) ,  
22 1 
RTOP.  See  Research  and   Technology 
Operating  P l an   Summary. 
Rukavishnikov,  Nikolay,  N.,  107,  283 
Rumford  Premium,  102 
Kusk,  Dr.  Howard  A.,  189 
Russell,  Dr.  Archibald  E.,  326 
The  Russian Space  Bluff,  331 
Ryan,  Gen.  John  D.  ( U S A F ) ,   11 

S 

S-IC.  See  S a tu rn  V  (boos ter) ,   stage,  1st. 
S-11.  See   Sa turn   V,  stage,  2nd. 
S-IVB.  See  Sa turn   V,  stage,  3rd. 
$210 
(Japanese   rocke t) ,   9 
S.  A.  Engins  MATRA ,   France,  3,  19  
SAAB   Aktieboloag,  3,  19  
Sabin,  Dr.  Albert  E.,  18 
SAC.  See  Strategic  A ir   Command. 
SAE.  See Society  of  Automotive  Engineers. 
Safeguard  (antiballistic  missile  sys tem) ,  
4,  43,  77,  78,  125,  311,  361 
Sagan,  Dr.  Carl  E.,  248-249,  318,  331 
Sagittarius  (constellation),  93  
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  288 
St.  Moritz,  Switzerland,  9 9  
St.  Vincent  Charity  Hospital  (C leve land) ,  
106 
Salon-de-Provence,  France,  150 
Salpeter, Edwin  E.,  90 
SALT.  See   Strategic  Arms  Limitation 
Talks. 
Sa l t   Lake   City,  Utah,  161 
Salyut  1  (U.S.S.R. 
scientific  space  sta- 
t ion) ,   105,  108,  110,  112,  122,  154-155, 
162-163,  177,  198,  229,  282,  366-367 

Sa lyu t   1-Soyuz  10  mission,  108,  110,  112, 
119,  121,  282 
Salyut  I-Soyuz  11 mission,  156,  158,  177, 
191,  200,  277,  282 
Salyut  Cra ter   (moon) ,   203 
Samoa,  30 
SAMSO.  See  Space   and   Missile  Systems 
Organization. 
San   Antonio,  Tex.,  325 
San   Clemente,  Calif.,  243 
San   Diego,  Calif.,  207,  281-282,  291 
San   Francisco  Bay,  Calif.,  281 
S an   Francisco,  Calif.,  32,  80,  307 
San   Francisco  In terna t iona l   Airport,  310 
San   Marco  (I ta l ian   launch  s i t e ) ,   Ind ian  
Ocean,  319 
Sun  Marco  I  (I ta l ian   sa te l l i te) ,   109-110 
Sun  M U K O  2,  109-110 
Sun  Marco  3  (S an   Marco-C),  109-110, 
333,  355,  368,  469 
Sandage,  Dr.  Allan  R.,  I8 
Sands   Point,  N.Y.,  13 
San ta   Clara,  Univ.  of,  254 
San ta   Fe,  N.  Mex.,  42-43 
SAO.  See  Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Ob- 
servatory. 
Saphier,  Lerner,  Schindler-Environetics, 
182 
Sapp,  Capt.  Ear le   W.  (U SN ) ,   349 
Sarnoff,  David,  349 
SAS.  See  Small  Astronomv  Satellite. 
(Small  Astronomy-Satellite),  356 
SAS-B 
Sashin,  O.,  220 
Satellite  Early  Warning  System  (SEWS), 
- .
 
319 
Sa turn   (booster),  24-25,  57,  201,  276 
Sa turn   IB,  64,  99,  164,  328 
S-IB  stage,  291-292 
Sa turn  V,  60,  110 ,245  
contract,  153,  353-354 
cost,  209 
launch,  217 
AS-509,  24,  30 
AS-510,  202,  207 
program,  57,  328-329 
stage 
1s t   (S-IC-511),  254,255 
2nd  ( S I I ) ,  153 
3rd  (S-IVB),  25,  202-203,  365 
Sa turn   (p l an e t ) ,   22,  121 
Sawyer,  Paul,  79,  84  
Scarp   Cra ter   (moon ) ,  205 
Schaefer,  Hermann  J.,  241 
Schaeffer,  Dr.  Oliver  A.,  265 
Schaibley,  John  R.,  188 
Scheer,  Ju l ian   W.,  51,  200,  232 
Scherer,  Lee  R.,  159, 255 
Schilling  Trophy,  262-263 
Schlesinger,  Dr.  James  R.,  199, 213,  222, 
233,294,300,  311,346 
Schmickrath.  Bernard  A..  178 
Schmitt,  Dr.'  Harrison  H.,  200-201,  217, 
229,  230,  234,  236,  312 
Schneider,  William  C.,  358 
Schneiderman.  Dan.  321 
Schultz,  M /G   Kenneth  W.  ( U S A F ) ,   193  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

SCI   Systems,  Inc.,  193 
SCI  Electronics,  Inc.,  193 
Science  (see  also  National  Academy  of 
Sciences  and   National  Science Foun- 
da t ion) ,   5,  58,  76,  234 
award,  17,  102,  138,  282,  307,  311 
benefits,  88,  146 
criticism,  147,  277,  283,  291,  303 
education.  288 
Governmint  support  of,  20,  40,  58,  88, 
99,  108,  116,  187, 216,  260,  363 
human  needs.  89.  108.  363 
international  'cooueration.  177 
national  poiicy  i n d   goais,  17,  20,  51, 
54-55,  69,  81,  89,  167,  187,  296,  363 
President's  Science  Advisory  Commit- 
tee.  16.  49 
U.S.S.R.,'  82,  100,  110,  140,  163,  183, 
190,  210,  262,  291,  309,  311,  315,  323 
Science  and   Technology,  Dept.  of  (pro- 
posed) ,   69 
Science  Information  Exchange,  82 
Science  Research  Council  ( S R C )   (U.K.), 
348,  356 
Scientific  Activities  of Independent  Non- 
profit  Institutions  1970  ( N S F   71-9),  58 
Scientific  Balloon  Flight  Station,  Tex., 
I " ,  I L L  
Scientific  instrument  module  ( S I M ) ,   202, 
207.  223 
Scienhst-astronaut,  87,  90,  133,  138,  200- 
201,  217,  228-229,  230,  234,  236,  312 
Scientists,  1, 248 
employment,  58,  76-77,  104-105,  118, 
119,  188,  252 
immigrant,  107 
NASA   programs,  96,  210 
reorientation,  221 
Union  of  Concerned  Scientists,  209 
Scorpius  (constellation),  93 
Scott  AFR ,   IN.,  132 
Scott,  Cot.  David  R.  ( U S A F )  
Apollo  15  mission,  114,  223,  226,  257- 
258,  298 
celebrations  for,  222,  236,  237 
Congress,  report  to,  253-254 
extravehicular activity,  120-121,  203- 
204 
flight,  202-208 
Kennedy  Space  Center  visit,  271 
Marshall  Space  Center  visit,  272 
medical  aspects,  118,  207,  222,  225, 
228,  261,  289 
New  York  Times  article.  200-201, 
228 
Nixon,  President  R ichard   M.,  201, 
208,  221-222 
preparations  for,  114 
press  conference,  120-121,  227 
tr ibu te   to,  121-122 
U.N.  visit,  239 
Apollo  17  mission,  229 
awards  and   honors,  239,  260,  262,  266, 
346-347 
European  visit,  311 
Scott,  Sen.  Hugh,  191 

(Mare   Serenitatis) 

Scott,  Miss  Sheila,  220 
Scout  (booster),  110,  164,  168,  189,  230, 
259.  319.  348 
Scripps  Institution  of  Oceanography,  292 
Sea  Gran t   Program,  99 
Sea   of  Fertility 
(M a r e   Fecunditatis) 
(moon) .   7.  190.  246 
Sea  of  Rains  (M a r e   Imbr ium)   (moon) ,  
4,  10,  66,  115,  133,  143,  167,  168,  196, 
223,  227,  278,  291 
Sea  of  Serenity 
(moon) .   143 
Sea  of  Tkanquility  (Mare   Tranquillita- 
t i s )   (moon) ,   6,  13,  121 
Sea  Sciences  Corp.,  292,  293 
Seabed  Arms  Control  Treaty,  45,  47,  55 
Seaborg,  Dr.  Glenn  T.,  65,  194,  199,  213, 
215,  219,  233,  250,  253,  257 
Sealab  Project,  292 
Seamans,  Secretary  of 
th e   Air  Force, 
Dr.  Robert  C.,  Jr.,  72,  87,  266 
Seattle-Tacoma  International  Airport,  278 
Seattle,  Wash.,  57,  63,  81,  166,  333 
Secret  Sentries  in   Space,  24.3 
Seed  experiment,  space,  235 
Seiberling,  Rep.  John  F.,  Jr.,  38 
Seismometer  experiment,  lunar,  291 
ApoZZo  12,  7,  25,  63,  113, 203,  207,  236, 
245 
Apollo  14,  25,  30,  44,  63,  64,  13,  203, 
207,  236,  245 
Apollo  15,  143.  203,  207.  222,  236.  245 
Seitz,  Dr.  Frederick,  112,  113,  265 
Self-test and  repair  ( S TAR )   computer,  179 
Serenitatis,  Mare  (Sea   of  Seren i ty) ,   143 
Sergievsky,  Boris,  330 
Serphukov  accelerator,  U.S.S.R.,  168, 182, 
299 
Servan-Schreiber,  J e an   Jacques,  73 
Service  module  ( s M ) ,   30,  141,  207 
SES-10033 
(Surface   Effect  S h i p ) ,   200 
(Space   Experiments  S u p  
Sesp  1971-2 
port  Program  sa te l l i te) ,   289 
SEVA.  See S tand-up  extravehicular  activity. 
Sevastyanov,  Vitaly  I.,  152,  167,  266 
SEWS.  See   Satellite  Early  Warning  Sys- 
tem. 
Seyfert  Galaxy,  73-74,  89 
Shaffer,  John  H.,  2,  65,  107,  194,  212, 
237,  287,  266,  332,  334,  351 
Shaniro.  Dr.  Irw in   I..  102.  310 
S h a p l e i   Willis  H.,  60,  267 
Sharp,  Mitchell  W.,  250 
Shatalov.  Vladimir  A.,  16.  107,  283 
Shea,  Joseph  F.,  102 
Sheldon,  Dr.  Charles S.,  11, 7,  268,  362 
Shemya,  Amchitka  Island,  326 
Shepard,  R /A   Alan  B.,  Jr .   ( U S N ) ,   247 
Apollo  14 mission,  35 
Congress,  report  to,  60-61 
docking,  25,  29-30 
extravehicular  activity,  25-26,  27- 
28,  41,  W 7 ,  48, 51  
flight,  24-30 
golf  shot,  28-29,106 
medical  aspects,  5,  30,  44+, 261 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Program-Fiscal 

Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  24,  31, 
42,  43 
preparations  for,  4,  10,  22-23 
press  conference,  4,  41,  59-60 
quarantine,  5,  30 
significance,  61  
splashdown,  30,  42 
appointment,  176,  254 
awards  and   honors,  72,  106,  242,  2616 
European  tour,  150,  152 
Freedom  7  mission,  122 
promotion,  240 
tr ibu te   to,  42 
Shepherd, James  T.,  116 
Shields,  Jack  E.,  133 
Shinsei  (New  S t a r )   (Japanese  sa te l l i te) ,  
268,  368 
Shklovsky,  Dr.  Yosif  S.,  248-249 
Short-range a t tack   missile  ( S R A M ) ,   8,  262 
Shuang-ch’eng  spaceport,  People’s  Repuh- 
lic  of  China,  53,  6 1  
Shu t t le   Technology 
Year  1972,  263 
Siberia,  210,  243,  288 
Significant  NASA  Inventions,  Available 
f o r  Licensing  i n   Foreign  Countries,  129 
Sikorskv.  Aircraft  Div..  United  Aircraft 
Corp.,  150,  357 
I ,  
Sikorsky,  Igor  I.,  150 
Silver,  Dr.  Leon  T.,  245.  257-258,  278 
SIM.  See   Scientific  instrument module. 
Simmons,  Dr.  Gene  M.,  183,  247 
Sinkiang  Province,  People’s  Republic  of 
China,  150 
S ir ius   ( s t a r ) ,   306 
Sjoberg,  S igurd   A.,  57 
Sjogren,  William  L.,  314 
Skully,  Richard  P.,  237 
(see  also  Airlock 
Skylah 
(spacecraf t)  
module;  Apollo  Telescope  Mount: 
Multiple  docking  adap ter ;   Orb i ta l  
Workshop),  42,  152,  172,  183,  265 
Skylab  program,  44+, 56,  172,  176,  328- 
329 
contract,  99,  106,  171,  175,  278,  279, 
286 
crew  preparation,  selection,  and   train- 
ing,  86-87,  132,  133,  284,  288,  346 
design.  64-  183 
experiments,  10-11,  38,  87,  106-107, 
“ I   1 
173,  175,  183,  193-194,  268-269,  342, 
358-359,  361 
funds,  20-21,  94,  157,  173,  198-199, 
221-  368 
- 7   - - -  
hardware,  64,  265,  281,  284,  323,  346, 
353,  355,  368-369 
international  cooperation,  10,  38,  44, 
? - 0  1 I 5  
medical  aspects,  167,  193-194,  256,  276, 
342 
NASA  program,  10-11,  39,  62-63,  84, 
86-87,  94-95,  127,  164,  172, 267,  291, 
302,  324,  361,  363-364,  368 
safety aspects,  42 
space  rescue  program,  64,  68-69,  163- 
164,  173,  198-199 

thermoelectric 

test,  11,  44  132,  152,  252,  258,  276, 
353,  355 
Skylah  S tuden t   Education  Conference, 
268-269 
Skylab  S tuden t   Project,  268-269 
Stater.  John  C..  18 
Slayton,.  Donald  K., 39,  176,  181 
Small .Astronomy  Satellite  ( S A S ) ,   67 
Explorer 42  (Uhu ru ) ,   89,  113, 131,  319 
SAS-B,  356 
Sma l l   Scientific  Satellite,  319,  365,  369 
Small  Business  Administration,  334 
Smelt,  Dr.  Ronald,  102 
Smith,  Dr.  Bradford  A.,  313,  339 
Smith,  Delbert  E.,  117 
Smith,  Sen.  Margaret  Chase,  24,  68 
Smith,  W.  B.,  310 
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory 
( S A O )   (Camhridge,  Mass.),  7,  40,  313 
Smithsonian  Institution,  24,  52,  82,  97, 
101,  130,  135,  153,  195,  301,  309 
Smog research,  170 
SMS.  See  Synchronous  Meteorological 
Satellite. 
(Synchronous  Meteorological  Sat- 
SMS-A 
e l l i t e ) ,  356 
Smyth,  Robert  K.,  141 
SNAP-SA 
(radioisotope 
genera tor) ,   180 
SNAP-19,  250 
SNAP-27.  250 
SNECMA   (Soci6t6  Nationale  d’ctude  e t  
de   Construction  de   Moteurs  d’Avia- 
t ion ) ,   267 
Snow,  Edgar,  84 
Snow,  Dr.  Joel  A.,  301 
SNSO.  See  AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  Sys- 
tems  Office. 
Snyder,  Dr.  Conway  W.,  144 
Society  of  Aerospace  Material  &  Process 
Engineers,  279 
Society  of  American  Test  Pilots,  259 
Society  of  Automotive  Engineers  ( S A E ) ,  
130,  161,  326 
Society  of  Exploration  Geophysicists,  312 
Society  of  Sigma  Xi,  283 
Sodium  experiment,  251,  256 
Sokolsky,  V.  N.,  234,  261 
Solar  cell,  4,  12,  369 
Solar  corona,  277-278 
Solar  energy,  129,  154 
Solar  flare,  56,  190,  277,  302,  304,  349, 
365 
Solar  neutrino,  113 
Solar  radiation  satellite.  See   So lrad   8,  9 ,  
and   10. 
Solar  wind,  67,  73,  93,  341,  354 
experiment,  27,  144 
Solrad  8  (Explorer  3 0 )   (solar  radiation 
sa te l l i te) ,   190 
Solrad  9  (Explorer  37), 190 
Solrad  10  (Explorer  44)  (Solrad-C), 
189-190,  240,  365 
Somnium,  233-234 
Sonett,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  5,  64,  350 
Sonic  boom,  78,  112,  122,  351 

463  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Sophia,  Princess  (Sp a in ) ,   24-25 
Sorells,  A.  R.,  90 
Sortie can,  334,  340 
Sounding  rocket 
individual 
(see  also 
sounding  rockets:  Aerobee,  Arcas, 
Black  Brant  VB,  Centaure,  Javelin, 
Nike-Apache,  Nike-Cajun,  Nike- 
Tomahawk ; Vertikal-2) 
international  programs,  236,  252,  369 
NASA-Canada,  8,  9,  14,  50,  63,  89,  174, 
192,  246,  248 
-France, 64,  74,  78,  82,  259,  370 
-India,  111, 115 
- 
-India-Tanan.  111 
, - - -  
-U.S.S.R.,  10,  133-134 
U.S.S.R.-France,  359 
Sours, Wayne  P.,  269 
South Africa,  267 
Sou th   Carolina  Lions  Clubs,  140  
South Dakota,  128 
South  Pole,  310 ,329  
Southwest  Research  Institute,  15 
Soviet  Academy  of  Medical  Sciences,  163 
Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  73,  94,  100, 
119,  127,  140,  145,  163,  181,  182, 218, 
268,  277,  357 
Council  for  International  Cooperation 
in  Space  Research,  217 
honorary  membership,  65,  194 
Intercosmos  Council,  171 
international  cooperation,  249 
international  cooperation,  space,  10,  16, 
77,  88,  133,  217,  242,  283,  293,  340, 
347,  353,  359,  369 
lunar   rock  samples,  exchange  of,  88, 
159, 190 
Soviet  Council  of  Ministers,  200 
Soviet  Par ty   Congress,  94 
Soviet  Space   Programs,  1966-70,  132 
The  Soviet SST,  126 
Soviet  S ta te   Committee 
Energy,  219 
Soviet  S ta te   P lann ing   Committee,  121 
Soyuz  (p rog r am ) ,  284 
Soyuz  (U.S.S.R.  spacecraf t) ,   16,  152,  177 
Soyuz 1 mission,  266 
Soyuz  9  mission,  155-156,  169 
Soyuz  10  mission,  107,  112,  119,  121,  283 
Soyuz  11  mission,  154-156,  180-181,  185, 
186,  187, 226,  283,  299,  366 
Space   and  Missile  Systems  Organization 
( SAM SO ) ,   102,  178,  188,  266,  290,  310, 
336 
Space  biology,  99,  325 
animal  experiments,  127,  182,  235 
award, 163, 298 ,325  
back  contamination,  115 
environment,  effects  of,  167,  225,  228, 
256,  261,  277 
extraterrestrial  life,  167,  248-249,  322, 
337-338,  345,  369 
international  cooperation,  11,  36,  284, 
325,  359 
International  Symposium  on  Basic  En- 
vironmental  Problems  of  Man   i n  
Space,  Fourth,  277 
a 

l i fe   suppor t   system,  95-96,  105,  156, 
181,  193-194,  196-197,  208,  231, 
235,  244,  308,  311-312 
lunar   soil  experiment,  6,  111 
medical  benefits,  183,  189, 235,  292,  368 
meeting,  253 
NASA  program,  138,  189,  210,  235,  245, 
284 
Apollo  14  mission,  5,  14,  17,  30,  35, 
44,  63,  261 
Apollo  15  mission,  188,  193,  196-197, 
207,  223,  225,  228,  289 
Skylab,  132, 193-194,  288 
nutrition,  177,  276,  289 
radiation  effects,  63,  235,  261,  325-326 
Soyuz  11  accident  cause,  187 
U.S.S.R.  program,  176-177 
weightlessness,  effects  of,  127,  132,  163, 
181,  342 
Space   debris,  166,  173,  181-187,  209 
Space   Electronics  Corp.,  57 
Space  F l igh t   Award  (AAS) ,  179 
Space  General  Corp.,  57 
Space  law,  153 
Space,  military  use  of,  77 
communications,  37,  41,  74,  80,  87,  95, 
306,  336,  365 
NATO,  36,  41,  365 
navigation,  94 
reconnaissance,  124,  328 
space  shuttle,  75,  87,  95,  328 
U S .   (see   also  unidentified  sa te l l i te) ,  
74,  87,  95,  124,  306,  328,  336 
U.S.S.R.,  7,  24,  115,  158,  172,  176, 
191-192,  296,  338,  362 
Space,  peaceful  use  of,  10,  16,  91,  101  
Space  program,  national  (see  also  indi- 
vidual  programs,  such  as Apollo  pro- 
gram:  and   National  Aeronautics  and  
Space  Administration,  budge t) ,   67, 
162,  172,  243,  275-276,  282,  283, 
328-329,  342-343,  365-368 
achievements,  7-8,  51,  167,  179,  225, 
253.  364-369 
manned  space  flight,  30,  42,  47,  48, 
208,  209,  223-224,  253-254,  361, 
364,  368 
Aeronautics  a n d   Space  Report  of  the 
President,  Transmitted  to  the   Con- 
gress,  J anu a r y   1971,  37 
anniversary,  142,  180 
benefits.  See  Suace  results. 
budget,  7-8,  14,  20-21,  31,  32,  38,  57, 
62,  112,  119,  121,  220,  221  292, 
363364 .   368 
cost,  50-51,  62 
criticism,  20,  32,  43,  133,  145,  146, 211, 
229,  236 
employment,  61-62,  75-76,  172,  179, 
368 
international  aspects  (see  also  In terna-  
tional  coooeration.  soace) .   7-8. 
10-11,  15-i6,  17,  i 8 ,  '37,  45,  5 d  
55,  60-61,  68,  96,  133,  138-139, 
159.  165.  185.  191.  247-248.  249- 
25d,  263;  265,.  324 ' 

, 

for   Nuclear 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

management,  69-70,  72,  106 
military  aspects,  7 - 8  
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  42,  54- 
55.  59.  161.  263-264.  265 
objecti&’67, 
105,  117,‘ 215,  263-264, 
272-273,  280-281,  343-344 
policy,  7-8,  32-33,  51,  67,  121.  127- 
128,  145, 146,  163-164,  165,  181, 
183,  199,  200,  212,  213,  267,  324 
p ~ t - A p o l l o ,  21-22,  45,  51,  57-58,  61- 
62,  67,  74,  89,  93,  96-97,  105,  139, 
145,  263,  324,  328-329 
press  comment,  32,  74,  223-224 
press  conference,  21-22,  119,  122,  127, 
139 
significance,  31,  42,  59,  126,  225,  281 
Space  Program  Advisory  Council,  105 
U.S.S.R.  vs.  U.S.  See  Space  race. 
Space  race,  7,  16,  24,  25,  62,  91,  111- 
112,  121,  158,  185,  223,  229,  329,  330, 
331,  366 
Space  rescue,  22,  64,  68-69,  140,  164, 
173,  198 
Space  results  (see  also  Ea r th ;   Mars; 
Moon :  Venus :  individual  Drobes. 
satellites,  and  sounding  ro ck ek ) ,   43; 
47,  51,  93,  126,  136-137,  167,  172, 
215-216,  217-218,  221-229,  298,  312, 
321.  368 
agriculture,  37, 98,  368,  369 
aircraft,  70,  74 
astronomy,  67,  93,  113,  223,  239,  245, 
257,  265-266,  281,  314,  315,  318,  321, 
332-333,  342,  349,  358-359,  368 
communications,  37,  126,  281,  368 
computer,  32,  98-99,  106-107,  121-122, 
162 
ea r th   sciences,  19,  32-33,  44,  48,  67, 
119-120,  128,  137,  171, 174-175,  198, 
230,  253,  261,  281,  309,  324,  369-370 
economic  benefits,  51,  166,  172 
education,  37,  117, 243 
engineering,  140,  259,  308,  309,  368- 
369 
environmental  sciences,  37,  67,  162, 
231,  320-321,  322,  324,  348, 368 
Fo r   the  Benefit  of  all  Mankind:  A 
Survey  of  the   P rac t ica l  Re tu rn s  from 
Space Investment,  350-351 
international  relations,  44  
materials  technology,  23,  72,  74,  350- 
351 
medicine,  98-99, 
106-107,  188,  189, 
193-194,  199-200,  235,  253,  256, 
261.  271-272.  292.  368 
meteoroIogy,  37,  281,  303,  327 
military,  70,  75,  8 7 , 9 5  
navigation,  37 
oceanography,  120,  348 
science  and  technglogy,  315 
social  problems,  342 
transportation,  37,  251,  257,  259 
sp a c e   shuttle,  44,  58,  e, 95,  139-140, 
Space  Science  Award  ( A I A A ) ,   15 
213,  229 

contract,  60,  101,  105,  106,  132,  165, 
187,  193,  218,  233,  240,  245-246,  272, 
276,  281,  298,  320,  328,  345,  353-354, 
356 
cooperation,  87,  93,  244,  257,  276 
cost,  24,  62,  94,  127-128,  145,  172, 
182-183,  257,  315 
criticism.  145-146 
design,  60,  64,  80,  87,  132,  161,  165, 
171,  218,  272,  281,  352,  356,  362- 
363,  365 
develomnent  site.  145. 281 
engine,  60,  87,  160,  193,  232,  240,  245- 
246 ,345 ,354 ,356  
fund s   for,  14,  20,  22,  37,  50-51,  80, 
87.  94.  116.  129.  152,  157.  177-178, 
198-199.  221.  226.  229.  368 
international  &operation,7 3,  16,  37,  45, 
278,  291,  340-341,  369-370 
launch  and  landing  sites,  2.  281 
meeting,  42,  75,  918,  279;  291,  352 
military  application,  87,  280,  328 
NAS A  program,  50-51,  62-63,  93,  127- 
128,  129,  139-140,  145,  160,  164,  165, 
182-183,  192-193,  213,  263,  264,275- 
276,  280,  297,  324,  330,  334 
patent,  171 
press  comment,  14 
safety,  42 
shuttle pilot  study,  308 
Shuttle  Technology  Program-Fiscal 
Year  1972, 263 
tests,  60,  87 
test  facilities, 8, 6 0  
Space  Shuttle  Aerothermodynamics  Tech- 
nology  Conference,  352 
Space  Shuttle  Technology  Conference,  98 
Space   Shuttle  Technologies,  FY   1971 
Programs,  129 
Space  station  (see  also  Salyut  I  and 
Sky lab ) ,  44, 58,  249 
contract,  174 
criticism,  145 
design,  3 - 4 , 1 2 ,  175,  183 
international  cooperation,  3,  10,  38,  45, 
173,  278,  333 
military,  229 
N AS A   program,  10-11,  12,  14,  50,  88, 
127-128,  139-140,  145,  172,  174-175, 
192,  228-229,  334 
use.  10-11.90.342 
U.S.S.R.,  61,‘100,  101,  107-108,  110- 
111,  115,  154-155,  163,  188,  18% 
190,  197,  282-283,  365-366 
Space tug,  224,  278,  340 
Spacecraft  ( see   also  individual  space- 
craft,  such  as  Apollo,  Explorer, 
Luna,  Mariner,  Skylab) 
accident.  See  Accident,  spacecraft. 
airlock,  284 
command  and  service  module.  See 
Command  and   service  module. 
command  module.  See  Command  mod- 
ule. 
computer,  179 
Contamination,  56 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

debris,  313-314 
design,  15, 64,  68,  80 
e leck ica l   systems,  244 
equipment,  106,  183,  207,  254,  264, 
265,  284,  302,  306,  323,  328,  330, 
344 
exhibit,  152,  153 
instrumentation,  8,  10-11,  14,  35-36, 
38,  174-175,  236-237,  240,  277,  278, 
321,  355 
international  cooperation,  105 
l ife   suppor t   system,  95-96,  99,  156, 
181,  193-194,  196-197,  235,  308 
lun a r   module.  See  Lunar   module. 
materials  technology,  87,  195,  279 
multiple  docking  adap ter ,   284,  323, 
34.6,  353,  355 
propulsion.  See   Engine;  NERVA ;   Nu- 
clear  propulsion;  and  
individual 
launch  vehicles.  such  as   Saturn. 
research 
and  
applications  module 
( R A M ) ,   3,  101,  192-193,  330,  334, 
337,  340 
safety,  42,  64,  68-69,  178,  261,  362- 
363 
scientific  instrument  module,  203,  207, 
223 
service  module.  See  Service  module. 
test,  86-87,  132,  152, 232,  258,  264,  327 
Spacesuit,  153,  156,  196,  223,  286,  288 
Spacetrack  system,  290-291 
Spain,  43,  112 
Spar tan   (missile),  4,  311,  326,  346 
Spectrograph, 8 
Spectroheliograph,  8 
Spectrometer,  10-11,  144,  148,  175,  195- 
196,220-221,  265-266,  31% 
Speer,  Dr.  F.  A.,  98 
Sperry,  Lawrence, Award,  298 
Sperry Rand  Corp.,  159 
Spin-scan camera,  15 
Sp inar   (celestial ob jec t) ,   73 
Sp ir i t   of  '76,  The  (Pres iden t ia l   a ircraf t) ,  
212,  326-327,  350 
Spitz,  Dr .  Armand  N., 103 
Spitz Laboratories,  103 
Spivak,  Jonathan,  182-183 
Spr ing   Mill  S ta te   Park ,   Ind.,  199 
Spr in t   (m iss i le) ,   4,  43,  77-78,  125,  361 
Spruce  Goose  (flying  bo a t ) ,   45,  197 
SPS.  See  Service  propulsion  system. 
Spur Cra ter   (moon ) , 205 
Spu tn ik   (U.S.S.R.  satellite),  145 
Spu tn ik  1, 24,  59,  113, 209 
Spu tn ik  2,  24 
(reconnaissance  a i r c r a f t ) ,   115 
SR-71 
SRAM.  See  Short-range  a t tack   missile. 
SRC.  See   Science  Research  Council 
(U .K .) .  
Sriharikota  Island, Ind ia ,  282 
(Sapwood)  (U.S.S.R.  ICBM),  362 
SS-6 
SS-9  (U.S.S.R.  ICBM),  84,  117,  135,  152, 
194, 362 
SS-11  (U.S.S.R.  ICBM), 146 
SST.  See Supersonic transport. 

Staats,  Comptroller  General  Elmer  B., 
218 
Stafford,  Maj.  Thomas  P.  (U SAF ) ,   176, 
186 
(SEVA)  , 
Stand-up  extravehicular  activity 
203-204 
S tandard   Oil  Co.  of  New  Jersev.  170 
_ ,  
Stanford  Linear  Accelerator  Center,  36 
Stanford  Research  Institute,  291 
Stanford  Univ.,  13,  15,  98,  183,  197,  235, 
248,  298 
Stanford  Univ.  Medical  Center  Cardi- 
ology Dept.,  301 
Star,  13,  36,  38,  60,  113,  226,  239,  350 
STAR.  See   Self-test  and   repair  computer. 
STAR  (Satellites  for   Telecommunications, 
Applications,  and   Research)  (consor- 
t ium ) ,   19  
S t a r  City,  U.S.S.R.,  16 
State,  Dept.  of,  45,  48,  77,  102,  120,  237, 
272,  358,  369-370 
S ta te  Univ.  of  New York 
Buffalo,  201 
Stonv Brook,  192. 257.260.  265 
Statements  by  Presidents  of  th e   United 
S ta tes   on  In terna t iona l   Cooperation  in  
Space-A  Chronology:  October  1957- 
August  1971  (Sen.  Doc.  9 2 - 4 0 ) ,   265 
5techer, Theodore P.,  36 
Stein, Andrew  J.,  2 
Steinbacher,  Dr.  Robert  H.,  301,  318 
Stennis,  Sen.  John   C.,  19,  351 
Stereo-1  (U.S.S.R.-France  Mars  experi- 
m en t ) ,   354 
Stevens,  Peter,  347 
Stevenson,  M /G   John  D. 
12  
Stever,  Dr.  H.  Guyford,  320,  341 
Steward Observatory,  40 
Stockholm,  Sweden,  282,329 
Stokes, Mayor  Carl  B.,  2 
STOL   (short  takeoff  and   land ing)   air- 
craft,  298,  363 
Canada,  147, 280 
contract,  19,  187,  300,  338,  365 
cooperative  research,  39,  71,  218,  267, 
290,  315 
Italv.  315 
NASA program,  21,  22,  39,  71,  97,  127, 
171,  187,  218,  233,  290,  301,  308, 
337 ,338 ,365 ,369  
(advanced  STOL  avionics  sys- 
STOLAND 
t em ) ,   187 
STOLport,  19 
Stoner,  George H.,  57 
Strasser, Gabor,  363 
Strategic  A ir   Command  (SAC),  279 
Strategic  Arms  Limitation  Talks  (SALT ) ,  
55,  74,  148,  189,  190,  194,  195,  252, 
264-265,  266 
Stratoscope  I1  (balloon-borne telescope), 
121, 253 
Strughold,  Dr.  Hubertus,  298,  325 
Stuhbs, Dr.  Peter,  57 

(USAF,  Re t .) ,  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

( transpor t   a i r c r a f t ) ,  

A  S tudy   OJ  NACA  a n d  NASA  Published 
Information  of  Pertinence  i n   the  De- 
sign  of  Light Aircraft,  56 
Stuhlinger, Dr.  Ernst,  334 
Submarine,  missile-carrying,  224,  283,  286 
Subsatellite,  87,  207,  225,  365 
Suffolk  County,  N.Y.,  295 
Sukhanovsky, A.,  315 
Sukhoi  Su-11  (U.S.S.R.  fighter  a i r c r a f t ) ,  
360 
Sullivan, Rep.  Leonor  K., 247 
Sullivan,  Walter  S.,  223,  287,  342 
Sun,  113 ,223 ,  257,350 
satellite  data, 269,  335,  349 
sounding  rocket  data,  228,  252 
Sunspots,  56,  304 
Suomi, Verner  E.,  15  
Sup e r   Guppy  (NASA  cargo  a ircraf t) ,   281, 
288,  355 
Super   nova,  36 
Superconstellation 
101 
Supercritical  wing.  See   Wing,  aircraft. 
Supersonic 
transport 
(see  also 
(SST )  
Concorde  and   T u - lM ) ,   119,  192 
cost,  73,  82,  84,  157,  346,  351 
criticism,  73 
design  and   development,  60-61,  90,264, 
323,  326 
sconomic  aspects,  56,  82,  109,  130,  131 
F ina l   Report  o j   the  Ad   Hoc  Super- 
sonic  Transport  Review  committee  of 
the  Ofice  of  Science  a n d   Technol- 
o m .   March  30.  1969.  232 
foreygn,  82,  85,  147,  214,  280-281,  332 
funds,  21,  74,  78,  80-81,  82,  98,  129- 
130,  131,  135,  137,  138,  139,  211, 
232.  366 
hazards,  6 0 6 1 ,   150,  240-241,  242 
international  aspects,  84-85,  109 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  37,  81, 
82,  130,349-350,  351 
press  comment,  78,  79,  85,  119,  129- 
130, 139 
press  conference,  48,  138,  148,  351 
sonic  boom,  351 
The  Supersonic  Transport:  (S tudy ) ,   56 
The  Supersonic  Transport:  A  Fac tua l  
Basis  for Decision,  60 
Suprathermal 
ion  detector  experiment, 
142, 288,  291 
Surface   propulsion  system  (SPS),  203 
Surveyor  (p rog r am ) ,  47,212 
Surveyor  3  ( lun a r   probe) ,   57,  83  
Sutherland,  Dr.  Ear l   W.,  Jr.,  282 
Sutter,  Dr.  John  F.,  257,  265 
Swan  experiment,  10 
Swann,  Dr.  Gordon  A.,  245,  279 
Swearingen  Aircraft  Co.,  309 
Sweden,  3,  19,  96,  198,  213,  313,  341, 
345,  346 
Swenson,  Dr.  Loyd  S.,  Jr.,  234 
Swigert,  John   L.,  Jr.,  68,  75,  179, 266 
Swiss  Transport  Museum,  267 
Switzerland,  50,  305 
Symington,  Rep.  J am e s  W.,  38 

Symington, Sen.  S tuar t ,   19  
Symphonie  (Wes t   German  comsat),  352 
Symposium  on  Clean  Room  Technol- 
ogy  i n  Surgery Suites,  139 
Symposium  on  Uranium  Plasmas:  Re- 
search  and   Applications,  2nd,  320 
Satellite 
Synchronous  Meteorological 
(SMS) , 21-22,  356 
Synthesis  (rad io   telescope),  279 
Syromyatnikov,  V.  S.,  254 
Szent-Gyorgi, Dr.  Albert,  296 
T 

T-33  ( j e t   tra iner) ,   115, 308 
Tacsat  I  (comsa t) ,  74 
TACT.  See  Transonic  Aircraft  Technol- 
ogy  Program. 
Tactical Air  Command,  262 
Takizawa,  Ataru,  138-139 
Talkeetna, AIaska,  69 
Tango-Kilo  (satellite  reconnaissance  in- 
telligence),  124 
Tansei 
(Japanese   sa te l l i te) ,  
(MST-1) 
48,  161-162,  200,  368 
Tanum,  Sweden,  341 
Task  Force  on  Science  and   Technology, 
320 
T a t a   Institute  of  Fundamental  Research, 
6 
Taurus   (constellation),  350 
Tavlor.  Dr.  Gerald R  h 
Tailor:  John- W.  R.:  $96 
(ESRO  scientific  sa te l l i te) ,   356 
TD-1 
TDRSS.  See  Track ing   and   d a t a   relay  sat- 
ellite  system. 
Teague,  Rep.  O l in   E.,  38,  63,  142,  222 
Technology,  4,  16,  89,  146147 ,   283 
benefits,  20,  126, 216,  272 
exhibit,  99,  301 
funding,  20,  109,  116,  118,  331-332 
international  aspects,  17 ,55  
policy,  50,  55,  81,  86,  109,  116,  213, 
248,  263-264,  275,  290-291,  303,  331- 
332,  344,  362 
U.S.S.R.,  311 
Technology,  Inc.,  276 
Technology  Mobilization  and   Reemploy- 
ment  Program,  94,  119,  141-142 
Technology  unitization,  space,  53,  76,  81, 
129, 283,  350-351 
agriculture,  10-11, 368 
communications,  18, 37, 368 
ear th   resources,  10-11,  325 
ecology,  1 6 4  321 
economic problems,  160 ,283  
education,  37,  306 
engineering,  311,  334-335 
environmental  problems,  96,  307,  324- 
325,  368 
health,  306 
materials technology,  250,  259 
medicine,  98-99, 
180,  199-200,  235, 
250,  253,  292,  301,  322,  350-351,  368 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

meteorology,  37 
oceanography, 10-11,  104 
Office  of  Technology  Transfer  (pro- 
posed),  173 
pollution  control,  322 
press  comment, 140 
safety,  146 
science,  350 
social  problems, 160,  301,  303,  306, 342 
transportation,  37,  160, 309 
urban  planning,  281 
Tektite  I ,   Project,  263 
Tele-Communications, Inc.,  74 
Telesat  Canada,  128 
Telesat-A  (Canadian  comsat),  128,  356 
Telescope  (see  also  Radiotelescope),  54, 
67.  121. 253 
Telescope,  space  (see  also  Apollo  Tele- 
I
.
 
scope Moun t ) ,  67, 330 
Television, 52,  83,  186, 237-238 
Apo l lo   14,  10,  23,  25-30,  40,  41,  43, 
65  
Apo l lo   15,  197,  203,  206-207,  213,  215- 
216 
Apollo 16, 267 
educational,  161, 264 
Lunokhod 1 , 8 , 2 2 0  
Mariner  9, 318 
Soyuz  10, 108 
Soyuz  11,  156 
v ia   satellite,  23,  71,  88,  98,  128,  161, 
210,  330,354,355 
Teller,  Dr.  Edward,  152 
Tennessee  Technological  Univ.,  298-299 
Tennessee.  Univ.  of.  Suace  Institute.  240 
Tereshkova,  Valentina:  See  Nikolayeva- 
Tereshkova, Valentina. 
Terhune,  L/G  Charles  H.  (USAF, Re t .) ,  
159-160 
TERLS.  See  Thumba  Equatorial  Rocket 
Launching  Station. 
Test Vehicle 3 (TV-31,  135 
Teton  National  Park.  112 
Tetr  3  (Te s t   and  ' T ra in ing   Sa te l l i te) ,  
269,  365 
Texas,  370 
Texas ABM  Univ.,  111 
Texas  Instruments,  Inc.,  170 
Texas, Univ.  of,  144, 193 
Textron,  Inc. 
Bell  Aerospace  Go.,  div.,  200,  290,  361 
Bell  Helicouter  Co..  div..  357 
TF -8A   ( j e t   research  a i r c r a f t ) ,   122, 356 
 
,
I
contract,  3 4 5 3 4 6  
test  flight,  65-66,  77,  9&95,  101,  114- 
115,  140,  145,  163,  165,  192,  233, 
240-241, 
252,  256,  270-271, 
27'2, 
278-279,  287,  345,  349,  365-366 
Thackray,  Arnold,  187-188 
Thant,  U,  U.N.  Secretary  General,  153- 
154, 222,  239,252 
Tharsis  (M a r s ) ,  321 
Thayer,  Sylvanus, Award, 121 
Thermoelectric  Outer  P lane t   Spacecraft 
(TOPS), 179 

Thermonuclear  fusion, 213 
T' 'ry,  Pau l ,  309 
This  Island  E a r th   (NASA  SP-2501,  48 
This New   Ocean:  A  History  o f   Project 
Mercury,  234 
Thomas, Dr.  Gary,  2 , 9 3  
Thompson-csF,  3 
Thompson,  Gerald  M.,  161 
Thompson Trophy  Race,  382 
Thor-Able-Star  (boos ter) ,  180 
Thor-Agena  (booster),  8, 48 
Thorad-Agena,  80-81,  195,  254,  289, 
3sn 
T h o r T B k e r   I1  (booster),  48,  157,  287 
Thor-Delta  (boos ter) ,   120,  269,  300-301 
long t ank ,   thrust-augmented,  294-295, 
300-301 
thrust-augmented,  72-73,106 
Thorpe,  Day,  5 
3C-279  (qu a s a r ) ,   102 
Thumba  Equatorial  Rocket  Launching 
India,  18-19,  105, 
Station 
(TERL S ) ,  
111,  115 
Tidbinbilla, Australia,  69 
Tilt  Rotor  Research  Aircraft  Technol- 
ogy  Program,  272 
Time magazine, 281 
Tischler,  Adelbert  O.,  291 
Titan  (boos ter) .   153 
T i tan   IIIB-Agena, 11 
T i tan   IIIB-Agena D,  79 
Titan  IIIC,  95,  122,  306,  310,  313,  329 
Titan  IIID,  163 
Titan  (missile),  224-225 
Tito,  President  Josip  Broz  (Yugoslavia), 
286 
Tito, Mrs.  Josip  Broz,  286 
TLI:  translunar  injection. 
Tobias, Dr.  Cornelius A.,  63 
Toksoz, Dr.  Mehmet Nafi,  345 
Tokyo,  Japan,  133 ,138 ,257  
Tokyo,  Univ.  of,  83-84 
Institute  of  Space  and  Aeronautical 
Science, 9,  48 
Topaz  (U.S.S.R.  nuclear  reac tor) ,   250 
TOPS.  See  Thermoelectric  Outer  P lane t  
Spacecraft. 
Torell,  Bruce N.,  178, 218 
Toro  (as tero id) .   281-282.  232-233 
Toronto, Univ.  of,  315 
' 
Toulouse, France,  150 ,242 ,248  
Tournesol  (F rench   sa te l l i te) ,   103,  369 
Townsend, John W.,  Jr.,  19 ,302  
Tracked  a i r   cushion  research  vehicle, 
182, 348 
Tracked  Hovercraft, Ltd.,  348 
Tracking,  209 
Apo l lo   14  mission,  30 
balloon,  250-251,254 
budget,  21  
cooperation, 
370 
deep  space  (DSN )  antenna,  69,  102, 
313,  318 
military,  357-358 
MSFN,  27 ,69 ,269  

international,  106,  36% 

468 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

satellite,  102, 290 
ship,  350,  357-358 
sounding  rocket,  64 
station,  97 
Australia,  69 
South Africa,  267 
Spain,  69 
Tracking  and  data  relay  satellite  sys- 
tem  (TDR S S ) .   173 
Tracking  ship, '350 
( TW A ) ,   71 
T ran s   World  Airlines,  Inc. 
Transit &A 
(navigation  satellite),  180 
Transonic  Aircraft  Technology  Program 
(TACT 1 ,   165, 272 
TRANSPO  '72,  309 
Transportation,  Dept.  of  (DOT )   (see  also 
Federal  Aviation  Administration), 
288,  307 
a i r  traffic  control,  85 
automated  transit  system, 47,  55 
award,  75 
budget.  21.  211.  226 
conGadt,  19, 4?,  85,  182 
cooperation,  3,  39,  53-54,  121-122,  187, 
218-219.242.290.  369 
facilities,  194, 247,  264 
general-aviation safety, 276-277 
noise  abatement,  21,  122-123,  242,  290 
organization,  81-82 
personnel,  45,  107,  123-124,  193,  253, 
323 
R&D, 82,  122-123,  369 
STOL   aircraft,  19,  39,  187,  218-219,  290 
supersonic  transport,  21,  60,  74,  75,  81, 
82,  84-85,  88,  129-130,  211,  323 
tracked  air  cushion  research  vehicle, 
_ _ _  
183 
Transportation  Systems Center,  82 
Treasury  Dept.,  266 
Treaty,  45,  47,  55,  88,  153-154,  162,  173, 
313-314 
Tribus,  Myron,  11 
Trubshaw,  Brian,  48 
Truman.  President  H a rm  S..  248 
Truszynski,  Gerald  M.,  6 9 , 9 7  
Truxal, Dr.  John  G.,  16-17 
TRW  Inc.,  89,  117,  174,  282.  306,  327, 
345-346 
Systems  Group,  329,  335-336 
Tsiolkovsky,  Konstantin,  234 
Tu-104  (U.S.S.R.  j e t   a i r l ine r ) ,   140 
Tu-134  (U.S.S.R.  jet  a i r l ine r ) ,   140 
Tu-144  ( U.S.S.R. 
supersonic  t ran spo r t ) ,  
77,  79,  85,  126,  127,  147,  150,  157, 
214,  232,  249,  263,  264,  314 
je t   a i r l ine r ) ,   140 
Tu-154  (U.S.S.R. 
Tucker, Dr.  Wallace,  113 
Tucson,  A r i s ,   40,  281 
Tullahoma, Tenn.,  60  
Tumulty, William  T.,  Jr.,  269 
Tupolev,  Aleksey  A.,  127,  148,  264 
Tupolev,  Andrey  N., 260,  263,  264 
( TAC )  , 
Turbine-alternator  compressors 
147 
Turbo-Mallard 
(amphibious  a i rc ra f t ) ,  
288 

Turcat,  Andrb,  249 
TWA.  See  T ran s   World  Airlines,  Inc. 
27th  Tactical  Fighter Wing,  314 
Tycho Crater  (moon ) ,  245 
U 

u-2  (reconnaissance  a i rc ra f t ) ,   95,  115, 
120, 158,281, 329 
Uchinoura  Space  Center,  Japan,  9,  48, 
200,  268 
UH-ID  (helicopter),  74 
UHF :   ultrahigh  frequency. 
Uhuru  (Exp lo r e r   42) 
(Small  Astron- 
omy  Sa te l l i te ) ,   89,  113,  131,  319 
U.K.  See United  Kingdom. 
Ulan  Bator,  Mongolia,  238 
ULMS .   s e e   Underwater  long-range  mis- 
siIe  system. 
Ultraviolet  ( u v ) ,  8,  14,  23,  60,  119,  135, 
148,  189,  220,  242,  302,  318,  327,  366 
Ultraviolet  panorama 
experi- 
(S-138) 
ment,  38 
U.N.  See  United  Nations. 
Underground  nuclear  tests,  300,  303 
Underwater 
long-range  missile  system 
( U L M S ) ,   335 
Unemp loymen t   Ra tes  
for  Sc ien t is ts ,  
Spr ing   1971  ( N S F   repo r t ) ,   188 
Unidentified  satellite,  11, 49,  79,  80,  107, 
122,  157,  163,  195,  227,  254,  287,  296, 
341,  350 
/ 
Union  of  Concerned Scientists, 209 
United  Aircraft  Corp. 
Hamilton  S tanda rd  Div.,  363 
P r a t t   &  Whitney  Div.,  60,  96,  131, 
178,  198,  218,  232,  240,  246,  300, 
354,  356 
Sikorsky Aircraft Div.,  150, 357 
United  Airlines,  211 
United  Automobile,  Aerospace, 
and 
Agricultural  Implementation  Workers 
of  America.  343 
United  Cerebral  Palsy  Research  Foun- 
dation,  253 
United  Kingdom  (U.K.),  171,  249,  287, 
312,  331 
aerospace  industry, 88, 173, 329 
aircraft,  80, 224,  300, 329,  346 
Concorde,  157, 214,346 
aircraft  carrier,  224 
Apollo  14  mission,  reaction, 43 
booster,  211, 300,  310 
computer use,  122 
cooperation,  space,  3,  16,  19,  37,  57- 
58,  96,  291,  310,  348,  369 
Defence Ministry,  303,  329 
hovertrain,  348 
launch,  365,  368 
Ar ie l   4 
(UK - 4 )  
l i t e ) ,   348 
Prosper0 
(X-3) 
lite,  300 
missile-firing  submarines,  224 

(technology  satel- 

(scientific  satel- 

459 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

nuclear  power,  252 
research 
and 
applications  modules 
( R A M ) ,   3 
Science  Research  Council,  348,  356 
space  shuttle,  16,  37,  291 
United  Nations  (U.N.),  70,  104, 110,  120, 
166, 171, 250,  361,370 
Apo l lo   15 message,  222 
astronaut  visit,  65,  238,  239 
Committee  on  the   Peaceful  Uses  of 
Ou ter  Space, 173,182,  334 
General  Assembly,  153,  252,  254,  257, 
313,  334 
lun a r  law  treaty  draft,  153 
Scientific  Subcommittee  on  Space,  198 
United  Nations  Day,  191 
United  Nations  Peace   Medal,  318 
United  S ta tes   (US.) (see   also  appro- 
pr ia te   agencies  and   Congress) 
atlas,  11 
award,  38-39,  60,  102,  139,  282,  307, 
314 
budget,  17, 20-21,  118 
communications,  3,  71 
defense,  20,  21,  103-104,  119,  124,  170, 
194,  201,  224-225,  284,  288,  319- 
320,  360,  361 
disarmament,  74,  85,  136 
economy,  71-72,  160, 295 
education,  146,  161, 260 
employment,  3-4,  20,  63,  76,  104-105, 
118,  119,  124,  141-142,  188,  252- 
253,  308,  309 
energy sources,  129,  154 
engineering,  308 
environmental  program  (see   also  Air 
pollution;  Noise,  a ircraf t ;   and   Wa- 
t e r   pollution),  2,  13,  42,  76,  78,  96, 
170,  180, 231 
foreign  policy,  54-55,  117 
Government  reorganization,  proposed, 
81-82,  154 
international  cooperation,  17,  104,  190, 
191 
international  cooperation,  space.  See 
International  cooperation,  space. 
meteorology,  2,  103,  180,  303-304 
metric  system,  212 
nuclear  nonproliferation 
treaty.  See  
Nuclear  nonproliferation  treaty. 
oceanography,  12 ,19 ,  24 ,45  
patent  policy.  238-239 
Eesearch  a n d  development,  13,  20,  33, 
116,  118,  122-123,  124-125,  175-176, 
201,  251,  291,  303,  305,  331-332, 
336,  363 
science  and   technology,  11,  17,  18,  20, 
30,  40,  58,  69,  76,  86,  89,  99,  104, 
108-109,  113,  118,  126,  127-128,  147, 
160,  167,  173,  187-188,197,  248,  260, 
291,  296,  303,  331332 ,   363-364 
space  program.  See   Space   program, 
national;  Space  race ;   Space   results. 
transportation 
(see  aIso  Supersonic 
transpor t) ,   36,  47,  53,  82,  128-129 
Vietnam  war.  See   Vietnam  war. 

United  S ta tes   and   Soviet  Progress  i n  
Space:  Some  New  Contrasts,  7 -8  
United  S ta tes   Space   Science  Program, 
167 
Universe,  132 
Universities,  68,  85,  146,  161,  210,  248, 
306,  308 
Uranus   (p l an e t ) ,   22 
Urey,  Dr.  Harold  C.,  6,  109 
US. Air  Force   (USAF)  (see  also  indi- 
vidual  bases,  centers,  and   com- 
mands,  such  a s   Air  Force  Academy, 
Air  Force  Systems  Command,  Air 
Defense  Command,  Arnold  Engi- 
neering  Development  Center,  Ed-  
wards  A F B )  
a ircraf t   (see  also  individual  aircraft, 
such  as   G 5 A ,   F-15,  F-111,  Heli- 
copter,  YF-lZ),  I,  21,  70,  87,  94, 
95,  112,  168,  239,  248,  255,  263, 
279,  300,  302,  344 
anniversary,  94 
award,  72,  178, 266,  354 
budget,  94.  263 
conGact,  2,  8,  12,  94,  294,  300,  310, 
312,  341 
cooperation,  65,  70,  87,  95,  130,  142, 
165,  173-174,  199,  210,  218-219, 
225,  237,  272-276,  278,  281,  290, 
328,  351,  365 
(flexible 
rolled-up  solar  ar-  
FRUSA 
r a y ) ,   8 
launch 
satellite,  11,  49,  79,  80,  107,  122, 
157,  163,  195-196,  220-221,  227, 
254,  287,  289,  296,  306,  350,  365 
failure,  49,  342 
lifting  body,  11,  39,  49,  65,  85,  130, 
142,  153,  210-211,  351,  365 
missile  program,  77-78,  95,  199,  224 ,  
225,  262,  266,  312,  346 
personnel,  11,  36,  42,  180-181,  186, 
191,  193,  320 
reentry  vehicle,  220-221 
satellite,  243 
(see  also  Defense, 
space  program 
Dept.  o f ) ,  94,  328 
space  shuttle,  276 
Transonic  Aircraft  Technology  (TACT )  
Program,  165, 272 
U S .   Arms  Control  and   Disarmament 
Agency,  74 
U S .   Army  (U SA ) ,   43,  70,  74,  182,  186, 
189,  272,  288,  294,  351,  357,  361,  365 
U.S.  Army  (USA)  Air  Mobility  Re- 
search   and   Development  Laboratory, 
233 
U S .   Coast  Guard,  21 
U S .  Conference  of  Mayors,  177 
U S .   Court  of  Appeals,  District  of  Co- 
lumbia,  300 
U.S.  Forest  Service,  129 
U.S.  Geological  Survey  (USCS ) ,   11,  104, 
120,  171,  224,  245,  279,  281,  339-340, 
348,  351 

470 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

U.S.  Marine  Corps  ( u SMC ) ,   80 
US. Military  Academy,  11 
U S .   Military  Academy  Assn.  of  Gradu- 
ates,  121 
U S .   Naval  Aerospace  Medical  Institute, 
182 
U.S.  Navy  (USN) ,18,241 
aircraft,  11-12,  17,  18,  41,  445-47,  70, 
112,  124,  141,  152,  163,  210,  211, 
. 
212.  219,  246.  252,  255.  271,  272, 
284;  286,‘  301,.  322,  323  
award,  72 
contract,  329,  335 
cooaeration,  119-120.  244.  369-370 
missile,  52,  335 
missile-firing  ship,  125 
personnel,  47,  345 
satellite,  95,  180 
Sealab  Project,  292-293 
space  shuttle,  244 
spacecraft  recovery  force,  349 
surface  effect  ship,  18,  199-200 
U.S.  Postal  Service,  232 
U S .  Supreme  Court,  49,65 
USA.  See US. Army. 
USAF. See U S .   Air  Force. 
“USAF   in  Space”  (exh ib i t ) ,  153 
USGS.  See U.S.  Geological  Survey. 
USMc .   See U.S.  Marine  Corps. 
USN.  See  U S .  Navy. 
U.S.S.  Nathaniel  Greene   (submarine). 
309 
U.S.S.  New   Orleans, 30,  42 
U.S.S.  Observation  Island,  125 
U.S.S.  Ok inawa ,  207,  222 
U.S.S.R. 
(Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Re- 
publics)  (see  also  Soviet  Academy 
of  Sciences,  e tc . ) ,   330,  362 
aircraft,  12,  17,  38,  78,  79,  85,  103, 
124,  126,  127,  140, 147,  148,  150, 
157,  211,  214,  232,  248,  249,  260, 
263,  264,  280,  286,  312,  314,  346, 
360 
anniversary,  100,  152,  167 
Apo l lo   1 I  mission  reaction,  162 
Apo l lo  1 4  mission  reaction,  35,43 
Apo l lo   I5 mission  reaction,  222 
astronomy,  357 
award,  180, 191,218,  266,311 
booster.  115.  246.  249 
communications  satellite  system,  238, 
3Rn 
coop i i i t ion ,   54-55,  117,  190,  197,  287, 
299 
cooperation,  space,  10,  13-14,  16,  19- 
20,  36,  43,  54-55,  62,  68,  77, 
101,  133-134,  139,  153-154,  159, 
171,  177.  185,  196.  197.  198.  216- 
217:  235:  237.  238.  243.  248.  249- 
275;  2M:  290;  293;  299:  3197  321; 
323,  325,  330,  332,  334,  337,  340, 
347,  358,  369 
cosmonaut.  See  Cosmonaut. 

SALT 

Council  of  Ministers, 216-217 
defector,  147,  168,  171,  176,  190,  329, 
331 
disarmament  (see  also  U.S.S.R., 
ta lk s ) ,   54-55,  74,  137,  148 
five-year plan,  58 
launch,  366-368 
probe 
Luna  18,  246 
Luna  19,  267-268 
Mars  2,  134 
Mars  3 ,   147 
Salyut  1,  105 
satellite 
Cosmos,  7,  9,  11,  15,  42,  49,  54, 
61,  78,  84,  93,  94,  96,  98,  102, 
108,  110,  115,  124,  125,  128,  133, 
135,  139,  146,  148,  153,  160,  174, 
197,  200,  212,  219,  222,  227,  240, 
250.  254.  255.  262.  265.  268.  270, 
280;  284-285,’  287,’  291;  306;  323, 
325,  327,  333,  334,  337,  339,  343, 
347-348,  351,  352,  353,  358,  359 
Intercosmos  5 ,  337 
Me teor   7,  11 
Meteor  8 ,   105 
Meteor  9,  195 
Me teor   10,  360 
Molniya  1-18,  210 
Molniya  1-19,  355 
Molniya  11-1,  330 
Oreol,  359 
sounding  rocket,  237,  252,  304 
SOYUZ  I O ,   107-108 
Soyuz  11,  154-155 
Lunokhod  I ,   4,  8,  9-10,  20,  41,  43,  60, 
66,  73,  98,  100,  133,  139,  145,  152, 
168.  188.  196.  209.  220.  221.  246. 
256;  272,  276,  306-3071  315;  322; 
368 
Ministry  of  Health,  36 
missile  and  rocket  program,  84,  103- 
104,  107,  109,  117,  122,  129,  135, 
137,  146,  152,  194,  243,  248,  286, 
303,  304,  320,  360 
missile  threat  to,  224-225 
nuclear  energy  facilities,  U.S.  visit  to, 
219 
nuclear  test,  331 
Paris  Air  Show  exhibit,  152,  168 
probe,  4,  9,  15,  20,  209,  293 
research  and  development,  86,  124- 
125.  201 
74,  148,  189,  190, 
54-55, 
S A L T - ~ ~ ~ ~ S ,  
194-195,  252,  264-265, 
266 
science  and   technology,  100-101,  110, 
124-125,  140,  163,  172,  182,  183, 
190,  210,  262,  290-291,  303-304, 
309,311,  315,  323 
Soyuz 
I 1   cosmonauts  funeral  and 
burial,  185,  186 
space encyclopedia,  9 1  
space  program,  7-8,  58,  62,  66,  73, 
82,  86,  94,  100-101,  102,  110,  111, 
152,  154-156,  157,  162-163,  166, 

471 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

167;  174-175,  176,  183,  201,  218, 
220,  221,  237,  283-284,  299-300, 
329.  331.  353.  366-368 
military  use,  7 3 ,   24,  115-116,  158, 
176, 296-297,  339 
space  station,  105,  107-108,  110-111, 
112.  115.  119.  122.  127.  154-156, 
1741175,’ 186,‘  198,’ 282-1283,  368 .  
space track ing   ship,  350 
spacecraft.  See  U.S.S.R., 
launch ;   and  
spacecraft, 
individual 
such  as  
Luna  16.  Mars  2.  Molniva  I-18. 
Sa lyu t   1 , ’ ~ o y u i  IO. 
supersonic  transport,  77.  79,  126,  127, 
147, 148, 157 
treaty,  45,  47,  153-154,  177,  313-314 
weapons,  39,  104,  115-116,  129,  201 
Ustinov,  G.,  314 
U tah   S ta te  Medical Assn.,  256 
Utah.  Univ.  of.  49.57.  72.  85.  368 
uv.  See  Ultrav’iokt. 
I
,
 
v 
VAB.  See  Vehicle  Assembly  Building. 
Van  Allen  radiation  belts,  261 
Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif.  (see   also  West- 
ern  Test Range) ,   8 
missile  target,  78 
satellite  launch  vehicle 
Agena,  350 
Atlas.  220 
Thor-Agena,  49,  195, 254 
Thor-Burner 11,48,  157 
Thorad-Agena,  80,  195,  254,  289,  350 
T i t an   IIIB-Agena,,  11,  79,  107,  227, 
296 
Titan  ITTD  163 
.. _ _ _ _  
Vandcrbilt  Uni;.,282 
Vanguard  (sa te l l i te) ,   75.  135. 362 
Van&zrd-A  History,  75 
Van  Reeth,  G., 352 
Vecchietti,  George J.,  166 
Vehicle  Assembly  Building  (VAB )  ( K S C ) ,  
271 
Vehicle  Technology  for   Civil  Aviation: 
The   70s  and   Beyond  (conference),  307 
Vela  (nuc lear   detection  sa te l l i te) ,   153 
Venus  (p lane t ,   14, 20,  22,  50, 62,  67,  174, 
186,  218,  333 
Venus  7 (U.S.S.R.  interplanetary  probe) ,  
15,  20 
Vernadsky  Ins t i tu te   for  Analvtical  Chem- 
istry,  6 
Veronique  (F r en ch  rocke t) ,   235 
Vertikal-2 
(U.S.S.R. 
sounding  rocke t) ,  
237,  252 
Very-large-array 
( v u )  
280 
VHF :   very  high  frequency. 
Victoria,  Australia,  167 
Vienna,  Austria,  148,  199,  253,  265 
Vietnam  war,  220,320,350,  358 
Viking  (program) ,   22,  61,  67,  116,  164 
339 

radiotelescope, 

Viking  Orb i ter   (spacecraf t) ,   211,344 
Viking,  Project,  247,264,  275 
Vinogradov,  Dr.  Aleksander  P.,  6,  159, 
217 
Viper  Dar t   (sounding  rocke t) ,   234,  236 
Virgin  Islands, 98,  133, 134 ,308  
Virginia,  97,  224 
Virginia  Ins t i tu te   of  Marine  Science,  292 
Virginians for Dulles,  271 
Virgo  (ga laxy) ,   132 
VLA.  See Very-large-array  telescope. 
Vladimirov,  Leonid,  329,  331 
Volgograd,  U.S.S.R.,  304 
Volkov,  Vladislav  N.,  154,  180,  181,  186, 
192, 200,  283 
Volpe,  Secretary  of  Transportation  John 
A.,  9,  19,  107,  109,  182,  194,  276-277, 
295 
von  Braun, Dr. Wernher,  191 ,298  
awards  and   honors,  266 
global  resources  management  system, 
32-33,  321 
science and  technology,  147 
space  program,  national,  62-63,  68-69, 
147, 249,281,  283, 329, 342 
space shuttle,  62-63 
von  KQ rm in  Lecture,  298 
von  Opel,  Fritz,  99 
Voskhod 1 mission,  100, 262 
Vostok  1 (U.S.S.R.  spacecraf t) ,   152 
Vostok  4  mission,  152 
(vertical  or  short  takeoff  and  
V/STOL 
land ing)   aircraft,  18,  65,  80,  298,  300, 
329,  365 
V/STOLpOrt,  287 
VTOL  (vertical  takeoff  and   land ing)   air- 
craft,  12, 262,  298,  300 
W 

Wagner, Charles S., 32,  44,  307 
Wakelin,  James  H.,  Jr., 11 
Walker, R.  M.,  83 
Wallops  Island,  Va.,  176 
Wallops  Station  ( N A S A )  
bird  migration  cooperative  experiment, 
160-161 
Central  Atlantic  Regional  Ecological 
Test  S i te   (CAR E T S )   project,  224 
contract,  126 
launch 
barium-ion-cloud 
cooperative 
(B IC )  
probe,  259 
P lane tary   Atmosphere  Experiments 
Test  ( P A E T ) ,   168-169 
sounding rocket 
Aerobee 350 ,52 ,159  
Black  Brant m, 54  
Arcas,  218 
Black Bran t  VC,  199 
Boosted  Arcas 11, 22 
Javelin,  176 
Nike-Apache, 68,236235,236-237, 
257 

472 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

meeting,  97 
' 
open  house,  105 
runway  research  program,  278 
Wapakoneta,  Ohio,  198 
Washington, Bradford,  award, 327 
Washington,  D.C.,  41,  129,  187, 219,  222, 
268,  280,  296,  301,  308,  314,  323 
astronauts in,  59,  141 
awards  presented  in,  135, 139, 178,  194, 
263,298-299,302,326 
comsat  communications  system,  252, 
265,  271,  272 
meetings,  15,  18,  36,  38-39,  53,  68-69, 
88,  112-113,  146-147,  166,  238,  281, 
297,  306,  335 
press  conference,  59-60,  71,  102,  114, 
122,  125-126,  141,  152,  156-157,  191- 
192 
Washington  National  Airport,  165,  209, 
271 
Washington  Univ.,  83,  296 
Washington,  Univ.  of,  13, 63  
Wasserburg,  Dr.  Gerald  J.,  7,  167,  235- 
236 
Water  pollution, 293,  322 
Water-vapor electrolysis system, 308 
Watkins, Allen H.,  139, 171 
Watson, Ambassador Arthur  K.,  350 
Watt,  James,  International Medal, 84  
Weapon  systems, 39,  40,  72,  78,  84,  303 
Weather  modification, 62, 320 
Weaver, Kenneth  F.,  70 
Webb, James E.,  69 
Webb,  John  A.,  Jr.,  106 
Weicker,  Sen. Lowell  P.,  24 
Weightlessness, effects,  127, 132,  153,  163, 
181,  342 
Weizmann Institute  of  Science, 18 
Welch, Dr.  William  J.,  299 
Weliachew. Dr.  Leonid N..  194 
Wertz, Carl C.,  178 
Wesleyan Univ.,  145 
Wesselski,  Clarence J.,  251 
West Point, N.Y.,  121 
Westerbork, The  Netherlands,  280 
Western  Test  Range  (WTR ) ,   88, 348 
Wetherill,  Dr.  George W.,  212 
Wetport  (offshore a irpor t) ,   137-138 
Wheeler. Dr.  .Tohn  A..  18 
Whirlpool  galaxy.  279-280 
Whitcomb, Gov.  Edgar  H.,  199 
Whitcomb, Dr. Richard  T., 299 
White,  L/C  Edward  H.,  I1  (USAF ) ,   10, 
357 
White,  Robert  M.,  19 
White  House,  9,  4 2 4 3 ,   124,  198,  212, 
265.  282 
appointments,  114, 253 
astronauts,  59,  68,  356 
awards presented  at,  59,138 
space program,  37 ,63 ,272  

White  Sand s   Missile  Range 
(WSMR ) ,  
N.  Mex. 
atmospheric da ta  experiment,  236 
launch 
Aerohee 150 
atmospheric  data,  171 
micrometeorite study, 54 
solar  astronomy, 161-162 
stellar  data,  13 
ultraviolet  astronomy, 14, 23,  119 
x-ray  astronomy, 132 
Aerobee  170 
airglow, 41,  209 
solar  astronomy, 228 
stellar  data,  226 
test  and  support mission, 292 
ultraviolet  astronomy, 79,  119,  226, 
296 
Aerobee  170B,  190-191 
Aerobee 174, 350 
Boosted Arcas 11.226.  285-286 
Nike- Apache 
airglow,  108 
micrometeorite collection, 108 
Nike-Cajun 
airglow,  130,  131 
atmospheric  data,  8 
ion  composition study, 285 
White  Sands  Test  Facility,  N.  Mex.,  131 
White,  Thomas  D.,  National  Defense 
Award,  150 
White,  Gen.  Thomas  D.,  Space  Trophy, 
178 
Whittaker  Corp.,  200 
Wichita, Kans.,  82,  121 
Wicker,  Tom,  217 
Wideroe, Turi,  135 
Wiesner, Dr.  Jerome  B.,  282 
Wilford,  John  N.,  343-344 
Williams,  Squadron  Leader  Graham,  135 
WilIiamsburg, Va.,  136, 307 
Wilson, George C.,  66,  115-116 
Wind  tunnel,  9,  70,  153,365-366 
Window Crater  (moon ) .  205 
Wine.  aircraft 
suup'ercritical, 70,  122, 345,  356 
141, 
flight  test,  65,  77,  94,  101,  114, 
145.  163.  165.  192.  233.  240. 
251- 
252,  25G256,'  269;  272;  279,  287, 
346,  349,  365-366 
swing,  248 
test,  static,  255-256 
Winstein, Dr.  Saul,  18 
Wisconsin,  Univ.  of,  15,  60,  79,  239,  279 
Educational  Satellite Center,  117 
Witkin,  Richard,  131 
Wollin, Goesta,  302 
Wood, Dr.  John  A.,  7 
Woomera,  Australia,  356 
Woomera Test Range, Australia,  300 
Worden, L/C Alfred  M.  (WAF )  
Apollo  15 mission 
celebrations  for, 222-223,  238-239 
Congress,  report  to,  254 
extravehicular  activity,  141,  207-208 
flight,  202-208 

473 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1971 

Kennedy  Space  Center visit,  271 
Marshall Space  Center visit,  272 
medical  aspects,  207,  222,  225,  228, 
261,  289 
New   York   T ime s   article,  200-201, 
229 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  201, 
208-209,  221-222,  223,  256 
photography,  206-207 
preparations  for,  141 
press  conference,  141, 227 
tr ibu te   to,  221-222 
U.N.  visit,  239 
Wh i te   House visit,  256 
Apollo  17 mission,  228-229 
awards  and   honors,  239,  260,  262,  266, 
346-347 
European  visit,  311 
Working  Group  on   Philosophy,  Science, 
and   Technology,  126 
Working  Group  on Remote Measurement 
of  Pollution,  231 
World  Administrative  Rad io   Conference 
for Space Communications,  132 
World  Law  Day,  166 
World  Weather  Program,  103 ,230  
World  Y e a t h e r   Program,  P lan   for Fiscal 
Year  1972, 103 
World  Weather Watch, 180 
Wright  Brothers Memorial  Trophy,  263 
Wright  1909 Military Flyer,  248 
Wright-Patterson AFB,  Ohio,  247,  268 
WSMR.  See   Wh i te   Sands   Missile  Range. 
WTR.  See  Western Test Range. 
Wydeven, Dr.  Theodore,  Jr.,  308 
Wydler,  Rep.  John  W.,  38 
Wyle  Laboratories,  49 
Wynn,  Rep.  Larry,  Jr.,  38 
Wyoming,  128 

X 

X-1  (rocket  research  a i r c r a f t ) ,  239 
X-3  (sa te l l i te) .   See Prospero. 
X-14A  (VTOL a ircraf t  1,  262 
X-l4B,  262 

X-15  (rocket  research  a ircraf t) ,   239 
( l if t ing   body) ,   210,  351,  356,  365 
X-24A 
test  flight,  130, 153, 351 
glide,  39,  210 
powered,  11, 49,  65,  85,  142, 210 
X-24B,  210 ,351 ,356 ,365  
XE  (nuc lear   rocket  eng ine) ,   53 
XLR-129  (rocket  eng ine) ,   87,240,  276 
X-ray,  67,  99  
source,  50,  52,  63,  73,  89,  119,  132, 174, 
189, 197,226,296,356 
weapon  detection device,  278 
Y 

Yak-40  (U.S.S.R.  j e t   transpor t) ,   140 
Yangel,  Mikhail K.,  73,  297 
Yardley,  John  F.,  299 
Yegorov, A.  D.,  167 
Yegorov, Dr.  Boris  B.,  111 ,119 ,262  
Yeliseyev,  Dr.  Aleksey  S.,  107,  110-111, 
282-283 
Yellowstone  National Park ,   112 
Yerevan,  U.S.S.R.,  277 
YF-12  ( j e t  in tercep tor) ,   174 
YF-12A,  115 
Young,  Capt.  John   W.  (USN), 61,  171, 
323 
Yugoslavia,  43,  242-243,  286,  305-306 

Z 

Zagreb,  Yugoslavia,  43 
Zhulin,  Dr.  I. A.,  321,  340 
Ziegler,  Henri,  351 
Zieeler.  Ronald L..  135 
Zngniye  (Knowledge)  (A l l  Union  Znaniye 
Society,  U.S.S.R.),  177 
Zoller,  Lowell K.,  196 
Zond  (p rog r am ) ,  235 
Zond  (U.S.S.R.  spacecraft 1 , 2 6 8  
Zond  2 ,   134 
Zuckerman,  Dr.  Benjamin M.,  299 
Zumwalt,  Adm.  Elmo  R.,  Jr.  (USN), 18 

474 

NASA  HISTORICAL  PUBLICATIONS 

HISTORIES 
Robert  L.  Rosholt,  An   Administrative  History  of  N A S A ,   1958-1963,  NASA  SP- 
4101,  1966,  GPO,  $4.00.* 
Loyd  S.  Swenson,  James  M.  Grimwood,  and   Charles  C.  Alexander,  Th i s   N ew  
Ocean:  A  History  of  Project  Mercury,  NASA  SP-4201,  1966,  GPO,  $5.50. 
Constance  McL.  Green  and   Milton  Lomask,  Vanguard-A  History,  NASA  SP- 
4202,  1970 : also Washington:  Smithsonian  Institution  Press,  1971, $12.50. 
Alfred  Rosenthal,  Ven ture   in to   Space:  Early  Years   of  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center,  NASA  SP-4301,  1968,  GPO,  $2.50. 
Edwin  P.  Hartman,  Adventures  in  Research:  A  History  of  t h e   Ame s   Research 
Center,  1940-1965,  NASA  SP-4302,  1970,  GPO,  $4.75. 

HISTORICAL STUDIES 
*  Eugene  M.  Emme  ( ed . ) ,   History  of  Rocket  Technology,  Detroit:  Wayne  S ta te  
University,  1964,  out  of  print. 
Mae  MiIIs  Link, Space  Medicine  i n   Project  Mercury,  NASA  SP-4003,  1965, 
NTIS,  $6.00.* * 
Historical  Ske tch   of  N A S A ,  NASA  EP-29,  1965 and  1966, NTIS,  $6.00. 
Katherine  M.  Dickson  (L ih ra ry   o f  Congress),  History  of  Aeronautics  and  Astro- 
nautics:  A  Preliminary  Bibliography,  NASA  HHR-29,  NTIS,  $6.00. 
*  Eugene  M.  Emme  ( ed . ) ,   S ta temen ts   by   the   Presidents  of  the   United  States  on 
International  Cooperation  in  Space,  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and 
Space  Sciences,  Sen.  Doc.  92-40,  1971,  GPO,  $0.55. 
William  R.  Corliss, N A S A  Sounding  Rocke ts ,   1958-1968:  A  Historical  Summary, 
NASA  SP-4401,  1971,  GPO,  $1.75. 
Helen  T.  Wells  with  Susan  Whiteley,  Origins  of  N A S A   Names,  NASA  SP-4402 
(1973). 
Jane  Van  Nimmen  and  Leonard  C.  Bruno  with  Robert  L.  Rosholt,  N A S A  
Historical  Data  Book,  1958-1968,  NASA  SP-4012  (1973). 

CHRONOLOGIES 
Aeronautics  and  Astronautics:  A n  American  Chronology  of  Science  and  Tech-  
nology  in  the  Exploration  of  Space,  1915-1960,  compiled  by  Eugene M.  Emme, 
Washington:  NASA,  1961,  NTIS,  $6.00. 
*  Aeronautical  and  Astronautical Events of  1961, published by  the  House  Committee 
on  Science  and   Astronautics,  1962,  NTIS,  $6.00. 
0  Astronautical and  Aeronautical Events  of 1962, published  by  the  House Committee 
.-  , 1964, NASA  SP-4005,  1965, NTIS,  $6.00. 
on  Science  and  Astronautics,  1963, NTIS,  $6.00. 
.-  , 1965, NASA  SP-4006,1966,  NTIS, $6.00. 
0  Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1963,  NASA  S P 4 0 0 4 ,   1964,  NTIS,  $6.00. 
.-  , 1966, NASA  SP-4007,  1967, NTIS,  $6.00. 
.-  , 1967, NASA  SP-4008,1968,  GPO, $2.25. 
.-  , 1970, NASA  SP-4015   (1972). 
*  -, 
1968, NASA  SP-4010,  1969, GPO,  $2.00. 
, 1969, NASA  SP-4014,  1970, GPO, $2.25. 
* -  
J am e s   M.  Grimwood,  Project  Mercury:  A  Chronology,  NASA  SP-4001,  1963, 
NTIS,  $6.00. 
0  James  M.  Grimwood  and   Barton  C.  Hacker,  with  Pe ter   J.  Vorzimmer,  Project 
Gemini Technology and  Operations:  A  Chronology, NASA  SP-4002,1969,  GPO, 
$2.75. 
Ivan  D.  Er te l   and   Mary  Louise  Morse,  T h e   Apo l lo   Spacecraft:  A  Chronology, 
Vol.  I,  Through  November  7,  1962,  NASA  S P 4 0 0 9 ,   1969,  GPO,  $2.50. 
Mary  Louise  Morse  and   J e an   Kernahan  Bays,  T h e  Apollo  Spacecraft:  A  Chronol- 
ogy,  Vol.  11,  November  8,  1962-September  30,  1964,  NASA  SP-4009  (1973). 
*  R.  Cargill  Hall,  Project  Ranger:  A  Chronology,  JPL/HR-2, 
1971,  NTIS,  $6.00. 

* GPO :   Titles  may  be   ordered  from  the   Superintendent  of  Documents,  Government 
Pr in t ing   Office,  Washington,  D.C.  20402. 
* *  NTIS :   Titles  may  be  ordered  from  National  Technical  Information  Service, 
Springfield,  Va.  22151. 

Q  U.S.  GOV ERNM EN T  P R I N T I N G   OFF ICE :   1973 -9i-zsa 

NA T IONA L   AERONAUT ICS   AND   SPACE  ADM IN I S TRA T ION  
WA SH ING TON .   D.C.  20546  

O F F I C I A L   BU S IN E S S  
P E N A L T Y   F O R  P R I V A T E   U S E  1900 

P O S T A G E  A N D  FEES P A I D  
N A T I O N A L  A E R O N A U T I C S  A N D  
S P A C E  A D M t N I S T R A T I O N  
4 5 1  

POSTnIASTER : 

I f  Undeliverable (Section 165 
Po s ta l   J I : in i ia l )   Do No t  Retom 

“The aeronautical  and  space  activities  of  the  United  States  shall  be 
conducted  so  as  to  contribute  .  . . to   the  expansion  of   human  know l-  
edge  of  phenomena  i n  the  atmosphere  and  space.  The Administration 
shall  provide  for the wsdest  practicdble and  appropriate  dissemination 
o f  mformution concernkg  its activitres and  the  results  thereof.” 
-NATIONAL AERONAUTICS  AND  SPACE ACT  OF  1958 

TECHNICAL  REPORTS:  Scientific and 
technical  information  considered  important, 
complete,  and  a  lasting  contribution  to  existing 
knowledge. 
TECHNICAL  NOTES:  Information  less  broad 
in  scope  bur  nevertheless  of  importance  as  a 
contribution  to  existing  knowled,ge. 
TECHNICAL  MEMORANDUMS 
Information  receiving  limiter1  distribution 
because  of  preliminary  data,  security  classifica- 
tion, or  other  reasons.  Also  includes conference 
proceedings with  either  limited  or  unlimited 
distrtbution. 
CONTRACTOR  REPORTS:  Scientific and 
technical  information  generated  under  a  NASA 
contract  or  grant  and  considered  an  important 
contribution  to  existing  knowledge. 

TECHNICAL  TRANSLATIONS:  Information 
published  in  a  foreign  language  considered 
to  merit  NASA  distribution  in  English. 

SPECIAL  PUBLICATIONS : Information 
derived  from  o r   of  value to NASA  activities. 
Publications include final  reports  of  major  projects, 
I 
monographs,  data  compilations,  handbooks, 
sourcebooks, and  special  bibliographies. 

TECHNOLOGY  UTILIZATION 
PUBLICATIONS : Information  on  technology 
used  by  NASA  that  may  be  of  particular 
interest  in  commercia1 and  other  non-aerospace 
applications.  Publications  include  Tech  Briefs, 
Technology  Utilization  Reports  and 
Technology  Surveys. 

D e ta i l s   on   the   a v a i l a b i l i t y   o f   t h e s e   pub l i ca t ion s   may   b e   o b t a i n e d   from  
SC IENT IF IC   AND   T ECHN IC A L   I N F O R M A T I O N   OFFICE 
A U T I C S   A N D   S P A C E   A D  
I N I S T R A T I O N  
Washington,  D.C.  20546  

